古文：十有二年春，葬陈灵公。
现代文：十二年春季，安葬陈灵公。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, Chen Linggong was buried.

古文：楚子围郑。
现代文：楚国包围郑国。
English: Chu surrounded Zheng.

古文：夏六月乙卯，晋荀林父帅师及楚子战于邲，晋师败绩。
现代文：夏季六月乙卯日，晋国的荀林父率领军队在邲地与楚军开战，晋军被打败。
English: In the summer of June on the 1st day of the month of Yu, the father of Yulin of Jin led the army to fight against the Chu army in Yunnan, and the Jin army was defeated.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬十有二月戊寅，楚子灭萧。
现代文：冬季十二月戊寅日，楚国灭掉萧国。
English: In the winter of December on the day of Wu Yin, Chu State eliminated Xiao State.

古文：晋人、宋人、卫人、曹人同盟于清丘。
现代文：晋国、宋国、卫国、曹国在清丘结盟。
English: Jin, Song, Wei and Cao allied at Qingqiu.

古文：宋师伐陈，卫人救陈。
现代文：宋国军队讨伐陈国，卫国出兵援救陈国。
English: The Song army fought against Chen, and the Qing dispatched troops to rescue Chen.

古文：十二年春，楚子围郑。
现代文：十二年春季，楚庄王包围郑国十七天。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the king of Chuzhuang besieged Zheng for seventeen days.

古文：旬有七日，郑人卜行成，不吉。卜临于大宫，且巷出车，吉。
现代文：郑国人占卜以求和，不吉利；为在太庙号哭和出车于街巷去占卜，吉利。
English: Zheng Guo people divination to seek peace, unlucky; to cry in the temple and go out to the streets to divination, lucky.

古文：国人大临，守陴者皆哭。
现代文：城里的人们在太庙大哭，守城的将士在城上大哭。
English: The people in the city cried loudly in the Great Temple, and the soldiers guarding the city cried loudly in the city.

古文：楚子退师，郑人修城，进复围之，三月克之。
现代文：楚庄王退兵。郑国人修筑城墙，楚国又进军，再次包围郑国，经三个月，攻克了郑国。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang withdrew from the army. Zheng Guo people began to build the city wall, Chu Guo marched in again, encircled Zheng Guo again, and conquered Zheng Guo after three months.

古文：入自皇门，至于逵路。
现代文：楚军从皇门进入，到达京城的大路上。
English: The Chu army entered from the imperial gate and reached the main road of the capital.

古文：郑伯肉袒牵羊以逆，曰： 孤不天，不能事君，使君怀怒以及敝邑，孤之罪也。敢不唯命是听。
现代文：郑襄公脱去衣服，牵着羊迎接楚庄王，说： 我不能承奉天意，不能事奉君王，使君王带着怒气来到敝邑，这是我的罪过，岂敢不唯命是听？
English: Zheng Xianggong took off his clothes and led his sheep to meet the king of Chuzhuang, saying: "I can't follow the will of heaven, I can't serve the king, I made the king come to Gan with anger, this is my fault, how dare I disobey my orders?"

古文：其俘诸江南以实海滨，亦唯命。其翦以赐诸侯，使臣妾之，亦唯命。
现代文：要把我俘虏到江南，放到海边，也听君王吩咐；要灭亡郑国，把郑地赐给诸侯，让郑国人作为奴隶，也听君王吩咐。
English: To take me captive to the south of the Yangtze River and put me on the seashore was also at the king's command; to destroy Zheng, to give Zheng to the princes, and to make the people of Zheng slaves, was also at the king's command.

古文：若惠顾前好，徼福于厉、宣、桓、武，不泯其社稷，使改事君，夷于九县，君之惠也，孤之愿也，非所敢望也。
现代文：如果承君王顾念从前的友好，向周厉王、宣王、郑桓公、武公求福，而不灭绝我国，让我国重新事奉君王，等同于楚国的诸县，这是君王的恩惠，我的心愿，但又不是我所敢于指望的了。
English: If the Prince Consort takes into account the friendship of the past and asks for the blessings of King Zhou Li, King Xuan, King Zheng Huan and King Wu, without destroying our country, and if our country serves the king again, it will be equal to the counties of Chu. This is the grace of the king, my heart's desire, but it is not what I dare to hope for.

古文：敢布腹心，君实图之。 
现代文：谨坦露心里的话，请君王考虑。 
English: If I may be so bold as to ask your Majesty to consider it.

古文：左右曰： 不可许也，得国无赦。 
现代文：左右随从说： 不能允许他，得到了国家没有赦免的。 
English: Left and right followers said: He can't be allowed to get a state pardon.

古文：王曰： 其君能下人，必能信用其民矣，庸可几乎？ 
现代文：楚庄王说： 他的国君能够屈居他人之下，必然能够取信和使用他的百姓，恐怕还是很有希望的吧！ 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang said: I'm afraid there is still a lot of hope that his sovereign will be able to bow down to others, and will certainly be able to win the trust and use of his people!

古文：退三十里而许之平。
现代文：楚军退兵三十里而允许郑国讲和。
English: The Chu army withdrew thirty miles and allowed Zheng to make peace.

古文：潘尪入盟，子良出质。
现代文：潘尪入郑国结盟，子良到楚国作为人质。
English: Pan Ye entered into an alliance with Zheng, and Ziliang went to Chu as a hostage.

古文：夏六月，晋师救郑。
现代文：夏季，六月，晋国的军队去救郑国。
English: In the summer, in June, the army of Jin went to save Zheng.

古文：荀林父将中军，先穀佐之。士会将上军，郤克佐之。赵朔将下军，栾书佐之。
现代文：荀林父率领中军，先縠为辅佐；士会率领上军，郤作辅佐；赵朔率领下军，栾书作为辅佐。
English: Yulin's father led the middle army, with Xing as the first assistant; Shikai led the upper army, with Xing as the assistant; Zhao Shuo led the lower army, with Xingshu as the assistant.

古文：赵括、赵婴齐为中军大夫。巩朔、韩穿为上军大夫。荀首、赵同为下军大夫。
现代文：赵括、赵婴齐担任中军大夫，巩朔、韩穿担任上军大夫，荀首、赵同担任下军大夫。
English: Zhao Guan and Zhao Yingqi served as doctors of the Chinese army, Gong Shuo and Han Zou served as doctors of the upper army, and Dagger and Zhao Yu served as doctors of the lower army.

古文：韩厥为司马。
现代文：韩厥担任司马。
English: Han Jue is acting as Sima.

古文：及河，闻郑既及楚平，桓子欲还，曰： 无及于郑而剿民，焉用之？
现代文：到达黄河，听到郑国已经和楚国讲和，荀林父想要回去，说： 没有赶到郑国，又劳动百姓，出兵有什么用？
English: Arriving at the Yellow River, he heard that Zheng had made peace with Chu. Yulin's father wanted to go back, saying, "I didn't get to Zheng, but I worked for the people. What's the use of sending troops?

古文：楚归而动，不后。 
现代文：等楚军回去以后我军再出兵进攻郑国，还不算晚。 士会说： 好。
English: It's not too late for our army to send troops to attack Zheng after the Chu army returns.

古文：随武子曰： 善。会闻用师，观衅而动。德刑政事典礼不易，不可敌也，不为是征。
现代文：会听说用兵之道，观察敌人的间隙而后行动，德行、刑罚、政令、事务、典则、礼仪合乎常道，就是不可抵挡的，不能进攻这样的国家。
English: They will hear about the use of troops, observe the enemy's gap, and then act. Virtue, punishment, decrees, affairs, rules, and etiquette are normal. They are irresistible and cannot attack such a country.

古文：楚军讨郑，怒其贰而哀其卑，叛而伐之，服而舍之，德刑成矣。
现代文：楚国的军队讨伐郑国，讨厌郑国有二心，又可怜郑国的卑下，郑国背叛就讨伐他，郑国顺服就赦免他，德行、刑罚都完成了。
English: The army of Chu State fought against Zheng State, hated Zheng State's double-mindedness, and pitied Zheng State's lowliness. Zheng State betrayed and fought him, Zheng State obeyed and pardoned him, and the virtue and punishment were completed.

古文：伐叛，刑也；柔服，德也。二者立矣。
现代文：讨伐背叛，这是刑罚；安抚顺服，这是德行，这二者树立起来了。
English: To fight treachery, which is a punishment; to pacify obedience, which is a virtue; these two are established.

古文：昔岁入陈，今兹入郑，民不罢劳，君无怨讟，政有经矣。荆尸而举，商农工贾不败其业，而卒乘辑睦，事不奸矣。
现代文：往年进入陈国，如今进入郑国，百姓并不感到疲劳，国君没有受到怨恨，政令就合于常道了，楚军摆成荆尸之阵而后发兵，井井有条，商贩、农民、工匠、店主都不废时失业，步兵车兵关系和睦，事务就互不相犯了。
English: In previous years, when entering Chen Province, now entering Zheng Province, the people did not feel tired, the sovereign did not receive resentment, and the government order was in line with the common practice. The Chu army set up a line of dead bodies and then sent troops. It was well organized. Merchants, farmers, artisans, and shopkeepers were all unemployed when they did not waste time. The relationship between infantry and chariots was harmonious, and affairs did not conflict with each other.

古文：蒍敖为宰，择楚国之令典，军行右辕，左追蓐，前茅虑无，中权后劲，百官象物而动，军政不戒而备，能用典矣。
现代文：蒍敖做令尹，选择实行楚国好的法典，军队出动，右军跟随主将的车辕，左军打草作为歇息的准备，前军以旄旌开路以防意外，中军斟酌谋划，后军以精兵押阵。各级军官根据象征自己的旌旗的指示而采取行动，军事政务不必等待命令而完备，这就是能够运用典则了。
English: When the commander-in-chief gave the order, he chose to implement the good code of the State of Chu. The army moved out, the right army followed the commander's carriage, the left army prepared to rest by mowing the grass, the front army cleared the way to prevent accidents, the central army carefully planned, and the rear army was supported by elite soldiers. Officers at all levels acted according to the instructions of the banner symbolizing themselves. Military affairs did not have to wait for orders to be complete. This was the ability to use the code.

古文：其君之举也，内姓选于亲，外姓选于旧，举不失德，赏不失劳，老有加惠，旅有施舍，君子小人，物有服章，贵有常尊，贱有等威，礼不逆矣。
现代文：他们国君选拔人材，同姓中选择亲近的支系，异姓中选择世代旧臣，提拔不遗漏有德行的人，赏赐不遣漏有功劳的人。对老人有优待，对旅客有赐予。君子和小人，各有规定的服饰。对尊贵的有一定的礼节示以尊重，对低贱的有一定的等级示以威严。
English: Their sovereigns select talents, choose close branches from the same surname, choose generations of old ministers from different surnames, promote those who do not omit virtue, reward those who do not omit merit. There are preferential treatment for the elderly, and gifts for travelers. Gentlemen and villains each have a prescribed dress. There is a certain etiquette to show respect to the noble, and a certain level of dignity to the lowly.

古文：德立刑行，政成事时，典从礼顺，若之何敌之？
现代文：这就是礼节没有不顺的了。德行树立，刑罚施行，政事成就，事务合时，典则执行，礼节顺当，怎么能抵挡楚国？
English: That is, there is nothing unsuitable about etiquette. Establishing virtue, enforcing punishment, accomplishing political affairs, timing affairs, enforcing rules, and having proper etiquette, how can one resist the state of Chu?

古文：见可而进，知难而退，军之善政也。
现代文：看到可能就前进，遇到困难就后退，这是治军的好办法。
English: It is a good way to govern an army to advance when it is possible and retreat when it is difficult.

古文：兼弱攻昧，武之善经也。
现代文：兼并衰弱进攻昏暗，这是用兵的好规则。
English: Annexation weakens and obscures the attack. This is a good rule for the employment of soldiers.

古文：子姑整军而经武乎，犹有弱而昧者，何必楚？
现代文：您姑且整顿军队、筹划武备吧！还有弱小而昏暗的国家，为什么一定要进攻楚军？
English: Let alone reorganize the army and plan the armament! There are still weak and dim countries, why must they attack the Chu army?

古文：仲虺有言曰： 取乱侮亡。 
现代文：仲虺说： 占取动乱之国，欺侮可以灭亡之国。 
English: Zhonglu said: Occupy a country in turmoil, a country that can be destroyed by bullying.

古文：兼弱也。
现代文：说的就是兼并衰弱。
English: That is to say, the merger is weak.

古文：《汋》曰： 於铄王师，遵养时晦。 耆昧也。
现代文：《诗经·周倾·酌》篇说： 天子的军队多么神气，率领他们把昏昧的国家占取。 
English: The "Shijing, Zhouqun, Jinbei" passage says: How majestic is the army of the Son of Heaven, leading them to occupy the dim-witted country.

古文：《武》曰： 无竞惟烈。 
现代文：说的就是进攻昏昧。《武》篇说： 武王的功业无比伟大强盛。 
English: The "Wu" passage says: King Wu's exploits are incomparably great and powerful.

古文：抚弱耆昧以务烈所，可也。 
现代文：安抚衰弱进攻昏暗，以致力于功业所在，这就可以了。 
English: To placate the enfeebled offensive dims, to commit to the cause, that's all.

古文：彘子曰： 不可。
现代文：先縠说： 不行。
English: The foreman said, "No, we can't."

古文：晋所以霸，师武臣力也。
现代文：晋国所以能称霸诸侯，是由于军队勇敢、臣下得力。
English: The reason why Jin was able to dominate the lords was due to the bravery of the army and the ability of the vassals.

古文：今失诸侯，不可谓力。有敌而不从，不可谓武。
现代文：现在失去了诸侯，不能说是得力；有了敌人不去追逐，不能说是勇敢。
English: Now that we have lost our lords, we cannot be said to be strong; if we have enemies and do not chase them, we cannot be said to be brave.

古文：由我失霸，不如死。
现代文：由于我们而丢掉霸主的地位，不如去死。
English: If you lose your dominant position because of us, you might as well die.

古文：且成师以出，闻敌强而退，非夫也。
现代文：而且晋国整顿军队不出动，听到敌人强大就退却，这不是大丈夫。
English: Moreover, it is not okay for the army of the rectification of Jin Province not to move, and to retreat when it hears that the enemy is strong.

古文：命为军帅，而卒以非夫，唯群子能，我弗为也。 
现代文：任命为军队的统帅，而做出了不是大丈夫所做的事，这只有你们能办到，我是不会干的。 
English: To be appointed commander-in-chief of the army and do something that is not okay, only you can do it, I will not do it.

古文：以中军佐济。
现代文：说完，就带领中军副帅所属军队渡过黄河。
English: Having said that, he led the troops belonging to the vice-commander of the Chinese army across the Yellow River.

古文：知庄子曰： 此师殆哉。
现代文：荀首说： 先縠这些军队危险了。
English: Dagger said: It is dangerous to move these troops first.

古文：《周易》有之，在《师》之《临》，曰： 师出以律，否臧，凶。 
现代文：《周易》上有这样的卦象，从《师》卦变成《临》卦，爻辞说： 出兵用法令治理，法令不严明，结果必凶。 
English: "Zhou Yi" has such a gaga image, from "division" gaga to "line" gaga, saying: Troops are governed by laws and regulations, laws and regulations are not strict, and the result is inevitable.

古文：执事顺成为臧，逆为否，众散为弱，川壅为泽，有律以如己也，故曰律，否臧。
现代文：执行顺当而成功就是 臧 ，反其道就是 否 。大众离散是柔弱，流水壅塞就成为沼泽。有法制指挥三军如同指挥自己一样，所以叫做律。
English: If the execution is smooth and successful, it is good; if it is not, it is bad. The dispersion of the masses is weak, and the obstruction of running water becomes a swamp. If there is a legal system, commanding the three armies is like commanding oneself, so it is called law.

古文：且律竭也，盈而以竭，夭且不整，所以凶也。
现代文：执行不顺当，法制治理就穷尽而无用。从充满到穷尽，阻塞而且不整齐，就是凶险的征兆了。
English: If the implementation is not smooth, the legal governance will be exhausted and useless. From full to exhaustion, obstruction and disorderly, it is a sign of danger.

古文：不行之谓《临》，有帅而不从，临孰甚焉！
现代文：不能流动叫做 临 ，有统帅而不服从，还有比这更严重的 临 吗？
English: Not being able to move is called "submission," disobeying a commander is called "insubordination," is there a more serious kind of submission than this?

古文：此之谓矣。
现代文：说的就是先縠的这个行为了。
English: That's a good point.

古文：果遇必败，彘子尸之。虽免而归，必有大咎。 
现代文：果真和敌人相遇，一定失败，彘子将会是主要罪魁，即使免于战死而回国，一定有大的灾祸。 
English: If they really meet the enemy, they will certainly fail, and the mule will be the main culprit. Even if they return home without being killed in battle, there will be a big disaster.

古文：韩献子谓桓子曰： 彘子以偏师陷，子罪大矣。
现代文：韩厥对荀林父说： 彘子率领一部分军队失陷，您的罪过大了。
English: Han Jue said to Yulin's father: Zizi led a part of the army to fall, your sin is too great.

古文：子为元帅，师不用命，谁之罪也？
现代文：您作为最高统帅，军队不听命令，这是谁的罪过？
English: You, as commander-in-chief, the army does not follow orders, whose fault is this?

古文：失属亡师，为罪已重，不如进也。
现代文：失去属国，丢掉军队，构成的罪过已经太重，不如干脆进军。
English: To lose one's country, to lose one's army, constitutes a crime already too serious. It would be better to simply march into battle.

古文：事之不捷，恶有所分，与其专罪，六人同之，不犹愈乎？ 
现代文：作战如果不能得胜，失败的罪过可以共分担，与其一个人承担罪责，六个人共同承担，不还好一点吗？ 
English: If a battle cannot be won, the guilt of defeat can be shared. Instead of one person taking the blame, six people can share it. Isn't that a bit better?

古文：师遂济。
现代文：于是晋国的军队就渡过了黄河。
English: As a result, Jin's army crossed the Yellow River.

古文：楚子北，师次于郔。
现代文：楚庄王率军北上，军队驻扎在郔地。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang led the army northward, and the army was stationed in Handan.

古文：沈尹将中军，子重将左，子反将右，将饮马于河而归。
现代文：沈尹率领中军，子重率领左军，子反率领右军，准备在黄河饮马以后就回国。
English: Shen Yin led the Central Army, Zi Chong led the Left Army, and Zi Fan led the Right Army, preparing to return to China after drinking horse urine in the Yellow River.

古文：闻晋师既济，王欲还，嬖人伍参欲战。令尹孙叔敖弗欲，曰： 昔岁入陈，今兹入郑，不无事矣。
现代文：听到晋国军队已经渡过黄河，楚庄王想要回去，宠臣伍参想打仗，令尹孙叔敖不想干，说： 往年进入陈国，今年进入郑国，不是没有战争。
English: Hearing that the Jin army had crossed the Yellow River, and that King Chu Zhuang wanted to go back, and that his favorite vassals wanted to fight, Yin Sun Shuxuan did not want to do it, saying: "In previous years, we entered Chen Province, and this year, we entered Zheng Province, but not without a war.

古文：战而不捷，参之肉其足食乎？ 
现代文：打起来以后不能得胜，吃了伍参的肉难道就够了吗？ 
English: If you can't win after a fight, is it enough to eat the meat of the ginseng?

古文：参曰： 若事之捷，孙叔为无谋矣。
现代文：伍参说： 如果作战得胜，孙叔就是没有谋略。
English: Wu San said: If the battle is won, Uncle Sun has no strategy.

古文：不捷，参之肉将在晋军，可得食乎？ 
现代文：不能得胜，参的肉将会在晋军那里，哪里还能吃得上呢？ 
English: If we can't win, the meat of the ginseng will be in the Jin army, where else can we eat it?

古文：令尹南辕反旆。
现代文：令尹回车向南，倒转旌旗。
English: He ordered Yin to turn back to the south and turn back the banner.

古文：伍参言于王曰： 晋之从政者新，未能行令。
现代文：伍参对楚庄王说： 晋国参政的是新人，不能行使命令。
English: Wu San said to Chu Zhuang Wang: It is new people who participate in politics in Jin Province, and they cannot exercise orders.

古文：其佐先縠刚愎不仁，未肯用命。
现代文：他的副手先縠刚愎不仁，不肯听从命令。
English: His second-in-command was too stubborn to follow orders.

古文：其三帅者专行不获，听而无上，众谁適从。
现代文：他们的三个统帅，想要专权行事而不能办到。想要听从命令而没有上级，大军听从谁的命令？
English: Their three generals want to exercise absolute power, but they cannot. They want to obey orders, but they have no superiors. Whose orders will the great army obey?

古文：此行也，晋师必败。
现代文：这一次，晋军一定失败。
English: This time, Jin's army is sure to fail.

古文：且君而逃臣，若社稷何？ 
现代文：而且国君逃避臣下，国君怎能蒙受这耻辱？ 
English: Moreover, the sovereign is running away from his subjects. How can the sovereign bear this shame?

古文：王病之，告令尹，改乘辕而北之，次于管以待之。
现代文：楚庄王听了不高兴，告诉令尹把战车改而向北，楚军驻扎在管地等待晋军。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang was not happy to hear this, and told Ling Yin to change the chariot to the north, and the Chu army was stationed in the jurisdiction to wait for the Jin army.

古文：晋师在敖、鄗之间。
现代文：晋国军队驻在敖、鄗两山之间。
English: The Jin army was stationed between the two mountains of Yunnan and Shandong.

古文：郑皇戌使如晋师曰： 郑之从楚，社稷之故也，未有贰心。
现代文：郑国的皇戌出使到晋军中，说： 郑国跟从楚国，是为了保存国家的缘故，对晋国并没有二心。
English: The Empress Dowager of Zheng dispatched an envoy to the Jin army, saying: Zheng followed Chu for the sake of preserving the country, and had no second thoughts about Jin.

古文：楚师骤胜而骄，其师老矣，而不设备，子击之，郑师为承，楚师必败。 
现代文：楚军屡次得胜而骄傲，他们在外面已经很久了，又不设防御。您攻击他们，郑国的军队作为后继，楚军一定失败。 
English: The Chu army is proud of its repeated victories. They have been outside for a long time and have not set up defenses. If you attack them, the army of Zheng as the successor, the Chu army will certainly fail.

古文：彘子曰： 败楚服郑，于此在矣，必许之。 
现代文：先縠说： 打败楚军，降服郑国，就在此一举了，一定要答应皇戌的请求。 
English: Xian Qi said: Defeating the Chu army and surrendering Zheng Guo is just one move. We must agree to the Emperor's request.

古文：栾武子曰： 楚自克庸以来，其君无日不讨国人而训之，于民生之不易，祸至之无日，戒惧之不可以怠。
现代文：栾书说： 楚国自从战胜庸国以来，楚国的国君没有一天不用不列的方式治理国内的人们：教训百姓生计的不容易、祸患不知哪天就会到来、戒备警惕不能放松。
English: The imperial edict said: Since the victory of Chu over Yongguo, the sovereign of Chu has never had to govern the people of the country in any of the following ways: it is not easy to teach the people how to make a living, disasters will come any day, and vigilance cannot be relaxed.

古文：在军无日不讨军实而申儆之，于胜之不可保，纣之百克而卒无后。
现代文：在军队里，没有一天不用这样的方式管理军官士兵，告诫军队：胜利的不能永远保有、纣得到一百次胜利而终究没有好结果。
English: In the army, there is not a single day when officers and soldiers are not managed in this way, and the army is warned that victory cannot be kept forever, and there is no good result after a hundred victories.

古文：训之以若敖、蚡冒筚路蓝缕以启山林。
现代文：用若敖、蚡冒乘柴车、穿破衣开辟山林的事迹来教训他们。
English: He taught them from the stories of the young men and women who rode fire trucks and wore ragged clothes to open up the mountains and forests.

古文：箴之曰： 民生在勤，勤则不匮。 
现代文：告诫说： 百姓的生计在于勤劳，勤劳就不会匮乏。 
English: He cautioned that the livelihood of the people lies in hard work, and there will be no shortage of hard work.

古文：不可谓骄。
现代文：这就不能说他们骄傲。
English: That's not to say they're proud.

古文：先大夫子犯有言曰： 师直为壮，曲为老。 
现代文：先大夫子犯说过： 出兵作战，理直就气壮，理亏就气衰。 
English: Qian Dafu Zi Guan said: When soldiers are sent out to fight, they are strong when they are right, and weak when they are wrong.

古文：我则不德而徼怨于楚，我曲楚直，不可谓老。
现代文：我们所做的事情不合于道德，又和楚国结怨，我们理曲，楚国理直，这就不能说他们气衰。
English: What we have done is unethical, and we have a grudge against the State of Chu. We are reasonable, and the State of Chu is reasonable. This is not to say that they are discouraged.

古文：其君之戎，分为二广，广有一卒，卒偏之两。
现代文：他们国君的战车分为左右二广，每广有战车一卒三十辆，每卒又分左右两偏。
English: The chariots of their sovereigns were divided into two broad chariots on the left and right, each broad chariot having one and thirty chariots, and each broad chariot having two broad chariots on the right and left.

古文：右广初驾，数及日中；左则受之，以至于昏。
现代文：右广先套车，计算时间等到中午，左广就接替它，一直到晚上。
English: The right-hand broad gauge first sets the train, and the calculation time waits until noon, and the left-hand broad gauge succeeds it, until the evening.

古文：内官序当其夜，以待不虞，不可谓无备。
现代文：左右近臣按次序值夜，以防备发生意外，这就不能说没有防备。
English: It cannot be said that there was no preparedness, as the right and left courtiers were ordered to stay up all night in case of an accident.

古文：子良，郑之良也。师叔，楚之崇也。
现代文：子良，是郑国的杰出人物；师叔，是楚国地位崇高的人物。
English: Ziliang is an outstanding person in Zhengzhou; Shizhu is a person of high status in Chu.

古文：师叔入盟，子良在楚，楚、郑亲矣。
现代文：师叔进入郑国结盟，子良作为人质住在楚国，楚国和郑国是亲近的。
English: Shifu entered into an alliance with Zheng, and Ziliang lived as a hostage in Chu. Chu and Zheng were close.

古文：来劝我战，我克则来，不克遂往，以我卜也，郑不可从。 
现代文：他们来劝我们作战，我们战胜就来归服，不胜就去依靠楚国，这是用我们作为占卜！郑国的话不能听从。 
English: They come to persuade us to fight, and when we win, we surrender, and when we lose, we rely on the State of Chu. This is using us as diviners! We cannot listen to the words of the State of Zheng.

古文：赵括、赵同曰： 率师以来，唯敌是求，克敌得属，又何俟？
现代文：赵括、赵同说： 领兵而来，就是为了寻找敌人。战胜敌人，得到属国，又等待什么？
English: Zhao Guan and Zhao Tong said, "To lead an army is to look for the enemy. Defeat the enemy, gain a vassal state, and what are you waiting for?

古文：必从彘子。 
现代文：一定要听从彘子的话。 
English: You must listen to the cripple.

古文：知季子曰： 原、屏，咎之徒也。 
现代文：荀首说： 赵同、赵括的主意，是一条自取祸乱之道。 赵庄子说： 栾伯好啊！
English: Dagger said: Zhao Tong, Zhao Guan's idea is a self-made path to disaster. Zhao Zhuangzi said: Good for Zhao Bo!

古文：赵庄子曰： 栾伯善哉，实其言，必长晋国。 楚少宰如晋师，曰： 寡君少遭闵凶，不能文。
现代文：实践他的话，一定能使晋国长久。 楚国的少宰到晋军中去，说： 寡君年轻时就遭到忧患，不善于辞令。
English: If his words are put into practice, they will surely make the Jin dynasty long-lasting. A young general from Chu went to the Jin army and said, "When you were young, you were plagued by misfortune and were not good at making speeches.

古文：闻二先君之出入此行也，将郑是训定，岂敢求罪于晋。
现代文：听到两位先君来往在这条道路上，就是打算教导和安定郑国，岂敢得罪晋国？
English: Do you dare to offend Jin when you hear that the two emperors traveled on this road, intending to teach and stabilize Zheng?

古文：二三子无淹久。 
现代文：您几位不要呆得太久了！ 
English: Don't stay too long, you two!

古文：随季对曰： 昔平王命我先君文侯曰： 与郑夹辅周室，毋废王命。 
现代文：士会回答说： 以前周平王命令我们的先君晋文侯说： 和郑国共同辅佐周王室，不要废弃天子的命令。 
English: The Council of Elders replied: In the past, King Zhou Ping ordered our forefather King Jin Wen Hou to say: "To assist the Zhou royal family together with Zheng Guo, do not abandon the order of the Son of Heaven.

古文：今郑不率，寡君使群臣问诸郑，岂敢辱候人？
现代文：现在郑国不遵循天子的命令，寡君派遣下臣们质问郑国，岂敢劳动楚国官吏来迎送？
English: Now Zheng Guo does not follow the order of the Son of Heaven, the widower sends his subordinates to question Zheng Guo, how dare the labor officials of Chu Guo come to welcome him?

古文：敢拜君命之辱。 
现代文：恭敬地拜谢君王的命令。 
English: I respectfully bow to your majesty's command.

古文：彘子以为谄，使赵括从而更之，曰： 行人失辞。
现代文：先穀认为这是奉承楚国，派遣赵括跟上去更正说： 我们的临时代表的说法不恰当。
English: Sankoku thought this was flattering to Chu, and sent Zhao Bu to follow up and correct it, saying: Our temporary representative's statement is inappropriate.

古文：寡君使群臣迁大国之迹于郑，曰： 无辟敌。 
现代文：寡君使臣下们把楚国从郑国迁出去，说： 不要躲避敌人！ 
English: The monarch's envoys and subordinates moved the state of Chu away from the state of Zheng, saying: Don't hide from the enemy!

古文：群臣无所逃命。 
现代文：臣下们没有地方可以逃避命令。 
English: There is no place for subordinates to escape orders.

古文：楚子又使求成于晋，晋人许之，盟有日矣。
现代文：楚庄王又派使者向晋国求和，晋国人答应了，已约定了结盟的日期。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang also sent an envoy to Jin to sue for peace, and the people of Jin agreed and set a date for the alliance.

古文：楚许伯御乐伯，摄叔为右，以致晋师。
现代文：楚国的许伯替乐伯驾御战车，摄叔作为车右，向晋军单车挑战。
English: Xu Bo from the State of Chu substituted for Le Bo to drive the imperial chariot, and Uncle Zheng, as the right side of the chariot, challenged the Jin army with a bicycle.

古文：许伯曰： 吾闻致师者，御靡旌摩垒而还。 
现代文：许伯说： 我听说单车挑战，驾车人疾驰而使旌旗斜倒，迫近敌营，然后回来。 
English: "I've heard of the bicycle challenge, where the cyclist speeds up and tips the flag, gets close to the enemy camp, and then comes back," Huib said.

古文：乐伯曰： 吾闻致师者，左射以菆，代御执辔，御下两马，掉鞅而还。 
现代文：乐伯说： 我听说单车挑战，车左用利箭射敌，代替御者执掌马缰，驾车人下车，整齐马匹，整理好马脖子上的皮带，然后回来。 
English: Le Bo said: I heard about the bicycle challenge. The rider shoots the opponent with a sharp arrow from the left side of the bicycle, takes the reins of the horse in place of the driver, the driver gets off the bicycle, tidies up the horses, tidies up the belt around the horse's neck, and then comes back.

古文：摄叔曰： 吾闻致师者，右入垒折馘，执俘而还。 
现代文：摄叔说： 我听说单车挑战，车右进入敌营，杀死敌人割取左耳、抓住俘虏，然后回来。 
English: Uncle said, "I heard about the bicycle challenge. The bicycle goes right into the enemy camp, kills the enemy, cuts off the left ear, grabs the prisoner, and then comes back.

古文：皆行其所闻而复。
现代文：这三个人都按照自己所听到的完成了任务，而后回来。
English: All three men did as they were told and came back.

古文：晋人逐之，左右角之。
现代文：晋国人追赶他们，左右两面夹攻。
English: The Jin chased them and attacked them from both sides.

古文：乐伯左射马而右射人，角不能进，矢一而已。
现代文：乐伯左边射马，右边射人，使晋军左右翼不能前进。箭只剩下一枝。
English: Le Bo shot horses on the left and people on the right, so that the left and right wings of the Jin army could not advance. There was only one arrow left.

古文：麋兴于前，射麋丽龟。
现代文：有麋鹿出现在前面，乐伯射麋鹿正中背部。
English: A moose appears in the foreground, and Le Bo shoots the moose in the mid-back.

古文：晋鲍癸当其后，使摄叔奉麋献焉，曰： 以岁之非时，献禽之未至，敢膳诸从者。 
现代文：晋国的鲍癸正在后面，乐伯让摄叔拿着麋鹿献给他，说： 由于今年还不到时令，应当奉献的禽兽没有来，谨把它奉献给您的随从作为膳食。 
English: The baobabs of Jin Province were in the back, and Le Bo asked Uncle Zheng to take the elk and offer it to him, saying, "Since it is not the season this year, the animal that should be offered has not come, I would like to offer it to your entourage as a meal."

古文：鲍癸止之，曰： 其左善射，其右有辞，君子也。 
现代文：鲍癸阻止部下，不再追赶，说： 他们的车左善于射箭，车右善于辞令，都是君子啊。 
English: Bao Tong stopped his subordinates from chasing him, saying, "Their left vehicle is good at archery, and their right vehicle is good at giving orders. They are all gentlemen."

古文：既免。
现代文：因此许伯等三人都免于被俘。
English: As a result, Xu Bo and the other three were spared from being captured.

古文：晋魏锜求公族，未得而怒，欲败晋师。
现代文：晋国的魏锜请求做公族大夫，没有达到目的，因而发怒，想要使晋军失败。
English: Wei Wei of Jin requested to be a public doctor, but he did not achieve his goal, so he became angry and wanted to make the Jin army fail.

古文：请致师，弗许。
现代文：请求单车挑战，没有得到允许。
English: A request for a cycling challenge was not granted.

古文：请使，许之。
现代文：请求出使，允许了。
English: Request sent. Permission granted.

古文：遂往，请战而还。
现代文：于是就去到楚军中，请战以后而回国。
English: So he went to the Chu army, fought and then returned home.

古文：楚潘党逐之，及荧泽，见六麋，射一麋以顾献曰： 子有军事，兽人无乃不给于鲜，敢献于从者。 
现代文：楚国的潘党追赶他，到达荧泽，魏锜看到六只麋鹿，就射死一只，回车献给潘党，说： 您有军事在身，打猎的人恐怕不能供给新鲜的野兽吧？
English: The Pan Party of Chu chased him and reached Huize. Wei Wei saw six elk and shot one dead. He returned to the car and presented it to the Pan Party, saying, "You have a military presence. I'm afraid hunters can't supply fresh animals, can they?"

古文：叔党命去之。
现代文：谨以此奉献给您的随从人员。 
English: I would like to dedicate this to your entourage.

古文：赵旃求卿未得，且怒于失楚之致师者。请挑战，弗许。
现代文：潘党下令不再追赶魏锜。赵旃请求做卿没有达到目的，而且对于失掉楚国单车挑战的人很生气，就请求挑战，没有得到允许。
English: Pan Party ordered not to chase Wei Yao any more. Zhao Yao's request to be the champion did not achieve the goal, and he was very angry with the person who lost the Chu bicycle challenge, so he asked for a challenge and was not allowed.

古文：请召盟，许之。
现代文：请求召请楚国人前来结盟，允许了。
English: The request to invite the people of Chu to come and form an alliance was approved.

古文：与魏锜皆命而往。
现代文：赵旃和魏锜都接受命令而前去。
English: Zhao Yao and Wei Yao both accepted the order and moved forward.

古文：郤献子曰： 二憾往矣，弗备必败。 
现代文：郤克说： 这两个心怀不满的人去了，不加防备，必然失败。 
English: "These two disgruntled people went there unprepared and were bound to fail," Mr. Shenke said.

古文：彘子曰： 郑人劝战，弗敢从也。楚人求成，弗能好也。
现代文：先縠说： 郑国人劝我们作战，不敢听从；楚国人求和，又不能实行友好。
English: Xian Qi said: The people of Zheng advised us to fight, but we did not dare to listen; the people of Chu asked for peace, but could not practice friendship.

古文：师无成命，多备何为？ 士季曰： 备之善。
现代文：带兵没有固定的策略，多加防备做什么？ 士会说： 防备他们为好。
English: There is no fixed strategy for leading troops, so what is the point of taking more precautions? A scholar would say: It is better to be prepared for them.

古文：若二子怒楚，楚人乘我，丧师无日矣。
现代文：如果这两位激怒了楚国，楚国人乘机掩袭，马上可以丧失军队。
English: If these two infuriate the State of Chu, the people of the State of Chu will take the opportunity to cover up and immediately lose their army.

古文：不如备之。楚之无恶，除备而盟，何损于好？
现代文：不如防备他们，楚国人没有恶意，撤除戒备而结盟，哪里会损害友好？
English: It's better to be on guard against them. The people of Chu have no ill-intentions. If we remove our guard and form an alliance, where will our friendship be damaged?

古文：若以恶来，有备不败。
现代文：如果带着恶意而来，有了防备，不会失败。
English: If you come with malice aforethought, you will not fail.

古文：且虽诸侯相见，军卫不彻，警也。 
现代文：而且即使是诸侯相见，军队的守备也不加撤除，这就是警惕。 
English: Moreover, even if the princes see each other, the army's defenses are not removed. This is vigilance.

古文：彘子不可。
现代文：先縠不同意。
English: Senki disagreed.

古文：士季使巩朔、韩穿帅七覆于敖前。故上军不败。
现代文：士会派遣巩朔、韩穿率领七队伏兵埋伏在敖山之前，所以上军不败。
English: The Council of Elders dispatched Gong Shuo and Han Peng to lead seven teams of ambush soldiers to ambush Lushan, so the army was undefeated.

古文：赵婴齐使其徒先具舟于河，故败而先济。
现代文：赵婴齐派遣他的部下先在黄河准备了船只，所以战败以后就渡过河去了。
English: Zhao Yingqi sent his subordinates to prepare boats in the Yellow River first, so they crossed the river after the defeat.

古文：潘党既逐魏锜，赵旃夜至于楚军，席于军门之外，使其徒入之。
现代文：潘党已经赶走了魏锜，赵旃在夜里达到楚军驻地，铺开席子坐在军门的外面，派遣他的部下先进军门。
English: Pan's party had already driven out Wei Xuan. Zhao Xuan reached the Chu garrison in the night, spread out a seat and sat outside the gate, and sent his subordinates to the front gate.

古文：楚子为乘广三十乘，分为左右。
现代文：楚庄王的战车一广三十辆，共分为左右两广。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang's chariot has a total of 30 chariots, divided into left and right chariots.

古文：右广鸡鸣而驾，日中而说。左则受之，日入而说。
现代文：右广在早晨鸡叫的时候套车，太阳到了中天才卸车；左广就接替右广，太阳落山才卸车。
English: In the morning, when the rooster crows, the right side of the road is covered with cars, and the sun doesn't come up until the middle of the day; the left side of the road takes over from the right side of the road, and the sun doesn't set until the car is unloaded.

古文：许偃御右广，养由基为右。彭名御左广，屈荡为右。
现代文：许偃驾御右广的指挥车，养由基作为车右；彭名驾御左广的指挥车，屈荡作为车右。
English: Xu Rong drove the right-wide command car, and Zhaoyu Ji drove the right-wide command car; Peng Ming drove the left-wide command car, and Xuan Rong drove the right-wide command car.

古文：乙卯，王乘左广以逐赵旃。
现代文：六月十四日，楚庄王乘坐左广的指挥车，以追赶赵旃。
English: On June 14, Chu Zhuang Wang took Zuo Guang's command car to catch up with Zhao Yao.

古文：赵旃弃车而走林，屈荡搏之，得其甲裳。
现代文：赵旃丢掉车子跑进树林里，屈荡和他搏斗，获得了他的铠甲和下衣。
English: Zhao Yao lost his car and ran into the woods. He wrestled with him and got his armor and underwear.

古文：晋人惧二子之怒楚师也，使軘车逆之。
现代文：晋国人害怕这两个人激怒楚军，让驻守的兵车前来接他们。
English: The people of Jin were afraid that the two men would anger the Chu army, so they asked the garrisoned military vehicles to come and pick them up.

古文：潘党望其尘，使骋而告曰： 晋师至矣。 
现代文：潘党远望飞起来的尘土，派战车奔驰报告说： 晋国的军队来了。 
English: Pan Party looked far and wide for the flying dust and sent the chariot Benz to report: Jin's army has arrived.

古文：楚人亦惧王之入晋军也，遂出陈。
现代文：楚国人也害怕楚庄王陷入晋军中，就出兵迎战。
English: The people of Chu were also afraid that Chu Zhuang Wang would fall into the Jin army, so they sent troops to fight.

古文：孙叔曰： 进之。
现代文：孙叔敖说： 前进！
English: Sun Shuxuan said, "Forward!"

古文：宁我薄人，无人薄我。
现代文：宁可我们迫近敌人，不要让敌人迫近我们。
English: It is better for us to draw near to the enemy than for the enemy to draw near to us.

古文：《诗》云： 元戎十乘，以先启行。 先人也。
现代文：《诗》说： 大兵车十辆，冲在前面开道 ，这是要抢在敌人的前面。
English: "Poem" says: Ten armored cars rushed forward to open the road, this is to seize the front of the enemy.

古文：《军志》曰： 先人有夺人之心 ，薄之也。 
现代文：《军志》说： 抢在敌人前面，可以夺去敌人的斗志。 
English: "Military History" said: to seize the front of the enemy, you can take away the fighting spirit of the enemy.

古文：遂疾进师，车驰卒奔，乘晋军。
现代文：这是要主动迫近敌人。 于是就很快地进军，战车奔驰、士卒奔跑，围攻晋军。
English: This is to take the initiative to approach the enemy. So he quickly marched in, chariots galloped, soldiers ran, and besieged the Jin army.

古文：桓子不知所为，鼓于军中曰： 先济者有赏。 
现代文：荀林父不知所措，在军中击鼓宣布说： 先过河的有赏。 
English: At a loss for what to do, Yulin's father played the drums in the army and announced: There is a reward for crossing the river first.

古文：中军、下军争舟，舟中之指可掬也。
现代文：中军、下军互相争夺船只，争先恐后，先上船的人用刀砍断后来者攀着船舷的手指，船中砍断的指头多得可以用手捧起来。
English: The Chinese army and the lower army competed with each other for ships, scrambling for the top. The first to board the ship cut off his fingers with a knife, while the latter clung to the side of the ship. The number of cut fingers in the ship was so large that they could be picked up by hand.

古文：晋师右移，上军未动。
现代文：晋军向右转移，上军没有动。
English: The Jin army shifted to the right, but the Shang army did not move.

古文：工尹齐将右拒卒以逐下军。
现代文：工尹齐率领右方阵的士兵，以追逐晋国的下军。
English: Gong Yin Qi led the soldiers of the right phalanx to chase the army of Jin.

古文：楚子使唐狡与蔡鸠居告唐惠侯曰： 不穀不德而贪，以遇大敌，不穀之罪也。
现代文：楚庄王派唐狡和蔡鸠居报告唐惠侯说： 我无德而贪功，而又遭遇强大的敌人，这是我的罪过。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang sent Tang Qiu and Cai Xingju to report to Tang Hui Hou, who said, "I am without virtue and greedy for merit, and yet I have encountered a powerful enemy. This is my sin.

古文：然楚不克，君之羞也，敢藉君灵以济楚师。 
现代文：楚国如果不能得胜，这也是君王的羞耻。谨借重君王的福佑，以帮助楚军成功。 
English: If the state of Chu cannot win, this is also the shame of the king. I would like to borrow the blessing of the king to help the Chu army succeed.

古文：使潘党率游阙四十乘，从唐侯以为左拒，以从上军。
现代文：派遣潘党率领后备的战车四十辆，跟随唐侯作为左方阵，以迎战晋国的上军。
English: The Pan faction dispatched forty reserve chariots led by the Pan faction, and followed the Tang lord as the left square formation to meet the Jin army's advance.

古文：驹伯曰： 待诸乎？ 
现代文：驹伯说： 抵御他们吗？ 
English: Do you want to resist them?

古文：随季曰： 楚师方壮，若萃于我，吾师必尽。
现代文：士会说： 楚军的士气正旺盛，如果楚军集中兵力对付我们的上军，我们的军队必然被消灭，不如收兵离开。
English: The officers would say: The morale of the Chu army is booming. If the Chu army concentrates its forces against our army, our army will inevitably be destroyed. It would be better to withdraw.

古文：不如收而去之，分谤生民，不亦可乎。 
现代文：分担战败的指责，保全士兵的生命，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Is it not also possible to share the blame for the defeat and to save the lives of soldiers?

古文：殿其卒而退，不败。
现代文：就亲自作为上军的后殿而退兵，因此没有被打败。
English: He personally retired from the army as a retainer of the army, so he was not defeated.

古文：王见右广，将从之乘。
现代文：楚庄王见到右广，准备乘坐。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang saw Uguang and prepared to ride.

古文：屈荡户之曰： 君以此始，亦必以终。 
现代文：屈荡阻止说： 君王乘坐左广开始作战，也一定要乘坐它结束战争。 
English: He said, "The king started the war on the Zuo Guang, and he must end the war on it."

古文：自是楚之乘广先左。
现代文：从此楚国的乘广改以左广为先。
English: From then on, the country of Chu changed from the multiplication of wide to the left wide.

古文：晋人或以广队不能进，楚人惎之脱扃，少进，马还，又惎之拔旆投衡，乃出。
现代文：晋国人有战车陷在坑里不能前进，楚国人教他们抽出车前横木，没走多远，马盘旋不能前进，楚国人又教他们拔掉大旗，扔掉车辕头上的横木，这样才逃了出去。
English: The Jin people had a chariot stuck in a pit and could not move forward. The Chu people taught them to pull out the crossbar in front of the chariot. They did not go far, and the horse could not move forward. The Chu people also taught them to pull out the big flag and throw away the crossbar on the head of the chariot, so they escaped.

古文：顾曰： 吾不如大国之数奔也。 
现代文：晋军转过头来说： 我们可不像大国的人有多次逃跑的经验。 
English: The Jin army turned around and said: We are not like the people of big countries who have the experience of escaping many times.

古文：赵旃以其良马二，济其兄与叔父，以他马反，遇敌不能去，弃车而走林。
现代文：赵旃用他的好马两匹帮助他的哥哥和叔父逃跑，而用其他的马驾车回来。碰上敌人不能逃脱，就丢弃车子跑到树林里。
English: Zhao Jun used two of his good horses to help his brother and uncle escape, and used the other horses to drive back. When the enemy could not escape, he abandoned the car and ran into the woods.

古文：逢大夫与其二子乘，谓其二子无顾。
现代文：逢大夫和他两个儿子坐在车上，对他两个儿子说： 不要回头去望。 
English: Dr. Feng and his two sons were sitting in the car, and he said to his two sons, "Don't look back.

古文：顾曰： 赵傁在后。 
现代文：儿子回头去望说： 赵老头在后边。 
English: My son looked back and said: Old Zhao is in the back.

古文：怒之，使下，指木曰： 尸女于是。 
现代文：逢大夫发怒，让他们下车，指着树木说： 在这里收你们的尸首。 
English: Dr. Feng flew into a rage, made them get out of the car, pointed to the trees and said, "Take your bodies here."

古文：授赵旃绥以免。
现代文：逢大夫就把缰绳交给了赵旃，赵旃登上战车得以逃脱。
English: Dr. Feng handed the reins to Zhao Yao, and Zhao Yao boarded the chariot and was able to escape.

古文：明日以表尸之，皆重获在木下。
现代文：第二天，按照标志前去收尸，在树下得到了两个叠压的尸首。
English: The next day, I followed the sign to collect the bodies and found two stacked corpses under a tree.

古文：楚熊负羁囚知罃。知庄子以其族反之，厨武子御，下军之士多从之。
现代文：楚国的熊负羁囚禁了知罃，荀首率领他的部属回来战斗，魏锜驾御战车，下军的士兵大多跟着回来。
English: The bear of Chu imprisoned Zhisheng, the dagger led his subordinates back to battle, Wei Wei drove the chariot, and most of the soldiers who left the army came back.

古文：每射，抽矢菆，纳诸厨子之房。
现代文：荀首每次发射，抽箭，如果是利箭，就放在魏锜的箭袋里。
English: Each time the dagger is fired, the arrow is drawn, and if it is a sharp arrow, it is placed in Wei Yao's quiver.

古文：厨子怒曰： 非子之求而蒲之爱，董泽之蒲，可胜既乎？ 
现代文：魏锜发怒说： 不去寻找儿子，反而爱惜蒲柳，董泽的蒲柳，难道可以用得完吗？ 
English: Wei Yao said angrily, "Instead of looking for his son, he spared the willow, Dong Ze's willow, can it be used up?

古文：知季曰： 不以人子，吾子其可得乎？
现代文：荀首说： 不得到别人的儿子，我的儿子难道可以得到吗？
English: The dagger said, If I cannot have another man's son, may I have my own?

古文：吾不可以苟射故也。 
现代文：利箭我是不能随便射出去的。 
English: I can't just shoot a sharp arrow.

古文：射连尹襄老，获之，遂载其尸。射公子穀臣，囚之。
现代文：荀首射中了连尹襄老，得到他的尸首，就用战车装上；射中公子谷臣，把他囚禁起来。
English: The dagger hit Lian Yin Xiang Lao, and when his corpse was found, it was loaded onto a chariot; it hit his son, Gu Chen, and he was imprisoned.

古文：以二者还。
现代文：荀首带了这两个人回去。
English: Dagger took the two men back.

古文：及昏，楚师军于邲，晋之馀师不能军，宵济，亦终夜有声。
现代文：到黄昏时，楚军驻扎在邲地，晋国剩余的士兵已经溃不成军，夜里渡河，喧吵了一整夜。
English: By dusk, the Chu army was stationed in Loudi, and the remaining soldiers of Jin had already collapsed into an army, crossing the river at night and quarreling all night.

古文：丙辰，楚重至于邲，遂次于衡雍。
现代文：六月十五日，楚军的辎重到达邲地，军队就驻扎在衡雍。
English: On June 15, the main body of the Chu army arrived in Handan, and the army was stationed in Hengyong.

古文：潘党曰： 君盍筑武军，而收晋尸以为京观？
现代文：潘党说： 君王何不建筑起军营显示武功，收集晋国人的尸首建立一个大坟堆？
English: The Pan Party said: Why doesn't the king build a military camp to show martial arts, collect the corpses of the Jin people and build a large cemetery?

古文：臣闻克敌必示子孙，以无忘武功。 
现代文：下臣听说战胜了敌人一定要有纪念物给子孙看，表示不忘记武功。 
English: The vassal heard that after defeating the enemy, there must be a memorial for the descendants to see, indicating not to forget the martial arts.

古文：楚子曰： 非尔所知也。
现代文：楚庄王说：这不是你所知道的。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang said: This is not what you know.

古文：夫文，止戈为武。
现代文：说到文字，止戈二字合起来是个武字。
English: When it comes to the characters, the combination of the two characters "止戈" is a martial character.

古文：武王克商，作《颂》曰： 载戢干戈，载櫜弓矢。
现代文：武王战胜商朝，作《周颂》说： 收拾干戈，包藏弓箭。
English: King Wu defeated the Shang Dynasty, and in his "Song of Zhou" he said: Pack up the war materials, and hide the bows and arrows.

古文：我求懿德，肆于时夏，允王保之。 
现代文：我追求那美德，陈于这《夏》乐之中，成就王业而保有天下。 
English: I pursue that virtue, display it in this "summer" music, achieve the king's career and keep it in the world.

古文：又作《武》，其卒章曰： 耆定尔功。 
现代文：又作《武》篇，它的最后一章说： 得以巩固你的功业。 
English: He also wrote "Wu" (武), the last chapter of which says, "Be able to consolidate your career."

古文：其三曰： 铺时绎思，我徂惟求定。 
现代文：《周颂》的第三章说： 布陈先王的美德而加以发扬，我前去征讨只是为了求得安定。 
English: The third chapter of "Zhouxiong" says: "I only went to fight for stability in order to carry forward the virtues of King Chen.

古文：其六曰： 绥万邦，屡丰年。 
现代文：它的第六章说： 安定万邦，常有丰年。 
English: Its sixth chapter says: "The nations will be secure, and there will be abundant harvests.

古文：夫武，禁暴、戢兵、保大、定功、安民、和众、丰财者也。故使子孙无忘其章。
现代文：武功，是用来禁止强暴、消灭战争、保持强大、巩固功业、安定百姓、调和大众、丰富财物的，所以要让子孙不要忘记他的大功。
English: Martial arts are used to prohibit violence, eliminate war, stay strong, consolidate achievements, stabilize the people, reconcile the public, and enrich wealth, so let the children and grandchildren not forget his great service.

古文：今我使二国暴骨，暴矣；观兵以威诸侯，兵不戢矣。暴而不戢，安能保大？
现代文：现在我让两国士兵暴露尸骨，这是强暴了；显耀武力以使诸侯畏惧，战争不能消灭了；强暴而不消灭战争，哪里能够保持强大？
English: Now I let the soldiers of the two countries expose the bones, which is violent; show force to make the princes afraid, the war can not be eliminated; rape without eliminating the war, where can you stay strong?

古文：犹有晋在，焉得定功？
现代文：还有晋国存在，如何能够巩固功业？
English: There is also the existence of Jin Province, how can we consolidate our achievements?

古文：所违民欲犹多，民何安焉？
现代文：所违背百姓的愿望还很多，百姓如何能够安定？
English: There are still many things that go against the people's wishes. How can the people be stable?

古文：无德而强争诸侯，何以和众？
现代文：没有德行而勉强和诸侯相争，用什么调和大众？
English: Without virtue, but reluctantly contending with the princes, how can the public be reconciled?

古文：利人之几，而安人之乱，以为己荣，何以丰财？
现代文：乘别人之危作为自己的利益，趁人之乱作为自己的安定，如何能丰富财物？
English: Taking advantage of others' danger as one's own benefit, taking advantage of human chaos as one's own stability, how can one enrich wealth?

古文：武有七德，我无一焉，何以示子孙？
现代文：武功具有七种美德，我对晋国用兵却没有一项美德，用什么来昭示子孙后代？
English: Martial arts has seven virtues, but I do not have a single virtue for the use of soldiers in Jin. How can I show this to future generations?

古文：其为先君宫，告成事而已。
现代文：还是为楚国的先君修建宗庙，把成功的事祭告先君罢了。
English: Or to build a family temple for the forefather of the Chu Kingdom, and to tell the forefather of the success of the matter.

古文：武非吾功也。
现代文：用武不是我追求的功业。
English: Martial arts is not what I'm after.

古文：古者明王伐不敬，取其鲸鲵而封之，以为大戮，于是乎有京观，以惩淫慝。
现代文：古代圣明的君王征伐对上不恭敬的国家，抓住它的罪魁祸首杀掉埋葬，作为一次大杀戮，这样才有了京观以惩戒罪恶。
English: In ancient times, emperors of the Ming and Qing dynasties would invade a disrespectful country, seize its culprits, kill and bury them as a great slaughter. This is how the Beijing Confucianism came into being to punish evil.

古文：今罪无所，而民皆尽忠以死君命，又可以为京乎？ 
现代文：现在并不能明确指出晋国的罪恶在哪里，士卒都尽忠为执行国君的命令而死，又难道能建造京观来惩戒吗？
English: Now it is not possible to clearly point out where the sins of Jin are, the soldiers are all loyal and die to carry out the orders of the sovereign, and can the Beijing Outlook be built to punish them?

古文：祀于河，作先君宫，告成事而还。
现代文：楚庄王说完，就在黄河边上祭祀了河神，修建了先君的神庙，报告战争胜利，然后回国。
English: After he finished speaking, the king of Chu Zhuang offered a sacrifice to the river god on the edge of the Yellow River, built a temple for his ancestor, reported the victory of the war, and then returned to China.

古文：是役也，郑石制实入楚师，将以分郑而立公子鱼臣。
现代文：这次战役，是郑国的石制把楚国军队引进来的，企图分割郑国，并且立公子鱼臣为国君。
English: This battle was an attempt to divide Zheng by bringing in the troops of Chu from Zheng's Stone Age, and to install the nobleman Yu Xian as the sovereign.

古文：辛未，郑杀仆叔及子服。
现代文：七月二十九日，郑国人杀死了鱼臣和石制。
English: On July 29th, the Zheng people killed Yu Chen and Stone.

古文：君子曰： 史佚所谓毋怙乱者，谓是类也。《诗》曰： 乱离瘼矣，爰其適归？ 
现代文：君子说： 史佚所谓 不要依仗动乱 ，说的就是这一类人，《诗》说： 动乱离散是那么厉害，有哪里可以归宿 ？
English: The nobles said, "Don't rely on the turmoil," and it was this kind of person who spoke. "Poetry" said, "The turmoil and dispersion are so severe, where can we go?"

古文：归于怙乱者也夫！ 
现代文：这是归罪于靠动乱来谋私利的人吧！ 
English: This is to be blamed on those who rely on the turmoil for personal gain!

古文：郑伯、许男如楚。
现代文：郑襄公、许昭公去到楚国。
English: Zheng Xiang Gong and Xu Zhao Gong went to Chu.

古文：秋，晋师归，桓子请死，晋侯欲许之。
现代文：秋季，晋国军队回国，荀林父自己请求处以死罪，晋景公打算答应他。
English: In the autumn, when the Jin troops returned to China, Yulin's father himself asked for the death penalty, and the Duke of Jin intended to grant it.

古文：士贞子谏曰： 不可。城濮之役，晋师三日穀，文公犹有忧色。
现代文：士贞子劝谏说： 不行，城濮那一次战役，晋军三天吃着楚军留下的粮食，文公还面带忧色。
English: Sadako, a scholar, advised him, "No, it's not possible. During the battle of Chengdu, the Jin army ate the grain left by the Chu army for three days, and Wengong still looked sad.

古文：左右曰： 有喜而忧，如有忧而喜乎？ 
现代文：左右的人说： 有了喜事而忧愁，如果有了忧事反倒喜悦吗？ 
English: People on all sides say, "If there is joy, why is there sorrow? If there is sorrow, why is there joy?"

古文：公曰： 得臣犹在，忧未歇也。
现代文：文公说： 得臣还在，忧愁还不能算完结。
English: Wengong said: The minister is still there, the sorrow is not over yet.

古文：困兽犹斗，况国相乎！ 
现代文：被困的野兽还要争斗一下，何况是一国的宰相呢？ 
English: Trapped beasts still have to fight, and what about the prime minister of a country?

古文：及楚杀子玉，公喜而后可知也，曰： 莫余毒也已。 
现代文：等到楚国杀了得臣，文公便喜形于色，说： 没有人来同我作对了。 
English: When the State of Chu killed the worthy minister, Wengong was overjoyed and said, "No one has come to oppose me."

古文：是晋再克而楚再败也，楚是以再世不竞。
现代文：这是晋国的再次胜利，也是楚国的再次失败，楚国由此两世都不能强盛。
English: This was another victory for Jin, but also another defeat for Chu. As a result, Chu could not prosper in the next two generations.

古文：今天或者大警晋也，而又杀林父以重楚胜，其无乃久不竞乎！
现代文：现在上天或者是要大大地警戒晋国，但又杀了荀林父以增加楚国的胜利，这恐怕会使晋国好久还不能强盛的吧？
English: Now, Heaven may want to greatly warn Jin Province, but it also killed Yulin father to increase the victory of Chu Province. This will probably make Jin Province not strong for a long time, right?

古文：林父之事君也，进思尽忠，退思补过，社稷之卫也，若之何杀之？
现代文：荀林父的事奉国君，进，想着竭尽忠诚，退，想着弥补过错，是捍卫国家的人，怎么能杀他？
English: Yulin father's service to the country, into, thinking to be loyal, retreat, thinking to make up for mistakes, is to defend the country, how can you kill him?

古文：夫其败也，如日月之食焉，何损于明？ 
现代文：他的失败，如同日蚀月蚀，怎么会损害日月的光明？ 
English: How could his failure, like an eclipse, impair the light of the sun and moon?

古文：晋侯使复其位。
现代文：晋景公就命令荀林父官复原位。
English: Lord Jinjing ordered that Yulin officials be restored to their original positions.

古文：冬，楚子伐萧，宋华椒以蔡人救萧。
现代文：冬季，楚庄王攻打萧国。宋国华椒率领蔡军去救萧国。
English: In winter, the king of Chu Zhuang attacked Xiao Guo. Song Guo Huajiao led the Cai Army to rescue Xiao Guo.

古文：萧人囚熊相宜僚及公子丙。
现代文：萧军囚禁了熊相宜僚和公子丙。
English: Xiao Jun imprisoned Xiong Xiangyi and Gongzi C.

古文：王曰： 勿杀，吾退。 
现代文：楚庄王说： 不要杀，我退兵。 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang said, "Don't kill me, I'm leaving the army."

古文：萧人杀之。
现代文：萧国人杀了他们。
English: The Xiao people killed them.

古文：王怒，遂围萧。
现代文：楚庄王发怒，就包围了萧国。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang got angry and surrounded Xiao Guo.

古文：萧溃。申公巫臣曰： 师人多寒。 
现代文：萧国崩溃，申公巫臣说： 军队里的人大多很冷。 
English: When Xiao Guo collapsed, Shengong Wuxian said, "Most of the people in the army are very cold.

古文：王巡三军，拊而勉之。三军之士，皆如挟纩。
现代文：楚庄王巡视三军，安抚慰勉士兵们，三军的战士感到温暖，都好像披上了丝棉一样。
English: King Chu Zhuang inspected the three armies, comforted and consoled the soldiers, and the soldiers of the three armies felt warm, as if they were wearing silk cotton.

古文：遂傅于萧。
现代文：军队就前进而逼近萧城。
English: The army then advanced and closed in on Xiaocheng.

古文：还无社与司马卯言，号申叔展。
现代文：还无社告诉司马卯，把申叔展喊出来。
English: There is still no company to tell Sima Yu to call out Shin Shuzhen.

古文：叔展曰： 有麦麹乎？ 
现代文：申叔展说： 你有酒药吗？ 
English: Shin Shuzhen said: Do you have any alcohol?

古文：曰： 无。 
现代文：还无社说： 没有。 
English: Luo Zichun said: No.

古文： 有山鞠穷乎？ 
现代文： 有川芎吗？ 还无社说： 没有。 
English: Is there a river raft? Still no company says: No.

古文：曰： 无。 
现代文： 得了风湿病怎么办？ 
English: Luo Zichun said: No.

古文： 河鱼腹疾奈何？ 
现代文：还无社说： 注意看枯井就可以拯救我。 
English: No company has yet said, "Looking out for dry wells can save me."

古文：曰： 目于眢井而拯之。  若为茅绖，哭井则己。 
现代文：申叔展说： 你在井上放一条草绳子，有向井里哭的人就是我。 
English: Shen Shuzhen said: You put a grass rope on the well, and I am the one who is crying to the well.

古文：明日萧溃，申叔视其井，则茅绖存焉，号而出之。
现代文：第二天，萧国崩溃。申叔展看到井上有草绳子在那里，就放声号哭，把还无社救出枯井。
English: The next day, Xiao Guo collapsed. Shen Shuzhan saw that there was a grass rope in the well, and he cried loudly to rescue the still helpless people from the dry well.

古文：晋原縠、宋华椒、卫孔达、曹人同盟于清丘。曰： 恤病讨贰。 
现代文：晋国的原縠、宋国的华椒、卫国的孔达、曹国人在清丘结盟，说： 周济有困难的国家，讨伐三心二意的国家。 
English: The Hara clan of Jin, the Hua pepper clan of Song, the Konda clan of Wei, and the Cao people allied in Qingqiu, saying: "Provide aid to countries with difficulties, and fight against countries with half-heartedness."

古文：于是卿不书，不实其言也。
现代文：对这次盟会，《春秋》没有记载卿的姓名，这是由于没有实行盟约。
English: For this alliance, "Spring and Autumn" did not record the name of the lord, this is due to the lack of implementation of the covenant.

古文：宋为盟故，伐陈。
现代文：宋国为了盟约的缘故，进攻陈国。
English: Song attacked Chen for the sake of the treaty.

古文：卫人救之。孔达曰： 先君有约言焉，若大国讨，我则死之。 
现代文：卫军救援陈国，孔达说： 先君有约定，如果大国进攻我们，我愿意为此去死。 
English: When the guards rescued Chen Guo, Konda said, "Our ancestors had an agreement that if a great power attacked us, I would be willing to die for it.

