古文：于栗磾，代人也。
现代文：于栗石单是代郡人。
English: Yu Kuriishi is a representative of the county.

古文：少习武艺，材力过人，能左右驰射。
现代文：从小就学习武艺，才干和气力都超乎常人，能左右驰射。
English: He learned martial arts from a young age, and his talent and strength are beyond ordinary people. He can shoot left and right.

古文：登国中，拜冠军将军，假新安子。
现代文：登国年间，任冠军将军，授新安子爵。
English: During the year of his ascension to the throne, he served as champion general and was awarded the title of Viscount Shinan.

古文：与宁朔将军公孙兰，潜自太原，从韩信故道，开井陉关路，袭慕容宝于中山。
现代文：他和宁朔将军公孙兰，暗地里从太原沿着韩信故道，开通井陉关的道路，在中山暗袭慕容宝。
English: He and the Ningshuo general Gongsun Lan secretly traveled from Taiyuan along the old road of Han Xin, opened the road of Jinghuaguan, and secretly attacked Murongbao in Zhongshan.

古文：道武后至，见道路修理，大悦，即赐其名马。
现代文：道武帝随后赶来，他见道路已经修好，十分高兴，当即赐于栗石单名马。
English: Emperor Daowu arrived later. He was very happy to see that the road had been repaired and immediately gave the horse a name.

古文：及赵魏平，帝置酒高会，谓栗磾曰： 卿，吾之黥、彭也！ 
现代文：当赵、魏两地被讨平之后，道武帝大摆筵席欢会众官时，对于栗石单说： 你就是我的黥布和彭越啊！ 
English: When the two regions of Zhao and Wei were levelled, Emperor Daowu held a grand banquet to celebrate the officials, and said to Liushi Shan, "You are my cloth and Peng Yue!"

古文：进假新安公。
现代文：晋封爵位为新安公。
English: He was promoted to the peerage as Xin'an Gong.

古文：道武田于白登山，见熊将数子，顾栗磾曰： 能搏之乎？ 
现代文：道武帝到白登山狩猎，看见一头大熊带着几只小熊，便看着于栗石单说 ：能够和它相搏斗吗？ 
English: Emperor Daowu went hunting in the Baekdu Mountains and saw a large bear with several cubs. He looked at Chestnut and said, "Can I fight with it?"

古文：对曰： 若搏之不胜，岂不虚毙一壮士！
现代文：于栗石单答 ：如果打不过它，岂不是白白当作一名勇士吗？
English: Yu Chestnut Single Answer: If you can't beat it, isn't it a waste to be a warrior?

古文：自可驱致御前，坐而制之。 
现代文：自当把它们赶到您的车驾前，轻而易举地制服它们。 
English: You can drive them right up to your car and easily overpower them.

古文：寻皆禽获，帝顾而谢之。
现代文：不一会，这几头熊都被捕获了。道武帝注视着他并表示谢意。
English: After a while, all the bears were captured. Emperor Daowu looked at him and thanked him.

古文：后为河内镇将。
现代文：后来他当河内镇将。
English: Later, he became the mayor of Hanoi.

古文：刘裕之伐姚泓，栗磾虑北侵扰，筑垒河上。裕惮之，遗栗磾书，假道西上。
现代文：刘裕攻打姚泓时，于栗石单担心他会继续往北侵扰，便在河边构筑坚固的堡垒，刘裕很觉不安，便送信给于栗石单，向他借道西去。
English: When Liu Yu attacked Yao Xi, Yu Liushi Shan was worried that he would continue to invade the north, so he built a solid fortress by the river. Liu Yu was very uneasy, so he sent a message to Yu Liushi Shan and asked him to go west.

古文：题书曰： 黑槊公麾下 。
现代文：这封信开头写 ：黑槊公麾下。 
English: The letter began: "Under the command of Lord Blackbeard."

古文：栗磾以状表闻，明元因之授栗磾黑槊将军。
现代文：于栗石单将书信表奏皇帝，明元帝因此而赐号于栗石单为 黑槊将军 。
English: The Emperor Mingyuan gave him the title of "General Heihei" (黑将军) for the letter he wrote to the Emperor.

古文：栗磾好持黑槊，裕望而异之，故有其号。
现代文：于栗石单喜欢拿着一把黑槊，刘裕远远望见，很是惊奇，所以有了这样称呼。
English: Yu Chestnut likes to hold a black pickaxe, Liu Yu can see it from far away, it is very surprising, so there is such a name.

古文：迁豫州刺史，进爵新安侯。
现代文：后升任豫州刺史，晋爵位为新安侯。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Yuzhou magistrate, and was given the title of Xin'an marquis.

古文：洛阳虽历代所都，实为边界，栗磾劳来安集，甚得百姓心。
现代文：洛阳虽然原是历代的都城，如今却是北魏的边界地。于栗石单勤于治理，人心安定，深得百姓的拥戴。
English: Although Luoyang was once the capital city, it is now a border town of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Yu Liushi is diligent in governance, stable in people's hearts, and deeply loved by the people.

古文：明元南幸盟津，谓栗磾曰： 河可桥乎？ 
现代文：明元帝南行至盟津时，问于栗石单说： 黄河上能造桥吗？ 
English: When Emperor Mingyuan traveled south to Meituan and Tianjin, he asked Yu Chulishi: "Can you build a bridge over the Yellow River?"

古文：栗磾曰： 杜预造桥，遗事可想。 
现代文：于栗石单说： 杜预曾经造过桥，有这样的往事，应当可以。 
English: Yu Chestnut said: Du Yue once built a bridge, with such a past, it should be possible.

古文：乃编大船，构桥于野坂。
现代文：于是他把许多大船连结在一起，在冶坂这个地方造了一座桥。
English: So he tied together a number of large ships and built a bridge in the Yezhan area.

古文：六军既济，帝深叹美之。
现代文：当大军渡过黄河后，明元皇帝大为赞叹。
English: When the army crossed the Yellow River, Emperor Mingyuan was greatly impressed.

古文：太武之征赫连昌，敕栗磾与宋兵将军周几袭陕城，长驱至三辅。
现代文：太武帝攻打赫连昌时，命令于栗石单跟宋兵将军周几领兵袭击陕州城，两人统率的军队长驱直入，攻至三辅之地。
English: When Emperor Taowu attacked Helianchang, he ordered Yu Liushi and Song general Zhou Qi to lead the troops to attack the city of Shaanxi. The two army commanders drove straight in and attacked the place of Sanfu.

古文：进爵为公。
现代文：太武帝给他晋封公爵。
English: Emperor Taibu promoted him to Duke.

古文：累迁外都大官，平刑折狱，甚有声称。
现代文：他多次担任外地重镇的大官，判案、量刑都很公平，很有声望。
English: He has served as a high-ranking official of a major foreign city many times, and his judgments and sentencing are very fair and have a high reputation.

古文：卒，赠太尉。
现代文：死时，追赠太尉官职。
English: When he died, he was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：栗磾自少总戎，迄于白首，临事善断，所向无前。
现代文：于栗石单从年轻时就统率军队，直至白发苍苍，他临事善作决断，所向无前。
English: From a young age, Yu Chulishi led the army until he was white-haired. He was good at making decisions and was always ahead of his time.

古文：加以谦虚下士，刑罚不滥，太武甚悼惜之。
现代文：加之又谦虚待人，礼贤下士，不滥用刑罚。所以他去世时太武帝十分伤心，惋惜不已。
English: In addition, he was a humble and courteous corporal, and did not abuse punishment. Therefore, when he died, Emperor Taibu was very sad and regretful.

古文：子洛拔，有姿容，善应对。
现代文：他的儿子名叫洛拔，长得十分秀美，又善于言谈。
English: His son's name was Robert, and he was very handsome and eloquent.

古文：拜侍御中散。
现代文：被任命为侍御中散大夫。
English: He was appointed to the position of Samurai Chusan-dof.

古文：太武甚加爱宠，因赐名焉。
现代文：太武帝十分宠爱他，所以赐给他这个名字。
English: Emperor Taibu loved him so much that he gave him this name.

古文：转监御曹令。
现代文：不久被任命为监御曹令。
English: He was soon appointed as a supervisor Cao Ling.

古文：景穆在东宫，厚加礼遇。
现代文：景穆帝为东宫太子时，对他格外敬重和礼遇。
English: When Emperor Jingmu was the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court, he was treated with special respect and courtesy.

古文：洛拔恆畏避屏退，不敢逆自结纳。
现代文：可是洛拔经常怀有戒心而自行退避，不敢倾心和景穆太子结交。
English: However, Robert was often cautious and retreated on his own, not daring to make friends with Prince Jingmu.

古文：顷之，袭爵。
现代文：过了一些时间，他承袭了父亲的爵位。
English: After some time, he succeeded to his father's title.

古文：后为侍中、尚书令，百僚惮之。
现代文：后来曾任侍中、尚书令，同僚官员们都怕他。
English: Later, he served as an attendant, Shang Shuling, and his fellow officials were afraid of him.

古文：卒官。
现代文：后死于任上。
English: He later died in office.

古文：洛拔有六子。
现代文：洛拔生有六个儿子。
English: Robert had six sons.

古文：长子烈，善射，少言，有不可犯之色。
现代文：于洛拔的长子于烈，精于箭术，不爱说话，一副凛然不可侵犯的样子。
English: Yu Robat's eldest son, Yu Lie, is good at archery, doesn't like to talk, and has a dignified and inviolable appearance.

古文：少拜羽林中郎，累迁侍中、殿中尚书。
现代文：年轻时任羽林中郎，屡升至侍中、殿中尚书。
English: When he was young, he was appointed as Uebayashi churo, and was repeatedly promoted to Samurai chu (chamberlain) and court noble.

古文：于时孝文幼冲，文明太后称制。烈与元丕、陆睿、李冲等各赐金策，许以有罪不死。
现代文：当时孝文帝年幼，文明皇后临朝听政，于烈和元丕、陆睿又、李冲等都被赐予金策，答应他们有罪也免死。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen was still young, and Empress Wenyuan was in the Lin Dynasty listening to politics. Yu Lie, Yuan Qi, Lu Rui Mata, Li Chong and others were all given money and promised that they would not be convicted and would not die.

古文：进爵洛阳侯，转卫尉卿。
现代文：晋爵洛阳侯，转卫尉卿。
English: He was raised to the peerage as Lord of Luoyang and later became Lord Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard.

古文：及迁都洛阳，人情恋本，多有异议。
现代文：当迁都洛阳时，人们留恋本土，许多人有不同看法。
English: When the capital was moved to Luoyang, people were nostalgic for the mainland, and many people had different opinions.

古文：帝以问烈。曰： 陛下圣略深远，非愚管所测。
现代文：皇帝询问于烈，他说： 陛下雄才大略，思虑深远，不是愚臣可以揣测的。
English: The emperor asked Yu Li, and he said, "Your majesty's talent is broad, and his thoughts are far-reaching. It is not for fools to speculate.

古文：若隐心而言，乐迁之与恋旧，中半耳。 
现代文：凭心而论，乐于迁徙和留恋故土，一半对一半错！ 
English: Speaking from the heart, being willing to migrate and yearn for one's native land is half right and half wrong!

古文：帝曰： 卿不唱异同，朕深感不言之益。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你不表示可否，我深感不说的好处了。 
English: The emperor said, "If you don't say whether it's possible or not, I'll feel the benefit of not saying anything."

古文：敕镇代，留台庶政，一相参委。
现代文：命令他镇守代都。留在京都，凡日常事务，全部参与处置。
English: He was ordered to stay in Kyoto and take part in all day-to-day affairs.

古文：车驾幸代，执烈手曰： 宗庙至重，翼卫不轻。
现代文：后来皇帝重新回代郡时，握着于烈的手说： 宗庙是特别重要的，护卫任务不轻。
English: Later, when the emperor returned to the county, he shook Yu Li's hand and said, "The ancestral temple is particularly important, and the task of guarding it is not easy.

古文：卿当祗奉灵驾，时迁洛邑。 
现代文：你应当恭奉灵驾，按时送往洛阳。 
English: You should pay your respects to the spirit and send it to Luoyang on time.

古文：烈与高阳王雍奉神主于洛阳，迁光禄卿。
现代文：于烈和高阳王雍便奉送神主到洛阳，升为光禄卿。
English: Yu Li and King Yong of Goyang sent the god to Luoyang and promoted him to Guangluqing.

古文：十九年，大选百僚，烈子登引例求进。
现代文：太和十九年，大选百官，于烈的儿子于登依例求职。
English: In the 19th year of the Taihe era, there were hundreds of officials in the general election, and Yu Lie's son, Yu Deng, applied for a job as usual.

古文：烈表引己素无教训，请乞黜落。
现代文：于烈上表说自己一向没有好好教育训导，请求将于登名字去掉。
English: Yu Rong said on the table that he had never done a good job of education and training, and requested that his name be removed from the register.

古文：帝曰： 此乃有识之言，不谓烈能辨此！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 这是有见识的言论，想不到于烈能够这样做！ 
English: The emperor said, "This is an insightful speech. I didn't expect Yu Lie to be able to do this!"

古文：乃引见登，诏曰： 朕今创礼新邑，明扬天下，卿父乃行谦让之表，而有直士之风，故进卿为太子翊军校尉。 
现代文：于是召见于登，对他说： 我如今创建新礼和都邑，明告于天下，你的父亲上表谦让，确有正直之士的风范，所以委派你当太子翊军校尉。 
English: So he summoned Yu Deng and said to him: "I am now establishing Xinyi and Ducheng, and I hereby announce to the world that your father is a very humble and honest man, so I am appointing you as the prince's lieutenant.

古文：又加烈散骑常侍，封聊城县子。
现代文：又加封于烈为散骑常侍，聊城县子爵。
English: In addition, Yu Lie was awarded the title of straggler, Viscount of Liaocheng County.

古文：及穆泰、陆睿谋反旧京，帝幸代，泰等伏法。
现代文：当穆泰、陆睿又在旧京谋反时，皇帝前往代都，将穆泰等依法处死。
English: When Mutai and Lu Rui again plotted rebellion in old Beijing, the emperor went to the capital and executed Mutai and others according to the law.

古文：赐烈及李冲玺书，述叙金策之意。
现代文：又赐于烈和李冲亲笔诏书，重述金策中的意思。
English: He also gave Li Chong and Li Lie an imperial edict in his own handwriting, recounting the meaning of the gold policy.

古文：时代乡旧族，同恶者多，唯烈一宗，无所染豫。
现代文：当时代都的旧士族里和穆泰同罪的人很多，只有于烈宗族里没有一人参与。
English: There were many people who committed the same crime as Mu Tai among the old warrior clans in the capital at that time, but no one from the Yu Liezong clan participated.

古文：帝益器重之。叹曰： 元俨决断威恩，深自不恶，然尽忠猛决，不如烈也。
现代文：皇帝更加敬重，感叹说： 元俨善于决断用威还是给予恩赏，已经不错了，但尽忠报国，勇猛果断，比不过于烈。
English: The emperor was even more respectful, lamenting: Yuan Shao was good at deciding whether to use force or give a reward, which was already good, but he was loyal to the country, brave and decisive, but not too fierce.

古文：尔日烈在代都，必即斩其五三元首。
现代文：当日要是于烈留在代都，必定立刻斩了几个首犯了。
English: On that day, if Yu Lie stayed in Dadu, he must have immediately beheaded several ringleaders.

古文：烈之节概，不谢金日磾。 
现代文：于烈的志节气概，不比金日石单差。 
English: Yu Lie's ambition is no worse than that of Kim Il Sung.

古文：诏除领军将军。
现代文：下诏任命于烈为领军将军。
English: The following edict appointed Yu Lie as the leading general.

古文：以本官从征荆沔，加鼓吹一部。
现代文：以本官跟从征讨荆沔地区，加赐给一部鼓吹。
English: With this official as a follower, the Jing'an area was conquered and given to a group of propagandists.

古文：二十三年，齐将陈显达入寇马圈，帝舆疾讨之。
现代文：太和二十三年，齐将陈显达入侵到马圈，皇帝带病征讨。
English: In the 23rd year of the Taihe era, the Qi invaded Chen Xianda into the stables, and the emperor was taken ill.

古文：执烈手，以京邑为托。
现代文：他拉住于烈的手，将守护京城责任托付给于烈。
English: He held Yu Rong's hand and entrusted the responsibility of guarding the capital to Yu Rong.

古文：帝崩于行宫，彭城王勰秘讳而返。称诏召宣武会驾鲁阳。
现代文：皇帝在行宫去世，彭城王元勰秘而不宣，回军途中宣称有诏召宣武帝到鲁阳会面。
English: The emperor died on his way to the palace, but the king of Pengcheng, Wang Yuanxuan, kept the death a secret and did not announce it. On his way back to the army, he announced that he had received an imperial edict summoning Emperor Xuanwu to meet him in Luyang.

古文：以烈留守之重，密报凶问。
现代文：因为于烈是留守京城的重臣，秘密地把凶信告诉了他。
English: Because Yu Rong was a senior vassal who stayed behind in Beijing, he secretly told him about the sinister letter.

古文：烈处分行留，神守无变。
现代文：于烈安排去留人员，神色不变。
English: Yu Lie arranged for people to come and stay, and his expression remained unchanged.

古文：宣武即位，宠任如前。
现代文：宣武帝即位，宠信如前。
English: Emperor Xuanwu ascended to the throne, and the favors continued as before.

古文：咸阳王禧为宰辅，权重当时。曾遣家僮传言于烈，求旧羽林武贲执仗出入。
现代文：咸阳王元禧当宰相，权势重于当时，他曾经派家僮传话给于烈，要羽林武贲出入所用的旧仪仗。
English: When Xianyang Wang Yuanxi became the prime minister, his power was greater than at that time. He once sent a message to Yu Lie, asking for the old ceremonial battle used by Ulin Wusong to enter and leave.

古文：烈不许。
现代文：于烈不给。
English: Yu Lie did not give it.

古文：禧遣谓烈曰： 我是天子兒，天子叔，元辅之命，与诏何异？ 
现代文：元禧派人对于烈说： 我是天子的儿子，天子的叔叔。首相的命令，和天子的诏书有什么区别？ 
English: The people who sent the New Year's greetings to the martyrs said: I am the son of the Son of Heaven, the uncle of the Son of Heaven. What is the difference between the prime minister's order and the edict of the Son of Heaven?

古文：烈厉色答曰： 向亦不道王非天子兒、叔。
现代文：于烈神情严肃地说 ：我向来没有说王爷不是天子的儿子和叔叔。
English: Yu Lie said solemnly, "I have never said that Wang Ye is not the son and uncle of the Son of Heaven.

古文：若是诏，应遣官人所由。
现代文：如果是诏书，就应当派官员前来。
English: If it is an imperial edict, officials should be sent here.

古文：若遣私奴索官家羽林，烈头可得，羽林不可得也！ 
现代文：如果私派奴仆来索取皇家羽林仪仗，于烈人头可以拿去，羽林仪仗是拿不到的！ 
English: If I send my slaves to claim the royal feathered ceremonial battle, I can take it from the head of the martyr, but I can't get the feathered ceremonial battle!

古文：禧恶烈刚直，出之为恆州刺史。
现代文：元禧恼恨于烈刚直的性格，派他出任恒州刺史。
English: The Yuan Dynasty enraged the character of the heroic and upright, and sent him to serve as the leader of the history of Hengzhou.

古文：烈不愿籓授，谓彭城王勰曰： 殿下忘先帝南阳之诏乎？
现代文：于烈不愿意到地方任职，便对彭城王元勰说： 殿下忘了先帝在南阳写的诏书了吗？
English: Yu Lie didn't want to hold a local post, so he said to Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan: Has your highness forgotten the imperial edict written by the former emperor in Nanyang?

古文：而逼老夫乃至于此！ 遂以疾辞。
现代文：竟然这样逼迫老夫！ 于是便以有病为由辞职。
English: How dare they persecute the old man like this! So he resigned on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：宣武以禧等专擅，潜谋废之。
现代文：宣武帝因元禧等人专权擅作主张，暗地策划废掉他。
English: Emperor Xuanwu, because of the rise of the Yuan Dynasty and other people's arbitrary assertions, secretly planned to abolish him.

古文：景明二年正月，礿祭，三公致斋于庙。
现代文：景明二年正月，举行礻勺祭，三公到太庙斋戒。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of King Jingming, the Feast of the Three Kings was held, and the three kings went to the Great Temple to fast.

古文：帝夜召烈子忠谓曰： 卿父明可早入。 
现代文：皇帝在夜间召见于烈的儿子于忠，对他说： 让你的父亲明天早些入宫。 
English: The emperor summoned Yu Lie's son Yu Zhong in the night and said to him: Let your father enter the palace early tomorrow.

古文：及明，烈至。
现代文：天亮时，于烈来到。
English: At dawn, Yu Rong arrived.

古文：诏曰： 诸父慢怠，今欲使卿以兵召之，卿其行乎？ 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 几位叔父傲慢怠惰，现在让您带兵士把他们召来，您能办得到吗？ 
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "Some uncles are arrogant and lazy. Now let you bring soldiers to summon them. Can you do it?

古文：烈曰： 老臣历奉累朝，颇以干勇赐识。
现代文：于烈说 ：老臣过去侍奉几个朝代的先帝，颇以办事干练勇武受赏识。
English: Yu Rong said: The old minister had served several emperors of previous dynasties in the past, and was appreciated for his diligence and bravery.

古文：今日之事，所不敢辞。 
现代文：今日的事情，决不敢推辞。 
English: Today's events, never dare to refuse.

古文：乃将直阁以下六十余人，宣旨召咸阳王禧、彭城王勰、北海王详，卫送至帝前。
现代文：于是，他便带领直以下将士六十多人，宣旨召请咸阳王禧、彭城王勰、北海王详，武装护卫送到皇帝面前。
English: As a result, he led more than sixty soldiers directly below him, issued an order to summon Xianyang Wangxi, Pengcheng Wangye, and Beihai Wangzhe, and sent armed escorts to the emperor.

古文：诸公各稽首归政。
现代文：几个人都跪拜叩头，归政于皇帝。
English: Several people knelt and bowed to the emperor.

古文：以烈为领军，进爵为侯，自是长直禁中，机密大事皆所参焉。
现代文：于是任命于烈为领军，晋爵位为侯，从此长期在宫中值日，参预处置各种机密大事。
English: As a result, Yu Rong was appointed as the leader of the army, and Jin Jiu was appointed as the marquess. Since then, he has been on duty in the palace for a long time, participating in the handling of various confidential matters.

古文：咸阳王禧之谋反，宣武从禽于野。左右分散，仓卒之际，莫知其计。
现代文：咸阳王禧谋反时，宣武帝的随从们在野外打猎，左右侍从分散，仓猝之间，不知怎么办好。
English: When Xianyang Wangxi was plotting a rebellion, Emperor Xuanwu's attendants were hunting in the field. The attendants were scattered to the left and right. They were in a hurry and didn't know what to do.

古文：乃敕烈子忠驰觇虚实。
现代文：于是便命令于烈的儿子于忠飞驰回城观看虚实。
English: Therefore, he ordered Yu Liang's son Yu Zhongfei to go back to the city to see the truth.

古文：烈时留守，已处分有备。因忠奏曰： 臣虽朽迈，心力犹可。
现代文：于烈当时留守京中，已经有了防备的安排，他让于忠回奏说： 老臣虽然年迈老朽，心力尚可。
English: Yu Rong was staying in Beijing at the time, and there was already a precautionary arrangement. He asked Yu Zhong to reply: Although the old minister is old and decrepit, his heart is still strong.

古文：禧等猖狂，不足为虑。
现代文：元禧等虽然猖狂，不足忧虑。
English: Although the celebration of the first anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China is rampant, there is no shortage of worries.

古文：愿缓跸徐还，以安物望。 
现代文：请皇上安心从容地返回，以安定人心。 
English: I would like to ask the Emperor to return safely and calmly in order to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：帝甚以为慰。
现代文：皇帝很感到安慰。
English: The emperor was greatly consoled.

古文：车驾还宫，禧已逃，诏烈追执之。
现代文：车驾回宫后，元禧已经出逃，诏令于烈追捕，抓住了他。
English: After returning to the palace by car, Yuan Xiyi had already fled, and the imperial command chased Yu Lie and caught him.

古文：顺后既立，以世父之重，弥见优礼。
现代文：立了顺皇后于氏之后，于烈是皇后的伯父，更受到皇帝的敬重。
English: After Shun's empress Yu, Yu Rong was the queen's uncle, and was even more respected by the emperor.

古文：及卒，宣武举哀于朝堂，给东园第一秘器，赠太尉，封钜鹿郡公。
现代文：当他去世时，宣武帝在朝堂为他举行哀礼，赐给东园生产的最好的棺木，赠为太尉，封巨鹿郡公。
English: When he died, Emperor Xuanwu held a memorial service for him in the imperial hall, gave him the best coffin produced by Dongyuan, and presented him with the rank of captain and the title of Duke of Ju County.

古文：子祚袭。
现代文：他的儿子于祚袭封。
English: His son, Yu Qi, succeeded him.

古文：祚弟忠，字思贤，本字千年。
现代文：于祚的弟弟于忠，字思贤，本字千年。
English: Yu Zhen's younger brother, Yu Zhong, is called Si Xian (思贤) and his real name is Millennium.

古文：弱冠，拜侍御中散。
现代文：年近二十岁时，被任命为侍御中散。
English: When he was nearly twenty years old, he was appointed to the position of Samurai Chusan.

古文：文明太后临朝，刑政颇峻，侍臣左右，多以微谴得罪。
现代文：文明太后临朝听政，法令颇严厉，身边的侍臣们，大多因小事而得罪。
English: The Empress Dowager Civili was in charge of the government, and the laws were quite strict. Most of the courtiers around her were offended by small things.

古文：忠朴直少言，终无过误。
现代文：于忠朴实直率，不爱说话，始终没有过错。
English: Yu Zhongpu is straightforward, does not like to talk, and has never made a mistake.

古文：太和中，授武骑侍郎，因赐名登。
现代文：太和年间，被任命为武骑侍郎，并赐名登。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, he was appointed as a military cavalry equerry, and given the posthumous name Deng.

古文：累迁左中郎将，领直寝。
现代文：屡迁至左中郎将，领直寝。
English: Repeatedly moved to the left-middle captain, leading to sleep.

古文：元禧之乱，车驾在外，变起仓卒。
现代文：元禧之乱时，皇帝在城外，变乱发生得十分仓促。
English: At the time of the Yuanxi Rebellion, the emperor was out of the city, and the revolution happened very quickly.

古文：忠曰： 臣父为领军，计必无所虑。 
现代文：于忠说： 我和父亲任领军，估计不必忧虑。 
English: Yu Zhong said: My father and I are leading the army, so there is no need to worry.

古文：帝遣忠驰观之，烈严备，果如所量。
现代文：皇帝派于忠驰回观看情形，于烈已严加防备，果然就像于忠预料的那样。
English: The emperor sent Yu Zhongqi back to observe the situation, and Yu Liang was already on high alert. It was just as Yu Zhong had expected.

古文：忠还，宣武抚其背曰： 卿差强人意。
现代文：于忠回来报告，皇帝抚摸着他的后背说 ：你真能让人放心。
English: When Yu Zhong returned to report, the emperor stroked his back and said, "You really can put people at ease."

古文：先帝赐卿名登，诚为美称。
现代文：先帝赐你名登，固然是美称。
English: The previous emperor gave you your name, which is of course a great honor.

古文：朕嘉卿忠款，今改名忠，既表贞固之诚，亦以名实相副也。 
现代文：我嘉美你的忠诚，现改名为忠，既表示坚定真诚，也使得名副其实。 
English: I applaud your loyalty, now renamed loyalty, which is both steadfast and sincere, and makes it worthy of the name.

古文：以父忧去职。
现代文：后因父亲去世而离职。
English: He left the post due to the death of his father.

古文：徙为司空长史。
现代文：后改任司空长史。
English: Later, he was reassigned to the post of Jikku Choshi.

古文：时太傅、录尚书、北海王详亲尊权重，将作大匠王遇多随详所欲而给之。
现代文：当时太傅、录尚书事、北海王详是皇帝的亲叔父，权重于时，将作大匠王遇经常听随元祥要求如数给他钱物。
English: At that time, Taifu, Luo Shang Shuxing, and Beihai Wang Zhe were the emperor's uncles. They were more important than time, and Wang Er, who was a great craftsman, often listened to Yuan Xiang's request to give him as much money as possible.

古文：忠于详前谓遇曰： 殿下国之周公，阿衡王室，何至阿谀附势，损公惠私也？ 
现代文：于忠便当着元详的面对王遇说 ：殿下是国家的周公，辅佐王室的重臣，你怎么阿谀奉承，趋炎附势，损公以肥私呢？ 
English: Yu Zhongben said to Wang Yu in front of the audience, "Your Royal Highness is the country's Zhou Gong, the senior minister who assists the royal family. How do you flatter, inflame, and undermine the public interest to enrich yourself?

古文：遇既不宁，详亦惭谢。
现代文：王遇感到不安，元详也因惭愧而谢罪。
English: Wang Yu felt uneasy, and Yuan Ye also felt guilty out of shame.

古文：以平元禧功，封魏郡公。
现代文：由于于忠有平定元禧之乱的大功，被封为魏郡公。
English: As a result of his great contribution to the suppression of the Genji Rebellion, he was made the governor of Wei County.

古文：及迁散骑常侍、兼武卫将军，每以鲠气正辞，为北海所忿。面责忠曰： 我忧在前见尔死，不忧尔见我死时也。 
现代文：当他迁任散骑常侍、兼武卫将军时，往往因为鲠直和义正辞严的语气，使北海王感到气愤，并当面责备他说： 我只担心你死在我的前头，不担心你看得到我死去。 
English: When he was transferred to the post of straggler's equerry and general of the imperial guards, he often made the Northern Sea King angry because of his straightforward and righteous tone, and scolded him in person: "I am only worried that you will die before me, not worried that you will see me die."

古文：忠曰： 人生自有定分，若应死王手，避亦不免；不尔，王不能杀。 
现代文：于忠说： 人生命运自有定数，如果应当死在大王手里，就是躲避也不能免死；不然，大王也杀不了我。 
English: Yu Zhong said, "A person's fate is predetermined. If I am to die at the hands of the great king, I cannot avoid death; otherwise, the great king cannot kill me.

古文：详因忠表让之际，密劝帝以忠为列卿，于是诏停其封，优进太府卿。
现代文：元详便乘于忠上表皇帝对封爵表示谦让的时候，暗地里劝告皇帝任命于忠为列卿，于是，停止了他的封爵，晋升为太府卿。
English: The Yuan dynasty took advantage of the fact that Emperor Taizhong made a modest concession to the knighting of Zhuang, and secretly advised the emperor to appoint Taizhong as a peer. Therefore, his knighthood was stopped and he was promoted to the rank of grand minister.

古文：正始二年，诏忠以本官使持节、兼侍中，为西道大使。刺史、镇将赃罪显暴者，以状闻。守令以下，便行决断。
现代文：正始二年，下诏让于忠以本官职持使节、兼侍中，任西道大使，凡是州刺史、镇将贪赃罪恶显著的，将详情报告朝廷；郡守县令以下官员，便可亲自决定处置办法。
English: At the beginning of the second year, the following edict allowed Yuzhong to use his official position to hold the position of envoy, concurrently attendant, and serve as the ambassador of the West Road. If there were any obvious crimes of corruption in the history of the state or the town, he would report the details to the imperial court; officials below the county magistrate could personally decide on the disposition.

古文：与尚书李崇分使二道。
现代文：他和尚书李崇分别巡行两道。
English: He and the monk Li Chong led two separate processions.

古文：忠劾并州刺史高聪赃罪二百余条，论以大辟。
现代文：于忠弹劾并州刺史高聪贪赃罪行二百多条，论定为大辟之罪。
English: Yu Zhong impeached and accused Gao Cong of more than two hundred crimes of corruption and bribery, which was regarded as a major crime.

古文：除华州刺史。遭继母忧，不行。
现代文：于忠又被任命为华州刺史，因继母去世守丧，没有赴任。
English: Yu Zhong was also appointed as the governor of Huazhou, but did not take up the post as he was in mourning for the death of his stepmother.

古文：服阕，再迁卫尉卿、河南邑中正。
现代文：守丧期满，迁任卫尉卿、河南邑中正。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Guards, and became a middle-ranking official in Henan.

古文：忠与吏部尚书元晖、度支尚书元匡、河南尹元苌等推定代方姓族。
现代文：于忠和吏部尚书元晖、度支尚书元匡、河南尹元苌等共同确定原代都各姓宗族门阀。
English: Yu Zhong and officials such as Shangshu Yuanjun, Doushi Shangshu Yuanjun, and Henan Yin Yuanjun jointly determined the family names of the original capital.

古文：高肇忌其为人，乃言于宣武，称中山要镇，作捍须才，乃出忠为定州刺史。
现代文：高肇忌恨于忠的为人，便对宣武帝说，中山是个重要州镇，镇守必需是有才干的人员，于是任命于忠为定州刺史。
English: Gao Zhao hated Yu Zhong as a person, so he told Emperor Xuanwu that Zhongshan was an important prefectural town, and the town guard must be a talented person. Therefore, he appointed Yu Zhong as the prefectural governor of Dingzhou.

古文：既而帝悔，复授卫尉卿、领左卫将军、恆州大中正，密遣使诣忠，慰勉之。
现代文：不久皇帝就改悔了，又任命于忠为卫尉卿、领左卫将军、恒州大中正。密派使者见于忠，给予安慰和勉励。
English: The emperor soon repented, and appointed Yuzhong as the captain of the Imperial Guards, the commander of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and the president of the Middle School of Hengzhou University. The secret emissary met with Yuzhong and gave him consolation and encouragement.

古文：延昌初，除都官尚书，领左卫、中正如故。
现代文：延昌初年，任都官尚书，原领的左卫、中正职务如故。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, Shangshu was appointed as the capital official, and the left guard and middle guard positions of the original leader remained unchanged.

古文：又加散骑常侍。
现代文：又加封散骑常侍。
English: They also added a samurai on horseback.

古文：尝因侍宴，赐之剑杖，举酒属忠曰： 卿世执贞节，故恆以禁卫相委。
现代文：曾经在一次侍宴时，皇帝赐给他剑杖，并举酒对于忠说 ：你们一家世代忠贞有节操，所以一直将守卫宫廷的任务委托给你们。
English: Once, at a banquet, the emperor gave him a sword and sceptre and, raising his glass of wine, said to Tadazane: Your family has been loyal and disciplined for generations, so I have always entrusted you with the task of guarding the palace.

古文：昔以卿行忠，赐名曰忠。
现代文：以前因为你的行为忠诚，所以赐名为忠。
English: In the past, because of your loyal behavior, you were given the name of loyalty.

古文：今以卿才堪御侮，以所御剑杖相锡。
现代文：如今因为你的才能可以抵御坏人，所以将我所用的剑杖相赐。
English: Now therefore, because thy power is great against the wicked, and I will give thee my sword and my staff.

古文：循名取义，意在不轻，出入恆以自防也。 
现代文：循名取义，其中的含意不轻，进出时可经常用来防范。 
English: According to the meaning of the name, the meaning is not light, and it can often be used to prevent entry and exit.

古文：迁侍中、领军将军。
现代文：改任侍中、领军将军。
English: He was reassigned to the position of chamberlain and leading general.

古文：忠辞无学识，宣武曰： 学识有文章者不少，但心直不如卿。
现代文：于忠以自己没有学识推辞。宣武帝说 ：有学识会文章的人不少，但都比不上你胸怀直率。
English: Emperor Xuanwu said, "There are many people with knowledge who can write articles, but they are not as forthright as you.

古文：欲使卿劬劳于下，我当无忧于上。 
现代文：所以要让你在下面辛劳，我也就能在上面没有忧虑了。 
English: So if you have to toil below, I can do it above without any worries.

古文：及帝崩夜，忠与侍中崔光遣右卫将军侯刚迎明帝于东宫而即位。
现代文：皇帝去世的当夜，于忠和侍中崔光派右卫将军侯刚到东宫迎接明帝并即位。
English: On the night of the emperor's death, Yuzhong and his aide-de-camp, General Choe Kwang Paik, marched to the East Palace to greet the Ming emperor and accede to the throne.

古文：忠与门下议，以帝冲年，未亲机政，太尉高阳王雍属尊望重，宜入居西柏堂，省决庶政；任城王澄明德茂亲，可为尚书令，总摄百揆。
现代文：于忠和门下省商议，因皇帝年幼，未能亲理朝政，太尉高阳王元雍是皇帝长辈，位高望重，应当住进皇宫内的西柏堂，处置日常政务；任城王元澄有德行又是皇帝至亲，可任尚书令，总理百事。
English: Yuzhong and his subordinates held provincial deliberations. Because the emperor was young, he was not able to personally manage the imperial government. First Lieutenant Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong was the emperor's elder and highly respected, and he should live in the Xibai Hall in the imperial palace to handle daily government affairs. As the city king, Yuan Cheng was virtuous and the emperor's closest relative, he could be appointed as Shang Shuling, the prime minister of Pepsi.

古文：奏中官，请即敕授。
现代文：当即奏明中宫，请即传旨授予。
English: Please inform the Chugu immediately, and the imperial edict will be issued immediately.

古文：御史中尉王显欲逞奸计，与中常侍、给事中孙莲等厉色不听，寝门下之奏。
现代文：御史中尉王显想施奸计，和中常侍、给事中孙莲等人怒形于色，不予理会，压下了门下省的奏书。
English: Wang Xian, the lieutenant of the imperial historian, wanted to play a treacherous trick, and Sun Lian, the middle-ranking attendant and the person in charge of the matter, and others were furious, ignored it, and suppressed the report of the subordinate province.

古文：孙莲等密欲矫太后令，以高肇录尚书事，显与高猛为侍中。
现代文：孙莲等人想假传太后命令，任命高肇为录尚书事，王显和高猛任侍中。
English: Sun Lian and others wanted to falsely transmit the Empress Dowager's order, appointing Gao Zhao as the secretary, and Wang Xian and Gao Meng as attendants.

古文：忠即殿中收显杀之。
现代文：于忠当即在殿内抓住王显并杀了他。
English: Yu Zhong immediately grabbed Wang Xian in the hall and killed him.

古文：忠既居门下，又总禁卫，遂执朝政，权倾一时。
现代文：于忠于是主持门下省，又总管宫中禁卫，因而执掌朝政，权倾一时。
English: Yuzhong then presided over the provinces under his control, and was also in charge of the palace guards, and thus held the reins of imperial government, temporarily gaining power.

古文：初，太和中，军国多事，孝文以用不足，百官禄四分减一。
现代文：起初，太和年间，军国事务繁多，孝文帝因为费用不足，让百官都减去四分之一的俸禄。
English: At first, during the reign of Empress Dowager Taiwa, there were many military affairs, and Emperor Xiaowen, because of insufficient expenses, had all officials deduct a quarter of their salary.

古文：忠既擅朝，欲以惠泽自固，乃悉复所减之禄，职人进位一级。
现代文：于忠执政以后，想施行恩惠来加强自己的地位，便恢复了被削减的全部俸禄。有职位的人晋位一级。
English: After Yuzhong came to power, he wanted to use favors to strengthen his position, so he restored all the salaries that had been cut. Those who had positions were promoted to the first level.

古文：旧制：百姓绢布一匹之外，各输绵麻八两。忠悉以与之。
现代文：过去规定，百姓们交纳一匹绢布之后，再加交绵、麻八两，于忠全部给了官员们。
English: In the past, it was stipulated that after the common people had paid one horse of coarse cloth, they would pay another horse of coarse cloth and two horses of fine cloth, and Yuzhong would give them all to the officials.

古文：乃白高阳王雍，自云宣武本许优转。
现代文：他又告诉高阳王元雍，说宣武帝原来答应给他晋升的。
English: He also told Goyang Wang Yuan Yong that Emperor Xuanwu had originally promised him a promotion.

古文：雍惮忠威权，便顺意加忠车骑大将军。
现代文：元雍慑于于忠的威力和权势，便顺从他的意愿加封为车骑大将军。
English: Yuan Yong was intimidated by Yu Zhong's power and influence, so he obeyed his wishes and promoted him to General of Cavalry and Cavalry.

古文：忠自谓新故之际，有安社稷功，讽百僚令加己赏。
现代文：于忠又自以为在新旧权力更换之际，自己有安定社稷的大功，便让百官们上奏请求给予奖赏。
English: Yu Zhong also thought that he had done a great job of stabilizing society at the time of the replacement of the old and new power, so he asked the officials to request a reward.

古文：太尉雍、清河王怿、广平王怀难违其意，封忠常山郡公。
现代文：太尉元雍、清河王元怿、广平王元怀难以违背他的意愿，又封于忠为常山郡公。
English: Captain Yuan Yong, Qinghe Wang Yuan Jie, and Guangping Wang Yuan Huai could hardly go against his wishes, and they also made Yu Zhong the governor of Changshan County.

古文：忠又难于独受，乃讽朝廷，同在门下者加封邑。
现代文：于忠难以独自接受封赏，又上奏朝廷，给在门下省的同僚们也加封食邑。
English: It was difficult for Yu Zhong to accept the award on his own, so he appealed to the imperial court, and his colleagues in the provinces under his tutelage also received the award.

古文：尚书左仆射郭祚、尚书裴植以忠权势日盛，劝雍出忠。
现代文：尚书左仆射郭祚、尚书裴植因于忠权势越来越大，便劝元雍把于忠放到外地任职。
English: Shangshu's left-hand servants, Shao Guozhen and Shangshu Pei Zhi, persuaded Yuan Yong to transfer Yu Zhong to a post outside the capital because of Yu Zhong's growing power.

古文：忠闻之，逼有司诬奏其罪。
现代文：于忠知道以后，强迫有关部门诬告两人有罪。
English: After Yu Zhong found out, he forced the relevant departments to falsely accuse the two people of being guilty.

古文：祚有师傅旧恩，植拥地入国，忠并矫诏杀之。
现代文：郭祚原是皇帝师傅，有恩于帝，裴植带着土地来归顺魏国的，于忠假传旨意将他们都杀了。
English: Guo Bingyuan was the emperor's master, he was grateful to the emperor, Pei Zhi brought land to Shun Wei, and killed them all at the behest of Yu Zhonglian.

古文：朝野愤忿，无不切齿。王公以下，畏之累迹。
现代文：朝野愤慨，无不咬牙切齿，王公以下官员，人人害怕受到牵连。
English: The court and the palace are indignant, all of them are gnashing their teeth, officials from the Prince on down are furious, and everyone is afraid of being implicated.

古文：又欲杀高阳王雍，侍中崔光固执乃止，遂免雍太尉，以王还第。
现代文：于忠又想杀害高阳王元雍，侍中崔光坚决反对才罢休，于是免去元雍太尉职务，以王爵回府。
English: Yu Zhong also wanted to kill the Goyang king, Yuan Yong, but the chamberlain, Cui Guang, strongly objected, so he dismissed Yuan Yong from the position of lieutenant and returned to the capital with the title of prince.

古文：自此诏命生杀，皆出于忠。
现代文：从此以后，下诏传命、生杀大权，全由于忠决定。
English: From then on, the imperial edict passed down from father to son, and the power of life and death, were all determined by loyalty.

古文：既尊灵太后为皇太后，居崇训宫，忠为仪同三司、尚书令、崇训卫尉，侍中、领军如故。
现代文：又尊称灵太后为皇太后，居住在崇训宫，于忠任仪同三司、尚书令、崇训宫卫尉，侍中、领军如故。
English: He also called the Reverend Mother Empress Dowager the Empress Dowager, lived in the Sutton Palace, and served as the third secretary, the chief secretary, the guard lieutenant of the Sutton Palace, the chamberlain, and the leader of the army in the loyalty ceremony.

古文：灵太后临朝，解忠侍中、领军、崇训卫尉，止为仪同、尚书令、侍中。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，免除了于忠的侍中、领军、崇训宫卫尉职务，仅保留了仪同三司、尚书令职务。
English: After Lingdai's accession to the throne, she was exempted from serving as Yuzhong's attendant, army leader, and palace guard. She only retained her duties as the third secretary of ceremonies and the secretary of letters.

古文：忠为令旬余，灵太后引门下侍官，问忠在端右声听。
现代文：于忠任尚书令十多天，灵太后召来门下省侍从官员，询问于忠在端右门的声望如何，众人都说实在不称职。
English: After more than ten days of Yu Zhongren Shang Shuling, the Empress Dowager summoned the provincial attendant officials under the door to inquire about the reputation of Yu Zhongren at the end of the right door, and everyone said that it was really incompetent.

古文：咸曰不称厥任，乃出为冀州刺史。
现代文：于是让于忠出任冀州刺史。
English: As a result, Yuzhong was appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：太傅清河王等奏： 忠擅杀枢纳，辄废宰辅，朝野骇心，远近怪愕。
现代文：太傅清河王等人上奏说 ：于忠擅自滥杀朝中重要大臣，随意废黜宰相，朝野震惊，远近怪异。
English: Daifu Kiyokawa no Okimi and others reported, "Yu Tadazane killed important ministers of the dynasty without permission, and arbitrarily deposed the prime minister. The court and the country were shocked, and it was bizarre from near and far."

古文：功过相除，悉不合赏，请悉追夺。 
现代文：功过相抵，不应再给封赏，请全部加以追回。 
English: If the merits outweigh the shortcomings, the award should not be given again. Please recover all of it.

古文：灵太后从之。
现代文：灵太后依从奏议。
English: Empress Dowager Ling complied with the request.

古文：熙平元年，御史中尉元匡奏： 忠以鸿勋盛德，受遇累朝，幸国大灾，专擅朝命，无人臣之心。
现代文：熙平元年，御史中尉元匡上奏说 ：于忠因有大的功德，在历朝深受重用。他趁国家大灾难时，专擅朝政，没有臣下之心。
English: In the first year of Heiping, the lieutenant of imperial history, Yuan Kuang, said: Yu Zhongyin had great merits and was deeply used in all dynasties. He took advantage of the national disaster, was good at court politics, and did not have the heart of a subject.

古文：裴、郭受冤于既往，宰辅黜辱于明世。
现代文：裴植、郭祚受冤于前，宰相黜辱于明世。
English: Baizhe and Guo Jun were wronged before, and the prime minister was humiliated in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：又自矫旨为仪同三司、尚书令、领崇训卫尉。
现代文：又自己矫诏任仪同三司、尚书令、领崇训宫卫尉。
English: In addition, he himself issued the imperial edict of appointment to the three offices, the imperial edict of appointment, and the imperial edict of discipline to the palace guards.

古文：原其此意，便欲无上自处。
现代文：他的本意，是想越过皇帝自行处置国家大事。
English: His intention was to bypass the emperor and deal with national affairs on his own.

古文：既事在恩后，宜加显戮。请遣御史一人、令史二人，就州行决。 
现代文：既然事情发生在恩遇之后，就应当公开杀掉，请派御史一人、令史两人，到州里行刑处决。 
English: Since the incident happened after the blessing, it should be publicly killed. Please send one official historian and two lay historians to the prefecture to carry out the execution.

古文：灵太后令，以忠事经肆眚，遂不追罪。
现代文：灵太后下令说，于忠的事情已经处置了，过而有害，从宽赦之，因而不再追究。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered that Yu Zhong's case had been dealt with, that it was too harmful, and that it should be pardoned, so that it would no longer be investigated.

古文：又诏以忠历任禁要，诚节皎然，赐爵灵寿县公。
现代文：又下诏说，于忠历任宫中要职，忠诚节操十分清楚，赐爵为灵寿县公。
English: The next edict also said that Yu Zhongli held an important position in the palace, and his loyalty and discipline were very clear, and he was awarded a knighthood as the prince of Lingshou County.

古文：初，宣武崩后，高太后将害灵太后。刘腾以告侯刚，刚以告忠。
现代文：当初，宣武帝去世以后，高太后准备加害灵太后，刘腾把这件事告诉侯刚，侯刚又告诉于忠。
English: At first, after the death of Emperor Xuanwu, Empress Gao was preparing to harm Empress Ling. Liu Teng told this to Hou Gang, who in turn told Yu Zhong.

古文：忠请计于崔光。
现代文：于忠向崔光问计。
English: Yu Zhong asked Cui Guang about the plan.

古文：光曰： 宜置胡嫔于别所，严兵守卫。 
现代文：崔光说 ：应当将胡嫔安置在其他地方，用军队严加守卫。 
English: Cui Guang said: Hu Yao should be placed elsewhere, and the army should be used to strictly guard it.

古文：忠从之，具以此意启灵太后，太后意乃安。
现代文：于忠听从了，并将这个想法报告灵太后，灵太后这才放下心来。
English: Yu Zhong obeyed, and reported this idea to the Reverend Mother, who then set her heart at rest.

古文：故太后深德腾等四人，并有宠授。
现代文：所以太后深深地感激刘腾等四人，都加以宠信和赏赐。
English: Therefore, the empress dowager was deeply grateful to Liu Teng and the other four people, and they were all favored and rewarded.

古文：忠以毁之者多，惧不免祸，愿还京，欲自营救。
现代文：于忠知道说他坏话的人很多，担心免不了有祸患，希望能够回京，以便自己想法自救。
English: Yu Zhong knows that there are many people who say bad things about him, and he is worried that there will inevitably be a disaster. He hopes to be able to return to Beijing so that he can think about how to save himself.

古文：灵太后不许。
现代文：灵太后不答应。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling did not agree.

古文：二年四月，除尚书右仆射，加侍中，将军如故。
现代文：二年四月，被任命为尚书右仆射、加侍中、将军封号如故。
English: In April of the second year, he was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, and was given the title of general.

古文：神龟元年三月，复仪同三司。
现代文：神龟元年三月，又恢复了仪同三司。
English: In March of the first year of Shenkui, the ceremony and the three divisions were restored.

古文：疾，未拜。
现代文：因病而未拜授。
English: He was absent due to illness.

古文：见裴、郭为祟，自知必死，先表养亡弟第二子司徒掾永超为子，乞以为嫡。灵太后许之。
现代文：他常见到裴植、郭祚在身边作祟，自知必死无疑，便事先上表，请求将自己抚养的已去世的弟弟的第二个儿子、现任司徒椽于永超作为自己嫡子。灵太后答应了。
English: He often saw Pei Zhi and Guo Yao causing trouble around him. Knowing that his death was inevitable, he went to the table in advance and requested that the second son of his deceased brother whom he had raised, the current Szeto Yu Yongchao, be his legitimate son. Empress Dowager Ling agreed.

古文：薨，赠司空。
现代文：去世后，赠为 司空 。
English: After his death, he was given the posthumous title of Sikyong.

古文：有司奏太常少卿元端议： 案谥法，刚强理直曰武，怙威肆行曰鬼，宜谥武鬼公。 
现代文：有关方面上奏太常少卿元瑞的建议说： 查阅谥法，刚强而理直为武，仗威胡作非为为丑，应当谥为 武丑公 。 
English: Relevant parties quoted the suggestion of Shaoqing Yuanrui, the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, as follows: "If you read the Tao Te Ching, you will be strong and righteous, and if you are not strong and righteous, you will be a coward. You should be a coward."

古文：太常卿元修义议： 忠尽心奉上，翦除凶逆。依谥法，除伪宁直曰武，夙夜恭事曰敬，宜谥武敬公。 
现代文：太常卿元义的奏议说 ：于忠尽忠侍奉皇帝，除去凶逆之徒，依照谥法，除伪宁真为武，日夜恭敬侍奉为敬，应当谥为 武敬公 。 
English: The petition of Tai Changqing Yuan Yi said: "It is best to serve the emperor faithfully, and to remove the traitors, according to the law of war, to remove the hypocrites, to be a true warrior, to respectfully serve the emperor day and night, and to be a warrior and a gentleman."

古文：二卿不同。
现代文：两位官员奏议不同。
English: The two officials made different arguments.

古文：灵太后令依正卿议。
现代文：灵太后下令，依照太常卿的奏议。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling issued an order in accordance with the request of the Grand Duke.

古文：忠性多阻忌，不交胜己，唯与直阁将军章初环、千牛备身杨保元为断金之交。
现代文：于忠性格多疑和嫉妒，不结交比自己强的人，只和直将军章初瞔、千牛备身杨保元是至交的同心朋友。
English: Yu Zhong is suspicious and jealous, and does not make friends with people who are better than him. He is only a close friend of General Zhi Zhi, General Zhang Huchuan, and General Yang Bao Yuan.

古文：谨字思敬，小名巨引。沈深有识量，略窥经史，尤好《孙子》兵书。
现代文：李世哲想取宠于于忠，私下用金帛贿赂章初瞔、杨保元，两人和他交谈之后，引为心腹之交。于忠擅权进官任崇训宫卫尉，也是李世哲的主意。于谨字思敬，小名巨引。为人深沉而有见识，略略浏览一些经籍史书，特别爱好《孙子兵法》。
English: Li Shizhe wanted to curry favor with Yu Zhong, and privately bribed Zhang Chuzhong and Yang Baoyuan with gold ingots. After the two had a conversation with him, they became his confidants. It was also Li Shizhe's idea that Yu Zhong should have the right to enter the government and serve as the palace guard. Yu Shizhe thought about the word "respect" and had a great reputation. He was a deep and insightful person, briefly browsed some books of history, and was particularly fond of "Sun Tzu's Art of War."

古文：屏居未有仕进志。
现代文：闲居在家，没有做官的想法。
English: Sitting idle at home, with no thought of running for office.

古文：或有劝之者，谨曰： 州郡之职，昔人所鄙，台鼎之位，须待时来。 
现代文：遇到有人劝时，他就说： 州郡一类职务，向来为人所鄙视的，公卿一类高位，须等待时机。 
English: When he was persuaded, he said: "To hold an office such as a county magistrate, which has always been despised, or a high position such as a peerage, one must wait for the right time.

古文：太宰元天穆见之，叹曰： 王佐材也。 
现代文：太宰元天穆见了后，感叹地说 ；真是王佐之材啊！ 
English: When Dazaimoto Tenmu saw him, he exclaimed, "What a king's son!"

古文：及破六韩拔陵首乱北境，引蠕蠕为授，大行台元纂讨之。夙闻谨名，辟为铠曹参军事，从军北伐。
现代文：待破六韩拔陵为首在北境叛乱时，援引蠕蠕作为后援，大行台元纂领兵讨伐，他一向听说于谨的名声，便请他当铠曹参军事，随军北伐。
English: When the rebellion led by Ba Ling of the Six Provinces of Korea broke out in the northern border, he invoked Cui Cui as a backup, and Da Xing, the founder of Taiwan, led the army to fight. He had always heard of Yu Zhen's reputation, so he asked him to join the military as Cai Cao and follow the army to the northern frontier.

古文：蠕蠕逃出塞，纂令谨追之，前后十七战，尽降其众。
现代文：蠕蠕败逃出了塞外，元纂令于谨追击，前后打了十七场战斗，全部招降了敌军部众。
English: Creep crawled out of the country, the founder ordered Yu Zhen to pursue, fought seventeen battles back and forth, and all the enemy troops surrendered.

古文：后率轻骑出塞觇贼，属铁勒数千骑奄至。谨以众寡不敌，乃散其骑，使匿丛薄间。又遣人升山指麾，若分部军众。
现代文：后来曾率领车骑出塞侦察敌情，突然铁勒部几千骑人马奔驰而来，于谨因为寡不敌众，便将车骑分散开来，让他们藏入树丛深草之中，又派人登山指挥，就像是指挥部众分开的样子。
English: Later, he had led the cavalry out of the city to reconnoiter the enemy situation. Suddenly, several thousand cavalrymen of the cavalry department came galloping. Because he was outnumbered, he dispersed the cavalry, let them hide in the deep grass of the bushes, and sent a mountaineering commander, as if he was separating the commanding staff.

古文：贼望见，虽疑有伏，恃众不以为虑，乃进逼谨。
现代文：贼军望见后，虽然也怀疑有伏兵，但他们倚仗人多势众并不害怕，便继续向于谨进逼。
English: When the bandits saw them, although they also suspected an ambush, they were not afraid because of the large number of people, so they continued to advance cautiously.

古文：以常乘骏马一紫一騧，贼先所识，乃使二人各乘一马，突阵而出。
现代文：于谨过去经常乘坐两匹骏马，一紫一黄，敌军早就熟悉了，于谨便让另两个人各乘一匹马，突围而出。
English: In the past, Yu Zhen often rode on two horses, one purple and one yellow. The enemy troops were already familiar with them, so Yu Zhen let the other two people ride one horse each and break out of the encirclement.

古文：贼以为谨，争逐之。
现代文：敌人以为于谨跑了，争先恐后去追赶。
English: The enemy thought that Yu Zhen had run away and scrambled to catch up with him.

古文：乃率余军击其追骑。
现代文：于谨便集合其余人马，攻击敌军的追骑。
English: Yu then gathered the rest of the men and horses to attack the enemy's pursuit.

古文：贼走，因得入塞。
现代文：敌军只得逃走，于谨人马因而得以入塞。
English: The enemy troops had to flee, and thus, with great difficulty, they were able to enter the fortress.

古文：正光四年，行台、广阳王元深北伐，引谨为长流参军。
现代文：正光四年，行台、广阳王元深兴师北伐，请于谨为长流参军。
English: In the four years of Zhengguang, Xingtai and Guangyang Wangyuan Shengxing Division Northern Expedition, please join the army for the long stream.

古文：特相礼接，使其世子佛陁拜焉。
现代文：他特别以大礼迎接，派他的世子佛瞓拜迎。
English: He greeted them with a grand salute and sent his heir, the Buddha, to greet them.

古文：遂与广阳破贼主斛律野谷禄等。
现代文：于是，于谨随广阳王打败了敌军主师斛律野谷禄等。
English: As a result, Yu Zhen followed Guangyang Wang and defeated the enemy's master, Zhaorutianogulou.

古文：谨请驰往喻之。
现代文：于谨又请求前往敌营中劝降。
English: Yu also requested to go to the enemy camp to persuade them to surrender.

古文：谨兼解诸国语，乃单骑入贼，示以恩信，于是西部铁勒酋长也列河等三万余户并款附，相率南迁。
现代文：于谨懂得几国的语言，便单骑进入敌军营垒，向他们表达朝廷的恩惠和信用，于是西部铁勒的酋长也列河等三万多户均归附朝廷，率领部族进迁。
English: Because he knew the languages of several countries, he rode alone into the enemy camp to express the court's favor and trust to them. As a result, more than 30,000 households, including the chiefs of the western Tiele, Yaliehe, all joined the court and led the tribe to move in.

古文：广阳与谨至析郭岭迎接之。
现代文：广阳王和于谨到析郭岭迎接他们。
English: Guangyang Wang and Yu Zhengyi went to Guoling to meet them.

古文：谨曰： 拔陵兵众不少，闻也列河等款附，必来要击。
现代文：于谨说： 拔陵的军队还很多，听说也列河等来归附，一定会前来袭击的。
English: Yu Zheng said: There are still a lot of troops from Bailing, and it is said that rivers and other rivers will come to attach, and they will certainly come to attack.

古文：彼若先据险，则难与争锋。
现代文：如果被他们先占领险要地方，就难以和他们争斗。
English: It's hard to fight them if they occupy critical territory first.

古文：今以也烈河等铒之，当竞来抄掠，然后设伏而待，必指掌破之。 
现代文：如今我们用也列河作为诱饵，他们必定竞相前来抄掠，我们先设下埋伏等待他们，必定轻而易举地击败他们。 
English: Now we are using the Yaleh River as a bait, they will certainly compete to come to plunder, we will first set up an ambush to wait for them, we will easily defeat them.

古文：广阳然其计。
现代文：广阳王听从他的计策。
English: Guangyang Wang followed his strategy.

古文：拔陵果来要击，破也列河于岭上，部众皆没。
现代文：拔陵果然前来攻击，他们在析郭岭上打败也列河，部众都陷入敌军围困之中。
English: Bailing really came to attack, they defeated Yeleihe on Seogwoling, and the general public fell into the siege of the enemy.

古文：谨伏兵发，贼大败，悉破收也列河之众。
现代文：这时，于谨的伏兵四起，敌军大败，于谨全部收降了也列河的部众。
English: At this time, Yu Zheng's ambushes were in full swing, the enemy army was defeated, and Yu Zheng completely subdued the troops of Lihe.

古文：孝昌元年，又随广阳王征鲜于修礼。
现代文：孝昌元年，于谨又随广阳王征讨鲜于礼。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, Yu Zhen followed the king of Guangyang in a campaign.

古文：军次白斗牛逻。会章武王为修礼所害，遂停军中山。
现代文：当军队到达白牛逻时，正赶上章武王被鲜于礼所杀，他们便将军队停留在中山。
English: When the army arrived at Bai Niu Luo, it was just in time for King Zhang Wu to be killed by Xian Yu Li, so they kept the army in Zhongshan.

古文：侍中元晏宣言于灵太后曰： 广阳盘桓不进，坐图非望。
现代文：侍中元晏在灵太后面前诽谤说： 广阳王领军盘桓不肯前进，显然坐等时机，有非分之想。
English: In front of the empress dowager, the attendant, Geng Yao, slandered: "The leader of the Guangyang King's army is reluctant to advance, obviously waiting for the right time and thinking about something else.

古文：又有于谨者，智略过人，为其谋主，恐非陛下纯臣。 
现代文：他身边又有个于谨，智谋过人，充当他的主谋，恐怕他们不是陛下的忠臣。 
English: Around him, there is also a scrupulous, brilliant strategist, who acts as his mastermind. I'm afraid they are not loyal subjects of His Majesty.

古文：灵太后诏于尚书省门外立榜，募获谨者，许以重赏。
现代文：灵太后便传旨，让人在尚书省的门外设立榜文，招募能够捕捉于谨的人，表示将给予重赏。
English: The Empress Dowager then sent out an order for people to set up a poster board outside the door of Shang Shuxuan to recruit people who could capture the honor, saying that they would be given a reward.

古文：谨闻之，请诣阙披露腹心，广阳许之。
现代文：于谨听说后，请求前往朝廷直接披露自己的真心，广阳王答应了。
English: After hearing this, Yu requested to go to the imperial court to directly disclose his true feelings, and Guangyang Wang agreed.

古文：谨遂到榜下，曰： 吾知此人。 
现代文：于谨便直接来到榜下，揭榜说： 我知道这个人。 
English: Yu Zhen came directly to the bottom of the list, unveiled the list and said: I know this person.

古文：众共诘之，谨曰； 我即是也。 
现代文：众人一起查问他。于谨说 ：我就是于谨。 
English: Everyone questioned him. Yu Zheng said, "I am Yu Zheng."

古文：有司以闻。
现代文：官员们把这件事奏明朝廷。
English: The official in charge of the matter reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：灵后见之，大怒。
现代文：灵太后见到于谨后，大为恼怒。
English: When the Empress Dowager Ling saw Yu Jianhou, she was very angry.

古文：谨备述广阳忠款，兼陈停军之状。
现代文：于谨详细陈述广阳王如何忠于朝廷，并说明军队停留在中山的原因。
English: I would like to state in detail how King Guangyang was loyal to the imperial court, and explain the reason why the army stayed in Zhongshan.

古文：灵后遂舍之。
现代文：灵太后这才释放了他。
English: It was only then that the Empress Dowager released him.

古文：后从尔硃天光与齐神武战于韩陵山，天光败，谨遂入关。
现代文：后来于谨又跟着尔朱天光与北齐神武帝在韩陵山对战，尔朱天光战败，于谨因而进入关中。
English: Later, Yu Gong also followed Er Zhu Tianguang and North Qi Emperor Shenwu to fight in Hanling Mountain. Er Zhu Tianguang was defeated, and Yu Gong thus entered Guanzhong.

古文：周文帝临夏州，以谨为防城大都督，兼夏州长史。
现代文：周文帝到夏州时，让于谨当防城大都督，兼夏州长史。
English: When Emperor Zhou Wenzhou came to Xiazhou, he let Gui Dangcheng, the governor of Xiazhou, be the governor of Xiazhou.

古文：及贺拔岳被害，周文赴平凉。
现代文：当贺拔岳被害时，周文帝前往平凉。
English: When Mt. Hebatake was damaged, Emperor Zhou went to Pingliang.

古文：谨言于周文曰： 关中秦汉旧都，古称天府。
现代文：于谨对周文帝说 ：关中是秦汉的旧都城，自古号称 天府 。
English: Yu Zhen said to Zhou Wendi: Guanzhong is the old capital of Qin and Han dynasties, known as Tianfu since ancient times.

古文：今若据其要害，招集英雄，足观时变。
现代文：如今如能占据各个要害之地，招集四方英雄好汉，足以观察时局的变化。
English: Nowadays, if we can occupy all the key places and recruit heroes and heroines from the four directions, it is enough to observe the changes in the current situation.

古文：且天子在洛，逼迫群凶。
现代文：况且天子在洛阳，被群凶所逼迫。
English: What's more, Tianzi was in Luoyang, being persecuted by the mob.

古文：请都关右，然后挟天子而令诸侯，千载一时也。 
现代文：你请求朝廷迁都关内，然后可以挟天子而令诸侯，这是千载难逢的好时机啊！ 
English: You ask the imperial court to move the capital to Guanzhong, and then you can blackmail the princes. This is a golden opportunity!

古文：周文大悦。
现代文：周文帝听后，大为高兴。
English: After listening, Zhou Wendi was very happy.

古文：会有敕追谨为关内大都督，谨因进都关中策。
现代文：正好朝廷传令让于谨任关内大都督，于谨因此上奏迁都关中的计策。
English: It was just at that time that the imperial court issued a summons to allow him to assume the position of the governor of Kansai, and as a result, I submitted a proposal to move the capital to Kansai.

古文：魏帝西迁，仍从周文征潼关，破回洛城，授北雍州刺史，进爵蓝田县公。
现代文：魏帝西迁之后，于谨仍跟从周文帝攻打潼关，攻破了回洛城，并被任命为北雍州刺史，晋爵位为蓝田县公。
English: After Emperor Wei moved to the west, Yu Zhen still followed Emperor Zhou to attack Shaoguan, broke through the back of Luo City, and was appointed as the governor of North Yongzhou, and was promoted to the rank of the governor of Lantian County.

古文：大统三年，大军东伐，为前锋，进拔弘农，禽东魏陕州刺史李徽伯。
现代文：大统三年，大军东征时，于谨为先锋，进军攻下弘农郡，抓住了东魏陕州刺史李徽伯。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, when the great army marched eastward, Yu Zhen took the vanguard, marched into Hongnong County and captured the East Wei Shaanxi prince Li Huibo.

古文：神武至沙苑，谨力战，进爵常山郡公。
现代文：齐神武帝到沙苑时，于谨奋力作战，晋爵为常山郡公。
English: When Emperor Qishenwu came to Shayuan, Yu Jian fought hard and was promoted to the peerage of Changshan County.

古文：又从战河桥，拜大丞相府长史，兼大行台尚书。
现代文：他又跟随到河桥作战，被任命为大丞相府长史，兼大行台尚书。
English: He also followed to fight in the Battle of the River Bridge, and was appointed as the grand chancellor, the prefectural governor, and the grand governor.

古文：再迁太子太保。
现代文：再升任太子太保。
English: He was then promoted to Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：芒山之战，大军不利，谨率麾下伪降，立于路左。
现代文：芒山之战时，大军出师不利，于谨率部假降，列队立于路的左侧。
English: During the Battle of Mangshan, it was unfavorable for a large army to send out a division, so Yu Zhen led his division to take a leave of absence and lined up on the left side of the road.

古文：神武乘胜逐北，不以为虞。
现代文：神武帝乘胜向北追击，并不防备。
English: Emperor Jimmu took advantage of the victory to pursue them northward, and did not take any precautions.

古文：谨自后击之，敌人大骇。
现代文：于谨便从背后攻击，敌军大为惊恐。
English: He attacked from behind, and the enemy was greatly alarmed.

古文：独孤信又收兵于后奋击，神武军乱，以此大军得全。
现代文：这时，独孤信又收兵从后面奋力攻打，神武帝军中大乱，因此西魏大军得以保全。
English: At this time, Du Guoxin also gathered troops to attack from behind, and the Divine Emperor's army was in chaos, so the West Wei army was preserved.

古文：十二年，拜尚书左仆射，领司农卿。
现代文：大统十二年，被任命为尚书左仆射，领司农卿。
English: In the 12th year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as Shang Shuzo's right-hand man, leading the Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：及侯景款附，请兵为援，谨谏以为景情难测，周文不听。
现代文：当侯景前来归附，请求派兵援助时，于谨进谏说，侯景的真心难以揣测，可是周文帝不肯听从。
English: When Hou Jing came to Huizhou and requested the dispatch of soldiers to help, Yu Zhengjin said that it was difficult to guess the true heart of Hou Jing, but Zhou Wendi refused to listen.

古文：寻兼大行台尚书、大丞相长史，率兵镇潼关，加授华州刺史，赐秬鬯一卣，珪瓚副焉。
现代文：不久于谨又兼大行台尚书、大丞相长史，领兵镇守潼关，并被加授为华州刺史，赐给他用黑黍和香草酿成的美酒一尊，玉王圭、玉瓒一对。
English: Not long after, he was also awarded the title of Daigangdai Shangshu, Dajo Changshi, and led the troops to guard Shouguan. He was also awarded the title of Huazhou Shishi, and was given a beautiful wine made of black ginger and vanilla, a pair of Jade King Kei and Jade Gourd.

古文：俄拜司空。
现代文：不久又被任命为司空。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：恭帝元年，除雍州刺史。
现代文：恭帝元年，任雍州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong, he was appointed as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：初，梁元帝于江陵嗣位，密与齐交通，将谋侵轶。
现代文：当初，梁元帝在江陵继位时，曾秘密地和北齐联络，准备侵扰西魏。
English: At first, Emperor Liang Yuan secretly contacted the Northern Qi to invade the Western Wei Dynasty when he succeeded to the throne in Jiangling.

古文：其兄子岳阳王詧时为雍州刺史，以梁元帝杀其兄誉，逐结隙，据襄阳来附。
现代文：梁元帝哥哥的儿子岳阳王鮞当时为雍州刺史，他因为梁元帝杀了他哥哥誉，便有了仇隙，把所据有的襄阳来投降西魏。
English: The son of Emperor Liangyuan's elder brother, Yueyang Wangye, was at that time the chief historian of Yongzhou. Because Emperor Liangyuan had killed his elder brother, he had a grudge against him, and he surrendered his possession of Xiangyang to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：乃命谨出讨。
现代文：朝廷命令出兵讨伐梁朝。
English: The imperial court ordered the dispatch of troops to fight against the Liang Dynasty.

古文：周文饯于青泥谷。
现代文：周文帝在青泥谷设宴为于谨饯行。
English: Emperor Zhou Wen set up a banquet in Qingde Valley to pay his respects.

古文：长孙俭曰： 为萧绎计将如何？ 
现代文：长孙俭问于谨 ：替萧绎设想该采取哪种计策？ 
English: The eldest grandson asked Yu Zhen: What kind of strategy should be adopted for Xiao Yuanzhong?

古文：谨曰： 曜兵汉沔，席卷度江，直据丹阳，是其上策。移郭内居人，退保子城，以待援至，是其中策。若难于移动，据守罗郭，是其下策。 
现代文：于谨说 ：显耀军威于汉、沔，倾其全力以渡江，直上攻占丹阳，是他的上策；迁移城郭中的居民，退守子城，等待援兵到达，是他的中策；如果难以迁移人口，坚守城郭，是他的下策。 
English: Yu Jian said: to show the army's strength in Han and Qi, to devote all its efforts to crossing the river, to go straight up to capture Danyang, is his best strategy; to relocate the residents in the castle, to retreat from the castle, to wait for reinforcements to arrive, is his middle strategy; if it is difficult to relocate the population, to hold on to the castle, is his next strategy.

古文：俭曰： 裁绎出何策？ 
现代文：长孙俭问 ：判断萧绎会采用哪种策略？ 
English: The eldest grandson asked: What kind of strategy will Xiao Yuanzhong adopt?

古文：谨曰： 必用下。 
现代文：于谨说： 肯定采用下策。 
English: Yu said, "We will definitely adopt the following measures."

古文：俭曰： 何也？ 
现代文：长孙俭问 ：什么原因？ 
English: The eldest grandson asked: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 萧氏保据江南，绵历数纪。属中原有故，未遑外略。
现代文：于谨回答 ：萧氏占据江南，已绵延几代人之久，正好中原地区多事，没来得及对外扩张。
English: Yu replied, "Mr. Xiao has occupied the southern part of the Yangtze River for several generations. The Central Plains region has been very eventful, and he did not have time to expand abroad.

古文：又以我有齐氏之患，必谓力不能分。
现代文：又因为我们有北齐这个外患，他们一定认为我们的力量难以分开。
English: And because we have Beiqi as an external threat, they must think that our strength is hard to separate.

古文：且绎懦而无谋，多疑少断。
现代文：况且萧绎为人懦弱而且没有谋略，多怀疑虑，难作决断。
English: Moreover, Xiao Yuanzhong is a coward and has no strategy, he is more suspicious and hesitant, and it is difficult to make a decision.

古文：愚人难与虑始，皆恋邑居，既恶迁移，当保罗郭。
现代文：愚蠢的人难以考虑事情的始因，都贪恋安居城池，他既然厌恶迁移，当然就要坚守外城。
English: Stupid people find it difficult to consider the cause of things. They all yearn to live safely in the city. Since he is averse to moving, of course he must stick to the outer city.

古文：所以用下策。 
现代文：所以肯定采用下策。 
English: Therefore, we will definitely take the next step.

古文：谨令中山公护及大将军杨忠等先据江津，断其走路。
现代文：于谨命令中山公宇文护和大将军杨忠等先占领江边渡口，断绝梁人的退路。
English: Yu ordered Zhongshan Gongyu Wenju and General Yang Zhong to occupy the riverside ferry first and cut off the escape route of the Liang people.

古文：梁人竖木栅于外城，广轮六十里。
现代文：梁人在外城树立起木栅，一圈周长六十里。
English: Liang people set up a wooden grate in the outer city, with a circumference of sixty miles.

古文：寻而谨至，悉众围之。
现代文：不久于谨兵到，他命令全军将城团团围住。
English: Shortly after the soldiers arrived, he ordered the entire army to surround the city.

古文：旬有六日，外城遂陷，梁主退保子城。
现代文：过了十六天，外城被攻破，梁帝只得退保子城。
English: Sixteen days later, the outer city was breached, and Emperor Liang had to retreat to Baozi City.

古文：翌日，率其太子以下，面缚出降。
现代文：第二天，梁元帝率领太子以下文武百官，自缚出城投降。
English: The next day, Emperor Liang Yuan led hundreds of civil and military officials, including the prince, out of the city to surrender.

古文：寻杀之。虏其男女十余万人，收其府库珍宝。得宋浑天仪、梁日晷、铜表、魏相风乌、铜蟠螭趺、大玉径西尺围七尺及诸舆辇法物以献，军无私焉。
现代文：不久于谨便将他们全杀掉了，俘获城中男女十多万人，收了梁朝府库中的所有珍宝，得到宋时制作的浑天仪、梁朝的日晷、铜表、魏国的相风鸟、铜盘龙趺座、大玉直径四尺，周围长七尺以及各种车驾，帝王所用各种器物献给朝廷，军队没有私留一点东西。
English: Soon after, he killed them all, captured more than 100,000 men and women in the city, collected all the treasures in the Liang Dynasty's treasury, obtained the Hun Tian Yi made in the Song Dynasty, the Liang Dynasty's sundial, the bronze watch, the Wei Dynasty's wind-up bird, the bronze dragon's beak, the large jade with a diameter of four feet and a circumference of seven feet, and various chariots, all kinds of utensils used by the emperor and dedicated to the imperial court. The army did not keep a single thing for themselves.

古文：立萧詧为梁主，振旅而旋。
现代文：同时，立萧鮞为梁帝，统领全军凯旋。
English: At the same time, Xiao Wei was established as Emperor Liang and led the whole army to a triumphant return.

古文：周文亲至其第，宴语极欢。
现代文：周文帝亲自来到于谨的府中，设宴畅叙，极为欢乐。
English: Zhou Wendi himself came to Zheng's residence, set up a banquet and had a good time. He was very happy.

古文：赏谨奴婢一千口。及梁宝物，并金石丝竹乐一部，别封新野郡公。
现代文：赏于谨奴隶一千人和梁朝的一些宝物，并有金石丝竹器乐一部，加封为新野郡公。
English: He was awarded a thousand slaves and some treasures from the Liang Dynasty, as well as a piece of gold, silk and bamboo musical instruments. He was also given the additional title of Lord of Nino County.

古文：谨固辞，不许。
现代文：于谨坚决辞谢，但周文帝不允许。
English: Yu Jian firmly declined to thank him, but Zhou Wendi did not allow it.

古文：又令司乐作《常山公平梁歌》十首，使工人歌之。
现代文：周文帝又令乐官制作了《常山公平梁歌》十首，让乐工演奏歌唱。
English: Zhou Wendi also ordered the music officials to produce ten pieces of "Changshan Fair Beam Song" and let the musicians play and sing.

古文：谨自以久当权重，功名既立，愿保优闲，乃上先所乘骏马及所著铠甲等。
现代文：于谨认为自己久担重任，掌握大权，如今功名已就，愿意保有悠闲的生活，便献上先前所乘的骏马和所穿的铠甲等物。
English: Since he thought that he had long shouldered heavy responsibilities and wielded great power, and now his achievement was complete, and he was willing to maintain a leisurely life, he offered the horse he had previously ridden and the armor he had worn.

古文：周文识其意，曰： 今巨猾未平，公岂得便尔独善？ 
现代文：周文帝明白他的心意，便对他说： 如今强敌未灭，你怎能便想独善其身呢？ 
English: Zhou Wendi understood his intention and said to him: "Nowadays, the strong enemy has not disappeared, how can you want to be independent?

古文：遂不受。
现代文：终于不肯接受。
English: He finally refused to accept it.

古文：六官建，拜大司寇。
现代文：建立六部官制时，于谨被任命为大司寇。
English: When the six-branch bureaucratic system was established, Yu was appointed as the grand secretary.

古文：及周文崩，孝闵帝尚幼，中山公护虽受顾命而名位素下，群公各图执政。
现代文：当周文帝死时，孝闵帝年纪尚幼。中山公宇文护虽受遗命辅政，但他的声名和职位一向比较低下，众位高官都想执掌朝政。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhouwen's death, Emperor Xiaohui was still young. Although Zhongshan Gongyu Wenku was appointed to assist the government, his reputation and position had always been relatively low, and many high-ranking officials wanted to take charge of the government.

古文：护深忧之，密访于谨。
现代文：宇文护十分忧虑，便秘密拜访于谨。
English: Yu Wenguo was very worried and secretly visited Yu Zheng.

古文：谨曰： 夙蒙丞相殊眷，今日必以死争之。
现代文：于谨说 ：我往昔承蒙丞相殊遇和眷顾，今日必当以死抗争。
English: I would like to say: In the past, I have benefited from the special treatment and patronage of the Prime Minister, and today I must fight to the death.

古文：若对众定策，公必不得让。 
现代文：如果对着众官定下大计，您一定不要谦让。 
English: If you set a grand plan for the officials, you must not be modest.

古文：明日，群公会议。谨曰： 昔帝室倾危，丞相志存匡救。
现代文：第二天，众位公卿聚会商议，于谨说 ：往昔帝室行将倾覆，外境艰难，丞相立志保存皇室，匡救于危难之中。
English: The next day, all the nobles gathered to discuss, and I would like to say: In the past, when the imperial family was about to be overthrown and the outside world was difficult, the prime ministers resolved to preserve the imperial family and save the emperor in the midst of danger.

古文：今上天降祸，奄弃百寮。嗣子虽幼，而中山公亲则犹子，兼受顾托，军国大事，理须归之。 
现代文：今日上天降下灾祸，丞相突然抛下百官而去，嗣子虽然年幼，但中山公是丞相的亲侄子，并且受命辅助嗣子，军国大事，理当由他总管。 
English: Today, a calamity descended from the heavens, the prime minister suddenly left hundreds of officials and went away. Although the heir is young, Nakayama is the prime minister's nephew, and was ordered to assist the heir, military affairs, he should be in charge.

古文：辞色抗厉，众皆悚动。
现代文：于谨说话时声色俱厉，众人心中都惊惧不已。
English: When Yu Zhen spoke, his voice was hoarse, and everyone's heart was filled with fear.

古文：护曰： 此是家事，护何敢有辞！ 
现代文：宇文护说： 这是我家的家事，我怎么敢推辞责任呢？ 
English: "This is my family's business. How dare I shirk my responsibilities?

古文：谨既周文等夷，护每申礼敬。
现代文：于谨原是和周文帝同列的朝官，所以宇文护一向十分敬重他。
English: Yu Jianyuan was a member of the imperial court on the same level as Emperor Zhou, so Uwenfo always held him in high esteem.

古文：至是，谨乃起而言曰： 公若统理军国，谨等便有所依。 
现代文：这时，于谨便站立起来，说道 ：贤公如果愿意统理军国大事，我们这些人也就有了依靠了。 
English: At this time, Yu Zhen stood up and said: "If Xian Gong is willing to manage the military affairs, we people will also have support.

古文：遂再拜。
现代文：于是，他便向宇文护作拜。
English: As a result, he began to worship Uwen.

古文：群公迫于谨，亦拜。
现代文：众公卿迫于于谨的压力，也只得拜见宇文护。
English: The nobles, under the pressure of duty, also had to pay a visit to Umunno.

古文：众议始定。
现代文：这样，众公卿才作了决定。
English: So the Lords have made their decision.

古文：孝闵践阼，进封燕国公，邑万户，迁太傅、太宗伯，与李弼、侯莫陈崇等参议朝政。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，晋封于谨为燕国公，食邑万户，晋升太傅、大宗伯，和李弼、侯莫陈崇等参议朝政。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, promoted Yu Ji to the title of the Prince of Yan Province, provided food for tens of thousands of households, promoted Taifu, Dazongbo, and Li Xi, Hou Mo, Chen Chong, and others to participate in the imperial politics.

古文：及贺兰祥讨吐谷浑，明帝令谨遥统其军，授以方略。
现代文：当贺兰祥征讨吐谷浑时，明帝命令于谨遥控指挥这支军队，传授作战的方略。
English: When Horan Xiangzheng marched against Tuyagun, Emperor Ming ordered Yu Ji to command the army by remote control and teach him the tactics of war.

古文：保定二年，谨以年老，乞骸骨，优诏不许。
现代文：保定二年，于谨以年老为由，请求朝廷让他退休养老，但不被允许。
English: Two years after Baoding, Yu Zhen requested the imperial court to let him retire on the grounds of old age, but was not allowed.

古文：三年，以谨为三老，固辞，又不许。
现代文：保定三年，让于谨成为朝中的三老之一，于谨坚决辞谢，又不得许可。
English: Baoding for three years, let Yu Zhen become one of the three elders of the dynasty, Yu Zhen resolutely declined, and was not allowed.

古文：赐延年杖。
现代文：赐给他延年杖。
English: Give him a staff of years.

古文：武帝幸太学以食之。
现代文：武帝亲临太学向三老进食。
English: Emperor Wu himself came to Taigaku to feed the three old men.

古文：三老入门，皇帝迎拜屏间，三老答拜。
现代文：当三老入门时，皇帝迎拜于屏门，三老当即答拜。
English: When the three old men entered, the emperor bowed to the screen door, and the three old men immediately bowed back.

古文：有司设三老席于中楹，南向。
现代文：有关官员在中庭设下了三老的座席，面朝南。
English: Officials have set up seats for the three elders in the atrium, facing south.

古文：太师、晋公护升阶，设席施几。
现代文：太师、晋国公宇文护登阶，陈设席位，铺好小几。
English: Grand Master and Jin Guo Gongwu Wengu ascended the steps, set up seats, and laid out small tables.

古文：三老升席，南面冯几而坐，师道自居。
现代文：三老入席，面朝南，靠小几坐下，以老师的身份自居。
English: The three elders take their seats, face south, lean on a small group to sit down, and introduce themselves as teachers.

古文：大司冠、楚国公宁升阶，正舄。
现代文：大司寇、楚国公宇文宁登阶，正鞋。
English: Daishi Kou and Chu Guogongwu Wenning ascended the steps and put on their formal shoes.

古文：皇帝升，立于斧扆之前，西面。
现代文：皇帝登阶，站立在绘有斧形纹的屏风前，面向西。
English: The emperor ascends the steps and stands facing west in front of an axe-shaped screen.

古文：有司进馔，皇帝跪设酱豆，亲自袒割。
现代文：有关官员送来食品，皇帝跪着陈放酱豆，亲自卷衣袖割切食物。
English: Officials brought food, and the emperor kneeled down to put out the soybeans and personally rolled up his sleeves to cut the food.

古文：三老食讫。皇帝又亲跪授爵以酳。
现代文：三老吃过以后，皇帝又亲跪向他们送爵，以酒漱口。
English: After the three old men had eaten, the emperor knelt down to present them with their knighthoods and rinsed his mouth with wine.

古文：有司撤讫。
现代文：礼毕，有关官员撤下这些东西。
English: With all due respect, the officials concerned should remove these things.

古文：皇帝北面立访道。
现代文：皇帝面北站立问治国之道。
English: The emperor stood facing north and asked the way to govern the country.

古文：三老乃起立于席。
现代文：三老便从席上站立起来。
English: The three elders stood up from their seats.

古文：皇帝曰： 猥当天下重任，自惟不才，不知政术之要，公其诲之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我辱当天下重任，自知缺少才能，不知治理国政的要术，请诸公教诲。 
English: The emperor said: I am humbled by the heavy responsibilities of the day, I know that I lack talent, I do not know the essentials of governing the country, please teach me.

古文：三老答曰： 木从绳则正，君从谏则圣。自古明王圣主，皆虚心纳谏，以知得失，天下乃安。惟陛下念之。 
现代文：三老答道 ：木材经过绳墨以后就方正了，国君听从劝谏就是贤明的君主，自古以来的明君圣主，都是虚心听从劝谏，从而知道得失之处，天下因此而得安定，愿陛下经常想到这一点。 
English: The three elders replied, "The wood becomes square after it has been inked with rope. A sovereign who listens to advice is a wise monarch. Since ancient times, wise monarchs and holy lords have listened to advice with an open mind, thereby knowing where to gain and where to lose, and the world has become stable as a result. May His Majesty think of this often."

古文：又曰： 为国之本，在乎忠信。
现代文：又一位说： 治国之本，在于忠信之道。
English: Another said: "The way to govern a country is through loyalty.

古文：古人去食去兵，信不可失。
现代文：古人可以没有食物，可以没有军队，但却不可以去掉信用。
English: The ancients could do without food, they could do without an army, but they could not do without trust.

古文：国家兴废，莫不由之，愿陛下守而勿失。 
现代文：国家的兴废，无不因此而造成，请陛下谨守而不要失去。 
English: The rise and fall of nations are all caused by this. Please, Your Majesty, be careful not to lose it.

古文：又曰： 为国之道，必须有法。
现代文：又说： 治国之道，必须有法则。
English: He also said: There must be rules for governing the country.

古文：法者，国之纲纪，不可不正。
现代文：法，是治国的制度，不可以不公正。
English: The law is a system for governing the country, and it cannot be unjust.

古文：所正在于赏罚。若有功必赏，有罪必罚，则为善者日益，为恶者日止。
现代文：公正表现在赏罚方面，如果有功劳的就要奖赏他，有罪的一定要惩罚，那么做好事的人就越来越多，做坏事的就越来越少。
English: Justice is manifested in the aspect of reward and punishment. If there is merit, it must be rewarded, and if there is guilt, it must be punished. Then there will be more and more people who do good things, and fewer and fewer people who do bad things.

古文：若有功不赏，有罪不罚，则天下善恶不分，下人无所措其手足。 
现代文：如果有功劳不奖赏，有罪过不惩罚，那么天下就会善恶不分，下边的人不知道怎么做才好。 
English: If there is no reward for merit and no punishment for guilt, then there will be no distinction between good and evil in the world, and people at the bottom will not know what to do.

古文：又曰： 言行者，立身之基，言出行随，诚愿陛下慎之。 
现代文：又说： 言论和行为，是立身的根基。说过话，行动就要跟上，诚恳地希望陛下认真记住。 
English: He also said: Words and deeds are the foundation of one's life. Once words are spoken, actions must follow. I sincerely hope that His Majesty will carefully remember this.

古文：三老言毕，皇帝再拜受之，三老答拜，礼成而出。
现代文：三老说完后，皇帝再次向他们拜谢，表示接受教诲。三老也答拜，礼仪完毕后才离开。
English: After the three elders finished speaking, the emperor thanked them again, indicating that he accepted their teachings. The three elders also bowed, and only left after the ceremony was over.

古文：及晋公护东伐，谨时有病。护以其宿将旧臣，犹请与同行，询访戎略。
现代文：当晋公宇文护东征时，于谨正在生病，宇文护因为于谨是久经沙战的老将旧臣，所以还是请他一起出征，以便经常请教谋略。
English: When Jin Gong Uwen Gu was on the Eastern Expedition, Yu Zhen was ill. Since Yu Zhen was a veteran of the war, he was invited to go on the expedition with him, so that he could consult with him frequently.

古文：军还，赐钟磬一部。
现代文：东征回朝后，赏赐给他钟磬一部。
English: After returning from the Eastern Expedition, he was awarded a part of the bell tower.

古文：天和二年，又赐安车一乘。寻授雍州牧。
现代文：天和二年，又得赏赐安车一辆，不久又任他为雍州刺史。
English: A year and a half later, he was rewarded with a safe car, and soon he was allowed to write the history of Yongzhou.

古文：三年，薨，年七十六。
现代文：天和三年，逝世，享年七十六岁。
English: He passed away at the age of seventy-six.

古文：武帝亲临。诏谯王俭监护丧事，赐缯千段、粟梦千斛，赠本官，加使持节、太师、雍恆等二十州诸军事、雍州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：周武帝亲临致哀，传旨让谯王俭监护治丧诸事，并赐给缯一千段，粟、麦一千斛，本官衔外，加封使持节、太师、雍、恒等二十州诸军事、雍州刺史，谥号为 文 。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu came in person to offer his condolences, and sent an order to let King Jian of Qin to supervise and handle all matters related to the funeral. He also gave him a thousand pieces of money, a thousand bags of millet, and a thousand bags of barley. In addition to his official title, he was also given the title of envoy to Jixi, Taishi, Yong, Heng, and other twenty states of the military, and the title of Yongzhou historian. His posthumous name was Wen.

古文：及葬，王公以下，咸送郊外。
现代文：下葬时，自王公以下爵位的官员，都送到郊外。
English: At the time of the burial, officials with titles from the rank of prince down were sent to the suburbs.

古文：配享于文帝庙庭。
现代文：并配祭在周文帝的庙堂中。
English: The festival was also held in the temple of Emperor Zhou.

古文：谨有智谋，善于事上。
现代文：于谨很有智谋，又善于侍奉皇上。
English: Yu Zheng was very resourceful and good at serving the emperor.

古文：名位虽重，愈存谦挹，每朝参往来，不过从两三骑而已。
现代文：他名声职位虽都很高，但自己却越加谦逊，自我约束。每次朝见皇帝，来往随从不过两三骑而已。
English: Although his reputation and position were very high, he became more and more humble and self-disciplined. Every time he met the emperor, he was accompanied by only two or three horsemen.

古文：朝廷凡有军国之务，多与谨决。
现代文：朝廷中凡遇到军国要事，大多和于谨商议处置办法。
English: In the imperial court, whenever important military matters were encountered, they were mostly discussed with Yu Xizhi.

古文：谨亦竭其智能，故功臣中特见委信，始终若一，人无间言。
现代文：于谨也竭尽自己的智慧和才能，所以在功臣当中特别受到信任，自始至终都一样，没有人说过他的坏话。
English: Yu Jian also exerted his wisdom and talent, so he was particularly trusted among the heroes. It was the same from beginning to end, no one said anything bad about him.

古文：每诫诸子，务存静退。
现代文：他常常告诫自己的几个儿子，务必常想到清静寡欲，功成身退。
English: He often admonished his sons that they must always keep in mind the principle of tranquility and renunciation.

古文：加以年齿遐长，礼遇隆重，子孙繁衍，皆至显达，当时莫比。
现代文：他年纪活得很长，朝廷礼遇十分隆重，子孙成群，都成为有名声有地位的人，这种情况，当时没有人可以相比的。
English: He lived to a very old age, was treated with great courtesy by the imperial court, and his children and grandchildren became famous and influential people in droves, a situation that no one could compare to at the time.

古文：子寔嗣。
现代文：他的儿子萛继承了他的爵位。
English: His son Zou inherited his title.

