古文：桓公问于管子曰： 轻重安施？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 轻重之术是怎样施行的？ 
English: Kan Gong asked Guanzhong, "How is the heavy and light technique performed?"

古文：管子对曰： 自理国戏以来，未有不以轻重而能成其王者也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 自从伏羲氏治国以来，没有一个不是靠轻重之术成王业的。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Since the Fuxi Dynasty ruled the country, there has not been a single person who did not become a king through various means.

古文：公曰： 何谓？ 
现代文：桓公说； 这话怎么讲？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "How can this be?

古文：管子对曰： 虙戏作，造六峜以迎阴阳，作九九之数以合天道，而天下化之。
现代文：管仲回答说： 伏羲执政，创造六艾八卦来预测阴阳，发明九九算法来印证天道，从而使天下归化。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Fujian was in power, and he created the Six Aisles and Eight Trigrams to predict yin and yang, and invented the Nine Nine Algorithm to confirm the heavenly way, thus naturalizing the world.

古文：神农作，树五谷淇山之阳，九州之民乃知谷食，而天下化之。
现代文：神农氏执政，在棋山南部种植五谷，九州百姓才懂得食用粮食，从而使天下归化。
English: When the Shennong clan was in power, they planted grain in the southern part of Kishan, and it was only then that the people of Kyushu knew how to eat grain, which led to the naturalization of the world.

古文：黄帝作，钻燧生火，以熟荤臊，民食之无兹胃之病，而天下化之。
现代文：燧人氏当政，钻木取火，以烧熟肉食，百姓免除了生食中毒之病，从而使天下归化。
English: When the Hayato clan was in power, they drilled wood to make fire and cooked meat with it. The people were spared the disease of raw food poisoning, thus making the world naturalized.

古文：黄帝之王，童山竭泽。
现代文：黄帝时代，实行了伐光山林、枯竭水泽的政策。
English: In the era of the Yellow Emperor, a policy of clearing the mountains and forests and draining the rivers and lakes was implemented.

古文：有虞之王，烧曾薮，斩群害，以为民利，封土为社，置木为闾，始民知礼也。
现代文：虞舜时代，实行了火烧薮，消除群害。为民兴利的政策，并且建立了土神社庙，里巷门间，开始让人民知礼。
English: In the era of the Guzheng, they implemented the policy of setting fire to straw to eliminate the harm of the crowd and benefit the people, and established the soil shrines and temples, the lanes and alleys, and began to let the people know the rules.

古文：当是其时，民无愠恶不服，而天下化之。
现代文：这两个朝代，人们没有怨恨、凶恶和抗拒，从而天下也归化了。
English: In these two dynasties, there was no resentment, no malice, and no resistance, so the world was naturalized.

古文：夏人之王，外凿二十虻,韘十七湛，疏三江，凿五湖，道四泾之水，以商九州之高，以治九薮，民乃知城郭、门闾、室屋之筑，而天下化之。
现代文：夏代，开凿二十条河流，疏浚十七条淤塞河道，疏三江，凿五湖，引四泾之水，以测度九州高地，防治九条大泽，让人们懂得城郭、里巷、房屋的建筑，从而使天下归化。
English: During the summer, twenty rivers were excavated, seventeen silted-up river channels were dredged, three rivers were drained, five lakes were drilled, and four rivers of water were diverted to measure the Kyushu highlands and prevent and control nine large rivers, so that people could understand the architecture of castles, alleys, and houses, thereby naturalizing the world.

古文：殷人之王，立皂牢，服牛马，以为民利，而天下化之。
现代文：殷代，修立栅圈，驯养牛马，以为人民兴利，从而使天下归化。
English: In the Yin Dynasty, they built fences and domesticated cattle and horses to benefit the people, thus naturalizing the world.

古文：周人之王，循六，合阴阳，而天下化之。 
现代文：周代，遵循六艾八卦，印证明阳发展，从而使天下归化。 
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, following the Six Aisles and Eight Divisions of Confucianism, Hinduism developed, thus naturalizing the whole world.

古文：公曰： 然则当世之王者何行而可？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那么，当今的王者应当怎样做才好？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "So, what should today's king do?"

古文：管子对曰： 并用而勿俱尽也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 都可以用，但不可全盘照搬。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "All of them can be used, but they cannot be copied in their entirety."

古文：公曰： 何谓？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这怎么讲？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "How can this be?

古文：管子对曰： 帝王之道备矣，不可加也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 上述帝王之道都已具备，不必增加。
English: Guanzhong replied: The above-mentioned ways of emperors are already available, there is no need to increase them.

古文：公其行义而已矣。 
现代文：您只需按情况行其所宜就是了。 
English: You just have to do the best you can under the circumstances.

古文：公曰： 其行义奈何？ 管子对曰： 天子幼弱，诸侯亢强，聘享不上。
现代文：桓公说； 如何行其所宜？  管仲回答说： 现在天子幼弱，诸侯过于强大，不向天子遣使进贡。
English: Kan said, "How can I do what is right?" Guanzhong replied, "At present, the heavenly son is young and weak, and the princes are too powerful to send tribute to the heavenly son.

古文：公其弱强继绝，率诸侯以起周室之祀。 
现代文：您应当削弱强大的诸侯，延续被灭绝的小国，率领天下诸侯来复兴周天子的王室。 桓公说： 好。 
English: You should weaken the powerful princes, continue the small countries that have been exterminated, and lead the princes of the world to revive the royal family of Zhou Tianzi.

古文：公曰： 善。 桓公曰： 鲁粱之于齐也，千榖也，蜂螫也，齿之有唇也。
现代文：桓公说： 鲁国、梁国对于我们齐国，就象田边上的庄稼，蜂身上的尾螫，牙外面的嘴唇一样。
English: Huan Gong said: Lu and Liang are the same to us as the crops on the edge of the field, the tail fin on the bee, and the lips on the outside of the tooth.

古文：今吾欲下鲁梁，何行而可？ 
现代文：现在我想攻占鲁梁两国，怎样进行才好？ 
English: Now I want to conquer the two countries of Luliang, how should I proceed?

古文：管子对曰： 鲁粱之民俗为绨。
现代文：管仲回答说： 鲁、梁两国的百姓，从来以织绨为业。
English: Guanzhong replied, "The people of Lu and Liang have always been weavers.

古文：公服绨，令左右服之，民从而眼之。
现代文：您就带头穿绵绨的衣服，令左右近臣也穿，百姓也就会跟着穿。
English: You will take the lead in wearing loose-fitting clothes, ordering your close advisers to wear them, and the people will follow suit.

古文：公因令齐勿敢为，必仰于鲁梁，则是鲁梁释其农事而作绨矣。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：您还要下令齐国不准织绨，必须仰给于鲁、梁二国。这样，鲁梁二国就将放弃农业而去织绨了。 桓公说： 可以。 
English: You will also have to order that Qi is not allowed to weave cocoons, and must be given to Yulu and Liang. In this way, the two countries of Lu and Liang will give up agriculture and weave cocoons. Huan Gong said: Yes.

古文：即为服于泰山之阳，十日而服之。
现代文：就在泰山之南做起绨服。十天做好就穿上了。
English: Just south of Mount Taishan, I started making a kimono. After ten days of work, I put it on.

古文：管子告鲁梁之贾人曰： 子为我致绨千匹，赐子金三百斤；什至而金三千斤。 
现代文：管仲还对鲁、梁二国的商人说： 你们给我贩来绨一千正，我给你们三百斤金；贩来万正，给三千斤。 
English: Guanzhong also said to the merchants from Lu and Liang, "If you sell me 1,000 yuan, I will give you 300 kg of gold; if you sell me 3,000 yuan, I will give you 3,000 kg of gold.

古文：则是鲁梁不赋于民，财用足也。
现代文：这样，鲁、梁二国即使不向百姓征税，财用也充足了。
English: In this way, even if the two countries of Lu and Liang do not tax the people, the financial use is sufficient.

古文：鲁梁之君闻之，则教其民为绨。
现代文：鲁、梁二国国君听到这个消息，就要求他们的百姓织绨。
English: When the sovereigns of Lu and Liang heard the news, they asked their people to start weaving cocoons.

古文：十三月，而管子令人之鲁梁，鲁梁郭中之民道路扬尘，十步不相见，绁繑而踵相随，车毂齺，骑连伍而行。
现代文：十三个月以后，管仲派人到鲁、梁探听。两国城市人口之多使路上尘土飞扬，十步内都互相看不清楚，走路的足不举睡，坐车的车轮相碰，骑马的列队而行。
English: Thirteen months later, Guanzhong sent people to Lu and Liang to listen. The large urban population of the two countries made the road dusty, they could not see each other clearly within ten steps, they did not sleep when walking, the wheels of the car collided, and the horses rode in a line.

古文：管子曰： 鲁梁可下矣。 
现代文：管仲说： 可以拿下鲁、梁二国了。 
English: Guanzhong said, "We can take Lu and Liang.

古文：公曰， 奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 该怎么办？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What should we do?"

古文：管子对曰： 公宜服帛，率民去绨。
现代文：管仲回答说： 您应当改穿帛料衣服。带领百姓不再穿绨。
English: Guanzhong replied, "You should change your clothes and take the people out of the shackles.

古文：闭关，毋与鲁粱通使。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：还要封闭关卡，与鲁、梁断绝经济往来。 桓公说： 可以。 
English: It is also necessary to close the checkpoints and cut off economic exchanges with Lu and Liang. Huan Gong said: Yes.

古文：后十月，管子令人之鲁梁，鲁梁之民饿馁相及，应声之正无以给上。
现代文：十个月后，管仲又派人探听，看到鲁梁的百姓都在不断地陷于饥饿，连朝廷 一说即得 的正常赋税都交不起。
English: Ten months later, Guanzhong sent another person to investigate, and saw that the people of Luliang were constantly starving, and could not even pay the normal taxes that the court was talking about.

古文：鲁梁之君即令其民去绨修农。谷不可以三月而得，鲁梁之人籴十百，齐粜十钱。
现代文：两国国君命令百姓停止织绨而务农，但粮食却不能仅在三个月内就生产出来，鲁、梁的百姓买粮每石要花上千钱，齐国粮价才每石十钱。
English: The sovereigns of the two countries ordered the people to stop weaving and start farming, but grain could not be produced in just three months. The people of Lu and Liang spent thousands of yuan per stone to buy grain, while the price of grain in Qi was only ten yuan per stone.

古文：二十四月，鲁梁之民归齐者十分之六；三年，鲁梁之君请服。
现代文：两年后，鲁、梁的百姓有十分之六投奔齐国。三年后，鲁、梁的国君也都归顺齐国了。
English: Two years later, six-tenths of the people of Lu and Liang surrendered to Qi. Three years later, the sovereigns of Lu and Liang also surrendered to Qi.

古文：桓公问管子曰： 民饥而无食，寒而无衣，应声之正无以给上，室屋漏而不居，墙垣坏而不筑，为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 人民饥而无食，寒而无衣，正常赋税无力交纳，房屋漏雨不肯修，墙垣颓坏不肯砌，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "What should we do when the people are hungry but have no food, cold but have no clothes, unable to pay normal taxes, unwilling to repair leaking houses, and unwilling to repair broken walls?

古文：管子对曰： 沐涂树之枝也。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 请剪掉路旁树上的树枝。 桓公说； 可以。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Please cut the branches off the trees by the road." Huan Gong said, "Yes."

古文：令谓左右伯沐涂树之枝。
现代文：使命令左右伯剪除路旁树枝。
English: The order went out to prune the roadside branches left and right.

古文：左右伯受沐，涂树之枝阔。
现代文：左右伯遵命剪除后，路旁树上的枝叶稀疏了。
English: The branches and leaves on the roadside trees were sparse after the trees on both sides of the road were cut down in compliance with the order.

古文：其年，民被白布，清中而浊，应声之正有以给上，室屋漏者得居，墙垣坏者得筑。公召管子问曰， 此何故也？ 
现代文：过了一年，百姓穿上了帛服，吃到了粮食，交上了正常赋税，破屋得到修理，坏墙也到到补砌。桓公问管仲说： 这是什么原因呢？ 
English: After a year, the people put on their fine clothes, ate their grain, paid their normal taxes, repaired their broken houses, and repaired their broken walls. Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "What is the reason for this?"

古文：管子对曰， 齐者，夷莱之国也。
现代文：管仲回答说； 齐国，原是莱族的国家。
English: Guanzhong replied that Qi was originally the country of the Lai people.

古文：一树而百乘息其下者，以其不也。
现代文：常在一棵大树下休息上百乘的车，是因为树枝不剪可以乘凉。
English: Hundreds of cars often rest under a large tree, because the branches are not cut and can take advantage of the cold.

古文：众鸟居其上，丁壮者胡丸操弹居其下，终日不归。
现代文：许多飞鸟在树上，青壮年拿弹弓在树下打鸟，而终日不归。
English: Many flying birds in the trees, young and old take a slingshot to hit the birds under the trees, and never return.

古文：父老柎枝而论，终日不归。
现代文：父老们扶着树枝高谈阔论，也是终日不归。
English: Fathers and grandfathers hold the branches of trees and talk about it, but they never come back.

古文：归市亦惰倪，终日不归。
现代文：赶集散市的人也懒惰思睡。而终日不归。
English: People who rush from market to market are also lazy and sleepy. They don't come back all day.

古文：今吾沐涂树之枝，日中无尺寸之阴，出入者长时，行者疾走，父老归而治生，丁壮者归而薄业。
现代文：现在我把树上的枝叶剪掉，中午没有尺寸的树荫，往返者珍惜时光了，过路者快速赶路了，父老回家干活，青壮年也回家勤于本业了。
English: Now I cut off the branches and leaves on the trees. At noon, there is no shade of any size. Those who travel back and forth cherish their time. Those who pass by hurry up. Parents go home to work, and young adults also go home to work hard.

古文：彼臣归其三不归，此以乡不资也。 
现代文：我之所以要纠正这个 三不归 的问题，正是因为百姓从前被它弄得衣食不继的缘故。 
English: The reason why I want to rectify this problem of the Three Stages of No Return is precisely because the people were once made destitute by it.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 莱、莒与柴田相并，为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 莱、莒两国砍柴与农业同时并举，该怎样对付他们？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "The two countries of Lai and Zhou both cut firewood and engaged in agriculture at the same time. How should we deal with them?"

古文：管子对曰： 莱、莒之山生柴，君其率白徒之卒铸庄山之金以为币，重莱之柴贾。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 莱、苔两国的山上盛产柴薪，您可率新征士兵炼庄山之铜铸币，提高莱国的柴薪价格。 
English: Guanzhong replied: The mountains of Laos and Laos are rich in fuelwood. You can lead the newly recruited soldiers to refine the copper coinage of Zhuangshan and increase the price of fuelwood in Laos.

古文：莱君闻之，告左右曰： 金币者，人之所重也。
现代文：莱国国君得知此事后，对左右近臣说； 钱币，是谁都重视的。
English: After learning of this matter, the sovereign of the State of Lae said to his right and left courtiers: Money is important to everyone.

古文：柴者，吾国之奇出也。以吾国之奇出，尽齐之重宝，则齐可并也。 
现代文：柴薪既是我国的特产，用我国特产换尽齐国的钱币，就可以吞并齐国。 
English: Since firewood is a special product of our country, if we exchange all the money of Qi with our special product, we can annex Qi.

古文：莱即释其耕农而治柴。
现代文：莱国随即弃农业而专事打柴。
English: As a result, the country abandoned agriculture in favour of firewood.

古文：管子即令隰朋反农。
现代文：管仲则命令隰朋撤回士兵种地。
English: Guanzhong then ordered Zhaopeng to withdraw the soldiers to farmland.

古文：二年，桓公止柴。
现代文：过了两年，桓公停止购柴。
English: After two years, Kan stopped buying firewood.

古文：莱：莒之籴三百七十，齐粜十钱，莱、莒之民降齐者十分之七。
现代文：莱、莒的粮价高达每石三百七十钱，齐国才每石十钱，莱、莒两国的百姓十分之七投降齐国。
English: The grain price in Lai and Handan was as high as 370 yuan per stone, while in Qi it was only 10 yuan per stone. Seven-tenths of the people in Lai and Handan surrendered to Qi.

古文：二十八月，莱、莒之君请服。
现代文：二十八个月后，莱、莒两国的国君也都请降了。
English: Twenty-eight months later, the sovereigns of both the Kingdom of Lai and the Kingdom of Yunnan also abdicated.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 楚者，山东之强国也，其人民习战斗之道。
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 楚，是山东的强国，其人民习于战斗之道。
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong and said: Chu is a powerful country in Shandong, and its people are accustomed to fighting.

古文：举兵伐之，恐力不能过。
现代文：出兵攻伐它，恐怕实力不能取胜。
English: If we send troops to attack it, I am afraid that strength cannot win.

古文：兵弊于楚，功不成于周，为之奈何？ 
现代文：兵败于楚国，又不能为周天子立功，为之奈何？ 
English: Defeated in Chu, but unable to make a contribution to Zhou Tianzi, why not?

古文：管子对曰： 即以战斗之道与之矣。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 就用战斗的方法来对付它。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Deal with it by fighting."

古文：公曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这怎么讲？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "How can this be?

古文：管子对曰： 公贵买其鹿。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 您可用高价收购楚国的生鹿。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "You can buy live deer from Chu at a high price.

古文：桓公即为百里之城，使人之楚买生鹿。
现代文：桓公便营建了百里鹿苑，派人到楚国购买生鹿。
English: Huan Gong then built the Baili Deer Park and sent people to Chu to buy live deer.

古文：楚生鹿当一而八万。
现代文：楚国的鹿价是一头八万钱。
English: The price of a deer in Chu is up to 80,000 yuan.

古文：管子即令桓公与民通轻重，藏谷什之六。
现代文：管仲首先让桓公通过民间买卖贮藏了国内粮食十分之六。
English: First of all, Guanzhong allowed Huan Gong to store six-tenths of domestic grain through private trade.

古文：令左司马伯公将白徒而铸钱于庄山，令中大夫王邑载钱二千万，求生鹿于楚。
现代文：其次派左司马伯公率民夫到庄山铸币。然后派中大夫王邑带上二千万钱到楚国收购生鹿。
English: Next, he sent Zuo Si Ma Bo Gong and his minions to Zhuangshan to mint coins. Then, he sent Zhong Dafu Wang Yi to take 20 million yuan to Chu to buy deer.

古文：楚王闻之，告其相曰： 彼金钱，人之所重也，国之所以存，明王之所以赏有功。
现代文：楚王得知后，向丞相说： 钱币是谁都重视的，国家靠它维持，明主靠它赏赐功臣。
English: After King Chu learned of this, he said to the prime minister, "Everyone values money. The country relies on it to sustain itself, and the emperor relies on it to reward his meritorious servants."

古文：禽兽者群害也，明王之所弃逐也。
现代文：禽兽，不过是一群害物，是明君所不肯要的。
English: The animals are just a bunch of pests, which Ming Jun does not want.

古文：今齐以其重宝贵买吾群害，则是楚之福也，天且以齐私楚也。
现代文：现在齐国用贵宝高价收买我们的害兽，真是楚国的福分，上天简直是把齐国送给楚国了。
English: Now that the State of Qi is buying our beasts of prey at a high price with precious treasures, it is truly a blessing for the State of Chu. Heaven is literally giving the State of Qi to the State of Chu.

古文：子告吾民急求生鹿，以尽齐之宝。 
现代文：请您通告百姓尽快猎取生鹿，换取齐国的全部财宝。 
English: Please inform the people to hunt deer as soon as possible in exchange for all the treasures of Qi.

古文：楚人即释其耕农而田鹿。
现代文：楚国百姓便都放弃农业而从事猎鹿。
English: The people of Chu all gave up agriculture and engaged in deer hunting.

古文：管子告楚之贾人曰： 子为我致生鹿二十，赐子金百斤。什至而金干斤也。 
现代文：管仲还对楚国商人说： 您给我贩来生鹿二十头，就给您黄金百斤；加十倍，则给您黄金千斤。 
English: Guanzhong also said to the merchant from Chu, "If you sell me twenty deer, I will give you one hundred jin of gold; if you sell ten times more, I will give you one thousand jin of gold."

古文：则是楚不赋于民而财用足也。
现代文：这样楚国即使不向百姓征税，财用也充足了。
English: In this way, even if the state of Chu did not tax the people, the financial resources would be sufficient.

古文：楚之男于居外，女子居涂。
现代文：楚国的男人为猎鹿而住在野外，妇女为猎鹿而住在路上。
English: The men of Chu live in the open for deer hunting, and the women live on the road for deer hunting.

古文：隰朋教民藏粟五倍，楚以生鹿藏钱五倍。
现代文：结果是隰朋让齐国百姓藏粮增加五倍，楚国则卖出生鹿存钱增加五倍。
English: The result was that Zou and his friends allowed the people of Qi to increase their grain reserves fivefold, and the people of Chu to increase their reserves fivefold by selling deer.

古文：管子曰： 楚可下矣。 
现代文：管仲说： 这回可以取下楚国了。 
English: Guanzhong said, "This time we can take down Chu."

古文：公曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 怎么办？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What should we do?"

古文：管子对曰： 楚钱五倍，其君且自得而修谷。钱五倍，是楚强也。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 楚存钱增加五倍，楚王将以自得的心情经营农业，因为钱增五倍，总算表示他的胜利。 桓公说： 不错。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "If the amount of money saved by Chu increases fivefold, King Chu will be able to run his agriculture with confidence, because a fivefold increase in money will ultimately mean his victory."

古文：因令人闭关，不与楚通使。
现代文：于是派人封闭关卡，不再与楚国通使。
English: As a result, someone was sent to close the checkpoint and no longer communicate with the envoys of the State of Chu.

古文：楚王果自得而修谷，谷不可三月而得也，楚籴四百，齐因令人载粟处芊之南，楚人降齐者十分之四。
现代文：楚王果然以自鸣得意的心情开始经营农业，但粮食不是三个月内就能生产出来的，楚国粮食高达每石四百钱。齐国便派人运粮到芊地的南部出卖，楚人投降齐国的有十分之四。
English: King Chu did indeed start farming in a self-satisfied mood, but grain could not be produced in three months, and the grain of Chu was as high as 400 yuan per stone. Qi then sent people to transport grain to the south of Handi to sell it, and the people of Chu surrendered four-tenths of Qi.

古文：三年而楚服。
现代文：经过三年时间，楚国就降服了。
English: After three years, Chu surrendered.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 代国之出，何有？ 管子对曰： 代之出，狐白之皮，公其贵买之。 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 代国有什么出产？ 管仲回答说： 代国的出产，有一种狐白的皮张，您可用高价去收购。 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "What does Guanzhong produce?" Guanzhong replied, "The products of Guanzhong have a kind of white skin, which you can purchase at a high price.

古文：管子曰： 狐白应阴阳之变，六月而壹见。
现代文：管仲又说； 狐白适应寒暑变化，六个月才出现一次。
English: Guanzhong also said; the fox white adapts to the changes of cold and heat, and only appears once every six months.

古文：公贵买之，代人忘其难得，喜其贵买，必相率而求之。
现代文：您以高价收购，代国人忘其难得，喜其高价，一定会纷纷猎取。
English: If you purchase at a high price, the local people will forget its rarity and like its high price, and will certainly hunt for it in succession.

古文：则是齐金钱不必出，代民必去其本而居山林之中。
现代文：这样，齐国还没有真正出钱，代国百姓就一定放弃农业而进到深山去猎狐。
English: In this way, Qi has not really paid, and the people of the country will definitely give up agriculture and go deep into the mountains to hunt foxes.

古文：离枝闻之，必侵其北。离枝侵其北，代必归于齐。
现代文：离枝国听到消息，必然入侵代国北部，离枝侵其北，代国必将归降于齐国。
English: Upon hearing the news, Liaocheng would inevitably invade the northern part of Zeng Guo, and Liaocheng would invade the northern part of Zeng Guo. Zeng Guo would inevitably fall to Qi Guo.

古文：公因令齐载金钱而往。 桓公曰， 诺。 
现代文：您可就此派人带钱去收购好了。 桓公说： 可以。 
English: You can send someone with money to buy it.Kanko said, "Yes."

古文：即令中大夫王师北将人徒载金钱之代谷之上，求狐白之皮。
现代文：便派中大夫王师北带着人拿着钱到代谷地区，收购这狐白的皮张。
English: Wang Shihoku, a middle-aged doctor, was then sent to the Daigaya area with a man and money to buy the fox-white pelt.

古文：代王闻之，即告其相曰： 代之所以弱于离枝者，以无金钱也。
现代文：代王听到后，马上对他宰相说： 代国之所以比离枝国弱，就是因为无钱。
English: When the deputy king heard this, he immediately said to his prime minister: The reason why the deputy country is weaker than the branch country is because it has no money.

古文：今齐乃以金钱求狐白之皮，是代之福也。
现代文：现在齐国出钱收购我们狐白的皮张，是代国的福气。
English: Now that Qi pays money to buy our fox-white coats, it is a blessing for the country.

古文：子急令民求狐臼之皮以致齐之币，寡人将以来离枝之民。 
现代文：您火速命令百姓搞到此皮，以换取齐国钱币，我将用这笔钱招来离枝国的百姓。 
English: You immediately ordered the people to get this skin in exchange for Qi coins. I will use this money to attract people from other countries.

古文：代人果去其本，处山林之中，求狐白之皮。
现代文：代国人果然因此而放下农业，走进山林，搜求狐白的皮张。
English: As a result, the local people abandoned agriculture and went into the mountains and forests to search for the fox's white fur.

古文：二十四月而不得一。离枝闻之，则侵其北。
现代文：但时过两年也没有凑成一张，离枝国听到以后，就侵入代国的北部。
English: However, after two years, they still hadn't put together a plan. After hearing from the branch country, they invaded the northern part of the country.

古文：代王闻之，大恐，则将其士卒葆于代谷之上。
现代文：代王知道后，大为恐慌，就率领士卒保卫代谷地区。
English: When the deputy king found out, he panicked and led his soldiers to defend the Daejeon area.

古文：离枝遂侵其北，王即将其士卒愿以下齐。
现代文：离枝终于侵占了代国北部领土，代王只好率领土兵自愿归服齐国。
English: The renegade branch finally occupied the northern territory of the representative country, and the representative king had no choice but to lead the territorial soldiers to voluntarily submit to Qi.

古文：齐未亡一钱币，修使三年而代服。
现代文：齐国没有花去一个钱，仅仅派使臣交往三年，代国就降服了。
English: The State of Qi did not spend any money, only sent envoys for three years, and then surrendered.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 吾欲制衡山之术，为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说； 我要找一个控制衡山国的办法，应怎样进行？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "I want to find a way to control Hengshan Province, how should I proceed?"

古文：管子对曰： 公其令人贵买衡山之械器而卖之。
现代文：管仲回答说； 您可派人出高价收购衡山国的兵器进行转卖。
English: Guanzhong replied: You can send someone to purchase Hengshan's weapons at a high price for resale.

古文：燕、代必从公而买之，秦、赵闻之，必与公争之。
现代文：这样，燕国和代国一定跟着您去买，秦国和赵国听说后，一定同您争着买。
English: In this way, Yan Guo and Dai Guo will definitely follow you to buy, and Qin Guo and Zhao Guo will definitely compete with you to buy after hearing about it.

古文：因令人之衡山求买械器，不敢辩其贵贾。
现代文：衡山兵器必然涨价一倍。若造成天下争购的局面，衡山兵器还必然涨价十倍。 桓公说： 可以。 
English: Hengshan weapons will inevitably double in price. If the situation of global competition for purchase is caused, Hengshan weapons will also inevitably increase in price tenfold. Huan Gong said: Yes.

古文：齐修械器于衡山十月，燕、代闻之，果令人之衡山求买械器，燕、代修三月，秦国闻之，果令人之衡山求买械器。衡山之君告其相曰， 天下争吾械器，令其买再什以上。 
现代文：便派人到衡山大量收购兵器，不同他们付价还价。齐国在衡山收购兵器十个月以后，燕、代两国听说，果然也派人去买。燕、代两国开展这项工作三个月以后，秦国听说，果然也派人去买。衡山国君告诉宰相说： 天下各国都争购我国兵器，可使价钱提高二十倍以上。 
English: They sent people to Hengshan to purchase a large number of weapons, but they paid a different price. Ten months after Qi Province purchased weapons in Hengshan, Yan, on behalf of the two countries, heard that they also sent people to buy. Three months after Yan, on behalf of the two countries, carried out this work, Qin Province heard that they also sent people to buy. Hengshan Guojun told the prime minister: All countries in the world are competing to buy our weapons, which can increase the price by more than twenty times.

古文：衡山之民释其本，修械器之巧。
现代文：衡山国的百姓于是都放弃农业发展制造兵器的工艺。
English: As a result, the people of Hengshan all gave up agricultural development and the craft of making weapons.

古文：齐即令隰朋漕粟千赵。赵籴十五，隰朋取之石五十。
现代文：齐国则派隰朋到赵国购运粮食，赵国粮价每石十五钱，隰朋按每石五十钱收购。
English: On the other hand, the State of Qi sent Yan Peng to the State of Zhao to purchase and transport grain. The price of grain in the State of Zhao was 15 yuan per kilo, while Yan Peng purchased grain at 50 yuan per kilo.

古文：天下闻之，载粟而之齐。
现代文：天下各国知道后，都运粮到齐国来卖。
English: After all countries in the world knew about it, they all shipped grain to Qi Province to sell it.

古文：齐修械器十七月，修粜五月，即闭关不与衡山通使。
现代文：齐国用十七个月的时间收购兵器，用五个月的时间收购粮食，然后就封闭丁关卡，断绝与衡山国的往来。
English: Qi spent seventeen months to acquire weapons, five months to acquire grain, and then closed the Ding Pass and cut off contacts with Hengshan.

古文：燕、代、秦、赵即引其使而归。
现代文：燕、代、秦、赵四国也从衡山召回了使者。
English: Yan, Dai, Qin and Zhao also recalled envoys from Hengshan.

古文：衡山械器尽，鲁削衡山之南，齐削衡山之北。
现代文：衡山国的兵器已经卖光，鲁国侵占了他的南部，齐国侵占了他的北部。
English: Hengshan's weapons have been sold out, Lu has occupied his south, and Qi has occupied his north.

古文：内自量无械器以应二敌，即奉国而归齐矣。
现代文：他自量没有后器招架两大敌国，便奉国而降齐了。
English: He didn't have the backbone to stand up to two major enemy countries, so he bowed to them and fell in line.

