古文：长孙嵩，代人也，太祖赐名焉。
现代文：长孙嵩，是代郡人，名为太祖所赐。
English: The eldest grandson, Takeshi, is a representative of the county and was named after his great-grandfather.

古文：父仁，昭成时为南部大人。
现代文：父亲长还仁，在瞪虚童时担任南部大人。
English: His father, Jianren, was a Southern adult when he was a child.

古文：嵩宽雅有器度，年十四，代父统军。
现代文：昼茎崖宽厚儒雅有气度，十四岁时，代替父亲统领军队。
English: At the age of fourteen, he took command of the army in place of his father.

古文：昭成末年，诸部乖乱，苻坚使刘库仁摄国事，嵩与元他等率部众归之。
现代文：昭成帝末年，各部落背叛作乱，苻坚派刘库仁代掌国中事务，长孙嵩和元他等人率领部众归附库仁。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Zhaocheng, various tribes rebelled and caused turmoil. Zhen Jian sent Liu Kuren to take charge of the country's internal affairs, and Changsun Song and Yuan and others led the people to attach themselves to Kuren.

古文：刘显之谋难也，嵩率旧人及乡邑七百余家叛显走，将至五原。
现代文：刘显谋划发难，长孙嵩率领旧部和乡党七百多家背叛刘显逃走，将要到达五原。
English: Liu Hsien planned to make trouble, the eldest son Song led the old ministry and the township party of more than seven hundred to betray Liu Hsien and escape, and will reach Wuhuan.

古文：时寔君之子，亦聚众自立，嵩欲归之。
现代文：这时宜君的儿子也聚集部众自登王位，长孙嵩打算归附他。
English: At this time, Yi Jun's son also gathered followers to ascend the throne, and the eldest grandson, Song, planned to join him.

古文：见于乌渥，称逆父之子，劝嵩归太祖。
现代文：见到工旦迟，称说那是作乱之父的儿子，劝说长逊崖归附叁担。
English: Seeing the work late, he said that it was the son of the father of the riot, and persuaded Changxiongyao to join the riot.

古文：嵩未决，乌渥回其牛首，嵩僶俛从之。
现代文：旦王裆没有决定，昼回拉回他的牛头，匡玉铛勉强听从他的话。
English: If Wang Yao is undecided, he pulls back his ox's head every day, and Kuang Yuxuan reluctantly obeys his words.

古文：见太祖于三汉亭。太祖承大统，复以为南部大人。
现代文：在三汉亭见到太担。叁担继承皇位，又任命长孙嵩为南部大人。
English: I saw Taitang in Sanhan Pavilion. Xitang succeeded to the throne, and appointed his eldest grandson Song as Nanfang adult.

古文：累著军功。后从征中山，除冀州刺史，赐爵钜鹿公。历侍中、司徒、相州刺史，封南平公，所在著称。
现代文：不断立下军功后来跟随征伐中山，授任冀州刺史，赐爵位为钜鹿公历任侍中、司徒、相州刺史，封南平公，在各处都受到称道。
English: After the conquest of Zhongshan, he was awarded the title of Jizhou Grand Historian and the title of Nanping Grand Historian. He was also awarded the titles of Jishu Grand Historian, Jishu Grand Historian, and Nanping Grand Historian. He was praised everywhere.

古文：太宗即位，与山阳侯奚斤、北新侯安同、白马侯崔宏等八人，坐止车门右，听理万几，故世号八公。
现代文：太宗即位，和山阳侯圣丘、北新侯室回、自毖崔塞等八人，坐在止车门右面，处理各项事务，所以当时称为八公。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, eight people, including Sanyang Hou Shengqiu, Beixin Hou Muxu Hui, and Zizhi Trisei, sat on the right side of the bus stop door to deal with various affairs, so they were called the eight princes at that time.

古文：晋将刘裕之伐姚泓，太宗假嵩节，督山东诸军事，传诣平原，缘河北岸，列军次于畔城。
现代文：晋国将领刘裕征伐姚泓，太宗赐给长遝当符节，督察太行山以束各军事务，乘传车到平原，沿董回北岸，排列军队停驻在畔城。
English: Liu Yu, the general of the Jin Dynasty, conquered Yaoshan, Taizong gave Changyuan as a festival, and inspected Taihang Mountain to tie up the affairs of the various armies. He took a truck to the plain, followed Dong back to the north shore, and stationed the army in the city.

古文：军颇失利。
现代文：军队遭受不少失败。
English: The army has suffered many defeats.

古文：诏假裕道，裕于舟中望嵩麾盖，遗以酃酒及江南食物，嵩皆送京师。
现代文：诏令借给刘裕道路，刘裕在船中望见长还崖的旌旗车盖，送给他酃湖的酒和长江以南的食物，长孙嵩都送到京城。
English: The imperial edict lent Liu Yu a road, and Liu Yu could see the flag-draped carriage cover of the Long March cliff from the boat. He was given wine from Wuhu and food from the south of the Yangtze River, and his eldest grandson Song was sent to Beijing.

古文：诏嵩厚答之。
现代文：诏令长孙嵩厚礼答谢他。
English: Chief Magistrate Sun Song thanked him profusely.

古文：又敕简精兵为战备，若裕西过者，便率精锐南出彭沛，如不时过，但引军随之。
现代文：左塞又命令挑选精锐兵士做好战斗准备，如果刘萤向西通过，就率领精锐部队向南出兵到彭球迪邓，如型登不按时通过，祇率领军队跟随他们。
English: Zuo Ce also ordered the selection of elite soldiers to prepare for battle. If Liu Huo passed to the west, he would lead the elite troops to the south to Peng Ku Di Deng. If Ji Deng did not pass on time, he would only lead the army to follow them.

古文：彼至崤陕间，必与姚泓相持，一死一伤，众力疲弊。
现代文：他们到了崤山陕县之间，必定和姚泓相对峙，一死一伤，士兵疲惫。
English: When they got to the area between Lushan and Shaanxi, they must have confronted Yao Qi, with one death and one injury, and the soldiers were exhausted.

古文：比及秋月，徐乃乘之，则裕首可不战而悬。
现代文：等到了秋季，再慢慢趁机出动，如此刘裕的首级可以不战而得。
English: Wait until the autumn, and then slowly take advantage of the opportunity to move out, so Liu Yu's head can be obtained without a fight.

古文：于是叔孙建等寻河趣洛。
现代文：于是叔孙建等人沿黄河前往洛水。
English: Therefore, Uncle Sun Jian and others went to Luoshui along the Yellow River.

古文：遂入关。嵩与建等自成皋南济，晋诸屯戍皆望尘奔溃，裕克长安，嵩乃班师。
现代文：刘裕进入函谷关长孙嵩和叔孙建等人从成皋向南渡河，晋国各屯驻戍守据点都望见尘土而逃奔溃散。刘裕攻克长安，长孙嵩于是撤军。
English: Liu Yu entered the Hakodate pass, and the warlord Sun Song and his uncle Sun Jian and others crossed the river from Chengdu to the south, and all the garrisons in Jin Province saw the dust and fled. Liu Yu conquered Chang'an, and the warlord Sun Song then withdrew.

古文：太宗寝疾，问后事于嵩。嵩曰： 立长则顺，以德则人服。
现代文：太宗患重病，向长孙嵩询问身后事，长孙嵩说： 立长子就顺畅，依德行就人心信服。
English: When Taizong was seriously ill, he asked his eldest grandson Song about what had happened to him. Song said, "Raising the eldest son was smooth, and following virtue was convincing to the people."

古文：今长皇子贤而世嫡，天所命也，请立。 
现代文：现在大皇子贤明而且是嫡子，是上天所定，请求立他。 
English: Now the great prince is wise and is the legitimate son, it is determined by heaven, ask him to be appointed.

古文：乃定策禁中。
现代文：就在宫中定下计策。
English: Right there in the palace, they decided on a strategy.

古文：于是诏世祖临朝监国，嵩为左辅。
现代文：于是诏令世祖临朝代行处理国政，长孙嵩任左辅。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the founder of the Lin Dynasty to deal with state affairs on his behalf, and the eldest son, Song, was appointed as the left assistant.

古文：世祖即位，进爵北平王，司州中正。
现代文：世祖即位，长孙嵩升爵位为北平王，任司州中正。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and his eldest grandson Song ascended to the title of Beiping King, and was appointed to the position of Sizhou Vice-governor.

古文：诏问公卿：赫连、蠕蠕征讨何先？
现代文：世祖下诏询问公卿，赫连氏、蠕蠕二者中先征讨谁。
English: The ancestor sent an imperial edict to inquire which of the nobles, the Heren clan, and the Cree clan should be conscripted first.

古文：嵩与平阳王长孙翰、司空奚斤等曰： 赫连居土，未能为患，蠕蠕世为边害，宜先讨大檀。
现代文：长孙嵩和乎阳王长孙翰、司空奚斤等人说： 赫连氏定居，不能成为祸患，蠕蠕世代是边境祸害，应该先征讨大檀。
English: Elder Grandson Song, Elder Grandson Han, Elder Grandson Han of King Hu Yang, and Elder Grandson Han of Siku said: The settlement of the Heren clan cannot be a disaster, and the creeping generation is a border disaster, and the sandalwood should be collected first.

古文：及则收其畜产，足以富国；不及则校猎阴山，多杀禽兽皮肉筋角，以充军实，亦愈于破一小国。 
现代文：追赶上了就缴获他们的牲畜，足以富足国家；赶不上就在阴山狩猎，多杀禽兽，皮肉筋角，用来充实军用物资，也超过打败一个小国家。 
English: If you catch up with them, you can capture their livestock, which is enough to enrich the country; if you can't catch up, you can hunt in the gloomy mountains, kill more animals, and use the meat angle to enrich military supplies, but also to defeat a small country.

古文：太常崔浩曰： 大檀迁徙鸟逝，疾追则不足经久，大众则不能及之。
现代文：太常崔浩说： 大檀迁徙如鸟飞，追快了不能持久，人多了则不能追上。
English: Cui Hao often said: The migration of large sandalwoods is like a bird's flight. If it is too fast, it cannot be sustained. If there are too many people, it cannot be caught up with.

古文：赫连屈丐，土宇不过千里，其刑政残虐，人神所弃，宜先讨之。 
现代文：赫连屈丐，土地不过一千里，刑罚政令残酷暴虐，为人神所抛弃，应该先征讨大檀。 
English: Helin is a beggar, the land is only a thousand miles away, the punishment decree is cruel and tyrannical, abandoned by man and God, and the sandalwood should be collected first.

古文：尚书刘洁、武京侯安原请先平冯跋。
现代文：尚书刘洁、武京侯安原请求先平定冯跋。
English: Shangshu Liu Jie and Wu Jing Hou An Yuan requested that Feng Bazaar be pacified first.

古文：帝默然，遂西巡狩。
现代文：皇帝保持沉默，于是向西巡视。
English: The emperor remained silent and continued his inspection to the west.

古文：后闻屈丐死，关中大乱，议欲征之。
现代文：后来听说屈丐死去，关中大乱，议论想要征讨关中。
English: Later, I heard that Kugai died, there was a big riot in the detention center, and there was talk of trying to negotiate with the detention center.

古文：嵩等曰： 彼若城守，以逸代劳，大檀闻之，乘虚而寇，危道也。 
现代文：长孙嵩等人说： 他们如果据城防守，以逸待劳，大檀听说后，乘虚而进犯，这是危险的做法。 
English: Chosun Song and others said, "If they defend the city and take advantage of the situation, it is a dangerous approach.

古文：帝乃问幽微于天师寇谦之，谦之劝行。
现代文：皇帝于是向天师寇谦之询问隐微的事，谦之劝他出兵。
English: The emperor then asked the celestial teacher, Kou Qianzhi, about something obscure, and Qianzhi advised him to send troops.

古文：杜超之赞成之，崔浩又言西伐利。
现代文：杜超之赞同促成这件事，崔浩又谈论向西征伐的利益。
English: Du Chaozhi agreed to facilitate this matter, and Cui Hao also talked about the benefits of the westward expedition.

古文：嵩等固谏不可。
现代文：长孙嵩等人执意规劝认为不可以。
English: Eldest grandson Song and others persisted in persuading that it was not possible.

古文：帝大怒，责嵩在官贪污，使武士顿辱。
现代文：皇帝大怒，斥责长孙嵩在任贪污，派武士侮辱他。
English: The emperor flew into a rage, rebuked his eldest son, Sun Song, for corruption while in office, and sent a samurai to humiliate him.

古文：寻迁太尉。
现代文：不久升任太尉。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：久之，加柱国大将军。
现代文：很久后，加授柱国大将军。
English: A long time later, he was awarded the additional title of Zhu Guodao.

古文：自是，舆驾征伐，嵩以元老多留镇京师，坐朝堂，平断刑狱。
现代文：从此，皇帝征伐，长孙嵩以元老身份多留守京城，坐在朝堂，决断刑罚诉讼。
English: Since then, the emperor has been on a crusade, and the eldest grandson, Song, has mostly stayed in Beijing as a veteran, sitting in the imperial court and deciding criminal lawsuits.

古文：薨，年八十。
现代文：逝世，时年八十岁。
English: He died at the age of eighty.

古文：谥曰宣王。
现代文：谧号为宣王。
English: His posthumous name was Xuanwang.

古文：后高祖追录先朝功臣，以嵩配飨庙庭。
现代文：后来高祖追录先朝功臣，以长孙嵩配祭宗庙。
English: Later, Gao Zu was recorded as a meritorious vassal of the previous dynasty, and his eldest grandson, Song Bi, was enshrined in the ancestral temple.

古文：子颓，善骑射，弯弓三百斤。
现代文：儿子长孙颓，善于骑马射箭，能拉三百斤的弓。
English: His son, the eldest grandson, is good at horse riding and archery, and can pull a bow of three hundred pounds.

古文：袭爵，加侍中、征南大将军。
现代文：继承爵位，加授侍中、征南大将军。
English: He inherited the title of nobility, and was additionally awarded the titles of Junior Chamberlain and General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：有罪，黜为戍兵，后复爵。
现代文：犯下罪过，被贬为戍守兵士，后来恢复爵位。
English: He was demoted to garrison soldier for his misdeeds, and later restored to his knighthood.

古文：薨，谥曰安王。
现代文：逝世，谧号为安王。
English: He died, and his nickname was An Wang.

古文：子敦，字孝友，位北镇都将。
现代文：儿子长孙敦，字孝友，担任北镇都将。
English: His son, Chosun Tun, alias Takatomo, will serve as the mayor of North Town.

古文：坐黩货，降为公。
现代文：因受贿而获罪，降爵位为公。
English: He was found guilty of accepting bribes and was stripped of his knighthood.

古文：高宗时，自颂先世勋重，复其王爵。
现代文：高宗时，他自己称颂先代功勋大，恢复他的王爵。
English: When Gao Zong, he himself praised the great merits of the previous generation and restored his peerage.

古文：薨，谥简王。
现代文：逝世，谧号为简王。
English: After his death, his nickname was Jane Wang.

古文：子道，字念僧，袭爵。
现代文：儿子长孙道，字念僧，继承爵位。
English: His son, Chosun Dao, a Zhanren monk, succeeded to the title.

古文：久之，随例降为公，位右卫将军。
现代文：很久后，依条例降为公，担任右卫将军。
English: After a long time, according to the regulations, he was demoted to the rank of general and served as the right guard general.

古文：卒，谥慎。
现代文：去世，谧号为慎。
English: He died, and his nickname was Shin.

古文：子悦，袭爵。
现代文：儿子长孙悦，继承爵位。
English: His son, Chosun Yue, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：建义初，复本王爵，寻降为公。
现代文：建义初年，恢复原来的王爵，不久降为公。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was restored to his former title of prince, but was soon demoted to a commoner.

古文：位光禄少卿。
现代文：担任光禄少卿。
English: He assumed the post of Koroku Shoko.

古文：卒，赠司空。
现代文：去世，追赠为司空。
English: He died of illness and was succeeded by Stut.

古文：长孙道生，嵩从子也。
现代文：长孙道生，是长孙嵩的侄儿。
English: The eldest grandson, Dousheng, is the nephew of the eldest grandson, Song.

古文：忠厚廉谨，太祖爱其慎重，使掌几密，与贺毗等四人内侍左右，出入诏命。
现代文：他忠实厚道廉洁谨慎，太祖喜爱他的谨慎稳重，派他掌管机密，和贺毗等四人在左右侍奉，传达诏令。
English: He was loyal, kind, honest, prudent, and the great-grandfather liked his prudence and stability, and sent him to be in charge of secrets, and four people, including He Bei, served around him to convey the edict.

古文：太宗即位，除南统将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：太宗即位，授任他为南统将军、冀州刺史。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the general of Southern Unification and the governor of Jizhou Province.

古文：后取人美女以献，太宗切责之，以旧臣不加罪黜。
现代文：后来夺取别人的美女进献，太宗严厉地斥责他，因他是旧曰臣属不加以治罪贬黜。
English: Later, when he took someone else's beautiful woman as a gift, Emperor Taizong severely reprimanded him because he was a former vassal.

古文：世祖即位，进爵汝阴公，迁廷尉卿。
现代文：世祖即位，道生升爵位为汝阴公，调任廷尉卿。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and Dosho was promoted to the peerage as Ruyin Gong and transferred to the position of Imperial Lieutenant.

古文：从征蠕蠕，与尉眷等率众出白黑两漠间，大捷而还。
现代文：跟随征伐蠕蠕，和尉眷等人率领军队出入白黑两片沙漠之间，大获全胜而返回。
English: Following the conquest of Cm Cm, he and his entourage led the army in and out between the white and black deserts, and returned with a great victory.

古文：世祖征赫连昌，道生与司徒长孙翰、宗正娥青为前驱，遂平其国。
现代文：世祖征伐赫连昌，道生和司徒长孙翰、宗正娥青担任前锋，于是平定他的国家。
English: The ancestor conquered Herengchang, with Tao Sheng, Stuchang Sun Han, and Zong Zheng E Qing as the forwards, thus pacifying his country.

古文：昌弟定走保平凉，刘义隆遣将到彦之、王仲德寇河南以救定。
现代文：赫连昌的弟弟赫连定逃走据守平凉，刘义隆派遣将领到彦之、王仲德侵犯黄河以南来解救赫连定。
English: He Lianchang's younger brother He Lianding fled to Pingliang, and Liu Yilong dispatched generals Yan Zhi and Wang Zhongde to invade south of the Yellow River to rescue He Lianding.

古文：诏道生与丹阳王太之屯河上以御之。
现代文：诏令道生和丹阳王太之驻守在黄河边来抵御他们。
English: He ordered Tao Sheng and Danyang Wangta to defend themselves against them by standing guard at the Yellow River.

古文：遂诱义隆将檀道济，邀其前后，追至历城而还。
现代文：于是引诱义隆的将领擅鲤，拦截他的前后，追击到历城后返回。
English: So he lured Yilong's generals to act without authorization, intercepted his advance and retreat, pursued him to Licheng, and then returned.

古文：除司空，加侍中，进封上党王。
现代文：授任司空，加授侍中，升封爵为上党王。
English: He was awarded the title of Siku, the additional title of Jizhong, and the title of Shangdang Wang.

古文：薨，年八十二。
现代文：逝世，时年八十二岁。
English: He died at the age of eighty-two.

古文：赠太尉，谥曰靖。
现代文：追赠太尉，谧号为靖。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain, and his posthumous name was Yasushi.

古文：道生廉约，身为三司，而衣不华饰，食不兼味。
现代文：遭生廉洁俭约，身为三司，衣服不华丽修饰，菜不过两种。
English: He was born to be honest, clean and frugal. He was a third-grade teacher, his clothes were not ornately decorated, and there were only two kinds of dishes.

古文：一熊皮鄣泥，数十年不易，时人比之晏婴。
现代文：一块熊皮遮泥，几十年不换，当时人把他比作晏婴。
English: A piece of bear skin covering mud, not changed for decades, at that time people likened him to a toddler.

古文：第宅卑陋，出镇后，其子弟颇更修缮，起堂庑。
现代文：第宅矮小简陋，外出镇守后，他的子弟另行修缮，建起堂下四周的房舍。
English: The first house was small and simple, and after the town guard left, his son repaired it separately and built the houses around the hall.

古文：道生还，叹曰： 昔霍去病以匈奴未灭，无用家为，今强寇尚游魂漠北，吾岂可安坐华美也！ 
现代文：返回，叹息说： 从前霍去病认为匈奴没消灭，要家做什么，现在强大的敌寇还在沙漠北面活动，我哪能安心坐在华美的房舍中呢? 
English: Returning, he sighed and said: Once upon a time, I thought that the Xiongnu had not been eradicated, what should I do, now the powerful enemy is still active in the north of the desert, how can I sit safely in a beautiful house?

古文：乃切责子弟，令毁宅。
现代文：就严厉斥责子弟，命令毁弃房舍。
English: He severely reprimanded his son and ordered the house to be demolished.

古文：其恭慎如此。
现代文：他就是如此地恭敬谨慎。
English: That's how respectful and careful he is.

古文：世祖世，所在著绩，每建大议，多合时机。
现代文：世担的时候，他在各处都留下政绩，每当发表重大意见，多合乎时机。
English: When he was in charge of the world, he left his political achievements everywhere, and whenever he expressed important opinions, it was more opportune.

古文：为将有权略，善待士众。
现代文：任将领有权变谋略，妥善对待兵士。
English: Appointed generals have the right to change strategies and treat soldiers properly.

古文：帝命歌工历颂群臣，曰： 智如崔浩，廉如道生。 
现代文：皇帝命令歌唱的人遍颂群臣，其中说： 智如崔造，廉如姓。 
English: The emperor ordered the singers to chant the names of all the ministers, saying: "Wisdom is like chrysanthemums, and modesty is like surnames.

古文：及年老，颇惑其妻孟氏，以此见讥。
现代文：等到年老，很受他的妻子重旦的迷惑，因此受到讥讽。
English: When he got old, he was very puzzled by his wife, Shigetan, and was ridiculed for it.

古文：与从父嵩俱为三公，当世以为荣。
现代文：他和叔父垦逐盏都任三公，当时人以为他们很荣耀。
English: He and his uncle were appointed as the three princes one after another. At that time, people thought they were very honored.

古文：子抗，位少卿，早卒。
现代文：儿子孙抗，担任少卿，很早就去世了。
English: His son, Sun Quan, who served as a minor lord, died very early.

古文：抗子观，少以壮勇知名，后袭祖爵上党王。
现代文：长孙抗的儿子长孙观，年轻时以强壮勇敢闻名，后来继承祖父的爵位上党王。
English: Nagasunkan, the son of Nagasunkan, was famous for his strength and bravery when he was young, and later succeeded his grandfather as the party king.

古文：时异姓诸王，袭爵多降为公，帝以其祖道生佐命先朝，故特不降。
现代文：当时异姓各王，继承爵位大多降为公，皇帝因他的祖父道生辅佐先朝，所以特地不降级。
English: At that time, all the kings had different surnames, and most of the inherited titles were downgraded to public. The emperor, because his grandfather Dousheng assisted the previous dynasty, was specially not downgraded.

古文：以征西大将军、假司空督河西七镇诸军讨吐谷浑。
现代文：任命他为征西大将军、假司空督河西七镇诸军事讨伐吐谷潭。
English: He was appointed as the general of the Western Conquest and the fake commander of the air force to lead the seven towns of Hexi Province in a military campaign against Tugu Lake.

古文：部帅拾寅遁藏，焚其所居城邑而还。
现代文：部落头领拾寅逃跑藏匿，焚烧他所居的城池后返回。
English: The leader of the tribe, Zhiying, ran away to hide, burned the city where he lived, and then returned.

古文：高祖初，拜殿中尚书、侍中。
现代文：高祖初年，任命长孙观为殿中尚书、侍中。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, he appointed his eldest grandson, Guan, as a courtier and chamberlain.

古文：吐谷浑又侵逼，复假观司空讨降之。
现代文：吐谷浑又侵犯进逼，高祖再次命长孙观为代理司空讨伐降伏他们。
English: Tugu Hun invaded again and forced them to surrender. Gaozu once again ordered Sun Guan to fight and surrender them as the agent of Siku.

古文：后为征南大将军。
现代文：后来担任征南大将军。
English: He later served as a general of the Southern Expeditionary Force.

古文：薨，谥曰定。
现代文：逝世，谧号为定。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was decided.

古文：葬礼依其祖靖王故事，陪葬云中金陵。
现代文：葬礼依照他的祖父靖王的旧例，在云中的金陵陪葬。
English: The funeral was held in accordance with the old custom of his grandfather, King Jing, and he was buried in the golden mausoleum in the clouds.

古文：子冀归，六岁袭爵，降为公。
现代文：长孙观的儿子冀归，六岁时继承爵位，降为公。
English: Ji Gui, the son of Guan's eldest grandson, inherited the title of nobility at the age of six and was demoted to a commoner.

古文：高祖以其幼承家业，赐名稚，字承业。
现代文：高祖因他年幼继承家业，赐名为稚，字承业。
English: Because Gao Zu inherited the family business at a young age, he was given the name "Zhuang" (稚) and the word "Zhuang" (承業) was given to him.

古文：稚聪敏有才艺，虚心爱士。
现代文：长孙稚聪明敏捷有才华技艺，虚心敬爱士人。
English: The eldest grandson is young, clever, quick, talented and skilled, with a humble heart and respect for scholars.

古文：为前将军，从高祖南讨，授七兵尚书、太常卿、右将军。
现代文：担任前将军，跟随高祖向南征讨，授任七兵尚书、太常卿、右将军。
English: He served as a former general, followed Gao Zu to the south to fight, and was awarded the titles of Shichibei Shoshu, Tai Changqing, and Right General.

古文：世宗时，侯刚子渊，稚之女婿。
现代文：世宗时，侯刚的儿子侯渊，是长孙稚的女婿。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Hou Gang's son Hou Yuan was the son-in-law of the eldest grandson.

古文：刚为元叉所厚，故稚骤得转进。
现代文：侯刚受元叉的厚待，所以长孙稚得以骤然擢升。
English: Hou Gang was well received by Yuan Xuan, so the eldest grandson was suddenly promoted to the top.

古文：出为抚军大将军，领扬州刺史，假镇南大将军，都督淮南诸军事。
现代文：外出任抚军大将军，兼扬州刺史，代理镇南大将军，为都督淮南诸军事。
English: He served as the general of the Fuzhong army, and also the governor of Yangzhou, the acting general of the Zhenan army, and the military governor of Huainan province.

古文：萧衍将裴邃、虞鸿袭据寿春，稚诸子骁果，邃颇难之，号曰 铁小兒 。
现代文：萧衍的将领裴邃、虞塑偷袭占据画画，旦逊整的几个儿子骁勇果敢，裴邃很感为难，称他们为 铁小儿 。
English: Xiao Yan's generals Pei Yao and Yu Shuo secretly attacked and occupied the painting, and several sons of Tan Xun Jie were brave and courageous. Pei Yao was very perplexed and called them iron children.

古文：诏河间王琛总众援之。
现代文：世宗韶令河间王元琛总领部众援助长孙稚。
English: Emperor Su issued an edict to make Kawama no Okimi the grandchild of the grandchild of the grandchild of the grandchild of Kawama no Okimi.

古文：琛欲决战，稚以雨久，更须持重。
现代文：元琛想要决战，长孙稚认为下雨时间很久了，格外需要稳重。
English: Geng Yao wanted a decisive battle, and Chosun Ju thought that it had been raining for a long time and needed to be extra steady.

古文：琛弗从，遂战，为贼所乘，稚后殿。
现代文：五拯不听从，于是交战，被贼寇抓住机会，长孙稚在后面拦击。
English: Wuxing did not listen, so they engaged in battle. The thief seized the opportunity, and the eldest grandson stopped him from behind.

古文：初，稚既总强兵，久不决战，议者疑有异图。
现代文：起初，长孙稚总领强大的兵马，长久不决战，议论的人怀疑他有另外的意图。
English: At first, Chosun Chika, commander of the powerful army and cavalry, was indecisive for a long time, and the critics suspected that he had other intentions.

古文：朝廷重遣河间王琛及临淮王彧、尚书李宪等三都督，外声助稚，内实防之。
现代文：朝廷再派遣河间王元琛和临淮王元或、尚书奎塞等三个都督，外面声称援助长孙稚，内心实为防范他。
English: The imperial court then dispatched three governors-general, including Wang Yuanqi of Kawama and Wang Yuan of Linhuai or Shangshu Kuisei, who outwardly claimed to be assisting the eldest grandson, but inwardly they were actually guarding against him.

古文：会鲜于脩礼反于中山，以稚为大都督北讨。
现代文：遇鲜于脩礼在中山反叛，任命长孙稚为大都督向北讨伐。
English: He rebelled against Yu Zili in Zhongshan and appointed his eldest grandson as the grand governor to lead a crusade to the north.

古文：寻以本使达鄴城。
现代文：不久以本身使命到达邺城。
English: He soon arrived in Lucheng on his own mission.

古文：诏稚解行台，罢大使，遣河间王琛为大都督，郦道元为行台。
现代文：诏令长孙稚解除行台，罢除大使，派遣河间王元琛担任大都督，郦道元担任行台。
English: The emperor ordered Chosonchika to cancel the trip, dismiss the ambassador, and send Kawama no Okimi to serve as the grand governor, and Sendo no Dogen to serve as the trip leader.

古文：稚遣子子裕奉表，称与琛同在淮南，俱当国难，琛败臣全，遂生私隙。
现代文：长孙稚派遣儿子子裕送奏疏，称说和元琛一同在淮水以南，都面临国家祸难，元琛失败臣下保全，于是产生私人嫌隙。
English: The eldest grandson, Wuchang, sent his son, Ziyu, to send a report to Zhuang Zang, saying that both he and Yuan Shao were facing a national calamity in the south of Huai Shui. Yuan Shao had failed to protect his vassals, resulting in a personal grudge.

古文：且临机夺帅，非算所长。
现代文：而且临事改换将帅，不是好的计谋。
English: Moreover, it is not a good strategy to change the adjutant.

古文：书奏，不纳。
现代文：奏疏呈上去，不被采纳。
English: Emperor Kanto did not approve of the play.

古文：琛与稚前到呼沱，稚未欲战，而琛不从。
现代文：元琛和长孙稚推进到呼沱，长孙稚不想交战，而元琛不听从。
English: The eldest grandson did not want to fight, and the eldest grandson did not listen.

古文：行达五鹿，为脩礼邀击，琛不赴之。
现代文：行进到五鹿，被脩礼截击，元琛不去增援。
English: They marched to Wolu and were intercepted by the Jurchen. The Yuan Jurchen did not go to reinforce them.

古文：贼总至，遂大败，稚与琛并除名。
现代文：贼寇全部到达，长孙稚于是大败。长孙稚和元琛都被除去名籍。
English: The bandits all arrived, and Chosun Waki suffered a crushing defeat. Both Chosun Waki and Motohiro were stripped of their family names.

古文：寻而正平郡蜀反，复假稚镇西将军、讨蜀都督。
现代文：不久正平郡蜀人反叛，又任命长孙稚为代理镇西将军、讨蜀都督。
English: Soon after, the Shu people of Zhengping County rebelled, and the eldest grandson was appointed acting general of Zhenxi and governor of Shu.

古文：频战有功，除平东将军，复本爵。
现代文：接连作战有功，授任平东将军，恢复原来的爵位。
English: He was awarded the title of General Pingdong and his former title of nobility was restored.

古文：后除尚书右仆射。
现代文：后来授任尚书右仆射。
English: Later, he was given the post of Shangshu Rongsha.

古文：未几，雍州刺史萧宝夤据州反，复以稚为行台讨之。
现代文：不久，雍州刺史萧宝夤占据州城反叛，又任命长孙稚为行台去讨伐他。
English: Soon, Xiao Baojun, the governor of Yongzhou, occupied the provincial capital and rebelled. He also appointed his eldest grandson to go to the capital to fight him.

古文：稚时背疽未愈，灵太后劳之曰： 卿疹源如此，朕欲相停，更无可寄如何？ 
现代文：长孙稚遣时背上毒疮没有痊愈，灵太后慰劳他说： 你的病如此重，我想让你歇歇，但无人可派怎么办? 
English: When the eldest grandson was sent away, the poisonous sores on his back did not heal, and the Dowager Empress consoled him, saying: "Your illness is so severe, I want you to rest, but what if there is no one to send?

古文：稚答曰： 死而后已，敢不自力。 
现代文：长孙稚回答说： 我死而后已，哪敢不尽自己的力量? 
English: The eldest grandson replied, "After my death, how dare I not do my best?"

古文：时子彦亦患脚痹，扶杖入辞。
现代文：这时子彦也患脚肿大麻木的病，扶着拐杖入宫告辞。
English: At this time, Zihang also suffered from the disease of swollen feet and cane, and entered the palace on crutches to say goodbye.

古文：尚书仆射元顺顾相谓曰： 吾等备位大臣，各居宠位，危难之日，病者先行，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：尚书仆射元顺回头对众人说： 我们身处于大臣之位，各任要职，危难的时候，有病的人走在前面，恐怕不行吧? 
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, Sha Yuan Shun, looked back and said to the crowd: We are in the position of a minister, each holding an important position. In times of crisis, sick people walk in front. I'm afraid that's not possible, is it?

古文：莫有对者。
现代文：没有回答的人。
English: No one could answer.

古文：时薛凤贤反于正平，薛脩义屯聚河东，分据盐池，攻围蒲坂，东西连结，以应宝夤。
现代文：这时薛凤贤在正平反叛，薛脩义聚集在河东，分别占据盐池，进攻包围蒲坂，东西联合，来呼应宝夤。
English: At this time, Xue Fengxian rebelled in Zhengping, and Xue Bingyi gathered in Hedong, respectively occupying Yanchi, attacking and encircling Busan, and uniting East and West to echo Baodi.

古文：稚乃据河东。
现代文：长孙稚于是占据河东。
English: The eldest grandson then occupied the eastern part of the river.

古文：时有诏废盐池税，稚上表曰： 盐池天资贿货，密迩京畿，唯须宝而护之，均赡以理。
现代文：当时有诏令废除盐池税收，长孙稚上奏疏说： 盐池是上天资助的财货，靠近京城，必须珍视而爱护它，平均赡给加以经营。
English: At that time, there was a decree abolishing the tax on salt ponds, and the eldest grandson said: "Salt ponds are a treasure funded by heaven, close to the capital, we must cherish and protect it, and support its operation.

古文：今四境多虞，府藏罄竭。
现代文：现在四方多事，国库空虚。
English: Now there is a lot going on and the treasury is empty.

古文：然冀定二州且亡且乱，常调之绢，不复可收。
现代文：然而冀定二州处于逃亡混乱状态中，正常征调的绢，不能再收取。
English: However, the two prefectures of Hebei and Shandong are in a state of fugitive chaos, and the money normally collected can no longer be collected.

古文：仰惟府库，有出无入，必须经纶，出入相补。
现代文：思虑府库中，有发出的没进入的，必须筹划，使出入互相弥补。
English: In the government treasury, there are issued and not entered, must be planned, so that the entries and exits make up for each other.

古文：略论盐税，一年之中，准绢而言，犹不应减三十万匹也，便是移冀定二州置于畿甸。
现代文：粗略估算盐税，一年之中，折成绢来说，还不应该少于三十万匹，这好似把冀定二州设置到了京郊。
English: According to a rough estimate of the salt tax, there should be no less than three hundred thousand horses in a year, which seems to set the Jieding two states to the outskirts of Beijing.

古文：今若废之，事同再失。
现代文：现在如果废除盐税，事情就同于再失冀定二州。
English: If the salt pond tax were to be abolished now, it would be a double loss.

古文：臣前仰违严旨，不先讨关贼而解河东者，非是闲长安而急蒲坂。
现代文：臣下先前违背严明的旨意，不先讨题中贼寇而解救速的原因，不是放缓垦玄而着急蒲坂。
English: The reason why the vassal previously violated the clear intention and did not first discuss the thieves and robbers in the problem and solve the speed of rescue is not to slow down, but to hurry up.

古文：蒲坂一陷，没失盐池，三军口命，济赡理绝。
现代文：而是蒲坂一沦陷，丢失了盐池，三军的性命，救济的办法就没有了。
English: On the other hand, as soon as the city fell, the salt ponds and the lives of the three armies were lost, and there was no way to provide relief.

古文：天助大魏，兹计不爽。
现代文：上天帮助大魏，这个计策是不错的。
English: Heaven help me, this strategy turned out to be correct.

古文：昔高祖升平之年，无所乏少，犹创置盐官而加典护，非为物而竞利，恐由利而乱俗也。
现代文：从前高祖太乎的年代，不缺乏什么，还创设盐官而加以掌管经营，不是为了物资而争夺利益，是恐怕由利益而扰乱了风俗。
English: In the time of the great ancestors, there was no shortage of anything, and salt officials were also created to manage the business. It was not for the sake of materials that they competed for profits, but I am afraid that they disturbed the customs by profit.

古文：况今王公素餐，百官尸禄，租徵六年之粟，调折来岁之资，此皆出人私财，夺人膂力。
现代文：何况当今的王公白吃饭，百官空受禄，田租征收六年的谷粟，户折算来年的资产，这都是拿出别人的私有财产，夺取别人的物品。
English: What's more, today's kings and queens eat for free, officials receive their salaries in vain, farm rents are levied for six years of corn, and households convert their assets for the next year. All of this is taking out other people's private property and seizing other people's goods.

古文：岂是愿言，事不获已。
现代文：遣哪是我想说的，事情出于不得已。
English: What I'm trying to say is, it's out of necessity.

古文：臣辄符司监将尉还率所部，依常收税，更听后敕。 
现代文：臣下已下令司监将尉仍率所属员吏，依常例收税，另外听取陛下今后的命令。 
English: The vassal has ordered the superintendent captain to continue to lead his staff, collect taxes as usual, and listen to His Majesty's future orders.

古文：稚克宝夤将侯终德，宝夤出走，雍州平。
现代文：长孙稚打败宝夤的将领侯终德，实夤出逃，雍州平定。
English: The eldest grandson defeated Baodi's general, Hou Shende, while Shida fled, and Yongzhou was pacified.

古文：除雍州刺史。
现代文：授长孙稚为雍州刺史。
English: The conferment of the title of Grandmaster to Sun Waki is a milestone in the history of Yongzhou.

古文：庄帝初，封上党王，寻改冯翊王，后降为郡公。
现代文：庄帝初年，封长孙稚为上党王，不久改封冯翊王，后来降为郡公。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, the title of the eldest grandson was the upper party king, soon changed to the title of King Feng Xuan, and later downgraded to the county.

古文：迁司徒公，加侍中，兼尚书令、大行台，仍镇长安。
现代文：升为司徒公，加授侍中，兼任尚书令、大行台，仍旧镇守长安。
English: He was promoted to Stukong, given the additional title of Jizhong, and concurrently served as Shang Shuling and Dagongtai. He was still the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：前废帝立，迁太尉公，录尚书事。
现代文：前废帝即位，长孙稚升太尉公，录尚书事。
English: The former emperor ascended the throne, the eldest grandson was promoted to the rank of captain, and his records were recorded.

古文：及韩陵之败，斛斯椿先据河桥，谋诛尔朱。
现代文：等到韩陵失败，斛斯椿先占据河桥，谋划诛杀尔朱氏。
English: Waiting for Han Ling to fail, Jieszczyna first occupied the river bridge and plotted to kill the Zhu clan.

古文：使稚入洛，启帝诛世隆兄弟之意。
现代文：派长孙稚进洛阳，向皇帝报告诛杀世隆兄弟的意图。
English: He sent his commander, Sun Wuchang, to Luoyang to report to the emperor his intention to kill the Shilong brothers.

古文：出帝初，转太傅，录尚书事。
现代文：出帝初年，长孙稚改任太傅，录尚书事。
English: In the first year after his enthronement, the eldest grandson was appointed taifu, and his records were recorded.

古文：以定策功，更封开国子。
现代文：以决断拥立的功劳，另封开国子。
English: He was awarded the title of "Kokushi" for his contribution to the establishment of the prefectural government.

古文：稚表请回授其姨兄廷尉卿元洪超次子恽。
现代文：长孙稚上奏请求改授给姨表哥哥廷尉卿元洪超的次子元惮。
English: The eldest grandson of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of

古文：初，稚生而母亡，为洪超母所抚养，是以求让，许之。
现代文：当初，长孙稚出生后母亲亡故，被洪超的母亲所抚养，所以请求让爵位，出帝准许了他的请求。
English: At first, after the birth of the eldest grandson, his mother died, and he was raised by Hong Chao's mother, so he asked to give up his title, and the emperor granted his request.

古文：出帝入关，稚时镇虎牢，亦随赴长安。
现代文：出帝进入函谷关，长孙稚当时镇守虎牢，也跟随赶赴长宣。
English: After the emperor's departure, he entered Hakodate, where his eldest grandson, who was then the warden of the tiger prison, also followed him to Chosun.

古文：稚妻张氏，生二子，子彦、子裕。
现代文：长孙稚的妻子张氏，生下两个儿子，即子彦、子裕。
English: The wife of the eldest grandchild, Zhang, gave birth to two sons, namely Zihang and Ziyu.

古文：后与罗氏私通，遂杀其夫，弃张纳罗。
现代文：后来和罗氏私通，就杀死她的丈夫，抛弃张氏娶罗氏。
English: Later, she had an affair with Mr. Luo, killed her husband, abandoned Mr. Zhang and married Mr. Luo.

古文：罗年大稚十余岁，妒忌防限。
现代文：罗氏年纪大长孙稚十多岁，妒忌心强对长孙稚防范限制。
English: Luo's eldest grandchild is more than ten years old, and he is jealous of his eldest grandchild.

古文：稚雅相爱敬，旁无姻妾，僮侍之中，嫌疑致死者，乃有数四。
现代文：长孙稚很喜爱尊敬她，再没有侍妾，僮仆侍婢中，受猜疑导致死亡的，竟有三四人。
English: The eldest grandson loved and respected her very much, and there were no more concubines. Among the servants and maids, there were actually three or four who were suspected of causing death.

古文：罗生三子，绍远、士亮、季亮，兄弟皆廉武。
现代文：罗氏生下三个儿子，即绍远、士亮、季亮，兄弟都廉洁勇敢。
English: Ms. Luo gave birth to three sons, namely, Shao Yuan, Shiliang and Ji Liang. The brothers were all honest and brave.

古文：稚少轻侠，斗鸡走马，力争杀人，因亡抵龙门将陈兴德家，会赦乃免。
现代文：长孙稚年轻时轻率好事，斗鶸跑马，争斗杀人后，就逃亡到龙门将领陈兴德家中，遇大赦才免死。
English: When the eldest grandson was young, he did something rash, got into a fight, and killed someone. After the fight, he fled to the home of Longmen General Chen Xingde, and was only spared death by an amnesty.

古文：因以后妻罗前夫女吕氏，妻兴德兄兴恩以报之。
现代文：于是把后妻罗氏前夫的女儿吕氏，嫁给兴德的哥哥兴恩来报答他。
English: So he rewarded him by marrying his second wife, Lu Shi, the daughter of Luo Shi's ex-husband, to Hinde's brother, Xing En.

古文：子彦，本名俊，有膂力。
现代文：王彦，本名为俊，有力气。
English: Wang Yan, whose real name is Jun, is a strong character.

古文：以累从父征讨功，封槐里县子。
现代文：因多次跟随父亲征讨的功劳，被封为槐里县子。
English: Due to the merit of repeatedly following his father to collect taxes, he was awarded the title of the best son of Bali County.

古文：出帝与齐献武王构隙，加子彦中军大都督、行台仆射，镇弘农，以为心膂。
现代文：盅童和齐献武王发生矛盾，加授王童为中军大都督、行台仆射，镇守至递，作为心腹。
English: There was a conflict between Xing Tong and Qi Xianwu Wang, and Wang Tong was awarded the title of Grand Governor of the Chinese Army, the title of Xing Tai Fu Sha, and the title of Zhen Gu Zhi Ji, as a confidant.

古文：后从帝入关。
现代文：后来跟随坐童进入亟釜题。
English: Later, he followed the emperor into Kansai.

古文：子彦少尝坠马折臂，肘上骨起寸余，乃命开内锯骨，流血数升，言戏自若。
现代文：王童年轻时曾经落马折伤手臂，肘上骨头凸出一寸多，就命令划开肉锯骨头，流血几升，仍言谈戏笑同往日一样。
English: When Wang Tong was young, he fell from a horse and broke his arm. The bone on his elbow protruded more than an inch. He ordered the bones to be cut with a meat saw, and several liters of blood were shed. He still talked and joked as before.

古文：时以为逾于关羽。
现代文：当时人认为他超过关羽。
English: At the time, people thought he was better than Guan Yu.

古文：子裕，位卫尉少卿。
现代文：王裕，任卫尉少卿。
English: Wang Yu was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard.

