古文：凡兴兵征讨，深入敌地，刍粮乏阙，必须分兵抄掠，据其仓廪，夺其蓄积，以继军饷，则胜。
现代文：凡是出兵征战，深入敌国境内，粮秣供应缺乏，必须分兵搜掠，占据敌国粮仓，夺取它的积蓄，用以接济军饷，这样就能够取得胜利。
English: Whenever soldiers are sent out to fight and go deep into the enemy's territory, and there is a shortage of grain supply, they must divide their troops to loot, occupy the enemy's grain silos, seize its savings, and use it to feed the army, so that they can achieve victory.

古文：法曰： 因粮于敌，故军食可足也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 粮秣给养靠在敌国补充，这样部队的后勤供应就充足了。 
English: As stated in the art of war, the food and supplies depend on the enemy country for replenishment, so that the logistics supply of the troops is sufficient.

古文：《北史》：北周将贺若敦率兵渡江取陈湘州。
现代文：《北史》记载：北周将领贺若敦率军过江攻取了陈朝的湘州。
English: "Northern History" records: Northern Zhou general He Ruodong led the army across the river and captured the Chen Dynasty's Xiangzhou.

古文：陈将侯瑱讨之。
现代文：陈朝将领侯瑱率兵进攻贺若敦，企图夺回湘州。
English: Chen dynasty general Hou Yi led troops to attack He Ruodong in an attempt to recapture Hunan.

古文：秋水泛滥，江路遂断。
现代文：此时正值秋水泛滥季节，水路交通严重受阻。
English: At this time, it was the autumn flood season, and waterway traffic was seriously impeded.

古文：粮援既绝，人怀危惧。
现代文：致使贺若敦部队粮援断绝，将士人人心怀恐惧。
English: Once the grain and grass had been cut off, the generals fled in fear.

古文：敦于是分兵抄掠，以充资费。
现代文：贺若敦于是分兵四出搜掠粮物，用来充作部队的军资费用。
English: Therefore, Herodong pillaged the detachment and used it to pay for the army's material expenses.

古文：恐瑱等知其粮少，乃于营内多聚土，覆之以米。召侧近村人，佯有访问，随即遣之。瑱等闻之，以粮为实。
现代文：贺若敦怕侯瑱了解自己部队的缺粮情况，就在军营中大量积土堆丘，在上面覆盖一层米粮，然后召集附近村庄的百姓到军营来，装作向他们询问事宜的样子，等他们看到堆积成山的粮食后，又让他们离开。
English: Horoadun was afraid that Houyi would find out about the shortage of grain for his troops, so he built a large number of mounds in the military camp, covered them with a layer of rice grain, and then called the people from the nearby villages to the military camp, pretending to ask them about the matter, and let them leave after they saw the mountains of grain.

古文：敦又增修营垒，造庐舍，示以持久。
现代文：侯瑱从百姓那里听到所见的情况后，便误认为贺若敦部队的粮食充足。
English: He Ruodong also increased the construction of military camps and fortresses, built buildings, and showed the enemy that he would continue to last.

古文：湘、罗之间，遂废农业。
现代文：贺若敦还进一步加修营垒，建造房舍，以显示其长期驻守湘州的企图。
English: Between Hunan and Luo, agriculture was devastated.

古文：瑱等无如之何。初，土人乘轻船，载米粟及笼鸡鸭以饷瑱军。
现代文：这样一来，从湘州至罗州之间，百姓害怕打仗，有一些农田荒废了，侯瑱对此毫无办法。起初，当地百姓经常驾驶小船，装载粮米和鸡鸭笼子送给侯瑱部队作军饷。
English: As a result, from Hunan to Luozhou, the people were afraid of war, and some farmlands were abandoned, and Hou Yi could do nothing about it. At first, local people often drove small boats to load grain and rice and chicken and duck cages to Hou Yi's troops as war booty.

古文：敦患之，乃伪为土人船，伏兵甲于中。瑱军望见，谓饷船至，逆水争取。敦甲士遂擒之。
现代文：贺若敦对此甚为忧虑，于是便派人伪装成当地百姓馈送粮谷和鸡鸭，而实际埋伏着士兵的武装船只向陈军驶来，侯瑱部队看到了，以为又是馈送饷粮的百姓船只，便迎水而上，争先恐后地去接取东西，若敦船中的士兵于是将他们全部抓获。
English: He Ruodong was very worried about this, so he sent people disguised as local people to feed grain and chickens and ducks, while the armed ships that actually ambushed the soldiers sailed towards the Chen army. The Houyi troops saw them, thinking that they were people's ships feeding grain, and they rushed to the water, scrambling to pick up things. The soldiers in Ruodong's ship then captured them all.

古文：又敦军数有叛者乘马投瑱，瑱辄纳之。
现代文：另外，若敦军中常有叛逃者骑马投降陈军的，侯瑱都予以接纳。
English: In addition, if there are often defectors on horseback in the Dun Army who surrender to the Chen Army, Hou Yi will accept them.

古文：敦乃取一马，牵以趣船，令船中人以鞭鞭之。如是者再，马畏船不敢上。
现代文：有鉴于此，若敦便令人找来一匹马，牵着它走上船，又让船上人用鞭子抽打这马匹，像这样做过多次以后，马匹因怕挨打而不敢上船了。
English: In view of this, a horse was fetched, led on board the ship, and whipped by the ship's crew. After this had been done several times, the horses did not dare to board the ship for fear of being beaten.

古文：后伏兵于江岸，使人乘畏船马诈投瑱军，瑱即遣兵迎接，争来牵马。
现代文：其后若敦设伏兵于江边，让人骑着这匹怕船马伪装投奔侯瑱军，侯瑱不辨真假就派兵乘船前来迎接，大家争相过去牵马，马因怕船而不敢上船。
English: Afterwards, if an ambush was set up on the river bank, and people rode this horse, which was afraid of boats, in disguise to join the Houyi army, the Houyi would send soldiers by boat to meet them, regardless of whether it was true or not. Everyone rushed to pull the horse, and the horse was afraid of the boat and did not dare to get on the boat.

古文：马既畏船不上，伏兵发，尽杀之。
现代文：这时，江边若敦预设的伏兵突然跃起齐击，将侯瑱所派的士兵全部杀死。
English: At this time, the ambush soldiers preset by Riverside Rondon suddenly jumped up and made a concerted attack, killing all the soldiers sent by Hou Yi.

古文：后实有馈饷及亡奔瑱者，犹恐敦设诈，兵不敢受。
现代文：此后，即使有了真正馈送粮饷或者投奔陈军的人，侯瑱因为害怕若敦的设诈阴谋，再也不敢接纳了。
English: After that, even if there were people who really fed grain or joined Chen's army, Hou Yi would no longer dare to accept them for fear of Rondon's fraud.

古文：相持岁余，瑱不能制。
现代文：就这样，双方对峙了一年多，侯瑱始终未能制胜贺若敦。
English: In this way, the two sides have been facing off for more than a year, and Hou Yi has never been able to defeat He Ruodong.

