古文：武都女东方朔双头鸡张遗翟宣臧仲英顿丘人王基应璩公孙渊诸葛恪零陵太守女荥阳廖氏陶璜赵王伦张骋怀瑶裴楷卫瓘贾谧刘峤王敦
现代文：武都女东方朔双头鸡张遗翟宣臧仲英顿丘人王基应璩公孙渊诸葛恪零陵太守女荥阳廖氏陶璜赵王伦张骋怀瑶裴楷卫瓘贾谧刘峤王敦
English: Wu Du's daughter Oriental Shuo double-headed chicken Zhang's widow Xuan  Zhong Ying Tong's hillman Wang Ji Ying  Gong's grandson Yuan Zhuge  Ling's daughter-in-law Yang Liao's Tao  Zhao Wang Lun  Zhang Huai  Pei Kai Wei  Jia  Liu Qi Wang Dun

古文：王献刘宠桓温府参军郭氏
现代文：王献刘宠桓温府参军郭氏
English: Wang Xian Liu Zhaoyuan of Wenfu joins the Guo army

古文：武都女
现代文：武都女
English: Wudu Woman

古文：武都有一丈夫，化为女子，美而艳，盖女精也。
现代文：甘肃武都有一个男人变化成女子，十分娇艳美丽，实际上是个女妖。
English: In Gansu Province, there is a case of a man changing into a woman. She is very beautiful, and is actually a succubus.

古文：蜀王纳为妃，不习水土，欲去，主留之。乃为东平之歌以乐之。
现代文：蜀王把这女妖纳为妃子。女妖不服水土，想走，蜀王再三挽留，并让歌伎演唱东平之歌来讨她的欢心。
English: Shu Wang took this female demon as his concubine. The female demon refused to accept the earth and water, and wanted to leave. Shu Wang repeatedly begged her to stay, and asked Kabuki to sing Dongping's song to please her.

古文：无几物故，王哀之，乃遣五丁之武都。
现代文：没有多久，那女妖死了，蜀王非常悲哀，派了五名大力士，从那妃子的家乡武都挑来土为她作坟。
English: Before long, the she-devil died, and King Shu was so saddened that he sent five Hercules warriors to bring soil from the princess' hometown of Wudu to make a grave for her.

古文：担土为妃作冢，盖地数亩，高七丈，上有石镜。
现代文：坟墓占了好几亩地，高七丈，上有石镜。
English: The grave covers several acres of land, is seven stories high, and has a stone mirror.

古文：今成都北角武担是也。
现代文：现在成都北城根上的武担，就是那女妖妃子的墓地。
English: The mound at the foot of Chengdu's North Town is now the graveyard of the she-devil.

古文：东方朔
现代文：东方朔
English: Dongfangshuo

古文：汉武帝东游，至函谷关，有物当道，其身长数丈，其状象牛。青眼而曜精，四足入土，动而不徙。
现代文：汉武帝刘彻东巡走到函谷关时，被一个怪物挡住了道。这怪物身长好几丈，形状像牛，黑色的眼睛闪闪发光，四只脚深深陷进土中谁也挪不动它，官员们又惊又怕。
English: When Emperor Liu Chedong of the Han Dynasty was on his way to the Han Valley Pass, he was blocked by a monster. This monster was several feet tall, shaped like a cow, with glittering black eyes. Its four feet were deeply sunk into the ground, and no one could move it. The officials were shocked and afraid.

古文：百官惊惧，东方朔乃请酒灌之，灌之数十斛而消。
现代文：东方朔出主意让拿酒灌那怪物，灌了几十斛酒后，那怪物终于消失。
English: Dongfang Shuo came up with the idea of pouring wine over the monster. After pouring dozens of glasses of wine, the monster finally disappeared.

古文：帝问其故，答曰：此名忧，患之所生也。
现代文：汉武帝问是什么怪物，东方朔说，这怪物叫 忧 ，是 患 所生的。
English: Emperor Hanwu asked what the monster was, and Dongfang Shuo said that the monster was called Zhen, and was born of illness.

古文：此必是秦之狱地。不然，罪人徙作地聚。夫酒忘忧，故能消之也。
现代文：此地必然是秦监狱的所在地，罪犯们在这里聚在一起，只有喝醉了酒才能忘 忧 ，所以我才让人用酒消除这怪物。
English: This must be the location of Qin Prison. Criminals gather here and only get drunk to forget their worries, so I had someone use alcohol to get rid of this monster.

古文：帝曰：博物之士，至于此乎？双头鸡
现代文：皇帝赞叹说，你可真是比谁都博学多才的人啊！双头鸡
English: The emperor said in admiration, "You really are a person who is more knowledgeable and talented than anyone else!

古文：汉太初二年，大月氏贡双头鸡，四足一尾，鸣则俱鸣。
现代文：汉朝太初二年，西域的大月氏国进贡了一只双头鸡。这鸡四只脚一只尾巴，两只头如果打鸣时都叫。
English: In the second year of the first century of the Han Dynasty, Dazhong of the Western Regions paid tribute to a two-headed chicken. This chicken had four feet and a tail, and both heads crowed when they chirped.

古文：武帝致于甘泉馆，更有余鸡媲之，得种类也。
现代文：武帝把它放在甘泉馆里，心想如果有其它的母鸡和它交配，双头鸡不就会越来越多了吗。
English: Emperor Wu put it in the Ganquan Pavilion, thinking that if other hens mated with it, there would be more and more double-headed chickens.

古文：而不能鸣，非吉祥也，帝乃送还西域。
现代文：然而双头鸡却从此不再打鸣，武帝认为不吉利，命人送回西域。
English: However, the two-headed chicken never chirped again, and Emperor Wu thought it was unlucky and ordered it to be sent back to the Western Regions.

古文：至西关，鸡返顾，望汉宫而哀鸣，言曰：三七末，鸡不鸣，犬不吠。宫中荆棘乱相移，当有九虎争为帝。
现代文：到了嘉峪关，那双头鸡突然回头望着汉家的宫殿哀叫起来，象人言道，三七末，鸡不鸣，犬不吠，宫中荆棘乱相移，当有九虎争为帝。
English: When they arrived at Jiayuguan, the two-headed chicken suddenly looked back at the palace of the Han family and wailed. As the saying goes, at the end of the 37th year, the chicken does not sing, the dog does not bark, the thorns in the palace are chaotic, and there are nine tigers vying for the emperor.

古文：至王莽篡位，将军九虎之号。
现代文：后来果然有号称九虎将军的王莽篡位。
English: Later, Wang Mang, known as the Nine Tigers General, usurped the throne.

古文：其后丧乱弘多，宫掖中并生蒿棘，家无鸡犬。
现代文：从那以后，战乱不断发生，宫庭中荒凉得生出了野草荆棘，老百姓逃荒失所，家中鸡犬皆无。
English: Since then, the war has continued to occur, the desolation in the palace garden has produced weeds and thorns, the people have fled, and there are no chickens or dogs at home.

古文：此鸡未至月支，乃飞，而声似鹍鸡，翱翔云里。
现代文：那双头鸡没到月支就飞走了。听声音像是天上的仙鸟鹍鸡，一直飞上了云端不见了。
English: The two-headed chicken flew away before reaching the crescent. It sounded like a celestial bird chirping, and it flew all the way up to the clouds and disappeared.

古文：张遗
现代文：张遗
English: Zhang Rui

古文：桂阳太守江夏张遗，字叔高，居傿陵。
现代文：桂阳太守张遗，是江夏人，字叔高，家住在傿陵。
English: Guiyang Grand Empress Dowager Zhang Ziyi was from Jiangxia, nicknamed "Uncle Gao," and lived in Fuling.

古文：田中有大树，十围余，盖六亩，枝叶扶疏，蟠地不生谷草。
现代文：家附近的田中有株十几围粗的大树，树荫能盖住六亩地，枝叶茂密。树下的土地不能长庄稼，张遗就派人想把树砍掉。
English: In the field near his home, there is a large tree with a circumference of more than ten meters. Its shade can cover six mu of land, and its branches and leaves are thick. The land under the tree cannot grow crops, so Zhang Ye sent someone to cut the tree down.

古文：遣客斫之，斧数下，树大血出。
现代文：刚砍了几斧，树忽然流出鲜血，砍树人大惊，跑回去告诉张遗。
English: Just after cutting a few axes, the tree suddenly leaked blood. The tree-cutter was shocked and ran back to tell Zhang Zhe.

古文：客惊怖，归白叔高，叔高怒曰：老树汗出，此等何怪？
现代文：张遗生气地说，这是老树出汗，有什么奇怪的？说罢自己跑去砍，果然一砍就出血。
English: Zhang Ziyi said angrily, "This is an old tree sweating, what's so strange about it? Tell it to cut itself, and it will bleed as soon as it is cut."

古文：诸人徐视之，似人非人，似兽非兽，此所谓木石之怪。夔魍魉者乎。
现代文：大家仔细看那些老头，不像人也不像兽，大概就是人们常说的夔龙魍魉之类的木石之怪吧。
English: Take a closer look at those old men. They don't look like people or animals. They are probably the wood and stone monsters that people often refer to as dragonflies.

古文：其伐树年中，叔高辟司空御史兖州刺史。
现代文：张遗砍树这年，被提升为司空御史兼兖州刺史。
English: In the same year that Zhang Ye chopped down the tree, he was promoted to the rank of Sikuo Imperial Historian and Zhangzhou Imperial Historian.

古文：翟宣
现代文：翟宣
English: Xuan Xuan

古文：王莽居摄，东郡太守翟义，知其将篡也，谋举兵。
现代文：王莽篡位当政之前，东郡大守崔义知道他将篡位，打算兴兵讨伐。
English: Before Wang Mang usurped the throne and came to power, Dong County Governor Cui Yi knew that he would usurp the throne and planned to raise an army.

古文：兄宣，教授诸生满堂，群雁数十中庭，有狗从而啮之。
现代文：翟义的哥哥翟宣，当时正在教学生读书，突然有几十只雁落在学堂的院中，接着闯进来一条狗扑咬大雁。
English: Xinyi's brother, Xuan Xuan, was teaching students at the time. Suddenly, dozens of geese landed in the courtyard of the school, and then a dog rushed in to catch and bite the geese.

古文：皆惊，比救之，皆断头。狗走出门，求不知处。
现代文：大家都很吃惊，跑去救雁，救下的雁已经都被狗咬断了头，狗跑出门后不知去处。
English: Everyone was surprised. They ran to save the geese, but the dogs had already bitten off the geese's heads. The dogs ran out of the door and didn't know where to go.

古文：宣大恶之，数日，莽夷其三族。
现代文：翟宣越想心里越厌恶。果然几天后，王莽篡位后，诛杀了翟宣、翟义的三族老少。
English: The more he thought about Xuan Xuan, the more disgusted he became. Sure enough, a few days later, after Wang Mang usurped the throne, he killed Xuan Xuan and Xiyi.

古文：臧仲英
现代文：臧仲英
English: Zou Zhongying

古文：扶风臧仲英为侍御史，家人作食，有尘垢在焉；炊熟，不知釜处；兵弩自行。
现代文：陕西扶风人臧仲英曾任侍御史，他家中常出怪事。作饭时，饭里会被拌上灰土，有时饭作熟了，饭锅却不见了。
English: Zou Zhongying, a Shaanxi wind benefactor, once served as an imperial historian. Strange things often happened in his home. When cooking, the rice would be mixed with ash, and sometimes when the rice was cooked, the rice pot would disappear.

古文：火从箧中起，衣尽烧而箧簏如故；儿妇女婢使，一旦尽亡其镜，数日后，从堂下投庭中。言：还汝镜。
现代文：兵器会自己到处走，衣箱会突然起火，里面衣服全烧毁了但箱子却完好无损。有时家中女眷们用的镜子会一齐丢失，几天后那些镜子又从房上扔进院子里，同时空中还有声音说，还你们镜子！
English: Weapons would walk around on their own, suitcases would suddenly burst into flames, with all the clothes inside burnt to a crisp, but the case intact. Sometimes the mirrors used by the women in the family would be lost altogether, and a few days later those mirrors would be thrown from the house into the courtyard, while a voice in the air said, "Return your mirrors!"

古文：女孙年四岁，亡之，求之不知处，二三日，乃于圊中粪下唬。
现代文：这家孙女四岁时突然不见，到处找不到，两三天后竟发现孙女在厕所粪坑中啼哭。
English: When this granddaughter was four years old, she suddenly disappeared and could not be found anywhere. Two or three days later, she was found crying in the toilet cesspit.

古文：若此非一。
现代文：像这样的怪事不断出现，臧仲英十分烦恼。
English: When strange things like this keep happening, Hao Zhongying is very worried.

古文：许季山上之曰：家当有青狗，内中御者名盖喜，与共为之，诚欲绝之。
现代文：后来有个下属许季山说，大概你家里有个青狗成了精在作妖。宫内有个车夫叫盖喜，他也和那青狗一起作怪。
English: Later, a subordinate of Xu Qishan said, "There is probably a young dog in your family that has become a demon. There is a coachman in the palace named Gexi, and he also works with that young dog.

古文：杀此狗，遣盖喜归乡里，从之遂绝，仲英迁太尉长史鲁相。
现代文：臧仲英非常想除掉祸患，就杀了家中的青狗，并把那个叫盖喜的车夫遣送回乡，从此才太平了。后来臧仲英升任为太尉长史、兼任鲁相。
English: Gong Zhongying was so eager to get rid of the scourge that he killed the family's greyhound and sent the driver, named Gexi, back to his hometown. From then on, everything was peaceful. Later, Gong Zhongying was promoted to the rank of First Lieutenant and concurrently held the post of Lushan.

古文：顿丘人
现代文：顿丘人
English: Dongqiu people

古文：黄初中，顿丘界骑马夜行者，见道中有物，大如兔，两眼如镜。跳梁遮马，令不得前。
现代文：魏文帝黄初年间，河南顿丘县有个人骑马夜行，看见大道当中有个像兔子般大的东西，两只眼像镜子一样闪光，不断地蹦跳着挡在马前，那人被吓得掉下马来。
English: In the early years of Emperor Wen of Wei and Huang, there was a man riding a horse at night in Dongqiu County, Henan Province. When he saw a rabbit-sized thing in the avenue, with two eyes flashing like a mirror, he kept jumping in front of the horse. The man was scared and fell off the horse.

古文：乃更上马，前行数里，逢一人相问讯，因说向者之事变如此，今相得甚欢。
现代文：那怪物就上去扑咬那骑马人，过了好久那人才得脱身，怪物也不见了。那人又上马，往前走了几里地，遇见一个行人，就向他说了刚才的事，两个人谈得很融洽。
English: The monster went up and bit the rider, and it took a long time for the man to get free, and the monster disappeared. The man got back on his horse, walked a few miles, and when he met a passerby, he told him what had just happened, and the two had a good conversation.

古文：人曰：我独行，得君为伴，快不可言。
现代文：行人对顿丘人说，我能和你作伴真是太好了。
English: "It's great to have you as a companion," a passer-by said to Don.

古文：君马行疾前，我在后相随也。
现代文：你现在骑在前面快些跑，我在后面跟着。
English: You ride in the front now, run faster, I'll follow behind.

古文：遂共行，乃问：向者物何如，乃令君如此怖？对曰：身如兔，眼如镜，形状可恶。
现代文：于是两个人一起走。那个行人又问，刚才你遇见什么东西把你吓成那样？顿丘人说，那怪物身子像兔子，眼睛像镜子，形貌非常丑恶。
English: So the two of them walked together. The passer-by asked again, "What did you encounter just now that frightened you so?" The Dunkirk man said, "That monster had the body of a rabbit, eyes like a mirror, and a very ugly appearance."

古文：人曰：试顾我眼。
现代文：那人说，现在你看看我的双眼。
English: The man said, "Now look at my eyes.

古文：又观视之，犹复是也，魅就跳上马，人遂堕地，怖死。
现代文：顿丘人回头一看，那人果然就是那怪物变的。说话间怪物就跳上马，顿丘人一下子被推跌到地下，吓死了。
English: The Dongqiu people looked back and saw that the man was indeed the monster. While they were talking, the monster jumped onto the horse, and the Dongqiu people were suddenly pushed to the ground and died of fright.

古文：家人怪马独归，即行推索，于道边得之，宿昔乃苏，说事如此状。
现代文：家人见只有那马独自回来了，非常奇怪，就回去找，只见顿丘人躺在道边。过了一夜他才复苏，说了他遇见怪物的事。
English: When the family saw that only the horse had returned alone, it was very strange, so they went back to look for it, only to find Dongqiu lying on the side of the road. He only woke up after one night and told them about the monster he had met.

古文：王基
现代文：王基
English: Wang Ji

古文：安平太守王基，家数有怪，使管辂筮之。
现代文：安平太守王基家里常常出些怪事，就找来会算卦的管辂，让他算算都发生过什么怪事。
English: Wang Ji, the governor of Anping, often had strange occurrences in his home, so he sought out Guan Yu, who could count, and asked him to count all the strange occurrences.

古文：卦成，辂曰：君之卦，当有一贱人生一男，堕地，便走入灶中死；又床上当有一大蛇衔笔，大小共视，须臾便去；又鸟来入室，与燕斗，燕死鸟去。
现代文：管辂算完后对王基说，你们家曾有一个女仆生了个孩子，孩子一落地就跑到灶房里死了。你家床上还有过一条大蛇口里衔着笔，看见人们来，大蛇就不见了。还有一次屋里进来一只鸟和燕子斗，鸟把燕子咬死，鸟也飞走。
English: After the calculation, Guan Yu said to Wang Qi, there was once a maid in your family who gave birth to a child. As soon as the child fell to the ground, it ran into the kitchen and died. There was also a big snake in your bed with a pen in its mouth. When you saw people coming, the snake disappeared. There was also a time when a bird and a swallow came into the house. The bird bit the swallow to death, and the bird flew away.

古文：有此三卦？
现代文：有这样三卦吧？
English: Is there such a gossip?

古文：王基大惊曰：精义之致，乃至于此。幸为处其吉凶。
现代文：王基大惊说，你的卦算得太准了，真是不可思议。
English: Wang Ji was shocked and said, "Your gua is too accurate, it's really incredible."

古文：辂曰：非有他祸，直以官舍久远，魑魅魍魉，共为妖耳。
现代文：那就再请你算算是吉是凶？管辂说，没有什么大祸，都因为你的房宅太古老了，就会有很多妖魔鬼怪出来兴妖作怪。
English: Then I would like you to consider whether it is good or evil? Guan Yu said that there is no big disaster, but because your house is too old, there will be many demons and monsters coming out to play monsters.

古文：儿生入灶，宋无忌之为也；大蛇者，老书佐也；鸟与燕斗者，老铃下也。
现代文：孩子生下来钻进了炉灶，这是火神宋无忌干的。大蛇是过去一个老书佐的精魂。鸟和燕子争斗，是一个早已死去的老门官的魂在作怪。
English: A child was born and crawled into the stove, which the fire god Song did without hesitation. The snake was the spirit of an old scribe. Birds and swallows fought, and the ghost of a long-dead gatekeeper was at work.

古文：夫神明之正者，非妖能乱也；万物之变，非道所止也；久远之浮精，必能之定数也。
现代文：原来神明如果有威严，妖物就不敢作怪，万物的千变万化，就是多高的道术也不能使它停止。年代久远的精怪们，它们的能耐是有限的。
English: Originally, if the gods had majesty, monsters would not dare to make monsters, and the ever-changing nature of all things, no matter how high the Taoism, could not stop it. Ancient monsters, their ability is limited.

古文：今卦中不见其凶，故知假托之类，非咎妖之征。
现代文：现在我给你算的卦中并没有凶卦，可以说明这些小妖小怪不会给你带来什么灾祸，它们只不过本能地假托蛇、鸟等动物，玩一点小妖术而已。
English: Now, there are no evil spells in the hexagrams I have given you, which shows that these little monsters will not bring any disaster to you. They are just instinctively pretending to be snakes, birds and other animals, playing a little magic.

古文：昔高宗之鼎，非雉所雊；太戊之阶，非桑所生。
现代文：当年汉高祖的天下，虽然有吕雉弄权，但终于还是被消灭掉了。商朝君王太戊的大殿台阶上是不会长出桑树的。
English: In the world of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, although there was the power of Lv Ying, it was finally eliminated. Mulberry trees would not grow on the steps of the Great Hall of King Tae of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：然而妖并至，二年俱兴，安知三事不为吉祥？
现代文：然而如果群妖都一齐作怪，闹上二年，就不敢说刚才给你算的卦中三件怪事都是吉祥的了。
English: However, if a group of demons all work together to create a monster for two years, they won't dare to say that the three strange things in the riddle just given to you are all auspicious.

古文：愿府君安神养道，勿恐于神奸也。
现代文：唯愿大人安神养道，不要怕那些妖魔作怪。
English: May the adults keep their spirits up and not be afraid of those demons.

古文：后卒无他，迁为安南将军。
现代文：后来王基一直没出什么事，还升任为安南将军。
English: Later, nothing happened to Wang Ji, and he was promoted to General Annan.

古文：应璩
现代文：应璩
English: Ying Zhe

古文：朱建平善相，相应璩曰：君年六十二，位为常伯。先此一年，当独见白狗也。
现代文：朱建平很会相面，他给应璩看相后说，你寿命是六十二岁，那时可以官作到常伯，死的前一年，你会独自看见一只白狗。
English: Zhu Jianping is very good at facial recognition. After he gave Ying Jun a facial recognition, he said, "Your life expectancy is sixty-two years old. At that time, you can work as an official until you are an old man. One year before you die, you will see a white dog by yourself."

古文：璩年六十一，为侍中，直内省，忽见白狗。众人悉不见。
现代文：应璩六十一岁时果然当了宫内省的侍中。后来有一次他果然独自看见一只白狗，别人都看不见。
English: At the age of sixty-one, he became an attendant of the Imperial Household Ministry. Later, he once saw a white dog all by himself. No one else could see it.

古文：作急游观，饮宴自娱，六十二卒。
现代文：他知道自己只能活到六十二岁，就抓紧时间吃喝玩乐，六十二岁时果然去世。
English: He knew he would only live to be 62, so he made the most of his time to eat, drink and be merry. He died at the age of 62.

古文：公孙渊
现代文：公孙渊
English: Gongsun Yuan

古文：魏司马太傅懿平公孙渊，斩渊父子。
现代文：三国时，魏国的太傅司马懿平定公孙渊，杀了公孙渊父子。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, the Wei ruler Sima Yu subdued Gongsun Yuan and killed Gongsun Yuan and his son.

古文：先时渊家有犬，著朱帻绛衣。
现代文：在这之前，公孙渊家有一条狗，穿着绛衣扎着红头巾。
English: Prior to this, Gongsun Yuan's family had a dog that wore a red scarf tied around its neck.

古文：襄平城北市，生肉，有头目，无手足而动摇。
现代文：还有人在襄平市的街上看见一块生肉，肉上有头有眼却没有手脚，这块生肉到处晃荡。
English: Another person saw a piece of raw meat on the street of Xiangping City. The meat had a head and eyes but no hands and feet. This piece of raw meat was wandering around.

古文：占者曰：有形不成，有体无声，其国灭亡。
现代文：根据这些怪事，算卦的人说：有形不成，有体无声，这个国家必亡。
English: According to these strange things, the fortune-teller said: "Without form, without body, without voice, this country will perish."

古文：诸葛恪
现代文：诸葛恪
English: Zhuge Ke

古文：诸葛恪为丹阳太守，出猎两山之间。有物如小儿，伸手欲引人。恪令伸之，仍引去故地，去故地即死。
现代文：诸葛恪当丹阳太守时，到西山之间去打猎，遇见一个怪物像个小孩，伸手要拉他，诸葛恪就让他伸手来拉，拉他离开原地，怪物马上就死了。
English: When Zhuge Keqiu was Danyang's daimyo, he went hunting between the western mountains. He met a monster like a child, and he stretched out his hand to pull it. Zhuge Keqiu let him stretch out his hand to pull it, and pulled it away from the original place. The monster died immediately.

古文：既而参佐问其故，以为神明，恪曰：此事在《白泽图》内。曰： 两山之间，其精如小儿，见人则伸手欲引人，名曰 俟 ，引去故地则死。
现代文：当时旁边的官员们问那小孩是不是神灵，诸葛恪说，这事在《白泽图》里有，上面说 两山之间，有一种妖怪像小孩，见人就伸手来拉，名字叫俟，使之离开原来的地方怪物就死。
English: At that time, officials nearby asked if the child was a deity. Zhuge said that this matter was in the "Bai Zetu," which said that between the two mountains, there was a monster like a child. When people saw it, they reached out their hands and pulled it. Its name was Dragonfly. The monster died when it was moved away from its original place.

古文：无谓神明而异之，诸君偶未之见耳。
现代文：千万不要把它当成什么神灵，你们只是少见多怪罢了。
English: Don't think of it as some kind of deity, you're just a rarity.

古文：零陵太守女
现代文：零陵太守女
English: 零陵太守女

古文：零陵太守史，有女，悦书吏，乃密使侍婢，取吏盥残水饮之。遂有孕，十月而生一子。
现代文：零陵太守史某的女儿看上了府中的书吏，就偷偷派丫环将书吏洗嗽的剩水喝了，喝了后竟怀上了孕，十月后生了个孩子。
English: The daughter of a certain Ziling Taishou looked up to the librarian in the government, so she secretly sent a maiden to drink the leftover water from the librarian's washing. After drinking it, she became pregnant and gave birth to a child after October.

古文：及晬，太守令抱出门，儿匍匐入吏怀，吏推之，仆地化为水。
现代文：孩子满周岁后，太守让把孩子抱出门。孩子一见到书吏，就爬到他的怀中，书吏把他推开，倒在地上化为一滩水。
English: As soon as the child saw the librarian, it crawled into his arms. The librarian pushed it away, and it fell to the ground and turned into a puddle of water.

古文：穷问之，省前事，太守遂以女妻其吏。
现代文：太守追问女儿，女儿说了实情，太守就把女儿嫁给了书吏。
English: The dowager empress questioned her daughter, the daughter told the truth, and the dowager empress married her daughter to the librarian.

古文：荥阳廖氏
现代文：荥阳廖氏
English: Shenyang Liao Clan

古文：荥阳郡有一家，姓廖，累世为盅，以此致富。
现代文：河南荥阳有个姓廖的人家，辈辈以养殖毒虫为生，并以此致富。
English: In Shenyang, Henan Province, there is a family with the surname Liao, who have made a living from breeding poisonous insects for generations, and have become rich in this way.

古文：后取新妇，不以此语之。
现代文：后来廖家娶进来一个新媳妇，事先没告诉她家中养有毒虫。
English: Later, the Liao family married a new daughter-in-law without telling her in advance that there were poisonous insects in their home.

古文：曾遇家人咸出，唯此妇守舍。
现代文：这天家里人都外出了，留新媳妇看家。
English: On this day, everyone in the family went out, leaving the new daughter-in-law to look after the house.

古文：忽见屋中有大缸，妇试发之，见有大蛇，妇乃作汤，灌杀之。
现代文：她见屋里有个大缸，打开一看，见里面有大蛇，就跑去烧了一锅开水倒缸里把大蛇烫死了。
English: She saw a large pot in the room, opened it, and saw a large snake inside. She ran to the pot and poured boiling water into the pot, scalding the snake to death.

古文：及家人归，妇具白其事，举家惊惋。
现代文：等家里人回来，新媳说了这事，全家又惊又惋惜。
English: When the family members came back, the new daughter-in-law said this, and the whole family was shocked and sorry.

古文：未几，其家疾疫，死亡略尽。
现代文：没过多久，全家就得了瘟疫，几乎全都病死了。
English: Before long, the whole family caught the plague and almost all of them died.

古文：又有沙门昙游，戒行清苦。
现代文：还有一个法名叫昙游的和尚，持戒很严恪守清规。
English: There is also a Buddhist monk called the Wandering Monk, who strictly observes the precepts and rules.

古文：时剡县有一家事盅，人啖其食饮，无不吐血而死。
现代文：当时剡县也有一家专养毒虫，凡是到他家去的客人，吃了他家的饭喝了他家的水，就会吐血而死。
English: At that time, there was also a family in Handan County that raised poisonous insects exclusively. Any guest who went to his house, ate his family's food and drank his family's water would vomit blood and die.

古文：昙游曾诣之，主人下食，游便咒焉。
现代文：昙游和尚听说后就到这家去看。主人给他端来食物，他就念起咒来。
English: When the wandering monk heard about this, he went to the house to have a look. The owner brought him some food, and he began to chant a spell.

古文：见一双蜈蚣，长尺余，于盘中走出，游因饱食而归，竟无他。
现代文：不一会就见一双尺多长的蜈蚣从饭碗中爬出来，和尚这才把饭吃了，而且什么事也没有。
English: After a while, he saw a pair of more than foot-long centipedes crawling out of the rice bowl. The monk then ate the rice, and nothing happened.

古文：陶璜
现代文：陶璜
English: Pottery wheel

古文：卢王将陶璜掘地，于土穴中得一物，白色，形似蚕，长数丈。大十围余，蠕蠕而动，莫能名。
现代文：卢王的部将陶璜，有一次挖地时在地洞中挖出一个东西，这东西白色，形状像蚕，有好几丈长十几围粗，还不断地蠕动，不知道是个什么东西。
English: King Lu's subordinate, Tao Xuan, once dug up something in a hole while digging. The thing was white, shaped like a silkworm, several feet long and more than ten times as thick, and it was constantly wriggling. He didn't know what it was.

古文：剖腹，内如猪肪，遂以为臞。
现代文：切开它的肚子，内面像猪的脂肪，就用它作了肉羹，很好吃。
English: Cut open its belly, the inside looks like pig fat, and use it to make meat soup, it's delicious.

古文：甚香美，璜啖一杯，于是三军尽食之。
现代文：陶璜先吃了一碗，于是三军将士们都吃光了。
English: Tao Qian ate a bowl first, so the three generals ate up all the fish.

古文：《临海异物志》云，土肉正黑，如小儿臂大，长五寸，中有肠，无目，有三十足，如钗股。
现代文：《临海异物志》这本书里曾说过，有一种名叫土肉的东西，颜色是纯黑的，像小孩手臂那样大，五寸长，里面有肠子，没有眼睛，有三十只像女人头钗样子的脚。
English: In the book "Strange Creatures of the Coast," it was said that there was a thing called earth meat, the color was pure black, as big as a child's arm, five inches long, with intestines inside, no eyes, and thirty feet like a woman's head.

古文：大者一头长尺余，中肉味。
现代文：土肉最大的有一尺多长，可以吃它身子里的肉，和别的肉味一样。
English: The biggest one is more than a foot long, and you can eat the meat inside it, just like any other meat.

古文：又有阳遂虫，其背青黑，肠下白。有五色，长短大小皆等，不知首尾所在。生时体软，死则干脆。
现代文：还有一种阳遂虫，背是青黑色，肠下白色，这种虫子有五种颜色，长短大小都一样，活着时虫子是软的，死后则变得又干又脆了。
English: There is also a kind of male roundworm, the back is blue-black, the intestine is white. This kind of worm has five colors, the length and size are the same. When alive, the worm is soft, and after death, it becomes dry and brittle.

古文：赵王伦
现代文：赵王伦
English: Zhao Wanglun

古文：永康初，赵王伦篡位。
现代文：东汉恒帝永康年初，赵王伦篡位。
English: At the beginning of the Yongkang era of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Zhao Wanglun usurped the throne.

古文：京师得一鸟，莫能名。
现代文：当时宫中得了一只怪鸟，不知叫什么。
English: At that time, there was a strange bird in the palace. I don't know what it was called.

古文：伦使人持出，周旋城邑以问人。
现代文：赵王伦叫人拿出宫去在城里到处问，看谁知道这是个什么鸟。
English: Zhao Wanglun asked someone to take out the palace and go around the city to ask around to see who knew what kind of bird it was.

古文：积日，有一小儿见之，自言曰：鸺鹠。
现代文：过了几天，有个小孩说那鸟叫鸺鹠，就回来告诉赵王伦。
English: A few days later, a child said that the bird was a quail, and came back to tell Zhao Wanglun.

古文：即还白伦，伦使更求，又见之，乃将入宫。
现代文：又命令把那小孩找到宫中，把鸟装进笼子，把小孩也关押起来。
English: He also ordered that the child be brought to the palace, that the bird be put in a cage, and that the child also be locked up.

古文：密笼鸟，并闭小儿。明日视之，封闭如故，悉不见。
现代文：第二天一看，笼子关着，关小孩的门也锁着，但小孩和鸟都不见了。
English: The next day, the cage was closed and the door was locked, but the child and the bird were gone.

古文：时伦有目瘤之疾，故言鸺鹠。
现代文：当时赵王伦眼睛上长个瘤子，所以很讨厌那鸟名叫鸺鹠。
English: At that time, Zhao Wangren had a pimple on his eye, so he hated the bird's name.

古文：伦寻被诛。
现代文：赵王伦不久就被杀死。
English: Zhao Wanglun was killed soon after.

古文：张骋
现代文：张骋
English: Zhang Ye

古文：晋大安中，江夏功曹张骋，乘车周旋，牛言曰：天下方乱，吾甚极为，乘我何之？
现代文：晋代大安年间，江夏县当功曹的张骋有一次乘车出游，拉车的牛忽然说了话，天下这么乱，我也卖尽了力气，你们还坐我的车干什么？
English: During the Taian period of the Jin Dynasty, Zhang Xuan, the most powerful man in Jiangxia County, was once traveling by car. The ox that was pulling the car suddenly spoke. The world was so chaotic. I had exhausted my strength. Why are you still riding in my car?

古文：骋及从者数人，皆惊惧，因绐之曰：令汝还，勿复言。
现代文：张骋和同行的人都十分惊恐，就骗那牛说，我们放你走，你别再说话了行不行？
English: Zhang Ye and his companions were very frightened, so they lied to the cow and said, "We'll let you go, can you stop talking?"

古文：乃中道还。
现代文：于是驾着牛车半路上就返了回去。
English: So he drove the ox cart half way and went back home.

古文：至家，未释驾，牛又言曰：归何也？
现代文：到家后还没把牛卸下来，牛又说，回来干什么？
English: When he got home and hadn't unloaded the cow, the cow said, "Why did you come back?

古文：骋益忧惧，秘而不言。
现代文：张骋更加害怕担忧，但没把这件事告诉别人。
English: Zhang Yao was even more afraid and worried, but did not tell anyone about it.

古文：安陆具有善卜者，骋从之，卜之曰：大凶，非一家之祸，天下将有起兵。一郡之内，皆破亡乎。
现代文：安陆县有一个善于算卦的，张骋去请他给算一算。算卦的说，你将有大灾难，而且不是一家的祸。天下将有人起兵造反，全郡百姓都要家破人亡了。
English: There is a man in Anlu County who is good at counting and divination. Zhang Ye went to him and asked him to count. The man said, "You will have a great disaster, and it will not be a family disaster. People all over the world will rebel, and all the people in the county will have their homes destroyed.

古文：骋还家，牛又人立而行，百姓聚观。
现代文：张骋回家后，又见那牛站起来用两条腿走路，很多人围观。
English: After Zhang Ye returned home, he saw the cow standing up and walking on two legs, with many people around to watch.

古文：其秋，张昌贼起，先略江夏，诳曜百姓，以汉祚复兴，有凤凰之瑞，圣人当世。
现代文：果然，这年秋天，张昌起兵造反，先占领了江夏，蒙骗百姓说要复兴汉朝皇室，并说有凤凰为他们预兆祥瑞，将有新王降世。
English: Sure enough, in the autumn of that year, Zhang Chang rebelled and first occupied Jiangxia, deceiving the people by saying that he wanted to revive the imperial family of the Han Dynasty, and that the phoenix was a good omen for them, and that a new king would be born.

古文：从军者皆绛抹额，以彰火德之祥。
现代文：造反的军队都用红色抹额头，说是借火神助威。
English: The rebellious troops all painted their foreheads red, saying that they were inspired by the fire god.

古文：百姓波荡，从乱如归。
现代文：百姓们人心浮动，不少人投了叛军。
English: The people's hearts were moved, and many people voted for the rebels.

古文：骋兄弟并为将军都尉，未期而败。于是一郡残破，死伤者半，而骋家族矣。
现代文：张骋兄弟也都当了叛军的将军都尉，不久就都被打败，全郡都遭到战乱的蹂躏，百姓死伤了一半，而张骋家被诛灭了九族。
English: Zhang Ye's brothers also became generals and captains of the rebel army. They were soon defeated, and the whole county was ravaged by war. Half of the people were killed and injured, and Zhang Ye's family was annihilated.

古文：京房《易妖》曰：牛能言，如其言，占吉凶。
现代文：西汉易学的创始者京房曾在他的《易妖》中说，如果牛说了话，就可以按它的话来预卜吉凶祸福。
English: Kyofusa, the founder of Western Han Yi studies, once said in his "Yi Demon" that if a cow spoke, you could use its words to foretell good fortune and bad luck.

古文：怀瑶
现代文：怀瑶
English: Wai Tong

古文：晋元康中，吴郡娄县怀瑶家，闻地中有犬子声隐隐。其声上有小穿，大如蚓。
现代文：晋代元康年间，吴郡娄县怀瑶家的地下能隐隐听到小狗的叫声，声音是从一个小洞传上来的，洞有蚯蚓那么粗。
English: During the reign of Yuan Kang in the Jin Dynasty, the cries of small dogs could be faintly heard in the basement of the Huaiyu family in Min County, Wuxi County. The sound came from a small hole, the hole was as thick as a cocoon.

古文：怀以杖刺之，入数尺，觉如有物。及掘视之，得犬，雌雄各一，目犹未开，形大于常犬也。
现代文：怀瑶用棍往下试探，深入几尺后，觉得碰到个东西，就把地挖开，挖出了一公一母两只小狗，眼睛尚未睁开，身形和平常的狗一样，于是就喂它们吃食。
English: After probing down a few feet with a stick, and feeling that he had hit something, he dug up the ground and dug out two puppies, one male and one female. Their eyes had not yet opened, and they were the same size as ordinary dogs, so he fed them food.

古文：哺之而食，左右咸往观焉。长老或云，此名犀犬，得之者家富昌，宜当养活。
现代文：邻居们都跑来看，其中一位长老说，这东西叫犀犬，得到它的家里就会富裕兴旺，应该好好养活着它。
English: The neighbors all came to see, and one of the elders said, "This thing is called a rhinoceros. If you get it, your family will be rich and prosperous. You should keep it alive."

古文：以为目未开，还置穿中，覆以磨砻。
现代文：怀瑶看它们眼还没睁开，就又放回洞里，用磨石盖上。
English: Seeing that their eyes were not yet open, he put them back in the cave and covered them with a grindstone.

古文：宿昔发视，左右无孔，而失所在，瑶家积年无他福祸也。
现代文：第二天揭开看，左右都没有洞，但犀犬却不见了。不过怀瑶家以后多年也没有什么大福大祸的事发生。
English: When it was opened the next day, there were no holes left or right, but the rhinoceros was gone. However, nothing terrible happened to the Huai'an family for many years.

古文：裴楷
现代文：裴楷
English: Baikai Zong

古文：晋裴楷家中炊，黍在甑，或变为拳，或化为血，或作芜菁子。
现代文：晋时有个叫裴楷的人，他家里作饭，把米下锅里以后，不是变成拳头就是化成血，有时还变成蔓青菜。
English: In Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Pei Kai. When his family cooked rice and put it in a pot, the rice turned into either fists or blood, and sometimes it even turned into vegetables.

古文：未几而卒。
现代文：过了不久，裴楷就死了。
English: Soon after, Baikai died.

古文：卫瓘
现代文：卫瓘
English: Guard tower

古文：卫瓘家人炊，饭堕地，悉化为螺，出足而行。
现代文：卫瓘家里人作饭，饭洒在地上立刻变成了田螺，而且伸出脚来爬行。
English: Wei Wei's family members were cooking, and when the rice spilled on the ground, it immediately turned into a snail, and it stretched out its legs to crawl.

古文：寻为贾后所诛。
现代文：过了不久，他就被贾后杀了。
English: Soon after, he was killed by Empress Jia.

古文：贾谧
现代文：贾谧
English: Jia Wei

古文：贾谧字长渊，元康九年六月，夜暴雷电。
现代文：贾谧字长渊。晋惠帝元康九年六月的一天夜里，突然天降暴雨，雷电交加。
English: One night in June of the ninth year of Emperor Jia Hui's reign, there was a sudden downpour of rain and lightning.

古文：谧斋柱陷，压毁床帐。飘风吹其服，上天数百丈，久乃下。
现代文：贾谧家里屋中的柱子坍倒，把床帐都砸坏了，狂风把他的衣服吹到几百丈高的天空，过了很久才落下来。
English: The pillar in Jia Jia's home collapsed, smashing the bedspread. The strong wind blew his clothes hundreds of meters into the sky, and it took a long time for them to come down.

古文：刘峤
现代文：刘峤
English: Liu Xuan

古文：永嘉末，有刘峤居晋陵。其兄早亡，嫂寡居。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉年末，有个叫刘峤的人住在晋陵，他的哥哥早年死了，嫂子寡居。
English: At the end of the Yongjia year of Emperor Huai of Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Liu Wei who lived in Jinling. His brother had died earlier, and his sister-in-law was a widow.

古文：夜，嫂与婢在堂中眠，二更中，婢忽大哭，走往其房。云：嫂屋中及壁上，奇怪不可看。
现代文：一天夜晚，嫂子和婢女在堂屋里睡觉，二更时分，婢女忽然大哭着跑到刘峤屋里，说他嫂子屋里和墙上有可怕的怪物。
English: One night, when his sister-in-law and her maid were sleeping in the hall, the maid suddenly burst into tears and ran to Liu Yao's house, saying that there were terrible monsters in his sister-in-law's house and on the wall.

古文：刘峤便持刀然火，将妇至。见四壁上如人面，张目吐舌，或虎或龙，千变万形。
现代文：刘峤点上灯拿着刀跟着丫环来到嫂子屋里，只见四面墙上都有人脸，瞪眼吐舌，一会又出现了龙虎，不断变化。
English: Liu Ye turned on the light and took a knife to follow the maidservant to her sister-in-law's house. She saw human faces on all four walls, her eyes widened, and for a moment dragons and tigers appeared, constantly changing.

古文：视其面长丈余，嫂即亡。
现代文：看那面孔都有一丈多长。嫂子马上就死了。
English: Look how long that face is. My sister-in-law will die soon.

古文：王敦
现代文：王敦
English: Wang Dong

古文：元帝时，王敦在于武昌。
现代文：东晋元帝时，王敦在武昌作官。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Wang Dun was an official in Wuchang.

古文：铃下仪杖生花，如莲花，五六日而萎落。
现代文：有一天，发现大门前的仪杖上长出花来，形状像荷花，过了五六天凋谢了。
English: One day, it was found that flowers were growing on the cane in front of the gate, shaped like lotus flowers, which faded after five or six days.

古文：干宝曰：荣华之盛，如狂花之不可久也。
现代文：干宝说，这就像富贵荣华都像盛开的花一样不会永不衰落。
English: Gan Bao said that this is just like the rich and glorious are like blooming flowers that will never decline.

古文：敦以逆命自死，加戮其尸焉。
现代文：果然，后来王敦因违抗圣命自杀，还被皇帝派人用刀砍碎了尸体。
English: Sure enough, Wang Dun later committed suicide for defying the holy order, and the emperor sent someone to chop up the body with a knife.

古文：王献
现代文：王献
English: Wang Xian

古文：王献失镜，镜在罂中，罂才数寸，而镜尺余。
现代文：王献的镜子丢了，后来发现镜子在酒瓮里。瓮口才有几寸，而镜子一尺多大。
English: Wang Xian's mirror was lost and was later found in the wine jar. The handle was only a few inches long, but the mirror was a foot long.

古文：以问郭璞，曰：此乃邪魅所为。
现代文：王献问郭璞这是怎么回事，郭璞说，这是妖怪干的。
English: Wang Xian asked Guo Gan what was going on. Guo Gan said that it was done by a monster.

古文：使烧车辖以拟镜，镜即出焉。
现代文：让王献烧了车轴上的铜闩做成一面铜镜，掉在瓮里的镜子自己就出来了。
English: Let Wang Xiancheng burn the bronze ingot on the axle to make a bronze mirror, and the mirror that fell into the ingot will come out by itself.

古文：刘宠
现代文：刘宠
English: Liu Zhaotong

古文：东阳刘宠字道弘，居姑熟。
现代文：东阳县有个刘宠，字道弘，住在姑塾。
English: In Dongyang County, there is a Liu Zhaocheng, surnamed Daohong, who lives in an orphanage.

古文：每夜，门庭自有血数斗，不知所从来，如此三四日。
现代文：每天夜里他家门口都有好几斗鲜血，不知从何而来。这样连续过了三四天。
English: Every night there were several buckets of blood on his doorstep, I don't know where it came from. This went on for three or four days.

古文：后宠为折冲将将军，见遣北征，将行而炊饭尽变为虫，其家蒸炒亦为虫，火愈猛而虫愈壮。
现代文：后来刘宠当了折冲将军，被派到北方打仗。军队要开拔时，军营中作好的饭都变成了虫子，他家人作的饭炒的菜也变成虫子，火越旺虫子长得越大。
English: Later, Liu Zhaocheng became a general and was sent to the north to fight. When the army was about to march, all the cooked meals in the military camp turned into worms, and the stir-fried dishes made by his family also turned into worms. The hotter the fire, the bigger the worms grew.

古文：宠遂北征，军败于檀丘，为徐龛之所杀。
现代文：刘宠北征中，在檀丘被打败，被徐龛之杀死。
English: During Liu Cai's Northern Expedition, he was defeated at Dangqiu and killed by Xu Yanzhong.

古文：桓温府参军
现代文：桓温府参军
English: Kan'en joins the army

古文：穆帝末年，桓温府参军夜坐，忽见屋梁上有伏兔，张目切齿向之，兔来转近。
现代文：晋穆帝末年，大司马桓温的公府中有个参军官夜里值班，忽然看见屋梁上趴着一只兔子，对他瞪着眼睛磨牙发狠。
English: In the last years of Emperor Jinmu, there was a senior officer on duty at night in the residence of the Grand Master Ma Huanwen. Suddenly, he saw a rabbit lying on the roof beam. He stared at it and ground his teeth at it.

古文：以刀砟之，见正中兔，而实及伤膝流血。
现代文：那兔子渐渐爬近了参军，参军举刀砍去，明明看见砍中了兔子，却把自己的膝盖砍伤血流不止。
English: The rabbit gradually crept closer to the soldiers. The soldiers raised their swords and slashed at it. When they saw that they had hit the rabbit, they slashed their own knees, which bled profusely.

古文：复以刀重砟，又还自伤。
现代文：参军又举刀再砍，还是砍伤自己。
English: If you join the army and take up the sword again, you will still cut yourself.

古文：幸刀不利，不至于死。
现代文：幸亏刀不快，没能把自己砍死。
English: Fortunately, the knife was not sharp and he was not able to cut himself to death.

古文：郭氏
现代文：郭氏
English: Mr. Guo

古文：毕修之外祖母郭氏，尝夜独寝，唤婢，应而不至。
现代文：毕修的外祖母郭氏有一次夜晚独自睡在屋里，她召唤婢女，不见婢女来。
English: Bi Xiu's grandmother, Guo, was once sleeping alone in the house at night. She summoned her maid, but the maid did not come.

古文：郭屡唤犹尔。
现代文：郭氏又喊了几声，还是如此。
English: Guo shouted a few more times, but it was still the same.

古文：后闻蹋床声甚重，郭厉声呵婢，又应诺诺不至。
现代文：就听见有很重的脚踏床板的声音，郭氏大声呵斥，婢女只是应声而不来。
English: He heard the sound of heavy foot treading on the bed board. Mr. Guo shouted loudly, but the maid did not come.

古文：俄见屏风上有一面。如方相，两目如升，光明一屋。手中如簸箕，指长数寸。又挺动其耳目。
现代文：这时她突然看见屏风上有一个大脸，好像是民间送丧时举的方相神，两眼像升那么大，目光照得屋里通亮，手像簸箕，手指好几寸长，还不时地扇动耳朵眨巴眼睛。
English: At this time, she suddenly saw a large face on the screen, as if it were a square-faced god held up by the people at a funeral. The two eyes were as large as a crane, the eyes shined brightly, the hands were like claws, the fingers were several inches long, and from time to time they fanned their ears and blinked their eyes.

古文：郭氏道精进，一心至念，凡物乃去。
现代文：郭氏向来修炼道术，这时心中专注的默念道经，那怪物就消失了。
English: Mr. Guo has always practiced alchemy, and at that moment, the monster disappeared from his mind.

古文：久之，婢辈悉来，云：向欲应，如有物镇压之者，体轻便来。
现代文：不久婢女来说，我刚才就想起来侍护你，但觉得有个很重的东西压着我。现在身子轻爽了我才来了。
English: Not long after, the maid said, "Just now I remembered to wait on you, but I felt something very heavy weighing me down. I'm feeling lighter now, so I've come."

