古文：李顺李顺，字德正，赵郡平棘人也。
现代文：李顺，字德正，趟郡平棘人。
English: Li Shun, the character of Dezheng, the hero of Pingxian County.

古文：父系，慕容垂散骑侍郎，东武城令，治有能名。
现代文：父亲李系，任慕容垂的散骑侍郎，束武城县令，治理政事有能干的名声。
English: His father was of the Li lineage, a horseback riding attendant of Ren Murongtui, and the magistrate of Sokmucheng County. He had a reputation of being able to manage political affairs.

古文：太祖定中原，以系为平棘令。
现代文：太祖平定中原，任命李系为平棘县令。
English: Taizu pacified the Central Plains and appointed Li to be the county magistrate of Pingxian County.

古文：年老，卒于家。
现代文：年老后，在家中去世。
English: He died at home in his old age.

古文：赠宁朔将军、赵郡太守、平棘男。
现代文：被追赠为宁朔将军、赵郡太守、平棘男。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Ningshuo General, Zhao County Governor, and Pingxian Man.

古文：顺博涉经史，有才策，知名于世。
现代文：李顺广泛涉猎经史著作，有才智和谋略，知名于世。
English: Li Shun extensively dabbled in historical works, with talent and strategy, well-known in the world.

古文：神瑞中，中书博士，转中书侍郎。
现代文：神瑞年间，任中书博士，升任中书侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinsui, he held the post of Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy and was promoted to the post of Secretary of Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：始光初，从征蠕蠕。
现代文：始光初年，跟随征伐蠕蠕。
English: In the first year of the first light, followed by the conquest of Crum Crum.

古文：以筹略之功，拜后军将军，仍赐爵平棘子，加奋威将军。
现代文：以谋划之功，被任命为后军将军，赐爵平棘子，加授奋威将军。
English: For his planning, he was appointed as the general of the rear army, given the title of peer of Pingxianzi, and awarded the title of General Fenwei.

古文：世祖将讨赫连昌，谓崔浩曰： 朕前北征，李顺献策数事，实合经略大谋。
现代文：世祖将要讨伐赫连吕，对崔浩说： 我以前北征，李顺几次献策，确实合乎治国方略。
English: The ancestor was going to fight against Khelianlu, and said to Cui Hao: I have been to the Northern Expedition before, and Li Shun has proposed several times, which is indeed in line with the strategy of governing the country.

古文：今欲使总摄前驱之事，卿以为何如？ 
现代文：现在想要派他总领先头部队，你以为怎样? 
English: Now you want to put him at the head of the line, what do you think?

古文：浩对曰： 顺智足周务，实如圣旨。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 李顺的智谋足以成事，确实如皇上所说。
English: Cui Hao replied: Li Shun's wit is enough to accomplish things, just as the emperor said.

古文：但臣与之婚姻，深知其行，然性果于去就，不可专委。 
现代文：不过我与他是姻亲，深知他的品行，然而他在进退之际性情果断坚决，不可专一托付。 
English: However, I am related to him by marriage, and I am well aware of his character, but his disposition is resolute and determined when he advances and retreats, and cannot be entrusted exclusively.

古文：世祖乃止。
现代文：世祖于是作罢。
English: It was only then that Xiao Kui gave up the idea.

古文：初浩弟娶顺妹，又以弟子娶顺女，虽二门婚媾，而浩颇轻顺，顺又弗之伏也。
现代文：起初崔浩的弟弟娶李顺的妹妹，又使弟弟的儿子娶奎岖的女儿，虽然两家是姻亲，但是崔造有点看不起奎顺，奎顺又不服他。
English: At first, Cui Hao's younger brother married Li Shun's younger sister, and he also made his brother's son marry Quigu's daughter. Although the two families were related by marriage, Cui Zuo looked down on Quishun a little, and Quishun disobeyed him.

古文：由是潜相猜忌，故浩毁之。
现代文：因此暗中互相猜忌，所以鲎浩诽谤他。
English: Therefore, they secretly suspected each other, so Zhao Hao slandered him.

古文：至统万，大破昌军，顺谋功居右，转拜左军将军。
现代文：到了统万，大败赫连定的军队，奎顺的谋略之功居多，改任左军将军。
English: When it came to the general election, the army, which had been defeated and consolidated, was largely due to Kuishun's strategy, and he was appointed as the general of the left army.

古文：后征统万，迁前将军，授之以兵。
现代文：后来征讨箍姜，升任前将军，把军队托付给他。
English: Later, he conscripted Gong Jiang, promoted him to former general, and entrusted the army to him.

古文：昌出逆战，顺督勒士众，破其左军。
现代文：赫连昌出来迎战，奎顺统率士兵，打败他的左路军。
English: He Lianchang came out to meet the battle, and Kui Shun led the soldiers to defeat his left-wing army.

古文：及克统万，世祖赐诸将珍宝杂物，顺固辞，唯取书数千卷。
现代文：及攻克统万，赐给诸将珍宝杂物，奎妪一再推辞，祇拿了数千卷书。
English: and conquered the whole world, and gave the generals all kinds of precious and miscellaneous goods, but Qui Xuan repeatedly refused, and only took thousands of volumes.

古文：世祖善之。
现代文：世祖嘉许他。
English: The patriarch appreciated his words.

古文：至京论功，以顺为给事黄门侍郎，赐奴婢十五户，帛千匹。
现代文：到达京师评定功劳大小，任命李顺为给事黄门侍郎，赐给奴婢十五户，帛一千匹。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, he evaluated the size of the merit, appointed Li Shun as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and gave fifteen households of slaves and maidservants and one thousand donkeys.

古文：又从击赫连定于平凉。
现代文：又跟从到平凉攻打趟平凉。
English: He also followed from Pingliang to Pingliang.

古文：三秦平，迁散骑常侍，进爵为侯，加征虏将军，迁四部尚书，甚见宠待。
现代文：三台平定，升任散骑常侍，升爵位为侯，加授征虏将军，升任四部尚书，很受重用。
English: He was promoted to the rank of samurai, knighted, given the title of general of conscripts, and promoted to the position of the fourth secretary of state. He was highly respected.

古文：沮渠蒙逊以河西内附，世祖欲精简行人。崔浩曰： 蒙逊称蕃，款著河右，若俾遐域流通，殊荒毕至，宜令清德重臣奉诏褒慰，尚书李顺即其人也。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊献出黄河以西归附，世祖想精选使臣，崔浩说： 蒙逊自称藩属，真诚明示于黄河以西，若使边远地区相互沟通，远荒异域之人都能来到这裹，应当派品德高洁的重臣奉诏褒奖抚慰，尚书李顺就是这样的人。 
English: Cui Hao said, "Monsoon claimed to be a member of the Han Dynasty, and sincerely showed that he belonged to the West of the Yellow River. If the remote areas can communicate with each other, and people from distant and wild regions can come here, he should send a dignified and virtuous vassal to reward and comfort. Shangshu Lishun is such a person."

古文：世祖曰： 顺纳言大臣，固不宜先为此使。
现代文：世祖说： 李顺是尚书重臣，所以不宜首先担当这一使命。
English: The ancestor said: Li Shun is the chief minister of Shangshu, so it is not appropriate to take on this mission first.

古文：若蒙逊身执玉帛而朝于朕，复何以加之？ 
现代文：如果蒙逊亲自捧着玉帛来朝见我，又有什么更高的礼遇呢? 
English: If Monson himself came to see me in the morning holding a jade scepter, what greater courtesy could there be?

古文：浩曰： 邢贞使吴，亦魏之太常。
现代文：崔浩说： 邢贞出使吴国，也是魏国的太常。
English: Cui Hao said: Zou Zhen sent envoys to the State of Wu, and also to the State of Wei.

古文：苟事是宜，无嫌于重。
现代文：衹要适宜于事情，就不要避忌尊贵。
English: If you want to be suitable for things, don't shun nobility.

古文：尔日之行，岂吴王入观也。 
现代文：那天的出行，难道是吴王入朝进见吗。 
English: That day's trip, is it Wu Wang into the morning into the morning?

古文：世祖从之，以顺为太常，策拜蒙逊为太傅、凉王。
现代文：世祖听从了他的意见，任命李顺为太常，策封蒙逊为太傅、凉蛆王。
English: The patriarch listened to his advice and appointed Li Shun as the Grand Master, Zafeng Mengxun as the Grand Master, and Liang Xuan as the King.

古文：使还，拜使持节、都督秦雍梁益四州诸军事、宁西将军、开府、长安镇都大将，进爵高平公。
现代文：完成使命返回，被任命为使持节、都督秦雍凿益四州诸军事、宁西将军、开府、长安镇都大将，升爵位为高平公。
English: After completing his mission and returning, he was appointed as the envoy of Jizhi Festival, the military governor of Qin and Yong, the general of Ningxi, the general of Kaifu, and the general of Chang'an Town, and was promoted to the rank of Gaoping.

古文：未几，复徵为四部尚书，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久，再次被征入任四部尚书，加授散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he was once again conscripted into the Fourth Division of the Imperial Japanese Army, and was given the additional rank of sanshaku samurai.

古文：延和初，复使凉州，蒙逊遣中兵校郎杨定归白顺曰： 年衰多疹，旧患发动，腰脚不随，不堪伏拜。
现代文：延和初年，再次出使凉州。蒙逊派遣中兵校郎杨定归白顺说： 年老多病，旧病发作，腰脚不听使唤，不能跪拜。
English: In the first year of Yanhe, he was sent to Liangzhou again. Meng Song dispatched Yang Dinggui Bai Shun, the son of a middle school soldier, to say: Old and sick, old diseases attack, waist and feet do not listen to commands, can not kneel.

古文：比三五日，消息小差，当相见。 顺曰： 王之年老，朝廷所知。
现代文：等三五天，有所缓解再相见。 奎妪说： 大王年老，朝廷知道。
English: After waiting for three to five days, the situation eased somewhat, and they saw each other again. Kuijun said, "The great king is old, and the imperial court knows it.

古文：以王祗执臣礼，别有诏旨，岂得自安不见上使也。 
现代文：因大王敬守为臣的礼仪，特别有诏旨，怎能自安其心地不见皇上的使臣呢。 
English: Since the great king respected the etiquette of being a vassal, and had a special imperial edict, how could he not see the emperor's envoys with peace of mind?

古文：蒙逊翌日延顺入，至庭中，而蒙逊箕坐隐几，无动起之状。
现代文：蒙逊第二天邀请李顺入王宫，行至厅堂中，而蒙逊身靠几案张开两腿坐着，没有起来的样子。
English: The next day, Monsoon invited Li Shun into the royal palace and walked to the hall, while Monsoon sat with his legs open, not getting up.

古文：顺正色大言曰： 不谓此叟无礼乃至于是！
现代文：李顺正色大声说： 不料这老头儿竟然无礼到这种地步!
English: Li Shunzheng said loudly: "Unsurprisingly, this old man is so rude!

古文：今则覆亡之不恤，而敢陵侮天地。
现代文：现在不顾虑覆亡，而且敢凌辱天地。
English: Now they do not care about perishing, and dare to insult heaven and earth.

古文：魂神逝矣，何用见之？ 
现代文：魂灵消失了，见他有什么用。 
English: The soul is gone, what use is it?

古文：将握节而出。
现代文：要手持使节出去。
English: You must go out with the envoy in hand.

古文：蒙逊使定归追于庭曰： 太常既雅恕衰疾，传云朝廷有不拜之诏，是以敢自安耳。
现代文：蒙逊派定归在厅堂中赶上奎妪说： 太常既原谅我衰老有病，又传说朝廷有可以不跪拜的诏令，所以敢自安其心。
English: The Monsoon faction gathered in the hall to catch up with Kuijun and said: I am too old and sick to be forgiven, and it is said that the imperial court has a decree that I can not kneel, so I dare to be at ease.

古文：若太常曰： 尔拜尔跽，而不祗命。 斯乃小臣之罪矣。 
现代文：如果太常说： 你应跪拜，却不恭奉诏命，造就是我的罪过了。 
English: If you say too often: You should kneel, but do not obey the edict, it is my fault.

古文：顺益怒曰： 齐桓公九合诸侯，一匡天下。周王赐胙，命曰：伯舅无下拜。
现代文：奎昵更加恼怒地说： 齐桓公多次联合诸侯，使天下得到匡正，周王赐给祭肉，下令说：伯舅不用下拜。
English: Queenie became even more angry and said, "Qi Kuan Gong united the princes many times, so that the world was rectified. King Zhou gave the sacrificial meat and ordered, "Uncle does not have to bow down."

古文：而桓公奉遵臣节，降而拜受。
现代文：但是桓公敬守臣子的礼节，下堂跪拜接受。
English: However, King Kan respected the etiquette of his vassal and kneeled down to accept it.

古文：今君虽功高勋厚，未若小白之勤朝廷，虽相崇重，未有不拜之诏。
现代文：现在你虽然功勋高大，比不上小皇尽心尽力地事奉朝廷，朝廷虽然相看重，但是没有不跪拜的诏令。
English: Now, although your merits are great, you cannot match the little emperor's dedication to serve the imperial court. Although the imperial court values you, there is no edict not to kneel.

古文：如便偃蹇自大，此乃速祸之道，非图久安之计。
现代文：如果就骄傲自大，这是招致灾祸的途径，不是谋求久安的办法。
English: If you are arrogant, this is a way to invite disaster, not a way to seek long-term peace.

古文：若朝廷震怒，遂相吞灭，悔何及哉！ 
现代文：如果朝廷大怒，就相吞并消灭，后悔怎么来得及呢! 
English: If the imperial court is enraged, it will absorb and destroy, how can regret come in time!

古文：蒙逊曰： 太常规之以古烈，惧之以天威，敢不翘悚，敬听休命。 
现代文：蒙逊说： 太常用古代建功立业的人来规劝我，用朝廷的威势来使我畏惧，怎敢不惶悚不安地等待盼望，敬听天子的旨意。 
English: Monson said, "I am too often persuaded by the ancient men of renown, and intimidated by the pomp of the imperial court. How dare I wait for hope without trepidation, and listen to the will of the Son of Heaven?

古文：遂拜伏尽礼。
现代文：于足跪拜俯伏竭尽礼仪。
English: Kneeling at the feet and prostrating oneself exhausts the etiquette.

古文：礼毕，蒙逊曰： 夫恃德者昌，恃力者亡。
现代文：行礼完毕，蒙逊说： 讲德的人昌盛，讲武力的人灭亡。
English: After the salute, Monson said, "Those who speak of virtue prosper; those who speak of force perish."

古文：朝廷顷来征伐屡克，境宇已博，但当循理此民，亦足兴治。
现代文：朝廷近来征伐屡屡成功，疆域已经广大，衹要抚慰治理这些民众，也足以安定。
English: The imperial court's recent conquests have been repeatedly successful, the territory has become vast, and it is necessary to soothe and govern these people, and it is also stable enough.

古文：然专务讨击，恐不可常胜。 
现代文：然而专门致力于讨伐攻打，恐怕不能常胜。 
English: However, if you only focus on fighting and attacking, you may not always win.

古文：顺曰： 昔太祖廓定洪基，造有区夏。
现代文：李顺说： 过去太祖开创大业，开始占有中原地区。
English: Li Shun said: In the past, the great ancestor created a great cause and began to occupy the Central Plains.

古文：太宗承统，王业惟新。
现代文：太宗继承帝统，帝业才开始更新。
English: Emperor Taizong succeeded to the throne, and the imperial system began to be renewed.

古文：自圣上临御，志宁四海。
现代文：自皇上君临天下，志在平定四海。
English: Since the emperor came to the world, he has been aiming to pacify the four seas.

古文：是以戎车屡驾，亲冒风霜，灭赫连于三秦，走蠕蠕于漠北。
现代文：所以兵车屡屡起驾，亲自冒着风霜，消灭三秦地区的赫连氏，把蠕蠕赶到漠北。
English: Therefore, the troop car drove repeatedly, personally braving the wind and frost, to eliminate the Herian clan in the Sanqin region and drive the Creep Creep to the north of the desert.

古文：辟土开边，隶首不纪;僵尸截馘，所在成观。
现代文：开拓疆土，不计其数；被割掉左耳的尸体，到处都能看到。
English: There are countless pioneers, and corpses with their left ears cut off can be seen everywhere.

古文：除荡暴虐，存飖黎庶，威震八荒，声被九域。
现代文：荡平暴虐，救济百姓，威势震惊八方荒远地区，声名传遍九,。
English: leveling the violent, relieving the people, shocking the desolate areas in all directions, and spreading its fame all over the world.

古文：自古以来，用兵之美，未有今日之盛。
现代文：自古以来，用兵的精妙，不如今天。
English: Since ancient times, the use of soldiers has not been as sophisticated as it is today.

古文：是以遐方荒俗之氓，莫不翘足抗手，敛衽屈膝。
现代文：所以远方没有教化的百姓，莫不举手投足急切盼望，敛衽屈膝恭敬地等待。
English: Therefore, the uneducated people in faraway places have no choice but to raise their hands and feet in eager hope, and wait respectfully with bowed knees.

古文：天兵四临，昭德罚罪，何云恃力？
现代文：朝廷的军队到达四方，昭示仁德惩罚有罪，怎么说是依恃武力?
English: The army of the imperial court reached the four directions, showed benevolence and punished the guilty, how can it be said to rely on force?

古文：夫圣王之用兵也，征南蛮则北狄怨，讨西戎则东夷恨，天子安得己哉？ 
现代文：圣明的天子用兵，征伐南方的少数民族则北方的少数民族就抱怨，讨伐西方的少数民族东方的少数民族就感到遗憾，天子有什么办法呢? 
English: The divine son of heaven uses soldiers, the ethnic minorities in the north complain when he conquers the ethnic minorities in the south, and the ethnic minorities in the east regret when he conquers the ethnic minorities in the west. What can the divine son of heaven do?

古文：蒙逊曰： 诚如来言，则凉土之民，亦愿魏帝远至，何为复遽驿告警，不舍昼夜？
现代文：蒙逊说： 如果像所说的那样，那么凉州的百姓，也希望魏帝到偏僻之地，为什么反复用驿站的车马告警，昼夜不停?
English: Monsoon said: If, as has been said, the people of Liangzhou also hope that Emperor Wei will go to a remote place, why do they repeatedly use the horses and carriages at the station to sound the alarm, day and night?

古文：意君之所言，殆为虚事。 
现代文：你所说的，大概是假话。 
English: What you said is probably a lie.

古文：顺曰： 苗民叛帝舜而亲暴君，有扈违后启而从逆主。
现代文：李顺说： 三苗民众背叛帝舜而亲近暴君，直尘背弃丘壁而跟从悖理的君主。
English: Li Shun said: The people of Sanmiao betrayed the emperor and became close to the tyrant, and abandoned the hills and followed the unreasonable monarch.

古文：咸慑逼于近地，牵制于凶威，自古而然，岂独凉民也？ 
现代文：都是受到近处的威慑逼迫，受到凶恶威势的牵制，自古以来就是这样，哪裹衹有凉州人是这样。 
English: All of them have been intimidated and persecuted by their neighbors, and restrained by the power of evil. This has been the case since ancient times, and this is the case with the people of Liangzhou.

古文：顺既使还，世祖问与蒙逊往复之辞，及蒙逊政教得失。
现代文：李顺出使回来以后，世祖询问与蒙逊往来的言辞，及蒙逊政治教化得失。
English: After Li Shun returned from his mission, the patriarch inquired about the words exchanged with Monson, and the gains and losses of Monson's political enlightenment.

古文：顺曰： 蒙逊专威河右三十许年，经涉艰难，粗识机变，又绥集荒陬，远人颇亦畏服。虽不能贻厥孙谋，犹足以终其一世。
现代文：李顺说： 蒙逊在威河以西独擅威势约三十来年，历经艰难，略识机谋，又安抚集聚荒远的角落，远方的人也都畏惧服从，虽然不能留下教育子孙的谋略，仍然足以度遇他这一生。
English: Li Shun said, "Monsoon has been holding sway in the west of Wei River for about 30 years. He has gone through hardships, learned some strategies, and pacified the desolate corners. People from far away are also afraid to obey. Although he cannot leave a strategy for educating his children and grandchildren, it is still enough for him to spend his life.

古文：前岁表许十月送昙无忏，及臣往迎，便乖本意。
现代文：去年十月上表许诺十月送昙翅谶，到了我去迎接昙无谶，他便违背了原来的主意。
English: Last October, he promised to send me a pair of wings in October, but when I went to meet him, he reneged on the original idea.

古文：不忠不信，于是而甚。
现代文：不忠不信，到这时就严重了。
English: At this point, infidelity becomes serious.

古文：礼者身之舆，敬者行之本。
现代文：礼是身体的车舆，敬是德行的根本。
English: Courtesy is the chariot of the body, and respect is the foundation of virtue.

古文：未有无礼不敬而能久享福禄。
现代文：没有无礼和不恭敬而能长久享有幸福和爵禄的。
English: Without rudeness and disrespect, they can enjoy long-term happiness and honor.

古文：以臣观之，不复周矣。 世祖曰： 若如卿言，则效在无远，其子必复袭世，袭世之后，早晚当灭？ 
现代文：在我看来，不能再保全了 些担说： 如果像你说的，那么效验就在不远的将来，他的儿子必然又继承先世的爵位，继承先世的爵位以后，早晚必定被消灭? 
English: If, as you say, the test is in the not-too-distant future, then his son must also inherit the title of the previous generation, and after inheriting the title of the previous generation, sooner or later it must be eliminated?

古文：顺对曰： 臣略见其子，并非才俊，能保一隅。
现代文：李顺回答说： 我偶尔见到他的儿子，并不是才能出众的人，仅能保全一隅。
English: Li Shun replied, "I have seen his son from time to time. He is not a talented person. He can only save a corner.

古文：如闻敦煌太守牧犍，器性粗立，若继蒙逊者必此人也。
现代文：比如听说敦煌太守牧犍，禀性大致成熟，好像继承蒙逊的必定是这人。
English: For example, I heard that Dunhuang's supreme governor, the herdsman, was roughly mature, as if it must be this person who inherits Monson.

古文：然比之于父，佥云不逮。
现代文：然而与父亲相比，都说比不上。
English: However, compared to his father, they are no match.

古文：殆天所用资圣明也。 
现代文：大概是上天用以资助皇上的。 
English: It was probably used by heaven to support the emperor.

古文：世祖曰： 朕今方事于东，末暇营西，如卿所言，三五年间不足为晚。
现代文：世祖说： 我现在将用兵于东方，无暇经营西方，像你所说的，三五年间，不能算晚。
English: The ancestor said: I will now use soldiers in the East and have no time to manage the West. As you said, three to five years is not too late.

古文：且停前计，以为后图。 
现代文：暂停前面的计议，留待以后谋取。 
English: Suspend the previous motion and leave it for later.

古文：既而蒙逊死问至，世祖谓顺曰： 卿言蒙逊死，今则验矣。又言牧犍立，何其妙哉！
现代文：不久蒙逊的死讯传来，世祖对李顺说： 你预言蒙逊死，现在应验了，又预言牧犍即王位，多么高明啊。
English: Not long after, the news of Mengsong's death came. The patriarch said to Li Shun, "You predicted Mengsong's death, and now it has come true. You also predicted the succession to the throne. How clever you are."

古文：朕克凉州，亦当不远。 
现代文：我攻克凉州，也必定为时不远。 
English: I am afraid that the day when I conquer Liangzhou is not far off.

古文：于是赐绢千匹，廊马一乘，进号安西将军。
现代文：于是赐给绢千匹，厩马四匹，进升官号为安西将军。
English: As a result, he was given a thousand yakitori, four stable horses, and was promoted to the rank of General Anxi.

古文：宠待弥厚，政之巨细无所不参。
现代文：恩遇更加厚重，大小政事无不参与。
English: Favours were more plentiful, and they took part in political affairs large and small.

古文：崔浩恶之。
现代文：崔浩忌恨他。
English: Cui Hao hated him.

古文：顺凡使凉州十有二返，世祖称其能。
现代文：李顺出使凉州共十二次，世祖称许他的才能。
English: Li Shun sent envoys to Liangzhou a total of twelve times, and the patriarch praised his talent.

古文：而蒙逊数与顺游宴，颇有悖慢之言，恐顺东还泄之朝廷，寻以金宝纳顺怀中，故蒙逊罪衅得不闻彻。
现代文：但是蒙逊多次与李顺游乐宴饮，很有些傲慢的话，恐怕李顺束还泄露给朝廷，经常把黄金珍宝放进李顺怀中，所以蒙逊的罪恶朝廷不全知道。
English: However, Monsoon often had banquets with Li Shun. If he was a bit arrogant, I'm afraid Li Shunzhu also leaked to the court. He often put gold treasures into Li Shun's bosom, so the court did not know all of Monsoon's crimes.

古文：浩知之，密言于世祖，世祖未之信。
现代文：崔浩知道这事，偷偷地对世祖说，世祖不相信他的话。
English: Knowing this, Cui Hao secretly told Shizuo that Shizuo did not believe his words.

古文：太延三年，顺复使凉州，及还，世祖曰： 昔与卿密图，期之无远。
现代文：太延三年，李顺又出使凉州，及至返回，世祖说： 昔日与你密谋，预定的时间不远。
English: Three years later, Li Shun again sent Liangzhou, and when he returned, the ancestor said: I conspired with you in the past, the scheduled time is not far away.

古文：但以顷年东伐，末遑西顾，荏苒之间，遂及于此。
现代文：衹是因近年东伐，无暇顾及西边，时光荏苒。就到了现在。
English: However, due to the Eastward Expedition in recent years, there has been no time to consider the West, and time has passed. It is now.

古文：今和龙既平，三方无事，比缮甲治兵，指营河右，扫荡万里，今其时也。
现代文：如今和龙已经平定，三方没有战事，普遍地修缮锁甲操练兵马，部署经营黄河以西地区，扫荡万里，现在正是时候。
English: Now that the war with the dragon has been settled and there is no war between the three parties, it is high time to generally repair the armour, drill and train soldiers and horses, deploy and operate the region west of the Yellow River, and sweep thousands of miles.

古文：卿往复积岁，洞鉴废兴，若朕此年行师，当克以不？ 
现代文：你往来多年，洞察兴盛和衰败，如果我今年出兵，一定能攻克吗? 
English: You have been coming and going for many years, gaining insight into prosperity and decline. If I send troops this year, will I be able to defeat them?

古文：顺对曰： 臣畴日所启，私谓如然。
现代文：李顺回答说： 我昔日所启奏的，私下认为是那样。
English: Li Shun replied: Privately, I think that's what I did in the past.

古文：但民劳既久，未获宁息，不可频动，以增劳悴。
现代文：不过百姓劳苦已久，得不到安宁休养，不可频频用兵，以增加辛苦劳累。
English: However, the people have been working hard for a long time, they cannot get rest and recuperation, and they should not use soldiers frequently to increase their hard work.

古文：愿待他年。 
现代文：希望等到其他年份。 
English: I hope to wait until other years.

古文：世祖从之。
现代文：世祖听从他的意见。
English: The patriarch accepted the suggestion.

古文：五年，议征凉州，顺议以凉州乏水草，不宜远征。
现代文：五年，商议征讨凉州，李顺的意见是凉州缺少水草，不适宜远征。
English: In the fifth year, Li Shun's opinion was that there was a lack of aquatic plants in Liangzhou and it was not suitable for an expedition.

古文：与崔浩庭诤。
现代文：与崔浩在朝中争论。
English: He argued with Cui Hao in the middle of the morning.

古文：浩固执为宜征。
现代文：崔浩坚决认为应当征讨。
English: Cui Hao is adamant that it should be collected.

古文：世祖从浩议。
现代文：世祖采纳了崔浩的意见。
English: The patriarch accepted Choi Ho's suggestion.

古文：及至姑臧，甚丰水草。
现代文：及到达姑臧，水草很茂盛。
English: By the time we reached Gulu, the aquatic plants were in full bloom.

古文：世祖与恭宗书以言其事，颇衔顺。
现代文：世祖给恭宗书信告知造件事，有些怨恨李顺。
English: The ancestor sent a letter to King Gyeongjong to inform him of the affair, and he had some resentment against Li Shun.

古文：后谓浩曰： 卿昔所言，今果验矣。 
现代文：后来对崔浩说： 你昔日所说的，今日果然被证实了。 
English: Later, he said to Cui Hao: What you said in the past has been confirmed today.

古文：浩曰： 臣之所言，虚实皆如此类。 
现代文：崔浩说： 我所说的，实际情况都像这样。 
English: Cui Hao said: What I said, the actual situation is like this.

古文：初，蒙逊有西域沙门昙无谶，微有方术。
现代文：起初，蒙逊有西域僧人昙无谶，略知阴阳占卜等方术。
English: At the beginning, Monsoon was as good as any monk in the Western Regions, and knew a little about Yin and Yang divination and other methods.

古文：世祖召顺令蒙逊送之京邑。
现代文：世祖命令李顺要蒙逊送那人到京师。
English: The patriarch ordered Li Shun to have Meng Xun send the man to the capital.

古文：顺受蒙逊金，听其杀之。
现代文：李顺接受了蒙逊的黄金，听任他杀掉那人。
English: Li Shun accepted Monson's gold and let him kill the man.

古文：世祖克凉州后，闻而嫌顺。
现代文：世担攻克疽业后，听说了就对奎顺不满。
English: After Shetan cracked down on the gangrene industry, he was dissatisfied with Kuishun after hearing about it.

古文：凉土既平，诏顺差次群臣，赐以爵位。
现代文：违州平定以后，命令李顺分别群臣的等级次序，据以赏赐爵位。
English: After the suppression of the rebel states, Li Shun ordered the hierarchical order of the vassals to be separated, according to which the peerage would be awarded.

古文：顺颇受纳，品第不平。
现代文：李顺因为受了贿，评定的次第不公平。
English: Since Li Shun took bribes, the judging process is unfair.

古文：凉州人徐桀发其事。
现代文：速丛人途丝告发了这事。
English: This was quickly reported by a number of people.

古文：浩又毁之，云： 顺昔受牧犍父子重赂，每言凉州无水草，不可行师。
现代文：崔造又诋毁他，说： 李顺昔日受牧犍父子的重贿，常说凉州无水草，不可出兵。
English: Cui Zou also slandered him, saying: Li Shun was heavily bribed by the father and son of Mu Xi in the past, and often said that Liangzhou had no water plants and could not send troops.

古文：及陛下至姑臧，水草丰足。
现代文：及陛下到姑臧，水草丰裕富足。
English: and His Majesty to Gudang, the aquatic plants are abundant.

古文：其诈如此，几误国事。
现代文：他这样欺诈，几乎贻误国家大事。
English: He cheated in such a way as to almost derail a national event.

古文：不忠若是，反言臣谗之于陛下。 
现代文：他这样不忠诚，反而说我对陛下说他的坏话。 
English: He was so disloyal that he told me to say bad things about him to His Majesty.

古文：世祖大怒，真君三年遂刑顺于城西。
现代文：世祖大怒，真君三年就在城西处死李顺。
English: The ancestor was furious, and three years later, Zhenjun executed Li Shun in the west of the city.

古文：顺死后数年，其从父弟孝伯为世祖知重，居中用事。
现代文：李顺死了几年以后，他的堂弟孝伯受世祖赏识，在朝中当权。
English: A few years after Li Shun's death, his cousin, Xiao Bo, was recognized by the patriarch and took power in the court.

古文：及浩之诛，世祖怒甚，谓孝伯曰： 卿从兄往虽误国，朕意亦未便至此。
现代文：及至崔浩被杀，世祖很愤怒，对孝伯说： 你的堂兄以往虽然贻误国家大事，我的本意也未必就杀了他。
English: When Cui Hao was killed, Shizhu was very angry and said to Xiao Bo: Although your cousin has been involved in national affairs in the past, I did not necessarily intend to kill him.

古文：由浩谮毁，朕忿遂盛。
现代文：因崔浩谗言诋毁，我于是极为气愤。
English: I was extremely angry because Cui Hao slandered me.

古文：杀卿从兄者，浩也。 
现代文：杀你堂兄的人，就是崔浩。 
English: The person who killed your cousin is Cui Hao.

古文：皇兴初，顺子敷等贵宠，显祖追赠顺侍中、镇西大将军、太尉公、高平王、谥曰宣王，妻邢氏曰孝妃。
现代文：皇兴初年，李顺的儿子李敷等受宠，显祖追赠李顺为侍中、镇西大将军、太尉公、高平王，谧号为宣王，妻子邢氏为孝妃。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's enthronement, Li Shun's son Li Shiki and others were favored, and Emperor Xuanzong posthumously granted Li Shun the titles of Chamberlain, Zhenxi Grand General, Taiyi Gong, and Gaoping Wang. His posthumous name was Xuan Wang, and his wife, Zou Shi, was Xiaofei.

古文：顺四子。
现代文：李顺有四个儿子。
English: Li Shun has four sons.

古文：长子敷，字景文。
现代文：长子李敷，字景文。
English: The eldest son, Li Shiki, was a calligrapher.

古文：真君二年，选入中书教学。
现代文：真君二年，被选入太学教学。
English: In his second year, he was selected to teach at Taihaku.

古文：以忠谨给侍东宫。
现代文：由于忠诚恭谨而侍奉太子。
English: Served the crown prince out of loyalty and respect.

古文：又为中散，与李、卢遐、度世等并以聪敏内参机密，出入诏命。
现代文：又任中散，与李、卢遐、度世等都以聪慧机敏在朝中参与机密，传达诏令。
English: He was also appointed to the position of Zhongsan, and together with Li Qian, Lu Qian, Du Shi and others, he participated in confidential matters in the DPRK and China with wisdom and astuteness, and conveyed the imperial edict.

古文：敷性谦恭，加有文学，高宗宠遇之。
现代文：李敷生性谦恭，加上有文才学问，高宗厚待他。
English: Li Shiji was born with a humble nature, coupled with literary talent and learning, and Gaozong treated him well.

古文：迁秘书下大夫，典掌要切，加前军将军，赐爵平棘子。
现代文：升任秘书下大夫，掌管重要事务，加授前军将军，赐爵平棘子。
English: He was promoted to the secretary of the lower doctor, in charge of important affairs, awarded the former army general, and awarded the knighthood of Ping Xianzi.

古文：后兼录南部，迁散骑常侍、南部尚书、中书监，领内外秘书。
现代文：后来兼管南部，升任散骑常侍、南部尚书、中书监，领内外秘书。
English: Later, he was also in charge of the southern part of the country, and was promoted to the positions of Sanzhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhiz

古文：袭爵高平公。
现代文：继承爵位为高平公。
English: Prince Takahira succeeded to the title.

古文：朝政大议，事无不关。
现代文：朝廷的重大决策。无不参与。
English: The major decision-making of the Imperial Court. Everyone participates.

古文：及刘彧徐州刺史薛安都、司州刺史常珍奇以彭城，悬瓠降附，于时朝议，谓彼诚伪未可信保，敷乃固执必然，曰： 刘氏丧乱，衅起萧墙，骨肉内离，籓屏外叛。
现代文：及至刘彧徐州刺史薛安都、司州刺史常珍奇献出彭城、悬瓠投降归附，当时朝中的评议，认为他们的诚伪不可确保。李敷却坚持认为必然是真的，说： 刘氏死丧祸乱，内部发生争端，在内地骨肉分离，边防重镇叛乱。
English: As far as Liu Bei, Xuzhou governor Xue Andu, and Shizhou governor Chang Zhenqi offered up Pengcheng and surrendered to annexation, the commentary of the central government at that time believed that their sincerity could not be guaranteed. However, Li Shiki insisted that it must be true, saying: Liu's death was disastrous, internal disputes occurred, bones and flesh were separated in the inland, and border towns rebelled.

古文：今以皇朝之灵，兵马之力，兼并之会，宜在于今。
现代文：现在有朝廷的圣明，兵马的威力，兼并的机会应当在现在。
English: Now, with the imperial court's sacred light and the might of the soldiers and horses, the opportunity for annexation should be now.

古文：况安都，珍奇识机归命，奉诚万里，小民元元，企仰皇化。
现代文：况且堂都、珍奇知晓势态变化的机微而归顺，在万里之外怀抱真诚，善良的百姓，仰慕皇帝的德政和教化。
English: What's more, Dongdu and Zhenqi knew the subtleties of the changes in the situation and surrendered, embraced the sincere and kind people thousands of miles away, and admired the emperor's good governance and enlightenment.

古文：今之事机，安可复失？ 
现代文：现在这行事的时机，怎么可以再丧失? 
English: How can this opportunity to act now be lost again?

古文：于是众议乃同，遣师接援。
现代文：于是众人的意见才一致，派兵接应。
English: As a result, everyone's opinion was unanimous and the troops were sent.

古文：淮海宁辑，敷有力焉。
现代文：从进丞到海边安定和睦，李敷是有功劳的。
English: From Jinzheng to the seaside of stability and harmony, Li Jiki is meritorious.

古文：敷既见待二世，兄弟亲戚在朝者十有余人。
现代文：李敷既然受两朝厚恩，兄弟亲戚在朝中做官的有十多人。
English: Since Lishiki was favored by the two dynasties, there are more than ten brothers and relatives working as officials in the court.

古文：弟弈又有宠于文明太后。
现代文：弟弟奎銮又受文明太后的宠爱。
English: His younger brother, Qui Xuan, was also favored by the Empress Dowager.

古文：李列其隐罪二十余条，显祖大怒，皇兴四年冬，诛敷兄弟，削顺位号为庶人。
现代文：奎堑罗列他不为人知的罪状二十多条，显祖很愤怒，皇兴四年冬，杀奎堑兄弟，革除李顺的爵位封号而贬为庶人。
English: He enumerated more than twenty unknown charges against him, and Emperor Xianzu was very angry. In the winter of the fourth year of the Emperor's reign, he killed the Kui brothers and stripped Li Shun of his title and demoted him to a commoner.

古文：敷从弟显德、妹夫广平宋叔珍等，皆坐关乱公私，同时伏法。
现代文：李敷的堂弟显德、妹夫广平人宋叔珍等，都因涉及扰乱公私的罪，同时被处死刑。
English: Li Shiki's cousin, Hende, and Guangping's brother-in-law, Song Shuzhen, were both sentenced to death for the crime of disturbing public and private affairs.

古文：敷兄弟敦崇孝义，家门有礼。至于居丧法度，吉凶书记，皆合典则，为北州所称美。
现代文：李敷兄弟崇尚行孝重义，家族懂礼，至于居丧的规矩，吉事丧事的记载，都符合准则，为北部州郡所赞美。
English: The Lishiki brothers advocate the practice of filial piety, and the family knows the etiquette. As for the rules of mourning, the records of auspicious events and funerals all meet the standards and are praised by the county government of the northern state.

古文：既致斯祸，时人叹惜之。
现代文：招致这样的祸事，当时的人为他们惋惜。
English: The people at the time felt sorry for them for having caused such a calamity.

古文：敷长子伯和。
现代文：李敷的长子伯和。
English: Li Shiki's eldest son, Bohe, is growing up.

古文：次仲良，与父俱死。
现代文：次子仲良，与父亲一同被处死。
English: The second son, Nakayoshi, was executed together with his father.

古文：伯和走窜岁余，为人执法，杀之。
现代文：伯和逃窜一年多，被人抓住送交官府，被杀。
English: He had been on the run for more than a year when he was caught, handed over to the authorities and killed.

古文：伯和有庶子孝祖，年小藏免。
现代文：伯和有庶子孝祖，年幼躲藏而逃脱。
English: His father-in-law had an illegitimate son, Takao, who escaped at a young age by hiding.

古文：后敷妻崔氏得出宫，养之。
现代文：后来李敷的妻子崔氏得释出宫，抚养他。
English: Later, Li Shiki's wife, Cui Shi, had to be released from the palace to raise him.

古文：至平凉太守。
现代文：官至平凉太守。
English: He rose to the position of Tairai Taishu.

古文：敷弟式，字景则。
现代文：李敷的弟弟李式，字景则。
English: Li Shiki's younger brother, Li Shiki, wrote the lyrics.

古文：学业知名。
现代文：以学问知名。
English: Famous for its culture.

古文：历散骑常侍、平东将军、西兗州刺史，濮阳侯。
现代文：历任散骑常侍、干东将军、西兖州刺史，濮阳侯。
English: Successive samurai rangers, Gan Dong generals, Xishuanzhou sashimi, Fenyang marquesses.

古文：式自以家据权要，心虑危祸，常敕津吏：台有使者，必先启告，然后渡之。
现代文：李式自因家人占据要职，心中忧虑危难祸患，常常告诫守渡口的官吏：朝廷有使者，一定先禀告，然后让他通过。
English: Li Shih, who was worried about danger and calamity because his family members held important positions, often admonished the officials guarding the ferry port: If the imperial court has an emissary, they must first announce it and then let him pass.

古文：既而使人平晓卒至，津吏欲先告式，使者绐云： 我须南过，不停此州，不烦令刺史知也。 
现代文：不久使者黎明时突然来到，守渡口的官吏想先禀告李式，使者欺骗说： 我需要南渡，不在此州停留，不烦劳告诉尊刺史。 
English: Soon after, a messenger suddenly arrived at dawn. The officials guarding the ferry wanted to inform Li Shih first. The messenger lied and said, "I need to go to the south, I don't want to stay in this state, don't bother to tell my father."

古文：津人信之，与使俱渡。
现代文：守渡口的人相信他的话，与他一起渡水。
English: The guards at the ferry believed his words and waded across the water with him.

古文：使者既济，突入执式赴都，与兄俱死。
现代文：使者渡过以后，冲进去捉拿李式前往京城，与兄长一同被杀。
English: After the messenger had passed, he rushed in to capture Li Shih and went to the capital, where he was killed together with his brother.

古文：式子宪，字仲轨。
现代文：李式的儿子李宪，字仲轨。
English: Li style's son, Li Xian, goes by the name Zhonglu.

古文：清粹，善风仪，好学，有器度。
现代文：清秀，仪容美好，好学，有器量。
English: He is handsome, good-looking, studious, and resourceful.

古文：太和初，袭爵，又降为伯。
现代文：太和初年，继承爵位，又被降为伯爵。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager, he succeeded to the peerage and was reduced to the rank of count.

古文：拜秘书中散，雅为高祖所赏。
现代文：被任命为秘书中散，很为高祖所赏识。
English: He was appointed secretary of Zhongshan and was highly appreciated by Gao Zu.

古文：稍迁散骑侍郎，接对萧衍使萧探、范云。
现代文：不久升任散骑侍郎，接待应对萧衍的使臣萧琛、范云。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of horseback riding attendant, and received Xiao Yan's envoys Xiao Jun and Fan Yun.

古文：以母老乞归养，拜赵郡太守。
现代文：以母亲年老请求回家奉养，被任命为趟郡太守。
English: At the request of his elderly mother to return home to care for him, he was appointed as the county magistrate.

古文：赵修与其州里。修归葬父母也，牧守以下畏之累迹，惟宪不为之屈，时人高之。
现代文：赵脩与他同乡，赵脩送父母的遣骸回乡安葬，郡守以下的官员对他畏惧得重足而立，衹有李宪不向他屈服，当时的人尊崇他。
English: Zhao Hao and his fellow villagers, Zhao Hao sent the remains of his parents back to his hometown for burial. Officials below the county governor were so afraid of him that they stood firm. Even Li Xian did not give in to him. People at the time respected him.

古文：转授骁骑将军、尚书左丞、长兼吏部郎中。
现代文：改任骁骑将军、尚书左丞、长兼吏部郎中。
English: He was reappointed as Shunkei Shogun, Shoshu Sajo, Choshu and Ritsube no roju.

古文：迁长兼司徒左长史、定州大中正。
现代文：升任长兼司徒左长史、定州大中正。
English: He was promoted to the post of headmaster and also to the post of Sittusha chōshi, and to the post of junior high school vice-president of Denzhou University.

古文：寻迁河南尹。
现代文：不久升任河南尹。
English: He was soon promoted to Henan Yin.

古文：参议新令于尚书上省。永平三年，出为左将军、兗州刺史。
现代文：在尚书上省参与商议新法令。永平三年，出任左将军、兖州刺史。
English: In Shangshu, the province participated in the deliberation of the new law. Yongping served as the left general and the governor of Zhangzhou for three years.

古文：四年，坐事除名。
现代文：四年，因事获罪被取消原有身份。
English: Four years later, he was stripped of his former status after being convicted of a crime.

古文：后以党附高肇，为御史所劾。
现代文：后来与高肇结党，被御史弹劾。
English: Later, he formed a party with Gao Zhao and was impeached by the Emperor.

古文：事具《高聪传》。
现代文：事在《高聪传》。
English: It's in "The Story of Gao Cong."

古文：正光二年二月，肃宗讲于国子堂，召宪预听，又以子骞为国子生。
现代文：正光二年二月，肃宗在国子学演讲，召李宪来参预听讲，又让他的儿子李骞做国子生。
English: In February of the second year of Zheng Guang, Su Zong gave a lecture on the study of the sons of the country, and called Li Xian to attend the preview lecture. He also asked his son Li Xi to be a son of the country.

古文：四年，拜光禄大夫，复本爵濮阳伯。
现代文：四年，被任命为光禄大夫，恢复原来的爵位濮阳伯。
English: Four years later, he was appointed as Guanglu Doctor and restored his former title of Jinyang Bo.

古文：五年，除持节、安四将军、行雍州刺史。
现代文：五年，任持节、安西将军、行雍州刺史。
English: In the fifth year, he was appointed as the general of Anxi, and went to Yongzhou to make history.

古文：寻除七兵尚书，加抚军将军。
现代文：不久任七兵尚书，加授抚军将军。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Shanshu of the Seven Soldiers and promoted to the rank of General of the General Staff.

古文：孝昌初，元法僧据徐州反叛。
现代文：孝昌初年，元法僧在徐州反叛。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, a former monk rebelled in Xuzhou.

古文：诏宪为使持节，假镇东将军，徐州督都，与安丰王延明，临淮王丐等讨之。
现代文：诏令李宪任使持节、假镇东将军、徐州都督，与安丰王延明、临淮王元或等讨伐他。
English: The imperial edict ordered Li Xian to appoint envoys such as Ji Jie, General Fuzhen Dong, and the governor of Xuzhou to fight against Anfeng Wang Yanming and Lin Huai Wang Yuan.

古文：会萧衍遣其豫章王综据彭城，俄而综降。
现代文：适逢萧衍派遣他的豫章王萧综占据彭城，不久萧综投降。
English: At the right time, Xiao Yan sent his Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Sim to occupy Pengcheng, and soon Xiao Sim surrendered.

古文：徐州既平，诏遣兼黄门侍郎常景诣军慰劳，赐宪骅马一匹，仍除征东将军、扬州刺史、淮南大都督。
现代文：徐州平定以后，韶令派遣兼黄门侍郎常景前往军中慰劳，赐给李宪驿骝马一匹，又授任征东将军、扬州刺史、淮南大都督。
English: After the pacification of Xuzhou, the imperial command sent Changjing, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, to the army for consolation, gave Li Xian a horse, and was also awarded the title of General of the East, Yangzhou, and Huainan.

古文：二年，萧衍遣其平北将军元树，右卫将军胡龙牙，护军将军夏侯亶等来寇寿阳。
现代文：二年，萧衍派遣他的平北将军元树、右卫将军胡龙牙、护军将军夏侯宜等来侵犯寿阳。
English: In the second year, Xiao Yan sent his Pingbei General Yuan Shu, Right Guard General Hu Longya, and Guard General Xia Houyi to invade Shouyang.

古文：树等从下蔡军于城之东北，亶从黎浆而屯于城南。
现代文：元树等经过下蔡驻扎在城东北，夏侯直经过黎浆驻扎在城南。
English: Yuan Shu and others were stationed in the northeast of the city after passing through Shimo Cai, and Xia Hou was stationed in the south of the city directly after passing through Lirui.

古文：宪谓不先破元树等，则夏侯亶无由可克，乃遣子长钧率众逆战。
现代文：李宪认为不先打败元树等，就无法攻克夏侯卖，于是派遣儿子长钧率军迎战。
English: Li Xian believed that without first defeating Yuan Shu and others, he would not be able to defeat Xia Hou Rong, so he sent his son Chang Kui to lead the army into battle.

古文：军败，长钧见执。
现代文：军队失败，长钩被捉拿。
English: The army failed, and Long Hook was captured.

古文：树等乘之，宪力屈，以城降。
现代文：元树等乘机进攻，李宪力竭，献出城池投降。
English: Yuan Shu and others took the opportunity to attack, Li Xian exhausted himself and surrendered the city.

古文：因求还国，衍听归。
现代文：于是请求回国，萧衍让他回去。
English: So he asked to return to China, and Xiao Yan let him go.

古文：既至，敕付延尉。
现代文：回国以后，被皇上下令交付廷尉。
English: After returning to China, he was made a courtier by order of the emperor.

古文：三年秋，宪女婿安乐王鉴据相州反。
现代文：三年秋，李宪的女婿安乐王元鉴在相州造反。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Li Xian's son-in-law Anle Wang Yuanjian rebelled in Xiangzhou.

古文：灵太后谓鉴心怀劫胁，遂诏赐宪死，时年五十八。
现代文：灵太后认为元鉴想威逼胁迫，于是赐令李宪自杀，当时五十八岁。
English: The Empress Dowager thought that Yuan Ken wanted to intimidate and coerce, so she ordered Li Xian to commit suicide. He was 58 years old at the time.

古文：永熙中，赠使持节、侍中、都督定冀相殷四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令、定州刺史，谥曰文静。
现代文：永熙年间，被追赠为使持节、侍中、都督定冀相殷四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令、定州刺史，溢号为文静。
English: During the Yongxi era, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Envoy, Chamberlain, and Governor of the Four Provinces of Hebei Province, as well as the military titles of General of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the

古文：子希远，字景冲。
现代文：儿子希远，字景冲。
English: His son Xiyuan, Zijing Chong.

古文：早卒。
现代文：去世很早。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：子祖悛，袭祖爵。
现代文：儿子祖悛，继承祖父的爵位。
English: His son, Zu Xi, inherited his grandfather's title.

古文：齐受禅，例降。
现代文：齐接受禅让，依例降低爵位。
English: After accepting the compromise, the peerage was reduced as usual.

古文：希远兄长钧，兴和中，梁州骠骑府长史。
现代文：希远的哥哥长钧，兴和年间，任梁州骠骑府长史。
English: His elder brother, Chang Kui, served as the governor of Liangzhou during the Xinghe era.

古文：希远第二弟希宗，字景玄。
现代文：希远的二弟希宗，字景玄。
English: His distant second brother Hizong, also known as Jing Xuan.

古文：出后宪兄。
现代文：过继给李宪的哥哥。
English: He was succeeded by his brother, Li Xian.

古文：性宽和，仪貌雅丽，涉猎书传，有文才。
现代文：他性情宽厚温和，仪容高雅优美，涉猎典籍，有文才。
English: His disposition is generous and gentle, his appearance is elegant and graceful, he dabbles in classics, and he has literary talent.

古文：起家太尉参军事，转直后，领侍御史，迁通直散骑常侍。
现代文：初入仕途任太尉参军事，改任直后，领侍御史，升任通直散骑常侍。
English: At the beginning of his career, he was appointed as a captain in the military, and immediately after the change of post, he was promoted to the position of chief equerry, and was promoted to the position of regular equerry.

古文：寻为东南道行台邸珍右丞，与诸军讨贼于彭沛，克之，转齐献武王大行台郎中。
现代文：不久任东南道行台逊趁的右丞，与各路大军在彭沛两地讨伐贼人，战胜敌人，改任齐献武王大行台郎中。
English: He was soon appointed as the right-hand man of the Southeastern Province, and fought against the bandits in the two regions of Pengpei, defeating the enemy. He was later appointed as the second-in-command of the King of Qi and King of Wu.

古文：迁散骑常侍、中军大将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：升任散骑常侍、中军大将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was promoted to the rank of straggler, general of the Chinese army, and doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：献武王擢为中外府长史，为齐王纳其第二女。
现代文：献亘迄提拔他为中外府长史，向齐王贡献他的第二个女儿。
English: He was promoted to the post of prefectural governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and offered his second daughter to the King of Qi.

古文：希宗以人望兼美，深见礼遇。
现代文：签宗因声望很好，深受礼遇。
English: Because of its good reputation, Xingzong was treated with great courtesy.

古文：出行上党太守。
现代文：派出兼任上塞太守。
English: He was also sent to serve as the governor of Upper Sesia.

古文：寻而遘疾，兴和二年四月卒于郡，年四十。
现代文：不久生病，垦和二年四月在郡中去世，终年四十岁。
English: Soon after, he fell ill, and died in Guanzhong in April of the following year, at the age of forty.

古文：赠使持节、都督定冀沧瀛殷五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、司空公、殷州刺史、谥曰文简。
现代文：被追赠为使持节、都督定冀涂遍凿五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、司空公、壁州刺史，谧号为文简。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Envoy to the Five Provinces," "Military Commander of the Five Provinces," "Commander of the Cavalry," "Emperor of the Sky" and "Historian of Bishu." His posthumous name was Wen Jian.

古文：长子祖升，武定末，太子洗马。
现代文：长子祖升，武定末年，任太子洗马。
English: The eldest son Zu Sheng, the last year of Wuding, was appointed the prince of Saima.

古文：希宗弟希仁，字景山。
现代文：希宗的弟弟希仁，字景山。
English: Hizong's younger brother Hidehito, Zeking Mountain.

古文：武定末，国子祭酒、兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：武定末年，任国子祭酒、兼给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the last years of Wuding's life, he was appointed as Kuniko Matsuri Sake brewer, and also as the Yellow Gate waiter.

古文：希仁弟骞，字希义。
现代文：希仁的弟弟希骞，字希义。
English: Hidehito's younger brother, Hidehiro, also goes by the name Hiyoshi.

古文：博涉经史，文藻富盛。
现代文：广泛涉猎经史着作，词采丰富华美。
English: It is a work that deals extensively with history, and the words are rich and beautiful.

古文：年十四，国子学生。
现代文：十四岁时，为国子学生员。
English: At the age of fourteen, he became a member of the Kuniko school.

古文：以聪达见知。
现代文：以聪慧明达受赏识。
English: He was praised for his intelligence and wisdom.

古文：历大将军府法曹参军、太宰府主簿，转中散大夫，迁中书舍人，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：历任大将军府法曹参军、太宰府主簿，改任中散大夫，升任中书舍人，加授通直散骑常侍。
English: Successive senior generals were promoted from the position of legal officer in the General Headquarters to join the army, and from the position of chief clerk in Dazaifu to the position of junior clerk, and from the position of junior clerk to the position of senior clerk, and from the position of senior clerk to the position of senior clerk.

古文：曾为《释情赋》曰：
现代文：曾经作《释情赋》，写道：
English: He once wrote in "Interpretation of Sentiments":

古文：单阏之年，无射之月，余承乏摄官，直于本省。对九重之清切，望八袭之峥嵘，感代序以长怀，观爽气而轸虑。
现代文：卯年九月，我担任官职，当值于中书省。面对清贵切近的宫殿，眼望高峻的京师八门，感慨时序更替而遐想，观看秋爽的景物而忧虑。
English: In September of the year of Wu, I held an official position and was on duty at the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Faced with the noble palace, looking at the lofty eight gates of Beijing, I was moved by the change of time sequence and had a reverie, and I was worried by the autumn scenery.

古文：笼樊之念既多，寥廓之想弥切。
现代文：对鸟笼的哀怜既多，对辽阔天空的向往就更迫切。
English: While there is a lot of pity for the birdcage, the yearning for the vast sky is even more urgent.

古文：含毫有思，斐然成赋。
现代文：提笔有思，斐然成赋。
English: He is a thoughtful writer with great talent.

古文：犹潘生之《秋兴》，王子之《登阁》也。
现代文：犹如潘岳的《秋兴赋》，王粲的《登楼赋》。
English: Just like Pan Yue's "Autumn Festival Fuxing" and Wang Yao's "Fuxing."

古文：厕郑璞于周宝，编鱼目于随珠，未敢自同作者，盖亦各言尔志云。
现代文：把难国的璞玉与周王的实玉杂置，负目混入随堡之珠，不敢自认为与他们的所作等同，不过衹是谈谈自己的志愿而已。
English: He mixed the jade of Nan Guo with the real jade of King Zhou, and mixed the negative eye with the pearl of Suibao. He did not dare to think that it was the same as what they did, but he only wanted to talk about his own will.

古文：荷峻极之层构，导积石之洪流。
现代文：负荷高峻而多屑的建筑物，疏导积石山的洪流。
English: Loaded with tall, steep and crumbly buildings, the canal channels torrents from the jade mountains.

古文：有马形而谟舜，亦龙德而史周。
现代文：具常入之形而为舜谋，怀圣人之德而为厘史。
English: With the form of frequent entry, it is a strategy, and with the virtue of a sage, it is a history.

古文：爰相赵之鸿烈，逮籓魏之优游。
现代文：言及为相趟国的伟业，想到屏藩的悠闲。
English: Mentioned as the great cause of successive visits to the country, the leisure of Pinghan comes to mind.

古文：为衢樽于上叶，号木铎于前修。
现代文：先世行仁政设酒通衢，前贤摇木铎宣布政教。
English: The previous generation of benevolent politics set up a liquor store, and the former sages announced their politics and religion by shaking a wooden stake.

古文：若豢龙之不陨，似穷叶之世济。
现代文：如豢龙氏的不败亡，似穷桑的世代相济。
English: For example, the invincibility of the Jialong clan is similar to the generation of poor mulberry.

古文：故抱玉而怀珠，且滋兰而树蕙。
现代文：所以满腹经纶如同抱玉怀珠，而心性芳洁如同滋兰树蕙。
English: Therefore, a full belly is like a pearl necklace, and a pure heart is like a gourd.

古文：或舟楫以匡时，或栖迟以卒岁。
现代文：或者做天子的臣僚以匡正时势，或者游山玩水以终年岁。
English: Or to be a minister of the Son of Heaven to rectify the situation, or to wander the mountains and play with water for the rest of the year.

古文：尚无忝于先人，谅贻厥于来裔。
现代文：或许无愧于先人，谅必仁及后世。
English: Perhaps worthy of the ancients, but also worthy of future generations.

古文：书金册以葳蕤，布银绳而昭哳。
现代文：记载于史籍而美好，陈述于典册而明晰。
English: What is recorded in the historical record is beautiful, and what is stated in the textbook is clear.

古文：清风忽其缅邈，启皇祖于庚寅。
现代文：在清风徐来的季节，选择庚寅日祭告祖庙。
English: In the season when the wind gradually clears, the ancestral temple is chosen as the site of the Gyeongin Day Festival.

古文：李伯仁《上东门铭》曰： 上东少阳，厥位在寅。
现代文：李伯仁的《上东门铭》说： 上东门在东方，方位在正月。
English: Li Boren's "Jangdongmenming" said: "Jangdongmen is in the east, and its location is in the first month of the year.

古文：条风动物，月值孟春。 
现代文：东北风萌动万物，月份正值孟春。 
English: The northeast wind sprouts everything, and the month is Mengchun.

古文：王武子诗曰： 于显我王，缉乘斯民。
现代文：王武子的诗说： 先王光明，治理驾御百姓。
English: The poem of Prince Takeshi says: Former King Komei, govern and lead your people.

古文：俊明有德，严恭惟寅。 
现代文：优秀明达有仁德，庄严恭敬畏天命。 
English: Excellent people have benevolence, solemnly respect and fear the fate of the world.

古文：逢轩教之方洽，遇周命之惟新。
现代文：遭逢正大周遍的轩辕教化，际遇周代的革命更新。
English: It has been subjected to the pervasive influence of Xuan Xuan's indoctrination in Zhengda University and the revolutionary renewal of Zhou Dynasty.

古文：譬龙虎其有合，信山川而降神。
现代文：譬如龙虎有相合之时，确信山川有降神之能。
English: For example, when dragons and tigers meet, they are convinced that mountains and rivers have the power of gods.

古文：若胜庭之五杰，似不速之三人。
现代文：好像胜庭的五位俊杰，如同不速的三位客人。
English: It seems that the five winners are like the three uninvited guests.

古文：协嗜欲于将至，岂物色而方臻。
现代文：把嗜欲协调在将成之时，何必要等到见物尝色后才算完美。
English: When it comes to coordinating one's desires, there is no need to wait until everything is perfect.

古文：荷天宠以来仪，步康衢而骋力。
现代文：蒙上天宠爱而降临凤凰，行于康庄大道而施展才力。
English: The phoenix, favored by the heavens, descends, walks along the Kangzhuang Avenue and displays its talents.

古文：如乾元之利贞，若坤四之方直。
现代文：如同上天的和谐贞正，类似大地的方正无际。
English: Like the harmony and uprightness of heaven, the uprightness of earth is boundless.

古文：内弼谐于本朝，外辟土于殊域。
现代文：内辅佐协调于本朝，外开辟疆土于异域。
English: The Inner Assistant Co-ordinator co-ordinates with this dynasty, while the Outer Assistant Co-ordinator opens up the territory to foreign countries.

古文：乘紫氛以厉羽，负青天而鼓翼。
现代文：乘紫色瑞气而振羽，背负青天而鼓翼。
English: Take advantage of the purple freshness and shake the feathers, carry the blue sky and drum the wings.

古文：既公侯之必复，亦庆绪之所融。
现代文：既庇护公侯之家，又昌盛皇家宗室。
English: It sheltered the princely family and prospered the royal family.

古文：绩并树于八凯，道俱升于二宫。
现代文：舆良臣一同建立功绩，与皇帝太子一同修得道义。
English: Good ministers of public opinion build merit together, and cultivate morality together with the emperor and the crown prince.

古文：遂遵流以至海，且因岳而为嵩。
现代文：于是沿着水流而到达大海，又凭藉高山而成嵩岳。
English: As a result, it follows the current to reach the sea, and by virtue of the high mountains, it becomes Mount Songdu.

古文：同羽仪于班氏，均载德于杨公。
现代文：堪为世人楷模如同班氏，具备高尚道德如同杨公。
English: He is a role model for the world, just like Mr. Ban, and has high morals, just like Yang Gong.

古文：何日月之逾迈，引寒暑而相终。
现代文：何止超越日月，与寒暑相终。
English: More than the sun and moon, it ends with the cold and heat.

古文：委晋会于弱齿，遗堂构于微躬。
现代文：托付晋会之地给少年，传祖先遣业给微贱。
English: The land entrusted to the Young Pioneers was given to the boys, and the land handed down from their ancestors was given to the peasants.

古文：嗟蒙昧之无取，故告舍而不及。
现代文：嗟叹愚昧而不足取，所以请求离去而惟恐不及。
English: Lamenting the folly of not being able to take it, he begged to leave, but was too afraid.

古文：已濩落而少成，又拥肿而无立，愧精坚于百炼，惭忠信于十邑。
现代文：既空虚无用而少成就，又臃肿无能而无所立。有愧于久经磨炼的精诚坚定，羞惭于十室之邑的忠诚信义。
English: Empty and useless with few accomplishments, bloated and impotent with nothing to stand on, unworthy of the time-honored sincerity and steadfastness, and ashamed of the loyalty and faithfulness of the town of Jishitsu.

古文：非圭璋之特达，讵芳菲之易袭。
现代文：如果不是特殊的俊杰，岂容易熏染芳香。
English: If it is not a special junjie, it is not easy to smudge the fragrance.

古文：末砥砺以自进，宁琢磨而成章。
现代文：未经砥砺而自求进取，岂能比得上经琢磨而成篇章。
English: Unpolished and self-motivated, can it be compared to polished and made into a chapter.

古文：乘宋子之万字，异应生之五行。
现代文：不同于宋子的文章，有异于应生的五行。
English: Unlike Song Zi's essay, there is a five-line rhyme that is different from Ying Sheng's.

古文：不请观于石室，岂借书于晋皇。
现代文：不能观书于石室，又怎能借书于晋皇。
English: You can't read a book in a stone room, so how can you borrow a book from the Emperor Jin?

古文：求班庄而不遂，况蔡文之可望？
现代文：追求班固文章的庄重而不成，又怎能指望学到蔡邕的文采?
English: How can we expect to learn from Cai Xuan's writing if we pursue the solemnity of Ban Gu's articles but fail to achieve it?

古文：参四科其末获，入三选而谁许。
现代文：参加四科考试而未中，参与三次选拔而无人推许。
English: He took part in the four-subject examination but failed, and participated in the three-phase selection but was not recommended.

古文：本无声于梁魏，故末闻于陈汝。
现代文：本来在梁魏没有声名，所以未闻名于陈汝。
English: Originally, Liang Wei did not have a reputation, so it was not known to Chen Ru.

古文：居玉石以多迷，宅显晦而乘所。
现代文：与贤愚同处而多迷惑，寄迹于仕宦和隐逸又违背本意。
English: It is more confusing to be in the same place with the wise and the foolish, and it is contrary to the original intention.

古文：既无怀于四至，安有情于再举？
现代文：既然没有远大的志向，哪有再次应选的心绪。
English: Since there is no lofty ambition, there is no mood to stand for re-election.

古文：虽衣冠之末胄，而世禄之绪余。
现代文：虽然是士大夫的后代，又是世袭贵族绪余。
English: Although he was a descendant of Shidafu, he was also a hereditary aristocrat.

古文：等渤澥之乘雁，类九罭之逃鱼。
现代文：如同渤獬上成群飞行的大雁，好似密网下的漏网之鱼。
English: They are like geese flying in flocks on the reeds, like fish caught in a net.

古文：处江淮而不变，对朝市而闲居。
现代文：身处江进而不改变，面对尘世而避人闲居。
English: When you are in the middle of the river, you do not change. When you face the world, you avoid people and stay idle.

古文：空阖门以靖轨，非论道而修书。
现代文：徒然关闭门户以整饬规矩，不虑谋治国的政令却编修图书。
English: Closing the portal in vain to rectify the rules, but compiling books without considering the government decree to govern the country.

古文：少宾客于季彦，谢朋交于太初。
现代文：宾客比季彦少，所交朋友也比太初时代逊色。
English: The number of guests is less than that of Ji Yan, and the number of friends made is also inferior to that of the early days.

古文：在正光之御历，实明皇之拱已。
现代文：正光年号初建之时，正是明皇无为而治之始。
English: When the Zhengguang Niango was first built, it was the beginning of Emperor Ming's reign of inaction.

古文：曾问政于上学，著为君而我齿。
现代文：曾在太学咨询政事，明示为君之道而我在其中。
English: He was a political consultant at Taixu University, and he explicitly advocated the way of the king, and I was one of them.

古文：叫阍人以望予，遂陟降于庭止。
现代文：叫阎人开启宫弓以接见我，于是往来于宫中。
English: Yaman was told to open the palace bow to receive me, so he went to and from the palace.

古文：同崔驷之谒帝，若谢兼之来仕。
现代文：如崔驷觐见皇帝，似谢兼年少为官。
English: If Cui Rong met the emperor, Nixie would become an official at a young age.

古文：逮孝庄之入统，乃道丧而时昏。
现代文：到孝庄入承大统，于是世道沦丧时局混乱。
English: When Xiaozhuang became emperor, the world fell into chaos.

古文：水群飞于溟海，火载燎于中原。
现代文：大海波涛汹涌，中原战火纷纷。
English: The sea is rough and the Central Plains are on fire.

古文：延胶船而越水，若朽索而乘奔。
现代文：拖着胶粘的船渡水，如同用朽索驾马狂奔。
English: Dragging a sticky boat across the water is like using a rotten rope to drive a horse.

古文：玉羊失而无御，金鸡亡而不存。
现代文：玉羊丢失从而驾车无御，金鸡飞走从而贤佐不复生。
English: The jade sheep was lost, and the car could not be driven. The golden chicken flew away, and the wise man could not be revived.

古文：天步忽其多难，横流且其云始。
现代文：时运倘然多难，灾祸将要开始。
English: As luck would have it, the disaster is about to begin.

古文：既云扰而海沸，亦岳立而棋峙。
现代文：既云扰海沸动荡不安，又高山耸立般互相对峙。
English: Not only are the clouds disturbing the sea, causing turbulence and unrest, but also the high mountains stand opposite each other.

古文：睇三纲之日紊，见四维之不理。
现代文：目睹三纲曰益紊乱，眼见四方不得治理。
English: Witnessing the chaos of the Three Guiding Principles, it is clear that the Four Parties must not govern.

古文：顾茂草以伤怀，视匪车而思起。
现代文：顾茂草而伤心，看疾驰的车子而哀愁。
English: Look at the grass and be sad, look at the speeding car and be sad.

古文：虽风雨之如晦，亮胶喈而不已。
现代文：虽然风雨如晦环境恶劣，但是鶸鸣胶喈坚定不移。
English: Although the weather is bad, the cymbals are steadfast.

古文：自牵役于宰朝，实有怀于胥耻。
现代文：自从为朝政拖累，实在心怀做官的羞耻。
English: Ever since I was dragged down by imperial politics, I have been ashamed to be an official.

古文：在下僚而栖屑，愿奋迅于泥滓。
现代文：作为属吏而奔忙不安，希望从耻辱中振奋而起。
English: As a subordinate official, he is anxious and anxious, hoping to rise from the shame.

古文：眷故乡以临睨，怅有动于思归。
现代文：因眷恋故乡而眺望远方，怅然若失而思归去。
English: Because of his attachment to his hometown, he gazes into the distance, as if lost, and thinks of returning.

古文：越来流以鼓枻，朔北风而结騑。
现代文：划双桨渡过回归的河道，迎着北风而两马并驰。
English: Paddling across the returning river, facing the north wind and riding two horses side by side.

古文：入成都之旧宅，反观津之故扉。乃曲肱而不闷，信抱甕而无机。
现代文：进入成都的旧宅，返回观津的故居于是弯曲胳膊作枕头而不烦忧，果真抱瓮浇水而心无机巧功利。
English: Entering the old house in Chengdu and returning to the former residence of Guanzin, he bent his arm to make a pillow and did not worry about it. He really did not care about watering, but was interested in inorganic and skillful utilitarianism.

古文：且耕而食，且蚕而衣。
现代文：耕作而食，蚕桑而衣。
English: Farming for food, silkworms for clothing.

古文：恆一日以自省，亦三月而无违。
现代文：保持每天自省，三个月没有违背礼仪。
English: Maintain daily introspection, three months did not violate etiquette.

古文：游仁义之肴覈，采坟素之精微。
现代文：学习仁义的实质，搜集典籍的精粹。
English: Study the essence of benevolence and righteousness, and collect the essence of classics.

古文：诚因闲而养拙，亦有乐于嘉肥。
现代文：诚然因闲居而休养藏拙，也从隐居中得到快乐。
English: It is true that because of idleness, they rest and recuperate, and they also get happiness from seclusion.

古文：及勾芒御节，姑洗之首，散迟迟于丽日，发依依于弱柳。
现代文：及至勾芒昭示春天，三月之初，丽日撤播温暖明亮的阳光，弱柳起舞轻柔披拂。
English: And the merest hint of spring, the beginning of March, the sun withdraws its warm, bright rays, and the willows dance softly in the breeze.

古文：鸟间关以呼庭，花芬披而落牖。
现代文：乌在庭院中婉转呜叫，花散乱地从窗前飘落。
English: Blackbirds whirled and chirped in the courtyard, and flowers fluttered down from the windows.

古文：听乃越于笙簧，望有逾于新妇。
现代文：听起来竟超过动听的笙簧，看起来又胜过美貌的新妇。
English: She sounds more beautiful than a beautiful reed, and looks more beautiful than a beautiful bride.

古文：袭成服以逍遥，愿良辰而聊厚。
现代文：穿着盛服而逍遥，希望良辰快乐多。
English: Wearing grand attire and being carefree, I hope the good times will be more joyful.

古文：乃席垅而踞石，遂啸俦而命偶。
现代文：于是布席高丘而坐于岩石，随即招呼同伴而为文赋诗。
English: So he sat on a rock at the foot of a hill and called his companions to join him.

古文：同浴沂之五六，似禊洛之八九。
现代文：如同沭浴于沂水的人群，也似祈祷于洛水边的男女。
English: Like the crowds bathing in the waters of the Nile, the men and women praying by the waters of the Nile.

古文：或促膝以持肩，或援笙而鼓缶。
现代文：或者促膝并肩，或者吹笙击缶。
English: Or kneeling side by side, or blowing kisses.

古文：宾奉万年之觞，主报千金之寿。
现代文：宾客举杯祝长寿，主人回报真诚的祝福。
English: The guests raise their glasses to wish him a long life, and the host reciprocates with sincere wishes.

古文：各笑语而卒获，传礼义于不朽。
现代文：都合乎规矩轻声谈笑，使礼仪永垂不朽。
English: They all chatted and laughed softly in accordance with the rules, immortalizing the etiquette.

古文：斯盖先民之所乐，而余心之所守也。
现代文：这大概是先民所乐意的，也是我心所向往的。
English: This is probably what the ancients were pleased with, and it is also what my heart yearns for.

古文：至于少昊为帝，庚辛处躔，视墟里之萧萧，过寒夜之绵绵。
现代文：至于少昊为帝，在庚辛日，看着村落萧萧，度遇寒夜绵绵。
English: As for Xiao Hao as emperor, on the day of Genghis Khan, he watched the village grow cold and spent a cold night.

古文：积霜霭于近援，起泬寥于远天。
现代文：迷茫的月色笼罩近处的篱笆，清朗之气显现于高速的长天。
English: The hazy moonlight covers the nearby hedges, and a clear atmosphere appears in the high-speed sky.

古文：思多端以类长，若临水而登山。
现代文：思绪多端而类似长者，好像临水和登山。
English: Thoughts are multi-faceted and similar to the elderly, like waterfront and mountain climbing.

古文：幸出游之或写。冀观涛之可蠲。
现代文：希望出游以抒发情感，期盼观涛以洁净身心。
English: I hope to travel to express my emotions, and I look forward to watching the waves with a clean mind and body.

古文：遂杖策缓步，或渔或田。
现代文：于是扶杖缓步，或打鱼或耕田。
English: So he walks slowly with a cane, or goes fishing or ploughs the fields.

古文：弋凫雁于清溪，钓鲂鲤于深泉。
现代文：射大雁于清溪，钓鳊鱼于深泉。
English: Shooting geese in the clear stream, trout fishing in the deep spring.

古文：张广幕，布长筵。
现代文：张设宽大的篷帐，布置长列的筵席。
English: Large tents were set up and long rows of tables were set up.

古文：酌浊酒，割芳鲜。
现代文：斟酌浑浊米酒，切割新鲜美味。
English: Mixed with cloudy rice wine, it is fresh and delicious.

古文：起《白雪》于促柱，奉《绿水》于危弦。
现代文：演奏《白雪》用急弦，奉和《绿水》也用急弦。
English: For the performance of "White Snow" I used a rapid string, and for the performance of "Green Water" I also used a rapid string.

古文：赋《湛露》而不已。歌《骊驹》而未旋。
现代文：吟诵《湛露》而不已，歌咏《骊驹》而不回还。
English: Chanting "Tan Lu" without ceasing, singing "Zhu" without returning.

古文：跌荡世俗之外，疏散造化之间。
现代文：纵情于世俗之外，闲散于天地之间。
English: Indulge in the secular outside, idle between heaven and earth.

古文：人生行乐，聊用永年。
现代文：人生行乐，聊以永年。
English: Enjoy life, talk forever.

古文：悟柱下之称工，闻首阳之为拙。
现代文：理解柱下史老子所称的巧，领会伯夷叔齐采薇隐居首阳山所表现的拙。
English: Understand the skill that the pillar of history, Lao Zi, called skill, and understand the bad luck that Uncle Bo Yi, Qi Cai Wei, lived in seclusion in Shouyang Mountain.

古文：既有惜于菰悬，且自悲于井渫。
现代文：既珍惜隐者所居之处，又自悲洁身自持而人不知。
English: Not only do they cherish the place where the hermit lives, but they are also self-supporting and self-sufficient.

古文：访郑詹之格言，求季主之高说。
现代文：搜寻郑詹的格言，寻求季主的高论。
English: Search for Zheng Zhan's motto, seek the high theory of the quarter master.

古文：去衡门以策驷，望象魏而投辙。
现代文：离开茅屋而鞭策驷马，面向朝廷而取道。
English: He left the cottage and whipped his horse, facing the court and taking the road.

古文：服毳衣以从务，乘大车而就列。
现代文：穿毳衣参预政务，乘牛车而位列朝班。
English: Dressed in ceremonial robes, they took part in pre-election government affairs, and rode in ox carts to work the morning shift.

古文：比汗海而无纪，喻江河而有缺。
现代文：与浩瀚大海相比十分渺小，比起奔流不息的江河也阙失甚多。
English: Compared with the vast ocean, it is very small, and compared with the ever-flowing rivers, it is also very small.

古文：眷重地而惧深，念索米而惭结
现代文：眷念重要的地位而忧虑深，回想求取米粮而羞惭蕴结。
English: Anxious and worried about the important position, and ashamed to ask for rice.

古文：运有折于玉斗，时忽亡于金镜。
现代文：天命有时毁灭社稷，时运有时亡失正道。
English: Sometimes the destiny of heaven destroys the society, and sometimes the fortune of time leads to the loss of the righteous path.

古文：始蒙尘以播荡，卒流彘而居郑。
现代文：先前蒙受风尘而流离动荡，最终流落彘地而居住于郑地。
English: Previously, they suffered from the wind and dust and were displaced and turbulent, and eventually they were displaced and lived in Zhengdi.

古文：彼上天之降鉴，实下民之请命。
现代文：上天所降临的鉴戒，实际也是小民的请求。
English: The admonition that came down from heaven is actually the request of the little people.

古文：因艰难以隆基，据殷忧而启圣，调南风以负扆，居北辰而为政，创彝伦于九畴，班平章于百姓。
现代文：凭藉危难而建立大业，满怀忧虑而开启圣人。弹奏《南风》而临朝听政，处在帝王之位而实行仁政。据伦理开创治理天下的大法，按等级考察表彰百官族姓。
English: With the help of danger, he established a great cause, full of anxiety, he started a saint. He played "South Wind" and listened to the government, and when he was on the throne, he implemented benevolent politics. According to ethics, he created a great law to govern the world, and awarded the surnames of the hundred officials according to the level of investigation.

古文：喻绳契以论踪，援成昭而比盛。
现代文：告知结绳刻木记事以评定事迹，援引成王昭王而比较兴盛。
English: It is more prosperous to tell the story of knotting the rope and carving the wood to evaluate the deeds, and to invoke Chengwang Zhaowang.

古文：酌徙镐之故典，究迁毫之遗令。
现代文：斟酌迁徙镐京的旧典，考究迁徙亳都的遣令。
English: We will consider the old texts on the relocation of the capital and study the dispatch order for the relocation of the capital.

古文：奄四海以为家，开七百而增庆。
现代文：拥有四海以为家，开创七百年基业而增庆。
English: With the four seas as its home, it has created a seven-hundred-year-old foundation and increased its celebration.

古文：睹礼乐之方隆，信光华之始映。
现代文：目睹礼乐刚刚兴盛，相信光华已开始辉映人间。
English: Witnessing the prosperity of the ritual music, I believe that the glory has begun to reflect the human world.

古文：百揆郁以时序，四门穆其惟清。
现代文：百官繁多而有条理，四方诸侯和睦天下太平。
English: The officials are numerous and well-organized, and the four principalities are in harmony and the world is at peace.

古文：如得人于汉世，比多士于周庭。
现代文：如漠代得到德才兼备的人，似周代有众多的贤能。
English: If the desert generation got people who were both virtuous and talented, it seems that the Zhou generation has a lot of virtuous people.

古文：有一匡以作相，或十乱而为桢。
现代文：拥有能够一匡天下的人做相，又有众多治国平乱的人做大臣。
English: It has a person who can conquer the world as the prime minister, and many people who govern the country and quell unrest as ministers.

古文：各秉文而经武，故天平而地成。
现代文：各自分别执掌文事经营武备，所以万事妥当天下太乎。
English: Each of them is in charge of literature, management and military affairs, so everything is right in the world.

古文：伊余身之忝秽，得再入于承明。
现代文：我玷污自身，得以再入朝为官。
English: I defiled myself so that I could return to the imperial court.

古文：执纶言之犹绋，戴会弁之如星。
现代文：职掌诏令如同掌管御玺，头戴彩冠如同星光。
English: Those in charge of the imperial edict are like those in charge of the imperial scepter, and those wearing the crown are like the starlight.

古文：非巡溃以窥井，信夕惕而怀惊。
现代文：不是察看江河泛滥然后再观看井水，确实早晚戒惧而心惊。
English: It's not like watching the river flood and then watching the well water, it's true that sooner or later you will be scared and frightened.

古文：承周任之有言，揽老子之知足。
现代文：听从昼珏的话，取童工的知足。
English: Listen to the words of the nooner, take the contentment of child labor.

古文：奉炯诫以周旋，抱徽猷而与属。
现代文：接受明鉴而举止有礼，抱持美善之道而小人乐意依附。
English: Accepting the clear example and behaving courteously, holding the way of beauty and goodness, and the villain is willing to adhere.

古文：每有偃于唯尘，恆兴言于宠辱。
现代文：每次进入仕途，常常困于荣辱。
English: Every time they enter the career path, they are often trapped in honor and disgrace.

古文：思散发以抽簪，愿全真而守朴。
现代文：想解散头发而弃官隐退，愿保全天性而保持质朴。
English: I want to let my hair down and retire from public life. I want to preserve my natural hair and keep it simple.

古文：眷疏傅以徘徊，望申公而踯躅。
现代文：反顾蕴僵而徘徊，瞻视空公而踯躅。
English: On the other hand, he wanders around in a daze, gazing at the sky and staring into space.

古文：冀鄙志之获展，庶微愿之逢时。
现代文：期望鄙陋的志愿得以伸展，希望微小的心愿遭逢机遇。
English: Hope that the humble will can be expanded, and hope that small wishes will be met with opportunities.

古文：歌致命而可卜，咏归田而有期。
现代文：歌唱捐躯而可以预料，吟咏归田而有期。
English: Singing and dying is to be expected, singing and going back to the fields is to be expected.

古文：揖帝城以高逝，与人事而长辞。
现代文：揖别帝都而远去，与仕途而长辞。
English: Farewell to the emperor and go far away, and say goodbye to the career.

古文：击壤而颂，结草而嬉。
现代文：做击壤的游戏而吟诵，结草为庐而嬉戏。
English: Chanting as a game of hitting the ground, playing as a grasshopper.

古文：援巢父以戏颍，追许子而升箕。
现代文：模仿巢父在颖水那样嬉戏，追随许由而登箕山。
English: Imitating the play of the nest father in Yingshui, following the reason and climbing Mount Lushan.

古文：供暮餐于沆瀣，给朝饵于琼芝。同糟离而无别，混名实而不治。
现代文：饮清露以为暮餐，用玉芝当作朝食。混合糟酒而不区别，淆乱名实而不分辨。
English: Drinking clear dew for dinner, using yakitori for breakfast. Mixing bad wine without distinguishing, confusing names and facts without distinguishing.

古文：放言肆欲，无虑无思。
现代文：放纵言谈和欲望，无所忧虑和思恋。
English: Indulge in talk and desire, free from worry and yearning.

古文：何鹪鹩之可赋，鸿鹄之为诗哉！
现代文：何止欲望不高的鹊鹑可以吟诵，志向远大的鸿鹄可以赋诗呢?
English: How much more can a grasshopper with small desires chant, and a giant with great aspirations write poetry?

古文：寻加散骑常侍，殷州大中正、镇南将军、尚书左丞，仍以本官兼散骑常侍使萧衍。
现代文：不久加授散骑常侍、殷州大中正、镇南将军、尚书左丞。仍旧以本官兼散骑常侍出使萧衍。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to sanshaku (free rider) regular attendant, Yinzhou Daizhongzheng, Zhenan Shogun, and Shangshuzojo. He continued to serve as his own officer and sanshaku (free rider) regular attendant to envoy Xiao Yan.

古文：后坐事免，论者以为非罪。
现代文：后来因事获罪免官，舆论以为无罪。
English: He was later found guilty and removed from office, but the public believed he was innocent.

古文：骞尝赠亲友卢元明、魏收诗曰： 幽楼多暇日，纟驾萃荒坰。
现代文：李骞曾经赠给亲密的朋友卢元明、魏收诗说： 隐居多暇曰，驱车到荒野。
English: Li Yao once gave a poem to his close friends Lu Yuanming and Wei Jie, saying: "If you want to live in seclusion and have more time, drive to the wilderness."

古文：南瞻带宫雉，北睇拒畦瀛。
现代文：南瞻环宫墙，北顾倚池泽。
English: To the south is the palace wall, to the north is the pond.

古文：流火时将末，悬炭渐云轻。
现代文：暑气时将退，秋还悬炭轻。
English: The heat will recede when the autumn is still light.

古文：寒风率已厉，秋水寂无声。
现代文：寒风已猛烈，秋水寂无声。
English: The cold wind has been fierce, and the autumn water is silent.

古文：层阴蔽长野，冻雨暗穷汀。
现代文：层云蔽原野，冷雨暗荒汀。
English: Layers of clouds cover the fields, cold rain falls, and the landscape is dark and desolate.

古文：侣浴浮还没，孤飞息且惊。
现代文：结伴游泳浮又沉，孤独飞乌息且惊。
English: Swimming in a group is both buoyant and subdued, flying alone is subdued and startling.

古文：三褫俄终岁，一丸曾未营。
现代文：三次解衣俄终岁，一丸仙药未经营。
English: After three times of undressing, Ru finally died, and one pill of immortality medicine was not sold.

古文：闲居同洛涘，归身款武城。
现代文：闲居同在洛滨，归身拜谒武城。
English: Idling in and around the city of Luobin, and returning to worship the city of Shenwu.

古文：稍旅原思藋，坐萝尹勤荆。
现代文：才居原思茅草屋，坐梦尹憋门前荆。
English: To live in a thatched-roof house, to dream of Yin and Yang in front of the gate.

古文：监河爱斗水，苏子惜余明。
现代文：监河吝惜斗水，苏子吝惜余明。
English: Guanhe begrudges Douwu, Suzi begrudges Yuming.

古文：益州达友趣，廷尉辩交情。
现代文：益州通达友人趣，廷尉明辨交往情。
English: Yizhou leads to friendships, and the imperial lieutenant clearly distinguishes between relationships.

古文：岂若忻蓬荜，收志偶沉冥。 
现代文：岂若心喜蓬摹屋，约束心志同归隐。 
English: If one's heart is full of joy, one will be able to return to the hermitage.

古文：后诏兼太府少卿。
现代文：后来韶令兼太府少卿。
English: Later, he became Shoryo and Taifu Shokei.

古文：寻除征南将军、给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久任征南将军、给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was soon appointed as a general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and later became an attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：死于晋阳。
现代文：死于晋阳。
English: He died in Jinyang.

古文：所著诗赋碑诔，别有集录。
现代文：所写作的诗赋碑诛，另有集录。
English: The poems he wrote are inscribed on a monument, and there is also a collection.

古文：赠本将军、太常、殷州刺史。
现代文：追赠为本将军、太常、殷州刺史。
English: The posthumous awards were given to General Hon, Tai Chang, and Yinzhou Zhishi.

古文：齐受禅，重赠使持节、侍中、都督殷沧二州诸军事、车骑大将军、仪同三司，仍殷州刺史，谥曰文惠。
现代文：齐接受禅让，重新追赠为使持节、侍中、都督殷沧二州诸军事、车骑大将军、仪同三司，依然为殷州刺史，谧号为文惠。
English: They all accepted the zen concession, and were posthumously re-gifted to the military of the two states, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and the three departments of the Yin and Yang dynasties, who are still the history of Yinzhou, and the nickname is Wen Hui.

古文：骞弟希礼，字景节。
现代文：李骞的弟弟希礼，字景节。
English: Li Yao's younger brother, Xie Li, starred in the festival.

古文：武定末，通直散骑常侍。
现代文：武定末年，任通直散骑常侍。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was appointed as a samurai.

古文：希远庶长兄长剑，兴和中，梁州骠骑府长史。
现代文：希远的庶长兄长剑，兴和年间，任梁州骠骑府长史。
English: He was the son-in-law of his elder brother, Chang Jian, and served as the governor of Liangzhou during the Xinghe era.

古文：式弟弈，字景世。
现代文：李式的弟弟李弈，字景世。
English: The younger brother of Li style, Li Yi, is called Jing Shi.

古文：美容貌，有才艺。
现代文：容貌美好，有才能。
English: Good-looking, talented.

古文：早历显职，散骑常侍、宿卫监、都官尚书、安平侯。
现代文：早年历任显要官职，散骑常侍、宿卫监、都官尚书，被封为安平侯。
English: In his early years, he held various important official positions, such as horseback riding attendant, night watchman, and city official, and was given the title of Anping Hou.

古文：与兄敷同死。
现代文：与哥哥李敷同时被处死。
English: He was executed at the same time as his brother, Li Shiki.

古文：太和初，文明太后追念弈兄弟，仍诛李，存问宪等一二家，岁时赐以布帛。
现代文：太和初年，文明太后追念李弈兄弟，于是诛杀李弈，慰问李等三家，每年赐给布帛。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Empress Dowager Cunming remembered the Li Yi brothers, so she killed Li Yi and gave condolences to Li and other three families, and gave them cloth bags every year.

古文：弈别生弟冏，字道度。
现代文：李弈的庶弟李同，字道度。
English: Li Yi's brother-in-law, Li Tong, is a wordsmith.

古文：少为中散。
现代文：年轻时任中散。
English: When he was young, he was dismissed from his job.

古文：逃避得免。
现代文：逃避而得以免祸。
English: He was able to avoid the disaster by fleeing.

古文：太和中，拜下大夫、南部给事。
现代文：太和年间，任下大夫、南部给事。
English: During the Taiwa era, Nanbu was appointed to the post of doctor.

古文：出为龙骧将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：出任龙骧将军、南豫州刺史。
English: He served as the general of Longyu and the governor of South Yuzhou.

古文：还，拜冠军将军。
现代文：回朝，任冠军将军。
English: He returned to Japan as a champion general.

古文：寻除光禄大夫，守度支尚书。
现代文：不久任光禄大夫，守度支尚书。
English: He was soon appointed as a doctor of Guanglu, Shudoshin Shosho.

古文：二十一年，高祖幸长安，冏以咸阳山河险固，秦汉旧部，古称陆海，劝高祖去洛阳而都之。
现代文：二十一年，高祖去长安，李同以咸阳山川险阻，是秦汉两代的旧都，自古就是物产丰饶之地，劝高祖放弃洛阳而定都长安。
English: In 1921, Gao Zu went to Chang'an. Li Tong advised Gao Zu to give up Luoyang and make Chang'an the capital. Xianyang was the old capital of both the Qin and Han dynasties, and had been a land of bountiful produce since ancient times.

古文：后高祖引见，笑而谓之曰： 卿一昨有启，欲朕都此。
现代文：后来高祖接见他，笑着对他说： 你以前竟然有奏疏，想要我定都此地。
English: Later, Gaozu met him and said to him with a smile, "You used to have a sonorous voice, and you wanted me to stay here."

古文：昔娄敬一说，汉祖即日西驾。
现代文：昔日娄敬一劝说，汉高祖即日车驾西行。
English: Once upon a time, Zou Jing persuaded Henkel's founder to drive west that very day.

古文：尚书今以西京说朕，仍使朕不废东辕，当是献可理殊，所以今古相反耳。 
现代文：尚书你如今拿西京来劝说我，还是不能使我的车驾停止东行，必定是议论国事兴革的事理不同，所以今古相反。 
English: Shangshu, you are now taking the West Beijing to persuade me, but you still can't make my car stop going east, it must be a different reason for discussing the national reformation, so it's the opposite of ancient times.

古文：冏对曰： 昔汉高祖起于布衣，欲藉险以自固，娄敬之言，合于本旨。
现代文：李同回话说： 昔日汉高祖从百姓中兴起，想凭藉险阻来确保自己的安全，娄敬的主张，符合他原来的意图。
English: Li Tong replied: In the past, the Han Emperor Gaozu rose from the people and wanted to ensure his own safety by means of dangerous obstacles. Xie Jian's proposition is in line with his original intention.

古文：今陛下百世重光，德洽四海，事同隆周，均其职贡，是以愚臣献说，不能上动。 
现代文：如今陛下相承累世的辉光，恩德遍及四海，事业如同盛周，藩属都按时纳贡，因此我议论国事兴革，不能改变皇上的初衷。 
English: Today, His Majesty inherits the glories of past generations, benevolence pervades the four seas, business is booming, and the vassals of the domain pay tribute on time. Therefore, I cannot change the Emperor's original intention when I talk about national rejuvenation and reform.

古文：高祖大悦。
现代文：高祖大为喜悦。
English: Gaozu Daye.

古文：其年冏卒。
现代文：这一年李同去世。
English: This year, Li Tong passed away.

古文：赐钱二十万，布百匹，朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：赐给钱二十万，布一百匹，朝服一套，衣服一套。
English: He gave her two hundred thousand yuan in money, one hundred horses of cloth, a set of imperial robes, and a set of clothes.

古文：冏性鲠烈，敢直言，常面折高祖，弹驳公卿，无所回避，百僚皆惮之。
现代文：李同性情鲠直刚烈，敢于直言，常常对高祖犯颜直谏，弹劾驳斥公卿大臣，无所回避，百官都害怕他。
English: Li Jiaxing is straightforward and tough, dares to speak frankly, often insults Gao Zu, impeaches and refutes the minister of nobility, there is no way around it, and hundreds of officials are afraid of him.

古文：高祖常加优礼，故车驾巡幸，恆兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：高祖常常给予优待礼遇，所以皇上出巡，他一直兼任尚书右仆射。
English: Gaozu often gave preferential treatment, so when the emperor went on a tour, he always served as his right-hand man.

古文：虽才学不及诸兄，然公强当世，堪济过之。
现代文：虽然才能学识不如诸位兄长，然而公正刚强一时无人可比，济世的才能超过诸位兄长。
English: Although his academic ability is not as good as his elder brothers, his justice and strength are unparalleled, and his ability to benefit the world surpasses his elder brothers.

古文：子祐，字长禧。
现代文：儿子李祐，字长禧。
English: His son, Li Yu, goes by the name Changxi.

古文：笃穆友于，见称于世。
现代文：淳厚和睦友爱兄弟，受世人称扬。
English: Honest, harmonious, friendly and loving brothers, praised by the world.

古文：历位给事中、尚书祠部郎、相州抚军府长史、司空从事中郎、博陵太守。
现代文：历任给事中、尚书祠部郎、相州抚军府长史、司空从事中郎、博陵太守。
English: Among those who have held the post, there are Shang Shuxu, minister of shrines and temples, Sangshu Fudun, prefect of prefectures, Sikuo, middle-ranking official, and Boling, governor-general.

古文：所在亦以清干著称。
现代文：所居官职也以清廉干练著称。
English: The office he holds is also known for its cleanliness and efficiency.

古文：祐弟太，字季宁。
现代文：李祐的弟弟李太，字季宁。
English: Li Yu's younger brother, Li Tai, nicknamed Ji Ning, is also in the film.

古文：涉历书传。
现代文：涉猎典籍。
English: He dabbles in classic books.

古文：太尉行军员外郎。
现代文：任太尉行军员外郎。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain and became a military officer.

古文：顺弟修基，陈留太守。
现代文：李顺的弟弟修基，任陈留太守。
English: Li Shun's younger brother, Shuki, was appointed Chen Liu Taishu.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子探幽。
现代文：儿子探幽。
English: Son Tanyu.

古文：探幽兄子洪鸾，河间太守。
现代文：探幽哥哥的儿子洪鸾，任河间太守。
English: Tanyu's brother's son, Hong Hao, was appointed governor of Kawama Province.

古文：洪鸾孙悕杰，乐陵太守。
现代文：洪鸾的孙子悕杰，任乐陵太守。
English: Gong Jie, the grandson of Hong Jie, was appointed as the governor of Le Ling.

古文：武定中，以贪污赐死。
现代文：武定年间，因贪污被赐令自杀。
English: During the Wuding era, he was ordered to commit suicide for corruption.

古文：修基季弟恽，字善祖，小字药囊。
现代文：修基最小的弟弟恽，字善祖，小名曲。
English: Shuki's youngest brother, Shun, the character "Zenzu," sings a minor famous song.

古文：少有高名，为中书侍郎。
现代文：年轻时有盛名，任中书侍郎。
English: When he was young, he was well-known and was appointed as a junior secretary.

古文：从世祖征凉州，战没。
现代文：跟从世祖征讨凉皿，战死。
English: He followed his ancestor's quest for a sundae and died in battle.

古文：时人咸惜焉。
现代文：当时的人都惋惜他。
English: People at the time felt sorry for him.

古文：初顺与从兄灵，从弟孝伯并以学识器业见重于晨，故能砥砺宗族，竞名修尚。
现代文：起初李顺与堂兄李灵、堂弟孝伯都以才能学识被当时的人看重，因此能鼓励宗族的人，各人争相提高品德修养。
English: At the beginning, Li Shun, his cousin Li Ling, and his cousin Xiao Bo were all valued by the people at that time for their ability to learn, so they could encourage the people of the clan, and everyone competed to improve their moral cultivation.

古文：灵与族叔诜，族弟熙等俱被徵。
现代文：李灵与本家的叔父李说、本家的弟弟李熙等都被征召。
English: Li Ling and our uncle Li said that our younger brother Li Xi and others had been conscripted.

古文：事在高允《高士颂》。
现代文：事情记载在高允的《高士颂》。
English: The event is recorded in Gao Yun's "Song of Gao Shi Zong."

古文：诜，字令孙。
现代文：李诜，字令孙。
English: Li Lan, Ziringsun.

古文：京兆太守。
现代文：任京兆太守。
English: He was appointed the governor of Kyoto.

古文：诜后继。
现代文：李说后继。
English: Li said the successor.

古文：缺。
现代文：阙文。
English: That's it.

古文：秀林，小名榼。
现代文：秀林，小名植。
English: Shurin, small name planting.

古文：性强直。
现代文：生性刚强直率。
English: They are naturally strong and forthright.

古文：太和中，自中书博士为顿丘相，豪右畏之，试守博陵郡，抑强扶弱，政以威严为名。
现代文：太和年间，从中书博士任顿丘相，世家大户畏惧他。景明初年，试守博陵郡，抑强扶弱，政令以威严闻名。
English: During the Taiwa era, Chushaku hakase was appointed to the post of Tonkotsu, and he was feared by the great families. In the first year of the reign of King Jingming, he tried to defend Boling County, suppressing the strong and supporting the weak, and the government order was famous for its majesty.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：因母亲去世而辞去官职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：后为太尉谘议参军、假节、行荆州事。
现代文：后来任太尉谘议参军，假节，行荆州事。
English: Later, he was appointed captain to advise on joining the army, the holiday, and the state affairs.

古文：拜司徒司马，加冠军将军、定州大中正、太中大夫。
现代文：任司徒司马，加授冠军将军、定州大中正、太中大夫。
English: Ren Stus Sima, awarded the champion general, Dingzhou University Junior High School, Tai Junior High School doctor.

古文：正光中卒，年六十三。
现代文：正光年间去世，终年六十三岁。
English: Masamitsu died at the age of sixty-three.

古文：赠左将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：追赠为左将军、齐州刺史。
English: This matter was reported to the imperial court by a superior officer, and Gaozu allowed him to do so.

古文：子裔，字徽伯。
现代文：儿子李裔，字徽伯。
English: Son of Li Zi, surnamed Huibao.

古文：出后秀林兄凤林。
现代文：过继给秀林的哥哥凤林。
English: Succession to Xiulin's brother Fenglin.

古文：裔初除汝南王悦常侍，稍迁定州别驾。
现代文：李裔起初任汝南王元悦的常侍，逐渐升任定州别驾。
English: At the beginning, Li Zi served as the equerry of King Yuan Rong of Southern Yunnan, and gradually rose to the position of governor of Dingzhou.

古文：孝昌中，为定州镇军长史，加辅国将军，带博陵太守。
现代文：孝昌年间，任定州镇军长史，加授辅国将军，兼任博陵太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he was appointed the military governor of Dingzhou Town, promoted to vice-governor, and concurrently served as the governor of Boling.

古文：于时逆贼杜洛周侵乱州界，寻假平北将军，防城都督。
现代文：当时逆贼杜洛周侵犯本州地界，不久代理平北将军，防城都督。
English: At that time, the traitor Douluo Zhou violated the territorial boundaries of Honshu, and soon became the acting general of Pingbei and the governor of the city.

古文：贼既围城，裔潜引洛周，州遂陷没。
现代文：贼军包围城池以后，李裔暗中勾结洛周，本州于是陷落。
English: After the invaders surrounded the city, the Li people secretly colluded with Luo Zhou, and Honshu fell.

古文：洛周僭窃，特无纲纪，至于市令驿帅，咸以为王，呼曰市王，驿王。
现代文：洛周越分窃取名位，最没有纲纪，以至于集市和驿站的头目都封为王，称为市王、驿王。
English: Luo Zhou was the most undisciplined, stealing the most prestigious positions, so much so that the head of the market and the station were crowned as kings, known as the king of the city and the king of the country.

古文：乃封裔为定州王。
现代文：于是封李裔为定州王。
English: As a result, Li Zi was crowned King of Dingzhou.

古文：洛周寻为葛荣所灭，裔仍事荣。
现代文：洛周不久被葛荣消灭，李裔于是事奉葛荣。
English: Luo Zhou was soon annihilated by Ge Rong, and the Li family then served Ge Rong.

古文：永安初，尔朱荣既擒葛荣，遂絷裔及高敖曹、薜脩义、李无为等于晋阳。
现代文：永安初年，尔朱荣擒获葛荣以后，就把李裔和高敖曹、薛脩义、李无为等拘禁在晋阳。
English: In the first year of Yongan, after Er Zhu Rongqian won Ge Rong, he detained Li Zi and Gao Yao Cao, Xue Yu Yi, Li Muwaei and others in Jinyang.

古文：从荣至洛。
现代文：跟从尔朱荣到洛阳。
English: Follow from Lzhu Rong to Luoyang.

古文：荣死乃免。
现代文：氽朱荣死后才被释放。
English: Zhai Zhu Rong was only released after his death.

古文：普泰初，以裔为持节、散骑常侍、安北将军、兼给事黄门侍郎，慰劳山东大使。
现代文：普泰初年，任命李裔为持节、散骑常侍、安北将军、兼给事黄门侍郎、慰劳太行山以束大使。
English: In the first year of Putai, Li Zi was appointed as the festival-keeping, horseback riding attendant, Anbei general, Huangmen attendant, and Taigangshan Izuka ambassador.

古文：永熙中，除镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫、齐献武王大丞相谘议参军。
现代文：永熙年间，任镇束将军、金紫光禄大夫、齐献武王大丞相谘议参军。
English: During the Yongxi era, he was appointed as General Zhenzoku, Doctor Jin Ziguanglu and Minister Qi Xianwu to consult on joining the army.

古文：天平初，以预定策之功，封固安县开国伯，食邑四百户，加征东将军。
现代文：天平初年，以参与谋立的功劳，封为固安县开国伯，食邑四百户，加授征束将军。
English: In the first year of the Tianping era, he was awarded the title of Gu'an County's founding prefect, 400 households in the county were provided with food, and he was awarded the title of Conscript General.

古文：车驾迁鄴，为大行台右丞，留在洛阳，监修宫殿。
现代文：皇上迁都邺城，李裔任大行台右丞，留在渔阳，监督修造宫殿。
English: When the emperor moved the capital to Shicheng, Li Zi served as the Grand Marshal of Taiwu, remaining in Yuyang to supervise the construction of the palace.

古文：寻除使持节、大将军、陕州刺史。
现代文：不久任使持节、大将军、陕州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as envoy, grand general, and governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：四年八月，宇文黑獭攻陷州城，被执见害，年五十。
现代文：四年八月，字文黑獭攻占州城，被捉拿遇害，终年五十岁。
English: In August of the fourth year, Zhe Wen Hei captured the state capital, was captured and killed, and died at the age of fifty.

古文：诏赠使持节、都督定冀瀛殷四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书令、司徒公、定州刺史。
现代文：诏令追赠为使持节、都督定冀瀛殷四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书令、司徒公、定州刺史。
English: The imperial edict posthumously bestowed the following awards for the Envoy's Day: the military of the four prefectures, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal and the grand marshal.

古文：子直，袭。
现代文：儿子李直，继承爵位。
English: His son, Li Zhi, inherited the title.

古文：武定末，司徒属。
现代文：武定末年，任司徒属。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was appointed as a subordinate of Sittu.

古文：齐受禅，例降。
现代文：齐接受惮让，依照惯例降低爵位。
English: After accepting the compromise, the peerage was reduced as usual.

古文：裔弟景义，大司马谘议参军、殷州大中正。
现代文：李裔的弟弟景义，任大司马谘议参军、殷州大中正。
English: Li Zi's younger brother, Jing Yi, was appointed as the senior secretary of the Ma Advisory Committee to join the army, and graduated from the Middle School of Yinzhou University.

古文：景义弟伯穆，武定末，合州刺史。
现代文：景义的弟弟伯穆，武定末年，任合州刺史。
English: Jingyi's younger brother Bo Mu, in the last years of Wuding's reign, was appointed as the governor of Hezhou.

古文：秀林从弟焕，字仲文，小字丑瑰。
现代文：秀林的堂弟李焕，字仲文，小名丑瓖。
English: Xiulin's cousin Li Huan, nicknamed "Zhongwen" (中文), is a famous clown.

古文：有干用。
现代文：有才干。
English: Talented.

古文：少与郦道元俱为李彪所知。
现代文：年轻时与郦道元一同为李彪所赏识。
English: When he was young, he was admired by Li Biao along with Gong Dogen.

古文：自给事中转治书侍御史。
现代文：从给事中改任治书侍御史。
English: He was reassigned to the post of secretary to the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：恆州刺史穆泰据代都谋反，高祖诏焕与任城王澄推治之。
现代文：恒州刺史穆泰占据代都谋反，高祖命令李焕与任城王元澄审问他并治罪。
English: Hengzhou ruler Shumutai occupied the capital on behalf of the rebellion, Gaozhu ordered Li Huan and the appointed king of the city, Yuancheng, to interrogate and punish him.

古文：焕先驱至州，宣旨晓喻，仍诛泰等。
现代文：李焕先驰马到恒州，宣旨晓谕，于是诛杀穆泰等人。
English: Li Huan first rode to Hengzhou to proclaim the edict, and then killed Mu Tai and others.

古文：景明初，迁司空从事中郎，萧宝卷豫州刺史裴叔业以寿春归附，诏焕以本官为军司，与杨大眼、奚康生等率众迎接。
现代文：景明初年，升任司空从事中郎。萧宝卷的豫州刺史裴叔业献出寿春归附，诏令李焕以现任官职为军司，与杨大眼、奚康生等人率领军队迎接。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingming, Li Huan was promoted to the position of the second-in-command and served as the second-in-command. Xiao Bao's poem "Yuzhou Shishi Pei Shuye" dedicated to Shuchun was added, and Li Huan was ordered to take the current official position as the military secretary, and led the army to meet with Yang Dajian, Zou Kang Sheng and others.

古文：焕至淮西，叔业兄子植遣使送质。
现代文：李焕到达淮水以西，叔业哥哥的儿子裴植派遣使者送人质。
English: When Li Huan arrived west of Huai Shui, his uncle's brother's son, Pei Zhi, sent an envoy to take the hostages.

古文：焕等济师，入城抚慰，民咸忻悦。
现代文：李焕等人的军队渡水，入城抚慰，百姓都喜悦。
English: The army of Li Huan and others crossed the water and entered the city to comfort the people, and the people were delighted.

古文：仍行杨州事，赐爵容城伯。
现代文：于是行扬州事，赐给爵位容城伯。
English: As a result, Yangzhou affairs were carried out and the title of Yongcheng was given to him.

古文：军还，行河内郡事。
现代文：军队返回，行河内郡事。
English: The troops returned and went to Hanoi County.

古文：拜司徒右长史。
现代文：任司徒右长史。
English: He was appointed to the post of chief historian.

古文：以荆蛮扰动，敕焕兼散骑常侍慰劳之，降者万余家。
现代文：由于荆蛮骚动，敕令李焕兼任散骑常侍安慰问候他们，投降的有一万多家。
English: Due to the violent turmoil in Jing, the emperor ordered Li Huan, who also served as a straggler, to comfort and greet them, and more than 10,000 people surrendered.

古文：除辅国将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：任辅国将军、梁州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Fu Guo Province, and the history of Liangzhou was written.

古文：时武兴氐杨集起举兵作逆，令弟集义邀断白马戍。
现代文：当时武兴氏人杨集起起兵作乱，派弟弟集义阻断白马戍。
English: At that time, Yang Ji, a member of the Wuxing clan, raised an army to create a disturbance and sent his younger brother to block the White Horse Pass.

古文：敕假焕西将军，督别将石长乐、统军王佑等与军司苟金养俱讨之，大破集起军。
现代文：敕令授予李焕平西将军，统领别将石长乐、统军王佑等人与军司苟金养一同讨伐集起，大败他的军队。
English: The imperial edict was given to General Li Huanping of the West, and the commander-in-chief ordered Shi Changle, Wang You of the United Army, and others to fight together with the military secretary, Gou Jin Yao, and defeated his army.

古文：会秦州民吕苟兒反，焕仍令长乐等由麦积崖赴援。
现代文：正逢秦州百姓吕苟儿造反，李焕于是命令长乐等人从麦积崖前往救援。
English: When the Qin people rebelled against Lü Guor, Li Huan ordered Changle and others to go to the rescue from the wheat cliff.

古文：属都督元丽至，遂共平之。
现代文：适逢都督元丽来到，于是共同平定反贼。
English: When the governor of the capital, Yuan Li, arrived, they worked together to quell the rebels.

古文：时氐王杨定进犹据方山，与苟兒影响，焕密募氐赵芒路斩定进。
现代文：当时氐人头领杨定进还占据方山，与苟儿呼应，李焕秘密招募氐人趟芒路斩杀定进。
English: At that time, Yang Dingjin, the leader of the Xiang people, still occupied Fangshan. Echoing Gou'er, Li Huan secretly recruited Xiang people to go to Meng Road to kill Dingjin.

古文：还朝，遇患卒，时年四十四。
现代文：回朝，生病去世，当时四十四岁。
English: Returning to China, he fell ill and died at the age of forty-four.

古文：赠征虏将军、幽州刺史，谥曰昭。
现代文：追赠为征虏将军、幽州刺史，谧号为昭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Conscript General and Yuzhou Assassin, and his posthumous name was Zhao.

古文：子密，武定中，襄州刺史秀林族子肃，字彦邕。
现代文：儿子李密，武定年间，任襄州刺史。秀林同族兄弟的儿子肃，字彦邕。
English: The son of Li Mi, during the Wuding period, was appointed as the governor of Xiangzhou. The son of Xiulin's brothers, Su, was called Yan Xuan.

古文：历奉朝请、清河王怿郎中令。
现代文：历任奉朝请，渣回王元堡的郎中令。
English: Successive ministers of the imperial court, please, go back to the castle of Wangyuan.

古文：稍迁洛阳令、步兵校尉、员外常侍。
现代文：逐渐升任盗阳县令、步兵校尉、员外常侍。
English: He was gradually promoted to Poyang County Governor, Infantry Lieutenant, and Non-commissioned Officer.

古文：初谄附侍中元晖，后以左道事侍中穆绍。
现代文：起初逢迎趋附侍中元晖，后来用旁门左道事奉侍中墨蝴。
English: At first, Feng Yingchen accompanied the attendant Zhongyuan Yao, and later used the side door to the left to serve the attendant Zhongyubiao.

古文：常裸身披发，画腹衔刀，于隐屏之处为绍求福，故绍爱之。
现代文：常常裸身披发，腹上作画中衔刀，在隐避之处为穆绍求福，所以穆绍喜欢他。
English: He liked him because he was often naked, wore his hair in a bun, had a knife drawn on his stomach, and prayed for blessings for him in secluded places.

古文：延昌四年，荐肃为黄门郎，加光禄大夫。
现代文：延昌四年，举荐李肃为黄门郎，加授光禄大夫。
English: In the fourth year of Yanchang, Li Su was recommended as Huangmen Lang and awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：肃为性酒狂，熙平初从灵太后幸江阳王继第，肃时侍饮，颇醉，言辞不逊，抗辱太傅、清河王怿，为有司弹劾。
现代文：李肃是纵酒使气的人，熙平初年跟从灵太后到江阳王元继的府第，李肃当时陪侍饮酒，略醉，言辞不逊，侮辱太傅、清河王元惮，被有关官员弹劾。
English: Li Su was a hard drinker. In the first year of Xi Ping, he followed the Empress Dowager Ling to the palace of King Yuan of Jiangyang. At that time, Li Su accompanied the attendants to drink, got a little drunk, spoke harshly, insulted Taifu and King Yuan of Qinghe, and was impeached by the relevant officials.

古文：灵太后怒之，出为章武内史。
现代文：灵太后谴责他，使他外任为章武内史。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling condemned him and had him appointed to the position of Zhangwu Naishi.

古文：岁余，迁右将军、夏州刺史，卒，赠左将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：一年多后，升任右将军、夏州刺史。去世，追赠为左将军、齐州刺史。
English: More than a year later, he was promoted to the right general, Cai Zhou Zhishi. He died and was posthumously given the left general, Cai Zhou Zhishi.

古文：肃从弟曒，字景林。
现代文：李肃的堂弟李暾，字景林。
English: Li Su's cousin Li Yao, Zhejing Lin.

古文：有学识。
现代文：有学识。
English: Knowledgeable.

古文：初除奉朝请、太学博士、司空主薄。
现代文：起初任奉朝请，太学博士、司空主簿。
English: At first, he was assigned to the Imperial Household Agency, Doctor of the Imperial Academy of Sciences, and the main bookkeeper of Siku.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：因母亲去世而辞职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：服阕，拜左将军。
现代文：服丧期满，任左军将军。
English: At the end of his term of mourning, he was appointed General of the Left Army.

古文：正光中，元叉以其弟罗为青州刺史，曒为罗平东府长史。
现代文：正光年间，元叉任命他的弟弟元罗为青州刺史，李暾为元罗的平束府长史。
English: During the reign of Zheng Guang, Yuan Zha appointed his younger brother Yuan Luo as the governor of Qingzhou, and Li Xi as the governor of Pingzukfu.

古文：迁廷尉少卿、殷州大中正。
现代文：升任廷尉少卿、殷州大中正。
English: He was promoted to Imperial Lieutenant, Junior Secretary, and then to Senior Middle School Teacher of Yinzhou University.

古文：孝昌二年冬，卒，年五十七。
现代文：孝昌二年冬，去世，终年五十七岁。
English: Xiaochang died in the winter of the second year, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：赠平东将军、齐州刺史，谥曰宣。
现代文：追赠为平东将军、齐州刺史，谧号为宣。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General Pingdong and General Qi Zhou, and his posthumous name was Xuan.

古文：子慎，武定中，东平太守。
现代文：儿子李慎，武定年间，任东平太守。
English: His son, Li Shen, became the governor of Dongping during the reign of Wu Ding.

古文：曒从弟仲旋，奉朝请、定雍二州长史、太尉谘议、中散、太中大夫、东郡汲郡二郡太守、司徒左长史、弘农太守。
现代文：李曒的堂弟仲旋，任奉朝请、定雍二州长史、太尉谘议、中散、太中大夫、束郡汲郡二郡太守、司徒左长史、弘农太守。
English: Li Yao's cousin Zhong Zuo was appointed to serve the imperial court, followed by Ding Yong, the second governor of Guizhou, the second lieutenant of Guizhou, Zhong San, the second lieutenant of Guizhou, the second governor of Guizhou County, Szeto Zuo, the second governor of Guizhou County, the second governor of Guizhou County, and the second governor of Guizhou.

古文：先是，宫牛二姓阻险为害，仲旋示以威惠，并即归伏。
现代文：先前，宫牛二姓人家凭据险要为害，仲旋显示声威和恩泽，都立即归附。
English: Previously, the two surnames of Miyagyu were at risk of being harmed, and the interplay showed prestige and favor, both of which were immediately attached.

古文：还除卫将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：回朝任卫将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He returned to the imperial court as the general of the Imperial Guards and the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：仍除北雍州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：又任北雍少刺史，将军一职照旧。
English: He was also appointed to be the Beiyong Minor Historian, and retained his position as a general.

古文：转车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：改任车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: He was reassigned to the post of chariot and cavalry general, and to the post of doctor of agriculture.

古文：天平初，迁都于鄴，以仲旋为营构将作，进号卫大将军。
现代文：天平初年，迁都邺城，任命仲旋为营构将作，进升官号为卫大将军。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, the capital was moved to Yeongseong, and Chunghwa was appointed as the commander-in-chief. He was promoted to the rank of General of the Guards.

古文：出除车骑大将军、兗州刺史。
现代文：出任车骑大将军、兖州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the cavalry general and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：仲旋以孔子庙墙宇颇有颓毁，遂修改焉。
现代文：仲旋因孔子庙墙壁屋宇多有坍塌毁坏，于是修缮改建。
English: Due to the collapse of the walls of the Confucius Temple, most of the buildings were damaged, so they were repaired and rebuilt.

古文：还，除将作大匠。
现代文：回朝，任将作大匠。
English: When he returned to Japan, he was appointed as the grand master of singing.

古文：所历并清勤有声。
现代文：所任官职都清廉勤勉有声誉。
English: All the officials are clean, diligent and have a good reputation.

古文：年六十六，卒。
现代文：六十六岁那年去世。
English: He died at the age of sixty-six.

古文：赠骠骑大将军，仪同三司，青州刺史。
现代文：追赠为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、青州刺史。
English: As a follow-up gift, the general of the imperial cavalry, the three divisions of the imperial etiquette, and the history of Qingzhou were presented.

古文：子希良，侍御史。
现代文：儿子希良，任侍御史。
English: His son, Hira, was appointed to the post of courtier to the Emperor.

古文：诜从子善，犯孝静讳。
现代文：李诜的侄子李善，犯了孝静帝名讳。
English: Li Xuan's nephew, Li Shan, made a name for himself as the Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：赵郡太守。
现代文：任赵郡太守。
English: He was appointed the governor of Zhao County.

古文：子显进，州主簿。
现代文：儿子显进，任州主簿。
English: His son, Henkin, became the state chief accountant.

古文：显进子映，字辉道。
现代文：显进的儿子李映，字辉道。
English: Hsien-jin's son, Li Ying, plays the role of Zi Hui.

古文：南安王国常侍、光州征虏府主簿、相州治中、宁朔将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：任南安王国常侍、光业征虏府主簿、相州治中、宁朔将军、步兵校尉。
English: He served as the attendant of the Kingdom of Nan'an, the chief bookkeeper of the Kwangye Conscription Headquarters, the Vice-Governor of Sangju, the General of Ningshuo, and the Infantry Lieutenant.

古文：孝昌三年冬卒，年四十二。
现代文：孝昌三年冬去世，终年四十二岁。
English: Xiaochang died in the winter of 2003, at the age of forty-two.

古文：天平中，赠通直散骑常侍、辅国将军、殷州刺史。
现代文：天平年间，追赠为通直散骑常侍、辅国将军、殷州刺史。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Tsuchizane Sanzhijishi no Tsuneishi, Fuukoku no Shogun, and Yinzhou no Shishi.

古文：子普济，武定中，北海太守。
现代文：儿子普济，武定年间，任北海太守。
English: His son, Puji, became the governor of the North Sea during the Wuding era.

古文：映弟育，字仲远。
现代文：李映的弟弟李育，字仲远。
English: Li Ying's younger brother, Li Yu, is a distant cousin.

古文：奉朝请。
现代文：任奉朝请。
English: I'd like to work for the government, please.

古文：稍迁杨烈将军、奉东都尉、都督相州防城别将。
现代文：逐渐升任扬烈将军、奉车都尉、都督相州防城别将。
English: He was gradually promoted to the rank of General Yang Rong, Lieutenant of Fengche, and General of the Provincial Defense.

古文：以拒葛荣之勋，赐爵赵郡公。
现代文：用来对抗葛荣的功劳，赐给爵位为趟郡公。
English: He was given the title of county magistrate for his efforts to oppose Ge Rong.

古文：后除征东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：后来任征东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Later, he was appointed as General of the Expedition to the East and Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：天平四年夏卒，年五十七。
现代文：天平四年夏季去世，终年五十七岁。
English: Tianping passed away in the summer of 2004, at the age of 57.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、都官尚书、定州刺史，谥曰贞。
现代文：追赠为骠骑大将军、都官尚书、定州刺史，谧号为贞。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Horse, Senior Official of the Capital, and Historian of Dingzhou, and his posthumous name was Zhen.

古文：子惜，袭。
现代文：儿子李惜，继承爵位。
English: His son, Li Zhan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定末，齐文襄王大将军府记室参军。
现代文：武定末年，任齐文襄王大将军府记室参军。
English: At the end of Wu Ding's life, Qi Wenxiang Wangda was appointed to join the army from the General's Office of Records.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐接受惮让，爵位依照惯例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：显进弟恃显，位至左中郎将。
现代文：显进的弟弟恃显，官至左中郎将。
English: Henshin's younger brother, Shun Henshin, rose to the rank of left middle-rank general.

古文：卒，赠中垒将军、安州刺史。
现代文：去世后，追赠为中垒将军、安州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Middle Camp and Anzhou Sashimi.

古文：恃显养京兆王愉妾杨氏为女，愉改杨姓为李，而亲念恃显。
现代文：恃显收养京兆王元愉的妾杨氏为女儿，元愉改杨姓为李姓，因而亲近思念恃显。
English: Yu Xian adopted Yang, the concubine of the King of Jing Zhao, Yuan Yu, as his daughter. Yuan Yu changed his surname from Yang to Li, and thus became close to Yu Xian.

古文：恃显子道舒与愉同逆。
现代文：恃显的儿子道舒与元愉共同叛逆。
English: Gong Xian's son Daoshu and Yuan You jointly rebelled.

古文：愉败，走免。
现代文：元愉失败，道舒逃脱。
English: Yuan Yu failed, Doushu escaped.

古文：第三子道璩，武定末，范阳太守。
现代文：第三个儿子道璩，武定末年，任范阳太守。
English: The third son, Daojun, was appointed Fanyang Taishu in the last years of Wuding.

古文：道璩弟道瓘，少以父谴被刑，位至中常侍。
现代文：道璩的弟弟道瓘，年轻时因父亲的过错受处罚，官至中常侍。
English: Doushun's younger brother, Doushun, was punished for his father's mistakes when he was young, and rose to the rank of middle attendant.

古文：恃显弟晔，字季显，涉历书史。
现代文：恃显的弟弟李晔，宇季显，涉猎经史书籍。
English: Yu Xian's younger brother, Li Yu, also known as Yu Ji Xian, is an avid reader of books on Chinese history.

古文：司徒行参军。
现代文：任司徒行参军。
English: Ren Sittu marched into the army.

古文：稍迁济州辅国府长史。
现代文：逐渐升任济州辅国府长史。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of governor of Jeju Province.

古文：坐兄事免。
现代文：因哥哥的事获罪免官。
English: He was exonerated because of his brother.

古文：后除尚书中兵郎，迁冠军，中散大夫。
现代文：后来任尚书中兵郎，升任冠军、中散大夫。
English: Later, he was appointed as Shosho's soldier, champion, and Nakasanzo's doctor.

古文：正光二年，南荆州刺史桓叔兴驱掠城民，叛入萧衍。衍资以兵粮，令筑谷陂城以立洛州，逼土山戍。
现代文：正光二年，南荆州刺史桓叔兴驱赶掠夺城民，叛投萧衍，萧衍供给兵粮，命令修筑谷陂城以设立洛州，威胁土山戍。
English: In the second year of Zhengguang, the Southern Jing State assassinated Shih Huan Shuxing, drove out and plundered the townspeople, rebelled against Xiao Yan, Xiao Yan supplied soldiers with grain, ordered the construction of Guyeye City to establish Luozhou, and threatened the soil and mountains.

古文：诏晔持节，兼尚书左丞为行台，督诸军讨叔兴，大破之。
现代文：诏令李晔持节、兼尚书左丞为行台，统领各军讨伐叔兴，大败敌军。
English: He ordered Li Xizhi Jie and Shangshu Zuojo to march to the capital and lead the army to fight against Shuxing, defeating the enemy army.

古文：乘胜拔谷陂，叔兴退走。
现代文：乘胜攻克谷陂，叔兴退走。
English: Taking advantage of the victory to conquer Kegui, Shuxing retreated.

古文：军还，仍除尚书左丞。
现代文：军队返回，仍然任尚书左丞。
English: When the army returned, he was still serving as Shangshu Zuo.

古文：出除洛州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：出任洛州刺史，将军一职照旧。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Lozhou, but retained his position as a general.

古文：未拜，卒。
现代文：还未就任，就去世了。
English: Taiming died in his first year in office at the age of fifty.

古文：赠左将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：追赠为左将军、齐州刺史。
English: This matter was reported to the imperial court by a superior officer, and Gaozu allowed him to do so.

古文：子晖宾，美容貌，宽和沉雅。
现代文：儿子晖宾，容貌美好，宽厚温和深沉雅正。
English: His son, Hao Bin, is good-looking, generous, gentle, profound and elegant.

古文：太学博士。
现代文：任太学博士。
English: He was appointed as Taigaku hakase.

古文：晖宾弟山儒，少而清立，学涉群书。
现代文：晖宾的弟弟山儒，年轻而清高特立，博览群书。
English: Zhibin's younger brother, Sanju, is young and bright, with an affinity for books.

古文：山儒少弟大盖。
现代文：山儒的小弟弟大盖。
English: Mountain man's little brother, Big.

古文：并早卒。
现代文：都过早去世。
English: Both died early.

古文：晔族弟孝怡，字悦宗。
现代文：李晔本家族的弟弟孝怡，字悦宗。
English: The younger brother of Li Yiming's family, Xiao Yi, goes by the name Yue Zong.

古文：中书学生、相州高阳王雍主簿、广陵王羽掾、新蔡太守、别将萧宝夤长史。
现代文：任中书学生、相州高阳王元雍的主簿、广陵王元羽的属官、新蔡太守、别将萧宝夤的长史。
English: The long history of Xiao Baojun, who served as a middle school student, the chief secretary of Wang Yuanyang in Gaoyang, the subordinate officer of Wang Yuanyu in Guangling, the new Cai Taizhou, and the second-in-command.

古文：从中山王英破萧衍临川王萧宏于梁城。
现代文：跟从中山王元英在梁城打败萧衍的临川王萧宏。
English: From Zhongshan Wang Yuanying to Linchuan Wang Xiaohong, who defeated Xiao Yan in Liangcheng.

古文：除朔州安北府长史，又为中坚将军、相州镇北府长史。
现代文：任朔州安北府长史，又任中坚将军、相州镇北府长史。
English: He served as the governor of Anbei Prefecture of Shuozhou, and also served as a key general and the governor of Beifu Prefecture of Xiangzhou Town.

古文：迁冠军将军、魏郡太守。
现代文：升任冠军将军、魏郡太守。
English: He was promoted to Champion General and Wei County Governor.

古文：相州刺史、中山王熙据鄴起兵也，孝怡阴结募城民与熙长史柳元章、别驾游荆之等率众擒熙，赏爵昌乐伯。
现代文：相州刺史、中山王元熙占据邺城起兵，孝怡暗中招募集聚城民与元熙的长史柳元章、别驾游荆之等率领众人擒获元熙，被赏给爵位为吕乐伯。
English: The Prince of Xiangzhou and Zhongshan, King Yuanxi, occupied Lucheng and raised an army. Xiao Yi secretly recruited and gathered the people of the city, and Yuanxi's Long Shi, Liu Yuanzhang, Beie Youjing, and others led the people to capture Yuanxi, and was awarded the title of Lü Le Bo.

古文：灵太后反政，以孝怡叉党，除名为民。
现代文：灵太后重新执政，把孝怡作为元叉的同党，取消原有的身份而成为平民。
English: After Lingdai regained power, she made Xiao Yi a member of the same party as Yuan Xuan, cancelled her original identity and became a commoner.

古文：后安乐王鉴镇鄴，起孝怡为别将。
现代文：后来安乐王元鉴镇守邺城，起用孝怡为别将。
English: Later, Anle Wang Yuanjian was appointed to guard Lucheng, with Xiaoyi as his second-in-command.

古文：永安初，除左将军、太中大夫，仍为防城都督。
现代文：永安初年，任左将军、太中大夫，又任防城都督。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he was appointed General of the Left, Grand Vice Admiral, and Governor of Fangcheng.

古文：以拒葛荣之勋，赐爵赵郡公，拜抚军将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：以抵挡葛荣的功劳，赐爵赵郡公，授予抚军将军、光禄大夫。
English: For his service in resisting Ge Rong, Zhao Gu Gong was given a knighthood, while General Fuzhuan and Doctor Guanglu were awarded.

古文：永安三年，行殷州事。
现代文：永安三年，代理殷州事。
English: Yongan for three years, acting for Yinzhou.

古文：迁骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：升任骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫。
English: He was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry and Doctor of the Left Hand.

古文：武定六年卒，八十。
现代文：武定六年去世，八十岁。
English: Wu Ding died six years later, at the age of eighty.

古文：子思道，仪同开府中兵参军，武城县公。
现代文：儿子思道，是仪同开府中兵参军，武城县公。
English: His son, Sido, joined the army at the same time as the soldiers from Kaifu and became the governor of Wucheng County.

古文：熙，字仲熙。
现代文：李熙，字仲熙。
English: Li Xi, also known as Zhong Xi.

古文：神中，与高允等俱被徵，拜中书博士，转侍郎。
现代文：神年间，与高允等人一同被召，任中书博士，改任侍郎。
English: During the Shinshaku era, he was called up together with Gao Yun and others, appointed as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy, and changed to a chamberlain.

古文：以使沮渠有功，赐爵元氏子，加中垒将军。
现代文：因出使沮渠有功。被赐给爵位为元氏子，加授中垒将军。
English: He was given a peerage as a member of the former clan, and was also awarded the title of General of the Middle Camp.

古文：卒，赠镇东将军、豫州刺史，谥曰庄。
现代文：去世后，追赠为镇东将军、豫州刺史，谧号为庄。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhendong General and Yuzhou Zhishi, and his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：子季主，袭。
现代文：儿子季主，继承爵位。
English: His son, the lord of the quarter, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：卒。赠青州刺史，谥曰贞。
现代文：去世后，追赠为青州刺史，谧号为贞。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Qingzhou Zhishi" and his nickname was "Zhong."

古文：子遗元，袭。
现代文：儿子遣元，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Yuan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：初除冀州赵郡王干东阁祭酒，累转尚书左民郎中、冀州京兆王愉功曹参军，带扶柳令。
现代文：起初任冀州赵郡王元干的东合祭酒，多次改任尚书左民郎中、冀州京兆王元愉的功曹参军，兼任扶柳县令。
English: At first, he was appointed as the Donghe Festival liquor of Wang Yuangan of Zhao County, Jizhou, and was repeatedly reappointed as the Shangshu Zuomin Langzhong, the Gong Cao of Wang Yuan Yuan of Jizhou, and also served as the governor of Fuliu County.

古文：为愉所亲，逼与同反。
现代文：为元愉所信任，逼迫与他一同反叛。
English: He trusted Yuan Yu and forced him to rebel with him.

古文：愉败，遗元逃窜，会赦乃雪。
现代文：元愉失败，遣元逃窜，遇到大赦才得昭雪。
English: Yuan Rong failed, Yuan Rong fled, and Yuan Rong was pardoned only after an amnesty.

古文：复除兗州平东府长史。
现代文：又任兖州平柬府长史。
English: He also served as the governor of Bozhou Pingkang Prefecture.

古文：后拜中坚将军、殷州征北将军长史。
现代文：后来任中坚将军、殷州征北将军长史。
English: Later, he served as a mid-level general, and was the leader of the northern expeditionary force to invade Yinzhou.

古文：卒，年六十三。
现代文：去世，终年六十三岁。
English: Sun Jue died at the age of sixty-three.

古文：赠征北将军、定州刺史。
现代文：追赠为征北将军、定州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Northern Expeditionary General" and "History of the Siege of Dingzhou."

古文：子恃宁，以父事被刑。
现代文：儿子恃宁，由于父亲的事受到处罚。
English: Son Huning was punished because of his father.

古文：武定末，官至中尹。
现代文：武定末年，官位达到中尹。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, his official rank rose to Middle Yin.

古文：恃宁弟子宁，袭爵。
现代文：恃宁的弟弟子宁，继承爵位。
English: Huning's younger brother, Disciple Ning, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：开府默曹参军。
现代文：任开府默曹参军。
English: Ren Kaifu silently joined the army.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依照惯例下降。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：熙族孙兰和，自右将军历平阳、勃海二郡太守。
现代文：李熙本家族的孙子兰和，从右军将军历任平腥、攰迤二郡太守。
English: Lan He, the grandson of Li Heibon's family, was a general in the right wing army and later became the governor of Handan County.

古文：兰和弟兰集，平昌太守。
现代文：兰和的弟弟兰集，任平昌太守。
English: Lan He's younger brother, Lan Ji, was appointed PyeongChang's governor.

古文：熙族孙同轨。
现代文：李熙本家族的孙子同轨。
English: Li Xi, the grandson of the original family, is on the same track.

古文：体貌魁岸，腰带十围。
现代文：身材魁伟，束衣的带子十围长。
English: He is a tall man, and the cords of his tunic are ten times as long.

古文：学综诸经，多所治诵，兼读释氏，又好医术。
现代文：学习包括诸经，大多都可以诵读，同时阅读佛教典籍，又喜欢医术。
English: His studies include the scriptures, most of which he can recite, as well as reading Buddhist classics, and he also likes medicine.

古文：年二十二，举秀才，射策，除奉朝请，领国子助教。
现代文：二十二岁，被举荐为秀才，通过射策考试，任奉朝请，领国子助教。
English: At the age of twenty-two, he was recommended as an outstanding talent, passed the shooting test, and was appointed as an assistant teacher.

古文：转著作郎，典仪注，修国史。
现代文：改任著作郎，掌管礼仪制度，编修国史。
English: He was reappointed as chancellor, in charge of the etiquette system, and compiled the national history.

古文：迁国子博士，加征虏将军。
现代文：升任国子博士，加授征虏将军。
English: He was promoted to Dr. Kuniko and given the additional title of Conscript General.

古文：永熙二年，出帝幸平等寺。僧徒讲说，敕同轨论难。音韵闲朗，往复可观，出帝善之。
现代文：永熙二年，出帝前往平等寺，僧众讲经说法，令同轨参与辩论，他音调优雅清朗答辩精采，出帝称赞他。
English: In the second year of Yongxi, Emperor Xuanzong went to Byungdaw Temple. The monks recited sutras and invited their peers to participate in the debate. His tone was elegant, clear and eloquent. Emperor Xuanzong praised him.

古文：三年春释菜，诏延公卿学官于显阳殿，敕祭酒刘廞讲孝经，黄门李郁讲《礼记》，中书舍人卢景宣解《大戴礼》《夏小正》篇。
现代文：三年春祭祀先圣先师，令延请公卿人臣学官到显阳殿，令祭酒刘厂讲《孝经》，黄门李郁讲《礼记》，中书舍人卢景宣讲《大戴礼夏小正》篇。
English: In the Spring Festival of the third year, the prelate was invited to the Hsien Yang Palace, and the lords, courtiers, and scholars were invited to attend the ceremony. The sacrificial wine Liu Zhuang gave a lecture on "The Book of Filial Piety," the Yellow Gate Li Yu gave a lecture on "The Book of Rites," and Lu Jing, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, gave a lecture on "The Great Reverence of Xia Xiao Zheng."

古文：时广招儒学，引令预听。
现代文：当时广泛招引儒家学者，让他们参预听讲。
English: At that time, Confucian scholars were widely invited to attend the lecture.

古文：同轨经义素优，辩析兼美，而不得执经，深为慨恨。
现代文：同轨的经书义理向来出众，辩论分析都擅长，却不能手持经书演讲，深为感慨遗憾。
English: Those who are on the same track of sutra doctrine have always been outstanding, and they are good at debate and analysis, but they can't hold sutra lectures, which is deeply regrettable.

古文：天平中，转中书侍郎。
现代文：天平年间，改任中书侍郎。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he was reassigned to the position of junior secretary.

古文：兴和中，兼通直散骑常侍，使萧衍。衍深耽释学，遂集名僧于其爱敬、同泰二寺，讲《涅盘大品经》，引同轨预席，衍兼遣其臣并共观听。
现代文：兴和年间，兼任通直散骑常侍，出使梁朝，萧衍很爱佛学，于是招名僧到爱敬、同泰二寺，讲说《涅槃大品经》，招同轨与二僧同席，萧衍又派遣他的臣僚都一同观听。
English: During the Xinghe period, he also served as the attendant of Tongzhi Sanzhi, dispatched by the Liang Dynasty, and Xiao Yan was very fond of Buddhism, so he invited famous monks to the two temples of Ai Jing and Tongtai to speak about the "Nirvana Grand Text" and invited them to sit at the same table with the two monks. Xiao Yan also sent his ministers to watch together.

古文：同轨论难久之，道俗咸以为善。
现代文：同轨辩论许久，出家之人和世俗之人都认为好。
English: The debate on the same track has been going on for a long time, and both monastics and secular people think it is good.

古文：卢景裕卒，齐献武王引同轨在馆教诸公子，甚嘉礼之。每旦入授，日暮始归。
现代文：卢景裕去世，齐献武王招同轨在学馆教授诸公子，甚表礼遇，每日天亮进去教授，曰暮才回家。
English: After the death of Lu Jingyu, all the princes who taught at the academy together with King Wu Zha were treated with great courtesy. Every day, they went in at dawn to teach, and only came home at dusk.

古文：缁素请业者，同轨夜为解说，四时恆尔，不以为倦。
现代文：僧人和俗众请教学业的，同轨夜晚给予解释说明，四季常常这样，不嫌疲劳。
English: Monks and lay people are invited to the teaching, the same track in the evening to give an explanation, the four seasons are often like this, do not like fatigue.

古文：武定四年夏卒，年四十七，时人伤惜之。
现代文：武定四年夏去世，终年四十七岁，当时的人为他哀伤惋惜。
English: Wu Ding died in the summer of the fourth year of his reign, at the age of forty-seven. People at the time mourned for him.

古文：齐献武王亦殊嗟悼，赙禭甚厚。
现代文：齐献武王也很哀伤悲叹，送给他家的钱财衣物很丰厚。
English: King Qi Xianwu was also very sad and lamented. The money, wealth and clothing given to his family were very rich.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、瀛州刺史，谥曰康。
现代文：追赠为骠骑大将军、瀛州刺史，谧号为康。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Horse and General of the State, and his nickname was Kang.

古文：同轨兄义深，武定中，齐州刺史。
现代文：同轨的哥哥义深，武定年问，任齐州刺史。
English: The brother of the same track, Yishen, Wu Dingnianqian, was appointed as the governor of Qizhou.

古文：同轨弟幼举，安德太守。
现代文：同轨的弟弟幼举，任安德太守。
English: His younger brother, who was in the same class, was promoted to the position of Ande Taishu.

古文：武定中，以在郡贪污，辄召部曲还京师，弃市。
现代文：武定年间，由于在郡中贪污和擅自带部曲回京，被处死刑。
English: During the Wuding era, he was sentenced to death for embezzlement in the county and for bringing a piece of music back to Beijing without permission.

古文：幼举弟之良，有干用。
现代文：乡哩的弟弟之旦，有才干。
English: The younger brother in the village, Zhutan, is talented.

古文：前将军，尚书金部郎。
现代文：任前将军、尚书金部郎。
English: Former general, Shosho Kaneburo.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：之良弟稚廉，武定末，并州仪同开府长史。
现代文：幼举的弟弟之良，武定末年任并州仪同开府长史。
English: His younger brother, Zhi Liang, who was brought up as a child, was appointed to the post of prefectural governor at the end of Wu Ding's life.

古文：史臣曰：李顺器宇才识，一时推重，谋宣中国，气折外蕃。
现代文：史臣曰：李顺的风度才识，为当代推重，谋略显扬于中原，气势折服了藩属。
English: Shichen said: Li Shun's demeanor and talent are important for the present generation, his strategy is prominent in the Central Plains, and his momentum has won over the clansmen.

古文：所以世祖垂心，而崔浩侧目。
现代文：所以世祖重视，而崔浩嫉妒。
English: Therefore, Shizhu attaches great importance to it, and Cui Hao is jealous.

古文：敷式兄弟，位望并高。
现代文：李敷李式兄弟，官位声望都高。
English: Li Shiki and Li Shiki brothers are both high-ranking and prestigious.

古文：宪风度恢雅，夙重朝列。
现代文：李宪风度恢弘雅正，久为朝廷重臣。
English: Li Xian had a magnificent, elegant and upright demeanor, and was a senior court official for a long time.

古文：而遭随有命，报施俱爽。
现代文：但是遭遇由命运决定，报应都有了结。
English: But the encounter is determined by fate, and retribution has come to an end.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼!
English: Alas!

古文：以兹盛德，克广其猷，宗绪扶疏，人位盛显，可谓李虽旧族，其世唯新矣。
现代文：以这样的盛德，大建功业，祖先的遣业昌盛，官位显要，李氏虽然是世家大族，其后代更能建立新功而光大门庭。
English: With such a great virtue, great achievements, ancestors' achievements are prosperous, and official positions are prominent, although the Li clan is a large family, its descendants are more able to establish new achievements.

