古文：魏文帝忌弟任城王骁壮。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕忌惮他的弟弟任城王曹彰勇猛刚强。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Pi was jealous of his younger brother, the city king Cao Chang, who was brave, fierce and strong.

古文：因在卞太后合共围棋，并啖枣，文帝以毒置诸枣蒂中。
现代文：就趁两人一起在卞太后阁中下围棋、一同吃枣子的时候，把毒放在枣蒂里，自己挑无毒的吃。
English: Just take advantage of the two of them playing Go together in the Empress Dowager's pavilion, and when eating dates together, put the poison in the date stalk and choose non-poisonous ones to eat.

古文：自选可食者而进，王弗悟，遂杂进之。
现代文：任城王没有察觉，就把有毒、没毒的混着吃了。
English: Without noticing, Ren Chengwang ate the poisonous and non-poisonous mixture.

古文：既中毒，太后索水救之。帝预敕左右毁瓶罐，太后徒跣趋井，无以汲。
现代文：中毒以后，卞太后要找水来解救他；可是曹丕事先命令手下的人把装水的瓶罐都打碎了，卞太后匆忙间光着脚赶到井边，却没有东西打水，不久任城王就死了。
English: After the poisoning, Empress Dowager Cixi wanted to find water to save him; however, Cao Pi ordered his subordinates to break all the water bottles and jars in advance. Empress Dowager Cixi hurried to the well with bare feet, but there was nothing to draw water, and the king of the city soon died.

古文：须臾，遂卒。复欲害东阿，太后曰： 汝已杀我任城，不得复杀我东阿。 
现代文：文帝后来又想杀害东阿王曹植，太后说： 你已经杀死了我的任城王，不许再杀我的东阿王！ 
English: Later, Emperor Wen also wanted to kill the King of Donga, Cao Zhi, and the Empress Dowager said, "You have already killed my King of the City, do not kill my King of Donga again!"

古文：王浑后妻，琅邪颜氏女。
现代文：王浑续弦的妻子，是琅邪颜家的女儿，王浑当时任徐州刺史。
English: Wang Hun's wife was the daughter of the Zou Yanyan family. At that time, Wang Hun was the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：王时为徐州刺史，交礼拜讫，王将答拜，观者咸曰： 王侯州将，新妇州民，恐无由答拜。 
现代文：结婚行交拜礼后，王浑正要答拜，观礼的人都说： 新郎是一州之主，新娘是州中的百姓，恐怕没有答拜的道理吧。 
English: After the wedding ceremony, Wang Hun was about to answer the prayer, and the people watching the ceremony said: The groom is the head of a state, and the bride is the people in the state. I'm afraid there is no reason to answer the prayer.

古文：王乃止。
现代文：王浑于是不答拜。
English: Wang Hun therefore did not respond.

古文：武子以其父不答拜，不成礼，恐非夫妇；不为之拜，谓为颜妾。
现代文：王武子认为自己父亲不答拜，就等于婚礼未成，恐怕不算夫妻，也就不拜后母，只称她为颜妾。
English: Wang Wuxi thought that if his father did not respond, it would mean that the wedding was not completed. I am afraid that they would not be counted as husband and wife, and would not bow to the stepmother, but would only call her a concubine.

古文：颜氏耻之。以其门贵，终不敢离。
现代文：颜氏认为这是耻辱，只是因为王浑门第高贵，终究不敢离婚。
English: Yan thinks this is a disgrace, but only because Wang Hun was the noblest and finally dared not to divorce.

古文：陆平原河桥败，为卢志所谗，被诛。
现代文：平原内史陆机在河桥兵败后，受到卢志的谗害，终于被杀死。
English: After the defeat of the soldiers in the river bridge, the land machine in the history of the plain was harmed by Lu Zhi and was finally killed.

古文：临刑叹曰： 欲闻华亭鹤唳，可复得乎！ 
现代文：临刑时叹息说： 想听一听故乡的鹤鸣，不能再听到了！ 
English: On his deathbed, he said with a sigh: "I wanted to listen to the cranes in my hometown, but I can't hear them anymore!

古文：刘琨善能招延，而拙于抚御。
现代文：刘琨擅长招募人才，却不善于安抚和驾驭他们。
English: Liu Wei is good at recruiting talents, but not good at appeasing and controlling them.

古文：一日虽有数千人归投，其逃散而去亦复如此。所以卒无所建。
现代文：一天之内虽然有几千人前来投奔他，可是逃跑的也有这个数目，因此他最终没有什么建树。
English: Though thousands came to him in a single day, so many fled that in the end he could do nothing.

古文：王平子始下，丞相语大将军： 不可复使羌人东行。 
现代文：王平子刚从荆州下建康，丞相王导告诉大将军王敦说： 不可再让那个羌人到东边来。 
English: Wang Pingzi had just set out from Jingzhou to establish Jiankang, when the chancellor Wang Du told the general Wang Dun: "Don't let that scoundrel come to the east again."

古文：平子面似羌。
现代文：因为王平子脸长得像羌人。
English: Because Wang Ping Zi's face looks like a skeleton.

古文：王大将军起事，丞相兄弟诣阙谢。
现代文：大将军王敦淇滨谋反，丞相王导兄弟到朝廷请罪。
English: The great general Wang Dunqibin plotted a rebellion, and the brothers of the prime minister Wang Tao went to the imperial court to plead guilty.

古文：周侯深忧诸王，始入，甚有忧色。
现代文：武城侯特别担忧王氏一家，刚进宫时，脸上满是忧虑的神色。
English: The marquis of Wucheng was particularly worried about the Wang family. When he first entered the palace, his face was full of worry.

古文：丞相呼周侯曰： 百口委卿！ 
现代文：王导招呼武城侯说： 我一家几百口人的性命就拜托你了！ 
English: Wang Du hailed the Marquis of Wucheng and said, "The lives of several hundred members of my family depend on you!

古文：周直过不应。
现代文：武城侯照直走过去，没有回答。
English: Wucheng marched straight over and did not answer.

古文：既入，苦相存救。
现代文：进宫后，极力援救王导。
English: After entering the palace, he tried his best to rescue Wang Du.

古文：既释，周大说，饮酒。
现代文：事情解决以后，武城侯极为高兴，喝起酒来。
English: After the matter was resolved, Wucheng Hou was extremely happy and drank wine.

古文：及出，诸王故在门。
现代文：等到出宫，王氏一家仍然在门口。
English: When they left the palace, the Wang family was still at the gate.

古文：周曰： 今年杀诸贼奴，当取金印如斗大系肘后。 
现代文：武城侯说： 今年把乱臣贼子都消灭了，定会拿到像斗大的金印挂在胳膊肘上。 
English: The marquis of Wucheng said, "This year, I have eliminated all the ruffian thieves, and I will surely get a big gold seal to hang on my elbow."

古文：大将军至石头，问丞相曰： 周侯可为三公不？ 
现代文：王敦攻陷石头城后，问王导说： 周侯可以做三公吗？ 
English: After Wang Dun captured Stone Town, he asked Wang Du: Can Zhou Hou become the Three Princes?

古文：丞相不答。
现代文：王导不回答。
English: Wang Du did not answer.

古文：又问： 可为尚书令不？ 
现代文：又问： 可以做尚书令吗？ 
English: He also asked: Is it possible to make Shang Shuling?

古文：又不应。
现代文：王导又不回答。
English: Du Zichun remained silent.

古文：因云： 如此，唯当杀之耳！ 
现代文：王敦就说： 这样，只该杀了他罢了！ 
English: Wang Dun said, "In that case, we should just kill him!"

古文：复默然。
现代文：王导再次默不作声。
English: Wang Du fell silent again.

古文：逮周侯被害，丞相后知周侯救己，叹曰： 我不杀周侯，周侯由我而死。幽冥中负此人！ 
现代文：等到周被害后，王导才知道周救过自己，他叹息说： 我不杀周侯，周侯却是因为我而死，我在糊涂中辜负了这个人！ 
English: It was only after Zhou was killed that Wang Du knew that Zhou had saved him. He sighed and said, "I didn't kill Zhou Hou, but Zhou Hou died because of me. In my confusion, I failed this man!"

古文：王导、温峤俱见明帝，帝问温前世所以得天下之由。
现代文：王导、温峤一同去见晋明帝。晋明帝向温峤询问前世帝王得到天下的原因。
English: Wang Du and Wen Hui went to see Emperor Jinming together. Emperor Jinming asked Wen Hui about the reason why the emperor of the previous generation gained the whole world.

古文：温未答。
现代文：温峤没有回答。
English: Wen Kun didn't answer.

古文：顷，王曰： 温峤年少未谙，臣为陛下陈之。 
现代文：过了一会儿，王导说： 温峤还年轻，不知道这些事。我来为陛下讲讲。 
English: After a while, Wang Du said: Wen Xuan is still young and doesn't know these things. I'll explain for His Majesty.

古文：王迺具叙宣王创业之始，诛夷名族，宠树同己。及文王之末，高贵乡公事。
现代文：于是详细地讲了宣王司马懿在创业初期，诛杀名门望族，扶植同党的事情，以及文王司马昭晚年，诛杀高贵乡公的事情。
English: Therefore, he spoke in detail about the fact that in the early days of his business, Sima Zhao, the king of Xuan, killed a famous family and supported the same party, as well as the fact that in his later years, Sima Zhao, the king of Wen, killed a noble townsman.

古文：明帝闻之，覆面著床曰： 若如公言，祚安得长！ 
现代文：晋明帝听了以后，把脸埋在御榻中说： 如果像您说的那样，我晋朝的国运怎么能够长久呢！ 
English: After listening to this, Emperor Jinming buried his face in his throne and said, "If it is as you say, how can the national movement of the Jin Dynasty last long?"

古文：王大将军于众坐中曰： 诸周由来未有作三公者。 
现代文：大将军王敦在大庭广众中说： 周氏一族从来没有位至三公的人。 
English: General Wang Dun said in front of a large audience: The Zhou family has never had anyone as high as the three princes.

古文：有人答曰： 唯周侯邑五马领头而不克。 
现代文：有人回答说： 只有周侯已经拿到五个筹码领头，只是最终没有成功。 
English: Someone replied: Only Zhou Hou has got five chips in the lead, but ultimately did not succeed.

古文：大将军曰： 我与周，洛下相遇，一面顿尽。
现代文：王敦说： 我和周侯在浴阳相会，初次见面就无话不说。
English: Wang Dun said, "I met Zhou Hou in Yuyang. The first time we met, we had nothing to say.

古文：值世纷纭，遂至于此！ 
现代文：只是赶上世事乱纷纷，竟然落得今天这样的结局！ 
English: It's just a matter of time before things get out of hand and end up like this!

古文：因为流涕。
现代文：于是为他流下泪来。
English: So I shed tears for him.

古文：温公初受刘司空使劝进，母崔氏固驻之，峤绝裾而去。
现代文：温峤当初受司空刘瑶委派过江劝说晋元帝即帝位，他母亲崔氏坚决阻止他走，温峤不顾一切地走了。
English: At the beginning, Wen Kun was sent by Liu Kun's committee to cross the river to persuade Emperor Jin Yuan to take the throne. His mother, Cui, resolutely prevented him from going, and Wen Kun went regardless.

古文：迄于崇贵，乡品犹不过也。
现代文：一直到他显贵以后，乡里的评论还是不能同意他的做法。
English: Even after his rise to prominence, rural commentators disagreed with his approach.

古文：每爵皆发诏。
现代文：每当给他晋升官爵，都要由皇帝发布命令来说明。
English: Whenever he was promoted to a peerage, the emperor had to issue an order to that effect.

古文：庾公欲起周子南，子南执辞愈固。
现代文：庾亮想要起用周子南做官，周子南执意推辞，而且越来越坚决。
English: Hao Liang wanted to appoint Zhou Zinan as an official, but Zhou Zinan stubbornly refused and became more and more resolute.

古文：庾每诣周，庾从南门入，周从后门出。
现代文：庾亮每次去拜访周子南，庾亮从大门进来，周子南就从后门出去。
English: Every time Yu Liang went to visit Zhou Zinan, Yu Liang came in through the front door, and Zhou Zinan went out through the back door.

古文：庾尝一往奄至，周不及去，相对终日。
现代文：有一次庾亮一下子突然到来，周子南来不及躲开，就只好陪着客人坐了一整天。
English: On one occasion, the thunderbolt suddenly arrived, and Zhou Zinan had no time to avoid it, so he had to sit with the guests for the whole day.

古文：庾从周索食，周出蔬食，庾亦强饭，极欢；并语世故，约相推引，同佐世之任。
现代文：庾亮向周子南要饭吃，周子南拿出租茶淡饭，庾亮也吃得很香，特别高兴；两人谈论世事，约定互相推荐，共同担负起辅助国家的重任。
English: Hao Liang asked Zhou Zi Nan for a meal. Zhou Zi Nan took the chow mein for rent. Hao Liang also ate it very fragrant and was particularly happy. The two talked about worldly affairs, agreed to recommend each other, and jointly shouldered the important task of supporting the country.

古文：既仕，至将军二千石，而不称意。
现代文：周子南出来做官后，升为将军、郡守，却不称心。
English: After Zhou Ziminan became an official, he was promoted to general and county governor, but he was not satisfied.

古文：中宵慨然曰： 大丈夫乃为庾元规所卖！ 
现代文：夜半感慨地说： 大丈夫竟被庾元规出卖了！ 
English: In the middle of the night, she said with emotion: My husband was betrayed by Xuan Yuanji!

古文：一叹，遂发背而卒。
现代文：一声长叹，终于背疮发作而死。
English: With a long sigh, he finally succumbed to the attack of his back sores.

古文：阮思旷奉大法，敬信甚至。
现代文：阮裕信奉佛教，虔诚无比。
English: Nguyen Huu is a devout Buddhist.

古文：大儿年未弱冠，忽被笃疾。
现代文：他的大儿子还不到二十岁，忽然得了重病。
English: His eldest son, not yet twenty years old, suddenly fell seriously ill.

古文：儿既是偏所爱重，为之祈请三宝，昼夜不懈。
现代文：这孩子是阮裕本来特别偏爱的，因此为他向佛祷告，昼夜不停。
English: This child was Nguyen Huu's special favorite, so he prayed for him to the Buddha, day and night.

古文：谓至诚有感者，必当蒙祐。
现代文：阮裕以为自己的一片至诚定能感动佛祖，孩子一定会得到保佑。
English: Ruan Yu thought that his piece of sincerity would surely be able to move the Buddha, and the child would surely be blessed.

古文：而儿遂不济。
现代文：但孩子却最终没能活下来。
English: But in the end, the child did not survive.

古文：于是结恨释氏，宿命都除。
现代文：于是阮裕从此对佛教怀恨在心，把宿命论彻底抛弃了。
English: As a result, Ruan Yu harbored a grudge against Buddhism and completely abandoned fatalism.

古文：桓宣武对简文帝，不甚得语。
现代文：桓温面对简文帝的时候，总是不能掏心掏肺地说话。
English: When faced with Emperor Jianwen, Kan-Wen was always unable to speak from the heart.

古文：废海西后，宜自申叙，乃豫撰数百语，陈废立之意。
现代文：在废黜海西公后，桓温认为自己应该把心里话都说出来。于是事先构思好几百句话，要陈说废黜旧君、拥立新君的本意。
English: After the dethronement of Emperor Haisi, Emperor Huanwen thought that he should speak his heart out. Therefore, he composed hundreds of words in advance to express his intention to dethrone the old emperor and support the new emperor.

古文：既见简文，简文便泣下数十行。
现代文：但是见到简文帝后，简文帝就泪流不止。
English: However, after seeing Emperor Jianwen, Emperor Jianwen burst into tears.

古文：宣武矜愧，不得一言。
现代文：桓温既怜悯又羞愧，最后一句话也说不出来。
English: Cao Wen is both pity and shame, the last word can not say.

古文：桓公卧语曰： 作此寂寂，将为文、景所笑！ 
现代文：桓温躺在床上和他的亲信说道： 做这种寂寂无闻的事，将会被文帝、景帝所耻笑。 
English: Lying on the bed with his cronies, Kuanwen said, "To do such a lonely and unheard-of thing will be laughed at by Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing.

古文：既而屈起坐曰： 既不能流芳后世，亦不足复遗臭万载邪？ 
现代文：接着一下坐起来说： 既不能流芳百世，难道还不能遗臭万年吗！ 
English: Then he sat up and said, "If you can't be loved for a hundred generations, can't you leave a bad smell for a thousand years?"

古文：谢太傅于东船行，小人引船，或迟或速，或停或待，又放船从横，撞人触岸。公初不呵谴。
现代文：太傅谢安在会稽坐船，纤夫拉着纤绳，有时慢，有时快，有时停下，有时等候；有时又不拉，由船任意飘荡，撞着别人的船，碰着河岸，谢安从不喝斥、责备。
English: Grandmaster Xie An was on a boat in the examination hall. The sailor pulled the rope, sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly, sometimes stopping, sometimes waiting; sometimes not pulling, drifting from the boat at will, crashing into other people's boats, touching the riverbank. Xie An never shouted or reproached.

古文：人谓公常无嗔喜。
现代文：人们认为谢安没有发怒的时候。
English: When people think Xie An is not angry.

古文：曾送兄征西葬还，日莫雨驶，小人皆醉，不可处分。
现代文：有一次给他哥哥镇西将军谢奕送葬回来，正赶上傍晚雨又急，赶车的车夫都喝醉了，掌握不住车子。
English: On one occasion, he was returning from the funeral of his brother, Zhenxi General Xie Yi, when the evening rain was coming down hard. The drivers were drunk and couldn't control the car.

古文：公乃于车中，手取车柱撞驭人，声色甚厉。
现代文：谢安于是从车厢中拿下车往来捅驭手，声色俱厉。
English: Xie An then took down the conductor from the carriage, and his voice was hoarse.

古文：夫以水性沈柔，入隘奔激。方之人情，固知迫隘之地，无得保其夷粹。
现代文：按道理水的本性是很沉静、柔和的，可是一流入狭窄的地方就要奔腾激荡，拿人之常情来和水相比，自然会懂得人逢险境，就没有可能保持自己平和、纯洁的性格。
English: According to the theory, the nature of water is very calm and gentle, but once it flows into a narrow place, it will be turbulent and agitated. Comparing people's common feelings with water, it is natural to understand that when people are in danger, it is impossible to maintain their peaceful and pure character.

古文：简文见田稻不识，问是何草？左右答是稻。
现代文：简文帝看见田里的稻子，不认识，问这事什么草，身边的随从回答是稻子。
English: When Emperor Jianwen saw the rice in the field, he did not recognize it and asked what kind of grass it was. The attendants around him answered that it was rice.

古文：简文还，三日不出，云： 宁有赖其末，而不识其本？ 
现代文：简文帝回到宫里，三天没有出门，说： 哪里有吃米饭依靠它而活，而不识其根本的呢！ 
English: Emperor Jianwen returned to the palace and did not leave the house for three days. He said, "Where can one eat rice and live on it without knowing its essence?"

古文：桓车骑在上明畋猎。
现代文：车骑将军桓冲在上明打猎。
English: General Kan, riding a chariot, rushes to hunt in the Upper Ming.

古文：东信至，传淮上大捷。
现代文：东边的信使到了，送来淮上大捷的消息。
English: The messenger from the east has arrived, bringing news of Huai's great victory.

古文：语左右云： 群谢年少，大破贼。 
现代文：桓冲对随从说： 谢家年轻人大败贼寇！ 
English: Kanchong said to his attendant: The young men of the Xie family have defeated the bandits!

古文：因发病薨。
现代文：于是就发病死了。
English: As a result, he became ill and died.

古文：谈者以为此死，贤于让扬之荆。
现代文：舆论认为这样死胜过让出扬州刺史到荆州去。
English: Public opinion believes that such a death is better than letting Yangzhou's history go to Jingzhou.

古文：桓公初报破殷荆州，曾讲论语，至 富与贵，是人之所欲，不以其道得之不处 。
现代文：桓玄刚刚接到打败荆州刺史殷仲堪的报告时，正在讲解《论语》，讲到下面一句： 富有和尊贵；是人人都想得到的，如果不用正当的方法去得到它，君子是不能受用的。 
English: When Huan Xuan had just received the report of defeating Jingzhou assassin Yin Zhongkan, he was explaining the "Analects" and told the following sentence: Rich and noble; everyone wants it, if you don't get it by legitimate means, the gentleman can't accept it.

古文：玄意色甚恶。
现代文：桓玄听了，心情、脸色都很不好。
English: After listening to it, Kuan Xuan's mood and complexion were very bad.

