古文：长孙无忌，字辅机。性通悟，博涉书史。
现代文：长孙无忌字辅机，秉性豁达机敏，博览文史典籍。
English: The eldest grandson is a word assistant, with an open-minded and quick-witted nature, and is well-versed in literary and historical classics.

古文：始，高祖兵度河，进谒长春宫，授渭北道行军典签。从秦王征讨有功，累擢比部郎中、上党县公。
现代文：当初，高祖率领义军渡过黄河时，长孙无忌到长春宫晋见高祖，被任命为渭北道行军典签，跟随秦王李世民征战有功，官职做到比部郎中，封为上党县公。
English: At first, when Gao Zu led the rebel army across the Yellow River, his eldest grandson went to the Changchun Palace to meet Gao Zu. He was appointed as the signer of the marching order of the North Minhang Province, followed the Qin King Li Shimin to fight, and achieved the official position of Hiburong, and was awarded the title of Shangdang County.

古文：皇太子建成毒王，王病，举府危骇。
现代文：皇太子李建成投毒暗害秦王，秦王中毒病重，全秦王府都感到凶险惊骇。
English: The crown prince Li Jiancheng poisoned and assassinated the Qin king. The Qin king was poisoned and seriously ill, and the whole Qin royal court was horrified.

古文：房玄龄谓无忌曰： 祸隙已芽，败不旋踵矣。
现代文：房玄龄对长孙无忌说： 灾祸已露出苗头，很快就要爆发了。
English: Fang Xuanling said to his eldest grandson: The scourge has already revealed its seeds, and it will soon break out.

古文：夫就大计者遗细行，周公所以绌管、蔡也。 
现代文：成就大业的人不拘小节，这是周公姬旦杀掉管叔、流放蔡叔的原因。 
English: People who achieve great things are not petty. This is the reason why Zhou Gong Xidan killed Guan Xiu and exiled Cai Xiu.

古文：遂俱入白王，请先事诛之，王未许。
现代文：于是一起进府禀告秦王，请求抢先杀掉李建成，秦王不答应。
English: So they went to the palace together to sue the Qin King, requesting that Li Jiancheng be killed first. The Qin King did not agree.

古文：无忌曰： 大王以舜何如人？ 
现代文：长孙无忌说 ：大王认为虞舜是怎样的人？ 
English: The eldest grandson said, "What kind of person does the great king think Yu Xi Rong is?"

古文：王曰： 浚哲文明，为子孝，为君仁，又何议哉？ 
现代文：秦王说： 他智慧深邃，经天纬地，光照四方。做儿子孝顺，做国君仁德，还有什么可说的呢？ 
English: King Qin said, "His wisdom is profound, and shines through the heavens and the earth, illuminating the four directions. What more can be said about being a dutiful son and a benevolent ruler?

古文：对曰： 向使浚井弗出，得为孝乎？
现代文：长孙无忌接着说 ：当初假使虞舜掏井出不来，能讲孝心吗？
English: The eldest grandson then said, "If the gourd cannot come out of the well, can we talk about filial piety?"

古文：涂廪弗下，得为仁乎？
现代文：填塞仓库裂缝不避火跳下来，能施仁政吗？
English: Is it possible to carry out a benevolent policy by filling cracks in the warehouse and jumping down without avoiding the fire?

古文：大杖避，小杖受，良有以也。 
现代文：避开大棒拷打，忍受小棍敲击，虞舜的确是事出有因。 
English: Avoid the big stick torture, endure the small stick tapping, the cormorant is indeed a cause.

古文：王未决。
现代文：秦王还是没有下决心。
English: King Qin still hadn't made up his mind.

古文：事益急，乃遣无忌阴召房玄龄、杜如晦定计。
现代文：事态更加紧急，才派长孙无忌暗中召集房玄龄、杜如晦商定计谋。
English: The situation became even more urgent, so he sent his eldest grandson to secretly convene Fang Xuanling and Du Ruwei to agree on a strategy.

古文：无忌与尉迟敬德、侯君集、张公谨、刘师立、公孙武达、独孤彦云、杜君绰、郑仁恭、李孟尝讨难，平之。
现代文：长孙无忌与尉迟敬德、侯君集、张公谨、刘师立、公孙武达、独孤彦云、杜君绰、郑仁恭、李孟尝讨伐并平息了祸乱。
English: His eldest grandson Mujin fought with his lieutenants Jingde, Hou Junji, Zhang Gongzhen, Liu Shili, Gongsun Wuda, Doku Hanyun, Du Junchao, Zheng Rinkong, and Li Mengqi and quelled the calamity.

古文：王为皇太子，授左庶子。
现代文：秦王当了皇太子，任命长孙无忌为左庶子。
English: When King Qin became the crown prince, he appointed his eldest grandson as his illegitimate son.

古文：即位，迁吏部尚书，以功第一，进封齐国公。
现代文：秦王登帝位后，提升他为吏部尚书，因为功劳第一，晋封为齐国公。
English: After Emperor Qin ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and because of his outstanding merits, he was promoted to the Prince of Qi.

古文：帝以无忌皇后兄，又少相友，眷倚日厚，常出入卧内。
现代文：太宗因为长孙无忌是皇后的哥哥，自幼又相友爱，垂爱倚重之情一天天深厚，让他经常出入自己的卧室。
English: As the eldest grandson of Emperor Taizong is undoubtedly the elder brother of the Empress, they have loved each other since they were children, and the affection is deep day by day, so that he often goes in and out of his bedroom.

古文：进尚书右仆射。
现代文：又提升他为尚书右仆射。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：突厥颉利可汗已盟而政乱，诸将请遂讨之。
现代文：突厥的颉利可汗与唐朝结盟后发生了政治动乱，众将领请求趁机征讨。
English: Political turmoil occurred after the alliance between the Turkic Qili Khan and the Tang Dynasty, and the generals requested to take advantage of the opportunity to fight.

古文：帝顾新歃血，不取为失机，取之失信，计犹豫，以问大臣。
现代文：太宗考虑刚结盟，不攻取是坐失良机，攻取又失去信用，犹豫不决，就向大臣们咨询。
English: Taizong hesitated, considering that once the alliance was formed, it would be a lost opportunity if he did not attack, and he would lose credibility if he did, so he consulted the ministers.

古文：萧瑀曰： 兼弱攻昧，讨之便。 
现代文：萧蠫说： 趁弱小兼并，趁政治昏暗攻取，征讨有好处。 
English: Xiao Wei said: Take advantage of weak and small annexation, take advantage of political dimness to capture, it is good to collect.

古文：无忌曰： 今我务戢兵，待夷狄至，乃可击。
现代文：长孙无忌说： 现在我朝致力于和平，等突厥进犯，才能还击。
English: The eldest grandson said: Now I am committed to peace, and only when the Turks attack can I fight back.

古文：使遂弱，且不能来，我又何求？
现代文：假使他们就此削弱，将来不能进犯，我们还有何求呢？
English: If this weakens them and prevents them from attacking in the future, what else can we ask for?

古文：臣谓按甲存信便。 
现代文：我认为按兵不动保持信用为好。 太宗说 ：好。 
English: I think it's better to keep the confidence by not moving the troops.Taizong said: Good.

古文：帝曰： 善。 然卒取突厥。
现代文：但后来还是征伐了突厥。
English: Later, however, the Turks were conquered.

古文：或有言无忌权太盛者，帝持表示无忌曰： 我与公君臣间无少疑，使各怀所闻不言，斯则蔽矣。 
现代文：有人向太宗上表说长孙无忌权力太大，太宗把表奏给他看，说 ：我与您君臣之间没有一点猜疑，如果各人把听到的话放在心里不说，这就会受蒙蔽了。 
English: Someone told Emperor Taizong that his eldest grandson must have too much power. Emperor Taizong showed him the transcript and said, "There is not a bit of suspicion between you and I. If everyone kept what they heard to themselves, they would be deceived."

古文：因普示君臣曰： 朕子幼，无忌于我有大功，视之犹子也。
现代文：因此向所有朝臣挑明说： 我的儿子年幼，无忌为我立过大功，我把他看得跟我儿子一样重要。
English: Therefore, he made it clear to all the courtiers: My son is young, he has undoubtedly done a great service for me, and I regard him as important as my son.

古文：疏间亲、新间旧之谓不顺，朕无取焉。 
现代文：关系疏远的人离间关系亲密的人，新朋友离间老朋友是不合情理，我不会听取。 
English: It's unconscionable for estranged people to alienate close people, for new friends to alienate old friends. I won't listen.

古文：无忌亦自惧贵且亢，后又数言之，遂解仆射，授开府仪同三司。
现代文：长孙无忌自己也害怕地位太高，长孙皇后又多次向太宗谈到这事，于是免去了他右仆射的职务，授予他开府仪同三司之职。
English: The eldest grandson must have feared that his position was too high, and the eldest grandson's empress spoke to Emperor Taizong about this many times, so she removed him from the position of the right-hand man and gave him the position of the head of the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：与房玄龄、杜如晦、尉迟敬德皆以元勋封一子郡公。
现代文：他同房玄龄、杜如晦、尉迟敬德都因为是头等功臣，太宗为他们每人封一个儿子为郡公。
English: Because he was a first-class meritorious vassal, Emperor Taizong made a son of each of his sons the county magistrate.

古文：进册司空，知门下、尚书省事，无忌辞，又因高士廉口陈 以外戚位三公，嫌议者谓天子以私后家 。
现代文：又颁发册书授予长孙无忌为司空，主持门下省、尚书省的政务，长孙无忌辞谢，又托付高士廉口头面奏太宗说 ：以皇室外戚的身份占据三公的高位，心怀不满的人会说皇上为皇后家谋私利。 
English: He also issued a book of records to the eldest grandson of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Cixi, who presided over the government affairs of the subordinate province and Shangshu Province. The eldest grandson of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Cixi expressed his gratitude, and entrusted Gao Shiliang to verbally play the role of Taizong, saying: Occupying the high position of the three princes as a relative of the emperor, those who are dissatisfied will say that the emperor is seeking personal gain for the empress family.

古文：帝曰： 朕任官必以才，不者，虽亲若襄邑王神符，不妄授；若才，虽仇如魏征，不弃也。
现代文：太宗说 ：我委任官员以才能为标准，没有才能，即使是像襄邑王神符那样的至亲，也不随意封官；如果是人才，即使像魏征这样的仇人，也不嫌弃。
English: Taizong said, "I appoint officials according to their ability. Without talent, even a close relative like Xiangyuan Wang Shenfu would not be appointed at will. If it is talent, even an enemy like Wei Zheng would not be rejected."

古文：夫缘后兄爱昵，厚以子女玉帛，岂不得？
现代文：如果因为是皇后的哥哥而喜欢他，用美女玉帛丰厚地赏赐他，不就行了吗？
English: If you like him because he is the queen's brother and reward him generously with a beautiful jade bracelet, is that not enough?

古文：以其兼文武两器，朕故相之，公等孰不曰然？ 
现代文：由于他文武双全，因此我任他为宰相，您诸位谁不说是这样呢？ 
English: I appointed him as prime minister because he is both a man of letters and a man of action. Who among you would not say so?

古文：无忌固让，诏答曰： 黄帝得力牧，为五帝先；夏禹得咎繇，为三王祖；齐桓得管仲，为五伯长；朕得公，遂定天下。
现代文：长孙无忌坚决辞让，太宗下诏书答复说： 黄帝轩辕得到力牧，成为五帝中的第一帝；夏禹得到咎繇，成为三王中的第一王；齐桓公得到管仲，成为五霸中的第一霸；我得到您，就平定了天下。
English: The eldest grandson resolutely refused to give in, and Emperor Taizong replied in his edict: The Yellow Emperor Xuan Zang gained Ligu, becoming the first emperor among the five emperors; Xia Yu gained Guan Zang, becoming the first king among the three kings; Qi Huan Gong gained Guanzhong, becoming the first hegemon among the five hegemons; If I get you, I will level the world.

古文：公其无让！ 
现代文：希望您不要推让！ 
English: I hope you don't give in!

古文：帝又思所与共艰难，赖无忌以免，作《威凤赋》以赐，且况其功。
现代文：太宗又想起跟他同生死共患难的往事，依靠他避免了危险，就写了《威凤赋》送给他，以此比拟他的功劳。
English: Taizong also remembered the past of living and dying with him, relying on him to avoid danger, and wrote "Wei Feng Fu" to give to him as a comparison of his achievements.

古文：帝欲功臣并世袭刺史，贞观十一年，乃诏有司： 朕凭明灵之祐，贤佐之力，克翦多难，清宇内。
现代文：太宗想让功臣们都世世代代袭任刺史职位，贞观十一年，便下诏书给有关官员说： 我靠神灵的保佑，贤臣的辅佐，战胜了许多危难，使得天下太平。
English: Emperor Taizong wanted his meritorious vassals to succeed to the post of crown prince from generation to generation. In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, he issued an edict to the relevant officials, saying, "I, relying on the blessing of the gods and the assistance of the sages, have overcome many perils and made the world peaceful."

古文：盖时屯共资其力，世安专享其利，朕所不取。
现代文：时势艰难靠大家共同出力，天下安定由一人独享其利，我是不愿这样干的。
English: When times are tough, we all need to work together. When the world is stable, only one person can benefit from it. I don't want to do that.

古文：刺史，古诸侯，虽名不同，而监统一也。
现代文：刺史就是古代的诸侯，虽然名称不同，但监督统领的职份是一样的。
English: Tashi is the ancient princes, although the name is different, but the position of supervisor is the same.

古文：无忌等义贯休戚，效挺夷险，嘉庸懿绩，简在朕心。
现代文：长孙无忌等人欢乐忧愁时与我情义相通，顺利艰难时对我忠心不变，他们的卓越功绩，铭记在我心里。
English: My eldest grandchild and others who share my feelings when they are happy or sad, and are loyal to me when things are going well or difficult, their outstanding achievements are remembered in my heart.

古文：其改锡土宇，用世及之制。 
现代文：还是改为赐给土地，采用世袭制度。 
English: Instead, it was decided to grant land and adopt a hereditary system.

古文：乃以无忌为赵州刺史，以赵为公国；房玄龄宋州刺史，国于梁；杜如晦赠密州刺史，国于莱；李靖濮州刺史，国于卫；高士廉申州刺史，国于申；侯君集陈州刺史，国于陈；道宗鄂州刺史，王江夏；孝恭观州刺史，王河间；尉迟敬德宣州刺史，国于鄂；李勣蕲州刺史，国于英；段志玄金州刺史，国于褒；程知节普州刺史，国于卢；刘弘基朗州刺史，国于夔；张亮澧州刺史，国于郧。
现代文：于是封长孙无忌为赵州刺史、赵国公，封地在赵；房玄龄为宋州刺史，封地在梁；杜如晦追认为密州刺史，封地在莱；李靖为濮州刺史，封地在卫；高士廉为申州刺史，封地在申；侯君集为陈州刺史，封地在陈；李道宗为鄂州刺史，王爵，封地在江夏；李孝恭为观州刺史、王爵，封地在河间；尉迟敬德为宣州刺史，封地在鄂；李责力为蕲州刺史，封地在英；段志玄为金州刺史，封地在褒；程知节为普州刺史，封地在卢；刘弘基为朗州刺史，封地在夔；张亮为澧州刺史，封地在郧。
English: Therefore, Fong Changsun was Zhaozhou and Zhao Guogong, and his fief was in Zhao; Fang Xuanling was Songzhou and his fief was in Liang; Du Rugao was Myizhou and his fief was in Lai; Li Jing was Zhangzhou and his fief was in Wei; Gao Shilian was Shenzhou and his fief was in Shen; Hou Junji was Chenzhou and his fief was in Chen; Li Daozong was Huzhou and his fief was in Jiangxia; Li Xiaogong was Guanzhou and his fief was in Hema; Yi Xi Jingde was Xuanzhou and his f

古文：凡十有四人。余官食邑尚不在。
现代文：共十四人，其余官职应收纳租税的封户还不计算在内。
English: A total of fourteen people, not counting the rest of the official tax-collecting accounts.

古文：无忌等辞曰： 群臣披荆刺，事陛下。
现代文：长孙无忌等人推辞说 ：从前我们在一起披荆斩棘，侍奉陛下。
English: The eldest grandson, Mubi, and others declined, saying: "Once upon a time, we worked hard together to serve His Majesty.

古文：今四海混一，诚不愿违远左右，而使世牧外州，与迁徙等。 
现代文：现在四海统一，实在不愿远离陛下，让我们世代治理外地州郡，跟流放一样。 
English: Now that the four seas are united, I really do not want to be far away from Your Majesty. Let us govern the outlying prefectures for generations, just like exile.

古文：帝曰： 割地封功臣，欲公等后嗣长为籓翰，而薄山河之誓，反为怨望，朕亦安可强公土宇邪？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：划分土地赐给功臣，是想让诸位的后代永远做保卫国家的重臣，以实践当年高山大河般庄重的誓言，这事反而引起埋怨，我哪能还勉强您诸位到封地去呢？ 
English: Taizong said, "Dividing the land and giving it to the meritorious vassals is to let your descendants forever be the vassals to defend the country, to practice the solemn oath of that year like a high mountain river, but this has caused complaints. How can I force you all to go to the fiefdom?

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：后帝幸其第，自家人姻娅劳赐皆有差。
现代文：后来太宗亲自到他家里慰问，从家属到亲戚都按级别赏赐。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong personally went to his home to offer condolences, and rewarded everyone from family members to relatives according to their ranks.

古文：久之，进位司徒。
现代文：过了很久，提升长孙无忌为司徒。
English: After a long time, the eldest grandson could not help but be promoted to be a disciple.

古文：太子承乾废，帝欲立晋王，未决，坐两仪殿，群臣已罢，独留无忌、玄龄、勣言东宫事，因曰： 我三子一弟，未知所立，吾心亡聊。 
现代文：太子李承乾被废，太宗想立晋王李治为太子，还没有决定，在两仪殿坐朝，群臣退朝后，只留下长孙无忌、房玄龄、李责力商议立太子的事，因而说： 我有三个儿子一个弟弟，不知立谁为太子，我心里烦乱得很。 
English: Prince Li Chengqian was dethroned, and Emperor Taizong wanted to make the King of Jin, Li Zhi, the crown prince, but had not yet made a decision. He sat in the Two Ceremonial Halls, and after the courtiers had retired, he left only his eldest grandson, Mu Mu, Fang Xuanling, and Li Liuli to discuss the matter of making the crown prince. Therefore, he said, "I have three sons and one brother, and I don't know who should be made the crown prince. My heart is very troubled.

古文：即投床，取佩刀自向，无忌等惊，争抱持，夺刀授晋王，而请帝所欲立。
现代文：说完向刀架扑去，抽出佩刀自杀，长孙无忌等人大惊，抢上去抱住他，夺下刀给晋王，然后请问太宗想立谁。
English: After saying this, he rushed to the sword rack, pulled out his sword and committed suicide. The eldest grandson Muji and others were shocked, grabbed him and hugged him, took the sword to the Jin king, and then asked Taizong who he wanted to set up.

古文：帝曰： 我欲立晋王。 
现代文：太宗说： 我想立晋王。 
English: Taizong said, "I want to be crowned King of Jin."

古文：无忌曰： 谨奉诏，异议者斩！ 
现代文：长孙无忌说 ：谨奉诏命，持异议者斩！ 
English: The eldest grandson did not hesitate to say: "I have been ordered by the emperor to execute anyone who dissents!"

古文：帝顾王曰： 舅许汝矣，宜即谢。 
现代文：太宗对晋王李治说： 你舅舅已答应你当太子了，应该拜谢。 
English: Emperor Taizong said to the King of Jin, Li Zhi: Your uncle has promised you to be crown prince, you should thank him.

古文：王乃拜。
现代文：晋王于是拜谢。
English: Jin Wang then bowed in thanks.

古文：帝复曰： 公等与我意合，天下其谓何？ 
现代文：太宗又说： 您各位跟我意见相同，天下人会有什么议论呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong also said, "You all have the same opinion as me. What will the world discuss?

古文：答曰： 王以仁孝闻天下久矣，固无异辞；有如不同，臣负陛下百死。 
现代文：长孙无忌回答说 ：晋王以仁德孝顺闻名天下已很久了，本来不会有异议；如果有变化，是我辜负陛下，罪当万死。 
English: The eldest grandson replied without hesitation, "King Jin has been famous for his benevolence, virtue and filial piety for a long time, and there would have been no objection; if there is a change, it is because I have failed His Majesty, and the crime is punishable by death."

古文：于是遂定。
现代文：于是就决定了。
English: So the decision was made.

古文：以无忌为太子太师、同中书门下三品， 同三品 自此始。
现代文：太宗委任长孙无忌为太子太师、同中书门下三品， 同三品 
English: Emperor Taizong appointed his eldest grandson to be the Crown Prince and Grand Master, and made him the Third Class of the Junior Middle School of Calligraphy, and the Third Class of the Senior Middle School of Calligraphy

古文：帝又欲立吴王恪，无忌密争止之。
现代文：的职位就是从这时才有的。太宗又想立吴王李恪为太子，长孙无忌暗中争辩才没有这样做。
English: Emperor Taizong also wanted to make Wu Wang Li Ke the crown prince, but his eldest grandson did not do so because he did not hesitate to argue in secret.

古文：帝征高丽，诏摄侍中。
现代文：太宗征讨高丽，诏令长孙无忌代理侍中职务。
English: Emperor Taizong enquired about Goryeo, and ordered the eldest grandson to act as an attendant.

古文：还，辞师傅官，听罢太子太师，遥领扬州都督。
现代文：回朝后，请求辞去太子太师的职务，太宗听从他的意见，免去了太子太师职务，让他身居京城而任扬州都督。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he asked to resign from the post of crown prince and daishi. The emperor listened to his advice, exempted him from the post of crown prince and daishi, and allowed him to live in the capital and serve as Yangzhou governor.

古文：帝尝从容问曰： 朕闻君圣臣直，人常苦不自知，公宜面攻朕得失。 
现代文：太宗曾亲切地对长孙无忌说 ：我听说国君圣明则臣子就刚直，人常常苦于不了解自己，你应该当面批评我的过失。 
English: Emperor Taizong once said kindly to his eldest grandson Mubi: "I have heard that the sovereign, the sage, and the vassal are upright, and people often suffer from not understanding themselves. You should criticize my fault in person."

古文：无忌曰： 陛下神武圣文，冠卓千古，性与天道，非臣等愚所及，诚不见有所失。 
现代文：长孙无忌说 ：陛下的文治武功超过千古帝王，禀性亲和天道，不是我们臣子比得上的，的确没有看到您有什么过失。 
English: The eldest grandson could not help but say, "Your Majesty's prowess in literature and martial arts surpasses that of the emperors of a thousand years ago, and your tenacious affinity with the heavenly way is not comparable to that of our courtiers. Indeed, I do not see any fault on your part."

古文：帝曰： 朕冀闻过，公等乃相谀悦。朕当评公等可否以相规。 
现代文：太宗说： 我希望指出我的过失，您各位都奉承我让我高兴，我可要评论您各位的优缺点，来告诫各位。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: I would like to point out my faults. You all flatter me and make me happy. I would like to comment on your strengths and weaknesses to admonish you.

古文：谓： 高士廉心术警悟，临难不易节，所乏者骨鲠耳。
现代文：接着说： 高士廉心术机警聪明，面对危险不改变气节，所缺乏的是刚直之气。
English: Then he said: Gao Shixianxin is alert and clever, and does not change his temperament in the face of danger. What he lacks is a straightforward temperament.

古文：唐俭有辞，善和解人，酒杯流行，发言可意，事朕二十年，未尝一言国家事。
现代文：唐俭会说话，善于调解矛盾，在酒杯流转之中，说话惹人发笑，为我服务二十年，还不曾说过一句有关国家大事的话。
English: Tang Jian can speak, is good at mediating conflicts, and in the midst of the circulation of wine cups, his speech makes people laugh. He has served me for twenty years and has never said a word about national events.

古文：杨师道性谨审，自能无过，而懦不更事，缓急非可倚。
现代文：杨师道性格谨慎小心，自然不会有错误，但懦弱不了解世事，碰到危难不能靠他帮忙。
English: Yang Shidao's character is cautious and careful, naturally there will be no mistakes, but he is cowardly and does not understand the world, and cannot rely on him to help when he is in danger.

古文：岑文本敦厚，文章、论议其所长也，谋常经远，自当不负于物。
现代文：岑文本性情敦厚，写文章、论是非是他的长处，出谋划策有远见，自应不比别人差。
English: He has a strong textual disposition, writing articles and discussing the pros and cons is his strength, and he has the foresight to make plans and suggestions. He is no worse than others.

古文：刘洎坚正，其言有益，不轻然诺于人，能自补阙。
现代文：刘洎坚强正派，他说的话都有益处，不轻易对人许诺，能自己弥补不足。
English: Liu Wei is strong and decent. Everything he says is beneficial. He does not easily make promises to others, and he can make up for his own shortcomings.

古文：马周敏锐而正，评裁人物，直道而行，所任皆称朕意。
现代文：马周敏锐正直，评判人物，出以公心，他办事都令人满意。
English: Ma Zhou is keen and honest, judges people, and is fair-minded. His work is satisfactory.

古文：褚遂良鲠亮，有学术，竭诚亲于朕，若飞鸟依人，自加怜爱。
现代文：褚遂良刚强正直，光明磊落，有学问谋略，竭尽忠诚亲近我，像小鸟绕着人飞，自然让我加倍喜爱。
English: Sui Liang, strong and upright, bright and honest, learned and resourceful, loyal and close to me, like a bird flying around people, naturally made me love him twice as much.

古文：无忌应对机敏，善避嫌，求于古人，未有其比；总兵攻战，非所善也。 
现代文：长孙无忌回答问题机警敏锐，会避嫌疑，在古人中，也没有比得上的，但不擅长统帅军队打仗。 
English: The eldest grandson answered questions alertly and keenly, avoiding suspicion. Among the ancients, there was no match, but he was not good at commanding the army to fight.

古文：二十三年，帝疾甚，召入卧内，帝引手扪无忌颐，无忌哭，帝感塞，不得有所言。
现代文：贞观二十三年，太宗病危，召长孙无忌到卧室内，伸手摸着他的脸，长孙无忌哭泣着，太宗激动得气息哽咽说不出话。
English: In the 23rd year of Zhenguan, when Taizong was critically ill, he called his eldest grandson to his bedroom. He stretched out his hand and touched his face. The eldest grandson was crying, and Taizong was so excited that he could not speak.

古文：翌日，与遂良入受诏，顾遂良曰： 我有天下，无忌力也。
现代文：第二天，与褚遂良进宫接受诏书。太宗转头对褚遂良说： 我得到天下，是靠无忌的力量。
English: The next day, Emperor Taizong entered the palace with Emperor Suiliang to receive the imperial edict. Emperor Taizong turned to Emperor Suiliang and said, "I gained the world by relying on my indomitable strength.

古文：尔辅政，勿令谗毁者害之。 
现代文：您辅佐朝政，不要让进谗言的人陷害他。 
English: You are an aide to the government. Don't let those who criticize him set him up.

古文：有顷，崩。
现代文：过了一会，就逝世了。
English: Moments later, he was dead.

古文：方在离宫，皇太子悲恸，无忌曰： 大行以宗庙、社稷属殿下，宜速即位。 
现代文：当时在离宫，皇太子李治极度悲哀，长孙无忌说： 刚逝世的皇帝把朝廷、国家交给殿下，应该迅速登位。 
English: At that time, when he was leaving the palace, the crown prince, Li Zhi, was extremely sad. The eldest grandson said, "The emperor who has just passed away has handed over the imperial court and the country to His Imperial Highness. He should quickly ascend to the throne."

古文：因秘不发丧，请还宫。
现代文：为保守太宗逝世的秘密，暂不发表讣告，请太宗的灵车回到皇宫。
English: In order to keep the secret of Taizong's death, no obituary was published for the time being, and Taizong's hearse was asked to return to the palace.

古文：太子即位，是为高宗。
现代文：太子登皇帝位，这就是高宗。
English: Prince ascended to the throne, this is Gaozong.

古文：进无忌太尉，检校中书令，犹知门下、尚书二省。
现代文：提升长孙无忌为太尉、检校中书令，还是主持门下、尚书二省政务。
English: There is no reason why the eldest grandson should not be promoted to the rank of captain, inspector of schools, or preside over the government affairs of two provinces.

古文：固辞尚书省，许之。
现代文：长孙无忌坚决辞去尚书省职务，高宗答应了。
English: Gao Zong agreed to his eldest grandson's resolute resignation from the post of the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：帝欲立武昭仪为后，无忌固言不可。
现代文：高宗想立武昭仪为皇后，长孙无忌坚持说不行。
English: Gao Zong wanted to make Wu Zhaoyi the empress, but his eldest grandson insisted that it was not possible.

古文：帝密以宝器锦帛十余车赐之，又幸其第，擢三子皆朝散大夫，昭仪母复诣其家申请。
现代文：高宗秘密地把十多车珍贵的器物、锦缎、丝绸赏赐给他，又亲自上门探望他，把他的三个儿子都提拔为朝散大夫，武昭仪的母亲又到他家申述请求。
English: Gaozong secretly gave him more than ten carts of precious utensils, brocade and silk, and visited him in person. He promoted his three sons to be Choshan doctors, and Wu Zhaoyi's mother went to his house to appeal.

古文：许敬宗数劝之，无忌厉色折拒。
现代文：许敬宗多次劝说他，长孙无忌都严词厉色拒绝了。
English: Xu Jingzong repeatedly persuaded him, but his eldest grandson refused to do so.

古文：帝后召无忌、遂良及于志宁言后无息，昭仪有子，必欲立之者。
现代文：高宗后来召见长孙无忌、褚遂良和于志宁说明皇后没有子女，武昭仪有儿子，是一定要立她的原因。
English: Gao Zong later summoned his eldest grandsons, Mu Mu, Zou Suiliang and Yu Zhining to explain that the empress had no children, and that Wu Zhaoyi had a son, which was the reason why she must be enthroned.

古文：无忌已数谏，即曰： 先帝付托遂良，愿陛下访之。 
现代文：长孙无忌多次劝谏无效，就说： 先帝把您托付给遂良，希望陛下听听他的意见。 
English: The eldest grandson said, "The late emperor entrusted you to Suiliang, and I hope your majesty will listen to his advice."

古文：遂良极道不可，帝不听。
现代文：褚遂良极力说不行，高宗仍然不听。
English: Zou Suiliang tried his best to say no, but Gao Zong still wouldn't listen.

古文：后既立，以无忌受赐而不助己，衔之。
现代文：武昭仪立为皇后以后，因为长孙无忌接受了赏赐却不帮助自己，怀恨在心。
English: After Wu Zhaoyi became empress, she held a grudge against her eldest grandson because he accepted the reward but did not help himself.

古文：敬宗揣后指，阴使洛阳人李奉节上无忌变事，与侍中辛茂将临按，傅致反状。
现代文：许敬宗猜到武后的心思，暗中指使洛阳人李奉节向高宗诬告长孙无忌谋反，与侍中辛茂将办理此案，教他编造长孙无忌谋反的情由。
English: Xu Jingzong guessed the queen's thoughts and secretly ordered Li Fengjie from Luoyang to falsely accuse Gao Zong's eldest grandson of plotting a rebellion. He and the attendant Xin Mao would handle the case and teach him to fabricate the reason for the eldest grandson's rebellion.

古文：帝惊曰： 将妄人构间，殆不其然。 
现代文：高宗震惊地说 ：怕是奸邪的人挑拨离间，大概不是这样。 
English: Gao Zong was shocked and said, "It's probably not a case of a traitor sowing discord.

古文：敬宗具言： 反迹已露，陛下不忍，非社稷之福。 
现代文：许敬宗陈述说： 谋反的迹象已暴露了，陛下心软，不是国家的福气。 
English: "The signs of plotting a rebellion have been exposed. Your Majesty's soft heart is not a blessing for the country," said Xu Jingzong.

古文：帝泣曰： 我家不幸，高阳公主与我同气，往谋反，今舅复尔，使我重愧天下，奈何？ 
现代文：高宗哭着说： 我家里不幸，高阳公主与我一母所生，先前谋反，现在舅父又这样，使我深深愧对天下臣民，怎么办啊？ 
English: Gaozong cried and said, "My family is unfortunate. Princess Gaoyang was born to my mother and I. Previously, she plotted a rebellion, and now my uncle is doing the same. This makes me deeply ashamed to be a subject of the world. What should I do?

古文：对曰： 房遗爱口乳臭，与女子反，安能就事？
现代文：许敬宗回答说： 房遗爱是乳臭未干的年轻之辈，伙同妇女一起造反，哪能成事？
English: Xu Jingzong replied, "Fang Youai is a young man who has not yet grown up, and he is rebelling together with women. How can anything be accomplished?

古文：无忌奸雄，天下所畏伏，一旦窃发，陛下谁使御之？
现代文：长孙无忌是奸雄，天下人都害怕而服从他，一旦暗中发难，陛下派谁抵抗他？
English: The eldest grandson is an unscrupulous man. The whole world is afraid of him and obeys him. If there is a secret trouble, who will His Majesty send to resist him?

古文：今即急，恐攘袂一呼，以啸同恶，且为宗庙忧。
现代文：现在就很紧急，只怕他振臂一呼，召唤同党，就成了朝廷的祸患。
English: It is very urgent now. If he were to raise his arm and call out his party comrades, he would become a scourge to the imperial court.

古文：陛下不见隋室乎？
现代文：陛下没有看到隋朝的教训吗？
English: Didn't His Majesty see the lesson of the Sui Dynasty?

古文：宇文化及父宰相，弟尚主，而身掌禁兵，炀帝处之不疑，然而起为戎首，遂亡隋。
现代文：宇文化及的父亲是宰相，弟弟是驸马，他本人统率皇宫的警卫部队，炀帝对他们不猜疑，然而他起兵造反成了贼头，就把隋朝灭亡了。
English: Yu's father was the prime minister, his brother was the steed, and he himself led the palace's guard troops. Emperor Zhao did not suspect them, but he rebelled and became the thief's head, and the Sui Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：愿陛下决之。 
现代文：希望陛下拿定主意处置他。 
English: I hope His Majesty has made up his mind about him.

古文：帝犹疑，更诏审核。
现代文：高宗犹豫不决，又下令审核。
English: Gao Zong hesitated and then ordered a review.

古文：明日，敬宗言无忌反明甚，请逮捕。
现代文：第二天，许敬宗说长孙无忌造反的证据清楚得很，请求逮捕他。
English: The next day, Xu Jingzong said that the evidence of his eldest grandson's rebellion was very clear and requested his arrest.

古文：帝泣曰： 舅果尔，我决不忍杀，后世其谓我何？ 
现代文：高宗哭着说 ：舅父果然这样，我决不忍心杀他，不然，后世将怎样评价我？ 
English: Gaozong cried and said, "My uncle is really like this, I can't bear to kill him. Otherwise, how will posterity judge me?"

古文：敬宗曰： 汉文帝舅薄昭，从代来有功，后坐杀人，帝惜挠法，令朝臣丧服就哭之，昭自杀，良史不以为失。
现代文：许敬宗说： 汉文帝的舅父薄昭，保护文帝从代地回朝登上帝位有功，后来犯了杀人罪，文帝怜惜他又怕扰乱了法律，就命令朝臣们穿上丧服上门去为他哭丧，薄昭便自杀了，优秀的史官不认为这不妥当。
English: Xu Jingzong said: Emperor Wen's uncle Bo Zhao, who protected Emperor Wen from returning to the throne, later committed the crime of homicide. Emperor Wen took pity on him and ordered courtiers to put on mourning clothes and go to his house to mourn for him. Bo Zhao then committed suicide. Excellent historians do not think this is inappropriate.

古文：今无忌忘先帝之德，舍陛下至亲，乃欲移社稷、败宗庙，岂特昭比邪？
现代文：现在长孙无忌忘记了先帝的恩德，抛弃与陛下的至亲关系，竟然想颠覆国家、毁掉朝廷，岂止薄昭的罪恶可比？
English: Now the eldest grandson has no doubt forgotten the kindness of the former emperor, abandoned the relationship of kinship with His Majesty, and even wants to subvert the country and destroy the imperial court. Is this not comparable to the sins of a common criminal?

古文：在法夷五族。
现代文：按法律该灭五族。
English: According to the law, the five ethnic groups should be exterminated.

古文：臣闻当断不断，反受其乱。
现代文：我听说当断不断，反受其乱。
English: I've heard that it's the constant interruptions that are the problem.

古文：乘机亟行，缓必生变。
现代文：应当抓紧时机迅速行动，迟了就必然发生变乱。
English: We should seize the opportunity to act quickly. If we are late, turmoil will inevitably occur.

古文：无忌与先帝谋取天下，天下伏其智，王莽、司马懿之流。
现代文：长孙无忌帮先帝谋划夺取了天下，天下的人都佩服他的智谋，他是王莽、司马懿一类的人。
English: The eldest grandson unhesitatingly helped the former emperor to plan the conquest of the whole country. People all over the world admired his cleverness. He was a man like Wang Mang and Sima Ye.

古文：今逆徒自承，何疑而不决？ 
现代文：现在他自己已承认谋反，为什么犹豫不决呢？ 
English: Now that he has admitted to plotting a coup, why is he hesitating?

古文：帝终不质问。
现代文：高宗始终没有对质审问长孙无忌。
English: Gao Zong has never shied away from questioning his eldest grandson.

古文：遂下诏削官爵封户，以扬州都督一品俸置于黔州，所在发兵护送；流其子秘书监冲等于岭外；从弟渝州刺史知仁贬翼州司马。
现代文：于是下令削去官爵封地，给予扬州都督一品官的俸禄流放到黔州，由扬州派兵护送。把他任秘书监的儿子长孙冲等人流放到岭南，把他任渝州刺史的堂弟长孙知仁降职为翼州司马。
English: Therefore, he ordered the fiefdoms of officials and nobles to be abolished, the governor of Yangzhou to be given the salary of a first-class official to be exiled to Zhangzhou and escorted by soldiers from Yangzhou, his son, Changsun Chong, who was the secretary, and others to be exiled to Lingnan, and his cousin, Changsun Zhiren, who was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou, to be demoted to the position of Sima of Yuzhou.

古文：后数月，又诏司空勣、中书令敬宗、侍中茂将等覆按反狱。
现代文：几个月后，又诏令司空李责力、中书令许敬宗、侍中辛茂将等人复查谋反案件。
English: A few months later, he also ordered Siku Li Rongli, Chusho Rong Xu Jingzong, and Samurai Chung Xin Mao Zheng to re-investigate the treason case.

古文：敬宗令大理正袁公瑜、御史宋之顺等即黔州暴讯。
现代文：许敬宗命令大理正堂袁公瑜、御史宋之顺等人到黔州用酷刑审讯。
English: Xu Jingsong ordered Yuan Gongyu, Song Zhishun and others from Dali Zhengtang to be tortured and interrogated in Zhangzhou.

古文：无忌投缳卒，冲免死，杀族子祥，流族弟思于檀口，大抵期亲皆谪徙。
现代文：长孙无忌上吊自缢，儿子长孙冲免去死罪，杀死了同族的侄儿长孙祥，把同族的弟弟长孙思流放到檀口，服丧一年时间的亲族大都被降职流放。
English: The eldest grandson hanged himself, his son Chong Chong was exempted from the death penalty, he killed the nephew of the same family, the eldest grandson Xiang, and the younger brother of the same family, the eldest grandson Si, was exiled to Dangkou. Most of the relatives who had been mourning for a year were demoted and exiled.

古文：初，无忌与遂良悉心奉国，以天下安危自任，故永徽之政有贞观风。
现代文：当初，长孙无忌和褚遂良全心全意为国家效力，把天下安危作为自己的责任，所以高宗永徽年间的政治有太宗贞观之治的风范。
English: At the beginning, the eldest grandson Mubi and Zou Suiliang worked wholeheartedly for the country, taking the world's security as their own responsibility, so the politics during Gao Zongyonghui had the style of Taizong's chastity.

古文：帝亦宾礼老臣，拱己以听。
现代文：高宗也尊敬老臣，恭敬地听取他们的意见。
English: Gao Zong also respected his elders and respectfully listened to their opinions.

古文：纲纪设张，此两人维持之也。
现代文：法纪的设立和推行，是这两个人全力维持的结果。
English: The establishment and enforcement of law and order is the result of the efforts of these two men.

古文：既二后废立计不合，奸臣阴图，帝暗于听受，卒，以屠覆，自是政归武氏，几至亡国。
现代文：到了为两个皇后的废立意见不合高宗的心意后，奸臣乘机暗中设计陷害他，高宗昏庸，听信谗言，长孙无忌终于被害死，从此后政权被武氏家族夺去，唐朝差点亡国。
English: When Gao Zong's intention to depose the two empresses did not meet with his approval, his treacherous vassals took the opportunity to secretly design and frame him. Gao Zong was stupid and listened to their advice, and his eldest grandson was finally killed. From then on, the regime was taken away by the Wu family, and the Tang Dynasty almost lost the country.

古文：上元元年，追复官爵，以孙元翼袭封。
现代文：高宗上元元年，恢复了长孙无忌的官职爵位，让他的孙子长孙无翼继承封爵。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Gao Zong restored the official title of his eldest grandson, and allowed his grandson, the eldest grandson, to inherit the title.

古文：初，无忌自作墓昭陵茔中，至是许还葬。
现代文：当初，长孙无忌在昭陵墓地为自己预建了坟墓，到这时才允许迁葬回来。
English: At first, the eldest grandson built a tomb for himself in the Zhaoling Cemetery, and only then was he allowed to return.

古文：子绾，为柏人令，有仁政，县为立祠。
现代文：文宗李昂开成三年，下诏书说 ：阅读本朝史料，每当读到有关太尉长孙无忌的事情，总是掩卷叹息。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Liangkaizhen, the next imperial edict said: "Read the historical materials of this dynasty. Whenever you read about the immorality of the eldest grandson of the captain, always hide the scroll and sigh."

古文：上官仪，字游韶，陕州陕人。
现代文：就让他的后代孙子长孙钧任猗氏县令吧。 上官仪字游韶，陕州陕县人。
English: Let his descendant, his grandchild, the eldest grandson, Sun Ye, serve as the county magistrate of Yuxi County.

古文：父弘，为隋江都宫副监，大业末，为陈棱所杀。
现代文：其父上官弘，隋朝时任江都宫副监，大业末年，被陈陵杀掉。
English: His father, Shangguan Hong, who was the deputy inspector of the Jiangdu Palace during the Sui Dynasty, was killed by Chen Ling in the last years of his life.

古文：时仪幼，左右匿免，冒为沙门服。
现代文：当时上官仪还年幼，被身边侍候的人隐藏起来，得以免遭不幸，假冒僧徒潜伏。
English: At that time, Shangguan Yi was still young. He was hidden by the attendants around him to avoid misfortune, and the fake monks were lurking.

古文：浸工文词，涉贯坟典。
现代文：后渐渐精于文章之学，涉猎遍及最古之书。
English: Later, he gradually became proficient in the study of texts, dabbling in the most ancient books.

古文：贞观初，擢进士第，召授弘文馆直学士。
现代文：贞观初年，考中进士，朝廷征招他任弘文馆直学士。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he was admitted to the middle school examination, and the imperial court recruited him to be a direct bachelor of the Hongwu Museum.

古文：迁秘书郎。
现代文：后来晋升为秘书郎。
English: He was later promoted to secretary.

古文：太宗每属文，遣仪视藁，宴私未尝不预。
现代文：太宗撰著文辞，往往将文稿送给上官仪看；赐宴臣下，上官仪无不参与。
English: When Taizong wrote a text, he often sent it to the high officials to read; when he gave a banquet to his vassals, the high officials all participated.

古文：转起居郎。
现代文：又转任起居郎。
English: He was also transferred to the position of kijiro.

古文：高宗即位，为秘书少监，进西台同东西台三品，时以雍州司士参军韦绚为殿中侍御史，或疑非迁。仪曰： 此野人语耳。
现代文：高宗就位，他任秘书少监，升任西台侍郎、同东西台三品。当时任用雍州司士参军韦绚为殿中侍御史，有人怀疑这不是迁升，上官仪说： 这不过是鄙陋无知的人的议论罢了。
English: Gao Zong took his place, he was appointed secretary and junior superintendent, and was promoted to the West District Attendant, and to the East and West District Third Rank. At that time, Wei Hua, the Yongzhou Scribe and member of the army, was appointed as the palace attendant. Some people suspected that this was not a promotion, and the senior official said: This is just the talk of a vulgar and ignorant person.

古文：御史供奉赤墀下，接武夔龙，簉羽鹓鹭，岂雍州判佐比乎？ 
现代文：御史是在宫殿内供职，地位近于舜帝时的重臣夔与龙，置身于朝官的班列之中，难道是雍州的佐吏僚属之职能比拟的吗？ 
English: Is the function of the imperial secretary comparable to that of the imperial secretary in Yongzhou, who serves in the palace, whose status is close to that of the senior minister of the emperor, and who is placed in the ranks of the imperial officials?

古文：时以为清言。
现代文：当时人们认为这是公正之言。
English: At the time, it was seen as a fair point.

古文：仪工诗，其词绮错婉媚。
现代文：上官仪长于做诗。他的诗绮丽多彩、柔婉华美。
English: Shangguan Yi is good at making poetry. His poetry is colorful, gentle and beautiful.

古文：及贵显，人多效之，谓为 上官体 。
现代文：到了他地位高贵显赫时，人们往往仿效他的诗风，被人称为 上官体 。
English: When he reached his position of nobility and prominence, people often imitated his poetic style, which was called the superior official body.

古文：麟德元年，坐梁王忠事下狱死，籍其家。
现代文：高宗麟德元年，上官仪因与梁王李忠的案件有牵连，判死罪投入监牢，他的家财被充公、亲属沦为奴婢。
English: In the first year of Gao Zonglin's reign, because Shang Guan Yi was implicated in the case of Liang Wang Lizhong, he was sentenced to death and put in prison. His family wealth was confiscated and his relatives were reduced to slaves.

古文：初，武后得志，遂牵制帝，专威福，帝不能堪；又引道士行厌胜，中人王伏胜发之。
现代文：起先，武后得志，因而牵制高宗，独断专行，作威作福，高宗忍受不了；她又勾结道士使用符咒谋求成功，被宦官王伏胜告发。
English: At first, the Empress Dowager won the hearts and minds of Gao Zong, so she tried to control Gao Zong, acting arbitrarily and arrogantly, which Gao Zong could not bear. She also colluded with Taoists to use charms and spells to seek success, and was denounced by the eunuch Wang Fuxing.

古文：帝因大怒，将废为庶人，召仪与议。仪曰： 皇后专恣，海内失望，宜废之以顺人心。 
现代文：高宗因此大怒，要将武后废为平民，召见上官仪一同商议，上官仪说： 皇后独断专行，恣意行事，朝野上下已失人望，应当废黜她以顺应人心。 
English: As a result, Gaozong was furious and wanted to abolish Wu Hou as a commoner. He summoned the higher officials to discuss the matter. The higher officials said, "The empress has been acting on her own, acting arbitrarily. She has lost the respect of the people both at home and abroad. She should be deposed so as to conform to the will of the people."

古文：帝使草诏。
现代文：高宗让他草拟诏书。
English: Gao Zong asked him to draft the edict.

古文：左右奔告后，后自申诉，帝乃悔；又恐后怨恚，乃曰： 上官仪教我。 
现代文：内宫侍臣急忙跑去通告武后，武后主动申诉辩解，高宗后悔；又怕武后怨怒愤恨自己，于是说： 这是上官仪教我这样做的。 
English: The palace attendant hurriedly ran to inform Empress Wu. Empress Wu took the initiative to appeal and defend herself. Gaozong regretted it; he also feared that Empress Wu would be angry and resentful of him, so he said: This is what the superior officer's etiquette taught me to do.

古文：后由是深恶仪。
现代文：武后因此对上官仪深恶痛绝。
English: As a result, Empress Wu detested the imperial court ceremony.

古文：始，忠为陈王时，仪为谘议，与王伏胜同府。
现代文：原先，李忠做陈王时，上官仪任咨议，与王伏胜同在王府。
English: Originally, when Li Zhong was the king of Chen, he was in the royal palace with Wang Fusheng.

古文：至是，许敬宗构仪与忠谋大逆，后志也。
现代文：这时，许敬宗诬陷上官仪与李忠谋反，这是武后的旨意。
English: At this time, Xu Jingzong falsely accused Shang Gui of plotting against Li Zhong, which was the will of Empress Wu.

古文：自褚遂良等元老大臣相次屠履，公卿莫敢正议，独仪纳忠，祸又不旋踵，由是天下之政归于后，而帝拱手矣。
现代文：自从褚遂良等元老大臣相继被残害，公卿大臣没有敢再坚持公论的人，惟独上官仪奉献忠诚，灾祸能不很快降临到他头上？自此国政归于武后，而高宗也无所作为了。
English: Since the elder ministers such as Gong Suiliang were killed one after another, and the noble ministers no longer dared to insist on public opinion, but only on the official ceremony to offer loyalty, could the disaster not soon fall on his head? Since then, the country's affairs have been returned to Wu Hou, and Gaozong has done nothing.

古文：子庭芝，历周王府属，亦被杀。
现代文：上官仪的儿子上官庭芝，历任周王府属官，也被杀。
English: The son of Shangguan Yi, Shangguan Tianzhi, who was a subordinate official of the Zhou royal court, was also killed.

古文：庭芝女，中宗时为昭容，追赠仪为中书令、秦州都督、楚国公；庭芝黄门侍郎、岐州刺史、天水郡公，以礼改葬。
现代文：上官庭芝的女儿婉儿，中宗时是宫中的昭容，因而追赠上官仪为中书令、秦州都督、楚国公；追赠上官庭芝为黄门侍郎、岐州刺史、天水郡公，按追赠职位的礼仪重行安葬。
English: The daughter of Shangguan Tianzhi, Wan'er, was Zhaorong in the imperial court during the reign of Emperor Zongzong, and was posthumously awarded the Shangguan Rites of Zhongshurong, Qin State Governor, and Duke of Chu; the posthumously awarded Shangguan Tianzhi was Huangmen Zhi Lang, Qizhou Zhi Shi, and Tianshui County Duke, and was reburied according to the etiquette of the posthumous position.

