古文：《齐民要术》：大、小麦皆须五月、六月暵地。
现代文：《齐民要术》：种大麦和小麦的田地，皆要在五六月间翻晒。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": the fields of barley and wheat should be ploughed between May and June.

古文：不暵地而种者，其收倍薄。
现代文：不不翻晒地便下种，收成就会成倍的减少。
English: If you do not turn the soil over and then plant, the harvest will be reduced by a factor of two.

古文：崔寔曰： 五月六月菑麦田 也。
现代文：崔寔说 五月六月耕耘麦田 。
English: Cui Wei said that the wheat fields should be ploughed in May and June.

古文：《孝经援神契》云：黑坟宜麦。
现代文：《孝经援神契》说：麦子适合在肥沃的黑坟土种植。
English: "The Filial Piety and Benevolence Pact" says: Wheat is suitable for planting in fertile black grave soil.

古文：《氾胜之书》曰：种麦得时，无不善。
现代文：《氾胜之书》说：种麦赶上农时，便没有生长不好的。
English: "The Book of Overwhelming Victory" says: When wheat planting catches up with agriculture, there is no bad growth.

古文：早种则虫而有节；晚种则穗小而少实。
现代文：种早了，会有虫害，麦秆的节多；种晚了，便会使麦穗小、子粒少。
English: If you plant early, there will be insect pests, and the stalks of wheat will have more knots; if you plant late, the ears of wheat will be small and the grains will be few.

古文：当种麦，若天旱无雨泽，则薄渍麦种以酢且故反，与 醋 字同。
现代文：如果种麦的农时已经到了，但天气干旱、缺少雨水，便可用酢浆 酢 ，且故反，同醋。
English: If the time has come to sow wheat, but the weather is dry and there is a lack of rain, you can use vinegar, and vice versa, with vinegar.

古文：浆并蚕矢，夜半渍向晨，速投之，令与白露俱下。
现代文：和蚕矢将麦种稍微浸渍些时，可自半夜浸到黎明，赶快拿出去种，让种子和晨露同时落入土中。
English: With the silkworm arrow, the wheat seed is slightly impregnated. It can be soaked from midnight to dawn, quickly taken out and planted, so that the seed and the morning dew fall into the soil at the same time.

古文：酢浆令麦耐旱，蚕矢令麦忍寒。
现代文：酸浆水能让麦耐旱，蚕矢能让麦耐寒。
English: Sour water can make wheat drought-resistant, and silkworm arrows can make wheat cold-resistant.

古文：麦生黄色，伤于太稠；稠者，锄而稀之。
现代文：麦苗出土，颜色泛黄，是苗稠的危害；苗太稠的地方，要锄掉一些，使它变稀。
English: When the wheat seedlings are unearthed, the color is yellowish, which is the harm of the seedlings being too thick. If the seedlings are too thick, they should be pruned to make them thinner.

古文：崔寔曰：凡种大、小麦，得白露节，可种薄田；秋分，种中田；后十日，种美田。
现代文：崔寔说：种大麦和小麦，等到白露节一到，即可开始种瘠薄的田地；秋分的时候就可以开始种中等的田地；秋分十日过后，再种肥沃的良田。
English: Cui Wei said: plant barley and wheat, and wait until the White Dew Festival arrives, you can start planting thin fields; at the time of the autumn equinox, you can start planting medium-sized fields; after the tenth day of the autumn equinox, plant fertile fields.

古文：惟蓣古猛反，大麦类。麦，早晚无常。
现代文：只有种蓣麦、蓣、大麦类，早晚没有一定的时间。
English: We only grow buckwheat, alfalfa and barley, so we don't have a lot of time.

古文：正月，可种春麦，尽二月止。
现代文：春麦，自正月开始种起，可一直延续到二月底。
English: Spring wheat has been planted since the beginning of the year and can be continued until the end of February.

古文：青稞苦禾反，麦名。
现代文：青稞麦：稞，苦禾反，麦名。
English: Blue buckwheat: starch, bitter grass, wheat name.

古文：麦：治打时稍难，惟快日用碌碡碾。
现代文：脱粒比较困难，快日须用碌碡碾打。
English: It is more difficult to thresh the grains, and in the early days, it is necessary to grind with a roller.

古文：与大麦同时熟。
现代文：跟大麦同时成熟。
English: They ripen at the same time as the barley.

古文：面堪作趁及饼饪，甚美。
现代文：面粉可作炒面和烙饼，味道非常美。
English: The flour can be used to make fried noodles and pancakes, and the taste is very beautiful.

古文：磨緫尽无麸。
现代文：用来磨面，全部磨尽，没有麸皮。
English: Used to grind the surface, all grinded up, no bran.

古文：锄一遍佳；不锄亦得。
现代文：锄一遍比较好，不锄也可以。
English: It's better to do it once, but you can also do it twice.

古文：《四时类要》：晒大小麦，今年收者，于六月扫庭除，候地毒热，众手出麦，薄摊，取苍耳碎剉拌晒之。
现代文：《四时类要》：晾晒刚收的大小麦，应在六月间，扫净庭院，等候地面晒至毒热，麦子出仓要众人一齐动手，要摊薄，要将苍耳剉碎，拌入麦子中去晒。
English: "Four-hour essentials": the small and medium-sized wheat that has just been harvested should be dried in June, the courtyard should be swept clean, and the ground should be dried to a poisonous heat. When the wheat comes out of the barn, everyone should work together, spread it thinly, chop the buckwheat and mix it into the wheat to dry it.

古文：至未时，及热收，可以二年不蛀。
现代文：等到三四点钟趁热收藏，如此，可以在两年内不生虫蛀。
English: Wait until three or four o'clock to take advantage of the heat collection, so that you can not produce worms for two years.

古文：音注，虫也。
现代文：音注，蛀虫。
English: Music note, roundworm.

古文：若有陈麦，亦须依此法更晒，须在立秋前；秋后，则已有虫生，恐无益矣。
现代文：如有陈麦，也应依上法重新晒过。应在立秋节前晒，立秋过后晒，已开始生虫，恐怕已无什么好处。
English: If there is stale wheat, it should also be re-baked according to the above method. It should be baked before the Mid-Autumn Festival and baked after the Mid-Autumn Festival. If insects have begun to grow, I am afraid there is no benefit.

古文：《士农必用》：古农语云： 彭祖寿，年八百，不可忘了植蚕植麦。 
现代文：《士农必用》：古代农谚说： 凭着老年人的宝贵经验，千万不可疏忽栽桑种麦这样的与民生至关重要的大事。 
English: "Essential for officials and farmers": An ancient agricultural proverb says: With the valuable experience of the elderly, one must not neglect such an important matter as planting mulberry seeds, which is crucial to people's livelihood.

古文：又云： 社后种麦争回耧。 
现代文：又说： 秋社后种麦要赶时间，力争尽快播种完。 
English: He also said: It is necessary to hurry to sow wheat after the autumn meeting, and strive to finish sowing as soon as possible.

古文：又云： 社后种麦争回牛。 
现代文：又说： 秋社过后种麦，争取快回牛。 
English: He also said: After the autumn festival, sow wheat, and strive to quickly return cattle.

古文：言夺时之急，如此之甚也。
现代文：以上是说争夺农时的急迫，竟到了如此地步。
English: The above is to say that the urgency of the struggle for agriculture has reached such a level.

古文：《韩氏直说》：五六月麦熟，带青收一半；合熟收一半，若过熟，则抛费。
现代文：《韩氏直说》：五六月间，麦子已经成熟，应在麦秆还带有青色的时候，收刈一半，合熟时收刈一半。如若熟过了头，便会造成抛撒浪费。
English: "Han's Straight Talk": Between May and June, when the wheat is ripe, half of the wheat should be harvested while the stalk is still blue, and half should be harvested when it is ripe. If it is overripe, it will cause scattering waste.

古文：每日至晚，即便载麦上场堆积，用苫缴覆，以防雨作。
现代文：每天傍晚，将刈下的麦子运回到麦场上堆积起来，用草苫子围盖好，预防着天下雨。
English: Every evening, the harvested wheat is transported back to the wheat field, where it is piled up and covered with straw to prevent rain.

古文：苫须于以前农隙时备下。
现代文：苫，应当在农闲时编制好备用。
English: , it should be prepared for standby during idle time.

古文：如搬载不及，即于地内苫积；天晴，乘夜载上场，即摊一二车，薄则易干。
现代文：如果来不及搬运，便可在田中堆积苫盖好。假使天气晴明，也可以连夜搬运到场上，并可随时摊开一两车，要摊薄一些，容易晾晒干。
English: If it is too late to transport, then the straw can be piled up in the middle of the field. If the weather is fine, it can also be transported to the field overnight, and one or two cars can be spread out at any time. It should be spread out thinly so that it is easy to dry.

古文：碾过一遍，翻过，又碾一遍，起秸下场，扬子收起。
现代文：碾打过一遍，将麦秸翻过来再碾打一遍，即可把秸秆起到场边堆起，将麦子扬净收起。
English: Grind it again, turn the straw over and grind it again, you can pile up the straw to the side of the field and put away the wheat.

古文：虽未净，直待所收麦都碾尽，然后将未净秸秆再碾。
现代文：秸秆没有脱粒干净，等到麦子全部碾打完毕，将未净秸秆，一并合起来再碾打一遍。
English: If the stalks are not cleanly threshed, wait until all the wheat has been milled, then grind the unpurified stalks together and grind them again.

古文：如此，可一日一场，比至麦收尽，已碾讫三之二。
现代文：这样做，可以每天碾打一场，等到田中的麦子收刈完毕，已经将三分之二的麦子碾打完毕。
English: In this way, it is possible to grind once a day, and by the time the wheat in the field has been harvested, two-thirds of the wheat has been ground.

古文：农家忙并，无似蚕麦。
现代文：农家的忙碌，再没有比得上蚕老麦熟的季节了。
English: A farmer's busy schedule is nothing compared to the silkworm and wheat ripening season.

古文：古语云： 收麦如救火。 
现代文：古话说： 抢收麦子如同救火。 
English: As the old saying goes: "Gathering wheat is like putting out a fire."

古文：若少迟慢，一值阴雨，即为灾伤，迁延过时，秋苗亦误锄治。
现代文：如稍有耽误，碰上天下雨，便会立即变成灾害。另外，如麦收工作费时过多，也会误了秋禾的耘锄工作。
English: If there is a slight delay, if it rains, it will immediately become a disaster. In addition, if the wheat collection work is too time-consuming, it will also miss the autumn harvest work.

