古文：侯景字万景，魏之怀朔镇人也。
现代文：侯景字万景，是北魏怀朔镇人。
English: Houjing, also known as Wanjing, was from the town of Huai Shuo in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：少而不羁，爲镇功曹史。
现代文：从小就放荡不守规矩。作过镇功曹史。
English: He has been debauched and unruly since he was a child. He has made great achievements.

古文：魏末北方大乱，乃事边将尒朱荣，甚见器重。
现代文：魏末北方大乱，他投靠边将尔朱荣，很受器重。
English: During the Northern Rebellion at the end of the Wei Dynasty, he sided with the border general, Er Zhu Rong, and was treated with great respect.

古文：初学兵法于荣部将慕容绍宗，未几绍宗每询问焉。
现代文：最初向尔朱荣的部将慕容绍宗学兵法，没多长时间绍宗就屡次向他求教了。
English: At first, he learned the art of war from Murong Shaosong, the commander of Le Zhurong. It didn't take long for Shaosong to repeatedly ask him for advice.

古文：后以军功爲定州刺史。
现代文：后来因军功作定州刺史。
English: He later made history in Dingzhou for his military exploits.

古文：始魏相高欢微时，与景甚相友好，及欢诛尒朱氏，景以衆降，仍爲欢用。
现代文：当初魏相高欢没作大官时，和侯景关系很好，等高欢杀了尔朱荣，侯景带领部众归顺高欢，于是被高欢任用。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, when Gao Huan was not a high-ranking official, he had a good relationship with Hou Jing. Gao Huan killed Le Zhu Rong, and Hou Jing led the people to Shun Gao Huan, so he was appointed by Gao Huan.

古文：稍至吏部尚书，非其好也。每独曰： 何当离此反故纸邪。 
现代文：逐渐官作到吏部尚书，这职务不合他的习性，每每自言自语说： 什么时候才能从这破纸堆里摆脱出来呢。 
English: He gradually worked his way up to the position of clerk, which did not suit his habits, and said to himself: When will I be able to get rid of this pile of paper?

古文：寻封濮阳郡公。
现代文：不久被封为濮阳郡公。
English: He was soon named the governor of Shenyang County.

古文：欢之败于沙苑，景谓欢曰： 宇文泰恃于战胜，今必致怠，请以数千劲骑至关中取之。 
现代文：高欢在沙苑败于西魏，侯景对高欢说： 宇文泰骄傲打了胜仗，如今一定懈怠，请让我带数千精锐骑兵到关中去捉他。 
English: Gao Huan was defeated in the Western Wei Dynasty at Sha Yuan. Hou Jing said to Gao Huan: "Uwentai fought a victorious battle with pride, but now he must be slacking. Please let me take thousands of elite cavalrymen to Guanzhong to catch him."

古文：欢以告其妃娄氏，曰： 彼若得泰，亦将不归。
现代文：高欢把他的主意告诉自己的妃子娄氏，娄氏说： 他如果抓到宇文泰，也会不回来。
English: Gao Huan told his idea to his concubine, Yu Shi, who said, "If he catches Uwentai, he won't come back either."

古文：得泰失景，于事奚益。 
现代文：得泰失景，有什么好处呢。 
English: What's the benefit of losing Thailand?

古文：欢乃止。
现代文：于是高欢没有派他去。
English: So Gao Huan did not send him.

古文：后爲河南道大行台，位司徒。
现代文：侯景后来作河南道大行台，位至司徒。
English: Hou Jing later became the governor of Henan Province, and was given the title of Worm to Sittu.

古文：又言于欢曰： 恨不得泰。
现代文：他又对高欢说： 遗憾没有抓到宇文泰。
English: He also said to Gao Huan: "It's a pity that we didn't catch Yu Wentai.

古文：请兵三万，横行天下；要须济江缚取萧衍老公，以作太平寺主。 
现代文：请给我三万兵马，我就可以横扫天下，定能过江把萧衍老头绑过来，让他来作我们太平寺的住持。 
English: Please give me thirty thousand soldiers and horses, and I will sweep the world. I will certainly be able to cross the river, tie up old man Xiao Yan, and make him the abbot of our Taiping Temple.

古文：欢壮其言，使拥兵十万，专制河南，仗任若己之半体。
现代文：高欢很赏识他的豪言壮语，让他带兵十万，管理河南一切事务，倚仗信任他就像是自己的另一半。
English: Gao Huan was very appreciative of his brave words. He let him lead 100,000 soldiers and manage all affairs in Henan. He trusted him as if he were his other half.

古文：景右足短，弓马非其长，所在唯以智谋。
现代文：侯景右腿短，弯弓骑马不是他所擅长，只是靠智谋取胜。
English: Hou Jing's right leg is short, and he is not good at riding a horse with a curved bow. He only relies on his wits to win.

古文：时欢部将高昂、彭乐皆雄勇冠时，唯景常轻之，言 似豕突尔，势何所至 。
现代文：当时高欢部将高昂、彭乐都是勇冠当世，只有侯景经常表示轻视他们，说他们 不过像野猪一样横冲直撞，又能怎么样 。
English: At that time, Gao Huanbu, Gao Gao, and Peng Le were all champions in the world. Only Hou Jing often expressed contempt for them, saying that they were just rampaging like wild boars, but what could they do.

古文：及将镇河南，请于欢曰： 今握兵在远，奸人易生诈僞，大王若赐以书，请异于他者。 
现代文：等他要出镇河南时，对高欢说： 如今我握兵在远方，恐怕奸人会玩弄什么诡计，大王要是给我写信，请作些特殊的标志。 
English: When he was about to leave the town of Henan, he said to Gao Huan: Now that I am far away, I am afraid that the traitor will play some tricks. If the great king writes to me, please make some special signs.

古文：许之。
现代文：高欢答应。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：每与景书，别加微点，虽子弟弗之知。
现代文：每次给侯景写信，总点上细微的记号，即使高欢的子弟也不知道。
English: Every time I write to Hou Jing, there is a tiny mark on the total point, even if Gao Huan's son does not know it.

古文：及欢疾笃，其世子澄矫书召之。
现代文：等高欢的病重，他的长子高澄假借他的名义给侯景写信召他回来。
English: When Gao Huan fell seriously ill, his eldest son Gao Cheng wrote to Hou Jing in his name to call him back.

古文：景知僞，惧祸，因用王伟计，乃乙太清元年二月遣其行台郎中丁和上表求降。
现代文：侯景看破是假的，怕遭祸，因此采用王伟的主意，在太清元年二月派他的行台郎中丁和向梁朝上表请求投降。
English: Hou Jing saw through the fake and feared disaster, so he adopted Wang Wei's idea and sent his courier Zhong Dinghe to the Liang Dynasty in February of the first year of the Qing Dynasty to request surrender.

古文：帝召群臣议之，尚书仆射谢举等皆议纳景非便，武帝不从。
现代文：武帝召集群臣商议，尚书仆射谢举等人都说接纳侯景不合适，武帝不从。
English: Emperor Wu convened a group of courtiers to discuss the matter. Shang Shufu, Sha Xieju and others all said that it was not appropriate to accept Houjing, and Emperor Wu did not comply.

古文：初，帝以是岁正月乙卯于善言殿读佛经，因谓左右黄慧弼曰： 我昨梦天下太平，尔其识之。 
现代文：当初，武帝在当年正月十七在善言殿读佛经，对左右黄慧弼说： 我昨夜梦见天下太平，你记住这件事。 
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu was reading Buddhist scriptures on the seventeenth day of the first month of the year in the Hall of Good Words. He said to Huang Huiqi: "I dreamed last night that the world was at peace. Please remember this."

古文：及和至，校景实以正月乙卯日定计，帝由是纳之。
现代文：等丁和到此，经核对侯景正是在正月十七决定降梁，武帝因此便接收下来。
English: At this point, after checking with Hou Jing, it was decided to lower the beam on the seventeenth day of the first month, so Emperor Wu accepted it.

古文：于是封景河南王、大将军、使持节、董督河南南北诸军事、大行台，承制如邓禹故事。
现代文：于是封侯景为河南王、大将军、使持节、董督河南南北诸军事、大行台，可以秉承皇帝旨意而便宜行事，像东汉的邓禹一样。
English: As a result, the vassal lord Jing was the king of Henan, the great general, the envoy of the festival, the military commander of the north and south of Henan, and the great general. He could adhere to the emperor's will and act cheaply, like Deng Yu of the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：高澄嗣事爲勃海王，遣其将慕容绍宗围景于长社。
现代文：高澄继承父位作了渤海王，派他的大将慕容绍宗在长社包围了侯景。
English: Takasumi succeeded his father as king of Bokkai, and sent his general Murong Shaosong to encircle Houjing in Chosha.

古文：景急，乃求割鲁阳、长社、东荆、北兖请救于西魏，魏遣五城王元庆等率兵救之，绍宗乃退。
现代文：侯景形势吃紧，便请求割鲁阳、长社、东荆、北兖向西魏求救，西魏派五城王元庆等率兵救侯景，绍宗才退兵。
English: Houjing was in a tight situation, so he asked the Western Wei for help from Quarry Luyang, Changsha, Dongjing, and Beilun. The Western Wei sent the Five Cities Wang Yuanqing and other soldiers to rescue Houjing, and it was only then that Shaozong withdrew.

古文：景复请兵于司州刺史羊鸦仁，鸦仁遣长史邓鸿率兵至汝水，元庆军夜遁，鸦仁乃据悬瓠。
现代文：侯景又向梁司州刺史羊鸦仁请求救兵，鸦仁派长史邓鸿率兵到汝水，元庆军队夜间撤走，鸦仁于是占据了悬瓠城。
English: Hou Jing also requested the rescue of soldiers from Liang Shizhou's commander Shi Yang Rongren. Rongren sent his commander Shi Denghong and his army to Riushui. Yuanqing's army withdrew at night, and Rongren then occupied the Hanging City.

古文：时景将蔡道遵北归，言景有悔过志。高澄以爲信然，乃以书喻景，若还，许以豫州刺史终其身，所部文武更不追摄，阖门无恙，并还宠妻爱子。
现代文：当时侯景部将蔡道遵北归魏都，说侯景有悔过之意，高澄信以为真，就给侯景写信，答应他如果回来，让他终身作豫州刺史，所部文武概不追究，保他一家无事，并送还他的宠妻爱子。
English: At that time, Hou Jing sent Cai Dao Zunbei back to the Wei capital, saying that Hou Jing had a sense of remorse, Gao Chengxin thought it was true, so he wrote a letter to Hou Jing, promising him that if he came back, he would be a historian of Yuzhou for life, the department would not investigate his culture and martial arts, and his family would be safe, and his beloved wife and son would be returned.

古文：景报书不从。
现代文：侯景回信不愿听从。
English: Hou Jing did not want to listen to the letter.

古文：澄知景无归志，乃遣军相继讨景。
现代文：高澄知道侯景没有回来的意思，便派兵不断去讨伐他。
English: Knowing that Hou Jing had no intention of returning, Gao Cheng continuously sent soldiers to fight him.

古文：帝闻鸦仁已据悬瓠，遂命群帅指授方略，大举攻东魏，以贞阳侯萧明爲都督。
现代文：梁武帝听说鸦仁已占据了悬瓠，就指派将帅们制订计划，要大举进攻东魏，委派贞阳侯萧渊明为都督。
English: When Emperor Liang Wu heard that Oren had occupied the capital, he assigned generals to draw up a plan to attack Eastern Wei in a big way, and appointed Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming as the governor.

古文：明军败见俘。
现代文：渊明兵败被俘。
English: Yuanming was defeated and captured.

古文：绍宗攻潼州，刺史郭凤弃城走。
现代文：慕容绍宗进攻潼州，刺史郭凤弃城逃走。
English: Murong Shao Zong attacked Zhangzhou, stabbed Guo Feng, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：景乃遣其行台左丞王伟、左户郎中王则诣阙献策，请元氏子弟立爲魏主。
现代文：侯景派遣他的行台左丞王伟、户部郎中王则到朝廷献计，请朝廷立元氏子弟为魏主。
English: Hou Jing sent Wang Wei, the governor of Zhudaizhang, and Wang Zhong, the head of the Household Division, to the imperial court to propose a plan, asking the imperial court to make the children of the Liyuan clan the rulers of Wei.

古文：诏遣太子舍人元贞爲咸阳王，须度江许即位，以乘舆之副资给之。
现代文：朝廷派太子舍人元贞去作咸阳王，许他大军渡江以后便可即位作魏帝，并把梁皇帝的副车辇送给他。
English: The imperial court sent the prince Xie Ren Yuanzhen to be the king of Xianyang, hoping that after his army crossed the river, he could be enthroned as the Emperor of Wei, and gave him the Emperor Liang's second chariot.

古文：高澄又遣慕容绍宗追景，景退保涡阳，使谓绍宗曰： 欲送客邪？将定雄雌邪？ 
现代文：高澄又派慕容绍宗追剿侯景，侯景退保涡阳，派人对绍宗说： 你是想来送客呢，还是要一决雌雄呢？ 
English: Gaocheng also sent Murong Shaosong to chase down Houjing, Houjing retreated to the protection of the whirlwind, and sent people to Shaosong saying: Do you want to send guests, or do you want to fight?

古文：绍宗曰： 将决战。 
现代文：绍宗回答： 将要决战。 
English: Shaozong replied, "There will be a decisive battle."

古文：遂顺风以阵。
现代文：于是就顺风布阵。
English: So it's fair winds and following seas.

古文：景闭垒，顷之乃出。
现代文：侯景紧闭营垒，不久又出来。
English: Hou Jing closed the camp tightly, but soon came out again.

古文：绍宗曰： 景多诡，好乘人背。 
现代文：绍宗说： 侯景多诡计，好攻人背后。 
English: Shaozong said, "Hou Jing is very cunning and likes to attack from behind.

古文：使备之，果如其言。
现代文：叫人防备，果然被他言中。
English: He warned people to be on their guard, and he was proved right.

古文：景命战士皆被短甲短刀，但低视斫人胫马足，遂败绍宗军。
现代文：侯景命令将士都披短甲拿短刀，只管往下砍人马腿脚，于是打败了绍宗的军队。
English: Hou Jing ordered his soldiers to wear short armor and carry short swords, only to cut people's legs and feet, thus defeating Shaozong's army.

古文：裨将斛律光尤之，绍宗曰： 吾战多矣，未见此贼之难也。
现代文：绍宗的裨将斛律光责怪他，绍宗说： 我打的仗多了，没见过像此贼这么难对付的。
English: Shaozong's benefactor, Zhaoliguang, blamed him. Shaozong said, "I have fought many battles, but I have never seen anything as difficult to deal with as this thief.

古文：尔其当之。 
现代文：你可以去抵挡他试试。 
English: You can try to resist him.

古文：光被甲将出，绍宗戒之曰： 勿度涡水。 
现代文：斛律光披甲将要出战，绍宗告诫他说： 不要渡过涡水。 
English: Shaozong admonished him: "Don't cross the whirlpool.

古文：既而又爲景败。
现代文：不久斛律光又被侯景战败。
English: Soon after, Baoliguang was defeated by Houjing.

古文：绍宗谓曰： 定何如也。 
现代文：绍宗问他： 到底怎么样啊？ 
English: Shaozong asked him: What's going on?

古文：相持连月，景食尽，诳其衆以爲家口并见杀。衆皆信之。
现代文：相持数月，侯景粮尽，骗自己的部下说他们的家人都已经被东魏杀了，众人都信以为真。
English: Holding out for several months, Hou Jing ran out of food and lied to his subordinates that their families had all been killed by the Eastern Wei Dynasty, which everyone believed to be true.

古文：绍宗遥谓曰： 尔等家并完。 
现代文：绍宗在远处对他们喊道： 你们的家属全都平安无事。 
English: Shaosong called out to them in the distance: All your family members are safe.

古文：乃被发向北斗以誓之。
现代文：并披发对着北斗发誓来证明自己的话。
English: And he swore by the Big Dipper to prove his words.

古文：景士卒并北人，不乐南度，其将暴显等各率所部降绍宗。
现代文：侯景的军士都是北方人，不愿随侯景南渡，部将暴显等人各率领自己的部卒投降绍宗。
English: Houjing's sergeants were all northerners, and they did not want to follow Houjing to the south. General Bulu Xian and others each led their subordinates to surrender to Shaosong.

古文：景军溃散，丧甲士四万人，马四千匹，辎重万馀两。
现代文：侯景军队溃散，损失甲士四万人，马四千匹，辎重车万余辆。
English: Houjing's army was dispersed, with a loss of forty thousand soldiers, four thousand horses, and more than ten thousand carts.

古文：乃与腹心数骑自硖石济淮，稍收散卒，得马步八百人。
现代文：于是和他的几名心腹骑马逃走，从硖石渡淮河，逐渐收集散兵，共得到步骑兵八百人。
English: So he and a few of his henchmen fled on horseback, crossing the Huai River from Shanshi, and gradually gathering scattered soldiers, gaining a total of 800 infantry and cavalry.

古文：南过小城，人登陴诟之曰： 跛脚奴何爲邪！ 
现代文：向南路过一座小城，有人登上城墙骂他说： 跛脚奴要干什么！ 
English: He was passing through a small town to the south, when someone climbed onto the city wall and shouted at him: "What does a lame man want!

古文：景怒，破城杀言者而去。
现代文：侯景发怒，破城杀了这人才离去。
English: Hou Jing was furious and broke the city to kill this man before leaving.

古文：昼夜兼行，追军不敢逼。
现代文：他们昼夜兼行，追军不敢近逼。
English: They marched both day and night, not daring to approach the pursuing army.

古文：使谓绍宗曰： 景若就禽，公复何用？ 
现代文：侯景派人对绍宗说： 我如果被擒，你还有什么用？ 
English: Hou Jing sent a man to say to Shaozong, "If I am captured, what use do you have?

古文：绍宗乃纵之。
现代文：绍宗便故意放他逃走。
English: Shaosong then deliberately let him escape.

古文：既而莫适所归，马头戍主刘神茂者，爲韦黯所不容，因是踣马乃驰谓景曰： 寿阳去此不远，城池险固，韦黯是监州耳。
现代文：后来侯景无处可去，马头戍的主帅刘神茂，和他的上司韦黯关系不好，因此他骑马跑到侯景那里说： 寿阳离此处不远，城池险要坚固，韦黯是监州。
English: Later, Houjing had nowhere to go. Liu Shenmao, the head coach of Ma Touyi, did not have a good relationship with his boss Wei Qian, so he rode to Houjing and said: Shouyang is not far from here, the city and lake should be strong, and Wei Qian is the supervising state.

古文：王若次近郊，必郊迎，因而执之，可以集事。
现代文：您如果驻在那里近郊，他一定会到郊外迎接你，趁机把他抓起来，就可以成事占有寿阳。
English: If you are stationed in the suburbs, he will certainly come to the suburbs to meet you, seize the opportunity to arrest him, and you can successfully occupy Shouyang.

古文：得城之后，徐以啓闻，朝廷喜王南归，必不责也。 
现代文：得城之后，再慢慢向朝廷解释，朝廷高兴您南归，一定不会责怪您。 
English: After conquering the city, slowly explain to the court that the court is happy that you have returned to the south and will not blame you.

古文：景执其手曰： 天教也。 
现代文：侯景拉着他的手说： 这是上天对我的指教啊。 
English: Hou Jing took his hand and said, "This is Heaven's instruction to me."

古文：及至，而黯授甲登陴。
现代文：赶到寿阳，韦黯披甲登城。
English: Arriving in Shouyang, Wei Ying entered the city in armour.

古文：景谓神茂曰： 事不谐矣。 
现代文：侯景对神茂说： 事情办不成了。 
English: Hou Jing said to Shenmao, "The matter can't be done."

古文：对曰： 黯懦而寡智，可说下也。 
现代文：神茂说： 韦黯懦弱而少智谋，可用言语说动他拿下此城。 
English: Shenmao said: Wei Ying is weak and lacks wisdom, he can be persuaded by words to take down the city.

古文：乃遣豫州司马徐思玉夜入说之，黯乃开门纳景。
现代文：于是侯景派豫州司马徐思玉夜间入城游说韦黯，韦黯就开城门迎侯景进城。
English: As a result, Hou Jing sent Yu Zhou's secretary Ma Xu Siyu into the city at night to lobby Wei Qian, and Wei Qian opened the city gate to welcome Hou Jing into the city.

古文：景执黯，数将斩之，久而见释。
现代文：侯景把韦黯拿下，把他数说一顿要杀他，过了很长时间又放了他。
English: Hou Jing took Wei Qian down, counted him out to kill him, and released him after a long time.

古文：乃遣于子悦驰以败闻，自求贬削。优诏不许。
现代文：侯景派于子悦到朝廷报告自己被东魏战败的消息，请求贬削官职，朝廷宽大不准所请。
English: Hou Jing sent Yu Ziyue to the imperial court to report the news that he had been defeated by the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and requested that he be demoted from his official position. The imperial court was not allowed to accept the request.

古文：复求资给，即授南豫州刺史，本官如故。
现代文：他又请求朝廷给予物资供应，朝廷当时委任他为南豫州刺史，本来的官职不变。
English: He also asked the imperial court to supply materials. The imperial court then appointed him as the official historian of South Henan Province, and his original official position remained unchanged.

古文：帝以景兵新破，未忍移易，故以鄱阳王范爲合州刺史，即镇合肥。
现代文：武帝因为侯景兵刚败，不忍把他迁到别处去，所以叫鄱阳王萧范作合州刺史，立即镇守合肥以防侯景。
English: Emperor Wu couldn't bear to move Hou Jinghe to another place because he had just been defeated, so he asked King Xiao Fan of Shenyang to write a history of Hezhou and immediately guard Hefei to prevent Hou Jing.

古文：魏人攻悬瓠，悬瓠粮少，羊鸦仁去悬瓠归义阳。
现代文：魏兵攻悬瓠城，悬瓠粮少，羊鸦仁就舍弃悬瓠回到义阳。
English: The Wei soldiers attacked the city of Zhangye, Zhangye was short of grain, and Guoren abandoned Zhangye and returned to Yiyang.

古文：魏人入悬瓠，更求和亲，帝召公卿谋之。
现代文：魏人进入悬瓠城，又来梁朝请求和好，武帝召集公卿商议此事。
English: The Wei people entered the Hanging Fort, and came to the Liang Dynasty to request reconciliation. Emperor Wu summoned the nobles to discuss the matter.

古文：张绾、朱异咸请许之。
现代文：张绾、朱异都请武帝答应魏人。
English: Zhang Ye and Zhu Yi both asked Emperor Wu to allow the Wei people to return.

古文：景闻未之信，乃僞作邺人书，求以贞阳侯换景。
现代文：侯景听说后还不敢确信。就假造魏国信件，向梁朝要求用被魏俘虏的贞阳侯萧渊明来换侯景。
English: After hearing this, Hou Jing was still not convinced. He forged a letter from Wei and asked the Liang Dynasty to replace Hou Jing with Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming, who had been captured by Wei.

古文：帝将许之。舍人傅岐曰： 侯景以穷归义，弃之不祥。
现代文：武帝打算答应下来，舍人傅岐说： 侯景无路可走才来投奔，抛弃他不合适。
English: Emperor Wu was going to agree, but Fu Qi said: "Hou Jing had no choice but to come to the capital, it was not right to abandon him.

古文：且百战之馀，宁肯束手受絷。 
现代文：况且他身经百战，怎肯束手就擒。 
English: What's more, he's been through a hundred battles, how could he just give up?

古文：谢举、朱异曰： 景奔败之将，一使之力耳。 
现代文：谢举、朱异说： 侯景不过是败逃之将，抓他不过派一个使者就够了。 
English: Xie Qiu and Zhu Yiming said, "Hou Jing is nothing but a fugitive, it is enough to send a messenger to catch him.

古文：帝从之，复书曰： 贞阳旦至，侯景夕反。 
现代文：武帝听从了他们的意见，就回信说： 贞阳侯早上到，晚上就把侯景送回去。 
English: Emperor Wu heeded their advice and wrote back saying, "Zhenyang Hou will arrive in the morning, and Houjing will be sent back in the evening.

古文：景谓左右曰： 我知吴儿老公薄心肠。 
现代文：侯景看了信对左右说： 我就知道这南方佬少情寡义。 
English: Hou Jing read the letter and said to both sides: I knew that this southerner was not very compassionate.

古文：又请娶于王、谢，帝曰： 王、谢门高非偶，可于朱、张以下访之。 
现代文：又上书请求娶王、谢家女儿，武帝回答： 王、谢高门大族不是你可以匹配的，你可以在朱、张门第以下找一个。 
English: He also sent a letter requesting to marry the daughter of Wang and Xie, and Emperor Wu replied: Wang and Xie Gaomen are not your match, you can find one below Zhu and Zhang Mendi.

古文：景恚曰： 会将吴儿女以配奴。 
现代文：侯景发怒说： 我一定要把这些南方佬的闺女配给奴仆。 
English: Hou Jing said angrily: I must assign these Southern girls to the servants.

古文：王伟曰： 今坐听亦死，举大事亦死，王其图之。 
现代文：王伟说： 如今听天由命也是死，造反也是死，大王要好好考虑。 
English: Wang Wei said, "Nowadays, it is death to follow the dictates of Heaven, and it is death to rebel. The great king should carefully consider this.

古文：于是遂怀反计。
现代文：于是侯景就生了反叛之意。
English: As a result, there was a sense of rebellion in Houjing.

古文：属城居人，悉占募爲军士。
现代文：他把所属城邑中的居民都强募为军士。
English: He conscripted every inhabitant of his town to become a sergeant.

古文：辄停责市估及田租，百姓子女悉以配将士。
现代文：私自扣留收取的商业税和田租，把百姓家的女儿都配给他手下兵将。
English: I withheld the business tax and field rent that I collected, and assigned the daughters of the common people to his subordinates.

古文：又啓求锦万疋爲军人袍，中领军朱异议以御府锦署止充颁赏，不容以供边用，请送青布以给之。
现代文：又上书要一万疋锦给他的兵将做衣服，中领军朱异认为御府锦署的物品只供颁赏，不能用来供边防做军服，请朝廷供给他们青布。
English: He also sent a letter asking for ten thousand baht of brocade to make clothes for his soldiers. The middle leader Zhu Ying believed that the goods of the Imperial Palace Brocade Office were only for awards and could not be used to make military uniforms for the border guards, and asked the court to provide them with blue cloth.

古文：又以台所给仗多不能精，啓请东冶锻工欲更营造，敕并给之。
现代文：侯景又提出朝廷发的兵器多不精良，请派给他东冶的锻工重新打造，朝廷一并给予。
English: Hou Jing also suggested that most of the weapons issued by the imperial court were not sophisticated. Please send him a forger from Dongye to rebuild them, and the imperial court will give them to him.

古文：景自涡阳败后，多所徵求，朝廷含弘，未尝拒绝。
现代文：侯景自涡阳战败后，向朝廷要过很多东西，朝廷宽宏大量，从未拒绝过。
English: After Hou Jing's defeat in the War of the Turbulent Sun, he asked the imperial court for many things. The imperial court was magnanimous and never refused.

古文：是时贞阳侯明遣使还梁，述魏人请追前好，许放之还。
现代文：当时贞阳侯萧渊明派人回梁朝，传达魏国希望恢复友好关系，答应放他回去。
English: At that time, the Prince of Zhengyang, Xiao Yuanming, sent someone back to the Liang Dynasty to convey that Wei hoped to restore friendly relations and promised to let him go back.

古文：武帝览之流涕，乃报明啓当别遣行人。
现代文：武帝看信流下眼泪，于是给渊明回信，答应派使者去接洽。
English: Emperor Wu shed tears when he read the letter, so he wrote back to Yuanming, promising to send an emissary to make contact.

古文：帝亦欲息兵，乃与魏和通。景闻之惧，驰啓固谏，帝不从。
现代文：武帝也想罢兵，就和魏国信使来往，侯景听说害了怕，赶紧派人去向武帝恳切请求不要与魏和好，武帝不听。
English: Emperor Wu also wanted to call off the troops, so he sent messengers to and from Wei. When Hou Jing heard about this, he was afraid and hurriedly sent someone to earnestly request Emperor Wu not to make peace with Wei. Emperor Wu did not listen.

古文：尔后表疏跋扈，言辞不逊。
现代文：后来侯景再给朝廷上奏就开始态度跋扈，言辞不逊。
English: After that, Hou Jing's attitude was arrogant and his words were insolent.

古文：又闻遣伏挺、徐陵使魏，不知所爲。
现代文：他又听说朝廷派了伏挺、徐陵出使魏国，不知干了什么。
English: He also heard that the imperial court had sent Fuding and Huling as envoys to Wei, but he did not know what they had done.

古文：元贞知景异志，累啓还朝。景谓曰： 将定江南，何不少忍。 
现代文：元贞知道侯景有异心，屡次要求回朝，侯景对他说： 我马上就要平定江南了，为何不稍忍几天呢。 
English: Yuan Zhen knew that Hou Jing had a different intention and repeatedly asked him to return to the North. Hou Jing said to him: I am about to pacify the south of the Yangtze River, why not wait a few days.

古文：贞益惧，奔还建邺，具以事闻。
现代文：元贞更加害怕，逃回建邺，把事情向齐帝报告。
English: Mototsune was even more afraid, fled back to Jianye and reported the matter to Emperor Qi.

古文：景又招司州刺史羊鸦仁同逆，鸦仁录送其使。
现代文：侯景联络司州刺史羊鸦仁一起造反，鸦仁扣押他的使者送交朝廷。
English: Hou Jing liaised with the prefect of Shizhou and rebelled together with Guoren. Guoren detained his envoy and sent him to the imperial court.

古文：时鄱阳王范镇合肥，及鸦仁俱累啓称景有异志。朱异曰： 侯景数百叛虏，何能爲役。 
现代文：当时鄱阳王萧范镇守合肥，和羊鸦仁都多次向朝廷报告侯景有异心，朱异说： 侯景几百名降卒，怎能反得起来。 
English: At that time, Xiao Fan Zhen, the governor of Hefei, and Yang Guoren repeatedly reported to the imperial court that Hou Jing had a different intention. Zhu Ying said: How can Hou Jing's hundreds of subordinates be turned against him?

古文：并抑不奏闻，景所以奸谋益果。
现代文：都扣压下来不向朝廷报告，因此侯景的奸谋更得以实现。
English: They were all suppressed and not reported to the imperial court, so Hou Jing's treachery was even more successful.

古文：乃上言曰： 高澄狡猾，宁可全信。
现代文：侯景向朝廷上书说： 高澄狡猾，怎能完全相信他。
English: Hou Jing wrote a letter to the imperial court saying: Gao Cheng is cunning, how can I fully trust him.

古文：陛下纳其诡语，求与连和，臣亦窃所笑也。
现代文：陛下听信他的谎言，以求与他和好，我真觉得可笑。
English: I find it ridiculous that his majesty should listen to his lies in order to make peace with him.

古文：臣行年四十有六，未闻江左有佞邪之臣，一旦入朝，乃致嚣讟，宁堪粉骨，投命雠门。
现代文：我已经四十六岁，本没听说过江东有佞邪之臣，可是我一旦入朝，却招来一片诽谤的叫嚣，我宁可粉身碎骨，也要找这些仇人拼命。
English: I'm forty-six years old, and I've never heard of any evil ministers in Jiangdong, but once I entered the imperial court, there was a clamor of slander. I'd rather break my bones than search desperately for these enemies.

古文：请乞江西一境，受臣控督；如其不许，即领甲临江，上向闽、越。非唯朝廷自耻，亦是三公旰食。 
现代文：请在长江西边划一块地盘，归我管辖，如果不答应，我就要兵临长江，向闽越进军，那时候不仅朝廷脸上难看，也叫大臣们忙得顾不上吃饭。 
English: Please carve out a piece of land on the west side of the Yangtze River and submit it to my jurisdiction. If you don't agree, I'll march my soldiers to the Yangtze River and march toward Shu Yue. At that time, not only would it look bad on the face of the imperial court, but it would also keep the ministers too busy to eat.

古文：帝使朱异宣语答景使曰： 譬如贫家畜十客五客，尚能得意，朕唯有一客，致有忿言，亦是朕之失也。 
现代文：武帝让朱异向侯景的使者传达旨意说： 就好像穷人家养十个五个客人，都还能让客人满意，我只有一个客人，却叫客人有不满的话，这是我的过失了。 
English: Emperor Wu asked Zhu Rong to convey his will to Hou Jing's emissary, saying, "It's like a poor family raising ten to five guests, and still being able to satisfy the guests. I only have one guest, but if I make the guests dissatisfied, it's my fault."

古文：景又知临贺王正德怨望朝廷，密令要结。正德许爲内啓。
现代文：侯景又知道临贺王萧正德怨恨朝廷，秘密和他联络勾结，正德答应给他作内应。
English: Hou Jing also knew that Linhe King Xiao Zhengde resented the imperial court and secretly communicated and colluded with him. Zhengde promised to do his bidding.

古文：二年八月，景遂发兵反，于豫州城内集其将帅，登坛歃血。
现代文：太清二年八月，侯景发兵造反，在豫州城内会集他的将帅，登坛歃血立誓。
English: In August of the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Hou Jing sent his troops to rebel. He gathered his generals in the city of Yuzhou and took the oath on the altar.

古文：是日地大震。
现代文：当天出现地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake occurred.

古文：于是以诛中领军朱异、少府卿徐驎、太子左率陆验、制局监周石珍爲辞，以爲奸臣乱政，请带甲入朝。
现代文：于是以诛中领军朱异、少府卿徐麟、太子左率陆验、制局监周石珍为借口，说奸臣乱政，请允许带甲兵入朝。
English: Therefore, Zhu Yixing, the leader of the Central Military Commission, Xu Lin, the leader of the Minor Prefectural Government, Prince Zuo, the head of the Land Inspection, and Zhou Shizhen, the Supervisor of the Bureau of Statistics, were used as an excuse to say that the treacherous vassals had made a mess of the government, and that they should be allowed to bring armored soldiers into the imperial court.

古文：先攻马头、木栅，执太守刘神茂、戍主曹璆等。
现代文：先攻取马头、木栅，俘获太守刘神茂，驻军头领曹趚等人。
English: They first captured Ma Tau and Muzi, captured the eunuch Liu Shenmao, the garrison commander Cao Wei and others.

古文：武帝闻之，笑曰： 是何能爲,吾以折棰笞之。 
现代文：武帝听说后，笑道： 这能成什么事呢，我用半截赶马棍就把他揍了。 
English: After hearing this, Emperor Wu laughed and said, "What can this lead to? I beat him with a half-cut horse stick."

古文：乃敕：斩景者不问南北人同赏封二千户兼一州刺史；其人主帅欲还北不须州者，赏以绢布二万，以礼发遣。
现代文：于是下诏，斩侯景的不问是梁人魏人，一样赏封二千户兼一州刺史，如果是魏人要北归不愿在南方作州刺史，赏绢布二万匹，用礼仪给他送行。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that no matter whether Liang or Wei were the ones who executed Houjing, they would be rewarded with the same two thousand households and one state history. If Wei wanted to return to the north and did not want to make a state history in the south, he would be rewarded with twenty thousand pieces of embroidered cloth and sent away with etiquette.

古文：于是诏合州刺史鄱阳王范爲南道都督，北徐州刺史封山侯正表爲北道都督，司州刺史柳仲礼爲西道都督，通直散骑常侍裴之高爲东道都督，同讨景，济自历阳。
现代文：于是下诏委任鄱阳王萧范为南道都督，北徐州刺史封山侯萧正表为北道都督，司州刺史柳仲礼为西道都督，通直散骑常侍裴之高为东道都督，共同讨伐侯景，从历阳渡江。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict was issued to appoint King Xiao Fan of Fenyang as the governor of the Southern Province, Xiao Zhengbo, the feudal lord of Fenshan in North Xuzhou, as the governor of the Northern Province, Liu Zhongli, the feudal lord of Sizhou, as the governor of the Western Province, and Zongzhi Zangjia, the attendant of Peizhigao, as the host governor, to jointly fight against Houjing and cross the river from Liyang.

古文：又令侍中、开府仪同三司邵陵王纶持节，董督衆军。
现代文：又命令侍中、开府仪同三司、邵陵王萧纶掌符节，督率众军。
English: He also ordered the chamberlains, Kaifu Yi and the three officials, and Shao Ling Wang Xiao Jie, to supervise the troops.

古文：景闻之，谋于王伟。
现代文：侯景听说，和王伟商议。
English: Hou Jing heard about it and discussed it with Wang Wei.

古文：伟曰： 莫若直掩扬都，临贺反其内，大王攻其外，天下不足定也。
现代文：王伟说： 不如直接袭击建康，萧正德在里边反，大王在外边攻，天下不难定。
English: Wang Wei said: It is better to directly attack Jiankang, Xiao Zhengde is inside the counterattack, the great king is outside the attack, the world is not difficult to determine.

古文：兵闻拙速，不闻工迟，令今便须进路，不然邵陵及人。 
现代文：用兵只听说宁可拙而速，没听说可以巧而迟的，如今必须立即进兵，不然萧纶就打过来了。 
English: The soldiers only heard that it was better to be slow and hasty, but they did not hear that it was possible to be skillful and late. Now they must enter the army immediately, otherwise Xiao Yao will come to fight.

古文：九月，景发寿春，声云游猎，人不觉也。
现代文：九月，侯景从寿春发兵，声称出游打猎，人们便没有察觉。
English: In September, Hou Jing sent troops from Shouchun, claiming to go hunting, but people did not notice.

古文：留僞中军大都督王贵显守寿春城，出军僞向合肥，遂袭谯州。助防董绍先降之，执刺史丰城侯泰。
现代文：留下伪中军大都督王贵显守寿春城，出兵假装向合肥，突然袭取谯州，助防董绍先投降侯景，俘获了丰城侯萧泰。
English: He left the pseudo-Chinese military governor Wang Guixian to defend Shuchun City, sent troops pretending to go to Hefei, suddenly attacked Zhangzhou, helped prevent Dong Shaoshan from surrendering Houjing, and captured Fengcheng Hou Xiaotai.

古文：武帝闻之，遣太子家令王质率兵三千巡江遏防。
现代文：武帝听说，派太子家令王质领兵三千巡江防卫。
English: Emperor Wu was said to have sent the crown prince and his family to lead 3,000 troops to defend the river.

古文：景进攻历阳太守庄铁，铁遣弟均夜斫景营，战没。
现代文：侯景进攻历阳，太守庄铁派他弟弟庄均夜袭侯景营寨，结果全部战死。
English: Houjing attacked Liyang, and the grand marshal Zhuang Tie sent his younger brother Zhuang Jun to attack Houjing's camp at night. As a result, they all died in the battle.

古文：铁母爱其子，劝铁降。
现代文：庄铁母亲爱他的儿子，劝他投降。
English: Zhuang Tie's mother loved her son and persuaded him to surrender.

古文：景拜其母，铁乃劝景曰： 急则应机，缓必致祸。 
现代文：侯景向庄铁母亲行礼下拜，庄铁劝侯景说： 快了就能抓住时机，慢了就要招祸。 
English: Hou Jing bowed to Zhuo Tie's mother, and Zhuo Tie advised Hou Jing saying, "If you are quick, you can seize the opportunity, but if you are slow, you will invite disaster."

古文：景乃使铁爲导。
现代文：侯景就派庄铁作为前导。
English: Hou Jing sent Zhuang Tie as a forerunner.

古文：是时镇戍相次啓闻，朱异尚曰： 景必无度江志。 
现代文：当时各处防守接连上奏报警，朱异还是说： 侯景一定没有渡江的意思。 
English: At that time, the alarm was sounded one after another by the guards everywhere, but Zhu Yi still said: Hou Jing must not have intended to cross the river.

古文：萧正德先遣大船数十艘僞称载荻，实拟济景。
现代文：萧正德事先安排了几十艘大船假称去运芦荻，其实是准备渡侯景过江。
English: In advance, Xiao Zhengde arranged for dozens of large ships to transport reeds, but they were actually preparing to cross the river to Houjing.

古文：景至江将度，虑王质爲梗，俄而质被追爲丹阳尹，无故自退。
现代文：侯景到江边准备渡江，怕王质拦击，不久王质被召回作丹阳尹，无缘无故自动退走。
English: Hou Jing went to the edge of the river to prepare for crossing the river, fearing that the royal hostage would intercept him. Soon, the royal hostage was recalled as Danyang Yin, and he automatically retreated without any reason.

古文：景闻未之信，乃密遣觇之，谓使者： 质若退，折江东树枝爲验。 
现代文：侯景听说还不敢信，便偷偷派人过江侦察，对他说： 王质如果退走，折下江东树枝带回来作为凭信。 
English: Hou Jing did not dare to believe what he heard, so he secretly sent someone across the river to investigate, and said to him: If the royal hostage retreats, break off the branches of the east river and bring them back as proof.

古文：觇人如言而返。
现代文：侦察的人像他说的那样回来了。
English: The scout returned as he had said.

古文：景大喜曰： 吾事办矣。 
现代文：侯景大喜道： 我的大事成功了。 
English: Hou Jing was overjoyed: My big event was a success.

古文：乃自采石济，马数百匹，兵八千人，都下弗之觉。
现代文：于是从采石渡江，有马数百匹，兵八千人，京城里居然没有察觉。
English: As a result, hundreds of horses and eight thousand soldiers crossed the river from the quarry, and the capital did not notice.

古文：景出，分袭姑孰，执淮南太守文成侯宁，遂至慈湖。
现代文：侯景登岸，分兵袭击姑孰，俘获淮南太守文成侯萧宁，随后兵至慈湖。
English: Hou Jing went ashore, the detachment attacked Gu Ye, captured Huainan Taishou Wencheng Hou Xiaoning, and then the soldiers went to Cihu.

古文：南津校尉江子一奔还建邺。
现代文：南津校尉江子一跑回建邺。
English: Nanjin school officer Jiang Zi immediately ran back to Jianye.

古文：皇太子见事急，入面啓武帝曰： 请以事垂付，愿不劳圣心。 
现代文：皇太子萧纲见事紧急，入宫面见武帝报告说： 请把事情交给我去办，希望不劳皇上费心。 
English: Crown Prince Xiao Gang saw the urgency of the situation and reported to Emperor Wu when he entered the palace: "Please leave the matter to me. I hope the emperor will not be bothered."

古文：帝曰： 此自汝事，何更问爲。 
现代文：武帝回答： 这本来就是你的事，还问什么。 
English: Emperor Wu replied: This is your business, what more can I ask.

古文：太子仍停中书省指授，内外扰乱相劫不复通。
现代文：太子于是到中书省指挥分派，内外乱糟糟地互不通气。
English: The crown prince then went to the People's Republic of China to take command of the detachment, and there was a chaotic lack of communication both internally and externally.

古文：于是诏以扬州刺史宣城王大器爲都督内外诸军事，都官尚书羊侃爲军师将军以副焉。遣南浦侯推守东府城，西丰公大春守石头，轻车长史谢禧守白下。
现代文：这时下诏任命扬州刺史宣城王萧大器为都督内外诸军事，都官尚书羊侃为军师将军，作大器的副手，派南浦侯萧推守东府城，西丰公萧大春守石头城，轻车长史谢禧守白下城。
English: At this time, the imperial edict appointed Yangzhou prince Wang Xiao Daqi as the military governor inside and outside the capital, and the capital official Shang Shuxu Yang Kan as the general of the army and the deputy of Daqi. He sent Nanpu prince Xiao to defend Dongfu City, Xifeng prince Xiao Dachun to defend Stone City, and the light vehicle captain Shi Xie to defend Baixia City.

古文：既而景至朱雀航，遣徐思玉入啓，乞带甲入朝，除君侧之恶，请遣了事舍人出相领解，实欲观城中虚实。
现代文：不久侯景到朱雀航，派徐思玉入朝启奏，请求带甲兵入朝，除掉君主身边的坏人，请朝廷派一个能办事的舍人出来把事说清楚，实际是想借机观察城中虚实。
English: Soon after, Hou Jing went to Suzakhang, sent Xu Siyu to the imperial court for the opening ceremony, and asked him to bring the armored soldiers to the imperial court, get rid of the bad people around the monarch, and ask the court to send a person who can do things to make things clear. In fact, he wanted to take the opportunity to observe the truth in the city.

古文：帝遣中书舍人贺季、主书郭宝亮随思玉往劳之于板桥。景北面受敕，季曰： 今者之举，何以爲名？ 
现代文：武帝派中书舍人贺季、主书郭宝亮跟随徐思玉到板桥慰劳侯景，侯景面北领受旨意，贺季说： 你今日的行动，是为了什么？ 
English: Emperor Wu sent the middle school teacher He Ji and the principal teacher Guo Baoliang to follow Xu Siyu to Panqiao to comfort Hou Jing, and Hou Jingmenbei received the will. He Ji said: What is the reason for your action today?

古文：景曰： 欲爲帝也。 
现代文：侯景说： 为了要当皇帝。 
English: Hou Jing said: In order to become emperor.

古文：王伟进曰： 朱异、徐驎谄黩乱政，欲除奸臣耳。 
现代文：王伟赶紧接过来说： 朱异、徐马谄媚污浊，误国乱政，我们只是为了除掉奸臣而已。 
English: Wang Wei quickly followed and said, "Zhu Ying and Xu Ma Ying are dirty and corrupt, and they have misled the country and made a mess of the government. We just want to get rid of the traitors."

古文：景既出恶言，留季不遣，宝亮还宫。
现代文：侯景既然已口出恶言，就把贺季扣留不放，只放宝亮回宫。
English: Since Hou Jing had already uttered evil words, he detained He Ji and did not let him go, only letting Bao Liang return to the palace.

古文：先是，大同中童谣曰： 青丝白马寿阳来。 
现代文：起初，大同年间有童谣说： 青丝白马寿阳来。 
English: At first, in the same year, there was a nursery rhyme that said: Qing Si Bai Ma Shou Yang Lai.

古文：景涡阳之败，求锦，朝廷所给青布，及是皆用爲袍，采色尚青。
现代文：侯景在涡阳战败后，向朝廷要锦，朝廷给的是青布，这时都用来作袍，崇尚青色。
English: After Hou Jing was defeated in the Battle of Wuyang, he asked the imperial court for brocade. The imperial court gave him blue cloth, which was used to make robes, advocating the color blue.

古文：景乘白马，青丝爲辔，欲以应谣。
现代文：侯景骑白马，用青丝做马缰，要用此来应童谣。
English: Hou Jing rode a white horse and used green silk to make a stirrup, which should be used to respond to nursery rhymes.

古文：萧正德先屯丹阳郡，至是率所部与景合。
现代文：萧正德原来驻扎在丹阳郡，这时率他的部下和侯景会合。
English: Xiao Zhengde was originally stationed in Danyang County, when he led his subordinates to meet with Hou Jing.

古文：建康令庾信率兵千馀人屯航北，及景至彻航，始除一舶，见贼军皆着铁面，遂弃军走。
现代文：建康县令庾信率兵千余人驻在朱雀航北边，等侯景到时要拆除渡桥，刚拆掉一只船，看见侯景军士都戴着铁面具，于是弃军逃走。
English: Jiankang County's Ling Yuxin led more than a thousand soldiers stationed on the north side of Zhu Zakhang, waiting for Hou Jing to dismantle the ferry bridge. Just after dismantling a ship, he saw Hou Jing's sergeants all wearing iron masks, so he abandoned the army and fled.

古文：南塘游军复闭航度景。
现代文：南塘的游军又把渡桥接上渡侯景过河。
English: The tour group from Nantang also connected the ferry bridge to the ferry across the river.

古文：皇太子以所乘马授王质，配精兵三千，使援庾信。
现代文：皇太子把自己骑的马给王质，配给他精兵三千，让他去援助庾信。
English: The crown prince gave the horse he was riding to the royal hostage, gave him three thousand elite soldiers, and sent him to reinforce Yan Xin.

古文：质至领军府与贼遇，未阵便奔。景乘胜至阙下。
现代文：王质到领军府和贼兵相遇，没有布阵就转身逃跑，侯景乘胜来到皇城下。
English: When the royal hostage arrived at the leader's palace, he encountered the robber soldiers. He turned around and fled without setting up a battle line. Hou Jing took advantage of the victory and came to the lower part of the imperial city.

古文：西丰公大春弃石头城走，景遣其仪同于子悦据之。
现代文：西丰公萧大春放弃石头城逃走，侯景派他的仪同于子悦据守。
English: Xifeng Gong Xiao Dachun abandoned Stone Town and fled. Hou Jian sent his son Ziyue to defend the castle.

古文：谢禧亦弃白下城走。
现代文：谢禧也丢弃白下城逃走。
English: Xie Xiyi also abandoned Baixia Town to escape.

古文：景遣百道攻城，纵火烧大司马、东西华诸门。
现代文：侯景派人四面围攻，纵火烧大司马、东华、西华各门。
English: Hou Jing sent men to lay siege on all sides and set fire to the gates of Dazhima, Donghua and Xihua.

古文：城中仓卒未有备，乃凿门楼，下水沃火，久之方灭。
现代文：城中仓猝间没有准备，只好从门楼处凿洞，往下灌水灭火，很久才将火浇灭。
English: There was no preparation in the middle of the city, so they had to dig a hole from the gate tower, pour water down to extinguish the fire, and it took a long time to put out the fire.

古文：贼又斫东掖门将入，羊侃凿门扇刺杀数人，贼乃退。
现代文：贼兵又砍破东掖门就要攻入，羊侃凿破门扇刺杀了几人，贼兵才退走。
English: The bandits cut through the East Gate and were about to break in. Yang Kan chiseled through the door and stabbed several people before the bandits retreated.

古文：又登东宫墙射城内。
现代文：贼兵又登上东宫墙往城内射箭。
English: The robber soldiers also climbed the wall of the East Palace to shoot arrows into the city.

古文：至夜，简文募人出烧东宫台殿遂尽，所聚图籍数百厨，一皆灰烬。
现代文：到了夜间，简文帝萧纲招募人出城去烧东宫台殿，于是一把火烧了个净光，所藏的图书文籍数百橱，全都成了灰烬。
English: At night, Emperor Xiaogang of the Jianwen Dynasty recruited people to go out of the city to burn the East Palace, so a fire burned a pure light, and the hundreds of books and literature all became ashes.

古文：先是简文梦有人画作秦始皇，云 此人复焚书 ，至是而验。
现代文：以前简文帝梦见有人画作秦始皇，说 这人又来焚书 ，这时候应验了。
English: In the past, Emperor Jianwen dreamed that someone was painting Qin Shihuang, saying that this person had come to burn books again, and this time it came true.

古文：景又烧城西马厩、士林馆、太府寺。
现代文：侯景又烧城西马厩、士林馆、太府寺。
English: Houjing also burned the West Stables, the Shilin Hall, and the Taifu Temple.

古文：明日，景又作木驴数百攻城，城上掷以石，并皆碎破。
现代文：第二天，侯景又造了几百头木驴攻城，城上用石头往下砸，木驴都被砸碎。
English: The next day, Hou Jing also made several hundred wooden donkeys to attack the city, and used stones to smash them down on the city. The wooden donkeys were all smashed.

古文：贼又作尖顶木驴，状似槥，石不能破。
现代文：贼兵又造尖顶木驴，形状像小棺材，石头砸不破。
English: The bandits also made a pointed wooden donkey, shaped like a small coffin, which cannot be broken by a stone.

古文：乃作雉尾炬，灌以膏蜡，丛下焚之。
现代文：于是城上又造雉尾火矩，灌上油脂，一丛丛扔下来去烧木驴。
English: So they built a bonfire on top of the castle, filled it with grease, and threw it down in piles to burn the donkeys.

古文：贼既不克，士卒死者甚多，乃止攻，筑长围以绝内外。
现代文：贼兵攻城不克，士兵死伤众多，就停止进攻，修筑长堤断绝城内外联系。
English: If the bandits did not attack the city and many soldiers were killed or wounded, they would stop the attack and build a long dike to cut off the connection between the city and the outside world.

古文：又啓求诛朱异、陆验、徐驎、周石珍等，城内亦射赏格出外，有能斩景首，授以景位，并钱一亿万，布绢各万疋，女乐二部。
现代文：又上书要求杀朱异、陆验、徐駘、周石珍等人。城里也把赏格射出城外，有能砍下侯景头的，就授予他侯景的职位，并赏钱一亿万，布绢各一万匹，女乐二部。
English: He also wrote a letter demanding the killing of Zhu Rong, Lu Qian, Xu Rong, Zhou Shizhen and others. The city also sent rewards outside the city. If anyone could cut off the head of Hou Jing, he would be awarded the position of Hou Jing, and rewarded with one hundred million yuan, ten thousand cloth ponies each, and two pieces of female music.

古文：庄铁乃奔历阳，紿言景已枭首。
现代文：庄铁于是跑到历阳，谎称侯景已被悬首示众。
English: Zhuo Tie then ran to Liyang, falsely claiming that Hou Jing had been beheaded.

古文：景城守郭骆惧，弃城走寿阳。
现代文：侯景的守城将领郭骆害怕，弃城逃往寿阳。
English: Houjing's garrison commander, Guo Luo, was afraid and abandoned the city and fled to Shouyang.

古文：铁得入城，遂奔寻阳。
现代文：庄铁得以入城，接着投奔寻阳。
English: Zhuo Tie was able to enter the city, and then he went in search of the sun.

古文：十一月，景立萧正德爲帝，即僞位，居于仪贤堂，改年曰正平。
现代文：十一月，侯景立萧正德为皇帝，登上伪位，住进仪贤堂，改年号叫正平。
English: In November, Hou Jingli appointed Xiao Zhengde as emperor, ascended the pseudo-position, lived in the Hall of Rites and Virtues, and changed his name to Zhengping.

古文：初童谣有 正平 之言，故立号以应之。
现代文：起初童谣中有 正平 这样的话，所以立此年号以应童谣。
English: At the beginning of the nursery rhyme, there was Zhengping, so this year's name was chosen to correspond to the nursery rhyme.

古文：识者以爲正德卒当平殄也。
现代文：有见识者认为正平是正德最后一定遭平定诛灭之意。
English: Some people with insight believe that Zhengping means that Zhengde will eventually be crushed and destroyed.

古文：景自爲相国、天柱将军，正德以女妻之。
现代文：侯景自封为相国、天柱将军，正德把女儿嫁给他。
English: Hou Jing proclaimed himself as the fatherland and general of Tianzhu, and Zheng De married his daughter to him.

古文：景又攻东府城，设百尺楼车，鈎城堞尽落。
现代文：侯景又进攻东府城，造百尺高的楼车，从上边把城垛全都钩塌。
English: Houjing also attacked Dongfucheng, built a hundred-foot-high tower car, and made all the battlements collapse from above.

古文：城陷，景使其仪同卢晖略率数千人持长刀夹城门，悉驱城内文武裸身而出，使交兵杀之，死者三千余人。
现代文：城被攻陷后，侯景派他的仪同卢晖略率领数千人拿着长刀夹城门而立，把城里文武官员光着身子赶出来，用刀夹击砍杀，砍死了三千多人。
English: After the city was captured, Hou Jing sent his son-in-law and Lu Xunliu to lead thousands of people to stand at the city gate with long knives, drove out the city's literary and military officials naked, and killed them with knives, killing more than three thousand people.

古文：南浦侯推是日遇害。
现代文：南浦侯萧推在这天遇害。
English: Nampo lord Xiao Du was killed on this very day.

古文：景使正德子见理及晖略守东府城。
现代文：侯景让正德的儿子见理和卢晖略守东府城。
English: Hou Jing allowed Zhengde's sons, Jian Li and Lu Yao, to briefly guard Dongfucheng.

古文：初，景至都，便唱云 武帝已晏驾 。虽城内亦以爲然。
现代文：当初，侯景刚到京都，就宣扬 武帝已经死了 ，即便是城里也信以为真。
English: At first, as soon as Hou Jing arrived in Kyoto, he proclaimed that Emperor Wu was dead, which was believed to be true even in the city.

古文：简文虑人情有变，乃请上舆驾巡城。
现代文：简文帝怕人心有变，就请武帝坐车驾巡城。
English: Emperor Jianwen was afraid that the people's hearts would change, so he asked Emperor Wu to take a car and drive around the city.

古文：上将登城，陆验谏曰： 陛下万乘之重,岂可轻脱。 
现代文：武帝将登上城墙时，陆验进谏说： 陛下万乘之尊，怎能轻易出来。 
English: When Emperor Wu was about to climb the city wall, Lu Xun said, "Your Majesty, how can you get out so easily?

古文：因泣下。
现代文：说着就流下了眼泪。
English: And cry.

古文：帝深感其言，乃幸大司马门。城上闻跸声皆鼓噪，军人莫不屑涕，百姓乃安。
现代文：武帝被他的话深深打动，就到大司马门去，城上听到皇帝车驾声音都欢呼起来，军民无不纷纷落泪，百姓才安定下来。
English: Emperor Wu was deeply moved by his words, so he went to Dashima Gate. When the city heard the emperor's driving voice, they all cheered. The soldiers and civilians all shed tears, and the people settled down.

古文：景又于城东西各起土山以临城，城内亦作两山以应之，简文以下皆亲畚锸。
现代文：侯景又在城东西面各堆土山逼近城墙，城里也堆两山来对付，简文帝以下官员都亲自拿工具去干活儿。
English: Houjing also piled up mounds of earth on the east and west sides of the city, approaching the city wall, and also piled up two mountains in the city to deal with them. Officials from Emperor Jianwen down took tools to do the work themselves.

古文：初，景至便望克定建邺，号令甚明，不犯百姓。
现代文：当初，侯景刚到时指望马上能拿下建邺，所以号令严明，不危害百姓。
English: At first, when Hou Jing first arrived, he expected to be able to take Jianye immediately, so he gave strict orders not to endanger the people.

古文：既攻不下，人心离沮，又恐援军总集，衆必溃散，乃纵兵杀掠，交尸塞路。
现代文：久攻不下以后，人心涣散沮丧，又怕援军汇集，部众势必溃散，就纵兵杀人抢劫，死尸枕藉堵塞道路。
English: After not being able to attack for a long time, the people were disheartened and discouraged, and they were afraid that reinforcements would gather and the troops would be dispersed, so they killed and robbed the soldiers and blocked the road with the dead bodies.

古文：富室豪家，恣意裒剥，子女妻妾，悉入军营。
现代文：富豪人家被肆意剥夺，他们的女儿妻妾被抓进军营。
English: The homes of the rich were arbitrarily confiscated, and their daughters, wives and concubines were taken to military camps.

古文：又募北人先爲奴者，并令自拔，赏以不次。
现代文：又招募北方起先作奴仆的人，让他们奋力作战以摆脱奴仆身份，有功的就破格封赏。
English: He also recruited the people in the north who were slaves at the beginning, and let them fight hard to get rid of their slave status. Those who were meritorious received an unprecedented reward.

古文：朱异家黥奴乃与其侪踰城投贼，景以爲仪同，使至阙下以诱城内，乘马披锦袍诟曰： 朱异五十年仕宦，方得中领军。我始事侯王，已爲仪同。 
现代文：朱异家一个脸上刺字的奴仆和别的奴仆翻出城外去投侯景，侯景封他作了仪同，让他到皇城下去诱降城里的人。这人乘马披锦袍对城内喊叫： 朱异作官五十年，才当了个中领军，我才到侯王这儿来，已经作了仪同。 
English: A servant of Zhu Yi's family with a tattoo on his face and other servants went out of the city to vote for Hou Jing. Hou Jing made him an eulogy and asked him to go to the imperial city to seduce the people in the city. This man rode into the city on a horse wearing a brocade robe and shouted: Zhu Yi has been an official for fifty years, and only now has he become the leader of the army. I have only just come here to the Hou Wang, and I have already made an eulogy.

古文：于是奴僮竞出，尽皆得志。
现代文：于是城里作僮仆的争着往外跑，全都称了心愿。
English: Then all the servants of the city, that wrought in the house, fled out of the city, and fled every one into his own place.

古文：景食石头常平仓既尽，便掠居人，尔后米一升七八万钱，人相食，有食其子者。
现代文：侯景把石头城内常平仓的粮食吃完后，便开始抢劫居民，后来一升米卖到七八万钱，造成人吃人，也有吃自己孩子的。
English: After Hou Jing finished eating the grain stored in the stone city, he began to rob residents. Later, one liter of rice was sold for 780,000 yuan, causing people to eat each other and their own children.

古文：又筑土山，不限贵贱，昼夜不息，乱加驱棰，疲羸者因杀以填山，号哭之声动天地。
现代文：又堆造土山，不论贵贱，都得去昼夜不停地干活儿，还要遭乱棍殴打，体弱的就被杀了填山，号哭的声音惊天动地。
English: In addition, they had to work day and night, regardless of whether they were rich or poor, to pile up mountains of earth. They were also beaten with sticks, and the weak were killed to fill the mountains. The sound of their wailing was earth-shattering.

古文：百姓不敢藏隐，并出从之，旬日间衆至数万。
现代文：百姓们不敢躲藏，都出来听他指派，十来天时间凑集了几万人。
English: The people did not dare to hide, they all came out to listen to his assignment, and gathered tens of thousands of people in about ten days.

古文：景仪同范桃棒密贪重赏，求以甲士二千人来降，以景首应购，遣文德主帅前白马游军主陈昕夜踰城入，密啓言状。
现代文：侯景的仪同范桃棒私贪重赏，密报朝廷要带两千甲士来投降，用侯景的头来领赏，他派文德主帅前白马游军头领陈昕夜间翻进城内，把情况密报。
English: Hou Jing's eunuch Fan Taobao was greedy for the reward. He secretly reported to the court that he would bring two thousand soldiers to surrender and use Hou Jing's head to receive the reward. He sent Wende's commander, the former leader of the White Horse Tour Army, Chen Xuan, to break into the city at night and secretly report the situation.

古文：简文以啓上，上大悦，使报桃棒，事定许封河南王，镌银券以与之。
现代文：简文帝报告武帝，武帝很高兴，派人告诉桃棒，事成之后封他作河南王，并刻了银券交给他。
English: Emperor Jianwen reported to Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu was very pleased, sent someone to tell Taobao, and after the event, he was appointed as the king of Henan, and engraved a silver certificate and handed it to him.

古文：简文恐其诈，犹豫不决。
现代文：简文帝怕是假的，犹豫不决。
English: Emperor Jianwen hesitated, fearing that it was a fake.

古文：上怒曰： 受降常理，何忽致疑。 
现代文：武帝发怒说： 接受投降本是常有的事，怎么忽然生什么疑心。 
English: Emperor Wu said angrily, "Accepting surrender is a common occurrence, so why is there suddenly any suspicion?"

古文：朱异、傅岐同请纳之。
现代文：朱异、傅岐都请求朝廷接纳他。
English: Zhu Yi and Fu Qi both petitioned the imperial court to accept him.

古文：简文曰： 吾即坚城自守，所望外援，外援若至，贼岂足平。
现代文：简文帝说： 我们凭借坚城自守，指望是外援，外援如来到，贼兵还有何难平定。
English: Emperor Jianwen said, "We rely on our strong cities to defend ourselves, and hope for foreign aid. If foreign aid comes, there will be no difficulty in defeating the bandits."

古文：今若开门以纳桃棒，桃棒之意尚且难知，一旦倾危，悔无及矣。 
现代文：如今开门接纳桃棒，他的本心还难了解，一旦出什么危险，后悔就来不及了。 
English: Now that he has opened the door to accept the peach stick, it is still difficult to understand his true intentions. Once there is any danger, it will be too late to regret.

古文：桃棒又曰： 今止将所领五百馀人，若至城门，自皆脱甲。乞朝廷赐容。事济之时，保禽侯景。 
现代文：桃棒又派人来说： 如今我只带领部下五百多人，如果到城门口，自己脱下盔甲，请朝廷放他们进城，事成之时，保擒侯景。 
English: Peach Stick also sent someone to say, "Nowadays, I only lead more than five hundred of my subordinates. If I go to the gate of the city and take off my armor, I will ask the court to let them enter the city. When it is done, I will guard Houjing."

古文：简文见其言愈疑之。
现代文：简文帝见他这样说便更加怀疑。
English: When Emperor Jianwen saw him say this, he became even more suspicious.

古文：朱异以手捶胸曰： 今年社稷去矣。 
现代文：朱异用手捶胸说： 今年国家完了！ 
English: Zhu Yi rubbed his chest with his hands and said, "This year, the country is finished!"

古文：俄而桃棒军人鲁伯和告景，并烹之。
现代文：不久桃棒的军士鲁伯和报告了侯景，侯景把桃棒及其部下全部下锅煮了。
English: Soon afterwards, Peach Stick's sergeant, Lu Bohe, reported to Hou Jing, who boiled Peach Stick and all his subordinates in a pot.

古文：至是，邵陵王纶率西丰公大春、新淦公大成、永安侯确、南安乡侯骏、前谯州刺史赵伯超、武州刺史萧弄璋、步兵校尉尹思合等马步三万，发自京口，直据锺山。
现代文：这时候，邵陵王萧纶率西丰公萧大春、新淦公萧大成、永安侯萧确、南安乡侯萧骏、前谯州刺史赵伯超、武州刺史萧弄璋、步兵校尉尹思合等马步兵三万人，从京口出发，直驱占据钟山，侯景党徒非常惊恐，都想逃散。
English: At this time, Shaoling Wang Xiaojun led 30,000 horse infantrymen including Xifeng Gong Xiao Dachun, Xinlu Gong Xiao Dacheng, Yong'an Hou Xiaojun, Nan'an Township Hou Xiaojun, former Zhangzhou assassin Zhao Bechao, Wuzhou assassin Xiao Nanyuan, and infantry lieutenant Yin Sihai. They set out from the capital and drove straight to occupy Zhongshan. The Houjing party members were very frightened and wanted to escape.

古文：景党大骇，咸欲逃散，分遣万余人拒战。
现代文：侯景分派万余人拒战，萧纶在爱敬寺下把他们打得大败。
English: Hou Jing dispatched more than ten thousand people to resist the war, and Xiao Yu defeated them at the foot of Ai Jing Temple.

古文：纶大败之于爱敬寺下。景初闻纶至，惧形于色，及败军还，尤言其盛，愈恐，命具舟石头将北济。
现代文：侯景起初听说萧纶兵到，吓得脸上变色，等败兵回来，说他人多势盛，便更加害怕，下令在石头城备船准备北渡。
English: At first, when Hou Jing heard that Xiao Qian's soldiers had arrived, his face turned pale with fear. When the defeated soldiers returned and said that the others were more powerful, he was even more afraid and ordered to prepare a ship in Shicheng to sail to the north.

古文：任约曰： 去乡万里，走欲何之？
现代文：任约说： 离开家乡万里，能跑到哪儿去呢？
English: Ren You said, "I'm thousands of miles away from home, where can I go?

古文：战若不捷，君臣同死。草间乞活，约所不爲。 
现代文：如若不能战胜，咱们君臣同死算了，流落到荒山野岭求条活命，我是不愿这样。 
English: If we can't win, I don't want our lords and gentlemen to die together and be exiled to the barren mountains to beg for their lives.

古文：景乃留宋子仙守壁，自将锐卒拒纶，阵于覆舟山北，与纶相持。
现代文：侯景于是留下宋子仙守营垒，自己带领精兵抗拒萧纶，在覆舟山北面布阵，与萧纶对峙。
English: Hou Jing then left Song Zixian to defend the camp, and led his elite soldiers to resist Xiao Yao. They formed a line on the north side of Zhoushan Mountain and confronted Xiao Yao.

古文：会暮，景退还，南安侯骏率数十骑挑之。景回军，骏退。
现代文：到晚上，侯景退回去，南安侯萧骏率领数十名骑兵去挑战，侯景回兵，萧骏后退。
English: In the evening, Hou Jing retreated, Nan'an Hou Xiao Wei led dozens of cavalry to challenge, Hou Jing retreated, and Xiao Wei retreated.

古文：时赵伯超阵于玄武湖北，见骏退，仍率军前走。衆军因乱，遂败绩。纶奔京口。
现代文：当时赵伯超在玄武湖北布阵，见萧骏后退，就率兵逃走，众军因此大乱，于是一败涂地，萧纶逃往京口。
English: At that time, Zhao Bochao was in the north of Xuanwu Lake, and when he saw Xiao Yao retreating, he led his soldiers to flee. As a result, the army was in chaos, and Xiao Yao fled to Beijing.

古文：贼执西丰公大春、纶司马庄丘慧达、南合将军胡子约、广陵令霍隽等来送城下，逼令云： 已禽邵陵王。 
现代文：贼兵抓获西丰公萧大春、萧纶的司马庄丘慧达、直阁将军胡子约、广陵县令霍亻隽等人，押到城下，逼他们喊话： 邵陵王已被俘了。 
English: The bandits captured Xifeng Gong Xiao Dachun, Xiao Yao's Sima Zhuang Qiu Huida, Zhaogu General Hu Zi Yao, Guangling County Commander Huo Yao and others, and pushed them to the outskirts of the city, forcing them to shout: Shao Ling Wang has been captured.

古文：霍隽独云： 王小失利，已全军还京口，城中但坚守，援军寻至。 
现代文：只有霍亻隽一个人喊： 邵陵王只是小受挫折，已保全军队退回京口，城中只要坚守，援军很快就到。 
English: Only Hou Yi shouted: Shao Ling Wang only suffered a minor setback, he has secured the army to return to Beijing. As long as the city holds firm, reinforcements will arrive soon.

古文：语未卒，贼以刀伤其口，景义而释焉。
现代文：话没说完，贼兵就用刀割破了他的嘴，侯景佩服他的忠义释放了他。
English: Before he had finished speaking, the bandits cut his mouth with a knife. Hou Jing admired his loyalty and released him.

古文：正德乃收而害之。
现代文：萧正德又把他抓起来杀害。
English: Xiao Zhengde arrested him again and killed him.

古文：是日，鄱阳世子嗣、裴之高至后渚，结营于蔡洲。
现代文：当天，鄱阳王的太子萧嗣、裴之高兵到后渚，在蔡洲扎营。
English: On the same day, Xiao Zi and Pei Zi Gao, the sons of the King of Shenyang, arrived in Hunan and set up camp in Caizhou.

古文：景分军屯南岸。
现代文：侯景分兵屯在南岸。
English: Houjing's detachment was stationed on the south bank.

古文：十二月，景造诸攻具及飞楼、橦车、登城车、鈎堞车、阶道车、火车，并高数丈，车至二十轮，陈于阙前，百道攻城。
现代文：十二月，侯景造各种攻城器具以及飞楼、撞车、登城车、钩堞车、阶道车、火车，都高数丈，一辆车有二十个轮子，排列在宫墙外，多路攻城。
English: In December, Hou Jing built all kinds of siege equipment, as well as flying towers, crashing cars, climbing cars, hooked cars, stair cars, trains, all several meters high, one car has twenty wheels, arranged outside the palace wall, multi-way siege.

古文：以火车焚城东南隅大楼，因火势以攻城。
现代文：用火车烧城东南角大楼，并趁火势攻城。
English: They used a train to burn the southeast corner of the city and took advantage of the fire to attack the city.

古文：城上纵火，悉焚其攻具，贼乃退。
现代文：城上也放火，把城下的攻城器具都烧毁，贼兵才退却。
English: They also set fire to the city and burned all the siege equipment under the city, and the robbers retreated.

古文：是时，景土山成，城内土山亦成。乙太府卿韦黯守西土山，左卫将军柳津守东土山。
现代文：当时，侯景的土山造成，城内的土山也造成了，派太府卿韦黯守西土山，左卫将军柳津守东土山。
English: At that time, Houjing's Tsuchiyama was caused, and the Tsuchiyama in the city was also caused, sending the Grand Mufti Wei Ying to guard the West Tsuchiyama, and the Left Guard General Liu Jin to guard the East Tsuchiyama.

古文：山起芙蓉层楼，高四丈，饰以锦罽，捍以乌笙，山峰相近。
现代文：山上建起莲花状的层楼，高四丈，用锦、毡、黑漆竹席包裹遮蔽。
English: A lotus-shaped four-story building was built on the mountain, covered with brocade, rattan and black lacquered bamboo mats.

古文：募敢死士，厚衣袍铠，名曰 僧腾客 ，配二山，交矟以战。
现代文：城内外山头相距很近，朝廷招募敢死之士，穿上厚厚的战袍铠甲，取名叫 僧腾客 。配置在东西二山上。
English: The mountains inside and outside the city were very close to each other, and the imperial court recruited men who were willing to die, put on thick battle robes and armor, and were called monk Tengke. They were placed on the two mountains to the east and west.

古文：鼓叫沸腾，昏旦不息。
现代文：两下里近距交战，鼓声喊叫声像开了锅，昼夜不停。
English: The two sides fought at close range, and the drums and shouts sounded like an open cauldron, day and night.

古文：土山攻战既苦，人不堪命，柳津命作地道，毁外山，掷雉尾炬烧其橹堞。
现代文：土山攻战太苦，人们难以忍受，柳津命令开掘地道，捣毁城外土山，投掷雉尾火炬烧敌军土山上的望楼。
English: The fighting on the mounds was too hard for the people to bear. Liu Jin ordered the soldiers to dig tunnels, destroy the mounds outside the city, and burn the enemy's watchtower on the mounds with a throwing torch.

古文：外山崩，压贼且尽。
现代文：城外土山崩塌，山上敌军多被压死。
English: The earth and mountains outside the city collapsed, and most of the enemy troops on the mountains were crushed to death.

古文：贼又作虾蟆车，运土石填堑，战士升之楼车，四面并至。
现代文：贼兵又造虾蟆车，运土石填护城壕，军士爬上楼车，从四面围过来。
English: The robber soldiers also built shrimp wagons, transported earth and stone to fill the trenches, and the sergeants climbed onto the wagons and surrounded them from all sides.

古文：城内飞石碎其车，贼死积于城下。
现代文：城里投掷石块砸碎他们的楼车，贼兵死伤堆积城下。
English: In the city, stones were thrown to smash their caravans, and the dead and wounded of the bandits piled up under the city.

古文：贼又掘城东南角，城内作迂城形如却月以捍之，贼乃退。
现代文：贼兵又扒毁城东南角，城内又砌起月牙形的弯城来防御，贼兵才又退回。
English: The bandits also destroyed the southeast corner of the city. A crescent-shaped curve was built inside the city to defend it. The bandits then retreated.

古文：材官将军宋嶷降贼，因爲立计，引玄武湖水灌台城，阙前御街并爲洪波矣。
现代文：材官将军宋嶷降贼，给他们出主意，引玄武湖水灌台城，宫殿前的御街成了一片汪洋。
English: General Song Jun, a military commander, gave them the idea to flood the palace with water from Lake Xuanwu. The street in front of the palace became a sea of water.

古文：又烧南岸居人营寺，莫不咸尽。
现代文：侯景又烧南岸居民房舍和寺院，全都化为灰烬。
English: Houjing also burned the houses and temples of Nan'an residents, all of which were reduced to ashes.

古文：司州刺史柳仲礼、衡州刺史韦粲、南陵太守陈文彻、宣猛将军李孝钦等皆来赴援；鄱阳世子嗣、裴之高又济江。柳仲礼营朱雀航南，裴之高营南苑，韦粲营青塘，陈文彻、李孝钦屯丹阳郡，鄱阳世子嗣营小航南，并缘淮造栅。
现代文：司州刺史柳仲礼、衡州刺史韦粲、南陵太守陈文彻、宣猛将军李孝钦等都赶来救援；鄱阳王太子萧嗣、裴之高又渡过江来，柳仲礼在朱雀航南扎营，裴之高在南苑扎营，韦粲扎营青塘，陈文彻、李孝钦屯兵丹阳郡，鄱阳王太子萧嗣扎营小航南边，都沿淮水建围栅。
English: Liu Zhongli, the governor of Shizhou, Shi Weiqi, the governor of Hengzhou, Chen Wenche, the governor of Nanling, and Li Xiaoqin, the fierce general, all came to the rescue; Xiao Zhi, the crown prince of Shiyang, and Pei Zhigao crossed the river again; Liu Zhongli camped in the south of Zhuqi Hang, Pei Zhi Gao camped in Nan Yuan, Wei Wei camped in Qingtang, Chen Wenche and Li Xiaoqin camped in Danyang County, and the crown prince of Shiyang, Xiao Zhi, camped in the south of Xiao Hang,

古文：及旦，景方觉，乃登禅灵寺门楼以望之。见韦粲营垒未合，度兵击之，粲败，景斩粲首徇城下。
现代文：到天明，侯景才发觉，于是登上禅灵寺门楼眺望，看到韦粲的营垒还没合拢，就发兵过河攻击，韦粲战败，侯景斩韦粲人头到城下示众。
English: It was not until dawn that Hou Jing found out, so he climbed the gate tower of the Zenling Temple to look out, and when he saw that Wei Gan's camp was not yet closed, he sent troops to attack across the river. Wei Gan was defeated, and Hou Jing cut off Wei Gan's head and went to the castle to show it to the public.

古文：柳仲礼闻粲败，不遑贯甲，与数十人赴之。
现代文：柳仲礼听说韦粲战败，来不及披甲，带领几十人赶去。
English: When Liu Zhongli heard that Wei Gan had been defeated, he was too late to put on his armor and led dozens of people to rush there.

古文：遇贼，斩首数百，仍投水死者千余人。
现代文：遇上贼兵，斩首数百，敌军投水死的又有千余人。
English: Encountering the bandits, hundreds were beheaded, and more than a thousand people were drowned by the enemy.

古文：仲礼深入，马陷泥，亦被重创。
现代文：仲礼深入敌阵，马陷入污泥，人也受了重伤。
English: Liu Zhongli penetrated deep into the enemy army, the horse got stuck in the mud, and was also seriously injured.

古文：自是贼不敢济岸。
现代文：从此贼兵不敢登淮水南岸。
English: After this battle, the bandits no longer dared to cross the water to land.

古文：邵陵王纶又与临城公大连等自东道集于南岸；荆州刺史湘东王绎遣世子方等、兼司马吴晔、天门太守樊文皎赴援，营于湘子岸前；高州刺史李迁仕、前司州刺史羊鸦仁又率兵继至。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶又和临城公萧大连等从东路会集到南岸；荆州刺史湘东王萧绎派他的太子萧方等、兼司马吴晔、天门太守樊文皎赶来援助，在湘子岸前扎营；高州刺史李迁仕、前司州刺史羊鸦仁又率兵接着赶到。
English: Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei and Lincheng Gong Xiao Dalian and others gathered from the east road to the south bank; Jingzhou scribe Shandong King Xiaoyan sent his prince Xiao Fang and others, concurrently Sima Wu Wei and Tianmen Taishu Wei Wen Wei, to come to the aid and camped in front of the Hanzhi bank; Gaozhou scribe Li Qian Shi and former Scribe Shuzhou scribe Yang Raven also led the soldiers to arrive.

古文：既而鄱阳世子嗣、永安侯确、羊鸦仁、李迁仕、樊文皎率衆度淮，攻破贼东府城前栅，遂营于青溪水东。
现代文：不久鄱阳王太子萧嗣、永安侯萧确、羊鸦仁、李迁仕、樊文皎率兵渡过淮水，攻破侯景东府城前的营栅，于是便在青溪东岸扎营。
English: Soon after, Xiao Zhi, the Prince of Shenyang, Xiao Jizhi, the Lord of Yong'an, Yang Guoren, Li Qian Shi, and Zou Wenqi led their armies across Huai Shui, broke through the camp gate in front of the castle of the Lord of Jingdong, and then camped on the east bank of Qingxi.

古文：景遣其仪同宋子仙缘水西立栅以相拒。
现代文：侯景派他的仪同宋子仙沿青溪西岸立营栅拒守。
English: Hou Jing sent his son along with Song Zixian to set up camp along the west coast of Qingxi and refused to defend it.

古文：景食稍尽，人相食者十五六。
现代文：侯景的粮食逐渐吃完，百姓人相食已吃掉了十分之五六。
English: Houjing's grain was gradually eaten up, and the common people had eaten up five-sixths of the rice.

古文：初，援兵至北岸，衆号百万。
现代文：起初，援兵到北岸，号称百万，百姓扶老携幼盼望官军。
English: At first, reinforcements came to the north bank, reputed to be one million, and the people helped the elderly with their children hoping for the official army.

古文：百姓扶老携幼以候王师，才过淮，便竞剥掠，征责金银，列营而立，互相疑贰。邵陵王纶、柳仲礼甚于雠敌，临城公大连、永安侯确逾于水火，无有斗心。贼党有欲自拔者，闻之咸止。
现代文：可官军刚过淮水，竞相抢劫，勒索金银，他们扎营不前，互相猜疑。邵陵王萧纶和柳仲礼对立甚于仇敌，临城公萧大连和永安侯萧确关系如同水火，都无心作战，侯景党徒原来想脱身逃走的，听说这情况也都不跑了。
English: However, as soon as the government army passed Huai Shui, they competed in robbing and extorting gold and silver. They camped and hesitated, suspicious of each other. Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei and Liu Zhongli were more opposed than enemies. Lincheng Gong Xiao Dalian and Yongan Hou Xiao Ji had a relationship like water and fire. They had no intention of fighting. Hou Jing's party members originally wanted to escape, but when they heard about this situation, they did not run away.

古文：贼之始至，城中才得固守，平荡之事，期望援军。
现代文：贼兵刚到时，城中力量只够守卫，扫平叛乱的事，要指靠援军。
English: When the robber soldiers first arrived, the strength of the city was only enough to guard, and to wipe out the rebellion, it was necessary to rely on reinforcements.

古文：既而中外断绝，有羊车儿献计，作纸鸦系以长绳，藏敕于中。
现代文：后来内外被隔断不通音讯，有个叫羊车儿的献计，扎只纸鸦用长绳系着，把武帝的敕令绑在上面。
English: Later, they were cut off from the outside and the inside, and there was a plan called the "sheep cart," in which a paper crow was tied with a long rope, and Emperor Wu's edict was tied to it.

古文：简文出太极殿前，因西北风而放，冀得书达。
现代文：简文帝站在太极殿前，趁西北风把它放上去，希望能把信送到。
English: Emperor Jianwen stood in front of the Taiji Hall, and took advantage of the northwest wind to put it up, hoping to deliver the letter.

古文：群贼骇之，谓是厌胜之术，又射下之，其危急如此。
现代文：群贼见了害怕，以为是什么符咒制胜的方法，把它射了下来，情况就是如此危急。
English: The bandits were so alarmed that they thought it was a spell and shot it down. The situation was so critical.

古文：是时城中围逼既久，膝味顿绝，简文上厨，仅有一肉之膳。
现代文：此时城中被围日久，肉食断绝，简文帝的上等膳食，也只剩下一个肉菜了。
English: At this time, the city had been besieged for a long time, meat-eating was cut off, and Emperor Jianwen's first-class meal had only one meat dish left.

古文：军士煮弩熏鼠捕雀食之。
现代文：军士们煮弩弓上的皮子，薰鼠捕雀充饥。
English: The sergeants boiled the skin on their crossbows and hunted mice and birds to satisfy their hunger.

古文：殿堂旧多鸽群聚，至是歼焉。
现代文：殿堂上原来有很多鸽子聚集，这时全被杀吃了。
English: Originally, there were many pigeons gathered on the hall, but they were all killed and eaten.

古文：初，宫门之闭，公卿以食爲念，男女贵贱并出负米，得四十万斛，收诸府藏钱帛五十亿万，并聚德阳堂，鱼盐樵采所取盖寡。至是乃坏尚书省爲薪，撤荐锉以饲马，尽又食飰焉。
现代文：当初，宫门要关闭时，公卿们怕吃不上饭，无论男女贵贱都出来背米，积有四十万斛，收集各府中所藏钱帛五十亿万，都堆聚在德阳堂，鱼盐柴草准备得不够，这时就扒了尚书省的房子当柴烧，把坐垫剁碎喂马，吃完后又断了食物。
English: At first, when the palace gate was about to be closed, the nobles were afraid that they would not be able to eat. Both men and women, high and low, came out to carry rice, accumulating four hundred thousand mu, collecting five hundred million mu hidden in each government, all piled up in Deyang Hall. Fish salt and firewood were not prepared enough. At that time, they used the house in Shangshu Province as firewood, chopped up the cushion and fed it to the horse. After eating, they stopped eating.

古文：御甘露厨有干苔，味酸咸，分给战士。
现代文：御厨房甘露厨内有干苔藓，味道酸咸，也分给战士吃了。
English: In the kitchen, there was dried moss in the kitchen, the taste was sour and salty, and it was also given to the soldiers to eat.

古文：军人屠马于殿省间鬻之，杂以人肉，食者必病。
现代文：军人杀了马在皇宫和中央官署里卖肉，中间还杂有人肉，吃了必定得病。
English: Soldiers killed horses to sell meat in the imperial palace and the central government office, and mixed human meat in the middle. If you eat it, you are bound to get sick.

古文：贼又置毒于水窦，于是稍行肿满之疾，城中疫死者太半。
现代文：贼兵又在水道里下毒，于是城中渐渐流行肿胀疾病，人死了一大半。
English: The robber soldiers also poisoned the water supply, which led to a swelling epidemic in the city, in which more than half the people died.

古文：初，景之未度江，魏人遣檄，极言景反复猜忍，又言帝饰智惊愚，将爲景欺。
现代文：当初，侯景还没渡江时，魏人就发出文告，强调侯景反复无常，猜疑残忍，又说武帝似智实愚，要受侯景欺骗。
English: At first, when Hou Jing had not yet crossed the river, the Wei people issued a proclamation, emphasizing that Hou Jing was capricious, suspicious and cruel, and saying that Emperor Wu was like Zhishigu and would be deceived by Hou Jing.

古文：至是祸败之状，皆如所陈，南人咸以爲谶。
现代文：如今遭受祸败的状况，全都像魏人所说，江南人都认为魏人的话是谶言。
English: The current disastrous situation is all like what the Wei people said, and the people in the south of the Yangtze River all think that the words of the Wei people are lies.

古文：时景军亦饥，不能复战。
现代文：当时侯景军队也在挨饿，不能再战。
English: At that time, Hou Jing's army was also starving and could no longer fight.

古文：东城有积粟，其路爲援军所断，且闻湘东王下荆州兵。
现代文：东城有存粮，路被援军阻断，又听说湘东王派荆州兵顺江而下。
English: There was grain stored in Dongcheng, the road was blocked by reinforcements, and it was also heard that the King of Eastern Hunan sent Jingzhou soldiers down the river.

古文：彭城刘邈乃说景曰： 大军顿兵已久，攻城不拔，今衆军云集，未易可破。
现代文：彭城刘邈对侯景说： 大军驻在这里已久，城攻不下来，如今众军云集，难以取胜。
English: Liu Yao of Pengcheng said to Hou Jing: A large army has been stationed here for a long time, the city cannot be attacked, and now many armies are gathered, it is difficult to win.

古文：如闻军粮不支一月，运漕路绝，野无所掠，婴儿掌上，信在于今。
现代文：听说军粮不够一月，运粮道路又被隔断，城外再没有好抢的了，就像婴儿托在手掌上，如今实在就是这种情况。
English: I heard that there was not enough military food for a month, and the roads for transporting the food were cut off again, so there was nothing left to grab outside the city. It was like holding a baby in the palm of your hand. This is really the situation now.

古文：未若乞和，全师而反。 
现代文：不如求和，保全军队退回去。 
English: Better to sue for peace and keep the troops back.

古文：景乃与王伟计，遣任约至城北拜表僞降，以河南自效。
现代文：侯景和王伟商量，派任约到城北上书伪降，自封河南之地。
English: Hou Jing and Wang Wei had a discussion, and he was assigned to go to the north of the city to submit a letter of fake abdication and declare himself the ruler of Henan Province.

古文：帝曰： 吾有死而已，宁有是议。
现代文：武帝说： 我有死而已，怎能立这种和议。
English: Emperor Wu said: I am only dead, how can I make such a peace proposal.

古文：且贼凶逆多诈，此言云何可信。 
现代文：况且贼人凶险多诈，这话怎么能可信。 
English: Besides, a thief is dangerous and treacherous. How can this be believed?

古文：既而城中日蹙，简文乃请武帝曰： 侯景围逼，既无勤王之师，今欲许和，更思后计。 
现代文：不久城中一天比一天艰难，简文帝就请求武帝说： 侯景围攻紧迫，外面既无援兵，如今打算许他讲和，以后再作商议。 
English: Soon, the situation in the city became more and more difficult day by day, and Emperor Jianwen pleaded with Emperor Wu, saying, "Houjing's siege is pressing, and there are no reinforcements outside. I now intend to ask him to make peace, and we will discuss it later."

古文：帝大怒曰： 和不如死。 
现代文：武帝大怒说： 和不如死。 
English: Emperor Wu said angrily: "Harmony is not as good as death."

古文：简文曰： 城下之盟，乃是深耻；白刃交前，流矢不顾。 
现代文：简文帝只好说： 城下之盟，是奇耻大辱，既然如此，只有不避刀箭，一决死战。 
English: Emperor Jianwen had no choice but to say: To form an alliance under the castle is a great disgrace. In that case, there is no choice but to fight to the death.

古文：上迟回久之，曰： 尔自图之，无令取笑千载。 
现代文：武帝考虑了很久，对简文帝说： 你自己看着办吧，不要让人千载耻笑。 
English: Emperor Wu thought about it for a long time, and said to Emperor Jianwen: You can do it on your own, don't make people laugh for a thousand years.

古文：乃听焉。
现代文：于是就按简文帝的意思办了。
English: So it was done according to Emperor Jianwen's will.

古文：景请割江右四州地，并求宣城王大器出送，然后解围济江。
现代文：侯景要求割长江西部四州的地盘，并让宣城王萧大器出城给他送行，然后才能解围过江。
English: Hou Jing demanded that the territory of the four states in the west of the Yangtze River be cut, and that King Xiao of Xuancheng be sent out of the city to see him off, before the siege could be lifted.

古文：仍许遣其仪同于子悦、左丞王伟入城爲质。中领军傅岐议以宣城王嫡嗣之重，有轻言者请剑斩之。
现代文：中领军傅岐认为大器是皇位继承人，不能答应侯景，谁再说让大器去送侯景就应用剑斩了谁。
English: Fu Qi, the leader of the middle army, thought that the big tool was the heir to the throne, and could not agree to Hou Jing. Whoever said that the big tool should be sent to Hou Jing would be beheaded with a sword.

古文：乃请石城公大款出送，诏许焉。
现代文：侯景又要求让石城公萧大款出城送，朝廷答应下来。
English: Hou Jing then requested that Shicheng Gong Xiao send him a large sum of money out of the city, and desperately agreed to such an arrangement.

古文：遂于西华门外设坛，遣尚书仆射王克、兼侍中上甲乡侯韶、兼散骑常侍萧瑳与于子悦、王伟等登坛共盟。
现代文：于是就在西华门外设坛，派尚书仆射王克、兼侍中上甲乡侯萧韶、兼散骑常侍萧王差和于子悦、王伟登坛共盟。
English: As a result, a altar was set up outside the West China Gate, and Shang Shufu Shaowang Ke, concurrent attendant Zhong Shang Jiaxiang Hou Xiao Wei, concurrent straggling attendant Xiao Wang Zhahe, Yu Ziyue, and Wang Wei were sent to the altar.

古文：右卫将军柳津出西华门下，景出其栅门，与津遥相对，刑牲歃血。
现代文：右卫将军柳津从西华门领兵出城，侯景领兵从他的营栅门出来，和柳津遥遥相对，杀牲畜歃血而盟。
English: The right guard general, Liu Jin, led the soldiers out of the city from the West China Gate, and Hou Jing led the soldiers out of his camp gate, far away from Liu Jin, killing livestock and blood.

古文：南兖州刺史南康嗣王会理、前青冀二州刺史湘潭侯退、西昌侯世子彧率衆三万至于马卬洲，景虑北军自白下而上，断其江路，请悉勒聚南岸。
现代文：南兖州刺史南康嗣王萧会理、前青冀二州刺史湘潭侯萧退、西昌侯太子萧带兵三万到马洲，侯景怕北岸的军队自白下城而上，断他过江的路，请朝廷把军队都召回南岸。
English: Nankangzhi Wang Xiao, the vice-president of Nanzhou County, Xiangtan Hou Xiaowei, the vice-president of the former Qinghai-Hebei Province, and Xichang Houdaizi Xiao led 30,000 soldiers to Mazhou. Houjing was afraid that the army on the north bank would confess and go up to the city, cutting off his way to cross the river. He asked the court to recall the army to the south bank.

古文：敕乃遣北军并进江潭苑。
现代文：于是朝廷下诏让江北军队都移到江潭苑。
English: As a result, the imperial court decreed that the northern Jiangxi troops should all move to Jiangtan Yuan.

古文：景又啓称： 永安侯、赵威方频隔栅诟臣，云 天子自与尔盟，我终当逐汝 。
现代文：侯景又奏称： 永安侯萧确、赵威方隔着围栅一个劲儿骂我，说什么 天子他跟你订盟约，我们还是要追击你 。
English: Hou Jing also said: Yongan Hou Xiaojing and Zhao Weifang scolded me across the fence, saying, "Heavenly Son, he signed a covenant with you, we still want to pursue you."

古文：乞召入城，即进发。 
现代文：请把他们召回城，我就开拔。 
English: Please call them back to the city and I'll be on my way.

古文：敕并召之。
现代文：朝廷便下令把他们都召回去。
English: The court summoned them both to the city at the same time.

古文：景遂运东城米于石头，食乃足。
现代文：侯景遂即把东城的米运到石头城，军粮充足了。
English: Hou Jing then transported Dongcheng's rice to Stone Town, and there was enough grain for the army.

古文：又啓云： 西岸信至，高澄已得寿春、锺离，便无处安足，权借广陵、谯州,须征得寿春、锺离，即以奉还朝廷。 
现代文：又上书说： 西岸来信，说高澄已占据寿春、钟离，我无处安身，先暂借广陵、谯州，等我把寿春、钟离夺回来，马上奉还朝廷广陵、谯州。 
English: The letter also said, "A letter from the West Bank says that Gaocheng has occupied Shouchun and Zhongli, and I have nowhere to stay. First, I will temporarily borrow Guangling and Zhangzhou. When I win back Shouchun and Zhongli, I will immediately return Guangling and Zhangzhou to the imperial court."

古文：时荆州刺史湘东王绎师于武成，河东王誉次巴陵，前信州刺史桂阳王慥顿江津，并未之进。
现代文：当时荆州刺史湘东王萧绎驻军武成，河东王萧誉驻扎巴陵，前信州刺史桂阳王萧忄造顿兵江津，都不肯向前。
English: At that time, King Xiaoyuan of Shandong Province stationed troops in Wucheng, King Xiaoyuan of Hedong Province stationed troops in Baling, and King Xiaoyuan of Guiyang Province stationed troops in Jiangjin, all of whom refused to move forward.

古文：既而有敕班师，湘东王欲旋。中记室参军萧贲曰： 景以人臣举兵向阙，今若放兵，未及度江，童子能斩之，必不爲也。
现代文：后来有诏书叫他们班师，湘东王要回去，中记室参军萧贲说： 侯景作为人臣，举兵攻打皇宫，如今他如果解除武装回去，不等他渡江，小孩子都能杀了他，他一定不会罢兵的。
English: Later, there was an imperial edict calling for them to form a group, and the king of eastern Hunan wanted to go back. Xiao Yao, a member of the Central Records Office, said: "Hou Jing, as a vassal, raised an army to attack the imperial palace. Now, if he disarms and goes back, even if he doesn't cross the river, children can kill him. He will definitely not leave the army."

古文：大王以十万之师，未见贼而退，若何！ 
现代文：大王带十万大兵，还没见贼兵就退回去，该怎么说呢。 
English: The great king with a hundred thousand soldiers retreated before he saw the robbers. What should I say?

古文：湘东王不悦。
现代文：湘东王不高兴。
English: The king of eastern Honshu is not happy.

古文：贲，骨鲠士也，每恨湘东不入援。
现代文：萧贲是个刚直的人，常对湘东王不去救援不满。
English: Xiao Yao was an upright person, and he was often dissatisfied with Xiangdong Wang for not coming to his rescue.

古文：尝与王双六，食子未下，贲曰： 殿下都无下意。 
现代文：他曾和萧绎玩双六，萧绎该吃却没有下子，萧贲一语双关地说： 殿下看来全然没有下的意思。 
English: He used to play double six with Xiao Yu, but Xiao Yu had nothing to eat. Xiao Yu said in a double entendre: Your highness seems to have no intention of eating.

古文：王深爲憾，遂因事害之。
现代文：暗指他没有顺江而下解救朝廷之意。
English: Implying that he had no intention of sailing down the river to rescue the imperial court.

古文：景既知援军号令不一，终无勤王之效，又闻城中死疾转多，当有应之者。
现代文：萧绎对他深为忌恨，后来找借口杀了他。侯景已知援军号令不统一，都不肯为朝廷出力，又听说城中死的病的越来越多，估计一定会有人投降响应他。
English: Xiao Yu was deeply jealous of him, and later found an excuse to kill him. Hou Jing knew that the reinforcement orders were not unified, and they were all unwilling to contribute to the imperial court. He also heard that the number of deaths in the city was increasing. It was estimated that someone would surrender in response to him.

古文：既却湘东王等兵，又得东城之米，王伟且说景曰： 王以人臣举兵背叛，围守宫阙，已盈十旬。
现代文：既退了湘东王等人的兵，又得到东城的粮米，王伟便对侯景进言： 大王作为人臣举兵造反，包围皇宫，已超过百日。
English: After the soldiers of the East Hunan king and others had retreated and the grain and rice of the East City had been obtained, Wang Wei made a suggestion to Hou Jing: The great king, as a vassal, has raised an army to rebel and encircle the imperial palace for more than a hundred days.

古文：逼辱妃主，陵秽宗庙，今日持此，何处容身？
现代文：威逼侮辱嫔妃公主，凌辱糟踏皇家宗庙，到了今日这步田地，还到哪里去容身？
English: Threatening and insulting Princess Gongfei, humiliating and abusing the royal ancestral temple, to this day, where else to go?

古文：愿且观变。 
现代文：望大王暂且还是静观待变。 
English: For the time being, Wang Daowang is still watching and waiting for change.

古文：景然之，乃表陈武帝十失。
现代文：侯景认为他说得对。就上表陈述武帝的十大过失。
English: Hou Jing thought he was right. He presented the top ten mistakes of Emperor Wu according to the table above.

古文：三年三月丙辰朔，城内于太极殿前设坛，使兼太宰、尚书仆射王克等告天地神只，以景违盟，举烽鼓噪。
现代文：太清三年三月初一早上，城内在太极殿前设坛，命兼太宰、尚书仆射王克等昭告天地神灵，说侯景违背盟约，举烽火擂鼓呐喊。
English: On the morning of the first day of March in the third year of the Taichi era, an altar was set up in front of the Taiji Hall in the city, and the life and dazaifu, Shang Shufu Shaowang Ke, and others announced to the gods of heaven and earth that Hou Jing violated the covenant, held a bonfire, beat a drum, and shouted.

古文：初，城围之日，男女十余万，贯甲者三万，至是疾疫且尽，守埤者止二三千人，并悉羸懦。
现代文：当初，台城被围时，城内有男女十余万，披甲者三万，到这时人已快病死完了，守城的只有二三千人，还都是羸弱怯懦的。
English: At first, when Taicheng was besieged, there were more than one hundred thousand men and women in the city, and thirty thousand people wearing armor. By this time, people had almost died of illness, and there were only twenty-three thousand people defending the city, and they were all weak and cowardly.

古文：横尸满路，无人埋瘗，臭气熏数里，烂汁满沟洫。
现代文：街上躺满了死尸，无人掩埋，臭气传出好几里，死尸腐烂的汁水流满了沟沟洼洼。
English: The streets were full of dead bodies, no one had buried them, the stench spread for miles, and the rotting juices of the dead bodies flowed into the ditches.

古文：于是羊鸦仁、柳仲礼、鄱阳世子嗣进军于东府城北。
现代文：这时羊鸦仁、柳仲礼、鄱阳王太子萧嗣进军到东府城北。
English: At this time, Yang Rongren, Liu Zhongli, and Xiao Zhi, the Prince of Shenyang, marched to the north of Dongfu.

古文：栅垒未立，爲景将宋子仙所败，送首级于阙下。
现代文：营垒的围栅还未建好，被侯景部将宋子仙战败，把砍下的头摆在皇城下面。
English: The fence around the camp had not yet been built, and Song Zixian was defeated by Hou Jingbu and his severed head was placed under the imperial city.

古文：景又遣于子悦乞和，城内遣御史中丞沈浚至景所。
现代文：侯景又派于子悦去求和，城内派御史丞沈峻到侯景处。
English: Houjing also sent Yu Ziyue to sue for peace, and in the city, he sent Moxie Shenjun to Houjing.

古文：景无去意，浚因责之，景大怒，即决石阙前水，百道攻城，昼夜不息。
现代文：侯景没有撤兵的意思，沈峻因此责备他，侯景大怒，马上决开石阙前的口子放水，百路攻城，日夜不停。
English: Hou Jing had no intention of withdrawing his troops, and Shen Jun reproached him for this. Hou Jing flew into a rage, and immediately opened the gate in front of the stone mound to release water, and attacked the city from all directions, day and night.

古文：丁卯，邵陵王世子坚帐内白昙朗、董勋华于城西北楼纳贼。五鼓，贼四面飞梯，衆悉上。永安侯确与其兄坚力战不能却，乃还见文德殿言状。
现代文：十三日，邵陵王太子萧坚的部下白昙朗、董勋华在城西北楼放贼入城，五更时，贼兵在城四周架上飞梯，一齐拥上，永安侯萧确和他哥哥萧坚力战不能退敌。就跑回文德殿报告情况。
English: On the 13th day of the month, Bai Xulang and Dong Xunhua, the subordinates of the Prince of Shao Ling, Prince Xiao Jian, let the thieves enter the city in the northwest tower of the city. At the 5th hour, the thief soldiers flew up the stairs around the city and crowded together. Yongan Hou Xiao Ji and his brother Xiao Jian could not fight back the enemy. They ran back to the Winter Palace to report the situation.

古文：须臾，景乃先使王伟、仪同陈庆入殿陈谢曰： 臣既与高氏有隙，所以归投，每啓不蒙爲奏，所以入朝。
现代文：眨眼功夫，侯景已派王伟、仪同陈庆来到，上殿谢罪说： 臣侯景与高氏有仇隙，所以来归顺投奔，每次上书启奏都被扣压不报告朝廷，因此入朝。
English: In the blink of an eye, Hou Jing had sent Wang Wei, Yi Tong, and Chen Qing to come to the palace to apologize, saying: His vassal Hou Jing had a feud with Gao Shi, so he came to surrender to Shun, and every time he submitted a report, he was held back from reporting to the imperial court, so he entered the imperial court.

古文：而奸佞惧诛，深见推拒，连兵多日，罪合万诛。 
现代文：而奸邪之人害怕被杀，便对我拼命阻拦，以至于兴兵多日，臣罪该万死。 
English: But the traitors, fearing that they would be killed, tried desperately to stop me, so much so that they raised an army for several days. The crime of a vassal is punishable by death.

古文：武帝曰： 景今何在？
现代文：武帝问： 侯景现在在哪儿？
English: Emperor Wu asked: Where is Hou Jing now?

古文：可召来。 
现代文：可召他前来。 
English: He can be summoned.

古文：景入朝，以甲士五百人自卫，带剑升殿。
现代文：侯景入朝，带甲士五百人自卫，带剑上殿。
English: When Hou Jing entered the imperial court, he brought 500 warriors to defend himself and brought a sword to the palace.

古文：拜讫，帝神色不变，使引向三公榻坐，谓曰： 卿在戎日久，无乃爲劳。 
现代文：叩拜完毕，武帝神色不变，让人引侯景坐三公的座位，问他： 你征战日久，太劳累了吧。 
English: After the kowtowing, Emperor Wu's expression remained unchanged, and he let Hou Jing sit in the seat of the three princes and asked him: You have been fighting for a long time, are you too tired?

古文：景默然。
现代文：侯景没有吭声。
English: Hou Jing remained silent, unable to answer.

古文：又问： 卿何州人？
现代文：又问： 你是哪州人？
English: He also asked: What state are you from?

古文：而来至此。 
现代文：怎么来到这里？ 
English: How did you get here?

古文：又不对。
现代文：侯景又答不上来。
English: Hou Jing could not come up with an answer.

古文：其从者任约代对。
现代文：他的随从任约便替他回答。
English: His valet answered for him.

古文：又问： 初度江有几人？ 
现代文：武帝又问： 你刚渡江时有多少人？ 
English: Emperor Wu also asked: How many people were there when you first crossed the river?

古文：景曰： 千人,  围台城有几人？ 
现代文：侯景答： 一千人。 问： 现在有多少人？ 
English: Hou Jing replied, "One thousand people." Q: How many people are there now?

古文：帝俛首不言。
现代文：回答： 普天之下，都是我的人。 
English: Answer: All over the world, they are my people.

古文：景出，谓其厢公王僧贵曰： 吾常据鞍对敌，矢刃交下，而意了无怖。
现代文：武帝低下头不说话。侯景出来，对他的厢公王僧贵说： 我经常跨马与敌对阵，刀箭交错，心里一点儿不觉得怕。
English: Emperor Wu bowed his head and did not speak. Hou Jing came out and said to his vassal, the Prince Sangu, "I often straddle the horse and the enemy, the sword and arrow interlace, and I do not feel afraid at all.

古文：今见萧公，使人自慑，岂非天威难犯。
现代文：如今看见萧公，却叫自己感到恐惧，难道不是天威难犯吗。
English: Now, when he sees Xiao Gong, he is horrified. Isn't it impossible?

古文：吾不可以再见之。 
现代文：我不能再见他了。 
English: I can't see him anymore.

古文：出见简文于永福省，简文坐与相见，亦无惧色。
现代文：出来到永福省见简文帝。简文帝坐着和他相见，也没有害怕的样子。
English: He came out to Yongfu Province to see Emperor Jianwen. Emperor Jianwen sat down to meet him and did not look scared.

古文：初，简文寒夕诗云： 雪花无有蔕，冰镜不安台。 
现代文：当初，简文帝作《寒夕诗》说： 雪花无有蒂，冰镜不安台。 
English: In the beginning, Emperor Jianwen said in his poem "Cold Evening Poem": Snowflakes have no pedicles, and ice mirrors are unstable.

古文：又咏月云： 飞轮了无辙，明镜不安台。 
现代文：又有《咏月诗》道： 飞轮了无辙，明镜不安台。 
English: There is also the "Crescent Moon Poem": The flywheel has no rut, the bright mirror is not stable.

古文：后人以爲诗谶，谓无蔕者，是无帝。不安台者，台城不安。轮无辙者，以邵陵名纶，空有赴援名也。
现代文：后人认为这是谶语诗，说 无蒂 ，就是无帝。 不安台 ，就是台城不安。 轮无辙 ，因为邵陵王名纶，空有来救援之名。
English: Later generations thought that this was a slang poem, saying "Wudi" means "without an emperor," "Unstable Taiwan" means "unsettled Taichung," and "Round and Round" means "without a rut," because Shao Ling Wang was famous and had the reputation of coming to the rescue.

古文：既而景屯兵西州，使僞仪同陈庆以甲防太极殿，悉卤掠乘舆服玩、后宫嫔妾，收王侯朝士送永福省，撤二宫侍卫。
现代文：然后侯景屯兵西州，派伪仪同陈庆带甲兵看守太极殿，把皇宫的舆服器玩、后宫嫔妃都抢个净光，把王侯朝臣都集中起来送到永福省，撤掉皇帝与太子宫中侍卫。
English: Then, Hou Jing sent troops to Xizhou, sent a pseudo-ceremony with Chen Qing and an armored soldier to guard the Taiji Hall, played with the palace's uniforms, and robbed the harem of the concubines. He gathered the princes and courtiers and sent them to Yongfu Province to remove the guards from the emperor and the princess's palace.

古文：使王伟守武德殿，于子悦屯太极东堂，矫诏大赦，自爲大都督、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，其侍中、使持节、大丞相、王如故。
现代文：派王伟守武德殿，于子悦屯驻太极东堂，假借帝命下诏大赦，自立为大都督、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，他的侍中、使持节、大丞相、河南王职务不变。
English: He sent Wang Wei to guard Wude Hall, stationed Yu Ziyue in Taiji East Hall, issued an amnesty under the pretext of the emperor's order, and established himself as the grand governor, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, and recorded the records. His attendants, envoys, ministers, and the king of Henan remained unchanged.

古文：先是，城中积尸不暇埋瘗，又有已死未敛，或将死未绝，景悉令聚而焚之，臭气闻十馀里。
现代文：原来，城中堆积的尸体没有功夫埋葬，还有死了没有收殓，或者是将死未死的，侯景命令都把他们堆在一块儿烧了，臭气传到十余里外。
English: It turned out that the bodies piled up in the city had not been buried with any effort, and there were still dead bodies that had not been collected, or bodies that had died but were not dead. Houjing ordered that they all be piled up and burned together, and the stench spread more than ten miles away.

古文：尚书外兵郎鲍正疾笃，贼曳出焚之，宛转火中，久而方绝。
现代文：尚书外兵郎鲍正病重，贼兵把他也拉出来烧了，他在火里挣扎翻腾，很久才死去。
English: Shangshu's foreign soldier, Bao Zheng, was seriously ill. The soldiers dragged him out and threw him into the fire. He rolled around in the fire for a long time before he died.

古文：景又矫诏征镇牧守各复本位，于是诸军并散。
现代文：侯景又假借帝命下令让州镇长官各回本处，于是各路军队都解散回去。
English: Houjing also issued an order, under the pretext of imperial order, to have the prefect of each prefecture return to his own place, so all the troops were disbanded and returned.

古文：降萧正德爲侍中、大司马，百官皆复其职。
现代文：降萧正德为侍中、大司马，百官各复其职。
English: Xiao Zhengde was demoted to the position of chamberlain and grand steward, and all the other officials resumed their posts.

古文：帝虽外迹不屈，而意犹忿愤，景欲以宋子仙爲司空，帝曰： 调和阴阳，岂在此物。 
现代文：武帝虽然外表已屈服，而心怀愤恨。侯景想让宋子仙当司空，武帝说： 调和阴阳，岂在这东西。 
English: Emperor Wu, although outwardly subdued, harbored resentment in his heart. Hou Jing wanted Song Zixian to be the Empress Dowager. Emperor Wu said, "Isn't this a matter of harmonizing yin and yang?"

古文：景又请以文德主帅邓仲爲城门校尉，帝曰： 不置此官。 
现代文：侯景又请让文德主帅邓仲为城门校尉，武帝： 不设这官职。 
English: Hou Jing also asked Wende coach Deng Zhong to be the castle gate captain. Emperor Wu: Do not set up this official position.

古文：简文重入奏，帝怒曰： 谁令汝来！ 
现代文：简文帝又来奏请此事，武帝发怒说： 谁叫你来的！ 
English: Emperor Wudi angrily said, "Who told you to come here?

古文：景闻亦不敢逼。
现代文：侯景听说了也不敢逼迫。
English: After hearing this, Hou Jing did not dare to persecute him.

古文：后每徵求，多不称旨，至于御膳亦被裁抑。遂怀忧愤。
现代文：后来每次要求办什么事，多不符合武帝意思而不被答应，于是武帝的膳食也被裁减克扣，武帝心中更加忧愤。
English: Later, every time he was asked to do something, most of it did not meet Emperor Wu's wishes and was not accepted. As a result, Emperor Wu's diet was also cut back, and Emperor Wu was even more upset.

古文：五月，感疾馁，崩于文德殿。
现代文：五月，因病饿在文德殿驾崩。
English: In May, he died of illness and starvation in the Winter Palace.

古文：景秘不发丧，权殡于昭阳殿，自外文武咸莫之知。
现代文：侯景保密不公布丧讯，暂时把灵柩放在昭阳殿，外边的文武官员谁也不知道。
English: Hou Jing kept the news of his death confidential and did not publicize it. He temporarily placed the coffin in the Zhaoyang Palace, but no one outside the civil and military officials knew about it.

古文：二十馀日，然后升梓宫于太极前殿，迎简文即位。
现代文：过了二十多天，才把武帝灵柩抬到太极前殿，迎简文帝即位。
English: It took more than twenty days before Emperor Wu's coffin was carried to the front hall of the Taiji Temple to welcome Emperor Jianwen to the throne.

古文：及葬修陵，使卫士以大钉于要地钉之，欲令后世绝灭。
现代文：等把武帝葬在陵时，让卫士用大钉在风水紧要处钉上，想让武帝断绝后世。
English: For example, when Emperor Wu was buried in the mausoleum, he asked the guards to use large nails to nail in the key points of feng shui, in order to let Emperor Wu cut off future generations.

古文：矫诏赦北人爲奴婢者，冀收其力用焉。
现代文：侯景假借朝廷命令赦免作奴婢的北方人，想让他们给自己出力。
English: Hou Jing took advantage of the imperial order to pardon the northerners who were slaves and wanted them to work for him.

古文：时东扬州刺史临城公大连据州，吴兴太守张嵊据郡，自南陵以上并各据守。景制命所行，唯吴郡以西、南陵以北而已。
现代文：当时东扬州刺史临城公萧大连、吴兴太守张山乘都各守自己州郡，自南陵以南地方官各守其地，侯景的命令所能实行的地区，只有吴郡以西、南陵以北而已。
English: At that time, Xiao Dalian, the governor of Lincheng of East Yangzhou, and Wu Xingta, the governor of Zhangshan, each guarded their own state and county, and local officials from Nanling to the south each guarded their own land. The area where Hou Jing's order could be implemented was only west of Wu County and north of Nanling.

古文：六月，景乃杀萧正德于永福省，封元罗爲西秦王，元景袭爲陈留王，诸元子弟封王者十馀人。
现代文：六月，侯景在永福省杀萧正德，封元罗为西秦王，元景袭为陈留王，各元姓子弟封王的有十余人。
English: In June, Hou Jing killed Xiao Zhengde in Yongfu Province, Fong Yuanluo became the King of Western Qin, and Yuan Jing became the King of Chen Liu. There were more than ten people with the surname of Fong Wang.

古文：以柳仲礼爲使持节、大都督，隶大丞相，参戎事。
现代文：委任柳仲礼为使持节、大都督，隶属大丞相管辖，参与军事。
English: He appointed Liu Zhongli as the envoy, the grand governor, under the jurisdiction of the grand chancellor, and participated in the military.

古文：十一月，百济使至，见城邑丘墟，于端门外号泣，行路见者莫不洒泣。
现代文：十一月，百济国使臣到此，见到城市已成废墟，在端门外号哭，行路人看到的无不流泪。
English: In November, Baekje envoys came here, saw the city in ruins, cried outside the front gate, and pedestrians were in tears.

古文：景闻大怒，收小庄严寺，禁不听出入。
现代文：侯景听说大怒，把他们关进小庄严寺，禁止出入。
English: When Hou Jing heard of the outrage, he locked them up in a small solemn temple and forbade them to leave.

古文：大宝元年正月，景矫诏自加班剑四十人，给前后部羽葆、鼓吹，置左右长史、从事中郎四人。
现代文：大宝元年正月，侯景借皇帝名义给自己加班剑随从四十人，赐给自己前后部羽葆、鼓吹，设置左右长史、从事中郎四人。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Great Treasure, Hou Jing borrowed the name of the emperor to give himself an overtime sword with forty followers, gave himself front and back feathers and trumpets, set up a left and right long history, and engaged four middlemen.

古文：三月甲申，景请简文禊宴于乐游苑，帐饮三日。
现代文：三月甲申日，侯景请简文帝到乐游苑水边举行沐浴仪式并设宴，在帐中畅饮三天。
English: On March 6th, Houjing invited Emperor Jianwen to the waterside of Le Youyuan to hold a bathing ceremony and set up a banquet, and they drank for three days.

古文：其逆党咸以妻子自随，皇太子以下，并令马射，箭中者赏以金钱。
现代文：他的党羽都带了老婆孩子同去，皇太子以下，被命令都要骑马射箭，射中的赏给金钱。
English: His henchmen brought their wives and children with them, and everyone from the crown prince on down was ordered to ride a horse and shoot arrows. Those who hit the target were rewarded with money.

古文：翌日向晨，简文还宫。景拜伏苦请，简文不从。
现代文：第二天天快亮时，简文帝要回宫，侯景拜伏苦苦请他留下，简文帝不答应。
English: When dawn broke the next day, Emperor Jianwen wanted to return to the palace. Hou Jingbai begged him to stay, but Emperor Jianwen refused.

古文：及发，景即与溧阳主共据御床南面并坐，群臣文武列坐侍宴。
现代文：他走以后，侯景就和溧阳公主一起在御床上并排面南而坐，文武群臣分列就座陪同饮宴。
English: After he left, Hou Jing and Princess Poyang sat side by side on the throne, facing south, and the courtiers and warriors took their seats in separate rows to accompany the banquet.

古文：四月辛卯，景又召简文幸西州，简文御素辇，侍卫四百余人。
现代文：四月十二日，侯景又叫简文帝到西州去，简文帝坐着没有彩饰的车子，侍卫四百余人。
English: On April 12th, Hou Jianjing also ordered Emperor Jianwen to go to Xizhou. Emperor Jianwen was sitting in an unadorned carriage with more than four hundred attendants.

古文：景衆数千浴铁翼卫。
现代文：侯景那帮人带数千铁骑两旁护卫。
English: Hou Jing's group of people with thousands of cavalry escorted on both sides.

古文：简文至西州，景等逆拜。
现代文：简文帝到西州，侯景等人迎拜。
English: Emperor Jianwen went to Xizhou, and Houjing and others came to pay homage.

古文：上冠下屋白纱帽，服白布裙襦。
现代文：简文帝头戴下屋白纱帽，身穿白布裙袄。
English: Emperor Jianwen is wearing a white cap and a white cloth skirt.

古文：景服紫紬褶，上加金带，与其僞仪同陈庆、索超世等西向坐。
现代文：侯景穿紫绸骑服，腰系金带，和他的伪仪同陈庆、索超世等面向西而坐。
English: Hou Jing wore a purple silk riding suit with a gold sash around his waist, and sat facing west with his false instruments, Chen Qing and So Chaoxi.

古文：溧阳主与其母范淑妃东向坐。
现代文：溧阳公主和她母亲范淑妃面向东坐。
English: Princess Fenyang and her mother, Fan Shufei, sit facing east.

古文：上闻丝竹，凄然下泣。
现代文：简文帝听到奏乐声，凄然下泪。
English: When Emperor Jianwen heard the music, he burst into tears.

古文：景起谢曰： 陛下何不乐？ 
现代文：侯景起身问候说： 陛下为什么不高兴了呢？ 
English: Hou Jing stood up and said, "Why is Your Majesty not happy?

古文：上爲笑曰： 丞相言索超世闻此以爲何声？ 
现代文：简文帝对他笑笑问： 丞相说索超世听到这以为是什么音乐？ 
English: Emperor Jianwen smiled at him and asked, "What kind of music did the prime minister think he was hearing?"

古文：景曰： 臣且不知，岂独超世。 
现代文：侯景回答： 我尚且不知道，何况超世呢。 
English: Hou Jing replied, "I still don't know, let alone transcend the world."

古文：上乃命景起舞，景即下席应弦而歌。
现代文：简文帝就让侯景起舞，侯景于是离席跟着弦乐唱起来。
English: Emperor Jianwen asked Hou Jing to dance, and Hou Jing left the table and began to sing along with the strings.

古文：上顾命淑妃，淑妃固辞乃止。
现代文：简文帝又回头让淑妃歌舞，淑妃一再推辞才作罢。
English: Emperor Jianwen turned his back and let Shu Fei sing and dance, but Shu Fei repeatedly refused to do so.

古文：景又上礼，遂逼上起舞。
现代文：侯景又起来行礼，逼简文帝跳舞。
English: Hou Jing stood up again and bowed, forcing Emperor Jianwen to dance.

古文：酒阑坐散，上抱景于床曰： 我念丞相。 
现代文：喝完酒众人散去后，简文帝坐在床上抱住侯景说： 我怜爱丞相。 
English: After drinking the wine and everyone dispersed, Emperor Jianwen sat on the bed, hugged Hou Jing and said, "I pity and love the prime minister."

古文：景曰： 陛下如不念臣，臣何至此。 
现代文：侯景说： 陛下如不怜爱我，我怎能到这一步。 
English: Hou Jing said, "If Your Majesty does not have mercy on me, how could I have come this far?"

古文：上索筌蹄，曰： 我爲公讲。 
现代文：简文帝让人给他拿过来筌蹄，说： 我给你讲经。 
English: Emperor Jianwen had someone bring him a pair of hooves and said, "I'll give you a sermon."

古文：命景离席，使其唱经。
现代文：命侯景离开座席，让他唱经。
English: Mihou Jing left the seat and let him sing the sutra.

古文：景问超世何经最小，超世曰： 唯观世音小。 
现代文：侯景问索超世什么经最小，超世说： 只有《观世音》小。 
English: Hou Jing asked Chaozhong what the smallest book was, and Chaozhong said: "Only Guanyin is small."

古文：景即唱 尔时无尽意菩萨 。
现代文：侯景就唱： 尔时无尽意菩萨。 
English: Hou Jing then sang: Once upon a time, there was a bodhisattva.

古文：上大笑，夜乃罢。
现代文：简文帝大笑，到夜间才散。
English: Emperor Jianwen laughed loudly and did not leave until nightfall.

古文：芰实荇花，所在皆罄，草根木叶，爲之凋残。虽假命须臾，亦终死山泽。
现代文：当时江南饥荒严重，江州、扬州更厉害，旱灾和蝗灾连续而来，五谷不收，百姓流亡，死者遍地。
English: At that time, the famine in the south of the Yangtze River was severe, and in Jiangzhou and Yangzhou it was even more severe. Droughts and locust plagues came one after another, grain was not harvested, people were exiled, and the dead were everywhere.

古文：其绝粒久者，鸟面鹄形，俯伏床帷，不出户牖者，莫不衣罗绮，怀金玉，交相枕藉，待命听终。
现代文：父子兄弟合家流落江湖山野，到处野菜草根树叶都被吃得净光，有的虽暂时还有口气儿，也早晚要暴尸山野。那些久未吃东西的人，都颧骨暴起，两颊深陷，趴在床上。足不出户的富贵人，都身穿罗绮，怀揣金玉，相互倚偎枕靠着等死。
English: Father and son brothers live together in a family in the mountains and rivers. Vegetables, roots and leaves are eaten everywhere. Although some temporarily have breath, they will sooner or later die. Those who have not eaten for a long time have their cheekbones raised, their cheeks sunken, and lie on the bed. Rich people who do not go out are wearing loincloths, carrying gold, and leaning on each other's pillows waiting to die.

古文：于是千里绝烟，人迹罕见，白骨成聚如丘陇焉。
现代文：当时千里断绝炊烟，人迹罕见，白骨一堆堆如同山丘。
English: At that time, thousands of miles were cut off from cooking smoke, human traces were rare, and piles of white bones were like hills.

古文：而景虐于用刑，酷忍无道，于石头立大舂碓，有犯法者捣杀之。
现代文：而侯景刑罚暴虐，惨无人道，他在石头城设立一个巨大的杵臼，有犯法的就放在里边捣死。
English: But Hou Jing's punishments were cruel and inhumane. He set up a huge mortar and pestle in Stone Town, and anyone who broke the law was beaten to death inside.

古文：东阳人李瞻起兵，爲贼所执，送诣建邺。景先出之市中，断其手足，刻析心腹，破出肝肠。
现代文：东阳人李瞻起兵反侯景，被抓获，送到建邺，侯景先把他拉到大街上，砍断手脚，剖开肚子，掏出肝肠。
English: Li Zhan of Dongyang raised an army against Hou Jing and was captured and sent to Jianye. Hou Jing first dragged him to the street, cut off his hands and feet, cut open his stomach, and pulled out his intestines.

古文：瞻正色整容，言笑自若，见其胆者乃如升焉。
现代文：李瞻脸色不变，言笑自如，有人看见他的胆有升那么大。
English: Li Zhan's face did not change, he smiled freely, and some people saw that his courage was so great.

古文：又禁人偶语，不许大酺，有犯则刑及外族。
现代文：侯景又禁止在街上两人以上交谈，不许聚会吃喝，有犯禁的连亲戚也要处死。
English: Houjing also forbade more than two people to talk in the street, forbade gatherings to eat and drink, and even relatives who violated the ban were to be executed.

古文：其官人任兼阃外者位必行台，入附凶徒者并称开府，其亲寄隆重则号曰左右厢公，勇力兼人名爲库真部督。
现代文：他的官员统兵在外的必授行台之位，投靠作帮凶的都有开府之职，受他特别信任重用的号称左右厢公，勇力过人的名为库真部督。
English: His officers and generals must be given the position of the marching table when they are outside, and those who have served as accomplices have the position of the head of the government. He is especially trusted and used by the so-called left and right wing officers, and the name of the courageous person is Ku Zhen Minister.

古文：七月，景又矫诏自进位相国，封泰山等二十郡爲汉王。入朝不趋，赞拜不名，剑履上殿，依汉萧何故事。
现代文：七月，侯景又用朝廷名义给自己进位相国，封地泰山等二十郡，号为汉王，入朝不趋，朝拜时不宣读其姓名，带剑穿鞋上殿，比照汉代萧何的待遇。
English: In July, Hou Jing also used the name of the imperial court to promote himself to the position of the crown prince, the fief of Taishan and other twenty counties, called Han Wang, did not enter the court, did not read his name when worshiping, and took a sword to wear shoes to the palace, comparing the treatment of Xiao He in the Han Dynasty.

古文：十月，景又矫诏自加宇宙大将军、都督六合诸军事，以诏文呈简文。
现代文：十月，侯景又借皇帝名义给自己加宇宙大将军、都督六合诸军事的封号，把拟好的诏文交简文帝过目。
English: In October, Hou Jing borrowed the emperor's name and gave himself the military titles of General of the Universe and Governor of the Six Provinces, and submitted the drafted edict to Emperor Jianwen.

古文：简文大惊曰： 将军乃有宇宙之号乎？ 
现代文：简文帝大惊道： 将军还有 宇宙 的称号吗？ 
English: Emperor Jianwen was shocked: Does the general still have the title of "Cosmos"?

古文：初，武帝既崩，景立简文，升重云殿礼佛爲盟曰： 臣乞自今两无疑贰，臣固不负陛下，陛下亦不得负臣。 
现代文：当初，武帝死后，侯景立简文帝，登重云殿拜佛立盟约说： 我希望从今后两人不要互相猜疑生二心，我固然不背叛陛下，陛下也不能背叛我。 
English: At first, after the death of Emperor Wu, Prince Jing and Emperor Jianwen made a pact and said, "I hope that from now on, the two of you will not be suspicious of each other. I certainly will not betray Your Majesty, and Your Majesty cannot betray me."

古文：及南康王会理之事，景稍猜惧，谓简文欲谋之。王伟因构扇，遂怀逆谋矣。
现代文：等到南康王萧会理谋诛侯景事泄被杀后，侯景对他渐生猜忌，对人说简文帝要算计他，王伟又趁机煽动，于是就起了弑帝之心。
English: After the murder of Nankang Wang Xiao Hui, who was plotting to assassinate Hou Jing, Hou Jing gradually became suspicious of him. He told people that Emperor Jianwen was plotting against him, and Wang Wei took the opportunity to instigate him. Thus, the idea of assassinating the emperor arose.

古文：二年正月，景以王克爲太宰，宋子仙爲太保，元罗爲太傅，郭元建爲太尉，张化仁爲司徒，任约爲司空，于庆爲太师，纥奚斤爲太子太傅，时灵护爲太子太保，王伟爲尚书左仆射，索超世爲右仆射。
现代文：大宝二年正月，侯景任命王克为太宰，宋子仙为太保，元罗为太傅，郭元建为太尉，张化仁为司徒，任约为司空，于庆为太师，纥奚斤为太子太傅，时灵护为太子太保，王伟为尚书左仆射，索超世为右仆射。
English: In the first month of the second year of the great treasure, Hou Jing appointed Wang Ke to be Dazai, Song Zixian to be Taibo, Yuan Luo to be Taifu, Guo Yuanjian to be Taifu, Zhang Huaren to be Stu, Yu Qing to be Taishi, Hao Jin to be Taifu, Shi Lingguo to be Taifu, Wang Wei to be Shangshu Zuoying, and So Chaozhi to be Zuoying.

古文：于大航跨水筑城，名曰捍国。
现代文：在大航跨河筑城，名为 捍国 。
English: He built a city in Dahang across the river, called "Defending the Country."

古文：四月，景遣宋子仙袭陷郢州刺史方诸。
现代文：四月，侯景派宋子仙袭击郢州，俘刺史萧方诸。
English: In April, Hou Jing sent Song Zisen to attack Zhangzhou and captured Shi Xiao Fangzhu.

古文：景乘胜西上，号二十万，联旗千里，江左以来，水军之盛未有也。
现代文：侯景乘胜西上。兵马号称四十万，旌旗千里相连，自晋南渡以来，水军还从未有如此盛大的阵容。
English: Hou Jing took the victory to the west. The soldiers and horses were said to be four hundred thousand, and the banners were connected by thousands of miles. Since Jin's arrival in the south, the navy had never had such a grand lineup.

古文：元帝闻之，谓御史中丞宗懔曰： 贼若分守巴陵，鼓行西上，荆、郢殆危，此上策也。
现代文：元帝闻讯，对御史中丞宗忄禀说： 贼兵如果分兵守巴陵，另派兵西上，荆、郢二州就危险了，这是他们的上策。
English: When Emperor Yuan heard the news, he said to Grand Historian Zhongzheng Zonglu: "If the robber soldiers divide their troops to guard Baling, and send other soldiers to the west, Jing and Handan will be in danger. This is their best strategy."

古文：身顿长沙，徇地零、桂，运粮以至洞庭，湘、郢非吾有，此中策也。
现代文：坐镇长沙，派兵出击零陵、桂阳，运粮到洞庭，湘州、郢州就不是我的了，这是中策。
English: Sitting in Changsha, dispatching troops to attack Ziling and Guiyang, transporting grain to Dongting, Hunan and Zhangzhou are not mine, this is the central policy.

古文：拥衆江口，连攻巴陵，锐气尽于坚城，士卒饥于半菽，此下策也。
现代文：带众兵处在江上，连攻巴陵，锐气在坚城下耗尽，士卒半饥不饱，这是下策了。
English: With the soldiers on the river, attacking Baling, exhausted under the strong city, the soldiers are half-starved, this is the next step.

古文：吾安枕而卧，无所多忧。 
现代文：我可以安枕而卧，没什么可忧虑的。 
English: I can rest easy, there's nothing to worry about.

古文：及次巴陵，王僧辩沈船卧鼓，若将已遁。景遂围城。
现代文：便把军驻在巴陵，王僧辩沉船息鼓，好像已经逃走，侯景围住巴陵。
English: He then stationed his army in Baling. Wang Sangyan was relieved to hear that the ship had sunk, as if he had already fled. Houjing surrounded Baling.

古文：元帝遣平北将军胡僧佑与居士陆法和大破之，禽其将任约，景乃夜遁还都。
现代文：元帝派平北将军胡僧佑和居士陆法和大破侯景，俘获他的大将任约，侯景于是夜间逃回建邺。
English: The Yuan emperor sent the general of Pingbei, Hu Zengyou, and the layman, Lu Fa, to capture Hou Jing, who then fled back to Jianye at night.

古文：左右有泣者，景命斩之。
现代文：左右有人哭泣，侯景命令斩首。
English: People were crying left and right, and Hou Jing ordered that they be beheaded.

古文：王僧辩乃东下，自是衆军所至皆捷。
现代文：王僧辩于是率兵东下，从此众军所到之处无不获胜。
English: Wang Sangye then led his army eastward, and from then on, the army was victorious everywhere it went.

古文：先是，景每出师，戒诸将曰： 若破城邑，净杀却，使天下知吾威名。 
现代文：以前，侯景每出兵，告诉诸将说： 如果打破城池，把人都杀光，让天下知道我威名。 
English: In the past, every time Hou Jing sent out troops, he told the generals: If you break the city, kill everyone, let the world know my prestige.

古文：故诸将以杀人爲戏笑，百姓虽死不从之。
现代文：所以诸将把杀人当乐趣，百姓也就死也不肯服从他。
English: So the generals will make killing fun, and the people will not obey him even if they die.

古文：是月，景乃废简文，幽于永福省，迎豫章王栋即皇帝位，升太极前殿，大赦，改元爲天正元年。
现代文：当月，侯景废黜简文帝，把他关押在永福省，迎接豫章王萧栋即皇帝位，登太极前殿，大赦天下，改元为天正元年。
English: That month, Hou Jing dethroned Emperor Jianwen and imprisoned him in Yongfu Province. He welcomed Emperor Yuanzhang Wang Xiaodong to the throne, ascended the Taiji Front Hall, pardoned the world, and changed the era to the first year of Tianzheng.

古文：有回风自永福省吹其文物皆倒折，见者莫不惊骇。
现代文：有股旋风从永福省刮出，把旗幡等物刮倒折断，见到的人无不感到惊恐。
English: A cyclone swept out of Yongfu Province, tearing flags and other objects upside down and breaking them. Everyone who saw it was horrified.

古文：初，景既平建邺，便有篡夺志，以四方须定，故未自立。
现代文：当初，侯景平定建邺后，就有心篡位，因为四方还须平定，所以没有自立为帝。
English: At the beginning, after Hou Jing had established the state, he had the heart to usurp the throne, because the four sides still needed to be pacified, so he did not stand up for himself as emperor.

古文：既而巴陵失律，江、郢丧师，猛将外歼，雄心内沮，便欲速僭大号。
现代文：后来在巴陵、江州、郢州屡次战败，猛将被歼，雄心便逐渐丧失，想赶快称帝。
English: Later, after repeated defeats in Baling, Jiangzhou, and Ganzhou, he was about to be annihilated. He gradually lost his ambition and wanted to become emperor as soon as possible.

古文：又王伟云： 自古移鼎必须废立。 
现代文：又因为王伟说： 自古改朝换代必须先经过废旧立新。 
English: It is also because Wang Wei said: Since ancient times, the change of dynasty must first go through the abolition of the old and the establishment of the new.

古文：故景从之。
现代文：所以侯景听从他的话废了简文帝。
English: Therefore, Hou Jing obeyed his words and abolished Emperor Jianwen.

古文：其太尉郭元建闻之，自秦郡驰还谏曰： 主上仁明，何得废之？ 
现代文：他的太尉郭元建听说，从秦郡赶回来进谏说： 君主仁慈贤明，怎么能废他呢？ 
English: His lieutenant, Guo Yuanjian, is said to have rushed back to Jincheng from Qin County and said, "The sovereign is kind and wise, how can I abandon him?

古文：景曰： 王伟劝吾。 
现代文：侯景说： 王伟劝我这样干。 
English: Hou Jing said: Wang Wei advised me to do this.

古文：元建固陈不可，景意遂回，欲复帝位，以栋爲太孙。
现代文：元建极力陈述不能这样，侯景开始回心转意，想恢复简文帝位，让萧栋作皇太孙。
English: Yuan Jian tried his best to explain that this was not possible, but Hou Jing began to change his mind and wanted to restore the throne of the Emperor Jianwen and make Xiaodong the grandson of the emperor.

古文：王伟固执不可，乃禅位于栋。
现代文：王伟一再坚持说不行，才让萧栋继位。
English: Wang Wei insisted again and again that it was impossible, only to let Xiaodong take the throne.

古文：景以哀太子妃赐郭元建，元建曰： 岂有皇太子妃而降爲人妾。 
现代文：侯景把皇太子萧大器的妃子赏给郭元建，元建说： 哪里有皇太子妃降级给人作妾的。 
English: Hou Jing awarded Guo Yuanjian the concubine of the crown prince Xiao Daqi. Yuanjian said: Where is the crown princess downgraded to a concubine?

古文：竟不与相见。
现代文：到底也不肯与她相见。
English: He has always refused to meet her.

古文：景司空刘神茂、仪同尹思合、刘归义、王晔、桑干王元頵等据东阳归顺。
现代文：侯景的司空刘神茂、仪同尹思合、刘归义、王晔、桑乾王元君页等人在东阳反侯景归顺朝廷。
English: Liu Shenmao, Yi Tong Yin Sihong, Liu Guiyi, Wang Qian, Sang Qian Wang Yuanjun and others, who were subordinates of Houjing, rebelled against Houjing Guishun in Dongyang.

古文：十一月，景矫萧栋诏，自加九锡，汉国置丞相以下百官，陈备物于庭。
现代文：十一月，侯景借萧栋之命，给自己加九锡，在他的汉国内设置丞相以下百官，在庭堂上陈设仪仗祭器等物。
English: In November, at the behest of Xiaodong, Hou Jing gave himself an extra nine hundred pennies, set up a hundred officials below the prime minister in his Han, and set up ceremonial vessels and other objects in the courtyard.

古文：忽有鸟似山鹊翔于景册书上，赤足丹觜，都下左右所无。
现代文：忽然有只像山鹊一样的鸟在侯景册封的本子上空飞翔，腿和嘴都是红色，京都和附近地区都没有这种鸟。
English: All of a sudden, a hawthorn-like bird with red legs and beak flies over the sealed book of Houjing, a bird that is not found in Kyoto or the surrounding area.

古文：贼徒悉骇，竞射之，不能中。
现代文：众贼都很害怕，争着用箭射它，射不中。
English: All the thieves were afraid, and they tried to shoot it with arrows, but they could not hit it.

古文：景又矫栋诏，追崇其祖爲大将军，父爲大丞相，自加冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，锺虡宫悬之乐，一如旧仪。
现代文：侯景又借萧栋名义，追封他祖父为大将军，父亲为大丞相，给自己加有十二旒的天子之冠，树立天子的旌旗，出入都要警戒清道，乘坐金根车，驾六匹马，备五时副车，设置顶端饰有牦牛尾的天子旌旗，用六十四人的天子乐舞，钟罄乐器之类，都如同旧日皇帝仪式。
English: Hou Jing also borrowed Xiaodong's name, followed his grandfather as the grand general, his father as the grand chancellor, added to himself the crown of the heavenly son with twelve scepters, set up the heavenly son's banner, and had to guard the clear road when entering and exiting. He rode a golden chariot, drove six horses, prepared a five-hour secondary car, set up a heavenly son's banner with a yakitori tail at the top, and used sixty-four heavenly son's music and dance, and musical instruments, all of which were like the old emperor's ceremony.

古文：寻又矫萧栋诏禅位，使僞太宰王克奉玺绂于己。
现代文：不久又借萧栋名义把帝位让给自己，让伪太宰王克把皇帝印绶奉献给他。
English: Not long after, he gave up the imperial throne to himself in the name of Xiaodong, and let the pseudo-dazai Wang Ke dedicate the emperor's seal to him.

古文：先夕，景宿大庄严寺，即南郊，柴燎于天，升坛受禅，大风拔木，旗盖尽偃，文物并失旧仪。
现代文：头一天晚上，侯景在大庄严寺过夜，第二天到南郊，对天行烧柴仪式，登坛接受帝位。这时起了大风，拔起树木，刮倒伞盖，各类仪仗设置全刮得不成体统。
English: On the evening of the first day, Hou Jing spent the night at the Grand Solemn Temple, and the next day he went to the southern suburbs to perform a firewood-burning ceremony against the sky and ascend the altar to accept the throne. At this time, a strong wind arose, uprooting trees, knocking down umbrella covers, and all kinds of ceremonial settings were blown out of shape.

古文：既唱警跸，识者以爲名景而言警跸，非久祥也。
现代文：天子出行要清道戒严，称为警跸，有见识者认为侯景名景而称警跸，不是久长的兆头。
English: Tianzi travel to clear the road of martial law, known as the police, some people think that Houjing famous scenery and known as the police, is not a long time.

古文：景闻恶之，改爲备跸。
现代文：侯景听说后觉得忌讳，改为备跸。
English: After hearing about it, Hou Jing felt it was taboo and changed it to preparation.

古文：人又曰，备于此便毕矣。
现代文：又有人说，齐备到此就该完毕了。
English: Others said that the preparations should end here.

古文：有司乃奏改云永跸。
现代文：有关官员就奏请改称永跸。
English: The officials concerned requested that the name be changed to Yongkang.

古文：乃以广柳车载鼓吹，橐驼负牺牲，辇上置垂脚坐焉。
现代文：用大车载鼓吹乐伎，骆驼驮上祭祀的牲畜，车辇上放置高凳。
English: A large cart is used to carry the propagandists, camels are used to carry the sacrificial animals, and a high stool is placed on the cart.

古文：景所带剑水精摽无故堕落，手自拾取，甚恶之。
现代文：侯景佩剑上的水晶扌票无故坠落，他自己用手捡起来，觉得很忌讳。
English: When the crystal banknote on Hou Jing's sword fell for no reason, he picked it up with his own hands, feeling it was taboo.

古文：将登坛，有兔自前而走，俄失所在。
现代文：将要登坛时，有只兔子从前边跑过去，一眨眼不见踪影。
English: When he was about to ascend the altar, a rabbit ran past him and disappeared in the blink of an eye.

古文：又白虹贯日三重，日青无色。
现代文：又有白虹蔽日三层，太阳发青失去光芒。
English: There was also a white rainbow covering the sun in three layers, and the sun turned blue and lost its shine.

古文：还将登太极殿，丑徒数万同共吹唇唱吼而上。
现代文：回宫后将要登上太极殿时，有数万丑恶不堪的人吹着口哨唱着吼着往殿阶上爬。
English: After returning to the palace, when they were about to ascend the Taiji Hall, there were tens of thousands of ugly people whistling, singing and shouting as they climbed up the steps of the hall.

古文：及升御床，床脚自陷。
现代文：等侯景坐上御床，床腿无故自己陷入地下。
English: When Hou Jing sat on the bed, the leg of the bed fell into the ground for no reason.

古文：大赦，改元爲太始元年。
现代文：大赦天下，改元为太始元年。
English: The country was amnestied and the era was changed to the first year of the Taishi era.

古文：方飨群臣，中会而起，触扆坠地。
现代文：一次大宴群臣，侯景半道上站起来，碰到屏风倒在地上。
English: At a grand banquet, the courtiers, Hou Jing stood up halfway and fell to the ground when he touched the screen.

古文：封萧栋爲淮阴王，幽之。
现代文：封萧栋为淮阴王，并把他关起来。
English: He declared Xiaodong to be the king of Huaiyin and locked him up.

古文：改梁律爲汉律，改左户尚书爲殿中尚书，五兵尚书爲七兵尚书，直殿主帅爲直寝。
现代文：把梁律改为汉律，改左户尚书为殿中尚书，五兵尚书为七兵尚书，直殿主帅为直寝。
English: Liang Ritsu was changed to Han Ritsu, Zuo Ritsu Shangshu was changed to Denshuchu Shangshu, Wubei Shangshu was changed to Shichibei Shangshu, and Zhidong Shusha was changed to Zhidose.

古文：景三公之官，动置十数，仪同尤多。
现代文：侯景三公一级的官职，动不动就有几十个，仪同更多。
English: There are dozens of official posts at the level of Hou Jingsan Gong, and there are even more gongs.

古文：或匹马孤行，自执羁絏。
现代文：这些官员有些往往是自己拉着缰绳匹马孤行，连一个随从也没有。
English: Some of these officials often pull the reins themselves and ride alone, without even an entourage.

古文：以宋子仙、郭元建、张化仁、任约爲佐命元功，并加三公之位；王伟、索超世爲谋主；于子悦、彭隽主击断；陈庆、吕季略、卢晖略、于和、史安和爲爪牙：斯皆尤毒于百姓者。
现代文：任宋子仙、郭元建、张化仁、任约为佐命元帅，都加三公之位；王伟、索超世为谋主；于子悦、彭亻隽主决断；陈庆、吕季略、卢晖略、于和、史安和为爪牙，这些都是对百姓特别狠毒的人。
English: Song Zixian, Guo Yuanjian, Zhang Huaren, and Yu Yu, who were appointed as marshals, were all promoted to the rank of three princes; Wang Wei and Suo Chaosei were the masterminds; Yu Ziyue and Peng Yao were the decision-makers; Chen Qing, Lü Jiliu, Lu Xiliu, Yu He, and Shi Anhe were the minions. These were all people who were particularly vicious to the people.

古文：其余王伯丑、任延和等复有数十人。
现代文：其余有王伯丑、任延和等数十人。
English: The rest are Wang Boqiu, Ren Yanhe and dozens of others.

古文：梁人而爲景用者，则故将军赵伯超、前制局监姬石珍、内监严亶、邵陵王记室伏知命，此四人尽心竭力者。
现代文：梁朝人被侯景任用的，有前将军赵伯超、前制局监姬石珍、内监严、邵陵王记室伏知命，这四个人是尽心竭力为侯景卖命的。
English: The Liang Dynasty people were appointed by Hou Jing, including the former general Zhao Bochao, the former system bureau supervisor Ji Shizhen, the internal inspector Yan, and the Shao Ling Wang Ji's office. These four people worked hard for Hou Jing.

古文：若太宰王克、太傅元罗、侍中殷不害、太常姬弘正等虽官尊，止从人望，非腹心任也。
现代文：至于太宰王克、太傅元罗、侍中殷不害、太常姬弘正等虽官位尊贵，只是为了利用他们的声望，并非委以心腹重任。
English: As for Dazai Wang Ke, Taifu Yuan Luo, Chamberlain Yin Nihong, and Taizang Ji Hong Zheng, although they held high-ranking positions, they only used their prestige and did not entrust themselves with important duties.

古文：景祖名乙羽周，及篡以周爲庙讳，故改周弘正、石珍姓姬焉。
现代文：侯景的祖父叫乙羽周，篡位后把 周 作为庙讳，所以把周弘正、周石珍改姓了姬。
English: Houjing's grandfather was called Yi Yu Zhou. After he usurped the throne, he used Zhou as a temple name, so he changed the surnames of Zhou Hongzheng and Zhou Shizhen to Ji.

古文：王伟请立七庙，景曰： 何谓七庙？ 
现代文：王伟奏请建立七庙，侯景问： 什么叫七庙？ 
English: Wang Wei asked for the establishment of seven temples. Hou Jing asked: What are the seven temples?

古文：伟曰： 天子祭七世祖考，故置七庙。 
现代文：王伟说： 天子要祭祀七世先祖，所以要建七庙。 
English: Wang Wei said: The Son of Heaven wants to sacrifice seven generations of ancestors, so he wants to build seven temples.

古文：并请七世讳，敕太常具祭祀之礼。
现代文：并问侯景七世祖宗的名讳，让他下令命太常备祭祀之礼。
English: He also asked for the name of the ancestor of the 7th generation of Houjing and ordered him to prepare a ritual offering.

古文：景曰： 前世吾不复忆，唯阿爷名摽，且在朔州，伊那得来噉是。 
现代文：侯景说： 我家前代的事我记不得了，只知道我爹叫扌票，而且他埋在朔州，他哪儿能来这儿吃供品。 
English: Hou Jing said, "I can't remember anything about the previous generation of my family. I only know that my father's name is Banknote, and that he is buried in Shuozhou. Where can he come here to eat the offerings?"

古文：衆闻咸笑之。
现代文：众人听到后都偷偷笑他。
English: After hearing this, everyone secretly laughed at him.

古文：景党有知景祖名乙羽周者，自外悉是王伟制其名位。
现代文：他的党徒有人知道他祖父叫乙羽周的，其他祖宗则都是王伟编造的。
English: Some of his party members knew that his grandfather was called Yi Yu Zhou, but the other ancestors were all made up by Wang Wei.

古文：以汉司徒侯霸爲始祖，晋征士侯瑾爲七世祖。
现代文：把汉代司徒侯霸作为始祖，晋朝徵士侯瑾作为七世祖。
English: The Han Dynasty's Shtu Houba as the progenitor, and the Jin Dynasty's Zheshi Hou Yi as the seventh progenitor.

古文：于是推尊其祖周爲大丞相，父摽爲元皇帝。
现代文：于是就尊奉他的祖父乙羽周为大丞相，父亲扌票为元皇帝。
English: As a result, he revered his grandfather, Yi Yu Zhou, as the grand chancellor, and his father, Qian Ji, as the former emperor.

古文：于时景修饰台城及朱雀、宣阳等门，童谣曰： 的脰乌，拂朱雀，还与吴。 
现代文：当时侯景修饰台城及朱雀、宣阳等门，有童谣说： 白脖乌，拂朱雀，还与吴。 
English: At that time, Houjing decorated Taicheng and Suzaku, Xuanyang and other gates. There is a nursery rhyme that says: "White neck Wu, whisk Suzaku, also with Wu."

古文：又曰： 脱青袍，着芒屩，荆州天子挺应着。 
现代文：又说： 脱青袍，穿芒繥，荆州天子挺应著。 
English: He also said, "Taking off the blue robe and putting on the manbun, Jingzhou Tianzi is quite appropriate."

古文：时都下王侯庶姓五等庙树，咸见残毁，唯文宣太后庙四周柏树独郁茂。
现代文：当时京城里王侯庶姓五等庙前的树全都凋残，只有梁元帝母文宣太后庙四周柏树葱郁茂盛。
English: At that time, all the trees in front of the Fifth-Class Temple of the Prince's Maiden Name in Beijing had withered away, and only the cypress trees surrounding the temple of Empress Dowager Liang Yuan's mother, Empress Dowager Wenxuan, were lush.

古文：及景篡，修南郊路，僞都官尚书吕季略说景令伐此树以立三桥。
现代文：侯景篡位时，修南郊的道路，伪都官尚书吕季略劝侯景砍了这些树造三桥。
English: When Hou Jing usurped the throne and repaired the roads in the southern suburbs, the pseudo-metropolitan Shangshu Lujiao advised Hou Jing to cut down these three bridges made of trees.

古文：始斫南面十馀株，再宿悉枿生，便长数尺。
现代文：刚砍倒南边的十几棵，第二天都又长出新枝，一下子就有几尺长。
English: I just chopped down a dozen trees on the south side, and the next day new branches sprouted, all of a sudden several feet long.

古文：时既冬月，翠茂若春。
现代文：当时是冬天，但却翠绿茂盛得像春天。
English: It was winter, but the foliage was as lush as spring.

古文：贼乃大惊恶之，使悉斫杀。
现代文：侯景大惊并深以为忌，下令把树全部砍光。
English: Shocked and deeply ashamed, Hou Jing ordered all the trees to be cut down.

古文：识者以爲昔僵柳起于上林，乃表汉宣之兴，今庙树重青，必彰陕西之瑞。
现代文：有见识者认为从前上林苑枯树复生，预示了汉宣帝中兴，如今庙树重青，一定是昭示朝廷的祥瑞。
English: Some observers believe that the revival of the dead trees in Shanglin Court in the past foreshadowed the rise of Emperor Han Xuan. Now that the temple trees are green again, it must be a sign of the auspiciousness of the imperial court.

古文：又景床东边香炉无故堕地，景呼东西南北皆谓爲厢，景曰： 此东厢香炉那忽下地。 
现代文：又有一次侯景床东边的香炉无故掉到地下，侯景把东西南北方向都叫作厢，说道： 这东厢香炉怎么掉地下了？ 
English: Another time, the incense burner on the east side of Houjing's bed fell to the ground for no reason. Houjing called the east-west and north-south directions as compartments, saying: How did this east compartment incense burner fall to the ground?

古文：议者以爲湘东军下之征。
现代文：别人议论这是湘东王军队要到来的征兆。
English: Others say that this is a sign that the army of the King of Shandong is about to arrive.

古文：十二月，谢答仁、李庆等军至建德，攻元頵、李占栅，大破之。执頵、占送京口，截其手足徇之，经日乃死。
现代文：十二月，谢答仁、李庆等人的军队到建德，攻打元君页、李占的营栅，大败他们，抓获元鈆、李占送到京口，砍断他们的手脚游行示众，过了一天才死去。
English: In December, the army of Xie Dairen, Li Qing and others arrived in Jiande, attacked the camp of Yuan Junshi and Li Zhan, defeated them, captured Yuan Xuan and Li Zhan and sent them to Beijing, cut off their hands and feet and paraded them to the public, and died a day later.

古文：景二年，谢答仁攻东阳，刘神茂降，以送建康，景爲大锉碓，先进其脚，寸寸斩之，至头方止。使衆观之以示威。
现代文：侯景二年，谢答仁攻东阳，刘神茂投降，被送到建康，侯景设大坐刂碓刑具，先把刘神茂的脚送进去，一寸一寸地铡，一直铡到头才算完，并让众人去观看以示威。
English: In the second year of Hou Jing, Xie Dairen attacked Dongyang, Liu Shenmao surrendered, and was sent to Jiankang. Hou Jing set up a large sitting torture device, first sent Liu Shenmao's feet into it, bit by bit, bit by bit, until it was over, and let everyone watch the demonstration.

古文：王僧辩军至芜湖，城主宵遁。
现代文：王僧辩兵到芜湖，守城主帅夜间逃走。
English: Wang Sofen soldiers went to Lugu Lake, and the commander of the castle fled in the night.

古文：侯子鉴率步骑万馀人度州，并引水军俱进。
现代文：侯子鉴率步骑兵万余人过江，并带领水军并进。
English: Hou Zi led more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry across the river, and led the navy.

古文：僧辩逆击，大破之。
现代文：僧辩迎击，大败子鉴。
English: If you argue with a monk, you will be defeated.

古文：景闻之大惧涕下，覆面引衾卧，良久方起，叹曰： 咄叱！
现代文：侯景听说后吓得哭了，用被子蒙着头躺在床上，半天才爬起来，叹气道： 唉！唉！
English: After hearing this, Hou Jing was so scared that he cried. He covered his head with a quilt and lay on the bed. It took him half a day to get up. He sighed, "Alas! Alas!

古文：咄叱！
现代文：真坑死你爹了。 
English: Your dad's a deadbeat.

古文：误杀乃公。 初，景之爲丞相，居于西州，将率谋臣，朝必集行列门外，谓之牙门。
现代文：当初，侯景作丞相，住在西州，要会集他的臣下时，早上都在他门外列队等候，把这门叫作牙门。
English: At the beginning, Hou Jing was the prime minister and lived in Xizhou. When he wanted to gather his vassals, they all waited in line outside his door in the morning. This door was called the tooth door.

古文：以次引进，赉以酒食，言笑谈论，善恶必同。
现代文：侯景把他们按顺序领进门，用酒食招待，不论关系好坏，都在一起说说笑笑。
English: Hou Jing led them into the door in order, invited them with wine and food, and whether the relationship was good or bad, they all talked and laughed together.

古文：及篡，恒坐内不出，旧将稀见面，咸有怨心。
现代文：篡位以后，常坐在宫内不出来，旧将也很难见面，都心生不满。
English: After the usurpation, they often sat in the palace and did not come out, and it was difficult to meet the old emperor. They were all dissatisfied.

古文：至是登烽火楼望西师，看一人以爲十人，大惧。
现代文：这时侯景登烽火楼观望西来的军队，把一个人看成十个，大为惊惧。
English: At this time, Hou Jing went up to the tower to watch the troops coming from the west. He was greatly alarmed when he saw that one person was equal to ten.

古文：僧辩及诸将遂于石头城西步上，连营立栅，至于落星墩。
现代文：僧辩和众将从石头城西码头上岸，连营结寨，一直到落星墩。
English: Sangye and his followers will disembark from the West Pier of Stone Town, camp side by side, and march all the way to the shooting star.

古文：景大恐，遣掘王僧辩父墓，剖棺焚其尸。
现代文：侯景非常害怕，派人扒开王僧辩父亲的坟，打开棺材烧了他的尸体。
English: Hou Jing was so afraid that he sent someone to dig up the grave of Wang Sangye's father, open the coffin and burn his body.

古文：王僧辩等进营于石头城北，景列阵挑战，僧辩大破之。
现代文：王僧辩等人前进把营扎在石头城北，侯景列阵挑战，僧辩把他打得大败。
English: Wang Sangye and others advanced and set up camp in the north of Stone Town. Hou Jinglian challenged, and Sangye defeated him.

古文：景既退败，不敢入宫，敛其散兵屯于阙下，遂将逃。
现代文：侯景败退后，不敢入宫，收集他的散兵驻扎在皇宫旁，作逃跑的打算。
English: Hou Jing retreated in defeat and did not dare to enter the palace. He gathered his scattered soldiers and stationed them next to the palace, planning to escape.

古文：王伟按剑揽辔谏曰： 自古岂有叛天子；今宫中卫士尚足一战，宁可便走。 
现代文：王伟一手按剑一手抓住他的马缰说： 自古哪有叛逃的天子，如今宫中的卫士还够用来打一仗，哪里就能逃跑呢。 
English: Wang Wei pressed his sword in one hand and grabbed his stirrup in the other and said, "Since ancient times, no one has ever defected. Nowadays, the guards in the palace are still enough to fight a war, and they can escape anywhere.

古文：景曰： 我在北打贺拔胜，败葛荣，扬名河朔，与高王一种人。
现代文：侯景说： 我在北方打贺拔胜，败葛荣，扬名河朔，和高欢是同样的人。
English: Hou Jing said: I am the same person who congratulated and won in the north, defeated Ge Rong, and became famous, and Gao Huan.

古文：来南直度大江，取台城如反掌，打邵陵王于北山，破柳仲礼于南岸，皆乃所亲见。
现代文：到南边来直渡大江，取台城易如反掌，在北山打邵陵王，在南岸败柳仲礼，都是你们亲眼所见。
English: You have seen with your own eyes that it is easy to cross the Dajiang River to the south, take Taicheng, fight Shao Ling Wang in the North Mountain, and defeat Liu Zhongli on the south bank.

古文：今日之事，恐是天亡。
现代文：今天的事，恐怕是天要亡我了。
English: If I am defeated today, I am afraid it will be God's will for me to die.

古文：乃好守城，当复一决。 
现代文：你们好好守城，再决战一场。 
English: You will defend the city well, and then there will be a decisive battle.

古文：仰观石阙，逡巡叹息久之。
现代文：他仰观宫阙，长时间徘徊叹息。
English: He looked up at Gong Li, lingered for a long time and sighed.

古文：乃以皮囊盛二子挂马鞍，与其仪同田迁、范希荣等百馀骑东奔。
现代文：用两只皮袋子装上他的两个儿子，挂在马鞍上，和他的仪同田迁、范希荣等百余骑向东逃去。
English: He loaded his two sons with two leather bags and hung them on the saddle, while more than a hundred other riders, including his son Tongtianqian and Fan Xirong, fled eastward.

古文：王伟遂委台城窜逸。侯子鉴等奔广陵。
现代文：王伟也丢下台城逃窜，侯子鉴等人逃往广陵。
English: Wang Wei also left Taicheng to escape, and Hou Zi Jian and others fled to Guangling.

古文：王克开台城门引裴之横入宫，纵兵蹂掠。
现代文：王克开台城门领裴之横入宫，裴之横纵兵在宫内蹂躏抢掠。
English: Wang Ke opened the gate of the palace and led Pei into the palace. Pei's soldiers ravaged and looted the palace.

古文：是夜遗烬烧太极殿及东西堂、延阁、秘署皆尽，羽仪辇辂莫有孑遗。
现代文：当夜士兵丢弃的火种烧着了太极殿和东西堂、延阁、秘署，都被烧了个净光，皇帝的仪仗车辇一点儿也没留下来。
English: That night, the kindling discarded by the soldiers set fire to the Taiji Hall and the East and West Halls, Yan Ge, and the Secret Office. They were all burned to a crisp, and the emperor's ceremonial chariot did not remain at all.

古文：王僧辩命武州刺史杜崱救火，仅而得灭。故武德、五明、重云殿及门下、中书、尚书省得免。
现代文：王僧辩派武州刺史杜山则去救火，才算把火扑灭，所以武德、五明、重云各殿及门下、中书、尚书省房屋得以幸免。
English: Wang Sangye sent Wuzhou priest Shidusan to fight the fire, but it was not extinguished until the fire was extinguished, so the Wude, Woming, Chongyun halls and their disciples, the Chinese and Shangshu provincial houses were spared.

古文：僧辩迎简文梓宫升于朝堂，三军缟素，踊于哀次。
现代文：僧辩在朝堂上迎接简文帝灵柩，三军戴孝，列队痛哭。
English: In the morning hall, Sangye greeted Jianwen Emperor Lingyao, and the three armies of Dai Xiao, lined up and cried bitterly.

古文：命侯瑱、裴之横追贼于东，焚僞神主于宣阳门，作神主于太庙，收图书八万卷归江陵。
现代文：僧辩命侯王真、裴之横向东追击侯景，把侯景设立的祖宗牌位在宣阳门烧掉，在太庙立梁朝祖先神位，搜集图书八万卷运回江陵。
English: The monks ordered Hou Wang Zhen and Pei Zhi to pursue Hou Jing horizontally to the east, burn the ancestor plaque set up by Hou Jing at Xuanyang Gate, establish the Liang Dynasty ancestor god in the Great Temple, and collect 80,000 volumes of books and transport them back to Gangneung.

古文：杜崱守台城，都下户口百遗一二，大航南岸极目无烟。
现代文：杜山则守台城。京城中户口只剩下百分之一二，大航南岸极目远望看不到炊烟。
English: Du Shan is the guardian of Taicheng. Only two percent of households in the capital remain, and cooking smoke cannot be seen as far as the eye can see from the southern coast of Dahang.

古文：老小相扶竞出，才度淮，王琳、杜龛军人掠之，甚于寇贼，号叫闻于石头。
现代文：听说梁朝官军来到，百姓们扶老携幼争相出来迎接，可是官军才渡过淮水，王琳、杜龛就纵兵抢掠，比侯景更甚，哭叫声在石头城都听得见。
English: It is said that the Liang Dynasty's government army arrived, and the people came out to meet it, but the government army had just crossed the Huai River, and Wang Lin and Du Qian looted and plundered, even more than Hou Jing, and the cries could be heard in the Stone City.

古文：僧辩谓爲有变，登城问故，亦不禁也。
现代文：僧辩还以为是兵变，登上城头问明原因，却也不加禁止。
English: Sangye also thought it was a mutiny and went to the top of the castle to find out the reason, but he was not banned.

古文：佥以王师之酷，甚于侯景，君子以是知僧辩之不终。
现代文：人们都感到官军比侯景还要暴虐。有识者据此知道僧辩没有好下场。
English: People all felt that the government army was even more brutal than Houjing. People with insight knew from this that the debate did not have a good ending.

古文：初，景之围台城，援军三十万，兵士望青袍则气消胆夺。
现代文：当初，侯景围台城时，朝廷援军三十万，可是兵士们看到穿青袍的侯景兵就吓得丢了魂儿。
English: At first, when Hou Jing besieged Taicheng, 300,000 imperial reinforcements arrived, but when the soldiers saw the blue-robed Hou Jing soldiers, they were scared out of their wits.

古文：及赤亭之役，胡僧佑以羸卒一千破任约精甲二万，转战而东，前无横阵。
现代文：到赤亭之战，胡僧佑用弱兵一千破任约精兵二万，转战向东，所向无人敢于阻挡。
English: At the Battle of Chateung, Hu Sangyou used a weak force of 1,000 soldiers to defeat about 20,000 elite soldiers, and turned to the east, where no one dared to stand in his way.

古文：既而侯瑱追及，景衆未阵，皆举幡乞降，景不能制。
现代文：后来侯王真追上，侯景的兵将没有对阵，都举旗求降，侯景制止不住。
English: Later, Hou Wangzhen caught up, and Hou Jing's soldiers did not fight against each other, they all raised their flags to surrender, and Hou Jing could not stop them.

古文：乃与腹心人数十单舸走，推堕二子于水，自沪渎入海至胡豆洲。
现代文：就和几十名心腹划一条船逃走。把他的两个孩子推到水中，从沪渎入海到胡豆洲。
English: He escaped with dozens of confidants by rowing a boat. He pushed his two children into the water and swam from Huzhou into the sea to Huzhou.

古文：前太子舍人羊鲲杀之，送于王僧辩。
现代文：前太子舍人羊鲲杀侯景，把尸体送交王僧辩。
English: The former crown prince killed Hou Jing with a shepherd's crook and sent the body to Wang Sangfen.

古文：景长不满七尺，长上短下，眉目疏秀，广颡高颧，色赤少鬓，低视屡顾，声散，识者曰： 此谓豺狼之声，故能食人，亦当爲人所食。 
现代文：侯景身高不满七尺，上身长下身短，眉目疏朗清秀，宽脑门高颧骨，脸色发红，鬓须稀疏，眼珠子向下左右乱转，嗓音嘶哑，有见识者说： 这就是所谓的豺狼之声，所以能吃人，也要被人所吃。 
English: Hou Jing was less than seven feet tall, with a short upper body and short lower body, sparse and clear eyes, a wide forehead and high cheekbones, a red face, sparse whiskers, downturned eyeballs, and a hoarse voice. An insider said: "This is the so-called howling wolf's voice, so it can eat people, but also be eaten by people."

古文：既南奔，魏相高澄悉命先剥景妻子面皮，以大铁镬盛油煎杀之。女以入宫爲婢，男三岁者并下蚕室。
现代文：跑到南方来以后，魏相高澄命人把侯景妻子脸上的皮扒掉，用大铁锅盛上油炸死，把他女儿入宫当奴婢，儿子三岁以上的都下蚕室阉割。
English: After he came to the south, Wei Xiang Gao Cheng ordered someone to peel off the skin on the face of Hou Jing's wife, fry her to death in a large iron pot, bring his daughter into the palace as a slave, and castrate his sons over the age of three.

古文：后齐文宣梦猕猴坐御床，乃并煮景子于镬，其子之在北者歼焉。
现代文：后来齐文宣帝高洋梦见猕猴坐在御床上，便把侯景的儿子都用锅煮了，他在北方的儿子被全部杀光。
English: Later, Emperor Qianwen Xuan and Emperor Gaoyang dreamed that a macaque was sitting on the queen's bed, so they boiled the sons of Houjing in a pot, and his sons in the north were all killed.

古文：景性猜忍，好杀戮，恒以手刃爲戏。
现代文：侯景性情猜忌残忍，喜欢杀人，常亲手杀人作为娱乐。
English: Houjing is suspicious and cruel by nature, likes to kill people, and often kills people with his own hands as entertainment.

古文：方食，斩人于前，言笑自若，口不辍餐。
现代文：正吃饭时，在他面前杀人，他谈笑自若，嘴里吃喝不停。
English: While he was eating, someone killed a man in front of him. He talked and laughed freely, and kept eating and drinking.

古文：或先断手足，割舌劓鼻，经日乃杀之。
现代文：有时杀人先斩断手脚，割下舌头鼻子，过一天再杀。
English: Sometimes killers first cut off hands and feet, cut off the tongue and nose, and then kill again a day later.

古文：自篡立后，时着白纱帽，而尚披青袍，头插象牙梳，床上常设胡床及筌蹄，着靴垂脚坐。
现代文：自从篡位后，时常戴白纱帽，喜欢披青袍，头插象牙梳，床上常摆着折迭椅和筌蹄，穿着靴子垂脚而坐。
English: Since he usurped the throne, he often wears a white gauze cap, likes to wear a blue robe, and combs his hair with an ivory comb. There are often folding chairs and horseshoes on the bed, and he sits with his feet hanging down while wearing boots.

古文：或跂户限，或走马遨游，弹射鸦鸟。
现代文：有时走门串户，有时骑马游玩，弹射鸦鸟。
English: Sometimes they go door-to-door, sometimes they ride horses and play, ejecting crows.

古文：自爲天子，王伟不许轻出，于是郁怏，更成失志，曰： 吾无事爲帝，与受摈不殊。 
现代文：自从当了天子，王伟不让他轻易外出，于是郁闷不乐，甚至有些糊涂了，说： 我没事作什么皇帝，跟被抛弃了有什么两样。 
English: Since he became the son of heaven, Wang Wei did not let him go out easily, so he was depressed and unhappy, and even a little confused, saying: I have nothing to do as an emperor, what is the difference with being abandoned.

古文：及闻义师转近，猜忌弥深，床前兰錡自遶，然后见客。
现代文：等听说朝廷军队临近，更加爱猜忌，床前放上兵器，然后才见客。
English: When he heard that the imperial army was approaching, he became even more suspicious and put a weapon in front of his bed before seeing his guests.

古文：每登武帝所常幸殿，若有芒刺在身，恒闻叱咄者。
现代文：每次到武帝常去的殿内，好像身上扎了刺一样，常听到呵斥的声音。
English: Every time I went to the hall where Emperor Wu often went, it was as if I had a thorn in my flesh, and I often heard shouting.

古文：又处宴居殿，一夜惊起，若有物扣其心。
现代文：有一次住在宴居殿，夜里忽然惊醒爬起来，觉得有什么东西在敲击他的心脏。
English: Once, when he was staying in a banquet hall, he suddenly woke up in the night and felt something beating in his heart.

古文：自是凡武帝所常居处，并不敢处。多在昭阳殿廊下。
现代文：从此凡是武帝常住的地方，都不敢去住，多住在昭阳殿廊下。
English: From then on, he did not dare to live in any of the places where Emperor Wu usually resided, preferring to live in the corridor of the Zhoyang Palace.

古文：所居殿屋，常有鸺鶹鸟鸣呼，景恶之，每使人穷山野捕鸟。
现代文：所住的殿堂，常有猫头鹰叫，侯景心里忌讳，常派人到山野中到处捕鸟。
English: In the palace where he lived, there were often owls hooting, and Hou Jing had a taboo in his heart. He often sent people to the mountains and fields to hunt birds.

古文：景所乘白马，每战将胜，辄踯躅嘶鸣，意气骏逸；其有奔衄，必低头不前。
现代文：侯景所骑的白马，每到要打胜仗时，总是四蹄踏动嘶鸣不已，十分神气；如要打败仗，一定是低头不前。
English: The white horse on which Hou Jing rode, whenever it was time to win a battle, always trotted on four hooves and hissed incessantly, very dignified; if you want to defeat a battle, you must bow your head and not move forward.

古文：及石头之役，精神沮丧，卧不肯动。
现代文：等打石头城这一仗，便精神沮丧，卧着不肯动。
English: After the battle of Stone Town, he was depressed and refused to move.

古文：景使左右拜请，或加棰策，终不肯进。
现代文：侯景使左右人对它下拜，请它起身，又拿马鞭打，它怎么也不肯朝前走。
English: Hou Jing made the people around him bow to him, asked him to stand up, and whipped him, but he refused to go forward.

古文：始景左足上有肉瘤，状似龟，战应克捷，瘤则隐起分明；如不胜，瘤则低。
现代文：侯景左脚上有个肉瘤，形状像乌龟，如果仗要打胜，瘤子就会明显地鼓起来；如果打不胜，瘤子就低平。
English: There is a sarcoma on Hou Jing's left foot, shaped like a turtle. If the battle is to be won, the tumor will be visibly swollen; if the battle is not won, the tumor will be flat.

古文：至景败日，瘤隐陷肉中。
现代文：到侯景败的那天，瘤子居然陷进了肉里。
English: On the day of Hou Jings defeat, the tumor actually got stuck in the flesh.

古文：天监中，沙门释宝志曰： 掘尾狗子自发狂，当死未死齧人伤，须臾之间自灭亡，起自汝阴死三湘。 
现代文：天监年间，曾有和尚宝志说过： 掘尾狗子自发狂，当死未死啮人伤，须臾之间自灭亡，起自汝阴死三湘。 
English: During the time of the Heaven's Guardianship, there was a monk Baozhi who said: "Dog-tailed dogs go mad spontaneously, when they die they don't die and hurt people, when they die they don't die, and when they die they don't die."

古文：又曰： 山家小儿果攘臂，太极殿前作虎视。 
现代文：又说： 山家小儿果攘臂，太极殿前作虎视。 
English: He also said: "The children of the mountain family were so excited that they changed into tigers in front of the Taiji Hall.

古文：狗子，景小字，山家小儿，猴状。
现代文：狗子，是侯景的小名；山家小儿，是猴的样子。
English: Dog, is the nickname of Houjing; mountain children, is the appearance of a monkey.

古文：景遂覆陷都邑，毒害皇家。
现代文：侯景后来就攻破建邺，危害皇家。
English: Hou Jing later broke through Jianye, endangering the royal family.

古文：起自悬瓠，即昔之汝南。
现代文：他起自悬瓠，就是从前的汝南。
English: He started from Hanging Rock, which is the former South Run.

古文：巴陵有地名三湘，景奔败处。
现代文：巴陵郡有个地方叫三湘，是侯景败逃之处。
English: There is a place in Baling County called Sanxiang, which is the place where Hou Jing fled.

古文：其言皆验。
现代文：宝志的话全部应验。
English: Those words have come to pass.

古文：景常谓人曰： 侯字人边作主，下作人，此明是人主也。 
现代文：侯景常对别人说： 侯字是人字边一个主字，下边又一个人字，这意思明明是说要作人主。 
English: Hou Jing often said to others: "Hou Zi is a person's character with a main character on the side and another person's character on the bottom, which clearly means to be the person's master.

古文：台城既陷，武帝尝语人曰： 侯景必得爲帝，但不久耳。
现代文：台城被攻陷后，武帝曾对人说： 侯景一定要作皇帝，只不会长罢了。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, Emperor Wu once said to people: "Houjing must become emperor, but it won't last long.

古文：破 侯景 字成 小人百日天子 ，爲帝当得百日。 
现代文：把 侯景 两个字破开，是 小人百日天子 几个字，他当皇帝该有一百天。 
English: Breaking the two characters of "Houjing" is a villain's "hundred days, son of heaven" A few characters, he should have a hundred days as an emperor.

古文：案景以辛未年十一月十九日篡位，壬申年三月十九日败，得一百二十日。而景以三月一日便往姑孰，计在宫殿足满十旬，其言竟验。
现代文：侯景在辛未年十一月十九日篡位，壬申年三月十九日败，共有一百二十天，而他在三月初一就跑到姑孰去了，算起来在宫中足足一百天，武帝的话也最终应验。
English: Hou Jing usurped the throne on November 19th of Xinwian and was defeated on March 19th of Jinshin, a total of one hundred and twenty days, and he ran to Gushan at the beginning of March. Counted up, he was in the palace for one hundred days, and the words of Emperor Wu were finally fulfilled.

古文：又大同中，太医令朱耽尝直禁省，无何梦犬羊各一在御坐，觉而告人曰： 犬羊非佳物也，今据御座，将有变乎？ 
现代文：又有在大同年间，太医令朱耽曾在宫中值班，无缘无故梦见一条狗一只羊坐在御座上，醒来后告诉别人说： 犬羊不是吉祥物，如今占据御座，难道国家会有变乱吗？ 
English: In addition, in the same year, Zhu Tan, the imperial physician, was on duty in the palace. For no reason, he dreamed of a dog and a sheep sitting on the throne. When he woke up, he told others, "Dogs and sheep are not mascots. They now occupy the throne. Will there be chaos in the country?"

古文：既而天子蒙尘，景登正殿焉。
现代文：不久天子遭难，侯景登上正殿。
English: Afterward, the heavenly son suffered a calamity, and Houjing ascended to the main hall.

古文：及景将败，有僧通道人者，意性若狂，饮酒噉肉，不异凡等。
现代文：侯景快要败亡时，有个僧通和尚，疯疯癫癫的，喝酒吃肉，和俗人一样。
English: When Hou Jing was on the verge of defeat, there was a mad monk who drank alcohol and ate meat, just like the common people.

古文：世间游行已数十载，姓名乡里，人莫能知。
现代文：在世上漂流已几十年，没有人知道他的姓名籍贯。
English: He has been adrift in the world for decades, and no one knows his name or where he comes from.

古文：初言隐伏，久乃方验。
现代文：开始他说的话很难懂，过很长时间才能应验。
English: At first, what he said was hard to understand, and it took a long time for it to sink in.

古文：人并呼爲闍梨。
现代文：人们都叫他梨。
English: People call him Pear.

古文：景甚信敬之。
现代文：侯景对他很是笃信敬重。
English: Hou Jing trusted and respected him very much.

古文：景尝于后堂与其徒共射，时僧通在坐，夺景弓射景阳山，大呼云 得奴已 。
现代文：侯景曾和他的党徒在后堂一块儿射箭，当时僧通在座，夺下侯景的弓射景阳山，大叫 得奴已 。
English: Hou Jing used to shoot arrows with his party members in the back hall. At that time, the monk Tong was also present. He took Hou Jing's bow and shot arrows at the target, shouting that he had won.

古文：景后又宴集其党，又召僧通。
现代文：后来侯景宴请他的党徒，又请来僧通。
English: Later, Hou Jing invited his party members to a banquet, and also invited Sotong.

古文：僧通取肉搵盐以进景，问曰： 好不？ 
现代文：僧通抓了一块肉蘸上盐递给侯景，问他： 好吃吗？ 
English: Monk Tong grabbed a piece of meat, dipped it in salt and handed it to Hou Jing. He asked, "Does it taste good?"

古文：景答： 所恨大咸。 
现代文：侯景回答： 可惜太咸了。 
English: Hou Jing replied: Unfortunately, it was too salty.

古文：僧通曰： 不咸则烂。 
现代文：僧通说： 不咸就烂了。 
English: Tong Gongzi said: If it is not salty, it will rot.

古文：及景死，僧辩截其二手送齐文宣，传首江陵，果以盐五斗置腹中，送于建康，暴之于市。
现代文：等侯景死后，王僧辩砍下他两只手送给齐文宣帝，把头送到江陵，果然是把五斗盐填在肚子里，送到建康，在大街上示众。
English: After the death of Hou Jing, Wang Sangye cut off his two hands and sent them to Qiwen Xuandi, and sent his head to Jiangling. He also stuffed five buckets of salt into his stomach and sent it to Jiankang, where it was displayed to the public on the street.

古文：百姓争取屠脍羹食皆尽，并溧阳主亦预食例。
现代文：百姓们争着去割他的肉吃，割了个净光，连溧阳公主也吃了他的肉。
English: The people fought to cut his flesh and eat it. They cut a clean slate, and even Princess Poyang ate his flesh.

古文：景焚骨扬灰，曾罹其祸者，乃以灰和酒饮之。
现代文：侯景被焚骨扬灰，曾受过他害的，把他骨灰和在酒里喝。
English: Hou Jing was cremated and his ashes were scattered. Those who had suffered from him drank his ashes in wine.

古文：首至江陵，元帝命枭于市三日，然后煮而漆之，以付武库。
现代文：他的头送到江陵，梁元帝命令在街上悬挂三天，然后煮了油漆，交付兵器仓库。
English: His head was sent to Jiangling, where Emperor Liang Yuan ordered it to be hung in the street for three days, after which it was boiled in paint and delivered to an arms depot.

古文：先是江陵谣言： 苦竹町，市南有好井。
现代文：起先江陵有歌谣说： 苦竹町，市南有好井。
English: At first, there was a ballad in Gangneung that said, "Kutake Town, there is a good well in the south of the city."

古文：荆州军，杀侯景。 
现代文：荆州军，杀侯景。 
English: Jingzhou army, kill Houjing.

古文：及景首至，元帝付谘议参军李季长宅，宅东即苦竹町也。
现代文：等侯景头送到，元帝把它交给谘议参军李季长家里，他家东边就是苦竹町。
English: When it was delivered to Hou Jingtou, the Yuan Emperor gave it to the home of Li Qichang, an advisory member of the army. To the east of his home is Qizhu Town.

古文：既加鼎镬，即用市南井水焉。
现代文：放在锅里煮时，就是用的市南井里的水。
English: When boiled in a pot, the water from the city's south well is used.

古文：景仪同谢答仁、行台赵伯超降于侯瑱，生禽贼行台田迁、仪同房世贵、蔡寿乐、领军王伯丑。
现代文：侯景的仪同谢答仁、行台赵伯超投降了侯王真，活捉了他的行台田迁、仪同房世贵、蔡寿乐、领军王伯丑。
English: Hou Jing's Yidong Xie Dairen and Guan Tai Zhao Bo Chao surrendered to Hou Wang Zhen and captured alive his Guan Tai Tian Qian, Yidong Fang Shigui, Cai Shule and the leader of the army, Wang Bo Jiu.

古文：凶党悉平，斩房世贵于建康市，馀党送江陵。
现代文：凶党都被消灭，把房世贵在建康街上斩首，其余人押送江陵。
English: The thugs were all eliminated, and Fang Shigui was beheaded on Jiankang Street, while the rest were escorted to Jiangling.

古文：初，郭元建以有礼于皇太子妃，将降，侯子鉴曰： 此小惠也，不足自全。 
现代文：当初，郭元建因为对皇太子妃守礼节，就想投降，侯子鉴说他： 这不过是小惠，难以自保。 
English: At first, Guo Yuanjian wanted to surrender because he was polite to the crown princess. Hou Zi Jian said to him: This is just a small benefit, it is difficult to protect oneself.

古文：乃奔齐。
现代文：于是他就逃到齐国去了。
English: So he fled to the State of Qi.

古文：王伟，其先略阳人。
现代文：王伟，祖上是略阳人。
English: Wang Wei's ancestor was a hermaphrodite.

古文：父略，仕魏爲许昌令，因居潁川。
现代文：父亲王略，在魏国作许昌县令，于是家居颍川。
English: His father, Wang Liao, was the county magistrate of Xuchang County in the State of Wei, so the family moved to Luochuan.

古文：伟学通周易，雅高辞采，仕魏爲行台郎。
现代文：王伟通晓《周易》，文章华美，在魏国作行台郎。
English: Wang Wei is familiar with "Zhou Yi," the article is gorgeous, and he was a hawker in Wei.

古文：景叛后，高澄以书招之，伟爲景报澄书，其文甚美。
现代文：侯景叛乱后，高澄写信让侯景回去，王伟替侯景给高澄复信，文辞很漂亮。
English: After Houjing's rebellion, Gao Cheng wrote a letter to let Houjing go back, and Wang Wei replied to Gao Cheng on behalf of Houjing. The words were very beautiful.

古文：澄览书曰： 谁所作也？ 
现代文：高澄看后问： 是谁写的？ 
English: After reading it, Gao Cheng asked: Who wrote it?

古文：左右称伟之文。
现代文：左右便都称赞王伟的文章。
English: Everyone praised Wang Wei's article.

古文：澄曰： 才如此，何由不早使知邪？ 
现代文：高澄说： 这样的才干，你们为什么不早告诉我？ 
English: Takasumi said, "With such talent, why didn't you tell me sooner?

古文：伟既协景谋谟，其文檄并伟所制，及行篡逆，皆伟创谋也。
现代文：王伟帮助侯景出谋划策，侯景的文告也都出自王伟之手，一直到篡位弑君，都是王伟出的主意。
English: Wang Wei helped Hou Jing to come up with a plan. Hou Jing's proclamations also came from the hand of Wang Wei. All the way up to the usurpation of the throne, they were the idea of Wang Wei.

古文：景败，与侯子鉴俱走相失，潜匿草中，直渎戍主黄公喜禽送之。
现代文：侯景败逃，王伟和侯子鉴都跑散了，藏在草丛里，被直渎守军头领黄公喜抓获送交荆州军。
English: Hou Jing was defeated and fled. Wang Wei and Hou Zi Jian both ran away and hid in the grass. They were captured by Huang Gongxi, the leader of the Zhiguo defenders, and sent to the Jingzhou Army.

古文：见王僧辩，长揖不拜。
现代文：见王僧辩时，长揖不拜。
English: When the king and the monk were debating, Nagasena did not bow.

古文：执者促之，伟曰： 各爲人臣，何事相敬。 
现代文：两边抓他的人要他下拜，王伟说： 我们各为人臣，为什么要行此大礼。 
English: His captors on both sides demanded that he bow down. Wang Wei said, "We are all ministers, why do we have to perform this grand salute?"

古文：僧辩谓曰： 卿爲贼相，不能死节，而求活草间，颠而不扶，安用彼相。 
现代文：僧辩对他说： 先生身为贼相，不能殉节而死，却藏在草里逃活命。主人要摔倒了你不去扶持，还要你这搀扶者干什么呢？ 
English: The debate monk said to him, "The master, being a thief, cannot die a martyr's death, but he hides in the grass to escape with his life. If the master were to fall, you would not help him up. What would you, the helper, do?

古文：伟曰： 废兴时也，工拙在人。
现代文：王伟回答： 失败成功要看时运，事情做得好坏在于当家人。
English: Wang Wei replied, "Success or failure depends on the luck of the draw. Whether things are done well or poorly depends on who is the head of the family.

古文：向使侯氏早从伟言，明公岂有今日之势。 
现代文：如果以前侯氏早听我的话，您哪儿会有今天的形势。 
English: If Mr. Hou had listened to me in the past, you would not be in this situation today.

古文：僧辩大笑，意甚异之，命出以徇。
现代文：僧辩大笑，感到他很不一般，让把他拉出去示众。
English: Sangye laughed loudly, feeling that he was very unusual, let him pull out to show the public.

古文：伟曰： 昨及朝行八十里，愿借一驴代步。 
现代文：王伟说： 昨天和今天早上跑了八十里，希望能给头驴代步。 
English: Wang Wei said: I ran eighty miles yesterday and this morning, hoping to give the donkey a ride.

古文：僧辩曰： 汝头方行万里，何八十里哉。 
现代文：僧辩说： 你的头就要行万里之外了，岂止八十里。 
English: The monk argued, "Your head will travel thousands of miles, even more than eighty miles.

古文：伟笑曰： 今日之事，乃吾心也。 
现代文：王伟笑道： 今天这结果，正合我意。 
English: Wang Wei said with a smile: Today's result is exactly what I wanted.

古文：前尚书左丞虞骘尝见辱于伟，遇之而唾其面，曰： 死虏，庸复能爲恶乎！ 
现代文：前尚书左丞虞骘曾被王伟侮辱过，这时碰到王伟，把唾沫吐在他脸上，骂道： 死囚，看你还能再作恶吗！ 
English: Previously, Shangshu Zu Rong Yu had been insulted by Wang Wei. When he met Wang Wei, he spat in his face and cursed: "Death row prisoner, see if you can do evil again!"

古文：伟曰： 君不读书，不足与语。 
现代文：王伟答道： 君不读书，不值得和你说话。 
English: Wang Wei replied: If you don't read, it's not worth talking to you.

古文：骘惭而退。
现代文：虞骘羞惭而去。
English: Shyly, Gu Yao left.

古文：及吕季略、周石珍、严亶俱送江陵，伟尚望见全，于狱爲诗赠元帝下要人曰： 赵壹能爲赋，邹阳解献书，何惜西江水，不救辙中鱼。 
现代文：等到和吕季略、周石珍、严一起被押送江陵，王伟还指望能活命，在狱中给元帝手下的显要人物赠诗说： 赵壹能为赋，邹阳解献书，何惜西江水，不救辙中鱼。 
English: When he was escorted to Jiangling together with Lv Jiliu, Zhou Shizhen, and Yan, Wang Wei still hoped to live. In prison, he gave poems to the prominent figures under the Yuan Emperor, saying: Zhao Yixing can give Fu, Zhou Yanglu can donate books, but he does not spare the West River water, and does not save the fish in the rut.

古文：又上五百字诗于帝，帝爱其才将舍之，朝士多忌，乃请曰： 前日伟作檄文，有异辞句。 
现代文：又向元帝上五百字诗，元帝爱他的才干打算赦免他，但朝臣们多数人都忌恨他，便告诉元帝说： 以前王伟作檄文，里边有很不中听的话。 
English: He also wrote a 500-character poem to the Yuan Emperor. The Yuan Emperor loved his talent and planned to pardon him, but most of the courtiers hated him. They told the Yuan Emperor, "In the past, Wang Wei wrote poems, and there were some very unpleasant words in them.

古文：元帝求而视之，檄云： 项羽重瞳，尚有乌江之败；湘东一目，宁爲赤县所归。 
现代文：元帝让把檄文拿来看，上说： 项羽重瞳，尚有乌江之败，湘东一目，宁为赤县所归。 
English: Emperor Yuan asked him to take a look at the letter and said, "It is better to return to Aka County than to be defeated at the Wujiang River.

古文：昙朗走入村中。村人斩之，传首建邺，悬于朱雀航，宗族无少长皆弃市。
现代文：元帝大怒，让人用钉把王伟的舌头钉在柱子上，用刀剜出他的肠子，王伟面不改色。他的仇人用刀零割他的肉，他低头观看，一直割到骨头才把他杀了。
English: The Yuan Emperor was so angry that he had Wang Wei's tongue nailed to a post and his intestines cut out with a knife. Wang Wei's face did not change color. His enemy cut his flesh with a knife, he looked down and cut him down to the bone before killing him.

古文：周迪，临川南城人也。
现代文：周石珍和严都被诛灭三族。周迪是临川南城人。
English: Zhou Di, from Nancheng, Linchuan County.

古文：少居山谷，有膂力，能挽强弩，以弋猎爲事。
现代文：小时候住在山谷里，有臂力，能拉强弓，靠打猎为生。
English: When he was a child, he lived in the valley. He had a strong arm and could pull a strong bow. He made a living by hunting.

古文：侯景之乱，迪宗人周续起兵于临川，梁始兴王萧毅以郡让续，迪占募乡人从之，每战勇冠诸军。
现代文：侯景作乱时，周迪的同族人周续在临川起兵，梁始兴王萧毅把自己的郡让给周续，周迪招募同乡加入周续的军队，每次作战周迪都勇于其他人。
English: When Hou Jing made a disturbance, Zhou Di's compatriots Zhou Lian took up arms in Linchuan, Liang Shixing and Wang Xiaoyi ceded their counties to Zhou Lian, Zhou Di recruited fellow villagers to join Zhou Lian's army, and Zhou Di was braver than others in every battle.

古文：续所部渠帅，皆郡中豪族，稍骄横，续颇禁之，渠帅等乃杀续推迪爲主。
现代文：周续部下的将领，都是郡中的豪门大族，日渐骄横，周续管束他们严了点儿，他们就杀了周续推举周迪为头领。
English: The generals under Zhou Di's command were all powerful families in the county, and they became increasingly arrogant. When Zhou Di tightened his control over them, they killed Zhou Di and promoted Zhou Di as their leader.

古文：梁元帝授迪高州刺史，封临汝县侯。
现代文：梁元帝委任周迪为高州刺史，封他为临汝县侯。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Zhou Di as the governor of Gaozhou and made him the marquis of Linru County.

古文：绍泰二年，爲衡州刺史，领临川内史。周文育之讨萧勃也，迪按甲保境，以观成败。
现代文：绍泰二年，作衡州刺史，兼任临川内史，周文育讨伐萧勃时，周迪按兵保境，静观双方成败。
English: In the second year of Shao Tai, he served as the historian of Hengzhou, and also as the historian of Linchuan. When Zhou Wenyu fought against Xiao Bo, Zhou Di secured the territory by military force, and watched the success or failure of both sides.

古文：陈武帝受禅，王琳东下，迪欲自据南川，乃总召所部八郡守宰结盟，声言入赴，朝廷恐其爲变，因厚抚之。
现代文：陈武帝称帝，王琳东下反陈，周迪打算自保南川，就召集自己部下八郡守宰结盟，扬言要带兵入朝援助，朝廷恐怕其中有诈，就赐给很多东西安抚他。
English: Chen Wudi proclaimed himself emperor, Wang Lin went to the east to oppose Chen, Zhou Di planned to protect himself in Nanchuan, so he gathered his subordinates from eight counties to form an alliance, threatening to bring troops to aid the North. The court was afraid that there would be fraud, so they gave him a lot of things to appease him.

古文：琳至盆城，新吴洞主馀孝顷举兵应琳。
现代文：王琳到盆城，新吴洞主余孝倾举兵响应王琳。
English: Wang Lin went to Boncheng, and the new Wudong master, Yu Xiao, raised an army in response to Wang Lin.

古文：琳以爲南川诸郡可传檄而定，乃遣其将李孝钦、樊猛等南征粮饷。
现代文：王琳认为南川诸郡发一张文告就可以平定，就派他的部将李孝钦、樊猛等人到南边征收粮饷。
English: Wang Lin thought that the counties of Nanchuan could be pacified by issuing a proclamation, so he sent his subordinates Li Xiaoqin, Xiang Meng and others to the south to collect grain.

古文：孝钦等与馀孝顷逼迪，迪大败之，禽孝钦、猛、孝顷送建邺。
现代文：孝钦和余孝倾合兵威逼周迪，周迪把他们打得大败，俘获孝钦、樊猛、孝倾送到建邺。
English: Xiao Qin and Yu Xiao joined forces to force Zhou Di. Zhou Di defeated them and captured Xiao Qin, Yan Meng and Xiao Qin and sent them to Jian Ye.

古文：以功加平南将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：因功被加封平南将军、开府仪同三司。
English: For his service, he was awarded the title of General Pingnan and the title of Kaifu Yi along with the title of Sanji.

古文：文帝嗣位，熊昙朗反，迪与周敷、黄法奭等围昙朗，屠之。
现代文：陈文帝即位后，熊昙朗反，周迪和周敷、黄法毛等围攻昙朗，屠城。
English: After Emperor Chen Wen ascended to the throne, Xiong Yaolang rebelled, Zhou Di and Zhou Shiki, Huang Fa Mao and others besieged Yaolang and slaughtered the city.

古文：王琳败后，文帝征迪出镇盆口，又征其子入朝，迪趑趄顾望并不至。
现代文：王琳失败后，文帝征召周迪去镇守盆口，又征召他儿子到朝廷去作官，周迪犹豫观望，父子都不到任。
English: After Wang Lin's defeat, Emperor Wen conscripted Zhou Di to guard the town of Binkou, and also conscripted his son to work as an official at the imperial court. Zhou Di hesitated and watched, and both father and son did not take office.

古文：豫章太守周敷本属迪，至是与法奭率其部诣阙，文帝录其破熊昙朗功，并加官赏。
现代文：豫章太守周敷本是周迪的下属，这时和黄法毛率本部到朝廷去，文帝记下他们破熊昙朗的功劳，都给予赏赐加官。
English: Yuzhang Daju Zhou Shiki was originally a subordinate of Zhou Di. At that time, he and Huang Fa Mao led the headquarters to the imperial court. Emperor Wen wrote down their merits in defeating Xiong Xiong Lang and rewarded them with promotion.

古文：迪闻之不平，乃阴与留异相结。
现代文：周迪听说后心中不平，便偷偷和留异勾结。
English: After Zhou Di heard that, he felt uneasy, so he secretly colluded with Lv Yulong.

古文：及王师讨异，迪疑惧，乃使其弟方兴袭周敷，敷与战，破之。
现代文：等到官军讨伐留异，周迪感到疑虑害怕，便派他弟弟周方兴袭击周敷，周敷和他交战，大败方兴。
English: When the government army arrived to fight the rebels, Zhou Di felt doubtful and afraid, so he sent his brother Zhou Fangxing to attack Zhou Shiki. Zhou Shiki fought with him and defeated Fangxing.

古文：又别使兵袭华皎于盆城，事觉，尽爲皎禽。
现代文：又另派兵到盆城偷袭华皎，被发现，全被华皎擒获。
English: He also sent soldiers to Boncheng to attack Huaqi. They were discovered and all of them were captured by Huaqi.

古文：天嘉三年，文帝乃使江州刺史吴明彻都督衆军，与高州刺史黄法奭、豫章太守周敷讨迪，不能克。
现代文：天嘉三年，文帝派江州刺史吴明彻统率众军，和高州刺史黄法毛、豫章太守周敷讨伐周迪，打不下来。
English: In the third year of Tianjia, Emperor Wen sent Jiangzhou's grand vizier Wu Mingcher to lead the army, and the grand vizier of Gaozhou, Huang Famao, and the grand vizier of Yuzhang, Zhou Shiki, to fight Zhou Di, but they could not defeat him.

古文：文帝乃遣宣帝总督讨之，迪衆溃，脱身踰岭之晋安，依陈宝应。
现代文：文帝于是派宣帝陈顼总领各路兵马征讨他，周迪部众溃败，他脱身翻过东兴岭逃到晋安，投靠陈宝应。
English: Emperor Wen then sent Emperor Xuanzong's general Chen Pi to lead soldiers and horses from all directions to recruit him. Zhou Di's troops were routed, and he escaped and fled across Dongxingling to Jin'an, where he took refuge with Chen Baoying.

古文：宝应以兵资迪，留异又遣第二子忠臣随之。
现代文：宝应借兵给他，留异又派他第二个儿子留忠臣跟随他。
English: Chen Bao should send troops to Zhou Di, and send his second son, a loyal subject, to follow Zhou Di.

古文：明年秋，复越东兴岭。
现代文：第二年秋天，周迪又越过东兴岭回来。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Zhou Di crossed Dongxingling again to return.

古文：文帝遣都督章昭达征迪，迪又散于山谷。
现代文：文帝派都督章昭达讨伐周迪，他的人又分散躲进山谷里。
English: Emperor Wen sent the governor Zhang Zhaoda to fight Zhou Di, and his men scattered and hid in the valley.

古文：初，侯景之乱，百姓皆弃本爲盗，唯迪所部独不侵扰，耕作肆业，各有赢储，政令严明，征敛必至。
现代文：当初，侯景作乱时，百姓们都弃农为盗，只有周迪的部下不侵扰百姓，他境内的百姓们务农经商，都有生活积蓄，他政令严明，朝廷的征敛从不违抗拖欠。
English: At first, when Hou Jing made a disturbance, the people all abandoned the farmers and became thieves. Only Zhou Di's subordinates did not disturb the people. The people in his territory were engaged in agriculture and commerce, and they all had life savings. His government decrees were strict, and the imperial court's collection never disobeyed the arrears.

古文：性质朴，不事威仪。
现代文：他性情质朴，不故作威严摆架子。
English: He has a simple nature and does not put on a pompous air.

古文：冬则短身布袍，夏则紫纱袜腹。
现代文：冬天穿着短布袍，夏天戴一个紫纱兜肚。
English: In winter, he wears a short robe, and in summer, a purple shawl.

古文：居常徒跣，虽外列兵卫，内有女伎，挼绳破篾，傍若无人。
现代文：在家时常光着脚，虽然门外有卫队，屋里有歌伎舞女，他却照样搓绳子剖篾条，旁若无人。
English: He often goes barefoot at home, and even though there are guards outside the door and Kabuki dancers inside, he still cuts the rope with a pair of scissors, as if no one is watching.

古文：然轻财好施，凡所周赡，毫厘必均。
现代文：他轻财好施，周济别人又非常公允。
English: He is generous with his money and very fair in giving to others.

古文：讷于语言，而衿怀信实，临川人皆德之。
现代文：不善言谈，却心怀诚信，临川人都热爱他。
English: He is not good at talking, but he is sincere. Linchuan people love him.

古文：至是并藏匿，虽加诛戮，无肯言者。
现代文：这时便都为他提供藏身之处，即使朝廷加以诛杀，也没人肯说出来。
English: At this time, they all provided him with a hiding place, and even if the court fought them, no one was willing to speak out.

古文：昭达仍度岭与陈宝应相抗。
现代文：章昭达带兵越岭和陈宝应相对抗。
English: Zhang Zhaoda led the troops across the ridge and Chen Bao should resist.

古文：迪复收合出东兴，文帝遣都督程灵洗破之。
现代文：周迪又收拢散兵出东兴岭，文帝派都督程灵洗击败他。
English: Zhou Di also gathered the scattered soldiers to leave Dongxingling, and Emperor Wen sent the governor Cheng Lingqi to defeat him.

古文：及宝应平，并禽异送都，斩建康市，子侄并伏诛，唯第三子贞臣以尚主获免。
现代文：周迪又和十几个人跑进山洞躲起来。后来派人偷偷出来到临川郡集市上买鱼，被临川太守骆文牙抓住，逼他交出周迪自赎。
English: Zhou Di also ran into a cave with more than a dozen people to hide. Later, he sent someone to sneak out to buy fish at the Linchuan County Fair. He was caught by Luo Wenya, the governor of Linchuan, who forced him to hand over Zhou Di to redeem himself.

古文：陈宝应，晋安候官人也，世爲闽中四姓。
现代文：这人把周迪引诱出来打猎，被官军伏兵所杀。周迪的头被送到建邺，在朱雀航挂了三天。陈宝应是晋安侯官人，世代都是闽中四大姓之一。
English: This man lured Zhou Di out to hunt and was killed by the ambush of the government army. Zhou Di's head was sent to Jianye and hung for three days in Suzakhang. Chen Bao should be a Jin'an court official, and his generation is one of the four major surnames in Jianye.

古文：父羽，有材干，爲郡雄豪。宝应性反复，多变诈。
现代文：父亲陈羽，很有才干，是郡内豪杰，宝应的性格反复多变，诡计很多。
English: His father, Chen Yu, is very talented and is a hero in the county. Bao Ying's personality is repeatedly changeable and full of tricks.

古文：梁时晋安数反，累杀郡将，羽初并扇惑成其事，后复爲官军乡导破之，由是一郡兵权皆自己出。
现代文：梁朝时晋安郡屡次背叛朝廷，杀害郡守，陈羽都是先煽动造反，后来又领着官兵来镇压，靠这样逐渐总揽了一郡兵权。
English: During the Liang Dynasty, Jin'an County repeatedly betrayed the imperial court and killed the county governor. Chen Yu first incited rebellion, and later led officers and soldiers to suppress it. By doing so, he gradually gained control of a county.

古文：侯景之乱，晋安太守宾化侯萧云以郡让羽，羽年老，但主郡事，令宝应典兵。
现代文：侯景作乱时，晋安太守宾化侯萧云把郡守位置让给陈羽，陈羽年老，便只主持日常事务，让宝应领兵。
English: At the time of the disturbance caused by Hou Jing, Jin'an's deputy governor, Hou Xiaoyun, became his guest and gave Chen Yu the position of county governor. When Chen Yu was old, he only presided over the daily affairs and let Bao Ying lead the troops.

古文：时东境饥馑，会稽尤甚，死者十七八，而晋安独丰沃，士衆强盛。
现代文：当时东部闹饥荒，会稽更厉害，十有七八都被饿死，而只有晋安衣食丰足，兵力强盛。
English: At that time, famine was raging in the east, and the famine was even more severe. Seventy-eight out of ten people died of starvation, but only Jinan had enough food and clothing and a strong army.

古文：侯景平，元帝因以羽爲晋安太守。
现代文：侯景被平定后，元帝便委任陈羽为晋安太守。
English: After Houjing was subdued, Emperor Yuan appointed Chen Yu as the governor of Jinan.

古文：陈武帝辅政，羽请归老，求传郡于宝应，武帝许之。
现代文：武帝陈霸先辅政，陈羽请求告老还乡，把郡守传给宝应，武帝答应。
English: Emperor Wu sent Chen Paxian to assist the government, Chen Yu requested to return to his hometown and pass the county seat to Bao Ying, Emperor Wu agreed.

古文：绍泰二年，封候官县侯。
现代文：绍泰二年，封宝应为侯官县侯。
English: In the second year of Shao Tai, the seal should be the county magistrate.

古文：武帝受禅，授闽州刺史，领会稽太守。
现代文：陈武帝代梁后，委任他为闽州刺史，兼任会稽太守。
English: After Emperor Chen Wu replaced Liang, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and also served as the auditor-general of the association.

古文：文帝即位，加其父光禄大夫，仍命宗正录其本系，编爲宗室。
现代文：文帝即位，加封他父亲为光禄大夫，又命宗正记录他家世系，编入皇帝宗室。
English: When Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he appointed his father as the doctor of Guanglu, and ordered Zong Zheng to record his family lineage and compile it into the imperial family.

古文：宝应娶留异女爲妻，侯安都之讨异，宝应遣师助之，又资周迪兵粮，出寇临川。
现代文：宝应娶留异女儿为妻，侯安都讨伐留异时，宝应派兵帮助留异，又资助周迪兵士和粮食，出兵侵犯临川。
English: Bao Ying married the daughter of Liu Di, and when Hou Andu was fighting against Liu Di, Bao Ying sent soldiers to help Liu Di, funded Zhou Di's soldiers and grain, and sent troops to invade Linchuan.

古文：及都督章昭达破迪，文帝因命讨宝应，诏宗正绝其属籍。
现代文：都督章昭达破周迪之后，文帝又命他讨伐宝应，下诏让宗正把他的家族从皇室除名。
English: After Governor Zhang Zhaoda defeated Zhou Di, Emperor Wen also ordered him to fight against Baoying, and issued an edict to remove Zong Zheng's family from the imperial family.

古文：宝应据建安湖际逆拒昭达，昭达深沟高垒不与战。但命爲簰，俄而水盛，乘流放之，突其水栅，宝应衆溃。
现代文：宝应盘据建安湖边抗拒昭达，昭达深沟高垒不与他交战，只让人造筏子，不久河里涨水，昭达借助水势放排，突破宝应水栅。宝应军溃败。
English: According to the legend, Bao Yingpan resisted Zhaoda on the edge of Lake Jian'an. Zhaoda's deep ditch high fortress did not fight with him, only let people make rafts. Soon the river rose, and Zhaoda used the water potential to break through Bao Ying's water barrier. Bao Ying's army was defeated.

古文：执送都，斩建康市。
现代文：他被抓到建康，在大街上斩首。
English: He was caught in Jiankang and beheaded in the street.

