古文：真卿为平原太守，禄山逆节颇著，真卿托以霖雨，修城浚壕，阴料丁壮，实储廪，佯命文士饮酒赋诗。
现代文：原文唐朝时颜真卿担任平原太守，当时安禄山反叛的野心已很明显。颜真卿借口雨季来临，不得不修城浚沟，暗中招募勇士，储存米粮防备安禄山的侵袭，然而表面上却不动声色，天天与一些书生喝酒作诗。
English: When Yan Zhenqing served as the governor of the plain in the Tang Dynasty, the ambition of the Anlu Mountain rebellion was already obvious. Yan Zhenqing had to build a ditch on the pretext of the rainy season, secretly recruit warriors, and store rice grain to prevent the invasion of Anlu Mountain. However, on the surface, he was quiet, drinking and writing poetry with some scholars every day.

古文：禄山密侦之，以为书生不足虞，未几禄山反，河朔尽陷，唯平原有备。
现代文：安禄山派密探暗中监视颜真卿的举动，见颜真卿只顾喝酒作诗，认为颜真卿不过一介书生而已，不足为虑。不久安禄山果然起兵造反，河东一带完全陷入贼手，唯有平原郡一带因颜真卿早有防范而未陷落。
English: An Lushan sent spies to surreptitiously monitor Yan Zhenqing's activities. They saw that Yan Zhenqing only drank alcohol and wrote poetry, and thought that Yan Zhenqing was just a student. They did not need to worry. Soon, An Lushan rebelled, and the area around Hedong completely fell into the hands of thieves. Only the area around Pingyuan County did not fall because of Yan Zhenqing's early precautions.

古文：小寇以声驱之，大寇以实备之。
现代文：碰到小贼寇，只要虚张声势恫吓一番就可以退敌；遇到大贼寇，就必须有坚实的武力作为后盾才能与之对抗。
English: When encountering a small bandit, the enemy can be repulsed by bluffing and intimidation; when encountering a large bandit, it is necessary to have a solid force as a back-up in order to confront it.

古文：或无备而示之有备者，杜其谋也；或有备而示之无备者，消其忌也。
现代文：本身没有实力，却虚张声势显示自己的武力，是为杜绝对方蠢动的念头；的确有实力而极力掩饰，表现出毫无防备的样子，是为消除对方猜忌的心理。
English: It has no strength itself, but it shows its strength by bluffing, which is the idea of bluffing; it does have strength, but it tries its best to cover it up, showing a defenseless appearance, in order to eliminate the other side's suspicion.

古文：必有深沉之思，然后有通变之略。
现代文：是虚是实，必须要先有深沉圆融的思虑，然后才能变通自如。
English: Whether it is false or true, we must first have deep and comprehensive thoughts, and then we can be flexible.

古文：微乎!微乎!岂易言哉？
现代文：其中的微妙之处，却并非三言两语就说得明白的
English: The subtleties are not so easily explained in a few words.

