古文：今有一人，入人园圃，窃其桃李，众闻则非之，上为政者，得则罚之，此何也？
现代文：现在有一个人，进人家果园，偷人家桃李，大家听到就谴责他，上面执政的人捉获就惩罚他。
English: Now there is a person who enters someone's orchard and steals someone's peaches and plums. When everyone hears about it, they condemn him. When the people in power catch him, they punish him.

古文：以亏人自利也。
现代文：这为什么呢？因为他损人利己。
English: Why is that? Because he is self-serving.

古文：至攘人犬豕鸡豚，其不义又甚入人园圃窃桃李。
现代文：至于偷人家鸡犬大猪小猪的，比进人家果园偷桃李更不义。
English: As for stealing other people's chickens, dogs, pigs and piglets, it is more unjust than stealing peaches and plums from other people's orchards.

古文：是何故也？
现代文：这是什么原故呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：以亏人愈多，其不仁兹甚，罪益厚。
现代文：因为他损人更多。如果损人越多，他越是不仁，罪越重。
English: Because he harms more people. If he harms more people, the more ruthless he is, the more serious the crime.

古文：至入人栏厩，取人马牛者，其不仁又甚攘人犬豕鸡豚，此何故也？
现代文：至于进人家牲口棚，牵走人家马牛的，这比偷人家鸡犬大猪小猪更不义。
English: As for going into people's barns and taking away people's horses and cattle, this is more unjust than stealing people's chickens, dogs, pigs and piglets.

古文：以其亏人愈多。
现代文：这是什么原故呢？因为他损人更多。
English: Because he's hurt more people.

古文：苟亏人愈多，其不仁兹甚，罪益厚。
现代文：如果损人越多，他越是不仁，罪越重。
English: If the more people he harms, the more cruel he is and the more serious his crime.

古文：至杀不辜人也，拖其衣裘，取戈剑者，其不义，又甚入人栏厩取人马牛。
现代文：至于杀无辜的人，剥下人家的衣服皮袄，拿走戈剑，这比进人家牲口棚牵走马牛又更不义。
English: As for the killing of innocent people, stripping people of their clothes, skinning them, and taking away their swords, this is even more unjust than going into people's barns and taking away their horses.

古文：此何故也？
现代文：这是什么原故呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：以其亏人愈多。
现代文：因为他损人更严重。
English: Because he's hurt more people.

古文：苟亏人愈多，其不仁兹甚矣，罪益厚。
现代文：如果损人越严重，他就越不仁，罪越大。
English: If the injury is more serious, he will be more ruthless and the crime will be greater.

古文：当此，天下之君子皆知而非之，谓之不义。
现代文：对此，现在天下有道德的人都知道其中的道理并认为他们不对，说他们这样做是不义的。
English: In this regard, now the world's moral people know the truth and think they are wrong, saying that they are doing so is unjust.

古文：今至大为攻国，则弗知非，从而誉之，谓之义。
现代文：今天最不义的事，是进攻别国，却不知道谴责，反而称赞它，说它是义。
English: The most unjust thing today is to attack another country, but not to condemn it, but to praise it and say that it is just.

古文：此可谓知义与不义之别乎？
现代文：这能说知道义与不义的分别吗？
English: Can this be said to know the difference between righteousness and unrighteousness?

古文：杀一人，谓之不义，必有一死罪矣。
现代文：杀一个人，说它不义，一定构成一个死罪了。
English: To kill a man and call it unjust must constitute a capital crime.

古文：若以此说往，杀十人，十重不义，必有十死罪矣；杀百人，百重不义，必有百死罪矣。
现代文：如果照这个说法类推下去，杀十个人，十倍不义，必定构成十个死罪了；杀一百个人，一百倍不义，必定构成一百个死罪了。
English: If we follow this analogy, killing ten people, ten times more unjustly, must constitute ten capital crimes; killing a hundred people, a hundred times more unjustly, must constitute a hundred capital crimes.

古文：当此，天下之君子皆知而非之，谓之不义。
现代文：对此，现在天下有道德的人都知道其中的道理并认为他们不对，说他们这样做是不义的。
English: In this regard, now the world's moral people know the truth and think they are wrong, saying that they are doing so is unjust.

古文：今至大为不义攻国，则弗知非，从而誉之，谓之义，情不知其不义也，故书其言以遗后世。
现代文：今天最不义的事，是进攻别国，却不知道反对，反而称赞它，说它义。这是确实不知道进攻别国是不义的，所以把称赞的话记载下来传给后世。
English: The most unjust thing today is to attack another country, but not to know how to oppose it, but to praise it and say that it is just. This is really not knowing that attacking another country is unjust, so write down the words of praise and pass them on to future generations.

古文：若知其不义也，夫奚说书其不义以遗后世哉？
现代文：如果知道它是不义的，那还有什么理由记载不义的事传给后世呢？
English: If it is known to be unjust, what reason is there to record the injustice and pass it on to future generations?

古文：今有人于此，少见黑曰黑，多见黑曰白，则以此人为不知白黑之辩矣；少尝苦曰苦，多尝苦曰甘，则必以此人为不知甘苦之辩矣。
现代文：现在有人在这里，见一点黑说是黑，见一片黑却说是白，那么一定以为这人是不知辩别黑白的了。尝一点苦说苦，尝多了苦却说是甜，那么一定以为这个人是不知辩别苦甜的了。
English: There are people here now who see a little bit of black and say it's black, see a patch of black and say it's white, so they must think that this person doesn't know the difference between black and white. If they taste a little bit of bitter and say it's bitter, and if they taste a lot of bitter and say it's sweet, then they must think that this person doesn't know the difference between bitter and sweet.

古文：今小为非，则知而非之；大为非攻国，则不知非，从而誉之，谓之义。此可谓知义与不义之辩乎？
现代文：今天干小的坏事，能够知道而且谴责它；干大的坏事，攻打别国，就不知道谴责，反而称赞它，说它义；这能说知道辨别义与不义吗？
English: Today, if you do a small bad thing, you can know and condemn it; if you do a big bad thing, attack another country, you don't know to condemn it, but praise it and justify it; can this be said to know the difference between righteousness and unrighteousness?

古文：是以知天下之君子也，辩义与不义之乱也。
现代文：由此可知世上的君子，分辨义与不义是多么混乱啊。
English: From this we can see how confused the world's gentlemen are in distinguishing between righteousness and unrighteousness.

