古文：赵宣子言韩献子于灵公，以为司马。
现代文：赵宣子把韩献子推荐给晋灵公，任命他为司马。
English: Zhao Xuan Zi recommended Han Xian Zi to Jin Ling Gong and appointed him as Sima.

古文：河曲之役，赵孟使人以其乘车干行，献子执而戮之。
现代文：河曲之战时，赵宣子让人用他乘坐的战车去干扰军队的行列，韩献子把赶车的人抓了起来，并且杀掉了他。
English: During the Battle of Hequ, Zhao Xuanzi had someone use the chariot he was riding in to interfere with the ranks of the army. Han Xianzi caught the driver and killed him.

古文：众咸曰： 韩厥必不没矣。
现代文：大家都说： 韩厥一定没有好结果。
English: Everyone said: Han Jue must not have a good result.

古文：其主朝升之，而暮戮其车，其谁安之！ 
现代文：他的主人早晨刚让他升了官，晚上他就杀了主人的车夫，谁还能使他保住这个官位呢？ 
English: His master had just promoted him in the morning, and in the evening he had killed his master's driver. Who could have kept him in this position?

古文：宣子召而礼之，曰： 吾闻事君者比而不党。
现代文：赵宣子召见了韩厥，并且以礼相待，说： 我听说事奉国君的人以义相结，而不结党营私。
English: Zhao Xuan Zi summoned Han Jue and treated him with courtesy, saying, "I have heard that those who serve the sovereign are united by righteousness, not by partisanship.

古文：夫周以举义，比也；举以其私，党也。
现代文：出于忠信，为国推举正直的人，这是以义相结。举荐人才而徇私情，这是结党营私。
English: Out of loyalty, for the country to nominate an honest person, this is a combination of righteousness. To nominate a talented person and to indulge in selfishness, this is a combination of party and self.

古文：夫军事无犯，犯而不隐，义也。
现代文：军法是不能违犯的，犯了军法而不包庇，这叫做义。
English: Military law cannot be violated. If you violate military law and do not cover it up, this is called righteousness.

古文：吾言女于君，惧女不能也。
现代文：我把你推荐给国君，怕的是你不能胜任。
English: I recommend you to the sovereign, but I'm afraid you're not up to the job.

古文：举而不能，党孰大焉！
现代文：推举的人不能胜任，还有什么结党营私比这更严重的呢！
English: The people who were elected are not up to the job, and what is more serious than this party-building?

古文：事君而党，吾何以从政？
现代文：事奉君主却结党营私，我还凭什么来执政呢？
English: How can I govern when I serve the monarch but have formed a party to support me?

古文：吾故以是观女。
现代文：我因此借这件事情来观察你。
English: That's why I'm using this to observe you.

古文：女勉之。
现代文：你努力吧。
English: Do your best.

古文：苟从是行也，临长晋国者，非女其谁？ 
现代文：假如能坚持这样去做，那么将来掌管晋国的，除了你还有谁呢？ 
English: If you can persist in doing this, then who will be in charge of Jin in the future, besides you?

古文：皆告诸大夫曰： 二三子可以贺我矣！
现代文：赵宣子遍告大夫们说： 你们诸位可以祝贺我了！
English: Zhao Xuanzi repeatedly told the doctors: "You can all congratulate me now!

古文：吾举厥也而中，吾乃今知免于罪矣。 
现代文：我推荐韩厥非常合适，我现在才知道自己可以不犯结党营私的罪了。 
English: My recommendation of Han Jue is very appropriate. I now know that I can not commit the crime of forming a party.

