古文：起旃蒙赤奋若，尽昭阳作噩，凡九年。
现代文：起，止，一共九年。
English: A total of nine years.

古文：孝安皇帝下延光四年
现代文：汉安帝延光四年
English: Han Dynasty extends its reign for four years

古文：春，二月，乙亥，下邳惠王衍薨。
现代文：春季，二月乙亥，下邳惠王刘衍去世。
English: In the spring, in February of the Year of the Boar, Liu Yan, the King of Huizhou, died.

古文：甲辰，车驾南巡。
现代文：甲辰，安帝去南方巡视。
English: Jia Chen, An Di went to the south to inspect.

古文：三月，戊午朔，日有食之。庚申，帝至宛，不豫。
现代文：三月戊午朔，出现日食。庚申，安帝抵宛，身体顿觉不适。
English: In the early afternoon of March, there was a solar eclipse. When Emperor Gaoshen and Emperor An arrived, he suddenly felt unwell.

古文：乙丑，帝发自宛；丁卯，至叶，崩于乘舆。
现代文：乙丑，从宛出发。丁卯，抵达叶县，就死在车上。
English: B Ugly, departing from Wan. Ding Wu, arriving at Ye County, died in the car.

古文：年三十二。
现代文：年仅三十二岁。
English: He was only thirty-two years old.

古文：皇后与阎显兄弟、江京、樊丰等谋曰： 今晏驾道次，济阴王在内，邂逅公卿立之，还为大害。 
现代文：欲久专国政，贪立幼年，与显等定策禁中，迎济北惠王子北乡侯懿为嗣。济阴皇后和她的兄弟阎显等，以及宦官江京、樊丰等密谋说： 如今皇帝死在道上，他的亲生儿子济阴王却留在京都洛阳。消息一旦传出，如果公卿大臣集会，拥立济阴王继承帝位，将给我们带来大祸。 
English: The empress Jiyin and her brother Yan Xian, as well as the eunuchs Jiang Jing and Zou Feng, conspired to say: Now the emperor is dead on the road, but his own son, King Jiyin, remains in Kyoto Luoyang. Once the news is spread, if the noble ministers gather to support King Jiyin's succession to the throne, it will bring us great disaster.

古文：乃伪云 帝疾甚 ，徙御卧车，所在上食、问起居如故。
现代文：于是谎称皇帝病重，将尸首抬上卧车，所过之处，贡献饮食、问候起居，和往常一样。
English: Therefore, he falsely claimed that the emperor was seriously ill, and carried his body on a sleeping car. Wherever he went, he contributed food, greetings, and living, as usual.

古文：驱驰行四日，庚午，还宫。
现代文：车队急行四天，于庚午返抵皇宫。
English: The motorcade made a four-day express journey and arrived back at the Imperial Palace in the afternoon.

古文：辛未，遣司徒刘熹诣郊庙、社稷，告天请命；其夕，发丧。尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：辛未，派司徒刘熹前往郊庙、社稷，祷告天地。当晚，发丧，尊皇后为皇太后。
English: On the eve of Xin Wei, Liu Ye, a scholar, was sent to the suburban temples and shrines to pray to heaven and earth. On the evening of the funeral, the queen was revered as the empress dowager.

古文：太后临朝。以显为车骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：太后临朝主政，任命其兄阎显为车骑将军、仪同三司。
English: The empress dowager, who presided over the imperial court, appointed her brother Yan Xian as the general of cavalry and cavalry and the third secretary of ceremony.

古文：太后欲久专国政，贪立幼年，与显等定策禁中，迎济北惠王子北乡侯懿为嗣。
现代文：太后为了长期把持朝廷大权，想要选立一个年幼的皇帝。于是和阎显等在禁宫中定策，决定迎立济北惠王的儿子、北乡侯刘懿继位。
English: The empress dowager wanted to choose a young emperor in order to hold the power of the imperial court for a long time. Therefore, she and Yan Xian decided in the Forbidden Palace to welcome the son of Ji Bei Hui Wang, Bei Xiang Hou Liu Ye, to succeed to the throne.

古文：济阴王以废黜，不得上殿亲临梓宫，悲号不食；内外群僚莫不哀之。
现代文：而济阴王因在此前已遭废黜，反而不得上殿在棺木前哀悼父亲，他悲痛号哭，饮食不进。宫廷内外文武百官，无不为之哀伤。
English: On the other hand, King Jiyin, who had already been deposed, was not allowed to go to the palace to mourn his father in front of the coffin. He cried with grief and did not eat. Hundreds of civil and military officials inside and outside the palace were saddened by this.

古文：甲戌，济南孝王香薨，无子，国绝。
现代文：甲戌，济南孝王刘香去世，无子继承，封国撤除。
English: Jiajing, Jinan Prince Liu Xiang passed away without a son to succeed him, and the state of siege was lifted.

古文：乙酉，北乡侯即皇帝位。
现代文：乙酉，北乡侯刘懿即皇帝位。
English: On the 28th, Hokusho became emperor.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，太尉冯石为太傅，司徒刘熹为太尉，参录尚书事，前司空李郃为司徒。
现代文：夏季，四月丁酉，任命太尉冯石为太傅，司徒刘熹为太尉，参与主管尚书事务。前任司空李为司徒。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Hui appointed Lieutenant Feng Shi as Taifu, and Sutor Liu Yao as Taifu, to participate in the management of Shangshu affairs. The former Sikuo Li was Sutor.

古文：阎显忌大将军耿宝位尊权重，威行前朝，乃风有司奏 宝及其党与中常侍樊丰、虎贲中郎将谢恽、侍中周广、野王君王圣、圣女永等更相阿党，互作威福，皆大不道。 
现代文：阎显顾忌大将军耿宝位尊权重，威望又高，于是指使有关官吏弹劾： 耿宝和他的同党中常侍樊丰、虎贲中郎将谢恽、侍中周广、野王君王圣、王圣的女儿永等人，互相结党营私，作威作福，都大逆不道。 
English: Yan Xian was concerned about General Geng Bao's high rank and high prestige, so he ordered the relevant officials to impeach: Geng Bao and his fellow party members, such as the regular attendant Xifeng, the vice-chairman of Xifeng, the junior attendant Zhou Guang, the wild king Wang Sheng, and the daughter of Wang Sheng, Yong, all formed a party for themselves and for others, and they all behaved arrogantly.

古文：辛卯，丰、恽、广皆下狱，死；家属徙比景。
现代文：辛卯，樊丰、谢恽、周广都被捕下狱处死，家属流放比景。
English: Xin Wu, Yu Feng, Xie Yu and Zhou Guang were all arrested and executed, and their families were exiled.

古文：贬宝及弟子林虑侯承皆为亭侯，遣就国；宝于道自杀。
现代文：耿宝和侄儿林虑侯耿承都贬为亭侯，遣归封国。耿宝在途中自杀。
English: Geng Bao and his nephew Lin Qian Hou Geng Cheng were both demoted to the status of princes and sent back to the feudal state. Geng Bao committed suicide on the way.

古文：王圣母子徙雁门。
现代文：王圣母子，流放雁门。
English: The Virgin and Child King, banishing the wild goose.

古文：于是以阎景为卫尉，耀为城门校尉，晏为执金吾，兄弟并处权要，威福自由。
现代文：于是，阎显又任命其弟阎景为卫尉，阎耀为城门校尉，阎晏为执金吾，兄弟同居权力中枢，任意作威作福。
English: As a result, Yan Xian also appointed his younger brother Yan Jing as the guard lieutenant, Yan Yao as the castle gate lieutenant, and Yan Xun as the executioner. The brothers lived together in the power center, arbitrarily using their authority to do good.

古文：己酉，葬孝安皇帝于恭陵，庙曰恭宗。
现代文：已酉，将安帝埋葬在恭陵，庙号恭宗。
English: He died, and Emperor An was buried in the Gongling Mausoleum, with the temple name Gongzong.

古文：六月，乙巳，赦天下。
现代文：六月乙巳，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of June, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，西域长史班勇发敦煌、张掖、酒泉六千骑及鄯善、疏勒、车师前部兵击后部王军就，大破之，获首虏八千馀人，生得军就及匈奴持节使者，将至索班没处斩之，传首京师。
现代文：秋季，七月，西域长史班勇征发敦煌、张掖、洒泉等郡六千骑兵和鄯善、疏勒、车师前王国的军队，进击车师后王国国王军就，大捷，斩首八千余人，生擒军就和匈奴持节使者，将其带到索班阵亡处斩首，把人头传送到京都洛阳。
English: In the autumn, in July, the governor of the western region, Ban Yong, conscripted six thousand cavalrymen from Dunhuang, Zhangye, Jianquan and other counties, and the army of the former kingdoms of Juxian, Shule and Chaozhong, and the king's army of the latter kingdom attacked Chaozhong and won a great victory, beheading more than eight thousand people, and the army of the living Jiu and the Hun kept the festival messenger, and took it to the place of Soban's death, beheaded it, and sent the head to Kyoto Luoyang.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，越巂山崩。
现代文：冬季，十月丙午，越郡发生山崩。
English: In winter, a landslide occurred in Yue County on the afternoon of October 3rd.

古文：北乡侯病笃，中常侍孙程谓济阴王谒者长兴渠曰： 王以嫡统，本无失德。先帝用谗，遂至废黜。
现代文：北乡侯刘懿病重，中常侍孙程对济阴王谒者长兴渠说： 济阴王是皇帝嫡子，原本没有过失，先帝听信奸臣谗言，竟被废黜。
English: North Township marquis Liu Ye was seriously ill, and Sun Cheng, the middle-ranking attendant, said to Chang Xingqiu, who was the one to depose the king of Jilin: The king of Jilin was the emperor's legitimate son, originally there was no fault, but the former emperor listened to the advice of the treacherous minister and was deposed.

古文：若北乡侯不起，相与共断江京、阎显，事无不成者。 
现代文：如果北乡侯的病不能痊愈，我与你联合除掉江京、阎显，没有不成功之理。 
English: If the illness of Beixianghou cannot be cured, I will work with you to eliminate Jiangjing and Yanxian. There is no reason why we cannot succeed.

古文：渠然之。
现代文：长兴渠同意。
English: Changxing Canal agreed.

古文：又中黄门南阳王康，先为太子府史，及长乐太官丞京兆王国等并附同于程。
现代文：此外，中黄门、南阳郡人王康，先前曾担任太子府史，以及长乐太官丞、京兆王国等人，也都赞成孙程的意见。
English: In addition, Wang Kang, a resident of Zhonghuangmen and Nanyang County, who previously served as the history of the Prince's Office, as well as Changle Taikanjo and Jingzhao Kingdom, also agree with Sun Cheng's opinion.

古文：江京谓阎显曰： 北乡侯病不解，国嗣宜以时定，何不早征诸王子，简所置乎！ 显以为然。
现代文：江京对阎显说： 北乡侯的病不愈，继位人应该按时确定，何不及早征召诸王之子，从中选择可以继位的人？ 
English: Jiangjing said to Yan Xian: The illness of Beixiang Hou will not be cured, the successor should be determined on time, why not call up the sons of kings early, and choose those who can succeed?

古文：辛亥，北乡侯薨。
现代文：阎显认为有理。辛亥，北乡侯去世。
English: Yan Xian thought it was reasonable. Xinhai, the mayor of Beixiang passed away.

古文：显白太后，秘不发丧，而更征诸王子，闭宫门，屯兵自守。
现代文：阎显急忙禀告太后，暂时秘不发丧，再征召诸王之子进宫，关闭宫门，驻兵把守。
English: Yan Xian hurriedly announced the death of the empress dowager, kept the mourning secret for the time being, and then summoned the sons of kings to enter the palace, closed the palace gate, and stationed soldiers to guard it.

古文：十一月，乙卯，孙程、王康、王国与中黄门黄龙、彭恺、孟叔、李建、王成、张贤、史泛、马国、王道、李元、杨佗、陈予、赵封、李刚、魏猛、苗光等聚谋于西钟下，皆截单衣为誓。
现代文：十一月乙卯，孙程、王康、王国和中黄门黄龙、彭恺、孟叔、李建、王成、张贤、史泛、马国、王道、李元、杨佗、陈予、赵封、李刚、魏猛、苗光等，在西钟楼下秘密聚会，每人撕下一幅衣襟进行盟誓。
English: In November, Sun Cheng, Wang Kang, Wang Guo and Zhonghuangmen Huanglong, Peng Yao, Meng Shu, Li Jian, Wang Cheng, Zhang Xian, Shi Pan, Ma Guo, Wang Dao, Li Yuan, Yang Qi, Chen Yu, Zhao Feng, Li Gang, Wei Meng, Miao Guang, etc. secretly gathered under the West Bell Tower, and each person tore off a piece of clothing to swear an oath.

古文：丁巳，京师及郡国十六地震。
现代文：丁巳，京都洛阳和十六个郡和封国发生地震。
English: At the same time, an earthquake occurred in Luoyang, Kyoto, and sixteen counties and fiefs.

古文：是夜，程等共会崇德殿上，因入章台门。
现代文：当晚，孙程等先在崇德殿上集合，然后进入章台门。
English: That evening, Sun Cheng and others first gathered at the Zunde Hall, and then entered the Zhangdai Gate.

古文：时江京、刘发及李闰、陈达等俱坐省门下，程与王康共就斩京、安、达。
现代文：当时，江京、刘安和李闰、陈达等正好都坐在禁门下，孙程和和王康一齐动手，斩杀江京、刘安和陈达。
English: At that time, Jiang Jing, Liu An, Li Li and Chen Da were all sitting under the forbidden door, and Sun Chenghe and Wang Kang started together to kill Jiang Jing, Liu An and Chen Da.

古文：以李闰权势积为省内所服，欲引为主，因举刃胁闰曰： 今当立济阴王，无得摇动！ 闰曰： 诺。 
现代文：因李闰长久享有权势，为宫内人所信服，想让他来领头。所以举刀胁迫李闰说： 你必须答应拥戴济阴王为帝，不得动摇！ 李闰回答： 是。 
English: Since Li Li enjoyed power for a long time, the people in the palace were convinced and wanted him to take the lead. Therefore, they raised their swords to coerce Li Li Li and said, "You must agree to support King Jiyin as emperor, and you must not waver!" Li Li answered, "Yes."

古文：于是扶闰起，俱于西钟下迎济阴王即皇帝位，时年十一。
现代文：于是，大家将李闰扶起来，都到西钟楼下迎济阴王即皇帝位，当时济阴王十一岁。
English: As a result, everyone helped Li Li up and went down to the West Bell Tower to welcome King Jiyin, the emperor, who was eleven years old at the time.

古文：召尚书令、仆射以下从辇幸南宫，程等留守省门，遮扞内外。
现代文：接着召集尚书令、仆射以下官吏跟随御车，进入南宫。孙程等留守禁门，断绝内外交通。
English: Next, the officials including Shang Shuling and Fusha were summoned to follow the carriage and enter the South Palace. Sun Cheng and others remained behind at the forbidden gate, cutting off internal and external traffic.

古文：帝登云台，召公卿、百僚，使虎贲、羽林士屯南、北宫诸门。
现代文：皇帝登上云台，召集公卿百官。派遣虎贲和羽林卫士分别驻守南宫和北宫的所有宫门。
English: The emperor ascended Mount Yuntai, summoned hundreds of court nobles and officials, and dispatched the tiger cub and the eagle guardian respectively to guard all the palace gates of the South Palace and the North Palace.

古文：阎显时在禁中，忧迫不知所为，小黄门樊登劝显以太后诏召越骑校尉冯诗、虎贲中郎将阎崇将兵屯平朔门以御程等。
现代文：阎显这时正在宫中，闻讯后惊惶失措，不知如何应变。小黄门樊登劝阎显用太后诏命征召越骑校尉冯诗、虎贲中郎将阎崇，率军驻守平朔门，以抵御孙程等人。
English: At this time, Yan Xian was in the palace, panicked after hearing the news, and did not know what to do. Xiao Huangmen Xuan advised Yan Xian to use the Empress Dowager's edict to conscript the Viet Cavalry Lieutenant Feng Shi and the Tiger Clan Vice Admiral Yan Chong to lead the army stationed at Pingshuo Gate to resist Sun Cheng and others.

古文：显诱诗入省，谓曰： 济阴王立，非皇太后意，玺绶在此。
现代文：于是，阎显用征召的办法引诱冯诗入宫，并对他说： 济阴王即位，不是皇太后的旨意，皇帝玺印还在这里。
English: As a result, Yan Xian lured Feng Xi into the palace by means of conscription, and said to him: The enthronement of King Jiyin is not the will of the empress dowager, the emperor's seal is still here.

古文：苟尽力效功，封侯可得。 
现代文：如果你能尽力效劳，可以得到封侯。 
English: If you can serve to the best of your ability, you can be given a title of nobility.

古文：太后使授之印曰： 能得济阴王者，封万户侯；得李闰者，五千户侯。 
现代文：太后派人送来印信说： 能拿获济阴王的，封万户侯。拿获李闰的，封五千户侯。 
English: The empress dowager sent a seal letter to the princes, saying: If you can capture the King of Jieyin, you will be able to capture ten thousand princes. If you capture Li Yue, you will be able to capture five thousand princes.

古文：诗等皆许诺，辞以 卒被召，所将众少。 
现代文：冯诗等人虽都承诺，但报告说： 因仓猝被召，带兵太少。 
English: Although Feng Shi and others promised, they reported: Due to the sudden call-up, there were too few soldiers.

古文：显使与登迎吏士于左掖门外，诗因格杀登，归营屯守。
现代文：阎显派冯诗等和樊登去左掖门外迎接增援的将士，冯诗等趁机斩杀樊登，归营固守。
English: Yan Xian sent Feng Shih and others to meet the reinforcement soldiers outside the Zuoying Gate. Feng Shih and others took the opportunity to kill Zhou Deng and return to the camp.

古文：显弟卫尉景遽从省中还外府，收兵至盛德门。
现代文：阎显的弟弟卫尉阎景仓猝从宫中返回外府，收兵抵达盛德门。
English: Yan Xian's younger brother, Guard Lieutenant Yan Jing, hurriedly returned to the capital from the palace and gathered troops at Shengde Gate.

古文：孙程传召诸尚书使收景。
现代文：孙程传诏书命令尚书们逮捕阎景。
English: Sun Cheng issued an imperial edict ordering Shang Shu to arrest Yan Jing.

古文：尚书郭镇时卧病，闻之，即率直宿羽林出南止车门，逢景从吏士拔白刃呼曰： 无干兵！ 
现代文：当时，尚书郭镇正卧病在床，一听到命令，立即率领值班的羽林卫士，从南止车门出来，正遇上阎景的部属拔刀大叫： 不要挡道！ 
English: At that time, Shang Shuguo was ill in bed. Upon hearing the order, he immediately led the Ulin guards on duty out of the south exit door. When confronted by Yanjing, his subordinates drew their swords and shouted, "Don't block the road!"

古文：镇即下车持节诏之，景曰： 何等诏！ 
现代文：郭镇立即下车持节宣读诏书，阎景说： 什么诏书！ 
English: Guo Zhen immediately got off the train and read the edict solemnly. Yan Jing said: What edict!

古文：因斫镇，不中。
现代文：于是举刀砍郭镇，没有砍中。
English: So he raised his sword to cut Guozhen, but missed.

古文：镇引剑击景堕车，左右以戟叉其胸，遂禽之，送廷尉狱，即夜死。
现代文：郭镇拔剑将阎景击落车下，羽林卫士用戟叉住他的胸脯，将其活捉，送至廷尉狱囚禁，当夜死去。
English: Guo Zhen drew his sword and shot down Yan Jing under the car. The guards of Ulin used a pickaxe to pierce his chest, caught him alive, and sent him to Tingyi Prison, where he died that night.

古文：戊午，遣使者入省，夺得玺绶，帝乃幸嘉德殿，遣侍御史持节收阎显及其弟城门校尉耀、执金吾晏，并下狱，诛；家属皆徙比景。
现代文：戊午，派使者入北宫，夺到皇帝玺印。于是，皇帝亲临嘉德殿，派遣侍御史持符节，将阎显及其弟城门校尉阎耀、执金吾阎晏一并逮捕，下狱处死，家属全都流放比景。
English: In the afternoon, he sent an envoy to the North Palace and captured the emperor's seal. Therefore, the emperor personally visited the Jiade Hall, dispatched the attendant Shi to hold the festival, arrested Yan Xian and his brother, the captain of the city gate, Yan Yao, and the executioner, Yan Yan, together, and sentenced them to death, and their families were all exiled.

古文：迁太后于离宫。
现代文：将太后迁往离宫。
English: The empress dowager was moved to the Imperial Villa.

古文：己未，开门，罢屯兵。
现代文：己未，打开宫门，撤走驻兵。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, open the palace gate and remove the heavy soldiers guarding the gate.

古文：壬戌，诏司隶校尉： 惟阎显、江京近亲，当伏辜诛，其馀务崇宽贷。 
现代文：壬戊，下诏给司隶校尉： 只有阎显、江京近亲应当被诛杀，其他的人，均须从宽处理。 
English: Therefore, the following edict was issued to Lieutenant Sisli: Only Yan Xian and Jiang Jing's close relatives should be killed, all others should be dealt with leniently.

古文：封孙程等皆为列侯：程食邑万户，王康、王国食九千户，黄龙食五千户，彭恺、孟叔、李建食四千二百户，王成、张贤、史泛、马国、王道、李元、杨佗、陈予、赵封、李刚食四千户，魏猛食二千户，苗光食千户：是为十九侯，加赐车马、金银、钱帛各有差；李闰以先不豫谋，故不封。
现代文：孙程等都被封为列侯：孙程食邑万户，王康、王国食邑九千户，黄龙食邑五千户，彭恺、孟叔、李建各食邑四千二百户，王成、张贤、史泛、马国、王道、李元、杨佗、陈予、赵封、李刚，各食邑四千户，魏猛食邑二千户，苗光食邑千户，号为十九侯。同时，分别等级，赏赐车马、金银和钱帛。李闰因没有参与首谋，所以没有封侯。
English: Sun Cheng and the others were all made vassals: 10,000 households in Sun Cheng's food villages, 9,000 households in Wang Kang's and Wang Guo's food villages, 5,000 households in Huanglong's food villages, 4,200 households in Peng Yu's, Meng Shu's and Li Jian's food villages, 4,000 households in Wang Cheng's, Zhang Xian's, Shi Pan's, Ma Guo's, Wang Dao's, Li Yuan's, Yang Hui's, Chen Yu's, Zhao Feng's and Li Gang's food villages, 2,000 households in Wei Meng's food villages, and 1,000 households in

古文：擢孙程为骑都尉。
现代文：擢升孙程为骑都尉。
English: Sun Cheng was promoted to cavalry captain.

古文：初，程等入章台门，苗光独不入。
现代文：起初，孙程等进入章台门，唯独苗光没有进去。
English: At first, Sun Cheng and others entered the Zhang Tai Gate, but Miao Guang did not enter.

古文：诏书录功臣，令王康疏名，康诈疏光入章台门。
现代文：诏书命王康呈报功臣名单时，王康谎报苗光进入章台门。
English: When the imperial edict ordered Wang Kang to report the list of meritorious subjects, Wang Kang lied and reported that Miao Guang entered the Zhang Tai Gate.

古文：光未受符策，心不自安，诣黄门令自告。
现代文：苗光未得到封赏的符策，内心惶恐不安，便向黄门令自首。
English: Miao Guang did not get the reward, and he was scared and uneasy, so he surrendered to Huang Menling.

古文：有司奏康、光欺诈主上；诏书勿问。
现代文：于是，有关官吏弹劾王康和苗光欺蒙皇上。皇帝下诏不必追究。
English: As a result, the officials concerned impeached Wang Kang and Miao Guang for defrauding the emperor. The emperor decreed that there was no need to investigate.

古文：以将作大匠来历为卫尉。
现代文：任命将作大匠来历为卫尉。
English: The appointment will be made by the Grand Master of the Order of the Garter.

古文：祋讽、刘玮、闾丘弘等先卒，皆拜其子为郎。
现代文：因讽、闾丘弘等前已病故，将他俩的儿子都任命为郎。
English: Due to irony, Makioka Hiroshi and others who had died of illness before, both of their sons were named Matsu.

古文：硃伥、施延、陈光、赵代皆见拔用，后至公卿。
现代文：朱伥、施延、陈光和赵代，也都得到提拔任用，后来官至公卿。
English: Zhu Xi, Shi Yan, Chen Guang and Zhao Dai were also promoted and appointed, and later became officials and nobles.

古文：征王男、邴吉家属还京师，厚加赏赐。
现代文：征召王男、邴吉家属，返回京都洛阳，给予厚赏。
English: The family members of Wangan and Yanji were conscripted to return to Luoyang, Kyoto, and given a large reward.

古文：帝之见废也，监太子家小黄门籍建、傅高梵、长秋长赵熹、丞良贺、药长夏珍皆坐徙朔方；帝即位，并擢为中常侍。
现代文：先前皇帝被废黜时，监太子家小黄门籍建、傅高梵、长秋长赵熹、丞良贺、药长夏珍都坐罪，被流放到朔方郡。皇帝即位后，全都擢升为中常侍。
English: When the previous emperor was dethroned, the procurators Xiao Huangmen Zhiqian, Fu Gaobang, Changqiu Chang Zhao, Zheng Lianghe, and Yue Chang Xiazhen all committed crimes and were exiled to Shuofang County. After the emperor ascended the throne, they were all promoted to the rank of middle-ranking attendants.

古文：初，阎显辟崔骃之子瑗为吏，瑗以北乡侯立不以正，知显将败，欲说令废立，而显日沉醉，不能得见，乃谓长史陈禅曰： 中常侍江京等惑蛊先帝，废黜正统，扶立疏孽。
现代文：起初，阎显征聘崔的儿子崔瑗为下属官员，崔瑗因北乡侯非先帝嫡子而继位为帝，预见阎显肯定要失败，打算说服阎显，废黜北乡侯，改立济阴王为帝。可是阎显日日沉醉，见不到面，他于是对长史陈禅说： 中常侍江京等迷惑先帝，废除皇家正统，另立旁支。
English: At first, Yan Xian recruited Cui's son, Cui Yu, as a subordinate official. Cui Yu, who succeeded to the throne as emperor because Bei Xiang Hou was not the legitimate son of the former emperor, foresaw that Yan Xian would certainly fail, and planned to persuade Yan Xian to depose Bei Xiang Hou and re-establish King Jiyin as emperor. However, Yan Xian was intoxicated day after day and did not see him, so he said to Changshi Chen Zhen: Zhong Chang served Jiangjing and so on to confuse the former emperor, abolish the royal orthodoxy, and establish another branch.

古文：少帝即位，发病庙中，周勃之征，于斯复见。
现代文：北乡侯即位后，就在宫中发病。周勃废黜吕后所立惠帝后宫子为少帝的迹象，如今又重复出现。
English: The enthronement of the young emperor, the outbreak in the temple, Zhou Bo's exclusive power, here again.

古文：今欲与君共求见说将军，白太后，收京等，废少帝，引立济阴王，必上当天心，下合人望，伊、霍之功不下席而立，则将军兄弟传祚于无穷；若拒违天意，久旷神器，则将以无罪并辜元恶。此所谓祸福之会，分功之时也。 
现代文：我打算和你一同面见将军阎显，说服他禀告太后，逮捕江京等人，废黜少帝，拥立济阴王为帝，定然上得天心，下合人望。这样，伊尹、霍光的功劳，我们不必离开座位，便可建立；而将军兄弟的封爵也可世代相传。如果抗拒天意，使帝位久缺，我们虽然无罪，却要和首恶同罪，这正是福祸交关的关键时机，分取胜利果实的时刻。 
English: I plan to meet with General Yan Xian together with you, persuade him to denounce the Empress Dowager, arrest Jiang Jing and others, depose the young emperor, and establish King Jiyin as emperor, so as to win the heart of heaven and meet the expectations of the people. In this way, the merits of Yi Yin and Huo Guang can be established without having to leave the seat; and the knighthood of the general brothers can also be passed down from generation to generation. If we resist the will of heaven and make the imperial throne long in short supply, although we are not guilty, we will be guilty of the first evil. This is the crucial time when good and evil intersect,

古文：禅犹豫未敢从。
现代文：陈禅犹豫，未敢听从。
English: Chen Zhen hesitates to obey.

古文：会显败，瑗坐被斥；门生苏祗欲上书言状，瑗遽止之。
现代文：正逢阎显破败，崔瑗坐罪免官，崔瑗的门生苏祗，准备上书呈报上述往事，崔瑗急忙加以制止。
English: Just as Yan Xian was defeated, Cui Yao was exonerated, and Cui Yao's protégé Su Yao was preparing to submit a letter to report the above-mentioned past events. Cui Yao hurriedly put a stop to it.

古文：时陈禅为司隶校尉，召瑗谓曰： 弟听祗上书，禅请为之证。 
现代文：当时，陈禅正担任司隶校尉，召见崔瑗说： 你尽管让苏祗上书，我愿意为你作证。 
English: At that time, Chen Zhen was serving as the captain of Sili, summoned Cui Yao and said: "You may have Su Yao write a letter, I am willing to testify for you."

古文：瑗曰： 此譬犹儿妾屏语耳，愿使君勿复出口。 
现代文：崔瑗说： 这就如同小孩、妇女私下谈话一样，愿您不要再提此事！ 
English: Cui Yao said, "This is just like a child or a woman having a private conversation. Please don't bring it up again!"

古文：遂辞归，不复应州郡命。
现代文：于是告辞归乡，不再接受州郡的征聘。
English: As a result, he resigned and no longer responded to the order of the state and county.

古文：己卯，以诸王礼葬北乡侯。
现代文：已卯，用诸侯王礼仪埋葬北乡侯。
English: He has been buried in accordance with the etiquette of princes.

古文：司空刘授以阿附恶逆，辟召非其人，策免。
现代文：司空刘授因阿附叛逆，所征聘的官吏也不是适当人选，被免官。
English: Siku Liu Zhu was dismissed from his post because the officials he recruited were not suitable candidates due to the rebellion of Atsuke.

古文：十二月，甲申，以少府河南陶敦为司空。
现代文：十二月甲申，擢升少府、河南郡人陶敦为司空。
English: In December, Jia Shen was promoted to the position of the second-highest-ranking official of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.

古文：杨震门生虞放、陈翼诣阙追讼震事；诏除震二子为郎，赠钱百万，以礼改葬于华阴潼亭，远近毕至。
现代文：杨震的门生虞放、陈翼，到宫阙为杨震鸣冤。皇帝下诏，任命杨震的两个儿子为郎，赠钱一百万，用三公的礼仪将杨震改葬在华阴潼亭。远近之人全都赶来吊丧。
English: Yang Zhen's protégé, Yu Fang and Chen Ying, went to the Imperial Palace to mourn for Yang Zhen. The emperor issued an edict, appointed Yang Zhen's two sons as his sons, gave a million of money, and buried Yang Zhen in Huayin Pavilion with the etiquette of the three princes. People from near and far all came to pay their respects.

古文：有大鸟高丈馀集震丧前，郡以状上。帝感震忠直，诏复以中牢具祠之。
现代文：当时有一只一丈余高的大鸟降落在灵堂前，郡太守府将此情景呈报朝廷，皇帝为杨震的忠心所感，下诏再用中牢即一羊、一猪进行祭祀。
English: At that time, a large bird with a height of more than 10 meters landed in front of the hall. The county governor's office reported this scene to the imperial court. The emperor was impressed by Yang Zhen's loyalty, and ordered that a sheep and a pig be used for the sacrifice.

古文：议郎陈禅以为： 阎太后与帝无母子恩，宜徙别馆，绝朝见， 群臣议者咸以为宜。
现代文：现在，阎显兄弟刚刚伏诛，太后被幽禁在离宫，如果悲愁生病，一旦发生意外，皇上将何以号令天下！
English: Now, Yan Xian's brother has just been killed, the empress dowager has been confined to the Imperial Palace, if Sadness falls ill, in the event of an accident, the emperor will order the world!

古文：司徒掾汝南周举谓李郃曰： 昔瞽瞍常欲杀舜，舜事之逾谨；郑武姜谋杀庄公，庄公誓之黄泉，秦始皇怨母失行，久而隔绝，后感颍考叔、茅焦之言，复修子道；书传美之。今诸阎新诛，太后幽在离宫，若悲愁生疾，一旦不虞，主上将何以令于天下！
现代文：如果采纳陈禅的意见，后世将把罪过归到您的身上。
English: If you adopt Chen Zhen's opinion, future generations will blame you for your sins.

古文：如从禅议，后世归咎明公。宜密表朝廷，令奉太后，率群臣朝觐如旧，以厌天心，以答人望！ 
现代文：应该密奏朝廷，请求皇帝供养太后，跟过去一样率领文武百官朝见，以顺天心，以回答人们的愿望！ 
English: It is necessary to play a secret game with the imperial court, ask the emperor to support the empress dowager, and, as in the past, lead hundreds of civil and military officials to the imperial court to answer people's wishes in accordance with the will of heaven!

古文：郃即上疏陈之。
现代文：李立即向皇帝上书陈辞。
English: Li immediately submitted his resignation to the emperor.

古文：孝安皇帝下永建元年
现代文：汉顺帝永建元年
English: Emperor Han Shun in the first year of Yongjian

古文：春，正月，帝朝太后于东宫，太后意乃安。
现代文：春季，正月，汉顺帝前往东宫朝见阎太后，太后的心情才安定下来。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Han Shun went to the East Palace to see Empress Dowager Yan, and it was only then that the Empress Dowager's mood settled down.

古文：甲寅，赦天下。
现代文：甲寅，大赦天下。
English: Jia Yin, amnesty to the world.

古文：辛未，皇太后阎氏崩。
现代文：辛未，阎太后去世。
English: On the 19th, Empress Dowager Hou Yan died.

古文：辛巳，太傅冯石、太尉刘熹以阿党权贵免。
现代文：辛巳，太傅冯石和太尉刘熹因巴结权贵被免职。
English: Soon after, Grand Master Feng Shi and Second Lieutenant Liu Ye were removed from their posts for being too close to power.

古文：司徒李郃罢。
现代文：同日，司徒李也被罢官。
English: On the same day, Szeto Li was also dismissed.

古文：二月，甲申，葬安思皇后。
现代文：二月甲申，埋葬安思皇后。
English: In February of Jiaxin, the burial of Queen Anshi took place.

古文：丙戌，以太常桓焉为太傅；大鸿胪京兆硃宠为太尉，参录尚书事；长乐少府硃伥为司徒。
现代文：安思皇后，即阎太后。丙戌，擢升太常桓焉为太傅；大鸿胪朱宠为太尉，参与主管尚书事务；长乐少府朱伥为司徒。
English: Empress An Si, i.e. Empress Dowager Yan. Bijie, promoted to Taizhang Kuanyan as Taifu; Dahongjie Zhu Jia as Taifu, involved in the management of Shangshu affairs; Changle Shofu Zhu Jia as Sito.

古文：封尚书郭镇为定颍侯。
现代文：封尚书郭镇为定颍侯。
English: Shang Shuguo Town was given the title of Dingye Town.

古文：陇西钟羌反，校尉马贤击之，战于临洮，斩首千馀级，羌众皆降；由是凉州复安。
现代文：陇西钟羌反叛，校尉马贤率军进击。在临洮会战，斩杀钟羌一千余人，钟羌部众全都归降。从此以后，凉州重新得到安定。
English: In the Linyi battle, more than a thousand people in Zhongye were killed, and all the people in Zhongye surrendered. Since then, Liangzhou has regained stability.

古文：六月，己亥，封济南简王错子显为济南王。
现代文：六月己亥，封济南简王刘错的儿子刘显为济南王。
English: In June of Ji Hai, Liu Xian, the son of Liu Xiang, the fief of Jinan Jian Wang, became the king of Jinan.

古文：秋，七月，庚午，以卫尉来历为车骑将军。
现代文：秋季，七月庚午，任命卫尉来历为车骑将军。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of the 7th month, the guard lieutenant was appointed as the cavalry general.

古文：八月，鲜卑寇代郡，太守李超战殁。
现代文：八月，鲜卑攻打代郡，太守李超阵亡。
English: In August, Xianbei launched an attack on Dayi County, and the grand marshal Li Chao was killed.

古文：司隶校尉虞诩到官数月，奏冯石、刘熹，免之，又劾奏中常侍程璜、陈秉、孟生、李闰等，百官侧目，号为苛刻。
现代文：司隶校尉虞诩到任数月，上奏弹劾太傅冯石和太尉刘熹，使他们被免官，又上奏弹劾中常侍程璜、陈秉、孟生、李闰等。百官都感到不满，指责他苛刻。
English: For several months after the arrival of the officer-in-charge, the lieutenant-colonel Yu Yao, the impeachment of the taifu Feng Shi and the lieutenant Liu Yao was filed, which led to their removal from office, and the impeachment of the regular attendants Cheng Yao, Chen Bing, Meng Sheng, Li Lie, etc. All the officials were dissatisfied and accused him of being harsh.

古文：三公劾奏： 诩盛夏多拘系无辜，为吏民患。 
现代文：于是，三公上奏弹劾： 虞诩违反常法，于盛夏之际，大肆逮捕和关押无罪的人，吏民深受其害。 
English: As a result, the three magistrates impeached him. In violation of the common law, in the height of summer, he arrested and detained innocent people. The officials and the people suffered from it.

古文：诩上书自讼曰： 法禁者，俗之堤防；刑罚者，民之衔辔。
现代文：虞诩也向顺帝上书，为自己申辩说： 法令是整齐风俗的堤防，刑罚是驾驭百姓的衔铁和缰绳。
English: Gu Yu also wrote a letter to Emperor Shun, defending himself, saying: Laws and regulations are the dike of orderly customs, and punishments are the bridle and reins to control the people.

古文：今州曰任郡，郡曰任县，更相委远，百姓怨穷；以苟容为贤，尽节为愚。
现代文：然而，现在的官州，州一级委任给郡，郡一级委任给县，层层往下推卸责任，百姓怨恨，投诉无门。并且，当今的风气，都以苟且容身为贤能，尽忠职守为愚蠢。
English: However, the current government, the state level is delegated to the county, the county level is delegated to the county, the responsibility is passed down, the people are resentful, and there is no way to complain. Moreover, today's culture is all about being virtuous, and being loyal to duty is stupid.

古文：臣所发举，臧罪非一。三府恐为臣所奏，遂加诬罪。
现代文：我所查获的贪赃枉法案件，各种各样，盘根错节。
English: The cases of corruption, bribery and abuse of power that I have uncovered are all different and intertwined.

古文：臣将从史鱼死，即以尸谏耳！ 
现代文：三公因恐被我举报，于是先来诬陷我。我将追随史鱼去死，向皇上尸谏！ 
English: The three nobles feared that I would report them, so they framed me first. I will follow Shi Yu to my death, to the emperor's corpse!

古文：帝省其章，乃不罪诩。
现代文：顺帝看了虞诩的奏章，于是不对虞诩降罪。
English: Emperor Shun looked at the music score of Gu Yao, so he did not punish Gu Yao.

古文：中常侍张防卖弄权势，请托受取；诩案之，屡寝不报。
现代文：因中常侍张防利用权势，接受贿赂和请托，虞诩曾多次请求将他法办，都被搁置，没有回音。
English: Due to the fact that Vice-Marshal Zhang Fang took advantage of his power and accepted bribes and favors, the county magistrate had repeatedly requested that he be prosecuted, but all requests were put on hold and no response was received.

古文：诩不胜其愤，乃自系廷尉，奏言曰： 昔孝安皇帝任用樊丰，交乱嫡统，几亡社稷。
现代文：虞诩不胜愤慨，于是自投廷尉监狱，上书顺帝说： 过去，安帝任用樊丰，废黜皇室正统，几乎使社稷灭亡。
English: Unable to contain his indignation, he threw himself into the lieutenant of the imperial court prison and wrote to Emperor Shun, saying: In the past, Emperor An appointed Shufeng, overthrew the royal orthodoxy, and almost caused the demise of the imperial court.

古文：今者张防复弄威柄，国家之祸将重至矣。
现代文：现在，张防又玩弄权势，亡国之祸，将再降临。
English: Now, Zhang Fang is playing with power again, and the calamity of losing the country will come again.

古文：臣不忍与防同朝，谨自系以闻，无令臣袭杨震之迹！ 
现代文：我不忍心和张防同列朝廷，谨自囚廷尉狱以报，免得让我重蹈杨震的覆辙！ 
English: I can't bear to be put on the same level as Zhang Fang in the imperial court, and I would like to report that I have been imprisoned, lest I repeat the mistakes of Yang Zhen!

古文：书奏，防流涕诉帝，诩坐论输左校；防必欲害之，二日之中，传考四狱。
现代文：奏章呈上后，张防在顺帝面前流泪哭诉，于是，虞诩坐罪，被遣送到左校罚作苦役。而张防仍然不肯放过虞诩，必欲置之死地。两天之内，虞诩被传讯拷打四次。
English: After the report was submitted, Zhang Fang wept and cried in front of Emperor Shun. As a result, Yujing was convicted and sent to the Left School for hard labor. Zhang Fang still refused to release Yujing and wanted to put him to death. Within two days, Yujing was summoned and tortured four times.

古文：狱吏劝诩自引，诩曰： 宁伏欧刀以示远近！
现代文：狱吏劝虞诩自杀，虞诩回答说： 我宁愿伏刑刀死于市，让远近的人都知道！
English: The prison officers advised him to commit suicide, to which he replied: "I would rather die in the city with a torture knife, so that everyone near and far would know about it!"

古文：喑呜自杀，是非孰辨邪！ 
现代文：如果不声不响地自杀，谁能分辨是非呢？ 
English: If you commit suicide silently, who will be able to tell the difference?

古文：浮阳侯孙程、祝阿侯张贤相率乞见，程曰： 陛下始与臣等造事之时，常疾奸臣，知其倾国。
现代文：浮阳侯孙程和祝阿侯张贤相继请求面见顺帝，孙程说： 陛下当初和我们起事的时候，常痛恨奸臣，深知他们会使国家倾覆。
English: Sun Cheng, the lord of Fuyang, and Zhang Xian, the lord of Zhu, successively requested a meeting with Emperor Shun. Sun Cheng said, "When His Majesty and I were at war, he always hated traitors, knowing full well that they would overthrow the country.

古文：今者即位而复自为，何以非先帝乎！
现代文：而今即位以后，却又自己纵容和包庇奸佞，又怎么能责备先帝不对？
English: But now that he has ascended the throne, how can he reproach the former emperor when he himself has connived at and covered up treason?

古文：司隶校尉虞诩为陛下尽忠，而更被拘系；常侍张防臧罪明正，反构忠良。
现代文：司隶校尉虞诩为陛下尽忠，却被逮捕囚禁。中常侍防贪赃枉法，证据确凿，反而陷害忠良。
English: Officer-in-charge Captain Yu Yu was loyal to you. He was taken into custody, and his regular attendant Zhang Fangyuan was found guilty. On the contrary, he framed Zhong Liang.

古文：今客星守羽林，其占宫中有奸臣；宜急收防送狱，以塞天变。 
现代文：今观天象，客星守羽林，是宫中有奸臣的征兆。应该急捕张防下狱，以堵塞上天所降的灾异。 
English: Watching the celestial object, the guest star guarding the egret, is a sign of a treacherous vassal in the palace. Zhang Bao should be urgently arrested and imprisoned to block the calamity brought down by heaven.

古文：时防立在帝后，程叱防曰： 奸臣张防，何不下殿！ 
现代文：当时，张防站在顺帝背后，孙程大声呵斥张防说： 奸臣张防，为何不下殿去！ 
English: At that time, Zhang Bao was standing behind Emperor Shun. Sun Cheng shouted at Zhang Bao and said, "Traitor Zhang Bao, why don't you go down to the palace!

古文：防不得已，趋就东箱。
现代文：张防迫不得已，小步疾走退入东厢。
English: As a last resort, Zhang De ran into the east compartment.

古文：程曰： 陛下急收防，无令从阿母求请！ 
现代文：孙程又对顺帝说： 陛下，请立即下令逮捕张防，不要让他去向您的奶母求情！ 
English: Sun Cheng also said to Shun Di: Majesty, please immediately order the arrest of Zhang De, don't let him go to your wet nurse to plead!

古文：帝问诸尚书，尚书贾朗素与防善，证诩之罪；帝疑焉，谓程曰： 且出，吾方思之！ 
现代文：顺帝征求尚书们的意见，尚书贾朗跟张防素来交情很好，争辩说虞诩有罪。顺帝疑惑，对孙程说： 你们先出去，朕正在考虑！ 
English: Shun Di solicited the opinions of Shang Shuxu and others. Shang Shuxu Jialang had a good relationship with Zhang Bosen, and argued that Gu Yao was guilty. Shun Di was suspicious and said to Sun Cheng: You go out first, I'm considering it!

古文：于是诩子顗与门生百馀人，举幡候中常侍高梵车，叩头流血，诉言枉状。
现代文：于是，虞诩的儿子虞和门生一百余人，举着旗帜，等候中常侍高梵的车子，向高梵叩头流血，申诉虞诩被冤枉的情况。
English: As a result, more than a hundred disciples of Yu Yu's son and disciple, holding banners, waited for Gao Fan's chariot, bowed down to Gao Fan, and complained that Yu Yu had been wronged.

古文：梵入言之，防坐徙边，贾朗等六人或死或黜；即日赦出诩。
现代文：高梵入宫后将报告给顺帝。结果，张防因罪被流放到边疆，尚书贾朗等六人，有的处死，有的免官，并于当天释放虞诩。
English: After Gao Van entered the palace, he would report to Emperor Shun. As a result, Zhang Bo was exiled to the frontier for his crime, and six people, including Shang Shu Jialang, were either executed or dismissed, and released on the same day.

古文：程复上书陈诩有大功，语甚切激。
现代文：孙程又上书陈述虞诩有大功，措辞甚为直率激烈。
English: Sun Cheng also submitted a letter stating that Gu Ying had made great contributions, and the wording was very direct and intense.

古文：帝感悟，复征拜议郎；数日，迁尚书仆射。
现代文：顺帝感动醒悟，又任命虞诩为议郎。几天后，擢升为尚书仆射。
English: Emperor Shun was moved to wake up, and appointed Yu Yao as the mediator. A few days later, he was promoted to Shang Shupu.

古文：诩上疏荐议郎南阳左雄曰： 臣见方今公卿以下，类多拱默，以树恩为贤，尽节为愚，至相戒曰： 白璧不可为，容容多后福。 
现代文：虞诩上书顺帝，保荐议郎、南阳郡人左雄说： 我看到，当今公卿以下的官吏，大多属于专会拱手作揖而不敢说话的好好先生，把到处讨好广结善缘的人，视为贤能，而把为国尽忠尽职的人，视作愚蠢，甚至还互相告诫说： 不可做白璧，和气多后福。 
English: Zuoxiong, a member of the Nanyang County People's Political Consultative Conference, who was a sponsor of Emperor Shun, said, "I see that most of today's officials below the level of court nobles belong to a special group of good-hearted gentlemen who do not dare to speak. They regard those who are good-natured everywhere as virtuous, and those who are loyal to the country as stupid. They even admonish each other, saying, "Don't be a whitewasher, be a good-natured person."

古文：伏见议郎左雄，有王臣蹇蹇之节，宜擢在喉舌之官，必有国弼之益。 
现代文：我认为议郎左雄，具有作为朝廷大臣必须具备的忠直气节，应该提拔为出纳王命的喉舌之官，一定会对扶正和辅佐朝廷，有所裨益。 
English: I think that Hei Lang Zuo, who has the loyalty and uprightness necessary as a minister of the imperial court, should be promoted to the position of the mouthpiece of the king's life, which will certainly be beneficial to Fu Zheng and the imperial court.

古文：由是拜雄尚书。
现代文：因此，顺帝任命左雄为尚书。
English: Therefore, Emperor Shun appointed Zuo as Shangshu.

古文：浮阳侯孙程等怀表上殿争功，帝怒。
现代文：浮阳侯孙程等人因带着奏章，上殿争功，顺帝勃然大怒。
English: Emperor Shun flew into a rage because Sun Cheng and others went to the Imperial Palace to compete for merit with their musical scores.

古文：有司劾奏 程等干乱悖逆，王国等皆与程党，久留京都，益其骄恣。 
现代文：于是，有关官吏弹劾： 孙程等人干乱朝政，抗命叛逆。王国等人和孙程结党，长期逗留京都洛阳，更使他们骄纵放肆。 
English: As a result, the relevant officials impeached Sun Cheng and others for disrupting the government and disobeying orders. Wang Guo and others formed a party with Sun Cheng and stayed in Kyoto Luoyang for a long time, which made them even more arrogant.

古文：帝乃免程等官，悉徙封远县。因遣十九侯就国，敕洛阳令促期发遗。
现代文：因此，顺帝将孙程等人免官，全都改封到偏远地区，又下令十九侯各自前往他们的封国，命洛阳令督促他们，限期动身。
English: Therefore, Emperor Shun dismissed Sun Cheng and the others from their posts and moved them all to remote areas. He also ordered the nineteen princes to go to their respective fiefdoms, and ordered Luo Yang to urge them to set off on time.

古文：司徒掾周举说硃伥曰： 朝廷在西钟下时，非孙程等岂立！
现代文：司徒掾周举劝说司徒朱伥： 当初，皇帝在西钟楼下时，如果不是孙程等人尽力，怎能即位为帝？
English: "At the beginning, when the emperor descended from the West Bell Tower, if it wasn't for the efforts of Sun Cheng and others, how could he be enthroned as emperor?

古文：今忘其大德，录其小过。
现代文：现在却忘记人家的大德，计较他们的微小过失。
English: but now they forget the mighty deeds of the righteous, and regard the small offenses of the wicked.

古文：如道路夭折，帝有杀功臣之讥。
现代文：如果他们在回封国的途中有人死亡，则皇帝就会遭受屠杀功臣的非议。
English: If any of them died on the way back to their fiefdoms, the emperor would be criticized by the heroes of the massacre.

古文：及今未去，宜急表之！
现代文：趁着孙程等人尚未动身，应该迅速奏明皇上，加以劝阻。 
English: Taking advantage of the fact that Sun Cheng and the others had not yet set out, they should quickly inform the emperor and dissuade him.

古文：伥曰： 今诏指方怒，吾独表此，必致罪谴。 
现代文：朱伥回答说： 现皇上正在发怒，如果我单独为此事上奏，一定会受到皇帝的降罪谴责。 
English: Zhu Xi replied: Now the emperor is getting angry. If I were to raise this matter alone, I would certainly be condemned by the emperor.

古文：举曰： 明公年过八十，位为台辅，不于今时竭忠报国，惜身安，欲以何求！
现代文：周举又说： 您年龄已经超过八十岁，位居宰相高位，不在此时尽忠报国，而珍惜自己，安于尊宠，您想得到什么？
English: Zhou Jiu also said: You are over eighty years old and hold the high position of prime minister. Instead of being loyal and serving the country at this time, you should cherish yourself and rest in His grace. What do you want?

古文：禄位虽全，必陷佞邪之机；谏而获罪，犹有忠贞之名。
现代文：尽管能保全自己的俸禄和官位，但定会被人谴责为奸佞之辈；而因谏诤而获罪，还能留下忠贞的美名。
English: Although they can preserve their salary and official position, they will be condemned as the generation of traitors; and if they are convicted of treason, they can still leave a good name of loyalty.

古文：若举言不足采，请从此辞！ 
现代文：如果我的意见不值得采纳，我请求从此告别！ 
English: If my opinion is not worth adopting, I ask to say goodbye from now on!

古文：伥乃表谏，帝果从之。
现代文：于是朱伥上表劝谏，顺帝果然采纳。
English: As a result, Zhu Xi went to the table to persuade him, and Shun Di really accepted.

古文：程徙封宜城侯，到国，怨恨恚怼，封还印绶、符策，亡归京师，往来山中。
现代文：孙程被改封为宜城侯。他到封国以后，怨恨不满，将印信和符策都退还朝廷，擅自逃归京都洛阳，往来于山中。
English: Sun Cheng was changed to the lord of Yicheng. After he came to the feudal state, he was resentful and dissatisfied, returned the seal and the seal to the imperial court, fled to Kyoto Luoyang without permission, and traveled in the mountains.

古文：诏书追求，复故爵土，赐车马、衣物，遣还国。
现代文：顺帝下诏搜寻孙程，找到以后，恢复他原来的封爵和食邑，赏赐车马和衣物，遣送他回到封国。
English: Emperor Shun issued an edict to search for Sun Cheng, and after he was found, he restored his original knighthood and food, rewarded him with chariots and horses and clothing, and sent him back to the feudal state.

古文：冬，十月，丁亥，司空陶敦免。
现代文：冬季，十月丁亥，将司空陶敦免官。
English: In the winter, in October, Sikyong Taodong was relieved of his duties.

古文：以廷尉张皓为司空。班勇更立车师后部故王子加特奴为王。
现代文：朔方郡以西，障塞多已损坏，鲜卑因此不断侵犯南匈奴，单于忧愁恐惧，上书朝廷，请求修复障塞。庚寅，顺帝下诏： 征调黎阳营兵到中山北界驻防。
English: To the west of Shuofang County, most of the barricades had been damaged, so Xianbei constantly invaded the Southern Xiongnu. Out of sorrow and fear, he sent a letter to the imperial court, requesting the repair of the barricades. Goyang, Shun Emperor issued an edict: Conscript Li Yang battalion to the Zhongshan Northern Border.

古文：勇又使别校诛斩东且弥王，亦更立其种人为王；于是车师六国悉平。勇遂发诸国兵击匈奴，呼衔王亡走，其众二万馀人皆降。
现代文：令沿边各郡增设步兵，分布驻扎在各边塞，进行军事训练。 擢升廷尉张皓为司空。班勇于是征发西域各国的军队，进击匈奴，呼衍王逃走，其部众二万余人全都投降。
English: He ordered to increase the number of infantrymen in each county along the border and stationed them in each border fortress for military training. He promoted the court lieutenant Zhang Qian to the position of air officer. Ban Yong then conscripted the armies of the countries in the western region to attack the Xiongnu. Huyan Wang fled, and all of the more than 20,000 people in his division surrendered.

古文：生得单于人兄，勇使加特奴手斩之，以结车师、匈奴之隙。
现代文：单于的堂兄被活捉，班勇让加特奴亲手将他斩杀，以此结下车师和匈奴之间的仇恨。
English: Shanyu's cousin was captured alive, and Ban Yong ordered Gatenu to personally kill him in order to end the hatred between Shanyu and the Xiongnu.

古文：北单于自将万馀骑入后部，至金且谷；勇使假司马曹俊救之，单于引去，俊追斩其贵人骨都侯。
现代文：于是，北单于亲自率领一万余骑兵攻打车师后王国，抵金且谷。班勇派遣假司马曹俊前去救援，单于率军后撤，曹俊追击，并斩杀其贵人骨都侯。
English: As a result, Beidan personally led more than ten thousand cavalry to attack the kingdom of Chariot Division and arrived in Jin and Gu. Ban Yong sent fake Sima Cao Jun to the rescue, while Sian led the army to retreat, Cao Jun pursued and killed his noblemen.

古文：于是呼衍王遂徙居枯梧河上，是后车师无复虏迹。
现代文：于是，呼衍王迁到枯梧河畔居住，车师此后不再有匈奴的足迹。
English: As a result, King Huyan moved to live on the banks of the Wu River, and there was no longer any trace of the Xiongnu.

古文：孝安皇帝下永建二年
现代文：永建二年
English: Yongjian two years later

古文：春，正月，中郎将张国以南单于兵击鲜卑其至鞬，破之。
现代文：春季，正月，中郎将张国率领南单于军队进击鲜卑首领其至，将其击破。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Zhong Lang led Zhang Guo to attack the army of Nan Shan and defeated the leader of Xianbei.

古文：二月，辽东鲜卑寇辽东玄菟；乌桓校尉耿晔发缘边诸郡兵及乌桓出塞击之，斩获甚众；鲜卑三万人诣辽东降。
现代文：二月，辽东鲜卑攻打辽东玄菟，乌桓校尉耿晔征发沿边各郡郡兵和乌桓的军队出塞讨伐，斩杀和俘虏甚多，鲜卑三万人到辽东郡投降。
English: In February, Liaodong Xianbei attacked Liaodong Xuanzang, and Wuhuan's lieutenant Geng Ying sent soldiers from the counties along the border and Wuhuan's army to fight, killing and capturing a lot of people, and nearly 30,000 people surrendered to Liaodong County.

古文：三月，旱。
现代文：三月，发生旱灾。
English: In March, there was a drought.

古文：初，帝母李氏瘗在洛阳北，帝初不知；至是，左右白之，帝乃发哀，亲到瘗所，更以礼殡。
现代文：当初，顺帝的母亲李氏埋葬在洛阳城北，顺帝先前不知道。直到现在，顺帝身边的人才将此事禀报。
English: At the beginning, Shunde's mother Li was buried in the north of Luoyang City, but Shunde did not know about it before. It is only now that people around Shunde have reported this.

古文：六月，乙酉，追谥为恭愍皇后，葬于恭陵之北。
现代文：于是，顺帝为母亲发丧举哀，亲自到埋葬的地方，改以皇后的礼仪殡殓。六月乙酉，追谥为恭愍皇后，埋葬在恭陵的北面。
English: As a result, Emperor Shun mourned his mother's death and went to the burial site in person, changing the funeral rites to those of an empress. In June, Empress Dowager Yi was buried as the Empress of Guanzhong in the north side of Guanzhong Mausoleum.

古文：西域城郭诸国皆服于汉，唯焉耆王元孟未降，班勇奏请攻之。
现代文：西域所有的城邦国家都已归服汉朝，只有焉耆王元孟未投降。班勇上奏朝廷，请求出兵讨伐。
English: All the city-states in the western region had already submitted to the Han Dynasty, but only Yuan Meng, the King of Yan, did not surrender. Ban Yong appealed to the imperial court, requesting the dispatch of troops for a crusade.

古文：于是遣敦煌太守张朗将河西四郡兵三千人配勇，因发诸国兵四万馀人分为两道击之。
现代文：于是，朝廷派敦煌太守张朗率河西四郡之兵三千人，配合班勇。班勇便征发西域各国之兵，共四万余人，分两路进击焉耆。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent Zhang Lang, the governor of Dunhuang, to lead three thousand soldiers from four counties in the west of the river, in cooperation with Ban Yong. Ban Yong then conscripted soldiers from various countries in the western region, a total of more than forty thousand people, to advance in two directions.

古文：勇从南道，朗从北道，约期俱至焉耆。
现代文：班勇从南道，张朗从北道，约定日期，到焉耆城下会师。
English: Ban Yong walked from the South Road, Zhang Lang walked from the North Road, and the appointment date was set.

古文：而朗先有罪，欲徼功自赎，遂先期至爵离关，遣司马将兵前战，获首虏二千馀人，元孟惧诛，逆遣使乞降。
现代文：而张朗因先前有罪，急于求功，为自己赎罪，就赶在约定日期之前，抵达爵离关，并派遣司马率军提前进攻，斩首二千余人，元孟害怕被杀，于是派使者请求投降。
English: However, because Zhang Lang was previously guilty, anxious to seek merit and atone for his sins, he arrived at the castle before the agreed date, and sent Sima and his army to attack in advance, beheading more than two thousand people. Yuan Meng was afraid of being killed, so he sent an envoy to request surrender.

古文：张朗径入焉耆，受降而还。
现代文：张朗便直接进入焉耆城，受降而回。
English: Zhang Lang then went directly into the city of Yan'an, was defeated, and returned.

古文：朗得免诛，勇以后期征，下狱，免。
现代文：结果，张朗得以免除诛杀，而班勇因迟到而被征回京都洛阳，下狱，免官。
English: As a result, Zhang Lang was able to be exempted from fighting and killing, while Ban Yong was conscripted back to Kyoto Luoyang due to his late arrival, sent to prison, and dismissed.

古文：秋，七月，甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月甲戌朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬午，太尉硃宠、司徒硃伥免。
现代文：壬午，太尉朱宠和司徒朱伥，都被免官。
English: In Renwu, the Taiyi Zhu Zha and the scholar Zhu Xi were dismissed from their posts.

古文：庚子，以太常刘光为太尉、录尚书事，光禄勋汝南许敬为司徒。
现代文：庚子，擢升太常刘光为主尉，主管尚书事务，将光禄勋、汝南郡人许敬任命为司徒。
English: Geng Zi promoted the great Liu Guang to the rank of chief lieutenant, in charge of the bookkeeping affairs, and appointed Guang Lu Xun, a native of Runan County, as a tutor.

古文：光，矩之弟也。
现代文：刘光是刘矩的弟弟。
English: Liu Guang is Liu An's younger brother.

古文：敬仕于和、安之间，当窦、邓、阎氏之盛，无所屈挠；三家既败，士大夫多染污者，独无谤言及于敬，当世以此贵之。
现代文：许敬曾在和帝与安帝时期作官，当窦、邓、阎氏权势鼎盛之时，他也无所畏缩和屈服。待三家垮台后，许多居官在位的人，都沾有污点，唯独许敬没有遭到非议。
English: Xu Jing served as an official during the reigns of Emperor He and Emperor An. When the Dou, Deng, and Yan dynasties were at the height of their power, he did not flinch or give in. After the downfall of the three dynasties, many of the officials who were in power were tainted, but Xu Jing was the only one who was not criticized.

古文：初，南阳樊英，少有学行，名著海内，陷于壶山之阳，州郡前后礼请，不应；公卿举贤良、方正、有道，皆不行；安帝赐策书征之，不赴。
现代文：因此，当时人都很敬佩他。当初，南阳郡人樊英，从小学问、品行兼优，闻名天下，隐居在壶山南麓，州郡官府曾先后多次征聘他出来当官，他不应命。朝廷公卿大臣荐举他为贤良、方正、有道，他都不肯动身。安帝赐策书征召，他还是不去。
English: Therefore, at that time, people admired him very much. At the beginning, Nanyang County's Zou Ying, who was famous for his elementary school education and good conduct, lived in seclusion at the southern foot of Mt. Jug. The county government had repeatedly recruited him to become an official, but he was not worthy of his life. The Minister of the Imperial Court recommended him as a virtuous, upright, and virtuous man, but he refused to leave. Andi gave him a call-up, but he still would not go.

古文：是岁，帝复以策书、玄纁，备礼征英，英固辞疾笃。
现代文：同年，安帝又用策书和黑色的缯帛，非常礼敬地征召樊英，而他以病重为理由坚决推辞。
English: In the same year, An Di also used a strategy book and a black shovel to very respectfully conscript Gong Ying, but he firmly refused on the grounds of serious illness.

古文：诏切责郡县，驾载上道。
现代文：诏书严厉谴责州郡官府办事不得力，于是州郡官府把樊英抬到车上上路。
English: The edict severely condemned the county government for its inability to perform its duties, so the county government carried Hao Ying to the car and drove away.

古文：英不得已，到京，称疾不肯起；强舆入殿，犹不能屈。
现代文：樊英不得已，来到京都洛阳。到洛阳后，樊英又称病不肯起床，于是，用轿子强行将他抬进宫殿，但他还是不肯屈从。
English: As a last resort, Gong Ying came to Kyoto Luoyang. After arriving in Luoyang, Gong Ying also said that he was sick and refused to get up, so they forced him into the palace with a palanquin, but he still refused to give in.

古文：帝使出就太医养疾，月致羊酒。
现代文：安帝让他出去，到太医处养病，每月送给羊和酒。
English: An Di asked him to go out and recover at the Imperial Medical Institution, and gave him a sheep and wine every month.

古文：其后帝乃为英设坛，令公车令导，尚书奉引，赐几、杖，待以师傅之礼，延问得失，拜五官中郎将。
现代文：其后，安帝又特地为樊英设立讲坛，命公车令在前面引路，尚书陪同，赏赐小桌和手杖，用尊敬老师的礼节来对待他，询问朝廷大政的得失，将他任命为五官中郎将。
English: Afterwards, Emperor An specifically set up a podium for Gong Ying, ordered a bus to lead the way in front, accompanied by Shang Shu, rewarded him with a small table and a cane, treated him with the etiquette of a respected teacher, inquired about the merits and demerits of the imperial government, and appointed him as the chief of five officials.

古文：数月，英称疾笃；诏以为光禄大夫，赐告归，令在所送谷，以岁时致牛酒。
现代文：数月之后，樊英又声称病重，安帝下诏，将他任命为光禄大夫，准许回家养病，令当地官府送谷米，每年四季送给牛和酒。
English: A few months later, Xing Ying also claimed to be seriously ill, and Emperor An issued an edict, appointing him as the doctor of Guanglu, allowing him to go home to recover, ordering the local government to send grain and rice, and to send cattle and wine to the four seasons every year.

古文：英辞位不受，有诏譬旨，勿听。
现代文：樊英请求辞去职位，有诏书晓告皇帝旨意，不予批准。
English: The imperial edict is not accepted, and the imperial edict is not heeded.

古文：英初被诏命，众皆以为必不降志。
现代文：樊英刚接到诏书时，大家都认为，他一定不会贬抑自己的志气，而去应命。
English: When Yu Ying just received the imperial edict, everyone thought that he would not lower his ambition, but would do his duty.

古文：南郡王逸素与英善，因与其书，多引古譬谕，劝使就聘。
现代文：南郡人王逸平素和樊英很要好，因而特地写信给他，引用了许多古人的事进行比喻，劝他接受朝廷的征召。
English: Wang Yiping, a resident of Nan County, was very friendly with Zou Ying, so he specifically wrote to him, quoted many ancient people's stories and metaphors, and persuaded him to accept the call of the court.

古文：英顺逸议而至；及后应对无奇谋深策，谈者以为失望。
现代文：于是，樊英听从了王逸的建议，而前往洛阳。可是，后来他在应对皇帝的提问时，没有什么奇谋远策，大家都很失望。
English: Therefore, Qu Ying followed Wang Yi's advice and went to Luoyang. However, later, when he answered the emperor's question, there was nothing out of the ordinary, and everyone was disappointed.

古文：河南张楷与英俱征，谓英曰： 天下有二道，出与处也。
现代文：河南人张楷和樊英同时接受征聘，他对樊英说： 天下只有两条路，即出仕和隐退。
English: Zhang Kai, a native of Henan Province, who was recruited at the same time as Gong Ying, said to Gong Ying: There are only two ways in the world, that is, to serve and to retire.

古文：吾前以子之出，能辅是君也，济斯民也。
现代文：我先前认为，如果你应召出仕，一定会辅佐君王，拯救百姓。
English: I used to think that if you answered the call to serve, you would help the king and save the people.

古文：而子始以不訾之身，怒万乘之主，及其享受爵禄，又不闻匡救之术，进退无所据矣。 
现代文：而你开始时以贵重之极的生命，去激怒君王，等到享受爵禄之后，却又听不到你有扶正补救的方法，这是进退没有依据。 
English: To begin with, you risked your precious life to provoke the king's anger, and then, after receiving a knighthood, you are not even told that you have the means to rectify the situation. There is no basis for this.

古文：臣光曰：古之君子，邦有道则仕，邦无道则隐。
现代文：臣司马光曰：古代的正人君子，当国家政治清明时，他就出来做官，国家政治暴虐时，他就隐退为民。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The ancient upright gentleman, when the national politics are clear, he will come out to be an official, when the national politics are tyrannical, he will retreat to the people.

古文：隐非君子之所欲也。
现代文：隐退为民，本来不是正人君子所愿意的。
English: Retiring to private life is not what an upright gentleman would want.

古文：人莫己知而道不得行，群邪共处而害将及身，故深藏以避之。
现代文：但他们深知，没有人真正了解自己，则正道不能得到推行，而和一群奸佞之辈共事，终将伤害自己，所以，才隐藏自己的才能，远远躲开。
English: However, they are well aware that if no one truly understands themselves, then the right path cannot be promoted, and working with a group of crooks will eventually hurt themselves, so they hide their talents and stay away.

古文：王者举逸民，扬仄陋，固为其有益于国家，非以徇世俗之耳目也。
现代文：圣明的君王之所以选用避世隐居的逸民和提拔出身卑微的人，原本是因为他们对国家有益，并不是以此来迎合世俗的视听。
English: The reason why the holy emperors chose hermits and promoted people from humble backgrounds was originally because they were beneficial to the country, not to cater to the secular audio-visual.

古文：是故有道德足以尊主，智能足以庇民，被褐怀玉，深藏不市，则王者当尽礼以致之，屈体以下之，虚心以访之，克己以从之，然后能利泽施于四表，功烈格于上下。
现代文：所以，在道德上足以使君主尊敬，在智慧和才能上足以庇护百姓的人，就犹如身穿粗布衣而怀有美玉一样，深藏不售。而圣明的君王应该竭尽礼节，将他征聘到手；降低自己的身分，向他请教；克制自己，听从他的意见。然后，才能使恩泽普施于四方，功业留传千古。
English: Therefore, he who is moral enough to command the respect of princes, and wise and able enough to protect the people, is like a coarse-clothed man with precious jewels in his bosom; he is not to be sold, and the wise king should be courteous enough to recruit him; humble himself enough to consult him; restrain himself enough to listen to his advice; and then he will be able to bestow favors in all directions, and his deeds will be handed down for thousands of years.

古文：盖取其道不取其人，务其实不务其名也。
现代文：因为圣明的君王所用的是隐士逸民的治国方法，而不是隐士逸民本身，因此，必须注重实际效果，而不是徒求虚名。
English: Because the kings of the holy light used the methods of governing the country of the hermits and hermits, rather than the hermits and hermits themselves, therefore, they must pay attention to the actual effect, rather than seeking a false name.

古文：其或礼备而不至，意勤而不起，则姑内自循省而不敢强致其人，曰：岂吾德之薄而不足慕乎？
现代文：如果礼节很完备，情意很殷勤，而贤才仍不愿出来做官，则圣明的君王不应该采取强制手段，而应该冷静地深自反省：难道是我的品德太薄，而不值得他仰慕？
English: If the etiquette is very complete, the sentiment is very courteous, and the sage still does not want to come out to work as an official, the saintly king should not take coercive measures, but should calmly reflect on himself: Is my character too thin to be worthy of his admiration?

古文：政之乱而不可辅乎？
现代文：政治太混乱使他无法辅佐？
English: Is politics too chaotic for him to help?

古文：群小在朝而不敢进乎？
现代文：奸佞当权，使他不敢出来做官？
English: Did he not dare to become an official because he was a traitor to those in power?

古文：诚心不至而忧其言之不用乎？
现代文：我的诚意不够，使他忧虑自己的意见不会被采纳？
English: Is my sincerity not enough to make him worry that his opinion will not be accepted?

古文：何贤者之不我从也？
现代文：为什么贤才不接受我的征聘？
English: Why didn't the sages accept my recruitment?

古文：苟其德已厚矣，政已治矣，群小远矣，诚心至矣，彼将扣阍以自售，又安有勤求而不至者哉！
现代文：假如我的品德已厚，朝政已清明，奸佞已疏远，诚意已到，那么，贤才定将叩门求见而自荐，哪里会有再三征召而不肯应聘的！
English: If my moral character is already strong, the government is already clear, the traitors are already alienated, and the sincerity has arrived, then the wise will definitely knock on the door to ask for advice and recommend themselves, where there will be repeated recruitment but unwilling to apply!

古文：荀子曰： 耀蝉者，务在明其火，振其木而已；火不明，虽振其木，无益也。
现代文：荀子说： 晚上燃火捕蝉，必须把火光照亮，再摇动树枝就行了。如果火光不亮，只摇树枝，也没有用处。
English: The lame man said, "In the evening, when lighting a fire to catch cicadas, it is necessary to light the flame and then shake the branches. If the flame is not bright, just shaking the branches is of no use.

古文：今人主有能明其德，则天下归之，若蝉之归明火也。 
现代文：而今，君王如能发扬厚德，则天下的人都会归心，犹如蝉去投奔亮光。 
English: But now, if the monarch can promote virtue, then everyone in the world will be converted, just like a cicada rushing to the light.

古文：或者人主耻不能致，乃至诱之以高位，胁之以严刑。
现代文：有些人主因贤才不应征聘而感到羞耻，于是，用高位来引诱他，用严刑峻法来威胁他。
English: Some masters, ashamed that a good man should not be recruited, lure him with high positions and threaten him with severe punishments.

古文：使彼诚君子邪，则位非所贪，刑非所畏，终不可得而致也；可致者，皆贪位畏刑之人也，乌足贵哉！
现代文：假如他是一个真正的正人君子，则对高位一定不贪婪，对严刑一定不畏惧，君主最终还是得不到他。能够得到的，都是贪图高位和贪生怕死的人，又怎么值得尊重呢？
English: If he is a true and upright gentleman, then he must not be greedy for a high position, and he must not be afraid of severe punishment. The monarch will not get him in the end. Those who can get it are those who covet high positions and those who are greedy for life and death. How can they be worthy of respect?

古文：若乃孝弟著于家庭，行谊隆于乡曲，利不苟取，仕不苟进，洁己安分，优游卒岁，虽不足以尊主庇民，是亦清修之吉士也。
现代文：如果能以孝悌著称于家庭，品行高尚闻名于乡里，不要不义之财，不采取不正当手段谋求做官，洁身自好，安守本分，悠然自得地过日子，虽然才能不足以辅佐君主和造福百姓，但也还属于品行洁美的善人。
English: If you can be known for filial piety in the family, high moral conduct in the village, do not have ill-gotten wealth, do not take improper means to seek to be an official, keep yourself clean, keep your duty, and live a leisurely life, although your talent is not enough to support the monarch and benefit the people, you are also a good person with a clean and beautiful character.

古文：王者当褒优安养，俾遂其志。
现代文：圣明的君王，应该给予褒奖和优待，成全他的志向。
English: The king of wisdom should give praise and preferential treatment to fulfill his ambition.

古文：若孝昭之待韩福，光武之遇周党，以励廉耻，美风俗，斯亦可矣，固不当如范升之诋毁，又不可如张楷之责望也。
现代文：如汉昭帝对待韩福，光武帝对待周党，用以砥砺廉耻之心，美化风俗，这也就可以了。实在不应该如范升，去加以诋毁，也不要如张楷，加以指责和抱怨。
English: If Han Zhao treated Hanfu, and Guangwu treated Zhou, it would be fine. It should not be like Fan Sheng to denigrate, nor should it be like Zhang Kai to blame and complain.

古文：至于饰伪以邀誉，钓奇以惊俗，不食君禄而争屠沽之利，不受小官而规卿相之位，名与实反，心与迹违，斯乃华士、少正卯之流，其得免于圣王之诛幸矣，尚何聘召之有哉！
现代文：至于那些作假伪装来窃取荣誉，以奇特的举动惊动世人，提高声望，不要朝廷俸禄而和屠夫酒贩一样争利，拒绝做小官而想爬上宰相和九卿的高位的人，他们的名与实恰恰相反，心里想的和行动做的完全不一样，他们就是华士、少正卯之流，得免于圣明君王的诛杀，就是很幸运的了，还有什么值得征召的？
English: As for those who use false pretenses to steal honor, startle the world with their strange behavior, increase their reputation, do not want to be paid by the imperial court but compete for profits like butchers and wine merchants, refuse to be minor officials and want to climb to the high positions of prime minister and nine lords, their names are exactly the opposite of the truth, and their thoughts and actions are completely different. They are the Huashi and Shosei, and they were spared from the battle of the Holy Emperor. They are very lucky. What else is worth conscripting?

古文：时又征广汉杨厚、江夏黄琼。
现代文：这时，朝廷又征召广汉郡人杨厚、江夏郡人黄琼。
English: At this time, the imperial court also conscripted Yang Hou from Guanghan County and Huang Qiong from Jiangxia County.

古文：琼，香之子也。
现代文：黄琼，即黄香的儿子。
English: Huang Qiong, the son of Huang Xiang.

古文：厚既至，豫陈汉有三百五十年之厄以为戒，拜议郎。
现代文：杨厚到洛阳以后，向朝廷上奏，预言汉朝到三百五十年左右，将会面临险恶的命运，提出了警告。他被任命为议郎。
English: After Yang Hou arrived in Luoyang, he appealed to the imperial court, predicting that the Han Dynasty would face a sinister fate in about three hundred and fifty years, and issued a warning. He was appointed as a mediator.

古文：琼将至，李固以书逆遗之曰： 君子谓伯夷隘，柳下惠不恭。不夷不惠，可否之间，圣贤居身之所珍也。
现代文：黄琼快到洛阳时，李固派人送给他一封信，信上说： 正人君子认为伯夷心胸太狭隘，而柳下惠则又太傲慢，既不效法伯夷，又不效法柳下惠，而是选择在两者之间，这才是圣贤做人的准则。
English: When Huang Qiong was about to arrive in Luoyang, Li Gu sent a letter to him, which said: The righteous gentleman thought that Bo Yi was too narrow-minded, while Liu Shimo Hui was too arrogant. He did not follow the law of Bo Yi or the law of Liu Shimo Hui, but chose between the two. This is the standard for a sage to be.

古文：诚遂欲枕山栖谷，拟迹巢、由，斯则可矣；若当辅政济民，今其时也。
现代文：如果真正愿意头枕山峰，身卧山谷，步巢父、许由的后尘，那就罢了。如果认为应该出来辅佐朝廷，拯救百姓，现在正是时候。
English: If you are truly willing to head for the peaks, lie in the valleys, and follow in the footsteps of your father and Xu You, that's enough. If you think you should come out to assist the court and save the people, now is the time.

古文：自生民以来，善政少而乱俗多，必待尧、舜之君，此为士行其志终无时矣。
现代文：自从有人类以来，善政少而暴政多，一定要等有了唐尧、虞舜一样的君主，才出来推行自己救国救民的理想，恐怕永远没有这种机会。
English: Since the beginning of mankind, there has been less good governance and more tyranny. We must wait until there is a monarch like Tang Xuan and Yujing before we can come out to promote our own ideal of saving the country and saving the people. I am afraid we will never have this opportunity.

古文：常闻语曰： 峣峣者易缺，皦皦者易污。 
现代文：我曾经听说过这样一句话： 山太高易崩，玉太白易污。 
English: I once heard such a sentence: The mountain is too high and easy to collapse, the jade is too white and easy to pollute.

古文：盛名之下，其实难副。
现代文：盛名之下，其实难副。
English: It's hard to live up to the reputation.

古文：近鲁阳樊君被征，初至，朝廷设坛席，犹待神明，虽无大异，而言行所守，亦无所缺；而毁谤布流，应时折减者，岂非观听望深，声名太盛乎！
现代文：最近，鲁阳人樊英受到征召，初到时，朝廷专门为他设立讲坛，犹如对待神明。他虽然没有提出什么奇谋深策，但言行谨慎，也没有什么失误。可是，对他的诋毁和谴责到处流传，他的声誉随着时间的推移而降低，岂不是因为大家对他的期望太高，他的声名太盛！
English: Recently, Luyang man Xing Ying was conscripted. When he first arrived, the imperial court set up a special pulpit for him, treating him as if he were a god. Although he did not put forward any cunning plan, he was careful in his words and deeds, and there was no mistake. However, his slander and condemnation spread everywhere, and his reputation declined over time. Is it not because everyone's expectations of him are too high, and his reputation is too strong!

古文：是故俗论皆言 处士纯盗虚声 。
现代文：因而，世俗的舆论都说： 所谓隐居之士，纯粹盗取虚名。 
English: Therefore, the secular public opinion all said: The so-called reclusive person is purely stealing a false name.

古文：愿先生弘此远谟，令众人叹服，一雪此言耳！ 
现代文：但愿先生这次能够提出深远的建议，让大家赞叹佩服，以洗刷这种舆论。 
English: I hope that you will be able to come up with far-reaching proposals this time, so that everyone can admire and admire, and so that this public opinion can be washed away.

古文：琼至，拜议郎，稍迁尚书仆射。
现代文：黄琼到达洛阳以后，先被任命为议郎，后来逐渐被擢升为尚书仆射。
English: After Huang Qiong arrived in Luoyang, he was first appointed as an advocate, and later he was gradually promoted to the rank of a clerk.

古文：琼昔随父在台阁，习见故事；及后居职，达练官曹，争议朝堂，莫能抗夺。
现代文：黄琼过去曾跟随其父黄香在尚书台，熟悉典章制度，等到后来他自己在这里任职时，对尚书诸曹的事务都很精通。每当在朝堂争议国家大事时，大家都不能驳倒他的意见。
English: In the past, Huang Qiong had followed his father Huang Xiang in Shang Shudai and was familiar with the award system. Later, when he himself served here, he was very familiar with the affairs of Shang Shudai. Whenever national events were disputed in the imperial court, no one could refute his opinion.

古文：数上疏言事，上颇采用之。
现代文：他曾经多次上奏言事，往往被皇帝所采纳。
English: He had made many speeches, which were often adopted by the emperor.

古文：李固，郃之子，少好学，常改易姓名，杖策驱驴，负笈从师，不远千里，遂究览坟籍，为世大儒。
现代文：李固是李的儿子，自幼喜爱读书，经常改换姓名，执鞭赶驴，载着书箱，不远千里，投奔名师。于是遍览各种古本秘籍，成为当代的大儒。
English: Li Gu, the son of Li, loved to read from a young age, often changed his name, drove a donkey with a whip, carried a bookcase, and ran to a famous teacher thousands of miles away. So he read all kinds of ancient books and became a contemporary great scholar.

古文：每到太学，密入公府，定省父母，不令同业诸生知其为郃子也。
现代文：他每次到太学，都要秘密地进入三公府，去向父母请安，不让同学们知道他是李的儿子。
English: Every time he went to Taishu, he had to secretly enter the Three Municipalities to ask his parents for their blessing, so as not to let his classmates know that he was Li's son.

古文：孝安皇帝下永建三年
现代文：永建三年
English: Yongjian three years

古文：春，正月，丙子，京师地震。
现代文：春季，正月丙子，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In the spring, on New Year's Eve, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：夏，六月，旱。
现代文：夏季，六月，发生旱灾。
English: In the summer, in June, there is a drought.

古文：秋，七月，丁酉，茂陵园寝灾。
现代文：秋季，七月，汉武帝陵园茂陵寝殿发生火灾。
English: In the autumn, in July, a fire broke out in the Mausoleum of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：九月，鲜卑寇渔阳。
现代文：九月，鲜卑侵犯渔阳郡。
English: In September, the fresh-faced peregrine falcon raids the fishing sun.

古文：冬，十二月，己亥，太傅桓焉免。
现代文：冬季，十二月己亥，太傅桓焉被免官。
English: In the winter, in December, Taifu Kanen was dismissed.

古文：车骑将军来历罢。
现代文：车骑将军来历被罢官。
English: Chariot and cavalry generals have been dismissed before.

古文：南单于拔死，弟休利立，为去特若尸逐就单于。
现代文：南单于栾提拔去世，他的弟栾提休利继位，号为去特若尸逐就单于。
English: Nan Shan died in the promotion, and his younger brother Yu Ti Xuli succeeded to the throne. It was rumored that if the body was removed, Nan Shan would succeed to the throne.

古文：帝悉召孙程等还京师。
现代文：顺帝将孙程等十九侯，全都召回京都洛阳。
English: Emperor Shun summoned Sun Cheng and nineteen other princes back to Kyoto and Luoyang.

古文：孝安皇帝下永建四年春，正月，丙寅，赦天下。丙子，帝加元服。
现代文：用建四年春季，正月丙寅，大赦天下。丙子，顺帝行成年加冠礼。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of construction, in the first month of the year, Cui Yin and Cui Zi were granted amnesty by the emperor. Cui Zi and Cun Di performed the coming-of-age and crowning ceremony.

古文：夏，五月，壬辰，诏曰： 海内颇有灾异，朝廷修政，太官减膳，珍玩不御。
现代文：夏季，五月壬辰，顺帝下诏说： 全国许多地方，都出现了灾异。朝廷正在整顿政治，太官减省皇帝饮食，不再进献珍贵的玩赏物品。
English: In the summer, at the end of May, Emperor Shun issued an edict saying, "Disasters have occurred in many parts of the country. The imperial court is rectifying politics. The eunuchs are cutting back on the emperor's diet and will no longer present precious trinkets.

古文：而桂阳太守文砻，不惟竭忠宣畅本朝，而远献大珠以求幸媚，今封以还之！ 
现代文：然而，桂阳郡太守文砻，不尽忠施行朝廷的善政，反而从遥远的地区进贡大颗珍珠，以谄媚邀宠，今将原物封好退回！ 
English: However, Guiyang County Taizhong, disloyal to the implementation of the good governance of the imperial court, but from distant regions to pay tribute to the large pearl, with charming invite pet, now the original will be sealed and returned!

古文：五州雨水。
现代文：五个州下了大雨。
English: Wuzhou rainwater.

古文：秋，八月，丁巳，太尉刘光、司空张皓免。
现代文：秋季，八月丁巳，太尉刘光和司空张皓，都被免官。
English: In the autumn, in August, Ding Si, Second Lieutenant Liu Guang and Secretary Zhang Ye were all dismissed.

古文：尚书侦射虞诩上言： 安定、北地、上郡，山川险厄，沃野千里，土宜畜牧，水可溉漕。
现代文：尚书仆射虞诩上书说： 安定郡、北地郡、上郡，山川险要，沃野千里，土地适合畜牧，河水可以灌溉农田和运输粮秣。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Zhaoyu wrote: Anding County, Beidi County, Shang County, mountains and rivers are dangerous, fertile fields are thousands of miles away, the land is suitable for animal husbandry, and the river can irrigate farmland and transport grain.

古文：顷遭元元之灾，众羌内溃，郡县兵荒，二十馀年。
现代文：可是，近遭安帝永初元年以来战乱，诸羌部落纷纷溃逃到中国境内，郡县战乱饥荒，历时二十余年。
English: However, recently, since the beginning of the first year of the 21st century, Andiyong has been plagued by war, and various tribes have fled to China. Counties and counties have been plagued by war and famine, which lasted for more than 20 years.

古文：夫弃沃壤之饶，捐自然之财，不可谓利；离河山之阻，守无险之处，难以为固。
现代文：舍弃富饶肥沃的土地，抛掉自然的财富，不能说是有利。并且，现在的边界远离山川要隘，在无险之处难以固守。
English: It cannot be said to be beneficial to abandon the rich and fertile land and throw away the natural wealth. Moreover, the current border is far from the mountains and rivers and is narrow, and it is difficult to adhere to where there is no danger.

古文：今三郡未复，园陵单外，而公卿选懦，容头过身，张解设难，但计所费，不图其安。
现代文：因三郡没有恢复，在长安的皇帝园陵没有屏障。然而，公卿怯懦，得过且过，故意夸大其辞，提出种种疑难，只知计算耗费，而不管国家安全。
English: Now three counties are not restored, and the gardens are deserted, but the Lords and Ministers are weak and cowardly, and give way, and exaggerate as an excuse, and list many reasons for making difficulties, without regard to the expense, and without regard to the safety of the country.

古文：宜开圣听，考行所长。 
现代文：建议陛下广泛听取意见，采用最好的策略。 
English: His Majesty is advised to listen to a wide range of opinions and adopt the best strategy.

古文：九月，诏复安定、北地、上郡归旧土。
现代文：九月，顺帝下诏，命安定郡、北地郡、上郡的郡治，重新迁回原来的地方。
English: In September, Emperor Shun issued an edict ordering the governors of the counties of Dangdang County, Beidai County, and Shang County to move back to their original places.

古文：癸酉，以大鸿胪庞参为太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：癸酉，擢升大鸿胪庞参为太尉，主管尚书事务。
English: , promoted Da Hong  Pang San to the rank of lieutenant, in charge of bookkeeping.

古文：太常王龚为司空。
现代文：太常王龚为司空。
English: Too often, Wang Yao is the empty seat.

古文：冬，十一月，庚辰，司徒许敬免。
现代文：冬季，十一月庚辰，司徒许敬被免官。
English: In the winter, in November, Geng Chen, Sito Xu Jing was removed from office.

古文：鲜卑寇朔方。
现代文：鲜卑侵犯朔方郡。
English: A fresh pike swoops in from the east.

古文：十二月，巳卯，以宗正弘农刘崎为司徒。
现代文：十二月乙卯，擢升宗正、弘农郡人刘崎为司徒。
English: On the second day of December, Zong Zheng and Liu Qi from Hongnong County were promoted to the position of assistant.

古文：是岁，于窴王放前杀拘弥王兴，自立其子为拘弥王，而遣使者贡献，敦煌太守徐由上求讨之。
现代文：同年，西域于国王放前诛杀拘弥国王兴，擅自立他的儿子为国王，尔后，派遣使者向朝廷进贡。敦煌郡太守徐由请求朝廷出兵讨伐。
English: In the same year, the Western Regions assassinated King Xing in front of the king, arbitrarily made his son king, and then sent envoys to pay tribute to the court. Dunhuang County Governor Xu Yu requested the court to send troops to fight.

古文：帝赦于窴罪，令归拘弥国；放前不肯。
现代文：顺帝下诏，赦免于阗国王放前擅自诛杀的大罪，仅令他归还拘弥国，放前不肯遵命。
English: Emperor Shun issued an edict, pardoning King Hozen of the great crime of killing without permission, only ordering him to return the country to the emperor, but Hozen refused to comply with the order.

古文：孝安皇帝下永建五年
现代文：永建五年
English: Yongjian five years

古文：夏，四月，京师旱。
现代文：夏季，四月，京都洛阳发生旱灾。
English: In the summer, in April, there was a drought in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：京师及郡国十二蝗。
现代文：京都洛阳和十二个郡国蝗虫成灾。
English: Twelve locust plagues hit the capital and the county.

古文：定远侯班超之孙始尚帝姑阴城公主。
现代文：定远侯班超的孙子班始，娶顺帝的姑姑阴城公主为妻。
English: The grandson of Dingyuan Hou Banchao, Ban Shi, married Shun Di's aunt, Yincheng Princess.

古文：主骄淫无道；始积忿怒，伏刃杀主。
现代文：因公主骄横荒淫，班始久积愤怒，于是，用刀剑杀死公主。
English: Because of the princess's arrogance and debauchery, Banshih pent up his anger for a long time, so he killed the princess with a sword.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，始坐腰斩，同产皆弃市。
现代文：冬季，十月乙亥，班始因坐罪被腰斩，他的同母兄弟姊妹，都在闹市处死，陈尸示众。
English: In the winter, in October of the year of the boar, Ban Shi was beheaded for the crime of sitting. His brothers and sisters of the same mother were all executed in the downtown area, and their corpses were displayed to the public.

古文：孝安皇帝下永建六年
现代文：永建六年
English: Yongjian six years

古文：春，二月，庚午，河间孝王开薨；子政嗣。
现代文：春季，二月庚午，河间孝王刘开去世，儿子刘政做他的继承人。
English: In the spring, on the afternoon of the second day of the second month, Liu Kai, the King of Kawama, died, and his son Liu Zheng became his heir.

古文：政慠很不奉法，帝以侍御史吴郡沈景有强能，擢为河间相。
现代文：刘政骄傲凶狠，不遵守法令。顺帝认为，侍御史、吴郡人沈景刚强而有能力，于是擢升他为河间国相。
English: Liu Zheng was proud and fierce, and did not abide by the law. Emperor Shun thought that Shen Jing, the attendant of the Emperor and the ruler of Wu County, was strong and capable, so he promoted him to the position of the Minister of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：景到国，谒王，王不正服，箕踞殿上；侍郎赞拜，景峙不为礼，问王所在。
现代文：沈景到国就任，晋见河间王刘政时，刘政衣冠不整，双腿叉开，傲慢无礼地坐在殿上。侍郎唱名，让沈景拜见刘政，但沈景站在那里不行礼，反问： 大王在哪里？ 
English: When Shen Jing came to the country to take office, and Jin saw the king of Kawama, Liu Zheng, at the top, Liu Zheng's robe was not in order, his legs were spread apart, and he sat arrogantly in the palace. The waiter sang the name and let Shen Jing meet Liu Zheng, but Shen Jing stood there impolite and asked: Where is the great king?

古文：虎贲曰： 是非王邪！ 
现代文：虎贲卫士说： 这不是大王吗？ 
English: The vise guard said, "Isn't this the great king?"

古文：景曰： 王不正服，常人何别！
现代文：沈景说： 大王不穿大王的衣服，和常人有何区别？
English: Shen Jing said: If the great king does not wear the great king's clothes, what is the difference between him and ordinary people?

古文：今相谒王，岂谒无礼者邪！ 
现代文：今天是诸侯王国宰相晋见诸侯王，岂是晋见无礼之徒？ 
English: Now you come to pay homage to the king, is it possible to pay homage to an impolite person?

古文：王惭而更服，景然后拜；出，住宫门外，请王傅责之曰： 前发京师，陛见受诏，以王不恭，使相检督。
现代文：刘政感到惭愧，更换衣服，沈景这才参拜。沈景参拜完毕出来，在宫门外，请出河间王傅，责备说： 先前我从京都洛阳动身，拜见皇上，接受诏书，皇上认为河间王态度不恭敬，命我检查督责。
English: Liu Zheng felt ashamed. He changed his clothes, and it was only then that Shen Jing paid a visit. After Shen Jing's visit was over, outside the palace gate, he invited Kawama Wang Fu and scolded him, saying, "Previously, I set out from Kyoto Luoyang to meet the emperor and receive the imperial rescript. The emperor thought that Kawama Wang's attitude was disrespectful and ordered me to inspect and supervise.

古文：诸君空受爵禄，曾无训导之义！ 
现代文：你们空受朝廷爵禄，连一点教导的工作都没做？ 
English: You've all been awarded imperial honours, but you haven't even done a bit of teaching?

古文：因奏治其罪，诏书让政而诘责傅。
现代文：于是沈景奏请朝廷，要求将他们治罪。顺帝下诏责备刘政和河间王傅。
English: Therefore, Shen Jingso asked the imperial court to punish them. Emperor Shun issued an edict to reprimand Liu Zheng and Kawama Wangfu.

古文：景因捕诸奸人，奏案其罪，杀戮尤恶者数十人，出冤狱百馀人。
现代文：其后，沈景又逮捕一批奸佞之徒，奏请查办他们的罪恶，诛杀其中情节特别恶劣的数十人，还平反冤狱，释放出一百余人。
English: After that, Shen Jing arrested a group of traitors, asked them to investigate their crimes, killed dozens of them with particularly bad circumstances, and rehabilitated the unjust imprisonment, releasing more than a hundred people.

古文：政遂为改节，悔过自修。
现代文：刘政于是改变节操，悔过自新。
English: Liu Zheng is a reformed person, he has repented and reformed.

古文：帝以伊吾膏腴之地，傍近西域，匈奴资之以为钞暴；三月，辛亥，复令开设屯田，如永元时事，置伊吾司马一人。
现代文：顺帝认为伊吾一带土地肥沃，又靠近西域，匈奴一直利用这个地区，进行劫掠和骚扰。三月辛亥，下令恢复伊吾屯田，与和帝永元年间一样，设置伊吾司马一人。
English: Emperor Shun believed that the land around Igo was fertile and close to the western region, and the Huns had been using this area to carry out looting and harassment. In March of the Year of the Fire Rooster, he ordered the restoration of Igo Tonden, and as in the years of Emperor Yong I, set up Igo Sima alone.

古文：初，安帝薄于艺文，博士不复讲习，朋徒相视怠散，学舍颓敝，鞠为园蔬，或牧儿、荛竖薪刈其下。
现代文：当初，由于安帝轻视典籍，博士不再讲习，门徒学生互相看着学业荒怠，人员离散，太学的房舍倒塌敝旧，破败得成为菜园，牧童、樵夫在附近砍柴割草。
English: At the beginning, because of Emperor An's contempt for the classics, the doctorate was no longer taught, the disciples and students looked at each other with academic desolation, the personnel were scattered, the old buildings of the university collapsed and became a vegetable garden, and the shepherds and woodsmen cut wood and mow grass nearby.

古文：将作大匠翟酺上疏请更修缮，诱进后学，帝从之。
现代文：将作大匠翟上奏，请求加以修缮，诱导后生求学，顺帝采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Shun accepted his suggestion to have a grand master play the gong, to request that it be repaired, and to encourage future generations to study.

古文：秋，九月，缮起太学，凡所造构二百四十房，千八百五十室。
现代文：秋季，九月，重新修缮太学，共建房二百四十幢，一千八百五十间。
English: In autumn and September, Taigaku was renovated again, with a total of 240 buildings and 1850 rooms built.

古文：护乌桓校尉耿晔遣兵击鲜卑，破之。
现代文：护乌桓校尉耿晔派兵攻击鲜卑，将其击破。
English: Wuhuan's tutelary, Captain Geng Yao, sent troops to attack Xianbei and defeated them.

古文：护羌校尉韩皓转湟中屯田置两河间，以逼群羌。
现代文：护羌校尉韩皓将湟中地区的屯田，转移到两河即赐支河和逢留大河之间，以逼近西羌诸部落。
English: Han Yan, the captain of the garrison, moved the military camps in the Central Yunnan region to the area between the two rivers and the Fengluu River to approach the tribes in the West Yunnan region.

古文：皓坐事征，以张掖太守马续代为校尉。
现代文：正当这时，韩皓因事获罪，被调回京都洛阳，由张掖郡太守马续接任护羌校尉。
English: It was at this time that Han Qi was found guilty for the incident and was transferred back to Luoyang, Kyoto, where he took over from Zhangye County's Taishouma as Shuoqi's lieutenant.

古文：两河间羌以屯田近之，恐必见图，乃解仇诅盟，各自儆备；续上移屯田还湟中，羌意乃安。
现代文：两河之间的羌人诸部落，认为屯田地区靠近他们，恐怕受到攻击，于是，互相解除仇怨，订立誓约，各自加强戒备。马续上奏朝廷，将屯田地区仍然迁回到湟中，羌人这才放心。
English: The tribes of the Xiongnu people between the two rivers thought that the Tonden area was close to them, and they were afraid of being attacked. Therefore, they relieved each other of their grudges, made pledges, and strengthened their defenses. They continued to report to the imperial court, and moved the Tonden area back to Yunnan. This reassured the Xiongnu people.

古文：帝欲立皇后，而贵人有宠者四人，莫知所建，议欲探筹，以神定选。
现代文：顺帝打算选立皇后，而贵人中受到宠爱的共有四人，不知选定哪一位。有人建议抽签，抽到谁，由神灵决定人选。
English: Emperor Shun planned to choose a queen, but there were four favorites among the nobles, and it was not known which one would be chosen. Someone suggested drawing lots, and the gods would decide who would be chosen.

古文：尚书仆射南郡胡广与尚书冯翊郭虔、史敞上疏谏曰： 窃见诏书，以立后事大，谦不自专，欲假之筹策，决疑灵神；篇籍所记，祖宗典故，未尝有也。
现代文：尚书仆射南郡人胡广与尚书冯翊人郭虔、史敞联名上书进谏说： 我们看到诏书，陛下认为选立皇后是件大事，谦恭地不愿意自己决定，希望用抽签的方法，请求神灵决定。
English: Shang Shuxu's servants Hu Guang from Jianan County and Shang Shuxu's Feng Xuan's Guo Qian and Shi Zhang jointly wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: "We have seen the imperial edict. Your Majesty considers the election of the empress to be a very important matter, and humbly does not want to decide on her own. She hopes to use the method of drawing lots to ask the gods to decide.

古文：恃神任筮，既不必当贤；就值其人，犹非德选。
现代文：可是，所有古书记载，以及祖宗前例，都未曾采取过这种方法。依靠在神灵前祷告占卜，未必能得到贤良，即使得到，也不是根据衡量品德来选定的。
English: If you rely on gods and witches, you will not necessarily find a wise man. Even if you encounter such a person, you are not choosing a person with virtue.

古文：夫歧嶷形于自然，伣天必有异表，宜参良家，简求有德，德同以年，年钧以貌；稽之典经，断之圣虑。 
现代文：聪明智慧会形于外表，大贤大德一定与众不同。最好的办法是，除了四位贵人外，再增选良家女儿，从其中物色品德最好的；品德一样好，物色年龄较大的；年龄一样大，挑选外貌美丽的；稽查典籍，最后由陛下考虑决定。 
English: The best way is, in addition to the four noblemen, to select the daughters of good families, from which to find the best moral character; if the moral character is as good, find the older one; if the age is the same, select the beautiful appearance; check the classics, and finally consider the decision by His Majesty.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：顺帝采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：恭怀皇后弟子乘氏侯商之女，选入掖庭为贵人，常特被引御，从容辞曰： 夫阳以博施为德，阴以不专为义。
现代文：和帝刘肇母亲梁贵人的侄女，即乘氏侯梁商的女儿梁，被选进皇宫，封为顺帝的贵人，唯独她常被召唤侍奉顺帝，但她总是婉言推辞说： 阳刚应以广泛施舍为德；阴柔应以不专享有为义。
English: The niece of Emperor Liu Zhao's mother Liang Guiren, that is, Liang, the daughter of the merchant Liang Guiren, was elected to the imperial palace and named the noblewoman of Emperor Shun. However, she was often called to serve Emperor Shun, but she always politely declined, saying: "Masculinity should be a virtue of extensive charity; femininity should be justified by non-exclusive enjoyment."

古文：《螽斯》则百福所由兴也。
现代文：螽斯所以子孙繁盛，就是这个缘故。
English: That's why our children and grandchildren will prosper.

古文：愿陛下思云雨之均泽，小妾得免于罪。 
现代文：希望陛下想到云雨之恩，应该大家均沾，使我得以免罪。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will think of the grace of the clouds and rain, which should be shared by all, so that I can be exonerated.

古文：帝由是贤之。
现代文：因此，顺帝认为她最贤淑。
English: Therefore, Emperor Shun considered her to be the most virtuous.

古文：孝顺皇帝上阳嘉元年
现代文：阳嘉元年
English: In the first year of Yang Jia

古文：春，正月，乙巳，立贵人梁氏为皇后。
现代文：春季，正月乙巳，封贵人梁为皇后。
English: In spring, at the first day of the new year, Liang, a noblewoman, was crowned empress.

古文：京师旱。
现代文：京都洛阳发生旱灾。
English: There is a drought in the capital.

古文：三月，扬州六郡妖贼章河等寇四十九县，杀伤长吏。
现代文：三月，扬州六郡妖贼章何等，攻打四十九个县，杀伤地方官吏。
English: In March, Yangzhou's six counties were attacked and 49 counties were attacked, and local officials were killed and injured.

古文：庚寅，赦天下，改元。
现代文：庚寅，大赦天下，改年号。
English: Geng Yin, amnesty to the world, change the year.

古文：夏，四月，梁商加位特进；顷之，拜执金吾。
现代文：夏季，四月，皇后梁之父梁商，被赐为特进，位在三公之下。不久，又被任命为执金吾。
English: In the summer, in April, the father of Empress Liang, Liang Shangru, was given a special promotion and was placed under the Three Princes. Soon, he was also appointed as the acting King.

古文：冬，耿晔遣乌桓戎末魔等钞击鲜卑，大获而还。
现代文：冬季，耿晔派乌桓酋长戎末魔等攻击鲜卑，大胜而回。
English: In the winter, Geng Yao sent Wuhuan chieftain Eun Suemo and others to attack Xianbei, and won a great victory.

古文：鲜卑复寇辽东属国，耿晔移屯辽东无虑城以拒之。
现代文：鲜卑部落遂反攻辽东属国，耿晔移兵屯驻辽东郡所属的无虑城，以抵御鲜卑的进攻。
English: The Xianbei tribe then counter-attacked the Liaodong vassal state, and Geng Yao moved his troops to Muxiancheng, which belonged to Liaodong County, in order to resist Xianbei's attack.

古文：尚书令左雄上疏曰： 昔宣帝以为吏数变易，则下不安业；久于其事，则民服教化。
现代文：尚书令左雄上书说： 过去宣帝认为，地方官吏经常调动，人民就不能安居乐业；任职的时间长，人民就能接受教化。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Zuo to write: In the past, Emperor Xuanxi believed that local officials were often transferred, and the people could not live and work in peace; if they served for a long time, the people would be able to accept enlightenment.

古文：其有政治者，辄以玺书勉励，增秩赐金，公卿缺则以次用之。
现代文：对于有政绩的官吏，每每用诏书勉励，增加官秩，赏赐黄金，公卿大臣职位空缺，就按照次序录用他们。
English: For officials with political achievements, every time they use the edict to encourage, increase the official rank, reward the gold, and the post of minister is vacant, they will be recruited according to the order.

古文：是以吏称其职，民安其业，汉世良吏，于兹为盛。
现代文：所以，地方官吏都很称职，人民安居乐业，汉代优秀的地方官吏，以那一时期最为鼎盛。
English: Therefore, the local officials are very competent, the people live in peace and prosperity, and the outstanding local officials in the Han Dynasty were the most prosperous in that period.

古文：今典城百里，转动无常，各怀一切，莫虑长久。
现代文：而现在，一个县的县令或县长经常更换，各人都抱着临时观点，没有长久打算。
English: But now, the county magistrate or governor of a county often changes, and everyone has a temporary view and no long-term plan.

古文：谓杀害不辜为威风，聚敛整办为贤能；以治己安民为劣弱，奉法循理为不治。
现代文：滥杀无罪小民的被认为有威严，擅长搜刮钱财的被认为贤良能干。相反，能够约束自己安定人民的被认为低劣懦弱，奉公守法被认为没有治理能力。
English: Those who indiscriminately kill innocent people are considered to be dignified, and those who are good at money-grabbing are considered to be virtuous and competent. On the contrary, those who can restrain themselves and stabilize the people are considered to be inferior and cowardly, and those who are law-abiding are considered to have no ability to govern.

古文：髡钳之戮，生于睚眦；覆尸之祸，成于喜怒。
现代文：一点小的怨恨，则处以髡钳之刑，一时的喜怒，可以酿成伏尸惨祸。
English: A small grudge is punishable by flogging, while a moment of joy or anger can lead to a gruesome death.

古文：视民如寇仇，税之如豺虎。
现代文：把人民看作仇敌，征收苛捐杂税，比虎狼还要凶暴。
English: It is more ferocious than the tiger and the wolf to regard the people as the enemy and levy heavy taxes.

古文：监司项背相望，与同疾疢，见非不举，闻恶不察。
现代文：朝廷派出的监察官吏，前后相继，他们和地方官吏具有同样的弊病，见到错误不检举，听到邪恶不调查。
English: The inspectors sent by the imperial court, one after another, have the same malady as local officials. They do not report mistakes when they see them, and do not investigate evil when they hear about it.

古文：观政于亭传，责成于期月；言善不称德，论功不据实。
现代文：仅在驿站视察政情，要求地方官吏做出政绩，而把期限定在一年之后。赞扬地方官吏的善政，和他的品德不相符合；褒奖功绩，则没有事实根据。
English: Only inspecting the political situation in the station, requiring local officials to make political achievements, and setting the deadline for one year later. Praising the good governance of local officials is not consistent with his character; praising achievements has no factual basis.

古文：虚诞者获誉，拘检者离毁；或因罪而引高，或色斯而求名，州宰不覆，竞共辟召，踊跃升腾，超等逾匹。
现代文：善于弄虚作假的获得声誉，踏实肯干的遭到诋毁。有人因罪状无法掩盖，就声称轻视富贵，弃官而去，以表示清高；有人因瞧见上司的脸色不好，就立即辞职，以表示自己有先见之明。
English: Those who are good at deception gain a reputation, and those who are willing to do it are slandered. Some people, because the crime cannot be covered up, claim to despise the rich and noble, and resign to show their purity; some people, because they saw the boss's face was not good, immediately resigned to show their foresight.

古文：或考奏捕案，而亡不受罪，会赦行赂，复见洗涤，硃紫同色，清浊不分。
现代文：而州官不审查内情，争相延聘，反而使他们得到越级提升，比正常的升迁更为迅速。有的人虽被弹劾缉捕，却逃亡而免罪，遇到大赦，或者行贿，便将过去的罪行，重新洗刷，朱和紫同色，清和浊不分。
English: Some people were impeached and arrested, but they escaped and were exonerated, and when they received amnesty or paid bribes, they rewashed their past crimes, and the red and purple were the same color, and there was no distinction between white and black.

古文：故使奸猾枉滥，轻忽去就，拜除如流，缺动百数。
现代文：遂使奸猾之辈，到处充斥，他们不在乎被任官和被免职，任免官吏如流水一样，官职缺额动不动数以百计。
English: Therefore, treacherous people abound, and it is easy to go. Appointment orders are like running water, and there are often hundreds of vacancies.

古文：乡官、部吏，职贱禄薄，车马衣服，一出于民，廉者取足，贪者充家；特选、横调，纷纷不绝，送迎烦费，损政伤民。
现代文：乡官、部吏，由于职位卑微，俸禄不多，他们的车马衣服，都是出自人民，清廉的只要自己够用就满足了，贪婪的还要满足他的家属。于是，又巧立所谓特选、横调等名目，不断搜刮人民。送往迎来，费用浩大，损政伤民。
English: Township officials and ministry officials, because of their lowly positions and small salaries, their chariots, horses, and clothes are all from the people. The honest ones are satisfied as long as they have enough for themselves, and the greedy ones have to satisfy their families. Therefore, they cleverly set up the so-called special election, horizontal transfer, and other names, and constantly scrounge the people. Sending them to usher, the cost is huge, damaging politics and hurting the people.

古文：和气未洽，灾眚不消，咎皆在此。
现代文：和气未洽，灾难不消，原因都在于此。
English: This is the root of the blame for the lack of harmony and the persistence of disasters and differences.

古文：臣愚以为守相、长吏惠和有显效者，可就增秩，勿移徙；非父母丧，不得去官。
现代文：我认为，郡太守、封国相和县令、长等官吏中，恩惠和慈爱人民有明显成效者，可以就地增加官秩，不要调动；不是因父母死亡，不让离职。
English: In my opinion, among officials such as county governors, ministers of state, county magistrates, and governors, those who have achieved significant results in favoring and loving the people can increase their ranks on the spot, do not transfer; not because of the death of their parents, do not let them leave office.

古文：其不从法禁，不式王命，锢之终身，虽会赦令，不得齿列。
现代文：而不遵守法令，不尊奉王命的人，要将其禁锢终身，不许再做官，即使遇到赦令，也不把他们包括在内。
English: Those who disobey the legal prohibition and disobey the king's order shall be ordered not to be allowed to work as an official for life. Even if they are pardoned, they shall not be ranked with good people.

古文：若被劾奏，亡不就法者，徙家边郡，以惩其后。
现代文：对于受到弹劾，就弃官逃亡，不愿接受法办的人，将他和家属放逐到边郡，以惩诫以后的赃官。
English: If the impeachment is carried out in accordance with the law, they will run away in defiance of the law and migrate to remote areas to discipline future generations.

古文：其乡部亲民之吏，皆用儒生清白任从政者，宽其负算，增其秩禄；吏职满岁，宰府州郡乃得辟举。
现代文：对于在乡、部直接和人民接触的官吏，都选用家世清白、有能力从政的儒生担任，减免他们应交的算赋，增加俸禄。任职一年以后，丞相和州郡官府才能征辟保举。
English: For officials in the townships and ministries who are in direct contact with the people, Confucian students with a clean family history and the ability to engage in politics will be selected to serve, their pay will be reduced, and their salary will be increased. After one year of service, the prime minister and the state and county government will be able to recruit and retain.

古文：如此，威福之路塞，虚伪之端绝，送迎之役损，赋敛之源息，循理之吏得成其化，率土之民各宁其所矣。 
现代文：如能这样，地方官吏作威作作福的路被堵塞，弄虚作假的端绪被断绝，送旧迎新的差役减少，横征暴敛的根源止息，奉职守法的官吏得以完成其教化，全国各地的人民就能各得其所了。 
English: If this can be done, the way for local officials to act as tyrants and do good will be blocked, the beginning of deception and falsehood will be cut off, the number of old and new officials will be reduced, the root cause of violent collection will be stopped, the officials who are on duty and abide by the law will be able to complete their enlightenment, and the people across the country will be able to get their own place.

古文：帝感其言，复申无故去官之禁，又下有司考吏治真伪，详所施行；而宦官不便，终不能行。
现代文：左雄又上书说： 孔子曰： 四十岁而不惑。 《礼记·曲礼》曰： 四十岁智力强盛，才出来做官。 
English: Zuo also wrote: Confucius said, "Don't get confused at the age of forty," and "Li Ji, Qu Li" said, "Only when you are forty years old and have a strong intellect should you become an official."

古文：雄又上言： 孔子曰： 四十不惑 ，《礼》称强仕。
现代文：请从现在开始，孝廉科的人选，年龄未满四十岁的，地方官府不得举荐。
English: Please, from now on, local governments are not allowed to recommend candidates who are under the age of forty.

古文：请自今，孝廉年不满四十，不得察举，皆先诣公府，诸生试家法，文吏课笺奏，副之端门，练其虚实，以观异能，以美风俗。
现代文：凡是被举荐的孝廉，都应先到司徒府报到。如果是儒生，则要考试他所师承的那门学问；如果是在职的文吏，则要考试起草上奏朝廷的表章。并将他们的副本，送到皇宫的端门，由尚书检查虚实，以观察他们的杰出才能，以建立良好的风气。
English: All recommended filial piety should first report to Stowe. If it is a Confucian, it is necessary to examine the field of study he has taught; if it is a clerk on duty, it is necessary to examine the drafting of the imperial seal. And send their copies to the front door of the imperial palace to check the truth and falsity by Shang Shu to observe their outstanding talents to establish a good culture.

古文：有不承科令者，正其罪法。
现代文：凡是不遵守上述规定的，依法定罪。
English: Those who do not comply with the law shall be dealt with in accordance with the law.

古文：若有茂材异行，自可不拘年齿。 
现代文：如果有特殊的才干和能力，当然也可以不限年龄。 
English: If you have special talents and abilities, of course, you can also be of any age.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：顺帝听从。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：胡广、郭虔、史敞上书驳之曰： 凡选举因才，无拘定制。
现代文：胡广、郭虔、史敞上书反驳说： 凡选举，都是根据才能，不要拘泥于某种固定的制度。
English: Hu Guang, Guo Qian and Shichang countered in a letter: All elections are based on talent, do not stick to a fixed system.

古文：六奇之策，不出经学；郑、阿之政，非必章奏；甘、奇显用，年乖强仁；终、贾扬声，亦在弱冠。
现代文：陈平六出奇计以佐高帝，不是出自儒家的经学。子产在郑国和晏子在东阿的政绩，也不一定是因为他们善于起草上奏的表章。甘罗和子奇受到重用时，年龄离四十岁还差得很远。终军和贾谊名扬天下，都在二十岁左右。
English: It is not from Confucian learning that Emperor Soko was chosen by Chen Pingrui. Zibo's political achievements in Zhengzhou and Jiazi's in East Africa were not necessarily because they were good at drafting the seal. When Ganluo and Ziqi were reused, they were far from forty years old. The final army and Jia Yi were famous all over the world, both around twenty years old.

古文：前世以来，贡举之制，莫或回革。
现代文：从前世以来，实行荐举制度，从来没有改变过。
English: Since the previous life, the implementation of the recommendation system has never changed.

古文：今以一臣之言，刬戾旧章，便利未明，众心不厌。
现代文：现在，陛下以一位臣子的建议，违背先朝的传统典章，便利并不明显，而人心不满。
English: Now, His Majesty, at the suggestion of a courtier, has violated the traditional rules of the previous dynasty. The convenience is not obvious, but the people are dissatisfied.

古文：矫枉变常，政之所重，而不访台司，不谋卿士，若事下之后，议者剥异，异之则朝失其便，同之则王言已行。
现代文：纠正错误和变更常规，是重要的政事，而既未征求三公府等有关官署的意见，也未和官员们商议；如果诏书颁下，有人会有反驳的意见。要是不准有异议，则朝廷难以实行；要是准许有异议，则圣旨已经下达。
English: Correcting mistakes and changing practices is an important political matter, but the opinions of relevant government agencies such as the three public offices have not been solicited, nor have officials been consulted. If the imperial edict is issued, there will be counter-opinions. If there are no objections, it will be difficult for the imperial court to implement; if there are objections, the imperial edict has been issued.

古文：臣愚以为可宣下百官，参其同异，然后览择胜否，详采厥衷。 
现代文：我以为，应把这件事交付百官，充分听取赞成和反对的意见，然后查找优劣，仔细地作出公允的决定。 
English: Zengwu believes that it is possible to proclaim a hundred officials, refer to their similarities and differences, and then choose their success or failure, and study their core parts in detail.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：顺帝不听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：辛卯，初令 郡国举孝廉，限年四十以上；诸生通章句，文吏能笺奏，乃得应选。
现代文：辛卯，顺帝初次命令： 郡、国荐举孝廉，限年四十岁以上；儒生必须精通儒家经典，文吏必须善于起草上奏的表章，才得应选。
English: Xinwu, Shundi's first order: the county and the country recommend the nomination of the filial piety, the age limit is more than forty years old; Confucian students must be proficient in Confucian classics, and the clerks must be good at drafting the inscribed seal, before they can be selected.

古文：其有茂才异行，若颜渊、子奇，不拘年齿。 
现代文：如果有像颜回和子奇那样的特殊才能，则不受年龄的限制。 
English: If you have a special talent like Yan Hui and Ziqi, you are not limited by age.

古文：久之，广陵所举孝廉徐淑，年未四十。
现代文：后来，广陵郡所荐举的孝廉徐淑，年龄不满四十岁。
English: Later, Xiaolian Xu Shu, who was recommended by Guangling County, was less than forty years old.

古文：台郎诘之，对曰： 诏书曰： 有如颜回、子奇，不拘年齿。 
现代文：尚书郎诘问他，他回答说： 诏书上说： 如果有像颜回和子奇一样的特殊才能，则不受年龄的限制。 
English: Shang Shulang asked him, and he replied: The edict said: If you have special talents like Yan Hui and Ziqi, you are not limited by age.

古文：是故本郡以臣充选。 
现代文：所以本郡让我来应选。 
English: That's why the county asked me to run.

古文：郎不能屈。
现代文：尚书郎无法反驳。
English: Shoshiro couldn't argue.

古文：左雄诘之曰： 昔颜回闻一知十，孝廉闻一知几邪？ 
现代文：尚书令左雄又诘问说： 颜回听到一件事，可知道十件事，孝廉听到一件事，可知道几件事呀？ 
English: Shang Shuling Zuoxiong then asked, "If Yan Hui hears one thing, can he know ten things? If Xiao Lian hears one thing, can he know several things?"

古文：淑无以对，乃罢却之。郡守坐免。
现代文：徐淑无话可说，于是，被罢黜送回故乡，郡太守也受到牵连而被免官。
English: Xu Shu had nothing to say, so he was dismissed and sent back to his hometown. The county magistrate was also implicated and dismissed.

古文：袁宏论曰：夫谋事作制，以经世训物，必使可为也。
现代文：袁宏论曰：计划一件事情，建立一项制度，用来治世教人，一定要使它可以实施才行。
English: Yuan Hong said: to plan a thing, to establish a system, to rule the world and teach people, we must make it possible to implement it.

古文：古者四十而仕，非谓弹冠之会必将是年也。以为可事之时在于强盛，故举其大限以为民衷。
现代文：古人所说的四十岁而做官，不是说一定要四十岁才可以做官；而是认为当官之时应在强盛之年，所以举出一个大的界限，以作为一般人的适中标准。
English: What the ancients said about becoming an official at the age of forty did not mean that one must be forty to become an official; rather, they believed that the time to become an official should be in the years of prosperity, so they set a large limit as a moderate standard for the average person.

古文：且颜渊、子奇，旷代一有，而欲以斯为格，岂不偏乎！
现代文：况且，颜回、子奇，乃是一代奇才，而要用他们作标准，岂不太偏了吗？
English: Moreover, Yan Hui and Zi Qi are a generation of prodigies, and to use them as a standard, isn't it too biased?

古文：然雄公直精明，能审核真伪，决志行之。
现代文：然而左雄公正精明，能洞察真伪，坚决地推行自己的主张。
English: However, Zuo Xiong is fair and astute, can discern truth from falsehood, and resolutely pursues his own ideas.

古文：顷之，胡广出为济阴太守，与诸郡守十馀人皆坐谬举免黜；唯汝南陈蕃、颍川李膺、下邳陈球等三十馀人得拜郎中。
现代文：不久，胡广出任济阴郡太守，他与其他郡的太守共十余人，都因为受到荐举不实的指控，或被免职，或被贬黜。在被荐举的孝廉中，仅有汝南郡人陈蕃、颍川人李膺、下邳人陈球等三十余人，被任命为郎中。
English: Soon after, Hu Guang was appointed as the governor of Jilin County. He and more than ten other governors of other counties were dismissed or demoted because of false accusations. Among the recommended filial piety, only more than thirty people, including Chen Yao from Runan County, Li Yao from Zhangchuan County, and Chen Gu from Heshan County, were appointed as vice-governors.

古文：自是牧、守畏栗，莫敢轻举。
现代文：从此以后，州牧和郡太守深怀恐惧，不敢轻率举荐。
English: Since then, the prefectural and county magistrates have been deeply afraid of recommending him.

古文：迄于永嘉，察选清平，多得其人。
现代文：直到永嘉年间，举荐和选拔，始终清廉公正，国家得到了很多人才。
English: Until the Yongjia years, the recommendation and selection were always clean and fair, and the country got a lot of talents.

古文：闰月，庚子，恭陵百丈庑灾。
现代文：闰月庚子，安帝陵园恭陵寝殿百丈庑，发生火灾。
English: In the leap month of Geng Zi, there was a fire at the Andi Mausoleum.

古文：上闻北海郎顗精于阴阳之学。
现代文：顺帝听说北海国人郎精通阴阳之学。
English: Shunde heard that Hokkai Kunichiro was proficient in the study of yin and yang.

古文：孝顺皇帝上阳嘉二年
现代文：阳嘉二年
English: The second year of Yangjia

古文：春，正月，诏公车征顗，问以灾异。
现代文：春季，正月，顺帝下诏，命公车征召郎，询问有关天象变异之事。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Shun issued an edict, ordering a bus to call for envoys to inquire about celestial phenomena.

古文：顗上章曰： 三公上应台阶，不同元首，政失其道，则寒阴反节。
现代文：郎上书说： 三公在上与天之台阶相应，在下和帝王同等重要，政治离开正道，则寒阴违反时节。
English: The letter from the retainer said: The three princes correspond to the steps of heaven in the upper world, and are as important as the emperor in the lower world. If politics deviates from the right path, then the cold will violate the seasons.

古文：今之在位，竞托高虚，纳累钟之奉，亡天下之忧。
现代文：现在身居朝廷显职的人，只知争相请托，谋求高位，享受丰厚的俸禄，却不知忧国忧民。
English: Those who now occupy prominent positions in the imperial court only know how to vie for favors, seek high positions, and enjoy rich salaries, but they do not know how to care for the country and the people.

古文：栖迟偃仰，寝疾自逸，被策文，得赐钱，即复起矣，何疾之易而愈之速！
现代文：他们整日养尊处优，无所事事，甚至佯装卧病在床，贪图安逸，可是，一旦接到封官授爵的策书，能得到皇帝的赐钱时，则会重新从病床上爬起来了。患病为何那么容易而痊愈又那么迅速！
English: They are pampered all day long, have nothing to do, and even pretend to be ill in bed, yearning for comfort, but once they receive a knighthood and receive money from the emperor, they will get up from their sickbeds again. Why is illness so easy and healing so quick!

古文：以此消伏灾眚，兴致升平，其可得乎！
现代文：采取这种态度，想要消除灾难，建立太平盛世，怎么能够作到？
English: With such an attitude, how can we hope to eliminate disasters and establish a peaceful and prosperous world?

古文：今选牧、守，委任三府；长吏不良，既咎州、郡，州、郡有失，岂得不归责举者！
现代文：现在举荐州牧和郡太守，全都委托三公负责。既然州郡属吏不能称职，就责备州牧和郡太守；那么州牧和郡太守有过失，又为何不去责备举荐他们的人？
English: Since the state and county officials are not competent, they blame the state and county magistrates; then the state and county magistrates are at fault, so why not blame the people who recommended them?

古文：而陛下崇之弥优，自下慢事愈甚，所谓 大网疏，小网数 。
现代文：而陛下不仅不责备举荐者，反而更加优待他们，这就滋长他们怠慢政事的劣习，愈演愈烈。正如俗语所说： 大网疏，小网密， 即朝廷要求三公过于宽缓，而责备州牧、郡太守，又过于严急。
English: And His Majesty not only did not reproach the recommenders, but treated them more favourably, which fostered their bad habit of neglecting political affairs, which became more and more intense. As the saying goes: big net, small net, that is, the Imperial Court demanded the three princes to be too lenient, but reproached the State Pastor and the County Governor to be too strict.

古文：三公非臣之仇，臣非狂夫之作，所以发愤忘食，恳恳不已者，诚念朝廷欲致兴平。
现代文：三公不是我的仇人，我也不是疯子在这里发狂，我所以发愤忘食，不断地恳切陈辞的原因，实在是惦念朝廷，希望达到兴盛和太平。
English: The three great lords are not my enemies, and I am not a madman who has gone mad here. The reason why I have lost my appetite in anger and continue to speak out earnestly is because I miss the imperial court and hope to achieve prosperity and peace.

古文：臣书不择言，死不敢恨！ 
现代文：我的奏书不选择言词，我就是死，也不敢怨恨！ 
English: My playbook does not choose words, I am death, and I dare not hold a grudge!

古文：因条便宜七事： 一，园陵火灾，宜念百姓之劳，罢缮修之役。
现代文：于是，向朝廷提出七项建议： 一，皇帝坟墓园陵失火，应该体恤老百性的劳苦，停止修缮的差役。
English: As a result, seven suggestions were made to the imperial court: First, since the emperor's tomb and garden had caught fire, it was necessary to sympathize with the hardships of the common people and stop the repair work.

古文：二，立春以后阴寒失节，宜采纳良臣，以助圣化。
现代文：二，立春以后，气候阴寒，不合时节，应该选择良臣，辅佐圣王教化。
English: Second, after the first day of spring, when the weather is gloomy and cold, and the time is not right, it is necessary to choose a good minister to assist the sage king in his enlightenment.

古文：三，今年少阳之岁，春当旱，夏必有水，宜遵前典，惟节惟约。
现代文：三，今年是少阳之年，春季当有旱灾，夏季必有水患，应该遵照以前的典章制度，厉行节约。
English: Third, this year is the year of Shaoyang, in spring there will be droughts, in summer there will be floods, we should follow the previous system of regulations and strictly implement economy.

古文：四，去年八月，荧惑出入轩辕，宜简出宫女，恣其姻嫁。
现代文：四，去年八月，火星出入轩辕星座，应该挑选合乎释放条件的宫女出宫，准许她们自由婚嫁。
English: Fourth, in August last year, when Mars entered and exited the constellation of Cancer, it was necessary to select the maids of honor who met the conditions for release and allow them to marry freely.

古文：五，去年闰十月，有白气从西方天苑趋参左足，入玉井，恐立秋以后，将有羌寇畔戾之患，宜豫宣告诸郡，严为备御。
现代文：五，去年闰十月，有白色的云气从西方天苑星座向着参宿的左足移动，进入玉井星座，恐怕立秋以后，将有西羌进犯和反叛，应该事先通知有关各郡，严加守备防御。
English: Fifth, last leap October, there was a white cloud moving from the western constellation of the Celestial Garden to the left foot of Betelgeuse, entering the constellation of Tamai. I am afraid that after the beginning of autumn, there will be the invasion and rebellion of the Western Dragon. It is necessary to inform the relevant counties in advance and strictly prepare for defense.

古文：六，今月十四日乙卯，白虹贯日，宜令中外官司，并须立秋然后考事。
现代文：六，本月十四日乙卯，白色的虹穿过太阳，应该下令朝廷和地方官府，一律等到立秋以后，再审理诉讼。
English: Sixth, on the 14th day of this month, when a white rainbow crosses the sun, the imperial court and local government offices should be ordered to wait until after the beginning of autumn to hear the lawsuit.

古文：七，汉兴以来三百三十九岁，于诗三期，宜大蠲法令，有所变更。
现代文：七，汉朝建立以来，迄今三百三十九年，已经超过了三个周期，应该大幅度删除修改法令，有所变更。
English: Seventh, since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, so far three hundred and thirty-nine years, has exceeded three cycles, it is necessary to significantly delete the amended laws and regulations and make some changes.

古文：王者随天，譬犹自春徂夏，改青服绛也。
现代文：圣明的君王，应该顺应天心，犹如由春入夏，大地脱去青色衣服，改穿绛色衣服。
English: The kings of the saints should follow the will of Heaven, just as the earth takes off its blue clothes and puts on its indigo clothes from spring to summer.

古文：自文帝省刑，适三百年，而轻微之禁，渐已殷积。
现代文：自从文帝减轻刑罚，已三百年了，然而那些微小的禁令，已渐渐积少成多。
English: It has been exactly three hundred years since Emperor Hanwen reduced corporal punishment, and the slight ban has gradually increased.

古文：王者之法，譬犹江、河，当使易避而难犯也。 
现代文：圣明君王的法令，犹如长江和黄河，应该使百姓容易避开，而难于冒犯。 
English: The edicts of the Sage-King, like the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers, should be easy for the people to avoid, but difficult to offend.

古文：二月，顗复上书荐黄琼、李固，以为宜加擢用。
现代文：二月，郎再次上书举荐黄琼、李固，认为朝廷应对他们二人加以擢用。
English: In February, Lang once again sent a letter recommending Huang Qiong and Li Gu, believing that the imperial court should promote them both.

古文：又言： 自冬涉春，讫无嘉泽，数有西风，反逆时节，朝廷劳心，广为祷祈，荐祭山川，暴龙移市。
现代文：又说： 自去冬到今春，一直没有降雨，并且多次刮西风，违反了时节，朝廷忧虑，到处祈祷，祭祀山川，在烈日之下，舞龙过市，祈求上天降雨。
English: He also said: From last winter to this spring, there has been no rain, and the west wind has blown many times, violating the seasons, the worries of the court, praying everywhere, sacrificing mountains and rivers, under the hot sun, dancing dragons passing through the city, and praying to heaven for rain.

古文：臣闻皇天感物，不为伪动；灾变应人，要在责己。
现代文：我曾经听说，上天虽然爱护万物，但决不会为虚伪的祈求所感动。灾异是针对人世而降的，最重要的在于责备自己。
English: I once heard that although God loves all things, He will never be moved by false prayers. Disasters are sent to the world, and the most important thing is to blame yourself.

古文：若令雨可请降，水可攘止，则岁无隔并，太平可待。
现代文：如果人们一祈求天就降雨，或者一祭祀就没有水灾，岂不是年年丰收，太平可以坐到？
English: If the rain can please fall, and the water can be stopped, then the years are not separated, and the Taiping Year can wait.

古文：然而灾害不息者，患不在此也。 
现代文：然而，灾害所以不能停息，是由于病源并不在这里。 
English: However, as disasters continue, it is clear that the problem is not here.

古文：书奏，特拜郎中；辞病不就。
现代文：奏忆呈上后，顺帝拜授郎为郎中，郎称病，不肯就职。
English: After the report was submitted, Shun Di worshiped his son as his son-in-law. The son-in-law claimed to be ill and refused to take office.

古文：三月，使匈奴中郎将赵稠遣从事将南匈奴兵出塞击鲜卑，破之。
现代文：三月，使匈奴中郎将赵稠派从事率南匈奴军队，出塞攻击鲜卑部落，将其击破。
English: In mid-March, the Xiongnu leader sent Zhao Zeguo to lead the Southern Xiongnu army to attack the Xianbei tribe and defeat them.

古文：初，帝之立也，乳母宋娥与其谋，帝封娥为山阳君，又封执金吾梁商子冀为襄邑侯。
现代文：当初，顺帝被立为皇帝，奶妈宋娥曾参与密谋，顺帝便封她为山阳君。另外，又封执金吾梁商的儿子梁冀为襄邑侯。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Shun was made emperor. His wet nurse, Song E, had been involved in the conspiracy, and Emperor Shun then made her Sanyang Jun. In addition, he also made Liang Ji, the son of the merchant Jingu Liang, the lord of Xiangyun.

古文：尚书令左雄上封事曰： 高皇帝约，非刘氏不王，非有功不侯。
现代文：尚书令左雄上密封奏章说： 高帝曾经约定，非姓刘的不封王，非有功的不封侯。
English: Shang Shu ordered Zuo Xiong to seal the record, saying: Emperor Gao once agreed that no one with the surname Liu would be crowned king, and no one with meritorious deeds would be crowned prince.

古文：孝安皇帝封江京、王圣等，遂致地震之异。
现代文：安帝封江京、王圣等人，于是导致地震的灾异。
English: Emperor Xiao'an fenced Jiangjing, Wang Sheng, and so on, which caused the earthquake disaster.

古文：永建二年封阴谋之功，又有日食之变。
现代文：永建二年赐封参与密谋的功臣时，又有日食的灾变。
English: In the second year of Yong Jian, when the title was conferred on the meritorious person who participated in the conspiracy, there was also a cataclysm of a solar eclipse.

古文：数术之士，咸归咎于封爵。
现代文：天文、历法和占卜之士都把这些灾害的原因归罪于封爵。
English: Some yin and yang superstitious people have blamed these strange things on the feudal lord.

古文：今青州饥虚，盗贼未息，诚不宜追寻小恩，亏失大典。 
现代文：而今，青州正发生饥馑，盗贼还没有平息，实在不应该顾念小恩，而使大典受到伤害。 
English: But now, there is a famine in Qingzhou, and the thieves have not calmed down. It is really not right to think about small favors and cause great harm to a great man.

古文：诏不听。
现代文：顺帝下诏，不予听从。
English: Singing is not allowed.

古文：雄复谏曰： 臣闻人君莫不好忠正而恶谗谀，然而历世之患，莫不以忠正得罪，谗谀蒙幸者，盖听忠难，从谀易也。
现代文：左雄再次进谏说： 我曾听说，虽然没有一个君主，不喜爱忠良正直，而厌恶阿谀谄媚。然而，历代的忧患，无不是由于忠良正直而获罪，而阿谀谄媚的受宠。这大概是因为听忠直的言词困难，听阿谀奉承的话容易的缘故。
English: Zuo Xiong again said, "I have heard that although there is no monarch who does not like loyalty and honesty, but abhors flattery. However, the sorrow of all ages is not because of loyalty and honesty, but flattery. This is probably because it is difficult to listen to honest words and easy to listen to flattery.

古文：夫刑罪，人情之所甚恶，贵宠，人情之所甚欲，是以时俗为忠者少而习谀者多。
现代文：犯罪服刑，甚为人心所厌恶；而富贵宠荣，甚为人心所喜好，所以，时俗风气都是做忠良正直的人少，习惯阿谀谄媚的人多。
English: Serving a criminal sentence is highly repugnant to people's hearts, while being rich and famous is highly favored by people's hearts. Therefore, there are fewer people who are loyal and honest, and more people who are used to flattery.

古文：故令人主数闻其美，稀知其过，迷而不悟，以至于危亡。
现代文：因此，让君主经常听到的，都是为他歌功颂德的话，而批评他的过错的话，却很难听到，君主执迷不悟，以至于危亡。
English: Therefore, the words of praise for his merits are often heard by the monarch, but the words of criticism of his faults are difficult to hear, and the monarch is so obsessed that he is in danger of dying.

古文：臣伏见诏书，顾念阿母旧德宿恩，欲特加显赏。
现代文：我拜读诏书，陛下眷念乳母宋娥过去的恩德，要特别加以重赏。
English: I read the imperial rescript. Your Majesty remembers the past kindness of your nanny, Song E, and I would like to especially appreciate it.

古文：案尚书故事，无乳母爵邑之制，唯先帝时阿母王圣为野王君，圣造生谗贼废立之祸，生为天下所咀嚼，死为海内所欢快。
现代文：但是，根据尚书台所掌握的成例，没有给乳母封爵食邑的制度，只有先帝时曾封乳母王圣为野王君，而王圣造谣陷害，酿成了罢黜皇太子的大祸。她在世时，遭到天下人的诅咒；身死时，天下人无不拍手称快。
English: However, according to the precedents of the Shang Shudai, there is no system of knighting the nanny. Only the former emperor had knighted the nanny Wang Sheng as a wild prince, and Wang Sheng set up a rumor, which led to the great disaster of ousting the crown prince. When she was alive, she was cursed by the people of the world; when she died, people all over the world applauded.

古文：桀、纣贵为天子，而庸仆羞与为比者，以其无义也；夷、齐贱为匹夫，而王侯争与为伍者，以其有德也。
现代文：夏桀王和商纣王贵为天子，可是，连奴仆都羞于与他们为伍，是因为他们暴虐无道。伯夷和叔齐是卑贱小民，而王侯都争着与他们为伍，是因为他们有崇高的品德。
English: The king of the Harsha and the king of the merchants are noble sons of heaven, but even the slaves are ashamed to be with them, because they are violent and have no morals. Bo Yi and Uncle Qi are lowly commoners, but the princes are fighting to be with them, because they have lofty morals.

古文：今阿母躬蹈俭约，以身率下，群僚蒸庶，莫不向风。
现代文：而今，乳母宋娥亲身实行节俭，以身作则，朝廷文武百官和全国百姓，无不闻风仰慕。
English: Today, Song E, the wet nurse, personally practices thrift and leads by example, and is admired by hundreds of court officials and ordinary people throughout the country.

古文：而与王圣并同爵号，惧违本操，失其常愿。
现代文：而竟然和王圣一样，封爵赐号，恐怕违背她本人的节操，不是她的宿愿。
English: But to be knighted, as was the case with Wang Sheng, I'm afraid goes against her own principles, not her long-cherished wish.

古文：臣愚以为凡人之心，理不相远，其所不安，古今一也。
现代文：我认为，凡是人心，按理都不会相差很远，乳母也会于心不安，古今是一样的。
English: I thought that people are all the same, the truth will not be too far apart, everything that is wrong, ancient and modern knowledge are the same.

古文：百姓深惩王圣倾覆之祸，民萌之命危于累卵，常惧时世复有此类，怵惕之念未离于心，恐惧之言未绝乎口。
现代文：百姓对于王圣颠覆国家的祸害，记忆犹深，人民的性命，危如累卵，常常害怕今世会再出现王圣这类人，警惕之心并没有消失，恐惧之言还在口中不断地议论。
English: The people still remember the evil of Wang Sheng's subversion of the country. People's lives are in danger. They are often afraid that people like Wang Sheng will appear again in this world. The vigilance has not disappeared, and the words of fear are still in their mouths.

古文：乞如前议，岁以千万给奉阿母，内足以尽恩爱之欢，外可不为吏民所怪。
现代文：请求陛下采纳我从前的建议，每年供奉乳母一千万钱，对内足以尽恩爱的欢娱，对外可以不遭到吏民的责怪。
English: Please continue to pay tens of millions of money to my mother every year as previously agreed. On the one hand, you have done your best, and on the other hand, you will not be blamed by the officials and the people.

古文：梁冀之封，事非机急，宜过灾顾之运，然后平议可否。 
现代文：梁冀的封爵不是紧急的事，应该等到度过这段灾难时期，然后讨论是否可行。 
English: Liang Jie's knighthood is not an urgent matter. We should wait until we get through this disaster period, and then discuss whether it is feasible.

古文：于是冀父商让还冀封；书十馀上，帝乃从之。
现代文：于是，梁冀的父亲梁商，辞退朝廷给梁冀的封爵，前后上书十余次，顺帝才允许。
English: As a result, Liang Jie's father, Liang Shang, refused the knighthood given to Liang Jie by the imperial court, and submitted more than ten letters back and forth, which was only allowed by Emperor Shun.

古文：夏，四月，己亥，京师地震。
现代文：夏季，四月己亥，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In the summer, in April, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：五月，庚子，诏群公、卿士各直言厥咎，仍各举敦朴士一人。
现代文：五月庚子，顺帝下诏，命三公、九卿等朝廷大臣，对朝政直言不讳地提出批评，并各向朝廷荐举一名淳真朴实之士。
English: In May, Geng Zi, Shun Emperor issued an edict, ordering the three princes, nine nobles and other imperial ministers to criticize the imperial government bluntly, and each of them recommended an honest and simple person to the imperial court.

古文：左雄复上疏曰： 先帝封野王君，汉阳地震，今封山阳君而京城复震，专政在阴，其灾尤大。
现代文：左雄又上书说： 先帝封王圣为野王君，汉阳郡发生地震，而今陛下封宋娥为山阳君，京都洛阳以发生地震。女人握权，灾难尤其严重。
English: Zuo also wrote: The previous emperor named Wang Sheng as the wild king, and an earthquake occurred in Hanyang County, but now His Majesty named Song E as the mountain king, and an earthquake occurred in Luoyang, Kyoto. Women hold power, and the disaster is particularly serious.

古文：臣前后瞽言，封爵至重，王者可私人以财，不可以官，宜还阿母之封以塞灾异。
现代文：我前后说了许多犹如瞎子一样的妄言，是为了提醒陛下注意，封爵是一件至关重要的事情。帝王可以因私情赏人钱财，不可以因私情赏人官爵，应该让乳母宋娥归还封爵，用以堵塞灾异。
English: I said a lot of things like a blind man, in order to remind His Majesty that the knighthood is a very important thing. The emperor can reward people with money for personal reasons, but he can't reward people with a knighthood for personal reasons. He should have his nanny Song E return the knighthood to stop the disaster.

古文：今冀已高让，山阳君亦宜崇其本节。 
现代文：而今，梁冀已经高姿态地让还封爵，山阳君也应该尊重她原本的节操。 
English: But now, Liang Jie has made a high gesture to return the knighthood, and Sanyang should also respect her original discipline.

古文：雄言切至，娥亦畏惧辞让。
现代文：由于左雄措辞至为激烈恳切，宋娥也很畏惧，表示辞让。
English: Because Zuo Xiong's wording was so fierce and earnest, Song E was also afraid and expressed his resignation.

古文：而帝恋恋不能已，卒封之。
现代文：可是，顺帝仍眷恋不已，终于赐封。
English: However, Emperor Shun was still attached to him, and finally granted him a seal.

古文：是时，大司农刘据以职事被谴，召诣尚书，传呼促步，又加以捶扑。
现代文：这时，大司农刘据因职事受到谴责。他应召到尚书台，被人大声吆喝催促快走，还遭到殴打。
English: At this time, the chief secretary, farmer Liu Yiming, was reprimanded for dereliction of duty. He was called to Shangshu, called out loudly, and beaten.

古文：雄上言： 九卿位亚三事，班在大臣，行有佩玉之节，动有庠序之仪。
现代文：左雄上书说： 九卿的地位，仅次于三公，在大臣行列中，行有佩玉的礼节，动有学校的礼仪。
English: Zuo wrote: The status of the Nine Lords is second only to that of the Three Princes. In the ranks of the ministers, there is the etiquette of the Peiyu and the etiquette of the school.

古文：孝明皇帝始有扑罚，皆非古典。 
现代文：明帝时，才开始有扑打大臣的处罚，但全不是古典的制度。 
English: In the Ming Dynasty, the punishment of whipping the minister began, but it was not a classical system.

古文：帝纳之，是后九卿无复捶扑者。
现代文：顺帝采纳。从此，九卿不再受到殴打。
English: Emperor Shun accepted. From then on, the nine nobles were no longer beaten.

古文：戊午，司空王龚免。
现代文：戊午，司空王龚被免官。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Sikuo Wang Yao was removed from his post.

古文：六月，辛未，以太常鲁国孔扶为司空。
现代文：六月辛未，擢升太常、鲁国人孔扶为司空。
English: In June, Shingwei was promoted to Taizhong, and Kongfu, a native of Lu, was promoted to Sifu.

古文：丁丑，洛阳宣德亭地坼，长八十五丈；帝引公卿所举敦朴之士，使之对策，及特问以当世之敝，为政所宜。
现代文：丁丑，京都洛阳的宣德亭发生地裂，长八十五丈。于是，顺帝召集三公九卿荐举的淳真朴实之士，让他们对策，并特别向他们询问当代的弊病和应该如何为政。
English: In Dingushi, the Xuande Pavilion in Luoyang, Kyoto, suffered a crack in the floor, which was eighty-five meters long. Therefore, Emperor Shun summoned the honest and simple people recommended by the three princes and nine nobles to let them countermeasures, and asked them in particular about the contemporary ills and how politics should be conducted.

古文：李固对曰： 前孝安皇帝变乱旧典，封爵阿母，因造妖孽，改乱嫡嗣，至令圣躬狼狈，亲遇其艰。
现代文：李固回答说： 从前，安帝破坏传统的典章制度，赐给乳母王圣封爵，因而使王圣得以兴风作浪，竟至改变皇太了的继承地位，以致使陛下陷于危境，亲遇艰险。
English: Li Gu replied, "Once upon a time, Emperor An destroyed the traditional system of awards and conferred a title of nobility on the king's wet nurse, thereby enabling the king to stir up trouble and even change the position of succession of the empress dowager, so that his majesty was in a perilous situation and faced hardships.

古文：既拔自困殆，龙兴即位，天下喁喁，属望风政。
现代文：现在，陛下既已摆脱困境，高升帝位，天下人民，抬头张口，渴望善政。
English: Since he emerged from the crisis and became the emperor, people all over the world have been looking up to him, hoping for a change in the style of government.

古文：积敝之后，易致中兴，诚当沛然思惟善道，而论者犹云 方今之事，复同于前 。
现代文：政治腐败到了极点之后，反而容易成就中兴大业。诚然应该放宽胸襟，谋求实行善政。可是，人们还是议论说：现在的事，仍是跟从前一个样。
English: After political corruption has reached the extreme, it is easy to achieve the great cause of ZTE. It is true that we should relax our minds and seek to implement good governance. However, people still argue that the current situation is still the same as before.

古文：臣伏在草泽，痛心伤臆！
现代文：我在草泽民间，听到这种议论，痛彻心肝！
English: I'm in Kusawa folk, hear this kind of talk, heartbroken!

古文：实以汉兴以来三百馀年，贤圣相继十有八主，岂无阿乳之恩，岂忘贵爵之宠？
现代文：自从汉王朝建立，迄今已有三百余年，圣贤世代相继，共有十八位帝王，有哪一位帝王没有乳母的恩情？
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it has been more than three hundred years so far. There have been successive generations of sages, with a total of eighteen emperors. Is there any emperor who does not have the grace of a nanny?

古文：然上畏天威，俯案经典，知义不可，故不封也。
现代文：难道都不知道给乳母尊贵的封爵？只是因为畏惧上天的威严，而又考查经典，在大义上不许可这样做，所以，才没有赐给乳母封爵。
English: However, the above is afraid of Tianwei, and the below, according to the classics, knows that it is impossible to violate morality, so there is no reward.

古文：今宋阿母虽有大功、勤谨之德，但加赏赐，足以酬其劳苦；至于裂土开国，实乖旧典。
现代文：现在，宋乳母虽有大功，而又有勤劳谨慎的大德，但是只要加以赏赐，就足够报答她的劳苦。如果分割土地，建立封国，的确是违背汉朝的传统制度。
English: Now, although the Song wet nurse has great merits, but also has the virtue of diligence and prudence, but as long as it is rewarded, it is enough to repay her hard work. If the land is divided and the country is established, it is indeed contrary to the traditional system of the Han Dynasty.

古文：闻阿母体性谦虚，必有逊让，陛下宜许其辞国之高，使成万安之福。
现代文：听说宋乳母秉性谦虚，定会辞让，陛下应该赞许她辞让封国的高贵品德，使她成全万安之福。
English: It is said that Lady Song is modest by nature and will make concessions. His Majesty should commend her for her noble character of making concessions and allowing the country to be named after her, so that she can achieve the blessing of peace.

古文：夫妃、后之家所以少完全者，岂天性当然？
现代文：皇后、妃妾之家，所以很少能够保全的原因，难道是他们天性自然邪恶？
English: The reason why the homes of queens, concubines, and concubines are so rarely preserved is that they are inherently evil.

古文：但以爵位尊显，颛总权柄，天道恶盈，不知自损，故致颠仆。
现代文：只不过是因为他们封爵太尊，官位太高，又总揽权柄。天道厌恶满盈，而他们却不知道自我克制，所以导致衰败。
English: It is only because they are too high-ranking, too high-ranking, and they always grab power. The sky is full of disgust, but they do not know self-restraint, so it leads to decay.

古文：先帝宠遇阎氏，位号太疾，故其受祸曾不旋时，《老子》曰： 其进锐者其退速也。 
现代文：先帝宠爱阎皇后及其家属，封爵和官位赏赐得太快，所以不久就遭受大祸。正如《老子》所说： 凡是前进太快的，后退也一定很快。 
English: The previous emperor favored the Queen of Hell and her family. He rewarded them with peerages and official positions too quickly, so they soon suffered a great calamity. As "Lao Zi" said: If you advance too quickly, you must also retreat quickly.

古文：今梁氏戚为椒房，礼所不臣，尊以高爵，尚可然也；而子弟群从，荣显兼加，永平、建初故事，殆不如此。
现代文：现在，梁商的女儿身为皇后，按照《礼经》所说，天子不把妻子的父母当作臣属。所以，对梁商本人尊之以高爵，还是可以的。然而，梁家的子弟晚辈却兼有荣耀和显贵，明帝永平年间和章帝建初年间的旧例，恐怕不是这样的。
English: Now that Liang Shang's daughter is the empress, according to the Book of Etiquette, the emperor does not treat his wife's parents as subordinates. Therefore, it is still possible to honor Liang Shang himself with a high rank. However, the children of the Liang family are both glorious and distinguished. The old example during the Ming Dynasty Yongping and the early years of Zhang Di Jian is probably not the case.

古文：宜令步兵校尉冀及诸侍中还居黄门之官，使权去外戚，政归国家，岂不休乎！
现代文：陛下应该命步兵校尉梁冀，以及梁氏家族中担任侍中的人，仍退回到原来所居的黄门之官，使权力离开外戚，归还国家，岂不是一项美政？
English: His Majesty should order the infantry captain Liang Ji, as well as the Liang family members who served as attendants, to return to the Yellow Gate official who originally lived there, so that the power would leave the foreign relative and return to the country. Isn't it a beautiful policy?

古文：又，诏书所以禁侍中、尚书、中臣子弟不得为吏、察孝廉者，以其秉威权，容请托故也。
现代文：再说，诏书之所以禁止侍中、尚书以及宫廷中其他官吏的子弟，不得为吏、不得被州郡官府举荐为孝廉，是因为他们手中把持着威势和权力，可以私相请托的缘故。
English: Furthermore, the reason why the edict forbade the sons of attendants, court officials and other officials in the court from becoming officials and being recommended by the state and county government as filial piety is because they hold the power and authority in their hands and can solicit each other.

古文：而中常侍在日月之侧，声势振天下，子弟禄任，曾无限极，虽外托谦默，不干州郡，而谄伪之徒，望风进举。
现代文：而中常侍在皇帝和皇后身边，其声名和威势震动天下，他们的子弟享受俸禄，担任官职，都没有限度。尽管中常侍表面上保持谦让和沉默，不干预州郡官府，然而谄媚之徒望风举荐他们的子弟。
English: While the middle attendants were at the side of the emperor and the empress, their fame and prestige shook the world, and their children enjoyed salaries and held official positions without limits. Although the middle attendants remained modest and silent on the surface, and did not interfere with the state and county government, however, the flatterers looked to the wind to recommend their children.

古文：今可为设常禁，同之中臣。
现代文：因此，从现在起，也应该为他们设立固定的禁令，和宫廷中其他官吏一样。
English: Therefore, from now on, a permanent ban should be established for them, as well as for other officials of the court.

古文：昔馆陶公主为子求郎，明帝不许，赐钱千万，所以轻厚赐，重薄位者，为官人失才，害及百姓也。
现代文：过去，馆陶公主请求任命她的儿子为郎，明帝没有答应，仅赏给她一千万钱。明帝之所以不在乎巨额赏赐，而在乎小小官位，是因为如果任命官吏失才，将会危害百姓。
English: In the past, Princess Guantao asked Emperor Ming to appoint her son as his heir, but Emperor Ming did not agree and only awarded her ten million yuan. The reason why Emperor Ming did not care about a huge reward, but cared about a small official position, was because appointing incompetent officials would harm the people.

古文：窃闻长水司马武宣、开阳城门候羊迪等，无它功德，初拜便真，此虽小失而渐坏旧章。
现代文：我又听说，长水司马武宣、开阳城门候羊迪等，没有其他的功劳和品德，刚一任命，没有经过试守一年，便直接担任官职，这虽然只是小的失误，但却逐渐破坏了过去的规章。
English: I also heard that Changshui Sima Wuxuan, Kaiyang City Gate Keeper Yang Di, and so on, have no other merits and virtues. As soon as they were appointed, they did not go through a one-year probation, but directly assumed official positions. Although this is only a small mistake, it has gradually destroyed the rules of the past.

古文：先圣法度，所宜坚守，故政教一跌，百年不复。
现代文：先朝圣王制订的法令制度，后代君主应该坚决遵守，无论政事或教化，一旦遭到破坏，一百年都难恢复。
English: Future generations of monarchs should resolutely abide by the system of laws and ordinances established by the previous pilgrim king. Once it is destroyed, it will be difficult to restore it for a hundred years, regardless of political affairs or education.

古文：《诗》云： 上帝板板，下民卒瘅 ，刺周王变祖法度，故使下民将尽病也。
现代文：《诗经》说： 上天反反复复，百姓尽受劳苦。 用以讽刺周厉王擅自改变祖宗的法令制度，使下民都深受其害。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The heavens have repeated themselves, and the people have suffered great hardships," which is used to satirize the fact that King Zhou Li arbitrarily changed the legal system of the ancestors, causing the people to suffer greatly.

古文：今陛下之有尚书，犹天之有北斗也。
现代文：而今，陛下有尚书，就像上天有北斗。
English: But now, His Majesty has Shangshu, just as the heavens have the Big Dipper.

古文：斗为天喉舌，尚书亦为陛下喉舌。
现代文：北斗是上天的喉舌，尚书也是陛下的喉舌。
English: Beidou is the mouthpiece of heaven, and Shangshu is the mouthpiece of His Majesty.

古文：斗斟酌元气，运乎四时；尚书出纳王命，赋政四海，权尊势重，责之所归，若不平心，灾眚必至，诚宜审择其人，以毘圣政。
现代文：北斗掌握元气，运行四时。尚书接受天下奏章，传达君王诏命，将政令颁布到全国，权力至大，威势至重，责任至巨，如果尚书不公平正直，灾难一定降临，的确应该审慎加以选任，使尚书能辅佐君王，推行善政。
English: The Beidou grasps the vitality and runs for four hours. Shangshu accepts the world's record, conveys the king's edict, and promulgates the decree to the whole country. The power is the greatest, the authority is the most important, and the responsibility is the greatest. If Shangshu is unfair and honest, disaster will surely come. Indeed, it should be carefully selected, so that Shangshu can assist the king and promote good governance.

古文：今与陛下共天下者，外则公、卿、尚书，内则常侍、黄门，譬犹一门之内，一家之事，安则共其福庆，危则通其祸败。
现代文：而今，和陛下共同治理天下的官吏，在朝廷，则有三公、九卿、诸位尚书，在宫廷，则有常侍、黄门，犹如一个大门之内的一家之事，平安时大家共同享福，危亡时大家共同遭殃。
English: Today, the officials who govern the world together with His Majesty, in the Imperial Court, there are the Three Princes, the Nine Lords and Ladies of Letters, and in the Imperial Court, there are the regular attendants and the Yellow Gate. It is like a family within a gate. When it is safe, we all enjoy happiness, and when it is dangerous, we all suffer misfortune.

古文：刺史、二千石，外统职事，内受法则。
现代文：州刺史和郡太守、封国相，对外代表朝廷统管职事，对内受朝廷法制的约束。
English: With a long history and 2,000 koku, he is in charge of official duties on the outside, but is subject to the law on the inside.

古文：夫表曲者景必邪，源清者流必洁，犹叩树本，百枝皆动也。
现代文：标竿弯曲，测出的日影必然歪斜；水源明澈，水流必然清洁，犹如一敲击树根，整棵树的枝叶都会摇动。
English: The surface of any thing is distorted, the shadow must be oblique, the source of clear flowing water must be clean, it is equal to knocking the roots of the tree, and all the branches are shaken.

古文：由此言之，本朝号令，岂可蹉跌！
现代文：这样说来，朝廷号令，岂能失误？
English: In this light, can the imperial command be wrong?

古文：天下之纪纲，当今之急务也。
现代文：维护治理天下的法令和制度，是当今最迫切的任务。
English: Upholding the laws and systems that govern the world is today's most urgent task.

古文：夫人君之有政，犹水之有堤坊。
现代文：君王管理妥善，犹如河川之有堤防。
English: A king well-governed is like a river with a dike.

古文：堤坊完全，虽遭雨水霖潦，不能为变。
现代文：堤防完整，虽遭连绵大雨和水涝，也不会成灾。
English: The dike is complete, and although it is subject to continuous heavy rain and floods, it will not become a disaster.

古文：政教一立，暂遭凶年，不足为忧。
现代文：政事和教化一经确立，即令暂时遇到荒年，也不必忧虑。
English: Once political affairs and education have been established, there is no need to worry even if there is a temporary famine.

古文：诚令堤防穿漏，万夫同力，不能复救；政教一坏，贤智驰鹜，不能复还。
现代文：如果让堤防穿孔，虽万人同心协力，也无法再挽救。政事和教化，一旦遭到破坏，即令贤人智者上下奔走，也不能重新恢复。
English: If the dike is pierced, it can no longer be saved, even if all people work together. Politics and enlightenment, once destroyed, can not be restored again, even if the wise and wise run up and down.

古文：今堤防虽坚，渐有孔穴。
现代文：现在，堤防虽然坚固，但已渐渐有了孔穴。
English: Now, although the dike is solid, it has gradually developed holes.

古文：譬之一人之身，本朝者，心腹也，州、郡者，四支也，心腹痛则四支不举。
现代文：犹如一个人的身体，朝廷是心腹，州郡是四肢，心腹发生病痛，则四肢不能举动。
English: Just like a person's body, the imperial court is the heart, and the state and county are the limbs. When the heart is sick, the limbs cannot move.

古文：故臣之所忧，在腹心之疾，非四支之患也。
现代文：所以，我所忧虑的，在于心腹的疾患，不是四肢的毛病。
English: So I'm worried about a disease of the heart, not of the limbs.

古文：苟坚堤防，务政教，先安心腹，整理本朝，虽有寇贼、水旱之变，不足介意也；诚令堤防坏漏，心腹有疾，虽无水旱之灾，天下固可以忧矣。
现代文：如能巩固堤防，致力于政治教化，先安定心腹，整顿朝廷，尽管有盗匪寇贼，水灾旱灾，也不足以放在心上。如果堤防被破坏，心腹有病，尽管没有水旱灾害，天下却实在令人担忧了。
English: If we can consolidate the dike, work on political enlightenment, first stabilize our hearts and minds, and rectify the imperial court, although there are robbers and thieves, floods and droughts, it is not enough to take it to heart. If the dike is destroyed and our hearts and minds are sick, although there are no floods and droughts, the world is really worrying.

古文：又宜罢退宦官，去其权重，裁置常侍二人方直有德者省事左右，小黄门五人才智闲雅者给事殿中。
现代文：还有，应该罢黜宦官，削减他们权力，仅保留品德方正的常侍二人，在左右听候驱使；再保留有才智和高雅的小黄门五人，在殿中供职。如此，批评自会停止，就会达到天下太平。
English: Moreover, the eunuchs should be removed and their powers reduced, and only two regular attendants of high moral character should be retained, waiting to be driven on the right and left; and five talented and elegant little yellow doors should be retained to serve in the hall. In this way, the criticism will stop, and the world will be at peace.

古文：如此，则论者厌塞，升平可致也！ 扶风功曹马融对曰： 今科条品制，四时禁令，所以承天顺民者，备矣，悉矣，不可加矣。
现代文：右扶风功曹马融回答说： 现在，各种法令条规，以及春夏秋冬等四时的禁令，用来承受天命，顺应民心的，都已具备，而且很完整，不能再有增添了。
English: Cao Ma Rong replied: At present, all kinds of laws and regulations, as well as the four-hour prohibitions such as spring, summer, autumn and winter, which are used to bear the fate of heaven and conform to the people's will, are already in place, and are very complete, and cannot be added any more.

古文：然而天犹有不平之效，民犹有咨嗟之怨者，百姓屡闻恩泽之声，而未见惠和之实也。
现代文：可是，上天仍然有不平的反应，百姓仍然嗟叹抱怨，原因在于，百姓虽多次听到朝廷要施行善政的声音，却没有见到善政的实惠。
English: However, the heavens still have an uneasy reaction, and the people still sigh and complain. The reason is that although the people have heard the voice of the imperial court to implement good governance many times, they have not seen the benefits of good governance.

古文：古之足民者，非能家赡而人足之，量其财用，为之制度。
现代文：上古所谓使人民富裕，并不是能做到家给人足，而只是酌量财富的多少，制定适当的用度。
English: In ancient times, the so-called "enrichment of the people" did not mean being able to provide enough for one's family, but merely measuring the amount of wealth and determining the appropriate degree of use.

古文：故嫁娶之礼俭，则婚者以时矣；丧制之礼约，则终者掩藏矣；不夺其时，则农夫利矣。
现代文：所以，出嫁和娶妻的礼节俭省，男女就可以及时婚配。丧葬和祭奠的礼节简单，死者就可以及时掩埋。只要不误农时，农夫就能取得好的收成。
English: Therefore, the etiquette of getting married and marrying a wife is thrifty, and men and women can get married in time. The etiquette of funerals and memorials is simple, and the dead can be buried in time. As long as the farmer is not late, the farmer can get a good harvest.

古文：夫妻子以累其心，产业以重其志，舍此而为非者，有必不多矣！ 
现代文：既有妻子儿女的牵挂，又有家庭财产的顾虑，抛弃这些而去为非做歹的人，即使还有，也肯定不多了。 
English: Even if there are still people who are concerned about their wives and children and are concerned about their family assets, there are certainly not many who have abandoned these concerns to commit evil.

古文：太史令南阳张衡对曰： 自初举孝廉，迄今二百岁矣，皆先孝行；行有馀力，始学文法。
现代文：太史令、南阳郡人张衡回答说： 自从创立荐举孝廉制度，迄今已有二百年之久，都是优先修养孝行，有了孝行，仍有余力，才开始学习法令条文。
English: Zhang Heng, Tai Shi Ling and Nanyang County resident, replied: Since the establishment of the filial piety system, it has been two hundred years old so far. It is a priority to cultivate filial piety. With filial piety, there is still room to learn the provisions of laws and regulations.

古文：辛卯诏书，以能章句、奏案为限；虽有至孝，犹不应科，此弃本而取末。
现代文：而陛下颁布的辛卯诏书，却限于能读懂经书的章节和句子，会写上奏皇帝的表章。虽有大孝，还是不能应选，这是弃本逐末的办法。
English: However, the Xinwu Imperial Rescript issued by His Majesty is limited to those who can read and understand the chapters and sentences of the scripture, and the Emperor's seal will be written on it. Although there is great filial piety, it is still not possible to choose, which is a way to discard the book one by one.

古文：曾子长于孝，然实鲁钝，文学不若游、夏，政事不若冉、季。
现代文：曾参对父母至孝，然而，实在迟钝笨拙，论文学不如言偃、卜商，论政事不如冉有、仲由。
English: He had been a filial son to his parents, but he was really dull and clumsy. In literature, he was not as good as Zhang Xuan and Bu Shang, and in politics, he was not as good as Ran Yu and Zhong Yu.

古文：今欲使一人兼之，苟外有可观，内必有阙，则违选举孝廉之志矣。
现代文：现在想使一个兼备这些本领，纵然外表可观，内在必有欠缺，这就违背选举孝廉的本意了。
English: Now, if you want to make a person have both of these skills, even if the appearance is impressive, there must be a deficiency inside, which goes against the original intention of the election of filial piety.

古文：且郡国守相，剖符宁境，为国大臣，一旦免黜十有馀人，吏民罢于送迎之役，新故交际，公私放滥，或临政为百姓所便而以小过免之，是为夺民父母使嗟号也。
现代文：而且，郡太守和封国相，接受朝廷的任命，负责维护所辖境内的安宁，是国家的大臣，却一下子被罢黜了十余人，官吏和人民都疲于送往迎来的差役，新旧交接时，公私发放浪费。有些人本来治理得不错，深得百姓的好感，却因一点小过，将其免职，这是强夺人民的父母，使他们哀叹。
English: Moreover, county governors and secretaries of state, who accept the appointment of the imperial court and are responsible for maintaining peace in the territory under their jurisdiction, are the ministers of the state, but more than ten people were dismissed at once. Officials and people are tired of sending ushering officials. When the old and the new handover, the public and private sectors are wasteful. Some people were originally well governed and deeply liked by the people, but they were removed from office because they were a little too small. This is robbing the people of their parents and making them lament.

古文：《易》不远复，《论》不惮改，朋友交接且不宿过，况于帝王，承天理物，以天下为公者乎！
现代文：《易经》上说：不要走得太远才回头。
English: "I Ching" says: Don't go too far before turning back.

古文：中间以来，妖星见于上，震裂著于下，天诫详矣，可为寒心。
现代文：《论语》上也说：有错不要害怕改正。连朋友之间相交，都不应该包庇过失错误，何况帝王承受天命，治理万物，以天下为公呢！今年上半年以来，天上出现妖星，地下发生地震，上天的警告，已经非常明显，令人寒心！
English: "The Analects" also says: Don't be afraid to correct mistakes. Even friendship between friends should not cover up mistakes, not to mention that emperors bear the fate of heaven, govern all things, and take the world as the public! Since the first half of this year, the sky has seen a monster star, an earthquake has occurred underground, and the warning from heaven has been very obvious, chilling!

古文：明者消祸于未萌。
现代文：聪明的人，当灾祸还没有萌芽时，便把它消灭。
English: A wise man, when disaster has not yet sprouted, will destroy it.

古文：今既见矣，修政恐惧，则祸转为福矣。 
现代文：而今，灾祸已经出现，应该心怀恐惧地整顿朝政，才会转祸为福。 
English: But now, the disaster has appeared, we should rectify the government with fear in our hearts, before turning the disaster into a blessing.

古文：上览众对，以李固为第一，即时出阿母还舍，诸常侍悉叩头谢罪，朝廷肃然。
现代文：顺帝看了大家的对策，以李固为第一名，并立即命乳母宋娥搬出皇宫，回到她自己的私舍。各位中常侍都向皇帝叩头，请求恕罪，朝廷一片肃然。
English: Emperor Shun saw everyone's countermeasures, with Li Gu in the first place, and immediately ordered the nanny Song E to move out of the imperial palace and return to her own private house. All of the regular attendants bowed to the emperor and asked for forgiveness, and the court was stunned.

古文：以固为议郎；而阿母、宦者皆疾之，诈为飞章以陷其罪。
现代文：于是，任命李固为议郎。然而，乳母宋娥和宦官都非常痛恨李固，于是伪造匿名黑信，罗织罪状，诬谄李固。
English: As a result, Li Gu was appointed as the mediator. However, the nanny Song E and the eunuch hated Li Gu very much, so they forged an anonymous black letter, fabricated charges, and falsely accused Li Gu.

古文：事从中下，大司农南郡黄尚等请之于梁商，仆射黄琼复救明其事。
现代文：顺帝下令查办李固，诏书没有经过尚书台而直接下达。大司农、南郡人黄尚等请求梁商营救，尚书仆射黄琼进行挽救，重新辩明事实真相。
English: Emperor Shun ordered the investigation of Li Gu, and the edict was issued directly without going through Shang Shudi. Huang Shang, a farmer and Nan County resident, asked Liang Shang for rescue, and Shang Shudi shot Huang Qiong to rescue and re-discuss the facts.

古文：久乃得释，出为洛令，固弃官归汉中。
现代文：过了很久，李固才被释放，调离朝廷担任洛县县令。李固辞官，回到故乡汉中。
English: It took a long time before Li Gu was released and transferred from the imperial court to serve as the county magistrate of Luo County. Li Gu resigned from the post and returned to his hometown of Zhuozhong.

古文：融博通经籍，美文辞；对奏，亦拜议郎。
现代文：马融十分博学，精通儒家经书，文辞也很优美，对策后，也被任命为议郎。
English: Ma Rong is very erudite, well versed in Confucian scriptures, and his words are also very beautiful. After the countermeasures, he was also appointed as a mediator.

古文：衡善属文，通贯《六艺》，虽才高于世，而无骄尚之情；善机巧，尤致思于天文、阴阳、历算，作浑天仪，著《灵宪》。
现代文：张衡擅长撰写文章，通晓礼、乐、射、御、书、数六艺，虽然才华盖世，但毫不骄傲。他善于制做灵巧的装置，尤其致力于研究天文、阴阳、历ā⑺闶醯龋圃臁盎胩煲恰保小读橄堋贰藕庑郧樘竦幌勰绞浪姿粗氐娜倩还螅凰喂僦埃嗄暌膊患ā￡
English: Zhang Heng is good at writing articles. He is fluent in the six arts of reading, music, shooting, reading, writing and arithmetic. Although his talent is world-renowned, he is not proud of it. He is good at making dexterous devices. In particular, he is committed to studying astronomy, yin and yang, and the lunar calendar.

古文：性恬憺，不慕当世；所居之官辄积年不徙。
现代文：太尉庞参，在三公之中，声名最为忠直，曾多次遭到皇帝左右的诋毁。
English: Lieutenant Pang San, among the three princes, was reputed to be the most loyal, and was repeatedly slandered by the emperor and others.

古文：太尉宠参，在三公中最名忠直，数为左右所毁。
现代文：一次，正遇上所举用的人和皇帝的旨意相抵触，司隶校尉便顺着风向，对庞参进行弹劾。当时，朝廷正召集茂才和孝廉，庞参因遭到弹劾，于是声称有病，没有出席。
English: On one occasion, when the person appointed was in conflict with the emperor's will, Lieutenant Sili followed the wind and impeached Pang Zhan. At that time, the court was summoning Maozai and Xiaolian. Because Pang Zhan was impeached, he claimed to be ill and did not attend.

古文：会所举用忤帝旨，司隶承风案之。时当会茂才、孝廉，参以被奏，称疾不会。广汉上计掾段恭因会上疏曰： 伏见道路行人、农夫、织妇皆曰： 太尉参竭忠尽节，徒以直道不能曲心，孤立群邪之间，自处中伤之地。 
现代文：广汉郡上计掾段恭乘与会之机上书说： 我看到，道路上的行人、农夫、织妇都说： 太尉庞参，竭尽忠节，只因为他奉行正直之道，不肯委曲已意去奉承别人，孤立于那群奸之徒中间，使自己处于被中伤的境地。 
English: Guanghan County's Shangke Ren Duan Gong took the opportunity to attend the meeting and wrote: I saw that pedestrians, farmers, and weavers on the road all said: Captain Pang San, devoted to loyalty, only because he pursued the path of honesty, refused to compromise, was already willing to flatter others, isolated himself among the group of traitors, and put himself in a situation of being slandered.

古文：夫以谗佞伤毁忠正，此天地之大禁，人主之至诫也！
现代文：奸陷害忠良，这是天地间最大的禁忌，君主最重要地戒律。
English: It is the greatest taboo in heaven and earth, and the most important commandment for a monarch, to betray and frame a loyal subject.

古文：昔白起赐死，诸侯酌酒相贺；季子来归，鲁人喜其纾难。
现代文：过去，白起被逼自杀，各国的国君斟酒祝贺。姬友来归附，鲁国人欢庆他来拯救国难。
English: Once upon a time, death was given to Baiqi, and the princes congratulated each other by drinking wine; when Ji Zi returned, the Lu people were glad that he had eased the national difficulties.

古文：夫国以贤治，君以忠安。
现代文：国家任用贤能，才可治理；君王依靠忠良，才会安全。
English: A country can only be governed if it appoints good people; a king can only be safe if he relies on loyal people.

古文：今天下咸欣陛下有此忠贤，愿卒宠任以安社稷。 
现代文：而今，天下之人都庆幸陛下有庞参这样忠良和贤能的辅佐，希望陛下最终还是宠信他，以此来安定国家。 
English: Today, people all over the world are glad that His Majesty has such a loyal and capable aide as Pang Zhan, and hope that His Majesty will eventually trust him and use him to stabilize the country.

古文：书奏，诏即遣小黄门视参疾，太医致羊酒。
现代文：奏章呈上后，顺帝下诏，立即派遣小黄门代表皇帝问候庞参的病情，并派御医送去羊和酒。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Shun issued an edict, immediately sending Xiao Huangmen on behalf of the emperor to greet Pang San's illness, and sent the royal doctor to send sheep and wine.

古文：后参夫人疾前妻子，投于井而杀之；雒阳令祝良奏参罪。
现代文：后来，庞参的后妻忌恨前妻的儿子，将其投入井中谋杀，于是洛阳县令祝良上奏弹劾庞参有罪。
English: Later, Pang San's second wife hated her ex-wife's son and murdered him by throwing him into a well, so Luoyang County ordered Zhu Liang to impeach Pang San.

古文：秋，七月，己未，参竟以灾异免。
现代文：秋季，七月已未，庞参终以天降灾异而被免官。
English: In the autumn, before July, Pang San was finally relieved of his duties due to a natural disaster.

古文：八月，己巳，以大鸿胪施延为太尉。
现代文：八月已巳，擢升大鸿胪施延为太尉。
English: In August, Shi Yan was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：鲜卑寇马城，代郡太守击之，不克。
现代文：鲜卑进犯马城，代郡太守率军讨伐，未能取胜。
English: Xianbei invaded Macheng, and led a crusade on behalf of the county's governor, but failed to win.

古文：顷之，其至鞬死。
现代文：不久，鲜卑首领其至犍去世。
English: Soon after, the leader of the Xianbei died.

古文：鲜卑由是抄盗差稀。
现代文：从此以后，鲜卑对内地的抢劫和骚扰，较以前减少。
English: Since then, Xianbei's robberies and harassment of the mainland have decreased compared to before.

