古文：十四日从蛮边饭而行。
现代文：十四日从蛮边吃饭后上路。
English: On the 14th, after eating from the barbarian side, we went on the road.

古文：仍从旧路东南一里，宜东下，误循大路倚西山南行。
现代文：仍从原路往东南一里，应该向东下走，却错沿大路紧靠西山往南行。
English: I still went one mile southeast from the original road. I should have gone east, but I went south along the highway close to the West Mountain.

古文：二里，望渡处已在东北，乃转一里，得东下之路，遂涉坑从田塍东行。
现代文：二里，望见渡江处已在东北，就转弯走一里，遇上往东下坡的路，就涉过坑谷从田野中往东行。
English: After two miles, you can see that the river crossing is in the northeast, so you turn around and walk one mile. When you meet the road downhill to the east, you wade through the valley and go east from the middle of the field.

古文：一里，至早龙川家，即龙江之弟，分居于此，以主此渡者。
现代文：一里，来到早龙川家，他就是早龙江的弟弟，分居在此地，是主管此处渡口的人。
English: He is the younger brother of Wulong River, who lives separately in this place and is in charge of the ferry here.

古文：时渡舟尚在江东岸，龙川迎坐以待之，其妻女即织綎于旁。
现代文：此时渡船还在江东岸，龙川迎接坐下来等船，他的妻子女儿就在旁边纺织。
English: At this time, the ferry was still on the east bank of the river. Longchuan greeted the boat, sat down and waited for the boat. His wife and daughter were weaving next to him.

古文：出火酒糟生肉以供。
现代文：拿出火酒与酒糟生肉给我吃。
English: Bring out the wine and the unleavened bread for me to eat.

古文：余但饮酒而已，不能啖生也。
现代文：我只是饮酒而已，不能吃生肉。
English: I only drink alcohol. I can't eat raw meat.

古文：雨忽作忽止，上午舟乃西过。
现代文：雨忽下忽停，上午船才过到西岸。
English: The rain suddenly stopped, and the boat only reached the west coast in the morning.

古文：又候舟人饭，当午乃发，雨大作。
现代文：又等候船夫吃饭，正午才开船，雨势大作。
English: We waited for the boatmen to eat, and the boat didn't leave until noon. It was raining heavily.

古文：同渡者言，猛赖东溪水暴涨，横木沉水底，不能着足；徒涉之，水且及胸，过之甚难。
现代文：一同渡江的人说，猛赖东溪的水暴涨，横架的木头沉入水底，不能落脚；徒步涉水，水将到胸部，过溪非常难。
English: The people who crossed the river with him said that the water of the East River rose sharply, and the wood of the cross-beam sank to the bottom of the water, unable to land; wading on foot, the water would reach the chest, and it was very difficult to cross the stream.

古文：余初以路资空乏，拟仍宿早龙江家，一日而至松坡，二日而至玛瑙山，皆可无烦杖头，即取所寄水帘石树归。
现代文：我起初因为路费空乏，准备仍住宿在早龙江家中，一天到松坡，二天到玛瑙山，都可不必麻烦带路费，就近取回所寄放的水帘洞石树归去。
English: At first, because of the lack of travel expenses, I was still prepared to stay at home in Wulongjiang. I could go to Songpo for one day and Manaowan for two days without having to bother with travel expenses, and return to the nearby water curtain cave stone tree.

古文：今闻此，知溪既难涉，且由溪北岸溯流而入，由北冲逾岭，既免徒涉之险，更得分流之脊，于道里虽稍远，况今日尚可达歪瓦，则两日即抵郡，其行反速也。
现代文：现在听到这话，知道溪水既难涉过，就由溪北岸溯流走进去，由北冲越岭，既免去徒步涉水的危险，更能见到分水的山脊，就道路而言虽然稍远些，何况今天还可到达歪瓦，那么两天就到府城，那路走得反而快了。
English: Now that I have heard this, I know that the stream is difficult to wade through, so I followed the stream from the north bank of the stream. I rushed across the ridge from the north, avoiding the danger of wading on foot and being able to see the ridge where the water splits. Although it is a little further away in terms of the road, it is still possible to reach the crooked tile today. Then it will take two days to get to the capital city, but that road is faster.

古文：遂从渡口东向截坞望峡入，先由坞东行田塍间。
现代文：便从渡口向东横穿山坞望着峡谷进去，先由坞中往东前行在田野中。
English: From the ferry, I walked east across the dock, looking down into the canyon. First, I walked from the middle of the dock to the middle of the field.

古文：一里，路为草拥，草为雨偃，几无从觅。
现代文：一里，路被草拥围着，草被雨压倒，几乎无法找到。
English: For a mile, the road is surrounded by weeds, the grass is overwhelmed by the rain, and it is almost impossible to find.

古文：幸一同渡者见余从此，亦来同行，令之前驱。
现代文：幸好一个一同渡江的人见我从此走，也来同行，我叫他在前引路。
English: Fortunately, a man who was crossing the river with me saw me and came to accompany me. I asked him to lead the way.

古文：半里，遂及峡口，循峡北突峰南麓东向入，溪沸于下，甚汹涌。
现代文：半里，便到了峡口，沿峡谷北边高突的山峰南麓向东进去，溪水沸腾在下方，十分汹涌。
English: Half a mile later, I arrived at the mouth of the canyon. I walked east along the southern foot of the towering peak on the north side of the canyon. The stream was boiling below, very turbulent.

古文：五里，峡自北来，有村在东山下，曰猛冈。
现代文：五里，峡谷自北面来，有个村庄在东山下，叫猛冈。
English: Wuli, the canyon comes from the north, there is a village at the foot of the east mountain, called Menggang.

古文：路挟西山北转上坡。
现代文：路傍着西山向北转上坡。
English: At the side of the road, turn north uphill along the West Mountain.

古文：五里，遂东盘东峰之南椒。
现代文：五里，就向东绕上东峰南面的山顶。
English: After five miles, I went east around the top of the mountain on the south side of Dongfeng.

古文：又东十里，有峡自东南来，想即猛淋所从来之小径也。
现代文：又向东十里，有峡谷自东南来，猜想就是从猛淋来的小径了。
English: Another ten miles to the east, there is a canyon from the southeast, guessing that it is a path from the fierce rain.

古文：于是折而北上山坳，二里，闻犬声。
现代文：于是折向北登上山坳，二里，听见狗叫声。
English: So I turned north up the ridge, two miles, and heard a dog barking.

古文：又里余。山环谷合，中得一坪，四五家倚之南向而居，日歪瓦，遂止而宿。
现代文：又走一里多，山峰环绕山谷闭合，在中间有一块平地，四五家人靠山向南居住，叫歪瓦，便停下来住宿。
English: After walking for more than a mile, the mountain peaks closed around the valley, and there was a flat land in the middle. Four or five families lived on the south side of the mountain, called the crooked tile, and stopped to stay.

古文：十五日昧爽而炊，平明，饭而行。
现代文：十五日天蒙蒙亮烧饭，黎明吃饭后上路。
English: On the fifteenth day, they cooked rice in the morning light, and went on their way after eating at dawn.

古文：雨色霏霏，南陟东坡一里，稍北下三里余，不得路。
现代文：雨色霏霏，向南上登东坡一里，渐往北下走三里多，找不到路。
English: It was a rainy day. I walked south up the east slope for one mile, and gradually walked north for more than three miles. I couldn't find my way.

古文：乃西向攀茅蹑坡，二里，登岭，乃得南来之路。
现代文：于是向西抓着茅草登坡，二里，登岭，才遇到南来的路。
English: So he climbed westwards, holding onto the thatch. It took him two miles to reach the ridge before he came across the road to the south.

古文：又稍北，循崖曲复东向行。
现代文：又稍向北，沿山崖弯曲处再向东行。
English: A little further north, follow the curve of the mountain cliff and then head east.

古文：八里，有峡自东来，而大溪则自北峡来受，其回曲处藤木罨蔽，惟见水势腾跃于下。
现代文：八里，有峡谷自东边来，而大溪则从北面峡中流来汇入其中，溪水弯曲处藤枝林木掩映荫蔽，唯见水势腾跃于下方。
English: For eight miles, there is a canyon coming from the east, while the big stream flows from the middle of the north-facing canyon and flows into it. At the bend of the stream, the wisteria trees cover the shadow, and the water can be seen leaping below.

古文：路仍北转溯之，遂从深箐中行。
现代文：路仍向北转溯溪走，于是从深著中前行。
English: The road still turned north to follow the creek, so I walked forward from the middle of the road.

古文：又二里稍下，渐下溪逼。
现代文：又是二里稍下走，渐渐与溪流逼近。
English: Another two-mile walk downhill, gradually approaching the stream.

古文：又北五里，峡复转东，路乃东，溯之。
现代文：又向北五里，峡谷又转向东，路就向东溯流走。
English: Another five miles to the north, the canyon turned to the east, and the road followed the stream to the east.

古文：屡降而与溪会，一路皆从溪右深管仄崖间，东北溯流行十五里，有一溪自北峡出，而下有田缘之，渐出箐矣。
现代文：屡次下降后与溪流相会，一路上都是从溪右的深著窄崖间走，往东北溯流行十五里，有一条溪水自北面峡中流出来，而下边有田沿着溪流，渐渐走出山著了。
English: After descending several times, they met a stream. All the way, they walked between the deep, narrow cliffs on the right side of the stream. Fifteen miles to the northeast, a stream flowed out of the Beimen Gorge, while the lower fields followed the stream and gradually came out of the mountains.

古文：又东五里，其下田遂连畦夹溪。
现代文：又向东五里，那下边的田亩相连夹住溪流。
English: Another five miles to the east, the lower fields are connected by a stream.

古文：又东五里，又有水自西北峡来，溪源遂岐为两，有桥度其北来者，仍溯其东来者。
现代文：又向东五里，又有水自西北峡中流来，溪流便岔为两条，有桥越过那北来的溪流，仍溯那东来的溪流走。
English: Another five miles to the east, there is water flowing from the middle of the northwest gorge, the stream is divided into two, there is a bridge over the stream coming from the north, still trace the stream coming from the east.

古文：其下田愈辟，路始无箐木之翳。
现代文：山下的田野愈加开阔，路开始无竹木的遮蔽。
English: The fields at the foot of the mountain become more and more open, and the road begins to be free of bamboo trees.

古文：又东五里，北界之山，中环为坪，而土官居之；亦早姓，为龙江之侄。南界之峡，平拓为田，而村落绕之，此即所谓北冲也。
现代文：又向东五里，北面的一列山，中间环绕成平地，而土官就居住在此地；南面的峡谷，平缓拓展为田地，而村落环绕着它，此地就是所谓的北冲了。
English: Another five miles to the east, a line of mountains to the north, surrounded by flat land in the middle, and the local officials live here; the canyon to the south, gently expanding into fields, and the villages surrounding it, this place is the so-called Beichong.

古文：又东五里，山箐复合，是为箐口。
现代文：又向东五里，山鲁重又合拢，这里是著口。
English: Another five miles to the east, Shanlu heavy and closed, here is the beginning.

古文：时才下午，而前无宿店，遂止。
现代文：此时才下午，但前方没有住宿的客店，便停下来。
English: At this time, it was only afternoon, but there was no hotel in front of us, so we stopped.

古文：是夕为中元，去岁在石屏，其俗犹知祭先，而此则寂然矣。
现代文：这天晚上是中元节；去年在石屏，那里的风俗还知道祭祖先，可此地却寂然无声了。
English: This evening is the Mid-Autumn Festival; last year in Shifing, where the custom of sacrificing ancestors was still known, the place was silent.

古文：十六日平明饭。
现代文：十六日黎明吃饭。
English: At dawn on the 16th, we had dinner.

古文：由箐口东稍下入峡，二里，有涧自东北来，越之。
现代文：由警口向东稍下走进入峡中，二里，有山涧自东北流来，越过山涧。
English: From the police gate, walk slightly eastwards into the gorge. For two miles, there is a mountain stream flowing from the northeast, crossing the mountain stream.

古文：其大溪则自峡中东来，犹在路之南。
现代文：那条大溪则从峡中向东流来，还在路的南边。
English: The big stream, which flows east from the gorge, is still on the south side of the road.

古文：路从两涧中支中东上，已复北倚中支，南临大溪，且上且平。
现代文：路从两条山涧中间的支脉向东上走，随后又往北紧靠中间的支脉走，南临大溪，渐上走渐平缓起来。
English: The road climbs from the middle branch of the two ridges to the east, then to the north, close to the middle branch, to the south of the creek, and gradually flattens out.

古文：七里稍下，又一里，下及溪，濒溪溯水而行。
现代文：七里后稍下走，又行一里，下到溪边，濒临溪流溯水而行。
English: After seven miles, walk down a little, walk another mile, go down to the stream, walk along the edge of the stream.

古文：又里余，有木桥跨溪，遂度其南岸，倚南崖东向行。
现代文：又是一里多，有座木桥跨在溪上，就过到溪流的南岸，靠着南边的山崖向东行。
English: After another mile or so, there was a wooden bridge over the stream, and I crossed to the south bank of the stream and walked eastward along the cliff on the south side.

古文：又里余，复度桥，行溪北岸。
现代文：又走一里多，再次过桥，行走在溪流北岸。
English: Walk another mile or so, cross the bridge again, and walk along the north bank of the stream.

古文：由是两崖夹涧，涧之上屡有桥左右跨，或度桥南，或度桥北，俱潆涧倚坡，且上且折。
现代文：由此起两面山崖夹住山涧，山涧之上多处有桥跨到左右岸，有时过到桥南，有时越到桥北，全因山涧潇徊紧靠山坡，一边上走一边曲曲折折。
English: From then on, the two sides of the cliff clamped the hawthorn. Above the hawthorn, there are bridges spanning to the left and right banks in many places, sometimes crossing to the south of the bridge, sometimes crossing to the north of the bridge, all because the hawthorn hovered close to the slope, going up one side while twisting and turning.

古文：又连度六桥，共七里，水分两派来，一东南，一东北，俱成悬流，桥不复能施，遂从中坡蹑峻，盘垂磴而上。
现代文：又一连越过六座桥，共七里，水分为两条，一条来自东南，一条来自东北，都成为高悬的水流，不再能建桥，就从中间的山坡陡峻地上登，绕着悬垂的石瞪上走。
English: Again, they crossed six bridges in a row, a total of seven miles. The water was divided into two streams, one from the southeast and one from the northeast, both of which became high-hanging streams. No longer able to build a bridge, they climbed up the steep slope in the middle of the mountain and walked around the overhanging rocks.

古文：曲折八里，冈脊稍平，有庐三楹横于冈上，曰茶庵，土人又呼为蒲蛮寨，而实无寨也。
现代文：曲折八里，冈脊上稍平缓了些，有三间房屋横在冈上，叫做茶庵，当地人又称为蒲蛮寨，可实际上无寨子。
English: After eight miles of twists and turns, the ridge is a little flatter. There are three houses lying on the ridge, called tea huts. Locals also call it Puman village, but there is actually no village.

古文：有一道流瀹茗于中。
现代文：有一个道士在庵中烹茶。
English: A Taoist monk is preparing tea in a hermitage.

古文：余知前路无居庐，乃出饭就之而啖。
现代文：我知道前边的路上没有居屋，便拿出饭到庵中吃了。
English: I knew that there was no inn on the road ahead, so I took out the rice and ate it in the hermitage.

古文：又北上，始临北坑，后临南坑，始披峡涉水，后蹑磴盘脊，十里，乃东登岭坳。
现代文：又向北上走，开始时面临北面的深坑，后来面临南边的深坑，开始时穿越峡谷涉过流水，后来登石瞪绕上山脊，十里，便向东上登岭坳。
English: He walked northward again, at first facing the deep pit on the north side, later facing the deep pit on the south side, at first crossing the canyon and wading through the running water, and later climbing the rocks around the ridge, ten miles, and then climbing the ridge to the east.

古文：既至岭头，雨势滂沱，随流南下，若骑玉龙而揽沧海者。
现代文：到岭头后，雨势谤沱，顺流水往南下走，好似骑玉龙力挽沧海的样子。
English: After reaching Lingtou, the rain was very heavy, and the downstream water went south, as if riding a jade dragon to turn back the sea.

古文：南下三里，雨忽中止，云霾遥涤。
现代文：往南下走三里，雨忽然中止了，云霆远远涤荡着。
English: Walking three miles to the south, the rain suddenly stopped, and the clouds swirled far away.

古文：又二里，遂随西峡下，坠峡穿箐，路既蒙茸，雨复连绵。
现代文：又走二里，就沿西峡下行，坠入峡谷穿越山臀，路既蒙蒙茸茸，雨又连绵不止地下起来。
English: After walking another two miles, I went down along the West Gorge, fell into the canyon and crossed the rump of the mountain. The road was muddy, and it rained continuously.

古文：又五里，从箐底踏波随流出。
现代文：又走五里，从警底踏着水波顺流出来。
English: He walked another five miles, treading water from the bottom of the river.

古文：又南五里，稍东，逾一东障西突之坡。
现代文：又往南五里，稍向东越过东面一座屏障样山峰向西突的山坡。
English: Another five miles to the south, a little to the east, over a barrier-like mountain peak to the west.

古文：从其南坠坡直下者三里，复随峡倚东障之支南向行，其西中壑稍开，流渐成溪。
现代文：从它南边的山坡上一直下坠三里，再顺着峡谷紧靠东面屏障样山峰的支峰向南行，它西边中间的壑谷稍微敞开，流水渐渐成溪。
English: From the hillside on its southern side, it drops three miles all the way down, and then follows the canyon close to the eastern peak of the barrier-like peak to the south. The valley in the middle of its western side is slightly open, and the water gradually becomes a stream.

古文：二里，雨益大，沾体涂足，足滑不能定，上险涉流，随起随仆。
现代文：二里，雨更大，从头到脚被淋个湿透，脚下打滑不能立定，上登险峰涉过流水，随即站起随即就跌倒了。
English: Two miles, the rain was heavier, I was drenched from head to toe, I couldn't keep my footing when I slipped, I waded through the flowing water on the dangerous peak, and then I stood up and immediately fell down.

古文：如是者三四里，头目既伤，四肢受病，一时无可如何。
现代文：如此走了三四里，头眼既已受伤，四肢筋疲力尽，一时之间无可奈何。
English: Having walked three or four miles in this way, my head and eyes were already injured, my limbs were exhausted, and there was nothing I could do.

古文：雨少止，又东南五里，坞稍东曲，乃截坞而度一桥。
现代文：雨稍停，又向东南行五里，山坞略往东曲，就横穿山坞跨过一座桥。
English: The rain stopped for a bit, and we drove five miles to the southeast. The dock curved slightly to the east, and we crossed a bridge across the dock.

古文：桥下水虽汹涌浑浊，其势犹未大，仅横木而度。
现代文：桥下的水虽然汹涌浑浊几但水势还不算大，仅横架木头越过去。
English: Although the water under the bridge is turbulent and muddy, the water potential is not great, and only the cross-beam wood crosses over.

古文：至是从溪西随西山行，溪逼东障山去。
现代文：到这里从澳西沿西山行，溪流逼近东面屏障样的山峰而去。
English: Here, from the west of Australia along the western mountains, the stream approaches the barrier-like peaks in the east.

古文：复逾坡坠箐向东南下，五里，又东南盘一坡，下涉一箐。
现代文：再翻越山坡坠入深著向东南下走，五里，又向东南绕过一坡，下涉一著。
English: Then I climbed over the mountain slope, fell into the deep, and walked down to the southeast, five miles, and went around a slope to the southeast, and waded down.

古文：又五里，转坡南，腋间得卧佛寺，已暮。
现代文：又走五里，转到坡南，侧旁之间见到了卧佛寺，已经天黑。
English: I walked another five miles, turned to the south slope, and saw the Reclining Buddha Temple between the sides. It was already dark.

古文：急入其厨，索火炙衣，炊汤啖所存携饭，深夜而卧其北楼。
现代文：急忙进入寺中的厨房，要来火烤衣服，烧来热汤吃下带着的剩饭，深夜才在寺中的北楼躺下。
English: He hurried into the kitchen of the temple, wanted to make a fire to bake clothes, burn hot soup to eat the leftovers, and lay down in the north tower of the temple late at night.

古文：十七日晨起绝粮。
现代文：十七日早晨起床断粮。
English: On the morning of the 17th, I got up and went without food.

古文：计此地去郡不过三十余里，与前东自小寨归相似，遂空腹行。
现代文：计算此地离府城不超过三十多里，与从前自东边的小寨归来时相似，就空着肚子上了路。
English: Calculating that this place is no more than thirty miles from the capital, similar to when I used to return from the small village on the east side, I went on the road with an empty stomach.

古文：仍再上岩殿，再下池轩，一凭眺之。
现代文：仍再次登上岩洞中的佛殿，再次下到池边的轩廊，凭眺了一番风光。
English: I still went up to the Buddha hall in the cave again, and went down to the gallery by the pond again, and had a look at the scenery.

古文：东南里许，过一小室，始有二家当路，是为税司。
现代文：往东南一里左右，路过一间小屋，开始有两家人位于路旁，这是税司。
English: About a mile to the southeast, I passed a small house, and there were two families sitting on the side of the road. This was the tax office.

古文：又南八里，过龙王塘峡，皆倚西山行。
现代文：又向南八里，经过龙王塘的峡谷，都是紧靠西山行。
English: Another eight miles to the south, through the canyon of Longwangtang, are all close to the West Mountain.

古文：又东南五里，过郎义村，村西有路逾岭，为清江坝、打郎道。
现代文：又向东南五里，走过郎义村，村西有路越岭，是去清江坝、打郎的路。
English: Another five miles to the southeast, passing through Langyi Village, there is a road across the ridge to the west of the village, which is the road to Qingjiang Dam and Durang.

古文：又南二十里，至郡城北通华门外，即随城北涧西上。
现代文：又往南二十里，来到府城北边的通华门外，立即顺城北的山涧向西上走。
English: Another twenty miles to the south, outside the Tonghua Gate on the north side of the capital, and immediately go west along the mountains north of the city.

古文：二里入仁寿门，由新城街一里余，过法明寺前，西抵刘馆。
现代文：二里进入仁寿门，经由新城街走一里多，经过法明寺前，往西抵达刘家书馆。
English: Two miles into Renshou Gate, walk more than a mile through Xincheng Street, pass in front of Faming Temple, and head west to arrive at Liu Jia Library.

古文：余初拟至干海子一宿即还，至是又十三日矣。
现代文：我起初打算到干海子住一宿就回来，到此时又是十三天了。
English: At first, I planned to stay one night in Hanhaizi and come back, but by this time it had been thirteen days.

古文：馆前老妪以潘莲华所留折仪、并会真陶道所馈点畀余，且谓闪知愿使人以书仪数次来候。
现代文：书馆前的老妇把藩莲华所留的信札和赠送的路费、以及会真楼陶道士所赠点心交给我，并说闪知愿派人拿着书信和馈赠的礼金几次前来等候。
English: The old woman in front of the library handed me the letter and travel expenses left by the lamas of the domain, as well as the dim sum given by the Taoist priest of the Realm, and said that she would like to send someone to come and wait several times with the letter and the gift money.

古文：盖知愿往先茔祖先的墓地，恐余东返，即留使相待也。
现代文：原来闪知愿去祖先的墓地，担心我返回东方，就留下使者相等了。
English: Originally, Shinji was willing to go to the ancestor's graveyard, but he was worried that I would return to the East, so he left the messenger behind.

古文：下午安仁来，俞禹锡同闪来，抵暮乃别。
现代文：下午安仁来，俞禹锡同闪知愿来，到天黑才告别。
English: In the afternoon, Anren came, Yu Yuxi came with Shenshi Ren, and they said goodbye only after dark.

古文：十八日余卧未起，马元真同其从兄来候。
现代文：十八日我躺着未起床，马元真同他的堂兄来访。
English: On the 18th day, I was lying in bed and didn't get up. Ma Yuanzhen and his cousin came to visit.

古文：余讶其早。
现代文：我惊讶他们来得太早。
English: I was surprised they came so early.

古文：曰： 即在北邻，而久不知。
现代文：他们解释说： 就在北边相邻，但长期不知道。
English: They explained: Right next to each other on the north side, but we didn't know for a long time.

古文：昨暮禹锡言，始知之。
现代文：昨天晚上禹锡说起，才知道。
English: I didn't know until Yuxi started talking about it yesterday evening.

古文：且知与老父约，而不从松坡返，能不使老父盼望耶？ 余始知为太麓乃郎。
现代文：并且知道与老父亲相约，但不从松坡返回，能不使老父亲盼望吗？  我这才知道是马太麓的儿郎。
English: And knowing that I made an appointment with my old father, but did not return from Songpo, can I not make my old father hope? This is how I know that I am the son of the foot of Mt.

古文：太麓虽言其长子读书城中，而不知即与刘馆并也。
现代文：太麓虽说起过他的长子在城中读书，却不知是就与刘家书馆相邻。
English: Although Taeruk mentioned that his eldest son was studying in the city, he did not know that it was adjacent to the Liu family library.

古文：禹锡邀饭，出其岳闪太翁降乩ｊī旧时求神降示语相示，录之，暮乃返。
现代文：禹锡邀请我吃饭，拿出他岳父闪太翁扶乱时神灵降临的辞语给我看，抄录下来，天黑才返回来。
English: Yuxi invited me to dinner, took out the words of his father-in-law, Shentai, to show me when the gods descended during the rebellion, copied them down, and only returned after dark.

古文：闪知愿使以知愿书仪并所留柬札来，且为余作书与杨云州。
现代文：闪知愿的使者拿着知愿馈赠的礼金及所留的柬帖来到，并为我写了给杨云州的信。
English: The emissary of the wish came with the gift money and the invitation card left by the wish, and wrote a letter to Yang Yunzhou for me.

古文：十九日闪太史手书候叙，既午乃赴之。
现代文：十九日闪太史亲自写信等我去叙谈，中午后才去赴约。
English: On the 19th, Shen Taishi personally wrote a letter to wait for me to talk about it, and only went to the appointment after noon.

古文：留款西书舍小亭间，出董太史一卷一册相示，书画皆佳，又出大理苍石屏置座间。
现代文：款留在西书房的小亭中，拿出董太史的一卷一册给我看，书画皆佳，又拿出大理苍山的石屏风摆在座椅间。
English: In the small pavilion of the west study room, I took out a volume of Dong Taishi to show me. The calligraphy and painting were all good. I also took out the stone screen of Dali Cangshan and placed it between the seats.

古文：另觅鲜鸡葼瀹汤以佐饭。
现代文：另外找来鲜鸡萝烧汤下饭。
English: In addition, they brought fresh chicken and radish soup for the next meal.

古文：深夜乃归馆。
现代文：深夜才归回书馆。
English: He did not return to the library until late at night.

古文：知安仁所候闪《序》已得，安仁将反命丽江矣。
现代文：了解到安仁守候的闪太史的序文已经得到，安仁将返回丽江复命了。
English: It was learned that the preface of the Shentai history of Anren's waiting has been obtained, and Anren will return to Lijiang to resume his life.

古文：二十日作书并翠生杯，托安仁师赍送丽江木公。
现代文：二十日写了信连同翠生石杯，托安仁禅师带去送给丽江的木公。
English: On the 20th, he wrote a letter together with the stone cup of Tsuisho, which was taken by Zen master Toan-Ren and given to the god of wood in Lijiang.

古文：二十一日命顾仆往玛瑙山取石树，且以失约谢道歉马元康。
现代文：二十一日命令顾仆去玛瑙山取石树，并以失约向马完康谢罪。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered his servant to go to the agate mountain to get a stone tree, and to complete the crime of Kangxie to the horse by breaking the contract.

古文：二十二日雨，禹锡同闪太史来寓，坐竟日，贳移酒移肴，为联句之饮。
现代文：二十二日下雨，禹锡同闪口口来寓所，坐了一整天，买酒端菜，联句饮酒。
English: It rained on the 22nd, and Yu Xi came to the apartment with a flashlight and sat all day, buying wine and side dishes, and drinking alcohol.

古文：二十三日早，马元真邀饭。
现代文：二十三日早晨，马元真邀请去吃饭。
English: On the morning of the 23rd, Ma Yuanzhen invited him to dinner.

古文：以顾奴往玛瑙山，禹锡知余无人具餐，故令元真邀余也。
现代文：因为顾奴去了玛瑙山，禹锡知道我无人备餐，所以叫元真来邀请我。
English: Because Gu Nong went to the Manaowan Mountain, Yu Xi knew that I had no one to prepare the meal, so he asked Yuan Zhen to invite me.

古文：先是自清水关遇雨，受寒受跌，且受饥，连日体甚不安，欲以汗发之。
现代文：这之前自从在清水关遇雨，受寒受跌，又受饥，连日来身体十分不适，想用出汗来发散风寒。
English: Prior to this, since being caught in the rain in Shimizu Pass, suffering from cold and hunger, I have been very unwell for days, and I want to use sweating to dissipate the cold.

古文：方赴市取药，而禹锡知余仆未归，再来邀余，乃置药而赴之，遂痛饮。
现代文：刚到市上去取来药，但禹锡知道我的仆人未归来，再次来邀我，只好放下药去赴约，于是痛饮。
English: I just went to the market to pick up the medicine, but Yu Xi knew that my servant had not returned and invited me again. I had to put down the medicine and go to the appointment, so I drank heavily.

古文：入夜，元真辈先去，余竟卧禹锡斋。
现代文：入夜后，元真一帮人先离去，我竟然躺卧在禹锡的书斋中。
English: After nightfall, Yuan Zhen and his group left first, and I ended up lying in Yu Xi's study.

古文：禹锡携袱ｆú被单被连榻，且以新绵被覆余，被褥俱丽甚。
现代文：禹锡提来被单铺盖连同卧床，并且拿出新棉被盖在我身上，被褥全都非常华丽。
English: Yuxi took out the coverlet along with the bed, and took out a new cotton quilt to cover me. The quilts were all very gorgeous.

古文：余以醉后觉蒸蒸有汗意，引被蒙面，汗出如雨，明日遂霍然，信乎挟纩丝棉之胜于药石也。
现代文：我在酒醉后觉得热腾腾的有出汗的意思，拉被子蒙住了脸，汗出得如下雨一样，第二天便霍然好转，确实是怀抱绵被胜过药物呀！
English: After I got drunk, I felt hot and sweaty, so I covered my face with a quilt. I was sweating like it was raining. The next day, I felt better. It's true that cuddling is better than medication!

古文：二十四日还寓。
现代文：二十四日返回寓所。
English: He returned to his apartment on the 24th.

古文：夜深而顾奴返。
现代文：夜深后顾奴返回来。
English: After midnight, Gu Nong returned home.

古文：以马元康见余不返，亲往松坡询踪迹，故留待三日而后归也。
现代文：由于马元康见我未返回来，亲自去松坡查询踪迹，故而顾仆留下等了三天后才归来。
English: Since Ma Yuankang saw that I did not return, he went to Songpa to investigate the trail in person, so Gu waited for three days before returning.

古文：二十五日闪太史以所作长歌赠，更馈以赆。
现代文：二十五日闪太史拿所作的长歌相赠，另外馈赠了路费。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Sheng Taishi presented the long song made by Na to each other, and also presented the travel expenses.

古文：其歌甚畅，而字画遒劲有法，真可与石斋赠余七言歌并镌为合璧。
现代文：他的歌非常通畅，而且字画遒劲有笔法，真正可与黄石斋赠我的七言歌一同刻石，成为珠连璧合之作。
English: His song is very smooth, and the words and paintings have a vigorous brushwork, which can truly be engraved with the seven-character song given to me by Huangshi Zhai, and become a work of pearl combination.

古文：已而俞禹锡又使人来邀移寓。
现代文：已而俞禹锡又派人来请我搬住所。
English: And now Yu Xi has sent someone to ask me to move.

古文：余乃令顾仆以石树往视之，相与抵掌拍手叫好为异惊奇。已而往谢太史之赐，太史亦为索观，遂从禹锡处送往观之。
现代文：我于是命令顾仆拿石树去给他看，相互击掌称异。随后前去感谢闪太史的赏赐，太史也为此想要观看石树，便从禹锡处送去给他观赏。
English: I then ordered Gu to take the stone tree to show it to him, and we exchanged high-fives. I then went to thank Sheng Taishi for the reward. Taishi also wanted to see the stone tree for this reason, so I sent it to him from Yu Xi.

古文：二十六日禹锡晨至寓，邀余移往其斋。
现代文：二十六日禹锡早晨来到寓所，邀我搬去他的书斋。
English: On the morning of the 26th, Yu Xi came to the apartment and invited me to move to his study.

古文：余感其意，从之。
现代文：我被他的诚意感动，听从了他。
English: I was moved by his sincerity and obeyed him.

古文：比至而知愿归，即同往晤，且与之别，知此后以服阕ｑｕè即服丧事，与太史俱有哭泣之哀，不复见客也。
现代文：等来到时而知愿归来，立即一同前去会面，并与他道别，了解到此后因为服阅之事，与太史都有哭泣的哀痛，不再见客了。
English: When he arrived, he was willing to return, immediately went to meet with him, and said goodbye to him, and learned that since then, because of the service, he and Taishi had weeping sorrow, and no longer see guests.

古文：比出门，太史复令人询静闻名号寺名，盖为静闻作铭已完，将欲书以界余也。
现代文：到出门时，太史又令人来询问静闻的名号及寺名，原来他为静闻作的铭文已完成，将要书写后交给我。
English: When he left the house, Taishi had someone come to inquire about Jingwen's name and the name of the temple. It turned out that the inscription he had made for Jingwen had already been completed, and he was going to write it down and give it to me.

古文：更谓余，石树甚奇，恐致远不便，欲留之斋头，以挹清风。
现代文：另外告诉我，石树十分奇异，恐怕带到远处不方便，想把它留在书斋案头，以便感受清风一样的情趣。
English: In addition, tell me that the stone tree is very strange, I'm afraid it's inconvenient to take it far away, I want to leave it on the study desk so that I can feel the same pleasure as the breeze.

古文：余谓 此石得天禄石渠之供甚幸，但余石交不固何 。
现代文：我说此石得以存放在天禄阁、石渠阁一类的地方十分幸运，只是我与石头的交谊不坚固怎么办？
English: I said that I was very lucky to be able to store this stone in places such as Tianlu Pavilion and Shiqiu Pavilion, but what if my friendship with the stone is not strong?

古文：知愿曰： 此正所谓石交友谊坚固的朋友也。 
现代文：知愿说： 这正是所谓岩石般坚固的友情了。 
English: Zhizhen said: This is exactly what is called a rock-solid friendship.

古文：遂置石而别。
现代文：于是放下石树告别。
English: So he put down the stone tree and said goodbye.

古文：余仍还刘馆，作纪竟日。
现代文：我仍返回刘家书馆，写了一整天日记。
English: I still returned to the Liu Family Library and wrote a diary for a whole day.

古文：晚还宿于俞。
现代文：晚上回到俞家住宿。
English: In the evening, we will return to our home for an overnight stay.

古文：既卧，太史以静闻铭来赐，谓明日五鼓祭先，不敢与外事也。
现代文：躺下后，太史拿静闻的铭文来赐赠，说他明天五更祭祖先，不敢参与家外之事了。
English: After lying down, Taishi took Jingwen's inscription to give as a gift, saying that he would hold the ancestor's festival on the 5th day of the 5th month the next day, and that he did not dare to participate in matters outside the home.

古文：二十七日余再还刘馆，移所未尽移者。
现代文：二十七日我再次回到刘家书馆，去搬未搬完的东西。
English: On the 27th, I returned to the Liu Family Library to move the unfinished items.

古文：并以银五钱畀禹锡，买鸡葼六斤。
现代文：并拿五钱银子交给禹锡，买来六斤鸡董。
English: He also gave five pieces of silver to Yu Xi to buy six catties of chicken.

古文：湿甚，禹锡为再蒸之，缝袋以贮焉。
现代文：湿气非常重，禹锡为我再蒸过，缝口袋贮藏起来。
English: The humidity was very heavy, so I steamed the yakitori again and stored it in a sewing bag.

古文：乃为余定往顺宁夫。
现代文：于是为我讲定了前往顺宁的脚夫。
English: So they arranged a porter for me to go to Shuning.

古文：二十八日夫至欲行，禹锡固留，乃坐禹锡斋头阅《还魂记》，竟日而尽。
现代文：二十八日脚夫来到打算上路，禹锡坚决挽留，只好坐在禹锡书斋案头阅读《还魂记》，一天功夫便读完了。
English: On the 28th, the porter came to take him on his way, but Yu Xi resolutely stayed behind. He had to sit at the desk of Yu Xi's study and read "Recovering the Soul." He finished reading it in one day.

古文：晚酌遂醉。
现代文：晚上饮酒居然喝醉了。
English: I got really drunk after a night of drinking.

古文：夜大雨。
现代文：夜间下大雨。
English: It rained heavily at night.

古文：二十九日晨，雨时作时止。
现代文：二十九日清晨，雨时下时停。
English: On the morning of the 29th, it rained on and off.

古文：待饭待夫，久之乃别禹锡。
现代文：等开饭等脚夫，很久后才告别禹锡。
English: After the meal, the footmen waited, and it was a long time before they said goodbye to Yu Xi.

古文：适马元真、闪太史亦来送。
现代文：恰好马元真、闪口口也来送行。
English: It just so happens that Ma Yuanzhen and Shining Mouth also came to see him off.

古文：遂出南门，从大道南二里，至夹路村居之街，遂分路由东岐，当平坞中南行，西与沙河之道相望。
现代文：于是走出南门，从大道往南二里，来到村庄房屋夹路的街上，就分路由东边的岔路走，在平旷的山坞中往南行，西边与去沙河的路相望。
English: So I walked out of the south gate, two miles south from the avenue, came to the street where the village houses intersected the road, and took the branch road on the east side, and drove south in the flat dockyard, facing the road to the Shahe on the west side.

古文：五里，过神济桥。
现代文：五里，过了神济桥。
English: Five miles, past the Shanzi Bridge.

古文：其南居庐连亘，是为诸葛营，诸葛之祠在焉，东向，颇小。
现代文：桥南居民房屋连绵不断，这是诸葛营，诸葛亮的祠堂在这里，面向东方，很小。
English: The houses of residents in Qiaonan are continuous. This is Zhuge's camp. Zhuge Liang's ancestral hall is here, facing the east, and is small.

古文：又南为东岳庙，颇巨，亦东向。
现代文：又在南边的是东岳庙，相当巨大，也是向东。
English: Also to the south is Dongyue Temple, quite huge, also to the east.

古文：又南五里，为大树墩，亦多居庐，村之北有小溪东南流，村之南有小溪东北流，合于村之东而东去，此两流即卧狮窝之水也。
现代文：又向南五里，是大树墩，也有很多居民房屋。村子的北边有条小溪向东南流，村子的南边有条小溪往东北流，在村子的东边合流后向东流去，这两条溪流就是卧狮窝的水了。
English: Another five miles to the south, there are large trees and a lot of residential houses. To the north of the village, there is a stream flowing to the southeast, and to the south of the village, there is a stream flowing to the northeast, and after merging in the east of the village, it flows to the east. These two streams are the water of the lion's den.

古文：又南三里，有水自西沿南坡而东，此乃坳子铺东注之水，小石桥跨其上。
现代文：又往南三里，有流水从西面沿南坡往东流，这是坳子铺向东流注的水，小石桥跨在水上。
English: Another three miles to the south, there is running water flowing from the west along the south slope to the east. This is the water flowing from the raft to the east. A small stone bridge spans the water.

古文：越桥南上坡，路分为三：一西南向大山之麓，一东南为石甸、姚关之道，一直东为养邑道。
现代文：越到桥南上坡，路分为三条：一条往西南通向大山的山麓，一条往东南是去石甸、姚关的路，一条向正东是去养邑的路。
English: When you get to the uphill to the south of the bridge, the road is divided into three: one to the southwest leads to the foot of the mountain, one to the southeast is the road to Shidian and Yaoguan, and one to the due east is the road to Yangyun.

古文：于是直东行坡上。
现代文：于是往正东行走在坡上。
English: So I walked due east on the slope.

古文：三里，有小溪自南而北，此亦自西南而来，至此北注而入于东溪，同东向落水坑者，其源当出于冷水管。
现代文：三里，有条小溪自南流向北，这也是自西南流来，到此处往北注入到东溪，一同向东流向落水坑的溪流，它的源头应当出自于冷水警。
English: At Sanli, there is a small stream that flows from south to north, which also flows from the southwest. At this point, it flows north into the East Stream and flows east to the sinkhole. Its source should be from the cold water police.

古文：于是下越一木桥，复东上坡，坡北有村倚之，其地为三条沟。
现代文：从这里下走越过一座木桥，再向东上坡，坡北边有村庄靠着山坡，此地是三条沟。
English: From here, walk over a wooden bridge and then uphill to the east. On the north side of the slope, there is a village leaning against the hillside. There are three ditches here.

古文：由坡东东南下而复上，三里，越一冈，有两三家当冈头，是为胡家坡。
现代文：由坡东往东南下坡后再上走，三里，翻越一座山冈，有两三家人正当冈头，这是胡家坡。
English: From the east slope to the southeast slope and then go up, three miles, over a mountain, there are two or three families right at the top of the hill, this is Hu Jia Po.

古文：越冈而东，三里又下，有水自南而北，南坞稍开，下盘为田，有数家倚南冈，是为阿今。
现代文：越过山冈往东，三里又下走，有水流自南流向北，南面的山坞略微开阔一些，下方盘绕为田，有数家人背靠南冈，这是阿今。
English: Cross the hill to the east, walk three miles down, there is water flowing from the south to the north, the dock on the south side is slightly wider, the bottom is coiled into a field, there are several families with their backs to the south hill, this is Agin.

古文：过阿今，复东上三里，其南坞水遂分东西下。
现代文：过了阿今，再往东上登三里，那南面山坞中的水于是分为东、西下流。
English: After Ahim, three miles further east, the water in the southern dock is then divided into east and west downstream.

古文：又东五里，乃饭。
现代文：又向东五里，才吃饭。
English: It was another five miles to the east before we had time to eat.

古文：又三里稍下，为养邑。
现代文：又走三里稍下行，是养邑。
English: Another three-mile walk slightly downhill is Yaoyuan.

古文：南有坞盘而为田，北正对笔架山之南垂，有数家当坞。
现代文：南面有山坞盘绕垦为农田，北面正对笔架山的南垂，有数家人位于坞中。
English: To the south, there is a dock surrounded by farmland, and to the north, facing the south slope of Pencil Hill, there are several families living in the dock.

古文：日才下午，而前无止处，遂宿。
现代文：时光才是下午，可前方无居住之处，便住下了。
English: It was only the afternoon, but there was nowhere to live, so they moved in.

古文：三十日店妇鸡鸣起炊，平明余起而饭，出店东南行。
现代文：三十日店中妇人鸡鸣起床煮饭，黎明我起床吃饭，出客店往东南行。
English: On the 30th, a woman in the inn woke up to the sound of chickens crowing and cooked rice. At dawn, I got up to eat and left the inn for the southeast.

古文：稍下，渡南来小溪，即上坡东逾南转，即养邑东环之支也。
现代文：稍下走，渡过南来的小溪，立即上坡向东翻越往南转，这里就是养邑东面环绕的支脉了。
English: Walk down a bit, cross the stream coming from the south, immediately go uphill to the east, turn over and turn south, here is the branch surrounded by the east of Yaoyuan.

古文：有公馆当坡，西瞰壑中，田庐历历。
现代文：有公馆位于坡上，向西俯瞰壑谷中，田野房屋历历在目。
English: There is a public house located on the slope, overlooking the west of Shibuya, and the field houses are clearly visible.

古文：车逾坡而下，又涉一小坞而东上坡，遂行冈头，共五里。
现代文：车子越过山坡下行，又涉过一处小山坞后向东上坡，于是行走在冈头，共五里。
English: The car went downhill over the hillside, and after passing a small dock, it went uphill to the east, so it walked on the ridge, a total of five miles.

古文：路分二岐：一东南者，为西邑道；一西北者，为山河坝道。
现代文：路分为两条岔道：一条向东南的，是去西邑的路；一条往西北的，是去山河坝的路。
English: The road is divided into two branches: one to the southeast is the road to Xiyu; one to the northwest is the road to Shanheba.

古文：先是问道，多言由西邑逾芭蕉岭达亦登，有热水从石盘中溢出，其处有大道通顺宁。
现代文：这之前间路，多数人说由西邑越过芭蕉岭到达亦登，有热水从石盘中溢出，那地方有大道通顺宁府。
English: On the previous road, most people said that they crossed the Basho Ridge from Xiyu to Yiden, and there was hot water overflowing from the stone plate. There was a road leading to Shuningfu in that place.

古文：余欲从之，而养邑店主言，往西邑路近，而山溪无桥，今雨后无桥，水涨难渡；当折而北，由山河坝渡其下流，仍由枯柯而达亦登为便。
现代文：我打算从此路走，可养邑的店主讲，往西邑路近，但山间溪流无桥，现在雨后无桥斗水涨难以渡过去；应当折向北走，由山河坝渡过它的下游，仍经由枯柯上登方便。
English: I plan to walk from this road, but the shopkeeper of Yangyur said that it is close to Xiyur Road, but there is no bridge between the mountain streams, and now it is difficult to cross after the rain without a bridge. It should be turned to the north, crossing the downstream of the mountain and river dams, and it is still convenient to climb up through the withers.

古文：至是，见同行者俱不走西邑而走山河坝，余亦从之。
现代文：到此时，见同行的人都不走西邑而走山河坝，我也跟着他们走。
English: At this time, I saw that my companions did not go to Xiyu, but went to Shanheba. I also followed them.

古文：遂西北两涉小坞，二里余，升坡而东，遂循永昌溪南崖行。
现代文：于是向西两次涉过小山坞，二里多，往东登坡，于是沿永昌溪南面的山崖行。
English: As a result, I waded through a small mountain dock twice to the west, more than two miles, climbed the slope to the east, and then walked along the cliffs south of Yongchang Creek.

古文：溪嵌崖底，止见北崖削壁下嵌，而犹不见水。
现代文：溪流嵌在山崖底下，只见北面山崖陡削的石壁下嵌，可仍然不见水。
English: The stream is embedded under the cliff, only the steeply cut stone wall of the northern cliff can be seen, but there is still no water.

古文：又东二里稍下，见水嵌崖底如一线，遂东见其门对束如削，门外环畴盘错，溪流曲折其中，有村倚北崖之东，即落水寨也。
现代文：又往东二里稍下走，见溪水嵌在山崖底下如一条线，终于见到东面峡口相对紧束如刀削出来的一般，峡口以外环绕的田地盘绕交错，溪流曲折在其中，有村庄紧靠在北面山崖之东，就是落水寨了。
English: Another two miles to the east, walk down a little, see the stream embedded in the bottom of the cliff like a line, and finally see the east side of the gorge relatively tightly bunched like a knife. The fields surrounding the gorge are intertwined, and the stream meanders in them. There are villages close to the east of the cliff on the north side, which is a flooded village.

古文：其南崖之夹溪为川者，东突如踞狮，水从其北出，路从其南下。
现代文：那南面的山崖夹住溪流成为平川，向东前突如同盘踞着的雄狮，水从它的北边流出去，路从它的南边下走。
English: The mountain cliff to the south clamped the stream into a flat river, jutting eastward like a coiled lion, the water flowing out from its north side, and the road going down from its south side.

古文：半里，遂由狮腋下降，路甚逼仄，半里，抵狮麓。
现代文：半里，便由雄狮岩侧旁下降，路非常狭窄，半里，抵达如雄狮盘踞的山麓。
English: After half a mile, I descended from the side of the Lion Rock. The road was very narrow, and after half a mile, I arrived at the foot of the mountain like a lion.

古文：又东半里，一溪自南坞来，有坝堰其上流，有桥跨其下流。度桥东行田塍间，泞甚。
现代文：又向东半里，一条溪水自南坞流来，有水坝拦在它的上游，有桥跨在它的下游，越到桥东前行在田野间，非常泥泞。
English: Halfway to the east, a stream flows from the south dock. There is a dam in its upper reaches, a bridge across it in its lower reaches, and to the east of the bridge, it is very muddy.

古文：一里，登坞东冈南行。
现代文：一里，登上山坞东面的山冈往南行。
English: One mile, climb the hill to the east of the dock and head south.

古文：一里，见坞西有瀑挂西崖，历两层而下，注坞中南来之溪。
现代文：一里，见山坞西边有瀑布挂在西面的山崖上，历经两层下落，注入坞中南来的溪中。
English: One mile to the west of the dock, there is a waterfall hanging on the western cliff, after two levels of fall, it is injected into the creek coming from the south of the dock.

古文：路隔对之，东向入峡，雨大至。
现代文：路隔溪与它相对，向东走入峡中，大雨来临。
English: The road across the creek is opposite to it, going east into the gorge, and heavy rain is coming.

古文：二里，逾岭头，有路西南来合，山头坑洼旁错，乱水交流。
现代文：二里，越上岭头，有条路从西南来会合，山头上坑坑洼洼遍布错杂，乱水纵横流淌。
English: Two miles further up the ridge, there is a road coming from the south-west. There are pits and potholes all over the mountain, and turbulent water flows vertically and horizontally.

古文：又东三里，再度坑坳，盘而东北行。
现代文：又往东三里，再次越过坑状的山坳，盘绕着往东北行。
English: Another three miles to the east, again over the crater-shaped mountains, winding around to the northeast.

古文：其下有坑，破石搜崖，亦突而北注。
现代文：那下边有流水，破开岩石搜寻山崖，也是急速前突往北流注。
English: Below there is running water, breaking through the rocks to search for cliffs, and also rushing rapidly northward.

古文：随之一里余，乃东下越其流。
现代文：沿坑谷走一里多，就向东下走越过水流。
English: After walking more than a mile along the valley of the pit, I walked eastward to cross the stream.

古文：又东北上半里，见东坞又有小水自东而西向，与南来之溪合于北崖下。
现代文：又向东北上走半里，见东面山坞中又有小溪自东向西流，与南来的溪水在北面山崖下合流。
English: Walk another half mile to the northeast, and you will see a small stream flowing from east to west in the eastern dock, merging with the stream coming from the south under the northern cliff.

古文：北崖纯石耸起，其上树木葱郁，而下则有穴，伏而暗坠，二水之所从入也。
现代文：北面的山崖纯是岩石高耸而起，崖上树木郁郁葱葱，而下边则有洞穴，低伏下去坠入黑暗之中，是两条溪水流进去的地方。
English: The cliffs to the north are pure rock, towering above the tree-lined cliffs, with caves below, plunging down into darkness, where two streams enter.

古文：又东向上岭，半里，逾其脊。
现代文：又向东上岭，半里，越上岭脊。
English: And eastward to Shangling, half a mile, crossing Shangling Ridge.

古文：行岭头半里，始见东壑有田下盘，其东复有山夹之。
现代文：行走在岭头半里，开始望见东边壑谷中有农田盘绕在下方，它东面又有山夹住它。
English: Walking along the first half mile of the ridge, I began to see farmland coiled below in the valley to the east, and mountains clinging to it to the east.

古文：路从岭上转而南行，一里余而下。
现代文：路从岭上转向南行，一里多后下山。
English: The road turns from the ridge to the south and descends after more than a mile.

古文：下半里，其坞自南而北，水亦经之。
现代文：下走半里，那山坞自南伸展到北，水也流经山坞。
English: Half a mile down, the dock stretches from south to north, and water also flows through the dock.

古文：度桥溯流而南，二里，南坞稍开，是为五马。
现代文：过桥溯流往南走，二里，南面山坞渐渐开阔起来，这是五马。
English: Cross the bridge and follow the stream to the south, two miles, the dock on the south side gradually opens up, which is five horses.

古文：其西南壑中居庐颇多，东坡上亦有四五家居路左。
现代文：它西南壑谷中居民房屋相当多，东面坡上也有四五家人住在路左。
English: There are quite a lot of residential houses in the southwest of Shibuya, and there are also four or five families living on the eastern slope.

古文：坡南有一坑，自东峡出，有小水从其中注西南壑。
现代文：坡南有一个坑谷，自东峡中出来，有小溪从其中注入西南的壑谷中。
English: There is a valley in the south of the slope, coming out of the East Gorge, from which a stream flows into the southwest of the valley.

古文：下坑，涉其水之南，溯之东上。
现代文：走下坑谷，涉到那溪水的南岸，溯溪流往东上行。
English: Walk down the valley, wade to the south bank of the stream, and follow the stream to the east.

古文：里余，随峡南转，而坑中水遂穷，有脊自东而西。
现代文：一里多，顺峡谷往南转，而坑谷中的水于是完了，有山脊自东往西延。
English: More than a mile, along the canyon to the south, and the water in the valley is then finished, with ridges extending from east to west.

古文：度脊南，复坠坑而下，从脊东行，转坑东之崖。
现代文：越到山脊南边，又坠下坑谷，从山脊上往东行，转过坑谷东边的山崖。
English: Go over the ridge to the south, fall down the valley, go east from the ridge, and turn around the cliff on the east side of the valley.

古文：其下亦嵌而成壑，壑中亦有人家，隐于深崖重箐之间，但闻鸡鸣舂响而已。
现代文：山崖下边也是深嵌成壑谷，壑谷中也有人家，隐藏在深深的山崖与重重山警之间，只听得见鸡鸣和春米的响声而已。
English: The lower edge of the cliff is also deeply embedded into the valley, and there are houses in the valley, hidden between the deep cliff and the heavy mountain police, only the sound of chickens and spring rice can be heard.

古文：东坑既尽，从其上涉坞升冈，见冈南一峰特耸而卓立，白雾偏笼其半，乃东来脊上石峰之层起者。
现代文：东边坑谷完后，从它上面涉过山坞登上山冈，见冈南一座山峰特别高耸卓立，白雾偏在一边笼罩着它的半边，是往东来的山脊上层层耸起的石峰。
English: After finishing the pit valley on the east side, I waded through the dock and climbed up the mountain from above it. I saw a particularly towering mountain peak in Gannan. The white mist shrouded its half on one side, and it was the stone peak rising in layers on the ridge to the east.

古文：由其北穿坳而东，共二里而抵坳中之脊。
现代文：由石峰北面穿过山坳往东走，共二里后抵达山坳中的山脊。
English: From the north side of the stone peak, walk through the mountains to the east, and after a total of two miles, you will reach the ridge in the mountains.

古文：有巨石当脊而中踞，其高及丈，大亦如之，其上有孔，大及尺，深亦如之，中贮水及其半，不涸不盈，正与哀牢金井之孔相似。
现代文：有块巨石盘踞在山脊的中央，石高达一丈，大处也如此，石上有孔，大到一尺，深处也如此，孔中贮水到达石孔的半中间，不干也不满，正好与哀牢山金井的孔相似。
English: In the middle of the ridge, there is a huge boulder. The stone is one meter high, and so is the large area. There is a hole in the stone, as big as one foot, and so is the depth. The water stored in the hole reaches the middle of the stone hole. It is not dry and is not satisfied. It is just similar to the hole in the golden well of Mount Ailou.

古文：踞大石而饭。
现代文：坐在大石头上吃饭。
English: Sitting on a big rock to eat.

古文：土人即名此岭为大石头。
现代文：当地人就把此岭起名为大石头。
English: Locals have nicknamed the ridge the Big Rock.

古文：从石东下坞中，道分为二：一由东向逾冈者，为大道，稍迂而达大腊彝；一由东南下峡者，为捷道，稍近而抵小腊彝。
现代文：从巨石向东下到坞中，路分为两条：一条由东面翻越山冈的，是大道，稍绕道后到达大猎彝；一条由东南下到峡中的，是捷径，稍近些而抵达小猎彝。
English: From the boulder eastward to the dock, the road is divided into two: one from the east over the mountain is a highway, and after a short detour, it reaches the big hunting pier; one from the southeast to the middle of the gorge is a shortcut, and it is a little closer to the small hunting pier.

古文：此皆枯柯属寨也。
现代文：这都是枯柯下属的寨子。
English: This is all the stockade of the subordinates of Kuike.

古文：乃由峡中下，于是石崖南突，丛箐交萦，北嵌为峡，南耸为崖。
现代文：于是由峡中下走，在这里石崖南突，成丛的竹林交缠，北边嵌为峡谷，南边耸成山崖。
English: So we walked down the middle of the gorge, where the stone cliff juts out to the south, intertwined with clumps of bamboo forest, embedded in the canyon to the north, and towering into a cliff to the south.

古文：二里，行南冈之上。
现代文：二里，行走在南冈之上。
English: Two miles, walking on top of the South Hill.

古文：又二里，盘冈嘴而南，其东峡中，平坠南绕。
现代文：又走二里，绕过冈嘴往南，它东边的峡中，平缓下坠往南回绕。
English: I walked another two miles, around the mouth of the Ganges to the south, and in the gorge to the east of it, I slowly fell down to the south and circled back.

古文：盖由此嘴东坠，其下皆削崖，故路又分为二：一由崖下循崖根南转，一由崖上蹑崖端南曲。
现代文：原来由此山嘴往东下坠，它下方全是陡削的山崖，所以路又分为两条：一条由山崖下沿崖根往南转，一条由山崖上登崖顶向南曲。
English: Originally, the mouth of the mountain fell down to the east from here, and the steep cliffs were all below it, so the road was divided into two: one from the bottom of the cliff along the cliff to the south, and one from the top of the cliff to the south.

古文：乃从崖端南逾石隙而下，一里，仍随南坡东转。
现代文：于是从崖顶向南穿过石缝下走，一里，仍顺着南坡向东转。
English: So I walked south from the top of the cliff through the stone gap, one mile, still following the south slope to the east.

古文：还瞰所逾之崖，壁立下嵌，其下盘为深坞，崖根有泉淙淙出穴间，小路之下盘者因之；遥望北崖山冈，排闼东出，大道之东陟者因之。
现代文：回身远望越过的山崖，墙壁样竖立下嵌，它下边盘绕成深深的山坞，崖根有泉水涂涂从洞穴中流出来，往下盘绕的小路沿着泉水走；遥望北崖的山冈，门扇样向东排列而出，往东上登的大道沿着山冈走。
English: Turn around and look at the cliff in the distance, the walls are erected in the bottom, the bottom is coiled into a deep dock, the cliff roots have spring water flowing out of the cave, and the winding path goes down along the spring water; look at the mountains and hills of the north cliff in the distance, the doors are lined up to the east, and the road to the east goes along the mountain.

古文：余平行南冈，又东一里，下盘之小路逾冈来合。
现代文：我平缓行走在南冈上，又向东一里，往下盘绕的小路越过山冈前来会合。
English: I walked smoothly up the south hill, and then one mile east, down a winding path over the hill to the rendezvous.

古文：又东一里余，南冈复东突，路下其北腋间。
现代文：又向东一里多，南冈又向东突，路下到它的北面山侧间。
English: Another kilometer to the east, Nangang to the east, the road down to its north side of the mountain.

古文：复盘坳东上半里，登东冈之南坡，始东见枯柯之川，与东山相夹，而未见其西底。
现代文：再绕着山坳向东上走半里，登上东冈的南坡，开始望见东方枯柯的平川，与东山相夹，但未见它西面的坞底。
English: Then I walked half a mile eastward around the ridge, climbed the south slope of Donggang, and began to see the Hirakawa River in Dongguan, sandwiched between Dongshan, but I did not see the dock bottom on its west side.

古文：又西南见岭头一峰，兀突插云雾中，如大士之披络而坐者，闪烁出没，亭亭独上，乃南来脊上之峰，不知其为何名也。
现代文：又见西南岭头有一座山峰，突兀上插云雾之中，如同观音菩萨披着缨络坐着的样子，闪烁出没，亭亭独自上耸，是南来的山脊上的山峰，不知它是什么名字。
English: In addition, there is a mountain in the southwest ridge of the ridge. It is a peak on the ridge coming from the south, and it is inserted into the clouds and fog. It is like the appearance of Guanyin Bodhisattva sitting with a halo around him. It shines everywhere, and Ting Ting rises alone. I don't know what its name is.

古文：又东一里，复转冈之北坡，东下一里，有四五家倚冈而居，是为小腊彝。
现代文：又往东一里，再转过山冈的北坡，向东下走一里，有四五家人背靠山冈居住，这是小猎彝。
English: Another mile to the east, then turn around the northern slope of the mountain, walk one mile eastward, there are four or five families living on the mountain, this is Xiao Yue.

古文：众欲下坡问亦登道，土人行人皆言下坡至江桥不可止宿，亦无居停之家，循江而南至亦登，且五六十里，时已不及，而途无可宿，必止于是。
现代文：我想下坡去打听去亦登的路，当地人行路人都说下坡到江桥不可住宿，也无居住停歇的人家，沿江往南到亦登，将近五六十里路，时间已来不及了，而且途中无处可住，必须住在这里。
English: I want to go downhill to inquire about the way to Yidang. Local pedestrians all say that it is not possible to stay downhill to Jiangqiao, and there are no people who live there. It is nearly fifty or sixty miles south along the river to Yidang. The time is too late, and there is nowhere to live on the way. I must live here.

古文：时才过午，遂偕止而止。
现代文：此时才过中午，便一同住下来。
English: It was just after noon when they moved in together.

古文：幸主人杨姓者，知江流之源委，道路之曲折，询之无不实，且知溢盘温泉。不在亦登而在鸡飞。
现代文：幸好姓杨的房主人，知道江流始末和道路的曲折，询问他没有不知道的，并且知道石盘中溢出的温泉，不在亦登而在鸡飞。
English: Fortunately, the owner of the house, surnamed Yang, knew the beginning and end of the river flow and the twists and turns of the road, asked him what he did not know, and knew that the hot springs overflowing in the stone plate were not in Yidang, but in Qianfei.

古文：乃止而作纪，抵暮而卧。
现代文：于是住下来写日记，到天黑才睡下。
English: So I stayed and wrote in my diary. I didn't fall asleep until it was dark.

