古文：左操五音，右执五味，怀绳与准钩，多备规轴，减溜大成，是唯时德之节。
现代文：左手操控五音，右手持守五味。胸中持有绳墨尺度，有多样的规矩与关键，瞬息之间万物成就，这是遵循时节变化的德操。
English: The left hand controls the five tones, the right hand holds the five tastes. The rope and ink scale is held in the chest, there are a variety of rules and keys, and everything is accomplished in the blink of an eye. This is the virtue of following the change of seasons.

古文：春采生，秋采蓏，夏处阴，冬处阳，大贤之德长。
现代文：春天顺着万物生长做事，秋天顺应万物含藏行为；夏天处在阴凉中，冬天处在阳光里，这是大贤的高德。
English: Spring follows the growth of all things to do things, autumn follows the behavior of all things to contain things; summer is in the shade, winter is in the sun, this is the virtue of the sages.

古文：明乃哲，哲乃明，奋乃苓，明哲乃大行，毒而无怒，怨而无言，欲而无谋。
现代文：明智即哲慧，哲慧即明智，盛满则凋零，知此，明哲之智才能畅行。内心毒恨而不发怒，心中怨恨却不作声，内心有求却不见谋求形迹。
English: Wisdom is wisdom, and wisdom is wisdom, and fullness is withering, and with this knowledge wisdom can flourish. The heart hates but does not become angry, the heart resents but does not speak out, and the heart seeks but finds no sign of seeking.

古文：大揆度仪，若觉卧，若晦明，若敖之在尧也。
现代文：有大的揣测考量，却像睡醒的人安卧那样无声，似明白的人掩藏其智，又像敖浑然处在尧的年代中。
English: There are great speculations and considerations, but they are as silent as a sleepy person lying down, a seemingly clear person hiding his wisdom, and like a cocoon in the age of cocoons.

古文：毋访于佞，毋蓄于谄，毋育于凶，毋监于谗，不正广其荒，不用其区区，鸟飞准绳，讂充末衡，易政利民，毋犯其凶，毋迩其求，而远其忧；高为其居，危颠莫之救。
现代文：不要向奸佞之人征询，不要豢养谄媚的人，不要培植凶恶之辈，不要听信谗巧之言，行为不正，丧亡可就广大了。不用逐个空间度量，而保持虚空，君主衡人论事依 鸟飞准绳 的原则。心胸要忠诚，耳目要端正，良好的政治对百姓有利。不要招惹那些凶事，不要接近无限奢求之事，要远离忧患；高耸的居处，一旦颠覆可就没法救了。
English: Don't solicit from traitors, don't cultivate flatterers, don't breed vicious people, don't listen to clever words, don't behave dishonestly, and the loss can be extensive. Don't measure space by space, but keep it empty, the monarch measures people according to the principle of the bird's flight scale. The heart should be loyal, the ears and eyes should be neat, and good politics is beneficial to the people. Don't provoke those evil things, don't get close to things of infinite luxury, and stay away from troubles; towering dwellings, once subverted, can't be saved.

古文：可浅可深，可浮可沉，可曲可直，可言可默。
现代文：可以深就深，可以浅就浅；可以漂起就漂起，可以下沉则下沉；可以曲弯即曲弯，可以正直则正直；可以言说则发言，应该沉默则闭口。
English: It can be deep to deep, it can be shallow to shallow; it can float to float, it can sink to sink; it can bend to bend, it can be honest to honest; it can speak to speak, it should be silent to shut up.

古文：天不一时，地不一利；人不一事，可正而视；定而履，深而迹，夫天地一险一易，若鼓之有楟，擿挡则击。
现代文：上天不单一个时令，大地也不仅一种利益；人也不只一件事情。应端正视觉，笃定脚步，深切表明自己的行迹。天地有险有平易，就像鼓有鼓槌，击之则叮当有声。
English: Heaven is not just a season, the earth is not just a benefit; people are not just one thing. You should correct your vision, determine your steps, and deeply show your footsteps. Heaven and earth have dangers and ease, just like a drum has a drumstick, and when you hit it, there is a clanging sound.

古文：天地万物之橐，宙合有橐天地。 
现代文：天地是囊括万物的大口袋，宙合的道理则包括天地。
English: Heaven and earth is a large pocket that contains all things, and the principle of the halo includes heaven and earth.

古文：左操五音，右执五味， 此言君臣之分也。
现代文： 左操五音，右执五味 ，这讲的是君臣各自的名位和本分。
English: Five syllables on the left, five flavors on the right, this is about the respective positions and duties of the monarchs and ministers.

古文：君出令佚，故立于左。臣任力劳，故立于右。
现代文：人君在上边发令，总是安逸的，故居于左；人臣在下边出力，总是劳顿的，故居于右。
English: The people's lord gives orders at the top, is always at ease, and used to live on the left; the people's vassal works hard at the bottom, is always exhausted, and used to live on the right.

古文：夫五音不同声而能调，此言君之所出令无妄也。而无所不顺，顺而令行政成。
现代文：五音虽不同声而可以协调，这是比喻人君出令没有离开法则，从而无所不顺， 顺 则法令通行无阻，政事赢得成就。
English: Although the five tones are not the same, they can be coordinated. This is a metaphor of the ruler issuing orders without departing from the law, so that everything goes smoothly.

古文：五味不同物而能和，此言臣之所任力无也，而无所不得，得而力务财多；故君出令，正其国而无齐其欲，一其爱而无独与是。王施而无私，则海内来宾矣。
现代文：五味虽不同物而可以调和，这是比喻人臣出力办事没有离开法则，从而无所不得。 得 则劳力有所专务，财物有所增长。所以人君出令，专为正国而不为满足私欲，与民同爱而并非独行其是，如此施德而无私，则四海归服。
English: Although the five elements are different, they can be reconciled. This is a metaphor for the power of human beings to work without departing from the law, so that they can do anything. The result is that labor has special duties and wealth has increased. Therefore, human beings issue orders, exclusively for the right country and not for the satisfaction of selfish desires, with the people and not alone, so generous and selfless, the four seas are subjugated.

古文：臣任力，同其忠而无争其利，不失其事而无有其名，分敬而无妒，则夫妇和勉矣。
现代文：人臣出力任事，同尽忠心而不争夺私利，不失本职而不猎取虚名，如此勤敬而无所忌妒，则天下男女都将和谐共勉。
English: If men and women in the world can work hard without envy, be loyal to each other without competing for personal gain, not neglect their duties without taking advantage of false fame, and work diligently without envy, then the world will be harmonious.

古文：君失音则风律必流，流则乱败。臣离味则百姓不养。百姓不养，则众散亡。
现代文：人君行事失去协调，则国家教化的成果必然流失，流失则国家混乱失败；人臣行事失去协调，则百姓的生活不能供养，不能供养则离散逃亡。
English: If people and officials act without coordination, the results of the country's indoctrination will inevitably be lost, and the loss will lead to the country's chaos and failure; if people and officials act without coordination, the people's lives cannot be supported, and if they cannot be supported, they will disperse and flee.

古文：臣各能其分，则国宁矣。
现代文：君臣各自胜任其本职，国家就安宁了。
English: The monarchs and the ministers will each competently perform their duties, and the country will be at peace.

古文：故名之曰不德。
现代文：所以，把这称之为 大德。 
English: So call it what it is.

古文： 怀绳与准钩，多备规轴，减溜大成，是唯时德之节。 
现代文：关于 怀绳与准钩，多备规轴，减溜大成，是唯时德之节。 
English: With regard to the harness rope and the standard hook, more standard shafts are prepared, and the reduction of slippage is completed.

古文：夫绳扶拨以为正，准坏险以为平，钩入枉而出直，此言圣君贤佐之制举也。
现代文：绳，可以扶偏为正；准可以破险为平；钩，可以进入弯曲而取出直线。这是比喻圣君贤相关于法度的运用。
English: A rope can be bent to make it straight; a rope can be broken to make it level; a hook can be bent to make it straight. This is a metaphor of the sage's application of the law.

古文：博而不失，因以备能而无遗国犹是国也，民犹是民也，桀纣以乱亡，汤武以治。
现代文：法度详尽而无所遗失，因而其功能也将完备无缺。国家还是那个国家，人民还是那些人民，桀纣因乱而败亡，汤武却因治而兴盛。
English: The laws are detailed and nothing has been lost, so their functions will be complete. The country is still that country, the people are still those people, and the war is defeated by the chaos, but the Tangwu is prosperous by the rule.

古文：昌章道以教，明法以期，民之兴善也如此，汤武之功是也。多备规轴者，成轴也。
现代文：彰明治国之道来教育人民，申明治国之法来对待人民，使人民从善成风，这就是汤武的功绩，所谓 多备规轴 ，指的是 成轴 。
English: To educate the people in accordance with the way of the Meiji era, to treat the people in accordance with the law of the Meiji era, and to make the people become good, this is the merit of Tangwu. The so-called "multiple axes" refers to the formation of axes.

古文：夫成轴之多也，其处大也不究，其入小也不塞。
现代文：成轴的品种繁多，放在大的地方不松动。放在小的地方不堵塞，就像按照各种足迹做成鞋楦子，怎么能够不合适呢？
English: There are many varieties of spindles, and they do not loosen when placed in large places. When placed in small places, they do not clog, just like shoelaces made according to various footprints. How can it be inappropriate?

古文：犹□求履之宪也。夫焉有不适善﹖适善，备也，仙也是以无乏。
现代文：非常合适，在于非常完备，因为挑选着使用，所以不会缺乏。
English: Very suitable, in that it is very complete, because it is used selectively, so there will be no shortage of it.

古文：故谕教者取辟焉。
现代文：由此，主持教化的人就可以得到了借鉴。
English: From this, those who preside over the indoctrination can learn from it.

古文：天淯阳，无计量，地化生，无法□。
现代文：上天养育万物，多得无法计量；大地造化万物，多得没有边际。
English: There is no limit to the number of things that Heaven has nurtured and the number of things that Earth has created.

古文：所谓是而无非，非而无是，是非有，必交来，苟信是，以有不可先规之，必有不可识虑之，然将卒而不戒，故圣人博闻、多见、畜道、以待物。
现代文：所谓是就不是非，非就不是是，但是非又一定是共同存在的。如果确认某一事物为正确，是因为早有一个错误事物先在那里被定下来了，而且必有一个错误事物已在那里被人识别考虑了。然而这些过程，都将是仓淬到来，令人无法准备的。所以，圣人总是要博闻多见，积累规律性的理论、原则等待新事物的到来。
English: The so-called "yes" is not "no," "no" is not "yes," but "no" must also co-exist. If a certain thing is confirmed as correct, it is because a wrong thing has already been determined there first, and a wrong thing must have been recognized and considered there. However, these processes will all be premature and unprepared. Therefore, sages always have to be well-informed, accumulate regular theories and principles, and wait for the arrival of new things.

古文：物至而对形，曲均存矣。减、尽也。溜，发也。
现代文：新事物一经出现，就与这些理论模式相参对，错误与正确的分别就在其中解决了。 减 的意思是完全， 溜 的意思是发展，说的是局部与全局全面完善，无不处理得宜。
English: As soon as a new thing emerges, it contradicts these theoretical models, and the difference between error and correctness is resolved therein. 减 means complete, 溜 means development, and refers to the comprehensive improvement of the local and global situation, and everything should be handled appropriately.

古文：言□环毕善，莫不备得，故曰减溜大成。成功之术，必有巨获。
现代文：所以说：完全发展而达到完备无缺。成功的方法，一定有规可循。
English: Therefore, it is said: to fully develop and achieve perfection. There must be rules to follow for a successful method.

古文：必周于德，审于时，时德之遇，事之会也，若合符然，故曰是唯时德之节。
现代文：必须极力修德，详审时机，时机与德望结合，便是成事的机会，就象符契的相合一样。所以说：最重要的是时与德的结合要恰到好处。 春采生，秋采蓏；夏处阴，冬处阳。 
English: Therefore, it is said that the most important thing is that the combination of time and virtue should be just right. Spring harvest, autumn harvest; summer is in the shade, winter is in the sun.

古文： 春采生，秋采蓏，夏处阴，冬处阳 ，此言圣人之动静开阖，诎信浧儒，取与之必因于时也。
现代文：这是说圣人的动静、开合、屈伸、取予，一定要因时制宜。合于时宜则动、不合时宜则静。
English: This means that the saint's movement and stillness, opening and closing, bending and stretching, and taking and giving, must be in accordance with the conditions of the time. When it is appropriate, it is moving, and when it is inappropriate, it is quiet.

古文：时则动，不时则静，是以古之士有意而未可阳也。
现代文：所以，古代贤士有图谋而不宣扬。他总是收敛其治世的言论，暗中收敛而注意隐藏自己。
English: Therefore, the ancient sage had a plot but did not announce it. He always restrained his reigning speech, secretly restrained and took care to hide himself.

古文：故愁其治言，含愁而藏之也。
现代文：贤人处于乱世，知道治世之道行不通，就以沉抑的态度躲避刑罚，静默的方式求得免祸。
English: The wise man is in a chaotic world, knowing that the way of ruling the world is not feasible, he avoids punishment with a subdued attitude, and seeks to avoid disaster in a silent manner.

古文：贤人之处乱世也，知道之不可行，则沉抑以辟罚，静默以侔免，辟之也犹夏之就清，冬之就温焉。
现代文：他的躲避，有如夏天之就清凉，冬天之就温暖，才可以沾不上寒热之害。他这并不是怕死而不忠。
English: He avoids it as he avoids the cold in summer and the heat in winter, so as not to catch cold and heat. He is not unfaithful because he is afraid of death.

古文：可以无及于寒暑之灾矣。非为畏死而不忠也，夫强言以为僇，而功泽不加，进伤为人君严之义，退害为人臣者之生，其为不利弥甚。故退身不舍端，修业不息版，以待清明。
现代文：硬要强进谏言而带来杀身之祸，往上说，伤害了君主尊严的义理；往下说，伤害了人臣个人的生命，其不利是太严重了。因此，他退身下野却不肯扔掉笏版，解职退休也不停止版书，以等待政治清明的形势。
English: His insistence on forcing his way into the discussion and bringing about the calamity of killing himself, in the first place, harmed the principle of the dignity of the monarch; in the second place, it harmed the life of the individual subject, and the disadvantage was too serious. Therefore, he retreated to the countryside but refused to throw away the forged edition, and the dismissal and retirement did not stop the edition book, in order to wait for the political situation to be clear.

古文：故微子不与于纣之难，而封于宋，以为殷主，先祖不灭，后世不绝，故曰大贤之德长。
现代文：所以，微子并没有替纣王死难，而是受封于宋国，充当殷遗民的首领。这样，祖先不被湮灭，后世也不断绝。所以说：大贤人的德泽是长远的。
English: Therefore, Muizi did not die on behalf of King Gong, but was sealed in Song and served as the leader of the remnants of Yin. In this way, the ancestors were not annihilated, and later generations continued to die out. Therefore, it is said that the virtue of great sages is long-term.

古文： 明乃哲，哲乃明，奋乃苓，明哲乃大行 ，此言擅美主盛自奋也，以琅汤凌轹人，人之败也常自此；是故圣人着之简策，传以告后进，曰： 奋盛，苓落也。
现代文： 明乃哲，哲乃明，奋乃苓，明哲乃大行。 这是说独擅其美，自恃其盛，自奋其能，而且以骄傲放荡的态势去欺凌他人，人之失败常从这里开始。为此，圣人写在书里，传给后学之士说：奋，是兴盛；苓，是衰落。
English: This is to say that if one is good at one's job, if one is self-assured, if one is self-motivated, and if one bullies others in a proud and dissolute manner, one's failure often begins here. For this reason, the sage wrote in a book and passed it on to later scholars, saying: "Enthusiasm is prosperity; arrogance is decline."

古文：盛而不落者，昧之有也。 
现代文：只兴盛而不衰落的事，从来没有。
English: There has never been such a thing as prosperity without decline.

古文：故有道者，不平其称，不满其量，不依其乐，不致其度。
现代文：所以，有道之人，总是不表现自己分量十足，不表现局量已满，不表现调子太高，不表现气度高傲至极。
English: Therefore, a virtuous person always does not show that he is full of weight, does not show that the weight is full, does not show that the tone is too high, and does not show that the temperament is extremely arrogant.

古文：爵尊则肃士，禄丰则务施，功大而不伐，业明而不矜。
现代文：爵位高就注意尊敬贤士，俸禄厚就注意施放财物，功劳大而不夸耀，事业盛而并不骄傲。
English: If the rank is high, pay attention to respect the sages. If the salary is high, pay attention to give away wealth. If the merit is great, do not boast. If the cause is prosperous, do not be proud.

古文：夫名实之相怨久矣，是故绝而无交。
现代文：名与实的互相矛盾是由来已久的事了，所以互相排斥而不能并有。
English: The contradiction between name and reality has been around for a long time, so they are mutually exclusive and cannot coexist.

古文：惠者知其不可两守，乃取一焉，故安而无忧。
现代文：明智的人知道不可能两者兼备，于是只取其一，弃名取实。因此，安定而无忧。
English: A wise man knows that it is impossible to have both, so he takes only one, renounces the name and takes the truth. Therefore, he is stable and worry-free.

古文： 毒而无怒 ，此言止忿速，济没法也。 怨而无言 ，言不可不慎也；言不周密，反伤其身。故曰 欲而无谋 。言谋不可以泄，谋泄灾极。
现代文： 毒而无怒 ，这是说平息忿怒可以速成其事。 怨而无言 说的是不可不保持谨慎：发言不周到严密，反伤其身。 欲而无谋 ，说的是谋事不可外泄，谋外泄则灾祸来临。
English: "Poison but no anger" means that anger can be quickly calmed down; "grudge but no words" means that one must be cautious: if one's speech is not thorough and strict, it will hurt one's body; "greed but no plans" means that plans must not be divulged, and if they are divulged, disaster will come.

古文：夫行忿速，遂没法，贼发。言轻谋泄，灾必及于身；故曰毒而无怒，怨而无言，欲而无谋。
现代文：若是用激发忿怒的办法速成其事，用连同处死的法律查获盗贼；而且还发言轻率，谋划外泄，灾祸一定累及于自身。所以说：有所厌恶也不要忿怒，有所抱怨也不要说出，有所企图也不可轻谋于他人。
English: Therefore, do not be angry when you are angry, do not complain when you complain, and do not plot against others when you plot.

古文： 大揆度仪，若觉卧，若晦明 ，言渊色以自诘也，静默以审虑，依贤可用也。
现代文： 大揆度仪，若觉卧，若晦明 ，说的是用深沉的态度自我反省，用静默的态度深思熟虑。
English: The Great Compass, if awake, if asleep, if half-awake, speaks of self-reflection with a deep attitude, and contemplation with a silent attitude.

古文：仁良既明，通于可不利害之理，循发蒙也。
现代文：此时要依靠贤才 的意见，采纳仁良之士的主张，既然明通于可否利害的道理，就有如启发了蒙昧一样。
English: At this time, it is necessary to rely on the opinions of sages and adopt the opinions of benevolent people. Since the truth of whether it is beneficial or not is clear, it is like enlightening the ignorant.

古文：故曰，若觉卧，若晦明，若敖之在尧也。
现代文：所以说：要像睁着眼睛睡觉，要像在暗夜里明察，要象丹朱在尧当政时的戒惧。
English: Therefore, he said: we should sleep with our eyes open, we should see clearly in the dark night, and we should be like the fear of Dan Zhu when he was in power.

古文： 毋访于佞 ，言毋用佞人也，用佞人，则私多行。 毋蓄于谄 ，言毋听谄。听谄则欺上。 毋育于凶 ，言毋使暴，使暴则伤民 毋监于谗 ，言毋听谗，听则失士。
现代文： 毋访于佞 ，说的是不可使用奸佞之人，使用奸佞则将严重行私。 毋蓄于谄 ，说的是不可保护诣媚行为，保护诣媚则将欺骗君上。 毋育于凶 ，说的是不可使用凶暴手段，手段凶暴则将伤害民众。 毋监于谗 ，说的是不可听信谗言，听信谗言则将脱离贤士。
English: It is not necessary to visit the magistrate, it is said that the person who cannot use the treacherous magistrate, and the use of the treacherous magistrate will seriously misbehave. It is not necessary to the magistrate, it is said that the flattery act cannot be protected, and the protection of the flattery will deceive the prince. It is not necessary to the wicked, it is said that the violent means cannot be used, and the violent means will harm the people. It is not necessary to the magistrate, it is said that it is not possible to listen to the wise man, and listening to the wise man will be separated from the wise man.

古文：夫行私、欺上、伤民、失士、此四者用，所以害君义失正也。
现代文：行私、欺上、伤害民众、脱离贤士，这四者用事，正是要危害君主仪法，丧失君主政绩的。
English: To act selfishly, to deceive, to hurt the people, and to break away from the wise men, these four things are used to endanger the monarchic rituals and laws, and to lose the monarchic achievements.

古文：夫为君上者，既失其义正，而倚以为名誉。为臣者不忠而邪，以趋爵禄，乱俗败世，以偷安怀乐，虽广其威，可损也。
现代文：作为君主，丧失了仪法与政绩，还想要靠它取得名誉；作为人臣，不忠而邪僻，以用它追求爵禄，乱风俗败世道，以便偷安享乐；即使国家威力再大，也是要损坏的。
English: As a monarch, he has lost ceremonial and political achievements, and still wants to rely on it to gain fame; as a vassal, he is disloyal and perverse, and uses it to pursue peerage, and to destroy the customs of the world in order to steal peace and enjoyment; even if the power of the country is great, it will be damaged.

古文：故曰不正广其荒。
现代文：所以说： 治国不正，虽大亦将灭亡。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "If a country is not governed properly, even a great nation will perish."

古文：是以古之人，阻其路，塞其遂，守而物修，故着之简策，传以告后人曰：其为怨也深，是以威尽焉。
现代文：因此，古人阻止这四者通行的途径，堵塞它们的通道，并控制自身而不许循行此路。所以写在书上，传下来告诫后代人说：造怨深重者，国威将丧失净尽。关于 不用其区区 ，说的是 虚静 。
English: Therefore, the ancients blocked the way for these four to pass, blocked their passage, and controlled themselves not to follow this path. Therefore, it was written in the book and passed down to warn future generations that: Those who have deep grudges will lose all national prestige. Regarding not using their districts, it is said to be "empty silence."

古文： 不用其区区 ，者虚也，人而无良焉，故曰虚也。凡坚解而不动，陼堤而不行，其于时必失，失则废而不济。
现代文：人生没有长久不变的，所以说要虚静待物。凡是固结事物而不许其活动，堵塞事物而不使其运行，那必然失掉时机。失掉时机则事情废而不成。
English: Life does not have a long-term unchanging, so it is said to wait for things. If you solidify things and do not allow them to move, if you block things and do not let them run, you will inevitably lose the opportunity. If you lose the opportunity, things will be useless and will not be accomplished.

古文：失植之正而不谬，不可贤也。植而无能，不可善也。
现代文：治国者只心正而无谬误，还不能称贤；正直而无才能，也不能称美。
English: Those who govern the country are upright and without error, yet they cannot be called virtuous; they are honest but without ability, yet they cannot be called beautiful.

古文：所贤美于圣人者，以其与变随化也。
现代文：圣人之所以被誉为贤美，是因为允许和随任事物的发展变化。
English: The reason why sages are praised as virtuous and beautiful is because they allowed and allowed things to develop and change.

古文：渊泉而不尽，微约而流施。是以德之流润泽均，加于万物。
现代文：这种赐与，好比渊泉之水没有枯竭，微微细细而不断流施，因此，德的流布，其润泽普遍加于万物。
English: This bestowal is like the water of a spring, which is never exhausted, but is constantly poured out, little by little, so that the diffusion of virtue imparts its balm universally to all things.

古文：故曰圣人参于天地。
现代文：所以说：圣人是与天地相配的。
English: Therefore, it is said that a saint is compatible with heaven and earth.

古文： 鸟飞准绳 ，此言大人之义也。
现代文：关于 鸟飞准绳 ，这是说伟大人物的生活义理。
English: Regarding "Bird's Flight", it's about the meaning of life for a great man.

古文：夫鸟之飞也，必还山集谷；不还山则因，不集谷则死。
现代文：鸟的飞翔，一定要返回到山上，集合在谷中。不飞回到山上则疲困，不集合到谷中则死亡。
English: In the flight of a bird, it must return to the mountain and gather in the valley. If it does not fly back to the mountain, it will be exhausted, and if it does not gather in the valley, it will die.

古文：山与谷之处也，不必正直，而还山集谷，曲则曲矣，而名绳焉。
现代文：山与谷的地位，不一定平正笔直。但回到山上、集在谷中的路线，曲折固然曲折，总的则应该是正直的。
English: The position of the mountain and the valley is not necessarily straight and level. However, the route back to the mountain and the concentration in the valley is tortuous, but in general it should be honest.

古文：以为鸟起于北，意南而至于南。起于南，意北而至于北。
现代文：因为鸟从北方起飞，意想到南方就飞到南方；从南方飞起，意想到北方就到达北方。
English: Because the bird takes off from the north, thinks of the south and flies to the south; takes off from the south, thinks of the north and flies to the north.

古文：苟大意得，不以小缺为伤。
现代文：如果大的意向是正确的，不可以小的曲折为妨害。
English: If the big intention is right, the small twists and turns should not be a hindrance.

古文：故圣人美而着之，曰：千里之路，不可扶以绳。万家之都，不可平以准。
现代文：所以，圣人称美此事而写在书里说：长达千里的道路，不可能用绳墨来拨直，大到万家的城市，不可能用准具来取平。
English: Therefore, the sage praised the beauty of this matter and wrote in the book: "It is impossible to straighten a thousand-mile-long road with rope and ink, and it is impossible to level a city that is as large as all the cities of the world with a yardstick."

古文：言大人之行，不必以先帝，常义立之谓贤。
现代文：这说的是伟大人物的行动，不必拘守先例与常规，能立义就可以称贤。
English: It's about the actions of a great man. You don't have to stick to precedents and conventions. You can be a great man if you can establish justice.

古文：故为上者之论其下也，不可以失此术也。 讂充 ，言心也，心欲忠。 末衡 ，言耳目也，耳目欲端。
现代文：所以，人君在考评臣下的时候，不可丢掉这个论人的方法。 讂充 ，说的是心，心要求忠； 末衡 ，说的是耳目，耳目要求正。
English: Therefore, when evaluating subordinates, one should not discard this method of thinking about people. 充, it is said that the heart, the heart requires loyalty; 末衡, it is said that the ears and eyes, the ears and eyes require positive.

古文：中正者，治之本也。
现代文：忠与正，是治世之本。
English: Loyalty and integrity are the foundation of governance.

古文：耳司听，听必顺闻，闻审谓之聪。目司视，视必顺见。见察谓之明。心司虑，虑必顺言，言得谓之知。
现代文：耳管听，听联带着所闻，所闻精审叫作聪；目管看，看联带着所见，所见精确叫作明；心管思虑，思虑联带着发言，发言得宜叫作智。
English: The ear hears, and what is heard is combined with what is heard, and what is heard is called the ear; the eye sees, and what is seen is combined with what is seen, and what is seen is called clarity; the heart thinks, and what is thought is combined with what is said, and what is said is called wisdom.

古文：聪明以知，则博。博而不惛，所以易政也。
现代文：聪明加上智则思想专一，专一而不昏乱，就带来安定的政治。
English: Cleverness plus wisdom means single-mindedness, single-mindedness without confusion, which brings about stable politics.

古文：政易民利，利乃劝，劝则告。
现代文：政治安定，人民有利；有利则勤勉，勤勉则吉。
English: Political stability is good for the people; if it is good, it is hard work, and if it is hard work, it is good luck.

古文：听不顺，不审不聪，不审不聪则缪。
现代文：听得不精审就谈不到聪，不审不聪则陷于荒谬。
English: If you don't listen carefully, you won't be able to talk about Satoshi, and if you don't listen carefully, you'll fall into absurdity.

古文：视不察不明，不察不明则过。
现代文：看得不准确就谈不到明，不准不明就陷于错误。
English: If you don't see accurately, you can't speak clearly, and if you don't allow yourself to be unclear, you will fall into error.

古文：虑不得不知，不得不知则□。
现代文：思虑不得宜就谈不到智，不宜不智就陷于昏乱。
English: If thoughts are not appropriate, wisdom cannot be discussed. If they are not appropriate, wisdom cannot be discussed. If they are not appropriate, wisdom cannot be discussed, and confusion will ensue.

古文：缪过以□则忧，忧则所以伎苛，伎苛所以险政，政险民害，害乃怨。
现代文：荒谬错误加上昏乱则思想陷于困扰，困扰就带来嫉妒与苛刻，嫉妒苛刻就产生险恶的政治。政治险恶，人民受害；受害则怨恨，怨恨则凶。
English: Absurdity, error, and delirium add to the confusion of the mind. Confusion brings jealousy and harshness. Jealousy and harshness produce sinister politics. Politics is sinister, and the people suffer. Suffering is resentment, and resentment is fierce.

古文：怨则凶，故曰：讂充末衡，言易政利民也。
现代文：所以说：心地平实，耳目端正，讲的是政治安定，兴利于人民。
English: Therefore, he said, he is a fair-minded person with good ears and eyes. He is talking about political stability and benefiting the people.

古文： 毋犯其凶 ，言中正以蓄慎也。 毋迩其求 ，言上之败常，贪于金玉马女，而□爱于粟米货财也。厚藉敛于百姓，则万民怼怨。 远其忧 ，言上之亡其国也。
现代文： 毋犯其凶 ，说的是立身中正而必须保持谨慎。 毋迩其求 ，说的是人君败亡常因贪恋于金玉马女，而不爱惜粮食、财物，重税于百姓则引起万民怨恨。 远其忧 ，说的是人君的亡国，经常是因为接近于享乐。
English: "Do no evil" means to be upright and prudent. "Do no evil" means that people will be ruined, often because they are greedy for gold and jewels, but do not care about food and wealth. Heavy taxes on the people will cause resentment among the people. "Do not worry" means that people will ruin the country, often because they are close to pleasure.

古文：常迩其乐，立优美，而外淫于驰骋田腊，内纵于美色淫声，下乃解怠惰失，百吏皆失其端。则烦乱以亡其国家矣。 高为其居。危颠莫之救 ，此言尊高满大，而好矜人以丽，主盛处贤，而自予雄也；故盛必失而雄必败。
现代文：设置女乐，外则沉溺于驰骋田猎，内则放纵于美色淫声，臣下懈怠懒惰，百官皆失其正，那就陷于混乱而亡国了。 高为其居，危颠莫之救 ，这是说身居高位，自满自大，而好自我焙耀；自主其盛，自处其贤，而自封为英雄。这样，其 盛 必失，而其 雄 必败。
English: Set up female music, on the outside indulge in galloping field hunting, on the inside indulge in beautiful erotic voices, the vassals are lazy and lazy, and the officials are all out of order, then they will fall into chaos and perish. If you are high, you are in danger, there is no salvation, which means that you are in a high position, you are complacent and arrogant, but you are good at boasting; you are independent, you are virtuous, and you are a hero. In this way, your success is bound to be lost, and your hero is bound to be defeated.

古文：夫上既主盛处贤，以操士民，国家烦乱，万民心怨，此其必亡也，犹自万仞之山播而入深渊，其死而不振也必矣。
现代文：人君若自主其盛，自处其贤，以此掌握士民，国家就混乱，万民就心怨，这是一定要亡国的。好比从万仍高山上跌入深渊，其死亡而不可再起成为必然。
English: If the ruler of the people is self-sufficient and self-righteous, and thus controls the people, the country will be in chaos, and the people will be resentful. This is a sure way to ruin the country. It is like falling from a still-high mountain into an abyss, and its death becomes inevitable.

古文：故曰：毋迩其求，而远其忧，高为其居，危颠莫之救也。
现代文：所以说：不可只顾眼前，而应当怀有远虑；一意攀高，到了危险的顶峰就无法挽救了。
English: Therefore, it is said: one should not only look at the present, but should have foresight; if one is determined to climb higher, it will be impossible to save oneself when reaching the dangerous peak.

古文： 可浅可深，可沉可浮，可曲可直，可言可默 ，此言指意要功之谓也。 
现代文： 可浅可深，可沉可浮，可曲可直，可言可默 ，这是说选择最佳主意，求取最佳效果的意思。
English: It can be shallow or deep, it can sink or float, it can bend or straighten, it can speak or be silent, which means choosing the best idea and seeking the best effect.

古文：天不一时，地不一利，人不一事 ，是以着业不得不多，人之名位不得不殊方。
现代文：天，不只有一个时序；地，不只有一种物利；人的活动，不只限一件事情。因此，事业不能不分为多种，名位不能不分为多样。
English: Heaven does not have only one time sequence; earth does not have only one kind of material benefit; human activities are not limited to one thing. Therefore, undertakings cannot but be divided into many kinds, and positions cannot but be divided into many kinds.

古文：明者察于事，故不官于物而旁通于道。
现代文：高明之士深通事物这一特点，所以，不只专于一种具体事物，而联系研究事物的共同规律。
English: It is a characteristic of those who are highly skilled that they are well versed in things. Therefore, they do not only specialize in a specific thing, but also study the common laws of things in connection.

古文：道也者，通乎无上，详乎无穷，运乎诸生。
现代文：所谓共同规律，就是通达到无上之高，概括无穷之多，并可运用于人间各种事物。
English: The so-called common law is to reach the highest, generalize an infinite number, and can be applied to all kinds of things in the world.

古文：是故辨于一言，察于一治，攻于一事者，可以曲说，而不可以广举。
现代文：因此，仅仅分清一句话，明白一个词，掌握一件事，那只可谈其片面，而不能广泛阐发。
English: Therefore, just to distinguish a sentence, to understand a word, to grasp a thing, that can only talk about its one-sided, but can not be widely explained.

古文：圣人由此知言之不可兼也，故博为之治，而计其意。知事之不可兼也，故名为之说，而况其功。
现代文：圣人由此看到，一言不可能兼容多种涵义，所以，广泛研究理论来选择需要的内容；一事不可能兼容多种成例，所以，大量创造学说来比较它们的效果。
English: The sage saw from this that a word cannot be compatible with multiple meanings, so he extensively studied theories to select the required content; a thing cannot be compatible with multiple examples, so he created a large number of theories to compare their effects.

古文：岁有春秋冬夏，月有上下中旬，日有朝暮，夜有□晨，半星。辰序各有其司，故曰天不一时。
现代文：年有四季，月有三旬，日有朝暮，夜有昏晨，而天上中星十二辰的运动次序，各有所主。所以说，天，不只有一个时序。
English: The year has four seasons, the moon has three phases, the day has a morning and evening, and the night has a morning and evening, and the movement order of the twelve stars in the sky has its own owner. Therefore, the sky does not have only one time order.

古文：山陵岑岩，渊泉闳流，泉逾瀷而不尽，薄承瀷不满。
现代文：山陵岑岩，渊泉水流，泉水越过氵翼水水流不尽，泊水承接滔水水流不满；土地高下肥瘠，产品各有所宜。
English: Mountains and villages are made of rock, water flows from deep springs, spring water flows inexhaustibly through the gullies, and stagnant water is not satisfied with receiving torrential water; the land is fertile at high and low altitudes, and the products are suitable for each.

古文：高下肥硗，物有所宜，故曰地不一利。乡有俗，国有法，食饮不同味，衣服异世用器械，规矩绳准，称量数度，品有所成，故曰人不一事。
现代文：所以说，地，不只有一种物利。乡有习俗，国有法度，饮食不同味，衣服不同色，常用器械，规矩准绳，称量数度，各事皆有成规。所以说，人的活动，不限于一件事情。
English: Therefore, there is not only one kind of material benefit. Towns have customs, state-owned laws, different flavors of food, different colors of clothes, commonly used instruments, rules and standards, weighing scales, all things have rules. Therefore, human activities are not limited to one thing.

古文：此各事之仪，其详不可尽也。
现代文：这形形色色事物的仪法规律，其详细内容是说不尽的。
English: The details of this code of etiquette for all manner of things are inexhaustible.

古文： 可正而视 言察美恶，审别良苦，不可以不审。
现代文： 可正而视 ，说的是分清美恶，区别优劣，此事不可不审慎对待。
English: But face it squarely, it is about distinguishing between good and evil, and distinguishing between superior and inferior, and this matter must be treated with caution.

古文：操分不杂，故政治不悔。 定而履 ，言处其位，行其路，为其事，则民守其职而不乱，故葆统而好终。 深而□ ，言明墨章书，道德有常，则后世人人修理而不迷，故名声不息。
现代文：掌握与分析不混杂，政事的治理就不会出现灾祸。 定而履 ，说的是在其位，行其路，做其事，这样，人民也就严守常业而不乱。所以能保持纲纪而赢得好的结果。 深而迹 ，说的是光明磊落，道德修养有素，这样，后代人人遵循常理而不陷于昏乱。故名声永传不息。
English: Mastery and analysis are not mixed, and there will be no disaster in the governance of political affairs. Steadily, it is said to be in its place, to walk its path, to do its thing, so that the people also strictly abide by the usual business without disturbance, so that they can maintain discipline and win good results. Deeply, it is said to be bright and upright, with good moral cultivation, so that future generations will all follow common sense without falling into confusion. Therefore, the reputation will be passed down forever.

古文： 夫天地一险一易，若鼓之有桴，擿挡则击 ，言苟有唱之，必有和之，和之不差，因以尽天地之道。
现代文： 天地一险一易，若鼓之有桴，擿挡则击 。说的是如有所唱，必有所和，所和不差，因为都合天地的规律。
English: It is said that if there is singing, there must be harmony, which is not bad, because it is the law of heaven and earth.

古文：景不为曲物直，响不为恶声美。
现代文：影子不可能替弯曲的物体表现为笔直，回响不可能替粗恶的音响表现为美声。
English: It is impossible for a shadow to represent a straight line for a curved object, and it is impossible for a reverberation to represent a beautiful sound for a coarse sound.

古文：是以圣人明乎物之性者必以其类来也，故君子绳绳乎慎其所先。
现代文：由是圣人懂得过去的事物一定被参行于未来，所以君子必须戒惧地慎其所先行。
English: Since a sage knows that what is past must be carried into the future, a gentleman must be wary of what precedes him.

古文： 天地万物之橐，宙合有橐天地 ，天地苴万物，故曰万物之橐。
现代文：关于 天地，万物之毫也，宙合有橐天地。 天地包裹着万物，所以叫万物之橐。
English: As for the heaven and the earth, they are as nothing, and as for the things that are in them, they are as nothing; and as for the heaven and the earth, they are as nothing, and as for the things that are in them, they are as nothing; and as for the things that are in them, they are as nothing.

古文：宙合之意，上通于天之上，下泉于地之下，外出于四海之外，合络天地，以为一裹。
现代文：而 宙合 的意思，是上通于天空之上，下深于土地之下，外出于四海之外，合拢天地，成为一个包裹。
English: And the meaning of "suspended" is to connect above the sky, below deep under the land, outside the four seas, to close heaven and earth, to become a package.

古文：散之至于无闲。不可名而山。
现代文：把它散放开来，可以渗透到没有间隙的极小地方，简直都说不出名字。
English: If it is spread out, it can penetrate into very small places where there are no gaps, and it is almost impossible to name them.

古文：是大之无外，小之无内，故曰有橐天地，其义不传。
现代文：真是可以说，大到没有什么物体在其外，小到没有什么东西可以在其内了。所以说：它又能包藏天地。
English: It may truly be said that it is so large that nothing can exist outside of it, and so small that nothing can exist within it, and so it is said that it can contain heaven and earth.

古文：一典品之不极一薄，然而典品无治也。
现代文：宙合的义理并没有传开，若一旦整理起来，其内容还不到一版，可惜整理之事没有人去做。
English: The principles of the concatenation have not spread, and once they are sorted out, their content is less than a single edition. Unfortunately, no one is doing the sorting out.

古文：多内则富。时出则当。
现代文：容纳广博就内容丰富，发表适时就用之得当。
English: If it is widely accepted, it will be rich in content, and if it is published at the right time, it will be used appropriately.

古文：而圣人之道，贵富以当。
现代文：而圣人之道，丰富尤贵在用之得当。
English: The way of the sage, however, is rich and precious when used properly.

古文：奚谓当，本乎无妄之治，运乎无方之事，应变不失之谓当。
现代文：何谓用之得当呢？根据不背离法则的理论，运用在没有固定范围的各类事物上，应变而不失误就叫作用之得当。
English: What is appropriate use? According to the theory of not deviating from the law, when applied to various types of things without a fixed range, the response without error is called appropriate action.

古文：变无不至，无有应当本错不敢忿。故言而名之曰宙合。
现代文：事物的变化虽然无所不至，但没有不处理得当的，治事的本末都不能离此中心，所以称它的名字为 宙合 。
English: Although the change of things is all-pervasive, there is nothing that cannot be handled properly, and the beginning and end of the management cannot be separated from this center, so it is called the halo.

