古文：谊字宜君，少有大志，便弓马，博览群言。
现代文：王谊，字宜君，武川人。从小就有远大志向，善于弓马，博览群书。
English: Wang Yi, also known as Yi Jun, is a native of Takekawa. He has had lofty ambitions since he was a child, is good at archery and horsemanship, and is well-versed in books.

古文：周闵帝时，为左中侍上士。
现代文：周闵帝时任左中侍上士。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhou Enlai, he held the position of Zuozhongzi Shosifu.

古文：时大冢宰宇文护执政，帝拱默无所关预。
现代文：这时，大冢宰宇文护执政，闵帝拱手沉默，无所事事。
English: At this time, Dajie Yufenguo came to power, and Emperor Gao remained silent and idle.

古文：有朝士于帝侧微不恭，谊勃然而进，将击之，其人惶惧请罪，乃止。
现代文：有一个朝臣在闵帝面前稍有些不恭敬，王谊便勃然大怒，快步向前，准备击杀他，那人吓得连忙请罪，他才停止。
English: There was a courtier who was a little disrespectful in the presence of the emperor, and the king flew into a rage, quickly marched forward and prepared to kill him. The man was so frightened that he quickly pleaded guilty, and only then did he stop.

古文：自是朝臣无敢不肃。
现代文：从此朝臣在闵帝面前没有人敢不严肃恭敬的。
English: From then on, no courtier dared to be anything but serious and respectful in the presence of Emperor Xuan.

古文：迁御正大夫。
现代文：他被迁任为御正大夫。
English: He was transferred to the post of chief doctor.

古文：丁父艰，毁瘁过礼，庐于墓侧，负土成坟。
现代文：他的父亲去世，他哀毁悲伤，超过常礼。在墓侧结庐居住守卫，天天背土，堆成坟丘。
English: When his father died, he mourned and grieved more than usual. Scabs lived on the side of the grave as guards, and every day they covered it with earth and piled it up into a mound.

古文：武帝即位，累迁内史大夫，封扬国公。
现代文：武帝即位，他迁任内史大夫，被封为杨国公。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he was transferred to the position of Inner Historian and was named Yang Guogong.

古文：从帝伐齐，至并州。
现代文：他跟随武帝讨伐齐国，到达并州。
English: He followed Emperor Wu in the crusade against Qi, and arrived in Anhui Province.

古文：帝既入城，反为齐人所败，左右多死，谊率麾下骁雄赴之。
现代文：武帝已经进入城中，反而被齐军打败，他周围的人大多战死。王谊率领部下骁勇士兵赶来救援，将齐军打败。
English: Emperor Wu had already entered the city, but was defeated by the Qi army, and most of the people around him died in battle. Wang Yi led his brave soldiers to come to the rescue and defeat the Qi army.

古文：齐平，自相州刺史征为大内史。
现代文：他在相州被刺史征用为大内史。
English: He was expropriated by the Shishi in Sangshu and became a member of the Dainaishi.

古文：汾州稽胡乱，谊击之。
现代文：汾州稽胡变乱，王谊领军平叛。
English: The state of Zhangzhou was in turmoil, and Wang Yi led the army to put down the rebellion.

古文：帝弟越王盛、谯王俭虽为总管，并受谊节度。
现代文：武帝的弟弟越王宇文盛、谯王宇文俭虽然官为总管，但都受王谊指挥。
English: Although Emperor Wu's younger brothers, Yue Wang Yu Wensheng and Zou Wang Yu Wensheng, were the chief administrators, they were all under Wang Yi's command.

古文：贼平，封一子开国公。
现代文：叛乱平定后，朝廷封他的一个儿子为开国公。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, the imperial court made one of his sons the founding prince.

古文：帝临崩，谓皇太子曰： 王谊社稷臣，宜处以机密，不须远任。 
现代文：武帝去世前对皇太子说 ：王谊是国家的重臣，应该让他参与机密，不要让他到外地任职。 
English: Before his death, Emperor Wu said to the crown prince: Wang Yi is the chief minister of the country, he should be allowed to participate in confidential matters, and he should not be allowed to work outside the country.

古文：皇太子即位，为宣帝，惮谊刚正，出为襄州总管。
现代文：皇太子即位，就是宣帝。他畏惧王谊的刚烈正直，将王谊调出京城，任襄州总管。
English: When the crown prince ascended to the throne, it was Emperor Xuan. He was afraid of Wangye's bravery and honesty, so he transferred Wangye out of Beijing and made him the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：及隋文帝为丞相，郧州总管司马消难举兵反，帝以谊为行军元帅讨之，未至而消难奔陈。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚任北周丞相，郧州总管司马消难举兵反叛，朝廷命王谊为行军元帅前去征讨，大军还未到达郧州，司马消难就逃到南陈。
English: Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty was the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, and the general manager of Zhangzhou, Sima Qianlang, raised an army to rebel. The imperial court ordered Wang Yi to go to the front as a marching marshal. The large army had not yet reached Zhangzhou, and Sima Qianlang fled to South Chen.

古文：于时北至商、洛，南拒江、淮，东西二千余里，巴蛮多叛，共推渠帅兰洛州为主。
现代文：这时，北至商、洛，南达江、淮，东西长两千多里，巴地蛮族大多发生叛乱，共同推选蛮族首领兰洛州为盟主。
English: At this time, from the north to Shang, Luo, Nanda River and Huai, with a length of more than two thousand miles from east to west, most of the Badi barbarians rebelled and jointly elected the barbarian leader Lanluozhou as the leader.

古文：洛州自号河南王以附消难，北连尉迟迥。
现代文：兰洛州自称河南王，依附司马消难，向北与尉迟迥联合。
English: Lanluo prefecture claimed to be the king of Henan Province. It depended on Sima to eliminate difficulties, and united with Fei Zhixuan to the north.

古文：谊分兵讨之，旬月皆平。
现代文：王谊分兵讨伐，一个来月便全部平定。
English: Wang's detachment of soldiers went on a crusade, and within a month everything was pacified.

古文：帝遣使劳问，冠盖不绝，以第五女妻其子奉孝。
现代文：朝廷派使者慰劳，一时，来庆贺和慰问的官吏不绝于路。杨坚把自己的第五个女儿嫁给他的儿子王奉孝。
English: The imperial court sent emissaries to offer consolation, and for a while, the officials who came to offer congratulations and condolences were constantly on the road. Yang Jian married his fifth daughter to his son Wang Fengxiao.

古文：寻拜大司徒。
现代文：不久，他被封为大司徒。
English: Soon after, he was named the grand steward.

古文：谊自以与帝有旧，亦归心焉。
现代文：他认为自己与杨坚交谊深厚，也倾心依附。
English: He believes that he has a deep friendship with Yang Jian and is also attached to him.

古文：及隋受禅，顾遇弥厚，帝亲幸其第，与之极欢。
现代文：杨坚受周静帝禅让称帝建隋，对他的礼遇更加优厚。亲自来到他的府第，与他尽情欢乐。
English: Yang Jian accepted Zhou Jing's offer to call him Emperor Jian of the Sui Dynasty, and treated him with even greater courtesy. He came to his capital in person and had a great time with him.

古文：太常卿苏威议，以为户口滋多，人田不赡，欲减功臣之地以给人。
现代文：太常卿苏威建议，因为人口日益增多，而耕地并不太多，应减少功臣们的封地，以分给百姓。
English: Tai Changqing Su Wei suggested that since the population was increasing and there was not much arable land, the fiefs of the heroes should be reduced and distributed to the people.

古文：谊奏曰： 百官者，历世勋贤，方蒙爵土，一旦削之，未见其可。 
现代文：王谊奏报道： 朝廷百官，都是几代的功勋贤臣，才蒙受朝廷赏赐的土地，一旦被削去，我看没有益处。 
English: Wang Yuisao reported: The hundreds of officials of the imperial court are all meritorious and wise men of several generations. The land was only given to them by the imperial court. Once it is taken away, I don't see any benefit.

古文：帝以为然，竟寝威议。
现代文：隋文帝也认为很对，竟把苏威的建议压了下来。
English: Sui Emperor Wen also thought it was right to suppress Sui Wei's suggestion.

古文：帝将幸岐州，谏曰： 陛下初临万国，人情未洽，何用此行。 
现代文：隋文帝将要到岐州，王谊劝阻说 ：陛下刚君临天下，人情还不安稳，何必要去这一趟？ 
English: Emperor Sui Wen is about to go to Qizhou, but Wang Yi dissuades him, saying, "Your Majesty has just come to the world, and the human condition is still unstable. Why do you need to go on this trip?"

古文：上戏之曰： 吾昔与公位望齐等，一朝屈节为臣，或当耻愧，是行也，振扬威武，欲以服公心耳。 
现代文：隋文帝跟他开玩笑说： 我过去与你地位和声望相等，一朝你委曲称臣，或许感到羞耻惭愧，我去岐州的目的，就是要张扬帝王的威风勇武，想制服天下人的心啊。 
English: Sui Wen Di jokingly said to him: I used to be equal to you in status and prestige. Once you were appointed as a courtier, you may feel ashamed. The purpose of my going to Qizhou is to promote the emperor's dignity and bravery, and to subdue the hearts of the world.

古文：谊笑而退。
现代文：王谊笑着听完退下。
English: Wang Yi laughs and listens, then retreats.

古文：寻奉使突厥。帝嘉其称旨，进郢国公。
现代文：不久，他奉命出使突厥，隋文帝为表彰他圆满完成使命，给他晋爵为郢国公。
English: Soon, he was ordered to send an envoy to Turkey. In recognition of the successful completion of his mission, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty gave him the title of Prince of the State of Qi.

古文：未几，其子奉孝卒。
现代文：不久，他的儿子王奉孝去世。
English: Soon after, his son Wang Fengxiao passed away.

古文：逾年，谊上表言公主少，请除服。
现代文：过了一年，他上表说公主年纪很轻，请允许她除掉丧服。
English: A year later, he announced that the princess was very young, and asked her to remove her mourning clothes.

古文：御史大夫杨素劾谊曰： 臣闻丧服有五，亲疏异节；丧制有四，降杀殊文。
现代文：御史大夫杨素上奏章弹劾他说 ：我听说居丧时所穿的服装有五种，根据与死者关系的亲疏有所不同；居丧的礼制有四种，投降的和被杀的人也有不同的规定。
English: "I heard that there are five types of clothing worn at funerals, which vary according to the closeness of the relationship with the deceased; there are four types of funeral etiquette, and there are different rules for those who surrender and those who are killed.

古文：王者之所常行，故曰不易之道也。
现代文：天子们也应当遵守，所以说这是不可改变的礼制。
English: The sons of heaven should also observe it, so it is said to be an unchangeable etiquette.

古文：而仪同王奉孝既尚兰陵公主，以去年五月身丧，始经一周，而谊便请除释。
现代文：然而，仪同王奉孝既然已经娶了兰陵公主，去年五月才故去，才刚刚一周年，而王谊便请求除去丧服。
English: However, since Iitong Wang Bongxiao had already married Lanling Princess, he only passed away last May, and it was just the first anniversary, and Wang Yiming requested to remove the mourning clothes.

古文：窃以虽曰王姬，终成下嫁之礼；公则主之，犹在移天之义。
现代文：我认为公主虽然是天子的女儿，也应当遵守下嫁的礼仪。他这样主张，就好像在改变天下人共同遵守的制度。
English: I think that even though the princess is the daughter of the Son of Heaven, she should also abide by the etiquette of marrying down. He advocated this as if he were changing the system that everyone in the world observes.

古文：况复三年之丧，自上达下，及期释服，在礼未详。
现代文：更何况三年的服丧时间，自天子以至于百姓，期满才能去掉丧服，在礼制上并没有详细规定。
English: What's more, the three-year mourning period, from the emperor to the people, can only be removed at the end of the period, and there is no detailed regulation on the etiquette.

古文：然夫妇之则，人伦攸始，丧纪之制，人道至大，苟不重之，取笑君子。
现代文：然而，夫妇之间的关系，是人际伦常的开端；丧礼的制度，是人道中最为重大的。如果不重视它，就会被君子取笑。
English: However, the relationship between husband and wife is the beginning of interpersonal morality; the funeral system is the most important in humanity. If you do not pay attention to it, you will be ridiculed by gentlemen.

古文：故钻燧改火，责以居丧之速；朝祥暮歌，讥以忘哀之早。
现代文：所以，要求守丧的人钻木取火，是批评他们守丧时间短；早晨守丧晚上唱歌，是讽刺忘悼哀痛太早。
English: Therefore, asking mourners to drill wood to make fire is to criticize their short time of mourning; morning mourning and evening singing is ironic to forget mourning and grief too early.

古文：然谊虽不自强，爵位已重，欲为无礼，其可得乎？
现代文：王谊虽然不自重，但爵位很高，想推行非礼的事情，怎么能行呢？
English: Although the king's friendship is not self-respecting, but the peerage is very high, how can it be done if you want to promote things that are improper?

古文：乃薄俗伤教，为父则不慈；轻礼易丧，致妇于无义。
现代文：他淡薄风俗，损伤礼教，作为死者的父亲则不仁慈；轻视礼仪，改变丧制，使他的儿媳陷于不义。
English: He trivialized customs, damaged etiquette, and, as the father of the deceased, was not merciful; he despised etiquette, changed the mourning system, and caused his daughter-in-law to fall into injustice.

古文：若纵而不正，恐伤风俗。 
现代文：如果放纵他的行为而不加以匡正，恐怕会伤风败俗。 
English: If you indulge his behavior without correcting it, I'm afraid it will offend customs.

古文：有诏不问。
现代文：朝廷下诏，对王谊不予追究。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict that there would be no investigation into the king's friendship.

古文：然恩礼稍薄，谊颇怨望。
现代文：然而，隋文帝对他的礼遇稍为淡薄。因而，王谊心中颇为怏怏不快。
English: However, the Sui Emperor's courtesy to him was a bit thin. Therefore, Wang Ye's heart was quite unhappy.

古文：或告谊谋反，帝令案其事。
现代文：有人告发他谋反，隋文帝命查清这件事。
English: Someone accused him of plotting a rebellion, and Emperor Sui ordered that the matter be investigated.

古文：主者奏谊有不逊之言，实无反状。
现代文：告发的人说他有对朝廷不恭敬的话，实则没有谋反的行动。
English: The person who reported him said that he had spoken disrespectfully of the imperial court, but that he had not actually taken any actions to rebel.

古文：帝赐酒而释之。
现代文：隋文帝赐给他酒食以宽慰他。
English: Emperor Sui gave him food and drink to comfort him.

古文：时上柱国元谐亦颇失意，谊数与往来，言论丑恶。
现代文：其时，上柱国元谐也颇为失意，王谊经常与他往来，谈论的内容十分丑恶。
English: At that time, the upper pillar, Kunimoto Hattori, was also quite disappointed. Wangye often interacted with him, and the content of the discussion was very ugly.

古文：胡僧告之。
现代文：胡地的僧人告发了他们。
English: The monks of the forest denounced them.

古文：公卿奏谊大逆不道，罪当死。
现代文：公卿们都奏报他大逆不道，罪当被诛。
English: The nobles all reported that he had committed high treason and should be arrested.

古文：帝见谊，怆然曰： 朕与公旧同学，甚相怜悯，将奈国法何。 
现代文：隋文帝召见他，怆然泪下，说 ：我与你过去是同窗好友，我对你十分同情。可是，能对国法如之奈何？ 
English: Emperor Sui Wen summoned him, burst into tears, and said, "I used to be your classmate and friend, and I sympathize with you very much. However, what can I do about the country's laws?

古文：于是诏曰： 谊有周之世，早预人伦，朕共游庠序，遂相亲好。
现代文：于是朝廷下诏说： 王谊在北周时，很早就相信相面占卜祸福的邪术。
English: Therefore, the Imperial Court issued an edict saying, "When Wang Yi was in Northern Zhou, he very early believed in the sorcery of face-to-face fortune-telling.

古文：然性怀险薄，巫觋盈门，鬼言怪语，称神道。
现代文：我与他同窗读书，关系亲密。然而他性情险薄，巫师神婆坐满厅堂，称神道怪，胡言乱语。
English: I went to school with him and we were very close. However, he had a dangerous temper. He would fill the auditorium with shamans, calling them Shinto monsters and speaking gibberish.

古文：朕受命之初，深存戒约，口云改悔，心实不悛。
现代文：我即位之初，便相警戒。他口中表示改悔，实在怙恶不悛。
English: When I first came to the throne, I was wary of him. He said he had repented, and that he was truly remorseful.

古文：乃说四天王神道，谊应受命，书有谊谶，天有谊星，桃、鹿二川，岐州之下，岁在辰巳，兴帝王之业。
现代文：胡说按四天王的神道所示，他应登基称帝。又说书上有他的图谶，天上有他的星宿；在桃、鹿二川，岐州以下这片地方，在辰巳这一年，他就可以成就帝王的大业。
English: According to the Shinto of the Four Heavenly Kings, he should be enthroned as emperor. It is also said that there is his picture in the book, and his star in the sky; in this area below Momo, Shishigawa, and Kishu, in the year of the rabbit, he can accomplish the great cause of the emperor.

古文：密令卜问，伺殿省之灾。
现代文：他暗中命人占卜，窥伺朝廷中的灾难，以寻机称帝。
English: He secretly ordered people to tell fortunes, spied on disasters in the imperial court, and sought opportunities to become emperor.

古文：又说其身是明王圣主。
现代文：他还说他是一代明王圣主。
English: He also said that he was a descendant of King Ming.

古文：信用左道，所在诖误。
现代文：信用旁门左道，处处都很错误。
English: Credit is a two-way street, and mistakes are made everywhere.

古文：自言相表，当王不疑。
现代文：又自己说相看面容仪表，一定会称王称帝。
English: He also said that if you look at the facial appearance, you will surely praise the king.

古文：此而赦之，将或为乱。
现代文：如果赦免他，将来很可能会祸乱天下。
English: If he is pardoned, the future is likely to be disastrous.

古文：禁暴除恶，宜伏国刑。 
现代文：为了禁暴除恶，应让他伏守国家刑法。 
English: In order to prohibit violence and eliminate evil, he should be made to abide by the national criminal law.

古文：帝复令大理正赵绰谓谊曰： 时命如此，将若之何！ 
现代文：隋文帝又命大理正赵绰对他说 ：命运就是这样，又有什么办法呢！ 
English: Emperor Sui also ordered the great scholar Zhao Zhaozhu to go to him and say, "This is the fate, what can we do about it?"

古文：乃赐死于家，时年四十六。
现代文：便在家中赐他死罪，时年四十六岁。
English: He was 46 years old when he was sentenced to death at his home.

古文：独孤信，云中人也，本名如愿。
现代文：独孤信，云中人，本名叫如愿。
English: Solitary believer, man in the clouds, his real name is Ruyi.

古文：魏初有四十六部，其先伏留屯者为部落大人，与魏俱起。
现代文：北魏开始有四十六部，他的祖先伏留屯任部落大人，与魏室一同兴起。
English: At the beginning of the Northern Wei Dynasty, there were forty-six branches. His ancestor, Furuyutun, was the head of the tribe, and arose together with the Wei dynasty.

古文：祖俟尼，和平中，以良家子自云中镇武川，因家焉。
现代文：他的祖父独狐俟尼，正光时以良家子弟的身份从云中去镇守武川，因而在那里定居。
English: His grandfather, Dokufukuni, came from the clouds to guard the town of Takekawa as the son of a good family, and settled there.

古文：父库者，为领人酋长，少雄豪有节义，北州咸敬服之。
现代文：父亲独孤库者，任领人酋长，从小便英勇豪迈，颇有节操信义，北州的人都很敬服他。
English: His father was the sole treasurer, and he was appointed as the leader of the chiefs. He was brave and courageous from an early age, and he was quite principled and faithful. The people of Beizhou all admired him.

古文：信美容仪，善骑射。
现代文：独孤信容貌俊美，善于骑射。
English: Duoluxun is handsome and good at riding.

古文：正光末，与贺拔度等同斩卫可瑰，由是知名。
现代文：正光末年，他与贺拔度等人一起杀死卫可环，因此出名。
English: At the end of Masamitsu's life, he was famous for killing Wei Kehuan together with He Badu and others.

古文：后为葛荣所获。
现代文：后来，他被葛荣抓住。
English: Later, he was caught by Ge Rong.

古文：信既少年，自修饰服章，军中号为独孤郎。
现代文：他正值青春年少，喜欢修饰服装，军队中都称他为独孤郎。
English: He was in the prime of his youth, liked to dress up, and was known as a loner in the army.

古文：及尔硃氏破葛荣，以信为别将。
现代文：朱氏打败葛荣，命他为别将。
English: Zhu defeated Ge Rong and ordered him to be the next leader.

古文：从征韩娄，信匹马挑战，禽贼渔阳王袁肆周。
现代文：他跟随大军征讨韩娄，单枪匹马向敌人挑战，捉拿住敌人的渔阳王袁肆周。
English: He followed the large army to conquer the Han Dynasty, challenged the enemy single-handedly, and caught the enemy's Yuyang Wang Yuan He Zhou.

古文：后以破元颢党，赐爵受德县侯，迁武卫将军。
现代文：后来因打败元颢的同党，被赐爵为受德县侯，迁任武卫将军。
English: Later, for defeating the same party as Yuan Zheng, he was given the title of Lord of Zhude County and transferred to the post of General Wuwei.

古文：贺拔胜出镇荆州，乃表信为大都督。
现代文：贺拔胜出镇荆州，上表要独孤信任他的大都督。
English: He Bi won out of the town of Jingzhou, and the table should only trust his great governor.

古文：及胜弟岳为侯莫陈悦所害，胜乃令信入关，抚岳余众。
现代文：贺拔胜的弟弟贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦害死，贺拔胜便命他入关招抚贺拔岳的余部。
English: He Batsheng's younger brother He Batsheng was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, and He Batsheng then ordered him to enter the pass to recruit the rest of He Batsheng.

古文：属周文帝已统岳兵，与信乡里，少相友善，相见甚欢，因令信人洛请事。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰统率贺拔岳的军队，宇文泰与他同为乡亲，从小关系亲密，见面后极为高兴，因而派他到洛阳请示朝廷。
English: The Zhou Emperor sent Uwentai to lead He Baturak's army. Uwentai was a fellow villager and had been close to him since childhood. He was very happy to meet him, so he sent him to Luoyang to ask the imperial court for advice.

古文：至雍州，大使元毗又遣信还荆州。
现代文：他到达雍州，朝廷派来的使者元毗又派他回荆州。
English: He arrived in Yongzhou, and Yuan Pi, the envoy sent by the imperial court, sent him back to Jingzhou.

古文：寻征入朝，魏孝武雅相委任。
现代文：不久被征入朝廷，魏孝武帝很重用他。
English: He was soon drafted into the imperial court, and Emperor Wei Xiaowu made great use of him.

古文：及孝武西迁，事起仓卒，信单骑及之于瀍涧。
现代文：孝武帝被高欢逼迫西迁，事情发生在仓促之间，独孤信单人独骑跟随武帝来到鏶间。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was forced by Gao Huan to move to the west. The event happened in a hurry, and a lone person rode alone with Emperor Wu to Shanzhong.

古文：孝武叹曰： 武卫遂能辞父母，捐妻子从我，世乱识忠良，岂虚言哉！ 
现代文：孝武帝感叹地说 ：武卫将军你能离开父母，舍弃妻子跟随我。世乱识忠贞，怎么能是虚妄之言呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu sighed and said, "General Wuwei, can you leave your parents, abandon your wife and follow me? In a world of chaos, how can you be loyal?

古文：进爵浮阳郡公。
现代文：将他晋爵为浮阳郡公。
English: He was promoted to the peerage as the Duke of Fuyang County.

古文：时荆州虽隐东魏，人心犹恋本朝，乃以信为卫大将军、都督三荆州诸军事，兼尚书右仆射、东南道行台、大都督、荆州刺史，以招怀之。
现代文：这时荆州虽然被东魏攻陷，人心仍然恋原来的朝廷。因而，朝廷便命他为卫大将军、都督三荆州诸军事，兼尚书右仆射、东南道行台、大都督、荆州刺史，前去招抚怀柔那里的百姓。
English: At this time, although Jingzhou was conquered by the Eastern Wei Dynasty, people still loved the original imperial court. Therefore, the imperial court ordered him to be the general of Wei, the military governor of three Jingzhou provinces, and also the right-hand man of Shangshu, the southeast road of Xingtai, the great governor of Jingzhou, and the history of Jingzhou, to go to the people of Huairou.

古文：既至，东魏刺史辛纂出战，信纵兵击纂，大败之。
现代文：他到达后，东魏刺史辛纂领兵迫不及待迎战。独孤信挥兵进击，大败敌兵。
English: After his arrival, the leader of the Eastern Wei army, Zhi Shi Xin Cao, couldn't wait to go to war. He single-handedly led the army to attack and defeated the enemy soldiers.

古文：都督杨忠等前驱斩纂，于是三荆遂定。
现代文：西魏都督杨忠等人奋勇向前，斩杀辛纂，于是，三荆全被收复。
English: Yang Zhong, the governor of the Western Wei Dynasty, and others moved forward bravely and killed Xin Cao. As a result, the Three Thorns were all recovered.

古文：东魏又遣其将高敖曹、侯景等奄至。
现代文：东魏又派将领高敖曹、侯景等领重兵杀来。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty also sent generals Gao Bing Cao, Hou Jing and other leaders to kill the heavy soldiers.

古文：信以众寡不敌，遂率麾下奔梁。
现代文：他认为敌我众寡悬殊，无法取胜，便率领部队投奔南梁。
English: He thought that he was outnumbered and could not win, so he led his troops to Nanliang.

古文：居三载，梁武帝方许信还北。
现代文：在那里住了三年，梁武帝才允许他返回。
English: He lived there for three years before Emperor Liangwu allowed him to return.

古文：信父母既在山东，梁武帝问信所往，答以事君无二。
现代文：他的父母都在东魏统治下的山东，梁武帝问他回到哪里去，他答说事君不能有二。
English: His parents were both from Shandong, which was under the rule of the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Emperor Liang Wudi asked him where he wanted to go back to, and he replied that you can't have two things.

古文：梁武义之，礼送甚厚。
现代文：梁武帝被他的信义感动，送给他的礼物十分丰厚。
English: Emperor Liangwu was moved by his loyalty and gave him a very rich gift.

古文：大统三年至长安，以亏损国威，上书谢罪。
现代文：大统二年，他来到长安，以亏损国威上书朝廷，表示谢罪。
English: In the second year of unification, he came to Chang'an and wrote a letter to the imperial court with a loss of national prestige to express his gratitude.

古文：魏文帝付尚书议之。
现代文：魏文帝将他的奏表给交尚书省讨论。
English: Emperor Wei sent his report to the Ministry of Culture and Literature for discussion.

古文：七兵尚书、陈郡王玄等议，以为既经恩降，请赦罪复职。
现代文：七兵尚书、陈郡王元玄等人认为，他既经朝廷恩准投降，应赦免罪过，恢复官职。
English: Seven soldiers Shang Shu, Chen County Wang Yuan Xuan and others believed that he should be pardoned for his crime and restored to his official post after he had surrendered with the approval of the imperial court.

古文：诏转骠骑大将军，加侍中、开府。
现代文：朝廷下诏任他为骠骑大将军，加任侍中、开府。
English: Under the imperial edict, he was appointed as the grand general of the imperial cavalry, as well as the chamberlain and the head of the government.

古文：寻拜领军将军。
现代文：不久，拜受领军将军。
English: Soon, the general leading the army came to pay his respects.

古文：仍从复弘农，破沙苑，改封河内郡公。
现代文：跟随大军收复弘农，攻破沙苑，改封爵位为河内郡公。
English: Following the great army, he recovered Hongnong, defeated Shayuan, and was awarded the title of Lord of Hanoi County.

古文：俘虏中有信亲属，始得父凶问，乃发丧行服。
现代文：在俘获东魏的兵士中有他的亲属，他才得知父亲去世的消息，便发丧举哀，换上孝服。
English: His relatives were among the soldiers who captured the Eastern Wei Dynasty. When he learned of his father's death, he sent condolences and changed into filial piety.

古文：寻起为大都督，与冯翊王元季海入洛阳，颍、豫、襄、广、陈留之地并款附。
现代文：不久，被起复任命为大都督，与冯翊王元季海进入洛阳，颍、豫、襄、广、陈留等地一起通款降服。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated and appointed as the grand governor. He entered Luoyang with Feng Yu Wang Yuan Ji Hai, and together with other places such as Handan, Henan, Xiangyang, Guangxi, and Chenliu, surrendered.

古文：四年，东魏将侯景等围洛阳，信据金墉城，随方拒守然有余日。
现代文：大统四年，东魏将领侯景等人领兵围攻洛阳，他坚守金墉城，依据地势抗拒敌兵，坚持了十多天。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, the Eastern Wei generals led by Hou Jing and others besieged Luoyang. He held on to Jinyu City, resisted the enemy soldiers according to the terrain, and persisted for more than ten days.

古文：及周文帝至瀍东，景等退走。
现代文：直到宇文泰率援军到达鏶东，候景等人才退走。
English: It was not until the reinforcements led by Uwentai arrived in Shandong that people such as Xingjing retreated.

古文：信与李远为右军，战不处，东魏遂有洛阳。
现代文：独孤信与李远为右军，作战失利，东魏便占有洛阳。
English: Du Guoxin and Li Yuan were the right-wing troops, but they lost the battle, and the Eastern Wei Dynasty occupied Luoyang.

古文：六年，侯景寇荆州，周文令信与李弼出武关，景退。
现代文：大统六年，侯景进犯荆州，宇文泰命他与李弼进向武关，侯景退兵。
English: In the sixth year of the Great Reunification, Hou Jing invaded Jingzhou. Wu Wentai ordered him and Li Xi to march to Wuguan. Hou Jing withdrew.

古文：即以信为大使，尉抚三荆。
现代文：朝廷便命他为大使，抚慰三荆百姓。
English: The imperial court then appointed him as an ambassador to soothe the people of Sanjiao.

古文：寻除陇右十一州大都督、秦州刺史。
现代文：不久，他被任命为陇右十一州大都督、秦州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the grand governor of the eleven states on the right bank of the Yangtze River and the crown prince of Qin State.

古文：先是守宰闇弱，政令乖方，人有冤讼，历年不能断决。
现代文：原先的守土长官昏弱无能，政令互相乖违。人们有了冤案，提出诉讼，也长年不能决断。
English: The former land stewards were weak and incompetent, and their decrees contradicted each other. People had unjust cases, filed lawsuits, and could not decide for many years.

古文：及信在州，事无拥滞。
现代文：他上任后，事情没有积压滞留的。
English: After he took office, there was no backlog.

古文：示以礼教，劝以耕桑，数年之中，公私富实，流人愿附者数万家。
现代文：对百姓用礼仪教育，以农桑劝导，数年之间，无论公私都富裕充实，无家可归的流人愿意归附的有数万家。
English: The people were educated with etiquette and persuaded with farming and sandalwood. Within a few years, both the public and private sectors were rich and full, and there were tens of thousands of homeless people who were willing to return.

古文：周文以其信著遐迩，故赐名为信。
现代文：宇文泰因为他的信誉远近驰名，所以赐名他叫信。
English: He was given the name "Uwentai" because his reputation was well-known.

古文：七年，岷州刺史赤水蕃王梁定举兵反，诏信讨之。
现代文：大统七年，岷州刺史、赤水蕃王梁人山定举兵反叛，朝廷命他率兵讨伐。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Reunification, Zhang Zhou Zishi and Liang Renshan Ding, the king of Chishui County, raised an army to rebel, and the imperial court ordered him to lead an army to fight.

古文：定寻为其部下所杀，而定子弟仍收其余众。
现代文：梁人山定不久被他的部下杀死，而人山定的子弟仍然收集余部抗拒官兵。
English: Liang Renshanding was soon killed by his subordinates, while Renshanding's younger brother was still collecting the remnants of resisting officers and soldiers.

古文：信乃勒兵向万年，顿三交谷口。
现代文：独孤信便率兵进向万年，驻扎在三交谷口。
English: Du Guoxin then led his troops to Wanling and stationed them at the mouth of the Sanjiao Valley.

古文：贼并力拒守。信因诡道趣稠松岭。
现代文：叛兵拼死坚守州城，独孤信便诡称要攻取稠松岭。
English: The rebels tried their best to hold on to the state capital, and only a few believed that they would be able to capture the thick pine ridge.

古文：贼不虞信兵之至，望风奔溃。
现代文：敌人没有想到官军会突然到来，便望风奔逃。
English: The enemy did not think that the government army would suddenly arrive, so they waited for the wind and fled.

古文：乘胜逐北，径至城下，贼并出降。
现代文：独孤信率军追赶，直接来到岷州城下，叛兵全都出城投降。
English: Du Guoxin led the army to chase and came directly to the foot of Zhangzhou City. All the rebels left the city and surrendered.

古文：加授太子太保。
现代文：朝廷加封他为太子太保。
English: The imperial court also made him the prince's bodyguard.

古文：芒山之战，大军不利。
现代文：邙山之役，西魏的军队失利。
English: The Western Wei army was defeated in the Battle of Lushan.

古文：信与于谨帅散卒自后击之，齐神武追骑惊扰，国因此得全。
现代文：他与于谨率领散兵从东魏军队背后攻击，高欢正率骑兵追赶西魏的军队，背后受到惊扰，才停止追击，西魏的军队因而得以保全。
English: He and Yu Zhen led the scattered soldiers to attack from the back of the East Wei army. Gao Huan Zheng led the cavalry to chase the West Wei army. They were disturbed from behind and stopped the pursuit. The West Wei army was thus saved.

古文：及凉州刺史宇文仲和据州不受代，周文令信率开府怡峰讨之。
现代文：凉州刺史宇文仲和占据州城，不接受别人前来代理。宇文泰命独孤信率领开府怡峰前去讨伐。
English: Yu Wenzhong, the governor of Liangzhou, occupied the city of Liangzhou, and did not accept others to come as agents. Yu Wenzhong led Ifeng, the governor of Kaifu, to fight.

古文：仲和婴城固守，信夜令诸将以冲梯攻其东北，信亲率壮士袭其西南，达明克之。禽仲和，虏其六千户送于长安。
现代文：宇文仲和据城固守，独孤信夜晚命诸将用冲梯攻打凉州城的东北，他亲率精壮士兵袭击城的西南，黎明攻克城池，擒获宇文仲和，俘虏六千民户送往长安。
English: Uwen Zhonghe held fast to the city, believing in the night alone that the generals would attack the northeast of the city of Liangzhou with ladders. He personally led the strong soldiers to attack the southwest of the city, conquered the city at dawn, captured Uwen Zhonghe, captured six thousand households and sent them to Chang'an.

古文：拜大司马。
现代文：他因此被封为大司马。
English: Pray for the big horse.

古文：十三年，大军南讨。
现代文：大统十三年，西魏大军南讨。
English: In the thirteenth year of unification, the West Wei army marched south.

古文：时以蠕蠕为寇，令信移镇河阳。
现代文：当时因蠕蠕叛乱，朝廷命独孤信率军镇守河阳。
English: At that time, because of the Cm Cm rebellion, the imperial court ordered the army led by Lng Sn to guard Hi Dng.

古文：十四年，进位柱国大将军，录前后功，增封，听回授诸子。
现代文：大统十四年，他晋位为柱国大将军。积累前后的功劳，增加封赏，允许他将爵位回授给自己的儿子们。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to General of the Pillar of the State. Accumulating the merits before and after, he increased the reward, allowing him to return the title to his sons.

古文：于是第二子善，封魏宁县公；第三子穆，必要县侯；第四子藏，义宁县侯，邑各一千户。
现代文：因此，二儿子独孤善被封为魏宁县公；三子独孤穆被封为必要县侯；四子独孤藏被封为义宁县侯，食邑各为一千户。
English: As a result, the second son, Dokuosen, was made the governor of Weining County; the third son, Dokuomu, was made the governor of Necessary County; and the fourth son, Dokuozo, was made the governor of Yining County, with 1,000 households in each county.

古文：第五子顺，武成县侯；第六子陀，建忠县伯，邑各五百户。
现代文：五子独孤顺，被封为武成县侯；六子独孤瞓，被封为建忠县伯，食邑各五百户。
English: The fifth son, Duoxun, was made the lord of Wucheng County; the sixth son, Duoxun, was made the county magistrate of Jianzhong County, with 500 households in each county.

古文：信在陇右岁久，启求还朝，周文不许。
现代文：他在陇右历时已久，请求回朝任职，宇文泰不同意。
English: He had been in exile for a long time and requested to return to the DPRK for a post, but Uwentai did not agree.

古文：或有自东魏来者，又告其母凶问，信发丧行服。
现代文：有从东魏来的人又告诉他母亲去世的消息，他立即发丧行守丧大礼。
English: Someone from the Eastern Wei Dynasty also told him the news of his mother's death, and he immediately held a funeral ceremony.

古文：信陈哀苦，请终礼制，又不许。
现代文：他向朝廷陈述自己的悲哀与痛苦，请求能按礼守完丧期，又不被允许。
English: He presented his grief and pain to the court and asked to be allowed to complete the mourning period in a respectful manner, but this was not allowed.

古文：于是追赠信父库者司空公，追封信母费连氏常山郡君。
现代文：于是，朝廷追赠他的父亲独孤库者为司空公，追封他的母亲费连氏为常山郡君。
English: As a result, the court posthumously awarded his father the title of Siku Gong and his mother, Fei Lian, the title of Changshan County Jun.

古文：十六年，迁尚书令。
现代文：大统十六年，他迁任为尚书令。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was transferred to Shang Shuling.

古文：六官建，拜大司马。
现代文：文官制度建立，拜受为大司马。
English: The civil servant system was established, and he was revered as the chief magistrate.

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，迁大宗伯，进封卫国公，邑万户。
现代文：周孝闵帝即皇帝位，他升任为大宗伯，晋封爵位为卫国公，食邑一万户。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaohui was the emperor. He was promoted to the rank of grand patriarch, given the title of grand marshal, and became the patron of ten thousand households.

古文：赵贵诛后，信以同谋坐免。
现代文：赵贵被诛杀，他因为犯同谋罪被免官。
English: Zhao Gui was beaten to death. He was removed from office for complicity.

古文：居无几，晋公护又欲杀之，以其名望素重，不欲显其罪过，逼令自尽于家，时年五十五。
现代文：没过多久，晋公宇文护也想杀死他，因他的名望太重，不想显示他的罪恶，逼迫他在家中自杀，时年五十五岁。
English: It didn't take long before Jin Gong Yu Wenguo also wanted to kill him. Because his fame was too great and he didn't want to reveal his crimes, he forced him to commit suicide at home, at the age of fifty-five.

古文：信美风度，雅有奇谋大略。
现代文：他仪容俊美，胸有奇谋大略。
English: He is good-looking and has a knack for intrigue.

古文：周文初启霸业，唯有关中之地，以陇右形胜，故委信镇之。
现代文：宇文泰初开霸业，只有关中这一片地方。因为陇右形胜地险，所以派他镇守。
English: At the beginning, Uwentai dominated the industry, but only in this area of central Taiwan. Because of the risk of flooding the resort, he was sent to guard the town.

古文：既为百姓所怀，声震邻国。
现代文：他为当地百姓怀念，声名震动邻国。
English: He is fondly remembered by the local people and his fame has shaken neighbouring countries.

古文：东魏将侯景之南奔梁也，魏收为檄梁文，矫称信据陇右，不从宇文氏，乃云 无关西之忧 ，欲以委梁人也。
现代文：东魏将领侯景投奔南梁，魏收起草给南梁的文书，假称独孤信占据陇右，不听从宇文氏的号令，便说东魏 不用忧虑关西的西魏 ，可以全力对付梁国，是用来吓唬梁人的啊。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty sent the vassal lord Jing to Nanliang, and the Wei Dynasty received the document drafted for Nanliang. Assuming that the right-hand side was occupied by a single person, and disobeying the order of the Uwen clan, they said that the Eastern Wei Dynasty did not need to worry about the Western Wei Dynasty in Kansai, it could deal with Liang Province with all its might, and it was used to scare the Liang people.

古文：陀弟整，位幽州刺史。
现代文：另外，他在秦州，曾因外出打猎天色已晚，骑马飞奔入城时，帽子微向一旁侧去。
English: In addition, in Qinzhou, he was out hunting when it was too late, and when he galloped into the city on horseback, his hat moved slightly to one side.

古文：大业初，赠金紫光禄大夫、平乡侯。
现代文：第二天一早，官吏百姓有戴帽子的，都因仰慕而模仿他将帽子侧向一旁。
English: In the morning of the next day, the officials and the commoners, some of whom were wearing hats, imitated him by turning his hat sideways in admiration.

古文：窦炽，字光成，扶风平陵人，后汉大鸿胪章之后也。
现代文：他就是这样被邻国和当地的官民所喜爱。窦炽，字光成，扶风平陵人，后汉大鸿胪窦章的后代。
English: In this way, he was loved by neighboring countries and local officials and people. Dou Zhao, Zhi Guangcheng, Fu Feng Pingling people, the descendants of the Han Dynasty great hero Dou Zhang.

古文：章子统，灵帝时为雁门太守，避窦武之难，亡奔匈奴，遂为部落大人。
现代文：窦章的儿子窦统，汉灵帝时任雁门太守，为躲避窦武因诛杀宦官给家庭带来的灾难，窦统逃向匈奴，成为部落大人。
English: Dou Tong, the son of Dou Zhang, was the governor of Ganmen at the time of Han Lingdi. In order to avoid the disaster that Dou Wu brought to the family because of the eunuch's assassination, Dou Tong fled to the Xiongnu and became a tribal adult.

古文：后魏南徙，子孙因家代，赐姓纥豆陵氏。
现代文：后魏向南迁徙，他的子孙因而在代地定居，朝廷给他们赐姓纥豆陵氏。
English: After Wei migrated to the south, his children and grandchildren settled in the place, and the court gave them the surname Peasling.

古文：累世仕魏，皆至大官。
现代文：世代在魏做官，而且官职都很重要。
English: Generations of officials served in Wei, and official positions are very important.

古文：父略，平远将军，以炽著勋，赠少保、住国大将军、建昌公。
现代文：窦炽的父亲窦略被封为平远将军，后因窦炽功勋卓著，窦略被朝廷赠封为少保、柱国大将军、建昌公。
English: Dou Liang's father, Dou Liang, was awarded the title of General Pingyuan, and later, because of Dou Liang's distinguished service, Dou Liang was awarded the title of Minor Protector, General Zhu Guo, and Jian Changg by the imperial court.

古文：炽性严明，有谋略，美须髯，身长八尺二寸。
现代文：窦炽性情严肃明达，有计谋韬略。须髯英美，身高八尺二寸，仪表不凡。
English: Dou Blazing's disposition is serious and clear-sighted, and he has strategies and stratagems. Suzy Yingmei, who is eight feet two inches tall, has an extraordinary appearance.

古文：少从范阳祁忻受《毛诗》、《左氏春秋》，略通大义。
现代文：从小师从范阳的祁忻，学习《毛诗》和《左氏春秋》，粗通其中的大义。
English: He learned "Mao Poetry" and "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" from Fan Yang's pupil, and is well-versed in their meaning.

古文：善骑射，膂力过人。
现代文：他善于骑马射箭，臂力超过常人。
English: He is good at riding horses and shooting arrows, and his arm strength exceeds that of an ordinary person.

古文：魏正光末，北镇扰乱，乃随略避地定州，投葛荣。
现代文：北魏正光末年，北部军镇骚乱，他随父亲逃难到定州，投奔了葛荣。
English: At the end of the Northern Wei Dynasty, when the northern military towns were in turmoil, he fled with his father to Dingzhou and joined Ge Rong.

古文：荣欲官略，略不受。
现代文：葛荣想让窦略做官，窦略不接受。
English: Ge Rong wanted Dou Liao to become an official, but Dou Liao did not accept.

古文：荣疑其有异志，遂留略于冀州，将炽及炽兄善随军。
现代文：葛荣怀疑他有二心，便将他留在冀州，让窦炽和窦善兄弟二人跟随军队。
English: Ge Rong suspected that he was double-minded, so he left him in Jizhou and let Dou Blazing and Dou Shan follow the army.

古文：及尔硃荣破葛荣，炽乃将家随荣于并州。
现代文：朱荣打败葛荣，窦炽才带领全家随朱荣迁至并州。
English: Zhu Rong defeated Ge Rong, and Dou Blazing led the whole family to move to Bianzhou with Zhu Rong.

古文：时葛荣别帅韩娄等据蓟城不下，以炽为都督，从骠骑将军侯深讨之。
现代文：这时葛荣的别帅韩娄等占据蓟城，朱荣的军队久攻不下，便任窦炽为都督，跟从骠骑将军侯深前往讨伐，窦炽亲手将韩娄斩杀。
English: At this time, Ge Rong's second-in-command, Han Zheng, and others occupied Lucheng. Zhu Rong's army was unable to conquer Lucheng for a long time, so he appointed Dou Gao as the governor and went to the crusade with the cavalry general, Hou Sheng. Dou Gao personally killed Han Zheng.

古文：炽手斩娄，以功拜扬烈将军。
现代文：因立功被封为扬烈将军。
English: He was awarded the title of General Yang Rong for his service.

古文：魏孝武即位，蠕蠕等诸蕃并遣使朝贡，帝临轩宴之。
现代文：魏孝武帝即位后，蠕蠕等蕃国都派使者朝拜，并奉献贡物，孝武帝亲临朝堂设宴招待他们。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty ascended the throne, many countries sent emissaries to pay homage and offer tributes. Emperor Xiaowu himself came to the imperial palace to host a banquet for them.

古文：有鸱飞鸣于殿前，帝素知炽善射，固欲矜示远人，乃给炽御箭两只，命射之，鸱乃应弦而落，诸蕃人咸叹异焉。
现代文：这时，一只猫头鹰鸣叫着在殿前飞来飞去。武帝知道窦炽善于射箭，因而想向远方的客人夸示，便给了窦炽两只御箭，命他将猫头鹰射下，猫头鹰随着弦声响过便落了下来，各蕃邦的客人都惊异得连连赞叹。
English: At this time, an owl flew around in front of the hall, chirping. Emperor Wu knew that Dou Blaze was good at archery, so he wanted to show off to his guests from far away. He gave Dou Blaze two arrows and ordered him to shoot the owl down. The owl fell down as the strings sounded. The guests from all over Shan State were amazed.

古文：帝大悦。
现代文：孝武帝十分高兴。
English: The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：寻随东南道行台樊子鹄追尔硃仲远，仲远奔梁。
现代文：不久，他随东南道行台樊子鹄追赶朱仲远，朱仲远奔向南梁。
English: Soon, he chased Zhu Zhongyuan with the Southeast Expressway, and Zhu Zhongyuan ran to Nanliang.

古文：时梁主又遣元树入寇，据谯城。
现代文：这时，南梁又派将领元树入侵北魏，占据了谯城。
English: At this time, Nan Liang also sent the general leader Yuan Shu to invade Northern Wei and occupied Lucheng.

古文：子鹄令炽击破之，封行唐县子，寻进爵上洛县伯。
现代文：子鸽命窦炽将谯城打破。他因功被封为行唐县子，不久又晋爵为上洛县伯。
English: He was awarded the title of Xingtang County Son for his achievements, and was soon promoted to Shangluo County Count.

古文：时帝与齐神武构隙，以炽有威重，堪处爪牙任，拜阁内大都督，迁硃衣直阁，遂从帝西迁。
现代文：这时，孝武帝与高欢之间产生分岐，孝武帝因窦炽威名颇重，可以充任自己的心腹爪牙，便封他为内大都督。迁任朱衣直。便随孝武帝西迁。
English: At this time, there was a divergence between Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Gaohan. Emperor Xiaowu was famous for his fiery temper, so he could appoint his own henchmen, and he was appointed Inner Great Governor. He was transferred to Zhu Yizhong. He then moved west with Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：仍与其兄善至城下，与武卫将军高金龙战于千秋门，败之。因入宫城，取御马四十匹并鞍勒，进之行所。
现代文：他与兄长窦善来到洛阳城下，与武卫将军高金龙在千秋门交战，将高金龙打败，进入宫城，取出四十匹御马并鞍鞯笼头，送到孝武帝临时的住所。
English: He and his elder brother Dou Shan came to the outskirts of Luoyang City and fought with the Wuwei general Gao Jinlong at the Qianqiu Gate, defeated Gao Jinlong, entered Miyagi, took out forty imperial horses and saddled them, and sent them to the temporary residence of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：帝大悦。赐炽及善骏马各二匹，驽马十匹。
现代文：孝武帝甚为高兴，赐给他们兄弟二人骏马各两匹，驽马十匹。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was very pleased and gave the two brothers two horses each and ten horses.

古文：大统元年，别封真定县公。
现代文：西魏大统元年，朝廷另外封他为真定县公。
English: In the first year of the unification of the Western Wei Dynasty, the imperial court additionally appointed him as the governor of Jinding County.

古文：从周文帝禽窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，皆有功。
现代文：他跟随宇文泰打败窦泰，收复弘农，破除沙苑，都立有功劳。
English: He followed Yu Wentai to defeat Dou Tai, recover Hong Nong, and eliminate Shayuan, all of which are meritorious achievements.

古文：河桥之战，诸将退走，炽时独从两骑，为敌人追至芒山。
现代文：河桥之战，西魏军队败退，他当时身边只有两名骑兵跟随，被东魏的军队追到邙山。
English: In the Battle of Heqiao, the West Wei army was defeated and retreated. He was accompanied by only two cavalrymen at that time, and was chased to Lushan by the East Wei army.

古文：炽乃下马，背山抗之。
现代文：他跳下战马，背靠邙山与敌人抗拒。
English: He jumped down from his horse and rode against the enemy with his back to Lushan.

古文：俄而敌众渐多，矢下如雨，炽骑士所执弓，并为敌人所射破。
现代文：不大一会儿，敌兵越来越多，射来的箭就像下雨一样。他的两名骑士的弓弦都被敌人射断。
English: In a short time, the enemy soldiers became more and more numerous, and the arrows rained down. The bow strings of his two knights were severed by the enemy.

古文：炽乃总收其箭以射之，所中人马，应弦而倒。
现代文：他将他们的箭收拢到自己这里射击敌人，敌兵的人和马，一个个应弦倒下。
English: He gathered their arrows to himself and shot at the enemy, and the enemy soldiers, men and horses, fell one by one.

古文：敌乃相谓曰： 得此三人，未足为功。 
现代文：敌人互相告诉说： 抓住这三个人，也算不上什么功劳。 
English: The enemy said to each other, "It is no great achievement to capture these three men.

古文：乃稍引退。
现代文：便向后退却。
English: He then retreated.

古文：炽因其怠，遂突围得出。
现代文：窦炽乘机突围出去。
English: Dou Blazing took the opportunity to break out of the encirclement.

古文：又从太保李弼讨白额稽胡，破之。
现代文：他又跟随太保李弼进攻白额稽胡，将敌兵打破。
English: He also followed the bodyguard Li Yan to attack Bai Yuan Qi Hu, breaking the enemy soldiers.

古文：高仲密以北豫州来，炽从周文援之。
现代文：东魏的高仲密献出北豫州归降，窦炽跟随宇文泰前去救援接应。
English: Gao Zhongmi of the Eastern Wei Dynasty surrendered Northern Yuzhou, and Dou Blaze followed Uwentai to rescue and receive.

古文：至洛阳，会东魏人据芒山为阵，周文命留辎于瀍曲，率轻骑奋击，中军与右军大破之，悉虏其步卒。
现代文：到达洛阳，适逢东魏人在邙山摆下阵势。宇文泰命辎重军需停在鏶河的拐弯处，便率领轻装骑兵奋力进攻敌人。中军与右军将敌兵打败，将他们的步兵全部抓获。
English: Arriving in Luoyang, it was time for the East Wei people to set up a position in Lushan. Uwentai's heavy army had to stop at the bend of the Lushan River, and he led the light cavalry to attack the enemy. The Chinese army and the right army defeated the enemy soldiers and captured all their infantry.

古文：炽独追至石济而还。
现代文：窦炽单独将敌兵追赶到石济才回来。
English: Dou Blaze alone chased the enemy soldiers to Shiji before returning.

古文：大统十三年，进使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中。
现代文：大统十三年，他被封为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加封为侍中。
English: In the 13th year of the Great Reunification, he was awarded the titles of Envoy of the Emperor, General of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Imperial Household, and Grand Marshal of the Imperial Household. He was also awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：出为泾州刺史，莅职数年，政号清静。改封安武县公。
现代文：他又出任泾州刺史，任职数年，为政被称赞为清静廉能，朝廷改封他为安武县公。
English: He also served as the governor of Zhangzhou, holding office for several years. He was praised as a quiet and incorruptible politician, and the court changed his title to Anwu County Governor.

古文：魏废帝元年，除原州刺史。
现代文：西魏废帝元年，他任原州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Yuanzhou.

古文：炽抑挫豪右，申理幽滞，在州十载，甚有政绩。
现代文：在任上他打击豪强地主，清理沉滞积压的案件，任刺史十年，政绩突出。
English: During his tenure, he cracked down on powerful landlords and cleared the backlog of cases. He has been in office for ten years, and his political achievements are outstanding.

古文：州城北有泉水，炽屡经游践，尝与僚吏宴于泉侧，因酌水自饮，曰： 吾在此州，唯当饮水而已。 
现代文：原州城北有一处泉水，他经常到这里游览，曾与僚属官吏在泉水旁边宴饮，因而斟了一杯泉水一饮而尽，说： 我在这个州，只应当饮泉水，其他一无所求。 
English: There is a spring north of the city of Wonju, which he often visits. He once had a banquet with his colleagues and officials next to the spring, so he poured a glass of spring water and drank it all, saying: "In this state, I should only drink spring water, I don't want anything else."

古文：及去职后，人吏感其遗惠，每至此泉者，莫不怀之。
现代文：他离职以后，官吏百姓怀念他过去的恩惠，每到这处泉水旁，无不想念他。
English: After he left office, officials and people remembered his past favors, and whenever they came to this spring, they all missed him.

古文：恭帝元年，进爵广武郡公。
现代文：西魏恭帝元年，他被晋爵为广武郡公。
English: In the first year of Emperor Gong of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was given the title of Guangwu County.

古文：属蠕蠕寇广武，炽与柱国赵贵分路讨之。
现代文：蠕蠕部落进犯广武，他与柱国赵贵分别率兵两路讨伐。
English: The Crome Crome tribe attacked Guangwu, and he and the pillar country Zhao Gui led the soldiers in a two-way crusade.

古文：蠕蠕引退，炽度河至麹伏川追及，大破之。
现代文：蠕蠕人撤退，他率军渡过黄河进至伏川，追上敌兵，把他们打得大败。
English: He led his army across the Yellow River into the Fuchuan River, caught up with the enemy soldiers and defeated them.

古文：武成二年，拜柱国大将军。
现代文：北周武成二年，他被封为柱国大将军。
English: In the second year of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was named the general of the pillar country.

古文：周明帝以炽前朝旧臣，勋望兼重，欲独为造第。
现代文：周明帝顾念他是前朝旧臣，功勋和名望都很重，想单独为他建造府第。
English: Zhou Mingdi thought of him as a former vassal of the former government, with great merits and fame, and wanted to build a palace for him alone.

古文：炽辞以天下未平，干戈未偃，不宜辄发徒役，周明不许。
现代文：他以天下还未平定，战争还未止息，不应该轻易征发工役为理由拒绝，周明帝不允许。
English: He refused on the grounds that the country had not yet been pacified, the war had not yet ended, and it was not easy to conscript laborers. Zhou Mingdi did not allow it.

古文：寻而帝崩，事方得寝。
现代文：不久明帝去世，事情才停下来。
English: Soon after, Emperor Ming died, and things came to a halt.

古文：保定元年，进封邓国公，邑一万户，别食资阳县一千户，收其租赋。
现代文：保定元年，朝廷晋封他为邓国公，食邑一万户，另外又将资阳县的一千户拨给他，以征收他们的租赋。
English: In the first year of Baoding, the imperial court promoted him to the rank of Deng Guogong, and allocated 10,000 households in Zhiyang County and another 1,000 households in Ziyang County to him in order to collect their rent.

古文：天和五年，自大宗伯为宜州刺史。
现代文：天和五年，他以大宗伯的职衔任宜州刺史。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as the first governor of Yizhou with the title of grand patriarch.

古文：先是周文田于渭北，令炽与晋公护分射走兔，炽一日获十七头，护十一头。
现代文：先前宇文泰在渭北田猎，命窦炽与宇文护分别射杀奔走的野兔，窦炽射得十七只，宇文护仅十一只。
English: Previously, when Uwentai was hunting in the Beipetian area of Jiangxi Province, he and Uwentai shot the running hares separately. Uwentai shot 17 hares while Uwentai shot only 11.

古文：护耻不及，因以为嫌。
现代文：宇文护为此感到羞耻，因而嫌弃他。
English: Umengo felt ashamed of this and disliked him.

古文：至是，炽又以周武年长，有劝护归政之议，护恶之，故左迁焉。
现代文：这时，窦炽又因为武帝宇文邕年龄已经长大，因而劝宇文护将朝政归还武帝掌管，宇文护很是恼恨他，所以降低了他的职务。
English: At this time, Dou Blaze also persuaded Wu Wenzhou to return the imperial government to the control of Emperor Wu, because Emperor Wu had outgrown Uwenzhou. Uwenzhou was very angry with him, so he lowered his position.

古文：及护诛，征拜太傅。
现代文：宇文护被武帝处死后，征拜他为太傅。
English: After Emperor Wu executed Uwenroo, he was worshipped as Taifu.

古文：炽既朝之元老，名望素隆，至于军国大谋，常与参议。
现代文：他为朝中元老，名高望隆，军中大事，武帝常与他商议。
English: He was an elder of the dynasty, highly respected, and was often consulted by Emperor Wu on military matters.

古文：尝有疾，周武帝幸其第问之，因赐金石之乐。
现代文：他曾经患病，周武帝亲自到家中去探视，并赐给他贵重的药品。
English: He was once ill, and Zhou Wudi personally visited his home and gave him valuable medicine.

古文：其见礼如此。帝于大德殿将谋伐齐，炽年已衰老，乃扼腕曰： 臣虽朽迈，请执干橹，首启戎行。
现代文：武帝在大德殿商议讨伐北齐，窦炽年纪已经高迈，仍扼腕慷慨陈词： 我虽然已年迈老朽，请求披坚执锐，愿首先与敌人交战，再看一看那些凶恶的人怎样被杀戮。
English: Emperor Wu deliberated on the campaign against the Northern Qi in the Great Hall of the People, and although he was already very old, he still made a generous statement: Although I am old and decrepit, I ask you to be steadfast and persistent. I would like to first fight with the enemy, and then see how those vicious people are killed.

古文：得一睹诛翦鲸鲵，廓清寰宇，省方观俗，登岳告成，然后归魂泉壤，无复余恨。 
现代文：廓清环宇，到天下四方观风问俗。登上山岳祭拜天地，宣告大功告成，然后闭目屏气，魂归黄泉，不再有什么遗憾。 
English: He ascended the mountain to worship heaven and earth, proclaiming that his great work was accomplished, and then closed his eyes and held his breath, his soul returned to hell, and he no longer had any regrets.

古文：帝壮其志节，遂以炽第二子武当公恭为左二军总管。
现代文：武帝很是鼓励他雄壮豪迈的志气，便任他的二儿子武当公窦恭为左二军总管。
English: Emperor Wu encouraged his heroic spirit and appointed his second son Wu Dang Gong Dou Gong as the commander of the Second Left Army.

古文：齐平之后，帝乃召炽历观相州宫殿。炽拜贺曰： 陛下真不负先帝矣。 
现代文：北齐被平定之后，武帝与窦炽一起游遍相州的齐国宫殿，他向武帝拜贺说 ：陛下您真不辜负先帝的遗命啊！ 
English: After Northern Qi was subdued, Emperor Wu and Dou Blazing traveled all over the palace of the State of Qi in Xiangzhou together. He congratulated Emperor Wu and said, "Your Majesty, you have truly lived up to the legacy of the former emperor!"

古文：帝大悦，进位上柱国。
现代文：武帝异常欢喜，晋封他为上柱国。
English: Emperor Wu was overjoyed and promoted him to Shangzhuang.

古文：宣政元年，兼雍州牧。
现代文：宣政元年，他兼任雍州刺史。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zheng, he also served as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：及周宣营建东京，以炽为京洛营作大监，宫苑制度，皆取决焉。
现代文：周宣帝营建东京洛阳，命窦炽任京洛营作太监，宫殿苑林的布局规划，都由他来决定。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan built Luoyang in Tokyo, appointed Yao Ming as the eunuch of Luoyang, and decided the layout of the palace gardens.

古文：大象初，改食乐陵县，邑户如旧。
现代文：大象初年，朝廷将乐陵县改为他的食邑，户数和过去一样。
English: In the first year of the elephant, the imperial court changed Leling County into his dining village, with the same number of households as in the past.

古文：隋文帝入辅政，停洛阳宫作，炽请入朝。
现代文：杨坚任宰相辅助北周朝政，停止了洛阳宫殿的兴建，窦炽请求回朝。
English: Yang Jian served as prime minister to assist the Northern Zhou Dynasty, stopped the construction of the Luoyang Palace, and requested Dou Yao to return to the dynasty.

古文：属尉迟迥举兵，炽乃移入金墉，与洛州刺史、平凉公元亨同心固守，仍权行洛阳镇事。
现代文：尉迟迥举兵反叛，他便移入金墉城，与洛州刺史、平凉公元亨同心协力，共同把守，暂时负责镇守洛阳。
English: After Li Shizhen raised an army to rebel, he moved to Jinyuan City, and worked together with Luozhou Zhishi and Pingliang B.D. Heng to jointly guard Luoyang. He was temporarily responsible for the town guard of Luoyang.

古文：相州平，炽方入朝。
现代文：相州被平定，他才回到朝廷。
English: He returned to the imperial court only after Sengzhou was pacified.

古文：属文帝初为相国，百僚皆劝进，自以累世受恩，遂不肯署笺，时人绵高其节。
现代文：隋文帝刚任宰相时，朝中百官都劝窦炽称帝，他认为自己世代受朝廷恩惠，便不肯接受。人们都崇敬他的节操。
English: When Emperor Sui Wen was newly appointed as prime minister, all the officials in the imperial court urged Dou to proclaim himself emperor. He thought that his generation had been favored by the imperial court, so he refused to accept. People revered his self-restraint.

古文：又追赠贤子绍宣秦州刺史，并袭贤爵。绍宣无子，仍以绍宣兄子德藏嗣。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚即皇帝位，封他为太傅，给他特殊的礼遇，他上朝参拜天子，可以不报自己的姓名。
English: Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty was the emperor, and he was given the title of Taifu, and he was given special courtesy. When he went to court to worship the Son of Heaven, he could not give his name.

古文：贺兰祥，字盛乐，其先与魏俱起，有乞伏者，为贺兰莫何弗，因以为氏。
现代文：开皇四年八月，窦炽去世，享年七十八岁。朝廷追赠他为八州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥号为恭。贺兰祥，字盛乐。他的祖先与北魏一起兴起，有一个叫乞伏的人，任贺兰的莫何弗，因而以地为姓。
English: In August of the fourth year of the Emperor's reign, Dou Blaze died at the age of seventy-eight. The imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of Hachizhou Military and Jizhou Historian, and his nickname was Kyo. Helan Xiang, the word Sheng Le. His ancestors arose together with the Northern Wei Dynasty, and there was a beggar named Mo Hefu, who was named Helan, so his surname was Ji.

古文：后有以良家子镇武川者，遂家焉。
现代文：后代的子孙有以良家子弟的身份入伍镇守武川的，便在那里定居。
English: The descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants

古文：父初真，少知名，为乡闾所重，尚文帝姊建安长公主。
现代文：贺兰祥的父亲贺兰初真从小就很出名，被乡亲们所看重，娶了魏文帝的姐姐建安长公主为妻。
English: He Lan Xiang's father, He Lan Chu Zhen, was very famous from an early age. He was valued by the villagers and married Wei Wendi's sister, Jian'an, the eldest princess.

古文：保定二年，追赠太傅、柱国、常山郡公。
现代文：保定二年，朝廷追赠贺兰初真为太傅、柱国、常山郡公。
English: In the second year of Baoding, the Imperial Court posthumously awarded Horan Hatsuchizane the title of Taifu, pillar country, and the head of Changshan County.

古文：祥年十一而孤，居丧合礼。
现代文：贺兰祥十一岁就失去父亲，居丧完全合乎礼仪的要求。
English: He Lanxiang lost his father at the age of eleven, and his funeral was completely in line with the requirements of etiquette.

古文：长于舅氏，特为周文帝所爱，虽在戎旅，常博延儒生，教以书传。
现代文：在舅父家长大，尤为周文帝宇文泰所宠爱。虽然常在戎马逆旅中度过，舅父却不断为他延请儒生授业，教他读《诗》、《书》、《左传》。
English: He grew up in his uncle's family, and was especially loved by Emperor Zhou Wen and Emperor Yu Wente. Although he often spent time in the army, his uncle constantly invited Confucian scholars to teach him, and taught him to read "Poetry," "Books," and "Left Biography."

古文：周文初入关，祥与晋公护俱在晋阳，后乃遣使迎致之。
现代文：宇文泰初入关时，他与晋公宇文护都在晋阳，后来，宇文泰才派人将他们接去。
English: When Uwentai first entered the customs, he and Jin Gong Uwentai were both in Jinyang. Later, Uwentai sent someone to pick them up.

古文：解褐奉朝请。
现代文：他脱去布衣，被朝廷征用。
English: First come, first served.

古文：少有胆气，志在立功。
现代文：他从小颇有胆量，志在建功立业。
English: Since he was a child, he had a lot of courage and aspired to build a career.

古文：寻擢补都督，恆居帐下。
现代文：不久被提拔，补任都督，常在宇文泰的帐下。
English: He was soon promoted to fill the post of governor-general, often working under Uwentai.

古文：从平侯莫陈悦，又迎魏孝武，以前后功封抚夷县伯。
现代文：他跟随宇文泰平定侯莫陈悦。魏孝武帝入关，积累前后功勋，被封为抚夷县伯。
English: He followed Yuwen Tai to subdue Hou Mo Chen Yue. Wei Xiaowu entered the customs, accumulated merits, and was awarded the title of Fuxi County Count.

古文：仍从击潼关，获东魏将薛长儒，又攻回洛拔之。
现代文：他还跟随宇文泰进攻潼关，俘获东魏将领薛长儒，又攻克回洛城。
English: He also followed Yu Wentai to attack Shaoguan, captured the Eastern Wei general Xue Changru, and conquered back Luocheng.

古文：还拜左右直长，进爵为公。
现代文：归来后被封为左右直长，晋封爵位为公。
English: After his return, he was appointed as the left and right direct chief, and the promotion to the peerage was public.

古文：大统九年，从周文与东魏战于芒山，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中。
现代文：大统九年，他跟随宇文泰在邙山与东魏军队交战，被升任为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加封为侍中。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Reunification, he followed Wu Wentai to fight against the Eastern Wei army in Lushan, and was promoted to General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Divisions, and was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：十四年，除都督、荆州刺史，进爵博陵郡公。
现代文：大统十四年，被朝廷任命为都督、荆州刺史，晋封爵位为博陵郡公。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed by the imperial court as the governor of Jingzhou and Jingzhou County, and was promoted to the title of Boling County.

古文：先是祥尝行荆州事，虽未期月，颇有惠政，至是重往，百姓安之。
现代文：以前，他曾代行荆州刺史职务，虽然不到一个月，却颇有政绩。这时重新上任，百姓很安心。
English: Previously, he had served as acting Jingzhou chief historian, and although it was less than a month, he had quite a lot of political achievements. When he took office again, the people were very relieved.

古文：由是汉南流人襁负至者，日有千数，还近蛮夷莫不款附。
现代文：因此，汉水以南流离失所的百姓都背着行李投奔他的人，每天都有一千多，远近的蛮族也无不归顺。
English: As a result, more than a thousand people who had been displaced south of Hanshui rushed to join him with their luggage on their backs every day, and barbarians from near and far also surrendered.

古文：祥随机抚纳，咸得其欢心。
现代文：他随时安抚接纳，都得到他们的欢心。
English: He was always soothed and accepted, and they all liked him.

古文：时盛夏亢阳，祥亲巡境内，观政得失，见有发掘古冢，暴露骸骨，乃谓守令曰： 此岂仁者为政邪！ 
现代文：时值盛夏骄阳，他亲自巡视境内各地，看见有人发掘古墓，暴露的骸骨遍地都是，便对守令说： 这怎么是仁者为政应该出现的情况呢！ 
English: It was the height of summer and the sun was shining brightly. He personally toured all parts of the territory, saw people excavating ancient tombs, and exposed skeletons everywhere. He said to the guard: "How is this the situation that should arise for a benevolent government?"

古文：命所在收葬之。
现代文：命人赶快收葬。
English: It was ordered to be buried as soon as possible.

古文：即日澍雨，是岁大有年。
现代文：当天下起大雨，这年获得丰收。
English: It rained heavily that day, and the harvest that year was very good.

古文：境内多古墓，其俗好行发掘，至是遂息。
现代文：荆州境内有许多古墓，当地居民相沿成俗，喜欢挖掘，这时便自动停止。
English: There are many ancient tombs in the territory of Jingzhou. Local residents follow the custom and like to excavate. At this time, they automatically stop.

古文：祥虽周文密亲，性甚清素。
现代文：他虽然与宇文泰关系亲密，性情却很清简素净。
English: Although he has a close relationship with Yu Wentai, his disposition is very simple and pure.

古文：州境南接襄阳，西通岷蜀，物产所出，多诸珍异。
现代文：荆州南接襄阳，西连岷蜀，出产的物品大多珍贵奇异。
English: South of Jingzhou is Xiangyang, and west of Lianyungang is Shushou. Most of the goods produced there are rare and exotic.

古文：既与梁通好，行李往来，公私赠遗，一无所受。
现代文：西魏已与南梁通好，货物往来，公私的馈赠，他一无所受。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty had already established good relations with the Southern Liang Dynasty. He had nothing to do with the exchange of goods and gifts between the public and private sectors.

古文：梁雍州刺史、岳阳王萧詧钦其风素，乃以竹屏风、絺绤之属及经史赠之。
现代文：梁雍州刺史、岳阳王萧鮞钦佩他的人品风貌，便赠给他竹制的屏风、粗细不等的葛布，以及经史类的书籍。
English: Liang Yongzhou and Yueyang King Xiao Xi admired his personality and style, and presented him with bamboo screens, georgette cloths of different thicknesses, and books on history.

古文：祥难违其意，取而付诸所司。
现代文：他难以违背萧鮞的心意，接受了之后就交给所司。
English: It was difficult for him to go against Xiao Yao's wishes, and after he accepted, he handed it over to Shoshi.

古文：周文后闻之，并以赐祥。
现代文：宇文泰后来听说后，又都拿来赏赐给他。
English: Later, after he heard about it, he gave it to him as a reward.

古文：十六年，拜大将军。
现代文：大统十六年，朝廷授予他大将军衔。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court awarded him the rank of general.

古文：周文以泾、渭溉灌之处，渠堰废毁，乃令祥修造富平堰，开渠引水，东注于洛。
现代文：宇文泰考虑到泾水与渭水灌溉的地方，渠坝堤堰已经被毁坏，便命他负责修建富平堰，开挖渠道，引来河水，向东注入洛阳。
English: Taking into account that the canal dam and dike weir had been destroyed in the place of irrigation with brackish water and brackish water, Uwentai ordered him to be responsible for building the Fuping weir, digging channels, attracting river water, and injecting it into Luoyang to the east.

古文：功用既毕，人获其利。
现代文：工程完成之后，人民大获其利。
English: After the completion of the project, the people benefited a lot.

古文：魏废帝二年，行华州事，后改华州为同州，仍以祥为刺史。
现代文：西魏废帝二年，他任华州刺史。后来改华州为同州，朝廷仍任命他为刺史。
English: In the second year of the abolition of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Huazhou. Later, Huazhou was changed to Tongzhou, but the court still appointed him as the governor.

古文：寻拜尚书左仆射。
现代文：不久，朝廷又封他为尚书左仆射。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed him as the second-in-command of the Imperial Palace.

古文：六官建，授小司马。
现代文：文官制度建立，朝廷授他为小司马。
English: The civil service system was established, and the imperial court awarded him the title of "Junior Sima."

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，进位柱国、大司马。
现代文：孝闵帝称帝，废魏建周，晋封他为柱国、大司马。
English: Emperor Xiaoyan proclaimed himself emperor, abolished Wei and Jian Zhou, and promoted him to pillar state and grand steward.

古文：时晋公护执政，祥与护中表，少相亲爱，军国之事，护皆与祥参谋。
现代文：这时，晋公宇文护执掌朝政，他们是中表亲戚，从小又相亲相爱，所以，军国大事，宇文护都与他商量。
English: At this time, Jin Gong Uwenguo was in charge of the imperial government. They were middle-ranking relatives and loved each other since childhood. Therefore, Uwenguo consulted with him on military affairs.

古文：及诛赵贵，废闵帝，祥有力焉。
现代文：诛杀赵贵，废除孝闵帝，贺兰祥都起了很大作用。
English: He Lanxiang played a great role in the assassination of Zhao Gui and the abolition of Emperor Xiaojun.

古文：武成初，吐谷浑侵掠州郡，诏祥与宇文贵总兵讨之。
现代文：武成初年，吐谷浑进犯北周的许多州郡，朝廷派他与宇文贵统兵讨伐。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wucheng, Tuya Hun invaded many counties and prefectures in the northern Zhou, and the imperial court sent him to fight against the soldiers led by Uwen Gui.

古文：祥乃遣其军司檄吐谷浑，与浑广定王、锺留王等战，破之，因拔其洮阳、洪和二城，以其地为洮州。
现代文：他便派他的军司起草给吐谷浑的文告，与吐谷浑的广定王、忠留王等交战，把他们打得落花流水。因而，攻占了吐谷浑的洮阳、洪和两座城池，把这片地方改为洮州。
English: He then sent his army chief to draft a message to Tugu Hun, and fought with Tugu Hun's King Guangding and King Zhongru, beating them to a pulp. As a result, he captured Tugu Hun's Shenyang, Honghe and two cities, and changed this area to Zhangzhou.

古文：毗，七岁袭爵石保县公。
现代文：他抚慰西部的百姓，整顿部队，返回北周。他被晋封为凉国公。
English: He comforted the people in the west, reorganized the troops, and returned to the north of Zhou. He was promoted to the Duke of Liang.

古文：及长，仪貌矜严，颇好经史，受汉书于萧该，略通大旨。能篆书，草隶尤善，为当时之妙。
现代文：去世，被赠封为太师、同、岐等十三州诸军事、同州刺史，谥号为景。阎毗，七岁继承父亲阎庆的爵位为石保县公。长大之后，仪表容貌矜持威严，十分喜好经史。曾向萧该学习《汉书》，粗通书中大义。会写篆书，草书和隶书更为擅长，成为当时的妙品。
English: After his death, he was awarded the titles of Taishi, Tong, Qi, and other military titles of the 13 prefectures, as well as the title of Shishi of the same prefecture. Yan Pi, at the age of seven, inherited the title of his father, Yan Qing, and became the governor of Shibao County. After growing up, his appearance was dignified and he was very fond of history. He had studied "Chinese" with Xiao Ke, and "Daiyi" in the rough book. He could write in cursive, and he was better at writing in cursive and cursive, which made him a wonderful product at that time.

古文：周武帝见而悦之，命尚清都公主。
现代文：周武帝见了很高兴，命将清都公主嫁给他。
English: Zhou Wudi was very happy to see him, and ordered the Qingdu princess to marry him.

古文：宣帝即位，拜仪同三司。
现代文：宣帝即位，封他为仪同三司。
English: Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of Ji Tong San Si.

古文：隋文帝受禅，以技艺侍东宫。数以琱丽之物取悦于皇太子，由是甚见亲待，每称之于上。
现代文：杨坚受禅称帝建隋，他靠技艺跟随东宫太子杨勇，多次用华丽的东西取悦于皇太子，因此很被信任，太子常常在隋文帝面前称赞他。
English: Yang Jian was praised by Zen as the emperor who built the Sui Dynasty. He relied on his skills to follow Yang Yong, the prince of the Eastern Court, and repeatedly pleased the crown prince with gorgeous things. Therefore, he was very trusted. The prince often praised him in front of the Sui Emperor.

古文：寻拜车骑，宿卫东宫。
现代文：不久，他被封为车骑将军，负责守卫东宫。
English: Soon after, he was appointed General of the Cavalry, responsible for guarding the East Palace.

古文：上尝遣高颎大阅于龙台泽，诸军部伍多不齐整，唯毗一军，法制肃然。
现代文：隋文帝曾派高赹在龙台泽检阅军队，各军队伍多不整齐，惟有他指挥的这支队伍肃穆齐整。
English: Emperor Sui Wen had sent Gao Jun to inspect the troops in Longtai Ze. The troops of each army were not neat, but the team he commanded was neat.

古文：颎言之于上，特蒙赐制。
现代文：高赹奏报文帝，特赏赐给他丝帛以资鼓励。
English: Gao Yao played for the Emperor and was given a special award to encourage him.

古文：俄兼太子宗卫率长史，寻加上仪同。
现代文：不久，任太子宗卫率长史，很快又封为上仪同。
English: Soon after, Ren Taishi Zongwei led a long history, and soon he was appointed to Shang Yi Tong.

古文：太子服玩之物多毗所为。
现代文：太子所赏玩的东西，大多是他送给的。
English: Most of the things that the prince enjoyed were given to him.

古文：及太子废，毗坐杖一百，与妻子俱配为官奴婢。
现代文：太子被废除后，他因此被打了一百杖，与妻子都沦为官府的奴婢。
English: After the prince was abolished, he was therefore beaten with a hundred canes, and he and his wife were reduced to slaves of the government.

古文：二岁放免。
现代文：两年后获免。
English: He was released two years later.

古文：炀帝嗣位，盛修军器，以毗性巧，练习旧事，诏典其职。寻授朝请郎。
现代文：炀帝杨广继承帝位，大修军械武器。因为阎毗灵活工巧，让他练习旧有的技能，下诏封给他官职，不久任命他为朝请郎。
English: Emperor Yang Guang inherited the imperial throne and overhauled the military weapons. Because Yan Pi was flexible and skillful, he let him practice the old skills, gave him an official post, and soon appointed him as a courtier.

古文：毗立议，辇辂车舆，多所增损。
现代文：根据他的建议，帝王乘坐的车轿的样式，多有改造。
English: According to his suggestion, the style of the carriage in which the emperor rode was often modified.

古文：擢拜起部郎。
现代文：不久，提拔他为部郎。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the position of chief.

古文：帝尝大备法驾，嫌属车太多，顾谓毗曰： 开皇之日，属车十二乘，于事亦得。
现代文：炀帝曾大肆准备车驾，嫌从属的车子太多，对阎毗说： 先帝时，从属的车子只有十二辆，也能满足需要。
English: Emperor Xizong had prepared a large number of chariots, and disliked the fact that there were too many subordinate chariots. He said to Yan Pi: When the emperor was alive, there were only twelve subordinate chariots, which was enough to meet the needs.

古文：今八十一乘，以牛驾车，不足以益文物，朕欲减之，从何为可？ 
现代文：现在定为八十一辆，用牛驾车，不足以增加礼乐典章制度，我也减去一些，究竟多少合适呢？ 
English: It is now set at eighty-one, and driving with cattle is not enough to increase the ceremonial music award system, I will also subtract some, how much is appropriate?

古文：毗曰： 臣初定数，共宇文恺参详故实，据汉胡伯始、蔡邕等议，属车八十一乘。
现代文：阎毗说： 我开始确定这个数目，与宇文恺一起参考旧例，根据汉代胡伯安、蔡邕等人的定议，属车为八十一辆。
English: Yan Pi said: I began to determine this number, and together with Yu Wenjun, I referred to the old example. According to the resolution of the Han Dynasty Hu Bo'an, Cai Jun and others, there are eighty-one vehicles.

古文：此起于秦，遂为后式。
现代文：这个数字起始于秦，后来便成了定式。
English: This number began in Qin and later became a fixed formula.

古文：故张衡赋云 属车九九 是也。
现代文：所以，张衡在他的文赋中说： 属车九九。 
English: Therefore, Zhang Heng said in his literary work: It belongs to the car nine nine.

古文：次及法驾，三分减一，为三十六乘，此汉制也。
现代文：天子的车驾，三分减一，为三十六辆，这是汉代的制度。
English: The number of chariots of the sons of God was reduced by one-third to thirty-six, which was the system of the Han Dynasty.

古文：又据宋孝建时，有司奏议，晋迁江左，唯设五乘，尚书令建平王宏曰： 八十一乘，义兼六国，三十六乘，无所准凭，江左五乘，俭不中礼。
现代文：另外，据南刘宋孝建年间有司奏议，说晋迁至江东，天子的车驾只有五辆，尚书令建平王刘宏说： 天子的车驾有八十一辆，含义包括九国。三十六辆，是没有根据的。江东只设五辆，勤俭但不合礼仪。
English: In addition, according to the Southern Liu, Song and Xiao Jian years, there was a sermon that said that the promotion to the east of the Yangtze River was only five chariots of the son of heaven, and the king of Jianping, Liu Hong, said: There are eighty-one chariots of the son of heaven, which means including nine countries. Thirty-six cars, which is unfounded. The east of the Yangtze River only has five cars, which is thrifty but not in line with etiquette.

古文：但帝王文物旗旒之数，爰及冕玉，皆用十二，今宜准此，设十二乘。 
现代文：但是帝王按规定所需要的旗帜的数目，以及皇冠上的玉石，都用十二这个数字，现在应该沿用，设车驾十二辆。 
English: However, the number of flags required by the emperor according to regulations, as well as the jade on the crown, all use the number twelve, which should now be used, with twelve chariots.

古文：开皇平陈，因以为法。
现代文：先帝平定南陈，因此袭用南朝的制度。
English: The previous emperor subdued the Southern Chen, so the system of the Southern Dynasty was adopted.

古文：今宪章往古，大驾依秦，法驾依汉，小驾依宋，以为差等。 
现代文：现在根据往古的制度，天子出行时的大驾按照秦制，小驾依据宋法，以有差别。 
English: Now, according to the ancient system, when the emperor travels, the big driver follows the Qin system, and the small driver follows the Song system, so there is a difference.

古文：帝曰： 何用秦法！
现代文：炀帝说： 何必用秦时的制度！
English: Emperor Qian said: Why use the system of Qin Dynasty!

古文：大驾宜三十六，法驾宜十二，小驾除之。 
现代文：大驾三十六辆为宜，法驾为十二辆，小驾除去。 
English: Thirty-six large vehicles are appropriate, 12 legal vehicles, and small vehicles should be eliminated.

古文：毗研精故事，皆此类也。
现代文：阎毗精心探究过去的旧例，都像这一样。
English: Yan Fei meticulously researched old cases from the past, all like this one.

古文：长城之役，毗总其事。
现代文：长城一役，他总理其事。
English: The Great Wall played a role, and he was the prime minister.

古文：及帝有事恆岳，诏毗营立坛场。
现代文：炀帝到北岳恒山祭奠，命他建立祭坛。
English: Emperor Yao went to Beidake Hengshan to pay homage and ordered him to build an altar.

古文：寻转殿内丞，从幸张掖郡。
现代文：不久，他任殿内丞，随从炀帝到达张掖城。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of imperial secretary, and followed Emperor Qian to Zhangye City.

古文：高昌王朝于行所，诏毗持节迎劳，遂将护入东都。
现代文：高昌国国王到炀帝的临时住所朝拜，炀帝命阎毗持符节迎接，并将他护送到东都洛阳。
English: The king of Gaochang paid homage to Emperor Gong at his temporary residence, and Emperor Gong greeted Emperor Yan with a rune festival and escorted him to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：寻以母忧去职，未期，起令视事。
现代文：不久，因母亲去世离职，丧期未完，朝廷便命他复职任事。
English: Soon after, due to the death of his mother, he left his post, and before the period of mourning was over, the Imperial Court ordered him to resume his duties.

古文：将兴辽东之役，自洛口开渠达涿郡以通漕，毗督其役。
现代文：炀帝准备发动征辽战役，从洛口开挖渠道抵达涿郡，以通漕运。阎毗奉命督管这项工程。
English: Emperor Qian was preparing to launch a campaign to conquer Liao, and a canal was dug from the mouth of the Luo River to the county of Qian, which was to be transported by rowing. Yan Bei was assigned to supervise this project.

古文：明年，兼领右翊卫长史，营建临朔宫。
现代文：第二年，兼任右翊卫长史，负责营建临朔宫。
English: In the second year, he also served as the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards and was responsible for the construction of Lin Shuo Palace.

古文：及征辽东，以本官领武贲郎将，典宿卫。
现代文：大军征讨辽东时，他以原来的官职领武贲郎将的职务，负责炀帝的护卫。
English: When a large army was sent to conquer Liaodong, he was in charge of escorting Emperor Xuan with his former official position as the leader of the Wuyulang general.

古文：时军围辽东城，帝令毗诣城下宣谕，贼弓弩乱发，流矢中所乘马，毗颜色不变，辞气抑扬，卒事而去。
现代文：这时隋军围攻辽东城，炀帝命他到城下宣读朝廷的谕旨，敌兵的弓箭纷纷射来，流矢射中他乘坐的马，他面色不变，意气昂扬，大声宣读完了才离去。
English: At this time, the Sui army besieged Liaodong City. Emperor Qian ordered him to go under the city and read out the imperial edict. The bows and arrows of the enemy soldiers came one after another. The horse he was riding was hit by a stray arrow. His face was unchanged and his spirits were high. He only left after he had finished reading out loud.

古文：迁殿内少监，又领将作少监。
现代文：他又迁任为殿内少监，兼领将作少监。
English: He was also transferred to the position of junior inspector in the palace, and concurrently served as junior inspector.

古文：云弟威，字世仪，亦以父勋赐爵武当县公。权景宣，字晖远，天水显亲人也。
现代文：后来，又随从炀帝攻打辽东。适逢杨玄感反叛，炀帝撤军，他随军到达高阳郡，去世。炀帝极为痛惜，赠封他为殿内监。权景宣，字晖远，天水显亲人。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Gong to attack Liaodong. When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled and Emperor Gong withdrew, he followed the army to Goyang County and died. Emperor Gong was very sorry and gave him the title of palace overseer. Quan Jingxuan was a distant relative of Tianshui Xian.

古文：父昙腾，魏陇西郡守，赠秦州刺史。
现代文：他的父亲权昙腾，魏时任陇西郡守，去世后赠封为秦州刺史。
English: His father, Quan Yuteng, was the governor of Shaanxi County in the Wei Dynasty. After his death, he was awarded the title of Qin State Historian.

古文：景宣少聪悟，有气侠，宗党皆叹异之。
现代文：景宣少小聪明颖悟，有气概侠骨，同宗的人都对他惊异和叹服。
English: Jing Xuan was young, clever and insightful. He was full of courage and chivalry. People of the same clan were surprised and impressed by him.

古文：年十七，魏行台萧宝夤见而奇之，表为轻车将军。
现代文：十七岁时，魏行台萧宝夤看见他深感惊奇，上表请求朝廷加封他为轻车将军。
English: At the age of seventeen, Wei Xingtai Xiao Baojun was deeply surprised to see him, and asked the court to add him as a light vehicle general.

古文：及宝夤败，景宣归乡里。
现代文：萧宝夤失败后，他重归乡里。
English: After Xiao Baojun's defeat, he returned to his hometown.

古文：周文帝平陇右，擢为行台郎中。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰平定陇右，提拔他任行台郎中。
English: Emperor Wenyu Wenya of Zhou promoted him to the position of middle-ranking official.

古文：孝武四迁，授镇远将军、步兵校尉，加平西将军、秦州大中正。
现代文：孝武帝西迁后，封他为镇远将军、步兵校尉，后又加封为平西将军、秦州大中正。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, he was given the titles of Zhenyuan General and Infantry Lieutenant, and later he was also given the titles of Pingxi General and Qinzhou Da Zhongzheng.

古文：大统初，转祠部郎中。
现代文：大统初年，他转任祠部郎中。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was transferred to the position of a junior member of the ancestral hall.

古文：景宣晓兵权，有智略。
现代文：他通晓用兵的方法，又有智谋胆略。
English: He is familiar with the methods of using soldiers, and has the wit and daring to do so.

古文：从周文拔弘农，破沙苑，皆先登陷阵。
现代文：跟随宇文泰攻克弘农，打破沙苑的敌军，他都冲锋陷阵。
English: He followed Yu Wentai in conquering Hongnong and breaking the enemy army in Shayuan.

古文：转外兵郎中。从开府于谨援洛阳，景宣督课粮储，军以周济。
现代文：被任为外兵郎中，跟从开府于谨援救洛阳，他负责督促征收粮草，军队的供应源源不断。
English: Appointed as one of the foreign soldiers, he followed the founder Yu Zhen to rescue Luoyang. He was responsible for supervising the collection of grain and grass, and the supply of the army was continuous.

古文：时初复洛阳，将修缮宫室，景宣率徒三千，先出采运。
现代文：当时，洛阳刚被收复，准备修缮宫殿，他率领三千工役，先外出采运材料。
English: At that time, Luoyang had just been recaptured and was preparing to repair the palace. He led three thousand construction workers to go out first to collect and transport materials.

古文：会东魏兵至，司州牧元季海等以众少拔还，属城悉叛，道路拥塞。
现代文：适逢东魏军队到来，司州刺史元季海等人因敌众我寡，献城投降，因而道路被堵塞。
English: When the Eastern Wei army arrived, Sizhou Zhishi Yuan Jihai and others surrendered the city due to the small number of enemies, and the road was blocked.

古文：景宣将二十骑且战且走，从骑略尽。
现代文：景宣率领二十名骑兵且战且走，跟随的骑兵伤亡殆尽。
English: Jing Xuan led twenty cavalrymen and fought and left, and the following cavalrymen were all killed or wounded.

古文：景宣轻马突围，手斩数级，驰而获免，因投人家自匿。
现代文：他匹马单枪突破包围，手斩数名敌兵，飞驰而去才免于一死，到一户人家躲藏起来。
English: He single-handedly broke through the encirclement, hand-chopped several enemy soldiers, sped away only to avoid death, and hid in a house.

古文：景宣以久藏非计，乃伪作周文书，招募得五百余人，保据宜阳，声言大军续至。
现代文：他认为这样长久藏匿不出不是办法，便假托宇文泰的名义发布文告，招募五百多人，保卫宜阳，并扬言大军马上就会来到。
English: He thought it was not a good idea to hide for such a long time, so he issued a proclamation in the name of Yu Wentai, recruited more than five hundred people to defend Yiyang, and threatened that the army would come soon.

古文：东魏将段琛等率众至九曲，惮景宣不敢进。
现代文：东魏将领段琛等人率军队来到九曲，害怕景宣而不敢前进。
English: Eastern Wei general Duan Yu and others led the army to Jiuqu, but they were afraid of Jing Xuan and did not dare to advance.

古文：景宣恐琛审其虚实，乃将腹心自随，诈云迎军，因得西遁。
现代文：他怕段琛弄清了自己的虚实，便带着心腹诈称前去迎接大军，因而得以逃回西魏。
English: He was afraid that Duan Xuan would find out the truth about him, so he went to meet the large army with false pretenses and was able to escape back to West Wei.

古文：与仪同李延孙相会，攻拔孔城。
现代文：路上与仪同李延孙相遇，一起攻克孔城。
English: On the way, he met Yi and Li Yansun, and together they conquered Kongcheng.

古文：洛阳以南，寻亦来附。
现代文：洛阳以南的许多地方，很快表示归附。
English: Many areas south of Luoyang soon declared their allegiance.

古文：周文即留景宣守张白坞，节度东南义军。
现代文：宇文泰留他守卫张白坞，统领东南的义军。
English: Uwentai left him to guard Zhangbai dock and command the south-eastern rebel army.

古文：东魏将王元轨入洛，景宣与延孙等击走之，以功授大行台左丞。
现代文：东魏将领王元轨入据洛阳，他与李延孙等人率兵将王元轨赶走。因立功被封为大行台左丞。
English: The East Wei general Wang Yuanlu entered Luoyang, and he and Li Yansun and others led the troops to drive Wang Yuanlu away. He was awarded the title of Dagangdai Zuo.

古文：进屯宜阳，攻襄城，拔之，获郡守王洪显。
现代文：他又率军进驻宜阳，攻打襄城，一举克服，生擒东魏太守王洪显。
English: He also led the army into Yiyang, attacked Xiangcheng, overcame it in one fell swoop, and captured the East Wei governor Wang Hongxian.

古文：周文嘉之，徵入朝。录前后功，封显亲县男，除南阳郡守。
现代文：宇文泰嘉奖他，将他调入朝廷，记录他前后立下的战功，封他为显亲县男，命他任南阳太守。
English: Uwentai commended him, transferred him to the imperial court, recorded his war exploits, made him the man of Xianxian County, and appointed him as the governor of Nanyang.

古文：郡邻敌境，旧制发人守防三十五处，多废农桑，而奸宄犹作。
现代文：南阳郡紧邻敌境，旧有的制度规定征集民夫守护三十五个军事据点，农桑因而荒废，而奸诈刁恶之徒却乘机窃发。
English: Nanyang County is in the immediate vicinity of the enemy's territory. The old system stipulated the conscription of civilians to guard thirty-five military strongholds. As a result, the farmers were abandoned, while the treacherous and evil people took the opportunity to steal.

古文：景宣至，并除之，唯修起城楼，多备器械，寇盗敛迹，人得肄业焉。
现代文：他上任后，将三十五处设防全部撤除，只修起城楼，准备许多战守的器械，盗贼因而销声匿迹，人民得以安心农桑。
English: After he took office, he removed all thirty-five fortifications, only rebuilt the city tower, and prepared a lot of defensive equipment. As a result, the thieves disappeared, and the people were able to live in peace.

古文：百姓称之，立碑颂德。
现代文：百姓赞美他，立碑歌颂他的功德。
English: The people praised him and erected a monument to praise his merits.

古文：周文特赏粟帛，以旌其能。
现代文：宇文泰特意赏赐给他许多粮食布匹，以表彰他的才能。
English: In recognition of his talent, Uwentei specially gave him a lot of grain cloth.

古文：迁广州刺史。
现代文：后迁任广州刺史。
English: Later, he moved to Guangzhou to become a historian.

古文：侯景举河南来附，景宣从仆射王思政经略应接。
现代文：侯景献出黄河以南土地前来归附，权景宜与仆射王思政前来负责接收处理。
English: Hou Jing offered land south of the Yellow River to be annexed, and Quan Jingyi and his servant Wang Sizheng came to be responsible for receiving and handling it.

古文：既而侯景南叛，恐东魏复有其地，以景宣为大都督、豫州刺史，镇乐口。
现代文：不久，侯景又向南朝投降。因为恐怕东魏来收复侯景献出的土地，朝廷命景宣为大都督、豫州刺史，镇守乐口。
English: Not long after, Hou Jing surrendered to the Southern Dynasty again. Because it was feared that the Eastern Wei Dynasty would come to recover the land offered by Hou Jing, the imperial court declared Jing to be the grand governor, the historian of Yuzhou, and the town guard of Lekou.

古文：东魏亦遣张伯德为刺史。
现代文：东魏也派张伯德任刺史。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty also sent Zhang Baode to be a history-maker.

古文：伯德令其将刘贵平率其戍卒及山蛮，屡来攻逼。
现代文：张伯德派他的将领刘贵平率领本部人马和山蛮，多次前来进攻。
English: Zhang Baode sent his general Liu Guiping to lead the headquarters and the mountain barbarians to attack many times.

古文：景宣珍不满千人，随机奋击，贵平乃退走。
现代文：景宣的军队不满千人，随机应变，奋勇反击，刘贵平被迫撤退。
English: Jing Xuan's army was less than a thousand strong, and Liu Guiping was forced to retreat.

古文：进授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：朝廷又授予他为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The imperial court also awarded him the title of "Imperial Envoy," "General of Chariot and Cavalry" and "Third Division of Ceremonial Affairs."

古文：颍川陷后，周文以乐口等诸城道路阻绝，悉令拔还。
现代文：颍川被东魏攻陷，宇文泰认为乐口等地的道路被敌兵切断，命令西魏的人马全部撤回。
English: Luochuan was invaded and occupied by the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Wu Wentai thought that the roads in Lekou and other places were cut off by the enemy soldiers, and ordered all the men and horses of the Western Wei Dynasty to withdraw.

古文：襄州刺史杞秀以狼狈获罪。
现代文：襄州刺史在撤退时，因部伍零乱受到惩罚。
English: When Xiangzhou Shishi was retreating, he was punished because his troops were disorganized.

古文：景宣号令严明，戎旅整肃，所部全济，独被优赏。
现代文：权景宣却号令严明，军旅整齐威武，所部全都撤回，因此受到奖赏。
English: The proclamation of power was clear, the army was neat and powerful, and all the departments were withdrawn, so they were rewarded.

古文：仍留镇荆州，委以鵶南之事。
现代文：他仍留下来镇守荆州，同时，朝廷把亚鸟南的事情也全部委托给他。
English: He still remained to guard Jingzhou, and at the same time, the imperial court entrusted all the affairs of Yajinan to him.

古文：初，梁岳阳王萧詧将以襄阳归朝，仍勒兵攻梁元帝于江陵。
现代文：早先，南梁岳阳王萧鮞准备献出襄阳归顺西魏，便率兵进攻驻扎在江陵的梁元帝。
English: Earlier, Xiao Jie, the king of Yueyang in southern Liang Province, was preparing to surrender Xiangyang to the Western Wei Dynasty, and he led his troops to attack Emperor Liang Yuan stationed in Jiangling.

古文：詧叛将杜岸乘虚袭之。
现代文：萧鮞的叛将杜岸乘襄阳空虚突然进袭。
English: Xiao Yao's renegade general Dugan took advantage of the emptiness of Xiangyang to suddenly attack.

古文：景宣乃率骑三千助詧。
现代文：权景宣便率三千骑兵帮助萧鮞。
English: Guan Jing Xuan then led three thousand cavalry to help Xiao Yao.

古文：詧因是乃送其妻王氏及子寮入质。
现代文：萧鮞因此将妻子王氏和儿子萧寮送给景宣以作人质。
English: As a result, Xiao Yan sent his wife Wang Shi and his son Xiao Liao to Jing Xuan as hostages.

古文：景宣又与开府杨忠取梁将柳仲礼，拔安陆、随郡。
现代文：景宣又与开府杨忠进攻梁将柳仲礼，攻克安陆、随郡。
English: In addition, Jing Xuan and Yang Zhong of Kaifu attacked Liang General Liu Zhongli and conquered Anlu and Su County.

古文：久之，随州城人吴士英杀刺史黄道玉，因聚为寇。
现代文：过了很久，随州城的居民吴士英杀死西魏派来的刺史黄道玉，因而聚为贼寇。
English: After a long time, Wu Shying, a resident of Suzhou City, killed Zhi Shi Huang Dao Yu, who was sent by the Western Wei Dynasty, and thus gathered as thieves.

古文：景宣以英小贼，可以计取之，若声其罪，恐同恶者众。
现代文：他认为吴士英不过是一个毛贼，可以用计谋赚取他。如果声讨他的罪恶，恐怕与他共同为恶的人太多。
English: He thought that Wu Shiying was nothing more than a petty thief, and that he could use trickery to win him over. If he were to denounce his sins, there would probably be too many people who would join him in committing evil.

古文：乃与英书，伪称道玉凶暴，归功英等。
现代文：他写给吴士英一封书信，假称黄道玉凶恶残暴，将他杀死是吴士英的一大功劳。
English: He wrote a letter to Wu Shiying, pretending that the Zodiac Jade was vicious and cruel, and it was Wu Shiying's great achievement to kill him.

古文：英等果信之，遂相率而至。
现代文：吴士英等人果然相信，便相率来归。
English: Wu Shih-ying and others truly believed, and then the phase rate came down.

古文：景宣执而戮之，获其党与。
现代文：他将他们逮捕杀戮，又擒获了他们的党羽。
English: He arrested them, killed them, and captured their followers.

古文：进攻应城，拔之，获夏侯珍洽。
现代文：他又率兵进攻应城，攻克并俘获敌将夏侯珍洽。
English: He also led his troops to attack Yingcheng, defeated and captured the enemy general Xia Hou Zhenchao.

古文：于是应礼安随并平。
现代文：于是，应、礼、安、随等地全被平定。
English: As a result, Ying, Rei, An, and so on were all subdued.

古文：朝议以景宣威行南服，乃授并安肆郢新应六州诸军事、并州刺史。
现代文：朝廷商议，认为他在南部边疆很有威望，便授予他并、安、郢、肆、新、应六州诸军事、并州刺史。
English: The imperial court deliberated and thought that he was very prestigious in the southern frontier, so he was awarded the military titles of He, An, Zhao, Zhao, Xin, and Ying of the six states, as well as the title of Shishi of the state.

古文：寻进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，兼督江、北司二州诸军事，进爵为伯。
现代文：不久晋位为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，又加任为侍中，兼督领江、北司二州诸军事，晋封爵位为伯。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and was also appointed as an attendant, concurrently the governor of the territorial river, the North Department of the two states' military, and was promoted to the peerage.

古文：唐州蛮田鲁嘉自号豫州伯，引致齐兵，大为人害。
现代文：唐州蛮人田鲁嘉自号为豫州伯，引来齐兵，祸害当地百姓。
English: Tianlu Jia, a barbarian from Tangzhou, called himself Yuzhou Bo and led an army of soldiers to wreak havoc on the local people.

古文：寻而洛阳不守，乃弃二州，拔其将士而还。至昌州而罗阳蛮反，景宣回军破之。
现代文：他领兵将田鲁嘉俘获，把他占领的地方设置为郡。南梁定州刺史李洪远先降又叛，景宣厌恶他的三心二意，暗中派兵将他打败，抓获他的全家和将士。他侥幸脱逃。
English: He led an army to capture Tianlu Jia and set up the place he occupied as a county. South Liangdingzhou stabbed Shi Li Hongyuan first surrendered and rebelled. King Xuan detested his half-heartedness, secretly sent troops to defeat him and captured his whole family and soldiers. He escaped with luck.

古文：还次霸上，晋公护亲迎劳之。
现代文：从此，蛮族首领都被震慑而归服，没有人敢再背叛。
English: From then on, the leaders of the barbarians were shocked into submission, and no one dared to betray them again.

古文：天和初，授荆州刺史，总管十七州诸军事，进爵千金郡公。
现代文：天和初年，朝廷命他为荆州刺史，总管十七州诸军事，晋爵为千金郡公。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, the imperial court appointed him to write the history of Jingzhou, to be the head of the military of the seventeen states, and to be the prince of Qianjin County.

古文：陈湘州刺史华皎举州款附，表请援兵。
现代文：南陈湘州刺史华皎率州投降，上表请求北周派兵援助。
English: South Chen, Xiangzhou, Zhishi and Huayuan surrendered, and the table above requested that North Zhou send troops to help.

古文：敕景宣统水军与皎俱下。
现代文：朝廷命景宣率水军接应。
English: The Imperial Court decreed his death, and the navy responded.

古文：景宣到夏口，陈人已至。
现代文：他来到夏口，陈朝的兵马已经到来。
English: He came to Xiakou, and the soldiers and horses of the Chen Dynasty had already arrived.

古文：而景宣以任遇隆重，遂骄傲纵恣，多自矜伐，兼纳贿货，指麾节度，朝出夕改。
现代文：他因为受朝廷重用厚待，便骄傲自大，放纵自为；接受贿赂，为所欲为；指挥军队，朝令夕改。
English: Because he was treated so well by the imperial court, he became arrogant and self-indulgent; he accepted bribes and did whatever he wanted; he commanded the army and changed his orders from morning to evening.

古文：将士愤怒，莫肯用命。
现代文：将士们十分愤怒，不肯听从他的指挥，更不愿为他卖命。
English: Enraged, the soldiers refused to follow his orders, let alone die for him.

古文：及水军始交，一时奔北，战舰器仗，略无孑遗。
现代文：两国水军一交锋，周军就败北奔逃，战船器杖，几乎全部丢失。
English: When the naval forces of the two countries clashed, Zhou's army was defeated and fled north. Almost all of the warship's equipment was lost.

古文：时卫公直总督诸军，以景宣负败，欲绳以军法。
现代文：这时卫公宇文直统率各路人马，因权景宣失败，想以军法处治。
English: At this time, Wei Gong Uwen Zhi Rong led all the way, because of the failure of Quan Jing Xuan, he wanted to use military law to deal with it.

古文：朝廷不忍加罪，遣使就军赦之。
现代文：朝廷不忍心给他加罪，派使者到军中将他赦免。
English: The imperial court could not bear to add to his guilt and sent an envoy to the army to pardon him.

古文：寻遇疾卒。
现代文：不久他有病去世。
English: He fell ill and died soon after.

