古文：马燧严振温造高骈南蛮张浚刘鄩张勍王建
现代文：马燧严振温造高骈南蛮张浚刘鄩张勍王建
English: Ma Rong, Yan Zhen, Wen Zong, Gao Rong, Nan Ban, Zhang Jian, Liu Rong, Zhang Jian, Wang Jian

古文：杂谲智魏太祖村妇将帅
现代文：杂谲智魏太祖村妇将帅
English: The village women of Taizu in the Wei and Taizu Dynasties

古文：马燧
现代文：马燧
English: Ma Xuan

古文：李怀光使徐庭光以精卒六千守长春宫，马燧乃挺身至城下呼庭光，庭光则拜于城下。
现代文：李怀光派徐庭光用六千精兵守卫长春宫。马燧一人挺身而出，到城下喊徐庭光。徐庭光只好到城下拜见马燧。
English: Li Huaiguang sent Xu Tingguang to guard the Changchun Palace with six thousand soldiers. Ma Jun alone stepped forward and called out to Xu Tingguang outside the city. Xu Tingguang had to go outside the city to meet Ma Jun.

古文：燧度庭光心已屈，乃谓曰：我来自朝廷，可西面受命。
现代文：马燧估计徐庭光的心已经屈服，便对徐庭光说：我是从朝廷来的，你可面向西受命。
English: Ma Yu estimated that Xu Tingguang's heart had already succumbed, so he said to Xu Tingguang: I came from the imperial court, you can face west to receive orders.

古文：庭光复西拜。
现代文：徐庭光便面向西方叩拜。
English: Xu Tingguang then bowed to the West.

古文：燧曰：公等皆禄山已来首建大勋，四十余年功伐最高，奈何弃祖父之勋力，为族灭之计耶？
现代文：马燧说：你们都是安禄山以来的开国元勋，四十多年来劳苦功高。怎么能抛弃祖父的功劳，去做毁宗灭族的事情。
English: Ma Yu said: You are all the founding fathers of the country since Mount Anlu, and you have worked hard for more than forty years. How can you discard the merits of your grandfather and do things to destroy the tribe?

古文：从吾言，非止免罪，富贵可图也。贼徒皆不对。
现代文：听我的话，不但免除你们的罪过，还能享受荣华富贵。徐庭光的部下都不说话。
English: Listen to my words, and you will not only be absolved of your sins, but also enjoy prosperity and wealth. Xu Tingguang's subordinates did not speak.

古文：燧曰：尔以吾言不诚。今相去数步，尔当射我。
现代文：马燧说，你们若是信不过我的话，我往前走几步，你们可以用箭射我。
English: "If you don't believe me," said the horse, "you can shoot me with an arrow when I take a few steps forward."

古文：乃披襟示之。庭光感泣俯伏，军士亦泣，乃率其下出降。
现代文：他便披衣往前走，徐庭光被感动的泣然泪下，跪伏在地，叛军的士兵们也感动得哭了。
English: He then put on his clothes and walked forward. Xu Tingguang was moved to tears and knelt on the ground. The rebel soldiers were also moved to tears.

古文：燧乃以数骑径入城，处之不疑，莫不畏伏。
现代文：徐庭光便率领部下投降了。马燧只和几个骑兵进了城，没有什么疑心的地方，降军的士兵们都很畏服。
English: Xu Tingguang then led his subordinates to surrender. Ma Jun only entered the city with a few cavalrymen, there was no room for doubt, and the soldiers who had surrendered were very intimidated.

古文：众大呼曰：复得为王人矣！
现代文：他们大喊：我们又是唐王的人了！
English: They shouted: "We are Tang's men again!"

古文：浑瑊私谓参佐曰：瑊为马公用兵，与仆不相远，但怪累败田悦。今睹其行师料敌，不及远矣。
现代文：浑瑊私下对参佐说，浑瑊认为马燧用兵和他差不多，但奇怪的是他屡次打败田悦，今天亲眼看到他用兵和对敌方的了解，比他差远了。
English: Hunhyun privately said to the councilor, Hunhyun thought that Ma Jun's use of soldiers was similar to his, but what was strange was that he repeatedly defeated Tian Yue. Today, I saw with my own eyes that his use of soldiers and his understanding of the enemy were far worse than his.

古文：燧勇力智强，常先计后战。将战，亲自号令。士卒无不感动，战皆决死，未尝奔北。兵胜冠于一时。
现代文：马燧智勇双全，经常是先计议后用兵，作战时亲自发号施令，士兵很受感动，打起仗来不怕死，很少有失败的时候，用兵取胜一时很有名气。
English: He was both wise and brave. He often used soldiers after deliberation. He personally gave orders during the battle. The soldiers were very moved. They were not afraid of death when they fought. When they rarely failed, they were famous for using soldiers to win.

古文：然力能擒田悦，而不能纳蕃师伪疑，而保其必盟。
现代文：他虽然能擒到田悦，却不能识别蕃师的假象，叫他们结盟不战。
English: Although he was able to get to Tian Yue, he couldn't recognize the illusion of the puppet master and told them to make an alliance and not fight.

古文：平凉之会，为结赞所绐，关中摇动。
现代文：在平凉之会时，被结赞所欺骗，至使关中动乱不安。
English: During a peaceful meeting, he was deceived by the eulogy, which led to unrest and anxiety in the middle of the meeting.

古文：此所谓才有余而心不正。
现代文：从此可以看出马燧是才气有余而心计尚有不足。
English: From this, it can be seen that Ma Jun has more than enough talent, but not enough heart.

古文：严振
现代文：严振
English: Yan Zhen

古文：德宗銮驾之幸梁洋，中书舍人齐映为之御。
现代文：唐德宗李适乘銮驾去梁洋，中舍人齐映在皇上面前待奉。
English: Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty Li Si rode a donkey to Liangyang, and all the attendants waited for the emperor.

古文：下洋州青源川，见旌期蔽野。上心方骇，谓泚兵有谙疾路者，透秦岭而要焉。
现代文：到洋州青源川时，只见到处都是军旗，皇上有些害怕，说这些流着汗水的兵，一定有熟悉小路的，他们穿过了秦岭而占据了要塞。
English: When he arrived at the Qingyuan River in Yangzhou, he only saw military flags everywhere. The emperor was a little afraid, saying that these sweating soldiers must have been familiar with the path. They crossed the Qinling and occupied the fortress.

古文：俄见梁帅严振具橐鞬，拜御马前，具言君臣乱离，呜咽流涕，上大喜。
现代文：不一会儿看见了驻守梁洋的军帅严振背着箭囊，跪拜在皇帝的面前，说了些君臣由于离乱而不能相见的怀念之情，痛苦流涕。皇上大喜，口授敕令对他进行提升奖励。
English: After a while, he saw the military commander Yan Zhen, who was stationed at Liangyang, kneel in front of the emperor with a quiver of arrows on his back, and said some words of nostalgia for the monarchs and ministers who could not see each other because of the confusion. The emperor was overjoyed and gave him a promotion award.

古文：顷之，上次洋州行在，召映，责以儒生不达时变，烟尘时，须姑息戎帅。
现代文：叫严振上马前去，为皇上此行引路。齐映身材很矮，声音却很高，他说，有严振在皇上面前牵马，皇帝的膳食自会有人管理。到了洋州行宫，皇上把齐映召到面前，责备齐映是书生不懂时务，战争时期，应该宽容武帅。
English: He told Yan Zhen to get on his horse and lead the way for the emperor on this trip. Qi Ying was very short, but his voice was very high. He said that if Yan Zhen led the horse in front of the emperor, the emperor's meal would be managed by someone. When he arrived at the Yangzhou Palace, the emperor called Qi Ying in front of him and reproached Qi Ying for being a scholar who did not understand the current affairs. During the war, he should be tolerant of the military commander.

古文：映伏奏曰：山南士庶，只知有严振，不知有陛下。今者天威亲临，令巴蜀士民，知天子之尊，亦足以尽振为臣子之节。
现代文：齐映跪伏在地奏说，山南的百姓，只知道有严振，不知有陛下您，现在皇上亲临巴蜀，让这里的百姓感受到皇上的尊严，也足可以让严振做一个臣子应该做的事。
English: Qi Ying kneeled on the ground and said, "The people of Shannan only know Yan Zhen, but they don't know about Your Majesty. Now that the emperor is in Bashu, let the people here feel the dignity of the emperor, and let Yan Zhen do what a vassal should do."

古文：上深嘉叹。振闻，特拜谢映。时议许映。
现代文：皇上对齐映的上奏很赞叹，严振听说后，特意去拜谢齐映，人们议论赞许齐映。
English: The Emperor was very impressed with Qi Ying's performance. After hearing about it, Yan Zhen went to pay his respects to Qi Ying. People talked about and praised Qi Ying.

古文：温造
现代文：温造
English: Hot-rolled steel

古文：宪宗之代，戎羯乱华。四方徵师，以静边患。
现代文：唐宪忠李纯时，边境少数民族作乱，朝廷四方征召军队，用以平定边境之乱。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzhong of Tang Dynasty and Emperor Lichun of Tang Dynasty, when the border ethnic minorities rioted, the four quarters of the imperial court conscripted troops to quell the border riot.

古文：诏下南梁，起甲士五千人，令赴关下。将起，帅人作叛，逐其帅，又惧朝廷讨伐，因团集拒命者岁余。宪宗深以为患。
现代文：诏书到了南梁，召集到五千多士兵，命令他们开赴关下，刚要走，士兵叛乱，赶走了军帅，他们又害怕朝廷来讨伐，他们聚在一起拒不服从命令一年多，宪忠认为这是一大祸患。
English: The imperial edict arrived in Nanliang, more than five thousand soldiers were gathered, and they were ordered to go to Guanzhong. Just as they were about to leave, the soldiers rebelled and drove away the military commander. They were also afraid of the imperial court coming to fight. They gathered together and refused to obey orders for more than a year. Xizhong thought this was a great disaster.

古文：择帅者久之。京兆尹温造请行。
现代文：选择新的军帅很长时间了，京兆尹温造请求担当此任。
English: It took a long time to choose a new military commander, and Beijing Zhao Yin Wenzo requested to be in charge of this post.

古文：宪宗问其兵储所费。
现代文：宪忠问他请求多少兵卒和费用。
English: Xianzhong asked him how many soldiers and how much money he wanted.

古文：温曰：不请寸兵尺刃而行。
现代文：温造说：我不请一兵一枪，就这样去。
English: Unzo said, "I won't ask one soldier to fire one shot, I'll just go this way."

古文：至其界，梁人觇其所来，止一儒生，皆相贺曰：朝廷必不问其罪，复何患乎？
现代文：到了南梁，南梁看他只是一介书生面已，互相庆幸说，朝廷必然不向我们问罪了，我们没有什么可怕的了。
English: When they arrived at Nanliang, Nanliang saw that he was just a scholar, and they congratulated each other, saying that the court would certainly not charge us with a crime, and we would have nothing to fear.

古文：温但宣诏敕安存，至则一无所问。
现代文：温造宣读了诏书，让大家平安的生活，其余的事情一概不问。
English: Unzo read out the edict, let everyone live in peace, and did not ask about anything else.

古文：然梁帅负过，出入者皆不舍器仗，温亦不械之。
现代文：然而梁帅却深知自己的过错，出入的军人都带着武器，温造也并不戒备。
English: However, Liang Shuai was well aware of his mistake. The soldiers entering and leaving were all carrying weapons, and Wenzuo was not alert.

古文：他日，球场中设乐，三军下士，并任执带弓箭赴之，遂令于长廊之下就食。
现代文：后来，在球场设宴，命令全体官兵可以带武器去赴宴。去后命令在长廊下就餐。
English: Later, a banquet was held at the stadium, and all officers and soldiers were ordered to bring their weapons to the banquet. After the banquet, they were ordered to eat under the promenade.

古文：坐筵之前，临阶南北两行，悬长索两条，令军人各于面前索上，挂其弓剑而食。
现代文：宴会之前，军人靠台阶站成两行，挂两条大绳子，命令军人把弓、剑挂在绳上。
English: Before the banquet, the soldiers stood in two lines by the steps, hung two large ropes and ordered the soldiers to hang their bows and swords on the ropes.

古文：逡巡，行酒至，鼓噪一声，两头齐抨其索，则弓剑去地三丈余矣。军人大乱，无以施其勇，然后阖户而斩之。
现代文：不一会，酒上来了，有人大喊一声，两头将绳子拉起，弓、剑离地三丈多高，军人大乱，没有了武器，也就无法施展他们的勇气。
English: After a while, the wine came, someone shouted, the rope was pulled up at both ends, the bow and sword were more than three feet off the ground, the soldiers were in chaos, and without weapons, they could not show their courage.

古文：五千余人，更无噍类。
现代文：然后将这些军人都关押在屋里，一个个的都斩了首，五千多人，没有一个活着的。
English: Then they locked the soldiers in a room and beheaded them one by one, more than five thousand of them, none of them alive.

古文：其间有百姓随亲情及替人有赴设来者甚多，并玉石一概矣。
现代文：其中有探亲的，有替人赴宴的无辜者很多，不分好坏一概屠杀。
English: Among them, there were many innocent people who were visiting relatives or attending the banquet in place of others, and they were all slaughtered regardless of whether they were good or bad.

古文：南梁人自尔累世不敢复叛。
现代文：南梁人从那以后再不敢反叛了。
English: The Nanliang people have not dared to rebel since then.

古文：余二十年前职于斯，故老尚历历而记之矣。
现代文：我二十年前在这任职，听到此事把它一一记录下来。
English: I was here 20 years ago and I heard about it and I wrote it down.

古文：高骈
现代文：高骈
English: Takatsuki

古文：咸通中，南蛮围西川，朝廷命太尉高骈，自天平军移镇成都。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通年中期，南方的少数民族围攻西川。朝廷命太尉高骈，从天平军移防到成都镇守。
English: In the middle of the year of the Tang Dynasty, the ethnic minorities in the south besieged Xichuan. The imperial court ordered Lieutenant Gao Wei to move from the Tianping Army to Chengdu Town.

古文：戎车未届，乃先以帛。书军号其上，仍书一符，于邮亭递之，以壮军声。
现代文：军车还没行动，先在布上写上军号，又画上符，通过驿站传递，用来壮大军威。
English: Military vehicles have not yet taken action, first write the military number on the cloth, and draw a sign, pass it through the station, and use it to strengthen military prestige.

古文：蛮酋惩交阯之败，望风而遁。
现代文：南蛮的酋长还记得交阯之败的教训，便望风而逃。
English: The chieftain of the Southern Barbarians remembered the lesson of the defeat in the skirmish and fled to the wind.

古文：先是府无罗郭，南寇才至，遽成煨烬。
现代文：这里开始时没有建筑围墙，南蛮来后，化成一片灰烬。
English: At the beginning, there was no construction fence here, but after Nanban came, it turned into a piece of ash.

古文：士民无久安之计。骈窥之，画地图版筑焉。
现代文：老百姓也无久安之计，高骈看到这种情况，他规划地段，重新建筑。
English: There is no long-term solution for the people. Gao Wei saw this situation, he planned the lot, and rebuilt.

古文：虑畚插将施，亭堠有警，乃命门僧景仙奉使入南诏，宣言躬自巡边。
现代文：当时正是春耕时节，亭岗上警戒。他又命令门僧景仙去南蛮处宣诏，并说，他要亲自去巡边。
English: At that time, it was the spring ploughing season, and there was a guard on the pavilion. He also ordered the monk Jing Xian to go to Nanban to proclaim the edict, and said that he would personally go to patrol the border.

古文：自下手筑城日，举烽直至大渡河，凡九十三日，楼橹矗然，旌旆竟不行。
现代文：从筑城那天开始，派人高举火把直到大渡河，在这九十三天中，楼橹矗立，军队却没有行动，南蛮的信使很害怕。
English: From the day the city was built, people were sent to hold up torches all the way to the Dadu River. During these ninety-three days, the building stood, but the army did not act. Nanban's messenger was very afraid.

古文：而骠信詟慓，不假兵以诈胜，斯之谓也。南蛮
现代文：不用兵而巧设骗局取胜，他就是这样做的。南蛮
English: That's what he does, he cheats his way to victory without using soldiers.

古文：唐南蛮侵轶西川，苦无亭障。
现代文：唐时，南蛮经常侵扰西川，因为没有警戒的岗亭和防御的屏障，深受其害。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Southern Barbarians often invaded the West River, because there was no guard post and defense barrier, they suffered from it.

古文：自咸通已后，剑南苦之，牛丛尚书作镇，为蛮寇凭凌，无以抗拒。
现代文：唐昭宗咸通年以后，剑南地区大受其苦。尚书牛丛坐镇的时候，受南蛮人的凌辱，无法抗拒。
English: After Tang Zhaozong lived in Haman for a whole year, the Jianan area suffered greatly. When Shang Shuxiu Niu Cong was in town, he was humiliated by the Southern barbarians and could not resist.

古文：因命宰相赵隆眉、杨奇鲲、段义宗来朝行在，且迎公主。高太尉自淮海飞章云：南蛮心膂，唯此数人，请止而鸩之。
现代文：高骈从东平到成都镇守时，南蛮也经常骚扰成都，他先选派一些精锐的骁勇善战的，每人身上背一道神符，南蛮人一看，便望风而逃。后来僖宗皇上到四川，深怕南蛮人扰乱，便想下嫁公主和蛮人连姻，蛮王很高兴，因此命宰相越隆眉、杨奇鲲、段义宗到皇上住的地方，准备迎接公主。太尉高骈从淮海飞奏急章，说，南蛮人多心野，尤其是这几个人，只要你把那几个头请来毒死他，就好办了。
English: When Gao Jiong was on guard duty from Dongping to Chengdu, the Southern Barbarians often harassed Chengdu. He first selected some elite warriors, each of whom carried a sacred symbol. When the Southern Barbarians saw them, they fled in the direction of the wind. Later, Emperor Taizong went to Sichuan, deeply afraid of being disturbed by the Southern Barbarians, and wanted to marry off the princess to the barbarians. The barbarian king was very happy, so the prime minister, Yue Long Mei, Yang Qichen, and Duan Yizong went to the emperor's place to prepare to welcome the princess. Lieutenant Gao Jiong flew from Huaihai to

古文：迄僖宗还京，南方无虞，用高公之策也。
现代文：直到僖宗还京时，南方没有发生骚乱，就是用高骈的办法。
English: Until Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing, there were no riots in the south, which is to use the high-sounding method.

古文：杨奇鲲辈皆有词藻。途中诗云：风里浪花吹又白。雨中风影洗还清。
现代文：杨奇鲲等人善写诗词，在回京的途中，他写了一道诗：风里浪花吹又白，雨中风影洗还青。
English: Yang Qichen and others are good at writing poetry. On his way back to Beijing, he wrote a poem: "In the wind, the waves and flowers are white, but in the rain, the wind and shadows wash them back to blue."

古文：江鸥聚处窗前见，林狖啼时枕上听。
现代文：江鸥聚处窗前见，林狖啼时枕上听。
English: See you at the window when the reeds are gathered, and listen to you on your pillow when the reeds are ruffled.

古文：词甚清美。
现代文：这首诗词句清新优美。
English: The lines of this poem are fresh and beautiful.

古文：张浚
现代文：张浚
English: Zhang Jun

古文：张相浚富于权略，素不知兵。
现代文：宰相张浚，很富于权略，却不懂用兵的方法。
English: The prime minister, Zhang Jun, is very good at strategy, but he does not know how to use troops.

古文：昭宗朝，亲统扈驾六师，往讨太原，遂至失律，陷其副帅侍郎孙揆。
现代文：唐昭宗时，他亲自统率禁卫军去征讨太原，由于他指挥上的失误，至使副帅孙揆战死。
English: When Tang Zhaozong was in power, he personally led the imperial guard to conquer Taiyuan. Due to his mistakes in command, the vice-commander Sun Yat-sen died in battle.

古文：寻谋班师，路由平阳。平阳即蒲之属郡也，牧守姓张，即蒲帅王珂之大校。
现代文：他想办法班师回朝，回程中必须经过平阳，平阳是蒲州的一个属郡，牧守姓张，是蒲帅王珂的大校，王珂为人狡诈难测。
English: He tried to find a way for the team to return to the North. On the way back, they had to pass through Pingyang. Pingyang is a county belonging to Puzhou. The herdsman's surname was Zhang. He was the headmaster of Pusai Wang Ke. Wang Ke was a cunning and unpredictable person.

古文：珂变诈难测，复虑军旅经过，落其诡计。
现代文：张浚怕军队过此时，中了他的阴谋诡计。
English: Zhang Jun, fearing that the army had passed this point, was taken in by his machinations.

古文：浚乃先数程而行，泊于平阳之传舍。六军相次，由阴地关而进。
现代文：张浚先走了，驻在平阳的客舍中，然后大军才从阴地关开过来。
English: Zhang Jun went first and stayed in a guesthouse in Pingyang before the army closed in from the shadows.

古文：浚深忌晋牧，复不敢除之。
现代文：张浚很讨厌张牧守，又不敢除掉他。
English: Zhang Jun disliked Zhang Mu Shou very much and did not dare to get rid of him.

古文：张于一舍郊迎，既驻邮亭，浚令张使君升厅，茶酒设食毕。
现代文：张牧守走出三十多里地去迎接他，驻在驿站。
English: Zhang Mu Shou walked more than thirty miles to meet him and stationed himself at the station.

古文：复命茶酒，不令暂起，仍留晚食。食讫，已晡时，又不令起，即更茶数瓯。至张灯，乃许辞去。
现代文：张浚命人将张牧守请进客厅，茶、酒、饭用过之后，不让他们走，留他们吃晚饭，晚饭吃过后，天已黑了，还是不让客人走，又喝了好几杯茶，直到点灯，才让客人回去。
English: After tea, wine, and meal, he did not let them go, but kept them for dinner. After dinner, when it was already dark, he still did not let the guests leave, and drank several cups of tea. He did not let the guests go back until the lights were turned on.

古文：自旦及暮，不交一言。口中咀少物，遥观一如交谈之状。
现代文：从早晨到晚上，不说一句话，嘴中咀嚼着一点东西，远看好象是在交谈。
English: From morning to evening, without saying a word, he chews something in his mouth, and from a distance it looks like he is having a conversation.

古文：珂性多疑，动有警察。时侦事者寻已密报之云：敕史与相国密话竟夕。
现代文：王珂多疑，他已事先派人去侦察情况，回来向他报告说，敕史与相国谈了一天。
English: Wang Keda suspected that he had sent someone to investigate the situation in advance and returned to report to him that Zou Shi had talked with his countrymen for a day.

古文：珂果疑，召张问之曰：相国与尔，自旦至暮，所话何？
现代文：王珂果然生疑，便召来了张牧守，问他：相国和你从早到晚说了些什么？
English: Wang Ke was really suspicious, so he summoned Zhang Mu Shou and asked him: What did your countrymen say to you from morning till night?

古文：对云：并不交言。
现代文：张牧守回答说，我们没有交谈。
English: Zhang Mu Shou replied that we did not talk.

古文：王殊不信，谓其不诚，戮之。
现代文：王珂不信，认为张牧守不诚实，便把他杀了。
English: Wang Ke didn't believe him and thought Zhang Mu Shou was dishonest, so he killed him.

古文：六师乃假途归京，了无纤虑。
现代文：回京的军队顺利地通过了此地，没发生一点意外。
English: The troops returning to Beijing passed through the area without incident.

古文：后判邦计，诸道各执绔绮之类。并不受之，乃命专人面付之曰：尔述吾意，以此物改充军行所费之物。锅幕布槽啖马药，土产所共之物，咸请备之。
现代文：后来，各道郡为了本地的安危，拿了些丝绸之类的东西来送礼，张浚不接受，又派专人送回去，并转达他的意思，把这些东西改为军队所需的东西，如：帐蓬、马槽、锅、马药等当地出产的东西，都准备好。
English: Later, for the sake of the safety of the local area, each county took some silk and other things as gifts. Zhang Jun did not accept them, and sent a special person to send them back, and conveyed his intention to change these things into things needed by the army, such as: tents, mangers, pots, horse medicine and other locally produced things, all ready.

古文：于是诸蕃镇欣然奉之，以至军行十万，所要无缺，皆心匠之所规画。
现代文：于是各藩镇都按他的办法办，十万大军，军需充足无缺，这都是张浚独具匠心的策划。
English: As a result, all the provinces and towns were run according to his methods. A hundred thousand-strong army and sufficient military supplies were the result of Zhang Jun's unique and ingenious planning.

古文：梁祖忌之，潜令刺客杀之于长水庄上。
现代文：后梁太祖朱晃很忌恨他，密令刺客在长水庄杀死了他。
English: Emperor Taizu hated him so much that he ordered a secret assassin to kill him in Changshuizhuang.

古文：刘鄩
现代文：刘鄩
English: Liu Xuan

古文：后唐晋王之入魏博也，梁将刘鄩先屯洹水，寂若无人。
现代文：后唐时，晋王想进占魏博，梁将刘鄩屯兵在洹水，平静的象没人似的。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, when the King of Jin wanted to occupy Weibo, Liang led Liu Bei's troops to Surabaya. They were as calm as if no one was there.

古文：因令觇之，云：城上有旗帜来往。
现代文：晋王派人去侦察，回来说，城上有很多旗帜来往。
English: Jin Wang sent someone to investigate and came back saying that there were a lot of flags flying over the city.

古文：晋王曰：刘鄩多计，未可轻进。更令审探，乃缚草为人，缚旗于上，以驴负之，循堞而行，故旗帜婴城不息。
现代文：晋王说，刘鄩这人计谋多，不可轻易前进，又派人去侦察，才知道，刘鄩用草扎成人把旗帜插在草人身上，绑在驴身上，沿着城墙走，所以看见旗帜环城不断。
English: Jin Wang said that Liu Ye was a man of many stratagems and could not advance easily. He also sent someone to investigate, only to find out that Liu Ye used straw men to plant the flag on the straw man, tied it to the donkey, and walked along the city wall, so he saw the flag around the city constantly.

古文：问城中羸者曰：军已去二日矣。
现代文：问城中挨饿的人说，军队已经走了两天了。
English: Ask the starving people in the city and they will tell you that the army has been gone for two days.

古文：果趋黄泽，欲寇太原，以霖潦不克进。
现代文：果然，军队赶到了黄泽，准备攻打太原，因为下大雨，没能前进。
English: Sure enough, the army arrived at Huangze, ready to attack Taiyuan, but because of the heavy rain, they were unable to advance.

古文：计谋如是。
现代文：刘鄩的计谋就是这样巧妙。
English: Liu Ye's stratagem is so ingenious.

古文：张勍
现代文：张勍
English: Zhang Ye

古文：若把到我面前，足可矜恕，或被当下斩却，非我能救。诸子闻戒，各务戢敛。然张勍胸上打人，堆叠通衢，莫有敢犯。识者以建能戒能惜，不陷人于刑，仁恕之比也。
现代文：后来，陈敬瑄、田令孜投降了，第二天王建进城入府，他事先告诉那些骄横的人说，我和你们在一起战斗多年，出生入死，将来，我们就是一家人了，入城之后，可以享受享受，但不能恣意横行，我方才来时已经命令张勍为斩砍马步使，责成他办这件事，你们不得违犯，若是送到我面前，我还可以饶恕你，你若是被当时砍了，我可不能救你，希望你们听到后收敛自己的行为。然而张勍却踩在人胸上打人，胡同中虽然挤满了人，但都没有敢违犯的。一些有识之士认为：王建能告戒他的士兵，爱惜他的士兵，不让他们触犯刑律，这种仁厚宽恕作法是无法比的。
English: Later, Chen Jingyao and Tian Lingzi surrendered. The next day, Wang Jian entered the city and entered the palace. He told those arrogant people in advance that I have been fighting with you for many years, from birth to death. In the future, we will be a family. After entering the city, you can enjoy the enjoyment, but you can't run amok. When I just came, I had ordered Zhang Yao to be the one to chop down the horse-shoe messenger and ordered him to do this. You must not violate it. If you are sent to me, I can still forgive you. If you were cut at that time, I can't save you. I hope you

古文：王建
现代文：王建
English: Wang Jian

古文：邛黎之间有浅蛮焉，世袭王号，曰刘王、杨王、郝王。岁支西川衣赐三千分，俾其侦云南动静；云南亦资其觇成都盈虚。
现代文：我国西南部邛黎之间有一个少数民族叫浅蛮。他们是世袭王号，叫刘王、杨王、郝王，每年从西川领取三千份衣服，让他们侦察云南的情况。云南方面也给他们财物，叫他们观察成都的虚实，他们两头牟利。
English: In the southwestern part of China, there is an ethnic minority called the Asaman. They are hereditary kings, called Liu Wang, Yang Wang, and Qian Wang. Every year, they receive three thousand pieces of clothing from Xichuan, so that they can investigate the situation in Yunnan. Yunnan also gives them property, so that they can observe the truth and falsehood of Chengdu, and they both make profits.

古文：持两端而求利也。每元戎下车，即率界上酋长诣府庭，号曰参元戎。
现代文：每当军中主将到来时，三王便率领界内的尊长到府庭，把这叫作参元戎。
English: Whenever the commander-in-chief of the army was about to arrive, the three kings would lead the dignitaries of the realm to the palace, and this was called the Sangwon-eup.

古文：上闻自谓威惠所致，其未参间，潜禀于都押衙，且俟可否。
现代文：皇上听说这是对他们太宽容的结果。
English: The Emperor heard that this was the result of being too lenient with them.

古文：或元戎慰抚大将间，稍至乖方，即教甚纷纭。时帅臣多是文儒，不欲生事。以是都押赖之，亦要姑息。蛮延蜑凭凌，苦无亭障，抑此之由也。
现代文：在他们没参拜的时候，秘密到都押衙处禀报，他们便等待机会，等到主将去慰劳大将时，他们便到关系不太协调那方去闹起事端，当时的主帅大都是书生出身，不想惹事生非，都依靠都押衙，都押衙又姑息他们，当地的蛮人便恣意横行，无所顾忌，这就是造成蛮人横行的原因。
English: When they did not visit, they secretly went to the governor's office to report, and they waited for an opportunity. When the governor went to console the general, they went to the side where the relationship was not well coordinated to stir up trouble. At that time, most of the superintendents were from students, and they did not want to cause trouble. They all relied on the governor, and the governor also tolerated them. The local barbarians then ran rampant without any scruples, which is the reason for the rampant barbarians.

古文：王建始镇蜀，绝其旧赐，斩都押衙山行章以令之。
现代文：王建开始镇守蜀地时，不再赐给蛮人财物了，斩杀了都押衙山行章。
English: When Wang Jian began to defend Shu, he no longer gave money and goods to the barbarians, and he killed Duabushan Xingzhang.

古文：昔日之患三王，非不知也，时不利也。
现代文：从此，邛峡之南，不立一个岗亭，不设一个哨兵，十年不敢侵犯边境。
English: From then on, in the south of the Bohai Gorge, without erecting a guard post, without setting up a sentry, for ten years they dared not encroach on the border.

古文：故曰：有非常之功，许公之谓也。先是唐咸通中，有天竺三藏僧，经过成都。
现代文：末年，命大将许存征讨蛮人时，因为三王泄露了军机，斩杀了三王，中断了世袭王号。
English: At the end of the year, when the commander-in-chief, Xu Cunxun, went to subjugate the barbarians, because the three kings leaked the military plane, he killed the three kings and interrupted the hereditary king.

古文：晓五天胡语，通大小乘经律论。
现代文：过去的三王之患，不是不知道，只是时机不利，所以说，这个大功是许存立的。
English: The troubles of the past three emperors were not due to ignorance, but to bad timing. Therefore, this great achievement is possible.

古文：以北天竺与云南接境，欲假途而还。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通中期，有一个印度的佛教徒经过成都回国，他懂五种外语，懂大小乘经律论。印度北部和云南接境，想借路回国。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, there was an Indian Buddhist who passed through Chengdu on his way back to China. He knew five foreign languages and knew the theory of the precepts. Northern India borders Yunnan, and he wanted to take a detour to return home.

古文：为蜀察事者识之，系于成都府，具得所记朝廷次第文字，盖曾入内道场也。
现代文：被蜀人看破了，把他绑送成都府，得到一些记载朝廷的有关文字，知道他曾进入宫中的内道场。
English: He was spotted by the Shu people, who tied him up and sent him to Chengdu, where they obtained some relevant texts documenting the imperial court and learned that he had entered the inner dojo of the palace.

古文：是知外国来廷者，安知非奸细乎？
现代文：我们要知道，外国来朝廷的人，怎么能知道没有奸细呢？
English: We need to know, how can people from abroad who come to the Imperial Court know that there are no spies?

古文：杂谲智
现代文：杂谲智
English: 杂智

古文：魏太祖
现代文：魏太祖
English: Wei Taizu

古文：魏武少时，尝为袁绍好为游侠。
现代文：魏武帝年少时，和袁绍都喜欢仿效侠客的作为。
English: When Emperor Weiwu was young, he and Yuan Shao both liked to imitate the deeds of knights.

古文：观人新婚，因潜入主人园中，夜叫呼云：有偷儿至。
现代文：他们为了看人家新婚，潜入人家的园中，晚上大叫小偷来了！
English: They sneak into people's gardens to watch their newlyweds get married, and in the evening they shout that the thieves are coming!

古文：庐中人皆出观，帝乃抽刃劫新妇，与绍还出。失道，坠枳棘中，绍不能动，帝复大叫：偷儿今在此！
现代文：屋里人都出来了，武帝便抽剑劫持新妇，和袁绍往回走，找不着路了，跌到荆棘中，袁绍爬不出来，武帝又大叫：小偷在这！
English: Everyone in the house came out, and Emperor Wu drew his sword to kidnap the bride. He and Yuan Shao walked back, unable to find their way, and fell into the thorns. Yuan Shao could not climb out, and Emperor Wu shouted again: "The thief is here!"

古文：绍惶迫自掷出，俱免。
现代文：袁绍急忙跑了出来，二人才没被抓住。
English: Yuan Shao hurriedly ran out, but the two were not caught.

古文：魏武又尝云，人欲危己，己辄心动。
现代文：武帝又曾经说，别人要危害你，你必然心动。
English: Emperor Wu also once said that if others want to harm you, you will inevitably be moved.

古文：因语所亲小人曰：汝怀刃密来，我心必动，便戮汝。
现代文：他告诉身边的侍者说，你拿刀秘密而来，我心必动，便要杀你。
English: He told the waiter next to him, "If you come secretly with a knife, I will kill you in a heartbeat."

古文：汝但勿言，当后相报。
现代文：你出去不要说，我以后会报答你。
English: If you go out, don't say I'll repay you later.

古文：侍者信焉，遂斩之。
现代文：侍者相信了，便被杀了。
English: The waiter believed him and was killed.

古文：谋逆者挫气矣。
现代文：想要谋杀他的人再不敢做了。
English: The people who wanted to kill him didn't dare to do it.

古文：又袁绍年少时，曾夜遣人以剑掷魏武，少下不著。帝揆其后来必高，因帖卧床上，剑果高。
现代文：又，袁绍年少时，曾经叫人晚间用剑刺武帝，第一剑刺往下了，没中，武帝想他再来一剑必定要高，他便紧贴床上，剑果然高了。
English: Moreover, when Yuan Shao was young, he once ordered someone to stab Emperor Wu with a sword in the evening. The first sword was stabbed downwards, and when it missed, Emperor Wu thought that his next sword must be high, so he clung to the bed, and the sword was indeed high.

古文：魏武又云：我眠中不可妄近，近辄斫人，亦不自觉，左右宜慎之。
现代文：武帝又说，我在睡觉时，你们不要轻易靠近我，你要走近，我便要杀人，这是不自觉的，左右侍者要小心谨慎。
English: Emperor Wu also said, "When I am sleeping, don't come close to me. If you come close, I will kill you. This is involuntary. Waiters on both sides should be cautious."

古文：后乃佯冻，所幸小人，窃以被覆之，因便斫杀。
现代文：后来，他假装蹬掉了被子，对他很好的一个侍者，慢慢地给他盖上被，武帝便把侍者杀了。
English: Later, he pretended to take off the quilt, and a waiter who was very kind to him slowly covered him with the quilt. Emperor Wu then killed the waiter.

古文：自尔莫敢近之。
现代文：自那以后，都没有敢靠近他的。
English: Since then, no one has dared to approach him.

古文：村妇
现代文：村妇
English: Village women

古文：昭宗为梁主劫迁之后，岐凤诸州，备蓄甲兵甚众，恣其劫掠以自给。
现代文：唐昭宗李晔被梁主撵走之后，岐凤等各州都蓄备了很多兵，放纵士兵抢掠用以自给。
English: After Li Xi of the Tang Zhaozong was taken away by Liang Shuzhen, Qi Feng and other states stockpiled a lot of soldiers and allowed soldiers to loot for self-sufficiency.

古文：成州有僻远村墅，巨有积货。
现代文：成州有一个偏僻的远村，很富裕。
English: There is a remote village in Chengdu that is very wealthy.

古文：主将遣二十余骑夜掠之。
现代文：军官派了二十多骑兵夜间去掠夺。
English: The officer sent more than twenty cavalrymen to plunder at night.

古文：既仓卒至，罔敢支吾。
现代文：他们突然而来，也没有敢说话的。
English: They came out of the blue and didn't dare to speak.

古文：其丈夫并囚缚之，罄搜其货，囊尔贮之。
现代文：丈夫被捆绑，搜寻着满意的东西就放进皮口袋中。
English: The husband was tied up, searched for something satisfactory and put it in a leather bag.

古文：然后烹豕犬，遣其妇女羞馔，恣其饮噉，其家尝收莨菪子，其妇女多取之熬捣，一如辣末。置于食味中，然后饮以浊醪。
现代文：搜完了东西，便杀猪杀狗，让这家妇女为他们做菜肴，供他们饮酒玩乐。这家曾收过莨菪子，妇女拿了一些捣碎了，象辣椒面似的，放在食物中，那些人吃完了便喝酒。
English: After they had searched everything, they killed a pig and a dog, and asked the woman to prepare food for them, so that they could drink and have fun. The family had received hazelnuts, and the woman took some and mashed them up, like chilli noodles, and put them in the food. When the men had finished eating, they drank.

古文：于时药作，竟于腰下拔剑掘地曰：马入地下去也。
现代文：于是，药力发作，竟从腰上拔出剑掘地，嘴里说，马进地下去了。
English: As a result, the healing power occurred, and he actually pulled out his sword from his waist to dig the ground, saying in his mouth that the horse had gone underground.

古文：或欲入火投渊，颠而后仆。
现代文：有的要跳入火中，有的要投入水里，疯颠一通后都躺倒了。
English: Some wanted to jump into the fire, others into the water, and all of them lay down after the frenzy was over.

古文：于是妇女解去良人执缚，徐取骑士剑，一一断其颈而瘗之。
现代文：妇女先给丈夫解了绑，又去拿了军人的剑，把这二十多人一一杀死，而后挖坑埋了。
English: The woman first untied her husband, then took the soldier's sword, killed the more than twenty people one by one, and then dug a pit and buried them.

古文：其马使人逐官路，棰而尔遣之，罔有知者。
现代文：把马让人赶到大路上，用鞭子打走，没有知道这事的。
English: The horse was driven into the road and whipped away, unbeknownst to him.

古文：后地土改易，方泄其事。
现代文：后来，由于地土挖掘，才泄露了此事。
English: Later, as a result of the excavation, the matter was leaked.

