古文：君所以治臣者有三：
现代文：君主用来控制臣下的方法有三种：
English: There are three methods used by a monarch to control his subjects:

古文：△经一
现代文：经一
English: 1st floor

古文：势不足以化则除之。
现代文：对权势不能加以驯化的臣下，君主就要把他除掉。
English: If a vassal is unable to tame the powerful, the sovereign must get rid of him.

古文：师旷之对，晏子之说，皆合势之易也，而道行之难，是与兽逐走也，未知除患。
现代文：师旷的回答，晏婴的议论，都丢掉了利用权势控制臣下这种易行的办法，而去称道实施恩惠争取民众这种困难的办法，这就如同，和野兽赛跑，不知道除掉祸害。
English: The teacher's evasive answer, the infant's argument, have lost the easy way of using power to control subjects, and praised the difficult way of implementing favors to win the people. This is like running with the beast and not knowing how to get rid of the scourge.

古文：患之可除，在子夏之说《春秋》也： 善持势者，蚤绝其奸萌。 
现代文：祸害可以及早除掉。在子夏解释《春秋》时所说的话中已表达出来了； 善于掌握权势的君主，及早杜绝臣下作奸的苗头。 
English: The scourge can be eliminated at an early stage. It has been expressed in the words of Zixia Zhuang when he explained "Spring and Autumn"; a monarch who is good at grasping power can eliminate the seeds of treachery among his subordinates at an early stage.

古文：故季孙让仲尼以遇势，而况错之于君乎。
现代文：所以，季孙为孔子的门徒滥用权势而向他提出指责，何况把这样的事移于君主呢？
English: So how could Ji Sun have accused a disciple of Confucius of abusing his power, much less taken it to the emperor?

古文：是以太公望杀狂矞，而臧获不乘骥。
现代文：因此，姜太公杀掉不为君主所用的狂禖，就像奴仆不乘貌似雄骏的劣马一样。
English: Therefore, Jiang Taigong killed the wild donkey that was not used by the monarch, just as the slaves did not ride the bad horse that looked like a stallion.

古文：嗣公知之，故不驾鹿。薛公知之，故与二孪博。
现代文：卫嗣公懂得这个道理， 所以拿鹿不能驾车来说明不能用如耳为相；薛公懂得这个道理，所以在一对孪生子赌博时用权术吓唬他们。
English: Weizhigong understands this principle, so he uses the fact that a deer cannot drive a car to show that it cannot be used as an ear; Xuegong understands this principle, so he uses the power trick to scare a pair of twins when gambling.

古文：此皆知同异之反也。
现代文：这些人都懂得君臣之间利害关系是相反的。
English: These people all understand that the interests of princes and ministers are completely opposite.

古文：故明主之牧臣也，说在畜鸟。
现代文：所以明君豢养臣下的道理，在养乌鸦的故事中可以体现出来。
English: Therefore, the principle of Ming Jun's eagerness to raise vassals can be reflected in the story of raising crows.

古文：△经二
现代文：经二
English: 2nd floor

古文：人主者，利害之轺毂也，射者众，故人主共矣。
现代文：君主成了群臣共同对准的目标。
English: The monarch became a common target for the courtiers.

古文：是以好恶见则下有因，而人主惑矣；辞言通则臣难言，而主不神矣。
现代文：因此，君主如果表现出爱憎，就会被臣下利用，这样君主就被迷惑了；君主把听到的话泄露出去，臣下就难以向君主进言，君主也就做不到神明了。
English: Therefore, if the monarch shows love and hatred, it will be used by the vassals, and the monarch will be deceived; if the monarch leaks what he hears, it will be difficult for the vassals to speak to the monarch, and the monarch will not be able to be a god.

古文：说在申子之言 六慎 ，与唐易之言弋也。
现代文：有关的解说在 说二 中申不害讲君主应该在六个方面谨慎小心，以及唐易鞠谈论七射飞禽的道理。
English: The relevant commentary is in Saying 2, which states that the monarch should be cautious in six aspects, and the reason why Tang Yiju talks about the seven-shooting bird.

古文：患在国羊之请变，与宣王之太息也。
现代文：不这样做的祸患在国羊用表示悔改来试探君主对他的态度和韩宣王的近侍从宣王的叹息中窥探到他的态度。
English: The misfortune of not doing so is that the national sheep uses the expression of repentance to test the monarch's attitude towards him and the close attendants of King Han Xuan spy his attitude from King Xuan's sigh.

古文：明之以靖郭氏之献十珥也，与犀首、甘茂之道穴闻也。堂谷公知术，故问玉卮；昭候能术，故以听独寝。
现代文：阐明上述观点的有靖郭君用十个玉珥测试齐威王爱哪个妾，以及甘茂派人从小洞里偷听到秦惠王的话，因而用计陷害犀首，堂公懂得术，所以问及玉杯无底来说明君主不能把群臣的话泄露出去；韩昭侯能用术，所以才能听取堂公的话而独自睡觉以免泄密。
English: To illustrate the above-mentioned point of view, Jing Guo Jun used ten jade jars to test which concubine Qi Wei Wang loved, and Gan Mao sent people to eavesdrop on Qin Hui Wang's words from a small cave, thus using a meter to trap the rhinoceros's head, the courtier knew the trick, so he asked about the jade cup bottomless to show that the monarch could not leak the words of the courtiers; Han Zhaohong could use the trick, so he could listen to the words of the courtier and sleep alone to avoid leaking secrets.

古文：明主之道，在申子之劝独断也。
现代文：明君的治国原则，表现在申不害劝说君主遇事要能独断的议论里。
English: The principle of ruling the country of the Ming Dynasty was expressed in the argument that the monarch should be able to make decisions in the event of an emergency.

古文：△经三
现代文：经三
English: 3rd floor

古文：术之不行，有故。
现代文：法术不能推行、总是有缘故的。
English: There's always a reason why a spell can't be cast.

古文：不杀其狗则酒酸。
现代文：卖酒人不杀掉他的恶狗，酒就会发酸。
English: If a wine-seller does not kill his dog, the wine will sour.

古文：夫国也有狗，且左右皆社鼠也。
现代文：国家也有恶狗，况且君主的近侍都像是躲在社坛里的老鼠。
English: There are also bad dogs in the country, moreover, the close attendants of the monarch are like mice hiding in the social circle.

古文：人主无尧之再诛，与庄王之应太子，而皆有薄媪之决蔡妪也。
现代文：一般的君主都不能像尧那样，一再杀掉反对自己决定的人；不能像楚庄王答复太子时那样，把坚决执法的臣子看作是最好的臣子；而都像薄媪那样，自家的主张却要取决于蔡巫婆。
English: Ordinary monarchs can't repeatedly kill those who oppose their decisions, like Xing; they can't regard the vassal who resolutely enforces the law as the best vassal, as King Chu Zhuang replied to the prince; but, like Bo Xing, they all have to depend on Cai Shifu for their family's claim.

古文：知贵不能以教歌之法先揆之。
现代文：要区分贤能的人和无能的人，就用教歌之类的方法先予以测试。
English: In order to distinguish between a capable person and an incompetent person, it is necessary to test them first by using a method such as teaching songs.

古文：吴起之出爱妻，文公之斩颠颉，皆违其情者也。
现代文：吴起因为爱妻织的布不合规定而把她休掉，晋文公因爱臣颠颉不遵从法令而把他杀掉，都是违反自身感情的。
English: Wu Qi dismissed his beloved wife because the cloth she was weaving was not in accordance with regulations, and Jin Wengong killed his beloved son because he did not obey the law, both of which were against his own feelings.

古文：故能使人弹疽者，秘其忍痛者也。
现代文：所以能让人治疗毒疮的人，一定是那些能忍痛的人。
English: Therefore, those who can let people treat poisonous sores must be those who can endure pain.

古文：△说一
现代文：说一
English: Say one thing.

古文：赏之誉不劝，罚之毁之不畏四者加焉不变，则除之。
现代文：奖赏、称赞不能使他奋勉，惩罚、谴责不能使他畏惧，赏、誉、罚、责加到身上都无动于衷，就应当除掉他。
English: Reward and praise can't motivate him, punishment and condemnation can't frighten him, and reward, praise, punishment and reprimand have no effect on him, so he should be eliminated.

古文：齐景公之晋，从平公饮，师旷侍坐。
现代文：齐景公到晋国，随晋平公饮洒，师旷陪坐。
English: Qi Jing Gong went to Jin Province, drank with Jin Ping, and was accompanied by Shiguang.

古文：景公问政于师旷曰： 太师将奚以教寡人？ 
现代文：齐景公向师旷请教如何处理政事，说： 您将用什么来教我呢？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong asked Shi Guang for advice on how to handle political affairs, saying: What will you use to teach me?

古文：师旷曰： 君必惠民而已。 
现代文：师旷说： 您一定要施惠于民罢了。 
English: Shigeaki said, "You must benefit the people."

古文：中坐，酒酣，将出，又复问政于师旷曰： 太师奚以教寡人？ 。
现代文：饮到一半的时候，酒兴正浓，又向师旷请教如何处理政事： 您用什么来教我？ 师旷说 您一定要施惠于民罢了。 
English: Halfway through the drink, when the wine was getting stronger, he asked Shigeaki for advice on how to handle political affairs. "What are you using to teach me?" Shigeaki said. "You just have to benefit the people."

古文：师旷曰： 君必惠民而已矣。 景公出之舍，师旷送之，又问政于师旷。师旷曰： 君必惠民而已矣。 
现代文：景公出门去住处，师旷送行。景公又向师旷请教如何处理政事。师旷说： 您一定要施惠于民罢了！ 
English: Jing Gong went out to his residence to see Shimei off. Jing Gong also asked Shimei for advice on how to handle political affairs. Shimei said: You must benefit the people!

古文：景公归思，未醒，而得师旷之所谓公子尾、公子夏者，景公之二弟也，甚得齐民，家富贵而说之，拟于公室，此危吾位者也，今谓我惠民，使我与二弟争民邪？
现代文：景公回到住处，考虑着这句话，酒还没有醒，就明白了师旷说话的意思一一公子尾、公子夏是齐景公的两个弟弟，很得齐国民众的心。他们的私家又富又贵，民众又喜欢他们，可以和公室相比，这是危及君位的事情。现在叫我施惠于民，大概就是让我和两个弟弟争夺民众吧？
English: Jing Gong went back to his residence and thought about this sentence. The wine had not yet woken up, so he understood the meaning of Shiguang's speech. The two younger brothers of Qi Jing Gong, Zong Ziwei and Zong Zi Xia, are very popular with the public. Their private homes are rich and expensive, and the public likes them. It can be compared to the official residence, which is a thing that endangers the dignity of the prince. Now, if I am called to benefit the people, it is probably to let me and my two younger brothers compete for the people?

古文：于是反国，发禀粟以赋众贫，散府馀财以赐孤寡，仓无陈粟，府无馀财，宫妇不御者出嫁之，七十受禄米，鬻德惠施于民也，已与二弟争民。
现代文：一一于是景公回到齐国，发放米仓粮食给予贫困民众，散发财库多余钱财去赏给孤寡人家。米仓没有陈年的粮食，财库没有多余的钱财，君主没有临幸过的宫女嫁了出去，七十岁以上的人可以得到国家供给的粮食。这是把恩德布施给民众，用来和两个弟弟争夺民众。
English: Therefore, Jing Gong returned to Qi, distributed the grain from the rice silo to the poor people, and distributed the extra money from the treasury to reward the lonely people. There was no old grain in the rice silo, there was no extra money in the treasury, the monarch did not marry the lucky princess, and people over the age of seventy could get the grain supplied by the state. This was the charity to the people, used to compete with the two younger brothers for the people.

古文：居二年，二弟出走，公子夏逃楚，公子尾走晋。
现代文：过了两年，两个弟弟出逃，公子夏逃到楚国，公子尾逃到晋国。
English: Two years later, the two younger brothers fled. Gongzi Xia fled to Chu Province, Gongzi Ou fled to Jin Province.

古文：后世将孰有此？ 晏子对曰： 其田成氏乎！ 景公曰： 寡人有此国也，而曰田成氏有之，何也？ 
现代文：齐景公和晏子在渤海游玩，登上柏寝的台观，回头眺望自己的国都，说： 真美啊：广大弘阔，雄伟壮观！后代谁能拥有这样的国都？ 曼子回答说： 大概是田成子吧！ 景公说： 我拥有这个国都，却说田成子会拥有，为什么？ 
English: Lord Qi Jing and his son Zongzi were playing in the Bohai Sea. They climbed onto the platform of a cypress tree and looked back at their capital. They said, "How beautiful it is: vast and majestic! Who will be able to own such a capital in the future?" The man replied, "Probably Tian Cheng Zi." Lord Jing said, "I own this capital, but I said Tian Cheng Zi would own it. Why?"

古文：晏子对曰： 夫田氏甚得齐民，其于民也，上之请爵禄行诸大臣，下之私大斗斛区釜以出贷，小斗斛区釜以收之。
现代文：曼子回答说： 田成子很得齐国的民心。他对待民众，向上请求爵位俸禄赐给大臣，向下私自增大量器出贷粮食，缩小量器来回收。
English: The young man replied, "Tan Shing Zi is very popular with the people of Qi. He treats the people well, asking the higher-ups to give the minister a knighthood and salary, and asking the lower-ups to increase the amount of grain to be loaned, and decreasing the amount of grain to be recycled.

古文：杀一牛，取一豆肉，馀以食士。
现代文：杀一头牛，自己只拿一盘肉，剩下的用来供养士人。
English: If you kill a cow, you will only take one plate of meat, and the rest will be used to feed the scholars.

古文：终岁，布帛取二制焉，馀以衣士。
现代文：一整年的布帛，自己只取七丈二尺，剩下的都给士人穿。
English: For a whole year of cloth, he would only take seven joys and two shaku, and the rest would be worn by scholars.

古文：故市木之价不加贵于山，泽之鱼监龟鳖蠃蚌不贵于海。
现代文：所以集市上木头的价格不比山上的贵，湖泊里的鱼、盐、龟、鳖、螺、蚌的价格不比海里的贵。
English: Therefore, the price of wood in the market is no more expensive than that of cacti in the mountains, and the price of fish, salt, turtles, clams, snails, and clams in lakes is no more expensive than that in the sea.

古文：君重敛，而田成氏厚施。齐尝大饥，道旁饿死者不可胜数也，父子相牵而趋田成氏者，不闻不生。故周秦之民相与歌之曰： 讴乎，其已乎！
现代文：您加重搜刮，而田成子更多地施舍，齐国曾遇特大荒年，路边饿死的人不能数清，父子相携投奔田成子的，没有听说不能活下去的，所以全国民众都相聚歌唱道： 哎呀，快要完了吧！
English: You have intensified your raiding, while Tian Cheng Zi has given more alms. Qi had a particularly severe year of famine, and the number of people who died of starvation on the roadside could not be counted. Father and son went to Tian Cheng Zi together, and no one heard that they could not live. So the people of the whole country gathered together and sang: Oh, it's almost over!

古文：苞乎，其往归田成子乎！ 
现代文：成了，还是去投奔田成子！ 
English: That's it, let's go to Nariko Tanaka!

古文：《诗》曰： 虽无德与女，式歌且舞。
现代文：《诗》上说： 虽然没有什么恩德施给你们，你们却高兴得又歌又舞。 
English: In the poem, it says, "Though there is no reward for you, yet you rejoice with singing and dancing."

古文：今田成氏之德而民之歌舞，民德归之矣。
现代文：现在从田成子的恩德和民众的歌舞来看，民众都将情愿投奔他了。
English: Now, judging from the benevolence of Nariko Tanaka and the song and dance of the people, the people will be willing to join him.

古文：故曰： 其田成氏乎！ 
现代文：所以说： 大概是囚成子吧。  
English: That's why he said: It's probably an illegitimate child.

古文： 公泫然出涕曰： 不亦悲乎！
现代文：齐景公眼泪汪汪地说： 不是太悲哀了吗？
English: Qi Jinggong said with tears in his eyes, "Isn't it too sad?"

古文：寡人有国而田成氏有之，今为之奈何？ 
现代文：我享有的国家却被田成子占去了。现在该怎么办呢？ 
English: The country I enjoy has been taken over by Nariko Tanaka. What should I do now?

古文：晏子对曰： 君何患焉？
现代文：曼子回答说： 您何必担忧呢？
English: The man replied, "Why should you worry?

古文：若君欲夺之，则近贤而远不肖，治其烦乱，缓其刑罚，振贫穷而恤孤寡，行恩惠而给不足，民将归君，则虽有十田成氏，其如君何？ 
现代文：如果您想夺回它，就亲近贤人，疏远不贤的人，治理混乱的局面，放宽刑罚，救济贫困，抚恤，孤寡，施行恩惠，资助不富裕的人，民众就会归心于您。那么即使有十个田成子，又能把您怎么样呢？ 
English: If you want to recapture it, approach the wise, alienate the unwise, manage the chaotic situation, relax penalties, relieve poverty, raise pensions, widows and orphans, grant favors, and support the poor, the people will come to you. So even if there are ten Tian Chengzi, what can you do?

古文：或曰：景公不知用势，而师旷、晏子不知患。
现代文：有人说：景公不懂得使用权势，师旷、晏子不懂得除去祸患。
English: Some people said: Jing Gong does not know how to use power, and Shi Kuang and Zizi do not know how to remove the scourge.

古文：夫猎者托车舆之安，用六马之足，使王良佐辔，则身不劳而易及轻兽矣。
现代文：打猎的人凭借车厢的安稳，依靠六匹马的脚力，用王良帮助驾车，那么自身毫不费力就可以轻易地追上轻捷的野兽了。
English: The hunter relies on the stability of the carriage, relies on the foot force of six horses, and uses Wang Liang to help drive the car, so he can easily catch up with the light beast without any effort.

古文：今释车舆之利，捐六马之足与王良之御，而下走逐兽，则虽楼季之足无时及兽矣。
现代文：现在丢掉车厢的便利，舍弃六匹马的脚力和王良的驾驭，却下车跑着追逐野兽，那么即使是楼季那样的快腿也没有追上野兽的时候了。
English: Now throw away the convenience of the carriage, give up the footwork of six horses and Wang Liang's driving, but get off and run after the beast, then even the fast legs like Lou Ji have not caught up with the beast.

古文：托良马固车，则臧获有馀。
现代文：依靠良马坚车，就是奴仆驾车追赶野兽，力量也会有余。
English: Relying on a good horse and cart, that is, a slave driving a car to catch up with the beast, the strength will be more than enough.

古文：国者，君之车也；势者，君之马也。
现代文：国家好比君主的车，权势好比君主的马。
English: A country is like a monarch's carriage, and power is like a monarch's horse.

古文：夫不处势以禁诛擅爱之臣，而必德厚以与天下齐行以争民，是皆不乘君之车，为因马之利，释车而下走者也。
现代文：不运用权势来限制和处罚那些擅施仁爱的臣子，而一定要用丰厚的恩惠，和普通人同样做法去争取民众，这样的做法，都像是不利用君主的车子，不依仗马的便利，丢掉车子而下地跑路一样。
English: Not using power to restrict and punish those courtiers who abuse their benevolence, but using rich favors to win over the people in the same way as ordinary people, is like not using the monarch's car, not relying on the convenience of horses, losing the car and running down the road.

古文：故曰：景公不知用势之主也，而师旷、晏子不知除患之臣也。
现代文：所以说：齐景公是不懂得运用权势的君主，而师旷、晏子是不懂得除去祸患的臣子。
English: Therefore, it is said: Qi Jing Gong is a monarch who does not know how to use his power, while Shiguang and Xunzi are courtiers who do not know how to remove the scourge.

古文：子夏曰： 《春秋》之记臣杀君、子杀父者，以十数矣，皆非一日之积也，有渐而以至矣。
现代文：子夏说： 《春秋》上记载臣杀君、子杀父的事件，要以十为单位来计算。这不是一天就都积累起来的，而是逐渐积累以至于此的。 
English: Zixia said, "The events recorded in "Spring and Autumn," in which a vassal killed a prince and a son killed his father, should be counted in units of ten. This was not all accumulated in one day, but gradually accumulated to this point.

古文：凡奸者，行久而成积，积成而力多，力多而能杀，故明主蚤绝之。 
现代文：凡是奸人，阴谋活动的时间长了，势力就有所积累；积累多了，力量就大；力量大了，就能杀人，所以明君应该及早消灭他们。
English: For all traitors, the longer the time of conspiracy activities, the more power they have accumulated; the more they have accumulated, the greater their power; the greater their power, the more they can kill people, so Ming Jun should eliminate them as soon as possible.

古文：今田常之为乱，有渐见矣，而君不诛。
现代文：现在田成子作乱，有苗头露出来了，但君主不杀他。
English: Now, Nariko Tanaka is causing trouble, and there are signs of trouble emerging, but the sovereign won't kill him.

古文：晏子不使其君禁侵陵之臣，而使其主行惠，故简公受其祸。
现代文：晏子不让他的君主禁止侵权犯法的臣子，却让他的君主施行恩惠，结果齐简公受到了祸害。
English: Zangzi did not allow his sovereign to ban the infringing courtiers, but allowed his sovereign to grant favors. As a result, Qi Jiang was plagued.

古文：故子夏曰： 善持势者，蚤绝奸之萌。 
现代文：所以子夏说： 善于掌握权势的人，要及早杜绝奸邪的苗头。 
English: Therefore, Zixia said: Those who are good at grasping power should eliminate the seeds of evil as early as possible.

古文：季孙相鲁，子路为郈令。
现代文：季孙做鲁相，子路做邱邑的长官。
English: Ji Sun became Lu Xiang, and Zilu became the governor of Qiu.

古文：鲁以五月起众为长沟，当此之为，子路以其私秧粟为浆饭，要作沟者于五父之衢而飡之。
现代文：鲁国在五月份发动民众开挖长沟，在开工期间，子路用自己的俸粮做成稀饭，邀请挖沟的人到五父路上来吃。
English: In May, the people of Lu Province started digging a long ditch. During the start of construction, Zilu made porridge with his own salary grain and invited the ditch diggers to eat on Wuchu Road.

古文：孔子闻之，使子贡往覆其饭，击毁其器，曰： 鲁君有民，子奚为乃餐之？ 
现代文：孔子听说后，叫子贡去倒掉他的饭，砸烂盛饭的器皿，说： 这些民众是属于鲁君的，你干吗要给他们饭吃？ 
English: When Confucius heard of this, he ordered Zigong to take away his food and smash the utensils used to serve it, saying, "These people belong to Lu Jun, why do you want to give them food to eat?

古文：子路怫然怒，攘肱而入，请曰： 夫子疾由之为仁义乎？
现代文：子路勃然大怒，握拳露臂走进来，质问说： 先生憎恨我施行仁义吗？
English: Zilu flew into a rage, walked in with his fists clenched and his arms outstretched, and asked, "Does my teacher hate me for practicing righteousness?"

古文：所学于夫子者，仁义也；仁义者，与天下共其所有而同其利其也。
现代文：从先生那里学到的，就是仁义；所谓仁义，就是与天下的人共同享有自己的东西，共同享受 自己的利益。
English: What I learned from my teacher is benevolence; so-called benevolence is to enjoy one's own things and one's own interests together with people all over the world.

古文：今以由之伯粟而餐民，其不可何也？ 孔子曰： 由之野也！
现代文：现在用我自己的俸粮去供养民众，为什么不行？ 孔子说： 子路好粗野啊!
English: Now, why can't I use my own salary to feed the people? Confucius said, "What a rough road!

古文：吾以女知之，女徒未及也。
现代文：我以为你懂了，你竟还不懂。
English: I thought you understood, but you still don't.

古文：女故如是之不知礼也！
现代文：你原来是这样的不懂得礼，你供养民众，是爱他们。
English: You used to be so impolite. You fed the people, you loved them.

古文：女之餐之，为受之也。夫礼，天子爱天下，诸候爱境内，大夫爱官职，士爱其家，过其所受曰侵。
现代文：礼法规定，天子爱天下，诸侯爱国境以内，大夫爱官职所辖，士人爱自己的家人，越过应爱的范围就叫冒犯。
English: The etiquette law stipulates that the heavenly son loves the whole world, the princes love within the borders, the doctors love the jurisdiction of officials, and the scholars love their families. If it goes beyond the scope of love, it is offensive.

古文：今鲁君有民而子擅爱之，是子侵也，不亦诬乎！ 言未卒，而季孙使者至，让曰： 肥也起民而使之，先生使弟子止徒役而餐之，将夺肥之民耶？ 
现代文：现在对于鲁君统治下的民众；你却擅自去爱，这是你在侵权，不也属胆大妄为吗！ 话没说完，季孙的使者就到了，责备说， 我发动民众而驱使他们，先生让弟子给徒役吃饭，是想夺取我的民众吗？ 
English: Now, with regard to the people under Lu Jun's rule, you love them without permission, which is infringing on their rights. Isn't it also an act of audacity? Before the words were finished, Ji Sun's messenger arrived and reproached him, saying, "Did I incite the people and drive them, did the master make his disciples feed the servants, and did I want to seize my people?"

古文：孔子驾而去鲁。
现代文：孔子驾车离开了鲁国。
English: Confucius drove away from Lu.

古文：以孔子之贤，而季孙非鲁君也，以人臣之资，假人主之术，蚤禁于未形，而子路不得行其私惠，而害不得生，况人主乎！
现代文：以孔子的贤明，而季孙又不是鲁君，对于以臣子的身分，借用君主的权术，能在危害还没有形成之前就及早杜绝，使子路不能施行个人的恩惠，使危害不致发生，何况是君主呢？
English: With the wisdom of Confucius, and Qisun is not Lu Jun, for the status of a vassal, borrowing the monarch's power and skill, it can be eliminated early before the harm has not yet formed, so that Zilu can not carry out personal favors, so that the harm does not occur, let alone the monarch?

古文：以景公之势而禁田常之侵也，则必无劫弑之患矣。
现代文：用齐景公的权势去禁止田常争取民众的越轨行为，那就必定不会出现被劫杀的祸患了。
English: Using the power of Qi Jingguo to prohibit the deviant behavior of Tian Chang to win the people, then there will certainly be no disaster of being robbed and killed.

古文：太公望东封于齐，齐东海上有居士曰狂矞、华士昆弟二人者立议曰： 吾不臣天子，不友诸侯，耕作而食之，掘井而饮之，吾无求于人也。
现代文：姜太公受封于东方的齐国，齐国东海边上有兄弟二人，名叫狂禖、华士，是隐居的士人，他们确定为人宗旨说： 我们不臣服天子，不交结诸侯。靠自己耕作吃饭，靠自己挖井喝水，我们无求于人。
English: Jiang Taigong was enthroned in the eastern country of Qi. On the eastern coast of Qi, there were two brothers, named Kuanzhang and Huasheng, who were hermit nobles. They determined their purpose as human beings and said: We do not submit to the Son of Heaven, we do not make treaties with princes. We cultivate and eat on our own, we dig wells and drink water on our own, we do not seek help from others.

古文：无上之名，无君之禄，不事仕而事力。 
现代文：不要君主给的名声，不要君主给的俸禄，我们不为做官忙碌而要从事体力劳动。 
English: We don't want the reputation given by the monarch, we don't want the salary given by the monarch, we don't want to be busy being an official and have to engage in manual labor.

古文：太公望至于营丘，使吏执而杀之，以为首诛。
现代文：姜太公到了齐都营丘，派官吏捕杀了他们，作为最先问斩的对象。
English: When Jiang Taigong arrived at Qidu Yingqiu, he sent officials to hunt them down and kill them, making them the first to be interrogated.

古文：周公旦从鲁闻之，发急传而问之曰： 夫二子，贤者也。
现代文：周公旦在鲁国听到这件事后，派出紧急的传信专车前往，向姜太公询问说； 这两位是贤士。
English: After Zhou Gongdan heard about this in Luzhou, he sent an emergency courier to inquire about Jiang Taigong. These two are sages.

古文：今日飨国而杀贤者，何也？ 
现代文：现在您有了封国而杀了贤士，为什么？ 
English: Now that you have the country, you kill the sage. Why?

古文：太公望曰： 是昆弟二人立议曰： 吾不臣天子，不友诸侯，耕作而食之，掘井而饮之，吾无求于人也。无上之名，无君之禄，不事仕而事力。
现代文：姜太公说： 这兄弟两个确定为人宗旨说； 我们不臣服天子，不交结诸侯。靠自己耕作吃饭，靠自己挖井喝水，我们无求于人，不要君主给的名声，不要君主给的俸禄，我们不为做官忙碌而要从事体力劳动。 
English: Jiang Taigong said, "These two brothers have definitely said their purpose as human beings: We do not submit to the Son of Heaven, we do not make treaties with princes. We cultivate and eat on our own, we dig wells and drink water on our own, we do not seek people, we do not want the reputation given by the monarch, we do not want the salary given by the monarch, we do not want to engage in manual labor because we are busy being an official.

古文：彼不臣天子者，是望不得而臣也；不友诸侯者，是望不得而使也；耕作而食之，掘井而饮之，无求于人者，是望不得以赏罚劝禁也。
现代文：他们不臣服天子的话，那我就不可能把他们看作臣子了；他们不结交诸侯的话，那我就不可能派他们出使了；靠自己耕作吃饭，靠自己挖井喝水，不求助于别人的话，那我就不可能用赏罚来勉厉和约束他们。
English: If they do not submit to the Son of Heaven, then I cannot possibly regard them as subjects; if they do not make friends with princes, then I cannot possibly send them on missions; if they farm and eat on their own, if they dig wells and drink water on their own, and if they do not seek help from others, then I cannot use rewards and punishments to coerce and constrain them.

古文：且无上名，虽知，不为望用；不仰君禄，虽贤，不为望功。
现代文：况且他们不要君主给的名位，即使聪明，也不能为我所用；他们不仰望君主授予的俸禄，即使贤明，也不能为我立功。
English: Moreover, they do not want the title given by the monarch, even if they are wise, they cannot use it for me; they do not look forward to the salary granted by the monarch, even if they are wise, they cannot make a contribution for me.

古文：不仕，则不治；不任，则不忠。
现代文：他们不愿意做官就无法管教，不接受任用就对上不忠。
English: If they don't want to be officials, they can't be disciplined, and if they don't accept appointments, they will be disloyal to their superiors.

古文：且先王之所以使其臣民者，非爵禄则刑罚也。
现代文：再说先王之所以能驱使臣民，不是依靠爵禄，就是依靠刑罚。
English: Furthermore, the reason why the former king was able to drive his subjects to revolt was that he relied either on peerage or on punishment.

古文：今四者不足以使之，则望当谁为君乎？
现代文：现在爵、禄、刑、罚都不足以驱使他们，那么我将做谁的主子呢？
English: Now rank, salary, punishment, and chastisement are not enough to drive them away, so whose master will I be?

古文：不服兵革而显，不亲耕耨而名，又非所以教于国也。
现代文：不打仗立功而显贵，不耕田种地而扬名，这又不是来教化国人的办法。
English: It is not a way to educate the people of the country to be distinguished without fighting, and to be famous without cultivating land.

古文：今有马于此，如骥之状者，天下之至良也。
现代文：假如有匹马在这儿，像良马的样子，是天下最好的马。
English: If there is a horse here, like a good horse, it is the best horse in the world.

古文：然而驱之不前，却之不止，左之不左，右之不右，则臧获虽贱，不托其足。
现代文：但驱赶它，它不上前；制止它，它不停步；叫它左，它不左；叫它右，它不右；那么奴仆虽然低贱，也不依托它的脚力。
English: But drive it, and it does not advance; stop it, and it does not stop; call it left, and it does not go left; call it right, and it does not go right; then the slave, though lowly, does not rely on the power of its feet.

古文：臧获之所愿托其足于骥者，以骥之可以追利辟害也。
现代文：奴仆之所以希望把脚力寄托在良马身上，是因为依托良马可以得到利益，避免危害。
English: The reason why servants hope to rely on a good horse is because relying on a good horse can bring benefits and avoid harm.

古文：今不为人用，臧获虽贱，不托其足焉。
现代文：现在不受人的支配，奴仆虽然低贱，也不依托它的脚力了。
English: Now it is no longer in the power of man, and the servant, though he is lowly, does not rely on his strength.

古文：已自谓以为世之贤士，而不为主用，行极贤而不用于君，此非明主之所以臣也，亦骥之不可左右矣，是以诛之。 
现代文：这样，他们自以为是世上的贤士，而不愿为君主所用，自以为行为好到了极点，而不肯为君主卖力，这不是明君可以用作臣子的，也就像良马不可以使唤一样。因此，我要杀掉他们。 
English: Thus, they believe themselves to be wise men of the world, but do not want to be used by the monarch; they believe themselves to have behaved extremely well, but do not want to work hard for the monarch. This is not to say that the prince can be used as a vassal, just as a good horse cannot be used. Therefore, I will kill them.

古文：一曰：太公望东封于齐。
现代文：另一种说法：姜太公被封在东方的齐国。
English: Another version: Jiang Taigong was imprisoned in the eastern state of Qi.

古文：海上有贤者狂矞，太公望闻之，往请焉，三却马于门而狂矞不报见也，太公望诛之。
现代文：东海边有个贤士叫狂禖，姜太公听说后，前去登门求见，三次在门前停下马车，狂禖都不答应见面。姜太公将处死他。
English: There was a sage by the East Sea called the Mad Viper. After Jiang Taigong heard about the story, he went to the door to ask for a meeting. He stopped his carriage in front of the door three times, but the Mad Viper would not agree to meet. Jiang Taigong was going to execute him.

古文：当是时也，周公旦在鲁，驰往止之；比至，已诛之矣。
现代文：当此之时，周公旦在鲁国，驾车前去制止。等赶到齐地，姜太公已杀了狂棋。
English: At this time, Zhou Gongdan was in Lu Province, driving to stop it. When he arrived in Qi, Jiang Taigong had already killed Yuqi.

古文：周公旦曰：狂矞，天下贤者也，夫子何为诛之？ 
现代文：周公旦说： 狂禖是天下的贤士，您为什么要杀他？ 
English: Zhou Gongdan said, "Crazy Dragonfly is a sage of the world, why would you kill him?

古文：太公望曰： 狂矞也议不臣天子，不友诸候，吾恐其乱法易教也，故以为首诛。
现代文：姜太公说： 狂禖主张不臣服天子，不交结诸侯，我伯他扰乱法度改变教令，所以拿他作第一个问斩的对象。
English: Jiang Taigong said, "Crazy Yao advocated not to submit to the Son of Heaven and not to make friends with the princes. My uncle disrupted the law and changed the edict, so I took him as the first target for interrogation.

古文：今有马于此，形容似骥也，然驱之不往，引之不前，虽臧获不托足于其轸也。 
现代文：假如有一匹马在这里，样子很像良马，但是赶了它不走动，拉了它不前进，即使是奴仆也不会把脚力寄托在它拉的车子。 
English: If there is a horse here, it looks like a good horse, but it does not move, it does not move forward, even the servants will not put their feet on the cart it pulls.

古文：如耳说卫嗣公，卫嗣公说而太息。
现代文：如耳游说卫嗣公，卫嗣公又高兴又叹息。
English: As the ear lobbies for the prince, the prince is both happy and sad.

古文：左右曰： 公何为不相也？ 
现代文：近侍说； 您为什么不任命他为相国？ 
English: The aide said; Why don't you appoint him as a peer?

古文：公曰： 夫马似鹿者，而题之千金。然而有百金之马而无千金之鹿者，何也？马为人用而鹿不为人用也。
现代文：卫嗣公说： 一匹像鹿的马可以标价千金，然而有价值千金的马，没有价值千金的鹿，因为马能为人所用而鹿不能为人所用。
English: Weizhigong said, "A horse that looks like a deer can be worth a lot of money, but a horse that is worth a lot of money is not a deer that is worth a lot of money, because a horse can be used by people, but a deer cannot be used by people.

古文：今如耳万乘之相也，外有大国之意，其心不在卫，虽辩知，亦不为寡人用，吾是以不相也。 
现代文：现在如耳是做大国相国的材料，表现出要到大国谋职的意愿，他的心不在卫同，虽有辩才和智谋，也不能为我所用，我因此不任他为相。 
English: Now, Ryohei is the material to be the foreign minister of a big country, showing his willingness to seek a job in a big country. His heart is not in the same place. Although he has the ability to argue and cleverness, he cannot be used for me. Therefore, I will not let him be the foreign minister.

古文：薛公子相魏昭候也，左右有栾子者曰阳胡，潘，其于王甚重，而不为薛公。
现代文：薛公做魏昭王的相国时，昭王近侍中有一对孪生子名叫阳胡、潘其，很受昭王的器重，但不肯替薛公效劳。
English: When Xue Gong was the consort of Wei Zhao Wang, there was a pair of twin sons named Yang Hu and Pan Qi among the close attendants of Zhao Wang. They were very important to Zhao Wang, but they did not want to serve Xue Gong.

古文：薛公患之，于是乃召与之博，予之人百金，令之昆弟博；俄又益之人二百金。
现代文：薛公为此感到忧虑，于是就召他们来赌博。薛公给他们每人一百金，让他们兄弟二人赌博；一会儿又给每人增加二百金。
English: Xue Gong was worried about this, so he invited them to gamble. Xue Gong gave each of them one hundred gold, and let the two brothers gamble. A moment later, he added two hundred gold to each of them.

古文：方博有问，谒者言客张季之子在门，公怫然怒，抚兵而授谒者曰： 杀之！
现代文：刚赌了一会儿，传达官通报门客张季的儿子在门口。薛公悖然大怒，拿出兵器交给传达官说： 杀了他！
English: He had just gambled for a while when the messenger informed him that the guest, Zhang Ji's son, was at the door. Despite his anger, Xue Gong took out a weapon and handed it to the messenger and said, "Kill him!"

古文：吾闻季之不为文也。 
现代文：我听说张季不肯为我效劳。 
English: I heard that Zhang Ji refused to work for me.

古文：立有间，时季羽在侧，曰： 不然。
现代文：一会儿，刚好张季的党羽在边上，说： 不是这样的。
English: After a while, a member of Zhang Ji's party, who happened to be nearby, said, "It's not like that.

古文：窃闻季为公甚，顾其人阴未闻耳。 
现代文：我私下听说张季为您出力很多，只是他暗中出力，您没有听到罢了。 
English: I have heard in private that Zhang Qi has done a lot of work for you, but he did it secretly and you didn't hear about it.

古文：乃辍不杀客大礼之，曰： 曩者闻季之不为文也，故欲杀之；今诚为文也，岂忘季哉！ 告廪献千石之粟，告府献五百金，告驺私厩献良马固车二乘，因令奄将宫人之美妾二十人并遗季也。
现代文：薛公就停了下来，不再杀门客张季的儿子，并厚礼相待，说： 过去我听说张季不为我效劳，所以想杀他；现在知道他确实为我出力，我怎么能忘了他呢! 于是通知管粮仓的人送给他千石粮食，通知管财库的人送给他五百金，通知养马的人从自己的马棚里拿出好马坚车二乘送给他，接着还命令宦官把宫中的二十个美女一并送给张季。
English: Then Xue Gong paused, and no longer killed the son of the gate guest Zhang Ji, and treated him with courtesy, saying, "In the past, I heard that Zhang Ji did not work for me, so I wanted to kill him; now that I know that he did work for me, how can I forget him!" So he told the person in charge of the granary to give him a thousand koku of grain, told the person in charge of the treasury to give him five hundred gold, told the horse breeder to take out a good horse carriage from his stable and give it to him, and then ordered the eunuch to give twenty beautiful women in the palace to Zhang Ji.

古文：栾子因相谓曰： 为公者必利，不为公者必害，吾曹何爱不为公？ 
现代文：孪生子就商量说： 既然为薛公效劳一定获利，不为薛公效劳一定受害，我们为什么不情愿为薛公效劳？ 
English: The twins discussed the matter and said, "Since there is a certain profit in serving Xue Gong and a certain loss in not serving Xue Gong, why don't we want to serve Xue Gong?"

古文：因私竞劝而遂为之。
现代文：因而私下争相劝勉并行动起来替薛公效劳。
English: Therefore, they privately urged each other and took action to serve Xue Gong.

古文：薛公以人臣之势，假人主之术也，而害不得生，况错之人主乎！
现代文：薛公以臣子的势位，假借君王的权术，使祸害不能发生，何况把这种权术移用到君主身上呢？
English: Xue Gong used his position as a courtier to borrow the sovereign's power to prevent the evil from happening, and what's more, he transferred this power to the sovereign.

古文：夫驯鸟者断其下翎，则必恃人而食，焉得不驯乎？
现代文：驯养乌鸦的人要剪断乌鸦的翅膀和尾巴下边的羽毛。剪断翅膀和尾巴上的羽毛后，乌鸦就必须靠人喂养，怎能不驯服呢？
English: People who want to tame crows have to cut the feathers of the wings and the underside of the tail. After cutting the feathers on the wings and the tail, the crow must be fed by people. How can it not be tamed?

古文：夫明主畜臣亦然，令臣不得不利君之禄，不得无服上之名。
现代文：明君蓄养臣子也是这样，要使臣子不得不贪图君主给他的俸禄，不得不臣服君主给他的名位。
English: It was the same way for Emperor Ming to raise his vassals, so that the vassals had to covet the salary given to them by the emperor, and had to submit to the position given to them by the emperor.

古文：夫利君之禄，服上之名，焉得不服？
现代文：贪图君主给的俸禄，臣服君主给的名位，怎么能不驯服呢？
English: How can those who covet the salary given by the monarch and submit to the position given by the monarch not be tamed?

古文：△说二
现代文：说二
English: Say two.

古文：申子曰： 上明见，人备之；其不明见，人惑之。
现代文：申不害说： 君主的明察如果显露出来，人们就会防备他；君主的糊涂如果显露出来，人们就会迷惑他。
English: It is not a bad thing to say: If the monarch's clear-sightedness is revealed, people will be wary of him; if the monarch's confusion is revealed, people will confuse him.

古文：其知见，人饰之；不知见，人匿之。
现代文：君主的智慧显露出来，人们就会美化他；君主的愚蠢显露出来，人们就会蒙蔽他。
English: When the wisdom of a prince is revealed, people glorify him; when the folly of a prince is revealed, people deceive him.

古文：其无欲见，人司之；其有欲见，人饵之。
现代文：君主没有欲望显露出来，人们就会探测他；君主有欲望显露出来，人们就要引诱他。
English: If a prince does not want to reveal himself, he will be discovered; if he does want to reveal himself, he will be seduced.

古文：故曰：吾无从知之，惟无为可以规之。 
现代文：所以说，我没有办法知道其中奥妙，只有无为可以窥测它的端倪。 
English: Therefore, I have no way of knowing the secret of it, only inaction can peep its clues.

古文：一曰：申子曰： 慎而言也，人且知女；慎而行也，人且随女。
现代文：另下种说法：申不害说： 言行谨慎了，人们将会探测你；行动谨慎了，人们将会跟踪你。
English: Another way of saying this is: "If you speak and act cautiously, people will detect you; if you act cautiously, people will follow you."

古文：而有知见也，人且匿女；而无知见也，人且意女。
现代文：智慧显露出来了，人们将会躲开你；愚蠢显露出来了，人们将会算计你。
English: Wisdom is revealed, and people will hide from you; folly is revealed, and people will take advantage of you.

古文：女有知也，人且臧女；女无知也，人且行女。
现代文：有智慧，人们将躲避你；没有智慧，人们将对你采取行动。
English: With wisdom, people will avoid you; without wisdom, people will take action against you.

古文：故曰：惟无为可以规之。 
现代文：所以说，只有无为可以窥测其中奥妙。 
English: Therefore, only inaction can reveal its secrets.

古文：田子方问唐易鞠曰： 弋者何慎？ 
现代文：田子方问唐易鞠说： 射飞禽的人要谨慎什么？ 
English: Tian Zi Fang asked Tang Yimu: What should bird shooters be careful of?

古文：对曰 鸟以数百目视子，子以二目御之，子谨周子禀。 田子方曰： 善。
现代文：唐易鞠回答说； 鸟用几百只眼睛看着你，你只用两只眼睛防备它们，你要谨慎地密闭你的谷仓。 田子方说； 好。
English: Tang Yiju replied, "Birds look at you with hundreds of eyes, you only have to guard against them with two eyes. You should carefully seal your barn." Tian Zifang said, "Good."

古文：子加之弋，我加之国。 
现代文：你把这个道理用在射飞鸟上，我把这个道理用在治理国家上。 
English: You apply this principle to shooting birds, I apply this principle to governing the country.

古文：郑长者闻之曰： 田子方知欲为禀，而未得所以为禀。
现代文：郑长者听到后说： 田子方知道要守护谷仓，却不知道守护谷仓的办法。
English: After hearing this, Elder Zheng said, "Tanzifang knows how to guard the barn, but does not know how to guard the barn.

古文：夫虚无无见者，禀见。 
现代文：那些虚静无为、不外露的人才能守护谷仓。 
English: Those who are silent and do nothing, who do not reveal themselves, are able to guard the barn.

古文：一曰：齐宣王问弋于唐易子曰： 弋者奚贵？ 唐易子曰： 在于谨禀。 
现代文：另一种说法：齐宣王向唐易鞠求问射飞鸟的方法，说： 射飞鸟的人看重什么？ 唐易鞠说： 在于谨慎地守护谷仓。 
English: Another version: King Qi Xuan asked Tang Yi Ju about how to shoot birds, saying: What do people who shoot birds value? Tang Yi Ju said: It's about carefully guarding the barn.

古文：王曰： 何谓谨禀？ 
现代文：宣王说： 什么叫做谨慎地守护谷仓？ 
English: Xuan Wang said: What is it called to guard the barn carefully?

古文：对曰： 鸟以数十目视人，人以二目视鸟，奈何不谨禀也？
现代文：唐易鞠说： 鸟用几十只眼睛看着人，人用两只眼睛看着鸟，怎么能不谨慎地守护谷仓。 
English: Tang Yiju said: A bird looks at a person with dozens of eyes, a person looks at a bird with two eyes, how can one guard a barn without caution?

古文：故曰 在于谨禀 也。 
现代文：宣王说： 那么用什么方法像守护谷仓那样来守护国家呢？
English: King Xuan said, "Then how can we guard the country like guarding a barn?"

古文：王曰： 然则为天下何以为此禀？今人主以二目视一国，一国以万目视人主，将何以自为禀乎？ 对曰： 郑长者有言曰： 夫虚静无为而无见也。其可以为此禀乎！ 
现代文：现在君主用两只眼睛看着全国，而一国的人用上万只眼睛看着君主，将用什么方法自己守护国家这个谷仓呢？ 唐易鞠回答说： 郑长者说过这样的话： 虚静无为，不要外露， 大概这样的方法就可以防卫国家这个谷仓了。 
English: Now that the monarch is looking at the whole country with two eyes, and the people of a country are looking at the monarch with tens of thousands of eyes, how will they guard the country's barn? Tang Yiju replied: The elder Zheng said something like this: "Keep quiet and do nothing, don't expose yourself. This is probably the way to defend the country's barn."

古文：国羊重于郑君，闻君之恶己也，侍饮，因先谓君曰： 臣适不幸而有过，愿君幸而告之。
现代文：国羊受到郑君重用，听说郑君厌恶自己，就在侍奉饮酒时，趁机先对郑君说： 我如果不幸犯有错误，深望您能告诉我。
English: The national sheep was heavily used by Zheng Jun. Hearing that Zheng Jun detested himself, he took the opportunity to say to Zheng Jun while serving alcohol: If I unfortunately make a mistake, I hope you can tell me.

古文：臣请变更，则臣免死罪矣。 
现代文：请让我改正过错，那样我就可以免除死罪了。 
English: Please let me correct my mistake, so that I can be exempted from the death penalty.

古文：客有说韩宣王，宣王说而太息。
现代文：有个客人向韩宣王游说，宣王又高兴又叹息。
English: A guest lobbied Han Xuanwang, who was both happy and saddened.

古文：左右引王之说之，以先告客以为德。
现代文：君王近侍就把韩王对说客表示满意的态度争先告诉说客，以此做人情。
English: The king's aides scrambled to tell the lobbyist that King Han was satisfied with the lobbyist's attitude, as a gesture of goodwill.

古文：靖郭君之相齐也，王后死，未知所置，乃献玉珥以知之。
现代文：靖郭君田婴做齐相时，齐王的正纪死了，田婴不知道立谁为正纪，就进献珠玉耳饰来了解真情。
English: When Jingguo Jun Tianying made Qi phase, the king of Qi, Zheng Ji, died. Tianying did not know who Zheng Ji was, so he presented pearl and jade earrings to understand the true feelings.

古文：一曰：薛公相齐，齐威王夫人死，中有十孺子，皆贵于王，薛公欲知王所欲立，而请置一人以为夫人。
现代文：另一种说法：薛公田婴担任齐相，齐威王的夫人死了，宫中有十个姬妄都被王宠爱着，薛公想了解齐王打算立哪个姬妄为夫人，然后请求立这个人为夫人。
English: Another way of saying this is: Xue Gong Tianying served as Qixiang, the wife of the King of Qi and Wei died, and there were ten Ji Lai in the palace who were all loved by the king. Xue Gong wanted to know which Ji Lai the King of Qi planned to make his wife, and then he asked for this person to be made his wife.

古文：王听之，则是说行于王而重于置夫人也；王不听，是说不行而轻于置夫人也。
现代文：齐王听从了，就是建议取得成功，而在立夫人这件事上被齐王看重；齐王不听，就是建议失败，而在立夫人这件事上被齐王看轻。
English: If King Qi listened to the advice, it would be a success, but in the matter of appointing a wife, it would be valued by King Qi; if King Qi did not listen, the advice would be a failure, but in the matter of appointing a wife, it would be regarded lightly by King Qi.

古文：欲先知王之所欲置以劝王置之，于是为十玉耳而美其一而献之。
现代文：田婴想先知道齐王想立的人，然后再去劝王立她，于是制作了十个珠玉耳饰，并把其中一个制作得特别精美，一起献给齐王。
English: Tian Ying wanted to know who Qi Wang wanted to marry first, and then persuade Wang to marry her. Therefore, she made ten pearl earrings, and dedicated one of them to Qi Wang.

古文：王以赋十孺子，明日坐，视美珥之所在而劝王以为夫人。
现代文：齐王把十个耳饰授给十个姬妄。第二天侍坐时，田婴就观察那只精美的耳饰由谁佩带，就劝齐玉立谁为夫人。
English: King Qi gave the ten earrings to the ten concubines. The next day, when they were sitting at table, Tian Yu observed who would wear the exquisite earrings, and advised Qi Yu to choose who would be his wife.

古文：甘茂相秦惠王，惠王爱公孙衍，与之间有所言，曰： 寡人将相子。 
现代文：甘茂做秦惠王的相。惠王喜爱公孙衍，和他私下有话说： 我准备立你为相。 
English: Ganmao was the consort of King Hui of Qin. King Hui loved Gongsunyan, and privately said to him, "I am ready to make you consort."

古文：甘茂之吏道穴闻之，以告甘茂。
现代文：甘茂手下的小官吏从孔洞里偷听到这件事，就去告诉了甘茂。
English: A petty official under the command of Kammao overheard this from the cave and went to tell Kammao.

古文：甘茂入见王，曰： 王得贤相，臣敢再拜贺。 
现代文：甘茂进见惠王，说： 大王得到贤相，我冒昧前来拜贺。 
English: Kammao went to see King Hui and said, "The great king has received a wise omen. I have ventured to come and offer my congratulations."

古文： 寡人托国于子，安更得贤相？ 
现代文：惠王说： 我把国家托付给你，怎会另外得到贤相？ 
English: Hui Wang said: I entrusted the country to you, how else could I get a wise man?

古文：对曰： 将相犀首。 王曰： 子安闻之？ 
现代文：甘茂回答说： 您准备立犀首将军公孙衍为相。 惠王说： 你怎么听说的？ 
English: Gammao replied, "You are preparing to make the head of the Rhino, General Gongsunyan, your consort." Hui Wang said, "How did you hear about that?

古文：对曰： 犀首告臣。 
现代文：甘茂回答说： 公孙衍告诉我的。 
English: The rhinoceros told me.

古文：王怒犀道之泄，乃逐之。
现代文：惠王对公孙衍泄露秘密很生气。
English: Hui Wang was very angry with Gongsun Yan for leaking the secret.

古文：一曰：犀首，天下之善将也，梁王之臣也。
现代文：就赶走了他。另一种说法：犀首是天下的良将，是魏惠王的臣子。
English: Another version: Rhino's head is the world's best general, a vassal of King Wei Hui.

古文：秦王欲得之与治天下，犀首曰： 衍人臣也，不敢离主之国。 
现代文：秦惠王想用犀首一起治理国家，犀首说： 我是做人臣子的，不敢离开魏国。 
English: Qin Hui Wang wanted to use the rhinoceros head to govern the country together. The rhinoceros head said: I am a human subject, I dare not leave Wei.

古文：居期年，犀首抵罪于梁王，逃而入秦，秦王甚善之。
现代文：过了一年，犀首因犯罪受到魏王的处罚，逃到秦国，秦王对他很好。
English: A year later, Rhino Head was punished by the Wei king for his crime and fled to Qin. The Qin king treated him well.

古文：樗里疾，秦之将也，恐犀首之代之将也，凿穴于王之所常隐语者。
现代文：樗里疾是秦国的将领，担心犀首会代他为将，在秦王经常说秘密话的地方挖了一个小洞。
English: Balizhi was a general of the Qin State. He was worried that the head of the Rhinoceros would replace him as the general, so he dug a small hole in the place where the Qin King often spoke in secret.

古文：俄而王果与犀首计，曰：吾欲攻韩，奚如？ 
现代文：不久秦王果真和犀首商量，说： 我想攻打韩国，怎么样？ 
English: Before long, Qin King Guozhen conferred with the head of the rhinoceros and said: I want to attack Korea, how about it?

古文：犀首曰： 秋可矣。 
现代文：犀首说： 秋天可以。 
English: The head of the rhinoceros said: Autumn is fine.

古文：王曰： 吾欲以国累子，子必勿泄也。 
现代文：素王说： 我想劳你负责国家大事，你一定不要外泄。 
English: Su Wang said, "I want you to be in charge of national affairs, you must not leak.

古文：犀首反走再拜曰： 受命。 
现代文：犀首倒退着拜两拜说： 接受命令。 
English: The head of the rhinoceros retreated, bowed twice and said: "Accept the order."

古文：于是樗是疾已道穴听之矣。
现代文：这时候梧里疾也从小洞里听到他们的谈话了。
English: At this time, Wulizi also heard their conversation from the small cave.

古文：郎中皆曰： 兵秋起攻韩，犀首为将。 
现代文：秦王近侍都说： 秋天起兵攻打韩国，犀首担任将领。 
English: Qin Wang's close attendants all said: In the autumn, the army will attack Korea, and the head of the rhinoceros will be the general.

古文：于是日也，郎中尽知之；于是月也，境内尽知之。
现代文：就在这一天里侍从都知道了，就在这个月里，国境以内部知道了。
English: It was on this day that the attendants knew everything, and it was in this month that the border was known from the inside.

古文：王召樗里疾曰： 是何匈匈也，何道出？ 樗里疾曰： 似犀首也。 
现代文：秦王召见樗里疾说： 为什么这样喧哗？消息是从哪里出去的？  樗里疾说： 好象是犀首。 
English: The king of Qin summoned Balizhi and said, "Why is there such a commotion? Where did the news come from?" Balizhi said, "It looks like the head of a rhinoceros."

古文：王曰： 吾无与犀首言也，其犀首何哉？ 
现代文：秦王说： 我没有跟犀首讲过，为什么说是犀首讲的呢？ 
English: Qin Wang said, "I didn't talk to the rhinoceros. Why do you say that the rhinoceros talked to you?"

古文：樗里疾曰： 犀首也羁旅新抵罪，其孤，是言自嫁于众。 王曰： 然。 
现代文：樗里疾说； 犀首在秦国寄居，由于刚受过处罚，心里感到孤单，想通过这样的话取悦于众人。 秦王说： 对。 
English: The king of Qin said, "That's right, the head of the rhinoceros is a sojourner in the state of Qin, and because he has just been punished, he feels lonely and wants to please everyone with such words."

古文：使人召犀首，已逃诸候矣。
现代文：派人召见犀百，犀首已逃往别国了。
English: They sent someone to summon the rhinoceros, but it had already fled to another country.

古文：堂谷公谓昭候曰： 今有千金之玉卮而无当，可以盛水乎？ 
现代文：堂公对韩昭侯说： 假如有个价值千金的玉杯，上下贯通没有底于，可以用来盛水吗？ 
English: Dongguan said to Han Zhaohou: If there is a jade cup worth thousands of dollars, and there is no bottom to pass it up and down, can it be used to hold water?

古文：昭候曰： 不可。 
现代文：昭侯说： 不可以。 
English: Akihiro said, "No, you can't."

古文： 有瓦器而不漏，可以盛酒乎？ 
现代文： 有陶器不漏水，可以用来盛酒吗？ 
English: Is there pottery that does not leak and can be used to hold wine?

古文：昭候曰： 可。 
现代文：昭侯说： 可以。 
English: Akihiro said, "Yes."

古文：对曰： 夫瓦器，至贱也，不漏可以盛酒。
现代文：堂公说： 陶器是最不值钱的，如果不漏，就可用它盛酒。
English: Tang Gong said: Pottery is the least valuable, if it does not leak, it can be used to hold wine.

古文：虽有千金之玉卮，至贵而无当，漏不可盛水，则人孰注浆哉？
现代文：虽然有价值千金的玉杯，最值钱，但没有底，不能盛水，那么还有什么人往里面倒饮料呢？
English: Although the priceless jade cup is the most valuable, it has no bottom and cannot hold water, so who would pour drinks into it?

古文：今为人之主而漏其君臣之语，是犹无当之玉卮也，虽有圣智，莫尽其术，为其漏也。 昭候曰： 然。 
现代文：现在贵为人君而泄漏群臣言论，这就好象没有底的玉杯一样。臣下虽有极高的智慧，也不肯充分献出自己的谋略，因为伯它被泄露出去。 昭侯说： 对。 
English: Now that you, as a prince, are divulging the words of your vassals, it is like a bottomless jade cup. Although your vassals are extremely wise, they are not willing to fully offer their own strategy, because it has been leaked. Zhao Hou said: That's right.

古文：昭侯闻堂谷公之言，自此之后，欲发天下之大事，未尝不独寝，恐梦言而使人知其谋也。
现代文：昭侯听了堂公的话，从这以后，想对天下采取大的行动，没有不是单独睡觉的，唯恐说梦话而让别人知道计谋。
English: Zhaohou listened to his uncle's words, and from then on, he wanted to take big actions against the world. No one slept alone, for fear of talking in his sleep and letting others know his plans.

古文：堂鸡公曰： 白玉之卮美，而君不以饮者，以其无当耶？ 
现代文：另一种说法：堂公进见韩昭侯说； 假如有白玉杯而没底，有陶瓷杯而有底。你渴了，将用什么喝水？ 昭侯说： 用陶瓷杯。 堂公说： 白玉杯很美，而您不用它喝水，是因为它没有底吧？ 
English: Another way of saying this is: Dongguan Jin met Han Zhaohong and said: If there is a white jade cup without a bottom, and there is a ceramic cup with a bottom. If you are thirsty, what will you use to drink water? Zhaohong said: Use a ceramic cup. Dongguan said: The white jade cup is beautiful, but you don't use it to drink water because it doesn't have a bottom, right?

古文：君曰： 然。 
现代文：昭侯说： 是的。 
English: Akihiro said, "Yes."

古文：堂谷公曰： 为人主而漏泄其君臣之语，譬犹玉卮之无当。 
现代文：堂公说： 做君主的泄露群臣的言论，就好比玉杯没有底。 
English: Dong Gong said: To be a monarch and divulge the words of a group of ministers is like a jade cup without a bottom.

古文：堂谷公每见而出，昭候必独卧，惟恐梦言泄于妻妾。
现代文：堂公每次进见完出去后，昭侯必定单独睡觉，唯恐讲梦话泄密给妻妾。
English: After every visit to the hall, Akihiro would sleep alone, for fear of telling a secret to his wife and concubine.

古文：申子曰： 独视者谓明，独听者为聪。能独断者，故可以为天下主。 
现代文：申不害说： 能独自观察问题叫明，能独自听取意见叫聪；能独自决断的人，就可以做天下的王。 
English: It does no harm to say, "He who can observe a problem alone is called clear, he who can listen to opinions alone is called wise, and he who can make decisions alone can be the king of the world."

古文：说三
现代文：说三
English: Say three

古文：宋人有酤酒者，升概甚平，遇客甚谨，为酒甚美，县帜甚高，然而不售，酒酸。
现代文：宋国有一个卖酒的人，量酒非常公平，待客非常殷勤，酿酒非常醇美，酒旗挂得又高又显眼，但却卖不出去，酒都变酸了。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there was a man who sold wine. He measured the wine very fairly, waited for his guests very attentively, brewed the wine very mellow, and hung the wine flag high and conspicuous. However, he couldn't sell it, and the wine turned sour.

古文：怪其故，问其所知闾长者杨倩，倩曰： 汝狗猛耶？ 
现代文：他对此感到诧异，不知原因何在，就去问他熟悉的地方长老杨倩，杨倩说： 你养的狗凶吗？ 他说： 狗凶。
English: He was surprised by this, and for some unknown reason, he went to ask the local elder Yang Xuan, whom he knew well. Yang Xuan said, "Is your dog fierce?" He said, "Dog fierce."

古文：曰： 狗猛则酒何故而不售？ 曰： 人畏焉。
现代文：可是酒为什么就卖不出去呢？ 杨倩说： 人们怕狗呀。
English: But why can't they sell the wine? Yang Jun said: People are afraid of dogs.

古文：或令孺子怀钱挈壶雍而往酤，而狗迓而龁之，此酒所以酸而不售也。 
现代文：有人让小孩子揣着钱拿着壶瓮去买洒，猛狗却迎上来咬他。这就是酒变酸而卖不出去的原因。 国家也有猛狗。
English: Someone asked a child to carry money with a kettle to buy water, but a fierce dog came up and bit him. This is the reason why the wine turned sour and could not be sold. The country also has fierce dogs.

古文：夫国亦有狗铬，有道之士怀其术而欲以明万乘之主，大臣为猛狗迎而龁之，此人主之所以蔽肋，而有道之士所以不用也。故桓公问管仲： 治国最奚患？ 
现代文：法术之士怀有治国的策略，想使大国的君主明察起来，大臣却像猛狗一样迎上去乱咬，这也就是君主被蒙蔽和挟持，而法术之士不能受到重用的原因所在。所以齐桓公问管仲： 治理国家最怕什么？ 
English: The sorcerer had a strategy for governing the country and wanted to make the monarch of the great country see it clearly, but the minister greeted him like a fierce dog and bit him. This was the reason why the monarch was blinded and held hostage, and the sorcerer could not be reused. So Qi Kuan asked Guanzhong: What is the worst thing about governing the country?

古文：对曰： 最患社鼠矣。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 最怕社坛里的老鼠呀。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "I'm most afraid of the rats in the social arena."

古文：公曰： 何患社鼠哉？ 
现代文：桓公说： 干吗要伯社坛里的老鼠呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "Why do you want a rat from the social circle?

古文：对曰： 君亦见夫为社者乎？
现代文：管仲回答说： 您曾看见过那些做社坛的人吗？
English: Guanzhong replied: Have you ever seen those people who are social workers?

古文：树木而涂之，鼠穿其间，掘穴托其中。熏之则恐焚木，灌之则恐涂阤，此社鼠之所以不得也。
现代文：把木头树起来；涂上泥巴；老鼠咬穿了木头，挖洞藏身在里面，用火熏的话担心烧了这个木头，用水灌又怕里面涂炭，这就是捉不到社鼠的原因。
English: Raising the wood; coating it with mud; the rat bites through the wood, digs a hole and hides inside, and if it is smoked with fire, it is afraid of burning the wood, and if it is doused with water, it is afraid of charring the inside. This is the reason why the social rat cannot be caught.

古文：今人君之左右，出则为势重而收利于民，入则比周而蔽恶于君。
现代文：现在君主身边的近侍，在朝廷外就卖弄权势，从民众那里榨取利益；在朝廷内就紧密勾结，在君主面前隐瞒罪恶。
English: Nowadays, the close attendants around the monarch flaunt their power outside the court and squeeze profits from the people; inside the court, they work closely together to hide their crimes from the monarch.

古文：内间主之情以告外，外内为重，诸臣百吏以为富。
现代文：在宫内刺探君主的情况告诉宫外的同党，内外勾结助长权势，群臣百官以此获得富贵。
English: The situation of spying on the monarch in the palace told the same party outside the palace that the internal and external collusion promoted the power, and the ministers and officials gained wealth.

古文：吏不诛则乱法，诛之则君不安。
现代文：官吏不诛杀他们，国法就要受到扰乱；诛杀他们，君主就不得安宁。
English: If officials do not fight and kill them, the national law will be disturbed; if they fight and kill them, the monarch will not have peace.

古文：据而有之，此亦国之社鼠也。 
现代文：他们控制着君主，也就是国家的社鼠啊。 
English: They control the monarch, that is, the country's social rat.

古文：故人臣执柄而擅禁，明为己者必利，而不为己者必害，此亦猛狗也。
现代文：所以臣子掌握权势，操纵法令，向人表明：为他卖力的人必有好处，不为他卖力的人必有祸患。这也就是猛狗。
English: Therefore, courtiers hold power, manipulate laws and regulations, and show people that those who work hard for him must have benefits, and those who do not work hard for him must have disasters. This is a fierce dog.

古文：夫大臣为猛狗而龁有道之士矣，左右又为社鼠而间主之情，人主不觉。
现代文：大臣既像猛狗一样迫害法术之士，左右近侍又像社鼠一样刺探君主内情，而君主却不能察觉。
English: The ministers persecute the magicians like mad dogs, and the attendants on the right and left probe the monarch's innermost thoughts like social rats, but the monarch is unable to detect them.

古文：如此，主焉得无壅，国焉得无亡乎？
现代文：这样，君主怎能不受蒙骗，国家怎能不衰亡呢？
English: How, then, can a prince not be deceived, and how can a state not decline?

古文：一曰：宋之酤酒者有庄氏者，其酒常美。
现代文：另一种说法：宋国卖酒的人中有个叫庄氏的，他的酒一直很美。
English: Another way of saying this is that one of the people who sold wine in Song was called Zhuang, and his wine was always very beautiful.

古文：或使仆往酤庄氏之酒，其狗龁人，使者不敢往，乃酤他家之酒。
现代文：有人派仆人前去买庄氏的酒，庄家的狗乱咬，仆人不敢去，就买了别家的酒。
English: Someone sent a servant to buy Mr. Zhuang's wine. The dog of the banker was biting wildly. The servant did not dare to go, so he bought the wine of another family.

古文：问曰： 何为不酤庄氏之酒？ 
现代文：有人问道： 为什么不买庄氏的酒？ 
English: Someone asked: Why not buy Zhuang's wine?

古文：对曰： 今日庄氏之酒酸。 
现代文：仆人回答说： 今天庄氏的酒酸。 
English: The servant replied, "Today, Zhuang's wine is sour.

古文：故曰： 不杀其狗则酒酸。 
现代文：所以说，不杀掉庄氏的狗，酒就会变酸。
English: Therefore, if you don't kill Zhuang's dog, the wine will turn sour.

古文：一曰：桓公问管仲曰： 治国何患？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 治理国家害怕什么？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: What is the fear of governing the country?

古文：对曰： 最苦社鼠。
现代文：管仲回答说： 最怕社鼠。
English: Guanzhong replied: I am most afraid of the social rat.

古文：夫社，木而涂之，鼠因自托也。
现代文：社坛，立了木头，涂上泥巴，老鼠趁势藏身在里面。
English: The social platform was made of wood and covered with mud, and the mice took advantage of the situation to hide inside.

古文：熏之则木焚，灌之则涂阤，此所以苦于社鼠也。
现代文：用烟熏它，木头就会烧毁；用水灌它，涂上的泥巴就会掉下来。这就是人们苦于社鼠的原因。
English: If you smoke it, the wood will burn; if you water it, the mud will fall off. That's why people suffer from rats.

古文：今人君左右，出则为势重以收利于民，入则比周谩侮蔽恶以欺于君，不诛则乱法，诛之则人主危。
现代文：现在君主的左右近侍，在朝廷外就卖弄权势，从民众那里榨取利益，在朝廷内就紧密勾结，欺瞒隐罪来蒙骗君主。不诛杀他们，就会扰乱国法；诛杀他们，君主就会不安。
English: At present, the monarch's right and left aides-de-camp are flaunting their power outside the court and squeezing profits from the people, while inside the court they are in close collusion, deceiving and concealing crimes to deceive the monarch. If you don't kill them, you will disturb the national law; if you kill them, the monarch will be uneasy.

古文：据而有之，此亦社鼠也。 
现代文：他们控制着君主，也就是社鼠了。 
English: They control the monarch, the social rat.

古文：故人臣执柄擅禁，明为己者必利，不为己者必害，亦猛狗也。
现代文：所以臣子掌握权势，操纵法令，向人表明：为他卖力的人必有好处，不为他卖力的人必有祸患。这也就是猛狗。
English: Therefore, courtiers hold power, manipulate laws and regulations, and show people that those who work hard for him must have benefits, and those who do not work hard for him must have disasters. This is a fierce dog.

古文：故左右为社鼠，用事者为猛狗，则术不行矣。
现代文：所以左右近侍像社鼠，掌权的大臣像猛狗，治国的法术就行不通了。
English: Therefore, the close attendants on both sides are like social rats, the ministers in power are like fierce dogs, and the magic of governing the country does not work.

古文：尧欲传天下于舜，鲧谏曰： 不祥哉！
现代文：尧想把天下传让给舜。鲧劝谏道： 不吉利啊！
English: He wanted to hand over the world to me. I advised him, "That's not good luck!

古文：孰以天下而传之天匹夫乎？ 
现代文：谁会把天下传让给平民呢？ 
English: Who will hand over the world to civilians?

古文：尧不听，举兵而诛杀鲧于羽山之郊。
现代文：尧不听，起兵在羽山郊外诛杀了鲧。
English: He did not listen, and the soldiers killed him on the outskirts of Hasan.

古文：共工又谏曰： 孰以天下而传之于匹夫乎？ 
现代文：共工又劝谏道： 谁会把天下传让给平民呢？ 
English: Another co-worker urged: "Who will hand over the world to the commoners?

古文：尧不听，又举兵而诛共工于幽州之都。
现代文：尧不听，又起兵在幽州都城杀了共工。
English: However, he did not listen and raised an army to kill his co-workers in Yuzhou.

古文：于是天下莫敢言无传天下于舜。
现代文：于是天下没有人敢说不要把天下传让给舜。
English: As a result, no one in the world dared to say that the world should not be handed over to Mao Zedong.

古文：仲尼闻之曰： 尧之知舜之贤，非其难者也。
现代文：孔子听到后说： 尧知道舜的贤明，并不是困难的事。
English: Upon hearing this, Confucius said, "It is not difficult for you to know your own wisdom.

古文：夫至乎诛谏者，必传之舜，乃其难也。 
现代文：至于杀掉那些劝阻一定传位给舜的人，确实是困难的。 
English: As for killing those who discourage certain transmission to baboons, it is indeed difficult.

古文：一曰： 不以其所疑败其所察则难也。 
现代文：另一种说法是，孔子说： 不因为进谏的人提出疑问而败坏自己明察的事情才是困难的啊。 
English: Another way of putting it is that Confucius said, "It is difficult not to be deceived by the doubters."

古文：荆庄王有茅门之法，曰： 群臣大夫诸公子入朝，马蹄践霤者，廷理斩其辀戮其御。 于是太子入朝，马蹄践霤，廷理斩其辀，戮其御。
现代文：楚庄王有外朝的法规是： 群臣、大夫、诸公子入朝，有马蹄踏到屋檐下滴水处的，执法官砍断他的车辕，杀掉他的车夫， 这期间太子入朝，马蹄踩到屋循下滴水的地方，执法官砍断他的车辕，杀了他的车夫。
English: During the reign of the Prince of Chu Zhuang, there was a rule: When a group of ministers, doctors, and nobles entered the court, if a horse's hoof stepped on the dripping water under the eaves, the magistrate cut off his cart and killed his coachman. During this period, when the prince entered the court, if a horse's hoof stepped on the dripping water under the eaves, the magistrate cut off his cart and killed his coachman.

古文：太子怒，入为王泣曰： 为我诛戮廷理。 
现代文：太子发怒了，进去向庄王哭泣道： 替我报仇，杀了执法官。 
English: The prince became angry and went crying to Zhuang Wang, saying, "Take revenge for me and kill the magistrate."

古文：王曰： 法者，所以敬宗庙，尊社稷。
现代文：庄王说： 法是用来敬宗庙，尊社稷的。
English: Zhuang Wang said, "Laws are used to respect ancestral temples and revered shrines.

古文：故能立法从令，尊敬社稷者，社稷之臣也，焉可诛也？
现代文：所以能确定法制，遵从法令，尊敬社稷的，是国家的臣子，怎么可以诛杀呢？
English: Therefore, those who can determine the legal system, comply with laws and regulations, and respect society are the state's vassals. How can they fight and kill?

古文：夫犯法废令，不尊敬社稷者，是臣乘君而下尚校也。
现代文：违犯法制，废除法令，不尊敬社程的，是臣下凌驾君主之上，臣下侵犯君主。
English: Those who violate the legal system, abolish laws and regulations, and do not respect the social order are vassals overriding the monarch, and vassals encroaching on the monarch.

古文：臣乘君，则主失威；下尚校则上位危。
现代文：臣下凌驾君主之上，君主就失去威势，臣。下侵犯君主，君主的地位就危险。
English: If a vassal overpowers the monarch, the monarch loses his power. If a subordinate encroaches on the monarch, the position of the monarch is in danger.

古文：威失位危，社稷不守，吾将何以遗子孙？ 
现代文：威势失去，地位危险，国家不能保有，我将拿什么传给子孙？ 
English: My power is gone, my position is in danger, my country cannot be preserved. What will I pass on to my children and grandchildren?

古文：于是太子乃还走，避舍露宿三曰，北面再拜请死罪。
现代文：于是太子就回头跑开，躲避到外面露宿了三天，面北一再拜请给予死罪。
English: As a result, the prince turned his back and ran away, hiding outside and sleeping rough for three days, repeatedly begging the North to give him the death penalty.

古文：一曰：楚王急召太子。
现代文：另一种说法：楚王急召太子。
English: Another version: King Chu urgently summoned the crown prince.

古文：楚国之法，车不得至于茆门。
现代文：一一楚国法令规定，车子不准坐到第二道门。
English: According to the law of the State of Chu, the car is not allowed to go to the second door.

古文：天雨，廷中有潦，太子遂驱车至于茆门。
现代文：一一天下着雨，院子里有积水，太子就把车子赶到了第二道门。
English: One day it rained and there was standing water in the courtyard, so the prince drove the car to the second gate.

古文：廷理曰： 车不得至茆门。
现代文：执法官说： 车子不能到达第二道门。
English: The magistrate said: 'The car couldn't get to the second gate.

古文：至茆门，非法也。 
现代文：到达第二道门是不合法的。 
English: Reaching the second gate is illegal.

古文：太子曰： 王召急，不得须无潦。 
现代文：太子说： 国王召唤得很急，我不能等到没有积水。 
English: The prince said, "The king's summons is very urgent, I can't wait until there is no standing water."

古文：遂驱之。
现代文：接着就赶马向前。
English: Then the horse galloped forward.

古文：廷理举殳而击其马，败其驾。
现代文：执法官举起兵器刺向太子的马，摧毁太子的车。
English: The bailiff raised his weapon and stabbed the prince's horse, destroying the prince's car.

古文：太子入为王泣曰： 廷中多潦，驱车至茆门，廷理曰 非法也 ，举殳击臣马，败臣驾。
现代文：太子进去，对楚王哭诉道： 院子里积水、很多，我赶车到了第二道门。执法官说不合法，举起兵器刺我的马，毁我的车。
English: The prince went in and cried to King Chu: "There is a lot of standing water in the courtyard. I rushed to the second gate. The enforcement officer said it was illegal, raised his weapon to stab my horse and destroy my car.

古文：王必诛之。 
现代文：父王一定要杀了他。 
English: His father had to kill him.

古文：王曰： 前有老主而不逾，后有储主而不属，矜矣！
现代文：楚王说： 前有年老的君主，他不越规办事；后有接位的太子，他也不去依附，贤啊！
English: King Chu said: In the past, there was an old monarch, and he did not go beyond the rules; later, there was a crown prince to take over the throne, and he did not cling to it, he was wise!

古文：是真吾守法之牙也。 
现代文：这真是我守法的臣子。 
English: This is truly my law-abiding vassal.

古文：乃益爵二级，而开后门出太子，勿复过。
现代文：于是就给执法官加了两级爵位，开了后门让太子出去，说； 不要再犯类似的错误。 
English: So he gave the bailiff a second-class knighthood, opened the back door to let the prince out, and said, "Don't make a similar mistake again."

古文：卫嗣君谓薄疑曰： 子小寡人之国以为不足仕，则寡人力能仕子，请进爵以子为上卿。 
现代文：卫嗣君对薄疑说： 你嫌我国家小，以为不值得做官，我可是有能力满足你做官的要求，让你进爵做上卿。 
English: Weizikun said to Haku, "You think that my country is small and that I am not worthy of being an official, but I am capable of meeting your requirements for being an official and making you a knight and a lord.

古文：乃进田万顷。
现代文：就给了薄疑一万顷土地。
English: So they gave him 10,000 hectares of land.

古文：薄子曰： 疑之母亲疑，以疑为能相万乘所不窕也。
现代文：薄疑说： 我的母亲爱我，认为我能做到大国的相并有余力。
English: "My mother loved me and thought I could do the role of a great power and had enough energy," he said.

古文：然疑家巫有蔡妪者，疑母甚爱信之，属之家事焉。
现代文：但我家有个姓蔡的老巫婆，我母亲非常喜爱并听信她，把家政都委托给她。
English: But in my family there was an old witch named Cai, whom my mother loved very much and trusted, entrusting her with all the household chores.

古文：疑智足以信言家事，疑母尽以听疑也。
现代文：我的智慧足以议论家事，我的母亲也完全听信我。
English: I am wise enough to discuss family matters, and my mother trusts me completely.

古文：然已与肄言者，亦必复决之于蔡妪也。
现代文：然而母亲已经和我商量过的事，还要由蔡巫婆再来决定。
English: However, the matter that my mother had already discussed with me had to be decided by Witch Cai.

古文：故论疑之智能，以疑为能相万乘而不窕也；论其亲，则子母之间也；然犹不免议之于蔡妪也。
现代文：所以要说我的智慧才能，母亲认为我能做大国的相而有余力；要说亲密关系，则是母子两人。即使这样，母亲还是不免要和蔡巫婆商量。
English: Therefore, when it comes to my wisdom and talent, my mother thinks that I can be a great power's consort and have enough power; when it comes to intimacy, it is the mother and son. Even so, my mother still has to consult with Cai Zihua.

古文：今疑之于人主也，非子母之亲也，而人主皆有蔡妪。
现代文：现在我和君主，没有母子之间的亲密关系，而君主身边却都是蔡巫婆之类的人物。
English: Now I and the monarch do not have a close relationship between mother and son, but the monarch is surrounded by figures such as Cai Zhenfu.

古文：人主之蔡妪，必其重人也。
现代文：君主身边的蔡巫婆，一定是握有权势的人。
English: The witch Cai next to the monarch must be a powerful person.

古文：重人者，能行私者也。
现代文：握有权势的人是能够行私的人。
English: A powerful man is a man who can act for himself.

古文：夫行私者，绳之外也；而疑之所言，法之内也。
现代文：那些行私的人，是可以逍遥法外的；而我讲的，则是按法办事。
English: Those who do illegal things can get away with it; I am talking about doing things according to the law.

古文：绳之外与法之内，仇也，不相受也。 
现代文：非法与合法，是完全对立的，是不能相容的。 
English: Illegality and legality are completely opposed and incompatible.

古文：一曰：卫君之晋，谓薄疑曰： 吾欲与子皆行。 
现代文：另一种说法：卫君要去晋国，对薄疑说： 我想和你一起走。 
English: Another way of saying this is: Wei Jun is going to Jin Province, and he says to Baizu: I want to go with you.

古文：薄疑曰： 媪也在中，请归与媪计之。
现代文：薄疑说： 老太太在家里，请让我回去和她商量一下。 
English: Suspicious, he said: The old lady is at home, please let me go back and talk to her.

古文：卫君自请薄媪。
现代文：卫君亲自请问薄疑的老母亲。
English: Wei Jun asked his suspicious old mother in person.

古文：曰： 疑，君之臣也，君有意从之，甚善。 
现代文：薄疑母亲说： 薄疑是您的臣子，您有意让他随从您，很好。 
English: Suspicion's mother said: Suspicion is your vassal, you intentionally let him follow you, that's fine.

古文：卫君曰： 吾以请之媪，媪许我矣。 
现代文：卫君对薄疑说： 我已经问过你母亲，她答应我了。 
English: Wei Jun said to the doubter: I have already asked your mother, and she agreed.

古文：薄疑归，言之媪也，曰： 卫君之爱疑奚与媪？ 
现代文：薄疑回家，向母亲谈起这件事，说： 卫君对我的爱和您对我的爱比起来，怎么样呢？ 
English: Suspicious, he went home and spoke to his mother about the matter, saying, "How does Wei Jun's love for me compare to your love for me?

古文：媪曰： 不如吾爱子也。 
现代文：老太太说： 不如我爱你。 
English: The old lady said, "I'd better love you."

古文： 卫君之贤疑奚与媪也？ 
现代文： 卫君说我能干和母亲说我能干比起来，怎么样呢？ 
English: How does Wei Jun's "I can do it" compare with his mother's "I can do it"?

古文：曰： 不如吾贤子也。 
现代文：老太太说： 不如我说你能干。 
English: The old lady said, "I might as well say you can do it.

古文： 媪与疑计家事已决矣，乃更请决之于卜者蔡妪。
现代文： 您和我商量家事，已经决定了的，还要和占卜的蔡老婆子商量后才决定。
English: You and I should discuss family matters. If you have already made a decision, you should discuss it with the fortuneteller, the old woman Cai, before making a decision.

古文：今卫君从疑而行，虽与疑决计，必与他蔡妪败之。如是，则疑不得则长为臣矣。 
现代文：现在卫君想让我跟他一起走，虽已和我说定，日后必会和其他像蔡老婆子一样的人去败坏它，这样一来，我就不能长久做臣子了。 
English: Now Wei Jun wants me to go with him, although I have already made up my mind that in the future there will certainly be other people like the old woman Cai to corrupt it, so that I cannot be a courtier for long.

古文：夫教歌者，使先呼而诎之，其声反清徵者，乃教之。
现代文：教歌的人先叫学唱的人放声高呼，然后转变音调。
English: The teacher of the song first asked the students to sing loudly, and then changed the tone.

古文：一曰：教歌者先揆以法，疾呼中宫，徐呼中徵。
现代文：对那些能在转音之后回复到清越微音的，才加以教授。另一种说法：教歌的人先用音法测验，要求学唱的人急呼合于宫调，慢呼合于微调。
English: For those who can return to the Qing Yue microtones after the transposition, they will be taught.Another way of saying this is that those who teach songs first use the phonetic test, requiring those who learn to sing to quickly harmonize with the palace tone and slowly harmonize with the microtones.

古文：疾不中宫，徐不中徵，不可谓教。
现代文：急呼不合宫调，慢呼不合微调，就不能算是教歌。
English: If the urgent call does not fit the palace tune, and the slow call does not fit the minor tune, it cannot be regarded as a teaching song.

古文：吴起，卫左氏中人也，使其妻织组，而幅狭于度。
现代文：吴起是卫国左氏邑中乡的人，让他妻子织丝带，结果幅宽比要求的尺度窄些。
English: Wu Qi, a man from Zhongxiang Township, Zuozhe Township, Yunnan Province, asked his wife to weave a ribbon, and the result was a narrower width than the required size.

古文：吴子使更之。其妻曰： 诺。 
现代文：吴起让她改一下，他妻子说： 行。 
English: Wu Qi asked her to change it, and his wife said, "Okay."

古文：及成，复度之，果不中度，吴子大怒。
现代文：等到织成，又量了量，结果还是不符合要求的尺度，吴起非常生气。
English: After waiting for the fabric to be woven and measuring the amount again, the result still did not meet the required standard. Wu Qi was very angry.

古文：其妻对曰： 吾始经之而不可更也。 
现代文：他妻子回答说： 我开头就把经线确定好了。不可以更改了。 
English: His wife replied, "I set the line from the beginning. It can't be changed."

古文：吴子出之，其妻请其兄而索入，其兄曰： 吴子，为法者也。
现代文：吴起休掉了她。
English: Wu Qi took leave of her.

古文：其为法也，且欲以与万乘致功，必先践之妻妾，然后行之，子毋几索入矣。 
现代文：吴起妻子请求哥哥去要求回去。她哥哥说： 吴起是制定法令的人，他制定法令，是想用来为大国建立功业。他必须首先在自己妻妄身上兑现，然后才能推行开去，你不要希望回去了。 
English: Wu Qi's wife asked her brother to go and ask him to return. Her brother said: "Wu Qi is the one who makes the laws. He makes the laws and wants to use them to build a great country. He must first fulfill his wife's wish before he can go. You should not hope to go back."

古文：其妻之弟又重于卫君，乃因以卫君之重请吴子。
现代文：吴起妻子的弟弟被卫君重用，就凭着被卫君器重的身份去请求吴起。
English: Wu Qi's wife's younger brother was heavily used by Wei Jun, so he went to request Wu Qi's release with the identity of being heavily used by Wei Jun.

古文：吴子不听，遂去卫而入 
现代文：吴起不听从，便离开卫国到楚国去了。
English: Wu Qi did not obey, and left the Great Patriotic War to go to Chu.

古文：一曰：吴起示其妻以组，曰： 子为我织组，令之如是。 
现代文：另一种说法：吴起把丝织的带拿给他妻子看过，说： 你为我织条丝带，织成这样。 
English: Another version: Wu Qi showed the silk ribbon to his wife and said, "You knit a ribbon for me, knit it like this."

古文：组已就而效之，其组异善。
现代文：丝带织成后一经比较，新织的那条特别好。吴起说： 让你织条丝带，要求像样品一样。
English: After the ribbon was woven, the newly woven one was particularly good. Wu Qi said: Let you weave the ribbon, and ask for the same as the sample.

古文：起曰： 使子为组，令之如是，而今也异善，何也？ 
现代文：现在织得特别好，为什么？ 他妻子说； 用的材料是一样的，只是额外多用了工夫，所以更好。 吴起说： 这不是我的吩咐。 
English: The materials used are the same, but it takes extra effort, so it's better, his wife said.Wu Qi said: This is not my order.

古文：其妻曰： 用财若一也，加务善之。 吴起曰： 非语也。 
现代文：让她穿好衣服，把她休回娘家。她父亲前去求情，吴起说： 我在家从不说空话。 
English: Let her get dressed and take her back to her daughter's house. Her father went to intercede, and Wu Qi said, "I never say empty words at home."

古文：文公曰： 吾弛关市之征而缓刑罚，其足以战民乎？ 
现代文：晋文公向狐偃询问道： 我把美味甘食遍赐朝内臣子，只有少量的酒肉放在宫内。
English: Jinwen Gong asked the fox cub, "I have given all the delicious sweet foods to the courtiers of the imperial court, but only a small amount of meat and wine is kept in the palace.

古文：狐子对曰： 不足。 文公曰： 吾民之有丧资者，寡人亲使郎中视事，有罪者赦之，贫穷不足者与之，其足以战民乎？ 
现代文：酒酿成后尚未澄清就给大家饮，鲜肉不经存放就煮给大家吃，杀一头牛也要普遍分给国人，一年织成的布都给士兵做衣服穿，这足以使民众为我打仗了吧？ 狐偃说； 还不行。 文公说： 我的民众有丧失财产的，我亲自派遣郎中去查看；对有罪的人予以赦免，对贫穷不足的人布施恩惠。这足以使民众为我打仗了吧？ 
English: After the wine is brewed, it is given to everyone to drink without being clarified, the fresh meat is cooked for everyone to eat without being stored, the killing of a cow is also generally distributed to the people of the country, and the cloth woven in a year is made into clothes for the soldiers to wear. Is this enough to make the people fight for me? The fox said; Not yet. Wengong said: If my people have lost property, I will personally send a steward to check it out; I will pardon the guilty and give favors to the poor. Is this enough to make the people fight for me?

古文：狐子对曰： 不足。
现代文：狐偃回答说： 还不行。
English: The fox cub replied, "Not yet.

古文：此皆所以慎产也；而战之者，杀之也。
现代文：这些都是满足民众生存要求的办法。而要他们打仗，等于要杀死他们。
English: These are ways to meet the people's survival needs, and to make them fight is to kill them.

古文：民之从公也，为慎产也，公因而迎杀之，失所以为从公矣。 曰：然则何如足以战民乎？ 
现代文：民众追随您，是为了顺顺当当地活着，您却违反他们的意愿而杀掉他们，也就失去了民众跟从您的理由了。 文公说： 那么，要怎样做才足以使民众为我打仗呢？ 
English: The people follow you in order to live in a proper way, but you kill them against their will and lose the reason for the people to follow you.Wen Gong said: So, what should be done to make the people fight for me?

古文：狐子对曰： 令无得不战。 
现代文：狐偃说： 使他们不得不去打仗。 
English: The fox said: So that they have to go to war.

古文：公曰： 无得不战奈何？ 
现代文：文公说： 不得不去打仗怎么说呢？ 
English: Wenguang said, "What if we have to go to war?

古文：狐子对曰： 信赏必罚，其足以战。 
现代文：狐倡回答说： 有功必赏，有罪必罚，大概足以使他们打仗了。 
English: Foxtrot replied: "Merit must be rewarded, guilt must be punished, probably enough to make them fight.

古文：公曰： 刑罚之极安至？ 
现代文：文公说： 怎样达到刑罚的最高境界？ 
English: Wenguang said: How to achieve the highest level of punishment?

古文：对曰： 不辟亲贵，法行所爱。 文公曰： 善。 
现代文：狐倡回答说： 刑罚不避开亲近和显贵的人，法治实施到你宠爱的人。 文公说； 好。 
English: The fox replied, "Punishment does not avoid those who are near and dear to you, and the rule of law applies to those who are dear to you."

古文：明日，令田于圃陆，期以日中为期，后期者行军法焉。
现代文：第二天，下令在圃陆打猎，约定以中午为期限，迟到的按军法处置。
English: The next day, ordered to hunt in the field, agreed to noon as the deadline, late according to military law.

古文：于是公有所爱者日颠颉，后期，吏请其罪，文公陨涕而忧。
现代文：这时有个文公爱重、名叫颠颉的人迟到了，官吏请君主定他的罪，文公掉着眼泪，很是犯愁。
English: At this time, there was a person who was late, who was close to Wengong and whose name was Jurchen. The officials asked the monarch to condemn him. Wengong shed tears and was very sad.

古文：吏曰： 请用事焉。 
现代文：官吏说： 请让我对他用刑。 
English: The magistrate said: Let me punish him.

古文：遂斩颠颉之脊以徇百姓，以明法之信也。
现代文：于是腰斩了颠领，拿他向百姓巡示，用来表明有法必依。
English: As a result, the leader was beheaded, and he was used to demonstrate to the people that there is a law that must be followed.

古文：而后百姓皆惧曰： 君于颠颉之贵重如彼甚也，而君犹行法焉，况于我则何有矣。 
现代文：此后百姓都非常害怕，说： 国君对颠领的爱重是那么深切，尚且按法治罪，何况对于我们，有什么值得留情的呢。 
English: After that, the people were very afraid, saying, "The sovereign's love for the topsy-turvy is so profound, yet it is a crime according to the rule of law, and what is there for us to be spared?"

古文：文公见民之可战也，于是遂兴兵伐原，克之；伐卫，东其亩，取五鹿；攻阳胜虢；伐曹；南围郑，反之陴；罢宋围。
现代文：文公见百姓可用以打仗了，于是就起兵攻打原国，战胜了对方。攻打卫国，让卫国的田亩吁陌方向改为东西向，占领了五鹿地区。攻取阳樊，战胜虢国，讨伐曹国。向南围困郑国，破坏了郑国的城垛，解除对宋国的包围。
English: Wengong saw that the people could be used to fight, so he took up arms to attack the original country and defeated the other side. Attacked the defense country, changed the direction of the defense country to the east-west direction, and occupied the Wulai area. Conquered Yangtze River, defeated Yunnan Province, and fought against Cao Province. Encircled Zheng Province to the south, destroyed the fortifications of Zheng Province, and lifted the siege of Song Province.

古文：还与荆人战城濮，大败荆人；返为践土之盟，遂成衡雍之义：一举而八有功。
现代文：回兵和楚军在城淄开战，大败楚军。班师北上，主持了在践土举行的盟会；接着又成就了衡雍的结盟。一下子就建立了八项功业。
English: The returnees and the Chu army fought in Chenghuang and defeated the Chu army. The team went north and presided over the alliance meeting held in the earthwork; then the alliance of Hengyong was achieved. Eight achievements were established at once.

古文：所以然者，无他故异物，从狐偃之谋，假颠颉之脊也。
现代文：所以能够这样，没有其他原因，只是由于听从了狐倡的主张，借用了颠领的脊梁。
English: Therefore, there is no other reason for being able to do so, but only because it has listened to the Fox Initiative's proposal and borrowed the backbone of the turtleneck.

古文：夫痤疽之痛也，非刺骨髓，则烦心不可支也；非如是，不能使人以半寸砥石弹之。
现代文：痈疽的疼痛，不用石针刺入骨髓，心里的烦苦就支持不了；如果不是这样，也就不肯让人用半寸长的石针去刺它。
English: The pain of gangrene cannot be supported without a stone needle piercing the bone marrow, and if this were not the case, one would not allow it to be pierced with a half-inch-long stone needle.

古文：今人主之于治亦然：非人不知有若则安；欲治其国，非如是不能听圣知则诛乱臣。
现代文：现在君主治理国家也是这样，不是不知道只有经过苦痛才能平安。要想治理好国家，不是这样就不能听信圣人智士而镇压作乱的奸臣。
English: It is the same with the way the monarch governs the country now. It is not that he does not know that peace can only be achieved through suffering. If you want to govern the country well, it is not that you cannot listen to sages and wise men and suppress treacherous ministers who make trouble.

古文：乱臣者必重人，重人者，必人主所甚亲爱也。
现代文：作乱的奸臣，一定是握有权势的人；握有权势的人，一定是君主非常亲近宠信的人。
English: The treacherous vassal who caused the disturbance must have been a powerful person; the powerful person must have been a person very close to and trusted by the monarch.

古文：人主所甚亲爱也者，是同坚白也。
现代文：君主非常亲近宠信的人，就像坚和白不能离开石头而独立存在一样，不能离开君主而存在。
English: Monarchs are very close to their favorite people, just as Jian and Bai cannot exist independently without the stone, they cannot exist without the monarch.

古文：夫以布衣之资，欲以离人主之坚白所爱，是犹以解左髀说右髀者，是身必死而说不行者也。
现代文：以普通人的身分，想要把君主和他所亲近的权臣分开，等于是劝说右腿同意割掉左腿一样，是不可能办到的。这样一来，自己一定会遭杀害，而主张仍然不会被采纳的。
English: As an ordinary person, trying to separate the monarch from his close vassals is as impossible as trying to persuade the right leg to agree to amputate the left leg. In this case, you will certainly be killed, and your proposal will still not be accepted.

