古文：晋公子重耳自狄适他国凡七，卫成公、曹共公、郑文公皆不礼焉，齐醒公妻以女，宋襄公赠以马，楚成王享之，秦穆公纳之，卒以得国。
现代文：春秋时，晋国公子重耳因国内动乱，从狄地开始逃亡，历经七个国家，卫国成公、曹国共公、郑国文公对他都不以礼相待。齐国桓公将自己的女儿嫁给重耳作妻子，宋国裹公赠送他马匹，楚国成王设宴招待他，秦国穆公接纳他，最后重耳终于回国做了国君，就是晋文公。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, due to domestic turmoil, the prince of the State of Jin, Chong Er, began to flee from Di, and went through seven countries. Emperor Wei, Emperor Cao, and Emperor Zheng did not treat him with courtesy. Emperor Qi married his daughter to Chong Er as his wife, Emperor Song gave him horses, Emperor Cheng of the State of Chu invited him to a banquet, Emperor Mu of the State of Qin accepted him, and finally Chong Er finally returned to China and became the sovereign, that is, the prince of the State of Jin.

古文：卫、曹、郑皆同姓，刘、宋、秦、楚皆异姓，非所谓 岂无他人，不如同姓 也。
现代文：卫国、曹国、郑国的国君与重耳都是同姓，齐国、宋国、秦国、楚国的国君并非是重耳同姓，同姓之国对他也不以礼相待，异姓却能做到这一点，这证明 异姓不如同姓 的说法是错误的。
English: The sovereigns of the states of Wei, Cao and Zheng had the same surname as Chong Er. The sovereigns of the states of Qi, Song, Qin and Chu did not have the same surname as Chong Er. The countries with the same surname did not treat him with courtesy, but the countries with different surnames did. This proves that the saying that different surnames are not as good as the same surname is wrong.

古文：晋文公卒未葬，秦师伐郑灭滑，无预晋事，晋先轸以为秦不哀吾丧，而伐吾同姓，背秦大惠，使襄公墨衰绖而伐之。
现代文：晋文公死后还没有埋葬，秦国进攻郑国灭掉滑国，本来这和晋国无关，晋国大臣先轸却认为，秦国竟然在晋国大丧之际，不派人来吊念，反而讨伐晋国的同姓国，因为背弃了秦国以前的恩惠，让晋襄公穿着孝服讨伐秦国。
English: After the death of King Jinwen, he had not yet been buried. Qin attacked Zheng and destroyed the State of Nian. Originally, this had nothing to do with the State of Jin. However, the Minister of the State of Jin, Xian Yi, believed that the State of Qin, on the occasion of the great mourning of the State of Jin, did not send anyone to commemorate, but instead fought against the State of the same name of the State of Jin, because it had abandoned the previous favors of the State of Qin and let the Prince of Jinxiang fight against the State of Qin in filial piety.

古文：虽幸胜于殽，终启焚舟之战，两国交兵，不复修睦者数百年。
现代文：这场战斗虽然晋国侥幸在淆地战胜，终于导致焚舟之役，两国交战，这种状态持续了数百年。
English: Although the battle was won by Jin by a fluke in confusion, it finally led to the Battle of the Burning Boat, the two countries were at war, and this situation lasted for hundreds of years.

古文：先轸是年死于狄，至孙縠而诛灭，天也。
现代文：先轸有一年死于和狄人交战中，到他的孙子先縠，而被诛灭宗族，这是天意啊。
English: It was the will of heaven that Senju died one year ago in a battle with the Di people, and that his grandson, Senju, was wiped out along with his clan.

