古文：悛字士操，随父征竟陵王诞于广陵，以功拜驸马都尉。
现代文：刘悛，字士操，曾跟随父亲到广陵征讨竟陵王刘诞，因军功任命为驸马都尉。
English: Liu Yao, a calligrapher, once followed his father to Guangling to fight for the birth of Liu Yao, the king of Guangling. Due to his military service, he was appointed as the captain of the cavalry.

古文：后爲桂阳王征北中兵参军，与齐武帝同直殿内，并爲宋明帝所亲待，由是与武帝款好。
现代文：后来做桂阳王的征北中兵参军，与齐武帝一同在殿内值勤，并受宋明帝亲切对待，由此与齐武帝十分友好。
English: Later, he joined the army as one of the soldiers of King Guiyang's Northern Expeditionary Force, and was on duty in the palace together with Emperor Qiwu. He was treated cordially by Emperor Songming, and thus became very friendly with Emperor Qiwu.

古文：悛本名忱，宋明帝多忌，反语 刘忱 爲 临雠 ，改名悛焉。
现代文：刘悛本名刘忱，宋明帝多忌讳，把 刘忱 反念为 临仇 ，便改名为刘悛。
English: Liu Zhen's real name was Liu Zhen, but Song Mingdi considered it taboo, and he changed his name to Liu Zhen because he wanted to take revenge on Liu Zhen.

古文：齐武帝尝至悛宅，昼卧觉，悛自捧金澡罐受四升水以沃盥，因以与帝，前后所纳称此。
现代文：齐武帝曾经到刘悛家中去，白天睡了一觉醒来，刘悛亲自捧着金澡罐盛上四升水给他浇水洗手，就此和武帝有了交情，前后所受到的好处是与这事密切相关的。
English: Emperor Qiwu once went to Liu Bei's home, fell asleep during the day and woke up. Liu Bei personally held a golden shower can and poured four liters of water for him to wash his hands. As a result, Emperor Qiwu became friends with Emperor Wu. The benefits received before and after are closely related to this.

古文：后迁安远护军、武陵内史。
现代文：后来调任安远护军、武陵内史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Anyuan Protection Corps and the Wuling Inner History Corps.

古文：郡南古江堤久废，悛修未毕，而江水忽至，百姓弃役奔走。
现代文：郡城南面的古代江堤废毁已久，刘悛修复还没有完工，而江水忽然到来，百姓们丢下工作纷纷逃走。
English: The ancient river dike in the south of the county seat has been destroyed for a long time, the restoration of Liu Ye has not yet been completed, but the river water suddenly arrived, and the people left their work and fled.

古文：悛亲率厉之，于是乃立。
现代文：刘悛亲自率领施工并严厉督促，于是才修建起来。
English: Liu Ye personally led the construction and strictly supervised, so it was built.

古文：汉寿人邵荣兴六世同爨，悛表其门闾。
现代文：汉寿人邵荣兴一家六代同灶吃饭，一齐生活，刘悛标帜了他的家门以作表彰。
English: The six generations of the Shao Rongxing family of Han Shou people eat from the same kitchen and live together. Liu Ying designated his family as a commendation.

古文：悛强济有世调，善于流俗。
现代文：刘悛精明强干，有世俗情调，和一般群众关系很好。
English: Liu Wei is shrewd and strong-willed, has a worldly temperament, and has a good relationship with the general public.

古文：蛮王田僮在山中，年垂百余岁，南谯王义宣爲荆州，僮出谒，至是又谒悛。
现代文：蛮王田僮住在山中，年龄已经一百多岁，南谯王刘义宣为荆州刺史，田僮出来拜见，到现在又出来拜见刘悛。
English: The barbarian king Tian Xuan lived in the mountains and was more than a hundred years old. Liu Yixuan, the king of Nan Xuan, was the history of Jingzhou. Tian Xuan came out to meet him, and now he has come out to meet Liu Xuan.

古文：明帝崩，表求奔赴。
现代文：明帝逝世，刘悛上表请求前往奔丧。
English: When Emperor Ming died, Liu Bei requested to go to the funeral.

古文：敕带郡还都，吏人送者数千万人。
现代文：下诏让他带职返回都城，官吏民众前来送行的有几千、几万人。
English: The following edict allowed him to return to the capital with his duties, and thousands and tens of thousands of officials and people came to see him off.

古文：悛人人执手，系以涕泣，百姓感之，赠送甚厚。
现代文：刘悛和人们一一握手，流下了眼泪，百姓非常感动，赠送十分丰厚。
English: Liu Wei shook hands with people one by one and shed tears. The people were very moved and the gifts were very rich.

古文：桂阳之难，加甯朔将军，助守石头。
现代文：桂阳之难以后，加封宁朔将军，协助镇守石头城。
English: After the difficulties in Guiyang, General Jiafeng Ningshuo came to help defend Stone Town.

古文：父勉于大航战死，悛时遇疾，扶伏路次，号哭求勉尸。
现代文：他的父亲刘面力在大航战死，刘悛当时正遇上疾病，由别人扶着趴在路边，大声哭叫着寻找父亲的尸体。
English: His father, Liu Mianli, died in the Battle of Dahuang. Liu Yao was ill at the time and was supported by others on the roadside, crying loudly and looking for his father's body.

古文：勉尸顶后伤缺，悛割发补之。
现代文：父亲的尸体头顶后面受伤缺少一块，刘悛割下自己的头发补上。
English: A piece was missing from the back of his father's head, and Liu Yao cut off his own hair to make up for it.

古文：持丧墓侧，冬日不衣絮。
现代文：他守丧呆在坟墓的旁边，冬天不穿棉衣。
English: He stays close to the grave during the mourning period and does not wear cotton clothes in winter.

古文：齐高帝代勉爲领军，素与勉善，书譬悛殷勤抑勉。
现代文：齐高帝替代刘面力做领军，他一向与刘面力友好，写信劝说刘悛好好节哀自勉。
English: Emperor Qi Gao replaced Liu Mianli as the leader of the army. He had always been friendly with Liu Mianli and wrote a letter to persuade Liu Bei to take good care of himself.

古文：建平王景素反，高帝总衆。
现代文：建平王刘景素反叛，高帝总统各路军马。
English: Jianping King Liu Jingsu rebelled, and President Gao Di's various armies followed.

古文：悛初免丧，高帝召悛及弟愃入省，欲使领支军。
现代文：刘悛刚刚免除了服丧，高帝召刘悛和他的弟弟刘入省台，打算让他们率领部分军队。
English: Liu Bei had just been released from mourning, and Emperor Gao called Liu Bei and his brother Liu into the provincial capital, intending to let them lead part of the army.

古文：及见皆羸削改貌，乃止。
现代文：等见到后，都是又疲惫又瘦弱，已经走形，这才打消了念头。
English: When I saw them, they were all tired, thin and out of shape, which made me give up the idea.

古文：霸业初建，悛先致诚节，沈攸之事起，加辅国将军。
现代文：霸业刚建立的时候，刘悛首先表达了自己效忠的诚心，沈攸之的事情发生后，加封他为辅国将军。
English: When the hegemony was just established, Liu Bei first expressed his loyalty and sincerity. After the incident of Shen You, he was awarded the title of auxiliary national general.

古文：后爲广州刺史，袭爵鄱阳县侯。
现代文：后来担任广州刺史，继承爵位为鄱阳县侯。
English: Later, he served as the chief historian of Guangzhou and succeeded to the title of Lord of Shenyang County.

古文：武帝自寻阳还，遇悛，欢宴敍旧，停十馀日乃下。
现代文：武帝从寻阳回来，遇到了刘悛，欢乐设宴叙说旧情，停了十几天才结束。
English: When Emperor Wu returned from his search for the sun, he met Liu Bei. They had a banquet to celebrate and talk about old times. It lasted for ten days before it was over.

古文：遣文惠太子及竟陵王子良摄衣履，备父友之敬。
现代文：让文惠太子和竟陵王刘子良牵衣提鞋，以显示对父亲的朋友的恭敬。
English: Let Prince Wen Hui and Liu Ziliang, the King of Jingling, carry their shoes to show their respect for their father's friend.

古文：齐受禅，国除，平西记室参军夏侯恭叔上书，以柳元景中兴功臣，刘勉殒身王事，宜存封爵。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，他的封国被废除，平西记室参军夏侯恭叔上书，认为柳元景是中兴功臣，刘面力是为皇帝的事情献身，应该保存封爵。
English: Qi accepted Zen's resignation, and his fiefdom was abolished. Xia Hou, who joined the army, sent a letter to the Pingxi Records Office, saying that Liu Yuanjing was a ZTE meritorious subject, Liu Mianli was dedicated to the emperor's cause, and should retain his knighthood.

古文：诏以与运隆替，不容复厝意也。
现代文：诏书指示说这些都是和时运一起兴衰，不能再加考虑。
English: The edict instructed that these were the ups and downs of the times and could not be taken into consideration.

古文：初，苍梧废，高帝集议中华门，见悛谓曰： 君昨直邪？ 悛曰： 仆昨正直，而之急在外。 
现代文：起初，苍梧王被废除，齐高帝在中华门集会议事，见到刘悛，便对他说： 你昨天值班吗？ 刘悛说： 我昨天正在值班，而有一个急事到外面去了。 
English: At first, King Cangwu was abolished, and Emperor Qigong held a meeting at Zhonghua Gate. When he saw Liu Yao, he said to him, "Were you on duty yesterday?" Liu Yao said, "I was on duty yesterday, and there was an urgent matter outside."

古文：至是，上谓悛曰： 功名之际，人所不忘，卿昔在中华门答我，何其欲谢世事？ 
现代文：到了现在，皇上又对刘悛说： 和功名有关的事，人们总是忘不了，卿过去在中华门回答我的提问，为什么企图回避世上的事情？ 
English: Now, the emperor said to Liu Bei: "People will always remember things related to fame and glory. Your Excellency used to answer my questions at Zhonghua Gate. Why do you try to avoid worldly affairs?

古文：悛曰： 臣世受宋恩，门荷齐眷，非常之勋，非臣所及，敢不以实仰答。 
现代文：刘悛说： 臣世代承领宋朝的恩情，家门蒙受齐朝的厚爱，超于平常的功勋，不是臣所能做到的，哪敢不以实际情况回答？ 
English: Liu Wei said: The vassal generation inherits the favor of the Song Dynasty, and the family receives the deep love of the Qi Dynasty. This is more than the usual merit. It is not something that a vassal can do. How dare you not answer with the actual situation?

古文：迁太子中庶子，领越骑校尉。
现代文：后来改任太子中庶子，兼任越骑校尉。
English: Later, he was reassigned as the prince's middle child and also served as an officer of the Viet Cavalry.

古文：时武帝在东宫，每幸悛坊，闲言至夕，赐屏风帷帐。
现代文：当时武帝在东宫，常常到刘悛的官署中去，一直闲谈到傍晚，曾赐给他屏风和帐子。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was in the East Palace, and he often went to Liu Bei's government office and kept chatting about the evening. He once gave him a screen and a curtain.

古文：武帝即位，改领前军将军。
现代文：武帝即位，改为兼任前军将军。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was also appointed as the general of the former army.

古文：后拜司州刺史。悛父勉讨殷琰，平寿阳，无所犯害，百姓德之，爲罍樽、铜豆、锺各二口献之。
现代文：他在州内设立了学校，曾经得到古代的礼器铜飠甑、豳山铜飠樽、铜豆、钟各二口，献了上去。
English: He set up a school in the state, and once received two pieces of the ancient ceremonial objects of bronze ingots, Lushan bronze ingot barrels, copper beans and bells, and presented them.

古文：迁长兼侍中。
现代文：后又改任长兼侍中。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of chancellor and chamberlain.

古文：车驾数幸悛宅。
现代文：车驾多次到刘悛的住宅中去。
English: He drove to Liu Yao's house several times.

古文：宅盛修山池，造瓮牖。
现代文：他的住宅中大修假山和水池，建造用瓮口做的窗户。
English: In his house, he overhauled the rockery and pool, and built windows made of cornices.

古文：武帝着鹿皮冠，披悛菟皮衾，于牖中宴乐。
现代文：武帝戴着鹿皮帽，披着刘悛的虎皮被，在窗内宴饮作乐。
English: Emperor Wu, wearing a deerskin hat and a tiger-skin quilt by Liu Ye, is feasting and making music in the window.

古文：以冠赐悛，至夜乃去。
现代文：他把帽子赐给刘悛，直到夜里才回去。
English: He gave the hat to Liu Yao and did not return until nightfall.

古文：后从驾登蒋山，上数叹曰： 贫贱之交不可忘，糟糠之妻不下堂。 
现代文：后来跟着皇上登上蒋山，皇上多次感叹说： 贫贱之交不可忘，糟糠之妻不下堂。 
English: Later, following the emperor up Mount Jiang, the emperor repeatedly sighed and said: The poor and lowly friends are unforgettable, and the wife of the trash can not go down the hall.

古文：顾谓悛曰： 此况卿也。
现代文：回头对刘悛说： 这是比喻您的。
English: He turned back to Liu Ye and said, "This is your metaphor.

古文：世言富贵好改其素情，吾虽有四海，今日与卿尽布衣之适。 
现代文：世上的人说富贵后好改变平素的感情，我虽然拥有四海，今天和卿要尽平民的快乐。 
English: People in the world say that it is good to change ordinary feelings after becoming rich. Although I have the four seas, today I want to enjoy the happiness of the common people.

古文：悛起拜谢。
现代文：刘悛起身拜谢。
English: Liu Ye stood up and bowed.

古文：累迁始兴王前军长史、平蛮校尉、蜀郡太守，行益州府州事。
现代文：逐渐地升迁为始兴王前军长史、平蛮校尉、蜀郡太守，负责益州府州事。
English: He was gradually promoted to Shixing Wang's former military commander, Ping Man's lieutenant, Shu County's governor, and was responsible for the state affairs of Yizhou Prefecture.

古文：初，高帝辅政，有意欲铸钱，以禅让之际，未及施行。
现代文：起初，高帝辅佐政事，打算铸造钱币，因为处在两朝禅让的时间，没有来得及施行。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gao was in charge of political affairs and planned to mint coins, but he did not have time to do so because it was too late for the two dynasties to make concessions.

古文：建元四年，奉朝请孔觊上铸钱均货议，辞证甚博，其略以爲：食货相通，理势自然。
现代文：建元四年，奉朝请孔觊上呈奏表《铸钱均货议》，言辞引证十分广博，其中大略意思是： 食物与财物互相连通，道理和形势自然如此。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Fong Dynasty asked Confucius to present the report on the table "Minting Money and Average Goods." The rhetoric citation is very extensive, which roughly means: Food and property are interconnected, the reason and the situation are naturally so.

古文：李悝曰： 籴甚贵伤人，甚贱伤农。
现代文：李悝说： 买粮太贵就要损伤众人，太贱就要损伤农民。
English: Li Wei said: If grain is too expensive, it will hurt everyone, and if it is too cheap, it will hurt farmers.

古文：人伤则离散，农伤则国贫。
现代文：众人受到损伤就会分离溃散，农民受到损伤就会国家贫穷。
English: If the people are harmed, they will be separated and scattered. If the farmers are harmed, the country will be impoverished.

古文：甚贱与甚贵，其伤一也。 
现代文：太贱与太贵，在要造成损伤这一点上是一致的。 
English: Too cheap and too expensive are the same in terms of causing damage.

古文：三吴国之关奥，比岁时被水潦，而籴不贵，是天下钱少，非谷穰贱，此不可不察也。
现代文：三吴是国家的关键，几年来不断遭受水灾，而买粮不贵，这是因为天下钱币少，而不是因为谷物丰收才变贱的，这一点不可不分辨清楚。
English: Sanwu is the key to the country. For several years, it has constantly suffered from floods, but it is not expensive to buy grain. This is because there are fewer coins in the world, not because of the bumper grain harvest. This must be clearly distinguished.

古文：铸钱之弊，在轻重屡变。
现代文：铸钱的弊端，在于轻重屡次变化。
English: The drawback of minting money lies in the repeated changes in weight.

古文：重钱患难用，而难用爲累轻；轻钱弊盗铸，而盗铸爲祸深。
现代文：重钱的忧虑是难用，而难用属于较小的缺陷；轻钱的弊端是盗铸，而盗铸则是很深的祸患。
English: The trouble with heavy money is that it is hard to use, and hard to use is a minor defect; the trouble with light money is that it is stolen, and stolen money is a great evil.

古文：人所盗铸，严法不禁者，由上铸钱惜铜爱工也。
现代文：人们盗铸，严峻的法律也不能禁止，其原因是由于上面的当权者吝惜铜、图省工。
English: People steal and cannot be prohibited by strict laws. The reason for this is that those in power are stingy with copper and save labor.

古文：惜铜爱工，谓钱无用之器，以通交易，务欲令轻而数多，使省工而易成，不详虑其爲患也。
现代文：吝惜铜、图省工，是由于认为钱是无用的东西，只是用以进行交易，务必要让它轻而且数量多，使它省工而容易制成，没有详细考虑它造成的祸患。
English: The sparing of copper and the saving of labour is due to the belief that money is a useless thing, only used for transactions, and that it is necessary to make it light and abundant, so that it can be made easily and without labour, without considering in detail the evils caused by it.

古文：自汉铸五铢至宋文帝，历五百馀年，制度世有废兴，而不变五铢钱者，明其轻重可法，得货之宜。
现代文： 自从汉朝铸造五铢钱到宋文帝，经历了五百多年，制度在各个时代都有所废除和新兴，而五铢钱却没有改变，这说明了它的轻重值得取法，找到了货币的合适分量。
English: From the Han Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, more than 500 years have passed. The system has been abolished and reinvented in various eras, but the five-baht money has not changed. This shows that its importance is worth adopting and that it has found the right weight of money.

古文：以爲宜开置泉府，方牧贡金，大兴鎔铸。
现代文：我以为应该设置钱府，各地长官贡献金属，大力兴办熔铸。
English: I thought that the Ministry of Finance should be set up, the governors of various regions should contribute metals, and smelting and casting should be vigorously promoted.

古文：钱重五铢，一依汉法。
现代文：钱重五铢，完全依照汉代的办法。
English: The weight of the money is five monme, which is completely in accordance with the Han Dynasty.

古文：若官铸已布于人，便严断翦凿，轻小破缺无周郭者，悉不得行。
现代文：如果是官家铸造的其他钱币已经发行到民间，应该严格控制，停止使用，轻小破缺没有周围轮廓的，一律不准流通。
English: If other coins minted by government mints have been issued to the general public, they should be strictly controlled and their use should be stopped. If they are small, broken, and have no contours around them, they should not be allowed to circulate.

古文：官钱细小者，称合铢两，销以爲大。
现代文：官钱细小的，折合重量，销毁重铸为较大的。
English: The government money is small in size, equivalent in weight, destroyed and recast as a larger one.

古文：利贫良之人，塞奸巧之路。
现代文：要有利于贫困善良的人们，而堵塞奸邪取巧的门路。
English: It is necessary to benefit the poor and kind-hearted people, and block the doorway of treachery and evil.

古文：钱货既均，远近若一，百姓乐业，市道无争，衣食滋殖矣。
现代文：钱币统一了，远近都一样，老百姓可以乐业，市场交易没有争执，衣食就会丰富繁荣起来。 
English: With the unification of coins, far and near are the same, the people can enjoy their work, there is no dispute in market transactions, and clothing and food will be rich and prosperous.

古文：时议多以钱货轻转少，宜更广铸，重其铢两，以防人奸。
现代文：当时的舆论大多认为钱币分量太轻数量减少，应该更加广泛地铸造，加重它们的分量，以防止有人捣鬼。
English: At that time, most of the public opinion believed that the weight of the coins was too light and the number was reduced. It should be more widely minted and their weight should be increased to prevent anyone from playing tricks.

古文：高帝使诸州郡大市铜炭，会晏驾事寝。
现代文：高帝让各州郡大量购买铜和炭，正遇上他逝世，事情便停了下来。
English: Emperor Gao let the states and counties buy a large amount of copper and coal, and just as he died, things stopped.

古文：永明八年，悛啓武帝曰： 南广郡界蒙山下有城名蒙城，可二顷地，有烧炉四所，高一丈，广一丈五尺。
现代文：永明八年，刘悛对武帝说： 南广郡地区蒙山下面有一座城名叫蒙城，大约有二顷地，有冶炼炉四处，高一丈，宽一丈五尺。
English: In the eighth year of Yongming, Liu Bei said to Emperor Wu: There is a city called Mengcheng at the foot of Mengshan Mountain in Nanguang County. It is about two hectares in size, with smelting furnaces all around. It is one meter high and five meters wide.

古文：从蒙城度水南百许步，平地掘土深二尺，得铜。
现代文：从蒙城渡水向南走一百来步，在平地上掘土深二尺，就可以得到铜。
English: From Mengcheng across the water to the south, walk a hundred steps, dig two feet deep on the plain, you can get copper.

古文：又有古掘铜坑深二丈，并居宅处犹存。
现代文：又有古代掘铜的坑深二丈，而且居住的地方还留存着。
English: There are also ancient copper pits two meters deep, and the places where they lived still remain.

古文：邓通南安人，汉文帝赐通严道县铜山铸钱。
现代文：邓通是南安人，汉文帝曾经准许邓通在严道县铜山铸钱。
English: Duntong is from Nan'an. Emperor Hanwen once allowed Duntong to mint money in Tongshan, Yandao County.

古文：今蒙山近在青衣水南，青衣左侧并是故秦之严道地。
现代文：现在蒙山就在青衣水南面很近的地方，青衣水左侧都是在古代秦国严道县的地面。
English: Now Mengshan is very close to the south side of Qingyi Water, and the left side of Qingyi Water is all on the ground of Yandao County in ancient Qin.

古文：青衣县，文帝改名汉嘉。
现代文：青衣县，文帝改名为汉嘉。
English: In Qingyi County, Wendi changed its name to Hanjia.

古文：且蒙山去南安二百里，案此必是通所铸处。
现代文：而且蒙山离南安二百里路，这里必定是邓通铸钱的地方。
English: Moreover, Mengshan is 200 miles away from Nan'an, so it must be the place where Duntong minted money.

古文：近唤蒙山獠出，云 甚可经略 。
现代文：最近叫了一个蒙山的獠人出来，他说 很值得经营 。
English: Recently, a person from Mengshan was called out. He said that it was worth doing business.

古文：此议若立，润利无极。
现代文：这个主张如果可以成立，利润是无穷的。
English: If this proposition could be established, the profits would be infinite.

古文：并献蒙山铜一片，又铜石一片，平州铸铁刀一口。 
现代文：同时献上了蒙山的铜一片，还有铜石一片，平州的铸铁刀一口。 
English: At the same time, a piece of copper from Mengshan was presented, as well as a piece of copper and a piece of cast iron from Pingzhou.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：遣使入蜀铸钱，得千余万，功费多乃止。
现代文：派遣使者进入蜀地铸钱，得到了一千多万，因为费工太多才停止了。
English: He sent an envoy to mint money in Shoudi and got more than ten million yuan, but stopped because it was too much work.

古文：悛仍代始兴王鉴爲益州刺史、监益甯二州诸军事。
现代文：刘悛仍然代替始兴王萧鉴做益州刺史、监益宁二州诸军事。
English: Liu Ye still replaced Shi Xing Wang Xiao Jian as the historian of Yizhou and the supervisor of the military of the two states of Yining.

古文：悛既藉旧恩，尤能承迎权贵，宾客闺房，供费奢广。
现代文：刘悛既能借助于过去的恩宠，尤其善于迎合权贵，对于宾客和女子的闺房，供应的费用奢侈广大。
English: Liu Ye could not only rely on the grace of the past, but he was especially good at catering to the powerful. For guests and women's boudoir, the cost of supply was extravagant.

古文：罢广、司二州，倾资贡献，家无留储。
现代文：罢免了广、司二州的职务，他把所有的资财都贡献了出来，家里没有一点留存。
English: He dismissed Guang and Si from their posts in the two prefectures. He gave away all of his wealth, and nothing was left in the family.

古文：在蜀作金浴盆，余金物称是。
现代文：在蜀地曾经做了一个金浴盆，其余的金银财物和这相当。
English: A gold bathtub was once made in Shudi, and the rest of the gold and silver belongings are comparable to this.

古文：罢任以本号还都，欲献之，而武帝晏驾。
现代文：罢官后以本来的官号返回京城，打算贡献出来，而武帝逝世了。
English: After his dismissal, he returned to the capital with his original official title, intending to contribute, but Emperor Wu passed away.

古文：郁林新立，悛奉献减少。
现代文：郁林王新登皇位，刘悛的奉献减少。
English: Yu Lin Wang newly ascended to the throne, Liu Ye's dedication decreased.

古文：郁林知之，讽有司收悛付廷尉，将加诛戮。
现代文：郁林王知道了，暗示有关部门拘捕了刘悛交给廷尉，将要把他杀死。
English: When Yu Lin Wang found out, he hinted that the relevant departments had arrested Liu Wei and handed him over to the court lieutenant, and that they were going to kill him.

古文：明帝啓救之，见原，禁锢终身。
现代文：明帝进言解救他，受到宽大，改为禁锢终身。
English: The Ming Emperor intervened to free him, but he was treated leniently and sentenced to life imprisonment.

古文：虽见废黜，而宾客日至。
现代文：虽然遭到废黜，而宾客却每天都来看望他。
English: Even though he was deposed, guests came to see him every day.

古文：海陵即位，以白衣除兼左户尚书，寻除正。
现代文：海陵王即位，以平民的身份被任命为兼左户尚书，不久任命为正职。
English: When King Hailing ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a commoner and Sadoguchishosho, and was soon appointed to a full-time post.

古文：明帝又爲晋安王宝义纳悛女爲妃。
现代文：明帝登基，加封他兼任骁骑将军，恢复原来的官职驸马都尉。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and he was also appointed to the post of general of cavalry, restoring the original post of lieutenant of cavalry.

古文：自此连姻帝室。王敬则反，悛出守琅邪城，转五兵尚书。
现代文：刘悛历朝都受到良好的待遇，高帝为鄱阳王萧锵纳刘悛的妹妹为妃子，从此和皇室联姻。王敬则反叛，刘悛出京守卫琅笽城，转任五兵尚书。
English: Liu Bei was treated well by all dynasties. Emperor Gao treated Liu Bei's sister as his concubine, and from then on, Liu Bei married into the imperial family. Wang Jing rebelled, Liu Bei went to Beijing to guard Lucheng, and was transferred to the Five Soldiers of Shangshu.

古文：悛兄弟以父死朱雀航，终身不行此路。
现代文：刘悛兄弟因为他们的父亲死在朱雀航，所以终身不再走这条路。
English: Because their father died in Zhujiahang, the Liu brothers never took this path again.

古文：明帝崩，东昏即位，改授散骑常侍，领骁骑将军，尚书如故。
现代文：明帝逝世，东昏侯即位，改任他为散骑常侍，兼任骁骑将军，尚书职务依旧。
English: After the death of Emperor Ming and the enthronement of Emperor Dongwu, he was appointed as a knight errant, and also as a cavalry general, but his official duties remained the same.

古文：卫送山陵，路经朱雀航感恸，至曲阿而卒。
现代文：护送皇帝的灵柩，路经朱雀航，十分感伤悲痛，到了曲阿死去。
English: While escorting the emperor's coffin, Zhu Qiaohang passed by. He was very emotional and sad, and died in Qu'ao.

古文：转大司马从事中郎，卒。
现代文：追赠为太常，常侍、都尉的职务仍然如同过去。
English: The posthumous gifts are too frequent, and the posts of regular attendants and captains are still the same as in the past.

古文：子孝绰。
现代文：追加谥号叫敬子。
English: An additional nickname is Keiko.

古文：孝绰字孝绰，本名冉。
现代文：刘孝绰，字孝绰，本名叫冉。
English: Liu Xiaoqiao, also known as Xiaoqiao, real name Ran.

古文：幼聪敏，七岁能属文。
现代文：幼年聪明敏捷，七岁能作文章。
English: Smart and agile at an early age, he can write an article at the age of seven.

古文：舅齐中书郎王融深赏异之，与同载以适亲友，号曰神童。
现代文：他的舅舅齐国的中书郎王融对他十分赏识，深感奇异，乐于和他一块到亲友那里去，号称神童。
English: His uncle, Wang Rong, a middle school teacher in Qi Province, appreciated him very much, was deeply impressed by him, and was happy to go with him to relatives and friends. He was known as a child prodigy.

古文：融每曰： 天下文章若无我，当归阿士。 
现代文：王融常说： 天下的文章如果没有我，当数阿士。 
English: Wang Rongchang said: The world's articles would not exist without me.

古文：阿士即孝绰小字也。
现代文：阿士就是刘孝绰的小名。
English: Ashi is Liu Xiaoqiao's nickname.

古文：父绘，齐时掌诏诰，孝绰时年十四，绘常使代草之。
现代文：他的父亲刘绘，在齐朝的时候掌管诏诰，刘孝绰当时十四岁，刘绘常常让他代替自己起草文件。
English: His father, Liu Miao, was in charge of the imperial rescript during the Qi Dynasty. Liu Xiaochu was fourteen years old at the time, and Liu Miao often let him draft documents on his behalf.

古文：父党沈约、任昉、范云等闻其名，命驾造焉，昉尤相赏好。
现代文：父亲的朋友沈约、任窻、范云等人听到他的名声，驾车前往会见，任窻尤其欣赏喜爱。
English: When his father's friends Shen Yoyo, Ren Hui, Fan Yun and others heard of his fame, they drove to meet him. Ren Hui was particularly fond of the actor.

古文：范云年长绘十馀岁，其子孝才与孝绰年并十四五。
现代文：范云年长刘绘十余岁，他的儿子孝才与孝绰年龄都是十四五。
English: Fan Yun's eldest son, Liu Ping, is more than ten years old, and his sons, Xiao Cai and Xiao He, are both 14 and 15 years old.

古文：及云遇孝绰，便申伯季，乃命孝才拜之。
现代文：等范云见了刘孝绰，便论年龄长幼，于是就让孝才拜他。
English: When Fan Yun saw Liu Xiaoqiao, he commented on his age, so he let Xiaoqiao worship him.

古文：兼善草隶，自以书似父，乃变爲别体。
现代文：他又兼善草隶书法，自己认为书法与父亲的相似，于是便改变为别的书体。
English: He was also good at cursive calligraphy. He thought the calligraphy was similar to his father's, so he changed to a different typeface.

古文：梁天监初，起家着作佐郎，爲归沐诗赠任昉，昉报曰： 彼美洛阳子，投我怀秋作，讵慰耋嗟人，徒深老夫托。
现代文：梁朝天监初年，自家中出来担任著作佐郎，写了一首《归沐诗》赠给任窻，任窻回复说： 彼美洛阳子，投我秋怀作，讵慰耋嗟人，徒深老夫托。
English: In the first year of Liang Chao's time as overseer of heaven, he came out of his home to serve as a scribe, and wrote a poem "Going Back" to give to Ren Zheng. Ren Zheng replied: "Pimeloyangzi, cast me into the autumn, comfort the people, and help the old man."

古文：直史兼褒贬，辖司专疾恶，九折多美疹，匪报庶良药。 
现代文：直史兼褒贬，辖司专疾恶。九折多美疹，匪报庶良药。 
English: Direct history and praise and blame, the jurisdiction department specializes in diseases and evils. Nine folds are more beautiful rashes, and bandits report good medicine.

古文：其爲名流所重如此。
现代文：他就是这样被名流所重视。
English: That's how he got noticed by celebrities.

古文：后迁兼尚书水部郎，奉啓陈谢。
现代文：后来升迁兼任尚书水部郎。
English: Later, he was promoted and concurrently served as the secretary of the Ministry of Education.

古文：手敕答曰： 美锦未可便制，簿领亦宜稍习。 
现代文：上表感谢，皇上自写敕书回答说： 美丽的锦缎不必马上就制作，登记的文簿应该逐渐去学习。 
English: Thanking the table for the above, the Emperor replied, "Beautiful brocades do not have to be made right away. The registered books should be learned gradually."

古文：顷之即真。
现代文：不久皇上正式即位。
English: It was soon changed from part-time to full-time.

古文：武帝时因宴幸，令沈约、任昉等言志赋诗，孝绰亦见引。
现代文：武帝当时就着宴会的机会，让沈约、任窻等言志赋诗，刘孝绰也被邀请。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu took the opportunity of the banquet to have Shen Yao, Ren Yao and others recite poems, and Liu Xiaoqiao was also invited.

古文：尝侍宴，于坐作诗七首，武帝览其文，篇篇嗟赏，由是朝野改观。
现代文：他曾经陪同宴饮，在座席上作诗七首，武帝看了他的文笔，篇篇嗟叹赞赏，由此朝内外改变看法。
English: He once accompanied a banquet and composed seven poems on the seat. Emperor Wu read his writings, admired and admired them, and thus changed the view inside and outside the court.

古文：累迁秘书丞。
现代文：逐步升任秘书丞。
English: He was gradually promoted to secretary.

古文：武帝谓舍人周舍云： 第一官当知用第一人。 
现代文：武帝对舍人周舍说： 第一官应当知道用第一人。 
English: Emperor Wu said to Zhou She, the first official: The first official should know how to use the first person.

古文：故以孝绰居此职。
现代文：所以让刘孝绰担任这一职务。
English: Therefore, the appointment of Xiao Zhuo to this position.

古文：后爲太子仆，掌东宫管记。
现代文：后来担任太子属官，负责东宫管记。
English: Later, he served as a subordinate official of the Crown Prince and was responsible for the records of the East Palace.

古文：时昭明太子好士爱文，孝绰与陈郡殷芸、吴郡陆倕、琅邪王筠、彭城到洽等同见礼。
现代文：当时昭明太子喜欢文士、爱好文章，刘孝绰与陈郡的殷芸、吴郡的陆翺、琅笽的王筠、彭城的到洽等一同见礼。
English: At that time, Prince Zhao Ming liked scribes and articles, and Liu Xiaochu and Chen County's Yin Yi, Wu County's Lu Yao, Handan's Wang Yao, and Pengcheng's Zu Cai all attended the ceremony.

古文：太子起乐贤堂，乃使先图孝绰。
现代文：太子建造乐贤堂，便让人先画上刘孝绰的肖像。
English: When the prince built the Le Xian Hall, he had a portrait of Liu Xiaochu painted first.

古文：太子文章，群才咸欲撰录，太子独使孝绰集而序之。
现代文：太子的文章，众位才士们都想编录，太子惟独让刘孝绰编集并写序言。
English: Many talented people wanted to compile the prince's articles, but the prince only asked Liu Xiaoqiao to compile and write the preface.

古文：迁兼廷尉卿。
现代文：后来改任他兼廷尉卿。
English: He was later promoted to Lord-Lieutenant.

古文：初，孝绰与到溉兄弟甚狎，溉少孤，宅近僧寺，孝绰往溉许，适见黄卧具，孝绰谓僧物色也，抚手笑。
现代文：起初，刘孝绰与到溉兄弟关系十分亲密，到溉少年时是孤儿，住宅靠近和尚的寺院，刘孝绰前往到溉那里去，正好看见黄色的卧具，刘孝绰说这是和尚用的物品，拍手嘲笑。
English: At first, Liu Xiaoqiao was very close to the Zui brothers. He was an orphan when he was a teenager, and his house was close to the monk's temple. When Liu Xiaoqiao went to Zui, he happened to see the yellow bedding. Liu Xiaoqiao said that it was a monk's item, clapping his hands and laughing.

古文：溉知其旨，奋拳击之，伤口而去。
现代文：到溉知道了他的意思，挥拳揍他，他被打伤了口部，然后离去。
English: Zuorigai knew what he meant, punched him, he was hit in the mouth, and then left.

古文：又与洽同游东宫，孝绰自以才优于洽，每于宴坐嗤鄙其文，洽深衔之。
现代文：又曾与到洽同游东宫，刘孝绰自以为才能比到洽强，常常在宴会的座席中嗤笑鄙薄到洽的诗文，到洽非常怨恨他。
English: He also toured the East Palace with Zu Chaotong, and Liu Xiaoqiao thought that his talent was stronger than Zu Chaotong, and often laughed at Zu Chaotong's poems in the banquet seats. Zu Chaotong hated him very much.

古文：及孝绰爲廷尉，携妾入廷尉，其母犹停私宅。
现代文：后来刘孝绰做了廷尉，带着一个小妾进入廷尉衙门，而他的母亲仍然留在私人宅院。
English: Later, Liu Xiaoqiao became a courtier and entered the courtier gate with a concubine, while his mother still stayed in a private house.

古文：洽寻爲御史中丞，遣令史劾奏之，云 携少妹于华省，弃老母于下宅。 
现代文：到洽不久担任了御史中丞，派遣令史上呈奏书弹劾他，说 携带少妹于豪华官府，遗弃老母于简陋宅院 。
English: Soon after his arrival, he assumed the post of Vice-Minister of History, and the dispatch ordered the history to present a report to impeach him, saying that he carried his younger sister in a luxurious government office and abandoned his mother in a humble house.

古文：武帝爲隐其恶，改妹字爲姝。
现代文：武帝为了隐蔽他的不良行为，把 妹 字改为 姝 字。
English: In order to conceal his bad behavior, Emperor Wu changed the character "妹" to "."

古文：孝绰坐免官。
现代文：刘孝绰因此被免官。
English: As a result, Liu Xiaoqiao was removed from his post.

古文：诸弟时随蕃皆在荆、雍，乃与书论共洽不平者十事，其辞皆诉到氏。
现代文：几个兄弟当时都跟随藩王住在荆州、雍州，他便给他们写信谈论和到洽相处不平的事情十件，其中内容都是控诉到氏的。
English: At that time, several brothers were living in Jingzhou and Yongzhou with the lord of the domain, and he wrote to them to talk about ten things that were unequal to get along with each other, the contents of which were complaints to Mr.

古文：又写别本封至东宫，昭明太子命焚之，不开视。
现代文：他又誊写了一个副本寄给东宫，昭明太子让人把它烧掉，而不打开观看。
English: He also scribbled a copy and sent it to the East Palace, but the Crown Prince ordered it to be burned instead of being opened for viewing.

古文：孝绰免职后，武帝数使仆射徐勉宣旨慰抚之，每朝宴常预焉。
现代文：刘孝绰免职以后，武帝几次让仆射徐勉宣旨抚慰他，每当朝廷宴会时常常一块参加。
English: After Liu Xiaoqiao was relieved of his duties, Emperor Wu had his servant Xu Mianxuan comfort him several times, and they often attended the imperial banquets together.

古文：及武帝爲籍田诗，又使勉先示孝绰。
现代文：后来武帝写了一首《籍田诗》，又派徐勉首先送给刘孝绰。
English: Later, Emperor Wu wrote a "poem of his birthplace" and sent Xu Mian to give it to Liu Xiaochu first.

古文：时奉诏作者数十人，帝以孝绰诗工，即日起爲西中郎湘东王谘议参军。
现代文：当时奉诏作诗的有几十人，皇帝因为刘孝绰的诗精工，当天起用为西中郎湘东王咨议参军。
English: At that time, there were dozens of people who wrote poems according to the edict of the emperor. Because Liu Xiaoqiao was a good poet, the emperor appointed him as the West Middle Elder to advise the East King of Hunan to join the army.

古文：迁黄门侍郎、尚书吏部郎，坐受人绢一束，爲饷者所讼，左迁信威临贺王长史。
现代文：升迁为黄门侍郎、尚书吏部郎，因为接受了别人的一束绢，被赠送的人所起诉，降职为信威临贺王长史。
English: He was promoted to Huangmen waiter, Shang Shuliriburo, because he accepted a bunch of money from others, he was sued by the person who gave it to him, and he was demoted to Xinwei Linhe Wang Changshi.

古文：晚年忽忽不得志，后爲秘书监。
现代文：晚年恍忽不得志，后来担任秘书监。
English: In his later years, he became disillusioned and later worked as a secretary supervisor.

古文：初，孝绰居母忧，冬月饮冷水，因得冷癖，以大同五年卒官，年五十九。
现代文：起初，刘孝绰母亲去世，在家守丧，冬季喝冷水，因此得了冷癖，于大同五年死在官任上，年龄五十九岁。
English: At first, Liu Xiaoqiao mourned his mother's death at home and drank cold water in winter. As a result, he became addicted to cold. He died in his official position at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：孝绰少有盛名，而仗气负才，多所陵忽。
现代文：刘孝绰少年就有盛名，他倚仗意气，自负才能，常常侵侮、忽视旁人。
English: Liu Xiaoqiao was famous as a young boy. He relied on his spirit, boasted of his talent, and often insulted and ignored others.

古文：有不合意，极言诋訾。
现代文：有不合自己心意的，就极力诋毁。
English: Whenever there is someone or something that is not to their liking, they try their best to defame others.

古文：领军臧盾、太府卿沈僧畟等并被时遇，孝绰尤轻之。
现代文：领军臧盾、太府卿沈僧繱等人都受到当时的优良待遇，刘孝绰尤其轻视他们。
English: The leader of the army, Zou Dun, and the grand prefect Shen Sangtao were all treated well at the time, and Liu Xiaochu despised them in particular.

古文：每于朝集会同，处公卿间无所与语，反呼驺卒访道途间事，由此多忤于物，前后五免。
现代文：常常于朝廷集会同聚，和公卿处在一块时与他们没有话说，反而叫住喝道的士卒打听一些道途之间的事情，因此得罪了许多人，前后五次被罢免。
English: He often gathered at court gatherings, and when he was in the company of nobles, he had nothing to say to them, but on the contrary, he would call out to the soldiers to inquire about something that was going on between them. As a result, he offended many people, and he was deposed five times.

古文：孝绰辞藻爲后进所宗，时重其文，每作一篇，朝成暮遍，好事者咸诵传写，流闻河朔，亭苑柱壁莫不题之。
现代文：刘孝绰的辞藻被后起士人所效法，当时很重视他的诗文，每作一篇，早晨写成，晚上传遍，爱好者都背诵抄写，一直流传到河朔一带，亭阁、苑囿、楹柱、墙壁，无处不题写。
English: Liu Xiaoqiao's words were imitated by later scholars. At that time, great importance was attached to his poetry. Each poem was written in the morning and passed on in the evening. Enthusiasts recited and copied it, and it spread all the way to the Hexuo area. It was inscribed on pavilions, garden fences, pillars, and walls everywhere.

古文：文集数十万言，行于时。
现代文：他的论文集几十万字，流行在当时。
English: His collection of essays, running to hundreds of thousands of words, was very popular at the time.

古文：兄弟及群从子侄当时有七十人，并能属文，近古未之有也。
现代文：兄弟和众位儿子堂侄当时有七十人，都能写文章，是近古以来所没有的。
English: At that time, there were seventy brothers, sons and cousins, all of whom were able to write articles, which had not been seen since recent times.

古文：其三妹，一适琅邪王叔英，一适吴郡张嵊，一适东海徐悱，并有才学。
现代文：他的三个妹妹，一个嫁给了琅琊的王叔英，一个嫁给了吴郡的张嵊，一个嫁给了东海的徐悱，都很有才学。
English: His three younger sisters, one married to Wang Shuying from Handan, one married to Zhang Yao from Wuxi, and one married to Xu Yao from Donghai, are all very talented.

古文：第七弟孝先，位武陵王主簿，与兄孝胜俱随纪军出峡口。
现代文：徐悱的妻子诗文尤其清拔，就是人们所称的刘三娘。徐悱是晋安郡的士卒，因为丧事回到建邺，他的妻子写的祭文，文辞十分凄凉悲痛。
English: The poems of Xu Yao's wife are particularly beautiful, and she is known as Liu San's third daughter. Xu Yao was a Jin'an County official who returned to Jianye after the funeral. The words of the dedicatory poem written by his wife are very desolate and sad.

古文：兵败，元帝以爲黄门郎，迁侍中。瑱字士温，绘弟也。
现代文：徐悱的父亲徐勉本来打算写一篇哀辞，等他看到了这篇文章，便搁笔不写了。刘瑱字士温，是刘绘的弟弟。
English: Xu Miao's father, Xu Miao, had originally planned to write a eulogy, but when he saw this article, he put down his pen and did not write it.

古文：少有行业，文藻、篆隶、丹青并爲当世所称。
现代文：少年时期就有业务专长，文采、篆隶、绘画都为当世所称道。
English: He had business expertise since he was a boy, and his literary skills, etiquette, and painting were all praised by the contemporary world.

古文：时有荥阳毛惠远善画马，瑱善画妇人，并爲当世第一。
现代文：当时有个荥阳的毛惠远善于画马，刘瑱善于画妇女，都是当时第一。
English: At that time, there was a Mao Huiyuan from Shenyang who was good at painting horses, and Liu Xuan was good at painting women, both of which were the first at that time.

古文：瑱妹爲齐鄱阳王妃，伉俪甚笃。
现代文：刘瑱的妹妹是齐朝鄱阳王的妃子，夫妻关系很好。
English: Liu Ye's younger sister was the concubine of King Puyang of the Qi Dynasty, and the couple had a good relationship.

古文：王爲齐明帝所诛，妃追伤遂成痼疾，医所不疗。
现代文：鄱阳王被齐明帝所杀死，王妃追念伤怀，于是成为重病，医生无法医治。
English: King Shenyang was killed by Emperor Qiming, and the empress became seriously ill and doctors were unable to cure her.

古文：有陈郡殷蒨善写人面，与真不别，瑱令蒨画王形像，并图王平生所宠姬共照镜状，如欲偶寝。
现代文：陈郡有个人叫殷茜，善于画人面像，与真的没有区别，刘瑱就让殷茜画下鄱阳王的像，并且画下王平生所宠爱的姬妾和他一齐照镜子的情状，好像就要一起睡觉的样子。
English: There was a person in Chen County named Yin Xi, who was good at painting portraits of people, and there was no difference from the real thing. Liu Yao asked Yin Xi to paint the image of the King of Shanyang, and to paint the image of Wang's favorite concubine and him looking at the mirror together, as if they were about to sleep together.

古文：瑱乃密使媪奶示妃，妃视画仍唾之，因骂云 故宜其早死 。
现代文：刘瑱便秘密地让乳母拿给王妃看，王妃看了画便唾他，并且骂道 本来就应该早死 。
English: Liu Ye then secretly asked the nanny to show it to the princess, who spat at him when she saw the painting and scolded him, saying that he should have died earlier.

古文：于是恩情即歇，病亦除差。
现代文：于是恩情便中断了，病也好了。
English: As a result, the favour was interrupted and the illness was cured.

古文：此姬亦被废苦，因即以此画焚之。
现代文：这个姬妾也因被废而十分痛苦，于是便把这幅画烧掉了。
English: This concubine was also very distressed by being discarded, so she burned the painting.

古文：瑱仕齐，历尚书吏部郎，义兴太守。
现代文：刘瑱在齐朝做官，曾任尚书吏部郎，义兴太守。
English: Liu Xuan was an official in the Qi Dynasty. He served as Shang Shuliriburo and Yixing Dazhu.

古文：先绘卒。
现代文：在刘绘前面去世。
English: He died before Liu Biao.

