古文：仪智，字居真，高密人。
现代文：仪智，字居真，高密人。
English: Yi Zhi, Zhi Ju Zhen, Gao Mi Ren.

古文：洪武末，举耆儒，授高密训导，迁莘县教谕。
现代文：洪武末年，被推举为耆儒，授予高密县训导，后升为莘县教谕。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's life, he was selected as a Confucian scholar, awarded the Gaomi County Teaching Award, and later promoted to the Shixian County Teaching Award.

古文：擢知高邮州，课农兴学，吏民爱之。
现代文：再升为高邮州知州，督课农业，兴办学校，吏民爱戴他。
English: He was promoted again to Gaoyou County and Zhizhou County, supervising agriculture and establishing schools. The officials and people loved him.

古文：永乐元年迁宝庆知府。
现代文：永乐元年，他升为宝庆知府。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was promoted to Baoqing prefecture.

古文：土人健悍，独畏智，相戒不敢犯。
现代文：当地人很骠悍，唯独害怕仪智，互相告诫说不敢碰他。
English: The local people are very tough, but they are afraid of Yizhi, and warn each other that they dare not touch him.

古文：召为右通政兼右中允。
现代文：后被召回任右通政兼右中允。
English: Later, he was recalled to the post of Utsusho-sei and Uchu-jo.

古文：未几，迁湖广右布政使。坐事谪役通州。
现代文：不久，升为湖广右布政使，后因犯罪被贬到通州服役。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the political envoy of Hubei Province, and was later demoted to serve in Tongzhou due to a crime.

古文：六年冬，湖广都指挥使龚忠入见。帝问湖湘间老儒，忠以智对。即日召之。
现代文：六年冬，湖广指挥使龚忠入京朝见，皇上问起湖湘间的老儒，龚忠说出仪智，皇上即日把他召回。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, the commander of Hukang sent Zhaozhong to the imperial court in Beijing. The emperor asked about the old man from Hunan, Zhaozhong said the etiquette, and the emperor recalled him the same day.

古文：既至，拜礼部左侍郎。
现代文：仪智到后，被任为礼部左侍郎。
English: After the arrival of Yi Zhi, he was appointed as the left attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：十一年元旦，日当食，尚书吕震请朝贺如常，智持不可。
现代文：十一年元旦，当有日食，尚书吕震请照常朝贺，仪智说不可。
English: On the New Year's Day of the 11th year, when there is a solar eclipse, please send morning greetings as usual.

古文：会左谕德杨士奇亦以为言，乃免贺如智议。
现代文：正好左谕德杨士奇也这么说，于是如仪智所言免朝贺。
English: Right on cue, Deyang Shiqi also said the same thing, and thus, as Yi Zhi said, the morning greetings were dispensed with.

古文：十四年诏吏部、翰林院择耆儒侍太孙。
现代文：十四年，诏令吏部、翰林院选择耆儒侍奉太孙。
English: In the 14th year of the Emperor's reign, the officials of the Imperial Household Agency and the Hanlin Academy chose Gong Ru to serve his grandson.

古文：士奇及蹇义首荐智。
现代文：杨士奇和蹇义首先推荐仪智。
English: Yang Shiqui and Zou Yi first recommended Yi Zhi.

古文：太子曰： 吾尝举李继鼎，大误，悔无及。
现代文：太子说： 我曾推举李继鼎，大错，悔之不及。
English: The crown prince said, "I once nominated Li Jidong. It was a big mistake and I regret it.

古文：智诚端士，然老矣。 
现代文：仪智诚然是端正之士，可惜老了。 
English: It is true that Yi Zhi is a man of integrity, but it is a pity that he is old.

古文：士奇顿首言： 智起家学官，明理守正。虽耄，精神未衰。
现代文：杨士奇叩头说道 ：仪智以学官起家，明理守正，虽然老了，但精神不衰。
English: Yang Shichi bowed his head and said, "Yi Zhi started out as a scholar-official, and he clearly abides by the truth. Although he is old, his spirit is still strong."

古文：廷臣中老成正大，无逾智者。 
现代文：廷臣中论起老成正大，还没有人超过仪智。 
English: Among the courtiers of the imperial court, no one has surpassed the wisdom of etiquette.

古文：是日午朝，帝顾太子曰： 侍太孙讲读得人未？ 
现代文：这一天午朝，皇上对太子说： 侍奉太孙讲读得人没有？ 
English: In the morning of this day, the Emperor said to the Crown Prince, "Has serving your great-grandson been well-told?

古文：太子对曰： 举礼部侍郎仪智，议未决。 
现代文：太子回答说 ：推举礼部侍郎仪智，但还没有决定。 
English: The crown prince replied, "I have nominated the etiquette attendant, Yizhi, but it has not been decided yet."

古文：帝喜曰： 智虽老，能直言，可用也。 
现代文：皇上高兴地说 ：仪智虽老，但能直言，可以用。 
English: The emperor said happily, "Although he is old, he can speak frankly and can be of use."

古文：遂命辅导皇太孙。
现代文：遂命他辅导皇太孙。
English: He was then ordered to tutor the crown prince's grandson.

古文：每进讲书史，必反复启迪，以正心术为本。
现代文：他每次进讲经书史籍，总是反复启迪，以端正心术为本。
English: Every time he lectured on the scriptures and historical books, he always repeated the enlightenment, based on the correct mind.

古文：十九年，年八十，致仕，卒于家。
现代文：十九年，他八十岁了，退休，在家中去世。
English: In 1919, at the age of 80, he retired and died at home.

古文：洪熙元年赠太子少保，谥文简。
现代文：洪熙元年，赠给他太子少保，谥号文简。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he was given the title of Prince Minor Protector and the posthumous name of Wen Jian.

古文：季子铭，字子新。宣宗即位，以侍郎戴纶荐，授行在礼科给事中。
现代文：小儿子仪铭，字子新，宣宗即位后，以戴伦的推荐，被授予行在礼科给事中。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, the youngest son, Yi Ming, was awarded the highest rank in etiquette on the recommendation of Dai Lun.

古文：九年秩满，帝念智旧劳，改铭修撰。
现代文：九年任满，皇上念在仪智的旧劳，改任仪铭为修撰。
English: At the end of his nine-year tenure, the emperor read the old work on etiquette and wisdom, and changed his eulogy to a recitation.

古文：正统三年预修宣庙《实录》成，迁侍讲，后改郕府长史。
现代文：正统三年，他参预修撰《宣宗实录》，修成一卷，升为侍讲，后改为成阝王府长史。
English: After three years of orthodoxy, he participated in the preparation of the "Proclamation Record," revised it into one volume, became an assistant lecturer, and later changed it to become the chief historian of Wangfu.

古文：郕王监国，视朝午门。
现代文：成阝王监国，在午门视朝。
English: Chengyu Wang oversaw the country and watched the North at the noon gate.

古文：廷臣劾王振，叫号莫辨人声。
现代文：廷臣弹劾王振，喊声嘈杂，不辨声音。
English: The courtiers impeached Wang Zhen, shouting noisily and indistinguishably.

古文：铭独造膝前，免冠敷奏。
现代文：仪铭独自闯到成阝王膝前，免冠陈奏。
English: The eulogy reached the knees of King Seonjo on its own, and was performed without a crown.

古文：下令旨族振，众哗始息。
现代文：成阝王下令旨族诛王振，众人喧闹之声才停息。
English: The king of Chenghuang ordered the people of He to beat Wang Zhen, and only then did the noisy voices of the crowd cease.

古文：景帝即位，力赞征伐诸大事。
现代文：景帝即位后，他极力赞佐征伐等大事。
English: After Emperor Jing ascended the throne, he vigorously supported the conquest and other major events.

古文：寻以潜邸恩，授礼部右侍郎。
现代文：不久以潜邸旧恩，被授予礼部右侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：明年兼经筵官。
现代文：第二年他兼任经筵官。
English: The following year, he also served as eunuch.

古文：帝每临讲幄，辄命中官掷金钱于地，任讲官遍拾之，号 恩典 。
现代文：皇上每次御临讲幄，都令宦官将金钱撒在地上，任凭讲官拾取，称为恩典。
English: Every time the emperor came to deliver a sermon, he ordered the eunuch to scatter money on the ground and let the speaker pick it up, which was called grace.

古文：文臣与者，内阁高谷等外，惟铭与俞山、俞纲、萧鎡、赵琬数人而已。
现代文：参与的文臣，除内阁高谷外，只有仪铭和俞山、俞纲、萧、赵琬数人而已。
English: In addition to the cabinet and Takaya, the only civil servants who participated were Rimei, Shaoshan, Yu Gang, Xiao, and Zhao Jun.

古文：寻进南京礼部尚书。
现代文：不久他进升为南京礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the head of the Nanjing etiquette department.

古文：怀献太子立，加太子太保，召为兵部尚书兼詹事。
现代文：怀献太子建立，仪铭被加封为太子太保，召回任兵部尚书兼詹事。
English: It was established with the intention of dedicating it to the crown prince, and the inscription was added to the seal as the crown prince's patron saint, and the appointment to the military department was recalled.

古文：苏州、淮安诸郡积雪，民冻饿死相枕。
现代文：苏州、淮安等府积雪，百姓冻饿而死的很多。
English: Snow accumulated in Suzhou, Huai'an and other prefectures, and many people died of cold and hunger.

古文：沙湾筑河，役山东、河南九万人，责民间铁器数万具。
现代文：沙湾筑河，役使山东、河南百姓九万人，索取民间铁器数万件。
English: Ninety thousand people from Shandong and Henan were sent to Shawan to build a river, and tens of thousands of pieces of folk ironware were requested.

古文：铭请于帝，多所宽恤。
现代文：仪铭向皇上请求，多得到抚恤和宽免。
English: He petitioned the emperor and received a pension and a pardon.

古文：因灾异，言消弭在敬天法祖，省刑薄敛，节用爱人。录《皇明祖训录》以进，深见奖纳。
现代文：有灾异发生，他说要消灾在于敬天和效法祖宗，省刑薄敛，节用爱民，他因此抄录《皇明祖训录》进呈，深受采纳和嘉奖。
English: When disasters occurred, he said that the way to eliminate disasters was to respect the heavens and follow the example of the ancestors, reduce the severity of punishments, and love the people. Therefore, he copied the "Imperial Ancestor's Precepts" and submitted it, which was well received and commended.

古文：洪熙初，赠太子宾客，谥文靖，遣官祭其家。
现代文：他去世后，谥号忠襄。仪铭少时拜吴讷为师。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Zhongxiang. When he was young, he studied under Bai WuNa.

古文：梁潜，字用之，泰和人。
现代文：他天性孝友，刚直有父亲遗风。梁潜，字用之，泰和人。
English: He is a natural filial friend, and has his father's upright demeanor. Liang Qian, as the characters say, is a kind and gentle person.

古文：洪武末，举乡试。授四川苍溪训导。以荐除知四会县，改阳江、阳春，皆以廉平称。
现代文：洪武末年，考中乡试，被授予四川苍溪县训导，因受推荐任为四会县知县，又改任阳江、阳春知县，都以廉洁平易著称。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's life, he was awarded the first place in Cangxi County, Sichuan Province, in the junior high school entrance examination. As a result of being recommended, he was appointed to Shikai County and Yangjiang County and Yangchun County, both of which are famous for their cleanliness and simplicity.

古文：永乐元年召修《太祖实录》。
现代文：永乐元年，被召回修撰《太祖实录》。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was recalled to compile the "Grandfather's Record."

古文：书成，擢修撰。
现代文：书成之后，被授予修撰。
English: After the book was completed, he was awarded the title of the author.

古文：寻兼右春坊右赞善，代郑赐总裁《永乐大典》。
现代文：不久兼任右春坊右赞善，取代郑赐任《永乐大典》总裁官。
English: Soon, he also served as the president of Yu Chunbo and Yu Zanzan, and replaced Zheng Jiuru as the president of "Yongle Grand Ceremony."

古文：帝幸北京，屡驿召赴行在。
现代文：皇上幸临北京，屡次以驿传召他赴行在所。
English: The emperor was fortunate enough to visit Beijing, and repeatedly summoned him to the capital.

古文：十五年复幸北京，太子监国。
现代文：十五年，皇上又幸临北京，太子监国。
English: Fifteen years later, the emperor was fortunate enough to visit Beijing again, and the prince became the supervisor of the country.

古文：帝亲择侍从臣，翰林独杨士奇，以潜副之。
现代文：皇上亲自选择侍从大臣，翰林院独有杨士奇，以梁潜为副。
English: The emperor himself chose the attendant minister, Yang Shichi, unique to the Hanlin Academy, with Liang Qian as his deputy.

古文：有陈千户者，擅取民财，令旨谪交阯。
现代文：有个陈千户，擅取民财，有令旨把他贬到交趾。
English: There is a Chen Chihou, who is good at taking people's money, and there is an order to relegate him to a crony.

古文：数日后念其有军功，贷还。
现代文：数日后念他有军功，宽宥了他，放他回来。
English: A few days later, he read about his military service, forgave him, and let him come back.

古文：或谗于帝曰： 上所谪罪人，皇太子曲宥之矣。 
现代文：有人向皇上进谗，说： 皇上所贬的罪人，皇太子宽宥他了。 
English: Someone approached the emperor and said: The crown prince has pardoned the sinner whom the emperor had condemned.

古文：帝怒，诛陈千户，事连潜及司谏周冕，逮至行在，亲诘之。
现代文：皇上大怒，诛杀了陈千户，事情牵连到梁潜和司谏周冕，把他们逮到行在所，亲自审问他们。
English: The emperor was enraged and killed Chen Qianhu. Liang Qian and Priest Zhou Guan were implicated in the case. They were arrested and interrogated in person.

古文：述温厚简静，未尝有疾言遽色，文章雅赡。
现代文：梁潜等人都照实回答。皇上对杨荣、吕震说： 此事岂是由梁潜而起？ 
English: Liang Qian and the others all answered truthfully. The emperor said to Yang Rong and Lv Zhen: Did Liang Qian start this?

古文：孟简谦退不伐，生平无睚眦于人。
现代文：但终于没有人为他们辩白，结果他们都被关进监狱。有人诬陷周冕放恣，遂将他和梁潜一起诛杀。
English: But in the end, no one came to their defense, and as a result, they were all put in prison. Someone framed Zhou Guanyuan as a libertine, and then killed him and Liang Qianlu together.

古文：并为世所重云。
现代文：梁潜的妻子杨氏伤痛梁潜死于非命，绝食而死。
English: Liang Qian's wife, Ms. Yang, died of pain and Liang Qian died of hunger strike.

古文：陈济，字伯载，武进人。
现代文：陈济，字伯载，武进人。
English: Chen Zi, Zi Bo Zai, Wu Jin Ren.

古文：读书过目成诵。
现代文：读书过目成诵。
English: You can recite the book by heart.

古文：尝以父命如钱塘，家人赍货以从。
现代文：他曾奉父亲之命去钱塘，家人送货相从。
English: He once went to Qiantang at the behest of his father, and his family followed his orders to deliver goods.

古文：词臣纂修者，及太学儒生数千人，繙秘库书数百万卷，浩无端倪。济与少师姚广孝等数人，发凡起例，区分钩考，秩然有法。
现代文：到回来时，他把其钱财的一半拿来买书，口诵手抄。十余年间，他尽通经史百家之言。成祖诏令修撰《永乐大典》，因大臣的推荐，陈济以一名布衣被召为都总裁，修撰曾蓕等做他的副手。他发凡起例，区分考证，都井然有法。
English: When he came back, he used half of his money to buy books and recited them by hand. For more than ten years, he thoroughly understood the words of hundreds of historians. Cheng Zu issued an order to compile the "Eternal Great Book of Music," and on the recommendation of the minister, Chen Ji was called to be the president of the capital with a cloth, and the author Zeng Qi was his deputy. He set an example, distinguished and studied the evidence, and was right.

古文：执笔者有所疑，辄就济质问，应口辨析无滞。
现代文：执笔者有什么疑问，总是问陈济，陈济顺口辨析，从没有迟疑。
English: If the author has any questions, he always asks Chen Jie, and Chen Jie readily answers without hesitation.

古文：书成，授右赞善。谨慎无过，皇太子甚礼重之。
现代文：书成之后，被授予右赞善，他谨慎没有过失，皇太子非常礼重他。
English: After the book was completed, he was awarded the Right Honorable Mention. He was careful not to make any mistakes, and the crown prince treated him with great respect.

古文：凡稽古纂集之事，悉以属济。
现代文：凡稽核古籍、编纂文集之事，都交给陈济负责。
English: Chen Jie was put in charge of auditing ancient books and compiling anthologies.

古文：随事敷奏，多所裨益。
现代文：陈济随事陈奏，多所裨益。
English: Chen Jie's playing along with everything is beneficial in many ways.

古文：五皇孙皆从受经。
现代文：五位皇孙都跟他学经书。
English: All five of the emperor's grandchildren studied scriptures with him.

古文：居职十五年而卒。年六十二。
现代文：他任职十五年而逝，终年六十二岁。
English: He served for 15 years and died at the age of 62.

古文：济少有酒过，母戒之，终其身未尝至醉。
现代文：陈济少时有酒过，母亲告诫他，此后终身不曾醉过。
English: When Chen Ji was young, his mother warned him against drinking, and he never got drunk again.

古文：弟洽为兵部尚书，事济如父。济深惧盛满，弥自谦抑。
现代文：他的弟弟陈洽为兵部尚书，对待他像对父亲一样，陈济深怕盛满，更加自谦。
English: His younger brother, Chen Ciao, was a military attaché and treated him like a father. Chen Ji was afraid of being full of himself and was more self-effacing.

古文：典制诰时，有以币酬者，坚却之。
现代文：他所住的是蓬户苇壁，仅能蔽风雨，终日危坐，手不释卷。
English: He lives in a lean-to house with walls, which can only shelter him from the wind and rain, and he sits all day, unable to move.

古文：士大夫重其学行，称为 南屏先生 。王英，字时彦，金溪人。
现代文：他做文都根据经史，不事奇异华丽。他曾说： 文章贵如布帛菽粟，但求有益于世而已。 王英，字时彦，金溪人。
English: He said: "Articles are as precious as poppies, but only if they are beneficial to the world." Wang Ying, aka Shi Yan, a native of Jinxi.

古文：永乐二年进士。选庶吉士，读书文渊阁。
现代文：永乐二年，中进士，选为庶吉士，入文渊阁读书。
English: In the second year of Yongle, he was promoted to junior high school, selected as a junior high school valedictorian, and went to study at Wen Yuange.

古文：帝察其慎密，令与王直书机密文字。
现代文：皇上察出他缜密，令他与王直抄写机密文字。
English: The emperor detected his meticulousness and ordered him and Wang Zhizhong to copy the confidential text.

古文：与修《太祖实录》，授翰林院修撰，进侍读。
现代文：他参与修撰《太祖实录》，被授予翰林院修撰，进升侍读。
English: He participated in the compilation of "The True Record of the Great Ancestors," was awarded the Hanlin Academy's award for compilation, and was promoted to attendant.

古文：二十年，扈从北征。
现代文：二十年，他扈从皇上北征。
English: Twenty years have passed since he left the emperor to go to the North.

古文：师旋，过李陵城。
现代文：部队回来时，经过李陵城。
English: When the troops returned, they passed through Liling City.

古文：帝闻城中有石碑，召英往视。
现代文：皇上听说城中有石碑，召王英前往查看。
English: The emperor heard that there was a stone monument in the city and summoned Wang Ying to go and inspect it.

古文：既至，不识碑所。而城北门有石出土尺余。发之，乃元时李陵台驿令谢某德政碑也，碑阴刻达鲁花赤等名氏。
现代文：王英到后，不知道石碑在哪里，而城北门有块石头露出地面一尺多，王英把它挖出来，发现是元朝时李陵台驿令谢某的德政碑，碑上阴刻有达鲁花赤等名氏。
English: After Wang Ying arrived, she did not know where the stone monument was, but there was a stone at the north gate of the city that exposed more than a foot of the ground. Wang Ying dug it out and found that it was a monument to Li Lingdai's virtue in the Yuan Dynasty. The monument was inscribed with famous names such as Daruhana.

古文：具以奏。
现代文：王英回来上奏皇上。
English: Wang Ying came back to play the imperial anthem.

古文：帝曰： 碑有蒙古名，异日且以为己地，启争端。 
现代文：皇上说： 碑上有蒙古名，将来会说是他们的土地，引起争端。 
English: The emperor said, "There is a Mongolian name on the monument, and in the future it will be said to be their land, causing disputes.

古文：命再往击碎之。沉诸河，还奏。
现代文：便命王英再去把碑击碎，王英还把它沉入河中。
English: He then ordered Wang Ying to smash the monument again, and Wang Ying also sank it into the river.

古文：帝喜其详审，曰： 尔是二十八人中读书者，朕且用尔。 
现代文：回来汇报时，皇上很高兴他这么细心，说 ：你是二十八人中读书的人，朕将任用你。 
English: When he came back to report, the Emperor was pleased that he had been so careful, and said, "You are a scholar among the twenty-eight, I will appoint you."

古文：因问以北伐事。
现代文：便问他北伐的事。
English: He asked him about the Northern Expedition.

古文：英曰： 天威亲征，彼必远遁，愿勿穷追。 
现代文：王英说 ：天威亲征，他们一定远逃，愿不要穷追。 
English: Wang Ying said: Tianwei personally led the expedition, they must have fled far away, I hope they don't chase after them.

古文：帝笑曰： 秀才谓朕黩武邪？ 
现代文：皇上笑道： 秀才是说朕黩武吗？ 
English: The emperor laughed and said, "Is it true that I am a martial artist?

古文：因曰： 军中动静，有闻即入奏。 
现代文：便对他说道 ：军中有什么动静，你即入奏。 
English: Then he said to him: "If there is any movement in the army, you are to join in."

古文：且谕中官勿阻。
现代文：还传谕宦官不要阻拦。
English: And he commanded the eunuchs that they should not hinder him.

古文：立功官军有过，命勿与粮，相聚泣。
现代文：立有功劳的官军有过失，皇上命不要给他们粮食，他们相聚而泣。
English: The meritorious officers and men of the imperial army were at fault. The emperor ordered that no grain be given to them. They gathered together and wept.

古文：以英奏，复给予。
现代文：王英上奏后，才又给予他们。
English: It was only after Wang Ying had performed that they were given the keys again.

古文：仁宗即位，累进右春坊大学士，乞省亲归。
现代文：仁宗即位后，王英累升为右春坊大学士，请求省亲归家。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Wang Ying was promoted to a scholar of the University of Right Spring, and asked his provincial relatives to return home.

古文：宣宗立，还朝。
现代文：宣宗即位后，王英回朝。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, Wang Ying returned to the imperial court.

古文：是时海内宴安，天子雅意文章，每与诸学士谈论文艺，赏花赋诗，礼接优渥。
现代文：这时海内平安，天子雅好文章，常常与学士们谈论文艺，赏花赋诗，对他们的礼遇非常优厚。
English: At this time, the sea was safe, and the emperor was fond of writing. He often talked with the bachelors about essay skills, appreciated flowers and poetry, and treated them with great courtesy.

古文：尝谓英曰： 洪武中，学士有宋濂、吴沉、朱善、刘三吾。永乐初，则解缙、胡广。
现代文：皇上曾对王英说： 洪武年间，学士有宋濂、吴沉、朱善、刘三吾，永乐初年，则有解缙、胡广。
English: The emperor once said to Wang Ying, "During the Hongwu era, the bachelors included Song Xi, Wu Shen, Zhu Shan, and Liu Sangu, and in the first year of the Yongle era, there were Ge Yao and Hu Guang.

古文：汝勉之，毋俾前人独专其美。 
现代文：你要自勉，不要让前人独专其美。 
English: You should be self-disciplined and not let your predecessors monopolize their beauty.

古文：修太宗、仁宗《实录》成，迁少詹事，赐麒麟带。
现代文：太宗和仁宗《实录》修成后，王英进升为少詹事，赐给麒麟带。
English: After the completion of the "Real Record" of Taizong and Renzong, Wang Ying was promoted to Shao Zhanji and given the Kirin Belt.

古文：母丧，特与葬祭，遣中官护归。
现代文：母亲去世时，皇上特给予祭葬，遣宦官护送归乡。
English: When his mother died, the emperor gave her a special funeral, and the funeral officials escorted her home.

古文：寻起复。
现代文：不久命他出来任职。
English: He was soon appointed to the post.

古文：正统元年命侍经筵，总裁《宣宗实录》，进礼部侍郎。
现代文：正统元年，命他侍奉经筵，总裁《宣宗实录》，进升为礼部侍郎。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he was ordered to serve as secretary, president of the "Proclamation of the True Faith," and promoted to attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：八年命理部事。
现代文：八年命他处理礼部事务。
English: He was appointed to handle ceremonial affairs eight years ago.

古文：浙江民疫，遣祭南镇。
现代文：浙江百姓染上瘟病，皇上派他到南镇祝祭。
English: The people of Zhejiang were infected with the plague, and the emperor sent him to Nanzhen to celebrate the festival.

古文：时久旱，英至，大雨，民呼 侍郎雨 。
现代文：当时久旱，王英到后，下起大雨，百姓欢呼为侍郎雨。
English: At that time, there was a long drought. After Wang Ying arrived, it rained heavily, and the people cheered for the rain.

古文：年七十，再乞休。不许。
现代文：他七十岁时，一再请求退休，皇上不许。
English: When he was seventy years old, he repeatedly asked to retire, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：十二年，英子按察副使裕坐事下狱。英上疏待罪。宥不问。
现代文：十二年，王英的儿子按察副使王裕因犯罪入狱，王英上疏待罪，皇上宽宥不问。
English: In the twelfth year, Wang Ying's son, Wang Yu, the vice-envoy of the inspector, was jailed for a crime. Wang Ying treated the crime carelessly, and the emperor did not ask for forgiveness.

古文：明年进南京礼部尚书，俾就闲逸。
现代文：第二年升他为南京礼部尚书，使他能有闲逸。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the Nanjing etiquette department, so that he could have leisure.

古文：居二年卒，年七十五。
现代文：过了两年，他去世，终年七十五岁。
English: He died two years later, aged 75.

古文：赐祭葬，谥文安。
现代文：赐给祭葬，谥号文安。
English: He was given the posthumous name Wen'an.

古文：英端凝持重，历仕四朝。
现代文：王英端庄稳重，历仕四朝。
English: Wang Ying is dignified and steady, and has served four dynasties.

古文：在翰林四十余年，屡为会试考官，朝廷制作多出其手，四方求铭志碑记者不绝。
现代文：他在翰林院四十余年，多次担任会试考官，朝廷制度多出于其手，四方来向他求铭文碑记的不断。
English: For more than forty years, he served as an examiner at the Hanlin Academy for many times. The imperial court system was mostly out of his hands, and the four parties came to him to ask him to keep inscribing inscriptions.

古文：性直谅，好规人过，三杨皆不喜，故不得柄用。
现代文：他个性正直，好助人，也好规劝别人的过失，三杨都不喜欢他，所以他不能掌大权。
English: He has an honest personality, is good at helping others, and is also good at persuading others of their mistakes. Sanyang doesn't like him, so he can't hold great power.

古文：裕后累官四川按察使。钱习礼，名干，以字行，吉水人。
现代文：钱习礼，名干，以字行，吉水人。
English: Qian Xi Li, Mei Gan, Zhi Xing, Jishui Ren.

古文：永乐九年进士。选庶吉士，寻授检讨。
现代文：永乐九年中进士，被选为庶吉士，不久被授予检讨。
English: Yongle won the prize in the ninth year of middle school, was selected as a junior prize winner, and was soon awarded a review.

古文：习礼与练子宁姻戚。
现代文：习礼与练子宁是姻亲。
English: Etiquette and etiquette are close relatives.

古文：既仕，乡人以奸党持之，恒惴惴。
现代文：他当了官后，乡人说他是奸党，使他常惴惴不安。
English: After he became an official, the villagers said he was a traitor, which made him feel uneasy.

古文：杨荣乘间言于帝，帝笑曰： 使子宁在，朕犹当用之，况习礼乎。 
现代文：杨荣找机会告诉皇上，皇上笑着说 ：如果子宁还在，朕还要用他呢，何况习礼。 
English: Yang Rong looked for an opportunity to tell the emperor, and the emperor smiled and said, "If Zoning is still alive, I still want to use him, not to mention the ritual."

古文：仁宗即位，迁侍读，知制诰，以省亲归。
现代文：仁宗即位后，他升为侍讲，掌管制诰，后回家省亲。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to attendant preacher, in charge of the control room, and then went home to visit relatives.

古文：宣德元年修两朝《实录》，与侍讲陈敬宗、陈循同召还，进侍读学士。
现代文：宣德元年，修撰两朝实录，习礼与侍讲陈敬宗、陈循一同被召回，进升为侍读学士。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, he compiled a record of the two dynasties. He was called back to study etiquette together with the attendant lecturers Chen Jingzong and Chen Zui, and was promoted to attendant bachelor.

古文：英宗开经筵，为讲官。
现代文：英宗开经筵，习礼任讲官。
English: Yingzong opened a school of classics and became a lecturer in etiquette.

古文：《宣宗实录》成，擢学士，掌院事。
现代文：《宣宗实录》修成，习礼升为学士，掌翰林院事。
English: "The True Record of the Xuan Zong" was completed, Xi Li was promoted to a bachelor, and Shou Hanlin became an academician.

古文：七年以故鸿胪寺为翰林院。落成，诸殿阁大学士皆至，习礼不设杨士奇、杨溥座，曰： 此非三公府也。 
现代文：七年，以原鸿胪寺为翰林院，落成之日，各殿阁大学士都到场，习礼不给杨士奇、杨溥设座，说 ：这里不是三公府。 
English: Seven years ago, on the day of the completion of the former Hongluo Temple as the Hanlin Academy, all the scholars of the palace and pavilion universities came to the scene, and they did not set up seats for Yang Shichi and Yang Jie, saying: This is not the three public houses.

古文：士奇等以闻。
现代文：杨士奇等人报告皇上。
English: Yang Shichi and others report to the emperor.

古文：帝命具座。后遂为故事。
现代文：皇上命备座，此后这遂成为惯例。
English: The emperor ordered the seat to be prepared, and this became the usual practice thereafter.

古文：正统九年乞致仕。不许。
现代文：正统九年，习礼请退休，皇上不许。
English: It's been nine years since the establishment of the orthodoxy. Please retire from performing rituals. The emperor won't allow it.

古文：明年，六部侍郎多阙，帝命吏部尚书王直会大臣推举，而特旨擢习礼于礼部。习礼力辞。不允。
现代文：第二年，六部的侍郎多出缺，皇上命吏部尚书王直会同大臣推举，而特旨把习礼升为礼部侍郎，习礼极力推辞，皇上不允。
English: In the second year, there were many vacancies among the attendants of the six divisions, and the Emperor's appointed official, Prince Shoshu, was directly elected by the Emperor and the ministers. However, the Emperor did not approve of the special order to promote Shirei to the position of attendant of the ceremonial division, and Shirei strongly declined the appointment.

古文：王振用事，达官多造其门，习礼耻为屈。
现代文：王振专权时，达官多登门造访，习礼耻于屈服于他。
English: When Wang Zhen was in power, many high-ranking officials came to visit him, and they were ashamed to bow to him.

古文：十二年六月复上章乞骸骨，乃得归。
现代文：十二年六月，习礼又上书请告老回乡，这才得到批准。
English: In June of the 12th year, Xi Li again sent a letter to request the old man to return to his hometown, and this was approved.

古文：习礼笃行谊，好古秉礼，动有矩则。
现代文：习礼厚重友情，好行古礼，行为都有准则。
English: The rituals are heavy with friendship, the ancient rituals are easy to perform, and there are rules for behavior.

古文：家居十五年卒，年八十有九。
现代文：家居十五年后去世，终年八十九岁。
English: He died fifteen years later, aged eighty-nine.

古文：谥文肃。
现代文：谥号文肃。
English: His posthumous name is Bunsu.

古文：周叙，字公叙，吉水人。
现代文：周叙，字公叙，吉水人。
English: Zhou Xiu, Zi Gong Xiu, Jishui Ren.

古文：年十一能诗。
现代文：十一岁时即能作诗。
English: He was able to write poetry at the age of eleven.

古文：永乐十六年进士。
现代文：永乐十六年，中进士，被选为庶吉士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 16th year of Yongle.

古文：选庶吉士，作《黄鹦鹉赋》，称旨，授编修。
现代文：他作的《黄鹦鹉赋》，很合皇上心意，被授予编修。
English: His "Yellow Parrot Fu" was very much in line with the emperor's wishes, and he was awarded the editorship.

古文：历官侍读，直经筵。
现代文：历任侍读，在经筵当值。
English: Successive attendants have been on duty at the station.

古文：正统六年上疏言事，帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：正统六年，他上疏提建议，皇上嘉纳了他的意见。
English: Six years after the enthronement, he made a suggestion, and the emperor accepted his opinion.

古文：八年夏又上言： 比天旱，陛下责躬虔祷，而臣下不闻效忠补过之言，徒陈情乞用而已。
现代文：八年夏，他又上书说 ：天旱频繁，陛下亲自虔诚祈祷，而不见臣下有效忠补过之言，徒见陈情乞求升用而已。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, he also wrote, "Due to frequent droughts, His Majesty prayed fervently in person, but he did not see that his vassals were effectively and faithfully fulfilling his words. He only saw their feelings and begged to be promoted."

古文：掌铨选者罔论贤否，第循资格。司国计者不问耕桑，惟勤赋敛。军士困役作，刑罚失重轻，风宪无激扬，言官务缄默。僧道数万，日耗户口，流民众多，莫为矜恤。 
现代文：掌选官的不论人才贤否，只论资格；管财政的不问农桑丰歉，但勤征敛；军士被劳役所困，刑罚失去轻重；监察官员不起激浊扬清的作用；言路官员专务缄口不言；僧人道士数万，户口不断流失；流民众多，不去怜悯抚恤。 
English: The person in charge of selecting officials does not care about talent or merit, but only about qualifications; the person in charge of finance does not ask the farmers and the mulberry trees for an apology, but is diligent in collecting; the soldiers are trapped by labor service, and the punishment has lost its weight; the supervisory officials do not play the role of stimulating and clarifying; the officials in charge of speech do not speak; the monks and humanitarians are tens of thousands, and the hukou is constantly lost; there are many people in exile, and there is no mercy.

古文：帝以章示诸大臣。
现代文：皇上将他的奏章出示给诸大臣。
English: The Emperor showed his report to his ministers.

古文：王直等皆引罪求罢。
现代文：王直等人都引罪请罢免。
English: Wang Zhi and others all pleaded guilty and asked to be dismissed.

古文：十一年迁南京侍讲学士。
现代文：十一年，周叙升为南京侍讲学士。
English: In the eleventh year, Zhou Xuesheng became a lecturer in Nanjing.

古文：郕王监国，驰疏言： 君父之仇不共戴天，殿下宜卧薪尝胆，如越之报吴。
现代文：成阝王监国时，周叙飞驰上疏说： 君父之仇不同戴天，殿下应卧薪尝胆，如越国报吴国之仇那样。
English: When King Chengxuan was in charge of the country, Zhou Xiu flew up to him and said: "The vengeance of the king's father is different from the vengeance of heaven. Your highness should lie down and taste the gall, just as Yue reported the vengeance of Wu."

古文：使智者献谋，勇者效力，务扫北庭，雪国耻。
现代文：让知者献策，勇者效力，务必扫除北庭，以雪国耻。
English: Let the wise offer advice, and the brave be effective. It is imperative to sweep away the north courtyard and shame the country with snow.

古文：先遣辩士，卑词重币乞还銮舆，暂为君父屈。 
现代文：现在应先派善辩之士去，以卑词重金乞请他们放回皇上，暂时为了君父忍点委屈。 
English: Now it is time to send our best debaters to beg the emperor to let them go back to the emperor. For the sake of your father, please bear with me for the time being.

古文：因条上励刚明、亲经史、修军政、选贤才、安民心、广言路、谨微渐、修庶政八事。王嘉纳之。
现代文：顺便还提出了励刚明、亲经史、修军政、选贤才、安民心、广言路、谨微渐、整百政八项建议，成阝王嘉许采纳了。
English: By the way, he also put forward eight suggestions, including "encouraging gongming," "being familiar with history," "improving military and political affairs," "selecting talents," "securing the people's hearts," "broad-mindedness," "prudence and moderation" and "completing one hundred political affairs," which were adopted by Chengyu Wang Jiaxu.

古文：景泰二年又请复午朝，日接大臣，咨诹治道。经筵之余，召文学从臣讲论政事，并诏天下臣民直言时政缺失。
现代文：景泰二年，他又请恢复午朝，每天接见大臣，询问治国之道；在讲经筵之余，召文学从臣讲论政事，并诏令天下臣民直言时政的失误。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, he also requested the restoration of the afternoon and morning, and received the minister every day to inquire about the way of governing the country; in addition to talking about the sutras, he called on the literature from the minister to talk about political affairs, and ordered the subjects of the world to speak frankly about the mistakes of current politics.

古文：帝因诏求言。
现代文：皇上于是下诏示求建议。
English: The emperor then issued an imperial edict asking for suggestions.

古文：叙负气节，笃行谊。
现代文：周叙有气节，重友情。
English: Zhou Xiu had a great temperament and valued friendship.

古文：曾祖以立，在元时以宋、辽、金三史体例未当，欲重修。
现代文：曾祖父周以立，在元朝时因宋、辽、金三史的体例不适当，想重修。
English: His great-grandfather, Zhou Yili, wanted to reconstruct the Song, Liao and Jin dynasties because the style of the three dynasties was inappropriate during the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：弘治五年召为南京祭酒。
现代文：周叙想继承先人的遗志，正统末年，向朝廷请示。
English: Zhou Xiu wanted to carry on the legacy of his predecessors, and at the end of the orthodox era, he petitioned the imperial court.

古文：久之，卒。孔公恂，字宗文，先圣五十八世孙也。
现代文：诏令允许他有自撰，周叙编撰了数年，没等完工而死。孔公恂，字宗文，先圣五十八世孙。
English: The imperial edict allowed him to write it himself, but Zhou Xiu compiled it for several years and died before it was finished. Kong Gongyao, Zi Zongwen, is the 58th generation of Xian Sheng's descendants.

古文：景泰五年举会试，闻母疾，不赴廷对。
现代文：景泰五年，他考取会试，听说母亲有病，不参加殿试。
English: In the fifth year of Jing Tai, he took the entrance examination, and heard that his mother was ill and would not participate in the entrance examination.

古文：帝以问礼部，具言其故，乃遣使召之。
现代文：皇上向礼部询问此事，礼部说明了原因，于是派使者去召他。
English: The Emperor asked the Ministry of Ceremonies about this, and the Ministry explained the reason, so they sent an envoy to summon him.

古文：日且午，不及备试卷，命翰林院给以笔札。
现代文：当时已将近中午，公恂来不及备试卷，皇上命翰林院给他笔纸。
English: At that time, it was nearly noon, and the prince had not had time to prepare the examination papers. The emperor ordered the Hanlin Academy to give him pen and paper.

古文：登第，即丁母忧归。
现代文：他登第之后，即因遭母丧回家。
English: After he became prime minister, he returned home due to the death of his mother.

古文：衍圣公孔彦缙卒，孙弘绪幼弱，诏遣礼部郎治丧，公恂理其家事。
现代文：衍圣公孔彦缙去世，孙子弘绪幼弱，诏令派礼部郎去治丧，公恂料理其家事。
English: After the death of Yansheng Gong Kong Yanyan, his grandson Hongxu was too young and weak, so the emperor ordered the ceremonial minister to go to the funeral, and the official minister took care of his family affairs.

古文：天顺初，授礼科给事中。
现代文：天顺初年，他被授予礼科给事中。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was awarded the title of vice-minister of etiquette.

古文：弘绪已袭封，大学士李贤妻以女，公恂因得交于贤。
现代文：弘绪已经袭封衍圣公，大学士李贤把女儿嫁给他为妻，公恂因而得以交上了李贤。
English: Hongxu had already succeeded to the throne of Yan Sheng. Li Xian, a university scholar, married his daughter to him, and the prince was thus able to marry Li Xian.

古文：贤言： 公恂，大圣人后；赞善司马恂，宋大贤温国公光后。宜辅导太子。 
现代文：李贤说 ：公恂是大圣人的后代，赞善司马恂，是宋朝大贤温国公司马光的后代，宜用他们辅导太子。 
English: Li Xian said: Gong Li is the descendant of a great sage, Zanzan Shima Yu, is the descendant of the Song Dynasty great sage Wen Guo Company Ma Guang, and it is appropriate to use them to tutor the prince.

古文：帝喜。
现代文：皇上很高兴。
English: The emperor was delighted to hear this.

古文：同日超拜少詹事，侍东宫讲读。
现代文：同一天超拜公恂为少詹事，侍奉东宫太子讲读。
English: On the same day, Chao Bai Gongjun was appointed as a minor official, and served as the East Palace's crown prince to read.

古文：入语孝肃皇后曰： 吾今日得圣贤子孙为汝子傅。 
现代文：皇上入宫对孝肃皇后说 ：我今天得到圣贤的子孙做你儿子的师傅。 
English: When the emperor entered the palace, he said to Empress Xiaosu, "Today, I have been given the descendants of sages to be your son's teacher."

古文：孝肃皇后者，宪宗生母，方以皇贵妃有宠。
现代文：孝肃皇后是宪宗的生母，她这时是皇贵妃，正受皇上宠爱。
English: Empress Xiaoshu was the birth mother of Emperor Xianzong. At that time, she was an empress dowager and was favored by the emperor.

古文：于是具冠服拜谢，宫中传以为盛事云。
现代文：皇后于是穿戴冠服拜谢，宫中传为盛事。
English: The empress then wore a crown to give thanks, which was rumored to be a great event in the palace.

古文：宪宗嗣位，改公恂大理左少卿。
现代文：宪宗继位后，改任公恂为大理寺左少卿。
English: After Emperor Genso succeeded to the throne, he was reappointed as Kugyo and became Zuoshokyo (Minor Secretary) of Dali Temple.

古文：公恂言不通法律，乃复少詹事。
现代文：公恂说自己不通法律，于是让他仍任少詹事。
English: The public prosecutor said that he did not understand the law, so he was allowed to remain in office.

古文：成化二年上章言兵事，诸武臣哗然，给事御史交章驳之。
现代文：成化二年，他上书谈军事，武臣们都哗然，给事中和御史纷纷上书驳斥他。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, he published a book on military affairs, and his vassals were outraged. He was refuted in a series of books.

古文：下狱，谪汉阳知府。
现代文：公恂被投入监狱，贬为汉阳知府。
English: Gongye was thrown into prison and reduced to the status of Hanyang prefecture.

古文：未至，丁父忧。
现代文：不久，遭父丧。
English: Soon after, his father passed away.

古文：服阕，商辂请复建言得罪者官，乃还故秩，涖南京詹事府。
现代文：守孝期满后，商辂请求给因提建议而得罪的人复官，公恂于是得以恢复原职，到南京詹事府上任。
English: After the expiration of the period of filial piety, Shangyu requested the reinstatement of the person who was offended by the suggestion, and the public official was able to resume his original position and took office in Nanjing Zhanji Prefecture.

古文：久之，卒。
现代文：不久，他去世。
English: After a long time, Wang Yao died of illness.

