古文：韦睿裴邃
现代文：父亲韦祖归，任宁远长史。
English: His father Wei Zu Gui and Ren Ning Yuan have a long history.

古文：睿事继母以孝闻。
现代文：韦睿侍奉继母以孝闻名。
English: Wei Rui is very filial to his stepmother, so he is praised by the villagers.

古文：祖征累爲郡守，每携睿之职，视之如子。
现代文：伯父韦祖征屡次作郡太守，总是带上韦睿赴任，对待他像对待自己的儿子。
English: Uncle Wei Zuzhen repeatedly served as the county governor, always taking Wei Rui with him to the post, treating him like his own son.

古文：时睿内兄王憕、姨弟杜恽并有乡里盛名，祖征谓睿曰： 汝自谓何如憕、恽？ 
现代文：当时韦睿的妻兄王忄登、姨弟杜恽在家乡都很有名望，祖征问韦睿说： 你自己认为比忄登、恽二人如何？ 
English: At that time, Wei Rui's brother-in-law, Wang Yuden, and his uncle, Du Xi, were both famous in their hometowns. Zu Zheng asked Wei Rui, "What do you think of them?"

古文：睿谦不敢对。
现代文：韦睿谦逊不敢回答。
English: Wei Rui modestly did not dare to answer.

古文：祖征曰： 汝文章或小减，学识当过之。
现代文：祖征说： 你的文章或许稍差点儿，学识应该说超过他们。
English: Zu Zheng said: Your article may be a little close, and your knowledge should be said to exceed theirs.

古文：然干国家，成功业，皆莫汝逮也。 
现代文：然而要说为国效力，成就功业，那谁也比不上你。 
English: However, when it comes to serving the country and accomplishing feats, no one can match you.

古文：外兄杜幼文爲梁州刺史，要睿俱行。
现代文：表兄杜幼文任梁州刺史，邀请他一块去。
English: Du's cousin, Du Yuwen, was appointed as the governor of Liangzhou and invited him to go with him.

古文：梁土富饶，往者多以贿败，睿虽幼，独以廉闻。
现代文：梁州地方富饶，去那里作官的大多因为受贿栽跟头，韦睿虽然年轻，却以廉洁闻名。
English: Liangzhou is a rich place. Most of the officials who went there were bribed. Although Wei Rui was young, he was known for his integrity.

古文：宋永光初，袁顗爲雍州刺史，见而异之，引爲主簿。
现代文：宋永光初年，袁靑作雍州刺史，见到他认为他不寻常，召他作主簿。
English: In the first year of Song Yongguang, Yuan Xuan, who was making a history of Yongzhou, saw that he thought he was unusual and called him to make the master book.

古文：顗到州，与邓琬起兵，睿求出爲义成郡，故免顗之祸。
现代文：袁靑到州任后，与邓琬起兵反宋明帝，韦睿请求外出到义成郡任职，因此免于和袁靑一起遭祸。
English: After Yuan Xuan was appointed to the state, he and Deng Xuan raised an army against Song Mingdi. Wei Rui requested to go out to Yicheng County to take office, so he was spared from suffering together with Yuan Xuan.

古文：累迁齐兴太守，本州别驾，长水校尉，右军将军。
现代文：屡次升迁为齐兴太守、本州别驾、长水校尉、右军将军。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to Qixing governor, Honshu governor, Changshui captain, and general of the right army.

古文：齐末多故，欲还乡里，求爲上庸太守。
现代文：到了齐朝末年多生变乱，想回故乡，就请求作上庸太守。
English: At the end of the Qi Dynasty, there was a lot of turmoil, and he wanted to return to his hometown, so he asked to be the Shangyong governor.

古文：俄而太尉陈显达、护军将军崔慧景频逼建邺，人心惶骇。
现代文：不久太尉陈显达、护军将军崔慧景起兵反齐东昏侯，屡次逼近建邺，人心惶恐。
English: Soon after, Captain Chen Xianda and the escorting general, Cui Huijing, raised an army against Qidong, and the army was in a daze. They repeatedly approached Jianye, and the people were terrified.

古文：西土人谋之，睿曰： 陈虽旧将，非高人才，崔颇更事，懦而不武。
现代文：西部人士和韦睿商讨，韦睿说： 陈显达虽然是旧将，却不是成气候的人物，崔慧景很有经验，但懦弱不能作战。
English: Westerners discussed with Wei Rui, and Wei Rui said: Although Chen Xianda is an old general, he is not a weathered person. Cui Huijing is very experienced, but he is too cowardly to fight.

古文：天下真人，殆兴吾州矣。 
现代文：天下能成就大业的人，怕是出现在我们这里了。 
English: People who can achieve great things in the world are afraid to appear here.

古文：乃遣其二子自结于梁武。
现代文：于是派遣自己两个儿子与梁武帝联络。
English: So he sent his two sons to contact Emperor Liangwu.

古文：及兵起檄至，睿率郡人伐竹爲筏，倍道来赴，有衆二千，马二百匹。
现代文：等萧衍起兵，文告传到，韦睿率领本郡人伐竹造筏，兼程赶来会合，共有人二千，马二百匹。
English: When Xiao Yan raised an army and the announcement was made, Wei Rui led the people of the county to cut bamboo and make a raft, and came to the meeting on the way, with a total of two thousand people and two hundred horses.

古文：帝见睿甚悦，抚几曰： 佗日见君之面，今日见君之心，吾事就矣。 
现代文：武帝见到韦睿很高兴，抚着几案说： 前日见君之面，今日见君之心，我的大事成功了。 
English: Emperor Wu was very happy to see Wei Rui, patted several cases and said: I saw your face the day before, I saw your heart today, my big event was a success.

古文：师克郢、鲁，平加湖，睿多建策，皆见用。
现代文：军队打下郢州、鲁，平定加湖，韦睿出过很多主意，都被采纳。
English: The army defeated Zhangzhou, Lu, Pingding and Hubei, and Wei Rui came up with many ideas, all of which were adopted.

古文：大军发郢，谋留守将，上难其人。久之，顾睿曰： 弃骐骥而不乘，焉遑遑而更索。 
现代文：大军从郢州出发，武帝考虑安排将领留守，却难找到人选，为难了很长时间，回头看到韦睿说： 丢弃好马而不骑，还急急忙忙到哪儿去找呢。 
English: The large army set out from Bozhou, and Emperor Wu considered arranging for generals to stay behind, but it was difficult to find candidates. He was puzzled for a long time, and when he looked back, he saw Wei Rui saying, "If you discard a good horse and don't ride it, where will you go in a hurry to find it?"

古文：即日以爲江夏太守，行郢州府事。
现代文：当天委任韦睿为江夏太守，管理郢州事务。
English: On the same day, Wei Rui was appointed as the governor of Jiangxia to manage the affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，郢城之拒守也，男女垂十万，闭垒经年，疾疫死者十七八，皆积尸于床下，而生者寝处其上，每屋盈满。
现代文：当初，郢州城守卫抗拒梁武帝时，城中男女将近十万，闭门固守一年，染瘟疫死的有十之七八，都把尸体堆在床下，活着的人就睡在上面，每间屋里都堆满了死尸。
English: At the beginning, when the defenders of Zhangzhou City resisted Emperor Liang Wudi, there were nearly 100,000 men and women in the city. They kept their doors closed for a year. Seventy-eight out of ten died of the plague. They piled the corpses under the beds, while the living slept on them. Every room was full of corpses.

古文：睿料简隐恤，咸爲营理，百姓赖之。
现代文：韦睿着手清理抚恤，全都为他们安排处理停当，百姓们靠他得以安居。
English: Wei Rui began to clean up the pensions, all of them arranged for the handling of the stop, the people rely on him to live in peace.

古文：梁台建，征爲大理。
现代文：武帝在受封梁王后，征召他为大理寺卿。
English: Emperor Wu, after receiving the title of Queen of Liang, called him to be the Lord of Dali Temple.

古文：武帝即位，迁廷尉，封都梁子。
现代文：武帝即帝位，改任廷尉，封为都梁子。
English: Emperor Wu was enthroned, and he was appointed as a court lieutenant and given the title of the son of the capital.

古文：天监二年，改封永昌，再迁豫州刺史，领历阳太守。
现代文：天监二年，改封永昌县，再改任豫州刺史，兼任历阳太守。
English: In the second year of his celestial governorship, he was assigned to Yongchang County, and then he was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, and concurrently as the governor of Liyang.

古文：魏遣衆来伐，睿率州兵击走之。
现代文：北魏派兵来讨伐，韦睿率领本州军队赶走了他们。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent soldiers to fight, and Wei Rui led the Honshu army to drive them away.

古文：四年侵魏，诏睿都督衆军。
现代文：天监四年北侵魏国，下诏派韦睿统率众军。
English: In the fourth year of the Northern Invasion of Wei, the Emperor sent Wei Rui to lead the army.

古文：睿遣长史王超宗、梁郡太守冯道根攻魏小岘城，未能拔。
现代文：韦睿派遣长史王超宗、梁郡太守冯道根攻魏国小岘城，没能打下来。
English: Wei Wei dispatched the warlord Wang Chaozong and the governor of Liang County, Feng Dogen, to attack the Northern Wei's Xiaohui City, but failed to conquer it.

古文：睿巡行围栅，魏城中忽出数百人陈于门外，睿欲击之。诸将皆曰： 向本轻来，请还授甲而后战。 
现代文：韦睿在魏军城防栅栏外巡视，城中忽然出来数百人在门外布阵，韦睿要攻击他们，诸将都说： 我们都是轻装前来，请回去穿上盔甲再战。 
English: Wei Rui was patrolling outside the defensive fence of the Wei military city. Suddenly, hundreds of people came out of the city and lined up outside the gate. Wei Rui wanted to attack them. All the generals said: We all came lightly armed, please go back and put on armor and fight again.

古文：睿曰： 魏城中二千馀人，闭门坚守，足以自保。
现代文：韦睿说： 魏军城中有两千多人，只要闭门坚守，就足以保住城池。
English: Wei Rui said: There are more than two thousand people in the Wei army city, as long as they stick to the closed door, it is enough to keep the city.

古文：今无故出人于外，必其骁勇，若能挫之，其城自拔。 
现代文：现在无缘无故把人开出来，这一定是一些勇悍的人，如果能击败他们，这城就不攻自破了。 
English: Now they are driving people out for no reason. These must be some brave people. If we can defeat them, the city will not be able to defend itself.

古文：衆犹迟疑，睿指其节曰： 朝廷授此，非以爲饰，韦睿之法，不可犯也。 
现代文：大家还是犹豫不定，韦睿指着他的节杖说： 朝廷授我这东西，不是拿来作装饰的，韦睿的法令，不可违犯。 
English: Everyone was still hesitant. Wei Rui pointed to his scepter and said, "This thing was given to me by the imperial court, it is not for decoration. You must not violate Wei Rui's edict."

古文：乃进兵，魏军败，因急攻之，中宿而城拔。
现代文：于是挥兵出击，魏军战败，韦睿趁势加紧攻城，第二天夜里城就被攻克。
English: As a result, troops were sent out to attack, the Wei army was defeated, and Wei Rui took advantage of the situation to intensify the siege of the city. The next day, the city was conquered in the night.

古文：遂进讨合肥。
现代文：遂即向合肥进军。
English: Next, they marched to fight against the Mongols.

古文：先是右军司马胡景略至合肥,久未能下,睿案行山川，曰： 吾闻 汾水可以灌平阳 ，即此是也。 
现代文：在此以前右军司马胡景略到合肥，但久攻不下。韦睿到后考察山川地势，说： 我听说 汾水可以灌平阳 ，就和这一样。 
English: Prior to this, the Right Division's Ma Huqing had planned to attack Hefei, but was unable to do so for a long time. After arriving, Wei Rui inspected the terrain of the mountains and rivers and said, "I heard that Surabaya can be flooded with the sun, just like this."

古文：乃堰肥水。
现代文：于是就在肥水上筑堰。
English: As a result, a weir was built on top of the manure.

古文：顷之堰成水通，舟舰继至。
现代文：很快堰成水通，战船相继开到。
English: Soon the weir was flooded and the warships arrived one after the other.

古文：魏初分筑东西小城，夹合肥。睿先攻二城。
现代文：魏军开初分筑东西两个小城，夹合肥而立，韦睿先攻这二城。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, the Wei army built two small cities in the east and west, which were sandwiched between Hebei and Liaoning. Wei Rui attacked these two cities first.

古文：既而魏援将杨灵胤帅军五万奄至，衆惧不敌，请表益兵。
现代文：不久魏援军杨灵胤率兵五万杀到，众人害怕敌挡不住，请韦睿奏请增兵。
English: Soon, the Wei reinforcement army led by Yang Lingyan had killed 50,000 soldiers. The people were afraid that the enemy could not be stopped, and asked Wei Ruisuo to increase the number of soldiers.

古文：睿曰： 贼已至城下，方复求军。且吾求济师，彼亦征衆。 师克在和 ，古人之义也。 
现代文：韦睿说： 贼兵已到城下，才又去求救兵，怎么来得及，何况我们求救，他们也会增兵， 军队致胜在于齐心协力 ，这就是古人的道理。 
English: Wei Rui said: The robber soldiers have already reached the bottom of the city, and then they go to ask for help, how can they be in time, not to mention that if we ask for help, they will also increase the number of soldiers. The victory of the army lies in concerted efforts, this is the principle of the ancients.

古文：因战，破之，军人少安。
现代文：于是和魏援军接战，战败了他们，军心稍加安定。
English: As a result, they fought with the Wei reinforcements, defeated them, and the military spirit was slightly more stable.

古文：初，肥水堰立，使军主王怀静筑城于岸守之，魏攻陷城，乘胜至睿堤下。
现代文：当初，肥水堤堰筑成后，韦睿派军官王怀静在岸边筑城守卫它，魏军攻陷了这城，乘胜杀到韦睿堤下。
English: At first, after the dam of the Fertile Water Dike was built, Wei Rui sent the officer Wang Huaijing to build a city on the shore to guard it. The Wei army captured the city and took advantage of the victory to go under the Wei Rui Dike.

古文：军监潘灵佑劝睿退还巢湖，诸将又请走保三釜。
现代文：军监潘灵劝韦睿退回巢湖，诸将又请求退走保住三义。
English: The military overseer Pan Ling advised Wei Rui to return to the lake, and the generals also asked him to withdraw and keep Sanyi.

古文：睿怒曰： 将军死绥，有前无却。 
现代文：韦睿发怒说： 军败将死，有进无退。 
English: Wei Rui said angrily: The defeat of the army will be fatal, there is no retreat.

古文：因令取伞扇麾幢树之堤下，示无动志。
现代文：于是命令取来他的伞扇旗帜等仪仗，立在大堤下面，表示决无退却的打算。
English: He was then ordered to fetch his umbrella, fan, flag, and other ceremonial objects, and stand under the embankment, indicating that he had no intention of retreating.

古文：睿素羸，每战不尝骑马，以板舆自载，督励衆军。
现代文：韦睿历来身体羸弱，每次作战从未骑过马，总是坐着小车督率军队。
English: Veri has always been physically weak, has never ridden a horse in every battle, and always sits in a cart to lead the army.

古文：魏兵凿堤，睿亲与争。魏军却，因筑垒于堤以自固。
现代文：魏兵来破堤，韦睿亲自率军和他们争夺，魏军后退，于是韦睿在堤旁筑垒来守卫。
English: Wei soldiers came to break the dike, and Wei Rui personally led the army to compete with them. The Wei army retreated, so Wei Rui built a barrier next to the dike to guard it.

古文：起斗舰高与合肥城等，四面临之。
现代文：又造战舰与合肥城墙一样高，四面进攻。
English: He also built warships as high as the Hefei city wall and attacked on all sides.

古文：城溃，俘获万馀，所获军实，无所私焉。
现代文：城被攻破，俘虏万余人，所缴获的战利品，没有一点据为己有。
English: The city was breached, more than ten thousand people were captured, and none of the captured booty was seized.

古文：初，胡景略与前军赵祖悦同军交恶，志相陷害，景略一怒，自齧其齿，齿皆流血。
现代文：起初，胡景略和前军赵祖悦一同参战而关系恶劣，相互陷害，景略发怒，狠咬自己的牙齿，以至把牙咬坏血流满嘴。
English: At first, Hu Jingliao and the former army Zhao Zuyue joined the war together and had a bad relationship. They set each other up. Jingliao got angry and bit his own teeth, so much so that he bit his teeth and bled all over his mouth.

古文：睿以将帅不和，将致患祸，酌酒自劝景略曰： 且愿两武勿复私斗。 
现代文：韦睿认为将帅不和，将会招致祸患，亲自斟酒劝解景略说： 希望两将军不要再为个人争斗。 
English: Wei Rui thought that it would be disastrous if the two generals were at odds with each other, and he personally poured wine to persuade and explain the situation, saying: I hope that the two generals will no longer fight for individuals.

古文：故终于此役得无害焉。
现代文：因此这次战役能够相安无事。
English: Therefore, this battle can be carried out without incident.

古文：睿每昼接客旅，夜算军书，三更起张灯达曙，抚循其衆，常如不及，故投募之士争归之。
现代文：韦睿每天白天接应宾客和军务，夜里处理军事文书，三更就起身点灯直到天亮，尽心安抚他的部众，常常表现得好像自己做得很不够，因此投军的人争相到他这儿来。
English: Every day, Wei Rui received guests and military affairs during the day, handled military documents at night, got up three times to light lights until dawn, tried his best to appease his subordinates, and often behaved as if he did not do enough, so the soldiers rushed to him.

古文：所至顿舍修立，馆宇藩篱墉壁皆应准绳。
现代文：他所到之处，营房都井井有条，馆舍和防务工事也都标准规范。
English: Everywhere he went, the barracks were well organized, and the buildings and defense works were also standard.

古文：合肥既平，有诏班师，去魏军既近，惧爲所蹑。
现代文：合肥平定后，有诏让他班师，因为离魏军太近，怕被他们跟踪追击。
English: After the subjugation of Hefei, there was an edict to let him lead the division, because he was too close to the Wei army and was afraid of being followed and pursued by them.

古文：睿悉遣辎重居前，身乘小舆殿后，魏人服睿威名，望之不敢逼，全军而还。
现代文：韦睿令辎重都作前队，自己坐小车殿后，魏人慑于他的威名，只是远望着不敢逼近，军队得以完整无损地退回。
English: Wei Rui ordered his troops to form the vanguard, and he himself rode behind in a carriage. The Wei people were intimidated by his prestige, but they dared not approach from a distance, and the army was able to return intact.

古文：于是迁豫州于合肥。
现代文：从此就把豫州州治迁到合肥。
English: Since then, the administration of Yuzhou Prefecture has been moved to Hefei.

古文：五年，魏中山王元英攻北徐州，围刺史昌义之于锺离，衆兵百万，连城四十馀。
现代文：天监五年，魏中山王元英进攻北徐州，把北徐州刺史昌义之围困在钟离，魏军拥兵百万，驻扎迤逦四十多座城池。
English: In the fifth year of Tianjing, Wang Yuanying of the Wei Zhongshan attacked North Xuzhou and besieged Changyi of the North Xuzhou Jishi in Zhongli. The Wei army had a million soldiers and stationed in more than forty cities.

古文：武帝遣征北将军曹景宗拒之。
现代文：武帝派征北将军曹景宗抗击。
English: Emperor Wu sent the general Cao Jingzong to resist.

古文：次邵阳洲，筑垒相守，未敢进。
现代文：景宗驻军邵阳洲，筑垒守卫，不敢前进。
English: Jingzong garrisoned in Shaoyangzhou, fortified and guarded, did not dare to advance.

古文：帝怒，诏睿会焉，赐以龙环御刀，曰： 诸将有不用命者斩之。 
现代文：武帝发怒，下诏让韦睿来见，赐他龙环御刀，说： 诸将有不听命令的就斩了他。 
English: Emperor Wu was furious and ordered Wei Rui to come and see him. He gave him a dragon ring and a sword and said, "If you disobey my order, I will have you beheaded."

古文：睿自合肥径阴陵大泽,过涧谷，辄飞桥以济师。
现代文：韦睿出兵自合肥直接过阴陵大泽，碰上山涧峡谷，一概马上架桥渡过。
English: Wei Rui sent troops from Hefei directly across Yinling Dasawa, encountered the hawthorn canyon, and immediately built a bridge.

古文：人畏魏军盛，多劝睿缓行。睿曰： 锺离今凿穴而处，负户而汲，车驰卒奔，犹恐其后，而况缓乎。 
现代文：众人都怕魏军势盛，多劝韦睿慢点儿前进，韦睿说： 钟离现在已经危急得挖洞居住，背着门板去打水了。驾着车急忙赶去，还怕来不及，何况缓进呢！ 
English: Many people were afraid of the powerful Wei army, and advised Wei Rui to advance more slowly. Wei Rui said: Zhongli is now in danger of digging a hole to live in, and carrying the door board to fetch water. Driving a car to hurry, I'm afraid it's too late, let alone slow down!

古文：旬日而至邵阳。
现代文：十天就赶到邵阳。
English: On the tenth day, the large army arrived in Tsumo.

古文：初，帝敕景宗曰： 韦睿卿乡望，宜善敬之。 
现代文：当初，武帝告诫景宗说： 韦睿是你们家乡的人望，要好好尊重他。 
English: At first, Emperor Wu admonished Emperor Jingzong, saying, "Wei Rui is a popular figure in your hometown, you should respect him.

古文：景宗见睿甚谨。
现代文：景宗见到韦睿很恭敬。
English: When Jingzong saw Wei Rui, he was very respectful.

古文：帝闻曰： 二将和，师必济矣。 
现代文：武帝听到后说： 二将和睦，军队一定打胜仗。 
English: After hearing this, Emperor Wu said, "The two sides will be reconciled, and the army will surely win the war."

古文：睿于景宗营前二十里，夜掘长堑，树鹿角，截洲爲城，比晓而营立。
现代文：韦睿在景宗营前二十里处，连夜挖掘长壕，扎上鹿角，把河洲截断形成城防，快天亮时营寨就筑起了。
English: Wei Rui was twenty miles ahead of Jingzong's camp. He dug a trench overnight, tied antlers, and cut off the riverbank to form a city defense. The camp was built at dawn.

古文：元英大惊，以杖击地曰： 是何神也！ 
现代文：元英大惊，用棍子敲着地说： 怎么这样神速呢！ 
English: When Yuan Ying saw this, she was taken aback. She beat the ground with her cane and said, "What kind of fairy godmother is this?"

古文：景宗虑城中危惧，乃募军士言文达、洪骐驎等齎敕入城，使固城守，潜行水底，得达东城。
现代文：景宗怕钟离城中因危急而恐惧，就召募军士言文达、洪骐马等带敕令入城，让他们固守城防。军士们从河底潜水，才到达东城。
English: King Gyeongjong was afraid to leave the city due to the danger and fear, so he called for soldiers such as Jin Wenda and Hong Yeonma to enter the city with orders to let them defend the city. The soldiers dived from the bottom of the river to reach Dongseong.

古文：城中战守日苦，始知有援，于是人百其勇。
现代文：城里守卫一天比一天艰苦，这时才知道有了援兵，于是人人勇气百倍。
English: The city's guards were getting tougher and tougher every day, and it was only then that they learned of the reinforcements, which made everyone a hundred times more courageous.

古文：魏将杨大眼将万余骑来战，大眼以勇冠三军，所向皆靡。
现代文：魏将杨大眼率万余骑兵来战，杨大眼勇冠三军，所向披靡。
English: Wei sent more than ten thousand cavalrymen to fight against Yang Dajian, and Yang Dajian won the three armies bravely. He was invincible.

古文：睿结车爲阵，大眼聚骑围之。
现代文：韦睿把车辆串起来连结成阵，大眼会合骑兵包围。
English: Véronique strung the cars together in a line and the cavalry closed in.

古文：睿以强弩二千一时俱发，洞甲穿中，杀伤者衆。
现代文：韦睿指挥强弩二千一齐发射，洞穿魏军铠甲，杀伤很多。
English: Wei Rui commanded the launch of two thousand and one powerful crossbows, which pierced the armor of the Wei army and caused a lot of casualties.

古文：矢贯大眼右臂，亡魂而走。
现代文：一箭贯穿大眼右臂，丧胆而逃。
English: An arrow pierced his right arm, and he fled in despair.

古文：明旦，元英自率衆来战，睿乘素木舆，执白角如意以麾军，一日数合，英甚惮其强。
现代文：第二天早上，元英亲自率兵来战，韦睿坐白木小车，手执白角如意指挥军队，一日接战几次，元英很有点儿惧怕他的顽强。
English: The next morning, Yuan Ying personally led the soldiers to battle. Wei Rui rode in a white wooden carriage, holding a white horn in his hand to command the army. He fought several times a day. Yuan Ying was a little afraid of his tenaciousness.

古文：魏军又夜来攻城，飞矢雨集。
现代文：魏军夜里又来攻城，箭如雨下。
English: The Wei army attacked the city again at night, and the arrows rained down.

古文：睿子黯请下城以避箭，睿不许。
现代文：韦睿的儿子韦黯请他下城去避箭，他不答应。
English: Wei Rui's son Wei Han asked him to go out of the city to avoid the arrows, but he refused.

古文：军中惊，睿于城上厉声呵之乃定。
现代文：军中惊乱，韦睿在城上厉声呵斥才安定下来。
English: The army was in a state of shock, and it took a sharp rebuke from Wei Rui in the city to calm down.

古文：魏人先于邵阳洲两岸爲两桥，树栅数百步，跨淮通道。
现代文：魏人先前在邵阳洲两岸造了两座桥，树立围栅数百步，截断淮河通道。
English: The Wei people had previously built two bridges on both sides of Shaoyangzhou, erected hundreds of steps of fence, and cut off the Huaihe channel.

古文：睿装大舰，使梁郡太守冯道根、庐江太守裴邃、秦郡太守李文钊等爲水军。
现代文：韦睿打造大舰，命梁郡太守冯道根、庐江太守裴邃、秦郡太守李文钊等为水军。
English: Wei Rui built a large ship, and ordered Liang County Governor Feng Dogen, Liang River Governor Pei Jun, Qin County Governor Li Wenjun, etc. to be the navy.

古文：会淮水暴长，睿即遣之，斗舰竞发，皆临贼垒。
现代文：碰上淮水暴涨，韦睿立刻派他们出战，一时战舰齐发，全都逼近魏军营垒。
English: When Wei Rui saw the Huai Shui surging, he immediately sent them out to fight. At one time, the warships were sent out simultaneously, and they all approached the Wei camp.

古文：以小船载草，灌之以膏，从而焚其桥。
现代文：梁军又用小船载草，灌上火油，放船来烧魏军桥梁。
English: The Liang army also used small boats to carry grass, poured fire oil, and launched ships to burn the bridges of the Wei army.

古文：风怒火盛，敢死之士拔栅斫桥，水又漂疾，倏忽之间，桥栅尽坏。
现代文：风急火猛，敢死之士拔除木栅，砍断桥梁，水流又急，转眼之间，桥栅全被破坏。
English: The wind was fast and furious, the daredevils pulled out the wooden grating, cut off the bridge, the water flow was rapid, and in a blink of an eye, the bridge grating was completely destroyed.

古文：道根等皆身自搏战，军人奋勇，呼声动天地，无不一当百。
现代文：道根等人都亲身搏斗厮杀，军士们奋勇作战，喊声震天动地，无人不是以一当百。
English: Dogen and the others all fought and killed in person, the sergeants fought bravely, their shouts shook the earth, and no one was more than a hundred.

古文：魏人大溃，元英脱身遁走。
现代文：魏军大败，元英脱身逃走。
English: The Wei army was heavily defeated, and Yuan Ying escaped and fled.

古文：魏军趋水死者十余万，斩首亦如之，其馀释甲稽颡乞爲囚奴犹数十万。
现代文：魏军投水逃命淹死的有十几万，被杀的也有这么多，其余脱甲叩头求为俘虏的也有几十万。
English: The Wei army drowned more than a hundred thousand people who threw water to escape, and so many were killed. The remaining hundreds of thousands of people who disarmed and prostrated themselves and asked to be taken prisoner.

古文：睿遣报昌义之，义之且悲且喜，不暇答，但叫曰 更生！
现代文：韦睿派人通知昌义之，义之悲喜交加，顾不上回答，只是一个劲儿地喊： 又活了！又活了！ 
English: Wei Rui sent someone to inform Chang Yizhi. Yizhi's grief and joy were mixed, and he could not answer, but just shouted: I'm alive again! I'm alive again!

古文：更生！ 帝遣中书郎周舍劳军于淮上。睿积所获于军门，舍观之，谓睿曰： 君此获复与熊耳山等矣。 
现代文：武帝派中书郎周扌舍到淮河边劳军。韦睿把缴获的物资堆积在军门，周扌舍观看后，对韦睿说： 将军缴获的真和熊耳山一样高了啊！ 
English: Emperor Wu sent the middle school teacher Zhou Yanshe to the Huai River to work for the army. Wei Rui piled up the captured materials at the army gate. After watching Zhou Yanshe, he said to Wei Rui: The general's capture is really as high as Xiong Er Mountain!

古文：以功进爵爲侯。
现代文：韦睿因功晋爵为侯。
English: Veri was knighted for his services.

古文：七年，迁左卫将军，俄爲安西长史、南郡太守。
现代文：天监七年，改任左卫将军，不久任安西长史、南郡太守。
English: In the seventh year of his tenure as celestial overseer, he was reassigned to the position of General of the Left Division, and was soon appointed to the positions of Anxi Changshi and Nan County Governor.

古文：会司州刺史马仙琕自北还军，爲魏人所蹑，三关扰动。
现代文：这时赶上司州刺史马仙王卑从北边回师，被魏人追击，三关人心惶恐。
English: At this time, Wang Bei, the superior of the Shoushi Ma Xian, returned to the division from the north and was chased by the Wei people. Sanguan was terrified.

古文：诏睿督衆军援焉。
现代文：朝廷下诏命韦睿率领众军增援。
English: The imperial court ordered Wei Rui to lead the troops to reinforce.

古文：睿至安陆，增筑城二丈馀，更开大堑，起高楼。
现代文：韦睿到安陆，把城墙增高到两丈多，又开掘大沟，建起高高的敌楼。
English: Wei Rui went to Anlu, increased the city wall to more than two stories, dug a ditch, and built a tall enemy tower.

古文：衆颇讥其示弱，睿曰： 不然，爲将当有怯时。 
现代文：众人都笑他胆小，韦睿说： 不对，作将军应该有胆小的时候。 
English: Everyone laughed at him for being so timid. Wei Rui said, "No, as a general, there should be a time to be timid."

古文：是时，元英复追仙琕，将复邵阳之耻，闻睿至乃退，帝亦诏罢军。
现代文：此时，元英又追击仙王卑，要雪邵阳战败之耻，听说韦睿到了才退兵，武帝也下诏罢兵。
English: At this time, Yuan Ying also chased after Xian Wang Bi, wanting to make Xue Shaoyang feel the shame of defeat. It is said that Wei Rui only left the army when he arrived, and Emperor Wu also issued an edict to disband the army.

古文：十三年，爲丹阳尹，以公事免。
现代文：天监十三年，作丹阳尹，因公事被免职。
English: Danyang Yin, the 13th year of the celestial supervisor, was removed from his post for official business.

古文：十四年，爲雍州刺史。
现代文：十四年，作雍州刺史。
English: For 14 years, he has been writing the history of Yongzhou.

古文：初，睿起兵乡中，客阴双光泣止睿，睿还爲州，双光道候。
现代文：起初，韦睿在家乡起兵，有个叫阴双光的客人哭着劝阻他。韦睿还乡作刺史，双光在路边迎接。
English: At first, Wei Rui raised an army in his hometown, but a guest named Yin Shuangguang dissuaded him with tears. Wei Rui returned to his hometown to make history, and Shuangguang greeted him on the roadside.

古文：睿笑曰： 若从公言，乞食于路矣。 
现代文：韦睿笑着对他说： 要是听了你的话，我恐怕要在路上要饭了。 
English: Wei Rui smiled and said to him, "If I listened to you, I'm afraid I'd have to ask for food on the way."

古文：饷耕牛十头。
现代文：赏给他十头耕牛。
English: He was given ten head of oxen.

古文：睿于故旧无所惜，士大夫年七十以上，多与假板县令，乡里甚怀之。
现代文：韦睿对旧友从不吝惜，士大夫七十岁以上的，多授予假板县令之职，家乡人对他十分感怀。
English: Wei Rui never begrudged his old friend. For those over the age of 70, he would often award them the post of county magistrate. People in his hometown were very impressed with him.

古文：十五年，拜表致仕，优诏不许。
现代文：天监十五年，上表请求辞官，朝廷下诏不准以示优待。
English: In the 15th year of Heaven's Inspector, he petitioned the Imperial Court to resign from his post, but Emperor Gaozhu did not allow him to resign.

古文：征拜护军，给鼓吹一部，入直殿省。
现代文：又征召他入京封为护军。赐给鼓吹一部，到宫廷内值班。
English: He was also conscripted into the Beijing-Feng as a bodyguard. He was given a part of the propaganda and went on duty in the court.

古文：居朝廷恂恂，未尝忤视，武帝甚礼敬之。
现代文：韦睿在朝廷内待人恭谨，甚至从未和别人怒目对视过，武帝也很尊敬他。
English: Wei Rui treated people respectfully in the imperial court, and never even glared at others. Emperor Wu also respected him.

古文：性慈爱，抚孤兄子过于己子，历官所得禄赐，皆散之亲故，家无馀财。
现代文：韦睿生性慈爱，抚养哥哥的遗孤比自己的儿子还经心，历次作官所得的赏赐，都分送给亲朋故友，家无余财。
English: Wei Rui was born with a compassionate nature. He was more concerned about raising his brother's orphan than his own son. The rewards he received from his previous posts were all given to relatives, friends and old friends. The family had no spare money.

古文：后爲护军，居家无事，慕万石、陆贾之爲人，因画之于壁以自玩。
现代文：后来作护军，在家闲居无事，仰慕汉代石建、陆贾的为人，于是把他们的像画在墙上供自己观赏。
English: Later, he served as a guard, idling at home, admiring the Han Dynasty's Shi Jian and Lu Jia, so he painted their portraits on the wall for himself to admire.

古文：时虽老，暇日犹课诸儿以学。
现代文：当时虽已年老，有空闲了还教儿孙们读书。
English: At that time, although he was already old, he still taught several sons to study in his free time.

古文：第三子棱尤明经史，世称其洽闻。
现代文：三儿子韦棱尤其通晓经史，当世人都称赞他的博闻。
English: The third son, Wei Ren, was particularly knowledgeable about the history of scripture, and the world praised his erudition.

古文：睿每坐使棱说书，其所发擿，棱犹弗之逮。
现代文：韦睿经常坐着让韦棱讲说书中内容，韦睿有时对书中的发现与解说，韦棱也赶不上。
English: Veri often sits and lets Veri narrate the contents of the book. Veri sometimes cannot keep up with Veri's discoveries and explanations of the book.

古文：武帝方锐意释氏，天下咸从风而化。
现代文：武帝当时醉心于佛教，天下人也都感染上这种风习。
English: Emperor Wu was infatuated with Buddhism at that time, and people all over the world were infected with this custom.

古文：睿自以信受素薄，位居大臣，不欲与衆俯仰，所行略如佗日。
现代文：韦睿自以为信守恬淡寡欲，又位居大臣，不愿与世人随波逐流，所以行为大致如前。
English: Wei Rui thought that he was adhering to the principle of modesty and modesty, and he was a minister, and he did not want to go with the world, so his behavior was roughly the same as before.

古文：普通元年，迁侍中、车骑将车，未拜，卒于家，年七十九。
现代文：普通元年，改任侍中、车骑将军，还未任命，死在家里，享年七十九岁。
English: In the first year of the common era, he was reappointed as an aide-de-camp and chariot and cavalry general. He died at home at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：遗令薄葬，敛以时服。
现代文：死前留下话让薄葬，用平时穿的衣服装殓。
English: The will requested that he be buried in a shallow grave and that he be dressed in ordinary clothing.

古文：武帝即日临器甚恸，赠车骑将军、开府仪同三司，諡曰严。
现代文：武帝当天亲临吊唁，哭得很悲痛，追赠他为车骑将军、开府仪同三司，谥为 严 。
English: Emperor Wu sent his condolences in person on the same day, weeping with great sorrow, and posthumously awarded him the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Imperial Regalia, and the title of Grand Marshal.

古文：睿雅有旷世之度，莅人以爱惠爲本，所居必有政绩。
现代文：韦睿常有稀世的风度，待人以仁爱恩惠为本，到哪儿任职必定有政绩。
English: Wei Rui often has a rare demeanor, treats people with benevolence and grace as the basis, and must have political achievements wherever he serves.

古文：以功授轻车将军，加持节，卒于城内。
现代文：带兵仁爱，士兵的营帐没搭好，他就不去睡觉，井灶没有挖成，他也不肯自己先吃饭。
English: With the soldiers' benevolence and love, he would not go to sleep if the soldiers' camp was not set up, the well was not dug, and he would not eat first.

古文：初，黯爲太仆卿，而兄子粲爲左卫率，黯以故常怏怏，谓人曰： 韦粲已落骅骝前，朝廷是能用才不？ 
现代文：穿戴像个儒生，即使是临阵交锋，也经常穿宽松的官服乘车而行，手执竹如意来指挥进退。他和裴邃同为梁代名将，别人谁也比不上。当初，邵阳之战，昌义之很感激韦睿，请曹景宗一起和韦睿聚会，并出钱二十万让大家赌着玩。景宗掷子得 雉 赢采，韦睿慢掷也得一个 卢 的赢采，可他立即取一子翻过来，这叫违反规则，于是变成了 塞 这个输采。
English: Dressed like a Confucian scholar, even in the face-to-face confrontation, he often wore a loose official uniform and rode in a car, holding a bamboo in his hand to command the advance and retreat. He and Pei Xuan are the same as Liang, and no one else can match them. At the beginning, in the battle of Shaoyang, Chang Yizhi was very grateful to Wei Rui, and asked Cao Jingzong to gather with Wei Rui, and pay 200,000 yuan for everyone to play. Jingzong's throw was a win, Wei Rui's slow throw was also a win, but he immediately turned one over, which was a violation of

古文：识者颇以此窥之。裴邃字深明，河东闻喜人，魏冀州刺史徽之后也。
现代文：这次打胜仗以后，景宗与各将帅争先入朝报捷，只有韦睿跟在后面，他不爱争强好胜大都像这样，当时人特别因此而称赞他。裴邃，字深明，河东闻喜人，原魏国冀州刺史裴徽的后代。
English: After the victory of this battle, Jingzong and the generals and marshals were the first to enter the court to report the victory, only Wei Rui followed behind. He did not like to compete for strength and wanted to win. Most of them were like this, and people especially praised him for it at that time. Pei Xuan, with a deep and clear character, was well-liked by the people of Hedong, and was a descendant of Pei Hui, who was originally from Jizhou, Wei.

古文：祖寿孙，寓居寿阳，爲宋武帝前军长史。
现代文：祖父名寿孙，寓居于寿阳，任宋武帝的前军长史。
English: His grandfather, named Shousun, lived in Shouyang and was the former military commander of Emperor Songwu.

古文：父仲穆，骁骑将军。
现代文：父亲仲穆，任骁骑将军。
English: His father, Pei Zhongmu, was a cavalry general.

古文：邃十岁能属文，善左氏春秋。
现代文：裴邃十岁就能写诗文，喜爱《左氏春秋》。
English: At the age of ten, Pei Yao could write poetry and loved "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：齐东昏践阼，始安王萧遥光爲扬州刺史，引邃爲参军。
现代文：齐东昏侯继位，始安王萧遥光任扬州刺史，任用他当了参军。
English: Qidong Wenghou succeeded to the throne, Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang was appointed Yangzhou governor, and he was appointed to join the army.

古文：遥光败，邃还寿阳，会刺史裴叔业以寿阳降魏，邃遂随衆北徙。
现代文：遥光兵败之后，裴邃回到寿阳，正值刺史裴叔业将寿阳向魏国投降，裴邃便随着众人北迁。
English: After the defeat of Yuan Guang, Pei Yao returned to Shouyang. At the time of the death of Shi Pei's uncle, who surrendered Shouyang to Wei, Pei Yao moved north with everyone else.

古文：魏宣武帝雅重之。
现代文：魏宣武帝很敬重他。
English: Emperor Wei Xuanwu held him in high esteem.

古文：仕魏爲魏郡太守。
现代文：他在魏国担任魏郡太守。
English: He served as the governor of Wei County in Wei.

古文：魏遣王肃镇寿阳，邃固求随肃，密图南归。
现代文：魏派王肃镇守寿阳时，裴邃坚决请求随同王肃一起，暗中打算回归南方。
English: Wei dispatched Wang Su Zhen to guard Shouyang, Pei Yu firmly requested to follow Wang Su and secretly planned to return to the south.

古文：梁天监初，自拔南还，除后军谘议参军。
现代文：梁朝天监初年，他自己逃回南方，被任命为后军谘议参军。
English: In the first year of Liang's time as overseer of heaven, he himself fled to the south and was appointed to advise and join the army.

古文：邃求边境自效，以爲庐江太守。
现代文：裴邃请求到边境去为国效力，朝廷委任他为庐江太守。
English: Pei Jun requested to go to the border to serve the country, and the court appointed him as the governor of the Minjiang River.

古文：五年，征邵阳洲，魏人爲长桥断淮以济，邃筑垒逼桥，每战辄克，于是密作没突舰。
现代文：天监五年，他进攻邵阳洲，魏人用长桥隔断淮河南渡，裴邃在近桥处修建城垒，每次出击都取得胜利。于是，他又暗暗制造了一种没突舰。
English: In the fifth year of the Heaven's Guardian, he attacked Shao Yangzhou, the Wei people used a long bridge to cut off the southern crossing of the Huai River, and Pei Jun built a fortress near the bridge. Each attack was successful. Therefore, he secretly built a non-piercing ship.

古文：会甚雨，淮水暴溢，邃乘舰径造桥侧，进击，大破之。
现代文：正值大雨时节，淮河暴涨，裴邃乘坐没突舰直到桥边进击敌人，大败敌军。
English: During the heavy rain season, the Huaihe River surged, and Pei Wei rode a barge to the edge of the bridge to attack the enemy, defeating the enemy army.

古文：以功封夷陵县子。
现代文：他因功而被封为夷陵县子。
English: He was awarded the title of "Emperor of Yiling County" for his achievements.

古文：迁广陵太守，与乡人共入魏武庙，因论帝王功业。
现代文：改任广陵太守时，他和乡里人一起进入魏武帝庙，于是一起谈论帝王的功业。
English: When he was appointed Guangling Taishou, he and the villagers entered the Weiwu Imperial Temple together, so they talked about the emperor's exploits.

古文：其妻甥王篆之密啓梁武帝云： 裴邃多大言，有不臣迹。 
现代文：他的妻子的外甥王篆之秘密报告梁武帝说： 裴邃喜欢说大话，有不忠的迹象。 
English: His wife's nephew Wang Xizhi's secret report to Liang Wudi said: Pei Xizhi likes to talk big, there are signs of infidelity.

古文：由是左迁始安太守。
现代文：于是被贬为始安太守。
English: As a result, he was demoted to the position of the first governor of An Province.

古文：邃志立功边陲，不愿闲远，乃致书于吕僧珍曰： 昔阮咸、顔延有二始之叹，吾才不逮古人，今爲三始，非其愿也，将如之何！ 
现代文：裴邃决心要在边境建功立业，不愿担任清闲疏远的官职，便写信给吕僧珍说： 以前阮咸、颜延之有 二始 的感叹，我才能比不上古人，如今已是 三始 了，这不是我的本愿，有什么办法呢？ 
English: Pei Xuan was determined to make a difference at the border, and did not want to hold an official position that was idle and distant, so he wrote to Lü Sengzhen, saying: In the past, Ruan Xian and Yan Yan had second thoughts, and I could not compare with the ancients, but now it is the third time, this is not my original wish, what can I do?

古文：后爲竟陵太守，开置屯田,公私便之。
现代文：后来，他担任了竟陵太守，便开设屯田，公家和私人都得到好处。
English: Later, when he served as the governor of Qionglin, he opened a military garrison, benefiting both the public and private sectors.

古文：再迁西戎校尉、北梁秦二州刺史，复开创屯田数千顿，仓廪盈实，省息边运，人吏获安。
现代文：再迁任西戎校尉、北梁秦二州刺史，又开创屯田几千顷，仓库充实，减少往边境运输粮食的重负，民众官吏们都得到休息。
English: He then moved to Xijun as a school captain and to Beiliang, Qin and Erzhou to make history. He also created several thousand hectares of military camps, filled warehouses, reduced the burden of transporting grain to the border, and civil servants were given a rest.

古文：乃相率饷绢千馀匹，邃从容曰： 汝等不应尔，吾又不可逆。 
现代文：于是，他们自发相互聚集起来，送给裴邃绢一千多匹。裴邃安详地对他们说： 你们不必这样做，不过我又不能有负你们的盛情。 
English: So they spontaneously gathered together and gave more than a thousand horses to Pei Xuan. Pei Xuan calmly said to them, "You don't have to do this, but I can't be responsible for your generosity."

古文：纳其二匹而已。
现代文：于是他收下了二匹绢。
English: So he took in two mules.

古文：入爲大匠卿。
现代文：后被召入朝担任大匠卿。
English: He was later called to the imperial court to serve as Daisho-kyo.

古文：普通二年，义州刺史文僧明以州入魏，魏军来援，以邃爲信武将军，督衆军讨焉。
现代文：普通二年，义州刺史文僧明以该州归附魏国。魏军前来援助，朝廷任命裴邃为信武将军，率领军队前去征讨。
English: Two years later, Yizhou's famous monk Ming the Great annexed the state to Wei. The Wei army came to help, and the imperial court appointed Pei Jun as General Xinwu to lead the army to conquer.

古文：邃深入魏境，出其不意。
现代文：裴邃深入魏国境内，出其不意发动进攻。
English: Pei Yan penetrated deep into the territory of Wei and launched a surprise attack.

古文：魏所署义州刺史封寿据檀公岘，邃击破之，遂围其城。
现代文：魏国任命的义州刺史封寿据守檀公岘，裴邃打败了他并进而包围了这座城。
English: Wei appointed the Yizhou statesman Feng Shou to guard Dangong, but Pei defeated him and proceeded to besiege the city.

古文：寿请降，义州平。
现代文：封寿请求归降，义州被讨平。
English: Fong Shou requested to surrender, and Yizhou was leveled.

古文：除豫州刺史，加督，镇合肥。
现代文：改任裴邃为豫州刺史，加封都督，镇守合肥。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Hefei, the governor of Hefei, and the governor of Hefei.

古文：四年，大军北侵，以邃督征讨诸军事，先袭寿阳，攻其郛，斩门而入，一日战九合，爲后军蔡秀成失道不至，邃以援绝拔还。
现代文：普通四年，梁军大举北征，任命裴邃总督征讨诸军事，他先领兵袭击寿阳，攻下外城后，破门而入，一天之内九次和敌人合战，但由于后军蔡秀成迷失道路没有按时赶到，裴邃因后援断绝，只得撤军而回。
English: In the past four years, Liang's army launched a large-scale northern expedition and appointed Pei Yu as the governor to recruit soldiers. He first led the army to attack Shouyang. After capturing the outer city, he broke into the gate and fought with the enemy nine times in one day. However, since the rear army of Cai Xiucheng lost the road and did not arrive on time, Pei Yu had to withdraw due to the lack of backup.

古文：于是邃复整兵，收集士卒，令诸将各以服色相别。
现代文：接着，裴邃又整顿军队，收集士卒，让众将各自穿上不同颜色的服装以相互区别。
English: At Yuanxiang, Pei again reorganized the army and gathered soldiers, ordering several generals to distinguish each other with different clothing colors.

古文：邃自爲黄袍骑，先攻拔狄丘、甓城、黎浆，又屠安成、马头、沙陵等戍。
现代文：裴邃自己身穿黄袍率领骑兵，先攻下狄丘、甓城、黎浆，又扫平安成、马头、沙陵等戍地。
English: Wearing a yellow robe, Pei Xuan himself led the cavalry, and first attacked Diqiu, Shicheng, Li Li, and swept Heiancheng, Ma Tou, Saling and other barren lands.

古文：明年，略地至汝、潁间，所在回应。
现代文：第二年，所控制的地盘已经到了汝、颍地区了，各地均纷纷响应。
English: In the second year, the controlled territory has already reached the Ru and Handan regions, and all regions have responded.

古文：魏寿阳守将长孙承业、河间王元琛出城挑战，邃临淮叹曰： 今日不破河间，方爲谢玄所笑。 
现代文：魏国的寿阳守将长孙承业、河间王元琛出城挑战，裴邃到达淮水边叹息着说： 今日不破河间，就要被谢玄所取笑了！ 
English: The Shouyang governor of Wei Province challenged the eldest grandson of Chengye and Wang Yuanxuan of Hema to leave the city. Pei Xuan arrived at the edge of Huai Shui and said with a sigh: If you do not break through Hema today, you will be made fun of by Xie Xuan!

古文：乃爲四甄以待之。令直阁将军李祖怜僞遁以引承业，承业等悉衆追之，四甄竞发，魏衆大败，斩首万馀级。
现代文：他便布置了四甄的阵容来等待魏军到达，同时命令直阁将军李祖怜装出败逃的样子来引诱长孙承业，长孙承业等便率领全体人马追击，四翼的伏兵突然大起，魏军大败，被斩首一万多级。
English: He then arranged a four-tiered lineup to wait for the arrival of the Wei army. At the same time, he ordered General Li Zu'er to disguise himself as a defeated fugitive to lure the eldest grandson Chengye. The eldest grandson Chengye led all the men and horses to pursue. The four-winged ambush suddenly rose, the Wei army was defeated, and more than ten thousand were beheaded.

古文：承业奔走，闭门不敢复出。
现代文：长孙承业逃走，关紧了城门不敢再出战。
English: The eldest grandson, Chengye, ran away, closed the city gate and did not dare to go to war again.

古文：在军疾笃，命衆军守备，送丧还合肥。
现代文：裴邃在军中病重，下令众军严加防备，护送他回到合肥去安葬。
English: Pei Jun was seriously ill in the army, ordered the troops to be on high alert, and escorted him back to Hefei for burial.

古文：寻卒，赠侍中、左卫将军，进爵爲侯，諡曰烈。
现代文：不久去世，追赠为侍中、左卫将军，晋封爵位为侯，谥为烈。
English: He died soon after, and was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Rank and General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards. He was also knighted and awarded the title of Marquis.

古文：邃沈深有思略，爲政宽明，能得士心，居身方正，有威重。将吏惮之，少敢犯法。
现代文：裴邃善于思考，有深远的谋略，为政宽和明察，很能得到士民百姓之心，他自身正直无私，有很高的威望，将士们都怕他，很少有人敢违犯法令。
English: Pei Xuan is good at thinking, has far-reaching strategies, is politically broad-minded and clear-sighted, and is able to win the hearts of the people. He is honest and selfless, and has high prestige. The generals are afraid of him, and few people dare to violate the law.

古文：及卒，淮、肥间莫不流涕，以爲邃不死，当大辟土宇。
现代文：当他去世后，淮河流域、合肥一带民众无不痛哭流涕，认为裴邃如果不是早死的话，必定会大大扩展土地。
English: After his death, the people in the Huaihe River basin and Hefei area all cried bitterly, believing that if Pei Xuan had not died early, he would have greatly expanded the land.

古文：子之礼嗣。
现代文：他的儿子裴之礼继承了他的爵位。
English: His son Pei Zili inherited his title.

