古文：茹瑺，衡山人。
现代文：茹瑺，衡山人。
English: Ruyi, from Hengshan.

古文：洪武中，由监生除承敕郎，历通政使。
现代文：洪武年间，由监生被授予承敕郎，历任通政使。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was awarded the title of Chengyuangro by the procurator, and successively served as a political envoy.

古文：勤于职，太祖贤之。
现代文：他勤于职守，太祖觉得他有贤才。
English: He was diligent in his duties, and his great-grandfather thought he was a genius.

古文：二十三年拜右副都御史，又试兵部尚书，寻实授，加太子少保。
现代文：二十三年他任为右副都御史，又代理兵部尚书，不久任为正职，加封为太子少保。
English: In 233, he was appointed as the right-hand vice-governor of the capital, and also acting military governor. He was soon appointed to a full-time position and given the additional title of crown prince and junior protector.

古文：及惠帝即位，改吏部，与黄子澄不相能，刑部尚书暴昭发其赃罪，出掌河南布政司事。寻复召为兵部尚书。
现代文：惠帝即位后，他改任吏部尚书，与黄子澄不相容。刑部尚书暴昭揭发他贪赃之罪，他被遣出京掌管河南布政司事务，不久又把他召回任兵部尚书。
English: After Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the position of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, which was incompatible with Huang Zicheng. The Secretary of the Ministry of Justice exposed his crime of embezzlement, he was sent out of Beijing to take charge of the affairs of Henan Province, and soon he was recalled to the position of the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：燕兵至龙潭，帝遣瑺及曹国公李景隆、都督同知王佐诣燕军议和。
现代文：燕兵到龙潭时，皇上遣茹瑺和曹国公李景隆、都督同知王佐前往燕军中议和。
English: When Yan's army arrived at Longtan, the emperor sent Zhu Xi, the Duke of Cao, Li Jinglong, and the governor of the capital, Wang Zuo, to discuss peace with Yan's army.

古文：瑺等见成祖，伏地流汗，不能发一言。
现代文：茹瑺等人见到成祖时，伏地流汗，一句话也说不出来。
English: When Zhu Xi and others saw Cheng Zu, they were sweating profusely and couldn't say a word.

古文：成祖曰： 公等言即言耳，何惧至是。 
现代文：成祖说 ：公等要说什么尽管说，何必怕成这样？ 
English: Cheng Zu said, "Whatever the public wants to say can be said, why be afraid of doing so?"

古文：久之，乃言奉诏割地讲和。
现代文：过了很久，他们才说是奉皇上的诏令来割地求和。
English: It was not until much later that they said they had been ordered by the emperor to divide the land and sue for peace.

古文：成祖笑曰： 吾无罪而削为庶人，今救死，何以地为！
现代文：成祖笑道 ：我无罪而被废为庶人，现在是起来救死，并不是为了土地。
English: Cheng Zu laughed and said, "I was not guilty and was dethroned as a commoner. Now I am standing up to save my life, and not for the sake of land."

古文：且皇考封诸子，已各有分地矣。
现代文：而且皇考分封诸子时，已经都各有分地了。
English: Moreover, when the imperial examination divided the sons of emperors, they already had their own land.

古文：其缚奸臣来，吾即解甲谒孝陵归藩。 
现代文：你们去将奸臣绑来，我就马上解甲拜谒孝陵，然后回到封地北平。 
English: You go and tie up the treacherous vassal, I will immediately disarm and pay homage to the tomb of Sun Yat-sen, and then return to the fief of Beiping.

古文：瑺等唯唯顿首还。
现代文：茹瑺等人唯唯答应，叩头而返。
English: Zhu Xi and others simply agreed and returned with their heads bowed.

古文：成祖入京师，召瑺。
现代文：成祖入京师后，召见茹瑺。
English: After Cheng Zu entered the Beijing division, he summoned Ru Ru.

古文：瑺首劝进。成祖既即位，下诏言景隆、瑺、佐及陈瑄事太祖忠，功甚重。
现代文：茹瑺首先劝成祖登基，成祖即位后，下诏说李景隆、茹瑺、王佐和陈蠧侍奉太祖很忠诚，功劳很重。
English: Zhu Xi first persuaded Cheng Zu to ascend to the throne. After Cheng Zu ascended to the throne, he issued an imperial edict saying that Li Jinglong, Zhu Xi, Wang Zuo and Chen Xi had served the great-grandfather loyally and with great merit.

古文：封瑺忠诚伯，食禄一千石，终其身。
现代文：封茹瑺为忠诚伯，食禄一千石，终其一生不改。
English: He was awarded the title of "loyal subject" and a stipend of 1,000 koku, which remained unchanged for the rest of his life.

古文：仍兵部尚书、太子少保。
现代文：仍任兵部尚书、太子少保。
English: He still held the posts of Hyobusho and Taishi shoho.

古文：选其子鉴为秦府长安郡主仪宾。
现代文：选他儿子茹鉴为秦府长安郡主仪宾。
English: He chose his son, Ru Jian, to be the guest of honor of the Qin governor of Chang'an.

古文：即命瑺出营郡主府第。
现代文：即命茹瑺出去营建郡主府第。
English: He immediately set out to build the county seat.

古文：还朝，坐不送赵王，遣归里。
现代文：回朝后，茹瑺因犯不送赵王罪，被遣回家乡。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Zhu Xi was sent back to his hometown for the crime of not sending Zhao Wang.

古文：既而为家人所讼，逮至京。
现代文：随后他被家人投诉，逮到京师，后被放回。
English: Subsequently, he was complained by his family, arrested by the Beijing Division, and then released.

古文：释还。过长沙不谒谷王，王以为言。
现代文：经过长沙时他不拜谒谷王，谷王向皇上提到这事。
English: When he passed through Changsha, he did not bow to the king of Shibuya. The king of Shibuya mentioned this to the emperor.

古文：时方重藩王礼，谷王又开金川门有功，帝意向之。
现代文：当时正重藩王之礼，谷王又因打开金川门有功，皇上心里向着他。
English: At that time, he was paying homage to the king of the domain, and since the valley king was also credited with opening the Kanagawa Gate, the emperor's heart went out to him.

古文：陈瑛遂劾瑺违祖制，逮下锦衣狱。
现代文：陈瑛便弹劾茹瑺违背祖制，茹瑺被逮入锦衣卫监狱。
English: Chen Ying then impeached Zhu Rong for violating the patriarchal system, and Zhu Rong was arrested and sent to Jin Rongwei Prison.

古文：瑺知不免，命子铨市毒药，服之死。
现代文：茹瑺知道罪不可免，使叫儿子茹铨在市场上买来毒药，吃下去而死。
English: Knowing that his sin was unavoidable, Zhu Rong ordered his son Zhu Rong to buy poison in the market, eat it and die.

古文：时永乐七年二月也。
现代文：当时是永乐七年二月。
English: It was February of the seventh year of Yongle.

古文：法司劾铨毒其父，请以谋杀父母论。
现代文：法司弹劾茹铨毒害他的父亲，请以谋杀父母之律给他定罪。
English: The Justice Department should impeach Zhu Rong for poisoning his father, and convict him of murdering his parents.

古文：后以铨实承父命，减死，与兄弟家属二十七人谪戍广西河池。
现代文：后来因为茹铨实是承父亲之命，便减去死罪，将他和兄弟家属共二十七人贬到广西河池戍守。
English: Later, because he was following his father's orders, the death penalty was commuted and he and his brothers and family members, a total of 27 people, were sent to Hechi, Guangxi Province.

古文：仁宗立，释还。
现代文：仁宗即位后，他们被放回。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ninsong, they were allowed to return.

古文：宣宗与所没田庐。
现代文：宣宗发回他们被没收的田地房舍。
English: Xuan Zong sent them back to their confiscated fields and houses.

古文：瑺居官谨慎，谦和有容。
现代文：茹瑺为官谨慎，谦和宽容。
English: Zhu Rong is a prudent, modest and tolerant official.

古文：其死也，人颇惜之。
现代文：他的死，人们颇觉得惋惜。
English: His death has been widely mourned.

古文：严震直，字子敏，乌程人。
现代文：严震直，字子敏，乌程人。
English: Yan Zhenzhi, Zi Zimin, Wu Chengren.

古文：洪武时以富民择粮长，岁部粮万石至京师，无后期，帝才之。
现代文：洪武时他以富民被选为粮长，每年安排将一万石粮食运到京师，从没有延期，皇上觉得他很有才干。
English: At the time of Hongwu, he was elected as the chief of grain with the rich people. Every year, he arranged to transport ten thousand kilos of grain to Beijing. There was never a delay. The emperor thought he was very talented.

古文：二十三年特授通政司参议，再迁为工部侍郎。二十六年六月进尚书。
现代文：二十三年特任他为通政司参议，升为工部侍郎，二十六年六月进升为尚书。
English: In 1923, he was appointed as a special adviser to the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, promoted to Chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, and in June, 1926, he was promoted to the position of Senior Adviser.

古文：时朝廷事营建，集天下工匠于京师，凡二十余万户。
现代文：当时朝廷正进行工程建设，将天下工匠集中到京师，总数达二十余万户。
English: At that time, the imperial court was carrying out construction projects, concentrating craftsmen from all over the world in Beijing, with a total of more than 200,000 households.

古文：震直请户役一人，书其姓名、所业于官，有役则按籍更番召之，役者称便。
现代文：震直请每户役使一人，把他的姓名和从事的职业登记于官，要役使时便按名册轮番召唤，服役的人都说方便。
English: Zhen Zhi directly invited one servant from each household to register his name and occupation with the official. When a servant is needed, he will be summoned in rotation according to the roster. Those who serve said it was convenient.

古文：乡民诉其弟侄不法，帝付震直讯。
现代文：乡民投诉说他的弟侄不法，皇上交由震直审问。
English: The villagers complained that his brother and nephew were illegitimate, and the emperor sent Zhen Zhi to interrogate them.

古文：具狱上，帝以为不欺，赦其弟侄。
现代文：结案上呈后，皇上觉得不欺，赦免了他的弟侄。
English: After the case was closed, the emperor felt vindicated and pardoned his nephew.

古文：已，坐事降御史，数雪冤狱。
现代文：后来他因犯有过失被降为御史，任内他多次平反冤狱。
English: Later, he was demoted to goshi for negligence, and during his term of office he was repeatedly rehabilitated from unjust imprisonment.

古文：二十八年讨龙州，使震直偕尚书任亨泰谕安南。
现代文：二十八年讨伐龙州，朝廷派震直偕同尚书任亨泰去谕告安南。
English: In the twenty-eighth year of the Longzhou Campaign, the imperial court sent Zhen Zhaojun and Shang Shu Ren Hengtai to report to Annan.

古文：还，条奏利病，称旨。
现代文：回来后，震直上奏论利弊，很合皇上意旨。
English: After returning, he immediately reported on the pros and cons, which was very much in line with the emperor's intention.

古文：寻命修广西兴安县灵渠。
现代文：不久命他修广西兴安县灵渠。
English: Shortly before his death, he built the Lingqiu Canal in Xing'an County, Guangxi.

古文：审度地势，导湘、漓二江，浚渠五千余丈，筑渼潭及龙母祠土堤百五十余丈，又增高中江石堤，建陡闸三十有六，凿去滩石之碍舟者，漕运悉通。
现代文：震直审度地势，疏导湘、漓二江，疏浚渠道五千余丈，修筑氵美潭和龙母祠一带土堤一百五十余丈又增高中江石堤，建三十六座陡闸，凿击妨碍行船的滩石，使漕运全部畅通。
English: The seismic direct examination of the topography, the dredging of the Hunan and Qin Erjiang Rivers, the dredging of more than 5,000 channels, the construction of more than 150-meter-long earthen dikes and the addition of high-level river stone dikes in the vicinity of the Qunmei Lake and the Longmao Ancestral Hall, the construction of 36 steep locks, and the excavation of beach stones that impede navigation, so that all rowing traffic can flow smoothly.

古文：归奏，帝称善。
现代文：他回来后上奏，皇上称善。
English: When he returned, he played it, and the emperor praised his skill.

古文：三十年二月疏言： 广东旧运盐八十五万余引于广西，召商中买。
现代文：三十年二月，震直上疏说： 广东原来运盐八十五万余引到广西，招商转卖。
English: In February of the thirtieth year, Zhenzhi Shangso said: Guangdong originally transported more than eight hundred and fifty thousand tons of salt to Guangxi, attracting merchants to resell.

古文：今终年所运，才十之一。
现代文：现在全年所运，才相当原来的十分之一。
English: Now the whole year's shipment is only about one-tenth of the original.

古文：请分三十万八千余引贮广东，别募商入粟广西之粮卫所，支盐广东，鬻之江西南安、赣州、吉安、临江四府便。 
现代文：请分出三十万八千余引贮存于广东，另招募商人输运粮食到广西缺乏粮食的卫所，据此领取盐引，然后到广东支盐，卖到江西南安、赣州、吉安、临江四府为便。 
English: Please allocate more than 308,000 salt lead to be stored in Guangdong, and recruit merchants to transport grain to health centers in Guangxi where there is a shortage of grain, according to which they will receive salt lead, and then to Guangdong's salt, and sell it to the four prefectures of An, Zhangzhou, Ji'an and Linjiang in southwest Jiangsu Province.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：广盐行于江西自此始。
现代文：广东盐行销江西即从此开始。
English: The marketing of Guangdong salt in Jiangxi will begin from now on.

古文：其年四月擢右都御史，寻复为工部尚书。
现代文：这一年四月他升为右都御史，不久又重任工部尚书。
English: In April of that year, he was promoted to the post of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and soon he was reappointed to the post of Shosho of the Engineering Department.

古文：建文中，尝督饷山东，已而致仕。
现代文：建文年间，他曾到山东督粮饷，不久退休。
English: During the years of Jianwen, he once went to Shandong to be the governor of Guanzhong, and soon retired.

古文：成祖即位，召见，命以故官巡视山西。至泽州，病卒。
现代文：成祖即位后，召见他，命他以原官巡视山西，行到泽州时，他病逝。
English: After Chengzu ascended to the throne, he summoned him and ordered him to inspect Shanxi with his original official. When he went to Zezhou, he died of illness.

古文：张紞，字昭季，富平人。
现代文：张紞，字昭季，富平人。
English: Zhang Ye, Zi Zhaoji, Fuping Ren.

古文：洪武中，举明经。
现代文：洪武年间，考中明经科。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was the top student in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：为东宫侍书，累迁试左通政。
现代文：任东宫侍书，累升为代理左通政。
English: He served as an attendant of the East Palace, and was promoted to the post of acting Sadongsei.

古文：十五年，云南平，出为左参政。
现代文：十五年，云南平定，张紞出任左参政。
English: Fifteen years later, Yunnan was pacified, and Zhang Ye became a left-wing politician.

古文：陛辞，帝赋诗二章赐之。
现代文：向皇上辞行时，皇上赋诗两首赐给他。
English: When he resigned to the emperor, the emperor gave him two poems.

古文：历左布政使。
现代文：历任左布政使。
English: Successive political envoys of the Left Bloc.

古文：二十年春入觐，治行为天下第一，特令吏部勿考。
现代文：二十八年春，张紞入京朝见皇上，他的治绩为天下第一，皇上特令吏部不用考查他。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, Zhang Rong entered the imperial court in Beijing to meet the emperor. He was the first in the world in terms of his performance, and the imperial officials did not have to examine him.

古文：赐玺书曰： 曩者讨平西南，命官抚守，尔紞实先往，于今五年。
现代文：赐给他玺书说 ：先前讨平西南，派官去抚治，你张紞实是先往，至今五年。
English: He was given a copy of a letter saying, "Previously, you pacified the southwestern region and sent officials to govern it. You, Zhang Xuan, were the first to do so, and it has been five years since then.

古文：诸蛮听服，诚信相孚，克恭乃职，不待考而朕知其功出天下十二牧上。
现代文：当地蛮夷听服，相互敬诚守信，你克尽职守，不待考核朕已知道你的功绩出其他十二位布政使之上。
English: Listen to the local barbarians, respect and keep faith with each other, do your duty, do not wait for assessment, I already know that your achievements are above the other twelve cloth envoys.

古文：故嘉尔绩，命尔仍治滇南。
现代文：所以嘉奖你的业绩，命你仍治理云南。
English: Therefore, I commend your performance and order you to continue to govern Yunnan.

古文：往，钦哉。 
现代文：你去吧，钦哉。 
English: You go ahead, Kinsha.

古文：紞在滇凡十七年，土地贡赋、法令条格皆所裁定。
现代文：张紞在云南前后十七年，凡土地贡赋、法令条例，都是他所裁定。
English: In the seventeen years that Zhang Ye was in Yunnan, all land tribute and laws and regulations were decided by him.

古文：民间丧祭冠婚咸有定制，务变其俗。
现代文：民间的丧葬祭祀、加冠婚娶，都定有礼制，力图改变当地风俗。
English: Folk funerals and ceremonies, as well as weddings, all have a certain etiquette, and efforts are being made to change local customs.

古文：滇人遵用之。
现代文：云南人民都遵照采用。
English: The people of Yunnan have all adopted it.

古文：朝士董伦、王景辈谪其地，皆接以礼意。
现代文：朝廷官员董伦、王景等人被贬到云南，张紞都以礼接待。
English: Court officials such as Dong Lun and Wang Jing were exiled to Yunnan, and Zhang Ye received them with courtesy.

古文：惠帝即位，召为吏部尚书。
现代文：惠帝即位后，把他召回任吏部尚书。
English: After Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, he was recalled to the position of secretary.

古文：诏征遗逸士集阙下。
现代文：皇上下诏征集隐逸之士到朝廷。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to recruit secluded people to the imperial court.

古文：紞所选用，皆当其才。
现代文：张紞所选用的，都实有才干。
English: All the actors Zhang Ye has chosen are really talented.

古文：会修《太祖实录》，命试翰林编纂官，紞奏杨士奇第一。
现代文：正值编修《太祖实录》，命考试翰林编纂官，张紞上奏杨士奇为第一名。
English: He was compiling the "Ancestor's Record" at the time, and was appointed as the compiler of Hanlin, and Yang Shiji was the first.

古文：士奇由是知名。
现代文：杨士奇从此出名。
English: Yang Shiqui has been famous ever since.

古文：成祖入京师，录中朝奸臣二十九人，紞与焉。
现代文：成祖进入京师后，登记朝廷中奸臣二十九人。张紞也在其中。
English: After Cheng Zu entered Beijing, he registered twenty-nine treacherous vassals in the imperial court. Zhang Ye was also among them.

古文：以茹瑺言，宥仍故职。
现代文：因茹王常的说明，成祖宽宥了张紞，仍任原职。
English: Due to the explanation of King Ru, Cheng Zu pardoned Zhang Xuan and remained in his original position.

古文：无何，帝临朝而叹，咎建文时之改官制者。
现代文：不久，皇上临朝时发出叹息，责怪建文时期改官制的人。
English: Before long, the emperor sighed as he approached the throne, blaming those who had changed the system of government during the Jianwen period.

古文：乃令紞及户部尚书王钝解职务，月给半俸，居京师。
现代文：于是令张紞和户部尚书王钝解除职务，每月给予一半俸禄，仍让他们住在京师。
English: As a result, Zhang Ye and the head of the household, Shang Shu Wang Blunt, were relieved of their duties and given half of their monthly salary, but they were still allowed to live in Beijing.

古文：紞惧，自经于吏部后堂，妻子相率投池中死。
现代文：张紞害怕了，在吏部后堂上吊而死，他的妻儿也相继投入池中而死。
English: Frightened, Zhang Yao hanged himself in the back hall of the administrative department, and his wife and child also died after being thrown into the pond.

古文：紞在吏部，值变官制，小吏张祖言曰： 高皇帝立法创制，规模甚远。
现代文：张紞在吏部时，正值变更官制。小吏张祖说： 高皇帝立法创制，设想很深远。
English: Zhang Zu, a minor official, said: Emperor Gao's idea of creating a legislative system is very far-reaching.

古文：今更之，未必胜，徒滋人口，愿公力持之。 
现代文：如今要加以改变，未必能胜过旧制，不过是徒增官员人数而已，愿公努力反对。 
English: To change it now would not necessarily be better than the old system, but would only increase the number of officials. I am willing to work hard to oppose it.

古文：紞不能用，然心贤祖，奏为京卫知事。
现代文：张紞无法采用他的建议，但心里认为张祖很贤，把他上奏为京师某卫的知事。
English: Zhang Ye could not accept his suggestion, but he thought that Zhang Zu was very wise and promoted him to the governor of Beijing Division of Wei.

古文：后紞死，属吏无敢视者，唯祖经纪其丧。
现代文：后来张紞死后，他的下属中没有一个敢去探视，只有张祖办理了他的丧事。
English: Later, after Zhang Ye's death, none of his subordinates dared to visit him, and only Zhang Zu took care of his funeral.

古文：世传燕师入京，紞即自经死；严震直奉使至云南，遇建文君悲怆吞金死。
现代文：世人相传燕王军队入京时，张紞即上吊而死；严震直奉命出使到云南，遇到建文君，因悲怆吞金而死。
English: According to legend, when Yan Wang's army entered Beijing, Zhang Ye immediately hanged himself to death; Yan Zhenzhu was ordered to go to Yunnan, met Jianwenjun, and died of grief.

古文：王钝，字士鲁，太康人。
现代文：但考国史的记载，这些传言都不真实。王钝，字士鲁，太康人。
English: However, according to the records of national history, these rumors are not true. Wang Blunt, Zhi Lu, Taikang people.

古文：元末猗氏县尹。
现代文：元朝末年任猗氏县尹。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed to the post of Yin of Jixi County.

古文：洪武中，征授礼部主事，历官福建参政，以廉慎闻。
现代文：洪武年间，征召他为礼部主事，历任福建参政，以廉洁谨慎而闻名。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was conscripted to be the head of the ceremonial department. Successive Fujian governors have participated in politics and are known for their integrity and prudence.

古文：遣谕麓川，却其赠。
现代文：皇上派他谕告麓川，王钝不接受当地的馈赠。
English: The emperor sent him to tell Lukawa that Wang Blunt would not accept local gifts.

古文：或曰： 不受恐远人疑贰。 
现代文：有人说： 不接受，恐怕远方之人会有疑虑。 
English: Some people said, "If we don't accept it, I'm afraid people from far away will have doubts."

古文：钝乃受之。
现代文：王钝这才收下。
English: It was only then that Wang Tupu accepted the offer.

古文：还至云南，输之官库。
现代文：回到云南时，他将所赠交给官库。
English: When he returned to Yunnan, he donated the money to the government treasury.

古文：二十三年迁浙江左布政使。
现代文：二十三年，他升为浙江左布政使。
English: In 233, he was promoted to the post of Zhejiang Zuobu Political Envoy.

古文：在浙十年，名与张紞埒。
现代文：在浙江十年，名气与张相当。
English: In Zhejiang for ten years, his fame is comparable to Zhang Zong.

古文：帝尝称于朝，以劝庶僚。
现代文：皇上曾在朝廷上称赞他，以勉励百官。
English: The emperor once praised him at court, encouraging hundreds of officials to follow suit.

古文：建文初，拜户部尚书。
现代文：建文初年，他被任为户部尚书。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, he was appointed as the head of the Household Department.

古文：成祖入，逾城走，为逻卒所执。诏仍故官。
现代文：成祖入京后，他越过城墙而走，被巡逻兵抓住，诏令让他仍任原职。
English: After Cheng Zu entered Beijing, he walked across the city wall and was caught by patrolmen. The imperial edict allowed him to remain in his original post.

古文：未几，与紞俱罢。
现代文：不久，他与张都被罢免。
English: Both he and Zhang were soon ousted.

古文：寻命同工部尚书严震直等分巡山西、河南、陕西、山东，又同新昌伯唐云经理北平屯种。
现代文：不久命他同工部尚书严震直等人分巡山西、河南、陕西、山东，又同新昌伯唐云经理北平的屯田耕种。
English: Not long after his death, he was assigned to patrol Shanxi, Henan, Shaanxi, and Shandong with Shangshu Yan Zhenzhu and others from the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and he also cultivated with Xinchang Bo Tangyun, manager of Beiping.

古文：母丧起复，入觐，留摄部事。
现代文：他奉令一再上疏提建议，都被允许实行。
English: He was ordered to repeatedly make suggestions, all of which were allowed to be implemented.

古文：寻以老乞归，卒。
现代文：永乐二年四月，赐给他敕书，让他以布政使之衔退休。
English: In April of the second year of Yongle, he was given an imperial edict to retire with the title of Bu Zheng.

古文：郑赐，字彦嘉，建宁人。
现代文：回来后，他郁郁而死。郑赐，字彦嘉，建宁人。
English: After returning, he died of depression. Zheng Qi, Zi Yan Jia, Jian Ning Ren.

古文：洪武十八年进士。授监察御史。
现代文：洪武十八年，中进士，后被授予监察御史。
English: In the 18th year of Hongwu, he was promoted to junior high school student, and was later awarded the title of inspector of history.

古文：时天下郡邑吏多坐罪谪戍，赐尝奉命于龙江编次行伍。方暑，诸囚惫甚。赐脱其械，俾僦舍止息，周其饮食，病者与医药，多所全活。
现代文：当时天下郡县官员多因犯罪被贬戍，郑赐曾奉命在龙江编组行伍，当时天气酷热，囚犯们都很疲惫，郑赐给他们脱去刑具，让他们租房休息，给他们接济饮食，有病便请医疗治，使他们大都活了下来。
English: At that time, most of the county officials in the world were demoted for crimes. Zheng Qi was ordered to march in formation in the Longjiang River. At that time, the weather was extremely hot and the prisoners were very tired. Zheng Qi ordered them to take off the torture equipment, let them rent a room to rest, give them food and drink, and if they were sick, they would ask for medical treatment, so most of them survived.

古文：秩满当迁，湖广布政司参议阙，命赐与检讨吴文为之。
现代文：任满应当升迁，湖广布政司参议出缺，朝廷命郑赐和检讨吴文担任。
English: After his term of office expired, he should have been promoted, and the post of Vice-Minister of Political Affairs of Hubei Province became vacant. The imperial court ordered Zheng Zi and Wu Wen to review the post.

古文：二人协心划弊，民以宁辑，苗獠畏怀。
现代文：两人协力除弊，百姓得以安居，苗、僚民族也都归服。
English: The two of them worked together to eliminate the evils, the people were able to live in peace, and the Miao and other ethnic groups were also subdued.

古文：母丧，去。
现代文：母亲去世，郑赐离去。
English: After his mother's death, Zheng Jie left home.

古文：服除，改北平参议，事成祖甚谨。
现代文：守孝期满后，他改任北平参议，侍奉成祖非常恭谨。
English: After his term of filial piety expired, he was reappointed as Beiping Councilor, and he served Cheng Zu very respectfully.

古文：复坐累谪戍安东屯。
现代文：后来他又因犯罪被贬戍安东屯。
English: Later, he was demoted to Andongton for a crime.

古文：及惠帝即位，成祖及楚王桢皆举赐为长史。
现代文：到惠帝即位后，成祖和楚王朱桢都举荐郑赐为长史。
English: After Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, Cheng Zu and King Zhu Xi of Chu both recommended Zheng Zi for a long history.

古文：不许，召为工部尚书。
现代文：皇上不许，把他召回任工部尚书。
English: The emperor did not allow it and recalled him to the Ministry of Works.

古文：燕兵起，督河南军扼燕。
现代文：燕王起兵时，他率领河南军阻止燕兵。
English: When Yan Wang raised an army, he led the Henan army to stop the Yan soldiers.

古文：成祖入京师，李景隆讦赐罪亚齐、黄。
现代文：成祖入京师后，李景隆攻击郑赐，说他的罪仅次于齐泰和黄子澄。
English: After Cheng Zu entered Beijing, Li Jinglong attacked Zheng Qi, saying that his crime was second only to Qi Tai and Huang Zicheng.

古文：逮至，帝曰： 吾于汝何如，乃相背耶？ 
现代文：他被逮来时，皇上说 ：我对你怎么样，为什么要背弃我？ 
English: When he was arrested, the emperor said: "What have I done to you, why did you turn your back on me?

古文：赐曰： 尽臣职耳。 
现代文：郑赐说 ：尽做臣的职责而已。 
English: Zheng Qi said, "I am just doing my duty as a minister."

古文：帝笑释之，授刑部尚书。
现代文：皇上笑着放了他，授予他为刑部尚书。
English: The emperor let him go with a smile and awarded him the title of Imperial Penitentiary.

古文：永乐元年，劾都督孙岳擅毁太祖所建寺，诏安置海南。
现代文：永乐元年，他弹劾都督孙岳擅自毁掉太祖所建的寺，诏令将孙岳安置于海南。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he impeached the governor Sun Yue for destroying the temple built by the great ancestor without authorization, and ordered Sun Yue to be resettled in Hainan.

古文：岳，建文时守凤阳，尝毁寺材，修战舰以御燕军，燕知其有备，取他道南下，故赐劾之。
现代文：孙岳在建文时期守卫凤阳，曾毁掉寺庙取木材，用来造战舰以抵御燕军，燕军知道他有防备，便取别的路南下，所以郑赐弹劾孙岳。
English: Sun Yue guarded Fengyang during the Jianwen period. He once destroyed a temple to get wood to build a warship to fend off the Yan army. The Yan army knew that he was prepared and took another route to the south, so Zheng Zi impeached Sun Yue.

古文：二年劾李景隆阴养亡命，谋不轨。
现代文：二年，他弹劾孙岳。三年，他弹劾李景隆暗中蓄养亡命之徒，图谋不轨。
English: In the second year, he impeached Sun Yue. In the third year, he impeached Li Jinglong for secretly harboring fugitives and scheming.

古文：又与陈瑛同劾耿炳文僣侈，炳文自经死。
现代文：他还与陈瑛一同弹劾耿炳文超越本份，耿炳文上吊而死。
English: Together with Chen Ying, he also impeached Geng Bingwen for exceeding his authority, and Geng Bingwen hanged himself.

古文：皆揣帝意所恶者。
现代文：这都是他揣测皇上所厌恶的人。
English: These were all people he suspected the Emperor disliked.

古文：祁阳教谕康孔高朝京师还，枉道省母。会母疾，留侍九阅月不行。
现代文：祁阳县教谕康孔高上京师朝见后回去，绕道回家探视母亲，正值母亲有病，他留下侍奉达九个多月还不动身。
English: Kang Kong Gao, the prefect of Shenyang County, went to Beijing to see his teacher in the morning and then returned home. He took a detour to visit his mother, who was ill at the time. He remained a servant for more than nine months and did not move.

古文：赐请逮问孔高，罪当杖。
现代文：郑赐请逮捕康孔高问罪，论罪当杖打。
English: Zheng Zi asked that Kang Kong Gao be arrested, questioned, and beaten with a cane.

古文：帝曰： 母子暌数年，一旦相见难遽舍，况有疾，可矜也。 
现代文：皇上说： 母子分别数年，一旦相见难以马上分离，何况又有病，值得同情。 
English: The emperor said, "The mother and son have been separated for several years. Once they meet, it is difficult to separate them immediately. What's more, they are both ill. They deserve sympathy."

古文：命复其官。
现代文：命给他复官。
English: Order his reinstatement.

古文：三年秋，代李至刚为礼部尚书。
现代文：三年秋，郑赐取代李至刚任礼部尚书。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Zheng Zi replaced Li Zhigang as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：四年正月，西域贡佛舍利，赐因请释囚。
现代文：四年正月西域进贡佛舍利，郑赐便请释放囚犯。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the western region paid a tribute to the Buddhist monastery, and Zheng Zi then asked for the release of prisoners.

古文：帝曰： 梁武、元顺溺佛教，有罪者不刑，纪纲大坏，此岂可效！ 
现代文：皇上说： 梁武帝、元顺帝都因迷信佛教，对有罪者也不加刑，导致纪纲大坏，这岂可仿效？ 
English: The emperor said: Emperor Liangwu and Emperor Yuan Shun were both superstitious Buddhists and did not punish the guilty, resulting in a bad disciplinary system. Is this something we should emulate?

古文：是年六月朔，日当食，阴云不见，赐请贺。不许。
现代文：这一年六月初一，应有日食，但因阴云看不见，郑赐请祝贺，皇上不许。
English: This year, on the first day of June, there was supposed to be a solar eclipse, but it could not be seen because of the dark clouds. Zheng Du asked for congratulations, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：赐言 宋盛时尝行之。 
现代文：郑赐说： 宋朝极盛时期曾这么干过。 
English: Zheng Qi said, "The Song Dynasty once did this in its heyday.

古文：帝曰： 天下大矣，京师不见，如天下见之何？ 
现代文：皇上说 ：天下大了，京师看不见日食，不能说天下都看不见。 
English: The emperor said, "The world is big, and the emperor cannot see the eclipse. It cannot be said that the whole world cannot see it."

古文：卒不许。
现代文：皇上终于没有答应。
English: In the end, he did not agree.

古文：赐为人颇和厚，然不识大体，帝意轻之。
现代文：郑赐为人颇为忠厚，但他不识大体，皇上很看不起他。
English: Zheng Zi was quite a loyal person, but he did not know much, and the emperor looked down on him.

古文：为同官赵羾所间，六年六月忧悸卒。
现代文：他被同僚赵羽工所离间，六年六月，忧悸而死。
English: He was separated from his colleague, Zhao Yagong, and died of grief in June of the same year.

古文：帝疑其自尽。
现代文：皇上怀疑他自尽。
English: The Emperor suspected that he had committed suicide.

古文：杨士奇曰： 赐有疾数日，惶惧不敢求退。
现代文：杨士奇说： 郑赐病了几天，心里害怕而不敢要求辞职。
English: Yang Shichi said: Zheng Qi was ill for a few days and was afraid to ask for resignation.

古文：昨立右顺门，力不支仆地，口鼻有嘘无吸。 
现代文：昨天他站在左顺门，因力不支而倒地，口鼻有出气而无入气。 
English: Yesterday, he stood at the left-hand door and fell to the ground due to lack of strength. His mouth and nose had air coming out but no air going in.

古文：语未竟，帝曰： 微汝言，几误疑赐。
现代文：话没说完，皇上说： 没有你的话，朕几乎误疑了郑赐。
English: Before he had finished speaking, the emperor said: "Without your words, I almost suspected Zheng Zi.

古文：赐固善人，才短耳。 
现代文：郑赐固然是好人，可惜才华不足。 
English: Zheng Qi is certainly a good man, but unfortunately he lacks talent.

古文：命予葬祭。
现代文：命给予祭葬。
English: He was given a ceremonial burial.

古文：洪熙元年赠太子少保，谥文安。
现代文：洪熙元年，赠他为太子少保，谥号文安。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he gave him the title of Prince Minor Protector, and the nickname Wen'an.

古文：郭资，武安人。
现代文：郭资，武安人。
English: Guo Zi, from Wu'an.

古文：洪武十八年进士。
现代文：洪武十八年中进士。
English: Hongwu is an 18-year-old trainee.

古文：累官北平左布政使，阴附于成祖。
现代文：累任北平左布政使，暗中依附于成祖。
English: He is a long-serving political envoy of Beiping Zuo Bu and secretly adheres to Cheng Zuo.

古文：及兵起，张昺等死，资与左参政孙瑜、按察司副使墨麟、佥事吕震率先降，呼万岁。
现代文：到起兵时，张籨等人死，郭资与左参政孙瑜、按察司副使墨麟、佥事吕震率先投降，高呼万岁。
English: By the time the troops were raised, Zhang Xuan and the others were dead, and Guo Zi, together with the left-wing politician Sun Yu, the deputy inspector general, Meilin, and the anecdote Lu Zhen, were the first to surrender, shouting "long live."

古文：成祖悦，命辅世子居守。
现代文：成祖很高兴，命辅佐世子居守北平。
English: Cheng Zu was very happy, and his son, Meitou Sasa, became the governor of Peiping.

古文：成祖转战三年，资主给军饷。
现代文：成祖转战三年，郭资负责供应军饷。
English: Cheng Zu went to war for three years, Guo Zi was responsible for the supply of military supplies.

古文：及即位，以资为户部尚书，掌北平布政司。
现代文：成祖即位后，以郭资为户部尚书，掌北平布政司。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, Guo Zi was appointed as the head of the household, and Bei Ping Bu as the political secretary.

古文：北京建，改行部尚书，统六曹事。
现代文：修建北京时，郭资改任刑部尚书，统管六曹事务。
English: During the construction of Beijing, Guo Zi was reassigned to the Criminal Investigation Department, where he was in charge of the Six Cao Affairs.

古文：定都，仍改户部。
现代文：定都北京后，他仍改任户部尚书。
English: After the capital was moved to Beijing, he was still assigned to the Household Division of the Ministry of Education.

古文：时营城郭宫殿，置官吏及出塞北征，工役繁兴，资举职无废事。
现代文：当时营建城郭宫殿，设置官吏以及出塞北征，工役频繁，郭资尽职尽责，从不误事。
English: At that time, the construction of the castle palace, the establishment of officials and the Northern Expedition were frequent. Guo Zi was conscientious and never did anything wrong.

古文：仁宗立，以旧劳兼太子宾客。
现代文：仁宗即位后，郭资以旧劳被兼任太子宾客。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, Guo Zi was appointed as the guest of the crown prince.

古文：寻以老病，加太子太师，赐敕致仕。
现代文：不久他因老病，被加封为太子太师，赐给敕书让他退休。
English: Soon, due to his chronic illness, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince and Grand Master, and he was given a letter of retirement.

古文：宣德四年，复起户部尚书，奉职益勤。
现代文：宣德四年，他又被起用为户部尚书，奉职更勤。
English: In the fourth year of Xuande, he was appointed as the head of the household department, and worked longer hours.

古文：八年十二月卒，年七十三。
现代文：八年十二月他去世，终年七十三岁。
English: He died in December 2008 at the age of 73.

古文：赠汤阴伯，谥忠襄。官其子佑户部主事。
现代文：赠给他汤阳伯，谥号忠襄，授予他的儿子郭佑为户部主事。
English: He was given the posthumous name of Tang Yang Bo and the nickname of Zhong Xiang, and his son Guo You was given the title of head of the household department.

古文：资治钱谷有能称，仁宗尝以问杨士奇。
现代文：郭资治理钱粮事务，以有才能见称，仁宗曾向杨士奇问起郭资其人。
English: Guo Zi is famous for his ability to manage money and grain affairs. Renzong once asked Yang Shiqui about Guo Zi.

古文：对曰： 资性强毅，人不能干以私。
现代文：杨士奇回答说 ：郭资个性刚毅，别人无法向他求私情。
English: Yang Shichi replied: Guo Zi has a strong personality, and others can't ask him for personal favors.

古文：然蠲租诏数下不奉行，使陛下恩泽不流者，资也。 
现代文：但减免租税的诏书，多次下达却不奉行，致使陛下的恩泽不流布于天下的，也是郭资。 
English: However, the imperial edict of tax reduction and exemption, which has been issued many times but not implemented, has caused His Majesty's grace not to spread throughout the world.

古文：吕震，字克声，临潼人。
现代文：吕震，字克声，临潼人。
English: Lv Zhen, Zhe Ke Xiang, Lin Xuan Ren.

古文：洪武十九年以乡举入太学。
现代文：洪武十九年，他以乡举进入太学。
English: In the 19th year of Hongwu's reign, he entered Taigaku with a township education.

古文：时命太学生出稽郡邑壤地，以均贡赋。
现代文：当时皇上命太学生出去检查各郡县的土地肥瘠情况，以均摊贡赋。
English: At that time, the emperor ordered the students to go out to check the fertility of the land in each county and county, and to pay tribute equally.

古文：震承檄之两浙，还奏称旨，擢山东按察司试佥事。入为户部主事，迁北平按察司佥事。
现代文：吕震受命前往两浙，回来汇报时很合皇上心意，被升为山东按察司试佥事，后召入京任户部主事，再升为北平按察司佥事。
English: Lv Zhen was ordered to go to the two Zhejiang Provinces, and when he returned to report, he was very much in line with the emperor's wishes. He was promoted to the position of Shandong inspector general, and later he was called to Beijing to be the head of the household department, and then he was promoted to the position of Beiping inspector general.

古文：燕兵起，震降于成祖，命侍世子居守。
现代文：燕王起兵时，吕震向成祖投降，受命侍奉世子居守。
English: When Yan Wang raised an army, Lu Zhen surrendered to Cheng Zu and was ordered to serve as his heir.

古文：永乐初，迁真定知府，入为大理寺少卿。
现代文：永乐初年，他升为真定知府，又入京任大理寺少卿。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was promoted to the post of Chifu (governor) of Shingon and went to Beijing to serve as Junior Secretary of Dali Temple.

古文：三年迁刑部尚书。
现代文：三年升为刑部尚书。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to Shosho of the Penal Department.

古文：六年改礼部。
现代文：六年改任礼部尚书。
English: Six years later, he was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：皇太子监国，震婿主事张鹤朝参失仪，太子以震故宥之。
现代文：皇太子监国时，吕震的女婿主事张鹤朝见时失仪，太子看在吕震的份上宽宥了他。
English: When the crown prince was the overseer of the country, Lv Zhen's son-in-law Zhang He, who was in charge of Lv Zhen, was disgraced when he met with the emperor. The prince forgave him for Lv Zhen's sake.

古文：帝闻之怒，下震及蹇义于锦衣卫狱。已，复职。
现代文：皇上知道后很愤怒，将吕震和蹇义投进锦衣卫监狱，不久，给他们复职。
English: The emperor was very angry when he found out, and threw Lv Zhen and Zhi Yi into the Jinling Wei Prison. Soon, they were reinstated.

古文：仁宗即位，命兼太子少师，寻进太子太保兼礼部尚书。
现代文：仁宗即位后，命吕震兼任太子少师，不久进升为太子太保兼礼部尚书。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended the throne, he ordered Lu Zhen to also serve as the prince's young teacher, and soon he was promoted to become the prince's eunuch and the head of the etiquette department.

古文：宣德元年四月卒。
现代文：宣德元年四月去世。
English: Xuan De passed away in April of the first year.

古文：震尝三奉命省亲，两值关中饥，令所司出粟振之，还始以闻。
现代文：吕震曾三次奉命省亲，其中两次正值关中闹饥荒，吕震令有关官员出粟赈济，回来后才上报皇上。
English: Lv Zhen was ordered to save the province three times, two of which were during the famine in Guanzhong. Lv Zhen ordered the relevant officials to send millet to the emperor, and only reported to the emperor after returning.

古文：然无学术，为礼官，不知大体。
现代文：但他没有学术，任礼官却不知大体。
English: But he doesn't have academic qualifications, and he doesn't know the first thing about being a ceremonial officer.

古文：成祖崩，遗诏二十七日释縗服。
现代文：成祖去世时，遗诏说二十七日后便脱去丧服。
English: When Cheng Zu died, his will said that he would take off his mourning clothes after 27 days.

古文：及期，震建议群臣皆易乌纱帽，黑角带。
现代文：到期时，吕震建议群臣都换上乌纱帽和黑角带。
English: At the end of the term, Lv Zhen suggested that the ministers should all put on black hats and black belts.

古文：近臣言： 仁孝皇后崩，既释縗服，太宗易素冠布腰绖。 
现代文：近臣说 ：仁孝皇后去世时，脱去丧服后，太宗是改换素冠和布腰带。 
English: A close retainer said, "When Empress Ninko died, after taking off her mourning clothes, Emperor Taizong changed into a plain crown and a cloth sash.

古文：震勃然变色，诋其异己。
现代文：吕震勃然变色，诋毁他反对自己的意见。
English: Lv Zhen suddenly changed his tone and slandered him for opposing his own opinion.

古文：仁宗黜震议，易素冠布腰绖。
现代文：仁宗不用吕震的建议，改换素冠和布腰带。
English: Renzong did not use Lu Zhen's suggestion to change the plain crown and cloth belt.

古文：洪熙元年，分遣群臣祀岳镇海渎及先代帝王陵，震乞祀周文、武、成、康。便道省母，私以妻丧柩与香帛同载。
现代文：洪武元年，分遣群臣祭祀五岳和镇海渎，以及先代帝王陵墓。吕震请祭祀周代文、武、成、康四王，顺便回家探母，私下把妻子的丧柩和香帛同载在一辆车上。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, a group of courtiers were dispatched to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains, the Towns and the Sea, as well as the mausoleums of the previous emperors. Lv Zhen invited the four kings of Zhou Dynasty, Wen, Wu, Cheng and Kang, and went home to visit his mother. He secretly carried his wife's funeral pyre and incense together in a car.

古文：祀太庙致斋，饮酒西番僧舍，大醉归，一夕卒。
现代文：祭祀太庙时设斋，他在西番僧人住处饮酒，大醉而归，当晚死去。
English: He drank alcohol at the residence of a monk in Seiban, got very drunk, and died that night.

古文：震为人佞谀倾险。
现代文：吕震为人善于献媚奉承而且阴险。
English: Lv Zhen is good at flattery and insidious.

古文：永乐时，曹县献驺虞，榜葛剌国、麻林国进麒麟，震请贺。
现代文：永乐时期，曹县进献驺虞，榜葛剌国、麻林国进贡麒麟，吕震请祝贺。
English: During the Yongle period, Cao County donated to Shougu, Bangge Province and Ma Lin Province donated to Kirin, and Lucheng Province offered congratulations.

古文：帝曰： 天下治安，无麒麒何害？ 
现代文：皇上说： 天下治安，没有麒麟又有何损？ 
English: The emperor said, "There is peace in the world. Without Kirin, what is there to lose?"

古文：贵州布政使蒋廷瓒言： 帝北征班师，诏至思南大岩山，有呼万岁者三。 
现代文：贵州布政使蒋廷瓒说： 皇上北征班师，诏书传到思南大岩山时，山迥传出三声万岁。 
English: Jiang Tingyao, the political envoy of Guizhou, said: When the imperial edict was sent to the Great Rock Mountain of Sinan, the imperial envoy sent three shouts of "Long live the emperor!"

古文：震言： 此山川效灵。 帝曰： 山谷之声，空虚相应，理或有之。
现代文：皇上说 ：山谷之声，空虚相应，依理或有可能。
English: The emperor said, "The voice of the valley, the emptiness correspondingly, is logically possible."

古文：震为国大臣，不能辩其非，又欲因之进媚，岂君子事君之道？ 
现代文：吕震身为国家大臣，不能辨别是非，还想借机献媚，这岂是君子事君之道？ 
English: As a state minister, Lu Zhen is unable to distinguish between right and wrong, and still wants to take the opportunity to flatter. Is this the way of a gentleman?

古文：郎中周讷请封禅，震力赞之，帝责其谬。
现代文：郎中周讷请求封禅，吕震极力赞成，皇上责备他荒谬。
English: His brother-in-law, Zhou Ne, asked for the seal of Zen, Lu Zhen strongly agreed, and the emperor reproached him for being absurd.

古文：震虽累受面斥，然终不能改。
现代文：吕震虽然屡次当面受到斥责，但终不能改。
English: Although Lv Zhen was repeatedly reprimanded in person, he could not change his ways.

古文：金水河、太液池冰，具楼阁龙凤花卉状。帝召群臣观之。震因请贺。不许。
现代文：金水河、太淮池结冰，结出楼阁龙凤花卉的形状，皇上召群臣去观看，吕震因请祝贺，皇上不许。
English: The Jinshui River and the Taihuai Pond froze, creating the shape of the pavilion dragon and phoenix flowers. The emperor called his ministers to watch. Lu Zhen asked for congratulations, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：而隆平侯张信奏太和山五色云见，侍郎胡濙图上瑞光榔梅灵芝，震率群臣先后表贺云。
现代文：而隆平侯张信上奏太和山出现五色云，侍郎胡氵荧画瑞光榔梅灵芝献上，听说吕震还率群臣先后上表祝贺。
English: However, the five-colored clouds appeared on Mount Taihe in the Longping Prince Zhang Xin's performance, and the attendant presented the Hu Yao Fluorescent Painting Ruiguang Yao Mei Lingzhi. It is said that Lu Zhen also led the group of ministers to congratulate the table successively.

古文：成祖初巡北京，命定太子留守事宜。
现代文：成祖最初巡视北京时，命吕震确定太子留守事宜。
English: When Cheng Zu first toured Beijing, he ordered Lu Zhen to determine whether the crown prince would stay.

古文：震请常事听太子处分，章奏分贮南京六科，回銮日通奏。
现代文：吕震请常事便听任太子处理，章奏则分贮于南京六科，等圣上回来后再一齐上奏。
English: Lv Zhen asked the Crown Prince to take care of the regular affairs, and the chapter music was stored separately in the Nanjing Six Divisions, to be played together again after the saint's return.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报说可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十一年、十四年，震再请如前制。
现代文：十一年、十四年，吕震再请照前例办。
English: In the eleventh and fourteenth years, Lv Zhen, please do the same as before.

古文：十七年，帝在北京，因事索章奏，侍臣言留南京。
现代文：十七年，皇上在北京，因事索要章奏，侍臣说留在南京了。
English: In the seventeenth year, the emperor was in Beijing, and he asked for a chapter to be written about the matter. The courtier said that he had stayed in Nanjing.

古文：帝忘震前请，曰： 章奏宜达行在，岂礼部别有议耶？ 
现代文：皇上忘了吕震先前的请求，说道： 章奏应该送达行在所，难道是礼部另有所议吗？ 
English: The emperor forgot Lu Zhen's previous request and said, "The chapter music should be delivered to the right place. Is it because the ceremonial department has something else to discuss?"

古文：问震。震惧罪，曰： 无之，奏章当达行在。 
现代文：便问吕震，吕震害怕得罪，说： 没有，奏章应当送达行在所。 
English: He then asked Lu Zhen, Lu Zhen was afraid of offending, and said: No, the score should be delivered and performed.

古文：三问，对如前。
现代文：皇上再三询问，吕震仍这么说。
English: Emperor repeatedly asked, Lv Zhen still said so.

古文：遂以擅留奏章，杀右给事中李能。
现代文：皇上于是以擅留奏章之罪，杀右给事中李能。
English: Therefore, the emperor punished Li Neng by killing him for the crime of illegally staying away from the capital.

古文：众知能冤，畏震莫敢言。
现代文：众人知道李能冤枉，但因害怕吕震都不敢说。
English: Everyone knew that Li Neng was wrong, but they were afraid to say anything for fear of upsetting Lu Zhen.

古文：尹昌隆之祸，由震构之。
现代文：尹昌隆之祸，也是吕震制造的。
English: The disaster of Yin Changlong was also caused by Lv Zhen.

古文：事具《昌隆传》。
现代文：事见《尹昌隆传》。
English: See "Yin Changlong Biography."

古文：夏原吉、方宾以言北征饷绌得罪，以震兼领户、兵部事。
现代文：夏原吉、方宾因说北征军饷短缺而得罪，皇上以吕震兼领户部和兵部事务。
English: Natsuhara Yoshitaka and Fang Bin were offended by the fact that there was a shortage of military supplies for the Northern Expedition, and the Emperor appointed Lv Zhen to be concurrently in charge of the Household Division and the Military Division.

古文：震亦自危。
现代文：吕震也自危。
English: Lv Zhen is also in danger.

古文：帝令官校十人随之，曰： 若震自尽，尔十人皆死。 
现代文：皇上令十名官校跟着吕震，说： 如果吕震自尽，你们十人都得死。 
English: The emperor ordered ten officials to follow Lv Zhen, saying: If Lv Zhen commits suicide, all ten of you will die.

古文：震有精力，能强记，才足以济其为人。
现代文：吕震有精力，能强记，才能足以补其为人之不足。
English: Lv Zhen has energy and can memorize well, which is enough to make up for his lack of personality.

古文：凡奏事，他尚书皆执副本，又与左右侍郎更进迭奏。
现代文：每次奏事，别的尚书都手拿副本，又与左右侍郎轮番上奏。
English: For each recital, he would hold a copy of the other Shoshu in his hand, and play it in turn with the left and right attendants.

古文：震既兼三部，奏牍益多，皆自占奏，侍郎不与也。
现代文：吕震既然身兼三部之任，奏章更多，但他都是自己口授奏章，不用侍郎参予。
English: Since Lv Zhen is also in charge of the three sections, there are more movements, but he dictates the movements himself, without the participation of attendants.

古文：情状委曲，千绪万端，背诵如流，未尝有误。
现代文：情状复杂，千头万绪，他都背诵如流，不曾有误。
English: The situation is complex, there are a thousand and one solutions, he recites them all fluently, and he has never made a mistake.

古文：尝扈北狩，帝见碑立沙碛中，率从臣读其文。
现代文：他曾扈从皇上北狩，皇上见有石碑立在沙碛中，率群臣去读碑文。
English: He once led a group of courtiers to read the inscription of a stone monument standing in the sand dunes, which the emperor had seen from Kitakari.

古文：后一年，与诸文学臣语及碑，诏礼部遣官往录之。
现代文：过了一年，皇上与文学之臣谈及该石碑，诏令礼部派官去录回碑文。
English: A year later, the Emperor spoke with the Minister of Literature about the stone monument, and ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to send an officer to record the inscription.

古文：震言不须遣使，请笔札帝前疏之。
现代文：吕震说不用派，请备好笔纸在皇上面前写出来。
English: Lv Zhen said that there was no need to send, please prepare a pen and paper and write it out in front of the emperor.

古文：帝密使人拓其本校之，无一字脱误者。
现代文：皇上暗中派人去拓回碑文校对，竟无一字脱误。
English: The emperor secretly sent someone to excavate the inscription and proofread it, but not a single word was found to be incorrect.

古文：子熊。
现代文：儿子吕熊。
English: His son, Lü Xiong, succeeds him.

古文：宣宗初立，震数于帝前乞官，至流涕。
现代文：宣宗初即位，吕震多次在皇上面前为儿子求官，直至流涕。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Xuanzong's accession to the throne, Lu Zhen repeatedly petitioned the emperor for a position for his son, until he was exiled.

古文：帝不得已，授兵科给事中。
现代文：皇上不得已，授予他兵科给事中。
English: As a last resort, the emperor awarded him the title of "Imperial Marshal."

古文：李至刚，名钢，以字行，松江华亭人。
现代文：李至刚，名钢，以字行，松江华亭人。
English: Li Zhigang, famous for steel, famous for calligraphy, famous for Songjiang Huating.

古文：洪武二十一年举明经。
现代文：洪武二十一年考中明经。
English: Hongwu was 21 years old when he took the middle school entrance examination.

古文：选侍懿文太子，授礼部郎中。
现代文：被选去侍奉懿文太子，授予礼部郎中。
English: He was chosen to serve Prince Shimon and was awarded the title of Reibu no roju.

古文：坐累谪戍边，寻召为工部郎中，迁河南右参议。
现代文：后因犯罪被贬职戍边，不久被召回任工部郎中，升为河南右参议。
English: After being demoted for a crime, he was soon recalled to his position as a junior member of the Ministry of Labor, and was promoted to Henan Right Counselor.

古文：河决汴堤，至刚议借王府积木，作筏济之。
现代文：黄河汴堤决口，至刚建议借王府所存的木材，做筏筑堤。
English: At the mouth of the Yellow River dike, it was suggested to borrow wood from Wangfu to build a dike.

古文：建文中，调湖广左参议，坐事系狱。
现代文：建文年间，他任湖广左参议，因犯过被关进监狱。
English: During the Jianwen period, he served as a councillor of the Hubei Provincial People's Congress and was jailed for his crimes.

古文：成祖即位，左右称其才，遂以为右通政。
现代文：成祖即位后，左右的人称赞他有才干，遂任他为右通政。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, people around him praised his talent and appointed him as the right-hand politician.

古文：与修《太祖实录》，朝夕在上左右，称说洪武中事，甚见亲信。寻进礼部尚书。
现代文：他参与修撰《太祖实录》，朝夕在皇上左右，论说洪武年间的事，很得皇上亲信，不久进升为礼部尚书。
English: He participated in the compilation of the "Grand Ancestor's Record," and was around the emperor in the morning and evening, discussing the events of the Hongwu years. He was very trusted by the emperor's relatives, and was soon promoted to the etiquette department.

古文：永乐二年册立皇太子，至刚兼左春坊大学士，直东宫讲筵，与解缙后先进讲。
现代文：永乐二年册立皇太子，至刚兼任左春坊大学士，在东宫讲筵当值，与解缙先后进讲。
English: Yongle was enthroned as crown prince in the second year of his reign, and concurrently served as a scholar at Zuochunfang University. He lectured at the East Palace on the topic of "Duty," and then on the topic of "Solution."

古文：已，复坐事下狱，久之得释，降礼部郎中。
现代文：后来，又因犯过入狱，不久获释，被降为礼部郎中。
English: Later, he was sent to prison for a misdemeanour, but was soon released and demoted to vice-minister.

古文：恨解缙，中伤之。
现代文：他恨解缙，中伤了他。
English: He hated him and slandered him.

古文：缙下狱，词连至刚，亦坐系十余年。
现代文：解缙被投进监狱，供词牵连到至刚，他也被判关了十余年。
English: Mr. Xie was sent to prison, and his confession implicated Mr. Jiang, who was also sentenced to more than 10 years in prison.

古文：仁宗即位，得释，复以为左通政。
现代文：仁宗即位后，他获释，又被任为左通政。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he was released and appointed to the post of Sotongseong.

古文：给事中梁盛等劾至刚辈十余人，当大行晏驾，不宿公署，饮酒食肉，恬无戚容。
现代文：给事中梁盛等人弹劾至刚之辈十余人，说他们在先帝驾崩时，不宿在公署，饮酒吃肉，毫无哀痛之容。
English: In the matter, Liang Sheng and others impeached more than ten members of the Ziguang generation, saying that when the former emperor died, they did not stay at the public office, drank alcohol and ate meat, and had no sorrow.

古文：帝念至刚先朝旧人，出为兴化知府，时年已七十。
现代文：皇上念至刚是先朝旧人，把他派出任兴化知府，当时他已七十岁。
English: Emperor Nenzhigang was an old man of the previous dynasty, and he was appointed as the governor of Xinghua when he was already seventy years old.

古文：再岁，殁于官。
现代文：再过了一年，他在任上去世。
English: A year later, he died in office.

古文：至刚为人敏给，能治繁剧，善傅会。
现代文：至刚为人敏捷，能处理复杂棘手的事情，善于附会。
English: He is very agile, can deal with complex and difficult things, and is good at attending meetings.

古文：首发建都北平议，请禁言事者挟私，成祖从之。
现代文：他首先提出建都北平的建议，请禁止上奏言事的人挟私情，成祖听从了。
English: He first proposed that the capital be built in Beiping, and asked for the prohibition of personal grudges, which Cheng Zu obeyed.

古文：既得上心，务为佞谀。
现代文：他既得皇上信任，便专务奉承献媚。
English: Having gained the emperor's trust, he devoted himself to flattery.

古文：尝言太祖忌辰，宜效宋制，令僧道诵经。
现代文：他曾说在太祖忌辰时，应仿效宋代制度，令僧道来诵经。
English: He once said that at the time of the death of the great ancestor, the Song Dynasty system should be emulated and the monks should be ordered to chant the sutras.

古文：山东野蚕成茧，至刚请贺。
现代文：山东野蚕成茧，至刚请祝贺。
English: Shandong wild silkworms into cocoons, just congratulations.

古文：陕西进瑞麦，至刚率百官贺。
现代文：陕西进呈瑞梦，至刚率百官祝贺。
English: Shaanxi advances to present a dream, to the rigidity of a hundred officials congratulations.

古文：帝皆不听。
现代文：皇上都不听。
English: Emperor Wei did not listen to them.

古文：中官使真腊，从者逃三人，国王以国中三人补之。
现代文：宦官出使真腊，随从人员有三人逃跑，真腊国王用三个本国人补上，皇上令将他们遣回。
English: The eunuch dispatched Zhenla, three of his attendants fled, Zhenla's king supplemented them with three of his own countrymen, and the emperor ordered them to be sent back.

古文：帝令遣还，至刚言： 中国三人，安知非彼私匿？ 
现代文：至刚说 ：中国的三人，怎知道不是他们私自藏起来？ 
English: Zhigang said, "The three people in China, how do we know they didn't hide themselves?"

古文：帝曰： 朕以至诚待内外，何用逆诈。 
现代文：皇上说： 我以至诚对待内外，他们何心违逆欺诈？ 
English: The emperor said: I treat both inside and outside with the utmost sincerity, what are they trying to do?

古文：所建白多不用。
现代文：至刚所提的意见，皇上多不采用。
English: The Emperor did not adopt most of the opinions just mentioned.

古文：妻父丽重法，至刚为乞免。
现代文：至刚的岳父犯了重法，至刚为他乞求免罪。
English: Zu Gang's father-in-law committed a serious crime, and Zu Gang begged for his exoneration.

古文：帝曰： 狱轻重，外人何以知之？ 
现代文：皇上说： 定刑轻重，外面的人何以得知？ 
English: The emperor said, "How does the outside world know how severe the sentence is?"

古文：至刚曰： 都御史黄信为臣言。 
现代文：至刚说 ：都御史黄信对臣说的。 
English: Shi Gang said: Metropolitan Huang Xin said this to his vassal.

古文：帝怒，诛信。
现代文：皇上大怒，诛杀了黄信。
English: The emperor was furious and killed Huang Xin.

古文：初，至刚与解缙交甚厚。帝书大臣姓名十人，命缙疏其人品，言至刚不端。
现代文：当初，至刚与解缙私交甚厚，皇上写出十个大臣的名字，命解缙评述他们的人品，解缙说志刚品行不端。
English: At the beginning, Zu Gang had a close personal relationship with Ge Gang. The emperor wrote down the names of ten ministers and ordered Ge Gang to comment on their character. Ge Gang said that Ge Gang's character was improper.

古文：缙谪广西，至刚遂奏其怨望，改谪交阯。
现代文：解缙被贬去广西，至刚于是上奏说解缙怨，望将他改贬到交趾。
English: Mr. Xie was demoted to Guangxi, and just then, Mr. Xie said that he wanted to change his demotion to Jiaozuo.

古文：方宾，钱塘人。
现代文：方宾，钱塘人。
English: Fang Bin, from Qiantang.

古文：洪武时由太学生试兵部郎中。
现代文：洪武时期由太学生试任兵部郎中。
English: During the Hongwu period, he was appointed to the position of Hyobusho-roju (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs) on a trial basis.

古文：建文中，署应天府事。
现代文：建文年间，代理应天府事务。
English: During the Jianwen period, he was in charge of Yingtianfu affairs.

古文：坐罪戍广东。以茹瑺荐，召复官。
现代文：因犯罪遣戍广东，后因茹王常的推荐，被召回复官。
English: He was exiled to Guangdong for a crime, and was later recalled to the post on the recommendation of Ru Wangcheng.

古文：成祖入京师，宾与侍郎刘俊等迎附，特见委用，进兵部侍郎。
现代文：成祖入京师时，方宾和侍郎刘俊等人迎接并归附，特受委用，升为兵部侍郎。
English: When Cheng Zu entered the capital, Fang Bin and Liu Jun, his attendant, greeted him and accompanied him. He was specially appointed and promoted to attendant of the military department.

古文：四年，俊以尚书出征黎利，宾理部事，有干才，应务不滞。
现代文：四年，尚书刘俊出征黎利，方宾代理兵部事务。他有才干把事务处理得很有条理。
English: In the fourth year, Shangshu Liu Jun went to Lili for the expedition, and Fangbin was the agent of the military affairs. He had the ability to handle the affairs in a very orderly manner.

古文：性警敏，能揣上意，见知于帝，颇恃宠贪恣。
现代文：他个性警敏，能揣测到皇上心意，受到皇上信任，颇为恃宠贪恣。
English: His personality is alert, he can guess the emperor's mind, he is trusted by the emperor, and he is quite greedy.

古文：七年进尚书，扈从北京，兼掌行在吏部事。
现代文：七年，他进升为尚书，扈从皇上到北京，兼掌行在吏部事务。
English: In seven years, he was promoted to Shangshu, and went from the emperor to Beijing, concurrently in charge of the affairs of the personnel department.

古文：明年从北征，与学士胡广、金幼孜、杨荣，侍郎金纯并与机密。
现代文：第二年随从北征，与学士胡广、金幼孜、杨荣、侍郎金纯一起参预机密。
English: In the second year, he followed the Northern Expedition and participated in the pre-secrecy together with the bachelor Hu Guang, Jin Yuzi, Yang Rong, and the waiter Jin Chun.

古文：自后帝北巡，宾辄扈从。
现代文：此后皇上北巡，方宾常常扈从。
English: After that, when the emperor went on a tour of the north, Fangbin often accompanied him.

古文：十九年，议亲征。
现代文：十九年，讨论亲征。
English: In nineteen years, the discussion of personal enlistment began.

古文：尚书夏原吉、吴中、吕震与宾共议，宜且休兵养民。
现代文：尚书夏原吉、吴中、吕震和方宾一同商议，他们建议应该休兵养民。
English: Shangshu, Xia Yuanji, Wu Zhong, Lu Zhen and Fang Bin discussed together. They suggested that the army should be disbanded to support the people.

古文：未奏，会帝召宾，宾言粮饷不足，召原吉，亦以不给对。
现代文：这意见还没奏上去，正好皇上召见方宾，方宾说粮饷不足，皇上召夏原吉来问了也这么说。
English: This opinion had not yet been voiced when the Emperor summoned Fang Bin to meet him. Fang Bin said that there was a shortage of grain, and when the Emperor summoned Xia Yuanji, he also said the same thing.

古文：帝怒，遣原吉视粮开平，旋召还下狱。
现代文：皇上大怒，遣夏原吉到开平去检查粮储情况，不久把他召回，投进监狱。
English: The emperor was so angry that he sent Natsuhara no Kichi to Kaiping to check on grain reserves. He was soon recalled and thrown into prison.

古文：宾方提调灵济宫。中使进香至，语宾以帝怒。
现代文：方宾正在提调灵济宫，进香的宦官使者来到，对他说皇上很生气。
English: The guests were in the process of moving to the Lingzhi Palace, when the eunuch emissary came and told him that the emperor was very angry.

古文：宾惧，自缢死。
现代文：方宾害怕了，自缢而死。
English: Fang Bin was scared and hanged himself.

古文：帝实无意杀宾，闻宾死，乃益怒，戮其尸。
现代文：皇上实无意杀方宾，听说方宾死了，便更加生气，将他戮尸。
English: The emperor really had no intention of killing Fang Bin. When he heard that Fang Bin was dead, he became even more angry and had him dismembered.

古文：吴中，字思正，武城人。
现代文：吴中，字思正，武城人。
English: Wu Zhong, Zi Zheng, Wucheng people.

古文：洪武末，为营州后屯卫经历。
现代文：洪武末年，他任营州后屯卫的经历。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's life, he had the experience of serving as the rear guard of Yingzhou.

古文：成祖取大宁，迎降。
现代文：成祖攻取大宁，吴中迎降。
English: Cheng Zu conquered Danying, and Wu Zhong surrendered.

古文：以转饷捍御功，累迁至右都御史。
现代文：他以输运粮饷和捍御之功，累升为右都御史。
English: He rose through the ranks to become the rightful ruler of the capital, thanks to his achievements in transporting grain and defending the city.

古文：永乐五年，改工部尚书。
现代文：永乐五年，改任工部尚书。
English: In Yongle's fifth year, he was transferred to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：从北征，艰归。
现代文：后随从皇上北征，遭亲丧回家。
English: Later, he followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition and returned home after being bereaved.

古文：起复，改刑部。
现代文：皇上令他出来任职，改任刑部尚书。
English: The emperor ordered him to take up the post, and he was reassigned to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：十九年，与夏原吉、方宾等同以言北征饷绌，忤旨系狱。
现代文：十九年，他与夏原吉、方宾等人一同说北征粮饷短缺，忤逆了皇上旨意而被关进监狱。
English: In the 19th year, he, along with Xia Yuanji, Fang Bin and others, said that there was a shortage of grain for the Northern Expedition, and he was put in prison for defying the emperor's will.

古文：仁宗即位，出之，复其官，兼詹事，加太子少保。
现代文：仁宗即位后，把他放出来，恢复他的官职，兼任詹事，加封太子少保。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he was released and restored to his official position, concurrently serving as Zhanji, and was given the additional title of Crown Prince and Minor Protector.

古文：宣德元年从征乐安。
现代文：宣德元年，他从征乐安。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he was exempted from conscription.

古文：三年坐以官木石遗中官杨庆作宅，下狱，落宫保，夺禄一年。
现代文：三年，他因把官家木材石料送给宦官杨太造房子而获罪，被投进监狱，削去太子少保之职，夺去一年俸禄。
English: Three years later, he was found guilty of giving government timber and stone to the eunuch Yang Tai to build a house. He was thrown into prison, stripped of his position as crown prince and deprived of a year's salary.

古文：正统六年，殿工成，进少师。
现代文：正统六年，宫殿工程完工，吴中进封为少师。
English: After six years of orthodoxy, the palace project was completed, and Wu Zhongjinfeng became a junior teacher.

古文：明年卒，年七十。
现代文：第二年他去世，终年七十岁。
English: He died the following year, aged 70.

古文：追封茌平伯，谥荣襄。
现代文：追封茌平伯，谥号荣襄。
English: His posthumous name was Rong Ping Bo, and his posthumous name was Rong Xiang.

古文：中勤敏多计算。
现代文：吴中勤敏而多算计。
English: Wu Zhong is diligent and calculating.

古文：先后在工部二十余年，北京宫殿，长、献、景三陵，皆中所营造。
现代文：他先后在工部二十余年，北京的宫殿、长陵、献陵和景陵，都是他所营造。
English: He has been in the Ministry of Industry for more than 20 years, and he built Beijing's palace, Changling Mausoleum, Xianling Mausoleum and Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：职务填委，规画井然。
现代文：尽管职务纷繁，他都规划井然。
English: Despite his many responsibilities, he always manages to plan ahead.

古文：然不恤工匠，又湛于声色，时论鄙之。
现代文：但他不体恤工匠，又迷恋声色，当时舆论都鄙视他。
English: However, he did not sympathize with the craftsmen and was infatuated with fame. At that time, the public opinion despised him.

古文：刘观，雄县人。
现代文：刘观，雄县人。
English: Liu Guan, a resident of Xiongxian.

古文：洪武十八年进士。授太谷县丞，以荐擢监察御史。
现代文：洪武十八年中进士，被授予太谷县丞，因受推荐被升为监察御史。
English: In his 18th year, Hongwu was promoted to the rank of junior officer and was awarded the title of Taiyuan county magistrate. He was also promoted to the rank of inspector-general of history upon recommendation.

古文：三十年迁署左佥都御史。
现代文：三十年，进升代理左佥都御史。
English: Thirty years later, the promotion agent, Zuo Tongdu, is still alive.

古文：坐事下狱，寻释。出为嘉兴知府，丁父忧去。
现代文：后因犯过入狱，不久获释，派出任嘉兴知府。遭父丧归家。
English: Later, he was sent to prison for a crime, but was soon released and assigned to Jiaxing Prefecture. He returned home after his father passed away.

古文：永乐元年，擢云南按察使，未行，拜户部右侍郎。
现代文：永乐元年，他升为云南按察使，还没出发，改任户部右侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, he was promoted to Yunnan Azechi, and before he left, he was appointed as the right hand man of the household.

古文：二年调左副都御史。
现代文：二年，调任左副都御史。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the post of deputy governor of the capital.

古文：时左都御史陈瑛残刻，右都御史吴中宽和，观委蛇二人间，务为容悦。
现代文：当时左都御史陈瑛残酷，右都御史吴中宽和，刘观委蛇于两人之间，专务取悦他们。
English: At that time, the Left Metropolitan Chen Ying was cruel, the Right Metropolitan Wu Zhong Guanghe was cruel, and Liu Guanqian was between the two, dedicated to pleasing them.

古文：四年，北京营造宫室，观奉命采木浙江，未几还。
现代文：四年，北京营造宫室，刘观奉命到浙江采木，不久回来。
English: Four years later, when the imperial palace was being built in Beijing, Liu Guan was ordered to go to Zhejiang to collect wood, but he soon returned.

古文：明年冬，帝以山西旱，命观驰传往，散遣采木军民。
现代文：第二年冬，皇上因山西旱灾，命刘观乘驿车前往，遣散采木的军民。
English: In the winter of the second year, due to the drought in Shanxi, the emperor ordered Liu Guan to take a carriage to disperse the soldiers and civilians who were harvesting trees.

古文：六年，郑赐卒，擢礼部尚书。
现代文：六年，郑赐去世，刘观升为礼部尚书。
English: In the sixth year, Zheng Qi passed away, and Liu Qunsheng became the head of the etiquette department.

古文：十二月与刑部尚书吕震易官。
现代文：十二月他与刑部尚书吕震换职。
English: In December, he and the head of the criminal investigation department, Shangshu Lucheng, changed jobs.

古文：坐事为皇太子谴责。
现代文：因有过失受到皇太子谴责。
English: He was reprimanded by the crown prince for his negligence.

古文：帝在北京闻之，以大臣有小过，不宜遽折辱，特赐书谕太子。
现代文：皇上在北京听到后，以大臣有小过，不应该即刻折辱，特赐信谕告太子。
English: After the Emperor heard about this in Beijing, he told the Crown Prince in a special letter that the minister had been negligent and should not be immediately humiliated.

古文：八年，都督佥事费瓛讨凉州叛羌，命观赞军事。
现代文：八年，都督佥事费王献讨伐凉州反叛的羌人，命刘观赞佐军事。
English: In the eighth year, the governor sent Liu Guanzanzao to the military to fight against the rebels in Liangzhou.

古文：还，坐事，谪本部吏。十三年还职，改左都御史。
现代文：回来后，因犯有过失，被贬为本部吏，十三年复职，改任左都御史。
English: After his return, he was demoted to the position of head clerk due to a crime of negligence. He was reinstated after 13 years and reassigned to the post of Sadogoto Imperial Historian.

古文：十五年督浚河漕。
现代文：十五年他督管疏浚黄河漕运。
English: For 15 years, he supervised the dredging of the Yellow River.

古文：十九年命巡抚陕西，考察官吏。
现代文：十九年，受命巡按陕西，考察官吏。
English: In 1919, he was ordered to make a tour of Shaanxi to inspect officials.

古文：仁宗嗣位，兼太子宾客，旋加太子少保，给二俸。
现代文：仁宗即位后，刘观兼任太子宾客，不久加封为太子少保，支给二职俸禄。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, Liu Guan also served as the prince's guest, and was soon appointed as the prince's junior bodyguard, and was paid a second-class salary.

古文：时大理少卿弋谦数言事，帝厌其繁琐。
现代文：当时大理寺少卿弋谦多次上书提建议，皇上讨厌他过于繁琐。
English: At that time, Zou Qian, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, repeatedly wrote to the emperor to make suggestions. The emperor hated him for being too cumbersome.

古文：尚书吕震、大理卿虞谦希旨劾奏，观复令十四道御史论其诬妄，以是为舆论所鄙。
现代文：尚书吕震、大理寺卿虞谦投合皇上心意，上奏弹劾弋谦，刘观又令十四道御史论奏弋谦欺骗皇上，他因此而被舆论所鄙。
English: Shangshu Lv Zhen and Yu Qian, Lord of Dali Temple, voted in line with the emperor's wishes, and impeached Zou Qian. Liu Guan also ordered the 14th Imperial Historian Zou Qian to deceive the emperor, for which he was despised by the public opinion.

古文：时未有官妓之禁。
现代文：当时还没有关于官妓的禁令。
English: At that time, there was no ban on courtesans.

古文：宣德初，臣僚宴乐，以奢相尚，歌妓满前。
现代文：宣德初年，臣僚欢宴时，都以奢华相尚，歌妓布满席前。
English: In the first year of Xuande, when the ministers had a banquet, they all looked luxurious, and the seats were full of geishas.

古文：观私纳贿赂，而诸御史亦贪纵无忌。
现代文：刘观私下收取贿赂，而御史们也贪婪无忌。
English: Liu Guan secretly took bribes, and the historians were also greedy.

古文：三年六月朝罢，帝召大学士杨士奇、杨荣至文华门，谕曰： 祖宗时，朝臣谨饬。年来贪浊成风，何也？ 
现代文：三年六月，罢朝后，皇上召大学士杨士奇、杨荣到文华门，对他们说： 祖宗时期，朝臣恭谨，近年以来却贪污成风，为什么？ 
English: In June of the third year, after the overthrow of the dynasty, the emperor summoned the university scholars Yang Shiji and Yang Rong to Wenhua Gate and said to them: In the ancestral period, courtiers were respectful, but in recent years, corruption has become commonplace. Why?

古文：士奇对曰： 永乐末已有之，今为甚耳。 
现代文：杨士奇回答说： 永乐末年这种情况已经出现了，现在是更甚而已。 
English: Yang Shichi replied, "This has already happened at the end of Yongle's life, and it's even worse now.

古文：荣曰： 永乐时，无逾方宾。 
现代文：杨荣说： 永乐时期，没有超过方宾的。 
English: Yang Rong said: During the Yongle period, there were no more than Fangbin.

古文：帝问： 今日谁最甚者？ 
现代文：皇上问 ：现在谁最严重？ 
English: The Emperor asked: Who is the most serious now?

古文：荣对曰： 刘观。 
现代文：杨荣回答说 ：刘观。 
English: Yang Rong replied: Liu Guan.

古文：又问： 谁可代者？ 
现代文：皇上又问 ：谁可以取代他？ 
English: The Emperor also asked: Who can replace him?

古文：士奇、荣荐通政使顾佐。
现代文：杨士奇、杨荣推荐通政使顾佐。
English: Yang Shichi and Yang Rong recommended Gu Zuo, the political envoy.

古文：帝乃出观视河道，以佐为右都御史。
现代文：皇上于是将刘观派出视察河道，以顾佐为右都御史。
English: The emperor then sent Liu Guan to inspect the waterway, with Gu Zuo as his right-hand man.

古文：于是御史张循理等交章劾观，并其子辐诸赃污不法事。
现代文：于是御史张循理等人纷纷上书弹劾刘观，以及他的儿子贪赃等不法之事。
English: As a result, the imperial historian Zhang Xunli and others have written to impeach Liu Guan, as well as his son, for illegal acts such as embezzlement.

古文：帝怒，逮观父子，以弹章示之。
现代文：皇上大怒，逮捕了刘观父子，把弹劾他的奉章拿给他看。
English: The emperor was furious, arrested Liu Qian and his son, and showed him the impeachment medal.

古文：观疏辨。
现代文：刘观上疏辩解。
English: Liu Guanzhong made a weak defense.

古文：帝益怒，出廷臣先后密奏，中有枉法受赇至千金者。
现代文：皇上更怒，出示廷臣先后的密奏，其中有的说他枉法受贿达千金的。
English: The emperor was even more angry, and showed the courtiers the secret transcripts, one after the other, some of which said that he had taken bribes of thousands of dollars.

古文：观引伏，遂下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：刘观这才伏罪，遂把他逮进锦衣卫监狱。
English: Liu Guan did not commit the crime until he was caught, and then he was arrested and sent to the Jinlingwei Prison.

古文：明年将置重典。
现代文：第二年将要给他治以重罪。
English: He faces a felony charge next year.

古文：士奇、荣乞贷其死。
现代文：杨士奇、杨荣请求宽恕他的死罪。
English: Yang Shichi and Yang Rong asked for forgiveness for his capital crime.

古文：乃谪辐戍辽东，而命观随往，观竟客死。
现代文：于是将刘辐贬戍辽东，而命刘观随同前往，刘观竟客死他乡。
English: As a result, Liu Rui was banished to Liaodong, while Liu Guan went with him, and Liu Guan actually died in his hometown.

古文：七年，士奇请命风宪官考察奏罢有司之贪污者，帝曰： 然。
现代文：七年，杨士奇请求命监察官员考察因贪污而被上奏罢免的有关官员，皇上说 ：好。
English: Seven years later, when Yang Shichi requested that a supervisory official be appointed to investigate the relevant officials who had been removed from office for corruption, the emperor said, "Good."

古文：向使不罢刘观，风宪安得肃。 
现代文：如果以前不罢免刘观，监察部门怎得整肃？ 
English: If Liu Guan was not removed from office before, how can the supervision department carry out a purge?

