古文：谭澄，字彦清，德兴怀来人。
现代文：谭澄字彦清，德兴怀来人。
English: Tan Cheng, the character Hikokiyo, is a virtuous person.

古文：父资荣，金末为交城令。国兵下河朔，乃以县来附，赐金符，为元帅左都监，仍兼交城令。
现代文：其父谭资荣，金末时任交城县令，蒙古军攻河朔时，资荣献城投降，赐予金符，任命为元帅左都监，仍兼交城县令。
English: His father, Tan Zirong, was the Jiaocheng County magistrate at the end of the Jin Dynasty. When the Mongolian army attacked Hexuo, Zirong surrendered the city, gave gold certificates, and was appointed marshal and left-wing inspector. He was still the Jiaocheng County magistrate.

古文：未几，赐虎符，行元帅府事，从攻汴有功。
现代文：不久，又赐虎符，掌管元帅府事。随从元帅攻汴梁立功。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of "Tiger's Emblem" and was put in charge of the marshal's affairs.

古文：年四十，移病，举弟资用自代。资用卒，澄袭职。
现代文：四十岁时因病离职，乃荐其弟资用代行其职，资用去世，澄仍袭其职。
English: At the age of forty, he left the post due to illness, but recommended his younger brother Zuye to act as his deputy. Zuye passed away, but Cheng still assumed his post.

古文：澄幼颖敏，为交城令时年十九。
现代文：澄幼年聪明颖慧，十九岁时即任交城县令。
English: At the age of nineteen, he was appointed as the Jiaocheng County magistrate.

古文：有文谷水，分溉交城田，文阳郭帅专其利而堰之，讼者累岁，莫能直，澄折以理，令决水，均其利于民。
现代文：有文谷之水，灌溉交城县农田，文水之南，郭帅却霸占其利，堵水为堰，百姓常年为此而诉讼于官府，都不能得到公正处理。澄据理判决，下令决堤，使百姓都能获利。
English: There is the water of Wen Valley, which irrigates the farmland of Jiaocheng County, and the south of Wen Water, but Guoshuai has occupied its profits and blocked the water as a weir. The people have been suing the government for this for many years, and they can not get a fair treatment. The court has clarified the reason and ordered to break the dike, so that the people can make a profit.

古文：豪民有持吏短长为奸者，察得其主名，皆以法治之。
现代文：有些豪民，利用官吏中的某些不良行为而作恶，澄了解了他们主子的姓名之后，而绳之以法。
English: Some high-ranking people took advantage of some bad behaviors among officials to do evil, and after clarifying the names of their masters, they were brought to justice.

古文：岁乙未，籍民户，有司多以浮客占籍，及征赋，逃窜殆尽，官为称贷，积息数倍，民无以偿。
现代文：太宗七年，登记户口，有司以客居人口入为本籍，但到征收田赋之时，客居之户都逃之夭夭，地方官则要百姓借贷交税，利息增加了几倍，百姓无力偿还。
English: In the seventh year of Taizong's reign, there was a registration of household registration, and there was a division to register the non-resident population as citizens. However, when the land tax was levied, the non-resident households all fled, and the local officials asked the people to borrow money to pay the tax. The interest rate increased several times, and the people were unable to repay.

古文：壬子，复大籍其民，澄尽削交城之不土著者，赋以时集。
现代文：澄晋见皇上、中书耶律楚材，面述了此种做法的害处，太宗表示同情，为避免百姓逃亡，免去增息。三年后，逃亡的百姓都已返乡。
English: Cheng Jin met with the emperor and the Chinese scholar Ye Li Chu Zai and explained the harm of this practice. Taizong expressed sympathy and, in order to prevent the people from fleeing, did not increase the interest rate. Three years later, the fleeing people had returned home.

古文：甲寅，世祖还自大理，澄进见，留藩府，凡遣使，必以澄偕，而以其弟山阜为交城令。
现代文：宪宗四年，世祖自大理返京，澄进见，被留于藩府，凡有遣使任务，都让澄陪同，而让其弟山阜为交城县令。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, the founder of the dynasty returned to Beijing from Dali, and was met by Cheng Jin. He was left at the government of the domain. Whenever there was a mission, he was accompanied by Cheng, and his younger brother, Shan Fu, was appointed as Jiaocheng County magistrate.

古文：时世祖以皇弟开藩京兆，总天下兵。
现代文：当时世祖作为皇弟分封于京兆，统帅天下兵马。
English: At that time, Shizu, as the younger brother of the emperor, was assigned to Keicho and became the commander of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：岁丁巳，有间之者，宪宗疑之，遂解兵柄。
现代文：七年，有人从中离间，宪宗生疑，于是解除了世祖的兵权。
English: In the seventh year, there was a rift between the two, and Genso became suspicious, so he removed Shiso's military power.

古文：遣阿蓝答儿往京兆，大集官吏，置计局百四十二条以考核之，罪者甚众，世祖每遣左丞阔阔与澄周旋其间，以弥缝其缺，及亲入朝，事乃释。
现代文：派阿蓝答儿前往京兆，召集各地官吏，提出一百四十二个问题进行考核，获罪者很多，世祖经常派左丞相阔阔和谭澄前往调解，以缓和其中的矛盾，并亲自入朝，疑问才得到澄清。
English: He sent Alangdeer to Beijing and Zhengzhou, summoned officials from all over the country, and raised one hundred and forty-two questions for assessment. There were many people who were offended. The ancestor often sent the Minister of the Left, Kuo Kuo, and Tan Cheng to mediate in order to ease the conflict, and personally went to the DPRK to clarify the doubts.

古文：中统元年，世祖即位，擢怀孟路总管，俄赐金符，换金虎符。
现代文：中统元年，世祖即位，提拔谭澄为怀孟路总管，不久又赐予金符，后又换金虎符。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the founder ascended to the throne, promoted Tan Cheng to the general manager of Huai Meng Road, and soon gave him a gold badge, and later changed it to a gold tiger badge.

古文：岁旱，令民凿唐温渠，引沁水以溉田，民用不饥。
现代文：这年大旱，令百姓开凿唐温渠，引沁水灌溉农田，使百姓免于饥荒。
English: This year's severe drought forced the people to dig the Tangwen Canal and divert water to irrigate farmland, saving the people from famine.

古文：教之种植，地无遗利。
现代文：教百姓种植，地能尽其利。
English: Teach the people to plant, the land can do its best.

古文：至元二年，迁河南路总管，改平滦路总管。
现代文：至元二年迁职河南路总管，又改任平滦路总管。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of Henan Road General Manager, and was also reappointed as Pingyao Road General Manager.

古文：七年，入为司农少卿，俄出为京兆总管。
现代文：至元七年进京任司农少卿，不久又出任京兆总管。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he entered Beijing as the Secretary of Agriculture, and soon became the General Manager of the Beijing Great Wall.

古文：居一年，改陕西四川道提刑按察使，建言： 不孝有三，无后为大。
现代文：一年后，改任陕西、四川道提刑按察使，澄建议： 不孝有三，无后为大。
English: A year later, he was transferred to the post of Shaanxi and Sichuan Provincial Criminal Investigation Commission. Cheng suggested: "There are three types of unfilial piety, and the last one is the greatest."

古文：宜令民年四十无子听取妾，以为宗祀计。 
现代文：应该下令百姓四十无子者可娶妾，以能传宗接代。 
English: It should be decreed that forty people who have no children may marry a concubine in order to be able to pass down the family line.

古文：朝廷从之，遂著为令。
现代文：朝廷接受了这一建议，并定为法令。
English: The Imperial Court accepted this suggestion and made it a law.

古文：四川佥省严忠范守成都，为宋将昝万寿所败，退保子城，世祖命澄代之。
现代文：四川佥省严忠范守成都，被宋将昝万寿击败，退保子城，世祖命澄前往接任。
English: Chengdu, held by Yan Zhong Fan of Sichuan Province, was defeated by Song Zhaozhou Wan Shou, withdrew to Baozhicheng, and the founder of the dynasty, Myocho, took over.

古文：朝廷闻其事，方欲用之而卒，年四十四。
现代文：澄至成都，掩埋尸体，修理被焚的房屋，赈济饥民，收容逃亡的百姓，民心稍安。
English: Chengdu, bury the bodies, repair the burned houses, feed the hungry, shelter the fleeing people, and the people's hearts will be a little calmer.

古文：子殷。许楫，字公度，太原忻州人。幼从元裕学，年十五，以儒生中词赋选，河东宣抚司又举楫贤良方正孝廉。
现代文：适逢西南夷罗罗斯归顺元朝，皇帝以为安抚新征之地应选择文武全才之人，就以澄为副都元帅、同知宣慰使之职，后因病逝世，享年五十八岁。许楫字公度，太原忻州人。幼年受教于元裕，十五岁时以善于词赋入选。河东宣抚司又推举他为贤良方正孝廉。
English: When the southwestern Yiloros fell to the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor thought that a person with full ability in literature and military affairs should be chosen to pacify the newly conquered land, so he appointed Cheng as vice-marshal of the capital, and his friend Xuan comforted him. He later died of illness at the age of fifty-eight. Xu Xi Zi Kandu, a native of Taiyuan and Zhangzhou. He was taught by Yuan Yu when he was young, and was selected at the age of fifteen for his ability in words. He was also nominated as a virtuous person by the Hedong Propaganda Department.

古文：楫至京师，平章王文统命为中书省掾，以不任簿书辞，改知印。
现代文：楫至京城后，被平章王文统任命为中书省下属官员，楫拒绝接任文簿官，而改任知印。
English: After Zou arrived in Beijing, he was appointed as an official under the Central Book Ministry by Pingzhang Wang Wenzhong. Zou refused to take over the position of the official in charge of books and records, and was instead appointed as the official in charge of printing.

古文：丞相安童、左丞许衡深器重之。
现代文：丞相安童、左丞许衡对楫甚为器重。
English: The Minister of the Left, Ando, and the Minister of the Right, Xu Heng, were very critical of Chiang.

古文：一日，从省臣立殿下，世祖见其美髯魁伟，问曰： 汝秀才耶？ 
现代文：一天，楫随省臣立于殿下，元世祖见他美髯魁伟，问： 你是秀才么？ 
English: One day, he was standing next to the provincial vassal in front of His Imperial Highness. The founding father saw his handsome face and asked, "Are you a great talent?"

古文：楫顿首曰： 臣学秀才耳，未敢自谓秀才也。 
现代文：楫躬身回答说 ：臣在学做秀才，不敢自认为秀才。 
English: Min bowed and replied, "I'm studying to be a genius, I don't dare to think of myself as a genius."

古文：帝善其对，授中书省架阁库管勾，兼承发司事。
现代文：皇帝因他善于答问，任命他为中书省架阁库管勾，并兼承发司事。
English: Because he was good at answering questions, the emperor appointed him as the treasurer of the Cabinet of the People's Republic of China and the secretary of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：未几，立大司农司，以楫为劝农副使。
现代文：不久，朝中设立大司农司，楫被任命为劝农副使。
English: Soon after, the General Division of the Department of Agriculture was established in the court, and Zou was appointed as the Deputy Minister of Agriculture.

古文：时商挺为安西王相，遇于途，楫因言： 京兆之西，荒野数千顷，宋、金皆尝置屯，如募民立屯田，岁可得谷，给王府之需。 
现代文：当时商挺任安西王相，途中与楫相遇，楫对商挺说： 京兆之西，有数千顷荒地，宋、金之时曾经屯垦过，如果召募百姓去屯田，一年可收获谷物，供王府之需。 
English: At that time, Shang Ting was the minister of Anxi province. On the way, he met Zou. Zou said to Shang Ting, "In the west of Jingzhao, there are thousands of hectares of wasteland. During the Song and Jin dynasties, people used to live in the wasteland. If people were recruited to live in the wasteland, they could harvest grain for the needs of the royal court in one year."

古文：挺以其言入奏，从之。
现代文：商挺将此话奏于皇上，并被朝廷接纳。
English: Shang Ting reported this to the emperor and was accepted by the imperial court.

古文：三年，屯成，果获其利。
现代文：三年后，屯垦完成，果然获利。
English: Three years later, the settlement was completed and the company made a profit.

古文：寻佩金符，为陕西道劝农使。
现代文：不久，楫被授予金符，并被任命为陕西道劝农使。
English: Soon after, Zou was awarded a gold medal and was appointed as an agricultural envoy of Shaanxi Province.

古文：至元十三年，宋平，帝命平章廉希宪行中书于荆南府，以楫为左右司员外郎。
现代文：至元十三年宋朝被平定，皇上命平章廉希宪行中书之职于荆南府，以楫为左右司员外郎。
English: By the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Song Dynasty had been subdued, and the emperor ordered Ping Zhanglian Xixian to perform the post of secretary in Jingnan Prefecture, with Zou as the left and right secretary.

古文：荆南父老舆金帛求见，楫曰： 汝等已为大元民矣，今置吏以抚字汝辈，奚用金帛以求见！ 
现代文：荆南的父老抬着金帛来求见，楫对他们说： 你们成为大元的百姓，现在设立官吏来抚育你们，何必要用金帛来求见？ 
English: Jing Nan's father and grandfather came to see him carrying a golden scepter. He said to them, "You have become a great people, and now you have set up officials to look after you. Why do you need a golden scepter to see you?

古文：明年，擢岭北湖南提刑按察副使。武冈富民有殴死出征军人者，阴以家财之半诱其佃者，代己款伏。楫审得其情，释佃者，系富民，人服其明。
现代文：第二年，提升楫为岭北湖南提刑按察副使，武冈有一富民打死了出征的军人，暗中许以家产的一半让其佃户代为服刑，楫获知此情后，释放了佃户，逮捕了富民，人们都很佩服他英明。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the vice-envoy of the Lingbei-Hunan Criminal Investigation Commission. In Wuyuan, there was a rich man who killed a soldier and secretly promised to let his tenant serve the sentence with half of his family's property. When he learned of this, he released the tenant and arrested the rich man. People admired his wisdom.

古文：改江西道提刑按察副使，行省命招讨郭昂讨叛贼董旗，兵士俘掠甚众，楫询究得良民六百口，遣还乡里。
现代文：后来楫改任江西道提刑按察副使，行省下令郭昂讨伐叛贼董旗，俘获了很多士兵，经楫查问后发现有良民六百多人，皆遣返还乡。
English: Later, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Jiangxi Provincial Criminal Investigation Commission, and the provincial government ordered Guo Ang to fight against the traitor Dong Qi, captured many soldiers, and found that there were more than 600 good people after the investigation. They were all repatriated to their hometowns.

古文：二十三年，授中议大夫、徽州总管。
现代文：至元二十三年，被授以中议大夫、徽州总管。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Zhongzheng Doctor and General Manager of Huizhou Province.

古文：桑哥立尚书，会计天下钱粮，参知政事忻都、户部尚书王巨济，倚势刻剥，遣吏征徽州民钞，多输二千锭，巨济怒其少，欲更益千锭，楫诣巨济曰： 公欲百姓死耶、生耶？
现代文：桑哥设立尚书，总管全国钱粮，参知政事忻都、户部尚书王巨济，仗势刻剥百姓，派遣官吏多征徽州人民的钱二千锭，王巨济还怒其少，要再加千锭。楫至巨济处对他说： 阁下是要百姓死，还是生？
English: Sango set up Shangshu, the general manager of the national money and grain, the governor of the political affairs and the capital, and the head of the household, Shangshu Wang Guoji, stripping the people of their power, sending officials to collect more money from the people of Huizhou by 2,000 baht. Wang Guoji was angry that it was too little, and wanted to add another thousand baht. When he arrived at the Guoji office, he said to him: Do you want the people to die, or live?

古文：如欲其死，虽万锭可征也。 
现代文：如果置其死，即使万锭也可以征敛。 
English: If it is put to death, it can be collected even if it is in a desperate situation.

古文：巨济怒解，徽州赖以免。
现代文：巨济消除了怒气，徽州幸免征赋。
English: The huge amount of money has eliminated the anger, and Huizhou has been exempted from conscription.

古文：楫考满去。
现代文：楫任期满，政绩考核合格便离去。
English: On the expiration of his term of office, he passed the performance appraisal and left.

古文：徽之绩溪、歙县民柯三八、汪千十等，因岁饥阻险为寇。行省右丞教化以兵捕之，相拒七月，乃使人谕之。三八等曰： 但得许总管来，我等皆降矣。 
现代文：徽州之绩溪、歙县民众柯三八、汪千十等，因饥荒为盗寇，行省右丞教化用兵去捕，双方相持七个月，派人前往说服，三八等人说 ：只要许总管来，我们就投降。 
English: The people of Jianxi of Huizhou and Jixian County, including Ke 38 and Wang Qizhong, were robbers due to famine, and the provincial government sent soldiers to arrest them. The two sides held each other for seven months and sent people to persuade them. The 38 and others said, "As long as General Manager Xu comes, we will surrender."

古文：行省为驿召楫至，命往招之。
现代文：行省立即召楫来此，命他前往招降。
English: The provincial government immediately summoned him here and ordered him to go to Zengcheng.

古文：楫单骑趋贼垒，众见楫来，皆拜曰： 我公既来，请署榜以付我。 
现代文：楫一人骑马前往寇处。众人见楫到来，皆拜曰： 公既来，请给我们张榜。 
English: One person rode on horseback to the imperial palace. Everyone saw  arrive, and everyone said: "Since you have come, please give us a list."

古文：楫白教化，请退军一舍，听其来降。
现代文：楫告知教化，请退兵十里，让他们自己来降。
English: Tell the indoctrination, please retreat ten miles, let them come down by themselves.

古文：不听。
现代文：教化不听其言。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：会以参政高兴代教化，楫复以前言告之，兴从其计，贼果降。
现代文：正逢朝廷以参政高兴代替教化，楫再以原来的话告知，高兴听从其计，为盗寇的民众果然投降。
English: Just when the imperial court replaced enlightenment with the pleasure of participating in politics, Zou told them again in the original words that it was a pleasure to follow his plan, and the people who were robbers surrendered.

古文：二十四年，授太中大夫、东平总管，谢事二年卒，寿七十。
现代文：至元二十四年，授予太中大夫、东平总管，楫谢事后二年逝世，终年七十岁。
English: In the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Taichung Doctor and Dongping General Manager. He died two years later, at the age of 70.

古文：十一子：余庆，重庆，崇庆，余失其名。田滋，字荣甫，开封人。
现代文：田滋字荣甫，开封人。
English: Tian Zhi Zi Rong Fu, Kaifeng people.

古文：至元二年，由汴梁路总管府知事入为御史台掾。
现代文：至元二年由汴梁路总管府知事，转任御史台属官。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred from the governor of Qilian Road General Administration Prefecture to a subordinate official of the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：十二年，拜监察御史。
现代文：十二年，拜监察御史。
English: In 12 years, he became the inspector general.

古文：十三年，宋平，滋建言： 江南新附，民情未安，加以官吏侵渔，宜立行御史台以镇之。 
现代文：十三年，宋被平定，滋建议： 江南刚刚征服，民情尚未安定，加上官吏掠夺百姓财物，应建立御史台予以镇守。 
English: In the thirteenth year, when the Song Dynasty was pacified, Zhe suggested: Jiangnan had just been conquered, the people's situation was not yet stable, and the officials plundered the people's property, it was necessary to establish an imperial historical platform to guard the town.

古文：诏从其言。
现代文：皇上接纳其建议。
English: The Emperor accepted his suggestion.

古文：遂超拜行御史台侍御史。
现代文：并越级提升他为御史台侍御史。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of goshi-dai-zami-goshi.

古文：历两淮盐运使、河南路总管。
现代文：历任两淮盐运使、河南路总管。
English: He has served as two Huaiyan Salt Transport Envoy and Henan Road General Manager.

古文：大德二年，迁浙西廉访使。
现代文：大德二年，任浙西廉访使。
English: In the second year of the Great Degenerate, he was appointed as a visiting envoy of Western Zhejiang.

古文：有县尹张彧者，被诬以赃，狱成，滋审之，但俯首泣而不语。滋以为疑，明日斋沐，诣城隍祠祷曰： 张彧坐事有冤状，愿神相滋，明其诬。 
现代文：县尹张，被诬为贼下狱，滋审问他，张只是哭泣而不语。滋疑惑不解，次日前往城隍庙祷告说： 张入狱有冤，求神助滋，弄清其冤。 
English: County Yin Zhang, falsely accused of being a thief, was sent to prison. Zi interrogated him. Zhang only cried and did not speak. Zi was puzzled and went to the City God Temple the next day to pray and said, "Zhang went to prison for a wrongdoing. Ask God to help Zi and clarify his wrongdoing."

古文：守庙道士进曰： 曩有王成等五人，同持誓状到祠焚祷，火未尽而去之，烬中得其遗稿，今藏于壁间，岂其人耶？ 
现代文：守庙的道士告诉他： 以前有王成等五人一同持誓词前来祷告，誓词还未烧尽就走了，从焚灰中得其余稿，藏于墙壁中，是否就是这些人。 
English: The priest guarding the temple told him: In the past, there were five people, including Wang Chengwu, who came to pray together with oaths. They left before the oaths were burned out, and the rest of the manuscript was obtained from the ashes and hidden in the walls. Is it these people?

古文：视之，果然。
现代文：看其稿后，果真如此。
English: After looking at his manuscript, it really is so.

古文：明日，诣宪司诘成等，不服。
现代文：次日，让宪司讯问王成等人，王成等不服。
English: The next day, the registrar interrogated Wang Cheng and others, and Wang Cheng was not satisfied.

古文：因出所得火中誓状示之，皆惊愕伏辜，张彧得释。
现代文：宪司出示其誓词，王成等大惊服罪，张被释放。
English: The registrar showed his oath, Wang Cheng and others were shocked and convinced of the crime, and Zhang was released.

古文：十年，改济南路总管，寻拜陕西行省参知政事。
现代文：十年，改任济南路总管，不久又任命为陕西行省参知政事。
English: Ten years later, he was appointed as the head of Jinan Road, and soon he was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：时陕西不雨三年，道过西岳，因祷曰： 滋奉命来参省事，而安西不雨者三年，民饥而死，滋将何归！
现代文：当时陕西三年无雨，田滋路过西岳，向上天祷告说 ：滋奉命来参省事，而安西已三年无雨，民因饥而死，滋将到哪里去？
English: At that time, there had been no rain in Shaanxi for three years. Tian Zi passed by Xiyue and prayed to the heavens, saying, "I have been ordered to attend to the affairs of the province, but there has been no rain in Anxi for three years, and the people are dying of hunger. Where will Zi go?"

古文：愿神降甘泽，以福黎庶。 
现代文：希望神能降雨，造福民众。 
English: I hope God will send rain to benefit the people.

古文：到官，果大雨。
现代文：滋到任后果然降大雨。
English: Heavy rain fell immediately after the earthquake.

古文：滋即开仓，以麦五千余石给小民之无种者，俾来岁收成以偿官，民大悦。
现代文：滋随即开放粮仓，以五千石小麦发放给无种的农民，以便明年有了收成后再归还，百姓皆大欢喜。
English: Subsequently, the granary was opened, and five thousand kilos of wheat were distributed to farmers without seeds, so that they could be returned after the next year's harvest. The people were very happy.

古文：未几，以疾卒于位。
现代文：不久，因病逝世。
English: He died of illness soon after.

古文：赠通奉大夫、河南行省参知政事，追封开封郡公，谥庄肃。
现代文：皇上赠通奉大夫、河南行省参知政事，追封为开封郡公，谥号庄肃。
English: The emperor bestowed upon him the title of doctor of medicine, and the title of senator of Henan Province, and he was posthumously awarded the title of county magistrate of Kaifeng County, with the posthumous name of Zhuangsu.

古文：卜天璋，字君璋，洛阳人。
现代文：卜天璋字君璋，洛阳人。
English: Bu Tianyao Zi Junyao, from Luoyang.

古文：父世昌，仕金为河南孔目官。
现代文：其父世昌，金代为河南孔目官。
English: His father, Shichang, was a Confucian official in Henan Province during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：宪宗南征，率众款附，授镇抚，统民兵二千户，升真定路管民万户。
现代文：宪宗南征时，世昌率领众人归降，被授予镇抚官，统帅民兵二千户；后升真定路管万户民众。
English: During the Southern Expedition of Emperor Xianzong, Shichang led the people to surrender, and was awarded the post of town marshal, commanding the militia of two thousand households; later, Sheng Zhending was the road manager of ten thousand households.

古文：宪宗六年，籍河北民徙河南者三千余人，俾专领之，遂家汴。
现代文：宪宗六年，将河北百姓三千多人迁于河南，让他去领导，从此家迁汴。
English: Six years ago, Xianzong moved more than 3,000 people from Hebei Province to Henan Province and asked him to lead the relocation.

古文：天璋幼颖悟，长负直气，读书史，识成败大体。
现代文：天璋幼年聪明，有抱负，读书学史，能分辨成败的原因。
English: As a child, Tianyao was bright, ambitious, studied history, and was able to distinguish the reasons for success and failure.

古文：至元中，为南京府史。
现代文：至元中，任南京府史。
English: In the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the prefectural historian of Nanjing.

古文：时河北饥民数万人，集河上欲南徙，有诏令民复业，勿渡，众汹汹不肯还。
现代文：当时河北有饥民数万人，集结于河上准备南迁，皇上下诏命民众回归乡里，勿要南渡，众人吵吵嚷嚷不肯回去。
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of starving people in Hebei, gathered on the river to prepare to move south. The emperor ordered the people to return to the countryside, not to go south, and everyone was clamoring not to go back.

古文：天璋虑其生变，劝总管张国宝听其渡，国宝从之，遂以无事。
现代文：天璋担心会发生事变，劝总管张国宝不要阻挡民众南渡，国宝听从其言，因而未发生什么事。
English: Tianzhu was worried that something would happen, so he advised the general manager Zhang Guobao not to stop the people from crossing the South China Sea. The national treasure listened to his advice, and nothing happened.

古文：河南按察副使程思廉察其贤，辟为宪史，声闻益著。
现代文：河南按察副史程思廉发现天璋的才干，召为宪史，名声也更大了。
English: Henan Acha Deputy Historian Cheng Silian discovered Tianyao's talent and called him to be a constitutional historian, and his reputation has become even greater.

古文：后为中台掾，有侍御史倚势贪财，御史发其赃，天璋主文牍，未及奏，顾为所谮，俱拘内廷，御史对食悲哽，天璋问故，御史曰： 吾老，唯一女，心怜之，闻吾系，不食数日矣，是以悲耳。 
现代文：以后又升为中台属官。当时有一侍御史仗势贪财，被御史发现其赃物，天璋起草弹劾奏章，还未来得及上奏，他们被诬陷，都被拘捕。御史对着饮食悲哽，天璋问他为何如此，御史说： 我仅有一女，甚是可怜，知我入狱，已绝食数日，所以很是悲痛。 
English: Later, he was promoted to a subordinate official of the Central Government. At that time, there was a courtier who was greedy for power and money, and his stolen goods were discovered by the courtier. Tensho drafted an impeachment report, but before it could be played, they were framed and arrested. The courtier was sad about the food. Tensho asked him why this was so. The courtier said: I only have one daughter, I am very poor. Knowing that I am in prison and have been on a hunger strike for several days, I am very sad.

古文：天璋曰： 死职，义也，奈何为儿女子泣耶！ 
现代文：天璋说 ：死于职守，属于大义，为何要为儿女哭泣！ 
English: Tenzin said: to die in the line of duty is a great act of righteousness, why should we weep for our children!

古文：御史惭谢。
现代文：御史听此，深感惭愧。
English: Hearing this, Goshi felt deeply ashamed.

古文：俄见原免。
现代文：不久，被免罪。
English: He was soon exonerated.

古文：丞相顺德王当国，擢掾中书，为提控，事有可否，必力辩，他相怒，天璋言不置，王竟从其议，且曰： 掾能如是，吾复何忧！ 
现代文：丞相顺德王主持国政时，提拔天璋为中书省官员，对于应办或不应办的事，天璋总要激烈争辩，顺德王深有感慨地说： 中书的官员都能如此，我还有什么需要担心的呢？ 
English: When the chancellor Shunde Wang presided over state affairs, he promoted Tianyao to the official of the Chinese book province. For the things that should be done or should not be done, Tianyao always had to argue fiercely. Shunde Wang said with deep emotion: Chinese book officials can be like this, what else do I have to worry about?

古文：大德四年，为工部主事。
现代文：大德四年，天璋任工部主事。
English: In the fourth year of Dade, Tianzhu was appointed as the head of the engineering department.

古文：蔚州有刘帅者，豪夺民产，吏不敢决，省檄天璋往讯之，帅服，田竟归民。
现代文：蔚州有一个名叫刘帅的人，强夺民产，官吏不敢判决，天璋前往审讯，刘帅信服，将田产归还与民。
English: In Ulshu, there was a man named Liu Shuai, who forcibly seized people's property. Officials did not dare to make a judgment. Tianyao went to the trial. Liu Shuai was convinced and returned the land to the people.

古文：大德五年，以枢密大臣暗伯荐，授都事，赞其府。引见，赐锦衣、鞍辔、弓刀。
现代文：大德五年，因枢密大臣伯之荐，天璋升为都事，又被引见皇上，赐锦衣、鞍辔、弓刀。
English: In the fifth year of Dade's reign, on the recommendation of the Minister of the Privy Council, Tianzhu was promoted to the capital, and was introduced to the emperor, given brocade clothes, saddles, and bows.

古文：适盗贼充斥，时议犯者并家属咸服青衣巾，以别民伍。
现代文：后又加封奉训大夫，赐侍燕服二套。武宗时，升任宗正府郎中，尚书省成立后，又升为刑部郎中。当时正巧盗贼很多，有人提议凡犯盗贼罪者及其家属一律只准穿青衣，以与民众相区别。
English: Later, he was also given the title of "training doctor" and two sets of serving men's and women's clothing. During the reign of Emperor Wu, he was promoted to the vice-minister of the Imperial Household Ministry, and after the establishment of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, he was promoted to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice. At that time, there were a lot of thieves, and it was suggested that anyone who committed the crime of theft and their family members were only allowed to wear blue clothes to distinguish them from the general public.

古文：天璋曰： 赭衣塞路，秦弊也，尚足法耶！ 
现代文：天璋说： 罪犯堵路，是秦时的弊端，还能效法吗？ 
English: Tianyao said: Criminals blocking roads is a drawback of the Qin Dynasty. Can we follow suit?

古文：相悟而止。有告诸侯王谋不轨者，敕天璋讯正之，赏赉优渥。
现代文：有人密告诸侯王图谋不轨，皇上命天璋迅速前去调查核实。
English: Someone tipped off the princes that the king was up to no good, and the emperor gave the order to go quickly to investigate and verify.

古文：尚书省臣得罪，仁宗召天璋入见，时兴圣太后在座，帝指曰： 此不贪贿卜天璋也。 
现代文：尚书省有一官员获罪，仁宗召见天璋，当时兴圣太后也在座，帝指着他说 ：这就是不贪贿的卜天璋。 
English: An official in Shangshu Province was found guilty, and Emperor Renzong summoned him to see Empress Dowager Heung. Empress Dowager Heung was also present at the time, and Emperor Renzong pointed to him and said, "This is Bu Tianyao, who does not take bribes."

古文：因问今何官，天璋对曰： 臣待罪刑部郎中。 
现代文：问他现任何官，天璋说： 臣待罪刑部郎中。 
English: When asked what kind of official he is now, Tenzin said: "He is a subordinate of the Crime and Punishment Department."

古文：复问谁所荐者，对曰： 臣不才，误蒙擢用。 
现代文：又问是谁举荐的，天璋回答说： 臣无才，误蒙提升重用。 
English: When asked who recommended him, Tianzhu replied: "The minister is incompetent and was promoted by mistake.

古文：帝曰： 先朝以谢仲和为尚书，卿为郎中，皆朕亲荐也。
现代文：帝说： 前朝以谢仲和为尚书，你为郎中，都是我亲自推荐。
English: The emperor said, "I personally recommended that Xie Zhonghe be made an honorary doctor and you be made a junior doctor the previous morning.

古文：汝宜奉职勿怠！ 
现代文：你应替职不懈！ 
English: You should work tirelessly!

古文：即以中书刑部印章付之。
现代文：就将中书刑部印给他。
English: He was given a copy of the Penal Code.

古文：既视事，入觐，赐酒隆福宫，及锦衣三袭。
现代文：天璋既就任，入宫见皇帝，帝在隆福宫赐酒，并赠锦衣三套。
English: As soon as Tianzhu took office, he entered the palace to see the emperor. The emperor gave him wine and three sets of brocade clothes at Longfu Palace.

古文：后被命治反狱，帝顾左右曰： 君璋，廉慎人也，必得其情。 
现代文：后来命他去治理狱中平反冤案之事，帝对周围的人说： 天璋是廉洁谨慎之人，一定会获得其中真情。 
English: Later, the emperor ordered him to deal with the matter of redressing injustice in prison, and said to the people around him: Tianyao is an honest and prudent person, and he will surely get the truth.

古文：天璋承命，狱赖不冤。
现代文：天璋承命办理，狱中未出现冤案。
English: Tianzhu carried out the order, and there was no case of injustice in the prison.

古文：皇庆初，天璋为归德知府，劭农兴学，复河渠，河患遂弭。
现代文：皇庆初年，天璋为归德知府，劝农兴学、修复河渠、消除水患。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Tianzhu returned to Germany as the prefectural governor, exhorted farmers to study, repaired canals, and eliminated floods.

古文：时群盗据要津，商旅不通，天璋擒百数人，悉磔以徇，盗为止息。
现代文：当时群盗占据交通要道，商客不能通行，天璋抓获百余人，皆处以重刑，盗贼从此被平。
English: At that time, a group of thieves occupied a major traffic road, and merchants could not pass. Tianzhu arrested more than a hundred people, all of whom were sentenced to heavy sentences. The thieves have since been leveled.

古文：升浙西道廉访副使，到任阅月，以更田制，改授饶州路总管。
现代文：天璋升浙西廉访副使，到任只一月，就变更田制，后又改任饶州路总管。
English: He was promoted to vice-envoy of the West Zhejiang Lianyungang Provincial Party Committee, and after only one month in office, he changed the field system. Later, he was appointed as the general manager of the Raozhou Road.

古文：失申之责，吾独任之，不以累诸君也。 
现代文：天璋就任后，让民众自报田亩，各种事情都不苛扰百姓，百姓甚为高兴，田亩、户籍都得到清理。
English: After Tianzhu took office, the people were allowed to self-report the number of mu, and all kinds of things did not bother the people. The people were very happy, and the number of mu and household registration were cleaned up.

古文：竟发藏以赈之，民赖全活。其临事无所顾虑若此。
现代文：当时饶州发生饥荒，天璋主张开仓赈济，僚属们坚持不可，天璋说 ：百姓饥饿得这样，等请示以后再赈济，他们都已饿死了。
English: At that time, there was a famine in Raozhou. Tianzhu advocated opening storehouses to provide relief, but his colleagues insisted that it was impossible. Tianzhu said, "The people are so hungry. Wait for instructions before providing relief. They have all starved to death."

古文：火延饶之东门，天璋具衣冠，向火拜，势遂熄。
现代文：不先请示的责任由我一人承担，决不连累各位。 
English: I alone will be responsible for not asking for permission first, and I will not involve you in any way.

古文：鸣山有虎为暴，天璋移文山神，立捕获之。
现代文：于是开仓放粮，百姓得以活命。天璋处理事情无所顾忌。
English: As a result, the granaries were opened and the people were able to survive. Tianzhu handled the situation without any scruples.

古文：以治行第一闻。
现代文：他的政绩卓著。
English: His political achievements are outstanding.

古文：升广东廉访使。
现代文：升广东廉访使。
English: He was promoted to the Guangdong Ambassador of Cleanliness.

古文：先是，豪民濒海堰，专商舶以射利，累政以赂置不问，天璋至，发卒决去之。
现代文：开始时，豪民临海筑堤停商船以获利，以往的官员都因贿赂而不过问，天璋到任后，派兵前往取缔。
English: At the beginning, wealthy people built dikes along the coast to stop merchant ships in order to make a profit. In the past, officials did not ask questions because of bribery. After Tensho took office, he sent soldiers to ban it.

古文：岭南地素无冰，天璋至，始有冰，人谓天璋政化所致云。
现代文：岭南向来无冰，天璋到后，开始有冰，有人说是天璋推行政治、教化的结果。
English: Lingnan has always been ice-free, but after Tianlu arrived, it began to have ice. Some people said that it was the result of Tianlu's political and educational efforts.

古文：寻乞致事。天历二年，蜀兵起，荆楚大震，复拜山南廉访使。人谓公老，必不行矣。
现代文：天历二年，蜀地兵乱，荆楚之地大为震惊，朝廷授天璋为山南廉访使，有人对他说您已年老，不能再去任职了。
English: In the second year of the solar calendar, Shu was in turmoil and Jingchu was in shock. The imperial court awarded Tianyao as a visiting envoy to Shannan. Someone said to him, "You are too old, you can no longer serve."

古文：天璋曰： 国步方艰，吾年八十，恒惧弗获死所耳，敢避难乎！ 
现代文：天璋说 ：国家有难，我年八十，总是怕死而不得其所，岂能去逃避困难呢？ 
English: Tianyao said, "The country is facing difficulties. I am 80 years old, and I am always afraid of death and cannot find a job. How can I escape the difficulties?"

古文：遂行。
现代文：于是去就任了。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

古文：至则厉风纪，清吏治，州郡肃然。
现代文：到任后整饬风纪，清理吏治，州郡官员都很恭敬他。
English: After taking office, he rectified the demeanor, cleaned up the administration, and the state and county officials were very respectful to him.

古文：是时，谷价翔踊，乃下令勿损谷价，听民自便，于是舟车争集，米价顿减。复止宪司赃罚库缗钱不输于台，留用赈饥，御史至，民遮道称颂。
现代文：当时谷价飞涨，他下令不要平抑物价，听百姓自便，于是粮商争相来此，米价立即下落，他又让宪司将罚得的赃款不交纳于府台，而留作赈济，御史来到后，百姓都俯伏于途颂扬他。
English: At that time, grain prices were soaring. He ordered that prices should not be suppressed, and that the people should be allowed to do as they pleased. As a result, grain merchants rushed to come here, and the price of rice immediately fell. He also asked the registrar not to pay the fine money to the prefectural government, but to keep it as alms. After the emperor arrived, the people all prostrated themselves on the road to praise him.

古文：会诏三品官言时政得失，因列上二十事，凡万余言，目之曰《中兴济治策》，皆中时病。
现代文：皇上下诏召集三品以上的官员议论时政的得失，因此，他上书列举二十条，共万余言，题为《中兴济治策》，条条皆言中时弊。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict summoning more than three tiers of officials to discuss the gains and losses of the current political situation. Therefore, he issued a letter listing twenty articles, totaling more than ten thousand words, entitled "Zhongxing Economic Policy," all of which are in the middle of the current situation.

古文：因自引去。既归汴，以余禄施其族党，家无甔储，天璋处之，晏如也。
现代文：随即引退，回汴之后，将其俸禄，尽施与同族。家中无一点存储，天璋对此处之泰然。
English: He immediately retired, and after returning to Kuching, he shared his salary with his compatriots to the best of his ability. There was nothing saved at home, and Tensho was at peace with this.

古文：至顺二年卒。
现代文：至顺二年逝世。
English: He died two years later.

古文：赠通议大夫、礼部尚书、上轻车都尉、河南郡侯，谥正献。
现代文：赠通议大夫、礼部尚书、上轻车都尉、河南郡侯，谥号正献。
English: He was awarded the title of Doctor of Law, the title of Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, the title of Lieutenant of the Upper Light Car, and the title of Marquis of Henan County.

