古文：李鹬
现代文：李鹬
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐敦煌李鹬，开元中，为邵州刺史。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，敦煌人李鹬被任命为邵州刺史。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Li Xi, a native of Dunhuang, was appointed as the chief historian of Shaozhou.

古文：挈家之任，泛洞庭，时晴景，登岸。
现代文：他带着家眷去上任，乘船经过洞庭湖。因天气晴朗，景色优美，他们便上岸游玩。
English: He and his family took a boat to Dongting Lake on the way to his new post. Because the weather was fine and the scenery was beautiful, they went ashore to play.

古文：因鼻衂血沙上，为江鼍所舐，俄然复生一鹬，其形体衣服言语，与其身无异。
现代文：李鹬的鼻子出血滴在沙滩上，被一条鼍龙舐着吃了。鼍龙变成一个李鹬，形体衣服和言语与李鹬一模一样。
English: Li Yao's nose dripped blood onto the beach and was licked and eaten by a dragon. The dragon turned into Li Yao, whose body, clothes and speech were identical to Li Yao.

古文：鹬之本身，为鼍法所制，絷于水中。
现代文：而李鹬本身却被鼍龙的法术制住，捆着放在水里。
English: But Li Yao himself was restrained by the dragon's spell and tied up in the water.

古文：其妻子家人，迎奉鼍妖就任，州人亦不能觉悟。
现代文：李鹬的妻子和家人，就迎接鼍妖去上任，邵州人也不能识破这鼍妖，管理州郡好几年。
English: Li Yao's wife and family welcomed the demon to take office, and the people of Shaoshu could not see through this demon, and managed the county for several years.

古文：为郡几数年，因天下大旱，西江可涉。道士叶静能自罗浮山赴玄宗急诏，过洞庭，忽沙中见一人面缚，问曰： 君何为者？ 
现代文：因为天下大旱，西江都能够趟水过，有个道士叫叶静能从罗浮山去京城接受唐玄宗的紧急召见，渡过洞庭湖时，他忽然看见沙滩上一个人被遮住脸绑着，就问道： 你是干什么的？ 
English: Because of the drought in the world, the West River is able to wade through the water. A Taoist called Ye Jingneng went from Luo Fu Shan to Beijing to accept the urgent summons of Tang Xuan Zong. When he crossed Dongting Lake, he suddenly saw a person on the beach with his face covered and tied, and asked: What are you doing?

古文：鹬以状对，静能书一符帖巨石上，石即飞起空中。
现代文：李鹬把情况对他说了。叶静能就画了一个符贴在大石头上，大石头立刻飞起到空中。
English: Li Qian told him the situation. Ye Jingneng drew a mark and stuck it on the big stone, and the big stone immediately flew into the air.

古文：鼍妖方拥案晨衙，为巨石所击，乃复本形。
现代文：这时的鼍妖正坐在衙门的桌子边上，被巨石击中，恢复了本来形态。
English: At this time, the goblin was sitting on the edge of the table at the gate. It was hit by a boulder and regained its original form.

古文：时张说为岳州刺史，具奏，并以舟楫送鹬赴郡，家人妻子乃信。
现代文：当时张说担任岳州刺史，把这件事详细地报告朝廷，并用船把李鹬送到邵州去，他的妻子家人这才相信了。
English: At that time, Zhang said that he served as the chief historian of Yuezhou, reported the matter in detail to the imperial court, and sent Li Yao to Shaozhou by ship. His wife's family only believed this.

古文：今舟行者，相戒不沥血于波中，以此故也。谢二
现代文：现在坐船行路的人，互相告诉不要把血滴在水中，就是因为这件事的缘故。谢二
English: For this cause therefore do they that go down to the sea in ships tell one another that they should not put blood in the water.

古文：唐开元时，东京士人以迁历不给，南游江淮，求丐知己，困而无获，徘徊扬州久之。
现代文：唐代开元年间，东京有个官吏想要升迁但家里没有钱活动，便往南到江淮一带去，找自己的朋友寻求资助，但却一直没有能借到钱，长久地在扬州一带徘徊停留。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a government official in Tokyo wanted to be promoted but his family did not have the money to do so. He went south to the Jianghuai area to find his friends to seek funding, but he was never able to borrow money and lingered around Yangzhou for a long time.

古文：同亭有谢二者，矜其失意，恒欲恤之，谓士人曰： 无尔悲为，若欲北归，当有三百千相奉。 
现代文：同他住在一个旅店的谢二，可怜他不得志总想要帮助他，对他说： 不要这么悲伤了，如果你想往北走回家，我有三百贯钱送给你。 
English: Xie Er, who lived in a hotel with him, felt sorry for him for not being able to help him, and said to him, "Don't be so sad. If you want to go north to go home, I have 300 yuan to give you."

古文：及别，以书付之曰： 我宅在魏王池东，至池，叩大柳树。家人若出，宜付其书，便取钱也。 
现代文：等到分手时，谢二把一封信交给他说： 我家住在魏王池的东面。到了池边，你就敲大柳树，我家里的人如果出来，你把信交给他，就可以得到钱了。 
English: When it was time to part, Xie Er handed a letter to Cormorant, saying, "My family lives on the east side of Wei Wang Pond. When you get to the edge of the pond, you knock on the willow tree. If someone from my family comes out and you hand him the letter, you can get the money."

古文：士人如言，径叩大树，久之，小婢出，问其故，云： 谢二令送书。 
现代文：读书人照他说的去做，叩那棵大树，过了很长时间，有个岁数很小的女仆出来，问他有什么事。他说： 谢二让我送封信来。 
English: The reader did as he was told, and knocked on the big tree. After a long time, a very young maid came out and asked him what was the matter. He said, "Please let me send you a letter."

古文：忽见朱门白壁，婢往却出，引入。
现代文：忽然看见红门白墙，女仆进去一会出来，领着他进去，看见一老太太身体健壮，坐在正堂上。
English: Suddenly, he saw a red door and a white wall. The maid went in and came out a moment later, leading him in. He saw a robust old lady sitting in the main hall.

古文：见姥充壮，当堂坐，谓士人曰： 儿子书劳君送，令付钱三百千，今不违其意。 
现代文：对读书人说： 我儿子的信烦劳你送来，信里让给你三百贯钱，我们不会违背他的意思。 
English: He said to the reader: My son's letter is so troublesome that you sent it. In the letter, he offered you three hundred crowns. We will not go against his wishes.

古文：及人出，已见三百千在岸，悉是官家排斗钱，而色小坏。士人疑其精怪，不知何处得之，疑用恐非物理，因以告官，具言始末。
现代文：等他走出门来，看见岸边已经有三百千钱放在那里，全是官家的排头钱，而颜色稍有磨损，他怀疑遇到的妖精鬼怪，不知他们是从何处弄到的钱，担心使用这些钱会招惹麻烦，便把这事报告官府，并把前因后果全都说了。
English: When he came out of the door, he saw that there was already three hundred thousand yuan on the shore, all of which was government money, and the color was slightly worn. He suspected the goblins and ghosts he encountered, did not know where they got the money from, and feared that using this money would cause trouble. He reported the matter to the government and told them all the reasons and consequences.

古文：河南尹奏其事，皆云： 魏王池中有一鼋窟，恐是耳。 
现代文：河南府尹把这事上报给朝庭，大家都说，魏王池里有个鼋洞，恐怕就是那个地方。
English: Yin of Henan Province reported the matter to the imperial court. Everyone said that there was a wormhole in Wei Wang Pond, and I was afraid it was that place.

古文：有敕，使击射之，得昆仑数十人，悉持刀枪，沉入其窟。
现代文：上面命令派人去杀死鼋怪。于是官府找来几十个从南洋各国买来的奴隶，手中拿着刀枪，潜入那个洞窟里去，捉到大小几十只鼋。
English: An order was issued to send people to kill the dragonflies, so the government found dozens of slaves bought from various countries in Southeast Asia, and with knives and guns in their hands, they sneaked into the cave and caught dozens of dragonflies.

古文：得鼋大小数十头，末得一鼋，大如连床。官皆杀之，得钱帛数千事。
现代文：最后捉到的一只大鼋，有几张床连起来那么大，官吏命令将鼋全都杀死，还从洞窟里找出很多钱。
English: The last big toad they caught was as big as several beds put together, so the officials ordered all the toads to be killed, and also found a lot of money in the cave.

古文：其后五年，士人选得江南一尉，之任，至扬州市中东店前，忽见谢二，怒曰： 于君不薄，何乃相负，以至于斯。
现代文：又过了五年，这个人被挑选担任江南某地的一个县尉，赴任途中走到扬州东客店门前，忽然看见了谢二。谢二愤怒地说： 我对你不薄，为什么竟辜负了我，而且到了这种程度。
English: After another five years, this person was selected to serve as a county lieutenant in a certain place in the south of the Yangtze River. On the way to the appointment, he walked to the front of the Yangzhou East Inn, and suddenly saw Xie Er. Xie Er angrily said: I am not thin, why did you fail me, and to such an extent.

古文：老母家人，皆遭非命，君之故也。 
现代文：我的老母亲和家人全都惨死，就是因为你的缘故。 
English: My old mother and all my family died a horrible death because of you.

古文：言讫辞去，士人大惧，十余日不之官，徒侣所促，乃发。
现代文：说完就走了。这个人非常害怕，十多天没有敢动身，同行的人催促他，他才出发。
English: This man was so scared that he did not dare to set out for more than ten days. His companions urged him, and he set out.

古文：行百余里，遇风，一家尽没，时人云： 以为谢二所损也。 
现代文：走了一百多里，遇上大风，全家人都淹死了。当时人们都说，是谢二干的。
English: After walking more than a hundred miles, they were caught in a gale and the whole family drowned. At the time, people said it was because of Xie Er.

古文：荆州渔人
现代文：荆州渔人
English: Jingzhou fisherman

古文：唐天宝中，荆州渔人得钓青鱼，长一丈，鳞上有五色圆花，异常端丽，渔人不识，以其与常鱼异，不持诣市，自烹食，无味，颇怪焉。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，荆州有个打渔的人钓到一条青鱼，长一丈，鳞上有五色圆形花纹，异常美丽。渔夫不认识这是什么鱼，因为它和平常的鱼不一样，也就没有拿到集市上去卖。
English: During the Tianbao era of the Tang Dynasty, a fisherman in Jingzhou caught a bluefish, which was unusually beautiful. The fisherman did not know what kind of fish it was, because it was different from ordinary fish, and he did not get it to sell at the market.

古文：后五日，忽有车骑数十人至渔者所。
现代文：自己做着吃了。却没有什么滋味，感到很奇怪。过后第五天，忽然有车马骑士几十个人来到渔夫住的村庄，渔夫又惊又怕出门拜见。
English: He made it himself and ate it. However, it didn't taste very good and he felt very strange. On the fifth day after that, dozens of horse-drawn carriages suddenly came to the village where the fisherman lived. The fisherman was shocked and afraid to go out.

古文：渔者惊惧出拜，闻车中怒云： 我之王子，往朝东海，何故杀之？
现代文：就听见车子里的人愤怒地说： 我的王子，到东海去朝拜，你为什么杀了他！
English: I heard the people in the car say angrily: My prince, go to the East Sea to worship, why did you kill him!

古文：我令将军访王子，汝又杀之，当令汝身崩溃分裂，受苦痛如王子及将军也！ 
现代文：我派将军出来访寻王子，你又杀了将军，应当让你身体崩溃分裂，遭受象王子和将军一样的痛苦。 
English: I sent the general out to find the prince, and you killed the general. You should be torn apart and suffer the same pain as the prince and the general.

古文：言讫，呵渔人，渔人倒，因大惶汗。
现代文：说完，呵斥渔夫。渔夫吓得倒在地上，出了很多汗，过了好久才苏醒过来。
English: When he finished, he yelled at the fisherman, who fell to the ground in fright, sweating profusely, and took a long time to wake up.

古文：久之方悟，家人扶还，便得癞病。十余日，形体口鼻手足溃烂，身肉分散，数月方死也。刘成
现代文：家里人把他扶回家之后，他就得了癞病，只有十多天的时间，身上口鼻和手脚都溃烂了，身上的肉也逐步分离，过了好几个月才死。刘成
English: After his family members helped him back home, he fell ill with rickets. He only had more than ten days to live, and his mouth, nose, hands and feet all became ulcerated. The flesh on his body also gradually separated. It took many months for him to die. Liu Cheng

古文：宣城郡当涂民，有刘成者、李晖者，俱不识农事。尝用巨舫载鱼蟹，鬻于吴越间。
现代文：宣城郡当涂县的老百姓刘成和李晖两个人，不会耕种，经常用一条大船载着鱼和蟹，到吴越之间去卖。
English: Liu Cheng and Li Yong, two ordinary people from Dangtu County, Xuancheng County, do not know how to farm. They often use a big boat to carry fish and crabs to sell them in Wuyue.

古文：唐天宝十三年春三月，皆自新安江载往丹阳郡。
现代文：唐代天宝十三年春天三月，两个人从新安江载鱼去丹阳郡。
English: In the spring of March in the 13th year of the Tang Dynasty, two men were carrying fish from the Xin'an River to Danyang County.

古文：行至下查浦，去宣城四十里，会天暮，泊舟，二人俱登陆。
现代文：走到下查浦，离宣城还有四十里天就黑了，两个人停下船，都上了岸。
English: When they reached Shimo-Chapo, still forty miles from Xuancheng, it was dark. The two men stopped the boat and went ashore.

古文：时李晖往浦岸村舍中，独刘成在江上。
现代文：这时李晖要到浦岸的村舍中去，只有刘成在江上。
English: At this time, Li Yao wanted to go to the village house on the bank of the river. Only Liu Cheng was on the river.

古文：四顾云岛，閴无人迹，忽闻舫中有连呼阿弥陀佛者，声甚厉。
现代文：江上浓云重迭，静悄悄地没有任何人的踪迹。刘成忽然听见船里有人连声呼喊阿弥陀佛，声音凄厉。
English: Thick clouds overlap on the river, quietly there is no trace of anyone. Liu Cheng suddenly hears someone in the boat shouting Amitabha Buddha in unison, the sound is terrible.

古文：成惊而视之，见一大鱼自舫中振须摇首，人声而呼阿弥陀佛焉。
现代文：刘成吃惊地看去，只看见一条大鱼在船舱里振动着胡须摇晃着头，在那里用人的声音呼喊阿弥陀佛。
English: Liu Cheng looked around in surprise, only to see a big fish in the cabin, vibrating its whiskers and shaking its head, where it called out Amitabha Buddha in a human voice.

古文：成且惧且悚，毛发尽劲，即匿身芦中以伺之。俄而舫中万鱼，俱跳跃呼佛，声动地。
现代文：刘成非常害怕，毛发竖起，就藏身在芦苇丛中继续观察，不一会船里千万条鱼，全都跳跃着呼喊佛号，叫声振动大地。
English: Liu Cheng was very scared. His hair stood on end, so he hid in the reeds and continued to observe. Before long, there were tens of thousands of fish in the boat, all jumping and shouting the Buddha's name, their cries vibrating the earth.

古文：成大恐，遽登舫，尽投群鱼于江中。
现代文：刘成惊恐万分，急忙登上船，把所有的鱼全都扔到江里去。
English: Panicked, Liu Cheng quickly boarded the boat and threw all the fish into the river.

古文：有顷而李晖至，成具以告晖，晖怒曰： 竖子安得为妖妄乎？ 
现代文：不久，李晖回来了，刘成把事情都告诉了李晖，李晖愤怒地说： 你小子怎么胡说这些妖妄的话？ 
English: Soon after, Li Yao returned, and Liu Cheng told Li Yao everything. Li Yao angrily said, "How can you say such nonsense?

古文：唾而骂言且久。成无以自白，即用衣资酬其直。
现代文：唾骂了很长时间，刘成也没有办法辩解，就用自己的衣服和资金赔偿了鱼钱。
English: The abuse lasted for a long time, and Liu Cheng had no way to defend himself, so he used his own clothes and money to compensate for the fish money.

古文：既而余百钱，易荻草十余束，致于岸。
现代文：还剩一百来文钱，他就买了十多捆荻草，放在岸上。
English: With a hundred pieces of money left, he bought more than ten bundles of reeds and placed them on the shore.

古文：明日，迁于舫中，忽觉重不可举，解而视之，得缗十五千，签题云： 归汝鱼直。 
现代文：第二天，把草搬到船里准备出发，忽然觉得草木重得拿不动，解开一看，得到十五钱，还有一张纸上写道： 还你的鱼钱。 
English: The next day, when the cormorant was preparing to set sail, it suddenly felt that the grass was too heavy to hold. When it was untied, it was found to contain fifteen dollars, as well as a piece of paper that read: "Return your fish money."

古文：成益奇之。
现代文：刘成更加觉得奇怪。
English: Liu Cheng felt even more strange.

古文：是日，于瓜洲会群僧食，併以缗施焉。
现代文：这一天，他们在瓜洲遇到一群和尚在吃饭，刘成把这些钱都送给了和尚。
English: On this day, they met a group of monks having dinner in Guazhou. Liu Cheng gave all the money to the monks.

古文：时有万庄者，自泾阳令退居瓜洲，备得其事，传于纪述。
现代文：当时有个叫万庄的人，从泾阳县令的职务上退休住在瓜洲，详细地听人讲述了这件事，就记录流传下来。
English: At that time, there was a man named Wanzhuang, who retired from the post of the governor of Fenyang County and lived in Guazhou. He listened to the story in detail, and the record was passed down.

古文：薛二娘
现代文：薛二娘
English: The Second Daughter of Xue

古文：唐楚州白田，有巫曰薛二娘者，自言事金天大王，能驱除邪厉，邑人崇之。
现代文：唐代楚州白田县有个女巫叫薛二娘，她自称奉金天大王法令，能够驱除邪魔恶鬼。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a witch in Baita County, Chuzhou, named Xue Er Er Er. She claimed to be able to drive away evil spirits by the order of King Jin Tian Da Wang.

古文：村民有沈某者，其女患魅发狂，或毁坏形体，蹈火赴水，而腹渐大，若人之妊者。
现代文：城里人都很崇拜她。有个姓沈的村民，女儿得了魅病发狂，有时损伤自己的身体，有时能够踩在火上或进入水里去，并且肚子一天一天大起来，象人怀孕一样。
English: There was a villager surnamed Shen who had a daughter who went mad with fascination, sometimes injuring her body, sometimes being able to step on fire or go into water, and her belly grew bigger and bigger day by day, like a pregnant woman.

古文：父母患之，迎薛巫以辨之。
现代文：父母很害怕，请薛二娘来治疗。
English: The parents were very scared and asked Xue Er's daughter to come for treatment.

古文：既至，设坛于室，卧患者于坛内，旁置大火坑，烧铁釜赫然。
现代文：薛二娘来了之后，在屋里安排好祭坛，让患者躺在坛内，旁边挖了个大火坑，上面烧着一口大铁锅。
English: After Xue Er's daughter arrived, an altar was arranged in the room, and the patient was allowed to lie in the altar. A large fire pit was dug next to it, with a large iron pot burning on top.

古文：巫遂盛服奏乐，鼓舞请神。
现代文：女巫穿着华丽的衣服打鼓跳舞，奏乐请神。
English: Witches dressed in gorgeous clothes dance and play drums.

古文：须臾神下，观者再拜。
现代文：不一会神来了，观看的人连连拜谢。
English: After a while, the deity arrived, and the onlookers bowed their heads.

古文：患者乃曰： 伏矣！ 
现代文：巫师洒酒祈祷说： 快点把妖孽叫来！ 
English: The sorcerer spilled his wine and prayed, "Quick, call the witches!"

古文：自陈云： 淮中老獭，因女浣纱悦之。不意遭逢圣师，乞自此屏迹。
现代文：说完，巫师走到火坑中坐下，神色自若，过了好一会，才拍拍衣服站起来，把烧热的铁锅戴在头上边打鼓边跳舞，唱完了才离开火坑，然后她坐在一把椅子上，呵叱患病的人自己把自己捆起来，患病的人果然背过手去象被捆住一样，又命令她自己陈述。刚开始，病人只是哭，不说话，巫师很生气，拿起刀来砍她。刀騞然而过，可是身体还象原来一样，患病的人这才说： 我服了 ，又说： 我是淮河中的一只老水獭，因为看见那女子浣纱而喜欢上她，没想到遇上了圣明的巫师，请允许我从此隐藏踪迹。
English: After saying this, the sorceress went to the fire pit and sat down, looking confident. After a while, she patted her clothes and stood up, put the hot iron pot on her head and danced while playing the drums. After singing, she left the fire pit. Then she sat on a chair and scolded the sick person to tie himself up. The sick person turned his hands behind his back as if he was tied up, and ordered her to make a statement. At first, the patient just cried and did not speak. The sorceress was angry and picked up a knife to cut her. The knife passed, but the body was still the same as before. The sick person then said: I

古文：但痛腹中子未育，若生而不杀，以还某，是望外也。 
现代文：只是心疼挂念她肚子里的孩子还未生下来，如果能够生下来之后不杀死它们，把它们还给我，这是我的非份之想。 
English: I'm just heartbroken for the unborn children in her belly. If I can give them back to her without killing them after they are born, that's part of what I want to do.

古文：言毕呜咽，人皆悯之。
现代文：说完就呜呜地哭了起来，人们都怜悯它。
English: When it was over, it began to whimper and cry, and people pitied it.

古文：遂秉笔作别诗曰： 潮来逐潮上，潮落在空滩。
现代文：她又拿起笔来作了一首离别诗说： 潮来逐潮上，潮落在空滩。
English: She took up her pen again to compose a parting poem, saying, "The tide comes in, the tide goes out, the tide comes in, the tide goes out."

古文：有来终有去，情易复情难。
现代文：有来终有去，情易复情难。
English: All things come to an end, and it's easy to get back together.

古文：肠断腹中子，明月秋江寒。 
现代文：断肠腹中子，明月秋江寒。 
English: Broken intestines, cold in the Aki River in the bright moon.

古文：其患者素不识书，至是落笔，词翰俱丽。
现代文：那得病的女子平时并不识字，到这时下笔书写流利，词句华丽。
English: The ill woman was not normally literate, but by this time she was writing fluently and her words were magnificent.

古文：须臾，患者昏睡，翌日乃释然。
现代文：不一会，患病的人，就昏睡过去了，第二天才苏醒过来。
English: In a short time, the sick man fell into a coma and did not wake up until the next day.

古文：方说，初浣沙时，有美少年相诱，因而来往，亦不自知也。
现代文：这时他才说： 刚去浣纱的时候，有个美少年来引诱我，于是我们就开始互相来往，自己也不知道是在干什么。 
English: It was only then that he said: "When I first went to Huludao, a beautiful young man came to seduce me, so we began to see each other, and I didn't know what I was doing.

古文：后旬月，产獭子三头，欲杀之。或曰： 彼魅也而信，我人也而妄，不如释之。 
现代文：十个月后，女子生下三只小水獭，本想杀死它们，可是有的人说： 那个妖魅尚且守信用，我们是人难道还不讲信用吗！不如放了它们。 
English: Ten months later, the woman gave birth to three baby otters. Originally, she wanted to kill them, but some people said, "That enchantress is still keeping her promise. Aren't we supposed to be trustworthy? It's better to let them go."

古文：其人送于湖中，有巨獭迎跃，而没之。
现代文：于是那个人就把三只小水獭送到湖里去，有个大水獭跳跃着迎上来，背着小水獭沉没到水里去了。
English: So the man sent the three little otters into the lake, and a great otter leaped up to meet them, and sank into the water with the little otter on his back.

古文：赵平原
现代文：赵平原
English: Zhao Pingyuan

古文：唐元和初，天水赵平原，汉南有别墅。
现代文：唐代元和初年，天水赵平原在汉南有座别墅。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Tang dynasties, Tianshui Zhao Pingyuan had a villa in Hannan.

古文：尝与书生彭城刘简辞、武威段齐真诣无名湖，捕鱼为脍。
现代文：有一次他和书生彭城人刘简辞、武威人段齐真到无名湖去捉鱼吃。
English: Once he and Liu Jianji, a student from Pengcheng, and Qi Zhen, a student from Wuwei, went to the Nameless Lake to catch fish and eat.

古文：须臾，获鱼数十头，内有一白鱼长三尺余，鳞甲如素锦，耀人目精，鳍鬣五色，鲜明可爱。
现代文：不一会就捉住了几十条鱼，其中有一条白鱼长三尺多，鳞甲象白色的锦缎，光彩夺目。鳍分五色，鲜明可爱。
English: Soon he caught dozens of fish, one of which was a white fish more than three feet long, with scales like white brocade, dazzling in its brilliance. It was five-colored, bright and lovely.

古文：刘与段曰： 此鱼状貌异常，不可杀之。 
现代文：刘简辞和段齐真说： 这条鱼的样子很不寻常，不要杀死它。 
English: Liu Jianji and Duan Qizhen said: This fish looks very unusual, don't kill it.

古文：平原曰： 子辈迂阔不能食，吾能食之矣！ 
现代文：赵平原说： 你们太迂腐了，你们不吃我吃。 
English: Zhao Pingyuan said: You are too pedantic, you won't eat me.

古文：言未毕，忽见湖中有群小儿，俱著半臂白袴，驰走水上，叫啸来往，略无畏惮。
现代文：话未说完，忽然看见湖里有一群小孩，全都穿着露出半截胳膊和腿的白色衣裤，在水面上奔跑，来来往往地叫喊着，一点也没有害怕的样子。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he suddenly saw a group of children in the lake, all wearing white trousers that showed half of their arms and legs, running on the surface of the water, shouting back and forth, and they didn't look scared at all.

古文：二客益惧，复以白鱼为请，平原不许之，叱庖人曰： 速斫脍来。 
现代文：两个客人更加害怕，又替白鱼说情。赵平原不答应他们，呵叱厨师说： 快些做熟了送来。 
English: The two guests were even more afraid and pleaded for the white fish. Zhao Pingyuan did not agree to them, but scolded the chef and said, "Hurry up and make it ripe and send it to me."

古文：逡巡，脍至。平原及二客食方半，风雷暴作，霆震一声，湖面小儿，脚下生白烟，大风随起。
现代文：不一会，做好的鱼送了上来，赵平原和两个客人刚吃一半，突然狂风骤起雷声大作，雷响第一次，湖面上奔跑的小孩脚下生出白烟，大风也随着刮起来。
English: After a while, the cooked fish was served. Zhao Pingyuan and the two guests had just eaten half of it, when suddenly a strong wind burst out and thundered loudly. It was the first thunder, and white smoke came out from under the feet of the children running on the lake. The strong wind also blew up.

古文：二客觉气候有变，顾望三里内，有一兰若，遂投而去。
现代文：两个客人看到气候发生变化，回头望见三里之内，有座寺庙，就跑去避雨。
English: Two guests saw the weather change, looked back and saw that there was a temple within three miles, and ran to avoid the rain.

古文：平原微哂，方复下箸，于时飞沙折木，雨火相杂而下，霆电掣曳，天崩地拆。
现代文：赵平原微笑着有点瞧不起他们，正要再动筷子吃鱼的时候，砂石飞起，树木折断，大雨和雷电交加，好像要天塌地陷一样。
English: Zhao Pingyuan smiled and looked down on them a little. Just as he was about to move his chopsticks again to eat the fish, sand and gravel flew up, trees snapped, heavy rain and thunder and lightning mixed, as if the sky was falling.

古文：二客惶骇，相顾失色，谓平原已为齑粉矣。
现代文：两个客人惊慌害怕，相顾失色，以为赵平原已经变成粉末了。
English: The two guests panicked and panicked, looking at each other discolored, thinking that Zhao Pingyuan had turned into powder.

古文：俄顷雨霁，二客奔诣脍所，见平原坐于地，冥然已无知矣。
现代文：不一会雨过天晴，两个客人跑到吃鱼的地方，看见赵平原坐在地上，失去了知觉。
English: Shortly after the rain passed, two guests ran to the place where they were eating fish and saw Zhao Pingyuan sitting on the ground, unconscious.

古文：二客扶翼，呼问之，良久张目曰： 大差事，大差事！
现代文：两个人将他扶起来，呼叫着问他。过了很久，他才睁开眼睛说： 办了一件大错事！办了一件大错事！
English: Two people picked him up and called out to him. It was a long time before he opened his eyes and said: "I've done something very wrong! I've done something very wrong!"

古文：辛勤食脍尽，被一青衫人，向吾喉中拔出，掷于湖中。吾腹今甚空乏矣！ 
现代文：辛辛苦苦地把鱼吃光了，却被一个穿黑衣服的人从我的喉咙里取出来，扔到湖里去了，我的肚子现在仍然是空空的。 
English: After struggling to finish the fish, a man in black took it out of my throat and threw it into the lake. My stomach is still empty.

古文：其操刀之仆，遂亡失所在，经数月方归。
现代文：他那个拿刀做菜的仆人，也不知哪里去了，过了好几个月才回来。
English: His servant, who was cooking with a knife, did not know where he had gone and did not return for months.

古文：平原诘其由，云： 初见青衫人于电火中嗔骂，遂被领将，令负衣袱。行仅十余日，至一处，人物稠广，市肆骈杂。青衣人云： 此是益州。 
现代文：赵平原问他原因，仆人说： 开始时看见一个穿黑衣的人在电火中抱怨并辱骂我，然后他命令我背着衣服包，带着我走了十多天，来到一个地方，人物众多，集市中摊床一个挨一个，穿青衫的人说： 这里是益州。 
English: Zhao Pingyuan asked him the reason, the servant said: At the beginning, I saw a man in black complain and abuse me in the electric fire. Then he ordered me to carry my clothes and bag, and took me for more than ten days. I came to a place with many people, stalls in the market one by one. The man in blue shirt said: This is Yizhou.

古文：又行五六日，复至一繁会处，青衫人云： 此是潭州。 
现代文：又走了五六天，又到了一个繁华的城镇。穿青衫的人说： 这里是潭州。 
English: After another five or six days of walking, we arrived at another bustling town. The man in the blue shirt said: This is Tanzhou.

古文：其夕，领入旷野中，言曰： 汝随我行已久，得无困苦耶？
现代文：那天晚上，他领我来到了一片旷野，说道： 你跟着我已经走了很长时间，难道不觉得饥苦劳累吗？
English: That night, he led me to a field and said, "You've been walking with me for a long time. Don't you feel tired and hungry?

古文：今与汝别。
现代文：现在就与你分别。 
English: I'm breaking up with you now.

古文：因怀中取干脯一挺与某，云： 饥即食之，可达家也。 
现代文：接着从怀中取出一块干脯给我，并说： 你饿了吃它，就可以回到家乡。 
English: Then he took a piece of dried toad out of his pocket and gave it to me, saying, "If you are hungry, eat this and you can go back to your hometown."

古文：又曰： 为我申意赵平原，无夭害生命。暴殄天物，神道所恶。
现代文：又说 替我向赵平原传句话，叫他不要任意残害生命，祸害自然界的鸟兽草木，这是神灵所不允许的。
English: He also said that he would pass on a message to Zhao Pingyuan for me, asking him not to arbitrarily destroy life and harm nature's birds, animals and plants. This is not allowed by the gods.

古文：再犯之，必无赦矣？ 
现代文：再犯这样的过错，一定不会被赦免了。  
English: If he commits such a crime again, he will definitely not be pardoned.

古文：平原自此终身不钓鱼。
现代文：赵平原从此一辈子不再钓鱼了。
English: Zhao Pingyuan stopped fishing for the rest of his life.

古文：高昱
现代文：高昱
English: Takatsuki

古文：元和中，有高昱处士以钓鱼为业。
现代文：东汉元和年间，有一个不愿做官的人叫高昱，以钓鱼为生。
English: During the Eastern Han Dynasty in the Yuan Dynasty, there was a person who did not want to be an official called Gao Yu, who made a living by fishing.

古文：尝舣舟于昭潭，夜仅三更不寐。
现代文：有一天他把鱼船停在昭潭的岸边。到了夜里三更天还没睡着。
English: One day, he parked his fishing boat on the shore of Zhaotan. At night, he hadn't slept for three days.

古文：忽见潭上有三大芙蕖，红芳颇异。
现代文：三个人都穿着白色衣裙，冰清玉洁像白雪一样，容貌艳丽迷人，神彩晶莹好似天仙。
English: All three of them were wearing white dresses, ice-clear and jade-pure like white snow, with glamorous and charming looks, as if they were celestial beings.

古文：有三美女各踞其上，俱衣白，光洁如雪，容华艳媚，莹若神仙，共语曰： 今夕阔水波澄，高天月皎，怡情赏景，堪话幽玄。 
现代文：她们说： 今天晚上水面广阔，风清浪静，天高月明，使人心情愉快。欣赏如此美景，正适合谈论一些幽深玄妙的道理。 
English: They said, "This evening, the vast expanse of the water, the calmness of the wind, and the brightness of the moon in the sky make people feel happy. Enjoying such a beautiful view, it is suitable to talk about some profound and mysterious principles.

古文：其一曰： 旁有小舟，莫听我语否？ 
现代文：其中一女子说： 旁边有条小船，会不会能听到我们的谈话呢？ 
English: One of the women said: "There's a boat next to us, could it hear us talking?

古文：又一曰： 纵有，非濯缨之士，不足惮也。 
现代文：另一个女子说： 即使有人，也不会是隐居的高人，不必害怕。 
English: Another woman said: "Even if there is someone, it won't be a reclusive high-ranking person, don't be afraid.

古文：相谓曰： 昭潭无底橘州浮，信不虚耳。 
现代文：接着又对另两个女子说： 昭潭有没底橘子洲就会漂浮起来，相信这句话不是假的。 
English: Then she said to the other two women: "If there is a bottomless orange pomegranate pond in Zhaotan, it will float. I believe this sentence is not false.

古文：又曰： 各请言其所好何道。 
现代文：又说： 请各人说说自己喜欢什么学说？ 
English: And he said, Let every man say what he will of the doctrine.

古文：其次曰： 吾性习释。 
现代文：其次一女子说： 我本性适合学习佛学。 
English: Next, a woman said, "I am naturally suited to study Buddhism.

古文：其次曰： 吾习道。 
现代文：第一个女子说： 我学习道教。 
English: The first woman said, "I study Taoism."

古文：其次曰： 吾习儒。 
现代文：最后一女子说： 我学习儒家学说。 
English: The last woman said: I study Confucianism.

古文：各谈本教道义，理极精微。
现代文：随后各自谈起了本教的教义，道理说得精深微妙。
English: Afterwards, each of them spoke about the teachings of this religion, explaining the principles in a profound and subtle way.

古文：一曰： 吾昨宵得不祥之梦。 
现代文：一个女子说： 我昨晚做了个不吉祥的梦。 
English: One woman said: "I had a bad dream last night.

古文：二子曰： 何梦也？ 
现代文：另两个女子问： 是什么梦？ 
English: The other two girls asked: What is a dream?

古文：曰： 吾梦子孙仓皇，窟宅流徙，遭人斥逐，举族奔波，是不祥也。 
现代文：回答说： 我梦见子孙们仓皇失措，我们住的洞窟府宅流离转移，受到别人的斥责和驱逐，全族人都被迫奔波迁移。这是不吉祥的预兆。 
English: He replied: I dreamt that my children and grandchildren were in a panic, the cave mansion we lived in was displaced, rebuked and expelled by others, and the whole family was forced to move. This is an ominous omen.

古文：二子曰： 游魂偶然，不足信也。 
现代文：另外两女子说： 灵魂出游，偶然看见的情景，不值得相信。 
English: The other two women said: "It's not worth believing in the wandering soul, in the chance sighting.

古文：三子曰： 各算来晨，得何物食。 
现代文：三个女子一齐说： 各自推算一下，明天早晨，能吃到什么食物。 
English: The three women said together: "Each of you should calculate what food you can eat tomorrow morning.

古文：久之曰： 从其所好，僧道儒耳。
现代文：过了好大一会儿，一个女子说： 遵从各人的爱好，一个和尚，一个道士，一个儒生罢了。
English: After a long while, a woman said, "Let's follow each other's hobbies, one monk, one Taoist, one Confucian."

古文：言讫，逡巡而没。昱听其语，历历记之。
现代文：唉，我刚才所说的梦，未必不是灾祸。 说完，全都沉没入潭，高昱听了她们所说的话，全都清清楚楚地记住了。
English: Alas, the dream I just mentioned may not be a calamity. After that, they all sank into the pool. Gao Yao listened to what they said and remembered everything clearly.

古文：及旦，果有一僧来渡，至中流而溺。
现代文：等到天亮，果然有一个和尚来渡水，船到中流就沉没淹死了。
English: At dawn, a monk came to cross the river, but the boat sank in the middle of the stream and he drowned.

古文：昱大骇曰： 昨宵之言不谬耳！ 
现代文：高昱非常害怕，意识到：昨天晚上她们说的不是假话。
English: Gao Yao was very scared and realized: What they said last night was not a lie.

古文：旋踵，一道士舣舟将济，昱遽止之，道士曰： 君妖也，僧偶然耳。
现代文：紧接着，一个道士来到停船处准备渡水。高昱急忙制止他，道士说： 你是个妖精，和尚之事是偶然的事。
English: Immediately afterwards, a Taoist came to the dock to prepare to cross the water. Gao Yao hurried to stop him. The Taoist said, "You are a fairy, the monk thing is a coincidence."

古文：吾赴知者所召，虽死无悔，不可失信。 
现代文：我去赶赴具有非凡智慧的人的召见，即使死了也不后悔，不能失信于人。 
English: I went to answer the call of a man of extraordinary wisdom. Even if I die, I won't regret it. I can't betray anyone.

古文：叱舟人而渡，及中流又溺焉。
现代文：于是呵叱驾船人赶快开船，结果道士乘船到中流又沉没淹死了。
English: Therefore, he scolded the boatman to leave the boat quickly. As a result, the Taoist took the boat to the middle of the stream and sank and drowned.

古文：续有一儒生，挈书囊径渡，昱恳曰： 如前去僧道已没矣！ 
现代文：后来又有一个读书人，带着一个装书的口袋也来渡水。高昱恳切地说： 先前来的和尚和道士已经淹死了。 
English: Later, another reader came to cross the water with a book bag. Gao Yao said earnestly: The monk and Taoist who came earlier have drowned.

古文：儒正色而言： 死生命也，今日吾族祥斋，不可亏其吊礼。 
现代文：读书人严肃地说： 人的生死是命中注定的，今天我们族人举行丧祭，不能不去参加吊丧的仪式。 
English: The reader said solemnly, "People's life and death are predestined. Today, our people are holding a funeral, and we can't help but attend the funeral ceremony.

古文：将鼓棹，昱挽书生衣袂曰： 臂可断，不可渡。 
现代文：正要划桨，高昱拉住书生的衣角说： 可砍断我的胳膊，却不能让你渡水。 
English: Just as he was about to paddle, Gao Yao tugged at Shousen's clothes and said, "You can cut off my arm, but you can't make you cross the water."

古文：书生方叫呼于岸侧，忽有物如练，自潭中飞出，绕书生而入。
现代文：书生正要向岸上叫喊，忽然地有个象绳子似的东西，从昭潭中飞出来，缠住读书人拖到水里去了。
English: The student was about to shout to the shore, when suddenly a rope-like object flew out of the pool, entangled the student and dragged him into the water.

古文：昱与渡人遽前捉其衣襟，漦涎前流滑，手不可制。
现代文：高昱和那些准备渡水的人急忙上前扯住他的衣襟，上面的粘涎滑溜溜的，没有扯住。
English: The stilt walkers and those preparing to cross the water hurried forward and tugged at his collar. The sticky tape on top was slippery and didn't hold.

古文：昱长吁曰： 命也！ 
现代文：高昱长叹一声说： 这是命中注定的。 
English: Gao Yao said with a long sigh, "This is destined.

古文：顷刻而没三子。
现代文：顷刻间淹没了三个人。
English: In an instant, three people were drowned.

古文：而俄有二客乘叶舟而至，一叟一少，昱遂谒叟，问其姓字。
现代文：又过了一会有两个客人乘坐着小船来到。一个老头，一个少年。高昱就上前拜见老头，问老头的姓名。
English: After a while, two guests arrived in a small boat. An old man and a young boy. Gao Yao went up to meet the old man and asked his name.

古文：叟曰： 余祁阳山唐勾鳖，今适长沙，访张法明威仪。 
现代文：老人说： 我是祁阳山的唐勾鳖，准备到长沙，拜见张法明。 
English: The old man said, "I am Tang Guoqi from Fenyang Mountain, and I am preparing to go to Changsha to meet Zhang Farming.

古文：昱久闻其高道，有神术，礼谒甚谨。
现代文：高昱很久就听说这老人道行高深，有神奇的法术，对老人很尊重。
English: Gao Yao had heard for a long time that the old man was very profound, had magical spells, and respected the old man very much.

古文：俄闻岸侧有数人哭声，乃三溺死者亲属也。
现代文：过了一会听到岸边有几个人在哭，是三个溺水者的亲属。
English: Moments later, she heard several people crying on the shore, relatives of the three people who drowned.

古文：叟诘之，昱具述其事，叟怒曰： 焉敢如此害人！ 
现代文：老人问他是怎么回事。高昱就把前面的事情详细说了。老人生气地说： 怎么敢这样害人！ 
English: The old man asked him what was going on. Gao Yao explained the previous incident in detail. The old man said angrily: "How dare you harm people like this!

古文：遂开箧，取丹笔篆字，命同舟弟子曰： 为吾持此符入潭，勒其水怪，火急他适！ 
现代文：然后打开箱子，拿出红笔写了一道篆字符帖，命令同船而来的弟子说： 替我拿着这道符到潭里去，勒令那些水中怪物，赶快迁到别处去。 
English: Then he opened the box, took out a red pen and wrote a message in Chinese characters. He ordered the disciple who came with the boat to say, "Take this message to the lake for me, and order those monsters in the water to quickly move to another place."

古文：弟子遂捧符而入，如履平地。循山脚行数百丈，观大穴明莹，如人间之屋室。
现代文：弟子就捧着符走进水潭，就象走在平地上一样，顺着山脚走了几百丈，看见一个大洞穴，里面很明亮，象人间的住房一样。
English: The disciple then walked into the pool holding the amulet, just as if he were walking on flat ground. He walked hundreds of meters along the foot of the mountain and saw a large cave, which was very bright inside, like a human dwelling.

古文：见三白猪寐于石榻，有小猪数十，方戏于旁。及持符至，三猪忽惊起，化白衣美女，小猪亦俱为童女，捧符而泣曰： 不祥之梦果中矣！ 
现代文：三只白猪在石床上睡觉，有几十个小猪正在旁边玩耍，弟子带着符帖来到，三只白猪忽然受惊起身，变成白衣美女，小猪也全变成小孩，美女捧着符帖哭着说： 不吉祥的梦果然应验了。 
English: The three white pigs were sleeping on a stone bed, and dozens of little pigs were playing nearby. A disciple came with charms. Suddenly, the three white pigs were startled and got up, turning into a beautiful woman in a white dress. The little pigs also all turned into children. The beautiful woman held the charms and cried, "My unlucky dream has come true."

古文：容三日涉归东海，各以明珠为献。 
现代文：又说： 请替我们禀告先师，我们在这里住了很久了，怎么会不留恋呢，请容许我们三天之内搬回东海。 并各自以明珠作为谢礼。
English: They also said, "Please tell our teacher's obituary for us, we have lived here for a long time, how can we not be nostalgic, please allow us to move back to the East Sea within three days, and each of us will take a pearl as a thank you."

古文：弟子曰： 吾无所用。 
现代文：弟子说： 这个我没有用处。 
English: The disciple said, "This is of no use to me.

古文：不受而返，具以白叟，叟大怒曰： 汝更为我语此畜生，明晨速离此，不然，当使六丁就穴斩之。 
现代文：没有接受就返回岸上，回禀老人。老人非常生气地说： 你再去替我告诉这几个畜牲，明天早晨赶快离开这里。不然的话，我就派六丁神将到洞里去杀了她们。 
English: The old man was very angry and said, "Go and tell these animals for me again, and leave here as soon as tomorrow morning. Otherwise, I will send six deities to the cave to kill them."

古文：弟子又去，三美女号恸曰： 敬依处分，弟子归。 
现代文：弟子又入潭去。三个美女大声哭着说： 我们接受处分。 弟子就回来了。
English: The disciple went into the lake again. The three beautiful women cried loudly and said, "We accept the punishment." The disciple came back.

古文：明晨，有黑气自潭面而出，须臾，烈风迅雷，激浪如山。
现代文：第二天早晨，有黑气从昭潭的水面上冒出。不一会，刮起了大风，响起了雷声，激起的波浪象山一样。
English: The next morning, black gas emerged from the water surface of Zhaotan. Soon, a strong wind blew, thunder sounded, and the waves were like mountains.

古文：有三大鱼长数丈，小鱼无数周绕，沿流而去。
现代文：出现三条几丈长的大鱼，还有无数条小鱼围绕在大鱼的周围。
English: Three large fish several feet in length appear, and countless small fish surround the large fish.

古文：搜曰： 吾此行甚有所利，不因子，何以去昭潭之害？ 
现代文：它们顺着流水离开了。老人对高昱说： 我这次出行很有好处。如果不是因为你，我怎么能除去昭潭的祸害呢？ 
English: They left along the flowing water. The old man said to Gao Yao: This trip is very beneficial for me. If it were not for you, how could I get rid of the scourge of Zhaotan?

古文：遂与昱乘舟东西耳。
现代文：就和高昱各自坐着船分别向东、向西而去。
English: So he and Gao Yao each took a boat and sailed east and west, respectively.

古文：僧法志
现代文：僧法志
English: Monk Hosshi

古文：台山僧法志游至淮阴，见一渔者坚礼而命焉。
现代文：台山的和尚法志出游走到淮阴，遇到一个渔夫礼貌地坚持邀请他去作客。
English: The monk Fa Zhi from Taishan went on a trip to Huaiyin and met a fisherman who politely insisted on inviting him to be his guest.

古文：法志随至草庵中，渔者设食甚谨，法志颇怪，因问曰： 弟子以渔为业，自是造罪之人，何见僧如此敬礼？ 
现代文：法志跟着他来到一个草屋之中，对他很尊敬，安排的饭菜很讲究。法志觉得很奇怪，便问渔夫说： 你以打鱼作为职业，本来是杀生的人。为什么看见和尚这么恭敬呢？ 
English: Haji followed him to a grass hut. He respected him very much and the meal arrangements were very elaborate. Haji felt very strange and asked the fisherman, "You are a fisherman by profession. You are a killer by nature. Why do you treat the monk with such respect?

古文：答曰： 我昔于会稽山遇云远上人为众讲法，暂曾随喜，得悟圣教。
现代文：渔夫回答说： 我从前在会稽山上遇见过云远上人为众人讲佛法，曾经跟着听过一段时间，领悟到佛家教义的神圣高深。
English: The fisherman replied, "I once met a monk on Mount Kechizan who was teaching Buddhism to people from far and wide. I followed him for a while and came to understand the sacredness and profundity of Buddhist teachings.

古文：迩来见僧，即欢喜无量。 
现代文：从那以后，看见和尚就高兴得不得了。 
English: Since then, he has been overjoyed to see the monk.

古文：僧异之，劝令改业，渔者曰： 我虽闻善道，而滞于罟网，亦犹和尚为僧，未能以戒律为事。其罪一也，又何疑焉？ 
现代文：法志觉得更加奇怪，劝渔夫改换职业，渔夫说： 我虽然听到了好的道理，却留恋这个打渔的职业，也就好比和尚是僧人，都不能严格地遵守戒律，罪过是一样的，又有什么可怀疑的呢？ 
English: Hanzhi thought it was even more strange, and advised the fisherman to change his occupation. The fisherman said, "Although I have heard good things, I still yearn for this occupation of fishing. It is just like a monk who cannot strictly abide by the precepts. The sin is the same, so what is there to doubt?

古文：僧惭而退，回顾，见渔者化为大鼋，入淮，亦失草庵所在。
现代文：和尚惭愧地走了，回头看时，发现渔夫变成一只大鼋，走进淮水，那个草屋也没有了。
English: The monk walked away shamefacedly. When he looked back, he found that the fisherman had turned into a big toad, walked into the water, and the grass hut was gone.

