古文：◎熙宗熙宗弘基缵武庄靖孝成皇帝，讳亶，本讳合剌，太祖孙，景宣皇帝子。
现代文：熙宗弘基缵武庄靖孝成皇帝，名叫亶，本名叫合剌，是太祖阿骨打的长孙，景宣皇帝的儿子。
English: Emperor Hizong Hongji, the founder of Wuzhuang, Jing, and Xiaocheng, whose real name was He, was the son of Emperor Jingxuan and the eldest grandson of Emperor Akechi.

古文：母蒲察氏。
现代文：母亲是蒲察氏。
English: His mother was from the Puca clan.

古文：天辅三年己亥岁生。
现代文：天辅三年己亥岁出生。
English: Tenshu was born in the year of the boar.

古文：天会八年，谙班勃极烈杲薨，太宗意久未决。
现代文：天会八年，谙班勃极烈杲逝世，太宗很长时间没有决定接替人选。
English: In the 8th year of the Heavenly Reunion, Gongban Boji Lirong passed away, and Taizong did not decide on a successor for a long time.

古文：十年，左副元帅宗翰、右副元帅宗辅、左监军完颜希尹入朝，与宗干议曰： 谙班勃极烈虚位已久，今不早定，恐授非其人。
现代文：十年，左副元帅宗翰、右副元帅宗辅、左监军完颜希尹入朝，和宗干商议说 ：谙班勃极烈的位子空了已经很长时间了，现在不早些定下人选，恐怕会授给不应该授予的那个人。
English: Ten years later, Left Vice-Marshal Zong Han, Right Vice-Marshal Zong Su, and Left Supervisor of the Army, after Yan Xiyin's accession to the imperial court, discussed with Zong Gan: "It has been a long time since the post of commander-in-chief has been vacant. If we don't decide on a candidate sooner, I'm afraid it will be awarded to someone who shouldn't be awarded it."

古文：合剌，先帝嫡孙，当立。 
现代文：合剌，是先帝太祖的嫡亲长孙，应当拥立他。 
English: He is the legitimate eldest grandson of the late Emperor Taizu, and he should be supported.

古文：相与请于太宗者再三，乃从之。
现代文：他们互相约好一起再三向太宗禀奏请求，太宗才依从了他们。
English: They made an appointment with each other and repeatedly requested Taizong to play the harp, and Taizong obeyed them.

古文：四月庚午，诏曰： 尔为太祖之嫡孙，故命尔为谙班勃极烈，其无自谓冲幼，狎于童戏，惟敬厥德。 
现代文：四月九日，太宗皇帝诏令： 尔是太祖的嫡孙，所以命令尔为谙班勃极烈，当不要再说自己年龄幼小，在儿童游戏中玩乐，只看重德行。 
English: On April 9, Emperor Taizong issued the following edict: You are the great-great-grandson of the great-great-grandfather, so I order you to be extremely disciplined. You should no longer say that you are young, have fun in children's games, and only pay attention to virtue.

古文：谙班勃极烈者，太宗尝居是官，及登大位，以命弟杲。
现代文：谙班勃极烈这个职务，太宗曾经当过这个官，到了登上大位，把这个职务任命给他的弟弟杲。
English: Emperor Taizong once served as this official, and when he ascended to the throne, he appointed this post to his younger brother Yao.

古文：杲薨，帝定议为储嗣，故以是命焉。
现代文：杲逝世了，皇帝议定这个官是储备留作承嗣皇位的，所以这样任命。
English: When Emperor Xuan died, it was agreed that this post would be reserved for the heir to the throne, and so it was appointed.

古文：十三年正月己巳，太宗崩。
现代文：天会十三年正月二十四日，太宗逝世。
English: Taizong died on the 24th day of the first month of the 13th year of Tianhui.

古文：庚午，即皇帝位。
现代文：二十五日，谙班勃极烈即皇帝位。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Zhiban Bo Jiliang ascended to the throne.

古文：甲戌，诏中外。
现代文：二十九日，诏告中外。
English: On the 29th, it was announced to the public.

古文：诏公私禁酒。
现代文：并诏令公家、私人一律禁止喝酒。
English: He also decreed a ban on alcohol for both the public and private sectors.

古文：癸酉，遣使告哀于齐、高丽、夏及报即位，仍诏齐自今称臣勿称子。
现代文：二十四日，派遣使者到齐、高丽、夏国告知太宗逝世，以及即位的事，仍然诏令齐国从今往后称臣不要称子。
English: On the 24th, envoys were dispatched to Qi, Goryeo, and Xia to inform them of Taizong's death and enthronement, but Qi still ordered that from now on, the emperor should not have a son.

古文：二月乙巳，追谥太祖后唐括氏曰圣穆皇后，裴满氏曰光懿皇后。
现代文：二月乙巳，追加谥封太祖的皇后唐括氏叫圣穆皇后，裴满氏叫光懿皇后。
English: In February, the empresses of the Tang Dynasty who were additionally conferred the title of Grandfather were called Empress Sheng Mu and Empress Guangya by the Baimans.

古文：追册太祖妃仆散氏曰德妃，乌古论氏曰贤妃。
现代文：追加册封太祖的妃子仆散氏叫德妃，乌古论氏叫贤妃。
English: The imperial concubine of the Emperor's second son, San, is called Defei, and the imperial concubine of the Emperor's third son, Uguon is called Xianfei.

古文：辛酉，改葬太祖于和陵。
现代文：辛酉，把太祖改葬在和陵。
English: Xin Xuan, the great-grandfather was reburied in the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：三月己卯，齐、高丽使来吊祭。
现代文：三月六日，齐、高丽两国派使者前来吊唁祭奠太宗。
English: On March 6, envoys from the two countries of Qi and Goryeo came to pay condolences and pay tribute to Taejong.

古文：庚辰，谥大行皇帝曰文烈，庙号太宗。
现代文：七日，尊谥大行皇帝号称文烈，庙号太宗。
English: On the seventh day, Emperor Zonglu Da Xing was given the title of Wen Rong and the temple name of Taizong.

古文：乙酉，葬太宗于和陵。
现代文：十二日，将太宗安葬在和陵。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Taizong was buried in He Mausoleum.

古文：甲午，以国论右勃极烈、都元帅宗翰为太保，领三省事，封晋国王。
现代文：二十一日，任命国论右勃极烈、都元帅宗翰为太保，领三省事，并封为晋国王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he appointed Do Marshal Zonghan, a staunch right-wing nationalist, as Taibo, in charge of three provinces, and crowned him King of Jin.

古文：戊戌，诏诸国使赐宴。不举乐。
现代文：二十五日，诏令赐各国使臣宴会，不举行奏乐。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict gave the envoys of various countries a banquet, but no concert was held.

古文：四月戊午，齐、高丽遣使贺即位。
现代文：四月十五日，齐、高丽两国派遣使者前来祝贺皇帝即位。
English: On April 15, the two countries of Qi and Goryeo sent envoys to congratulate the emperor on his enthronement.

古文：丙寅，昏德公赵佶薨，遣使致祭及赙赠。
现代文：二十三日，昏德公赵佶逝世，派人去祭奠以及赠送办丧事用的财物。
English: On the 23rd, Comrade Zhao Yao passed away, and sent people to pay tribute to him, as well as presented him with property to be used for the funeral.

古文：是月，甘露降于熊岳县。
现代文：当月，熊岳县普降甘露。
English: That month, Purifuri nectar in Kumagatake County was at its peak.

古文：五月甲申，左副元帅宗辅薨。
现代文：五月十一日，左副元帅宗辅逝世。
English: On May 11, Left Vice-Marshal Zong Fu passed away.

古文：九月壬申，追尊皇考丰王为景宣皇帝，庙号徽宗，皇妣蒲察氏为惠昭皇后。
现代文：九月二日，追尊皇帝的父亲丰王为景宣皇帝，庙号叫徽宗；追尊皇帝的母亲蒲察氏为惠昭皇后。
English: On September 2, Feng Wang, the father of Emperor Suizong, became Emperor Jingxuan, and the temple name was Huizong; Emperor Suizong's mother, Pu Cha, became Empress Huizhao.

古文：戊寅，尊太祖后纥石烈氏、太宗后唐括氏皆为太皇太后，诏中外。
现代文：八日，尊封太祖的皇后纥石烈氏、太宗的皇后唐括氏都为太皇太后，诏告中外。
English: On the 8th, the Empress Zou Shilei, who was given the title of Grand Patriarch, and the Empress Tang Kuo, who was given the title of Grand Empress Dowager, were both proclaimed Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：乙酉，改葬徽宗及惠昭后于兴陵。
现代文：十五日，将徽宗以及惠昭皇后改葬在兴陵。
English: On the 15th, Huizong and Empress Huizhao were reburied in Xingling.

古文：十一月，以尚书令宋国王宗磐为太师。
现代文：十一月，让尚书令宋国王宗磐当太师。
English: In November, Zhang Shangshu ordered the Song King Zong Pan to become the Grand Master.

古文：乙亥，初颁历。
现代文：六日，开始颁布历法。
English: On the 6th, the promulgation of the calendar began.

古文：己卯，以元帅左监完颜希尹为尚书左丞相兼侍中，太子少保高庆裔为左丞，平阳尹萧庆为右丞。
现代文：十日，任命元帅左监军完颜希尹为尚书左丞相兼侍中，太子少保高庆裔为左丞，平阳尹萧庆为右丞。
English: On the 10th, Marshal Guan Yan Xiyin, the left supervisor of the army, was appointed as Shangshu's left secretary and chamberlain, Prince Shobao Gaoqing's descendants as left secretary, and Pingyang Yin Xiaoqing as right secretary.

古文：己丑，建天开殿于爻剌。
现代文：二十日，在爻剌修建天开殿。
English: On the 20th, the Tinkai Hall was built in Handan.

古文：十二月癸亥，始定齐、高丽、夏朝贺、赐宴、朝辞仪。
现代文：十二月二十五日，开始规定齐、高丽、夏国朝贺、赐宴、朝辞的礼仪。
English: On December 25th, the etiquette for the morning greetings, banquets, and speeches of Qi, Koryo, and Xia began to be specified.

古文：以京西鹿囿赐农民。
现代文：把京城西边的鹿囿赐给农民。
English: The Deer Park on the west side of the capital was given to the farmers.

古文：十四年正月己巳朔，上朝太皇太后于两宫。
现代文：天会十四年正月初一，皇上到两宫朝见太皇太后。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 14th year of Tianhui, the emperor went to the two palaces to see the great empress dowager.

古文：齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：齐、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: Qi, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：癸酉，颁历于高丽。丁丑，太皇太后纥石烈氏崩。
现代文：初五，在高丽颁布历法。初九，太皇太后纥石烈氏逝世。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month, the calendar was promulgated in Korea. On the 9th day of the 1st month, the Grand Empress Dowager Shiori passed away.

古文：乙酉，万寿节，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，齐、高丽、夏国派遣使臣前来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was Manchukuo Day, and Qi, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：上本七月七日生，以同皇考忌日，改用正月十七日。
现代文：皇上本来是七月七日出生，因为和他父亲的忌日相同，所以改用正月十七日作为万寿节。
English: Originally, the emperor was born on July 7th, but because it was the same day as his father's death, it was changed to the 17th day of the first month.

古文：二月癸卯，上尊谥曰钦宪皇后，葬睿陵。
现代文：二月五日，皇上尊谥太皇太后纥石烈氏叫钦宪皇后，安葬在睿陵。
English: On February 5, the Emperor's wife, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager.

古文：三月壬午，以太保宗翰、太师宗磐、太傅宗干并领三省事。
现代文：三月十五日，任命太保宗翰、太师宗磐、太傅宗干领三省事。
English: On March 15th, Taibo Zonghan, Taishi Zongban, and Taifu Zong were appointed to lead the three provinces.

古文：丁酉，高丽遣使来吊。
现代文：十八日，高丽派遣使者来吊唁。
English: On the 18th, Korea sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：八月丙辰，追尊九代祖以下曰皇帝、皇后，定始祖、景祖、世祖、太祖、太宗庙皆不祧。
现代文：八月二十一日，追尊九代皇祖以下叫皇帝、皇后，规定始祖、景祖、世祖、太祖、太宗庙都不作为祖庙。
English: On August 21, the ninth generation of emperors and ancestors were named emperor and empress, and it was stipulated that the ancestral temple, the Jingzu, the Shizu, the Taizu, and the Taizong Temple would not be regarded as ancestral temples.

古文：癸亥，诏齐国与本朝军民诉讼相关者，文移署年，止用天会。
现代文：二十八日，诏令齐国和本朝军民诉讼相关的案子，文件转移的时候要署年，停止用天会年号。
English: On the 28th, it was decreed that in cases related to the military and civil litigation between Qi and this country, the year should be signed when transferring documents, and the Tianhui year should be stopped.

古文：十月甲寅，以吴激为高丽王生日使，萧仲恭为齐刘豫回谢并生日正旦使。
现代文：十月二十日，派吴激作为高丽王生日使，萧仲恭作为齐国刘豫回谢并生日正旦使。
English: On October 20th, he sent Wu Rong as the birthday envoy of the King of Goryeo, and Xiao Zhonggyong as the birthday envoy of Liu Yu of Qi.

古文：十五年正月癸亥朔，上朝太皇太后于明德宫。齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会十五年正月初一，皇上到明德宫朝见太皇太后，齐、高丽、夏国派遣使臣前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 15th year of Tianhui, the emperor went to the Mingde Palace in the morning to see the great empress dowager, and Qi, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：初用《大明历》。
现代文：开始启用《大明历》。
English: "Daming Calendar" was launched.

古文：己卯，万寿节，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，齐、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the seventeenth day, it was the Manchukuo Festival. Qi, Goryeo, and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：六月庚戌，尚书左丞高庆裔、转连使刘思有罪伏诛。
现代文：六月二十日，尚书左丞高庆裔、转运使刘思有罪伏法被杀。
English: On June 20th, Liu Si, a high-ranking official of the Gao Qing Clan, was killed in an ambush.

古文：七月辛巳，太保、领三省事、晋国王宗翰薨。
现代文：七月二十一日，太保、领三省事、晋国王宗翰逝世。
English: On July 21st, King Jin Zonghan passed away after serving as Tai Po and leading three provinces.

古文：丙戌夜，京师地震。
现代文：二十六日夜间，京城发生地震。
English: On the night of the 26th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：封皇叔宗隽、宗固，叔祖晕皆为王。
现代文：封皇叔宗隽、宗固、叔祖晕都是王。
English: Emperor-appointed uncles Zong Rong, Zong Gu, and Uncles Zhou are all kings.

古文：丁亥，汰兵兴滥爵。
现代文：二十七日，削减兴兵打仗以来滥增的爵位。
English: On the 27th, the titles of nobility, which had increased incessantly since the beginning of the war, were reduced.

古文：十月乙卯，以元帅左监军挞懒为左副元帅，封鲁国王。宗弼右副元帅，封渖王。
现代文：十月二十六日，任命元帅左监军挞懒为左副元帅，封为鲁国王；宗弼为右副元帅，封为沈王。
English: On October 26th, he appointed Marshal Zuo Jianjun to be the left deputy marshal and named Lu King; Zonglu to be the right deputy marshal and named Shen Wang.

古文：知枢密院事兼侍中时立爱致仕。
现代文：知枢密院事兼侍中时立爱任期已满辞去官职。
English: The term of the Privy Councillor of the Privy Council and the Vice-Chamberlain of the Privy Council, Shi Lixiao, has expired and he has resigned from the post.

古文：十一月丙午，废齐国，降封刘豫为蜀王，诏中外。
现代文：十一月十七日，废除齐国，降封刘豫为蜀王，并诏告中外。
English: On November 17th, he abolished the State of Qi and demoted Liu Yu to the position of King of Shu.

古文：置行台尚书省于汴。
现代文：在汴京设置行台尚书省。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture was set up in Beijing.

古文：十二月戊辰，刘豫上表谢封爵。
现代文：十二月十一日，刘豫上表谢封爵的恩德。
English: On December 11th, Liu Yu made a speech to express his gratitude for the knighthood.

古文：癸未，诏改明年为天眷元年。
现代文：十四日，诏令明年改年号为天眷元年。
English: On the 14th, the imperial decree changed the name of the year next year to the first year of Tianxin.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：命韩昉、耶律绍文等编修国史。
现代文：命令韩窻、耶律绍文等编辑修撰国史。
English: He ordered editors such as Han Zheng and Ye Lu Shaowen to rewrite the national history.

古文：以勖为尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任命完颜勖为尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事。
English: After the appointment, Yan Xuan was promoted to the left of Shang Shuxu and to the right of Dongzhong Shumen.

古文：徙蜀王刘豫临潢府。
现代文：把蜀王刘豫迁徙到临潢府。
English: Shu King Liu Yu was moved to Linyi.

古文：天眷元年正月戊子朔，上朝明德宫。
现代文：天眷元年正月初一，皇上到明德宫去朝拜太皇太后。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year, the emperor went to the Mingde Palace to pay homage to the great empress dowager.

古文：高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：高丽、夏国遣使者来朝贺。
English: Koryo and Natsukuni sent envoys to congratulate the Emperor.

古文：颁女直小字。
现代文：颁布女真族小字。
English: promulgated the small character of Jianzhen nationality.

古文：封大司空昱为王。
现代文：封大司空昱为王。
English: The feudal daishi, Kukai, became king.

古文：甲辰，万寿节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，高丽、夏国派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the All-Year's Eve, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：二月壬戌，上如爻剌春水。
现代文：二月六日，皇上去爻剌春水。
English: On February 6, the emperor went to drink spring water.

古文：乙丑，幸天开殿。
现代文：九日，驾临天开殿。
English: On the 9th, they arrived at Tiankaidong.

古文：己巳，诏罢来流水、混同江护逻地，与民耕牧。
现代文：十三日，诏令免除来流水、混同江守护巡逻的地盘，给百姓耕种和放牧。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict exempted the land patrolled by the guardians of the river from flowing water and mixing with the river, and allowed the people to cultivate and graze.

古文：三月庚寅，以禁苑隙地分给百姓。
现代文：三月五日，把皇家禁苑中的空隙地方分给百姓。
English: On March 5th, the vacant space in the Royal Forbidden Garden was allocated to the people.

古文：戊申，以韩昉为翰林学士。
现代文：二十七日，任命韩窻为翰林学士。
English: On the 27th, Han Wei was appointed as a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：四月丁卯，命少府监卢彦伦营建宫室，止从俭素。
现代文：四月十二日，命令少府监卢彦伦营建宫室，要求只是节俭朴素。
English: On April 12th, the young prefectural governor, Lu Yanlun, ordered the construction of a palace room. The request was simple and frugal.

古文：壬午，朝享于天元殿。
现代文：二十七日，在天元殿朝拜祭献。
English: On the 27th, there will be a worship service at Tengen-den.

古文：立裴满氏为贵妃。
现代文：立裴满氏为贵妃。
English: He made Pei Man as a noble consort.

古文：五月己亥，诏以经义、词赋两科取士。
现代文：五月十五日，诏令经义、词赋两科开科考试，选取贤士。
English: On the 15th of May, the imperial edict was issued to begin the examination of two subjects, the meaning of the sutra and the composition of the poem, to select the sages.

古文：六月戊午，上至自天开殿。
现代文：六月四日，皇上从天开殿回到朝廷。
English: On June 4, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Court from the Imperial Reception Hall.

古文：秋七月辛卯，左副元帅挞懒、东京留守宗隽来朝。
现代文：秋季七月七日，左副元帅挞懒、东京留守宗隽来朝见皇上。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the left vice-marshal, lazy, Tokyo stay-at-home Soen, came to see the Emperor.

古文：丁酉，按出浒河溢，坏庐舍，民多溺死。
现代文：十三日，按出浒河涨水，毁坏房舍，不少老百姓淹死。
English: On the 13th, according to reports, the water of the Lugu River rose, destroying houses and drowning many people.

古文：壬寅，左丞相希尹罢。
现代文：十八日，免除左丞相希尹官职。
English: On the 18th, he removed the left-wing chancellor, Xi Yin, from his post.

古文：八月甲寅朔，颁行官制。
现代文：八月一日，颁布施行官制。
English: On August 1, the implementation of the official system was promulgated.

古文：癸亥，回鹘遣使朝贡。
现代文：十日，回鹘派使者入朝来进贡。
English: On the 10th, Hui sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：己卯，以河南地与宋。
现代文：十七日，把河南地方割让给宋国。
English: On the 17th, the Henan region was ceded to Song.

古文：以右司侍郎张通古等使江南。
现代文：派右司侍郎张通古等人出使江南。
English: He sent Zhang Tonggu, the right-hand man of the secretary, and others to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：以京师为上京，府曰会宁，旧上京为北京。
现代文：把京师叫上京，府叫会宁，旧上京称北京。
English: The capital of Beijing was called Shangjing, the prefecture was called Huining, and the former Shangjing was called Beijing.

古文：九月甲申朔，以奭为会宁牧，封邓王。
现代文：九月一日，任命为会宁府牧，并封他为邓王。
English: On September 1st, he was appointed as the pastor of Huining Prefecture and given the title of Deng Wang.

古文：乙未，诏百官诰命，女直、契丹、汉人各用本字，渤海同汉人。
现代文：十二日，诏令百官诰命说，女真、契丹、汉人各用本民族的文字，渤海人和汉人相同。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the imperial edict issued by the hundred officials ordered that the Jurchen, Khitan, and Han people each use their own national characters, and the Bohai people and the Han people are the same.

古文：丁酉，改燕京枢密院为行台尚书省。
现代文：十四日，把燕京枢密院改称行台尚书省。
English: On the 14th, the Yanjing Privy Council was renamed the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy.

古文：戊戌，上朝明德宫。
现代文：十五日，皇上到明德宫朝见太皇太后。
English: On the 15th, the Emperor went to the Mingde Palace in the morning to see the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：甲辰，以奕为平章政事。
现代文：二十一日，任命奕为平章政事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Yi was appointed as the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：己酉，省燕中西三京、平州东、西等路州县。
现代文：二十六日，视察燕、中、西三京和平州东、西等路州县。
English: On the 26th, they inspected Yan, Zhong and West Sanjing and Heping East and West Luzhou counties.

古文：辛亥，权行台左丞相张孝纯致仕。
现代文：二十八日，权行台左丞相张孝纯任期已满辞去官职。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Xiaochun, the Minister of the Left, resigned from his post after his term of office expired.

古文：十月甲寅朔，以御前管勾契丹文字李德固为参知政事。
现代文：十月一日，任命御前管勾契丹文字李德固为参知政事。
English: On October 1st, Li Degu, the former imperial steward with Khitan script, was appointed to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：丙寅，封叔宗强为纪王，宗敏邢王，太宗子斛鲁补等十三人为王。
现代文：十三日，封皇叔宗强为纪王，宗敏为邢王，封太宗的儿子斛鲁补等十三人为王。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor's uncle Zong Qiang was crowned as the King of Ji, Zong Min was crowned as the King of Xing, and the son of Emperor Zong Daizong was crowned as the King of Lu, and so on.

古文：己巳，始禁亲王以下佩刀入宫。
现代文：十六日，开始禁止亲王以下官员佩刀入宫。
English: On the 16th, officials below the rank of prince were prohibited from entering the palace with swords.

古文：辛未，定封国制。
现代文：十八日，确定封国制度。
English: On the 18th, the system of sealing the country was established.

古文：癸酉，以东京留守宗隽为尚书左丞相兼侍中，封陈王。
现代文：二十二日，任命东京留守宗隽为尚书左丞相兼侍中，并封他为陈王。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Soen, who was staying in Tokyo, as Shojo-zojo (minister of the left) and chamberlain, and gave him the title of King Chen.

古文：十一月丙辰，以康宗以上画像工毕，奠献于乾元殿。
现代文：十一月丙辰，为康宗以上祖先画像完工，奠献在乾元殿。
English: In November, the portraits of the ancestors of Kangzong and above were completed and laid in the Qianyuan Hall.

古文：十二月癸亥，新宫成。
现代文：十二月十一日，新宫室建成。
English: On December 11th, the new palace was completed.

古文：甲戌，高丽遣使入贡。
现代文：二十二日，高丽派遣使者入朝进贡。
English: On the 22nd, Goryeo sent an envoy to Korea to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，立贵妃裴满氏为皇后。
现代文：二十五日，立贵妃裴满氏为皇后。
English: On the 25th, Princess Pei Man was enthroned as empress.

古文：二年正月壬午朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天眷二年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate the new year.

古文：戊戌，万寿节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，高丽、夏国派遣使者来庆贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the Manjushri Festival, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：以左丞相宗隽为太保、领三省事，进封衮国王。
现代文：任命左丞相宗隽为太保、领三省事，进封兖国王。
English: He appointed the Left Chancellery's Minister of the Left, Zong Xi, as Taibao and leader of the three provinces, and crowned him king.

古文：兴中尹完颜希尹复为尚书左丞相兼侍中。
现代文：兴中府尹完颜希尹复任尚书左丞相并兼侍中。
English: After the completion of the construction of Xingzhongfu, Yin was reinstated as the minister of the left of Shangshu and also as a chamberlain.

古文：二月乙未，上如天开殿。
现代文：二月乙未，皇上到天开殿去。
English: In February, the Emperor went to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月丙辰，命百官详定仪制。
现代文：三月丙辰，命令百官详细制定礼仪制度。
English: In March, he ordered officials to work out a detailed etiquette system.

古文：四月甲戌，百官朝参，初用朝服。
现代文：四月二十五日，百官朝见参拜，初次穿朝服。
English: On April 25th, hundreds of officials came to pay homage to the emperor and wore imperial robes for the first time.

古文：己卯，宋遣使谢河南地。
现代文：二十日，宋遣使者来感谢割给河南地。
English: On the 20th, Song sent an envoy to thank Cang for being assigned to Henan.

古文：五月戊子，太白昼见。
现代文：五月九日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On May 9th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：乙巳，上至自天开殿。
现代文：二十八日，皇上从天开殿回到朝廷。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Court from the Imperial Reception Hall.

古文：六月己酉朔，初御冠服。
现代文：六月一日，初次穿御服、戴御冠。
English: On June 1, he put on the imperial robe and crown for the first time.

古文：辛亥，吴十谋反，伏诛。
现代文：三日，吴十阴谋造反，按法令杀了他。
English: On the third day, Wu Shifu plotted to rebel and killed him in accordance with the law.

古文：己未，上从容谓侍臣曰： 朕每阅《贞观政要》，见其君臣议论，大可规法。 
现代文：十一日，皇上从容地对侍臣说： 朕每次阅读《贞观政要》，发现他们君臣的议论，大多可以作为法律。 
English: On the eleventh day, the emperor calmly said to his attendants: "Every time I read "The Virtue of Chastity," I find that most of the discussions of their princes and ministers can be used as laws.

古文：翰林学士韩昉对曰： 皆由太宗温颜访问，房、杜辈竭忠尽诚。
现代文：翰林学士韩窻回答说： 这些议论都是由唐太宗和颜悦色地访问，房、杜等人竭忠尽诚地回答。
English: Han Zheng, a scholar of Hanlin, replied: These discussions were all interviewed by Tang Taizong in a friendly manner, and Fang, Du and others answered with utmost sincerity.

古文：其书虽简，足以为法。 
现代文：那书记载虽然简练，却足以作为法律。 
English: That document, though concise, is sufficient as law.

古文：上曰： 太宗固一代贤君，明皇何如？ 
现代文：皇上说： 唐太宗本来是一代贤君，唐明皇怎么样？ 
English: The emperor said: Tang Taizong was originally a generation of wise men, how about Tang Ming Emperor?

古文：昉曰： 唐自太宗以来，惟明皇、宪宗可数。
现代文：韩窻说： 唐朝从太宗以来，屈指可数的，只有明皇、宪宗。
English: Han Zheng said: Since Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, only a handful of emperors can be counted, including Emperor Ming and Emperor Gensong.

古文：明皇所谓有始而无终者。
现代文：唐明皇是所谓有始无终的。
English: Emperor Tang Ming is said to have had no beginning and no end.

古文：初以艰危得位，用姚崇、宋璟，惟正是行，故能成开元之治。
现代文：起初，因为艰辛危难得到皇位，重用姚崇、宋瞡，只实行正大的事业，所以能造成开元盛世之治。
English: At first, because of the hardships and perils to get the throne, Yao Chong and Song Xi were reused, and only carried out the great cause, so it could cause the reign of prosperity in the founding of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：末年怠于万机，委政李林甫，奸谀是用，以致天宝之乱。
现代文：到了晚年对万事懈怠，把政务委托给李林甫，此人用的都是奸诈阿谀的诡计，因而导致天宝之乱。
English: In his later years, he slacked off on everything and entrusted government affairs to Li Linfu, who used all the tricks of a treacherous grandma, thus leading to the Tianbao Rebellion.

古文：苟能慎终如始，则贞观之风不难追矣。 上称善。
现代文：如果明皇能慎重到最后像起初一样，那么贞观的风气不难追回。 皇上说： 好。 
English: If Emperor Ming could be as prudent in the end as he was in the beginning, then it would not be difficult to bring back the culture of chastity.

古文：又曰： 周成王何如主？ 
现代文：又说： 周成王是怎样的一位君主？ 
English: He also said: What kind of monarch is Zhou Cheng Wang?

古文：昉对曰： 古之贤君。 
现代文：韩窻回答： 是古代的贤君。 
English: Han Zheng replied: He is an ancient sage.

古文：上曰： 成王虽贤，亦周公辅佐之力。
现代文：皇上说 ：周成王虽然贤明，也是周公辅佐的力量。
English: The emperor said: Although Zhou Cheng Wang is wise, he is also the power of Zhou Gong Yuxu.

古文：后世疑周公杀其兄，以朕观之，为社稷大计，亦不当非也。 
现代文：后世怀疑周公杀了他的兄长，而朕看这件事，为了社稷大计，也不应当说不对。 
English: Later generations suspected that Zhou Gong had killed his brother, but from my point of view, for the sake of society, I should not say it was wrong.

古文：七月辛巳，宋国王宗磐、衮国王宗隽谋反，伏诛。
现代文：七月三日，宋国王宗磐、兖国王宗隽阴谋造反，伏法被杀。
English: On July 3rd, King Zong of Song and King Zong of Han conspired to rebel, and Fuba was killed.

古文：丙戌，以右副元帅宗弼为都元帅，进封国王。
现代文：八日，任命右副元帅宗弼为都元帅，进封越国王。
English: On the 8th, the Right Vice-Marshal Zong Yu was appointed as the Marshal of the Capital and crowned the King of Vietnam.

古文：丁亥，以诛宗磐等诏中外。
现代文：九日，把杀宗磐等人的事情诏告中外。
English: On the 9th, the killing of Soiwa and others was announced to the public.

古文：己丑，以左副元帅挞懒为台左丞相，杜充为行台右丞相，萧宝、耶律辉行台平章政事。
现代文：十一日，任命左副元帅挞懒为行台左丞相，杜充为行台右丞相，萧宝、耶律晖为行台平章政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Left Vice-Marshal Zou Lazy was appointed Minister of the Left of Xingtai Province, Du Chong was appointed Minister of the Right of Xingtai Province, and Xiao Bao and Yelutong were appointed Minister of the Right of Xingtai Province.

古文：甲午，咸州祥稳沂王晕坐与宗磐谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十六日，咸州详稳沂王晕因为参与宗磐谋反获罪，伏法被杀。
English: On the 16th, Wang Huan was found guilty of participating in the Zongban conspiracy and was killed.

古文：辛丑，以太傅、领三省事宗干为太师，领三省如故，进封梁宋国王。
现代文：二十三日，任命太傅、领三省事宗干为太师，仍然留领三省事，并进封为梁宋国王。
English: On the 23rd, Zongcan, who had been appointed Taifu and the leader of the three provinces, was appointed Taishi. He still retained the leadership of the three provinces and was enthroned as the King of Liang and Song.

古文：八月辛亥，行台左相挞懒、翼王鹘懒及活离胡土、挞懒子斡带、乌达补谋反，伏诛。
现代文：八月四日，行台左丞相挞懒、翼王鹘懒以及活离胡土、挞懒的儿子斡带、乌达补图谋造反，伏法被杀。
English: On August 4th, Gongtai Zuozhong Zhaolai, Wing Wang Zhaolai, as well as Zhixiang Hutu, Zhaolai's son Zhaozhong Zhaolai, and Uda Zhaotou plotted a rebellion, and Fufa was killed.

古文：丁丑，太白昼见。
现代文：三十日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 30th, the too-white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：九月戊寅朔，降封太宗诸子。
现代文：九月一日，降封太宗的各个儿子。
English: On September 1, the sons of Emperor Taizong were demoted.

古文：大司空昱罢。
现代文：大司空昱免除官职。
English: Daishi Kuwabuchi removed from office.

古文：丙申，初居新宫。
现代文：十九日，开始住进新宫。
English: On the 19th, they began to live in the new palace.

古文：立太祖原庙于庆元宫，壬寅，宋遣王伦等乞归父丧及母韦氏等，拘伦不遣。
现代文：在庆元宫立太祖原庙。二十五日，宋国君主派王伦等人乞请归还他父亲徽宗梓宫以及母亲韦太后等，把王伦拘留不遣返。
English: On the 25th, the Song monarchs sent Wang Lun and others to beg for the return of his father, Huizong Zigu, and his mother, Empress Dowager Wei. Wang Lun was detained and not repatriated.

古文：以温都思忠诸路廉问。
现代文：派温都思忠去各路考察巡访。
English: He sent Weng Du Sizhong to inspect and visit various roads.

古文：十月癸酉，夏国使来告丧。
现代文：十月二十六日，夏国派人来报丧。
English: On October 26th, Xia Guo sent someone to report the death.

古文：十二月，豫国公昱薨。
现代文：十二月，豫国公昱逝世。
English: In December, Yu Guoguang passed away.

古文：三年正月丁丑朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天眷三年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: As Providence would have it, on the first day of the first month of the third year, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate the new year.

古文：癸巳，万寿节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。以都元帅宗弼领行台尚书省事。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺，任命都元帅宗弼领行台尚书省事。
English: On the 17th, which was the Day of Longevity, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to offer congratulations, and appointed the capital's marshal, Zong Pi, to lead the delegation.

古文：四月乙巳朔，温都思忠廉问诸路，得廉吏杜遵晦以下百二十四人，各进一阶，贪吏张轸以下二十一人皆罢之。
现代文：四月一日，温都思忠查访各路，选出廉洁的官吏杜遵晦等一百二十四人，对他们各晋一级；对贪官张轸等二十一人全都罢免了职务。
English: On April 1st, Weng Du Sizhong inspected all roads and selected 124 incorruptible officials such as Du Zunyu, each of whom was promoted to the first level; and dismissed all 21 corrupt officials such as Zhang Ye.

古文：癸丑，蜀国公完颜银术哥薨。
现代文：九日，蜀国公完颜银术可逝世。
English: On the 9th, the Duke of Shu passed away.

古文：丁卯，上如燕京。
现代文：二十三日，皇上往南京去。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor left for Nanjing.

古文：五月丙子，诏元帅府复取河南、陕西地。
现代文：五月三日，诏令元帅府再次攻取河南、陕西两地。
English: On May 3, the Generalissimo ordered the Marshal's Office to attack Henan and Shaanxi again.

古文：己卯，诏册李仁孝为夏国王。
现代文：六日，诏令册封李仁孝为夏国王。
English: On the 6th, the imperial edict proclaimed Li Renkiao as the king of Xia.

古文：命都元帅宗弼以兵自黎阳趋汴，右监军撒离合出河中趋陕西。
现代文：命令都元帅宗弼带兵从黎阳奔赴汴京，右监军撤离合从河中出发奔赴陕西。
English: He ordered the capital's marshal, Zong Yu, to lead his troops from Liyang to Beijing, and ordered the Right Supervision Army to evacuate and leave Hezhong for Shaanxi.

古文：是月，河南平。
现代文：当月，平定河南。
English: That month, Henan Province was pacified.

古文：六月，陕西平。
现代文：六月，收复陕西。
English: In June, Shaanxi was recovered.

古文：上次凉陉大旱。
现代文：皇上到凉陉。天大旱。
English: The emperor went to Liangyao. It was very dry.

古文：使萧彦让、田瑴决西京囚。
现代文：派萧彦让、田处决西京的囚犯。
English: He sent Xiao Yan and Tian to execute the prisoners in West Beijing.

古文：秋七月癸卯朔，日有食之。乙卯，宗弼遣使奏河南、陕西捷。
现代文：七月一日，有日食发生。十三日，宗弼派遣使者来禀报河南、陕西捷报。
English: On July 1, a solar eclipse occurred, and on the 13th, Zonglu sent an emissary to Yunnan to report the news to Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：丁卯，诏文武官五品以上致仕，给俸禄之半，职三品者仍给傔人。
现代文：二十五日，诏令五品以上文武官员任期满了辞去官职的，发给原俸禄的一半，职在三品的仍然配给侍从。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that civil and military officials with five or more pins who had completed their term of office and resigned from their posts would be paid half of their original salary, while those with three pins would still be assigned to attendants.

古文：八月辛巳，招抚谕陕西五路。
现代文：八月十日，招抚晓谕陕西五路。
English: On August 10th, the Shaanxi No. 5 Road was promoted.

古文：壬午，初定公主、郡县主及驸马官品。
现代文：十一日，开始确定公主、郡县主以及驸马官品。
English: On the 11th day, the official prizes of princess, county head and steed began to be determined.

古文：九月壬寅朔，宗弼来朝。
现代文：九月一日，宗弼来朝见。
English: On September 1, Zonglu came to see him in the morning.

古文：戊申，上至燕京。
现代文：七日，皇上到达燕京。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor arrived in Yanjing.

古文：己酉，亲飨太祖庙。
现代文：八日，亲自去祭祀太祖庙。
English: On the eighth day, I went to the ancestral temple in person.

古文：庚申，宗弼还军中。夏国遣使谢赙赠。
现代文：十九日，宗弼返回军中，夏国派遣使者来感谢赠给丧葬用的财物。
English: On the 19th, when Zonglu returned to the army, Xia Guo sent an envoy to thank him for the funeral gifts.

古文：癸亥，杀左丞相完颜希尹、右丞萧庆及希尹子昭武大将军把搭、符宝郎漫带。
现代文：二十二日，杀死左丞相完颜希尹、右丞相萧庆以及希尹的儿子昭武大将军把搭、符宝郎漫带。
English: On the 22nd, Yan Xiyin, Minister of the Left, and Xiao Qing, Minister of the Right, as well as Xiyin's son, General Zhaowu, were killed.

古文：戊辰，夏国遣使谢封册。
现代文：二十七日，夏国派遣使者来谢册封。
English: On the 27th, Xia sent an envoy to thank the seal.

古文：十一月癸丑，以孔子四十九代孙璠袭封衍圣公。
现代文：十一月十三日，把孔子的第四十九代孙孔袭封为衍圣公。
English: On November 13th, the 49th generation of Confucius's grandson Confucius was enthroned as a yang shenggu.

古文：癸亥，以都点检萧仲恭为尚书右丞，前西京留守昂为平章政事。
现代文：二十三日，任命都点检萧仲恭为尚书右丞，前西京留守昂为平章政事。
English: On the 23rd, Xiao Zhongyong, the inspector of all points, was appointed as the vice-premier, and Aung, who had previously stayed in West Beijing, was appointed as the vice-premier.

古文：甲子，行台尚书右丞相杜充薨。
现代文：二十四日，行台尚书右丞相杜充逝世。
English: On the 24th, Gyotai Shoshu's righthand minister Du Chong passed away.

古文：十二月乙亥，都元帅宗弼上言宋将岳飞、张俊、韩世忠率众渡江，诏命击之。
现代文：十二月五日，都元帅宗弼上报宋将岳飞、张俊、韩世忠率领军队渡过长江，帝诏令迎击他们。
English: On December 5, Grand Marshal Zong Pi reported that Song had led the troops of Yue Fei, Zhang Jun, and Han Shizhong across the Yangtze River, and the emperor ordered to attack them.

古文：丁丑，地震。
现代文：七日，发生地震。
English: On the 22nd, an earthquake.

古文：己亥，以元帅左监军阿离补为左副元帅，右监军撒离合为右副元帅。
现代文：二十九日，任命元帅左监军阿离补为左副元帅，右监军撒离合为右副元帅。
English: On the 29th, Marshal Mao Aiyi, the left supervisor, was appointed as the left deputy marshal, and the right supervisor, Sa Yinghe, was appointed as the right deputy marshal.

古文：皇统元年正月辛丑朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统元年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Emperor's reign, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate the Emperor.

古文：庚戌，群臣上尊号曰崇天体道钦明文武圣德皇帝。
现代文：十日，群臣尊上号称崇天体道钦明文武圣德皇帝。
English: On the 10th, a group of high-ranking officials proclaimed him to be the Emperor of Heaven and Earth, the Emperor of Heaven and Earth, the Emperor of Heaven and Earth.

古文：初御衮冕。
现代文：初次御用套衣和衮冕。
English: The first-time royal tunic and crown are worn.

古文：癸丑，谢太庙。大赦。
现代文：十三日，拜谒太庙，大赦天下。
English: On the 13th day of the month, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：改元。
现代文：改元纪年。
English: Change the year.

古文：丁巳，万寿节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the All-Year's Eve, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent an envoy to congratulate.

古文：己未，初定命妇封号。
现代文：十九日，初次规定命妇封号。
English: On the 19th, for the first time, the number of women's seals was set.

古文：夏国请置榷场，许之。
现代文：夏国请求设置边贸市场，准许了他们的请求。
English: Xia requested the establishment of a border market, and their request was granted.

古文：己巳，封平章政事昂为漆水郡王。
现代文：二十九日，封平章政事昂为漆水郡王。
English: On the 29th, Fengping Zhang Zhengjiang became the king of Lishui County.

古文：二月戊寅，诏诸致仕官职俱至三品者，俸禄人力各给其半。
现代文：二月九日，诏令众任满辞官而职务达到三品的人员，俸禄、侍从各给他们在职时所得的一半。
English: On February 9, the imperial edict ordered all officials who had completed their term of office and reached the rank of Sanpon to receive half of their salary and retainers.

古文：宗弼克庐州。
现代文：宗弼攻克卢州。
English: Zonglu invaded Kelu.

古文：乙酉，改封海滨王耶律延禧为豫王，昏德公赵佶为天水郡王，重昏侯赵桓为天水郡公。
现代文：十六日，改封海滨王耶律延禧为豫王，昏德公赵佶为天水郡王，重昏侯赵桓为天水郡公。
English: On the 16th, the coastal king, Yelu Yanxi, was renamed as the king of Henan, the dimwit prince Zhao Wei became the king of Tianshui County, and the heavy dimwit prince Zhao Huan became the prince of Tianshui County.

古文：戊子，上亲祭孔子庙，北面再拜。退谓侍臣曰： 朕幼年游佚，不知志学，岁月逾迈，深以为悔。
现代文：十九日，皇上亲自祭祀孔子庙，而向北一拜再拜，退下对侍臣说： 朕幼年时时光都流失了，不知道立志学习，岁月过去了，深深因为这个感到后悔。
English: On the 19th, the emperor himself dedicated the Confucius Temple, and bowed to the north, bowed again, retreated and said to his attendant: When I was young, time was lost, I did not know how to study, the years passed, and I deeply regretted this.

古文：孔子虽无位，其道可尊，使万世景仰。
现代文：孔子虽然没有皇位，他的道可以尊奉，让万世景仰。
English: Although Confucius does not have an imperial throne, his way can be revered and admired by all ages.

古文：大凡为善，不可不勉。 
现代文：凡是做好事，不能不勉励。 
English: Whenever you do something good, you can't help but be encouraged.

古文：自是颇读《尚书》、《论语》及《五代》、《辽史》诸书，或以夜继焉。
现代文：从此狠下功夫读《尚书》、《论语》以及《五代》、《辽史》多种书籍，有时是夜以继日。
English: Since then, he has made great efforts to read "Shang Shu" and "Analects" as well as "Five Dynasties" and "Liao Shi" books, sometimes day and night.

古文：三月己未，上宴群臣于瑶池殿，适宗弼遣使奏捷，侍臣多进诗称贺。
现代文：三月二十日，皇上在瑶池殿设宴款待群臣，正逢宗弼派人禀报胜利的消息，侍臣中不少人进献诗篇称贺。
English: On March 20th, the Emperor held a banquet for his courtiers at Tsugaike-den. Just as the Emperor sent a messenger to announce his victory, many of his courtiers sent poems to congratulate him.

古文：帝览之曰： 太平之世，当尚文物，自古致治，皆由是也。 
现代文：皇帝看了一遍说 ：太平的世道，应当崇尚礼乐，自古以来达到大治的朝代，都是这样做的。 
English: The emperor read it once and said, "In a peaceful world, ritual music should be revered. Dynasties that have achieved great prosperity have done so since ancient times.

古文：四月丙子，以济南尹韩昉参知政事。
现代文：四月八日，任命济南府尹韩窻为参知政事。
English: On April 8th, Yin Hanjun of Jinan was appointed as a co-governor.

古文：辛巳，宗弼请伐江南，从之。
现代文：十三日，宗弼请求攻伐江南，皇上听从了他的建议。
English: On the 13th, Zonglu requested to attack the south of the Yangtze River, and the emperor followed his suggestion.

古文：五月己酉，太师、领三省事、梁宋国王宗干薨。
现代文：五月十二日，太师、领三省事、梁宋国王宗干逝世。
English: On May 12th, the Grand Master, the leader of the three provinces and the King of the Liang Song Dynasty, Zongkang, passed away.

古文：庚戌，上亲临。
现代文：十三日，皇上亲临吊唁。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor came to offer his condolences.

古文：日官奏，戌、亥不宜哭泣。
现代文：日官禀奏道： 戌、亥日不适合哭泣。 
English: Nikkan Shosei said, "It's not appropriate to cry on the days of the Rooster and the Boar.

古文：上曰： 君臣之义，骨肉之亲，岂可避之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：君臣之义，骨肉之亲，怎么可以避讳什么日子哭呢！ 
English: The emperor said, "For the sake of the dignity of the monarchs and the subjects, and for the sake of the relatives, how can we avoid crying on certain days?"

古文：遂哭之恸，命辍朝七日。
现代文：于是大哭，哀痛之至，命令停止处理朝政七天。
English: As a result, there was much weeping and sorrow, and an order was given to stop dealing with the imperial government for seven days.

古文：六月甲戌，诏都元帅宗弼与宰执同入奏事。
现代文：六月七日，诏令都元帅宗弼和宰执一同入朝禀奏事务。
English: On June 7th, Marshal Zong Xi and Zai Kei jointly entered the imperial harp recital.

古文：庚寅，行台平章政事耶律晖致仕。
现代文：二十三日，行台平章政事耶律晖任期已满辞去官职。
English: On the 23rd, the term of office of the governor of Taiwan, Pingzhang Yerutuan, has expired and he resigned from his post.

古文：壬辰，有司请举乐，上以宗干新丧不允。
现代文：二十五日，有司请求奏乐，皇上因为宗干新丧而不允许。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, there was a request to play music, but the emperor did not allow it because the emperor was in mourning.

古文：甲午，卫王宗强薨，上亲临、辍朝如宗干丧。
现代文：二十九日，卫王宗强逝世，皇上亲临吊丧，像宗干丧期那样停止上朝料理政务七天。
English: On the 29th, Wei Wang Zongqiang passed away, and the emperor attended the funeral in person. As in the case of Zongqiang's funeral, he stopped attending the imperial banquet and government affairs for seven days.

古文：七月癸卯，以景宣皇帝忌辰，命尚食彻肉。
现代文：七月七日，因为是景宣皇帝的忌辰，命令管理伙食的撤去肉食。
English: On July 7th, because it was the anniversary of the death of Emperor Jingxuan, he ordered the management of the meal to remove the meat.

古文：丙午，以宗弼为尚书左丞相兼侍中、都元帅、领行台如故。
现代文：十日，任命宗弼为尚书左丞相兼侍中，仍像以前一样保留都元帅、领行台的职务。
English: On the 10th, Zong Li was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Left and Vice-Minister of the Left, and still retained the duties of the Marshal of the Capital and the leader of the parade as before.

古文：己酉，宗弼还军中。
现代文：十三日，宗弼返回军中。
English: On the 13th, Zonglu returned to the army.

古文：辛亥，参知政事耶律让罢。
现代文：十五日，免除参知政事耶律让的官职。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he removed the official post of the co-governor and political officer, Yerujang.

古文：九月戊申，上至自燕京。朝太皇太后于明德宫。
现代文：九月十三日，皇上从燕京回到宫廷，到明德宫朝见太皇太后。
English: On September 13th, the Emperor returned to the court from Yanjing and went to the Mingde Palace to see the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：诏赐鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人绢二匹、絮三斤。
现代文：诏令赐予鳏寡孤独不能照顾自己生活的人，每人二匹绢、三斤棉絮。
English: The edict gave widows, widowers and lonely people who could not take care of their own lives, two horses and three pounds of cotton wool per person.

古文：是秋，蝗。
现代文：当年秋天，发生蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of that year, a locust plague occurred.

古文：都元帅宗弼伐宋，渡淮。以书让宋，宋复书乞罢兵，宗弼以便宜画淮为界。
现代文：都元帅宗弼攻伐宋国，渡过淮河，先下书责备宋国，宋回书乞求免除用兵，宗弼因此斟酌事宜划淮河为国界。
English: Grand Marshal Zonglu attacked Song and crossed the Huai River. He first wrote a letter to reproach Song, and Song wrote back begging to be exempted from military service. Therefore, Zonglu considered the matter of delimiting the Huai River as the national border.

古文：十一月己酉，高丽国贺受尊号。
现代文：十一月十五日，高丽国祝贺皇上受到尊号。
English: On November 15, the Republic of Korea congratulated the emperor on receiving the honorific title.

古文：稽古殿火。
现代文：稽古殿失火。
English: The rehearsal hall caught fire.

古文：十二月癸巳，夏国贺受尊号。
现代文：十二月二十九日，夏国派使者来祝贺皇上受到尊号。
English: On December 29, Xia Guo sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor on receiving the honorary title.

古文：天水郡公赵桓乞本品俸，诏赒济之。
现代文：天水郡公赵桓乞请给予本品薪俸，诏令周济他。
English: Tianshui County official Zhao Huan begged to be given a salary for this product, and the imperial edict was issued to support him.

古文：左丞勖进先朝《实录》三卷，上焚香立受之。
现代文：左丞勖进献先朝《实录》三卷，皇上焚香站立接受《实录》。
English: Zuo Zhengyu presented the three volumes of "Real Record" to the first emperor, and the emperor stood up to receive the "Real Record" by burning incense.

古文：二年正月乙未朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统二年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of imperial rule, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：己亥，上猎于来流河。
现代文：初五，皇上到来流河打猎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor came to the river to go hunting.

古文：乙巳，命封高丽。
现代文：十一日，命令加封高丽。
English: On the 11th, the order to seal Koryo was issued.

古文：丁未，上至自来流河。
现代文：十三日，皇上从来流河回到宫廷。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor returned to the court from the river.

古文：辛亥，万寿节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，高丽、夏国派遣使臣来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was Manjusri, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to offer congratulations.

古文：壬子，衍圣公孔璠薨，子拯袭。
现代文：十八日，衍圣公孔逝世，他的儿子孔拯承袭了衍圣公之位。
English: On the 18th, Yansheng Gong Kong passed away, and his son, Kong Zheng, succeeded to the position of Yansheng Gong.

古文：二月丁卯，上如天开殿。
现代文：二月三日，皇上去天开殿。
English: On February 3, the emperor ascended to heaven.

古文：甲戌，赈熙河路，戊子，皇子济安生。
现代文：十日，赈济熙河路。二十四日，皇子济安出生。
English: On the 10th, Prince Jian was born on the 24th.

古文：辛卯，宋使曹勋来许岁币银、绢二十五万两、匹，画淮为界，世世子孙，永守誓言。
现代文：二十七日，宋国使者曹勋前来许下每年进贡币银二十五万两、绢二十五万匹，按淮河划分国界，世代子孙，永远遵守誓言。
English: On the 27th, Cao Xun, the emissary of the Song Dynasty, came to promise an annual tribute of 250,000 taels of silver and 250,000 taels of silver, dividing the national borders according to the Huai River, and the generations of descendants would always abide by the oath.

古文：改封蜀王刘豫为曹王。
现代文：把蜀王刘豫改封为曹王。
English: He changed Shu King Liu Yu's title to Cao King.

古文：壬辰，以皇子生，赦中外。
现代文：二十八日，因为皇子出生，大赦中外。
English: On the 28th, because the prince was born, there was a general amnesty in China and abroad.

古文：三月辛丑，还自天开殿。
现代文：三月八日，皇上从天开殿返回。
English: On March 8th, the Emperor returned from the Imperial Palace.

古文：大雪。
现代文：天降大雪。
English: Heavy snow is falling.

古文：丙午，以宗弼为太傅。
现代文：十三日，让宗弼当太傅。
English: On the thirteenth day, let Zong Yao be the Taifu.

古文：丙辰，遣左宣徽使刘筈以衮冕圭册册宋康王为帝。归宋帝母韦氏及故妻邢氏、天水郡王并妻郑氏丧于江南。
现代文：二十三日，差遣左宣徽使刘薚拿衮冕圭册册封宋康王为皇帝，送还宋帝的母亲韦氏以及宋帝已故妻子邢氏、天水郡王和他妻子郑氏的灵柩到江南。
English: On the 23rd, Zuo Xuanhui was sent to Liu Bei to make him crown Song Kang Wang as emperor, and to return the coffins of Emperor Song's mother Wei, Emperor Song's late wife Yan, King Tianshui and his wife Zheng to Jiangnan.

古文：戊午，立子济安为皇太子。
现代文：二十五日，立皇子济安为皇太子。
English: On the 25th, Prince Jian became crown prince.

古文：四月丙寅，以臣宋告中外。
现代文：四月三日，把宋国称臣的事向中外宣布。
English: On April 3, the proclamation of Song as a vassal state was announced to China and the world.

古文：庚午，五云楼、重明等殿成。
现代文：七日，五云楼、重明等殿建成。
English: On the seventh day, Wuyun Building, Chongming Hall and other halls were completed.

古文：五月癸巳朔，不视朝。
现代文：五月一日，不上朝处理朝政。
English: On May 1, he did not go to the imperial court to deal with the imperial court affairs.

古文：上自去年荒于酒，与近臣饮，或继以夜。
现代文：皇上自从去年以来迷恋在酒上，和近臣饮酒，有时夜以继日。
English: Since last year, the emperor has been infatuated with liquor, drinking with his courtiers, sometimes day and night.

古文：宰相入谏，辄饮以酒，曰： 知卿等意，今既饮矣，明日当戒。 
现代文：宰相进入劝谏，则让他饮酒，说： 知道卿等人的意思，今天既然饮了，明天当戒掉。 
English: When the prime minister entered the consultation, he made him drink alcohol, saying, "I know what you and others mean. Since you drank today, you should quit drinking tomorrow.

古文：因复饮。
现代文：又继续饮下去。
English: He continued to drink.

古文：乙卯，赐宋誓诏。
现代文：二十三日，赐给宋国誓诏。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict of the Song Dynasty was issued.

古文：辛酉，宴群臣于五云楼，皆尽醉而罢。
现代文：二十九日，在五云楼宴请群臣，都完全醉了才罢休。
English: On the 29th, he held a banquet for his ministers at Wuyunlou, and they were all completely drunk before they left.

古文：七月甲午，回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：七月三日，回鹘派使者来进贡。
English: On July 3, the Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：北京、广宁府蝗。
现代文：北京、广宁府发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues hit Beijing and Guangningfu.

古文：丁酉，赐宗弼金券。
现代文：六日，赐予宗弼金券。
English: On the 6th, a gold certificate was given to the patriarch.

古文：八月丁卯，诏归朱弁、张邵、洪皓于宋。
现代文：八月七日，诏令朱弁、张邵、洪皓回归宋国。
English: On August 7, Zhu Ben, Zhang Shao, and Hong Qi were ordered to return to Song.

古文：辛未，复太宗子胡卢为王。
现代文：十一日，又封太守的儿子胡卢为王。
English: On the eleventh day, the son of the daimyō, Hulú, was proclaimed king.

古文：赈陕西。
现代文：救济陕西。
English: Relief for Shaanxi.

古文：九月壬辰，诏给天水郡王子、侄、婿，天水郡公子俸给。
现代文：九月三日，诏令给予天水郡王的儿子、侄子、女婿、天水郡公子俸给。
English: On September 3, the son, nephew, son-in-law, and son-in-law of the king of Tianshui County were given a salary by imperial decree.

古文：十一月甲寅，平章政事漆水郡王昂薨，追封郓王。
现代文：十一月二十六日，平章政事漆水郡王昂逝世，追封为郓王。
English: On November 26th, the political leader of Pingzhang, Wang Ang of Lingshui County, passed away and was posthumously crowned as the King of Xuan.

古文：十二月乙丑，高丽王遣使谢封册。
现代文：十二月七日，高丽王派遣使者来谢册封。
English: On December 7th, King Goryeo sent an envoy to thank the seal.

古文：庚午，宋遣使谢归三丧及母韦氏。
现代文：十二日，宋帝派遣使者前来感谢归还三丧以及母亲韦氏。
English: On the twelfth day, Emperor Song sent an envoy to thank the three mourners and their mother, the Wei clan.

古文：壬申，上猎于核耶呆米路。
现代文：十四日，皇上在核耶呆米路打猎。
English: On the 14th, the emperor went hunting on the nuclear Yadelm Road.

古文：癸未，还宫。
现代文：二十五日，回宫。
English: On the 24th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲申，皇太子济安薨。
现代文：二十六日，皇太子济安逝世。
English: On the 26th, Crown Prince Jian passed away.

古文：三年正月己丑朔，以皇太子丧不御正殿，群臣诣便殿称贺。
现代文：皇统三年正月初一，因为皇太子丧事不到正殿临朝听政，群臣到偏殿称贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of imperial rule, because the crown prince could not attend the funeral in the main hall to listen to the government, the courtiers came to the hall to celebrate.

古文：宋、高丽、夏使诣皇极殿遥贺。
现代文：宋、高丽、夏国派使者到皇极殿遥贺。
English: Song, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to the Imperial Palace to congratulate him.

古文：乙巳，万寿节，如正旦仪。
现代文：十七日，万寿节，和正旦的礼仪一样。
English: The seventeenth day, the All-Year's Eve, follows the same ritual as the Day of the Dead.

古文：三月辛卯，以尚书左丞勖为平章政事，殿前都点检宗宪尚书左丞。
现代文：三月四日，任命尚书左丞勖为平章政事，殿前都点检宗宪为尚书左丞。
English: On March 4, Shosho Zuojo was appointed as Taira no Shosho Seiji, and Dotonken Sokan was appointed as Shosho Zuojo.

古文：丁酉，太皇太后唐括氏崩。
现代文：十三日，太皇太后唐括氏逝世。
English: On the 13th, the Great Empress Dowager Tang Hui passed away.

古文：己酉，封子道济为魏王。
现代文：二十五日，封皇子道济为魏王。
English: On the 25th, the crown prince Daoji became the king of Wei.

古文：五月丁巳朔，京兆进瑞麦。
现代文：五月一日，京兆进献吉祥物麦子。
English: On May 1st, Keizho presented its mascot, Maizi.

古文：癸亥，上致祭太皇太后。
现代文：七日，皇上专心祭奠太皇太后。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor concentrated on paying tribute to the great empress dowager.

古文：甲申，初立太庙、社稷。
现代文：二十八日，初次设立太庙、社稷。
English: On the 28th, the temple and shrine were established for the first time.

古文：六月己酉，初置骁毅军。
现代文：六月二十四日，开始设置骁毅军。
English: On June 24th, the establishment of the Shan Yi Army began.

古文：七月丙寅，上致祭太皇太后。
现代文：七月十一日，皇上专心致志地祭奠太皇太后。
English: On July 11, the Emperor devoted himself to paying tribute to the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：庚辰，太原路进獬豸并瑞麦。
现代文：二十五日，太原路进献异兽獬豸，连同吉祥的麦子。
English: On the 25th, the Taiyuan Road will offer different animals, along with the auspicious wheat.

古文：八月辛卯，诏给天水郡王孙及天水郡公婿俸禄。
现代文：八月七日，诏令给予天水郡王的孙子以及天水郡公的女婿俸禄。
English: On August 7th, a decree was issued to give a salary to the grandson of the King of Tamsui County and the son-in-law of the Prince of Tamsui County.

古文：丙申，老人星见。
现代文：十二日，老人星显现。
English: On the 12th, the old man's star appeared.

古文：乙巳，谥太皇太后曰钦仁皇后。
现代文：二十一日，谥太皇太后叫钦仁皇后。
English: On the 21st, Empress Dowager Zou was named Empress Qinren.

古文：戊申，葬恭陵。
现代文：二十四日，将太皇太后安葬在恭陵。
English: On the 24th, the empress dowager was buried in the Gongling Mausoleum.

古文：十二月癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月一日，出现日食。
English: On December 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：四年正月癸丑朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统四年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of imperial rule, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：甲寅，诏以去年宋币赐始祖以下宗室。
现代文：初二，诏令把去年宋国进贡的币银赐给始祖以下各宗室。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict gave the coins and silver from the Song state tribute last year to the ancestral families below the founder.

古文：己未，以宋使王伦为平州转运使，既受命，复辞，罪其反覆，诛之。
现代文：初七，让宋国使臣王伦当平州转运使，王伦已经接受命令，又来辞退，定他反复无常罪，杀了他。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wang Lun, an envoy of the Song Dynasty, was sent to Pingzhou as a transfer envoy. Wang Lun had already accepted the order, but he refused again. He was found guilty of caprice and killed him.

古文：乙丑，陕西进嘉禾十有二茎，茎皆七穗。
现代文：十三日，陕西进献的优良稻禾十株各有二根茎，每根茎都是七个穗。
English: On the 13th, each of the ten fine rice plants donated by Shaanxi had two stems, and each stem had seven ears.

古文：己巳，万寿节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the Manchukuo Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：乙亥，上祭钦仁皇后，哭尽哀。
现代文：二十三日，皇上祭奠钦仁皇后，哭得十分哀痛。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor paid tribute to Empress Qinren and wept bitterly.

古文：二月癸未，上如东京。
现代文：二月二日，皇上到东京去。
English: On February 2, the Emperor left for Tokyo.

古文：丙申，次百泊河春水。
现代文：十五日，到百泊河春水。
English: On the fifteenth day, I went to Hyakupari River Spring Water.

古文：丁酉，回鹘遣使来贺，以粘合韩奴报之。
现代文：十六日，回鹘派遣使者来朝贺，让粘合韩奴回报这件事。
English: On the 16th, Huizhou sent an envoy to congratulate the morning, and let the bonding Han Niu return the matter.

古文：五月辛亥朔，次薰风殿。
现代文：五月一日，到薰风殿。
English: On May 1st, I went to the Fengxian Hall.

古文：六月辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月一日，有日食出现。
English: On June 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：七月庚午，建原庙于东京。
现代文：七月二十一日，在东京建筑原庙。
English: The construction of the original temple in Tokyo was completed on July 21.

古文：八月癸未，杀魏王道济。
现代文：八月四日，杀魏王道济。
English: On August 4, he killed Wei Wang Daoji.

古文：九月乙酉，上如东京。
现代文：九月乙酉，皇上往东京去。
English: At the end of September, the Emperor left for Tokyo.

古文：壬子，畋于沙河，射虎获之。
现代文：四日，在沙河围猎，射老虎并获得了它。
English: On the fourth day, they hunted in the sand river, shot the tiger and got it.

古文：乙卯，遣使祭辽主陵。
现代文：七日，派人祭祀辽主陵墓。
English: On the seventh day, people were sent to worship the mausoleum of Lord Liao.

古文：辛酉，诏薰风殿二十里内及巡幸所过五里内，并复一岁。
现代文：十三日，诏令薰风殿二十里内及皇上巡察御驾所经过的五里之内的地方，免除徭役一年。
English: On the 13th, the emperor decreed that all places within 20 miles of the Hall of the Winds and within five miles of the Emperor's inspection car would be exempted from corvee service for one year.

古文：癸酉，行台左丞相张孝纯薨。
现代文：二十五日，行台左丞相张孝纯逝世。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Xiaochun, the Minister of the Left of the line, passed away.

古文：十月壬辰，立借贷饥民酬赏格。
现代文：十月十五日，制订借贷饥民酬赏规格。
English: On October 15th, the loan and reward specifications for starving people were formulated.

古文：甲辰，以河朔诸郡地震，诏复百姓一年，其压死无人收葬者，官为敛藏之。
现代文：二十七日，因为河朔各郡地震，诏令免除百姓徭役一年，那些被压死没有人收葬的，官府负责把他们装殓埋葬了。
English: On the 27th, because of the earthquake in all counties of Hexuo, the imperial edict exempted the people from forced labor for one year. Those who were crushed to death and had no one to bury them, the government was responsible for decorating and burying them.

古文：陕西、蒲、解、汝、蔡等处因岁饥，流民典雇为奴婢者，官给绢赎为良，放还其乡。
现代文：陕西、蒲、解、汝、蔡等处因遭逢饥饿年景，流浪平民被典卖或者雇用当奴婢的，由官府发给绢赎回仍是平民，打发他们返回自己的故乡。
English: In Shaanxi, Pu, He, You, Cai and other places, due to the famine, the stray civilians were sold or hired as slaves, and the government issued bonds to redeem the civilians and send them back to their hometowns.

古文：十一月己酉，上猎于海岛。
现代文：十一月二日，皇上在海岛打猎。
English: On November 2, the emperor went hunting on the island.

古文：十二月甲午，至东京。
现代文：十二月十八日，皇上到达东京。
English: On December 18, the Emperor arrived in Tokyo.

古文：五年正月丁未朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统五年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of imperial rule, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：癸亥，万寿节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the Manchukuo Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：二月乙未，次济州春水。
现代文：二月十九日，皇上到济州春水。
English: On February 19, the emperor went to Chunshui, Jeju.

古文：三月戊辰，次天开殿。
现代文：三月二十三日，在天开殿停留。
English: On March 23rd, the caravan stopped at Tenkaden.

古文：五月戊午，初用御制小字。
现代文：五月十三日，开始使用御制小字。
English: On May 13th, the use of imperial small characters began.

古文：壬寅，以平章政事勖谏，上为止酒，仍布告廷臣。
现代文：二十七日，因为平章政事勖劝谏，皇上停止饮酒，并且布告宫廷大臣。
English: On the 27th, because of Pingzhang's political advice, the emperor stopped drinking alcohol and notified the court minister.

古文：六月乙亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月一日，有日食出现。
English: On June 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：八月戊戌，发天开殿。
现代文：八月二十五日，从天开殿出发。
English: On August 25th, they set out from Tenkaden.

古文：九月庚申，至自东京。
现代文：九月十七日，从东京回到宫廷。
English: On September 17th, he returned to the Imperial Court from Tokyo.

古文：十月辛卯，增谥太祖。
现代文：十月十九日，增谥太祖。
English: On October 19th, Zeng Rong Taizu passed away.

古文：闰月戊寅，大名府进牛生麟。
现代文：闰十月七日，大名府进献一头牛生的麒麟。
English: On October 7th, Daimyo-fu presented a cow-born unicorn.

古文：壬辰，怀州进嘉禾。
现代文：二十一日，怀州进献优良的稻禾。
English: On the 21st, Waizhou presented high-quality rice.

古文：十二月戊申，增谥始祖以下十帝及太宗、徽宗。
现代文：十二月八日，增谥始祖以下十位皇帝以及太宗、徽宗。
English: On December 8th, ten emperors, including Emperor Zeng Rong, Emperor Taizong and Emperor Huizong.

古文：丁巳，赦。
现代文：十七日，赦免罪犯。
English: On the 17th, he pardoned the criminals.

古文：六年正月辛未朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统六年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of imperial rule, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：壬申，封太祖诸孙为王。
现代文：初二，封太祖的各位孙子为王。
English: On the second day of the new year, the grandchildren of the great-grandfather are crowned.

古文：乙亥，畋于谋勒。
现代文：五日，在谋勒围猎。
English: On the fifth day, they went hunting in Mule.

古文：甲申，还京师。
现代文：十四日，返回京城。
English: On the 14th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：丁亥，万寿节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the Manchukuo Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：庚寅，以边地赐夏国。
现代文：二十日，把边地赐给夏国。
English: On the 20th, he gave the borderland to Xia Guo.

古文：壬辰，如春水。
现代文：二十二日，到春水。
English: On the 27th, to Chunshui.

古文：帝从禽，导骑误入大泽中，帝马陷，因步出，亦不罪导者。
现代文：皇帝追随禽鸟，导行的人将皇上误引到大沼泽中，皇帝马陷进烂泥，只好步行出来，皇上也不责怪引导的人。
English: The emperor followed the birds. The guide misled the emperor into the swamp. The emperor's horse got stuck in the mud and had to walk out. The emperor did not blame the guide.

古文：乙未，封偎喝为王。
现代文：二十五日，封偎喝为王。
English: On the 25th, he was proclaimed king.

古文：二月丙寅，右丞相韩企先薨。
现代文：二月二十七日，右丞相韩企先逝世。
English: On February 27, Minister of the Right Han Kexian passed away.

古文：三月壬申，以阿离补为行台右丞相。
现代文：三月三日，任命阿离补为行台右丞相。
English: On March 3, he appointed Ai Yixu as the Minister of the Right of Taiwan.

古文：四月庚子朔，上至自春水。
现代文：四月一日，皇上从春水回到宫廷。
English: On April 1, the emperor returned to the court from Chunshui.

古文：以同判大宗正事宗固为太保、右丞相兼中书令。
现代文：任命同判大宗正事宗固为太保、右丞相兼中书令。
English: The same court appointed Daizong Seiji Mungu as Taiho, Ujosho and Chushiro.

古文：戊午，行台右丞相阿离补薨。
现代文：十九日，行台右丞相阿离补逝世。
English: On the 19th, the Minister of the Right of the Taiwan Straits, Ah Yixu, passed away.

古文：五月壬申，高丽王楷薨。
现代文：五月四日，高丽王楷逝世。
English: On May 4, King Kai of Goryeo passed away.

古文：辛卯，以左宣徽使刘筈为行台右丞相。
现代文：二十三日，任命左宣徽使刘薚为行台右丞相。
English: On the 23rd, Zuo Xuan Hui appointed Liu Wei as the Minister of the Right of Taiwan.

古文：六月乙巳，杀宇文虚中及高士谈。
现代文：六月七日，杀宇文虚中和高士谈。
English: On June 7th, Xiaoyu Wenyu and Gao Shi had a talk.

古文：乙丑，遣使吊祭高丽，并起复嗣王晛。
现代文：二十七日，派遣使臣到高丽国去吊唁祭奠，并在国丧期间命由日见承嗣王位。
English: On the 27th, he sent envoys to Goryeo to offer condolences and pay tribute, and during the period of national mourning, he ordered Nichimen to succeed to the throne.

古文：九月戊辰朔，以许王破汴，睿宗平陕西，郑王克辽及娄室、银术可皆有大功，并为立碑。
现代文：九月一日，因为许王攻破汴京，睿宗平定陕西，郑王攻克辽军以及娄室、银术可都有大功，一并为他们立碑。
English: On September 1, because King Xu conquered Beijing, King Ruizong conquered Shaanxi, and King Zheng conquered the Liao Army, as well as Yishu and Yinju, they all made great contributions, and a monument was erected for them.

古文：戊寅，曹王刘豫薨。
现代文：十一日，曹王刘豫逝世。
English: On the 11th day, Cao Wang Liu Yu passed away.

古文：是岁，遣粘割韩奴招耶律大石，被害。
现代文：当年，派遣粘割韩奴招抚耶律大石，粘割韩奴被杀害。
English: In that year, Yerut Daishi was dispatched to seduce the viscous Korean, and the viscous Korean was killed.

古文：七年正月乙丑朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统七年正月初一，宋国、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of imperial rule, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：辛巳，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the Manchukuo Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：癸未，以西京鹿囿为民田。
现代文：十九日，把西京鹿苑改成民用田地。
English: On the 19th, the Saikyo Deer Park was turned into a civilian field.

古文：丁亥，太白经天。
现代文：二十三日，太白星经天。
English: On the 23rd, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：三月戊寅，高丽遣使谢吊祭、起复。
现代文：三月十五日，高丽遣使者来感谢皇上派人去吊祭，和在国丧期间安排嗣王。
English: On March 15th, Goryeo sent an envoy to thank the emperor for sending people to the hanging ceremony and for arranging a successor during the national mourning period.

古文：四月戊午，宴便殿。上醉酒，杀户部尚书宗礼。
现代文：四月二十五日，在偏殿设宴，皇上喝醉了，杀了户部尚书宗礼。
English: On April 25th, a banquet was held in the hall, and the emperor got drunk and killed the head of the household, Shoshu Sorei.

古文：六月丁酉，杀横海军节度使田瑴、左司郎中奚毅、翰林待制邢具瞻及王植、高凤廷、王效、赵益兴、龚夷鉴等。
现代文：六月五日，杀横海军节度使田、左司郎中奚毅、翰林待制邢具瞻以及王植、高凤廷、王盕、赵益兴、龚夷鉴等人。
English: On June 5, Wang Zhi, Gao Fengting, Wang Yao, Zhao Yixing, Gao Yijian and others were killed in the naval festival.

古文：七月己巳，太白经天，曲赦畿内。
现代文：七月八日，太白星经天，局部地赦免王都所在地的千里地面。
English: On July 8th, the Taibai Star passed through the heavens and partially pardoned the thousand-mile ground where the capital was located.

古文：九月，太保、右丞相宗固薨。
现代文：九月，太保、右丞相宗固逝世。
English: In September, Taiho and Ujosho Muneyoshi passed away.

古文：以都元帅宗弼为太师、领三省事，都元帅、行台尚书省事如故，平章政事勖为左丞相兼侍中，都点检宗贤为右丞相兼中书令，行台右丞相刘筈、右丞萧仲恭为平章政事，李德固为尚书右丞，秘书监萧肄为参知政事。
现代文：任命都元帅宗弼当太师、领三省事，仍然保留都元帅、行台尚书省事的职务。任命平章政事勖为左丞相兼侍中，都点检宗贤为右丞相兼中书令，行台右丞相刘薚、右丞萧仲恭为平章政事，李德固为尚书右丞，秘书监萧肄为参知政事。
English: Appointed Grand Marshal Zong Xi as Grand Marshal and in charge of three provincial affairs, and still retained the posts of Grand Marshal and Gaotai Shangshu Provincial Affairs. Appointed Pingzang Zhengshu as Left Vice-Minister and Vice-Minister, Du Dangguan Zongxian as Right Vice-Minister and Vice-Minister, Gaotai Right Vice-Minister Liu Xi, Right Vice-Minister Xiao Zhongxiong as Pingzang Vice-Minister, Li Degu as Right Vice-Minister, Secretary Gao Xiao as Vice-Minister.

古文：十月壬子，平章行台尚书省事奚宝薨。
现代文：十月二十二日，平章行台尚书省事奚宝逝世。
English: On October 22nd, Pingzhang Xingtai's disciple Shang Shushu passed away.

古文：十一月癸酉，以工部侍郎仆散太弯为御史大夫。
现代文：十一月十三日，任命工部侍郎仆散太弯为御史大夫。
English: On November 13th, he appointed a servant of the Ministry of Works, San Taiben, as a goshi taifu.

古文：乙亥，兵部尚书秉德进三角羊。
现代文：十五日，兵部尚书秉德进献三只角的羊。
English: On the fifteenth day, the military department of Shangshu Bingde presented three horned sheep.

古文：己卯，诏减常膳羊豕五之二。
现代文：十九日，诏令日常膳食中的羊肉、猪肉减去五分之二。
English: On the 19th, the emperor decreed that two-fifths of mutton and pork in daily meals should be reduced.

古文：癸未，以尚书左丞宗宪为行台平章政事，同判大宗正事亮为尚书左丞。
现代文：二十三日，任命尚书左丞宗宪为行台平章政事，同判大宗正事完颜亮为尚书左丞。
English: On the 23rd, Zong Xian, the left-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed to govern Taiyuan Pingzhang, and Yan Liang, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed to govern Taiyuan Daizong.

古文：十二月戊午，参知政事韩昉罢。
现代文：十二月二十八日，参知政事韩窻被免除职务。
English: On December 28th, Han Min, the political advisor to the governor, was removed from his post.

古文：兵部尚书秉德为参知政事。
现代文：任命兵部尚书秉德为参知政事。
English: Appointed Hyobusho Shoshu Bingde as Sangchiseiji.

古文：八年正月庚申朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统八年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of imperial unification, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：丙子，万寿节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the Manchukuo Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：二月壬子，以哥鲁葛波古等为横赐高丽、夏国使。
现代文：二月二十三日，派哥鲁葛波古等人作为横赐高丽、夏国使。
English: On February 23rd, Paikoru Kepogu and others were appointed as envoys to Goryeo and Xia.

古文：甲寅，以大理卿宗安等为高丽王晛封册使。
现代文：二十五日，委派大理卿宗安等人作为高丽王日见封册使。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Daliqing Zong'an and others as the envoys of the King of Goryeo, Nichimin.

古文：乙卯，上如天开殿。
现代文：二十六日，皇上去天开殿。
English: On the 26th, the emperor ascended to heaven.

古文：四月戊子朔，日有食之。辛丑，遣参知政事秉德等为廉察官吏。
现代文：四月一日，发生日食。十四日，派遣参知政事秉德等检查访问官吏。
English: On April 1st, a solar eclipse occurred. On the 14th, inspecting and visiting officials such as the political advisor to the governor, Bing De, were dispatched.

古文：庚戌，至自天开殿。
现代文：二十三日，从天开殿回到宫廷。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to the court from the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲寅，《辽史》成。
现代文：二十七日，《辽史》编写完成。
English: On the 27th, "Liao Shi" was completed.

古文：六月乙卯，平章政事萧仲恭为行台左丞相，左丞亮为平章政事，都点检唐括辩为尚书左丞。
现代文：六月二十九日，任命平章政事萧仲恭为行台左丞相，左丞完颜亮为平章政事，都点检唐括辩为尚书左丞。
English: On June 29th, Xiao Zhongyan, the political secretary of Pingzhang, was appointed as the secretary of the left of Xingtai, Yan Liang, the political secretary of Pingzhang, was appointed as the secretary of the left of Xingtai, and Duan Jian, the political secretary of Tang, was appointed as the secretary of the left of Shangshu.

古文：高丽遣使谢封册。
现代文：高丽王派遣使者来感谢册封。
English: King Goryeo sent an envoy to thank the crown prince.

古文：七月乙亥，御史大夫仆散弯罢，以侍卫亲军都指挥使阿鲁带为御史大夫。
现代文：七月十九日，御史大夫仆散太弯被罢免官职，任命侍卫亲军都指挥使阿鲁带为御史大夫。
English: On July 19th, the imperial historian's henchman, San Taoyuan, was removed from his official post, and Aru was appointed imperial historian by the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards.

古文：戊寅，以尚书左丞唐括辩奉职不谨，杖之。
现代文：二十二日，因为尚书左丞唐括辩履行职责不严谨，对他施用杖刑。
English: On the 22nd, because Shangshu Zuoxiao Tang Paraphrased was not strict in performing his duties, he was punished with a cane.

古文：八月戊戌，宗弼进《太祖实录》，上焚香立受之。
现代文：八月十三日，宗弼进献《太祖实录》，皇上焚香站立接受它。
English: On August 13th, Emperor Zonglu presented "The True Record of the Great Ancestors" to the emperor, who accepted it with incense.

古文：庚子，以尚书左丞相勖领行台尚书省事，右丞相宗贤为太保、尚书左丞相。
现代文：十五日，任命尚书左丞相勖领行台尚书省事，右丞相宗贤为太保、尚书左丞相。
English: On the fifteenth day, he appointed Shangshu, the left prime minister, to be in charge of the government of Taiwan, and the right prime minister, Zongxian, to be the deputy prime minister and Shangshu, the left prime minister.

古文：丙午，以行台左丞相萧仲恭为尚书右丞相。
现代文：二十一日，任命行台左丞相萧仲恭为尚书右丞相。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Xiao Zhongyong, the minister of the left of the line, was appointed as the minister of the right of the line.

古文：闰月庚申，宰臣以西林多鹿，请上猎。上恐害稼，不允。
现代文：闰八月五日，宰相大臣们认为西林鹿多，请皇上去打猎，皇上恐怕损害庄稼，不允许。
English: On August 5th, the prime ministers and ministers thought that there were too many deer in the West Forest, so they asked the emperor to go hunting. The emperor was afraid that it would damage the crops, so it was not allowed.

古文：丙寅，太庙成。
现代文：十一日，太庙落成。
English: On the 11th day, the grand temple was completed.

古文：九月丙申，尚书左丞唐括辩罢。
现代文：九月十一日，罢免尚书左丞唐括辩的官职。
English: On September 11th, the official position of Shangshu Zuojie Tang Brawl was removed.

古文：以左宣徽使禀为尚书左丞。
现代文：任命左宣徽使禀为尚书左丞。
English: He appointed Zuo Xuan Hui to be the Zojo of Shangshu.

古文：十月辛酉，太师、领三省事、都元帅、越国王宗弼薨。
现代文：十月七日，太师、领三省事、都元帅、越国王宗弼逝世。
English: On October 7th, the Grand Master, the leader of three provinces, the Grand Marshal, and the King of Vietnam, Zong Pi, passed away.

古文：十一月壬辰，太白经天。
现代文：十一月八日，太白星经天。
English: On November 8th, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：乙未，左丞相宗贤、左丞禀等言，州郡长吏当并用本国人。
现代文：十一日，左丞相宗贤、左丞禀等人说，州郡的主要官员应当全用本国人。
English: On the 11th, the Left Chancellors Munenori and Sadafusa said that the main officials of prefectures and counties should all be from their own country.

古文：上曰： 四海之内，皆朕臣子，若分别待之，岂能致一。
现代文：皇上说 ：四海之内，都是朕的臣民，如果分别对待他们，怎么能达到一统天下？
English: The emperor said, "Within the four seas, all are my subjects. If we treat them separately, how can we achieve the unification of the world?"

古文：谚不云乎， 疑人勿使，使人勿疑 。
现代文：谚语不是说吗： 疑人勿使，使人勿疑。 
English: Isn't there a proverb that says: Don't make people doubt you, make them not doubt you.

古文：自今本国及诸色人，量才通用之。 
现代文：从今天起本国以及各种人，一律量才通用他们。 
English: From today, the country and all the people will have the same amount.

古文：辛丑，以尚书左丞相宗贤为左副元帅，平章政事亮为尚书左丞相兼侍中，参知政事秉德为平章政事。
现代文：十七日，任命尚书左丞相宗贤为左副元帅，平章政事亮为尚书左丞相兼侍中，参知政事秉德为平章政事。
English: On the 17th, the Left Vice-Marshal Shojo Sosen was appointed, the Left Vice-Marshal Taira no Shojo Seiji Ryo was appointed as the Left Vice-Marshal, the Left Vice-Marshal Taira no Shojo Seiji Ryo was appointed as the Left Vice-Marshal, the Vice-Marshal Taira no Shojo Seiji Ryo was appointed as the Left Vice-Marshal, the Vice-Marshal Taira no Shojo Seiji Ryo was appointed as the Vice-Marshal, the Vice-Marshal Taira no Shojo Seiji Ryo was appointed as the Vice-Marshal

古文：庚戌，左副元帅宗贤复为太保，左丞相、左副元帅如故。
现代文：二十六日，任命左副元帅宗贤再当太保，原来的左丞相、左副元帅的职务仍然保留。
English: On the 26th, Left Vice-Marshal Zong Xian was reappointed to the position of Taibo, while the positions of Left Vice-Marshal and Left Vice-Marshal remained unchanged.

古文：十二月乙卯，以右丞相萧仲恭为太傅、领三省事，左丞相亮为尚书右丞相。
现代文：十二月一日，任命右丞相萧仲恭为太傅、领三省事，左丞相亮为尚书右丞相。
English: On December 1, Xiao Zhongyan, the right-hand minister, was appointed taifu and leader of three provincial affairs, and the left-hand minister, ryo, was appointed shoshu right-hand minister.

古文：乙亥，以左丞相宗贤为太师、领三省事兼都元帅。
现代文：二十一日，任命左丞相宗贤为太师、领三省事兼都元帅。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he appointed Zuojo (Left) Minister Muneyoshi as Taishi (Grand Master) and Marshal of the Three Provinces and the Capital.

古文：九年正月甲申朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：皇统九年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the ninth year of imperial rule, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：戊戌，太师、领三省事、都元帅宗贤罢。
现代文：十五日，太师、领三省事、都元帅宗贤被免除官职。
English: On the 15th, the Grand Master, the leader of the three provinces, and the Grand Marshal Zongxian were removed from office.

古文：领行台尚书省事勖为太师、领三省事，同判大宗正事充为尚书左丞相，右丞相亮兼都元帅。
现代文：任命领行台尚书省事勖为太师、领三省事；同判大宗正事充为尚书左丞相；右丞相亮兼任都元帅。
English: He appointed the leader of the table, Shang Shuxuan Zhisheng, as the grandmaster and the leader of the three provincial affairs; the same judge, Daizong Zhengji, was appointed as Shang Shuxuan Zuozhong; and the right-hand minister, Liang, also served as the capital marshal.

古文：庚子，万寿节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十七日，是万寿节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 17th, it was the Manchukuo Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：壬寅，左丞相充薨。
现代文：十九日，左丞相充逝世。
English: On the 19th, Sadayo Norimitsu passed away.

古文：丙午，以右丞相亮为左丞相，判大宗正事宗本为尚书右丞相，左副元帅宗敏为都元帅，南京留守宗贤为左副元帅兼西京留守。
现代文：二十三日，任命右丞相亮为左丞相，判大宗正事宗本为尚书右丞相，左副元帅宗敏为都元帅，南京留守宗贤为左副元帅兼任西京留守。
English: On the 23rd, the minister of the right was appointed as the minister of the left, and the minister of the left was appointed as the minister of the right, the vice-marshal of the left was appointed as the vice-marshal of the left, the vice-marshal of the left was appointed as the vice-marshal of the left, and the vice-marshal of the left was appointed as the vice-marshal of the left.

古文：己酉，宗贤复为太保、领三省事。
现代文：二十六日，宗贤再次出任太保、领三省事。
English: On the 26th, Zongxian once again assumed the post of Taiho and led three provincial affairs.

古文：二月甲寅，会宁牧唐括辩复为尚书左丞，尚书左丞禀为行台平章政事。
现代文：二月一日，会宁牧唐括辩恢复了尚书左丞的职务，尚书左丞禀是行台平章政事。
English: On February 1st, the Ningmu Tang Association reinstated the post of Shangshu Zuojie. Shangshu Zuojie is the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：三月癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月一日，有日食出现。
English: On March 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛丑，以司空宗本为尚书右丞相兼中书令，左丞相亮为太保、领三省事。
现代文：十九日，任命司空宗本为尚书右丞相兼任中书令，左丞相亮为太保、领三省事。
English: On the 19th, Siku Sochimoto was appointed as Shosho Ujisho (Minister of the Right) and Chusho Rei (Minister of the Middle), and Sojo Soyo Ryo was appointed as Taibo (Minister of the Imperial Household) and in charge of three provincial affairs.

古文：四月壬申夜，大风雨，雷电震坏寝殿鸱尾，有火入上寝，烧帏幔，帝趋别殿避之。
现代文：四月二十一日夜间，大风雨天气，雷电震坏了皇帝寝殿的鸱尾，有火侵入皇上寝床，烧了帏幔，皇帝跑到偏殿去躲避火灾。
English: On the night of April 21st, in a stormy weather, lightning and electric shock damaged the appendix of the emperor's bedchamber. A fire broke into the emperor's bed and burned the cocoon. The emperor ran to the side hall to escape the fire.

古文：丁丑，有龙斗于利州榆林河水上。
现代文：二十六日，在利州榆林河水上有龙在那里相斗。
English: On the 26th, there were dragons fighting in the water of the Yulin River in Lizhou.

古文：大风坏民居、官舍，瓦木人畜皆飘扬十数里，死伤者数百人。
现代文：大风毁坏了百姓住房、官舍，瓦、木、人、畜顺水漂流十几里远，死伤的有几百人。
English: The gale destroyed people's houses and government offices, and the debris of tiles, wood, people and animals drifted along the water for more than ten miles. Hundreds of people were killed and injured.

古文：五月戊子，以四月壬申、丁丑天变，肆赦。
现代文：五月七日，因为四月二十一日和二十六日天气变化，延缓赦免罪犯。
English: On May 7, due to weather changes on April 21 and 26, the pardoning of criminals was delayed.

古文：命翰林学士张钧草诏，参知政事萧肄擿其语以为诽谤，上怒，杀钧。
现代文：命令翰林学士张钧起草诏书，参知政事萧肄认为他的话是诽谤，皇上恼怒，把张钧杀了。
English: He ordered the scholar of Hanlin, Zhang Xuan, to draft the imperial edict. Xiao Xuan, the political advisor, thought that his words were slanderous. The emperor was so angry that he killed Zhang Xuan.

古文：是日，曲赦上京囚。
现代文：当天，赦免了部分上京囚犯的罪行。
English: On the same day, some of the crimes of the prisoners who went to Beijing were pardoned.

古文：庚寅，出太保、领三省事亮领行台尚书省事。
现代文：九日，命令太保、领三省事亮出面领行台尚书省事。
English: On the 9th, he ordered the three provincial governors of Taibao and Lian to come forward to lead the provincial government.

古文：戊申，武库署令耶律八斤妄称上言宿直将军萧荣与胙王元为党，诛之。
现代文：二十七日，武库署令耶律八斤谎称皇上说宿直将军萧荣和胙王元是奸党，耶律八斤被杀。
English: On the 27th, the Armament Agency ordered Ye Lu Yakin to falsely claim to the emperor that the retired general Xiao Rong and Zou Wangyuan were traitors. Ye Lu Yakin was killed.

古文：六月己未，以都元帅宗敏为太保、领三省事兼左副元帅，左丞相宗贤兼都元帅。
现代文：六月九日，任命都元帅宗敏为太保、领三省事兼任左副元帅，左丞相宗贤兼任都元帅。
English: On June 9th, Grand Marshal Zong Min was appointed as the Tai Po, the leader of the three provinces and the Left Vice-Marshal, and the Left Vice-Minister Zong Xian was also appointed as the Grand Marshal.

古文：八月庚申，以刘筈为司空，行台右丞相如故。
现代文：八月十一日，任命刘薚为司空，行台右丞相的官职保留如故。
English: On August 11th, Liu Ye was appointed as the Vice Premier, and the position of the Vice Premier remained unchanged.

古文：宰臣议徙辽阳、勃海之民于燕南，从之。
现代文：宰相大臣建议将辽阳、渤海的人民迁徙到燕南，皇上采纳了这项建议。
English: The prime minister suggested that the people of Liaoyang and Bohai should be moved to Yan'nan, and the emperor accepted this suggestion.

古文：侍从高寿星等当迁，诉於后，后以白上，上怒议者，杖平章政事秉德，杀左司郎中三合。
现代文：侍从高寿星等人应当升迁，去找皇后诉说，皇后把这话告诉了皇上，皇上对议论的人恼怒，杖打平章政事秉德，杀了左司郎中三合。
English: Attendants such as Gao Shouxing should be promoted, go to the queen to tell her, the queen told this to the emperor, the emperor was angry with the people who talked about it, and the scepter was used to level Zhang Zhengji Bingde, and killed Zuo Si Lang Zhong Sanhe.

古文：九月丙申，以领行台尚书省事亮复为平章政事。
现代文：九月十七日，任命领行台尚书省事亮再任平章政事。
English: On September 17th, he was reappointed to the post of Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of the Province of Taizhou.

古文：戊戌，以右丞相宗本为太保、领三省事，左副元帅宗敏领行台尚书省事，平章政事秉德为尚书左丞相兼中书令，司空刘筈为平章政事。
现代文：十九日，任命右丞相宗本为太保、领三省事，左副元帅宗敏领行台尚书省事，平章政事秉德为尚书左丞相兼中书令，司空刘薚为平章政事。
English: On the 19th, he appointed U.S. Vice-Marshal Zong Ben as Taibao and leader of the three provincial affairs, Left Vice-Marshal Zong Min to lead the Taishang Provincial Affairs, Ping Zang Political Affairs Bing De as Taishang Left Vice-Marshal and Vice-Marshal, and Siku Liu Wei as Ping Zang Political Affairs.

古文：庚子，以御史大夫宗甫为参知政事。
现代文：二十一日，任命御史大夫宗甫为参知政事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Mishi no Daifu Sofu was appointed to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：十月乙丑，杀北京留守胙王元及弟安武军节度使查剌、左卫将军特思。
现代文：十月十七日，杀北京留守胙王元以及他的弟弟安武军节度使查剌、左卫将军特思。
English: On October 17th, Wangyuan Zhai, who stayed behind in Beijing, and his brother, Anwu Jun, were killed, along with the commander of the inspection team and General Te Si of the Left Division.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：癸酉，以翰林学士京为御史大夫。
现代文：二十五日，任命翰林学士京为御史大夫。
English: On the 25th, Hanlin Baccalaureate Kyo was appointed as goshi daifu.

古文：十一月癸未，杀皇后裴满氏。
现代文：十一月五日，杀皇后裴满氏。
English: On November 5th, the murder of Empress Pei Man began.

古文：召胙王妃撒卯入宫。
现代文：召纳胙王妃撒卯入宫。
English: Queen Naeko and her consort Sasuke are summoned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：戊子，杀故邓王子阿懒、达懒。
现代文：十日，杀已故邓王的儿子阿懒、达懒。
English: On the tenth day, they killed the late King Deng's sons, Alo and Dalao.

古文：癸巳，上猎于忽剌浑土温。遣使杀德妃乌古论氏及夹谷氏、张氏。
现代文：十五日，皇上到忽剌浑土温打猎，派遣使者杀德妃乌古论氏以及夹谷氏、张氏。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor went hunting in the muddy fields of Hubei, and sent an envoy to kill the German empress, the Uguon clan, the Jiaotong clan, and the Zhang clan.

古文：十二月己酉朔，上至自猎所。
现代文：十二月一日，皇上从打猎的地方回到宫廷。
English: On December 1st, the emperor returned to the court from a hunting trip.

古文：丙辰，杀妃裴满氏于寝殿。
现代文：初八日，在寝殿杀了裴满氏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he killed Pei Man in his bedroom.

古文：而平章政事亮因群臣震恐，与所亲驸马唐括辩、寝殿小底大兴国、护卫十人长忽土、阿里出虎等谋为乱。
现代文：然而平章政事完颜亮趁着群臣震惊恐怖，和所亲近的驸马唐括辩、寝殿的应答小吏大兴国、护卫十人长忽土、阿里出虎等人密谋作乱。
English: However, as soon as the political affairs of Pingzhang came to an end, he took advantage of the shock and terror of the courtiers, and conspired with his close friend, the horse-drawn carriage master, the answering clerk of the dormitory, Daxing Guo, the head of the ten guards, Hu Tu, Ali the Tiger, and others to create a disturbance.

古文：丁巳，以忽土、阿里出虎当内直，命省令史李老僧语兴国。
现代文：九日，让忽土、阿里出虎当内应，命令省令史李老僧传达给大兴国。
English: On the 9th, he ordered the provincial governor Shi Li Lao Zang to convey the news to Daxing.

古文：夜二鼓，兴国窃符，矫诏开宫门，召辩等。
现代文：夜间二更时分，大兴国盗窃了符牌，诈称皇帝诏令打开宫门，召进唐括辩等人。
English: At two o'clock in the morning, Daxing Guo stole the tokens, falsely claimed that the emperor had ordered the palace gate to be opened, and summoned Tang Duan and others.

古文：亮怀刀与其妹夫特厮随辩入至宫门，守者以辩驸马，不疑，内之。
现代文：完颜亮怀里揣着刀，和他的妹夫特厮跟随唐括辩进入到宫门里，守门人认为唐括辩是驸马，不怀疑，让他们进去了。
English: With a sword in his arms, Guan Yan Liang and his brother-in-law Te Ying followed Tang Baofeng into the palace gate. The gatekeeper thought that Tang Baofeng was a horse, and let them in.

古文：及殿门，卫士觉，抽刃劫之，莫敢动。
现代文：到了殿门，卫士发觉，亮抽出刀劫持住他们，没有人敢动。
English: When they arrived at the palace gate, the guards noticed them, drew their swords and held them hostage. No one dared to move.

古文：忽土、阿亮出虎至帝前，帝求榻上常所置佩刀，不知已为兴国易置其处，忽土、阿里出虎遂进弑帝，亮复前手刃之，血溅满其面与衣。
现代文：忽土、阿里出虎来到皇帝面前，皇帝在榻上常常置放佩刀的地方寻找，他不知道佩刀已经被大兴国换放了地方，忽土、阿里出虎于是进前杀皇帝，完颜亮也上前动手杀他，鲜血溅满了皇帝的脸和他的衣服。
English: Suddenly, Ali Izhiger came to the emperor. The emperor was looking for the place where he often placed his sword on the bed. He did not know that the sword had been replaced by the Great Hing Kingdom. Suddenly, Ali Izhiger then went forward to kill the emperor. When he was finished, he also went forward to kill him. Blood spattered the emperor's face and his clothes.

古文：帝崩，时年三十一。
现代文：皇帝去世，当时年龄是三十一岁。
English: The emperor died at the age of thirty-one.

古文：左丞相秉德等遂奉亮坐，罗拜呼万岁，立以为帝。
现代文：左丞相秉德等于是尊奉完颜亮上坐，排列叩拜并呼 万岁 ，拥立亮当皇帝。
English: Zuo Zhengxian upholding virtue is equal to honoring the completion of Yan Liang and sitting on the throne, lining up and bowing and calling "long live" and supporting Liang Dang as emperor.

古文：降帝为东昏王，葬于皇后裴满氏墓中。
现代文：完颜亮把熙宗皇帝降为东昏王，葬在皇后裴满氏的墓中。
English: After Yan Liang demoted Emperor Hezong to Dongguan King, he was buried in the tomb of Empress Pei Man.

古文：贞元三年，改葬于大房山蓼香甸，诸王同兆域。
现代文：贞元三年，改葬在大房山蓼香甸诸王同葬的区域之内。
English: In the third year of Zhengyuan, he was reburied in the area where the kings of Shangdian were buried together in Dafang Mountain.

古文：大定初，追谥武灵皇帝，庙号闵宗，陵曰思陵。
现代文：大定初年，追谥叫武灵皇帝，庙号是闵宗，陵墓叫思陵。
English: In the first year of Dading, the chased dragonfly was called Wuling Emperor, the temple name was Shanzong, and the mausoleum was called Siling.

古文：别立庙。
现代文：另外设立庙宇。
English: In addition, a temple was established.

古文：十九年，升祔于太庙，增谥弘基缵武庄靖孝成皇帝。
现代文：十九年，升纎在太庙，增谥弘基缵武庄靖孝成皇帝的称号。
English: In the 19th year, he was enthroned in the Great Temple, and was given the title of Emperor Zeng Hongji, Zeng Wuzhong, Zeng Jing and Zeng Xiaocheng.

古文：二十七年，改庙号熙宗。
现代文：二十七年，改庙号为熙宗。
English: In 1927, the temple name was changed to Xi Zong.

古文：二十八年，以思陵狭小，改葬于峨眉谷，仍号思陵。诏中外。
现代文：二十八年，因为思陵狭小，改葬在峨眉谷，仍然叫思陵，并诏令向中外宣布。
English: In 1928, because of the narrowness of Siling, it was reburied in Emei Valley, still called Siling, and was announced to China and the world by imperial edict.

