古文：柳元景元景少便弓马，数随父伐蛮，以勇称。
现代文：柳元景少年时期就熟悉弓马，多次跟随父亲讨伐蛮人，以勇敢著称。
English: As a boy, Liu Yuanjing was familiar with bows and arrows. He often followed his father to fight barbarians and was known for his bravery.

古文：寡言语，有器质，荆州刺史谢晦闻其名，要之，未及往而晦败。
现代文：他少言寡语，有器识，荆州刺史谢晦听到他的名气，曾经邀请他，还没有来得及去而谢晦失败。
English: He is a man of few words and great intelligence. Jingzhou Zhi Shi Xie Hui heard of his fame and invited him, but he did not have time to go and Xie Hui failed.

古文：雍州刺史刘道産深爱其能，会荆州刺史江夏王义恭复召之，道産谓曰： 久规相屈。今贵王有召，难辄相留，乖意以爲罔罔。 
现代文：雍州刺史刘道产深爱他的能力，正赶上荆州刺史江夏王刘义恭又召用他，刘道产对他说： 很久就打算让您屈尊来这里任职，现在贵王相召，难以相留，违背心意会显得无知。 
English: Liu Dousan, the governor of Yongzhou, loved his ability deeply. He was just catching up with Liu Yiqiong, the governor of Jingzhou and the governor of Jiangxia. Liu Yiqiong called him again. Liu Dousan said to him: I have long planned to have you deign to come here to serve. Now that you have been summoned by the king, it is difficult to stay, and it would be ignorant to go against your will.

古文：服阕，累迁义恭司徒太尉城局参军。
现代文：服丧期满，逐步升迁为刘义恭司徒太尉城局参军。
English: At the end of the period of mourning, he was gradually promoted to join the army as Liu Yigong Shi, Second Lieutenant of the City Bureau.

古文：文帝见又知之。
现代文：文帝见到后又十分欣赏。
English: After seeing it, Emperor Wen appreciated it very much.

古文：先是，刘道産在雍州有惠化，远蛮归怀皆出，缘沔爲村落，户口殷盛。
现代文：在此以前，刘道产在雍州有良好的政治教化，远方的蛮人都出来归顺，缘沔河两岸住下组成村落，户口繁盛。
English: Prior to this, Liu Daozhong had a good political education in Yongzhou, the barbarians from far away came out to submit, lived on both sides of the Yunnan River and formed villages, and the hukou was prosperous.

古文：及道産死，群蛮大爲寇暴。
现代文：等刘道产死后，群蛮大肆进行抢掠。
English: After Liu Dao's death, the group went on a large-scale looting spree.

古文：孝武西镇襄阳，义恭荐元景，乃以爲武威将军、随郡太守。
现代文：孝武帝西镇襄阳，刘义恭推荐柳元景，于是便任命他为武威将军、随郡太守。
English: Xiao Wu Di Xi Zhen Xiangyang, Liu Yigong recommended Liu Yuanjing, so he appointed him as General Wu Wei, Sui County Governor.

古文：及至，广设方略，斩获数百，郡境肃然。
现代文：等到任以后，他广设策略，斩杀和俘虏了数百人，郡内治安肃然。
English: After he took office, he set up a broad strategy, killed and captured hundreds of people, and the county was in a state of high security.

古文：随王诞镇襄阳，元景徙爲后军中兵参军。
现代文：随王刘诞镇守襄阳，柳元景调为后军中兵参军。
English: With the birth of Wang Liu, the town guards Yangyang, and Liu Yuanjing is transferred to join the army after the army.

古文：及朝廷大举北侵，使诸镇各出军。二十七年八月，诞遣尹显祖出赀谷，鲁方平、薛安都、庞法起入卢氏，田义仁出鲁阳，加元景建威将军，总统军帅。
现代文：后来朝廷大举北侵，让诸藩镇各出军队，元嘉二十七年八月，刘诞派遣尹显祖兵出赀谷，鲁方平、薛安都、庞法起进入卢氏，田义仁兵出鲁阳，加任柳元景为建威将军，担任各军总的统率。
English: Later, the imperial court launched a large-scale invasion of the north, letting all the provinces and towns send their troops. In August 27th, Yuan Jia, Liu Xuan dispatched Yin Xian's ancestors to Shibuya, Lu Fangping, Xue Andu, and Pang Faki to Lu, Tian Yiren's soldiers to Luyang, and appointed Liu Yuanjing as General Jian Wei, serving as the overall leader of the army.

古文：后军外兵参军庞季明，三秦冠族，求入长安，招怀关、陕，乃自赀谷入卢氏。
现代文：后军外兵参军庞季明，是三秦显贵的豪门世族，请求进入长安，招抚关、陕一带，于是从赀谷进入卢氏。
English: After the foreign soldiers joined the army, Pang Jiming, a prominent member of the Three Qin Dynasties, requested to enter Chang'an, Fuzhou and Shaanxi, and then entered the Lu clan from Shibuya.

古文：卢氏人赵难纳之。
现代文：卢氏人赵难接纳了他。
English: Zhao Nan, a Lu, took him in.

古文：元景率军系进，以前锋深入，悬军无继，驰遣尹显祖入卢氏，以爲诸军声援。
现代文：柳元景率领军队继续前进，因为前锋深入，孤军没有后继部队，所以柳元景派人驰马传令，让尹显祖进入卢氏，以作为各路军队的声援。
English: Liu Yuanjing led the army to continue to advance, because the vanguard was deep and the lone army had no follow-up troops, so Liu Yuanjing sent a messenger on horseback to let Yin Xianzu enter the Lu clan, as a show of support for all armies.

古文：元景以军食不足，难可旷日相持，乃束马悬车，引军上百丈崖，出温谷以入卢氏。
现代文：柳元景因为军粮不足，难以长久相持，于是便束马悬车，把军队引上了百丈崖，路出温谷而进入卢氏。
English: Because of the shortage of military food, it was difficult for Liu Yuanjing to hold out for a long time, so he hitched his horse to a cart and led the army up the Baizhang Cliff, out of Wen Valley and into the Lu.

古文：法起诸军进次方伯堆，去弘农城五里。
现代文：庞法起等军队前进驻扎在方伯堆，离弘农城五里路。
English: Pang Faki and other troops advanced and stationed in Fangbo Dui, 5 miles away from Hongnongcheng Road.

古文：元景引军度熊耳山，安都顿军弘农。
现代文：柳元景引军度过熊耳山，薛安都驻军在弘农。
English: Liu Yuanjing led his army through Mount Xiong'er, while Xue An stationed his army in Hongnong.

古文：法起进据潼关，季明率方平、赵难诸军向陕。
现代文：庞法起前进占据潼关，庞季明率领鲁方平、赵难诸军开向陕州。
English: Pang Fa started to advance and occupied Shaoguan. Pang Ji Ming led the armies of Lu Fangping and Zhao Nan to Shaanxi.

古文：十一月，元景率衆至弘农，营于开方口。
现代文：十一月，柳元景率领众军到达弘农，扎营在开方口。
English: In November, Liu Yuanjing led the troops to arrive at Hongnong and set up camp at Kaifangkou.

古文：仍以元景爲弘农太守。
现代文：仍然以柳元景为弘农太守。
English: Yanagi Motokage was still appointed as Kononodai no kami.

古文：初，安都留住弘农而诸军已进陕。
现代文：起初，薛安都留住在弘农而诸军已经进到陕州。
English: At first, Xue An stayed in Hongnong while the troops had entered Shaanxi.

古文：元景既到，谓安都曰： 卿无坐守空城，而令庞公孤军深入，宜急进军。 
现代文：柳元景到了以后，对薛安都说： 您不要坐守空城，而让庞公孤军深入，应该抓紧进军。 
English: After Liu Yuanjing arrived, he said to Xue Andu: You should not sit and guard the empty city, but let Pangong Lone Army go deep, you should march in.

古文：衆军并造陕下，列营以逼之，并大造攻具。
现代文：众军都来到陕州城下，排列开军营而对他们进行逼迫，并且一齐大造攻城器具。
English: All the armies came to the outskirts of the city of Shaanxi, lined up and opened the military camp to persecute them, and built the siege equipment together.

古文：魏城临河爲固，恃险自守。
现代文：魏朝的城镇临着河，十分牢固，他们恃险自守。
English: The towns of the Wei Dynasty facing the river were very strong, and they defended themselves against danger.

古文：季明、安都、方平、显祖、赵难诸军频三攻未拔，安都、方平各列阵于城东南以待之。
现代文：庞季明、薛安都、鲁方平、尹显祖、赵难诸军频频进攻而没有攻下，薛安都、鲁方平各自在城东南列阵，以等待他们。
English: The armies of Pang Qiming, Xue Andu, Lu Fangping, Yin Xianzu and Zhao Nan attacked frequently but failed to capture the city. Xue Andu and Lu Fangping formed lines in the southeast of the city to wait for them.

古文：魏兵大合，轻骑挑战，安都瞋目横矛，单骑突阵，四向奋击，左右皆辟易，杀伤不可胜数，于是衆军并鼓噪俱前。
现代文：魏兵大量出阵，先用轻骑挑战，薛安都怒目横矛，单骑冲上阵地，向四外奋勇突击，左右的人都纷纷后退，杀伤的人不可胜数，于是众军一齐呐喊前进。
English: A large number of Wei soldiers marched out, first using light cavalry to challenge, and Xue An was furious. He rushed to the position on a single horse and bravely attacked the four sides. People on both sides retreated one after another, and the number of people killed was countless. Therefore, all the troops shouted and advanced together.

古文：魏多纵突骑，衆军患之。
现代文：魏朝放出了很多突骑兵，众军都很忧虑。
English: The Wei Dynasty unleashed a lot of shock troops, and the troops were very worried.

古文：安都怒甚，乃脱兜鍪，解所带铠，唯着绛衲两当衫，马亦去具装，驰入贼阵。
现代文：薛安都十分恼怒，于是便脱去头盔，解下所带的铠甲，只穿一件绛色的两当衫，马也去掉了鞍具，驰入了贼阵。
English: Xue An was very angry, so he took off his helmet, took off the armor he was wearing, and only wore a dark-colored shirt. The horse also removed the saddle and galloped into the thieves.

古文：猛气咆勃，所向无前，当其锋者无不应刃而倒。
现代文：猛烈咆哮，所向无前，挡着刀锋的无不应刃而倒。
English: Violent roar, all the way forward, blocking the blade of the undeserved blade and fell.

古文：如是者数四。
现代文：就这样连续进行了好几次。
English: In this way, the Sui army was driven back four times.

古文：每入，衆无不披靡。
现代文：每次进入，众军无不披靡。
English: Every time they enter, the troops are all invincible.

古文：魏军之将至也，方平遣驿骑告元景。
现代文：在魏军即将到来的时候，鲁方平派遣驿马报告了柳元景。
English: When the Wei army was about to arrive, Lu Fangping sent his horse to report to Liu Yuanjing.

古文：时诸军粮尽，各馀数日食。
现代文：当时各军粮食已经用尽，各自只剩下了几天的粮食。
English: At that time, each army had run out of grain, and each had only a few days of grain left.

古文：元景方督义租并上驴马以爲粮运之计，遣军副柳元怙简步骑二千以赴陕急，卷甲兼行，一宿而至。
现代文：柳元景正在督促义租并且收缴驴马以准备运粮，他派军副柳元怙挑选了步骑兵二千人赶去应付陕州的紧急情况。
English: Liu Yuanjing was supervising the charitable rent and collecting donkeys and horses to prepare for grain transportation. He sent an army deputy, Liu Yuanjun, to select two thousand infantry cavalry to rush to deal with the emergency in Shaanxi.

古文：诘朝，魏军又出，列阵于城外。
现代文：他们卷起盔甲兼程前进，一夜功夫就赶到了。第二天早晨，魏军又出来，在城外列阵。
English: They rolled up their armour and advanced part of the way, arriving after a night of hard work. The next morning, the Wei army came out again and lined up outside the city.

古文：方平诸军并成列，安都并领马军，方平悉勒步卒左右掎角之，余诸义军方于城西南列阵。
现代文：鲁方平的各军都排成一列，薛安都率领着骑兵，鲁方平率领着步卒，在左右形成犄角，其余的各义军正在城西南列阵。
English: Lu Fangping's armies were all lined up in a row, Xue An led the cavalry, Lu Fangping led the infantry, forming a square on the left and right, and the rest of the rebels were lined up in the southwest of the city.

古文：方平谓安都曰： 今勍敌在前，坚城在后，是吾取死之日。
现代文：鲁方平对薛安都说： 现在强敌在前，坚城在后，是我们拼死的日子。
English: Lu Fangping said to Xue Andu: Now the strong enemy is in front, the strong city is behind, it is the day of our desperate struggle.

古文：卿若不进，我当斩卿，我若不进，卿当斩我也。 
现代文：您如果不进，我就要斩您，我如果不攻，您就要斩我！ 
English: If you don't advance, I will behead you; if I don't attack, you will behead me!

古文：安都曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：薛安都说： 您说的对。 
English: Xue Andu said: You are right.

古文：遂合战。
现代文：于是交战。
English: So they went to war.

古文：安都不堪其愤，横矛直前，杀伤者甚多。
现代文：薛安都无比愤怒，横矛直前，杀伤的人很多。
English: Xue Andu was extremely angry, and immediately attacked, killing many people.

古文：流血凝肘。
现代文：流血都凝聚在肘后。
English: The blood pooled behind his elbow.

古文：矛折，易之复入，军副谭金率骑从而奔之。
现代文：矛折断了，换了一根又重新杀入，军副谭金率领着骑兵随后奔杀。
English: The spear was broken, replaced with a new one and re-entered. Deputy Tan Jin led the cavalry and then rushed to kill.

古文：自诘旦战至日晏，魏军大溃，面缚军门者二千馀人。
现代文：从清晨一直战到黄昏，魏军大败，反绑双手而押送到军门前面的有两千多人。
English: From the early morning until dusk, the Wei army was defeated, and more than two thousand people were escorted to the front of the military gate with their hands tied.

古文：诸将欲尽杀之，元景以爲不可，乃悉释而遣之。
现代文：诸将想把他们全部杀掉，柳元景认为不可，于是便全都释放让他们返回。
English: The generals wanted to kill them all, but Liu Yuanqing thought it was impossible, so he released them all and let them return.

古文：皆称万岁而去。
现代文：都高呼万岁而去。
English: They all shouted hooray and left.

古文：时北略诸军王玄谟等败退，魏军深入。
现代文：当时北侵的各军王玄谟等人败退，魏军深入。
English: At that time, the northern invading armies of Wang Xuanmu and others were defeated and retreated, and the Wei army advanced.

古文：文帝以元景不宜独进，且令班师。
现代文：文帝认为柳元景不应该单独进军，暂且让他回军。
English: Emperor Wen thought that Liu Yuanjing should not march into the army alone, and temporarily let him return to the army.

古文：诸军乃自湖关度白杨岭出于长洲，安都断后，宗越副之。
现代文：诸军便从湖关度过白杨岭出往长洲，薛安都断后，宗越做他的副手。
English: The troops then went from Hukuan through Poplar Ridge to Cheung Chau. After Xue An died, Zong Yue became his deputy.

古文：法起自潼关向商城，与元景会，季明亦从胡谷南归，并有功而入。
现代文：庞法起从潼关向商城，与柳元景会师，庞季明也从胡谷南归，都是有功入京。
English: Pang Fa started from Shouguan to Shangcheng, meeting with Liu Yuanjing, and Pang Jiming also returned from Hutu South, both of which were successful in entering Beijing.

古文：诞登城望之，以鞍下马迎元景。
现代文：刘诞登城远望，以鞍下的马送给了柳元景。
English: Liu Xing went to the city for a long look and gave Liu Yuanjing a horse under the saddle.

古文：时鲁爽向虎牢，复使元景率安都等北出，爽退乃还。
现代文：当时鲁爽正在开向虎牢，又让柳元景率薛安都等人北出，鲁爽才回来。
English: At that time, Lu Shuang was driving to the tiger prison, and he let Liu Yuan, Jing Li, Xue Andu and others go north, and Lu Shuang came back.

古文：再出北侵，威信着于境外。
现代文：柳元景再次出兵北侵，在境外树立了很高的威信。
English: Liu Yuanjing once again sent troops to invade the north, establishing a high prestige abroad.

古文：孝武入讨元凶，以爲谘议参军，配万人爲前锋，宗悫、薛安都等十三军皆隶焉。
现代文：孝武帝入京讨伐元凶刘劭，以柳元景为咨议参军，配了一万人作为前锋，宗悫、薛安都等十三军都隶属在他的统率之下。
English: Emperor Xiaowu went to Beijing to fight against the main culprit Liu Bei, with Liu Yuanjing as the leader and 10,000 men as the vanguard. The Thirteen Armies, including the Zongfu and Xue'an armies, were under his command.

古文：时义军船乘小陋，虑水战不敌。
现代文：当时义军的船只小而简陋，担心水战打不过贼军。
English: At that time, the rebel ships were small and rudimentary, and they were worried that they would not be able to beat the pirates in a naval battle.

古文：至芜湖，元景大喜，倍道兼行至新亭，依山建垒栅，东西据险。
现代文：到了芜湖，柳元景大喜，倍道兼程到了新亭，依山建起营垒栅栏，东西都占据着险要地势。
English: When he arrived at Wuhu, Liu Yuanjing was overjoyed. When he arrived at Xinting, he built a camp fence along the mountain. Everything occupied a precarious situation.

古文：令军中曰： 鼓繁气易衰，叫数力易竭，但各衔枚疾战，一听吾营鼓音。 
现代文：他给军中下令说： 鼓声太频繁容易气衰，叫喊太多力气易尽，只需要各自衔枚猛战，完全听我营中的鼓声。 
English: He gave orders to the troops, saying: "Drums are too frequent, and it is easy to lose heart. Too much shouting exhausts one's strength. We only need to fight fiercely in our own ranks, and fully listen to the drums in our camp.

古文：元景察贼衰竭，乃命开垒鼓噪以奔之，贼衆大溃。
现代文：柳元景观察贼军衰竭，才下令打开营垒呐喊着冲向敌人，贼军大败。
English: Liu Yuanjing observed the exhaustion of the rebel army, and then ordered the camp to be opened, shouting at the enemy. The rebel army was soundly defeated.

古文：劭更率馀衆自来攻垒，复大破之，劭仅以身免。
现代文：刘劭又亲自率领其余的兵众前来进攻军垒，又把他们杀得大败，元凶劭仅只自己一人逃免。
English: Liu Ye also personally led the rest of the soldiers to attack the fortress, and killed them in a crushing defeat. He was the only one to escape.

古文：上至新亭即位，以元景爲侍中，领左卫将军，寻转甯蛮校尉、雍州刺史，监雍梁南北秦四州荆州之竟陵随二郡诸军事。
现代文：皇上到新亭即位，以柳元景为侍中，兼左卫将军，不久转为宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，监雍梁南北秦四州、荆州的竟陵随二郡诸军事。
English: The emperor ascended to the throne in Xinting, with Liu Yuanqing as a chamberlain and general of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard. He was soon transferred to the military as a lieutenant of Ningmanzhong, the governor of Yongzhou, the governor of the four provinces of North and South Qin, and the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：始上在巴口，问元景事平何所欲。
现代文：起初皇上在巴口，问柳元景事平以后有什么要求。
English: At first, the Emperor was in Bakuch and asked Liu Yuanjing what he wanted after the war was over.

古文：对曰： 愿还乡里。 
现代文：回答说： 希望回到家乡。 
English: He replied: I hope to return to my hometown.

古文：故有此授。
现代文：所以才有这一任命。
English: That is why this appointment has been made.

古文：初，臧质起义，以南谯王义宣闇弱易制，欲相推奉，潜报元景，使率所领西还。
现代文：起初，臧质起义，以为南谯王刘义宣软弱容易控制，打算推举他，暗中报告了柳元景，让他率领手下的军队西还。
English: At the beginning of the Glutinous Uprising, thinking that Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxi, was weak and easy to control, he planned to promote him, secretly reported to Liu Yuanjing, and let him lead his army to the west.

古文：元景即以质书呈孝武。
现代文：柳元景就把臧质的信交给了孝武帝。
English: Liu Yuanjing then handed over the sealed letter to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：语其信曰： 臧冠军当是未知殿下义举耳，方应伐逆，不容西还。 
现代文：告诉他的送信人说： 臧冠军一定是不知道殿下现在的义举，正应该讨伐叛逆，不容许西还。 
English: The messenger who told him said: "The champion must not know that His Royal Highness is doing a good deed now. He should fight against the rebels and not allow them to return to the West."

古文：质以此恨之。
现代文：臧质因此十分恨他。
English: That's why gluten hates him so much.

古文：及元景爲雍州，质虑其爲荆、江后患，称爪牙不宜远出。
现代文：到了柳元景做了雍州刺史，臧质担心他会成为荆州、江州的后患，称说皇上的爪牙不适合远出。
English: When Liu Yuanjing arrived, he made a stab at the history of Yongzhou. Gongye was worried that he would become the scourge of Jingzhou and Jiangzhou, saying that the emperor's minions were not suitable for going far away.

古文：上重违其言，更以元景爲领军将军，加散骑常侍，封曲江县公。
现代文：皇上违背了他的话，更以柳元景为领军将军，加散骑常侍，封为曲江县公。
English: The emperor reneged on his word, and appointed Liu Yuanqing as the leading general, and appointed him to be the magistrate of Qujiang County.

古文：孝建元年正月，鲁爽反，遣左卫将军王玄谟讨之。
现代文：孝建元年正月，鲁爽反叛，派遣左卫将军王玄谟去讨伐他。
English: In the first month of the first year of Xiao Jian, Lu Shuang rebelled and sent the left guard general Wang Xuanmu to fight him.

古文：加元景抚军将军，假节置佐，系玄谟。
现代文：加任柳元景为抚军将军，假节杖，设佐官，继王玄谟之后。
English: After Wang Xuanmu, Liu Yuanjing was appointed as the general of the Fuzhong army, the false festival staff, and the adjutant.

古文：后以爲领南蛮校尉、雍州刺史，加都督。
现代文：后来让他兼任南蛮校尉、雍州刺史，加任都督。
English: Later, he also made him the captain of Nanban, the governor of Yongzhou, and the governor of Chongqing.

古文：臧质、义宣并反，王玄谟南据梁山，垣护之、薛安都度据历阳，元景出屯采石。
现代文：臧质、刘义宣一齐反叛，王玄谟在南面占据梁山，垣护之、薛安都占据历阳，柳元景出兵屯驻采石。
English: Lu Xun and Liu Yixuan rebelled together, Wang Xuanmu occupied Liangshan in the south, Qi Guozhi and Xue An occupied Liyang, and Liu Yuanjing stationed troops in the quarry.

古文：玄谟求益兵，上使元景进屯姑孰。
现代文：王玄谟请求增兵，皇上让柳元景进驻姑孰。
English: Wang Xuanmu requested an increase in troops, and the emperor allowed Liu Yuanjing to enter Gushan.

古文：元景悉遣精兵助王玄谟，以羸弱居守。
现代文：柳元景把精兵全部派出去帮助王玄谟，而以病弱兵士守营。
English: Liu Yuanjing sent all of his elite soldiers to help Wang Xuanmu, while he guarded the camp with sick and weak soldiers.

古文：所遣军多张旗帜，梁山望之如数万人，皆谓都下兵悉至，由是克捷。
现代文：所派出的兵士打出了很多旗子，从梁山望去好像是数万人，都说是京城的兵全部开来了，于是战胜。
English: The soldiers sent out flew many flags. Looking from Liangshan, there seemed to be tens of thousands of people. They all said that all the soldiers from Beijing had come, so they won.

古文：与沈庆之俱以本号加开府仪同三司，改封晋安郡公。
现代文：柳元景与沈庆之都以本号加封开府仪同三司，改封柳元景为晋安郡公。
English: Both Liu Yuanjing and Shen Qingzhi were awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Liu Yuanjing was awarded the title of Jin'an County Governor.

古文：固让开府。
现代文：他坚持推辞开府。
English: He persisted in refusing to open the government.

古文：复爲领军、太子詹事，加侍中。
现代文：又担任领军、太子詹事，加任侍中。
English: He also served as the leader of the army, prince Zhanji, and was also appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：大明三年，爲尚书令，太子詹事、侍中、中正如故。
现代文：大明三年，他担任尚书令，太子詹事、侍中、中正职务依旧。
English: In the third year of Daming, he served as Shang Shuling, while Prince Zhan Zhi, Zhan Zhong, and Zhan Zheng still held their positions.

古文：以封在岭南，改封巴东郡公。
现代文：因为封地在岭南，改封为巴东郡公。
English: Because the fief was in Lingnan, it was changed to Patong County.

古文：又命左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，侍中、令、中正如故。
现代文：又命令他为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，侍中、尚书令、中正依旧不变。
English: He also ordered him to serve as Sakoroku-dokufu, Kaifu-gi, and Sanji, and the positions of Samurai-chujo, Shosho-rei, and Chujo remained unchanged.

古文：又让开府。
现代文：他又辞让开府。
English: He also resigned from the post of prime minister.

古文：乃与沈庆之俱依晋密陵侯郑袤不受司空故事。
现代文：于是与沈庆之都依照晋朝的密陵侯郑袤不接受司空的旧例。
English: As a result, the capital of Shenqing followed the old example of the Jin dynasty's Miryang Hou Zheng Qi not accepting Sikuo.

古文：六年，进司空，侍中、令、中正如故。
现代文：大明六年，晋升为司空，侍中、令、中正职务依旧。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to the rank of Jikku, but retained his positions as Samurai, Lieutenant, and Vice Admiral.

古文：又固让。
现代文：又坚持辞让。
English: He also insisted on resigning.

古文：乃授侍中、骠骑大将军、南兖州刺史，留卫都下。
现代文：于是授给他侍中、骠骑大将军、南兖州刺史，留在京城负责守卫。
English: As a result, he was given the title of chamberlain, grand general of cavalry, and the title of the governor of Southern Gansu Province, and remained in the capital to be in charge of the guards.

古文：孝武晏驾，与太宰江夏王义恭、尚书仆射顔师伯并受遗诏辅幼主，迁尚书令，领丹阳尹，侍中、将军如故。
现代文：孝武帝逝世，他与太宰江夏王刘义恭、尚书仆射颜师伯一齐接受遗诏辅助幼主，调为尚书令，兼任丹阳尹，侍中、将军依旧不变。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, he, together with Liu Yigong, the Dazai of the Xia King of the Jiangxi Province, and Shayan Shibao, the imperial secretary, received the imperial edict to assist the young lord, and was transferred to the imperial secretary, concurrently serving as Danyang Yin, while the position of chamberlain and general remained unchanged.

古文：加开府仪同三司，给班剑二十人。
现代文：加封开府仪同三司，配给仪仗二十人。
English: In addition, the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions were added, and twenty people were assigned to the ceremony.

古文：固辞班剑。
现代文：他坚持推辞仪仗。
English: He insisted on withdrawing from the war.

古文：元景少时贫苦，尝下都至大雷，日暮寒甚，颇有羇旅之叹。
现代文：柳元景少年时期家中贫苦，曾经出京到了大雷，天黑了非常寒冷，很为羁旅而感慨。
English: When he was a boy, Liu Yuanjing was poor at home. Once he went to Beijing and came to Dairi. It was very cold when it got dark, and he was very moved by the journey.

古文：岸侧有一老父自称善相，谓元景曰： 君方大富贵，位至三公。 
现代文：岸边有一个老父自称善于相面，对柳元景说： 您将大大富贵，位至三公。 
English: On the shore, there was an old man who claimed to be good at making facial expressions. He said to Liu Yuanjing, "You will be very rich and will be as high as the three kings."

古文：元景以爲戏之，曰： 人生免饥寒幸甚，岂望富贵。 
现代文：柳元景以为是开玩笑，说： 人生能避免饥寒就是很幸运的了，哪里敢盼望富贵！ 
English: Liu Yuanjing thought it was a joke and said, "If you can avoid hunger and cold in life, you are very lucky. How dare you hope to be rich!"

古文：老父曰： 后当相忆。 
现代文：老父说： 以后您会想起我来的。 
English: The old man said, "In the future, you will remember why I came.

古文：及贵求之，不知所在。
现代文：等富贵后再去找他，却不知他在哪里了。
English: You wait until you're rich and then you go looking for him and you don't know where he is.

古文：元景起自将率，及当朝，理务虽非所长，而有弘雅之美。
现代文：柳元景由将帅起家，等他执掌了朝政，管理政务虽然不是他的所长，却有弘雅的美名。
English: Liu Yuanqing started his career as a general, and when he took charge of the imperial government, he managed the government affairs, although he was not the director, but he had a reputation for elegance.

古文：时在朝勋要多事産业，惟元景独无所营。
现代文：当时在朝的要人大多经营产业，只有柳元景独自无所经营。
English: At that time, most of the dignitaries in the North were engaged in business. Only Liu Yuanjing did not run anything independently.

古文：南岸有数十亩菜园，守园人卖菜得钱三万，送还宅。
现代文：江南岸有几十亩菜园，守园人卖菜得了三万钱，送还给家里。
English: There are dozens of acres of vegetable gardens on the south bank of the Yangtze River. The gardeners sold vegetables and got 30,000 yuan, which they gave back to their families.

古文：元景怒曰： 我立此园种菜，以供家中啖耳，乃复卖以取钱，夺百姓之利邪。 
现代文：柳元景生气地说： 我开这个园子种菜，目的是供家中吃的，却又卖了取钱，是要夺百姓们的利吗？ 
English: Liu Yuanjing said angrily, "I started this garden to grow vegetables to feed my family, but I sold it to get money. Is it to take advantage of the people?"

古文：以钱乞守园人。
现代文：结果把钱送给了守园人。
English: As a result, the money was given to the caretaker.

古文：孝武严暴无常，元景虽荷宠遇，恒虑及祸。
现代文：孝武帝严厉暴虐无常，柳元景虽然受到了宠幸的待遇，却总是担心遭到祸患。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was stern, tyrannical and capricious. Although Liu Yuanjing was treated as a favorite, he was always worried about being harmed.

古文：太宰江夏王义恭及诸大臣莫不重足屏气，未尝敢私相往来。
现代文：太宰江夏王刘义恭以及各位大臣无不小心翼翼，不敢互相来往。
English: Dazai Jiangxia King Liu Yigong and the ministers were very careful not to come into contact with each other.

古文：孝武崩，义恭、元景等并相谓曰： 今日始免横死。 
现代文：孝武帝逝世，刘义恭、柳元景等互相说： 今天才算免除了横死。 
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, Liu Yigong, Liu Yuanjing and others said to each other, "Today, we have been spared a violent death."

古文：义恭与义阳等诸王，元景与顔师伯等常相驰逐声乐酣饮，以夜继昼。
现代文：刘义恭与刘义阳等诸王，柳元景与颜师伯等常常互相邀请奏乐酣饮，夜以继日。
English: Kings such as Liu Yigong and Liu Yiyang, Liu Yuanjing and Yan Shibao often invited each other to play music and drink, day and night.

古文：前废帝少有凶德，内不能平，杀戴法兴后，悖情转露，义恭、元景忧惧，乃与师伯等谋废帝立义恭，持疑未决。
现代文：废帝少年而有凶德，内心不能平衡，杀掉戴法兴以后，悖谬之情暴露，刘义恭、柳元景担忧恐惧，便与颜师伯等谋划废除皇帝，立刘义恭，犹疑未决。
English: After killing Dai Faxing, the paradox was exposed. Liu Yigong and Liu Yuanjing were worried and afraid, so they plotted with Yan Shibai and others to abolish the emperor and establish Liu Yigong. They were hesitant.

古文：发觉，帝亲率宿卫兵自出讨之，称诏召元景。
现代文：事情被发觉，废帝亲自率领宿卫兵出阵讨伐，他以诏令的名义召见柳元景。
English: When the affair was discovered, the deposed emperor personally led the inn guards in a crusade. He summoned Liu Yuanjing in the name of the imperial edict.

古文：左右奔告，兵刃非常。
现代文：左右的人跑来报信，说兵刃戒备情况反常。
English: People on both sides came running to report that the state of alert was abnormal.

古文：元景知祸至，整朝服乘车，应召出门。
现代文：柳元景知道灾祸到了，整顿朝服乘上车子，应召出门。
English: Liu Yuanjing knew that the disaster had arrived, so he put on his morning dress, got into his car, and went out when he was summoned.

古文：逢弟车骑司马叔仁戎服，左右壮士数十人，欲拒命。
现代文：遇上弟弟车骑司马柳叔仁穿着军服，左右壮士几十人，打算拒绝服从命令。
English: When he met his younger brother, the chariot driver, Sima Liu Shujin, who was wearing a military uniform, there were dozens of strong men on his right and left, planning to refuse to obey orders.

古文：元景苦禁之。
现代文：柳元景苦苦禁止。
English: Yanagi Motokage is banned from performing.

古文：及出巷，军士大至，下车受戮，容色恬然。
现代文：等出了街巷，军士大批开来，柳元景下车受死，表情十分安静。
English: After waiting in the streets and alleys, the sergeants came in large numbers, and Liu Yuanjing got out of the car and died, his expression was very quiet.

古文：长子庆宗有干力，而情性不伦，孝武使元景送还襄阳，于道赐死。
现代文：他的长子柳庆宗很有才干，而性情不同寻常，孝武帝让柳元景把他送还襄阳，在途中赐他自杀。
English: His eldest son Liu Qingzong was very talented, and his temperament was unusual. Emperor Xiaowu asked Liu Yuanjing to send him back to Xiangyang, and let him commit suicide on the way.

古文：次子嗣宗、绍宗、茂宗、孝宗、文宗、仲宗、成宗、秀宗至是并遇祸。
现代文：次子嗣宗、绍宗、茂宗、孝宗、文宗、仲宗、成宗、秀宗到现在都遇祸。
English: His second sons, Shigetsu, Shoshu, Moshu, Koshu, Wenzong, Chuzong, Chengzong, and Shuzong have all met with misfortune.

古文：元景六弟：僧景、僧珍、叔宗、叔政、叔珍、叔仁。
现代文：柳元景有六个弟弟：僧景、僧珍、叔宗、叔政、叔珍、叔仁。
English: Liu Yuanjing had six younger brothers: Sojing, Sozhen, Shuzong, Shuzheng, Shuzhen and Shuren.

古文：僧珍、叔仁及子侄在都下襄阳死者数十人。
现代文：僧珍、叔仁和子侄在京城和襄阳死掉的有几十人。
English: Dozens of monks, uncles and nephews died in Beijing and Xiangyang.

古文：惔着仁政传及诸诗赋，粗有辞义。子昭，位中书郎，袭爵曲江侯。
现代文：柳元景的少子柳承宗、柳嗣宗的儿子柳都在怀孕中，从而获得保全。明帝即位，赠柳元景为太尉，配给仪仗三十人，羽葆、乐队一部，谥号为忠烈公。
English: Liu Yuanjing's youngest son, Liu Chengzong, and his son, Liu Shizong, were both pregnant, so they were spared. When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Liu Yuanjing was given the title of Second Lieutenant, assigned to a ceremonial guard of thirty men, a feathered plume, and a part of the orchestra, and was given the posthumous title of "Chung Ye Kung."

古文：惔弟恽字文畅，少有志行。
现代文：柳恽字文畅，少年时就很有志向。
English: Yanukovych's writing is fluent, and he was very ambitious when he was a boy.

古文：好学，善尺牍。
现代文：好学习，善于写书信。
English: Good at studying, good at writing letters.

古文：与陈郡谢沦邻居，深见友爱。
现代文：与陈郡的谢是邻居，互相深深地友爱。
English: He and Chen County's Xie are neighbors and have a deep friendship with each other.

古文：沦曰： 宅南柳郎，可爲仪表。 
现代文：谢说： 宅南的柳郎，可以为楷模。 
English: Xie said: Yanagiro from Takenami can be a role model.

古文：初，宋时有嵇元荣、羊盖者，并善琴，云传戴安道法。
现代文：起初，宋朝的时候有嵇元荣、羊盖两个人，都善于弹琴，说是传承的戴安道技法。
English: At first, during the Song Dynasty, there were two people, Gong Yuan Rong and Yang Gai, who were both good at playing the piano, and it was said to be a traditional Dian Dao technique.

古文：恽从之学。
现代文：柳恽跟随他们学习。
English: Yanagisawa learned from them.

古文：恽特穷其妙。
现代文：柳恽特别能得尽他们的奥妙。
English: Willow warblers, in particular, are able to tap into their inner wisdom.

古文：齐竟陵王子良闻而引爲法曹行参军，唯与王暕、陆杲善。每叹曰： 暕虽名家，犹恐累我也。 
现代文：齐朝的竟陵王萧子良听说后，便聘用他做法曹行参军。他只与王、陆杲要好，常常慨叹说： 王虽是名家，还是怕会耽误我的。 
English: After hearing of Xiao Ziliang, the king of Qidong, he hired him to join Cao Xing's army. He only wanted to be with the king and Lu Yao, and often lamented: Although the king is a famous family, I am still afraid that he will delay me.

古文：雅被子良赏狎。
现代文：他很受萧子良的赏识和亲近。
English: He is very appreciated and close to Xiao Ziliang.

古文：子良尝置酒后园，有晋太傅谢安鸣琴在侧，援以授恽，恽弹爲雅弄。
现代文：萧子良曾经在后花园里设下酒宴，当时有晋朝太傅谢安的鸣琴放在旁边，便拿来交给柳恽，柳恽弹了一支雅曲。
English: Xiao Ziliang once held a wine banquet in the back garden. At that time, he had the Jing Dynasty's Taifu Xie'an's harpsichord placed next to him, and he brought it to Liu Xuan. Liu Xuan played a classical piece.

古文：子良曰： 卿巧越嵇心，妙臻羊体，良质美手，信在今夜。
现代文：萧子良说： 你巧过嵇心，妙达羊体，良好的姿质，优美的手，真确地就在今夜演奏。
English: Xiao Ziliang said: You have a skillful heart, a wonderful body, a good posture, and a beautiful hand, and you will really play tonight.

古文：岂止当今称奇，亦可追踪古烈。 
现代文：岂只是在当今堪称奇妙，也可以追踪古代英贤。 
English: Isn't it amazing that in this day and age, we can track down ancient sages.

古文：爲太子洗马，父忧去官，着述先颂，申其罔极之心，文甚哀丽。
现代文：后来做了太子洗马，父亲去世后，他离职守丧，著了《述先颂》，表达他的感戴心情，文字十分悲哀婉丽。
English: Later, he did the prince's horse-washing ceremony, and after his father's death, he left his post to attend the funeral and wrote "The Antecedents," expressing his feelings. The text is very sad and beautiful.

古文：后试守鄱阳相，听吏属得尽三年丧礼，署之文教，百姓称焉。
现代文：后来试守鄱阳相，听由属官守尽三年丧礼，安排文教职务，百姓非常称赞。
English: Later, he tried his hand at the post of minister of education and culture, and was commended by the people for having his subordinate officials perform the funeral rites for three years and arrange cultural and educational duties.

古文：还除骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：回京任命为骠骑从事中郎。
English: He returned to Kyoto and was assigned to be a middle-ranked horseman.

古文：梁武帝至建邺，恽候谒石头，以爲征东府司马。
现代文：梁武帝到了建邺，柳恽在石头城拜见问候，让他担任了征东府司马。
English: When Emperor Liangwu arrived in Jianye, Liu Bei greeted him in Stone Town and made him the leader of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：上笺请城平之日，先收图籍，及遵汉高宽大之义。
现代文：他上书请求在城市平定后，首先收管图书典籍，并且遵从汉高祖的宽大政策。
English: He submitted a petition requesting that, after the city was pacified, the administration of books and classics should be taken over first, and that the lenient policy of the founder of Henkel should be followed.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：梁武帝听从了他了建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：徙爲相国右司马。
现代文：改任他为相国右司马。
English: He was appointed to the post of the right-hand man of the shogunate.

古文：天监元年，除长兼侍中，与仆射沈约等共定新律。
现代文：天监元年，任命他为长兼侍中，与仆射沈约等人共同制定新的制度。
English: In the first year of the Tianjun era, he was appointed as the chief and attendant, and worked together with others such as the puppeteer Shen Yu to develop a new system.

古文：恽立性贞素，以贵公子早有令名，少工篇什，爲诗云： 亭臯木叶下，垄首秋云飞。 
现代文：柳恽性格坚贞朴实，因为是贵公子而早有美名，少年时候擅写诗文，曾经作诗说： 亭高木叶下，垅首秋云飞。 
English: Yanagisawa's character is staunchly chaste and unpretentious. Because he is a nobleman, he has long had a reputation. When he was a boy, he was not good at writing poetry. He once wrote a poem saying, "Under the leaves of the tall trees of the pavilion, the daggers of the autumn clouds fly."

古文：琅邪王融见而嗟赏，因书斋壁及所执白团扇。
现代文：琅笽人王融见到后嗟叹赞赏，于是把它写在书斋的墙上和白团扇上。
English: Wang Rong, the eunuch, sighed with appreciation after seeing it, so he wrote it on the wall of the study and on the white fan.

古文：武帝与宴，必诏恽赋诗。
现代文：武帝参加宴会，必定要诏令柳恽赋诗。
English: If Emperor Wu attended a banquet, he would definitely have to issue an edict to Liu Bei to compose a poem.

古文：尝和武帝登景阳楼篇云：太液沧波起，长杨高树秋，翠华承汉远，雕辇逐风游。 
现代文：他曾经与武帝的《登景阳楼篇》唱和道： 太液沧波起，长杨高树秋，翠华承汉远，雕辇逐风游。 
English: He once sang in harmony with Emperor Wu's "Climbing to the Top of the Mountain" as follows: "The great liquid rises and falls, the tall poplars and tall trees grow and fall, the bright flowers succeed the distant Han Dynasty, and the carved dragonflies travel with the wind."

古文：深见赏美。
现代文：深受赞美。
English: It has been widely praised.

古文：当时咸共称传。
现代文：当时人们都共同传诵。
English: At that time, they all praised and propagated it.

古文：历平越中郎将、广州刺史，秘书监，右卫将军。
现代文：他历任平越中郎将、广州刺史、秘书监、右卫将军。
English: He successively served as the General of Pingyue, the General of Guangzhou, the Superintendent of Secretaries, and the General of the Right Division.

古文：再爲吴兴太守，爲政清静，人吏怀之。
现代文：两次为吴兴太守，为政清静，民众官吏都很怀念他。
English: Wu Xing was twice the governor of Taizhou, and was a political leader. The people and officials miss him very much.

古文：于郡感疾，自陈解任。
现代文：他在郡中感染了疾病，自己请求解除职务。
English: He contracted the disease in the county and asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：父老千馀人拜表陈请，事未施行，卒。
现代文：父老一千多人上表请求让他留任，事情没有施行，就去世了。
English: More than a thousand people petitioned to keep him in office, but he died before the request was carried out.

古文：初，恽父世隆弹琴，爲士流第一，恽每奏其父曲，常感思。
现代文：起初，柳恽的父亲柳世隆弹琴，在士流中名列第一，柳恽每每弹奏他父亲的曲子，常常感念追思。
English: At first, Liu Xuan's father, Liu Shilong, played the piano and ranked first in the scholar's stream. Liu Xuan played his father's music every time, and often thought about it.

古文：复变体备写古曲。
现代文：又变体改写了各种古曲。
English: He also rewrote various pieces of ancient music.

古文：尝赋诗未就，以笔捶琴，坐客过，以箸扣之，恽惊其哀韵，乃制爲雅音。
现代文：他曾经赋诗未成，用笔捶琴，因为有客人前来，便用筷子敲击，柳恽惊异于它的哀惋意韵，便谱写为雅曲。
English: He once tried to compose a poem, but before he could complete it, he strummed a harp with a pen, and because some guests were coming, he struck it with chopsticks. Liu Xuan was surprised by its mournful rhyme, so he composed it as a classical piece.

古文：后传击琴自于此。
现代文：后来传说击琴就是从这里开始的。
English: Later, it was said that this is where the music began.

古文：恽常以今声转弃古法，乃着清调论，具有条流。
现代文：柳恽常常用今声转变扬弃古法，便著了《清调论》，有详细的解说。
English: Yanagisawa often used the present tone to change and abandon the ancient law, and then wrote "Clear Tone Theory" with a detailed explanation.

古文：齐竟陵王尝宿晏，明旦将朝见，恽投壶枭不绝，停舆久之，进见遂晚。
现代文：齐朝的竟陵王曾经在头天夜里举行宴会，第二天早晨将要朝见皇帝，柳恽投壶连胜不断，车子停了好久，于是进见便晚了。
English: The Qianling King of the Qi Dynasty once held a banquet in the night of the first day, and the next morning he was going to see the emperor, and the willow warbler kept winning. The car stopped for a long time, so he was late to see the emperor.

古文：齐武帝迟之，王以实对。
现代文：齐武帝嫌他来得太迟了，竟陵王如实作了回答。
English: Emperor Qiwu thought that he had come too late, but the Mausoleum King answered truthfully.

古文：武帝复使爲之，赐绢二十匹。
现代文：武帝又让他继续进行，赐给他绢二十匹。
English: Emperor Wu allowed him to continue and gave him twenty yakitori.

古文：尝与琅邪王瞻博射，嫌其皮阔，乃摘梅帖乌珠之上，发必命中，观者惊骇。
现代文：柳恽曾经与琅笽人王瞻比赛射箭，嫌他的靶皮太宽，便摘梅贴在乌珠上面，每次发射必定命中，观看的人都很惊奇。
English: Liu Yao once had an archery competition with the eunuch Wang Zhan. He thought his target was too wide, so he picked a plum and stuck it on the top of the black pearl. Every time he fired, he was sure to hit it, and the people watching were very surprised.

古文：梁武帝好弈棋，使恽品定棋谱，登格者二百七十八人，第其优劣，爲棋品三卷。
现代文：梁武帝好下棋，让柳恽品定棋谱，登格的二百七十八人，按照优劣进行排列，写成《棋品》三卷。
English: Emperor Liangwu liked to play chess, so he asked Liu Yuxin to compile a chess score, and the 278 players who passed the test were arranged according to their strengths and weaknesses, resulting in the three volumes of "Chess Set."

古文：恽爲第二焉。
现代文：柳恽列居第二。
English: Yanagisawa ranked second.

古文：帝谓周舍曰： 吾闻君子不可求备，至如柳恽可谓具美。
现代文：武帝对周舍说： 我听说君子不可以苛求完备，至于像柳恽，可以说都具备了。
English: Emperor Wu said to Zhou She: I have heard that a gentleman should not demand perfection, but as for someone like Liu Ye, he can be said to have it all.

古文：分其才艺，足了十人。 
现代文：分开他的才艺，足以成全十个人。 
English: Separate his talent, enough to complete ten people.

古文：恽着卜杖龟经。
现代文：柳恽著有《卜杖龟经》。
English: Liu Xuan is the author of "The Book of the Wand and the Turtle."

古文：性好医术，尽其精妙。
现代文：他的性格喜爱医术，完全掌握了它的精妙。
English: His character is fond of medicine and has fully mastered its subtleties.

