古文：稍就正于衡，衡亦赏其辞，且戒之曰： 弓矢为物，以待盗也；使盗得之，亦将待人。
现代文：姚燧字端甫，父名姚格。其世系见《姚枢传》。姚燧三岁丧父，寄养于隐居苏门的伯父姚枢家。
English: Yao Zhezi Duanfu, father's name Yao Ge. His lineage can be found in the "History of Yao Zhezi." Yao Zhezi lost his father at the age of three and was fostered by his uncle Yao Zhezi, who lived in seclusion in Sumen.

古文：文章固发闻士子之利器，然先有能一世之名，将何以应人之见役者哉！
现代文：姚枢对燧教育甚急，使他几乎不堪忍受。杨奂写信劝姚枢说，燧是块好料，长大自会成材，用不着性急，并把女儿许配给姚燧。
English: Yao Zu was in such a hurry to educate Yao Yao that it was almost unbearable for him. Yang Lu wrote a letter to persuade Yao Zu that Yao Yao was a good material and would grow up to be a man. There was no need to be impatient, and he betrothed his daughter to Yao Zu.

古文：非其人而与之，与非其人而拒之，钧罪也，非周身斯世之道也。 
现代文：姚燧十三岁时在苏门见过许衡，十八岁在长安拜许衡为师，这时他还未开始写作，但看同辈人之文章不如古人，内心不以为然。二十四岁才读韩退之的著作，开始习写文章，人们看后认为有作者风度，许衡亦欣赏其文辞。
English: When Yao Wei was 13 years old, he met Xu Heng in Shumen, and when he was 18 years old, he studied under Xu Heng in Chang'an. At that time, he had not yet begun to write, but he didn't think it was right when he saw that the writings of his contemporaries were not as good as those of the ancients. When he was 24 years old, he read the writings of Han Beiji and began to learn how to write articles. After reading them, people thought that he had the demeanor of an author, and Xu Heng also appreciated his words.

古文：至元七年，衡以国子祭酒教贵胄，奏召旧弟子十二人，燧自太原驿致馆下。
现代文：至元七年，许衡任国子祭酒，教导贵族子弟，奏请召回他散于四方的旧时弟子十二人，姚燧为其中之一，由河内应召而来。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Xu Heng was appointed as the son of the country to offer wine and teach the children of the aristocracy. He was asked to call back twelve of his old disciples scattered in the four directions. Yao Yao was one of them, and he was called from Hanoi.

古文：燧年三十八，始为秦王府文学。
现代文：燧年三十八岁时为秦王府文学。
English: At the age of thirty-eight in the year of the rooster, he became the king of Qin literature.

古文：未几，授奉议大夫，兼提举陕西、四川、中兴等路学校。
现代文：不久，授为奉议大夫，兼提举陕西、四川、中兴等路学校。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the title of "Promising Doctor" and was also recommended to schools in Shaanxi, Sichuan, and Zhongxing.

古文：十二年，以秦王命，安辑庸蜀。
现代文：十二年，奉秦王之命安抚庸、蜀。
English: In the twelfth year, he was ordered by King Qin to pacify Yong and Shu.

古文：明年，汉嘉新附，入谕其民。
现代文：十三年，汉川、嘉定两地为新占领地区，燧奉命去晓谕百姓，使他们归顺。
English: In the thirteenth year, Hanchuan and Jiading were the two newly occupied areas, and he was ordered to preach to the people and make them submit.

古文：又奉命招王立于合州。
现代文：又奉命到合州去招王立。
English: He was also ordered to go to Hezhou to recruit Wang Li.

古文：又明年，抚循夔府。
现代文：十四年，奉命安抚夔府人民。
English: Fourteen years later, he was ordered to pacify the people of Shifu.

古文：凡三使蜀，皆称职。
现代文：连续三次出使四川，都尽其职责。
English: He has been sent to Sichuan three times in a row and has done his duty.

古文：十七年，除陕西汉中道提刑按察司副使。录囚延安，逮系诖误，皆纵释之，人服其明决。
现代文：十七年，任命为陕西汉中道提刑按察司副使，审查延安囚犯的罪状，凡错捕者一律无罪释放，人们佩服他英明决断。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Shaanxi Hanzhong Road Criminal Investigation Department to review the crimes of Yan'an prisoners. All those who were arrested by mistake were released without charge. People admired his wise decision.

古文：调山南湖北道。按部澧州，兴学赈民，孜孜如弗及。
现代文：调山南湖北道，巡视澧州，兴学校，赈灾民，孜孜不倦，唯恐做得不够。
English: He worked tirelessly in Shanshan, South Hubei Province, inspecting Luzhou, building schools, and helping disaster victims, fearing that he would not be able to do enough.

古文：二十三年，自湖北奉旨趋朝。
现代文：二十三年，自湖北奉旨还朝。
English: In 233, it was ordered to return to China from Hubei Province.

古文：明年，为翰林直学士。
现代文：二十四年，任命为翰林直学士。
English: Twenty-four years later, he was appointed as a direct graduate of Hanlin University.

古文：二十七年，授大司农丞。
现代文：二十七年，授大司农丞。
English: In 1927, he was awarded the title of Senior Vice-Minister of Agriculture.

古文：九年，拜中奉大夫、江西行省参知政事。
现代文：元贞元年，以翰林学士资格参加修纂《世祖实录》，与侍读高道凝为总裁。大德五年，授中宪大夫、江东廉访使，因病呈请辞职。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, he participated in the compilation of the "Ancestor Record" with the qualification of Hanlin Baccalaureate, and served as president with Gao Daojun. In the fifth year of Dade, he was awarded the title of Zhongxian Doctor and the Jiangdong Visiting Ambassador, and he submitted his resignation due to illness.

古文：至大元年，仁宗居藩邸，开宫师府，燧年已七十，遣正字吕洙，如汉征四皓故事，起燧为太子宾客。
现代文：至大元年，姚燧已年至古稀。时仁宗为太子，仿效汉高祖太子刘盈敦请 四皓 的故事，遣正字吕洙去聘请姚燧为太子宾客。
English: By the first year of the Taisho era, Yao Jie had become a rarity. When Emperor Renzong was crown prince, he emulated the story of Prince Liu Yingdong, the founder of the Han Dynasty, who invited the Four Emperors, and sent Zhengzhi Lv Jie to invite Yao Jie as the prince's guest.

古文：未几，除承旨学士，寻拜太子少傅。
现代文：不久，连续拜为承旨学士、太子少傅。
English: Soon after, he was consecutively awarded the title of Zhengzhi Baccalaureate and the title of Prince Junior Master.

古文：武宗面谕燧，燧拜辞，谢曰： 昔臣先伯父枢尝除是官，尚不敢拜，臣何敢受！ 
现代文：燧辞谢，不肯受任。
English: He declined to accept the post.

古文：明年，授荣禄大夫、翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史。
现代文：第二年授荣禄大夫、翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史。
English: In the second year, he was awarded the title of doctor of honor, the title of bachelor of Hanlin, and the title of scholar of national history.

古文：四年，得告南归，中书以承旨召；明年，复召。燧以病，俱不赴。
现代文：至大四年，告老南归，中书省又召他为承旨，未赴任。五年，又召，仍以病辞谢。
English: When he was four years old, he announced that he was returning to the south, and the Ministry of Education and Culture called him to serve as a successor, but he did not take up the post. Five years later, he was called again, but he still resigned due to illness.

古文：卒于家，年七十六。
现代文：后于家中病逝，享年七十六岁。
English: He later died of illness at home at the age of 76.

古文：谥曰文。
现代文：谥 文 。
English: His nickname is Wen.

古文：燧先在苏门山时，读《通鉴纲目》，尝病国统散于逐年，不能一览而得其离合之概，至告病江东，著《国统离合表》若干卷，年经而国纬之，如《史记》诸《表》，将附朱熹《凡例》之后，复取徽、建二本校仇，得三误焉，序于《表》首。
现代文：姚燧往年在苏门山读《通鉴纲目》时，深感其关于历代皇帝传承的世系分见于各年，因著《国统离合表》若干卷，系仿《史记》诸《表》，以年为经、国为纬编辑而成，附于朱熹《通鉴纲目？凡例》之后；又取徽、建二版本进行校勘，查出三处错误。详见所著《表》前的《序篇》。
English: In previous years, when Yao Wei read the "General Survey Outline" in Sumenshan, he deeply felt that the lineage of the succession of emperors in the past was divided into different years. Because of the "National Unification Clutch Table," several volumes were modeled on the "History" from the "Table," edited by year and country, and attached to Zhu Wei's "General Survey Outline? General Example"; he also took the emblem and built the second version for proofreading, and found three errors. For details, see the "Preface" before the "Table."

古文：彼复有班孟坚者出，表古今人物，九品中必以一等置欧阳子，则为去圣贤也有级而不远，其文虽无谢、尹之知，不害于行后。岂有一言几乎古，而不闻之将来乎！ 
现代文：姚燧的学问造诣，得助于许衡的教诲。他从追求天理，认识世界，到最后身体力行，故成为一代名儒。其文内容丰富，文笔流畅，恰到好处，气势豪迈而不放纵，刚健而不严厉，声调宏大响亮，有西汉文风，宋末之弊习为之一变。
English: Yao Yao's scholarly accomplishment was aided by the teachings of Xu Heng. He became a famous Confucianist from the pursuit of heavenly truth, understanding the world, to the last physical practice. His text is rich in content, the writing is smooth, just right, the momentum is bold but not indulgent, robust but not severe, the tone is grand and loud, there is a Western Han style, and the bad habits at the end of the Song Dynasty have changed.

古文：当时孝子顺孙，欲发挥其先德，必得燧文始可传信；其不得者，每为愧耻。
现代文：延以前的那些文章大匠都还没有达到这种境界。姚燧认为，文章的好坏，取决于所载道之轻重，而道之轻重又有赖于文章之好坏，相辅相成。当时孝子顺孙，欲弘扬祖宗德行，必须请姚燧为之撰文才可传之后世，得不到姚燧所撰文章，深为愧疚。
English: None of the great masters of writing before Yan Yan had reached this level. Yao Zang believed that the quality of an article depended on the importance of the path it contained, and the importance of the path depended on the quality of the article, and the two complemented each other. At that time, if a filial son or grandson wanted to promote the moral conduct of the founder, he had to ask Yao Zang to write an article for him before he could pass it on to the next generation. If he couldn't get an article written by Yao Zang, he was deeply ashamed.

古文：故三十年间，国朝名臣世勋、显行盛德，皆燧所书。
现代文：故三十年间，国朝名臣世勋及其显行盛德，都是由姚燧撰文记述的。
English: For the past thirty years, Yao Yao has been writing about the eminent statesmen and eminent scholars of the Qing Dynasty and their virtuous deeds.

古文：每来谒文，必其行业可嘉，然后许可，辞无溢美。
现代文：凡来请他撰文的人，其德行必须是有可称赞者，才同意撰写，无溢美之辞。
English: Anyone who came to ask him to write an article would have to have commendable virtues before agreeing to write, and there were no words of praise.

古文：又稍广置燕乐，燧则为之喜而援笔大书，否则弗易得也。
现代文：还须设宴奏乐，使燧高兴，这才命笔大书，否则也得不到他撰写的文章。
English: He also had to set up a banquet and music to make Zou happy, which required a lot of effort, otherwise he would not have been able to get the article he wrote.

古文：时高丽沈阳王父子，连姻帝室，倾赀结朝臣。
现代文：高丽沈阳王父子与元朝皇室联姻，以大量金钱交结朝臣。
English: The father and son of Goryeo's Shenyang Wang married into the imperial family of the Yuan Dynasty, and used a large amount of money to make friends with courtiers.

古文：一日，欲求燧诗文，燧靳不与，至奉旨，乃与之。
现代文：有一天，想请姚燧为他们做诗撰文，燧不肯，皇帝下令才答应。
English: One day, they wanted to ask Yao Yao to write a poem for them. Yao refused, but the emperor ordered him to agree.

古文：王赠谢币帛、金玉、名画五十篚，盛陈致燧。
现代文：沈阳王赠姚燧币帛、金玉、名画五十筐，表示谢意。
English: The king of Shenyang presented Yao with 50 baskets of money, gold, and famous paintings to express his gratitude.

古文：燧即分散诸属官及史胥侍从，止留金银，付翰林院为公用器皿，燧一无所取。
现代文：燧收下分给各级官吏侍从，只留金银给翰林院做公用器皿，自己一无所取。
English: He left only the gold and silver to be used as public utensils at the Hanlin Academy, and took nothing for himself.

古文：人问之，燧曰： 彼藩邦小国，唯以货利为重，吾能轻之，使知大朝不以是为意 。
现代文：有人问他为何如此，他说： 高丽是藩邦小国，以货利为重，我轻视这些东西，使他知道我大元朝本不在乎这些。 
English: When someone asked him why this was so, he said, "Goryeo is a small country with a feudal domain, and it places great emphasis on goods and profits. I despise these things, and I want him to know that I don't care about these things.

古文：其器识豪迈过人类如此。
现代文：其器量与见识豪迈超人。
English: His ability and insight are superhuman.

古文：然颇恃才，轻视赵孟頫、元明善辈，故君子以是少之。
现代文：然而姚燧颇自恃其才华，轻视赵孟兆页、元明善等人，所以一些有德行的人因此而菲薄他。
English: However, Yao Wei prided himself on his talent and despised Zhao Mengzhao, Yuan Mingshan and others, so some virtuous people despised him because of this.

古文：平生所著，有《牧庵文集》五十卷行于世。
现代文：平生所著有《牧庵文集》五十卷流传于世。
English: Fifty volumes of "Mukian Collection" written by Heisei-jo have been handed down to the world.

古文：耶律有尚，字伯强，辽东丹王十世孙。祖父在金世尝官于东平，因家焉。
现代文：耶律有尚字伯强，契丹族人，辽东丹王十世孙，祖父在金朝东平为官，因安家于东平。
English: Ye Lu has Shang Zi Bo Qiang, a Khitan, the 10th grandchild of Liaodong Dan Wang, whose grandfather was an official in Dongping during the Kim dynasty and settled in Dongping.

古文：有尚资识绝人，笃志于学，受业许衡之门，号称高第弟子。
现代文：有尚天资过人，勤奋好学，拜许衡为师，并成为高足弟子。
English: He was gifted, diligent and eager to learn. He took Bai Xu Heng as his teacher and became a disciple of Gaozu.

古文：其学邃于性理，而尤以诚为本，仪容辞令，动中规矩，识与不识，莫不服其为有道之君子。
现代文：他对性理之学颇有研究，尤其把 诚 作为治学为人的根本。其言行莫不遵循规矩，无论是认识他或不认识他的人，都从内心称赞他是有道君子。
English: He has done a lot of research on the study of human nature, and especially regards sincerity as the foundation of the study of human nature. His words and deeds do not follow the rules, and people who know him or do not know him praise him from the bottom of their hearts as a moral gentleman.

古文：至元八年，衡罢中书左丞，除集贤大学士，兼国子祭酒，以教国人之子弟，乃奏以门人十二人为斋长以伴读，有尚其一也。
现代文：至元八年，许衡辞中书左丞，被任命为集贤大学士兼国子祭酒，教育蒙古贵族子弟。他奏请聘其弟子十二人为斋长以辅导子弟们的学习，有尚为其中之一。
English: In the 8th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Xu Hengji was appointed as a scholar of Juxian University and the son of the country to teach the children of Mongolian aristocrats. He invited twelve of his disciples to be the head of the school to tutor the children's learning, and Shang was one of them.

古文：十年，衡告免还乡里，朝廷乃以有尚等为助教，嗣领其学事。
现代文：十年，衡辞职回乡，朝廷任有尚等为助教，继续领导国子监的教学。
English: Ten years later, Heng resigned and returned to his hometown. The imperial court appointed Shang Yu as an assistant professor and continued to lead the teaching of the State Children's Supervisor.

古文：居久之，拜监察御史，不赴。
现代文：在国子监工作了很长时间后，拜有尚为监察御史，有尚未去就任。
English: After working for a long time in the State Children's Supervisor, there is still a history of supervision, and some have not yet taken office.

古文：除秘书监丞，出知蓟州，为政以宽简得民情。
现代文：又任命他为秘书监丞，后又出任蓟州知州。他在蓟州简政宽刑，深得民心。
English: He also appointed him as secretary and supervisor, and later served as Zhangzhou chizhou. He won the hearts of the people with his lenient sentence in Zhangzhou Jianzheng.

古文：裕宗在东宫，召为詹事院长史。
现代文：裕宗为太子，召有尚为詹事院长史。
English: Yu Zong was the crown prince, and Shang Zhanji was the dean of the school.

古文：自有尚既去，而国学事颇废，廷议以谓非有尚无足以继衡者，除国子司业。
现代文：国子学自有尚走后，教学停滞，朝廷认为非有尚不能继承许衡的事业，于是任命有尚为国子司业。
English: The imperial court thought that he could not succeed the cause of Xu Heng, so he appointed him as the secretary of state.

古文：时学馆未建，师弟子皆寓居民屋，有尚屡以为言。
现代文：当时尚未建立学馆，教师学生都住在民房内。有尚多次奏请建设学馆。
English: At that time, the school had not yet been built, and the teachers and students were all living in private houses. There were still many requests to build a school.

古文：二十四年，朝廷乃大起学舍，始立国子监，立监官，而增广弟子员。
现代文：至元二十四年，朝廷才大建学舍，始立国子监，设置监官，增收学生。
English: It was not until the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty that the imperial court built a large school building, established a state superintendent, set up an inspector, and increased the number of students.

古文：于是有尚升国子祭酒，儒风为之丕振。
现代文：有尚升为国子祭酒，从此，儒学之风大振。
English: Some Shang wine was elevated to the level of the national son's sacrificial wine. From then on, Confucianism became very popular.

古文：二十七年，以亲老，辞职归。
现代文：二十七年，有尚因双亲年高，辞职归家奉养。
English: In the 27th year, due to the advanced age of his parents, he resigned and returned home to take care of his family.

古文：大德改元，复召为国子祭酒。
现代文：大德元年，再次召有尚回京任国子祭酒。
English: In the first year of the Great Tokugawa Shogunate, he was called back to Kyoto to serve as Kuniko Matsuri sake brewer.

古文：寻除集贤学士，兼其职。
现代文：不久，任集贤学士兼国子祭酒。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a scholar of virtue and scholar of the country.

古文：顷之，迁太常卿，又迁集贤学士。
现代文：又不久，调任太常卿，后又回任集贤学士。
English: Not long after, he was transferred to the position of Tai Changqing, and later he was reappointed to the position of Jixian Baozhang.

古文：八年，葬父还乡里。
现代文：大德八年，为葬父而还乡。
English: In 1978, he returned to his hometown to bury his father.

古文：已而朝廷思用老儒，以安车召之于家，累辞不允，复起为昭文馆大学士，兼国子祭酒，阶中奉大夫。
现代文：其后，朝廷要用老儒生，派专车到家中去接他，他再三辞谢，后起任昭文馆大学士兼国子祭酒，官阶为中奉大夫。
English: After that, the imperial court wanted to use the old Confucianist and sent a special car to his home to pick him up, but he repeatedly declined. Later, he was appointed as a scholar of the Shobunkwan University and the national son's sacrificial wine, with the official rank of junior doctor.

古文：有尚前后五居国学，其立教以义理为本，而省察必真切；以恭敬为先，而践履必端悫。
现代文：有尚在国子学前后五年，其教育方针以义理为本，但必须做实地考察，不尚空谈。教育学生要讲求恭敬，要端正、诚实。
English: In the five years before and after Kuniko School, its educational policy was based on the principle of righteousness, but it was necessary to do on-site inspections, not empty talk. Educating students should be respectful, upright and honest.

古文：凡文词之小技，缀缉雕刻，足以破裂圣人之大道者，皆屏黜之。
现代文：对于那些只讲求文章词句华美，修修补补，故意雕刻者，认为有害于圣人之大道，一律排斥。
English: For those who only pay attention to the words and sentences of the article, fix and repair, and deliberately carve, they are considered to be harmful to the saint's avenue, and they are all rejected.

古文：是以诸生知趋正学，崇正道，以经术为尊，以躬行为务，悉为成德达材之士。
现代文：所以学生都知道端正学习态度，尊崇儒学，身体力行，都成为德才兼备之士。
English: Therefore, students all know the correct learning attitude, respect Confucianism, and practice hard, and all become people with both virtues and talents.

古文：大抵其教法一遵衡之旧，而勤谨有加焉。身为学者师表者数十年，海内宗之，犹如昔之宗衡也。
现代文：这些也大体上是遵行许衡教育方针。有尚身为学者师表数十年，受到海内人士所推崇，如同过去推崇许衡一样。
English: These also generally follow the educational policy of Xu Heng, who has been a scholar and teacher for decades and is respected by people at home, just as Xu Heng was respected in the past.

古文：迁陕西行省参知政事，拜陕西行御史台侍御史。
现代文：有尚因年老，请求归家，朝廷赐纸币七千缗。终年八十六岁，赐谥 文正 。
English: Due to his old age, he requested to return home, and the court gave him 7,000 baht in paper money. At the age of 86, he was given the title of "Wenzheng."

古文：张孔孙张孔孙，字梦符，其先出辽之乌若部，为金人所并，遂迁隆安。
现代文：张孔孙字梦符，其祖先为契丹族之乌若部，该部为金人所并，迁至隆安。
English: Zhang Kongsun, also known as Mengfu, was an ancestor of the Urawa branch of the Khitan tribe, which was merged with the Jin people and moved to Long'an.

古文：父之纯，为东平万户府参议，夜梦谒孔子庙，得赐嘉果，已而孔孙生，因丐名于衍圣公，遂名今名。
现代文：父张之纯，为金朝东平万户府参议。有天夜里梦中拜谒孔子庙，赐他嘉果，其后生孔孙。孔孙这名字，表示是孔子所赐的意思。
English: His father, Zhang Zhichun, was a councillor of the Great Hall of the People for the Kim dynasty. One night, in a dream, he visited the Confucius Temple, which gave him the blessing of success, and later gave birth to his son, Kong Sun. The name Kong Sun means given by Confucius.

古文：既长，以文学名，辟万户府议事官，万户严忠范之兄为陕西行省平章政事，聘孔孙，以母老不应。
现代文：长大后以文学著名，召聘为万户府议事官。
English: After growing up, he became famous for his literature and was appointed as a member of the Council of Ten Thousand Households.

古文：时汴梁既下，太常乐师流寓东平，旧章缺落，止存登歌一章而已。
现代文：蒙古军攻下汴梁，汴梁的太常乐师流落于东平。当时，祭祀乐章残缺不全，只存《登歌》一章。
English: The Mongolian army captured Shiliang, and Shiliang's musicians were exiled to Dongping. At that time, the ritual music was incomplete, with only one chapter of "The Ascension Song" remaining.

古文：世祖居潜邸，尝召乐师至日月山观之，至是，徐世隆奏帝，宜增设宫县及文、武二舞，以备大典。
现代文：世祖为太子时，曾召乐师至日月山演奏。这时，徐世隆向皇帝建议，增设宫县及文、武二舞，以备举行大典时演奏。
English: When the founder of the dynasty was crown prince, he once invited musicians to perform on Mount Sun and Moon. At that time, Xu Shilong suggested to the emperor that he should add the Palace Dance and the Military and Martial Arts Dance, so that they could be performed during the grand ceremony.

古文：因诏徐世隆为太常卿，而孔孙以奉礼郎为之副，以董乐师，肄成，献之京师。
现代文：于是，朝廷诏令徐世隆为太常卿，以孔孙为奉礼郎，监督乐师制成乐曲，献给朝廷。
English: As a result, the imperial court decreed that Xu Shilong should become the Grand Duke and that Kongsun should be the bestowal, supervising the musicians to make music and dedicate it to the imperial court.

古文：廉希宪居政府，辟为掾。
现代文：廉希宪主管中书省，召孔孙为属官。
English: Lian Xixian, in charge of the Ministry of Literature, summoned Kongsun as a subordinate official.

古文：及安童为相，尤礼重之，授户部员外郎，出为南京总管府判官。
现代文：安童为相，更加器重孔孙，授户部员外郎之职，出任南京总管府判官。
English: With Ando as his consort, he placed even more importance on Kongsun, who was assigned the position of a member of the household department and served as a judge of the Nanjing General Administration Office.

古文：时方议下襄樊，朝廷急用兵，孔孙谓： 今以越境私贩坐罪者，动以千数，宜开自新之条，俾得效战赎死。 
现代文：朝廷计划攻下襄阳，急需兵源，孔孙提出 ：今越境走私而判罪的人，动辄数以千计，最好给他们一条生路，即让他在战场上效力，赎其死罪。 
English: The imperial court was planning to capture Yangyang and was in urgent need of soldiers. Kong Sun proposed: There are thousands of people who have been convicted of smuggling across the border. It is best to give them a way out, that is, let him serve on the battlefield to atone for his capital crime.

古文：朝论采之。
现代文：这意见被朝廷采纳了。
English: This opinion was accepted by the Imperial Court.

古文：佥四川道提刑按察司事，寻升湖北道提刑按察副使。
现代文：孔孙因任佥四川道提刑按察司事，不久升为湖北道提刑按察副使。
English: As a result of his appointment as the deputy inspector of the Sichuan Provincial Criminal Investigation Department, Kong Sun was soon promoted to deputy inspector of the Hubei Provincial Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：行部巴陵，有囚三百人，因怒龚乙建言兴银利，发其坟墓而烧其家，烧死者三人。
现代文：他巡视巴陵时，有囚犯三百人将处死刑，经了解，这些人是因为对龚乙提出开银矿一事不满，挖了龚家的坟茔，烧了龚家房屋，烧死三人，官府认为他们是图财害命。
English: When he toured Baling, there were 300 prisoners who were about to be executed. It was learned that these people, because they were dissatisfied with Zou Bi's proposal to open a silver mine, dug the graves of the Zou family, burned the Zou family's house, and burned three people to death. The government considered them to be seeking wealth and causing death.

古文：有司以真图财杀人坐之，孔孙原其情，减罪。
现代文：孔孙认为这些人犯法有其特殊原因，减了他们的罪。
English: Kong Sun believed that these people had their special reasons for breaking the law, and reduced their crimes.

古文：迁浙西提刑按察副使，改同知保定路总管府事，俄拜侍御史，行御史台事。
现代文：后调任浙西提刑按察副使，又改任同知保定路总管府事，不久拜为侍御史，主持行御史台事。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Deputy Envoy of the Criminal Investigation Bureau of the Western Zhejiang Province, and he was also transferred to the post of the chief administrator of the Baoding Road, and soon he was appointed as the attendant of the historian, presiding over the administration of the historian.

古文：至元二十二年，安童复入相，言于帝曰： 阿合马颛政十年，亲故迎合者，往往骤进，据显位；独刘宣、张孔孙二人，恬守故常，终始如一。 
现代文：至元二十二年，安童再次为相，向皇帝陈奏道： 阿合马专政十年，其亲戚、朋友和迎合他的人，往往很快升官，占据重要位置，只有刘宣与张孔孙二人安守旧职，始终如一。 
English: In 222 AD, Andong again acted as an emissary, reciting to Emperor Chen: In the ten years of the Aham dictatorship, his relatives, friends and those who pandered to him were often quickly promoted and occupied important positions. Only Liu Xuan and Zhang Kongsun kept their old positions and remained consistent.

古文：乃除宣吏部尚书，孔孙礼部侍郎。
现代文：于是任命刘宣为吏部尚书，孔孙为礼部侍郎。
English: As a result, Liu Xuan was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department and Kong Sun as the attendant of the ceremony department.

古文：寻升孔孙礼部尚书，擢燕南提刑按察使。
现代文：不久，升孔孙为礼部尚书，又升为燕南提刑按察使。
English: Soon after, Kongsun was promoted to Shangshu of the Ministry of Rites and Rituals, and then to Yan Nanzhi of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：二十八年，提刑按察司改肃政廉访司，仍为使，莅治于大名，一以所没赃籴粟五千斛赈饥民。
现代文：二十八年，提刑按察司改为肃政廉访司，仍以孔孙为肃政廉访使，衙门设在大名府。他在燕南将所没收赃款买粟五千斛，用来赈济饥民。
English: In the 28th year, the name of the Department of Investigation was changed to the Department of Investigation of Political Corruption. Kong Sun was still appointed as the Minister of Investigation of Political Corruption, and the office was located in Damingfu. He used the money confiscated from Yan'nan to buy five thousand catties of poppies to feed the hungry.

古文：拜佥河南江北行中书省事。
现代文：拜佥河南江北行中书省事；不久，任大名路总管兼大名知府。
English: During his trip to the north of the Henan River, Bailu was in charge of administrative affairs. Soon, he was appointed as the general manager of Daming Road and the governor of Daming.

古文：亡何，除大名路总管，兼府尹，大兴学校。
现代文：他在大名大兴学校。
English: He went to Daimyo Daxing School.

古文：有献故河堤三百余里于太后者，即上章，谓宜悉还细民，从之。
现代文：该地有人将旧河堤土地三百余里献于太后，孔孙知道后立即上书，请求将这些土地全归还给百姓，得到批准。
English: Someone in the area donated more than 300 miles of land from the old river dike to the empress dowager. After learning this, Kong Sun immediately wrote a letter requesting that all of this land be returned to the people, which was approved.

古文：擢淮东道肃政廉访司使，因谳狱盐场，民尹执中兄弟诬伏为强盗，平反之。
现代文：升淮东道肃政廉访司使。该地盐场盐民尹执中兄弟被人诬告为强盗，孔孙审理清楚后，为此兄弟二人平反。
English: Shenghuai hosted the envoy of the Department of Investigation of Political Corruption. The brothers of Yin Xizhong, a salt miner at the salt mine in the area, were falsely accused of being robbers. After the trial of Kongsun was clear, the two brothers were rehabilitated.

古文：召还，拜集贤大学士、中奉大夫，商议中书省事。
现代文：召还朝拜集贤大学士、中奉大夫，商议中书省事。
English: He also summoned the revered scholar of Jixian University and the doctor of Zhongfeng University to discuss the matter.

古文：丞相完泽卒，孔孙与陈天祥上封事，荐和礼霍孙可为相。
现代文：丞相完泽去世，孔孙与陈天祥上书举荐和礼霍孙为相。
English: After the death of the chancellor Kanazawa, Kong Sun and Chen Tianxiang wrote a letter recommending and praising Kong Sun.

古文：会地震，诏间弭灾之道，孔孙条对八事，其略曰：蛮夷诸国，不可穷兵远讨；滥官放谴，不可复加任用；赏善罚恶，不可数赐赦宥；献鬻宝货，不可不为禁绝；供佛无益，不可虚费财用；上下豪侈，不可不从俭约；官冗吏繁，不可不为裁减；太庙神主，不可不备祭享。
现代文：这时发生了地震，皇帝下诏，征求消灾之道。孔孙进呈八条意见，大意是：蛮夷诸国，不可派兵去远征；已被罢职的无用官员，不可重新起用；赏善罚恶，不可多次赦免；凡献卖宝货者，一律禁绝；供奉佛祖只是白白耗费钱财，应制止；禁止奢侈，要上下一切从俭；裁汰多余的无事可做的官吏；要按时祭祀太庙。
English: At this time, an earthquake occurred, and the emperor issued an edict to seek a way to eliminate the disaster. Kong Sunjin presented eight opinions, to the effect that: barbarian countries should not send soldiers to the expedition; useless officials who have been dismissed should not be reappointed; reward good and punish evil should not be repeatedly pardoned; all those who offer and sell precious goods should be banned; worshipping Buddha is just wasting money and should be stopped; luxury should be banned, and everything should be done frugally; redundant officials who have nothing to do should be cut off; and temples should be sacrificed on time.

古文：帝悉嘉纳之，赐钞五千贯。
现代文：皇帝认为这些意见都很好，赐钞五千贯以示奖励。
English: The emperor thought that these opinions were very good, and gave 5,000 yuan as a reward.

古文：又累疏言： 凡七十致仕者，宜加一官；丁忧服阕者，宜待起复；宿卫之冒滥者，必当革；州郡之职，必当遴选，久任达鲁花赤，宜量加迁转；又宜增给官吏俸禄；修建京师庙学，设国子生徒，给赐曲阜孔庙洒扫户；相位宜参用儒臣，不可专任文吏；故相安童、伯颜、和礼霍孙与廉希宪等，各宜赠谥。 
现代文：他又建议： 凡七十退休官员，应加官一级；守丧期满的官员，应加起用；宿卫军中有冒名者，应当开除；州郡官吏应选择任用，在某一地方任久的达鲁花赤，应适当地转至别地；增加官吏俸禄；修建京师庙学，设国子生徒，对于曲阜孔庙的洒扫户给予赏赐；相位应参用儒臣，不可一律只用文官；已故宰相安童、伯颜、和礼霍孙与廉希宪等，应各赠谥号。 
English: He also suggested that: all retired officials in the 70s should be promoted to the next level; officials who have completed the mourning period should be promoted; impostors in the Home Guard should be fired; state and county officials should choose to be appointed, and those who have been in a certain place for a long time should be transferred to other places; increase the salary of officials; build the Beijing Teachers' Temple School, set up the national students, and reward the scavengers of the Qufu Confucius Temple; the phase should be used by Confucian scholars, and not all civil servants should be used; the deceased prime ministers Ando, Bo Yan, and Li Huosun and Lian X

古文：久之，请老还家，拜翰林学士承旨、资善大夫，致仕，集贤大学士如故。
现代文：其后，孔孙告老还家，朝廷拜他为翰林学士承旨、资善大夫，退休后仍为集贤大学士。
English: After that, Kong Sun announced that he was returning home, and the court praised him as a scholar of Hanlin, a doctor of good fortune, and a scholar of Jixian University after retirement.

古文：大德十一年卒，年七十有五。
现代文：大德十一年卒，享年七十五岁。
English: Dade was seventy-five years old when he died at the age of eleven.

古文：孔孙素以文学名，且善琴，工画山水竹石，而骑射尤精。
现代文：孔孙素来以文学著名，同时也很会弹琴，其画工于山水竹石，尤精于骑射，可称为全才。
English: Kong Sun has always been famous for literature, and is also very good at playing the piano. He is a painter of landscapes, bamboo and stone, and is especially good at riding and shooting. He can be called a generalist.

古文：及其立朝，谠言嘉论，有可观者，士论服之。
现代文：在朝中敢于直言，而且往往正确，为同朝人所佩服。
English: He is admired by his peers in the imperial court for daring to speak his mind and often getting it right.

