古文：文襄六王○河南康舒王孝瑜广宁王孝珩河间王孝琬兰陵武王孝瓘安德王延宗渔阳王绍信
现代文：文襄帝有六个儿子：文敬五皇后河间生了王孝琬，文敬元皇后生河间王孝琬，宋氏生河南王孝瑜，王氏生广宁王孝珩，兰陵王长恭不得母氏姓，陈氏生安德王延宗，燕氏生渔阳王绍信。
English: Emperor Wenxiang had six sons: Empress Wenjing of the Five Dynasties gave birth to Wang Xiaojun, Empress Wenjing of the Five Dynasties gave birth to Wang Xiaojun, the Song Dynasty gave birth to Henan Wang Xiaoyu, the Wang Dynasty gave birth to Guangning Wang Xiaojun, the Lanling Dynasty gave birth to Wang Changgong, the Chen Dynasty gave birth to Anding Wang Yanzong, and the Yan Dynasty gave birth to Yuyang Wang Shaoxin.

古文：文襄六男：文敬元皇后生河间王孝琬，宋氏生河南王孝瑜，王氏生广宁王孝珩，兰陵王长恭不得母氏姓，陈氏生安德王延宗，燕氏生渔阳王绍信。河南康舒王孝瑜，字正德，文襄长子也。
现代文：河南康舒王高孝瑜，字正德，文襄的大儿子。
English: Henan Kangshu Wang Gao Xiaoyu, Zhengde, the eldest son of Wenxiang.

古文：初封河南郡公，齐受禅，进爵为王。
现代文：起初封为河南郡公，齐国接受禅位，进升爵位为王。
English: At first, he was given the title of Henan County Governor, Northern Qi accepted Zen instead of Eastern Wei, and he was promoted to the peerage.

古文：历位中书令、司州牧。
现代文：历任中书令、司州牧。
English: Among his successive posts, he held the posts of Shurei (書令) and Shishumaki (司州牧).

古文：初，孝瑜养于神武宫中，与武成同年相爱。
现代文：起初，高孝瑜在神武宫中抚养，舆武成同岁而相互爱护。
English: Earlier, he was raised in the palace of Emperor Shenwu, the same age as Emperor Gaozhan, and the two loved each other.

古文：将诛杨愔等，孝瑜预其谋。
现代文：将要杀掉杨情等人，高孝瑜参预了其中的谋划。
English: He was involved in the premeditation to kill Yang Yuyin and others.

古文：及武成即位，礼遇特隆。
现代文：等到武成登皇帝位，得到特别的优厚待遇。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdi, that is, the imperial throne, was treated with special courtesy.

古文：帝在晋阳，手敕之曰： 吾饮汾清二杯，劝汝于邺酌两杯。 
现代文：皇帝在晋阳，亲手写韶令说： 我饮汾清二杯，劝你在邺城酌饮两杯。 
English: In Jinyang, the emperor wrote the imperial edict in his own hand and said: I will drink two cups of ginger ale, and I advise you to drink two cups of ginger ale in Lucheng.

古文：其亲爱如此。
现代文：他受亲近爱护就像这样。
English: Their close friendship goes like this.

古文：孝瑜容貌魁伟，精彩雄毅，谦慎宽厚，兼爱文学，读书敏速，十行俱下，覆棋不失一道。
现代文：高孝瑜容貌魁伟，神采勇武刚毅，谦谨宽厚，加上喜爱文学，读书敏捷迅速，一目十行，下完棋后再重新摆开不错失一道。
English: He was tall and handsome, radiant and strong. He was modest, prudent, and generous. In addition, he loved literature, read books quickly, and could recite ten lines at a glance without making any mistakes.

古文：初，文襄于邺东起山池游观，时俗眩之。
现代文：起初，文襄在邺城束面修起山池游赏观览，世俗感到眼花缭乱。
English: At first, Wen Xiang was dazzled by the beauty of the mountains and ponds he had visited in Shicheng Bunchu.

古文：孝瑜遂于第作水堂、龙舟，植幡槊于舟上，数集诸弟宴射为乐。
现代文：高孝瑜于是在住宅兴建水堂、龙舟，在船上插上旗帜长矛，多次召集弟弟们宴饮射箭取乐。
English: Gao Xiaoyu then built a water temple and a dragon boat in the house, planted a flag and a spear on the boat, and repeatedly gathered his brothers for banquets and archery for fun.

古文：武成幸其第，见而悦之，故盛兴后园之玩，于是贵贱慕斅，处处营造。
现代文：武成到他的住宅，看到后很高兴，所以大肆兴建后园的玩物，因此无论贵贱的人都羡慕仿效，处处修建。
English: Wu Cheng went to his house and was very happy to see it, so he built a lot of toys in the backyard. Therefore, both noble and humble people are envious of the imitation and build everywhere.

古文：武成常使和土开与胡后对坐握槊，孝瑜谏曰： 皇后天下之母，不可与臣下接手。 
现代文：武成经常让和士开和胡后相对坐着玩握槊的游戏，高孝瑜进谏说： 皇后是天下人的母亲，不能和臣下手相接触。 
English: Gao Xiaoyu said, "The empress is the mother of all the people in the world, and she cannot come into contact with her subordinates.

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：皇帝诚恳地接受了他的意见。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：后又言赵郡王父死非命，不可亲。
现代文：后来又说趟郡王的父亲死于非命，不能亲近。
English: Later, he also said that the father of the county king had died a violent death and that he could not be close to him.

古文：由是睿及士开皆侧目。
现代文：因此直数和和士开都对他含恨斜视。
English: Therefore, Gao Rui, the son of Zhao Guo Wang, and He Shikai both looked sideways at him.

古文：士开密告其奢僭，睿又言山东唯闻河南王，不闻有陛下。
现代文：和士开秘密告发他奢侈僭越，高靓又说山束祇听说河南玉，没听说有陛下。
English: Gao Rui also said in front of Emperor Wu Chengdi: In Shandong, people only know about the King of Henan, but they don't know about Your Majesty.

古文：帝由是忌之。
现代文：皇帝因此忌恨他。
English: Emperor Wu Rongcheng therefore envied him.

古文：尔朱御女名摩女，本事太后，孝瑜先与之通，后因太子婚夜，孝瑜窃与之言。
现代文：尔朱御女名叫麈玄，本来侍奉太后，高孝瑜先和她私通，后来藉太子结婚的夜裹，高孝瑜偷偷和她说话。
English: Er Zhu's daughter, named Yu Xuan, originally served the empress dowager. Gao Xiaoyu first had sexual intercourse with her. Later, on the night of the prince's wedding, Gao Xiaoyu secretly spoke with her.

古文：武成大怒，顿饮其酒三十七杯。
现代文：亘递大怒，一下子灌了他三十七杯酒。
English: Watanabe flew into a rage and poured him thirty-seven glasses of wine at once.

古文：体至肥大，腰带十围。
现代文：身体直到粗大，腰带十围。
English: The body is up to coarse, with a girdle ten times around.

古文：使娄子彦载以出，鸩之于车。
现代文：派娄子彦用车载着他出宫，在车上给他喝了毒酒。
English: Zang Zihang sent a car to take him out of the palace and gave him poisoned wine to drink in the car.

古文：至西华门，烦热躁闷，投水而绝。
现代文：到了西华门，烦热躁闷，投水而死。
English: When he arrived at Xihua Gate, he was so fidgety and irritable that he threw water on himself and died.

古文：赠太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：追赠太尉、绿尚书事。
English: He was posthumously awarded the rank of captain, and his record was written up.

古文：子弘节嗣。
现代文：儿子高弘节继承爵位。
English: His son Takahiro inherited the title.

古文：孝瑜母，魏吏部尚书宋弁孙也，本魏颍川王斌之妃，为文襄所纳，生孝瑜，孝瑜还第，为太妃。
现代文：高孝瑜的母亲，是魏固吏部尚书塞垒的孙女，本是委困颖川王五筮之的妃子。被文襄帝娶来，生了高孝瑜，高孝瑜回到住宅，成为太妃。
English: Gao Xiaoyu's mother was the granddaughter of Shang Shuxi of the Wei Gu Li Department, and was originally the concubine of the troubled Yingchuan King Wuzhen. She was married by Emperor Wenxiang and gave birth to Gao Xiaoyu. Gao Xiaoyu returned to the house and became a princess.

古文：孝瑜妃，卢正山女，武成胡后之内姊也。
现代文：直耋逾的妃子，是卢正山的女儿，亘噬毒妪家的姐姐。
English: The concubine of Zhi Yao, the daughter of Lu Zhengshan, is the elder sister of the drug lord's family.

古文：孝瑜薨后，宋太妃为卢妃所谮诉，武成杀之。
现代文：高孝瑜薨后，宋太妃受到卢起的谗言诬告，武成杀了她。
English: Emperor Wucheng sent Zang Zihang to take him out by car, and he fell drunk on the car, feeling irritable and hot, and jumped into the water and drowned.

古文：广宁王孝珩，文襄第二子也。
现代文：卢窒王产耋堑，是文襄帝的第二个儿子。
English: Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun, the second son of Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：历位司州牧、尚书令、司空、司徒、录尚书、大将军、大司马。
现代文：历任司塑牧、尚书令、司空、司徒、录尚书、大将军、大司马。
English: Successive incumbents have held the positions of Shishu-maki, Shosho-rei, Shikku, Shito, Rokusho, Taisho, and Daisima.

古文：孝珩爱赏人物，学涉经史，好缀文，有伎艺。
现代文：直耋蛮喜欢品赏人物，读书涉及经史，喜欢写文章，有艺术才能。
English: Naosuke likes to enjoy characters, reading involves history, likes to write articles, and has artistic talent.

古文：尝于厅事壁自画一苍鹰，见者皆以为真，又作朝士图，亦当时之妙绝。
现代文：曾经在厅事壁上画了一只苍鹰，看到的人都以为是真的，又画了朝士图，也是当时的精妙绝伦之作。
English: He once painted a goshawk on the wall of the hall, and everyone who saw it thought it was real. He also painted a morning star, which was also an exquisite masterpiece at the time.

古文：后主自晋州败奔邺，诏王公议于含光殿。
现代文：奎王从置业战败逃奔整继，韶令王公在贪韭腿商议。
English: King Kuei ran away from the defeat in the battle for the purchase of the property to rectify the situation, and ordered the prince to negotiate.

古文：孝珩以大敌既深，事藉机变，宜任城王领幽州道兵入土门，扬声趣并州；独孤永业领洛州兵趣潼关，扬声趣长安；臣请领京畿兵出滏口，鼓行逆战。
现代文：直赵认为大敌已经深入，事情要藉助机诈权变。应该派任城王率领幽州道的军队进入置，扬言奔赴差丛；猩巫丞塞率领盘出的军队奔赴撞飓，扬言要奔赴垦窒；臣请求带领京畿的军队出遥旦，击鼓进军迎战。
English: Zhi Zhao believed that the great enemy had already penetrated deep into the country, and things should be changed by means of opportunism and fraud. The king of the city should be assigned to lead the troops of Yuzhou Road into the camp and threaten to go to the bushes; the orangutan should lead the troops out of the camp and go to the hurricane, and threaten to go to the thunderstorm; the vassal should request to lead the troops of Gyeonggi out of the distant lands and march into battle with drums.

古文：敌闻南北有兵，自然溃散。
现代文：敌人听说南北有军队，自然溃散。
English: When enemy soldiers hear that our soldiers and horses are in the north and south, they will naturally disperse.

古文：又请出宫人珍宝赐将士，帝不能用。
现代文：又请求拿出宫女珍宝赏赐将士，皇帝不能采纳。
English: He also asked the emperor not to accept the emperor's request to take out the treasure of the imperial concubine to reward the generals.

古文：承光即位，以孝珩为太宰。
现代文：丞光继承帝位，任命高孝珩为太宰。
English: Zheng Guang succeeded to the throne and appointed Gao Xiaojun as Dazai.

古文：与呼延族、莫多娄敬显、尉相愿同谋，期正月五日，孝珩于千秋门斩高阿那肱，相愿在内以禁兵应之，族与敬显自游豫园勒兵出。
现代文：舆坠至递、莫多娄敬显、尉相愿共同谋划，约定正月五，高孝珩在千秋门斩杀高阿那肱，慰扭题在宫内派禁兵接应他，呼延族和莫多娄敬题从游豫园指挥军队出来。
English: With the decline of public opinion, Moduo, Jingxian, and Fei were willing to jointly plan, and agreed on the 5th day of the first month that Gao Xiaojuan would kill Gao Anaxuan at the Qianqiu Gate, the consolation issue would be to send forbidden soldiers to meet him in the palace, and the Huyan people and Moduo, Jingxian, would command the army from Yuyuan.

古文：既而阿那肱从别宅取便路入宫，事不果。
现代文：不久高阿那肱从别的住宅取便路进入宫内，事情不能成功。
English: Soon, Anas entered the palace from somewhere else, making their plan impossible.

古文：乃求出拒西军，谓阿那肱、韩长鸾、陈德信等云： 朝廷不赐遣击贼，岂不畏孝珩反耶？
现代文：于是请求出外抵抗西边旦固的军队，对高阿那肱、整昼鸾、陈德信等人说： 朝廷不赐给调遣的军队攻打贼寇，难道不怕高孝珩谋反吗?
English: He then requested to go abroad to resist the Tanggu army in the west, and said to Gao Anaxun, Quanzhong, Chen Deshin and others: If the imperial court does not allow the dispatched army to attack the bandits, isn't Gao Xiaozhong afraid of plotting a rebellion?

古文：孝珩破宇文邕，遂至长安，反时何与国家事。
现代文：高孝珩打败宇文邕，于是到了长安，这样的反和国家的事有什么两样。
English: Gao Xiaojuan defeated Uwen Yao, so when he came to Chang'an, there was no difference between this kind of rebellion and the state.

古文：以今日之急，犹作如此猜疑。 高、韩恐其变，出孝珩为沧州刺史。
现代文：以今天的危急，还作这样的猜疑 高阿那肱、韩长鸾担心其中有变，调出高孝珩任沧州刺史。
English: With today's critical situation, Gao Ananyuan and Han Changyuan still have such suspicions. They are worried that there will be a change, and Gao Xiaojuan will be appointed as the governor of Cangzhou.

古文：至州，以五千人会任城王于信都，共为匡复计。
现代文：到了州裹，带领五千人到信都和任城王会合，共同谋划匡复国家的计策。
English: After arriving in Cangzhou, he sent five thousand people to Xindu to meet with Ren Shiwang and jointly make plans to support the country.

古文：周齐王宪来伐，兵弱不能敌。
现代文：周国齐王宇文宪前来讨伐，兵力弱小不能抵挡。
English: Zhou Qi Wang Yuwen Xian came to attack, and the North Qi army was too weak to resist the enemy soldiers.

古文：怒曰： 由高阿那肱小人，吾道穷矣！ 
现代文：愤怒地说： 由着高阿那肱这小人，我的路走到尽头了! 
English: He said angrily, "My wish cannot be fulfilled because of this little man, Gao Anaxun!"

古文：齐叛臣乞扶令和以槊剌孝珩坠马，奴白泽以身扞之，孝珩犹伤数处，遂见虏。
现代文：齐国叛臣乞扶令和用长矛把高孝珩刺下马，奴仆白泽用身体护着他，高孝珩还是伤了好几处，于是被俘。
English: The traitor of the State of Qi begged for help and stabbed Gao Xiaojuan off his horse with a spear, the slave Bai Ze protected him with his body, Gao Xiaojuan was still injured in several places, so he was captured.

古文：齐王宪问孝珩齐亡所由，孝珩自陈国难，辞泪俱下，俯仰有节。
现代文：齐王宇文宪向高孝珩询问齐国灭亡的原因，高孝珩自己陈说国家的灾难，说着说着眼泪流了出来，一举一动都有节制。
English: North Zhou's Qi Wang Yu Wenxian asked him the reason for the demise of North Zhou, he said that the country was in danger, his voice was full of tears, and he was overcome with grief.

古文：宪为之改容，亲为洗创傅药，礼遇甚厚。
现代文：宇文宪为此脸上露出感动的神情。亲自给他洗伤口敷上药，以礼相待十分优厚。
English: For this, Uwen Xian's face showed an expression of emotion. He personally washed and applied medicine to his wound, and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：孝珩独叹曰： 李穆叔言齐氏二十八年，今果然矣。
现代文：高孝珩独自感叹地说： 李穆叔说齐氏二十八年，现在真是这样的。
English: Gao Xiaojuan said with a sigh: "Uncle Li Mu said that the Qi Dynasty lasted for 28 years, and now it's really like this.

古文：自神武皇帝以外，吾诸父兄弟无一人得至四十者，命也。
现代文：从神武皇帝以外，我的父亲兄弟们没有一人能活到四十岁，命运啊。
English: With the exception of Emperor Shenwu, none of my father's or brother's generation has ever lived beyond the age of forty. This is truly God's will.

古文：嗣君无独见之明，宰相非柱石之寄，恨不得握兵符，受庙算，展我心力耳。 
现代文：继位的君主没有独到见解的明智，宰相不是柱石般的寄托，恨不能掌握兵符，接受朝廷的谋划，施展我的心智和力量。 
English: The heir to the throne is young and has no independent opinion, and the prime minister is not a strong and powerful person like a pillar. I wish I could grasp the military power and teach the strategy in my heart to exert my wisdom.

古文：至长安，依例授开府、县侯。
现代文：到了长安，依照惯例授给开府、县侯。
English: When it came to Chang'an, it was awarded to Kaifu and county magistrates in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：后周武帝在云阳，宴齐君臣，自弹胡琵琶，命孝珩吹笛。
现代文：后来周武帝在云阳，宴请齐国的君臣，亲自弹着胡琵琶，命令高孝珩吹笛子。
English: Later, in Yunyang, Emperor Zhou Wu gave a banquet for the princes and ministers of Qi. He himself played the lute and ordered Gao Xiaojuan to play the flute.

古文：辞曰： 亡国之音，不足听也。 
现代文：推辞说： 亡国的声音，不值得听。 
English: "The voice of a defeated nation is not worth listening to," the rebuttal said.

古文：固命之，举笛裁至口，泪下呜咽，武帝乃止。
现代文：坚持命令他，举起笛子才到嘴边。眼泪流下低声抽泣，周武帝于是作罢。
English: Emperor Wu insisted that he should play the flute. He only lifted the flute to the edge of his mouth before he burst into tears and sobbed. Emperor Wu no longer allowed him to play the flute.

古文：其年十月，疾甚，启归葬山东，从之。
现代文：遣年十月，病重，上书请求回去葬在山东，依从了他。
English: In October of the following year, seriously ill, he sent a letter requesting to be buried in Shandong, and his request was complied with.

古文：寻卒，令还葬邺。
现代文：不久死去，下令送回去葬在邺城。
English: He died soon after and was ordered to be sent back to be buried in Lucheng.

古文：河间王孝琬，文襄第三子也。
现代文：河间王高孝琬，文襄的第三个儿子。
English: Kawama Wang Gao Xiaojun, the third son of Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：天保元年封。
现代文：天保元年封王。
English: He was crowned king in the first year of the Tenpo era.

古文：天统中，累迁尚书令。
现代文：天统年间，逐渐升迁到尚书令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tenmu, it was gradually promoted to Shang Shuling.

古文：初，突厥与周师入太原，武成将避之而东。
现代文：当初，突厥和周国军队进入太原，武成将要躲避他们去东边。
English: At first, the Turkic and Zhou armies entered Taiyuan, and Wu Cheng was going to evade them and go to the east.

古文：孝琬叩马谏，请委赵郡王部分之，必整齐，帝从其言。
现代文：高孝琬勒住马进谏，请求委任赵郡王指挥军队，一定井然有序，皇帝听从了他的话。
English: Gao Xiaohui held back Ma Jinjun and asked for the appointment of Zhao Guowang to command the army. It must be orderly. The emperor obeyed his words.

古文：孝琬免胄将出，帝使追还。
现代文：高孝琬脱去头盔将要出去，皇帝派人把他追了回来。
English: Gao Xiaojuan took off his helmet and was about to go out. The emperor sent someone to chase him back.

古文：周军退，拜并州刺史。
现代文：周国军队撤退，授任并州刺史。
English: Zhou's army retreated, and he was awarded the title of "Bingzhou stabbing history."

古文：孝琬以文襄世嫡，骄矜自负。
现代文：高孝琬因是文襄的继承人，骄傲自负。
English: He considered himself to be the legitimate son of Emperor Wenxiang, and was quite proud and conceited.

古文：河南王之死，诸王在宫内莫敢举声，唯孝琬大哭而出。
现代文：河南王死的时候，各王在宫内没有敢吭声的，衹有高孝琬大哭着出来。
English: When the king of Henan died, none of the kings dared to speak out in the palace, but Gao Xiaojuan burst into tears.

古文：又怨执政，为草人而射之。
现代文：又抱怨执政的人，制作草人用箭射它。
English: He also resented the fact that Shikai was in power, and as a grasshopper, he shot arrows at him to vent his hatred.

古文：和士开与祖珽谮之，云： 草人拟圣躬也。
现代文：和士开和祖埏谗毁他说： 草人是模拟皇帝。
English: And Shi Kai and Ancestor Ruin said, "Grass people are simulated emperors.

古文：又前突厥至州，孝琬脱兜鍪抵地，云 岂是老妪，须着此 。
现代文：又过去突厥到州裹，高孝琬脱去头盔掷在地上，说 难道是老妇人，须要用这个。
English: When the Turk came to the state, Gao Xiaojuan took off his helmet and threw it on the ground, saying, "Isn't it an old woman who needs to use this?"

古文：此言属大家也。 
现代文：逭话是暗指天子。 
English: It's making fun of everyone.

古文：初，魏世谣言： 河南种谷河北生，白杨树头金鸡鸣。 
现代文：当初，魏国民间童谣说： 河南种谷河北生，白杨树头金鸡鸣。 
English: At the beginning, the folk nursery rhymes of the Wei people said: Henan seed grain, Hebei birth, poplar tree head, golden rooster.

古文：珽以说曰： 河南、河北，河间也。
现代文：祖埏以此说道： 河南、河北，是指河间。
English: Zu Xi said: "Henan, Hebei, refers to the middle of the river.

古文：金鸡鸣，孝琬将建金鸡而大赦。 
现代文：金鶸呜，是高孝琬将建立金鸡而大赦天下。 
English: Golden chicken, it is Gao Xiaojuan who will build the golden chicken and amnesty the world.

古文：帝颇惑之。
现代文：皇帝对此十分疑惑。
English: When Emperor Wucheng heard this, he was puzzled about filial piety.

古文：时孝琬得佛牙，置于第内，夜有神光。
现代文：当时高孝琬得到佛牙，放在住宅内，夜裹有神奇的光彩。
English: At that time, the filial son got a Buddha's tooth, put it at home, and let it shine at night.

古文：昭玄都法顺请以奏闻，不从。
现代文：昭玄都法顺请求上奏给皇帝，没有听从。
English: At the request of Fa Shun, Zhao Xuan Du appealed to the emperor, but he did not listen.

古文：帝闻，使搜之，得镇库槊幡数百。
现代文：皇帝听说后，派人搜查，得到镇库的长矛旗帜几百件。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he sent someone to search and obtained several hundred spears and flags from the town treasury.

古文：帝闻之，以为反。
现代文：皇帝听说后，认为是谋反。
English: When the emperor heard about it, he thought it was a plot to rebel.

古文：讯其诸姬，有陈氏者无宠，诬对曰 孝琬画作陛下形哭之 ，然实是文襄像，孝琬时时对之泣。
现代文：审讯他的姬妾们，有个姓陈的不受宠爱，诬陷回答说： 高孝琬画了陛下的像对着它哭。 然而实际上是文襄的画像，高孝琬时常对着它哭。
English: Interrogating his concubines, there was an unloved one named Chen, and the frame-up answered: Gao Xiaojuan painted the image of His Majesty crying over it, but it was actually the image of Wenxiang, and Gao Xiaojuan often cried over it.

古文：帝怒，使武卫赫连辅玄倒鞭挝之。
现代文：皇帝发怒，派武卫赫连辅玄倒过鞭子打他。
English: The emperor was enraged and sent the martial guard, Heren Fu Xuan, to beat him with a whip.

古文：孝琬呼阿叔，帝怒曰： 谁是尔叔？
现代文：高孝琬呼喊阿叔，皇帝发怒说： 谁是你的叔?
English: Gao Xiaojuan shouted "uncle," and the emperor angrily said: "Who is your uncle?

古文：敢唤我作叔！ 
现代文：敢唤我作叔! 
English: How dare he call me uncle!

古文：孝琬曰： 神武皇帝嫡孙，文襄皇帝嫡子，魏孝静皇帝外甥，何为不得唤作叔也？ 
现代文：高孝琬说： 神武皇帝的嫡亲孙子，文襄皇帝的嫡亲儿子，魏孝静皇帝的外甥，为什么不能唤作叔? 
English: Gao Xiaojuan said: The legitimate grandson of Emperor Jinwu, the legitimate son of Emperor Wenxiang, the nephew of Emperor Wei Xiaojing, why can't he be called uncle?

古文：帝愈怒，折其两胫而死。
现代文：皇帝更加愤怒，折断他的两条腿死去。
English: The emperor was even more enraged and broke both of his legs and died.

古文：瘗诸西山，帝崩后，乃改葬。
现代文：草草埋在西山，皇帝崩逝后，于是改葬。
English: He was buried in the West Mountain. After the emperor passed away, he was reburied here.

古文：子正礼嗣，幼聪颖，能诵《左氏春秋》。
现代文：儿子高正礼继承爵位，小时候聪明，能背诵《左氏春秋》。
English: His son Gao Zhengli inherited the title of nobility. As a child, he was clever and could recite "The Spring and Autumn of the Zuo Clan."

古文：齐亡，迁绵州卒。
现代文：齐国灭亡，迁移到绵州死去。
English: Emperor Wu Rongcheng became more and more angry, broke his two legs, and he died.

古文：兰陵武王长恭，一名孝瓘，文襄第四子也。
现代文：兰陵武王高长恭，一名孝璇，文襄的第四个儿子。
English: Lanling Wu Wang Gao Changqiong, also known as Filial Piety, is the fourth son of Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：累迁并州刺史。
现代文：逐渐升迁到并州刺史。
English: He has been promoted many times and has made history in his career.

古文：突厥入晋阳，长恭尽力击之。
现代文：突厥进入晋阳，高长恭尽力反击。
English: The Turkic army invaded Jinyang, and he led the troops to fight back.

古文：邙山之败，长恭为中军，率五百骑再入周军，遂至金墉之下，被围甚急，城上人弗识，长恭免胄示之面，乃下弩手救之，于是大捷。
现代文：芒山失败，高长恭任中军，带领五百骑兵再次冲入周国军队中，于是到了金墉城下，被围困十分紧急，城上的人不认识他，高长恭脱去头盔露出面孔，于是派下弓弩手救援他，于是大胜。
English: Mengshan was defeated, Gao Changjun took command of the Chinese army, and led five hundred cavalry to rush into the Zhou army again, so he arrived at the foot of Jinyu Castle, was besieged very urgently, the people on the city did not know him, Gao Changjun took off his helmet to reveal his face, so he sent a bowman to rescue him, so he won a great victory.

古文：武士共歌谣之，为《兰陵王入阵曲》是也。
现代文：武士一起唱歌歌颂他，就是《兰陵王入阵曲》。
English: The soldiers sang together, and it became the "Lanling King's Marching Song."

古文：历司州牧、青瀛二州，颇受财货。
现代文：历任司州牧，青州、瀛州二州刺史，接受很多财物。
English: He has served as the governor of two prefectures in succession, and received a number of bribes.

古文：后为太尉，与段韶讨栢谷，又攻定阳。
现代文：后来任太尉，和段韶讨伐柏谷，又攻打定阳。
English: Later, he was appointed as a captain, and he and Duan Xi fought in the Battle of Baiyun Valley and the Battle of Dingyang.

古文：韶病，长恭总其众。
现代文：段韶患病，高长恭统率他的部属。
English: Duan Xuan fell ill and Chang Gong took command of his army.

古文：前后以战功别封巨鹿、长乐、乐平、高阳等郡公。
现代文：前后因战功另封钜鹿、长乐、乐平、高阳等郡公。
English: He was awarded the title of county magistrate of Menglu, Changle, Leping, Goyang and other counties.

古文：邙山之捷，后主谓长恭曰： 入阵太深，失利悔无所及。 
现代文：芒山的胜利，后主对高长恭说： 进入敌阵太深，失利后悔就来不及了。 
English: After the victory of Mangshan, the master said to Gao Changqiong: Entering the enemy's camp is too deep, and it is too late to regret the defeat.

古文：对曰： 家事亲切，不觉遂然。 
现代文：回答说： 家裹的事关系密切，不觉就这样了。 
English: He replied, "I've been extraordinarily selfless when it comes to my own family, and I've unknowingly penetrated deep into the enemy's camp."

古文：帝嫌其称家事，遂忌之。
现代文：皇帝嫌他称是家裹的事，于是忌恨他。
English: Later, his superiors suspected him of referring to state affairs as family affairs, and he was treated with suspicion.

古文：及在定阳，其属尉相愿谓曰： 王既受朝寄，何得如此贪残？ 
现代文：等到在定阳，他的属下尉相愿对他说： 王既然接受朝廷的委托，为什么变得这样贪婪残忍? 
English: In Dingyang, his subordinate lieutenants said to him: Since you have been entrusted by the imperial court, why are you so greedy and cruel?

古文：长恭未答。
现代文：高长恭没有回答。
English: He did not reply.

古文：相愿曰： 岂不由邙山大捷，恐以威武见忌，欲自秽乎？ 
现代文：尉相愿说： 难道不是因为芒山大捷，担心因威望勇力受到忌恨，想糟践自己吗? 
English: The lieutenant said, "Isn't it because of Meng Shanshan's victory, fearing that he would be hated for his prestige and courage, that he wants to abuse himself?

古文：长恭曰： 然。 
现代文：高长恭说： 是这样。 
English: And he said, So be it.

古文：相愿曰： 朝廷若忌王，于此犯便当行罚，求福反以速祸。 
现代文：尉相愿说： 朝廷如果忌恨王，在这个犯法的事上就应当实行惩罚，求福反会加速祸患的到来。 
English: "If the imperial court is suspicious of you, you will be punished for violating the law in this way. On the other hand, if you seek happiness, you will soon be plagued by misfortune.

古文：长恭泣下，前膝请以安身术。
现代文：高长恭哭着流下眼泪，跪着向前请求给以保全性命的办法。
English: Gao Changqiong cried and shed tears, kneeling forward to ask for a way to save his life.

古文：相愿曰： 王前既有勋，今复告捷，威声太重，宜属疾在家，勿预事。 
现代文：尉相愿说： 王以前既然有功勋，现在又报告胜利，威名声望太重，应该假托有病在家，不要参预政事。 
English: The lieutenant wished to say: Since the king had meritorious deeds before, and now reports victory, his prestige is too heavy. He should pretend to be ill at home, and not participate in pre-election political affairs.

古文：长恭然其言，未能退。
现代文：高长恭认为他的话说的对，但未能退下来。
English: Chang Qiong thought that what he said was right, but he did not back down.

古文：及江淮寇扰，恐复为将，叹曰： 我去年面肿，今何不发。 
现代文：等到长江淮水一带被侵扰，担心又作为将领，叹息道： 我去年脸肿，现在为什么不发作。 
English: Wait until the Yangtze River Huai Shui area is invaded, worry and as a general, sigh: I had a swollen face last year, why not have an attack now.

古文：自是有疾不疗。
现代文：从此有病不治。
English: From then on, there was no treatment for illness.

古文：武平四年五月，帝使徐之范饮以毒药。
现代文：武平四年五月，皇帝派徐之范给他毒药要他喝下去。
English: In May of the 4th year of Wuping, the emperor sent Xu Zhifan to bring poison for him to drink.

古文：长恭谓妃郑氏曰： 我忠以事上，何辜于天，而遭鸩也！ 
现代文：高长恭对妃子郑氏说： 我忠心事奉皇上，对天有什么错，却遭受鸩毒。 
English: Gao Changqiong said to his concubine Zheng: I have served the emperor loyally, what is wrong with heaven, but I have been poisoned.

古文：妃曰： 何不求见天颜？ 
现代文：妃子说： 为什么不请求见皇上。 
English: Zheng said, "Why don't you ask to see God?"

古文：长恭曰： 天颜何由可见。 
现代文：高长恭说： 皇上怎么可以见到。 
English: Gao Changgyong said, "How can the emperor see you?"

古文：遂饮药薨。
现代文：于是喝毒药薨。
English: So he drank poisoned toddy.

古文：赠太尉。
现代文：追赠太尉。
English: He was awarded the rank of First Lieutenant by the Imperial Court.

古文：长恭貌柔心壮，音容兼美。
现代文：高长恭相貌柔和内心豪壮，声音姿容都很美。
English: Chang Qiong is mild-mannered and ambitious.

古文：为将躬勤细事，每得甘美，虽一瓜数果，必与将士共之。
现代文：担任将领亲自辛勤处理琐细小事，每次得到甜美的食物，即使是一个瓜几个果子，一定和将士共同分享。
English: As a general, he personally worked hard to deal with trifles, and every time he got sweet food, even if it was a melon and a few fruits, he would share it with the soldiers.

古文：初在瀛州，行参军阳士深表列其赃，免官。
现代文：起初在瀛州，行参军阳士深上表列举他的贪脏之事，被免除官职。
English: At first, he was in Zhangzhou, and he was dismissed from his post after the military enlisted men listed his corruption charges on the list.

古文：及讨定阳，士深在军，恐祸及。
现代文：等到讨伐定阳，阳士深在军中，担心灾祸到来。
English: By the time of the Battle of Dingyang, Yang Shizhen was deep in the army, fearing the arrival of disaster.

古文：长恭闻之曰： 吾本无此意。 
现代文：高长恭听说这事说： 我本来没有这个意思。 
English: "I didn't mean it that way," Gao Changqiong said when she heard about it.

古文：乃求小失，杖士深二十以安之。
现代文：于是求小的过失，用棍棒打了阳士深二十下来使他安心。
English: So he pleaded for a minor fault, and clubbed the young man twenty times to put him at ease.

古文：尝入朝而仆从尽散，唯有一人，长恭独还，无所谴罚，武成赏其功，命贾护为买妾二十人，唯受其一。
现代文：曾经入朝而仆从都散去了，衹有一人，高长恭独自回来，没有责罚。武成奖赏他的功劳，命令贾护给他买妾二十人，衹接受其中的一个。
English: Once when he entered the court and his servants had dispersed, only one man, Gao Changgong, returned alone without being punished. Wu Cheng rewarded him for his service and ordered Jia Gong to buy him twenty concubines, of which he accepted one.

古文：有千金责券，临死日，尽燔之。
现代文：有一千金的债券，临死那天，把它们全烧掉了。
English: On the day he was about to die, he burned all of his 1,000-guilder bonds.

古文：安德王延宗，文襄第五子也。
现代文：安德王高延宗，文襄的第五个儿子。
English: Gao Yanzong, King of Ande, was the fifth son of Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：母陈氏，广阳王妓也。
现代文：母亲陈氏，是广阳王的歌妓。
English: His mother, Chen, is the daughter of the king of Guangyang.

古文：延宗幼为文宣所养，年十二，犹骑置腹上，令溺己脐中，抱之曰： 可怜止有此一个。 
现代文：高延宗幼年时被文宣帝抚养，十二岁了，还骑坐在肚子上，让他尿在自己的肚脐裹，抱着他说： 可怜祇有这一个。 
English: When Gao Yanzong was a child, he was raised by Emperor Wenzhong. At the age of twelve, he was still riding on his stomach, letting him urinate in his own navel, holding him and saying, "Pity this one."

古文：问欲作何王，对曰： 欲作冲天王。 
现代文：问想作什么王，回答说： 想作冲天王。 
English: Asked what kind of king he wanted to be, he replied: "I want to be king of heaven."

古文：文宣问杨愔，愔曰： 天下无此郡名，愿使安于德。 
现代文：文宣帝问杨情，杨情说： 天下没有这个郡的名字，希望让他安于德。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan asked Yang Jieyin if he could add the seal. Yang Jieyin said, "There is no name for this county in the world. I hope this will make him more moral."

古文：于是封安德焉。
现代文：于是封为安德王。
English: Therefore, he was named King Ender.

古文：为定州刺史，于楼上大便，使人在下张口承之。
现代文：任定州刺史，在楼上大便，要人在下边张开口接着。
English: Dingzhou stabbed history, defecated upstairs, and asked people to open their mouths at the bottom.

古文：以蒸猪糁和人粪以饲左右，有难色者鞭之。
现代文：用蒸猪食掺和人的粪便给身边的人吃，有为难神色的鞭打他。
English: He used steamed pig's food mixed with human excrement to feed people around him, and whipped them with a look of bewilderment.

古文：孝昭帝闻之，使赵道德就州杖之一百。
现代文：孝昭帝知道后，派趟道德到州裹用棍棒打了他一百下。
English: After Xiao Zhaodi heard about it, he sent Zhao Daode to Dingzhou to beat him with a hundred canes.

古文：道德以延宗受杖不谨，又加三十。
现代文：趟道德因高延宗接受棍打不恭谨，又加了三十下。
English: Zhao Daode, because he was not honest when he was beaten, received an additional 30 canes.

古文：又以囚试刀，验其利钝。
现代文：又用囚犯试刀，验看刀的利钝。
English: The prisoner was also used to test the knife to see how sharp or blunt it was.

古文：骄纵多不法。
现代文：骄横放纵多干违法的事。
English: He arrogantly indulges in many illegal activities.

古文：武成使挞之，杀其昵近九人，从是深自改悔。
现代文：武成帝派人鞭打他，杀了和他亲近的九个人，从此自己深深地改正悔过。
English: Emperor Wucheng sent someone to punish him with a cane, killing nine people close to him. Only then did he decide to repent.

古文：兰陵王邙山凯捷，自陈兵势，诸兄弟咸壮之。
现代文：兰陵王芒山凯旋报捷，自己陈述军阵形势，兄弟们都认为壮勇。
English: Lanling King Mangshan triumphantly returned to report the situation of the military front, and the brothers all thought that he was very brave.

古文：延宗独曰： 四兄非大丈夫，何不乘胜径入？
现代文：衹有高延宗说： 四哥不是个大丈夫，为什么不乘胜直接进入?
English: However, Enzong said: The fourth brother is not well, why not take advantage of the victory to pursue and directly attack the capital city in the northern circuit.

古文：使延宗当此势，关西岂得复存！ 
现代文：假使我高延宗处在这个形势，关西难道能够继续存在。 
English: If I were in this situation, Kansai would not still exist.

古文：及兰陵死，妃郑氏以颈珠施佛。
现代文：等到兰陵王死，妃子郑氏将颈珠施给佛家。
English: When Lanling Wang died, Zheng's concubine gave the neck bead to the Buddhist family.

古文：广宁王使赎之。
现代文：广宁王派人将其赎回来。
English: Guangning Wang sent someone to ransom him.

古文：延宗手书以谏，而泪满纸。河间死，延宗哭之泪亦甚。
现代文：高延宗亲手写信规劝，而眼泪流满了纸，河问王死，高延宗哭他的眼泪也很多。
English: Gao Yanzong wrote a letter of exhortation with his own hand, and tears flowed all over the paper. When the king died, Gao Yanzong cried, and his tears were many.

古文：又为草人以像武成，鞭而讯之曰： 何故杀我兄！ 
现代文：又制作草人来模拟武成帝，鞭打并审讯他说： 为什么杀我的哥哥! 
English: He also made a straw man to simulate Emperor Wu Chengyu, while lashing with a whip, while interrogating, asking: Why did you kill my brother?

古文：奴告之，武成覆卧延宗于地，马鞭挝之二百，几死。
现代文：奴仆告发了他，武成帝让高延宗趴着躺在地上，用马鞭打了他二百下，几乎死去。
English: A servant denounced him, and Emperor Wucheng pinned him to the ground, gave him two hundred lashes, and nearly beat him to death.

古文：后历司徒、太尉。
现代文：后来历任司徒、太尉。
English: Later, he served as an officer and captain.

古文：及平阳之役，后主自御之，命延宗率右军先战，城下擒周开府宗挺。
现代文：到了乎阳战役，后主亲自指挥军队，命令高延宗率领右军先战，在城下活捉了周国的开府宗挺。
English: When it came to the Battle of Khuyang, the queen mother personally commanded the army and ordered Gao Yanzong to lead the right army into the first battle, and captured Kaifu Zontian of Zhou under the city.

古文：及大战，延宗以麾下再入周军，莫不披靡。
现代文：等到大战，高延宗带领部下再次冲入周国军队中，所向披靡。
English: Wait until the Great War, Gao Yanzong led his subordinates to rush into the Zhou army again, which was overwhelming.

古文：诸军败，延宗独全军。
现代文：各军战败，高延宗独自保全了军队。
English: People from all walks of life in Northern Qi were defeated, but he was the only one who won and preserved the army.

古文：后主将奔晋阳，延宗言： 大家但在营莫动，以兵马付臣，臣能破之。 
现代文：后主将要逃奔晋阳，高延宗说： 天子衹在军营中不要动，把兵马交给臣，臣能够打败他们。 
English: After the master was about to flee to Jinyang, he dissuaded him, saying, "You should not move in the camp. Give me the soldiers and horses, and I will defeat the enemy."

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇帝没有采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：及至并州又闻周军已入雀鼠谷，乃以延宗为相国、并州刺史，总山西兵事。
现代文：等到了并州，又听说周国军队已进入雀鼠谷，就任命高延宗为相国、并州刺史，统领山西军事。
English: After the annexation of Shanxi Province, when he heard that the Zhou army had entered the Valley of the Sparrow Mice, he appointed Gao Yanzong as the head of the Shanxi military.

古文：谓曰： 并州阿兄自取，儿今去也。 
现代文：对他说： 并州，阿哥自己占有，我现在离开了。 
English: He said to him, "Unification of the states, my elder brother has taken possession of everything, I am leaving now."

古文：延宗曰： 陛下为社稷莫动，臣为陛下出死力战。 
现代文：高延宗说： 陛下为社稷不要动，臣为陛下拼出死力作战。 
English: Yan Zong dissuaded him, saying: Your Majesty, for the sake of the country, don't go, I will fight to the death for you.

古文：骆提婆曰： 至尊计已成，王不得辄沮。 
现代文：骆提婆说： 皇上的主意已定，王不能阻拦。 
English: Luo Dibao said, "God's will has already been decided, so don't stand in the way."

古文：后主竟奔邺。
现代文：后主最后逃奔困。
English: The victim eventually managed to escape.

古文：在并将率咸请曰： 王若不作天子，诸人实不能出死力。 
现代文：在差她的将帅都请求说： 王如果不作天子，大家实在不能拼死出力。 
English: The generals and admirals who sent her all pleaded: "If the king does not become the son of heaven, we really cannot exert ourselves to the utmost."

古文：延宗不得已，即皇帝位，下诏曰： 武平孱弱，政由宦竖，衅结萧墙，盗起疆埸。
现代文：高延宗不得已，登皇帝位，下韶书说： 武平孱弱，政事经由太监小人，在内部挑起事端，在边境兴起盗贼。
English: Gao Yanzong ascended to the throne as a last resort, and the imperial edict said: Wu Ping was weak, the government was run by eunuchs, and internal troubles were stirred up, and thieves arose at the border.

古文：斩关夜遁，莫知所之，则我高祖之业将坠于地。
现代文：夺关在夜裹逃走，无人知道去了哪儿，那么我高祖的基业将要丧失。
English: If Ruiguan escapes in the middle of the night, and no one knows where he has gone, then my great-grandfather's legacy will be lost.

古文：王公卿士，猥见推逼，今便祗承宝位。
现代文：王公卿士，被他们推举逼迫，今天就恭敬地继承帝位。
English: Wang Gongningshi, who was persecuted by them, will respectfully succeed to the imperial throne today.

古文：可大赦天下，改武平七年为德昌元年。 
现代文：可以大赦天下，改武平七年为德昌元年。 
English: We can grant amnesty to the world and change the seventh year of the Heian period to the first year of the Tokugawa period.

古文：以晋昌王唐邕为宰辅，齐昌王莫多娄敬显、沐阳王和阿于子、右卫大将军段畅、武卫将军相里僧伽、开府韩骨胡、侯莫陈洛州为爪牙。
现代文：任命晋昌王唐邕为宰相，齐昌王莫多娄敬显、沭阳王和阿于子、右卫大将军堡蝗、武卫将军相里僧伽、开府韩置塑、堡墓速洛州为党羽。
English: Jinchang King Tang Jun was appointed as the prime minister, Qichang King Modo Jianxian, Shanyang King and Ayuzi, Right Guard General Fort Locust, Wuwei General Sori Sangha, Kaifu Hanji Sculpture, and Fort Tomb Saurashtra were appointed as party members.

古文：众闻之，不召而至者，前后相属。
现代文：大家听说后，没有召唤就来了的，前后相继。
English: Everyone heard the news, and people who were not invited kept coming back and forth.

古文：延宗容貌充壮，坐则仰，偃则伏，人笑之，乃赫然奋发。
现代文：高延宗容貌壮实，坐着就仰着脸，向后仰就脸朝下，人都笑起来，于是精神振奋。
English: Gao Yanzong has a strong appearance. When he sits, he looks up, and when he leans back, he looks down. Everyone laughs, and his spirits are lifted.

古文：气力绝异，驰骋行阵，劲捷若飞。
现代文：气力独特不凡，快马奔驰摆开军阵，敏捷有力就像飞一样。
English: Its strength is unique and extraordinary. The fast horse Benz swings the army formation. Its agility and strength are just like flying.

古文：倾覆府藏及后宫美女，以赐将士，籍没内参千余家。
现代文：全部拿出府库中的贮藏和后宫的美女，来赏赐将士，抄没太监一千多家。
English: He took out everything stored in the government treasury and the beautiful women of the harem to reward the generals, and confiscated more than a thousand eunuchs.

古文：后主谓近臣曰： 我宁使周得并州，不欲安德得之。 
现代文：后主对身边的臣子说： 我宁可让周国得到并州，也不想让安德王得到它。 
English: The queen mother said to the courtiers around her: I would rather let Zhou get the annexation of the state than let King Ando get it.

古文：左右曰： 理然。 
现代文：身边的人说： 道理是这样的。 
English: Close advisers on both sides said: of course.

古文：延宗见士卒，皆亲执手，陈辞自称名，流涕呜咽。
现代文：高延宗见士兵，都亲自握手，陈说自称名字，流着眼泪哭泣。
English: When Gao Yan met the soldiers, they all shook hands, said their names, and shed tears.

古文：众皆争为死，童儿女子亦乘屋攘袂，投砖石以御周军。
现代文：大家都争着为他效死，儿童女人也上了屋顶捋着袖子，投下砖石来抵抗周国军队。
English: Everyone was fighting to die for him, and women and children climbed onto the rooftops with their sleeves rolled up and threw bricks to resist the Zhou army.

古文：特进、开府那卢安生守太谷，以万兵叛。
现代文：特进、开府那卢安生防守太谷，带领一万士兵叛变。
English: Beiqi's special advance, Kaifu Naqian Sheng led the troops to guard Taiyuan, and led 10,000 people to mutiny.

古文：周军围晋阳，望之如黑云四合。
现代文：周国军队包围了晋阳，看上去就像黑色的云四面汇合。
English: The troops of the Northern Circuit besieged Jinyang. Looking back, it was as if dark clouds were closing in from all directions.

古文：延宗命莫多娄敬显、韩骨胡拒城南，和阿于子、段畅拒城东。
现代文：高延宗命令莫多娄敬显、韩骨胡拒守城南，和阿于子、段畅拒守城束。
English: Gao Yanzong ordered Modo Zong Jing Xing, Han Jian Hu to refuse to defend the south of the city, and Ayushi and Duan Chang to refuse to defend the city.

古文：延宗亲当周齐王于城北，奋大槊，往来督战，所向无前。
现代文：高延宗亲自在城北抵挡周齐王，举起大矛，来往督战，所向无人敢挡在前面。
English: Gao Yanzong personally resisted King Zhou Qi in the north of the city, raised a large spear, and fought back and forth. No one dared to stand in front of him.

古文：尚书令史沮山亦肥大多力，捉长刀步从，杀伤甚多。
现代文：尚书令史沮山也健壮有力，握着长刀步行跟随，杀伤很多。
English: Shang Shuling Shi Deshan also had a large body and was very strong. He carried a big sword and followed behind him, killing and wounding many enemy soldiers.

古文：武卫兰芙蓉、綦连延长皆死于阵。
现代文：武卫兰芙蓉、綦连延长都死在阵前。
English: Wuwei Lan Furong and Qilian Zenglong both died before the battle.

古文：阿于子、段畅以千骑投周。
现代文：和阿于子、段畅带着一千骑兵投降了周国。
English: He, Ayuko, and Duan Chang surrendered Zhou with a thousand cavalry.

古文：周军攻东门，际昏，遂入。
现代文：周国军队攻打束门，黄昏时候，攻进城。
English: Zhou's army attacked Sokumen and entered the city at dusk.

古文：进兵焚佛寺门屋，飞焰照天地。
现代文：进城的士兵焚烧佛寺的门屋，飞起的火焰照亮了天地。
English: A small group of enemy soldiers entered the city and set fire to the buildings of the temple. The flames soared into the sky, illuminating the world.

古文：延宗与敬显自门入，夹击之，周军大乱，争门相填压，齐人从后斫刺，死者二千余人。
现代文：高延宗和莫多娄敬显从门进入，夹击他们，周国军队大乱，争着过门口而相互填压，齐国人从后面砍刺，死去的有两千多人。
English: Gao Yanzong and Moduo Jianxian entered through the gate and clamped down on them. The Zhou army was in chaos, fighting over the gate and crushing each other. The Qi people cut the thorns from behind, and more than two thousand people died.

古文：周武帝左右略尽，自拔无路，承御上士张寿辄牵马头，贺拔佛恩以鞭拂其后，崎岖仅得出。
现代文：周武帝周围的人差不多没了，自己逃脱没有路，承御上士张寿就牵着马头，贺拔佛恩用鞭子在后面赶，高低不平刚刚能出来。
English: The people around Emperor Zhou Wu were almost gone, and there was no way for him to escape. Heir-apparent Staff Sergeant Zhang Shou led the horse by the head, and He Bafang chased behind with a whip. The high and low were just able to come out.

古文：齐人奋击，几中焉。
现代文：齐国人奋勇进击，几乎击中了周武帝。
English: The people of Qi bravely attacked and almost hit the Zhou Emperor.

古文：城东厄曲，佛恩及降者皮子信为之导，仅免，时四更也。
现代文：城束面两边高险中间狭窄道路曲折，贺拔佛恩和投降的人皮子信为他们引导，仅能逃脱，当时是四更天。
English: On both sides of the city, there are high risks, and the narrow roads are tortuous in the middle. He Baofeng and the person who surrendered, Pizixin, guided them, and they were only able to escape. At that time, it was four days later.

古文：延宗谓周武帝崩于乱兵，使于积尸中求长鬣者，不得。
现代文：高延宗认为周武帝死在乱军中，派人在堆积的死尸中寻找长胡须的人，没有找到。
English: Gao Yanzong believed that Emperor Zhou Wu died in the rebel army. He sent people to look for people with long beards among the piled up dead bodies, but they were not found.

古文：时齐人既胜，入坊饮酒，尽醉卧，延宗不复能整。
现代文：当时齐国人已经胜利，进入坊内喝酒，全都醉了躺下，高延宗不再能整顿。
English: At this time, the Qi army won the victory, entered the tavern to drink, all drunk, and Yan Zong could no longer reorganize the team.

古文：周武帝出城，饥甚，欲为遁逸计。
现代文：周武帝出城，十分饥饿，想作逃走的打算。
English: Emperor Zhou fled outside the city, very hungry and tired, and wanted to withdraw his troops.

古文：齐王宪及柱国王谊谏，以为去必不免。
现代文：齐王宇文宪和柱国王谊规劝，认为离去一定不能逃脱。
English: Zhou Qi, Wang Yu, Wen Xian and the pillar of the king's friendship advised him that the withdrawal would inevitably be pursued.

古文：延宗叛将段畅亦盛言城内空虚。
现代文：高延宗的叛变将领段畅也一再说城内空虚。
English: The renegade general of the Gao Yan sect, Duan Chang, also repeatedly said that the city was empty.

古文：周武帝乃驻马，鸣角收兵，俄顷复振。
现代文：周武帝就停下马，吹响号角收兵，不久又振作起来。
English: Zhou Wudi stopped his horse, blew the horn to call in the troops, and soon perked up again.

古文：诘旦，还攻东门，克之，又入南门。
现代文：清晨，返回攻打东门，攻占了它，又进入南门。
English: Early in the morning, they returned to attack the east gate, captured it, and entered the south gate.

古文：延宗战，力屈，走至城北，于人家见禽。
现代文：高延宗交战，力量用尽，逃到城北，在一户人家裹被捉。
English: Yan Zong fought hard, but was gradually unable to hold out and retreated to the north of the city, where he was captured by Zhou's army in a house.

古文：周武帝自投下马，执其手。
现代文：周武帝自己跳下马，握住他的手。
English: Zhou Wudi jumped down from the horse and took him by the hand.

古文：延宗辞曰： 死人手何敢迫至尊。 
现代文：高延宗推辞说： 死人的手怎么敢接近天子。 
English: Gao Yanzong said, "How dare the dead man's hand get close to the Son of Heaven!"

古文：帝曰： 两国天子，有何怨恶，直为百姓来耳。
现代文：周武帝说： 两国的天子，有什么怨恨，衹是为百姓来罢了。
English: Zhou Wudi said, "Son of Heaven of the two countries, if there is any grudge, it is just for the people.

古文：勿怖，终不相害。 
现代文：不要害怕，终究不会害你。 
English: Don't be afraid, I won't kill you.

古文：便复衣帽，礼之。
现代文：派人送来衣帽，对他以礼相待。
English: They sent clothes and a hat, and treated him with courtesy.

古文：先是，高都郡有山焉，绝壁临水，忽有黑书见，云： 齐亡延宗。 洗视逾明。
现代文：在这之前，高都郡有座山，一面绝壁靠近水，忽然有黑字出现，说 齐亡延宗 ，擦洗后再看更加明晰。
English: Prior to this, there was a mountain in Gautu County, one side of the cliff was close to the water, and suddenly black letters appeared, saying "Qi Du Yan Zong," which looked clearer after scrubbing.

古文：帝使人就写，使者改亡为上。
现代文：皇帝派人靠近书写，使者把 亡 字改为 上 。
English: The Son of Heaven sent someone to copy it, and the person who was sent changed the dead letter to the upper letter.

古文：至是应焉。
现代文：到逭时应验了。
English: At this time, this sentence came true.

古文：延宗败前，在邺厅事，见两日相连置，以十二月十三日晡时受敕守并州，明日建瘭号，不间日而被围，经宿，至食时而败。
现代文：高延宗失败前，在邺城厅事，看见两个太阳连在一起，在十二月十三日晡时接受韶令防守并州，第二天建立尊号，没隔一天而被包围，经过一夜，到吃早饭的时候战败。
English: Before the defeat of Gao Yanzong, he was in the Lucheng Office and saw the two suns joined together. At midnight on December 13th, he received the imperial order to defend and annex the state. The next day, he established the honorific title. Less than a day later, he was surrounded. After a night, he was defeated at breakfast time.

古文：年号德昌，好事者言其得二日云。
现代文：年号德昌，好事的人说遣衹能两曰。
English: The year is Dechang, and people who do good things say that it takes two days to send money.

古文：既而周武帝问取邺计，辞曰： 亡国大夫不可以图存，此非臣所及。 
现代文：不久周武帝询问夺取邺越的计策。推辞说： 亡国大夫不可以谋划国家存亡的大事，逭不是臣所做得到的。 
English: Soon after, Emperor Zhou Wu inquired about the strategy for seizing Xinyue, and was told: "The doctor of a defeated country cannot plan the important matter of the country's survival. That is not something a minister can do."

古文：强问之，乃曰： 若任城王援邺，臣不能知，若今主自守，陛下兵不血刃。 
现代文：强制问他，就说： 如果任城王援助邺城，臣不能知道，如果现在的君主自己防守，陛下兵不血刃。 
English: If you force him to ask, he will say: If the king of the city comes to the aid of the city, the vassal cannot know, if the current monarch defends himself, his majesty's soldiers are bloodless.

古文：及至长安，周武与齐君臣饮酒，令后主起舞，延宗悲不自持。
现代文：等到了长安，周武帝和齐国的君臣一起喝酒，命令后主跳舞，高延宗悲痛不能控制自己。
English: When they arrived in Chang'an, Emperor Zhou Wu drank wine with the princes and ministers of Qi and ordered the queen to dance. Gao Yanzong could not control his grief.

古文：屡欲仰药自裁，傅婢苦执谏而止。
现代文：几次想喝毒药自杀，照顾他的婢女苦苦拉住规劝才停止。
English: He tried to commit suicide by drinking poison several times, but his maid, who took care of him, had to persuade him to stop.

古文：未几，周武诬后主及延宗等，云遥应穆提婆反，使并赐死。
现代文：不久，周武帝诬陷后主以及高延宗等人，说是遥相呼应穆提婆谋反，派人都赐自尽。
English: Soon after, Emperor Zhou Wu framed the queen mother and Yan Zong, saying that they were far away in response to Muti's rebellious activities, and sent someone to give them the death penalty.

古文：皆自陈无之，延宗攘袂，泣而不言。
现代文：都自己陈述没有这事，高延宗捋起袖子，哭泣着不说话。
English: Both of them stated that there was no such thing. Gao Yanzong rolled up his sleeves, wept and did not speak.

古文：皆以椒塞口而死。
现代文：都用花椒塞住死去。
English: They all died after being stuffed with pepper.

古文：明年，李妃收殡之。
现代文：第二年，李妃收尸将他们安葬。
English: The following year, Li Fei collected the bodies and buried them.

古文：后主之传位于太子也，孙正言窃谓人曰： 我武定中为广州士曹，闻襄城人曹普演有言，高王诸儿，阿保当为天子，至高德之承之，当灭。 
现代文：后主传位给太子，孙正言私下对人说： 我毖室年间任卢塑士曹，听说塞垣人萱登远有这样的话，直至的儿子们，阿保应当做天子，到了高德之承之，就会灭亡。 
English: Afterward, the position was passed on to the crown prince, and Sun Zhengyan said to the people in private, "In my childhood, Lu Shuxiao was appointed, and I heard that the people of Segaki were so far away, until the sons, Ah Bao should be the son of heaven, and when Gao De succeeded, he would perish.

古文：阿保谓天保，德之谓德昌也，承之谓后主年号承光，其言竟信云。
现代文：阿保是说天保，德之是说垄旦，承之是说厘王的年号丞光，他的话竟然成事实。
English: A Bao is said to be Tian Bao, De Zhi is said to be Rong Dan, He Zhi is said to be the year of Li Wang, and his words turned out to be true.

古文：渔阳王绍信，文襄第六子也。
现代文：渔阳王绍信，文襄帝的第六个儿子。
English: He died with pepper stuffed in his mouth. Gao Shaoxin, the sixth son of Emperor Wenxiang, was a fishing king.

古文：历特进、开府、中领军、护军、青州刺史。
现代文：历任特进、开府、中领军、护军、青州刺史。
English: The successors of the special advance, the opening of the prefecture, the middle leader, the escort, and the history of Qingzhou.

古文：行过渔阳，与大富人钟长命同床坐。
现代文：路过渔疆，和大富人钟长命同床坐着。
English: Passing through the fishing region, and sitting in bed with the rich man.

古文：太守郑道盖谒，长命欲起，绍信不听，曰： 此何物小人，而主人公为起。 
现代文：太守鄞谴谒见，钟长命想站起来，高绍信不让，说： 这是什么小人，而主人公为他站起来。 
English: Seeing this, Zhong Chang Sheng wanted to stand up, but Gao Shaoxin would not let him, saying, "What kind of villain is this, but the hero stood up for him?"

古文：乃与长命结为义兄弟，妃与长命妻为姊妹，责其阖家幼长皆有赠贿，钟氏因此遂贫。
现代文：于是和钟长佥结为义兄弟，妃子和钟长命的妻子结为姐妹，要求他全家老小都赠送财物，钟旦因此就穷了。
English: As a result, he married his brother-in-law, Zhong Changyu, and his concubine and the wife of Zhong Changyu became sisters. He asked his entire family to donate their wealth. As a result, Zhongdan became poor.

古文：齐灭，死于长安。
现代文：变旦灭亡，产钮值死在垦叁。
English: If it is destroyed, the value of the button will be lost.

