古文：淮阴侯韩信者，淮阴人也。
现代文：淮阴侯韩信，是淮阴人。
English: Huaiyin Hou Hanxin is a Huaiyin man.

古文：始为布衣时，贫，无行，不得推择为吏；又不能治生商贾。常从人寄食饮，人多厌之者。
现代文：当初为平民百姓时，贫穷，没有好品行，不能够被推选去做官，又不能做买卖维持生活，经常寄居在别人家吃闲饭，人们大多厌恶他。
English: When he was a commoner, he was poor, had no good character, could not be elected to office, could not do business to make a living, and often stayed at other people's homes to eat idle food. People mostly detested him.

古文：常数从其下乡南昌亭长寄食，数月，亭长妻患之，乃晨炊蓐食。
现代文：曾经多次前往下乡南昌亭亭长处吃闲饭，接连数月，亭长的妻子担心韩信，就提前做好早饭，端到内室床上去吃。
English: He had gone to Nanchang Pavilion many times to have a leisurely meal. For several months in a row, the pavilion manager's wife worried about Han Xin, so she made breakfast in advance and brought it to the inner room to eat.

古文：食时信往，不为具食。
现代文：开饭的时候，韩信去了，却不给他准备饭食。
English: When it was time for dinner, Han Xin went, but no meal was prepared for him.

古文：信亦知其意，怒，竟绝去。
现代文：韩信也明白他们的用意。一怒之下，居然离去不再回来。
English: Han Xin also understood their intention. In a fit of anger, he actually left and never came back.

古文：信钓于城下，诸母漂，有一母见信饥，饭信，竟漂数十日。
现代文：韩信在城下钓鱼，有几位老大娘漂洗涤丝棉，其中一位大娘看见韩信饿了，就拿出饭给韩信吃。几十天都如此，直到漂洗完毕。
English: Han Xin was fishing at the foot of the city. There were several older women rinsing the polyester cotton. When one of the older women saw that Han Xin was hungry, she brought out rice for him to eat. This went on for dozens of days until the rinsing was complete.

古文：信喜，谓漂母曰： 吾必有以重报母。 
现代文：韩信很高兴，对那位大娘说： 我将来一定重重地报答您老人家。 
English: Han Xin was very happy and said to the old lady, "I will surely repay your kindness in the future."

古文：母怒曰： 大丈夫不能自食，吾哀王孙而进食，岂望报乎！ 
现代文：大娘生气地说： 大丈夫不能养活自己，我是可怜你这位公子才给你饭吃，难道是希望您报答吗？ 
English: The eldest daughter said angrily: "It's okay, my husband can't feed himself, I feel sorry for you, this gentleman only gave you food to eat, is it because I want you to repay me?"

古文：淮阴屠中少年有侮信者，曰： 若虽长大，好带刀剑，中情怯耳。 
现代文：淮阴屠户中有个年轻人侮辱韩信说： 你虽然长的高大，喜欢带刀佩剑，其实是个胆小鬼罢了。 
English: A young man in a slaughterhouse in Huaiyin insulted Han Xin, saying: Although you are tall and tall and like to carry a sword, you are actually a coward.

古文：众辱之曰： 信能死，刺我；不能死，出我袴下。 
现代文：又当众侮辱他说： 你要不怕死，就拿剑刺我；如果怕死，就从我胯下爬过去。 
English: And they insulted him in public, saying, "If you are not afraid of death, then put your sword in my hand; but if you are afraid of death, then pass over from under my hand."

古文：於是信孰视之，俛出袴下，蒲伏。
现代文：于是韩信仔细地打量了他一番，低下身去，趴在地上，从他的胯下爬了过去。
English: So Han Xin took a good look at him, bent down, lay on the ground, and crawled under his arm.

古文：一市人皆笑信，以为怯。
现代文：满街的人都笑话韩信，认为他胆小。
English: People all over the street make fun of Han Xin and think he is a coward.

古文：及项梁渡淮，信杖剑从之，居麾下，无所知名。
现代文：等到项粱率军渡过了淮河，韩信持剑追随他，在项粱部下，却没有名声。
English: When Xiang Yu's army crossed the Huai River, Han Xin followed him with a sword, but he had no reputation among Xiang Yu's subordinates.

古文：项梁败，又属项羽，羽以为郎中。
现代文：项粱战败，韩信又隶属项羽，项羽让他做了郎中。
English: Xiang Yu was defeated, Han Xin was subordinate to Xiang Yu, and Xiang Yu made him his henchman.

古文：数以策干项羽，羽不用。
现代文：他屡次向项羽献策，以求重用，项羽都没有采纳。
English: He repeatedly proposed ideas to Xiang Yu in order to reuse it, but Xiang Yu did not adopt them.

古文：汉王之入蜀，信亡楚归汉，未得知名，为连敖。
现代文：汉王刘邦入蜀，韩信脱离楚军归顺了汉王。因为没有什么名声，只做了接待宾客的小官。
English: Han king Liu Bang entered Shu, Han Xin left the Chu army and submitted to the Han king. Because he had no reputation, he only served as a minor official to receive guests.

古文：坐法当斩，其辈十三人皆已斩，次至信，信乃仰视，适见滕公，曰： 上不欲就天下乎？
现代文：后来犯法被判处斩刑，同案的十三人都被杀了，轮到韩信，他抬头仰视，正好看见滕公，说： 汉王不想成就统一天下的功业吗？
English: Later, he was sentenced to beheading for breaking the law. Thirteen of his co-defendants were killed. It was Han Xin's turn. He looked up, saw Tenggong, and said, "Doesn't the King of Han want to accomplish the task of unifying the country?

古文：何为斩壮士！ 
现代文：为什么要斩杀壮士！ 
English: Why kill a brave man!

古文：滕公奇其言，壮其貌，释而不斩。
现代文：滕公感到他的话不同凡响，见他相貌堂堂，就放了他。
English: Teng Gong felt that his words were extraordinary, and when he saw that he looked respectable, he released him.

古文：与语，大说之。言於上，上拜以为治粟都尉，上未之奇也。
现代文：和韩信交谈，很欣赏他，把这事报告汉王，汉王任命韩信为治粟都尉。但汉王并没有看出他有什么特别的才能。
English: He talked with Han Xin, admired him very much, and reported this to the Han king, who appointed Han Xin as the governor of the poppy fields. However, the Han king did not see any special talent in him.

古文：信数与萧何语，何奇之。
现代文：韩信多次跟萧何谈话，萧何认为他是位奇才。
English: Han Xin talked to Xiao He many times, and Xiao He thought he was a genius.

古文：至南郑，诸将行道亡者数十人。
现代文：到达南郑，各路将领在半路上逃跑的有几十人。
English: When they reached Nan Zheng, there were dozens of generals who ran away halfway.

古文：信度何等已数言上，上不我用，即亡。
现代文：韩信揣测萧何等人已多次向汉王推荐自己，汉王不任用自己，也就逃走了。
English: Han Xin speculated that Xiao He and others had repeatedly recommended themselves to Han Wang, but Han Wang did not appoint himself and fled.

古文：何闻信亡，不及以闻，自追之。
现代文：萧何听说韩信逃跑了，来不及报告汉王，亲自追赶他。
English: When Xiao He heard that Han Xin had run away, he couldn't wait to report to Han Wang and chased after him himself.

古文：人有言上曰： 丞相何亡。 
现代文：有人报告汉王说： 丞相萧何逃跑了。 
English: It was reported that Han Wang said, "Josho Xiao He has run away."

古文：上大怒，如失左右手。
现代文：汉王大怒，因为失去萧何如同失去了左右手。
English: Han Wang was furious, because losing Xiao He was like losing his right and left hand.

古文：居一二日，何来谒上，上且怒且喜，骂何曰： 若亡，何也？ 
现代文：过了一两天，萧何来拜见汉王，汉王又是恼怒又是高兴。骂萧何道： 你逃跑，是为什么？ 
English: A day or two later, Xiao He came to see the Han king, who was both angry and happy. He scolded Xiao He, "Why did you run away?

古文：何曰： 臣不敢亡也，臣追亡者。 
现代文：萧何说： 我不敢逃跑，我去追赶逃跑的人。 
English: Xiao He said, "I don't dare to run away, I will go after the person who runs away."

古文：上曰： 若所追者谁？ 
现代文：汉王说： 你追赶的人是谁呢？ 
English: King Han said, "Who are you chasing?"

古文：何曰： 韩信也。 
现代文：回答说： 是韩信。 
English: He replied, "It's Han Xin."

古文：上复骂曰： 诸将亡者以十数，公无所追；追信，诈也。 
现代文：汉王又骂道： 各路将领逃跑了几十人，您没去追任何人；却去追韩信，是骗人。 
English: Han Wang also scolded, "Dozens of generals fled from all directions. You didn't go after anyone, but you went after Han Xin, which is a lie.

古文：何曰： 诸将易得耳。
现代文：萧何说： 那些将领容易得到。
English: Xiao He said: Those generals are easy to get.

古文：至如信者，国士无双。
现代文：至于像韩信这样的杰出人物，普天之下找不出第二人。
English: As for such an outstanding person as Han Xin, there is no second person in the world.

古文：王必欲长王汉中，无所事信；必欲争天下，非信无所与计事者。
现代文：大王如果想要长期在汉中称王，自然用不着韩信，如果想要争夺天下，除了韩信就再没有可以和您计议大事的人了。
English: If you want to be the king of Hanzhong for a long time, you don't need Hanxin. If you want to compete for the world, there is no one except Hanxin who can discuss important matters with you.

古文：顾王策安所决耳。 
现代文：但看大王怎么决策了。 
English: But it's up to the king to decide.

古文：王曰： 吾亦欲东耳，安能郁郁久居此乎？ 
现代文：汉王说： 我也是想要向东发展啊，怎么能够内心苦闷地长期呆在这里呢？ 
English: Han Wang said: I also want to develop to the east, how can I stay here for a long time with a heavy heart?

古文：何曰： 王计必欲东，能用信，信即留；不能用，信终亡耳。 
现代文：萧何说： 大王决意向东发展，能够重用韩信，韩信就会留下来，不能重用，韩信终究要逃跑的。 
English: Xiao He said: The great king is determined to develop eastward. If Han Xin can be reused, Han Xin will stay. If Han Xin cannot be reused, Han Xin will eventually flee.

古文：王曰： 吾为公以为将。 
现代文：汉王说： 我看在您的情面上，让他做个将军吧。 
English: King Han said, "I think it would be in your best interest to make him a general."

古文：何曰： 虽为将，信必不留。 
现代文：萧何说： 即使是做将军，韩信一定不肯留下。 
English: Xiao He said: Even if he were to become a general, Han Xin would definitely not want to stay.

古文：王曰： 以为大将。 
现代文：汉王说： 任命他做大将军。 
English: Han Wang said, "Appoint him as grand general."

古文：何曰： 幸甚。 
现代文：萧何说： 太好了。 
English: Xiao He said: That's great.

古文：於是王欲召信拜之。
现代文：于是汉王就要把韩信召来任命他。
English: Therefore, the Han king summoned Han Xin to appoint him.

古文：何曰： 王素慢，无礼，今拜大将如呼小兒耳，此乃信所以去也。
现代文：萧何说： 大王向来对人轻慢，不讲礼节，如今任命大将军就像呼喊小孩儿一样。这就是韩信要离去的原因啊。
English: Xiao He said: The great king has always been contemptuous of people and does not speak of etiquette, and now appointing a general is like calling a child. That's why Han Xin wants to leave.

古文：王必欲拜之，择良日，斋戒，设坛场，具礼，乃可耳。 
现代文：大王决心要任命他，要选择良辰吉日，亲自斋戒，设置高坛和广场，礼仪完备才可以啊。 
English: The great king decided to appoint him, to choose a good time and a good day, to fast in person, to set up a high altar and a square, and to complete the etiquette.

古文：王许之。
现代文：汉王答应了萧何的要求。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：诸将皆喜，人人各自以为得大将。
现代文：众将听到要拜大将都很高兴，人人都以为自己要做大将军了。
English: The generals were very happy to hear that they were going to be promoted to general. Everyone thought they were going to be a great general.

古文：至拜大将，乃韩信也，一军皆惊。
现代文：等到任命大将时，被任命的竟然是韩信，全军都感到惊讶。
English: When it came time to appoint a general, the whole army was surprised that it was Han Xin who was appointed.

古文：信拜礼毕，上坐。
现代文：任命韩信的仪式结束后，汉王就座。
English: After the ceremony of appointing Han Xin, Han Wang took his seat.

古文：王曰： 丞相数言将军，将军何以教寡人计策？ 
现代文：汉王说： 丞相多次称道将军，将军用什么计策指教我呢？ 
English: Han Wang said, "The prime minister praised the general many times. What strategy did the general use to instruct me?

古文：信谢，因问王曰： 今东乡争权天下，岂非项王邪？ 汉王曰： 然。 
现代文：韩信谦让了一番，趁势问汉王说： 如今向东争夺天下，难道敌人不是项王吗？ 汉王说： 是。 
English: Han Xinqian gave in and took advantage of the situation to ask the Han king: "Nowadays, we are competing for the world to the east. Isn't the enemy Xiang Wang?" The Han king said: "Yes."

古文：曰： 大王自料勇悍仁彊孰与项王？ 
现代文：韩信说： 大王自己估计在勇敢、强悍、仁厚、兵力方面与项王相比，谁强？ 
English: Han Xin said: The great king himself estimated that compared with Xiang Wang in terms of bravery, strength, benevolence and military strength, who is stronger?

古文：汉王默然良久，曰： 不如也。 
现代文：汉王沉默了好长时间，说： 不如项王。 
English: Han Wang was silent for a long time and said, "Not as good as Xiang Wang."

古文：信再拜贺曰： 惟信亦为大王不如也。
现代文：韩信拜了两拜，赞成地说： 我也认为大王比不上他呀。
English: Han Xin bowed twice and said approvingly, "I also think that the great king is no match for him."

古文：然臣尝事之，请言项王之为人也。
现代文：然而，我曾经侍奉过他，请让我说说项王的为人吧。
English: However, I once served him, so let me tell you about him.

古文：项王喑噁叱咤，千人皆废，然不能任属贤将，此特匹夫之勇耳。
现代文：项王震怒咆哮时，吓得千百人不敢稍动，但不能放手任用有才能的将领，这只不过是匹夫之勇罢了。
English: When he roared with rage, he scared hundreds of people into not moving, but he couldn't let go of appointing talented generals. It was just the courage of a peacock.

古文：项王见人，恭敬慈爱，言语呕呕，人有疾病，涕泣分食饮；至使人有功当封爵者，印刓敝，忍不能予。此所谓妇人之仁也。
现代文：项王待人恭敬慈爱，言语温和，有生病的人，心疼的流泪，将自己的饮食分给他，等到有的人立下战功，该加封进爵时，把刻好的大印放在手里玩磨的失去了棱角，舍不得给人，这就是所说的妇人的仁慈啊。
English: The king treats people with respect and kindness, his words are mild, there are sick people who shed tears of distress, he gives his food and drink to him, until some people have made war exploits, when it is time to add a knighthood, they put the engraved seal in their hands and play with it. They have lost their edges and corners and are reluctant to give it to others. This is the so-called woman's kindness.

古文：项王虽霸天下而臣诸侯，不居关中而都彭城。
现代文：项王即使是称霸天下，使诸侯臣服，但他放弃了关中的有利地形，而建都彭城。
English: Even though King Xiang dominated the world and subjugated the princes, he gave up the favorable terrain of Guanzhong and built the capital of Pengcheng.

古文：有背义帝之约而以亲爱王，诸侯不平。
现代文：又违背了义帝的约定，将自己的亲信分封为王，诸侯们愤愤不平。
English: He also violated the agreement with the emperor and made his own cronies into kings. The lords were indignant.

古文：诸侯之见项王迁逐义帝，置江南，亦皆归逐其主而自王善地。
现代文：诸侯们看到项王把义帝迁移到江南僻远的地方，也都回去驱逐自己的国君，占据了好的地方自立为王。
English: When the princes saw that Xiang Wang had moved Yidi to a remote place in the south of the Yangtze River, they also went back to expel their own sovereigns and occupied a good place to become independent kings.

古文：项王所过，无不残灭者，天下多怨，百姓不亲附，特劫於威，彊耳。
现代文：项王军队所经过的地方，没有不横遭摧残毁灭的，天下的人大都怨恨，百姓不愿归附，只不过迫于威势，勉强服从罢了。
English: Wherever the king's army passed, there was nothing but devastation and destruction. Most people in the world were resentful, and the people did not want to join in, but were forced by force to reluctantly obey.

古文：名虽为霸，实失天下心。
现代文：虽然名义上是霸主，实际上却失去了天下的民心。
English: Although it is nominally the hegemon, it has actually lost the hearts and minds of the people around the world.

古文：故曰其彊易弱。
现代文：所以说他的优势很容易转化为劣势。
English: So his advantage could easily turn into a disadvantage.

古文：今大王诚能反其道：任天下武勇，何所不诛！
现代文：如今大王果真能够与他反其道而行：任用天下英勇善战的人才，有什么不可以被诛灭的呢？
English: Now the great king can really go the opposite way with him: what can not be destroyed by appointing the world's heroic and warlike talents?

古文：以天下城邑封功臣，何所不服！
现代文：用天下的城邑分封给有功之臣，有什么人不心服口服呢？
English: Using the world's cities and towns to award meritorious vassals, who wouldn't be impressed?

古文：以义兵从思东归之士，何所不散！
现代文：以正义之师，顺从将士东归的心愿，有什么样的敌人不能击溃呢？
English: What kind of enemy can't be defeated by a righteous teacher who obeys the wishes of the returning soldiers?

古文：且三秦王为秦将，将秦子弟数岁矣，所杀亡不可胜计，又欺其众降诸侯。
现代文：况且项羽分封的三个王，原来都是秦朝的将领，率领秦地的子弟打了好几年仗，被杀死和逃跑的多到没法计算，又欺骗他们的部下向诸侯投降。
English: Moreover, the three kings of Xiang Yu's division were originally all generals of the Qin Dynasty. They led the sons of Qin to fight for several years, were killed and fled more than can be counted, and deceived their subordinates into surrendering to the princes.

古文：至新安，项王诈阬秦降卒二十余万，唯独邯、欣、翳得脱，秦父兄怨此三人，痛入骨髓。
现代文：到达新安，项王狡诈地活埋了已投降的秦军二十多万人，唯独章邯、司马欣和董翳得以留存，秦地的父老兄弟把这三个人恨入骨髓。
English: Arriving in Xin'an, Xiang Wang cunningly buried more than 200,000 surrendered Qin soldiers alive. Only Zhang Jun, Sima Xin and Dong Jun were able to survive. The fathers and brothers of Qin hated these three people to the marrow of their bones.

古文：今楚彊以威王此三人，秦民莫爱也。
现代文：而今项羽凭恃着威势，强行封立这三个人为王，秦地的百姓没有谁爱戴他们。
English: Now, however, Xiang Yu used his power to forcibly enthrone these three men as kings. The people of Qin did not love them.

古文：大王之入武关，秋豪无所害，除秦苛法，与秦民约，法三章耳。秦民无不欲得大王王秦者。
现代文：而大王进入武关，秋毫无犯，废除了秦朝的苛酷法令，与秦地百姓约法三章，秦地百姓没有不想要大王在秦地做王的。
English: However, when the great king entered Wuguan, he did not commit any crimes, abolished the harsh laws of the Qin Dynasty, and made a three-chapter agreement with the people of Qin. The people of Qin did not want the great king to be king in Qin.

古文：於诸侯之约，大王当王关中，关中民咸知之。大王失职入汉中，秦民无不恨者。
现代文：根据诸侯的成约，大王理当在关中做王，关中的百姓都知道这件事，大王失掉了应得的爵位进入汉中，秦地百姓没有不遗憾的。
English: According to the agreement of the princes, the great king should be the king in Guanzhong. The people in Guanzhong knew about this. The great king lost his deserved title and entered the Han Dynasty. The people in Qin did not regret it.

古文：今大王举而东，三秦可传檄而定也。 
现代文：如今大王发动军队向东挺进，只要一道文书三秦封地就可以平定了。 
English: Now that the great king has launched an army to advance eastward, as long as there is a document, the three Qin fiefs can be leveled.

古文：於是汉王大喜，自以为得信晚。
现代文：于是汉王特别高兴，自认为得到韩信太晚了。
English: As a result, Han Wang was particularly pleased, as he thought it was too late to get the Korean letter.

古文：遂听信计，部署诸将所击。
现代文：就听从韩信的谋划，部署各路将领攻击的目标。
English: He followed Han Xin's plan and deployed all generals to attack the target.

古文：八月，汉王举兵东出陈仓，定三秦。
现代文：八月，汉王出兵经过陈仓向东挺进，平定了三秦。
English: In August, Han Wang sent troops to advance eastward through Chencang and pacified Sanqin.

古文：汉二年，出关，收魏、河南，韩、殷王皆降。
现代文：汉二年，兵出函谷关，收服了魏王、河南王，韩王、殷王也相继投降。
English: In the second year of the Han Dynasty, soldiers were sent to Hankow Pass, where they conquered the Wei and Henan kings, and the Han and Yin kings also surrendered one after another.

古文：合齐赵共击楚。
现代文：汉王又联合齐王、赵王共同攻击楚军。
English: Han Wang also united with Qi Wang and Zhao Wang to jointly attack the Chu army.

古文：四月，至彭城，汉兵败散而还。
现代文：四月，到彭城，汉军兵败，溃散而回。
English: In April, in Pengcheng, the Chinese army was defeated and dispersed.

古文：信复收兵与汉王会荥阳，复击破楚京、索之间，以故，楚兵卒不能西。
现代文：韩信又收集溃散的人马与汉王在荥阳会合，在京县、索亭之间又摧垮楚军。因此楚军始终不能西进。
English: Han Xin also gathered the scattered men and horses to meet with the Han king in Fenyang, and destroyed the Chu army between Jing County and So Ting. Therefore, the Chu army could not advance westward.

古文：汉之败卻彭城，塞王欣、翟王翳亡汉降楚，齐、赵亦反汉与楚和。
现代文：汉军在彭城败退之后，塞王司马欣、翟王董翳叛汉降楚，齐国和赵国也背叛汉王跟楚国和解。
English: After the defeat of the Han army in Pengcheng, King Sima Xin of Sai and King Dong of Shao rebelled against Han and surrendered to Chu. The Kingdom of Qi and the Kingdom of Zhao also rebelled against Han and reconciled with Chu.

古文：六月，魏王豹谒归视亲疾，至国，即绝河关反汉，与楚约和。
现代文：六月，魏王豹以探望老母疾病为由请假回乡，一到封国，立即切断黄河渡口临晋关的交通要道，反叛汉王，与楚军订约讲和。
English: In June, Wei Wangbao took a leave of absence to visit his ailing mother and returned to his hometown. As soon as he arrived in Hunan, he immediately cut off the important transportation route of the Yellow River ferry to Jinguan, rebelled against the Han king, and signed a peace treaty with the Chu army.

古文：汉王使郦生说豹，不下。
现代文：汉王派郦生游说魏豹，没有成功。
English: Han Wang sent his son to lobby Wei Pan to succeed, but he was unsuccessful.

古文：其八月，以信为左丞相，击魏。
现代文：这年八月，汉王任命韩信为左丞相，攻打魏王豹。
English: In August of that year, Han Xin was appointed by the Han king as the minister of the left, attacking Wei Wangbao.

古文：魏王盛兵蒲坂，塞临晋，信乃益为疑兵，陈船欲度临晋，而伏兵从夏阳以木罂缻渡军，袭安邑。
现代文：魏王把主力部队驻扎在蒲坂，堵塞了黄河渡口临晋关。韩信就增设疑兵，故意排列开战船，假装要在临晋渡河，而隐蔽的部队却从夏阳用木制的盆瓮浮水渡河，偷袭安邑。
English: The king of Wei stationed the main force in Busan and blocked the Yellow River ferry at Linjin Pass. Han Xin then increased the number of suspicious soldiers, deliberately lined up the warships and pretended to cross the river at Linjin, while the hidden troops crossed the river from Xiayang with wooden pots of floating water and secretly attacked Anyi.

古文：魏王豹惊，引兵迎信，信遂虏豹，定魏为河东郡。
现代文：魏王豹惊慌失措，带领军队迎击韩信，韩信就俘虏了魏豹，平定了魏地，改制为河东郡。
English: Wei Wangpiao panicked and led the army to meet Han Xin. Han Xin captured Wei Piao, leveled Wei, and reformed it into Hedong County.

古文：汉王遣张耳与信俱，引兵东，北击赵、代。
现代文：汉王派张耳和韩信一起，领兵向东进发，向北攻击赵国和代国。
English: The Han king sent Zhang Er and Han Xin together to lead the army to the east and attack Zhao and Dai countries to the north.

古文：後九月，破代兵，禽夏说阏与。
现代文：这年闰九月打垮了代国军队。在阏与生擒了夏说。
English: This year's leap September defeated the national army.

古文：信之下魏破代，汉辄使人收其精兵，诣荥阳以距楚。
现代文：韩信攻克魏国，摧毁代国后，汉王就立刻派人调走韩信的精锐部队，开往荥阳去抵御楚军。
English: After Han Xin conquered Wei and destroyed the Qing Dynasty, the Han king immediately dispatched Han Xin's elite troops to Poyang to resist the Chu army.

古文：信与张耳以兵数万，欲东下井陉击赵。
现代文：韩信和张耳率领几万人马，想要突破井陉关，攻打赵国。
English: Han Xin and Zhang Er led tens of thousands of men and horses to break through the pass and attack Zhao.

古文：赵王、成安君陈馀闻汉且袭之也，聚兵井陉口，号称二十万。
现代文：赵王歇和成安君陈馀听说汉军将要来袭击赵国，在井陉口聚集兵力，号称二十万大军。
English: Zhao Wang Xie and Cheng Anjun Chen Yu heard that the Chinese army was going to attack Zhao Province, and gathered forces at the well's mouth, claiming to be a two hundred thousand strong army.

古文：广武君李左车说成安君曰： 闻汉将韩信涉西河，虏魏王，禽夏说，新喋血阏与，今乃辅以张耳，议欲下赵，此乘胜而去国远斗，其锋不可当。
现代文：广武君李左车向成安君献计说： 听说汉将韩信渡过西河，俘虏魏豹，生擒夏说，新近血洗阏与，如今又以张耳辅助，计议要夺取赵国。这是乘胜利的锐气离开本国远征，其锋芒不可阻挡。
English: Guangwu's Li Zuo Che presented his plan to Cheng Anjun, saying: "I heard that Han crossed Han Xin across the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Xin crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Xin crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Xin crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Han crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Han crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Han crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Han crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan. I heard that Han Han crossed the West River and captured Wei Pan.

古文：臣闻 千里餽粮，士有饥色，樵苏後爨，师不宿饱 。
现代文：可是，我听说 千里运送粮饷，士兵们就会面带饥色，临时砍柴割草烧火做饭，军队就不能经常吃饱。 
English: However, I heard that when grain is transported thousands of miles, the soldiers will be hungry, temporarily cutting wood, cutting grass, cooking on fire, and the army cannot always eat enough.

古文：今井陉之道，车不得方轨，骑不得成列，行数百里，其势粮食必在其後。愿足下假臣奇兵三万人，从间道绝其辎重；足下深沟高垒，坚营勿与战。
现代文：眼下井陉这条道路，战车不能并列行进，战马不能排成行，行进的军队迤逦数百里，运粮食的队伍势必远远地落到后边，希望您临时拨给我奇兵三万人，从隐蔽小路拦截他们的粮草，您就深挖战壕，高筑营垒，坚守军营，不要跟他们交战。
English: At the moment, the road is blocked, the chariots cannot march side by side, the horses cannot line up, the marching army is hundreds of miles away, and the team transporting grain is bound to fall far behind. I hope that you will temporarily assign me thirty thousand soldiers, intercept their grain and grass from hidden paths, you will dig deep trenches, build high camps, and stick to the camp, do not fight with them.

古文：彼前不得斗，退不得还，吾奇兵绝其後，使野无所掠，不至十日，而两将之头可致於戏下。
现代文：他们向前不得战斗，向后无法退却，我出奇兵截断他们的后路，使他们在荒野什么东西也抢掠不到，用不了十天，韩信和张耳的人头就可送到将军帐下。
English: They were not allowed to fight forward and could not retreat backward. I made a surprise attack to cut off their rear path, so that they could not loot anything in the wilderness. Within ten days, the heads of Han Xin and Zhang Er could be sent to the general's account.

古文：愿君留意臣之计。
现代文：希望您仔细考虑我的计策。
English: I hope you will carefully consider my proposal.

古文：否，必为二子所禽矣。 
现代文：否则，一定会被他二人俘虏。 
English: Otherwise, both of them would have been captured.

古文：成安君，儒者也，常称 义兵不用诈谋奇计 ，曰： 吾闻兵法 十则围之，倍则战 ，今韩信兵号数万，其实不过数千，能千里而袭我，亦已罢极。
现代文：成安君，是信奉儒家学说的刻板书生，经常宣称正义的军队不用欺骗诡计，说： 我听说兵书上讲，兵力十倍于敌人，就可以包围它，超过敌人一倍就可以交战。现在韩信的军队号称数万，实际上不过数千。竟然跋涉千里来袭击我们，已经极其疲惫。
English: Cheng Anjun, a strict scholar who believes in the Confucian doctrine, often claims that a righteous army does not need to use deception and trickery, saying: I heard that the military book said that if the troop strength is ten times that of the enemy, it can surround it, and if it is more than twice that of the enemy, it can engage in battle. Now, Han Xin's army claims to be tens of thousands, but it is actually only thousands. It has traveled thousands of miles to attack us, and it is already extremely tired.

古文：今如此避而不击，後有大者，何以加之！
现代文：如今像这样回避不出击，强大的后续部队到来，又怎么对付呢？
English: Now that there is no way to avoid an attack like this, and powerful follow-up troops are coming, how can we deal with it?

古文：则诸侯谓吾怯，而轻来伐我。 
现代文：诸侯们会认为我胆小，就会轻易地来攻打我们。 
English: The lords will think I'm a coward, and they will easily attack us.

古文：不听广武君策。
现代文：不采纳广武君的计谋。
English: He did not adopt Guangwu's stratagem.

古文：广武君策不用。韩信使人间视，知其不用，还报，则大喜，乃敢引兵遂下。
现代文：韩信派人暗中打探，了解到广武君的计策没有被采用，侦探回来报告，韩信大喜，才敢领兵进入井陉狭道。
English: Han Xin sent someone to secretly investigate and learned that Guang Wu Jun's strategy had not been adopted. The detective came back to report that Han Xin was overjoyed and dared to lead soldiers into Jingyao Narrow Road.

古文：未至井陉口三十里，止舍。
现代文：离井陉口还有三十里，停下来宿营。
English: There are still thirty miles to go from the wellhead, so stop and camp.

古文：夜半传发。选轻骑二千人，人持一赤帜，从间道萆山而望赵军，诫曰： 赵见我走，必空壁逐我，若疾入赵壁，拔赵帜，立汉赤帜。 
现代文：半夜传令出发，挑选了两千名轻装骑兵，每人拿一面红旗，从隐蔽小道上山，在山上隐蔽着观察赵国的军队。韩信告诫说： 交战时，赵军见我军败逃，一定会倾巢出动追赶我军，你们火速冲进赵军的营垒，拔掉赵军的旗帜，竖起汉军的旗帜。 
English: In the middle of the night, a signal was sent out, and two thousand light cavalrymen were selected, each carrying a red flag. They went up the mountain from a hidden path and observed the Zhao army in the mountains. Han Xin warned: In the war, when the Zhao army saw our army was defeated and fled, they would certainly rush out to chase our army. You rushed into the Zhao army's camp, pulled down the Zhao army's flag, and erected the Chinese army's flag.

古文：令其裨将传食，曰： 今日破赵会食！ 
现代文：又让副将传达开饭的命令。说： 今天攻破赵军以后会餐 。
English: He also asked the vice-commander to convey the order to open the meal. He said: After defeating the Zhao Army today, we will have a meal.

古文：诸将皆莫信，详应曰： 诺。 
现代文：将领们都不相信，假意回答道： 好。 
English: The generals didn't believe him and replied, "Okay."

古文：谓军吏曰： 赵已先据便地为壁，且彼未见吾大将旗鼓，未肯击前行，恐吾至阻险而还。 
现代文：韩信对手下军官说： 赵军已先占据了有利地形筑造了营垒，他们看不到我们大将旗帜、仪仗，就不会出来攻打我军的先头部队，怕我们到了险要的地方退回去。 
English: Han Xin said to his subordinate officers: Zhao's army has first occupied the favorable terrain and built fortifications. They can't see our general flag and honorable battle, so they won't come out to attack the leading troops of our army. They are afraid that we will retreat to the critical place.

古文：信乃使万人先行，出，背水陈。
现代文：韩信就派出万人为先头部队，出了井陉口，背靠河水摆开战斗队列。
English: Han Xin sent ten thousand men as the leading troops, went out of the well mouth, backed by the river, and set up a battle line.

古文：赵军望见而大笑。
现代文：赵军远远望见，大笑不止。
English: Zhao Jun can be seen far away, laughing uncontrollably.

古文：平旦，信建大将之旗鼓，鼓行出井陉口，赵开壁击之，大战良久。
现代文：天刚亮的时候，韩信设置起大将的旗帜和仪仗，大吹大擂地开出井陉口。赵军打开营垒攻击汉军，两军对战了很久。
English: At the break of dawn, Han Xin set up the general's banner and ceremonial battle, and opened the well's mouth with great fanfare. Zhao's army opened the camp to attack the Han army, and the two armies fought for a long time.

古文：於是信、张耳详弃鼓旗，走水上军。
现代文：这时候，韩信、张耳假装抛旗弃鼓，逃回河边的阵地。
English: At this time, Han Xin and Zhang Er pretended to abandon the flag and the drum and fled back to the riverside position.

古文：水上军开入之，复疾战。
现代文：河边阵地的部队打开营门放他们进去。然后再和赵军激战。
English: The troops at the riverside position opened the gate of the camp to let them in. Then they fought fiercely with the Zhao army.

古文：赵果空壁争汉鼓旗，逐韩信、张耳。
现代文：赵军果然倾巢出动，争夺汉军的旗鼓，追逐韩信、张耳。
English: Zhao's army was dispatched, fought for the banner of the Chinese army, and chased Han Xin and Zhang Er.

古文：韩信、张耳已入水上军，军皆殊死战，不可败。
现代文：韩信、耳新已进入河边阵地。全军殊死奋战，赵军无法把他们打败。
English: Han Xin and Er Xin have entered the riverside position. The whole army fought desperately, and Zhao Jun could not defeat them.

古文：信所出奇兵二千骑，共候赵空壁逐利，则驰入赵壁，皆拔赵旗，立汉赤帜二千。
现代文：韩信预先派出去的两千轻骑兵，等到赵军倾巢出动去追逐战利品的时候，就火速冲进赵军空虚的营垒，把赵军的旗帜全部拔掉，竖立起汉军的两千面红旗。
English: Han Xin sent out two thousand light cavalry in advance, and when the Zhao army rushed out to chase the booty, they rushed into the empty camp of the Zhao army, pulled out all the flags of the Zhao army, and erected two thousand red flags of the Chinese army.

古文：赵军已不胜，不能得信等，欲还归壁，壁皆汉赤帜，而大惊，以为汉皆已得赵王将矣。兵遂乱，遁走，赵将虽斩之，不能禁也。
现代文：这时，赵军已不能取胜，又不能俘获韩信等人，想要退回营垒，营垒插满了汉军的红旗，大为震惊，以为汉军已经全部俘获了赵王的将领，于是军队大乱，纷纷落荒潜逃，赵将即使诛杀逃兵，也不能禁止。
English: At this time, Zhao's army could not win and could not capture Han Xin and others. They wanted to return to the camp. The camp was full of the red flags of the Chinese army. They were shocked and thought that the Chinese army had already captured all of Zhao Wang's generals. The army was in chaos and deserted one after another. Zhao would not be able to prohibit even if he killed the deserters.

古文：於是汉兵夹击，大破虏赵军，斩成安君泜水上，禽赵王歇。
现代文：于是汉兵前后夹击，彻底摧垮了赵军，俘虏了大批人马，在泜水岸边生擒了赵王歇。
English: As a result, the Han soldiers attacked back and forth, completely destroyed the Zhao army, captured a large number of people and horses, and killed Zhao Wangxie on the shore of Surabaya.

古文：信乃令军中毋杀广武君，有能生得者购千金。
现代文：韩信传令全军，不要杀死广武君，有能活捉他的赏一千金。
English: Han Xin ordered the whole army not to kill Guangwu Jun, and there was a reward of one thousand gold for catching him alive.

古文：於是有缚广武君而致戏下者，信乃解其缚，东乡坐，西乡对，师事之。
现代文：于是就有人捆着广武君送到军营，韩信亲自给他解开绳索，请他面向东坐，自己面向西对坐着，像对待老师那样对待他。
English: As a result, someone tied up Guangwu Jun and sent him to the military camp. Han Xin personally untied the ropes for him, asked him to sit facing east, while he sat facing west, and treated him like a teacher.

古文：诸将效首虏，休，毕贺，因问信曰： 兵法右倍山陵，前左水泽，今者将军令臣等反背水陈，曰破赵会食，臣等不服。然竟以胜，此何术也？ 
现代文：众将献上首级和俘虏，向韩信祝贺，趁机向韩信说： 兵法上说： 行军布阵应该右边和背后靠山，前边和左边临水 。这次将军反而令我们背水列阵，说 打垮了赵军正式会餐 ，我等并不信服，然而竟真取得了胜利，这是什么战术啊？ 
English: The crowd will present their heads and captives, congratulate Han Xin, and take the opportunity to say to Han Xin: According to military law, the marching formation should be on the right and behind the mountain, and the front and left should be facing the water. This time, the general instead made us line up with our backs to the water, saying that we had defeated the Zhao Army formal dinner. We were not convinced, but we actually won the victory. What kind of tactics is this?

古文：信曰： 此在兵法，顾诸君不察耳。
现代文：韩信回答说： 这也在兵法上，只是诸位没留心罢了。
English: Han Xin replied, "This is also in the laws of war, but you have not paid attention."

古文：兵法不曰 陷之死地而後生，置之亡地而後存 ？
现代文：兵法上不是说 陷之死地而后生，置之亡地而后存 吗？
English: Isn't it said in the art of war that one is born dead after being trapped, and survives after being left for dead?

古文：且信非得素拊循士大夫也，此所谓 驱市人而战之 ，其势非置之死地，使人人自为战；今予之生地，皆走，宁尚可得而用之乎！ 
现代文：况且我平素没有得到机会训练诸位将士，这就是所说的 赶着街市上的百姓去打仗 ，在这种形势下不把将士们置之死地，使人人为保全自己而战不可；如果给他们留有生路，就都跑了，怎么还能用他们取胜呢？ 
English: Moreover, I have never had the opportunity to train soldiers, that is to say, to drive the people in the streets to fight, in this situation, soldiers are not put to death, people must fight to save themselves; if they are left alive, they will all run away, how can they be used to win?

古文：诸将皆服曰： 善。
现代文：将领们都佩服地说： 好。
English: The generals all said with admiration, "Good."

古文：非臣所及也。 
现代文：将军的谋略不是我们所能赶得上的呀。 
English: The general's strategy is not something we can catch up with.

古文：於是信问广武君曰： 仆欲北攻燕，东伐齐，何若而有功？ 
现代文：于是韩信问广武君说： 我要向北攻打燕国，向东讨伐齐国，怎么办才能成功呢？ 
English: Han Xin then asked Guangwu Jun, "If I want to attack Yan to the north and Qi to the east, how can I succeed?"

古文：广武君辞谢曰： 臣闻败军之将，不可以言勇，亡国之大夫，不可以图存。
现代文：广武君推辞说： 我听说 打了败仗的将领，没资格谈论勇敢，亡了国的大夫没有资格谋划国家的生存 。
English: Guangwu said, "I have heard that a general who has lost a battle is not qualified to talk about bravery, and a doctor who has lost his country is not qualified to plan the country's survival.

古文：今臣败亡之虏，何足以权大事乎！ 
现代文：而今我是兵败国亡的俘虏，有什么资格计议大事呢？ 
English: But now that I am a prisoner of war who has been defeated and killed, what qualifications do I have to discuss important matters?

古文：信曰： 仆闻之，百里奚居虞而虞亡，在秦而秦霸，非愚於虞而智於秦也，用与不用，听与不听也。
现代文：韩信说： 我听说，百里奚在虞国而虞国灭亡了，在秦国而秦国却能称霸，这并不是因为他在虞国愚蠢，而到了秦国就聪明了，而在于国君任用不任用他，采纳不采纳他的意见。
English: Han Xin said: I have heard that Bailiqin was stupid in the State of Yu, but the State of Yu was destroyed, but he was able to dominate in the State of Qin, but the State of Qin. This is not because he was stupid in the State of Yu, but he was smart when he came to the State of Qin, but because the sovereign did not appoint him and did not adopt his opinion.

古文：诚令成安君听足下计，若信者亦已为禽矣。
现代文：果真让成安君采纳了你的计谋，像我韩信也早被生擒了。
English: If you really let Cheng An adopt your strategy, I, Han Xin, would have been captured long ago.

古文：以不用足下，故信得侍耳。 
现代文：因为没采纳您的计谋，所以我才能够侍奉您啊。 
English: Because I didn't take your advice, that's why I can serve you.

古文：因固问曰： 仆委心归计，原足下勿辞。 
现代文：韩信坚决请教说： 我倾心听从你的计谋，希望您不要推辞。 
English: Han Xin resolutely asked for advice, saying, "I wholeheartedly follow your advice. I hope you will not refuse."

古文：广武君曰： 臣闻智者千虑，必有一失；愚者千虑，必有一得。
现代文：广武君说： 我听说， 智者千虑，必有一失；愚者千虑，必有一得 。
English: Guangwu Jun said, "I have heard that a wise man with a thousand worries is sure to make a mistake; a fool with a thousand worries is sure to make a gain.

古文：故曰 狂夫之言，圣人择焉 。
现代文：所以俗话说： 狂人的话，圣人也可以选择 。
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: If a madman says it, a sage can also choose it.

古文：顾恐臣计未必足用，原效愚忠。
现代文：只恐怕我的计谋不足以采用，但我愿献愚诚，忠心效力。
English: Only I am afraid that my strategy is not enough to adopt, but I am willing to offer sincerity, loyalty and effectiveness.

古文：夫成安君有百战百胜之计，一旦而失之，军败鄗下，身死泜上。
现代文：成安君本来有百战百胜的计谋，然而一旦失掉它，军队在鄗城之下战败，自己在泜水之上亡身。
English: Cheng Anjun originally had a plan to win every battle, but once he lost it, the army was defeated under Lucheng, and he died on Lishui.

古文：今将军涉西河，虏魏王，禽夏说阏与，一举而下井陉，不终朝破赵二十万众，诛成安君。
现代文：而今将军横渡西河，俘虏魏王，在阏与生擒夏说，一举攻克井陉，不到一早晨的时间就打垮了赵军二十万，诛杀了成安君。
English: But now the general has crossed the West River, captured the Wei King, and conquered Jingyi in one fell swoop. In less than a morning, he defeated 200,000 Zhao troops and killed Cheng Anjun.

古文：名闻海内，威震天下，农夫莫不辍耕释耒，褕衣甘食，倾耳以待命者。
现代文：名声传扬四海，声威震动天下，农民们预感到兵灾临头，没有不放下农具，停止耕作，穿好的，吃好的，打发日子，专心倾听战争的消息，等待死亡的来临。
English: Their fame spread far and wide, and their prestige shook the world. The peasants sensed the impending military disaster and did not hesitate to put down their farm tools, stop farming, dress well, eat well, pass the time, listen intently to the news of the war, and wait for death to come.

古文：若此，将军之所长也。
现代文：像这些，都是将军在策略上的长处。
English: These are the strategic strengths of a general.

古文：然而众劳卒罢，其实难用。
现代文：然而，眼下百姓劳苦，士卒疲惫，很难用以作战。
English: However, at the moment, the people are working hard, the soldiers are tired, and it is difficult to fight.

古文：今将军欲举倦弊之兵，顿之燕坚城之下，欲战恐久力不能拔，情见势屈，旷日粮竭，而弱燕不服，齐必距境以自彊也。
现代文：如果将军发动疲惫的军队，停留在燕国坚固的城池之下，要战恐怕时间过长，力量不足不能攻克。实情暴露，威势就会减弱，旷日持久，粮食耗尽，而弱小的燕国不肯降服，齐国一定会拒守边境，以图自强。
English: If the general launches a tired army and stays under the solid city of Yan, it will take too long to fight, and the lack of strength can not be overcome. If the truth is exposed, the power will be weakened, the time will be long, the grain will be exhausted, and the weak Yan will not surrender, Qi will refuse to defend the border in order to strengthen itself.

古文：燕齐相持而不下，则刘项之权未有所分也。
现代文：燕、齐两国坚持不肯降服，那么，刘项双方的胜负就不能断定。
English: If Yan and Qi persist in refusing to surrender, then Liu Xiang's victory or defeat cannot be determined.

古文：若此者，将军所短也。
现代文：像这样，就是将军战略上的短处。
English: As such, it is a strategic shortcoming of the generals.

古文：臣愚，窃以为亦过矣。
现代文：我的见识浅薄，但我私下认为攻燕伐齐是失策啊。
English: My knowledge is shallow, but I privately think that attacking Yanvar Qi is a mistake.

古文：故善用兵者不以短击长，而以长击短。 
现代文：所以，善于带兵打仗的人不拿自己的短处攻击敌人的长处，而是拿自己的长处去攻击敌人的短处。 
English: Therefore, those who are good at leading soldiers to fight do not take advantage of their own shortcomings to attack the enemy's strengths, but take advantage of their own strengths to attack the enemy's weaknesses.

古文：韩信曰： 然则何由？ 
现代文：韩信说： 虽然如此，那么应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Han Xin said: Even so, what should we do?

古文：广武君对曰： 方今为将军计，莫如案甲休兵，镇赵抚其孤，百里之内，牛酒日至，以飨士大夫醳兵，北首燕路，而後遣辩士奉咫尺之书，暴其所长於燕，燕必不敢不听从。燕已从，使諠言者东告齐，齐必从风而服，虽有智者，亦不知为齐计矣。如是，则天下事皆可图也。
现代文：即使有聪明睿智的人，也不知该怎样替齐国谋划了。
English: Even if there are clever and wise people, they do not know how to plan for Qi.

古文：兵固有先声而後实者，此之谓也。 
现代文：如果这样，那么，夺取天下的大事都可以谋求了。用兵本来就有先虚张声势，而后采取实际行动的，我说的就是这种情况。 
English: If this is the case, then the great cause of conquering the world can be pursued. This is what I mean when I say that the use of troops is inherently a matter of bluffing first and then taking actual action.

古文：韩信曰： 善。 
现代文：韩信说： 好。 
English: Han Xin said: Good.

古文：从其策，发使使燕，燕从风而靡。
现代文：听从了他的计策。派遣使者出使燕国，燕国听到消息果然立刻降服。
English: They followed his advice and sent an envoy to Yan's country. Upon hearing the news, Yan's country immediately surrendered.

古文：乃遣使报汉，因请立张耳为赵王，以镇抚其国。
现代文：于是派人报告汉王，并请求立张耳为赵王，用以镇抚赵国。
English: So he sent someone to report to the king of Han, and requested that Zhang Er be made the king of Zhao in order to pacify Zhao.

古文：汉王许之，乃立张耳为赵王。
现代文：汉王答应了他的请求，就封张耳为赵王。
English: Han Wang agreed to his request, and named Zhang Er as Zhao Wang.

古文：楚数使奇兵渡河击赵，赵王耳、韩信往来救赵，因行定赵城邑，发兵诣汉。
现代文：楚国多次派出奇兵渡过黄河攻击赵国。赵国张耳和韩信来来回回地救援赵国，在行军中平定了赵国的城邑，再调兵支援汉王。
English: Chu repeatedly sent soldiers across the Yellow River to attack Zhao. Zhang Er and Han Xin of Zhao went back and forth to rescue Zhao, leveled the cities and towns of Zhao during the march, and then transferred troops to support the Han king.

古文：楚方急围汉王於荥阳，汉王南出，之宛、叶间，得黥布，走入成皋，楚又复急围之。
现代文：楚军正把汉王紧紧地围困在荥阳，汉王从南面突围，到宛县、叶县一带，接纳了黥布，奔入成皋，楚军又急忙包围了成皋。
English: The Chu army was tightly besieging the Han king in Poyang. The Han king broke out from the south, went to Wan County and Ye County, received the cloth, rushed into Chengdu, and the Chu army hastily surrounded Chengdu.

古文：六月，汉王出成皋，东渡河，独与滕公俱，从张耳军脩武。
现代文：六月间，汉王逃出成皋，向东渡过黄河，只有滕公相随，去张耳军队在修武的驻地。
English: In June, Han Wang escaped from Chengdu and crossed the Yellow River to the east, accompanied only by Teng Gong, to go to the camp of Zhang Er's army.

古文：至，宿传舍。
现代文：一到，就住进可舍中。
English: As soon as they arrive, they live in comfortable homes.

古文：晨自称汉使，驰入赵壁。
现代文：第二天早晨，他自称是汉王的使臣，骑马奔入赵军的营垒。
English: The next morning, he claimed to be an envoy of the Han king and rode into the Zhao army's camp.

古文：张耳、韩信未起，即其卧内上夺其印符，以麾召诸将，易置之。
现代文：韩信、张耳还没有起床，汉王就在他们的卧室里夺取了他们的印信和兵符，用军旗召集众将，更换了他们的职务。
English: Han Xin and Zhang Er had not yet woken up, when Han Wang seized their seal and military insignia in their bedroom, called the generals together with military flags, and changed their positions.

古文：信、耳起，乃知汉王来，大惊。
现代文：韩信、张耳起床后，才知道汉王来了，大为震惊。
English: Only after Han Xin and Zhang Er got up did they know that the Han king was coming. They were very shocked.

古文：汉王夺两人军，即令张耳备守赵地。拜韩信为相国，收赵兵未发者击齐。
现代文：汉王夺取了他二人统率的军队，命令张耳防守赵地，任命韩信为国相，让他收编赵国还没有发往荥阳的部队，去攻打齐国。
English: The Han king captured the army led by the two of them, ordered Zhang Er to defend Zhao, appointed Han Xin as the minister of state, and asked him to assemble the troops that Zhao had not yet sent to Fenyang to attack Qi.

古文：信引兵东，未渡平原，闻汉王使郦食其已说下齐，韩信欲止。
现代文：韩信领兵向东进发，还没渡过平原津，听说汉王派郦食其已经说服齐王归顺了。
English: Han Xin led the army to the east, but had not yet crossed the plain of Tianjin. He heard that the Han king had persuaded the Qi king to surrender.

古文：范阳辩士蒯通说信曰： 将军受诏击齐，而汉独发间使下齐，宁有诏止将军乎？
现代文：韩信打算停止进军。范阳说客蒯通规劝韩信说： 将军是奉诏攻打齐国，汉王只不过暗中派遣一个密使游说齐国投降，难道有诏令停止将军进攻吗？
English: Han Xin intended to stop his advance. Fan Yang, a lobbyist, advised Han Xin: "The general attacked Qi by imperial edict. The Han king only secretly sent a secret envoy to persuade Qi to surrender. Is there an imperial edict to stop the general's attack?"

古文：何以得毋行也！
现代文：为什么不进军呢？
English: Why not march?

古文：且郦生一士，伏轼掉三寸之舌，下齐七十馀城，将军将数万众，岁馀乃下赵五十馀，为将数岁，反不如一竖儒之功乎？ 
现代文：况且郦生不过是个读书人，坐着车子，鼓动三寸之舌，就收服齐国七十多座城邑。将军率领数万大军，一年多的时间才攻克赵国五十多座城邑。为将多年，反不如一个读书小子的功劳吗？ 
English: What's more, Xinsheng was nothing more than a reader. Sitting in a carriage and using his three-inch tongue, he conquered more than 70 cities and towns in Qi Province. The general led tens of thousands of troops, and it took more than a year to conquer more than 50 cities and towns in Zhao Province. For many years to come, isn't it better to have the merit of a reading boy?

古文：於是信然之，从其计，遂渡河。
现代文：韩信认为他说得对，听从他的计策，就率军渡过黄河。
English: Han Xin thought he was right and followed his advice to lead his army across the Yellow River.

古文：齐已听郦生，即留纵酒，罢备汉守御信因袭齐历下军，遂至临菑。
现代文：齐王听从郦生的规劝以后，挽留郦生开怀畅饮，撤除了防备汉军的设施。韩信乘机突袭齐国属下的军队，很快就打到国都临菑。
English: After King Qi listened to the advice of his son, he kept his son to drink freely and removed the facilities for guarding the Chinese army. Han Xin took the opportunity to raid the army under Qi, and soon reached the capital Linyi.

古文：齐王田广以郦生卖己，乃烹之，而走高密，使使之楚请救。
现代文：齐王田广认为被郦生出卖了，就烹杀了他，而后逃往高密，派出使者前往楚国求救。
English: King Tianguang of Qi thought that he had been betrayed by Zengsheng, so he killed him, and then fled to Gaomi and sent an envoy to Chu for help.

古文：韩信已定临菑，遂东追广至高密西。
现代文：韩信平定临菑以后，就向东追赶田广，一直追到高密城西。
English: After Han Xin subdued Linyi, he pursued Tian Guang to the east, all the way to the west of Gaomi City.

古文：楚亦使龙且将，号称二十万，救齐。
现代文：楚国也派龙且率领兵马，号称二十万，前来救援齐国。
English: Chu also sent dragons and led soldiers and horses, reputed to be 200,000, to come to the rescue of Qi.

古文：齐王广、龙且并军与信战，未合。人或说龙且曰： 汉兵远斗穷战，其锋不可当。
现代文：齐王田广和司马龙且两支部队合兵一起与韩信作战，还没交锋，有人规劝龙且说： 汉军远离国土，拼死作战，其锋芒锐不可挡。
English: Qi Wang Tianguang and Sima Long and the two troops joined forces to fight with Han Xin. Before the battle, someone advised Long and said: The Chinese army is far away from the country, fighting to the death, and its sharp edge is unstoppable.

古文：齐、楚自居其地战，兵易败散。
现代文：齐楚两军在自己的土地上作战，士兵容易逃散。
English: The two armies of Qi and Chu fought on their own land, and the soldiers were easily dispersed.

古文：不如深壁，令齐王使其信臣招所亡城，亡城闻其王在，楚来救，必反汉。
现代文：不如深沟高垒，坚守不出。让齐王派他的亲信大臣，去安抚已经沦陷的城邑，这些城邑的官吏和百姓知道他们的国王还在，楚军又来援救，一定会反叛汉军。
English: Let King Qi send his trusted ministers to pacify the cities that have fallen. The officials and people of these cities know that their king is still alive and that the Chu army will come to the rescue, and they will certainly rebel against the Han army.

古文：汉兵二千里客居，齐城皆反之，其势无所得食，可无战而降也。 
现代文：汉军客居两千里之外，齐国城邑的人都纷纷起来反叛他们，那势必得不到粮食，这就可以迫使他们不战而降。 
English: The Han army was stationed two thousand miles away, and the people in the cities of Qi Province rose up in droves to rebel against them. They were bound to get no food, which would force them to surrender without a fight.

古文：龙且曰： 吾平生知韩信为人，易与耳。
现代文：龙且说： 我一向了解韩信的为人，容易对付他。
English: Long said: I have always known Han Xin as a person, it is easy to deal with him.

古文：且夫救齐不战而降之，吾何功？
现代文：而且援救齐国，不战而使韩信投降，我还有什么功劳？
English: And what credit do I have for rescuing Qi and making Han Xin surrender without a fight?

古文：今战而胜之，齐之半可得，何为止！ 
现代文：如今战胜他，齐国一半土地可以分封给我，为什么不打？ 
English: If we defeat him now, half of the land of Qi can be assigned to me, why not fight?

古文：遂战，与信夹濰水陈。
现代文：于是决定开战，与韩信隔着潍水摆开阵势。
English: Therefore, they decided to go to war and set up a position across Surabaya from Han Xin.

古文：韩信乃夜令人为万馀囊，满盛沙，壅水上流，引军半渡，击龙且，详不胜，还走。
现代文：韩信下令连夜赶做一万多口袋，装满沙土，堵住潍水上游，带领一半军队渡过河去，攻击龙且，假装战败，往回跑。
English: Han Xin ordered more than ten thousand bags to be made overnight, filled with sand, blocked the upper reaches of the Surabaya River, led half of the army across the river, attacked Longji, pretended to be defeated, and ran back.

古文：龙且果喜曰： 固知信怯也。 
现代文：龙且果然高兴地说： 我早就知道韩信胆怯。 
English: He said happily: I already knew that Han Xin was timid.

古文：遂追信渡水。
现代文：于是就渡过潍水追赶韩信。
English: So he crossed Surabaya to catch up with Han Xin.

古文：信使人决壅囊，水大至。龙且军大半不得渡，即急击，杀龙且。
现代文：韩信下令挖开堵塞潍水的沙袋，河水汹涌而来，龙且的军队一多半还没渡过河去，韩信立即回师猛烈反击，杀死了龙且。
English: Han Xin ordered to dig up the sandbags that blocked the floodwaters, the river was raging, and more than half of Long Qi's army had not yet crossed the river. Han Xin immediately returned to the division and fought back fiercely, killing Long Qi.

古文：龙且水东军散走，齐王广亡去。
现代文：龙且在潍水东岸尚未渡河的部队，见势四散逃跑，齐王田广也逃跑了。
English: The troops that had not yet crossed the river on the east coast of Surabaya were scattered and fled, and Qi Wang Tianguang also fled.

古文：信遂追北至城阳，皆虏楚卒。
现代文：韩信追赶败兵直到城阳，把楚军的士兵全部俘虏了。
English: Han Xin chased the defeated soldiers as far as Chengyang and captured all the soldiers of the Chu army.

古文：汉四年，遂皆降。平齐。
现代文：汉四年，韩信降服且平定了整个齐国。
English: In the fourth year of the Han Dynasty, Han Xin surrendered and pacified the whole of Qi.

古文：使人言汉王曰： 齐伪诈多变，反覆之国也，南边楚，不为假王以镇之，其势不定。
现代文：他派人向汉王上书，说： 齐国狡诈多变，反复无常，南面的边境与楚国交界，如果不设立一个暂时代理的王来镇抚，局势就无法稳定。
English: He sent someone to write to the king of Han, saying: Qi is cunning and changeable, capricious, the southern border is the border with Chu, if you do not set up a temporary acting king to pacify, the situation will not be stable.

古文：原为假王便。 
现代文：为有利于当前的局势，希望允许我暂时代理齐王。 
English: In order to benefit the current situation, I hope to be allowed to temporarily serve as the king.

古文：当是时，楚方急围汉王於荥阳，韩信使者至，发书，汉王大怒，骂曰： 吾困於此，旦暮望若来佐我，乃欲自立为王！ 
现代文：正当这时，楚军在荥阳紧紧地围困着汉王，韩信的使者到了，汉王打开书信一看，勃然大怒，骂道： 我在这儿被围困，日夜盼着你来帮助我，你却想自立为王！ 
English: Just at this time, the Chu army was tightly besieging the Han king in Poyang. Han Xin's envoy arrived. The Han king opened the letter, flew into a rage, and cursed: I am besieged here, day and night I am waiting for you to help me, but you want to become king!

古文：张良、陈平蹑汉王足，因附耳语曰： 汉方不利，宁能禁信之王乎？
现代文：张良、陈平暗中踩了一下汉王的脚，凑近汉王的耳朵说： 目前汉军处境不利，怎么能阻止韩信称王呢？
English: Zhang Liang and Chen Ping secretly stepped on the feet of the Han king, approached the ears of the Han king and said: At present, the Han army is in an unfavorable situation, how can Han Xin be prevented from claiming the throne?

古文：不如因而立，善遇之，使自为守。
现代文：不如趁机册立他为王，很好地对待他，让他自己镇守齐国。
English: It would be better to seize the opportunity to make him king, treat him well, and let him defend Qi.

古文：不然，变生。 
现代文：不然可能发生变乱。 
English: Otherwise, chaos could ensue.

古文：汉王亦悟，因复骂曰： 大丈夫定诸侯，即为真王耳，何以假为！ 
现代文：汉王醒悟，又故意骂道： 大丈夫既然平定了诸侯，就要做真王，何必做个暂时代理的王呢？ 
English: Han Wang woke up, and deliberately cursed: "Since I have pacified the princes, I have to be a true king. Why do I have to be a temporary acting king?

古文：乃遣张良往立信为齐王，徵其兵击楚。
现代文：就派遣张良前去册立韩信为齐王，征调他的军队攻打楚军。
English: He sent Zhang Liang forward to register Han Xin as the king of Qi and conscripted his army to attack the Chu army.

古文：楚已亡龙且，项王恐，使盱眙人武涉往说齐王信曰： 天下共苦秦久矣，相与戮力击秦。
现代文：楚军失去龙且后，项王害怕了，派盱眙人武涉前往规劝齐王韩信说： 天下人苦秦的暴政很久了，因此大家合力攻打它。
English: After the Chu army lost Long Jie, Xiang Wang was afraid and sent armed men to persuade Qi King Han Xin, saying: The people of the world have been suffering from the tyranny of Qin for a long time, so everyone should work together to attack it.

古文：秦已破，计功割地，分土而王之，以休士卒。
现代文：秦朝破灭后，按照功劳裂土分封，各自为王，以便休兵罢战。
English: After the collapse of the Qin Dynasty, they were divided according to their merits, and each of them became king in order to have a truce.

古文：今汉王复兴兵而东，侵人之分，夺人之地，已破三秦，引兵出关，收诸侯之兵以东击楚，其意非尽吞天下者不休，其不知厌足如是甚也。
现代文：如今汉王又兴师东进，侵犯他人的境界，掠夺他人的封地，已经攻破三秦，率领军队开出函谷关，收编各路诸侯的军队向东进击楚国，他的意图是不吞并整个天下不罢休，他贪心不足到这步田地，太过份了。
English: Now, the Han king is marching eastward again, encroaching on other people's borders, plundering other people's fiefs. He has broken through the Three Qin Dynasties, led the army to open the Huan Valley Pass, and assembled the armies of all the princes to march eastward to attack Chu. His intention is not to annex the whole world. His greed is not enough for this step, it is too much.

古文：且汉王不可必，身居项王掌握中数矣，项王怜而活之，然得脱，辄倍约，复击项王，其不可亲信如此。
现代文：况且汉王不可信任，自身落到项王的掌握之中多次了，是项王的怜悯使他活下来，然而一经脱身，就背弃盟约，再次进攻项王。他是这样地不可亲近，不可信任。
English: Moreover, Han Wang could not be trusted. He had fallen into the hands of Xiang Wang many times. It was Xiang Wang's mercy that kept him alive. However, as soon as he escaped, he reneged on the covenant and attacked Xiang Wang again. He was thus unapproachable and could not be trusted.

古文：今足下虽自以与汉王为厚交，为之尽力用兵，终为之所禽矣。
现代文：如今您即使自认为和汉王交情深厚，替他竭尽全力作战，最终还得被他所擒。
English: Now, even if you think you have a deep friendship with the Han king and do your best to fight for him, you will eventually be captured by him.

古文：足下所以得须臾至今者，以项王尚存也。
现代文：您所以能够延续到今天，是因为项王还存在啊。
English: You have been able to continue to this day because Xiangwang still exists.

古文：当今二王之事，权在足下。
现代文：当前刘、项争夺天下的胜败，举足轻重的是您。
English: At present, Liu and Xiang are competing for the world's victory and defeat, and it is you who are pivotal.

古文：足下右投则汉王胜，左投则项王胜。
现代文：您向右边站，那么汉王胜，您向左边站，那么项王胜。
English: If you stand on the right side, you will win the Han Dynasty; if you stand on the left side, you will win the Shang Dynasty.

古文：项王今日亡，则次取足下。
现代文：假若项王今天被消灭，下一个就该消灭您了。
English: If Xiang Wang is eliminated today, you should be eliminated next.

古文：足下与项王有故，何不反汉与楚连和，参分天下王之？
现代文：您和项王有旧交情，为什么不反汉与楚联和，三分天下自立为王呢？
English: You and King Xiang have an old friendship. Why don't you make peace with Han and Chu and become the king of the world?

古文：今释此时，而自必於汉以击楚，且为智者固若此乎！ 
现代文：如今，放过这个时机，必然要站到汉王一边攻打项王，一个聪明睿智的人，难道应该这样做吗？ 
English: Now, let this opportunity pass, it is inevitable to stand on the side of Han Wang to attack Xiang Wang, a clever and wise person, should we do this?

古文：韩信谢曰： 臣事项王，官不过郎中，位不过执戟，言不听，画不用，故倍楚而归汉。
现代文：韩信辞谢说： 我侍奉项王，官不过郎中，职位不过是个持戟的卫士，言不听，计不用，所以我背楚归汉。
English: Han Xin Jie Xie said: I served the King of Xiang, the official was just a junior, the position was just a guard with a scepter, I didn't listen, I didn't have to think, so I returned to Han.

古文：汉王授我上将军印，予我数万众，解衣衣我，推食食我，言听计用，故吾得以至於此。
现代文：汉王授予我上将军的印信，给我几万人马，脱下他身上的衣服给我穿，把好食物让给我吃，言听计用，所以我才能够到今天这个样子。
English: King Han granted me the seal of the general, gave me tens of thousands of horses, took off his clothes to dress me, gave me good food to eat, and listened to me, so I was able to be like this today.

古文：夫人深亲信我，我倍之不祥，虽死不易。
现代文：人家对我亲近、信赖，我背叛他不吉祥，即使到死也不变心。
English: People are close to me and trust me. It is not auspicious for me to betray them. Even if I die, I will not change my mind.

古文：幸为信谢项王！ 
现代文：希望您替我辞谢项王的盛情！ 
English: I hope you will thank King Xiang for me!

古文：武涉已去，齐人蒯通知天下权在韩信，欲为奇策而感动之，以相人说韩信曰： 仆尝受相人之术。 
现代文：武涉走后，齐国人蒯通知道天下胜负的关键在于韩信，想出奇计打动他，就用看相的身份规劝韩信，说： 我曾经学过看相技艺。 
English: After Wu Wu left, the people of Qi knew that the key to the world's victory and defeat lay in Han Xin. They came up with a plan to impress him, and used their status as a photographer to persuade Han Xin, saying: I once learned the art of photography.

古文：韩信曰： 先生相人何如？ 
现代文：韩信说： 先生给人看相用什么方法？ 
English: Han Xin said: What method does the teacher use to show people?

古文：对曰： 贵贱在於骨法，忧喜在於容色，成败在於决断，以此参之，万不失一。 
现代文：蒯通回答说： 人的高贵卑贱在于骨骼，忧愁、喜悦在于面色，成功失败在于决断。用这三项验证人相万无一失。 
English: Xitong replied, "A person's nobility and lowliness lie in the bones, sorrow and joy lie in the face, and success and failure lie in determination. Use these three things to verify that a person is infallible.

古文：韩信曰： 善。先生相寡人何如？ 
现代文：韩信说： 好，先生看我的面相怎么样？ 
English: Han Xin said, "Good, sir, how does my face look?"

古文：对曰： 原少间。 
现代文：蒯通回答说： 希望随从人员暂时回避一下。 
English: Shuntong replied: I hope that the entourage will temporarily avoid it.

古文：信曰： 左右去矣。 
现代文：韩信说： 周围的人离开吧。 
English: Han Xin said: Let the people around you leave.

古文：通曰： 相君之面，不过封侯，又危不安。
现代文：蒯通说： 看您的面相，只不过封侯，而且还有危险不安全。
English: Zhaotong said, "From the look on your face, it's just a ban, and it's dangerous and unsafe.

古文：相君之背，贵乃不可言。 
现代文：看您的背相，显贵而不可言。 
English: Look behind you, it's obvious but inexpressible.

古文：韩信曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：韩信说： 这话是什么意思呢？ 
English: Han Xin said: What does this mean?

古文：蒯通曰： 天下初发难也，俊雄豪桀建号壹呼，天下之士云合雾集，鱼鳞櫜鹓，熛至风起。
现代文：蒯通说： 当初，天下举兵起事的时候，英雄豪杰纷纷建立名号，一声呼喊，天下有志之士像云雾那样聚集，像鱼鳞那样杂沓，如同火焰迸飞，狂风骤起。
English: Zhaotong said: At the beginning, when the whole world raised an army to rise up, the heroes and heroines successively established a name, a shout, the world's aspirants gathered like a cloud, mingled like fish scales, flew like flames, and a fierce wind suddenly arose.

古文：当此之时，忧在亡秦而已。
现代文：这个时候，关心的只是灭亡秦朝罢了。
English: At this time, they were only concerned with the downfall of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：今楚汉分争，使天下无罪之人肝胆涂地，父子暴骸骨於中野，不可胜数。
现代文：而今，楚汉纷争，使天下无辜的百姓肝胆涂地，父子的尸骨暴露在荒郊野外，数不胜数。
English: Now, the disputes between Chu and Han have made the innocent people of the world tremble with fear, and the bones of fathers and sons are exposed in the wilderness, countless.

古文：楚人起彭城，转斗逐北，至於荥阳，乘利席卷，威震天下。
现代文：楚国人从彭城起事，转战四方，追逐败兵，直到荥阳，乘着胜利，像卷席子一样向前挺进，声势震动天下。
English: The people of Chu rose up from Pengcheng, fought in four directions, chased the defeated soldiers, until Poyang, took advantage of the victory, advanced like a roll of mat, and the momentum shook the world.

古文：然兵困於京、索之间，迫西山而不能进者，三年於此矣。
现代文：然后军队被困在京、索之间，被阻于成皋以西的山岳地带不能再前进，已经三年了。
English: Then the army was trapped between Beijing and So, and prevented from advancing further in the mountainous area west of Chengdu, for three years.

古文：汉王将数十万之众，距巩、雒，阻山河之险，一日数战，无尺寸之功，折北不救，败荥阳，伤成皋，遂走宛、叶之间，此所谓智勇俱困者也。
现代文：汉王统领几十万人马在巩县、洛阳一带抗拒楚军，凭借着山河的险要，虽然一日数战，却无尺寸之功，以至遭受挫折失败，几乎不能自救。在荥阳战败，在成皋受伤，于是逃到宛、叶两县之间，这就是所说的智尽勇乏了。
English: The Han king led hundreds of thousands of horses to resist the Chu army in Gong County and Luoyang, relying on the peril of mountains and rivers. Although he fought several battles a day, he did not have a large-scale achievement, so that he suffered setbacks and failures, and could hardly save himself. He was defeated in Shenyang and injured in Chengdu, so he fled to Wan and Ye between the two counties. This is the so-called wisdom and courage exhausted.

古文：夫锐气挫於险塞，而粮食竭於内府，百姓罢极怨望，容容无所倚。
现代文：将士的锐气长期困顿于险要关塞而被挫伤，仓库的粮食也消耗殆尽，百姓疲劳困苦，怨声载道，人心动荡，无依无靠。
English: The morale of the soldiers was dampened by being trapped in the dangerous blockade for a long time, the grain in the warehouse was also exhausted, the people were tired and distressed, complaining, the people's hearts were in turmoil, and they had no one to rely on.

古文：以臣料之，其势非天下之贤圣固不能息天下之祸。
现代文：以我估计，这样的局面不是天下的圣贤就不能平息这场天下的祸乱。
English: In my estimation, such a situation is not the world's sages can not quell the world's calamity.

古文：当今两主之命县於足下。
现代文：当今刘、项二王的命运都悬挂在您的手里。
English: Today, the fate of Liu and Xiang is in your hands.

古文：足下为汉则汉胜，与楚则楚胜。
现代文：您协助汉王，汉王就胜利；协助楚王，楚王就胜利。
English: If you help King Han, King Han will be victorious; if you help King Chu, King Chu will be victorious.

古文：臣原披腹心，输肝胆，效愚计，恐足下不能用也。
现代文：我愿意披肝沥胆，敬献愚计，只恐怕您不采纳啊。
English: I'm willing to put my heart and soul into it, I'm just afraid you won't accept it.

古文：诚能听臣之计，莫若两利而俱存之，参分天下，鼎足而居，其势莫敢先动。
现代文：果真能听从我的计策，不如让楚、汉双方都不受损害，同时存在下去，你和他们三分天下，鼎足而立，形成那种局面，就没有谁敢轻举妄动。
English: If you can really follow my strategy, it is better to let both Chu and Han not be harmed, and at the same time continue to exist. You and they are three-quarters of the world, standing on your feet, forming that kind of situation, no one would dare to act rashly.

古文：夫以足下之贤圣，有甲兵之众，据彊齐，从燕、赵，出空虚之地而制其後，因民之欲，西乡为百姓请命，则天下风走而响应矣，孰敢不听！
现代文：凭借您的贤能圣德，拥有众多的人马装备，占据强大的齐国，迫使燕、赵屈从，出兵到刘、项两军的空虚地带，牵制他们的后方，顺应百姓的心愿，向西去制止刘、项分争，为军民百姓请求保全生命，那么，天下就会迅速地群起而响应，有谁敢不听从！
English: By virtue of your virtue, possessing a large number of men, horses and equipment, occupying the powerful Qi country, forcing Yan and Zhao to submit, dispatching troops to the empty zone of Liu and Xiang's two armies, restraining their rear, complying with the wishes of the people, going west to stop Liu and Xiang's dispute, and requesting the preservation of life for the military and the people, then the world will quickly swarm and respond, who would dare not obey!

古文：割大弱彊，以立诸侯，诸侯已立，天下服听而归德於齐。
现代文：而后，割取大国的疆土，削弱强国的威势，用以分封诸侯。诸侯恢复之后，天下就会感恩戴德，归服听命于齐。
English: After that, the territory of the great power was cut off, the power of the great power was weakened, and the princes were divided. After the restoration of the princes, the world would be grateful and obedient.

古文：案齐之故，有胶、泗之地，怀诸侯以德，深拱揖让，则天下之君王相率而朝於齐矣。
现代文：稳守齐国故有的疆土，据有胶河、泗水流域，用恩德感召诸侯，恭谨谦让，那么天下的君王就会相继前来朝拜齐国。
English: If we firmly defend the ancient territory of Qi, according to the Jiaozuo River and the Surabaya River basin, use grace to inspire the princes, and be respectful and humble, then the kings of the world will come one after another to worship Qi.

古文：盖闻天与弗取，反受其咎；时至不行，反受其殃。
现代文：听说： 苍天赐予的好处不接受，反而会受到惩罚；时机到了不采取行动，反而要遭祸殃 。
English: It is said that: If you do not accept the benefits given by heaven and earth, you will be punished; if you do not take action when the time comes, you will suffer misfortune.

古文：原足下孰虑之。 
现代文：希望您仔细地考虑这件事。 
English: I hope you will consider this matter carefully.

古文：韩信曰： 汉王遇我甚厚，载我以其车，衣我以其衣，食我以其食。
现代文：韩信说： 汉王给我的待遇很优厚，他的车子给我坐，他的衣裳给我穿，他的食物给我吃。
English: Han Xin said, "King Han treated me very well. He gave me a seat in his car, his clothes to wear, and his food to eat.

古文：吾闻之，乘人之车者载人之患，衣人之衣者怀人之忧，食人之食者死人之事，吾岂可以乡利倍义乎！ 
现代文：我听说，坐人家车子的人，要分担人家的祸患，穿人家衣裳的人，心里要想着人家的忧患，吃人家食物的人，要为人家的事业效死，我怎么能够图谋私利而背信弃义呢！ 
English: I have heard that he who rides in another man's chariot must share in his misfortunes, that he who wears another man's clothes must think of his sorrows, that he who eats another man's food must die for his cause. How could I betray my own interests?

古文：蒯生曰： 足下自以为善汉王，欲建万世之业，臣窃以为误矣。
现代文：蒯通说： 你自认为和汉王友好，想建立流传万世的功业，我私下认为这种想法错了。
English: Zhaotong said, "You think that you are friendly with Han Wang and want to establish a world-renowned cause. I privately think that this idea is wrong.

古文：始常山王、成安君为布衣时，相与为刎颈之交，後争张黡、陈泽之事，二人相怨。
现代文：当初常山王、成安君还是平民百姓时，结成割掉脑袋也不反悔的交情，后来因为张黡、陈泽的事发生争执，使得二人彼此仇恨。
English: At first, when Changshan Wang and Cheng Anjun were still commoners, they formed a friendship that did not regret cutting off their heads. Later, a dispute occurred because of Zhang Ye and Chen Ze, causing the two to hate each other.

古文：常山王背项王，奉项婴头而窜，逃归於汉王。
现代文：常山王背叛项王，狼狈的逃跑，归降汉王。
English: The King of Changshan betrayed the King of Xiang, fled in confusion, and surrendered to the King of Han.

古文：汉王借兵而东下，杀成安君泜水之南，头足异处，卒为天下笑。
现代文：汉王借给他军队向东进击，在泜水以南杀死了成安君，身首异处，被天下人耻笑。
English: The king of Han lent him an army to march eastward, and south of Surabaya, he killed Cheng Anjun. His severed head was ridiculed by the world.

古文：此二人相与，天下至驩也。
现代文：这两个人的交情，可以说是天下最要好的。
English: The friendship between these two people can be said to be the best in the world.

古文：然而卒相禽者，何也？
现代文：然而到头来，都想把对方置于死地，这是为什么呢？
English: However, at the end of the day, they both want to put the other person to death. Why is that?

古文：患生於多欲而人心难测也。
现代文：祸患产生于贪得无厌而人心又难以猜测。
English: The scourge is born of an insatiable and unpredictable greed.

古文：今足下欲行忠信以交於汉王，必不能固於二君之相与也，而事多大於张黡、陈泽。故臣以为足下必汉王之不危己，亦误矣。
现代文：如今您打算用忠诚、信义与汉王结交，一定比不上张耳、陈余结交更巩固，而你们之间的关连的事情又比张黡、陈泽的事件重要的多，所以我认为您断定汉王不会危害自己，也错了。
English: Now that you are planning to make friends with the Han King with loyalty and faithfulness, your friendship will surely be more solid than that of Zhang Er and Chen Yu, and the relationship between you is much more important than the events of Zhang Ye and Chen Ze. Therefore, I think you are wrong to conclude that the Han King will not harm himself.

古文：大夫种、范蠡存亡越，霸勾践，立功成名而身死亡。
现代文：大夫文种、范蠡使濒临灭亡的越国保存下来，辅佐勾践称霸诸侯，功成名就之后，文种被迫自杀，范蠡被迫逃亡。
English: The doctors Wenzhong and Fan Qi preserved Yue, which was on the verge of extinction, and the assistants practiced to dominate the princes. After their success, Wenzhong was forced to commit suicide, and Fan Qi was forced to flee.

古文：野兽已尽而猎狗烹。
现代文：野兽已经打完了，猎犬被烹杀。
English: The game is over, the hounds are cooked.

古文：夫以交友言之，则不如张耳之与成安君者也；以忠信言之，则不过大夫种、范蠡之於勾践也。
现代文：以交情友谊而论，您和汉王就比不上张耳与成安君了，以忠诚信义而论也就赶不上大夫文种、范蠡与越王勾践了。
English: In terms of friendship and friendship, you and Han Wang are not as good as Zhang Er and Cheng Anjun, and in terms of loyalty and faithfulness, you are not as good as Dr. Wenzhong, Fan Yu and Yue Wang.

古文：此二人者，足以观矣。
现代文：从这两个事例看，足够您断定是非了。
English: From these two examples, it is enough for you to judge right from wrong.

古文：原足下深虑之。
现代文：希望您深思熟虑地考虑。
English: I hope you will consider it carefully.

古文：且臣闻勇略震主者身危，而功盖天下者不赏。
现代文：况且我听说，勇敢、谋略使君主感到威胁的人，有危险；而功勋卓著冠盖天下的人得不到赏赐。
English: Moreover, I have heard that those who are brave and whose schemes threaten the sovereign are in danger, and that those who are most meritorious are not rewarded.

古文：臣请言大王功略：足下涉西河，虏魏王，禽夏说，引兵下井陉，诛成安君，徇赵，胁燕，定齐，南摧楚人之兵二十万，东杀龙且，西乡以报，此所谓功无二於天下，而略不世出者也。
现代文：请让我说一说大王的功绩和谋略吧：您横渡西河，俘虏魏王，生擒夏说，带领军队夺取井陉，杀死成安君，攻占了赵国，以声威镇服燕国，平定安抚齐国，向南摧毁楚国军队二十万，向东杀死楚将龙且，西面向汉王捷报，这可以说是功劳天下无二。而计谋出众，世上少有。
English: Let me tell you about the exploits and stratagems of the great king: You crossed the West River, captured the Wei king, and led the army to seize the well, killed Cheng Anjun, captured the Zhao kingdom, subdued the Yan kingdom with the sound of the bell, pacified the Qi kingdom, destroyed the 200,000 troops of the Chu kingdom to the south, killed the Chu general Long Jie to the east, and faced the Han king Jie Bao to the west. This can be said to be a unique achievement in the world. And it is rare in the world.

古文：今足下戴震主之威，挟不赏之功，归楚，楚人不信；归汉，汉人震恐：足下欲持是安归乎？
现代文：如今您据有威胁君主的威势，持有不能封赏的功绩，归附楚国，楚国人不信任；归附汉国，汉国人震惊恐惧：您带着这样大的功绩和声威，那里是您可去的地方呢？
English: Now you have the power to threaten the monarch, you have achievements that cannot be rewarded, you belong to the Chu nation, the Chu nation does not trust you; you belong to the Han nation, the Han nation is shocked and afraid: you have such great achievements and prestige, where is the place you can go?

古文：夫势在人臣之位而有震主之威，名高天下，窃为足下危之。 
现代文：身处臣子地位而有着使国君感到威胁的震动，名望高于天下所有的人，我私下为您感到危险。 
English: In my position as a vassal, with the jolt of feeling threatened by the sovereign, with a reputation higher than all the people in the world, I privately feel in danger because of you.

古文：韩信谢曰： 先生且休矣，吾将念之。 
现代文：韩信说： 先生暂且说到这儿吧！让我考虑考虑。 
English: Han Xin said: Teacher, let's talk about this for now! Let me think about it.

古文：後数日，蒯通复说曰： 夫听者事之候也，计者事之机也，听过计失而能久安者，鲜矣。
现代文：此后过了数日，蒯通又对韩信说： 能够听取别人的善意，就能预见事情发展变化的征兆，能反复思考，就能把握成功的关键。
English: A few days later, Hao Tong said to Han Xin: "If you can listen to the goodwill of others, you can foresee the signs of development and change, and if you can think over and over again, you can grasp the key to success."

古文：听不失一二者，不可乱以言；计不失本末者，不可纷以辞。
现代文：听取意见不能作出正确的判断，决策失误而能够长治久安的人，实在少有。听取意见很少判断失误的人，就不能用花言巧语去惑乱他；计谋筹划周到不本末倒置的人，就不能用花言巧语去扰乱他。
English: Those who listen to opinions but fail to make correct judgments and make mistakes in decision-making but are able to maintain long-term stability are few and far between. Those who listen to opinions but rarely make mistakes in judgment should not be fooled by fancy words and tricks; those who carefully plan and do not put the cart before the horse should not be fooled by fancy words and tricks.

古文：夫随厮养之役者，失万乘之权；守儋石之禄者，阙卿相之位。
现代文：甘愿做劈柴喂马差事的人，就会失掉争取万乘之国权柄的机会；安心微薄俸禄的人，就得不到公卿宰相的高位。
English: Those who are willing to do the work of chopping wood and feeding horses will lose the opportunity to win the power of the country of Mansei; those who are comfortable with a meager salary will not get the high position of Kugyo Prime Minister.

古文：故知者决之断也，疑者事之害也，审豪氂之小计，遗天下之大数，智诚知之，决弗敢行者，百事之祸也。
现代文：所以办事坚决是聪明人果断的表现，犹豫不决是办事情的祸害。专在细小的事情上用心思，就会丢掉天下的大事，有判断是非的智慧，决定后又不敢冒然行动，这是所有事情的祸根。
English: Therefore, resolute action is the decisive performance of a clever person, and indecision is the scourge of doing things. If you concentrate on small things, you will lose the big things in the world. If you have the wisdom to judge right and wrong, and dare not act rashly after making a decision, this is the bane of all things.

古文：故曰 猛虎之犹豫，不若蜂虿之致螫；骐骥之跼躅，不如驽马之安步；孟贲之狐疑，不如庸夫之必至也；虽有舜禹之智，吟而不言，不如瘖聋之指麾也 。
现代文：所以俗话说： 猛虎犹豫不能决断，不如黄蜂、蝎子用毒刺去螫；骏马徘徊不前，不如劣马安然慢步；勇士孟贲狐疑不定，不如凡夫俗子，决心实干，以求达到目的；即使有虞舜、夏禹的智慧，闭上嘴巴不讲话，不如聋哑人借助打手势起作用 。
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: If a tiger hesitates and cannot decide, it is better than a wasp or a scorpion to sting it with a stinger; if a horse lingers and does not move forward, it is better than an inferior horse to walk slowly and safely; if the warrior Meng Ronghu is uncertain, it is better than an ordinary person, and he is determined to work hard to achieve his goal; even if he has the wisdom of Yu Yu and Xia Yu, if he closes his mouth and does not speak, it is better than a deaf-mute to play a role by using gestures.

古文：此言贵能行之。
现代文：这些俗语都说明付诸行动是最可宝贵的。
English: These sayings all illustrate that taking action is the most valuable.

古文：夫功者难成而易败，时者难得而易失也。
现代文：所有的事业都难以成功而容易失败，时机难以抓住而容易失掉。
English: All undertakings are difficult to succeed and easy to fail, opportunities are difficult to seize and easy to lose.

古文：时乎时，不再来。
现代文：时机啊时机，丢掉了就不会再来。
English: Opportunity, opportunity, if you lose it, you'll never get it back.

古文：原足下详察之。 
现代文：希望您仔细地考虑斟酌。 
English: I hope you will consider this carefully.

古文：韩信犹豫不忍倍汉，又自以为功多，汉终不夺我齐，遂谢蒯通。
现代文：韩信犹豫不决，不忍心背叛汉王，又自认为功勋卓著，汉王终究不会夺去自己的齐国，于是谢绝了蒯通。
English: Han Xin hesitated, he could not bear to betray the Han king, and he thought that he had made a great contribution, and the Han king would not take away his Qi country after all, so he declined the offer.

古文：蒯通说不听，已详狂为巫。
现代文：蒯通的规劝没有被采纳，就假装疯癫做了巫师。
English: He pretended to be insane and became a sorcerer.

古文：汉王之困固陵，用张良计，召齐王信，遂将兵会垓下。
现代文：汉王被围困在固陵时，采用了张良的计策，征召齐王韩信，于是韩信率领军队在垓下与汉王会师。
English: When Han Wang was besieged in Guryong, he adopted Zhang Liang's strategy and conscripted Han Xin, the king of Qi, so Han Xin led the army to join forces with Han Wang.

古文：项羽已破，高祖袭夺齐王军。
现代文：项羽被打败后，高祖用突然袭击的办法夺取了齐王的军权。
English: After Xiang Yu was defeated, Gaozu used a surprise attack to seize the military power of King Qi.

古文：汉五年正月，徙齐王信为楚王，都下邳。
现代文：汉五年正月，改封齐王韩信为楚王，建都下邳。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Han Dynasty, King Han Xin of Qi was renamed King Chu, and the capital was built.

古文：信至国，召所从食漂母，赐千金。
现代文：韩信到了下邳，召见曾经分给他饭吃的那位漂母，赐给她黄金千斤。
English: When Han Xin reached the lower jaw, he summoned the drifter who had once given him food to eat and gave her a gold coin.

古文：及下乡南昌亭长，赐百钱，曰： 公，小人也，为德不卒。 
现代文：轮到下乡南昌亭亭长，赐给百钱，说： 您，是小人，做好事有始无终。 
English: When it was his turn to go to the countryside, the head of the Nanchang Pavilion gave him a hundred coins and said, "You are a villain, good deeds have no beginning and no end.

古文：召辱己之少年令出胯下者以为楚中尉。告诸将相曰： 此壮士也。
现代文：召见曾经侮辱过自己、让自己从他胯下爬过去的年轻人，任用他做了中尉，并告诉将相们说： 这是位壮士。
English: He summoned the young man who had disgraced himself by climbing over his shoulders, made him his lieutenant, and told his generals: "This is a strong man.

古文：方辱我时，我宁不能杀之邪？
现代文：当时他侮辱我的时候，我难道不能杀死他吗？
English: Couldn't I have killed him when he insulted me?

古文：杀之无名，故忍而就於此。 
现代文：只不过是杀死他没有意义，所以我忍受了一时的侮辱而成就了今天的功业。 
English: It just didn't make sense to kill him, so I put up with the momentary indignity and got the job done today.

古文：项王亡将锺离眛家在伊庐，素与信善。
现代文：项王部下逃亡的将领锺离昧，家住伊庐，一向与韩信友好。
English: The generals who fled from the king's subordinates are estranged, live in Ili, and have always been friendly with Han Xin.

古文：项王死後，亡归信。
现代文：项王死后，他逃出来归附韩信。
English: After the death of King He, he escaped and joined Han Xin.

古文：汉王怨眛，闻其在楚，诏楚捕眛。
现代文：汉王怨恨锺离昧，听说他在楚国，诏令楚国逮捕锺离昧。
English: The Han king resented Yao Yimai, and when he heard that he was in Chu, he ordered Chu to arrest Yao Yimai.

古文：信初之国，行县邑，陈兵出入。
现代文：韩信初到楚国，巡行所属县邑，进进出出都带着武装卫队。
English: When Han Xin first arrived in Chu, he went on a tour of the counties and towns he belonged to. He was accompanied by armed guards.

古文：汉六年，人有上书告楚王信反。
现代文：汉六年，有人上书告发韩信谋反。
English: In the sixth year of the Han Dynasty, someone sent a letter to Han Xin accusing him of plotting a rebellion.

古文：高帝以陈平计，天子巡狩会诸侯，南方有云梦，发使告诸侯会陈： 吾将游云梦。 
现代文：高帝采纳陈平的计谋，假托天子外出巡视会见诸侯，南方有个云梦泽，派使臣通告各诸侯到陈县聚会，说： 我要巡视云梦泽。 
English: Emperor Gao adopted Chen Ping's stratagem, pretending to be the son of heaven to go out to inspect and meet with the princes. There was a cloud of dreams in the south, and he sent an envoy to inform the princes to gather in Chen County, saying: I want to inspect the cloud of dreams.

古文：实欲袭信，信弗知。
现代文：其实是要袭击韩信，韩信却不知道。
English: In fact, it was to attack Hanxin, but Hanxin did not know it.

古文：高祖且至楚，信欲发兵反，自度无罪，欲谒上，恐见禽。
现代文：高祖将要到楚国时，韩信曾想发兵反叛，又认为自己没有罪，想朝见高祖，又怕被擒。
English: When Gaozu was about to arrive in Chu, Han Xin wanted to send troops to rebel, but also thought that he was not guilty. He wanted to see Gaozu in the morning, but was afraid of being arrested.

古文：人或说信曰： 斩眛谒上，上必喜，无患。 
现代文：有人对韩信说： 杀了锺离昧去朝见皇上，皇上一定高兴，就没有祸患了。 
English: Someone said to Han Xin, "If you kill your shyness and go to the imperial court to meet the emperor, the emperor will surely be happy, and there will be no disaster."

古文：信见未计事。
现代文：韩信去见锺离昧商量。
English: Han Xin went to see him for a confidential discussion.

古文：眛曰： 汉所以不击取楚，以眛在公所。若欲捕我以自媚於汉，吾今日死，公亦随手亡矣。 
现代文：锺离昧说： 汉王之所以不攻打楚国，是因为我在您这里，你想逮捕我取悦汉王，我今天死，你也会紧跟着死的。 
English: Zou Yimai said, "The reason why the King of Han did not attack the State of Chu is because I am here with you, and you want to arrest me to please the King of Han. If I die today, you will die right after me."

古文：乃骂信曰： 公非长者！ 
现代文：于是骂韩信说： 你不是个忠厚的人！ 
English: So he scolded Han Xin and said, "You are not a loyal person!"

古文：卒自刭。
现代文：终于刎颈身死。
English: He finally strangled himself to death.

古文：信持其首，谒高祖於陈。
现代文：韩信拿着他的人头，到陈县朝拜高帝。
English: Han Xin took his human head and went to Chen County to worship Gao Di.

古文：上令武士缚信，载後车。
现代文：皇上命令武士捆绑了韩信，押在随行的车上。
English: The emperor ordered the samurai to tie up Han Xin and put him in the accompanying car.

古文：信曰： 果若人言， 狡兔死，良狗烹；高鸟尽，良弓藏；敌国破，谋臣亡。 
现代文：韩信说： 果真像人们说的 狡兔死了，出色的猎狗就遭到烹杀；高翔的飞禽光了，优良的弓箭收藏起来；敌国破灭，谋臣死亡 。
English: Han Xin said: If, as people say, the cunning rabbit is dead, the excellent hunting dogs will be cooked and killed; the high-flying birds will be exhausted, and the excellent bows and arrows will be collected; the enemy country will be destroyed, and the strategist will die.

古文：天下已定，我固当亨！ 
现代文：现在天下已经平安，我本来应当遭烹杀！ 
English: Now all is well, I should have been killed!

古文：上曰： 人告公反。 
现代文：皇上说： 有人告发你谋反。 
English: The emperor said, "Someone has accused you of plotting a rebellion."

古文：遂械系信。
现代文：就给韩信带上了刑具。
English: Han Xin was then given the instruments of torture.

古文：至雒阳，赦信罪，以为淮阴侯。
现代文：到了洛阳，赦免了韩信的罪过，改封为淮阴侯。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he pardoned Han Xin's sins and changed his name to Huaiyin Hou.

古文：信知汉王畏恶其能，常称病不朝从。
现代文：韩信知道汉王畏忌自己的能力，常常托病不参加朝见和侍行。
English: Han Xin knows that Han Wang is afraid of his own ability, and often feigns illness to avoid attending court and attending the procession.

古文：信由此日夜怨望，居常鞅鞅，羞与绛、灌等列。
现代文：从此，韩信日夜怨恨，在家闷闷不乐，和绛侯、灌婴处于同等地位感到羞耻。
English: Since then, Han Xin has been resentful day and night, sullen at home, and ashamed to be in the same position as a peasant and a baby.

古文：信尝过樊将军哙，哙跪拜送迎，言称臣，曰： 大王乃肯临臣！ 
现代文：韩信曾经拜访樊哙将军，樊哙跪拜送迎，自称臣子。说： 大王怎么竟肯光临。 
English: Han Xin once visited General Zou, and Zou knelt down to greet him, calling himself a vassal. He said, "How could the great king come?"

古文：信出门，笑曰： 生乃与哙等为伍！ 
现代文：韩信出门笑着说： 我这辈子竟然和樊哙这般人为伍了。 
English: Han Xin went out and said with a smile: I've been with such a person all my life.

古文：上常从容与信言诸将能不，各有差。
现代文：皇上经常闲暇时和韩信议论将军们的高下，认为各有长短。
English: In his spare time, the emperor often discussed the generals' merits and demerits with Han Xin, believing that they each had their own strengths and weaknesses.

古文：上问曰： 如我能将几何？ 
现代文：皇上问韩信： 像我的才能能统率多少兵马？ 
English: The emperor asked Han Xin: How many soldiers can I command with my talent?

古文：信曰： 陛下不过能将十万。 
现代文：韩信说： 陛下不过能统率十万。 
English: Han Xin said, "Your Majesty is only capable of leading 100,000 people.

古文：上曰： 於君何如？ 
现代文：皇上说： 你怎么样？ 
English: The emperor said: How are you?

古文：曰： 臣多多而益善耳。 
现代文：回答说： 我是越多越好。 
English: He replied: "The more I am, the better."

古文：上笑曰： 多多益善，何为为我禽？ 
现代文：皇上笑着说： 您越多越好，为什么还被我俘虏了？ 
English: The Emperor smiled and said: "The more of you the better. Why am I still a prisoner?

古文：信曰： 陛下不能将兵，而善将将，此乃言之所以为陛下禽也。
现代文：韩信说： 陛下不能带兵，却善于驾驭将领，这就是我被陛下俘虏的原因。
English: Han Xin said, "Your Majesty can't lead soldiers, but you are good at managing generals. That's why I was captured by Your Majesty."

古文：且陛下所谓天授，非人力也。 
现代文：况且陛下是上天赐予的，不是人力能做到的。 
English: Moreover, His Majesty was bestowed by heaven, not by man.

古文：陈豨拜为钜鹿守，辞於淮阴侯。
现代文：陈豨被任命为钜鹿郡守，向淮阴侯辞行。
English: Chen Hao was appointed as the governor of Elk County, and resigned from Huaiyin County.

古文：淮阴侯挈其手，辟左右与之步於庭，仰天叹曰： 子可与言乎？
现代文：淮阴侯拉着他的手避开左右侍从在庭院里漫步，仰望苍天叹息说： 您可以听听我的知心话吗？
English: Huaiyin Hou took his hand and avoided the attendants around him. He strolled in the courtyard, looked up at the sky and sighed, "Can you listen to my heartfelt words?"

古文：欲与子有言也。 豨曰： 唯将军令之。 
现代文：有些心里话想跟您谈谈。 陈豨说： 一切听任将军吩咐！ 
English: There are some things in my heart that I would like to talk to you about.Chen Yao said: Leave everything to the general's orders!

古文：淮阴侯曰： 公之所居，天下精兵处也；而公，陛下之信幸臣也。
现代文：淮阴侯说： 您管辖的地区，是天下精兵聚集的地方；而您，是陛下信任宠幸的臣子。
English: Huaiyin Hou said: The area under your jurisdiction is the place where the world's elite soldiers are gathered; and you are His Majesty's trusted and favored vassal.

古文：人言公之畔，陛下必不信；再至，陛下乃疑矣；三至，必怒而自将。
现代文：如果有人告发说您反叛，陛下一定不会相信；再次告发，陛下就怀疑了；三次告发，陛下必然大怒而亲自率兵前来围剿。
English: If someone reports that you have rebelled, His Majesty will certainly not believe it; if they report it again, His Majesty will doubt it; if they report it three times, His Majesty will certainly be enraged and personally lead an army to encircle you.

古文：吾为公从中起，天下可图也。 
现代文：我为您在京城做内应，天下就可以取得了。 
English: If I do the internal correspondence for you in Beijing, the whole world can obtain it.

古文：陈豨素知其能也，信之，曰： 谨奉教！ 
现代文：陈豨一向知道韩信的雄才大略。深信不疑，说： 我一定听从您的指教！ 
English: Chen Yao always knew about Han Xin's great talent. Convinced, he said: I will definitely follow your advice!

古文：汉十年，陈豨果反。
现代文：汉十年，陈豨果然反叛。
English: In the tenth year of the Han Dynasty, Chen Xi rebelled.

古文：上自将而往，信病不从。
现代文：皇上亲自率领兵马前往，韩信托病没有随从。
English: The emperor himself led the soldiers and horses to go, but Han Zhaozong did not accompany him.

古文：阴使人至豨所，曰： 弟举兵，吾从此助公。 
现代文：暗中派人到陈豨处说： 只管起兵，我在这里协助您。 
English: He secretly sent someone to Chen Xuan's place and said, "Just raise an army, I'm here to help you."

古文：信乃谋与家臣夜诈诏赦诸官徒奴，欲发以袭吕后、太子。
现代文：韩信就和家臣商量，夜里假传诏书赦免各官府服役的罪犯和奴隶，打算发动他们去袭击吕后和太子。
English: Han Xin discussed with his vassals, and in the night he issued a fake imperial edict to pardon the criminals and slaves serving in various government offices, intending to unleash them to attack Lü and the crown prince.

古文：部署已定，待豨报。
现代文：部署完毕，等待着陈豨的消息。
English: After deployment, waiting for news of Chen Yao.

古文：其舍人得罪於信，信囚，欲杀之。
现代文：他的一位家臣得罪了韩信，韩信把他囚禁起来，打算杀掉他。
English: One of his vassals offended Han Xin, who imprisoned him and planned to kill him.

古文：舍人弟上变，告信欲反状於吕后。
现代文：他的弟弟上书告变，向吕后告发了韩信准备反叛的情况。
English: His younger brother reported to Lü Biao in a letter that Han Xin was preparing to rebel.

古文：吕后欲召，恐其党不就，乃与萧相国谋，诈令人从上所来，言豨已得死，列侯群臣皆贺。
现代文：吕后打算把韩信召来，又怕他不肯就范，就和萧相国谋划，令人假说从皇上那儿来，说陈豨已被俘获处死，列侯群臣都来祝贺。
English: Lü Guo planned to summon Han Xin, but fearing that he would not comply, she plotted with Xiao Xianguo, leading people to assume that she had come from the emperor, saying that Chen Xi had been captured and executed, and all the princes and ministers came to congratulate her.

古文：相国绐信曰： 虽疾，彊入贺。 
现代文：萧相国欺骗韩信说： 即使有病，也要强打精神进宫祝贺吧。 
English: Xiao Xianguo deceived Han Xin and said, "Even if you are sick, you must be strong and enter the palace to congratulate me."

古文：信入，吕后使武士缚信，斩之长乐锺室。
现代文：韩信进宫，吕后命令武士把韩信捆起来，在长乐宫的钟室杀掉了。
English: Han Xin entered the palace, and Lü ordered the samurai to tie up Han Xin and kill him in the bell room of the Changle Palace.

古文：信方斩，曰： 吾悔不用蒯通之计，乃为兒女子所诈，岂非天哉！ 
现代文：韩信临斩时说： 我后悔没有采纳蒯通的计谋，以至被妇女小子所欺骗，难道不是天意吗？ 
English: Han Xin said at the time of his death: "I regret that I did not adopt the stratagem of Zhaotong, and that I was deceived by a woman and a boy. Isn't it God's will?

古文：遂夷信三族。
现代文：于是诛杀了韩信三族。
English: So he killed the three families of Han Xin.

古文：高祖已从豨军来，至，见信死，且喜且怜之，问： 信死亦何言？ 
现代文：高祖从平叛陈豨的军中回到京城，见韩信已死，又高兴又怜悯他，问： 韩信临死时说过什么话？ 
English: Gaozu returned to Beijing from the army of the counter-rebel Chen Xi and saw that Han Xin had died. He was happy and pitied him. He asked: What did Han Xin say when he was about to die?

古文：吕后曰： 信言恨不用蒯通计。 
现代文：吕后说： 韩信说悔恨没有采纳蒯通的计谋。 
English: Lü Hou said: Han Xin said that regret did not adopt Shantong's stratagem.

古文：高祖曰： 是齐辩士也。 
现代文：高祖说： 那人是齐国的说客。 
English: Gaozu said, "That man is a lobbyist for Qi.

古文：乃诏齐捕蒯通。
现代文：就诏令齐国捕捉蒯通。
English: He issued an imperial edict ordering Qi to capture Shantong.

古文：蒯通至，上曰： 若教淮阴侯反乎？ 
现代文：蒯通被带到，皇上说： 你唆使淮阴侯反叛吗？ 
English: Shantong was taken to the emperor, who said: Did you incite Huaiyin to rebel?

古文：对曰： 然，臣固教之。竖子不用臣之策，故令自夷於此。
现代文：回答说： 是。我的确教过他，那小子不采纳我的计策，所以自取灭亡。
English: He answered, "Yes, I did teach him, but the boy would not listen to my advice, so he killed himself."

古文：如彼竖子用臣之计，陛下安得而夷之乎！ 
现代文：假如那小子采纳我的计策，陛下怎能够灭掉他呢？ 
English: If the boy accepts my plan, how can Your Majesty get rid of him?

古文：上怒曰： 亨之。 
现代文：皇上生气地说： 煮了他。 
English: The emperor said angrily, "He was boiled."

古文：通曰： 嗟乎，冤哉亨也！ 
现代文：蒯通说： 哎呀，煮死我，冤枉啊！ 
English: Hao Tong said, "Oh, boil me to death, I was wronged!

古文：上曰： 若教韩信反，何冤？ 
现代文：皇上说： 你唆使韩信造反，有什么冤枉？ 
English: The emperor said: You instigated Han Xin to rebel, what is wrong?

古文：对曰： 秦之纲绝而维弛，山东大扰，异姓并起，英俊乌集。
现代文：蒯通说： 秦朝法度败坏，政权瓦解的时候，山东六国大乱，各路诸侯纷纷起事，一时天下英雄豪杰象乌鸦一样聚集。
English: Zhaotong said: When the Qin Dynasty's legal system was corrupted and the regime collapsed, there was a great turmoil in Shandong's six provinces. Princes from all walks of life rose up one after another. At one point, the world's heroes gathered like crows.

古文：秦失其鹿，天下共逐之，於是高材疾足者先得焉。
现代文：秦朝失去了他的帝位，天下英杰都来抢夺它，于是才智高超，行动敏捷的人率先得到它。
English: The Qin Dynasty lost its imperial throne, the world's heroes came to snatch it, so the highly intelligent and agile people were the first to get it.

古文：蹠之狗吠尧，尧非不仁，狗因吠非其主。
现代文：蹠的狗对着尧狂叫，尧并不是不仁德，只因为他不是狗的主人。
English: A yakitori dog barks wildly at a baboon. The baboon is not being unkind, just because he is not the dog's owner.

古文：当是时，臣唯独知韩信，非知陛下也。
现代文：正当这时，我只知道有个韩信，并不知道有陛下。
English: It was at this time that I only knew that there was a Korean letter, and did not know that there was His Majesty.

古文：且天下锐精持锋欲为陛下所为者甚众，顾力不能耳。
现代文：况且天下磨快武器、手执利刃想干陛下所干的事业的人太多了，只是力不从心罢了。
English: Moreover, there are too many people in the world who want to sharpen their weapons, wield their blades, and do the work that His Majesty has done, but they just can't do it.

古文：又可尽亨之邪？ 高帝曰： 置之。 
现代文：您怎么能够把他们都煮死呢？ 高祖说： 放掉他。 
English: How can you boil them all to death? Gao Zu said: Let him go.

古文：乃释通之罪。
现代文：就赦免了蒯通的罪过。
English: He pardoned the sins of Shantong.

古文：太史公曰：吾入淮阴，淮阴人为余言，韩信虽为布衣时，其志与众异。
现代文：太史公说：我到淮阴，淮阴人对我说，韩信即使是平民百姓时，他的心志就与众不同。
English: Taishigong said, "When I went to Huaiyin, the Huaiyin people told me that even though Han Xin was a commoner, his spirit was different from others.

古文：其母死，贫无以葬，然乃行营高敞地，令其旁可置万家。
现代文：他母亲去世了，家中贫困无法埋葬，可他还是到处寻找又高又宽敞的坟地，让坟墓旁可以安置万户人家。
English: His mother died, and the poverty of his family could not be buried, but he still searched everywhere for a tall and spacious cemetery, so that thousands of families could be accommodated next to the grave.

古文：余视其母冢，良然。
现代文：我看了他母亲的坟墓，的确如此。
English: I looked at his mother's grave, it's true.

古文：假令韩信学道谦让，不伐己功，不矜其能，则庶几哉，於汉家勋可以比周、召、太公之徒，後世血食矣。
现代文：假使韩信能够谦恭退让，不夸耀自己的功劳，不自恃自己的才能，那就差不多了。他在汉朝的功勋可以和周朝的周公、召公、太公这些人相比，后世子孙就可以享祭不绝。
English: If Han Xin can humbly make concessions, not boast of his own merits, not boast of his own talents, that's pretty much it. His merits in the Han Dynasty can be compared to those of Zhou Dynasty's Zhou Gong, Zhao Gong, and Tai Gong, and future generations will be able to enjoy endless sacrifices.

古文：不务出此，而天下已集，乃谋畔逆，夷灭宗族，不亦宜乎！
现代文：可是，他没能致力于这样做，而天下已经安定，反而图谋叛乱，诛灭宗族，不也是应该的么。
English: However, he failed to commit to doing so, and the world has been stable, but instead plotted a rebellion, annihilate the clan, is not it also right?

古文：君臣一体，自古所难。
现代文：君臣一体，自古以来就很困难。
English: Monarch-vassal unity has been difficult since ancient times.

古文：相国深荐，策拜登坛。
现代文：韩信被萧何相国看重而极力推荐给刘邦，因自己的策略而登坛拜为大将军。
English: Han Xin was highly valued by Xiao He's country and strongly recommended to Liu Bang. Because of his strategy, he was worshipped as a great general.

古文：沈沙决水，拔帜传餐。
现代文：潍水之战半渡而击，背水之战拔赵帜易汉帜。
English: The Battle of Surabaya was a half-hearted attack, while the Battle of Backwater was a decisive victory.

古文：与汉汉重，归楚楚安。
现代文：归于大汉一方，汉国加重了胜利的把握，归属楚国则楚国得以安定。
English: Belonging to the Han side, Han intensified the grasp of victory, while belonging to Chu, Chu was able to stabilize.

古文：三分不议，伪游可叹。
现代文：最终却是不考虑三分天下，以至于最后落了个高祖伪游云梦被贬的结局实在令人叹息。
English: In the end, however, they did not consider the three-point world, so that in the end, a high-ancestor pseudo-traveling dream was dethroned. The ending is really sigh-inducing.

