古文：木华黎木华黎，札剌儿氏，世居阿难水东。
现代文：木华黎，姓札剌儿氏，孔温窟哇之第三子。
English: Mu Huali, surnamed Zha Jia Er, the third son of Kong Wen Guo.

古文：父孔温窟哇，以戚里故，在太祖麾下，从平篾里吉，征乃蛮部，数立功。
现代文：孔温窟哇随太祖平定蒙古各部有功。
English: Kongwen Grottoes Wow, with the Great Ancestor's subjugation of all parts of Mongolia.

古文：后乃蛮又叛，太祖与六骑走，中道乏食，擒水际橐驼杀之，燔以啖太祖。
现代文：木华黎足智多谋，力大善射，与博尔术、博尔忽、赤老温同为太祖部下，号称 四杰 。
English: Mu Huali was resourceful, powerful and good at shooting. He was a subordinate of the Great Ancestors together with Bolshu, Bolhu and Chelaowen. They were known as the Four Heroes.

古文：追骑垂及，而太祖马毙，五骑相顾骇愕，孔温窟哇以所乘马济太祖，身当追骑，死之。
现代文：有一天随太祖三十余骑，行至溪谷之间遇寇，木华黎挽弓射之，三发三中。克烈王可汗与乃蛮打仗，太祖遣木华黎及博尔术援救，杀尽乃蛮部落。
English: One day, along with more than thirty horsemen, he rode to the valley and encountered a bandit. Mu Huali drew his bow and shot him, three shots, three hits. King Cre Khan fought with Naaman, and the great ancestor sent Mu Huali and Bor to rescue him, killing the Naaman tribe.

古文：太祖获免。有子五人，木华黎其第三子也。
现代文：后来克烈王可汗阴谋袭击太祖，太祖遣木华黎选精兵大破王可汗之营帐，于是诸部落都归附太祖。太祖即皇位后，首命木华黎、博尔术为左右万户。
English: Later, King Khrei Khan plotted to attack the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather sent Mu Huali to choose the best soldiers to break the camp of King Khan, so all the tribes were attached to the great-grandfather. After the great-grandfather, that is, the throne, the first to die were Mu Huali and Bolshu for about 10,000 households.

古文：生时有白气出帐中。
现代文：太祖六年，蒙古大举伐金，相继攻克宣德、德兴。
English: In the sixth year of Taizu's reign, Mongolia made a great effort to mine gold, and successively conquered Xuande and Dexing.

古文：神巫异之，曰： 此非常儿也。 
现代文：第二年又攻克云中、九原，进围抚州。
English: In the following year, they conquered Yunzhong and Jiuyuan and encircled Fuzhou.

古文：及长，沉毅多智略，猿臂善射，挽弓二石强。
现代文：金兵号称四十万，列阵于野狐岭以北，木华黎率敢死军策马横戈，大呼陷阵。
English: The gold soldiers, said to number 400,000, were arrayed to the north of the Wild Fox Ridge, with Mu Huali leading the death-defying army to Zhema Yanguo and the Great Call-up Line.

古文：与博尔术、博尔忽、赤老温事太祖，俱以忠勇称，号掇里班曲律，犹华言四杰也。
现代文：太祖指挥诸军并进，大败金兵。太祖八年进攻居庸关，久攻不克，遣别进军紫荆口，大败守军高琪部，蒙古军攻克涿州。
English: The great-great-grandfather commanded all the armies to march side by side and defeated the gold soldiers. The great-great-grandfather attacked Juyongguan in eight years, but could not conquer it for a long time. He was sent off to march into Bijiekou, defeated the defending army Gaoqib, and the Mongolian army conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：太祖军尝失利，会大雪，失牙帐所在，夜卧草泽中。木华黎与博尔术张裘毡，立雪中，障蔽太祖，达旦竟不移足。
现代文：接着分兵攻下益都、滨州、棣州，进至霸州。太祖九年，木华黎随太祖围攻燕，因金朝皇帝请和而撤军北还。太祖十年，副将萧也先用计平定东京，攻北京。
English: Next, the detachment captured Yidu, Binzhou, Zhangzhou, and advanced to Bazhou. In the ninth year of the Taizu era, Mu Huali followed the Taizu to besiege Yan, and withdrew to the north due to the invitation of the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty. In the tenth year of the Taizu era, Vice Admiral Xiao also first used the strategy to pacify Tokyo and attack Beijing.

古文：一日，太祖从三十余骑行溪谷间，顾谓曰： 此中或遇寇，当奈何？ 
现代文：金守将银青率兵二十万在花道站迎战，大败。蒙军围攻北京，城中粮尽，守城军杀银青投降。
English: The Mongolian army besieged Beijing, the city ran out of food, and the defenders surrendered after killing Yinqing.

古文：对曰： 请以身当之。 
现代文：木华黎认为金军投降迟缓，要全部坑杀他们，为萧也先劝阻。
English: Mu Huali thought that the Chinese army was slow to surrender and wanted to kill them all. He also tried to dissuade Xiao.

古文：既而，寇果自林间突出，矢下如雨。
现代文：北京攻下后，令契州军首领寅答虎留守，以吾也而暂为北京宋军兵马都元帅。
English: After the capture of Beijing, the leader of the Qizhou army, Yin Duhu, stayed behind, and I also temporarily became the marshal of the Beijing Song Army.

古文：木华黎引弓射之，三发中三人。其酋呼曰： 尔为谁？ 
现代文：又遣高德玉、刘蒲速窝儿招谕兴中府投降，守将兀里卜不从，城中吏民杀兀里卜，推土豪石天应为帅，开门投降蒙军。
English: He also sent Gao Deyu and Liu Buzhouwo to invite Xingzhongfu to surrender, but the guard did not obey, the city officials and the people killed Xinglib, and the bulldozer Gao Shi should be brave and open the door to surrender to the Mongolian army.

古文：曰： 木华黎也。 徐解马鞍持之，捍卫太祖以出，寇遂引去。
现代文：太祖十二年八月，诏封木华黎为太师、国王、都行省承制行事，并划定：太行以北地方由太祖自己攻占，以南由木华黎负责夺取。
English: In August of the twelfth year of the Emperor Taizu, Emperor Wuhuari, acting as the Grand Master and King, ordered the provinces to be conquered, and it was decided that the areas north of Taizu would be conquered by Emperor Taizu himself, and the areas south of Taizu would be conquered by Emperor Wuhuari.

古文：克烈王可汗与乃蛮部雠战，求援于太祖。
现代文：于是木华黎领兵自燕南攻遂城、蠡州，是年冬破大名府后，挥军向东夺取益都、淄、登、莱、潍、密等州。
English: As a result, Mu Huali led the troops from Yan'nan to conquer Chengdu and Bozhou, and after breaking through the daimyo's palace in winter, he led the troops to the east to capture Yidu, Handan, Deng, Lai, Handan, and My and other provinces.

古文：木华黎曰： 善。 下令禁无剽掠，所获老稚，悉遣还田里，军中肃然，吏民大悦。兵至滏阳，金邢州节度使武贵迎降，进攻天平寨，破之。
现代文：十三年自西京由太和岭入河东，攻克太原、忻、代、泽、潞、汾、霍等州。接着进军平阳，金守臣弃城逃走。十四年派萧特末儿等出兵云州、朔州，攻岢岚火山军。十五年复由燕向赵进军，克满城，真定守军武仙投降。此后，木华黎采纳权知河北西路兵马事史天倪的意见，下令禁止蒙古军抢劫，释放所俘老幼。大军至滏阳，金邢州节度使武贵迎降，进而攻破天平寨。
English: In the thirteenth year, he marched from Xijing from Taihe-ling into Hedong, and conquered Taiyuan, Min, Dai, Ze, Min, Min, Ho and other prefectures. He then marched into Pingyang, and Kim Shou-shin abandoned the city and fled. In the fourteenth year, he sent Xiao Te's youngest son and others to send troops to Yunnan and Shuozhou to attack the Volcano Army. In the fifteenth year, Yan marched to Zhao, Kerman City, and Zhen Ding's garrison army surrendered to Wu Xian. After that, Mu Huali adopted the opinion of Tian Ni,

古文：遣蒙古不花分兵略定河北卫、怀、孟州，入济南。
现代文：遣蒙古不花分兵夺取河北卫、怀、孟州，攻入济南。
English: The Mongolian expeditionary force took Wei, Huai and Mengzhou in Hebei Province and entered Jinan without spending a cent.

古文：严实籍所隶相、魏、磁、名、恩、博、滑、浚等州户三十万，诣军门降。
现代文：金守臣严实投降，献上所属之相、魏、磁、氵名、恩、博、滑、浚等州三十万户之户籍。
English: Kim Shoshin surrendered unconditionally and presented the household registrations of 300,000 households belonging to the states of So, Wei, Mago, Shonan, En, Bo, Nyo, and Jun.

古文：时金兵屯黄陵冈，号二十万，遣步兵二万袭济南。木华黎以轻兵五百击走之。
现代文：这时金兵屯扎黄陵冈，号称二十万，遣步兵二万袭击济南，为木华黎的轻兵五百人击走。
English: At this time, the Jin soldiers camped at Huanglinggang, reputed to be two hundred thousand, sent twenty thousand infantry to attack Jinan, and drove away five hundred light soldiers for Mu Huali.

古文：遂会大军，薄黄陵冈。金兵阵河南岸，示以死战。
现代文：蒙军进逼黄陵冈，金兵沿黄河列阵以待，决心死战。
English: The Mongolian army pushed into Huangling Hill, and the gold soldiers lined up along the Yellow River to wait, determined to fight to the death.

古文：木华黎曰： 此不可用长兵，当以短兵取胜。 
现代文：木华黎令骑兵下马，引箭齐发，大败金兵。蒙军又攻克楚丘、单州，围攻东平。
English: Mu Huali ordered the cavalry to dismount, and the arrows were fired in unison, defeating the gold soldiers. The Mongolian army also attacked Chuqiu and Shanzhou, and besieged Dongping.

古文：令骑下马，引满齐发，亦下马督战，果大败之，溺死者众。
现代文：直到十六年四月，东平粮尽，金行省忙古奔往汴梁，严实入东平，建立行省，安抚百姓。
English: Until April 16th, when Dongping ran out of grain, Jin Xing Zhou hurried to Qiliang, entered Dongping, established Xing Zhou, and pacified the people.

古文：进攻楚丘。楚丘城小而固，四面皆水，令诸军以草木填堑，直抵城下。
现代文：与此同时，木华黎遣石天应率兵协同郡王带孙攻克氵名州。五月还军野狐岭。秋八月，蒙军驻青冢，大设酒宴慰劳将士，然后由东胜渡河再度伐金，西夏国李王请求以五万兵协助蒙古军作战。
English: At the same time, Mu Hua Li sent Shitian Ying to lead the troops in cooperation with the county king and his son to conquer Yunnan. In May, the troops returned to the wild fox ridge. In autumn and August, the Mongolian army stationed in Qingdao, held a grand wine banquet to console the laborers, and then from Dongsheng to cross the river again to mine gold. King Li of Xixia requested fifty thousand soldiers to assist the Mongolian army in battle.

古文：严实率所部先登，拔之。
现代文：十月，大军由云中，经过太和寨，连克葭州、绥德，直至距延安三十里而止。
English: In October, the great army marched from Yunzhong, passing through Taihezhai, Lianke, Zhangzhou and Shunde, until it was 30 miles from Yan'an.

古文：攻下单州，围东平，以实权山东西路行省，戒之曰： 东平粮尽，必弃城走，汝伺其去，即入城安辑之，勿苦郡县，以败事也。 
现代文：金行省完颜合达出兵三万严阵以待。次日，蒙古不花率其骑兵三千挑战，见金兵出阵即弃鼓旗而走，金兵追入山谷，蒙古伏兵齐出，大败金兵，斩杀七千余人，获马八百匹。
English: The next day, Mongolia did not spend its cavalry three thousand challenge, saw the gold soldiers leave the battle and abandoned the drum and flag, the gold soldiers chased into the valley, the Mongolian ambush, defeated the gold soldiers, killed more than seven thousand people, and won eight hundred horses.

古文：木华黎召石天应谓曰： 蒲为河东要害，我择守者，非君不可。 
现代文：合达回军固守延安。蒙军围城十来天未下，转而进攻洛州，占领鹿阝州。闻金收复隰州，木华黎挥师复由丹州渡河，再次攻克隰州。太祖十七年，令蒙古不花率兵出秦陇，以张声势。
English: The Mongolian army besieged Yan'an for nearly ten days, and then attacked Lozhou and occupied Lushan. Weng Jin recovered Lushan, and Mu Huari's army crossed the river from Danzhou and conquered Lushan again. In the seventeenth year of Taizu, the Mongols led their troops out of Qinhuangdao at great expense.

古文：乃以天应权河东南北路陕右关西行台，平阳李守忠、太原攸哈剌拔都、隰州田雄，并受节制。
现代文：大军经云中攻下孟州四蹄寨，拔晋阳义和寨，进克三清岩，进入霍邑山堡。十月，蒙古大军经晋至降州，拔荣州胡瓶堡，金人望风归顺。
English: Through the clouds, the great army captured the Mengzhou Four-Hoofed Village, pulled out the Jin Yangyi Village, penetrated the Sanqing Rock, and entered the Huoyi Mountain Fort. In October, the Mongolian army passed through Jin to the Jiaozhou, pulled out the Rongzhou Hujing Fort, and the Jin people waited for the wind to surrender.

古文：命天应造浮梁，以济归师，乃渡河拔同州，下蒲城，径趋长安。
现代文：木华黎以石天应暂领河东南北路陕右关西行台。大军渡黄河拔同州，克蒲城，直指长安。
English: The north-south road of Shaanxi Province to the west of Kansai should be temporarily led by the east-to-north road of Hebei Province. The army crossed the Yellow River to Battongzhou, Kepu City, and directly to Chang'an.

古文：至治元年，诏封孔温窟哇推忠效节保大佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、鲁国王，谥忠宣；木华黎体仁开国辅世佐命功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、鲁国王，谥忠武。
现代文：金京兆行省完颜合达拥兵二十万固守。蒙军围攻不下，木华黎留兀胡乃、太不花等率兵六千围城，另遣按赤将兵三千占据潼关，自己率大军西击凤翔，但围攻月余未克。于是屯兵于渭水之南，遣蒙古不花南越牛岭关进攻宋之凤州而还。太祖十八年春，木华黎攻下河西堡寨十余处，三月渡河还至闻喜县，染重病，召其弟带孙嘱咐说： 我为国东征西讨四十年，无遗憾，只恨未攻克汴京，你要努力做到。 是月病卒，年五十四岁。孛鲁，鲁国王木华黎之子。
English: Jin Jing Zhao marched to the province of Yanheda and garrisoned it with 200,000 soldiers. The Mongolian army was unable to besiege the city, and Mu Hua Li stayed there, leading 6,000 soldiers to besiege the city. He also sent 3,000 soldiers to occupy Shaoguan. He led a large army to attack Fengxiang in the west, but the siege did not end for months. Therefore, the garrison was in the south of Surabaya, and Mongolia was sent to attack Song's Fengzhou by crossing Niu Lingguan in the south. In the spring of the 18th year, Mu Hua Li conquered more than ten castles in Hexi, and in March he crossed the river

古文：子孛鲁嗣。孛鲁，沈毅魁杰，宽厚爱人，通诸国语，善骑射，年二十七，入朝行在所。
现代文：其人身体魁梧，才智过人，性情沉毅，待人宽厚，能通诸国语言，善骑射，二十七岁入朝见太祖。
English: He was a man of great stature, surpassing in intelligence, with a stoic temperament, generous in his treatment of others, fluent in the languages of many countries, good at horseback riding and archery. At the age of twenty-seven, he entered the imperial court to see his great-grandfather.

古文：时太祖在西域，夏国主李王阴结外援，蓄异图，密诏孛鲁讨之。
现代文：当时太祖在西域，夏国主李王暗中联络外援，心怀不轨，太祖密诏孛鲁征讨之。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was in the western region, and Li Wang, the ruler of Xia, secretly contacted foreign aid, thinking it was wrong, and the great-grandfather secretly ordered Lu to collect it.

古文：甲申秋九月，攻银州，克之，斩首数万级，获生口马驼牛羊数十万，俘监府塔海，命都元帅蒙古不华将兵守其要害而还。
现代文：太祖十九年九月，蒙古军攻克银川，斩首数万级，俘获人口、马驼、牛羊数十万，命都元帅蒙古不花领兵守其要害。
English: In September of the 19th year of Taizu, the Mongolian army conquered Yinchuan, beheaded tens of thousands of people, captured hundreds of thousands of people, horses and camels, cattle and sheep, and ordered the Mongolian marshal to lead the troops to guard its key.

古文：乙酉春，复朝行在所。同知真定府事武仙叛，杀都元帅史天倪，胁居民遁于双门寨。
现代文：太祖二十年春，同知真定府事武仙叛，杀都元帅史天倪，胁迫居民逃入双门寨。在蒙古军中做人质的武仙之弟，也携家逃归。
English: In the spring of the 20th year of Taizu's reign, a fellow scholar named Zhending led a rebellion against Emperor Wu, killed the Grand Marshal Shi Tianni, and forced the residents to flee into Shuangmenzhai. Emperor Wu's younger brother, who was a hostage in the Mongolian army, also fled with his family.

古文：仙弟质于军中，挈家逃归，遣撒寒追及于紫荆关，斩之，命天倪弟天泽代领帅府事。
现代文：太祖遣撒寒追及于紫荆关斩之，命天倪弟天泽代领帅府事。
English: The great-great-grandfather sent Sakan to chase and behead him at the Bauhinia Pass, and ordered his younger brother, Tenzawa, to take charge of the affairs of the government.

古文：丙戌夏，诏封功臣户口为食邑，曰十投下，孛鲁居其首。
现代文：二十一年夏，诏封功臣户口为食邑，共十人，称 十投下 ，孛鲁居首位。
English: In the summer of the 21st year, a total of ten people from the households of the meritorious subjects of the imperial edict were invited to the food village.

古文：宋将李全陷益都，执元帅张琳送楚州。
现代文：宋将李全攻陷益都，俘元帅张琳送至楚州。
English: Song sent Li Quan to attack and trap Yiwu, and sent the captive marshal Zhang Lin to Chuzhou.

古文：秋九月，郡王带孙率兵围全于益都。
现代文：二十一年九月，郡王带孙率兵围攻益都。
English: In September of the twenty-first year, the county king and his son led an army to besiege and attack the capital.

古文：冬十二月，孛鲁引兵入齐，先遣李喜孙招谕全，全欲降，部将田世荣等不从，杀喜孙。
现代文：十二月，孛鲁领兵入山东，先遣李喜孙去招降李全，全欲降而部将田世荣不从，杀喜孙。
English: In December, Zhao Lu led the army into Shandong, and sent Li Xisun ahead to recruit Li Quan to surrender. He wanted to surrender, but the commander Tian Shirong did not comply and killed Xisun.

古文：丁亥春三月，全突围欲走，邀击大败之，斩首七千余级，自相蹂践溺死不可胜计。
现代文：二十二年三月，李全突围失败，其士卒被斩首者七千余人，自相践踏和落水溺死者不可胜计。
English: In March 1922, Li Quan failed to break through the siege. More than seven thousand of his soldiers were beheaded, and the number of those who were trampled and drowned was incalculable.

古文：夏四月，城中食尽，全降。
现代文：四月，城中食尽，李全等被迫投降。
English: In April, the city ran out of food and Li Quan and others were forced to surrender.

古文：诸将皆曰： 全势穷出降，非心服也，今若不诛，后必为患。 
现代文：蒙军诸将都说 ：李全是势穷力尽，不得不降，但心仍不服，今若不杀，后必为患。 
English: The generals of the Mongolian army all said: Li Quan exhausted his strength and had to surrender, but his heart was still not satisfied. If he did not kill now, he would be in trouble later.

古文：孛鲁曰： 不然，诛一人易耳。山东未降者尚多，全素得人心，杀之不足以立威，徒失民望。 
现代文：孛鲁曰： 不然，诛杀李全容易，但山东未降者尚多，而全素得人心，杀他并不能树立我军之威，反而使百姓失望。 
English: Jialu said: Otherwise, it is easy to kill Li Quan, but there are still many people in Shandong who have not fallen, and all of them are popular. Killing him cannot establish the authority of our army, but disappoints the people.

古文：表闻，诏孛鲁便宜处之。
现代文：将孛鲁的意见上报太祖。太祖令孛鲁有权自行处置。
English: He reported Jilu's opinion to the Grand Patriarch. The Grand Patriarch gave Jilu the right to make his own decisions.

古文：乃以全为山东淮南楚州行省，郑衍德、田世荣副之，郡县闻风款附，山东悉平。
现代文：于是任李全为山东淮南楚州行省，郑衍德、田世荣为副。其他郡县相继归附，山东全平。
English: As a result, Li Quan was appointed as the governor of Shandong Huainan Chuzhou Province, with Zheng Yande and Tian Shirong as deputies. Other counties and counties were successively annexed, and Shandong was completely leveled.

古文：时滕州尚为金守，诸将或言炎暑未可进攻，孛鲁曰： 主上亲督大军，平定西域数年，未闻当暑不战，我等安敢自逸乎！ 
现代文：这时，滕州尚为金朝所有，蒙军诸将中有人认为正当炎暑，不便进军。孛鲁说 ：主上亲督大军平定西域数年，从未听说暑天不战，我等怎能自图安逸！ 
English: At this time, Tengzhou was still owned by the Kim dynasty, and some of the Mongol generals thought that the heat was justified and it would be inconvenient to march in. Jilu said: Lord, the imperial governor's army has been pacifying the western region for several years, I have never heard that there is no war in the summer, how can I relax!

古文：遂促进兵。金兵出战，败之，斩三千余级，其余老幼开门出降，以州属石天禄。
现代文：乃督促进兵，大败金军，斩三千余级，其余老幼开门出降。滕州交石天禄统治。
English: Naidu promoted soldiers, defeated the Golden Army, cut more than three thousand ranks, and the rest of the old and young opened the door to surrender. Tengzhou Jiaoshi was ruled by Tianlu.

古文：及还，赐馆人银数百两。闻太祖崩，趋赴北庭，哀毁遘疾。
现代文：令先锋元帅肖乃台统蒙古军屯驻济州和兖州，课课不花率兵三千屯驻潍州、沂州、莒州一线，均为防宋；千户按札统大军驻河北以御金军。是年九月孛鲁领军还至燕京，闻太祖崩，急赴北庭。
English: He ordered the vanguard marshal Xiao Naitai to garrison the Mongolian army in Jeju and Bozhou. It did not take long for him to lead three thousand soldiers to garrison the first line in Bozhou, Bozhou and Bozhou, all of which were to defend the Song Dynasty; thousands of households were stationed in Hebei to guard the gold army. It was in September of the year that the leader of the Baolu army returned to Yanjing, heard of the death of Taizu, and rushed to Beiting.

古文：戊子夏五月薨，年三十二。
现代文：第二年夏五月去世，年仅三十二岁。
English: He died in the summer of May the following year, aged just 32.

古文：至治元年，诏封纯诚开济保德辅运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、鲁国王，谥忠定。
现代文：至治元年，诏封为纯诚开济保德辅运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、鲁国王，谥 忠定 。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the imperial seal was awarded to Choshen Kaiji Bao, a meritorious vassal of the German auxiliary movement, Taishi, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, Shangzhu Guo, King Lu, and Zou Zhongding.

古文：子七人：长塔思，次速浑察，次霸都鲁，次伯亦难，次野蔑干，次野不干，次阿里乞失。
现代文：塔思、速浑察均孛鲁之子。
English: Tas, the son of the swift Hunza Jundulu.

古文：塔思，一名查剌温，幼与常儿异，英才大略，绰有祖风。木华黎常曰： 成吾志必此儿也。 
现代文：塔思，一名查剌温。自幼就与一般儿童不同，英才大略，有其祖父木华黎的风度，木华黎常说： 此儿必能实现我的志愿。 
English: Tas, a Jia Wei Wen, has been different from ordinary children since he was young. He is very talented and has the demeanor of his grandfather, Mu Huali. Mu Huali often said, "Here I will be able to realize my wish."

古文：及长，每语必先忠孝，曰： 大丈夫受天子厚恩，当效死行阵间，以图报称，安能委靡苟且目前，以隳先世勋业哉！ 
现代文：塔思长大之后，常以忠孝为先，曾说 ：大丈夫受天子厚恩，当誓死报国，怎能委靡苟且于目前，而毁祖先之大业！ 
English: When Tas grew up, he always put loyalty and filial piety first. He once said, "It is all right to be favored by heaven, but when you pledge your life to serve the country, how can you be complacent in the present and destroy the great cause of your ancestors!"

古文：年十八袭爵，遂至云中。
现代文：十八岁承继鲁国王爵位，至云中。
English: At the age of eighteen, he succeeded to the title of King of Lu and ascended to the clouds.

古文：庚寅秋九月，叛将武仙围潞州，太宗命塔思救之，仙闻之，退军十余里。
现代文：太宗二年九月，叛将武仙围潞州，太宗命塔思援救。武仙闻塔思将至，退军十余里。
English: In September of the second year of Emperor Taizong, the rebel general Wuxian besieged Bozhou, and Emperor Taizong ordered Tashi to come to the rescue. Wuxian heard that Tashi was coming, and retreated more than ten miles.

古文：大兵未至，塔思率十余骑觇贼形势，仙恐有伏，不敢犯。
现代文：蒙古大军至潞州之前，塔思亲率十余骑来察看形势。仙恐有伏兵，不敢出战。
English: Before the Mongolian army arrived in Zhangzhou, more than ten Tasi relatives rode to inspect the situation. Xian was afraid of an ambush and did not dare to go to war.

古文：塔思曰： 日暮矣，待明旦击之。 
现代文：塔思对部将说： 天色已晚，等明早进击。 
English: Tas said to his commander: It is getting late, let's attack in the morning.

古文：是夜五鼓，金将移剌蒲瓦来袭，我师与战不利，退守沁南。
现代文：是夜五更，金将移剌蒲瓦来袭，蒙军战不利，退守沁南。
English: It was the 5th day of the 5th month of the year. The Jin army was about to move to Bophuwa and attack. The Mongolian army was at a disadvantage and retreated to the south of Linyi.

古文：贼还攻潞州，城陷，主将任存死之。
现代文：叛军攻陷潞州城，主将任存战死。
English: The rebels captured the city of Zhangzhou, and the commander-in-chief died in the battle.

古文：冬十月，帝亲征，遣万户因只吉台与塔思复取潞州，仙夜遁，邀击之，斩首七千余级，以任存侄代领其众。
现代文：十月，太宗亲征，遣万户因只吉台与塔思再取潞州。武仙夜间逃遁，途中遭伏击，死七千余人，其余降，由任存之侄代领其众。
English: In October, Emperor Taizong personally conscripted and sent ten thousand households to recapture Zhangzhou because only Jiedai and Tas could march. Emperor Wuxian fled at night, was ambushed on the way, and more than seven thousand people died. The rest surrendered, and were led by his nephew.

古文：十一月，帝攻凤翔，命塔思守潼关以备金兵。
现代文：十一月，太宗攻凤翔，命塔思守潼关以御金兵。
English: In November, Emperor Taizong attacked Fengxiang, and the Life Tower thought of guarding Shouguan with gold soldiers.

古文：河中自石天应死，复为金有。
现代文：河中自石天应死，复为金军占领。
English: In the middle of the river, Shi Tian died and was occupied by the Golden Army.

古文：辛卯，帝亲攻拔之，金元帅完颜火燎遁，塔思追斩之。
现代文：三年，太宗亲领军攻克，金元帅完颜火燎逃走，塔思追斩之。
English: Three years later, Emperor Taizong's relatives led the army to conquer, Marshal Kim fled after the battle, and Tas followed him.

古文：壬辰春，睿宗与金兵相拒于汝、汉间，金步骑二十万，帝命塔思与亲王按赤台、口温不花合军先进渡河，以为声援。
现代文：太宗四年春，睿宗与金兵相持于汝、汉之间，金军步骑共二十万。太宗命塔思与亲王按赤台、口温不花合军渡河先进，以为声援。
English: In the spring of Taizong's fourth year, Ruizong and the gold soldiers stood side by side between you and Han, with a total of two hundred thousand gold soldiers marching. Taizong ordered Tassi and the prince to cross the river in solidarity with the advance of the army.

古文：至三峰山，与睿宗兵合。
现代文：行至三峰山，与睿宗合兵一处。
English: He went to Sanfeng Mountain and joined forces with Ruizong.

古文：金兵成列，将战，会大雪，分兵四出，塔思冒矢石先挫其锋，诸军继进，大败金兵，擒移剌蒲瓦。完颜合达单骑走钧州，追斩之，遂拔钧州。
现代文：时逢大雪，金军分兵四路出击，塔思冒矢挫败敌锋，诸军继进，大败金兵，生擒敌将移剌蒲瓦，完颜合达单骑奔钧州，蒙军追斩之，攻克钧州。
English: When there is heavy snowfall, the detachment of the Golden Army will attack in four directions, Tas will take the initiative to defeat the enemy, the armies will advance, the Golden Army will be defeated, the enemy will move to Shibuya, and the Mongolian Army will pursue and conquer Shibuya.

古文：三月，帝北还，诏塔思与忽都虎统兵，略定河南，诸郡皆降，惟汴京、归德、蔡州未下。
现代文：三月，太宗北还，诏令塔思与忽都虎统兵进占河南。河南诸郡皆降，惟汴京、归德、蔡州未下。
English: In March, Taizong Bei also issued an edict to Tasi and the Khutu Tiger United Army to occupy Henan. The counties in Henan all fell, but Beijing, Guidong and Caizhou did not fall.

古文：塔思遣使请曰： 臣之祖父，佐兴大业，累著勋伐。
现代文：塔思遣使上书太宗曰： 臣之祖父，辅佐太祖兴建伟业，功勋卓著。
English: Taizong, the envoy from the Tower of Sights, wrote to Emperor Taizong, saying: Your grandfather, who assisted Emperor Taizong in building a great career, has made outstanding contributions.

古文：臣袭世爵，曾无寸效，去岁复失利上党，罪当万死，愿分攻汴城一隅，以报陛下。 
现代文：臣袭世爵，曾无尺寸之功。去岁又于上党失利，罪当万死，愿分攻汴城一隅，以报陛下。 
English: As a vassal inheriting a peerage, he had no great achievements. Last year, he lost to the upper party, and he is willing to conquer a corner of the city to report to His Majesty.

古文：帝壮其言，命卜之，不利，乃止。
现代文：太宗十分赞赏塔思这豪言壮语，但卜卦说出兵不利，故未能使他实现其征战大志。
English: Emperor Taizong highly appreciated Tashi's brave words, but he was unable to make him realize his ambition of going to war because he was not good at telling soldiers what to do.

古文：癸巳秋九月，从定宗于潜邸，东征，擒金咸平宣抚颜万奴于辽东。
现代文：太宗五年九月，塔思随太子定宗贵由东征，擒金威平宣抚完颜万奴于辽东。
English: In September of Emperor Taizong's fifth year, Tas followed Prince Dingzonggui in his eastward expedition, and accompanied Jin Weiping to proclaim Yan Bannu in Liaodong.

古文：万奴自乙亥岁率众保东海，至是平之。
现代文：万奴自金宣宗贞三年，即元太祖十年，率众占据东海，直到此时才被蒙古军平定。
English: Banna occupied the East Sea in the third year of the reign of King Seonjo, i.e. the tenth year of the reign of King Wonjo, until it was conquered by the Mongolian army.

古文：甲午秋七月，朝行在所。时诸王大会，帝顾塔思曰： 先皇帝肇开大业，垂四十年。
现代文：太宗六年七月，太宗召诸王大会，对塔思道 ：先皇帝开创大业，于今四十年。
English: In July of the sixth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Taizong called a meeting of all the emperors and told Tasido, "It has been forty years since the former emperor began his great career.

古文：今中原、西夏、高丽、回鹘诸国皆已臣附，惟东南一隅，尚阻声教。
现代文：今中原、西夏、高丽、回鹘诸国皆已平定，称臣纳贡，惟东南一隅尚在化外，阻我大军。
English: At present, the Central Plains, Western Xia, Goryeo, and Uighur States have all been pacified and have paid tribute, but the southeast corner is yet to be pacified, hindering our great army.

古文：朕欲躬行天讨，卿等以为何如？ 
现代文：朕欲御驾亲征，卿等以为如何？ 
English: I'd like to enlist myself, sir, what do you think?

古文：群臣未对，塔思对曰： 臣家累世受恩，图报万一，正在今日。
现代文：群臣未回答，惟有塔思表示： 臣家世受皇上恩典，图报万一正在今日。
English: The group of courtiers did not answer, except for Tas, who said: The courtier family has been favored by the emperor for generations, and if by chance the picture was taken today.

古文：臣虽驽钝，愿仗天威，扫清淮、浙，何劳大驾亲临不测之地哉！ 
现代文：臣虽愚钝，愿依仗皇上天威，扫清淮、浙，用不着皇上御驾亲临那不测之地！ 
English: Although the minister is stupid, he is willing to rely on the emperor's divine power to sweep Huai and Zhejiang, and there is no need for the emperor to personally visit that unpredictable place!

古文：帝悦曰： 塔思虽年少，英风美绩，简在朕心，终能成我家大事矣。 
现代文：太宗甚喜，对众人称赞道 ：塔思虽少，却英姿飒爽，朕心中有数，他日后必能完成我家大事。 
English: Taizong was overjoyed and praised everyone, saying, "Though Tas is young, he has a dashing appearance. I know in my heart that he will be able to accomplish great things for our family in the future."

古文：赐黄金甲、玻璃带及良弓二十，命与王子曲出总军南征。
现代文：赐黄金甲、玻璃带及良弓二十，命与王子曲出领兵南征。
English: He was given a golden helmet, a glass belt and twenty good bows, and his life and the prince's bidding to lead the army to the south.

古文：乙未冬，拔枣阳。曲出别徇襄、邓，塔思引兵攻郢。
现代文：七年冬，蒙军攻占枣阳，曲出进军襄、邓，塔思攻郢。
English: In the winter of the seventh year, the Mongolian army occupied Zaoyang, and marched into Xiang, Deng, and Tas to attack Yunnan.

古文：郢濒汉江，城坚兵精，且多战舰。
现代文：郢滨汉江，城坚兵精，且多战舰。
English: On the coast of the Han River, the castle is fortified with soldiers, and there are many warships.

古文：塔思命造木筏，遣汶上达鲁花赤刘拔都儿将死士五百，乘筏进击。
现代文：塔思命造木筏，遣汶上达鲁花赤刘拔都儿率敢死队五百人，乘筏进击。
English: Tas ordered to build a raft and sent 500 daredevils led by Red Liu Badu to attack the city.

古文：引骑兵沿岸迎射，大破之，溺死者过半，余皆走郢，壁坚，不能下，俘生口、马牛数万而还。
现代文：塔思引骑兵沿岸迎射，大破敌军，溺死者过半，其余皆退入郢城。城坚不能破，蒙古军俘获人口、马牛数万而还。
English: Tarsus led the cavalry along the coast to meet fire, the enemy army was greatly defeated, more than half of the victims drowned, and the rest retreated to Lushan. The city walls could not be broken, the Mongol army captured the population and tens of thousands of horses and cattle and returned.

古文：丙申冬十月，复出邓州，遂至蕲、黄。
现代文：八年十月，复攻邓州，兵至蕲州、黄州。
English: In October of the eighth year, the attack on Dengzhou was resumed, and the soldiers went to Zhangzhou and Huangzhou.

古文：蕲州遣使献金帛、牛酒犒师，请曰： 宋小国也，进贡大朝有年矣。惟王以生灵为念。 
现代文：蕲州守将遣使献金帛、牛酒以犒蒙军，并称： 宋一小国，多年来一直向大朝进贡，希王以生灵为念。 
English: The governor of Bozhou sent an envoy to present gold ingots and cattle wine to the Mongolian army, and said: Song, a small country, has been paying tribute to the Great Dynasty for many years.

古文：乃舍之。遂进拔符镇、六安县焦家寨。
现代文：塔思遂不攻城，而攻克符镇及六安之焦家寨。
English: Therefore, Tas did not attack the city, but attacked Fu Town and Jiao Jia Zhai of Lu'an.

古文：丁酉秋九月，由八柳渡河，入汴京。
现代文：太宗九年九月，塔思率军由八柳渡黄河，直入汴京。
English: In September of the 9th year of Taizong, Tas led the army from Hachiyan to cross the Yellow River and go straight to Beijing.

古文：守臣刘甫置酒大庆殿。
现代文：金守臣刘甫置酒宴于大庆殿。
English: Liu Fu, the vassal of the Jin Dynasty, held a banquet at the Daqing Palace.

古文：塔思曰： 此故金主所居，我人臣也，不可处此。 
现代文：塔思说 ：此殿是故金主所居之地，我乃人臣，不可于此处宴饮。 
English: Tas said, "This hall is the place where the late sovereign lived. I am a vassal, and I cannot have a banquet here."

古文：遂宴于甫家。
现代文：于是改宴于刘甫家中。
English: As a result, the banquet was changed to Liu Fu's home.

古文：冬十月，复与口温不花攻光州，主将黄舜卿降。
现代文：十月，与口温不花攻光州，宋主将黄舜卿开门投降。
English: In October, after attacking Gwangju with a warm-hearted attitude, Song opened the door for Huang Jieqing to surrender.

古文：口温不花别略黄州。塔思攻大苏山，斩首数千级，获生口、牛马以千数。
现代文：口温不花进军黄州，塔思攻大苏山，斩首数千级，俘获人口、牛马数以千计。
English: It didn't take much for the Tongwen to march into Huangzhou, and the Tas to attack Mount Dasu, beheading thousands, and capturing thousands of people, cattle, and horses.

古文：戊戌春正月，至安庆府，官民皆遁于江东。
现代文：十年正月，蒙军至安庆府，官民逃往江东。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, the Mongolian army reached Anqing Prefecture, and the officials and people fled to the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：至北峡关，宋汪统制率兵三千降，迁之尉氏。
现代文：蒙军至北峡关，宋汪统制率兵三千投降，塔思将他迁于尉氏。
English: When the Mongolian army reached the North Gorge Pass, Song Wang led three thousand soldiers to surrender, and Tass moved him to Fuxi.

古文：三月，朝行在所。秋九月，帝宴群臣于行宫，塔思大醉。
现代文：九月，太宗在行宫大宴群臣，塔思大醉。
English: In September, Emperor Taizong held a grand banquet for his courtiers at the imperial palace, and Tashi got very drunk.

古文：帝语侍臣曰： 塔思神已逝矣，其能久乎！ 
现代文：太宗对侍臣说 ：塔思的精神恍惚，恐不久于人世！ 
English: Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers, "Tasu's spirit is in a trance, and I fear he will not live long!"

古文：宝哥薨，子道童袭。
现代文：是年十二月，塔思还归云中。
English: It was December, and Tass was still in the dark.

古文：速浑察，性严厉，赏罚明信，人莫敢犯。与兄塔思从太宗攻凤翔有功。
现代文：十一年三月逝世，年二十八岁。子硕笃儿年幼，由其弟速浑察袭爵位。速浑察为孛鲁次子，禀性严厉，赏罚分明。与兄塔思随太宗攻凤翔有功。
English: He died in March of the eleventh year, at the age of twenty-eight. His children were very young, and his younger brother, Hayahunzaka, succeeded to the peerage. Hayahunzaka was the second son of Jiro, a stern character, with clear rewards and punishments. He and his brother Tas followed Taizong to attack Fengxiang.

古文：将兵抵潼关，与金人战屡捷。
现代文：曾领兵至潼关，与金军屡战屡捷。
English: He once led his troops to Shaoguan and won many battles with the Chinese army.

古文：既灭金，皇子阔出攻宋枣阳，入郢，速浑察皆与焉。岁己亥，塔思薨，速浑察袭爵，即上京之西阿儿查秃置营，总中都行省蒙古、汉军。
现代文：灭金之后，又随皇子阔出攻宋枣阳，占领郢城。塔思死，速浑察袭鲁国王爵位后，于上京之西阿儿查秃置营，总领中都行省之蒙古军和汉军。
English: After extinguishing the gold, he also followed the prince to attack Song Zaoyang and occupy Lucheng. After the death of Tas and the accession of Huancha to the throne of the King of Lu, he set up a camp in the west of Shangjing, and led the Mongol army and the Chinese army in the province.

古文：凡他行省监镇事，必先白之，定其可否，而后上闻。
现代文：凡其他行省监镇事，必先报告速浑察，定其可否，然后奏陈皇帝。
English: In all other matters concerning provincial supervisors, they must first report for a quick inspection to determine whether it is possible, and then report to Emperor Chen.

古文：帝尝遣使至，见其威容凛然，倜傥有奇气，所部军士纪纲整肃，还朝以告。帝曰： 真木华黎家儿也。 
现代文：太宗曾遣使至速浑察处，见其威容凛然，军纪整肃，还朝如实报告皇帝，帝曰 ：真木华黎的子孙也。 
English: Emperor Taizong once sent an envoy to Zhifu to inspect the place, and seeing his dignified demeanor and military discipline, he also truthfully reported to the emperor, saying: "He is also a descendant of Maki Huali."

古文：他国使有至者，每见皆仓皇失次，不能措辞，必慰抚良久，始得尽其所欲言。
现代文：蒙古皇帝所封各王国，其使者每见皇帝皆仓皇失措，连话也不敢说，必经一番慰抚之后，才得尽言其所欲言。
English: The emissaries of the Mongolian emperors, who were sent to the various kingdoms, were always at a loss for words when they saw the emperors. They did not even dare to speak, and had to be comforted before they could say as much as they wanted.

古文：左右或谏曰： 诸王百司既莫敢越，而复示之以威，使人怖畏，盍少加宽恕以待之。 速浑察曰： 尔言诚是也，然时有不同，宽猛各有所宜施。
现代文：有人认为这是由于皇帝威严使人畏惧，建议皇帝对他们 稍加宽恕以待之 。速浑察说： 你的话是正确的，但须因时而异，宽猛各有所宜。
English: Some people thought that this was because the emperor's majesty was so awe-inspiring, and suggested that the emperor should give them a little more forgiveness. Hohunca said: Your words are correct, but they must be different from time to time.

古文：天下初附，民心未安，万一守者自纵，事变忽起，悔之晚矣。 
现代文：天下初定，民心未定，万一守臣放纵不羁，事变突然发生，那时悔之晚矣。 
English: The fate of the world is predetermined, but the hearts of the people are undecided. In the unlikely event that a vassal indulges in unrestrained behavior and an incident suddenly occurs, it will be too late to repent.

古文：寻薨。
现代文：不久，速浑察去世。
English: Soon after, Hayabusa passed away.

古文：相威自有传。乃燕，性谦和，好学，以贤能称。
现代文：延三年，赠宣忠同德翊运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封为东平郡王，谥 忠宣 。乃燕，速浑察之子，性谦和，好学，以贤能著称。
English: Three years later, he bestowed the title of Dongping County King to Xuanzhong Zhongtong, a virtuous and successful general, grand master, Kaifu Yi, and Sanji, Shangzhu Province. He was the son of Hohunca, Naoyan, who was humble and eager to learn, and was known for his ability.

古文：速浑察既薨，宪宗择于诸子，命乃燕袭爵。乃燕力辞曰： 臣有兄忽林池当袭。 
现代文：速浑察死后，宪宗命乃燕承袭爵位。乃燕极力推辞说： 臣有兄忽林池，应由他承袭。 
English: After the death of Hayahuncha, Kenzong ordered Naoyan to succeed to the title. Naoyan strenuously objected, saying, "The vassal has an older brother, Kulinchi, and he should succeed to the title."

古文：帝曰： 朕知之，然柔弱不能胜。 
现代文：宪宗说： 朕知道，但忽林池软弱，不能胜任。 
English: Gensong said, "I know, but Kulinchi is weak and incompetent.

古文：于是忽林池袭为国王，事无巨细，必与乃燕谋议，剖决精当，无所拥滞。
现代文：忽林池也坚持推让，乃燕仍力辞不受，对宪宗说道： 王爵是不敢受的，但愿代臣兄行军国之事。 终于由忽林池袭为国王，然事无大小，都必须与乃燕商议而后行。乃燕对政事处理精当及时，无所积压。
English: Kulinchi also insisted on making concessions, but Naoyan still refused to be persuaded, and said to Kenzong: The crown prince is unbearable, but I hope that the vassal brother will march to the country. Finally, Kulinchi will become the king, but no matter how big or small, it must be discussed with Naoyan. Naoyan's handling of political affairs is precise and timely, and there is no backlog.

古文：世祖在潜藩，常与论事。
现代文：世祖在即皇位之前，常与乃燕讨论国事。
English: Prior to his ascension to the throne, the founder often discussed state affairs with Naoyan.

古文：乃燕敷陈大义，又明习典故。世祖谓左右曰： 乃燕后必可大用。 
现代文：乃燕熟悉典章制度，诸事应如何办理，均详加说明，世祖对左右侍臣道： 乃燕日后必有大用。 
English: Naoyan is familiar with the award system, and explains in detail how things should be handled. The ancestor said to the attendants on both sides: Naoyan will be of great use in the future.

古文：因号之曰薛禅，犹华言大贤也。
现代文：因称他为 薛禅 ，汉语为 大贤 的意思。
English: Because they called him Xue Zhen, which means "great sage" in Chinese.

古文：乃燕虽居显要，而小心谨畏，每诲群从子弟曰： 先世从太祖皇帝出入矢石间，被坚执锐，斩将搴旗，勤劳四十余年，遂成功名。以故一家蒙恩深厚，可谓极矣。
现代文：乃燕虽地位显要，但小心谨慎，常教育子弟说 ：我们先世随太祖在枪林箭雨中东征西讨，披坚执锐，斩将夺旗，勤劳四十余年，功勋卓著，名扬天下，全家厚蒙圣恩，可谓至极。
English: Although Naiyan has a prominent position, she is careful and prudent, always educating her children, saying, "In our previous lives, we followed our great-grandfather in the battlefields of the Middle East and the conquest of the West, we are stubborn and determined, we will win the flag, we have worked hard for more than forty years, we have outstanding achievements, we are famous all over the world, and the whole family has been blessed with divine grace, which can be described as the ultimate.

古文：慎勿骄惰，以堕先王之名，尔曹戒之。 
现代文：尔等切勿骄惰，破坏先王的名声，要铭记在心。 
English: Do not be conceited and destroy the reputation of the former king. Keep this in mind.

古文：病卒。
现代文：不久病卒。
English: He died of illness.

古文：世祖闻之，为之悲悼。
现代文：世祖闻耗，为之悲痛。
English: The world's ancestors were saddened to hear of his death.

古文：硕德，通敏有干才。世祖即位，入宿卫，典朝仪，后同知通政院事。
现代文：至正八年，赠中奉大夫、辽阳等处行中书省参知政事、护军，追封鲁郡公。硕德，乃燕之子，聪敏能干。世祖即位，硕德为宫中警卫，负责朝廷礼仪事宜，后任同知通政院事。
English: In the eighth year of the first month of the year, Zhuo De, the son of Yan, was gifted the title of doctor of the Middle Bong, Liaoyang, and other places in the line of the book, the governor of the province, the governor of the political affairs, the military escort, and the governor of Lu County. Shuo De was the guardian of the palace, responsible for the etiquette of the imperial court, and later served as the secretary of Tong Tong Political Academy.

古文：尝言辽东斡拙、吉烈灭二种民数为寇，宜遣近臣谕之。
现代文：有人提出，辽东之斡拙、吉烈灭二部族多次为寇，应该派皇帝侍臣去安抚。
English: Some people suggested that Liaodong should send the emperor's courtiers to pacify the two tribes, which had been repeatedly defeated by the good offices and benevolence of Liaodong.

古文：帝方难其人，佥曰： 惟硕德元勋世胄，可使。 
现代文：世祖一时难找人选，大家都举荐硕德，认为他是元勋后代，非他莫属。
English: It was difficult for the founder to find a candidate at the time, but everyone recommended Shuo De, believing that he was the progeny of the founder.

古文：帝深然之，以问硕德，对曰： 先臣从太祖皇帝定天下，不辞险艰，以立勋业。
现代文：世祖问硕德如何，硕德说： 臣先王从太祖平定天下，不辞艰险，建功立业。
English: When the founder of the world asked Shuo De how he was, Shuo De said, "The vassal king has been pacifying the world since the time of my grandfather. He has not shirked any hardships and has made great achievements.

古文：陛下不以臣年少愚戆，愿请行。 
现代文：陛下若不嫌臣年少愚钝，请让臣去。 
English: If Your Majesty doesn't like his young and stupid vassal, please let him go.

古文：帝大喜，赐御衣，锡燕以行。
现代文：世祖大喜，赐御衣，设宴饯行。
English: The patriarch was overjoyed, gave her a robe, set up a banquet and departed.

古文：硕德至，集诸万户陈兵冲要，诘其渠魁诛之。胁从者皆降。
现代文：硕德至辽东后，先召集诸万户屯兵险要地方，然后查究为寇之事，将为首者诛杀，于是胁从者皆降。
English: After Shuo De arrived in the east of Liaoning Province, he first gathered tens of thousands of troops to secure the important place, and then investigated the matter of robbery. He would fight and kill the leader, so all the followers of the robbery would surrender.

古文：帝大悦，赏赉有差。
现代文：世祖大喜，予以奖赏。
English: The ancestor was overjoyed and rewarded him.

古文：后从征乃颜及使西域，屡建殊勋。
现代文：其后硕德又从征乃颜及出使西域，屡建殊勋。
English: After that, Shuo De was sent to the Western Regions from Zhenoyan and won many honors.

古文：卒，赠推忠宣惠宁远功臣，谥忠敏，加赠资善大夫、岭北等处行中书省右丞、上护军，追封鲁郡公。
现代文：死后赠推忠宣惠宁远功臣，谥 忠敏 ，加赠资善大夫、岭北等处行中书省右丞、上护军，追封鲁郡公。
English: After his death, he bestowed the title of Lu County Grand Duke on the meritorious subject of promoting Zhong Xuan and benefiting Ningyuan, Zou Zhongmin, as well as the titles of Zhishan Doctor, Lingbei and so on.

古文：霸突鲁，从世祖征伐，为先锋元帅，累立战功。
现代文：霸突鲁，木华黎之孙，勃鲁之第三子。从世祖征伐，为先锋元帅，累立战功。
English: He was the third son of Bu Tu Lu, the grandson of Mu Hua Li, and the third son of Bu Lu. He was a pioneer marshal and distinguished himself in war.

古文：世祖在潜邸，从容语霸突鲁曰： 今天下稍定，我欲劝主上驻驿回鹘，以休兵息民，何如？ 
现代文：世祖即位前曾问霸突鲁： 天下初定，我欲劝主上屯驻于回鹘，休兵息民，你看如何？ 
English: Before ascending to the throne, the founder of the world once asked the tyrant Turu: The world has made its initial decision. I would like to advise the Lord to stay in Uluwatu, cease hostilities and pacify the people. What do you think?

古文：对曰： 幽燕之地，龙蟠虎踞，形势雄伟，南控江淮，北连朔漠。
现代文：霸突鲁对曰： 幽燕之地，龙蟠虎踞，形势雄伟，南控江淮，北连大漠。
English: Batu Lu said to him: The land of gentle swallows, the land of dragons and tigers, the situation is majestic, the south-controlled Yangtze River and Huai River, and the north-linked desert.

古文：且天子必居中以受四方朝觐。
现代文：而且天子必须居中以受四方的朝见。
English: Moreover, the Son of Heaven must be in the center to be seen by the four sides.

古文：大王果欲经营天下，驻驿之所，非燕不可。 世祖怃然曰： 非卿言，我几失之。 
现代文：大王果欲统御天下，非驻燕不可。 世祖有所省悟地说： 若不是你这样说，我几乎失误了。 
English: If the great king wants to rule the world, he has to stay in Yan. The patriarch said thoughtfully, "If you didn't say that, I almost made a mistake.

古文：己未秋，命霸突鲁率诸军由蔡伐宋，且移檄谕宋沿边诸将，遂与世祖兵合而南，五战皆捷，遂渡大江，傅于鄂。
现代文：宪宗九年秋，命霸突鲁率诸军由蔡伐宋。霸突鲁传令给宋朝沿边诸将，晓谕利害，然后与世祖合兵南进，五战皆捷，渡大江直逼鄂州。
English: In the autumn of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Cai sent an order to the generals along the border of the Song Dynasty, telling them what was at stake, and then marched south with the ancestors, winning all five battles, crossing the Yangtze River and directly approaching Ezhou.

古文：会宪宗崩于蜀，阿里不哥构乱和林，世祖北还，留霸突鲁总军务，以待命。
现代文：正当此时，宪宗在蜀驾崩，阿里不哥阴谋在和林篡位，世祖疾速北还，留霸突鲁总领军务，就地待命。
English: Just at this time, Emperor Xianzong passed away in Shuxu, Emperor Ali's brother conspired to usurp the throne in Hailin, Emperor Shizu hastily returned to the north, and remained in charge of the military affairs of Turu, and was on standby.

古文：世祖至开平，即位，还定都于燕。
现代文：世祖至开平即皇位，定都于燕。
English: The ancestor to Kaiping, that is, the imperial throne, is located in Yan.

古文：尝曰： 朕居此以临天下，霸突鲁之力也。 
现代文：曾对左右说： 朕居燕京统治天下，此霸突鲁之力也。 
English: He once said to the right and the left: I live in Yanjing to rule the world, this is the power of tyranny.

古文：师还，中统二年卒于军。
现代文：蒙古军北还，霸突鲁于中统二年卒于军中。
English: The Mongolian army was still in the north, and Batulu died in the middle of the army in the second year of unification.

古文：大德八年，追赠推诚宣力翊卫功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、东平王，谥武靖。
现代文：大德八年，追赠推诚宣力翊卫功巨、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、东平王，谥 武靖 。
English: In the eighth year of the Great German Empire, he posthumously conferred the titles of Grand Master, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies.

古文：夫人帖木伦，昭睿顺圣皇后同母兄也。
现代文：其夫人贴木伦为昭睿顺圣皇后同母姊妹。
English: His wife, Stick Mulan, is the same-mother sister of Empress Zhaorai Shunsheng.

古文：子四人：长安童，次定童，次霸都虎台；他姬子曰和童，袭国王。
现代文：有子四人，安童为长子，自有传。脱脱，速浑察之孙，继承其祖父爵位。
English: He had four children, with Ando as the eldest son, and it is said that he was the grandson of Hidaka, who inherited his grandfather's title.

古文：安童别有传。
现代文：禀性深沉，有智略，曾奉命征讨，战无不克。
English: He is stubborn and resourceful. He was once ordered to collect taxes, but he did not hesitate to fight.

古文：尝挟之南征，同舟济大江，虑其有失，系之御榻。
现代文：脱脱的父亲为撒蛮，自幼聪颖。婴儿时，世祖当作自己的儿子来抚育。
English: His father was a savage, and he was clever from a young age. When he was a baby, Shizuru raised him as his own son.

古文：及长，常侍左右。
现代文：南征还带在身边。撒蛮长大后，侍奉世祖于左右。
English: Nansei is still with him. When Saban grew up, he served his ancestor to the left and right.

古文：帝尝诏之曰： 男女异路，古制也，况掖庭乎。
现代文：世祖对他说： 男女各行其道，这是古制，皇宫嫔妃所居住地方，尤当如此。
English: The patriarch said to him: "Men and women go their separate ways. This is an ancient system. This is especially true of the places where the imperial concubines live.

古文：礼不可不肃，汝其司之。 
现代文：此礼必须严格执行，由你来负责。 
English: This must be strictly enforced and you are responsible for it.

古文：既而近臣孛罗衔命遽出，行失其次。
现代文：有天，近臣孛罗奉命出宫，未按规定行走。
English: One day, his close retainer, Yao Luo, was ordered to leave the palace, but he did not follow the rules.

古文：撒蛮怒其违礼，执而囚之别室。
现代文：撒蛮斥责他违礼，并把他囚禁起来。
English: The savages scolded him for his impertinence and put him in prison.

古文：帝怪其久不至，询知其故，命释其罪。
现代文：世祖久等撒蛮不至，询问原因，命撤蛮释放。
English: The ancestor waited for a long time for the police to arrive, inquired about the reason, and was released.

古文：由是有意大任之。
现代文：撒蛮进言曰： 男女各行其道，这是陛下的命令。
English: Sabanjin said, "Men and women should go their separate ways. This is His Majesty's order."

古文：会以疾卒，不果，年仅一十有七。
现代文：今陛下自己违背规定，将何以责臣下遵行？ 世祖说 ：卿言极是。 本拟重用他，但不久病卒，年仅十七岁。
English: Now that his majesty himself has violated the rules, how can he order his subjects to obey? The patriarch said, "Yes, sir, I intended to use him again, but he soon fell ill and died at the age of seventeen."

古文：脱脱幼既失怙，其母孛罗海笃意教之，孜孜若恐不及。稍长，直宿卫，世祖复亲诲导，尤以嗜酒为戒。
现代文：脱脱自幼丧父，母亲孛罗海孜孜不倦地教养。稍大，为宫中禁卫，世祖亲自教诲，特别不准嗜酒。
English: After losing his father at a young age, he was raised tirelessly by his mother, Luo Hai. When he was a little older, he was a palace guard and was personally taught by his grandfather. He was especially not allowed to drink alcohol.

古文：既冠，仪观甚伟。
现代文：二十岁，仪表堂堂。
English: Twenty years old, with a magnificent appearance.

古文：喜与儒士语，每闻一善言善行，若获拱璧，终身识之不忘。
现代文：好与儒士们谈论，每闻一善言善行，如获至宝，终身牢记不忘。
English: It is best to talk with Confucians, and if you hear a good word or do a good deed, it will be treasured and remembered for life.

古文：至元二十四年，从征乃颜。
现代文：至元二十四年，从征乃颜。
English: In the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zheng Noyan was exiled.

古文：帝驻驿于山巅，旌旗蔽野。
现代文：世祖屯兵于山巅，旌旗蔽野。
English: The ancestor stationed soldiers at the top of the mountain, waving flags and covering the fields.

古文：鼓未作，候者报有隙可乘，脱脱即擐甲率家奴数十人疾驰击之。
现代文：探马报告敌人乘隙而入，脱脱立即披甲率家奴数十人快马出击。
English: The scout reported that the enemy had taken advantage of a gap to enter the city. Immediately, dozens of soldiers wearing armor and led by their servants set out on horseback.

古文：众皆披靡不敢前。帝望见之，大加嗟赏，遣使者劳之，且召还曰： 卿勿轻进，此寇易擒也。 视其刀已折，马已中箭矣。帝顾谓近臣曰： 撒蛮不幸早死，脱脱幼，朕抚而教之，常恐其不立，今能如此，撒蛮可谓有子矣。 
现代文：敌人望风溃逃。世祖大加叹赏，遣使慰劳，召还对他说 ：卿勿轻进，此寇易擒。 见脱脱的刀已折断，马已中箭，对左右近臣道： 撒蛮不幸早死，脱脱年幼，朕抚育教诲，常恐他不能成材，今能如此，撒蛮可谓有子矣。 
English: The enemy waited for the wind to blow and fled. The ancestor gave him a big sigh of appreciation, sent a messenger to console him, and summoned him to say, "Sir, do not enter lightly, this thief is easily defeated. Seeing that the escaped sword has been broken, and the horse has been hit by an arrow, he said to his left and right vassals, "Savant unfortunately died early, escaped when he was young, I raised and taught him, and I always feared that he would not be able to become a man. Now that he can do so, Savant can be said to have a son."

古文：其后哈丹复为乱，成宗时在潜邸，督师往征之。脱脱引众率先跃马蹙之，其众大溃。
现代文：将自己所挂佩刀和乘马赐与脱脱。从此以后，脱脱受到重用，参预机要大事。哈丹又作乱，太子成宗督师征讨。脱脱率部首先跃马出击，敌人大溃。
English: He gave the sword he wore and the horse he rode as gifts to the escapees. From then on, the escapees were put to good use, and it was important for them to take part in the preparations. Hardan caused another riot, and the prince became the superintendent. The escapees were the first to attack on horseback, and the enemy was routed.

古文：脱脱马陷于淖泥中，哈丹兵复进挑战，脱脱弟阿老瓦丁奋戈冲击，遂大败之。
现代文：脱脱马陷入泥淖中，哈丹回兵挑战，幸脱脱弟阿老瓦丁奋戈冲杀，哈丹军大败。
English: The escaping horse got stuck in the mud. Hardan challenged the retreating soldiers. Fortunately, the escaping brother, Ah Lao Vadim, rushed to the scene and fought to the death. Hardan's army was soundly defeated.

古文：成宗即位，其宠顾为尤笃，常侍禁闼，出入惟谨，退语家人曰： 我昔亲承先帝训，饬令毋嗜饮，今未能绝也。
现代文：成宗即位，脱脱倍受宠信，常侍奉皇帝于宫中，而出入谨慎，对家人说 ：过去我承蒙先帝的教训，严禁我嗜酒，但我未能戒绝。
English: Chengzong ascended to the throne, he was often favored, he often served the emperor in the palace, he was cautious in going out and coming in, and he said to his family: In the past, I learned the lessons of the former emperor, I was strictly forbidden to drink alcohol, but I could not quit.

古文：自今以往，家人有以酒至吾前者，即痛惩之。 
现代文：为人岂能知过而不改吗！自今以后，家人有送酒来者，即痛惩不贷。 
English: Can't people learn from this and not change? From now on, if a family member sends someone wine, that person will be severely punished.

古文：帝闻之，喜曰： 紥剌儿台如脱脱者无几，今能刚制于酒，真可大用矣。 
现代文：成宗闻言喜曰 ：札剌儿台像脱脱者没有几人。他今能决心戒酒，真可大用。 
English: Chengzong Wenzhongxi said, "There are not many people who have escaped from the cycle of drinking. He can now make up his mind to quit drinking, which is really useful."

古文：即拜资德大夫、上都留守、通政院使、虎贲卫亲军都指挥使，政令严肃，克修其职。
现代文：拜脱脱为资德大夫、上都留守、通政院使、虎贲卫亲军都指挥使。他政令严肃，忠于职守。
English: Baidutsu was a doctor of finance and administration, but he was absent from the capital, he was an envoy to the Imperial Court of Japan, and he was the commander of the troops of the Togakushi Imperial Guards. He was serious about government and loyal to his duties.

古文：三年，朝议以江浙行省地大人众，非世臣有重望者，不足以镇之。
现代文：大德三年，朝臣们认为，江浙行省地大人众，非有重望之世臣不足以镇慑。
English: In the third year of the Great German Reign, the courtiers believed that the people of Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces would not be deterred by the arrival of a high-ranking courtier.

古文：进拜荣禄大夫、江浙等处行中书省平章政事，有旨，命中书祖道都门外以饯之。始至，严饬左右，毋预公家事，且戒其掾属曰： 仆从有私嘱者，慎勿听。若军民诸事，有关于利害者，则言之。
现代文：于是进拜脱脱为荣禄大夫、江浙等处行中书省平章政事。他一到任就严令左右不准干预公事，告诫其所属官员： 仆从有以私事嘱托者，切不可听；若系军民诸事，有关于利害者，你们报告与我。
English: As soon as he took office, he strictly ordered his subordinates not to interfere in public affairs, and warned his subordinate officials: If you have a subordinate who entrusts you with a private matter, you must not listen to him; if it is a military or civilian matter, if there is an interested party, you should report to me.

古文：当言而不言，尔之责也；言而不听，我之咎也。 
现代文：当讲不讲，这是你们失职；若我不听，那是我的过错。 
English: If you do not speak, it is your fault; if I do not listen, it is my fault.

古文：闻者为之悚栗。
现代文：当时，朱清、张蠧在负责海运，官至参知政事。
English: At that time, Zhu Qing and Zhang Ye were in charge of maritime transport, and officials were involved in political affairs.

古文：时朱清、张瑄以海运之故，致位参知政事，恃其势位，多行不法，恐事觉，以黄金五十两、珠三囊赂脱脱，求蔽其罪。脱脱大怒，系之有司，遣使者以闻。
现代文：二人恃其权势地位，干了些违法的事，又恐朝廷发觉，以黄金五十两，珠三袋去贿赂脱脱，请求他包庇其罪行。脱脱大怒，把他们囚禁起来，遣使上报皇帝。
English: Fearing that the imperial court would find out that the two men had abused their positions of power and committed illegal acts, they bribed him with fifty-two bags of gold and three bags of pearls and asked him to cover up their crimes. Out of great anger, he imprisoned them and sent them to report to the emperor.

古文：帝喜曰： 脱脱我家老臣之子孙，其志固宜与众人殊。 
现代文：成宗大喜曰 ：脱脱是我皇家老臣之子孙，其德行应当与常人不同。 
English: Chengzong Daxi said, "Begone is the son and grandson of my royal elder, and his virtue should be different from that of ordinary people."

古文：赐内府黄金五十两，命回使宠赉之。
现代文：赐内府黄金五十两。有豪绅白昼杀人，脱脱立即命官府按法处以死刑。
English: He gave fifty taels of gold to Naifu. When a wealthy gentleman committed murder in broad daylight, he immediately ordered the government to impose the death penalty according to the law.

古文：子朵儿只，别有传。博尔术博尔术，阿儿剌氏。
现代文：但未及召还，于大德十一年去世，享年四十四岁。博尔术，姓阿儿剌氏。
English: However, before he could be recalled, he died in the eleventh year of the Taede era, at the age of forty-four.

古文：始祖孛端察儿，以才武雄朔方。
现代文：始祖名孛端察儿，以雄才武略闻名于北方。
English: The founder's name is Xuan Duanzhaer, and he is famous in the north for his great talent in martial arts.

古文：父纳忽阿儿阑，与烈祖神元皇帝接境，敦睦邻好。
现代文：父名纳忽阿儿阑，其领地与烈祖神元皇帝接境，彼此睦邻友好。
English: His father's name was Nakhu A'erqin, and his territory was adjacent to that of Emperor Shenyuan, and they were good neighbors and friends.

古文：博尔术志意沉雄，善战知兵，事太祖于潜邸，共履艰危，义均同气，征伐四出，无往不从。
现代文：博尔术沉着，勇敢善战，熟知兵法，太祖称帝前，就与太祖艰危与共，情义相投，征伐四方，无往不从。
English: Bor is calm, brave, good at fighting, and familiar with the art of war. Before his great-grandfather became emperor, he shared the hardships and dangers with his great-grandfather, sympathized with each other, conquered four directions, and never deviated from the path.

古文：时诸部未宁，博尔术每警夜，帝寝必安枕。
现代文：那时蒙古诸部尚未统一，博尔术每夜警卫，使太祖寝必安枕。
English: At that time, Mongolia's various departments had not yet been unified, and Bolshy was on guard every night, so that the great-grandfather could sleep peacefully.

古文：寓直于内，语及政要，或至达旦。君臣之契，犹鱼水也。
现代文：两人谈论政事，有时竟通宵达旦，君臣之交，有如鱼水。
English: The two of them talk about politics, sometimes staying up all night, and the friendship between the monarch and the minister is like fish and water.

古文：初，要儿斤部卒盗牧马，博尔术与往追之，时年十三，知众寡不敌，乃出奇从旁夹击之，盗舍所掠去。
现代文：早先，要儿斤部卒盗牧马，博尔术带兵奋起追捕，时年仅十三，知寡不敌众，乃出奇兵，从两旁夹击，强盗丢掉所掠马匹而逃。
English: Earlier, when a robber stole a wrangler's horse, Bol's soldiers rose up to chase him. He was only 13 years old, outnumbered and outgunned, but he was an extraordinary soldier. He clamped down from both sides, and the robbers lost the horses they had stolen and fled.

古文：即战于大赤兀里，两军相接，下令殊死战，跬步勿退。博尔术系马于腰，跽而引满，分寸不离故处，太祖嘉其勇胆。
现代文：后与要儿斤部战于大赤兀里，两军相接，博尔术下令殊死战斗，半步也不准退，他自己将马系于腰，跪地射箭，分寸不离所在位置，太祖盛赞其胆量超群。
English: Later, he fought with the warlord in the Great Red Knot, and the two armies came into contact. Bolshy ordered a desperate battle, and he was not allowed to retreat even half a step. He tied his horse to his waist, kneeled down and shot arrows, and did not leave his position. The great-grandfather praised his courage.

古文：又尝溃围于怯列，太祖失马，博尔术拥帝累骑饵驰，顿止中野。
现代文：在怯列突围时，太祖失马，博尔术拥太祖共骑一马奔驰于草原。
English: When breaking through the encirclement, the great-great-grandfather lost his horse, and the great-great-great-grandfather galloped across the grassland on one horse.

古文：会天雨雪，失牙帐所在，卧草泽中，与木华黎张毡裘以蔽帝，同夕植立，足迹不移，及旦，雪深数尺，遂免于难。
现代文：逢天降雨雪，又丢失了帐篷，卧于草泽中。博尔术与木华黎张开毡裘为太祖挡风遮雪。他们两人通宵伫立，寸步不移，到第二天清晨，雪深数尺，太祖得免于难。
English: It rained and snowed every day, and they lost their tent and lay in the grass. Bolshy and Mu Huali opened their tents to block the snow for the grandfather. The two of them stood up all night, without moving an inch. By the morning of the next day, the snow was several feet deep, and the grandfather was spared.

古文：篾里期之战，亦以风雪迷阵，再入敌中，求太祖不见，急趋辎重，则帝已还卧憩车中，闻博尔术至，曰： 聪天赞我也。 
现代文：篾里期之战，风雪迷阵，博尔术再杀入敌军，不见太祖，及还，见太祖已在车中。太祖闻博尔术至，连声说： 此天助我也。 
English: During the Battle of Baili, the wind and snow confused the battle, and Bol once again entered the enemy army. He did not see his great-grandfather, and furthermore, he saw his great-grandfather already in the car. Hearing of Bol's arrival, his great-grandfather said in unison, "This day, help me too."

古文：丙寅岁，太祖即皇帝位，君臣之分益密，尝从容谓博尔术及木华黎曰： 今国内平定，多汝等之力，我之与汝，犹车之有辕，身之有臂，汝等宜体此勿替。 
现代文：太祖登皇帝位后，君臣关系更加密切，曾对博尔术及木华黎说： 今国内平定，多赖你们的力量，我与你们关系，如车之有辕，身之有臂。你们切勿断绝。 
English: After Emperor Taizu ascended the throne, the relationship between the emperor and his subjects became even closer. He once said to Bolshu and Mu Huali, "The current domestic peace is largely due to your strength. My relationship with you is like that of a car with a hub and a body with an arm. You must not break it off."

古文：遂以博尔术及木华黎为左右万户，各以其属翊卫，位在诸将上。
现代文：于是以博尔术和木华黎为左右万户，各以其所部来辅佐太祖，位在诸将之上。
English: As a result, Bolshy and Mu Huali were the right and left of all households, each with its department to assist the great ancestor, ranking above the generals.

古文：皇鬃察哈歹出镇西域，有旨从博尔术受教，博尔术教以人生经涉险阻，必获善地，她过无轻舍止。
现代文：皇子察哈歹出镇西域，太祖令他从博尔术受教。博尔术教导皇子说，人生经历险阻，最终必得善地，所过之地，切勿轻易舍弃。
English: When Prince Caha went out to the western region of the town, the great-grandfather ordered him to be taught the art of Bol. Bol taught the prince that life is full of obstacles, and in the end, you must be good at what you do. Don't give up easily where you have been.

古文：太祖谓皇子曰： 朕之教汝，亦不逾是。 
现代文：太祖对皇子说 ：朕教汝也是这样。 
English: The great-grandfather said to the prince, "This is what I have taught you.

古文：未几，赐广平路户一亡七千三百有奇为分地。
现代文：不久，赐博尔术广平路一万七千三百户为分地。
English: Soon, 17,300 households on Guangping Road in Zibo were allocated land.

古文：以老病薨，太祖痛悼之。
现代文：博尔术以老病卒，太祖深为哀痛。
English: Bol's art takes an old invalid as its pawn, and the great-grandfather is deeply saddened.

古文：大德五年，赠推忠协谋佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司，追封广平王，谥武忠。
现代文：大德五年，追赠推忠协谋佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司，追封广平王，谥 武忠 。
English: In the fifth year of his reign, he posthumously awarded the title of "Companion and Co-ordinator of the Military Campaign, Hero and Heroine," "Grand Master," "Grand Master of the Imperial Household" and "Third Grand Master of the Imperial Household," as well as the titles of "King of Guangping" and "King of Wuchang."

古文：玉昔帖木儿曰： 风宪所以戢奸，若是，有伤监临之体。 
现代文：玉昔帖木儿，博尔术之孙。受世祖宠爱，赐号 月吕鲁那演 ，汉语 能官 之意。
English: Gyokuseki Timur, the grandson of Bolshy. Beloved by the founder of the world, he was given the name Yue Luruna, which means "powerful official" in Chinese.

古文：其议乃沮。
现代文：二十岁袭爵位，统按台部众。
English: At the age of twenty, he inherited a peerage and unified the Taibe people.

古文：遇事廷辩，吐辞鲠直，誓祖每为之霁威。
现代文：玉昔帖木儿器量宏大莫测。世祖闻其贤，召入朝廷，命主持宫廷膳食诸事。至元十二年，拜为御史大夫。
English: In ancient times, Timur's vessels were immeasurably large. The patriarch heard of his wisdom, was summoned to the imperial court, and ordered to preside over all matters of court meals. In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was worshipped as the chief historian.

古文：至元二十四年，宗王乃颜叛东鄙，世祖躬行天讨，命总戎者先之。
现代文：江南平定后，赐全州清湘县户为分地。至元二十四年，宗王乃颜叛，世祖躬亲讨伐，命玉昔帖木儿领兵先行。
English: After the pacification of the southern Jiangsu Province, households in Qingxiang County in Quanzhou were allotted land. In the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestral king was a traitor, and the ancestors fought against him, and ordered Gyuluxi Timur to lead the army.

古文：世祖至帮道，玉昔帖木儿已退敌，僵尸覆野，数旬之间，三战三捷，获乃颜以献。
现代文：世祖至半途，玉昔帖木儿已击退敌军。数十天之间，三战三捷，僵尸遍野，俘乃颜献于朝廷。
English: Halfway to the ancestor, Gyokuseki Timur has repulsed the enemy army. Within a few dozen days, three wars, three victories, zombies everywhere, and captured Naoyan dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：诏选诚舆橐驼百蹄劳之。
现代文：诏选车辆与骆驼一百头犒劳。
English: A motor vehicle and a hundred camels.

古文：谢曰： 天威所临，犹风偃草，臣何力之有。 
现代文：玉昔帖木儿谢道： 皇上天威所临，如同风吹草伏一般，臣有何力能克敌制胜。 
English: Gyokuseki Timur said gratefully, "When the Emperor's divine power comes, it is like the wind blowing grass. How can a vassal defeat the enemy and win?"

古文：世祖还，留吁昔帖木儿剿其余党，乃执其酋金家奴以献，戮其同恶数人于军前。
现代文：世祖还京，留玉昔帖木儿剿尽余党。玉昔帖木儿俘其酋金家奴，诛杀其同恶数人于军前。
English: The founder of the dynasty returned to Beijing, and his son, Tamerlane, stayed behind to do his best. Tamerlane captured his chief, Jin Jia Nong, and killed several of his fellow evildoers in front of the army.

古文：明年，乃颜之遗孽哈丹秃鲁干复叛，再命出师，两与之遇，皆败之，追及两河，其众大衄，遂遁。
现代文：二十五年，乃颜余党哈丹秃鲁干复叛，玉昔帖木儿再次奉诏出师，与敌两战两捷，追及两河，敌众大受其挫，仓皇逃遁。
English: In the 25th year of the Yan Yu Party, Hardan Baldur rebelled, and Yuxi Timur was once again dispatched by imperial edict. He fought two wars with the enemy, achieved two victories, and chased two rivers. The enemy suffered a great setback and fled in a hurry.

古文：时已盛冬，声言俟春方进，乃倍道兼行过黑龙江，捣其巢穴，杀戮殆尽。哈丹秃鲁干莫知所终，夷其城，抚其民而还。
现代文：时已严冬，玉昔帖木儿声言等开春后再进军，实际却疾速抄近道过黑龙江，捣其巢穴，杀戮殆尽，哈丹秃鲁干生死不明，毁其城，安抚其民而后还。
English: It was already winter, and Yuxi Timur claimed that he would march again after the spring, but in fact he hastily made a shortcut across the Heilongjiang River, smashed his lair, killed everyone, the life and death of Hardan Baldur was unknown, destroyed his city, pacified his people and then returned.

古文：诏赐内府七宝冠带以旌之，加太傅、开府仪同三司。
现代文：诏赐内府七宝冠带以表彰其功，加太傅、开府仪同三司等职。
English: He was awarded the Naifu Seven Treasures Crown Ribbon in recognition of his achievements, as well as the posts of Taifu, Kaifu Yi, and Sanji.

古文：申命御边杭海。
现代文：又命他至杭海岭防守边境。
English: He was also ordered to go to Hanghairing to defend the border.

古文：二十九年，加录军国重事、知枢密院事。宗王帅臣咸禀命焉。
现代文：至元二十九年，加录军国重事、知枢密院事，宗王帅臣都听命于他。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jia Luo was put in charge of important military and state affairs, as well as the affairs of the Privy Council, and his subordinates all obeyed his orders.

古文：特赐步辇入内。
现代文：特赐坐轿入朝。
English: He was given the privilege of entering the Imperial Palace in a limousine.

古文：位望之崇，廷臣无出其右。
现代文：其地位和威望之高为廷臣所不及。
English: Their status and prestige is higher than that of courtiers.

古文：定策之际，玉昔帖木儿起谓晋王甘麻剌曰： 宫车晏驾，已逾三月，神器不可久虚，宗祧不可乏主。
现代文：三十年，成宗以皇孙抚军北边，以玉昔帖木儿为辅臣。玉昔帖木儿奏请授皇孙以太子印，世祖允准。三十一年世祖崩，在商议立新天子之际，玉昔帖木儿对晋王甘麻剌说道 ：皇上晏驾已经三月有余，皇位不可久虚，国家不可无主。
English: In the thirtieth year, Chengzong made the grandson of the emperor, Fuzun, the north side of the army, with Gyuxi Timur as an assistant. Gyuxi Timur requested that the grandson of the emperor be given the seal of the ethereal son, and the ancestor agreed. When the 31st ancestor passed away, on the occasion of discussing the establishment of a new heavenly son, Gyuxi Timur said to Jin Wang Ganmao: The emperor has been here for more than three months, the throne cannot be empty for a long time, and the country cannot be without a ruler.

古文：畴昔储闱符玺既有所归，王为宗盟之长，奚俟而不言。 
现代文：目前太子玉玺既有所归，晋王为宗室诸王之长，怎可默不做声。 
English: At present, since Prince Tamakazura has returned and Jin Wang is the head of the royal family, how can he remain silent?

古文：甘麻剌遽曰： 皇帝践祚，愿北面事之。 
现代文：甘麻剌立刻说道： 皇帝登位，我等愿为效忠。 
English: Ganmao immediately said, "When the emperor ascends to the throne, I am willing to be loyal."

古文：于是宗亲大臣合辞劝进，玉昔帖木儿复坐，曰： 大事已定，吾死且无憾。 
现代文：于是宗亲大臣共同劝成宗即位。玉昔帖木儿宣称： 大事已定，吾死而无憾！ 
English: As a result, the patriarchal ministers jointly persuaded Chengzong to accede to the throne.Gyukseok Timur declared: The important thing has been decided, I have no regrets about my death!

古文：皇孙遂即位。
现代文：于是皇孙成宗即帝位。
English: As a result, Emperor Shoson ascended to the throne.

古文：进秩太师，赐以尚方玉带宝服，还镇北边。
现代文：玉昔帖木儿进秩太师，受赐尚方玉带宝服，还镇北边。
English: Once upon a time, Timur was given the title of Chichidaishi, and was given a golden robe with a jade sash. He returned to the north side of the town.

古文：元贞元年冬，议边事入朝，两宫锡宴，如家人礼。赐其妻秃忽鲁宴服，及他珍宝。
现代文：元贞元年冬，玉昔帖木儿为讨论边疆事入朝，皇帝皇后赐宴，并赐其妻秃忽鲁宴服及其珍宝。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Yuan Zhen, the Emperor and Empress gave a banquet to the Jade Emperor and the Empress in order to discuss the border affairs. The Emperor and Empress also gave his wife the Bald Khru banquet dress and its precious treasures.

古文：十一月，以疾薨。
现代文：同年十一月玉昔帖木儿病卒。
English: In November of the same year, Tamerlane died of illness.

古文：大德五年，诏赠宣忠同德弼亮功臣，依前太师、开府仪同三司、录军国重事、御史大夫，追封广平王，谥曰贞宪。
现代文：大德五年，诏赠宣忠同德弼亮功臣，依前任为太师、开府仪同三司、录军国重事、御史大夫，追封广平王，谥曰 贞宪 。
English: In the fifth year of Dadu, the imperial edict presented Xuan Zhong with the title of outstanding meritorious subject, and according to the predecessor, he was the grand master, Kaifu Yi with the three departments, Luo Junguo, and Gu Shi Daifu, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Guangping Wang, and his posthumous title was Zhen Xian.

古文：子三人：木剌忽，仍袭爵为万户；次脱怜；次脱脱哈，为御史大夫。
现代文：子三人，长子木剌忽，袭爵位为万户；次子脱怜；第三子脱脱哈，为御史大夫。
English: He had three children. The eldest son, Muxunhu, inherited the peerage of Wanyu; the second son, Deterai; and the third son, Deteraha, became the imperial historian.

古文：资貌英伟，望之如神。
现代文：月赤察儿，姓许兀慎氏，博尔忽之孙。
English: Moon Chakchar, surnamed Xu Shushan, the grandson of Bolkhu.

古文：世祖雅闻其贤，且闵其父之死，年十六，召见。
现代文：博尔忽效力于太祖，为第一千户，在战争中阵亡。月赤察儿的父亲失烈门，曾随宪宗征六诏等城，也阵亡。
English: Bor suddenly served the great-great-grandfather, was the leader of the first thousand households, and was killed in the war. Yue Chia's father was killed in battle, and had been with the Constitutionalists in the conquest of six cities, and was also killed in battle.

古文：帝见其容止端重，奏对详明，喜而谓曰： 失烈门有子矣。 即命领四怯薛太官。
现代文：月赤察儿禀性仁厚勤俭，体态英伟，看去如神一般，孝敬母亲。世祖闻其贤，且怜悯其父阵亡，十六岁时就召见了他，又见他言行庄重，答对详明，即命他领四怯薛太官。
English: The ancestors of the world heard of his virtue, and pitied his father's death in battle. They summoned him when he was sixteen years old. They also saw that his words and deeds were dignified, and his answers were detailed. They immediately ordered him to lead the four timid Xue eunuchs.

古文：至元十七年，长一怯薛。明年诏曰： 月赤察儿秉心忠实，执事敬慎，知无不言，言无不尽，晓畅朝章，言辄称旨，不可以其年少而弗升其官。可代線真为宣徽使。 
现代文：至元十八年世祖在诏书中说 ：月赤察儿忠心耿耿，做事谨慎，知无不言，言无不尽，熟知朝廷的规章制度，讲话简明扼要，不要因为他尚年少而不升其官职，可代替纟泉真为宣徽使。 
English: In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestor said in the imperial rescript: Yue Chakchar is loyal, prudent in doing things, knows everything without saying anything, knows everything without saying anything, is familiar with the rules and regulations of the imperial court, and his speech is concise and concise. He should not be promoted to his official position because he is still young. He can replace Yu Quanzhen as the herald.

古文：二十六年，帝讨叛者于杭海，众皆阵，月赤察儿奏曰： 丞相安童、伯颜，御史大夫月吕禄，皆已受命征战，三人者臣不可以后之。
现代文：至元二十六年，世祖讨伐叛逆于杭海，随征的人都上阵对敌，丞相安童、伯颜、御史大夫月吕禄等，皆奉命出战，月赤察儿也不甘落后，请求世祖批准他出阵。
English: In the 26th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestor fought against and rebelled against Hanghai, and the people who followed the enlistment went into battle against the enemy, including the prime minister Ando, Bo Yan, and the chief historian Yue Lulu, all of whom were ordered to go to war. Yue Chia'er was not willing to lag behind, and asked the ancestor to approve him to go to battle.

古文：卿以为安童辈与尔家同功一体，各立战功，自耻不逮。
现代文：世祖不同意，对他说： 你祖父博尔忽辅助太祖，无征不在，无战不克，立了大功。卿现在认为安童等都立了功，自耻不如。
English: The ancestor disagreed and said to him, "Your grandfather Bor suddenly assisted the ancestor, without requisition, without war, and made great contributions. Sir now thinks that Ando and others have made contributions, and is ashamed.

古文：乃以没入桑哥黄金四百两、白金三千五百两，及水田、水硙、别墅赏其清强。
现代文：然而你亲自带着武器，朝夕保卫，其功非小，何必要临阵杀敌才遂心愿呢？ 至元二十七年，桑哥设立尚书省，诛杀异己，不让别人讲话，以刑罚和爵位来对付和拉拢别人，朝廷纲纪遭到破坏。
English: However, you personally armed with weapons, defend morning and evening, its contribution is not small, why is it necessary to kill the enemy in order to achieve the desire? In the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sango established Shangshuo, killed dissidents, did not allow others to speak, used punishment and peerage to deal with and attract others, and the imperial discipline was destroyed.

古文：桑哥既败，帝以湖广行省西连番洞诸蛮，南接交趾岛夷，延袤数千里，其间土沃人稠，畲丁、溪子善惊好斗，思得贤方伯往抚安之。
现代文：尚书平章政事也速答儿将桑哥种种不法行径暗中告诉月赤察儿，希望他出面弹劾。后来桑哥伏诛，世祖说： 这是因为月赤察儿的弹劾，揭发出桑哥的重大罪恶。 桑哥伏法之后，世祖考虑到湖广行省西南与许多少数民族相连，南与交趾接界，东西数千里，土肥人稠，而山区人民好斗，必须有位贤德的地方长官去安抚。
English: Shangshu Pingzhang also quickly replied that he had secretly told Zangge all kinds of illegal acts to Yue Qiacha'er, hoping that he would come forward to impeach. Later, when Zangge was impeached, the patriarch said: This is because the impeachment of Yue Qiacha'er revealed Zangge's serious crimes. After Zangge was impeached, the patriarch considered that the southwest of Hunan Province is connected to many ethnic minorities, the south is bordered by Kota, the east and west are thousands of miles away, the soil is thick with people, and the people in the mountainous areas are combative, and there must be a wise local governor to pac

古文：月赤察儿举哈剌哈孙答剌罕以为行省平章政事，凡八年，威德交孚，洽于海外；入为丞相，天下称贤。
现代文：月赤察儿荐举哈剌哈孙答剌罕为行省平章政事。这位行省平章政事在湖广执政八年，威德并用，与海外国家和睦亲善。后入朝为丞相，天下人都交口称贤。
English: He was recommended by the Red Crescent's Moon Chachaer to be the governor of Pingzhang Province. He was governor of Pingzhang Province for eight years in Huguang Province. He was a man of great virtue, and was on good terms with foreign countries. After he entered the imperial court, he became the prime minister, and people all over the world spoke highly of him.

古文：帝语近臣曰： 是渠非月赤察儿身率众手，成不速也。 
现代文：世祖对左右侍臣说 ：这条河若不是月赤察儿亲自率众参加劳动，也不会完成得如此之快。 
English: The patriarch said to the attendants on his right and left, "This river would not have been completed so quickly if it were not for Yue Chia-er, who personally led the crowd to participate in the work.

古文：成宗即位，制曰： 月赤察儿尽其诚力，深其谋议，抒忠于国，流惠于人，可加开府仪同三司、太保、录军国重事、枢密、宣徽使。 
现代文：成宗即位，宣告： 月赤察儿竭诚尽力，深谋远虑，为国尽忠，为民造福，可加开府仪同三司、太保、录军国重事、枢密、宣徽使。 
English: When Chengzong ascended the throne, he announced: "Moon Chetsang has made every effort, foresighted, loyal to the country, and beneficial to the people, and can add the prefectural etiquette, the three departments, the palace guards, the military and national affairs, the privy council, and the heraldic envoy.

古文：大德四年，拜太师。
现代文：大德四年，拜为太师。
English: Dade was four years old when he became Grand Master.

古文：初，金山南北，叛王海都、笃娃据之，不奉正朔垂五十年，时入为寇。
现代文：叛王海都、笃娃占据金山南北，不臣服于朝廷达五十年，且时常入寇。
English: The traitor Haidu and Tutuva occupied the north and south of Jinshan, disobeyed the imperial court for fifty years, and often invaded.

古文：尝命亲王统左右部宗王诸帅，屯列大军，备其冲突。
现代文：朝廷曾命亲王统率左右部宗王诸帅，屯驻大军，防止叛王的袭击。
English: The imperial court once ordered the prince to lead the generals of the left and right branches of the Zongwang and garrison a large army to prevent attacks by traitors.

古文：五年，朝议北师少怠，纪律不严，命月赤察儿副晋王以督之。
现代文：大德五年，朝臣们指出防守的军队放松警惕，纪律不严。朝廷命月赤察儿辅佐晋王去加以督察。
English: In the fifth year of the Great German Reign, the courtiers pointed out that the defensive army had relaxed its vigilance and its discipline was not strict. The imperial court ordered Yue Chachaer, the assistant of King Jin, to inspect it.

古文：是年，海都、笃娃入寇。
现代文：是年，海都、笃娃又入寇。
English: In the same year, Haidu and Tutuva were robbed again.

古文：大军分为五队，月赤察儿将其一。
现代文：边防军分为五队，月赤察儿领导一队。
English: The border guards were divided into five teams, with Yue Chia-er leading one team.

古文：锋既交，颇不利。月赤察儿怒，被甲持矛，身先陷阵，一军随之，出敌之背，五军合击，大败之。
现代文：交战中边防军失利，月赤察儿大怒，披甲持矛，身先陷阵，一军随其后，攻敌之背，五军合击，大败叛军，海都、笃娃逃遁。
English: During the battle, the border guards were defeated, and the moon was furious, wearing armor and carrying a spear, he was the first to fall into the battle, one army followed, attacked the enemy's back, five armies fought together, defeated the rebels, and Haidu and Dukuwa fled.

古文：海都、笃娃遁去，月赤察儿亦罢兵归镇。
现代文：月赤察儿也罢兵归镇。
English: Tsukihakucharo also withdrew and returned to the town.

古文：其部人惊溃，月赤察儿遣秃满铁木儿、察忽将万人深入，其部人亦降。
现代文：其后笃娃请求归附朝廷。大德十年，叛王灭里铁木儿等占据金山，月赤察儿协助武宗征讨，灭里铁木儿投降，其部众逃散，月赤察儿遣秃满铁木儿、察忽率万人追击，逃散部众相继投降。
English: After that, Dukuwa requested to be annexed to the imperial court. In the 10th year of the Great German Empire, rebels such as Zhili Tiemu'er occupied Jinshan, Yue Chacha'er assisted Wu Zong in the conquest, Zhili Tiemu'er surrendered, and his followers fled. Yue Chacha'er sent a large number of Tiemu'er and tens of thousands of people to chase them, and the fleeing followers surrendered one after another.

古文：察八儿者，海都长子也，海都死，嗣领其众，至是掩取其部人，凡两部十余万口。
现代文：海都死后，其部众由其长子察八儿率领，月赤察儿乘其不备而夺取部众，以上两部共十余万口。
English: After the death of Haidu, his followers were led by his eldest son Cha Biao, and Yueh Chao took advantage of his unpreparedness to capture his followers. The above two groups totaled more than one hundred thousand.

古文：至大元年，月赤察儿遣使奏曰： 诸王秃苦灭本怀携贰，而察八儿游兵近境，叛党素无悛心，倘合谋致死，则垂成之功顾为国患。臣以为昔者笃娃先众请和，虽死，宜遣使安抚其子款彻，使不我异。
现代文：至大元年，月赤察儿向朝廷报告说 ：诸王秃苦灭本怀二心，察八儿等叛党素无悔改之意，倘此二人合谋，将为我朝之患。臣以为过去笃娃率众归顺天朝，笃娃已死，应遣使去安抚其子款彻，使他不背叛朝廷。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, Tsuchihakari reported to the imperial court: "All kings have suffered hardships to eliminate their original two hearts, and the rebels such as Chahakari have no intention of repenting. If these two conspire together, it will be a disaster for my imperial court. My vassal thought that in the past, Tsuchihakari led the people to submit to the imperial court, but Tsuchihakari is dead, and he should send an envoy to appease his son Janchi, so that he would not betray the imperial court."

古文：又诸部既已归明，我之牧地不足，宜处诸降人于金山之阳，吾军屯田金山之北，军食既饶，又成重戍，就彼有谋，吾已捣其腹心矣。 
现代文：诸部既已归顺，而我朝牧地又不足，宜把他们安置在金山以南，我军屯田于金山以北。我军粮充足，戍守坚固，即或他们有什么阴谋，我军已打入其心腹之内了。 
English: Since all the troops have surrendered, and we are short of pastureland, it is appropriate to place them to the south of Jinshan, and our army's garrison is to the north of Jinshan. Our army is well-fed and well-defended, even if they have any plot, our army has penetrated into their hearts.

古文：奏入，帝曰： 是谋甚善，卿宜移军阿答罕三撒海地。 
现代文：武宗同意这一战略计划，并命月赤察儿移军于阿答罕三撒海地区。
English: Emperor Wuzong agreed to this strategic plan and ordered Yue Chachal to move his army to the Sansahai region of Atahan.

古文：卿乃国之元老，宣忠底绩，靖谧中外。朕入继大统，卿之谋猷居多。
现代文：结果，察八儿、秃苦灭相继来降，北部边境得以安宁无事。武宗诏月赤察儿说 ：卿先世辅助我朝祖宗，常为大将，攻城夺地，功勋卓著。卿为国之元老，其效忠劳绩，足以安定朝野。朕即位之后，卿多有谋划。
English: As a result, Chabacal and Balducal came down one after another, and the northern border was peaceful and uneventful. Emperor Wu Zhaozong said to Chabacal: You have assisted my ancestors in the past, you have always been a great general, you have attacked cities and conquered lands, and your achievements are outstanding. You are the elder of the country, and your loyalty and achievements are sufficient to stabilize the court and the country. After I ascended the throne, you had many plans.

古文：今立和林等处行中书省，以卿为右丞相，依前太师、录军国重事，特封淇阳王，佩黄金印。
现代文：今立和林等处行中书省，以卿为右丞相，仍职兼太师、录军国重事，特封淇阳王，佩黄金印。
English: Imari and Hayashi were appointed as the Minister of Education and Culture, with Kyo as the Minister of the Right, still serving as the Grand Master, recording the important matters of the military state, the special seal of King Kiyohito, and wearing the golden seal.

古文：宗藩将领，实瞻卿麾进退。
现代文：宗藩将领，听从你的指挥。
English: General Zong, I will follow your orders.

古文：其益懋乃德，悉乃心力，毋替所服。 
现代文：更进一步发扬你的德行，尽心尽力，不要放弃你的职责。 
English: Further develop your virtue, do your best, and do not abandon your duty.

古文：四年，月赤察儿入朝，帝宴于大明殿，眷礼优渥。
现代文：至大四年，月赤察儿从北边入朝，武宗在大明殿设宴款待，以优厚礼节待他。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, when Tsukikatcha entered the imperial court from the north, Emperor Takemune held a banquet at Daimyo-den and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：寻以疾薨于第。诏赠宣忠安远佐运弼亮功臣，谥忠武。
现代文：不久病卒。诏赠宣忠安远佐运弼亮功臣，谥 忠武 。
English: He died of illness soon after. The imperial edict presented him with the title of Xuan Zhong An Yuan Sajun 亮功臣, 忠武.

古文：乃遣塔察儿、耶律楚材穷治其党，诛首恶十有六人，由是巨盗屏迹。
现代文：塔察儿，一名奔盏，博尔忽之侄，居于官山。塔察儿骁勇善战，年幼就参加太祖的近卫军。太祖平燕后，燕京盗贼横行，恣意杀人，抢劫财物，官府不能禁。睿宗派塔察儿与耶律楚材去治理，诛首恶十六人，从此大盗再也不敢出来为非作歹。
English: Tacha'er, a gallant, nephew of Bor Hu, lived in Guanshan. Tacha'er was brave and good at fighting, and he joined his great-grandfather's bodyguard at a young age. After the great-grandfather Pingyan, the Yanjing thieves ran rampant, arbitrarily killing people and robbing property, and the government could not stop them. Ruizong sent Tacha'er and Yerutchu Zhai to govern, and they killed sixteen people with daggers. From then on, the thieves never dared to do anything wrong.

古文：太宗伐金，塔察儿从师，授行省兵马都元帅，分宿卫与诸王军士俾统之，下河东诸州郡，济河，破潼关，取陕洛。
现代文：太宗伐金，塔察儿随行，任行省兵马都元帅，统领一部分近卫军和诸王军队。南下河东诸州郡，渡过黄河，破潼关，取陕、洛。
English: Taizong cut gold, Tachar accompanied him, served as the provincial marshal of soldiers and horses, commanded a part of the Imperial Guard and the armies of kings. He went south to Zhouzhou County in the east of the river, crossed the Yellow River, broke through Shaoguan, and took Shaanxi and Luo.

古文：辛卯，从围河中府，拔之。
现代文：太宗三年，参加围攻河中府，夺取该城。
English: In the third year of Taizong's reign, he took part in the siege of Hechu Prefecture and captured the city.

古文：壬辰，从渡白坡。
现代文：四年，随南征大军渡白坡。
English: In four years, he went to Baipa with the Southern Expeditionary Force.

古文：时睿宗已自西和州入兴元，由武关出唐、邓，太宗以睿宗与金兵相持久，乃遣使约期，会兵合进。
现代文：这时睿宗已领兵从西和州入兴元路，再由武关出唐州、邓州。太宗看到睿宗与金兵相持甚久，约期会集各路军合力进讨。
English: At this time, Ruizong had led his army from West Hechu into Xingyuan Road, and then from Wuguan out of Tangzhou and Dangzhou. Tai Zong saw that Ruizong had been holding out against the Jin soldiers for a long time, and agreed to gather the armies from all directions to advance.

古文：塔察儿复与金兵战于南薰门。
现代文：诸军会集于钧州，睿宗大破金军于三峰山。塔察儿等奉诏进围汴京，与金兵战于南薰门。
English: The armies will gather in Bozhou, Ruizong will defeat the gold army in Sanfeng Mountain. Tacha'er and others will march into Beijing and fight against the gold soldiers in Nanhuangmen.

古文：癸巳，金主迁蔡州，塔察儿复帅师围蔡。
现代文：五年，金朝皇帝迁都蔡州，塔察儿又率师围蔡。
English: Five years later, the emperor of the Jin Dynasty moved the capital to Caizhou, and Tachar led his teachers to surround Cai.

古文：甲午，灭金，遂留镇抚中原，分兵屯大河之上，以遏宋兵。
现代文：六年，灭金。塔察儿留中原，分兵屯守黄河上游，阻遏宋朝军队。
English: In the sixth year of the Jin Dynasty, Tachara stayed in the Central Plains, and his detachment guarded the upper reaches of the Yellow River to deter the Song Dynasty army.

古文：丙申，破宋光、息诸州，事闻于朝，以息州军民三千户赐之。
现代文：八年，塔察儿攻破宋朝之光州、息州，向朝廷报捷，朝廷将息州军民三千户赐与塔察儿。
English: In the eighth year, Tachara defeated Gwangju and Seocho of the Song Dynasty and reported the victory to the imperial court. The imperial court gave 3,000 military and civilian households in Seocho to Tachara.

古文：戊戌卒。
现代文：十年，塔察儿卒。
English: Ten years later, Tachara is no more.

古文：子别里虎，嗣为火儿赤。
现代文：有子二人，长子别里虎，次子宋都，分别在宪宗和世祖时期伐宋立过战功。
English: He had two sons, the eldest son, Bei Lihu, and the second son, Song Du, who distinguished themselves in the Song Dynasty during the reign of Emperor Xianzong and Emperor Shizuo, respectively.

