古文：眭弘字孟，鲁国蕃人也。
现代文：眭弘字孟，鲁国蕃人。
English: Meng Hongzhi, Lu Guozhong.

古文：少时好侠，斗鸡走马，长乃变节，从嬴公受《春秋》。
现代文：年轻时尚气任侠，喜欢斗鸡跑马，后来却作风大变，跟嬴公学习《春秋》。
English: As a young fashionista, he liked cockfights and horse races, but later he changed his style and studied "Spring and Autumn" with Shao Gong.

古文：以明经为议郎，至符节令。
现代文：因为通晓经术而做了议郎，官至符节令。
English: Because of his knowledge of the scriptures, he became a hiror, an official of the Fu Jie Ruling.

古文：孝昭元凤三年正月，泰山、莱芜山南匈匈有数千人声，民视之，有大石自立，高丈五尺，大四十八围，入地深八尺，三石为足。
现代文：昭帝元凤三年正月，泰山莱芜山之南发出了像是有几千人在一起的喧闸之声，老百姓去看，衹见有块大石自己竖了起来，有一丈五尺高，四十八人合围那么粗，入地有八尺深，另有三块石头作为大石的脚。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Zhao Di Yuan Feng, the south of Mount Laiwu of Mount Taishan sent out a noisy sound as if there were several thousand people together. The people went to see, and saw that a large stone had erected itself. It was five feet high, and as thick as forty-eight people together. The entrance was eight feet deep, and there were three other stones as the feet of the large stone.

古文：石立后有白乌数千下集其旁。
现代文：大石自立后，有几千只白色的乌鸦飞下来聚集在它旁边。
English: After the boulder broke free, thousands of white crows flew down and gathered around it.

古文：是时，昌邑有枯社木卧复生，又上林苑中大柳树断枯卧地，亦自立生，有虫食树叶成文字，曰 公孙病已立 ，孟推《春秋》之意，以为 石、柳，皆阴类，下民之象；泰山者，岱宗之岳，王者易姓告代之外。
现代文：与此同时，昌邑社庙中已经枯死倒地的树居然又活了过来，而且上林苑中原已折断枯萎倒卧在地的大柳树竟自己竖了起来，重新获得了生机，有许多虫子吃逭棵树的叶子，吃剩的树叶的形状像这样几个字： 公孙病已立 。眭弘于是推衍《春秋》大意，认为： 石头和柳树都是阴物，象征着处在下层的老百姓，而泰山是群山之首，是改朝换代以后皇帝祭天以报功的地方。
English: At the same time, the tree in the temple in Changyi that had already died and fallen to the ground actually came back to life, and the big willow tree in the middle of Shanglin Court that had been broken and withered and lying on the ground actually stood up on its own and regained its vitality. There are many worms eating the leaves of the eucalyptus tree, and the shape of the leftover leaves is like these words: Gongsun disease has been established. Gonghong then deduced the meaning of "Spring and Autumn," believing that: Stones and willows are yin things, symbolizing the common people in the lower strata, and Mount Tai is the head of the mountains,

古文：今大石自立，僵柳复起，非人力所为，此当有从匹夫为天子者。
现代文：如今大石自立，枯柳复生，它们并非人力所为，造就说明要有普通老百姓成为天子了。
English: Nowadays, large boulders are standing on their own and dead willows are coming back to life. They are not man-made, and their creation shows that ordinary people must become the sons of God.

古文：枯社木复生，故废之家公孙氏当复兴者也。 
现代文：社庙中已死的树木复生，造就表示以前被废的公孙氏一族要复兴了。 
English: The dead trees in the shrine and temple have been revived, indicating that the previously abolished Gongsun clan will be revived.

古文：孟意亦不知其所在，即说曰： 先师董仲舒有言，虽有继体守文之君，不害圣人之受命。
现代文：眭弘也不知道逭公孙氏所在何处，就说： 我的先师董仲舒曾经说过，即使有继皇帝位并且遵守文德的君主，也不会妨碍圣人受命于天。
English: Yu Hong also did not know where Yu Gongsun was, so he said: My former teacher Dong Zhongshu once said that even if there is a monarch who succeeds the emperor and obeys Wende, it will not prevent the saint from being ordered by heaven.

古文：汉家尧后，有传国之运。
现代文：汉家是尧的后代，有传国给他姓的运势，漠帝应该普告天下。
English: The Han family is a descendant of Zou, and there is a fortune that the country will give him a surname. The Emperor of the Desert should announce it to the world.

古文：汉帝宜谁差天下，求索贤人，禅以帝位，而退自封百里，如殷、周二王后，以承顺天命。 
现代文：征求贤能的人，把帝位禅让给他，而自己退位封得百里之地，就像殷周二王的后代那样，以顺从天命。 
English: He solicited a man of virtue to cede the imperial throne to him, and he abdicated to seal a hundred miles of land, just like the descendants of King Yin Tuesday, in order to obey the fate of heaven.

古文：孟使友人内官长赐上此书。
现代文：眭弘请他的担任内官长的朋友赐替他奏上此书。
English: Tsuchihiro asked his friend, who was an internal affairs officer, to give him the book.

古文：时，昭帝幼，大将军霍光秉政，恶之，下其书廷尉。
现代文：当时，昭帝还很年幼，由大将军霍光管理朝政，霍光很讨厌此事，就把眭弘的奏书交给廷尉。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhao was still very young, and the imperial court was managed by the general Huo Guang. Huo Guang hated this, so he gave the report of Zhai Hong to the imperial lieutenant.

古文：奏赐、孟妄设袄言惑众，大逆不道，皆伏诛。
现代文：霍光上奏赐和眭弘妖言惑众，大逆不道，两人都判处死刑。
English: Huo Guang Shang So Zi and Xing Hong were convicted of sedition and sentenced to death.

古文：后五年，孝宣帝兴于民间，即位，征孟子为郎。
现代文：五年后，孝宣帝从民间兴起，即位，就征召眭弘的儿子为郎。
English: Five years later, Emperor Xiaoxuan rose from the people, ascended to the throne, and conscripted the son of Zou Hong as his son.

古文：夏侯始昌，鲁人也。
现代文：夏侯始昌，是鲁人。
English: Xia Hou Shichang is a Lu person.

古文：通《五经》，以《齐诗》、《尚书》教授。
现代文：精通《五经》，讲授《齐诗》和《尚书》。
English: He is proficient in the "Five Classics" and teaches "Qi Shi" and "Shang Shu."

古文：自董仲舒、韩婴死后，武帝得始昌，甚重之。
现代文：董仲舒、韩婴死后，武帝很器重夏侯始昌。
English: After the death of Dong Zhongshu and Han Ying, Emperor Wu attached great importance to Xia Hou Shichang.

古文：始昌明于阴阳，先言柏梁台灾曰，至期日果灾。
现代文：始昌通晓阴阳之道，他曾经预言过柏梁台发生火灾的日期，结果到那天果然发生了火灾。
English: Shi Chang was familiar with the path of yin and yang. He once predicted the date of the fire in Bai Liang Tai, and the fire did indeed occur on that day.

古文：时，昌邑王以少子爱，上为选师，始昌为太傅。
现代文：当时昌邑王因为年纪最小而得到宠爱，武帝给他挑选老师，始昌就做了太傅。
English: At that time, Changyi Wang was favored because he was the youngest. Emperor Wu selected a teacher for him, and Shi Chang became the teacher.

古文：年老，以寿终。
现代文：始昌年老而死。
English: Shichang died of old age.

古文：族子胜亦以儒显名。
现代文：他的同族兄弟之子夏侯胜也是以儒者而有名。
English: His brother's son, Xia Hou Sheng, is also famous for being a Confucian.

古文：夏侯胜字长公。
现代文：夏侯胜字长公。
English: Xia Hou wins over Zi Chang Gong.

古文：初，鲁共王分鲁西宁乡以封子节侯，别属大河，大河后更名东平，故胜为东平人。
现代文：当初，鲁共王把鲁西的宁乡封给他的儿子节侯时，宁乡属于大河。大河后来改名为束平，所以夏侯胜是束平人。
English: At first, when the King of the Communist Party of the Russian Empire granted the title of Prince of Ningxiang to his son, Ningxiang belonged to Dahe. Dahe was later renamed Sokping, so Xia Hosseng was a Sokping man.

古文：胜少孤，好学，从始昌受《尚书》及《洪范五行传》，说灾异。
现代文：夏侯胜少年丧父，但他很好学，跟随始昌学习《尚书》和《洪范五行传》，论说灾异。
English: Xia Hou Sheng lost his father as a young boy, but he was very studious. He studied "Shang Shu" and "Hong Fan Wuxing Biography" with Shi Chang, and discussed disasters.

古文：后事蕳卿，又从欧阳氏问。
现代文：后来师从简卿，又问学于欧阳氏。
English: Later, he studied under Jianqing and Ouyang.

古文：为学精孰，所问非一师也。
现代文：夏侯胜做学问精细纯熟，他所师从的不只一人。
English: Xia Hou Sheng was a scholar of exquisite knowledge, and he studied under more than one person.

古文：善说礼服。
现代文：夏侯胜擅长讲述礼服典制。
English: Xia Hou Sheng is good at talking about the dress ceremony system.

古文：征为博士、光禄大夫。
现代文：被征召为博士、光禄大夫。
English: He was called up to be a doctor and a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：会昭帝崩，昌邑王嗣立，数出。
现代文：这时恰逢昭帝驾崩，昌邑王继位，昌邑王经常出游。
English: This coincided with the death of Emperor Zhao and the succession of King Changyi, who often traveled.

古文：胜当乘舆前谏曰： 天久阴而不雨，臣下有谋上者，陛下出欲何之？ 
现代文：有一次夏侯胜挡着昌邑王坐的车子上前进谏道： 天久阴而不下雨，造就有臣下图谋皇帝的事发生，陛下还要出门到哪里去呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, the summer lord Sheng blocked the carriage in which the King of Changyi was riding, and the carriage drove forward. It had been cloudy for a long time without rain, so there must be something that his vassals were plotting against the emperor. Where did His Majesty want to go?

古文：王怒，谓胜为袄言，缚以属吏。
现代文：昌邑王大怒，说夏侯胜是妖言惑众，就把他绑起来交付官吏处置。
English: The king of Changyi was furious, saying that Xia Hosseng was a sorcerer, so he tied him up and handed him over to the officials.

古文：吏白大将军霍光，光不举法。
现代文：那个官吏把这件事报告给大将军霍光，霍光没有对夏侯胜施以刑罚。
English: The official reported the matter to General Huo Guang, who did not impose any punishment on Xia Hou Sheng.

古文：是时，光与车骑将军张安世谋欲废昌邑王。
现代文：这时，霍光和车骑将军张安世正商量着要废掉昌邑王。
English: At this time, Huo Guang and the cavalry general Zhang Anshi were discussing to abolish the King of Changyi.

古文：光让安世以为泄语，安世实不言。
现代文：霍光责备张安世露了口风，而实际上安世并没有泄露。
English: Huo Guang accused Zhang Anshi of leaking, but in fact, Anshi did not leak.

古文：乃召问胜，胜对言： 在《洪范传》曰 皇之不极，厥罚常阴，时则下人有伐上者 ，恶察察言，故云臣下有谋。 
现代文：于是就审问夏侯胜，夏侯胜回答道： 《洪范传》中说 帝王没有统治的准则就会被恒常的阴惩罚，这时就会有地位在下的讨伐他的事发生，只是因为忌讳这么明显地说，所以只说有臣下图谋皇帝的事发生。 
English: So they interrogated Xia Hossheng. Xia Hossheng replied, "According to the "Hong Fan Biography," if the emperor does not have a rule of rule, he will be punished by the constant yin. At this time, there will be a situation under him to fight him. However, because the taboo is so obvious, it is only said that there are vassals plotting against the emperor.

古文：光、安世大惊，以此益重经术士。
现代文：霍光、安世都大吃一惊，从此就更加看重经学家了。
English: Both Huo Guang and An Shidun were taken aback, and from then on they valued the scribes even more.

古文：后十余日，光卒与安世白太后，废昌邑王，尊立宣帝。
现代文：十多天后，霍光终于和安世一起上奏太后，废掉昌邑王，立了宣帝。
English: After more than ten days, Huo Guang finally played the role of empress dowager together with An Shi, abolished the King of Changyi, and established Emperor Xuan.

古文：光以为群臣奏事东宫，太后省政，宜知经术，白令胜用《尚书》授太后。
现代文：霍光认为群臣向东宫上奏政事，太后视察政务，应该了解经术，于是就让夏侯胜给太后讲授《尚书》。
English: Huo Guang thought that the courtiers should report the government affairs to the East Palace, and the empress dowager should inspect the government affairs, so he asked Xia Hossheng to teach the Empress Dowager "Shangshu."

古文：迁长信少府，赐爵关内侯，以与谋废立，定策安宗庙，益千户。
现代文：夏侯胜后改任长信少府，并被赐予关内侯，他以参与谋划废立之事和决定宗庙社稷的重大决策，后又被增加了千户的食邑封地。
English: After the victory of Xia Hou, he was changed to Changxin Shophu, and was given the title of Guan Nei Hou. He participated in the planning of the abolition of the establishment and the important decision-making of the decision of the patriarchal temple, and later he was added to the thousand-household food town fief.

古文：宣帝初即位，欲褒先帝，诏丞相御史曰： 朕以眇身，蒙遗德，承圣业，奉宗庙，夙夜惟念。
现代文：宣帝刚刚即位，就想要褒扬武帝的功业，宣韶丞相御史说： 我以卑微的身份，蒙受祖先的恩德，继承圣人的事业，奉祀宗庙，日夜不敢忘。
English: As soon as Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne, he wanted to praise the exploits of Emperor Wu, and Emperor Xuanxuan's minister Mishi said: I, in my humble capacity, received the grace of my ancestors, inherited the cause of the saints, and worshipped at the ancestral temple. I will never forget this day and night.

古文：孝武皇帝躬仁谊，厉威武，北征匈奴，单于远循，南平氐羌、昆明、瓯骆两越，东定薉、貉、朝鲜，廓地斥境，立郡县，百蛮率服，款塞自至，珍贡陈于宗庙；协音律，造乐歌，荐上帝，封太山，立明堂，改正朔，易服色；明开圣绪，尊贤显功，兴灭继绝，褒周之后；备天地之礼，广道术之路。
现代文：孝武皇帝自己躬行仁义，而又威武迅猛，北上征讨匈奴，单于逃得远远的，南下平定氐羌、昆明、瓯骆两越，向东平定了菱、貉、朝鲜，开拓我们的疆土，设立了郡县，各个蛮夷之国也都臣服，通好的使臣不请自至，珍贵的贡物陈列在宗庙中；协调音律，改造乐府之歌，荐享上天，封泰山，建立明堂，改以建寅之月为岁首，又改订了车马祭牲的颜色；开创了圣人的功业，尊重贤能的人而赏赐有功之人，复兴衰败灭亡的诸侯和贵族之家，赞美周的后代；用完备隆重的礼物祭祀天地，使道术之路更加光明正大。
English: Emperor Xiaowu himself was benevolent and righteous, but he was also mighty and swift. He went to the north to fight the Xiongnu. He went to the south to pacify Kunming, Kunming, and Huludao only for those who had escaped far away. He went to the east to pacify Ling, Kunming, and Korea. He explored our territory, established counties and prefectures. All barbarian countries were subjugated. Good envoys were not invited to come. Precious tributes were displayed in the ancestral temple. He harmonized musical rhythms, reformed the Song of Lefu, recommended the enjoyment of heaven, sealed Mount Tai, established the

古文：上天报况，符瑞并应，宝鼎出，白麟获，海效巨鱼，神人并见，山称万岁。
现代文：上天对他也有报答赏赐，各种吉符和祥瑞一起得到应验，从地下出土了宝鼎，又获得了白麟，从海里又钓到了大鱼，神仙和圣人都出现了，连群山也在称呼万岁。
English: Heaven also rewarded him. All kinds of auspicious symbols and auspicious omens were fulfilled together. Baoding was unearthed from the ground, white unicorns were obtained, big fish were caught from the sea, immortals and saints appeared, and even the mountains were calling "long live."

古文：功德茂盛，不能尽宣，而庙乐未称，朕甚悼焉。
现代文：功德是那么的广大，这里不能一齐说出，然而他的庙乐却与此盛功伟业不符，我实在为此而感到难过。
English: The merits are so vast that they cannot all be mentioned here, but his temple music does not match this great achievement, and I really feel sad about it.

古文：其与列侯、二千石、博士议。 
现代文：所以把这件事提出而与列侯、二千石、博士们商议。 
English: Therefore, I brought this matter up and discussed it with the lords, the two thousand koku, and the doctors.

古文：于是群臣大议廷中，皆曰： 宣如诏书。 
现代文：于是群臣就在廷中热烈地讨论起来，都说： 应该像诏书那样。 
English: Then the courtiers began to discuss it heatedly in the court, and they all said: It should be like the imperial edict.

古文：长信少府胜独曰： 武帝虽有攘四夷广土斥境之功，然多杀士众，竭民财力，奢泰亡度，天下虚耗，百姓流离，物故者半。
现代文：这睁睦独长信少府夏侯胜说道： 武帝虽然确实有打败四夷开拓疆土的功绩，但是他杀了许多大臣和百姓，使老百姓的财力穷竭，挥霍无度，天下已被消耗得很虚弱，百姓流离失所，死去的人超过一半。
English: Xia Hou Sheng, a minor prefect who believed in the supremacy of the Four Emperors, said: Although Emperor Wu did have the merit of defeating the barbarians and opening up the territory, he killed many ministers and people, exhausted the people's financial resources, and spent extravagantly. The country was exhausted and weak, the people were displaced, and more than half of the people died.

古文：蝗虫大起，赤地数千里，或人民相食，畜积至今未复。
现代文：蝗灾四起，赤地数千里，甚至发生人吃人的惨剧，原先的储备积累至今还未恢复。
English: Four locust plagues, thousands of miles of red earth, and even the tragedy of people eating people. The original reserve accumulation has not yet been restored.

古文：亡德泽于民，不宜为立庙乐。 
现代文：所以武帝对老百姓没有恩泽，不能另为他立庙乐。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu had no grace for the common people and could not set up temple music for him.

古文：公卿共难胜曰： 此诏书也。 
现代文：公卿一起责难夏侯胜说： 这是韶书啊。 
English: The court nobles together reproached Xia Hosheng, saying, "This is a forged book."

古文：胜曰： 诏书不可用也。
现代文：夏侯胜说： 此韶书不可以用。
English: Xia Housheng said, "This copybook cannot be used."

古文：人臣之谊，宜直言正论，非苟阿意顺指。
现代文：为人臣下，应该实话实说，而不能曲意迎奉别人的意旨。
English: As a vassal, you should speak the truth, not bend to the will of others.

古文：议已出口，虽死不悔。 
现代文：我想说的已经说了，就是死我也不会再后悔。 
English: I've already said what I wanted to say, and I won't regret it even if I die.

古文：于是丞相义，御史大夫广明劾奏胜非议诏书，毁先帝，不道，及丞相长史黄霸阿纵胜，不举劾，俱下狱。
现代文：于是丞相义、御史大夫广明弹劾夏侯胜对韶书胡说八道，诋毁先帝，大逆不道，而且丞相长史黄霸也因为纵容夏侯胜而不弹劾他，两个人都被投进了监狱。
English: As a result, the prime minister and the chief historian, Guangming, impeached Xia Hosseng for talking nonsense about the imperial rescript and slandering the former emperor, which was an act of high treason. Moreover, the prime minister, Shi Huangba, did not impeach Xia Hosseng because he indulged him, and both of them were thrown into prison.

古文：有司遂请尊孝武帝庙为世宗庙，奏《盛德》、《文始》、《五行》之舞，天下世世献纳，以明盛德。
现代文：于是主事的官吏就请把武帝庙尊为世宗庙，进行《盛德》、《文始》、《五行》的乐舞表演，以后世世供奉，以彰明盛德。
English: As a result, the officials in charge requested that the Emperor Wudi Temple be revered as the world's ancestral temple, and that the music and dance performances of "Shengde," "Wen Zhi" and "Wu Xing" be performed, which would be offered to the world in the future to highlight Shengde.

古文：武帝巡狩所幸郡国凡四十九，皆立庙，如高祖、太宗焉。
现代文：而武帝所巡行过的四十九个郡国也都立了庙，就像高祖、太宗一样。
English: However, the forty-nine counties and prefectures visited by Emperor Wu also built temples, just like Gaozu and Taizong.

古文：胜、霸既久系，霸欲从胜受经，胜辞以罪死。霸曰：  朝闻道，夕死可矣 。 
现代文：夏侯胜、黄霸已经被关在牢裹很久了，黄霸想跟夏侯胜学习经术，夏侯胜以已获死罪为由拒绝了他。黄霸说： 朝闻道，夕死可矣。 
English: Xia Hou Sheng and Huang Ba have been locked up in prison for a long time. Huang Ba wanted to study the sutras with Xia Hou Sheng, but Xia Hou Sheng refused him on the grounds that he had been sentenced to death. Huang Ba said: "If you hear the Dharma in the morning, you can die in the evening."

古文：胜贤其言，遂授之。
现代文：夏侯胜觉得他说得很好，于是就教他学习经术。
English: Xia Hou Sheng thought that he spoke very well, so he taught him to study the sutra.

古文：系再更冬，讲论不怠。
现代文：这样又过了一个冬天，而讲论如故。
English: So another winter passed, and the discourse remained the same.

古文：至四年夏，关东四十九郡同日地动，或山崩，坏城郭室屋，杀六千余人。
现代文：到宣帝本始四年夏天，关东四十九郡同日地震，或者山崩，城墙房屋倒塌，死了六千多人。
English: By the summer of the fourth year of Emperor Xuanzang's reign, forty-nine counties in Kanto had been hit by earthquakes or landslides on the same day, and city walls and houses had collapsed, killing more than six thousand people.

古文：上乃素服，避正殿，遣使者吊问吏民，赐死者棺钱。
现代文：宣帝穿着素服，不在正殿上朝，派遣大臣慰问官员和百姓，并赐给死者入棺的费用。
English: Emperor Xuan dressed in plain clothes, did not visit the main hall, sent ministers to console officials and the people, and gave the dead the cost of the coffin.

古文：下诏曰： 盖灾异者，天地之戒也。
现代文：宣帝下诏书说： 发生灾异，是天地对我们的警告。
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Xuan said: The occurrence of disasters is a warning from heaven and earth to us.

古文：朕承洪业，托士民之上，未能和群生。
现代文：我承继祖上的功业，在士民之上，但却没有让他们好好地生活。
English: I am inheriting the work of my ancestors, on top of the people, but I did not let them live well.

古文：曩者地震北海、琅邪，坏祖宗庙，朕甚惧焉。其与列侯、中二千石博问术士，有以应变，补朕之阙，毋有所讳。 
现代文：从前北海、琅邪发生地震，损坏祖宗庙，我也很是畏惧，诸位列侯、中二千石中的博学之士们，如果能有办法应付灾变、弥补我的缺漏的，不要有忌讳。 
English: Once upon a time, there was an earthquake in the North Sea, which damaged the ancestral temple, and I was very afraid. My lords, you learned men of the middle two thousand, if you can find a way to cope with the disaster and make up for my shortcomings, don't be afraid.

古文：因大赦。胜出为谏大夫、给事中，霸为扬州剌吏。
现代文：于是大赦天下，夏侯胜被赦而担任谏大夫给事中，黄霸担任扬州剌史。
English: As a result, the world was amnestied, and Xia Hossheng was pardoned and served as a doctor in charge of the matter, and Huangba served as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：胜为人质朴守正，简易亡威仪。
现代文：夏侯胜为人质朴刚正，平易近人而没有威仪。
English: Xia Hou Sheng is a simple and upright person, approachable and without pomp.

古文：见时谓上为君，误相字于前，上亦以是亲信之。
现代文：朝见宣帝时称宣帝为君，又在宣帝前对同僚以字相称，这些做法都是不合礼仪的，但宣帝反而因为这些而对他更加亲近信任了。
English: When he saw Emperor Xuan at dawn, he called Emperor Xuan as "Jun," and before Emperor Xuan, he called his colleagues by their first names. These actions were not in accordance with etiquette, but Emperor Xuan trusted him more because of these actions.

古文：尝见，出道上语，上闻而让胜，胜曰： 陛下所言善，臣故扬之。
现代文：有一次夏侯胜被接见后，出去把宣帝的话告诉别人，宣帝听说后就责备夏侯胜，夏侯胜回答说： 陛下说得很好，所以我就宣扬它。
English: Once, after being received, Xia Hossheng went out to tell others what Emperor Xuan had said. After Emperor Xuan heard it, he reproached Xia Hossheng. Xia Hossheng replied, "Your Majesty spoke very well, so I will preach it."

古文：尧言布于天下，至今见诵。
现代文：尧的话散布于天下，至今仍被诵读。
English: His words spread around the world and are still recited today.

古文：臣以为可传，故传耳。 
现代文：我认为这些话可以传颂，就传布开了。 
English: And when I thought that these things were worthy to be published, they were published.

古文：朝廷每有大议，上知胜素直，谓曰： 先生通正言，无惩前事。 
现代文：朝廷上海次有大事情要商议时，因为宣帝一直知道夏侯胜很率直，宣帝就会对夏侯胜说： 先生您尽管直话直说，不要因为以前的事而有畏惧之心。 
English: The next time the imperial court in Shanghai had a big matter to discuss, because Emperor Xuan had always known that Xia Hossheng was very straightforward, Emperor Xuan would say to Xia Hossheng: Sir, you should speak frankly, don't be afraid because of the past.

古文：胜复为长信少府，迁太子太傅。
现代文：夏侯胜再次做了长信少府，又升任太子太傅。
English: Xia Hou Sheng was once again appointed as Changxin Shao Fu, and was also promoted to Prince Taifu.

古文：受诏撰《尚书》、《论语说》，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：他受宣帝诏撰写《尚书》、《论语说》，赐给一百斤黄金。
English: He was awarded one hundred jin of gold by Emperor Xuanzang for writing "Shang Shu" and "Analects of Confucius."

古文：年九十卒官，赐冢茔，葬平陵。
现代文：夏侯胜九十岁时在任上去世，被赐给墓地，安葬在平陵。
English: Xia Hou Sheng died in office at the age of ninety, was given to the cemetery, and was buried in Pingling.

古文：太后赐钱二百万，为胜素服五日，以报师傅之恩，儒者以为荣。
现代文：太后赐予他二百万，并为夏侯胜穿了五天孝服，以报答师傅之恩，儒者引以为荣。
English: The empress dowager gave him two million, and dressed Xia Hou Sheng in five days of filial piety to repay the grace of the master. Confucians are proud of this.

古文：始，胜每讲授，常谓诸生曰： 士病不明经术，经术苟明，其取青紫如俯拾地芥耳。
现代文：以前，夏侯胜讲课时常对学生说： 儒者最怕不懂经术，经术如果能通晓了，要取得高官就像捡起地上的小草一样简单。
English: In the past, Xia Hosseng often said to his students in lectures: Confucians are most afraid of not understanding the sutra. If you can understand the sutra, getting a high-ranking official is as simple as picking up grass on the ground.

古文：学经不明，不如归耕。 
现代文：学经不精，还不如回家种地。 
English: If you don't study hard, you might as well go home and farm.

古文：胜从父子建字长卿，自师事胜及欧阳高，左右采获，又从《五经》诸儒问与《尚书》相出入者，牵引以次章句，具文饰说。
现代文：夏侯胜的叔伯辈的孩子中有名建字长卿的，自从师事夏侯胜和欧阳高后，经常采问有疑义之处，又问学于研究《五经》的各位儒士，向他们询问与《尚书》不同之处，排列比次章句，然而衹是徒具形式，而长卿却又修饰其说。
English: Among the children of Xia Hosseng's uncles and cousins, there was a famous calligrapher named Changqing. Since he had studied under Xia Hosseng and Ouyang Gao, he often asked questions about doubtful points. He also asked the Confucian scholars who had studied the "Five Classics," asking them about the differences from the "Song of Songs" and the order of the chapters and sentences. However, it was just a form, but Changqing embellished it.

古文：胜非之曰： 建所谓章句小儒，破碎大道。 
现代文：夏侯胜对此不以为然，他说： 夏侯建是那种衹求章句文辞的小儒，把儒道搞得支离破碎。 
English: Xia Hou Sheng did not agree with this. He said, "Xia Hou Jian is the kind of petty-bourgeois who is obsessed with words and phrases, and has made Confucianism fragmented.

古文：建亦非胜为学疏略，难以应敌。
现代文：夏侯建对夏侯胜也不以为然，他认为夏侯胜做学问粗疏，难以应敌。
English: Xia Hou Jian was not impressed with Xia Hou Sheng either. He thought that Xia Hou Sheng was not well-educated and would not be able to stand up to the enemy.

古文：建卒自颛门名经，为议郎、博士，至太子少傅。
现代文：夏侯建终于在经学上自成一家之学，他做过议郎博士，官至太子少傅。
English: Xia Hou Jian finally became the family's own scholar in the study of the classics. He worked as a scholar and doctor, and rose through the ranks to become the prince's young tutor.

古文：胜子兼为左曹太中大夫，孙尧至长信少府、司农、鸿胪，曾孙蕃郡守、州牧、长乐少府。
现代文：夏侯胜的儿子夏侯兼担任左曹太中大夫，孙子夏侯尧官至长信少府、司农、鸿胪，曾孙夏侯蕃担任郡守、州牧、长乐少府。
English: Xia Hou Sheng's son, Xia Hou, also served as Zuo Cao Taizhong Daifu, his grandson, Xia Hou Yigang, served as Changxin Shofu, Sino, and Hongyi, and his great-grandson, Xia Hou Sheng, served as county governor, state herdsman, and Changle Shofu.

古文：胜同产弟子赏为梁内史，梁内史子定国为豫章太守。
现代文：夏侯胜的同母兄弟之子夏侯赏做了梁内史，夏侯赏的儿子定国做了豫章太守。
English: Xia Hou Sheng's half-brother's son, Xia Hou An, became Liang Neishi, and Xia Hou An's son, Ding Guo, became the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：而建子千秋亦为少府、太子少傅。
现代文：而夏侯建的儿子千秋也担任了少府、太子少傅。
English: However, Xia Houjian's son, Qian Qiu, also served as the young prefect and the young prince.

古文：京房字君明，东郡顿丘人也。
现代文：京房字君明，束郡顿丘人。
English: Kyofusa Aza Junmei, a resident of Toka-gun, Toka-gun.

古文：治《易》，事梁人焦延寿。
现代文：研究《周易》，师从梁人焦延寿。
English: Studied "Zhou Yi" and learned from Liang Ren Jiao Yan Shou.

古文：延寿字赣。
现代文：延寿字赣。
English: The characters "延寿" (延寿) and "" () were created.

古文：赣贫贱，以好学得幸梁王。梁王共其资用，令极意学。
现代文：焦赣出身贫贱，因为好学而得到梁王的礼遇，梁王供给他所需的费用，让他安心学习。
English: Jiaojun was born poor, but because he was eager to learn, he was treated with courtesy by Liang Wang. Liang Wang provided him with the necessary expenses and let him study with peace of mind.

古文：既成，为郡史，察举补小黄令。
现代文：学成之后焦赣担任郡史，并被选拔补小黄县令。
English: After completing his studies, Jiao Wei served as the county historian and was selected to supplement Xiao Huang County.

古文：以候司先知奸邪，盗贼不得发。
现代文：因为焦赣常常能预先知道奸邪之事，使得那些盗贼不敢作案。
English: Because Jiaojuan can often know about the treachery in advance, it makes those thieves dare not commit crimes.

古文：爱养吏民，化行县中。
现代文：焦赣又十分关心体恤下层官吏和老百姓，因此小黄县的风气很好。
English: Jiaozuo is also very concerned about the feelings of lower-level officials and ordinary people, so the atmosphere in Xiaohuang County is very good.

古文：举最当迁，三老官属上书愿留赣，有诏许增秩留，卒于小黄。
现代文：结果他的政绩在考课时得分很高，按规定应当升任他官。但是小黄县的三老一齐上书表示希望能留下焦赣，结果诏书下来允许小黄县留下焦赣，增加了他的俸禄。焦赣在小黄县去世。
English: As a result, his political performance scored very high in the examination, and according to regulations, he should be promoted to a higher position. However, all three elders of Xiaohuang County wrote a letter expressing their hope to keep Jiao Tong. As a result, an imperial decree was issued to allow Xiaohuang County to keep Jiao Tong, and his salary was increased. Jiao Tong died in Xiaohuang County.

古文：赣常曰： 得我道以亡身者，必京生也。 
现代文：焦赣常说： 能得到我的道但却因此而身亡的人，一定是京房吧。 
English: Jiaozhou often said: Those who can get my way but die because of it must be Beijing.

古文：其说长于灾变，分六十四卦，更直日用事，以风雨寒温为候：各有占验。
现代文：焦赣最擅长说灾变，他把六十四卦与每天要做的事联系起来，又以风雨寒温等气象变化作为征候，各有各的占算和应验。
English: Jiao Tong is the best at talking about catastrophes. He links the sixty-four sagas with the things to be done every day, and also takes meteorological changes such as wind, rain, cold and temperature as signs. Each has its own calculation and fulfillment.

古文：房用之尤精。
现代文：京房尤其精通此道。
English: Kyobo is particularly adept at this.

古文：好钟律，知音声。
现代文：京房好钟律，叉通晓音律。
English: Jingfang has a good bell rhythm, and Zheng Tongxiao has a good melody.

古文：初元四年以孝廉为郎。
现代文：初元四年时，以举孝廉为郎官。
English: At the beginning of the 4th year of the first century, he made Takakado Moro his vassal.

古文：永光、建昭间，西羌反，日蚀，又久青亡光，阴雾不精。
现代文：永光、建昭年间，西羌造反，不久发生了日食，接着天老是黑黑的不见阳光，阴雾满天一点亮色也没有。
English: In the years of Yongguang and Jianzhao, Xidi rebelled, a solar eclipse soon occurred, and then the sky was always dark and dark without sunlight, and there was no bright color in the sky.

古文：房数上疏，先言其将然，近数月，远一岁，所言屡中，天子说之。
现代文：京房好几次上书，预言将要发生某事某事，近则几个月，远则一年，所说的屡次应验了。
English: Jingfang has written several times, predicting that something will happen, in the near future it will be a few months, in the distant future it will be a year, and what has been said has come true many times.

古文：数召见问，房对曰： 古帝王以功举贤，则万化成，瑞应著，末世以毁誉取人，故功业废而致灾异。
现代文：元帝对此很高兴，于是经常把京房召来询问他，京房回答说： 古代的帝王都是凭功绩来选举贤能，于是万物得到生育，祥瑞也出现了，而到了衰败之世衹凭赞扬的话来选人才，所以功业就被废置，灾异也就出现了。
English: Emperor Yuan was very pleased with this, so he often called Jing Fang to inquire about him. Jing Fang replied: The ancient emperors were elected on the basis of merit. As a result, all things were born, and auspiciousness appeared. However, in the era of decline, they were elected on the basis of words of praise. Therefore, their achievements were discarded, and disasters occurred.

古文：宜令百官各试其功，灾异可息。
现代文：这时最好让百官各自考察一下自己的业绩，这样灾异就会平息了。 
English: At this time, it is best to let the officials examine their own performance, so that the disaster will subside.

古文：诏使房作其事，房奏考功课吏法。
现代文：于是元帝下韶让京房来做遣件事，京房就上奏了具体考察官吏业绩的方法。
English: As a result, Emperor Yuan sent Emperor Jingfang to do the dispatching, and Emperor Jingfang came up with a specific method of inspecting the performance of officials.

古文：上令公卿朝臣与房会议温室，皆以房言烦碎，令上下相司，不可许。
现代文：元帝让公卿朝臣和京房一起到温室殿去商议这件事，他们都认为京房说的太琐碎，让上级下级互相监察，这是不可以的。
English: The Yuan Emperor asked the court nobles and courtiers to go to the greenhouse with the emperor to discuss the matter. They all thought that what the emperor said was too trivial, and that it was not acceptable to have superiors and subordinates supervise each other.

古文：上意乡之。
现代文：皇上心裹也这样想。
English: The Emperor was of the same opinion.

古文：时，部刺史奏事京师，上召见诸刺史，令房晓以课事，刺史复以为不可行。
现代文：当时部刺史到京师来报告一些事情，元帝召见各位刺史，让京房告诉他们要考察官吏们政绩的事，刺史们也认为不可以实行。
English: At that time, the imperial historian came to Beijing to report some things. The Yuan Emperor summoned all the imperial historians and asked the imperial household to tell them that they wanted to inspect the political achievements of officials. The imperial historians also thought that it was impossible to implement.

古文：唯御史大夫郑私、光禄大夫周堪初言不可，后善之。
现代文：衹有御史大夫郑弘、光禄大夫周堪开始说不可以，后来认为很好。
English: Zheng Hong, the chief historian, and Zhou Kan, the doctor of Guanglu, initially said it was impossible, but later thought it was good.

古文：是时，中书令石显颛权，显友人五鹿充宗为尚书令，与房同经，论议相非。
现代文：这时中书令石显专权，石显的朋友五鹿充宗担任尚书令，他与京房学的是同一经，但议论却相差很大。
English: At this time, Shi Xian was given the exclusive right to issue the calligraphy. Shi Xian's friend, Wu Lu Cheng Zong, served as Shang's calligrapher. He studied the same scripture as Jing Fang, but the discussion was very different.

古文：二人用事，房尝宴见，问上曰： 幽、厉之君何以危？
现代文：二人当权，有一次京房在元帝闲宴时被召见，就问元帝说： 像幽王、厉王这样的君主为什么会灭亡？
English: The two of them were in power. Once, Kyofusa was summoned to see Yuan Di during a banquet. He asked Yuan Di, "Why did monarchs like Yu Wang and Li Wang perish?"

古文：所任者何人也？ 
现代文：他们任用的是什么人呢？ 
English: Who did they appoint?

古文：上曰： 君不明，而所任者巧佞。 
现代文：五帝回答说： 幽王厉王统治昏庸，他们任用的也是花言巧语迎奉谄媚之人。 
English: The five emperors replied, "Yu Wang Li Wang is the ruler of dullness and mediocrity. They also appoint people who are flatterers and flatterers.

古文：房曰： 知其巧佞而用之邪，将以为贤也？ 
现代文：京房说： 幽王厉王是知道这些人是巧佞之人后任用他们的呢，还是以为他们是贤能的人才任用他们的呢？ 
English: Kyofusa said, "Did Yu Wang Liguo appoint these people after he knew they were clever, or did he appoint them because he thought they were capable people?"

古文：上曰： 贤之。 
现代文：元帝答道： 是认为他们贤能才任用的。 
English: Emperor Yuan replied, "I thought they were appointed for their ability."

古文：房曰： 然则今何以知其不贤也？ 
现代文：京房说： 那么今天又是怎么知道他们不是贤人呢？ 
English: Kyofusa said: So how do we know today that they are not sages?

古文：上曰： 以其时乱而君危知之。 
现代文：元帝说： 因为当时的社会很乱而且君主失败所以可以知道。 
English: Yuan Di said: Because the society at that time was very chaotic and the monarch failed, so it can be known.

古文：房曰： 若是，任贤必治，任不肖必乱，必然之道也。
现代文：京房说： 像这样，任用贤能之人国家就治理得好，任用不肖的人国家就乱，这是一定的道理。
English: Kyofusa said, "In this way, it is a certain truth that if a country appoints a capable person, the country will be well governed, but if it appoints an unscrupulous person, the country will be chaotic."

古文：幽、厉何不觉寤而更求贤，曷为卒任不肖以至于是？ 
现代文：幽王厉王为什么不觉悟而去用贤能之人，却终于任用那些不肖之人，以至于最后到那种地步？ 
English: Why did Yu Wang Li Wang not wake up to the fact that he was using capable people, but ended up appointing those unsavory people, so that he ended up in that situation?

古文：上曰： 临乱之君各贤其臣，令皆觉寤，天下安得危亡之君？ 
现代文：元帝说： 身临乱世的国君各以其臣为贤，假使他们都觉悟了，天底下哪裹会有身危国亡之君呢？ 
English: Yuan Di said: The sovereigns who lived in the turbulent world were all virtuous with their vassals. If they were all enlightened, where in the world would there be a sovereign who was in danger of dying?

古文：房曰： 齐桓公、秦二世亦尝闻此君而非笑之，然则任竖习、赵高、政治日乱，盗贼满山，何不以幽、厉卜之而觉寤乎？ 
现代文：京房说： 齐桓公、秦二世也曾听说过幽厉二君的事并且取笑过他们，但他们自己也还是任用了竖刁、赵高这样的人，政治一天比一天混乱，各个山头都有盗贼，为什么不把幽王厉王作为鉴戒而觉悟呢？ 
English: Jing Fang said, "Qi Kuan Gong and Qin II had also heard about You Li Er and made fun of them, but they themselves still appointed people like Zhisheng and Zhao Gao. Politics is getting more and more chaotic every day, and there are thieves on every hilltop. Why not take You Wang Li Wang as a warning and wake up?

古文：上曰： 唯有道者能以往知来耳。 
现代文：元帝说： 衹有有道的才能惩前毖后啊。 
English: Emperor Yuan said: "Only those who have virtue can punish the former and the latter."

古文：房因免冠顿首，曰： 《春秋》纪二百四十二年灾异，以视万世之君。
现代文：京房于是脱掉帽子叩首说： 《春秋》记载了二百四十二年的灾异以给后代的君主借鉴。
English: Kyofusa then took off his hat and bowed his head and said: "Spring and Autumn" recorded the disasters of 242 years as a reference for future monarchs.

古文：今陛下即位已来，日月失明，星辰逆行，山崩泉涌，地震石陨，夏霜冬雷，春凋秋荣，陨霜不杀，水旱螟虫，民人饥疫，盗贼不禁，刑人满市，《春秋》所记灾异尽备。
现代文：陛下即位已来，日月已不再像以前那样明亮，星辰也逆着运行，又有山崩，洪水泛滥，大地震动，天落陨石，夏天下霜，冬天打雷，春天万物凋零秋天反而繁荣，下霜却没有肃杀之气，水灾旱灾频繁，螟虫横行，老百姓挨饿，瘟疫流行，盗贼猖獗，屡禁不止，满街都是受刑之人，《春秋》记载的灾异已经全都具备了。
English: His Majesty has come to the throne, the sun and the moon are no longer as bright as before, the stars are also moving in the opposite direction, there are landslides, floods, large earthquakes, meteorites falling from the sky, frost in summer, thunder in winter, everything withers in spring, but prosperity in autumn, but frost does not have the power to kill, floods and droughts are frequent, aphids are rampant, people are starving, plagues are prevalent, thieves are rampant, prohibitions are repeated, the streets are full of people who have been punished, and the disasters recorded in "Spring and Autumn" have all been met.

古文：陛下视今为治邪，乱邪？ 
现代文：请问陛下看今天下是治呢，还是乱呢？ 
English: Your Majesty, in your opinion, is the current situation one of governance or chaos?

古文：上曰： 亦极乱耳。
现代文：元帝说： 是太乱了。
English: Yuan Di said: It's too chaotic.

古文：尚何道！ 
现代文：你有什么话要说吗？ 
English: Do you have anything to say?

古文：房曰： 今所任用者谁与？ 
现代文：京房说： 如今您任用谁呢？ 
English: Kyofusa said: Who are you going to appoint now?

古文：上曰： 然幸其愈于彼，又以为不在此人也。 
现代文：元帝说： 毕竟现在的灾异比以前要好多了吧，这应该跟任用的人没关系吧。 
English: Yuan Di said: After all, the current disaster is much better than before. This should have nothing to do with the person appointed.

古文：房曰： 夫前世之君亦皆然矣。臣恐后之视今，犹今之视前也。 
现代文：京房说： 以前的君主也是这么认为的呀，我恐怕后人看我们就像我们看前代一样哦。 
English: Kyofusa said, "The previous monarchs thought so too. I'm afraid future generations will look at us the same way we look at our predecessors."

古文：上良久乃曰： 今为乱者谁哉？ 
现代文：过了好久，元帝说： 如今行乱的是谁呢？ 
English: After a long time, Emperor Yuan said, "Who is it that is making trouble now?"

古文：房曰： 明主宜自知之。 
现代文：京房说： 圣明的君主应该自己知道。 
English: Kyofusa said: The sovereign of the sacred should know this for himself.

古文：上曰： 不知也，如知，何故用之？ 
现代文：元帝说： 我不知道，如果我知道了，为什么还用他呢？ 
English: Yuan Di said, "I don't know. If I knew, why would I still use him?"

古文：房曰： 上最所信任，与图事帷幄之中进退天下之士者是矣。 
现代文：京房说： 您最信任的，能与您一起在帷幄之中谋划大事，并且可以任用罢免天下读书人的那个人就是。 
English: Kyofusa said, "The person you trust the most, who can work with you to plan big things behind the scenes, and who can appoint and dismiss the world's readers, is that person."

古文：房指谓石显，上亦知之，谓房曰： 已谕。 
现代文：京房指的就是石显，元帝也知道，就对京房说： 我明白了。 
English: What Kyofusa was referring to was Shihsien. Yuan Di also knew, so he said to Kyofusa, "I understand."

古文：房罢出，后上令房上弟子晓知考功课吏事者，欲试用之。
现代文：京房已然出来，后来元帝命令京房推举弟子中通晓考察官吏政绩的，想要试用他们。
English: Kyofusa had already come out, and later Emperor Yuan ordered Kyofusa to select disciples who were familiar with examining the performance of government officials and wanted to try them out.

古文：房上中郎任良、姚平， 愿以为刺史，试考功法，臣得通籍殿中，为奏事，以防雍塞。 
现代文：京房推荐中郎任良、姚平，说： 希望任用他们为刺史，试着实行考察官吏政绩的方法，我可以进入殿中，为他们上奏情况，以防止下情不能上达。 
English: He said, "I hope to appoint them as historians and try to implement the method of inspecting the performance of government officials. I can enter the hall and report the situation for them to prevent the situation from being reported."

古文：石显、五鹿充宗皆疾房，欲远之，建言宜试以房为郡守。
现代文：石显、五鹿充宗都很痛恨京房，想让他离得皇上远远的，就建议任用京房为郡守。
English: Both Ishi Hsien and Goka Mitsumune hated Kyofusa very much. If they wanted him to be far away from the emperor, they suggested that Kyofusa be appointed as the county governor.

古文：元帝于是以房为魏郡太守，秩八百石居，得以考功法治郡。
现代文：元帝于是任命京房担任魏郡太守，俸禄八百石，使他能够用考察官吏政绩的方法来治理魏郡。
English: Emperor Yuan then appointed Jingfang as the governor of Wei County, with a salary of 800 koku, so that he could use the method of inspecting the performance of officials to govern Wei County.

古文：房自请，愿无属刺史，得除用它郡人，自第吏千石已下，岁竟乘传奏事。
现代文：京房自己申请，希望能够不受制于刺史，能够任用别的郡的人，能够亲自考察千石以下的官吏等次，岁末时能够坐着驿传的马车上奏事情。
English: Keifang applied on his own, hoping that he would not be constrained by gossip, would be able to appoint people from other counties, would be able to personally inspect officials under 1,000 koku, and so on, and would be able to sit in the carriage at the end of the year.

古文：天子许焉。
现代文：元帝答应了。
English: Emperor Yuan agreed.

古文：房自知数以论议为大臣所非，内与石显、五鹿充宗有隙，不欲远离左右，及为太守，忧惧。
现代文：京房自己知道他屡次议论时政而被大臣们非议，在朝中又与石显、五鹿充宗有嫌隙，因此他不想远离皇上左右，等到做了太守，十分忧虑。
English: Kyofusa himself knew that he repeatedly discussed current affairs and was criticized by ministers, and that he had a rift with Isen and Goka Shoson in the court, so he did not want to be far away from the emperor, and when he became the governor, he was very worried.

古文：房以建昭二年二月朔拜，上封事曰： 辛酉已来，蒙气衰去，太阳精明，臣独欣然，以为陛下有所定也。
现代文：京房在建昭二年二月初一，向元帝上奏一封密封的奏章说： 辛酉那天以来，蒙气衰退离去，太阳变得光明，我暗自高兴，认为陛下您有所作为了。
English: On the first day of the second month of the second year of Jian Zhao's reign, Jing Fang played a sealed musical score to the Yuan Emperor, saying: "Since the day of Xin Zhao, the air has faded away, the sun has become bright, I am secretly happy, and I think that Your Majesty has made a difference.

古文：然少阴倍力而乘消息。
现代文：然而臣下的卦象仍比君主要强。
English: However, his vassals were still better than him.

古文：臣疑陛下虽行此道，犹不得如意，臣窃悼惧。
现代文：我猜想陛下虽然能做这事，但好像不能够如愿，我私下裹很是担心忧惧。
English: I suspect that, although His Majesty is able to do this, he does not seem to be able to do so, and I am privately very worried.

古文：守阳平侯凤欲见未得，至己卯，臣拜为太守，此言上虽明下犹胜之效也。
现代文：我本来想请求阳平侯凤转达想要进见之意却没有能够，到己卯那天被任命为太守，造就说明陛下虽然圣明但您的臣下仍然比您更厉害。
English: I originally wanted to ask Yang Ping Houfeng to convey my desire to advance, but I couldn't. On the day I was appointed governor, I created a situation that showed that although your majesty was holy, your vassals were still more powerful than you.

古文：臣出之后，恐必为用事所蔽，身死而功不成，故愿岁尽乘传奏事，蒙哀见许。
现代文：我出了朝廷后，担心您一定被掌权之人所蒙蔽，人死了而功业却没有完成，所以希望岁未能乘着驿传的车马上奏事情，得到您的怜爱和允许。
English: After I left the imperial court, I was worried that you must have been deceived by the people in power. People die, but the work is not completed. Therefore, I hope that I will not be able to take the car that was passed down to me and immediately play things, and get your love and permission.

古文：乃辛巳，蒙气复乘卦，太阳侵色，此上大夫覆阳而上意疑也。
现代文：到了辛巳那天，蒙气重又在太阳卦之上，太阳为色所侵，这表明上大夫掩蔽阳而陛下正犹疑不决。
English: On the day of Xin Si, he was overcome with emotion and stood on the top of Sun Gua, and the sun was invaded by the color, which showed that the doctor was covering the sun and his majesty was hesitating.

古文：已卯、庚辰之间，必有欲隔绝臣令不得乘传奏事者。 
现代文：己卯、庚辰这两天中，一定有阻隔我不让我坐着驿传的马车向您禀告事情的人。 
English: During the two days of Jiwu and Gengchen, there must have been someone who prevented me from sitting in the carriage and reporting to you.

古文：房未发，上令阳平侯凤承制诏房，止无乘传奏事。
现代文：京房还未出发，元帝命令阳平侯凤向京房宣诏，不让他入朝奏事。
English: Before Kyofusa set off, Emperor Yuan ordered Yang Ping Houfeng to issue an edict to Kyofusa not to attend the morning ceremony.

古文：房意愈恐，去至新丰，因邮上封事曰： 臣前以六月中言《遁卦》不效，法曰： 道人始去，寒，涌水为灾。 
现代文：京房更加恐惧了，走到新丰时，就向元帝邮寄了一封密封的奏章说： 我以前在六月中旬讲的《避卦》没有应验，法说： 有道术的人刚刚离去时，就会天气寒冷，会有水涌出来而为灾。 
English: When he reached Xinfeng, he mailed a sealed letter to the Yuan Emperor, saying, "The "Avoidance of Deception" that I spoke of in mid-June has not come to pass. The Fa said, "When a person with Taoism just leaves, the weather will be cold, and water will gush out, causing a disaster.

古文：至其七月，涌水出。
现代文：到了七月，水涌出来了。
English: By July, the water was gushing out.

古文：臣弟子姚平谓臣曰： 房可谓知道，未可谓信道也。
现代文：我的弟子姚干对我说： 京房可以说知道道，不能说是相信道。
English: My disciple Yao Gan said to me: Jingfang can be said to know the Tao, but cannot be said to believe in the Tao.

古文：房言灾异，未尝不中，今涌水已出，道人当遂死，尚复何言？ 
现代文：京房说灾异，没有没说中的，如今已经涌出水来，有道之人应该避开死亡，还要再说什么呢？ 
English: Jingfang said that the disaster was unusual, there was nothing that was not said, and now the water has gushed out. A virtuous person should avoid death, what else to say?

古文：臣曰： 陛下至仁，于臣尤厚，虽言而死，臣犹言也。 平又曰： 房可谓小忠，未可谓大忠也。
现代文：我说： 陛下十分仁爱，对我尤其厚爱，虽然说了会死，但我仍要说，姚平又说： 京房是小忠，但不能说是大忠。
English: I said: Your Majesty is very benevolent, especially to me. Although I would die if I said it, I still want to say it. Yao Ping also said: Jingfang is a small loyal, but can not be said to be a big loyal.

古文：昔秦时赵高用事，有正先者，非刺高而死，高威自此成，故秦之乱，正先趣之。 今臣得出守郡，自诡效功，恐未效而死。
现代文：从前秦朝时赵高当权，有个叫正先的，因非议赵高而死，赵高的淫威从此立了起来，所以秦的乱，是正先促成的，如今我出朝担任郡守，要尽力报效，很担心还未效功就死去。
English: In the former Qin Dynasty, when Zhao Gao was in power, there was a man named Zhengxian, who died as a result of Zhao Gao's criticism. Zhao Gao's arrogance has stood up since then, so the Qin Rebellion was caused by Zhengxian. Now that I have become the county governor, I must do my best to repay the favor, and I am very worried that I will die before I can repay the favor.

古文：惟陛下毋使臣塞涌水之异，当正先之死，为姚平所笑。 
现代文：衹请陛下不要让我来担当涌水之异的责任，像正先那样死去，而被姚平耻笑。 
English: Please, Your Majesty, don't let me take on the responsibility of the flood, die like I did, and be laughed at by Yao Ping.

古文：房至陕，复上封事曰： 乃丙戌小雨，丁亥蒙气去，然少阴并力而乘消息，戊子益甚，到五十分，蒙气复起。
现代文：京房到了陕县，又奏上了一封密封的奏章说： 丙戌那天下小雨，丁亥那天阴气离去，但是少阴合力遮住了太阳，戊子那天更厉害了，到这天中的第五十分时，阴气重又兴起。
English: When Jingfang arrived in Shaanxi County, he also played a sealed record saying: It rained lightly on the day of Pingyao, and the gloomy atmosphere left on the day of Dinghai, but the sun was covered by the combined forces of a few yin and yang. It was even more severe on the day of Wuzi, and by the fiftieth minute of the day, the gloomy atmosphere arose again.

古文：此陛下欲正消息，杂卦之党并力而争，消息之气不胜。
现代文：这时陛下您想要正定消息，而那杂卦的同党合力来争，消和息的气不能战胜它们。
English: Now, sire, you wish to set the record straight, and the gossips of the same party join forces to contend, and the spirit of conciliation cannot prevail against them.

古文：强弱安危之机不可不察。
现代文：强弱安危的时候不可以不细察。
English: When it comes to strength, weakness, and safety, it is essential to take a closer look.

古文：己丑夜，有还风，尽辛卯，太阳复侵色，至癸巳，日月相薄，此邪阴同力而太阳为之疑也。
现代文：己丑这天晚上，有暴风，到辛卯那暴风停息，太阳重又被遮住，到癸巳那天，曰月相近，这是邪阴合力而太阳为之所惑的缘故。
English: On the evening of the same day, there was a storm. By the time it reached Xinwu, the storm had died down and the sun was again covered. By the next day, the moon was close to the sun. This was because the sun was confused by the combined forces of evil and good.

古文：臣前白九年不改，必有星亡之异。
现代文：我以前曾经说过如果九年没有变化，一定会有看不见星的灾异。
English: I have said before that if there is no change in nine years, there will be a catastrophe of invisible stars.

古文：臣愿出任良试考功，臣得居内，星亡之异可去。
现代文：我愿意推荐任良试行考察官吏政绩的方法，我能够居住在陛下您那儿，那么看不见星的灾异就可以去除。
English: I am willing to recommend Ren Liang to try the method of inspecting the performance of government officials. I can live with Your Majesty, then the plague of invisible stars can be removed.

古文：议者知如此于身不利，臣不可蔽，故云使弟子不若试师。
现代文：那些人知道这样的话对他们自己不利，而且我是不会被他们蒙蔽的，所以他们说与其使用弟子不如用老师。
English: Those people knew that this was not good for them and that I would not be fooled by them, so they said that it was better to use a teacher than a disciple.

古文：臣为刺史又当奏事，故复云为刺史恐太守不与同心，不若以为太守，此其所以隔绝臣也。
现代文：而如果我做刺史就应该向陛下奏事，所以又说做刺史担心我不能和太守同心，不如让我担任太守，他们就是像这样隔绝我和陛下的。
English: On the other hand, if I were to act as a magistrate, I would have to report to His Majesty, so they also said that as a magistrate, they were worried that I would not be able to have the same heart as the Grand Master, so it would be better to let me act as the Grand Master. This is how they isolated me from His Majesty.

古文：陛下不违其言而遂听之，此乃蒙气所以不解，太阳亡色者也。
现代文：陛下不违背他们的话而听任他们这么做，造就是阴气一直不离开而太阳无光的原因。
English: Your Majesty did not go against their words and let them do this, which is why the gloom has not left and the sun has no light.

古文：臣去朝稍远，太阳侵色益甚，唯陛下毋难还臣而易逆天意。
现代文：我离朝廷越远，太阳被蒙蔽就越厉害，希望陛下不要以让我回来为难而轻易违背天意。
English: The farther I am from the Imperial Court, the more the sun is blinded. I hope that His Majesty will not find it difficult to let me return and easily go against the will of Heaven.

古文：邪说虽安于人，天气必变，故人可欺，天不可欺也，愿陛下察焉。 
现代文：在人间邪说虽然能够安稳，但天气一定会有变化，所以人可以被欺骗，天是不可以被欺骗的，希望陛下明察。 
English: In the human world, although evil theories can be stable, the weather will certainly change, so people can be deceived, but the heavens cannot be deceived. I hope Your Majesty will see this.

古文：房去月余，竟征下狱。
现代文：京房离开一个多月后，终于被投进大牢。
English: After more than a month away from the capital, he was finally thrown into jail.

古文：初，淮阳宪王舅张博从房受学，以女妻房。
现代文：当初，淮阳宪王的舅舅张博跟着京房学习，把他女儿嫁给京房。
English: At first, Zhang Bo, the uncle of Huaiyang Xianwang, studied with Jingfang and married his daughter to him.

古文：房与相亲，每朝见，辄为博道其语，以为上意欲用房议，而群臣恶其害己，故为众所排。
现代文：京房和张博很要好，每次朝见后，总是把皇上的话告诉张博，以为皇上原本是想要采用京房的意见的，但是群臣害怕这会损害自己的利益，所以京房被众人排挤。
English: Kyofusa and Zhang Bo were very close. After every morning meeting, Zhou always told Zhang Bo the emperor's words, thinking that the emperor originally wanted to adopt Kyofusa's opinion, but the ministers were afraid that this would harm their own interests, so Kyofusa was crowded out by everyone.

古文：博曰： 淮阳王上亲弟，敏达好政，欲为国忠。
现代文：张博说： 淮阳王是皇上的亲弟弟，敏捷通达喜欢从政，想要为国尽忠。
English: Zhang Bo said: King Huaiyang is the emperor's younger brother. He is quick-witted, likes politics and wants to be loyal to the country.

古文：今欲令王上书求入朝，得佐助房。 
现代文：如今我想请淮阳王上书请求入朝，以辅助您。 
English: Now I would like to ask King Huaiyang to write a letter requesting you to come to the DPRK to assist you.

古文：房曰： 得无不可？ 
现代文：京房说： 恐怕不可以吧。 
English: Kyofusa said, "I'm afraid I can't."

古文：博曰： 前楚王朝荐士，何为不可？ 
现代文：张博说： 以前楚王就曾入朝荐举士人，淮阳王为什么不可以？ 
English: Zhang Bo said: Previously, King Chu had entered the imperial court to recommend candidates, so why can't King Huaiyang?

古文：房曰： 中书令石显、尚书令五鹿君相与合同，巧佞之人也，事县官十余年；及丞相韦侯，皆久亡补于民，可谓亡功矣。
现代文：京房说： 中书令石显、尚书令五鹿充宗互相勾结，他们是奸佞的小人，事奉天子已十多年；还有丞相韦侯，他们都已很久对百姓没有办什么好事，可说是没有功劳了。
English: Kyofusa said, "Chuan Shuling Shi Xian and Shang Shuling Wolu Chengzong are in collusion with each other. They are traitors and villains. They have been serving the Son of Heaven for more than ten years. There is also the Prime Minister Wei Hou. They have not done anything good for the people for a long time, and can be said to have no merit.

古文：此尤不欲行考功者也。
现代文：这些就是尤其不愿实行考察官吏政绩制度的人。
English: These are the people who are particularly reluctant to implement the system of inspecting officials' performance.

古文：淮阳王即朝见，劝上行考功，事善；不然，但言丞相、中书令任事久而不治，可休丞相，以御史大夫郑弘代之，迁中书令置他官，以钩盾令徐立代之，如此，房考功事得施行矣。 
现代文：淮阳王如果能朝见，劝皇上实行考察官吏的制度，这是最好。如果不行，衹说丞相、中书令做事已很久但却没有治理好，可以罢免现在的丞相，让御史大夫郑弘来代替，让现在的中书令改任另外的官职，用钩盾令徐立代替他，这样，我的考察官吏的建议就可以施行了。 
English: If Huaiyang Wang can go to the imperial court and persuade the emperor to implement the system of inspecting officials, this is the best. If not, Zou said that the prime minister and the secretary general have been doing things for a long time but have not been well managed, the current prime minister can be dismissed and replaced by the chief historian Zheng Hong, the current secretary general can be reassigned to another official position, and Xu Li, the hook and shield commander, can replace him. In this way, my recommendation of inspecting officials can be implemented.

古文：博具从房记诸所说灾异事，因令房为淮阳王作求朝奏草，皆持柬与淮阳王。
现代文：张博完全听从京房所说的各种灾异事，于是让京房为淮阳王作朝见皇上的奏章，将这些都写信给淮阳王。
English: Zhang Bo fully obeyed the various calamities and disasters mentioned by Jing Fang, so he asked Jing Fang to make a report for Huai Yang Wang to see the emperor, and wrote all of this to Huai Yang Wang.

古文：石显微司具知之，以房亲近，未敢言。
现代文：石显暗地裹伺察，这些事都被他知道了，衹是因为京房和皇上比较亲近，所以不敢说。
English: Shih Hsien silently watched, he knew all these things, but because Kyofo and the emperor were relatively close, he did not dare to say anything.

古文：及房出守郡，显告房与张博通谋，非谤政治，归恶天子，诖误诸侯王，语在《宪王传》。
现代文：等到京房出任郡守，石显诬告京房和张博合谋，诽谤朝政，说皇上的坏话，连累诸侯王，这些已在《宪王传》中说过了。
English: When Kyofusa assumed the post of county governor, Ishi Hsien falsely accused Kyofusa and Zhang Bo of conspiring, slandering the imperial government, speaking ill of the emperor, and even implicating the princes, all of which has already been mentioned in "The Biography of the Constitutional King."

古文：初，房见道幽、厉事，出为御史大夫郑弘言之。
现代文：当初，京房被召见，说幽王厉王之事，出来后曾把这些向御史大夫郑弘说过。
English: At first, Kyofusa was called in to say something about Yu Wang Li Wang, and when he came out, he said these things to the Imperial Historian Zheng Hong.

古文：房、博皆弃市，弘坐免为庶人。
现代文：京房、张博都在闸市被执行死刑，并被陈尸街头示众，郑弘也受连累而被罢官成为平民。
English: Jingfang and Zhang Bo were both executed in Zheshi, and their corpses were paraded in the streets. Zheng Hong was also implicated and removed from his post to become a commoner.

古文：房本姓李，推律自定为京氏，死时年四十一。
现代文：京房本来姓李，后来按照律自己推算改姓京，死的时候才四十一岁。
English: Kyofusa was originally surnamed Li, but later changed his surname to Kyo according to his own calculation. He was only forty-one years old when he died.

古文：翼奉字少君，东海下邳人也。
现代文：翼奉字少君，东海下邳人。
English: Ying Bongzha Shao Jun, a native of Shimonoseki in the East Sea.

古文：治《齐诗》，与萧望之、匡衡同师。
现代文：研究《齐诗》，和萧望之、匡衡师从同一个老师。
English: Studied "Qi Shi" and studied under the same teacher as Xiao Wangzhi and Kuang Heng.

古文：三人经术皆明，衡为后进，望之施之政事，而奉惇学不仕，好律历阴阳之占。
现代文：三个人对经术都很精通，匡衡是后辈，望之把经术应用到政事上，而翼奉勤奋学习不愿做官，喜欢历法阴阳占卜之术。
English: All three of them are proficient in the art of divination. Kuangheng is the younger generation and hopes to apply the art of divination to political affairs, while Yingfeng is a diligent student and does not want to be an official. He likes the art of divination of yin and yang by the calendar.

古文：元帝初即位，诸儒荐之，征待诏宦者署，数言事宴见，天子敬焉。
现代文：元帝即位不久，许多儒者就推荐他，他被征召在待诏宦者署中，多次上书言事并在皇上闲暇时被召见，天子很尊敬他。
English: Not long after the Yuan Emperor ascended the throne, many Confucians recommended him. He was called up to serve in the Office of the Emperor's Privy Council. He wrote to the Emperor many times and was summoned to see the Emperor in his spare time. The Emperor respected him very much.

古文：时，平昌侯王临以宣帝外属侍中，称诏欲从奉学其术。
现代文：这时，平昌侯王临凭着是宣帝的外戚为侍中，称诏要跟随翼奉学习经术。
English: At this time, the Pyeongchang prince Wang Lin, who was a relative of Emperor Xuan, was a chamberlain and said that he wanted to follow the winged monk to learn the scriptures.

古文：奉不肯与言，而上封事曰： 臣闻之于师，治道要务，在知下之邪正。
现代文：翼奉不肯和他说，就上了一封密封的奏章说： 我从老师那儿听说，治道最要紧的在于知道人的正邪。
English: When Wing Bong refused to talk to him, he wrote a sealed letter saying, "I heard from my teacher that the most important thing in governing is to know the rights and wrongs of people.

古文：人诚乡正，虽愚为用；若乃怀邪，知益为害。
现代文：如果那人确实追求品性端正，那么即使那人愚笨也是有用的；如果他怀着奸邪之心，那么他的知识越多，危害也就更大。
English: If he really pursues virtue, then even his stupidity is useful; if he harbors treachery, then the more knowledge he has, the greater the harm.

古文：知下之术，在于六情十二律而已。
现代文：知人的方法，有六情十二律。
English: There are six emotions and twelve ways to make acquaintances.

古文：北方之情，好也；好行贪狼，申子主之。
现代文：北方之情是喜爱；有了喜爱就会贪得无厌像狼一样，申子主持这一方。
English: The feeling of the north is affection; with affection, it will be insatiable like a wolf, Shenzi presides over this side.

古文：东方之情，怒也；怒行阴贼，亥卯主之。
现代文：东方之情是愤怒；有了怒气就会以阴气贼害它物，亥卯主持这一方。
English: The emotion of the East is anger; when angered, it will use negative energy to harm others, and hao presides over this side.

古文：贪狼必待阴贼而后动，阴贼必待贪狼而后用，二阴并行，是以王者忌子卯也。
现代文：贪婪的狼一定要等待阴贼而后才动，阴贼也一定要等待贪婪的狼而后才会作用，这两个阴并行，因此为王的忌讳子卯。
English: The greedy wolf must wait for the evil thief before moving, and the evil thief must also wait for the greedy wolf before acting. These two yin are parallel, so they are the king's taboo.

古文：《礼经》避之，《春秋》讳焉。
现代文：《礼经》避开它们，《春秋》也忌讳它们。
English: "The Book of Rites" avoids them, and "Spring and Autumn" also forbids them.

古文：南方之情，恶也；恶行廉贞，寅午主之。
现代文：南方之情是憎恨；有了憎恨就会精专严整，寅午主持遣一方。
English: Nanfang's feeling is hatred; if there is hatred, it will be meticulous and strict, and Yinbao will preside over the dispatch of one side.

古文：西方之情，喜也；喜行宽大，已酉主之。
现代文：西方之情是高兴；高兴了就会做事宽大，巳酉主持这一方。
English: The feeling of the West is joy; when they are happy, they will do things generously, and Xi Jinping presides over this side.

古文：二阳并行，是以王者吉午酉也。《诗》曰： 吉日庚午。 
现代文：这两个阳一齐运行，因此为王的以午酉为吉利。《诗经》中说： 庚午是吉曰。 
English: The two yang run together, so it is auspicious for the king to ride the horse at noon. "The Book of Songs" says: "It is auspicious to ride the horse at noon."

古文：上方之情，乐也；乐行奸邪，辰未主之。
现代文：上方之情是快乐；有了快乐就会有奸邪之事，辰未主持这一方。
English: Shangfang's feeling is happiness; with happiness, there will be treachery, and Chen Wei presides over this side.

古文：下方之情，哀也；哀行公正，戌丑主之。
现代文：下方之情是哀伤；哀伤就会公正，戌丑主持这一方。
English: The feeling below is sadness; sadness will be just, and ugliness will preside over this side.

古文：辰未属阴，戌丑属阳，万物各以其类应。
现代文：辰未属于阴，戌丑属于阳，万物都以自己所属的类与之相应。
English: The hour does not belong to the yin, the day does not belong to the yang, and everything corresponds to the class to which it belongs.

古文：今陛下明圣虚静以待物至，万事虽众，何闻而不谕，岂况乎执十二律而御六情！
现代文：如今陛下圣明谦虚安静以等待事物到来，世事虽多，可没有什么不能被了解的，何况是用十二律来驾驭六情呢！
English: Now, Your Majesty is holy, humble and quiet, waiting for things to come. Although there are many things in the world, there is nothing that cannot be understood, let alone using the Twelve Laws to control the six emotions!

古文：于以知下参实，亦甚优矣，万不失一，自然之道也。
现代文：陛下如果能知人并且参考实际来统治，这已经是很好的了，而如果能用自然之道来治理天下，就会万无一失了。
English: If His Majesty can know people and rule by reference to reality, this is already very good, and if he can rule the world by natural means, it will be foolproof.

古文：乃正月癸未日加申，有暴风从西南来。
现代文：在正月的癸未那天加上了申，有暴风雨来自西南面。
English: On the day before the first day of the month, a thunderstorm came from the southwest.

古文：未主奸邪，申主贪狼，风以大阴下抵建前，是人主左右邪臣之气也。
现代文：未主管奸邪，而申主管贪狼，风在大阴底下到了建的前面，这是皇上的身边有邪臣之气。
English: He did not lead the evil, but Shen led the greedy wolf, and the wind came to the front of the building under the big shadow. This is the atmosphere of evil around the emperor.

古文：平昌侯比三来见臣，皆以正辰加邪时。辰为客，时为主人。
现代文：平昌侯连着三次来看我，三次都在正辰那天加上邪时，辰是客，而时是主人。
English: The Prince of PyeongChang came to see me three times in a row. On all three occasions, he came on the day of the right hour and the wrong time. The hour was the guest, but the time was the master.

古文：以律知人情，王者之秘道也，愚臣诚不敢以语邪人。 
现代文：用律来理解人情，这是王者的秘术，我实在不敢将它告诉邪恶之人。 
English: It is the secret of kings to understand men by their laws, and I dare not tell it to the wicked.

古文：上以奉为中郎，召问奉： 来者以善日邪时，孰与邪日善时？ 
现代文：元帝拜翼奉为中郎，有一次召见翼奉并问他说： 来的人在善曰邪时好呢，还是邪曰善时好？ 
English: Emperor Yuan worshipped Yingfeng as his middle brother. Once, he summoned Yingfeng and asked him: "Is it better for those who come to be good to say evil, or evil to say good?

古文：奉对曰： 师法用辰不用日。
现代文：翼奉回答说； 按照老师的方法用辰不用日。
English: Wing Bong replied: According to the teacher's method, it takes an hour, not a day.

古文：辰为客，时为主人。
现代文：辰是客人，时是主人。
English: Time is the guest, time is the master.

古文：见于明主，侍者为主人。
现代文：被圣明的皇帝在内廷接见，侍奉皇帝左右的人就是主人。
English: The Holy Emperor was received at the Inner Court. Those who serve the Emperor are the masters.

古文：辰正时邪，见者正，侍者邪；辰邪时正，见者邪，侍者正。
现代文：辰正时邪，那么朝见的人是正直的，侍奉皇帝左右的人是邪的；如果辰邪时正，那么朝见的人是邪的，而侍奉皇帝左右的人是正直的。
English: If the hour is evil, then those who see the emperor are honest, and those who serve the emperor are evil; if the hour is evil, then those who see the emperor are evil, and those who serve the emperor are honest.

古文：忠正之见，侍者虽邪，辰时俱正；大邪之见，侍者虽正，辰时俱邪。
现代文：忠心正直的人去朝见，即使侍奉皇帝左右的人是邪的，仍然辰、时俱正；大邪的人去朝见，那么即使侍奉皇帝左右的人是正直的，辰、时仍然都是邪的。
English: If a loyal and honest person goes to the imperial court, even if the people around and serving the emperor are evil, the time and the hour will still be right; if a very evil person goes to the imperial court, even if the people around and serving the emperor are honest, the time and the hour will still be evil.

古文：即以自知侍者之邪，而时邪辰正，见者反邪；即以自知侍者之正，而时正辰邪，见者反正。
现代文：如果已经自己知道侍奉皇帝的人是邪的，那么时是邪的、辰是正的，被接见的人反受邪气所侵；如果已经知道侍奉皇帝左右的人是正直的，那么时是正的辰是邪的，被接见的人也会被正气所染。
English: If you already know that the person who serves the emperor is evil, then the time is evil and the hour is right, and the person being received will be affected by evil; if you already know that the person serving the emperor is honest, then the time is right and the hour is evil, and the person being received will also be affected by righteousness.

古文：辰为常事，时为一行。
现代文：辰是恒常的状态，而时是一时的状态。
English: 辰 is a constant state, while 时 is a transient state.

古文：辰疏而时精，其效同功，必参五观之，然后可知。
现代文：辰疏略而时精密，它们的功效是一样的，一定要错综交互着来看，然后才可以知道。
English: They are at the same time abstract and precise, and their effects are the same. We must look at them in an intricate and interactive way before we can know.

古文：故曰：察其所繇，省其进退，参之六合五行，则可以见人性，知人情。
现代文：所以说：观察它的来源，弄清楚它的经过，参考六合五行，就可以了解人性，知道人情。
English: Therefore, it is said that: observing its source, clarifying its process, and referring to the six-in-five line, you can understand human nature and know human feelings.

古文：难用外察，从中甚明，故诗之为学，情性而已。
现代文：由外面来观察是困难的，从内部就很清楚了。所以诗歌的学问，顺着情性而已。
English: It is difficult to observe from the outside, but it is very clear from the inside. Therefore, the study of poetry is only in accordance with emotion.

古文：五性不相害，六情更兴废。
现代文：五性互相不抵触，六情互相更替兴废。
English: The five sexes do not conflict with each other, and the six affections replace each other.

古文：观性以历，观情以律，明主所宜独用，难与二人共也。
现代文：以日历来观察五行，以十二律来观察六情，是圣明的君主应该独自使用的，很难与第二人一起使用。
English: Using the calendar to observe the five elements and the twelve precepts to observe the six emotions should be used by the sovereign alone. It is difficult to use it with a second person.

古文：故曰： 显诸仁，臧诸用。 露之则不神，独行则自然矣，唯奉能用之，学者莫能行。 
现代文：所以说： 表现出仁义，隐藏它的使用，显露出来就不灵验了，独自使用就自然了，衹有奉能够使用它，学我的人不能够实行。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "Showing benevolence, concealing the use of benevolence, and revealing it will not be effective. It is natural to use it alone. Only those who have served can use it, and those who learn from me cannot practice it."

古文：是岁，关东大水，郡国十一饥，疫尤甚。
现代文：这一年，关束发生大水灾，十分之一的郡国发生了饥荒，瘟疫尤其盛行。
English: In that year, there was a great flood in Guanzhou, and famine occurred in one-tenth of the county. Plague was particularly prevalent.

古文：上乃下诏江海陂湖园池属少府者以假贫民，勿租税；损大官膳，减乐府员，损苑马，诸官馆稀御幸者勿缮治；太仆、少府减食谷马，水衡省食肉兽。
现代文：元帝于是下韶那些属于少府的江海湖泊园林池子用来资助那些贫穷的老百姓，不征收税；减损太官负责供给的御膳，裁减乐府中的成员，减少苑中马匹的数量，皇帝很少临幸的各个宫殿馆合不再修缮；太仆少府减少喂马的谷物，水衡少吃肉类食物。
English: Therefore, Emperor Yuan decreed that the rivers, lakes, gardens, and ponds belonging to the shofus should be used to subsidize the poor people, and no tax should be levied; the imperial meals that the eunuchs were responsible for providing should be reduced, the members of the pleasure palace should be reduced, the number of horses in the garden should be reduced, and the palaces that the emperor rarely visited should not be repaired; the servants of the shofus should reduce the grain fed to the horses, and the water balance should eat less meat food.

古文：明年二月戊午，地震。
现代文：第二年二月戊午那天发生了地震。
English: On the afternoon of February 2nd, an earthquake occurred.

古文：其夏，刘地人相食。
现代文：夏天，齐地发生人吃人的惨剧。
English: In the summer, a man-eating tragedy occurred in Qi.

古文：七月己酉，地复震。
现代文：七月己酉那天，又发生地震。
English: On the last day of July, there was another earthquake.

古文：上曰： 盖闻贤圣在位，阴阳和，风雨时，日月光，星辰静，黎庶康宁，考终厥命。
现代文：元帝说： 听说圣贤之君在位，阴阳和谐，风调雨顺，日月光明，星辰安静，百姓安康宁静，老人能够寿终正寝。
English: Yuan Di said: It is said that when the Prince of Wisdom is on the throne, the yin and yang are harmonious, the wind and rain are harmonious, the sun and moon are bright, the stars are quiet, the people are healthy and tranquil, and the old people can sleep peacefully.

古文：今朕共承天地，托于公侯之上，明不能烛，德不能绥，灾异并臻，连年不息。
现代文：如今我供奉天地，位在公侯之上，而光明不能俯照，德行不能安绥百姓，灾异并至，连年不息。
English: Now I worship heaven and earth, I am above the princes, but the light cannot shine down, virtue cannot pacify the people, disasters come one after another, year after year.

古文：乃二月戊午，地大震于陇西郡，毁落太上皇庙殿壁木饰，坏败豸原道县城郭官寺及民室屋，厌杀人众，山崩地裂，水泉涌出。
现代文：今年二月戊午那天，在陇西郡发生大地震，使得太上庙殿壁上的木饰掉了下来，毁坏了螈道县城郭中的官府建筑和民屋，砸死了很多人，山崩地裂，水泉涌出。
English: On the afternoon of February this year, a major earthquake occurred in Shaanxi County, causing the wooden ornaments on the wall of the Great Mother Temple to fall down, destroying the government buildings and private houses in the castle of Shandong County, killing many people, landslides, and springs gushing out.

古文：一年地再动，天惟降灾，震惊朕躬。
现代文：一年之中发生两次地震。上天降下灾祸，我自己感到震惊。
English: Two earthquakes in the space of a year. I was shocked by this act of God.

古文：治有大亏，咎至于此。
现代文：治理国家有很大缺陷，以致招来这么多灾难。
English: The governance of the country is very flawed, which has led to so many disasters.

古文：夙夜兢兢，不通大变，深怀郁悼，未知其序。
现代文：我整夜战战兢兢，不知道要发生什么大的变故，深怀忧郁哀伤，不知道该如何是好。
English: I spent the whole night trembling, not knowing what big changes were going to happen, and I was deeply saddened and didn't know what to do.

古文：比年不登，元元因乏，不胜饥寒，以陷刑辟，朕甚闵焉，憯怛于心。
现代文：好几年没有好的收成，平民饥困贫乏，受不了饥饿寒冷，以至于触犯法律受到处罚，我很同情他们，心裹忧伤痛苦。
English: For several years there has been no good harvest, the civilians are hungry and poor, they can't stand the hunger and cold, so they break the law and are punished, I sympathize with them, my heart is full of sadness and pain.

古文：已诏吏虚仓廪，开府臧，振救贫民，群司其茂思天地之戒，有可蠲除减省以便万姓者，各条奏。
现代文：已经下诏让官吏打开仓库，救济贫穷的老百姓。各位官员们也要好好想想天地的告诫，有可以免除减少节省而方便老百姓的，可以上奏给我。
English: An edict has been issued for officials to open warehouses to help the poor people. All officials should also think about the admonitions of heaven and earth. If there is anything that can be exempted from the reduction of savings and is convenient for the people, it can be reported to me.

古文：悉意陈朕过失，靡有所讳。 
现代文：尽心指出我的过失，不要有所顾忌。 
English: Don't hesitate to point out my mistakes.

古文：因赦天下，举直言极谏之士。
现代文：于是大赦天下，选拔直言敢谏的人。
English: As a result, there was a general amnesty, and those who spoke out and dared to speak out were selected.

古文：奉奏封事曰：
现代文：翼奉上奏了一封密封的奏章说：
English: Ying Feng played a sealed musical score and said:

古文：臣闻之于师曰，天地设位，悬日月，布星辰，分阴阳，定四时，列五行，以视圣人，名之曰道。
现代文：臣听老师说，天地定位，上悬曰月，布列星辰，划分阴阳，确定四时，排列五行，这些是给圣人看的，如果给一个名称就叫做道。
English: After listening to the teacher, the minister said that the positioning of heaven and earth, the hanging of the sun and moon, the setting of the stars, the division of yin and yang, the determination of four o'clock, and the arrangement of five lines are for the saints. If you give a name, it is called a road.

古文：圣人见道，然后知王治之象，故画州土，建君臣，立律历，陈成败，以视贤者，名之曰经。
现代文：圣人看到了道，然后知道王道的特征，所以划定疆界，建立君臣制度，制定历法，总结成败的经验，以给贤能的人看，给它一个名称叫经。
English: The sage saw the way, and then knew the characteristics of the king's way, so he delineated the boundaries, established the monarch-subject system, formulated the calendar, summed up the experience of success and failure, and gave it a name called the scripture.

古文：贤者见经，然后知人道之务，则《诗》、《书》、《易》、《春秋》、《礼》、《乐》是也。
现代文：贤能的人看到经，然后知道人道的要务，就是《诗》、《书》、《易》、《春秋》、《礼》、《乐》。
English: Wise people see the scripture and then know the important tasks of humanity, that is, "Poetry," "Book," "Ease," "Spring and Autumn," "Rite" and "Music."

古文：《易》有阴阳，《诗》有五际，《春秋》有灾异，皆列终始，推得失，考天心，以言王道之安危。
现代文：《周易》讲究阴阳，《诗经》讲究五际，《春秋》讲究灾异，皆列出结束开始，推求得失，考察天意，用来说明王道的安危。
English: "Zhou Yi" focuses on yin and yang, "Shijing" focuses on the five ages, and "Spring and Autumn" focuses on disasters. They all list the end and the beginning, deduce the gains and losses, examine the providence, and are used to illustrate the safety and danger of the royal road.

古文：至秦乃不说，伤之以法，是以大道不通，至于灭亡。
现代文：到秦代时，就不喜欢《诗》、《书》等经，用法令来禁毁它们，因此大道不能通畅，终于灭亡。
English: By the time of the Qin Dynasty, they did not like "Poetry," "Book" and other scriptures, and used laws and regulations to ban them, so the avenue could not be smooth, and finally died out.

古文：今陛下明圣，深怀要道，烛临万方，布德流惠，靡有阙遗。
现代文：如今陛下圣明，深怀治国要术，照临天下广布德惠，没有遗漏的。
English: Today, His Majesty is a saint, deeply cherishing the essential skills of governing the country, following the world's wide bounty and benevolence, and not missing anything.

古文：罢省不急之用，振救困贫，赋医药，赐棺钱，恩泽甚厚。
现代文：废止省掉不急需的费用，赈济救助困乏贫穷的人，给他们安排医生和良药，赐予买棺材的费用，恩德泽惠已经很大了。
English: Abolishing and eliminating unnecessary expenses, providing relief to the poor and needy, arranging doctors and good medicines for them, and giving them the money to buy coffins, the benefits have been great.

古文：又举直言，求过失，盛德纯备，天下幸甚。
现代文：又推举直言，求人指出自己的过失，德行纯贞完备，天下很幸运啊。
English: He also recommended speaking frankly, asking people to point out their own faults, complete virtue and chastity, and the world is very lucky.

古文：臣奉窃学《齐诗》，闻五际之要《十月之交》篇，知日蚀、地震之效昭然可明，犹巢居知风，穴处知雨，亦不足多，适所习耳。
现代文：臣奉自己学习《齐诗》，知道五际的要点在于《十月之交》这篇，日食地震的效验就知道得十分清楚了，就好像住在树上对风敏感，住在洞穴中对雨敏感一样，这也并不值得赞美，衹是习惯罢了。
English: If you study "Qi Shi" on your own and know that the main point of the five years is "The Turn of October," you will know the effect of the solar eclipse earthquake very clearly. It is just like living in a tree is sensitive to wind, and living in a cave is sensitive to rain. This is not worthy of praise, it is just a habit.

古文：臣闻人气内逆，则感动天地；天变见于星气日蚀，地变见于奇物震动。
现代文：我听说人的气在体内逆行，天地就会有感应运动；天的变化表现在星气和日食上，地的变化表现在奇物和地震上。
English: I have heard that when the human qi is retrograde in the body, the heaven and the earth will have induction movement; the change of the heaven is manifested in the star qi and the solar eclipse, and the change of the earth is manifested in the strange object and the earthquake.

古文：所以然者，阳用其精，阴用其形，犹人之有五脏六体，五脏象天，六体象地。
现代文：之所以这样，因为阳用它的精，阴用它的形，就好像人有五脏六腑，五脏象天，六腑象地。
English: The reason for this is that the yang uses its essence and the yin uses its form, just as a person has five viscera and six glands. The five viscera are like the sky and the six glands are like the earth.

古文：故脏病则气色发于面，体病则欠申动于貌。
现代文：所以五脏有病气色就会表现在脸上，六腑有病就会表现在打哈欠和伸懒腰等动作上。
English: Therefore, if the five viscera are diseased, it will show on the face, and if the six glands are diseased, it will show on yawning and stretching the waist.

古文：今年太阴建于甲戌，律以庚寅初用事，历以甲午从春。
现代文：今年太阴建在甲戌，按律应该在庚寅初行事，按历甲午就立春了。
English: This year, the lunar new year falls on the first day of the second lunar month, and according to the lunar calendar, the first day of spring falls on the first day of the second lunar month.

古文：历中甲庚，历得参阳，性中仁义，情得公正贞廉，百年之精岁也。
现代文：历中的甲庚，按律是三阳，品性仁义，感情能够公正贞廉，是一百年中最好的年头。
English: According to the calendar, the year of Jia Geng, according to the law, is the year of the three suns, the character is benevolent and righteous, and the feelings can be just and chaste. It is the best year in a hundred years.

古文：正以精岁，本首王位，日临中时接律而地大震，其后连月久阴，虽有大令，犹不能复，阴气盛矣。
现代文：正因为是好年份，本来是首王之位，但太阳在接近正中间时碰到律而发生大地震，以后连着好几个月一直阴天，虽然有皇上的许多补救措施，但仍然不能恢复，阴气太盛了。
English: Precisely because it was a good year, it was originally the first king's throne, but the sun hit the law when it was close to the middle and a major earthquake occurred. After that, it was cloudy for many months. Although there were many remedial measures from the emperor, it still could not be restored, the gloom was too strong.

古文：古者朝廷必有同姓以明亲亲，必有异姓以明贤贤，此圣王之所以大通天下也。
现代文：古时候朝廷中一定有与皇帝同姓的大臣表示亲近之意，也一定有与皇帝不同姓的大臣表示尊重贤能的人，这是圣明的皇帝之所以能天下大治的原因所在。
English: In ancient times, there must have been a minister in the imperial court with the same surname as the emperor to show closeness, and there must also have been a minister with a different surname from the emperor to show respect for the virtuous. This is the reason why the holy emperor was able to rule the world.

古文：同姓亲而易进，异姓疏而难通，故同姓一，异姓五，乃为平均。
现代文：同姓之人因为与皇帝亲近而容易仕进，异姓之人与皇帝疏远而难以仕进，所以同姓一人，异姓有五人，这就平均了。
English: People with the same family name were easily promoted because they were close to the emperor, while people with different family names were difficult to promote because they were distant from the emperor. Therefore, there was one person with the same family name and five people with different family names, which was an average.

古文：今左右亡同姓，独以舅后之家为亲，异姓之臣又疏。
现代文：如今皇上身边没有同姓之人，衹是把太后和皇后的家族当成亲信，异姓的大臣又被疏远。
English: Nowadays, there is no one with the same surname around the emperor. He treats the empress dowager and the family of the empress dowager as close friends, and ministers with different surnames are alienated.

古文：二后之党满朝，非特处位，势尤奢僣过度，吕、霍、上官足以卜之，甚非爱人之道，又非后嗣之长策也。
现代文：太后和皇后二家的党羽充斥朝廷，不仅身处高位，威势更是奢侈无度，吕、霍、上官的遭遇足以预测他们的下场，这远不是爱护他们的方式，也不是留给后人的长久之策。
English: The empress dowager and the two families of empresses filled the imperial court with their followers. Not only were they in high positions, but their power was also extravagant. The fate of Lü, Huo, and Shangguan was enough to predict their fate. This was far from being a way to cherish them, nor was it a long-term strategy for posterity.

古文：阴气之盛，不亦宜乎！
现代文：阴气这么盛行，不也是应该的吗？
English: If gloom is so prevalent, isn't that to be expected?

古文：臣又闻未央、建章、甘泉宫才人各以百数，皆不得天性。
现代文：我又听说未央、建章、甘泉宫的才人各有几百个，都不能与皇上有男女之事。
English: I've also heard that there are hundreds of talented people at the Imperial Palace, Kenzhang Palace, and Ganquan Palace, and none of them are related to the emperor.

古文：若杜陵园，其已御见者，臣子不敢有言，虽然，太皇太后之事也。
现代文：像杜陵园，已经被御见的，臣子不敢说什么，即使如此，也是太皇太后的事。
English: Like Tulingyuan, which has already been seen, the courtiers dare not say anything. Even so, it is a matter for the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：及诸侯王园，与其后宫，宜为设员，出其过制者，此损阴气应天救邪之道也。
现代文：至于诸侯王的园林和他们的后宫，最好设定限额，遣出那些超过制度的人，这是消损阴气回应上天治邪的方法。
English: As for the gardens of princes and kings and their harems, it is best to set a limit and send out those who exceed the system. This is a way to eliminate negative energy and respond to God's remedy.

古文：今异至不应，灾将随之。
现代文：如今怪异的事发生而不改正，灾难就会随之而来。
English: Now, when strange things happen and are not corrected, disaster will follow.

古文：其法大水，极阴生阳，反为大旱，甚则有火灾，春秋宋伯姬是矣。
现代文：按占验之法逢 大水 时，阴到了极点就会生阳，反会有大旱，甚至有火灾，春秋时宋国的伯姬就是这样。
English: According to the method of divination, when there is a lot of water, when the yin reaches the extreme, the yang will be born, but there will be a drought, and even a fire. This is the case of the Song Dynasty's Bo Ji in spring and autumn.

古文：唯陛下财察。
现代文：愿陛下裁夺。
English: May His Majesty decide.

古文：明年夏四月乙未，孝武园白鹤馆灾。奉自以为中，上疏曰： 臣前上五际地震之效，曰极阴生阳，恐有火灾。
现代文：第二年夏天四月乙未这天，孝武园白鹤馆发生火灾，翼奉自认为被他说中了，就上疏说： 我以前上奏《诗经》、《十月之交》五际关于地震之说，阴到了极点就生出阳，恐怕有火灾。
English: On this day in April of the second summer, a fire broke out in the White Crane Hall of the Xiaowu Garden. Tsubomoto thought he had been tricked by him, so he said: I used to play "Shijing" and "October Friendship" about the earthquake, and when the sun came out at the end of the day, I was afraid there would be a fire.

古文：不合明听，未见省答，臣窃内不自信。
现代文：这与完美的德性不相合，也不见回答，我也不敢自以为是。
English: It's not in keeping with a perfect character, and I don't have an answer, and I don't presume to.

古文：今白鹤馆以四月乙未，时加于卯，月宿亢灾，与前地震同法。
现代文：如今白鹤馆在四月乙未这天，时加在卯，月位在亢而发生火灾，和以前的地震是同一个规则。
English: Nowadays, the fire that occurred at the White Crane Pavilion on the day of April 18th, when the hour was in the evening and the moon was in the morning, is the same rule as the previous earthquake.

古文：臣奉乃深知道之可信也。
现代文：我才深知道应该被相信。
English: I just knew I had to be believed.

古文：不胜拳拳，愿复赐间，卒其终始。 
现代文：实在忍不住恳切忠谨之心，愿陛下能赐予我一段时间以研究透它的来龙去脉。 
English: I can't help but feel a sincere sense of loyalty, and I hope His Majesty will grant me some time to study the ins and outs of it.

古文：上复延问以得失。
现代文：元帝又向翼奉请教得失之事。
English: Emperor Yuan also asked Xiang Ying for advice on the matter.

古文：奉以为祭天地于云阳汾阴，及诸寝庙不以亲疏迭毁，皆烦费，违古制。
现代文：翼奉认为在云阳汾阴祭祀天地，以及各个寝庙不因为亲疏而毁掉一部分，都要花费很多，这是违背古代制度的。
English: Wing Bong believed that it would cost a lot to worship heaven and earth in Yunyang and Yin, as well as to not destroy a part of each sleeping temple because of estrangement, which is contrary to the ancient system.

古文：又宫室苑囿，奢泰难供，以故民困国虚，亡累年之畜。
现代文：而且宫室苑囿，奢侈豪华难以供给，搞得百姓穷困国库空虚，失去了这么多年的积蓄。
English: Moreover, it is difficult to provide luxury and luxury, making the people poor and the treasury empty, and losing so many years of savings.

古文：所繇来久，不改其本，难以末正，乃上疏曰：
现代文：这些由来已久，如果不改变根本，很难使末正常，于是就上疏说：
English: These things have been around for a long time, and if you don't change the fundamentals, it's hard to make the end normal, so Shang Zuo said:

古文：臣闻昔者盘庚改邑以兴殷道，圣人美之。
现代文：我听说从前盘庚迁都以复兴殷朝，圣人赞美他。
English: I've heard that in the past, the Pan-Gengyuan migration was all about reviving the Yin Dynasty, and saints praised him.

古文：窃闻汉德隆盛，在于孝文皇帝躬行节俭，外省徭役。
现代文：我又听说汉的德业兴隆旺盛，在于孝文皇帝带头节俭，减免徭役。
English: I also heard that the prosperity of Han's virtue industry was due to the fact that Emperor Xiaowen took the lead in frugality and reduced the number of officials.

古文：其时未有甘泉、建章及上林中诸离宫馆也。
现代文：那时没有甘泉、建章以及上林中各个可供皇上随时游处的离宫别馆。
English: At that time, there were no hot springs, no medals, and no pavilions in the upper forest that the emperor could visit at any time.

古文：未央宫又无高门、武台、麒麟、凤皇、白虎、玉堂、金华之殿，独有前殿、曲台、渐台、宣室、温室、承明耳。
现代文：未央宫也没有高门、武台、麒麟、凤皇、白虎、玉堂、金华这些宫殿，衹有前殿、曲台、渐台、宣室、温室、承明罢了。
English: Wiyang Palace does not have the high gate, the martial arts hall, the goblin, the phoenix emperor, the white tiger, the golden hall, and Jinhua. It only has the vestibule, the music stand, the stage, the reading room, the greenhouse, and the reception room.

古文：孝文欲作一台，度用百金，重民之财，废而不为，其积土基，至今犹存，又下遗诏，不起山坟。
现代文：孝文想要造一个台，估计要用一百斤黄金，于是乎以民为重，就不再兴建，那个用土砌成的地基，至今还在。他又留下遣诏，不建高大坟墓。
English: Xiaowen wanted to build a platform, and it was estimated that it would take a hundred pounds of gold, so he did not build it anymore, because he was concerned about the people. The foundation, which was made of earth, is still there. He also left an edict not to build a tall tomb.

古文：故其时天下大和，百姓洽足，德流后嗣。
现代文：所以那时天下安定，百姓和睦富足，德业流传给后世子孙。
English: Therefore, at that time, the world was stable, the people were harmonious and prosperous, and the virtues were passed down to future generations.

古文：如令处于当今，因此制度，必不能成功名。
现代文：如果让他处在当今，因袭这种制度，一定不能成就功名。
English: If you put him in today's world, with this kind of system, he will not be able to achieve great things.

古文：天道有常，王道亡常，亡常者所以应有常也。
现代文：天道常在，王道无常，无常的王道是用来回应常在的天道的。
English: The heavenly way always exists, the royal way is impermanent, and the impermanent royal way is used to respond to the heavenly way that always exists.

古文：必有非常之主，然后能立非常之功。
现代文：一定要有不同寻常的君主，然后才建立不同寻常的功业。
English: You have to have an unusual monarch before you can build an unusual business.

古文：臣愿陛下徙都于成周，左据成皋，右阻黾池，前乡崧高，后介大河，建荥阳，扶河东，南北千里以为关，而入敖仓；地方百里者八九，足以自娱；东厌诸侯之权，西远羌胡之难，陛下共已亡为，按成周之居，兼盘庚之德，万岁之后，长为高宗。
现代文：我希望陛下迁都到成周，左面依有成皋，右面可以阻池作为阻隔，前面面向嵩山，后有黄河，营建荣阳，佐助河东，从南到北的千里之地都可以作为关隘，而进入敖仓；方圆百里的地方有八九个，足够用来自娱；向东可以压制诸侯的权力，向西可以远离羌胡的发难，陛下自己庄重无为，定居在成周，兼有盘庚的德业，万年之后，能够长久地成为高宗。
English: I hope that His Majesty will move the capital to Chengzhou. On the left is Chengzhu, on the right can be the dam as a barrier, facing the Songshan Mountain in front, the Yellow River behind, building Rongyang, Sasuke east of the river, thousands of miles from south to north can be used as a pass, and enter Kamakura; there are eight or nine places within a hundred miles, enough to use for self-entertainment; to the east can suppress the power of the princes, to the west can be far away from the calamity of the moustache, His Majesty himself is solemnly inactive, settled in Chengzhou, and has the virtuous

古文：汉家郊兆寝庙祭祀之礼多不应古，臣奉诚难亶居而改作，故愿陛下迁都正本。
现代文：汉家郊祀祭坛的界域以及寝庙祭祀的礼节很多与古制不合，我认为如果衹是凭照旧居于长安而进行改革是很困难的，所以希望陛下迁都以正根本。
English: The boundaries of the Han suburb's sacrificial altar and the etiquette of the sleeping temple's sacrificial rites are often inconsistent with the old system. I think it would be very difficult to carry out reforms if the emperor were to live in Chang'an according to the old system. Therefore, I hope that His Majesty's relocation of the capital will be fundamental.

古文：众制皆定，亡复缮治宫馆不急之费，岁可余一年之畜。
现代文：各种制度都制定了，不再有修治宫馆这些不急需的费用，到年底可以多一年的积蓄。
English: All kinds of systems have been developed, and there are no longer any unnecessary expenses such as repairing the palace. By the end of the year, savings can be made for one more year.

古文：臣闻三代之祖积德以王，然皆不过数百年而绝。
现代文：我听说三代的先祖积累德性而称王天下，但是都不过几百年就结束了。
English: I have heard that three generations of ancestors accumulated virtues and became kings, but it was all over in just a few hundred years.

古文：周至成王，有上贤之材，因文、武之业，以周、召为辅，有司各敬其事，在位莫非其人。
现代文：周到了成王，有最优秀的贤能的人才，依仗文王武王的功业，以周公、召公为辅佐之人，官吏们各自做好他们的本职工作，在职位上的也都是合适的人选。
English: When Zhou came to Chengwang, there were the best and most talented people, relying on the merits of King Wen and King Wu, with Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong as assistants. The officials each did their own job, and they were all suitable candidates for the position.

古文：天下甫二世耳，然周公犹作诗、书深戒成王，以恐失天下。
现代文：天下刚传了两代，然而周公仍然写诗书深深地告诫成王，担心失去天下。
English: Two generations have just passed under the heavens, but Zhou Gong still wrote a book of poems to deeply admonish Cheng Wang, fearing the loss of the world.

古文：《书》则曰： 王毋若殷王纣。 
现代文：《周书》上说： 大王不要像殷王纣那样。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: "Great King, don't be like King Yin.

古文：其《诗》则曰： 殷之未丧师，克配上帝；宜监于殿，骏命不易。 
现代文：《诗》上说： 殷还没有失去天下时，能够配天而行；应该以殷为戒，知道帝王之业来之不易。 
English: "Poem" said: "Yin has not yet lost the world, but can be worthy of the world; we should beware of Yin, knowing that the emperor's career is not easy.

古文：今汉初取天下，起于丰沛，以兵征伐，德化未洽，后世奢侈，国家之费当数代之用，非直费财，又乃费士。
现代文：如今汉当初夺取天下时，从丰沛起事，用武力征伐，德业教化没有融洽，后世子孙奢侈挥霍，国家的花费相当于几代的费用，不衹是耗费财力，也耗费人才。
English: Today, when the Han Dynasty initially conquered the world, it started from abundance and used force to conquer, the moral education was not harmonious, the future generations extravagantly squandered, and the cost of the country was equivalent to the cost of several generations. It is not only a waste of financial resources, but also a waste of talent.

古文：孝武之世，暴骨四夷，不可胜数。
现代文：孝武帝时，在四夷暴露尸骨的人，数都数不过来。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, the number of people who had their bones exposed in Shiyi could not be counted.

古文：有天下虽未久，至于陛下八世九主矣，虽有成王之明，然亡周、召之佐。
现代文：拥有天下虽然还不长久，到陛下也共有八代九个皇帝了，虽然有成王那样的圣明，但是没有周公、召公那样的人的辅佐。
English: Although we have not ruled the world for a long time, there have been nine emperors in eight generations up to His Majesty. Although we have saints like Cheng Wang, we do not have the support of people like Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong.

古文：今东方连年饥馑，加之以疾疫，百姓菜色，或至相食。
现代文：如今东方连年闸饥荒，又加上疾病瘟疫，百姓饥馑，甚至人吃人。
English: Today, the East has been suffering from famine for years on end, coupled with disease and plague, the people are starving, and people are even eating each other.

古文：地比震动，天气混浊，日光侵夺。
现代文：大地接连震动，天气浑浊，曰光不明。
English: The ground shook continuously, the weather was cloudy, and the time was unknown.

古文：繇此言之，执国政者岂可以不怀怵惕而戒万分之一乎！
现代文：由此说来，国家中执政的人怎么可以不怀着惊惧而警戒那万分之一呢？
English: How, then, can the governors of a country guard against that one in ten thousand without fear?

古文：故臣愿陛下因天变而徙都，所谓与天下更始者也。
现代文：所以我希望陛下因为天变而迁都，所谓和天下重新开始。
English: Therefore, I hope that His Majesty will move the capital due to a change in the weather, and start anew with the rest of the world.

古文：天道终而复始，穷则反本，故能延长而亡穷也。
现代文：天道到了终点又重新开始，到了尽头就返回根本，所以能够延长而没有穷尽。
English: When the heavenly way reaches the end, it begins again, and when it reaches the end, it returns to the root, so it can be extended without being exhausted.

古文：今汉道未终，陛下本而始之，于以永世延祚，不亦优乎！
现代文：如今汉的气运还没有终结，陛下能够务本而让它重新开始，从而世代相传，不也是很好的吗？
English: Now that Han's good fortune has not yet ended, wouldn't it be great if His Majesty could make it start again from scratch, so that it could be passed down from generation to generation?

古文：如因丙子之孟夏，顺太阴以东行，到后七年之明岁，必有五年之余蓄，然后大行考室之礼，虽周之隆盛，亡以加此。
现代文：如果能乘着丙子的盂夏，顺着太阴而向东行，到以后七年的第二年，一定有五年的积蓄，然后隆重地举行考室之礼，即使周这样兴隆昌盛，也不会超过这。
English: If you can take advantage of the summer of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the

古文：唯陛下留神，详察万世之策。
现代文：愿陛下留意，仔细地考虑万世长久之策。
English: May His Majesty pay attention and carefully consider the long-term strategy.

古文：书奏，天子异其意，答曰： 问奉：今园庙有七，云东徙，状何如？ 
现代文：书奏上之后，天子觉得翼奉的意见与众不同，就批答道： 问奉：如今皇帝墓地所在的宗庙有七个，说要向东迁徙，怎么办？ 
English: After the calligraphy, Tian Zi felt that Ying Bong's opinion was different from others, so he replied, "Question: Today, there are seven ancestral temples where the emperor's graveyard is located. If you say you want to move east, what should you do?

古文：奉对曰 昔成王徙洛，般庚迁殷，其所避就，皆陛下所明知也。
现代文：翼奉回答说： 以前成王迁到洛，盘庚迁于殷，其事情的原委，都是陛下清楚知道的。
English: Wing Bong replied, "In the past, Cheng Wang moved to Luo and Pan Geng moved to Yin, and His Majesty was well aware of the reasons for this.

古文：非有圣明，不能一变天下之道。
现代文：不是有圣明之德，不能改变天下。
English: You can't change the world if you don't have the virtue of holiness.

古文：臣奉愚戆狂惑，唯陛下裁赦。 
现代文：我刚直愚昧狂妄昏惑，凭陛下裁断赦免。 
English: I am just stupid, arrogant and deluded, and I am pardoned by His Majesty's decision.

古文：其后，贡禹亦言当定迭毁礼，上遂从之。
现代文：其后，贡禹也说应定下宗庙制度，元帝于是听从了他的意见。
English: After that, Gong Yu also said that the ancestral temple system should be established, and the Yuan Emperor then listened to his opinion.

古文：及匡衡为丞相，奏徙南北郊，其议皆自奉发之。
现代文：到匡衡做丞相，上奏迁到南北郊，他们的议论都是从翼奉开始发起的。
English: When Kuangheng became chancellor and the imperial envoy moved to the northern and southern suburbs, their discussions were initiated from the beginning.

古文：奉以中郎为博士、谏大夫，年老以寿终。
现代文：翼奉从中郎做到博士、谏大夫，年老而终。
English: Tsubasa worked his way up from a junior doctor to a doctor, and then to a senior doctor, before dying of old age.

古文：子及孙，皆以学在儒官。
现代文：他的儿子和孙子，都凭学问而当上了学官。
English: Both his son and grandson became academicians by virtue of their education.

古文：李寻字子长，平陵人也。
现代文：李寻字子长，平陵人。
English: Li Huan is the eldest son, and comes from Pingling.

古文：治《尚书》，与张孺、郑宽中同师。
现代文：研究《尚书》，和张孺、郑宽中同一个老师。
English: Studied "Shang Shu" under the same teacher as Zhang Xi and Zheng Guang.

古文：宽中等守师法教授，寻独好《洪范》灾异，又学天文月令阴阳。
现代文：宽中等人遵守师法教授门徒，惟独李寻喜欢《洪范》灾异之说，又学习天文月令和阴阳。
English: The middle-class people in Guangxi followed the teachings of the teachers and professors, but Li Xun liked "Hong Fan" and studied the astronomical lunar calendar and yin and yang.

古文：事丞相翟方进，方进亦善为星历，除寻为吏，数为翟侯言事。
现代文：事奉丞相翟方进，方进也擅长研究星历，任命李寻担任吏，李寻几次对翟侯谈论政事。
English: He appointed Li Huan as an official, and several times Li Huan talked about political affairs with Xiong Hou.

古文：帝舅曲阳侯王根为大司马票骑将军，厚遇寻。
现代文：皇上的舅舅曲阳侯王根做丁大司马骠骑将军，对李寻很好。
English: The emperor's uncle, Quyang marquis Wang Gen, who was the general of Ding Daishi horse riding, was very good to Li Xun.

古文：是时多灾异，根辅政，数虚己问寻。
现代文：这时灾异很多，王根辅助朝政，几次虚心向李寻请教。
English: At this time, there were many disasters. Wang Gen assisted the imperial government and humbly asked Li Xun for advice several times.

古文：寻见汉家有中衰厄会之象，其意以为且有洪水为灾，乃说根曰：
现代文：李寻看到漠家有中衰困厄交会之象，认为将会有洪水为灾，就劝说王根道：
English: Li Xun saw that the Mo family was in a state of decline, and thought that there would be a flood, so he persuaded Wang Gendao:

古文：《书》云 天聪明 ，盖言紫宫极枢，通位帝纪，太微四门，广开大道，五经六纬，尊术显士，翼张舒布，烛临四海，少微处士，为比为辅，故次帝廷，女宫在后。
现代文：《书》上说 天聪明 ，是说紫宫中的北极星在迥转，它与天帝是通为一体的，太微有四门，广开大路，五经和六纬，尊重经术，使士显贵，翼张漫布，普照四海，少微主管未仕或不仕的士人，是太微的辅佐。所以皇帝宫廷的次序，女子之宫在后。
English: "The Book" says that Heaven is wise, which means that the North Star in the Purple Palace is turning, and it is one with the Heavenly Emperor. There are four gates, wide open roads, five scriptures and six latitudes, respect for the scriptures, emissaries, wings spread, illuminating the four seas, and a small number of competent unqualified or unqualified scholars are too small assistants. Therefore, the order of the emperor's court, the women's palace is behind.

古文：圣人承天，贤贤易色，取法于此。
现代文：圣人秉承天意，尊贤轻色，就是取法于此。
English: The sage adhering to the will of heaven, honorable and light-hearted, is to take the method from here.

古文：天官上相上将，皆颛面正朝，忧责甚重，要在得人。
现代文：天宫中的上相上将都是专管一面而正确处理天朝之事，忧虑和责任都很重大，关键在于能得到合适的人才。
English: The top generals in the Heavenly Palace are all in charge of one side and correctly handle the affairs of the Heavenly Palace. The worries and responsibilities are very significant. The key is to get the right talent.

古文：得人之效，成败之机，不可不勉也。
现代文：得人的功效如何是成败的关键，不可以不勉励呀。
English: How to get people's efficacy is the key to success or failure, we must encourage them.

古文：昔秦穆公说諓々之言，任仡仡之勇，身受大辱，社稷几亡。
现代文：从前秦穆公爱听巧言善辩，任用勇壮之士，而自己受到很大的耻辱，国家也几乎灭亡。
English: Former Qin Mu Gong loved to listen to eloquence and debate, appointing brave men, while he himself suffered great shame, and the country almost perished.

古文：悔过自责，思惟黄发，任用百里奚，卒伯西域，德列王道。
现代文：悔过自责，想想衹有老人，于是任用百里奚，终于在西边称伯，德业也被列在王道。
English: Repented of self-condemnation, thinking that there was no old man, he appointed Bai Lijuan, and finally became famous in the west, and virtue was also listed in the royal road.

古文：二者祸福如此，可不慎哉！
现代文：二者祸福相差造么大，可以不谨慎吗？
English: How great is the difference between the two, can we not be prudent?

古文：夫士者，国家之大宝，功名之本也。
现代文：人才是国家的宝贝，是成就功名的根本。
English: Talent is the treasure of the country and the foundation of achievement and fame.

古文：将军一门九候，二十朱轮，汉兴以来，臣子贵盛，未尝至此。
现代文：将军您一门当中有九人封侯，二十人成为高官，汉朝以来，臣子尊贵兴盛，还没有到这样的。
English: General, nine members of your family have been ennobled and twenty have become high-ranking officials. Since the Han Dynasty, there has never been such a flourishing of courtiers.

古文：夫物盛必衰，自然之理，唯有贤友强辅，庶几可以保身命，全子孙，安国家。
现代文：事物盛极必衰，这是自然的道理，衹有有了贤者相助强者相辅，才可以保全陆命、保全子孙，使国家安宁。
English: Things rise and fall, this is a natural principle. Only when the wise help the strong and the strong help each other can we preserve life on earth, protect our children and grandchildren, and make the country peaceful.

古文：《书》曰： 历象日月星辰 ，此言仰视天文，俯察地理，观日月消息，侯星辰行伍，揆山川变动，参人民谣俗，以制法度，考祸福。
现代文：《尚书》说 历象曰月星辰 ，这是说可以仰观天象，俯察地理，观察曰月的运行，望星辰的排列，度量山的变动，考察民谣民俗，用来制定法度，考求祸福。
English: "Shangshu" says that the calendar is the moon and the stars, which means that you can look up at the celestial bodies, look down at the geography, observe the movement of the moon, look at the arrangement of the stars, measure the changes of the mountains, and examine the folk songs and folk customs, which are used to formulate laws and seek blessings and misfortunes.

古文：举措悖逆，咎败将至，征兆为之先见。明君恐惧修正，侧身博问，转祸为福；不可救者，即蓄备以待之，故社稷亡忧。
现代文：实行政策如果违背这些，灾祸就会降临，相应的征兆会预先出现，圣明的君主发现征兆就恐惧而改正过失，侧身倾听，广泛求问，转祸为福；不可以拯救的，就积蓄储备以等待，所以社稷就没有忧虑了。
English: If the implementation of the policy is contrary to these, the disaster will come, the corresponding signs will appear in advance, and the enlightened monarchs will find the signs and correct the mistakes with fear, listen to the side, ask questions widely, and turn the disaster into a blessing; if it cannot be saved, it will accumulate reserves to wait, so the society will have no worries.

古文：窃见往者赤黄四塞，地气大发，动土竭民，天下扰乱之征也。
现代文：我看到以前到处都是赤气黄气，地气很厉害地发作，震动土地耗尽民力，这是天下大乱的征兆。
English: I saw that in the past, red gas and yellow gas were everywhere, and the earth's atmosphere was very violent, shaking the land and exhausting the people's strength. This was a sign of great turmoil in the world.

古文：彗星争明，庶雄为桀，大寇之引也。
现代文：彗星与曰月争明，平民成为英雄豪杰，这是大乱的开始。
English: The comet clashes with the sun and moon, and the commoners become heroes. This is the beginning of chaos.

古文：此二者已颇效矣。
现代文：这两点已经很有效验了。
English: These two points have been tested very effectively.

古文：城中讹言大水，奔走上城，朝廷惊骇，女孽入宫，此独未效。
现代文：城中又讹传要发大水，人们都跑到城墙上，朝廷惊骇，女孽进入宫中，这还没有应验。
English: And there was a rumour of great waters in the city, and the people ran upon the wall, and the court was troubled, and the prostitutes came into the palace: but it was not so.

古文：间者重以水泉涌溢，旁宫阙仍出。
现代文：这期间地下水大量涌出，附近的宫殿也频频出水。
English: During this period, a large amount of groundwater gushed out, and the nearby palace was also frequently flooded.

古文：月、太白入东井，犯积水，缺天渊。
现代文：月亮、太白进入东井，冒犯了积水，擦过天渊。
English: The moon, too white, enters the east well, offends the stagnant water, and crosses the abyss.

古文：日数湛于极阳之色。羽气乘宫，起风积云。
现代文：太阳屡次沉没在极阳之色当中，羽气乘到了宫的上面，大风起来云层积厚。
English: The sun repeatedly sank into the color of the polar sun, the wind reached the top of the palace, and the clouds gathered thickly.

古文：又错以山崩地动，河不用其道。
现代文：又夹杂有山崩地震，黄河也改道了。
English: There were also landslides and earthquakes, and the Yellow River changed its course.

古文：盛冬雷电，潜龙为孽。
现代文：隆冬时打雷闪电，潜伏着的龙作怪。
English: Thunder and lightning in the middle of winter, lurking dragons and monsters.

古文：继以陨星流彗，维、填上见，日蚀有背乡。
现代文：接着又出现陨石和彗星，维、填这样的妖星也在上空出现了。日食有不同的方位。
English: Then meteorites and comets appeared, and strange stars such as D and F also appeared in the sky. The eclipse has different directions.

古文：此亦高下易居，洪水之征也。
现代文：这也是高和下要交换地位，发生洪水的征兆。
English: This is also a sign that the high and the low are about to exchange positions, and a flood is about to occur.

古文：不忧不改，洪水乃欲荡涤，流彗乃欲扫除；改之，则有年亡期。
现代文：如果不因此而忧虑改变，那么洪水就将冲垮一切，彗星将要为害，如果有改变，就能禳除灾异。
English: If there is no change, the flood will destroy everything, the comet will do harm, and if there is a change, the disaster will be eliminated.

古文：故属者颇有变改，小贬邪猾，日月光精，时雨气应，此皇天右汉亡已也，何况致大改之！
现代文：所以最近颇有一些变革，贬低邪猾之人，曰月大放光明，雨下得及时天气也来帮助，这是上天保佑漠不灭亡，何况进行大改革呢！
English: So recently there have been quite a few changes, belittling the wicked, saying that the moon shines brightly, the rain falls in time and the weather also helps, this is God's blessing of indifference, let alone a major reform!

古文：宜急博求幽隐，拔擢天士，任以大职。诸阘茸佞谄，抱虚求进，乃用残贼酷虐闻者，若此之徒，皆嫉善憎忠，坏天文，败地理，涌跃邪阴，湛溺太阳，为主结怨于民，宜以时废退，不当得居位。
现代文：应该急切地广泛征求幽隐之士，而且选拔破格提升懂得天道的人，使他们担任重要的职位，那些卑贱奸佞谄媚的人，一心想往上爬的人，以及用残酷的手段迫害虐待别人的人，像这些人，都是妒嫉善行憎恨忠良，败坏天象，破坏地理，争着涌入邪阴，而使太阳沉溺，让君主与百姓结下怨恨，应该这时把他们废掉辞退，不能占居官位。
English: It is necessary to widely solicit the hidden ones, and select those who know the way of heaven in an extraordinary way to elevate them to important positions. Those who are lowly, treacherous and flattering, those who are eager to climb up, and those who use cruel means to persecute and abuse others, such as these, are jealous, hate the faithful, corrupt the sky, destroy the geography, fight to pour into the evil shadow, and indulge the sun, and let the monarch and the people bear grudges. They should be abolished and dismissed at this time, and cannot occupy the official position.

古文：诚必行之，凶灾销灭，子孙之福不旋日而至。
现代文：如果真的能这么做，凶灾就会消失，子孙的福佑不几时就能到来。
English: If you can really do this, the disaster will disappear, and the blessings of your children and grandchildren will come in a short time.

古文：政治感阴阳，犹铁炭之低卬，见效可信者也。
现代文：政事与阴阳感应，就好像铁和炭的一低一高，效果是可以被相信的。
English: Political affairs and yin and yang are like iron and charcoal, one low and one high, and the effect can be believed.

古文：及诸蓄水连泉，务通利之。
现代文：那些蓄水池和连着的水源，务必疏通利导。
English: Those reservoirs and connected water sources must be properly drained.

古文：修旧堤防，省池泽税，以助损邪阴之盛。
现代文：修理旧的堤防，免去池泽的税收，以此来消耗邪阴的盛行。
English: Repair the old embankment, exempt the pond tax, in order to consume the prevalence of evil.

古文：案行事，考变易，讹言之效，未尝不至。
现代文：查考做的事，考求变化，讹传不卜定就不会应验。
English: Examine what has been done, seek for changes, and if you are not sure, you will not be able to fulfill it.

古文：请征韩放，掾周敞、王望可与图之。
现代文：请征用韩放，掾用周敞、王望，可以与他们一起谋划事情。
English: Please requisition Han Fang, use Zhou Zhang and Wang Wang, and you can plan things with them.

古文：相于是荐寻。
现代文：王根于是推荐李寻。
English: Wang Gen then recommended Li Xing.

古文：哀帝初即位，召寻待诏黄门，使侍中卫尉傅喜问寻曰： 间者水出地动，日月失度，星辰乱行，灾异仍重，极言毋有所讳。 
现代文：哀帝即位不久，召李寻为待诏黄门，派侍中卫尉傅喜问李寻说： 前些时候地震水涌，日月不按常规运行，星辰紊乱，灾异频频发生，愿您畅所欲言，不要有所顾忌。 
English: Soon after Emperor Ai's accession to the throne, Li Xun was summoned to the Yellow Gate to attend the imperial edict. He was sent an attendant, Lieutenant-Commander Fu Xi, who asked Li Xun, "Some time ago, there was an earthquake and flood, the sun and moon did not follow the normal course, the stars were disrupted, and disasters occurred frequently. I hope you can say whatever you want, and do not have any scruples.

古文：寻对曰：
现代文：李寻回答说：
English: Li Huan replied:

古文：陛下圣德，尊天敬地，畏命重民，悼惧变异，不忘疏贱之臣，幸使重臣临问，愚臣不足以奉明诏。
现代文：陛下圣德，尊天敬地，畏命重民，警惕灾变异常之事，不忘记离得很远和地位卑贱的臣子，派遣重臣来询问我，我不足以接奉圣明的诏书。
English: Your Majesty, holy and virtuous, reverent to heaven, fearing for the lives of the people, on the alert for calamities and abnormal occurrences, and not forgetting your distant and lowly ministers, has sent your chief ministers to inquire about me. I am not worthy to receive the imperial rescript from the emperor.

古文：窃见陛下新即位，开大明，除忌讳，博延名士，靡不并进。
现代文：我看到陛下即位，就广开言路，免除忌讳，博求名士，无不并进。
English: When I saw His Majesty's accession to the throne, I opened up the path of speech, dispensed with taboos, solicited celebrities, and went all the way.

古文：臣寻位卑术浅，过随众贤待诏，食太官，衣御府，久污玉堂之署。
现代文：我地位卑微道术浅薄，却很不好意思地能与众多的贤人一起待诏黄门，吃太官做的饭菜，穿御府做的衣服，长久地在玉堂官署中。
English: My position is humble and my Taoism is shallow, but I am very embarrassed to be able to wait at the Yellow Gate with many sages, eat meals made by the eunuchs, wear clothes made by the imperial court, and stay for a long time in the Gyokudo government office.

古文：比得召见，亡以自效。
现代文：等到得到召见，自己却没有什么可效劳。
English: When he is called, he has nothing to offer.

古文：复特见延问至诚，自以逢不世出之命，愿竭愚心，不敢有所避，庶几万分有一可采。
现代文：又特别召见我，请教问题实在真诚，我自己认为碰到了不世出的君主的命令，希望能竭尽我的心力，不敢有所逃避，也许其中有万分之一可以被采纳吧。
English: I have been specially summoned, and the question is very sincere. I myself believe that I have met with the order of a peerless monarch, and I hope that I will do my best and not dare to escape. Perhaps one in ten thousand can be accepted.

古文：唯弃须臾之间，宿留瞽言，考之文理，稽之《五经》，揆之圣意，以参天心。
现代文：希望您能给出一点时间，听听我的没有见识的胡说八道，参考天象地理，用《五经》核查，测度圣意，以知道天意。
English: I hope you can give me a little time to listen to my ignorant nonsense, refer to celestial geography, use the "Five Classics" to verify, and measure the sacred will to know the will of heaven.

古文：夫变异之来，各应象而至，臣谨条陈所闻。《易》曰： 县象著明，莫大乎日月。 
现代文：灾变异事发生，是各自应验征兆而出现的，我这裹恭谨地呈上我所知道的。《易》上说： 悬象着明，莫大乎曰月。 
English: I respectfully present what I know about the occurrence of cataclysmic events, which appear as a result of their respective signs. "Yi" said: "The overhang is clear, as big as the moon."

古文：夫日者，众阳之长，辉光所烛，万里同晷，人君之表也。
现代文：太阳是众阳之首，阳光所照，万里同辉，是人君的象征。
English: The sun is the head of all the suns, the sun shines, and is a symbol of humanity.

古文：故日将旦，清风发，群阴伏，君以临朝，不牵于色。
现代文：所以曰将要升出时，清风吹起，群阴躲避，人君临朝，不被美色牵累。
English: Therefore, it is said that when it is about to rise, the clear wind will blow, the group shade will evade, the people will be close to the morning, and they will not be affected by the beauty.

古文：日初出，炎以阳，君登朝，佞不行，忠直进，不蔽障。
现代文：日出时，炎热如火，人君登朝，奸佞不能出行，忠直之人进奏，不被障碍蒙蔽。
English: When the sun rises, it is hot as fire, people ascend to the throne, traitors cannot travel, loyal people march in, and are not blinded by obstacles.

古文：日中辉光，君德盛明，大臣奉公。
现代文：曰到了中天光辉灿烂，人君德业盛明，大臣奉公守法。
English: It is said that in the Middle Ages, the heavens were bright and shiny, the people were virtuous, and the ministers were law-abiding.

古文：日将入，专以一，君就房，有常节。
现代文：曰将要下山，单纯专一，人君入椒房，不失常礼。
English: He said that he would go down the mountain, be simple and single-minded, enter the pepper room, and not miss the etiquette.

古文：君不修道，则日失其度，暗昧亡光。
现代文：如果人君不修习大道，那么曰就会失去法度，暗淡而无光。
English: If you don't practice the Great Way, then you will lose your morality, and you will be dim and without light.

古文：各有云为：其于东方作，日初出时，阴云邪气起者，法为牵于女谒，有所畏难；日出后，为近臣乱政；日中，为大臣欺诬；日且入，为妻妾役使所营。
现代文：各有感应表现。当日从东方兴起初升时，阴云邪气也起来了，根据占验常法知道这是君王受妻妾请托，有所畏难之象；日出之后，如发生上述异象，则知其近臣扰乱朝政；曰到当中，如发生上述异象，则知其为大臣欺诬；日将要下山时，被妻妾奴仆所纠缠。
English: On the same day, when rising from the rising of the east at the beginning, the dark clouds and evil spirits also arose, and according to the usual method of divination, it was known that this was a sign that the king was entrusted by his wife and concubine, and there was something to be afraid of; after sunrise, if the above-mentioned vision occurred, it was known that his close vassals were disturbing the imperial government; in the middle of the day, if the above-mentioned vision occurred, it was known that he was a minister who was cheating; when the sun was about to go down, he was entangled by his wife and concubine's servants.

古文：间者日尤不精，光明侵夺失色，邪气珥蜺数作。本起于晨，相连至昏，其日出后至日中间差愈。
现代文：近来日尤其不光明，它的光明被侵夺失去了亮色，邪气珥霓几次出现，本来自晨起身，相连一直到黄昏，日出之后到曰在当中这中间差别较大。
English: In recent days, the sun has been particularly dim. Its light has been robbed of its brilliance, and evil spirits have appeared several times. Originally from the morning, they are connected until dusk, and after sunrise to daytime, there is a big difference between them.

古文：小臣不知内事，窃以日视陛下志操，衰于始初多矣。
现代文：我不知道朝廷内的事，但私下裹用日来看陛下的志气和节操，日出就有些衰弱的现象比较多。
English: I don't know about the inner workings of the Imperial Court, but privately, I use the time of day to gauge His Majesty's morale and stamina, and the sunrise is often a bit of a downer.

古文：其咎恐有以守正直言而得罪者，伤嗣害世，不可不慎也。
现代文：造就会有过错，恐怕有因为持守正道而敢于直言进谏得罪皇上的事，以致伤害他的后嗣子孙，不可以不谨慎啊。
English: Otherwise, you will make mistakes. I'm afraid you might offend the emperor by holding to the right path and daring to be outspoken, thereby harming his heirs and descendants. You can't be too careful.

古文：唯陛下执乾刚之德，强志守度，毋听女谒邪臣之态。
现代文：希望陛下能坚持干刚的德性，用坚强的意志遵守法度，不要听从女子的请求和奸臣的话。
English: I hope that His Majesty will uphold the virtue of diligence, use his strong will to abide by the law, and not listen to the requests of women and the words of treacherous ministers.

古文：诸保阿乳母甘言悲辞之托，断而勿听。
现代文：那些守卫之臣和乳母的美言悲哀之辞，断绝而不要听。
English: Do not listen to the sad words of those guardians and nurses.

古文：勉强大谊，绝小不忍；良有不得已，可赐以货财，不可私以官位，诚皇天之禁也。
现代文：尽力去做最应该做的事，不要去做小仁小义的事；实在不得已，可以赐给他们一些钱财货物，不可以私下赐给他们官位，这些真正是上天的禁令啊。
English: Try your best to do what should be done, don't do what is petty and small; if you really have to, you can give them some money and goods, but you can't give them official positions in private. These are truly Heaven's prohibitions.

古文：日失其光，则星辰放宽。
现代文：曰失去了它的光，星辰就放任自流。
English: Said to have lost its light, the stars are left to drift.

古文：阳不能制阴，阴桀得作。
现代文：阳不能制阴，阴中的杰出者就能兴起。
English: The yang cannot control the yin, but the outstanding person in the yin can rise.

古文：间者太白正昼经天。
现代文：这期间太白正定白昼而统治天。
English: During this period, Taibai ruled the day and ruled the sky.

古文：宜隆德克躬，以执不轨。
现代文：应该使德业隆盛而自己努力，以驾驭不合法度之人。
English: It is necessary to make virtue flourish and make efforts to control those who are not legitimate.

古文：臣闻月者，众阴之长，销息见伏，百里为品，千里立表，万里连纪，妃后大臣诸侯之象也。
现代文：我听说月是众阴之首，消长盈缺，百里之内数度相同，千里立其影，万里连纪，是妃后大臣诸侯的象征。
English: I have heard that the moon is the head of all shadows, that it waxes and wanes, that within a hundred miles it is the same several degrees, that a thousand miles cast its shadow, that a thousand miles is a thousand years, and that it is the symbol of empresses, ministers, and princes.

古文：朔晦正终始，弦为绳墨，望成君德，春夏南，秋冬北。
现代文：朔晦确定一个月的始终，月半圆是作为规矩和法度，月圆就成就君王的德性，春天夏天在南边，秋冬在北边。
English: Shuo Yao determined the length of a month. The half-moon is regarded as a rule and regulation. The full moon fulfills the king's virtue. Spring and summer are in the south, and autumn and winter are in the north.

古文：间者，月数以春夏与日同道，过轩辕上后受气，入太微帝廷扬光辉，犯上将近臣，列星皆失色，厌厌如灭，此为母后与政乱朝，阴阳俱伤，两不相便。
现代文：近来，月亮几次在春夏和太阳在同一条轨迹上，经过轩辕上后星宿时受气所染，进入太微皇帝宫廷发扬光辉，冒犯上将和近臣，各星都暗淡，蔫蔫地好像要熄灭了，这是皇帝母后参与政事扰乱朝政，阴阳两者都受损伤，两者不融洽。
English: Recently, the moon several times in the spring and summer and the sun on the same trajectory, after the uproar after the stars when the gas-tainted, into the imperial court to carry forward the brilliance, offend the generals and courtiers, the stars are dim, suddenly seems to be extinguished, this is the emperor's mother to participate in political affairs to disrupt the government, both yin and yang are damaged, the two are not compatible.

古文：外臣不知朝事，窃信天文即如此，近臣已不足仗矣。
现代文：外臣我不知道朝廷中的事，但我相信天象就是这样的，近臣已经不能够依仗了。
English: Foreign Minister, I don't know what's going on in the imperial court, but I believe that's just how it is with the heavenly beings. My close advisor can no longer rely on me.

古文：屋大柱小，可为寒心。
现代文：屋子很大梁柱却很细，令人担心。
English: The house is large, but the beams and pillars are very thin, which is worrying.

古文：唯陛下亲求贤士，无强所恶，以崇社稷，尊强本朝。
现代文：希望陛下亲自征求贤能的人，不要因为讨厌而不用他，以国家为重，使本朝尊贵强大。
English: I hope that His Majesty will personally solicit the best and most capable people, and not use them out of dislike. He will put the country first, and make this dynasty honorable and strong.

古文：臣闻五星者，五行之精，五帝司命，应王者号令为之节度。
现代文：我听说金、木、水、火、土五星是五行的精华，五帝和司命神回应王者的号令并进行节制调度。
English: I have heard that the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and earth are the essence of the five elements, and that the five emperors and the god of life respond to the king's call and carry out restrained scheduling.

古文：岁星主岁事，为统首，号令所纪，今失度而盛，此君指意欲有所为，未得其节也。
现代文：岁星主管一年的事，是统领，是王者的号令所依据的准绳，如今失去节度而十分盛行，这表明人君想要有所作为，在没有得到节制。
English: The year star is in charge of the year's affairs, is the ruler, is the king's call, and is now out of control and is very popular, which shows that people want to make a difference and are not restrained.

古文：又填星不避岁星者，后帝共政，相留于奎、娄，当以义断之。
现代文：而且镇星不避开岁星，这表明帝、后共同执政，互相滞留在奎、娄，应当以义来决断。
English: Moreover, the town star does not avoid the year star, which indicates that the emperor and the empress jointly govern, stay in Kwei and Yao, and should be decided by righteousness.

古文：荧惑往来亡常，周历两宫，作态低卬，入天门，上明堂，贯尾乱宫。
现代文：荧惑来去没有一定的规律，经历紫微和太微两宫，故意作势高低起伏，进入天门，登上明堂，贯穿尾而扰乱后宫。
English: Fluorescence bewitchment comes and goes without a certain regularity, going through the two palaces of violet and too small, deliberately making the potential high and low, entering the heavenly gate, boarding the bright hall, running through the tail and disturbing the harem.

古文：太白发越犯库，兵寇之应也。
现代文：太白速度很快冒犯了奎，这是兵灾之象。
English: Too white speed quickly offended Kui, this is the phenomenon of military disaster.

古文：贯黄龙，入帝庭，当门而出，随荧惑入天门，至房而分，欲与荧惑为患，不敢当明堂之精。
现代文：大白通贯黄龙，进入帝庭，遇到门就出来，跟随荧惑进入天门，到了房就分开，想要和荧惑一起作乱，终于不敢抵挡明堂的精气。
English: The great white dragon passes through the yellow dragon, enters the imperial court, comes out when it encounters the door, follows the fluorescence into the heavenly gate, and separates when it reaches the room. It wants to make trouble with the fluorescence, and finally dares not resist the essence of the bright hall.

古文：此陛下神灵，故祸乱不成也。
现代文：这是因为陛下神明，所以祸乱没有形成。
English: It is because of the majesty of the gods that the calamity did not take place.

古文：荧惑厥弛，佞巧依势，微言毁誉，进类蔽善。
现代文：荧惑动摇，佞巧之人依势，密谋诽谤善行而称誉恶行，大进其同党而排斥贤良。
English: Fluttering and vacillating, clever people follow the trend, conspire to slander good deeds and praise evil deeds, and advance their party and exclude the virtuous.

古文：太白出端门，臣有不臣者。
现代文：太白从太微正南门出来，这表明有臣下犯上的事。
English: Taibai came out of the south gate of Taibai, which indicates that something was done by a vassal.

古文：火入室，金上堂，不以时解，其忧凶。
现代文：荧惑进入营室，太白进入房星，如果不及时解开，恐怕有凶灾。
English: Fluorescence enters the camp room, too white enters the room star, if not untied in time, I am afraid there will be a disaster.

古文：填、岁相守，又主内乱。
现代文：填、岁相守，又会有内乱。
English: There will be civil unrest again.

古文：宜察萧墙之内，毋急亲疏之微，诛放佞人，防绝萌牙，以荡涤浊濊，消散积恶，毋使得成祸乱。
现代文：应该注意内部潜在的祸害，不要疏忽亲疏之间的小事，诛杀流放奸佞之人，预防杜绝事情的萌芽，从而洗尽污秽，消除积累的恶行，不要让它成为祸乱。
English: It is necessary to pay attention to the internal potential evil, do not neglect the small things between relatives and strangers, kill and exile the traitors, prevent and stop the germination of things, so as to wash out the filth, eliminate the accumulated evil deeds, and do not let it become a disaster.

古文：辰星主正四时，当效于四仲；四时失序，则辰星作异。
现代文：辰星主管正定四时，应当在四仲上得到应验；四时失去了次序，那么辰星就会作怪。
English: If the leader of the four-pointed star is correctly set at four o'clock, it should be fulfilled on the four-pointed star; if the four-pointed star is out of order, then the four-pointed star will act strangely.

古文：今出于岁首之孟，天所以谴告陛下也。
现代文：如今出于一年之首的孟，就是上天用来告诫陛下的。
English: The moon, which now appears at the beginning of the year, is used by heaven to admonish His Majesty.

古文：政急则出早，政缓则出晚，政绝不行则伏不见而为彗茀。
现代文：政令紧急就出得早，政令宽缓就出得晚，政令不行就隐藏不出现而成为彗星。
English: Emergency decrees come out early, lenient decrees come out late, and if decrees do not work, they are hidden and do not appear and become comets.

古文：四孟皆出，为易王命；四季皆出，星家所讳。
现代文：四孟都出来，就会改变王命；四季都出来，是占星家非常忌讳的。
English: If all four monsoons come out, it will change the king's life; if all four seasons come out, it is very taboo for astrologers.

古文：今幸独出寅孟之月，盖皇天所以笃右陛下也，宜深自改。
现代文：如今幸运的是衹出来了寅孟之月，这大概是皇天厚佑陛下的结果，应该自己好好反省一下了。
English: Now, fortunately, the month of Yin and Meng has come out, which is probably the result of the Emperor's benevolence, and you should reflect on yourself.

古文：治国故不可以戚戚，欲速则不达。
现代文：治国不可急于求成，欲速则不达。
English: In governing the country, one should not be in a hurry to achieve success, and haste is not enough.

古文：经曰： 三载考绩，三考黜陟。 
现代文：经典上说： 三年考察官吏政绩，三次考察之后，决定官吏降职还是升职。 
English: As the saying goes: three years of inspection of the performance of government officials is enough. After three inspections, it is decided whether the officials will be demoted or promoted.

古文：加以号令不顺四时，既往不咎，来事之师也。
现代文：加上号令不顺应四时，对以往的过错不再责备追究，它们是以后做事的借鉴。
English: In addition, if they do not comply with the order at four o'clock, they will no longer be blamed and investigated for past mistakes. They are a reference for future work.

古文：间者春三月治大狱，时贼阴立逆，恐岁小收；季夏举兵法，时寒气应，恐后有霜雹之灾；秋月行封爵，其月土湿奥，恐后有雷雹之变。
现代文：以前春天三月时治理大的讼案，当时贼阴起来阻隔，恐怕会减少一年的收成；夏末举兵，当时天气寒冷与之相应，恐怕以后会有霜雹之灾；秋月裹实行封爵，那个月裹土气温湿，恐怕以后会有雷雹的灾变。
English: In the past, a major lawsuit was handled in the spring and March, when the thief rose up to block the crane, I am afraid it will reduce the harvest of the year; in the late summer, when the weather was cold, I am afraid there will be a frost disaster; in the autumn and September, the knighthood was implemented, and the temperature of the soil was wet in that month, I am afraid there will be a thunderstorm disaster in the future.

古文：夫以喜怒赏罚，而不顾时禁，虽有尧、舜之心，犹不能致和。
现代文：根据喜怒来实行赏罚，却不顾时节的禁令，虽然有尧舜的心，仍然不能使天下和畅。
English: To give rewards and punishments according to one's feelings of joy and anger, disregarding the prohibition of the time of the year, even though one has a cold heart, still cannot make the world peaceful.

古文：善言天者，必有效于人。
现代文：善于论说天的人，一定对人们有益处。
English: People who are good at talking about the heavens must be beneficial to people.

古文：设上农夫而欲冬田，肉袒深耕，汗出种之，然犹不生者，非人心不至，天时不得也。
现代文：假设一个优秀的农民却想在冬天种田，袒着胸精耕细作，汗流浃背地种着，然而仍然不能使庄稼生长，这不是人的心意不到，而是由于不得天时啊。
English: Suppose that a good farmer wants to plant fields in the winter, ploughing and sowing with sweat and sweat, but still can't make the crops grow. This is not unexpected, but due to bad weather.

古文：《易》曰： 时止则止，时行则行，动静不失其时，其道光明。 
现代文：《易》说： 时候到了该停止时就停止，时候到了该进行时就进行，动静不违背天时，这样做前途很光明。 
English: "Yi" said: When the time comes to stop, stop, when the time comes to go, go. The movement does not violate the time of day, and the future is very bright.

古文：《书》曰： 敬授民时。 
现代文：《书》说： 恭敬地授给老百姓四时之命。 
English: The "Book" says: Respectfully grant the people the life of four hours.

古文：故古之王者，尊天地，重阴阳，敬四时，严月令。
现代文：所以古代的王者，尊崇天地，重视阴阳，敬重四时，严守月令。
English: Therefore, the kings of ancient times revered heaven and earth, valued yin and yang, respected four o'clock, and strictly observed the lunar calendar.

古文：顺之以善政，则和气可立致，犹枹鼓之相应也。
现代文：顺从时令再加上良好的统治，和畅之气就可以立刻获得，就好像抱鼓那样互相应和。
English: Seasonal compliance, coupled with good governance, and a relaxed atmosphere can be achieved immediately, as if they are in harmony with each other.

古文：今朝廷忽于时月之令，诸侍中、尚书近臣宜皆令通知月令之意，设群下请事；若陛下出令有谬于时者，当知争之，以顺时气。
现代文：如今朝廷在时令月令上有疏忽，各个侍中尚书以及皇上亲近之臣都应该通晓知道月令的意思，设立臣下请事的制度；如果陛下发出诏令有违背时令的，应当有臣下知道并进谏，从而能顺从时令和节气。
English: Nowadays, the imperial court has been negligent in the seasonal and lunar calendars. All the attendants and courtiers, as well as the emperor's close courtiers, should be familiar with the meaning of the lunar calendar and establish a system for courtiers to request things. If His Majesty issues a decree that violates the seasonal calendar, the courtiers should know and follow it, so that they can obey the seasonal calendar and the solar terms.

古文：臣闻五行以水为本，其星玄武婺女，天地所纪，终始所生。
现代文：我听说五行以水为根本，它的星是玄武的婺女星，它是天地的法度，是阴阳终始所生发的地方。
English: I have heard that the five elements are based on water. Its star is the phoenix of Xuanwu, it is the law of heaven and earth, and it is the place where yin and yang originate.

古文：水为准平，王道公正修明，则百川理，落脉通；偏党失纲，则踊溢为败。
现代文：水性平，如王道公正圣明，那么百川就会理顺，经络通畅；如果王道偏爱私党失去纲纪，那么水就会涌出而为灾。
English: The nature of water is flat. If the king's way is just and holy, then all the rivers will be smoothed and the meridians will flow smoothly. If the king's way favors selfishness and loses discipline, then the water will gush out and cause disaster.

古文：《书》云 水曰润下 ，阴动而卑，不失其道。
现代文：《书》说 水能够润下 ，阴动而地位卑微，但不迷失其道。
English: "The Book" says that water can be moist, negative and lowly, but it does not lose its way.

古文：天下有道，则河出图，洛出书，故河、洛决溢，所为最大。
现代文：天下如果有道，黄河就会出《河图》，洛水就会出《洛书》，如果天下无道，河、洛就会决溢，所以河、洛所做的是最大的。
English: If there is a road under the sky, the Yellow River will come out of the "River Map," and the Luo Water will come out of the "Luo Book." If there is no road under the sky, the river and Luo will overflow, so the river and Luo have done the greatest.

古文：今汝、颍畎澮皆川水漂踊，与雨水并为民害，此《诗》所谓 烨烨震电，不宁不令，百川沸腾 者也。
现代文：如今汝水水系、颖水水系都水流汹涌，和雨水一起成为老百姓的祸害，造就是《诗》上说的 闪光的雷电，不安宁也不和善，百川沸腾 啊。
English: Nowadays, the rushing water of the Ye water system and the Ying water system have become a scourge to the common people together with the rainwater. This is the lightning of lightning mentioned in the "Poem." Restlessness is not good, and the rivers are boiling.

古文：其咎在于皇甫卿士之属。
现代文：过错在于我们有皇甫卿士这类人。
English: The fault lies in the fact that we have people like Hof Kyoei leading us.

古文：唯陛下留意诗人之言，少抑外亲大臣。
现代文：希望陛下留意讲诗的人的话，稍微抑制外戚大臣。
English: I hope that His Majesty will pay attention to the words of the poet and restrain the Minister of Maternal Relatives.

古文：臣闻地道柔静，阴之常义也。
现代文：我听说地道柔和宁静，这是阴的常义常理。
English: I have heard that the real way is gentle and tranquil, which is the common sense of Yin.

古文：地有上、中、下：其上位震，应妃、后不顺；中位应大臣作乱；下位应庶民离畔。
现代文：地有上中下之分，它的上位震动，对应后妃不顺从，中位震动，对应大臣作乱，下位震动，对应百姓背叛。
English: The earth is divided into the upper, middle, and lower parts. Its upper quake corresponds to the queen's disobedience, the middle quake corresponds to the minister's disturbance, and the lower quake corresponds to the people's betrayal.

古文：震或于其国，国君之咎也。
现代文：如果国都地震，那就是该国国君的过错。
English: If the capital of a country is hit by an earthquake, it is the fault of the country's sovereign.

古文：四方中央连国历州俱动者，其异最大。
现代文：四方中央连绵诸国家以及各州都震动起来，这个灾异是最大的。
English: All the countries in the central and south-eastern regions, as well as all the states, were shaken, and this disaster was the greatest.

古文：间者关东地数震，五星作异，亦未大逆，宜务崇阳抑阴，以救其咎；固志建威，闭绝私路，拔进英隽，退不任职，以强本朝。
现代文：以前关东几次发生地震，五星也作怪，终究还没有大碍，应该努力崇尚阳抑制阴，以弥补过错；坚定志向建立威，杜绝私路，选拔任用英才，斥退不称职的官吏，从而使本朝强大。
English: In the past, there were several earthquakes in the Kanto region, and the Five Stars also made mistakes. After all, there were no major problems. We should strive to advocate the sun to suppress the yin to make up for the mistakes; firmly aspire to establish dignity, eliminate personal interests, select and appoint talents, and reject incompetent officials, so as to make this dynasty strong.

古文：夫本强则精神折冲，本弱则招殃致凶，为邪谋所陵。
现代文：如果根本强大那么精神就会去折挫冲突危害，如果根本衰弱就会招致灾殃和祸害，被邪恶欺凌。
English: If the spirit is fundamentally strong, it will defeat the harm of conflict, and if it is fundamentally weak, it will lead to calamity and disaster, and be bullied by evil.

古文：闻往者淮南王作谋之时，其所难者，独有汲黯，以为公孙弘等不足言也。
现代文：听说从前淮南王谋反时，他难以对付的，衹有汲黯，认为公孙弘等人不值一提。
English: I heard that in the past, when King Huainan plotted a rebellion, he found it difficult to deal with, and thought that Gongsun Hong and others were not worth mentioning.

古文：弘，汉之名相，于今亡比，而尚见轻，何况亡弘之属乎？
现代文：公孙弘，是汉的名相，到今天也没有人能比得上，尚且显得力量轻微，何况连公孙弘这样的人都没有呢？
English: Gongsunhong is the name of the Han Dynasty. To this day, there is no one who can match him, yet he appears to be weak. What's more, there is no one like Gongsunhong.

古文：故曰朝廷亡人，则为贼乱所轻，其道自然也。
现代文：所以说朝廷上没有贤人就会被作贼为乱之人所轻视，这是很自然的道理。
English: Therefore, it is a very natural reason to say that if there are no wise men in the imperial court, they will be despised by those who commit theft and disorder.

古文：天下未闻陛下奇策固守之臣也。
现代文：天下人没有听说陛下有用奇策来守国之人。
English: There is no one in the world who has heard of your majesty's ingenious plan to defend the country.

古文：语曰，何以知朝廷之衰？
现代文：有人问，怎么知道朝廷的衰弱？
English: Someone asked, how do you know the weakness of the imperial court?

古文：人人自贤，不务于通人，故世陵夷。
现代文：每个人都自己认为自己很贤能，不向贤达之人请教，所以世道颓靡。
English: Everyone thinks that they are very capable, and they don't ask for advice from people who are capable, so the world is in turmoil.

古文：马不伏历，不可以趋道；士不素养，不可以重国。
现代文：马如果不吃草，就不可以行路；人如果平时不看重知识分子，就不可以使国家强盛。
English: If horses don't eat grass, they can't travel; if people don't value intellectuals, they can't make the country strong.

古文：《诗》曰 济济多士，文王以宁 ，孔子曰 十室之邑，必有忠信 ，非虚言也。
现代文：《诗》说 因为有众多的贤士啊，文王得以安享天下 ，孔子说 衹有十家的小邑，也一定有忠信之人 ，这些都是实话呀。
English: "Poetry" says that because there are so many sages, King Wen was able to enjoy the peace of the world, and Confucius said that if there are ten small towns, there must also be loyal people. These are all true.

古文：陛下秉四海之众，曾亡柱干之固守闻于四境，殆闻之不广，取之不明，劝之不笃，传曰： 土之美者善养禾，君之明者善养士。 
现代文：陛下拥有天下这么广大的领土，怎么会没有栋梁之材可以固守四境呢？原因大概在于人才仕进之路开得不广，选拔任用不明，勉励又不笃厚。传上说： 好的土质善于养育禾苗，圣明的君主善于供养人才。 
English: His Majesty has such a vast territory, how can there be no pillar material to hold fast to the four borders? The reason is probably that the road to talent is not wide open, the selection and appointment are unclear, and the encouragement is not thick. Legend has it that: Good soil is good at nurturing seedlings, and a holy monarch is good at nurturing talent.

古文：中人皆可使为君子。
现代文：中等资质的人都可以让他们成为君子。
English: People with average qualifications can make them into gentlemen.

古文：诏书进贤良，赦小过，无求备，以博聚英隽。
现代文：陛下应下诏书选拔贤良，赦免小的过错，不要求全责备，从而广聚英才。
English: His Majesty should issue an edict to select the virtuous, pardon minor faults, and not demand full blame, so as to gather a wide range of talents.

古文：如近世贡禹，以言事忠切蒙尊荣，当此之时，士厉身立名者多。
现代文：如近世的贡禹，因为论事恳切而得到了尊荣，于是这时士人中磨砺自身成就功名的人就有了很多。
English: For example, the modern-day Gong Yu received honor because he was earnest about things, so there are many people who have honed their own achievements in this era.

古文：禹死之后，日日以衰。
现代文：贡禹死后，就一天天不振了。
English: After Gong Yu's death, it went downhill day by day.

古文：及京兆尹王章坐言事诛灭，智者结舌，邪伪并兴，外戚颛命，君臣隔塞，至绝继嗣，女宫作乱。
现代文：等到京兆尹王章牵涉议论国事犯罪被诛灭族时，明白的人都结舌不再有言论，所以邪佞奸伪的风气并兴，外戚党徒专权，君臣相互隔绝，直到断了子嗣，终于京城发生赵飞燕姊妹之乱。
English: By the time Beijing Zhaoying Wangzhang was involved in discussing the state crime of exterminating ethnic minorities, people who understood were stunned and no longer had any words. Therefore, the culture of evil, treachery and hypocrisy flourished, the relatives of party members had exclusive power, and monarchs and ministers were isolated from each other until they had lost their children. Finally, the Zhao Feiyan sisters' rebellion occurred in Beijing.

古文：此行事之败，诚可畏而悲也。
现代文：这件事的失败，实在是可畏可悲。
English: The failure of this case is truly appalling and deplorable.

古文：本在积任母后之家，非一日之渐，往者不可及，来者犹可追也。
现代文：根本在于长久放任母亲和皇后之家，这不是一天形成的，过去的事就算了，但将来的事可还要慎重。
English: The bottom line is to leave the mother and the queen's house for a long time. This is not a one-day formation. The past matters, but the future matters should be handled carefully.

古文：先帝大圣，深见天意昭然，使陛下奉承天统，欲矫正之也。
现代文：先帝很圣明，深知天意十分明白，让陛下继承天统，是想要矫正它啊。
English: The former emperor was very holy, and he knew that the will of heaven was very clear, and he wanted to correct it by letting his majesty inherit the heavenly throne.

古文：宜少抑外亲，选练左右，举有德行道术通明之士充备天官，然后可以辅圣德，保帝位，承大宗。
现代文：应该稍微抑制一下外戚，选拔训练左右亲近之人，任用有德行道术的通达之士来充任百官，这样才可以辅佐圣德，永保帝位，继承大宗。
English: It is necessary to restrain the relatives a little, select and train people who are close to the emperor, and appoint people with virtue and virtue to serve as officials, so that they can support virtue, maintain the throne forever, and inherit the bulk.

古文：下至郎吏从官，行能亡以异，又不通一艺，及博士无文雅者，宜皆使就南亩，以视天下，明朝廷皆贤材君子，于以重朝尊君，灭凶致安，此其本也。
现代文：下面的郎吏从官，做事没有特别之处，又不通一经的，以及博士中没有文才的，应该都遣归，让他们从事农业，以此昭示天下，表明朝廷上都是贤人君子，从而让百姓重视朝廷尊崇国君，消灭凶灾安宁祥和，这是根本啊。
English: The lower echelons of officials, who have nothing special to do, and are not well versed, as well as those who do not have literary talent, should all be repatriated and let them engage in agriculture, so as to show the world that the court is full of wise men and gentlemen, so that the people can value the court and respect the sovereign, eliminate disasters, and maintain peace and tranquility. This is fundamental.

古文：臣自知所言害身，不辟死亡之诛，唯财留神，反复复愚臣之言。
现代文：我自己知道我所说的对自己很有害，但我仍然冒死进言，希望您能听进我的意见，反复考虑一下我的话。
English: I myself know that what I said is very harmful to myself, but I still dare to speak, I hope you can listen to my opinion and reconsider my words.

古文：是时，哀帝初立，成帝外家王氏未甚抑黜，而帝外家丁、傅新贵，祖母傅太后尤骄恣，欲称尊号。
现代文：这时哀帝刚刚即位，成帝外戚王氏还没有被废黜，而哀帝的外戚丁、傅又刚尊贵起来，祖母傅太后尤其骄纵，想要自称尊号。
English: At this time, Emperor Ai had just ascended to the throne, Emperor Cheng's maternal relative Wang Shigu had not yet been dethroned, and Emperor Ai's maternal relatives Ding and Fu had just been ennobled. Grandmother Fu, the empress dowager, was particularly arrogant and wanted to call herself a noble.

古文：丞相孔光、大司空师丹执政谏争，久之，上不得已，遂免光、丹而尊傅太后。
现代文：丞相孔光、大司空师丹执政，极力劝谏，过了很久，皇上不得已罢免了孔光、师丹而尊奉傅太后。
English: The prime minister, Kong Guang, and the grand secretary, Ku Shidan, tried their best to persuade him to return to power. After a long time, the emperor had no choice but to dismiss Kong Guang and Shidan and honor the Empress Dowager.

古文：语在《丹传》。
现代文：这件事记在《师丹传》。
English: This event is recorded in the "Biography of Shi Dan."

古文：上虽不从寻言，然采其语，每有非常，辄问寻。
现代文：皇上虽然没有按照李寻的话去做，但采纳了他的话，每当遇到特别的事，就会去询问李寻。
English: Although the emperor did not act according to Li Xun's words, he accepted his words. Whenever he encountered a special matter, he would ask Li Xun.

古文：寻对屡中，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：李寻的回答屡次被应验，升任黄门侍郎。
English: Li Xun's answer was repeatedly confirmed, and he was promoted to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：以寻言且有水灾，故拜寻为骑都尉，使护河堤。
现代文：根据李寻的话将会有水灾，所以拜李寻为骑都尉，让他守护河堤。
English: According to Li Xun, there will be a flood, so Bai Li Xun will be the cavalry captain and let him guard the riverbank.

古文：初，成帝时，齐人甘忠可诈造《天官历》、《包元太平经》十二卷，以言 汉家逢天地之大终，当更受命于天，天帝使真人赤精子，下教我此道。 
现代文：当初，成帝时，齐地人甘忠可伪造《天官历》、《包元太平经》十二卷，说 汉家正逢天地的末日，应当重新受命于天，天帝派真人赤精于，下天界来教我逭一道术。 
English: At first, when the emperor was enthroned, the Qidi man, Ganzhong, was able to forge twelve volumes of the "Heavenly Calendar" and "Bao Yuan Taiping," saying that the Han family was facing the end of heaven and earth, and should be re-commissioned by heaven. The heavenly emperor sent a real person, a red-skilled person, to teach me a trick in the next world.

古文：忠可以教重平夏贺良、容丘丁广世、东郡郭昌等，中垒校尉刘向奏忠可假鬼神罔上惑众，下狱治服，未断病死。
现代文：忠可因此教授重平夏贺良、容丘丁广世、东郡郭昌等人，中垒校尉刘向上奏忠可假藉鬼神欺君罔上迷惑众人，于是被投入监狱定为死罪，还未执行时就病死了。
English: As a result, Zhong could teach Chongping Xiaheriang, Yongqiu Ding Guangzhi, Dongguan Guo Chang and others, and Liu Xiangyang, the captain of the middle block, could deceive everyone by using ghosts and spirits to deceive people, so he was put in prison as a capital crime, and died of illness before it was carried out.

古文：贺良等坐挟学忠可书以不敬论，后贺良等复私以相教。
现代文：贺良等人也受连累，因为学习忠可书而以不敬罪论处，后来贺良等人重又私下里互相讨论讲授。
English: Hera and others were also implicated. They were punished with the crime of disrespect because they were loyal to the book. Later, Hera and others discussed the lectures with each other in private.

古文：哀帝初立，司隶校尉解光亦以明经通灾异得幸，白贺良等所挟忠可书。
现代文：哀帝刚即位，司隶校尉解光也因为精通经术通晓灾异之事而得到宠幸，上书说贺良等人还藏着忠可书。
English: Emperor Ai had just ascended to the throne, and Sili's lieutenant, Taiguang, was also favored because he was proficient in the arts and knew about disasters. The letter said that Hera and others still hid the book of loyalty.

古文：事下奉车都尉刘歆，歆以为不合《五经》，不可施行。
现代文：这件事下达奉车都尉刘歆那里，刘歆认为不合《五经》，不可以施行。
English: The matter was referred to Fengche captain Liu Wei, who believed that it was not in accordance with the "Five Classics" and could not be implemented.

古文：而李寻亦好之。
现代文：而李寻也喜好这些。
English: And Li Huan also likes these.

古文：光曰： 前歆父向奏忠可下狱，歆安肯通此道？ 
现代文：解光说： 以前刘歆的父亲刘向上书使忠可下狱，刘歆怎么肯给他们开这个方便呢？ 
English: Xie Guang said: In the past, Liu Bei's father Liu Shangzhu wrote to make it possible for Zhong to be released from prison. How could Liu Bei give them this convenience?

古文：时，郭昌为长安令，劝寻宜助贺良等。
现代文：当时郭昌是长安的县令，劝李寻也帮助贺良等人。
English: At that time, Guo Chang was the county magistrate of Chang'an, and he persuaded Li Xun to help He Liang and others.

古文：寻遂白贺良等皆待诏黄门，数诏见，陈说： 汉历中衰，当更受命。
现代文：李寻于是上书让贺良等人都待韶黄门，几次被召见，陈说 漠的命运中衰，应当重新受命。
English: Li Huan then wrote to Hera and the others to wait at the Yellow Gate, and was summoned several times. Chen said that the fate of the desert was in decline and should be re-commissioned.

古文：成帝不应天命，故绝嗣。
现代文：成帝不合天命，所以绝后。
English: Becoming emperor was not in accordance with the will of heaven, so she became the empress dowager.

古文：今陛下久疾，变异屡数，天所以谴告人也。
现代文：如今陛下已长久地生病，变故灾异也很频繁，这是天在告诫人们啊。
English: Now that His Majesty has been ill for a long time, disasters are frequent. This is heaven's warning to people.

古文：宜急改元易号，乃得延年益寿，皇子生，灾异息矣。
现代文：应该马上改元易号，才能够延年益寿，皇子一出生，灾异就平息了。
English: It is necessary to immediately change the name of the Yuan and Yi Dynasty in order to be able to prolong life. Once the prince is born, the calamity will subside.

古文：得道不得行，咎殃且亡，不有洪水将出，灾火且起，涤荡民人。 
现代文：知道道而不能实行，一定有殃咎，将会灭亡，不然洪水就将来临，火灾等灾难也将发生，使百姓处于水深火热之中。 
English: If they know the way but cannot practice it, they must have the curse and will perish. Otherwise, floods will come, fires and other disasters will also occur, leaving the people in deep water and heat.

古文：哀帝久寝疾，几其有益，遂从贺良等议。
现代文：哀帝长期卧病在床，希望它真的有益处，于是听从了贺良等人的议论。
English: Aidi was sick in bed for a long time, hoping that it was really beneficial, so he listened to the arguments of Hera and others.

古文：于是诏制丞相御史： 盖闻《尚书》 五曰考终命 ，言大运一终，更纪天元人元，考文正理，推历定纪，数如甲子也。
现代文：于是下诏给丞相御史： 听说《尚书》中有句话 五日考终命，这是说天命大运一旦终了，就要重新记载天地之始和人世之始，考之以文献而正之以事理，推求历法制定纪元，其规律就好像六十甲子。
English: Therefore, he issued the following edict to the prime minister: It is said that there is a sentence in the Shang Shu, "Five-day examination of the end of life," which means that once the great fortune of fate is over, it is necessary to re-record the beginning of heaven and earth and the beginning of the human world, examine the literature and judge the matter rationally, and deduce the calendar to set the era, and its rules are like the sixty-year period.

古文：朕以眇身入继太祖，承皇天，总百僚，子元元，未有应天心之效。
现代文：朕以微渺之身继承了太祖的大业，承奉皇天之命，统领王侯公卿，抚育黎明百姓，却没有得到顺应天心的效验。
English: In my smallness, I have inherited the great cause of my great-grandfather, obeyed the emperor's order, led the princes and court nobles, and nurtured the people of the dawn, but I have not obtained the effect of obeying the will of Heaven.

古文：即位出入三年，灾变数降，日月失度，星辰错谬，高下贸易，大异连仍，盗贼并起。
现代文：即位将近三年，灾异变故多次降临，曰月失去常规，星辰运行紊乱，山崩而水枯竭，大的灾异频频发生，盗贼纷起。
English: He has been on the throne for nearly three years, and disasters have occurred many times. For example, the moon has lost its regularity, the movement of the stars has been disrupted, landslides and water depletion have occurred, major disasters have occurred frequently, and thieves have arisen.

古文：朕甚俱焉，战战兢兢，唯恐陵夷。
现代文：朕很是忧惧，战战兢兢，惟恐国家渐渐衰弱灭亡。
English: I am very worried and trembling, fearing that the country will gradually weaken and perish.

古文：惟汉兴至今二百载，历纪开元，皇天降非材之右，汉国再获受命之符，朕之不德，曷敢不通夫受天之元命，必与天下自新。
现代文：想到汉从兴起到今天已有二百年，享国之运重新开始，皇天降恩保佑不才我，国家又重新获得承受天命的符瑞，朕虽然没有圣德，怎么敢不顺应接受天之大命。一定和天下臣民一起除旧布新。
English: Thinking that it has been two hundred years since the rise of the Han Dynasty until today, the fortune of enjoying the country has begun anew, the emperor's grace and blessing is not for me, and the country has regained the fury of bearing the destiny of heaven. Although I have no holiness, how dare I not conform to accept the great destiny of heaven. I must remove the old cloth and make it new together with the subjects of the world.

古文：其大赦天下，以建平二年为太初元年，号曰陈圣刘太平皇帝。
现代文：兹命大赦天下，以建平二年作为太初元年，朕的号是陈圣刘太平皇帝。
English: I hereby decree a general amnesty to the world, with the second year of Jianping as the first year of the year, and my name is Emperor Chen Sheng Liu Taiping.

古文：漏刻以百二十为度。
现代文：漏壶刻度共分为一百二十度。
English: Leakage is one hundred and twenty degrees.

古文：布告天下，使明知之。 
现代文：宣告天下，让大家都清楚知道。 
English: Announce it to the world and let everyone know clearly.

古文：后月余，上疾自若。
现代文：这以后过了一个多月，皇上卧病如故。
English: After this, more than a month passed, and the Emperor was still bedridden.

古文：贺良等复欲妄变政事，大臣争以为不可许。
现代文：贺良等人又想乱改政事，大臣们向皇上谏静认为不能允许。
English: Hera and others also wanted to change the government in a chaotic manner, and the ministers told the emperor that this was unacceptable.

古文：贺良等奏言大臣皆不知天命，宜退丞相御史，以解光、李寻辅政。
现代文：贺良等人上奏说大臣们都不知道天命，应当斥退丞相御史，用解光、李寻来辅政。
English: Hera and others made a report saying that the ministers did not know the Mandate of Heaven, and that they should expel the prime minister, and use Joko and Riho to assist the government.

古文：上以其言亡验，遂下贺良等吏，而下诏曰： 朕获保宗庙，为政不德，变异屡仍，恐惧战栗，未知所繇。
现代文：皇上因为他们以前所说的话没有效验，便把贺良等人交给执法官吏，下诏书说： 朕能继位保守宗庙，但为政不善，灾异频频发生，我忧惧害怕，不知如何是好。
English: The emperor, because what they had said before had no effect, handed Hera and the others over to the magistrates. The next imperial edict said: I can succeed to the throne and preserve the family temple, but because of bad politics, disasters occur frequently. I am worried and afraid, and I don't know what to do.

古文：待诏贺良等建言改元易号，增益漏刻，可以永安国家。
现代文：待诏贺良等人建议说改元易号，增加漏壶刻度，可以使国家长久安定。
English: He Liang and others suggested that changing the name of the Yuan and changing the name of the Yuan and changing the name of the Yuan and changing the name of the Yuan and changing the name of the Yuan and changing the name of the Yuan and changing the name of the Yuan and changing the name of the Yuan.

古文：朕信道不笃，过听其言，几为百姓获福。
现代文：朕对圣人之道信之不笃，误听了他们的话，期望为百姓求得福佑。
English: I did not truly believe in the words of the sages, misheard their words, and hoped to obtain blessings for the people.

古文：卒无嘉应，久旱为灾。
现代文：但是终于没有好的效验，长久干旱成灾。
English: But in the end, there was no good test, and the long drought became a disaster.

古文：以问贺良等，对当复改制度，皆背经谊，违圣制，不合时宜。
现代文：以此质问贺良等人，回答说应当再改制度，所言都背离经义，违背圣人的制度，不合时宜。
English: He questioned Hera and others about this and answered that the system should be changed again. Everything they said was contrary to the teachings of the scriptures, contrary to the system of saints, and untimely.

古文：夫过而不改，是为过矣。
现代文：犯了过错又不肯改正，才是真正的过错。
English: If you make a mistake and refuse to correct it, that's a real mistake.

古文：六月甲子诏书，非赦令，它皆蠲除之。
现代文：六月甲子日所下的诏书除了大赦天下令以外其他各项都废除。
English: The edict issued on June 1st abolished everything except the general amnesty.

古文：贺良等反道惑众，奸态当穷竟。 
现代文：贺良等人离经叛道，妖言惑众，其作奸犯科之事要彻底追究。 
English: Hera and others who deviated from the teachings of the sutras and deceived the public with magical sayings should be thoroughly investigated for treason and crimes.

古文：皆下狱，光禄勋平当、光禄大夫毛莫如与御史中丞、廷尉杂治，当贺良等执左道，乱朝政，倾覆国家，诬罔主上，不道。
现代文：他们都被关进了监狱，光禄勋平当、光禄大夫毛莫如和御史中丞、廷尉共同审理此案，判决贺良等人使用邪门歪道，扰乱朝政，颠覆国家，欺君罔上，大逆不道。
English: They were all put in prison. Guanglu Xunping, Guanglu Dr. Mao Moru, and Goshi Chujo and Tingfei jointly tried the case, and decided that He Liang and others had used evil methods, disrupted the imperial government, subverted the country, deceived the emperor, and committed high treason.

古文：贺良等皆伏诛。
现代文：贺良等人都被杀了。
English: Hera and the others were all killed.

古文：寻及解光减死一等，徙敦煌郡。
现代文：李寻和解光罪减一等，流放到敦煌郡。
English: Li Xing was reduced to the first class for the crime of reconciliation and light, and was exiled to Dunhuang County.

古文：赞曰：幽赞神明，通合天人之道者，莫著乎《易》、《春秋》。
现代文：赞曰：能够深刻阐明神祇灵异，贯通天人之道的，当首推《周易》、《春秋》。
English: Praise says: "Zhou Yi" and "Spring and Autumn" are the first to be able to profoundly clarify the gods and spirits and penetrate the way of heaven and man.

古文：然子赣犹云 夫子之文章可得而闻，夫子之言性与天道不可得而闻 已矣。
现代文：然而子贡还是说： 夫子的文章我们能够听到，夫子关于性与天道的言论我们却听不到 。
English: However, Zigong still said: We can listen to Fu Zi's articles, but we can't listen to Fu Zi's speech about sex and the heavenly way.

古文：汉兴，推阴阳言灾异者，孝武时有董仲舒、夏侯始昌；昭、宣则眭孟、夏侯胜；元、成则京房、翼奉、刘向、谷永；哀、平则李寻、田终术。
现代文：汉建立以来推究阴阳谈论灾异的人，孝武帝时有董仲舒、夏侯始昌，昭、宣帝时则有眭孟、夏侯胜，元、成帝时则有京房、翼奉、刘向、谷永，哀、平帝时则有李寻、田终术。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the Yin and Yang of people who talk about disasters and changes have been studied. During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, there were Dong Zhongshu and Xia Hou Shichang. During the reign of Emperor Zhao and Emperor Xuan, there were Yao Meng and Xia Hou Sheng. During the reign of Emperor Yuan and Emperor Cheng, there were Jing Fang, Ying Bong, Liu Xiang and Gu Yong. During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, there were Li Xuan and Tian Zenshu.

古文：此其纳说时君著明者也。
现代文：这是其中其说被当时君主采纳的一些著名人物。
English: Here are some of the famous faces he says were adopted by the monarch.

古文：察其所言，仿佛一端。
现代文：考察他们所讲的那一套，仿佛如出一辙。
English: If you look at what they're saying, it's almost identical.

古文：假经设谊，依托象类，或不免乎 亿则屡中 。
现代文：假藉经书，依托天象异常附会政事得失，有时也不免 猜度屡中 。
English: Using the scriptures and relying on the celestial phenomenon to gain or lose political gains and losses, sometimes it is unavoidable that the guessing is often in progress.

古文：仲舒下吏，夏侯囚执，眭孟诛戮，李寻流放，此学者之大戒也。
现代文：仲舒曾入狱吏之手，夏侯被关进监狱，眭孟惨遭杀戮，李寻被流放，这些都是学者要引为大戒的。
English: Zhongshu once fell into the hands of prison officials, Xia Hou was put in prison, Yao Meng was brutally killed, and Li Xuan was exiled. These are all things that scholars should take to heart.

古文：京房区区，不量浅深，危言刺讥，枢怨强臣，罪辜不旋踵，亦不密以失身，悲夫！
现代文：京房以小小郎官，不顾深浅安危，直言讽刺时政，得罪当权奸臣，杀身之祸固然迅速降临，也是由于他说话不周密而致惨死，真是可悲啊！
English: Kyofusa was a petty bureaucrat who disregarded safety and security, satirized the politics of the time, and offended the treacherous ministers in power. Although the evil of killing himself came quickly, it was also due to his careless speech that he died a tragic death. What a pity!

