古文：起玄黓敦牂，尽柔兆阉茂，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共五年。宋文帝元嘉十九年
English: a total of five years. In the 19th year of the reign of Emperor Songwen

古文：太祖文皇帝中之中元嘉十九年
现代文：春季，正月，甲申，北魏国主拓跋焘备好车驾，打着全青色的旗帜来到道教神坛前接受符。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, in Jiaxing, the Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba prepared a good car and drove to the Taoist shrine with a blue flag to receive the emblem.

古文：春，正月，甲申，魏主备法驾，诣道坛受符箓，旗帜尽青。自是每帝即位皆受箓。谦之又奏作静轮宫，必令其高不闻鸡犬，欲以上接天神。
现代文：从此以后，北魏每位皇帝即位时都要接受符。寇谦之又奏请建造静轮宫，并一定要建得很高，高到人在上面听不到鸡鸣犬吠之声，目的是想伸向天上与天神相接。
English: From then on, every emperor of the Northern Wei Dynasty had to receive a badge when he ascended to the throne. Kou Qian also requested the construction of Jinglun Palace, and it must be built very high, so high that people could not hear the sound of chickens and dogs barking. The purpose was to reach the sky and connect with the gods.

古文：崔浩劝帝为之，功费万计，经年不成。
现代文：宰相崔浩也力劝拓跋焘兴建，花费了数以万计的财力物力，建了几年仍未完工。
English: Prime Minister Cui Hao also strongly advised the construction of Tuobao, spent tens of thousands of financial and material resources, and has not been completed for several years.

古文：太子晃谏曰： 天人道殊，卑高定分，不可相接，理在必然。
现代文：太子拓跋晃劝谏太武帝说： 上天与世人的道不同，谁高谁低已有定分，二者不能相接，这是理所当然的事。
English: Prince Tuobao advised Emperor Wu of Taiwu, saying, "The way of heaven is different from the way of man. Who is higher and who is lower has already been determined. The two cannot be connected. This is a matter of course.

古文：今虚耗府库，疲弊百姓，为无益之事，将安用之！
现代文：现在我们白白地浪费财力物力，老百姓也累得疲惫不堪，做这种无益的事，干什么用呢？
English: Now we are wasting money and material resources in vain, and the people are tired and exhausted. What is the use of doing such a useless thing?

古文：必如谦之所言，请因东山万仞之高，为功差易。 
现代文：如果一定要照寇谦之所说的去做，我请求建造在万仞高的东山上，这样做，工事就容易些。 
English: If it is necessary to do what Kou Qian Zhi said, I request that it be built on the towering Dongshan Mountain. In this way, the construction will be easier.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：拓跋焘没有接受。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：夏，四月，沮渠无讳将万馀家，弃敦煌西就沮渠安周。
现代文：夏季，四月，沮渠无讳率领一万多家舍弃敦煌，西去沮渠安周那里与他会合。
English: In the summer, in April, he led more than ten thousand people to abandon Dunhuang and go west to meet him there.

古文：未至，鄯善王比龙畏之，将其众奔且末，其世子降于安周。
现代文：还没有到，鄯善王比龙很害怕，率领人马逃到且末，他的嫡长子向沮渠安周投降。
English: Before he arrived, King Biryong was very scared. He led his men and horses to flee to Ketchum, where his eldest son surrendered to An Zhou.

古文：无讳遂据鄯善，其士卒经流沙，渴死者太半。
现代文：沮渠无讳于是占据了鄯善，但他的士卒在过沙漠地区时因干渴而死亡的人超过了一半。
English: The ruthless general then took possession of Jinshan, but more than half of his soldiers died of thirst while crossing the desert.

古文：李宝自伊吾帅众二千入据敦煌，缮修城府，安集故民。
现代文：逃亡到伊吾的李宝这时又从伊吾率将士二千人进占了敦煌，修缮敦煌城府，安定集结当地百姓。
English: At this time, Li Bao, who had fled to Igu, led 2,000 soldiers from Igu to occupy Dunhuang, repair the city of Dunhuang, and steadily rally the local people.

古文：沮渠牧犍之亡也，凉州人阚爽据高昌，自称太守。
现代文：沮渠牧犍从高昌逃走之后，凉州人阚爽占据了高昌并自封太守。
English: After the dejected herdsmen ran away from Gaochang, the Liangzhou people bravely occupied Gaochang and self-appointed themselves as emperors.

古文：唐契为柔然所逼，拥众西趋高昌，欲夺其地。
现代文：唐契由于受柔然国逼迫难以忍受，于是率其部下西去高昌，并想攻取高昌。
English: Since it was unbearable for Tang Qi to be persecuted by Zhu Ranzhong, he led his subordinates west to Gaochang and wanted to capture Gaochang.

古文：柔然遣其将阿若追击之，契败死。
现代文：柔然派遣大将阿若追杀他们，唐契战败而亡。
English: Zhu Rong sent General Arao to chase after them, and Tang Qi was defeated and died.

古文：契弟和收馀众奔车师前部王伊洛。
现代文：唐契的弟弟唐和召集残余将士投奔车师前部王伊洛。
English: Tang Qi's younger brother, Tang He, gathered the remaining soldiers to join Wang Yiluo, the front section of the cavalry division.

古文：时沮渠安周屯横截城，和攻拔之，又拔高宁、白力二城，遣使请降于魏。
现代文：这时，沮渠安周正屯居在横截城，唐和攻克了横截城，又攻克了高宁、白力二城，并派遣使节前往北魏请降。
English: At this time, Deshu Qian and Zhou Zheng were living in Qiaojie, Tang and conquered Qiaojie, and conquered Gaoning and Baili, and sent envoys to the Northern Wei Dynasty to ask for surrender.

古文：甲戌，上以疾愈，大赦。
现代文：甲戌，刘宋文帝刘义隆因病痊愈，实行大赦。
English: Emperor Jiajing, Emperor Liu Songwen and Emperor Liu Yilong recovered from illness and were granted amnesty.

古文：五月，裴方明等至汉中，与刘真道分兵攻武兴、下辩、白水，皆取之。
现代文：五月，龙骧将军裴方明等抵达汉中，他联合梁州刺史刘真道等人分别派兵攻取了武兴、下辩、白水三地。
English: In May, Longyu's general Pei Fangming and others arrived in Hanzhong, and he, together with Liangzhou's general Liu Zhendao and others, sent troops to capture Wuxing, Hefei and Baishui.

古文：杨难当遣建节将军符弘祖守兰皋，使其子抚军大将军和将重兵为后继。
现代文：杨难当派遣建节将军符弘祖据守兰皋城，又派他自己的儿子抚军大将军杨和率重兵作为他的后续部队。
English: Yang Nan Dang sent Jian Jie General Fu Hong Zu to guard Lanyu City, and also sent his own son, General Yang He, to lead the heavy troops as his follow-up troops.

古文：方明与弘祖战于浊水，大破之，斩弘祖；和退走，追至赤亭，又破之。
现代文：裴方明与符弘祖在浊水大战，裴方明大胜，将符弘祖斩首。杨和溃退而逃，裴方明追到了赤亭，又把杨和击败。
English: Pei Fangming and Fu Hongzu fought in the Battle of Surabaya. Pei Fangming won a great victory and decapitated Fu Hongzu. Yang He broke away and fled. Pei Fangming chased Yang He to Akatei and defeated him again.

古文：难当奔上邽；获难当兄子建节将军保炽。
现代文：杨难当逃奔到了上，裴方明生擒杨难当的侄子、建节将军杨保炽。
English: Yang Nantang fled to Shang, and Pei Fang Mingsheng seduced Yang Nantang's nephew, Jianjie General Yang Baoqing.

古文：难当以其子虎为益州刺史，守阴平，闻难当走，引兵还，至下辩；方明使其子肃之邀击之，擒虎，送建康，斩之；仇池平。
现代文：杨难当任命自己的儿子杨虎为益州刺史，镇守阴平，杨虎听说杨难当离开上，便率兵返回，走到下辩时，裴方明已派他的儿子裴肃之赶来拦击，抓获杨虎，押送到建康斩首，仇池平定。
English: When Yang Nantang appointed his son Yang Hu to be the governor of Yizhou, the town guard was Yin Ping. When Yang Hu heard that Yang Nantang had left, he returned with his soldiers. When he came to the next debate, Pei Fangming had sent his son Pei Su to intercept, capture Yang Hu, escort him to Jiankang and behead him, and the feud was settled.

古文：以辅国司马胡崇之为北秦州刺史，镇其地；立杨保炽为杨玄后，使守仇池。
现代文：刘宋朝廷派辅国司马胡崇之担任北秦州刺史，镇守该地；又命杨保炽承继杨玄王位，驻守仇池。
English: The Liu Song Dynasty sent the assistant state secretary Ma Hu Chongzhi to serve as the chief historian of North Qin Province and guard the place; he also ordered Yang Baogao to succeed Yang Xuan to the throne and stationed in Quchi.

古文：魏人遣中山王辰迎杨难当诣平城。
现代文：北魏朝廷派遣中山王崐拓跋辰迎接杨难当到平城。
English: The Northern Wei court sent the King of Zhongshan to welcome Yang Nantang to Pingcheng.

古文：秋，七月，以刘真道为雍州刺史，裴方明为梁、南秦二州刺史；方明辞不拜。
现代文：秋季，七月，任命刘真道做雍州刺史，裴方明为梁、南秦二州刺史，但裴方明辞谢了。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Zhendao was appointed to be the chief historian of Yongzhou, and Pei Fangming was appointed to be the leader and the chief historian of the two southern Qin states, but Pei Fangming resigned.

古文：丙寅，魏主使安西将军古弼督陇右诸军，及殿中虎贲与武都王杨保宗自祁山南入，征西将军渔阳皮豹子与琅邪王司马楚之，督关中诸军自散关西入，俱会仇池。
现代文：丙寅，北魏国主派安西将军古弼督统陇右各支军队及朝廷内的勇士与武都王杨保宗从祁山向南开进，征西将军渔阳人皮豹子与琅邪王司马楚之督统关中的诸路军队从散关向西开进，两路人马在仇池会师。
English: Hun Yin, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent General Anxi to lead the right and left armies, and the warriors in the imperial court and the warrior king Yang Baozong marched southward from Shaoshan. General Western Conquest, the fisherman Yang, the skin leopard and the evil king Sima Chu marched westward from Sanguan. The two armies met in Quchi.

古文：又使谯王司马文思督洛、豫诸军南趋襄阳，征南将军刁雍东趋广陵，移书徐州，称为杨难当报仇。
现代文：又派谯王司马文思督统洛、豫各支部队南近襄阳，征南将军刁雍东近广陵，并派人将文告传送到徐州，声称替杨难当报仇。
English: He also sent the king of Wei, Sima Wenshidu, to lead the Luo and Yu detachments to the south near Yangyang, and the general of the Southern Expedition, Zou Yongdong, to the south near Guangling. He also sent someone to deliver a message to Xuzhou, claiming to take revenge for Yang Nan.

古文：甲戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：甲戌晦，出现日食。
English: October 30th, solar eclipse.

古文：唐契之攻阚爽也，爽遣使诈降于沮渠无讳，欲与之共击契。
现代文：唐契向阚爽进攻，阚爽派使节诈降沮渠无讳，表示与沮渠无讳共同攻打唐契。
English: Tang China attacked Zhuang Shuang, and the envoys of Zhuang Shuang's faction did not hesitate to betray their allegiance, saying that they would jointly attack Tang China with Zhuang Shuang.

古文：八月，无讳将其众趋高昌；比至，契已死，爽闭门拒之。
现代文：八月，沮渠无讳率兵前往高昌，将要到达时，唐契已战死，阚爽紧闭城门拒绝会见沮渠无讳。
English: In August, Deshu Mujib led his troops to Gaochang. When they were about to arrive, Tang Qi had already died in battle, and Shao Shuang closed the city gate and refused to meet with Deshu Mujib.

古文：九月，无讳将卫兴奴夜袭高昌，屠其城，爽奔柔然。
现代文：九月，沮渠无讳带领卫兴奴夜袭高昌，血洗全城。阚爽投奔柔然。
English: In September, Wei Xingnu led the night attack on Gaochang, blood-washed the whole city.

古文：无讳据高昌，遣其常侍汜俊奉表诣建康。
现代文：沮渠无讳占据高昌，派常侍隽带着奏表到了建康。
English: Gaochang was overtly depressed, and sent the regular attendants to Jiankang with the report card.

古文：诏以无讳为都督凉、河、沙三州诸军事、征西大将军、凉州刺史、河西王。
现代文：刘宋文帝下诏任命沮渠无讳为都督凉、河、沙三州诸军事、征西大将军、凉州刺史和河西王。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen issued an edict appointing Deqiu Muxin as the military governor of Liangshan, He and Shanzhou, the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of Liangzhou and the king of Hexi.

古文：冬，十月，己卯，魏立皇子伏罗为晋王，翰为秦王，谭为燕王，建为楚王，余为吴王。
现代文：冬季十月，己卯，北魏封皇子拓跋伏罗为晋王，拓跋翰为秦王，拓跋谭为燕王，拓跋建为楚王，拓跋余为吴王。
English: In the winter of October, Tuoba Fulao, the prince of Northern Wei Dynasty, became the king of Jin, Tuoba Han became the king of Qin, Tuoba Tan became the king of Yan, Tuoba Jian became the king of Chu, and Tuoba Yu became the king of Wu.

古文：甲申，柔然遣使诣建康。
现代文：甲申，柔然派使节到宋都城建康。
English: Jiankang, the capital of the Song Dynasty, was sent to Jiankang, the capital of the Song Dynasty.

古文：十二月，辛已，魏襄城孝王卢鲁元卒。
现代文：十二月，辛巳，北魏襄城孝王卢鲁元去世。
English: In December, Lu Luyuan, the pious king of Xiangcheng in Northern Wei, passed away.

古文：丙申，诏鲁郡修孔子庙及学舍，蠲墓侧五户课役以供洒扫。
现代文：丙申，刘宋文帝下诏，让鲁郡修缮孔庙及学校房舍。免除孔子墓地附近五家住户的赋税差役，让他们清扫保护孔庙。
English: According to the edict of Emperor Xinshen and Emperor Liu Songwen, Lu County was allowed to repair the Confucius Temple and school buildings. Five households near the Confucius Cemetery were exempted from paying taxes, and they were allowed to clean and protect the Confucius Temple.

古文：李宝遣其弟怀达、子承奉表诣平城；魏人以宝为都督西垂诸军事、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、沙州牧、敦煌公，四品以下听承制假授。
现代文：李宝派他的弟弟李怀达、儿子李承带着奏表到达平城。北魏任命李宝为都督西垂诸军事、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、沙州牧和敦煌公。四品以下官员均由他秉承皇帝旨意全权委派。
English: Li Bao sent his younger brother Li Huida and his son Li Cheng to arrive in Pingcheng with a report. The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Li Bao as the military governor of Xittu, the general of Zhenxi, the third secretary of Kaifu Yidong, the governor of Shazhou and the governor of Dunhuang. The officials below the fourth grade were all appointed by him with full authority in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：雍州刺史晋安襄侯刘道产卒。
现代文：刘宋雍州刺史晋安襄侯刘道产去世。
English: Liu Song, Prince of Yongzhou, Prince of Jinan, Prince of Xiangzhou, and Prince of Liu Province passed away.

古文：道产善为政，民安其业，小大丰赡，由是民间有《襄阳乐歌》。
现代文：刘道产善于治理政务，老百姓安居乐业，户户富庶，因此，民间流传有《襄阳乐歌》。
English: Liu Daoshan is good at governing government affairs, the common people live and work in peace, and the households are rich. Therefore, "Xiangyang Song" has been popular among the people.

古文：山蛮前后不可制者皆出，缘沔为村落，户口殷盛。
现代文：一直藏在山中没人能制服的山蛮都走出深山，沿着沔水定居下来，而且人丁兴旺。
English: The mountain barbarians, who had been hiding in the mountains and no one could subdue them, came out of the mountains and settled down along the Surabaya River, and they are thriving.

古文：及卒，蛮追送至沔口。
现代文：刘道产死后，山蛮们一直送他的灵柩到沔口。
English: After Liu Dao's death, the mountain men carried his coffin all the way to Hekou.

古文：未几，群蛮大动，征西司马硃修之讨之，不利；诏建威将军沈庆之代之，杀虏万馀人。
现代文：不久，山蛮纷纷叛乱，征西司马朱之出兵讨伐，没有成功；文帝诏令建威将军沈庆之代替朱之前去讨伐山蛮，结果杀伤俘虏山蛮一万多人。
English: Soon, the mountain barbarians rebelled one after another, and Emperor Wen ordered General Jian Wei to go to fight the mountain barbarians in place of Zhu, and as a result, more than 10,000 mountain barbarians were killed or captured.

古文：魏主使尚书李顺差次群臣，赐以爵位；顺受贿，品第不平。
现代文：北魏国主让尚书李顺评定文武百官的等级，并据此来进行封赏赐爵。李顺接受贿赂，所定等级极不公平。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty asked Shangshu Li Shun to evaluate the level of 100 civil and military officials, and based on this, he awarded knighthoods. Li Shun accepted bribes, and the level set was extremely unfair.

古文：是岁，凉州人徐桀告之，魏主怒，且以顺保庇沮渠氏，面欺误国，赐顺死。
现代文：这年，凉州人徐桀告发了他，认为李顺是在公开欺君误国，所以命令李顺自杀。
English: This year, Liangzhou resident Xu Wei denounced him, believing that Li Shun was openly deceiving the king and betraying the country, so he ordered Li Shun to commit suicide.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之中元嘉二十年
现代文：元嘉二十年
English: 20 years of Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月，魏皮豹子等进击乐乡，将军王奂之等败没。
现代文：春季，正月，北魏征西将军皮豹子进犯乐乡，刘宋将军王奂之等战败，全军覆没。
English: In the spring and the first month of the year, the Northern Wei general of the Western Expedition, Pei Baozi, invaded Le Township, and the Liu Song general, Wang Xizhi, and others were defeated, and the whole army was wiped out.

古文：魏军进至下辩，将军强玄明等败死。
现代文：北魏军队进抵下辩，刘宋将军强玄明等战败而亡。
English: The Northern Wei army arrived and fought, and Liu Song's general Qiang Xuanming and others were defeated and died.

古文：二月，胡崇之与魏战于浊水，崇之为魏所擒，馀众走还汉中。
现代文：二月，刘宋刺史胡崇之与北魏军队在浊水相战，胡崇之被北魏所俘，剩余的部下士卒逃回汉中。
English: In February, Liu Song stabbed Hu Chongzhi and the Northern Wei army fought in Surabaya. Hu Chongzhi was captured by the Northern Wei, and the remaining subordinates fled back to Hanzhong.

古文：将军姜道祖兵败，降魏，魏遂取仇池。
现代文：将军姜道祖也大败，投降了北魏。北魏于是夺取了仇池。
English: General Jiang Daozhu also suffered a crushing defeat and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern Wei Dynasty then captured Qiuqiu.

古文：杨保炽走。
现代文：杨保炽逃走。
English: Yang Baoqing ran away.

古文：丙午，魏主如恒山之阳；三月，庚申，还宫。
现代文：丙午，北魏国主前往恒山之南。三月，庚申，魏主回到皇宫。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, the Northern Wei sovereign went to the south of the Hengshan Mountains. In March, the Northern Wei sovereign returned to the imperial palace.

古文：壬戌，乌洛侯国遣使如魏。
现代文：壬戌，乌洛侯国派使节前往北魏。
English: At that time, the Uluo State sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：初，魏之居北荒也，凿石为庙，在乌洛侯西北，以祀其先，高七十尺，深九十步。
现代文：当初，北魏居住在荒凉的北方边地的时候，在乌洛侯国的西北祭祀祖先，凿石头建寺庙，高七十尺、深九十步。
English: In the beginning, when the Northern Wei Dynasty lived in the desolate northern borderlands, they built a temple with a height of seventy feet and a depth of ninety paces in the northwest of the Uluo principality to worship their ancestors.

古文：及乌洛侯使者至魏，言石庙具在，魏主遣中书侍郎李敞诣石庙致祭，刻祝文于壁而还，去平城四千馀里。
现代文：乌洛侯使者到达北魏的时候，说石庙仍在，魏主便派中书侍郎李敞到石庙去祭祀。李敞在石庙的墙壁上刻下祝文后返回。石庙距平城四千多里。
English: When the emissary of the Ulu-khu arrived in the Northern Wei Dynasty, he said that the stone temple was still there, so the Lord of Wei sent the Chinese scribe Li Chan to the stone temple to make a sacrifice. Li Chan carved a congratulatory message on the wall of the stone temple and then returned. The stone temple is more than four thousand miles away from Pingcheng.

古文：魏河间公齐与武都王杨保宗对镇雒谷，保宗弟文德说保宗，令闭险自固以叛魏。
现代文：北魏河间公拓跋齐和武都王杨保宗分别驻守在谷两旁。杨保宗的弟弟杨文德劝杨保宗据守险要，以此背叛北魏。
English: The Northern Wei general Tuoba Qi and the Wu capital king Yang Baozong were stationed on both sides of the valley. Yang Baozong's brother Yang Wende advised Yang Baozong to hold fast and thus betray the Northern Wei.

古文：或以告齐，夏，四月，齐诱执保宗，送平城，杀之。
现代文：有人将此报告给了拓跋齐。夏季四月，拓跋齐诱使杨保宗前来并抓住了他，将他押送平城斩首。
English: Someone reported this to Tuoba Qi. In the summer of April, Tuoba Qi lured Yang Baozong to come and caught him, and he was taken to Pingcheng to be beheaded.

古文：前镇东司符达、征西从事中郎任朏等遂举兵立杨文德为主，据白崖，分兵取诸戍，进围仇池，自号征西将军、秦、河、梁三州牧、仇池公。
现代文：前任镇东将军苻达、征西从事中郎任等于是起兵立杨文德为盟主，占据白崖，分几路大军夺取各个据点，进兵包围了仇池，杨文德自封为征西将军，秦、河、梁三州牧和仇池公。
English: When the former Zhendong General Xinda and the Western Expeditionary Force engaged in Zhonglang Ren, it was tantamount to raising an army and setting up Yang Wende as the commander, occupying the White Cliff, dividing the army into several routes to seize various strongholds, and encircling Qiuchi. Yang Wende appointed himself as the Western Expeditionary Force General, Qin, He, Liang, Sanzhou, Mu and Qiuchi.

古文：甲午，立皇子诞为广陵王。
现代文：甲午，刘宋立皇子刘诞为广陵王。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Prince Liu Songli was born as the Guangling King.

古文：丁酉，魏大赦。
现代文：丁酉，北魏实行大赦。
English: Ding Xi, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：己亥，魏主如阴山。
现代文：己亥，北魏国主拓跋焘前去阴山。
English: At the end of the 19th century, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to the mountains.

古文：五月，魏古弼发上邽、高平、岍城诸军击杨文德，文德退走。
现代文：五月，北魏安西将军古弼征发上、高平、城等地的几支军队进攻杨文德，杨文德退走。
English: In May, several armies of the Northern Wei Anxi General Gu Xi sent troops to Shang, Gaoping, Cheng and other places to attack Yang Wende, and Yang Wende retreated.

古文：皮豹子督关中诸军至下辩，闻仇池解围，欲还；弼遣人谓豹子曰： 宋人耻败，必将复来。
现代文：征西将军皮豹子督统关中各路大军到下辩，听说仇池解除围困，打算回去。古弼马上派人对皮豹子说： 宋国耻于这次战败，一定会再回来。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Guanzhong Guanzhong, who was in charge of all the armies in Guanzhong, heard that the siege of Quchi had been lifted and planned to go back. Gu Yao immediately sent people to Guanzhong Guanzhong to say: Song Guozhong is ashamed of this defeat and will definitely come back again.

古文：军还之后，再举为难，不如练兵蓄力以待之。
现代文：你的军队回去之后，再次举兵是很难的，不如在此训练士卒，积蓄力量等待宋兵。
English: After your army returns, it is difficult to raise troops again. It is better to train soldiers here and accumulate strength to wait for Song soldiers.

古文：不出秋冬，宋师必至；以逸待劳，无不克矣。 
现代文：出不了秋冬二季，宋军一定会来。我们以逸待劳，没有不能攻克的。 
English: If we can't get out of the autumn and winter, the Song Army will definitely come. We will work hard, and there is nothing we can't conquer.

古文：豹子从之。
现代文：皮豹子听从了他的话。
English: The leopard obeyed his words.

古文：魏以豹子为仇池镇将。
现代文：北魏任命皮豹子做仇池镇将。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the leather leopard to be the general of Qiuqi Town.

古文：杨文德遣使来求援。
现代文：杨文德派使节来宋求援。
English: Yang Wende sent an envoy to Song Dynasty to ask for help.

古文：秋，七月，癸丑，诏以文德为都督北秦、雍二州诸军事、征西大将军、北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸丑，刘宋文帝下诏，任命杨文德为都督北秦、雍二州诸军事，征西大将军，北秦州刺史，武都王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Liu Songwen issued an edict, appointing Yang Mende as the governor of North Qin, the military commander of the two states of Yong, the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of North Qin, and the king of the capital.

古文：文德屯葭芦城，以任朏为左司马；武都、阴平氐多归之。
现代文：杨文德屯兵葭芦城，任命任为左司马。武都、阴平一带的氐人大多归附于他。
English: Yang Wende garrisoned Hulucheng, and was appointed as the Left Division of the Horse Guards. Most of the Hun people in Wudu and Yinping areas joined him.

古文：甲子，前雍州刺史刘真道、梁、南秦二州刺史裴方明，坐破仇池减匿金宝及善马，下狱死。
现代文：甲子，刘宋前雍州刺史刘真道，梁、南秦二州刺史裴方崐明被查出在仇池侵吞金银财宝及良马一事，被抓进牢狱，处以死刑。
English: Gao Zi, Liu Zhen Dao, Liu Song's predecessor as governor of Yongzhou, and Liang and Southern Qin's governor of Erzhou, Pei Fang Yiming, were found to have stolen gold, silver, treasures and fine horses in Quching. They were taken to prison and sentenced to death.

古文：九月，辛巳，魏主如漠南。
现代文：九月，辛己，北魏国主前往漠南。
English: In September, Xin Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to the south of the desert.

古文：甲辰，舍辎重，以轻骑袭柔然。
现代文：甲辰，魏军舍弃辎重，率轻骑袭击柔然。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the Wei army abandoned the heavy burden and rode lightly and attacked softly.

古文：分军为四道：乐安王范、建宁王崇各统十五将出东道，乐平王丕督十五将出西道，魏主出中道，中山王辰督十五将为后继。
现代文：分兵四路：乐安王拓跋范、建宁王拓跋崇各率十五名将领从东路进军，乐平王拓跋丕督统十五名将领从西路进军，北魏国主从中路进军，中山王拓跋辰督统十五名将领作为后援。
English: The division of the army into four routes: Le An Wang Tuoba Fan and Jianning Wang Tuoba Chong each led fifteen generals and marched from the east, Le Ping Wang Tuoba and his fifteen generals marched from the west, the Northern Wei ruler marched from the middle, and Zhongshan Wang Tuoba and his fifteen generals marched as backup.

古文：魏主至鹿浑谷，遇敕连可汗。
现代文：北魏国主来到鹿浑谷，正好与柔然国的敕连可汗相遇。
English: When the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty came to Luhun Valley, he happened to meet the Qilian Khan of the State of Juran.

古文：太子晃言于魏主曰： 贼不意大军猝至，宜掩其不备，速进击之。 
现代文：太子拓跋晃对北魏国主说： 柔然贼兵没想到我们的大部队突然到此，我们该趁他们没有防备时立刻进攻。 
English: Prince Tuobao said to the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty: "Gentle thief soldiers did not expect our large forces to suddenly arrive here. We should take advantage of their unpreparedness and attack immediately."

古文：尚书令刘絜固谏，以为贼营中尘盛，其众必多，出至平地，恐为所围。不如须诸军大集，然后击之。
现代文：尚书令刘却竭力劝阻，他认为： 柔然军营中尘土很大，他们的人一定很多，到平地去与他们交战，恐怕会被柔然军队包围，不如等到各路大军会集到这里之后再攻打。 
English: Shang Shuling Liu tried his best to dissuade him. He thought: There is a lot of dust in the Juran army camp, and there must be a lot of their people. If you go to the plain to fight them, you will probably be surrounded by the Juran army. It is better to wait until all the armies gather here before attacking.

古文：晃曰： 尘之盛者，由军士惊怖扰乱故也，何得营上而有此尘乎！ 
现代文：拓跋晃说： 柔然军营尘土飞扬，是因为柔然士卒惊慌失措到处乱跑所造成的，不然，怎么会在军营上空有如此多的尘土呢！ 
English: Tuoba said: "The dust flying over the Juran military camp was caused by the panic of the Juran soldiers running around. Otherwise, how could there be so much dust over the military camp?"

古文：魏主疑之，不急击。
现代文：北魏国主为此也将信将疑，没有马上攻打。
English: For this reason, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty was also suspicious and did not attack immediately.

古文：柔然遁去。追至石水，不及而还。
现代文：柔然部队趁机逃走，北魏国主追到石水，没有追上而返回。
English: Zhu Rong's troops took the opportunity to escape. They chased the Northern Wei sovereign to Shishui, but did not catch him and returned.

古文：既而获柔然候骑曰： 柔然不觉魏军至，上下惶骇，引众北走，经六七日，知无追者，始乃徐行。 
现代文：不久，俘获了柔然的侦察骑兵说： 柔然国没有发觉魏兵的到来，所以当得知魏兵已到时，整个军营慌作一团，敕连可汗赶快率将士向北而逃，跑了六七天，知道后面没有追赶的魏兵，才开始缓步行进。 
English: Soon, the reconnaissance cavalryman who captured Zhu Ran said: Zhu Ran's country did not notice the arrival of the Wei soldiers, so when it was learned that the Wei soldiers had arrived, the entire military camp panicked. Qilian Khan hurriedly fled the soldiers to the north and ran for six or seven days. When he knew that there were no Wei soldiers chasing him, he began to walk slowly.

古文：魏主深恨之。
现代文：北魏国主听后非常后悔。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty was very sorry to hear this.

古文：自是军国大事，皆与太子谋之。
现代文：从此以后，每遇军队或国家大事，北魏国主都要和拓跋晃商量。
English: From then on, whenever there was a military or national event, the Northern Wei sovereign had to consult with Tuo Babang.

古文：司马楚之别将兵督军粮，镇北将军封沓亡降柔然，说柔然令击楚之以绝军食。
现代文：琅邪王司马楚之另外率领一支部队督运军粮。镇北将军封沓逃走归降柔然，他劝说柔然攻打司马楚之，以断绝北魏兵士的粮饷。
English: In addition, the evil king Sima Chu led an army to supervise the transportation of military grain. Zhenbei General Feng Qi fled and surrendered to Zhu Rong. He persuaded Zhu Rong to attack Sima Chu to cut off the grain supply of the Northern Wei soldiers.

古文：俄而军中有告失驴耳者，诸将莫晓其故。楚之曰： 此必贼遣奸人入营觇伺，割驴耳以为信耳。
现代文：不久，司马楚之军中有人报告说有一只驴子的耳朵没有了，各位将领不知这是什么缘故，司马楚之说： 这一定是贼军派奸人偷偷到我们这里察看动静，割掉一只驴的耳朵作为证据。
English: Soon, someone in Sima Chu's army reported that a donkey's ear was missing. The generals did not know what the reason was. Sima Chu said, "It must be that the bandits sent a traitor to sneak up on us and cut off a donkey's ear as evidence."

古文：贼至不久，宜急为之备。 
现代文：贼军马上就会来进犯，我们应该迅速做好准备。 
English: The bandits will attack soon, we should prepare quickly.

古文：乃伐仰为城，以水灌之，令冻；城立而柔然至，冰坚滑，不可攻，乃散走。
现代文：于是，司马楚之命砍伐柳树建造城堡，然后把水浇在上面使之结冰。城堡刚刚建好，柔然兵就到了，由于城堡地面冰坚而滑，柔然兵无法攻城，于是就撤走了。
English: Therefore, Sima Chu's order was to cut down willow trees to build a castle, and then pour water on it to make it freeze. The castle had just been built, when the soldiers arrived. Since the ground of the castle was icy and slippery, the soldiers could not attack the city, so they withdrew.

古文：十一月，将军姜道盛与杨文德合众二万攻魏浊水戍，魏皮豹子、河间公齐救之，道盛败死。
现代文：十一月，刘宋将军姜道盛同杨文德合兵共二万人，攻打北魏的浊水戍。北魏皮豹子和河间公拓跋齐赶来营救，姜道盛战败身亡。
English: In November, Jiang Dousheng, the general of Liu Song Dynasty, and Yang Wende, together with a total of 20,000 soldiers, attacked the Northern Wei's Surabaya. The Northern Wei's Pei Taobao and Hema Gong Tuo rushed to rescue, and Jiang Dousheng was defeated and died.

古文：甲子，魏主还，至朔方，下诏令皇太子副理万机，总统百揆。
现代文：甲子，北魏国主拓跋焘在返回京城的途中来到朔方，下诏让太子拓跋晃协佐总管全国日常事务，统领文武百官。
English: On his way back to the capital, Prince Tuobao, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, came to the Shuo side and ordered Prince Tuobao to be the general manager of the daily affairs of the whole country and the leader of hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：且曰： 诸功臣勤劳日久，皆当以爵归第，随时朝请，飨宴朕前，论道陈谟而已，不宜复烦以剧职；更举贤俊以备百官。 
现代文：拓跋焘还说： 各位功臣劳苦很长时间了，都应该按自己的爵位回到府中去养老。按时朝见或在朕面前参加宴会，谈论一些治国之道，陈述一下自己的见解，这样也就可以了。不适于再担任繁重的职务来劳烦自身。我们要另外推荐贤能俊才来完备百官职位。 
English: Tuobao also said, "All of you heroes and heroines have been working hard for a long time, and you should return to the palace to retire according to your titles. You can meet me in the morning on time or attend a banquet in front of me, talk about some ways of governing the country, and state your own opinions. It is not suitable for you to take on heavy duties to trouble yourself. We have to recommend another talented person to complete the hundred official positions.

古文：十二月，辛卯，魏主还平城。
现代文：十二月，丁卯，北魏国主返回平城。
English: In December, Emperor Dingwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之中元嘉二十一年春，正月，己亥，帝耕藉田，大赦。
现代文：元嘉二十一年春季，正月，己亥，刘宋文帝举行亲耕仪式，实行大赦。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, the first month, Ji Hai, Emperor Liu Songwen held a ceremony of pro-cultivation and implemented an amnesty.

古文：壬寅，魏太子始总百揆，命侍中、中书监穆寿、司徒崔浩、侍中张黎、古弼辅太子决庶政，上书者皆称臣，仪与表同。
现代文：壬寅，北魏太子拓跋晃开始总管百官事务。拓跋焘任命中侍、中书监穆寿，司徒崔浩，侍中张黎、古弼辅佐太子拓跋晃裁决日常政务。凡上书给太子时都要称臣，礼仪与所称呼的尊卑一致。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Prince Tuobao began to be in charge of the affairs of hundreds of officials. Tuobao appointed the middle attendant, the Chinese librarian Mu Shou, the tutor Cui Hao, the attendant Zhang Li, and the assistant assistant to the prince Gu Wei Tuobao to adjudicate the daily affairs of government. Whenever a letter was sent to the prince, it was necessary to praise the subordinate, and the etiquette was consistent with the dignity of the address.

古文：古弼为人，忠慎质直。尝以上谷苑囿太广，乞减太半以赐贫民，入见魏主，欲奏其事。
现代文：古弼为人忠厚谨慎，善良正直，曾经因为上谷的皇家苑囿占地面积太大而请求减去一半面积，赐给贫民百姓。
English: Gu Yao was a loyal and prudent person, kind and honest. He once requested that half of the area be subtracted and given to the poor people because the area of the Royal Garden in Shangguan was too large.

古文：帝方与给事中刘树围棋，志不在弼。
现代文：当他进宫晋见拓跋焘，打算奏请这件事时，拓跋焘正在同给事中刘树下围棋，他的心思没在古弼身上。
English: When he went to the palace to see Tuobao and planned to ask him about the matter, Tuobao was playing Go with Liu Shu in the middle of the game, and his mind was not on Gu Yao.

古文：弼侍坐良久，不获陈闻。忽起，捽树头，掣下床，搏其耳，殴其背，曰： 朝廷不治，实尔之罪！ 
现代文：古弼坐等许久，没有得到说话的机会，他忽然跳起来，揪住刘树的头发，把他拉下床，揪着他的耳朵殴打他的后背，说： 朝廷没有治理好，实在是你的罪过！ 
English: Gu Yao sat and waited for a long time without getting a chance to speak, he suddenly jumped up, grabbed Liu Shu's hair, pulled him off the bed, covered his ears and beat his back, saying: "The imperial court did not govern well, it's really your fault!"

古文：帝失容，舍棋曰： 不听奏事，朕之过也，树何罪！
现代文：拓跋焘大惊失色，放下棋子说： 不听你奏请事情，是我的过错，刘树有什么罪过！
English: Tuoba was stunned and lost his composure. He put down his pieces and said, "I am at fault for not listening to your request. What is Liu Shu guilty of?

古文：置之！ 
现代文：放了他！ 
English: Let him go!

古文：弼具以状闻，帝皆可其奏。
现代文：古弼把要奏请的事情全都说了出来，拓跋焘完全同意。
English: Gu Yao said everything that needed to be said, and Tuobao completely agreed.

古文：弼曰： 为人臣无礼至此，其罪大矣！ 
现代文：古弼说： 我身为臣属，竟无礼到这种程度，罪过实在太大。 
English: Gu Yao said: As a subordinate, I have been so disrespectful to such an extent. My sin is really too great.

古文：出诣公车，免冠徒跣请罪。
现代文：说完出宫来到公车官署，脱掉帽子、光着脚请求处罚。
English: After that, I went to the bus office, took off my hat and barefoot to request punishment.

古文：帝召入，谓曰： 吾闻筑社之役，蹇蹶而筑之，端冕而事之，神降之福。
现代文：拓跋焘召他入宫，对他说： 我听说过建造社坛的工事，是要一跛一拐地去干活；完工后，要衣冠端正地去祭祀，神灵就降福于他。
English: Tuobao called him into the palace and said to him, "I have heard that the construction of the community altar is to be carried out with a limp. After completion, you must go to the sacrifice with a proper robe and crown, and the gods will bless him.

古文：然则卿有何罪！
现代文：可是你有什么罪过呢！
English: But what is your crime?

古文：其冠履就职。
现代文：戴上帽子穿上鞋做你该做的事去吧。
English: Put on your hat and shoes and do what you gotta do.

古文：苟有可以利社稷、便百姓者，竭力为之，勿顾虑也。 
现代文：如果是对国家有利，方便百姓的事，就要尽全力去做，不要有任何顾虑。 
English: If it is beneficial to the country and convenient for the people, we must do our best to do it without any concerns.

古文：太子课民稼穑，使无牛者借人牛以耕种，而为之芸田以偿之，凡耕种二十二亩而芸七亩，大略以是为率。
现代文：太子拓跋晃督促百姓种庄稼，让没有牛的人家去向有牛的人家借牛来耕种，然后再替有牛的人家锄地来作为偿还，通常是耕种二十二亩，替人家锄地七亩，大概都以这种比例来进行。
English: Prince Takubawaka urged the people to grow crops, so that people without cattle would borrow cattle from people with cattle to cultivate, and then they would plow land for people with cattle as repayment, usually farming twenty-two mu and plowing seven mu for others, probably in this proportion.

古文：使民各标姓名于田首，以知其勤惰，禁饮酒游戏者。
现代文：让百姓把自己的姓名标在地头，这样就可以看到谁勤谁懒。同时，禁止百姓喝酒和游玩。
English: Let the people mark their names on the ground, so you can see who is hardworking and who is lazy. At the same time, ban people from drinking and playing.

古文：于是垦田大增。
现代文：因此，开垦的农田大大增加。
English: As a result, the amount of cultivated farmland has increased significantly.

古文：戊申，魏主诏： 王、公以下至庶人，有私养沙门、巫觋于家者，皆遣诣官曹；过二月十五日不出，沙门、巫觋死，主人门诛。 
现代文：戊申，北魏国主拓跋焘下诏说： 王公以下直到平民，私自在家供养僧侣、男女巫师的人都要送到官府。超过二月十五日而不交出者，处死僧侣和巫师，私藏者满门抄斩。 
English: According to the edict issued by the Northern Wei ruler Tuoba, "From the prince down to the common people, those who privately support monks and witches at home must be sent to the government office. If they do not surrender after February 15, the monks and witches will be put to death, and those who secretly hide will be beheaded."

古文：庚戌，又诏： 王、公、卿、大夫之子皆诣太学，其百工、商贾之子，当各习父兄之业，毋得私立学校；违者，师死，主人门诛。 
现代文：庚戌，又下诏说： 王、公、卿、大夫的儿子都要送到太学读书，而百工、商人之子，都要学习并继承父兄的职业，不能私设学校。违犯规定的，老师处死，当事人全家抄斩。 
English: He also issued the following edict: The sons of kings, princes, nobles, and doctors should all be sent to study at Taixu, while the sons of craftsmen and merchants should study and inherit their father's and brother's professions, and should not set up private schools. Teachers who violate the regulations will be put to death, and the whole family of the offender will be beheaded.

古文：二月，辛未，魏中山王辰、内都坐大官薛辨、尚书奚眷等八将坐击柔然后期，斩于都南。
现代文：二月，辛未，北魏中山王拓跋辰、内都坐大官薜辨、尚书奚眷等八名将领因在攻打柔然时没能按时到达，在平城南郊被斩首。
English: In February, Xinwei, eight generals, including the Northern Wei Middle Mountain King Tuoba Chen, the Inner Mongolian Grand Officer Shuban, and the relatives of Shang Shuxuan, were beheaded in the southern suburb of Pingcheng because they failed to arrive on time when attacking Juran.

古文：初，魏尚书令刘絜，久典机要，恃宠自专，魏主心恶之。
现代文：当初，北魏尚书令刘长期主管朝廷机要事务，他依仗主上的宠信，独断专行，北魏国主拓跋焘厌恶他。
English: At first, the Northern Wei Emperor ordered Liu to be in charge of the important affairs of the imperial court for a long time. He relied on the Lord's favor and acted arbitrarily. The Northern Wei ruler Tuobao detested him.

古文：及将袭柔然，絜谏曰： 蠕蠕迁徙无常，前者出师，劳而无功；不如广农积谷以待其来。 
现代文：北魏要去攻袭柔然汗国时，刘劝谏说： 蠕蠕经常迁徙，没有固定居处，上次我们出兵，劳而无功，不如扩大农业生产、广屯粮食，等待他们前来。 
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty was about to attack the Zhu Ran Khanate, Liu Zhaojun said: "The Cormorants often migrate and have no fixed abode. The last time we sent out troops, it was in vain. It would be better to expand agricultural production and Canton grain and wait for them to come.

古文：崔浩固劝魏主行，魏主从之。
现代文：司徒崔浩则坚持劝拓跋焘前去征讨，拓跋焘接受了他的建议。
English: Stul Cui Hao insisted on advising Tuobao to go to collect, and Tuobao accepted his suggestion.

古文：絜耻其言不用，欲败魏师；魏主与诸将期会鹿浑谷，絜矫诏易其期。
现代文：刘为自己的建议未被采纳而感到羞愧，打算想办法使北魏军队打败仗。拓跋焘与各位将领约好日期在鹿浑谷会师，刘却假传诏令，私改了日期。
English: Liu was ashamed that his suggestion was not accepted and planned to find a way to defeat the Northern Wei army. Tuoba and the generals agreed on a date to meet in Luhun Valley, but Liu falsely issued a decree and changed the date.

古文：帝至鹿浑谷，欲击柔然，絜谏止之，使待诸将。
现代文：拓跋焘到达鹿浑谷已经六天，其他将领还未到达，柔然王于是远远逃走，北魏将士追赶而未追上。
English: It had been six days since Tuobao arrived in Luhun Valley, and the other generals had not yet arrived. Therefore, King Julan fled far away, and the Northern Wei generals chased after him but did not catch up.

古文：帝留鹿浑谷六日，诸将不至，柔然遂远遁，追之不及。
现代文：北魏军队回师，途经沙漠地带，粮食已经吃完，将士死了很多。
English: The Northern Wei army returned to the division, passing through the desert, the grain had been eaten, and many soldiers died.

古文：军还，经漠中，粮尽，士卒多死。絜阴使人惊魏军，劝帝委军轻还，帝不从。
现代文：刘又私下派人惊扰魏军军心，刘本人力劝拓跋焘抛下军队自己轻装回京，拓跋焘没有接受。
English: Liu also privately sent someone to disturb the military spirit of the Wei army. Liu himself urged Tuoba to leave the army and return to Beijing with a light load. Tuoba did not accept.

古文：絜以军出无功，请治崔浩之罪。
现代文：刘以这次军队出师无功而要求追究崔浩的罪责。
English: Liu demanded that Cui Hao be held accountable for the failure of this military deployment.

古文：帝曰： 诸将失期，遇贼不击，浩何罪也！ 
现代文：拓跋焘说： 各路将领延误了会师日期，我自己遇上贼兵而没有攻打，崔浩有什么罪呢！ 
English: Tuobao said: Generals from all directions delayed the date of joining the division, I myself met the bandits and did not attack, what is Cui Hao's crime?

古文：浩以絜矫诏事白帝，帝至五原，收絜，囚之。
现代文：崔浩把刘假传诏令之事告诉了拓跋焘，拓跋焘抵达五原，将刘逮捕囚禁起来。
English: Cui Hao told Tuobao about Liu's fake edict. Tuobao arrived in Wuhuan and arrested and imprisoned Liu.

古文：帝之北行也，絜私谓所亲曰： 若车驾不返，吾当立乐平王。 
现代文：拓跋焘北征时，刘暗中对与他亲近的人说： 如果车驾回不来了，我就拥立乐平王拓跋丕做皇帝。 
English: During the Northern Expedition, Liu secretly said to those close to him: "If the car does not come back, I will make Leping Wang Tuobao the emperor."

古文：絜闻尚书右丞张嵩家有图谶，问曰： 刘氏应王，继国家后，吾有姓名否？
现代文：刘听说尚书右丞张嵩家藏有图谶，就问张嵩： 刘氏应该称王，承继国家以后的大业，那里有我的姓名吗？ 
English: When Liu heard that the family of Shangshu Rongcheng Zhang Song had a collection of maps, he asked Zhang Song: "Should the Liu clan be crowned king and succeed the great cause of the country, is my name there?"

古文：嵩曰： 有姓无名。 
现代文：张嵩说： 有姓而没有名。 
English: Zhang Song said, "It is better to have a surname than a name."

古文：帝闻之，命有司穷冶，索嵩家，得谶书。
现代文：拓跋焘听到这件事后，命令有关部门严厉追究查治，搜查张嵩家宅，果然得到了那本谶书。
English: After Tuobao heard about this, he ordered the relevant departments to strictly investigate and investigate, search Zhang Song's home, and finally got the stolen book.

古文：事连南康公锹邻，絜、嵩、邻皆夷三族，死者百馀人。
现代文：这件事还牵连了南康公狄邻。最终，刘张嵩和狄邻都被屠灭三族，死了一百多人。
English: This incident also implicated Nan Kang Gong Di's neighbor. In the end, Liu Zhang Song and Di's neighbor were both slaughtered, and more than a hundred people died.

古文：絜在势要，好作威福，诸将破敌，所得财物皆与分之。
现代文：刘在位时，喜欢作威作福，将领们打败了敌人，得到的财宝都要与他同分。
English: When Liu was on the throne, he liked to use his power for good. When generals defeated the enemy, they had to share the treasure with him.

古文：既死，籍其家，财巨万。
现代文：刘被处死后，查抄他的家，财产以万万计。
English: After Liu was executed, his home was searched, and his property was worth tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：帝每言之，则切齿。
现代文：太武帝每次谈起这件事都恨得咬牙切齿。
English: Emperor Taowu gritted his teeth every time he talked about it.

古文：癸酉，乐平戾王丕以忧卒。
现代文：癸酉，乐平戾王拓跋丕忧虑过度而去世。
English: , 乐平王拓跋 overly worried and passed away.

古文：初，魏主筑白台，高二百馀尺。
现代文：当初，北魏国主曾建造白台，高二百多尺。
English: At the beginning, the Northern Wei sovereign had built a white platform, more than two hundred feet high.

古文：丕梦登其上，四顾不见人，命术士董道秀筮之，道秀曰： 大吉。 
现代文：拓跋丕梦见自己登上了白台，四处望去却不见人影，他叫术士董道秀为他占卜，董道秀说： 大吉。 
English: Tuobao dreamed that he was on the white platform. He looked around but saw no one. He asked the sorcerer Dong Daoxiu to tell his fortune. Dong Daoxiu said: "Good luck."

古文：丕默有喜色。
现代文：拓跋丕面露喜色。
English: Tuobao's face was radiant.

古文：及丕卒，道秀亦坐弃市。
现代文：等到拓跋丕去世，董道秀也因罪被押往刑场斩首。
English: When Tuobao died, Dong Daoxiu was also beheaded for his crime.

古文：高允闻之，曰： 夫筮者皆当依附爻象，劝以忠孝。
现代文：高允听说这件事后，说： 占卜的人都应当按照六爻的形象去规劝人们忠于国家孝敬父母。
English: When Gao Yun heard about this, he said, "Those who practice divination should follow the image of the Six Immortals to persuade people to be loyal to the country and honor their parents."

古文：王之问道秀也，道秀宜曰： 穷高为亢。
现代文：乐平王向董道秀问卦时，董道秀应该说： 高到极点就是亢。
English: When Leping Wang asked Dong Daoxiu for advice, Dong Daoxiu should have said: The highest point is the highest point.

古文：《易》曰： 亢龙有悔。 又曰： 高而无民。 皆不祥也，王不可以不戒。 
现代文：《易经》说： 亢龙有悔 ，又说： 高则无民 ，都是不吉祥的兆头，乐平王不能不以此为戒。 
English: "I Ching" said: "The dragon has remorse," and also said: "The mountain is without people," are all ominous signs. King Leping could not help but take this as a warning.

古文：如此，则王安于上，身全于下矣。
现代文：如果这样，在上，乐平王平安无事；在下，董道秀保全性命。
English: If so, on the top, King Leping is safe and sound; on the bottom, Dong Daoxiu has saved his life.

古文：道秀反之，宜其死也。 
现代文：董道秀却反其道而行之，他当然应该被处死。 
English: Dong Daoxiu, on the other hand, did the opposite. Of course, he should be executed.

古文：庚辰，魏主幸庐。
现代文：庚辰，北魏国主来到卢地。
English: Geng Chen, the Northern Wei sovereign, came to Ludi.

古文：己丑，江夏王义恭进位太尉，领司徒。
现代文：己丑，刘宋江夏王刘义恭晋升太尉，兼任司徒。
English: Liu Songjiang Xia Wang Liu Yigong was promoted to the rank of captain and concurrently served as an apprentice.

古文：庚寅，以侍中、领右卫将军沈演之为中领军，左卫将军范晔为太子詹事。
现代文：庚寅，刘宋任命侍中、兼右卫将军沈演之为中领军，左卫将军范晔为太子詹事。
English: Geng Yin and Liu Song appointed the Vice-Admiral and Right Guard General Shen Yuan as the leader of the middle army, and the Left Guard General Fan Yu as the prince.

古文：辛卯，立皇子宏为建平王。
现代文：辛卯，刘宋立皇子刘宏为建平王。
English: Xinwu, Liu Song made Prince Liu Hong the King of Jianping.

古文：三月，甲辰，魏主还宫。
现代文：三月，甲辰，北魏国主回到皇宫。
English: In March, Jia Chen, the Northern Wei sovereign, returned to the imperial palace.

古文：癸丑，魏主遣司空长孙道生镇统万。
现代文：癸丑，北魏国主派司空长孙道生镇守统万。
English: At the same time, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched Sun Daosheng, the chief of the Air Ministry, to guard the capital.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，魏侍中、太宰、阳平王杜超为帐下所杀。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙亥，北魏侍中、太宰、阳平王杜超被手下的卫士杀死。
English: In the summer, in April, in the second year of the Heian period, the Northern Wei samurai, Dazai, and Yangping King Du Chao were killed by their guards.

古文：六月，魏北部民杀立义将军衡阳公莫孤，帅五千馀落北走。遣兵追击之，至漠南，杀其渠帅，馀徙冀、相、定三州为营户。
现代文：六月，北魏北方地区百姓杀了立义将军衡阳公莫孤，聚集五千多帐落崐向北逃去，北魏朝廷派兵前去追击，追到漠南，杀了他们的首领，其余的百姓则迁到冀、相、定三州成为营户。
English: In June, the people in the northern region of the Northern Wei Dynasty killed Hengyang Gongmo Guo, the general of Liyi, and gathered more than 5,000 tents to flee to the north. The Northern Wei Dynasty sent soldiers to chase them, chase them to the south of the desert, and kill their leaders. The rest of the people moved to Ji, Sang and Ding three states to become tenants.

古文：吐谷浑王慕利延兄子纬世与魏使者谋降魏，慕利延杀之。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延的侄子慕容纬世同北魏使节密谋要向北魏投降，慕容慕利延杀了他。
English: The nephew of the Turku Hun Khan Murong Muriyan, Murong Weixi, plotted with the Northern Wei envoy to surrender to the Northern Wei, and Murong Muriyan killed him.

古文：是月，纬世弟叱力延等八人奔魏，魏以叱力延为归义王。
现代文：这个月，慕容纬世的弟弟慕容叱力延等八人投奔北魏，北魏朝廷封慕容叱力延为归义王。
English: This month, eight people, including Murong Sheli Yan, the younger brother of Murong Sheli, defected to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the Northern Wei Dynasty crowned Murong Sheli Yan as the King of Guiyi.

古文：沮渠无讳卒，弟安周代立。
现代文：沮渠无讳去世，其弟沮渠安周代替他为王。
English: Deshu Mubo died, and his younger brother, Deshu Anzhu, became king in his place.

古文：魏入中国以来，虽颇用古礼祀天地、宗庙、百神，而犹循其旧俗，所祀胡神甚众。
现代文：北魏进入中原以来，虽然也常常使用古代礼仪来祭祀天地、祖庙和各种神灵，却仍在沿循旧有习俗，祭祀的胡族神很多。
English: Since the Northern Wei Dynasty entered the Central Plains, although ancient rituals have often been used to sacrifice heaven and earth, ancestral temples and various gods, they are still following old customs, and there are many Hu gods to be sacrificed.

古文：崔浩请存合于祀典者五十七所，其馀复重及小神悉罢之。
现代文：司徒崔浩请求只留下符合祭祀典章的五十七所寺庙，其余重复的寺庙和过小的神祗都取消。
English: The chief priest Cui Hao requested that only the fifty-seven temples that complied with the sacrificial regulations should remain, and that the remaining duplicate temples and shrines that were too small should be abolished.

古文：魏主从之。
现代文：北魏国主同意他的建议。
English: Tuobao adopted Cui Hao's opinion.

古文：秋，七月，癸卯，魏东雍州刺史沮渠秉谋反，伏诛。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸卯，北魏东雍州刺史沮渠秉图谋造反，被朝廷处死。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zou Yu, the Northern Wei ruler of East Yongzhou, plotted a rebellion and was executed by the imperial court.

古文：八月，乙丑，魏主畋于河西，尚书令古弼留守。
现代文：八月，乙丑，北魏国主拓跋焘去河西狩猎，尚书令古弼留守平城。
English: In August, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty went on a hunting trip to Hexi and ordered Gu Zang to stay in Pingcheng.

古文：诏以肥马给猎骑，弼悉以弱者给之。
现代文：拓跋焘下诏让古弼将肥壮的马送给打猎骑兵，但古弼提供的却全是瘦弱的马。
English: Tuoba issued an edict to let Guzheng send fat horses to the hunting cavalry, but Guzheng only provided thin horses.

古文：帝大怒曰： 笔头奴敢裁量朕！
现代文：拓跋焘勃然大怒说： 笔头奴胆敢对我的诏令打折扣。
English: Tuobao flew into a rage and said: "How dare the pen-pusher discount my edict.

古文：朕还台，先斩此奴！ 
现代文：我回去，先折了这个奴才！ 
English: I'll go back and break this bastard first!

古文：弼头锐，故帝常以笔目之。
现代文：古弼的头长得很尖，拓跋焘经常把他的脑袋比作笔尖。
English: Gudang's head is very sharp, and Tuobao often compares his head to the tip of a pen.

古文：弼官属惶怖，恐并坐诛。
现代文：古弼的属下官员惶然恐怖，唯恐自己受牵连被杀。
English: The officials under Gu Yao panicked, fearing that they would be implicated and killed.

古文：弼曰： 吾为人臣，不使人主盘于游畋，其罪小；不备不虞，乏军国之用，其罪大。
现代文：古弼却说： 我身为人臣，不让人主沉湎于游玩狩猎之中，这个罪过是小的。如果不预防国家出现的不测之事，使国家缺少军队所用的物资，这个罪过才是大的。
English: Gudrun, however, said: As a vassal, I do not allow my lord to indulge in hunting. This is a small sin. If I do not prevent unforeseen events from occurring in the country, causing the country to lack the materials used by the army, this is a great sin.

古文：今蠕蠕方强，南寇未灭，吾以肥马供军，弱马供猎，为国远虑，虽死何伤！
现代文：现在蠕蠕正处于强盛时期，南方贼寇还未消灭，我把肥壮的马供军队所用，瘦弱的马供打猎所用，这是为国家做长远打算，虽然被处死了又有什么关系呢？
English: Now Creep Creep is in its heyday, the southern bandits have not yet been eliminated. I use fat horses for the army and thin horses for hunting. This is a long-term plan for the country. What does it matter if I am executed?

古文：且吾自为之，非诸君之忧也。 帝闻之，叹曰： 有臣如此，国之宝也！ 
现代文：况且这一切是我一个人所做的，你们不要担心。 拓跋焘听说后，感叹说： 我有这样的臣子，是国家之宝呀。 
English: Moreover, all of this was done by me alone, so don't worry. Upon hearing this, Tuobao sighed and said, "I have such a vassal, he is a national treasure."

古文：赐衣一袭，马二匹，鹿十头。
现代文：赏赐给古弼一套礼服、两匹马和十头鹿。
English: He was rewarded with a set of ceremonial robes, two horses and ten deer.

古文：它日，魏主复畋于山北，获麋鹿数千头。
现代文：又一天，拓跋焘再次去山北打猎，捕获了几千头麋鹿。
English: Another day, Tuoba Yao went hunting again in Shanbei and caught several thousand elk.

古文：诏尚书发牛车五百乘以运之。
现代文：拓跋焘下诏给尚书，让尚书派出五百辆车来运送麋鹿。
English: Tuoba issued an edict to Shangshu, ordering him to send 500 vehicles to transport the elk.

古文：诏使已去，魏主谓左右曰： 笔公必不与我，汝辈不如自以马运之。 
现代文：拿着诏书的信使已经走了，拓跋焘对左右将士说： 笔头公一定不会给我这么多车，你们不如用马来运送。 
English: The messenger with the imperial edict had already left, and Tuoba said to the generals on both sides: "The man of letters will certainly not give me so many carts, you might as well use horses to transport them."

古文：遂还。
现代文：说完他就回宫了。
English: I just came back.

古文：行百馀里，得弼表曰： 今秋谷悬黄，麻菽布野，猪鹿窃食；鸟雁侵费，风雨所耗，朝夕三倍。
现代文：拓跋焘刚走了一百多里，就收到古弼的奏表说： 今年秋天谷穗下垂而且颜色金黄，桑麻大豆遍布在田野里，野猪野鹿偷吃，飞鸟大雁啄食，加之风吹雨打，这样损耗早晚就会相差三倍。
English: Tuoba Yao had just walked more than a hundred miles when he received Gu Yao's report saying, "This autumn, the ears of corn are drooping and the color is golden, the mulberry soybeans are all over the fields, the wild boars and wild deer are stealing, the birds and geese are eating, and the wind is blowing and the rain is beating, so the losses will be three times different sooner or later.

古文：乞赐矜缓，使得收载。 
现代文：乞请允许推迟延缓运送麋鹿，以便把谷子尽快收割运送完毕。 
English: Please slow down for a moment so that we can collect the grain.

古文：帝曰： 果如吾言，笔公可谓社稷之臣矣！ 
现代文：拓跋焘说： 果然如我所说的那样，笔头公可称得上是国家栋梁之臣啦！ 
English: Tuobao said: As I said, the writer can be said to be a pillar of the state!

古文：魏主使员外散骑常侍高济来聘。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘派员外散骑常侍高济去刘宋探访。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, sent a member of the imperial cavalry, Gaoji, to visit Liu Song.

古文：戊辰，以荆州刺史衡阳王义季为征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南衮州刺史，以南谯王义宣为荆州刺史。
现代文：戊辰，刘宋朝廷任命荆州刺史衡阳王刘义季为征北大将军、开府仪同三司和南兖州刺史，南谯王刘义宣为荆州刺史。
English: The Wangchen and Liu Song dynasties appointed Hengyang King Liu Yizi of Jingzhou as the general of the Northern Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary of the Southern Expedition, and Liu Yixuan of the Southern Expedition as the general of the Northern Expedition.

古文：初，帝以义宣不才，故不用；会稽公主屡以为言，帝不得已用之。
现代文：当初，文帝认为刘义宣没有什么才能，因而不用他，姐姐会稽公主总是替刘义宣说话，文帝才不得不用他。
English: At first, Emperor Wendi thought that Liu Yixuan had no talent, so he did not use him. His sister, the Princess of the Auditing Committee, always spoke for Liu Yixuan, so Emperor Wendi had to use him.

古文：先赐中诏敕之曰： 师护以在西久，比表求还，今欲听许，以汝代之。
现代文：正式诏令下达之前，文帝先给他下了一份手诏，告诫他说： 师护在西边呆得时间太长了，近来表奏要求回来，现在我打算答应他，让你接替他的职务。
English: Before the official edict was issued, Emperor Wen first gave him a handwritten edict, admonishing him: "Shigu has stayed too long in the west, recently he has asked me to come back, now I am going to agree with him and let you take over his duties.

古文：师护虽无殊绩，洁己节用，通怀期物，不恣群下，声著西土，为士庶所安，论者乃未议迁之。
现代文：师护虽然没有特殊的成就，但他洁身自好，俭朴廉正，胸怀宽广，待人诚实，不骄纵属下，因而其声名在西部广为传诵，被士族和平民所拥戴，监察论政的人才没有提出调他离任的动议。
English: Although he did not have any special achievements, he was self-righteous, frugal, honest, broad-minded, honest, and not proud of his subordinates. As a result, his reputation was widely recited in the west, and he was embraced by the warrior class and the common people. The people who monitored and discussed politics did not put forward a motion to transfer him from office.

古文：今之回换，更为汝与师护年时一辈，欲各试其能。
现代文：现在我换了你，还是因为你跟师护辈份一样，想试试你们各自的能力。
English: Now I've replaced you, or because you, like the teachers and guardians, want to try out your respective abilities.

古文：汝往，脱有一事减之者，既于西夏交有巨碍，迁代之讥，必归责于吾矣。
现代文：你去西边，假若有一件事处理得不如他，就会同荆楚一带产生隔阂，讥刺我换人不当，将责任归于我一身。
English: If you go to the west and do not handle one thing as well as he did, you will create a rift with the Jingchu area, ridicule me for changing people improperly, and put the responsibility on me alone.

古文：此事亦易勉耳，无为使人复生评论也！ 
现代文：对这个差事，你也不过就是努力治理，谨慎为之罢了，不能让别人又来指指点点，说出别的话来。 
English: As far as this mission is concerned, all you can do is to manage it diligently and prudently. You can't let others point fingers or say anything else.

古文：义宣至镇，勤自课厉，事亦修理。
现代文：刘义宣到了他的住地，勤勉严格，各种事务做得也很有条不紊。
English: When Liu Yixuan arrived at his place of residence, he was diligent and strict, and all kinds of affairs were done in an orderly manner.

古文：庚辰，会稽长公主卒。
现代文：庚辰，刘宋会稽长公主去世。
English: Princess Gengchen, Auditor of the Liu Song Society, passed away.

古文：吐谷浑叱力延等请师于魏以讨吐谷浑王慕利延，魏主使晋王伏罗督诸军击之。
现代文：吐谷浑的慕容叱力延等请求北魏朝廷出兵讨伐吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延，北魏国主派晋王拓跋伏罗督统各路大军袭击慕容慕利延。
English: Tugu Hun's Murong Zhelian and others requested the Northern Wei court to send troops to fight the Tugu Hun Khan Murong Muliian, and the Northern Wei sovereign sent Jin Wang Tuoba to lead the troops to attack Murong Muliian.

古文：九月，甲辰，以沮渠安周为都督凉、河、沙三州诸军事、凉州刺史、河西王。
现代文：九月，甲辰，刘宋朝廷任命沮渠安周为都督凉、河、沙三州诸军事，凉州刺史和河西王。
English: In September, Jia Chen, the Liu Song Dynasty court appointed Deqiu An Zhou as the military governor of Liangshan, He and Shazhou, the governor of Liangzhou and the king of Hexi.

古文：丁未，魏主如漠南，将袭柔然，柔然敕连可汗远遁，乃止。
现代文：丁未，北魏国主前去漠南，准备袭击柔然，柔然敕连可汗远远逃走，于是停止。
English: Ding Wei, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to the south of the desert, prepared to attack Zhu Rong, Zhu Rong Lian Khan fled far away, and then stopped.

古文：敕连寻卒，子吐贺真立，号处罗可汗。
现代文：不久，敕连可汗去世，他的儿子郁久闾吐贺真继位，号称处罗可汗。
English: Soon after, Qilian Khan died, and his son, Yu Jiuyong, succeeded to the throne. He was known as Shuro Khan.

古文：魏晋王伏罗至乐都，引兵从间道袭吐谷浑，至大母桥。
现代文：北魏晋王拓跋伏罗到达乐都，带领军队从小路袭击吐谷浑，到达大母桥。
English: The Northern Wei Jin King Tuoba Luo arrived in Letu, leading the army to attack Tuyugun from a small road and reach the Dam Bridge.

古文：吐谷浑王慕利延大惊，逃奔白兰，慕利延兄子拾寅奔河西；魏军斩首五千馀级，慕利延从弟伏念等帅万三千落降于魏。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延非常惊恐逃到了白兰，他的侄子慕容拾寅逃奔河西。北魏军队杀了五千多吐谷浑人。慕容慕利延的堂弟慕容伏念等人率一万三千多帐落向北魏投降。
English: The Turku Hun Khan Murong Muriyan was so terrified that he fled to Bran, and his nephew Murong Shuyin fled west of the river. The Northern Wei army killed more than five thousand Turku Huns. Murong Muriyan's cousin Murong Funei and others led more than thirteen thousand villages to surrender to the Northern Wei.

古文：冬，十月，己卯，以左军将军徐琼为衮州刺史，大将军参军申恬为冀州刺史。
现代文：冬季，十月，己卯，刘宋任命左军将军徐琼做兖州刺史，大将军参军申恬为冀州刺史。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Song appointed the general of the Left Army, Xu Qiong, as the historian of Zhangzhou, and the general who joined the army, Shen Yi, as the historian of Jizhou.

古文：徙衮州镇须昌，冀州镇历下，恬，谟之弟也。
现代文：将兖州的治所迁到须昌，冀州治所迁到了历下。申恬是申谟的弟弟。
English: He moved the provincial capital of Ganzhou to Suchang and the provincial capital of Jizhou to Leshan. Shen Rong was the younger brother of Shen Mue.

古文：十二月，丙戌，魏主还平城。
现代文：十二月，北魏国主回到了平城。
English: In December, the Northern Wei sovereign returned to Pingcheng.

古文：是岁，沙州牧李窦入朝于魏，魏人留之，以为外都大官。
现代文：这一年，沙州牧李宝来到平城朝见北魏国主。北魏朝廷把他留在了平城，任命他为外都大官。
English: In that year, Li Bao, the patriarch of Shazhou, came to Pingcheng to see the Northern Wei emperor. The Northern Wei court kept him in Pingcheng and appointed him as the foreign capital official.

古文：太子率更令何承天撰《元嘉新历》，表上之。
现代文：刘宋太子率更令何承天撰写《元嘉新历》，呈报给文帝。
English: Prince Liu Song even ordered He Chengtian to write the "Yuan Jia New Calendar" and submit it to Emperor Wen.

古文：以月食之冲知日所在。
现代文：他认为从月崐食时日月相对的关系就能知道太阳的位置。
English: He thought that the position of the sun could be known from the relative relationship between the sun and the moon during a lunar eclipse.

古文：又以中星检之，知尧时冬至日在须女十度，今在斗十七度。
现代文：他又用中星进行检查，测出帝尧时期冬至这天太阳位于须女星十度之处，现在在斗星十七度的位置上。
English: He also used the middle star to check and found that on the day of the winter solstice during the reign of the emperor, the sun was located at the tenth degree of the Pleiades, and now it is at the seventeenth degree of the Dipper.

古文：又测景校二至，差三日有馀，知今之南至日应在斗十三四度。
现代文：何承天还测量了日影，以此来校正冬至和夏至，最后测出有三天多的误差。他认为现在的冬至太阳应该在斗星十三四度的位置上。
English: He Chengtian also measured the shadow of the sun to calibrate the winter solstice and summer solstice, and finally measured an error of more than three days. He believes that the current winter solstice sun should be in the position of the zodiac.

古文：于是更立新法，冬至徙上三日五时，日之所在，移旧四度。
现代文：于是，他改订新的历法：将冬至往前移动了三天零五个时辰。太阳从它现在的位置上向原来的位置上移动了四度。
English: So he devised a new calendar: he moved the winter solstice forward by three days and five hours, and the sun moved four degrees from its current position to its original position.

古文：又月有迟疾，前历合朔，月食不在朔望；今皆以盈缩定其小馀，以正朔望之曰。
现代文：又由于月亮运转或快或慢，把原来的历法中的初一和十五拿来对照，发现月食并不在初一和十五这两个日子上。现在，他全部用每月天数的多少来推出闰月，以此调正了初一、十五的位置。
English: Also, because the moon moves either quickly or slowly, he compared the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month in the original calendar and found that the lunar eclipse was not on the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month. Now, he uses the number of days in the month to push out the leap month, thus adjusting the position of the first day and the fifteenth day of the month.

古文：诏付外详之。
现代文：文帝下诏交给宫外其他大臣详细考察。
English: Emperor Wen gave the edict to other ministers outside the palace for detailed examination.

古文：太史令钱乐之等奏：皆如承天所上，唯月有频三大，频二小，比旧法殊为乖异，谓宜仍旧。
现代文：太史令钱乐之等上奏，认为这一切都和何承天所讲的一样，但是何承天历法的月份有一连三个月都为大月、一连两个月都是小月的情况，比起旧历法来差异较大，更加有谬，认为还应该使用旧历法。
English: They thought that all this was the same as what He Rongtian had said, but the fact that the months of He Rongtian's calendar had three consecutive months of large moons and two consecutive months of small moons was more different and more absurd than the old calendar, and they thought that the old calendar should still be used.

古文：诏可。
现代文：文帝下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之中元嘉二十二年
现代文：元嘉二十二年
English: The 22nd year of Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月，辛卯朔，始行新历。
现代文：春季，正月，辛卯朔，刘宋开始使用新历法。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Xinwu Shuo, Liu Song began to use the new calendar.

古文：初，汉京房以十二律中吕上生黄钟，不满九寸，更演为六十律。
现代文：当初，西汉京房将十二音律中的中吕、上生、黄钟，凡没有超过九寸的，都改到六十音律。
English: At first, the Western Han court changed the twelve-tone bells of Zhonglu, Shangsheng and Huangzhong, all of which did not exceed nine inches, to sixty-tone bells.

古文：钱乐之复演为三百六十律，日当一管。
现代文：钱乐之又把它扩大到三百六十音律。每日使用一种乐器。
English: Qian Le also expanded it to 360 tones, using one musical instrument every day.

古文：何承天立议，以为上下相生，三分损益其一，盖古人简易之法，犹如古历周天三百六十五度四分度之一也。而京房不悟，谬为六十。
现代文：何承天提出见解，认为上下相生，于三分之中增减其一，是古人所用的简便易行的方法，如同古代历法中的能见到的天空三百六十五度四分度中的一个单位，但京房却没有明白其中的真义，而把它错误地定为六十。
English: He Zhengtian put forward the opinion that it is a simple and easy method used by the ancients to add and subtract one from the three, just like a unit in the quarter degree of 365 degrees in the sky that can be seen in the ancient calendar. However, Beijing did not understand the true meaning and mistakenly set it as 60.

古文：乃更设新率，林钟长六寸一厘，则从中吕还得黄钟，十二旋宫，声韵无失。
现代文：于是，何承天改设新的音律，林钟长六寸一厘，便从中吕回到黄钟的位置，每十二律吕又回到第一音级，声韵毫无损失。
English: As a result, He Chengtian set a new musical rhythm, and the Lin bell became six inches and one centimeter long, then returned to the position of the yellow bell from the middle lü, and returned to the first tone level every twelve lü, with no loss of sonority.

古文：壬辰，以武陵王骏为雍州刺史。
现代文：壬辰，刘宋文帝任命武陵王刘骏为雍州刺史。
English: Emperor Wenzong of the Song Dynasty appointed the king of Wuling, Liu Bei, to be the crown prince of Yongzhou.

古文：帝欲经略关、河，故以骏镇襄阳。
现代文：文帝想要收回关、河一带北方土地，因此让刘骏去镇守襄阳。
English: Emperor Wen wanted to reclaim the northern lands around the Guan and He rivers, so he let Liu Bei go to the town of Xiangyang.

古文：魏主使散骑常侍宋愔来聘。
现代文：北魏国主让散骑常侍宋来刘宋探访。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent his equestrian equerry Song to visit Liu Song.

古文：二月，魏主如上党，西至吐京，讨徙叛胡，出配郡县。
现代文：二月，北魏国主来到上党，西到吐京，征讨并迁移叛变的胡人，将他们发配到各郡县。
English: In February, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty came to Shangdang in the west and to Tubing in the east to recruit and relocate the mutinous Hu people, and sent them to various counties.

古文：甲戌，立皇祎为东海王，昶为义阳王。
现代文：甲戌，文帝立皇子刘为东海王，刘昶为义阳王。
English: Emperor Gao and Emperor Wen made Prince Liu the king of the East Sea and Liu Bei the king of Yiyang.

古文：三月，庚申，魏主还宫。
现代文：三月庚申，北魏国主返回平城。
English: In March, Emperor Gaoshen of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：魏诏： 诸疑狱皆付中书，以经义量决。 
现代文：北魏朝廷下诏说： 所有有疑问的诉讼案件都交给中书，中书凭借经籍的义理来衡量裁决。 
English: The imperial edict of the Northern Wei Dynasty said: All doubtful litigation cases are submitted to the Chinese book, and the Chinese book relies on the principles of scripture to measure the ruling.

古文：夏，四月，庚戌，魏主遣征西大将军高凉王那等，击吐谷浑王慕利延于白兰，秦州刺史代人封敕文、安远将军乙乌头击慕利延兄子什归于枹罕。
现代文：夏季四月，庚戌，北魏国主派遣征西大将军高凉王拓跋那等人在白兰袭击逃亡的吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延，秦州刺史代郡人封敕文、安远将军乙乌头在罕向慕容慕利延的侄子慕容什归发起了进攻。
English: In the summer of April, Gao Liang Wang Tuobana, the general sent by the Northern Wei sovereign to conquer the West, and others attacked the fugitive Tuyun Khan Murong Muriyan in Bailan, and the nephew of the fugitive Murong Muriyan, Murong Shigui, the nephew of the fugitive Tuyun Khan Murong Muriyan, the nephew of the fugitive Tuyun Khan Murong Muriyan, the nephew of the fugitive Tuyun Khan Murong Muriyan, the nephew of the fugitive Tuyun Khan Murong Muriyan, the nephew of the fugitive Tuyun Khan Murong Muriyan, the

古文：河西之亡也，鄯善人以其地与魏邻，大惧，曰： 通其使人，知我国虚实，取亡必速。 
现代文：河西灭亡后，鄯善人认为自己的土地与北魏相邻，大为惊惧，说： 如果允许北魏的使节到我们这里来，知道我们的虚实，我们会很快灭亡。 
English: After the fall of Hexi, the good people of Yunnan thought that their land was adjacent to the Northern Wei Dynasty. They were greatly alarmed and said, "If we allow the envoys of the Northern Wei Dynasty to come to us and know our true nature, we will soon perish."

古文：乃闭断道，使者往来，辄抄劫之。
现代文：于是，将与北魏相通的道路全部封锁。北魏的使节来往经过这里，他们就抢劫。
English: As a result, all roads leading to the Northern Wei Dynasty were blocked. The envoys of the Northern Wei Dynasty came and went through here, and they looted.

古文：由是西域不通者数年。
现代文：因此，北魏与西域隔绝了几年的时间。
English: As a result, the Northern Wei Dynasty was cut off from the West for several years.

古文：魏主使散骑常侍万度归发凉州以西兵击鄯善。
现代文：北魏国主派散骑常侍万度归率凉州以西的士卒攻打鄯善人。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched his horseback riding attendants to attack the good people of Zhai to the west of Liangzhou.

古文：六月，壬辰，魏主北巡。
现代文：六月，壬辰，北魏国主到北方巡视。
English: In June, in Imjin, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty went on a tour to the north.

古文：帝谋伐魏，罢南豫州入豫州。辛亥，以南豫州刺史南平王铄为豫州刺史。
现代文：文帝计划讨伐北魏，他先撤销南豫州，将其归并到豫州，任命南豫州刺史南平王刘铄为豫州刺史。
English: Emperor Wen planned to attack the Northern Wei Dynasty. First, he revoked the Southern Yuanzhou, merged it into Yuanzhou, and appointed the Southern Yuanzhou scribe, the Nanping King Liu Bei, as the Yuanzhou scribe.

古文：秋，七月，己未，以尚书仆射孟顗为左仆射，中护军何尚之为右仆射。
现代文：秋季七月，己未，刘宋文帝任命尚书仆射孟为左仆射，中护军何尚之为右仆射。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Shemeng as his left-hand man, and the middle-ranking guard soldier He Shang as his right-hand man.

古文：武陵王骏将之镇，时缘沔诸蛮犹为寇，水陆梗碍；骏分军遣抚军中兵参军沈庆之掩击，大破之。
现代文：刘宋武陵王刘骏将到襄阳镇守，此时，沔水两岸各蛮族仍然以打家劫舍为生，水陆交通受到阻塞。刘骏派出一部分军队由抚军中兵参军沈庆之指挥突然攻袭那些强盗，把他们打得打败。
English: At this time, the barbarians on both sides of the Surabaya River were still living by robbing homes, and land and water transportation was blocked. Liu Bei sent a part of the army under the command of Shen Qing, a member of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, to suddenly attack the robbers and defeat them.

古文：骏至镇，蛮断驿道，欲攻随郡；随郡太守河东柳元景募得六七百人，邀击，大破之。遂平诸蛮，获七万馀口。
现代文：刘骏到达襄阳后，蛮夷人切断了他与外界联络的道路，打算攻打随郡。随郡太守河东人柳元景招募到六七百人截击蛮夷人，将他们打得大败，各地蛮夷叛乱因此平定，共俘获了七万多人。
English: After Liu Bei arrived in Xiangyang, the barbarians cut off his way of communication with the outside world and planned to attack Su County. Liu Yuanjing, the governor of Su County, recruited 6,700 people to intercept the barbarians and defeated them. As a result, the barbarian rebellion in various regions was suppressed and more than 70,000 people were captured.

古文：涢山蛮最强，沈庆之讨平之，获三万馀口，徙万馀口于建康。
现代文：山蛮夷势力最强，沈庆之前去讨伐，平定了那里，俘获三万多人，将一万多人迁移到了都城建康。
English: The barbarians in the mountains had the strongest power, and Shen Qing went to fight them before, pacified the area, captured more than thirty thousand people, and relocated more than ten thousand people to the capital Jiankang.

古文：吐谷浑什归闻魏军将至，弃城夜遁。
现代文：吐谷汗的慕容什归听说北魏军将要到达罕，他放弃城池，连夜逃走。
English: Tugu Khan's Murong Shigu heard that the Northern Wei Army was about to arrive in Han, he abandoned the city and fled overnight.

古文：八月，丁亥，封敕文入枹罕，分徙其民千家还上邽，留乙乌头守枹罕。
现代文：八月，丁亥，封敕文进入罕，将一千多户百姓迁入上，让乙乌头留守罕。
English: In August, Dinghai, Fong Xuanwen entered Han, moved more than a thousand households into Shang, and let Yiwu head stay in Han.

古文：万度归至敦煌，留辎重，以轻骑五千度流沙，袭鄯善。
现代文：北魏万度归到达敦煌，留下辎重，率领轻骑兵五千人向西渡过流沙，袭击鄯善部落。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Dunhuang in all directions, leaving behind heavy baggage, and led five thousand light cavalry to the west to cross the quicksand and attack the Shanshan tribe.

古文：壬辰，鄯善王真达面缚出降。
现代文：壬辰，鄯善王真达反绑双臂出来投降。
English: In Imjin, the benevolent King Zhenda bound his arms and came out to surrender.

古文：度归留军屯守，与真达诣平城，西域复通。
现代文：万度归留下部分军队驻守，他同真达回到了平城。西域之路再次开通。
English: Wandu returned, leaving part of his army behind, and he and Zhenda returned to Pingcheng. The West Area Road was reopened.

古文：魏主如阴山之北，发诸州兵三分之一，各于其州戒严，以须后命。
现代文：北魏国主到了阴山之北，下令发动每个州三分之一的兵力在本州警戒，等待以后命令。
English: When the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in the north of Yinshan, he ordered to launch one-third of the troops of each state to be on alert in their own state and wait for later orders.

古文：徙诸种杂民五千馀家于北边，令就北畜牧，以饵柔然。
现代文：把五千多户不同民族的居民迁移到北方边地，让他们在北方放牧牲畜，以引诱柔然。
English: More than five thousand households of residents of different ethnic groups were relocated to the northern borderlands, and they were allowed to graze livestock in the north to lure animals.

古文：壬寅，魏高凉王那军至宁头城，吐谷浑王慕利延拥其部落西度流沙。
现代文：壬寅，北魏高凉王拓跋那率兵到达宁头城。吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延带着他的部落穿过沙漠向西逃去。
English: In Ren'in, Northern Wei Gaolang King Tuobana led an army to reach Ningtou City. Tuyun Khan Murong Muriyan and his tribe fled west across the desert.

古文：吐谷浑慕璝之子被囊逆战，那击破之；被囊遁走，中山公杜丰帅精骑追之，度三危，至雪山，生擒被囊及吐谷浑什归、乞伏炽磐之子成龙，皆送平城。
现代文：吐谷浑前可汗慕容慕之子慕容被囊领兵迎战，被拓跋那击败。慕容被囊逃走。中山公杜丰又率精锐骑兵追赶，穿过三危山，来到雪山，活捉了慕容被囊、慕容什归和乞伏炽磐的儿子乞伏成龙，全部押送到平城。
English: Murong, the son of Murong, the former khan of Tugu, was confronted by the leader of the army and defeated by Tubana. Murong was chased by the leader of the army and fled. Du Feng, the lord of Zhongshan, led the elite cavalry to chase him, crossed the Three Dangerous Mountains, came to the Snow Mountain, and captured alive Murong, Murong Shiguo, and Begging Glowing Rock's son, Begging Glowing Dragon, all of whom were escorted to Pingcheng.

古文：慕利延遂西入于阗，杀其王，据其地，死者数万人。
现代文：慕容慕利延于是又向西进入于阗国，杀了国王，占领了该国的属地，死了几万人。
English: Murong Muriyan then went west into Yunnan, killed the king, occupied the country's territory, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：九月，癸酉，上饯衡阳王义季于武帐冈。
现代文：九月，癸酉，刘宋文帝在武帐冈为衡阳王刘义季饯行。
English: In September, Emperor Liu Songwen led the procession of Hengyang King Liu Yizi in Wuzhigang.

古文：上将行，敕诸子且勿食，至会所设馔；日旰，不至，有饥色。
现代文：文帝将要离开皇宫时，他告诉儿子们暂时不要吃东西，等到达送别刘义季的地方再设宴进餐。直到太阳西斜，刘义季还没有来到，大家饿得脸色很难看。
English: When Emperor Wen was about to leave the palace, he told his sons not to eat for the time being, and to wait until they arrived at the place where Liu Yizi was to be sent off, and then set up a banquet. Until the sun set, Liu Yizi had not yet arrived, and everyone looked hungry and ugly.

古文：上乃谓曰： 汝曹少长丰佚，不见百姓艰难。
现代文：文帝这才对大家说： 你们从小生活在富裕安适的环境中，看不到老百姓生活的艰难。
English: It was then that Emperor Wen said to everyone: You have been living in an affluent and comfortable environment since childhood, and do not see the hardships of ordinary people's lives.

古文：今使汝曹识有饥苦，知以节俭御物耳。 
现代文：今天就是想让你们知道还有饥饿困苦，让你们以后知道使用东西要节俭罢了。 
English: Today is just to let you know that there is still hunger and hardship, and to let you know that you should use things sparingly in the future.

古文：裴子野论曰：善乎太祖之训也！
现代文：裴子野论曰：太祖刘义隆这番训导真是正确啊！
English: Peizhino said: Grandfather Liu Yilong's teaching is really correct!

古文：夫侈兴于有馀，俭生于不足。
现代文：奢华浪费产生在富足的环境中，节俭出在贫穷困苦之中。
English: Extravagance comes from abundance, and frugality from poverty.

古文：欲其隐约，莫若贫贱。
现代文：如果打算让他懂得忧困然后成材的道理，不如让他生长在贫贱的环境中。
English: If you want him to understand the meaning of suffering and then becoming a man, it is better to let him grow up in a poor environment.

古文：习其险限，利以任使；达其情伪，易以躬临。
现代文：学会在艰难困苦的环境中生活，能更好地担当重任；亲身经历民情真伪，易于君临天下。
English: Learn to live in a difficult and difficult environment, can better take on heavy responsibilities; personally experience the truth and falsity of the people's feelings, it is easy to reign over the world.

古文：太祖若能率此训也，难其志操，卑其礼秩，教成德立，然后授以政事，则无怠无荒，可播之于九服矣。
现代文：太祖如若能以他的训导为表率，就应该让他的儿子们的志向操行受到磨炼，降低他们的官职待遇，教育他们树立良好的道德风范，然后再将国家大事交给他们，他们就不会懈怠、荒唐行事，就可以让远近悦服。
English: If the great-grandfather can use his training as a model, he should let his sons' ambition and behavior be tempered, reduce their official treatment, educate them to establish a good moral character, and then hand over the national affairs to them. They will not slack off, act absurdly, and can make far and near clothes.

古文：高祖思固本枝，崇树襁褓；后世遵守，迭据方岳。
现代文：高祖刘裕打算巩固本家族的地位，对皇家襁褓中的婴儿都封以很高的爵位，后代也遵循他的办法，先后让小孩子独镇一方。
English: Liu Yu, the great-great-grandfather, intended to consolidate the status of his family, and the babies in the royal cradle were all given high ranks. The descendants also followed his method, successively letting the children take the lead.

古文：及乎泰始之初，升明之季，绝咽于衾衽者动数十人。
现代文：到了泰始初年、升明末年，幼小亲王在襁褓中就被掐死的动辄有几十人。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era and the last year of the Meiji era, there were dozens of cases of young princes being strangled to death in their cots.

古文：国之存亡，既不是系，早肆民上，非善诲也。
现代文：国家存亡，既然不维系在那些小孩子身上，那么让他们过早地居于万民之上的高位，实在不是好的教诲。
English: Since the survival of the state does not depend on those children, it is not a good lesson to let them prematurely occupy a high position above all people.

古文：魏民间讹言 灭魏者吴 ，卢水胡盖吴聚众反于杏城，诸种胡争应之，有众十馀万，遣其党赵绾来上表自归。
现代文：北魏民间传说一种谣言 灭亡北魏的是吴 。卢水胡人盖吴在杏城聚众反叛，各族胡人都争先恐后地前来响应，聚有部众十多万人。盖吴派遣他的同伙赵绾来到刘宋朝廷，上疏请求归降。
English: Northern Wei folklore is a kind of rumor. It was Wu who brought about the downfall of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Lu Shui Hu man Gai Wu rallied the people to rebel in Xiancheng. All ethnic Hu people scrambled to respond, gathering more than a hundred thousand people. Gai Wu sent his accomplice Zhao Wei to Liu Song's court to ask Shang Shu to surrender.

古文：冬，十月，戊子，长安镇副将拓跋纥帅众讨吴，纥败死。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊子，长安镇副将拓跋纥率众兵征讨盖吴，却战败而死。
English: In the winter, in October, Wu Zi, the vice-general of Chang'an Town, led the soldiers to recruit Ga Wu, but was defeated and died.

古文：吴众愈盛，民皆渡渭，奔南山。
现代文：盖吴的兵卒越来越多，老百姓都渡过渭水逃奔南山。
English: Gai Wu's soldiers were increasing in number, and the common people were fleeing across Surabaya to Nanshan.

古文：魏主发高平敕勒骑赴长安，命将军叔孙拔领摄并、秦、雍三州兵屯渭北。
现代文：北魏国主征调高平敕勒骑兵奔赴长安，命令将军叔孙拔统领并、秦、雍三州的军队屯居渭水之北。
English: The main expedition of the Northern Wei State transferred Gaoping Qule's cavalry to Chang'an, and ordered the general's uncle Sunba to lead the troops of Qin and Yong three states to settle in the north of Surabaya.

古文：十一月，魏发冀州民造浮桥于碻磝津。
现代文：十一月，北魏调遣冀州百姓在津建造浮桥。
English: In November, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the people of Jizhou to build a pontoon bridge in Tsu.

古文：盖吴遣别部帅白广平西掠新平，安定诸胡皆聚众应之。又分兵东掠临晋巴东，将军章直击破之，溺死于河者三万馀人。
现代文：盖吴派遣另一支部队的统帅白广平西去新平劫掠财物，安定的各族胡人群起响应，盖吴又分兵向东劫掠临晋以东的地方，北魏将军章直把他击败，被河水淹死达三万多人。
English: Gai Wu sent the commander of another army, Bai Guangping Xi, to Xinping to loot and plunder. The stable Hu people of all ethnic groups responded. Gai Wu also sent troops to the east to loot and plunder the places east of Jin. Northern Wei General Zhang Zhi defeated him, and more than 30,000 people were drowned by the river.

古文：吴又遣兵西掠至长安，将军叔孙拔与战于渭北，大破之，斩首三万馀级。
现代文：盖吴又派兵向西劫掠，走到长安，与北魏将军叔孙拔在渭水之北交战，结果被叔孙拔打得大败，斩首三万多人。
English: Gui Wu also sent troops to the west to plunder, went to Chang'an, and fought with the Northern Wei general Uncle Sun Bata in the north of Surabaya. As a result, he was defeated by Uncle Sun Bata and beheaded more than 30,000 people.

古文：河东蜀薛永完聚众以应吴，袭击闻喜。闻喜县无兵仗，令忧惶无计；县人裴骏帅厉乡豪击之，永宗引去。
现代文：河东蜀人薛永宗聚众响应盖吴，袭击闻喜，由于闻喜县没有军队驻守，县令惊忧害怕不知如何是好，本县人裴骏率领各乡豪士对抗，薛永宗引兵撤退。
English: Xue Yongzong, a man from Shu in the east of the river, gathered a crowd in response to Gai Wu and attacked Wensi. Since there was no army stationed in Wensi County, the county commander was worried and afraid and did not know what to do. Pei Jun, a man from this county, led the heroes of each town to fight, and Xue Yongzong led the troops to retreat.

古文：魏主命薛谨之子拔纠合宗、乡，壁于河际，以断二寇往来之路。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘命令薛谨的儿子薛拔纠合宗族乡里百姓，在黄河边上建造营垒，以此来切断盖吴与薛永宗相联系的道路。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign Tuobao ordered Xue Jian's son Xue Bao to entangle the people in the village of the clan and build a camp on the edge of the Yellow River in order to cut off the road linking Gaiwu and Xue Yongzong.

古文：庚午，魏主使殿中尚书拓跋处直等将二万骑讨薛永宗，殿中尚书乙拔将三万骑讨盖吴，西平公寇提将万骑讨白广平。
现代文：庚午，拓跋焘派殿中尚书拓跋处直等人率二万骑兵讨伐薛永宗，派殿中尚书乙拔率三万骑兵讨伐盖吴，派西平公寇提统领一万骑兵讨伐白广平。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Taobao sent Shangshu Tuoba and others with 20,000 cavalry to fight against Xue Yongzong, Shangshu A with 30,000 cavalry to fight against Gai Wu, and Xi Ping Gong Kotei with 10,000 cavalry to fight against Bai Guangping.

古文：吴自号天台王，署置百官。
现代文：盖吴自称天台王，手下设置文武百官。
English: Gai Wu claimed to be the king of Tiantai and set up a hundred civil and military officials under his command.

古文：辛未，魏主还宫。
现代文：辛未，北魏国主回到平城宫内。
English: Xin Wei, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to the palace.

古文：魏选六州骁骑二万，使永昌王仁、高凉王那分将之，为二道，掠淮、泗以北，徙青、徐之民以实河北。
现代文：北魏从六个州中选出二万骁勇骑兵，派永昌王拓跋仁、高凉王拓跋那分别统率，分二路劫淮河、泗水以北的地方，迁移青州、徐州老百姓充实河北。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty selected 20,000 brave cavalrymen from six states, and sent Yongchang Wang Tuobaren and Gaolang Wang Tuobanen to lead the troops respectively. They divided into two groups to rob the areas north of the Huaihe River and Surabaya, and to relocate the people of Qingzhou and Xuzhou to enrich Hebei.

古文：癸未，魏主西巡。
现代文：癸未，北魏国主去西部巡察。
English: Soon after, the Northern Wei sovereign went to the west to inspect.

古文：初，鲁国孔熙先博学文史，兼通数术，有纵横才志；为员外散骑侍郎，不为时所知，愤愤不得志。
现代文：当初，鲁国人孔熙先精通文学和历史，并通晓数术，有纵横天下的才气和抱负。担任员外散骑侍郎时，不被世人所了解，愤愤而不得志。
English: At the beginning, Kong Xixian, a native of Lu, was well versed in literature and history, and was familiar with mathematics, and had the talent and ambition to spread across the world. When he served as a foreign horseman, he was not understood by the world, and was angry and discouraged.

古文：父默之为广州刺史，以赃获罪，大将军彭城王义康为救解，得免。
现代文：他的父亲孔默之任广州刺史，因为贪赃枉法犯罪，多亏大将军彭城王刘义康相救才免于判刑。
English: His father, Kong Miao, was appointed as Guangzhou's chief historian. Thanks to the help of General Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, he was not sentenced for the crime of corruption.

古文：及义康迁豫章，熙先密怀报效。
现代文：刘义康被贬到豫章时，孔熙先感激刘义康，决心效力报恩。
English: When Liu Yikang was demoted to Yuanzhang, Kong Xixian was grateful to Liu Yikang and determined to return the favor.

古文：且以为天文、图谶，帝必以非道晏驾，由骨肉相残，江州应出天子。
现代文：而且他又认为根据天文、图谶，都表明刘宋文帝一定死于非命，原因是骨肉互相残杀，江州应该出天子。
English: Moreover, he believed that according to astronomy and maps, it was clear that Emperor Liu Songwen must have died a violent death. The reason was that flesh and blood were killing each other. Jiangzhou should produce a heavenly son.

古文：以范晔志意不满，欲引与同谋，而熙先素不为晔所重。
现代文：孔熙先感到范晔心中也有对朝廷的不满情绪，想拉范晔一起来谋划。但是，孔熙先平时并不被范晔所看重。
English: Kong Xixian felt that Fan Rong also had dissatisfaction with the imperial court in his heart and wanted to pull Fan Rong together to plan. However, Kong Xixian was not valued by Fan Rong in ordinary times.

古文：太子中舍人谢综，晔之甥也，熙先倾身事之。综引熙先与晔相识。
现代文：太子中舍人谢综是范晔的外甥，孔熙先全力以赴来巴结谢综，谢综将孔熙先引见给范晔，让他们相识。
English: Among the princes, Xie Zami is the nephew of Fan Hui. Kong Xiseng went all out to woo Xie Zami. Xie Zami introduced Kong Xiseng to Fan Hui and let them meet.

古文：熙先家饶于财，数与晔博，故为拙行，以物输之。
现代文：孔熙先家非常富有，他常常和范晔在一块儿赌博，他故意赌得不好，将钱输给范晔。
English: Kong Xixian's family was very rich. He often gambled with Fan Rong. He deliberately gambled badly and lost money to Fan Rong.

古文：晔既利其财，又爱其文艺，由是情好款洽。
现代文：范晔既爱他的钱财，又喜欢他的才华，由此，二人慢慢亲近起来。
English: Fan Ye not only loves his money, but also likes his talent. As a result, the two slowly become close.

古文：熙先乃从容说晔曰： 大将军英断聪敏，人神攸属，失职南垂，天下愤怨。
现代文：孔熙先才渐渐地游说范晔道： 大将军刘义康果断聪敏，百姓及神明都愿归属于他，但他却被罢免职务发配到南部边陲，普天之下都为他愤恨不平。
English: Kong Xi first gradually lobbied Fan Rong: General Liu Yikang was decisive and clever, and the people and gods were willing to belong to him, but he was dismissed from his post and sent to the southern border, and the whole world resented him.

古文：小人受先君遗命，以死报大将军之德。
现代文：小人我接受了先父的遗言，要以死来报答大将军刘义康的大恩大德。
English: I accepted my father's last words that I would die to repay the great kindness of General Liu Yikang.

古文：顷人情骚动，天文舛错，此所谓时运之至，不可推移者也。
现代文：近来，天下人心骚动不定，天象错乱，这就是人们常说的时运已经来到，这是不可以改变的事情。
English: Recently, the world's people are in turmoil, and the astrological signs are chaotic. This is what people often say that the time has come, and this is something that cannot be changed.

古文：若顺天人之心，结英豪之士，表里相应，发于肘腋，然后诛除异我，崇奉明圣，号令天下，谁敢不从！
现代文：如果我们顺应上天、百姓的心愿，结交英雄豪杰，内外接应，在宫廷内起兵，尔后杀掉反对我们的人，拥戴圣明的天子，号令天下，有谁能敢不服从呢！
English: If we comply with the wishes of heaven and the people, make friends with heroes and heroines, respond inside and outside, raise an army in the court, and then kill those who oppose us, embrace the Son of Heaven, and command the world, who would dare to disobey?

古文：小人请以七尺之躯，三寸之舌，立功立事而归诸君子，太人以为何如？ 
现代文：小人我愿意用我这七尺之躯、三寸不烂之舌，建立大功、成就大事而归之于各位君子，老人家认为怎么样？ 
English: I am willing to use my seven-foot body and three-inch incorruptible tongue to establish great achievements and accomplish great things and attribute them to you gentlemen. What do the old people think?

古文：晔甚愕然。
现代文：范晔感到非常吃惊。
English: Fan Ye was very surprised.

古文：熙先曰： 昔毛玠竭节于魏武，张温毕议于孙权，彼二人者，皆国之俊乂，岂言行玷缺，然后至于祸辱哉！
现代文：孔熙先说： 从前，毛对魏武帝曹操忠心耿耿，张温对孙权侃侃而谈，那二人都是国家的俊杰，难道他们是因为自己的言行不当而后招致祸害屈辱的吗？
English: Kong Xixian said: Once upon a time, Mao was deeply loyal to Cao Cao, the Emperor of Wei, and Zhang Wen spoke eloquently about Sun Quan. Both of them were national heroes. Was it because of their improper words and deeds that they later brought disaster and humiliation?

古文：皆以廉直劲正，不得久容。
现代文：他们都是因为自己太廉洁正直、刚烈清正而不能长期被人所容纳。
English: They are all because they are too honest and upright and cannot be tolerated for a long time.

古文：丈人之于本朝，不深于二主，人间雅誉，过于两臣，谗夫侧目，为日久矣，比肩竞逐，庸可遂乎！
现代文：老人家您在本朝受到的信任程度并不比曹操、孙权宠信毛、张温更深，可是您在老百姓中间的名声却远远超过那两个忠臣。想要诬陷您的人对您侧目而视已经很久了，而您却要同他们肩并肩地平等竞争，这怎么能够办得到呢！
English: Old man, the degree of trust you have received in this dynasty is not deeper than that of Cao Cao, Sun Quan, Xin Mao and Zhang Wen, but your reputation among the people is far greater than those two loyalists. People who want to frame you have been looking sideways at you for a long time, but you have to compete with them shoulder to shoulder on an equal footing. How can this be done?

古文：近者殷铁一言而刘班碎首，彼岂父兄之仇，百世之怨乎？
现代文：最近，殷铁只一句话，刘班就被击碎头颅，他们难道是因为父兄之间的仇恨或是存有百代的夙怨吗？
English: Recently, Liu Ban's head was smashed with a single word from Yin Tie. Was it because of the hatred between his father and brother, or was it the result of a centuries-old grudge?

古文：所争不过荣名势利先后之间耳。
现代文：他们之间所争夺的实际上不过是名利、权势谁先谁后的问题。
English: The competition between them is really just a matter of who gets fame, fortune and power first.

古文：及其末也，唯恐陷之不深，发之不早；戮及百口，犹曰未厌。
现代文：争到最后，双方都怕自己陷得不深、动手不早，杀了一百人还说自己并未满足。
English: At the end of the struggle, both sides were afraid that they were not deeply involved, did not start early, killed a hundred people and said that they were not satisfied.

古文：是可为寒心悼惧，岂书籍远事也哉！
现代文：这可以说是令人心寒、恐慌的，这难道是书读得多了就不懂得世事的缘故吗！
English: This can be said to be chilling and frightening. Is it because they have read too much and do not understand the world?

古文：今建大勋，奉贤哲，图难地易，以安易危，享厚利，收鸿名，一旦包举而有之，岂可弃置而不取哉！ 
现代文：现在，是建立大的功业，崇奉贤明睿智之人的良好时机，在容易的时候图谋难办的事，用安逸代替危险，而且，也可以享受荣华富贵，坐收大的美名，一个早晨举兵就能够得到这些，怎么能放弃而不去争取呢！ 
English: Now is a good time to build a great career, to worship a wise and clever man, to try to do difficult things when it is easy, to replace danger with ease, and also to enjoy glory, wealth, and a great reputation. You can get all this by raising an army in the morning. How can you give up and not fight for it?

古文：晔犹疑未决。
现代文：范晔犹豫不决。
English: Fan Ye hesitated.

古文：熙先曰： 又有过于此者，愚则未敢道耳。 晔曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：孔熙先说： 还有比这更厉害的事情，我不敢说出来。 范晔说： 是什么？ 
English: Kong Xixian said, "There is something more powerful than this, I dare not say it." Fan Ye said, "What is it?"

古文：熙先曰： 丈人弈叶清通，而不得连姻帝室，人以犬豕及相遇，而丈人曾不耻之，欲为之死，不亦惑乎！ 
现代文：孔熙先说： 老人家您代代清白，却不能和皇室联姻，人家把您当作猪狗来对待，而您却不曾认为这是一种耻辱，还想要为皇帝献身，这不也是很糊涂的事吗？ 
English: Kong Xixian said: The old man, you have been innocent for generations, but you can't marry into the royal family. People treat you like a pig dog, but you didn't think it was a shame, and you still want to devote yourself to the emperor. Isn't this also a very confused matter?

古文：晔门无内行，故熙先以此激之。
现代文：范晔家人品行崐不端，所以，孔熙先就用这些来激怒范晔。
English: Fan Qi's family members had a bad character, so Kong Xi first used these to provoke Fan Qi.

古文：晔默然不应，反意乃决。
现代文：范晔默不作声，造反的决心于是下定了。
English: Fan Yu remained silent, and the decision to rebel was made.

古文：晔与沈演之并为帝所知，晔先至，必待演之俱入，演之先至，尝独被引，晔以此为怨。
现代文：范晔和吏部尚书沈演之都为文帝所信任。每次范晔先到朝廷时，一定要等待沈演之，然后一同入宫。可是沈演之先到，却曾经单独被文帝先行召见，范晔因为这事怀有怨气。
English: Emperor Wen trusted Fan Xuan and his secretary, Shang Shu and Shen Yuan. Every time Fan Xuan arrived at the imperial court first, he had to wait for Shen Yuan and then enter the palace together. However, when Shen Yuan arrived first, he was summoned by Emperor Wen alone, and Fan Xuan was angry about this.

古文：晔累经义康府佐，中间获罪于义康。
现代文：范晔曾经一直做刘义康的府佐，在此期间，他得罪过刘义康。
English: Fan Qi had been Liu Yikang's aide-de-camp, during which he offended Liu Yikang.

古文：谢综及父述，皆为义康所厚，综弟约聚义康女。
现代文：但谢综和他的父亲谢述却都受到刘义康的厚待，谢综的弟弟谢约又娶了刘义康的女儿。
English: But both Xie Zomei and his father Xie Shuling were treated well by Liu Yikang. Xie Zomei's brother Xie You married Liu Yikang's daughter.

古文：综为义康记室参军，自豫章还，申义康意于晔，求解晚隙，复敦往好。
现代文：谢综现在是刘义康的记室参军，他从豫章回到建康，向范晔申述了刘义康对他所表示的歉意，请求范晔谅解过去的隔阂，于是，二人又象往日一样友好。
English: Xie Zamin is now Liu Yikang's secretary and has joined the army. He returned to Jiankang from Yuanzhang and told Fan Hui about Liu Yikang's apology to him and asked Fan Hui to understand the past estrangement. As a result, the two were as friendly as before.

古文：大将军府史仲承祖，有宠于义康，闻熙先有谋，密相结纳。
现代文：大将军府史仲承祖受到刘义康的宠爱，听说孔熙先图谋反叛，于是与他秘密结交。
English: General Fuchizhong Chengzu was favored by Liu Yikang. When he heard that Kong Xizhi was plotting to rebel, he secretly befriended him.

古文：丹阳尹徐湛之，素为义康所爱，承祖因此结事湛之，告以密计。
现代文：丹杨尹徐湛之平素也一直被刘义康所喜爱，所以仲承祖便因此极力结交奉事徐湛之，并把孔熙先等人的秘密计划告诉了徐湛之。
English: Deng Yang, Yin, and Xu Zhan have always been loved by Liu Yikang, so Zhong Chengzu tried his best to befriend and serve Xu Zhan, and told Xu Zhan about the secret plans of Kong Xixian and others.

古文：道人法略、尼法静，皆感义康旧恩，并与熙先往来。
现代文：道士法略、尼姑法静都感激刘义康的旧恩，也跟孔熙先来往。
English: The Taoist priest Faryou and the nun Fajing were both grateful for Liu Yikang's old favor, and they also visited Kong Xi first.

古文：法静妹夫许曜，领队在台，许为内应。
现代文：法静的妹夫许曜在宫廷中率领禁卫，他向孔熙先等人许诺做他们的内应。
English: Fa Jing's brother-in-law Xu You led the palace guards in the court, and he promised Kong Xixian and others that he would be their inside man.

古文：法静之豫章，熙先付以笺书，陈说图谶。
现代文：法静到豫章，孔熙先交给她一封信，向刘义康陈说图谶的含义。
English: When Fa Jing arrived at Yu Zhang, Kong Xi first handed her a letter and told Liu Yikang the meaning of the picture.

古文：于是密相署置，及素所不善者，并入死目。
现代文：这样，他们暗地计划布署，对于平素与他们关系不好的人，都一并列入诛死的名册里。
English: In this way, they secretly plan the deployment, and for those who are not on good terms with them, they are all included in the list of death.

古文：熙先又使弟休先作檄文，称： 贼臣赵伯符肆兵犯跸，祸流储宰。湛之、晔等投命奋戈，即日斩伯符首及其党与。
现代文：孔熙先又派他的弟弟孔休先作一篇声讨的文章，言称： 叛臣赵伯符恣意使用武器冒犯皇帝，并对皇太子刘劭造成了极大的威胁，为此，徐湛之、范晔等人不顾自己的性命奋力挥戈战斗，即日内杀赵伯符和他的党羽。
English: Kong Xixian also sent his brother Kong Xiu to write an article criticizing Zhao Bofu, saying: The traitor Zhao Bofu arbitrarily used weapons to offend the emperor and caused a great threat to the crown prince Liu Bei. Therefore, Xu Zhanzhi, Fan Yu and others fought hard regardless of their own lives, killing Zhao Bofu and his party within a day.

古文：今遣护军将军臧质奉玺绶迎彭城王正位辰极。 
现代文：现在，派护军将军臧质捧着皇帝的玉玺绶带去迎接彭城王刘义康正式登基。 
English: Now, the general of the escort army, Gongye, is holding the emperor's jade sash to welcome the formal enthronement of Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng.

古文：熙先以为举大事宜须以义康之旨谕众，晔又诈作义康与湛之书，令诛君侧之恶，宣示同党。
现代文：孔熙先认为发起大事应该用刘义康的旨令告谕大家，于是，范晔又伪造刘义康写给徐湛之的书信，命令他杀掉文帝身边的坏人，把这封信拿给同党们看。
English: Kong Xi first thought that Liu Yikang's order should be used to announce the launch of the event, so Fan Yu forged a letter from Liu Yikang to Xu Zhanzhi, ordering him to kill the bad guys around Emperor Wen and show the letter to his fellow party members.

古文：帝之燕武帐冈也，晔等谋以其日作乱。
现代文：文帝到武帐冈赴宴，范晔等人图谋在这天发动叛乱。
English: Emperor Wen went to Wuzhigang for a banquet, while Fan Yu and others plotted to launch a rebellion on this day.

古文：许曜侍帝，扣刀目晔，晔不敢仰视。
现代文：许曜侍卫文帝，将佩刀微微拔出，向范晔使眼色。范晔不敢抬起头来看。
English: Xu You, who was guarding Emperor Wen, pulled out his sword and glared at Fan Rui. Fan Rui did not dare to look up.

古文：俄而座散，徐湛之恐事不济，密以其谋白帝。
现代文：不一会儿，宴席结束，徐湛之害怕事情不能成功，就将孔熙先等人的阴谋全都报告了文帝。
English: Soon after the banquet was over, Xu Zhan was afraid that things would not succeed, so he reported all the plots of Kong Xixian and others to Emperor Wen.

古文：帝使湛之具探取本末，得其檄书，选署姓名，上之。
现代文：文帝让徐湛之仔细探听事情的先后情况，徐湛之拿到了他们起兵的檄文以及被选入参加叛乱的人的名单呈送给文帝。
English: Emperor Wen asked Xu Zhanzhi to carefully listen to the sequence of events. Xu Zhanzhi got their letter of enlistment and the list of those who were selected to participate in the rebellion and presented it to Emperor Wen.

古文：帝乃命有司收掩穷治。
现代文：文帝于是命令有关部门严密搜捕追查。
English: Emperor Wen then ordered the relevant departments to carry out a strict search and investigation.

古文：其夜，呼晔置客省，先于外收综及熙先兄弟，皆款服。
现代文：这天夜里，范晔被召唤入宫后就被软禁在客省内。事先已经在外面逮捕了谢综和孔熙先兄弟，他们全部服罪。
English: That night, after being summoned to the palace, Fan Xuan was placed under house arrest in Hakka Province. The brothers Xie Zhai and Kong Xixian had already been arrested outside, and they all pleaded guilty.

古文：帝遣使诘问晔，晔犹隐拒；熙先闻之，笑曰： 凡处分、符檄、书疏，皆范所造，云何于今方作如此抵蹋邪？ 
现代文：文帝又派人审问范晔，范晔还在隐瞒抗拒，孔熙先听到这个情况后，大笑着说： 我们所有的筹划、讨伐檄文及信件等等都出于范晔之手，为什么到现在还这样抵赖呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen also sent someone to interrogate Fan Rong. Fan Rong was still hiding his resistance. When Kong Xi first heard about this, he laughed loudly and said, "All of our planning, campaigning, writing letters, etc. are from Fan Rong's hand. Why do you still resist like this?

古文：帝以晔墨迹示之，乃具陈本末。
现代文：文帝将范晔亲笔写的东西拿出来给他看，他才将事件的始末招供出来。
English: Emperor Wen showed him Fan Qi's handwriting, and only then did he confess the details of the incident.

古文：明日，仗士送付廷尉。
现代文：第二天，全副武装的兵士将他们送交廷尉。
English: The next day, heavily armed soldiers handed them over to a court official.

古文：熙先望风吐款，辞气不桡。
现代文：孔熙先见风使舵，从容道来，言辞语气没有丝毫胆怯。
English: Kong Xi foresaw the wind and used the rudder, calmly, and the tone of his speech was not timid at all.

古文：上奇其才，遣人慰勉之曰： 以卿之才而滞于集书省，理应有异志，此乃我负卿也。 
现代文：文帝对他的才华感到十分惊奇，派人慰问并勉励他说崐： 凭着你的才气，在集书省埋没这么久，理该有别的想法，这是我亏待了你。 
English: Emperor Wen was very surprised by his talent and sent someone to console and encourage him, saying: "With your talent, you have been buried in the book collection department for so long, you should have had other ideas. I have treated you unfairly."

古文：又责前吏部尚书何尚之曰： 使孔熙先年将三十作散骑郎，那不作贼！ 
现代文：他又责怪前吏部尚书何尚之说： 让年龄即将三十的孔熙先做散骑郎，他怎么能不成为叛贼！ 
English: He also reproached the former cadre, Shangshu He Shangzhi, saying: Let Kong Xi, who is about thirty years old, be a straggler first, how can he not become a traitor!

古文：熙先于狱中上书谢恩，且陈图谶，深戒上以骨肉之祸，曰： 愿且勿遗弃，存之中书。
现代文：孔熙先在狱中上书文帝，感谢他的恩典，并将图谶上所显示的征兆告诉文帝，特别告诫文帝要小心骨肉之间的祸变，他说： 请不要把我写的这些东西扔掉，把它放在书省。
English: While in prison, Kong Xi first went to visit Emperor Wen, thanking him for his grace, and told Emperor Wen about the signs shown on the picture frame. He especially warned Emperor Wen to beware of the calamity between flesh and blood. He said, "Please don't throw away these things I wrote, put them in the library."

古文：若囚死之后，或可追录，庶九泉之下，少塞衅责。 
现代文：如果我坐监死了以后，也许可以想起来查看，我在九泉之下，也会稍稍减少我闯下这一大祸的罪责。 
English: If, after I die in prison, I can perhaps look back and see that I am better off, I will also slightly reduce my culpability for this great disaster.

古文：晔在狱，为诗曰： 虽无嵇生琴，庶同夏侯色。 
现代文：范晔在狱中作诗说： 虽不像嵇康被杀时索琴而弹，却可以像夏侯玄临刑时面不改色。 
English: Fan Rong wrote a poem in prison, saying: Although it's not like when Gong Kang was killed, he played the piano, he can be like Xia Hou Xuan when he was in prison.

古文：晔本意谓入狱即死，而上穷治其狱，遂经二旬，晔更有生望。
现代文：范晔本来以为自己入狱当天就会被处死，可是，文帝却在彻底追查这一案件，过了二十天没有什么动静，范晔又有了生的希望。
English: Fan Qi originally thought that he would be executed on the day he was jailed. However, Emperor Wen thoroughly investigated the case. After twenty days, there was no movement, and Fan Qi had hope for life again.

古文：狱吏戏之曰： 外传詹事或当长系。 
现代文：狱吏嘲弄他说： 外边传说太子詹事有可能被长期囚禁狱中。 
English: The warden mocked him and said, "There is a rumor that Prince Zhan Zhe may be imprisoned for a long time.

古文：晔闻之，惊喜。
现代文：范晔听后，惊喜交加。
English: After listening to Fan Qi, he was surprised.

古文：综、熙先笑之曰： 詹事畴昔攘袂瞋目，跃马顾盼，自以为一世之雄；今扰攘纷纭，畏死乃尔！设令赐以性命，人臣图主，何颜可以生存！ 
现代文：谢综、孔熙先笑话他说： 詹事范晔当初是卷袖怒目、跃马驰骋，顾盼自如，自认为是一代豪杰。如今混乱纷纭，却怕死到了这种程度，即便皇上赐他不死，作为人臣而图谋皇上，他还有什么脸面活着呢？ 
English: Xie Zhao and Kong Xixian laughed and said, "Zhan Zhifan initially wore rolled-up sleeves, a furrowed brow, and rode a galloping horse. He looked forward to the future and considered himself to be a generation of heroes. Nowadays, there is chaos and confusion, but he is afraid of death to such an extent that even if the emperor did not grant him death, as a vassal and plotting against the emperor, how could he still be alive?

古文：十二月，乙未，晔、综、熙先及其子弟、党与皆伏诛。
现代文：十二月，乙未，范晔、谢综、孔熙先和他们的儿子、兄弟及同党全部被杀。
English: In December, Yi Wei, Fan Jun, Xie Zomei, Kong Xixian and their sons, brothers and fellow party members were all killed.

古文：晔母至市，涕泣责晔，以手击晔颈，晔色不怍；妹及妓妾来别，晔悲涕流涟。
现代文：范晔的母亲赶到刑场，痛哭流涕责骂范晔，用手打范晔的脖子，范晔并未显出惭愧的样子，范晔的妹妹及妻妾歌妓们前来作别时，范晔却悲从心起，涕泪横流。
English: Fan Yao's mother rushed to the execution site, cried bitterly and scolded Fan Yao, and hit Fan Yao's neck with her hand. Fan Yao did not show any shame. When Fan Yao's sister and his wife's concubines came to say goodbye, Fan Yao was heartbroken and burst into tears.

古文：综曰： 舅殊不及夏侯色。 
现代文：谢综在一边说： 舅舅这样做可赶不上夏修玄那时的样子。 
English: Xie Zomei said, "My uncle is not as good-looking as Xia Hou.

古文：晔收泪而止。
现代文：范晔于是又止住了泪水。
English: Fan Ye did not shed tears at all.

古文：谢约不预逆谋，见兄综与熙先游，常谏之曰： 此人轻事好奇，不近于道，果锐无检，未可与狎。 
现代文：谢约没有参预这场反叛，当初他看见哥哥谢综与孔熙先聚在一起时，常劝诫他说： 孔熙先这个人常常轻率从事，行为离奇，不走正路，做事果断决绝却不检点，不能和他过于亲近。 
English: Xie You did not participate in the rebellion. When he first saw his brother Xie Zong and Kong Xixian together, he often admonished him: Kong Xixian is a person who often acts rashly, behaves strangely, does not take the right path, does things decisively but does not behave properly, and he should not be too close to him.

古文：综不从而败。
现代文：谢综没有听从而导致身败。
English: Xie Zhao did not listen, which led to his defeat.

古文：综母以子弟自蹈逆乱，独不出视。
现代文：谢综的母亲因为儿子和弟弟自己制造叛乱，独独不到法场上去看他们。
English: Xie Zomei's mother did not come to say goodbye to Xie Zomei alone, because her son's brother personally plotted the rebellion.

古文：晔语综曰： 姊今不来，胜人多矣。 
现代文：范晔对谢综说： 我姐姐今天不来，比别人高明得多。 
English: Fan Ye said to Xie Zui: My sister is not coming today, she is much more clever than others.

古文：收籍晔家，乐器服玩并皆珍丽，妓妾不胜珠翠。母居止单陋，唯有一厨盛樵薪；弟子冬无被，叔父单布籍。
现代文：朝廷没收范晔家产，见那些音乐器具、服饰珍玩，都非常珍奇华丽，歌妓妻妾们有用不完的珠宝翡翠，唯独范晔母亲居住的房子简陋不堪，只有一个堆着木柴的厨房，他的侄子冬天没有棉被盖，叔父冬天只穿一件单薄的布衣。
English: The court confiscated Fan Qi's family property. Look at those musical instruments and costumes. They are very rare and gorgeous. Song prostitute wives and concubines have an endless supply of jade jewelry. However, the house where Fan Qi's mother lives is very simple. There is only a kitchen with a pile of firewood. His nephew does not have a quilt cover in winter, and his uncle only wears a thin cloth coat in winter.

古文：裴子野论曰：夫有逸群之才，必思冲天之据；盖俗之量，则愤常均之下。
现代文：裴子野论曰：有超过常人的才能的人，一定有想一飞冲天的抱负；有超世越俗的胸怀的人，常常不想久居人下。
English: Peizhino said: People who have more talent than ordinary people must have the ambition to fly into the sky; people who have a transcendent mind often do not want to live under others for a long time.

古文：其能守之以道，将之以礼，殆为鲜乎！
现代文：能够恪守道德规范，用礼教去约束自己行为的，恐怕很少！
English: Those who are able to abide by ethical norms and use etiquette to restrict their behavior are few and far between!

古文：刘弘仁、范蔚宗皆忸志而贪权，矜才以徇逆，累叶风素，一朝而陨。
现代文：刘弘仁、范蔚宗都志傲而贪权，矜傲自己的才能而图谋叛逆，几代留存下来的清白家风毁于一旦。
English: Liu Hongren and Fan Weizong were arrogant and greedy for power. They were proud of their talents and plotted to rebel. The pure family tradition that had survived for several generations was destroyed.

古文：向之所谓智能，翻为亡身之具矣。
现代文：平时所称道的智慧才能，反而成了他们毁灭自身的工具。
English: The intellectual talent that they usually praise has instead become a tool for their own destruction.

古文：徐湛之所陈多不尽，为晔等辞所连引，上赦不问。
现代文：丹杨尹徐湛之向文帝告发，有很多没有陈说出来，被范晔等人在供词中牵连出来，但文帝赦免了他，不再追究。
English: Danyang Yang, Yin Xu, and Zhan Zhi reported to Emperor Wen. Many did not come out and were implicated by Fan Qi and others in their confessions. However, Emperor Wen pardoned him and no longer investigated.

古文：臧质，熹之子也，先为徐、衮二州刺史，与晔厚善；晔败，以为义兴太守。
现代文：臧质是臧熹的儿子，曾经做徐、兖二州的刺史，与范晔关系很好，范晔被处死之后，文帝调他做了义兴太守。
English: Xingye was the son of Yao, who had been the chief historian of the two states of Xu and Yao, and had a good relationship with Fan Yu. After Fan Yu was executed, Emperor Wen designated him as the governor of Yixing.

古文：有司奏削彭城王义康爵，收付廷尉治罪。
现代文：有关部门奏请文帝削掉彭城王刘义康的爵位，将他逮捕交给廷尉定罪。
English: Relevant departments petitioned Emperor Wen to strip Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, of his title, arrest him, and hand him over to a court lieutenant for conviction.

古文：丁酉，诏免义康及其男女皆为庶人，绝属籍，徙付安成郡；以宁朔将军沈邵为安成相，领兵防守。
现代文：丁酉，文帝下诏免去刘义康及其亲属的爵位官职，全部贬为平民，从宗室中除名，将他们解送到安成郡。任命宁朔将军沈邵为安成相，统领军队防守、看管。
English: According to Emperor Wen's edict, Liu Yikang and his relatives were stripped of their titles and official positions, all of them were reduced to civilians, removed from the family room, and sent to Ancheng County. Ningshuo General Shen Shao was appointed Minister of Ancheng, leading the defense and supervision of the army.

古文：邵，璞之兄也。
现代文：沈邵是沈璞的哥哥。
English: Shen Shao is the elder brother of Shen Yao.

古文：义康在安成，读书，见淮南厉王长事，废书叹曰： 自古有此，我乃不知，得罪为宜也。 
现代文：刘义康在安成，用看书来消磨时光，当他看到西汉的淮南厉王刘长的事情时，丢下书感叹着说： 古时就有这样的事，我却一点都不知道。看起来我获罪受惩也是应该的了。 
English: In Ancheng, Liu Yikang used to read books to pass the time. When he saw the case of Liu Chang, King of Huainan Li in Western Han, he dropped the book and sighed, "There was such a thing in ancient times, but I didn't know anything about it. It seems that I should be punished for my crime."

古文：庚戌，以前豫州刺史赵伯符为护军将军。
现代文：庚戌，刘宋文帝任命前豫州刺史赵伯符为护军将军。
English: On the 26th, Zhao Bofu, the former governor of Henan Province, was appointed as the military escort general.

古文：伯符，孝穆皇后之弟子也。
现代文：赵伯符是孝穆皇后赵氏的侄子。
English: Zhao Bofu was the nephew of Empress Xiaomu of the Zhao clan.

古文：初，江左二郊无乐，宗庙虽有登歌，亦无二舞。
现代文：当初，江东南、北郊祭时还都没有音乐，皇室祖庙虽然有祭祀时唱的歌，但也没有文、武这二种舞蹈。
English: At first, there was no music at the festivals in the southeastern and northern suburbs of the Yangtze River, and although there were songs sung at the royal ancestral temple during the rituals, there were no two kinds of dances such as literature and martial arts.

古文：是岁，南郊始设登歌。
现代文：这一年，南郊祭祀开始作了祭祀歌。
English: In this year, the Nanjiao Festival began to perform a ritual song.

古文：魏安南、平南府移书衮州，以南国侨置诸州多滥北境名号；又欲游猎具区。
现代文：北魏安南府和平南府送给刘宋兖州一封信，指责刘宋土地上所设的各种侨州大多乱用北魏各州的名称；同时，他们要求去太湖游玩狩猎。
English: Northern Wei's Annan Prefecture and Pingnan Prefecture sent a letter to Liu Song's Bozhou, accusing the various overseas Chinese states set up on Liu Song's land of mostly misusing the names of the Northern Wei states; at the same time, they requested to go hunting in Taihu Lake.

古文：衮州答移曰： 必若因土立州，则彼立徐、扬，岂有其地？
现代文：兖州府回信答复说： 如果一定要就土地来设立州郡，那么，你们设立徐州和扬州，难道也有这块土地吗？
English: The Zhangzhou government replied in a letter: If it is necessary to establish prefectures and counties based on land, then, if you establish Xuzhou and Yangzhou, do you really have this land?

古文：复知欲游猎具区，观化南国。开馆饰邸，则有司存；呼韩入汉，厥仪未泯，馈饩之秩，每存丰厚。 
现代文：我们又知道你们想来太湖游玩狩猎，参观我们南国的风土教化，设置旅邸并进行装饰，由有关部门负责办理；当年呼韩邪单于到汉朝时所使用的仪式并未废除，用来款待你们的生肉粗米，经常储存而且丰富。 
English: We also know that you want to come to Taihu Lake to go hunting, visit the culture and civilization of our southern country, set up a lodge and decorate it, which will be handled by the relevant departments; the ceremony used when the Han Dynasty came to the Han Dynasty has not been abolished, and the raw meat and coarse rice used to entertain you are often stored and abundant.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之中元嘉二十三年
现代文：元嘉二十三年
English: The 23rd year of Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月，庚申，尚书左仆射孟顗罢。
现代文：春季，正月，庚申，刘宋尚书左仆射孟被免职。
English: In the spring of the first month of the year, Gao Sheng, Liu Song Shangshu's left-hand man, shot Meng and was dismissed.

古文：戊辰，魏主军至东雍州，临薛永宗垒，崔浩曰： 永宗未知陛下自来，众心纵弛。
现代文：戊辰，北魏国主率领军队来到东部的雍州，临近薛永宗的城堡，崔浩说： 薛永宗不知道陛下您亲自前来，他们的军心一定放纵松驰。
English: Wu Chen, the Northern Wei sovereign, led his army to the eastern city of Yongzhou, near Xue Yongzong's castle. Cui Hao said, "Xue Yongzong did not know that Your Majesty had come in person. Their military spirit must have been relaxed."

古文：今北风迅疾，宜急击之。 
现代文：现在正是北风又急又快的时候，我们应该趁此机会赶快攻打。 
English: Now is the time when the north wind is swift and fast, and we should take advantage of this opportunity to attack quickly.

古文：魏主从之，庚午，围其垒。
现代文：拓跋焘同意他的意见。庚午，北魏军队包围了薛永宗营垒。
English: Tuobao agreed with him. At noon, the Northern Wei army surrounded Xue Yongzong's camp.

古文：永宗出战，大败，与家人皆赴汾水死。
现代文：薛永宗出来迎战，结果大败，他和家里人都投入汾水自杀。
English: Xue Yongzong came out to fight, but was soundly defeated. He and his family all committed suicide in Surabaya.

古文：其族人安都先据弘农，弃城来奔。
现代文：他的同族人薛安都在此之前据守弘农，听到这个消息后，放弃了弘农而投奔刘宋。
English: His compatriot Xue An had previously supported Hongnong, but after hearing this news, he abandoned Hongnong and joined Liu Song.

古文：辛未，魏主南如汾阴，济河，至洛水桥。
现代文：辛未，北魏国主拓跋焘南去汾阴，渡过黄河，来到洛水桥。
English: Xin Wei, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled south to Jinyin, crossed the Yellow River and came to Luoshui Bridge.

古文：闻盖吴在长安北，帝以渭北地无谷草，欲渡渭南，循渭而西。
现代文：听说盖吴驻扎在长安北边，拓跋焘认为渭河以北没有粮食和青草，就打算渡到渭河的南部，沿着渭河向西挺进。
English: Heard that Gui Wu was stationed in the north of Chang'an, Tuobao thought that there was no grain and grass north of the Min River, so he planned to cross to the south of the Min River and advance westward along the Min River.

古文：以问崔浩，对曰： 夫击蛇者先击其首，首破则尾不能掉。
现代文：拓跋焘问崔浩这个想法如何，崔浩回答说： 打蛇的人先打蛇头，头被击坏，尾巴就无法调动了。
English: Tuobao asked Cui Hao how he thought about this. Cui Hao replied, "When you hit a snake, you hit the head first. If the head is damaged, the tail cannot be moved.

古文：今盖吴营去此六十里，轻骑趋之，一日可到，到则破之必矣。
现代文：如今盖吴营地与我们相距六十里，派轻骑前去攻打，一天就能到了，到达那里，就一定能击败盖吴。
English: Now Gaewu's camp is sixty miles away from us. If we send light cavalry to attack, we can get there in one day. When we get there, we will surely defeat Gaewu.

古文：破吴，南向长安亦不过一日，一日之乏，未至有伤。
现代文：打败盖吴后，我们再南下长安也不过一天，多一天的辛苦并不会有什么损失。
English: After defeating Gai Wu, we have only one more day to go south to Chang'an. One more day of hard work will not be a loss.

古文：若从南道，则吴徐入北山，猝未可平。 
现代文：如果从渭河之南进发，盖吴就会从容地进入北山，我们一下子是平定不了他们的。 
English: If we advance from the south of the Minhe River, Gaiwu will calmly enter Beishan. We can't subdue them all at once.

古文：帝不从，自渭南向长安。
现代文：拓跋焘没有按照崔浩说的去做，而从渭河南岸向长安进发。
English: Tuobao did not do what Cui Hao said, but set off from the south bank of the Wei River to Chang'an.

古文：庚辰，至戏水。
现代文：庚辰，军队到达戏水。
English: Geng Chen, the army arrived at the water play.

古文：吴众闻之，悉散入北地山，军无所获。
现代文：盖吴众人得到消息，全都分散进入北山，北魏军队没有什么收获。
English: When all the people in Gaiwu received the news, they all dispersed into Beishan. The Northern Wei army had nothing to gain.

古文：帝悔之。
现代文：拓跋焘为此非常后悔。
English: Emperor Wu regretted this very much.

古文：二月，丙戌，帝至长安，丙申，如雍城，历陈仓，还，如雍城。所过诛民、夷与盖吴通谋者。
现代文：二月，丙戌，拓跋焘到达长安，丙申，到达，又经过陈仓，尔后返回，前往雍城，所过之处，凡遇到汉人、夷蛮与盖吴串通的人一律诛杀。
English: In February, Hun Sen and Tuobao arrived in Chang'an, Hun Sen arrived, passed through Chencang, and then returned to Yongcheng. Wherever they passed, they fought and killed any Han people, barbarians, and those who colluded with Ge Wu.

古文：乙拔等诸军大破盖吴于杏城，吴复遣使上表求援。
现代文：乙拔等各军在杏城大败盖吴。盖吴又派使节去刘宋呈上奏表请求救援，文帝下诏任命盖吴为都督关、陇诸军事、雍州刺史，封为北地公。
English: Yibat and other armies defeated Gai Wu in Ancheng. Gai Wu also sent an envoy to Liu Song to submit a petition for rescue, and Emperor Wen issued an edict appointing Gai Wu as the governor of Guan, the military governor of Zhu, the military governor of Yongzhou, and the governor of the North.

古文：诏以吴为都督关、陇诸军事、雍州刺史、北地公；使雍、梁二州发兵屯境上，为吴声援；遣使赐吴印一百二十一纽，使吴随宜假授。
现代文：然后又派雍、梁二州出动军队驻扎在边境，作为盖吴的声援后盾。派遣使节赐给盖吴一百二十一个大印，让盖吴随时代替朝廷封赐官爵。
English: Then, the two states of Yong and Liang dispatched troops to be stationed at the border as a back-up of solidarity for Gai Wu. They sent envoys to give Gai Wu the 121st Great Seal, and let Gai Wu confer titles and ranks on behalf of the imperial court.

古文：初，林邑王范阳迈，虽遣使入贡，而寇盗不绝，所贡亦薄陋；帝遣交州刺史檀和之讨之。
现代文：当初，林邑王范阳迈虽然派遣使节向刘宋朝廷进贡，但依旧不断犯事骚扰，他们进献的贡品很少而且简陋。于是，文帝派交州刺史檀和之去讨伐林邑。
English: At first, although Linyi Wang Fan Yangmai sent envoys to pay tribute to the Liu Song Dynasty, he still continued to commit harassment. The tribute they offered was few and simple. Therefore, Emperor Wen sent the Jiaozhou statesman Shi Danhe to fight Linyi.

古文：南阳宗悫，家世儒素，悫独好武事，常言 愿乘长风破万里浪 。
现代文：南阳人宗世世代代都是清白的儒士，只有宗欢军事，他常常说： 我愿乘长风破万里浪。 
English: Nanyang people have been pure Confucianists for generations. Only Zong Huan was a military man. He often said, "I am willing to take advantage of the long wind to break through the waves."

古文：及和之伐林邑，悫自奋请从军。诏以悫为振武将军，和之遣悫为前锋。
现代文：檀和之要去讨伐林邑时，宗告奋勇请求从军，文帝任命宗振武将军，檀和之派宗前锋。
English: When Danghezhi wanted to attack Lin'yi, Zong told him to be brave and asked him to join the army. Emperor Wen appointed General Zong Zhenwu, and Danghezhi sent Zong forward.

古文：阳迈闻军出，遣使上表，请还所掠日南民，输金一万斤，银十万斤。
现代文：范阳迈听说宋军要来讨伐，就派使节请求文帝还回所掳掠的日南老百姓，并用一万斤黄金、十万斤白银作为赎金。
English: When Fan Yangmai heard that the Song Army was about to attack, he sent an envoy to ask Emperor Wen to return the Japanese and South Korean people he had captured, and to pay 10,000 kilos of gold and 100,000 kilos of silver as ransom.

古文：帝诏和之： 若阳迈果有款诚，亦许其归顺 和之至硃梧戍，遣府户曹参军姜仲基等诣阳迈，阳迈执之；和之乃进军围林邑将范扶龙于区粟城。
现代文：文帝给檀和之下诏说： 如果范阳迈真的有这么大的诚意，应该允许他归顺。 檀和之到达朱梧戍，派府户曹参军姜仲基等人前去拜访范阳迈，范阳迈却把他们抓了起来。于是，檀和之率兵包围了林邑将领范扶龙所驻守的区粟城。
English: Emperor Wen issued a decree to Tang He: If Fan Yangmai really had such great sincerity, he should be allowed to surrender. When Tang He arrived at Zhu Wuyi, he sent Fuhu Cao, Jiang Zhongji and others to visit Fan Yangmai, but Fan Yangmai arrested them. Therefore, Tang He and his soldiers surrounded the district of Maocheng, which was garrisoned by the Linyi general Fan Guolong.

古文：阳迈遣其将范毘沙达救之，宗悫潜兵迎击毘沙达，破之。
现代文：范阳迈派他的大将范毗沙达前去营救，宗悄悄派兵迎击范毗沙达把他打得大败。
English: Fan Yangmai sent his general Fan Bishada to rescue him, and Zong quietly sent troops to meet Fan Bishada and defeated him.

古文：魏主与崔浩皆信重寇谦之，奉其道。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘同司徙崔浩都很尊重信任寇谦之，也信奉寇谦之的道教。
English: Northern Wei Emperor Tuobao and Northern Wei General Secretary Yu Cuihao both respected and trusted Kuo Qian and also believed in Kuo Qian's Taoism.

古文：浩素不喜佛法，每言于魏主，以为佛法虚诞，为世费害，宜悉除之。
现代文：崔浩向来就不喜欢佛教，经常向拓跋焘进言，认为佛教虚幻荒诞，在世上浪费财物损害百姓，应该全部灭掉。
English: Cui Hao had always disliked Buddhism, and often gave advice to Tuobao. He believed that Buddhism was unreal and absurd, that it wasted wealth in the world and harmed the people, and that it should be completely eliminated.

古文：及魏主讨盖吴，至长安，入佛寺，沙门饮从官酒；从官入其室，见大有兵器，出以白帝。
现代文：拓跋焘讨伐盖吴，后来到长安，进入一座佛教寺院，和尚让拓跋焘的侍从将官们喝酒。拓跋焘的侍从将官来到和尚居住的房里时，发现那里有许多兵器，出来告诉了拓跋焘。
English: Tuobaobao fought against Gao Wu, and then went to Chang'an and entered a Buddhist monastery. The monk let Tuobaobao's attendants and generals drink wine. When Tuobaobao's attendants and generals came to the monk's room, they found many weapons there and came out to tell Tuobaobaobao.

古文：帝怒曰： 此非沙门所用，必与盖吴通谋，欲为乱耳！ 
现代文：拓跋焘勃然大怒，说： 这不是和尚应该使用的东西，他们一定是同盖吴相通，想作乱的。 
English: Tuobao flew into a rage and said, "This is not something a monk should use. They must be in league with Gaiwu and want to cause trouble."

古文：命有司案诛阖寺沙门，阅其财产，大得酿具及州郡牧守、富人所寄藏物以万计，又为窟室以匿妇子。
现代文：于是，命令有关部门将全寺院的和尚都杀了。查封寺院的财产时，又发现酿酒的工具及州郡牧守、富人们所寄藏在这里数以万计的东西，又发现和尚挖的地下密室用来藏匿妇女。
English: As a result, the relevant departments were ordered to kill all the monks in the monastery. When seizing the property of the monastery, they also found the tools for brewing wine and tens of thousands of things stored here by the state and county pastors and rich people. They also found the underground secret room dug by the monk to hide women.

古文：浩因说帝悉诛天下沙门，毁诸经像，帝从之。
现代文：崔浩因此劝说拓跋焘将世上的和尚全都斩尽杀绝，毁掉各种佛经佛像，拓跋焘接受了他的建议。
English: Cui Hao therefore persuaded Tuobao to exterminate all the monks in the world and destroy all kinds of Buddhist scriptures and statues. Tuobao accepted his suggestion.

古文：寇谦之与浩固争，浩不从。
现代文：寇谦之极力劝阻崔浩，崔浩不听。
English: Kou Qian tried his best to dissuade Cui Hao, but Cui Hao would not listen.

古文：先尽诛长安沙门，焚毁经像，并敕留台下四方，令一用长安法。
现代文：他们首先杀了长安的和尚，焚毁佛经和佛像，并下诏给留台，让他通令全国，按长安诛杀和尚的办法去做。
English: They first killed a monk in Chang'an, burned Buddhist scriptures and Buddhist statues, and issued an edict to the emperor, ordering him to order the whole country to follow the example of killing a monk in Chang'an.

古文：诏曰： 昔后汉荒君，信惑邪伪以乱天常，自古九州之中，未尝有此。
现代文：诏书上说： 从前，后汉荒淫无道的昏君信奉迷惑人的又假又邪的神来扰乱天道常规，这是自古以来，在九州之内未曾发生过的事。
English: The imperial edict said: Once upon a time, a debauched and dissolute ruler of the Later Han Dynasty believed in false and evil gods to confuse people and disrupt the normal course of heaven. This is something that has never happened in Kyushu since ancient times.

古文：夸诞大言，不本人情，叔季之世，莫不眩焉。
现代文：夸张荒诞的大话，根本不符合人的常情常理，在国家将要灭亡时是没有人不受到迷惑的。
English: The exaggerated and absurd big words do not conform to human common sense at all. When the country is about to perish, no one will not be confused.

古文：由是政教不行，礼义大坏，九服之内，鞠为丘墟。
现代文：因此，因家政治教化不能推行，礼义大遭破坏，普天之下，荡乏穷困，都变成了荒丘废墟。
English: As a result, political indoctrination could not be carried out, etiquette and morality were severely undermined, and the whole world was destitute and impoverished and turned into a wasteland.

古文：朕承天绪，欲除伪定真，复羲、农之治。其一切荡除，灭其踪迹。
现代文：我承继上天的旨令，想要铲除伪善，保留真正实在的东西，恢复伏羲、神农时期的太平安定的社会，应将佛教全都荡除，消灭它的痕迹。
English: In order to eradicate hypocrisy, retain what is truly real, and restore the peaceful and stable society of the Fuxi and Shennong period, I should completely eradicate Buddhism and eliminate its traces.

古文：自今已后，敢有事胡神及造形像泥人、铜人者硃。
现代文：从今以后，胆敢事奉胡人所信奉的神以及塑造这些神的泥像、铜像者满门抄崐斩。
English: From now on, anyone who dares to serve the gods believed in by the Hu people, as well as the clay and bronze statues of these gods, will be beaten and beheaded.

古文：有非常之人，然后能行非常之事，非朕孰能去此历代之伪物？
现代文：有不平常的人，然后才会有不平常的事。不是我，又有谁能消除这历经多少代的虚假的东西！
English: There are unusual people, and then there are unusual things. If not me, then who can eliminate this false thing that has gone through so many generations!

古文：有司宣告征镇诸军、刺史，诸有浮图形像及胡经，皆击破焚烧，沙门无少长悉坑之！ 
现代文：有关部门要通告在外地征战或驻守的各位将领、刺史，凡有佛像和佛经等等的东西都必须打毁焚烧，和尚不管年纪大小都活埋了。 
English: The relevant departments should inform the generals and historians who are in the field or stationed in the field that all things with Buddha statues and Buddhist scriptures must be destroyed and burned. Monks, regardless of age, are buried alive.

古文：太子晃素好佛法，屡谏不听，乃缓宣诏书，使远近豫闻之，得各为计。
现代文：太子拓跋晃平素就喜欢佛法，他多次劝谏，但拓跋焘不听。
English: Prince Tuobao always liked Buddhism. He tried to persuade him many times, but Tuobao didn't listen.

古文：沙门多亡匿获免，或收藏经像，唯塔庙在魏境者无复孑遗。
现代文：他只好拖延时间，慢慢将诏书发下去，这就使远近寺院的和尚事先得到消息，各自想办法脱身，许多和尚都逃走藏了起来，幸免于难，有的把佛经佛像收藏起来，只有在北魏境内的佛塔、寺庙全都不复存在。
English: He had no choice but to delay the time and slowly issue the edict. This caused the monks in and around the temple to get the news in advance and try to escape. Many monks fled and hid and survived. Some collected Buddhist scriptures and statues. Only in the Northern Wei territory did all the pagodas and temples cease to exist.

古文：魏主徙长安工巧二千家于平城。
现代文：北魏国主将长安的工匠、巧匠二千户迁到平城。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign moved 2,000 families of craftsmen and artisans from Chang'an to Pingcheng.

古文：还，至洛水，分军诛李闰叛羌。
现代文：回师，走到洛水，北魏国主又派出部分军队诛杀以李闰为首反叛的羌族部落。
English: After returning the division to Luoshui, the Northern Wei sovereign sent part of the army to fight and kill the rebellious Yi tribe led by Li Yue.

古文：太原颜白鹿私入魏境，为魏人所得，将杀之，诈云青州刺史杜骥使其归诚。
现代文：刘宋太原人颜白鹿私下进入北魏境内，被北魏抓获，要杀他，他欺骗对方说，青州刺史杜骥派他来归降北魏。
English: Liu Song Taiyuan's Yan Bailu secretly entered the territory of the Northern Wei Dynasty. He was captured by the Northern Wei Dynasty and they wanted to kill him. He lied to the other side and said that the Qingzhou ruler Du Xi had sent him to return to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏人送白鹿诣平城，魏主喜曰： 我外家也。 
现代文：北魏人将颜白鹿送到平城，北魏国主高兴地说： 杜骥是我外公的一家子。 
English: The Northern Wei people sent Yan Bai Deer to Pingcheng, and the Northern Wei sovereign said happily: Cuckoo is my grandfather's family.

古文：使崔浩作书与骥，且命永昌王仁、高凉王那将兵迎骥，攻冀州刺史申恬于历城；杜骥遣其府司马夏侯祖欢等将兵救历城。魏人遂寇衮、青、冀三州，至清东而还；杀掠甚众，北边骚动。
现代文：北魏国主让崔浩给杜骥写信，并且命令永昌王拓跋仁、高凉王拓跋那率军迎接杜骥，并到历城攻伐冀州刺史申恬。杜骥派他的司马夏侯祖欢等人统率军队前去历城援救，北魏军队攻打兖、青、冀三州，直打到清水东边才回来，诛杀掳掠了许多人，刘宋北部边境的百姓深感不安，有些骚动。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty asked Cui Hao to write a letter to Du Juan, and ordered Yongchang Wang Tuobaren and Gaolang Wang Tuobaren to lead the army to meet Du Juan, and to go to Licheng to attack Jizhou Zhishisheng. Du Juan sent his Sima Xia Hou Zu Huan and others to lead the army to rescue Licheng. The Northern Wei Army attacked the three provinces of Handan, Qing and Jizhou, and did not return until it reached the eastern edge of Clear Water. Many people were killed and captured. The people on the northern border of Liu Song were deeply uneasy and somewhat agitated.

古文：帝以魏寇为忧，咨访群臣。
现代文：文帝对北魏的侵犯非常担心，向大臣们征求意见。
English: Emperor Wen was very worried about the encroachment of the Northern Wei Dynasty and asked the ministers for advice.

古文：御史中丞何承天上表，以为： 凡备匈奴之策，不过二科：武夫尽征伐之谋，儒生讲和亲之约。
现代文：御史中丞何承天呈上奏表，认为： 大凡防备匈奴侵犯的计策不过有两种：武将想尽征伐作战的办法，儒士却主张利用和亲的办法建立互不侵犯的关系。
English: Historian He Chengtian submitted a report, saying: There are only two ways to prevent the invasion of the Xiongnu: the warlords want to use all means to conquer and fight, but the Confucians advocate the use of friendship to establish a non-aggression relationship.

古文：今若欲追踪卫、霍，自非大田淮、泗，内实青、徐，使民有赢储，野有积谷，然后发精卒十万，一举荡夷，则不足为也。
现代文：现在想要追寻卫青、霍去病的做法，自然就非要在淮河、泗水流域扩大农田面积不可，并使青州、徐州内部力量充实起来，老百姓有丰盈的存储，田野里有积存起来的谷子，然后，发动十万精兵，一举荡平夷蛮，就不是什么费力的事了。
English: Now, if we want to follow the practice of Weiqing and Huo de-disease, we must naturally expand the farmland area in the Huaihe and Ershui basins, and enrich the internal strength of Qingzhou and Xuzhou. The people have abundant storage, and there is accumulated grain in the fields. Then, it is not a laborious matter to launch a hundred thousand elite soldiers and be barbaric in one fell swoop.

古文：若但欲遣军追讨，报其侵暴，则彼必轻骑奔走，不肯会战。
现代文：如果仅仅是想派兵追击讨伐，报复其侵犯暴虐的仇怨，他们一定会轻装逃走，不肯与我们正面打一仗。
English: If they merely want to send troops to pursue the crusaders and avenge their aggression and tyranny, they will certainly flee lightly and refuse to fight us head-on.

古文：徒兴巨费，不损于彼，报复之役，将遂无已。斯策之最末者也。
现代文：白白地浪费巨大的财物，而他们却无丝毫损失，这种互相报复的征伐，从此将不会停止，这是最下等的办法。
English: Wasting huge amounts of wealth in vain, while they have nothing to lose, this kind of mutual revenge campaign will not stop from now on. This is the lowest of the low.

古文：安边固守，于计为长。
现代文：安定边境，巩固边防才是长远之计。
English: Stable and firm border protection should be discussed from a long-term perspective.

古文：臣窃以曹、孙之霸，才均智敌，江、淮之间，不居各数百里。
现代文：我私下里认为，曹操、孙权之所以能各霸一方，是因为他们才能智慧势均力敌。长江、淮河之间地带，各自有数百里没有人家居住。
English: Privately, I believe that the reason why Cao Cao and Sun Quan were able to dominate one side or the other was because they were able to match the strength of their opponents. In the area between the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River, there are hundreds of miles of uninhabited land.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：斥候之郊，非耕牧之地，故坚壁清野以俟其来，整甲缮兵以乘其弊；保民全境，不出此涂。
现代文：因为那是各自细探出没的地方，而不是耕地放牧的地方。因此，坚壁清野等待他们的到来，整顿士卒修缮兵器以抓住他们的弱点。保护老百姓，维持国家领土的完整，不会超出这条途径。
English: Because it is a place where they can explore, not a place for farming and grazing. Therefore, strong walls and clear fields await their arrival, and rectifiers repair weapons to catch their weaknesses. Protecting the people and maintaining the integrity of the country's territory will not go beyond this path.

古文：要而归之，其策有四：一曰移远就近。
现代文：简要归纳说来，办法有四项：一是将住在远处的老百姓迁到附近来。
English: Briefly summarized, there are four measures: First, the people who live far away will be moved to the vicinity.

古文：今青、兗旧民及冀州新附，在界首者三万馀家，可悉徙置大岘之南，以实内地。
现代文：现在青州、兖州的当地百姓和冀州新归附的人，在边界上住有三万多户，可崐以将他们全部迁到大岘的南边，以此来充实境内的力量。
English: At present, there are more than 30,000 households of local people in Qingzhou, Ganzhou and newly annexed people in Jizhou living on the border, and it is possible to move them all to the south of Dalian to enrich the strength of the territory.

古文：二曰多筑城邑以居新徙之家，假其经用，春夏佃牧，秋冬入保。寇至之时，一城千家，堪战之士，不下二千，其馀羸弱，犹能登陴鼓噪，足抗群虏三万矣。
现代文：二是多多修建城邑，让新迁来的人家有房子住，一个城堡内有一千户，能够参加战斗的人不会少于二千，剩下那些老幼病残的，还能登到城堡上呐喊助战，这样一来，足能抵抗住寇贼三万人。
English: The second is to build more and more towns, so that the newly arrived people have houses to live in. There are a thousand households in a castle, and the number of people who can participate in the battle will not be less than two thousand. The remaining old, young and sick can also climb to the castle and shout for help. In this way, it is enough to resist the bandits of thirty thousand.

古文：三曰纂偶车牛以载粮械。计千家之资，不下五百耦牛，为车五百两，参合钩连以卫其众；设使城不可固，平行趋险，贼所不能干，有急征发，信宿可聚。
现代文：三是将百姓使用的车、牛编排搭配起来，用来拉粮食、武器，合计一千户的财产，不少于一千头牛、五百辆车，将它们放在一起，相互搭配好，用来保护众人。即使城池不牢固了，还可以从平地进入险要地带，这样一来，贼寇就不能再进一步干犯了，一旦有紧急情况发生，临时聚众，两夜就可以聚合好。
English: The third is to match the cars and oxen used by the people to pull grain and weapons, a total of one thousand households' property, not less than one thousand cattle, and five hundred cars, and put them together and match them well to protect the people. Even if the city is not solid, it can still enter the critical zone from the flatland. In this way, the thieves can no longer interfere. In the event of an emergency, the temporary crowd can be gathered for two nights.

古文：四曰计丁课仗。
现代文：四是计算士卒数目、准备武器。
English: The fourth is to count the number of soldiers and prepare weapons.

古文：凡战士二千，随其便能，各自有仗，素所服习，铭刻由己，还保输之于库，出行请以自新。
现代文：一个城池大致要有二千名士卒，按照他们各自的长处，发给他们不同的器械，使他们每个人都有武器，平时进行军事训练，让他们自己刻上记号，练习完毕后，将武器交回到军库内统一保存，出战时就把它们拿出来自己将它磨好。
English: A city should have about two thousand soldiers. According to their respective strengths, they should be issued with different equipment, so that each of them has weapons. In peacetime, they should carry out military training, let them engrave their own marks, and after the training is over, they should return the weapons to the military warehouse for unified storage. When they go to war, they should take them out and sharpen them themselves.

古文：弓簳利铁，民不得者，官以渐充之。
现代文：在民间不能得到的弓箭和锐利的铁制武器，官府应该逐渐补充齐全。
English: The government should gradually complete the supply of bows and arrows and sharp iron weapons that are not available to the general public.

古文：数年之内，军用粗备矣。
现代文：几年之内，军事等方面的准备就可初具规模了。
English: Within a few years, military and other preparations can begin to take shape.

古文：近郡之师，远屯清、济，功费既重，嗟怨亦深，以臣料之，未若即用彼众之易也。
现代文：附近各郡军队，要到很远的清水、济水驻扎，费事费财，哀怨和叹息也会更深。依我所见，不如用当地的老百姓更容易些。
English: The armies of the nearby counties would have to spend a lot of money and effort to station themselves far away in Shimizu and Yeosu, and their grief and sighing would be even deeper. As far as I can see, it would be easier to use local people.

古文：今因民所利，导而帅之，兵强而敌不戒，国富而民不劳，比于优复队伍，坐食粮廪者，不可同年而校矣。 
现代文：现在，我们应该按照对老百姓有好处的准则去做，引导并统率他们，这样，兵力强盛就没有敌寇进犯的忧虑国家富强了而老百姓并不劳苦，同原来免除士卒的赋税，只是坐吃粮食相比，是不能相提并论的。 
English: Now, we should act in accordance with the principles that are good for the people, and guide and lead them. In this way, when the army is strong, there will be no fear of enemy invasion. When the country is rich and strong, and the people do not work hard, it cannot be compared with the original exemption of the tax of the soldiers, but just sitting and eating grain.

古文：魏金城边固、天水梁会，与秦、益杂民万馀户据上邽东城反，攻逼西城。
现代文：北魏金城人边固、天水人梁会和秦、益两地杂居的老百姓一万多户据守上东城，起来造反，他们的攻势直逼西城。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, more than ten thousand households of the common people of Jincheng, Bianqu, Tianshui, Lianghui, Qin and Yixing, who lived in the two places, guarded the upper east city and rebelled. Their offensive reached the west city.

古文：秦、益二州刺史封敕文拒却之。
现代文：秦、益二州刺史封敕文抵抗并击退了叛乱者。
English: Qin and Yizhou resisted and repulsed the rebels.

古文：氐、羌万馀人，休官、屠各二万馀人皆起兵应固、会，敕文击固，斩之，馀众推会为主，与敕文相攻。
现代文：氐、羌两族一万多人、休官、屠各部族两万多人都起兵响应边固、梁会。封敕文迎击边固，把他杀了，其余造反的人又推举梁会做他们的领头人，同封敕文相对抗。
English: More than ten thousand people from the Min and Min ethnic groups and more than twenty thousand people from the Hui and Tu ethnic groups raised an army in response to Bian Gu and Liang Hui. Fong Xuanwen attacked Bian Gu and killed him, and the rest of the rebels elected Liang Hui as their leader to oppose Fong Xuanwen.

古文：夏，四月，甲申，魏主至长安。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲申，北魏国主到达长安。
English: In the summer, in April, Jia Shen, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Chang'an.

古文：丁未，大赦。
现代文：丁未，刘宋实行大赦。
English: On March 11th, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：仇池人李洪聚众，自言应王。
现代文：仇池人李洪集结百姓，自称应该做王。
English: Li Hong, a native of Qiuqi, rallied the people and claimed that he should be king.

古文：梁会求救于氐王杨文德，文德曰： 两雄不并立，若须我者，宜杀洪。 
现代文：梁会向氐王杨文德求救，杨文德说： 两雄不能同行并立，如果一定需要我帮忙，你应该先杀了李洪。 
English: Liang would turn to Yang Wende, the King of Gong, for help. Yang Wende said, "Two men cannot stand side by side. If you must need my help, you should kill Li Hong first."

古文：会诱洪斩之，送首于文德。
现代文：于是，梁会诱骗出李洪将他杀了，并把李洪的头颅送给杨文德看。
English: As a result, Liang would trick Li Hong into killing him and give Li Hong's head to Yang Wende to look at.

古文：五月，癸亥，魏主遣安丰公闾根帅骑赴上邽，未至，会弃东城走。
现代文：五月，癸亥，北魏国主拓跋焘派安丰公闾根率领骑兵奔赴上，还未到达，梁会就已放弃上东城逃走了。
English: In May, the Northern Wei ruler Tuoba sent the cavalry led by Anfeng Gong Jigen to the Shangcheng. Before they arrived, the Liang Clan had already abandoned the Shangcheng and fled.

古文：敕文先掘重堑于外，严兵守之，格斗从夜至旦。
现代文：封敕文事先就在外围挖好了几重壕沟，然后派兵严加防守，两军在这里搏斗，从夜里一直杀到第二天早晨。
English: In advance, Fong Xuanwen dug several trenches on the outskirts, and then sent troops to defend it strictly. The two armies fought here from the night until the next morning.

古文：敕文曰： 贼知无生路，致死于我，多杀伤士卒，未易克也。 
现代文：封敕文说： 贼人知道他们没有活路，同我们以命相拼，杀死和杀伤了我们很多士卒，我们不容易战胜他们。 
English: Fong Yuwen said, "The thieves knew they had no way out, so they fought with us to the death, killing and wounding many of our soldiers. It was not easy for us to defeat them.

古文：乃以白虎幡宣告会众，降者赦之，会众遂溃；分兵追讨，悉平之。
现代文：于是，封敕文高举起一块白虎幡，大声告诉梁会部下，投降的可得到赦免。梁会部众立刻崩溃。封敕文分别派兵讨伐，结果将这次造反全部平定了。
English: As a result, Fong Xiwen held up a white tiger banner and loudly told Liang's subordinates that surrender could be pardoned. Liang's followers immediately collapsed. Fong Xiwen sent troops to fight separately, and as a result, the rebellion was completely quelled.

古文：略阳人王元达聚众屯松多川，敕文又讨平之。
现代文：略阳人王元达集结民众屯居于松多川，封敕文又前去讨伐，平定了他们。
English: Wang Yuanda, a Yang person, gathered people to live in Songta River, and Fong Xianwen went to fight against them and pacified them.

古文：盖吴收兵屯杏城，自号秦地王，声势复振。
现代文：北魏叛民领盖吴收集残余部众屯居杏城，自封秦地王，声势又高涨起来。
English: The remnants of the Northern Wei rebels led by Gui Wu gathered and settled in Xingcheng, self-appointed the king of Qin, and the momentum rose again.

古文：魏主遣永昌王仁、高凉王那督北道诸军讨之。
现代文：北魏国主派永昌王拓跋仁、高凉王拓跋那督统北道各路军队前去讨伐。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Yongchang Wang Tuobaren and Gaoliang Wang Tuobanen to lead the troops from all over the North to fight.

古文：檀和之等拔区粟，斩范扶龙，乘胜入象浦；林邑王阳迈倾国来战，以具装被象，前后无际。
现代文：檀和之等人攻下区粟，斩了范扶龙，并乘胜追击到象浦。林邑国王范崐阳迈发动全国兵力出来迎战，把马匹的锐甲披到大象身上，象阵前后望不到头。
English: Dang Hezhi and others captured the district of Guo, cut off Fan Fu Rong, and chased the victory to Xiangpu. The king of Linyi, Fan Bingyang Mai, launched the national troops to fight, and put the horses' armor on the elephants. The elephants could not see their heads.

古文：宗悫曰： 吾闻外国有师子，威服百兽。 
现代文：宗说： 我听说外国有狮子，它的威严可以使百兽顺从。 
English: Zong said: I have heard that there is a lion in a foreign country, and its majesty can make all beasts obey.

古文：乃制其形，与象相拒，象果惊走，林邑兵大败。
现代文：于是，他们制造了许多狮子形的东西，与大象相对峙，大象果然被狮子惊吓逃跑，林邑国军队大败。
English: As a result, they made many lion-shaped things and confronted the elephant. The elephant was indeed frightened by the lion and ran away, and the army of Linyi was defeated.

古文：和之遂克林邑，阳迈父子挺身走。
现代文：檀和之于是攻占了林邑国。范阳迈父子赶紧逃走。
English: As a result, Tanawa conquered Lin'eup Province. Fan Yangmai and his son hurriedly fled.

古文：所获未名之宝，不可胜计，宗悫一无所取，还家之日，衣栉萧然。
现代文：刘宋军得到叫不上名字的财宝不可胜数，宗没拿一件东西，回家那天，他的穿着仍很俭朴。
English: Liu Songjun got countless treasures that cannot be named. He did not take a single thing. On the day he went home, he was still dressed very frugally.

古文：六月，癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，癸未朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：甲申，魏发冀、相、定三州兵二万人屯长安南山诸谷，以备盖吴窜逸。
现代文：甲申，北魏出动冀、相、定三州二万兵，屯驻长安南山各个山谷中，防备盖吴败后窜逃到别的地方去。
English: In Jiaxing, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched 20,000 soldiers from the three states of Hebei, Sang and Ding, stationed in the valleys of the South Mountain of Chang'an, to prevent Ga and Wu from fleeing to other places after their defeat.

古文：丙戌，又发司、幽、定、冀四州十万人筑畿上塞围，起上谷，西至河，广纵千里。
现代文：丙戌，又出动司、幽、定、冀四州十万兵修筑京畿外围的要塞，这一工程东起上谷、西到黄河，绵延覆盖达一千里。
English: At the same time, 100,000 soldiers from the four prefectures of Doushi, Yu, Ding and Hebei were dispatched to build a fortress on the outskirts of Gyeonggi Province. This project stretched for a thousand miles from Shanggok in the east to the Yellow River in the west.

古文：帝筑北堤，立玄武湖，筑景阳山于华林园。
现代文：刘宋文帝下令修筑北堤，建造玄武湖，在华林园建造景阳山。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen ordered the construction of the north embankment, the construction of Xuanwu Lake, and the construction of Jingyang Mountain in Hualin Garden.

古文：秋，七月，辛未，以散骑常侍杜坦为青州刺史。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛未，文帝任命散骑常侍杜坦为青州刺史。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xin Wei, Emperor Wen appointed Du Tan, a knight errant, as the history of Qingzhou.

古文：坦，骥之兄也。
现代文：杜坦是杜骥的哥哥。
English: Dutan is Cuckoo's older brother.

古文：初，杜预之子耽，避晋乱，居河西，仁张氏。
现代文：当初，晋朝名将杜预的儿子杜耽为躲避晋朝战乱迁移到河西居住，在张氏那里做官。
English: At first, Du Tan, the son of Du Yuan, the famous general of the Jin Dynasty, moved to Hexi to avoid the war chaos of the Jin Dynasty, and worked as an official for the Zhang family.

古文：前秦克凉州，子孙始还关中。
现代文：前秦攻克了凉州后，杜家的子孙才回到关中。
English: After the former Qin conquered Liangzhou, the descendants of the Du family returned to Guanzhong.

古文：高祖灭后秦，坦兄弟从高祖过江。
现代文：刘宋高祖灭了后秦后，杜坦兄弟跟着高祖渡过长江。
English: After the death of Liu Song Gao Zu, the Du Tan brothers followed Gao Zu to cross the Yangtze River.

古文：时江东王、谢诸族方盛，北人晚渡者，朝廷番以伧荒遇之，虽复人才可施，皆不得践清涂。
现代文：此时，江东的王、谢几个家族正处于兴盛时期，晚来的北方人就受到歧视，朝廷把他们看成是从北方荒凉之地来的乡巴佬，即便有才能可以任用也不允许在朝廷中担任清贵之官。
English: At this time, the Wang and Xie families in the east of the Yangtze River were in their heyday. The northerners who came later were discriminated against. The court regarded them as rednecks from the desolate land of the north. Even if they had the talent to be appointed, they were not allowed to serve as noble officials in the court.

古文：上尝与坦论金日磾，曰： 恨今无复此辈人！ 
现代文：文帝曾同杜坦谈论过金日，说： 遗憾的是现在世上再也没有金日这类难得之才了！ 
English: Emperor Wen once talked about Kim Il-sung with Tutan, saying: "Unfortunately, there is no longer such a rare talent as Kim Il-sung in the world!

古文：坦曰： 日磾假生今世，养马不暇，岂办见知！ 
现代文：杜坦说： 假如金日生活在今天，让他去养马都忙不过来，哪里还能为人所知呢！ 
English: Dutan said: "If Kim Il-sung were alive today, he would be too busy to keep horses. How else would he be known?

古文：上变色曰： 卿何量朝廷之薄也！ 
现代文：文帝脸色大变说： 你为什么认为朝廷对人太薄了呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen's face changed dramatically and he said, "Why do you think the imperial court is too lenient with people?

古文：坦曰： 请以臣言之：臣本中华高族，晋氏丧乱，播迁凉土，世业相承，不殒其旧；直以南度不早，便以荒伧赐隔。
现代文：杜坦说： 请以我自身为例：我原来是中华的豪富望族，因为晋氏作乱，不得不迁移到凉州居住，世世代代承袭官职，并没有因为迁徙而受到削减。
English: Dutan said: Please take me as an example: I was originally a member of a wealthy and prestigious family in China. Because of the Jin Dynasty's rebellion, I had to move to Liangzhou to live. I have inherited official positions for generations, and I have not been reduced because of migration.

古文：日磾，胡人，身为牧圉，乃超登内侍，齿列名贤。
现代文：可是，如今仅仅是因为我们渡江南晚了些，就把我们排斥为边远的粗野之人。金日是匈奴人，身为朝廷马厩管马之人，却能越级提拔做到了内侍，而且与其他名才贤士们相并列。
English: But now, just because we crossed the south of the river a little late, we are ostracized as remote and uncouth people. Kim Il-sung was a Hun, and as a person in charge of horses in the imperial stables, he was able to be promoted beyond his grade to become an inner servant, and was on a par with other famous sages.

古文：圣朝虽复拔才，臣恐未必能也。 
现代文：如果像现在这样，即使圣明的朝廷再次选拔贤才，恐怕也不一定能轮到我的。 
English: Although we can promote talent this morning, I'm afraid we may not be able to have such a thing as a Kim Il Sung list.

古文：上默然。
现代文：文帝听罢默不作无声。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：八月，魏高凉王那等破盖吴，获其二叔；诸将欲送诣平城，长安镇将陆俟曰： 长安险固，风俗豪忮，平时犹不可忽，况承荒乱之馀乎！
现代文：八月，北魏高凉王拓跋那等率将士击败盖吴，俘获了盖吴的两个叔父。将士们想要把他们押送到平城，镇守长安的大将陆俟说： 长安险要坚固，风俗豪爽强悍，和平时期都不应该被忽视，何况正是在战乱之后呢！
English: In August, Northern Wei Gao Liang Wang Tuoba and other generals defeated Gaewu and captured Gaewu's two uncles. The generals wanted to escort them to Pingcheng, and the town guard of Chang'an, General Lu Wei, said: Chang'an should be strong, the customs should be strong, and it should not be ignored in peacetime, let alone after the war!

古文：今不斩吴，则长安之变未已也。
现代文：现在如果不杀了盖吴，长安的战乱就不会停止。
English: If we don't kill Gai Wu now, the war in Chang'an won't stop.

古文：吴一身潜窜，非其亲信，谁能获之！
现代文：盖吴如今一人潜逃鼠窜，不是他的亲信，谁能把他抓获呢！
English: Gui Wu is now a fugitive, not one of his cronies, who can capture him?

古文：若停十万之众以追一人，又非长策。
现代文：如果留下十万人去追捕盖吴一人，也不是长久之策。
English: If you leave a hundred thousand people to hunt down Ge Wu alone, it is not a long-term strategy.

古文：不如私许吴叔，免其妻子，使自追吴，擒之必矣。 
现代文：我崐们不如私下里释放盖吴的叔父，同时也赦免他们的妻子和孩子，让他们自己去寻找盖吴，这样，我们一定会抓到盖吴 。
English: We'd better secretly release Gai Wu's uncle, and also pardon their wives and children, and let them search for Gai Wu on their own. In this way, we will definitely catch Gai Wu.

古文：诸将咸曰： 今贼党众已散，唯吴一身，何所能至？ 
现代文：众将领都说： 现在盗贼党羽已经溃散，只有盖吴一人逃走了，他能逃到什么地方呢？ 
English: All the generals said, "Now that the thieving party has been broken up, only Gai Wu has escaped. Where can he escape to?"

古文：俟曰： 诸君不见毒蛇乎！
现代文：陆俟说： 各位没有看见过毒蛇吗？
English: Lu Yao said, "Haven't you all seen poisonous snakes?

古文：不断其首，犹能为害。
现代文：不斩断它的头，它还能去伤害人。
English: Without cutting off its head, it can still hurt people.

古文：吴天性凶狡，今若得脱，必自称王者不死，以惑愚民，为患愈大。 
现代文：盖吴天性凶狠狡诈，如今如果得以逃脱，一定会宣称做王的人不会被杀死，以此来迷惑愚昧无知的百姓，这样一来，给我们造成的祸患会更大。 
English: Gai Wu is a cunning man by nature, and if he were to escape now, he would deceive the ignorant people by saying that the king would not be killed, which would only bring more disasters to us.

古文：诸将曰： 公言是也。
现代文：众将领们说： 你说得很对。
English: The generals said: You are quite right.

古文：但得贼不杀，而更遣之，若遂往不返，将何以任其罪？ 
现代文：只是俘获了贼寇不杀，反而放走，假如他们不再回来了，谁来承担这一罪过呢？ 
English: If they do not return, who will bear the guilt?

古文：俟曰： 此罪我为诸君任之。 
现代文：陆俟说： 这一罪过，我替各位承担。 
English: Lu Wei said, "I will take responsibility for this crime.

古文：高凉王那亦以俟计为然，遂赦二叔，与刻期而遣之。
现代文：高凉王拓跋那也认为陆俟的计策是正确的，于是赦免盖吴的两个叔父，同他们定下返回日期后就将他们放走了。
English: Gao Liang Wang Tuobana also thought that Lu Yao's strategy was correct, so he pardoned the two uncles of Gui Wu, set a return date with them and released them.

古文：及期，吴叔不至，诸将皆咎俟，俟曰： 彼伺之未得其便耳，必不负也。 
现代文：到了约定的日期，盖吴的两个叔父没有回来，各将领都怪罪陆俟，陆俟说： 他们只不过是还没有机会下手罢了，他们一定不会辜负我们。 
English: On the appointed day, Gai Wu's two uncles did not return. The generals all blamed Lu Yao. Lu Yao said, "They just haven't had a chance to attack yet. They will not let us down."

古文：后数日，吴叔果以吴首来；传诣平城。
现代文：几天后，盖吴的叔父果然拿着盖吴的头回来了，消息很快传到了平城。
English: A few days later, Gai Wu's uncle did indeed return with Gai Wu's head, and the news soon reached Pingcheng.

古文：永昌王仁等讨吴馀党白广平、路那罗等，悉平之。
现代文：永昌王拓跋仁讨伐盖吴余党白广平和路那罗，都平定了。
English: Yongchang Wang Tuobujin's crusade against the Wu Yu Party's Bai Guangping and Lu Naro, have been leveled.

古文：以陆俟为内都大官。
现代文：北魏任命陆俟为内都大官。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Lu Wei as the Inner Capital.

古文：会安定卢水胡刘超等聚众万馀人反，魏主以俟威恩著于关中，复加俟都督秦、雍二州诸军事，镇长安。
现代文：正巧又赶上安定的卢水胡人刘超等人集聚一万多人造反，北魏国主拓跋焘因为陆俟的威力和恩德在关中都很有名，又加授陆俟为都督秦、雍二州诸军事，镇守长安。
English: Coincidentally, it also caught up with the stable Lu Shui Hu people, Liu Chao and others, who gathered more than 10,000 people to rebel. The Northern Wei sovereign Tuobao was famous in Guanzhong because of the power and virtue of Lu Yao. In addition, Lu Yao was awarded as the governor of Qin, the military of Yong Erzhou, and the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：谓俟曰： 关中奉化日浅，恩信未洽，吏民数为逆乱。
现代文：拓跋焘对陆俟说： 关中接受我们的教化还没有多长时间，我们的恩德信誉还没有树立起来，因此，那里的官吏和老百姓几次发动叛乱。
English: Tuobao said to Lu Yao: Guanzhong has not accepted our enlightenment for a long time, and our reputation for benevolence has not yet been established. Therefore, officials and ordinary people there have launched several rebellions.

古文：今朕以重兵授卿，则超等必同心协力，据险拒守，未易攻也；若兵少，则不能制贼，卿当自以方略取之。 
现代文：现在，我把重兵交给你，刘超等知道后也必然会齐必协力，共同把守险要抗拒你，他们不是很容易就攻取的，我们派的兵少，不能制服贼寇。你应该自己谋划策略取得胜利。 
English: Now, I am handing over the heavy troops to you. After knowing this, Liu Chao and others will surely make a concerted effort to jointly resist you. They are not easy to attack. We have fewer soldiers and cannot subdue the bandits. You should plan your own strategy to achieve victory.

古文：俟乃单马之镇。
现代文：陆俟一个人骑马到长安去镇守。
English: Lu Wei rode alone to Chang'an to guard the town.

古文：超等闻之，大喜，以俟为无能为也。
现代文：刘超等人听到这个消息后，非常高兴，他们认为陆俟不能有所作为。
English: After hearing this news, Liu Chao and others were very happy. They thought that Lu Yao could not make any difference.

古文：俟既至，谕以成败，诱纳超女，与为姻戚以招之；超自恃其众，犹无降意。
现代文：陆俟到了那里后，以事情的成败，生死存亡的利害来劝导刘超等人，还以娶刘超的女儿为妻做诱饵，通过与刘超联姻而达到招纳刘超归顺的目的。但是，刘超却自恃他手下人多，还是没有归降的意思。
English: After Lu Yao arrived there, he used the success or failure of the matter and the survival of life and death to persuade Liu Chao and others. He also used the marriage of Liu Chao's daughter as a bait to achieve the goal of recruiting Liu Chao's submission through marriage with Liu Chao. However, Liu Chao said that he had many subordinates and still had no intention of surrendering.

古文：俟乃帅其帐下亲往见超，超使人逆谓俟曰： 从者过三百人，当以弓马相待；不及三百人，当以酒食相供。 
现代文：于是，陆俟就带着他的侍卫将领亲自去见刘超。刘超派人前去迎接，对陆俟说： 你的随从士卒超过三百人，我们就用弓箭战马来对待，如果不到三百人，我们就会用美酒佳肴来款待。 
English: As a result, Lu Wei took his general of bodyguards to see Liu Chao in person. Liu Chao sent someone to meet him and said to Lu Wei: If your entourage exceeds three hundred people, we will treat them with bows and arrows and war horses. If it is less than three hundred people, we will entertain them with fine food and wine.

古文：俟乃将二百骑诣超。超设备甚严，俟纵酒尽醉而还。
现代文：于是，陆俟就带了二百名骑士到了刘超那里，刘超戒备很严，而陆俟却只是纵酒豪饮，直喝到酩酊大醉才返回自己的驻地。
English: As a result, Lu Yao brought two hundred knights to Liu Chao's place. Liu Chao was on high alert, while Lu Yao just drank and drank until he was very drunk before returning to his station.

古文：顷之，俟复选敢死士五百人出猎，因诣超营，约曰： 发机当以醉为限。 
现代文：不久，陆俟又挑选出五百名敢死士卒出外狩猎，顺便到了刘超所在的军营，他要求士卒们说： 发动攻击的时间应该以我喝醉的时候为限。 
English: Not long after, Lu Yao selected another five hundred death-defying soldiers to go out hunting, and by the way went to the military camp where Liu Chao was. He asked the soldiers to say: The time to launch an attack should be limited to when I am drunk.

古文：既饮，俟阳醉，上马大呼，手斩超首；士卒应声纵击，杀伤千数，遂平之。
现代文：刘超款待了陆俟，酒喝了一会儿，陆俟表面上假装大醉，跳上马大声呼喊，亲手斩了刘超的头，他手下的士卒应声而起进行狙击，杀死杀伤刘超将士一千多人，于是，平定了那里。
English: Liu Chao entertained Lu Yao and drank wine for a while. On the surface, Lu Yao pretended to be very drunk, jumped on a horse and shouted loudly. He cut off Liu Chao's head with his own hands. His officers responded by sniping, killing and wounding more than a thousand of Liu Chao's soldiers. As a result, the situation was stabilized there.

古文：魏主征俟还，为外都大官。
现代文：拓跋焘将陆俟召回平城，封他为外都大官。
English: Tuoba Zhen called Lu Zhen back to Pingcheng and made him the highest-ranking official outside the capital.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑复还旧土。
现代文：这一年，吐谷浑汗国又回到过去的土地上生活。
English: This year, Tugu Hunkan returned to live in the land of the past.

