古文：建当立有，以靖为宗，以时为宝，以政为仪，和则能久。
现代文：建立常规常道，应当以虚静为本，以合于时宜为贵，以正确不偏为准则，这三者协调一致，就能够持久不败。
English: The establishment of a regular routine should be based on the principle of "virtuous and tranquil," "timely and appropriate" and "correct and unbiased." If these three are coordinated and consistent, it will be able to last for a long time.

古文：非吾仪虽利不为，非吾当虽利不行，非吾道虽利不取。
现代文：不合我的准则，虽有利也不去做；不合我的常规，虽有利也不推行；不合我的常道，虽有利也不采用。
English: If it doesn't meet my standards, I won't do it, even if it's advantageous; if it doesn't meet my standards, I won't implement it, even if it's advantageous; if it doesn't meet my standards, I won't adopt it, even if it's advantageous.

古文：上之随天，其次随人。
现代文：首先是适应天道，其次是适应人心。
English: The first is to adapt to the heavenly way, and the second is to adapt to the human heart.

古文：人不倡不和，天不始不随。
现代文：人们不提倡的事不去应和，天不曾开创的事不去听从。
English: Don't go along with what people don't advocate, and don't listen to what heaven didn't create.

古文：故其言也不废，其事也不随。
现代文：所以，其言论不会失效，其事业不会失败。
English: Therefore, his words will not be invalidated and his cause will not fail.

古文：原始计实，本其所生。
现代文：追索事物的来源，研讨事物的实质，由此来探索事物生成的根据。
English: Trace the source of things, study the essence of things, and thus explore the basis for the creation of things.

古文：知其象则索其形，缘其理则知其情，索其端则知其名。
现代文：了解现象就可以探查形体，考究道理就可以掌握实情，找到事物的始末，就知道应该给它什么名称了。
English: If you understand the phenomenon, you can explore the shape, and if you study the reason, you can grasp the truth, find the beginning and end of things, and know what name to give it.

古文：故苞物众者，莫大于天地；化物多者，莫多于日月；民之所急，莫急于水火。
现代文：看来，包藏物类广泛的，莫大于天地；化育物类众多的，莫多于日月；人民生活急切需要的，莫急于水火。
English: It seems that there is nothing greater than heaven and earth to contain a wide range of species; there is nothing greater than the sun and the moon to breed a large number of species; there is nothing more urgent than water and fire to meet the urgent needs of people's lives.

古文：然而，天不为一物在其时，明君圣人亦不为一人枉其法。
现代文：然而天不由于某一种物的需要而错行它的节令，明君圣人也不因为某一个人的需要而错行它的法度。
English: However, heaven does not miscarry its festivals because of the needs of a certain thing, nor does the wise man miscarry his laws because of the needs of a certain person.

古文：天行其所行而万物被其利，圣人亦行其所行而百姓被其利。
现代文：天按照它的规律运行，万物就自然得到它的好处；圣人也按照他的法度行事，百姓就自然得到他的好处。
English: Heaven operates according to its laws, and all things naturally receive its benefits; the sage also acts according to his laws, and the people naturally receive his benefits.

古文：是故万物均、既夸众百姓平矣。
现代文：因此，万物平衡，百姓也安定了。
English: As a result, all things are balanced and the people are stable.

古文：是以圣人之治也，静身以待之，物至而名自治之。
现代文：所以，圣人治世，总是安静地在那里等待着。事物一到，就循名责实自然地去治理它。
English: Therefore, sages reign over the world, always quietly waiting there. As soon as things arrive, they govern them naturally according to their names.

古文：正名自治之，奇身名废。
现代文：正确的名称自然治理得好，不正确的名称自然会被淘汰。
English: The correct name will naturally be well managed, and the incorrect name will naturally be eliminated.

古文：名正法备，则圣人无事。
现代文：只要是名称正确法度完备，圣人是安坐无事的。
English: As long as the name is correct and the law is complete, the saint is safe.

古文：不可常居也，不可废舍也。
现代文：名称与法度不可永远不变，也不可没有稳定。
English: The name and the legal system cannot remain unchanged forever, nor can they be unstable.

古文：随变断事也，知时以为度。
现代文：要适应变化来裁断事物，了解时宜来确定法度。
English: It is necessary to adapt to changes to adjudicate things, understand the time to determine the rule of law.

古文：大者宽，小者局，物有所余有所不足。
现代文：因为范围偏大则过宽，偏小则局限；事物发展又是参差不齐。
English: Because if the scope is too large, it is too broad, and if it is too small, it is limited; the development of things is uneven.

古文：兵之出，出于人；其人入，入于身。
现代文：战争的出击，虽是出击他人；但他人反击进来，也会危及自身。
English: The attack of war, although it is the attack of others, but the counterattack of others, will also endanger themselves.

古文：兵之胜，从于适；德之来，从于身。
现代文：战争的胜利，虽是敌人失败；但得来这个胜利，还是出自自身的牺牲。
English: The victory of war, although the defeat of the enemy; but to win this victory, or from their own sacrifice.

古文：故曰：祥于鬼者义于人，兵不义不可，强而骄者损其强，弱而骄者亟死亡；强而卑义信其强，弱而卑义免于罪。
现代文：所以说：凡是得福于鬼神者必行义于人，不义的战争是发动不得的。强国如果骄傲就损害它的强大，弱国如果骄傲就加速它的死亡；强国谦卑就可以发展它的强大，弱国谦卑就可以免于遭到祸患。
English: Therefore, it is said: "Whoever is blessed by ghosts and gods must do justice to people, and an unjust war must not be launched. If a strong country is proud, it will damage its strength, and if a weak country is proud, it will accelerate its death; if a strong country is humble, it can develop its strength, and if a weak country is humble, it can be free from disaster.

古文：是故骄之余卑，卑之余骄。
现代文：因此，骄纵的结局将是卑陋，谦卑的结局则是矜荣。
English: Therefore, the end of arrogance will be lowly, and the end of humility will be glorious.

古文：道者，一人用之，不闻有余；天下行之，不闻不足。
现代文：道，一个人使用它，没有听说有余；天下人都来行道，也没有听说不足。
English: Road, a person using it, has not heard enough; people all over the world come to the road, and have not heard enough.

古文：此谓道矣。
现代文：这就叫作道。
English: This is called the path.

古文：小取焉则小得福，大取焉则大得福，尽行之而天下服，殊无取焉则民反，其身不免于贼。
现代文：稍稍地按道行事，就稍得其福；大行之；就大得其福；完全按道行事，就得到天下信服；毫不按道行事，则人民反抗，其身不免被害。
English: If you act a little according to the way, you will be blessed a little; if you act a lot, you will be blessed a lot; if you act completely according to the way, you will be convinced by the world; if you do not act according to the way, the people will resist and you will be harmed.

古文：左者，出者也；右者，人者也。出者而不伤人，入者自伤也。
现代文：左的方位是出生，有的方位是死亡，出生的方位不伤人，死亡的方位自然会有伤人之事的。
English: The left position is birth, some position is death, the birth position does not hurt people, the death position will naturally hurt people.

古文：不日不月，而事以从；不卜不筮，而谨知吉凶。
现代文：不必选择什么良辰吉日，依道行事就可以从其心愿；不用求神问卜，依道行事就可以理解吉凶。
English: You don't have to choose a good time or a good day, you can act according to your heart's desire; you don't have to ask God for divination, you can understand good and bad luck by acting according to the way.

古文：是谓宽乎形，徒居而致名。
现代文：这叫作身心闲适，安坐而可以得名。
English: It's called leisure, and you can get a reputation for sitting still.

古文：去善之言，为善之事，事成而顾反无名。
现代文：说了好话，做了好事，事成后还应该回到无名的状态。
English: Say good things, do good things, and return to obscurity after the deed is done.

古文：能者无名，从事无事。
现代文：有才能的往往不求出名，真干事的往往显得无事。
English: Talented people often do not seek fame, and those who are real officers often appear to have nothing to do.

古文：审量出入，而观物所载。
现代文：审量政令的出入，要根据事物的实际承担能力行事。
English: When judging the discrepancy between the amount of government orders, it is necessary to act according to the actual ability to bear things.

古文：孰能法无法乎？
现代文：谁能做到既能治理好国家而又不用亲自去治理？
English: Who can manage a country well without managing it personally?

古文：始无始乎？
现代文：开创了事业而又不用亲自去开创？
English: Started a business without having to start it yourself?

古文：终无终乎？
现代文：完成了事业而不用自己去亲自完成？
English: Did you complete your career without having to do it yourself?

古文：弱无弱乎？
现代文：削弱了敌人而不用亲自去削弱他们？
English: weakened the enemy without having to weaken them yourself?

古文：故曰：美哉岪岪。
现代文：这样才是美好兴旺的。
English: That's what makes it beautiful and prosperous.

古文：故曰有中有中，孰能得夫中之衷乎？
现代文：所以说，不插手举事之中正无偏反而可保持中正，谁能领会这个中正的深刻本质呢？
English: Therefore, without interfering in the affairs of others, it is possible to maintain the middle way, and who can understand the profound essence of this middle way?

古文：故曰功成者隳，名成者亏。
现代文：所以说，功成则将下降，名成则将有亏。
English: Therefore, achievement will decline, and fame will be at a disadvantage.

古文：故曰，孰能弃名与功而还与众人同？
现代文：所以说，谁能做到放弃功业与名声而回到普通人的地位呢？
English: So, who can give up their achievements and fame and return to the status of ordinary people?

古文：孰能弃功与名而还反无成？
现代文：谁能做到放弃功业名声而回到尚无成就的状态呢？
English: Who can afford to give up their professional reputation and return to a state of non-achievement?

古文：无成有贵其成也，有成贵其无成也。
现代文：无成就者固然重视成就，有成就者更应重视尚无成就的本色。
English: The non-achiever certainly attaches importance to achievement, and the achiever should pay more attention to the nature of the non-achievement.

古文：日极则仄，月满则亏。
现代文：太阳到了最高之后，便走向偏斜；月亮到了最满之后，便走向亏缺。
English: When the sun is at its highest, it tends to tilt; when the moon is at its fullest, it tends to wane.

古文：极之徒仄，满之徒亏，巨之徒灭。
现代文：最高的要走向偏斜，最满的要走向亏缺，最巨大了就将走向死亡。
English: The tallest will go to obliquity, the fullest to deficiency, the largest to death.

古文：孰能己无乎？
现代文：谁能把自己忘掉呢？
English: Who can forget himself?

古文：效夫天地之纪。
现代文：学一学天地的运行法则吧。
English: Learn the laws of heaven and earth.

古文：人言善亦勿听，人言恶亦勿听，持而待之，空然勿两之，淑然自清。
现代文：人们说好，不轻易听信；说不好，也不轻易听信。保留而加以等待，虚心地戒止冲突，终究会寂然自明的。
English: If people say yes, it is not easy to believe; if they say no, it is not easy to believe; if they withhold and wait, and humbly refrain from conflict, it will eventually become self-evident.

古文：无以旁言为事成，察而征之，无听辩，万物归之，美恶乃自见。
现代文：不要把道听途说当成事实，进行观察与考证，不听信任何巧辩，把万事万物归并到一起，相互比较之下，美、恶就自然显现出来了。
English: Do not take hearsay as fact, observe and investigate, do not listen to any clever arguments, put everything together, and compare with each other, beauty and evil will naturally appear.

古文：天或维之，地或载之。
现代文：天好象有个东西在维系着，地好象有个东西在擎载着。
English: The sky seems to be held up by something, and the earth seems to be carrying something.

古文：天莫之维，则天以坠矣；地莫之载，则地以沉矣。夫天不坠，地不沉，夫或维而载之也夫！
现代文：天若没有东西维系着它。就将坠下来了；地若没有东西擎载着它，就会沉下去了，天不坠，地不沉，或者正是有个什么东西在维系而擎载着它们的吧!
English: If the sky has nothing to hold it up, it will fall; if the earth has nothing to hold it up, it will sink. The sky doesn't fall, the earth doesn't sink, or it's just that something is holding them up and holding them up!

古文：又况于人？
现代文：何况于人呢？
English: What about people?

古文：人有治之，辟之若夫雷鼓之动也。
现代文：人也是有某种力量在支配着他，就象鼓被敲击之后才发声一样。
English: Man, too, has a certain power over him, just as a drum only sounds after it has been beaten.

古文：夫不能自摇者，夫或摇之。
现代文：凡是自己不能推动自己的事物，就仿佛有种力量推动着它们。
English: All things that cannot move themselves seem to be moved by a force.

古文：夫或者何？
现代文：这个仿佛存在的力量是什么呢？
English: What is this force that seems to exist?

古文：若然者也。
现代文：就是上面所讲的那个东西了。
English: It's all of the above.

古文：视则不见，听则不闻，洒乎天下满，不见其塞。
现代文：看又看不见，听又听不着，洒满了天下，但又看不到充塞的现象。
English: You can't see it when you look at it, you can't hear it when you listen to it, it's all over the world, but you can't see the phenomenon of congestion.

古文：集于颜色，知于肌肤，责其往来，莫知其时。
现代文：聚集在人的颜面上，表现在人的皮肤上，但探其往来，却不能了解它的时间。
English: It gathers on a person's face and manifests itself on the skin, but it is not possible to understand its time by looking into its history.

古文：薄乎其方也，韕乎其圜也，韕韕乎莫得其门。
现代文：它既象广平的方形，又象浑圆的圆形，但又团团地找不到门。
English: It is like a wide, flat square, and like a round, but it can't find the door.

古文：故口为声也，耳为听也，目有视也，手有指也，足有履也，事物有所比也。
现代文：看来，口能发声，耳能听音，眼能看，手能指，足能行路，一切事物也都是依靠着它的。
English: It seems that the mouth can speak, the ear can hear, the eye can see, the hand can point, the foot can walk, and all things depend on it.

古文： 当生者生，当死者死 ，言有西有东，各死其乡。
现代文： 当生则生，当死则死 ，这句话是说事物无论在西在东，都遵循它自身的趋向发展。
English: When life is life, when death is death, this sentence is to say that things, whether in the West or in the East, follow their own trend of development.

古文：置常立仪，能守贞乎？
现代文：立规章，定准则，能保证正确么？
English: Can you guarantee the correctness of the rules and regulations?

古文：常事通道，能官人乎？
现代文：办政事，讲道理，能保证管好人们么？
English: Is it possible to run government affairs and be reasonable, and ensure that people are well managed?

古文：故书其恶者，言其薄者。
现代文：所以，著书是令人厌恶的，立说是令人鄙薄的。
English: Therefore it is an abomination to write, and it is contemptible to speak.

古文：上圣之人，口无虚习也，手无虚指也，物至而命之耳。
现代文：最高的圣人，口不空说，手不空指，事物出现以后，给它一个名称说明就是了。
English: The most exalted sage does not speak, nor does he point with his hand. When a thing appears, it is enough to give it a name and a description.

古文：发于名声，凝于体色，此其可谕者也。不发于名声，不凝于体色，此其不可谕者也。
现代文：有名声、有体色的事物是可以说明白的；无名声、无体色的事物是无需说明白的。
English: Things of reputation and stature can be explained; things of no reputation and no stature do not need to be explained.

古文：及至于至者，教存可也，教亡可也。
现代文：至于一种最好的处理方法，则是让它自己存在下去，或让它自己消亡下去。
English: As for the best way to deal with it, it is to let it exist on its own, or let it die out on its own.

古文：故曰：济于舟者和于水矣，义于人者祥其神矣。
现代文：所以说：能渡船的，自然会适应水性；能行义于人的，自然会得福于鬼神的。
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who can cross a ship will naturally adapt to the watery nature; those who can do righteousness to people will naturally be blessed by ghosts and gods.

古文：事有适，而无适，若有适；觿解，不可解而后解。
现代文：办事情本有恰当的方法，然而在人们尚无此法时，才有人提出来。骨锥开解绳结。
English: There was a proper way of doing things, but it was only suggested when there wasn't.

古文：故善举事者，国人莫知其解。
现代文：也是在绳结无法解开时，才有人想出来用它。所以，善于举事的人，国人往往不理解他的方法。
English: It is also when the knot cannot be untied that someone comes up with the idea of using it. Therefore, people who are good at handling things often do not understand his methods.

古文：为善乎，毋提提；为不善乎，将陷于刑。
现代文：做好了，不可张扬显示；做得不好，还将陷于刑网。
English: If you do a good job, don't flaunt it; if you do a bad job, you will be caught in the net.

古文：善不善，取信而止矣。
现代文：好与不好，取信于国人就完了。
English: Good or bad, gaining the trust of the Chinese people is complete.

古文：若左若右，正中而已矣。
现代文：是左好呢？或是右好呢？还是正中为好。
English: Is it better to be on the left? Or on the right? Or in the middle?

古文：县乎日月无已也。
现代文：正中就能象日月悬空，永无息止。
English: In the middle of the day, it can hang in the air like the sun and the moon, never stopping.

古文：愕愕者不以天下为忧，剌剌者不以万物为策，孰能弃剌剌而为愕愕乎？
现代文：落落无牵挂的人总是不以天下事务为忧虑，烈烈有为的人总是不以统率万物为满足。但谁能做到放弃烈烈有为而奉行落落无为呢？
English: Those who have no worries about the future always do not worry about the affairs of the world, and those who are vigorous and active are always not satisfied with leading all things. But who can give up the vigorous and active and pursue the passive and inactive?

古文：难言宪术，须同而出。
现代文：宣布一项政策法令是不容易的，它必须符合众人心愿才可以发表出来。
English: It is not easy to announce a policy decree, it must be in line with the wishes of the people before it can be published.

古文：无益言，无损言，近可以免。
现代文：不要说增加的话，也不说减少的话，只要接近众人心愿就免事增删。所以说：论智慧，自己有什么智？
English: Say not thou, What is the increase? nor, What is the diminution? but, What is the desire of the children of men? wherefore it is said, Concerning wisdom, what wisdom hath he?

古文：故曰：知何知乎？
现代文：论谋略，自己有什么谋？
English: Speaking of strategy, what strategy do you have?

古文：谋何谋乎？审而出者彼自来。
现代文：凡是查明众人心愿而制定出法度政策的，人家自然会投奔来。
English: Whenever a legislative policy is formulated after ascertaining the wishes of the people, people will naturally flock to it.

古文：自知曰稽，知人曰济。
现代文：只了解自己心愿，依此行事叫作 稽 ；能了解他人心愿，依此行事叫作 济 。
English: To know one's own mind and act accordingly is called discernment; to know another's mind and act accordingly is called wisdom.

古文：知苟适，可为天下周。内固之，一可为长久。论而用之，可以为天下王。
现代文：了解人心如能做到准确，可成为天下君主；把此事牢记在心，便可以永久不败，经过讲求、研究而运用之，就可以成就天下的王业。
English: If you can accurately understand the hearts of the people, you can become the monarch of the world; if you keep this in mind, you can be invincible forever, and if you apply it through solicitation and research, you can achieve the royal cause of the world.

古文：天之视而精，四璧而知请，壤土而与生。
现代文：天的观察万物是精确的，四面没有障碍而看得清楚真实。一直到大地土壤及其所有的生物。
English: The observation of the sky Everything is accurate, there are no obstacles and you can see clearly and truly on all sides, all the way to the earth and soil and all its creatures.

古文：能若夫风与波乎？
现代文：但人们能够象大自然的风与波浪一样么？
English: But can people be like nature's wind and waves?

古文：唯其所欲适。
现代文：只按照其愿望行事。
English: They only act according to their wishes.

古文：故子而代其父，曰义也，臣而代其君，曰篡也。
现代文：本来儿子继承他的父亲坐天下称为义，可是臣子继承他的君主坐天下，就叫篡了。
English: Originally, a son inheriting his father's throne was called righteousness, but a vassal inheriting his monarch's throne was called usurpation.

古文：篡何能歌？
现代文：篡怎么能歌颂呢？
English: How can we sing his praises?

古文：武王是也。
现代文：周武王却又是被歌颂着的对象。
English: King Zhou Wu, however, is the object of praise.

古文：故曰：孰能去辩与巧，而还与众人同道？
现代文：所以说：谁能不用诡辩与巧诈，而与众人共同信奉一个道理呢？
English: Wherefore he saith, Who is he that exhorteth a doctrine among the people, and addeth it not with guile and deceit?

古文：故曰：思索精者明益衰，德行修者王道狭，卧名利者写生危，知周于六合之内者，吾知生之有为阻也。
现代文：所以说：思索愈精细的人明智愈加不足，德行越有修养的人王道越加狭窄，大量拥有名利的反而有生命危险的忧虑，智慧遍及天地四方的，我相信他的生机就要受到阻碍了。
English: Therefore it is said: The more refined the thinking, the more deficient the wisdom. The more cultivated the virtue, the narrower the king's way. The one who has a lot of fame and fortune, on the other hand, has life-threatening worries. Wisdom pervades the four corners of the world. I believe that his vitality will be hindered.

古文：持而满之，乃其殆也。
现代文：骄傲种持而自满起来，那是非常危险的表现。
English: It's a very dangerous thing to be proud and complacent.

古文：名满于天下，不若其已也。
现代文：名满天下的。不如早些罢手。
English: It's famous all over the world. It's better to stop earlier.

古文：名进而身退，天之道也。
现代文：因为名进而身退，才合于天道。
English: Because the name and then retreat, only fit for the heavenly way.

古文：满盛之国，不可以仕任；满盛之家，不可以嫁子；骄倨傲暴之人，不可与交。
现代文：极盛的国度，个可给它当官；极盛的家族，不可同他结亲；骄倔傲暴之人，是不可同他交朋友的。
English: The most prosperous country, one can give it a post; the most prosperous family, can not be related to him; the proud and violent people, can not make friends with him.

古文：道之大如天，其广如地，其重如石，其轻如羽。
现代文：道，其大如天，其广如地，其重如石，其轻如羽毛。
English: Tao is as big as the sky, as wide as the earth, as heavy as a stone, and as light as a feather.

古文：民之所以，知者寡。
现代文：人们与它共处。但对它却很少了解。
English: People live with it, but they know very little about it.

古文：故曰：何道之近而莫之与能服也，弃近而就远何以费力也。
现代文：所以说，为什么道离人很近而不努力实行呢？弃近而就远，人们又何必浪费力气呢？
English: Therefore, why is it that the way is so close to people, but they do not make efforts to practice it? Why do people waste their energy if they abandon the near and go to the far?

古文：故曰：欲爱吾身，先知吾情，君亲六合，以考内身。
现代文：所以说：要珍爱自身求道，先就来了解自身实际。
English: Therefore, it is said: to cherish oneself and seek the way, first understand one's own reality.

古文：以此知象，乃知行情。
现代文：普遍观察宇宙事物，来验证身体内部。从这里了解典型，乃知道可行之事。
English: Universal observation of cosmic things to verify the inside of the body. From here to understand the typical, is to know what is feasible.

古文：既知行情，乃知养生。
现代文：既知道可行之事，就懂得修养生命。
English: Once you know what is possible, you know how to cultivate life.

古文：左右前后，周而复所。
现代文：要查访左右前后，一遍一遍地寻找。
English: You have to visit around and around, searching over and over again.

古文：执仪服象，敬迎来者。
现代文：然后就举行仪式，穿上礼服，恭敬地迎接来者。
English: Then they hold a ceremony, put on ceremonial robes, and greet the visitors respectfully.

古文：今夫来者，必道其道，无迁无衍，命乃长久。
现代文：这个来者降临，一定走自己的路，不改变也不拖延，生命便能长久。
English: When this newcomer arrives, he will surely go his own way, without changing or delaying, and life will be long.

古文：和以反中，形性相葆。一以无贰，是谓知道。
现代文：和协而返于正中，使形体与精气相保，专一而无二意，这就叫懂得了 道 。
English: To harmonize and return to the center, so that the form and essence are protected, one and only, this is called understanding the Tao.

古文：将欲服之，必一其端，而固其所守。
现代文：人们将要行道。开始就必须专一，然后再坚定地贯彻厂去。
English: People are going to walk. You have to be single-minded at first, and then you have to follow through.

古文：责其往来，莫知其时，索之于天，与之为期，不失其期，乃能得之。
现代文：要探求道的往来，总是不知其时。可以索之于天，与苍天互定约期。只要不失约期，就能得到它了。
English: You never know when it's the right time to explore the path of exchange. You can ask the heavens for it, and make an appointment with the heavens. As long as you don't miss the appointment, you can get it.

古文：故曰：吾语若大明之极，大明之明非爱人不予也。
现代文：所以说，我的话就象日月升到最高处一样，象日月之明那样的没有隐蔽，只是人们不肯追求而已。
English: Therefore, my words are like the sun and the moon rising to the highest place. Like the light of the sun and the moon, there is no hiding place, but people refuse to pursue them.

古文：同则相从，反则相距也。
现代文：与道相同的就相从，与道相反的就相距。
English: Those who are of the same mind should walk together, and those who are not of the same mind should walk apart.

古文：吾察反相距，吾以故知古从之同也。
现代文：我从考察反则相距的道理中，了解到同则相从的 同 字是个什么涵义了。
English: From examining the principle of opposites and opposites, I learned what the meaning of the word "same" is.

