古文：◎成祖二
现代文：成祖二
English: Cheng Zui

古文：永乐元年春正月己卯朔，御奉天殿受朝贺，宴群臣及属国使。
现代文：永乐元年春一月一日，成祖在奉天殿接受朝臣庆贺，宴请群臣及属国来使。
English: On January 1, the first day of the spring of the first year of Yongle, Cheng Zu received the congratulations of the courtiers in the Bongten Hall, and invited the courtiers and the vassal states to the envoy.

古文：乙酉，享太庙。
现代文：七日，于太庙祭奠。
English: On the seventh day, a memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 16th, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：复周王橚、齐王榑、代王桂、岷王楩旧封。
现代文：恢复周王朱木肃、齐王朱、代王朱桂、岷王朱木便原来封号。
English: The reinstatement of Zhou Wang Zhu Muxu, Qi Wang Zhu, Dai Wang Zhu Gui, and Zou Wang Zhu Muxu will restore the original seal.

古文：以北平为北京。
现代文：以北平为北京。
English: From Beiping to Beijing.

古文：癸巳，何定侯孟善镇辽东。
现代文：十五日，保定侯孟善镇守辽东。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Meng Shan, the governor of Baoding, arrived to defend Liaodong.

古文：丁酉，宋晟为平羌将军，镇甘肃。
现代文：十九日，宋晟为平羌将军，镇守甘肃。
English: On the 19th, Song Tao became the general of Pingyao and the town guard of Gansu.

古文：二月庚戌，设北京留守行后军都督府、行部、国子监，改北平曰顺天府。
现代文：二月三日，设北京留守代替后军都督府、行部、国子监，改北平为顺天府。
English: On February 3, Beijing Remainder was set up to replace the post-war military governor's office, administration department, and provincial overseer, and Beiping was changed to Shuntianfu.

古文：乙卯，遣御史分巡天下，为定制。
现代文：八日，派御史分别巡行天下，成为定制。
English: On the 8th, the Emperor and Empress parade separately around the world, becoming a custom.

古文：己未，徙封宁王权于南昌。
现代文：十二日，徙封宁王朱权于南昌。
English: On the 12th, Zhu Quan, King of Ning, was exiled to Nanchang.

古文：贻书鬼力赤可汗，许其遣使通好。
现代文：送诏书给鬼力赤可汗，允许他派使臣与朝廷通好。
English: An imperial edict was sent to the ghostly red khan, allowing him to send envoys to negotiate with the imperial court.

古文：癸亥，耕耤田。
现代文：十六日，耕田。
English: On the 16th, the fields were ploughed.

古文：乙丑，遣使徵尚师哈立麻于乌斯藏。
现代文：十八日，遣使征尚师哈立麻于乌斯藏。
English: On the 18th, he sent the recruiting officer, Harima, to Usuzo.

古文：己巳，振北京六府饥。
现代文：二十二日，赈济北京等六府饥荒。
English: On the 22nd, six prefectures including Beijing were affected by famine.

古文：辛未，命法司五日一引奏罪囚。
现代文：二十四日，下令有关掌法部门五天一次引奏罪囚。
English: On the 24th, the relevant law-enforcement departments were ordered to cite prisoners once every five days.

古文：壬申，瘗战地暴骨。
现代文：二十五日，掩埋露于战地尸骨。
English: On the 25th, they buried the bones that had been exposed on the battlefield.

古文：甲戌，高阳王高煦备边开平。
现代文：二十七日，高阳王高煦在开平准备边关之事。
English: On the 27th, Gaoyang Wang Gaoqi was preparing for the opening ceremony.

古文：三月庚辰，江阴侯吴高镇大同。
现代文：三月三日，江阴侯吴高镇守大同。
English: On March 3, Wu Gao, a vassal of Jiangyin, became the governor of Datong.

古文：壬午，改北平行都司为大宁都司，徙保定，始以大宁地畀兀良哈。
现代文：五日，改北平行都司为大宁都司，迁保定，始以大宁地给兀良哈。
English: On the fifth day, the north-parallel capital was changed to the Daining capital, and Baoding was moved, and the Daining region was given to Ailangha.

古文：戊子，平江伯陈瑄、都督佥事宣信充总兵官，督海运，饷辽东、北京，岁以为常。
现代文：十一日，平江伯陈蠧、都督佥事宣信充任总兵官，总督海运，给北京、辽东运输粮饷，每年为常。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the governor of Pingjiang and the governor of Liaodong announced that he would be appointed as the commander-in-chief and the governor of maritime transportation, and would transport grain to Beijing and Liaodong every year.

古文：甲午，振直隶、北京、山东、河南饥。
现代文：十七日，救济直隶、北京、山东、河南饥荒。
English: On the 17th, the relief of famine in Zhili, Beijing, Shandong and Henan began.

古文：夏四月丁未朔，安南胡气袭陈氏封爵，遣使察实以闻。
现代文：夏四月一日，安南胡大互请求承袭陈氏封爵，派使臣查实报告。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, Annan and Hu Da requested each other to succeed Chen's knighthood, and sent envoys to verify the report.

古文：己酉，户部尚书夏原吉治苏、松、嘉、湖水患。
现代文：三日，户部尚书夏原吉治理苏、松、嘉、湖水患。
English: On the third day, the head of the department, Shangshu Xiayuanji, came to deal with the floods in Su, Song, Jia and the lake.

古文：辛未，岷王楩有罪，降其官属。
现代文：二十五日，岷王朱木便有罪，降其官及属下。
English: On the 25th, Shao Wang Zhu Mu was found guilty, and his officials and subordinates were demoted.

古文：甲戌，襄城伯李濬镇江西。
现代文：二十八日，襄城伯李镇守江西。
English: On the 28th, Xiangcheng Bo Li Zhen guarded Jiangxi.

古文：五月丁丑，除天下荒田未垦者额税。
现代文：五月一日，免除天下未垦荒田的额定税。
English: On May 1, the world's uncultivated wasteland was exempted from the rated tax.

古文：癸未，宥死罪以下，递减一等。
现代文：七日，宽容死罪以下各递减一等。
English: On the seventh day, the tolerance of the following capital crimes will be reduced by one grade.

古文：庚寅，捕山东蝗。
现代文：十四日，捕捉山东蝗虫。
English: On the 14th, catching Shandong locusts.

古文：丁酉，河南蝗，免今年夏税。
现代文：二十一日，河南蝗灾，免当年夏税。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Henan was exempted from the summer tax after the locust plague.

古文：是月，再论靖难功，封驸马都尉袁容等三人为侯。陈亨子懋等六人为伯。
现代文：这一月，再次论及靖难之功，封驸马都尉袁容等三人为侯，陈亨之子陈懋等六人为伯。
English: In this month, the work of Jingnan was discussed again, and three people, including Yuan Rong, the commander of the Horse Guards, and six people, including Chen Yu, the son of Chen Heng, were honored.

古文：六月壬子，代王桂有罪，削其护卫。
现代文：六月六日，代王朱桂有罪，削减其护卫。
English: On June 6, the acting king, Zhu Gui, was found guilty and his escort was reduced.

古文：癸丑，遣给事中、御史分行天下，抚安军民，有司好贪者逮治。
现代文：七日，派给事中、御史分行天下，安抚军民，主管部门有奸诈贪污的逮捕惩治。
English: On the 7th, it was dispatched to all parts of the world to pacify the military and the people, and the competent departments arrested and punished the treachery and corruption.

古文：丁巳，改上高皇帝、高皇后尊谥。
现代文：十一日，改尚高皇帝、高皇后谥号。
English: On the 11th, they changed their names to Emperor Gao and Empress Gao.

古文：戊辰，武安侯郑亨镇宣府。
现代文：二十二日，武安侯郑亨镇守宣府。
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Heng, the lord of Wu'an, became the commander of Xuanfu.

古文：秋七月庚寅，复贻书鬼力赤。
现代文：七月十五日，又送诏书给鬼力赤。
English: On July 15th, an imperial edict was also sent to the ghost red.

古文：八月己巳，发流罪以下垦北京田。
现代文：八月二十四日，发配流放罪以下罪人耕垦北京田土。
English: On August 24th, the following criminals were sentenced to exile for ploughing Beijing's fields.

古文：甲戌，徙直隶苏州等十郡、浙江等九省富民实北京。
现代文：二十九日，迁徙直隶、苏州等十郡、浙江等九省富民充实北京。
English: On the 29th, the migration of rich people from Zhili, Suzhou and other ten counties, and Zhejiang and other nine provinces enriched Beijing.

古文：九月癸未，命宝源局铸农器，给山东被兵穷民。
现代文：九月八日，命宝源局铸造农具，给山东遭战乱穷民。
English: On September 8th, the Bureau of Vital Resources began to cast agricultural tools for the war-torn poor people in Shandong.

古文：庚寅，初遣中官马彬使爪哇诸国。
现代文：十五日，首次派遣中官马彬出使爪哇诸国。
English: On the 15th, Lieutenant General Ma Bin was dispatched to Java for the first time.

古文：乙未，夺历城侯盛庸爵，寻自杀。
现代文：十日，夺历城侯盛庸爵位，不久自杀。
English: On the 10th, he seized the title of Prince Shengyong of Licheng and committed suicide soon after.

古文：庚子，岷王楩有罪，削其护卫。
现代文：十五日，岷王朱螰有罪，削去其护卫。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, King Zhu Xi was found guilty and stripped of his bodyguards.

古文：冬十一月乙亥朔，颁历于朝鲜诸国，著为令。
现代文：冬十一月一日，颁布历法于朝鲜诸国，写成文以为法令。
English: In the winter, on November 1, the calendar was promulgated in all the countries of North Korea, and it was written as a decree.

古文：壬辰，罢遣浚河民夫。甲午，北京地震。
现代文：十八日停止调遣民夫疏浚黄河。二十日，北京发生地震。
English: On the 18th, the dispatch of civil servants to dredge the Yellow River was suspended. On the 20th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：乙未，命六科办事官言事。
现代文：命令六科办事官商量有关事宜。
English: Six science officials were ordered to discuss the matter.

古文：丙申，韩观讨柳州山贼，平之。
现代文：韩观讨平柳州山贼叛乱。
English: Han Guan Tackles the Liuzhou Mountain Bandit Rebellion.

古文：闰月丁卯，封胡为安南国王。
现代文：封胡大互为安南国王。
English: Hu Daiguo was crowned King of Annan.

古文：是年，始命内臣出镇及监京营军。
现代文：当年，开始命令内臣出任边镇守将监督筑垒营军。
English: That year, he began to order his vassals to serve as border town guards to supervise the construction of fortifications.

古文：朝鲜入贡者六，自是岁时贡贺为常。琉球中山、山北、山南，暹罗，占城，爪哇西王，日本，剌泥，安南入贡。
现代文：朝鲜六人来贡，从此，经常来贡。琉球中山、山北、山南、暹罗、占城、爪哇西王、日本、剌泥、安南入朝进贡。
English: Six people from Korea came to pay tribute, and since then, they have often come to pay tribute. Ryukyu Nakayama, Shanbei, Shannan, Siam, Zhancheng, Java West King, Japan, Yunnan mud, Annan into the morning tribute.

古文：二年春正月乙卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：永乐二年春正月十三日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Jiajing, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：己巳，召世子高炽及高阳王高煦还京师。
现代文：二十七日，召世子高炽及高阳王高煦回京师。
English: On the 27th, he summoned his sons Gao Gao and Gao Yang Wang Gao to return to Beijing.

古文：三月乙巳，赐曾棨等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月四日，赐曾蓕等进士及第，出身各有差别。
English: On March 4th, Zeng Yao and others were promoted to the first and second ranks, with different origins.

古文：己酉，始选进士为翰林院庶吉士。
现代文：八日，选进士为翰林院庶吉士。
English: On the 8th, he was selected as a member of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：庚戌，吏部请罪千户违制荐士者，帝曰： 马周不因常何进乎？
现代文：九日，吏部请降罪违制荐士千户，成祖说： 马周不是代替过常何上书么？
English: On the 9th, the cadre department asked a thousand recommenders to plead guilty to violating the system, and Chengzu said: Isn't Ma Zhou a substitute for excessive writing?

古文：果才，授之官，否则罢之可耳。 
现代文：果然有才，授其官，否则罢免即可。 
English: If a person is truly talented, they should be given a post, otherwise they can be dismissed.

古文：戊辰，改封敷惠王允熙瓯宁王，奉懿文太子祀。
现代文：二十七日，改封敷惠王朱允火熙为瓯宁王，继嗣懿文太子。
English: On the 27th, Prince Zhu Yun Huaxi of Shiki Hui was enthroned as the King of Huning and the Prince of Huning as his successor.

古文：夏四月辛未朔，置东宫官属。
现代文：夏四月一日，设置东宫官员。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, officials of the East Palace were set up.

古文：壬申，僧道衍为太子少师，复共姓姚，赐名广孝。
现代文：二日，僧人道衍任太子少师，改姓姚，赐名广孝。
English: On the second day, the monk Duan Yan was appointed the young teacher of the prince, changed his surname to Yao, and was given the name Guang Xiao.

古文：甲戌，立子高炽为皇太子，封高煦汉王，高燧赵王。
现代文：三日，立子高炽为皇太子，封高煦汉王、高燧赵王。
English: On the third day, Tatsuko Takaharu became the crown prince, and was given the titles of King Takahata of Han and King Takahata of Zhao.

古文：壬午，封汪应祖为琉球国山南王。
现代文：十一日，封汪应祖为琉球国山南王。
English: On the 11th day, Wang Yingzu was crowned King of Shannan, Ryukyu.

古文：五月壬寅，丰城侯李彬镇广东，清远伯王友充总兵官，率舟师巡海。
现代文：五月二日，丰城侯李彬镇守广东，清远伯王友充任总兵官，率舟师巡行海上。
English: On May 2, Fengcheng marquis Li Bin was appointed to guard Guangdong, and Qingyuan marquis Bo Wangyou was appointed as the chief military officer, leading the boat division on a cruise at sea.

古文：六月丁亥，汰冗官。
现代文：六月十八日，削减多余官员。
English: On June 18th, redundant officials were reduced.

古文：辛卯，振松江、嘉兴、苏州、湖州饥。
现代文：二十二日，赈济松江、嘉兴、苏州、湖州饥荒。
English: On the 22nd, famine broke out in Songjiang, Jiaxing, Suzhou and Huzhou.

古文：甲午，封哈密安克帖木儿为忠顺王。
现代文：二十五日，封哈密安克帖木儿为忠顺王。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Hamiankh Timur was crowned as the King of Zhongshun.

古文：秋七月壬戌，鄱阳民进书毁先贤，杖之，毁其书。
现代文：七月二十三日，鄱阳平民上书诋诟各位先贤，遭杖刑，毁其书。
English: On July 23rd, a civilian in Shenyang wrote a book slandering the sages. He was caned and his book was destroyed.

古文：丙寅，振江西、湖广水灾。
现代文：二十七日，救济江西、湖广水灾。
English: On the 27th, the relief of Jiangxi and Hunan floods began.

古文：八月丁酉，故安南国王陈日煃弟天平来奔。
现代文：八月二十八日，原安南国王陈日火奎之弟陈天平投奔明成祖。
English: On August 28th, Chen Tianping, the younger brother of the former King of Annam, Chen Rihoukui, became the founder of Benming.

古文：九月丙午，周王橚来朝，献驺虞，百官请贺。
现代文：九月八日，周王朱木肃朝见皇帝，进献驺虞，文武百官请求祝贺。
English: On September 8th, King Zhu Muxu of the Zhou Dynasty went to see the emperor to present the imperial regalia, and hundreds of civil and military officials came to congratulate him.

古文：帝曰： 瑞应依德而至，驺虞若果为祥，在朕更当修省。 
现代文：皇帝说： 吉祥应兆依德而至，驺虞若是吉祥之物，朕在位就更应当修身反省了。 
English: The emperor said, "If auspiciousness comes with virtue, and auspiciousness comes with virtue, then I should have more self-cultivation and self-reflection during my reign.

古文：丁卯，徙山西民万户实北京。
现代文：二十九日，迁山西平民一万户充实北京。
English: On the 29th, 10,000 Shanxi residents moved to Beijing.

古文：命自今御史巡行察吏毋得摭拾人言，贤否皆具实迹以闻。
现代文：下令从今以后御史巡行检察官吏不得道听他人之言，贤能与否均以实际政绩报告。
English: Ordered that from now on, the procurators on the historical tour shall not listen to the words of others, and whether they are capable or not shall be reported according to their actual political performance.

古文：冬十月丁丑，河决开封。
现代文：冬十月九日，黄河在开封附近决堤。
English: In winter, on October 9, the Yellow River burst its banks near Kaifeng.

古文：乙酉，蒲城、河津黄河清。
现代文：十七日，蒲城、河津黄河河水清澈。
English: On the 17th, the water of the Yellow River in Pudong and Kawazu was clear.

古文：是月，籍长兴侯耿炳文家，炳文自杀。
现代文：这一月，查抄长兴侯耿炳文家业，炳文自杀。
English: This month, the investigation of Changxing Hou Geng Bingwen's family business was carried out, and Bingwen committed suicide.

古文：十一月甲辰，御奉天门录囚。
现代文：十一月六日，成祖在奉天门审查囚犯。
English: On November 6th, Cheng Zu reviewed the prisoners at Feng Tianmen.

古文：癸丑，京师及济南、开封地震，敕群臣修省。
现代文：十五日，京师及济南、开封发生地震，告诫群臣自省。
English: On the 15th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, Jinan and Kaifeng, and he admonished his ministers to self-reflect.

古文：戊午，蠲苏、松、嘉、湖、杭水灾田租。
现代文：二十日，免苏、松、嘉、湖州、杭州水灾地区田租。
English: On the 20th, the land rent in the flood-stricken areas of Su, Song, Jia, Huzhou and Hangzhou was exempted.

古文：十二月壬辰，同州、韩城黄河清。
现代文：十二月二十五日，同州、韩城黄河河水清澈。
English: On December 25th, the water of the Yellow River in Dongzhou and Hancheng was crystal clear.

古文：是月，下李景隆于狱。
现代文：本月，李景隆下狱。
English: This month, Li Jinglong was released from prison.

古文：是年，占城，别失八里，琉球山北、山南，爪哇，真腊入贡。
现代文：这一年，占城，别失八里，琉球山南、山北，爪哇，真腊，入朝进贡。
English: This year, the city of Zhancheng should not lose eight li, and the Ryukyu Shannan, Shanbei, Java, and Jinla should pay tribute to the North.

古文：暹罗，日本，琉球中山入贡者再。
现代文：日本、琉球中山两次来贡。
English: Japan and Ryukyu Nakayama paid tribute twice.

古文：三年春正月庚戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：永乐三年正月十日，于南郊大祭天地鬼神。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the third year of Yongle, the Heaven and Earth Ghosts Festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：甲寅，遣使责谕安南。
现代文：十六日，派使臣谕责安南。
English: On the 16th, he sent an envoy to reprimand Annan.

古文：庚申，复免顺天、永平、保定田租二年。
现代文：二十三日，又免顺天、永平、保定田租二年。
English: On the 23rd, Shuntian, Yongping and Baoding were exempted from land lease for another two years.

古文：二月己巳，行部尚书雒佥以言事涉怨诽诛。
现代文：二月三日，行部尚书雒佥因参与机要事务牵涉，发怨恨、诽谤被诛。
English: On February 3, Xingbe Shang Shuxuan was arrested for participating in important business affairs, causing resentment and defamation.

古文：癸未，赵王高燧居守北京。
现代文：十七日，赵王高燧居守北京。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Wang Gaojun stayed in Beijing.

古文：三月甲寅，免湖广被水田租。
现代文：四月七日，免湖广遭水灾地区田租。
English: On April 7th, rice fields in the flooded area of Menghuang were rented.

古文：夏六月己卯，中官郑和帅舟师使西洋诸国。
现代文：六月十五日，中官郑和率舟师出使西洋诸国。
English: On June 15th, Lieutenant General Zheng He and his boatmen were dispatched to the Western countries.

古文：庚辰，中官山寿等帅兵出云州觇敌。
现代文：十六日，中官山寿等率军出云南侦察敌情。
English: On the 16th, Lieutenant-General Shan Shou and others led the troops out of Yunnan to investigate the enemy situation.

古文：甲申，夏原吉等振苏、松、嘉、湖饥。
现代文：二十日，夏原吉等救济苏、松、嘉、湖州饥荒。
English: On the 20th, Xia Yuanji and other relief Su, Song, Jia, Huzhou famine.

古文：免天下农民户口食盐钞。
现代文：免天下农民户口食盐钞。
English: The world's farmers are exempt from the household salt bill.

古文：庚寅，胡谢罪，请迎陈天平归国。
现代文：二十六日，胡大互谢罪，请求迎接陈天平回国。
English: On the 26th, Hu Da and Chen Tianping thanked each other and asked to welcome Chen Tianping back to China.

古文：秋九月丁酉，蠲苏、松、嘉、湖水灾田租，凡三百三十八万石。
现代文：九月五日，减免苏、松、嘉、湖等州遭水灾田租，共三百三十八万石。
English: On September 5, a total of 3.38 million koku of farmland in the flood-affected prefectures of Su, Song, Jiayu and Huzhou was exempted from land rent.

古文：丁巳，徙山西民万户实北京。
现代文：二十五日，迁山西农民一万户充实北京。
English: On the 25th, 10,000 farmers from Shanxi Province moved to Beijing.

古文：冬十月，盗杀驸马都尉梅殷。
现代文：冬十月，盗贼杀害驸马都尉梅殷。
English: In the winter of October, thieves killed Captain Mei Yin.

古文：丁卯，齐王榑有罪，三赐书戒之。
现代文：十月五日，齐王朱犯罪，三次赐书警告他。
English: On October 5th, Qi Wang Zhu committed a crime, and he was given three warnings.

古文：戊子，颁《祖训》于诸王。
现代文：二十六日，颁布《祖训》给诸王。
English: On the 26th, the "Ancestor's Teaching" was promulgated to the kings.

古文：十二月戊辰，沐晟讨八百，降之。
现代文：十二月六日，沐晟讨平八百。
English: On December 6th, the number of dead reached 800.

古文：庚辰，都督佥事黄中、吕毅以兵纳陈天平于安南。
现代文：都督佥事黄中、吕毅用兵接纳陈天平于安南。
English: The prefectural governors, Huang Zhong and Lu Yi, sent soldiers to receive Chen Tianping in Annan.

古文：是年，苏门答剌、满剌加、古里、浡泥来贡，封其长为王。
现代文：这一年，苏门答剌、满剌加、古里、氵孛泥入朝进贡，封其尊长为王。
English: In the same year, Sumendawang, Manjangga, Guri, and Gangdawang paid tribute to the emperor and made him king.

古文：日本贡马，并俘获倭寇为边患者。
现代文：日本贡马匹，还俘获在边境作乱的倭寇。
English: Japan paid tribute with horses, and captured wako (Japanese pirates) who had caused trouble at the border.

古文：爪哇东、西，占城，碟里，日罗夏治，合猫里，火州回回入贡。
现代文：爪哇东、西，占城，碟里，日罗夏治，合猫里，火州回回入朝进贡。
English: Java East, West, Zhancheng, Di, Jiro, Shajing, Heshou, and Heshou paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：暹罗，琉球山南、山北入贡者再，琉球中山入贡者三。
现代文：暹罗，琉球山北、山南两次来贡。琉球中山三次入朝进贡。
English: Siam and the northern and southern parts of the Ryukyu Islands paid tribute twice, and the Ryukyu Islands paid tribute three times.

古文：四年春正月丁未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：永乐四年春正月十六日，在南郊大祈天地鬼神。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Yongle's reign, in the southern suburbs, there was a great prayer to the heaven and earth spirits.

古文：丙辰，初御午朝，令群臣奏事得从容陈论。
现代文：二十五日，初定中午上朝，命群臣奏事要从容认真。
English: On the 25th, it was initially set for noon to dawn, and it was decreed that the ministers should take things slowly and seriously.

古文：三月辛卯朔，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：三月一日，祭奠先师孔子。
English: On March 1st, a memorial service was held for Confucius.

古文：甲午，设辽东开原、广宁马市。
现代文：三日，设辽东开原、广宁马市。
English: On the third day, Liaodong Kaiyuan and Guangningma were set up.

古文：乙巳，赐林环等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：四月三日，赐林环等进士及第，出身各有差别。
English: On April 3, Linhuan and others were promoted to the first and second ranks, with different origins.

古文：丙午，胡袭杀陈天平于芹站，前大理卿薛岩死之，黄中等引兵还。
现代文：十五日，胡大互袭杀陈天平于芹站，前大理卿薛山品死，黄中等领兵而还。
English: On the 15th, Hu Da and Chen Tianping attacked and killed each other at the Seri Station. Former Dali Lord Xue Shanpin died, and Huang Zhong led the troops and returned.

古文：夏四月己卯，遣使购遗书。
现代文：四月十九日，派使臣重金收买遗佚之书。
English: On April 19, he sent an envoy with a large sum of money to buy the widow's book.

古文：五月丁酉，振常州、庐州、安庆饥。
现代文：五月八日，救济常州、庐州、安庆饥荒。
English: On May 8th, the relief of Changzhou, Zhangzhou and Anqing famine began.

古文：庚戌，齐王榑有罪，削官属护卫，留之京师。
现代文：二十一日，齐王朱犯罪，削夺其官属护卫，仍留在京城。
English: On the twenty-first day, Qi Wangzhu committed a crime, robbed his official escort, and still stayed in Beijing.

古文：六月己未朔，日当食，阴云不见，礼官请表贺，不许。
现代文：六月一日，应当出现日食，因有云雾看不见，礼官上书请求祝贺，皇帝不许。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse was supposed to occur, but due to clouds and fog it was not visible. The etiquette officer sent a letter requesting congratulations, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：丙寅，南阳献瑞麦，谕礼部曰： 比郡县屡奏祥瑞，独比为丰年之兆。 
现代文：八日，南阳进献吉祥之麦，召谕礼部说： 各郡县经常上奏吉祥预兆，唯独此麦才是丰年之兆。 
English: On the eighth day, Nanyang presented the auspicious wheat, and the summoning ritual department said: Each county and county often plays an auspicious omen, but this wheat is the only sign of a good year.

古文：命荐之宗庙。
现代文：命令去宗庙敬献。
English: He was ordered to go to the family temple to pay his respects.

古文：秋七月辛卯，朱能为征夷将军，沐晟、张辅副之，帅师分道讨安南，兵部尚书刘俊参赞军务，行部尚书黄福、大理卿陈洽督饷。
现代文：七月四日，朱能为征夷将军，沐晟、张辅为副将，率兵分道进攻安南，兵部尚书刘鯭参与军务大事，行部尚书黄福、大理卿陈洽督运粮饷。
English: On July 4th, Zhu Can became the general of the conquest of the barbarians, with Mu Xi and Zhang Fu as vice-generals, and led the troops to attack Annan in separate directions. Liu Wei, the secretary of the military department, participated in the military affairs, Huang Fu, the secretary of the political department, and Chen Jia, the secretary of the Dalian government, transported grain.

古文：诏曰： 安南皆朕赤子，惟黎季犛父子首恶必诛，他胁从者释之。
现代文：下诏说： 安南都是我的忠心赤子，只有黎季睺父子首恶必诛，他若收敛顺从可以轻释。
English: The next edict said: Annan is my loyal child, only Lijian and his son must be punished. If he is submissive, he can be released.

古文：罪人既得，立陈氏子孙贤者。
现代文：罪人既已得到，册立陈氏子孙中有贤能的。
English: Now that the sinners have been punished, the virtuous among the descendants of the Chen clan have been recorded.

古文：毋养乱，毋玩寇，毋毁庐墓，毋害禾稼，毋攘财货掠子女，毋杀降。
现代文：不要姑息叛乱，不要轻视敌人，不要毁坏房屋、损害庄稼，不准抢劫财物、掠夺民女，不要杀害降兵。
English: Don't condone rebellion, don't despise the enemy, don't destroy houses and damage crops, don't loot property, don't rob women, and don't kill demobilized soldiers.

古文：有一于此，虽功不宥。 
现代文：以上有一项触犯，虽有功也不能饶恕。 
English: The above is a violation, although meritorious, it cannot be forgiven.

古文：乙巳，申诽谤之禁。
现代文：十八日，重申诽谤禁令。
English: On the 18th, the ban on defamation was reaffirmed.

古文：闰月壬戌，诏以明年五月建北京宫殿，分遣大臣采木于四川、湖广、江西、浙江、山西。
现代文：闰七月五日，颁诏明年五月兴建北京宫殿，分别派大臣到四川、湖广、江西、浙江、山西采伐树木材料。
English: On July 5, he issued an edict to start building the Beijing Palace in May next year, and sent ministers to Sichuan, Hunan, Jiangxi, Zhejiang and Shanxi to harvest tree materials.

古文：八月丁酉，诏通政司，凡上书奏民事者，虽小必以闻。
现代文：八月十一日，召通政司，凡是上书奏告民间事务的，再小也要报告。
English: On August 11th, the Secretary for Political Affairs was summoned. Anyone who submitted a report on civil affairs, no matter how small, had to report.

古文：癸丑，齐王榑废为庶人。
现代文：二十七日，废齐王朱为庶人。
English: On the 27th, Qi Wangzhu became a commoner.

古文：九月戊辰，振苏、松、常、杭、嘉、湖流民复业者十二万余户。
现代文：九月十二日，赈济苏、松、常、杭、嘉、湖州十二万户游民复业。
English: On September 12th, 120,000 migrant households in Su, Song, Chang, Hang, Jia and Huzhou were allowed to resume work.

古文：冬十月戊子，成国公朱能卒于军，张辅代领其众。
现代文：十月二日，成国公朱能死于军中，部众由张辅带领。
English: On October 2nd, Chengguo Gong Zhu Neng died in the army, and his subordinates were led by Zhang Fu.

古文：乙未，克隘留关。
现代文：九日，攻克隘留关。
English: On the 9th, the narrow pass was conquered.

古文：庚子，沐晟率师会于白鹤。
现代文：十四日，沐晟率师会于白鹤。
English: On the 14th, Mu Xuan led the division to Baizhe.

古文：十一月己巳，甘露降孝陵松柏，醴泉出神乐观，荐之太庙，赐百官。
现代文：十一月十三日，甘露降到孝陵松柏枝上，有甜泉出于神乐观，进献给太庙，赏赐百官。
English: On November 13th, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：十二月辛卯，赦天下殊死以下。
现代文：十二月六日大赦天下殊死以下罪行。
English: On December 6th, the country granted amnesty for the following crimes.

古文：张辅大破安南兵于嘉林江。丙申，拔多邦城。
现代文：张辅在嘉林江大败安南军。一月十一日，攻下多邦城。
English: Zhang Fu defeated Annan's army in the Jialing River. On January 11, he captured the city of Taobang.

古文：丁酉，克其东都。
现代文：一月十二日，攻克其东都。
English: On January 12, the eastern capital was conquered.

古文：癸卯，克西都，贼遁入海。
现代文：十八日，又攻克西都，安南兵逃往海上。
English: On the 18th, they attacked Xidu again, and Annan's soldiers fled to the sea.

古文：辛亥，瓯宁王允熙邸第火，王薨。
现代文：二十六日，瓯宁王朱允火熙住宅起火，朱允火熙被烧死。
English: On the 26th, the residence of Zhu Yun Huoxi, King of Huning, caught fire, and Zhu Yun Huoxi was burned to death.

古文：是年，暹罗，占城，于阗，浡泥，日本，琉球中山、山南、婆罗入贡。
现代文：这一年，暹罗、占城、于阗、氵孛泥、日本、琉球中山、山南、婆罗入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Siam, Jamsil, Yunnan, Shandong, Japan, Ryukyu Nakayama, Shannan, and Borah paid tribute to the North.

古文：爪哇东、西，真腊入贡者再。别失八里入贡者三。
现代文：爪哇东、西，真腊第二次来贡，别里八里第三次来贡。
English: East Java, West Java, and Java paid tribute for the second time, while Bali and Bali paid tribute for the third time.

古文：琉球进阉人，还之，回回结牙曲进玉碗，却之。
现代文：琉球进献阉人，被退还。回回结牙曲进献玉碗，也被打发回去。
English: The Ryukyuan people who brought in offerings were sent back, and the people who brought in offerings of jade bowls were also sent back.

古文：五年春正月丁卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：永乐五年正月十二日，大祭鬼神于南郊。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the fifth year of Yongle, the Grand Ghost Festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：己巳，张辅大败安南兵于木丸江。
现代文：十四日，张辅大败安南军于木丸江。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Yu defeated Annan's army in the Maru River.

古文：二月庚寅，出翰林学士解缙为广西参议。
现代文：二月五日，翰林学士解缙出任广西参议。
English: On February 5th, Hanlin Scholar Jie Xuan took up the post of Guangxi Councilor.

古文：三月丁巳，封尚师哈立麻为大实法王。
现代文：三月三日，封尚师哈里麻为大宝法王。
English: On March 3rd, His Holiness the Dalai Lama was enthroned.

古文：辛巳，张辅大破安南兵于富良江。
现代文：二十七日，张辅大败安南军于富良江。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Yu defeated Annan's army in the Fura River.

古文：夏四月己酉，振顺天、河间、保定饥。
现代文：四月二十五日，救济顺天、河间、保定饥荒。
English: April 25th, relief Shuntian, Hema, Baoding famine.

古文：五月甲子，张辅擒黎季犛、黎苍献京师，安南平，河南饥，逮治匿灾有司。
现代文：五月十一日张辅擒获黎季睺、黎苍献给皇帝，安南被讨平。河南发生饥荒，逮捕并惩治隐匿灾情的有关部门负责人。
English: On May 11, Zhang Fuxuan captured Lijiang and Lichang and presented them to the emperor; Annan was leveled; a famine occurred in Henan, and the heads of relevant departments who concealed the disaster were arrested and punished.

古文：敕都察院，凡灾伤不以实闻者罪之。
现代文：告诫都察院，凡是灾伤不如实报告的都是犯罪。
English: It is a crime to falsely report a disaster or injury, warned the prefectural government.

古文：六月癸未，以安南平，诏天下，置交阯布政司。
现代文：六月一日，因平安南，诏告天下。设交趾布政司。
English: On June 1st, because of South Pyongan Province, it was announced to the world that a political secretary would be appointed.

古文：己丑，山阳民丁珏讦其乡人诽谤，擢为刑科给事中。
现代文：七日，山阳平民丁珏揭发乡人诽谤罪，升其为刑科给事中。
English: On the 7th, Ding Hao, a citizen of Shanyang, exposed the villain's defamation crime and was promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：甲午，诏自永乐二年六月后犯罪去官者，悉宥之。
现代文：十二日，下诏从永乐二年六月以后犯罪夺官去职的都可以饶恕。
English: On the 12th, it was decreed that anyone who had been removed from office after June of Yongle 2 could be pardoned.

古文：乙未，张辅移师会韩观讨浔、柳叛蛮。
现代文：十三日张辅调兵会同韩观一起征讨柳、浔州叛乱蛮夷。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Fu transferred troops together with Han Guan to fight against Liu and Zhangzhou Rebellion barbarians.

古文：癸卯，命张辅访交阯人才，礼遣赴京师。
现代文：二十一日，命张辅访问交趾人才，交趾也派使者来京师。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Fu was ordered to visit the talent of Koji, and Koji also sent an envoy to Beijing.

古文：秋七月乙卯，皇后崩。
现代文：秋七月四日，皇后死。
English: On the 4th of July in autumn, the empress died.

古文：丁卯，河溢河南。
现代文：十六日，黄河在河南一带涨水。
English: On the 16th, the Yellow River began to flood in Henan Province.

古文：八月乙酉，左都督何福镇甘肃。
现代文：九月五日，左都督何福镇守甘肃。
English: On September 5th, Zuo Governor He Fu Zhen became the governor of Gansu.

古文：庚子，录囚，杂犯死罪减等论戍，流以下释之。
现代文：十八日，审查囚犯。其他犯罪、死刑都各减轻一级论处戍边，流放罪以下全部释放。
English: On the 18th, the prisoners were examined. Other crimes and the death penalty were each reduced by one level, and all were released.

古文：九月壬子，郑和还。
现代文：九月二日，郑和使西洋回国。
English: On September 2, Zheng He returned to China.

古文：乙卯，御奉天门，受安南俘，大赉将士。
现代文：五日，在奉天门接受安南俘虏，大赏将士。
English: On the fifth day, he received Annan's prisoners at the Gate of Heaven, and gave a large reward to the soldiers.

古文：冬十月，浔、柳蛮平。
现代文：冬十月，平定浔、柳州叛乱蛮夷。
English: In the winter of October, the Yan Rebellion and the Liuzhou Rebellion were crushed.

古文：是年，琉球中山、山南，婆罗，日本，别失八里，阿鲁，撒马儿罕，苏门答剌，满剌加，小葛兰入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球中山、山南、婆罗、日本、别失八里、阿鲁、撒马儿罕、苏门答剌、满刺加、小葛兰入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Shannan, Borah, Nihon, Beppu, Aru, Samarkand, Sumatra, Manzikga, and Oguran paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：六年春正月丁巳，岷王楩复有罪，罢其官属。
现代文：永乐六年春正月八日，岷王朱螰又犯罪，罢免其官及属官。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of Yongle, Zhu Xi, the king of Qi, committed another crime and dismissed his officials and subordinate officials.

古文：辛酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭鬼神于南郊。
English: On the fifteenth day, in the southern suburbs, a grand ritual was held.

古文：二月丁未，除北京永乐五年以前逋赋，免诸色课程三年。
现代文：二月二十八日免除北京永乐五年以前欠交赋税，免诸色课程三年。
English: On February 28th, Beijing Yongle was exempted from paying tax arrears before five years, and all-color courses were exempted for three years.

古文：三月癸丑，宁阳伯陈懋镇宁夏。
现代文：三月四日，宁阳伯陈懋镇守宁夏。
English: On March 4th, the town of Ningyang, Bo Chenqi, began to defend Ningxia.

古文：乙卯，除河南、山东、山西永乐五年以前逋赋。
现代文：六日，除河南、山东、山西永乐五年以前欠交赋税。
English: On the 6th, in addition to Henan, Shandong and Shanxi Yongle, the tax arrears were paid five years ago.

古文：夏四月丙申，始命云南乡试。
现代文：四月十日，始命云南乡试。
English: On April 10, the first order was given to Yunnan Township.

古文：五月壬戌夜，京师地震。
现代文：五月十四日夜，京师发生地震。
English: On the evening of May 14th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：六月庚辰，诏罢北京诸司不急之务及买办，以甦民困；流民来归者复三年。
现代文：六月三日，诏书停止北京各司不急办事务及买办，以免民困。流民归附者免徭役三年。
English: On June 3, the imperial edict suspended the non-urgent and urgent affairs of all departments in Beijing to avoid people's distress. Those who returned were exempted from forced labor for three years.

古文：丁亥，张辅、沐晟还。
现代文：十日，张辅、沐晟还。
English: On the 10th, Zhang Yu and Mu Xuan returned.

古文：秋七月癸丑，论平交阯功，进封张辅英国公，沐晟黔国公，王友清远侯，封都督佥事柳升安远伯，余爵赏有差。
现代文：七月七日，论平定交趾之功，提封张辅为英国公，沐晟为黔国公，王友为清远侯，封都督佥事柳升为安远伯，其余的赐爵赏赐各有差别。
English: On July 7th, Zhang Fu was awarded the title of Duke of Britain, Mu Xi was awarded the title of Duke of Guizhou, Wang You was awarded the title of Prince of Qingyuan, the title of Duke of Anji Liu was awarded the title of Prince of Anyuan, and the rest of the awards were different.

古文：八月乙酉，交阯简定反，沐晟为征夷将军，讨之，刘俊仍参赞军务。
现代文：八月十日，交趾简定造反，沐晟为征夷将军征讨简定，刘俊仍参加军务大事。
English: On August 10th, the Jiaozi Jianzhong rebelled, and the Muyi Jianzhong was appointed as the general of the Conquest, but Liu Jun still participated in the military affairs.

古文：九月己酉，命刑部疏滞狱。
现代文：九月四日，命刑部疏解没处理好的案件。
English: On September 4th, the Death Penalty Division was relieved of cases that had not been handled well.

古文：癸亥，郑和复使西洋。
现代文：十八日，郑和又出使西洋。
English: On the 18th, Zheng He sent another envoy to the West.

古文：冬十一月丁巳，录囚。
现代文：十一月十三日，逮捕犯囚。
English: On November 13th, the prisoners were arrested.

古文：十二月丁酉，沐晟及简定战于生厥江，败绩，刘俊及都督佥事吕毅、参政刘昱死之。
现代文：十二月二十四日，沐晟与简定战于生厥江，战败，刘隽及都督佥事吕毅、参政刘昱死。
English: On December 24th, Mu Xi and Jian Ding fought in the Shengju River. They were defeated, and Liu Xi and the governor, Lu Yi, and Liu Xi, who was involved in politics, died.

古文：是月，柳升、陈瑄、李彬等率舟师分道沿海捕倭。
现代文：当月，柳升、陈蠧、李彬等率水师分道于沿海捕捉倭寇。
English: That month, Liu Sheng, Chen Qi, Li Bin and other sailors went their separate ways along the coast to catch wako.

古文：是年，鬼力赤为其下所弑，立本雅失里为可汗。
现代文：这年，鬼力赤被其部下所杀，册立本雅失里为可汗。
English: In this year, the ghostly red dragon was killed by his subordinates, and Ben Yaguri was appointed as khan.

古文：浡泥国王来朝。
现代文：氵孛泥国王前来朝贺皇帝。
English: The mud king came to congratulate the emperor.

古文：瓦剌，占城，于阗，暹罗，撒马儿罕，榜葛剌，冯嘉施兰，日本，爪哇，琉球中山、山南入贡。
现代文：瓦剌、占城、于阗、暹罗、撒马儿罕、榜葛剌、冯嘉施兰、日本、爪哇、琉球中山、山南入朝进贡。
English: Wafang, Zhancheng, Yunnan, Siam, Samarkand, Pangkal Pinang, Fengjia Shilan, Japan, Java, Ryukyu Zhongshan, and Shannan paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：七年春正月癸丑，赐百官上元节假十日，著为令。
现代文：永乐七年春一月十日，赐百官上元节假日十天，成文以为法令。
English: On January 10th, the seventh year of the Yongle Spring, 100 officials were granted a 10-day holiday for the Lantern Festival, which was written as a decree.

古文：乙卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭鬼神于南郊。
English: On the twelfth day, a grand festival of ghosts and gods was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月乙亥，遣使于巡狩所经郡县存问高年，八十以上赐酒肉，九十加帛。
现代文：二月二日，派使臣于巡狩所经郡县问候高寿老人，八十岁以上赐给酒肉，九十岁加玉帛。
English: On February 2nd, envoys were sent to the patrol hunting station to visit counties and counties to greet the elderly. Those over eighty years old were given wine and meat, and those over ninety years old were given jade brooches.

古文：丙子，徵致仕知府刘彦才等九十二人分署府州县。
现代文：三日，征召致仕知府刘彦才等九十二人分别安置到各州县。
English: On the third day, ninety-two people, including Liu Yancai, who had been called up to serve as prefectural governor, were relocated to various prefectures.

古文：辛巳，以北巡告天地宗庙社稷。
现代文：八日，因北巡而奉告天地鬼神宗庙社稷。
English: On the 8th, due to the northern tour, the company of the Heaven and Earth Ghost and God Sect Temple was disbanded.

古文：壬午，发京师，皇太子监国。
现代文：九日，从京师外出，皇太子监国。
English: On the 9th, he left the capital, leaving the crown prince in charge of the country.

古文：张辅、王友率师讨简定。
现代文：张辅、王友率师讨伐简定。
English: Zhang Fu and Wang You led the division to fight against Jianzhen.

古文：戊子，谒凤阳皇陵。
现代文：十五日，拜谒凤阳陵。
English: On the 15th, he visited the Fengyang Mausoleum.

古文：三月甲辰，次东平州，望祭泰山。
现代文：三月一日，临时住东平州，望祭泰山。
English: On March 1, he temporarily lived in Dongpingzhou and visited Mount Tai.

古文：辛亥，次景州，望祭恒山。
现代文：八日，临时住景州，望祭恒山。
English: On the 8th, he temporarily lived in Jingzhou and visited the Hengshan Festival.

古文：乙卯，平安自杀。
现代文：十二日，平安自杀。
English: On the 12th, Ping'an committed suicide.

古文：壬戌，至北京。
现代文：十九日，到北京。
English: On the 19th, he arrived in Beijing.

古文：癸亥，大赉官吏军民。
现代文：二十日，大赏官吏军民。
English: On the 20th, a large reward was given to officials, soldiers and civilians.

古文：丙寅，诏起兵时将士及北京效力人民杂犯死罪咸宥之，充军者官复职，军民还籍伍。
现代文：二十三日，诏告起兵时诸将士及北京效力人民，杂犯死罪一律宽恕，充军的官复原职，军民各还民籍或军中。
English: On the 23rd, it was announced that all soldiers and people who had served in Beijing at the time of the military uprising were to be pardoned, all minor crimes punishable by death were to be pardoned, all officers who had served in the military were to be reinstated, and all soldiers and civilians were to return to their civilian status or to the military.

古文：壬申，柳升败倭于青州海中，敕还师。
现代文：二十九日，柳升大败倭寇于青州海上，遂命还师。
English: On the 29th, Liu Sheng defeated the wokou in the sea of Qingzhou, and then returned to his division.

古文：夏四月癸酉朔，皇太子摄享太庙。
现代文：四月一日，皇太子摄享太庙。
English: On April 1st, the Crown Prince received the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：壬午，海寇犯钦州，副总兵李珪遣将击败之。
现代文：十日，海寇侵犯青州，副总兵李皀派将打败他。
English: On the 10th, the sea pirates invaded Qingzhou, and the Vice-Commander-in-Chief Li Junpai defeated them.

古文：闰月戊申，命皇太子所决庶务，六科月一类奏。
现代文：闰四月六日，命皇太子所处理的一般性事务，六科每月分类上奏一次。
English: On leap April 6th, the general affairs handled by the crown prince were ordered to be submitted once a month in six categories.

古文：丙辰，谕行在法司，重罪必五覆奏。
现代文：十四日谕告执法有关部门，重罪必须五次复奏。
English: On the 14th, the relevant law enforcement departments were instructed that felonies must be repeated five times.

古文：五月己卯，营山陵于昌平，封其山曰天寿。
现代文：六月二十日，营山陵于昌平，封其山曰天寿山。
English: On June 20th, the Ying Mountain Mausoleum was built in Changping, and its mountain was named Tianshou Mountain.

古文：乙未，封瓦剌马哈木为顺宁王，太平为贤义王，把秃孛罗为安乐王。
现代文：五月八日，封瓦剌马哈木为顺宁王，太平为贤义王，把秃孛罗为安乐王。
English: On May 8, the king of Shuning, Taiping, and the king of wisdom and righteousness, and the king of happiness, Vulture, were named.

古文：六月壬寅，察北巡郡县长吏，擢汶上知县史诚祖治行第一，下易州同知张腾于狱。
现代文：六月一日，考察北巡郡县长吏，擢升汶上知县史诚祖治行第一，易州同知张腾被下狱中。
English: On June 1, the chief officials of Beiguanshan County were inspected, and Shi Chengzu of Wenshangzhi County was promoted to the first, and Zhang Teng of Yizhou Tongzhi County was sent to prison.

古文：辛亥，给事中郭骥使本雅失里，为所杀。
现代文：十日，给事中郭骥出使本雅失里，被杀害。
English: On the 10th, the envoy of Guo Xuan, Ben Ya, lost his way and was killed.

古文：丁卯，斥御史洪秉等四人，诏自今御史勿用吏员。
现代文：二十六日，斥责御史洪秉等四人，下诏自今起御史不得使用吏员。
English: On the 26th, he reprimanded goshi Hongbing and four others, and issued the following edict: from now on, goshi must not use clerks.

古文：秋七月癸酉，淇国公丘福为征虏大将军，武成侯王聪、同安侯火真副之，靖安侯王忠、安平侯李远为左、右参将，讨本雅失里。
现代文：七月三日，以淇国公丘福为征虏大将军，武成侯王聪、同安侯火真为副将，靖安侯王忠、安平侯李远为左、右参将，征讨本雅失里。
English: On July 3rd, with Qi Guogong Qufu as the general of the conquest, Wucheng Hou Wang Cong and Tongan Hou Huizhen as vice-generals, Jingan Hou Wang Zhong and Anping Hou Li Yuan as left and right co-generals, the conquest of Ben Ya was lost.

古文：八月甲寅，丘福败绩于胪朐河，福及聪、真、忠、远皆战死。
现代文：八月十五日，丘福败于胪朐河，丘福及王聪、火真、王忠、李远全部战死。
English: On August 15th, Qufu was defeated at the Wei River. Qufu, Wang Cong, Hu Zhen, Wang Zhong and Li Yuan all died in the battle.

古文：庚申，张辅败贼于咸子关。
现代文：二十一日，张辅大败本雅失里于咸子关。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Yu defeated Ben Ya in Hanziguan.

古文：九月庚午朔，日有食之。张辅败贼于太平海口。
现代文：九月一日，有日食。张辅又败贼于太平海口。
English: On September 1, there was a solar eclipse. Zhang Fu defeated the bandits again in Taiping Haikou.

古文：甲戌，赠北征死事李远莒国公、王聪漳国公，遂决意亲征。
现代文：五日，赠北征战死的李远为莒国公封号，赠王聪为漳国公，并决定亲自出征。
English: On the fifth day, Li Yuan, who died in the Northern Expedition, was given the official seal of the State of Shandong, and Wang Cong was given the official seal of the State of Shandong, and decided to personally go to the front.

古文：丙子，武安侯郑亨率师巡边。
现代文：七日，武安侯郑亨率兵巡察边疆。
English: On the seventh day, Wu'an marquis Zheng Heng led the troops to patrol the border.

古文：壬午，成安候郭亮备御开平。
现代文：十三日，成安侯郭亮备御开平。
English: On the thirteenth day, Cheng'an Hou Guo Liang prepared to go to Kaiping.

古文：冬十月丁未，削丘福封爵，徙其家于海南。
现代文：十月九日，削除丘福封爵，徙迁其家属于海南。
English: On October 9, Qufu's title was revoked, and his family moved to Hainan.

古文：十一月戊寅，张辅获简定于美良，送京师，诛之。
现代文：十一月十日，张辅在美良擒获简定，送到京师杀掉。
English: On November 10, Zhang Fu was summarily sentenced in Meiliang and sent to Beijing to be killed.

古文：十二月庚戌，赐济宁至良乡民频年递运者田租一年。
现代文：十二月十三日，赏赐济宁到良乡常年运输的农民田租一年。
English: On December 13th, Jining awarded a year's farmland rent to the farmers who had been transporting rice to Liangxiang all year round.

古文：乙丑，召张辅还。
现代文：二十八日，召张辅回京。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Fu was summoned back to Beijing.

古文：是年，满剌加，哈烈，撒马儿罕，火州，古里，占城，苏门答剌，琉球中山、山南入贡。
现代文：当年，满剌加、哈烈、撒马儿罕、火州、古里、占城、苏门答剌、琉球、中山、山南入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Manchukuo, Halei, Samarkand, Huzhou, Guli, Zamcheng, Sumatra, Ryukyu, Zhongshan and Shannan paid tribute to the North.

古文：暹罗、榜葛剌入贡者再。
现代文：暹罗、榜葛剌第二次进贡。
English: Siam, Phang Nga receives second tribute.

古文：八年春正月辛未，召宁阳侯陈懋随征漠北。
现代文：永乐八年春正月四日，召宁阳侯陈懋随征漠北。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 8th year of Yongle, Ningyang marquis Chen Qi was summoned to accompany the conquest of the north.

古文：己卯，皇太子摄祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，皇太子代皇上大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 12th, the Crown Prince's Grand Imperial Festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：癸巳，免去年扬州、淮安、凤阳、陈州水灾田租，赎军民所鬻子女。
现代文：二十六日，免去去年扬州、淮安、凤阳、陈州水灾地区田租，赎回军民所买去的子女。
English: On the 26th, the land rent of Yangzhou, Huai'an, Fengyang and Chenzhou flood-stricken areas last year was exempted, and the children bought by the military and civilians were redeemed.

古文：二月辛丑，以北征诏天下，命户部尚书夏原吉辅皇长孙瞻基留守北京。
现代文：二月四日，因北征颁诏天下，命户部尚书夏原吉辅佐皇长孙朱瞻基留守北京。
English: On February 4, because of the Northern Expedition, the imperial edict was issued to the whole world, ordering the head of the household, Shangshu Xia Yuan, Kishu Su, and the emperor's eldest son, Zhu Zhanzhong, to stay in Beijing.

古文：乙巳，皇太子录囚，奏贳杂犯死罪以下，从之。
现代文：八日，皇太子审查囚犯，奏疏赦免杂犯死罪以下犯人，得到允许。
English: On the 8th, the crown prince reviewed the prisoners, and was allowed to pardon the minor offenders and those below the death penalty.

古文：丁未，发北京。
现代文：十日，从北京出发。
English: On the 10th, they set off from Beijing.

古文：癸亥，遣祭所过名山大川。
现代文：二十六日，祭祀所经过的名山大川。
English: On the 26th, the famous mountain stream through which the ritual took place disappeared.

古文：乙丑，大阅。
现代文：二十八日，举行大阅兵。
English: On the 28th, a grand military parade was held.

古文：三月丁卯，清远侯王友督中军，安远伯柳升副之，宁远侯何福、武安侯郑亨督左、右哨，宁阳侯陈懋、广恩伯刘才督左、右掖，都督刘江督前哨。
现代文：三月一日，清远侯王友督中军，安远伯柳升为副将，宁远侯何福、武安侯郑亨督左、右哨兵，宁阳侯陈懋、广恩伯刘才率左、右两翼军队，都督刘江率前哨。
English: On March 1, Qingyuan marquis Wang Youdu led the middle army, Anyuan Baoliu was promoted to vice-general, Ningyuan marquis He Fu, Wu'an marquis Zheng Hengdu led the left and right sentries, Ningyang marquis Chen Qi and Guang Enbo Liu Cai led the left and right wings of the army, and the governor Liu Jiang led the outpost.

古文：甲戌，次鸣銮戍。
现代文：四月八日，临住鸣銮戍。
English: On April 8th, it was time to go to live in Narita.

古文：乙亥，誓师。
现代文：九日，誓师于军。
English: On the 9th, he swore to serve in the army.

古文：夏四月庚申，次威虏镇，以橐季驼所载水给卫士，视军士皆食，始进膳。
现代文：四月二十日，到达威虏镇，用骆驼拖水给养将士，亲眼看到将士都吃饭了，自己方才吃饭。
English: On April 20, he arrived at Wairu Town and used a camel to haul water to feed the soldiers. He saw with his own eyes that the soldiers had all eaten, but he had to eat first.

古文：五月丁卯，更名胪朐河曰饮马。
现代文：五月一日，改胪朐河为饮马河。
English: On May 1, it was changed to "Drinking Horse River."

古文：甲戌，闻本雅失里西奔，遂渡饮马河追之。
现代文：八日，听说本雅失里向西逃窜，率军渡饮马河追击。
English: On the eighth day, hearing that Benya had fled west, he led his army across the Mahe River in pursuit.

古文：己卯，及于斡难河，大败之，本雅失里以七骑遁。
现代文：十三日，追至斡难河大败本雅失里，本雅失里只带七名骑兵逃跑。
English: On the thirteenth day, they chased him to the Yangtze River, where he was defeated and lost to Benya, who fled with only seven horsemen.

古文：丙戌，还次饮马河，诏移师征阿鲁台。
现代文：二十日，还住饮马河，颁诏调兵打阿鲁台。
English: On the 20th, he still lived in Pingmahe and issued an edict to transfer troops to attack Arutai.

古文：丁亥，回回哈剌马牙杀都指挥刘秉谦，据肃州卫以叛，千户朱迪等讨平之。
现代文：二十一日，回回哈剌马牙杀都指挥刘秉谦，据守肃州卫叛乱，被千户朱迪等平定。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Bingqian, the commander of the capital of Hebei Province, returned to the capital of Hebei Province. According to him, the rebellion in Suzhou Wei was suppressed by Chihou Zhudi and others.

古文：六月甲辰，阿鲁台伪降，命诸将严阵以待，果悉众来犯。
现代文：六月九日，阿鲁台假装投降，命诸将士严阵以待，果然又大举来犯。
English: On June 9th, Arutai pretended to surrender and ordered his soldiers to wait in a tight line, but they came back with a vengeance.

古文：帝自将精骑迎击。大败之，追北百余里。
现代文：朱棣亲率精骑迎击，大败哈剌马牙，并乘胜追击百余里。
English: Zhu Xi's relatives eagerly rode to meet the attack, defeated Hao Ma's teeth, and took advantage of the victory to chase more than 100 miles.

古文：丁未，又败之。己酉，班师。
现代文：二十日，又败哈剌马牙，二十二日，回师。
English: On the 20th, it was defeated again by Harima Tooth, and on the 22nd, it returned to the division.

古文：秋七月丁卯，次开平。
现代文：七月二日住开平。
English: On July 2nd, I moved to Kaiping.

古文：帝在军，念士卒艰苦，每蔬食，是日宴赉，始复常膳。
现代文：朱棣慰问军士，念将士辛苦，每天生活也很差，当天宴请并赏赐将士。朱棣也开始恢复正常饮食。
English: Zhu Xi offered condolences to the sergeant, remembering the soldiers' hard work and poor daily life. On the same day, he held a banquet and rewarded the soldiers. Zhu Xi also began to resume his normal diet.

古文：西宁侯宋琥镇甘肃。
现代文：西宁侯宋琥镇守甘肃。
English: The lord of Xining, Song Yanzhen, was the governor of Gansu.

古文：辛巳，振安庆、徽州、凤阳、镇江饥。
现代文：十六日赈济安庆、徽州、凤阳、镇江饥荒。
English: On the 16th, famine broke out in Anqing, Huizhou, Fengyang and Zhenjiang.

古文：壬午，至北京，御奉天殿受朝贺。
现代文：十七日，到北京奉天殿接受朝臣庆贺。
English: On the 17th, he went to Beijing to receive congratulations from the courtiers at the Imperial Court.

古文：甲午，论功行赏有差。
现代文：二十九日，论功行赏各有差别。
English: On the 29th, there were differences in the discussion of merit, performance and reward.

古文：八月壬寅，进封柳升安远侯。
现代文：八月八日，进封柳升安远侯。
English: On August 8th, Liu Sheng and Yuan Hou of Jinfeng passed away.

古文：乙卯，何福自杀。
现代文：二十一日，何福自杀。
English: On the 21st, He Fu committed suicide.

古文：庚申，河溢开封。
现代文：二十六日，开封附近黄河涨水。
English: On the 26th, the Yellow River near Kaifeng began to flood.

古文：九月己巳，幸天寿山。
现代文：十月十九日，巡幸天寿山。
English: On October 19th, the inspection tour of Tianshou Mountain began.

古文：冬十月丁酉，发北京。
现代文：十月四日，从北京出发。
English: On October 4th, they set off from Beijing.

古文：是月，倭寇福州。
现代文：这一月，倭寇在福州作乱。
English: This month, wako (Japanese pirates) rioted in Fuzhou.

古文：十一月甲戌，至京师。
现代文：十一日，到京师。
English: On the 11th, he arrived in Beijing to teach.

古文：十二月癸巳，阿鲁台遣使贡马。
现代文：十二月一日，阿鲁台派使臣进贡马匹。
English: On December 1, Arutai sent envoys to bring in the tribute horses.

古文：戊午，陈季扩乞降，以为交阯右布政使，季扩不受命。
现代文：二十六日，陈季扩请求投降，任他为交趾右布政使，陈季扩不接受朝廷命令。
English: On the 26th, Chen Jizan requested to surrender, and was appointed as the political envoy of Jiaozuo. Chen Jizan did not accept the order of the imperial court.

古文：是年，失捏干寇黄河东岸，宁夏都指挥王俶败没。
现代文：这一年，失捏干侵犯黄河东岸，被宁夏都指挥王亻叔打败并歼灭。
English: In that year, the Kuomintang invaded the east bank of the Yellow River and was defeated and annihilated by the commander of the Ningxia capital, Wang Bingxu.

古文：浡泥、吕宋、冯嘉施兰、苏门答剌、榜葛剌入贡。
现代文：氵孛泥、吕宋、冯嘉施兰、苏门答剌、榜葛剌入朝进贡。
English: Gongde, Luzon, Fengjia, Shilan, Sumedan, and Pangge all paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：占城贡象。
现代文：占城进贡大象。
English: Tribute elephants arrive in Zamcheng.

古文：琉球山南、爪哇、暹罗贡马。
现代文：琉球山南、爪哇、暹罗进贡马匹。
English: Ryukyu Shannan, Java, Siam tribute horses.

古文：琉球中山入贡者三。
现代文：琉球中山三次入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama pays tribute for the third time.

古文：九年春正月甲戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：永乐九年正月十三日，大祭天地鬼神于南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the ninth year of Yongle, the grand festival Heaven and Earth Ghosts was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：丙子，柳升镇宁夏。
现代文：七日，柳升镇守宁夏。
English: On the 7th, Liu Sheng was appointed to guard Ningxia.

古文：巳卯，张辅为征虏副将军，会沐晟讨交阯。
现代文：十八日，张辅为征虏副将军，与沐晟一起讨伐交趾。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Fu was the vice-general of conscription and fought alongside Mu Xi.

古文：丙戌，丰城侯李彬、平江伯陈瑄率浙江、福建兵捕海寇。
现代文：二十五日，丰城侯李彬、平江伯陈蠧率浙江、福建官兵捕捉海盗。
English: On the 25th, Fengcheng Hou Li Bin and Pingjiang Bo Chen Yi led officers and soldiers from Zhejiang and Fujian to capture pirates.

古文：二月辛亥，陈瑛有罪，下狱死。
现代文：二月二十日，陈瑛犯罪，下狱而死。
English: On February 20, Chen Ying committed a crime and died in prison.

古文：丙辰，诏赦交阯。
现代文：二十五日，下诏赦免交趾之罪。
English: On the 25th, the emperor issued an edict pardoning the crime of having sexual relations.

古文：丁巳，倭陷昌化千户所。
现代文：二十六日，倭寇攻占昌化千户所。
English: On the 26th, the Japanese invaded and occupied Changhua's Chihousho.

古文：己未，工部尚书宋礼开会通河。
现代文：二十八日，工部尚书宋礼开凿会通河。
English: On the 28th, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce held a groundbreaking ceremony for the Tonghe River.

古文：三月甲子，赐萧时中等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月四日，赐萧时中等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 4th, Xiao Shi was awarded the title of junior middle-ranking scholar, with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：壬午，浚祥符县黄河故道。
现代文：二十二日，疏通祥符县黄河故道。
English: On the 22nd, the old Yellow River Road in Xiangfu County was dredged.

古文：戊子，刘江镇辽东。
现代文：二十八日，刘江镇守辽东。
English: On the 28th, Liujiang Town became the garrison of Liaodong.

古文：夏六月乙巳，郑和还自西洋。
现代文：六月十六日，郑和从西洋回国。
English: On June 16, Zheng He returned to China from the West.

古文：是月，下交阯右参议解缙于狱。
现代文：这月，交趾右参议解缙被投入监狱。
English: This month, a right-wing councillor was sent to prison.

古文：秋七月丙子，张辅败贼于月常江。
现代文：七月十七日，张辅大败盗贼于月常江。
English: On July 17th, Zhang Yu defeated the thieves in the Yuejiang River.

古文：九月戊寅，谕法司，凡死罪必五覆奏。
现代文：九月二十日，谕诏有关部门，凡是定死罪的必须五次覆奏。
English: On September 20th, the relevant departments were ordered to review all death sentences five times.

古文：壬午，命屯田军以公事妨农务者，免徵子粒，著为令。
现代文：二十四日，命令凡是屯田军士以公事妨碍农事的，免征一子一粒，写成文作为法令。
English: On the 24th, it was ordered that any Tonden sergeant-at-arms who impeded agricultural work with his official duties would be exempted from taxation, one grain for each son, and this was written down as a decree.

古文：冬十月乙未，宽北京谪徙军民赋役。
现代文：十月七日，减少北京被贬降职军民赋役。
English: On October 7th, the reduced Beijing was demoted to the rank of military and civilian service.

古文：癸卯，封哈密兔力帖木儿为忠义王。
现代文：十七日，封哈密兔力帖木儿为忠义王。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Hami Tuxili designated Timur as the King of Loyalty.

古文：乙巳，复修《太祖实录》。
现代文：十九日，增修《太祖实录》。
English: On the 19th, the "Grandfather Record" was updated.

古文：十一月戊午，蠲陕西逋赋。
现代文：十一月一日，蠲免陕西欠交赋税。
English: On November 1, Shaanxi Province was exempted from tax arrears.

古文：癸亥，张辅败贼于生厥江。
现代文：二十一日，张辅在生厥江打败盗贼。
English: On the 21st day of the month, Zhang Fu defeated the thief in the Zhongjue River.

古文：丁卯，立皇长孙瞻基为皇太孙。
现代文：十日，立皇长孙朱瞻基为皇太孙。
English: On the 10th, Zhu Zhanji, the eldest grandson of the founding emperor, became the imperial great-grandson.

古文：壬申，韩观为征夷副将军，改镇交阯，都指挥葛森镇广西。
现代文：十五日，韩观为征夷副将军，改调镇守交趾，都指挥葛森镇守广西。
English: On the 15th, Han Guan was promoted to vice-general for subjugation of the barbarians, and was reassigned to command both Gessen and Guangxi.

古文：丙子，敕法司决遣罪囚毋淹滞。
现代文：十二月六日，告诫有关部门如决定遣送罪囚不要掩饰停留。
English: On December 6, he warned the relevant departments that if they decided to deport criminal prisoners, they should not disguise the stay.

古文：是月，遣使督瘗战场暴骨。
现代文：当月，派遣使臣督促掩埋露于战场上的尸骨。
English: That month, envoys were dispatched to urge the burial of the bones that had been exposed on the battlefield.

古文：十二月壬辰，敕宥福余、朵颜、泰宁三卫罪，令入贡。
现代文：二十二日，饶恕福余、朵颜、泰宁三卫罪行，命令三卫入朝进贡。
English: On the 22nd, he pardoned Fuyu, Doan and Taining Sanwei for their crimes and ordered Sanwei to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：闰月丁巳，命府部诸臣陈军民利弊。
现代文：闰十二月一日，命府部诸臣陈述军民利弊之事。
English: On the first day of leap December, he ordered the officials of the prefectural government to make a statement on the advantages and disadvantages of the military and the people.

古文：是年，浙江、湖广、湖南、顺天、扬州水，河南、陕西疫，遣使振之。
现代文：这一年，浙江、湖广、河南、顺天、扬州涨水，河南、陕西发生瘟疫，派使臣赈救。
English: In this year, Zhejiang, Huguang, Henan, Shuntian and Yangzhou were flooded, and plague occurred in Henan and Shaanxi, and envoys were sent to help.

古文：满剌加王来朝。
现代文：满剌加国王前来朝贡。
English: King Manchukuo came to pay tribute.

古文：爪哇、榜葛剌、古里、柯枝、苏门答剌、阿鲁、彭亨、急兰丹、南巫里、暹罗入贡。
现代文：爪哇、榜葛剌、古里、柯枝、苏门答剌、阿鲁、彭亨、急兰丹、南巫里、暹罗入朝进贡。
English: Java, Pangkal Pinang, Guri, Kochi, Sumatra, Aru, Pahang, Sri Lanka, South Sumatra, and Siam paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：阿鲁台来贡马，别失八里献文豹。
现代文：阿鲁台贡献马匹，别失八里贡献文豹。
English: Alutai contributed horses, while Baili contributed leopards.

古文：琉球中山入贡者三。
现代文：琉球中山三次进贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama pays tribute for the third time.

古文：十年春正月己丑，命入觐官千五百余人各陈民瘼，不言者罪之，言有不当勿问。
现代文：永乐十年正月四日，命入朝朝见官吏一千五百余人各述民间疾苦，不说的加罪，言而不当的不予追究。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 10th year of Yongle, more than 1,500 officials were summoned to the court to see the court officials. They each described the hardships of the people, not to mention the aggravation of crime, and said that they would not be investigated.

古文：丁酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭鬼神于南郊。
English: On the 9th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：癸丑，振平阳饥，逮治布政使及郡县官不奏闻者。
现代文：二十八日，救济平阳饥荒。逮捕并惩治布政使司及郡县知情不报官员。
English: On the 28th, relief Pingyang famine. Arrest and punish Bu political envoys and county officials who did not report.

古文：二月辛酉，蠲山西、河南逋赋。
现代文：二月六日，免山西、河南欠交赋税。
English: On February 6, Shanxi and Henan were exempted from tax arrears.

古文：庚辰，辽王植有罪，削其护卫。
现代文：二十五日，辽王朱植犯罪，削夺其护卫。
English: On the 25th, Liao King Zhu Zhi committed a crime and robbed his bodyguard.

古文：三月丁亥，丰城侯李彬讨甘肃叛寇八耳思朵罗歹。
现代文：三月三日，丰城侯李彬征讨甘肃叛寇八耳思朵罗歹。
English: On March 3rd, Fengcheng marquis Li Bin led a campaign against the Gansu rebels.

古文：戊子，赐马铎等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：四日，赏赐马铎等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the fourth day, prizes were given to horse riders and other prize-winners with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：甲辰，免北京水灾租税。
现代文：二十日，免北京水灾后租税。
English: On the 20th, Beijing was exempted from taxes after the floods.

古文：夏六月甲戌，谕户部，凡郡县有司及朝使目击民艰不言者，悉逮治。
现代文：六月二十一日，告谕户部，凡郡县有关部门及朝中使臣看见百姓艰苦不报者，一律逮捕惩治。
English: On June 21, it was announced to the Household Department that all relevant departments of counties and counties and the envoys of the central government who saw the hardships of the people and did not report them would be arrested and punished.

古文：秋七月癸卯，禁中官干预有司政事。
现代文：七月二十日，禁止中官干预有关部门政事。
English: On July 20, the vice-minister was prohibited from interfering in the political affairs of relevant departments.

古文：八月癸丑，张辅大破交阯贼于神投海。
现代文：九月六日，张辅在神投海大败交趾盗贼。
English: On September 6th, Zhang Yu defeated a thief in Shengtouhai.

古文：己未，敕边将自长安岭迤西迄洗马林筑石垣，深濠堑。
现代文：七日，告诫边将从长安岭以西起到洗马林止修筑石垣，挖深壕沟。
English: On the seventh day, the warning side will build a stone wall and dig a deep trench from the west of Chang'an Ridge to Shimaring.

古文：冬十月戊辰，猎城南武冈。
现代文：十月十六日，去城南武冈打猎。
English: On October 16th, I went hunting in Seongnam-Wookang.

古文：十一月壬午，侍讲杨荣经略甘肃。
现代文：十一月一日，侍讲杨荣经略甘肃。
English: On the first day of November, Yang Rongjing, the assistant lecturer, became a little more serious.

古文：丙申，郑和复使西洋。
现代文：十五日，郑和再次出使西洋。
English: On the 15th, Zheng He once again sent an envoy to the West.

古文：是年，浡泥、占城、暹罗、满剌加、榜葛剌、苏门答剌、南浡利、球琉山南入贡。
现代文：这一年，氵孛泥、占城、暹罗、满剌加、榜葛剌、苏门答剌、南氵孛利、琉球山南入朝进贡。
English: In that year, the provinces of Putuo, Zhancheng, Siam, Manchukuo, Bangka, Sumatra, South Gili, and the southern part of the Ryukyu Islands paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：十一年春正月辛己朔，日有食之，诏罢朝贺宴会。
现代文：永乐十一年正月一日，有日食，诏谕停止朝贺宴会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of Yongle, there was a solar eclipse, and the imperial edict stopped the morning greeting banquet.

古文：壬午，谕通政使、礼科给事中，凡朝觐官境内灾伤不能闻为他人所奏者，罪之。
现代文：二日，告诉通政使、礼科给事中，凡是入朝朝见官员其境内有灾伤之事不明察报告而被别人上奏的，加罪。
English: On the second day, he told the envoy and the etiquette experts that anyone who went to the DPRK to see officials and did not inspect the report on the disaster and injury in its territory and was reported by others would be charged with an additional crime.

古文：辛卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地鬼神于南郊。
English: On the 16th, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：辛丑，丰城侯李彬镇甘肃，召宋琥还。
现代文：二十一日，丰城侯李彬镇守甘肃，召宋琥回京。
English: On the twenty-first day, Fengcheng marquis Li Bin, the town guard of Gansu, called Song Yue back to Beijing.

古文：二月辛亥，始设贵州布政司。
现代文：二月二日，始设贵州布政司。
English: On February 2, the Guizhou Political Bureau was established.

古文：癸亥，令北京民户分养孳生马，著为令。
现代文：十四日，命北京民户分养能繁殖的马匹，写成文作为法令。
English: On the 14th, the order for Beijing households to raise and breed horses was written as a decree.

古文：甲子，幸北京，皇太孙从。
现代文：十五日，巡幸北京，皇太孙随同前往。
English: On the 15th, the procession went to Beijing, accompanied by the Emperor's grandson.

古文：尚书蹇义、学士黄淮、谕德杨士奇、洗马杨溥辅皇太子监国。
现代文：尚书蹇义、学士黄淮、谕德杨士奇、洗马杨溥辅佐皇太子监国。
English: Shang Shuxun Rongyi, Baccalaureate Huang Huai, Guan Deyang Shiqi, Zima Yang Rongfu assisted the crown prince in supervising the country.

古文：乙丑，发京师，命给事中、御史所过存间高年，赐酒肉及帛。
现代文：十六日，从京师出发，命给事中、御史所过之处询问高年长寿，赏赐酒肉玉帛。
English: On the 16th, he set out from Beijing to inquire about his longevity, and was rewarded with meat and wine.

古文：丙寅，葬仁孝皇后于长陵。
现代文：十七日，葬仁孝皇后于长陵。
English: On the 17th, the funeral of Empress Ninko took place at the Chosonin Mausoleum.

古文：辛未，次凤阳，谒皇陵。
现代文：二十二日，住凤阳，拜谒皇陵。
English: On the 22nd, he lived in Fengyang and visited the imperial mausoleum.

古文：夏四月己酉，至北京。
现代文：四月一日，到北京。
English: On April 1st, I arrived in Beijing.

古文：五月丁未，曹县献驺虞，礼官请贺，不许。
现代文：五月二十九日，曹县进献驺虞，礼官请求庆贺，没得到允许。
English: On May 29th, Cao County's ceremonial offering was in jeopardy, and the etiquette official requested a celebration, but did not receive permission.

古文：秋七月戊寅，封阿鲁台为和宁王。
现代文：七月一日，封阿鲁台为和宁王。
English: On July 1st, Aru Tai was crowned King of Honen.

古文：八月甲子，北京地震。
现代文：八月十八日，北京发生地震。
English: On August 18, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：乙丑，镇远侯顾成讨思州、靖州叛苗。
现代文：十九日，镇远侯顾成征讨思州、靖州叛乱苗蛮。
English: On the 19th, Zhenyuanhou Gu Chengzheng discussed the rebellion of Miao barbarians in Shizhou and Jingzhou.

古文：九月壬午，诏自今郡县官每岁春行视境内，蝗蝻害稼即捕绝之，不如诏者二司并罪。
现代文：九月六日，下诏从今以后郡县官吏于每年春天要巡视境内情况，有蝗蝻损害庄稼要立即捕绝，不听诏书的郡县有关部门均有罪。
English: On September 6, the following edict was issued: henceforth, county and county officials should inspect the situation within the territory every spring, locusts that damage crops should be immediately arrested, and the relevant county and county departments that do not listen to the edict are guilty.

古文：冬十月丙寅，以玺书命皇太子录囚。
现代文：十月二十日，以玺书命皇太子审查囚犯。
English: On October 20th, an imperial edict was issued ordering the crown prince to examine prisoners.

古文：十一月戊寅，以野蚕茧为衾，命皇太子荐太庙。
现代文：十一月二日，用野蚕茧制成被子，命皇太子进献给太庙。
English: On November 2nd, a quilt was made from wild silk cocoons, and the crown prince ordered it to be presented to the imperial temple.

古文：壬午，瓦剌马哈木兵渡饮马河，阿鲁台告警，命边将严守备。
现代文：六日，瓦剌马哈木率兵渡过饮马河，阿鲁台告急，命边将加强守备。
English: On the 6th, Wah Yan Mahagi and his soldiers crossed the Binma River. Arutai was in a desperate situation, and they had to strengthen their defenses.

古文：甲申，宁阳侯陈懋，都督谭青、马聚、朱崇巡宁夏、大同、山西边，简练士马。
现代文：八日，宁阳侯陈懋，都督谭青、马聚、朱崇巡察宁夏、大同、山西边界，检练军士马匹。
English: On the 8th, Ningyang marquis Chen Wei, governors Tan Qing, Ma Ju, and Zhu Chong inspected the borders of Ningxia, Datong, and Shanxi, and tested the horses of the sergeants.

古文：寻命陕西、山西及潼关等五卫兵驻宣府，中都、辽东、河南三都指挥使司及武平等四卫兵会北京。
现代文：不久命陕西、山西及潼关等五卫兵驻宣府，中都、辽东、河南三都指挥使司及武平等四卫兵在北京会合。
English: Soon, five guards from Shaanxi, Shanxi and Shaoguan were stationed in Xuanfu, and the commanders of the envoys from Zhongdu, Liaodong and Henan, as well as the four guards from Wudong, met in Beijing.

古文：乙巳，应城伯孙岩备开平。
现代文：二十九日，应城伯孙岩备兵开平。
English: On the 29th, at the request of Sun Yat-sen, Sun Yat-sen's troops prepared for battle.

古文：十二月壬子，张辅、沐晟大败交阯贼于爱子江。
现代文：十二月七日，张辅、沐晟大败交趾贼于爱子江。
English: On December 7th, Zhang Yu and Muxun were defeated in the Aizi River.

古文：是年，马哈木弑其主本雅失里，立答里巴为可汗。
现代文：就在这年，马哈木杀其首领本雅失里，立答里巴为可汗。
English: In the same year, Mahagi killed its leader, Benyashri, and made Tariba the khan.

古文：别失八里、满剌加、占城、爪哇西王入贡。
现代文：别里八里、满剌加、占城、爪哇西王入朝进贡。
English: Bailibari, Manchukuo, Zhancheng and West Java paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：琉球中山入贡者四。
现代文：琉球中山四次来贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama came four times to pay tribute.

古文：琉球山南入贡者再。
现代文：琉球山南两次入朝进贡。
English: The southern part of the Ryukyu Islands was twice taken over by Japan as tribute.

