古文：敬晖，绛州太平人也。
现代文：敬晖，绛州太平人。
English: Respectfully, from the Taiping people of Zhangzhou.

古文：弱冠举明经。
现代文：二十岁，参加明经科考试而中举。
English: At the age of twenty, he passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：圣历初，累除卫州刺史。
现代文：圣历初年，敬晖任卫州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Gregorian calendar, Jingyao was appointed as the governor of Weizhou.

古文：时河北新有突厥之寇，方秋而而修城不辍，晖下车谓曰： 金汤非粟而不守，岂有弃收获而缮城郭哉？ 
现代文：当时河北出现突厥的强盗，到了秋收季节还修城不止。敬晖到任就对大家说 ：固若金汤的城墙并不是粮食，哪里有放弃收获而修城郭的？ 
English: At that time, Turkic bandits appeared in Hebei, and by the autumn harvest season they were still building more and more cities. When he took office, Jingyao said to everyone: If the walls of Gu Ruo Jin Tang are not grain, where are the people who give up the harvest and build castles?

古文：悉令罢散，由是人吏咸歌咏之。
现代文：下令停止修城放老百姓回乡收获，由此吏人都歌颂他。
English: He ordered to stop the construction of the city and let the people return to their hometowns to harvest. As a result, the officials all sang his praises.

古文：再迁夏官侍郎，出为泰州刺史。
现代文：后升任夏官侍郎，又出任泰州刺史。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of a summer official's attendant, and also served as a Taizhou magistrate.

古文：大足元年，迁洛州长史。
现代文：大足元年，调任洛州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Foot, he was transferred to the post of Lozhou chief historian.

古文：天后幸长安，令晖知副留守事。在职以清干著闻；玺书劳勉，赐物百段。
现代文：武则天去长安，令敬晖任副留守，在职以清廉能干著闻，得到皇上加奖，赐五彩绸百段。
English: Wu Zetian went to Chang'an, leaving Jing Yao as his deputy. He was known for his integrity and ability while in office. He received a special award from the emperor and was given a hundred pieces of colorful silk.

古文：长安三年，拜中台右丞，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：长安三年，拜中台右丞，加银青光禄大夫。
English: In the third year of Chang'an, he was promoted to Zhongtai Yujo, and was promoted to Qingguanglu Doctor.

古文：神龙元年，转右羽林将军。
现代文：神龙元年，调任羽林将军。
English: In the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of General Urin.

古文：以诛张易之、昌宗功，加金紫光禄大夫，擢拜侍中，赐爵平阳郡公，食实封五百户。
现代文：因为诛张易之、张昌宗有功，加金紫光禄大夫的荣誉职衔，拜侍中，赐爵平阳郡公，食邑实封五百户。
English: Because of the meritorious service of Zhang Yi and Zhang Changzong, the honorary title of the gold and purple doctor was added, the title of the waiter was given, the title of the Pingyang County official was given, and 500 households of the food town were sealed.

古文：寻进封齐国公。
现代文：不久晋封齐国公。
English: He was soon promoted to Prince of Qi.

古文：天后崩，遗制加实封通前满七百户。
现代文：武则天去世，遗旨加实封满七百户。
English: Wu Zetian passed away, and his last will and testament sealed seven hundred households.

古文：晖等以唐室中兴，武氏诸王咸宜降爵，上章论奏，于是诸武降为公。
现代文：敬晖等上章论奏，唐室中兴，武姓诸王都应降爵，于是均由王降为公。
English: The above chapter, such as Jing Xi, was discussed and played, the Tang family was promoted, and the kings with the surname of Wu were all demoted, so they were all demoted from the king to the prince.

古文：武三思益怒，乃讽帝阳尊晖等为郡王，罢知政事。
现代文：武三思更加恼怒，于是怂恿中宗明尊敬晖等为郡王，实免除宰相之职。
English: Wu Sansi was even more angry, so Yu Zhong Zongming respected Yu as the county king and actually relieved him of the post of prime minister.

古文：仍赐铁券，恕十死，朔望趋朝。
现代文：并赐铁券，恕十死，只初一、十五上朝。
English: He also granted iron coupons, forgave ten deaths, and only the first day and the fifteenth went to the imperial court.

古文：初，晖与彦范等诛张易之兄弟也，洛州长史薛季昶谓晖曰： 二凶虽除，产、禄犹在。请因兵势诛武三思之属，匡正王室，以安天下。 
现代文：当初，敬晖与桓彦范等诛张易之兄弟，洛州长史薛季昶对敬晖说： 二凶虽除，产和禄二人还存在，应趁兵势诛武三思之辈，匡正王室，以安天下。 
English: At the beginning, the governor of Luo Province, Shi Xuejian, who was a brother of Zhang Yi, said to Jing Yi, "Although there are two villains, there are also two people with wealth and income. We should take advantage of the military power to promote the martial and thoughtful generation, the righteous royal family, and the peace of the world."

古文：晖与张柬之屡陈不可，乃止。
现代文：敬晖与张柬之屡次言其不可，故其事不行。
English: Jingyao and Zhang Qian repeatedly said that it was impossible, so it was not possible.

古文：季昶叹曰： 吾不知死所矣。 
现代文：薛季昶叹道： 我们不知死在什么地方了。 
English: Xue Jiya sighed, "I don't know where we died.

古文：翌日，三思因韦后之助，潜入宫中，内行相事，反易国政，为天下所患，时议以此归咎于晖。
现代文：后，武三思偷偷进宫与韦氏勾结，实际上行使宰相职事，改变国政，造成天下的大患，当时人们议论把责任归咎于敬晖。
English: Later, Wu Sansi sneaked into the palace and colluded with Wei, and actually exercised the prime minister's duties, changed the national politics, and caused a great danger to the world. At that time, people talked about blaming the blame on Jing Yi.

古文：晖等既失政柄，受制于三思，晖每推床嗟惋，或弹指出血。
现代文：敬晖等既已失去权柄，受制于武三思，敬晖悔不当初，常拍床嗟叹，有时弹指出血。
English: Having lost their power, Jing Xi and the others were constrained to think twice before acting. Jing Xi regretted not acting sooner, often beat his bed, and sometimes vomited blood.

古文：柬之叹曰： 主上畴昔为英王时，素称勇烈，吾留诸武，冀自诛锄耳。
现代文：张柬之叹道： 主上过去为英王时，一向勇烈，我们留下武三思之辈，本想自能诛除。
English: Zhang Khamzhi sighed, "When the Lord was the king, He was always brave. We left behind those who thought twice about fighting. We thought we could get rid of them by ourselves.

古文：今事势已去，知复何道。 
现代文：今大势已去，明白了又有何办法呢？ 
English: Now that the general trend has gone, what can we do?

古文：三思既深愤惋，以许州司功参军郑愔素被晖等废黜，因令上表陈其罪状。
现代文：武三思也深恨敬晖等，挑拨曾被敬晖废黜的许州司功参军的郑忄音上表陈述敬晖的罪状。
English: Wu Sansi also deeply hated Jing Yi, and instigated Xu Zhou Shigong, who had been deposed by Jing Yi, to join the army. Zheng Shigong publicly stated the charges against Jing Yi.

古文：中宗诏曰： 则天大圣皇后，往以忧劳不豫，凶竖弄权。
现代文：中宗下诏： 则天大圣皇后，过去因为忧劳身体不好，致使凶狠小人弄权。
English: Zhongzong issued the following edict: Then the Heavenly Great Holy Empress, in the past because of her poor health due to hard work, caused a vicious villain to usurp power.

古文：晖等因兴甲兵，铲除妖孽，朕录其劳效，备极宠劳。自谓勋高一时，遂欲权倾四海，擅作威福，轻侮国章，悖道弃义，莫斯之甚。
现代文：敬晖等兴甲兵，铲除妖孽，朕记得他们的功劳，很是尊重，而敬晖自谓功高一时，就想权倾四海，擅作威福，轻视践踏国章，背道弃义，没有谁比他更厉害的。
English: I remember their achievements with great respect. However, when he claimed to have achieved great feats, he wanted to spread his power to the four corners of the world, arrogated to himself the power to bestow blessings, disdained to trample on the national emblem, and abandoned the path of righteousness. No one was more powerful than him.

古文：然收其薄效，犹为隐忍，锡其郡王之重，优以特进之荣。
现代文：然而朕看在他们的功绩上，赐他郡王之重爵，以特进的荣誉奖赐。
English: However, considering their merits, I have given him the title of Count's Knight and the honorary award of Special Advancement.

古文：不谓溪壑之志，殊难盈满，既失大权，多怀怨望。
现代文：不料欲海难填，既失大权，多怀怨恨。
English: Unexpectedly, he was shipwrecked, lost power, and harbored a lot of resentment.

古文：乃与王同皎窥觇内禁，潜相谋结，更欲权兵绛阙，图废椒宫，险迹丑辞，惊视骇听。属以帝图伊始，务静狴牢，所以久为含容，未能暴诸遐迩。
现代文：于是与王同皎暗中窥探内禁，互相勾结，更想掌兵权再次颠覆朝政。朕看到帝业刚创，力求少用刑狱，所以久为容忍，未能把他的行为暴露于公众。
English: As a result, he and Wang Tongyao secretly spied on the internal ban, colluded with each other, and even wanted to take military power to subvert the imperial government again. I saw that the emperor had just created and tried to use prison less, so I tolerated him for a long time and failed to expose his behavior to the public.

古文：睿宗即位，追复五王官爵，赠晖秦州都督，谥曰肃愍。
现代文：自从王同皎伏法，分裂朝廷的阴谋更加暴露，倘若再行姑息，又怎么能惩罚背叛。按其反叛之罪，本应严诛，但念昔日功劳，还加宽宥，给予降职，贬到外州，敬晖可任崖州司马。 
English: Since the Wang Tong Xuan Fu Law, the conspiracy to split the imperial court has become more and more exposed. If leniency is given again, how can betrayal be punished? According to his crime of rebellion, he should have been severely punished, but he was pardoned, given a demotion, and relegated to Gaozhou. He could have been appointed as the Sima of Gaozhou.

古文：建中初，重赠太尉。
现代文：敬晖到崖州，竟被周利贞所杀。
English: He went to Jiaozhou and was killed by Zhou Lizhen.

古文：曾孙元膺，开成三年，自试太子通事舍人为河南县丞。崔玄暐，博陵安平人也。父行谨，为胡苏令。
现代文：睿宗即位，追复官爵，赠敬晖泰州都督，谥号肃愍。崔玄暐，博陵安平人。父崔行谨，曾为胡苏县令。
English: Ruizong ascended the throne, restored the title of nobility, bestowed the title of governor of Taizhou with the honorific title of Zui. Cui Xuanqian was born in Anping, Boling. His father, Cui Xingji, was the governor of Husu County.

古文：本名晔，以字下体有则天祖讳，乃改为玄暐。
现代文：崔玄暐，本名晔，因字的下体华为武则天祖父的名，于是改为玄暐。
English: Cui Xuanqian, whose real name was Cui, was changed to Xuanqian because the lower part of the character was the name of Wu Zetian's grandfather.

古文：少有学行，深为叔父秘书监行功所器重。
现代文：少年时代学习就很好，为叔父秘书监崔行功所器重。
English: He was good at studying when he was a boy, and his uncle's secretary, Supervisor Cui Xinggong, was very important to him.

古文：龙朔中，举明经，累补库部员外郎。其母卢氏尝诫之曰： 吾见姨兄屯田郎中辛玄驭云： 兒子从宦者，有人来云贫乏不能存，此是好消息。若闻赀货充足，衣马轻肥，此恶消息。 
现代文：龙朔年中，参加明经科考试中举，任库部员外郎，他的母亲卢氏曾训诫他说 ：我见姨兄屯田郎中辛玄驭说 ：儿子做了官，有人来说再不会贫穷了，这的确是喜事；但听到他钱财充足，轻裘马肥，这又是担忧的事。 
English: Long ago, in the middle of the year, he took part in the examination of the Ming Dynasty, he was the treasurer, and his mother Lu had admonished him, saying: I saw my uncle Tun Tian Lang Zhong Xin Xuan Rui said: My son has become an official, some people say that he will never be poor again, this is indeed a happy event; but to hear that he has enough money and is not greedy, this is also a worrying matter.

古文：吾常重此言，以为确论。
现代文：我很重视这句话，认为这是很实在的看法。
English: I attach great importance to this sentence and think that it is a very realistic view.

古文：比见亲表中仕宦者，多将钱物上其父母，父母但知喜悦，竟不问此物从何而来。
现代文：近来看见亲表中做官的，多将钱物来交给父母，父母只知喜，竟不问此物从何而来。
English: Recently, when I saw my cousin, who is an official, he often gave money and things to his parents. His parents were only pleased, but they did not ask where this thing came from.

古文：必是禄俸余资，诚亦善事。如其非理所得，此与盗贼何别？
现代文：如果定是俸禄中所用之剩余，这也确实是大好事；如果是非理所得，这与盗贼又有什么区别呢？
English: If it is the surplus of the salary, this is indeed a good thing; if it is unjustified income, what is the difference between this and theft?

古文：纵无大咎，独不内愧于心？
现代文：纵容子女这样，这就是大错，难道不有愧于心吗？
English: Isn't it a big mistake to indulge your children in this way? Don't you feel ashamed?

古文：孟母不受鱼鲊之馈，盖为此也。
现代文：孟母不受赠送的鲜鱼，大概就是为的这一点吧！
English: This is probably the reason why Meng's mother does not accept gifts of fresh fish.

古文：汝今坐食禄俸，荣幸已多，若其不能忠清，何以戴天履地？
现代文：你现在食俸禄，荣幸已多，如果不能忠正清廉，怎么好意思立足于天地？
English: If you cannot be honest and clean, how can you be proud to stand in the world?

古文：孔子云： 虽日杀三性之养，犹为不孝。 
现代文：孔子说： 虽每天杀三牲养父母，仍然不能算孝。 
English: Confucius said, "Even if you kill three animals every day to feed your parents, you still cannot be considered a filial son.

古文：又曰： 父母惟其疾之忧。 
现代文：又说 ：父母担忧的是子女的毛病。 
English: He also said: Parents are worried about their children's problems.

古文：持宜修身洁已，勿累吾此意也。 
现代文：这些话特别提醒人要修身洁己，不要辜负了我的这番心意。 
English: These words are a special reminder to people to cultivate their bodies and purify themselves, and not to fail to live up to my intentions.

古文：玄暐遵奉母氏教诫，以清谨见称。
现代文：崔玄暐遵奉母亲的教导，做官以清谨见称。
English: Following his mother's teachings, Cui Xuanqian is known for his scrupulousness as an official.

古文：寻授天宫郎中，迁凤阁舍人。
现代文：不久，崔玄暐授天官郎中，又升迁观阁舍人。
English: Soon after, Cui Xuanqin was promoted to the middle-ranking official, and then to the highest-ranking official.

古文：长安元年，超拜天官侍郎。每介然自守，都绝请谒，颇为执政者所忌。
现代文：长安元年，越级升天官侍郎，他每处事严正不移，严于律己，杜绝来拜见拉关系的人，很为执政者所忌恨。
English: In the first year of the Chang'an era, he was promoted to the highest rank and became an attendant of a high-ranking official. He was very strict in everything he did, stricter than his own self-discipline. He would ban anyone who came to visit him, which was very hated by the rulers.

古文：转文昌左丞。
现代文：又调任文昌左丞。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Wenchang Zuo.

古文：经月余，则天谓曰： 自卿改职以来，选司大有罪过。
现代文：经过一个多月，武则天说 ：自卿改职以来，选司大有罪过。
English: After more than a month, Wu Zetian said, "Since you changed your post, the chief electoral officer has been guilty of misconduct."

古文：或闻令史乃设斋自庆，此欲盛为贪恶耳。
现代文：有的人接受令史之职就设斋自庆，这是欲望太盛成为贪婪。
English: Some people accept the duty of making history and set up a feast for self-celebration, which is the desire to become greedy.

古文：今要卿复旧任。 
现代文：卿今要恢复旧职。 
English: Sir now wants to resume his old position.

古文：又除天官侍郎，赐杂彩七十段。
现代文：崔玄暐又任天官侍郎，并赏赐绸七十段。
English: Cui Xuanqian was also appointed as the official attendant of the emperor, and was rewarded with seventy pieces of silk.

古文：三年，拜鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，兼太子左庶子。
现代文：长安三年，崔玄暐拜鸾台侍郎，代理宰相，兼太子左庶子。
English: In the third year of Chang'an, Cui Xuanqin became the attendant of Xingtai, the acting prime minister, and the left illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：四年，迁凤阁侍郎，加银青光禄大夫，仍依旧知政事。
现代文：长安四年，迁任凤阁侍郎，加荣誉职银青光禄大夫，继续主持政事。
English: In the fourth year of Chang'an, he was transferred to the position of Fengge waiter, and was given the honorary title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, and continued to preside over political affairs.

古文：先是，来俊臣、周兴等诬陷良善，冀图爵赏，因缘籍没者数百家。
现代文：在此之前，来俊臣、周兴等诬陷善良人，达到自己升官封爵的目的，被诬陷而造成没收家中所有人财的达数百家。
English: Prior to this, there were hundreds of families who were falsely accused by Lai Junchen, Zhou Xing and others of framing good people to achieve their own promotion and knighthood, resulting in the confiscation of all the family's assets.

古文：玄暐固陈其枉状，则天乃感悟，咸从雪免。
现代文：崔玄暐坚持陈述他们的冤屈，武则天才感悟，才得到赦免。
English: Cui Xuanqin persisted in exposing their grievances, and Wu Zetian was so impressed that he was pardoned.

古文：则天季年，宋璟劾奏张昌宗谋为不轨，玄暐亦屡有谠言，则天乃令法司正断其罪。
现代文：武则天末年，宋王景检举张昌宗谋图不轨，崔玄暐也多次直言，武则天才令法司审理他们的罪行。
English: At the end of the Wu Zetian era, Song Wangjing accused Zhang Changzong of scheming, and Cui Xuanlian also spoke out many times. Wu Zetian ordered the legal department to investigate their crimes.

古文：玄暐弟升时为司刑少卿，又请置以大辟。
现代文：崔玄暐的弟弟崔升当时任司刑少卿，又请求判他们的重罪。
English: Cui Xuanlian's younger brother, Cui Sheng, who was a junior secretary of the Criminal Investigation Department at the time, also requested that they be convicted of a felony.

古文：其兄弟守正如此。
现代文：他们俩兄弟均如此坚守正道。
English: Both of them are so down to earth.

古文：是时，则天不豫，宰相不得召见者累月。
现代文：这时，武则天患病，宰相经常累月得不到召见。
English: At this time, Wu Zetian fell ill, and the prime minister often could not be summoned for months.

古文：及疾少间，玄暐奏言： 皇太子、相王仁明孝友，足可亲侍汤药。宫禁事重，伏愿不令异姓出入。 
现代文：等到病好，崔玄暐又奏道 ：皇太子、相王仁明孝友，完全可以亲侍汤药，宫禁很重要，愿不要让异姓出入。 
English: When he was well again, Cui Xuanqin recited, "The crown prince and Prince Consort Wang Jinming, you can serve the soup and medicine by yourself. The palace ban is very important. Please don't let anyone with a different surname enter and leave the palace."

古文：则天曰： 深领卿厚意。 
现代文：武则天说： 深领卿的厚意。 
English: Wu Zetian said, "I am deeply touched by your kindness.

古文：寻以预诛张易之功，擢拜中书令，封博陵郡公。
现代文：不久，因参与诛张易之兄弟有功，升任中书令，封博陵郡公。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Zhongshuling, the governor of Boling County, for his contribution to Zhang Yi's brothers.

古文：中宗将授方术人郑普思为秘书监，玄暐切谏，竟不纳。
现代文：中宗欲授方术之士郑普思为秘书监，崔玄暐恳切地提反对意见，但未被采纳。
English: Zheng Puxi, a scholar of the Chinese tradition who wanted to teach the art, was the secretary supervisor. Cui Xuanqian earnestly raised objections, but they were not accepted.

古文：寻进爵为王，赐实封四百户，检校益州大都督府长史，兼知都督事。
现代文：不久，晋爵为王，赐实封四百户，检校益州大都督府长史，兼管正都督事务。
English: Soon, Jinzhe became the king, bestowed real fiefs to four hundred households, inspected the history of the governor of Yizhou, and was also in charge of the governor's affairs.

古文：其后被累贬，授白州司马，在道病卒。
现代文：其后，多次被贬，授白州司马，在赴任途中死去。
English: After that, he was demoted many times and awarded the title of Baizhou Sima. He died on his way to the post.

古文：建中初，赠太子太师。
现代文：建中初年，赠太子太师。
English: In the first year of junior high school, he was given the title of crown prince.

古文：玄暐与弟升甚相友爱。诸子弟孤贫者，多躬自抚养教授，颇为当时所称。
现代文：崔玄暐与其弟崔升很是友爱，诸子弟孤贫的，大多亲自抚育教养，当时很为人赞扬。
English: Cui Xuanlian and his brother Cui Sheng were very friendly. Most of their children were orphans and poor, and Cui Xuanlian personally raised and educated them, which was highly praised at the time.

古文：升，官至尚书左丞。
现代文：崔升，官至尚书左丞。
English: Cui Sheng, official to Shang Shuxu Zuo.

古文：玄暐少时颇属诗赋，晚年以为非己所长，乃不复构思，唯笃志经籍，述作为事。所撰《行己要范》十卷、《友义传》十卷、《义士传》十五卷、训注《文馆辞林策》二十卷，并行于代。
现代文：崔玄暐少年时善于诗赋，晚年认为这不是自己专长，就不再写诗赋，一心一意读经籍，著述自己的看法，所撰写的书有《行己要范》十卷，《友义传》十卷，《义士传》十五卷，训注《文馆辞策》二十卷。
English: When he was young, Cui Xuanqian was good at poetry, but in his later years he thought that this was not his specialty, so he no longer wrote poetry. He devoted himself to reading scriptures and writing about his own views. The books he wrote include "Walking in the Right Way" ten volumes, "Friendship" ten volumes, "Friendship" fifteen volumes, and "Criticism" twenty volumes.

