古文：房陵王勇，字睍地伐，高祖长子也。
现代文：房陵王杨勇字睍地伐，是高祖的长子。
English: Fangling Wang Yangyong is the eldest son of Gao Zu.

古文：周世，以太祖军功封博平侯。
现代文：北周时，因为隋太祖的军功，被封为博平侯。
English: During the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was given the title of Bo Pinghou because of his military exploits.

古文：及高祖辅政，立为世子，拜大将军、左司卫，封长宁郡公。
现代文：到高祖辅佐北周朝政时，被立为世子，授为大将军、左司卫，封为长宁郡公。
English: When Gao Zu Fu, assistant to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, came to power, he was appointed as the heir, given the title of General, Zuo Siwei, and made the governor of Changning County.

古文：出为洛州总管、东京小冢宰，总统旧齐之地。
现代文：出任洛州总管、东京小冢宰，管辖过去齐国的领地。
English: He served as the governor of Lozhou and the governor of Tokyo, and governed the territory of what was formerly Qi Province.

古文：虽北夷猖獗，尝犯边烽，今城镇峻峙，所在严固，何待迁配，以致劳扰。
现代文：后来召回到京城，升为上柱国、大司马，兼任内史御正，京城禁卫军全归他统管。高祖得到皇位后，立为皇太子，国家的军务政事与尚书奏来关于死罪以下的事，都让杨勇参加决断。
English: Later, he was called back to Beijing and was promoted to Shangzhu Guo and Daishima, and concurrently served as Inner Historian. He was in overall charge of the Beijing Imperial Guard. After Emperor Gaozhu was enthroned, he was appointed crown prince. Yang Yong was allowed to participate in the decision-making of the country's military and political affairs, as well as matters concerning capital crimes.

古文：臣以庸虚，谬当储贰，寸诚管见，辄以尘闻。 
现代文：高祖因为崤山以东老百姓大多四处流动，派遣特使考察，又打算移民充实到北方边塞。
English: Gaozu, because most of the common people east of Lushan were moving around, sent a special envoy to investigate, and also planned to immigrate to the northern border.

古文：上览而嘉之，遂寝其事。
现代文：杨勇上书劝谏，高祖赞许他的建议，停止了移民这件事。
English: Yang Yong wrote to Gao Zu to persuade him, and Gao Zu approved his suggestion and stopped the immigration.

古文：是后时政不便，多所损益，上每纳之。
现代文：从此以后，朝政不顺遂，多有斟酌损益，高祖都采纳他的意见。
English: From then on, the government of the dynasty was not successful, and there were many losses and gains to be considered. Gao Zu adopted his opinion.

古文：上尝从容谓群臣曰： 前世皇王，溺于嬖幸，废立之所由生。
现代文：高祖曾对大臣们说： 前代君王，溺爱宠幸的人，废立太子之事从中产生。
English: Gaozu once said to his ministers: The previous monarch, who doted on his favorites, was the cause of the abdication of the crown prince.

古文：朕傍无姬侍，五子同母，可谓真兄弟也。
现代文：我别无侍妾，五个儿子为同一个母亲所生，可以说是真正的亲兄弟。
English: I have no concubine, five sons born of the same mother, can be said to be a true brother.

古文：岂若前代多诸内宠，孽子忿诤，为亡国之道邪！ 
现代文：哪像前代君王有众多宠爱的姬妾，生下的儿子你争我夺，这就是亡国的道路啊！ 
English: What if the previous monarch had many favorite concubines, and the sons he fathered were fought over by you and me? This is the road to ruin!

古文：勇颇好学，解属词赋，性宽仁和厚，率意任情，无矫饰之行。
现代文：杨勇十分好学，通达撰著词赋，生性宽厚仁慈，温和厚道，随意任性，没有矫揉造作的行为。
English: Yang Yong is quite fond of learning, can fill in words, has a generous and thick personality, is headstrong and natural, and never makes things up.

古文：引明克让、姚察、陆开明等为之宾友。
现代文：招引明克让、姚察、陆开明等人为朋友。
English: Ming Kejan, Yao Zha, Lu Kaiming and others are listed as friends.

古文：勇尝文饰蜀铠，上见而不悦，恐致奢侈之渐，因而诫之曰： 我闻天道无亲，唯德是与，历观前代帝王，未有奢华而得长久者。
现代文：杨勇曾经在蜀铠上雕饰花纹，高祖见了有些不高兴，怕他会渐渐地形成奢侈的习性，因而告诫他说： 我听说天道不唯亲，只给有德之君，纵观前代帝王，没有一个能靠奢侈豪华而得到天下长久的。
English: Yang Yong once carved and decorated patterns on the Shu Gong. Gao Zu was somewhat unhappy to see this, fearing that he would gradually form a habit of luxury, so he warned him: I heard that the heavenly way is not only for relatives, but also for virtuous princes. Looking at the previous emperors, no one can rely on luxury and get the world for a long time.

古文：汝当储后，若不上称天心，下合人意，何以承宗庙之重，居兆民之上？
现代文：你作为太子，如果不上遵从天意，下符合民心，凭什么承担统治国家的重任，位居百姓的上面？
English: As the crown prince, if you do not first obey the will of heaven, and secondly conform to the people's will, how can you assume the important task of ruling the country and rank higher than the people?

古文：吾昔日衣服，各留一物，时复看之，以自警戒。
现代文：我过去的衣服佩饰，各留存一件，时常看看，来自行警诫。
English: My past clothes and accessories, each of which I keep and look at from time to time, come from the practice of caution.

古文：今以刀子赐汝，宜识我心。 
现代文：今天我将腰刀给你，应该知道我的用心。 
English: Today I will give you the waist knife, you should know my intentions.

古文：其后经冬至，百官朝勇，勇张乐受贺。
现代文：后来，到了冬至，官员们都朝拜杨勇，杨勇让乐队奏乐来接见他们。
English: Later, at the winter solstice, officials paid homage to Yang Yong, who had an orchestra play music to welcome them.

古文：高祖知之，问朝臣曰： 近闻至节，内外百官相率朝东宫，是何礼也？ 
现代文：高祖知道后，问朝臣说： 近来听说冬至节那天，宫廷内外的大臣们相继到东宫朝拜，是什么礼节？ 
English: After learning this, Gaozu asked the courtier, "Recently, I heard that on the day of the winter solstice, ministers from both inside and outside the court came to the East Palace one after another to pay homage. What is the etiquette?

古文：皇太子虽居上嗣，义兼臣子，而诸方岳牧，正冬朝贺，任土作贡，别上东宫，事非典则，宜悉停断。 
现代文：太常少卿辛回答说： 在东宫敬贺，不能说是朝拜。 高祖说： 时令变化称贺，只须三五个上十个人，各人自愿去，为什么由有关部门邀集，一时都会聚一起，太子身穿礼服安排乐队接待他们？东宫这样做，实是违背礼制的。 
English: Too often, Shaoqing Xin replied, "Greeting at the East Palace cannot be said to be worship." Gaozu said, "As the season changes, it only takes three to ten people to congratulate, and each person goes voluntarily. Why are they invited by the relevant departments, and why do they all gather together at the same time? The crown prince wears a gown and arranges a band to receive them? The East Palace is actually violating the etiquette by doing this.

古文：自此恩宠始衰，渐生疑阻。
现代文：从此对杨勇宠爱开始衰减了，逐渐产生了隔阂。
English: From then on, Yang Yong's favor began to wane, gradually creating a rift.

古文：时高祖令选宗卫侍官，以入上台宿卫。
现代文：当时高祖下令选派同宗的侍卫官，到皇宫警卫。
English: At that time, Emperor Gaozhu ordered the selection of a bodyguard from the same clan to guard the imperial palace.

古文：高颎奏称，若尽取强者，恐东宫宿卫太劣。
现代文：高赹建议说，如果都选取强手，恐怕东宫的警卫就太差了。
English: Gao Yao suggested that if they all chose strong players, I'm afraid the guards at the East Palace would be too bad.

古文：高祖作色曰： 我有时行动，宿卫须得雄毅。
现代文：高祖变了脸色说： 我有时行动，警卫必须要雄健勇毅。
English: Gao Zu changed his face and said: I sometimes act, guards must be courageous.

古文：太子毓德东宫，左右何须强武？
现代文：太子在东宫修身养性，身边怎么会需要强手？
English: Prince De Bu Donggong, why do his subordinates need to be strong and valiant?

古文：此极敝法，甚非我意。如我商量，恆于交番之日，分向东宫上下，团伍不别，岂非好事？
现代文：这实在是陈旧的法度，不符合我的意思，如果让我裁决，固定轮流值班的日子，分派到东宫去，卫队组织不分开，难道不是好事？
English: This is really an old law and does not correspond to my intention. If I were to make a ruling, wouldn't it be a good thing to fix the days of rotating duty, assign to the East Palace, and not separate the guard organization?

古文：我熟见前代，公不须仍踵旧风。 
现代文：我清楚地知道前代的法规，你不必仍然沿袭旧的习俗。 
English: I'm very familiar with the ins and outs of previous systems, and you don't have to ask me to still do things the traditional way.

古文：盖疑高颎男尚勇女，形于此言，以防之也。
现代文：高祖怀疑高赹的儿子娶了杨勇的女儿，帮太子说话，有意味地说了这番话，来提防他。
English: Gaozhu suspected Gaozhang's son of marrying Yang Yong's daughter, and helped the prince to speak, meaningfully said these words to guard against him.

古文：勇多内宠，昭训云氏，尤称嬖幸，礼匹于嫡。
现代文：杨勇有很多宠幸的姬妾，其中昭训云氏尤受宠爱，所用礼节近于正妻。
English: Yang Yong had many favored concubines, among whom Shao Xunyun was especially favored, and the etiquette he used was close to that of his lawful wife.

古文：勇妃元氏无宠，尝遇心疾，二日而薨。
现代文：杨勇的妃子元氏不能得宠，犯了心痛病，病发两天就死了。
English: Yang Yong's concubine, Genji, could not be favored and fell ill with a heart ailment. She died two days after the onset of the illness.

古文：献皇后意有他故，甚责望勇。
现代文：文献皇后认为有别的缘故，狠狠地指责杨勇。
English: The queen had other ideas and scolded Yang Yongru.

古文：自是云昭训专擅内政，后弥不平，颇遣人伺察，求勇罪过。
现代文：后来云昭训专权太子内宫，皇后更加不满，派人暗地观察，查找杨勇的过错。
English: Later, the Empress was even more dissatisfied with Yun Zhaoxun's exclusive power over the inner palace of the crown prince, and sent someone to secretly observe and find Yang Yong's fault.

古文：晋王知之，弥自矫饰，姬妾但备员数，唯共萧妃居处。
现代文：晋王知道了这事，更加假装起来，姬妾不超过规定的数目，只同萧妃住在一起。
English: Jin Wang knew about this and pretended even more. He did not have more than the required number of concubines and only lived with Xiao Fei.

古文：皇后由是薄勇，愈称晋王德行。
现代文：皇后因此薄待杨勇，更加称赞晋王的德行。
English: As a result, the empress treated Yang Yong with disdain and praised Jin Wang's virtue even more.

古文：其后晋王来朝，车马侍从，皆为俭素，敬接朝臣，礼极卑屈，声名籍甚，冠于诸王。
现代文：后来晋王来朝见，所带车马侍从，都是很俭朴的，他礼貌地对待朝廷大臣，礼节甚是谦恭，因此名声很大，超过了其他王子。
English: Later, when the King of Jin came to see the emperor, the attendants he brought with him were all very frugal. He treated the ministers of the imperial court politely, and his etiquette was very courteous. As a result, he had a great reputation, surpassing other princes.

古文：临还扬州，入内辞皇后，因进言曰： 臣镇守有限，方违颜色，臣子之恋，实结于心。
现代文：等到要回扬州时，到内宫辞别皇后，进言说： 儿臣将镇守远方，要和您分别了，儿臣的依恋，实是凝结在心里。
English: When it was time to return to Yangzhou, he went to the Inner Palace to bid farewell to the empress, and said: My son will be away from home, and I want to separate from you. My son's attachment is really congealed in my heart.

古文：一辞阶闼，无由侍奉，拜见之期，杳然未日。 
现代文：这次一别京城，不能侍奉您了，再次拜见您，远得不知在什么时候。 
English: This time I am leaving the capital, I cannot serve you, I will see you again, I don't know when.

古文：因哽咽流涕，伏不能兴。
现代文：于是泣不成声，伏在地上不能起来。
English: As a result, she couldn't stop crying and lay on the ground unable to get up.

古文：皇后亦曰： 汝在方镇，我又年老，今者之别，有切常离。 
现代文：皇后也说： 你在地方驻守，我又年老了，今日一别如同永别。 
English: The Empress also said: "You are stationed in a place, I am old, and today's parting is like a farewell.

古文：又泫然泣下，相对歔欷。
现代文：也流下了眼泪，母子相对抽泣。
English: She also shed tears, while her mother and son sobbed.

古文：王曰： 臣性识愚下，常守平生昆弟之意，不知何罪，失爱东宫，恆蓄盛怒，欲加屠陷。
现代文：晋王说： 我见识愚蠢低下，常常遵从兄弟和睦的意图，不知犯了什么过失，我不为东宫喜爱，大哥长久地心存怒意，想要加以陷害。
English: Jin Wang said, "The subject was born with a foolish nature, he always kept the brotherly feeling throughout his life, I don't know for what crime, he offended the East Palace, he was always angry, and he wanted to kill and frame the subject.

古文：每恐谗谮生于投杼，鸩毒遇于杯勺，是用勤忧积念，惧履危亡。 
现代文：我常担心诽谤产生于投杼，毒酒来自于杯勺，因此忧虑紧张，害怕产生危险。 
English: I'm often afraid of gossip coming out of the mouths of my relatives, of poison being put into wine or food, so I'm very worried, I'm thinking about it in my heart, I'm worried about the fate of being endangered.

古文：皇后忿然曰： 睍地伐渐不可耐，我为伊索得元家女，望隆基业，竟不闻作夫妻，专宠阿云，使有如许豚犬。
现代文：皇后忿忿不平地说： 睍地伐逐渐地不能使人容忍了，我为他娶得元家的女子，希望兴隆基业，竟然与她没有正常的夫妻关系，一味地宠爱阿云，使元氏好像许配给猪狗一般。
English: The empress said angrily: "Gradually, people can no longer tolerate the bullying. I married the daughter of the Yuan family for him, hoping for the prosperity of the inheritance, but he did not have a normal husband and wife relationship with her, and he loved Ah Yun blindly, making the Yuan family look like a pig dog.

古文：前新妇本无病痛，忽尔暴亡，遣人投药，致此夭逝。
现代文：以前那媳妇本来没有疾病，突然死了，还不是派人投药，使她夭折了。
English: The former empress, who had not been ill before, died suddenly. It must have been the prince who poisoned her, causing her early death.

古文：事已如是，我亦不能穷治，何因复于汝处发如此意？
现代文：事情已经这样，我也无法追究，谁知道他又怎么会在你身上打这样的主意？
English: The way things are, I can't go after him. Who knows how he got the idea to do this to you?

古文：我在尚尔，我死后，当鱼肉汝乎？
现代文：我在尚且这样，我死后，怎么不会任意欺凌你呢？
English: If I am still like this, how can I not bully you at will after my death?

古文：每思东宫竟无正嫡，至尊千秋万岁之后，遣汝等兄弟向阿云兒前再拜问讯，此是几许大苦痛邪！ 
现代文：每当想到东宫没有正妻，父皇死后，要你们兄弟去向云氏的孩子叩拜询问，这该是多么大的痛苦啊！ 
English: Whenever I think of the fact that there is no lawful wife in the East Palace, and after the death of the father emperor, I want you brothers to go and ask Yun's children, how great the pain must be!

古文：晋王又拜，呜咽不能止，皇后亦悲不自胜。
现代文：晋王再一次叩拜，哭泣不止，皇后也一样地极度悲伤。
English: King Jin bowed again and wept more and more. The queen was also overcome with grief.

古文：此别之后，知皇后意移，始构夺宗之计。
现代文：这一次分别后，杨广知道皇后心思转移，开始谋划夺太子之位。
English: After this separation, Jin Wang, knowing that the Empress had changed her mind, began to plan to compete for the position of crown prince.

古文：因引张衡定策，遣褒公宇文述深交杨约，令喻旨于越国公素，具言皇后此语。
现代文：特邀引张衡出谋划策，派褒公宇文述与杨约结交为友，让他向越国公杨素说明打算，详细告诉了皇后说的话。
English: Zhang Heng was specially invited to come up with a plan. He sent Bao Gong Yu Wenshu to make friends with Yang You, and asked him to explain his plan to Yang Su, the Duke of Yue, and told him in detail what the Empress had said.

古文：素瞿然曰： 但不知皇后如何？
现代文：杨素惊异地说： 只是不知道皇后有什么打算？
English: Yang Su said in surprise, "I just don't know what will happen to the empress."

古文：必如所言，吾又何为者！ 
现代文：一定是像你们所说的，我又有什么理由不这么做。 
English: It must be like you said, I have no reason not to do it.

古文：后数日，素入侍宴，微称晋王孝悌恭俭，有类至尊，用此揣皇后意。
现代文：过了几天，杨素参加宴会，暗中夸奖晋王孝道节俭，近似于皇上，以此来揣度皇后的意图。
English: A few days later, Yang Su attended a banquet, secretly praising Jin Wang for his filial piety and frugality, similar to the emperor, in order to guess the queen's intention.

古文：皇后泣曰： 公言是也。
现代文：皇后哭着说： 您说得对。
English: The queen cried and said, "You are right.

古文：我兒大孝顺，每闻至尊及我遣内使到，必迎于境首。
现代文：我的孩子十分孝顺，每次听说皇上与我派的使臣到扬州，他必定到边境迎接。
English: Jin Wang is very filial, every time he hears that the emperor and I are sending an envoy to Yangzhou, he will certainly go to the state border to meet us.

古文：言及违离，未尝不泣。
现代文：话一说到分别，没有不哭泣的。
English: When it comes to parting, there is no way not to cry.

古文：又其新妇亦大可怜，我使婢去，常与之同寝共食。
现代文：他的新娘也很可爱，我派的婢女去了，时常与她们一起睡觉一同吃饭。
English: His bride was also lovely. I sent my maids to him, and he often slept and ate with them.

古文：岂若睍地伐共阿云相对而坐，终日酣宴，昵近小人，疑阻骨肉。
现代文：哪象睍地伐同云氏面对面地坐着，整天沉醉在宴席上，亲近小人，与父母兄弟过不去。
English: Which is like sitting face to face with Mr. Yun, drunk all day at the banquet, close to the villain, and can't get along with his parents and brothers.

古文：我所以益怜阿摐者，常恐暗地杀之。 
现代文：我之所以更加可怜阿，是因为时常担心他被暗杀了。 
English: I was all the more sorry because I often feared that he had been assassinated.

古文：素既知意，因盛言太子不才。
现代文：杨素既已明白了话意，于是极力贬斥太子没有才能。
English: Yang Su had already understood the meaning of the words, so he tried his best to disparage the crown prince's lack of talent.

古文：皇后遂遗素金，始有废立之意。
现代文：皇后便给了杨素金子，开始有了废杨勇立杨广的打算。
English: The empress presented Yang Su with money and began to have the intention of abolishing the position of crown prince.

古文：勇颇知其谋，忧惧，计无所出。
现代文：杨勇知道了他们的计谋，忧虑害怕，无法可想。
English: Yang Yong knew something about Jin Wang's stratagem, but he was worried and afraid, and had no countermeasures.

古文：闻新丰人王辅贤能占候，召而问之。
现代文：听说新丰人王辅贤能占卜吉凶，召到东宫问他。
English: I heard that Wang Fuxian, a person from Xinfeng, would come to inquire about astrology.

古文：辅贤曰： 白虹贯东宫门，太白袭月，皇太子废退之象也。 
现代文：王辅贤说： 长虹穿过东宫之门，太白金星侵袭月亮，这是皇太子要被废除的征兆啊。 
English: Wang Fuxian said: The long rainbow crossing the gate of the East Palace and the white Venus invading the moon are signs that the crown prince is about to be abolished.

古文：以铜铁五兵造诸厌胜。又于后园之内作庶人村，屋宇卑陋，太子时于中寝息，布衣草褥，冀以当之。
现代文：于是用铜铁五种兵器制作治服人的符象来挡灾，又在后园做了平民小村，房子简陋，太子时常在村中休息，穿粗布衣服，床垫蓬草，希望以此来避免灾祸。
English: So he used the five kinds of weapons of copper and iron to make symbols of subduing people to ward off disasters, and made a civilian village in the backyard. The house was simple, and the prince often rested in the village, wearing coarse cloth clothes and a mattress with fluffy grass, hoping to avoid disaster.

古文：高祖知其不安，在仁寿宫，使杨素观勇。
现代文：高祖知道杨勇很不安，在仁寿宫，派杨素去看杨勇。
English: Gao Zu knew that Yang Yong was very uneasy. At Renshou Palace, he sent Yang Su to see Yang Yong.

古文：素至东宫，偃息未入，勇束带待之，故久不进，以激怒勇。
现代文：杨素到了东宫，在外屋歇息不进杨勇里屋，杨勇系好腰带等待他，杨素有意长时间不进去，来激怒杨勇。
English: When Yang Su arrived at the East Palace, he rested in the outer room and did not enter Yang Yong's inner room. Yang Yong wore a good belt and waited for him. Yang Su deliberately did not go in for a long time to irritate Yang Yong.

古文：勇衔之，形于言色。
现代文：杨勇心中怨恨他，表现出不满。
English: Yang Yong resented him in his heart and showed his dissatisfaction.

古文：素还，言勇怨望，恐有他变，愿深防察。
现代文：杨素回到仁寿宫，说杨勇心怀不满，恐怕有反常行为，希望谨慎观察提防。
English: Yang Su returned to the Renshou Palace, saying that Yang Yong was dissatisfied, afraid of abnormal behavior, and hoped to cautiously observe and guard against.

古文：高祖闻素谮毁，甚疑之。
现代文：高祖听了杨素的谗言，非常怀疑。
English: Gaozu listened to Yang Su's criticism and was very skeptical.

古文：皇后又遣人伺觇东宫，纤介事皆闻奏，因加媒蘖，构成其罪。
现代文：皇后又派人观察东宫，细小的事情都能听到汇报，夸大事实，无中生有，构成杨勇的罪过。
English: The empress also sent someone to secretly go to the East Palace to observe, and all matters large and small were to be reported, so as to frame and frame the crime.

古文：高祖惑于邪议，遂疏忌勇。乃于玄武门达至德门量置候人，以伺动静，皆随事奏闻。
现代文：高祖为奸邪的言论所迷惑，于是疏远猜忌杨勇，便在玄武门到至德门的路上安排人，来观察动静，什么事都要随时报告。
English: Gaozu was confused by the words of treachery, so he distanced himself from Yang Yong and arranged people on the road from Xuanwumen to Demen to observe the movement and report anything at any time.

古文：又东宫宿卫之人，侍官已上，名藉悉令属诸卫府，有健兒者，咸屏去之。
现代文：东宫警卫，侍卫官以上的，名册都归属侍卫府管，有强健的人，都被调走了。
English: The East Palace guards, above the rank of bodyguard, all belong to the bodyguard administration, and those who are strong have been transferred.

古文：晋王又令段达私于东宫幸臣姬威，遗以财货，令取太子消息，密告杨素。
现代文：晋王又派段达暗暗地在东宫结交杨勇的亲信姬威，给他财物，让他取得太子的消息，秘密告诉杨素。
English: Jin Wang also sent Duan Da to secretly make friends with Yang Yong's close confidant Ji Wei in the East Palace, give him property, let him get the news of the prince, and secretly tell Yang Su.

古文：于是内外喧谤，过失日闻。
现代文：于是宫廷内外责难杨勇，过失天天可以听到。
English: As a result, Yang Yong was criticized both inside and outside the court, and the fault can be heard every day.

古文：段达胁姬威曰： 东宫罪过，主上皆知之矣，已奉密诏，定当废立。
现代文：段达威胁姬威说： 东宫的罪过，皇上都知道了，我已接到秘密的诏书，决定废弃太子。
English: Duanda threatened Jiwei, saying, "The sins of the Eastern Palace are known to the emperor. I have received a secret edict and have decided to abandon the crown prince.

古文：君能靠之，则大富贵。 
现代文：你能告诉情况，就可以取得大富贵。 
English: If you can tell the situation, you can get very rich.

古文：威遂许诺。
现代文：姬威于是答应了。
English: Jiwei agreed.

古文：九月壬子，车驾至自仁寿宫，翌日，御大兴殿，谓侍臣曰： 我新还京师，应开怀欢乐，不知何意，翻邑然愁苦？ 
现代文：九月二十六日，高祖从仁寿宫回到皇宫，第二天，到大兴殿，对侍臣们说： 我刚到京城，应当尽情欢乐，不知什么原因，反而愁闷？ 
English: On September 26th, Gao Zu returned to the Imperial Palace from Renshou Palace. The next day, he went to Daxing Palace and said to his courtiers: "I just arrived in Beijing. I should be happy. I don't know why, but I'm sad."

古文：吏部尚书牛弘对曰： 由臣等不称职，故至尊忧劳。 
现代文：吏部尚书牛弘回答说： 因为我们不称职，所以使皇上忧闷。 
English: The clerk, Shoshu Niuhiro, replied, "Because the vassals are incompetent, let the emperor worry about his work."

古文：高祖既数闻谗谮，疑朝臣皆具委，故有斯问，冀闻太子之愆。
现代文：高祖已经多次听到谗言，怀疑朝廷大臣都知道原因，因此有意这样问，希望听到关于太子的罪过。
English: Gaozu had heard the criticism many times, and suspected that the ministers of the imperial court knew the reason, so he deliberately asked this question, hoping to hear about the prince's crime.

古文：弘为此对，大乖本旨。
现代文：牛弘这样回答，违背了高祖问话的用意。
English: Ushihiro's answer violated Gao Zu's intention to ask questions.

古文：高祖因作色谓东宫官属曰： 仁寿宫去此不远，而令我每还京师，严备仗卫，如入敌国。
现代文：高祖因此改变了脸色，对东宫的臣僚们说： 仁寿宫离这里不远，但是我每次回到京城，警卫森严，好像到了敌国一样。
English: Gaozu's face changed as a result, and he said to the ministers of the East Palace, "Renju Palace is not far from here, but every time I return to the capital, the guards are strict, as if I were in an enemy country.

古文：我为患利，不脱衣卧。
现代文：我因此非常担心，不敢脱衣睡觉。
English: I'm bedridden with dysentery, so I can't undress.

古文：昨夜欲得近厕，故在后房，恐有警急，还移就前殿。岂非尔辈欲坏我国家邪？ 
现代文：昨天夜里要上厕所，原先住在后房，担心有意外，回来后又转移到前殿，难道不是你们要毁坏我的国家吗？ 
English: Last night I had to go to the toilet, I was living in the back room, I was worried about an accident, I came back and moved to the front hall, aren't you going to destroy my country?

古文：于是执唐令则等数人，付所司讯鞫。
现代文：于是拘捕唐令则等人，交给主管部门审讯。
English: As a result, Tang Lingzi and others were arrested and handed over to the competent authorities for interrogation.

古文：令杨素陈东宫事状，以告近臣。
现代文：命令杨素陈述杨勇的罪状，告知身边的大臣们。
English: He ordered Yang Su to report Donggong's crime and inform his close vassals.

古文：素显言之曰： 臣奉敕向京，令皇太子检校刘居士余党。
现代文：杨素宣布说： 我奉皇上的命令到京城，命令皇太子查核刘居士的余党。
English: Yang Su announced, "I have come to Beijing on the emperor's orders to order the crown prince to investigate Liu Kuxi's remaining followers.

古文：太子奉诏，乃作色奋厉，骨肉飞腾，语臣云： 居士党尽伏法，遣我何处穷讨？
现代文：太子奉旨，便声色俱厉，连骨肉也好像抖动起来，对我说： 刘居士党羽已全都处置，你要我还到哪里去找？
English: Upon receiving the order, the crown prince became very angry, and even his bones and flesh seemed to tremble. He said to me: Liu Kuishi has disposed of all his followers. Where do you want me to go?

古文：尔作右仆射，委寄不轻，自检校之，何关我事？ 
现代文：你作为右仆射，受权不小，自己查处他们，与我有什么相干？ 
English: What does it have to do with me that you, as my right-hand man, have been given considerable authority to investigate and deal with them yourself?

古文：又云： 若大事不遂，我先被诛。
现代文：又说： 如果大事不成功，我就要首先被杀。
English: He also said: "If things don't work out, I'll be the first to be killed."

古文：今作天子，竟乃令我不如诸弟。
现代文：如今作为天子，竟然使我不如几个弟弟。
English: Now, as the son of heaven, I am not even as good as a few younger brothers.

古文：一事以上，不得自由。 
现代文：没有一件事，能够自由办理的。 
English: There is not a single thing that can be done freely.

古文：因长叹回视云： 我大觉身妨。  
现代文：因而长声叹息还顾左右说： 我特别地感觉到受到妨碍。  
English: He sighed and said, "I don't feel very free."

古文：高祖曰： 此兒不堪承嗣久矣。
现代文：高祖说：这个孩子早就不能继承皇位了。
English: Gaozu said, "This child can no longer succeed to the throne.

古文：皇后恆劝我废之，我以布素时生，复是长子，望其渐改，隐忍至今。
现代文：皇后常劝我废除他，我因为贫困时生的他，又是长子，希望他慢慢地改正，忍耐到今天。
English: The Empress often advised me to get rid of him. I did it because he was born in poverty and was the eldest son. I hoped that he would slowly reform and be patient to this day.

古文：勇昔从南兗州来，语卫王云： 阿娘不与我一好妇女，亦是可恨。 
现代文：杨勇过去从南兖州来，对卫王说： 娘不给我选配一个好女人，很遗憾。 
English: Yang Yong used to come from Nanluozhou and said to Wei Wang, "It's a pity that my daughter didn't choose a good woman for me.

古文：因指皇后侍兒曰： 是皆我物。 
现代文：还指着皇后的侍女们说： 这将来都是我的。 
English: He also pointed to the queen's maids of honour and said: "This will all be mine in the future."

古文：此言几许异事。
现代文：这话多么荒唐。
English: What a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：其妇初亡，即以斗帐安余老妪。新妇初亡，我深疑使马嗣明药杀。
现代文：他的前妻刚死，就用很小的帐子安置剩余的年老妇人，新娘子刚死，我很怀疑是他派马嗣明用毒药杀的。
English: His ex-wife had just died, so he used a very small tablecloth to accommodate the remaining old woman. The bride had just died, and I very much doubt that he sent Masitsugu to kill her with poison.

古文：我曾责之，便怼曰： 会杀元孝矩。 
现代文：我曾责问他，他便忿恨地说： 有机会杀了元孝矩。 
English: When I questioned him, he said angrily, "I had the opportunity to kill Mototaka Takanori."

古文：此欲害我而迁怒耳。
现代文：这是要杀害我而迁怒他人罢了。
English: This is an attempt to harm me and anger Genko Takanori.

古文：初，长宁诞育，朕与皇后共抱养之，自怀彼此，连遣来索。
现代文：起初，长孙长宁王生后，我同皇后一同抱养他，杨勇自己心存芥蒂，连续派人来要回去。
English: At first, Changning Wang was born, and I held him together with the empress. Ever since there was a rift between us, I sent someone to claim him.

古文：且云定兴女，在外私合而生，想此由来，何必是其体胤！
现代文：况且云定兴的女儿，是他在外与人姘居而生，想想这一由来，凭什么一定是他的亲生儿子？
English: Moreover, Yun Dingxing's daughter was born out of wedlock. Considering her background, how can it be said that she must be his child?

古文：昔晋太子取屠家女，其兒即好屠割。
现代文：过去晋国太子娶了屠岸沽的女子，孩子们也就喜欢宰杀。
English: In the past, if the crown prince married the daughter of a butcher, his son would be slaughtered.

古文：今傥非类，便乱宗社。
现代文：如今倘若是非正派的人，就会乱我国家。
English: Right now, if it's not the right people, it's going to mess up our country.

古文：又刘金驎谄佞人也，呼定兴作亲家翁，定兴愚人，受其此语。
现代文：还有刘金马，奸佞的小人，叫云定兴是亲家，定兴是愚蠢之人，接受了他的要求。
English: There is also Liu Jinma, the villain of the villain, called Yun Dingxing is a relative, Dingxing is a stupid person, accepted his request.

古文：我前解金驎者，为其此事。
现代文：我前些时候罢除刘金马，也就是这个缘故。
English: It was because of this that I relieved Liu Jin of his duties.

古文：勇尝引曹妙达共定兴女同燕，妙达在外说云： 我今得劝妃酒。 
现代文：杨勇曾经邀约曹妙达与云定兴的女儿一起宴会，妙达在外面对人说： 我今天得以劝太子妃饮酒。 
English: Yang Yong once invited Cao Myaoda to a banquet with the daughter of Yun Dingxing. Myaoda said to the outside world: Today I was able to persuade the princess to drink alcohol.

古文：直以其诸子偏庶，畏人不服，故逆纵之，欲收天下之望耳。
现代文：只因他的儿子都是偏房所生，害怕别人不服，因此纵容他们，想得到天下人的拥护罢了。
English: Only because his sons were all born in the wrong house, he was afraid that others would disapprove, so he indulged them and wanted to get the support of the world.

古文：我虽德惭尧、舜，终不以万姓付不肖子也。
现代文：我虽然德操不及尧、舜，到底不能把天下百姓交给品行不好的孩子。
English: Although I am not good at morality, I cannot hand over the people of the world to a child with a bad character.

古文：我恆畏其加害，如防大敌，今欲废之，以安天下。 
现代文：我时常害怕他加害于我，如防范大敌，今天决意废除他，来安定天下。
English: I have often feared him to my detriment, as if guarding against a great enemy, and today I am determined to abolish him in order to bring stability to the world.

古文：左卫大将军、五原公元旻谏曰： 废立大事，天子无二言，诏旨若行，后悔无及。
现代文：左卫大将军、五原公元进谏说： 废立是大事，天子说话不能更改，圣旨一下，后悔就来不及了。
English: General Zuo Wei and Emperor Wuzhong of the Five Dynasties said: Abolishing the emperor is a big deal. The emperor's words cannot be changed. Once the emperor makes a decision, it is too late to regret it.

古文：谗言罔极，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：诬陷的话是没有准则的，希望陛下明察。 
English: There is no end to the criticism, and I hope His Majesty will take a closer look.

古文：旻辞直争强，声色俱厉，上不答。
现代文：元言辞正直，据理力争，声色俱厉，皇上没有答理他。
English: His words were honest, reasoned, and forceful, but the Emperor did not answer him.

古文：是时姬威又抗表告太子非法。
现代文：这时姬威又上书状告太子违法。
English: At this time, Jiwei also filed a petition to sue the crown prince for violating the law.

古文：高祖谓威曰： 太子事迹，宜皆尽言。 
现代文：高祖对姬威说： 太子所做的事，应该都说出来。 
English: Gaozu said to Jiwei, "You should tell everyone what the prince has done.

古文：威对曰： 皇太子由来共臣语，唯意在骄奢，欲得从樊川以至于散关，总规为苑。
现代文：姬威回答说： 皇太子多次对我说，他只想骄横奢侈，想要从焚川到散关，一并规定为游苑。
English: Jiwei replied, "The crown prince has told me many times that he only wants to be arrogant and extravagant, and he wants to make the whole area from Tuichuan to Sankuan into a pleasure garden.

古文：兼云： 昔汉武帝将起上林苑，东方朔谏之，赐朔黄金百斤，几许可笑。
现代文：还说： 从前汉武帝准备建造上林苑，东方朔规劝他，赏给东方朔百斤黄金，多么可笑。
English: He also said: Once upon a time, Emperor Wudi of the Han Dynasty was preparing to build Shanglinyuan. Dongfang Shuo advised him and rewarded Dongfang Shuo with 100 catty of gold. How ridiculous.

古文：我实无金辄赐此等。
现代文：我实是没有黄金赏赐给你们的。
English: I really don't have any gold to give these people.

古文：若有谏者，正当斩之，不过杀百许人，自然永息。 
现代文：如果有规谏的人，就该被斩除，不过杀死百把人，自然而然就永远平息了。 
English: If there are any who resist, they should be killed, but if only a hundred are killed, the situation will calm down naturally.

古文：前苏孝慈解左卫率，皇太子奋髯扬肘曰： 大丈夫会当有一日，终不忘之，决当快意。 
现代文：前不久苏孝慈被解除左卫率，太子扬起胡须挥舞手臂说： 大丈夫总会有一天的，决不会忘记他，一定会使我称心如意的。 
English: Not long ago, Su Xiaoqi was relieved of the left guard, and the prince raised his beard and waved his arm, saying: "There will always be a day when I will be fine, I will never forget him, and I will definitely be satisfied.

古文：又宫内所须，尚书多执法不与，便怒曰： 仆射以下，吾会戮一二人，使知慢我之祸。 
现代文：还有，宫内所要的东西，尚书大都依照规定不给他，他便发怒说： 仆射以下的官员，我要杀他一两人，使人们都知道怠慢我的灾祸。 
English: Furthermore, most of the things that Shang Shu wanted from the palace were not given to him in accordance with the regulations, and he became angry and said: "Officials below the rank of lieutenant, I will kill one or two of them so that people will know the evil of neglecting me."

古文：又于苑内筑一小城，春夏秋冬，作役不辍，营起亭殿，朝造夕改。
现代文：他又在花苑内建一个小城，一年四季，建城的劳役不能停歇，建起的亭殿，早上建造晚上又改了。
English: He also built a small city in the flower garden. Throughout the year, the labor of building the city could not be stopped. The pavilion that was built in the morning was rebuilt in the evening.

古文：每云： 至尊嗔我多侧庶，高纬、陈叔宝岂是孽子乎？ 
现代文：常常说： 皇上责怪我有很多偏房，高纬、陈叔宝就一定是孽子吗？ 
English: He often said, "The emperor has many concubines, Gao Wei and Chen Shubao. Are these princes of a ruined country illegitimate?"

古文：尝令师姥卜吉凶，语臣曰： 至尊忌在十八年，此期促矣。  
现代文：曾经让年老的巫婆占卜吉凶，对我说： 皇上禁忌是十八年，这个期限已经快到了。  
English: He once ordered a fortuneteller to tell fortunes, and said to his vassal: The emperor's death anniversary is in eighteen years, and this date is approaching.

古文：高祖泫然曰： 谁非父母生，乃至于此！
现代文：高祖老泪纵横地说： 谁不是父母所生，竟是这样可恶。
English: Gao Zu said with tears streaming down his face, "Whoever is not born of parents is so abominable.

古文：我有旧使妇女，令看东宫，奏我云： 勿令广平王至皇太子处。东宫憎妇，亦广平教之。 
现代文：我有过去的一名老侍女，派她探访东宫时，对我说： 不要让广平王到皇太子居处，东宫憎恨我，是广平王教他这样的。 
English: I had an old lady-in-waiting in the past who, when I sent her to visit the East Palace, said to me, "Don't let Guangping Wang come to the crown prince's residence. The East Palace hates me. It was Guangping Wang who taught him this."

古文：元赞亦知其阴恶，劝我于左藏之东，加置两队。
现代文：元赞也知道太子的阴险，劝我在左边府库之东，增派两个卫队。
English: Yuan Zang also knew the prince's insidiousness, and advised me to send two more guards to the left, east of the government treasury.

古文：初平陈后，宫人好者悉配春坊，如闻不知厌足，于外更有求访。
现代文：当初平定陈国后，宫女容貌美的都安排到了太子宫，但是听说他不知满足，在外面还在访求寻找。
English: At first, after Ping Chen's reign, all the beautiful courtiers were assigned to the prince's uterus. It was said that he was still unsatisfied, and went outside to visit the beautiful women.

古文：朕近览《齐书》，见高欢纵其兒子，不胜忿愤，安可效尤邪！ 
现代文：我近来读《齐书》，看到高欢放纵自己的儿子，非常气愤，怎么可以效仿他的坏作法！ 
English: I recently read "Qi Shu" and was very angry to see Gao Huan indulge his son. How could I follow his bad practice!

古文：于是勇及诸子皆被禁锢，部分收其党与。
现代文：于是杨勇和他的孩子都被监禁起来，部分地逮捕了他的党羽。
English: As a result, Yong and his sons were all imprisoned, and party members also arrested some of them.

古文：杨素舞文巧诋，锻炼以成其狱。
现代文：杨素玩弄文辞，奸巧地诽谤，罗织罪状构成冤狱。
English: Yang Su-mai's literary manipulation, clever words and slander, and fabrication of charges to constitute the crime of imprisonment.

古文：勇由是遂败。
现代文：杨勇因此失败了。
English: As a result, Yang Yong was defeated.

古文：居数日，有司承素意，奏言左卫元旻身备宿卫，常曲事于勇，情存附托，在仁寿宫，裴弘将勇书于朝堂与旻，题封云勿令人见。
现代文：过了几天，有关部门按照杨素的意图，向高祖上书说左卫官元身为皇官侍卫，经常暗地里侍奉杨勇，感情深厚，暗自有托付。在仁寿宫，裴弘将杨勇的书信在朝廷上给元，封信处写有 勿令人见 的字。
English: A few days later, the relevant departments, in accordance with Yang Su's intention, wrote to Gao Zu that the left guard was originally an imperial bodyguard, often secretly served Yang Yong, had deep feelings, and secretly entrusted. At Renshou Palace, Pei Hong gave Yang Yong's letter to Yuan in the imperial court, and the letter office was written with the word "not to be seen."

古文：高祖曰： 朕在仁寿宫，有纤小事，东宫必知，疾于驿马。怪之甚久，岂非此徒耶？ 
现代文：高祖说： 我在仁寿宫，连细小的事东宫也一定知道，比驿马传得还快，我觉得奇怪已经很久了，莫非就是这个家伙作祟？ 
English: Gao Zu said: I'm in the Renshou Palace, even small things must be known to the East Palace, it's faster than a horse. I think it's been strange for a long time. Could it be that this guy is the culprit?

古文：遣武士执旻及弘付法治其罪。
现代文：命令武士拘捕元和裴弘，交给执法部门治罪。
English: He ordered the samurai to arrest Yuan and Pei Hong and hand them over to the law enforcement department for prosecution.

古文：先是，勇尝从仁寿宫参起居还，途中见一枯槐，根干蟠错，大且五六围，顾左右曰： 此堪作何器用？ 
现代文：在这以前，杨勇曾经到仁寿宫参见请安后回来，路上看见一棵枯槐，根节交结盘错，高大而且粗得五六个人才能合抱，他环顾侍从说： 这树能做什么器具用？ 
English: Prior to this, Yang Yong had gone to Renshou Palace to see the emperor and came back. On the way, he saw a withered oak tree. The roots and knots were intertwined, and it was so tall and thick that only five or six people could hold it. He looked around at the attendants and said, "What kind of tools can this tree be used for?"

古文：或对曰： 古槐尤堪取火。 
现代文：有人回答说： 古槐树尤其能够取火。 
English: Someone replied: "Ancient jars are particularly suitable for lighting fires."

古文：于时卫士皆佩火燧，勇因令匠者造数千枚，欲以分赐左右。
现代文：当时卫士都佩带火燧，杨勇于是令工匠做了几千枚，准备赐给身边的卫士侍从。
English: At that time, the guards all wore fire mirrors, so Yang Yong ordered craftsmen to make thousands of fire mirrors and prepare to distribute them to his men.

古文：至是，获于库。
现代文：到这时，都放在仓库里。
English: To date, all have been seized from warehouses.

古文：又药藏局贮艾数斛，亦搜得之。
现代文：另外，专门收藏医药的部门贮存几斛艾草，也搜寻得到了。
English: In addition, the Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Agency's stockpile of aconite was also searched.

古文：大将为怪，以问姬威。
现代文：司法部门觉得奇怪，就来问姬威。
English: The judicial department thought it was strange and came to ask Ji Wei.

古文：威曰： 太子此意别有所在。
现代文：姬威说： 太子要这些东西是别有用心的。
English: Ji Wei said: The prince wants these things for ulterior motives.

古文：比令长宁王已下，诣仁寿宫还，每尝急行，一宿便至。
现代文：接连地派长宁王以下的人，拜谒仁寿宫后回来，每次行动迅速，一夜就到了。
English: He successively sent people below the rank of Channing Wang to come back after visiting the Jinshou Palace, and each time they acted quickly and arrived overnight.

古文：恆饲马千匹，云径往捉城门，自然饿死。 
现代文：平常喂养千匹马，说抄近路到城门捉捕，自然要饿死。 
English: He had been raising thousands of horses, and said that he would rush directly to the Renshou Palace, close the gates, and the people inside would naturally starve to death.

古文：素以威言诘勇，勇不服曰： 窃闻公家马数万匹，勇忝备位太子，有马千匹，乃是反乎？ 
现代文：杨素拿姬威的话质问杨勇，杨勇不服说： 我听说你家就有数万匹马，我好歹也是太子，养马一千匹，这难道是谋反吗？ 
English: Yang Su Su took these words from Ji Wei and interrogated Yang Yong. Yang Yong was not convinced and said: I have heard privately that your family has tens of thousands of horses, I am a prince and have thousands of horses, is it necessary to rebel?

古文：素又发泄东宫服玩，似加周饰者，悉陈之于庭，以示文武群官，为太子之罪。
现代文：杨素又找来东宫的穿用和玩赏的物品，好像加以雕刻和装饰的，都陈放在大庭里，展示给文武百官，作为太子的罪证。
English: Yang Su also found items that were worn and played with in the East Palace, as if they were carved and decorated. They were all placed in the courtyard and displayed to the civil and military officials as evidence of the prince's guilt.

古文：高祖遣将诸物示勇，以诮诘之。
现代文：高祖派人将这些东西拿给杨勇看，以此来诘难他。
English: Gao Zu sent someone to show these things to Yang Yong, in order to embarrass him.

古文：皇后又责之罪。
现代文：皇后也斥责杨勇的罪过。
English: The empress also reproached Yang Yong for his sins.

古文：高祖使使责问勇，勇不服。
现代文：高祖派使者责问杨勇，杨勇不服。
English: Gao Zu sent an envoy to question Yang Yong, but Yang Yong was not convinced.

古文：太史令袁充进曰： 臣观天文，皇太子当废。 
现代文：太史令袁充向高祖进言说： 我观察天象，皇太子应当废除了。 
English: Emperor Taishi ordered Yuancheng to give the following advice: "Vassal, look at the celestial elephant. The crown prince should be abolished."

古文：于是集群官于广阳门外，宣诏以戮之。
现代文：高祖说： 天象早就显示出来了，只是大臣们没有敢说话的罢了。 于是派使臣召见杨勇。杨勇见了使臣，惊恐地说： 莫非要杀我了？ 
English: Gao Zu said: The celestial phenomenon had already appeared, but the ministers did not dare to speak. So he sent envoys to summon Yang Yong. Yang Yong saw the envoys and said in horror: Are they going to kill me?

古文：广平王雄答诏曰： 至尊为百姓割骨肉之恩，废黜无德，实为大庆，天下幸甚！ 乃移勇于内史省，立晋王广为皇太子，仍以勇付之，复囚于东宫。
现代文：高祖着戎装，布卫兵，到武德殿，召集百官，让他们站在东面，各位亲王站在西面，让杨勇和他的几个孩子依次站在殿堂中间，命令薛道衡宣读废除杨勇的诏书。将杨勇移交给内史省，立晋王杨广为皇太子，将杨勇交给他，便又囚禁杨勇于东宫内。
English: Gao Zu dressed in military attire, clothed guards, went to the Wude Hall, gathered hundreds of officials, let them stand on the east side, the princes stood on the west side, let Yang Yong and several of his children stand in the middle of the hall, ordered Xue Daoheng to read out the decree to abolish Yang Yong. Yang Yong was handed over to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Yang Guang, the King of Jin, was made crown prince, Yang Yong was handed over to him, and Yang Yong was imprisoned in the East Palace.

古文：赐杨素物三千段，元胄、杨约并千段，杨难敌五百段，皆鞫勇之功赏也。
现代文：赏赐给杨素布三千匹，元胄、杨约二人各一千匹，杨难敌五百缎，都是有审查杨勇的功劳而获得的奖赏。
English: Yang Suxin was awarded 3,000 dan, Yuan Qi and Yang Jiao each received 1,000 dan, and Yang Nanyuan received 500 dan. They were rewarded for their merits in interrogating Yang Yong.

古文：时文林郎杨孝政上书谏曰： 皇太子为小人所误，宜加训诲，不宜废黜。 
现代文：当时文林郎杨孝政上书劝说道： 皇太子是被小人害成这样的，应该给以教诲，不应该罢免废除。 
English: At that time, Wenlin's son, Yang Xiaozheng, sent a letter to persuade him, saying: The crown prince was harmed by villains, and should be given a lesson, and should not be dismissed and abolished.

古文：上怒，挞其胸。
现代文：高祖很气愤，鞭挞了他的胸部。
English: In anger, Emperor Wen lashed Yang Xiaozheng's chest with a whip.

古文：寻而贝州长史裴肃表称： 庶人罪黜已久，当克己自新，请封一小国。 
现代文：不久贝州长史裴肃上表说： 杨勇因罪被罢除很久了，应该让他改过自新，请封给他一个小国。 
English: Not long after, Bei governor Shi Pei Su said on the table: Yang Yong has been ousted for a long time for his crime, he should be reformed, please give him a small country.

古文：高祖知勇之黜也，不允天下之情，乃征肃入朝，具陈废立之意。
现代文：高祖意识到杨勇被废，不能使人们在情理上理解，便召裴肃进入朝廷，详细陈述了废立的缘由。
English: Gaozu realized that Yang Yong was abolished and could not make people understand it rationally, so he called Pei Su to enter the imperial court and explained in detail the reason for the abolition.

古文：时勇自以废非其罪，频请见上，面申冤屈。
现代文：杨勇自以为没有被废除的那些罪名，多次要求进见皇上，当面申诉冤曲。
English: At that time, Yang Yong believed that his innocence had been nullified, and he frequently requested to meet the emperor to complain about his grievances in person.

古文：而皇太子遏之，不得闻奏。
现代文：但新太子阻止他，不能使他当面奏说。
English: But the new crown prince prevented him from saying so in person.

古文：勇于是升树大叫，声闻于上，冀得引见。
现代文：杨勇于是爬在树上大声叫唤，希望皇上听到，得以召见。
English: Yang Yong then climbed up the tree and shouted loudly, hoping that the emperor would hear and be summoned.

古文：素因奏言： 勇情志昏乱，为癫鬼所著，不可复收。 
现代文：杨素对皇上说： 杨勇已神志昏乱，鬼魅附身，不能再接纳。 
English: Yang Su said to the emperor: Yang Yong has lost his sanity, is possessed by ghosts, and can no longer be accepted.

古文：上以为然，卒不得见。
现代文：高祖认为他说的对，到底没有见面。
English: Gaozu thought he was right, but they never met.

古文：素诬陷经营，构成其罪，类皆如此。
现代文：杨素诬陷人，耍弄计谋，来构成他人的罪过，都是这样。
English: This is how Yang Su frames people and plays tricks to frame others.

古文：杨素进曰： 伏愿圣心同于螫手，不宜复留意。 
现代文：高祖在仁寿宫病重卧床，叫太子杨广入宫服侍，而杨广却任意淫乱宫闱，事情传到高祖那里，高祖支撑在床上说： 错废了我的勇儿！ 
English: Gao Zu was seriously ill in bed at Renshou Palace, and asked Prince Yang Guang to enter the palace to serve, but Yang Guang arbitrarily fornicated with the concubine. The matter was passed on to Gao Zu, who was propped up in bed and said, "My brave son made a mistake!

古文：炀帝践极，俨常从行，卒于道，实鸩之也。
现代文：因此派人去找杨勇，还没来得及派使臣，高祖就突然死了，杨广隐瞒着不发丧。
English: Therefore, they sent someone to find Yang Yong, but before they could send an envoy, Gaozu suddenly died, and Yang Guang concealed his grief.

古文：诸弟分徙岭外，仍敕在所皆杀焉。
现代文：立即拘捕柳述、元岩，关进大理监狱，伪造高祖诏书，命令将杨勇处死。
English: He immediately arrested Liu Shu and Yuan Yan, put them in Dali Prison, forged the Emperor Gaozhu's edict, and ordered Yang Yong to be put to death.

古文：秦孝王俊，字阿祗，高祖第三子也。
现代文：追封杨勇为房陵王。秦孝王杨俊，字阿祗，高祖第三子。
English: Yang Yong, the third son of Emperor Gaozu, was named the Funeral King. Yang Jun, the third son of Emperor Qin, was named the Grandmother.

古文：开皇元年立为秦王。
现代文：开皇元年立为秦王。
English: He was crowned King of Qin in the first year of his reign.

古文：二年春，拜上柱国、河南道行台尚书令、洛州刺史，时年十二。
现代文：开皇二年春，授上柱国、河南道行台尚书令、洛州刺史，时年十二岁。
English: In the spring of the second year of the emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo, the title of Yangdai Shangshuling of Henan Province, and the title of Lozhou Shishi, at the age of twelve.

古文：加右武卫大将军，领关东兵。
现代文：加授右武卫大将军，统领关东部队。
English: He was also given the additional post of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, commanding the soldiers of Guandong Province.

古文：三年，迁秦州总管。陇右诸州尽隶焉。
现代文：开皇三年，升任秦州总管，陇右的各州郡，都归他管。
English: In the third year of the emperor's reign, he was promoted to the general manager of Qin State, and all the states and counties to his right were under his management.

古文：俊仁恕慈爱，崇敬佛道，请为沙门，上不许。
现代文：杨俊仁恕慈爱，崇敬佛教，请求当和尚，皇上不同意。
English: Yang Jun was kind and compassionate, revered Buddhism, and asked to become a monk, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：六年，迁山南道行台尚书令。
现代文：开皇六年，调任山南道行台尚书令。
English: Six years later, he was reappointed as the Shandong Provincial Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：伐陈之役，以为山南道行军元帅，督三十总管，水陆十余万，屯汉口，为上流节度。
现代文：在伐陈战争中，以他为山南道行军元帅，督管三十个总管，水军陆军共十几万人马，驻扎在汉口，为长江上游的主帅。
English: In the logging war, he was the marshal of the march of Shannan Road, the supervisor of thirty general managers, a total of more than one hundred thousand people in the navy and army, stationed in Hankou, and the commander of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：陈将周罗、荀法尚等，以劲兵数万屯鹦鹉洲，总管崔弘度请击之。
现代文：陈国将领周罗目侯、荀法尚等，率劲旅几万驻扎在汉阳的鹦鹉州。总管崔弘度请求进攻。
English: Chen Guo's generals Zhou Lome Hou, Zou Fashang, etc. led tens of thousands of troops stationed in Hanyang's Parrot State. The general manager, Cui Hongdu, requested an attack.

古文：俊虑杀伤，不许。
现代文：杨俊担心杀伤人，不同意。
English: Yang Jun, worried about killing people, disagrees.

古文：罗亦相率而降。
现代文：周罗目侯等也相继投降。
English: Zhou Lome Hou and others also surrendered one after another.

古文：于是遣使奉章诣阙，垂泣谓使者曰： 谬当推毂，愧无尺寸之功，以此多惭耳。 
现代文：于是派使者奉表章到朝廷。他泣泪对使者说： 我胡里胡涂地被推举当元帅，惭愧的是没有尺寸之功，因此很惭愧罢了。 
English: So he sent an envoy to the imperial court to receive the seal. He said to the envoy with tears in his eyes: I was foolishly elected as a marshal. I am ashamed that I did not have the merit of size, so I am only ashamed.

古文：上闻而善之。
现代文：皇上听了，认为他很好。
English: The Emperor listened to him and thought he was very good.

古文：授扬州总管四十四州诸军事，镇广陵。
现代文：授杨俊扬州总管四十四州诸军事，镇守广陵。
English: Awarded to Yang Jun, the general manager of Yangzhou, the military of forty-four states, and the town guard of Guangling.

古文：岁余，转并州总管二十四州诸军事。
现代文：一年多后，转任并州总管二十四州诸军事。
English: A little more than a year later, he was transferred to the post of military governor of 24 states.

古文：初颇有令问，高祖闻而大悦，下书奖励焉。
现代文：起初，杨俊很有好名声，高祖知道了，很高兴，下诏书奖励他。
English: At first, Yang Jun had a good reputation. Gaozu was pleased to learn of this and rewarded him with an imperial edict.

古文：其后俊渐奢侈，违犯制度，出钱求息，民吏苦之。
现代文：其后杨俊逐渐奢侈，违反制度，放债收利息，官吏、百姓都以为苦。
English: After that, Yang Jun gradually became extravagant, violated the system, borrowed money to collect interest, and officials and ordinary people thought it was hard.

古文：上遣使按其事，与相连坐者百余人。
现代文：皇上派人调查他的事，受牵连而坐罪的有一百多人。
English: The emperor sent someone to investigate him, and more than a hundred people were implicated and convicted.

古文：俊犹不悛，于是盛治宫室，穷极侈丽。
现代文：杨俊仍不悔改，于是大修宫室，穷奢极欲。
English: Yang Jun still didn't repent, so he overhauled the palace and became extremely extravagant.

古文：俊有巧思，每亲运斤斧，工巧之器，饰以珠玉。
现代文：杨俊有巧思，常常亲自挥动斧头干活，工巧之器，饰以珠玉。
English: Yang Jun is very dexterous. He often personally transports jars to make axes, and the skillfully crafted objects are all decorated with jewels.

古文：为妃作七宝，又为水殿，香涂粉壁，玉砌金阶。梁柱楣栋之间，周以明镜，间以宝珠，极荣饰之美。每与宾客妓女弦歌于其上。
现代文：他为王妃作七宝隤，又建造水上宫殿，涂香粉刷，玉墙金阶，梁柱楣栋之间，全都装上明镜，又间以宝珠，极尽装饰之美，常常与宾客、妓女，在上面唱歌。
English: He made seven treasures for the princess, and built a water palace, painted with incense, jade walls, gold steps, between beams and columns, all equipped with mirrors, and with precious stones, the most beautiful decoration, often with guests and prostitutes, singing on it.

古文：俊颇好内，妃崔氏性妒，甚不平之，遂于瓜中进毒。
现代文：杨俊又特喜欢女色，崔氏王妃性女石，心中很不平，于是在瓜中放毒。
English: Yang Jun is quite fond of women, and the concubine Cui Shi is jealous and angry, so she poisons the melon.

古文：俊由是遇疾，征还京师。
现代文：杨俊因此生病，被调回京师。
English: As a result, Yang Jun fell ill and was transferred back to the Beijing Division.

古文：上以其奢纵，免官，以王就第。
现代文：皇上因他奢侈放纵，削了他的官职，仅让他以王爷身份回到王府去。
English: Because of his extravagant indulgence, the emperor reduced his official position and only allowed him to return to the royal palace as a prince.

古文：左武卫将军刘升谏曰： 秦王非有他过，但费官物营舍而已。
现代文：左武卫将军刘升进谏说： 秦王并无别的过错，只是花费官府的钱物，营造自己的府第宫室罢了。
English: Liu Shengjin, General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, said: "King Qin had no other fault but to spend money and materials from the government to build his own palace.

古文：臣谓可容。 
现代文：我认为可以原谅。 
English: I thought I could be forgiven.

古文：上曰： 法不可违。 
现代文：皇上说： 法律不可违反。 
English: Emperor Wen replied, "The laws of the country must not be violated.

古文：升固谏，上忿然作色，升乃止。
现代文：刘升坚持劝谏，皇上愤然变色，刘升才作罢。
English: Liu Sheng persisted in persuading the emperor, but the emperor became furious, and Liu Sheng had to give up.

古文：其后杨素复进谏曰： 秦王之过，不应至此，愿陛下详之。 
现代文：其后杨素又进谏说： 秦王的过失，不应该落到这个地步。
English: After that, Yang Su said: "Qin Wang's fault should not have fallen to this level.

古文：上曰： 我是五兒之父，若如公意，何不别制天子兒律？
现代文：请陛下想一想。 皇上说： 我是五个儿子的父亲，如按你的意思，何必不另外制定一个天子儿子的法律？
English: Think about it, Your Majesty, the emperor said, I am the father of five sons, if it is your wish, why don't you make another law for a son of heaven?

古文：以周公之为人，尚诛管、蔡，我诚不及周公远矣，安能亏法乎？ 
现代文：以周公的为人，尚且杀了管、蔡，我的确大大的不如周公，怎能有损法律的尊严呢？ 
English: With Zhou Gong as a person, even though I killed Guan, Cai, I am indeed much inferior to Zhou Gong, how can I undermine the dignity of the law?

古文：卒不许。
现代文：到最后也不同意。
English: In the end, he did not agree.

古文：俊疾笃，未能起，遣使奉表陈谢。
现代文：杨俊病重，不能起床，派人奉表谢罪。
English: Yang Jun was seriously ill and couldn't get out of bed, so he sent someone to apologize.

古文：上谓其使曰： 我戮力关塞，创兹大业，作训垂范，庶臣下守之而不失。
现代文：皇上对他的使者说： 我努力奋斗，创此大业，作训垂范，想让臣下遵守它而无过失。
English: The emperor said to his emissary: I have striven hard to create this great cause, to set an example, and to make my subjects observe it without fault.

古文：汝为吾子，而欲败之，不知何以责汝！ 
现代文：你是我的儿子，而想败坏法律，我不知道怎样责备你！ 
English: You, as my son, want to corrupt it, and I don't know how to punish you!

古文：俊惭怖，疾甚。
现代文：杨俊惭愧恐怖，病更重。
English: Embarrassed and terrified, Yang Jun became even more ill.

古文：大都督皇甫统上表，请复王官，不许。
现代文：大都督皇甫统上表，请恢复秦王的官职，皇上不答应。
English: The grand governor, Emperor Fu, sent a request to reinstate King Qin's official position, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：岁余，以疾笃，复拜上柱国。
现代文：一年多后，因杨俊病重，又授他上柱国。
English: More than a year later, due to his serious illness, he was reappointed as Shangzhuangguo.

古文：二十年六月，薨于秦邸。
现代文：开皇二十年六月，在秦王府中去世。
English: In June of the 20th, he died at the official residence of King Qin.

古文：上哭之数声而已。
现代文：皇上只哭了几声就算了。
English: The Emperor only cried a few times.

古文：俊所为侈丽之物，悉命焚之。
现代文：杨俊所作的奢侈之物，全部下令烧掉。
English: Emperor Wen ordered all the luxurious and ornate objects made by Yang Jun before his death to be burned.

古文：敕送终之具，务从俭约，以为后法也。
现代文：皇上还下令，送葬的东西，一定要节俭，以作为以后的法式。
English: The emperor also ordered that the things sent to the funeral must be frugal, so that they can be used as the French style in the future.

古文：王府僚佐请立碑，上曰： 欲求名，一卷史书足矣，何用碑为？
现代文：秦王府的官员们请求为秦王立碑，皇上说： 想求名，只要一卷史书就够了，何必要碑呢？
English: The officials of Qin Wangfu requested to erect a monument for Qin Wang, and the emperor said: If you want to be famous, just one volume of history books is enough, why do you need a monument?

古文：若子孙不能保家，徒与人作镇石耳。 
现代文：如子孙不能保家，那碑石不过白白地送给人家作盖房子的基石罢了。 
English: If the children and grandchildren can't keep the house, just give it to someone else for free to use as a foundation stone.

古文：妃崔氏以毒王之故，下诏废绝，赐死于其家。
现代文：秦王妃崔氏，因毒杀秦王的缘故，下诏废绝，赐她死在家里。
English: Qin Wangfei of the Cui clan, because of the poisoning of Qin Wangfei, abrogated the imperial edict and allowed her to die at home.

古文：子浩，崔氏所生也。
现代文：秦王之子杨浩，崔王妃所生。
English: His son, Yang Hao, was born to the Cui family.

古文：庶子曰湛。
现代文：庶出之子叫杨湛。
English: The illegitimate son is called Yang Zhan.

古文：群臣议曰： 《春秋》之义，母以子贵，子以母贵。
现代文：群臣商议说： 《春秋》的意思，母因子贵，子因母贵。
English: The ministers deliberated and said: "Spring and Autumn" means that the mother factor is expensive, and the child is expensive because of the mother.

古文：贵既如此，罪则可知。
现代文：贵既如此，罪则可知。
English: If this is the case, the crime can be known.

古文：故汉时栗姬有罪，其子便废，郭后被废，其子斯黜。
现代文：所以汉代栗姬有罪，其儿子便被废掉。郭皇后被废，她儿子也因此被废黜。
English: Therefore, in the Han Dynasty, Queen Guo was dethroned, her son was dethroned, and her son was dethroned.

古文：大既然矣，小亦宜同。
现代文：大事是这样，小事也应相同。
English: The great things are like this, and the small things should be the same.

古文：今秦王二子，母皆罪废，不合承嗣。 
现代文：如今秦王的两个儿子，母亲都因有罪而被废黜，不应继承王位。 
English: Now the two sons of King Qin, whose mothers were both deposed for their crimes, should not inherit the throne.

古文：于是以秦国官为丧主。
现代文：于是以秦国为丧主。
English: As a result, the palace of King Qin was left without an owner.

古文：俊长女永丰公主，年十二，遭父忧，哀慕尽礼，免丧，遂绝鱼肉。
现代文：杨俊长女永丰公主，十二岁，遭父丧，哀伤追思，服丧期满后，于是不吃鱼肉。
English: Yang Jun's eldest daughter, Princess Yongfeng, twelve years old, was bereaved by her father, sad and pensive. After the mourning period, she did not eat fish.

古文：每至忌日，辄流涕不食。
现代文：每到父亲亡故这天，就流泪不吃东西。
English: On the day of his father's death, he would shed tears and not eat.

古文：有开府王延者，性忠厚，领亲信兵十余年，俊甚礼之。
现代文：有一个叫王延的开府，生性忠厚，率领亲兵十几年，杨俊很礼遇他。
English: There was a governor named Wang Yan, who was loyal by nature and led his own soldiers for more than ten years. Yang Jun treated him very politely.

古文：及俊有疾，延恆在閤下，衣不解带。
现代文：杨俊有病后，王延总在府中侍卫，衣不解带。
English: After Yang Jun fell ill, Wang Yan was always on guard in the palace. He couldn't take off his clothes.

古文：俊薨，勺饮不入口者数日，羸顿骨立。
现代文：杨俊死后，他好几天水米未沾牙，骨瘦如柴。
English: After Yang Jun's death, he had no teeth for several days, and his bones were as thin as wood.

古文：上闻而悯之，赐以御药，授骠骑将军，典宿卫。
现代文：皇上听说此事，很怜悯他，赐给他御药，授他骠骑将军，让他负责宿卫。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he felt very sorry for him, gave him imperial medicine, bestowed on him the rank of cavalry general, and put him in charge of the rear guard.

古文：俊葬之日，延号恸而绝。
现代文：杨俊下葬的那一天，王延号哭哭死。
English: On the day of Yang Jun's burial, Wang Yanbo cried himself to death.

古文：上嗟异之，令通事舍人吊祭焉。
现代文：皇上嗟叹奇异，让通事舍人吊唁祭扫。
English: The emperor sighed strangely, and let Tsongtso pass on the condolence offering.

古文：诏葬延于俊墓侧。
现代文：下诏把王延安葬在杨俊的坟墓旁边。
English: Wang Yan'an was buried next to Yang Jun's grave.

古文：炀帝即位，立浩为秦王，以奉孝王嗣。
现代文：炀帝即位后，立杨浩为秦王，以作为孝王的继嗣。
English: After Emperor Qian ascended the throne, Yang Hao was appointed King of Qin as the successor to Emperor Xiaowang.

古文：封湛为济北侯。
现代文：封杨湛为济北侯。
English: Yang Zhan was given the title of Jibei marquis.

古文：后以浩为河阳都尉。
现代文：后来以杨浩为河阳都尉。
English: Later, Yang Hao was promoted to the post of Hayao's lieutenant.

古文：杨玄感作逆之际，左翊卫大将军宇文述勒兵讨之。
现代文：杨玄感造反时，左翊卫大将军宇文述率兵讨伐。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, General of the Left Division of the National Guard Yu Wenshu led the troops in a crusade.

古文：至河阳，修启于浩，浩复诣述营，兵相往复。
现代文：到了河阳，修书于杨浩，杨浩又到宇文述军营中，士兵们几次来往。
English: When they arrived in Kheyang, Yang Hao read the book, and Yang Hao went to the military camp to recite the poem. The soldiers went back and forth several times.

古文：有司劾浩，以诸侯交通内臣，竟坐废免。
现代文：有关部门弹劾杨浩，以诸侯身份与内臣来往，杨浩因此被废黜王位、免除官职。
English: Relevant departments impeached Yang Hao for dealing with vassals as a vassal. Yang Hao was therefore dethroned from the throne and removed from office.

古文：宇文化及杀逆之始，立浩为帝。
现代文：宇文化及杀了炀帝后，立杨浩为皇帝。
English: After Emperor Yu and Emperor Zhou were assassinated, Yang Ho became emperor.

古文：化及败于黎阳，北走魏县，自僭伪号，因而害之。
现代文：宇文化及失败于黎阳，北逃魏县，自称皇帝，因此杀害了杨浩。
English: Yu culture and failed in Liyang, fled north to Wei County, claimed to be the emperor, and thus killed Yang Hao.

古文：湛骁果，有胆烈。
现代文：杨湛骁勇果敢，有胆略。
English: Yang Zhanqi is courageous and daring.

古文：大业初，为荥阳太守，坐浩免，亦为化及所害。
现代文：大业初，任荥阳太守，因杨浩事被免职，也被宇文化及所杀害。
English: At the beginning of his great career, he was appointed as the governor of Fenyang, but was dismissed due to Yang Hao's affair, and was also killed by Yu Wenlin and others.

古文：庶人秀，高祖第四子也。开皇元年，立为越王。
现代文：杨秀，是高祖的第四个儿子，开皇元年，立为越王。
English: Yang Xiu, the fourth son of Emperor Gaozu, was crowned King of Yue in the first year of his reign.

古文：未几，徙封于蜀，拜柱国、益州刺史、总管，二十四州诸军事。
现代文：不久，转封于蜀，授为柱国、益州刺史，总管二十四州诸军事。
English: Soon, he was transferred to Shu, and was awarded the title of "pillar of the country" and "historian of Yizhou," and was in charge of the military of twenty-four states.

古文：二年，进位上柱国、西南道行台尚书令，本官如故。
现代文：开皇二年，升任上柱国、西南道行台尚书令，原职依旧。
English: In the second year of the emperor's reign, he was promoted to Shangzhu Guo and Xuanwen Dao Xingtai Shang Shuling, but his original position remained the same.

古文：岁余而罢。
现代文：一年多后作罢。
English: After more than a year, it was abandoned.

古文：十二年，又为内史令、右领军大将军。
现代文：开皇十二年，又任内史令、右领军大将军。
English: In the twelfth year of the Emperor's reign, he was also appointed as the Inner Historian and the right-hand leading general.

古文：寻复出镇于蜀。
现代文：不久又出京镇守蜀地。
English: Soon after, he was sent to the capital to defend Shushi.

古文：秀有胆气，容貌瑰伟，美须髯，多武艺，甚为朝臣所惮。
现代文：杨秀有胆气，容貌魁伟，长髯丰额，多有武艺，很为朝臣所惮服。
English: Yang Xiu had courage, a majestic appearance, a long beard and a plump forehead, and was skilled in martial arts. He was highly respected by courtiers.

古文：上每谓献皇后曰： 秀必以恶终。
现代文：皇上常对献皇后说： 秀儿肯定没个好结果。
English: The emperor often said to the queen: "Xiu Er certainly did not have a good result.

古文：我在当无虑，至兄弟必反。 
现代文：我在世，自当没什么担心的。到兄弟们那时，他肯定造反。 
English: As long as I'm alive, I don't think I have anything to worry about. By that time, my brothers, he will definitely rebel.

古文：兵部侍郎元衡使于蜀，秀深结于衡，以左右为请。
现代文：兵部侍郎元衡出使到蜀，杨秀与元衡深深地交好，请求给他增派左右。
English: The attendant of the military department, Yuan He, sent an envoy to Shu. Yang Xiu had a deep friendship with Yuan He and asked him to send more troops.

古文：既还京师，请益左右，上不许。
现代文：元衡回京师后，为杨秀请求增加左右，皇上不许可。
English: After Yuan Heng returned to Beijing to teach, he asked Yang Xiu to increase his salary, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：大将军刘哙之讨西爨也，高祖令上开府杨武通将兵继进。
现代文：大将军刘哙讨伐西爨时，高祖令上开府杨武通率部跟着前进。
English: When the great general Liu Bei was attacking Xicheng, Gao Zu ordered Yang Wudong, the leader of Shang Kaifu, to follow him.

古文：秀使嬖人万智光为武通行军司马，上以秀任非其人，谴责之。
现代文：杨秀派嬖人万智光当杨武通的行军司马。皇上因杨秀用人不对，谴责了他。
English: Yang Xiu sent a man named Wan Zhiguang to act as the marshal of Yang Wutong's army. The emperor condemned Yang Xiu for employing the wrong man.

古文：因谓群臣曰： 坏我法者，必在子孙乎？
现代文：高祖对群臣们说： 破坏我的法度的，一定是我的子孙吧？
English: Gaozu said to his courtiers, "Those who break my laws must be my descendants, right?

古文：譬如猛兽，物不能害，反为毛间虫所损食耳。 
现代文：如同猛兽，别的东西不能害它，反被毛里的小虫所损食。 
English: Like a beast of prey, nothing can harm it, but it is devoured by the worms in its fur.

古文：于是遂分秀所统。
现代文：于是分了杨秀的兵权。
English: As a result, Yang Xiu's military power was divided.

古文：秀渐奢侈，违犯制度，车马被服，拟于天子。
现代文：杨秀渐渐奢侈，违反制度，车马被服都和皇上一样。
English: Yang Xiu gradually became extravagant and violated the system. His car, horse, and clothes were all the same as those of the emperor.

古文：及太子勇以谗毁废，晋王广为皇太子，秀意甚不平。
现代文：太子杨勇因受谗言之害被废黜后，晋王杨广被立为皇太子，杨秀心里很不服气。
English: After Prince Yang Yong was deposed due to slander, Yang Guang, the King of Jin, was made crown prince. Yang Xiu was very dissatisfied.

古文：皇太子恐秀终为后变，阴令杨素求其罪而谮之。
现代文：杨广怕杨秀会成为祸害，偷偷地让杨素找他的罪过而上谗言害他。
English: Yang Guang was afraid that Yang Xiu would become a scourge, and secretly asked Yang Su to find his sins and slander him.

古文：仁寿二年，征还京师，上见，不与语。
现代文：仁寿二年，调杨秀回京师，皇上见了他，不与他说话。
English: In the second year of Yan Shou's life, Yang Xiu was transferred back to Beijing. The emperor did not speak to him when he met him.

古文：明日，使使切让之。
现代文：次日，派人责问他。
English: The next day, they sent someone to reprimand him.

古文：秀谢曰： 忝荷国恩，出临籓岳，不能奉法，罪当万死。 
现代文：杨秀谢罪说： 我承受国恩，出京当藩王，不能遵守法令，真是罪该万死。 
English: Yang Xiu Xie said, "I have received the grace of the state, I went to Beijing to become the king of the domain, and I can't abide by the law. It's really a crime worthy of death."

古文：皇太子及诸王流涕庭谢。
现代文：皇太子杨广和诸王都在朝廷上流泪，代杨秀谢罪。
English: Crown Prince Yang Guang and all the kings shed tears at the imperial court, on behalf of Yang Xiu Xie.

古文：上曰： 顷者秦王糜费财物，我以父道训之。
现代文：皇上说： 往日秦王浪费财物，我用父道教训他。
English: The emperor said, "In the past, King Qin wasted his wealth. I taught him the way of my father.

古文：今秀蠹害生民，当以君道绳之。 
现代文：现在杨秀祸害百姓，我要用君道处罚他。 
English: Now that Yang Xiu is a scourge to the people, I will punish him in the way of a monarch.

古文：于是付执法者。
现代文：于是把他交给司法部门。
English: As a result, Yang Xiu was handed over to law enforcement officials.

古文：开府庆整谏曰： 庶人勇既废，秦王已薨，陛下兒子无多，何至如是？
现代文：开府庆整进谏说： 庶民杨勇已被废黜，秦王已经去世了。陛下的儿子不多了，何必弄到这个地步？
English: Kaifu Qingtai Jinjun said: Commoner Yang Yong has been dethroned, King Qin has passed away. His Majesty's sons are not many, why did it have to come to this?

古文：然蜀王性甚耿介，今被重责，恐不自全。 
现代文：蜀王生性耿直，如今他被重责，恐怕他会自杀。 
English: Shu Wang has a straightforward nature. Now that he is under heavy responsibility, I'm afraid he will commit suicide.

古文：上大怒，欲断其舌。
现代文：皇上大怒，要割他的舌头。
English: The emperor was furious and wanted to cut out his tongue.

古文：因谓群臣曰： 当斩秀于市，以谢百姓。 
现代文：因此对群臣说： 要把杨秀杀死在大街上，以向百姓道歉。 
English: Therefore, he said to his ministers, "We should kill Yang Xiu on the street to apologize to the people."

古文：乃令杨素、苏威、牛弘、柳述、赵绰等推治之。
现代文：于是下令杨素、苏威、牛弘、柳述、赵绰等人给他治罪。
English: He then ordered Yang Su, Su Wei, Niu Hong, Liu Shu, Zhao Cao and others to punish him.

古文：太子阴作偶人，书上及汉王姓字，缚手钉心，令人埋之华山下，令杨素发之。
现代文：太子杨广偷偷地作了木偶人，写上皇上和汉王的姓名，捆上手，用钉钉在心上，然后让人埋在华山之下，再让杨素装模作样挖出来。
English: Prince Yang Guang secretly made a puppet man, wrote the names of the emperor and the Han king, tied up his hands, nailed them to his heart, and then had them buried under Huashan Mountain, and then let Yang Su pretend to dig it out.

古文：又作檄文曰： 逆臣贼子，专弄威柄，陛下唯守虚器，一无所知。 
现代文：杨广又以杨秀的口气作檄文，说： 逆臣贼子，专门玩弄权柄，陛下表面上当皇帝，其实什么都不知道。 
English: Yang Guang also used Yang Xiu's tone to write an obituary, saying: "The traitorous son of a traitor, he specialized in playing with power. On the surface, His Majesty was an emperor, but in fact, he knew nothing.

古文：陈甲兵之盛，云 指期问罪 。
现代文：然后陈述兵甲如何强大，说是要 指期问罪 。
English: He then goes on to describe how powerful the armor is, and says that it's meant to incriminate.

古文：置秀集中，因以闻奏。
现代文：杨广把这篇 檄文 放在杨秀的文集之中，然后上告高祖。
English: Yang Guang put this article in Yang Xiu's anthology, and then sued Gao Zu.

古文：上曰： 天下宁有是耶！ 
现代文：高祖说： 天下难道有这样的事吗？ 
English: Gaozu said: Is there such a thing in the world?

古文：于是废为庶人，幽内侍省，不得与妻子相见，令给獠婢二人驱使。
现代文：于是把杨秀废为庶民，软禁在内侍省，不得与妻子儿女相见，下令只给他两个獠婢，供他驱使。
English: As a result, Yang Xiu was abolished as a commoner, placed under house arrest in the Ministry of the Interior, was not allowed to see his wife and children, and was ordered to give him only two maidservants to drive him.

古文：与相连坐者百余人。
现代文：受牵连的有一百多人。
English: More than a hundred people were implicated.

古文：秀既幽逼，愤懑不知所为，乃上表曰： 臣以多幸，联庆皇枝，蒙天慈鞠养，九岁荣贵，唯知富乐，未尝忧惧。
现代文：杨秀既被囚禁，愤懑不已，不知做什么才好，于是上表说： 我因为幸运，成为皇上的儿子，承蒙父母抚养长大，九岁就得到了荣华富贵，只知富贵享乐，从未忧惧过。
English: Since Yang Xiu was imprisoned, he was furious and did not know what to do, so the above table said: Because I was lucky to become the emperor's son, I was raised by my parents, and at the age of nine I got glory and wealth. I only knew wealth and pleasure, and I never worried.

古文：轻恣愚心，陷兹刑网，负深山岳，甘心九泉。
现代文：我轻易地放纵我这颗愚笨的心，落到这个地步，我辜负父皇山岳一样高的大恩，心甘情愿地去死。
English: I easily indulged my foolish heart and fell to this point. I failed my father's great grace, which was as high as the mountains, and willingly went to my death.

古文：不谓天恩尚假余漏，至如今者，方知愚心不可纵，国法不可犯，抚膺念咎，自新莫及。
现代文：不料天恩还可让我有余漏，到如今这地步，我才知道愚心不可放纵，国法不可触犯，我扪心问罪，真是来不及改过自新。
English: Unexpectedly, God's grace allowed me to have some shortcomings, and it is only now that I know that I must not indulge my foolishness, that I must not violate the laws of the country, and that it is too late for me to mend my ways.

古文：犹望分身竭命，少答慈造，但以灵祗不祜，福禄消尽，夫妇抱思，不相胜致。
现代文：我还想分身有术，竭尽余生，稍稍报答一下父母的养育之恩。但因神灵不保佑，我的福分爵禄完了，夫妻团聚，不可能了。
English: I still want to be able to devote the rest of my life to repaying my parents for their upbringing. But because the gods do not bless me, my fortune-sharing is over, and the reunion of husband and wife is impossible.

古文：只恐长辞明世，永归泉壤，伏愿慈恩，赐垂矜愍，残息未尽之间，希与爪子相见。
现代文：只怕我长辞人间，永归地府，伏请父皇，赐我怜悯，在我死之前，让我与我的儿子爪子见上一面。
English: If only I could take a long leave of absence from this world and return to the realm of the dead, implore my father, the emperor, to grant me mercy and allow me to meet my son, the claw, before I die.

古文：请赐一穴，令骸骨有所。 
现代文：然后请你赐我一个墓穴，让我的尸骨有个去处。 
English: Then please give me a grave, so that my bones have a place to go.

古文：爪子即其爱子也。
现代文：爪子就是他的爱子。
English: Paws is his love child.

古文：上因下诏数其罪曰：汝地居臣子，情兼家国，庸、蜀要重，委以镇之。
现代文：皇上因此下诏书，数落他的罪过，说：你从地位上说，是臣又是子；从感情上说，与家又与国相关。庸、蜀是重要的地方，我让你去镇守。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an imperial edict, enumerating his sins, saying, "In terms of your position, you are a vassal and a son; in terms of your feelings, you are related to your family and the country. Yong and Shu are important places, I let you go to the town guard.

古文：汝乃干纪乱常，怀恶乐祸，辟睨二宫，伫迟灾衅，容纳不逞，结构异端。
现代文：你却触犯纲纪，心怀恶意，幸祸乐灾。你小看皇宫和太子宫，等着这里发生灾祸。你容纳不法之徒，交结异端分子。
English: You, however, have violated the rules of etiquette, harboring malice in your heart, rejoicing in misfortune. You despise the imperial palace and the prince's womb, waiting for a disaster to occur here. You have accommodated lawless people and mingled with heretics.

古文：我有不和，汝便觇候，望我不起，便有异心。
现代文：我有什么不和，你便等着，指望我死了，你就起异心。
English: If there is any disagreement with me, you wait and hope that I die, and then you have a change of heart.

古文：皇太子汝兄也，次当建立，汝假托妖言，乃云不终其位。
现代文：皇太子是你的兄长，按长幼顺序也当立他。你却假托妖言，说他不能终其位。
English: The crown prince is your elder brother, and he is also in charge according to the order of eldest son and youngest son. However, you are pretending that he can't stay on the throne.

古文：妄称鬼怪，又道不得入宫，自言骨相非人臣，德业堪承重器，妄道清城出圣，欲以己当之，诈称益州龙见，托言吉兆。
现代文：你装神弄鬼，又说你可惜不能入主东宫。你自称骨相不该当人臣，品德、功业应当皇帝。你胡说青城出圣人，想用自己当其位。你诈称益州出现了龙，假托是什么好兆头。
English: You pretended to be a conjurer, and said that it was a pity that you could not enter the East Palace. You said that you were not worthy to be a vassal, and that you should be an emperor because of your moral character and achievements. You said nonsense that a saint comes out of a youth, and you wanted to use yourself to take his place. You falsely claimed that a dragon appeared in Yizhou, but what was the good omen?

古文：重述木易之姓，更治成都之宫；妄说禾乃之名，以当八千之运。
现代文：你重述 木易 之姓，又修成都的宫室，胡说 禾乃 之名，以当 八千 年的皇运。
English: You have repeated the surname of Mu Yi Lu, and built the palace of Chengdu, and said that the name of Wo Nao is nonsense, claiming to be the eight-thousand-year imperial fortune.

古文：横生京师妖异，以证父兄之灾；妄造蜀地徵祥，以符己身之箓。
现代文：胡编京师有什么妖异，以证明父亲兄长有灾。妄造蜀地有什么吉祥，以说明你有什么祥瑞。
English: Hu Hui has compiled the following list: What are the spells and wonders of the capital, Beijing, to prove that his father's elder brother is afflicted with misfortune? What are the auspicious signs of Shu, Shandong, to show that you have good fortune?

古文：汝岂不欲得国家恶也，天下乱也，辄造白玉之廷，又为白羽之箭，文物服饰，岂似有君，鸠集左道，符书厌镇。
现代文：你哪里不想我倒楣哟，哪里不想天下大乱哟？你还建造白玉王廷，又作白羽箭，你的服饰车马与天子无异，哪里像有我的样子？你纠集旁门左道，用符书压镇我和汉王。
English: Where do you not want me to be unlucky, where do you not want the world to be in chaos? You also built the white jade royal court, and made white feather arrows, your clothing, chariots and horses are no different from the heavenly son, where is my appearance? You gather side-by-side, and use characters to crush me and the Han king.

古文：汉王于汝，亲则弟也，乃画其形像，书其姓名，缚手钉心，枷锁杻械。
现代文：汉王和你，是亲兄弟，你却画他的形像，写上他的姓名，缚手钉心，枷锁木丑械。
English: Han Wang and you are brothers, yet you draw his image, write his name, bind his hands, nail his heart, and chain him with ugly weapons.

古文：仍云请西岳华山慈父圣母神兵九亿万骑，收杨谅魂神，闭在华山下，勿令散荡。
现代文：还说要请华山的慈父圣母的神兵九亿万骑，收杨谅的魂魄，闭在华山之下，不让魂魄散开。
English: He also said that he would ask the Divine Soldier of the Holy Mother of the Merciful Father of Huashan to ride nine hundred million times, collect the soul of Yang Tong, close it under Huashan, and not let the soul disperse.

古文：我之于汝，亲则父也，复云请西岳华山慈父呈母，赐为开化杨坚夫妻，回心欢喜。
现代文：我对于你，是你的亲父亲，你却又说要请西岳华山的慈父圣母开化杨坚夫妻，让我们回心转意，欢欢喜喜。
English: For you, I am your own father, but you say that you want to invite the Holy Father of Xiyue Huashan to enlighten Yang Jian and his wife, so that we can change our minds and rejoice.

古文：又画我形像，缚手撮头，仍云请西岳神兵收杨坚魂神。
现代文：你又画我的形像，缚手撮头，还说请西岳神兵收杨坚鬼魂。
English: You also drew my image, tied my hands and head, and said that you asked Xiyue's soldiers to collect Yang Jian's ghost.

古文：如此形状，我今不知杨谅、杨坚是汝何亲也？
现代文：如此这般，我如今不知道杨谅、杨坚是你的什么人？
English: In this way, I now don't know who Yang Qian and Yang Jian are.

古文：苞藏凶慝，图谋不轨，逆臣之迹也；希父之灾，以为身幸，贼子之心也；怀非分之望，肆毒心于兄，悖弟之行也；嫉妒于弟，无恶不为，无孔怀之情也；违犯制度，坏乱之极也；多杀不幸，豺狼之暴也；剥削民庶，酷虐之甚也；唯求财货，市井之业也；专事妖邪，顽嚣之性也；弗克负荷，不材之器也。
现代文：包藏祸心，图谋不轨，这是叛逆之臣的罪证。希望父亲遭灾，以此为幸事，这是贼子的毒心。怀着非分之想，对兄长放肆毒心，这是悖弟的行为。嫉妒小弟，无恶不为，无孔怀之情。你触犯国法，到了极点。你多杀无辜，这是豺狼的暴行。你剥削百姓，酷虐到了极点。你只求财货，这是市井小民的勾当。你专门侍奉妖邪，这是顽的本性。你辜负了我的重托，是个不成器的东西。
English: Concealing evil intentions and scheming to deviate from the path is evidence of guilt for a traitorous vassal. Wishing misfortune to befall one's father as a blessing is the poisonous heart of a thief. Thinking ill of one's brother and acting maliciously towards him is the act of a disobedient younger brother. Jealousy of one's younger brother, doing anything and everything, harboring no remorse. You have violated the law of the land to the extreme. You have killed many innocent people, this is the brutality of a jackal. You have exploited the people, brutalized them to the extreme. You only seek wealth, this is the work of

古文：凡此十者，灭天理，逆人伦，汝皆为之，不祥之甚也，欲免祸患，长守富贵，其可得乎！
现代文：凡此十罪，灭天理，逆人伦，你都作了，坏到了极点。你还想免除祸患，长守富贵，怎么可能呢？
English: You have committed all of these ten sins, the destruction of heavenly principles, and the violation of human ethics, and you have become extremely corrupt. You still want to be free from evil and remain rich. How is that possible?

古文：后复听与其子同处。
现代文：后来又让他与他儿子同处。
English: He was later allowed to stay with his son.

古文：炀帝即位，禁锢如初。
现代文：炀帝即位后，依旧禁锢他。
English: After Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, he was still imprisoned.

古文：宇文化及之弑逆也，欲立秀为帝，群议不许。
现代文：宇文化及杀了炀帝后，想立杨秀为皇帝，大伙商议，不同意。
English: After Emperor Yu was assassinated, he wanted to make Yang Xiu the emperor. Everyone discussed the matter and disagreed.

古文：于是害之，并其诸子。
现代文：于是杀害了他和他的几个儿子。
English: So they killed him and his sons.

古文：庶人谅，字德章，一名杰，开皇元年，立为汉王。
现代文：杨谅字德章，一名杰。开皇元年，立为汉王。
English: Yang Yuanzhong, also known as Dezhang, was a great man. In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was crowned King of Han.

古文：十二年，为雍州牧，加上柱国、右卫大将军。
现代文：开皇十二年，为雍州牧，加授上柱国、右卫大将军。
English: In the 12th year of the Emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo and the title of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：岁余，转左卫大将军。
现代文：一年多后，转任左卫大将军。
English: More than a year later, he was transferred to the post of General of the Left Division.

古文：十七年，出为并州总管，上幸温汤而送之。
现代文：开皇十七年，出京任并州总管，皇上巡幸温汤时送他到任。
English: In the seventeenth year of the emperor's reign, he went to Beijing to serve as the chief administrator of the annexed provinces. The emperor sent him to the post when he was on a tour of warm soups.

古文：自山以东，至于沧海，南拒黄河，五十二州尽隶焉。
现代文：自华山以东，到沧海，南到黄河，五十二州都属他管辖。
English: From Mount Huashan in the east, to the Canghai Sea, and south to the Yellow River, the fifty-two states are under his jurisdiction.

古文：特许以便宜，不拘律令。
现代文：特别允许他便宜从事，不拘限于法律政令。
English: In particular, he is allowed to do it cheaply, without being restricted by laws and decrees.

古文：十八年，起辽东之役，以谅为行军元帅，率众至辽水，遇疾疫，不利而还。
现代文：开皇十八年，发起辽东战争，以杨谅为行军元帅，率部到辽水，遇上疾病，不利而还。
English: In the 18th year of the Emperor's reign, the Liaodong War was launched, with Yang Peng as the marching marshal. He led his troops to Liaoshui, encountered disease, was unfavorable and returned.

古文：十九年，突厥犯塞，以谅为行军元帅，竟不临戎。
现代文：十九年，突厥进犯边疆，以杨谅为行军元帅，最后未去临阵统兵。
English: In the 19th year, the Turks invaded the frontier, with Yang Piao as the marching marshal, and finally did not go to the front line.

古文：高祖甚宠爱之。
现代文：高祖很宠爱他。
English: Gaozou is very fond of him.

古文：谅自以所居天下精兵处，以太子谗废，居常怏怏，阴有异图。
现代文：杨谅自以为住在天下出精兵的地方，因太子杨勇被进谗言而废黜，平时常怏怏不乐，私下里有反叛的图谋。
English: Yang Peng thought that he lived in a place where the world produced elite soldiers. He was dethroned because Prince Yang Yong was slandered. He was often unhappy and secretly plotted to rebel.

古文：遂讽高祖云： 突厥方强，太原即为重镇，宜修武备。 
现代文：他于是劝高祖说： 突厥正强大，太原即为重镇，应加强防备。 
English: He then advised Gaozu, saying, "The Turks are becoming powerful, and Taiyuan is an important town, so we should strengthen our defenses.

古文：高祖从之。
现代文：高祖听从了他的话。
English: Gaozu listened to him.

古文：于是大发工役，缮治器械，贮纳于并州。
现代文：于是大发民工劳役，修缮兵器，贮存在并州。
English: As a result, a large number of migrant laborers were dispatched to repair weapons and store them in Anhui Province.

古文：招佣亡命，左右私人，殆将数万。
现代文：他又招纳亡命之徒，他身边的无户籍的人，差不多有几万。
English: He also recruited outlaws, and there are almost tens of thousands of people around him who do not have household registration.

古文：王頍者，梁将王僧辩之子也，少倜傥，有奇略，为谅咨议参军。
现代文：有个叫王支页的，是梁国将领王僧辩的儿子，年少倜傥，有奇略，为杨谅的咨议参军。
English: There was a man named Wang Zhizhe, the son of Liang's general Wang Sofen, who was too young to enlist in the army, but had the wisdom to consult Yang Peng.

古文：萧摩诃者，陈氏旧将。
现代文：有个叫萧摩诃的，是陈国过去的将领。
English: There was a man named Xiao Maqian, who was a general in Chen's past.

古文：二人俱不得志，每郁郁思乱，并为谅所亲善。
现代文：二人都不得志，常郁郁思乱，都被杨谅所亲近友善。
English: Both of them are discouraged, often depressed and confused, and are both close and friendly to Yang Yuanzhong.

古文：及蜀王以罪废，谅愈不自安。
现代文：到蜀王因罪被废黜后，杨谅心里更加不安。
English: After Shu Wang was deposed for his crimes, Yang Peng felt even more uneasy.

古文：会高祖崩，征之不赴，遂发兵反。
现代文：碰上高祖去世，调他赴京，他不去，于是举兵造反。
English: When Gao Zu passed away, he was transferred to Beijing, but he did not go, so he raised an army to rebel.

古文：总管司马皇甫诞切谏，谅怒，收击之。
现代文：总管司马皇甫诞切劝，杨谅发怒，把他抓了起来。
English: Yang Peng got angry and arrested him.

古文：王頍说谅曰： 王所部将吏家属，尽在关西，若用此等，即宜长驱深入，直据京都，所谓疾雷不及掩耳。
现代文：王支页劝说杨谅说： 王爷所部将吏的家属，都在关西，若用他们，就要马上长驱直入，直据京师，所谓迅雷不及掩耳。
English: Wang Zhifang persuaded Yang Peng to say: The families of the generals in Wang Ye's headquarters are all in Kansai. If you use them, you must immediately drive straight in, straight to Beijing. The so-called thunderbolt can't cover your ears.

古文：若但欲割据旧齐之地，宜任东人。 
现代文：如只想割据过去齐国的地盘，那就要用东部的人。 
English: If you only want to occupy the territory that used to belong to Qi, then you should use people from the east.

古文：谅不能专定，乃兼用二策，唱言曰： 杨素反，将诛之。 
现代文：杨谅不能专定，于是兼用两个办法，扬言说： 杨素反叛，将要杀他。 
English: Yang Peng could not decide, so he used two methods, threatening: Yang Su would rebel, and he would kill him.

古文：闻喜人总管府兵曹裴文安说谅曰： 井陉以西，是王掌握之内，山东士马，亦为我有，宜悉发之。
现代文：闻喜人、总管府兵曹裴文安劝杨谅说： 井陉以西，是王爷您掌握的地方，华山以东的兵马，也为我们所有。应全部发兵。
English: Pei Wen'an, the general manager of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, advised Yang Yuanzhong: "The area west of Jing'an is under your control, and the soldiers and horses east of Mount Huashan are also ours. You should send all your soldiers.

古文：分遣羸兵，屯守要路，仍令随方略地。
现代文：另分派弱兵，把守路口，仍叫他们见机行事，占领地方。
English: In addition, weak soldiers were assigned to guard the junction, and they were still told to seize the opportunity to occupy the place.

古文：率其精锐，直入蒲津。
现代文：您率领精锐部队，直入蒲津。
English: You will lead an elite force straight into Putsu.

古文：文安请为前锋，王以大军继后，风行电击，顿于霸上，咸阳以东可指麾而定。
现代文：我裴文安请当先锋，王爷您统领大军继后，风驰电掣，一下子赶到灞上，咸阳以东，可指挥而平定了。
English: I, Pei Wen'an, would like to be the vanguard, followed by you, Wang Ye, leading the great army. The wind is blowing and the lightning is flashing, and all of a sudden we are on the raft, east of Xianyang. We can command and we can pacify.

古文：京师震扰，兵不暇集，上下相疑，群情离骇，我即陈兵号令，谁敢不从，旬日之间，事可定矣。 
现代文：京师震扰，官军来不及聚集，朝中上下互相猜疑，群情离异而震惊，谁敢不听您的号令？不出十天，大事就可定下来了。 
English: The Beijing division was shocked, the government army was too late to gather, the government and the people were suspicious of each other, and the group was shocked by the divergence of feelings. Who would dare not to listen to your order? Within ten days, the matter could be settled.

古文：谅大悦。
现代文：杨谅很高兴。
English: Yang Jun is very happy.

古文：于是遣所署大将军余公理出太谷，以趣河阳。
现代文：于是派他所任命的大将军余公理出太谷，以奔赴河阳。
English: So he sent the general he had appointed, Yu Gongli, out of Taiyuan to go to Heyang.

古文：大将军綦良出滏口，以趣黎阳。大将军刘建出井陉，以略燕赵。柱国乔钟葵出雁门。
现代文：派大将军綦良出滏口，以奔向黎阳；派大将军刘建出兵井径，以经略燕、赵故地；派柱国乔钟葵出雁门。
English: He sent the great general Qiliang out of the Hukou to run to Liyang; sent the great general Liu Jian out of the Hejing Road to pass through the Yan and Zhao ancestral lands; sent the pillar country Qiao Zhong Kwai out of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：署文安为柱国，纥单贵、王聃、大将军茹茹天保、侯莫陈惠直指京师。
现代文：又任命裴文安为柱国，派纥单贵、王耳冉、大将军蠕蠕天保、侯莫陈惠等，直指京师。
English: In addition, he appointed Pei Wen'an as the pillar country, and dispatched Xuan Danggui, Wang Liran, General Cun Cun Tian Bao, Hou Mo Chen Hui, etc., directly to the Beijing Division.

古文：未至蒲津百余里，谅忽改图，令纥单贵断河桥，守蒲州，而召文安。
现代文：到离蒲津一百多里的地方，杨谅忽然改变布署，令纥单贵切断河桥，驻守蒲州，而召来裴文安。
English: At a place more than a hundred miles away from Puzin, Yang Peng suddenly changed the deployment, ordered Zou Shan Gui to cut off the river bridge, stationed in Puzhou, and summoned Pei Wen An.

古文：文安至曰： 兵机诡速，本欲出其不意。
现代文：裴文安到了，说： 兵贵神速诡密，本想出其不意。
English: When Pei Wen'an arrived, he said, "The soldiers are so quick and cunning that I didn't expect this.

古文：王既不行，文安又退，使彼计成，大事去矣。 
现代文：王爷您既又不动，我文安又退了兵，使他们计划得成，大势完了啊！ 
English: Even though you, Prince, did not move, I, Wen'an, withdrew our troops, so that their plan could be carried out, and the situation was over!

古文：谅不对。
现代文：杨谅不回答。
English: Yang Peng was speechless.

古文：以王聃为蒲州刺史，裴文安为晋州，薛粹为绛州，梁菩萨为潞州，韦道正为韩州，张伯英为泽州。
现代文：杨谅以王耳冉为蒲州刺史，裴文安为晋州刺史，薛粹为绛州刺史，梁菩萨为潞州刺史，韦道正为韩州刺史，张伯英为泽州刺史。
English: Yang Peng took Wang Liran as the chief historian of Puzhou, Pei Wen'an as the chief historian of Jinzhou, Xue Zi as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, Liang Bosa as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, Wei Daozheng as the chief historian of Hanzhou, and Zhang Boying as the chief historian of Zhejiang.

古文：炀帝遣杨素率骑五千，袭王聃、纥单贵于蒲州，破之。
现代文：炀帝派杨素率五千骑兵，袭击王耳冉、纥单贵于蒲州，打败了他们。
English: Emperor Qian sent Yang Su and five thousand cavalry to attack Wang Liran and Gong Shan Gui in Puzhou and defeated them.

古文：于是率步骑四万趣太原。
现代文：杨素于是率步兵、骑兵四万奔向太原。
English: Yang Su then led 40,000 infantry and cavalry to Taiyuan.

古文：谅使赵子开守高壁，杨素击走之。
现代文：杨谅让赵子开守高壁，杨素打跑了他。
English: Yang Peng let Zhao Zi guard the high wall, Yang Su beat him.

古文：谅大惧，拒素于蒿泽。
现代文：杨谅大惧，在蒿泽抵抗杨素。
English: Yang Yuanzhong was very afraid and resisted Yang Su in Heze.

古文：属天大雨，谅欲旋师，王頍谏曰： 杨素悬军，士马疲弊，王以锐卒亲戎击之，其势必举。
现代文：刚好天下大雨，杨谅想撤兵回去。王支页劝他说： 杨素长途奔袭，兵马劳累，王爷您亲率精兵攻击，势力必然大涨。
English: It just so happened that it was raining heavily, and Yang Peng wanted to withdraw his troops. Wang Zhiqi advised him: "Yang Su is making a long-distance attack, the troops are tired, and Wang Ye himself is leading the elite soldiers to attack. Your strength will inevitably rise.

古文：今见敌而还，示人以怯，阻战士之心，益西军之气，愿王必勿还也。 
现代文：如今见敌而退，把胆怯显示给他人看，阻拦了战士斗志，增加了西军的气焰，请王爷不要退兵。 
English: Now he has retreated in the face of the enemy, showing his cowardice to others, hindering the fighting spirit of the soldiers and increasing the pride of the Western Army. I ask Wang Ye not to retreat.

古文：谅不从，退守清源。
现代文：杨谅不听，退兵守清源。
English: Yang Yu didn't listen and led his army to retreat to Qingyuan.

古文：素进击之，谅勒兵与官军大战，死者万八千人。
现代文：杨素进而攻击，杨谅统兵与官军大战，死了一万八千人。
English: Yang Su then attacked, and Yang Piao led his soldiers into a great battle with the government army, in which 18,000 people died.

古文：谅退保并州，杨素进兵围之。
现代文：杨谅退兵保并州，杨素进兵包围了他。
English: Yang Peng was released from military service and allowed to return to the state, while Yang Su was surrounded by soldiers.

古文：谅穷蹙，降于素。
现代文：杨谅穷途末路，向杨素投降。
English: Yang Peng, at the end of his rope, surrendered to Yang Su.

古文：百僚奏谅罪当死，帝曰： 终鲜兄弟，情不忍言，欲屈法恕谅一死。 
现代文：百官上奏，杨谅罪该处死。炀帝说： 我兄弟太少，不忍心说什么，想曲法饶杨谅一死。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: My brothers are too few, I can't bear to say anything, I want to compose a piece to spare Yang Peng's life.

古文：于是除名为民，绝其属籍，竟以幽死。
现代文：于是削职为民，不让子孙继承爵位，最后被活活关死。
English: As a result, he gave up his position and did not allow his children and grandchildren to inherit his title, and was eventually imprisoned alive.

古文：子颢，因而禁锢，宇文化及弑逆之际，遇害。
现代文：他儿子杨颢，因而也被禁锢。宇文化及杀炀帝时，杨颢遇害。
English: His son, Yang Hui, was also imprisoned as a result. Yang Hui was killed when the emperor was assassinated.

古文：史臣曰：高祖之子五人，莫有终其天命，异哉！
现代文：史臣曰：高祖的儿子五人，未有终其天年的，真是怪事啊！
English: Shichen said, "It's really strange that the five sons of Gaozu didn't live out the rest of their natural lives.

古文：房陵资于骨肉之亲，笃以君臣之义，经纶缔构，契阔夷险，抚军监国，凡二十年，虽三善未称，而视膳无阙。
现代文：房陵王杨勇，借助于与高祖的骨肉之亲，讲究君臣之义，经略创造，与高祖契阔夷险，抚军监国，总共二十年。他虽不能称有三善，但能侍奉父母，不缺人子之礼。
English: Fangling Wang Yangyong, with the help of his flesh-and-blood relatives with Gao Zu, paid attention to the righteousness of princes and ministers, created strategies, agreed with Gao Zu to expand and subjugate dangers, and supervised the military for a total of twenty years. Although he cannot be said to have three virtues, he can serve his parents and does not lack the gift of a son of man.

古文：恩宠既变，谗言间之，顾复之慈，顿隔于人理，父子之道，遂灭于天性。
现代文：高祖对他恩宠既变，外加谗言离间，高祖为父的慈爱，立即隔于人理；父子之道，于是灭了天性。
English: Gaozu's grace to him was changed, and his words were torn apart. Gaozu's fatherly love was immediately separated from human reason; the father-son way, thus extinguishing nature.

古文：隋室将亡之效，众庶皆知之矣。
现代文：隋朝将亡，庶民百姓都知道了。
English: The Sui Dynasty is about to die, and the common people know it.

古文：《慎子》有言曰： 一兔走街，百人逐之，积兔于市，过者不顾。 
现代文：《慎子》有言说： 一只兔子在街上跑，上百人追逐它；满街都是兔子，过路人连看都不看一下。 
English: There is a saying in "Shinko": A rabbit runs down the street, and hundreds of people chase it; the street is full of rabbits, and passers-by don't even glance at them.

古文：岂有无欲哉？
现代文：难道是他们不想得到兔子吗？
English: Don't they want the rabbit?

古文：分定故也。
现代文：这是因为他们都能得到兔子的缘故。
English: This is because they can all get rabbits.

古文：房陵分定久矣，高祖一朝易之，开逆乱之源，长觊觎之望。
现代文：房陵王当太子很久了，高祖一朝换了他，开了逆乱的头，长了觊觎的望。
English: Fang Ling Wang had been crown prince for a long time. Gao Zu replaced him on the first day of the new year, which opened the door to rebellion and gave rise to great expectations.

古文：又维城肇建，崇其威重，恃宠而骄，厚自封植，进之既逾制，退之不以道。俊以忧卒，实此之由。
现代文：另外，维城建帜，加重威权，恃宠而骄，多自封植，进而超过规矩，退而不依其道，杨俊忧郁而死，实在是由于这个缘故。
English: In addition, it is because of this that Wei Cheng built a banner, increased authority, favored and proud, mostly self-sealed, and then exceeded the rules, retreated and did not follow his path, and Yang Jun died of melancholy.

古文：俄属天步方艰，谗人已胜，尺布斗粟，莫肯相容。
现代文：不久国运方艰，谗人已胜，兄弟之间，不肯相容。
English: Soon, the country's fortunes take a turn for the worse, and the bad guys have won. The brothers are not compatible.

古文：秀窥岷蜀之阻，谅起晋阳之甲，成兹乱常之衅，盖亦有以动之也。
现代文：杨秀窥探岷山、蜀地的险阻，杨谅发动晋阳的甲兵，成此乱国乱常之祸，大概也是有原因而这样作的。
English: Yang Xiu spied the dangerous obstacles in Lushan and Shu, and Yang Piao unleashed the armored soldiers in Jinyang, which led to chaos in the country. There is probably a reason for this.

古文：《棠棣》之诗徒赋，有鼻之封无期，或幽囚于囹圄，或颠殒于鸩毒。
现代文：《棠棣》诗是白作了的呀，有鼻之封没有指望了，有的被幽囚在牢房里，有的被下毒毒死。
English: "Tang Xuan" poem is made in vain, there is no hope for the nose seal, some are imprisoned in a cell, some are poisoned to death.

古文：本根既绝，枝叶毕剪，十有余年，宗社沦陷。
现代文：本根既绝，枝叶全剪，十几年后，国家就完了。
English: If the root is cut off and all the branches and leaves are cut off, the country will be finished in a dozen years.

古文：自古废嫡立庶，覆族倾宗者多矣，考其乱亡之祸，未若有隋之酷。
现代文：自古以来废长立幼，以至倾覆家国的多得很，但考究他们的乱亡之祸，没有像隋朝这么残酷的。
English: Since ancient times, there have been many leaders who have overthrown their own countries, but if you look at the calamities that befell them, they were not as cruel as the Sui Dynasty.

古文：《诗》曰： 殷鉴不远，在夏后之世。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 殷鉴不远，在夏后之世。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The reference of the Yin Dynasty is not far away, just in the summer time.

古文：后之有国有家者，可不深戒哉！
现代文：后来有国有家的人，能不深以为戒吗？
English: Later, can people with state-owned homes not be deeply admonished?

