古文：世谓范增为人杰，予以为不然。
现代文：世人都认为范增是人中豪杰，我认为并非如此。
English: The world thinks that Fan Zeng is a hero among the people, but I don't think so.

古文：夷考平生，盖出战国从横之余，见利而不知义者也。
现代文：平心静气地考察他的生平，可以把他看成是战国纵横家的残余，是见到好处就不管道义的人。
English: A dispassionate examination of his life reveals him to be a remnant of the warlords, a man who did not care about morality when he saw an advantage.

古文：始劝项氏立怀王，及羽夺王之地，迁王于郴，已而弑之。增不能引君臣大谊，争之以死。
现代文：起初他劝项粱扶立怀王，可是等到项羽夺得怀王的土地，把怀王迁到郴，不久又杀了怀王，范增却不能依照君臣的大义以死相殉。
English: At first, he advised Xiang Yu to help establish King Huai, but when Xiang Yu conquered the land of King Huai, moved King Huai to Shao, and soon killed King Huai, Fan Zeng could not, in accordance with the great justice of monarchs and ministers, kill each other.

古文：怀王与诸将约，先入关者王之，沛公既先定关中，则当如约，增乃劝羽杀之，又徒之蜀汉。
现代文：怀王跟几位将领约定，先进入关中灭秦的为关中之王，沛公既然已经先平定了关中，那么就应该遵守约定，范增竟然劝项羽杀了沛公，事既不成，又将他迁移到蜀郡汉中一带。
English: King Huai agreed with several generals that the first to enter the pass to destroy Qin would be the king of the pass. Since Pei Gong had already leveled the pass first, then the agreement should be observed. Fan Zeng even persuaded Xiang Yu to kill Pei Gong, but it did not work, and he was moved to the Hanzhong area of Shu County.

古文：羽之伐赵，杀上将军义，增为末将，坐而视之。
现代文：项羽在征伐赵军的时候，杀了上将军宋义，范增作为末将，坐视不管。
English: During the conquest of Zhao's army, Xiang Yu killed the senior general Song Yi, while Fan Zeng, as the last general, sat idly by.

古文：坑秦降卒、杀秦降王、烧秦宫室，增皆亲见之，未尝闻一言也。
现代文：项羽活埋秦朝降兵，杀死秦朝降王、烧毁秦朝皇室，范增都亲眼所见，却没有听到他说一句劝说的话。
English: Fan Zeng saw Xiang Yu bury the Qin Emperor's retreating soldiers alive, kill the Qin Emperor's retreating king, and burn down the Qin Emperor's royal family with his own eyes, but he did not hear him say a word of persuasion.

古文：至于荥阳之役，身遭反间，然后发怒而去。
现代文：到了荥阳之战，范增自己受了敌方的离间，竟然又发怒离去。
English: When it came to the Battle of Shenyang, Fan Zeng himself was torn apart by the enemy, to the point that he left in anger.

古文：鸣呼，疏矣哉！
现代文：唉，疏失太多了！
English: Alas, there are too many omissions!

古文：东坡公论此事伟甚，犹未尽也。
现代文：苏东坡对这件事的论述非常深刻，但还是不够充分。
English: Su Dongpo's discussion of this matter is very profound, but still insufficient.

