古文：黄万祐任三郎黄齐王处回天自在掩耳道士抱龙道士何昭翰卢延贵
现代文：黄万祐任三郎黄齐王处回天自在掩耳道士抱龙道士何昭翰卢延贵
English: Huang Wanyu appointed as the third son of King Huang Qi, but in his return to heaven, he freely covered the ears of the dragon-holding Taoist Taoist He Zhaohan and Lu Yangui.

古文：杜鲁宾建州狂僧刘甲卢婴赵燕奴
现代文：杜鲁宾建州狂僧刘甲卢婴赵燕奴
English: Jianzhou mad monk Liu Jia Lu infancy Zhao Yannu

古文：黄万祐
现代文：黄万祐
English: Huang Mansuo

古文：黄万祐修道于黔南无人之境，累世常在。
现代文：黄万祐在黔南没有人烟的地方修道，经过几代人了，他一直在那个地方。
English: Huang Wanyu is a monk in the no man's land of southern Fujian. He has been there for several generations.

古文：每三二十年一出成都卖药，言人灾祸无不神验。
现代文：每隔二三十年出来一次，到成都去卖药。他谈论别人的灾祸，没有一次不是神奇般的应验。
English: Once every two or three decades, he comes out to sell medicine in Chengdu. He talks about the misfortunes of others, and not once is it not a miraculous fulfillment.

古文：蜀王建迎入宫，尽礼事之。
现代文：蜀国王建把他迎接进宫，尽一切礼节来对待他。
English: King Shu welcomed him into the palace and treated him with every courtesy.

古文：问其服食，皆秘而不言。曰： 吾非神仙，亦非服饵之士。但虚心养气，仁其行，鲜其过而已。 
现代文：问他服用的是什么长寿药物，他严守秘密不跟人说，他说： 我不是神仙，也不是靠了服用什么药物；只是虚心寡欲地养气，端正自己的行为，少做过分的事而已。 
English: Asked what longevity drug he was taking, which he was keeping a closely guarded secret, he said: "I'm not a god, and I'm not taking any drugs; I'm just trying to keep my spirits up, clean up my act, and not overdo things.

古文：问其齿，则曰： 吾只记夜郎侯王蜀之岁，蚕丛氏都郫之年，时被请出。
现代文：问他多大岁数了，他则说： 我只记得夜郎侯做蜀国国王的时候，蚕丛氏以郫为京都的那些年，时常被请出来。
English: When asked how old he was, he said, "I only remember that when Yeloh Maro was the king of Shu, I was often invited out during the years when the Jamsul clan used Kyoto as their capital.

古文：尔后乌兔交驰，花开木落，竟不记其甲子矣。 
现代文：从那以后，太阳与月亮交替出现，花开了叶落了，到底有多少年也记不得了。 
English: Since then, the sun and the moon have alternately appeared, flowers have bloomed and leaves have fallen, and I can't remember how many years it has been.

古文：忽一日，南望嘉州曰： 犍为之地，何其炎炎，请遣人赴之。 
现代文：忽然有一天，他朝南而远望着嘉州说： 犍为那个地方，大火烧得好凶呵，请派人赶去救灭！ 
English: Suddenly, one day, he was facing south and looking at Jiazhou in the distance, saying: "This is the place, the fire is so fierce, please send someone to save it!"

古文：如其言，使至嘉州，市肆已为瓦砾矣。
现代文：照他说的派人到了嘉州，市场已经变成一片瓦砾。
English: As he said, he sent someone to Jiazhou, and the market had turned into a pile of rubble.

古文：后坚辞归山，建泣留不住，问其后事，皆不言之。
现代文：后来他硬要告辞回山，王建哭着挽留也留不住，问他以后的事，他什么也不说。
English: Later, he insisted on saying goodbye and going back to the mountain. Wang Jian started crying and couldn't hold him back. When he asked him about the future, he wouldn't say anything.

古文：既去，于所居壁间见题处曰： 莫交牵动青猪足，动即炎炎不可扑。
现代文：走了之后，在他住处的墙上发现有个地方题着下面几句： 莫交牵动青猪足，动即炎炎不可扑。
English: After he left, he found a place on the wall of his residence inscribed with the following words: "Don't touch a blue boar's foot.

古文：鸷兽不欲两头黄，黄即其年天下哭。 
现代文：鸷兽不欲两头黄，黄即其年天下哭。 
English: The beasts of prey do not want to have two yellow heads. Yellow is the cry of the year.

古文：智者不能详之。
现代文：有学问的人也不能评细弄懂其中的含义。
English: Nor can the learned judge its meaning.

古文：至乙亥年，起师东取秦凤诸州。
现代文：到了乙亥年，蜀国兴兵东伐，攻占了秦凤各个州。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, Shu's armies advanced eastward and conquered all of Qin and Feng's provinces.

古文：报捷之际，宫内延火，应是珍宝帑藏，并为煨烬矣。
现代文：正在报捷庆祝胜利的时候，宫内起了火，一应珍宝钱财等收藏的物品，统统化为灰烬了。
English: While they were celebrating their victory, a fire broke out in the palace, and all the treasures, money, and other items in the collection were reduced to ashes.

古文：乃知太岁乙亥，是为青猪，为焚爇之明也。
现代文：这才知道太岁乙亥之年是青猪年，是起火焚烧的日期。
English: It was only then that I knew that the year of the Year of the Rooster was the Year of the Pig, and that was the date of the fire.

古文：后三年，岁在戊寅土而建殂。
现代文：过了三年，岁在戊寅，王建逝世。
English: Three years later, in Wuyin, Wang Jian passed away.

古文：方知寅为鸷兽，干与纳音俱是土，土黄色，是以言鸷兽两头黄。
现代文：这才知道寅为鸷兽，于与纳音都是土，土是黄色的，所以说鸷兽两头黄。
English: This is how we know that the crane is a beetle, and both the ying and the na are earth, and earth is yellow, so we say that the beetle is yellow at both ends.

古文：此言不差毫发。
现代文：黄万祐的这些预言，与后来发生的事情对比，分毫不差。
English: Compared to what happened later, these predictions of Huang Wanyu are not bad at all.

古文：任三郎
现代文：任三郎
English: Ren Saburo

古文：凤州宾祐王鄑员外，时在相国满存幕中筹画，宾佐最为相善。
现代文：凤州宾祐王鄑员外，当时在相国满存的府中做事，幕僚们跟他处得最好。
English: In addition to Fengzhou Binyu Wang's staff, at that time he was working in the government of a neighboring country, and the staff members got along best with him.

古文：有客任三郎者在焉，府中僚属咸与之相识，而独亲于王。
现代文：有个门客任三郎也在相国府，府中幕僚们都跟他相识，但他只亲近王鄑。
English: Ren Saburo also had a close friend in Shogoku-fu, and the staff at the government office all knew him, but he was only close to Wang Yao.

古文：居无何。忽谓王曰： 或有小失意，即吾子之福也。 
现代文：过不多久，任三郎忽然跟王鄑说： 你可能要发生失意的事，这就是你的福分呀！ 
English: Not long after, Ren Saburo suddenly said to Wang Yao, "You may have to face disappointment, that's your good fortune!"

古文：又旬月，王忽失主公意，因称疾百余日。
现代文：又过了一个月，王鄑忽然使主公满相国不满意他，他便请了病假一百余天，没到相府上班。
English: After another month, Wang Yao suddenly made the patriarch of the entire sister-in-law country dissatisfied with him, so he took sick leave for more than a hundred days and did not go to work at the sister-in-law's house.

古文：主公致于度外，音问杳绝。
现代文：满相国已把此事放在度外，也不追问他的消息。
English: Man Sang Guo has put the matter aside and does not ask him for information.

古文：任亦时来，一日谓王曰： 此地将受灾，官街大树自枯。
现代文：任三郎仍然常到他这里来，一天，他对王鄑说： 此地要遭受灾难，大街上的大树要自行干枯。
English: Ren Saburo still often came to him. One day, he said to Wang Yao: "This place will suffer a disaster. The big trees on the main street will dry up on their own.

古文：事将逼矣，叶堕之时，事行也。
现代文：祸事快要发生了，落叶的时候，就要出事。
English: A calamity is about to happen. When the leaves fall, there will be an accident.

古文：速求寻医，以脱此祸 王以主公之怒未息，深以为不可。
现代文：快去请求相国找人医治，以解除这场灾祸。 王鄑以为相国的气还没消，这时去跟他说此事太不合适。
English: Quickly go and ask your partner country to find someone to cure to relieve this disaster. Wang Yao thought that his partner country's spirit had not yet disappeared, so it was too inappropriate to tell him about this.

古文：任曰： 但三贡启事，必有指挥。 
现代文：任三郎说： 这次是三贡起事，一定有人指挥。 
English: Ren Saburo said, "This time it's the Sangun uprising, someone must be directing it.

古文：如其言，数日内三贡启。
现代文：果然像他说的，几天之内三贡便起事了。
English: Sure enough, as he said, within a few days, the Sangun rose up.

古文：乞于关陇已来寻医。
现代文：求于关陇，已来寻救治之方。
English: Seek help from Guan Zang, he has come to find a cure.

古文：果使人传旨相勉，遽以出院例钱匹缎相遗，倍厚于常。
现代文：皇上果然派人传旨表扬他，相国立即拿出院中的钱和几匹绸缎来赠给他，比平常加倍厚待他。
English: The emperor did indeed send someone to convey his praise to him, and his country immediately took out the money from the court and a few silken horses to give to him, and treated him twice as generously as usual.

古文：王乃入谢，留宴，又遗采缬锦诱之物及其家。
现代文：他到相府道谢，相国留他设宴招待，又赠各种珍贵的丝织品给他家里。
English: He went to the sister-in-law's residence to thank her, and the sister-in-law's country invited him to a banquet, and presented him with a variety of precious silk fabrics to take home.

古文：不旬，即促行北去。满相于郊外宴饯。
现代文：不到十天，就催他立即起程往北方去，满相国在郊外设宴亲自为他饯行。
English: In less than ten days, he urged him to leave immediately for the north, and the whole country held a banquet for him in the suburbs.

古文：临歧之际，仅二百余人。
现代文：分手的时候，送行的有二百人之多。
English: When they parted, there were more than two hundred people to see them off.

古文：五六日至吴山县僦居，又十日至凤州。
现代文：走了五六天来到吴山县，租房子住了下来，又走了十天到达凤州。
English: I walked five or six days to get to Wushan County, rented a house to live in, and walked another ten days to get to Fengzhou.

古文：人言已军变矣，满公归褒中。
现代文：人们都说已经发生军变了，满相国已经回到褒中老家。
English: People are saying that there has been a military coup, and Manchuria has returned to its home in Baozhong.

古文：同院皆死于难，王独免其祸。
现代文：与王鄑同院的人都死于祸乱，只有王鄑一人免受其难。
English: The people in the same house with Wang Yao all died from the calamity, and only Wang Yao was spared from the calamity.

古文：又其年至长安开化坊西北角酒肆中，复见任公。
现代文：那一年他来到长安开化坊西北角的一家酒店里，又见到了任三郎。
English: That year, he came to a hotel in the northwest corner of Chang'an Kaifang and met Ren Saburo again.

古文：问其所舍，再往谒之，失其所在矣。
现代文：王鄑打听了他的住处，再去拜访他时，已不知道他到哪里去了。
English: Wang Yao inquired about his place of residence, and when he went to visit him again, he did not know where he had gone.

古文：黄齐
现代文：黄齐
English: Huang Qi

古文：黄齐者，蜀之偏裨也。常好道，行阴功有岁年矣。
现代文：黄齐是蜀国的一员偏将，爱好道家学说，善积阴德已有多年了。
English: Huang Qi is a partial general of Shu Province. He is fond of Taoist teachings and has been accumulating virtue and virtue for many years.

古文：于朝天岭遇一老人，髭发皎白，颜色璎孺，肌肤如玉。
现代文：他在朝天岭上遇见一个老人，此人须发雪白，脸色却像小孩一样鲜艳红润，肌肤白嫩光滑如玉。
English: He met an old man on the Asatien Ridge. He had snow-white hair, but his face was as bright and rosy as a child's, and his skin was white and smooth as jade.

古文：与之语曰： 子既好道，五年之后，当有大厄，吾必相救。
现代文：他对黄齐说： 你既然爱好道家的思想，五年之后，你会有难，到时候我一定救你。
English: He said to Huang Qi, "Since you are fond of Taoist thought, in five years, you will be in trouble, and I will definitely save you then.

古文：勉思阴德，无退前志。 
现代文：你要时时善积阴德，不要改变原来的志向。 
English: You should always be good at accumulating virtue and not change your original aspiration.

古文：其后齐下峡，舟船覆溺，至滩上，如有人相拯。
现代文：后来，黄齐沿江路过巫峡，船翻了掉到水里，被水冲到石滩上时，好像有人相救一样，很顺利地到了岸边。
English: Later, Huang Qi passed through the Wuxia Gorge along the river. When the boat overturned and fell into the water and was washed onto the rocky beach, it was as if someone had come to the rescue, and he successfully reached the shore.

古文：得及于岸，视之，乃前所遇老人也，寻失所在。
现代文：黄齐上岸后回头一看，救自己上岸的正是过去遇见的那个老人。转眼之间，老人就在原地不见了。
English: When Huang Qi looked back after getting ashore, it was the old man he had met in the past who had saved him from going ashore. In the blink of an eye, the old man had disappeared.

古文：自是往往见之。
现代文：从此之后，黄齐常常见到他。
English: Since then, Huang Qi has often seen him.

古文：忽于什邡县市中相见，召齐过其所居。
现代文：有一天，两人偶然间在什邡县城里相见了，老人招呼黄齐到自己住的地方去。
English: One day, the two met by chance in the city of Shifang County. The old man invited Huang Qi to go to his place of residence.

古文：出北郭外，行桤林中，可三二里，即到其家。
现代文：出北门到了郊外，穿过一片桤木林，走了约二三里便到了老人的家。
English: I went out of the north gate to the suburbs, walked through a eucalyptus forest, and walked about two or three miles to the old man's home.

古文：山川林木，境趣幽胜。
现代文：只见此处山川秀丽，林木成荫，环境幽静别致。
English: Here you can only see the beautiful mountains and rivers, shady trees, and a quiet and unique environment.

古文：留止一宿，及明，相送出门，已在后城山内，去县七十余里。
现代文：老人留他在家里住了一宿，天亮后送他走出家门，刚走出老人的家门，却已站在县城后山里了，这里离县城有七十多里远。
English: The old man kept him at home for one night, and sent him out after dawn. Just after leaving the old man's home, he was already standing in the mountains behind the county seat, more than seventy miles away from the county seat.

古文：既归，亦话于人。
现代文：黄齐回去之后，也把自己的这次见闻告诉给别人。
English: After Huang Qi returned, he also told others about his experience.

古文：王处回
现代文：王处回
English: Wang Shuguo

古文：王侍中处回常于私第延接布素之士。
现代文：侍中王处回常常在自己家里迎送和接待一些没有官禄的人士。
English: The King's Chamberlain often welcomes and entertains people without official rank at his home.

古文：一旦有道士，庞眉大鼻，布衣褴褛，山童从后，擎柱杖药囊而已，造诣王公。于竹叶上大书 道士王挑杖奉谒。 
现代文：一天，有一位道士到他家拜访，这位道士宽眉毛大鼻子，穿着破旧的布衣服，背后跟着个小童，拿的不外是柱杖药口袋之类，他在竹叶上写道： 道士王挑杖前来拜见！ 
English: One day, a Taoist visited his home. The Taoist had wide eyebrows and a big nose, wore worn-out cloth clothes, was followed by a child, and was carrying nothing more than a cane, medicine bag, and the like. He wrote on a bamboo leaf: Taoist King, come and see me!

古文：王公素重士，得以相见，因从容致酒。
现代文：王处回素来看重士人，便立即与道士相见，客客气气地敬酒。
English: When Wang Du came back to see the priest, he immediately met the priest and had a friendly toast.

古文：观其谈论，清风飒然。处回曰： 弟子有志清闲，愿于青城山下致小道院，以适闲性。 
现代文：看到这个道士的言谈是那样清爽洒脱，王处回说： 弟子有志于清闲，愿在青城山下修造一座小小的道院，住在那里修心养性，以满足自己喜欢过清闲自在生活的心愿。 
English: Seeing that this Taoist's speech was so refreshing and free, Wang Du replied: Disciples are interested in leisure, and are willing to build a small Taoist monastery under the Qingcheng Mountain, live there to cultivate their minds, and satisfy their desire to live a leisurely life.

古文：道士曰： 未也。 
现代文：道士说： 不要这样做。 
English: The priest said, "Don't do that.

古文：因于山童处取剑，细点阶前土广尺余，囊中取花子二粒种子，令以盆覆于上。
现代文：他便从小童手里取过宝剑，仔细地指点院阶前面一尺多见方的土地，从口袋里取出两粒花籽种下去，叫人用盆扣上。
English: He then took the sword from the child's hand, carefully pointed to a piece of land more than a foot square in front of the courtyard steps, took two flower seeds from his pocket, planted them, and asked someone to use a pot to fasten them.

古文：逡巡去盆，花已生矣，渐渐长大，颇长五尺已来，层层有花，烂然可爱者两苗。
现代文：过了一会儿，把盆拿走后，花已经长出来了，只见它渐渐长大，足有五尺来高，每层叶子上都开出花朵，其中有两朵灿烂夺目，格外可爱。
English: After a while, when the pot was taken away, the flower had already sprouted, and it gradually grew to be five feet tall, with flowers blooming on each layer of leaves, including two dazzling, particularly lovely ones.

古文：尊师曰： 聊以寓目适性，此则仙家旌节花也。 
现代文：这位道士说： 这是仙家的旌节花，它可供你寓目适性。 
English: The Taoist said, "This is the rhododendron of the Immortals. It can be used as a visual aid.

古文：命食不餐，唯饮数杯而退。曰： 珍重，善为保爱。 
现代文：王处回命人给道士摆上酒饭，他不吃饭，只喝了几杯酒就退席，说： 请你珍重，善自保全爱护自己。 
English: The king's representative ordered someone to serve wine and rice to the Taoist. He did not eat, drank only a few glasses of wine and left the table, saying, "Please be careful, be good to yourself, protect and cherish yourself."

古文：言讫而去，出门不知所之。
现代文：说完就走了，出了门不知去了什么地方。
English: After saying that, he left, and I don't know where he went after he left.

古文：后王公果除二节镇，方致仕。
现代文：后来王处回果然被任为两个节镇的节度使，开始在仕途上努力。
English: Later, Wang Shubei was appointed as the festival envoy of the two festival towns, and began to work hard on the way.

古文：自后往往有人收得其花种。
现代文：自此之后，常常有人收得那枝 旌节花 的花种。
English: Since then, people have often harvested the seeds of the dogwood.

古文：天自在
现代文：天自在
English: Tenjizai

古文：利州市廛中，有一人，披发跣足，衣短布襦。
现代文：在利州的市区内有一个人，整天披头散发赤着脚，穿着短布衣。
English: In the urban area of Lizhou, there is a person who wears a hat and bare feet all day, wearing a short cloth.

古文：与人语，多说天上事。或遇纸笔，则欣然画楼台人物，执持乐器，或云龙鸾凤之像。
现代文：跟人说话时说的多是天上的事，有时碰到纸和笔，他就高高兴兴地画上楼台宫阙，里面的人物都拿着乐器；或者画上云雾中的龙以及鸾鸟凤凰之类的图像。
English: When he talks to people, he mostly talks about heavenly things. Sometimes, when he comes across paper and pen, he happily draws a palace on the stage, with characters holding musical instruments; or draws images such as a dragon in the clouds and an ostrich phoenix.

古文：夜则宿神庙中。
现代文：夜晚他睡在神庙里。
English: At night he sleeps in the temple.

古文：人谓之天自在。
现代文：人们都称他为天自在。
English: People have called him a natural leader.

古文：州之南有市，人甚阗咽。
现代文：利州的南边有个市场，人声鼎沸。
English: There's a market on the south side of Lizhou that's a hive of activity.

古文：一夕火起，烟焰亘天。
现代文：有一天晚上市场里起了火，浓烟与火焰直冲天空。
English: One night, a fire broke out in the market, sending smoke and flames into the sky.

古文：天自在于庙中独语曰： 此方人为恶日久，天将杀之。 
现代文：天自在在庙里自言自语道： 这个地方的人长期为非作歹，老天将要杀灭他们。 
English: Tian Zi said to himself in the temple: The people in this place have been doing bad things for a long time, and God is going to destroy them.

古文：遂以手探阶前石盆中水，望空浇洒。逡巡有异气自庙门出，变为大雨，尽灭其火。
现代文：说完就把手伸进阶前石头盆的水里面，捧起水来往天空浇洒，立刻有一股特殊的气体从庙门飞了出去，变成瓢泼大雨，把正在熊熊燃烧的大火全部浇灭了。
English: Having said that, he put his hand into the water of the stone basin in front of the steps, picked up the water and poured it into the sky. Immediately, a special gas flew out from the temple gate, turned into a torrential rain, and extinguished all the blazing fires.

古文：掌庙者往往与人说之，天自在遂潜遁去。
现代文：事后，掌管这座神庙的人，常跟别人讲起这天晚上他在庙里看到的种种事情，于是，天自在便悄悄地逃走了。
English: After the incident, the person in charge of this temple often told others about the various things he saw in the temple that night, so Tian Zizhi quietly fled.

古文：其后居人果为大火漂荡，始信前言有征。
现代文：后来，这里的居民果然被一场大火烧得空荡荡的。由此才相信天自在原先说的话是验证的。
English: Later, the residents here were indeed burned to a cinder by a fire, which is why I believe that what Tenzin originally said is verified.

古文：掩耳道士
现代文：掩耳道士
English: Covering the ears of Taoists

古文：利州南门外，乃商贾交易之所。
现代文：利州南门外是个贸易市场。
English: There is a trade market outside the south gate of Lizhou.

古文：一旦有道士，羽衣褴褛。来于稠人中，卖葫芦子种。
现代文：一天，有一个衣衫褴褛的道士，来到人多的地方出卖葫芦苗。
English: One day, a shabbily dressed Taoist came to a crowded place to sell gourd seedlings.

古文：云： 一二年间，甚有用处。
现代文：嘴里喊着： 一二年间，甚有用处。
English: "In a year or two, it will be very useful," he exclaimed.

古文：每一苗只生一颗，盘地而成。 
现代文：每棵苗只结一只葫芦。藤蔓盘在地上就成。
English: Each seedling produces only one gourd, and the vine plate is formed on the ground.

古文：兼以白土画样于地以示人，其模甚大。
现代文：不用打架子。 一边喊一边用白垩土块在地上画样子给人看，葫芦的模样特别大。
English: There's no need to put on airs and graces. While shouting, they use chalk clods to draw shapes on the ground for people to see. The shape of the gourd is particularly large.

古文：逾时竟无买者，皆云： 狂人不足可听。 
现代文：过了好长时间，一直没人买，人们都说： 这是个疯子，他的话不能听。 
English: After a long time, no one bought it, and people said, "He's crazy, we can't listen to him."

古文：道士又以两手掩耳急走，言 风水之声何太甚耶？ 
现代文：道士又用两手捂着耳朵急急忙忙地跑，边跑边说： 风声和水声怎么响得这么厉害呀！ 
English: Again, the Taoist covered his ears with both hands and hurriedly ran. As he ran, he said, "How come the wind and the water are so loud!

古文：巷陌孩童，竞相随而笑侮之，时呼为掩耳道士。
现代文：正在路上和胡同里玩的孩子，都跟在后面嘻嘻哈哈地起哄耍笑他，当时人们都称呼他为掩耳道士。
English: Children who were playing with him on the road and in the alley followed behind, laughing and making fun of him. At that time, people called him a hypocrite.

古文：至来年秋，嘉陵江水，一夕泛涨，漂数百家。
现代文：到了第二年秋天，嘉陵江的水在一天夜晚突然猛涨，江水漫过堤岸，淹没了几百户人家。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the water of the Jialing River suddenly surged one night. The river water overflowed the embankment and flooded hundreds of homes.

古文：水方渺瀰，众人遥见道士在水上，坐一大瓢，出手掩耳，大叫水声风声何太甚耶？ 
现代文：大水弥漫，汪洋浩渺，人们远远地望见道士正在水上，他坐着一只大瓢，伸出两手捂住耳朵，大声喊着： 水声和风声怎么响得这么厉害呀！ 
English: The water was so deep and the ocean so vast that people could see the Taoist priest on the water in the distance. He was sitting on a large oar, stretched out his hands to cover his ears, and shouted loudly: "How can the sound of the water and the wind be so loud!

古文：泛泛而去，莫知所之。
现代文：只见他在水上漂漂荡荡地远去了，谁也不知道他去了什么地方。
English: He was seen drifting away on the water, and no one knew where he had gone.

古文：抱龙道士
现代文：抱龙道士
English: Dragon-holding Taoist

古文：灌口白沙有太山府君庙。
现代文：在灌口白沙那个地方，有一座太山府君庙。
English: In the area of Hankou Baisha, there is a Taishan prefectural temple.

古文：每至春三月，蜀人多往设斋，乃至诸州医卜之人，亦尝集会。
现代文：每逢春天三月时，蜀人大都前去烧香祭奠，至于各个州的看病的、算命的，也曾到庙上去集会。
English: Every spring in March, most of the Shu people go to burn incense and pay tribute. As for the doctors and fortune-tellers from various states, they also went to the temple to gather.

古文：时有一人，鹑衣百结，颜貌憔悴，亦往庙所。
现代文：当时有一个人，穿着打了许多补钉的破衣服，容貌憔悴，也在往庙那边走。
English: At that time, there was a man, dressed in torn clothes with a lot of staples, with a haggard appearance, who was also walking towards the temple.

古文：众人轻之。
现代文：众人都没把他放在眼里。
English: People didn't think much of him.

古文：行次江际，众人憩于树荫，贫士亦坐石上。
现代文：他走到江边时，众人正在树荫下休息，这位贫士也在石头上坐下。
English: When he came to the edge of the river, the people were resting in the shade of the trees, and the poor man also sat down on the stone.

古文：逡巡谓人曰： 此水中有一龙睡。 
现代文：坐了一会儿，他对别人说： 这条江里有条龙在睡觉。 
English: After sitting for a while, he said to the others, "There is a dragon sleeping in this river."

古文：众不之应。
现代文：大家都不理睬他。
English: Everyone ignored him.

古文：旁有一叟曰： 何得见？ 贫士曰： 我则见。 
现代文：旁边有个老头儿说： 怎么见得？ 贫士说： 我见过。 
English: An old man next to him said, "How did you see it?" The poor man said, "I saw it."

古文：众曰： 我等要见如何？ 
现代文：大家说： 我们要见一见，怎么样？ 
English: They said, "We want to meet, how about it?"

古文：贫士曰： 亦不难。 
现代文：贫士说： 也不难。 
English: The poor man said, "It is not difficult.

古文：遂解衣入水，抱一睡龙出，腥秽颇甚，深闭两目，而爪牙鳞角悉备。云雾旋合，风起水涌。
现代文：他脱掉外衣跳进水里，抱着一条睡着的龙出来了，腥味特别大，那条龙深深地闭着两眼，龙爪龙牙龙鳞龙尾全都完好，云雾顿时聚拢上来，刮起了风，江水在翻腾。
English: He took off his coat and jumped into the water. He came out holding a sleeping dragon. The smell was particularly strong. The dragon's eyes were deeply closed. The dragon's claws, teeth, scales, and tail were all intact. The clouds suddenly gathered, the wind blew, and the river was churning.

古文：众皆惊走遥礼，谓之圣人。
现代文：众人都吃惊地跑出很远，远远地向这位贫士行礼，说他是圣人。
English: Surprised, everyone ran far away, far away, to pay homage to the poor man, saying that he was a saint.

古文：遂却沉龙于水底，自挂鹑衣而行。谓众人曰： 诸人皆以医卜为业，救人疾急，知人吉凶，亦近于道也。
现代文：贫士放下怀里的睡龙把它沉入水底，捡起地上的衣服搭在肩上就走，对着众人说： 你们各位都以看病占卜为职业，专门救活别人的病痛，预知别人的吉凶祸福，差不多也是在行道。
English: The poor man put down the sleeping dragon in his arms, sank it to the bottom of the water, picked up the clothes on the ground, put them on his shoulders and walked away, saying to the crowd: You all have the profession of seeing patients and divination, specialising in reviving other people's illnesses, and predicting other people's fortunes and misfortunes, almost also on the sidewalk.

古文：切不得见贫素之士便轻侮之。 
现代文：千万不要见到贫寒素谈的人就轻视侮辱他们！ 
English: Don't look down on poor people and insult them!

古文：众人惭谢而已。
现代文：众人听了，只有惭愧和称谢而已。
English: When the crowd heard this, all they could do was feel ashamed and grateful.

古文：复同行十里，瞥然不见。
现代文：大家又跟他一起走了十余里路，一眨眼他就不见了。
English: They walked more than ten miles with him, and in the blink of an eye he was gone.

古文：何昭翰
现代文：何昭翰
English: He Zhaohan

古文：伪蜀度支员外郎何昭翰，尝从知于黔南。
现代文：伪蜀王朝的度支员外郎何昭翰，曾经跟随别人在黔南当判官。
English: He Zhaohan, a member of the False Shu Dynasty, once followed others to serve as a judge in southern Anhui Province.

古文：暇日。因闲步野径，于水际见钓者，谓翰曰： 子何判官乎？ 
现代文：空闲时到野外散步，在河边看见一个钓鱼的，这个人对何昭翰说： 你是何判官吗？  是。 
English: During his free time, he went for a walk in the open and saw a fisherman by the river. The man said to He Zhaohan, "What kind of judge are you? Yes.

古文：曰： 然。 曰： 我则野人张涉也。
现代文： 我是山野之人张涉。
English: I am Zhang Zang, a man of the mountains.

古文：余比与子交知久矣，子今忘我也。 
现代文：我过去与你交往了很长时间呢，你现在忘记我了。 
English: I used to spend a lot of time with you, and now you've forgotten me.

古文：翰懵然不醒，因籍草坐。谓翰曰： 子有数任官，然终于青城县令。
现代文：何昭翰懵懵懂懂没弄明白，便在草地上坐下来，他又对何说： 你有好几任官职，但最终是做到青城县令。
English: He Zhaohan did not understand, so he sat down on the grass. He also said to He: You have several official positions, but in the end you have to be the governor of Qingcheng County.

古文：我则住青城山也，待君官满，与君同归山中，今不及到君公署也。 
现代文：我则住在青城山里，等你的官期满了时，我与你一起回山里，今天来不及到你官署里去了。 
English: I live in the Qingcheng Mountains. When your term of office is over, I will go back to the mountains with you. I cannot go to your office today.

古文：遂辞而去。
现代文：说完便告辞走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：翰深志之。
现代文：何昭翰对这件事印象特别深。
English: He Zhaohan was particularly impressed by this.

古文：后累历官，及出为青城县令，有忧色。
现代文：后来他接连做了几任官员，等出任青城县令时，心里颇为忧虑。
English: Later, he successively served as several officials, and when he became the governor of Qingcheng County, he was quite worried.

古文：钓者亦常来往，何甚重之。
现代文：那个钓鱼的也常来常往，何昭翰对他非常尊重。
English: The fisherman also came and went frequently, and He Zhaohan had great respect for him.

古文：一旦大军到城，劫贼四起，钓者与翰相携入山，何之骨肉尽在城内。
现代文：一天，大军压城，贼寇四起，钓鱼人与何昭翰结伴逃到青城山中，何的家属全都留在城里。
English: One day, a large army pressed the city, thieves and robbers were everywhere, the fishermen and He Zhaohan fled to the Qingcheng Mountains together, and He's family members all stayed in the city.

古文：贼众入县，言杀县令，脔而食之。
现代文：贼寇进入县城之后，扬言要杀死县令，剁成肉酱吃。
English: After the bandit entered the county seat, he threatened to kill the county magistrate and eat him in meat sauce.

古文：后有人入山，见何与张同行。
现代文：贼寇首领的儿子自称小将军，那一天突然失踪了。
English: The son of the leader of the bandits, who called himself Junior General, suddenly disappeared that day.

古文：何因寄语妻子曰： 吾本不死，却归旧山。尔等善为生计，无相追忆也。 自此人不复见，莫知所之。
现代文：细看画像上县令的脑袋，就是小将军的脑袋，于是，贼寇便互相残杀起来，谁也不知道县令究竟在什么地方。后来有人进山，看见何昭翰与张涉在一起走路，何便托他捎信告诉家属，说： 我并没有死，已经逃回原来的山里，你们要好好过日子，不要想念我。 从此，人们再也没看见他，不知他到哪里去了。
English: Looking closely at the head of the county magistrate on the picture, it is the head of the little general, so the thieves killed each other, and no one knows where the county magistrate is. Later, someone went into the mountains and saw He Zhaohan and Zhang Wada walking together, so he asked him to write a letter to his family, saying: I am not dead, I have fled back to the original mountain, you should live well, don't miss me. Since then, people have never seen him again, I don't know where he went.

古文：卢延贵
现代文：卢延贵
English: Lu Yangui

古文：卢延贵者，为宣州安仁场官，赴职中途阻风，泊大江次数日。
现代文：卢延贵被任命为宣州安仁场官员，在上任的途中遇上了大风，把船停泊在大江里住了几天。
English: Lu Yangui was appointed as an official of Xuanzhou Anren Field. On his way to the post, he encountered a strong wind and moored his boat in the big river for a few days.

古文：因登岸闲步，不觉行远，遥望大树下若有屋室。稍近，见室中一物，若人若兽。
现代文：闲暇无事便登岸散步，不知不觉间走出去很远。遥望前面大树底下有一所房子，走近一看，见屋里有个东西，像人又像野兽，见了人便朝你走来。
English: In his spare time, he would go ashore for a walk without incident, and without noticing it, he would go far away. Looking far ahead, there was a house under a large tree. When he looked closer, he saw that there was something in the house that looked like a man and a beast. When he saw the man, he came towards you.

古文：见人即行起而来，延贵惧而却走。此物连呼： 无惧，吾乃人也。 
现代文：卢延贵非常害怕，急急忙忙逃走，他却连连呼吁： 不要害怕，我是个人！ 
English: Lu Yangui was very scared and ran away in a hurry, but he repeatedly appealed: Don't be afraid, I'm an individual!

古文：即往就之，状貌奇伟，裸袒而通身有毛，长数寸。
现代文：延贵走到他跟前，见他生得高大奇异，裸露着身子，遍身有毛，毛长有好几寸。
English: Yan Gui walked up to him and saw that he was born unusually tall, naked, with hair all over his body, several inches long.

古文：自言商贾也，顷岁泛舟，至此遇风，举家没溺。而身独得就岸，数日食草根，饮涧水，因得不死。岁余，身乃生毛。
现代文：他自己说是做买卖的，近几年行船，走到这里遇上了大风，全家都沉没到水里去了，只剩下自己活着上了岸，天天吃草根，喝山沟里的水，这才活了下来，过了一年多身上就长出了毛。
English: He himself said that he was a trader. In recent years, he had been sailing, and when he came here, he encountered a gale, and the whole family sank into the water. He was the only one left alive on the shore. He ate grass roots every day and drank water from the ravine, and only then did he survive. After more than a year, hair grew on his body.

古文：自尔乃不饮不食，自伤孤独，无复世念。结庐于此，已十余年矣。
现代文：从那以后便不吃不喝，因为太孤独而伤心难受，再没有回到世上去的念头，就在这个地方安家住了下来，至今已经十多年了。 
English: Since then, he has not eaten or drunk, because he is too lonely and sad, and has no idea of returning to the world. He has settled down in this place, and it has been more than ten years now.

古文：因问独居于此，得无虎豹之害乎？
现代文：延贵问他一个人住在这里，难道没有虎豹等猛兽来侵害吗。
English: Yan Gui asked him if he lived here alone, wouldn't there be tigers, leopards and other wild beasts to invade?

古文：答曰： 吾已能腾空上下，虎豹无奈何也。 
现代文：他答道： 我已经能够飞上飞下地腾空飞越，虎豹之类对我没有办法了。 
English: He replied: I have been able to fly up and down, soar through the sky, and the likes of tigers and leopards can't do anything to me.

古文：延贵留久之，又问有所须乎？
现代文：延贵在那里呆了很长时间，又问他有没有需要的东西。他说： 也有。
English: He stayed there for a long time and asked if there was anything he needed. "Yes," he said.

古文：对曰： 亦有之。每浴于溪中，恒患身下不速干，得数尺布为巾，乃佳也。
现代文：我在溪水里洗澡的时候，总因为洗完后身上不能很快干燥而犯愁，如果能有几尺布做浴巾，那就好了。
English: When I take a bath in the stream, I always worry about not being able to dry my body quickly after washing. If I could have a few feet of cloth to make a bath towel, that would be fine.

古文：又得小刀，以掘药物，益善。
现代文：再有一把小刀，用来采掘药物，那更好。
English: And a knife to extract the drugs, that's even better.

古文：君能致之耶？ 
现代文：您能送给我这两样东西吗？ 
English: Can you give me these two things?

古文：延贵延之至船，固不肯。
现代文：延贵要领他到自己船上去，他说啥也不肯。
English: Yan Gui wanted to take him to his ship, but he refused to do anything.

古文：乃送巾与刀而去。
现代文：延贵只好给他送去浴巾和小刀，然后就走了。
English: Yan Gui had no choice but to give him a bath towel and a knife, and then left.

古文：罢任，复寻之，遂迷失路。后无有遇之者。
现代文：卸任之后，卢延贵又去找那个人，结果迷失了路，后来没人再碰见过那个人。
English: After leaving office, Lu Yangui went to look for that person again, but lost his way, and no one ever saw that person again.

古文：杜鲁宾
现代文：杜鲁宾
English: Mr. Trubin

古文：建康人杜鲁宾，以卖药为事。
现代文：建康有个人叫杜鲁宾，以卖药为业。
English: Jiankang has a man named Durubin, who sells drugs for a living.

古文：尝有客自称豫章人，恒来市药，未尝还值，鲁宾善待之。
现代文：曾有个顾客自称是豫章人，常来买药，没给过钱，鲁宾对他很友善。
English: There was once a customer who claimed to be from Yuzhang, who often came to buy medicine without giving any money. Rubin was very kind to him.

古文：一日复至，市药甚多，曰： 吾欠君药钱多矣，今更从君求此。
现代文：一天，他又来了，要买很多药，说： 我欠你的药钱已经很多了，今天还要从你这里拿药。
English: One day, he came again to buy a lot of medicine, saying, "I owe you a lot of money for the medicine, and I still need to get the medicine from you today."

古文：吾将还西，天市版木。
现代文：我要回到西边去，上天蒙许买卖版木。
English: I'm going back to the West, heaven forbid, to buy and sell woodblocks.

古文：比及再求，足以并酬君矣。 
现代文：等我再回来时，我就有足够的钱一起还给你了。 
English: When I come back, I'll have enough money to pay you back.

古文：杜许之。
现代文：鲁宾答应了他。
English: Rubin agreed.

古文：既去，久之乃还，赠杜山桃木十条，委之而去，莫知所之。
现代文：他走了以后，很长时间才回来，送给鲁宾十根山桃木，放在地上就走了，也不知去了什么地方。
English: After he left, it was a long time before he came back. He gave Rubin ten hickory logs, put them on the ground and left, not knowing where he was going.

古文：杜得之，不以介意，转移亲友，所存三条。
现代文：杜鲁宾得到这十根山桃木，并没有放在心上，又转手给了亲友，自己还剩下三根。
English: Durubin did not care about the ten hickory logs he received, he gave them to his relatives and friends, and he still had three left.

古文：偶命工人剖之，其中得小铁杵臼一具，高可五六寸，臼有八足，间作兽头，制作精巧，不类人力。
现代文：有一天，他偶而让工人把山桃木劈开。竟然在里面得到一套铁制的小杵臼，杵长约有五六寸。臼的下面有八只脚，每隔一只做成兽头的形状，做工精巧，好像不是人力所能干的。
English: One day, he happened to ask a worker to split a piece of hickory wood. What he got inside was a set of small iron mortise and pestle, about five or six inches long. The bottom of the mortar has eight feet, each of which is made into the shape of an animal's head. The workmanship is exquisite, as if it were not humanly possible.

古文：杜亦凡人，不知所用，竟为人取，今失所在。
现代文：杜鲁宾也是一个世俗的凡人，不知道这东西有什么用途，后来被别人拿走了，现在已不知道失落在什么地方。
English: Trubin is also a mundane mortal. He doesn't know what this thing was used for. Later it was taken away by someone else, and now he doesn't know where it was lost.

古文：杜又常治舍，有卖土者，自言金坛县人，来往甚数，杜亦厚资给之。
现代文：杜鲁宾又经常修理房子，有个卖土料的，自己说是金坛县人，与杜来往很频繁，杜鲁宾也给了他很多钱。
English: Durubin also often repaired houses. There was a man who sold soil, who said he was from Jintan County. He had frequent dealings with Du, and Durubin also gave him a lot of money.

古文：治舍毕，卖土者将去，留方尺之土曰： 以比为别。 
现代文：房子盖完了，卖土的要走，他留给杜鲁宾一尺见方的一块白土，说了声： 以此赠别。 
English: When the house was finished and the man selling the soil was about to leave, he left Trubin a piece of white soil a foot square and said, "This is a parting gift."

古文：遂去不复来。
现代文：便走了，再也没有回来。
English: He left and never came back.

古文：其土坚致，有异于常。
现代文：这块白土质地坚硬细密，跟普通的白土不一样。
English: The texture of this white soil is hard and fine, which is different from ordinary white soil.

古文：杜置药肆中，不以为贵。
现代文：杜把它放在药店里，并不把它当作什么贵重东西看待。
English: Du keeps it in the pharmacy and doesn't treat it as something precious.

古文：数年，杜之居为火所焚，屋坏土裂。
现代文：过了几年，杜鲁宾家的房子被火烧了，房屋烧坏了，这块白土也被烧裂了。
English: A few years later, the Trubin family's house was destroyed by fire. The house burned down, and this piece of white earth was also burned.

古文：视之，有小赤蛇在其隙中，剖之，蛇萦绕一白石龟，大可三二寸。
现代文：仔细一看，在土的裂缝里有一条红色小蛇，把土剖开后，发现小蛇缠绕着一只白色的石头龟，有二三寸大。
English: On closer inspection, a small red snake was found in a crack in the soil. After cutting the soil, the snake was found to be wrapped around a white stone turtle, two to three inches in size.

古文：蛇去龟存，至今宝于杜氏。
现代文：蛇没有了，石龟仍然存在，至今还珍藏在杜氏家里。
English: The snake is gone, but the stone turtle still exists, and is still treasured in the To's home.

古文：建州狂僧
现代文：建州狂僧
English: Jianzhou Mad Monk

古文：建州有僧不知其名，常如狂人。
现代文：建州有个僧人，不知道他的名字是什么。
English: There is a monk in Jianzhou, I don't know his name.

古文：其所言动，多有征验。
现代文：他经常跟疯子一样。他说的话，他的行动，多数为后来的事实所验证。
English: He often behaved like a madman. What he said, his actions, were mostly confirmed by later facts.

古文：邵武县前临溪，有大磐石，去水犹百步。一日忽以墨画其石之半，因坐石上，持竿为钓鱼之状。
现代文：邵武县城前面靠近一条河，有块大磐石距离河水有一百步远，一天，这个僧人忽然用墨水在磐石一半高的地方画了一道横线，他则坐在石头顶上，拿着鱼竿做出钓鱼的样子。
English: In front of the town of Shouwu County, near a river, there was a large rock a hundred paces away from the river. One day, the monk suddenly drew a horizontal line with ink at half the height of the rock. He sat on the top of the rock and held a fishing rod to make it look like he was fishing.

古文：明日山水大发，适至其墨画而退。
现代文：第二天山洪暴发，河水正好涨到他画的墨水横线那里就退了。
English: The next day there was a flash flood, and the river rose right up to where he had drawn the inky horizontal line and then receded.

古文：癸卯岁。尽砍去临路树枝之向南者。人问之，曰： 免碍旗幡。 
现代文：癸卯年狂僧将路旁向南伸出的树枝都砍掉了，人们问他为什么这样，他说： 免得这些树枝阻碍旌旗幡仗通过。 
English: In the year of the Rooster, the mad monk cut down all the branches of the trees that stretched southward along the road. When people asked him why he did this, he said, "I didn't want these branches to impede the passage of the banner.

古文：又曰： 要归一边。 
现代文：又说： 路过这里时，要靠一边走。 
English: And he said, "When you pass this way, turn aside."

古文：及吴师之入，皆行其下。
现代文：等到吴国军队进入建州时，果然都从被他砍掉树枝的树下走过。
English: When the Wu army entered Jianzhou, they all walked under the tree whose branches he had cut off.

古文：又城外僧寺，大署其壁，某等若干人处书之。
现代文：他还在城外寺庙的墙上，到处写下 某等若干人住在这里 的题字。
English: On the wall of a temple outside the city, he also wrote the inscription "A certain number of people live here" everywhere.

古文：及军至城下，分据僧寺，以为栅所，安置人数，一无所差。
现代文：军队来城下时，用栅栏将寺庙分成几部分，安排住人；在这里安置的人数，与狂僧在墙上题的数字，果然一点儿也不差。
English: When the army came to the city, they used the fence to divide the temple into several parts and arrange the residents; the number of people placed here is not at all different from the number inscribed on the wall by the mad monk.

古文：其僧竟为军士所杀。
现代文：后来这个狂僧竟被兵士杀害了。
English: Later, the mad monk was killed by soldiers.

古文：初王氏之季，闽建多难，民不聊生。或问狂僧曰： 时世何时当安？ 
现代文：以前，在王氏统治闽地的后期，闽建地区多有灾难，民不聊生，有人问狂僧道： 什么时候局势能够安定呢？ 
English: In the past, in the late period of Wang's rule in Handan, Handan and its surrounding areas were plagued by disasters, and the people were living a life of idleness. Some people asked the mad monk: When will the situation be stable?

古文：答曰： 侬去即安矣。 
现代文：他答道： 我死了以后局势就安定了。 
English: He replied: After my death, the situation will be stable.

古文：及其既死，闽岭克平，皆如其言。
现代文：等他死了之后，闽岭一带克复平定，都跟他说的一样。
English: After his death, the area around Fuling was restored and stabilized, just as he said.

古文：刘申
现代文：刘申
English: Liu Shen

古文：有人姓刘，在朱方，不得共语。
现代文：有个人姓刘，住在朱方。
English: There is a person surnamed Liu, who lives in Zhufang.

古文：若与之言，人必遭祸难，或本身死疾。
现代文：他不能跟别人说话，如果跟谁说话，这个人肯定要遭受灾祸，或者他本人得病死掉。
English: He can't talk to anyone, and if he does talk to someone, that person is sure to suffer a disaster, or he himself will get sick and die.

古文：唯一士谓无此理，偶值人有屯塞耳。
现代文：偏有一个人说断无这种道理，那是正赶上这个人有厄运堵滞就是了。
English: Only one person said that there was no such reason, that is, it was just catching up with this person's bad luck.

古文：刘闻之，忻然而往，自说被谤，君能见明。
现代文：刘申听说后，高高兴兴地去找他，说是自己被别人诽谤，只有您的见解高明。
English: After hearing this, Liu Shen cheerfully went to him and said that he had been slandered by others, and that only your opinion was superior.

古文：答云： 世人雷同，何足恤。 
现代文：他答道： 世上的人都这个样，用不着忧虑。 
English: He replied, "Everyone in the world is like this. There is no need to worry."

古文：须臾火发，资畜服玩荡尽。
现代文：不一会儿便起了火，他的全部积蓄衣物古玩等烧得荡然无存。
English: Soon after, a fire broke out, and all of his accumulated clothing, antiques, and other belongings were burned to nothing.

古文：于是举世号为鸺鶹。
现代文：从此，举世都称刘申为大不吉祥的鸺鶹。
English: Since then, the whole world has called Liu Shen a very unlucky dragonfly.

古文：脱遇诸涂，皆闲车走马，掩目奔避。
现代文：人们如果在道上碰见他，都丢下车马捂起耳朵拼命逃避。
English: If people meet him on the road, they all abandon their cars and horses, cover their ears and try to escape.

古文：刘亦杜门自守。
现代文：刘申自己也关起门来守在家里。
English: Liu Shen himself also shut the door to stay at home.

古文：岁时一出，则人惊散，过于见鬼。
现代文：一年之中偶尔出来一次，人们见了立即惊慌逃散，比看见鬼还要害怕。
English: Occasional once a year, people see it and immediately panic and flee, more afraid than seeing a ghost.

古文：卢婴
现代文：卢婴
English: Lu Ying

古文：淮南有居客卢婴者，气质文学，俱为郡中绝。人悉以卢三郎呼之。
现代文：淮南郡住着一个叫卢婴的人，他的气质和文学才能，都是郡中绝无仅有的，人们都叫他卢三郎。
English: In Huainan County, there lives a man named Lu Yingguo. His temperament and literary talent are unique in the county. People call him Lu Saburo.

古文：但甚奇蹇，若在群聚中，主人必有横祸，或小儿堕井，幼女入火。
现代文：但他的命运极不顺利，总与灾难连在一起。如果与众人相聚时，主人必有飞来之祸，不是小儿掉在井里，就是幼女困在火中。
English: However, his fate was not a happy one, and he was always associated with disaster. If he were to meet with many people, his master was sure to meet with misfortune. Either his child would fall into a well, or his young daughter would be trapped in a fire.

古文：既久有验，人皆捐之。
现代文：既然长时期应验，人们就都捐弃他。
English: Since it has been fulfilled over a long period of time, people have abandoned it.

古文：时元伯和为郡守，始至，爱其材气，特开中堂设宴。
现代文：当时元伯和为该郡的太守，他刚来到这里时，因为喜爱卢婴的才气，特地打开正厅的中间设宴招待客人。
English: At that time, Yuan Bohe was the governor of the county. When he first came here, he opened a banquet in the middle of the main hall to invite guests because he loved Lu Yu's talent.

古文：众客咸集，食毕。伯和戏问左右曰： 小儿堕井乎？ 
现代文：各位客人都来了，吃完点心之后，伯元跟自己手下人开玩笑道： 我的小儿子掉到井里去了吗？  没有。 
English: All the guests have arrived, and after eating the dim sum, Bo Yuan joked with his staff: Did my little son fall into the well? No.

古文：曰： 否。  小女入火乎？ 
现代文： 我的小女儿走进火坑里去了吗？  没有。 
English: Did my little girl walk into a fiery pit?

古文：曰： 否。 伯和谓坐客曰： 众君不胜故也。 
现代文：伯和对在座的客人说： 你们怕这怕那，不敢与他接近，那是你们的命运敌不过的缘故呵！ 
English: The count said to the guests present: You are afraid of this, afraid of that, you dare not approach him, that is the reason why your fate is invincible!

古文：顷之合饮，群客相目惴惴然。
现代文：过了一会儿，大家一起饮酒，客人们互相看了看，一个个心里惴惴不安。
English: After a while, everyone was drinking together, and the guests looked at each other, uneasy in their hearts.

古文：是日，军吏围宅，擒伯和弃市。
现代文：这一天，军队包围了郡守的住宅，抓住伯和后将他暴尸街头。
English: On this day, the army surrounded the residence of the county governor, seized Bo He and dragged his corpse through the streets.

古文：时节度使陈少游，甚异之，复见其才貌。谓曰： 此人一举，非摩天不尽其才。 
现代文：陈少游听说后对卢婴这个人十分惊异，后又亲眼看到他的才貌，对别人说： 此人一旦被推举，非直到最高位置不能充分发挥他的才能。 
English: After hearing this, Chen Shaoyou was very surprised at Lu Ying as a person. Later, he saw his talent with his own eyes and said to others: Once this person is elected, he will not be able to give full play to his talent until he reaches the highest position.

古文：即厚以金帛宠荐之。
现代文：便给他许多钱财并极力推宠举荐他。
English: They gave him a lot of money and tried their best to flatter and recommend him.

古文：行至潼关，西望烟尘，有东驰者曰： 朱泚作乱，上幸奉天县矣。 
现代文：节度使陈少游走到潼关时，遥望西方烟尘滚滚，有骑马往东跑的人说： 朱泚起兵叛乱了，皇上出奔奉天县了。 
English: When the festival made Chen Shaoyou walk to Shaoguan, he saw the smoke and dust billowing in the west. Some people who rode to the east said: Zhu Xi started a rebellion, and the emperor went to Fengtian County.

古文：赵燕奴
现代文：赵燕奴
English: Zhao Yannu

古文：赵燕奴者，合州石镜人也，居大云寺地中。
现代文：赵燕奴是合州石镜县人，居住在大云寺地方。
English: Zhao Yannu is from Hezhou Shijian County and lives in Dayunji District.

古文：初其母孕，数月产一虎，弃于江中；复孕，数月产一巨鳖，又弃之；又孕，数月产一夜叉，长尺余，弃之；复孕，数月而产燕奴，眉目耳鼻口一一皆具，自项已下，其身如断瓠。
现代文：当年，他母亲怀孕后，过了几个月生下一只虎，扔在江里了；第二次怀孕几个月后生下了一只大王八，又扔了；第三次怀孕几个月后生了一个夜叉，一寸来长，又扔掉了；第四次怀孕，几个月后生下燕奴。燕奴刚出生时，眉毛眼睛耳朵鼻子和嘴样样都有，从脖往下，身子就像一截切断的冬瓜。
English: That year, a few months after his mother became pregnant, she gave birth to a tiger and threw it into the river; a few months after her second pregnancy, she gave birth to a giant pangolin and threw it away again; a few months after her third pregnancy, she gave birth to a nightingale, which was an inch long, and threw it away again; a few months after her fourth pregnancy, she gave birth to a swallowtail. When the swallowtail was first born, it had eyebrows, eyes, ears, a nose and a mouth, and from the neck down, its body was like a cut-off piece of winter melon.

古文：亦有肩脾，两手足各长数寸，无肘臂腕掌，于圆肉上各生六指，才寸余，爪甲亦具。
现代文：也有肩膀，两只手臂各有几寸长，分不出大臂小臂臂肘手腕手掌来，只是在两块圆圆的肉上各生出六个指头，才一寸多长，都有指甲。
English: There were also shoulders, and two arms, each a few inches long, so that it was impossible to tell the large arm from the small arm, the elbow from the wrist, and the palm from the palm, but on each of the two round pieces of flesh there were six fingers, just over an inch long, all with nails.

古文：其下布两足，一二寸，亦皆六指。
现代文：身子下边有两只脚，一二寸长，也都是六个脚趾。
English: There are two feet on the underside of the body, one or two inches long, and they also have six toes.

古文：既产，不忍弃之。
现代文：母亲觉得既然生下来了，就不忍心再把他扔了。
English: His mother felt that now that he was born, she couldn't bear to throw him away.

古文：及长，只长二尺寸。善入水，能乘舟，性甚狡慧，词喙辩给，颇好杀戮，以捕鱼宰豚为业。
现代文：等他长大后，身高只有二尺多点儿，擅长游泳，能摆船，生性十分刁滑聪明，能言善辩，很喜屠宰动物，以捕鱼和杀猪为职业。
English: When he grew up, he was only a little over two feet tall, good at swimming, able to swing a boat, naturally very slippery and intelligent, able to speak well, very fond of slaughtering animals, fishing and killing pigs as a profession.

古文：每斗船驱傩，及歌竹枝词较胜，必为首冠。
现代文：每逢赛船驱傩以及民歌比赛等较量胜负的民间活动，他肯定是冠军得主。
English: He is certainly the champion winner in folk activities such as the boat race and the folk song competition.

古文：市肆交易，必为牙保。
现代文：在市场店铺的交易中，他总充当掮客和保人的角色。
English: He always acts as a broker and guarantor in the transactions of market shops.

古文：常发髡缁衣，民间呼为赵师。
现代文：因为他常常剃光头发，穿着黑色的衣服，所以当地人都称呼他赵师父。
English: Because he often shaved his hair and wore black clothes, the locals called him Master Zhao.

古文：晚岁但秃头白衫而已。
现代文：到了晚年，他仍然是秃头，只是黑衣服改换了白大衫。
English: In his later years, he was still bald, but his black clothes had been replaced by a white overcoat.

古文：或拜跪跳跃，倒踣于地，形裸露，人多笑之。
现代文：有时候他在跪拜跳跃时跌倒地上，下身就裸露在外面，旁边的人见了就笑话他。
English: Sometimes, when he was kneeling and jumping, he would fall to the ground and his lower body would be exposed, and the people around him would laugh at him.

古文：或乘驴远适。只使人持之，横卧鞍中，若衣囊焉。
现代文：有时候骑着毛驴走远路，他只让别人牵着驴，自己则横躺在鞍子上，好像一个衣服包搭在驴背上。
English: Sometimes he rides a donkey for a long distance. He only lets others lead the donkey, while he himself lies on the saddle, like a garment bag on the donkey's back.

古文：有二妻一女，衣食丰足。
现代文：他有两个老婆一个女儿，过着丰衣足食的日子。
English: He has two wives and one daughter, and lives a well-fed life.

古文：或击室家，力不可制。
现代文：他有时候打老婆，力气很大，难以抵制。
English: He sometimes beats his wife. He is very strong and can't resist.

古文：乾德初，年仅六十，腰腹数围，面目如常人无异。
现代文：乾德初年，燕奴只有六十岁，腰粗有几抱，面目与一般人没有不同之处，并无衰老的标志。
English: In the first year of Qiande, Yan Niu was only sixty years old, with a thick waist and a few arms, his face was no different from the average person, and there was no sign of aging.

古文：其女右手无名指，长七八寸，亦异于人。
现代文：他那个女儿的右手，无名指有七八寸长，也跟别人大为不同。
English: His daughter's right hand, with its seven-and-a-half-inch ring finger, was also very different.

