古文：凡百臣僚，当体朕意。壬子，赐前昭义军节度使张从恩衣一袭，金带、鞍马、彩帛等。
现代文：乾祐二年春正月八日，赐前昭义军节度使张从恩衣服一套，以及金带、鞍马和彩帛等。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the second year of the Qianlong Spring, he gave Zhang Congen a set of clothes, as well as a gold belt, a pommel horse and a colorful scepter to the former Shouyi Army.

古文：时有投无名文字诬告从恩者，故特有是赐，以安其心。
现代文：当时有人寄匿名信诬告张从恩，所以特地有这次赏赐，以安他的心。
English: At that time, someone sent an anonymous letter falsely accusing Zhang Congen, so this reward was specially given to appease his heart.

古文：乙卯，河府军前奏，今月四日夜，贼军偷斫河西寨，捕斩七百余级。
现代文：十一日，河府军中上奏，本月四日夜晚，贼军偷袭河西寨，被捕杀七百多人。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Hebei army was in full swing, and on the evening of the 4th day of the month, the bandits raided Hexi Village, capturing and killing more than 700 people.

古文：时蜀军自大散关来援王景崇，郭威自将兵赴岐下，将行，戒白文珂、刘词等曰： 贼之骁勇，并在城西，慎为儆备。 
现代文：当时蜀军从大散关前来援救王景崇，郭威亲自领兵奔赴岐下，临行，告诫白文珂、刘词等人说： 贼兵骁勇，都在城西，要慎为戒备。 
English: At that time, the Shu army came from Dazangguan to rescue Wang Jingsong. Guo Wei personally led the troops to rush to Qishan, and on the way, he warned Bai Wenke, Liu Zhi and others, saying: The thief soldiers are all in the west of the city, be cautious and alert.

古文：既行，至华州，闻川军退败，且忧文珂等为贼奔突，遂兼程而回。
现代文：郭威走到华州，听到蜀军已经败退，又担心白文珂等人被贼兵攻击，于是兼程而回。
English: Guo Wei walked to Huazhou, heard that the Shu army had been defeated, and feared that Bai Wenke and others would be attacked by thieves, so he made a side trip back.

古文：丁丑夕，大风。乙酉，以前房州刺史李筠夫为鸿胪卿。
现代文：贼人在城内侦察到郭威已经西行，便在正月四日夜，派贼将王三铁等人，率领骁勇一千多人，沿黄河而行，挖坎上岸，分三路进攻。
English: Thieves in the city detected that Guo Wei had left for the west, so on the evening of the fourth day of the first month, the thieves sent Wang San Tie and others, led by more than a thousand people, along the Yellow River, dug dikes ashore, and attacked in three ways.

古文：戊子，前右监门将军乔达，及其兄契丹伪命客省使荣等皆弃市。
现代文：贼军已进入朝廷军队的防御栅栏中，刘词极力抗击，短兵相接，于是打败了贼兵。二月十四日，前右监门将军乔达，以及他兄长、契丹伪任客省使乔荣等都被处死在大街上。
English: The thief army had entered the defense fence of the imperial court army. Liu Zhi tried his best to fight back and defeated the thief soldiers. On February 14th, the former right guard gate general Qiaoda, as well as his brother, the Khitan pseudo guest provincial envoy Qiao Rong, were all executed on the street.

古文：戊申，以前邠州节度使安审约为左神武统军，以前洛京副留守袁鳷为右神武统军。
现代文：乔达，是叛军李守贞的妹夫，所以都被诛杀。十六日，徐州巡检使成德钦上奏，在峒山吾镇遇上南唐贼寇，打败他们，杀死五百人，活捉一百二十人。
English: On the 16th, Cheng Deqin, the inspector of Xuzhou, encountered the Southern Tang bandits in Lushanwuzhen, defeated them, killed 500 people, and captured 120 people alive.

古文：乙卯，河府军前奏，今月九日，河中节度副使周光逊弃贼河西寨，与将士一千一百三十人来奔。
现代文：二十六日，诏令左谏议大夫贾纬等修撰高祖实录。夏四月，幽、定、沧、贝、深、冀等州地震。八日，太白星横过天空。五月十二日，河府军上报，本月九日，河中节度副使周光逊放弃河西贼寨，与将士一千一百三十人前来投奔。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict ordered the doctor Jia Wei and others to write down the real record of Gaozu. In the summer of April, the earthquake occurred in the states of Yu, Ding, Cang, Bei, Sheng and Hebei. On the 8th, the white star crossed the sky. On the 12th of May, the Hebei army reported. On the 9th of this month, Zhou Guangxun, the deputy envoy of the Mid-Hebei Festival, abandoned the Hexi Thieves' Village and fled with 1,130 soldiers.

古文：己未，右监门大将军许迁上言，奉使至博州博平县界，睹蝝生弥亘数里，一夕并化为蝶飞去。
现代文：十六日，右监门大将军许迁上言，奉命出使到博州博平县界时，目睹幼蝗发生绵延数里，一个晚上全化为蝴蝶飞走。
English: On the 16th, General Xu Qian, the Right Supervisor of the Gate, gave a speech. When he was ordered to go to the border of Boping County in Bozhou, he witnessed the young locusts stretching for several miles, and one night they all turned into butterflies and flew away.

古文：辛酉，兗、郓、齐三州奏蝝生。
现代文：十八日，兖、郓、齐三州上奏幼蝗出生。
English: On the 18th, the first baby locusts were born in Shangxiao, Zhishan and Qi.

古文：乙丑，永兴赵思绾遣牙将刘成诣阙乞降，制授赵思绾华州节度留后、检校太保，以永兴城内都指挥使常彦卿为虢州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，永兴府赵思绾派牙将刘成到京城求降，诏令授赵思绾为华州节度留后、检校太保，以永兴城内都指挥使常彦卿为虢州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, Yongxing Prefecture's Zhao Siyu sent Liu Cheng to Beijing to ask for a demotion, and Zhao Siyu was awarded the title of Huazhou Festival, the title of school inspector, and Yongxing City's commander-in-chief, Lord Changyan, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁卯，宋州奏，蝗抱草而死。
现代文：二十四日，宋州上奏蝗虫拥抱着枯草而死。
English: On the 24th, Songzhou Shangso locusts hugged the dead grass and died.

古文：己巳，湖南奏，蛮寇贺州，遣大将军徐进率兵援之，战于风阳山下，大败蛮獠，斩首五千级。
现代文：二十六日，湖南上奏，南蛮寇犯贺州，派大将军徐进领兵援助贺州，在风阳山下交战，大败蛮兵，斩首五千级。
English: On the 26th, the Southern Barbarian Cossacks invaded Hezhou from Hunan Province, and sent General Xu Jin to lead the troops to aid Hezhou. They fought at the foot of Mount Fengyang and defeated the barbarians, beheading 5,000 of them.

古文：辛卯，回鹘遣使贡方物。
现代文：六月一日，日食。兖州上奏，捕获蝗虫二万斛，魏、博、宿三州蝗虫拥抱着枯草而死。
English: On June 1st, the solar eclipse, the music was played in Zhangzhou, and twenty thousand locusts were caught. The locusts in the three provinces of Wei, Bo, and Shuku hugged the dead grass and died.

古文：丙申，改商州乾元县为乾祐县，隶京兆府。是月，邠、宁、泽、潞、泾、延、鄜、坊、晋、绛等州旱。
现代文：七日，滑、濮、澶、曹、兖、淄、青、齐、宿、怀、相、卫、博、陈等州上奏发生蝗灾，隐帝分别命令朝中使者到蝗虫所在地的川泽山林祭神。本月，宁、泽、潞、泾、延、鹿阝、坊、晋、绛等州干旱。
English: On the 7th, locust plagues were reported in the provinces of Nanning, Zhe, Guizhou, Shandong, Qingdao, Qi, Shandong, Huizhou, Guizhou, Huizhou, Weizhou, Bo, and Chen. Emperor Qian separately ordered the ambassadors of the two countries to go to the forests of the Sichuan Ze Mountains, where the locusts were located, to offer sacrifices to the gods. This month, the provinces of Ning, Zhe, Guizhou, Guizhou, Yan, Yan, Lucheng, Fang, Jin, and Handan suffered from drought.

古文：秋七月辛亥，湖南奏，析长沙县东界为龙喜县。
现代文：秋七月十日，湖南上奏，分出长沙县东部设置龙喜县，隐帝准允。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, Hunan Province was divided into Longxi County in the eastern part of Changsha County, with the consent of Emperor Yingdi.

古文：从之。丙辰，枢密使郭威奏，收复河府罗城，李守贞退保子城。
现代文：十五日，枢密使郭威上奏，收复河府外大城，李守贞退守内小城。
English: On the 15th, Guo Wei was sent by the emperor to recapture the large cities outside Hefu, while Li Shouzhen retreated to the small cities inside.

古文：丁巳，永兴都部署郭从义奏： 新除华州留后赵思绾，自今月三日授华州留后，准诏赴任，三移行期，仍要铠甲以给牙兵，及与之，竟不遵路。
现代文：十六日，永兴总部署郭从义上奏 ：新任华州留后赵思绾，从本月三日被授华州留后以后，依诏当上任，而再三拖延行期，又索要铠甲以供给他的牙兵，当给予他后，还不上路。
English: On the 16th, Guo Congyi, the general manager of Yongxing, made the following announcement: Zhao Siyi, the newly-appointed Huazhou resident, took office in accordance with the edict after being granted Huazhou residence on the 3rd of this month, but he repeatedly delayed the term of office, and he also asked for armor to supply his dental soldiers, but when he was given it, he did not go.

古文：至九日夕，有部曲曹彦进告，思绾欲于十一日夜与同恶五百人奔南山入蜀。
现代文：到九日晚，有部下曹彦上告，赵思绾将在十一日夜与同恶五百人逃往南山进入蜀地。
English: On the evening of the 9th, one of Cao Yan's subordinates appealed that Zhao Siyu would flee to Nanshan and enter Shu on the night of the 11th, together with 500 people who shared the same evil.

古文：戊辰，永兴军节度使兼兵马都部署郭从义加同平章事，徙华州节度使。
现代文：十一日清晨，再次催他上路，他又说要等到晚上才上路。我旋即与王峻进城，分兵把守四方城门，赵思绾部下兵士，已各被捉拿，于是到永兴官府，令赵思绾来到后就抓住他，赵思绾与他一帮党徒，已全被处置完毕。 
English: In the early morning of the 11th day, he urged him to go on the road again, and he said that he would wait until the evening to go on the road. I immediately entered the city with Wang Jun. A detachment of soldiers guarded the four-sided city gate. Zhao Siyan's subordinates had already been arrested, so I went to the Yongxing government office, ordered Zhao Siyan to come and caught him. Zhao Siyan and his gang of party members have all been disposed of.

古文：郭从义奏，处斩前巡检使乔守温，供奉官王益、时知化、任继勋等。
现代文：二十三日，枢密使郭威上奏，收复河中府，逆贼李守贞自焚而死。二十五日，兖州上奏，捕获蝗虫三万斛。二十七日，郭从义上奏，处斩前巡检使乔守温，供奉官王益、时知化、任继勋等。
English: On the 23rd, Guo Wei, the envoy of the privy council, made a report to recover the central government of Hechuan, and the traitor Li Shouzhen died of self-immolation. On the 25th, Bozhou made a report to capture thirty thousand locusts. On the 27th, Guo Zongyi made a report to execute the former inspector general Qiao Shouwen, and offered the officials Wang Yi, Shi Zhichua, and Ren Jixun.

古文：守温受高祖命巡检京兆，会王益自凤翔押送赵思绾等赴阙，行至京兆，守温迎益于郊外，思绾等突然作乱，遂据其城。
现代文：乔守温受高祖命巡检京兆府，当王益从凤翔押送赵思绾等到京城时，走到京兆，乔守温在郊外迎接王益，赵思绾等人突然作乱，占据了京兆府城。
English: Qiao Shouwen received Gao Zu's order to inspect Jingzhao Prefecture. When Wang Yi escorted Zhao Sijun from Fengxiang to Beijing, he went to Jingzhao. Qiao Shouwen met Wang Yi in the suburbs. Zhao Sijun and others suddenly made a disturbance and occupied Jingzhao Prefecture.

古文：乙未，宣徽南院使、永兴行营兵马都监王峻，宣徽北院使、河府行营兵马都监吴虔裕，并加检校太傅。九月乙己，枢密使郭威检校太师、兼侍中，宋州节度使兼侍卫亲军都指挥使史宏肇加兼中书令。
现代文：到郭从义领兵攻讨赵思绾时，令乔守温安排役夫。乔守温有宠爱的姬妾陷于贼城中，被赵思绾收用，到攻下贼城后，郭从义得到赵思绾的全部婢仆，乔守温索求他的爱姬，郭从义虽然给了他，但内心不满意，于是追究他前一次的罪过，密告郭威，请除掉他，于是乔守温与王益等人全被诛杀。兖州上奏，捕获蝗虫四万斛。八月二十日，右拾遗高守琼上言： 官员年龄不到三十岁，请不要任为县令。 诏令说： 从今以后选用人才，年纪到七十岁的，应该选任悠闲轻松的官职；年纪轻资历不够的，不得选任县令。 九月五日，枢密使郭威加封检校太师、兼侍中，宋州节度使兼侍卫亲军都指挥史弘肇加封兼中书令。
English: When Guo Zongyi led the troops to attack Zhao Siyu, he ordered Qiao Shouwen to arrange for a servant. Qiao Shouwen's favorite concubine was trapped in the thief's city and was used by Zhao Siyu. After the capture of the thief's city, Guo Zongyi got all of Zhao Siyu's maidservants. Qiao Shouwen asked for his love, and although Guo Zongyi gave it to him, he was not satisfied with his heart, so he investigated his previous crime and informed Guo Wei, please get rid of him. Qiao Shouwen and Wang Yi and others were

古文：初，郭威平河中回，朝廷议加恩，威奏曰： 臣出兵已来，辇毂之下，无犬吠之忧，俾臣得专一其事，军旅所聚，资粮不乏，此皆居中大臣镇抚谋画之功也，臣安敢独擅其美乎！ 
现代文：先前，郭威平定河中回来，朝廷商议给他施加恩惠，郭威上奏说 ：臣出兵以来，京城之中，无鸡鸣狗叫之忧，使臣得以专心战事，军旅之中，资粮不缺，这都是朝中大臣镇抚谋画的功劳，臣哪敢一人独占功劳啊！ 
English: Earlier, when Guo Wei returned from Pingdinghe, the imperial court discussed granting him a favor. Guo Wei reported: "Since my father-in-law sent troops to the capital, there have been no chickens crowing or dogs barking, so my father-in-law was able to concentrate on the war, and there was no shortage of supplies during his military tour. All of this is the merit of the strategizing of the central and northern ministers. How dare a minister take all the credit!

古文：帝然之，于是宏肇与宰相、枢密使、三司使，次第加恩。
现代文：隐帝认为说得对，于是史弘肇与宰相、枢密使、三司使，依次加恩。
English: Emperor Inti thought that he was right, so Shi Hongzhao and the prime minister, the privy councilor, and the three commissioners, followed suit.

古文：癸未，监修国史苏逢吉、史官贾纬以所撰《高祖实录》二十卷上之。
现代文：不久各大臣因为皇恩所加，都是朝廷亲近之臣，而宗室刘信以及青州刘铢等人都是国家元勋，必有不平之意，又担心诸侯认为朝廷对亲近之臣偏爱，于是建议对各地诸侯，普加恩惠。
English: Soon, all the ministers were close subjects of the imperial court because of the royal favor, and Liu Xin, the ancestor's wife, and Liu Ye of Qingzhou were all national heroes. There must have been a sense of dissatisfaction, and they were worried that the princes thought that the imperial court favored close subjects, so they suggested that the princes around the country should be favored.

古文：丙戌，荆南高保融加检校太师、兼侍中；以殿前都部署、江州防御使李建为遂州节度使，充侍卫马军都指挥使；以奉国左厢都指挥使、永州防御使王殷为夔州节度使，充侍卫步军都指挥使。
现代文：十九日，湖南马希广上奏，于八月十八日大破朗州马希萼部众。二十一日，右武卫将军石懿、左武卫将军石训均被停职。石懿等人在八月中秋祭享晋室五代先祖之时，命娼女在斋宫留宿，被鸿胪寺弹劾，所以有此惩罚。二十二日，邺都、磁、相、邢、氵名等州上奏，大雨毁坏禾稼。西京上奏，洛水溢出堤岸。冬十月一日，契丹人入寇。
English: On the 19th, Hunan Mashi Guang was performed, and on the 18th of August, the audience of the Langzhou Mashi Calybe was defeated. On the 21st, the Right Wuwei General Shisheng and the Left Wuwei General Shishun were both suspended. When Shisheng and others were enjoying the mid-August Mid-Autumn Festival to enjoy the five-generation ancestors of the Jin family, the life prostitute stayed at the Jaigu and was impeached by Hongyu Temple, so there was this punishment. On the 22nd, Shidu, Magneto, So, Xing and Yunnan provinces were performed, and heavy rain destroyed the crops. In the West,

古文：契丹陷贝州高老镇，南至鄴都北境，又西北至南宫、堂阳，杀掠吏民。
现代文：十四日，监修国史的苏逢吉、史官贾纬将所撰《高祖实录》二十卷呈上。契丹攻陷贝州高老镇，南到邺都北境，又西北到南宫、堂阳，杀掠官吏百姓。
English: On the 14th, Su Fengji, the supervisor of the national history, and Jia Wei, the historian, presented the 20 volumes of "Gao Zu Shih Lu" compiled by Su Fengji and Jia Wei. The Khitan attacked and occupied Beizhou Gaolao Town, south to the northern border of Xindu, and northwest to Nangu and Doyang, killing and plundering officials and common people.

古文：数州之地，大被其苦，籓郡守将，闭关自固。
现代文：数州大地，深受其苦，藩郡守将，闭关自守。
English: Several prefectures in the country have suffered from this, and the governors of the domains and counties have closed their gates to protect themselves.

古文：乙卯，以大府卿刘皞为宗正卿。
现代文：隐帝派枢密使郭威领军巡视边境，仍令宣徽使王峻参预军事。
English: Guo Wei, a confidential envoy of the Hidden Emperor, led the army to patrol the border, and still ordered Xuan Hui to make Wang Jun participate in the pre-military.

古文：十二月庚午朔，湖南奏，静江军节度使马希赡以今年十月十八日卒。废朝二日。
现代文：十二月一日，湖南上奏，静江军节度使马希赡在今年十月十八日去世，隐帝停止上朝两天。
English: On December 1st, Hunan's Shangso and Jingjiang's Military Festival caused Ma Xilii to die on October 18th this year, and Emperor Inti stopped being enthroned for two days.

古文：辛未，日晕三重。
现代文：二日，日晕三重。
English: On the second day, I felt dizzy three times.

古文：戊寅，司徒、门下侍郎、平章事窦贞固奏，请修晋朝实录。诏史官贾纬、窦俨、王伸等修撰。
现代文：九日，司徒、门下侍郎、平章事窦贞固上奏，请修撰晋朝实录，诏令史官贾纬、窦俨、王伸等人修撰。
English: On the 9th, Sito, his attendants, and Taira no Sho asked Dou Zhenggu to write a historical record of the Jin Dynasty, and ordered the historians Jia Wei, Dou Xuan, and Wang Shin to write it.

古文：壬午，皇帝二十一姊永宁公主进封秦国长公主。
现代文：十三日，隐帝的二十一姐永宁公主进封为秦国长公主。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Qin's 21st sister, Princess Yongning, was enthroned as the First Princess of Qin.

古文：颍州奏，破淮贼于正阳。
现代文：颍州上奏，在正阳打败南唐贼寇。
English: He played in Zhangzhou and defeated the South Tang bandits in Zhengyang.

