古文：阏逢阉茂，一年。
现代文：阏逢阉茂，一年。
English: I've been in Shimo for a year.

古文：高宗明皇帝上建武元年
现代文：齐纪五齐明帝建武元年
English: Emperor Jianwu of the Five Dynasties in the First Year of the Ming Dynasty

古文：春，正月，丁未，改元隆昌；大赦。
现代文：春季正月，丁未，郁林王萧昭业改年号为隆昌，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of spring, Ding Wei, Yu Lin Wang Xiao Zhaoye changed his name to Longchang, and was pardoned by the world.

古文：雍州刺史晋安王子懋，以主幼时艰，密为自全之计，令作部造仗；征南大将军陈显达屯襄阳，子懋欲胁取以为将。
现代文：雍州刺史晋安王萧子懋考虑到皇帝年幼，时局不稳定，就暗中筹措，以便发生不测之事时能自我保全。他命令所辖兵器作坊打造兵器；又想胁迫当时驻扎在襄阳的征南大将陈显达担任自己的大将。
English: Taking into account that the emperor was young and the situation was unstable, Xiao Zixuan, the prince of Jinan, the ruler of Yongzhou, secretly raised the money so that he could protect himself in the event of an accident. He ordered the weapons workshop under his jurisdiction to build weapons; he also wanted to coerce Chen Xianda, the general stationed in Xiangyang at that time, to serve as his general.

古文：显达密启西昌侯鸾，鸾征显达为车骑大将军；徙子懋为江州刺史，仍令留部曲助镇襄阳，单将白直、侠毂自随。
现代文：陈显达把情况密告西昌侯萧鸾，萧鸾任命陈显达为车骑大将军，而调萧子懋为江州刺史，并且命令他把部曲留下来帮助镇守襄阳，仅仅带周围随从、侍卫人员随行。
English: Chen Xianda tipped off the situation to Xichang Hou Xiaoqi, Xiaoqi appointed Chen Xianda as the general of the cavalry, and appointed Xiao Ziqi as the historian of Jiangzhou, and ordered him to keep the part to help the town guard of Xiangyang, only to accompany the entourage and the guards.

古文：显达过襄阳，子懋谓曰： 朝廷令身单身而返，身是天王，岂可过尔轻率！
现代文：陈显达经过襄阳时，萧子懋对他说： 朝廷命令我单身而返，我身为皇室王爵，难道能过于轻率吗！
English: When Chen Xianda passed through Xiangyang, Xiao Zixuan said to him: The court ordered me to return single. As a royal prince, can I be too reckless?

古文：今犹欲将二三千人自随，公意何如？ 
现代文：现在我想要二三千人马随行，不知将军您意下如何呢？ 
English: Now I want two or three thousand horses to accompany me. I don't know, General, what do you think?

古文：显达曰： 殿下若不留部曲，乃是大违敕旨，其事不轻；且此间人亦难可收用。 
现代文：陈显达回答道： 殿下您如果不把部曲留下，就是完全违抗圣旨，这可是罪过不轻的事情呀！况且，这个地方的人也难以收用，您带上他们也未必能尽听指挥。 
English: Chen Xianda replied, "Your highness, if you don't keep the piece, you are completely defying the sacred will, which is a serious matter! Moreover, it is difficult for people in this place to use it, and they may not be able to listen to the conductor when you take it with you.

古文：子懋默然。
现代文：萧子懋见目的难以达到，只好沉默不语了。
English: Xiao Zixuan found it difficult to achieve his goal, so he had no choice but to remain silent.

古文：显达因辞出，即发去。
现代文：于是，陈显达告辞而出，很快就出发走了。
English: As a result, Chen Xianda made a farewell speech and left soon after.

古文：子懋计未立，乃之寻阳。
现代文：萧子懋因计谋未成，就去了寻阳。
English: Xiao Zixuan did not succeed in his plan, so he went to look for the sun.

古文：西昌侯鸾将谋废立，引前镇西咨议参军萧衍与同谋。
现代文：西昌侯鸾萧将要谋划废除郁林王，另立新皇帝，因此叫来原镇西谘议参军萧衍一起密谋。
English: Xichang lord Xiao Yan was planning to abolish King Yulin and set up a new emperor, so he invited Xiao Yan, a former member of the Western Advisory Council, to conspire with him.

古文：荆州刺史随王子隆，性温和，有文才；鸾欲征之，恐其不从。
现代文：担任荆州刺史的随王萧子隆性情温和，风雅而有文才，萧鸾想要调用他，但又担心他不听从。
English: Su Wang Xiao Zilong, who served as the chief of Jingzhou, was mild-mannered, elegant and literate. Xiao Yu wanted to call him, but he was worried that he would not listen.

古文：衍曰： 随王虽有美名，其实庸劣。
现代文：萧衍说： 随王这个人虽然美名外传，其实非常平庸顽劣。
English: Xiao Yan said: Although Su Wang is famous, he is actually a very mediocre and bad actor.

古文：既无智谋之士，爪牙唯仗司马垣历生、武陵太守卞白龙耳。
现代文：他身边没有一个智谋人物，手下武将中他只依靠司马垣历生和武陵太守卞白龙。
English: He did not have a strategist around him. Among his generals, he only relied on Sima Qigong Lian Sheng and Wuling Taizhong Baolong.

古文：二人唯利是从，若啖以显职，无有不来；随王止须折简耳。 
现代文：垣历生和卞白龙这两个家伙是唯利是从之徒，如果以显要的官职引诱他们，没有不来的道理。至于随王本人，仅用一封信即可请到。 
English: These two fellows, Gaki Lisheng and Zou Bailong, are mercenaries and followers. If you entice them with a prominent official position, there is no reason why they should not come. As for the king himself, you can invite him with just one letter.

古文：鸾从之。
现代文：萧鸾听从了萧衍的计划。
English: Xiao Yao followed Xiao Yan's plan.

古文：征历生为太子左卫率，白龙为游击将军；二人并至。
现代文：于是，就征召垣历生为太子左卫率，卞白龙为游击将军，垣、卞两人一起来了。
English: As a result, he conscripted Kakitsuko to be the prince's bodyguard, and Tsukuda Hakuryo to be a guerrilla general. Kakitsuko and Tsukuda came together.

古文：续召子隆为侍中、抚军将军。
现代文：接着，又征召萧子隆为侍中、抚军将军。
English: Next, he conscripted Xiao Zilong as an aide-de-camp and general of the garrison.

古文：豫州刺史崔慧景，高、武旧将，鸾疑之，以萧衍为宁朔将军，戍寿阳。
现代文：豫州刺史崔慧景是齐高帝萧道成、齐武帝萧赜的旧将，萧鸾对他有疑心，就派遣萧衍为宁朔将军，戍守寿阳。
English: Cui Huijing, the governor of Yuzhou, was a former general of Qigong Emperor Xiao Ducheng and Qiwu Emperor Xiao Jie. Xiao Jie was suspicious of him, so he sent Xiao Yan as the general of Ningshuo to guard Shouyang.

古文：慧景惧，白服出迎；衍抚安之。
现代文：崔慧景害怕了，穿着白色衣服出城迎接萧衍，萧衍对他大加安抚。
English: Cui Huijing was scared and went out of the city in white clothes to meet Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan tried to calm him down.

古文：辛亥，郁林王祀南郊；戊午，拜崇安陵。
现代文：辛亥，郁林王在南郊祭天；戊午拜谒其父文惠太子墓崇安陵。
English: In Xinhai, King Yulin held a divine service in the southern suburbs; in the afternoon, he visited the tomb of his father, Prince Wen Hui, at the Chong'an Mausoleum.

古文：癸亥，魏主南巡；戊辰，过比干墓，祭以太牢，魏主自为祝文曰： 乌呼介士，胡不我臣！ 
现代文：癸亥，北魏孝文帝南下巡视；戊辰，经过比干的坟墓时，用牛、羊、猪三性祭于墓前，孝文帝亲自撰写祭文，其中说道： 呜呼！如此耿直之士，为何不生于当今成为朕的大臣呢！ 
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen went south to inspect the tomb of Bi Gan; in the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen personally wrote an offering in front of Bi Gan's tomb, using oxen, sheep, and pigs. He said, "Wow! Such an upright man, why wasn't he born today to become my minister!"

古文：帝宠幸中书舍人綦毌珍之、硃隆之、直阁将军曹道刚、周奉叔、宦者徐龙驹等。
现代文：南齐郁林王宠幸偏爱中书舍人綦毋珍之、朱隆之、直将军曹道刚、周崐奉叔、宦官徐龙驹等人。
English: Nanqi Yuling Wang favorably favored the middle school students such as Zhu Rongzhi, Cao Daogang, Zhou Bongshu, and Xu Longyao.

古文：珍之所论荐，事无不允；内外要职，皆先论价，旬月之间，家累千金；擅取官物及役作，不俟诏旨。
现代文：凡是綦毋珍之所论定、荐举的事情和人选，没有得不到信任、答应的。因此，綦毋珍之把朝廷内外的重要官职统统划定价格，然后交钱任命，一月之间，他就富得家累千金。他还擅自攫取朝中物品，占用差役人员供自己驱使，不等待朝廷的诏旨。
English: All matters and candidates decided and recommended by Zou Beizhen were trusted and approved. Therefore, Zou Beizhen set the prices for all important official positions both inside and outside the court, and then appointed them by paying money. Between January and May, he became rich and accumulated a lot of money. He also arbitrarily seized the goods of the court and occupied the guards for his own use, without waiting for the imperial edict.

古文：有司至相语云： 宁拒至尊敕，不可违舍人命。 
现代文：朝中的官员在一起言谈时说： 宁可抗拒皇上的圣旨，也不可以违背綦毋珍之的命令。 
English: When officials of the Korean and Chinese governments were talking together, they said: It is better to resist the emperor's sacred will than to disobey an order that is not rare.

古文：帝以龙驹为后阁舍人，常居含章蓼，著黄纶帽，被貂裘，南面向案，代帝画敕；左右侍直，与帝不异。
现代文：明帝任徐龙驹为后舍人，徐龙驹经常住在含章殿中，戴着黄纶帽，披着貂皮大衣，面朝南坐在案前，代替皇帝批阅文告，左右侍奉，与皇帝没有什么两样。
English: Emperor Ming appointed Xu Longtao as his heir. Xu Longtao often lived in the Hall of the Grand Chapter. He wore a yellow skullcap, wore a mink coat, sat facing south in front of the desk, approved and read proclamations in place of the emperor, and served the emperor left and right. He was no different from the emperor.

古文：帝自山陵之后，即与左右微服游走市里，好于世宗崇安陵隧中掷涂、赌跳，作诸鄙戏，极意赏赐左右，动至百数十万。
现代文：郁林王自从登基之后，就与左右侍从们穿上民服在闹市中游走戏玩，还喜欢在文惠太子崇安陵的墓道中扔掷泥巴、比赛跳高，做种种粗鄙下流的游戏，使劲赏赐服从人员，动辄就是成千上万。
English: Ever since he ascended to the throne, King Yulin has dressed up in civilian clothes and swam around the busy city with his attendants on his right and left. He also likes to throw mud in the graveyard of Prince Wenhui's Chong'an Mausoleum, compete in high jump, do all kinds of crude and vulgar games, and reward obedient personnel with hard work. There are thousands of them at any time.

古文：每见钱，曰： 我昔思汝一枚不得，今日得用汝未？ 
现代文：一见到钱，他就说： 过去我想得到你十个都不行，现在我还用得着你吗？ 
English: As soon as he saw the money, he said, "In the past, I couldn't even get you for ten yuan. Do I still need you now?"

古文：世祖聚钱上库五亿万，斋库亦出三亿万，金银布帛不可胜计；郁林王即位未期岁，所用垂尽。
现代文：武帝生前聚敛钱财，上库中存有五亿万之多，斋库中所存也多于三亿万，至于金银布帛更不可胜计，而郁林王即位还不满一年，就挥霍将尽。
English: Emperor Wu collected money during his lifetime, with as much as 500 million yuan stored in the treasury, and more than 300 million yuan stored in the treasury. As for gold and silver cloth, it is even more difficult to calculate, and King Yulin has been on the throne for less than a year, and he will squander it all.

古文：入主衣库，令何后及宠姬以诸宝器相投击破碎之，用为笑乐。
现代文：他经常进入主衣库，让何皇后以及宠爱的妃子们用各种宝贵器具互相投击，直到把它们打破成碎片，以此玩笑取乐。
English: He would often go into the main wardrobe and let the Queen and her favorite concubines playfully hit each other with various precious utensils until they were broken into pieces.

古文：蒸于世祖幸姬霍氏，更其姓曰徐。
现代文：他还伦，与父亲文惠太子的宠妾霍氏通奸，让她改姓徐。
English: He also committed adultery with his father, Prince Wen Hui's favorite concubine, Huo Shi Rong, and made her change her surname to Xu.

古文：朝事大小，皆决于西昌侯鸾。
现代文：朝廷中的大小事情，全部由西昌侯萧鸾来决定。
English: All major and minor matters in the imperial court were decided by Xichang Hou Xiaoqi.

古文：鸾数谏争，帝多不从；心忌鸾，欲除之。
现代文：萧鸾数次劝谏，可是郁林王不但不听从，反而心生忌怨，想把萧鸾除掉。
English: Xiao Yao tried to persuade him several times, but Yu Lin Wang not only didn't listen, but also harbored a grudge and wanted to get rid of Xiao Yao.

古文：以尚书右仆射鄱阳王锵为世祖所厚，私谓锵曰： 公闻鸾于法身如何？ 
现代文：由于尚书右仆射鄱阳王萧锵曾被齐武帝所厚爱优待，郁林王就私下里对萧锵说： 您听说萧鸾对待我如何呢？ 
English: As Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Yang Wang Xiao Jie, had been loved and favored by the Qiwu Emperor, Yu Lin Wang said to Xiao Jie in private: You heard how Xiao Jie treated me?

古文：锵素和谨，对曰： 臣鸾于宗戚最长，且受寄先帝；臣等皆年少，朝廷所损，唯鸾一人，愿陛下无以为虑。 
现代文：萧锵为人向来平和谨慎，就回答说： 萧鸾在皇室宗族中年岁最长，而且接受了先帝的托嘱，我们都年幼，朝廷中所可以依赖之人唯有萧鸾，盼愿陛下您不要以他为虑。 
English: Xiao Yu, who has always been a peaceful and prudent person, replied: Xiao Yu is the oldest in the royal family, and he accepted the commission of the former emperor. We are all young, and the only person in the court who can be relied on is Xiao Yu. I hope Your Majesty will not worry about him.

古文：帝退，谓徐龙驹曰： 我欲与公共计取鸾，公既不同，我不能独办，且复小听。 
现代文：郁林王回宫之后，对徐龙驹说： 我想与萧锵一起合计收拾掉萧鸾，萧锵不同意，而我独自一人又不能办到，那么只好让萧鸾继续专权一阵子了。 
English: After returning to the palace, King Yulin said to Xu Longtao: I want to work with Xiao Yao to get rid of Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao disagrees, and I can't do it alone, so I have to let Xiao Yao continue to have absolute power for a while.

古文：卫尉萧谌，世祖之族子也，自世祖在郢州，谌已为腹心。
现代文：卫尉萧谌是武帝的本家侄子，从武帝在郢州时起，萧谌就成为他的心腹之人。
English: Guard lieutenant Xiao Wei was Emperor Wu's own nephew. From the time Emperor Wu was in Zhangzhou, Xiao Wei became his confidant.

古文：及即位，常典宿卫，机密之事，无不预闻。
现代文：武帝登基即位之后，萧谌经常在宫中值宿，担任警卫，凡是机密的事情，他无不参预知晓。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, Xiao Wei often stayed on duty in the palace and served as a guard. He was privy to all confidential matters.

古文：征南咨议萧坦之，谌之族人也，尝为东宫直阁，为世宗所知。
现代文：征南谘议萧坦之是萧谌的本家，曾经做过东宫直，为文惠太子所知遇。
English: Xiao Tan Zhi, the Southern Conquest Advisory Council, is Xiao Yao's own family. He used to be a member of the Eastern Palace Guard and was known to Prince Wen Hui.

古文：帝以二人祖父旧人，甚亲信之。
现代文：郁林王因为萧谌、萧坦之两人曾是祖父和父亲的人，所以就特别亲近、信赖他们。
English: Because Xiao Jun and Xiao Tan were his grandfather and father, Yu Lin Wang was particularly close to and trusted them.

古文：谌每请急出宿，帝通夕不寐，谌还乃安。
现代文：每当萧谌有急事请假不值宿，郁林王就通夜不寐，直到萧鸾回来才能安下心来。
English: Whenever Xiao Yao has an urgent request for leave without lodging, Yu Lin Wang will stay up all night, until Xiao Yao returns, he can calm down.

古文：坦之得出入后宫。帝亵狎宴游，坦之皆在侧。
现代文：萧坦之也可以出入于后宫，凡是郁林王亵狎宴游的场合，他都守在旁边侍奉。
English: Xiao Tan Zhi can also go in and out of the harem. Whenever King Yulin is on a banquet tour, he always stands by and serves.

古文：帝醉后，常裸袒，坦之辄扶持谏谕。
现代文：郁林王酒醉之后，常常脱光上衣，萧坦之经常扶持着他，并且谏言劝谕。
English: After drunkenness, Yu Lin Wang often stripped off his shirt. Xiao Tan Zhi often supported him and advised him.

古文：西昌侯鸾欲有所谏，帝在后宫不出，唯遣谌、坦之径进，乃得闻达。
现代文：西昌侯萧鸾想要进谏，郁林王就躲在后宫中不出来，萧鸾只好派遣萧谌、萧坦之直接进到后宫，才能把要说的话转告于他。
English: Xiao Tong, the lord of Xichang, wanted to go into the harem, but King Yulin was hiding in the harem and could not come out. Xiao Tong had to send Xiao Tong and Xiao Tan directly into the harem to tell him what to say.

古文：何后亦淫泆，私於帝左右杨珉，与同寝处如伉俪；又与帝相爱狎，故帝恣之。
现代文：何皇后也非常淫荡，私通于郁林王的随从杨珉，与他同枕共寝就像夫妻一般。何后又对郁林王极尽狎昵亲热之能事，所以郁林王很是宠纵她。
English: Queen Ho was also very lascivious, fornicating with King Yulin's attendant Yang Ye, and sleeping with him like a husband and wife. After that, she did her best to be intimate with King Yulin, so King Yulin was very fond of her.

古文：迎后亲戚入宫，以耀灵殿处之。斋阁通夜洞开，外内淆杂，无复分别。
现代文：他还把何崐后的亲戚迎进宫中，安排住在耀灵殿里，门户彻夜洞开，内外淆杂混处，没有任何分别。
English: He also welcomed the relatives of Queen He into the palace and arranged for them to live in the Yaoling Palace. The gate was open all night, and there was no separation between the inside and outside.

古文：西昌侯鸾遣坦之入奏诛珉，何后流涕覆面曰： 杨郎好年少，无罪，何可枉杀！ 
现代文：西昌侯萧鸾派遣萧坦之进去宫奏请诛杀杨珉，何皇后哭得泪流满面，对郁林王说： 杨郎多么年轻、多么英俊啊！
English: Xiao Yan, the lord of Xichang, sent Xiao Tan to go to the palace to plead for the killing of Yang Xuan. The queen cried with tears and said to King Yulin, "How young and handsome Yang Rong is!

古文：坦之附耳语帝曰： 外间并云杨珉与皇后有情，事彰遐迩，不可不诛。 
现代文：又没有什么罪，怎么可以无缘无故就杀掉呢？ 萧坦之见状赶紧向郁林王悄悄耳语道： 外面纷纷传说杨珉同皇后有苟且之情，事实确凿，远近皆知，不可以不杀掉呀。 
English: There is no crime, so how can they kill her for no reason? Xiao Tan's opinion quickly whispered to Yu Lin Wang: Outside, there are many rumors that Yang Xuan and the queen have a close relationship, the facts are conclusive, known far and wide, it is impossible not to kill her.

古文：帝不得已许之；俄敕原之，已行刑矣。
现代文：郁林王不得已，只好同意处死杨珉。不一会儿，郁林王又后悔了，诏令赦免杨珉，可是已经行刑完毕了。
English: As a last resort, King Yulin had no choice but to agree to the execution of Yang Xuan. After a while, King Yulin regretted again and issued a decree to pardon Yang Xuan, but the execution was already over.

古文：鸾又启诛徐龙驹，帝亦不能违，而心忌鸾益甚。
现代文：萧鸾又启奏郁林王，请求诛死徐龙驹，郁林王亦不得不违心同意，但是从此对萧鸾的忌恨之心更加强烈了。
English: Xiao Yao also appealed to Yu Lin Wang, asking him to strangle Xu Longyao. Yu Lin Wang had to agree against his will, but from then on, his hatred for Xiao Yao became even stronger.

古文：萧谌、萧坦之见帝狂纵日甚，无复悛改，恐祸及己，乃更回意附鸾，劝其废立，阴为鸾耳目，帝不之觉也。
现代文：萧谌、萧坦之见郁林王狂荡放纵一日甚于一日，已经到了无可悔改的地步，担心连累自己，祸害及身，就反过来一心依附萧鸾，劝说他把郁林王废掉，另立新皇帝。
English: Xiao Yan and Xiao Tan thought that King Yulin had indulged in more than one day of debauchery, and had reached the point of no repentance. They were worried about implicating themselves, the scourge and their own bodies, so they, in turn, wholeheartedly adhered to Xiao Yan and persuaded him to abolish King Yulin and establish a new emperor.

古文：周奉叔恃勇挟势，陵轹公卿。
现代文：从此，他们两人就成了萧鸾安排在郁林王身边的耳目，而郁林王却丝毫没有觉察。
English: From then on, the two of them became Xiao Yao's eyes and ears around King Yulin, who was completely unaware of it.

古文：常翼单刀二十口自随，出入禁闼，门卫不敢诃。
现代文：周奉叔倚仗自己的勇武和与皇帝亲近，有恃无恐，凌辱欺侮朝中公卿百官，常常以二十口单刀分挂在身体两侧，出入于皇宫禁门，门卫敢怒而不敢言。
English: Zhou Fongzhu relied on his bravery and closeness to the emperor. He was fearless, abused and bullied hundreds of court nobles and officials in the dynasty, often hanging on both sides of his body with twenty single swords, entering and leaving the palace forbidden door, the doorman dared to be angry but dared not speak.

古文：每语人曰： 周郎刀不识君！ 
现代文：他还经常对人讲： 我周某人的刀可是不认人啊！ 
English: He also often said to people: I am surrounded by someone's knife, but I don't recognize anyone!

古文：鸾忌之，使萧谌、萧坦之说帝出奉叔为外援。
现代文：萧鸾对他特别忌恨，指使萧谌和萧坦之去游说郁林王，让把周奉叔弄出朝廷，安排到外地去。
English: Xiao Yao was particularly jealous of him, and ordered Xiao Yao and Xiao Tan to go and lobby King Yulin to get Uncle Zhou Fong out of the imperial court and arrange for him to go abroad.

古文：己巳，以奉叔为青州刺史，曹道刚为中军司马。
现代文：已巳，下令周奉叔为青州刺史，曹道刚为中军司马。
English: It has already been ordered that Zhou Fengshu will be the official historian of Qingzhou, and Cao Daogang will be the secretary of the Chinese army.

古文：奉叔就帝求千户侯；许之。
现代文：周奉叔来见郁林王，请求封自己为千户侯，郁林王准许了。
English: Zhou Fengshu came to see King Yulin and asked him to make him the lord of a thousand households. King Yulin agreed.

古文：鸾以为不可，封曲江县男，食三百户。
现代文：萧鸾却不同意，只封他为曲江县男的爵位，食邑三百户。
English: However, Xiao Yao did not agree. He was only given the title of baron of Qujiang County, with 300 households.

古文：奉叔大怒，于众中攘刀厉色；鸾说谕之，乃受。
现代文：周奉叔大怒，站在人群中挥刀喊叫，表示不满，萧鸾反复劝谕告说，他才接受了。
English: Zhou Fongshu was furious and stood in the crowd waving his sword and shouting, expressing his dissatisfaction. Xiao Yao repeatedly advised that he only accepted.

古文：奉叔辞毕，将之镇，部伍已出。鸾与萧谌称敕，召奉叔于省中，殴杀之，启云： 奉叔慢朝廷。 
现代文：周奉叔辞谢完毕，将要去青州，部下人马已经出发了，萧鸾与萧谌称皇帝有令，把他召到官署中来，殴打他，直至丧命，并启奏皇帝说： 周奉叔傲慢朝廷，因此处死。 
English: After Zhou Fengshu finished his resignation, he will go to Qingzhou. His subordinates have already set off. Xiao Yan and Xiao Yan said that the emperor had an order, called him to the government office, beat him until he died, and inspired the emperor to say: Zhou Fengshu was arrogant to the court, so he was executed.

古文：帝不获已，可其奏。
现代文：郁林王不得已，只好认可他们的奏章。
English: As a last resort, Yu Lin Wang had no choice but to approve their performance.

古文：溧阳令钱唐杜文谦，尝为南郡王侍读，前此说綦毋珍之曰： 天下事可知，灰尽粉灭，匪朝伊夕；不早为计，吾徒无类矣。 
现代文：溧阳令钱唐人杜文谦，曾经在郁林王初封南郡王时，陪伴他读过书。不久以前，杜文谦游说綦毋珍之，对他讲道： 天下之事至此已不难料知，朝廷危难将近，难以保全，这已是早晚之间的事情了。
English: Du Wenqian, a Qian Tang from Shiyang, once read a book with King Yulin when he was crowned the king of Nan County for the first time. Not long ago, Du Wenqian lobbied him not to be rare, and preached to him: The things of the world are not difficult to predict at this time, the imperial court is in danger, it is difficult to preserve, this is already a matter of sooner or later.

古文：珍之曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：所以如果不及早作好打算，我们这些人将遭灭族之灾了。綦毋珍之问道： 有什么办法呢？ 
English: So if we don't make plans soon, we will be wiped out as a people. It's not uncommon to ask: What can we do?

古文：文谦曰： 先帝旧人，多见摈斥，今召而使之，谁不慷慨！
现代文：杜文谦说： 先前皇帝的旧人，多数被排斥在一边，如今召他们回来加以重用，谁能不意气风发呢？
English: Du Wenqian said: The old men of the former emperor, most of whom were excluded from one side, are now calling them back to reuse them. Who can not be surprised?

古文：近闻王洪范与宿卫将万灵会等共语，皆攘袂捶床；君其密报周奉叔，使万灵会等杀萧谌，则宫内之兵皆我用也。
现代文：近来听说王洪范与宿卫将万灵会等人在一起议论时，都气得攘袖床，急忿万分。所以，您可密告周奉叔，让他派万灵会等人杀掉萧谌，这样的话，皇宫内的卫兵就可以掌握在我们手中。
English: Recently, I heard that when Wang Hongfan and the bodyguard discussed the All Souls' Society and other people together, they were both furious and furious. Therefore, you can secretly tell Uncle Zhou Feng to send the All Souls' Society and other people to kill Xiao Yao. In this case, the guards in the palace can be in our hands.

古文：即勒兵入尚书，斩萧令，两都伯力耳。
现代文：然后，派兵进入尚书省，斩掉萧鸾，只需两个刽子手就可以办到的。
English: Then, he sent soldiers into Shangshu Province to behead Xiao Yu, which only required two executioners.

古文：今举大事亦死，不举事亦死；二死等耳，死社稷可乎！
现代文：如今，这样干一场是一死，不干也是一死，同样是死，还是为朝廷而死吧！
English: Nowadays, to do such a thing is death, not to do it is also death, the same is death, or to die for the court!

古文：若迟疑不断，复少日，录君称敕赐死，父母为殉，在眼中矣。 
现代文：如果前瞻后顾，迟疑寡断，用不了许久，萧鸾就会以皇帝的名义赐我们死，父母也要受牵连而死，事情已经近在眼前了。 
English: If we look back and hesitate, it won't be long before Xiao Yao will give us death in the name of the emperor, and our parents will also be implicated and die. The matter is close at hand.

古文：珍之不能用。
现代文：綦毋珍之没有采纳杜文谦的意见。
English: Du Wenqian's opinion was not taken into account.

古文：及鸾杀奉叔，并收珍之、文谦，杀之。
现代文：等到萧鸾杀了周奉叔之后，就把綦毋珍之和杜文谦二人也抓了起来，一起杀掉了。
English: After Xiao Yao killed Zhou Fengshu, he also arrested Zou Beizhanzhong and Du Wenqian and killed them together.

古文：乙亥，魏主如洛阳西宫。
现代文：乙亥，北魏孝文帝到了洛阳西宫。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived at the West Palace in Luoyang.

古文：中书侍郎韩显宗上书陈四事：其一以为： 窃闻舆驾今夏不巡三齐，当幸中山。
现代文：中书侍郎韩显宗向孝文帝上书讲陈了四件事情：其一，认为： 我听说陛下今年夏天舆驾出行，不是去巡视三齐，就是临幸中山。
English: Han Xianzong, the attendant of the imperial secretary, told four things to Emperor Xiaowen in his letter: First, he thought: I heard that His Majesty will travel by carriage this summer, either to inspect Sanchi or to visit Zhongshan.

古文：往冬舆驾停鄴，当农隙之时，犹比屋供奉，不胜劳费。
现代文：往年冬天大驾停在邺城，虽然正当农闲之时，但仍使每家每户出资出力供奉，不胜辛劳破费。
English: In previous years, the caravan stopped in Lucheng in the winter. Although it was a time of idleness for farmers, every household still contributed funds to make offerings. It was a lot of hard work and expense.

古文：况今蚕麦方急，将何以堪命！
现代文：何况现在正是蚕麦刚熟的农忙时节，您大驾所至，百姓将如何忍受得住呢？
English: What's more, now is the busy season for farmers, when the silkworms and wheat are just ripe. How will the people bear it if you come all the way here?

古文：且六军涉暑，恐生疠疫。
现代文：而且六军冒着酷暑护驾，恐怕要生疠疫。
English: Moreover, the six armies braved the scorching heat to escort the procession. I'm afraid there will be a plague of boils.

古文：臣愿早还北京，以省诸州供张之苦，成洛都营缮之役。 
现代文：臣希望早点回到北京平城，以便能节省各州张罗供奉的费用，这样就能使营建修缮洛阳都城的工程早日完成。 
English: The minister hopes to return to Beijing Pingcheng earlier, so as to save the cost of Zhang Luo's offering in each state, so that the construction and renovation of Luoyang Capital City can be completed as soon as possible.

古文：其二以为： 洛阳宫殿故基，皆魏明帝所造，前世已讥其奢。
现代文：其二，认为： 洛阳宫殿的旧基，都是魏明帝所建造的，在那时人们就批评他太奢侈了。
English: Secondly, it is believed that: the old foundation of Luoyang Palace was built by Emperor Wei Ming. At that time, people criticized him for being too extravagant.

古文：今兹营缮，宜加裁损。
现代文：如今我们的营建，应该缩减规模。
English: Now our construction should be scaled down.

古文：又，顷来北都富室，竞以第舍相尚；宜因迁徙，为之制度。
现代文：还有，近来北都平城的富室大户，竞相比逐宅舍房宇的高下，应该借这次迁都搬移的机会，在这方面定出一个制度。
English: Also, recently, the rich large households in Pingcheng, the northern capital, have been competing against each other in terms of the height of the buildings. They should take this opportunity to move the capital and set up a system in this regard.

古文：及端广衢路，通利沟渠。 
现代文：同时，对于都城的道路交通要拓宽加直，水沟渠道也要加以疏通。
English: At the same time, the road traffic of the capital should be widened and straightened, and the channels of the ditch should be cleared.

古文：其三以为： 陛下之还洛阳，轻将从骑。
现代文：其三，认为： 陛下您往还洛阳，随从保卫的武器人员很少。
English: Thirdly, he thought: Your Majesty, you are returning to Luoyang, and there are very few armed guards accompanying you.

古文：王者于闱闼之内施警跸，况涉履山河而不加三思乎！ 
现代文：皇帝平时住在宫中，还要施行警戒保护措施，何况出外巡察山河呢？对此不可不加以三思。 
English: The emperor usually lives in the palace, but he also has to take precautions and protection measures, not to mention going out to inspect the mountains and rivers. This is something that must be considered.

古文：其四以为： 陛下耳听法音，目玩坟典，口对百辟，心虞万机，景昃而食，夜分而寝；加以孝思之至，随进而深；文章之业，日成篇卷；虽睿时所用，未足为烦，然非所以啬神养性，保无疆之祚也。
现代文：其四，认为： 陛下耳听雅乐，眼观圣人典籍，口对百官言谈，心虑万机，日头偏西方才吃饭，午夜时分才能入侵。再加上自文明太后去世之后，陛下对她的孝思随着时日的推移而日日加深；陛下还撰写文章，每日都有篇章写成。虽然陛下聪明睿智，这些都不足以成为烦若，但是终非修心养性、爱惜圣体，以保万寿无疆之良策。
English: Fourthly, it is believed that: His Majesty listens to classical music with his ears, looks at the classics of saints with his eyes, talks to all kinds of officials with his mouth, thinks about everything, eats only when the sun is in the west, and invades at midnight. In addition, since the death of the Empress of China, His Majesty's filial piety towards her has deepened with the passage of time; His Majesty also writes articles, and has a chapter written every day. Although His Majesty is clever and wise, these are not enough to become a nuisance, but they are ultimately not a good way to cultivate the mind and nurture the nature, cherish the sacred body,

古文：伏愿陛下垂拱司契而天下治矣。 
现代文：所以，俯请陛下无为而治，只管重要之事，不必事事亲躬。 
English: Therefore, I humbly request Your Majesty to do nothing and govern, only deal with important matters, and do not have to be personally involved in everything.

古文：帝颇纳之。
现代文：孝文帝对上述建议颇有采纳。
English: Emperor Xiaowen accepted the above suggestion.

古文：显宗，麒麟之子也。
现代文：韩显宗是韩麒麟的儿子。
English: Han Xianzong is the son of Han Qilin.

古文：显宗又上言，以为： 州郡贡察，徒有秀、孝之名，而无秀、孝之实；朝廷但检其门望，不复弹坐。
现代文：韩显宗又上书上天，指出： 各州郡举荐上贡的秀才、孝廉，徒有其名而无其实，朝廷只查他们的门第出身如何，而不弹劾其违实之罪。
English: Han Xianzong also wrote a letter to heaven, pointing out: The talented people and filial piety recommended by various states and counties to pay tribute are nothing more than their names, and the court only investigates their lineage, but does not impeach them for the crime of violating the truth.

古文：如此，则可令别贡门望以叙士人，何假冒秀、孝之名也！
现代文：如果这样的话，那么以后可以命令下面另以门第资望为举荐标准，以此来品评、选拔读书人，何必又冒假秀才、孝廉之名呢？
English: If this is the case, then in the future, we can order the following to use the reputation of the disciple as the recommendation standard, and use this to evaluate and select the reader. Why do you have to pretend to be a great talent and filial piety?

古文：夫门望者，乃其父祖之遗烈，亦何益于皇家！益于时者，贤才而已。
现代文：门第资望，是他们父、祖的功业，于朝廷皇家有何用处呢？有益于现时的是贤才。
English: What use is it for the imperial court and the royal family to look up to one's parents and ancestors? What is beneficial for the present is the wise men.

古文：苟有其才，虽屠、钓、奴、虏，圣王不耻以为臣；苟非其才，虽三后之胤，坠于皁隶矣。
现代文：如果真正有才能，即使如姜太公那样屠牛于朝歌，钓于渭滨；又如箕子那样身为奴隶，周文王、武王也都礼遇而用为臣子，不以此为耻。如果没有才能，即便他是夏、商、周三代之王的后裔，也照样编入仆隶差役之列。
English: If he really has talent, even if he slaughters cattle in the morning song and fishes in the reed beach like Jiang Taigong; and if he is a slave like a mule, King Zhouwen and King Wu will treat him politely and use him as a vassal, and he will not be ashamed of it. If he does not have talent, even if he is a descendant of Xia, Shang and the third generation of kings, he will still be included in the ranks of servants.

古文：议者或云 今世等无奇才，不若取士于门 ，此亦失矣。
现代文：有人可能会议论说： 当今世上实在没有奇才，所以不如以门第取士。 这也是不对的。
English: Some people may argue: There is no real genius in the world today, so it's better to take a disciple. This is also wrong.

古文：岂可以世无周、邵，遂废宰相邪！
现代文：难道可以因为世上没有周公、召公二人那样的相才，于是就废除掉宰相的位子吗？
English: Is it possible to abolish the position of prime minister because there is no Zhou Gong or Zhao Gong in the world who are as talented as the two?

古文：但当校其寸长铢重者先叙之，则贤才无遗矣。
现代文：只要一个人比众人稍有一寸之长、一铢之重，就应当先选拔、录用他，这样就可以做到贤才没有遗漏。
English: As long as a person is a little bit longer and heavier than others, he should be selected and hired first, so that there is no shortage of talent.

古文： 又，刑罚之要，在于明当，不在于重。
现代文： 还有，刑罚的关键，在于运用得当，而不在于专门求重。
English: Moreover, the key to punishment lies in its proper application, not in its special severity.

古文：苟不失有罪，虽捶挞之薄，人莫敢犯；若容可侥幸，虽参夷之严，不足惩禁。
现代文：如果执法严明，不使有罪者漏网，虽然捶挞的很轻，人们也不敢再犯；如果执法不严明，给留有侥幸逃脱的余地，虽然有夷杀三族的严厉刑法，也不足以完全惩禁住犯罪行为。
English: If the enforcement of the law is strict and does not let the guilty slip through the net, although the punishment is very light, people will not dare to repeat the crime; if the enforcement of the law is not strict, it will leave room for getting away with it, and although there is a strict criminal law for the extermination of the three ethnic groups, it is not enough to completely punish the criminal behavior.

古文：今内外之官，欲邀当时之名，争以深酷为无私，迭相敦厉，遂成风俗。
现代文：当今朝廷内外的官员，都想获得时下的名声，争着以严酷表示无私，于是互相比赛，不得不严上再严，遂成为一时之风气。
English: Today's officials, both inside and outside the imperial court, all want to gain contemporary fame, competing to show selflessness with severity, so they compete with each other and have to be stricter and stricter, thus becoming a temporary trend.

古文：陛下居九重之内，视人如赤子；百司分万务之任，遇下如亿雠。
现代文：陛下您住在深宫之内，看待人民如赤子，而百官分担着处理各种具体事务的职责，对待百姓则如仇敌。
English: Your Majesty, you live in a deep palace and treat the people like babies, while the officials share the responsibilities of dealing with various specific matters and treat the people like enemies.

古文：是则尧、舜止一人，而桀、纣以千百；和气不至，盖由于此。
现代文：如尧、舜者只有陛下一人，而如桀、纣者则以成百上千计，官民不和，原因正在于此。
English: This is the reason why there is discord between the government and the people, with only His Majesty the Emperor and hundreds of emperors and empresses.

古文：谓宜敕示百僚，以惠元元之命。
现代文：所以，我认为陛下应该诏示内外官员注意，以有利于百姓的生息。
English: Therefore, I think that His Majesty should call the attention of officials at home and abroad so as to benefit the livelihood of the people.

古文： 又，昔周居洛邑，犹存宗周；汉迁东都，京兆置尹。
现代文： 还有，过去周成王居处洛阳，但仍保存丰镐为故都；东汉迁都洛阳，而在长安仍置京兆尹。
English: Moreover, in the past, Luoyang was the residence of King Zhoucheng, but Fengye was still preserved as the former capital; the Eastern Han Dynasty moved the capital to Luoyang, but Beijing Zhaoyun was still located in Chang'an.

古文：案《春秋》之义，有宗庙曰都，无曰邑。
现代文：根据《春秋》大义，有宗庙的叫 都 ，没有宗庙叫 邑 。
English: According to the principles of "Spring and Autumn," if there is a patriarchal temple, it is called the capital, but if there is no patriarchal temple, it is called a town.

古文：况代京，宗庙山陵所托，王业所基，其为神乡福地，实亦远矣，今便同之郡国，臣窃不安。
现代文：况且平城这个地方，是宗庙和先帝陵墓所在之地，是朝廷王业的根基所在，其作为一块神奇福地，意义是非常久远的，如今就把它等同于一般的州郡，我私下里非常不安。
English: Moreover, this place in Pingcheng is the place where the ancestral temple and the mausoleum of the former emperor are located, and it is the foundation of the royal cause of the imperial court. As a miraculous blessed land, its significance is very long-standing. Now it is equated with an ordinary county. I am privately very uneasy.

古文：谓宜建畿置尹，一如故事，崇本重旧，光示万叶。
现代文：所以，我认为应该如过去的惯例那样，在平城建置京兆尹，以示崇尚根本，重视过去，光昭万世。
English: Therefore, I think that, as in the past, the Jing Zhaoyun should be built in Pingcheng to show that it is fundamental, pays attention to the past, and shines forever.

古文： 又，古者四民异居，欲其业专志定也。
现代文： 还有，古代士、农、工、商分别居处，不使杂混，以便他们能各专其业、各安其志。
English: Furthermore, in ancient times, nobles, farmers, industrialists, and merchants lived in separate residences and did not mingle with each other, so that they could each specialize in their own business and pursue their own ambitions.

古文：太祖道武皇帝创基拨乱，日不暇给，然犹分别士庶，不令杂居，工伎屠沽，各有攸处；但不设科禁，久而混殽。
现代文：太祖道武皇帝创基立国之始，拨乱反正，日夜操劳，无有闲暇之时，然而仍然不忘区别士族与庶族，不让他们杂混居处，工匠、技人、屠夫、商贩等各有所处，但没有制定禁止措施，时间久了就互相混淆而住了。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the foundation of the country, Emperor Daowu, the great-grandfather, tried to restore order, worked day and night, and had no leisure time. However, he still did not forget to distinguish between the nobles and the commoners, and did not allow them to live in mixed residences. Craftsmen, technicians, butchers, merchants, etc. had their own places, but there were no prohibitive measures. After a long time, they were confused with each other and lived.

古文：今闻洛邑居民之制，专以官位相从，不分族类。
现代文：现在听说洛阳城居民居处制度专以官位来分划，而不以士族庶族分类。
English: Now I heard that the residential system of Luoyang City is exclusively divided by official rank, rather than by the classification of the commoners of the warrior class.

古文：夫官位无常，朝荣夕悴，则是衣冠、皁隶不日同处矣。
现代文：官职并非是永久不变的，有时朝得之而夕失之，所以以官位来划分居处，则势必使衣冠之士和仆隶之徒不日而相杂混处。
English: Official position is not permanent, sometimes it is gained and lost, so the official position is used to divide the residence, which is bound to make the crowned men and servants mingle with each other.

古文：借使一里之内，或调习歌舞，或讲肄诗书，纵群儿随其所之，则必不弃歌舞而从诗书矣。
现代文：假如同一里居之内，有的人家调教演习歌舞，有的人家讲读《诗》、《书》，在此情况之下，即使让孩子们选择自己的爱好，则必定不能弃歌舞而接近《诗》、《书》。
English: If you live in the same house, some people will teach the exercises of singing and dancing, and some people will read "poetry" and "books." Under these circumstances, even if you let the children choose their own hobbies, they must not abandon singing and dancing and approach "poetry" and "books."

古文：然则使工伎之家习士人风礼，百年难成；士人之子效工伎容态，一朝而就。
现代文：但是，让工匠、伎艺人家学习士人的礼仪习俗，一百年也难以学成；让士人的子弟仿效工匠、伎艺们的举止言谈，一朝半夕就可以学成。
English: However, for craftsmen and artists to learn the etiquette and customs of the scholar, it is difficult to learn for a hundred years; for the scholar's children to imitate the manners and speech of craftsmen and artists, it can be learned overnight.

古文：是以仲尼称里仁之美，孟母勤三徙之训。
现代文：所以，孔子指出人选择居处，应居于仁者之里，如此就是美；孟母三次择邻而居，以便使孟子远下贱而近礼仪。
English: Therefore, Confucius pointed out that people choose where to live, and should live among the benevolent, such is beauty; Mencius chose his neighbors three times in order to make Mencius far lower and closer to etiquette.

古文：此乃风俗之原，不可不察。
现代文：这乃是风俗礼仪的根本所在，不可不加以明察。
English: This is the foundation of custom and etiquette, and must not be overlooked.

古文：朝廷每选人士，校其一婚一宦以为升降，何其密也！
现代文：朝廷每次选拔人才，考察其婚姻和仕宦情况作为升降的标准，何其严密认真啊！
English: Every time the imperial court selects talents, it examines their marital and service status as the standard for promotion and demotion. How rigorous and serious it is!

古文：至于度地居民，则清浊连甍，何其略也！
现代文：可是，在安置民众居住事情上，却尊卑贵贱不辨，使他们杂混居住在一起，又是何等的疏略啊！
English: However, in the matter of resettling people, there was no distinction between the high and the low, and they were allowed to live together. What an oversight!

古文：今因迁徙之初，皆是公地，分别工伎，在于一言，有何可疑，而阙盛美！
现代文：如今正是迁徙初始之时，洛阳城中皆是空地，使工匠、伎艺等行当的人分别居住，甚为容易，一言之令即可以办到，有何疑难而不为，以致使如此盛美之事付之阙如呢？
English: Now, at the very beginning of the migration, the city of Luoyang is full of open spaces. It is very easy to make craftsmen, artists and other people live separately. It can be done with a word. What are the difficulties and what should not be done, so that such a magnificent thing is not done?

古文： 又，南人昔有淮北之地，自比中华，侨置郡县。
现代文： 还有，南朝过去占有淮北之地时，自己比作是中华，在那里设置了侨郡侨县。
English: Moreover, when the Southern Dynasty occupied the land of Huaibei in the past, it likened itself to China and set up overseas Chinese counties there.

古文：自归附圣化，仍而不改，名实交错，文书难辨。
现代文：但是，自从淮北归附本朝管辖之后，这一情况仍然沿而未改，以致名实交错，给文书方面带来诸多不便。
English: However, since Huaibei was attached to the jurisdiction of this dynasty, this situation has remained unchanged, so that the names and facts are intertwined, bringing a lot of inconvenience to the paperwork.

古文：宜依地理旧名，一皆厘革，小者并合，大者分置，及中州郡县，昔以户少并省，今民口既多，亦可复旧。
现代文：所以，现在应该依照地理上的旧名，一一核实，重新加以规定，小的合并，大的分开设置。至于中原地区的郡县，过去我们因为户少人稀而合并撤消了一些，如今人口既然多起来了，就可以恢复旧有设置了。
English: As for counties in the Central Plains region, in the past we cancelled some mergers because of the scarcity of households, but now that the population has increased, we can restore the old system.

古文： 又，君人者以天下为家，不可有所私。
现代文： 还有，国君以天下为家，不应该有所偏私。
English: Also, the sovereign of a country should not be partial, since the whole world is his home.

古文：仓库之储，以供军国之用，自非有功德者不当加赐。
现代文：仓库之中的储藏，是供给军队和国家所用的，除非有大功大德者不可以随意加以赏赐。
English: The storage in the warehouse is used to supply the army and the country. Unless there is great merit, it cannot be rewarded at will.

古文：在朝诸贵，受禄不轻；比来颁赉，动以千计。
现代文：朝廷中的诸位大臣，已经享受俸禄不轻了，但是近来对他们的赐予，动辄以千数计。
English: The ministers of the court were already well paid, but recently they were receiving thousands of gifts.

古文：若分以赐鳏寡孤独之民，所济实多；今直以与亲近之臣，殆非 周急不断富 之谓也。 
现代文：如果把这些钱物分别赏赐给那些鳏寡孤独的老百姓，就一定能救济许多人。但是，现在只是一个劲地赏赐给那些亲近的大臣们，这种做法不正好与孔子所说的君子周济人以急需而不帮助富人使其更富背道而驰了吗？ 
English: If this money and goods were given separately to the poor, widowed and lonely people, it would certainly help many people. However, now it is only vigorously given to those close to the ministers. Is this practice not contrary to what Confucius said about the gentleman who gives to the needy without helping the rich to become richer?

古文：帝览奏，甚善之。
现代文：孝文帝看了韩显宗的奏章，非常称赞他的意见。
English: Emperor Xiaowen read Han Xianzong's composition and highly praised his opinion.

古文：二月，乙丑，魏主如河阴，规方泽。
现代文：二月乙丑，北魏孝文帝驾临河阳，勘测划定筑建夏至日祭地时所用方泽的地址。
English: In February, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty came to Heyang to survey the location of Fangze, which was used to build the summer solstice festival site.

古文：辛卯，帝祀明堂。
现代文：辛卯，南齐郁林王在明堂举行祭祀仪式。
English: Xinwu, the king of South Qi Yulin held a sacrificial ceremony in the Ming Hall.

古文：司徒参军刘斅等聘于魏。
现代文：司徒参军刘等人出使北魏。
English: Liu and others sent by the Northern Wei to join the army.

古文：丙申，魏徙河南王干为赵郡王，颍川王雍为高阳王。
现代文：丙申，北魏改任河南王拓跋干为赵郡王，颍川王拓跋雍为高阳王。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Tuobao of Henan Province was renamed King of Zhao County, and King Tuobaoyong of Sichuan Province was renamed King of Gaoyang.

古文：壬寅，魏主北巡；癸卯，济河；三月，壬申，至平城。
现代文：壬寅，北魏孝文帝到北方巡视；癸卯，渡过黄河；三月壬申，到了平城。
English: Jinshin, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen's inspection tour to the north; Zouwu, crossing the Yellow River; March Jinshin, arrived in Pingcheng.

古文：使群臣更论迁都利害，各言其志。
现代文：孝文帝让诸大臣再次议论迁都的利害关系，各位臣子们都表述了自己对此问题的看法。
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked the ministers to discuss the interests of moving the capital again, and all the courtiers expressed their views on this issue.

古文：燕州刺史穆罴曰： 今四方未定，未宜迁都。
现代文：燕州刺史穆罴说： 如今天下四方没有安定，所以不宜于迁都。
English: "If the situation in the four directions is not stable today, it is not appropriate to move the capital," said Yanzhou official Shi Muxuan.

古文：且征伐无马，将何以克？ 
现代文：况且到时军中缺少战马，这样如何能克敌取胜呢？ 
English: Moreover, there was a shortage of horses in the army at the time, so how could they defeat the enemy and win?

古文：帝曰： 厩牧在代，何患无马！
现代文：孝文帝回答说： 养马的地方在平城地区，何愁没有马呢？
English: Emperor Xiaowen replied, "The place where horses are raised is in the Pingcheng area. Why worry about not having horses?

古文：今代在恒山之北，九州之外，非帝王之都也。 
现代文：如今的都城代京到处恒山的北边，九州之外，并不是理想的帝王之都。 
English: The present-day capital, Kyoto, is not an ideal imperial capital anywhere north of Mount Hengshan, outside of Kyushu.

古文：尚书于果曰： 臣非以代地为胜伊、洛之美也。但自先帝以来，久居于此，百姓安之；一旦南迁，众情不乐。 
现代文：尚书于果接着说道： 我并不是认为代京这块地方就比洛阳好，但是自从道武皇帝以来，就一直居住在这里，老百姓已经安居于此，一旦让他们往南边搬迁，恐怕会产生不满情绪。 
English: Shangshu Yu Guo went on to say: I do not think that this area of Daijing is better than Luoyang, but since the Emperor Daowu, it has been living here, and the people have been living here safely. If they are allowed to move to the south, I am afraid that there will be discontent.

古文：平阳公丕曰： 迁都大事，当迅之卜筮。 
现代文：平阳公拓跋丕说： 迁都是一件大事，应当通过卜筮来决定。 
English: Pingyang Gongtuo said: The relocation of the capital is a major event, and it should be decided through consultation.

古文：帝曰： 昔周、邵圣贤，乃能卜宅。
现代文：孝文帝说： 古代的周公、召公是圣贤之人，所以才能卜问宅居。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong in ancient times were saints and sages, so they were able to ask about the residence.

古文：今无其人，卜之何益！
现代文：如今没有他们这样的圣贤了，卜筮又有什么用处呢？
English: Today, there are no more sages like them, so what is the use of the Bodhisattvas?

古文：且卜以决疑，不疑何卜！
现代文：况且古人曾言： 卜筮为了决疑，没有犹疑，何必占卜？ 
English: Moreover, the ancients once said: In order to resolve doubts, there is no hesitation, why do we need divination?

古文：黄帝卜而龟焦，天老曰 吉 ，黄帝从之。
现代文：过去，黄帝灼龟甲卜吉凶，龟甲烧焦了，黄帝的臣子天老说是 吉 ，黄帝听从了。
English: In the past, the Yellow Emperor burned the tortoise shell for good luck, and the tortoise shell was scorched, and the Yellow Emperor's vassal Tianlao said it was good luck, and the Yellow Emperor obeyed.

古文：然则至人之知未然，审于龟矣。
现代文：那么，至美至善的完人知晓未发生的事情，是通过龟兆而审悉的。
English: So, the most beautiful and perfect person knows what has not happened through the signs of the tortoise.

古文：王者以四海为家，或南或北，何常之有！
现代文：但是，统治天下做王称帝的人以四海为家，南北不定，哪有常常居留一地而不动的呢？
English: However, those who rule the world as kings and emperors have the four seas as their home, and the north and south are uncertain. Who often stays in one place and does not move?

古文：朕之远祖，世居北荒，平文皇帝始都东木根山，昭成皇帝更营盛乐，道武皇帝迁于平城。
现代文：朕的远祖，世世代代居住在北方荒凉之地，到平文皇帝之时方才建都于东木根山。其后，昭成皇帝又营建了盛东而迁居。道武皇帝之时，又迁都于平城。
English: My distant ancestors lived in the desolate lands of the north for generations. It was not until the time of Emperor Pingwen that the capital was built in Higashi-Mugenzan. Later, Emperor Akechi built Shengdong and moved there. At the time of Emperor Daowu, the capital was moved to Pingcheng.

古文：朕幸属胜残之运，何为独不得迁乎！ 
现代文：朕很幸运遇上了能平定天下、施行教化的时运，为什么就不能迁都呢？ 
English: I am very lucky to be able to pacify the world and carry out enlightenment. Why can't we move the capital?

古文：群臣不敢复言。
现代文：群臣百僚们不敢再表示反对意见了。
English: The hundreds of courtiers no longer dared to voice their objections.

古文：罴，寿之孙；果，烈之弟也。
现代文：穆罴是穆寿的孙子，于果是于烈的弟弟。
English: Mu Xi is the grandson of Mu Shou, and Yu Guo is the younger brother of Yu Lie.

古文：癸酉，魏主临朝堂，部分迁留。
现代文：癸酉，孝文帝驾临朝堂，主持部署了迁往新都洛阳和留在平城的人事、机构安排事项。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen arrived at the Imperial Palace and presided over the deployment of personnel and institutional arrangements for moving to the new capital Luoyang and staying in Pingcheng.

古文：夏，四月，庚辰，魏罢西郊祭天。
现代文：夏季，四月庚辰，北魏免去了西郊祭天仪式。
English: In the summer, April Gengchen, the Northern Wei Dynasty exempted the Xijiao Festival.

古文：辛巳，武陵昭王晔卒。
现代文：辛巳，南齐武陵昭王萧晔去世。
English: Soon after, King Zhao of Wuling, Nanqi, passed away.

古文：戊子，竟陵文宣王子良以忧卒。
现代文：戊子，竟陵文宣王萧子良因忧郁成疾而去世。
English: As a result of his melancholy, Prince Xiao Ziliang of Ling Wen Xuan passed away.

古文：帝常忧子良为变，闻其卒，甚喜。
现代文：郁林王常常担忧萧子良谋反，听到他死了，大喜过望。
English: Yu Lin Wang often worried about Xiao Ziliang plotting against him, and was overjoyed to hear that he had died.

古文：臣光曰：孔子称 鄙夫不可与事君，未得之，患得之；既得之，患失之。
现代文：臣下司马光说：孔子说： 贪鄙的人不可以奉事君王，这种人对自己的利害得失斤斤计较，当他没有得到之时，处心积虑于如何得到；一旦得到了，又惟恐失去。
English: His vassal Sima Guang said: Confucius said: A greedy person cannot serve the king. Such a person is concerned about his own interests. When he does not get it, he is preoccupied with how to get it. Once he gets it, he is afraid of losing it.

古文：苟患失之，无所不至。 
现代文：如果担忧失去，就会不择手段，无所不用其极。 
English: If you're afraid of losing them, they'll do anything.

古文：王融乘危徼幸，谋易嗣君。
现代文：王融正是如此，他乘着危难之时，投机取巧，阴谋废君另立。
English: Wang Rong was just like that. He took advantage of the time of crisis, took advantage of opportunism, and plotted to depose the emperor.

古文：子良当时贤王，虽素以忠慎自居，不免忧死。
现代文：萧子良是当时的贤王，虽然素来以崐忠心谨慎而自居，但是仍然不免忧郁而死。
English: Xiao Ziliang was a virtuous king at that time. Although he always considered himself to be loyal and prudent, he still died of melancholy.

古文：迹其所以然，正由融速求富贵而已。
现代文：分析他之所以忧死的原因，正是由于王融急于贪求富贵所致。
English: Wang Rong's eagerness to seek wealth is the reason why he is so depressed.

古文：轻躁之士，乌可近哉！
现代文：轻薄躁急的人，岂可以接近呢？
English: Shall the uncircumcised and the unclean come near?

古文：己亥，魏罢五月五日、七月七日飨祖考。
现代文：已亥，北魏免除五月五日、七月七日祭祀祖先的礼俗。
English: Already in the winter, the Northern Wei Dynasty exempted the May 5th and July 7th rituals and customs of ancestor worship.

古文：魏录尚书事广陵王羽奏： 令文：每岁终，州镇列属官治状，及再考，则行黜陟。
现代文：北魏录尚书事广陵王拓跋羽上奏说： 朝令规定：每年年终，各州镇要列出所属官员的政绩情况，经过考察核对之后，进行降免或提拔。
English: Wang Tuoba, a senior official of the Northern Wei Dynasty, said: The morning order stipulates that at the end of each year, each county and town should list the political performance of its officials, and after inspection and verification, they will be reduced or promoted.

古文：去十五年京官尽经考为三等，今已三载。
现代文：自太和十五年京官们全部经过考评列为三等之后，到如今已经整整满三年了。
English: It has been exactly three years since the Beijing officials of the 15th and 15th years have all been evaluated and ranked as third-class.

古文：臣辄准外考，以定京官治行。 
现代文：所以，我欲参照考评州镇属官的办法来考核京官，以便评定他们的政绩等级。 
English: Therefore, I would like to evaluate the Beijing officials with reference to the method of evaluating the state-town officials in order to evaluate their political performance level.

古文：魏主曰： 考绩事重，应关朕听，不可轻发；且俟至秋。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 考评京官政绩事关重大，应该由朕来决定，不可轻率从事，且等到秋天再说吧。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: It is very important to evaluate the performance of the Beijing government. It should be up to me to decide. It should not be taken lightly. Let's wait until the autumn.

古文：闰月，丁卯，镇军将军鸾即本号，开府仪同三司。
现代文：闰四月丁卯，南齐镇军将军萧鸾以这个名号，开府仪同三司。
English: At the end of April, Xiao Wei, the general of the Nanqi Town Army, used this name to open the ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：戊辰，以新安王昭文为扬州刺史。
现代文：戊辰，新安王萧昭文任扬州刺史。
English: Boshen, Xin'an King Xiao Zhaowen was appointed Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：五月，申戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月甲戌，发生日食。
English: In May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：六月，己巳，魏遣兼员外散骑常侍卢昶、兼员外散骑侍郎王清石为聘。
现代文：六月已巳，北魏派遣兼员外散骑常侍卢昶、兼员外散骑侍郎王清石来访。
English: As early as June, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched Lu Yao, a non-commissioned officer, and Wang Qingshi, a non-commissioned officer, to visit.

古文：昶，度世之子也。
现代文：卢昶是卢度世的儿子。
English: Lu Xun is the son of Lu Du.

古文：清石世仕江南，魏主谓清石曰： 卿勿以南人自嫌。彼有知识，欲见则见，欲言则言。
现代文：王清石世代做官于江南，北魏孝文帝告诉他说： 你不要因为是南方人而有顾虑，他们之中如果有谁与你相识，想见面就见面，想说什么就说什么。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen told Wang Qingshi, who had been an official in the south of the Yangtze River for generations, "Don't be worried because you are from the south. If any of them knows you, they can meet if they want to, and say whatever they want to say."

古文：凡使人以和为贵，勿迭相矜夸，见于辞色，失将命之体也。 
现代文：做使节出访别国，要以和为贵，不要一味地矜持夸耀，尤其不能从言谈举止中表现出来，否则就失去了奉命出使的本体。 
English: When an envoy visits another country, he or she should cherish harmony and not be boastful. In particular, he or she should not show it in his or her speech and behavior. Otherwise, he or she will lose the essence of being an envoy.

古文：秋，七月，乙亥，魏以宋王刘昶为使持节、都督吴、越、楚诸军事、大将军，镇彭城。
现代文：秋季，七月乙亥，北魏任命宋王刘昶为使持节、都督吴越楚诸军事、大将军、镇守彭城。
English: In the autumn, in July of the second year of the Heian period, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Song King Liu Bei as the envoy, the governor Wu Yue Chu as the military, the general, and the town guard of Pengcheng.

古文：魏主亲饯之。
现代文：孝文帝亲自为他饯行。
English: Emperor Xiaowen personally escorted him.

古文：以王肃为昶府长史。
现代文：又派遣王肃为刘昶府署的长史。
English: Wang Su was also sent to Liuye for the long history of the Liuye Prefecture.

古文：昶至镇，不能抚接义故，卒无成功。
现代文：刘昶到了彭城之后，没有能安抚接收过去受过他的恩义的部属，所以未能取得成功。
English: After Liu Bei arrived in Pengcheng, he failed to placate the subordinates who had received his gratitude in the past, so he could not succeed.

古文：壬午，魏安定靖王休卒。
现代文：壬午，北魏安定靖王拓跋休去世。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the Northern Wei Dynasty's Prince of Stability and Pacification, Tuoba Hui, passed away.

古文：自卒至殡，魏主三临其第；葬之如尉元之礼，送之出郊，恸哭而返。
现代文：从去世到出殡，孝文帝三次驾临他的府上。安葬时的礼仪与拓跋尉元的一样，孝文帝亲自送灵柩到郊外，然后失声恸哭返宫。
English: From his death to the funeral, Emperor Xiaowen visited his residence three times. The funeral etiquette was the same as that of Emperor Tuoba. Emperor Xiaowen personally sent the coffin to the suburbs, and then returned to the palace in tears.

古文：壬戌，魏主北巡。
现代文：壬戌，北魏孝文帝在北方巡视。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty made a tour in the north.

古文：西昌侯鸾既诛徐龙驹、周奉叔，而尼媪外入者，颇传异语。
现代文：南齐西昌侯萧鸾诛杀徐龙驹、周奉叔之后，一些进宫的尼姑妇女纷纷传言，说萧鸾等人密谋叛乱。
English: After Xiao Yao, the lord of Xichang in southern Qi, killed Xu Longyao and Zhou Fengtuo, some nuns who entered the palace spread rumors that Xiao Yao and others were plotting a rebellion.

古文：中书令何胤，以后之从叔，为帝所亲，使直殿省。
现代文：中书令何胤是何皇后的堂叔，郁林王非常亲近信任他，让他在殿省入值。
English: According to Chinese records, He Yatian was the uncle of Empress He. King Yulin was very close to and trusted him, and had him honored in the palace and province.

古文：帝与胤谋诛鸾，令胤受事；胤不敢当，依违谏说，帝意复止。
现代文：郁林王与何胤共同策划诛杀萧鸾，命令何胤承担这件事情，但是何胤不敢担当，不顾郁林王的意图而反复劝谏，郁林王只好作罢。
English: Yu Lin Wang and He Yin jointly planned to kill Xiao Yao and ordered He Yin to take charge of the matter, but He Yin did not dare to take charge and repeatedly advised Yu Lin Wang against Yu Lin Wang's intention. Yu Lin Wang had no choice but to give up.

古文：乃谋出鸾于西州，中敕用事，不复关咨于鸾。
现代文：于是，又谋划使萧鸾离开台城到西州去，诏令及朝廷事务等，不再咨问于萧鸾。
English: As a result, they plotted to have Xiao Yao leave Taicheng and go to Xizhou, and no longer consult Xiao Yao about imperial edicts and court affairs.

古文：是时，萧谌、萧坦之握兵权，左仆射王晏总尚书事。
现代文：这时候，萧谌、萧坦之掌握着兵权，左仆射王晏总领尚书事。
English: At this time, Xiao Yao and Xiao Tan Zhi held the military power, and his left-hand man, Sha Wang Yao, was the commander-in-chief.

古文：谌密召诸王典签，约语之，不许诸王外接人物。
现代文：萧谌秘密召见诸王的典签官，对他们打招呼，不许诸王与外人接触。
English: Xiao Yu secretly summoned the kings' signature officers and greeted them. The kings were not allowed to have contact with outsiders.

古文：谌亲要日久，众皆惮而从之。
现代文：萧谌长时期以来一着崐受宠幸，所以大家都害怕他，没有不听从的。
English: For a long time, Xiao Yao has been favored by everyone, so everyone is afraid of him, and no one disobeys him.

古文：鸾以其谋告王晏，晏闻之，响应；又告丹阳尹徐孝嗣，孝嗣亦从之。骠骑录事南阳乐豫谓孝嗣曰： 外传籍籍，似有伊、周之事。
现代文：萧鸾把自己的计谋告诉王晏，王晏听了之后，立即赞同迎合。萧鸾又告诉了丹杨尹徐孝嗣说： 外界传言纷纷，说萧鸾要废掉郁林王，另立幼主，自己象伊尹、周公那样摄政，操持国事。
English: Xiao Yao told his plan to Wang Yao, and after listening to Wang Yao, Wang Yao immediately agreed to accommodate. Xiao Yao also told Danyang Yin Xu Xiaoji, saying: There are rumors from the outside world that Xiao Yao wants to abolish King Yulin, set up another young master, and himself as a regent like Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, and conduct state affairs.

古文：君蒙武帝殊常之恩，荷托附之重，恐不得同人此举。
现代文：您承蒙武帝超乎寻常的恩待，在遗诏中被委以统管尚书省的事务，既然担负着如此重大的托付，恐怕就不应该再随同别人一起做这种举动了。
English: You have received extraordinary favors from Emperor Wu, and in your last will and testament you were entrusted with the overall management of the affairs of Shangshu Province. Since you are entrusted with such an important task, I am afraid you should no longer do this kind of action with others.

古文：人笑褚公，至今齿冷。 
现代文：人们对于褚渊当年的所作所为，至今还嘲笑不已，这可是前车之鉴啊！ 
English: People are still laughing about what Shibuya did that year. This is a lesson for the future!

古文：孝嗣心然之，而不能从。
现代文：徐孝嗣心里完全同意乐豫说的，但是身不由己，不能听从。
English: In his heart, Xu Xiaozhe completely agreed with what Le Yu said, but he couldn't help but obey.

古文：帝谓萧坦之曰： 人言镇军与王晏、萧谌欲共废我，似非虚传。
现代文：郁林王对萧坦之说： 人们都说镇军将军萧鸾同王晏、萧谌一起想把我废掉，似乎并不是虚传谣言。
English: Yu Lin Wang said to Xiao Tan Zhi: People say that the general of the town army, Xiao Jun, together with Wang Jun and Xiao Jun, want to abolish me. It seems that this is not a false rumor.

古文：卿所闻云何？ 
现代文：你听到的是些什么呢？ 
English: What did you hear?

古文：坦之曰： 天下宁当有此，谁乐无事废天子邪！
现代文：萧坦之回答道： 岂能有这样的事情呢？谁喜欢没事找事废除天子呢？
English: Xiao Tianzhi replied, "How could such a thing happen? Who would like to abolish the Son of Heaven for no reason?

古文：朝贵不容造此论，当是诸尼姥言耳，岂有信邪！
现代文：朝廷中的大臣们是不可能制造这种谣言的，一定是那些瞎尼姑们说的，岂可以相信呢？
English: It is impossible for the ministers in the court to create such a rumor. It must have been said by those blind nuns. How can we believe it?

古文：官若无事除此二人，谁敢自保！ 
现代文：陛下如果无故把他们三人除掉，谁还又能保全自身呢？ 
English: Your Majesty, if you were to eliminate the three of them without reason, who would be able to save themselves?

古文：直阁将军曹道刚疑外间有异，密有处分，谋未能发。
现代文：直将军曹道刚怀疑外面有异变，秘密地有所布置，然而没有能够执行。
English: General Cao Daogang suspected that there was a change in the outside world and secretly arranged something, but was unable to carry it out.

古文：时始兴内史萧季敞、南阳太守萧颖基皆内迁，谌欲待二人至，藉其势力以举事。
现代文：当时，始兴内史萧季敞、南阳太守萧颖基都调迁朝中，萧谌想等待他们二人到后，凭借他们的势力而开始行动。
English: At that time, Shi Xing Nai Shi Xiao Jichang and Nanyang Daju Xiao Ying Ke were both transferred to the Middle Court. Xiao Yan wanted to wait for the two of them to arrive and use their power to start the operation.

古文：鸾虑事变，以告坦之，坦之驰谓谌曰： 废天子，古来大事。
现代文：萧鸾担心事情有变故，就把自己的忧虑告诉了萧坦之，萧坦之又骑马去急告萧谌说： 废除天子，自古以来就是一件大事。
English: Xiao Yao was worried that something had changed, so he told Xiao Tan Zhi about his worries. Xiao Tan Zhi then rode on horseback to report to Xiao Yao, saying, "The abolition of Tianzi has been a major event since ancient times.

古文：比闻曹道刚、硃隆之等转已猜疑，卫尉明日若不就事，无所复及。
现代文：最近听说曹道刚、朱隆之等人反而已经猜疑我们了，您如果明天还不行动，就要失去机会，无法加以弥补了。
English: Recently, I heard that Cao Daogang, Zhu Longzhi and others have suspected us. If you do not act tomorrow, you will lose the opportunity and will not be able to make up for it.

古文：弟有百岁母，岂能坐听祸败，正应作馀计耳！ 
现代文：我有百岁老母亲在堂，岂能坐视不动，眼看灾祸降临呢？
English: I have a hundred-year-old mother in the hall, can I sit still and watch the disaster come?

古文：谌惶遽从之。
现代文：所以不能不为以后想一想。 
English: So you have to think about the future.

古文：壬辰，鸾使萧谌先入宫，遇曹道刚及中书舍人硃隆之，皆杀之。
现代文：萧谌听了，也觉得事情危急，心中非常不安，就匆忙地答应了。壬辰，萧鸾派萧谌先进入宫中，正遇上了曹道刚以及中书舍人朱隆之，就把二人一齐杀了。
English: Upon hearing this, Xiao Yao also felt that the situation was critical and was very uneasy in his heart, so he hurriedly agreed. In the morning, Xiao Yao sent Xiao Yao to enter the palace first, and just as he met Cao Daogang and Zhu Longzhi, a scholar in the palace, he killed the two of them together.

古文：直后徐僧亮盛怒，大言于众曰： 吾等荷恩，今日应死报！ 
现代文：负责郁林王车舆后面侍卫任务的宿卫官徐僧亮见此情形，怒气冲天，大声对众人喊道： 我们承受皇恩，今日应当以死相报！ 
English: Xu Sangliang, the palace guard officer in charge of the guard duty behind the carriage of King Yulin, saw this situation and shouted loudly to the crowd: "We have received the royal grace, today we should repay it with death!"

古文：又杀之。
现代文：言未毕，也被杀掉。
English: The villain has killed Keiko again.

古文：鸾引兵自尚书入云龙门，戎服加硃衣于上，比入门，三失履。
现代文：萧鸾带兵从尚书府进入云龙门，他在朝服外面又加穿了战服，武装披挂，但是心中难免恐惧紧张，才进入宫门，鞋子就掉了三次。
English: Xiao Yao led the soldiers from Shangshufu into the Yunlong Gate. He put on the battle uniform on the outside of the court uniform and armed himself. However, he was inevitably afraid and nervous in his heart before entering the palace gate. His shoes fell off three times.

古文：王晏、徐孝嗣、萧坦之、陈显达、王广之、沈文季皆随其后。
现代文：王晏、徐孝嗣、萧坦之、陈显达、王广之、沈文季等人都紧随在萧鸾之后。
English: Wang Hui, Xu Xiaozhi, Xiao Tan Zhi, Chen Xian Da, Wang Guang Zhi, Shen Wenzhi and others followed Xiao Hui.

古文：帝在寿昌殿。闻外有变，犹密为手敕呼萧谌，又使闭内殿诸房阁。
现代文：这时，郁林王正在寿昌殿中，听得外面有变故，还秘密写诏令传唤萧谌前来相救，又让人把内殿的门窗全关闭了。
English: At this time, King Yulin was in Shouchang Hall, and he heard that there was a disturbance outside. He also secretly wrote an edict summoning Xiao Yao to come to his rescue, and had the doors and windows of the inner hall completely closed.

古文：俄而谌引兵入寿昌阁，帝走趋徐姬房，拔剑自刺，不入，以帛缠颈，舆接出延德殿。
现代文：不一会儿，萧谌就领兵进入寿昌殿，郁林王见状，匆忙跑进徐姬的房中，拔出宝剑抹脖子自杀，但所进不深，被萧谌制止，又用帛绸把他的脖子缠裹好，然后用轿把他抬出了延德殿。
English: Soon after, Xiao Yao led his soldiers into Shuchang Palace. Seeing this, Yu Lin Wang panicked and hurriedly ran into Xu Ji's room. He pulled out his sword and slashed his neck to commit suicide. However, Xiao Yao stopped him from going too far, wrapped his neck in silk, and then carried him out of Yende Palace in a carriage.

古文：谌初入殿，宿卫将士皆操弓楯欲拒战。谌谓之曰： 所取自有人，卿等不须动！ 
现代文：萧谌刚进入殿内时，侍卫将士们都操起兵器准备和他搏战一场，萧谌对他们说： 我的目标是他人，与你们无关，请你们不要乱动！ 
English: When Xiao Yao had just entered the hall, the attendants and guards all took up their weapons and prepared to fight him. Xiao Yao said to them: My target is someone else, it has nothing to do with you. Please do not move!

古文：宿卫素隶服于谌，皆信之，及见帝出，各欲自奋，帝竟无一言。
现代文：这些侍卫们向来属萧谌所管，因此都听他的话，就不再准备抗拒了。
English: These guards had always been under Xiao Yao's control, so they all listened to his words and were no longer prepared to resist.

古文：行至西弄，弑之。舆尸出殡徐龙驹宅，葬以王礼。
现代文：尸体运出宫中，灵柩停在徐龙驹的府中，用亲王的礼仪安葬。
English: The body was taken out of the palace, and the coffin was placed in Xu Longyu's residence, where it was buried according to the prince's etiquette.

古文：徐姬及诸嬖幸皆伏诛。
现代文：徐姬和其他宠人统统被杀。
English: Xu Ji and the other favorites were all killed.

古文：鸾既执帝，欲作太后令；徐孝嗣于袖中出而进之，鸾大悦。
现代文：萧鸾抓住郁林王之后，想假造太后的手令，这时徐孝嗣马上从衣袖中取出已准备好的太后手令递过去，于是萧鸾异常高兴。
English: After Xiao Yao caught King Yulin, he wanted to forge the empress dowager's warrant. At this time, Xu Xiaozhi immediately took the ready-made empress dowager's warrant from his sleeve and handed it over, so Xiao Yao was extremely happy.

古文：癸巳，以太后令追废帝为郁林王，又废何后为王妃，迎立新安王昭文。
现代文：癸巳，萧鸾以太后之令追封废帝萧昭业为郁林王，又废黜何皇后为王妃，另准备迎立新安王萧昭文为新皇帝。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiao Yu's ethereal empress decreed that the former emperor Xiao Zhaoye should be enthroned as the King of Yulin, the Empress He should be deposed as the Empress, and Xiao Zhaowen, the King of Xin'an, should be installed as the new emperor.

古文：吏部尚书谢瀹方与客围棋，左右闻有变，惊走报瀹。
现代文：吏部尚书谢瀹正和客人下围棋，手下的人听说宫廷发生事变，惊慌地跑来报告。
English: The clerk, Shangshu Xiejun, was playing Go with a guest. When his subordinates heard that there had been an incident at the court, they came running in panic to report it.

古文：瀹每下子，辄云 其当有意 ，竟局，乃还斋卧，竟不问外事。
现代文：然而，谢瀹就象没听见一般，继续下棋，每下一子，就说声： 恐怕里面含有深意 ，一局终了，就回室中躺下休息，竟然没有问一下外面发生的事情。
English: However, Xie Yao continued to play as if he hadn't heard, and after every move, he said, "I'm afraid there's a hidden meaning in this." When the game was over, he went back to his room to lie down and rest, and he didn't even ask what had happened outside.

古文：大匠卿虞悰窃叹曰： 王、徐遂缚袴废天子，天下岂有此理邪！ 
现代文：大匠卿虞私下里叹息说： 王晏、徐孝嗣如此轻易地就把皇帝废黜了，天底下那有这样的道理呢？ 
English: Master craftsman Sir Yu privately sighed and said, "Wang Xi and Xu Xiaozhi deposed the emperor so easily. Is there such a reason under heaven?"

古文：悰，啸父之孙也。
现代文：虞是虞啸父的孙子。
English: Yu is the grandson of Yu Xiao's father.

古文：朝臣被召入宫。国子祭酒江斅至云龙门，托药发，吐车中而去。
现代文：朝中大臣都被召进宫中，惟有国子祭酒江来到云龙门时，借口药性发作，在车中呕吐不已，因而返回去了。
English: The ministers of both Koreas were summoned to the palace, but when Kuniko Matsuri Sake River came to Yunlongmen, he vomited in the car under the pretext of a drug-induced seizure, so he returned.

古文：西昌侯鸾欲引中散大夫孙谦为腹心，使兼卫尉给甲仗百人。
现代文：西昌侯萧鸾想使中散大夫孙谦成为自己的心腹，就让他兼任卫尉，并且派给他披甲执兵的卫士一百人。
English: Xiao Wei, the lord of Xichang, wanted to make Sun Qian, the Zhongshan doctor, his confidant, so he also made him a lieutenant of the guard, and sent him a hundred guards of armored soldiers.

古文：谦不欲与之同，辄散甲士；鸾亦不之罪也。
现代文：然而，孙谦却不想与萧鸾同党，就把那些卫士统统打发走了，可是萧鸾也不因之而怪罪孙谦。
English: However, Sun Qian did not want to be a member of the same party as Xiao Yu, so he sent all those guards away. However, Xiao Yu did not blame Sun Qian for this.

古文：丁酉，新安王即皇帝位，时年十五。
现代文：丁酉，新安王萧昭文即皇帝位，其时他年纪才十五岁。
English: Xiao Zhaowen, the king of Xin'an, was only 15 years old when he became emperor.

古文：以西昌侯鸾为骠骑大将军、录尚书事、扬州刺史、宣城郡公。
现代文：任命西昌侯萧鸾为骠骑大将军、录尚书事、扬州刺史、宣城郡公。
English: Appointed the Xichang Hou Xiao Wei as the cavalry general, recorded the records, recorded the history of Yangzhou, and became the governor of Xuancheng County.

古文：大赦，改元延兴。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号为延兴。
English: The country was amnestied, and the year was changed to Yanxing.

古文：辛丑，魏主至朔州。
现代文：辛丑，北魏孝文帝到达朔州。
English: Sin Ug, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrives in Shuozhou.

古文：八月，甲辰，以司空王敬则为太尉。鄱阳王锵为司徒，车骑大将军陈显达为司空，尚书左仆射王晏为尚书令。
现代文：八月甲辰，南齐任命司空王敬则为太尉，鄱阳王箫锵为司徒，车骑大将军陈显达为司空，尚书左仆射王晏为尚书令。
English: In August Jia Chen, Nanqi appointed Sikuo Wang Jing as Taifeng, Shiyang Wang Yao as Sito, Cavalry General Chen Xanda as Sikuo, and Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Wang Yao as Shangshu Ling.

古文：魏主至阴山。
现代文：北魏孝文帝到达阴山。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in the gloomy mountains.

古文：以始安王遥光为南郡太守，不之官。遥光，鸾之兄子也。
现代文：南齐又任命始安王萧遥光为南郡太守，但萧遥光没有去就任。
English: Nanqi also appointed the King of Shi'an, Xiao Yaoguang, as the governor of Nan County, but Xiao Yaoguang did not take office.

古文：鸾有异志，遥光赞成之，凡大诛赏，无不预谋。
现代文：萧遥光是萧鸾哥哥的儿子。萧鸾有了废立的意图，萧遥光十分赞同帮助他，凡是有关重大的诛杀或赏拔事情，萧遥光都参加了预谋。
English: Xiao Yaoguang was the son of Xiao Yao's brother. When Xiao Yao had the intention of overthrowing Xiao Yaoguang, Xiao Yaoguang fully agreed to help him. Xiao Yaoguang took part in the premeditation of all major battles and awards.

古文：戊申，以中书郎萧遥欣为兗州刺史。
现代文：戊申，又任命中书郎萧遥欣为兖州刺史。
English: Wushin, and also appointed Zhongshuro Xiao Yaoxin as the leader of Zhangzhou.

古文：遥欣，遥光之弟也。
现代文：萧遥欣是萧遥光的弟弟。
English: Xiao Yaoxin is the younger brother of Xiao Yaoguang.

古文：鸾欲树置亲党，故用之。
现代文：萧鸾想树立亲信，广揽同党，所以重用他。
English: Xiao Yao wanted to establish a close confidant and win over a wide range of party members, so he made heavy use of him.

古文：癸丑，魏主如怀朔镇；己未，如武川镇；辛酉，如抚宜镇；甲子，如柔玄镇；乙丑，南还；辛未，至平城。
现代文：癸丑，北魏孝文帝来到怀朔镇；己未，又到了抚宜镇；甲子，到达柔玄镇；乙丑，南下返回；辛未，到了平城。
English: 丑, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen came to Huai Shuo Town;己未, he came to Fuxi Town;甲子, he came to Zhuoxuan Town;乙丑, he came back to the south;辛未, he came to Pingcheng.

古文：九月，壬申朔，魏诏曰： 三载考绩，三考黜陟；可黜者不足为迟，可进者大成赊缓。
现代文：九月壬申，北魏孝文帝下诏令说： 每三年考评一次官员们的政绩，考评三次后根据情况对他们进行罢免或提升，这对于那些应该被罢免的人来说当然不会认为是太迟了，但是对于那些应该提升的人来说就大大地拖欠了。
English: In September of Jinshin, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree saying: Every three years, the performance of officials will be evaluated, and they will be dismissed or promoted according to the situation after three times of evaluation. Of course, this will not be considered too late for those who should be dismissed, but for those who should be promoted, it is greatly in arrears.

古文：朕今三载一考，即行黜陟，欲令愚滞无妨于贤者，才能不拥于下位。
现代文：朕现在决定三年考评一次，考评完毕就实行罢黜或提升处理，目的是为了使那些低能者不要妨碍了忠贤者的上进，使有才能的不要总是处在低位。
English: I now decide to have a three-year appraisal once a year, and after the appraisal is completed, the dismissal or promotion will be implemented. The purpose is to ensure that those who are incompetent do not hinder the advancement of those who are loyal and wise, and that those who are talented do not always stay in a low position.

古文：各令当曹考其优劣为三等，其上下二等仍分为三。
现代文：崐分别命令负责考评的部门官员，把考评者分为优劣三等，其中上等和下等仍然再分为三等。
English: Separately ordered the department officials responsible for the evaluation to divide the evaluators into superior and inferior third classes, of which the upper and lower classes are still divided into three classes.

古文：六品已下，尚书重问；五品已上，朕将亲与公卿论其善恶，上上者迁之，下下者黜之，中者守其本任。 
现代文：六品以下的官员，由尚书复核审查，五品以上的官员，朕将亲自与各位公卿一起评议其好坏，上上者提升使用，下下者罢免不用，中等的原任不变。 
English: Officials below the sixth grade will be reviewed by Shang Shu, and officials above the fifth grade will be personally reviewed by me together with the nobles. The higher grade will be promoted, the lower grade will not be removed, and the middle grade will remain unchanged.

古文：魏主之北巡也。留任城王澄铨简旧臣。
现代文：北魏孝文帝北巡期间，留下任城王拓跋澄考评百官。
English: During the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen's inspection tour of the north, he left the post of the king of the city, Tuoba Cheng, to evaluate hundreds of officials.

古文：自公侯已下，有官者以万数，澄品其优劣能否为三等，人无怨者。
现代文：朝中从公侯以下，有官职的以万计数，拓跋澄评定他的优劣和才能高低，划为三个等级，结果没有一个人有怨言。
English: From the middle of the dynasty to the prince and below, there are tens of thousands of officials. Tuoba Cheng evaluated his strengths and weaknesses and talents and divided them into three levels. As a result, no one complained.

古文：壬午，魏主临朝堂，黜陟百官，谓诸尚书曰： 尚书，枢机之任，非徒总虚务，行文书而已；朕之得失，尽在于此。
现代文：壬午，北魏孝文帝亲临朝堂，宣布对众臣百官们的罢黜或提升情况，他对诸位尚书们说： 尚书是关键性的要害职位，并非仅仅是总管事务，处理一下文书而已。朕的成败得失，完全关系于尚书。
English: In the afternoon of the third day of the third month, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty came to the imperial court in person to announce the dismissal or promotion of hundreds of officials. He said to all the officials: "The position of secretary is a key and important position. It is not just to be in charge of affairs and deal with documents. My success or failure is entirely related to the position of secretary.

古文：卿等居官，年垂再期，未尝献可替否，进一贤退一不肖，此最罪之大者。 
现代文：你们担任这职务，已经有两年了，但是从来没有向朕建议过什么事可为，什么事不可信；没有推荐过一个贤才，撤换过一个不称职的人，这是罪过中之最大者。 
English: You have been in office for two years, but you have never advised me on what to do and what not to believe; you have not recommended a capable person and replaced an incompetent person, which is the biggest crime.

古文：又谓录尚书事广陵王羽曰： 汝为朕弟，居机衡之右，无勤恪之声，有阿党之迹。
现代文：孝文帝又对录尚书事广陵王拓跋羽说： 你是朕的弟弟，处在执掌要害部门的位置上。但是，你没有勤勉为政、恪守本职的声誉，却有结党营私的行迹。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also said to Wang Tuoba, the chief of the General Office of Records and Records, "You are my younger brother, and you are in charge of a key department. However, you do not have the reputation of being diligent in politics and abiding by your duties, but you have a track record of forming parties and doing personal business.

古文：今黜汝录尚书、廷尉，但为特进、太子太保。 
现代文：现在，罢免去你的录尚书、廷尉之职，只担任特进、太子太保。 
English: Now, you have been dismissed from your posts as a courtier and lieutenant, and you will only serve as a special envoy and prince's bodyguard.

古文：又谡尚书令陆睿曰： 叔翻到省之初，甚有善称；比来偏颇懈怠，由卿不能相导以义。
现代文：又对尚书令陆睿说： 拓跋羽初到尚书省任职之时，人们对他的评价相当高，可是近来偏听偏信，论事不公，而且松懈懒惰，这完全是由于你不能以道义引导相劝他的结果。
English: He also said to Shang Shuling Lu Rui: When Tuoba Yu first came to Shang Shuling, people's evaluation of him was quite high, but recently he has been biased, unfair, and lazy. This is entirely due to the fact that you can't use moral guidance to persuade him.

古文：虽无大责，宜有小罚，今夺卿禄一期。 
现代文：你虽然没有大的责任，但是也应该受到小小的罚处，因此减去你一年的俸禄。 
English: Although you do not have a big responsibility, you should also be punished with a small fine, so deduct your salary for one year.

古文：又谓左仆射拓跋赞曰： 叔翻受黜，卿应大辟；但以咎归一人，不复重责；今解卿少师，削禄一期。 
现代文：又对左仆射拓跋赞说： 拓跋羽被罢黜，你应处以死刑。但是，事情既然归咎于拓跋羽一人了，就不再处分他人了，所以只解除你少师之职，削去一年的俸禄。 
English: He also said to his left-hand man, Sho Takubazan, "You should be sentenced to death because Takubazan was ousted. However, since the blame was placed on Takubazan alone, there is no need to punish others, so you will only be relieved of your duties as a junior teacher and your salary will be reduced by one year.

古文：又谓左丞公孙良、右丞乞伏义受曰： 卿亦应大辟；可以白衣守本官，冠服禄恤尽从削夺。若三年有成，还复本任；无成，永归南亩。 
现代文：接着又对左丞公孙良、右丞乞伏义受说： 你们的罪过也应该处以死刑，但是只对你们进行如下处罚；削去你们的官服和俸禄，以布衣身份继续留任本职，如果在三年之内有政绩，就官复原职；如果没有任何成就，那就永远削职为民，回去种地去。 
English: Next, he said to Sun Liang of the Left Council of Elders and Qibui Yizhu of the Right Council of Elders: Your sins should also be punished by death, but only the following punishments will be imposed on you; your official uniforms and salaries will be cut off, and you will continue to hold your position as a civilian, and if you have political achievements within three years, you will be reinstated; if you have no achievements, then you will be cut off from the people forever and go back to farming.

古文：又谓尚书任城王澄曰： 叔神志骄傲，可解少保。 
现代文：又接着对尚书任城王拓跋澄说： 叔叔你趾高气扬，骄傲自大，所以解除少保官职。 
English: He went on to say to the newly appointed city king, Tuoba Cheng, "Uncle, you are arrogant and proud, so you have been relieved of your position as a minor official.

古文：又谓长兼尚书于果曰： 卿不勤职事，数辞以疾。可解长兼，削禄一期。 
现代文：还对长兼尚书于果说： 你不勤于职任之事，数次以疾病为借口，所以亦解除长兼，削去一年的俸禄。 
English: He also sent a letter to his superior, saying, "You have not been diligent in your duties and have used illness as an excuse several times. Therefore, I am terminating your position as superior and cutting off one year's salary.

古文：其馀守尚书尉羽、卢渊等，并以不职，或解任，或黜官，或夺禄，皆面数其过而行之。
现代文：其余如守尚书尉羽、卢渊等人，均以不称职，或者被解除职务，或者被罢黜官位，或者被削去俸禄，孝文帝当面指责了他们的过失，所受处罚立即执行。
English: The rest, such as Shou Shang, Shuhei Yu, Lu Yuan and others, were all dismissed for incompetence, or dismissed from their posts, or dismissed from their official positions, or had their salaries cut. Emperor Xiaowen accused them of their faults in person, and the punishment they received was immediately carried out.

古文：渊，昶之兄也。
现代文：卢渊是卢昶的哥哥。
English: Lu Yuan is Lu Yao's older brother.

古文：帝又谓陆睿曰： 北人每言 北俗质鲁，何由知书！ 
现代文：孝文帝又对陆睿说： 北方人常说： 北方风俗朴质、粗犷，怎么会变得知书识礼、文质彬彬呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also said to Lu Rui: Northerners often say: Northern customs are simple and rough, how can they become literate and courteous?

古文：朕闻之，深用怃然！
现代文：朕听了之后，感到异常失望。
English: After listening to it, I felt extremely disappointed.

古文：今知书者甚众，岂皆圣人！
现代文：现在好读书、有学识的人很多，难道他们都是圣人吗？
English: Nowadays, there are many people who are good at reading and have knowledge. Are they all saints?

古文：顾学与不学耳。
现代文：完全在于好学与不好学。
English: It's all about whether you're a good student or a bad student.

古文：朕修百官，兴礼乐，其志固欲移风易俗。
现代文：朕整顿百官，大兴礼乐，全部心意在于移风易俗。
English: My whole intention is to rectify the etiquette of the eunuchs and promote the etiquette of the eunuchs.

古文：朕为天子，何必居中原！
现代文：朕身为天子，何必一定要去中原地区居住呢？
English: As a son of heaven, why do I have to go and live in the Central Plains?

古文：正欲卿等子孙渐染美俗，闻见广博；若永居恒北，复值不好文之主，不免面墙耳。 
现代文：还不是为了使你们的子孙后代渐渐习染当地好的风俗习惯，能多闻多见，增加见识。如果永远住在恒山之北，再遇上一个不喜欢诗书礼乐的国君的话，那就难免会变得孤陋寡闻。 
English: It is not to enable your children and grandchildren to gradually get used to the good local customs and habits, to hear more and see more, and to increase their knowledge. If you always live in the north of the Hengshan Mountains, and then meet a king who does not like poetry, books, and music, it will inevitably become lonely.

古文：对曰： 诚如圣言。
现代文：陆睿回答道： 确实如圣上所说。
English: Lu Rui replied: It is indeed as the saint said.

古文：金日磾不入仕汉朝，何能七世知名！ 
现代文：金日如果不到汉朝去做官，怎么能够知名于世呢？ 
English: If Kim Il-sung did not become an official of the Han Dynasty, how could he be famous in the world?

古文：帝甚悦。
现代文：孝文帝听了陆睿的话，心里十分喜悦。
English: Emperor Ming was very happy to hear this.

古文：郁林王之废也，鄱阳王锵初不知谋。
现代文：南齐鄱阳王箫锵最初并不知道萧鸾有废掉郁林王的阴谋。
English: At first, Wang Yao, the governor of South Qi Province, did not know that Xiao Yao was plotting to depose King Yulin.

古文：及宣城公鸾权势益重，中外皆知其蓄不臣之志。
现代文：后来，郁林王被废，宣城公萧鸾的权势日益增大，朝廷内外都知道他心里有凯觎皇位之意。
English: Later, King Yulin was abolished, and the power of Xuancheng Xiaoqi was increasing day by day. Both inside and outside the imperial court, it was known that he had the intention of winning the throne.

古文：锵每诣鸾，鸾常屣履至车后迎之；语及家国，言泪俱发，锵以此信之。
现代文：但是，萧锵每次去拜见他时，萧鸾常常匆忙得连鞋都来不及穿好就到车子后面去迎接，说到国家大事，萧鸾无不声泪俱下，表现的非常忠贞，因此萧锵还是很信任他。
English: However, every time Xiao Yao went to visit him, Xiao Yao was often in such a hurry that he didn't even have time to put on his shoes before going to the back of the car to greet him. When it came to national events, Xiao Yao was always in tears and showed great loyalty, so Xiao Yao still trusted him very much.

古文：宫台之内皆属意于锵，劝锵入宫发兵辅政。
现代文：朝中各方都倾向于萧锵，劝他入宫发兵，取代萧鸾，辅佐朝政。
English: All parties in the DPRK and China were inclined towards Xiao Tong, and advised him to enter the palace and send troops to replace Xiao Tong and assist the government.

古文：制局监谢粲说锵及随王子隆曰： 二王但乘油壁车入宫，出天子置朝堂，夹辅号令；粲等闭城门、上仗，谁敢不同！
现代文：制局监谢粲游说萧锵和随王萧子隆，对二人说： 二位王爷只需乘着油壁车进入宫中，把皇帝带出来，挟持到朝堂之上，左右辅佐，发布号令，我和其他人关闭城门，带卫士前来声援，谁敢不听令呢？
English: The Supervisor of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Xie Zhen, lobbied Xiao Zhen and his follower, Wang Xiao Zilong, and said to the two of them: The two princes only need to enter the palace by oil wall cart, bring the emperor out, hold him above the palace, assist him left and right, and issue an order. I and others will close the city gate and bring guards to show solidarity. Who would dare not obey the order?

古文：东城人正共缚送萧令耳。 
现代文：只怕东府里的人会乖乖地把萧鸾缚送过来呢。 
English: I'm just afraid that the people in Dongfu will obediently send Xiao Yuanzhong here.

古文：子隆欲定计。锵以上台兵力既悉度东府，且虑事不捷，意甚犹豫。
现代文：萧子隆想认真计谋一番，但是萧锵却因朝中兵力全控制在萧鸾手中，且考虑到事情不一定能成功，心中犹豫万分。
English: Xiao Zilong wanted to make a serious plan, but Xiao Yao was hesitant because of the full control of the North Korean and Chinese forces in Xiao Yao's hands, and considering that things may not be successful.

古文：马队主刘巨，世祖时旧人，诣锵，请间，叩头劝锵立事。
现代文：马队头目刘巨是武帝时的旧人，他来见萧锵，要求和萧锵单独说话，跪下磕头，力劝萧锵采取行动。
English: The leader of the horse team, Liu Jiu, was an old man at the time of Emperor Wu. He came to see Xiao Yao, asked to speak with Xiao Yao alone, knelt down and urged Xiao Yao to take action.

古文：锵命驾将入，复还内，与母陆太妃别，日暮不成行。
现代文：萧锵命令准备车马，将要进宫，但是又回到内室，与母亲陆太妃告别，结果天黑了还没有出发。
English: Xiao Yao ordered to prepare the carriage and horses, and was about to enter the palace. However, he returned to the inner room to say goodbye to his mother, Lu Taifei. As a result, he did not leave when it got dark.

古文：典签知其谋，告之。
现代文：萧锵身边的典签知道了这一计划，就向萧鸾告发了他。
English: Xiao Yao's bodyguard knew about this plan and reported him to Xiao Yao.

古文：癸酉，鸾遣兵二千人围锵第，杀锵，遂杀子隆及谢粲等。
现代文：癸酉，萧鸾派遣两千士兵围住萧锵的住处，把他杀了，接着又杀了萧子隆、谢粲等人。
English: Then, Xiao Yao sent two thousand soldiers to surround Xiao Yao's residence, killed him, and then killed Xiao Zilong, Xie Yao and others.

古文：于时太祖诸子，子隆最壮大，有才能，故鸾尤忌之。
现代文：在当时，武帝的儿子中数萧子隆强壮高大，且颇有才能，因此萧鸾尤其忌妒他。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu's middle son, Xiao Zi, was tall, strong and talented, so Xiao Yao was especially jealous of him.

古文：江州刺史晋安王子懋闻鄱阳、随王死，欲起兵，谓防阁吴郡陆超之曰： 事成则宗庙获安，不成犹为义鬼。 
现代文：江州刺史晋安王萧子懋闻知鄱阳王萧锵和随王萧子隆已被萧鸾杀死，准备起兵讨伐，他对防吴郡人陆超之说： 事情如果能成功则朝廷获得安宁，如果失败我们死而犹荣。 
English: Jiangzhou scribe Jinan King Xiao Zixuan heard that Yangyang King Xiao Zixuan and his follower King Xiao Zilong had been killed by Xiao Zixuan and was preparing to raise an army to fight. He said to Lu Chaozhi, a resident of Wuxi County: "If things succeed, the imperial court will be at peace. If things fail, we will die with honor."

古文：防阁丹阳董僧慧曰： 此州虽小，宋孝武尝用之。若举兵向阙以请郁林之罪，谁能御之！ 
现代文：防丹阳人董僧慧说： 江州虽然地域狭小，但是宋孝武帝就曾从这里起兵讨伐杀死宋文帝而自立的刘劭。
English: Dong Sanghui, a defender of Danyang, said: Although Jiangzhou is a small region, Emperor Song Xiaowu once raised an army from here to fight and kill Liu Bei, who was independent of Emperor Song.

古文：子懋母阮氏在建康，密遣书迎之，阮氏报其同母兄于瑶之为计。
现代文：现在，我们如果发兵进朝，讨伐萧鸾杀害郁林王之罪，谁能够抵抗呢？ 
English: Now, if we send troops into the North to fight against Xiao Yan's crime of killing King Yulin, who will be able to resist?

古文：瑶之驰告宣城公鸾；乙亥，假鸾黄钺，内外纂严，遣中护军王玄邈讨子懋，又遣军主裴叔业与于瑶之先袭寻阳，声云为郢府司马。
现代文：萧子懋的母亲阮氏住在建康，萧子懋派人秘密传书把她接来，阮氏把情况告诉了自己的同母哥哥于瑶之，与他计谋，谁知于瑶之立即派快马报告了宣城公萧鸾。乙亥，授萧鸾黄钺，内外戒严，派遣中护军王玄邈讨伐萧子懋，另又派遣军主裴叔业与于瑶之先去袭击寻阳，声称是郢府司马。
English: Xiao Zixuan's mother, Ruan, lived in Jiankang. Xiao Zixuan sent a secret courier to fetch her. Ruan told his half-brother Yu Zizhi about the situation and plotted with him. Who knew that Yu Zizhi immediately sent a fast horse to report to the Xuancheng Xuancheng. Yi Hai, who had issued Xiao Zixuan with the Yellow Flag and imposed internal and external martial law, sent the middle guard Wang Xuanqin to fight Xiao Zixuan. In addition, he sent the military leader Pei Shuhe and Yu Zixuan to attack Xuanyang first, claiming to be the

古文：子懋知之，遣三百人守湓城。
现代文：萧子懋知道情况之后，派遣三百人守卫湓城。
English: After Xiao Zicheng learned of the situation, he sent three hundred men to guard the city.

古文：叔业溯流直上，至夜，回袭湓城；城局参军乐贲开门纳入。
现代文：裴叔业溯江而上，到了夜间，又回过头来奔袭湓城，城局参军乐贲打开城门，迎接裴叔业进入城中。
English: Pei Shuhei followed the river upstream. At night, he turned around and raided Shicheng. The city government opened the gate to welcome Pei Shuhei into the city.

古文：子懋闻之，帅府州兵力据城自守。
现代文：萧子懋知此情况后，率领府州的兵力据城自守。
English: After Xiao Zixuan learned of this situation, he led the troops from Fuzhou to defend the city.

古文：子懋部曲多雍州人，皆勇跃愿奋。
现代文：萧子懋崐的部曲大多是雍州人，都自告奋勇，跃跃欲试。
English: Most of Xiao Zixuan's pieces are from Yongzhou. They all volunteered to perform and are eager to try.

古文：叔业畏之，遣于瑶之说子懋曰： 今还都必无过忧，正当作散官，不失富贵也。 
现代文：裴叔业害怕了，派遣于瑶之去说服萧子懋，瑶之对子懋讲： 你现在如果能够主动放弃，回到京城去，一定不会有什么担心之处，正好可以做一个闲散之官，仍然不失富贵荣华呀。 
English: Pei Shuhei got scared and sent Yu Zhi to persuade Xiao Ziqi. Yu Ziqi said to Zi Ziqi: If you can give up and go back to Beijing now, you will have nothing to worry about. You can just be an idle official and still be rich and glorious.

古文：子懋既不出兵攻叔业，众情稍沮。
现代文：萧子懋既然不出兵攻打裴叔业，部下的情绪就渐渐有几分沮丧低落。
English: Since Xiao Zixuan did not send troops to attack Pei Shiye, the mood of his subordinates gradually became somewhat depressed.

古文：中兵参军于琳之，瑶之兄也，说子懋重赂叔业，可以免祸。
现代文：中兵参军于琳之是于瑶之的哥哥，他劝说萧子懋以重金贿赂裴叔业，可以免除灾祸。
English: Yu Linzhi, the elder brother of Yu Yuanzhi, who joined the Chinese People's Liberation Army, persuaded Xiao Zizhi to bribe Pei Shuhei with a large sum of money so that he could be spared from the disaster.

古文：子懋使琳之往，琳之因说叔业取子懋。
现代文：萧子懋派于琳之前去，但是于琳之却又劝说裴叔业捉拿萧子懋。
English: Xiao Zixuan sent Yu Lin to go ahead of him, but Yu Lin persuaded Pei Shuhei to capture Xiao Zixuan.

古文：叔业遣军主徐玄庆将四百人随琳之入州城，僚佐皆奔散。
现代文：裴叔业派军主徐玄庆带领四百兵士随于琳之进入江州城，萧子懋手下的官员们纷纷奔散逃命。
English: Pei Shuhei sent the military commander Xu Xuanqing to lead four hundred soldiers to follow Yulin into Jiangzhou City, and the officials under Xiao Zixuan fled for their lives.

古文：琳之从二百人，拔白刃入斋，子懋骂曰： 小人！何忍行此！ 
现代文：于琳之领着二百人，手执刀剑进入萧子懋的住处，萧子懋见此情形，大骂于琳之说： 无耻小人，怎么能忍心干出这样的事呢？ 
English: Yu Linzhi led two hundred people, sword in hand, into Xiao Zixuan's residence. Seeing this, Xiao Zixuan scolded Yu Linzhi, saying, "You shameless villain, how can you bear to do such a thing?

古文：琳之以袖障面，使人杀之。
现代文：于琳之用衣袖遮住自己的脸，让人杀死了萧子懋。
English: Yu Lin covered her face with her sleeve and had someone kill Xiao Zixuan.

古文：王玄邈执董僧慧，将杀之，僧慧曰： 晋安举义兵，仆实预其谋；得为主人死，不恨矣！
现代文：王玄邈抓住了董僧慧，将要杀他，董僧慧说： 晋安王萧子懋举义兵，讨逆贼，本人确实参与了策谋，现在能为主人而死，死而无怨！
English: Wang Xuanqian caught Dong Sanghui and was about to kill him. Dong Sanghui said, "Jin'an King Xiao Ziqian raised a volunteer army to fight against the traitors. I actually took part in the plot. Now I can die for my master. I have no grudge against death!"

古文：愿至大敛毕，退就鼎镬。 
现代文：但是，希望能在晋安王的大敛之礼举行完毕之后，我便就身鼎镬，以求一死。 
English: However, I hope that after King Jinan's Great Constraint Ceremony is over, I will be so exhausted that I will die.

古文：玄邈义之，具以白鸾；免死配东冶。
现代文：王玄邈觉得董僧慧非常有义气，就把情况告诉了萧鸾，结果董僧慧免于处死，被发配到东治做苦工。
English: Wang Xuanqi felt that Dong Sanghui was very righteous, so he told Xiao Yu about the situation. As a result, Dong Sanghui was spared from execution and was sent to Dongzhi to do hard labor.

古文：子懋子昭基，九岁，以方二寸绢为书，参其消息，并遗钱五百，行金得达，僧慧视之曰： 郎君书也！ 
现代文：萧子懋的儿子萧昭基当时年龄才九岁，他以二寸见方的丝织写成一封书信，打问董僧慧的情况，并送去五百钱，用这些钱行贿管制人员，信才被转交董僧惠。
English: Xiao Zixuan's son, Xiao Zhaoji, was only nine years old at the time. He wrote a letter with a two-inch-square silk fabric, inquired about the situation of Dong Sanghui, and sent five hundred dollars. He used the money to bribe the control personnel, and the letter was transferred to Dong Sanghui.

古文：悲恸而卒。于琳之劝陆超之逃亡，超之曰： 人皆有死，此不足惧！
现代文：董僧惠看到绢书之后，一眼就认出来了，说道： 这是小公子写的啊！ 
English: After seeing the letter, Dong Sanghui recognized it at a glance and said, "This was written by a young gentleman!"

古文：吾若逃亡，非唯孤晋安之眷，亦恐田横客笑人！ 
现代文：于是悲恸万分，气绝而死。于琳之劝说陆超之逃跑，陆超之却不为所动，并且对他说： 人迟早都有一死，这丝毫也没有什么可畏惧的。
English: Yu Lin persuaded Lu Chaozhi to escape, but Lu Chaozhi was unmoved and said to him, "People all die sooner or later, and there is nothing to be afraid of.

古文：玄邈等欲囚以还都，超之端坐俟命。
现代文：我如果逃亡了，不但已经死去的晋安王的家眷孤单而无人照料，而且恐怕还遭田横门客们的嘲笑。
English: If I run away, not only will the family of the dead King Jinan be left alone and uncared for, but I'm afraid I'll also be ridiculed by Tianyou's guests.

古文：超之门生谓杀超之当得赏，密自后斩之，头坠而身不僵。
现代文：王玄邈等人想把陆超之押送到京都，陆超之端坐不动，等待他们前来捕他。陆超之的门生以为杀了陆超之一定能得到重赏，就偷偷地从背后把陆超之斩了，但是他的头虽然落地了，身子却还不倒下去。
English: Wang Xuanqin and others wanted to escort Lu Chaozhi to Kyoto, but Lu Chaozhi sat motionless, waiting for them to come and capture him. Lu Chaozhi's protégé thought that killing one of Lu Chaozhi would definitely get a reward, so he secretly beheaded Lu Chaozhi from behind, but although his head fell to the ground, his body did not fall down.

古文：玄邈厚加殡敛。门生亦助举棺，棺坠，压其首，折颈而死。
现代文：王玄邈以丰厚的物品装敛了陆超之，为他殡葬，那个门生也来帮忙举棺入葬，棺材突然坠下，压住了门生的脑袋，折颈而死。
English: Wang Xuanqin dressed up Lu Chaozhi with rich items and buried him. The disciple also came to help lift the coffin for burial. The coffin suddenly fell down, crushing the disciple's head and breaking his neck.

古文：鸾遣平西将军王广之袭南兗州刺史安陆王子敬。
现代文：萧鸾派遣平西将军王广之去袭击南兖州刺史安陆王萧子敬。
English: Xiao Qi dispatched the Pingxi general Wang Guang to attack the southern Zhangzhou prince Anlu Wang Xiao Zi Jing.

古文：广之至欧阳，遣部将济阴陈伯之先驱。
现代文：王广之到欧阳后，就派部下将领济阴人陈伯之为先驱，前去袭击。
English: After Wang Guangzhi arrived in Ouyang, he sent his subordinate general Chen Bo Gui, a native of Jiyin, as a pioneer to attack.

古文：伯之因城开独入，斩子敬。
现代文：陈伯之到后，见城门大开，就率先而入，斩了萧子敬。
English: After Chen Bozhi arrived, he saw the gate was wide open, so he went in first and killed Xiao Zikong.

古文：鸾又遣徐玄庆西上害诸王。
现代文：萧鸾又派遣徐玄庆去西边杀害诸位藩王。
English: Xiao Yu also sent Xu Xuanqing to the west to kill the kings.

古文：临海王昭秀为荆州刺史，西中郎长史何昌寓行州事。玄庆至江陵，欲以便宜从事。昌寓曰： 仆受朝廷意寄，翼辅外籓。
现代文：临海王萧昭秀为荆州刺史，西中郎长史何昌主持州中事务，徐玄庆到了江陵之后，想不经奏报直接作出处置杀了临海王，何昌义正辞严地说道： 我受朝廷之委托，辅助临海王。
English: Xiao Zhaoxiu, the king of Linhai, was the governor of Jingzhou, and He Chang, the head of the West Middle School, presided over the affairs of the Middle School. After Xu Xuanqing arrived in Jiangling, he wanted to directly deal with and kill the king of Linhai without a report. He Chang Yi said solemnly: I was commissioned by the imperial court to assist the king of Linhai.

古文：殿下未有愆失，君以一介之使来，何容即以相付邪！
现代文：殿下并没有什么过失，你只不过是别人派来的一个使臣，如何就能让我把殿下交给你呢？
English: Your Highness has not done anything wrong, you are just an envoy sent by someone else, how can I hand over your Highness to you?

古文：若朝廷必须殿下，当自启闻，更听后旨。 
现代文：如果圣上一定索要殿下，我自己会启奏陈述，等待圣上的答复。 
English: If His Holiness were to ask His Royal Highness for something, I would play the opening statement myself and wait for His Holiness's reply.

古文：昭秀由是得还建康。
现代文：徐玄庆的目的没有实现。于是，萧昭秀才得以回到建康。
English: Xu Xuanqing's goal was not realized, so Xiao Zhaoxiu was able to return to Jiankang.

古文：昌寓，尚之之弟子也。
现代文：何昌是何尚之弟弟之子。
English: He Chang is the son of He Shang's younger brother.

古文：鸾以吴兴太宗孔琇之行郢州事，欲使之杀晋熙王銶。
现代文：萧鸾派吴兴太守孔之主管郢州事务，想让他杀害晋熙王萧。
English: Xiao Yao sent Wu Xingtao to guard Kong, the director of Zhangzhou affairs, and wanted him to kill Jinxi Wang Xiao.

古文：琇之辞不许，遂不食而死。
现代文：孔之坚决辞而不干，但是萧鸾不答应，于是就绝食而亡。
English: Kongzhi resolutely refused to do so, but Xiao Yu did not agree, so he went on a hunger strike and died.

古文：琇之，靖之孙也。
现代文：孔之是孔靖的孙子。
English: Kong Zhi is the grandson of Kong Jing.

古文：裴叔业自寻阳仍进向湘州，欲杀湘州刺史南平王锐，防阁周伯玉大言于众曰： 此非天子意。
现代文：裴叔业从寻阳出发，来到了湘州，想要杀掉湘州刺史南平王萧锐，南平王属下的防周伯玉对众人大声说道： 这并不是天子的命令。
English: Pei Shuhei came to Xiangzhou from Huanyang and wanted to kill the Xiangzhou assassin Nanping Wang Xiao Rui. Nanping Wang's subordinate Zhou Bo Yu said loudly to the crowd: This is not the order of the Son of Heaven.

古文：今斩叔业，举兵匡社稷，谁敢不从！ 
现代文：现在，我要斩掉裴叔业，举众发兵，匡扶社稷江山，哪个敢不听从呢？ 
English: Now, I'm going to cut off Pei Shuhei, raise the troops, and support the Qijiang Mountains, who would dare not to obey?

古文：锐典签叱左右斩之。
现代文：萧锐的典签喝退周围的人，斩了周伯玉。
English: Xiao Rui's signature drove away the people around him and beheaded Zhou Boyu.

古文：乙酉，杀锐；又杀郢州刺史晋熙王銶、南豫州刺史宜都王铿。
现代文：乙酉，杀害了南平王萧锐，郢州刺史晋熙王萧、南豫州刺史宜都王萧铿亦同时被杀害。
English: Acetylene, killed Nanping Wang Xiao Rui, Zhangzhou stabbing history Jinxi Wang Xiao, South Yuzhou stabbing history Yidu Wang Xiao Yao were also killed at the same time.

古文：丁亥，庐陵王子卿为司徒，杜阳王铄为中军将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁亥，任命庐陵王萧子卿为司徒，桂阳王萧铄为中军将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Dinghai, appointed Gongling King Xiao Ziqing as the tutor, Guiyang King Xiao Wei as the general of the Chinese army, and Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：冬，十月，丁酉，解严。
现代文：冬季，十月丁酉，解除戒严。
English: In winter, in October, martial law was lifted.

古文：以宣城公鸾为太傅、领大将军、扬州牧、都督中外诸军事，加殊礼，进爵为王。
现代文：任命宣城公萧鸾为太傅、领大将军、扬州牧、都督中外诸军事，并加以特殊的礼仪，进爵位为王。
English: Appointed Xuancheng Xiao Jie as Taifu, leading general, Yangzhou herdsman, governor of foreign and domestic military, and with special etiquette, he was promoted to the rank of king.

古文：宣城王谋继大统，多引朝廷名士与参筹策。
现代文：宣城王萧鸾策划篡位当皇帝，因此广为招揽朝廷名士参与筹谋。
English: Xiao Xi, the king of Xuancheng, planned to usurp the throne and become emperor. Therefore, the court celebrities were widely invited to participate in the planning.

古文：侍中谢朏心不愿，乃求出为吴兴太守。
现代文：侍中谢心里不愿意，于是就请求出任吴兴太守。
English: Xie, the chamberlain, did not want to do it, so he asked Wu Xing to become the governor.

古文：至郡，致酒数斛遗其弟吏部尚书瀹，为书曰： 可力饮此，勿豫人事！ 
现代文：他到任之后，给担任吏部尚书的弟弟谢瀹送去好几斛酒，并且附信一封，信上说： 可以尽量饮酒，不要参与人事。 
English: After he took office, he sent several bottles of wine to his younger brother Xie Jun, who was in charge of the personnel department, and attached a letter saying: "You can drink as much as possible, don't get involved in personnel matters."

古文：臣光曰：臣闻 衣人之衣者怀人之忧，食人之食者死人之事。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：我听说： 穿了他人衣服的人替他人分忧，吃了他人东西的人要替他人的事情而死。 
English: Minister Sima Guang said: I have heard that: Those who wear other people's clothes should share their worries for others, and those who eat other people's things should die for other people's affairs.

古文：二谢兄弟，比肩贵近，安享荣禄，危不预知；为臣如此，可谓忠乎！
现代文：谢、谢瀹弟兄二人，同时任皇帝身边的亲近大臣，但是他们只知道安享自己的荣华富贵，朝廷的危难竟然不参预不过问，如此做臣，可以说是忠良吗？
English: The two brothers Xie and Xie Yao, at the same time serving as close ministers around the emperor, but they only knew how to enjoy their own glory and wealth, and did not anticipate the danger of the court, so to be a minister, can it be said to be loyal?

古文：宣城王虽专国政，人情犹未服。
现代文：宣城王萧鸾虽然一手专权，独断国政，但是人们并不服气他。
English: Although Xiao Xi, the king of Xuancheng, wielded absolute power single-handedly and dictated national politics, people were not convinced by him.

古文：王胛上有赤志，骠骑咨议参军考城江祐劝王出以示人。
现代文：他的肩胛处有一个红色的痣，骠骑谘议参军考城人江劝他出示给人看。
English: There is a red badge on his shoulder, and he is advised to show it to people.

古文：王以示晋寿太守王洪范，曰： 人言此是日月相，卿幸勿泄！ 
现代文：宣城王就出示给晋寿太守王洪范看，并说道： 人们说这个痣是日月之相，你一定不要往外泄露。 
English: King Xuancheng showed it to Wang Hongfan, the governor of Jinju, and said, "People say that this cocoon is the phase of the sun and moon. You must not reveal it to the outside world."

古文：洪范曰： 公日月在躯，如何可隐，当转言之！ 
现代文：王洪范回答： 大人您有日月在身上，怎么能隐而不宣呢？
English: Wang Hongfan replied: "Adult, you have the sun and the moon on your body, how can you hide it?

古文：王母，祏之姑也。
现代文：应该转告别人。 
English: You should tell someone.

古文：戊戈，杀桂阳王铄、衡阳王钧、江夏王锋、建安王子真、巴陵王子伦。
现代文：宣城王萧鸾的母亲是江的姑姑。戊戌，桂阳王萧铄、衡阳王萧钧、江夏王萧锋、建安王萧子真、巴陵王萧子伦同时被杀害。
English: The mother of Xuancheng King Xiao Zhen was the aunt of Jiang. Wu Zhen, Guiyang King Xiao Zhen, Hengyang King Xiao Zhen, Jiangxia King Xiao Feng, Jian'an King Xiao Zicheng, and Baling King Xiao Zilun were killed at the same time.

古文：铄与鄱阳王锵齐名；锵好文章，铄好名理，时人称为鄱、桂。
现代文：萧铄与鄱阳王萧锵名气相等，萧锵爱好并擅长文学，萧铄爱好并擅长玄理，当时人们称之为鄱、桂。
English: Xiao Yao was as famous as Xiao Yao, the King of Shenyang. Xiao Yao was fond of and good at literature, and Xiao Yao was fond of and good at metaphysics. At that time, people called him Zou and Gui.

古文：锵死，铄不自安，至东府见宣城王，还，谓左右曰： 向录公见接殷勤，流连不能已，而面有惭色，此必欲杀我。 
现代文：萧锵死后，萧锵即感到自危不安，他到东府去见宣城王萧鸾，回来之后，对手下的人说： 刚才萧鸾接见我时表现的十分殷勤周到，一付流连不舍的样子，但是面带愧色，这一定是想杀掉我。 
English: After Xiao Yao's death, Xiao Yao immediately felt insecure. He went to Dongfu to see Xiao Yao, the king of Xuancheng. After his return, his opponents said: Xiao Yao was very courteous and thoughtful when he received me, and he had a lingering look, but he was ashamed. He must have wanted to kill me.

古文：是夕，遇害。
现代文：当天晚上，萧铄即被害。
English: That evening, Xiao Yao was killed.

古文：宣城王每杀诸王，常夜遣兵围其第，斩关逾垣，呼噪而入，家赀皆封籍之。
现代文：宣城王萧鸾每当杀害一个藩王，总是于夜间派兵包围其住所，翻墙破门，喝喊而入，把他的家产全部操封没收。
English: Whenever the king of Xuancheng, Xiao Tong, killed a feudal lord, he always sent troops to surround his residence at night, overturned the wall, broke through the door, shouted and entered, and confiscated all his family property.

古文：江夏王锋，有才行，宣城王尝与之言 遥光才力可委 。
现代文：江夏王萧锋，德才兼备，萧鸾曾经对他讲道： 始安王萧遥光极有才干，可以委以重任。 
English: Xiao Feng, the King of Jiangxia, was both virtuous and talented. Xiao Yu once preached to him: Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, was extremely talented and could be entrusted with important tasks.

古文：锋曰： 遥光之于殿下，犹殿下之于高皇；卫宗庙，安社稷，实有攸寄。 
现代文：萧锋回答道： 萧遥光之于殿下您，正如殿下之于高皇帝一样。卫护宗庙，安定社稷，他确实可以寄于厚望。 
English: Xiao Feng replied: Xiao Yaguang is to you, Your Highness, as Your Highness is to Emperor Gao. He can indeed have high hopes for protecting the ancestral temple and stabilizing society.

古文：宣城王失色。
现代文：萧鸾听萧锋如此一说，被人点破了心事，不禁大惊失色。
English: Xiao Yao was shocked when he heard Xiao Feng say this.

古文：及杀诸王，锋遗宣城王书，诮责之；宣城王深惮之，不敢于第收锋，使兼祠官于太庙，夜，遣兵庙中收之。
现代文：等到萧鸾大杀诸位藩王之时，萧锋派人给萧鸾送去一封信，在信中嘲讽、责斥他。萧鸾因此而非常害怕萧锋，不敢到萧锋的住所去抓获他，于是就让萧锋在太庙中兼任祠官之职，然后在夜里派兵去庙中捕获他。
English: At the time of Xiao Feng's massacre of the kings of the domain, Xiao Feng sent a letter to Xiao Feng, in which he mocked and scolded him. Xiao Feng was so afraid of Xiao Feng that he did not dare to go to Xiao Feng's residence to capture him, so he let Xiao Feng serve as an ancestral priest in the temple, and then sent soldiers to the temple at night to capture him.

古文：锋出，登车，兵人欲上车，锋有力，手击数人皆仆地，然后死。
现代文：萧锋从太庙中出来，进到自己车中，那些前来杀他的兵士也要上车去，但是萧锋不让他们上来，他力气非常大，徒手与这些人击打，使好几个人倒在地上起不来，然后被杀。
English: Xiao Feng came out of the temple and got into his car. The soldiers who came to kill him also wanted to get on the car, but Xiao Feng did not let them get on. He was very strong and hit these people with his bare hands, so that several people fell to the ground and could not get up, and then he was killed.

古文：宣城王遣典签柯令孙杀建安王子真，子真走入床下，令孙手牵出之；叩头乞为奴，不许而死。
现代文：宣城王萧鸾派遣典签柯令孙去杀建安王萧子真，萧子真吓得钻进床底下藏起来，柯令孙用手把他拉出来，他给柯令孙下跪磕头，乞求免于一死，情愿为奴仆，但不被答应，照样被杀害。
English: The king of Xuancheng, Xiao Yan, sent a signed order to Ke Lingson to kill the king of Jian'an, Xiao Zizhen. Xiao Zizhen was so scared that he hid under his bed. Ke Lingson pulled him out with his hand. He knelt down and bowed to Ke Lingson, begging to be spared from death. He would have preferred to be a slave, but was not allowed, and was killed anyway.

古文：又遣中书舍人茹法亮杀巴陵王子伦。
现代文：萧鸾又派中书舍人茹法亮去杀巴陵王萧子伦。
English: Xiao Yao also sent the Chinese scholar Ru Fa Liang to kill the Balinese king Xiao Zilun.

古文：子伦性英果，时为南兰陵太守，镇琅邪，城有守兵。
现代文：萧子伦其人，性情英勇果敢，当时任南兰陵太守，镇守琅邪。
English: Xiao Zilun was a man with a heroic and courageous disposition. At that time, he was the governor of South Lanling, and the town guard was evil.

古文：宣城王恐不肯就死，以问典签华伯茂。伯茂曰： 公若以兵取之，恐不可即办。
现代文：琅邪城中有守兵，萧鸾担心萧子伦不肯轻易屈服，任人宰杀，就问典签华伯茂如何办，华伯茂说： 大人您如果派兵去收拾他，恐怕不能很快达到目的。
English: There were guards in the evil city. Xiao Yao was worried that Xiao Zilun would not give in easily and would be slaughtered. So he asked the warden, Hua Bo Mao, what to do. Hua Bo Mao said, "My lord, if you send soldiers to deal with him, I'm afraid you won't be able to achieve your goal quickly.

古文：若委伯茂，一夫力耳。 
现代文：如果把这事委托与我办理，只以一人之力就可以办妥。 
English: If you entrust this matter to me, I can handle it with just one person.

古文：乃手自执鸩逼之。子伦正衣冠，出受诏，谓法亮曰： 先朝昔灭刘氏，今日之事，理数固然。
现代文：于是，华伯茂就亲自手执配有毒药的酒，声称为御赐，逼使萧子伦喝下去，萧子伦理正自己的衣服、帽子，出来接受诏书，并且对茹法亮说： 先前，太祖灭宋而自立。今天的情况，也是天数所定，在劫难逃。
English: As a result, Hua Bomao personally handled the poisoned wine, claiming it as a gift, forcing Xiao Zilun to drink it, Xiao Zi adjusted his clothes and hat, came out to accept the edict, and said to Ruo Farang: Previously, the great-grandfather killed Song and became independent. Today's situation is also determined by the number of days, and it is difficult to escape.

古文：君是身家旧人，今衔此使，当由事不获已。
现代文：你是曾奉事过武帝的老人了，现在受指使而来，当是身不由己，奉命行事而已。
English: You are an old man who once served Emperor Wu, and now you have been ordered to come here. You cannot help yourself, you are only acting under orders.

古文：此酒非劝酬之爵。 
现代文：这酒绝非是平常饮宴的酒。 
English: This is no ordinary party wine.

古文：因仰之而死，时年十六。
现代文：说完接过酒杯，一仰而尽饮之，受毒而死。
English: Having said this, he took the goblet, drank it all in one gulp, and died of poisoning.

古文：法亮及左右皆流涕。
现代文：死时他年龄才十六岁，茹法亮以及周围的人无不感动而流泪。
English: At the time of his death, he was only sixteen years old. Rufa Liang and the people around him were moved to tears.

古文：初，诸王出镇，皆置典签，主帅一方之事，悉以委之。
现代文：当初，各藩王出镇州郡，都配置典签官，凡地方之事全部委任其统管。
English: In the beginning, all the lords of the feudal lords in towns, counties and prefectures had their own signature officers, who were entrusted with the overall management of all local affairs.

古文：时入奏事，一岁数返，时主辄与之间语，访以州事，刺史美恶专系其口。自刺史以下莫不折节奉之，恒虑弗及。
现代文：典签官时不时地入朝奏告情况，一年之内数次往返于镇所于朝廷之间，皇帝经常与其单独谈话，询问州里的事情，因此，州刺史的好坏善恶全凭典签的一张嘴而定，于是从刺史到下属其他官员无不对其毕恭毕敬，曲意奉承，唯恐不及。
English: From time to time, the official would report the situation to the imperial court. Within a year, he would travel back and forth between the town hall and the imperial court several times. The emperor would often talk to him alone and inquire about things in the prefecture. Therefore, whether the prefecture's history was good or bad depended entirely on the mouth of the official. Therefore, from the prefecture's history to other subordinate officials, there was nothing but respect and flattery.

古文：于是威行州部，大为奸利。
现代文：所以，典签威行一州之内，干了许多奸邪不法的事。
English: Therefore, he did many treacherous and illegal things within one state.

古文：武陵王晔为江州，性烈直，不可干；典签赵渥之谓人曰： 今出都易刺史！ 
现代文：武陵王萧晔任江州刺史，他性情刚烈耿直，不可冒犯，典签赵渥之就对人讲： 我现在进朝见驾去，等我一到京城就会把他换掉。 
English: King of Wuling, King Xiao Xi, was the ruler of Jiangzhou. He had a strong and upright character and could not be offended. He told people: I am going to the Imperial Palace to meet him, and I will change him as soon as I get to Beijing.

古文：及见世祖，盛毁之；晔遂免还。
现代文：赵渥之见了武帝，对萧晔大加毁谤，于是萧晔就被免职，回到京都。
English: Zhao Wo saw Emperor Wu and slandered Xiao Yao, so Xiao Yao was dismissed and returned to Kyoto.

古文：南海王子罕戍琅邪，欲暂游东堂，典签姜秀不许。
现代文：南海王萧子罕戍守琅邪，他想去东堂游玩一次，但是典签姜秀不准许。
English: Xiao Zi, the king of the South China Sea, wanted to visit the East Hall once, but he was not allowed by Jiang Xiu.

古文：子罕还，泣谓母曰： 儿欲移五步亦不得，与囚何异！ 
现代文：萧子罕回到家中，哭着对母亲讲道： 儿欲想移动五步都不能，这与被囚禁有什么两样呢？ 
English: Xiao Zihan returned home, crying and preaching to his mother: "My son can't move five steps even if he wants to. How is this different from being imprisoned?

古文：邵陵王子贞尝求熊白，厨人答典签不在，不敢与。
现代文：邵陵王萧子贞一次想要吃熊掌，但是厨子却说因典签不在，所以不敢私自给他。
English: Shaoling King Xiao Zizhen once wanted to eat bear paws, but the cook said that because the signature was not there, he did not dare to give it to him.

古文：永明中，巴东王子响杀刘寅等，世祖闻之，谓群臣曰： 子响遂反！ 
现代文：在永明年间，巴东王萧子响杀死了刘寅等人，武帝听说了，对诸位大臣们说： 子响是要谋反啊！ 
English: In the middle of the eternal year, Xiao Zihong, the king of Padang, killed Liu Yin and others. Emperor Wu heard about it and said to the ministers: Zihong is plotting a rebellion!

古文：戴僧静大言曰： 诸王都自应反，岂唯巴东！ 
现代文：不料戴僧静在下面大声说道： 诸藩王本来都应该谋反，岂只巴东王一个呢？ 
English: Unexpectedly, Dai Sojing said in a loud voice below: All the kings of the domains should have revolted, but only King Badong?

古文：上问其故，对曰： 天生无罪，而一时被囚，取一挺藕，一杯浆，皆咨签帅；签帅不在，则竟日忍渴。
现代文：武帝问这是因为什么原因，戴僧静接着讲道： 这些藩王何罪之有，但是时时被囚禁起来，他们要一截藕，要一杯水，都要请示典签，如果典签不在，那就只好整日忍渴挨饿。
English: Emperor Wu asked what was the reason for this, and Dai Sojing went on to preach: These lords of the domain are guilty of many crimes, but they are always imprisoned. They have to ask for a piece of straw and a glass of water, and they have to ask for a signature. If the signature is not there, then they have to starve all day.

古文：诸州唯闻有签帅，不闻有刺史。何得不反！ 
现代文：各州郡只知道有典签，而不知道有刺史，他们怎么能不反呢？ 
English: The states and counties only know that there is a license plate, but do not know that there is a history of stabbing, how can they not go against it?

古文：竟陵王子良尝问众曰： 士大夫何意诣签帅？ 
现代文：竟陵王萧子良曾经问众人： 士大夫们出于什么意图纷纷带着礼物往典签那里跑？ 
English: In fact, Xiao Ziliang, the king of mausoleums, once asked everyone: What was the reason for the scholars and doctors to run to the place of the signature with gifts one after another?

古文：参军范云曰： 诣长史以下皆无益，诣签帅立有倍本之价。
现代文：参军范云回答说： 去长史及以下的人那里都不会得到什么好处，而去典签那里很快就可以获得双倍于所送之礼的好处，如此好的买卖，为什么不去呢？ 
English: Fan Yun, who joined the army, replied, "Going to Changshi and people below will not get any benefits, but going to Dianzi will soon get twice the benefits of the gifts sent, such a good deal, why not go?

古文：不诣谓何！ 子良有愧色。
现代文：萧子良听了，颇有愧色。
English: Xiao Ziliang listened and felt quite ashamed.

古文：及宣城王诛诸王，皆令典签杀之，竟无一人能抗拒者。
现代文：到了宣城王诛杀诸藩王之时，都令典签去杀，竟然没有一个人能够抗拒。
English: When the King of Xuancheng was about to kill the kings of various domains, he ordered all of them to be killed, and no one was able to resist.

古文：孔珪闻之，流涕曰： 齐之衡阳、江夏最有意，而复害之；若不立签帅，故当不至于此。 
现代文：孔听到情况之后，流着眼泪说道： 齐朝的衡阳王、江夏王非常有意于辅佐帝室，然而仍被杀害，如果不设立典签，肯定不会至于如此的。 
English: After listening to the situation, Kong shed tears and said: King Hengyang and King Jiangxia of the Qi Dynasty were very interested in assisting the imperial family, but they were still killed. If you do not set up a sign, it will certainly not happen.

古文：宣城王亦深知典签之弊，乃诏： 自今诸州有急事，当密以奏闻，勿复遣典签入都。 
现代文：宣城王萧鸾也深深地知道给诸王设典签的弊端，因此发布诏令： 从今开始，各州有紧急事情，应当秘密地奏告朝廷，不要再派遣典签进都。 
English: Xuancheng's king, Xiao Qi, was also deeply aware of the drawbacks of issuing signatures to kings, so he issued a decree: From now on, if there is an urgent matter in each state, it should be secretly reported to the imperial court, and no more signatures should be sent to the capital.

古文：自是典签之任浸轻矣。
现代文：从此，典签这一职务的作用就渐渐弱小了。 
English: Since then, the role of the function of the signature has gradually diminished.

古文：萧子显论曰：帝王之子，生长富厚，期出闺阃，暮司方岳，防骄翦逸，积代常典。
现代文：萧子显论说：帝王之子，生长在富贵之中，才刚刚离开后宫闺房，就去担任作为一州之长的刺史。
English: Xiao Zixian said: The emperor's son, growing up in wealth, has just left the harem boudoir to serve as the governor of a state.

古文：故辅以上佐，简自帝心；劳旧左右，用为主帅，饮食游居，动应闻启；处地虽重，行己莫由。
现代文：为了预防和消除他们骄奢淫逸，特意要给他们制定出一些法规，这在历代均被看作常典。所以，皇帝就从自己的心腹中挑选一些人，去监督辅佐这些藩王；或者从身边旧人中挑选出来一些人，任命为藩王们的典签，凡饮食起居一应，事项，都得告诉典签。
English: In order to prevent and eliminate their arrogance and lasciviousness, some rules and regulations were specially formulated for them, which were regarded as a constant throughout the ages. Therefore, the emperor selected some people from his own heart to supervise and assist these kings of the domain; or selected some people from the old people around him and appointed them as the signatories of the kings of the domain, and they had to tell the signatories about all matters related to eating and living.

古文：威不在身，恩未下及，一朝艰难总至，望其释位扶危，何可得矣！
现代文：所以，藩王虽然所处位置很高，但是都行不由己，藩王们由于威不在身，不能施恩于下属，所以一旦朝廷艰难危急之际，期望他们来扶危匡正，如何可能呢？
English: Therefore, although the lords of the domain are in a high position, they cannot help themselves. Since the lords of the domain are not present, they cannot be kind to their subordinates. Therefore, once the imperial court is in a difficult and critical situation, how is it possible to expect them to help rectify the situation?

古文：斯宋氏之馀风，至齐室而尤弊也。
现代文：藩王置典签之例始于刘宋，南齐沿袭而不变，弊端尤多。
English: The example of the king of the domain placing a signature began with Liu Song, followed by Nanqi, and the drawbacks are many.

古文：癸卯，以宁朔将军萧遥欣为豫州刺史，黄门郎萧遥昌为郢州刺史，辅国将军萧诞为司州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任宁朔将军萧遥欣为豫州刺史，黄门郎萧遥昌为郢州刺史，辅国将军萧诞为司州刺史。
English: At the same time, Ningshuo General Xiao Yaoxin was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou, Huangmen Lang Xiao Yaochang was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou, and the auxiliary general Xiao Zi was appointed as the historian of Shizhou.

古文：遥昌，遥欣之弟；诞，谌之兄也。
现代文：萧遥昌是萧遥欣的弟弟；萧诞是萧谌的哥哥。
English: Xiao Yaochang is Xiao Yaoxin's younger brother; Xiao Zhao is Xiao Yao's elder brother.

古文：甲辰，魏以太尉东阳王丕为太傅、录尚书事，留守平城。
现代文：甲辰，北魏任命太尉东阳王拓跋丕为太傅、录尚书事，并令其留守平城。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Tai Fu Dongyang Wang Tuobao as Tai Fu, recorded his records, and ordered him to stay in Pingcheng.

古文：戊申，魏主亲告太庙，使高阳王雍、于列奉迁神主于洛阳；辛亥，发平城。
现代文：戊申，北魏孝文帝亲自去太庙祝告，又责成高阳王拓跋雍和于烈奉命迁神主于洛阳。辛亥，开始从平城出发。
English: Wu Shen, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen personally went to the Great Temple to congratulate, and also ordered the Goyang King Tuoba Yong and Yu Lie to relocate the god in Luoyang. Xin Hai, started from Pingcheng.

古文：海陵王在位，起居饮食，皆咨宣城王而后行。
现代文：南齐海陵王萧昭文虽然身居帝位，但起居饮食等事项，统统要请问宣城王萧鸾准许后才可以进行。
English: Although Xiao Zhaowen, the King of the Southern Qi Kingdom, was on the throne, he had to ask Xiao Jian, the King of Xuancheng, for permission to live, eat, and do other things.

古文：尝思食蒸鱼菜，太官令答无录公命，竟不与。
现代文：一次，海陵王想要吃蒸鱼菜，太官令说没有萧鸾的命令，竟然不给他吃。
English: On one occasion, Hailing Wang wanted to eat steamed fish and vegetables, but the eunuch ordered him not to eat it without Xiao Yao's order.

古文：辛亥，皇太后令曰： 嗣主冲幼，庶政多昧；且早婴尪疾，弗克负荷。
现代文：辛亥，皇太后发出诏令： 新继位的皇帝年令幼小，不明国事，昧于朝政。
English: In Xinhai, the empress dowager issued a decree: The newly enthroned emperor is young, does not know the state affairs, and is not familiar with the court politics.

古文：太傅宣城王，胤体宣皇，钟慈太祖，宜入承宝命。
现代文：况且，他从小就疾病缠身，体质羸弱，不能承受过重的负担。太傅宣城王萧鸾，是宣皇帝萧承之之嫡孙，又深得太祖皇帝的钟爱，所以宜于入宫承受皇位。
English: Moreover, he had been plagued by illness since childhood, and was physically weak and unable to bear the heavy burden. Taifu Xuancheng King Xiaojun, the great-grandson of Xuan Emperor Xiao Cheng, was deeply loved by the great-grandfather emperor, so it was appropriate for him to enter the palace and assume the imperial throne.

古文：帝可降封海陵王，吾当归老别馆。 
现代文：皇帝可降封为海陵王，我本人也因年老而告退，不再过问朝政。 
English: The emperor can be demoted to the title of Hailing King, and I myself have retired due to old age and no longer care about the imperial court.

古文：且以宣城王为太祖第三子。
现代文：并且，以宣城王萧鸾为太祖的第三子。
English: Moreover, the third son of the great-great-grandfather was the king of Xuancheng, Xiao Yu.

古文：癸亥，高宗即皇帝位，大赦，改元。
现代文：癸亥，明帝萧鸾即位，大赦天下，改换年号为建武。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, Ming Emperor Xiao Wei ascended to the throne, pardoned the world, and changed the year name to Jianwu.

古文：以太尉王敬则为大司马，司空陈显达为太尉，尚书令王晏加骠骑大将军，左仆射徐孝嗣加中军大将军，中领军萧谌为领军将军。
现代文：任命太尉王敬则为大司马，司空陈显达为太尉，尚书令王晏加封骠骑大将军，左仆射徐孝嗣加封中军大将军，中领军萧谌为领军将军。
English: He appointed the first lieutenant Wang Jing to be the grand steward, the second lieutenant Chen Xianda to be the second lieutenant, the general Wang Qi to be the commander of the cavalry, the left servant Xu Xiaozhi to be the commander of the middle army, and the leader of the middle army Xiao Qi to be the leader of the army.

古文：度支尚书虞悰称疾不陪位。
现代文：度支尚书虞借口有病，不愿陪侍萧鸾。
English: Du Shizhong and Shu Yu used the excuse that they were ill and did not want to accompany Xiao Yu.

古文：帝以悰旧人，欲引参佐命，使王晏赍废立事示悰。
现代文：萧鸾因虞是过去的老人，想拉他参与朝政，所以就指使王晏把废除海陵王而自立的事告诉了他。
English: As Xiao Yao was an old man in the past, he wanted to get him to participate in court politics, so he ordered Wang Yao to tell him about the abolition of King Hailing and his independence.

古文：悰曰： 主上圣明，公卿戮力，宁假朽老以赞惟新乎！
现代文：不料虞听后却说道： 主上圣明睿智，公卿士大夫们自然会合力辅佐的，为何还要借用老朽我来赞助新皇帝呢？
English: Unexpectedly, however, after hearing this, Yu said, "Lord, since the sages, wise men, and nobles have naturally joined forces to support me, why should I use my old age to support the new emperor?

古文：不敢闻命！ 
现代文：实在不敢从命！ 
English: I really don't dare risk my life!

古文：因恸哭。
现代文：言毕，恸哭不已。
English: Then she burst into tears.

古文：朝议欲纠之，徐孝嗣曰： 此亦古之遗直。 
现代文：朝廷中议论要追究虞，徐孝嗣却说： 虞这样也是古代正直耿介之士之遗风啊！ 
English: The imperial court discussed the need to investigate Yu, but Xu Xiaozhi said: "Yu, this is also the legacy of the ancient upright Geng Shuai!

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是，止而不议。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：帝与群臣宴会，诏功臣上酒。
现代文：明帝与群臣百官欢宴庆贺，令有功之臣上来敬酒与他们对饮。
English: Emperor Ming and his courtiers celebrated with a banquet for hundreds of officials, and had meritorious courtiers come up to drink a toast with them.

古文：王晏等兴席，谢瀹独不起，曰： 陛下受命，应天顺人；王晏妄叨天功以为己力！ 
现代文：王晏等人遵命离席，上前去祝酒助兴，惟独谢瀹安坐不起，说道： 陛下受命登基，上应天心，下顺人意，而王晏竟然贪天功以为己力！ 
English: Wang Yao and the others left the table as ordered and went up to make a toast to help the party, but Xie Yaoan could not sit down and said, "Your Majesty was ordered to ascend to the throne, the top was in accordance with the will of Heaven, and the bottom was in accordance with the will of man, but Wang Yao was greedy for heavenly power and thought it was his own power!

古文：帝大笑，解之。
现代文：明帝听了大笑，就不强使谢瀹给自己上酒了。
English: When Emperor Ming heard the loud laughter, he did not force Xie Yao to pour himself a drink.

古文：座罢，晏呼瀹共载还令省，欲相抚悦。瀹正色曰： 君巢窟在何处！ 
现代文：宴会完毕，王晏招呼谢瀹与自己一同乘车回尚书省，谢瀹严厉地对他说： 您的巢窝在何处呢？ 
English: After the banquet, Wang Yao invited Xie Yao to ride with him back to Shangshu Province. Xie Yao sternly said to him: "Where is your nest?

古文：晏甚惮之。
现代文：从此，王晏特别害怕谢瀹。
English: From then on, Wang Yao was particularly afraid of Xie Yao.

古文：丁卯，诏： 籓牧守宰，或有荐献，事非任土，悉加禁断。 
现代文：丁卯，明帝诏令： 州郡长官们时常给朝廷上贡礼品，今后除去当地的土产外，别的一概加以禁止。 
English: Dingwu, Ming Emperor's edict: State and county governors often gave tribute gifts to the imperial court, and in the future, except for local indigenous products, everything else would be prohibited.

古文：己巳，魏主如信都。
现代文：己巳，北魏孝文帝到达信都。
English: Suddenly, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Xindu.

古文：庚午，曰： 比闻缘边之蛮，多窃掠南土，使父子乖离，室家分绝。
现代文：庚午，发布诏令： 近来听说边境上的蛮人，经常抢劫掠夺南方人，使他们父子相离，家庭破碎。
English: Geng Wu, issued an edict: Recently, I heard that the barbarians on the border often rob and plunder the southerners, separating fathers and sons and breaking up families.

古文：联方荡壹区宇，子育万姓，若苟如此，南人岂知朝德哉！
现代文：朕正要统一天下，像对子女一样安抚百姓百姓，如果这样的话，南方人怎么能知道我们魏朝的仁德呢？
English: I am about to unify the country and pacify the people as if they were my children. If this is the case, how can people in the south know about our benevolence of the Wei Dynasty?

古文：可诏荆、郢、东荆三州，禁勒蛮民，勿有侵暴。 
现代文：所以，应该诏令荆州、郢州、东荆州三个地方，要对那些蛮民们严加禁止，不许再对江南人进行强暴掠夺。 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to issue an edict to the three places of Jingzhou, Zhangzhou and East Jingzhou to strictly prohibit those barbarians from raping and plundering the people in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：十一月，癸酉，以始安王遥光为扬州刺史。
现代文：十一月癸酉，南齐任命始安王萧遥光为扬州刺史。
English: At the end of November, Nanqi appointed Shi'an Wang Xiao Yaoguang as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：丁丑，魏主如鄴。
现代文：丁丑，北魏孝文帝到了邺城。
English: Ding Yuxi, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Handan.

古文：庚辰，立皇子宝义为晋安王，宝玄为江夏王，宝源为庐陵王，宝寅为建安王，宝融为随郡王，宝攸为南平王。
现代文：庚辰，南齐明帝萧鸾封皇子萧宝义为晋安王，萧宝玄为江夏王，萧宝源为庐陵王，萧宝寅为建安王，萧宝融为随郡王，萧宝攸为南平王。
English: Geng Chen, Emperor Gaozhong of the Ming Dynasty of Southern Qi, Emperor Xiao Rongfeng's son Xiao Baoyi was the king of Jinan, Xiao Baoxuan was the king of Jiangxia, Xiao Baoyuan was the king of Fuling, Xiao Baoying was the king of Jian'an, Xiao Baorong was the king of Su County, and Xiao Baoyu was the king of Nanping.

古文：甲申，诏曰： 邑宰禄薄，虽任土恒贡，自今悉断。 
现代文：甲申，明帝诏令： 各县令俸薄禄少，从今天开始，连田赋常贡，也悉加减免。 
English: Jiashen, Ming Emperor's edict: Each county has a low salary, and from today on, Lian Tian Fu will pay a regular tribute, and there will also be reductions and exemptions.

古文：乙酉，追尊始安贞王为景皇，妃为懿后。
现代文：乙酉，明帝追尊始安贞王为景皇帝，其妃子为懿后。
English: According to acetylene, the Ming Emperor chased the venerated King Anzhen for the Emperor Jing, and his concubine for the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙戌，以闻喜公遥欣为荆州刺史，丰城公遥昌为豫州刺史。
现代文：丙戌，任命闻喜公萧遥欣为荆州刺史，丰城公萧遥昌为豫州刺史。
English: He also appointed Wen Xi Gong Xiao Yao Xin as the chief historian of Jingzhou and Fengcheng Gong Xiao Yao Chang as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：时上长子晋安王宝义有废疾，诸子皆弱小，故以遥光居中，遥欣镇抚上流。
现代文：当时，明帝萧鸾的长子萧宝义有痼疾难医，其他儿子又都幼小，所以就让萧遥光镇守扬州，萧遥欣镇守荆州。
English: At that time, Xiao Baoyi, the eldest son of the Ming Emperor Xiao Yan, had malaria and was difficult to treat, and the other sons were very young. Therefore, Xiao Yaoguang was assigned to guard Yangzhou, and Xiao Yaoxin to guard Jingzhou.

古文：戊子，立皇子宝卷为太子。
现代文：戊子，明帝立皇子萧宝卷为太子。
English: Empress Dowager Wu and Emperor Ming made Prince Xiao Baoru the crown prince.

古文：魏主至洛阳，欲澄清流品，以尚书崔亮兼吏部郎。
现代文：北魏孝文帝到达洛阳。他想整理朝纲，澄清流品，就让尚书崔亮兼任吏部郎。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in Luoyang. He wanted to sort out the morning program and clarify the poor quality, so he asked Shangshu Cui Liang to also serve as the secretary.

古文：亮，道固之兄孙也。
现代文：崔亮是崔道固的哥哥的孙子。
English: Cui Liang is the grandson of Cui Daogu's brother.

古文：魏主敕后军将军宁文福行牧地。
现代文：北魏孝文帝令后军将军宇文福测量规划牧畜之地。
English: Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen ordered General Yu Wenfu to survey and plan the pastoral land.

古文：福表石济以西，河内以东，距河凡十里。
现代文：宇文福奏称石济以西、河内以东，距黄河十里方圆之地为牧场。
English: According to Uwen Fuxiao, the area west of Sheki and east of Hanoi, about ten miles from the Yellow River, was a pasture.

古文：魏主自代徙杂畜置其地，使福掌之；畜无耗失，以为司马监。
现代文：孝文帝又命令从代地移迁各种牲畜到此地牧养，由宇文福具体负责该事。一路上，由于牲口没有丢失减损，所以最后任宇文福为司卫监。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also ordered that all kinds of livestock be moved from the place of substitution to this place for herding, and Uwenfu was specifically responsible for this matter. Along the way, since the livestock were not lost or damaged, Uwenfu was finally appointed as the director of the Department of Sanitation.

古文：初，世祖平统万及秦、凉，以河西水草丰美，用为牧地，畜甚蕃息，马至二百馀万匹，橐驼半之，牛羊无数。
现代文：当初，太武帝拓跋焘平定统万以及秦、凉等地，由于河西之地水草丰美，就开辟为牧地，牲畜繁殖甚为兴旺，马匹多至二百余万匹，骆驼一百多万匹，牛羊则多到无法计数。
English: At the beginning, the Taiwu Emperor expanded and leveled Dingdunwan, Qin, Liang and other places. Due to the abundance of aquatic plants in the west of the river, it was opened up as a pasture. Livestock breeding was very prosperous, with more than two million horses, more than one million camels, and more cattle and sheep than can be counted.

古文：及高祖置牧场于河阳，常畜戌马十万匹，每岁自河西徙牧并州，稍复南徙，欲其渐习水土，不至死伤，而河西之牧愈更蕃滋。
现代文：到孝文帝的时候，又设河阳场牧，时常蓄养战马十万匹，每崐年从河西把马匹移迁到并州放牧一段时间，然后再移迁到南边牧场放牧，以便马匹能逐渐熟悉习惯水土，不至于因水土不服而死伤，这样一来，河西的牲畜反而更加蕃滋兴盛。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, there was also a herding station in Heyang, where 100,000 war horses were regularly kept. Every three years, the horses were moved from the west of the river to Bozhou for grazing for a period of time, and then moved to the southern pastures for grazing, so that the horses could gradually get used to the soil and water, and would not be killed or injured due to soil and water resistance. As a result, the livestock in the west of the river became more prosperous.

古文：及正光以后，皆为寇盗所掠，无孑遗矣。
现代文：到正光年间以后，这些牲畜全被寇盗掠夺而去，无有孑遗。
English: After the Zhengguang era, these livestock were all plundered by robbers and left without a trace.

古文：永明中，御史中丞沈渊表，百官年七十，皆令致仕，并穷困私门。
现代文：南齐永明年间，御史中丞沈渊上表，凡百官中年令达到七十岁的，皆令其退休。这些人退休之后，都穷困家门之中。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianlong of the Southern Qi Dynasty, Emperor Shen Yuan of the Southern Qi Dynasty decreed that all middle-aged officials who had reached the age of 70 should retire. After retirement, these people were all impoverished.

古文：庚子，诏依旧铨叙。
现代文：庚子，明帝发布诏令，依照旧例铨叙百官。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor of Ming issued the edict, according to the old example, hundreds of officials were dismissed.

古文：上辅政所诛诸王，皆复属籍，封其子为侯。
现代文：又对在摄政期间所杀害的诸位藩王，都重新列入皇室宗族，封他们的儿子为侯。
English: In addition, all the lords of the domain who were killed during the regency period were reinstated in the royal family, and their sons were made princes.

古文：上诈称海陵恭王有疾，数遣御师瞻视，因而殒之，葬礼并依汉东海恭王故事。
现代文：明帝诈称海陵王有疾病，几次派遣御医前去看视，终于害死海陵王，其葬礼依照东汉时曾让出皇位的东海恭王刘强的旧例进行。
English: Emperor Ming falsely claimed that King Hailing was ill and sent his doctor to see him several times, finally killing King Hailing. His funeral was conducted in accordance with the old practice of King Liu Qiang of Donghaiguan, who had abdicated the throne in the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：魏郢州刺史韦珍，在州有声绩，魏主赐以骏马、谷帛。
现代文：北魏郢州刺史韦珍，在州内颇有政绩，声誉不错，孝文帝赐赏他骏马、谷物、布帛等物。
English: Emperor Xiaowen rewarded him with horses, grain, cloth and other things.

古文：珍集境内孤贫者，悉散与之，谓之曰： 天子以我能绥抚卿等，故赐以谷帛，吾何敢独有之！ 
现代文：韦珍把州内孤独贫困的人招集在一起，以孝文帝所赐之物散发他们，并且对他们说： 天子因为我能安绥抚优你们，所以赏赐我谷物、布帛，我怎么敢独自享有呢？ 
English: Wei Zhen called together the lonely and poor people in the state, distributed them with the gifts given by Emperor Xiaowen, and said to them: Son of Heaven, because I can appease you, so give me grain and cloth, how dare I enjoy it alone?

古文：魏主以上废海陵王自立，谋大举入寇。
现代文：北魏孝文帝因为萧鸾废掉海陵王而自立为帝，计谋大举入侵南齐。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty established himself as emperor after Xiao Wei deposed King Hailing, and plotted a large-scale invasion of Southern Qi.

古文：会边将言，雍州刺史下邳曹虎遣使请降于魏，十一月，辛丑朔，魏遣行征南将军薛真度督四将向襄阳，大将军刘昶、平南将军王肃向义阳，徐州刺史拓跋衍向钟离，平南将军广平刘藻向南郑。
现代文：恰在这时，边境将领又报告，南齐雍州刺史下邳人曹虎派遣使节送信，请求投降北魏。十二月辛丑，北魏派遣行征南将军薛真度统领四个将领向襄阳进发，大将军刘昶、平南将军王肃向义阳进发，徐州刺史拓跋衍向钟离进发，平南将军广平人刘藻向南郑进发。
English: Just at this time, the border generals also reported that Cao Hu, the second-ranked general in the history of Southern Qi Yongzhou, sent an envoy to send a request to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty. In December of Xinwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent four generals under the command of the Southern General Xue Zhendu to Xiangyang, the Great General Liu Wei and the Southern General Wang Su to Yiyang, the Southern General Xuzhou under the command of the Southern General Shi Tuobayan to Zhongli, and the Southern General Guangping to the Southern Zheng.

古文：真度，安都从祖弟也。
现代文：薛真度是薛安都的族弟。
English: Xue Zhendu is the younger brother of Xue Andu.

古文：以尚书卢渊为安南将军，督襄阳前锋诸军。
现代文：又任命尚书仆射卢渊为安南将军，督帅襄阳前锋诸军。
English: He also appointed Shang Shuxu's lackey Lu Yuan as General Annan, the commander of Xiangyang and the vanguard of the army.

古文：渊辞以不习军旅，不许。
现代文：卢渊以不熟习军旅事务而加以推辞，没有得到准许。
English: Lu Yuan refused to do so, saying that he was not familiar with military travel affairs, and was not allowed to do so.

古文：渊曰： 但恐曹虎为周鲂耳。 
现代文：卢渊说： 只恐怕曹虎是像周鲂一样诈降。 
English: Lu Yuan said, "I'm afraid that Cao Hu is just like Zhou Qi.

古文：魏主欲变易旧风，壬寅，诏禁士民胡服。国人多不悦。
现代文：北魏孝文帝想改革旧的风俗习惯，壬寅发布诏令，禁止士大夫与民众穿胡服，鲜卑族人大多不乐意。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to reform the old customs and habits, and Emperor Renzhin issued an edict prohibiting officials and the public from wearing Hu clothing. Most of the Xinbei people were not happy about this.

古文：通直散骑常侍刘芳，缵之族弟也，与给事黄门侍郎太原郭祚，皆以文学为帝所亲礼，多引与讲论及密议政事；大臣贵戚皆以为疏己，怏怏有不平之色。
现代文：通直散骑常侍刘芳是刘缵的族弟，他同给事黄门侍郎太原郭祚，均以工于文学受到孝文帝的亲接礼遇，经常招他们二人一起讲论义理，以及密议政事。大臣贵戚们都认为孝文帝疏远了自己，心中怏怏不乐，不平之色溢于颜表。
English: Liu Fang, Liu Ye's brother-in-law and Liu Ye's brother-in-law, and the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, Taiyuan Guo Wei, were both honored by Emperor Xiaowen for their work in literature. The two of them were often invited to give lectures on the principles of justice and to discuss political affairs in secret. The minister's noble relatives all believed that Emperor Xiaowen had distanced himself from them, and they were unhappy in their hearts. The color of discontent was overflowing on their faces.

古文：帝使给事黄门侍郎陆觊私谕之曰： 至尊但欲广知古事，询访前世法式耳，终不亲彼而相疏也。 
现代文：孝文帝让给事黄门侍郎陆凯私下里对这些人说： 皇上只是想通过这二人多知道些古代的事情，了解前代的法式罢了，并非是亲近他们而疏远你们。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen let Lu Kai, the steward of the Yellow Gate, say to these people in private: The emperor just wants to know more about ancient things and understand the French style of the previous generation through these two people, not to be close to them and alienate you.

古文：众意乃稍解。
现代文：由此，这些人的情绪才渐渐宽解了些。
English: As a result, these people's emotions have gradually eased.

古文：觊，馛之子也。
现代文：陆凯是陆的儿子。
English: Lu Kai is Lu's son.

古文：魏主欲自将入寇。
现代文：北魏孝文帝要亲自挂帅入侵南齐。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to personally lead the invasion of South Qi.

古文：癸卯，中外戒严。
现代文：癸卯，内外戒严。
English: Martial law was imposed at home and abroad.

古文：戊申，诏代民迁洛者复租赋三年。
现代文：戊申，孝文帝诏令由平城迁到洛阳的百姓免除三年赋税。
English: Emperor Wushin and Emperor Xiaowen issued a decree exempting the people who moved from Pingcheng to Luoyang from paying taxes for three years.

古文：相州刺史高闾上表称： 洛阳草创，曹虎既不遣质任，必非诚心，无宜轻举。 
现代文：相州刺史高闾上表孝文帝，建议： 刚刚迁都洛阳，尚处草创阶段，而曹虎既然不派遣人质，足见其没有诚心，所以不应该轻举妄动。 
English: Xiao Wendi, a high-ranking official of the State Council, suggested: The capital has just been moved to Luoyang, and it is still in the initial stage. Since Cao Hu did not send hostages, it shows that he is not sincere, so he should not act rashly.

古文：魏主不从。
现代文：但是，孝文帝没有采纳他的意见。
English: However, Emperor Xiaowen did not accept his opinion.

古文：久之，虎使竟不再来，魏主引公卿议行留之计，公卿或以为宜止，或以为宜行。
现代文：很长时间，曹虎的使者再也没有来联系请降之事，孝文帝招集公卿士大夫们议论行动与否的问题，有的认为不宜于行动，有的则认为可以行动。
English: For a long time, Cao Hu's emissaries did not contact him again to ask him to abdicate. Emperor Xiaowen summoned nobles and officials to discuss whether or not to act. Some thought it was not appropriate to act, while others thought it was possible to act.

古文：帝曰： 众人纷纭，莫知所从。
现代文：孝文帝说： 众说纷纭，莫衷一是，使朕不知所从。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "The opinions are all different, and there is no consensus, so I don't know which way to go.

古文：必欲尽行留之势，宜有客主，共相起发。
现代文：如果想把行动与否的利弊得失讨论明白，应该分立宾主，互相引发，共同探讨。
English: If you want to understand the pros and cons of action or not, you should separate the guests, trigger each other, and discuss together.

古文：任城、镇南为留议，朕为行论，诸公坐听得矣，长者从之。 众皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：以任城王和镇军将军为主张留下的一方，朕为主张行动一方，诸位听取各方意见之长短得失，哪方所见高明就听从哪方的。 众人都说： 很好。 
English: With the king of the city and the general of the town army as the advocate of the remaining side, I am the advocate of the action side, you listen to the opinions of all parties, the long and short of the gains and losses, which side sees the wisdom and obeys which side. Everyone said: Very good.

古文：镇南将军李冲曰： 臣等正以迁都草创，人思少安；为内应者未得审谛，不宜轻动。 
现代文：于是，镇军将军李冲首先发表意见： 我们认为目前正是迁都伊始，诸事草创之际，大家都想有一段安定的时期。再加上我们对作为内应的曹虎并没有细加审查了解，情况多有不明，所以不宜于轻率行动。 
English: As a result, the general of the town army, Li Chong, was the first to express his opinion: We believe that this is the beginning of the relocation of the capital, and everyone wants to have a period of stability at the time of the creation of all things. In addition, we have not carefully reviewed and understood Cao Hu as an internal response, and the situation is mostly unclear, so it is not appropriate to act rashly.

古文：帝曰： 彼降款虚实，诚未可知。
现代文：孝文帝紧接着反驳道： 曹虎投降一事虚实如何，确实还难以判定。
English: Emperor Xiaowen immediately retorted, "It is indeed difficult to judge whether the story of Cao Hu's surrender is true or false.

古文：若其虚也，朕巡抚淮甸，访民疾苦，使彼知君德之所在，有北向之心；若其实也，今不以时应接，则失乘时之机，孤归义之诚，败朕大略矣。 
现代文：如果曹虎投降是虚假的，朕也可以借此行巡视、抚慰淮水一带，访查探问一下民间疾苦，使那里的百姓知道朕的仁政善德之所在，以便让他们产生归顺本朝的心思。如果曹虎之降属实，而我们若不及时加以接应，就会坐失时机，有负于他一片弃暗投明之诚心，无疑将毁败朕的宏大计略。 
English: If Cao Hu's surrender is false, I can also take advantage of this trip to inspect and soothe the Huai Shui area, visit and inquire about the people's sufferings, so that the people there know where my benevolence, good governance and virtue are, so that they can have the thought of surrendering to this dynasty. If Cao Hu's surrender is true, and if we do not respond in time, we will lose the opportunity, and will be responsible for his sincerity of abandoning the dark to the light, and will undoubtedly ruin my grand plan.

古文：任城王洽曰： 虎无质任，又使不再来，其诈可知也。
现代文：这时，任城王拓跋澄发表了自己的不同看法，他说： 曹虎没有派人质，也没有再遣使者来联系，其中之诡诈是显而易知的。
English: At this time, Ren Shiwang Tuobaocheng expressed his different opinion, saying: Cao Hu did not send any hostages, nor did he send any emissaries to make contact. The deceitfulness of this is obvious.

古文：今代都新迁之民，皆有恋本之心。
现代文：如今从代京新搬迁到这里来的民众，皆有留恋本土的心思。
English: The people who have recently moved here from Daikyo are all nostalgic for their home town.

古文：扶老携幼，始就洛邑，居无一椽之室，食无甔石之储。
现代文：他们扶老携幼，长途跋涉，刚刚到达洛阳，居住房屋尚没有一间，食物储备没有一石，而目前冬季将尽，春耕生产即将开始，正是《诗经》中所说的 兴建屋室 、 耕作南亩 之时。
English: They helped the elderly with their children, trekked for a long distance, and just arrived in Luoyang. There is not a single residential building yet, and there is not a stone of food reserve. At present, winter is coming to an end, and spring farming production is about to begin. It is the time of "building houses" and "cultivating southern mu" mentioned in the "Song of Songs."

古文：又冬月垂尽，东作将起，乃 百堵皆兴 、 俶载南亩 之时，而驱之使擐甲执兵，泣当白刃，殆非歌舞之师也。且诸军已进，非无应接。
现代文：然而，在这种情况之下，反而要驱使他们披坚执锐，出征打仗，被迫地面向敌人的刀枪，流血冒死，这样的出征恐怕并非是当年武王伐纣、前歌后舞的正义之师。况且，各路军马已经进发，他们之间能够互相接应。
English: However, under such circumstances, they should instead be driven to be tough and persistent, to go out to fight, to be forced to face the enemy's guns and knives, to bleed and risk death. Such a mission is probably not the righteous teacher of the king of war, the former song and dance. Moreover, all the horses have set off, and they can meet each other.

古文：若降款有实，待既平樊、沔，然后銮舆顺动，亦可晚之有！
现代文：如果曹虎投降属实，就等待平定了樊、沔之后，陛下您再顺势而动，到那时銮舆前往，为时并不晚啊！
English: If Cao Hu's surrender is true, you should wait until after the battle is over, and then, Your Majesty, you should act accordingly. By then, I will go. It's not too late!

古文：今率然轻举，上下疲劳；若空行空返，恐挫损天威，更成贼气，非策之得者也。 
现代文：如今即要轻举妄动，只能使军中上下疲劳，如果落一场徒劳而返，恐怕会有损于我朝的天威，反而使贼军的气势更为嚣张，所以万万不是妥善之计。 
English: To act rashly now will only make the middle and upper ranks of the army tired. If we fall back in vain, I'm afraid it will undermine the imperial power of our dynasty, but on the contrary, it will make the momentum of the thief army more arrogant, so it's not a good idea.

古文：司空穆亮以为宜行，公卿皆同之。
现代文：司空穆亮却认为宜于行动，其他臣僚们也都同意他的意见。
English: Siku Mu Ryo, however, thought it appropriate to act, and other ministers also agreed with his opinion.

古文：澄谓亮曰： 公辈在外之时，见张旗授甲，皆有忧色，平居论议，不愿南征，何得对上即为此语！
现代文：拓跋澄质问穆亮： 各位在前不久之时，看见诸路军马出征，都流露出担忧之色，私下里议论时，都不同意南征，为什么面对皇上时就变了一种态度，言不由衷呢？
English: Tuoba Cheng questioned Mu Liang: Not long ago, when you all saw the various armies and horses going to war, you all showed concern. When discussing in private, you all disagreed with the Southern Expedition. Why did you change your attitude when facing the emperor, and why did you say things that were not sincere?

古文：面背不同，事涉欺佞，岂大臣之义、国士之体乎！
现代文：当面背后看法不一，这已经关涉到欺君佞上之罪，难道这样就是大臣的忠义、国士的品格吗？
English: Behind the scenes, opinions differ. This has already involved the crime of bullying the emperor. Is this the loyalty of a minister, the character of a statesman?

古文：万一倾危，皆公辈所为也。 
现代文：万一这次南征不利，就完全是诸位所造成的。 
English: In the unlikely event that this southern expedition is unfavorable, it will be entirely caused by you.

古文：冲曰： 任城王可谓忠于社稷。 
现代文：李冲说道： 任城王可以说是忠心耿耿于国家啊！ 
English: Li Chong said: Ren Chengwang can be said to be loyal to the country!

古文：帝曰： 任城以从朕者为佞，不从朕者岂必皆忠！
现代文：孝文帝说道： 任城王认为赞同朕的人都是佞上，可是与朕所见不同的人难道一定都忠诚吗？
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Ren Chengwang thinks that people who agree with me are all liars, but are people who are different from me necessarily loyal?

古文：夫小忠者，大忠之贼，无乃似诸！ 
现代文：常言说，小忠是大忠的敌人，这不正和眼前的情形十分相似吗？ 
English: It is often said that small loyalties are the enemies of big loyalties. Is this not very similar to the current situation?

古文：澄曰： 臣愚暗，虽涉小忠，要是竭诚谋国；不知大忠者竟何所据！ 
现代文：拓跋澄又说道： 我愚昧无知，虽然属于 小忠 之列，归根到底是出于一片竭诚之心，为国家而计虑。不知道所谓 大忠 者，又出于哪一种根据？ 
English: Takubasumi also said, "I am stupid and ignorant. Although I belong to the ranks of lesser loyalists, in the final analysis, I do it out of a sincere heart, thinking about the country. I don't know who the so-called great loyalists are, and on what basis?

古文：帝不从。
现代文：孝文帝没有听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：辛亥，发洛阳，以北海王详为尚书仆射，统留台事；李冲兼仆射，同守洛阳。
现代文：辛亥，北魏从洛阳发兵，以北海王拓跋详为尚书仆射，留下来统管朝中之事；使李冲兼仆射，固守洛阳。
English: In Xinhai, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent troops from Luoyang, with the North Sea King Tuoba as a subordinate, left to control the affairs of the Middle Kingdom; Li Chong and subordinate, adhered to Luoyang.

古文：戊辰，魏主至悬瓠。己巳，诏寿阳、钟离、马头之师所获男女皆放还南。
现代文：又以给事黄门侍郎崔休为左丞，使赵郡王拓跋干都督中外诸军事。以始平王拓跋勰率领皇族子弟兵担任左右侍卫。崔休是崔逞的重孙子。戊辰，孝文帝到达悬瓠。孝文帝命令卢渊攻打南阳。
English: He also appointed the Yellow Gate attendant Cui Xiu as the left-hand man, and made the Zhao County King Tuobao the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces. Cui Xiu, the great-grandson of Cui Gang, led the imperial soldiers to serve as the left and right guards with Shi Ping Wang Tuobao. At that time, Emperor Xiaowen arrived at the Hanging Palace. Emperor Xiaowen ordered Lu Yuan to attack Nanyang.

古文：曹虎果不降。魏主命卢渊攻南阳。渊以军中乏粮，请先攻赭阳以取叶仓，魏主许之。
现代文：卢渊以军队缺乏粮食为理由，请求先进攻赭阳，以便获取叶地粮仓，孝文帝同意。
English: Lu Yuan, citing the army's lack of grain as the reason, requested an advance attack on Fenyang in order to obtain the leaf grain silos, and Emperor Xiaowen agreed.

古文：乃与征南大将军城阳王鸾、安南将军李佐、荆州刺史韦珍共攻赭阳。
现代文：于是，卢渊与征南大将军成阳王拓跋鸾、安南将军李佐、荆州刺史韦珍等一起攻打赭阳。
English: As a result, Lu Yuan, together with the Southern Expeditionary Army General Chengyang Wang Tuobao, Annan General Li Zuo, Jingzhou General Shi Wei Zhen and others, attacked Fenyang.

古文：鸾，长寿之子；佐，宝之子也。
现代文：拓跋鸾是拓跋长寿的儿子，李佐是李宝的儿子。
English: Tuobao is the son of Tuobao Longevity, and Li Zuo is the son of Li Bao.

古文：北襄城太守成公期闭城拒守。
现代文：南齐方面的北襄城太守成公期闭城拒守，难以攻克。
English: The Northern Xiangcheng Taishou Cheng Gong refused to defend the city during the closed period and was difficult to conquer.

古文：薛真度军于沙堨，南阳太守房伯玉、新野太守刘思忌拒之。
现代文：薛真度驻扎在沙，而南齐的南阳太守房伯玉、新野太守刘思忌率兵抵抗。
English: Xue Zhendu was stationed in Shashi, while the Nanyang daimyōs of Nanzhi, Nanyang Taishōmō Fubo and Nanyang Shinshōmōs, led the resistance.

古文：先是，魏主遣中书监高闾治古乐；会闾出为相州刺史，是岁，表荐著作郎韩显宗、太乐祭酒公孙崇参知钟律，帝从之。
现代文：早先，北魏孝文帝命令中书监高闾修治古乐，不久高闾出任相州刺史，这一年，高闾上表举荐著作郎韩显宗、大乐祭酒公孙崇参与制定钟律，孝文帝采纳了他的建议。
English: In the early days of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen ordered Gao Jian, the book supervisor, to revise the ancient music, and soon Gao Jian became the official historian of Xiangzhou. In this year, Gao Jian's brother Han Xianzong, the author of the above-mentioned book, and Sun Chong, the Grand Music Festival master of wine, participated in the formulation of the bell rule, and Emperor Xiaowen adopted his suggestion.

