古文：齐澣，字洗心，定州义丰人。
现代文：齐澣，字洗心，是定州义丰人。
English: Qi Xuan, also known as Zhenxin, is a native of Yifeng, Dingzhou.

古文：少开敏，年十四，见特进李峤，峤称有王佐才。
现代文：少年时就很聪颖。十四岁时去见到特进李峤，李峤称赞他有王佐之才。
English: He was very clever when he was a boy. When he was fourteen, he went to see the special envoy Li Yao. Li Yao praised him as having the talent of a king.

古文：中宗在庐陵，澣上言请抑诸武，迎太子东宫，不报。
现代文：中宗在武后称帝时又成为庐陵王。那时，齐澣曾上言请稍抑制各武姓人的权势，将太子迎回东宫，武后不做回答。
English: When Empress Wu proclaimed herself emperor, Zhongzong became the king of the imperial mausoleum. At that time, Qi Yan had asked the emperor to restrain the power of the various emperors and welcome the prince back to the East Palace, but Empress Wu did not respond.

古文：及太子还，武后召氵幹宴同明殿，谕曰： 朕母子如初，卿豫有力焉，方不次待尔。 
现代文：及至太子回京，武后召齐澣在同明殿宴饮，对齐澣说： 我母子能和好如初，你出了不少力。我不会亏待你。 
English: When the prince returned to Beijing, Empress Wu invited Qi Jun to a banquet at the Tongming Palace, and said to Qi Jun: My mother and son can be reconciled as before, you have made a lot of effort. I will not treat you unfairly.

古文：澣辞母老不忍远离，赏而罢。
现代文：齐澣以母亲年老不能远离为理由向武后辞谢，得了赏赐后回家。
English: With her mother's old age as the reason for not being able to stay away, Qi Qian thanked Empress Wu for her resignation, and returned home after receiving a reward.

古文：圣历初，及进士第，以拔萃调蒲州司法参军。
现代文：圣历初年，考中进士，因特别优秀，调任蒲州司法参军。
English: In the first year of the calendar, he passed the middle school entrance examination, and because of his outstanding performance, he was transferred to the Puzhou Judiciary to join the army.

古文：有父子连坐论死者，澣曰： 条落则本枯，奈何俱死？ 
现代文：有父子两人被牵连都判了死罪，齐澣说： 枝条都砍了，树根也就枯死了，怎么可以父子都判死呢？ 
English: A father and son who were both implicated were both sentenced to death, Qi Xuan said: The branches were all cut, and the roots of the tree also withered. How could both father and son be sentenced to death?

古文：议贷其父，太守不听，固争，卒原。
现代文：建议宽恕父亲。太守不听，齐澣反复争论，终于赦免了父亲。
English: He suggested forgiving his father, but the emperor would not listen, and after repeated arguments, he finally pardoned his father.

古文：景云初，姚崇取为监察御史。
现代文：景云初年，姚崇取他为监察御史。
English: In Jingyun's first year, Yao Chong took him as his inspector.

古文：凡劾奏，常先风教，号善职。
现代文：齐澣每有检举，常常风教在先，当时称之为善职。
English: Whenever there was an accusation against Qi Xuan, he was often the first to preach morality. At the time, this was called "doing a good job."

古文：睿宗将祠太庙，刑部尚书裴谈摄太尉，先告。
现代文：睿宗将祭祠太庙，刑部尚书裴谈代理太尉，先去告庙。
English: Ruizong took the sacrificial shrine to the temple, and the deputy captain of the criminal department, Shangshu Pei, went to the temple first.

古文：澣奏： 孝享摄事，稽首而拜，恭明神也，而谈慢媟不恭。 
现代文：齐澣上奏： 祭告宗庙，孝享之事，应该头至地稽首而拜，是为了对神明表示恭敬。而裴谈轻率不恭。 
English: Chihiro's ascending chant: In the matter of worshiping the ancestral temple and showing filial piety, it is necessary to bow one's head to show reverence to the gods. However, it is thoughtless and disrespectful to bow one's head.

古文：并劾谈 神昏形滓，挟邪以罔上。
现代文：同时揭发裴谈 ：昏庸污浊，挟邪而欺上。
English: At the same time, Pei Tuan was exposed: he was a dullard and a scoundrel, and he was deceived by evil.

古文：神龙时，事武三思，陷敬晖，没其家以获进。
现代文：神龙年中，依附武三思，陷害敬晖，抄没敬晖的家以获取进身。
English: In the middle of the year of the Dragon God, he attached himself to Wu Sanxi, framed Jing Qi, and copied the home of Jing Qi to gain the upper hand.

古文：妻外淫，男女不得姓氏。夫告神慢，事主不忠，家不治，有是三罪，不可不置之法。 
现代文：其妻外有情夫。有告神时怠慢，事主不忠，治家不严三种罪状，不可不绳之以法。 
English: His wife had a lover. There are three kinds of crimes: negligence when reporting to God, disloyalty to the principal, and laxity in managing the family, which must be brought to justice.

古文：谈由是下除汾州刺史。
现代文：裴谈因此下降为汾州刺史。
English: As a result, Pei Dan was relegated to a footnote in the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：开元初，姚崇复相，用为给事中、中书舍人。
现代文：开元初年，姚崇恢复宰相职位，用齐澣为给事中、中书舍人。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Yao Chong resumed the post of prime minister, and used Qi Ren to give advice to the middle and middle school students.

古文：论驳及诰诏皆援准古谊，朝廷大政必咨之，时号 解事舍人 。
现代文：他若撰文有所论驳或草拟诰诏，都要援引古法古义，朝廷大政都要问问他，当时称他为 解事舍人 。
English: If he wrote a refutation or drafted an edict, he would have to invoke the ancient law, the ancient meaning, and the imperial court would have to ask him. At that time, he was called a solver.

古文：数讽崇年老宜避位。
现代文：齐澣多次暗示姚崇年老了应该退位。
English: Qi Jun repeatedly hinted that Yao Chong should abdicate when he was old.

古文：时宋璟在广州，因劝崇举自代，崇用其谋。
现代文：那时，宋瞡在广州，于是劝姚崇推荐宋瞡接替自己，姚崇照他的话做了。
English: At that time, Song Tao was in Guangzhou, so he persuaded Yao Chong to recommend Song Tao to succeed him, and Yao Chong did as he said.

古文：璟为相，它日问曰： 吾不敢冀房、杜，比尔日诸公云何？ 
现代文：宋瞡为宰相，有一天问齐澣： 我不敢自比房玄龄、杜如晦，但比近来的几位如何？ 
English: Song Tao, the prime minister, one day asked Qi Tao: I don't dare to compare myself to Fang Xuanling and Du Ruwei, but how about the recent ones?

古文：澣曰： 不如。 
现代文：齐澣回答 ：比不上。 
English: Chihiro replied, "It's incomparable."

古文：璟请故，答曰： 前时近郊户三百以为困，今不百户，是以知之。 
现代文：宋瞡问原因。齐澣说 ：前些时近郊有三百户，尚且觉得困窘。现在不到一百户了，由此就可以得知。 
English: Song Tao asked the reason. Qi Tao said: Some time ago, there were three hundred households in the suburbs, and I still felt embarrassed. Now there are less than a hundred households, so this can be known.

古文：马怀素等绪次四库书，表澣为副，改秘书少监。
现代文：马怀素等人来编次四库书，上表推荐齐澣任副职，乃改任秘书少监。
English: Ma Huai Su and others to compile the four library books, the above table recommended Qi Wei as a deputy, but he was reappointed as a secretary and junior supervisor.

古文：出为汴州刺史，地当舟车凑集，事浩繁，前刺史数不称职，唯倪若水与澣以清毅闻，吏民颂美。
现代文：出京任汴州刺史，汴州是交通要道，车船齐集，事情很多，以前的刺史好几任都不称职，只有倪若水与齐澣以清廉果毅闻名，吏民都称颂。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the chief historian of Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou is an important transportation route, with a large number of vehicles and ships. There are many things to do. Several previous chief historians were incompetent. Only Ni Ruoshui and Qi Xuan are known for their integrity and courage, and are praised by officials and the public.

古文：玄宗封太山，历汴、宋、许，车骑数万，王公妃主四夷君长马、橐驼亦数万，所顿弥数十里。
现代文：玄宗封禅泰山时，历经汴州、宋州、许州，车骑有好几万，王公、嫔妃、公主、四夷君长的马、骆驼也有好几万。休息进餐时绵延几十里。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was enthroned on Mount Tai, he passed through Zhangzhou, Songzhou, and Huzhou, with tens of thousands of riders and horses, and tens of thousands of horses and camels belonging to kings, queens, princesses, and the four emperors. When he took a break to eat, he rode for dozens of miles.

古文：澣列长棚，帟幕联亘，上食凡千舆，纳筦钥，身进膳，帝以为知礼，喜甚，为留三日，赐帛二千匹。
现代文：齐澣建设长棚，帘幕相互连接。
English: The long shelves are built flush with each other, and the curtains are connected to each other.

古文：澣以淮至徐城险急，凿渠十八里，入青水，人便其漕。
现代文：每次奉上食物要几千车，齐澣亲自奉进膳食。皇帝认为他知礼，很高兴，因而留下三天，赐帛二千匹。齐澣因为从淮到徐城一段湍流险急，乃凿渠十八里，汇入青水，漕运因此便利。
English: Each time the food was served, several thousand carts were needed, and Qi Xi personally served the meal. The emperor thought he was polite and happy, so he stayed for three days and gave him two thousand carts. Qi Xi, because the turbulent flow from Huai to Xucheng was dangerous, dug a canal of eighteen miles and merged into the blue water, so it was convenient to transport carts.

古文：中书令张说择丞辖，以王丘为左，澣为右。
现代文：中书令张说选择丞宰，以王丘为左丞，齐澣为右丞。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zhang to choose a chancellor, with Wang Qiu as the left chancellor and Qi Jun as the right chancellor.

古文：李元纮、杜暹当国，表宋璟为吏部尚书，澣及苏晋为侍郎，世谓台选。
现代文：李元、杜暹执政时，表荐宋瞡为吏部尚书，齐澣及苏晋为侍郎，当时称之为 台选 。
English: When Li Yuan and Du Siam were in power, Song Xi was recommended to be the secretary of the personnel department, and Qi Xi and Su Jin were recommended to be the attendants. At that time, it was called Taiwan election.

古文：尝奏事，帝指政事堂曰： 非卿尚谁居者。 
现代文：齐澣曾奏事，皇帝指着政事堂说： 这地方除了你，谁还有资格在里面？ 
English: When Qi Xuan had finished his report, the emperor pointed to the government building and said, "This place, who has the right to be in it but you?

古文：是时，开府王毛仲宠甚，与龙武将军葛福顺相婚嫁，毛仲请奏无不从。
现代文：那时，开府王毛仲甚为得宠，与龙武将军葛福顺相互婚嫁。王毛仲有什么奏请，没有不得到允许的。
English: At that time, Kaifu King Maozhong was very popular, and he married Longwu General Ge Fushun. There was nothing that Wang Maozhong asked for that was not allowed.

古文：澣乘间曰： 福顺典兵马，与毛仲为婚家，小人宠极则奸生，不预图，且有后患。
现代文：齐澣找机会奏说 ：葛福顺主管兵马，与王毛仲结为姻亲。小人得宠多了就会生奸心，不做预防，会有后患的。
English: Qi Xuan looked for an opportunity to say: Ge Fushun was in charge of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and was related to Wang Mao by marriage. If a villain is pampered too much, he will develop a treacherous heart. If you don't take precautions, there will be consequences.

古文：高力士小心谨畏，加宦人可备禁中驱使，腹心所委，何必毛仲哉？ 
现代文：高力士为人细心，严谨有礼，可以用作禁中的驱使者。心腹所能委托的，不一定是王毛仲。 
English: Gao Lixi is a careful, rigorous and courteous person, and can be used as a driving messenger in the forbidden. It is not necessarily Wang Maozhong who can be entrusted by a confidant.

古文：又言： 君不密失臣，臣不密失身，惟陛下密此言。 
现代文：又说： 君如果不能守秘将会失去臣子，臣不能守秘将会失身送命，希望陛下秘守今天的谈话。 
English: He also said, "If you cannot keep a secret, you will lose a vassal. If a vassal cannot keep a secret, he will lose his life. I hope His Majesty will keep today's conversation confidential."

古文：帝嘉纳，且劳曰： 卿第出，我徐计其宜。 
现代文：皇帝接纳他的建议，且慰抚他说： 你只管放心出去，我会慢慢设法的。 
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion and comforted him, saying, "Just go out with confidence. I'll work on it slowly."

古文：会大理丞麻察坐事，出为兴州别驾，澣往饯，因道谏语。
现代文：正逢大理丞麻察犯了事，贬为兴州别驾，齐澣去与他饯别，提到对皇帝的劝谏。
English: On the very day that Dali Zheng Masa committed the crime, he was relegated to Xingzhou, and they went to bid him farewell, mentioning the emperor's advice.

古文：察素奸佻，遽言状。
现代文：麻察一向奸诈狡猾，即刻将此事上告。
English: The magistrate, ever cunning and crafty, immediately appealed the matter.

古文：帝怒，召澣入殿中曰： 卿向疑朕不密，而反告察，谓何？
现代文：皇帝大怒，把齐澣召到殿中，对他说 ：你前时担心我不能保密，而你反而去告诉麻察，这是怎么说？
English: The emperor was furious and summoned Qi Yan to the palace. He said to him, "You were worried that I couldn't keep it a secret, but instead you went to tell the grand vizier. What does this mean?

古文：且察轻躁无行，常游太平门者，讵不知邪？ 
现代文：何况麻察轻率无德，是常去太平门的人，你难道不知道吗？ 
English: Besides, don't you know that Macha is thoughtless and immoral, and is a frequent visitor to Taiping Gate?

古文：澣免冠顿首谢，贬高州良德丞，察再贬皇化尉，其党齐敷、郭禀皆流放。
现代文：齐澣摘下官帽谢罪，被贬为高州良德丞，麻察再贬为皇化尉，其党羽齐敷、郭禀都遭流放。
English: Qi Qian took off his official hat to apologize, and was relegated to Gaozhou Liang Dezheng, Masa was relegated to the imperial lieutenant, and his party members Qi Jiki and Guo Jian were all exiled.

古文：久之，澣徙索卢丞、郴州长史、濠常二州刺史。
现代文：很久以后，齐澣调为索卢丞、郴州长史、濠州常州二州的刺史。
English: After a long time, Qixuan was changed to Solu Zhen, the history of the governor of Zhangzhou, and the history of the two states of Zhangzhou and Changzhou.

古文：迁润州，州北距瓜步沙尾，纡汇六十里，舟多败溺。
现代文：又迁到润州，州的北面是瓜步沙尾，有六十里迂回曲折处，船很多在那里倾覆。
English: They also moved to Runzhou. To the north of Runzhou is Guabuxawei, with sixty miles of twists and turns. Many ships capsized there.

古文：澣徙漕路繇京口埭，治伊娄渠以达扬子，岁无覆舟，减运钱数十万。
现代文：齐澣改变漕路，由京口埭，治理伊娄渠，直达扬子江，就再也没有翻船的事发生了，还节约了运费几十万。
English: When Qi Gang changed the route from the Beijing-Kou Canal to the Yili Canal and reached the Yangtze River, there were no more overturned boats, and hundreds of thousands of freight costs were saved.

古文：又立伊娄埭，官征其入；招还流人五百户，置明州以安辑之。
现代文：另设立伊娄埭，官征其税入；又招回流亡在外的人五百户，设置明州安顿他们。
English: In addition, Yili was established, and its tax revenue was collected by the government. In addition, 500 households of exiles were called back, and they were settled in Mingzhou.

古文：复徙汴州。
现代文：于是又调齐澣任汴州刺史。
English: As a result, he was transferred to the post of the chief historian of Bozhou.

古文：澣中失势，益怅恨，素操浸衰。更倚力士助，得为两道采访使，兴利以中天子意，裒货财遗谢贵幸。
现代文：齐澣中年失势，心中惆怅而懈怠，自律放松，倚仗了高力士的帮助，才得任两道采访使，努力兴利使天子中意，又搜集财货送给高力士做酬谢。
English: In his middle age, Qi Yan lost his power, his mind became lazy, his self-discipline relaxed, and he relied on the help of Gao Lixi. Only then did he have to take on the duties of two emissaries, work hard to please God, and collect money and goods to give to Gao Lixi as a reward.

古文：纳刘戒女为妾，不答其妻。
现代文：娶了刘戒的女儿为妾，不理睬妻子。
English: He married Liu Kai's daughter as his concubine and ignored his wife.

古文：李林甫恶其行，欲挤而废之。
现代文：李林甫厌恶其丑行，想排挤掉他。
English: Li Linfu was disgusted by his bad behavior and wanted to oust him.

古文：会其幕府坐赃，事连澣，诏矜澣老，放归田里。
现代文：正好，他的幕府受贿被告发，案情牵连到齐澣。皇帝怜恤齐澣年老，诏令放他回归乡里。
English: Just at that time, he was accused of accepting bribes from the shogunate, and the case implicated Qi Yan. The emperor took pity on Qi Yan's old age and issued a decree to let him return to the countryside.

古文：天宝初，召为太子少詹事，留司东都。
现代文：天宝初年，又招为太子少詹事，留司东都。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was also recruited as a young prince, and stayed in Dongdu.

古文：严挺之亦为林甫所废，与澣家居，杖屦经过不缺日，林甫畏之，乃用澣为平阳太守，离其谋。
现代文：严挺之也被李林甫排挤废官，与齐澣家居，每日来往。李林甫怕他们有什么，又用齐澣为平阳太守，把他们两人分开。
English: Yan Tingzhi was also ousted by Li Linfu, and he had daily dealings with Qi Gan's household. Li Linfu was afraid of what they had, and used Qi Gan as the governor of Pingyang to separate the two.

古文：更以黄老清静为治，卒，年七十二。
现代文：齐澣复为官，以黄老之说以清静简政治理。死时年七十二岁。
English: Qi Jian was reinstated as an official, with Huang Laozhi saying and Qing Jing Jian as the political principles. He was 72 years old at the time of his death.

古文：肃宗时，录林甫所陷者，皆褒洗，故澣赠礼部尚书。
现代文：肃宗时，查检被李林甫陷害的人，都昭雪褒奖，所以追赠齐澣为礼部尚书。
English: During Su Zong's reign, the people who were investigated and framed by Li Linfu were all rewarded, so the posthumous award of Qi Xuan is the highest award of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：澣尝称陈希烈、宋遥、苗晋卿、韦述之才，后皆大显。
现代文：齐澣曾经称赞陈希烈、宋遥、苗晋卿、韦述等人有才。
English: Qi Jun once praised the talents of Chen Xilei, Song Yao, Miao Jinqing, Wei Shu and others.

古文：明日，嫁其女。
现代文：这些人后来都甚显赫。
English: All of these men would later rise to prominence.

