古文：钧石之石，五权之名，石重百二十斤。
现代文： 钧石 的 石 ，是五种重量单位的名称之一，每石重一百二十斤。
English: The stone of flint is one of the names of the five units of weight, with each stone weighing one hundred and twenty pounds.

古文：后人以一斛为一石，自汉已如此， 饮酒一石不乱 是也。
现代文：后人以一斛为一石，自汉代以来已经如此，如说 饮酒一石不乱 ，就是以一斛当一石。
English: Subsequent generations have regarded a gong as a stone, and this has been the case since the Han Dynasty. For example, "drinking a stone is not disorderly" means treating a gong as a stone.

古文：挽蹶弓弩，古人以钧石率之。今人乃以粳米一斛之重为一石。凡石者，以九十二斤半为法，乃汉秤三百四十一斤也。
现代文：拉弓踏弩的力量之大小，古人都用作为重量单位的钧、石来计算；今人却以粳稻米一斛的重量为一石，而每石以九十二斤半为标准，则相当于汉秤的三百四十一斤。
English: The size of the force of pulling a bow and stepping on it was calculated by the ancients using cormorant and stone as a unit of weight; today, however, people use the weight of a stalk of glutinous rice as one stone, and each stone is standardized at ninety-two and a half pounds, which is equivalent to three hundred and forty-one pounds of Chinese scales.

古文：今之武卒蹶弩，有及九石者，计其力乃古之二十五石，比魏之武卒，人当二人有余；弓有挽三石者，乃古之三十四钧，比颜高之弓，人当五人有余。
现代文：现在的武士踏弩，有能达到九石力量的，换算所用之力，乃相当于古代的二十五石，与先秦魏国的武士相比，则一人之力抵得上二人还有余；弓有能拉到三石力量的，乃相当于古代的三十四钧，与鲁国武士颜高的六钧之弓相比，则一人之力抵得上五人还有余。
English: Today's samurai have the strength of nine stones when stepping on the crossbow, which is equivalent to the strength of twenty-five stones in ancient times. Compared with the samurai of the pre-Qin and Wei dynasties, the strength of one person is more than that of two people. The bow has the strength of three stones, which is equivalent to the thirty-four stones in ancient times. Compared with the bow of six stones of the high-ranking samurai of Lu, the strength of one person is more than that of five people.

古文：此皆近歳教养所成。以至击刺驰射，皆尽夷夏之术；器仗铠胄，极今古之工巧。
现代文：这些都是近年来的军事训练所取得的成效，以至于击刺、驰射等都掌握了中原和四裔之民所能有的技术，兵器铠甲的制造也都极尽古今工巧之能事。
English: These are the results of the military training in recent years, so much so that the stabbing, shooting, etc. have mastered the technology available to the people of the Central Plains and the four ethnic groups, and the manufacture of weapon armor has also exhausted the capabilities of ancient and modern craftsmanship.

古文：武备之盛，前世未有其比。
现代文：现时武备的程度，前世没有哪一代可以相比。
English: The current level of military preparedness is incomparable to that of any previous generation.

古文：阳燧照物皆倒，中间有碍故也。
现代文：用阳燧照物体都是倒立的影像，是因为中间有障碍的缘故。
English: The reason why all the objects photographed with the camera are upside down is because there is an obstacle in the middle.

古文：算家谓之 格术 。
现代文：算学家说这叫做 格术 。
English: Mathematicians say it's called checkers.

古文：如人摇橹，臬为之碍故也。
现代文：譬如人摇橹，作支撑的小木桩成了橹的障碍一样。
English: For example, if a person shakes a plough, the small wooden stake that supports it becomes an obstacle to the plough.

古文：若鸢飞空中，其影随鸢而移，或中间为窗隙所束，则影与鸢遂相违，鸢东则影西，鸢西则影东。又如窗隙中楼塔之影，中间为窗所束，亦皆倒垂，与阳燧一也。
现代文：像老鹰在空中飞行，它的影子随着鹰飞而移动，如果鹰和影子之间的光线被窗孔所约束，那么影子与鹰飞的方向就相反了。又像窗孔中透过楼塔的影子，中间的光线被窗孔所约束，也都是倒垂，与阳燧的情形一样。
English: Like an eagle flying in the air, its shadow moves with the eagle's flight, if the light between the eagle and the shadow is constrained by the window, then the shadow is in the opposite direction to the eagle's flight, and like the shadow of the tower through the window, the light in the middle is constrained by the window, and they are also inverted, just like the case of impotence.

古文：阳燧面洼，以一指迫而照之则正；渐远则无所见；过此遂倒。
现代文：阳燧的镜面是凹陷的，当一个手指靠近镜面时，像是正的；当手指渐渐移远到某一位置，像就不见了；超过这一位置，像就倒过来了。
English: The mirror of impotence is concave. When a finger approaches the mirror, it seems to be positive; when the finger gradually moves to a certain position, the image disappears; beyond this position, the image is reversed.

古文：其无所见处，正如窗隙、橹臬、腰鼓碍之，本末相格，遂成摇橹之势。
现代文：那个看不见的地方，正如窗户的孔、架橹的木桩、腰鼓的腰成了障碍一样，物体与像相对，就成了摇橹的情形。
English: The invisible place, just as the hole of the window, the wooden post of the frame, the waist of the waist drum became an obstacle, the object opposite the image, became a wobbling situation.

古文：故举手则影愈下，下手则影愈上，此其可见。
现代文：所以举起手来影子就越向下，放下手来影子就越向上，这应该是可以看得到的。
English: So if you raise your hand, the shadow goes down, and if you lower your hand, the shadow goes up, which should be visible.

古文：阳燧面洼，向日照之，光皆聚向内。
现代文：阳燧的表面是凹陷的，对着太阳照，光线都集中在内心。
English: The surface of the impotence is sunken, against the sun, the light is concentrated in the heart.

古文：离镜一、二寸，光聚为一点，大如麻菽，著物则火发，此则腰鼓最细处也。
现代文：离镜面一二寸的地方，光线集中成一个点，大小如芝麻粒，照到物体上面，物体一会儿就燃烧起来，这就是腰鼓最细的地方。
English: One or two inches from the mirror surface, the light is concentrated into a point, the size of a sesame seed, shining on the object, the object will burn in a moment. This is the thinnest part of the waist drum.

古文：岂特物为然，人亦如是，中间不为物碍者鲜矣。
现代文：岂止物体是这样，人也如此，中间不被外物阻碍的很少。
English: But not only objects are like this, so are people, and there are very few things in between that are not hindered by external objects.

古文：小则利害相易，是非相反；大则以已为物，以物为已。
现代文：小的就把利害互相改变，是非互相颠倒；大的就把自己当成外物，把外物当成自己。
English: The small change their interests to each other, and turn their rights and wrongs upside down; the large regard themselves as something external, and regard the external as themselves.

古文：不求去碍，而欲见不颠倒，难矣哉！
现代文：不要求去掉障碍，却想看到不颠倒的物象，太难了啊!
English: Not asking to remove obstacles, but wanting to see an image that is not upside down, is so difficult!

古文：《酉阳杂俎》谓 海翻则塔影倒 ，此妄说也。
现代文：《酉阳杂俎》所说 海翻则塔影倒 ，这纯属虚枉之谈。
English: "Puyang Chowder" said that the sea turn is the tower's shadow, which is pure nonsense.

古文：影入窗隙则倒，乃其常理。
现代文：影像通过窗孔就会颠倒，这才是通常的道理。
English: The image through the window will be reversed, this is the usual reason.

古文：先儒以日食正阳之月止谓四月，不然也。
现代文：从前的学者认为日食于正阳之月，正阳之月只指四月，其实不是这样。
English: In the past, scholars believed that the solar eclipse occurred in the month of Zhengyang, and that Zhengyang only refers to April. However, this is not true.

古文：正、阳乃两事，正谓四月，阳谓十月。
现代文：正、阳是两码事，正指四月，阳指十月，即 岁亦阳止 。
English: Zheng and Yang are two different things. Zheng refers to April, Yang refers to October, which is also the end of the year.

古文：日月阳止是也。《诗》有 正月繁霜 ； 十月之交，朔月辛卯。
现代文：比如《诗经·小雅·正月》说 正月繁霜 、 十月之交，朔月辛卯。
English: For example, "Shikei, Xiaoya, Shogatsu" says that the first month is frosty, the turn of October, and the new moon is cold.

古文：日有食之，亦孔之丑 二者，此先王所恶也。
现代文：日有食之，亦孔之丑 两种情形，这两种情形是先王所讨厌的。
English: The sun is eclipsed, and the hole is ugly - two situations, both of which are abhorrent to the former king.

古文：盖四月纯阳，不欲为阴所侵；十月纯阴，不欲过而干阳也。
现代文：大概因为四月纯阳，不愿被阴所侵扰；十月纯阴，不愿阴太盛而干犯了阳。
English: Probably because of April's pure sun, not wanting to be disturbed by the shade; October's pure shade, not wanting the shade to be too strong and causing the sun.

古文：余为《丧服后传》，书成，熙宁中欲重定五服敕，而余预讨论。
现代文：我撰写《丧服后传》，书写成后，熙宁年间朝廷要重新制定丧服制度，而我参与了讨论。
English: After I wrote "The Legacy of Mourning Clothes," during the reign of Emperor Xining, the imperial court wanted to reform the mourning clothes system, and I took part in the discussion.

古文：雷、郑之前，阙谬固多，其间高祖远孙一事，尤为无义。
现代文：雷、郑的学说缺漏、错误的地方固然很多，其中高祖玄孙一事，尤其没有道理。
English: Of course, there are many gaps and mistakes in the teachings of Lei and Zheng, among which the story of Gao Zu and Xun Sun is especially unreasonable.

古文：《丧服》但有曾祖齐衰六月，远曾缌麻三月，而无高祖远孙服。
现代文：《礼仪·丧服》中之说曾祖齐衰三月，曾孙缌麻三月，而没有提到高祖玄孙守丧的服装。
English: In "Etiquette, Funeral Costumes," it is said that the great-grandfathers died in March and the great-grandchildren in March, but there is no mention of the clothing of the great-grandfathers and great-grandchildren in mourning.

古文：先儒皆以谓 服同曾祖曾孙，故不言可推而知 ，或曰 经之所不言则不服 ，皆不然也。曾，重也。
现代文：从前的学者都认为 服装与为曾祖、曾孙守丧的相同，虽然没提也可以推想得到 ，有人说 经上没提到的就不服丧 ，这两种说法都不对。曾，是重的意思。
English: In the past, scholars believed that clothing was the same as mourning for great-grandparents and great-grandchildren, although it could be inferred without mentioning it. Some people said that if it was not mentioned in the scriptures, it would not be mourned. Both of these statements are wrong. Zeng is a heavy meaning.

古文：由祖而上者，皆曾祖也；由孙而下者，皆曾孙也：虽百世可也。
现代文：从祖父以上的都是曾祖，从孙子以下的都是曾孙，即使一百代以后也是这样。
English: From the grandfather up are the great-grandfathers, from the grandson down are the great-grandchildren, even after a hundred generations.

古文：苟有相逮者，则必为服丧三月。
现代文：如果可能的话，都必须为之服丧三个月。
English: If possible, they should all be mourned for three months.

古文：故虽成王之于后稷，亦称曾孙。而祭礼祝文，无远近皆曰曾孙。
现代文：所以即使周成王对于后稷也称曾孙，而祭祀祝文中无论世代远近都称曾孙。
English: Therefore, even Zhou Cheng Wang referred to Houyi as his great-grandson, and in the sacrificial congratulatory text, Houyi was referred to as his great-grandson regardless of generation.

古文：《礼》所谓 以五为九 者，谓傍亲之杀也。
现代文：《礼记》所谓 以五为九 ，讲的是为旁系亲属服丧时如何降低等次。
English: The so-called "five to nine" in "The Book of Rites" is about how to lower the order of precedence when mourning for collateral relatives.

古文：上杀、下杀至于九，傍杀至于四，而皆谓之族。族昆弟父母、族祖父母、族曾祖父母。
现代文：上杀、下杀至于九代，旁杀至于四代，在此之内的都称为同族，族昆弟父母、族祖父母、族曾祖父母。
English: As far as the ninth generation and the fourth generation are concerned, all of them are called the same family, the parents, grandparents and great-grandparents.

古文：过此则非其族也。
现代文：在此之外的就不算同族了。
English: Anyone outside of this is not considered to be of the same race.

古文：非其族，则为之无服。
现代文：不是同族，就不为他服丧。
English: If he wasn't from the same tribe, they didn't mourn for him.

古文：唯正统不以族名，则是无绝道也。
现代文：唯有正统不以族来命名，是因为正统是绵延不绝的。
English: Only orthodoxy is not named after a race, because orthodoxy is continuous.

古文：水以漳名、洛名者最多，今略举数处：赵、晋之间有清漳、浊漳，当阳有漳水，灨上有漳水，鄣郡有漳江，漳州有漳浦，亳州有漳水，安州有漳水。
现代文：水流以漳、洛命名的最多，现在略举几处：赵、晋之间有清漳、浊漳，当阳有漳水，赣水的上流有漳水，鄣郡有漳江，漳州有漳浦，亳州有漳水，安州有漳水。
English: The largest number of watercourses are named after Luo and Luo. Here are a few examples: between Zhao and Jin, there are Qingluo and Luo; between Dangyang, there is Luo Shui; upstream of Luo Shui, there is Luo Shui; in Luo County, there is Luo River; in Luzhou, there is Luo Pu; in Luzhou, there is Luo Shui; and in Anzhou, there is Luo Shui.

古文：洛中有洛水，北地郡有洛水，沙县有洛水。
现代文：洛中有洛水，北地郡有洛水，沙县有洛水。
English: There is Luoshui in Luo, Luoshui in Beidi County and Luoshui in Sha County.

古文：此概举一二耳，其详不能具载。
现代文：这里不过略举一二，详情不能具载。
English: Here are just a few examples, details cannot be included.

古文：余考其义，乃清浊相蹂者为漳。
现代文：我考察它们的含义，漳乃是清浊相混合的意思。
English: I looked up their meanings, and the meaning of  is a mixture of pure and impure.

古文：当阳即沮、漳合流，赣上即漳、灨合流，漳州余未曾目见，鄣郡即西江合流，亳、漳则漳、涡合流，云梦则漳、郧合流。此数处皆清浊合流，色理如螮蝀，数十里方混。如璋亦从章，璋，王之左右之臣所执，《诗》云： 济济辟王，左右趣之。
现代文：章有文采、区分之意。所谓漳，就是两件东西相混合后既有文采而且能够区分的意思。清漳、浊漳，汇合于上党。当阳的漳水就是沮、漳水的合流，赣水上流之漳合贡水为灨，漳州的漳浦我没有亲眼见过，鄣郡之漳汇合于大江，亳州之漳就是漳、涡水的合流，安州云梦之漳是漳、郧水的合流。这几个地方的漳水也都是清浊合流，色泽纹理如天上的虹一样，绵延几十里才混合如一。璋也有章的字旁，璋，是君王身边的大臣所执，《诗》云： 济济辟王，左右趣之。
English: Zhang has the meaning of "literacy" and "distinction." The so-called "Chuang" is the meaning of "literacy" and "distinction" after two things are mixed. Clear "Chuang" and "Chuang" converge in Shangdang. Dangyang's "Chuangshui" is the confluence of "depression" and "Chuangshui," the upstream "Chuangshui" is the confluence of "tribute" and "tribute," and I have never seen "Chuangpu" in Guizhou. Guizhou's "Chuang" is the

古文：济济辟王，左右奉璋。 
现代文：济济辟王，左右奉璋。 
English: Jizhi is the king, and the left and right are subordinate to him.

古文：璋，圭之半体也。合之则成圭。
现代文：璋，就是圭的一半，两个璋合起来就是一个圭。
English: A gourd is half a cucumber, and two cucumbers together are a cucumber.

古文：王左右之臣，合体一心，趣乎王者也。
现代文：这正是君王身边的大臣们联合同心，趋奉君王的意思。
English: This is what it means for the ministers around the king to be united in their devotion to the king.

古文：又诸侯以聘女，取其判合也。
现代文：诸侯用璋来互相聘问，是取其能互相分合的意思。
English: The feudal lords asked questions of each other with their scepters, meaning that they were able to divide and conquer each other.

古文：有事于山川，以其杀宗庙礼之半也。
现代文：君王祭祀山川用璋，是取其与祭祖所用礼器相差一半。
English: There is only half the difference between the ceremonial utensils used by the ancestors and the bowls used by kings to worship mountains and rivers.

古文：又牙璋以起军旅，先儒谓 有鉏牙之饰于剡侧 ，不然也。
现代文：所谓 牙璋以起军旅 ，过去的学者认为它是刃口饰有突出牙状物的东西，是不对的。
English: In the past, scholars thought that the so-called "battle-axe" was something with a blade decorated with protruding teeth, but this is not true.

古文：牙璋，判合之器也，当于合处为牙，如今之合契。
现代文：牙璋，是一种能互相分合的东西，应当在可以相合之处制作牙，就好像现在的合契一样。
English: Gums are something that can fit together. Teeth should be made where they can fit together, just like the current fit.

古文：牙璋，牡契也，以起军旅，则其牝宜在军中，即虎符之法也。
现代文：牙璋，是有凸牙之器，既用以调发军队，则凹牙之器应该在军队中，这也就是虎符的方式。
English: The cusp is a tool with raised teeth. If it is used to dispatch an army, then a tool with concave teeth should be in the army. This is the way of the tiger charm.

古文：洛与落同义，谓水自上而下，有投流处。
现代文：洛与落的含义相同，是指该水流自上而下投流的地方。
English: Luo has the same meaning as Luo, and refers to the place where the water flows from top to bottom.

古文：今淝水、沱水，天下亦多，先儒皆自有解。
现代文：现在天下名为淝水、沱水的水流也很多，过去的学者都各有说法。
English: Nowadays, there are many watercourses in the world with the names of Surabaya and Surabaya. In the past, scholars had their own theories.

古文：解州盐泽，方百二十里。
现代文：解州的盐池，方圆有一百二十里。
English: There are a hundred and twenty miles around the salt ponds of Luzhou.

古文：久雨，四山之水悉注其中，未尝溢；大旱未尝涸。
现代文：雨多的时候，四面山里的水都流入池中，池水却从来没有满溢过；大旱的时候，池水也从来没有干涸过。
English: When there is a lot of rain, the water from the mountains on all sides flows into the pond, but the pond water has never overflowed; when there is a drought, the pond water has never dried up.

古文：卤色正赤，在版泉之下，俚俗谓之 蚩尤血 。
现代文：盐池咸水的颜色是纯红的，因为在版泉之下，所以民间俗称为 蚩尤血 。
English: The color of the salty water of the salt pond is pure red, because it is under the plate spring, so it is popularly known as the "Yuyu blood."

古文：唯中间有一泉，乃是甘泉，得此水然后可以聚人。
现代文：在盐池中部附近只有一处泉水是淡水泉，有了这一处泉水，人们才可以在这里聚集居住。
English: Near the middle of the salt pond, there is only one freshwater spring, and with this spring water, people can gather and live here.

古文：其北有尧梢音消水，一谓之巫咸河。
现代文：盐池的北面又有尧梢河，也称巫咸河。
English: To the north of the salt pond, there is another river, the Kunze River, also known as the Wuxian River.

古文：大卤之水，不得甘泉和之，不能成盐。
现代文：含盐量很高的咸水，如果不能与淡水泉的水混合，就不能结晶出盐来。
English: If salty water with a high salt content cannot be mixed with water from a freshwater spring, it cannot crystallize into salt.

古文：唯巫咸水入，则盐不復结，故人谓之 无咸河 ，为盐泽之患，筑大堤以防之，甚于备寇盗。
现代文：唯独巫咸河的水流入盐池，则盐池的水就不能再结晶，所以人们称这条河叫 无咸河 ，视为盐池的大祸害，筑起一条大堤防堵它，看得比防范贼寇强盗还要重。
English: However, if the water of the Wuxian River flows into the salt pond, the water of the salt pond can no longer crystallize, so people call this river the Wuxian River. It is regarded as the great scourge of the salt pond, and building a large dike to block it is considered more important than preventing thieves and robbers.

古文：原其理，盖巫咸乃浊水，入卤中，则淤淀卤脉，盐遂不成，非有他异也。《庄子》云： 程生马。 
现代文：推究其间的道理，大抵巫咸河的水是混浊的重水，流入咸水之后，就会因为淤淀而造成咸水上源的阻塞，从而使得咸水的含盐量降低而不能结晶，并无其他特别的原因。《庄子》书中说： 程生马。 
English: According to the reasoning, most of the water of the Wuxi Aral River is turbid heavy water. After flowing into the salty water, the blockage of the source of the salty water will be caused by siltation, which will reduce the salt content of the salty water and prevent it from crystallizing. There is no other special reason. The book "Zhuangzi" says: Cheng Shengma.

古文：尝观《文字注》： 秦人谓豹曰程。 
现代文：曾翻阅《文字注》一书，其注中谈到： 秦人把豹叫做程。 
English: He once read the book "Text Note," which mentioned in the note: Qin people called the leopard Cheng.

古文：余至延州，人至今谓虎豹为 程 ，盖言 虫 也。
现代文：我到延州任职时，见那里的人至今还把虎豹叫做 程 ，大概说的是 虫 。
English: When I went to work in Yanzhou, the people there still call the tiger and leopard "Cheng," which is roughly equivalent to "insect."

古文：方言如此，抑亦旧俗也。
现代文：此类方言，或者也是沿袭旧时风俗而来的。
English: Such dialects may also have come from old customs.

古文：《唐六典》述五行，有禄命、驿马、湴河之目。
现代文：《唐六典》述说五行，有禄、命、驿马、湴河等名目。
English: "Tang Six Classics" describes the five elements, with names such as "luke," "life," "horse" and "river."

古文：人多不晓湴河之义。
现代文：人们大多不知道湴河的含义。
English: Most people don't know the meaning of Luohe.

古文：余在鄜延，见安南行营诸将阅兵马藉，有称 过范河损失 。
现代文：我在鄜延任职时，看见安南行营将领们检阅兵马的册籍，有 过范河损失 的说法。
English: When I was serving in Zhenyan, I saw the commanders of Annan's battalion inspecting the registers of soldiers and horses, saying that there had been losses in the Fanhe River.

古文：问其何谓 范何 ？
现代文：我问他们为什么叫 范河 ？
English: I asked them why they were called Fanhe?

古文：乃越人谓淖沙为 范河 ，北人谓之 活沙 。
现代文：原来南方人把泥沼叫做 范河 ，北方人则叫做 活沙 。
English: Originally, southerners called the quagmire the Fan River, while northerners called it quicksand.

古文：余尝过无定河，度活沙，人马履之，百步之外皆动，澒澒然如人行幕上。
现代文：我曾经过无定河，穿越过活沙，人马走在上面百步以外都动起来，晃晃荡荡就像走在帐幕上一样。
English: I have crossed the Muding River and the quicksand. People and horses move when they walk more than a hundred paces above it. It is like walking on a tent.

古文：其下足处虽甚坚，若遇其一陷，则人马蹻车，应时皆没，至有数百人平陷无孑遗者。
现代文：落脚的地方虽然比较坚硬，但如果一遇到塌陷，人、马、驼、车立刻就会陷没，甚至有好几百人全被淹没而没有一个剩下的。
English: Although the landing place is relatively hard, if a collapse occurs, people, horses, camels, and cars will immediately sink, and even several hundred people will be completely submerged without a single one remaining.

古文：或谓：此即流沙也。又谓：沙随风流，谓之流沙。湴，字书亦作 埿 。
现代文：有人说这就是流沙；也有人说沙随着风流动叫做流沙。 湴 ，在字书里也写作 埿 。
English: Some people say that this is quicksand; others say that sand flowing with the wind is called quicksand.

古文：蒲滥反。按古文，埿，深泥也。
现代文：根据古文，埿，是深泥的意思。
English: According to the ancient text, "" means "deep mud."

古文：本书有湴河者，盖谓陷运，如今之 空亡 也。
现代文：术数书中有湴河，是指厄运，就像现在所说的 空亡 。
English: In the book of Chinese numerals, there is a river called Fenhe, which refers to bad luck, just like what is now called empty death.

古文：古人藏书辟蠹用芸。
现代文：古人藏书用芸香来防蛀虫。
English: The ancients used perfumes in their book collections to ward off aphids.

古文：芸，香草也，今人谓之七里香者是也。
现代文：芸香是一种香草，就是如今人说的七里香。
English: Geisha is a kind of vanilla, which is what people call clootie nowadays.

古文：叶类豌豆，作小丛生，其叶极芬香，秋间叶间微白如粉污，辟蠹殊验。
现代文：它的叶子类似于豌豆叶，小丛生长。叶子十分芳香，秋后叶子间微微发白如同用面粉涂抹过一样，用它防蛀虫有特效。
English: Its leaves are similar to pea leaves, and small clusters grow. The leaves are very fragrant, and after autumn, there is a slight whitening between the leaves as if they had been coated with flour. Using it to prevent aphids has a special effect.

古文：南人采置席下，能去蚤虱。
现代文：南方人采来放在席下，可以除跳蚤、虱子。
English: Nanfang people collect it and put it under the seat, which can remove fleas and lice.

古文：余判昭文馆时，曾得数株于潞公家，移植秘阁后，今不復有存者。
现代文：我担任判昭文馆事时，曾在文彦博家求得了许多株芸香，移植到秘阁后面，现在没有存活的了。
English: When I was in charge of the Zhan Zhaowen Museum, I obtained many incense plants from the home of Wen Yanbo and transplanted them to the back of the cabinet, but they are no longer alive.

古文：香草之类，大率多异名，所谓兰荪，荪，即今菖蒲是也；蕙，今零陵香是也；茞，今白芷是也。
现代文：香草这类东西，大体上都有别的名字，如所谓兰荪，荪就是今天的菖蒲；蕙就是今天的零陵香；苣就是今天的白芷。
English: Things like vanilla generally have other names, such as the so-called orchid, which is today's iris; today's mallow; today's lily of the valley; today's egret.

古文：祭礼有腥、燖、熟三献。
现代文：祭礼中有腥、焊、熟三种献祭品。
English: There are three kinds of sacrificial offerings at the festival: boiled, welded, and cooked.

古文：旧说以谓腥、燖备太古、中古之礼，余以为不然。
现代文：过去的说法认为腥、焊是具备了远古、中古之礼，我认为不是这样的。
English: In the past, it was said that ware and soldering were ancient and medieval, but I don't think that's true.

古文：先王之于死者，以为之无知则不仁，以之为有知则不智。
现代文：先王对于死者，以为他们无知就算不上仁，认为他们有知就算不上智。
English: For the dead, the ancients believed that their ignorance was not benevolence, and that their knowledge was not wisdom.

古文：荐可食之熟，所以为仁；不可食之腥、燖，所以为智。
现代文：献祭可食用的熟食是为了表示仁；献祭不可食的腥、焊，是为了表示智。
English: The sacrifice of edible cooked food is to show benevolence; the sacrifice of inedible meat is to show wisdom.

古文：又一说，腥、燖以鬼道接之，馈食以人道接之，致疑也。
现代文：又有一种说法，腥、焊是以鬼神的行为规范来对待他们，熟食是以生人的行为规范来对待他们，以使他们迷惑。
English: There is also a saying that ghost and solder are treated according to the behavioral norms of ghosts and gods, and cooked food is treated according to the behavioral norms of living people, so as to confuse them.

古文：或谓鬼神嗜腥、燖，此虽出于异说，圣人知鬼神之情状，或有此理，未可致诘。
现代文：有人说鬼神喜好腥、焊，这虽然是出于经义之外的说法，但圣人了解鬼神的情况，或者有它的道理，不能怀疑否定它。
English: Some people say that ghosts and gods like to get drunk, although this is a statement outside the meaning of the sutras, but saints understand the situation of ghosts and gods, or have a reason for it, and cannot doubt or deny it.

古文：世以玄为浅黑色，璊为赭玉，皆不然也。
现代文：世人认为玄是浅黑色，璊是赭色的玉，都是不对的。
English: The world thinks that Xuan is light black, and Zou is an amber-colored jade, but they are both wrong.

古文：玄乃赤黑色，燕羽是也，故谓之玄鸟。
现代文：玄是赤黑色，燕子的羽毛就是这种颜色，所以被称为玄鸟。
English: The swan is reddish-black, and the swallow's feathers are this color, so it is called the swan bird.

古文：熙宁中，京师贵人戚里，多衣深紫色。谓之黑紫，与皂相乱，几不可分，乃所谓玄也。
现代文：熙宁年间，京师的贵人和皇亲国戚多穿深紫色衣服，而称为黑紫，与黑色相混，几乎不可分别，这也是一种人们所称的玄色。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, the nobles of Beijing and the relatives of the imperial family mostly wore dark purple clothes, which was called black purple, mixed with black, almost indistinguishable, which is also a kind of dark color.

古文：穈色在朱黄之间，似乎赭，极光莹，掬之粲，泽熠熠如赤珠。
现代文：璊是赭色，所以《诗经》里说 毳衣如璊 。有一种稷子的米是璊色的，这种稷子叫做穈。穈的颜色在朱黄之间，与赭色相似，极为光洁晶莹，捧在手上鲜亮有光泽，熠熠生辉如赤色宝珠。
English: There is a kind of hazelnut rice that is hazelnut-colored, and this hazelnut is called ginger. The color of ginger is between vermilion and yellow, similar to ginger. It is extremely bright and shiny, and when held in the hand, it is bright and shiny, shining like a red jewel.

古文：此自是一色，似赭非赭。
现代文：这自是一种颜色，似赭色而非赭色。
English: It is a colour in its own right, resembling indigo rather than amber.

古文：盖所谓璊，色名也，而从玉，以其赭而泽，故以谕之也。犹鴘以色名而从鸟，以鸟色谕之也。
现代文：大抵所谓 璊 是一种颜色的名称，而其字以 玉 为部首，是因为它近乎赭色而有光泽，故以玉来比喻它；这也如同 鴘 也用作一种颜色的名称，而其字以 鸟 为部首，也是用这种鸟的颜色来比喻它。
English: For the most part, the so-called  is the name of a color, and the word with 玉 as its head is because it is almost  and shiny, so it is likened to a jade; this is just as  is also used as the name of a color, and the word with 鸟 as its head is also used to liken it to the color of this bird.

古文：世间锻铁所谓钢铁者，用柔铁屈盘之，乃以生铁陷其间，泥封炼之，锻令相入，谓之 团钢 ，亦谓之 灌钢 。
现代文：世上锻铁所称的钢铁，是先把熟铁弯曲盘卷起来，又将生铁陷入其中，然后用泥包裹好加以烧炼，炼好后再加锻打，使熟铁和生铁互相掺杂渗透，这样锻炼出来的钢就称为 团钢 ，也叫 灌钢 。
English: The world's wrought iron, known as steel, is made by first rolling up a bent plate of wrought iron, and then sinking pig iron into it, and then wrapping it in mud to be refined. After refining, it is then forged, so that the wrought iron and pig iron are mixed and permeated with each other. The steel that is tempered in this way is called "gang steel," also known as "poured steel."

古文：此乃伪钢耳，暂假生铁以为坚，二三炼则生铁自熟，仍是柔铁。
现代文：这其实是一种假钢，只不过暂时借生铁提高熟铁的硬度，经过两三次烧炼之后，生铁自然变熟，则得到的还是熟铁。
English: This is actually a kind of fake steel, but temporarily using pig iron to increase the hardness of wrought iron. After two or three times of firing, the pig iron naturally matures, and the result is still wrought iron.

古文：然而天下莫以为非者，盖未识真钢耳。
现代文：然而天下人都不以为这办法有什么不对，大概是由于不知道什么是真钢。
English: However, people around the world do not think there is anything wrong with this method, probably because they do not know what real steel is.

古文：余出使，至磁州锻坊，观炼铁，方识真钢。
现代文：我出使河北时，曾到磁州的锻坊看炼铁，才知道什么是真钢。
English: When I was on a mission to Hebei Province, I went to the forge in Zhengzhou to see how iron was made. Only then did I know what real steel was.

古文：凡铁之有钢者，如面中有筋，濯尽柔面，则面筋乃见。
现代文：凡是铁里面含有钢的，如同小麦面粉和成的面团里头有面筋，把面团的软面洗干净了，才会见到面筋。
English: All iron contains steel inside, just as wheat flour and the resulting dough contain gluten. Only when the soft side of the dough is washed clean will you see the gluten.

古文：炼钢亦然，但取精铁，锻之百余火，每锻称之，一锻一轻，至累锻而斤两不减，则纯钢也，虽百炼不耗矣。
现代文：炼钢也是这样，只要取精纯的熟铁烧炼锻打百余火，每次锻打都称称重量，锻一回轻一回，直到屡次锻打而斤两不减，那就是纯钢了，即使再炼上百次也将不会再有损耗。
English: The same is true of steelmaking. As long as pure wrought iron is taken to the furnace, burned, and forged over hundreds of fires, the weight is weighed each time it is forged, and the weight of each forging is weighed, until it is repeatedly forged and the weight is not reduced, that is pure steel. Even if it is refined hundreds of times, there will be no further loss.

古文：此乃铁之精纯者，其色清明，磨莹之，则黯黯然青且黑，与常铁迥异。
现代文：这是最精纯的铁，其成色看上去清澈有光亮，而磨光之后又显得暗暗的，青而且黑，和普通的铁迥然不同。
English: This is the purest iron, its color looks clear and bright, and after polishing it looks dark, blue and black, very different from ordinary iron.

古文：亦有炼之至尽而全无钢者，皆系地之所产。
现代文：也有铁炼尽了而全无钢的，这都和铁的产地有关系。
English: There is also iron that has been refined and is completely steel-free, which all has to do with the place of origin of the iron.

古文：余家有阎博陵画唐秦府十八学士，各有真赞，亦唐人书，多与旧史不同：姚柬字思廉，旧史乃姚思廉字简之。
现代文：我家中藏有阎立本所画的唐初秦王府十八学士图，每图各有姓字爵里及画像赞，也是唐人撰文题写的，而多与《旧唐书》的记载不同。姚柬字思廉，《旧唐书》则作姚思廉字简之。
English: In my home, I have Yan Liben's drawing of the 18 academicians of the Qin Dynasty in the early Tang Dynasty. Each drawing has a family name and a picture praise. They are also inscribed by Chinese people, but most of them are different from the records of the "Old Tang Book." Yao CAM is the character Siliang, while the "Old Tang Book" is the character Yao Siliang.

古文：苏台、陆元朗、薛庄，《唐书》皆以字为名。
现代文：苏壹、陆元朗、薛庄，《旧唐书》皆以他们的字为名。
English: Su Yi, Lu Yuan Lang, Xue Zhuang, and "Old Tang Book" are all named after their characters.

古文：李玄道、盖文达、于志宁、许敬宗、刘教孙、蔡允恭，《唐书》皆不书字。
现代文：李玄道、盖文达、于志宁、许敬宗、刘孝孙、蔡允恭，《旧唐书》则都没有记录他们的字。
English: Li Xuan Dao, Ge Wenda, Yu Zhining, Xu Jingzong, Liu Xiaosun, Cai Yunqong, and their words are not recorded in the "Old Tang Book."

古文：房玄龄字乔年，《唐书》乃房乔字玄龄。
现代文：房玄龄字乔年，《旧唐书》却作房乔字玄龄。
English: Fang Xuanling is the character for the year of the rooster, but the "Old Tang Book" is the character for the year of the rooster.

古文：孔颖达字颖达，《唐书》字仲达。
现代文：孔颖达字颖达，《旧唐书》记载他字仲达。
English: Kong Yingda's name was Yingda, and the "Old Tang Book" recorded that his name was Zhongda.

古文：苏典签名旭，《唐书》乃勖。
现代文：苏典签本名从日从九的 旭 ，《旧唐书》却写作从日从助的 勖 。
English: Su Dian signed his real name as "Xu" from "日" and "九" from "九," but the "Old Tang Book" was written as "" from "日" and "助."

古文：许敬宗、薛庄官皆直记室，《唐书》乃摄记室。
现代文：许敬宗、薛庄的官职都是直记室，《旧唐书》却作摄记室。
English: The official posts of Xu Jingzong and Xue Zhuang are direct recording rooms, but the "Old Tang Book" is a recording room.

古文：盖《唐书》成于后人之手，所传容有讹谬；此乃当时所记也。
现代文：大抵《旧唐书》成书于后人之手，所传述的免不了会有讹谬，而这幅十八学士图的附加文字则是当时的记录。
English: Most of the "Old Tang Dynasty Books" were written by later generations, and what was passed down inevitably contained fallacies. The additional text on this 18th-century academic map is a record of that time.

古文：以旧史考之，魏郑公对太宗云： 目如悬铃者佳。 
现代文：以旧史考之，魏郑公曾对太宗说： 目如悬铃者佳。 
English: According to the old historical research, Wei Zheng Gong once said to Taizong: Eyes like hanging bells are good.

古文：则玄龄果名，非字也。
现代文：则玄龄确是房氏的名，而不是他的字。
English: However, Xuanling is indeed Fang's name, not his surname.

古文：然苏世长，太宗召对玄武门，问云： 卿何名长意短？ 
现代文：然而苏世长，高祖曾在玄武门召见他，问他说： 您为何名为长而见识短？ 
English: However, Su Shichang, Gaozhu once summoned him at the Xuanwu Gate and asked him: "Why do you have a long name but a short sight?"

古文：后乃为学士，似为学士时，方更名耳。
现代文：他后来才成为十八学士之一，似乎是在为学士时才改名壹的。
English: It was only later that he became one of the eighteen bachelors, and it seems that he only changed his name when he became a bachelor.

古文：唐贞观中，敕下度支求杜若，省郎以谢朓诗云： 芳洲采杜若。 乃责坊州贡之。当时以为嗤笑。
现代文：唐贞观年间，诏令户部寻觅杜若，承办官员竟根据谢朓 芳洲采杜若 的诗句，要坊州进贡，当时曾传为笑谈。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengguan of the Tang Dynasty, the imperial edict ordered the household department to search for Du Rong, and the hosting officials actually asked for a tribute from Fangzhou according to the poem of Xie Yu Fangzhou. At that time, it was rumored to be a joke.

古文：至如唐故事，中书省中植紫薇花，何异坊州贡杜若，然历世循之，不以为非。
现代文：而像有唐一代沿为成例的在中书省署内种植紫薇花，其性质和要坊州进贡杜若没什么两样，却被历代因循，不觉得不对。
English: However, it is not wrong for successive generations to follow the example of the Tang generation, who planted mauve flowers in the General Office of the General Office of the People's Republic of China.

古文：至今舍人院紫微阁前植紫薇花，用唐故事也。
现代文：现在中书省舍人院的紫薇阁前植紫薇花，就是袭用唐代的成例。
English: The planting of mauve flowers in front of Ziwei Pavilion of the People's Literature Academy of the People's Literature Academy of the People's Literature Academy of the People's Literature Academy of the People's Literature Academy of the People's Literature Academy of the People's Literature Academy.

古文：汉人有饮酒一石不乱。
现代文：汉代有人饮酒一石不醉。
English: In the Han Dynasty, some people drank a stone of alcohol without getting drunk.

古文：余以制酒法较之，每粗米二斛，酿成酒六斛六斗。
现代文：我以酿酒法考校，汉代用二斛粗米能够酿出六斛六斗酒。
English: I used the brewing method to test the school. In the Han Dynasty, two stalks of coarse rice could brew six stalks and six barrels of wine.

古文：今酒之至醨者，每秫一斛，不过成酒一斛五斗，若如汉法，则粗有酒气而已。能饮者饮多不乱，宜无足怪。
现代文：现在最薄的酒，用一斛粘高粱米，不过能酿成一斛五斗。若采取汉代那种酿法，则不过稍微有些酒味而已，能饮者饮多了也不醉，应该无足为怪。
English: Nowadays, the thinnest wine is made from a stalk of sticky high-glutinous rice, but it can be brewed into a stalk of five bu. If you take the Han Dynasty brewing method, it is only slightly alcoholic, and those who can drink more are not drunk, which should not be surprising.

古文：然汉之一斛，亦是今之二斗七升。人之腹中，亦何容置二斗七升水邪？
现代文：但汉代的一斛，也相当于今天的二斗七升，人的肚子里又如何容得下二斗七升水？
English: However, a gourd in the Han Dynasty was equivalent to today's two-dozen-and-seven-liter jars. How can a human stomach hold two-dozen-and-seven-liter jars of water?

古文：或谓： 石乃钧石之石，百二十斤。 以今秤计之，当三十二斤，亦今之三斗酒也。
现代文：或说饮酒一石指的是作为重量单位的石，即一百二十斤，用今天的秤来换算，相当于三十二斤，那也等于现在的三斗酒。
English: Or to say that drinking a stone refers to the stone as a unit of weight, that is, one hundred and twenty pounds, converted by today's scales, equivalent to thirty-two pounds, which is also equal to the current three buckets of wine.

古文：于定国食酒数石不乱，疑无此理。
现代文：史书上说于定国饮酒数石不醉，恐怕没有这样的道理。
English: The history books say that in Dingguo, drinking a few stones will not make you drunk, but I'm afraid there is no such reason.

古文：古说济水伏流地中，今历下凡发地皆是流水，世传济水经过其下。
现代文：过去有说济水消失后是在地下潜流的。现在历下一带，只要掘地就都是流水，世人相传是因为济水经过其地下。
English: In the past, it was said that after the water of life disappeared, it flowed underground. Now, throughout the next area, as long as the ground is excavated, it is flowing water, and the world is said to be because the water of life passed through its underground.

古文：东阿亦济水所经，取井水煮胶，谓之 阿胶 ；用搅浊水则清。
现代文：东阿也是济水经过的地方，这里的人们取井水熬胶，称之为 阿胶 ；将阿胶放入浊水中搅动，浊水就会变清。
English: Dong'a is also a place where the water supply passes through. People here take well water and boil it to make glue, which they call ejiao. Put the ejiao into the irrigation water and stir it, and the irrigation water will become clear.

古文：人服之，下膈、疏痰、止吐，皆取济水性趋下清而重，故以治淤浊及逆上之疾。
现代文：人服用阿胶，能够疏通食气、化痰、止呕吐。这些都是利用了济水更趋下的天然性质，其水清而不滞，重而不浊，因此被用于治疗食气淤滞混浊、不能通下的病症。
English: When people take ejiao, they are able to clear their gas, dissolve phlegm, and stop vomiting. These are all using the natural properties of water. Its water is clear but not stagnant, and heavy but not salty. Therefore, it is used to treat gas congestion, cloudiness, and inability to pass gas.

古文：今医方不载此意。
现代文：现在医家的药方书没有记载这层意思。
English: Currently, doctors' prescriptions do not include this information.

古文：宗庙之祭西向者，室中之祭也。
现代文：宗庙祭祀时向西南行礼，是在室内的祭奠。
English: At the time of the ancestral temple's ritual, a bow is made to the southwest, which is the best way to pay homage indoors.

古文：藏主于西壁，以其生者之处奥也。
现代文：神主收藏在西面的墙壁，因为那儿是活人居处的部位。
English: The god is kept in the west wall, because that's where the living quarters are.

古文：即主祏而求之，所以西向而祭。
现代文：对着藏神主的石室而祈祷，所以要向西面祭奠。
English: Since we pray facing the stone chamber of the enshrined deity, we should pray facing the west.

古文：至三献则尸出于室，坐于户西南面，此堂上之祭也。
现代文：三献之后尸从室里出来，坐在门户的西侧面向南，这是在堂上的祭奠。
English: After the third offering, the corpse came out of the room and sat on the west side of the portal facing south. This was the offering in the hall.

古文：户西谓扆，设扆于此。
现代文：门户以西称为扆，因为扆设在那儿。
English: And the gate on the west is called The Skull, because there the Skull is.

古文：左户、右牖，户、牖之间谓之扆。
现代文：门户以西，窗子以东，门户与窗户之间叫做扆。
English: To the west of the doorway, to the east of the window, and between the doorway and the window is called the ridge.

古文：坐于户西，即当扆而坐也。
现代文：坐在门户的西侧，就是背靠扆而坐。
English: If you sit on the west side of the portal, you are sitting with your back to the dragonfly.

古文：上堂设位而亦东向者，设用室中之礼也。
现代文：到了堂上位次也要朝向东面，是设置位次用室内祭奠的礼节。
English: When arriving at the upper tier of the hall, they should also face east, which is the etiquette for setting the tier for indoor worship.

古文：《庄子》言： 野马也，尘埃也。 乃是两物。
现代文：《庄子》书中说到 野马也，尘埃也 ，指的是两种东西。
English: In the book of Zhuang Zi, when it says wild horses and dust, it refers to two things.

古文：古人即谓野马为尘埃，如吴融云： 动梁间之野马。 又韩偓云： 窗里日光飞野马。 皆以尘为野马，恐不然也。
现代文：前人即有以为 野马 就是尘埃的，如吴融说 动梁间之野马 ，又韩偓也说 窗里日光飞野马 ，都以尘埃为 野马 ，恐怕不是这样。 野马 其实就是田野间的浮气。
English: The ancients thought that wild horses were made of dust, for example, Wu Rong said, "Wild horses moving between beams," and Han Zheng also said, "Wild horses flying in the sunlight in the window," both using dust as wild horses, but I'm afraid this is not the case.

古文：野马乃田野间浮气耳，远望如羣马，又如水波，佛书谓 如热时野马阳焰 ，即此物也。
现代文：这种浮气远望如群马，又像水波，佛书上称酷热时的 阳焰 如 野马 ，就是这种东西。
English: This kind of buoyant air looks far and wide like a herd of horses, and also like water waves. The Buddhist scriptures say that the sun's flame when it is extremely hot is like a wild horse. This is the kind of thing.

古文：十神太一：一曰太一，次曰五福太一，三曰天一太一，四曰地太一，五曰君基太一，六曰臣基太一，七曰民基太一，八曰大游太一，九曰九气太一，十曰十神太一。
现代文：太一十神：一是太一，二是五福太一，三是天一太一，四是地一太一，五是君基太一，六是臣基太一，七是民基太一，八是大游太一，九是九气太一，十是十神太一。
English: There are ten major deities: the first is Taiyi, the second is Wufu Taiyi, the third is Tianyi Taiyi, the fourth is Earth Taiyi, the fifth is Junji Taiyi, the sixth is Zongji Taiyi, the seventh is Minji Taiyi, the eighth is Dayu Taiyi, the ninth is Jiuqi Taiyi, and the tenth is Jishin Taiyi.

古文：唯太一最尊，更无别名，止谓之太一。三年一移。
现代文：唯有太一最尊贵，再没有别名，只称为太一，每三年移一次宫。
English: Only the Most Exalted Lady, who has no other name but Lady, moves her palace every three years.

古文：后人以其别无名，遂对大游而谓之小游太一，此出于后人误加之。
现代文：后人因为太一没有别名，就相对大游太一而称它为小游太一，这是后人误加在它头上的。
English: Later generations, because Taichi had no other name, called him Xiaoyu Taichi instead of Dayu Taichi, which was mistakenly put on his head by later generations.

古文：京师东西太一宫，正殿祠五福，而太一乃在廊庑，甚为失序。
现代文：京城的东太一宫、西太一宫，正殿供奉五福太一，而太一却供在偏殿，很是次序颠倒。
English: In the East Taichi-gu Shrine and the West Taichi-gu Shrine in Kyoto, the main hall is dedicated to Wofuku Taichi, while Taichi is offered in the side hall, which is quite a reversal of the order.

古文：熙宁中，初营中太一宫，下太史考定神位。余时领太史，预其议论。
现代文：熙宁年间，开始营建中太一宫，朝廷下令由太史考定神位，我当时任太史，参与了这一讨论。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, when the construction of the Zhongtaiyi Palace began, the imperial court ordered that the god's throne be determined by the Grand Historian. I was the Grand Historian at the time and took part in this discussion.

古文：今前殿祠五福，而太一别为后殿，各全其尊，深为得礼。
现代文：现在中太一宫前殿供奉五福太一，而另外修筑后殿供奉太一，各自顾全了他们的尊贵，很是得体。
English: Now, the front hall of the Chūtaichi-gu Shrine is dedicated to Wofuku Taichi, while the additional rear hall is dedicated to Taichi. Each has taken care of their dignity, which is very appropriate.

古文：然君基、臣基、民基，避唐明帝讳改为 棋 ，至今仍袭旧名，未曾改正。
现代文：然而君基太一、臣基太一、民基太一中的 基 字，因避唐明帝讳改为 棋 字，至今仍然沿袭旧名，未曾改正。
English: However, the Chinese characters of Junji Taichi, Sunji Taichi, and Minji Taichi were changed to the Chinese characters of "棋" in order to avoid the taboos of the Tang and Ming dynasties, and they still follow the old names and have not been corrected.

古文：余嘉祐中客宣州宁国县，县人有方玙者，其高祖方虔，为杨行密守将，总兵戍宁国，以备两浙。
现代文：嘉祐年间我客居在宣州宁国县，县里有个人叫方玛，他的高祖方虔是杨行密的守将，领兵戍守宁国县以防备两浙的吴越国。
English: During the Jiayu era, I stayed in Ningguo County, Xuanzhou. There was a man named Fangma in the county. His great-great-grandfather Fangqian was Yang Xingmi's guard captain. He led the troops to guard Ningguo County in order to protect Wuyue Province in Zhejiang.

古文：虔后为吴人所擒，其子从训代守宁国，故子孙至今为宁国人。
现代文：方虔后被吴越人所擒，他的儿子方从训替代他的位置镇守宁国县，所以他们的子孙至今是宁国县人。
English: Fang Qian was later abducted by Wu Yue people, and his son Fang Zongxun took his place to guard Ningguo County, so their descendants are still Ningguo County people.

古文：有杨溥与方虔、方从训手教数十纸，纸扎皆精善。
现代文：方玛有杨溥与方虔、方从训的手教几十封，纸张都很精美。
English: Fangma has dozens of manuals from Yang Hui, Fang Qian and Fang Congxun, and the papers are all exquisite.

古文：教称委曲书，押处称 使 ，或称 吴王 。
现代文：手教称 委曲 ，签名处称 使 ，或称 吴王 。
English: The teacher is called 委曲, and the signature is called 使, or 吴王.

古文：内一纸报方虔云： 钱镠此月内已亡殁 。
现代文：其中一封通报方虔说： 钱镠此月内已亡殁。 
English: In one of the notifications, Fang Qian said: Qian Ye passed away this month.

古文：纸尾书 正月二十九日。 
现代文：手教末尾写着 正月二十九日 。
English: At the end of the manual, it says the 29th day of the first month.

古文：按《五代史》，钱镠以后唐长兴二年卒，杨溥天成四年已僭即伪位，岂得长兴二年尚称 吴王 ？
现代文：查考《五代史》，钱谬在后唐长兴三年逝世，杨溥在天成二年已经自行称帝，怎么会在长兴三年还自称 吴王 ？
English: According to the "History of the Five Dynasties," Qian Mu died three years after the Tang Dynasty in Changxing, and Yang Zhe proclaimed himself emperor in Tiancheng Year Two. How could he still call himself King Wu in Changxing Year Three?

古文：溥手教所指挥事甚详，翰墨印记，极有次序，悉是当时亲迹。
现代文：杨溥手教中所命令的事情很详细，字迹和印记极有次序，全是当时的亲笔。
English: The things that were ordered during Yang Xuan's apprenticeship were very detailed, and the handwriting and markings were very orderly. They were all handwritten at the time.

古文：今按，天成四年歳庚寅，长兴三年歳壬辰，计差二年。
现代文：据今天的查考，天成二年是丁亥年，长兴三年是壬辰年，相差五年。
English: According to today's investigation, Tiancheng 2nd year is Dinghai year, Changxing 3rd year is Renchen year, a difference of five years.

古文：溥手教，余得其四纸，至今家藏。
现代文：杨溥的手教，我获得了四封，至今还收藏在家。
English: I received four copies of Yang Mi's manual, and I still have them at home.

