古文：○崔暹子达高德政崔昂崔暹，字季伦，博陵安平人，汉尚书寔之后也，世为北州著姓。
现代文：崔暹，字季伦，博陵安平人，是汉代尚书崔塞的后人，世代为北州大姓。父亲崔穆，为州主簿。
English: Cui Siam, surnamed Ji Lun, born in Boling Anping, was a descendant of the Han Dynasty Shangshu Cui Sai, and was the eldest son of Beizhou. His father, Cui Mu, was the governor of Beizhou.

古文：父穆，州主簿。暹少为书生，避地渤海，依高乾，以妹妻乾弟慎。
现代文：崔暹年少时为读书人，避地到渤海，依附于高干，把妹妹嫁给高干的弟弟高慎作妻子。
English: As a young man, Cui Siem was a reader. He fled to the Bohai Sea, attached himself to Gao Gan, and married his sister to Gao Gan's brother, Gao Sheng.

古文：慎后临光州，启暹为长史。
现代文：高慎后来监临光州，启奏崔暹为长史。
English: Gao Sheng later supervised Lin Gwangju, and the opening of Choi Siem was a long history.

古文：赵郡公琛镇定州，辟为开府谘议。
现代文：趟郡公高琛镇守定州，征召为开府谘议。
English: Gaojun Town, the county seat, was summoned to Dingzhou for consultation on the establishment of the prefecture.

古文：随琛往晋阳，高祖与语说之，以兼丞相长史。
现代文：跟随高琛到晋阳，高祖与他谈话而喜欢他，让他兼任丞相长史。
English: Gaozu followed Gao Yao to Jinyang. Gao Zu talked with Gao Yao and liked him so much that he made Gao Yao concurrently the prime minister.

古文：高祖举兵将入洛，留暹佐琛知后事。
现代文：高祖起兵将进入洛，留崔退辅助高琛掌管后方事务。
English: Gaozhu's army will enter Luo, leaving Cui Bei to assist Gaozhu in taking charge of the rear affairs.

古文：谓之曰： 丈夫相知，岂在新旧。
现代文：对他说： 大丈夫相知，难道在于新旧。
English: I said to him, "It's okay to know each other, isn't it because of the old and the new."

古文：军戎事重，留守任切，家弟年少，未闲事宜，凡百后事，一以相属。 
现代文：军队的事情很重要，留守的任务也很关键，家弟年少，不熟悉事宜，各项后事，一概相托。 
English: The military affairs are very important, and the tasks left behind are also very important. My younger brother is young, he is not familiar with the matters, and he has to take care of all the after-effects.

古文：握手殷勤，至于三四。
现代文：殷勤握手，至于再三。
English: A cordial handshake, as for repeatedly.

古文：后迁左丞、吏部郎，主议《麟趾格》。
现代文：后升任左丞、吏部郎，主持议定《麟趾格》。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Sajo (Left Assistant Secretary) and Ritsuburo (Administrative Officer), and presided over the negotiation of the "Rinji Code."

古文：暹亲遇日隆，好荐人士。言邢邵宜任府僚，兼任机密，世宗因以征邵，甚见亲重。
现代文：崔暹受皇帝恩遇一天比一天深厚，喜欢推荐贤士，说邢邵应在府僚任职，兼掌机密之事，世宗因此召邢邵，很受亲近重用。
English: Cui Siam's favor with the emperor became more and more profound day by day. He liked to recommend sages and said that Yao Shao should serve as a government official and be in charge of confidential matters. Shizong therefore summoned Yao Shao and was very close to him.

古文：言论之际，邵遂毁暹。
现代文：言谈之际，邢邵就毁谤崔暹。
English: While they were talking, Zou Shao slandered Cui Siam.

古文：世宗不悦，谓暹曰： 卿说子才之长，子才专言卿短，此痴人也。 
现代文：世宗不高兴，对崔暹说： 你讲子才的长处，子才专讲你的短处，这是个子庸之人。 
English: Sejong was not happy and said to Choi Siem, "You only talk about your strengths, and your son only talks about your weaknesses. This is a mediocre person."

古文：暹曰： 子才言暹短，暹说子才长，皆是实事，不为嫌也。 
现代文：崔暹说： 子才讲崔暹的短处，崔暹讲子才的长处，都是实事，不算是嫌疑。 
English: Choi Siam said: Choi Siam's weaknesses, as told by his son, and Choi Siam's strengths, as told by his son, are real things, not suspicions.

古文：高慎之叛，与暹有隙，高祖欲杀之，世宗救免。
现代文：高慎叛乱，与崔暹有关联，高祖要杀他，世宗救而得免。
English: Gaozhen rebelled and was associated with Cui Siam. Gaozhu wanted to kill him, but Shizong was spared.

古文：武定初，迁御史中尉，选毕义云、卢潜、宋钦道、李愔、崔瞻、杜蕤、嵇晔、郦伯伟、崔子武、李广皆为御史，世称其知人。
现代文：武定初年，升任御史中尉，选拔毕义云、卢潜、宋钦道、李惰、崔瞻、杜蕤、嵇晔、鄘伯伟、崔子武、李广皆作了御史，世人称赞他知人善任。
English: In the first year of Wuding, he was promoted to lieutenant of imperial history, and selected Bi Yiyun, Lu Xuan, Song Qin Dao, Li Nian, Cui Zhan, Du Wei, Zou Bo Wei, Cui Ziwu, and Li Guang to be imperial historians, and the world praised him for being a good friend.

古文：世宗欲遐暹威势，诸公在坐，令暹高视徐步，两人掣裾而入，世宗分庭对揖。暹不让席而坐，觞再行，便辞退。
现代文：世宗想给予崔暹威势。诸公在座，让崔暹高扬着头，慢步走，两人扯着衣襟进殿，世宗与崔暹分处庭中，相对行礼，崔暹不让席而自己坐下，行了两次酒，便辞退。
English: Sejong wanted to give power to Choi Siam. When the princes were present, they asked Choi Siam to hold her head high and walk slowly. The two of them entered the hall with their arms around each other's necks. Sejong and Choi Siam separated in the middle of the court and bowed to each other. Choi Siam refused to give up her seat and sat down on her own. They had two drinks and then declined.

古文：世宗曰： 下官薄有蔬食，愿公少留。 
现代文：世宗说： 下官薄备蔬食，愿公少作停留。 
English: Sejong said, "Lower-ranking officials should prepare vegetable food sparingly, and officials should stay home less often."

古文：暹曰： 适受敕在台检校。 
现代文：崔暹说： 适逢受皇帝之命在台检校。 
English: Cui Siam said: It was a good time to be ordered by the emperor to inspect the school in Taiwan.

古文：遂不待食而去，世宗降阶送之。
现代文：于是不等吃饭而离去，世宗下台阶送他。
English: So he left without waiting for dinner, and Shizong walked down the steps to see him off.

古文：旬日后，世宗与诸公出之东山，遇暹于道，前驱为赤棒所击，世宗回马避之。
现代文：十后，世宗与诸公外出到东山遇到崔暹，前导为崔暹仪仗中的赤棒所击，世宗回转马头避开他。
English: Ten years later, Shizong and Zhu Gong went out to Dongshan and met Cui Siam. The forerunner was hit by Cui Siam's red club during the ceremonial battle. Shizong turned his horse around to avoid him.

古文：暹前后表弹尚书令司马子如及尚书元羡、雍州刺史慕容献，又弹太师咸阳王坦、并州刺史可朱浑道元，罪状极笔，并免官。
现代文：崔暹先后上表弹劾尚书令司马子如及尚书元羡、雍州刺史慕容献，又弹劾太师咸阳王元坦、并州刺史可朱浑道元，罪状淋漓尽致，全部写出，全都免除了官职。
English: Cui Siam successively impeached Shang Shuling Sima Zi as well as Shang Shuling Yuan Zhen, Yongzhou Shuling Shuling Murong Xian, and impeached Grand Master Xianyang Wang Yuan Tan, and State Shuling Ke Zhu Hun Dogen. The charges were detailed, all were written out, and all were relieved of their official duties.

古文：其馀死黜者甚众。
现代文：其余的人判死刑和罢官的也很多。
English: The rest were sentenced to death and many were dismissed from their posts.

古文：高祖书与邺下诸贵曰： 崔暹昔事家弟为定州长史，后吾儿开府谘议，及迁左丞吏部郎，吾未知其能也。
现代文：高祖给邺下诸权贵写信说： 崔暹往昔事奉家弟为定州长史，后为我儿的开府谘议，到了升任左丞吏部郎，我不了解他的才能。
English: Gao Zu wrote to all the dignitaries under his command, saying: In the past, Cui Siam served his younger brother as the governor of Chengdu, and then consulted for my son's governorship. When he was promoted to the position of secretary of the left, I did not understand his talent.

古文：始居宪台，乃尔纠劾。
现代文：开始任御史府官职，于是举发弹劾。
English: He began to serve as a government official of the Imperial Historian's Office, and was impeached.

古文：咸阳王、司马令并是吾对门布衣之旧，尊贵亲昵，无过二人，同时获罪，吾不能救，诸君其慎之。 
现代文：咸阳王、司马令全是我对门布衣旧交，尊贵亲近，没有超过他们二人的，同时获罪，我不能救他们，诸位要谨慎。 
English: Xianyang Wang and Sima Ling are all my old friends from Fenpuyi. They are close to the dignitaries, no more than the two of them, and they were convicted at the same time. I can't save them. You all should be careful.

古文：高祖如京师，群官迎于紫陌。
现代文：高祖到京师，群官在紫陌迎接。
English: Gaozu arrived in Beijing and was greeted by officials in Shimo.

古文：高祖握暹手而劳之曰： 往前朝廷岂无法官，而天下贪婪，莫肯纠劾。
现代文：高祖握着崔暹的手慰劳他，说： 以前朝廷难道没有法官，而天下的贪婪之人，没有谁肯举发弹劾。
English: Gao Zu held Cui Siam's hand to comfort him and said, "In the past, there were no judges in the imperial court, and no greedy people in the world were willing to impeach.

古文：中尉尽心为国，不避豪强，遂使远迩肃清，群公奉法。
现代文：中尉尽心为国，不避豪强，于是使远近肃清，群公守法。
English: The lieutenant devoted himself to the country and did not shun the brave and the strong, so he made the far and near areas clean and the public law abiding.

古文：冲锋陷阵，大有其人，当官正色，今始见之。
现代文：冲锋陷阵，大有其人，作官的本色，今天才见到。
English: It was only today that I saw the true colours of the officers who charged into the fray.

古文：今荣华富贵，直是中尉自取，高欢父子，无以相报。 
现代文：今天的荣华富贵，衹是中尉自己取得的，高欢父子，没有用来报答的东西。 
English: Today's prosperity and wealth, it is the lieutenant's own achievement, the high joy of father and son, and there is nothing to repay.

古文：赐暹良马，使骑之以从，且行且语。
现代文：赐予崔暹良马，让他骑上跟从自己，一边走一边谈话。
English: Give Cui Siam a horse, let him ride and follow him, walk and talk at the same time.

古文：暹下拜，马惊走，高祖为拥之而授辔。
现代文：崔暹下拜，马受惊而跑，高祖为他拦住马而将马辔交给他。
English: Cui Siam bowed down, the horse was frightened and ran away. Gaozu stopped the horse for him and gave him the bridle.

古文：魏帝宴于华林园，谓高祖曰： 自顷朝贵、牧守令长、所在百司多有贪暴，侵削下人。
现代文：魏帝在华林园宴饮，对高祖说： 满朝权贵、牧守令长、部门官吏多有贪婪残暴之人，侵夺百姓。
English: Wei Emperor had a banquet in the Hualing Garden and said to Gao Zu: The powerful and noble of the Manchu Dynasty, the chief of the herdsmen, and the departmental officials were mostly greedy and cruel people, and they robbed the people.

古文：朝廷之中有用心公平，直言弹劾，不避亲戚者，王可劝酒。 
现代文：朝廷之中有用心公平，直言弹劾，不回避亲戚的人，王可以劝酒。 
English: In the imperial court, those who are fair-minded, outspoken in impeachment, and do not avoid relatives can be persuaded to drink.

古文：高祖降阶，跪而言曰： 唯御史中尉崔暹一人。
现代文：高祖走下殿阶，跪下进言说： 衹有御史中尉崔暹一个人。
English: Gao Zu walked down the palace steps, knelt down and said: There is only one person, Lieutenant Cui Siam.

古文：谨奉明旨，敢以酒劝，并臣所射赐物千匹，乞回赐之。 
现代文：谨奉圣旨，冒昧以酒相劝，连同我所得赏赐的财物千匹，请求转赐给他。 
English: I have taken the liberty, according to the will of God, to buy him a drink and to ask him to give me a thousand animals, together with the treasure I have been given.

古文：帝曰： 崔中尉为法，道俗齐整。 
现代文：帝说： 崔中尉执法，出家人与世俗之人一视同仁。 
English: The emperor said, "Lieutenant Cui is in charge of enforcing the law. Monks and lay people are treated equally.

古文：暹谢曰： 此自陛下风化所加，大将军臣澄劝奖之力。 
现代文：崔暹感谢说： 逭自然是陛下风化所致，和大将军高澄劝勉鼓励的力量。 
English: Cui Siem thanked him and said: "It is naturally the result of your majesty's demeanor, and the power of General Gao Cheng's exhortation and encouragement.

古文：世宗退谓暹曰： 我尚畏羡，何况馀人。 
现代文：世宗退朝后对崔暹说： 我尚且敬畏羡慕，何况其他的人。 
English: After the abdication of King Sejong, he said to Choe Si-am, "I am still in awe and admiration of you, let alone other people.

古文：由是威名日盛，内外莫不畏服。
现代文：由此威名盛，朝廷内外没有谁不敬服。
English: As a result of this prestige, there was no one inside or outside the court who did not admire him.

古文：高祖崩，未发丧，世宗以暹为度支尚书，兼仆射，委以心腹之寄。
现代文：高祖逝世，没有发丧，世宗让崔暹任度支尚书，兼任仆射，委托以心腹之任。
English: Gao Zu passed away, and there was no funeral. The emperor asked Cui Siem to be in charge of supporting the imperial edicts, and also to serve as a courier, entrusting him with the duties of a confidant.

古文：暹忧国如家，以天下为己任。
现代文：崔暹忧国如家，以天下为己任。
English: Cui Siam-Zang regards the country as his home and regards the world as his duty.

古文：世宗车服过度，诛戮变常，言谈进止，或有亏失，暹每厉色极言，世宗亦为之止。
现代文：世宗车服超过规定的制度，诛杀无常，言谈进止，有时有失误，崔暹每每面色严厉地直言规劝，世宗也因此而改正。
English: Shizong's car clothes exceeded the prescribed system, the fight was fickle, the talk was advanced and stopped, and sometimes there were mistakes. Cui Siew sternly and bluntly admonished every face, and Shizong also corrected it.

古文：有囚数百，世宗尽欲诛之，每催文帐。暹故缓之，不以时进，世宗意释，竟以获免。
现代文：有囚徒数百名，世宗想全部杀了他们，每每催促公文案卷，崔暹故意推延逭件事，不按时进呈，世宗心意宽解，囚徒终于因此得免。
English: There were hundreds of prisoners. Shizong wanted to kill all of them. Every time he pressed for the official document file, Cui Siam deliberately delayed the matter and did not submit it on time. Shizong was relieved and the prisoners were finally released.

古文：自出身从官，常日晏乃归。
现代文：自从出仕作官，经常天色很晚才回家。
English: Since I became an official, I often get home very late.

古文：侵晓则与兄弟问母之起居，暮则尝食视寝，然后至外斋对亲宾。
现代文：拂晓就与兄弟问母亲的起居，晚上就尝食视寝，然后到外斋接待亲友宾客。
English: At dawn, he and his brothers would ask their mother where she was staying, and in the evening they would try to eat and sleep, and then go to receive guests from relatives and friends.

古文：一生不问家事。
现代文：一生不过问家中的事情。
English: He never asked about his family.

古文：魏、梁通和，要贵皆遣人随聘使交易，暹惟寄求佛经。
现代文：魏、梁相互往来和好，有权势的人都派人随使者作买卖，崔暹惟托人求得佛经。
English: Wei and Liang made peace with each other. Powerful people sent emissaries to do business with each other. Cui Siew asked people to obtain Buddhist scriptures.

古文：梁武帝闻之，为缮写，以幡花宝盖赞呗送至馆焉。
现代文：梁武帝听说此事，为他缮写，举着供佛幡花、唱着宗教颂歌送到客馆。
English: When Emperor Liangwu heard about this, he wrote it down for him and brought it to the guesthouse, holding an offering of flowers and singing religious carols.

古文：然而好大言，调戏无节。
现代文：然而崔暹好说大话，调戏没有节度。
English: However, Cui Siam likes to talk big and play rough.

古文：密令沙门明藏著《佛性论》而署己名，传诸江表。
现代文：秘密让僧侣明藏着《佛性论》而署上自己的名字，在江南流传。
English: The secret was to let the monks keep the "Buddha's Character" and sign their names on it, and it was circulated in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：子达拏年十三，暹命儒者权会教其说《周易》两字，乃集朝贵名流，令达拏升高座开讲。
现代文：儿子达擎十三岁，崔暹让儒家学者权会教他说解周易》两字，就召集朝廷权贵名流，让达孥登上高座开讲。
English: When his son Dajing was 13 years old, Cui Shem asked the Confucian scholar Quan Rong to teach him the two words "Zhou Yi" and called together the powerful and famous people of the imperial court to let Dajing ascend to the high seat to give a speech.

古文：赵郡睦仲让阳屈服之，暹喜，擢为司徒中郎。
现代文：趟郡眭仲让假装屈服于他，崔暹大喜，升任为司徒中郎。
English: After the pretense of yielding to him, Cui Siem was overjoyed and was promoted to the position of Stochung.

古文：邺下为之语曰： 讲义两行得中郎。 
现代文：邺下人为此说： 讲义两行得中郎。 
English: For this reason, his subordinates said: "Handouts are the middle of the road.

古文：此皆暹之短也。
现代文：这都是崔暹的短处。
English: These are all shortcomings of Choi Siam.

古文：显祖初嗣霸业，司马子如等挟旧怨，言暹罪重，谓宜罚之。
现代文：显祖开始继承霸业，司马子如等人挟旧怨，说崔暹罪重，应处罚他。
English: Xianzu began to inherit the domineering business, Sima Zi and others held old grudges, saying that Cui Siam was guilty and should be punished.

古文：高隆之亦言宜宽政网，去苛察法官，黜崔暹，则得远近人意。
现代文：高隆之亦说应放宽政网，去掉苛察的法官，罢免崔暹，就能得到远近的人心。
English: Gao Longzhi also said that the political net should be loosened, the harsh judges should be removed, and Cui Siam should be dismissed, in order to win the hearts and minds of people near and far.

古文：显祖从之。
现代文：显祖听从了他们的意见。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：及践祚，谮毁之者犹不息。
现代文：到即位，中伤毁谤他的人还不止息。
English: Once on the throne, his detractors did not stop.

古文：帝乃令都督陈山提等搜暹家，甚贫匮，唯得高祖、世宗与暹书千馀纸，多论军中大事。
现代文：帝就令都督陈山提等人搜查崔暹家，非常贫乏，衹得到高祖、世宗给崔暹的书信千余张纸，大多谈国家大事。
English: The emperor ordered the governor Chen Shanti and others to search Choi Siam's house, which was very poor. They obtained more than a thousand pieces of paper from Gaozu and Shizong's letters to Choi Siam, most of which were about national affairs.

古文：帝嗟赏之。
现代文：帝赞赏他。
English: The emperor praised him.

古文：仍不免众口，乃流暹于马城，昼则负土供役，夜则置地牢。
现代文：但仍不免众人之口，就流放崔暹到马城，白天负土作劳役，夜间关入地牢。
English: However, people still complained, so they exiled Choi Siam to Macheng, where he was forced to work during the day and locked up in a dungeon at night.

古文：岁馀，奴告暹谋反，锁赴晋阳，无实，释而劳之。
现代文：一年多，奴才告发崔暹谋反，押到晋阳，没有事实根据，释放而慰问他。
English: It took more than a year for the slave to denounce Choi Siam for plotting a counter-coup and send him to Jinyang. There was no factual basis for the accusation, and Choi Siam was released to console him.

古文：寻迁太常卿。
现代文：不久任太常卿。
English: He was soon appointed as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：帝谓群臣曰： 崔太常清正，天下无双，卿等不及。 
现代文：帝对群臣说： 崔太常清正，天下无双，你们比不上。 
English: The emperor said to the courtiers, "Cui Taizang is pure and upright, second to none in the world, and you are no match.

古文：初，世宗欲以妹嫁暹子，而会世宗崩，遂寝。
现代文：当初世宗想把妹妹嫁给崔暹的儿子，而逢世宗逝世，就搁置了。
English: At first, Sejong wanted to marry his sister to Choi Siam's son, but when Sejong died, the plan was put on hold.

古文：至是，群臣宴于宣光殿，贵戚之子多在焉。
现代文：到逭时，群臣宴饮于宣光殿，权贵外戚之子大多在这裹。
English: At dinnertime, a group of courtiers were feasting at the palace, and most of the sons of powerful relatives were gathered there.

古文：显祖历与之语，于坐上亲作书与暹曰： 贤子达拏，甚有才学。
现代文：显祖逐一舆他们谈话，在座位上亲自写信给曲说： 贤子达擎，很有才学。
English: Emperor Xianzu listened to their conversation one by one, and wrote a letter to Qu in person on the seat, saying: "Xianzi Daming, you are very talented in learning.

古文：亡兄女乐安主，魏帝外甥，内外敬待，胜朕诸妹，思成大兄宿志。 
现代文：亡兄之女乐安全注，是蕴壶的外甥女，内外尊敬，超过我的众妹，想成就兄长的遗愿。 
English: My late brother's niece, she is my niece, respected inside and out, more than my sisters, and she wants to fulfill my brother's last wish.

古文：乃以主降达拏。
现代文：于是把公主下嫁达孥。
English: So he married the princess off to Dadu.

古文：天保末，为右仆射。
现代文：天保末年，任右仆射。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, he was appointed to the post of right-hand man.

古文：帝谓左右曰： 崔暹谏我饮酒过多，然我饮何所妨？ 
现代文：帝对左右的人说： 崔暹谏诤我饮酒过多，然而我饮酒又有什么妨害呢? 
English: The emperor said to the people around him, "Cui Xiamun, I drink too much alcohol, but what hinders me from drinking?

古文：常山王私谓暹曰： 至尊或多醉，太后尚不能致言，吾兄弟杜口，仆射独能犯颜，内外深相感愧。 
现代文：常山王私下对崔暹说： 皇帝有时多醉，太后尚且不能说话，吾兄弟住口，仆射独自触犯龙颜，内外之人深为感动惭愧。 
English: The King of Changshan said to Choi Siam in private: The emperor is sometimes drunk, the empress dowager is still unable to speak, my brother is silent, the archer has only offended Longyan, and people at home and abroad are deeply moved and ashamed.

古文：十年，暹以疾卒，帝抚灵而哭。
现代文：十年，崔暹因病去世，帝抚灵而哭。
English: Ten years later, Cui Siam died of illness, leaving the emperor weeping.

古文：赠开府。
现代文：追赠开府。
English: He was later given the opportunity to open a post office.

古文：达拏温良清谨，有识学，少历职为司农卿。
现代文：达垩温良清谨，有学识，年轻时任职为司农卿。
English: Daju was mild-mannered, clean-cut, and learned. When he was young, he served as the Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：入周，谋反伏诛。
现代文：到且伐，谋反被杀。
English: When they arrived, they were killed for plotting rebellion.

古文：天保时，显祖尝问乐安公主： 达拏于汝何似？ 
现代文：丢惺时，题担曾问乐室公圭： 对你怎么样? 
English: When the urn was thrown away, the person in charge of the inscription once asked Gonggui, the music room master: What about you?

古文：答曰： 甚相敬重，唯阿家憎儿。 
现代文：回答说： 很相敬重，衹是婆婆憎恶我。 
English: He replied, "I respect her very much, but my mother-in-law hates me."

古文：显祖召达拏母入内，杀之，投尸漳水。
现代文：题狙召鲤母入宫，杀了她，把尸体投入挞。
English: He summoned his stepmother to the palace, killed her, and threw her body into the moat.

古文：齐灭，达拏杀主以复仇。
现代文：蛮减，违垩杀掉公主来报仇。
English: He killed the princess to get revenge.

古文：高德政，字士贞，渤海蓚人。
现代文：高德政，字士贞，渤海蓨县人。
English: Gao Desheng, Zi Shizhen, a native of Bohai County.

古文：父颢，魏沧州刺史。
现代文：父亲高颢，魏刺史。
English: His father was Gao Zhen, Wei Zhen Zhou.

古文：德政幼而敏慧，有风神仪表。
现代文：堕苏年幼机敏聪明，仪表有风度神采。
English: He is young, quick-witted, and has a dashing appearance.

古文：显祖引为开府参军，知管记事，甚相亲狎。
现代文：显祖举荐为开府参军，掌管记事，非常亲近。
English: He was recommended by Xianzu to join the army in Kaifu and was in charge of record-keeping. They were very close.

古文：高祖又擢为相府掾，委以腹心。
现代文：高祖又提升他为相府掾，委以心腹之任。
English: Gaozu also promoted him to the post of prefectural councillor, entrusting him with the duties of a confidant.

古文：迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：升任黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：世宗嗣业，如晋阳，显祖在京居守，令德政参掌机密，弥见亲重。
现代文：世宗继业，到晋阳，颢祖在京留守，让德政参与掌管机密，更被亲近重用。
English: When Shizong succeeded to Jinyang, Shizuo stayed behind in Beijing and let Desheng participate in the management of secrets, and was even more closely used.

古文：世宗暴崩，事出仓卒，群情草草。
现代文：世宗忽然逝世，事情发生得仓猝，众人心情骚扰不安。
English: Sejong died suddenly, things happened in a hurry, and everyone was disturbed and uneasy.

古文：勋将等以缵戎事重，劝帝早赴晋阳。
现代文：有功勋的将领等因继承王位的事情很重要，劝帝早赴晋阳。
English: Since the succession of the throne is very important for meritorious generals and so on, they advised the emperor to go to Jinyang as early as possible.

古文：帝亦回遑不能自决，夜中召杨愔、杜弼、崔季舒及德政等，始定策焉。
现代文：帝也徘徊不能决定，夜间召杨撞、杜弼、崔季舒和德政等，才决定对策。
English: The emperor also wandered and could not decide. He summoned Yang Qian, Du Wei, Cui Jishu and De Zheng at night to decide on a countermeasure.

古文：以杨愔居守。
现代文：让杨撞留守。
English: Let Yang Qian stay away.

古文：德政与帝旧相昵爱，言无不尽。
现代文：德政与帝过去就相亲近，言无不尽。
English: Desheng and the emperor were close to each other in the past and had a lot to talk about.

古文：散骑常侍徐之才、馆客宋景业先为天文图谶之学，又陈山提家客杨子术有所援引，并因德政劝显祖行禅代之事。
现代文：散骑常侍途之才、门客宋景业先为天文图谶之学，又有陈山提家客扰王街有所引证，都是通过堕堕，劝显祖行桦代之事。
English: The ability to ride horseback frequently, the disciple Song Jingye's preference for the study of astronomical charts, and the reference to Chen Shanzhi's family visiting Wang Jie are all examples of persuading Xianzu to travel in his place by means of corruption.

古文：德政又披心固请。
现代文：德政又披露真心坚决请求。
English: Desheng also disclosed his sincere and resolute request.

古文：帝乃手书与杨愔，具论诸人劝进意。
现代文：帝才亲手写信给扰情，全面论说众人劝登帝位的意思。
English: The emperor himself wrote a letter to disturb the situation, comprehensively discussing the meaning of persuading the people to ascend the throne.

古文：德政恐愔犹豫不决，自请驰驿赴京，托以馀事，唯与杨愔言，愔方相应和。
现代文：德政怕杨情犹豫不决，自己请求乘驿马疾行到京，假托有其他的事情，衹舆杨惜讲，杨惰方相配合。
English: Desheng was afraid of Yang's indecisiveness, and he asked Yang to ride his horse to Beijing, pretending to have other things to do. Yang regretted that Yang was too lazy to cooperate.

古文：德政还未至，帝便发晋阳，至平城都，召诸勋将入，告以禅让之事。
现代文：德政返回未到，帝便从晋阳出发，到平都球，召集众有功将领，把禅让的事情告诉他们。
English: Before Desheng's return, the emperor set out from Jinyang to the capital Pingdu and summoned all the meritorious generals to tell them about the matter of Zen Zheng.

古文：诸将等忽闻，皆愕然，莫敢答者。
现代文：众将等忽然听说，都很吃惊，没有谁敢回答。
English: When the generals heard about this, they were so surprised that no one dared to answer.

古文：时杜弼为长史，密启显祖云： 关西是国家劲敌，若今受魏禅，恐其称义兵挟天子而东向，王将何以待之？ 
现代文：当时挂迩为长史，密奏题担说： 飓西是国家的劲敌，如果现在接受魏的惮让，恐怕他们举义兵挟天子而向东进攻，王将怎么对待他们? 
English: At that time, it was a long history, and the secret theme was: The West is a strong enemy of the country. If they now accept Wei's surrender, I am afraid that they will attack the East with the help of the soldiers of righteousness. What will the king do to them?

古文：显祖入，召弼入与徐之才相告。
现代文：颢祖进去，召杜弼进来告诉徐之才。
English: The ancestor went in and called the cuckoo to come in and tell Xu Zhicai.

古文：之才云： 今与王争天下者，彼意亦欲为帝，譬如逐兔满市，一人得之，众心皆定。
现代文：之才说： 现在舆王争天下的人，他们的意思也想称帝，好比满市场的人追兔子，一人得到它，众人的心就全安定了。
English: Zhi Cai said, "Nowadays, people who are vying for the throne of the world also want to be emperor. It's like a market full of people chasing a rabbit. If one person gets it, everyone's heart will be completely stable."

古文：今若先受魏禅，关西自应息心。
现代文：今天如果先接受魏的禅让，关西自然应当死了心。
English: Today, if Wei's concession is accepted first, Kansai should naturally be heartbroken.

古文：纵欲屈强，止当逐我称帝。
现代文：纵然也想争强，衹当跟着我称帝。
English: Even if you want to compete, you should follow me to praise the emperor.

古文：必宜知机先觉，无容后以学人。 
现代文：一定要知道征兆先觉悟，不能在后面学别人。 
English: You must know the signs before you become aware, and you cannot learn from others later.

古文：弼无以答。
现代文：杜弼没有办法回答。
English: The cuckoo could not answer.

古文：帝已遣驰驿向邺，书与太尉高岳、尚书令高隆之、领军娄睿、侍中张亮、黄门赵彦深、杨愔等。
现代文：帝已派人乘驿马疾行向邺，写信给太尉高岳、尚书令高隆之、领军娄散、侍中张亮、黄门赵彦深、杨情等。
English: The emperor had sent people to gallop towards the capital on horses, and wrote letters to Taifu Gao Yue, Shang Shuling Gao Longzhi, the leader of the army Zou San, the chamberlain Zhang Liang, Huangmen Zhao Yanshen, Yang Jie and so on.

古文：岳等驰传至高阳驿，帝使约曰： 知诸贵等意，不须来。 
现代文：高岳等驾乘驿站车马疾行至高阳驿。帝派人约定说： 知道诸权贵人等的意思，不用来。 
English: Gao Yue and others sped to Gaoyangyuan by stagecoach. The emperor's emissaries agreed: "If you know the meaning of the dignitaries, don't use it."

古文：唯杨愔见，高岳等并还。
现代文：衹有杨情见面，高岳等人一起返回。
English: When they met Yang Rong, Gao Yue and others returned together.

古文：帝以众人意未协，又先得太后旨云： 汝父如龙，汝兄如虎，尚以人臣终，汝何容欲行舜、禹事？
现代文：帝因众人意见还不协调一致，又事先得到太后的旨意： 你的父亲像龙，你的兄长像虎，尚且以人臣寿终，你何容得想行舜、禹禅让的事情?
English: Because the opinions of all people are not yet coordinated, the emperor also obtained the will of the empress dowager in advance: Your father is like a dragon, your brother is like a tiger, and even if he dies as a vassal, how can you tolerate things that you want to do?

古文：此亦非汝意，正是高德政教汝。 
现代文：逭也不是你的本意，正是高德政教你的。 
English: It was not your intention, but it was Gao Dezheng who taught you.

古文：又说者以为昔周武王再驾盟津，然始革命，于是乃旋晋阳。
现代文：又有谈论此事的人认为从前周武王两次驾临盟津，然后开始革命，于是仍然回到晋阳。
English: There are also people who talk about this and think that King Zhou Wu came to Meitun twice before, and then started a revolution, so he still returned to Jinyang.

古文：自是居常不悦。
现代文：自此经常不高兴。
English: I've been unhappy ever since.

古文：徐之才、宋景业等每言卜筮杂占阴阳纬侯，必宜五月应天顺人，德政亦劝不已。
现代文：徐之才、宋景业等每讲卜筮杂占阴阳谶纬的征候，必宜在五月顺应天命人意，德政也劝说不已。
English: Xu Zhicai, Song Jingye, and others all spoke of the signs of Yin and Yang, and it was necessary to comply with the will of heaven in May. German politics also persisted in persuasion.

古文：仍白帝追魏收。
现代文：就禀告帝追召魏收。
English: Wei Jie was summoned to report the incident to the emperor.

古文：收至，令撰禅让诏册、九锡建台及劝进文表。
现代文：魏收至，命他撰写禅让韶册、九锡、建台和劝登帝位的文表。
English: Wei received him and ordered him to write a list of Zen Zhen, Jiuxi, Jiantai and persuasion to ascend to the throne.

古文：至五月初，帝发晋阳。德政又录在邺诸事条进于帝，帝令陈山提驰驿赍事条并密书与杨愔。
现代文：至五月初，帝从晋阳出发，德政又记录在邺的诸事条奏于帝，帝命陈山提乘驿马疾行送事条并秘密写信给杨情。
English: By the beginning of May, the emperor set out from Jinyang, and the records of the various events recorded in the imperial rescript were sent to the emperor. The emperor ordered Chen Shan Ti to ride a horse to send the records and write a secret letter to Yang Rong.

古文：大略令撰仪注，防察魏室诸王。
现代文：大略是令撰写仪节制度，防备观察魏室诸王。
English: It is roughly ordered to write the ceremony and festival system, to prevent the observation of the kings of the Wei dynasty.

古文：山提以五月至邺，杨愔即召太常卿邢邵、七兵尚书崔、度支尚书陆操、詹事王昕、黄门侍郎阳休之、中书侍郎裴让之等议撰仪注。
现代文：山提在五月到邺，杨情就召太常卿邢邵、七兵尚书崔棱、度支尚书陆操、詹事王昕、黄门侍郎阳休之、中书侍郎裴让之等商议撰写仪节制度。
English: When Santhi arrived in Handan in May, Yang Jie called on the Tai Changqing, Zhao Shao, the Seven Soldiers, Shangshu Cui Ren, Du Shih, Shangshu Lu Cao, Zhan Ji Wang Qi, Huangmen Attendant Yang Xue Zhi, and the Chinese Attendant Pei Jang to discuss the writing of the ritual system.

古文：六日，要魏太傅咸阳王坦等总集，引人北宫，留于东斋，受禅后，乃放还宅。
现代文：六日，邀魏太傅咸阳王元坦等集合，引入北宫，留在束斋，受禅之后，才放回宅。
English: On the sixth day, Wei Tai Fu Xianyang Wang Yuan Tan and others were invited to gather, brought to the North Palace, stayed in the seder, received Zen, and then returned to the house.

古文：帝初发至亭前，所乘马忽倒，意甚恶之，大以沉吟。
现代文：帝出发到亭前，所骑的马忽然倒下。心裹非常厌恶逭件事，大加犹豫。
English: When the emperor set out to the pavilion, the horse he was riding suddenly fell down. He was very disgusted with this incident and hesitated.

古文：至平城都，便不复肯进。
现代文：到平城都，便不肯再前进。
English: When they reached Heijo, they refused to go any further.

古文：德政、徐之才苦请帝曰： 山提先去，若为形容，恐其漏泄不果。 
现代文：德政、徐之才苦苦请求帝说： 山提先往，若有表现，恐怕泄露不能成功。 
English: Desheng and Xu Zhicai pleaded with the emperor, saying: "Santi first, if there is a performance, I'm afraid the leak can't succeed.

古文：即命司马子如、杜弼驰驿续入，观察物情。
现代文：就命令司马子如、杜弼乘驿马疾行相继入邺，观察情况。
English: After listening to Gao Yang, he ordered Sima Ziru and Cuckoo to follow the Mercedes into the cocoon along the cocoon road to observe the development of the situation and the movement of people.

古文：七日，子如等至邺，众人以事势已决，无敢异言。
现代文：七，子如等到邺，众人因为形势已定，不敢有异。
English: Seven, if the son waits until dusk, the people will not dare to make a difference because the situation has already been decided.

古文：八日，杨愔书中旨，以魏襄城王旭并司空公潘相乐、侍中张亮、黄门赵彦深入通奏事。
现代文：八日，杨情书写皇帝的诏谕，让魏襄城王元旭并司空公潘相乐、侍中张亮、黄门趟彦深入宫通报启奏事宜。
English: On the eighth day, Yang Liushi wrote the emperor's edict, and asked Wang Yuanxu, the king of Wei Xiang City, and Sikuo Pan Sangle, Zhang Liang, and Huangmen Wabi Yan, the chamberlains, to report the opening ceremony to the palace.

古文：魏孝静在昭阳殿引见。
现代文：魏孝静帝在昭阳殿，引见。
English: Emperor Wei Xiao Jing at the Shoyang Palace, introduction.

古文：旭云： 五行递运，有始有终，齐王圣德钦明，万方归仰，臣等昧死闻奏，愿陛下则尧禅舜。 
现代文：元旭说： 五行交替运转，有始有终，齐王圣德敬肃明察，万方归顺仰慕，我等冒死奏请皇上，希望陛下效法尧樟让舜。 
English: Yuan Xu said: The five elements run alternately, there is a beginning and an end, Qi Wang's sanctity is revered and observed, all sides are obedient and admired, we are waiting for the death of the emperor, and hope that His Majesty will follow suit.

古文：魏帝便敛容曰： 此事推挹已久，谨当逊避。 
现代文：魏帝便收敛容颜说： 这件事推辞揖让很久了，应当退位。 
English: Emperor Wei then averted his face and said: This matter has been postponed for a long time, it is time to abdicate.

古文：又道： 若尔，须作诏。 
现代文：又说： 如果这样，须作诏书。 
English: He also said: If this is the case, an imperial edict must be issued.

古文：中书侍郎崔劼奏云： 诏已作讫。 
现代文：中书侍郎崔劫启奏说： 诏书已作完。 
English: Cui Rongqi, the attendant of the imperial edict, said: The imperial edict has been completed.

古文：即付杨愔进于魏静帝。
现代文：就交付杨情进呈魏静帝。
English: On the delivery of Yang Jian, Wei Jing presented to the emperor.

古文：凡有十馀条，悉书。
现代文：总共十余条，全都写好。
English: A total of more than ten articles, all written well.

古文：魏静云： 安置朕何所，复若为去？ 
现代文：魏静帝说： 安置我在什么地方，又如何前往? 
English: Wei Jingdi said: Where should I be placed, and how should I go?

古文：杨愔对： 在北城别有馆宇，还备法驾，依常仗卫而去。 
现代文：杨情回答说： 在北城另有馆舍，还备有天子车驾，依平时的仪仗卫队前往。 
English: Yang Rong replied: In Beicheng, there are other buildings, and there is also a celestial chariot, and the honor guard will go according to the usual time.

古文：魏静帝于是下御坐，就东廊，口咏范蔚宗《后汉书赞》云： 献生不辰，身播国屯，终我四百，永作虞宾。 
现代文：魏静帝于是走下御座，靠近束廊。口裹吟咏范蔚宗《后汉书赞》说： 献生不辰，身播国屯，终我四百，永作虞宾。 
English: Emperor Wei Jing then stepped down from the throne and approached the throne room. He said, "If I give my life, I won't be honored, but if I broadcast myself in Guotun, I'll end up with four hundred, and I'll always be a guest of the rich."

古文：所司寻奏请发。
现代文：主管官吏不久启奏请求出发。
English: The officials in charge soon asked for permission to leave.

古文：魏静帝曰： 人念遗簪弊屦，欲与六宫别，可乎？ 
现代文：魏静帝说： 人怀念他遗弃的簪子和破旧的鞋，想与六宫告别，可以吗? 
English: Wei Jingdi said: People miss his abandoned pigtails and worn-out shoes, and want to say goodbye to the Six Palace, is that okay?

古文：乃入与夫人嫔御以下诀别，莫不歔欷掩涕。
现代文：于是入宫与夫人侍妾宫女以下诀别，没有谁不掩涕悲泣。
English: So, after entering the palace, they bid farewell to their wives, concubines, and daughters-in-law. No one could help but shed tears.

古文：嫔赵国李氏口诵陈思王诗云： 王其爱玉体，俱享黄发期。 
现代文：嫔妃赵国李氏口诵陈思王诗说： 王其爱玉体，俱享黄发期。 
English: The Empress Dowager Zhao Guoli recited the Chen Si Wang poem and said: Wang Qi loves the jade body and enjoys the yellow hair period.

古文：魏静帝登车出万春门，直长赵道德在车中陪侍，百官在门外拜辞。
现代文：魏静帝登车出万春门；直长赵道德在车中陪伴侍奉，百官在门外拜辞。
English: Wei Jingdi boarded the car and left the Wanchun Gate; Zhao Daode, the immediate chief, accompanied the attendants in the car, and hundreds of officials bowed their heads outside the door.

古文：遂入北城下司马子如南宅。
现代文：于是进入北城司马子如的南宅。
English: So he entered the south house of Sima Ziru in Beicheng.

古文：帝至城南顿所。
现代文：帝至城南馆舍。
English: Imperial Palace to Seongnam Mansion.

古文：受禅之日，除德政为侍中，寻封蓝田公。
现代文：受禅那一天，任擅迪为侍中，不久封蓝旦公。
English: On the day of receiving Zen, Ren Hongdi became an attendant, and soon after, Lan Danggu.

古文：七年，迁尚书右仆射，兼侍中，食渤海郡干。
现代文：七年，升任尚书右仆射，兼任侍中，食渤海郡的俸禄。
English: In the seventh year, he was promoted to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man, concurrently serving as a chamberlain, receiving the salary of Erhai County.

古文：德政与尚书令杨愔纲纪政事，多有弘益。
现代文：垄堕与尚书令圭瞄治理政事，多有增益。
English: There are many gains to be gained from letting Gui Zai govern the government.

古文：显祖末年，纵酒酣醉，所为不法，德政屡进忠言。
现代文：显祖末年，纵酒酣醉，所作不合法度，德政屡次进献忠言。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xianzu's life, when he was drunk and doing illegal things, German statesmen repeatedly recommended him.

古文：后召德政饮，不从，又进言于前，谏曰： 陛下道我寻休，今乃甚于既往，其若社稷何，其若太后何！ 
现代文：后召德政饮酒，不从命，又在面前进言，谏静说： 陛下告诉我不久停止，今天竟然比以往更厉害，那对国家怎么办啊?对太后怎么办啊! 
English: After summoning Desheng to drink, he refused to do so, and argued in front of him. Hao Jing said: "Your Majesty told me to stop soon, today it turned out to be more severe than ever, what about the country? What about the Empress Dowager!

古文：帝不悦。又谓左右云： 高德政恒以精神凌逼人。 
现代文：帝不高兴，又对左右的人说： 高德政常在精神上欺凌逼迫人。 
English: The emperor was displeased and said to those around him: Gao Dezheng often bullies and persecutes people mentally.

古文：德政甚惧，乃称疾屏居佛寺，兼学坐禅，为退身之计。
现代文：德政很恐惧，就称病隐居在佛寺，兼学习坐禅，作为退身的计策。
English: Desheng was very afraid, so he claimed to be ill and secluded himself in a Buddhist temple, while also studying zazen, as a way of retreating.

古文：帝谓杨愔曰： 我大忧德政，其病何似？ 
现代文：帝对杨情说： 我很忧虑德政，他的病怎样? 
English: The emperor said to Yang Rong: I am very worried about Desheng, how is his illness?

古文：愔以禅代之际，因德政言情切至，方致诚款，常内忌之。
现代文：杨情因惮代之时，德政言辞心情恳切，正要向帝表示诚意，常在内心嫉妒这件事。
English: At the time of Yang's death, De Zheng's words were sincere, he was about to express his sincerity to the emperor, and he was often jealous of this in his heart.

古文：由是答云： 陛下若用作冀州刺史，病即自差。 
现代文：因此回答说： 陛下如用他作冀州刺史，自会立即病除。 
English: Therefore, he replied, "If Your Majesty were to use him to write the history of Jizhou, he would immediately take sick leave."

古文：帝从之，德政见除书而起。
现代文：帝听从了他的意见，德政见到任命的信就起身。
English: The emperor listened to his advice, and when Desheng saw the letter of appointment, he stood up.

古文：帝大怒，召德政谓之曰： 闻尔病，我为尔针。 
现代文：帝大怒召德政对他说： 听说你病了，我为你扎针。 
English: The emperor angrily summoned Desheng and said to him, "I heard that you are ill. I'll give you an injection."

古文：亲以刀子刺之，血流沾地。
现代文：亲自用刀子刺他，血流至地。
English: I personally stabbed him with a knife, and blood flowed to the ground.

古文：又使曳下，斩去其趾。
现代文：又让人拖下，砍去他的脚趾。
English: He was dragged down again and had his toes chopped off.

古文：刘桃枝捉刀不敢下。
现代文：刘桃枝提刀不敢下手。
English: Liu Taozhi did not dare to take up the sword.

古文：帝起临阶砌，切责桃枝曰： 尔头即堕地！ 
现代文：帝起身到阶前，厉责桃枝说： 你的头马上就要掉在地上! 
English: The emperor stood up in front of the steps, scolded the peach branch and said, "Your head is about to fall to the ground!"

古文：因索大刀自带，欲下阶。
现代文：于是找大刀自己带上，准备下阶。
English: So find a big knife and bring it with you to prepare for the next step.

古文：桃枝乃斩足之三指。
现代文：桃枝于是砍断德政脚上的三个趾头。
English: Tao Zhi then cut off the three toes on Dezheng's foot.

古文：帝怒不解，禁德政于门下，其夜开城门，以毡舆送还家。
现代文：帝怒气未消，将德政囚禁在门下，夜间打开城门，用车送他回家。
English: The emperor, still angry, imprisoned Desheng under the gate, opened the gate at night, and sent him home by car.

古文：旦日，德政妻出宝物满四床，欲以寄人。
现代文：第二天，德政的妻子取出宝物满四个几案，想将它们寄存别人。
English: The next day, Desheng's wife took out four suitcases full of treasures and wanted to deposit them with someone else.

古文：帝奄至其宅，见而怒曰： 我府藏犹无此物！ 诘其所从得，皆诸元赂之也。
现代文：帝忽然到宅中，见而发怒说： 我府库还没有这些东西! 责问是从哪裹得到的，都是诸元贿赂他的。
English: The emperor suddenly came to the house, saw it and became angry, saying, "My treasury doesn't have these things yet! I don't know where he got them from, but he was bribed with all kinds of money."

古文：遂曳出斩之。时妻出拜，又斩之，并其子祭酒伯坚。
现代文：于是拖出去杀了他，这时他妻子出来拜见，又杀了她，连同他的儿子祭酒伯坚。
English: So they dragged him out and killed him, and when his wife came out to meet him, they killed her too, together with his son, the sacrificial drinker Boqian.

古文：德政死后，显祖谓群臣曰： 高德政常言宜用汉人，除鲜卑，此即合死。
现代文：德政死后，显祖对群臣说： 高德政常说应任用汉人，除掉鲜卑人，造就该死。
English: After the death of Desheng, Xianzu said to his courtiers: Gao Desheng often said that Han people should be appointed, despicable people should be eliminated, and despicable people should be created.

古文：又教我诛诸元，我今杀之，为诸元报仇也。 
现代文：又教我杀诸元，我今天杀他，是为诸元报仇。 
English: He also taught me to kill Zhuyuan. I killed him today to avenge Zhuyuan.

古文：帝后悔，赠太保，嫡孙王臣袭焉。
现代文：帝事后悔恨，追赠太保，嫡孙王臣承袭这一官职。
English: The emperor regretted and regretted, posthumously bestowed the title of grand tutor, and his legitimate grandson Wang Chen succeeded to this official post.

古文：崔昂，字怀远，博陵安平人也。
现代文：崔昂，字怀远，博陵安平人。
English: Cui Ang, the word is far away, Boling Anping people.

古文：祖挺，魏州刺史。
现代文：祖父崔挺，为魏幽州刺史。
English: Grandfather Cui Ting, is Wei Yuzhou stabbing history.

古文：昂年七岁而孤，伯父吏部尚书孝芬尝谓所亲曰： 此儿终当远至，是吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：崔昂年七岁而丧父，伯父吏部尚书孝芬曾对亲人说： 此儿终当成大器，是我家的千里马。 
English: Cui Ang lost his father at the age of seven. His uncle, the official Shang Shuxu Xiaofen, once said to his relatives: "This child will eventually become a great instrument. He is the workhorse of our family."

古文：昂性端直少华，沉深有志略，坚实难倾动。
现代文：崔昂品性端正，少浮华，深沉而有志谋，处事坚决而难以动摇。
English: Cui Ang is upright, less flashy, deep and ambitious, resolute and hard to shake.

古文：少好章句，颇综文词。
现代文：少年喜好章句之学，善于文词。
English: The boy likes to study chapter and verse and is good at writing.

古文：世宗广开幕府，引为记室参军，委以腹心之任。
现代文：世宗广招幕府，征引为记室参军，委以心腹之任。
English: Shizong Guang was recruited by the shogunate, conscripted to join the army as a recorder, and appointed to the post of confidant.

古文：世宗入辅朝政，召为开府长史。
现代文：世宗入宫辅佐朝政，召入任开府长史。
English: Sejong entered the palace as an assistant to the court, and was called to the post of governor.

古文：时勋将亲族兵客在都下放纵，多行不轨，孙腾、司马子如之门尤剧。
现代文：当时功臣亲族宾客在都城，放纵多行不轨之事，孙腾、司马子如两家尤其厉害。
English: At that time, the guests of the relatives of the heroes and heroines were in the capital, indulging in many wrongdoings. Sun Teng and Sima Zi were two particularly bad examples.

古文：昂受世宗密旨，以法绳之，未几之间，内外齐肃。
现代文：崔昂接受世宗密旨，以法制裁他们，没有多少时间，内外肃整敬慎。
English: Choe Aung accepted the secret edict of the Sejong Sect and sanctioned them with the law. He did not have much time, and he was very careful and cautious both at home and abroad.

古文：迁尚书左丞，其年，又兼度支尚书。
现代文：升任尚书左丞，一年后，又兼任度支尚书。
English: He was promoted to the post of Shangshu Zuojo, and a year later, he was also appointed to the post of Doushi Shangshu.

古文：左丞之兼尚书，近代未有，唯昂独为冠首，朝野荣之。
现代文：左丞兼任尚书，近代没有，衹有崔昂是首位，朝廷内外都认为他荣耀。
English: Zuojo concurrently served as Shangshu, which was unprecedented in modern times. Choe Aung was the first, and both inside and outside the imperial court considered him a great honor.

古文：武定六年，甘露降于宫阙，文武官僚同贺显阳殿。
现代文：武定六年，甘露降在宫阙，文武官员一起到显阳殿庆贺。
English: In the sixth year of Wuding, the nectar fell in the imperial palace, and the officials of literature and military affairs went to the Xianyang Palace to celebrate.

古文：魏帝问仆射崔暹、尚书杨愔等曰： 自古甘露之瑞，汉、魏多少，可各言往代所降之处，德化感致所由。 
现代文：魏帝问仆射崔暹、尚书杨情等说： 自古以来降甘露的祥瑞之兆，汉、魏有多少，可以讲讲前代所降的地方，德化感致的由来。 
English: Emperor Wei asked his servants Choi Siem and Shang Shu Yang Rong and said: Since ancient times, how many auspicious signs of Han and Wei have dropped nectar, we can talk about the places dropped by the previous generation, and the origin of the virtue feeling.

古文：次问昂，昂曰： 案《符瑞图》，王者德致于天，则甘露降。
现代文：其次问崔昂，崔昂说： 查《符瑞图》，君王德达于天，就降甘露。
English: Next, he asked Choe Aung. Choe Aung said, "If you look at "Furitu," King De Da is in the sky, and he drops nectar.

古文：吉凶两门，不由符瑞，故桑雉为戒，实启中兴，小鸟孕大，未闻福感。
现代文：吉凶两端，不取决于吉祥的征兆，所以用桑雉为戒，修德治国，实始中兴，小鸟孕大，未听说是福兆。
English: Both ends of the auspicious and inauspicious do not depend on the auspicious signs, so using mulberry as a warning, cultivating virtue and governing the country, starting from scratch, and the bird is pregnant, are unheard of as auspicious signs.

古文：所愿陛下虽休勿休。 
现代文：所希望陛下的是即使是福庆，也不要以之为福庆。 
English: What His Majesty wants is that even if it is Fuqing, it should not be called Fuqing.

古文：帝为敛容曰： 朕既无德，何以当此。 
现代文：帝为之收敛容颜说： 我既然无德，为什么会这样。 
English: The emperor, with a subdued expression, said, "Since I have no virtue, why is this happening?"

古文：齐受禅，迁散骑常侍，兼太府卿、大司农卿。
现代文：齐接受惮让，崔昂升任散骑常侍，兼任太府卿、大司农卿。
English: They all accepted the offer, and Cui Ang was promoted to the position of straggler, and concurrently held the positions of Taifu minister and Daisho minister of agriculture.

古文：二寺所掌，世号繁剧，昂校理有术，下无奸伪，经手历目，知无不为，朝廷叹其至公。
现代文：二府所掌管的，号称繁杂，崔昂审查治理有方，下面没有奸伪之事，经手过目，知道的事没有不做的，朝廷赞叹他最公正。
English: The affairs under the control of the two prefectures were said to be complicated, and Cui Ao's examination and administration were well-organized. There was no fraud or forgery, and there was no passing of the buck, and there was nothing he knew that he did not do. The court praised him for being the most fair.

古文：又奏上横市妄费事三百一十四条，诏下，依启状速议以闻。
现代文：又向帝启奏霸市浪费事三百一十四条，诏令下，依奏状尽快商议报告。
English: He also sent a report on the waste of 314 articles to the Emperor, and the report was discussed as soon as possible in accordance with the report.

古文：其年，与太子少师邢邵议定国初礼，仍封华阳县男。
现代文：一年后，舆太子少师邢邵商议建国开始的礼仪，于是封华阳男。
English: A year later, the crown prince's young teacher, Zou Shao, discussed the etiquette of the beginning of the founding of the country, and then sealed Huayangan.

古文：又诏删定律令，损益礼乐，令尚书右仆射薛琡等四十三人在领军府议定。
现代文：又韶令删定律令，增删礼乐，命令尚书右仆射薛斑等四十三人在领军府议定。
English: In addition, forty-three people in the leading military office agreed on the order to delete the legal order, add and delete the ceremonial music, and order the right-hand servant to shoot Xue Bian.

古文：又敕昂云：若诸人不相遵纳，卿可依事启闻。 
现代文：又命崔昂说： 如果众人不遵从，你可按事奏知。 
English: He also ordered Choe Aung to say, "If the people don't obey, you can report it accordingly."

古文：昂奉敕笑曰： 正合生平之愿。 
现代文：崔昂奉敕笑着说： 正符合我平生的愿望。 
English: Choi Aung Bong-soo said with a smile, "It's exactly what I've always wanted.

古文：昂素勤慎，奉敕之后，弥自警勖，部分科条，校正今古，所增损十有七八。
现代文：崔昂素来勤劳谨慎，奉敕之后，更加自己警戒勉励，处理法律条文核正古今律令等，增减的有十之七八。
English: Choi Aung has always been diligent and prudent. After he was promoted, he became more vigilant and encouraged himself to deal with legal provisions, such as the revision of ancient and modern laws, with an increase or decrease of seventy-eight percent.

古文：转廷尉卿。
现代文：改任廷尉卿。
English: He was reappointed as Lord-Lieutenant.

古文：昂本性清严，凡见黩货辈，疾之若仇，以是治狱文深，世论不以平恕相许。
现代文：崔昂本性清廉严厉，凡是见到贪污纳贿的人，疾恶如仇，因此治理案件深文周纳，以定人罪，世人评论不以持平宽仁赞许。
English: Choe Aung is honest and stern by nature. Anyone who sees a corrupt bribe-taker is filled with hatred. Therefore, he manages cases in a thorough manner, convicts people, and is praised by the world for his fairness and leniency.

古文：显祖幸东山，百官预宴，升射堂。
现代文：显祖驾临塞业，百官参与宴集，升射堂。
English: Emperor Xianzu came to Jie, hundreds of officials participated in the banquet, and the hall was lit up.

古文：帝召昂于御坐前，谓曰： 旧人多出为州，我欲以台阁中相付，当用卿为令仆，勿望刺史。
现代文：帝召崔显到御坐前，对他说： 老臣多外出作州官，我想以尚书台相托，当用卿为令仆，不要想作刺史。
English: The emperor summoned Cui Xian to the throne and said to him, "The old minister often goes out to be a prefectural official. I want to be entrusted with Shang Shudai, be used as a servant, and do not want to be a history buff.

古文：卿六十外当与卿本州，中间州不可得也。 
现代文：卿六十岁以后当给你家乡所在的州，在此之间，州不能得到啊。 
English: Sir, after the age of sixty, you should be given the state in which your hometown is located. In between, you can't get the state.

古文：后九卿以上陪集东宫，帝指昂及尉瑾、司马子瑞谓太子曰： 此是国家柱石，汝宜记之。 
现代文：后九卿以上的官员陪同颢担集聚束宫，帝指着崔显以及旦瑾、司马子瑞对太子说： 这是国家的柱石，你应记住他们。 
English: After more than nine officials accompanied the prince to the palace, the emperor pointed to Cui Xian, and said to the prince: This is the pillar of the country, you should remember them.

古文：未几，复侍宴金凤台，帝历数诸人，咸有罪负，至昂曰： 崔昂直臣，魏收才士，妇兄妹夫，俱省罪过。 
现代文：不久，又在金凤台侍奉显祖宴饮，帝历敷众人，都有罪名，至崔垦说： 崔显是直臣，馥是才士，妇兄妹夫，全减去罪过。 
English: Not long after, he was again serving Emperor Xianzu at a banquet in Jinfeng Terrace. All the people in the imperial palace were guilty, until Cui Yao said: Cui Xian is a direct vassal, Zou is a talented person, and his wife, brother and sister-in-law are all innocent.

古文：天保十年，策拜仪同燕子献，百司陪列，昂在行中。
现代文：天保十年，帝以策书命仪同燕子献，百官陪列，崔昂在其中。
English: In the 10th year of Tianbao, the emperor presented the imperial seal with swallows, accompanied by hundreds of officials, and Cui Ang was among them.

古文：明日，即拜为真。杨愔曰： 昨不与崔昂正者，言其太速，欲明年真之。
现代文：帝特召崔显到御所，说： 历敷群臣可治理省台者，衹寄希望你一人。 当任为兼右仆射。几天之后，崔显因入宫奏事，帝对尚书令扭撞说： 昨天不；滩昂正职，是说他升得太快，想明年任他正职。
English: The emperor summoned Cui Xian to the imperial palace and said, "If you can govern Taiwan, I would like you to be the one to send for me." A few days later, Cui Xian entered the palace to report for duty, and the emperor said to Shang Shuling, "Not yesterday; Tang An is a high-ranking official, which means that he has risen too quickly and wants to be appointed to a high-ranking official next year."

古文：终是除正，何事早晚，可除正仆射。 
现代文：最终是任正职，何论早晚，可任正仆射。 
English: In the end, it will be Ren Zhengfei, but sooner or later, it may be Ren Zhengfei.

古文：明日，即拜为真。
现代文：第二天，就授任正职。
English: The next day, he was promoted to a full-time position.

古文：杨愔少时与昂不平，显祖崩后，遂免昂仆射，除仪同三司。
现代文：杨情年少时舆崔昂不和，垩担逝世后，就免去崔显仆射的官职，任仪同三司。
English: When Yang Liang was young, he and Cui Ang did not get along. After the death of Xiangtang, he was exempted from the official post of Cui Xianpu, and was appointed to the Third Division.

古文：后坐事除名。卒祠部尚书。
现代文：后因事获罪除名，在祠部尚书的官位上去世。
English: Later, he was expelled from the priesthood for his crime and passed away while still holding the post of secretary of the shrine.

古文：昂有风调才识，旧立坚正刚直之名。
现代文：崔昂有品格情调才识，过去建立了坚正刚直的名声。
English: Choe Aung is a man of character and talent who has built up a reputation for integrity in the past.

古文：然好探揣上意，感激时主，或列阴私罪失，深为显祖所知赏，发言奖护，人莫之能毁。
现代文：然而喜欢揣测主上的意图，感激当代的君王，有时列举阴私罪过，深为颢祖赏识，一说话就是鼓励爱护，人不能诋毁他。
English: However, he likes to speculate on the Lord's intentions, is grateful to contemporary kings, and sometimes lists the sins of selfishness. He is deeply appreciated by his ancestors. One word is to encourage love and care. People cannot discredit him.

古文：议曹律令，京畿密狱，及朝廷之大事多委之。
现代文：议定律令，京城的秘密案件，以及朝廷的大事往往委托他。
English: He was often entrusted with the promulgation of decrees, secret cases in the capital, and important affairs of the imperial court.

古文：尚严猛，好行鞭挞，虽苦楚万端，对之自若。
现代文：崇尚严猛，好施刑罚，即使痛苦万端，面对刑罚也泰然自若。
English: They advocate severity and are good at imposing punishments. Even if they are extremely painful, they are calm in the face of punishment.

古文：前者崔暹、季舒为之亲援，后乃高德政是其中表，常有挟恃，意色矜高，以此不为名流所服。
现代文：前面有崔暹、季舒为他本家的支持，后而高德政是他的中表亲戚，时常有所依仗，神气高傲，因此不被名流信服。
English: In front of him, there are Cui Siam and Ji Shu as the support of his own family, and then Gao Desheng is his middle table relative. He often relies on others and is arrogant, so he is not convinced by celebrities.

古文：子液嗣。
现代文：儿子崔液继承了他的职位。
English: His son Choe Su inherited his position.

