古文：永平十一年，庐江皖侯国际有湖。
现代文：永平十一年，庐江郡皖侯国边境上有个大湖。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongping, there was a large lake on the border of Gonghou, Minjiang County.

古文：皖民小男曰陈爵、陈挺，年皆十岁以上，相与钓於湖涯。
现代文：皖侯国百姓家有两个男孩叫陈爵和陈挺，年龄都在十岁以上，他们一起到湖边去钓鱼。
English: There are two boys named Chen Zhe and Chen Ting in the people's home of Yanhou, both of whom are over ten years old. They went fishing for trout together.

古文：挺先钓，爵後往。
现代文：陈挺先去钓，陈爵后来才去。
English: Chen Ting went fishing first, Chen Jie went fishing later.

古文：爵问挺曰： 钓宁得乎？ 
现代文：陈爵问陈挺： 钓着鱼了吗？ 
English: Chen Jie asked Chen Ting: Have you caught any fish?

古文：挺曰： 得！ 
现代文：陈挺说： 钓着了。 
English: Chen Ting said, "I've caught a fish."

古文：爵即归取竿纶，去挺四十步所，见湖涯有酒樽，色正黄，没水中。
现代文：陈爵立马回去取钓竿和钓线，走到离陈挺四十步左右的地方，看见湖边有个酒樽，颜色纯黄，淹没在水中。
English: Chen Jie immediately went back to get the fishing rod and line, walked about forty paces away from Chen Ting, and saw a wine bottle on the edge of the lake, pure yellow in color, submerged in the water.

古文：爵以为铜也，涉水取之，滑重不能举。
现代文：陈爵以为是铜器，就到水中去取它，又滑又重不能搬动。
English: Chen Jie thought it was a bronze object and went into the water to retrieve it. It was slippery and heavy and could not be moved.

古文：挺望见，号曰： 何取？ 
现代文：陈挺看见了，大声问： 捞什么东西？ 
English: Chen Ting saw this and loudly asked: What are you fishing for?

古文：爵曰： 是有铜，不能举也。 
现代文：陈爵说： 这里有铜器，搬不起来。 
English: Chen Jie said, "There are bronze objects here, I can't lift them."

古文：挺往助之，涉水未持，樽顿衍更为盟盘，动行入深渊中，复不见。
现代文：陈挺过来帮助他，到水中还没有抓住，酒樽立刻变成一个盟盘，下沉到深水之中，再也看不见了。
English: Chen managed to come to his aid, but before he could reach the water, the wine barrel turned into a pail and sank into the deep water, never to be seen again.

古文：挺、爵留顾，见如钱等，正黄，数百千，即共掇，各得满手，走归示其家。
现代文：陈挺和陈爵守候在湖边四下观看，看到数百上千枚像钱一样的纯黄的东西，就一同捡取这些东西，各人捡得满满的两手，跑回家拿给家里人看。
English: Chen Ting and Chen Jie waited by the lake and looked around. They saw hundreds of thousands of pure yellow things that looked like money. They picked up these things together. They each picked up a handful of things and ran home to show them to their families.

古文：爵父国，故免吏，字君贤，惊曰： 安所得此？ 
现代文：陈爵的父陈国，是过去免职的官吏，字君贤，他大惊问道： 这是从什么地方得到的？ 
English: Chen Jian's father, Chen Guo-Ren, was a retired official, known as "Jun Xian." He was shocked and asked, "Where did you get this?"

古文：爵言其状，君贤曰： 此黄金也！ 
现代文：陈爵讲述了捡到的情况，君贤说： 这些都是黄金呀。 
English: Chen Jie recounted what he found, and Junxian said, "This is all gold."

古文：即驰与爵俱往，到金处，水中尚多，贤自涉水掇取。
现代文：立即与陈爵一起跑去那里，到了出现金子的地方，水中黄金还很多，君贤亲自下水去拾取。
English: He immediately ran there with Chen Jie, and when they arrived at the place where the gold had appeared, there was still a lot of gold in the water, and Junxian personally went into the water to pick it up.

古文：爵、挺邻伍并闻，俱竟采之，合得十余斤。
现代文：陈爵和陈挺的邻居们都听说了，一齐来争捡黄金，合计捡得十多斤。
English: Chen Jie and Chen Ting's neighbors all heard about it, and they all came to compete to pick up the gold. In total, they picked up more than ten pounds.

古文：贤自言於相，相言太守。
现代文：君贤亲自把这件事告诉了相，相又告诉了太守。
English: Junxian personally reported the matter to the emperor, who in turn reported it to the emperor.

古文：太守遗吏收取，遣门下掾程躬奉献，具言得金状。
现代文：太守派官吏收取捡到的黄金，派门下属官程躬将黄金献给皇帝，详细他讲述了捡到黄金的情况。
English: The governor sent an official to collect the gold and sent a subordinate official, Cheng Mu, to present the gold to the emperor. He gave a detailed account of how the gold was found.

古文：诏书曰： 如章则可。
现代文：皇帝下诏书说： 如果像奏章所说的那样，就算了。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: If everything is as the document says, it's all right.

古文：不如章，有正法。 
现代文：如果不像奏章所说的那样，就要依法惩办。 
English: If they do not do as the playbook says, they will be punished according to the law.

古文：躬奉诏书，归示太守，太守以下，思省诏书，以为疑隐，言之不实，苟饰美也，即复因却上得黄金实状如前章。
现代文：程躬奉接了诏书，回来让太守看。自太守以下各级官吏思索领悟诏书的意思，认为皇帝怀疑奏章上有隐瞒的地方，说的情况不真实，作了不正当的粉饰美化，就又找机会向皇帝报告得到黄金的真实情况，内容和上次的奏章一样。
English: Cheng Mian received the imperial rescript and came back to show it to the daimyo. Since then, officials at all levels below the daimyo have pondered and understood the meaning of the imperial rescript. They believed that the emperor suspected that there was something hidden in the rescript, that the situation described was not true, and that it was improperly embellished. They then looked for an opportunity to report to the emperor the true situation of obtaining the gold, the content of which was the same as the previous rescript.

古文：事寝。
现代文：这件事就搁下了。
English: The matter was dropped.

古文：十二年，贤等上书曰： 贤等得金湖水中，郡牧献，讫今不得直。 
现代文：永平十二年，君贤等人给皇帝上书说： 君贤等人从湖水中捡得黄金，郡长官把黄金献给了皇帝，我们至今没有得到报酬。 
English: In the twelfth year of Yongping, Junxian and others sent a letter to the emperor saying: Junxian and others picked up gold from the lake water, the county magistrate donated the gold to the emperor, we have not been paid so far.

古文：诏书下庐江，上不畀贤等金直状。
现代文：皇帝下诏书令庐江郡呈报不给陈君贤等人献金报酬的具体情况。
English: The emperor issued an edict ordering Minjiang County to report the specific situation of not giving Chen Junxian and others a donation reward.

古文：郡上贤等所采金自官湖水，非贤等私渎，故不与直。 
现代文：庐江郡呈报陈君贤等人所采取的黄金来自官家的湖水中，不是来自陈君贤等人的私家沟渠，所以不给报酬。
English: Minjiang County reported that the gold taken by Chen Junxian and others came from the official lake water, not from the private ditch of Chen Junxian and others, so they would not be paid.

古文：十二年，诏书曰： 视时金价，畀贤等金直。 
现代文：永平十二年，皇帝下诏书说： 比照当时黄金的价格，给陈君贤等人献金的报酬。 
English: In the twelfth year of Yongping, the emperor issued an edict saying: According to the price of gold at that time, the reward for donating money to Chen Junxian and others is the best.

古文：汉瑞非一，金出奇怪，故独纪之。
现代文：汉代的祥瑞不止一种，黄金出现特别怪异，所以单独记下了这件事。
English: There was more than one kind of Xiang Rui in the Han Dynasty, and the gold one was particularly strange, so I wrote it down separately.

古文：金玉神宝，故出诡异。
现代文：金玉是神奇的宝物，所以它们的出现奇怪异常。
English: The jewels are a magical treasure, so their appearance is strange and unusual.

古文：金物色先为酒樽，後为盟盘，动行入渊，岂不怪哉？
现代文：金物的样子先是酒樽，后来变成盟盘，游动沉入深水中，难道不奇怪吗！
English: Isn't it strange that the appearance of the gold object was first a wine bottle, and then it turned into a league plate, and swam and sank into the deep water!

古文：夏之方盛，远方图物，贡金九牧，禹谓之瑞，铸以为鼎。
现代文：夏朝正当全盛的时候，边远地区把当地的特产神怪之物绘成图画献给朝廷，九州的长官向夏朝献铜，夏禹认为这是祥瑞，把铜铸成大鼎。
English: When the Xia Dynasty was in its heyday, the outlying regions painted pictures of the local specialty, the crane, as a gift to the imperial court. The governor of Kyushu offered copper to the Xia Dynasty. Xia Yu thought it was auspicious and cast the copper into a large tripod.

古文：周之九鼎，远方之金也。
现代文：周朝的九鼎，是远方的铜铸成的。
English: The Jiuding of the Zhou Dynasty was made of copper from far away.

古文：人来贡之，自出於渊者，其实一也。皆起盛德，为圣王瑞。
现代文：远方的人进贡的金和自然出现在水中的金，实质是一样的，都是由于帝王有盛德，为圣王出现的祥瑞。
English: The gold that people from far away pay tribute to and the gold that naturally appears in the water are essentially the same. Both are due to the emperor's virtue and the auspiciousness of the holy king.

古文：金玉之世，故有金玉之应。
现代文：如金玉般的盛世，所以就有金玉出现的瑞应。
English: If the golden age is like a golden ball, then there is a good reason for the golden ball to appear.

古文：文帝之时，玉棒见。
现代文：汉文帝的时候，玉杯出现。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwen, the jade cup appeared.

古文：金之与玉，瑞之最也。
现代文：金和玉在祥瑞中是无与伦比的。
English: Gold and jade are unrivaled in Xiangrui.

古文：金声玉色，人之奇也。
现代文：金的声音和玉的颜色，是人间极稀有的。
English: The sound of gold and the color of jade are extremely rare in the world.

古文：永昌郡中亦有金焉，纤靡大如黍粟，在水涯沙中。民采得，日重五铢之金，一色正黄。
现代文：永昌郡中也有金，细小得像粟粒那样大，在水边的沙中，老百姓每天可以采得五铢重的金，一色纯黄。
English: There is also gold in Yongchang County. It is so small that it is as big as a corn kernel. In the sand at the water's edge, ordinary people can collect five times their weight in gold every day. It is pure yellow.

古文：土生金，土色黄。
现代文：土生金，土色是黄色。
English: Native gold, earthy yellow.

古文：汉，土德也，故金化出。
现代文：汉朝，属土德，所以黄金就化生出来。
English: The Han Dynasty belonged to the Germanic people, so gold was born.

古文：金有三品，黄比见者，黄为瑞也。
现代文：金有三个等级，黄金一再出现，因为黄色是汉朝祥瑞的标志。
English: There are three grades of gold, and gold appears again and again, because yellow is the symbol of the Han Dynasty.

古文：圯桥老父遗张良书，化为黄石。黄石之精，出为符也。
现代文：圯桥上一位老人授给张良一部兵书，后来老人又变成黄石，黄石之精变成老人出现，是汉朝的一种符瑞。
English: An old man on the bridge gave Zhang Liang a military book. Later, the old man turned into Huangshi, and the spirit of Huangshi turned into an old man. It was a kind of evidence of the Han Dynasty.

古文：夫石，金之类也，质异色钧，皆土瑞也。
现代文：黄石，也是金一类的东西，质地虽然不同，颜色却是一样的。
English: Yellowstone is also a type of gold. Although the texture is different, the color is the same.

古文：建初三年，零陵泉陵女子傅宁宅，土中忽生芝草五本，长者尺四五寸，短者七八寸，茎叶紫色，盖紫芝也。
现代文：建初三年，零陵郡泉陵县女子傅宁的家里，土中忽然长出五棵灵芝草，长的有一尺四五寸，短的有七八寸，茎叶全是紫色，是紫灵芝。
English: In the first three years of construction, in the home of a woman named Fu Ning in Quanling County, Liling County, five reishi grasses suddenly sprung up in the soil. The long ones were 1.45 meters and the short ones were 7.8 meters. The stems and leaves were all purple, and they were purple reishi.

古文：太守沈酆遗门下掾衍盛奉献，皇帝悦怿，赐钱衣食。
现代文：郡太守沈丰派门下属官衍盛把紫芝奉献给皇帝，皇帝非常喜欢，赐给钱、衣服和食物。
English: The county governor Shen Feng sent his subordinate officer Yan Sheng to dedicate Zizhi to the emperor. The emperor was very pleased and gave him money, clothes and food.

古文：诏会公卿，郡国上计吏民皆在，以芝告示天下。
现代文：皇帝下令召集三公九卿、地方各郡、各诸侯国、上计吏、豪绅地主等，把紫灵芝的出现向全国公布。
English: The emperor ordered to convene the three princes and nine nobles, the local counties, the vassal states, the chief accountant, the wealthy landowners, etc. to announce the appearance of the purple reishi mushroom to the whole country.

古文：天下并闻，吏民欢喜，咸知汉德丰雍，瑞应出也。
现代文：天下同时闻知此事，官民欢呼喜庆，都知道汉朝的功德隆盛，所以祥瑞出现了。
English: The whole world heard about it at the same time, and the officials and the people cheered and celebrated. They all knew that the Han Dynasty was flourishing, so Xiang Rui appeared.

古文：四年，甘露下泉陵、零陵、洮阳、始安、冷道五县，榆柏梅李，叶皆洽薄，威委流漉，民嗽吮之，甘如饴蜜。
现代文：建初四年，甘露降下泉陵、零陵、洮阳、始安、泠道五个县，榆柏梅李各种树木的叶子普遍得到滋润，茂盛的树叶往下滴甘露，老百姓吸饮甘露，甘甜得像饴蜜一样。
English: In the first four years of construction, the nectar fell on the five counties of Quanling, Ziling, Fenyang, Shi'an and Shantou. The leaves of various trees in Zibo and Meili were generally moisturized. The lush leaves dripped nectar, and the people drank the nectar, which was as sweet as honey.

古文：五年，芝草复生泉陵男子周服宅，六本，色状如三年芝，并前凡十一本。
现代文：建初五年，灵芝草又在泉陵县男子周服的家中长出六棵，颜色形状与建初三年长的一样，连同前面长出的共计有十一棵之多。
English: In the first five years of construction, six trees of Ganoderma lucidum grew up in the home of a man named Zhoufu in Quanling County. The color and shape were the same as those that grew up in the first three years of construction. Together with the trees that grew up before, there were a total of eleven trees.

古文：湘水去泉陵城七里，水上聚石曰燕室丘，临水有侠山，其下岩淦，水深不测，二黄龙见，长出十六丈，身大於马，举头顾望，状如图中画龙，燕室丘民皆观见之。
现代文：湘江距泉陵城七里远，江水中有一座砂石堆成的小岛叫 燕室丘 ，江边有座山叫 侠山 ，山下是陡壁悬崖，水深得测不到底。两条黄龙出现在这里，长度超过了十六丈，身体比马粗大，龙抬着头四处观望，形状就像图画中画的龙那样，燕室丘附近的老百姓都望见了这两条龙。
English: The Xiangjiang River is seven miles away from Quanling City. In the river, there is a small island made of sand and stone called Yanmuro Hill. There is a mountain called Xiaoshan at the edge of the river. Below the mountain is a steep cliff, and the water depth can not be measured. Two yellow dragons appeared here, with a length of more than sixteen feet and a body larger than a horse. The dragons looked around with their heads up. The shape was like the dragon in the picture. The people near the Yanmuro Hill saw the two dragons.

古文：去龙可数十步，又见状如驹马，小大凡六，出水遨戏陵上，盖二龙之子也。
现代文：距两龙大约数十步远的地方，又看见形体像马驹一样大的龙，大大小小一共六条，从水中出来在丘陵上游玩，它们是那两条龙的儿子。
English: About a dozen paces away from the two dragons, he also saw six dragons, large and small, as big as foals, come out of the water to play on the hills. They were the sons of the two dragons.

古文：并二龙为八，出移一时乃入。
现代文：连同两条龙一起共为八条龙，出水经过一个时辰才进入水中。
English: Together with the two dragons, there are a total of eight dragons, and it takes an hour for them to enter the water.

古文：宣帝时，凤皇下彭城，彭城以闻。
现代文：汉宣帝时，凤凰降落在彭城郡，彭城郡把这件事报告了皇帝。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, the phoenix landed in Pengcheng County, and Pengcheng County reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：宣帝诏侍中宋翁一。翁一曰： 凤皇当下京师，集於天子之郊，乃远下彭城，不可收，与无下等。 
现代文：汉宣帝下诏询问侍中宋翁一，翁一说： 凤凰应当降落在京城，停落在天子祭天的地方，竟远远地降落在彭城，不可取，和没有降落一样。 
English: When Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict, he asked the chamberlain Song Wengyi. Wengyi said, "The phoenix should have landed in the capital, in the place where the Son of Heaven was sacrificed, but it landed far away in Pengcheng, which is not desirable, and is the same as not landing.

古文：宣帝曰： 方今天下合为一家，下彭城与京师等耳，何令可与无下等乎？ 
现代文：汉宣帝说： 当今天下统一成一家，降落在彭城和降落在京师是一样的，怎么能把它看作和没有降落一样呢？ 
English: Han Xuan Di said, "When today we are united as one family, landing in Pengcheng is the same as landing in Beijing Division, how can it be regarded as the same as not landing?"

古文：令左右通经者论难翁一，翁一穷，免冠叩头谢。
现代文：皇帝命令左右通晓经书的人反驳宋翁一，翁一理屈辞穷，取下头冠向皇帝叩头谢罪。
English: The emperor ordered those around him who were familiar with the scriptures to refute Song Wengyi. Wengyi politely declined and took off his headdress to bow to the emperor.

古文：宣帝之时，与今无异。
现代文：汉宣帝的时候，与现在没有什么区别。
English: There was no difference between the time of Emperor Han Xuan and now.

古文：凤皇之集，黄龙之出，钧也。
现代文：凤凰的停落，黄龙的出现，都是同样的。
English: The halting of the phoenix and the appearance of the yellow dragon are the same.

古文：彭城、零陵，远近同也。
现代文：彭城和零陵距都城远近差不多。
English: Pengcheng and the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier are almost the same distance from the capital.

古文：帝宅长远，四表为界，零陵在内，犹为近矣。
现代文：帝王的领土又长又远，四边以极远的地方为疆界，零陵郡在四表之内，仍然是很近的了。
English: The emperor's territory is long and far, and the four sides are bounded by extremely distant places. Luling County is within four tables, but it is still very close.

古文：鲁人公孙臣，孝文时言汉土德，其符黄龙当见。
现代文：鲁地人公孙臣，在汉文帝时说汉朝属土德，汉朝的符瑞应当是黄龙出现。
English: In the time of Emperor Hanwen, the Ludian Sun Zhen said that the Han Dynasty belonged to the Germanic people, and the Fu Rui of the Han Dynasty should be the appearance of the Yellow Dragon.

古文：其後，黄龙见於成纪。
现代文：以后，黄龙在成纪县出现。
English: Later, Huanglong appeared in Chengji County.

古文：成纪之远，犹零陵也。
现代文：成纪县的远近，和零陵一样。
English: Chengji County is near and far, just like the Zero Mausoleum.

古文：孝武、孝宣时，黄龙皆出。
现代文：汉武帝和汉宣帝时，黄龙都出现过。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Han Xuan, yellow dragons appeared.

古文：黄龙比出，於兹为四。汉竟土德也。
现代文：黄龙接连出现，到这次出现共有四次了，汉朝完全了它的土德。
English: The Yellow Dragon appeared one after another, and by this time it had appeared a total of four times. The Han Dynasty had perfected its national spirit.

古文：贾谊创议於文帝之朝云： 汉色当尚黄，数以五为名。 
现代文：贾谊在汉文帝在位时首先建议，说： 汉朝的服色应当崇尚黄色，数字应当以五作为标志。 
English: When Emperor Hanwen was on the throne, Jia Yi first suggested, saying: The Han Dynasty's clothing color should be yellow, and the number should be marked with five.

古文：贾谊，智襄之臣，云色黄数五，土德审矣。
现代文：贾谊是足智多谋的大臣，说崇尚黄色和五这个数字，可见汉朝确实是土德了。
English: Jia Yiyi was a resourceful minister. He said that advocating yellow and the number five showed that the Han Dynasty was indeed German.

古文：芝生於土，土气和，故芝生土。
现代文：灵芝草生长在土中，土气调和，所以灵芝草生长。
English: Ganoderma lucidum grows in the soil, the soil atmosphere is harmonized, so Ganoderma lucidum grows.

古文：土爰稼穑，稼穑作甘，故甘露集。
现代文：土是适合耕种收获的，庄稼长出来味道甘甜，所以甘露就汇集。
English: The soil is suitable for cultivation and harvest, and the crops grow and taste sweet, so the nectar is collected.

古文：龙见，往世不双，唯夏盛时，二龙在庭，今龙双出，应夏之数，治谐偶也。
现代文：龙出现，以往不见双数，只有夏朝兴盛时有两条龙出现在朝廷，当今龙成双出现，符合夏朝时龙出现的数目，说明汉朝的统治与夏朝同样好。
English: In the past, there was no double number of dragons, only two dragons appeared at the imperial court when the Xia Dynasty was flourishing. Today's dragons appear in pairs, which is consistent with the number of dragons that appeared during the Xia Dynasty, indicating that the rule of the Han Dynasty is as good as that of the Xia Dynasty.

古文：龙出往世，其子希出，今小龙六头，并出遨戏，象乾坤六子，嗣後多也。
现代文：以往出现龙，小龙极少出现，当今六条小龙一起出现游玩嘻戏，就像乾坤六子，象征子孙后代很多。
English: In the past, dragons and small dragons rarely appeared. Today, six small dragons appear together to play hip-hop, just like the legendary six sons, symbolizing many future generations.

古文：唐、虞之时，百兽率舞，今亦八龙遨戏良久。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜的时候，各种野兽都欢舞，当今也有八条龙游玩嘻戏了很长时间。
English: During the Tang Dynasty and the Yu Dynasty, all kinds of beasts danced for joy. Today, there are also eight dragons that have been dancing for a long time.

古文：芝草延年，仙者所食，往世生出不过一二，今并前後凡十一本，多获寿考之徵，生育松乔之粮也。
现代文：灵芝草可以延年益寿，是仙人吃的东西，以往长出来不过一二棵而已，当今连同前后长出的总共十一棵，这是很多人将会获得长寿的征兆，因为灵芝草是养育赤松子、王子乔一类仙人的食粮啊。
English: Ganoderma lucidum can prolong life and is eaten by immortals. In the past, only one or two plants grew. Today, together with a total of eleven trees that have grown before and after, this is a sign that many people will gain longevity, because Ganoderma lucidum is the food for raising red pine nuts, Prince Joe and other immortals.

古文：甘露之降，往世一所，今流五县，应土之数，德布濩也。
现代文：甘露降落，以往降一个地区，当今散布五个县，符合土德所崇尚的数字，这是由于汉朝的功德广泛传播的缘故。
English: The descent of the nectar, which in the past fell to one region, is now spread over five counties, which is in line with the number advocated by the German people. This is due to the widespread dissemination of the merits of the Han Dynasty.

古文：皇瑞比见，其出不空，必有象为，随德是应。
现代文：大的祥瑞连接出现，它们的出现不是平白无故的，必然有所象征，是密切应合了汉朝的功德的。
English: The emergence of great auspicious and auspicious connections is not gratuitous, but necessarily symbolic, and is closely in line with the merits of the Han Dynasty.

古文：孔子曰： 知者乐，仁者寿。 
现代文：孔子说： 聪明的人快乐，仁爱的人长寿。 
English: Confucius said: "Wise people are happy, benevolent people live long."

古文：皇帝圣人，故芝草寿徵生。
现代文：汉代皇帝圣明仁爱，所以作为长寿象征的灵芝草就出现了。
English: Emperor Shengmingren of the Han Dynasty loved Ganoderma lucidum, so Ganoderma lucidum appeared as a symbol of longevity.

古文：黄为土色，位在中央，故轩辕德优，以黄为号。
现代文：黄色是土相配属的颜色，位置配属五方的中央，所以轩辕氏功德高尚，用 黄 字作为名号称 黄帝 。
English: Yellow is the color of the earth phase, and the position belongs to the center of the five sides. Therefore, Xuan Yu's merits are noble, and he is called Huang Di with the yellow character as his name.

古文：皇帝宽惠，德侔黄帝，故龙色黄，示德不异。
现代文：汉代皇帝宽厚仁惠，功德与黄帝相等，所以龙的颜色是黄色，表示汉代皇帝的功德和黄帝没有两样。
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty was generous and benevolent, and his merits were equal to those of the Yellow Emperor, so the color of the dragon was yellow, indicating that the merits of the emperor of the Han Dynasty were no different from those of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：东方曰仁，龙，东方之兽也，皇帝圣人，故仁瑞见。
现代文：东方属仁，龙，是东方之兽，皇帝圣明仁爱，所以仁瑞就出现了。
English: The East belongs to benevolence, and the dragon is the beast of the East. Emperor Shengming was benevolent and loving, which is why Ren Rui appeared.

古文：仁者，养育之味也，皇帝仁惠爱黎民，故甘露降。
现代文：甘味，是滋养万物的味，皇帝仁惠，爱护老百姓，所以甘露就降下来了。
English: Sweetness is the taste that nourishes all things, the emperor is benevolent and cares for the people, so the nectar falls down.

古文：龙，潜藏之物也，阳见於外，皇帝圣明，招拔岩穴也。
现代文：龙，是潜藏着的神物，却公开出现，象征皇帝圣明，收罗选用隐居的人才。
English: The dragon is a hidden sacred object, but it appears openly, symbolizing the emperor's sacredness, and is used to attract and select secluded talents.

古文：瑞出必由嘉士，佑至必依吉人也。
现代文：祥瑞出现一定是因为有了贤臣，福祐到来必定是因为有了良臣。
English: Xiang Rui must have appeared because he had a wise minister, and Fu Yu must have come because he had a good minister.

古文：天道自然，厥应偶合。
现代文：天道自然无为，这种应合是偶然碰到了一起。
English: The natural course of nature is to do nothing, and this coincidence came about by chance.

古文：圣主获瑞，亦出群贤。
现代文：圣主遇到祥瑞，也就会碰巧出现很多贤良的人才。
English: When a saint meets a virtuous person, many virtuous people will also happen to appear.

古文：君明臣良，庶事以康。
现代文：君王圣明臣下贤良，所有的事情因此都办理得很好。
English: The king, Sun Myung Moon, and his ministers were all virtuous, so everything went well.

古文：文、武受命，力亦周、邵也。
现代文：周文王和周武王承受天命，是得力于周公和邵公的辅佐。
English: King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu received their heavenly destinies and were assisted by Zhou Gong and Shao Gong.

