古文：◎宣宗下四年春正月壬辰朔，诏免朝。
现代文：兴定四年春正月初一，诏令免朝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Xingding, the imperial edict exempted the imperial court.

古文：丙申，金安军节度使行元帅府事古里甲古伦除名。
现代文：初五，金安军节度使行元帅府事古里甲石伦被除名。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the commander of the Jinan Army, Marshal Gu Li, was removed from his post.

古文：丁酉，大元兵下好义堡，霍州刺史移剌阿里合等死之。
现代文：初六，元朝军攻下好义堡，霍州刺史移剌阿里合等死去。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Yuan Dynasty army captured Goyiborg, and Huozhou stabbed Shiqian Ali and died.

古文：诏赠官有差。
现代文：诏令有区别的赠官。
English: The imperial edict made a distinction in the bestowing of officials.

古文：庚戌，宋步骑十余万围邓州，闻援军至，夜焚营去，招抚副使术虎移剌答追及之，夺其俘还。
现代文：十九日，宋朝十几万步骑兵围攻邓州，听说援军到，夜晚焚营而走，招抚副使术虎移剌答追上了宋军，夺回俘虏。
English: On the 19th, more than a hundred thousand foot cavalrymen of the Song Dynasty besieged Dengzhou. Hearing that reinforcements had arrived, they set fire to the camp and left in the evening. The deputy envoy of the Song Dynasty, Zhaopu, caught up with the Song Army and recaptured the prisoners.

古文：壬子，昼晦，有顷大雷电，雨以风。
现代文：二十一日，天气晦暗，一会儿雷电交加，风雨齐作。
English: On the twenty-first day, the weather was gloomy, with thunder and lightning for a while, and wind and rain.

古文：癸丑，户部侍郎张师鲁上书，请遣骑兵数千，及春，淮、蜀并进、以挠宋。
现代文：二十二日，户部侍郎张师鲁上书，请派几千骑兵，到春天时，淮、蜀两地并进，阻止宋朝军。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Shilu, the head of the Household Division, sent a letter requesting the dispatch of several thousand cavalry. By spring, the two regions of Huai and Shu would march side by side to stop the Song Dynasty army.

古文：丙辰，以武仙遥领中京留守，进官一阶。
现代文：二十五日，任命武仙为遥领中京留守，升一级官。
English: On the 25th, Wu Xian was appointed as the remote leader in Beijing, and was promoted to the first-level official.

古文：三月辛丑，议迁睢州，治书侍御史蒲鲁虎奉诏相视京东城池，还言勿迁便，乃止。
现代文：三月十一日，议论迁址睢州，治书侍御史蒲鲁虎奉诏巡视京东城池，回来说不迁为好，于是停止迁址。
English: On March 11th, discussing the relocation of the site to Bozhou, the chief secretary, Shi Buluhu, made an inspection of the Jingdong city pond, and said that it would be better not to move, so the relocation was stopped.

古文：癸卯，长春节，诏免朝。
现代文：十三日，长春节，诏令免朝贺。
English: On the 13th day of the Chinese New Year, the imperial edict forbade morning greetings.

古文：乙巳，林州元帅惟良擒叛人单仲、李俊，诛之，降其党卢广。
现代文：十五日，林州元帅惟良擒捕叛人单仲、李俊，杀了他们，降服了其党徒卢广。
English: On the 15th, Linzhou Marshal Wei Liangyao captured the traitors Shan Zhong and Li Jun, killed them, and subdued his party member Lu Guang.

古文：己酉，以吏部尚书李复亨参知政事，南京兵马使术甲赛也行怀、孟帅府事。
现代文：十九日，任命吏部尚书李复亨为参知政事，南京兵马使术甲赛也行怀、孟帅府事。
English: On the 19th, Li Fuheng, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Nanjing's soldiers and horses were also sent to the capital.

古文：辛亥，进平章政事高汝砺为尚书右丞相，监修国史，封寿国公。
现代文：二十一日，晋升平章政事高汝砺为尚书右丞相、监修国史，封为寿国公。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Gao Rucheng, the political secretary of the Taira clan, was promoted to the Minister of the Right of the Imperial Household, the supervisor of the national history, and was named the Prince of Shou.

古文：参知政事李复亨兼修国史。
现代文：参知政事李复亨兼修国史。
English: Li Fucheng, a member of the Council of Elders and a politician, also studied national history.

古文：平章政事、陕西行尚书省胥鼎进封温国公，致仕。
现代文：平章政事、陕西行尚书省胥鼎进封温国公，退休。
English: Pingzhang government affairs, Shaanxi Province, Shangshuo Province, Guiding into the seal of Wen Guogong, retired.

古文：壬子，红袄贼于忙儿袭据海州，经略使完颜陈儿以兵击败忙儿，复取之。
现代文：二十二日，红袄贼寇于忙儿袭击占据海州，经略使完颜陈儿带兵打败了于忙儿，又收回了海州。
English: On the 22nd, the Red Kite raiders attacked and occupied Haizhou, and after a bit of maneuvering, the soldiers led by Yan Chen defeated Yu Chaer and took back Haizhou.

古文：甲寅，木星犯鬼宿积尸气。
现代文：二十四日，木星侵犯鬼宿积尸气。
English: On the 24th, Jupiter invaded the house of the dead.

古文：夏四月庚申朔，诏御史中丞完颜伯嘉提控防城事。
现代文：夏四月初一，诏令御史中丞完颜伯嘉提控防城事。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Zhao ordered the Grand Historian Zhongzheng to take control of the defense of the city.

古文：癸亥，安武军节度使柴茂破红袄贼于枣强。
现代文：初四，安武军节度使柴茂在枣强打败红袄贼寇。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Anwu army's festival caused Chai Mao to defeat the Red Skull thief in Zaoqiang.

古文：祁州经略使段增顺破叛贼甄全于唐县。
现代文：祁州经略使段增顺在唐县打败叛贼甄全。
English: The Zhangzhou Economic Slip enabled Duan Zengshun to defeat the traitor Yan Quan in Tang County.

古文：夏人犯边，元帅石盏合喜破之。
现代文：西夏军侵犯边疆，元帅石盏合喜打败了他们。
English: The Xixia Army invaded the frontier, and Marshal Shizhen Hexi defeated them.

古文：乙丑，以彰德、卫、辉、滑、浚诸州隶河南路转运司。
现代文：初六，把彰德、卫、辉、滑、浚等州划归河南路转运司管辖。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Zhangde, Wei, Hui, Slip and Dredge prefectures were placed under the jurisdiction of Henan Road Transportation Division.

古文：以河南路转运司为都转运，视中都，增置官吏。
现代文：把河南路转运司改为都转运，在中都办公，增设官员。
English: The Henan Road Transshipment Division will be renamed as the Henan Road Transshipment Division, with offices in Zhongdu and additional officials.

古文：戊辰，禘于太庙。
现代文：初九，在太庙祭祀。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：大元遣赵瑞以兵攻孟州。
现代文：元朝派赵瑞带兵攻打孟州。
English: The Yuan Dynasty sent Zhao Rui to lead troops to attack Mengzhou.

古文：提控鲁德、王安复大名府。
现代文：提控鲁德、王安收复大名府。
English: He took control of Lude, and Wang An recovered Damingfu.

古文：以参知政事把胡鲁权尚书右丞、左副元师，元帅左都监承立为右监军权参知政事，同行尚书省元帅府于京兆。
现代文：任命参知政事把胡鲁权尚书右丞、左副元帅，元帅左都监承立为右监军权参知政事，在京兆同行尚书省元帅府。
English: Appointed the political advisor to the governor-general, appointed Huluguan Shangshu to the vice-governor-general and deputy marshal of the left, and appointed the marshal of the left to be the supervisor of the right, and the political advisor to the governor-general of the military, in the marshal's office of Shangshu Province.

古文：庚辰，东平元帅府总领提控蒲察山儿破红袄贼于聊城。
现代文：二十一日，东平元帅府总令提控蒲察山儿在聊城大败红袄贼寇。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the general commander of the Dongping Marshal's Office brought charges against the Putsasans, who defeated the Red Skull Thieves and Robbers in Liaocheng.

古文：壬年，命六部检法以法状亲白部官，听其面议，大理寺如之。五月壬辰，定二品至三品立功迁官格。
现代文：五月初三，制定二品到三品官员立功升官的制度。二十七日，元朝军占领兖州，泰定军节度使兀颜畏可死去。六月初八，派人招安张柔。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, a system was established to promote officials from the second grade to the third grade on the basis of merit. On the 27th day, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Zhangzhou, and the Tai Ding Army festival made Yan Yanwei die. On the eighth day of the sixth month, An Zhang Rong was sent to recruit.

古文：癸巳，红袄贼寇乐陵、盐山，横海军节度使王福连击败之，张聚来寇，又败之。
现代文：初九，诏令削减四名监察御史。八月初三，宣宗皇帝告谕枢密，颍州百姓渡过淮河投靠宋军的已有几十村，可追查领头人，惩罚一个以警告其余的人。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the imperial edict cut four supervisors. At the beginning of the third month of August, Emperor Xuanzong announced to the Privy Council that the people of Zhangzhou had crossed the Huai River to support the Song Army in dozens of villages, and they could track down the leaders and punish one to warn the rest.

古文：甲午，上击鞠于临武殿。
现代文：九月初二，诏令派官在河南、陕西选拔亲军。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the imperial edict sent officials to select relatives in Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：丙申，以时暑，免常朝，四日一奏事。
现代文：二十三日，西夏军攻陷西宁州，尚书省都事仆散奴失不因此被杀，驸马都尉徒单寿春降一级官，杖打六十。
English: On the 23rd, the Western Xia Army invaded and occupied Xining Province. Shangshu Province's capital, Zhuji, was captured and killed as a result. The captain of the horse, Toushan Shuchun, was demoted to a first-class official, and his staff was reduced to sixty.

古文：丁酉，谕工部暑月停工役。癸卯，大元兵徇庾州。
现代文：冬十月初六，元朝派蒙古塔忽、讹里剌等来朝。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, the Yuan Dynasty sent Mongolian pagodas such as Khu and Baoli to China.

古文：丙辰，大元兵徇兖州，泰定军节度使兀颜畏可死之。
现代文：二十四日，宣宗皇帝在临武殿打球。十一月初一，免去越王永功月初、月中朝拜。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Xuanzong played ball at the Linwu Palace. On the first day of November, Emperor Yonggong of Yue was excused from paying homage at the beginning and middle of the month.

古文：六月丙寅，遣人招张柔。
现代文：十二日，诏令恢复卫绍王的王爵，仍任开府仪同三司。
English: On the 12th, the imperial edict restored the title of prince to King Weishao, and he was still appointed as Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：丁卯，诏减监察御史四员。
现代文：兴定五年春正月初一，免朝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Xingding, the morning is free.

古文：壬午，上亲奠于殡所。
现代文：初二，是世宗的忌日，在启庆宫祭奠。
English: On the second day of the first month, the day of Sejong's death, a memorial service was held at the Kaiqing Palace.

古文：秋七月己亥，义勇军叛，据砀山县。
现代文：二月初一，在单州设置招抚司。大赦东平府。初五，下令攻打宋朝。
English: On the first day of the second month of the year, he set up a recruiting office in Shanzhou. He granted amnesty to Dongpingfu. On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered to attack the Song Dynasty.

古文：庚子，诏增给徐州、清口等处戍兵衣粮。
现代文：三月初一，宣宗皇帝御驾仁安殿求雨。四月十八日，俘虏宋朝宗室男女七十多人送到京城。
English: On the first day of March, Emperor Xuanzong rode to the Ren'an Palace to pray for rain. On April 18, more than 70 male and female prisoners of the Song Dynasty were sent to the capital.

古文：己酉，砀山贼夜袭永城县，行军副总领高琬败之，命蒙古纲并力讨捕。
现代文：六月初一，尚书省上奏驸马都尉安贞谋反情况，宣宗皇帝看了奏章后考虑情况不实，对平章政事英王守纯说： 国家杀一大臣，一定会遭天下后世人议论。此令压下。 二十六日，越王永功死去。二十七日，辍朝。二十九日，宣宗皇帝在殡所亲自祭奠。
English: On the first day of the month of June, Shang Shuxu made a report on the situation of Ma Duan An Zhen's plotting to rebel. After reading the report, Emperor Xuan Zong considered the situation to be untrue. He said to Ping Zang's political advisor, Ying Wang Shujun: "If the country kills a minister, it will certainly be discussed by the world." This order was suppressed. On the 26th, King Yue Yong Gong died. On the 27th, he left the dynasty. On the 29th, Emperor Xuan Zong personally paid tribute at the funeral parlor.

古文：辛亥，单州招抚刘琼乞移河南粮济其军，诏给之。
现代文：秋七月十七日，义勇军叛乱，占据砀山县。二十九日，单州招抚刘琼乞求调河南粮食给他的军队，皇帝宣宗下诏批准。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict approving the transfer of grain from Henan to his army, after Liu Qiong, the governor of Shan State, begged for the transfer.

古文：八月壬子朔，罢黄陵堈招抚司。
现代文：八月初一，废除黄陵聏招抚司。
English: On the first day of August, the Huangling District Social Welfare Department was abolished.

古文：上谕尚书省，砀山叛军家属囚归德，旬余不给粮，恐伤其生。
现代文：宣宗皇帝告谕尚书省，砀山叛军的家属囚在归德，十几天不给粮食，恐怕伤害了他们的性命。
English: Emperor Xuanzong announced to Shangshu Province that the families of the Lushan rebel prisoners were returning to Germany, and they would not be given food for ten days, which would probably hurt their lives.

古文：宰臣奏，已给之矣。
现代文：宰臣奏说 ：已经给他们粮食了。 
English: The vice-minister said, "They have been given food."

古文：又谕枢密，河北艰食，民欲南来者日益多，速令渡之，毋致殍死。
现代文：宣宗皇帝又告谕枢密，河北粮食困难，百姓想南迁的日益增多，快让他们渡过黄河，这样不至于饿死。
English: Emperor Xuanzong also announced to the imperial court that Hebei was experiencing food shortages and that the number of people who wanted to move south was increasing. He urged them to cross the Yellow River so that they would not starve to death.

古文：庚戌，岁星犯左执法。
现代文：九月初三，因京东饥荒而多盗贼，派遣御史大夫纥石烈胡失门为宣慰使，前往招安。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, due to the famine in Jingdong, there were many thieves, so the Imperial Historian, Zou Shi Li Hu, was sent as a messenger of consolation to Zhao'an.

古文：右丞相高汝砺表乞致仕，诏温留之。
现代文：二十七日，右丞相高汝砺上表请求退休，诏令他留任。
English: On the 27th, the Minister of the Right, Gao Rucheng, requested retirement from the table and was ordered to remain in office.

古文：冬十月癸丑，进汝砺官荣禄大夫。
现代文：冬十月初三，进升高汝砺为荣禄大夫。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of the winter, he was promoted to the position of honorary doctor.

古文：命仆散毅夫行尚书省于京东，督诸军刍粮。
现代文：命令仆散毅夫在京东行尚书省，督察诸军粮草。
English: He ordered his servant, San Yifu, to go to Shangshu Province in the eastern part of Beijing to inspect the grain and grass of the troops.

古文：乙卯，太医侯济、张子英治皇孙疾，用药瞑眩，皇孙不能任，遂不疗，罪当死。
现代文：十一月初三，陕西东路行省报在安塞堡打败西夏人的捷报。十二月初一，元朝军攻下潼关、京兆。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the provincial newspaper of the East Shaanxi Province defeated the Xixia people in Anseburg. On the first day of December, the Yuan Dynasty army captured Shaoguan and Jingzhao.

古文：上曰： 济等所犯诚宜死，然在诸叔及弟兄之子，便应准法行之，以朕孙故杀人，所不忍也。 
现代文：闰十二月初一，元朝军占领州，保大军节度使完颜六斤、权元帅左都监纥石烈鹤寿、右都监蒲察娄室、遥授金安军节度使女奚烈资禄都死去。初九，孙王禹及捕盗官吾古出招降泰和县贼寇两千人，诏令斩其首恶，其余的都释放。元光元年春正月初一，免朝。初二，世宗忌日，到启庆宫祭奠。
English: On the first day of the leap month of December, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied the prefecture, the Baoding Army festival was completed, the authority marshal, the left capital overseer, Shi Rongxu, the right capital overseer, Pu Cangshu, and the remote teaching of the Jinan Army festival, the female warrior, died. On the ninth day of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：命杖七十，除名。尚书省言： 司、县官贪暴不法，部民逃亡，既有决罚，他县停匿亦宜定罪。随处土民久困徭役，客户贩鬻坐获厚利，官无所敛，亦宜稍及客户，以宽土民。
现代文：二月十四日，皇帝告谕宰臣，宋朝用重兵攻打平舆、褒信，金军打败了他们。二月二十五日，宣宗皇帝念及、延遭遇战争，加上延安受围，尝试调拨百姓的粮食给军队。
English: On February 14th, the emperor told the vice-ministers that the Song Dynasty had attacked Pingwu and Baoxin with heavy troops, and the Jin Army had defeated them. On February 25th, Emperor Xuanzong tried to allocate the grain of the people to the army, considering that Yan had suffered war and Yan'an had been besieged.

古文：行院帅府幕职，虽无部众，亦尝赞画戎功，而推赏止进官一阶，宜听主将保奏，第功行赏。 
现代文：三月十二日，宋朝军掠夺确山县的刘村。三月二十三日，尚书右丞徒单思忠用病马送给官府，冒领高价，御史弹劾他，有司认为他应为死罪，宣宗顾惜大体，降他为陈州防御使。
English: On March 12th, the Song Dynasty army plundered Liu Village in Jishan County. On March 23rd, Shan Sizhong, a disciple of Xuan Zong, sent a sick horse to the government, pretending to receive a high price. He was impeached by the imperial court, and some judges thought that he should be sentenced to death. Xuan Zong took pity on the situation and demoted him to the position of Chenzhou defense envoy.

古文：丁酉，红袄贼掠柳子镇，驱百姓及驿马而去，提控张瑀追击，夺所掠还。
现代文：夏四月初三，任命金吾卫上将军、劝农使讹可为签枢密院事。初四，元朝军攻打陵川县。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Kim Woo Wee was appointed as the supreme general, and the agrarian envoys were persuaded to sign the Privy Council. On the 4th day of the first month, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Lingchuan County.

古文：伪监军王二据黎阳县，提控王泉讨之，复其城。
现代文：五月初一，元朝兵驻扎隰、吉、翼等州。六月初一，造船运送陕西粮食，由大庆关到湖城。十六日，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of May, Yuan Dynasty soldiers were stationed in states such as Handan, Ji, and Ying. On the first day of June, ships were built to transport grain from Shaanxi, from Daqingguan to Hucheng. On the 16th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：秋七月庚戌，大元将按察邬以其众屯晋安、冀州之境。
现代文：秋七月初四，元朝大将按察儿率兵驻扎晋安、冀州境内。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month of the autumn, the general of the Yuan Dynasty, An Zhaer, led the troops stationed in Jin'an and Jizhou.

古文：丙辰，上党公完颜开复泽州。
现代文：初七，上党公完颜开收复泽州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, the upper-level party officials finally took over Fuzhou.

古文：己未，归德行枢密院王庭玉报曹州破红袄贼之捷。
现代文：八月九日，积石州蕃族叛乱归附西夏，巩州提控尼庞古三郎讨伐他们。因为彗星出现，改元年号，大赦天下。
English: On August 9th, the Jishizhou Yi Rebellion was annexed to Western Xia, and Gongzhou took control of Nepang Kuzaburo to fight them. Because the comet appeared, the name of the year was changed to the first year of the year, and the whole world was pardoned.

古文：庚申，定监当官选法。河北群盗犯封丘、开封界，令枢密院御捕。
现代文：宣宗皇帝谕旨宰臣说 ：大赦文告已颁布，时刻关系人命。此令命人速去公布。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to the vice-minister, saying, "The amnesty proclamation has been issued, people's lives are always at stake. This order is to be announced immediately."

古文：甲子，京东总帅纥石烈牙吾塔请自今行院帅府幕职，有过得自决之。
现代文：十八日，河间公移剌众家奴、高阳公张甫部队收复河间府，当日，报捷的人到朝。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the troops of Goyang Gong Zhangfu and the troops of Kawama Gong Ying and the troops of Goyang Gong Zhangfu retook Kawama Prefecture. On the same day, the people who reported the victory came to the morning.

古文：不允。戊辰，红袄贼袭徐州之十八里砦，又袭古城、桃园，官军破之。
现代文：宣宗皇帝认为道路阻塞，报告人艰苦，命令厚赏。九月初七，牙吾塔请求率军队由寿州渡淮河，捣宋朝的巢穴，没被批准。二十四日，宋朝军队侵掠遂平县的石砦店，又侵犯南阳，唐州提控夹谷九住打败了他们。
English: Emperor Xuanzong thought that the road was blocked, the reporter was difficult, and ordered a large reward. On the 7th day of the 9th month, the request of Yaguta to lead the army from Shoushu to cross the Huaihe River and attack the nest of the Song Dynasty was not approved. On the 24th day, the Song Dynasty army invaded and plundered the Shifeng Store in Suiping County, and invaded Nanyang. Tangzhou defeated them.

古文：乙亥，太白昼见经天，与日争光。
现代文：冬十月初十，宣宗皇帝在近郊打猎，下诏免去百官送迎，并且命令不要开道，避免劳民。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, Emperor Xuanzong went hunting in the suburbs. He issued an edict exempting all officials from escorting him, and ordered that no roads be opened to avoid laborers.

古文：事事须朕言之，安用汝曹也！ 
现代文：十一月初三，元朝军占领同州，定国军节度使李复亨、同知定国军节度使讹可都自尽而亡。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Tongzhou, and Li Fuheng, the commander of the Dingguo Army, and Zou Ke, the commander of the Dingguo Army, both committed suicide.

古文：乙卯，丹凤门坏。丁巳，阴坡族之骨鞠门等叛归夏，元帅夹谷瑞发兵讨之，以捷闻。
现代文：十二月初一，宣宗皇帝对皇太子说 ：我曾经夜里考虑天下事，一定起来点蜡烛记下它，第二天就实行，你也应这样做。 元光二年春正月初一，诏令免去朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of December, Emperor Xuanzong said to the crown prince: I used to think about world affairs at night, I must get up and light a candle to write it down, and do it the next day, you should do the same.

古文：御史中丞师安石言制敌二事。
现代文：初二世宗的忌日，到启庆宫祭奠。
English: On the day of the death of the first two generations, a memorial service was held at the Kaiqing Palace.

古文：戊午，宰臣方对次，有司奏前奉御温敦太平卒。
现代文：右丞相汝砺请求退休，宣宗皇帝召见挽留。三月十一日，宣宗皇帝对宰臣说 ：人有才无德，终不为贵。 秋七月十七日，有司奏前奉御温敦太平死了。
English: On March 11th, Emperor Xuanzong summoned him to ask him to stay on. On the same day, Emperor Xuanzong said to the vice-minister, "A man is valuable if he has talent, but not if he has virtue." On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Emperor Xuanzong's former vassal Emperor Wenden Taiping died.

古文：上大骇曰： 朕屡欲授太平一职，每以事阻，今仅授之未数日而亡，岂非天耶！ 
现代文：宣宗皇帝大惊说 ：朕屡次想授温敦太平一职务，常因为其他事而耽搁，现在才授几天他就死了，难道这是天意！ 
English: Emperor Xuan Zong was shocked and said, "I have repeatedly wanted to confer the title of Taiping on Wyndon, but have often been delayed by other matters. Now, only a few days after conferring the title, he has died. Is this the will of heaven?

古文：因谓宰臣曰： 海陵时有护卫二人私语，一曰富贵在天，一曰由君所赐。
现代文：因此宣宗皇帝对宰臣说 ：海陵做皇帝时有两个护卫私下说，一说富贵在天，一说由君所赐。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong said to the Vice-Minister: When Hailing became emperor, there were two guards who said in private, one said that wealth was in heaven, and the other said that it was given by the emperor.

古文：海陵窃闻之，诏授言由君所得以五品职，意谓诚由己也，而其人以疾竟不及授。
现代文：海陵皇帝暗中听说后，诏令授予 由君所赐 者五品职务，而其人因为病竟不能接受授职。
English: After the Emperor Hailing heard about it in secret, he issued a decree awarding the five-star rank to the person who was given the rank by the emperor, but the person was unable to accept the award because of illness.

古文：章宗秋猎，闻平章张万公薨，叹曰： 朕乃将拜万公丞相，而遂不起，命也。  
现代文：章宗皇帝秋猎，听说平章张万公死去，他感叹道 ：朕回去将授予张万公为丞相。 而他却死了，这是命。 
English: When Emperor Zhangzong of Qiuhuang heard that Zhang Wankong of Pingzhang had died, he lamented, "I will go back and make Zhang Wankong the prime minister, but he is dead, this is life."

古文：开封县境有虎咥人，诏亲军百人射杀之，赏射获者银二十两，而以内府药赐伤者。
现代文：八月初一，邳州从宜经略使纳合六哥等率都统金山颜俊带领沂州的一百多人，早晨进入省府，杀了行尚书省蒙古纲后反叛。九月初，宋朝军进入寿州，女奚烈蒲乃奋力作战打退了他们。冬十月初四，把晋阳公郭文振的兵调到卫州。初八，宣宗皇帝在近郊打猎。
English: On the first day of August, more than a hundred people from Bozhou entered the provincial capital in the morning, led by Jinshan Yanjun, who was sent from Yicheng to the capital of Jinan Province, and killed the rebels after marching to the Mongolian capital of Shangshu Province. At the beginning of September, the Song Dynasty army entered Shoushou, and the female warrior Poona fought hard to beat them back. In the winter, on the fourth day of October, the soldiers of Guo Wenzhen, the Duke of Jinyang, were transferred to Weizhou. In the eighth day of the first month, Emperor Xuanzong hunted in the suburbs.

古文：丙午，邳州红袄贼三千来降，初拟置诸陈、许之间，上以为 若辈虽降，家属尚在河朔，余党必杀之，所得者寡而被害者众，亦复安忍？
现代文：十一月初八，邳州红袄贼寇三千人来降，开始拟把他们放到陈、许两地间。宣宗皇帝说：他们虽然投降了，而家属还在河朔，其余的党徒一定会杀他们，而我们所得到的人少而被杀人多，于心何忍？
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month of the year, three thousand Zhangzhou Red Skull bandits came down and began to plan to put them between Chen and Xu. Emperor Xuanzong said: Although they have surrendered, and their families are still in Hexuo, the rest of the party members will surely kill them, and we get fewer people but are killed more, how can we bear it?

古文：不若命使抚谕，加以官赏而遣之还。
现代文：不如命使者安抚告谕，加以官职、奖赏而送他们回去。
English: It would be better to send them back with a placating message from the messenger of death, an official post and a reward.

古文：丁亥，上不豫，免朝。
现代文：十九日，宣宗皇帝不舒服免朝。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Xuanzong was not feeling well and was excused from the court.

古文：戊子，皇太子率百官及王妃、公主入问起居。
现代文：二十日，皇太子率百官及王妃、公主入朝问皇帝安。
English: On the 20th, the crown prince led hundreds of officials and empresses and princesses into the court to ask the emperor for his greetings.

古文：己丑，复入问起居。
现代文：二十一日，又入朝问安。
English: On the twenty-first day, I went to the Imperial Palace again to ask for their greetings.

古文：庚寅，上崩于宁德殿，寿六十有一。
现代文：二十二日，宣宗皇帝死于宁德殿，终年六十一岁。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Xuanzong died at the Ningde Palace at the age of 61.

古文：上疾大渐，暮夜，近臣皆出，惟前朝资明夫人郑氏年老侍侧，上知其可托，诏之曰： 速召皇太子主后事。 
现代文：宣宗皇帝病重的当夜，近臣都离开了，只有前朝资明夫人郑氏年老侍立床边，宣宗皇帝知道她可托嘱，诏她说 ：速召皇太子主持后事。 
English: On the night of Emperor Xuanzong's serious illness, all of his close advisers had left. Only Zheng's elderly attendant, the wife of the former Emperor Zi Ming, stood at his bedside. Emperor Xuanzong knew that she could be entrusted with the task, and told her: "Quickly summon the crown prince to preside over the aftermath."

古文：言绝而崩。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：夫人秘之。是夜，皇后及遣妃庞氏问安寝阁。
现代文：郑夫人把遗旨密封起来，当夜，皇后及贵妃庞氏在寝中问安。
English: Mrs. Zheng sealed the will, and that night, the empress and Princess Pang said good night in their sleep.

古文：庞氏阴狡机慧，常以其子守纯年长不得立，心鞅鞅。
现代文：庞氏阴险狡诈机谋聪明，常认为其子完颜守纯年长而没能立为皇太子，心里不满意。
English: Pang was insidious, cunning and clever. He often thought that his son was too old to be crown prince, and he was not satisfied.

古文：夫人恐其为变，即绐之曰： 上方更衣，后妃可少休他室。 
现代文：郑夫人怕她叛乱，即哄骗她说： 皇帝正换衣服，后妃可在其他室里稍作休息。 
English: Madame Zheng was afraid that she would rebel, so she tricked her by saying, "The emperor is changing his clothes, the empress can take a short rest in another room."

古文：伺其入，遽钥之，急召大臣，传遗诏立皇太子，始启户出后妃，发丧。
现代文：等到后妃进到屋中，她赶快锁上门，急忙召集大臣，传遗诏立皇太子为皇帝，尔后放出后妃并发丧。
English: When the Empress Dowager entered the room, she quickly locked the door, hurriedly summoned the ministers, proclaimed the will to establish the Crown Prince as Emperor, and then released the Empress Dowager and went into mourning.

古文：皇太子方入宫，英王守纯已先入，皇太子知之，分遣枢密院官及东宫亲卫军官移剌蒲阿集军三万余于东华门街。
现代文：皇太子刚入宫，英王完颜守纯已先进去。皇太子知道了，分别派枢密院官及东宫亲卫军官移剌蒲阿在东华门街召集三万多军队。
English: The crown prince had just entered the palace, but the British king had already gone ahead to complete his ceremonial duties. The crown prince learned of this and sent the Privy Councillor and the East Palace Guard officer separately to Yibin Pu'a to gather more than thirty thousand troops in Donghuamen Street.

古文：部署即定，命护卫四人监守纯于近侍局，乃即皇帝位于柩前。壬辰，宣遗诏。
现代文：部署完毕，命令四个护卫在近侍局监禁完颜守纯，于是在灵柩前即皇帝位。二十四日，宣布遗诏。
English: After the deployment was completed, he ordered four guards to imprison Yan Shou Chun at the Courtier Bureau, and then he became the emperor in front of the coffin. On the 24th, the will was announced.

古文：是日，诏赦中外。
现代文：当日，诏赦中外。
English: On the same day, the Emperor pardoned both Chinese and foreigners.

古文：明年正月戊戌朔，改元正大，谥大行曰继天兴统述道勤仁英武圣孝皇帝，庙号宣宗。
现代文：第二年正月初一，改元正大，先帝谥号继天兴统述道勤仁英武圣孝皇帝，庙号宣宗。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year, the era was changed to Zhengda, and the former emperor's posthumous name followed Tianxing as the emperor of Dao Qinren Yingwu Shengxiao, and the temple name was Xuan Zong.

古文：三月庚申，葬德陵。
现代文：三月二十三日，葬于德陵。
English: He was buried in Deling on March 23.

