古文：马融字季长，扶风茂陵人也，将作大匠严之子。
现代文：◆马融传，马融字季长，扶风茂陵人。将作大匠马严的儿子。
English: ◆Ma Rong Chuan, Ma Rong Zi Ji Chang, Fu Feng Murying people. Will be the son of the great craftsman Ma Yan.

古文：为人美辞貌，有俊才。
现代文：人长得漂亮，有才华，善于言辞。
English: People are beautiful, talented and eloquent.

古文：初，京兆挚恂以儒术教授，隐于南山，不应征聘，名重关西，融从其游学，博通经籍。
现代文：以前，京兆挚恂隐居南山，用儒术教授生徒，不应征聘，名闻关西。马融从他游学，博通经书。
English: In the past, Jing Zhaoxin lived in seclusion in Nanshan and used Confucianism to teach his students. He was not allowed to recruit students and was famous in Kansai. Ma Rong traveled to study with him and learned a lot of scriptures.

古文：恂奇融才，以女妻之。
现代文：挚恂赞赏马融的才华，把女儿嫁给了他。
English: Sincerely appreciating Ma Rong's talent, she married her daughter to him.

古文：永初二年，大将军邓骘闻融名，召为舍人，非其好也，遂不应命，客于凉州武都，汉阳界中。
现代文：永初二年，大将军邓骘闻马融有名，召为舍人，他不喜欢这个，不应命。客居凉州武都、汉阳间。
English: In the second year of the Yongzheng era, the great general Deng Xuan heard that Ma Rong was famous and called him to be his disciple. He did not like this and did not want to die. He lived as a guest in Liangzhou between Wudu and Hanyang.

古文：会羌虏飙起，边方扰乱，米谷踊贵，自关以西，道殣相望。
现代文：这时羌虏突起，扰乱边境。米谷价格飞涨，自关以西，道上饿死的一个接一个。
English: At this time, the Yangtze River rises and disturbs the border. The price of rice soars, and from the west of Guan, people starve to death one after another.

古文：融既饑因，乃悔而叹息，谓其友人曰 古人有言：左手据天下之图，右手刎其喉，愚夫不为。
现代文：马融饥困，就后悔起来，对他的朋友说： 古人有言： 左手据天下之图，右手割其喉，这种以名害生的事，愚夫也不干。 
English: Hungry, Ma Rong regretted his action and said to his friend: The ancients said: "The left hand follows the pattern of the world, while the right hand cuts one's throat. A fool would not do such a thing that harms life in the name of fame."

古文：所以然者，生贵于天下也。
现代文：为什么呢？生是最可贵的。
English: Why? Life is the most precious thing.

古文：今以曲俗咫尺之羞，灭无赀之躯，殆非老、庄所谓也 故往应骘召。
现代文：现在为了怕乡曲之士耻笑，使无价的身体受到摧残，这不符合老庄的道理。 就去应了邓骘的征召。
English: Now, in order to avoid the ridicule of the folk singers, the priceless body is being destroyed, which is not in line with the principle of the old village.

古文：四年，拜为校书郎中，诣东观典校秘书。
现代文：四年，拜为校书郎中，至东观典校秘藏书籍。
English: In his fourth year, he became one of the school's scribes, and was given access to the school's secret library.

古文：是时邓太后监朝，骘兄弟辅政。
现代文：这时，邓太后掌权，邓骘兄弟辅政。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Deng came to power, and the Deng brothers became vice-governors.

古文：而俗儒世士，以为文德可兴，武功宜废，遂寝蒐狩之礼，息战陈之法，故猾贼从横，乘此无备。
现代文：一般浅见的儒生学士，认为文德可兴，武功宜废，停止了练武的制度，不讲战阵之法。因此猾贼蜂起，乘国家无备。
English: Confucian scholars, who are generally shallow-minded, believed that literature and politics could be promoted and martial arts should be abolished. They stopped the system of martial arts training and did not teach the law of battle. Therefore, cunning thieves rose up and took advantage of the country's lack of preparedness.

古文：融乃感激，以为文武之道，圣贤不坠，五才之用，无或可废。
现代文：马融大为不满，认为文武之道，圣贤所重，金、木、水、火、土，人并用之，废一不可，哪能不讲武功呢。
English: Ma Rong was very dissatisfied, and thought that the way of literature and martial arts was important to the sages, and that gold, wood, water, fire, and earth, all of which were used by people, should not be wasted. How can we not talk about martial arts?

古文：元初二年，上《广成颂》以讽谏。
现代文：元初二年，上《广成颂》以讽谏之。
English: In the first two years of the Yuan Dynasty, the "Song of Guangcheng" began to ridicule it.

古文：其辞曰：臣闻孔子曰 奢则不逊，俭则固 奢俭之中，以礼为界。
现代文：序言说： 我闻孔子讲过： 奢侈浪费就不谦让，太朴素节约就是鄙陋。 奢、俭，以礼为标准。
English: The preamble said: I have heard Confucius say: extravagance and waste are immodest, too simple and economical is despicable. Luxury and frugality, with courtesy as the standard.

古文：是以《蟋蟀》、《山枢》之人，并刺国君，讽以太康驰驱之节。
现代文：所以《蟋蟀》、《山枢》都是讽刺国君不要太享乐，也不要放着车马不用。
English: Therefore, both "Shu" and "Sanzhu" are satirical. The sovereign should not enjoy too much, and should not let the horses and chariots go.

古文：夫乐而不荒，忧而不困，先王所以平和府藏，颐养精神，致之无疆。
现代文：文武之道，折衷行事。要乐而不过度，忧而不疲乏，先王所以平和五脏六腑，怡养精神，永远行之。
English: The way of literature and martial arts is to act as a compromise. We should be happy but not excessive, worried but not tired. That is why the former king is always at peace with his internal organs and nourishes his spirit.

古文：故戛击鸣球，载于《虞谟》。吉日车攻，序于《周诗》。
现代文：所以如何用乐，记载在《虞谟》之中，吉日田猎，《周诗》也有叙述。
English: Therefore, how to use music is recorded in "Gumo," and is also described in "Yoshihidaiho" and "Zhoushi."

古文：圣主贤君，以增盛美，岂徒为奢淫而已哉。
现代文：这是圣王贤君，为了赞美盛世，难道是为了奢侈淫乐吗？
English: This is the sage king, in order to praise the prosperity of the world, is it for the luxury of sexual pleasure?

古文：伏见元年已来，遭值厄运，陛下戒惧灾异，躬自菲薄，荒弃禁苑，废乐悬，勤忧潜思，十有馀年，以过礼数。
现代文：安帝即位以来，遇上地震，皇上警惕灾异，自己刻苦，禁苑荒芜，乐器废弃，勤劳忧思，十有余年，超过礼制。
English: Since Emperor An's accession to the throne, there have been earthquakes, the emperor has been on the alert for disasters, he has worked hard, the Forbidden City has been deserted, musical instruments have been abandoned, he has worked hard and worried, and he has exceeded the etiquette for more than ten years.

古文：重以皇太后体唐尧亲九族笃睦之德，陛下履有虞烝烝之孝，外舍诸家，每有忧疾，圣恩普劳，遣使交错，稀有旷绝。
现代文：加之，皇太后体现了唐尧亲九族，笃和睦之情；皇上实践了有虞淳厚的孝道，外戚诸家，有什么疾病，派人慰问，很少疏忽。
English: In addition, the empress dowager embodies the nine families of Tang Dynasty, and the feelings of harmony; the emperor has practiced a profound filial piety, relatives from all families, any disease, send condolences, and rarely neglect.

古文：时时宁息，又无以自娱乐，殆非所以逢迎太和，裨助万福也。
现代文：时时宁息，又没有什么娱乐，这大概不是迎接太和，有助万福之道吧。
English: Peace and quiet at all times, and no entertainment, this is probably not the way to welcome the Emperor and Empress, it is the way to contribute to good fortune.

古文：臣愚以为虽尚颇有蝗虫，今年五月以来，雨露时澍，祥应将至。
现代文：我认为现在虽有蝗灾，今年五月以来，雨露及时，好兆头来了。
English: I think that although there is a locust plague now, since May this year, the rain and dew have come in time, and good signs have come.

古文：方涉冬节，农事间隙，宜幸广成，览原隰，观宿麦，劝收藏，因讲武校猎，使寮庶百姓，复睹羽旄之美，闻钟鼓之音，欢嬉喜乐，鼓舞疆畔，以迎和气，招致休庆。
现代文：进入冬节，农事间隙，应该去广成，观察川原，看宿麦，奖励收藏，从而讲武狩猎，使官吏百姓，再看到旌旗之美，听到钟鼓之音，欢嬉喜乐，鼓舞于田野之间，迎和气，召休庆。
English: Entering the winter festival, between agricultural affairs, it is necessary to go to Guangcheng, observe the plains of Sichuan, watch the dormice, reward the collection, thus talking about the martial hunting, so that the officials and the people, and then see the beauty of the banner, hear the sound of the bell and drum, rejoice and rejoice, inspire the fields, welcome the harmony, and call off the celebration.

古文：礼乐既阕，北辕反旆，至自新城，背伊阙，反洛京。颂奏，忤邓氏，滞于东观，十年不得调。
现代文：蝼蚁小人，不尽思念。职在校书，根据旧文，叙说田猎的事情。写了《广成颂》一篇作为讽刺。 《颂》送上，触犯了邓氏，呆在东观，十年不得升迁。
English: An ant-eating villain, not full of thought. A school book on duty, based on an old text, tells the story of hunting in the fields. Wrote an "Ode to Guangcheng" as a satire. "Ode" was sent, violated the Deng family, stayed in Dongguan, and was not allowed to be promoted for ten years.

古文：因兄子丧自劾归。
现代文：因为兄长之子死了，自己请罪归家。
English: Because his elder brother's son had died, he pleaded guilty and returned home.

古文：太后闻之怒，谓融羞薄诏除，欲仕州郡，遂令禁锢之。
现代文：太后听说了，大怒，说马融不尊重朝廷命令，想去州郡做官。于是下令禁止马融为官。
English: When the empress dowager heard of this, she was furious, saying that Ma Rong did not respect the order of the imperial court and wanted to become an official in the prefecture. Therefore, she ordered to ban Ma Rong from becoming an official.

古文：太后崩，安帝亲政，召还郎署，复在讲部。
现代文：太后死，安帝亲政，召还郎署，回到讲部。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Emperor An, who was personally in charge of the government, was summoned back to the palace and returned to the lecture hall.

古文：出为河间王厩长史。
现代文：出为河间王厩长史。
English: He became the longest-serving member of the Kawama Royal Mews.

古文：时车驾东巡岱宗，融上《东巡颂》帝奇其文，召拜郎中。
现代文：这时皇帝东巡泰山，马融上《东巡颂》，帝赞赏他的文章，召拜郎中。
English: At this time, the emperor was on an eastward tour of Mount Tai, and Ma Rong wrote "Ode to the Eastward Tour." The emperor appreciated his article and summoned Bai Lang.

古文：及北乡侯即位，融移病去，为郡功曹。
现代文：北乡侯即位，融作书称病，离郎中，为郡功曹。
English: North Township lord acceded to the throne, Rong Zuo-shu claimed to be ill, separated from his son-in-law, and became a county meritorious person.

古文：阳嘉二年，诏举敦朴，城门校尉岑起举融，征诣公车，对策，拜议郎。大将军梁商表为从事中郎，转武都太守。
现代文：阳嘉二年，朝廷推举敦朴之士。城门校尉岑起举马融，征召赴公车，经过考试，拜议郎，大将军梁商荐为从事中郎，升武都太守。
English: In the 2nd year of Yang Jia, the imperial court nominated a man of unpretentiousness. The castle gate lieutenant picked up Ma Rong and conscripted him to the bus. After the examination, he was recommended by the general Liang Shang to be engaged in the middle, and promoted to the governor of the capital.

古文：时西羌反叛，征西将军马贤与护羌校尉胡畴征之，而稽久不进。
现代文：这时西羌反叛，征西将军马贤与护羌校尉胡畴征讨，而拖延不进。
English: At this time, Xishu rebelled, and the general of the Western Expedition, Ma Xian, and the lieutenant of the Western Expedition, Hu Jia, discussed the issue of the Western Expedition, but delayed it.

古文：融知其将败，上疏乞自效，曰：今杂种诸羌转相抄盗，宜及其未并，亟遣深入，破其支党，而马贤等处处留滞。
现代文：马融知将败，上疏要求效命： 现在杂种各羌到处抄盗，应该趁他没有集中之前，赶快派兵深入，消灭他的党羽，而马贤等处处留滞。
English: Ma Rongzhi was about to be defeated, and Shang So demanded his life: Now that the mongrels are stealing everywhere, we should take advantage of his lack of concentration by quickly sending troops deep into the country to wipe out his followers, while Ma Xian and the others remain everywhere.

古文：羌胡百里望尘，千里听声，今逃匿避回，漏出其后，则必侵寇三辅，为民大害。
现代文：羌胡消息灵通，望尘听声，现在虽躲藏回避，一旦乘虚而来，一定要侵掠三辅，为民大害。
English: Hao Hu is well-informed and observant. Although he hides and avoids now, once he takes advantage of the situation, he will definitely invade and plunder Sanfu, causing great harm to the people.

古文：臣愿请贤所不可用关东兵五千，裁假部队之号，尽力率厉，埋根行首，以先吏士，三旬之中，必克破之。
现代文：我愿请马贤所不可用的关东兵五千，假借部队的番号令，尽力统率奋厉，扎根部队前列，身先士卒，三十天内，一定能击败羌胡。
English: I would like to invite five thousand Kanto soldiers who are not available to Ma Xian, to borrow the number order of the troops, to make every effort to lead and work hard, to take root in the front of the troops, to be the forerunners, and to be able to defeat Yan Hu within thirty days.

古文：臣少习学艺，不更武职，猥陈此言，必受诬罔之辜。
现代文：我年轻学习艺文，不懂军事，冒昧上言，不实之辞，应受罪责。
English: I am young, I study art and literature, I don't understand military affairs, I make presumptuous and untrue remarks, and I should be held accountable.

古文：昔毛遂厮养，为众所蚩，终以一言，克定从要。
现代文：从前毛遂是下贱之人，大家都嘲笑他。终于用一句话使楚与赵定合纵盟约。
English: Once upon a time, Mao Sui was a lowly person, and everyone laughed at him. Finally, with one sentence, Chu and Zhao Ding made a long-term alliance.

古文：臣惧贤等专守一城，言攻于西而羌出于东，且其将士必有高克溃叛之变。
现代文：我恐怕马贤等专守一城，说打西，而羌在东出现，且其将士必然会发生像高克那样溃败逃叛的事情。 
English: I am afraid that Ma Xian and others will only keep one city, saying that they will fight in the west, while Zou will appear in the east, and their soldiers will inevitably be defeated and flee like Gao Ke.

古文：朝廷不能用。
现代文：朝廷不能用。
English: The Imperial Court cannot be used.

古文：又陈 星孛参、毕，参西方之宿，毕为边兵，至于分野，并州是也。
现代文：又上疏说：  参 、 毕 变色， 参 西方之宿， 毕 为边兵，至于分野 ，参 在申，为晋分，并州之地。
English: Shang Shou also said: "Sang, Bi is changing color, Sang is the lodging of the West, Bi is the frontier soldier, as for the field, Sang is in Shen, is the promotion, and the place of the state.

古文：西戎北狄，殆将起乎。
现代文：西戎北狄，可能来侵扰了，应该做好准备。 
English: Xijun Beidi, there may be an intrusion, you should be prepared.

古文：宜备二方 寻而陇西羌反，乌桓寇上郡，皆卒如融言。
现代文：不久，陇西羌反，乌桓侵掠上郡，都如马融所说的。
English: Soon, the Xizang Rebellion and the Wuhuan invasion and plundering of Shang County were all as Ma Rong said.

古文：三迁，桓帝时为南郡太守。
现代文：经三次迁官，桓帝时为南郡太守。
English: After being transferred three times, Emperor Kan became the governor of Minami-gun.

古文：先是融有事忤大将军梁冀旨，冀讽有司奏融在郡贪浊，免官，髡徙朔方。
现代文：先是，马融有事触犯了大将军梁冀的意旨，梁冀暗示官吏告马融在郡贪污，免官，剃掉头发，迁徙朔方。
English: First of all, Ma Rong violated the intention of the general Liang Ji. Liang Ji implied that the officials accused Ma Rong of corruption in the county, dismissed him, shaved off his hair, and moved to Shuo Fang.

古文：自刺不殊，得赦还，复拜议郎，重在东观著述，以病去官。
现代文：自杀不死，得免罪还。再拜议郎，又在东观著述。因病去官。
English: If you don't commit suicide, you won't die, and you'll be pardoned. Then you'll pay homage to Heiro, and write about it in Dongguan. You'll be dismissed from your post due to illness.

古文：融才高博洽，为世通儒，教养诸生，常有千数。
现代文：马融才高，学问渊博，是当世的通家。教授辅导学生，常以千计。
English: Ma is highly talented and knowledgeable, and is a contemporary family friend. He teaches and coaches students, often thousands of them.

古文：涿郡卢植，北海郑玄，皆其徒也。
现代文：涿郡卢植，北海郑玄，都是他的学生。
English: Lu Zhi of Zhang County and Zheng Xuan of Beihai are his students.

古文：尝坐高堂，施绛纱帐，前授生徒，后列女乐，弟子以次相传，鲜有入其室者。
现代文：会鼓琴，好吹笛。放达任性，不为儒者的小节所拘。房屋器用衣物，崇尚奢侈，常坐高堂，挂红纱帐，前面教生，后有女乐。弟子按次传授，很少有进入室内的。
English: Can play the koto, good at playing the flute. Plays freely, not constrained by the Confucian melody. Wears housewares, advocates luxury, often sits in the hall, hangs a red curtain, teaches students in front, and women's music behind. Disciples are taught sequentially, and rarely enter the room.

古文：尝欲训《左氏春秋》，及见贾逵、郑众注，乃曰 贾君精而不博，郑君博而不精。
现代文：曾经想注解《左氏春秋》，见了贾逵、郑众的注解，就说： 贾君精而不博，郑君博而不精。
English: I once wanted to annotate "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," and when I saw the annotations of Jia Wei and Zheng Zong, I said: Jia Jun is clever but not clever, Zheng Jun is clever but not clever.

古文：既精既博，吾何加焉 但著《三传异同说》。
现代文：有精有博，我没有什么说的了。 只著《三传异同说》。
English: I don't have anything more to say, I've already said too much.

古文：注《孝经》、《论语》、《诗》、《易》、《三礼》、《尚书》、《列女传》、《老子》、《淮南子》、《离骚》，所著赋、颂、碑、诔、书、记、表、奏、七言、琴歌、对策、遗令，凡二十一篇。
现代文：注《孝经》、《论语》、《诗》、《易》、《三礼》、《尚书》、《列女传》、《老子》、《淮南子》、《离骚》，所著赋、颂、碑、诔、书、记、表、奏、七言、琴歌、对策、遗令，共二十一篇。
English: Note: "The Filial Piety Sutra," "Analects," "Poems," "Ease," "Three Rites," "Book of Songs," "Biographies of Women," "Lao Tzu," "Hua Nan Zi," "Leaving So," the author's Fu, Ode, Monument, Koto, Book, Record, Table, Music, Seven Sayings, Piano Song, Countermeasures, Last Will and Testament, a total of twenty-one.

古文：初，融惩于邓氏，不敢复违忤势家，遂为梁冀草奏李固，又作大将军《西第颂》，以此颇为正直所羞。
现代文：起先，马融被邓氏惩办，不敢再触犯权势之家，为梁冀起草陷害李固的奏折，又作大将军《西第颂》。因此颇被一般正直之士耻笑。
English: At first, Ma Rong was punished by the Deng family and did not dare to offend the powerful family again. For Liang Ji, he drafted a report on the framing of Li Gu, and also made the general "Siddy's Ode." Therefore, he was quite laughed at by ordinary honest people.

古文：年八十八，延熹九年卒于家。
现代文：年八十八，延熹九年，死在家里。
English: He died at home in 1988, nine years later.

古文：遗令薄葬。
现代文：遗嘱薄葬。
English: Before his death, he ordered a simple burial.

古文：族孙日磾，献帝时位至太傅。
现代文：族孙马日石单，献帝时官至太傅。
English: Sun Maji Shi Shan, dedicated to the emperor, rose to the rank of taifu.

古文：论曰：马融辞命邓氏，逡巡陇、汉之间，将有意于居贞乎。
现代文：史官评论说：马融辞去邓氏之命，徘徊陇汉之间，或者是在要求自己言行一致。
English: The historian commented: Ma Rong resigned the order of Deng, wandered between Han and Han, or was asking himself to be consistent in words and deeds.

古文：既而羞曲士之节，惜不赀之躯，终以奢乐恣性，党附成讥，固知识能匡欲者鲜矣。
现代文：然而，不久就以乡曲之士的拘谨小节为羞，爱惜他的千金之躯，终于因为奢侈淫乐，党附被讥。本来知性能正的就太少啊！
English: However, he soon became ashamed of the stiffness of the folk singer's melody and cherished his golden body. Finally, he was ridiculed for his extravagant sexual pleasures. There are too few people who are intellectually honest.

古文：夫事苦，则矜全之情薄。生厚，故安存之虑深。
现代文：工作艰苦爱惜保全之情就稀薄了，生的可贵，所以安全求存的思想就多。
English: Hard work and the feeling of cherishing and preserving are rare, and life is precious, so there are many thoughts of safety and survival.

古文：登高不惧者，胥靡之人也。
现代文：登高不害怕的，是那些相随受刑的人，因为已置死生不顾了。
English: The ones who are not afraid of climbing are those who are being punished, because they have given up on life and death.

古文：坐不垂堂者，千金之子也。
现代文：不在屋檐下坐，怕瓦片掉下来打着自己，这是千金之子啊！
English: Not sitting under the eaves, afraid of tiles falling down and hitting yourself, this is the son of a millionaire!

古文：原其大略，归于所安而已矣。
现代文：考其主要的原因，求其所安而已。
English: Examine the main reasons for this and seek reassurance.

古文：物我异观，亦更相笑也。
现代文：对事物的看法不同，也彼此不免相笑呢。
English: They have different views on things, and they can't help but laugh at each other.

