古文：又南入葱岭山，又从葱岭出而东北流。
现代文：又往南流进葱岭山，又从葱岭流出，往东北奔去。
English: It also flows southward into the Qianling Mountains, and flows out of the Qianling Mountains to the northeast.

古文：河水重源有三，非惟二也。
现代文：河水发源后伏地潜流重又冒出，这样的情况有三处而不止两处。
English: There are three cases, but not more than two, in which the subterranean flow is heavy and emerges again after the river starts flowing.

古文：一源西出捐毒之国葱岭之上。西去休循二百余里，皆故塞种也。
现代文：一条水源出自西方捐毒之国的葱岭上，西距休循二百余里，从前是塞种居住的地区。
English: A source of water comes from the western country of the poison donor, the country of the poison donor. It is more than two hundred miles to the west, and was once an area inhabited by Serbs.

古文：南属葱岭，高千里。
现代文：该区南与葱岭相连，岭高千里。
English: The southern part of this district is connected to the Qianling Mountains, which are thousands of miles high.

古文：《西河旧事》曰：葱岭在敦煌西八千里，其山高大，上生葱，故曰葱岭也。
现代文：《西河旧事》说：葱岭在敦煌西八千里，山极高大，山上长着野葱，所以叫葱岭。
English: "Ancient West River" said: the green onion ridge is eight thousand miles west of Dunhuang, the mountain is very tall, and wild green onions grow on the mountain, so it is called green onion ridge.

古文：河源潜发其岭，分为二水，一水西径休循国南，在葱岭西。郭义恭《广志》曰：休循国居葱岭，其山多大葱。
现代文：河水源头在岭间地下冒出，分为两条。一条往西流经葱岭西的休循南边。郭义恭《广志》说：休循国在葱岭，山上多大葱。
English: The source of the river emerges underground between the ridges and is divided into two streams. One flows westward through the west of the green onion ridge and follows the south side. Guo Yigong "Guangzhi" said: The country of the green onion is in the green onion ridge, and there are many green onions on the mountain.

古文：又径难兜国北，北接休循，西南去厨宾国三百四十里。
现代文：又流经难兜国以北，该国北与休循接壤，西南距厨宾国三百四十里。
English: It also flows through the north of the country, the north of the country is bordered by Shujian, and the southwest is 340 miles away from the kitchen guest country.

古文：河水又西径罽宾国北。
现代文：河水又往西流经厨宾国北边。
English: The river then flows west through the northern part of the country.

古文：月氏之破，塞王南君罽宾，治循鲜城。
现代文：月氏被打垮后，塞王南迁，在厨宾为王，国治在循鲜城。
English: After the defeat of the Yue clan, the king of Sai moved to the south, the chef became the king, and the country was ruled by Xun Xiancheng.

古文：土地平和，无所不有，金银珍宝，异畜奇物，逾于中夏，大国也。
现代文：那里土地平和，物产无所不有，金银珍宝、异畜奇物，比中国这个涣映大国还要多。
English: There, the land is peaceful, the products are omnipresent, and there are more gold and silver treasures, exotic animals and strange things than in China, the great country.

古文：山险，有大头痛、小头痛之山，赤土，身热之阪，人畜同然。
现代文：山势很险，有名的大头痛、小头痛等山，赤土、身热等坡，不论人畜，经过那些地方都会得病。
English: The mountain is very dangerous. The famous headache, headache and other mountains, red earth, body heat and other slopes, regardless of people and animals, will get sick through those places.

古文：河水又西径月氏国南。治监氏城，其俗与安息同。
现代文：河水又往西流经月氏国南边，都城监氏城，风俗和安息相同。
English: The river then flows west through the southern part of Yue's country, the capital Junc's City, and the customs are the same as those of Shuban.

古文：匈奴冒顿单于破月氏，杀其王，以头为饮器。
现代文：匈奴冒顿单于打垮月氏，杀了月氏王，用他的头颅骨做杯子。
English: The Xiongnu single-handedly defeated the Yue clan, killed the king of the Yue clan, and used his skull to make a cup.

古文：国遂分，远过大宛，西居大夏，为大月氏；其余小众不能去者，共保南山、羌中，号小月氏，故有大月氏、小月氏之名也。
现代文：于是月氏分裂，大队人马远远越过大宛西迁，定居于大夏，这就是大月氏；留下的小股人众走不了，一同保住南山羌中这块地方，号称小月氏，因而有了大月氏、小月氏这些称号。
English: As a result, the Yue clan split, and a large group of people moved far beyond Dawan to the west and settled in Daxia, which is the Yue clan; the small group of people left behind could not leave, and together they kept this place in the middle of the Nanshan Mountains, known as the Yue clan, and thus had the titles of the Yue clan and the Yue clan.

古文：又西径安息国南，城临妫水，地方数千里，最大国也。
现代文：水又往西流经安息国南边。安息国都城濒临妨水，地方数千里，是一方最大的国度。
English: And the waters went westward over the south of Parthia: and the city of the king of Parthia was nigh unto the waters, a thousand furlongs: it was the largest of all kingdoms.

古文：有商贾车船行旁国，画革旁行为书记也。
现代文：国中商人用车船来往于邻国，在皮革上记事，文字都是横写的。
English: The country's merchants used cars and boats to travel to and from the neighboring countries, and wrote notes on the leather. The words were all written horizontally.

古文：河水与蜺罗跂噘水同注雷翥海。
现代文：河水与蜿罗跤袜水一同注入雷翁海。
English: The water from the river and the water from Gong Luo's wrestling socks are injected into the Lei On Sea.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：蜺罗跂噘出阿耨达山之北，西径于阗国。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：蜕罗跤蹄水发源于阿褥达山北麓，往西北流经于闻国。
English: According to the "Westland Chronicle" written by Shi Jie, the Luo Jingtou Water originates from the northern foot of Mount Aida and flows northwestward through Wenguo.

古文：《汉书。西域传》曰：于阗之西，水皆西流，注西海。
现代文：《汉书•西域传》说：于阖以西，水都往西流，注入西海。
English: "The History of the Western Regions" says: "To the west of Yunnan, all water flows westward and flows into the West Sea.

古文：又西径四大塔北。释法显所谓糺尸罗国，汉言截头也。
现代文：又往西流经四大塔北边，那就是法显所谓红尸罗国，汉语意思是 断头 。
English: It also flows westward to the north of the Four Great Towers, which is the so-called "red corpse country" of Faxian, which means "decapitation" in Chinese.

古文：佛为菩萨时，以头施人，故因名国。
现代文：佛陀前生做菩萨时，把自己的头施舍给别人，所以就以断头为国名。
English: When Buddha was a bodhisattva in his previous life, he gave away his head to others, so he named the country after the severed head.

古文：国东有投身饲饿虎处，皆起塔。
现代文：国都东边有他前生舍身饲喂饿虎的地方，都建了佛塔。
English: Buddhist pagodas have been built in places on the east side of the capital where he once sacrificed himself to feed hungry tigers.

古文：又西径揵陀卫国北。是阿育王子法益所治邑。
现代文：又往西流经键陀卫国北边，这是阿育王的儿子法益治理的城邑。
English: It also flows westward through the northern part of Kenda Province. This is the city governed by the son of King Ashoka, Faek.

古文：佛为菩萨时，亦于此国以眼施人，其处亦起大塔。
现代文：佛陀前生做菩萨时，也曾在这个国度把眼珠施舍给别人，那地方也造了大塔。
English: When the Buddha was a bodhisattva in his previous life, he also gave his eyeballs to others in this country, and a large tower was built there.

古文：又有弗楼沙国，天帝释变为牧牛小儿，聚土为佛塔，法王因而成大塔，所谓四大塔也。
现代文：还有个弗楼沙国，天帝释在那里变成放牛娃，用泥土堆成佛塔，法王就凭着这小塔建起一座大塔。
English: There is also a Furusaka kingdom, where the celestial emperor was released to become a cowherd, and the dirt was piled into a stupa, and His Holiness used this small tower to build a large tower.

古文：《法显传》曰：国有佛钵，月氏王大兴兵众，来伐此国，欲持钵去，置钵象上，象不能进；更作四轮车载钵，八象共牵，复不进。
现代文：以上这些塔就是所谓四大塔。妾法显传》说：弗楼沙国有一只佛钵。月氏王调动大军来攻打这个国家，想把佛钵放在象背上带走，可是大象却走不动。他又造了一辆四轮车来装载佛钵，用八头大象合力拉车，还是拉不动。
English: The above towers are the so-called Four Great Towers. "Concubine Law Revealed" says: There is a Buddha image in Furusaka. King Yue mobilized a large army to attack the country and wanted to carry the Buddha image on the back of an elephant, but the elephant could not move. He also built a four-wheeled cart to load the Buddha image, and used eight elephants to pull the cart together, but still could not pull it.

古文：王知钵缘未至，于是起塔留钵供养。
现代文：月氏王知道佛钵的缘分还没有到，于是造了一座塔，把佛钵留下来供养。
English: The King of the Moon Clan knew that the Buddha statue's fate had not yet arrived, so he built a tower and left the Buddha statue to be cared for.

古文：钵容二斗，杂色而黑多，四际分明，厚可二分，甚光泽。
现代文：钵的容量能装两斗，颜色驳杂，但以黑色为主；四面轮廓分明，厚约二分，光泽照人。
English: The capacity of the bowl can hold two buckets, the color is mixed, but mainly black; the contours are clear on all sides, the thickness is about two minutes, and the luster is dazzling.

古文：贫人以少花投中便满；富人以多花供养，正复百千万斛，终亦不满。
现代文：穷人用一点点花投入钵中就会装满，富人拿了很多花来供养，即使是几百儿千几万解，始终还是装不满。
English: Poor people put a little bit of flowers into the jar and it will be filled, rich people take a lot of flowers to support, even if it is hundreds of thousands of flowers, it is still not satisfied.

古文：佛图调曰：佛钵，青玉也，受三斗许，彼国宝之。
现代文：佛图调说：佛钵是用青玉做的，能装三斗左右，那个国家把它视为国宝。
English: Buddha tune said: the Buddha statue is made of blue jade, can hold about three buckets, that country regards it as a national treasure.

古文：供养时，愿终日香花不满，则如言；愿一把满，则亦便如言。
现代文：供养时，心中希望它终日香花不满，就会如愿；希望一把花就能装满，也会如愿。
English: When making an offering, if you hope in your heart that it will not be satisfied with the fragrant flowers all day long, you will get your wish; if you hope that a bunch of flowers can be filled, you will get your wish.

古文：又案道人竺法维所说，佛钵在大月支国，起浮图，高三十丈，七层，钵处第二层，金络络锁县钵，钵是青石。
现代文：又按修行人竺法维所说，佛钵在大月氏国，建了一座宝塔，高三十丈，共七层，佛钵就放在第二层。钵用青石制成，裹上金丝网络悬挂着。
English: Also, according to the practitioner Gong Fawy, in Dazhong's kingdom, a pagoda was built for the Buddha, thirty stories high, with a total of seven floors, and the Buddha's coffin was placed on the second floor. The coffin was made of lapis lazuli, wrapped in a network of gold wire, and hung.

古文：或云悬钵虚空。
现代文：又有人说钵是凌空悬浮着的。
English: Others say that the dragonfly hovers in the sky.

古文：须菩提置钵在金机上，佛一足迹与钵共在一处，国王、臣民，悉持梵香、七宝、壁玉供养。
现代文：须菩提把钵放在金几上，佛陀的一个足印和钵同在一处，国王和臣民手里都拿着梵香、七宝、璧玉来供养塔迹。
English: Subhuti placed the cocoon on a gold table, a footprint of Buddha and the cocoon together in one place, the king and his subjects holding the sacred incense, the seven treasures, and the gems to support the monument.

古文：塔迹、佛牙、袈裟、顶相舍利，悉在弗楼沙国。
现代文：佛牙、架装、顶相舍利，这些全都在弗楼沙国。
English: The Buddha's tooth, the carvings, the top shrine, all of these are in the country of Furusaka.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：揵陀越王城西北有钵吐罗越城，佛袈裟王城也，东有寺。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：键陀越王城西北，有钵吐罗越城，就是佛架装王城。城东有一座佛寺。
English: According to the "West Country Diary" of Shi Jie, there was a Buddhist temple in the east of the city and a Buddhist temple in the northwest of the city.

古文：重复寻川水，西北十里有河步罗龙渊。佛到渊上浣衣处，浣石尚存。
现代文：再来探寻这条川水，西北十里有河步罗龙渊，佛陀到渊上洗衣的地方，洗衣石还在。
English: Let's explore the water of this river again. In the northwest, there is a river called Luolongyuan. The washing stone is still there where Buddha washed his clothes.

古文：其水至安息，注雷翥海。
现代文：这条水流到安息，注入雷蠢海。
English: This water flowed to rest, injecting thunder into the sea.

古文：又曰：握陀越西，西海中有安息国。
现代文：又说：键陀越以西是西海，那里有个安息国。
English: And he said, The west is the west sea, and the east is the east sea; and there is a sabbath rest.

古文：竺枝《扶南记》曰：安息国去私诃条国二万里，国土临海上，即《汉书》天竺安息国也。
现代文：竺枝《扶南记》说：安息国距私诃条国二万里，领土濒临海边，就是《汉书》中的天竺安息国。
English: "Fu Nan Ji" said: the land of rest is 20,000 miles away from the land of selfishness, and the territory is close to the sea, which is the land of heavenly rest in the "Chinese Book."

古文：户近百万，最大国也。
现代文：国中户口近一百万，是个最大的国家。
English: The country has nearly one million household accounts, the largest in the world.

古文：《汉书。西域传》又云：梨靬、条支临西海。
现代文：《汉书，西域传》又说：梨靳、条支濒临西海。
English: "Hanshu, Saigai chuan" also says: Lushan and Jiaozuo are on the edge of the West Sea.

古文：长老传闻，条支有弱水，西王母亦未尝见。
现代文：据老人们的传闻，条支有弱水、西王母，但也没有见过。
English: According to the rumors of the old people, there are weak water and West Queen Mother in Jiaozhi, but they have not seen it.

古文：自条支乘水西行，可百余日，近日所入也。
现代文：从条支沿水路往西去，约百余日，就临近太阳沉没的地方了。
English: From the tributary along the waterway to the west, about a hundred days, it is close to the place where the sun sets.

古文：或河水所通西海矣。
现代文：也许这就是河水所通的西海了。
English: Perhaps this is the West Sea through which the river flows.

古文：故《凉土异物志》曰：葱岭之水，分流东西，西入大海，东为河源，《禹记》所云昆仑者焉。
现代文：所以《凉土异物志》说：葱岭的水东西分流，往西流的注入大海，往东流的就是河水的源头，即《禹记》所说的昆仑了。
English: Therefore, the "History of the Cool Earth" said: the water of the Qilian Mountains flows from east to west, and the westward flow is injected into the sea, and the eastward flow is the source of the river water, that is, the Kunlun River mentioned in the "Yu Ji."

古文：张骞使大宛而穷河源，谓极于此，而不达于昆仑也。
现代文：张赛出使大宛，到了河水源头的尽处，以为就到此为止了，并不通到昆仑。
English: Zhang Sai sent an envoy to Dayuan, and when he reached the end of the river's headwaters, he thought he had reached the end, and did not make it to Kunlun.

古文：河水自葱岭分源，东径边舍罗国。
现代文：河水源头从葱岭分流后，往东流经迎舍罗国。
English: After the source of the river is diverted from Qiu Ling, it flows eastward through Yingshe Luo.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：有国名伽舍罗逝。此国狭小，而总万国之要道无不由。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：有个国度，叫伽舍罗逝，领土狭小，但却是万国交通要道必经之地。
English: According to the "West Country" of Shi Jie, there was a country called Gasero, which had a small territory, but it was a place that had to be passed through by the world's major roads.

古文：城南有水，东北流，出罗逝西山。山即葱岭也。
现代文：城南有水，往东北流出罗逝西山，这座山就是葱岭。
English: There is water to the south of the city, and it flows to the northeast out of Luo Qixi Mountain. This mountain is Qiuling.

古文：径岐沙谷，出谷分为二水。
现代文：又流经岐沙谷，出谷后分为两条。
English: It also flows through the Kisa Valley, and after leaving the valley it divides into two streams.

古文：一水东流，径无雷国北。治卢城，其俗与西夜、子合同。
现代文：一条往东流经无雷国北边，国都卢城，风俗与西夜、子合相同。
English: One flows eastward through the northern part of Mulei Province, the capital Lu Cheng, and the customs are the same as those of Xiyang and Zihe.

古文：又东流径依耐国北。去无雷五百四十里，俗同子合。
现代文：又往东流经依耐国以北，这里距无雷五百四十里，风俗与子合相同。
English: It also flows eastward through the north of Enai Province, 540 miles away from Mulei, and the customs are the same as those of Zihe.

古文：河水又东径蒲犁国北。治蒲犁谷，北去疏勒五百五十里，俗与子合同。
现代文：河水又往东流经蒲犁国北边，都城在蒲犁谷，北距疏勒五百五十里，风俗与子合相同。
English: The river also flows eastwards through the northern part of the country. The capital is in the valley of the river, 550 miles north of Sule. The customs are the same as in Zihe.

古文：河水又东径皮山国北。治皮山城，西北去莎车三百八十里。
现代文：河水又往东流经皮山国北边，都城皮山城，西北距莎车三百八十里。
English: The river also flows eastward through the northern part of Pishan, the capital city of Pishan, 380 miles northwest of Shache.

古文：其一源出于阗国南山，北流与葱岭所出河合，又东注蒲昌海。
现代文：一条水源出自于闻国的南山，往北流，与发源于葱岭的河汇合，又往东注人蒲昌海。
English: A water source originates from the Nanshan Mountain in Wenzhou, flows northward, merges with the river originating from the Qilian Mountains, and flows eastward into the Putian-Puchang Sea.

古文：河水又东与于阗河合。
现代文：河水又往东流，与于闻河汇合。
English: The river then flows east to join the Yuwen River.

古文：南源导于阗南山，俗谓之仇摩置，自置北流，径于阗国西。治西城，土多玉石，西去皮山三百八十里，东去阳关五千余里。
现代文：南源出自于闻南山，俗称仇摩置。河水从仇摩置往北流经于间国西边，国都西城，西距皮山三百八十里，东距阳关五千余里。
English: The south source comes from Wenan Mountain, commonly known as Qumajing. The river water flows from Qumajing to the north through the west of the country, the national capital Xicheng, 380 miles west of Pishan, and more than 5,000 miles east of Yangguan.

古文：释法显自乌帝西南行，路中无人民，沙行艰难，所径之苦，人理莫比。
现代文：那个地区出产玉石。法显和尚从乌帝往西南走，路上没有碰到一个人；在沙漠中行走，艰难到了极点，一路上所经历的千辛万苦，真不是世间平常的困难所能相比的。
English: That region produces jade. When the monk Faxian walked from Wudi to the southwest, he did not meet a single person on the road. Walking in the desert was extremely difficult, and the hardships he experienced along the way were truly incomparable to the ordinary difficulties of the world.

古文：在道一月五日，得达于阗。
现代文：路上走了一个月又五天，才到于闻。
English: It took one month and five days on the road to get to Yuwen.

古文：其国殷庶，民笃信，多大乘学，威仪齐整，器钵无声。
现代文：于闻国家富庶，人民信仰佛教很是虔诚，学的大都是大乘，礼仪十分严肃整齐，器钵寂然无声。
English: In the affluent country of Wen, the people's belief in Buddhism is very pious, most of the studies are Mahayana, the etiquette is very serious and neat, and the utensils are silent.

古文：城南十五里有利刹寺，中有石靴，石上有足迹，彼俗言是辟支佛迹。
现代文：城南十五里，有一座利刹寺，寺内有石靴，岩石上留着些足印，据民传说 是辟支佛的足迹。
English: Fifteen miles south of the city, there is a Risso temple. There are stone shoes inside the temple, and some footprints are left on the rock. According to folk legend, they are the footprints of Hijiji Buddha.

古文：法显所不传，疑非佛迹也。
现代文：但法显没有提到这件事，恐怕不是佛陀的足迹。
English: But Fa Hsien did not mention it, and I am afraid it was not the Buddha's footprints.

古文：又西北流，注于河，即《经》所谓北注葱岭河也。
现代文：又往西北流，注入河水。这就是《水经》所说的：往北流，注入葱岭河。
English: It also flows to the northwest, injecting river water. This is what the "Water Sutra" says: flow to the north and inject into the Qilianling River.

古文：南河又东径于阗国北，释氏《西域记》曰：河水东流三千里，至于阗，屈东北流者也。
现代文：南河又往东流经于闻国北边。释氏《西域记》说：河水往东流了三千里，到了于闻，就折向东北流去。
English: The South River flowed eastward through the northern part of Wen. According to the "Record of the Western Regions" by Shi You, the river flowed eastward for three thousand miles, and when it reached Wen, it turned to the northeast.

古文：《汉书。西域传》曰：于阗已东，水皆东流。
现代文：《汉书•西域传》说：于闻以东，水都东流。
English: "The History of the Han Dynasty and the Western Regions" says: If you go east of Wen, the water will flow eastward.

古文：南河又东北径杆弥国北。
现代文：南河又往东北流经抒弥国北边。
English: The South River then flows northeast through the northern part of Limi Province.

古文：治扞弥城，西去于阗三百九十里。
现代文：都城抒弥城，西距于闻三百九十里。
English: The capital city, Limi, is 390 miles west of Wen.

古文：南河又东径精绝国北。西去阗弥四百六十里。
现代文：南河又往东流经精绝国北边，该国西距抒弥四百六十里。
English: The South River flows eastward through the north of the country, 460 miles west of the country.

古文：南河又东径且末国北，又东，右会阿耨达大水。
现代文：南河又往东流经且末国北边；又往东流，在右边汇合了阿褥达大水。
English: The South River also flows eastward and passes through the northern end of the country; it also flows eastward and merges with the Ajanta Dam on the right.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：阿耨达山西北有大水，北流注牢兰海者也。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：阿褥达山西北有大水，北流注入牢兰海。
English: According to the "Western Regions Chronicle" by Shi Jie, there was a large body of water northwest of Mount Aqtada, and the northern current flowed into the Doklam Sea.

古文：其水北流径且末南山，又北径旦未城西。
现代文：此水往北流经且末南山，又往北流经且末城西边。
English: This water flows northward through the southern mountains, and northward through the western side of the city.

古文：国治且末城，西通精绝二千里，东去鄯善七百二十里，种五谷，其俗咯与汉同。
现代文：国都且末城，西通精绝国，路程二千里，东到都善七百二十里。那个地区种植五谷，风俗大体上与汉人相同。
English: The capital is located at the end of the country, the west is 2,000 miles from the capital, and the east is 720 miles from the capital. The area is planted with grain crops, and the customs are generally the same as those of the Han people.

古文：又曰：且末河东北流径且未北，又流而左会南河，会流东逝，通为注滨河。
现代文：又说：且末河往东北流经且末北边，又流了一程，在左边汇合南河；汇合后往东流，通称注滨河。
English: He also said: "And the last river flows to the northeast, passing through the northern end of the last river, and flows one more time, merging with the South River on the left; after merging, it flows eastward, commonly known as the Chubin River.

古文：注滨河又东径鄯善国北。治伊循城，故楼兰之地也。
现代文：注滨河又往东流经都善国北边，都城伊循城，过去是楼兰地方。
English: Note that the Binhe River flows eastward through the northern part of Duzheng, the capital city of Duzheng, in the past it was the Loulan area.

古文：楼兰王不恭于汉，元凤四年，霍光遣平乐监傅介子刺杀之，更立后王。
现代文：楼兰王对汉朝不恭，元凤四年霍光派了平乐监傅介子去刺杀了他，另立国王。
English: King Loulan was not loyal to the Han Dynasty. In the fourth year of Yuan Feng, Huo Guang sent Ping Le's overseer Fu Kaizi to assassinate him and set up another king.

古文：汉又立其前王质子尉屠耆为王，更名其国为鄯善。
现代文：汉朝又立了楼兰前主留作人质的儿子尉屠曹为王，把国名改为都善。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the son of Loulan's former master, who had been left as a hostage, named Tu Cao, became king, and the country's name was changed to Du Shan.

古文：百官祖道横门，王自请天子曰：身在汉久，恐为前王子所害，国有伊循城，土地肥美，愿遣将屯田积粟，令得依威重。
现代文：尉屠普回国时，文武百官在横门为他饯行，王向汉天子请求道：我留在汉朝很久了，回去恐怕要被前王的儿子谋害。我们国内有座伊循城，土地肥沃，希望皇上派遣将帅去屯田种粮，使我能够依仗大国的声威。
English: When Lieutenant Tuopu returned to China, hundreds of civil and military officials lined up for him at the side gate. The king pleaded with Han Tianzi: I have stayed in the Han Dynasty for a long time, and I am afraid that I will be killed by the son of the former king. There is an Ixu city in our country, and the land is fertile. I hope that the emperor will send generals to Tonden to grow grain, so that I can rely on the prestige of a great country.

古文：遂置田以镇抚之。
现代文：汉朝于是就在那里设置屯田，来镇抚都善。
English: Therefore, the Han Dynasty set up military garrisons there, and came to Zhenfudoshan.

古文：敦煌索励，字彦义，有才略。
现代文：敦煌索励，字彦义，为人有才气和谋略。
English: Dunhuang Soryi, the character Hikonyi, has talent and strategy.

古文：刺史毛奕表行贰师将军，将酒泉、敦煌兵千人，至楼兰屯田。
现代文：刺史毛奕上表推荐他为贰师将军，率领了酒泉、敦煌兵一千名，到楼兰去屯田。
English: Zhang Shi Mao Yi recommended him as the general of the imperial army on the table, and he led a thousand soldiers from Jiuquan and Dunhuang to Loulan to go to Tonden.

古文：起白屋，召鄯善、焉耆、龟兹三国兵各千，横断注滨河，河断之日，水奋势激，波陵冒堤。
现代文：他搭了茅草屋，调集都善、焉眷、龟兹三国兵各一千名，动工在注滨河拦河筑坝。河道截流那天，水流奔腾汹涌，来势很猛，直冲到堤上。
English: He built a thatched hut, gathered a thousand soldiers each from the three countries of Doushan, Yanzhong and Ganzi, and started to build a dam on the Chubin River. On the day the river was cut off, the water flowed furiously and violently, and rushed straight to the dike.

古文：劢厉声曰：王尊建节，河堤不溢，王霸精诚，呼沱不流，水德神明，古今一也。
现代文：索肋厉声高叫道：王尊察承王命，河堤就不溢水；王霸精诚所至，呼沱河水因而不流。水性若有神灵，也当助我，古今该都是一样的。
English: Sorai shouted loudly: "If the king heeds the king's command, the dike will not overflow; if the king heeds the king's command, the water of the Hulun River will not flow. If there is a water spirit, it should also help me. It should be the same now as it was in the past."

古文：劢躬祷祀，水犹未减，乃列阵被杖，鼓噪欢叫。
现代文：他亲自举行祈祷祭祀，但水势还是不减；于是摆起阵势，带了兵器，呼噪呐喊，一边刺，一边射。
English: He himself held a prayer ceremony, but the water still did not subside; so he set up a position, brought weapons, shouted and shouted, stabbed and shot.

古文：且刺且射，大战三日，水乃回减，灌浸沃衍，胡人称神。
现代文：这样大战了三日，水势才逐渐减退，驯服听命，灌溉着肥沃的平原，胡人都把他看作神人。
English: He fought like this for three days before the water gradually receded, obediently following orders and irrigating the fertile plains. The Hu people regarded him as a man of God.

古文：大田三年，积粟百万，威服外国。
现代文：耕种了三年，积累的粮食多达百万，声威震慑外国。
English: After three years of cultivation, the accumulated grain is as much as one million, which is a shock to foreign countries.

古文：其水东注泽，泽在楼兰国北扞泥城。其俗谓之东故城，去阳关于六百里，西北去乌垒千七百八十五里，至墨山国千八百六十五里，西北去车师干八百九十里。
现代文：这条水往东流，注入沼泽中。沼泽在楼兰国北边的抒泥城，当地俗称东故城，离阳关一千六百里，西北离乌垒一千七百八十五里，到墨山国一千八百六十五里，西北离车师一千八百九十里。
English: This water flows to the east and flows into the swamp. The swamp is located in the northern part of Loulan Province, Lili City, locally known as the East Old Town, 1,600 miles from Yangguan, 1,785 miles from Uyi in the northwest, 1,865 miles from Mozan Province, and 1,890 miles from Cheji in the northwest.

古文：土地沙卤少田，仰谷旁国。
现代文：那一带是沙质盐碱地。少有水田，吃粮全靠邻国供应。
English: The area is sandy, saline and alkaline. There are few rice paddies, and food is entirely supplied by neighbouring countries.

古文：国出玉，多蓖苇、柽柳、胡桐、白草。
现代文：那个国家出产玉石，芦苇、怪柳、梧桐、白草之类很多。
English: That country produces a lot of jade, reed, willow, sycamore and white grass.

古文：国在东垂，当白龙堆，乏水草，常主发导，负水担粮，迎送汉使。
现代文：都城在东部边境，位于白龙堆前，缺少水草，人们经常当向导，背负了饮水和干粮，迎送汉朝使者。
English: The capital city on the eastern border, located in front of the White Dragon Mound, lacks aquatic plants. People often act as guides, carrying drinking water and dry food, to welcome the Han Dynasty emissaries.

古文：故彼俗谓是泽为牢兰海也。
现代文：所以当地风俗把这片大泽叫做牢兰海。
English: That's why the local custom calls this part of Osawa the Dokoran Sea.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：南河自于阗东于北三千里，至鄯善入牢兰海者也。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：南河从于闻东往北三千里，到都善注入牢兰海。
English: According to the "West Country Diary" of Shi Jie, the Nanhe River flows from the east of Wen to the north for three thousand miles, and then flows into the Duolan Sea in Doushan.

古文：北河自岐沙东分南河，即释氏《西域记》所谓二支北流，径屈茨、乌夷、禅善，入牢兰海者也。
现代文：北河在岐沙东分出南河，这就是释氏《西域记》所说的两条水往北流经屈茨、乌夷、禅善，注入牢兰海。
English: The North River splits from the South River in the east of Kisha. This is how the two waters flowed northward through Kuts, Wuyi, and Zenzan, and into the Doklam Sea, as described in the "History of the Western Regions" by Shi.

古文：北河又东北流，分为二水，枝流出焉，北河自疏勒径流南河之北。
现代文：北河又往东北流，分出支流，成为两条。北河从疏勒流经南河以北。
English: The North River also flows to the northeast, branching out into two tributaries. The North River flows from Sule to the north of the South River.

古文：《汉书。西域传》曰：葱岭以东，南北有山，相距千余里，东西六千里，河出其中。
现代文：《汉书•西域传》说：葱岭以东，南北两边都有山，其间相距千余里，山脉绵延，东西长达六千里，河水就在中间。
English: "Hanshu • West Regions Biography" said: To the east of the Qiu Ling, there are mountains on both sides of the north and south, with a distance of more than a thousand miles between them, the mountains stretch, the east and west are up to six thousand miles, and the river is in the middle.

古文：暨于温宿之南，左合枝水，枝水上承北河于疏勒之东；西北流径疏勒国南，又东北与疏勒北山水合；水出北溪，东南流径疏勒城下。南去莎车五百六十里，有市列，西当大月氏、大宛、康居道。
现代文：流出。到了温宿的南边，左边与支流相汇合。支流上流在疏勒以东承接北河，往西北流经疏勒国南边，又转向东北，与疏勒北山水汇合。北山水发源于北溪，往东南流经疏勒城下，疏勒城南距莎车五百六十里，有商行店铺，西边是通大月氏、大宛、康居的交通要道。
English: It flows out to the south of Onjuku, where it merges with a tributary on the left. The upstream tributary joins the North River east of Sule, flows northwest through the south of Sule Province, and turns northeast to merge with the Sule North Mountain Water. The North Mountain Water originates from the North Stream and flows southeast through the lower part of Sule City. Sule City is five hundred and sixty miles south of Shache, with shops and businesses. To the west is the major transportation route of Tong Dazhong, Dawan, and Kangju.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：国有佛浴床，赤真檀木作之，方四尺，王于宫中供养。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：疏勒有佛浴床，用赤真檀木制作，大小四尺见方，国王把它放在宫中供养。
English: According to the "West Country Diary" of Shi Jie, there was a Buddha bath bed in Sule, made of red sandalwood, four feet square in size, which the king kept in the palace.

古文：汉永平十八年，耿恭以戊己校尉，为匈奴左鹿蠡王所逼，恭以此城侧涧傍水，自金蒲迁居此城，匈奴又来攻之，壅绝涧水。
现代文：汉永平十戈年，耿恭当戊己校尉，受到匈奴左鹿鑫王的逼迫。耿恭鉴于此城座落在溪涧旁边，地点近水，因而就从金蒲迁居到这里。匈奴又来进攻，把涧水堵断了。
English: In the tenth year of Han Yongping, when Geng Gong was the captain of Wuxi, he was persecuted by the Hun Zuolu Xin Wang. Geng Gong moved from Jinpu to this place because this city was located next to the creek and close to the water. The Hun attacked again and blocked the water.

古文：恭于城中穿井，深一十五丈，不得水，吏士渴乏，笮马粪汁饮之。
现代文：耿恭在城中挖井，深达十五丈，可是仍没有水。官吏士兵口渴难当，竟至榨取马粪汁来喝。
English: Geng Gong dug a well in the city, reaching a depth of fifteen meters, but there was still no water. The officials and soldiers were so thirsty that they even squeezed horse dung juice to drink.

古文：恭乃仰天叹曰：昔贰师拔佩刀刺山，飞泉涌出，今汉德神明，岂有穷哉？
现代文：耿恭于是仰天叹息道：从前贰师将军拔出佩刀刺山，就有飞泉涌出；现在大汉国运神灵，难道会到穷途末路吗？
English: Geng Gong then looked up to the heavens and sighed, "Once upon a time, when General Gong Shizhu pulled out his sword to stab a mountain, a flying spring gushed forth; now, when the Great Han Dynasty's national anthem is played, will it come to a dead end?

古文：整衣服，向井再拜，为吏士祷之。
现代文：他整了整衣服，向井拜了两拜，为官吏士兵祈祷。
English: He straightened his clothes, bowed twice to the well, and prayed for the officers and soldiers.

古文：有顷，水泉奔出，众称万岁。
现代文：一会儿，泉水涌出来了，众人都高呼庆贺。
English: A moment later, the spring water gushed out, and everyone shouted in celebration.

古文：乃扬水以示之，虏以为神，遂即引去。
现代文：于是就扬起水来给匈奴人看，匈奴人以为他是神人，就立即领兵退去。
English: So he raised the water to show the Huns, who thought he was a god and immediately withdrew their troops.

古文：后车师叛，与匈奴攻恭，食尽穷困，乃煮铠弩，食其筋革。
现代文：后来车师反叛，与匈奴人一起进攻耿恭，城里粮食都吃光了，处境十分艰难，甚至把恺甲和弓弩都拿来煮了，把其中的牛筋牛皮拿来吃。
English: Later, the coachman rebelled and attacked Genghis Khan together with the Huns. The city ran out of food, and the situation was very difficult. He even boiled armor and bows and arrows, and ate the beef sinew and leather.

古文：恭与士卒同生死，咸无二心。
现代文：耿恭与兵卒誓同生死，没有一个人怀着两条心的。
English: Geng Gong and his soldiers swore to live and die together. No one marched with two hearts.

古文：围恭不能下，关宠上书求救，建初元年，章帝纳司徒鲍昱之言，遣兵救之。
现代文：敌人围困耿恭却打不进去。关宠上书向朝廷求救，建初元年，汉章帝采纳了司徒鲍竖的意见，派兵前去救援。
English: The enemy besieged Geng Gong, but couldn't get in. Guan Zhaotong wrote to the imperial court for help. At the beginning of the first year of the Jian Dynasty, Emperor Han Zang adopted the opinion of Stu Bao Jia and sent soldiers to the rescue.

古文：至柳中，以校尉关宠分兵入高昌壁，攻交河城，车师降，遣恭军吏范羌将兵二千人迎恭。
现代文：到了柳中，派了校尉关宠分兵到高昌壁，去攻打交河城，车师投降了。于是又派耿恭的军吏范羌，领兵两千去迎接耿恭。
English: When he arrived in Liuzhong, he sent Lieutenant Guan Diao's detachment to Gaochangbei to attack Dechenghe City, and the driver surrendered. So he also sent Geng Gong's military official Fan Qi to lead two thousand soldiers to meet Geng Gong.

古文：遇大雪丈余，仅能至，城中夜闻兵马，大恐，羌遥呼曰：我范羌也。
现代文：当时正下大雪，积雪深达丈余，勉强才到疏勒城。城中夜间听到兵马声，非常惊恐；范羌远远地叫道：我是范羌啊！
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily, and the snow was so deep that it was difficult to get to Shule. In the middle of the city at night, they heard the sound of soldiers and horses, and they were very frightened; Fan Ye shouted from a distance, "I'm Fan Ye!

古文：城中皆称万岁，开门相持涕泣。
现代文：城中都欢呼起来，开了城门，相扶哭泣。
English: And all the city cried out, and opened their doors, and wept sore.

古文：尚有二十六人，衣屦穿决，形容枯槁，相依而还，枝河又东径莎车国南。治莎车城，西南去蒲犁七百四十里。
现代文：这时活着的还有二十六人，衣服鞋袜都穿破了，脸色十分憔悴，大家相扶着回来。支流又往东流经莎车国南边，国都莎车城，西南离蒲犁七百四十里。
English: At this time, there were still twenty-six people alive, their clothes, shoes, and socks were all worn out, their faces were very sad, and everyone supported each other to come back. The tributary flowed eastward through the south of Shache Province, the capital of Shache City, and seven hundred and forty miles southwest of Pu'er.

古文：汉武帝开西域，屯田于此。
现代文：汉武帝开拓西域，曾在这里屯田。
English: Emperor Hanwu explored the western regions, and once established a garrison here.

古文：有铁山，出青玉。
现代文：有铁山，山上出产青玉。
English: There is an iron mountain, and the mountain produces blue jade.

古文：枝河又东径温宿国南。治温宿城，土地物类，与鄯善同。
现代文：支流又往东流经温宿国南边，都城是温宿城，这一带的地理情况和物产，也与都善相同。
English: The tributary also flows eastward through the southern part of Onjuku Province. The capital is Onjuku City, and the geographical situation and products in this area are the same as those in Doushan.

古文：北至乌孙赤谷六百一十里，东通姑墨二百七十里。
现代文：从这里往北到乌孙赤谷六百一十里，往东通姑墨二百七十里。
English: From here, it is 610 miles north to Wusun Chaya, and 270 miles east to Tonggumo.

古文：于此，枝河右入北河。
现代文：支流到了这里向右注入北河。
English: At this point, the tributary flows into the Beichuan River to the right.

古文：北河又东径姑墨国南，姑墨川水注之，水导姑墨西北，历赤沙山，东南流径姑墨国西。
现代文：北河又往东流经姑墨国南边。有姑墨川水注入。姑墨川水从姑墨西北流来，流过赤沙山，往东南流经姑墨国西边，国都是南城。
English: The North River also flows eastward through the south of Gumo. It is fed by water from the Gumo River. The water of the Gumo River flows from the north of Gumessi, flows through the Red Sand Mountain, and flows southeastward through the west of Gumo. The whole country is Nancheng.

古文：治南城，南至于阗，马行十五日，土出铜铁及雌黄。
现代文：往南到于闻，骑马要走十五日。那个地区出产铜铁和雌黄。
English: It takes 15 days to ride south to Yuwen, an area that produces copper, iron and rutile.

古文：其水又东南流，右注北河。
现代文：水又往东南流，向右边注入北河。
English: The water then flows south-east and flows into the North River on the right.

古文：北河又东径龟兹国南，又东，左合龟兹川水，有二源，西源出北大山南。
现代文：北河又往东流经龟兹国南边，又往东流，在左边与龟兹川汇合。龟兹川有两个源头，西边的源头出自北大山南麓。
English: The North River flows eastward through the southern part of the Kuez country, and flows eastward again, merging with the Kuez River on the left. The Kuez River has two sources, and the source on the west comes from the southern foothills of Mount Beidai.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：屈茨北二百里有山，夜则火光，昼日但烟，人取此山石炭，冶此山铁，恒充三十六国用。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：屈茨以北二百里有山，夜间有火光，白天光冒烟。人们拿这山上的石炭来冶炼山上的铁矿，常可供三十六国的需用。
English: In the "Westland Chronicle" by Shi You, it says: "There are two hundred mountains to the north of Kecskemét, which glow with fire at night and smoke during the day. People use the coal from these mountains to smelt the iron ore from the mountains, which is often used by thirty-six countries."

古文：故郭义恭《广志》云：龟兹能铸冶。
现代文：所以郭义恭《广志》说：龟兹能铸冶。
English: Therefore, Guo Yigong said in "Guangzhi" that "tortoise can cast iron."

古文：其水南流径赤沙山。
现代文：两源的水往南流经赤沙山。
English: The water of the two sources flows southward through the Red Sand Mountain.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：国北四十里，山上有寺，名雀高大清净。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：龟兹国以北四十里，山上有寺院，名叫雀离大清净寺。
English: According to the "Western Regions" of Shi Jie, there was a temple on a mountain forty miles north of Kamezi Province. It was called Jiali Daqingjing Temple.

古文：又出山东南流，枝水左派焉。
现代文：又出山往东南流，向左边分出一条支流。
English: It flows out of the mountain to the southeast, and a tributary branches off to the left.

古文：又东南，水流三分，右二水俱东南流，注北河。
现代文：又往东南流，分为三支，右边两支都往东南流，注入北河。
English: It also flows southeastward and is divided into three branches. The two branches on the right both flow southeastward and feed into the North River.

古文：东川水出龟兹东北，历赤沙、积梨南流，枝水右出，西南入龟兹城。
现代文：东川水发源于龟兹东北，经过赤沙、积梨往南流，右边分出一条支流，往西南流入龟兹城。
English: The water of the East River originates in the northeast of Kuez, flows southward through Akasha and Jiali, and a tributary branches off to the right, flowing southwest into Kuez City.

古文：音屈茨也，故延城矣，西去姑墨六百七十里。
现代文：龟兹读作屈茨，就是昔日的延城，西距姑墨六百七十里。
English: Kamezi pronounced as Kuts, that is, the former Yancheng, 670 miles west of Gumo.

古文：川水又东南流径于轮台之东也。
现代文：川水又往东南流经轮台东边。
English: The river then flows southeast past the east side of the wheelhouse.

古文：昔汉武帝初通西域，置校尉，屯田于此。
现代文：从前汉武帝开始通西域时，设置校尉，在这里屯田。
English: When the former Emperor Hanwu began to pass through the western region, he set up a schoolmaster, and here is the Tonden.

古文：搜粟都尉桑弘羊奏言：故轮台以东，地广，饶水草，可溉田五千顷以上，其处温和，田美，可益通沟渠，种五谷，收获与中国同。
现代文：搜粟都尉桑弘羊奏道：旧日的轮台以东，土地辽阔，水草丰饶，川水可灌溉田亩五千顷以上。那里气候温和，水田肥美，可以多开儿条沟渠，种植五谷，收获就会赶上中原一带了。
English: "To the east of the old roundabout, the land is vast, the aquatic plants are abundant, and the river water can irrigate more than five thousand hectares of fields. The climate there is mild, the paddy fields are fertile, and more ditches can be opened to plant crops. The harvest will catch up with the Central Plains area.

古文：时匈奴弱，不敢近西域，于是徙莎车，相去千余里，即是台也。
现代文：当时匈奴力量薄弱，不敢接近西域，于是就迁到相距千余里的莎车去，就是轮台。
English: At that time, the Xiongnu were weak and did not dare to approach the western region, so they moved to Yarko, which was more than a thousand miles away, that is, the wheelhouse.

古文：其水又东南流，右会西川枝水，水有二源，俱受西川，东流径龟兹城南，合为一水。
现代文：水又往东南流，在右边汇合了西川的支流。这条支流有两个源头，都接纳了从西川来的水，往东流经龟兹城南，汇合成一条。
English: The water flows to the southeast, and on the right it joins a tributary of the Nishikawa River. This tributary has two sources, both of which receive water from the Nishikawa River, and flows eastward through the south of Kamez, merging into one.

古文：水间有故城，盖屯校所守也。
现代文：两水之间有一座旧城，就是屯田校尉驻守的地方。
English: Between the two rivers, there is an old town, which is where Lieutenant Tonden was stationed.

古文：其水东南注东川，东川水又东南径乌垒国南。
现代文：水往东南注入东川，东川又往东南流经乌垒国南边。
English: The water flows southeast into the Dongchuan River, which then flows southeast through the southern part of Wushi Province.

古文：治乌垒城，西去龟兹三百五十里，东去玉门阳关二千七百三十八里，与渠犁田官相近，土地肥饶，于西域为中故都护治焉。
现代文：国都乌垒城，西距龟兹三百五十里，东到玉门阳关二千七百三十八里，与渠梨的田官驻地相近。这里土地肥沃，在西域说来地位居中，是旧时的都护治所。
English: The national capital, Wuyucheng, is located 350 miles west of Ganzi and 2,738 miles east of Yumenyangguan. It is close to the residence of the local government officials. The land here is fertile, and it occupies a middle position in the western region. It was the capital protection and administration center in the old days.

古文：汉使持节郑吉，并护北道，故号都护，都护之起，自吉置也。
现代文：汉朝派遣郑吉为使，并保护北道，所以称为都护；都护的官职就是从郑吉时开始的。
English: The Han Dynasty dispatched Zheng Ji as an envoy and protected the North Road, so it was called the tutelage; the official post of tutelage began from the time of Zheng Ji.

古文：其水又东南注大河。
现代文：水又往东南注入大河。
English: Water is also being pumped into the river to the southeast.

古文：大河又东，右会敦薨之水，其水出焉耆之北，敦薨之山，在匈奴之西，乌孙之东。
现代文：大河又往东流，在右边汇合敦芫之水。敦芫之水发源于焉誊以北的敦莞之山，山在匈奴以西，乌孙以东。
English: The big river flows eastward again, and on the right it meets the water of Dunhuang. The water of Dunhuang originates from the Dunguan Mountains north of Yan'an, the mountains are west of Xiongnu and east of Wusun.

古文：《山海经》曰：敦薨之山，敦亮之水出焉，而西流注于泑泽。
现代文：《山海经》说：敦亮之山是敦芫之水的发源地，西流注入坳泽。
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: The mountain of Dunliang is the birthplace of the water of Dunhuang, and the west stream flows into Heze.

古文：出于昆仑之东北隅，实惟河源者也。
现代文：此水发源于昆仑山的东北角，其实是河水的源头。
English: This water originates from the northeast corner of Mount Kunlun, which is actually the source of the river.

古文：二源俱道，西源东流，分为二水，左水西南流，出于焉耆之西，径流焉耆之野，屈而东南流，注于敦薨之渚。右水东南流，又分为二，左右焉耆之国。
现代文：两条水源流出后，西源往东流分为两条：左边的一条往西南流，从焉誉以西出来，流过焉普之野，折向东南，注入敦亮之诸；右边的一条往东南流，也分为两条，从焉着都城左右两侧流过。
English: After the two water sources flowed out, the west-to-east flow was divided into two streams: the one on the left flowed to the southwest, coming from the west of Enyo, flowing through Enfunano, turning to the southeast, and injecting into Dunryo; the one on the right flowed to the southeast, and was also divided into two, flowing through the left and right sides of the capital.

古文：城居四水之中，在河水之洲，治员渠城，西去乌垒四百里。
现代文：都城四面环水，座落在河水的沙洲上。都城就是员渠城，西距乌垒四百里。
English: The capital city is surrounded by water on all sides and sits on a river sandbar. The capital city is Yanqiu City, four hundred miles west of Wuyi.

古文：南会两水，同注敦薨之浦。
现代文：水往南流，汇合了两条水，一同注入敦莞之浦。
English: The water flows to the south, merging the two streams and flowing into the Dongguan River.

古文：东源东南流，分为二水，涧澜双引，洪湍濬发，俱东南流，径出焉耆之东，导于危须国西。
现代文：东源往东南流，分为两条，这两条溪涧水流既急且深，都往东南流，从焉誉以东汹涌而出，流过危须国西边。
English: The east-to-south-east stream is divided into two streams, both of which are rapid and deep, both of which flow to the south-east, surging from the east and flowing through the west of the country.

古文：国治危须城，西去焉耆百里。
现代文：国都危须城，西距焉首一百里。
English: The country's capital, Jianshu, is a hundred miles to the west.

古文：又东南流，注于敦薨之薮。川流所积，潭水斯涨，溢而为海。
现代文：又往东南流向敦莞之蔽，水流源源不断地注入，潭水愈涨愈高，泛滥成为内海。
English: It also flows to the southeast to the cover of Dongguan, the water flow is continuously injected, the pool water rises higher and higher, and the flooding becomes the inland sea.

古文：《史记》曰：焉耆近海多鱼鸟；东北隔大山与车师接。
现代文：《史记》说：焉曹近海，鱼类和鸟类都很多。东北隔着大山与车师相邻接。
English: "Histories" said: Yan Cao offshore, fish and birds are many. The northeast is separated by mountains and is adjacent to the coachman.

古文：敦薨之水自西海径尉犁国。国治尉犁城，西去都护治所三百里，北去焉耆百里。
现代文：敦亮之水从西海流经尉犁国，都城尉犁城，西距都护治所三百里，北至焉誊一百里。
English: The water of Dun Liang flows from the West Sea through Lop County, the capital city of Lop City, 300 miles west of the capital protection and control center, and 100 miles north to Yancheng.

古文：其水又西出沙山铁关谷，又西南流，径连城别注，裂以为田。
现代文：水又往西从沙山铁关谷流出，又往西南流，经过连城时引水向四面灌溉田亩。
English: The water also flows westward from Shashan Tieguanyin, and flows to the southwest, passing through Liancheng and drawing water to irrigate fields on all sides.

古文：桑弘羊曰：臣愚以为连城以西，可遣屯田，以威西国，即此处也。
现代文：桑弘羊说：我以为连城以西一带可以派兵去屯田，以威慑西域诸国，他说的就是这地方。
English: Kuang Hongyang said, "I thought that the area west of Liancheng could be used to send troops to occupy the field to deter the countries in the western region. He was talking about this place."

古文：其水又屈而南，径渠犁国西。
现代文：水又转向南，流经渠犁国西边。
English: The water turned south again and flowed through the canal to the west of the country.

古文：故《史记》曰：西有大河，即斯水也。
现代文：所以《史记》说：西有大河，指的就是这条水。
English: Therefore, "Histories" said: "There is a big river in the west," referring to this water.

古文：又东南流，径渠犁国。治渠犁城，西北去乌垒三百三十里。
现代文：又往东南流经渠犁国，都城渠犁城，西北离乌垒三百三十里。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the Ducheng Province, the capital Ducheng, and is 330 miles northwest of Wuji.

古文：汉武帝通西域，屯渠犁，即此处也。
现代文：汉武帝通西域，在渠犁驻兵，就是这地方。
English: This is the place where Emperor Hanwu passed through the western region and stationed troops at Quzhou.

古文：南与精绝接，东北与尉犁接。
现代文：渠犁南与精绝接境，东北与尉犁相邻。
English: The southern part of Suqian is adjacent to Jingju, and the northeastern part is adjacent to Fuxin.

古文：又南流注于河。
现代文：水又往南流，注入河水。
English: The water then flows south, filling the river.

古文：《山海经》曰：敦薨之水，西流注于泑泽。
现代文：《山海经》说：敦芫之水西流注入坳泽。
English: "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: The westward flow of Dunhuang's water flows into Heze.

古文：盖乱河流自西南注也。
现代文：这条水是穿过河水从西南注入泽中的。
English: This water flows through the river from the southwest into the lagoon.

古文：河水又东径墨山国南。治墨山城，西至尉犁二百四十里。
现代文：河水又往东流经墨山国南边，都城墨山城，西到尉犁二百四十里。
English: The river also flows eastward through the southern part of Moushan, the capital city of Moushan, and westward to the 240-mile point of Ilu.

古文：河水又东径注宾城南。
现代文：河水又往东流经注宾城南边。
English: The river then flows east through the southern part of Shubin.

古文：又东径楼兰城南而东注。
现代文：又往东流经楼兰城南边，然后往东流去。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern side of Loulan City, and then flows eastward.

古文：盖坺田士所屯，故城禅国名耳。
现代文：这里原是屯田兵士的驻地，所以城也承受了国名了。
English: It was originally the garrison of the Tonden soldiers, so the city also inherited the name of the country.

古文：河水又东注于泑泽，即《经》所谓蒲昌海也。
现代文：河水又往东流，注入坳泽，就是《水经》所说的蒲昌海。
English: The river then flows to the east, flowing into Heze, which is the "Puchang Sea" mentioned in the "Water Sutra."

古文：水积鄯善之东北，龙城之西南。
现代文：这片沼泽是在都善东北、龙城西南积聚起来的。
English: This swamp has accumulated in the northeast of Duzen and the southwest of Longcheng.

古文：龙城，故姜赖之虚，胡之大国也。蒲昌海溢，荡覆其国，城基尚存而至大。
现代文：龙城原是旧时的姜赖之墟，是西域的大都城，蒲昌海泛滥，把这座都城冲毁了。
English: Longcheng used to be the ruins of Jianglai in the old days, and was the largest city in the western region. The flooding of the Putang Sea destroyed this capital city.

古文：晨发西门，暮达东门。
现代文：今天城墙基址还在，规模很大，早上从西门出发，傍晚才能到东门。
English: Today, the foundation site of the city wall is still there. It is very large. In the morning, you can start from the west gate, and in the evening you can reach the east gate.

古文：法其崖岸，余溜风吹，稍成龙形，西面向海，因名龙城。
现代文：水流绕着崖岸，经风一吹，粼粼的水波有如龙纹，西面向海，因而称为龙城。
English: The water flows around the cliff, and when the wind blows, the rippling water waves are like dragon stripes, facing the sea to the west, so it is called Longcheng.

古文：地广千里，皆为盐而刚坚也。
现代文：这一带平原千里，土地辽阔，都是盐碱地，又硬又实。
English: There are thousands of miles of plains and vast lands in this area, all of which are saline and alkaline, hard and solid.

古文：行人所径，畜产皆布毡卧之，掘发其下，有大盐，方如巨枕，以次相累，类雾起云浮，寡见星日，少禽，多鬼怪。
现代文：游牧民经过这里，牲口都要摊了毡才可躺下。挖掘下去，地下都是大盐块，呈方形，很像是大枕头，一个挨着一个堆叠在一起。那里常有云雾蒸腾，很少能看到太阳和星星；飞禽很少，鬼怪却很多。
English: The nomads pass through here, and the animals have to spread their beaks before they can lie down. Digging down, the ground is full of large salt blocks, square in shape, much like large pillows, stacked one next to the other. There are often clouds and mist, and it is rare to see the sun and stars; there are few birds, but many ghosts.

古文：西接鄯善，东连三沙，为海之北隘矣。
现代文：龙城西与都善相邻，东与三沙接壤，是蒲昌海北边的险要之地。
English: Longcheng is adjacent to Dusan in the west and to Sansha in the east. It is an important place on the north side of the Putang Sea.

古文：故蒲昌亦有盐泽之称也。
现代文：所以蒲昌海也有盐泽之称。
English: That's why the Puchang Sea is also known as the Salt Lake.

古文：《山海经》曰：不周之山，北望诸毗之山，临彼岳崇之山，东望泑泽，河水之所潜也，其源浑浑泡泡者也。
现代文：《山海经》说：不周之山，北与诸毗之山相望，昂然高出于岳崇之山的顶上，朝东可遥望坳泽，这就是河水潜入地下的地方。水源滚滚奔流，哗哗作响。
English: "Shanhaikyo" says: "In the middle of the mountains, the north faces the mountains of Zhuwei, the top of the mountain of Yue Chong stands tall, and the east faces the distant view of Heze. This is the place where the river water sinks into the ground. The water source is rushing and roaring.

古文：东去玉门阳关千三百里，广轮四百里。
现代文：坳泽东距至玉门阳关一千三百里，方圆四百里。
English: The distance from Heze Dong to Gyumon Yangguan is 1,300 miles, and the circumference is 400 miles.

古文：其水澄渟，冬夏不减，其中洄湍电转，为隐沦之脉。
现代文：泽水静止而澄清，冬夏不减，泽中有急转的漩涡，就是潜流的水脉。
English: The lake water is still and clear, and does not decrease in winter and summer. There is a swirling vortex in the lake, which is the underwater current.

古文：当其澴流之上，飞禽奋翮于霄中者，无不坠于渊波矣。
现代文：正当漩涡急转的上空，振翅高翔于云霄的飞鸟，没有不掉入深渊的。
English: Just as the whirlpool whirls in the sky, so does the bird that flutters high above the clouds fall into the abyss.

古文：即河水之所潜，而出于积石也。
现代文：这就是河水潜入地下处，到了积石才又涌出地面。
English: This is where the river dives into the ground, only to gush out of the ground when it reaches the boulders.

古文：又东入塞，过敦煌、酒泉、张掖郡南，河自蒲昌，有隐沦之证，并间关入塞之始。
现代文：又东流入塞，经过教煌、酒泉、张掖诸郡南边，有证据表明，河水在蒲昌海潜入地下，并从这里开始辗转流入边塞。
English: It also flows eastward into the dam, passing through Jiuhuang, Jiuquan and Zhangye in the south of the county. There is evidence that the river water sinks into the ground in the Puchang Sea, and from here begins to flow into the border dam.

古文：自此，《经》当求实致也。
现代文：从这里起，《水经》应当探究水流实际所到的地方。
English: From here, Shui Jing should explore where the water flow actually reaches.

古文：河水重源，又发于西塞之外，出于积石之山。
现代文：河水潜入地下，再次在西塞外面发源，从积石山流出。
English: The river water went underground and once again had its source outside of West Say, flowing out of Jishishan Mountain.

古文：《山海经》曰：积石之山，其下有石门，河永冒以西流，是山也，万物无不有。
现代文：《山海经》说：积石之山，下面有石门，河水就从石门漫出往西流。这座山上什么都有。
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: "The mountain is made of stone, and there is a stone gate below, and the river flows from the stone gate to the west. There is everything on this mountain."

古文：《禹贡》所谓导河自积石也。
现代文：《禹贡》说的从积石疏导河水，就指这里。
English: This is where "Yugong" refers to diverting river water from boulders.

古文：隃糜相曹凤上言：建武以来，西戎数犯法，常从烧当种起。
现代文：积石山在西羌境内，是烧当族所居的地方。延熹二年以来，西戎屡次进犯，时常都是从烧当羌族开始的。
English: Jishishan is in the territory of Xidi and is the place where the Burntang people live. Since the second year of Yancheng, Xidong has repeatedly attacked, often starting from the Burntang people.

古文：所以然者，以其居大、小榆谷，土地肥美，又近塞内，与诸种相傍，南得钟存，以广其众，北阻大河，因以为固，又有西海鱼盐之利，缘山滨河，以广田畜，故能强大，常雄诸种。
现代文：为什么会这样呢？这是因为他们居住在大榆谷和小榆谷，土地肥沃，又接近塞内，和各民族为邻，南边又有钟存族的支援，因此兵源众多。北面有大河阻挡着，可以凭险固守，同时又有西海鱼盐之利，依山濒河，可以扩大农耕和畜牧，所以能够强大，常在各民族中称雄。
English: Why is this? This is because they live in the Daxiguan and Xiaoguan valleys. The land is fertile and close to the Seine. They are neighbors with all ethnic groups. In the south, they have the support of the Zhongcun people, so they have a large number of soldiers. In the north, there is a big river blocking them, so they can stick to the danger. At the same time, they have the advantage of the West Sea fish and salt, and the mountains near the river can expand farming and animal husbandry. Therefore, they can be strong and often dominate among all ethnic groups.

古文：今党援沮坏，亲属离叛，其余胜兵，不过数百，宜及此时，建复西海郡县，规固二榆，广设屯田，隔塞羌胡交关之路，殖谷富边，省输转之役。
现代文：现在他们的党羽崩溃了，已是众叛亲离，留下的残兵败卒不过几百人，正好趁此时机，重新建立西海郡县，设法加强大榆谷和小榆谷的防卫，并扩大屯田，这就可以阻断羌人和胡人交往的道路，同时又可以种粮来增加边区的财富，省却了从内地辗转运输的劳力。
English: Now that their party has collapsed, and they have been deserted by their relatives, leaving only a few hundred soldiers, it is time to take advantage of this opportunity to re-establish the counties and counties of the West Sea, try to strengthen the defense of the Great Yunnan Valley and the Small Yunnan Valley, and expand the built-up areas. This can block the way for the Yunnan people to interact with the Hu people, and at the same time, it can grow grain to increase the wealth of the border areas, saving the labor of transporting it from the mainland.

古文：上拜凤为金城西部都尉，遂开屯田二十七部，列屯夹河，与建成相首尾，后羌反，遂罢。
现代文：皇上就封曹凤为金城西部都尉，开辟了屯田二十七部，在河水两岸分布了一系列屯垦区，与建威头尾连成一线。
English: The emperor appointed Cao Feng as the captain of the western part of Jincheng, opened up 27 military garrisons, and distributed a series of military garrisons on both sides of the river, which were connected to Jianwei.

古文：案段国《沙州记》，吐谷浑于河上作桥，谓之河厉，长百五十步，两岸累石作基陛，节节相次，大木从横更镇压，两边俱平，相去三丈，并大材以板横次之，施钩栏甚严饰。
现代文：后来羌人造反，屯田也就撤销了。按段国《沙州记》，吐谷浑在河上造桥，称为河厉，长一百五十步，两岸结石成为台阶，一级挨着一级。桥梁以巨木纵横相压成，两边都是平的，相距三丈；又用巨木锯板横铺，边上做了栏干，十分整伤。
English: According to Duan Guo's "Chronicle of Shazhou," Tu Gu Hun built a bridge over the river, called He Li, which was 150 paces long, and the stones on both sides became steps, one next to the other. The bridge was pressed with huge trees in vertical and horizontal phases, and both sides were flat, three meters apart. It was also laid with huge wooden saw plates, and a railing was made on the edge, which was very neat.

古文：桥在清水川东也。
现代文：这座桥梁位于清水川以东。
English: The bridge is located east of the Shimizu River.

古文：又东过陇西河关县北，洮水从东南来流注之。
现代文：又往东流过陇西郡河关县北边，洮水从东南流来注人。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Heguan County, Shaanxi County, and the Surabaya River flows from the southeast.

古文：河水右径沙州北。
现代文：河水右边流经沙州北面。
English: The right side of the river flows through the northern part of Shazhou.

古文：段国曰：浇河西南百七十里有黄沙，沙南北百二十里，东西七十里，西极大杨川。
现代文：段国说，浇河西南一百七十里有一片黄沙，这片沙漠南北长一百二十里，东西宽七十里，西边到大杨川为止。
English: Duan Guo said that there is a piece of yellow sand one hundred and seventy miles southwest of the Ge River. This desert is one hundred and twenty miles long from north to south and seventy miles wide from east to west, up to the Dayang River.

古文：望黄沙，犹若人委于糒于地，都不生草木，荡然黄沙，周回数百里，沙州于是取号焉。
现代文：一眼望去，这片黄沙就像有人把干粮倒在地上似的，沙上草木不生，一片荒漠，周围几百里，因此就取名为沙州。
English: At a glance, this piece of yellow sand looks like someone poured dry grain on the ground. No plants or trees grow on the sand. It's a desert, hundreds of miles around. That's why it's called Shazhou.

古文：县，玄也，首也，从系倒首，举首易偏矣。言当玄静，平谣役也。
现代文：《地理志》说：汉宣帝神爵二年，就是玄的意思，也是首的意思。偏旁从系，誉字则倒了过来意思是说应当涵蓄沉静，谣役要平和。
English: "Geography" said: the second year of the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, that is, the meaning of Xuan, is also the meaning of the head. The side is subordinate, and the honorific is reversed, meaning that it should be calm, and the ballad should be peaceful.

古文：《释名》又曰：县，悬也，悬于郡矣。
现代文：《释名》又说：县，就是悬的意思，是悬附于郡。
English: The "Explanation of Names" also says: County, which means hanging, is attached to the county.

古文：《百官表》曰：县有蛮夷谓之道，公主所食曰邑。应劭曰：反舌左衽，不与华同，须有译言，乃通也。
现代文：黄义仲《十三州记》说：县，就是弦的意思。弦是正直的，就是说屈身居于微贱的地位，与老百姓为邻，不轻易违背自己的誓言；执法不枉曲，要像弦一样直。
English: Huang Yizhong's "History of the Thirteen States" said: County means string. String is honest, that is, to live in a lowly position, to be neighbors with the people, not to easily violate their oaths; law enforcement is not unfair, it should be as straight as a string.

古文：汉陇西郡治，秦昭王二十八年置。
现代文：弦字读音与县字相近，所以取名。
English: The pronunciation of the Chinese character for "string" is similar to that of the Chinese character for "county," hence the name.

古文：应劭曰：有陇堆在其东，故曰陇西也。
现代文：汉高帝六年。应肋说，东方有陇纸，所以叫陇西。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Han Gao, Ying Li said, "The East has crepe paper, which is why it is called the West."

古文：《神仙传》曰：封君达，陇西人，服炼水银，年百岁，视之如年三十许，骑青牛，故号青牛道士。
现代文：《神仙传》说：封君达，陇西人，他以水银炼丹服食，到了一百岁时，看来还像三十左右的样子。他常常骑着青牛，所以号为青牛道士。
English: "The Legend of the Immortal" says: Feng Junda, a man from Shaanxi Province, used mercury to make potions, and when he was a hundred years old, he still looked like he was about thirty. He often rode a young bull, so he was called the Young Bull Taoist.

古文：王莽更郡县之名，郡曰厌戎，县曰操虏也。
现代文：王莽把郡县改名，郡叫厌戎，县名操虏。
English: Wang Mang changed the name of the county, the county is called Weiyong, and the county name is Zhulong.

古文：昔马援为陇西太守，六年，为狄道开渠，引水种秔稻，而郡中乐业，即此水也。
现代文：从前马援在陇西当了六年太守，为狄道开渠引水种粳稻，一郡百姓都安居乐业。
English: Once upon a time, Ma Yuan was the governor of Shaanxi for six years. He opened a canal for Di Dao to divert water to grow indica rice, and the people of the county lived and worked in peace.

古文：滥水又西北流，注于洮水。
现代文：他开的就是这条水。滥水又往西北流，注入挑水。
English: It was this water that he drove. The polluted water flowed to the northwest, injecting water.

古文：洮水右合二水，左会大夏川水。
现代文：挑水在右边汇合了两条水，左边汇合了大夏川水。
English: On the right side of the water lift, two rivers converge, and on the left side, the waters of the Daxia River converge.

古文：水出西山，二源合舍而乱流，径金纽城南。
现代文：大夏川水发源于西山，两个源头合并后乱流经过金钮城南边。
English: The water of the Daxia River originates from the West Mountain. After the two sources are combined, the turbulent flow passes through the south side of Jinnuo City.

古文：《十三州志》曰：大夏县西有故金纽城，去县四十里，本都尉治。
现代文：《十三州志》说：大夏县西边有旧金钮城，离县城四十里，原来是都尉治所。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Prefectures" said: There is an old gold button city on the west side of Daxia County, forty miles from the county seat, which was originally a governor's office.

古文：又东北径大夏县故城南。
现代文：又往东北流经大夏县旧城南边。
English: It also flows northeast through the southern part of the old city of Daxia County.

古文：《地理志》王莽之顺夏。
现代文：大夏就是《地理志》里王莽的顺夏。
English: The big summer is the summer of Wang Mang in "Geography."

古文：《晋书地道记》曰：县有禹庙，禹所出也。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》说：县里有禹庙，是禹出生的地方。
English: "Jinshu•Jindo Ji" said: There is a Yu temple in the county, which is the place where Yu was born.

古文：又东北出山，注于洮水。
现代文：又往东北从山间流出，注入挑水。
English: It also flows out of the mountains to the northeast, injecting rushing water.

古文：洮水又北，翼带三水，乱流北入河。
现代文：挑水又往北流，在两岸接纳了三条溪涧，乱流往北注入河水。
English: The rushing water flowed northward, receiving three creeks on both sides, and the turbulent flow injected the river water to the north.

古文：《地理志》曰：洮水北至枹罕，东入河是也。
现代文：《地理志》说：挑水往北流，到抱罕往东流注入河水。
English: "Geography" said: the water is pumped to the north stream, and the east stream is injected into the river at Baohan.

古文：应劭曰：汉宣帝神爵二年置，城省南门。
现代文：又往东流经金城郡允吾县北边，允吾县是金城郡的治所。金城郡置于汉昭帝始元六年所置，县城没有南门。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Unwu County, Jincheng County. Unwu County is the administrative center of Jincheng County. Jincheng County was established in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Han Zhaoyi, and the county seat does not have a south gate.

古文：《十二州志》曰：湟水河在南门前东过。六谷水自南，破羌川自北，左右翼注。
现代文：《十三州志》说：徨水河往东流过南门前，来自南方的六谷水，来自北方的破羌川，从左右两侧注入。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Prefectures" says: The Waisui River flows eastward past the south gate, and the Rokkoku Water from the south and the Broken River from the north are injected from both sides.

古文：湟水又东南径小晋兴城北，故都尉治。
现代文：涅水又往东南流经小晋兴城北边，旧时这里是都尉治所。
English: The Neisse also flows south-east through the northern part of the small Jinxing city, which used to be the governor's residence.

古文：阚駰曰：允吾县西四十里有小晋兴城。
现代文：阐胭说：允吾县西四十里有小晋兴城。
English: Elucidation said: There is a small Jinxing City in the west forty of Yungu County.

古文：湟水又东与阁门河合，即浩亹河也。
现代文：徨水又往东流，与阁门河汇合一一阁门河就是浩睿河。
English: The wandering water flows eastward again, and merges with the Gakumen River - the Gakumen River is the Horai River.

古文：出西塞外，东入塞，径敦煌、酒泉、张掖南，东南径西平之鲜谷塞尉故城南，又东南与湛水合。
现代文：阁门河发源于西塞外，往东流入塞内，流经敦煌、酒泉、张掖南边，往东南流经西平的鲜谷塞尉老城南边，又往东南与湛水汇合。
English: The Geumun River originates in the west of Saipan, flows eastward into Saipan, flows through Dunhuang, Jiuquan, and the south of Zhangye, flows southeastward through the south of Xiping's Xingu Old Town, and merges with the waterlogging to the southeast.

古文：水有二源，西水出白岭下，东源发于白岸谷，合为一川。
现代文：湛水有两个源头：西边一支发源于白岭山下，东边的源头出自白岸谷，汇合成一条水。
English: There are two sources of waterlogging: the western one originates from the bottom of the Bai Ling Mountain, and the eastern source originates from the Bai Gui Valley, merging into one water.

古文：东南流至雾山，注阁门河。
现代文：水往东南流到雾山，注入阁门河。 
English: The water flows south-east to Mount Fog, where it flows into the Katamon River.

古文：阁门河又东径养女北山东南，左合南流川水，水出北山，南流入于阁门河。
现代文：阁门河又往东流经养女北山，往东南流，左边与南流川水汇合。川水发源于北山，南流注入阁门河。
English: The Katamon River also flows eastward through Kitayama, flowing southeastward, and merges with the south-flowing river water on the left. The river water originates from Kitayama, and the south-flowing river flows into the Katamon River.

古文：故亦曰阁门水，两兼其称矣，又东流注于湟水。
现代文：周门河又往东 流经浩叠县旧城南边，王莽改名为兴武。阐驰说，浩，读作阁，所以也叫阁门水，两个名称可以兼用。水又往东流，注入涅水。
English: The Zhoumen River also flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Haojia County, and Wang Mang changed his name to Xingwu. Yanqi said that Hao, pronounced as gak, is also called gakmen water, so the two names can be used at the same time. The water also flows eastward, injecting nirvana water.

古文：故《地理志》曰，浩亹水东至允吾入湟水。
现代文：所以《地理志》说：浩杏水东流到允吾，注入徨水。
English: Therefore, the "Geography" said: the eastward flow of the vast apricot water reaches the Yungu, and the wavering water is injected.

古文：湟水又东径允吾县北为郑伯津，与涧水合，水出令居县西北塞外，南流径其县故城西。
现代文：徨水又往东流经允吾县北边，就是郑伯津，与涧水相汇合。涧水发源于令居县西北的塞外，往南流经令居县旧城西边。
English: Hovering water also flows eastward through the northern part of Yunwu County, that is, Zhengbojin, and merges with turbid water. The turbid water originates in the northwest of Lingju County, and flows southward through the west of the old city of Lingju County.

古文：汉武帝元鼎二年置，王莽之罕虏也。
现代文：令居县设置于汉武帝元鼎二年，就是王莽的罕虏。
English: Lingju County was established in the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuan of the Han Dynasty. It was the crown jewel of Wang Mang.

古文：又南径永登亭西，历黑石谷南流，注郑伯津。
现代文：又南经永登亭西边，穿过黑石谷往南流，注入郑伯津。
English: It also flows south through the west side of Yongdeng Pavilion, through the Black Rock Valley to the south, and flows into Zhengbojin.

古文：湟水又东径允街县故城南。
现代文：徨水又往东流经允街县旧城南边。
English: The wandering water also flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Yunjie County.

古文：汉宣帝神爵二年置，王莽之修远亭也。
现代文：允街县置于汉宣帝神爵二年前，就是王莽的修远亭。
English: Located in Yunjie County two years before the Han Emperor Shenzhu, it is Wang Mang's Xiuyuan Pavilion.

古文：县有龙泉，出允街谷，泉眼之中，水文成交龙，或试挠破之，寻平成龙。
现代文：县里有龙泉，发源于允街谷。泉眼中间涟漪轻漾，交织成龙纹，如果把它搅乱，一会儿水平后仍旧成为龙纹。
English: There is a dragon spring in the county, which originates in Yunjie Valley. The middle of the spring's eye is smooth and light, interwoven into dragon lines. If it is disturbed, it will still become dragon lines after a while.

古文：畜生将饮者，皆畏避而走，谓之龙泉，下入湟水。
现代文：牲口刚想去喝水，一见龙纹就吓跑了。因而叫龙泉，下流注入徨水。
English: As soon as the cattle wanted to drink water, they were scared away at the sight of dragon stripes. Therefore, it is called Longquan, and the downstream is filled with wandering water.

古文：湟水又东径枝阳县，逆水注之。水出允吾县之参街谷，东南流径街亭城南，又东南径阳非亭北，又东南径广武城西，故广武都尉治。
现代文：徨水又往东流经枝阳县，有逆水发源于允吾县的参街谷，往东南流经街亭城南边，又往东南流经阳非亭北边，又往东南流经广武城西边―这就是旧时的广武都尉治所。
English: The wandering water flows eastward through Shiyang County, and there is a reverse water that originates from the Sanjie Valley in Yunwu County, flows southeastward through the south side of Jiejing City, flows southeastward through the north side of Yangfiting, and flows southeastward through the west side of Guangwu City - this is the old Guangwu Capital.

古文：郭淮破叛羌，治无戴，于此处也。城之西南二十许里，水西有马蹄谷。
现代文：郭淮打垮了反叛的羌人，就在这里治理无戴族。此城西南二十来里，水西有马蹄谷。
English: Guo Huai defeated the rebellious Xiang people and governed the Muda people here. Twenty miles southwest of this city, west of the water, there is Horseshoe Valley.

古文：汉武帝闻大宛有天马，遣李广利伐之，始得此马，有角为奇。
现代文：汉武帝听说大宛有天马，就派遣李广利出兵征伐，这才得到了天马。
English: Emperor Hanwu heard that there was a Heavenly Horse in Dawan, so he sent Li Guangli to lead an army to conquer it, and only then did he obtain the Heavenly Horse.

古文：故汉武帝《天马之歌》曰：天马来兮历无草，径千里兮循东道。
现代文：天马的奇处是有角，所以汉武帝《天马之歌》说：天马来呵，驰过无草之地，沿着东道呵，奔驰千里。
English: The strange thing about the Heavenly Horse is that it has horns, so Emperor Hanwu said in the "Song of the Heavenly Horse": Come Heavenly Horse, gallop through the grassless land, along the host, gallop thousands of miles.

古文：胡马感北风之思，遂顿羁绝绊，骤首而驰，晨发京城，夕至敦煌北塞外，长鸣而去，因名其处曰候马亭。
现代文：胡马感到北风吹来，引起了乡思，于是就挣断僵绳，昂首奔驰。早晨从京城出发，晚上就到敦煌北边的塞外，长嘶一声而去，因此把这地方叫候马亭。
English: Huma felt the north wind blowing, causing homesickness, so he broke the rope and galloped with his head held high. In the morning, he set out from the capital, and in the evening, he went to the outskirts of Dunhuang in the north, and left with a long hiss. Therefore, this place is called Houma Pavilion.

古文：今晋昌郡南及广武马蹄谷盘石上，马迹若践泥中，有自然之形，故其俗号曰天马径，夷人在边效刻，是有大小之迹，体状不同，视之便别。
现代文：现在晋昌郡南边和广武马蹄谷的大石上，还留有马脚印，像是在泥中踏成似的，形状十分自然，所以当地民间称为天马径。夷人在旁边仿刻了一些，却有大有小，形状不同，一看就分辨得出来。
English: Nowadays, horse footprints are still left on the large boulders in the southern part of Jinchang County and Guangwu Horseshoe Valley. It looks like they were trampled in the mud. The shape is very natural, so the local people call it the Heavenly Horse Path. The barbarians imitated and engraved some on the side, but they are large and small, different in shape, and can be distinguished at a glance.

古文：逆水又东径枝阳县故城南，东南入于湟水。
现代文：逆水又往东流经枝阳县老城南边，往东南注入徨水。
English: The backwash also flows eastward through the southern side of the old city of Shiyang County, injecting wavering water to the southeast.

古文：《地理志》曰：逆水出允吾东，至枝阳入湟。
现代文：《地理志》说：逆水发源于允吾，东流到枝阳注入涅水。
English: "Geography" said: the backwash originates from Yungu, and the eastward flow to Ziyang infuses nirvana.

古文：湟水又东流，注于金城河，即积石之黄河也。
现代文：涅水又往东流，注入金城河，就是积石的黄河。
English: The water of Nirvana flowed eastward and poured into the Jincheng River, which is the Yellow River of sedimentary rocks.

古文：阚駰曰：河至金城县，谓之金城河，随地为名也。
现代文：阐姻说：河水到了金城县，称为金城河，是随着所经之地而取的河名。
English: Elucidation: When the river reaches Jincheng County, it is called the Jincheng River. The name of the river comes from the place it flows through.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：牢兰海东伏流龙沙堆，在屯皇东南四百里阿步于，鲜卑山。东流至金城为大河。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：牢兰海东边，河水在地下潜流于龙沙堆，这地方在屯皇东南四百里的阿步干―这是鲜卑山名，往东流到金城就是大河。
English: According to the "West Country Diary" of Shi Jia, on the east side of the Lankan Sea, the river water flows underground in the Longsha heap. This place is in Abugan, four hundred miles southeast of Tunhuang - this is the name of the Xianbei Mountain. The river flowing east to Jincheng is the big river.

古文：河出昆仑，昆仑即阿耨达山也。
现代文：大河发源于昆仑，这昆仑就是阿褥达山。
English: The great river originates from Kunlun, and this Kunlun is the Adda Mountain.

古文：河水又东径石城南，谓之石城津。
现代文：河水又往东流经石城南边，称为石城津。
English: The river then flows east through the southern part of Shicheng, known as Shichengjin.

古文：阚駰曰：在金城西北矣。
现代文：阐胭说：石城津在金城西北。
English: Elucidated: Shichengjin is in the northwest of Jincheng.

古文：河水又东南径金城县故城北。
现代文：河水又往东南流经金城县老城北边。
English: The river then flows southeast through the northern part of the old town of Jincheng County.

古文：应劭曰：初筑城得金，故曰金城也。
现代文：应肋说：开始筑城时掘到黄金，所以叫金城。
English: Ying Li said, "When we started to build the city, we dug up gold, which is why it is called the Golden City.

古文：《汉书集注》，薛瓒云：金者，取其坚固也，故墨子有金城汤池之言矣。
现代文：在《汉书集注》中，薛攒说：以金为名，是取其坚固的意思，所以墨子有金城汤池的说法。
English: In the "Commentary on the Chinese Classics," Xue Nan said: "The name of gold is to take its solid meaning, so Mozi has the saying of Jincheng Tangchi.

古文：王莽之金屏也。
现代文：金城就是王莽的金屏。
English: Jincheng is the golden screen of Wang Mang.

古文：《世本》曰：鲧作城。
现代文：《世本》说：是鲸筑的城。
English: "World Book" says: it is a city built by whales.

古文：《风俗通》曰：城，盛也，从土，成声。
现代文：《风俗通》说：城是盛的意思，偏旁从土，读作成。
English: "Folklore" said: the city is the meaning of Sheng, from the side of the earth, read and made.

古文：《管子》曰：内为之城，城外为之郭，郭外为之土阆。
现代文：《管子》说：里重筑的是城，城外筑的是郭，郭外筑的是土壕。
English: "Pipe" said: the city is rebuilt in the city, the castle is built outside the city, and the ditch is built outside the castle.

古文：地高则沟之，下则堤之，命之曰金城。
现代文：地势高的地方就开沟，低的地方就筑堤，名为金城。
English: Where the terrain is high, a ditch is dug, and where it is low, a dike is built, which is called Jincheng.

古文：《十三州志》曰：大河在金城北门。
现代文：《十三州志》说：大河在金城北门，往东流，有梁泉注入。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: The great river is at the north gate of Jincheng, flowing eastward, with Liangquan flowing into it.

古文：东流，有梁泉注之，出县之南山。案耆旧言：梁晖，字始娥，汉大将军梁冀后。
现代文：梁泉发源于县内的南山，据老人们说：梁晖，字始娥，是汉朝大将军梁冀的后裔。
English: Liangquan originated from the Nanshan Mountain in the county. According to the old people, Liang Kun, also known as Shi E, is a descendant of the Han Dynasty general Liang Ji.

古文：冀诛，入羌。
现代文：梁冀被杀后，子孙迁居于羌人地区。
English: After Liang Jie was killed, his descendants moved to the Xuanren area.

古文：后其祖父为羌所推，为渠帅而居此城。
现代文：后来梁晖的祖父受羌人推戴，当了首领，住在这座城中。
English: Later, Liang Xuan's grandfather was promoted by the Xuan people and became the leader, living in this city.

古文：土荒民乱，晖将移居枹罕，出顿此山，为群羌围迫，无水，晖以所执榆鞭竖地，以青羊祈山，神泉涌出，榆木成林。
现代文：到了梁晖时，土地荒芜，百姓作乱，梁晖打算迁居到袍罕去，动身出城，在这里山上歇宿。成群的羌人来包围进逼，山上无水，他把手中握着的榆树鞭子竖在地上，用青羊来祭山祈祷，于是神泉涌出，榆树后来也发展成林了 。
English: When he arrived at Liangyao, the land was barren and the people were rioting. Liangyao planned to move to Gohan, and set out from the city to spend the night on the mountain. Hordes of Qiang people surrounded him, and there was no water on the mountain. He held the eucalyptus whip in his hand and raised it to the ground. He used the green sheep to sacrifice to the mountain and pray. As a result, a sacred spring gushed forth, and the eucalyptus trees later developed into a forest.

古文：其水自县北流注于河也。
现代文：梁泉从县城往北流，注入大河。
English: The Liangquan River flows north from the county seat and flows into the Tahe River.

古文：又东过榆中县北，昔蒙恬为秦北逐戎人，开榆中之地。
现代文：又往东流过榆中县北边，从前蒙恬为秦朝北征，驱逐戎人，开辟了榆中这片地方。
English: It also flows eastward through the north of Yuzhong County. In the past, Mengyi was the northern expedition of the Qin Dynasty, expelling the Eunuchs and opening up this area of Yuzhong.

古文：案《地理志》，金城郡之属县也，故徐广《史记音义》曰：榆中在金城，即阮嗣宗《劝进文》所谓榆中以南者也。
现代文：按照《地理志》，榆中是金城郡的属县。所以徐广《史记音义》说：榆中在金城。阮嗣宗《劝进文》所说的榆中以南，就指这地方。
English: According to the "Geography," Yuzhong is a county belonging to Jincheng County. Therefore, Xu Guang's "History Notes" said: Yuzhong is in Jincheng. The south of Yuzhong mentioned by Ruan Jizong's "Persuasion" refers to this place.

古文：又东过天水北界，苑川水出勇士县之子城南山，东北流，历此成川，世谓之子城川。
现代文：又往东流过天水郡北部边界，苑川水发源于勇士县的子城南山，往东北流经此成川，世人称为子城川。
English: It also flows eastward across the northern border of Tianshui County. The water of the Yuanchuan River originates from Zicheng Nanshan in Warriors County and flows northeast through this Chengchuan River, known to the world as the Zicheng River.

古文：又北径牧师苑，故汉牧苑之地也。
现代文：又往北流经牧师苑，就是从前汉时的牧苑地方。
English: It also flows north through the vicarage, which was the pastoral area in the former Han Dynasty.

古文：羌豪迷吾等万余人，到襄武、首阳，平襄、勇士，抄此苑马，焚烧亭驿，即此处也。
现代文：羌族豪迷吾等万余人，到了襄武、首阳、平襄、勇士等地，掠夺了苑里的马匹，焚烧了亭和骚站，就是这地方。
English: More than ten thousand people, including the heroes of the Yi people, went to Xiangwu, Shouyang, Pingxiang, Warriors and other places, plundered the horses in the courtyard, burned the pavilion and the sow station, and this is the place.

古文：又曰：苑川水地，为龙马之沃土，故马援请与田户中分以自给也。
现代文：又说：苑川水地区是龙马的沃土，所以马援请求与田户平分以自给。
English: He also said: the Yuanchuanshui area is a fertile land for long horses, so the horse aid request is equally divided with the field to be self-sufficient.

古文：有东、西二苑城，相去七十里。
现代文：这里有东西两座城，相距七十里。
English: There are two cities here, one to the east and one to the west, seventy miles apart.

古文：西城，即乞佛所都也。
现代文：西城就是乞佛建都的地方。
English: Xicheng is the place where the capital was built.

古文：又北入于河也。
现代文：水又往北流，注入河水。
English: The water then flows north, filling the river.

古文：又东北过武威姐围县南，河水径其界东北流，县西南有泉源，东径其县南，又东北入河也。
现代文：又往东北流过武威郡媳围县南边，河水经过温围县边界往东北流。温围县西南有泉源，往东流经县南，又往东北流，注入河水。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the south of Zhenwei County, Wuwei County, and the river flows to the northeast through the border of Wenwei County. There is a spring source in the southwest of Wenwei County, flowing eastward through the south of the county, and flowing to the northeast, injecting river water.

古文：又东北过天水勇士县北，《地理志》曰：满福也，属国都尉治，王莽更名之曰纪德。
现代文：又往东北流过天水郡勇士县北边，《地理志》说：勇士县就是满福，是属国都尉治所。王莽改名为纪德。
English: It also flowed to the northeast past the northern edge of Warriors County, Tianshui County. "Geography" said: Warriors County is Manfu, it is a provincial capital. Wang Mang changed his name to Ji De.

古文：有水出县西，世谓之二十八渡水。东北流，溪涧萦曲，途出其中，径二十八渡，行者勤于溯涉，故因名焉。
现代文：有一条水发源于县西，人们称为二十八渡水：往东北流，溪涧弯弯曲曲，道路穿过其间，要过二十八次渡，行人忙于涉水，因此人们把它叫做二十八渡水。
English: There is a stream that originates in the west of the county and is known as the 28th ford. It flows to the northeast, the creek meanders, the road passes through it, and it takes 28 times to cross the river. Pedestrians are busy wading through the water, so people call it the 28th ford.

古文：北径其县而下注河。
现代文：水往北流过勇士县，下注河水。
English: The water flowed northward through Warriors County, and the water flowed downstream.

古文：又有赤晔川水，南出赤蒿谷，北流径赤晔川，又北径牛官川。又北径义城西北，北流历三城川，而北流注于河也。
现代文：又有赤哗川水，发源于南边的赤篙谷，往北流经赤哗川，又往北流经牛官川，又往北流经义城西北，往北流经三城川，然后往北注入河水。
English: There is also the water of the Akawazu River, which originates in the southern Akawazu Valley, flows northward through the Akawazu River, then northward through the Niu Guan River, then northward through the northwest of Yicheng, northward through the Sancheng River, and then northward into the river.

