古文：起重光大渊献，尽阏逢摄提格，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。
English: A total of four years.

古文：安皇帝辛义熙七年
现代文：晋安帝义熙七年
English: The seventh year of Emperor Andean Emperor Yixi

古文：春，正月，己未，刘裕还建康。
现代文：春季，正月，己未，刘裕回到建康。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, and in the second month of the year, Liu Yu returned to Jiankang.

古文：秦广平公弼有宠于秦王兴，为雍州刺史，镇安定。
现代文：后秦广平公姚弼，受到后秦王姚兴的宠爱，担任雍州刺史，镇守安定。
English: Later Qin Guangping Gong Yao Zhen, who was favored by Later Qin King Yao Xing, served as the governor of Yongzhou and kept the city stable.

古文：姜纪谄附于弼，劝弼结兴左右以求入朝。
现代文：姜纪投靠姚弼，极尽谄媚，他劝说姚弼结交姚兴身边的人，争取回到朝廷任职。
English: Jiang Ji relied on Yao Zhen and was extremely charming. He persuaded Yao Zhen to make friends with people around Yao Xing and strive to return to the imperial court.

古文：兴征弼为尚书令、侍中、大将军。
现代文：姚兴征召姚弼为尚书令、侍中、大将军。
English: Yao Xing conscripted Yao Jun to serve as Shang Shuling, chamberlain, and general.

古文：弼遂倾身结纳朝士，收采名势，以倾东宫；国人恶之。
现代文：姚弼于是谦恭地与朝中官员交往结纳，树立名望，培植势力，以此排挤太子姚泓，国内官民，对他非常讨厌。
English: Therefore, Yao Tong humbly interacted with officials from the DPRK and China to make a profit, establish a reputation, and cultivate power, in order to oust Prince Yao Tong, who was very hated by officials and people in the country.

古文：会兴以西北多叛乱，欲命重将镇抚之；陇东太守郭播请使弼出镇，兴不从，以太常索稜为太尉、领陇西内史，使招抚西秦。
现代文：正赶上姚兴因为西北地区的叛乱层出不穷，打算派一名重要的将领到那里镇抚，所以陇东太守郭播便请求派姚弼去镇守。姚兴并不听从，任命太常索棱为太尉、兼陇西内史，让他去招扶西秦。
English: Yao Xing was just getting to Yao Xing, and because there were more and more rebellions in the northwest, he was planning to send an important general there to pacify them. Therefore, Guo Fan, the governor of the eastern part of Qin, requested that Yao Xing be sent to guard the town. However, Yao Xing did not listen to him, and appointed Taojang So Ren as a lieutenant and also the governor of the western part of Qin, and asked him to recruit Western Qin.

古文：西秦王乾归遣使送所掠守宰，谢罪请降。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归派使节送还被他俘虏的守、宰等地方官，承认罪过，请求投降。
English: The king of Western Qin begged the envoys sent by Emperor Qian to return the local officials he had captured, such as the governor and the viceroy, to confess their sins and to surrender.

古文：兴遣鸿胪拜乾归都督陇西、岭北、匈奴、杂胡诸军事、征西大将军、河州牧、单于、河南王，太子炽磐为镇西将军、左贤王、平昌公。
现代文：姚兴便派鸿胪拜乞伏乾归都督陇西、岭北、杂胡诸军事及征西大将军、河州牧、单于、河南王，封太子乞伏炽磐为镇西将军、左贤王、平昌公。
English: Yao Xing then sent Hong Bao to beg Qian to return to the capital of Shaanxi, Lingbei, and Zhigu to the military and the general of the Western Expedition, Hezhou Mu, Shan Yu, and the king of Henan, and the crown prince to beg Blazing Rock for the general of Zhenxi, the king of Zuoxian, and the prince of Pyeongchang.

古文：兴命群臣搜举贤才。
现代文：姚兴命令大臣们寻找荐举贤能的人才。
English: Yao Xing ordered the ministers to look for talented people to recommend.

古文：右仆射梁喜曰： 臣累受诏而未得其人，可谓世之乏才。 
现代文：右仆射梁喜说： 臣几次接受诏命却没有得到一个那样的人，可以说世上的确缺乏人才。 
English: His right-hand man, Sha Liangxi, said: "The minister accepted the imperial command several times but did not get a person like that. It can be said that there is indeed a lack of talent in the world."

古文：兴曰： 自古帝王之兴，未尝取相于昔人。待将于将来，随时任才，皆能致治。
现代文：姚兴说： 自古以来，帝王之业兴起的时候，从不曾在古人的行列中借取宰相，也不曾等待在将来出生的人中选拔大将，他们都是随时随地在当世选任才俊，却也都能使国家得到较好的治理。
English: Yao Xing said: Since ancient times, when the cause of emperors arose, they never borrowed prime ministers from the ranks of the ancients, nor did they wait for generals to be selected from those who would be born in the future. They are always and everywhere in the world to select talents, but they can also make the country get better governance.

古文：卿自识拔不明，岂得远诬四海乎！ 
现代文：你自己缺乏识才拔才的眼光，怎么可以诬蔑说广大的四海没有俊才呢？ 
English: You yourself lack the insight and vision to draw talent, how can you slanderously say that there is no talent in the vast ocean?

古文：群臣咸悦。
现代文：大臣们都很高兴。
English: The ministers were delighted.

古文：秦姚详屯杏城，为夏王勃勃所逼，南奔大苏；勃勃遣平东将军鹿弈干追斩之，尽俘其众。
现代文：后秦安远将军姚详屯扎在杏城，被夏王刘勃勃逼迫，向南逃奔大苏。刘勃勃派遣平东将军鹿弈干追上他并把他杀了，俘虏了他的全部部众。
English: After Qin Anyuan general Yao Yizhong was besieged in Ancheng, he was forced by Xia king Liu Gong to flee south to Dasu. Liu Gong sent Pingdong general Lu Yigang to catch up with him and killed him, capturing all his followers.

古文：勃勃南攻安定，破尚书杨佛嵩于青石北原，降其众四万五千；进攻东乡，下之，徙三千馀户于贰城。
现代文：刘勃勃向南进攻安定，在青石北面的原野，击败尚书杨佛嵩，收降他的部众四万五千。随后，他又进攻东乡，攻克那里，把当地的三千多户居民强行迁到贰城。
English: Liu Rong attacked and stabilized the south, and defeated Shangshu Yangfosong in the fields north of Qingshi, capturing 45,000 of his troops. Subsequently, he attacked and conquered Dongxiang, and forcibly relocated more than 3,000 local residents to Lucheng.

古文：秦镇北参军王买德奔夏，夏王勃勃问以灭秦之策，买德曰： 秦德虽衰，籓镇犹固，愿且蓄力以待之。 
现代文：后秦镇北参军王买德投降夏国，夏王刘勃勃向他询问消灭后秦的办法，王买德说： 后秦的德势虽然已经衰败，但是地方势力却还很稳固，所以我希望您暂时积蓄力量等待机会。 
English: After the Northern Sang Army's Wang Baide surrenders Xia Province, Xia King Liu Qun inquired about the way to eliminate the Later Qin. Wang Baide said: Although the moral power of the Later Qin has decayed, the local forces are still very stable, so I hope you will temporarily accumulate strength and wait for an opportunity.

古文：勃勃以买德为军师中郎将。
现代文：刘勃勃任命王买德为军师中郎将。
English: Liu Gongren appointed Wang Baide as the general of the military division.

古文：秦王兴遣卫大将军常山公显迎姚详，弗及，遂屯杏城。
现代文：后秦王姚兴派遣卫大将军、常山公姚显前去迎救姚详，没有来得及，于是便屯扎在杏城。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing sent Wei General and Changshan Gong Yao Xian to rescue Yao Zhao, but he did not have time, so he stayed in Ancheng.

古文：刘籓帅孟怀玉等诸将追卢循至岭表，二月，壬午，怀玉克始兴，斩徐道覆。
现代文：东晋兖州刺史刘藩率领孟怀玉等几位将领追击卢循到达五岭以南。二月，壬午，孟怀玉攻克始兴，杀死了徐道覆。
English: East Jin Bozhou Shishi Liu clan led by Meng Huaiyu and several other generals chased Lu Cun to the south of Wuling. In February, at noon, Meng Huaiyu defeated Shixing and killed Xu Daohui.

古文：河南王乾归徙鲜卑仆浑部三千馀户于度坚城，以子敕勃为秦兴太守以镇之。
现代文：后秦刚刚加封的河南王乞伏乾归，把鲜卑族仆浑部落的三千多户居民强行迁往度坚城，任命儿子乞伏敕勃为秦兴太守，镇守那里。
English: After Qin, the king of Henan, who had just been sealed, forcibly moved more than three thousand residents of the Xianbei tribe to Dujian City, and appointed his son, Qifu Zibo, as the governor of Qin Xing and the town guard there.

古文：焦朗犹据姑臧，沮渠蒙逊攻拔其城，执朗而宥之；以其弟挐为秦州刺史，镇姑臧。
现代文：南凉将军焦朗还占据着姑臧。北凉沮渠蒙逊攻克了这座城市，活捉焦朗，又把他宽释了，并任命自己的弟弟沮渠为秦州刺史，镇守姑臧。
English: Jiaolang, the general of Nanliang, still occupied Guzheng. Mengsong, the general of Beiliang, conquered the city, captured Jiaolang alive, released him, and appointed his brother Deqiu as the governor of Qin and the town guard of Guzheng.

古文：遂伐南凉，围乐都。
现代文：于是，他们继续征伐南凉围困乐都城，过了三十天也不能攻克。
English: As a result, they continued to conquer Nanliang and besieged Letu City, and after thirty days they were unable to conquer it.

古文：三旬不克；南凉王傉檀以子安周为质，乃还。
现代文：南凉王秃发檀用自己的儿子秃发安周作为人质交给了北凉国，沮渠蒙逊才撤兵。
English: The king of the Southern Liang Dynasty, Balfa Dang, used his son, Balfa Anzhou, as a hostage and handed him over to the Northern Liang Dynasty. It was only after he was defeated that Meng Song withdrew his troops.

古文：吐谷浑树洛干伐南凉，败南凉太子虎台。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗树洛干讨伐南凉国，打败了南凉太子秃发虎台。
English: Tugu Han, Khan Shu, and Luo Gan fought against the Southern Liang Province and defeated the Southern Liang Prince, Bald Tiger Tai.

古文：南凉王傉檀欲复伐沮渠蒙逊，邯川护军孟恺谏曰： 蒙逊新并姑臧，凶势方盛，不可攻也。 
现代文：南凉王秃发檀打算再一次征伐沮渠蒙逊，邯川护军孟恺劝阻说： 沮渠蒙逊刚刚吞并了姑臧，凶猛的势头正在极盛的时候，不可以去进攻他。 
English: King of the Southern Liang Dynasty, Bald-Faced Tan, planned to once again invade Deshiqiu Mengsong. Meng Yao, the guardian of the Li River, dissuaded him, saying: Deshiqiu Mengsong has just annexed Guzheng. When the ferocious momentum is at its peak, it is not allowed to attack him.

古文：傉檀不从，五道俱进，至番禾、苕藋，掠五千馀户而还。
现代文：秃发檀不听，兵分五路，同时进军，抵达番禾、苕，抢掠了五千多户居民回军。
English: Bald-haired Dang didn't listen. The soldiers were divided into five groups and marched at the same time. They reached Fanhe and Handan, robbed more than five thousand households and returned to the army.

古文：将军屈右曰： 今既获利，宜倍道旋师，早度险伌。
现代文：将军屈右说： 这次既然已经得到了好处，就应该火速班师，早点摆脱危险的环境。
English: General Qu Rong said, "Since we have already gained some benefits this time, we should make a quick withdrawal and get out of the dangerous environment as soon as possible."

古文：蒙逊善用兵，若轻军猝至，大敌外逼，徙户内叛，此危道也。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊善于指挥军队，如果他派一支轻装的部队突然来到，强大的敌人在外围步步威逼，我们裹胁的这些迁移百姓在里面叛乱，这可是危险的事呵！ 
English: Despondent Monson is good at commanding an army, if he sends a lightly armed force to suddenly arrive, a powerful enemy is threatening on the periphery, and these displaced people we are threatening are rebelling inside, this is a dangerous thing!

古文：卫尉伊力延曰： 彼步我骑，势不相及。
现代文：卫尉伊力延说： 他们步行我们骑马，按道理他们是赶不上我们的。
English: Guardsman Ilien said: "They are on foot and we are on horseback, so logically they can't keep up with us.

古文：今倍道而归则示弱，且捐弃资财，非计也。 
现代文：现在如果我们加速回去，就是向敌人显示我们懦弱，而且要扔掉许多军用物资，不是好办法。 
English: If we rush back now, we will show the enemy that we are weak, and it is not a good idea to throw away a lot of military supplies.

古文：俄而昏雾风雨，蒙逊兵大至，傉檀败走。
现代文：不久，天气昏暗，大雾弥漫，风雨交加，沮渠蒙逊的军队大批出现，秃发檀败退而走。
English: Soon, the weather was gloomy, foggy, windy and rainy, and a large number of monsoon troops appeared, bald and defeated, and retreated.

古文：蒙逊进围乐都，傉檀婴城固守，以子染干为质以请和，蒙逊乃还。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊进军围困乐都，秃发檀绕着城池，坚持防守，最后又用儿子秃发染干作为人质，向对方请求和解，沮渠蒙逊才收兵回去。
English: Despondent Mengxun marched into the besieged Ledu, surrounded the city, insisted on defense, and finally used his son as a hostage to request reconciliation from the other side. Only then did Despondent Mengxun withdraw his troops.

古文：三月，刘裕始受太尉、中书监，以刘穆之为太尉司马，陈郡殷景仁为行参军。
现代文：三月，东晋刘裕开始接受太尉、中书监的职务。他任命刘穆之为太尉司马，任命陈郡人殷景仁为行参军。
English: In March, Liu Yu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty began to accept the posts of captain and chief librarian. He appointed Liu Mu Shi as captain Sima, and appointed Yin Jingren from Chen County to join the army.

古文：裕问穆之曰： 孟昶参佐谁堪入我府者？ 
现代文：刘裕问刘穆之说： 孟昶手下的人谁可以到我这里做事？ 
English: Liu Yu asked Liu Muzhi, "Meng Yao's subordinates, who can work for me?

古文：穆之举前建威中兵参军谢晦。
现代文：刘穆之荐举前建威中兵参军谢晦。
English: Liu Mu's recommendation to encourage former Jianwei soldiers to join the army has been accepted.

古文：晦，安兄据之曾孙也，裕即命为参军。
现代文：谢晦是谢安的哥哥谢据的曾孙。刘裕便命他为参军。
English: Xie Yu is the great-grandson of Xie An's brother Xie Zu. Liu Yu ordered him to join the army.

古文：裕尝讯囚，其旦，刑狱参军有疾，以晦代之；于车中一览讯牒，催促便下。
现代文：刘裕曾经亲自去审问囚犯，那天早晨，恰好刑狱参军有病，便让谢晦去顶替。谢晦在车中，只把各种诉状口供看了一遍，催促令立刻就能下达。
English: Liu Yu once went to interrogate a prisoner in person. That morning, just as the prisoner was ill, he asked Xie Hui to take his place. In the car, Xie Hui only read the various complaints and confessions once, and the urgent order could be issued immediately.

古文：相府多事，狱系殷积，晦随问酬辨，曾无违谬；裕由是奇之，即日署刑狱贼曹。
现代文：宰相府的杂事繁多，讼案更是堆积了很多，谢晦随着询问便进行安排分辨，从没有发生过错误。刘裕因此认为他是一个奇才，当天便调他任刑狱贼曹。
English: The Prime Minister's Office has a lot of miscellaneous affairs, and the lawsuits are piled up a lot. Xie Hui arranged and distinguished with the inquiry, and there was never a mistake. Liu Yu therefore considered him to be a genius, and transferred him to be a prison thief on the same day.

古文：晦美风姿，善言笑，博赡多通，裕深加赏爱。
现代文：谢晦风度优美，善于言谈逗趣，见多识广，刘裕对他非常欣赏喜爱。
English: Xie Qiao has a graceful demeanor, is good at talking and joking, and is well-informed. Liu Yu appreciates and likes him very much.

古文：卢循行收兵至番禺，遂围之。孙处据守二十馀日。
现代文：卢循在撤退的过程中收集残兵败将，来到番禺，于是把番禺包围，孙处在那里抵抗坚守了二十多天。
English: In the process of retreating, Lu Xun gathered the remnants of the defeated soldiers, came to Panyu, and then surrounded Panyu. Sun Zhe held out there for more than twenty days.

古文：沈田子言于刘籓曰： 番禺城虽险固。本贼之巢穴；今循围之，或有内变。
现代文：沈田子对刘藩说： 番禺城池虽然险要坚固，但是却本来就是敌兵的老窝，现在被卢循围困着，或许城里会出现变乱。
English: Shen Tianzi said to Liu Fan: Although Panyu Castle Pond is almost solid, it was originally an old nest of enemy soldiers. Now it is besieged by Lu Xun. Perhaps there will be turmoil in the city.

古文：且孙季高众力寡弱，不能持久，若使贼还据广州，凶势复振矣。 
现代文：况且孙处的军队少，力量弱，不可能坚持太久，如果让这些贼兵回来占据了广州，那么他们的凶恶势力就要重振了。 
English: Moreover, Sun's army is small and weak, and it is impossible to hold out for too long. If these bandits are allowed to return and occupy Guangzhou, then their vicious forces will be reinvigorated.

古文：夏，四月，田子引兵救番禺，击循，破之，所杀万馀人。
现代文：夏季，四月，沈田子带兵去援救番禺，进攻卢循，并把他打败，杀死一万多人。
English: In the summer, in April, Shen Tianzi led an army to rescue Panyu, attacked Luchu, and defeated him, killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：循走，田子与处共追之，又破循于危梧、郁林、宁浦。
现代文：卢循逃跑，沈田子与孙处一起去追击他，又在苍梧、郁林、宁浦等地几次打败卢循。
English: Lu Xun ran away, and Shen Tianzi and Sun Zu went to chase him, and defeated Lu Xun several times in Gowu, Yulin, Ningpu and other places.

古文：会处病，不能进，循奔交州。
现代文：正巧此时孙处病倒，大军不能继续前进，卢循乘机投奔交州。
English: Just at this time, Sun Chuan fell ill, the army could not continue to advance, and Lu Xun took the opportunity to rush to Jiaozhou.

古文：初，九真太守李逊作乱，交州刺史交趾杜瑗讨斩之。
现代文：当初，九真太守李逊起兵叛乱，交州刺史交趾人杜瑗前去讨伐，并把他斩杀。
English: At first, Emperor Jiu Zhen's grand vizier, Li Xun, started a mutiny. He went to fight against Du Xuan, who was from Jiaozhou, and killed him.

古文：瑗卒，朝廷以其子慧度为交州刺史。
现代文：杜瑗去世，朝廷任命他的儿子杜慧度为交州刺史。
English: After Du Xuan's death, the imperial court appointed his son Du Huidu as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：诏书未至，循袭破合浦，径向交州；慧度帅州府文武拒循于石碕，破之，循馀众犹三千人，李逊馀党李脱等结集俚獠五千馀人以应循。
现代文：诏书还没有到达，卢循已经攻占了合浦，一直奔向交州。杜慧度率领州府的文武官员在石迎击卢循，把他打败。卢循剩下的残兵还三千人，李逊的余党李脱等人也结集俚獠族人五千多响应卢循。
English: The imperial edict had not yet arrived, but Lu Xun had already captured Hepu and was running all the way to Jiaozhou. Du Huidu led the civil and military officials of the prefectural government to meet Lu Xun at Shishi and defeat him. There were still three thousand remnants of Lu Xun's army, and Li De and others of Li Xun's remaining party also gathered more than five thousand Yi people to respond to Lu Xun.

古文：庚子，循晨至龙编南津；慧度悉散家财以赏军士，与循合战，掷雉尾炬焚其舰，以步兵夹岸射之，循从舰俱然，兵众大溃。
现代文：庚子，卢循早晨到达龙编南面的渡口，杜慧度把自己家的财产全部散发给军士们做奖赏，与卢循展开决战。杜慧度军队投掷许多雉尾炬，用来焚烧对方的战舰，又用步兵在两岸开弓射箭进攻敌人，卢循军队的那些船全部着火，部众彻底溃散。
English: In the morning, Geng Zi and Lu Xun arrived at the ferry south of Longyan. Du Huidu distributed all of his family's property to the soldiers as a reward and launched a decisive battle with Lu Xun. Du Huidu's army threw many stern torches to burn each other's warships, and used infantrymen to attack the enemy with bows and arrows on both sides of the river. All of the ships of Lu Xun's army were set on fire, and the troops were completely dispersed.

古文：循知不免，先鸩妻子，召妓妾问曰： 谁能从我死者？ 
现代文：卢循知道自己这次难免一死，于是先用毒酒毒死妻子，然后把那些歌妓、小妾等召集在一起问道： 你们谁能跟我一起死？ 
English: Lu Xun knew that he would inevitably die this time, so he first poisoned his wife with poisoned wine, and then gathered those geishas, concubines, etc. together and asked: Which of you can die with me?

古文：多云； 雀鼠贪生，就死实难。 
现代文：这些人都说： 即使是一只麻雀、一个老鼠也都贪生，跟你一起死，实在太难。 
English: These people all said: Even a sparrow and a mouse are greedy for life, and it is really too difficult to die with you.

古文：或云： 官尚当死，某岂愿生！ 
现代文：但也有的说： 您都要死了，我怎能愿意再活下去！ 
English: But there are also those who say: You are all going to die, how can I want to go on living!

古文：乃悉杀诸辞死者，因自投于水。
现代文：卢循于是把那些不愿死的全部杀掉，随后自己也投水自杀。
English: Lu Xun then killed all those who did not want to die, and then committed suicide by throwing himself into the water.

古文：慧度取其尸斩之，并其父子及李脱等，函七首送建康。
现代文：杜慧度把他的尸体涝上来，割下人头，再加上他父亲、儿子以及李脱等共七颗人头，装在木盒中，送往都城建康。
English: Du Huidu picked up his body, cut off the head, and together with his father, son, and Li De, a total of seven heads were packed in a wooden box and sent to the capital Jiankang.

古文：初，刘毅在京口，贫困，与知识射于东堂。
现代文：当初，刘毅在京口居住时，家庭很贫困，一次与熟人在东堂比赛射箭。
English: At first, when Liu Yi lived in Jingkou, his family was very poor. Once, he and an acquaintance had an archery competition in the east hall.

古文：庾悦为司徒右长史，后至，夺其射堂；众人皆避之，毅独不去。
现代文：庾悦当时是司徒右长史，后来到这里，夺用了这个射箭的大堂。
English: At that time, Mei Yue was the governor of Szczecin. Later, she came here and took over this archery hall.

古文：悦厨馔甚盛，不以及毅；毅从悦求子鹅炙，悦怒不与，毅由是衔之。
现代文：别的人全都回避走了，只有刘毅不走，庾悦在这里大摆宴席，酒菜非常丰盛，却不给刘毅吃。刘毅跟他要一块烤小鹅肉吃，庾悦大怒，没有给，刘毅从此对他怀恨在心。
English: The others all avoided going. Only Liu Yi did not go. Mei Yue held a grand banquet here. The food and wine were very rich, but she did not give it to Liu Yi. Liu Yi asked him to eat a piece of roasted goose meat. Mei Yue was furious and did not give it to him. Liu Yi has held a grudge against him ever since.

古文：至是，毅求兼督江州，诏许之，因奏称： 江州内地，以治民为职。不当置军府凋耗民力，宜罢军府移镇豫章；而寻阳接蛮，可即州府千兵以助郡戍。 
现代文：到了现在，刘毅请求兼管江州，安帝下诏允许。于是，他便呈上奏章说： 江州属于国家的腹地，江州刺史应该以治理民间事务为主要职守，不应该再配置一个军府消耗百姓的力量，应该解除军府，移到豫章镇守。寻阳接近蛮夷地区，所以也可在州府的部队中分出一千名兵丁加强该郡的防卫。 
English: Now, Liu Yi requested to be in charge of Jiangzhou as well, and Emperor An decreed permission. Therefore, he submitted a report saying: Jiangzhou belongs to the hinterland of the country, the history of Jiangzhou should take the governance of civil affairs as its main duty, it should no longer be allocated a military base to consume the power of the people, the military base should be disbanded and moved to Yuzhang Town. Xuanyang is close to the barbarian areas, so it is also possible to allocate a thousand soldiers from the troops of the state capital to strengthen the defense of the county.

古文：于是解悦都督、将军官，以刺史镇豫章。
现代文：于是解除了江州刺史庾悦的都督、将军等官职，仅以刺史的身分镇守豫章。
English: As a result, he dismissed the governor and general of Jiangsu Province, and only kept Yuzhang as the governor.

古文：毅以亲将赵恢领千兵守寻阳；悦府文武三千悉入毅府，符摄严峻。
现代文：刘毅派亲信的将领赵恢带领一千名士兵去戍守寻阳，而庾悦府中的三千名文武官员等全部并入刘毅的府中办公。
English: Liu Yi sent his trusted general Zhao Huan to lead a thousand soldiers to defend Xuanyang, while the three thousand civil and military officials in the Xuan Yue government were all merged into Liu Yi's government office.

古文：悦忿惧，至豫章，疽发背卒。
现代文：刘毅对庾悦不断下达严苛的命令又催逼甚紧。庾悦既愤怒又惧怕，到豫章后不久，后背上生疽痈，去世。
English: Liu Yi constantly gave strict orders to and pressed Mu Yue very hard. Both angry and afraid, shortly after arriving in Yuzhang, Mu Yue died of gangrene on his back.

古文：河南王乾归徙羌句岂等部众五千馀户于叠兰城，以兄子阿柴为兴国太守以镇之。
现代文：后秦河南王乞伏乾归把羌族句岂等部落的五千多户居民强行迁到叠兰城居住。任命自己的侄儿乞伏阿柴为兴国太守，镇守那里。
English: Later, Qin and Henan King Qianfu Qianfu forcibly moved more than five thousand residents of the Qianfu and other tribes to live in Lanyang City, and appointed his nephew Qianfu Achai as the governor of Xingguo and the town guard there.

古文：五月，复以子木栾干为武威太守，镇嵻良城。
现代文：五月，他又任命儿子乞伏木弈干为武威太守，镇守城。
English: In May, he also appointed his son 乞伏木弈干 as Wuwei Taishu, the town guard.

古文：丁卯，魏主嗣谒金陵，山阳候奚斤居守。
现代文：丁卯，北魏国主拓跋嗣拜谒金陵，命令山阳侯奚斤留在都城镇守。
English: Ding Wu, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, ordered Shanyang Hou Xingjin to stay in the capital city to guard it.

古文：昌黎王慕容伯儿谋反；己已，奚斤并其党收斩之。
现代文：昌黎王慕容伯儿谋反。己巳，奚斤把他连同他的党羽抓起来后，一同斩首。
English: Murong Bo'er, the king of Changli, plotted a rebellion. However, he and his henchmen were captured and beheaded together.

古文：秋，七月，燕王跋以太子永领大单于，置四辅。
现代文：秋季，七月，北燕国主冯跋任命太子冯永兼任大单于，设置四位辅佐大臣。
English: In the autumn, in July, Feng Ba, the ruler of Beiyan Province, appointed Prince Feng Yong to concurrently serve as Da Shan Yu, and set up four assistant ministers.

古文：柔然可汗斛律遣使献马三千匹于跋，求娶跋女乐浪公主。
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾斛律派遣使节向冯跋献上三千匹好马，请求迎娶冯跋的女儿乐浪公主。
English: The gentle khan, Ikujutsu, dispatched an envoy to present three thousand fine horses to Fengbaba, and requested to marry Fengbaba's daughter, Princess Le Lang.

古文：跋命群臣议之。
现代文：冯跋命令大臣们讨论这件事。
English: Feng ordered the ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：辽西公素弗曰： 前世皆以宗女妻六夷，宜许以妃嫔之女，乐浪公主不宜下降非类。 
现代文：辽西公冯素弗说： 前代的君主都把宗室女儿嫁给那些夷人为妻，现在应该把妃嫔所生的女儿许配给他，至于乐浪公主，就不应该下嫁给地位不相当的人了。 
English: Liao Xi Gong Feng Su Fu said: The previous monarchs all married their daughters to those barbarians. Now he should marry the daughter born of the concubine. As for Princess Le Lang, she should not marry someone who is not of equal status.

古文：跋曰： 朕方崇信殊俗，奈何欺之！ 
现代文：冯跋说： 我正要在蛮荒地区树立威信，怎么能够欺骗他呢？ 
English: Feng Baw said, "I am trying to establish my prestige in a wild area. How can I deceive him?"

古文：乃以乐浪公主妻之。
现代文：于是把乐浪公主嫁给郁久闾斛律为妻。
English: So he married Princess Le Lang to Ikuhisa Ritsu.

古文：跋勤于政事，劝课农桑，省徭役，薄赋敛；每遣守宰，必亲引见，问为政之要，以观其能。
现代文：冯跋对国家政务勤勤恳恳，鼓励人民务农种桑，减少徭役，降低赋税，每次任命、下派守宰一类的地方官时，总要亲自召见他们，问他们施政的基本打算，观察他的能力。
English: Feng Bao was diligent and earnest about the state's political affairs, encouraged the people's agricultural work to plant mulberry, reduce the corvee, and reduce taxes. Every time he appointed or sent a local official such as the governor, he always summoned them in person, asked them about the basic plan of governance, and observed his ability.

古文：燕人悦之。
现代文：北燕百姓对此十分欢悦。
English: The people of Beiyan are very happy about this.

古文：河南王乾归遣平昌公炽磐及中军将军审虔伐南凉。
现代文：后秦河南王乞伏乾归派遣平昌公乞伏炽磐以及中军将军乞伏审虔讨伐南凉国。
English: Later, Qin and Henan kings sent the PyeongChang Emperor and the Chinese generals to invade the southern Liang Province.

古文：审虔，乾归之子也。
现代文：乞伏审虔是乞伏乾归的儿子。
English: Beggar Shengyi is the son of Beggar Qiangui.

古文：八月，炽磐兵济河，南凉王傉檀遣太子虎台逆战于岭南。
现代文：八月，乞伏炽磐的大军渡过金城河，南凉王秃发檀派遣太子秃发虎台在岭南地区迎战，结果，南凉国军队被打得大败。
English: In August, the army of the supplicant crossed the Jincheng River, and the king of Nanliang, Balda Dang, sent the prince of Balda Houtai to fight in the southern region of Lingnan. As a result, the army of Nanliang was defeated.

古文：南凉兵败，虏牛马十馀万而还。
现代文：乞伏炽磐抢掠了十几万匹牛马便回去了。
English: After looting and plundering more than a hundred thousand cattle and horses, they went back.

古文：沮渠蒙逊帅轻骑袭西凉，西凉公暠曰： 兵有不战而败敌者，挫其锐也。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊率领轻装骑兵袭击西凉国，西凉公李说： 用兵的人有不用战斗而把敌人打败的，那就是挫伤他的锐气。
English: Despondent, Mengxun led the light cavalry to attack Xilang. Xilang Gong Li said: If a soldier defeats the enemy without fighting, it is to weaken his spirit.

古文：蒙逊新与吾盟，而遽来袭我，我闭门不与战，待其锐气竭而击之，蔑不克矣。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊刚刚与我们结盟，却又突然前来袭击我们，我们关紧城门不和他们接战，等到他们锐气枯竭之后再来进攻他们，没有不获胜的。 
English: Despondent Monsoon has just allied with us, but suddenly comes to attack us, we close the gate and do not fight with them, wait until they are exhausted and then attack them, there is no failure.

古文：顷之，蒙逊粮尽而归，暠遣世子歆帅骑七邀击之，蒙逊大败，获其将沮渠百年。
现代文：不久，沮渠蒙逊的军队粮食吃完，撤军，李派嫡长子李歆率领骑兵七千人拦腰进攻他们，沮渠蒙逊军队惨败，西凉俘获了他们的大将沮渠百年。
English: Soon after, Deshu Mengxun's army ran out of food and withdrew. Li sent his eldest son, Li Jun, to lead seven thousand cavalry to attack them. Deshu Mengxun's army suffered a crushing defeat, and Xiliang captured their general, Deshu Centenary.

古文：河南王乾归攻秦略阳太守姚在于柏阳堡，克之。
现代文：河南王乞伏乾归进攻后秦略阳太守姚龙于柏阳堡，攻陷了这座城。
English: After the attack of the king of Henan Province, Qin Liaoyang, the eunuch Yao Long, who was the governor of Baiyang Fort, captured the city.

古文：冬，十一月，进攻南平太守王憬于水洛城，又克之，徙民三千馀户于谭郊。遣乞伏审虔帅众二万城谭郊。
现代文：冬季十一月，又到水洛城进攻南平太守王憬，也攻克了。把那里的三千多户百姓强行迁往谭郊，派儿子乞伏审虔统帅二万士卒筑谭郊城。
English: In the winter of November, he went to Shuilao City to attack Wangjing, the governor of Nanping, and conquered it. He forcibly moved more than three thousand people from there to Tanjiao, and sent his son, the commander of 20,000 soldiers, to build Tanjiao City.

古文：十二月，西羌彭利发袭据枹罕，自称大将军、河州牧，乾归讨之，不克。
现代文：十二月，西羌部落首领彭利发攻占了罕，自称为大将军、河州牧，乞伏乾归前去讨伐，没有攻克。
English: In December, the leader of the Xidi tribe, Peng Lifa, attacked and occupied Han. He called himself the great general, Hezhou Mu, and begged Qian Qian to return to fight, but failed to conquer.

古文：是岁，并州刺史刘道怜为北徐刺史，移镇彭城。
现代文：这一年，东晋并州刺史刘道怜改任北徐州刺史，迁移到彭城镇守。
English: In the same year, Liu Daorai, the governor of East Jin, was appointed governor of North Xuzhou and moved to Pengcheng.

古文：安皇帝辛义熙八年
现代文：义熙八年
English: in the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi

古文：春，正月，河南王乾归复讨彭利发，至奴葵谷，利发弃众南走，乾归遣振威将军乞伏公府追至清水，斩之，收羌户一万三千，以乞伏审虔为河州刺史镇枹罕而还。
现代文：春季，正月，河南王乞伏乾归再一次出兵讨伐彭利发，抵达奴葵谷。彭利发扔下部众向南逃走，乞伏乾归派遣振威将军乞伏公府追到清水，把他杀了。这一战，收集了羌族居民一万三千户，任命乞伏审虔为河州刺史，镇守罕，大军回师。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the king of Henan, Qianfu Qianfu, once again sent troops to fight against Peng Lifa and arrived at Nuo Aoi Valley. Peng Lifa abandoned his subordinates and fled to the south, and Qianfu Qianfu sent General Zhenwei Qianfu to chase the government office to Qingshui and killed him. This battle gathered 13,000 Yao residents and appointed Qianfu Qianfu as the history of Hezhou, the town guard, and the great army.

古文：二月，丙子，以吴兴太守孔靖为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二月，丙子，东晋任命吴兴太守孔靖为尚书右仆射。
English: In February, Emperor Xizong of the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Wu Xing as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：河南王乾归徙都谭郊，命平昌公炽磐镇苑川。
现代文：河南王乞伏乾归把都城迁到谭郊，命令平昌公乞伏炽磐镇守苑川。
English: The king of Henan Province begged Emperor Qian to move the capital to Tanjiao, and ordered the PyeongChang court to beg the Blazing Rock Town to guard the Yuan River.

古文：乾归击吐谷浑阿若干于赤水，降之。
现代文：乞伏乾归在赤水袭击吐谷浑汗国的阿若干，收降了他。
English: At the time of the attack by the Red Water, Qian Rong, who was begging for surrender, attacked Ah Guo of the Tuyun Khanate in the Tuyun Valley, but he surrendered.

古文：夏，四月，刘道规以疾求归，许之。
现代文：夏季四月，东晋荆州刺史刘道规因为身体有病，请求解职回京，朝廷准许。
English: In the summer of April, Liu Daojun, the governor of Jingzhou in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, requested to be relieved of his duties and return to Beijing because he was ill, and the imperial court granted his request.

古文：道规在荆州累年，秋毫无犯。
现代文：刘道规在荆州任职几年，丝毫也没有侵占百姓的利益。
English: Liu Daojun served in Jingzhou for several years, and did not encroach on the interests of the people at all.

古文：及归，府库帷幕，俨然若旧。
现代文：到他回京的时候，府库的帷幕都和他刚来时一模一样。
English: By the time he returned to Beijing, the curtains of the prefectural treasury were exactly the same as when he first arrived.

古文：随身甲士二人迁席于舟中，道规刑之于市。
现代文：他的随从中有两个卫兵把一条草席带上了船，刘道规也把他们拉到市井中斩首。
English: Two guards from his entourage brought a straw mat onto the boat, and Liu Daojun also dragged them to the middle of the city and beheaded them.

古文：以后将军豫州刺史刘毅为卫将军、都督荆、宁、秦、雍四州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：东晋朝廷任命后将军、豫州刺史刘毅为卫将军，都督荆、宁、秦、雍四州诸军事，荆州刺史。
English: After the East Jin Dynasty court appointed the general, the governor of Yuzhou, Liu Yi, as the general of Wei, and the governors of Jing, Ning, Qin and Yong as the military leaders of the four states, and the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：毅谓左卫将军刘敬宣曰： 吾忝西任，欲屈卿为长史南蛮，岂有见辅意乎？ 
现代文：刘毅对左卫将军刘敬宣说： 我忝居西方重任，打算委屈你为南蛮长史，你有没有帮我忙的意思？ 
English: Liu Yi said to the left guard general Liu Jingxuan: I live in the west and have heavy responsibilities, and I plan to offend you because you have a long history in the south. Do you mean to help me?

古文：敬宣惧，以告太尉裕。裕笑曰： 但令老兄平安，必无过虑。 
现代文：刘敬宣很害怕，把这件事告诉了太尉刘裕，刘裕笑着说： 总会让你老兄平安，一定不要过分忧虑。 
English: Liu Jingxuan was very scared and told this to Lieutenant Liu Yu. Liu Yu smiled and said, "I will always keep you safe, don't worry too much."

古文：毅性刚愎，自谓建义之功与裕相埒，深自矜伐，虽权事推裕而心不服。及居方岳，常怏怏不得志。
现代文：刘毅性格刚愎自用，自以为当年勤王举义的功劳与刘裕相等，心里深深为此骄矜自负，因此，虽然暂时拥戴听从刘裕，但是心里却并不服气，等到独当一面，当上一个地区的首脑之后，仍然经常郁闷不乐，觉得志向不得实现。
English: Liu Yi's character is stubborn and self-serving. He thinks that his contribution to the promotion of righteousness that year is equal to that of Liu Yu, and he is deeply proud of this. Therefore, although he temporarily supports and obeys Liu Yu, he is not convinced in his heart. When he is alone, when he is the head of a region, he is still often depressed and unhappy, and feels that his ambition cannot be realized.

古文：裕每柔而顺之，毅骄纵滋甚，尝云： 恨不遇刘、项，与之争中原！ 
现代文：刘裕每每对他容让顺从，这更加纵容滋长了他的狂傲，曾说： 真遗憾没有遇到刘邦、项羽，跟他们争夺中原！ 
English: Liu Yu always indulged and obeyed him, which further indulged and nurtured his arrogance. He once said: It's a real pity that I didn't meet Liu Bang and Xiang Yu, and compete with them for the Central Plains!

古文：及败于桑落，知物情已去，弥复愤激。
现代文：到了在桑落惨败之后，他知道自己的情势已去，更增加了他的烦恼和愤激。
English: By the time of the Sandown fiasco, he knew his situation was gone, adding to his frustration and anger.

古文：裕素不学，而毅颇涉文雅，故朝土有清望者多归之，与尚书仆射谢混、丹阳尹郗僧施，深相凭结。
现代文：刘裕一向不读书，刘毅却相当地涉猎过一些文墨，所以朝中有很多名望清高的有学识的人，都与他往来密切。他与尚书仆射谢混、丹阳尹郗僧施关系最好，感情最深，互相结纳。
English: Liu Yu had never been a reader, but Liu Yi had dabbled in some literature, so there were many famous and learned people in the court who were in close contact with him. He had the best relationship and the deepest feelings with Shang Shufu Sha Xiehong and Danyang Yunyang Zongshi, and they paid tribute to each other.

古文：僧施，超之从子也。
现代文：郗僧施是郗超的侄儿。
English: Zou Zongshi is Zou Chao's nephew.

古文：毅既据上流，阴有图裕之志，求兼督交、广二州，裕许之。
现代文：刘毅把持了长江上游一带的大权之后，暗地里有图谋刘裕的志向，便请求兼管交、广二州的军事，刘裕也答应了他。
English: After Liu Yi took control of the power in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, he secretly had the intention of scheming against Liu Yu. He asked to be in charge of foreign affairs and the military in Guanzhou, and Liu Yu agreed.

古文：毅又奏以郗僧施为南蛮校尉后军司马，毛修之为南郡太守，裕亦许之，以刘穆之代僧施为丹阳尹。
现代文：刘毅又奏请任命郗僧施为南蛮校尉后军司马，任命毛之为南郡太守，刘裕又答应了他，改派刘穆之代替郗僧施为丹阳尹。
English: Liu Yi also made a request for the appointment of the eunuch Shi as the military secretary after the arrival of the captain of Nanban, and the appointment of Mao Iting as the governor of Nan County. Liu Yu also agreed to him and reassigned Liu Mu Zhi to replace the eunuch Shi as Danyang Yin.

古文：毅表求至京口辞墓，裕往会之于倪塘。
现代文：刘毅上表请求到京口去向祖先的坟墓辞行，刘裕前往倪塘与他相会。
English: Liu Yi requested to go to Jingkou to visit his ancestor's grave, and Liu Yu went to Niitang to meet him.

古文：宁远将军胡籓言于裕曰： 公谓刘卫军终能为公下乎？ 
现代文：宁远将军胡藩对刘裕进言道： 您说刘毅能永远地做您的部下吗？ 
English: Ningyuan General Hu Han said to Liu Yu: Do you think Liu Yi can be your subordinate forever?

古文：裕默然，久之，曰： 卿谓何如？ 
现代文：刘裕沉默不语，很久，说： 你认为应当怎么办？ 
English: Liu Yu was silent for a long time and said: What do you think should be done?

古文：籓曰： 连百万之众，攻必取，战必克，毅固以此服公。
现代文：胡藩说： 统帅百万大军，攻击一定得手，交战一定胜利，刘毅以此佩服您。
English: Hu Han said: Commander of a million-strong army, the attack must be successful, the battle must be victorious. Liu Yi admires you for this.

古文：至于涉猎传记，一谈一咏，自许以为雄豪；以是搢绅白面之士辐凑归之。
现代文：至于博览群书，谈吐吟咏，他却自认为是英雄豪杰。正因如此，高雅的士绅、白面的书生等集中归附到他那里。
English: As for reading a lot of books and talking a lot, he thinks of himself as a hero. That is why the elegant gentry, white-faced students, etc. have concentrated on him.

古文：恐终不为公下，不如因会取之。 
现代文：我担心他终将不会甘心在您之下，不如趁这次会面的机会，干脆除掉他。 
English: I'm afraid he won't be happy to be under you, so why not take the opportunity of this meeting to get rid of him altogether.

古文：裕曰： 吾与毅俱有克复之功，其过未彰，不可自相图也。 
现代文：刘裕说： 我与刘毅都有使国家复兴的功劳，他的罪过还没有表露出来，不可自相残杀。 
English: Liu Yu said, "Both Liu Yi and I have contributed to the rejuvenation of the country. His sins have not yet been revealed. We must not kill each other.

古文：乞伏炽磐攻南凉三河太守吴阴于白土，克之，以乞伏出累代之。
现代文：乞伏炽磐在白土进攻南凉三河太守吴阴，击败了他，让乞伏出累代替吴阴镇守白土。
English: Beggar Blazing Rock attacked Wu Yin, the governor of the Southern Liang and Three Rivers, in the White Earth and defeated him, forcing Beggar Blazing Rock to take the place of Wu Yin in the defense of the White Earth.

古文：六月，乞伏公府弑河南王乾归，并杀其诸子十馀人，走保大夏。
现代文：六月，西秦振威将军乞伏公府刺杀了河南王乞伏乾归。同时杀死了乞伏乾归的十几个儿子。逃到大夏据守。
English: In June, the Western Qin general Zhenwei assassinated the king of Henan, Qian Gui, at the Begging Palace. At the same time, he killed more than a dozen sons of Qian Gui. He fled to Daxia.

古文：平冒公炽磐遣其弟广武将军智达、扬武将军木弈干帅骑三千讨之；以其弟昙达为镇京将军，镇谭郊，骁骑将军娄机镇苑川。
现代文：平昌公乞伏炽磐派他的弟弟广武将军乞伏智达、杨武将军乞伏木弈干率领三千骑兵，前去讨伐。任命他的另一个弟弟乞伏昙达为镇东将军，镇守谭郊；任命骁骑将军乞伏娄机镇守苑川。
English: He sent his younger brothers, General Guangwu and General Yangwu, to lead 3,000 cavalry in the crusade. He appointed his other brother, General Qianwu and General Qianwu to be the generals of Zhendong and Tanjiao, respectively. He also appointed General Qianwu and General Qianji to be the generals of Zhendong and Tanjiao, respectively.

古文：炽磐帅文武及民二万馀户迁于枹罕。
现代文：乞伏炽磐统帅文武官员及二万多户百姓迁移到罕。
English: The commander-in-chief, military and civilian officials and more than 20,000 households migrated to Han.

古文：秦人多劝秦王兴乘乱取炽磐，兴曰： 伐人丧，非礼也。 
现代文：后秦国人有很多都劝后秦王姚兴乘西秦国内危亡动乱之机，消灭乞伏炽磐，姚兴说： 趁别人遭丧之时，讨伐他，不合礼仪。 
English: Many people in the later Qin Dynasty advised the later Qin King Yao Xing to take advantage of the danger and turmoil in the western Qin Dynasty to eliminate the beggar, Yao Xing said: It is not proper to take advantage of others when they are in mourning.

古文：夏王勃勃欲攻炽磐，军师中郎将王买德谏曰： 炽磐，吾之与国，今遭丧乱，吾不能恤，又恃众力而伐之，匹夫且犹耻为，况万乘乎！ 
现代文：夏王刘勃勃打算进攻乞伏炽磐，军师中郎将王买德劝阻说： 乞伏炽磐是我们的邻邦，现在遭受丧乱，我们不能去体恤帮助，反而依仗人多力大去讨伐他，这样的事，连普通的老百姓都觉得可耻而不去做，何况您是拥有万乘之尊的天王了！ 
English: Xia Wang Liu Gong planned to attack Begging Glowing Rock, but the military instructor Zhong Lang dissuaded Wang Maide, saying: Begging Glowing Rock is our neighbor, now suffering from turmoil, we can't go to sympathize and help, but rely on many people to fight him, such a thing, even ordinary people feel shameful and don't do it, not to mention that you are a heavenly king with the dignity of the Buddha!

古文：勃勃乃止。
现代文：刘勃勃这才停止。
English: Only then did Liu Gongren stop.

古文：闰月，庚子，南郡烈武公刘道规卒。
现代文：闰六月，庚子，东晋南郡烈武公刘道规去世。
English: In intercalary June, Geng Zi, Liu Daoyi, the hero of Dongjin South County, passed away.

古文：秋，七月，己巳朔，魏主嗣东巡，置四厢大将、十二小将；以山阳侯斤、元城侯屈行左、右丞相。
现代文：秋季，七月，己巳朔，北魏国主拓跋嗣巡视东方，设置了四厢大将、十二小将等官。任命山阳侯奚斤、元城侯拓跋屈担任左、右丞相。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Sui made a tour of the East, and set up four general officers and twelve junior generals and other officials. He appointed Sanyang Hou Yujin and former city lord Tuoba Qu to serve as left and right ministers.

古文：庚寅，嗣至濡源，巡西北诸部落。
现代文：庚寅，拓跋嗣抵达濡源，巡视西北的那些部落。
English: Geng Yin and Tuoba Zi arrived at Niuyuan and inspected the tribes in the northwest.

古文：乞伏智达等击破乞伏公府于大夏，公府奔叠兰城，就其弟阿柴。
现代文：乞伏智达等人在大夏击败乞伏公府。乞伏公府逃奔叠兰城，投靠他的弟弟乞伏阿柴。
English: Zhida Qibui and others defeated Qibui Gongfu in Daxia. Qibui Gongfu fled to the city of Lanyang and took refuge with his younger brother, Qibui Achai.

古文：智达等攻拔之，斩阿柴父子五人。
现代文：乞伏智达等攻陷了那里，斩杀了乞伏阿柴他们父子五人。
English: Beggars Zhida and others attacked there and killed five of Beggars Achai's sons and their father.

古文：公府奔嵻良南山，追获之，并其四子，轘之于谭郊。
现代文：乞伏公府又逃到以南的山区，被追上抓获，连同他的四个儿子一起，在谭郊城内用车裂刑处死。
English: Kuibukongfu fled to the mountains to the south, was caught and, together with his four sons, was executed by being run over with a cart in Tanjiao Town.

古文：八月，乞伏炽磐自称大将军、河南王，大赦，改元永康；葬乾归于枹罕，谥曰武元王，庙号高祖。
现代文：八月，乞伏炽磐自称为大将军、河南王，下令大赦，改年号为永康。把乞伏乾归安葬在罕，追谥他为武元王，庙号高祖。
English: In August, Qibuxing Blazing Rock claimed to be a great general and the king of Henan Province, ordered a general amnesty, and changed the year name to Yongkang. Qibuxing Qian was buried in Han, and he was known as King Wuyuan and the founder of the temple.

古文：皇后王氏崩。
现代文：东晋皇后王氏去世。
English: The Queen's Works passed away.

古文：庚戌，魏主嗣还平城。
现代文：庚戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣回到平城。
English: Geng Zheng, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：九月，河南王炽磐以尚书令武始翟勍为相国，侍中、太子詹事赵景为御史大夫；罢尚书令、仆、尚书六卿、侍中等官。
现代文：九月，西秦河南王乞伏炽磐任命尚书令武始人翟为相国，任命侍中、太子詹事赵景为御使大夫，撤销了尚书令、仆、尚书六卿、待中等官职。
English: In September, the king of Western Qin Province, Henan Province, appointed Shang Shurong, Wuchang Shi, as his consort, appointed Zhao Jing, the prince's chamberlain, as his imperial physician, and revoked Shang Shurong, the servant, Shang Shurong, and the middle-ranking officials.

古文：癸酉，葬僖皇后于休平陵。
现代文：癸酉，东晋把僖皇后王氏安葬在休平陵。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the Empress Wang was buried in the Shu Ping Mausoleum.

古文：刘毅至江陵，多变易守宰，辄割豫州文武、江州兵力万馀人以自随。
现代文：刘毅抵达江陵，对下属的守宰等地方官进行很大的变动、撤换，他擅自抽调豫州原来的老文武僚属、江州的原部众一万多人跟随自己到荆州。
English: When Liu Yi arrived in Jiangling, he made great changes and replaced subordinate local officials such as the provincial governor. He arbitrarily transferred more than ten thousand people from the old civil and military subordinates of Yuzhou and the original part of Jiangzhou to follow him to Jingzhou.

古文：会毅疾笃，郗僧施等恐毅死，其党危，乃劝毅请从弟兗州刺史籓以自副，太尉裕伪许之。
现代文：正好赶上刘毅病重，郗僧施等人恐怕刘毅死掉，他们这一党处境危险，于是劝说刘毅请求朝廷派自己的堂弟兖州刺史刘藩做自己的副手，太尉刘裕假装答应了他。
English: Just in time for Liu Yi to fall seriously ill, Zangzang Shi and others feared that Liu Yi would die, and their party was in danger, so they persuaded Liu Yi to ask the court to send his cousin, Zhangzhou Jishi Liu Han, to be his deputy. Lieutenant Liu Yu pretended to agree with him.

古文：籓自广陵入朝，己卯，裕以诏书罪状毅，云与籓及谢混共谋不轨，收籓及混赐死。
现代文：刘藩从广陵前往建康来朝见皇帝。已卯，刘裕用皇帝的名义下诏书，公布刘毅的罪状，指出他与刘藩以及谢混等人一起阴谋叛乱，抓住了刘藩和谢混，命令他们自杀。
English: Liu Han traveled from Guangling to Jiankang to meet the emperor. Already, Liu Yu used the imperial edict in the name of the emperor to announce the charges against Liu Yi, pointing out that he conspired with Liu Han and Xie Ming and others to rebel. He caught Liu Han and Xie Ming and ordered them to commit suicide.

古文：初，混与刘毅款昵，混从兄澹常以为忧，渐与之疏，谓弟璞及从子瞻曰： 益寿此性，终当破家。 
现代文：当初，谢混与刘毅感情密切亲昵，谢混的堂兄谢澹常常为此担忧，逐渐与他疏远，并对弟弟谢璞和侄儿谢瞻说： 谢混这种性情，将来一定会家破人亡。 
English: At first, Xie Ming and Liu Yi were very close. Xie Ming's cousin Xie Yao often worried about this and gradually distanced himself from him. He said to his brother Xie Yao and his nephew Xie Zhan: "With Xie Ming's character, the family will surely be destroyed in the future."

古文：澹，安之孙也。
现代文：谢澹是谢安的孙子。
English: Xie Jun is the grandson of Xie An.

古文：庚辰，诏大赦，以前会稽内史司马休之为都督荆、雍、梁、秦、宁、益六州诸军事、荆州刺史；北徐州刺史刘道怜为兗、青二州刺史，镇京口。使豫州刺史诸葛长民监太尉留府事。
现代文：庚辰，东晋安帝下诏命令大赦。任命前会稽内史司马休之为都督荆、雍、梁、秦、宁、益六州诸军事，荆州刺史；任命北徐州刺史刘道怜为兖、青二州刺史，镇守京口；命豫州刺史诸葛长民监太尉留府事。
English: Emperor An of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Geng Chen, issued an edict of amnesty. The pre-appointment internal auditor, Sima Xiu, was appointed as the military governor of Jing, Yong, Liang, Qin, Ning, and Yixing six provinces, and the governor of Jing Province; the governor of North Xuzhou, Liu Daorai, was appointed as the governor, the governor of Qing two provinces, and the governor of Jingkou; the governor of Yuzhou, Zhuge Changminjun, was ordered to stay in the capital.

古文：裕疑长民难独任，乃加刘穆之建武将军，置佐吏，配给资力以防之。
现代文：刘裕担心诸葛长民很难单独胜任，于是加封刘穆之为建武将军，设置辅佐官员，配备军事力量，防备意外。
English: Liu Yu was worried that it would be difficult for Zhuge Changmin to be competent alone, so he added Liu Mu as a military general, set up assistant officials, equipped with military forces, and prepared for accidents.

古文：壬午，裕帅诸军发建康，参军王镇恶请给百舸为前驱。
现代文：壬午，刘裕率领几支部队从建康出发，参军王镇恶请求交给他一百条船担任先锋。
English: At noon, Liu Yu led several troops from Jiankang to join the army. Wang Zhenxiong requested that he be given a hundred ships to serve as the vanguard.

古文：丙申，至姑孰，以镇恶为振武将军，与龙骧将军蒯恩将百舸前发。裕戒之曰： 若贼可击，击之；不可者，烧其船舰，留屯水际以待我。 
现代文：丙申，抵达姑孰，任命王镇恶为振武将军，与龙骧将军蒯恩带领一百条船提前出发，刘裕告诫他们说： 如果敌人可以战胜，便进攻他们；如果不能取胜，便把他们的船舰烧毁，停留在水边等待我来。 
English: When Bishin arrived at Gushan, he appointed Wang Zhenxiong as Zhenwu's general, and set off ahead of time with Longyu's general Zhen to lead a hundred ships. Liu Yu warned them: If the enemy can be defeated, attack them; if they can't win, burn their ships and stay by the water to wait for me.

古文：于是镇恶昼夜兼行，扬声言刘兗州上。
现代文：于是王镇恶白天黑夜地加速前进，声言说是刘藩到来。
English: As a result, Wangzhen accelerated its advance day and night, claiming that Liu Han had arrived.

古文：冬，十月，己未，镇恶至豫章口，去江陵城二十里，舍船步上。
现代文：冬季十月，己未，王镇恶抵达豫章口，离江陵城只有二十里，因此，他们下船，步行进军。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Zhenxiong arrived at Yuzhangkou, only twenty miles from Jiangling City, so they disembarked and marched on foot.

古文：蒯恩军居前，镇恶次之。
现代文：蒯恩带兵走在前面，王镇恶紧跟着他。
English: Yan En led the soldiers in front, Wang Zhenxiong followed him closely.

古文：舸留一二人，对舸岸上立六七旗，旗下置鼓，语所留人： 计我将至城，便鼓严，令若后有大军状。 
现代文：每条船上只留一二个人，停船的岸上立起六七面旗帜，旗下放置战鼓，告诉留下的人： 估计我们就要到江陵城时，你们便不停地擂起战鼓，做出后面好像还有大部队的样子。 
English: Only one or two people were left on each boat, and six or seven flags were set up on the shore where the boat stopped, and war drums were placed under the flags, telling those who stayed behind: When we are expected to arrive at Gangneung City, you will constantly set up war drums, making it look like there is a large army behind.

古文：又分遣人烧江津船舰。
现代文：又分别派人去火烧江津那里的船舰。
English: They also sent people to burn the ship in Jiangjin separately.

古文：镇恶径前袭城，语前军士： 有问者，但云刘兗州至。 
现代文：王镇恶径直去突袭江陵城，告诉前面的军士： 如果有人问，就说刘藩到了。 
English: Wang Zhen viciously went straight to raid Jiangling City, telling the front sergeant: If anyone asks, just say that Liu Han has arrived.

古文：津戍及民间皆晏然不疑。
现代文：渡口卫兵和当地百姓都安下心来，毫不怀疑。
English: The guards at the ferry crossing and the local people were very reassured and had no doubts.

古文：未至城五、六里，逢毅要将硃显之欲出江津，问： 刘兗州何在？ 军士曰： 在后。 
现代文：离城还有五六里远时，正好碰上刘毅手下的重要将领朱显之准备去江津，问道： 刘藩在哪里？ 军士们说： 在后面。 
English: When he was still five or six miles away from the city, he happened to meet Zhu Xianchi, an important general under Liu Yi, who was preparing to go to Jiangjin, and asked: Where is Liu Han? The sergeants said: In the back.

古文：显之至军后，不见籓，而见军人担彭排战具，望江津船舰已被烧，鼓严之声甚盛，知非籓上，便跃马驰去告毅，行令闭诸城门。
现代文：朱显之到了部队的后面也没有看到刘藩，却看见军士扛着盾牌、旁排等作战工具，又看见江津的船舰已经火起被烧，江边擂鼓的声音又很大，恍然大悟不是刘藩到来，便跳上马背，飞马回城向刘毅报告，下令赶快关闭各个城门。
English: When Zhu Xianzhi arrived at the rear of the troops, he did not see the Liu clan, but he saw the sergeants carrying shields, sideboards and other combat tools. He also saw that the ships of Jiangjin had been set on fire and burned, and the sound of drums along the river was very loud. He suddenly realized that it was not the arrival of the Liu clan, so he jumped on horseback and returned to the city to report to Liu Yi, and ordered to quickly close all gates.

古文：镇恶亦驰进，门未及下关，军人因得入城。
现代文：王镇恶也跟着跑进城去，城门还没来得及关闭，军队所以得以进入江陵城。
English: Wang Zhenxiong also ran into the city. The gate was not closed in time, so the army was able to enter Jiangling City.

古文：卫军长史谢纯入参承毅，出闻兵至，左右欲引车归。纯叱之曰： 我，人吏也，光将安之！ 
现代文：卫军长史谢纯进府去拜见刘毅，出来的时候，听说军队杀到，左右侍从打算拉着他的车回去，射纯呵斥他们说： 我是人家的下属，逃能逃到哪里去？ 
English: The head of the guards, Shi Xiechun, went to the palace to meet Liu Yi. When he came out, he heard that the army had arrived, and the attendants on his right and left were planning to take his car back. He shouted at them: "I am someone's subordinate. Where can I escape to?"

古文：驰还入府。
现代文：于是驰回刘毅府中。
English: So he rushed back to Liu Yi Middle School.

古文：纯，安兄据之孙也。
现代文：谢纯是谢安的哥哥谢据的孙子。
English: Xie Chun is the grandson of Xie An's brother Xie Zuo.

古文：镇恶与城内兵斗，且攻其金城。自食时至中晡，城内人败散。
现代文：王镇恶与城内的士兵展开激战，一面又进攻江陵的牙城，从中午直到傍晚，城内的守军终于败退溃散。
English: Wang Zhenxiong launched a fierce battle with the soldiers in the city, while attacking the city of Gangneung. From noon until the evening, the defenders in the city were finally defeated and dispersed.

古文：镇恶穴其金城而入，遣人以诏及赦文并裕手书示毅，毅皆烧不视，与司马毛修之等督士卒力战。
现代文：王镇恶从牙城挖一个洞，冲了进去，派人把皇帝的诏书和赦免他的文件以及刘裕写给他的亲笔信交给刘毅，刘毅看也不看，便全部烧掉了。他与司马毛之等人督促士卒拼力死战。
English: Wang Zhenxiong dug a hole from the city of Fang, rushed in, and sent someone to take the emperor's edict and the document pardoning him, as well as Liu Yu's personal letter to him, to Liu Yi. Liu Yi did not look at it and burned it all. He and Sima Mao and others urged the soldiers to fight to the death.

古文：城内人犹未信裕自来，军士从毅自东来者，与台军多中表亲戚，且斗且语，知裕自来，人情离骇。
现代文：城内的人还不相信刘裕亲自到来，可是军队中那些跟着刘毅从东方来的士兵，与朝廷来的兵有一些是表亲的关系，他们一边交战一边对话。知道的确是刘裕亲自来了，人心为此震骇离乱。
English: The people in the city still did not believe that Liu Yu had come in person, but the soldiers in the army who had followed Liu Yi from the east were cousins of the soldiers who had come from the court. They were fighting and talking at the same time. When they knew that Liu Yu had indeed come in person, their hearts were shocked and confused.

古文：逮夜，听事前兵皆散，斩毅勇将赵蔡，毅左右兵犹闭东西閤拒战。
现代文：到了夜晚，刘毅办公的府前卫兵全部逃散，并杀掉了刘毅手下的勇将赵蔡；刘毅身边的侍卫还关紧东西大门顽强抗拒。
English: In the evening, all the guards in front of Liu Yi's office fled and killed Liu Yi's brave general Zhao Cai; the guards around Liu Yi also closed the east and west gates and stubbornly resisted.

古文：镇恶虑暗中自相伤犯，乃引军出围金城，开其南面。
现代文：王镇恶担心黑暗之中自己的士兵彼此误伤，于是又把部众带出围困牙城，并把南面打开一个出口。
English: Wang Zhenxiu was worried that his soldiers would accidentally hurt each other in the darkness, so he took his subordinates out to besiege Fangcheng, and opened an exit to the south.

古文：毅虑南有伏兵，夜半，帅左右三百许人开北门突出。
现代文：刘毅害怕南面有埋伏的官兵，半夜的时候，率领三百个左右的侍卫，打开北门突围出去。
English: Liu Yi was afraid of ambushed officers and soldiers to the south. At midnight, he led about three hundred guards and opened the north gate to break out of the encirclement.

古文：毛修之谓谢纯曰： 君但随仆去。 
现代文：毛之对谢纯说： 你只管跟我去。 
English: Mao Zhi said to Xie Chun: Just come with me.

古文：纯不从，为人所杀。
现代文：谢纯不同意，被别人杀掉了。
English: Xie Jun disagreed and was killed by others.

古文：毅夜投牛牧佛寺。
现代文：刘毅连夜投奔牛牧佛寺。
English: Liu Yi rushed to the Cattle Pasture Buddhist Temple overnight.

古文：初，桓蔚之败也，走投牛牧寺僧昌，昌保藏之，毅杀昌。
现代文：当初，桓蔚失败的时候，便跑到这里投奔牛牧寺的僧人昌。昌把桓蔚藏了起来，保护他，刘毅则杀了昌。
English: At first, when Huan Wei failed, the monk Chang, who ran to the Cowherd Temple, ran here. Chang hid Huan Wei and protected him, while Liu Yi killed Chang.

古文：至是，寺僧拒之曰： 昔亡师容桓蔚，为刘卫军所杀，今实不敢容异人。 
现代文：到这时，寺里的僧人们拒绝了他，说： 过去我们亡故的师傅昌容留醒蔚，被你杀死，现在实在再不敢容留他人了。 
English: At this point, the monks in the temple rejected him, saying: "In the past, our deceased master, Chang Rong Zuo Wei, was killed by you, and now I really don't dare to tolerate others.

古文：毅叹曰： 为法自弊，一至于此！ 
现代文：刘毅哀叹说： 自己制订法律规章断绝自己的活路，竟然到了这种程度！ 
English: Liu Yi lamented, "It has come to this degree that you can make your own laws and regulations and cut off your own way of life!

古文：遂缢而死。
现代文：于是，他自己上吊而死。
English: He gave up his illness and hanged himself.

古文：明日，居人以告，乃斩首于市，并子侄皆伏诛。
现代文：第二天，当地居民报告，王镇恶便将他的尸体拖到市中，砍下脑袋。他的儿子、侄子等也都一起被杀。
English: The next day, local residents reported that Wang Zhenxun dragged his body to the city center and cut off his head. His son, nephew and others were also killed.

古文：毅兄模奔襄阳，鲁宗之斩送之。
现代文：刘毅的哥哥刘模逃奔到襄阳，雍州刺史鲁宗之斩了他，并把人头送到建康。
English: Liu Yi's brother, Liu Miao, fled to Yangyang. The Yongzhou assassin, Shiluzong, beheaded him and sent the head to Jiankang.

古文：初，毅季父镇之闲居京口，不应辟召，常谓毅及籓曰： 汝辈才器，足以得志，但恐不久耳。
现代文：当初，刘毅的叔父刘镇之在京口闲居，不应朝廷的征召，常常对刘毅和刘藩说： 凭你们的才能天赋，足可以实现自己的志向，干一番大事业，但是恐怕不会得势太长时间。
English: At the beginning, Liu Yi's uncle, Liu Zhenzhi, was idle in Beijing and did not want to be summoned by the imperial court. He often said to Liu Yi and the Liu clan: With your talent and talent, you can fully realize your aspirations and do a great cause, but I am afraid you will not gain power for too long.

古文：我不就尔求财位，亦不同尔受罪累。 
现代文：我不依靠你们谋求钱财和地位，也不和你们一起受到罪行的连累。 
English: I don't rely on you for money or status, and I don't share your criminal record.

古文：每见毅、籓导从到门。
现代文：他每次看见刘毅、刘藩领着部下路过家门，都出去辱骂他们。
English: Every time he saw Liu Yi and Liu Han leading his subordinates passing by his home, he would go out and abuse them.

古文：辄诟之，毅甚敬畏，未至宅数百步，悉屏仪卫，与白衣数人俱进。
现代文：刘毅对他非常尊敬而又害怕，回家时，在没到家宅的几百步远的地方，便把仪仗卫兵等全部屏退，只和几个部下的小官吏的人一起进屋。
English: Liu Yi respected him very much but was also afraid of him. When he returned home, he screened off all the honor guards and other people who were several hundred paces away from his home, and only went into the house with a few of his subordinate minor officials.

古文：及毅死，太尉裕奏征镇之为散骑常侍、光禄大夫，固辞不至。
现代文：等到刘毅死后，太尉刘裕奏请征召刘镇之为散骑常侍、光禄大夫，刘镇之仍然坚决推辞，不来上任。
English: After Liu Yi's death, Second Lieutenant Liu Yuso requested that Liu Zhen Zi be conscripted as a cavalryman and doctor of Guanglu, but Liu Zhen Zi still resolutely refused to take up the post.

古文：仇池公杨盛叛秦，侵扰祁山。
现代文：被后秦封为仇池公的氐王杨盛，背叛后秦，侵犯骚扰祁山。
English: Yang Sheng, the king of Qi, who was made the enemy of the Prince of Qi by the Later Qin Dynasty, betrayed the Later Qin Dynasty, invaded and harassed Lushan.

古文：秦王兴遣建威将军赵琨为前锋，立节将军姚伯寿继之，前将军姚恢出鹫峡，秦州刺史姚暠出羊头峡，右卫将军胡翼度出汧城，以讨盛。
现代文：后秦国王姚兴派遣建威将军赵琨率领先行部队，派立节将军姚伯寿率领后援部队，派前将军姚恢进军鹫峡，派秦州刺史姚嵩进军羊头峡，派右卫将军胡翼度进军城，同时讨伐杨盛。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing sent General Jianwei Zhao Qian to lead the troops, sent General Lixi Yao Bozhou to lead the backup troops, sent former General Yao Gui to march into the Yangtze Gorge, sent Qin State Jishi Yao Song to march into the Yangtze Gorge, and sent Right Guard General Hu Yingdu to march into the city and fight against Yang Sheng.

古文：兴自雍赴之，与诸将会于陇口。
现代文：姚兴从雍城带兵前去，与那些将领在陇口会合。
English: Yao Xing led his troops from Yongcheng to meet the generals at the pass.

古文：天水太守王松匆言于嵩曰： 先帝神略无方，徐洛生以英武佐命，再入仇池，无功而还；非杨氏智勇难全也，直地势险固耳。
现代文：天水太守王松向姚嵩进言道： 先帝奇谋神智，变化莫测，徐洛生又以自己的英才勇武辅佐王命，就是那样的条件，二次进攻仇池的时候，也免不了没有任何收获，空手而回。这不是因为杨氏的智谋勇力能够保全自己，只不过是那里的地势艰险牢固罢了。
English: Wang Song, the governor of Tianshui, said to Yao Song, "The previous emperor was unpredictable and unpredictable, and Xu Lousheng used his own talent to fight and save the king's life. That was the condition. When the enemy attacked Quchi for the second time, there would inevitably be no gains, and they would return empty-handed. This was not because the Yang clan's wisdom and courage could protect themselves, but because the terrain there was difficult and dangerous.

古文：今以赵琨之众，使君之威，准之先朝，实未见成功。
现代文：现在依靠赵琨等人的大军，依靠您的威信名望，和先帝的朝代相比，实在也不见得能够成功。
English: Compared to the dynasties of the previous emperors, relying on the great army of Zhao Wei and others, and relying on your prestige and reputation, is not necessarily successful.

古文：使君具悉形便，何不表闻！ 
现代文：您全盘了解这样的形势，为什么不报告皇上呢？ 
English: You are fully aware of the situation. Why don't you report it to the Emperor?

古文：嵩不从。
现代文：姚嵩没有听从。
English: Yao Song did not listen.

古文：盛帅众与琨相持，伯寿畏懦不进，琨众寡不敌，为盛所败。
现代文：杨盛率领部众与赵琨对抗，双方僵持不下，姚伯寿畏惧怯懦，不进兵增援，赵琨力量单薄，难以抵敌，被杨盛打败。
English: Yang Sheng led his subordinates to fight against Zhao Wei, and the two sides were deadlocked. Yao Boshou was afraid and cowardly, and did not send reinforcements. Zhao Wei was weak and hard to resist, and was defeated by Yang Sheng.

古文：兴斩伯寿而还。
现代文：姚兴斩了姚伯寿之后回军。
English: After Yao Xing beheaded Yao Bershou, he returned to the army.

古文：兴以杨佛嵩为雍州刺史，帅岭北见兵以击夏。
现代文：姚兴任命杨佛嵩为雍州刺史，率领岭北现有的军队进击夏国。
English: Yao Xing appointed Yang Fosong to write the history of Yongzhou and lead the existing army of Lingbei to attack Xia.

古文：行数日，兴谓群臣曰： 佛嵩每见敌，勇不自制，吾常节其兵不过五千人。
现代文：军队走了几天，姚兴对大臣们说： 杨佛嵩每当看见敌人，便奋勇向前，无法自己克制，我常常限制他的军队不让它超过五千人。
English: After the army had marched for a few days, Yao Xing said to the ministers: "Whenever Yang Fosong saw the enemy, he would march forward bravely, unable to restrain himself. I often limited his army to no more than five thousand.

古文：今所将既多，遇敌必败，行已远，追之无及，将若之何？ 
现代文：这次他所统领的兵力已经太多了，遇到敌人便一定要失败，但是他们已经走远，追也追不上了，怎么办好呢？ 
English: This time, he has too many troops under his command. If he encounters the enemy, he is sure to fail, but they have gone far away and can't be caught up with. What should he do?

古文：佛嵩与夏王勃勃战，果败，为勃勃所执，绝亢而死。
现代文：杨佛嵩与夏王刘勃勃交战，果然失败，被刘勃勃抓获，扼住喉咙掐死。
English: Yang Fusong fought with Xia Wang Liu Gong, but failed. He was captured by Liu Gong and strangled to death.

古文：秦立昭仪齐氏为后。
现代文：后秦册立昭仪齐氏为王后。
English: Later, the Qin Dynasty inscribed Zhaoyi Qi as the queen.

古文：沮渠蒙逊迁于姑臧。
现代文：北凉沮渠蒙逊把都城迁到姑臧。
English: When the Northern Liang Dynasty was overthrown by the Song Dynasty, the capital was moved to Gushan.

古文：十一月，己卯，太尉裕至江陵，杀郗僧施。
现代文：十一月，己卯，东晋太尉刘裕抵达江陵，杀死郗僧施。
English: In November, Liu Yu, a lieutenant of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, arrived in Gangneung and killed the monk Shi.

古文：初，毛修之虽为刘毅僚佐。素自结于裕，故裕特宥之。
现代文：当初，毛之虽然是刘毅的幕僚属下，但却一向暗自与刘裕结交，所以刘裕特别宽宥了他。
English: At first, although Mao Zhi was a subordinate of Liu Yi's staff, he had always secretly made friends with Liu Yu, so Liu Yu specially pardoned him.

古文：赐王镇恶爵汉寿子。
现代文：朝廷赐给王镇恶以汉寿子爵位。
English: The imperial court gave Wang Zhenxuan the title of viscount to Han Shou.

古文：裕问毅府咨议参军申永曰： 今日何施而可？ 
现代文：刘裕问刘毅府的谘议参军申永说： 现在应当怎么做才合适？ 
English: Liu Yu asked Liu Yifu's advisory to join the army, Shen Yong said: What should be done now?

古文：永曰： 除其宿畔，倍其惠泽，贯叙门次，显擢才能，如此而已。 
现代文：申永说： 消除那些以往的隔阂，加倍向百姓官员施加恩惠，重新严格按照门第来加封官职，公开地擢升有才能的人，不过这样罢了。 
English: Shin Yong said: Eliminate those past divisions, redouble the favors to the people's officials, re-seal official posts strictly according to the lineage, and openly promote talented people, but that's it.

古文：裕纳之，下书宽租省调，节役原刑，礼辟名士，荆人悦之。
现代文：刘裕采纳了他的建议，下令减少赋税役差，放宽刑罚，以礼相聘有名望的人士。
English: Liu Yu accepted his suggestion and ordered to reduce the tax gap, relax the penalty, and hire famous people with courtesy.

古文：诸葛长民骄纵贪侈，所为多不法，为百姓患，常惧太尉裕按之。
现代文：荆州的百姓非常拥护他。东晋豫州刺史诸葛长民骄横放纵，贪婪奢侈，干的事大多都不合法度，成了百姓的一大祸患。他也常常担心太尉刘裕查处他。
English: The people of Jingzhou are very supportive of him. East Jinzhou, Yuzhou, Zhushizhu, Zhuge Changmin are arrogant and indulgent, greedy and extravagant, and most of the things they do are illegal, which has become a major disaster for the people. He is also often worried that Lieutenant Liu Yu will investigate him.

古文：及刘毅被诛，长民谓所亲曰：  昔年醢彭越，今年杀韩信。 
现代文：到了刘毅被杀，诸葛长民便对他所亲近的人说：  前年杀彭越，今年杀韩信。 
English: When Liu Yi was killed, Zhuge Changmin said to those close to him: "Last year, kill Peng Yue, this year, kill Han Xin."

古文：祸其至矣！ 
现代文：我的大祸就要来了！ 
English: My doom is at hand!

古文：乃屏人问刘穆之曰： 悠悠之言，皆云太尉与我不平，何以至此？ 
现代文：于是，他把别人屏退，问刘穆之说： 大家纷纷传言，都说太尉对我非常不满，这是什么原因？ 
English: As a result, he blocked out others and asked Liu Muzhi, "Everyone is spreading rumors that the captain is very dissatisfied with me. What is the reason for this?

古文：穆之曰： 公溯流远征，以老母稚子委节下。若一豪不尽，岂容如此邪！ 
现代文：刘穆之说： 刘公逆流而上，远征刘毅，把老母和幼子全都交给您照顾，如果有一点点的不信任，哪里能这样呢？ 
English: Liu Muzhi said: Liu Gong went against the tide and sent Liu Yi on an expedition, leaving his mother and young son in your care. If there is a little distrust, how can this be?

古文：长民意乃小安。
现代文：诸葛长民的心里才稍稍安定一些。
English: Zhuge Changmin's heart is only slightly more stable.

古文：长民弟辅国大将军黎民说长民曰： 刘氏之亡，亦诸葛氏之惧也，宜因裕未还而图之。 
现代文：诸葛长民的弟弟、辅国大将军诸葛黎民，劝说诸葛长民道： 刘毅的死，也就是诸葛氏的可怕的下场，应该趁着刘裕还没有回来，抢先动手。 
English: Zhuge Changmin's younger brother, Assistant National General Zhuge Limin, persuaded Zhuge Changmin: Liu Yi's death, that is, the terrible fate of the Zhuge clan, should take advantage of Liu Yu has not yet returned, and take the lead.

古文：长民犹豫未发，既而叹曰： 贫贱常思富贵，富贵必履危机。
现代文：诸葛长民犹豫不决，没有行动，过后叹息说： 贫贱的时候，常常想着富贵，富贵之后又一定会有危险。
English: Zhuge Changmin hesitated, did not act, and later said with a sigh: When I was poor, I often thought about being rich. After being rich, there will definitely be danger.

古文：今日欲为丹徒布衣。
现代文：现在要想当一个丹徒的老百姓，怎么能行呢！ 
English: Now, if you want to be an ordinary citizen of Danto, how can you do it?

古文：岂可得邪！ 因遗冀州刺史刘敬宣书曰： 盘龙狠戾专恣，自取夷灭。
现代文：于是，给冀州刺史刘敬宣写信道： 刘毅狠毒暴戾，专横任性，自己找的灭亡。
English: As a result, he wrote to Liu Jingxuan, the governor of Jizhou Province, saying: Liu Yi is vicious and violent, arbitrary and capricious, and seeks his own demise.

古文：异端将尽，世路方夷，富贵之事，相与共之。 
现代文：现在，有叛乱之心的人已经要被剿灭，天下就要太平，如果有富贵的事情的话，希望我们一同享受。 
English: Now, people with a rebellious heart are about to be annihilated, the world is about to be peaceful, and if there are rich and valuable things, I hope we can enjoy them together.

古文：敬宣报曰： 下官自义熙以来，忝三州、七郡，常惧福过灾生，思避盈居损。
现代文：刘敬宣回信说： 下官我从义熙初年以来，不称职地当过三个州的刺史，七个郡的太守，常常害怕福份就要过去，灾祸就要降在头上，因此只想回避太满的好处，宁可吃亏受损。
English: Liu Jingxuan wrote back: Subordinate officer, since the first year of Yixi, I have incompetently served as the chief historian of three states and the governor of seven counties. I am often afraid that fortune will pass and disaster will fall on my head. Therefore, I only want to avoid too much benefit, and would rather suffer losses.

古文：富贵之旨，非所敢当。 
现代文：您所说的富贵的意思，我实在不敢承当。 
English: What you mean by rich, I really can't handle.

古文：且使以书呈裕，裕曰： 阿寿故为不负我也。 
现代文：而且又把信送给刘裕，刘裕说： 刘敬宣还是没有辜负我。 
English: Moreover, he sent the letter to Liu Yu. Liu Yu said: Liu Jingxuan still did not disappoint me.

古文：刘穆之忧长民为变，屏人问太尉行参军东海何承天曰： 公今行济否？ 
现代文：刘穆之担心诸葛长民制造叛乱，屏退别人问太尉行参军、东海人何承天说： 刘公这次能不能成功？ 
English: Liu Mu Zhi was worried that Zhuge Changmin would create a rebellion, and others asked the captain to join the army, and the East Sea people said: Can Liu Gong succeed this time?

古文：承天曰： 荆州不忧不时判，别有一虑耳。
现代文：何承天说： 荆州不怕不马上被平定，不过有另外一个值得忧虑的事。
English: He Chengtian said: Jingzhou is not afraid of being immediately pacified, but there is another thing worth worrying about.

古文：公昔年自左里还入石头，甚脱尔；今还，宜加重慎。 
现代文：刘公过去在左里大胜之后回到石头，非常轻松随便，但这次回来，却应该加倍谨慎。 
English: In the past, Liu Gong used to return to the stone after a big victory in Zuoli, very easily and casually, but this time, he should be more careful.

古文：穆之曰： 非君，不闻此言。 
现代文：刘穆之说： 不是你，听不到这样的忠告。 
English: Liu Muzhi said, "It's not you, you can't listen to such advice."

古文：裕在江陵，辅国将军王诞白裕求先下，裕曰： 诸葛长民似有自疑心，卿讠巨宜便去！ 
现代文：刘裕在江陵，辅国将军王诞向刘裕表示，请求先行东还，刘裕说： 诸葛长民好像自己非常担心，你怎么敢轻易地就走！ 
English: When Liu Yu was in Jiangling, the auxiliary general Wang Xizang said to Liu Yu, asking him to go east first, Liu Yu said: Zhuge Changmin seems to be very worried about himself, how dare you go easily!

古文：诞曰： 长民知我蒙公垂眄，今轻身单下，必当以为无虞，乃可以少安其意耳。 
现代文：王诞说： 诸葛长民知道我一向承蒙您的垂爱照顾，我现在轻装简从，单身而回，他就一定会觉得没有危险，这样也可以稍稍安定一下他的心意。 
English: Wang Xizhe said: Zhuge Changmin knows that I have always been under your loving care, I am now lightly dressed and simple, single and back, he will certainly feel that there is no danger, this can also stabilize his mind a little.

古文：裕笑曰： 卿勇过贲、育矣。 
现代文：刘裕笑着说： 你的勇气，超过孟贲、夏育了。 
English: Liu Yu smiled and said: Your courage surpasses that of Meng Xi and Xia Yu.

古文：乃听先还。
现代文：于是就听凭他先回去。
English: So I let him go back first.

古文：沮渠蒙逊即河西王位，大赦，改元玄始，置官僚如凉王光为三河王故事。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊登上河西王的位子，下令大赦，改年号为玄始，设置的官员，就像后凉王吕光为三河王时设置的官员一样。
English: Despondent Mengxun ascended to the position of the king of Hexi, ordered an amnesty, changed the year to the beginning of the year, and set up officials, just like the officials set up by Liangwang Luguang when he was the king of the three rivers.

古文：太尉裕谋伐蜀，择元帅而难其人。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕计划讨伐蜀地，选择元帅的时候，觉得很难找到合适的人选。
English: When Liu Yu, a captain of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, planned to invade Shu, he found it difficult to find a suitable candidate when choosing a marshal.

古文：以西阳太守硃龄石既有武干，又练吏职，欲用之。
现代文：他认为西阳太守朱龄石既有武勇，又熟悉胜任官吏的职责，打算任用他。
English: He thought that Zhu Lingshi, the governor of Xiyang, was both brave and familiar with the duties of a competent official, and planned to appoint him.

古文：众皆以为龄石资名尚轻，难当重任，裕不从。
现代文：大家却都认为朱龄石的资历名望还轻，难以承当重任。刘裕不听从。
English: However, everyone thought that Zhu Lingshi's qualifications and reputation were still light, and it would be difficult for him to take on a heavy responsibility. Liu Yu did not listen.

古文：十二月，以龄石为益州刺史，帅宁朔将军臧熹、河间太守蒯恩、下邳太守刘钟等伐蜀，分大军之半二万人以配之。
现代文：十二月，任命朱龄石为益州刺史，统帅宁朔将军臧熹、河间太守蒯恩、下邳太守刘钟等人前去讨伐蜀地，并把自己大军的一半共二万人配给他指挥。
English: In December, Zhu Lingshi was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, and the commander-in-chief, Ningshuo Zhengyuan, the Empress Dowager of Kawama Zhen, the Empress Dowager of Lower Yunnan Liu Zhong, and others went to fight in Shu, and assigned him the command of half of his army, a total of 20,000 people.

古文：熹，裕之妻弟，位居龄石之右，亦隶焉。
现代文：臧熹是刘裕的内弟，职位也比朱龄石高，但也接受朱龄石的统领。
English: Zou is Liu Yu's younger brother-in-law, and his position is also higher than Zhu Lingshi, but he also accepts Zhu Lingshi's leadership.

古文：裕与龄石密谋进取，曰： 刘敬宣往年出黄虎，无功而退。
现代文：刘裕与朱龄石密谋进攻取胜的办法，说： 刘敬宣以前进军到黄虎，没建立什么功业便退回来了。
English: Liu Yu conspired with Zhu Lingshi to attack and find a way to win, saying: Liu Jingxuan previously marched into Huanghu, but he retreated without establishing any achievements.

古文：贼谓我今应从外水往，而料我当出其不意犹从内水来也。
现代文：所以，敌兵以为我们这次应当从外水出发，又防备我们出其不意仍然还从内水进兵。
English: Therefore, the enemy soldiers thought that we should start from the open water this time, and also beware that we still entered the troops from the inner water unexpectedly.

古文：如此，必以重兵守涪城以备内道。
现代文：这样，他们一定会用重兵把守涪城，封锁内水。
English: In this way, they will surely use heavy troops to guard the city of Handan and block the inland water.

古文：若向黄虎，正堕其计。
现代文：如果我们进军黄虎，正中他们的计策。
English: If we march into the Yellow Tiger, we will be right in the middle of their strategy.

古文：今以大众自外水取成都，疑兵出内水，此制敌之奇也。 
现代文：现在，我们以大部队经过外水直取成都，另派一支迷惑敌人的军队进攻内水，这是克敌制胜的奇计。 
English: Now, the main force enters Chengdu from the outside water, and the doubtful soldiers come from the inside water. This is the magic strategy to defeat the enemy.

古文：而虑此声先驰，贼审虚实。别有函书封付龄石，署函边曰： 至白帝乃开。 
现代文：他担心这种计划事先传扬出去，敌人摸清了自己的虚实动静，便另外写了一封信装在盒子里，交给朱龄石，在盒子边上写： 到白帝城再打开。 
English: He was worried that the plan would be leaked in advance, and that the enemy would figure out what he was up to. So he wrote another letter, put it in a box, and gave it to Zhu Lingshi. On the edge of the box, he wrote: "To Baidicheng, open it again."

古文：诸军虽进，未知处分所由。
现代文：这几路大军虽然开始行动，但却不知道为什么要这样安排。
English: Although these large armies began to move, they did not know why they should do so.

古文：毛修之固请行，裕恐修之至蜀，必多所诛杀，土人与毛氏有嫌，亦当以死自固，不许。
现代文：毛之坚决要求随大军出发，刘裕恐怕毛之到蜀地后大肆屠杀，而当地人因为与毛之有宿怨，也可能拼死坚守抵抗，所以，没有答应他的请求。
English: Mao resolutely requested to set out with the large army. Liu Yu was afraid that Mao would carry out a large-scale massacre after arriving in Shu, and the local people, because they had a long-standing grudge with Mao, might also fight to the death to resist, so they did not agree to his request.

古文：分荆州十郡置湘州。
现代文：东晋把荆州的十个郡分出来，设立湘州。
English: Ten counties were separated from Jingzhou to form Hunan.

古文：加太尉裕太傅、扬州牧。
现代文：东晋朝廷加授太尉刘裕为太傅、扬州牧。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty conferred the title of Taifu on Liu Yu, and he became the Taifu and Yangzhou Patriarch.

古文：丁巳，魏主嗣北巡，至长城而还。
现代文：丁巳，北魏国主拓跋嗣，巡视北方，到达长城后返回。
English: Ding Si, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi, inspected the north, reached the Great Wall and returned.

古文：安皇帝辛义熙九年
现代文：义熙九年
English: in the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi

古文：春，二月，庚戌，魏主嗣如高柳川。甲寅，还宫。
现代文：春季二月，庚戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往高柳川；甲寅，回宫。
English: In the spring of February, Geng Zheng, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled to Gaoliang River; Jia Yin, returned to the palace.

古文：太尉裕自江陵东还，骆驿遣辎重兼行而下，前刻至日，每淹留不进。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕从江陵东下，返回建康，陆续把军用物资尽快地运送回去，在预定的日期以前，常常滞留，不能按期进发。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Lieutenant Liu Yu went from Jiangling to the east, returned to Jiankang, and successively transported military supplies back as soon as possible. Before the scheduled date, he often stayed behind and could not proceed as scheduled.

古文：诸葛长民与公卿频日奉候于新亭，辄差其期。
现代文：诸葛长民与公卿们每天都到新亭去等候，每每错过日期。
English: Zhuge Changmin and court nobles went to the new pavilion every day to wait, and missed the date every time.

古文：乙丑晦，裕轻舟径进，潜入东府。
现代文：乙丑夜，刘裕乘快速小艇迅速前进，暗中回到了东府。
English: On the evening of the second day of the second lunar month, Liu Yu took a fast boat and secretly returned to Dongfu.

古文：三月，丙寅朔旦，长民闻之，惊趋至门。
现代文：三月，丙寅朔凌晨，诸葛长民才得到消息，大吃一惊，急往晋见。
English: In the early morning of March, Zhuge Changmin got the news, was taken aback, and rushed to see Jin.

古文：裕伏壮土丁旿于幔中，引长民却人闲语，凡平生所不尽者皆及之，长民甚悦。
现代文：刘裕命武士丁埋伏在幔中，然后迎接诸葛长民入内，把别人屏退，单独谈话，把凡是一生以来谈不透的话全部谈到了。
English: Liu Yu ordered the samurai Ding to lie in wait in the cocoon, and then welcomed Zhuge Changmin into the house, screened others away, talked alone, and talked about everything that was not clear from his whole life.

古文：丁旿自幔后出，于座拉杀之，舆尸付廷尉。
现代文：诸葛长民非常高兴，却不料丁从帷幔后跳出来，在座位上弄死他。刘裕命令用车子把他的尸体拉到延尉去判罪。
English: Zhuge Changmin was very happy, but unexpectedly Ding jumped out from behind the curtain and killed him on the seat. Liu Yu ordered to use the car to pull his body to Yanfei for sentencing.

古文：收其弟黎民，黎民素骁勇，格斗而死。
现代文：又去抓他的弟弟诸葛黎民，诸葛黎民一向非常骁勇，拒捕格斗，被杀死。
English: He also went to arrest his brother Zhuge Limin. Zhuge Limin had always been very brave, resisted arrest and was killed.

古文：并杀其季弟大司马参军幼民、从弟宁朔将军秀之。
现代文：又杀了他的小弟弟大司马参军诸葛幼民、他的堂弟宁朔将军诸葛秀之。
English: He also killed his little brother, the great-uncle Ma Sangjun Zhuge Xiaomin, and his cousin, the Ningshuo general Zhuge Xiu.

古文：庚午，秦王兴遣使至魏修好。
现代文：庚午，后秦王姚兴派遣使节前往北魏建立友好关系。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, King Yaoxing of the Later Qin Dynasty sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty to establish friendly relations.

古文：太尉裕上表曰： 大司马温以 民无定本，伤治为深 ，《庚戌》土断以一其业。
现代文：东晋国太尉刘裕呈上奏表说： 从前，大司马桓温因为 民众没有固定的根基，对国家的治理危害极大 ，所以，颁布 庚戌 诏书，规定按照现在的住所，确定流亡居民的籍贯，让他们安居乐业。
English: Liu Yu, captain of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, submitted a report saying: Once upon a time, because the people did not have a fixed foundation, and it was extremely harmful to the governance of the country, the Grand Master Ma Huanwen promulgated the "Gengyu" edict, stipulating that the origin of the exiled residents should be determined according to the current residence, so that they could live and work in peace.

古文：于是财阜国丰，实由于此。
现代文：当时财富的逐渐积累、国家的充实强盛，实在是由于这个缘故。
English: The gradual accumulation of wealth at that time, the enrichment and prosperity of the country, was really due to this reason.

古文：自兹迄今，渐用颓驰；请申前制。 
现代文：从那个时候到现在，对这种规定的执行逐渐放松，因此，请求重新强调以前的这项政策。 
English: From then until now, the enforcement of this provision has been gradually relaxed, hence the request to re-emphasize the previous policy.

古文：于是依界土断，唯徐、兗、青三州居晋陵者，不在断例；诸流寓郡县多所并省。
现代文：于是按照现在居民的住所重新确定籍贯，只有徐、兖、青这三个州居住在晋陵的人，不在这个限制之内，那些寄居在别郡之上的郡县，有很多不是被合并，就是被撤销。
English: As a result, the origin was re-determined according to the residence of the current residents. Only the people living in Jinling in the three states of Xu, Handan and Qing were not within this limit. Those counties that lived on top of other counties, many were either merged or revoked.

古文：戊寅，加裕豫州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，东晋加任刘裕为豫州刺史。
English: Wu Yin, the Eastern Jin Dynasty and Liu Yu are the history of Yuzhou.

古文：裕固让太傅、州牧。
现代文：刘裕坚定辞让太傅、州牧等职。
English: Liu Yu firmly resigned from the posts of Taifu and State Pastor.

古文：林邑范胡达寇九真，杜慧度击斩之。
现代文：林邑国范胡达进犯东晋九真郡，杜慧度回击并把他杀了。
English: Lin Yip Guo Fan Huda invaded East Jin Jiu Zhen County, Du Huidu fought back and killed him.

古文：河南王炽磐遣镇东将军昙达、平东将军王松寿将兵东击休官权小郎、吕破胡于白石川，大破之，虏其男女万馀口，进据白石城。
现代文：河南王乞伏炽磐派遣镇东将军乞伏昙达、平东将军王松寿带领部队进攻东部休官部落首领权小郎、吕破胡所据守的白石川，并把他们打得大败，把当地的男女百姓一万多口俘虏，进占白石城。
English: The king of Henan Province, Gui Fu Blazing Rock, dispatched the Zhendong general, Gui Fu Xingda, and the Pingdong general, Wang Song Shou, to lead the troops to attack the Shiroishi River, which was defended by the eastern retired tribal leader, Quan Xiao Lang, and Luba Hu, and defeated them, captured more than ten thousand local men and women, and occupied Shiroishi City.

古文：显亲休官权小成、吕奴迦等二万馀户据白坑不服，昙达攻斩之，陇右休官悉降。
现代文：显亲休官部落首领权小成、吕奴迦等共二万多户人占据白，不服。乞伏昙达攻克了那里，把他们杀了。
English: A total of more than twenty thousand households, including those of prominent relatives, retired officials, and tribal leaders, such as Quan Xiaocheng and Lunuca, occupied Bai and refused to submit.

古文：秦太尉索稜以陇西降炽磐，炽磐以稜为太傅。
现代文：陇右的休官部落全部投降。后秦太尉索棱，献出他所据守的陇西，向乞伏炽磐投降。乞伏炽磐任命索棱为太傅。
English: The retired officers' tribe on the right side of the Yangtze River all surrendered. Afterward, Qin Tai Li So Ren gave up the western part of the Yangtze River, which he had defended, and surrendered to Beggar Blazing Rock. Beggar Blazing Rock appointed So Ren as Tai Fu.

古文：夏王勃勃大赦，改元凤翔。
现代文：夏王刘勃勃下令实行大赦，改年号为凤翔。
English: Xia Wang Liu Gong ordered a general amnesty and changed his name to Fengxiang.

古文：以叱干阿利领将作大匠，发岭北夷、夏十万人筑都城于朔方水北、黑水之南。
现代文：任命叱干阿利兼任将作大匠，征发岭北胡人、汉人共十万，在朔方水以北、黑水以南的地方建筑都城。
English: He also appointed Zhaogan Ali to be the grand master, and enlisted a total of 100,000 Hu and Han people from the northern part of Faling to build the capital city in the area north of Shuo Fangshui and south of Heishui.

古文：勃勃曰： 朕方统一天下，君临万邦，宜名新城曰统万。 
现代文：刘勃勃说： 我正要统一天下，以君王的地位统辖所有地区，因此，新城的名字应该叫 统万 。 
English: Liu Ling said, "I am about to unify the world and rule all regions as a king. Therefore, the new city should be called "Unification of the World."

古文：阿利性巧而残忍，蒸土筑城，锥入一寸，即杀作者而并筑之。
现代文：叱干阿利性情乖巧伶利，但却凶暴残忍。他用蒸过的土修筑城墙，验收时铁锥如果能插入一寸深，他就要把泥工杀掉并把他的尸首筑进城中。
English: He built the walls with steamed earth, and if the trowel could be inserted an inch deep at the time of acceptance, he would kill the mason and build his corpse into the city.

古文：勃勃以为忠，委任之。
现代文：刘勃勃认为他非常忠诚，便把筑城的事全部交给了他。
English: Liu Ling believed him to be very loyal, so he entrusted all the work of building the city to him.

古文：凡造兵器成，呈之，工人必有死者，射甲不入则斩弓人，入则斩甲匠。
现代文：凡是把兵器造成，呈送给他过目的时候，做工的人当中就一定会有人被杀死：弓箭射不透铠甲，那么就杀掉作弓的人；如果射透了，就要杀死作铠甲的工匠。
English: Whenever anyone makes a weapon and brings it to the king, one of the craftsmen must be put to death. If the bow and arrow do not pierce the armor, then the bowmaker must be put to death. If the arrow pierces the armor, then the armor maker must be put to death.

古文：又铸铜为一大鼓。飞廉、翁仲、铜驼、龙虎之属，饰以黄金，列于宫殿之前。
现代文：他又用铜铸成一面大鼓，把 飞廉 、 翁仲 、 铜驼 、 龙 、 虎 等塑像，面上装饰黄金，排列在宫殿之前。
English: He also used copper to cast a large drum, and arranged the statues of Fei Lian, Weng Zhong, bronze camel, dragon, tiger, etc., decorated with gold on the surface, in front of the palace.

古文：凡杀工匠数千，由是器物皆精利。
现代文：前后大约杀掉了几千名工匠，因此，武器什物等都打磨得非常锋利和精良。
English: Around several thousand craftsmen were killed, and as a result, weapons and other items were polished to a very high standard.

古文：勃勃自谓其祖从母姓为刘，非礼也。
现代文：刘勃勃自认为他的祖先沿用母姓，姓刘，不合礼法。
English: Liu Gongren thinks that his ancestor's mother's surname, Liu, is inappropriate.

古文：古从氏族无常，乃改姓赫连氏，言帝王系天为子，其徽赫与天连也。
现代文：鉴于古人用姓氏也没有常规，于是自己改姓 赫连 ，意思是说帝王是天的儿子，他的伟大光耀与天相连。
English: In view of the fact that the ancients did not have a routine for using surnames, he changed his surname to Khelian, which means that the emperor is the son of heaven, and his great glory is connected with heaven.

古文：其非正统者，皆以铁伐为氏，言其刚锐如铁，皆堪伐人也。
现代文：那些不是直系亲属的旁支后裔，都用 铁伐 为姓，意思是说他们钢强锐利如铁，都可以攻伐别人。
English: Those collateral descendants who are not direct relatives all use "Tiefa" as their surname, which means that they are as strong and sharp as iron and can attack others.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，魏主嗣西巡，命郑兵将奚斤、鸿飞将军尉古真、都将闾大肥等击越勤部于跋那山。
现代文：夏季四月，乙卯，北魏国主拓跋嗣向西巡视，下令郑兵将军奚斤、鸿飞将军尉古真、都将闾大肥等进军跋那山，袭击越勤部落。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, made an inspection tour to the west, and ordered General Zheng Bingjin, General Hongfei's lieutenant Gu Zhen, and General Duan Dahui to march into Banya Mountain and attack the Yueqin tribe.

古文：大肥，柔然人也。
现代文：闾大肥是柔然人。
English: Gong Dahui is a gentle person.

古文：河南王炽磐遣安北将军乌地延、冠军将军翟绍击吐谷浑别统句旁于泣勤川，大破之。
现代文：河南王乞伏炽磐派遣安北将军乌地延、冠军将军翟绍进攻吐谷浑所属的远方部落首领句旁所据守的泣勤川，并把他们打得大败。
English: The king of Henan Province sent the Anbei general Udi Yan and the champion general Zou Shao to attack the distant tribal leader Gu, who belonged to the Tuyugun tribe, and the Qieqin River, which they were defending, and defeated them.

古文：河西王蒙逊立子政德为世子，加镇卫大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊册立儿子沮渠政德为世子，加封为镇卫大将军、录尚书事。
English: King Deshu Mengxun of the West of the North Lianghe River appointed his son Deshu Zhengde as his heir, added the title of Zhenwei General, and recorded the records.

古文：南凉王傉檀伐河西王蒙逊，蒙逊败之于若厚坞，又败之于若凉；因进围乐都，二旬不克。
现代文：南凉王秃发檀讨伐河西王沮渠蒙逊，沮渠蒙逊在若厚坞把他打败，又在若凉再一次击败他。
English: The king of the South Liang, Balfa Dang, fought against the king of the West of the River, Deqiu Mengxun. Deqiu Mengxun defeated him in Ruo Hou dock, and defeated him again in Ruo Liang.

古文：南凉湟河太守文支以郡降于蒙逊，蒙逊以文支为广武太守。
现代文：于是，沮渠蒙逊进军围困秃发檀的都城乐都，过了二十天也没有攻破。南凉湟河太守秃发文支献出湟河郡，向沮渠蒙逊投降。沮渠蒙逊任命秃发文支为广武太守。
English: As a result, Deshu Mengxun marched into the capital Ledu, which was besieged by Baldassare, and did not break through after twenty days. The Southern Liangyu River's governor, Baldassare Wenshi, surrendered to Deshu Mengxun by surrendering Luhe County. Deshu Mengxun appointed Baldassare Wenshi as the governor of Guangwu.

古文：蒙逊复伐南凉，傉檀以太尉俱延为质，乃还。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊再一次讨伐南凉，秃发檀把太尉秃发俱延交给他作为人质，他才撤军。
English: Despondent, Mengxun once again attacked Nanliang. Bald-headed Dang gave him Second Lieutenant Bald-headed Quan as a hostage, and he withdrew.

古文：蒙逊西如苕台，遣冠军将军伏恩将骑一万袭卑和、乌啼二部，大破之，俘二千馀落而还。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊向西巡视，前往苕，派遣冠军将军伏恩带领一万骑兵进攻卑和、乌啼两个部落，并把他们击败，俘虏了两千多帐落的百姓回来。
English: Despondent, Mengxun made a tour to the west, went to Zhai, and sent the champion general Fuen to lead ten thousand cavalry to attack the two tribes of Biahe and Wuyi, and defeated them, captured more than two thousand villagers and returned.

古文：蒙逊寝于新台，阉人王怀祖击蒙逊，伤足，其妻孟氏禽斩之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊在新台皇宫就寝，宦官王怀祖突然向他袭击，但却只伤到了他的脚，沮渠蒙逊的妻子孟氏把王怀祖活捉然后杀了。
English: Despondent Monson was sleeping in the New Taiwan Palace when the eunuch Wang Huai Zu suddenly attacked him, but only injured his foot. Despondent Monson's wife Meng captured Wang Huai Zu alive and then killed him.

古文：蒙逊母车氏卒。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊的母亲车氏去世。
English: Despondent, Monson's mother, Che, passed away.

古文：五月，乙亥，魏主嗣如云中旧宫。
现代文：五月，乙亥，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往云中的旧日宫殿。
English: In May, the Emperor of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba, went to the Old Sun Palace in Yunzhong.

古文：丙子，大赦。
现代文：丙子，实行大赦。
English: Bongzi, amnesty to the whole world.

古文：西河胡张外等聚众为盗；乙卯，嗣遣会稽公长乐刘絜等屯西河招讨之。
现代文：西河的胡人张外等人招集部众，成了强盗。乙卯，拓跋嗣派遣会稽公、长乐人刘等带兵集结在西河，招降或者讨伐他们。
English: Zhang Wai and others of the Hu people of the West River gathered their followers and became bandits. E U, Tuo Baizi dispatched the auditor of the association, and Liu, a Changle person, gathered soldiers in the West River to invite them to surrender or fight them.

古文：六月，嗣如五原。
现代文：六日，拓跋嗣前往五原。
English: On the 6th, Takubasugi left for Gohara.

古文：硃龄石等至白帝发函书，曰： 众军悉从外水取成都。臧熹从中水取广汉，老弱乘高舰十馀，从内水向黄虎。 
现代文：东晋朱龄石等人带兵抵达白帝，打开盒中刘裕写的书信，上面说： 大部队全部从外水进攻成都，臧熹从水中进攻广汉，老弱残兵乘坐高大的战舰十几条，从内水向黄虎进发。 
English: Eastern Jin Zhu Lingshi and others arrived in Baidu with soldiers and opened the letter written by Liu Yu in the box, which said: The main forces all attacked Chengdu from the outer water, and  attacked Guanghan from the water. The old and weak remnants took more than a dozen tall warships and set off from the inner water towards the Yellow Tiger.

古文：于是诸军倍道兼行。
现代文：于是，几路大军火速向目标进发。
English: As a result, several large arms fire quickly towards the target.

古文：谯纵果命谯道福将重兵镇倍城，以备内水。
现代文：谯纵果然命令谯道福带领主力部队镇守涪城，用来防备从内水进攻的敌人。
English: Gong Zong ordered Gong Daofu to lead the main force to guard Gongcheng, to be used to prevent the enemy from attacking from inland waters.

古文：龄石至平模，去成都二百里，纵遣秦州刺史候晖、尚书仆射谯诜帅众万馀屯平模，夹岸筑城以拒之。
现代文：朱龄石抵达平模，距离成都还有二百里。谯纵派遣秦州刺史侯晖、尚书仆射谯诜率领一万多部众屯扎在平模，在江水两岸筑起城墙，抗拒敌兵。
English: Zhu Lingshi arrived in Pingmo, still two hundred miles away from Chengdu. He dispatched the Qin statesmen Zhishi Houyi and Shang Shubu Sheyi to lead more than ten thousand troops to camp in Pingmo, build walls on both sides of the river, and resist the enemy soldiers.

古文：龄石谓刘钟曰： 今天时盛热，而贼严兵固险，攻之未必可拔，只增疲困。
现代文：朱龄石对刘钟说： 现在正赶上天气太热，但是敌兵又防守严密、地热险固，进攻他们也不一定能够攻克，只是白白地增加士兵的疲劳困顿。
English: Zhu Lingshi said to Liu Zhong: The weather is too hot right now, but the enemy soldiers are tightly defended and the ground is hot and dangerous. They may not be able to conquer the attack, but they will only increase the soldiers' fatigue and hardship in vain.

古文：且欲养锐息兵以伺其隙，何如？ 钟曰： 不然。
现代文：我想暂时停止进攻，养精蓄锐，等待机会，怎么样？ 刘钟说： 不行。
English: I want to temporarily stop the attack, keep my energy up, and wait for an opportunity, how about that? Liu Zhong said: No.

古文：前扬声言大从向内水。谯道福不敢舍涪城。
现代文：开始的时候我们扬言大部队从内水进攻，谯道福所以才不敢放弃涪城。
English: At the beginning, we threatened to attack with a large force from inland waters, which is why Shantou Fu did not dare to give up Shantou.

古文：今重军猝至，出其不意，侯晖之徒已破胆矣。
现代文：现在大军到了这里，出乎敌人的意料之外，侯晖这帮家伙已经吓破了胆。
English: Now that the big army has arrived here, unexpectedly for the enemy, Hou Yi's gang has been scared out of their wits.

古文：贼阻兵守险者，是其惧不敢战也。
现代文：贼兵之所以挡住去路、坚守险要，是因为他们害怕，不敢迎战。
English: The reason why the robber soldiers blocked the way and clung to the precipice was because they were afraid and did not dare to fight.

古文：因其凶惧。尽锐攻之，其势必克。
现代文：正应趁他们非常害怕，调动全部的精锐部队进攻他们，结果我们一定会胜利。
English: We should take advantage of their great fear and mobilize all our best troops to attack them, with the result that we will surely win.

古文：克平模之后，自可鼓行而进，成都必不能守矣。
现代文：攻克平模之后，自然可以擂动战鼓，勇往直前，成都也便一定不能坚守了。
English: After conquering Pingmo, it is natural to beat the war drums and move forward. Chengdu will not be able to hold out.

古文：若缓兵相守，彼将知人虚实。
现代文：如果把进攻援解下来，相持不下，他们就会了解到我们的虚实。
English: If the offensive is broken off and cannot be sustained, they will learn the truth about us.

古文：涪军忽来，并力拒我。人情既安，良将又集，此求战不获，军食无资，二万馀人悉为蜀子虏矣。 
现代文：涪城的守军再忽然到来，把兵力合在一起，抵抗我们，他们的人心也已经安定，良将也集结过来。这样，我们希望对战又没有办法把敌人引出来，军中粮食又无法供应，那么，我们的二万多人就要全部被蜀中小子俘虏了。 
English: If the defenders of Lucheng suddenly arrive, gather their forces together and resist us, and their morale has stabilized and good generals have gathered. In this way, we hope that there will be no way to draw the enemy out of the battle, and the army will not be able to supply grain. Then, all of our more than 20,000 people will be captured by the middle children of Shu.

古文：龄石从之。
现代文：朱龄石听从了他的劝告。
English: Zhu Lingshi followed his advice.

古文：诸将以水北城地险兵多，欲先攻其南城。
现代文：诸将领认为江北的城垣地势险要，守兵众多，所以打算先进攻江南的城池。
English: The generals thought that the castle walls in the north of the river were in a precarious situation, with many defenders, so they planned to attack the castle in the south of the river first.

古文：龄石曰： 今屠南城，不足以破北，若尽锐以拔北城，则南城不麾自散矣。 
现代文：朱龄石说： 现在，我们即使屠灭了南城，也没有办法攻克北城，如果集中精锐攻克北城，那么南城便不用挥旗进攻也会自动星散的。 
English: Zhu Lingshi said: Now, even if we slaughter the South City, there is no way to conquer the North City. If we concentrate the elite to conquer the North City, then the South City will automatically disperse without waving the flag.

古文：秋，七月，龄石帅诸军急攻北城，克之，斩侯晖、谯诜；引兵回趣南城，南城自溃。
现代文：秋季，七月，朱龄石率领几支部队向北城发动猛烈进攻，终于攻克。斩杀了侯晖、谯诜，又带兵回师进攻南城，南城自动溃败。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhu Lingshi led several troops to launch a fierce attack on Beicheng, and finally conquered it. He killed Houyi and Yao, and led the troops back to the division to attack Nancheng, and Nancheng was automatically defeated.

古文：龄石舍船步进。
现代文：朱龄石把船遗留在江中，上岸步行向成都进发。
English: Zhu Lingshi left the boat in the river and went ashore on foot to Chengdu.

古文：焦纵大将谯抚之屯牛脾，谯小苟塞打鼻。
现代文：谯纵的大将谯抚之在牛脾屯聚兵力，谯小苟驻防打鼻。
English: The commander of the imperial army, Zou Fuzhi, gathered troops in Niu Peng, and Zou Xiaoguo stationed troops to fight the enemy.

古文：臧熹击抚之，斩之；小苟闻之，亦溃。
现代文：臧熹进攻谯抚之，把他杀了；谯小苟听说这个消息，也全军崩溃。
English: Gong attacked Gong Fuzhi and killed him; when Gong Xiaoguo heard the news, the whole army collapsed.

古文：于是纵诸营屯望风相次奔溃。
现代文：于是谯纵手下的那些军营卫所，一听见东晋部队到来的消息，便都一个接一个地崩溃瓦解。
English: As a result, the military camps and garrisons under his command collapsed one after another as soon as they heard the news of the arrival of the East Jin troops.

古文：戊辰，纵弃成都出走，尚书令马耽封府库以待晋师。
现代文：戊辰，谯纵放弃成都出逃，尚书令马耽把府库封存起来，等待东晋军队。
English: Wuchen reluctantly abandoned Chengdu and fled, and Shangshu ordered Ma Tan to seal up the government treasury and wait for the Eastern Jin army to come.

古文：壬申，龄石入成都，诛纵同祖之亲，馀皆按堵，使复其业。
现代文：壬申，朱龄石进入成都，诛杀了谯纵同祖父的亲属，其余的人都安居如常，让他们恢复正常的生产经营。
English: In Jinshin, Zhu Lingshi entered Chengdu, killed the relatives of his grandfather, and the rest of the people lived peacefully as usual, allowing them to resume normal production and operation.

古文：纵出成都。先辞墓，其女曰： 走必不免，只取辱焉。等死，死于先人之墓可也。 
现代文：谯纵逃出成都，先去辞别祖先陵墓，他女儿说： 逃跑也一定不能逃脱，只是取得更多的侮辱，同样是死，可以死在祖先的墓旁。 
English: After escaping from Chengdu, he first went to bid farewell to the ancestral mausoleum. His daughter said, "You can't escape if you run away. You will only get more insults. It's the same as death. You can die next to the tomb of your ancestors."

古文：纵不从。
现代文：谯纵不听。
English: Don't listen to them.

古文：谯道福闻平模不守。自涪引兵入赴，纵往投之。
现代文：谯道福听说平模失守，从涪城带兵赶来救援，谯纵前去投奔他。
English: When Shandaofu heard that Pingmo was defeated, he led soldiers from Shicheng to come to the rescue and rushed to help him.

古文：道福见纵，怒曰： 大丈夫有如此功业而弃之，将安归乎！
现代文：谯道福看见谯纵，大怒说： 大丈夫有这样伟大的功名事业，却把它丢弃了，你要回到哪里去！
English: Xing Daofu saw the obstinacy and said angrily, "You have such a great and glorious cause, but you have thrown it away. Where are you going to go back to?"

古文：人谁不死，何怯之甚也！ 
现代文：一个人谁能不死，怎么怕成这个样子！ 
English: A person who can not die, how afraid to become like this!

古文：因投纵以剑，中其马鞍。
现代文：于是把佩剑狠狠地向谯纵掷去，只砍中了他的马鞍。
English: So he hurled his sword at the stag, but it only grazed his saddle.

古文：纵乃去，自缢死，巴西人王志斩其首以送龄石。
现代文：谯纵只好离去，自己上吊而死。巴西人王志把他的脑袋砍下来，送给朱龄石。
English: The Brazilian Wang Zhi cut off his head and gave it to Zhu Lingshi.

古文：道福谓其众曰： 蜀之存亡，实系于我，不在谯王。
现代文：谯道福对他的部众们说： 蜀国的生存和灭亡，其实是维系在我的身上，不在谯王的身上。
English: Gong Daofu said to his subordinates: The survival and demise of Shu is actually dependent on me, not on Gong Wang.

古文：今我在，犹足一战。 
现代文：现在我还活着，因此，还足以进行一次决战。 
English: Now I'm still alive, so there's still enough for a showdown.

古文：众皆许诺。
现代文：部下都表示同意。
English: His subordinates all agreed.

古文：道福尽散金帛以赐众，众受之而走。
现代文：谯道福把金银财宝全部分发给手下的人，众人接过东西，却都逃走了。
English: Gong Daofu distributed all the gold, silver and treasure to his subordinates. Everyone took what they were given, but they all ran away.

古文：道福逃于獠中，巴民杜瑾执送之，斩于军门。
现代文：谯道福无奈，逃到獠人部落之中，巴地居民杜瑾把他抓住，送交东晋军，就在军营门前斩首。
English: Shantou Fu helplessly fled to the middle of the Shinu tribe, and the Badi resident Du Juan caught him, sent him to the East Jin Army, and beheaded him in front of the military camp.

古文：龄石徙马耽于越嵩，耽谓其徒曰： 硃侯不送我京师，欲灭口也，吾必不免。 
现代文：朱龄石把马耽放逐到越，马耽对他的部下说： 朱龄石不把我送往京师，是打算杀我灭口。我必定难逃一死。 
English: Zhu Lingshi banished Ma Tan to Yue, and Ma Tan said to his subordinates: Zhu Lingshi did not send me to Beijing Division, but intended to kill me. I will surely die.

古文：乃盥洗而卧，引绳而死。
现代文：于是，沐浴之后，躺在床上，自缢而死。
English: So, after bathing, he lay down on the bed and hanged himself to death.

古文：须臾，龄石使至，戮其尸。
现代文：不一会儿，朱龄石的使者便到了，砍下了他尸体上的人头。
English: Not long after, Zhu Lingshi's emissary arrived and cut off the human head on his corpse.

古文：诏以龄石进监梁、秦州六郡诸军事，赐爵丰城县侯。
现代文：东晋下诏朱龄石升任监梁、秦州六郡诸军事，赐爵位为丰城县侯。
English: After the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Zhu Lingshi was promoted to supervisor and military commander of six counties in Qinzhou, and was given the title of lord of Fengcheng County.

古文：魏奚斤等破越勤于跋那山西，徙二万馀家于大宁。
现代文：北魏奚斤等人在跋那山以西的地区打败越勤部落，把当地居民二万多家强行迁移到大宁。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yan Jin and others defeated the Yueqin tribe in the area west of Mount Pan and forcibly relocated more than 20,000 local residents to Daming.

古文：河西胡曹龙等拥部众二万人来入蒲子，张外降之，推龙为大单于。
现代文：河西的胡人曹龙等人带领部众二万多人前来进犯蒲子，西河胡人张外向他投降，推举曹龙为大单于。
English: Cao Long, a Hu man from the west of the river, and others led a group of more than twenty thousand people to attack Puzi. Zhang Gao, a Hu man from the west of the river, surrendered to him and promoted Cao Long to the rank of general.

古文：丙戌，魏主嗣如定襄大洛城。
现代文：丙戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往定襄郡大洛城。
English: Pu Yi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled to Daluo City, Dingxiang County.

古文：河南王炽磐击吐谷浑支旁于长柳川，虏旁及其民五千馀户而还。
现代文：河南王乞伏炽磐在长柳川进攻吐谷浑的支帝部落，把支旁和他的部众五千多户俘虏，然后回师。
English: The king of Henan Province begged Blazing Rock to attack the tributary tribe of the emperor of Tuyuhun in the Yangtze River, captured the tributary and more than five thousand of his followers, and then returned to the division.

古文：八月，癸卯，魏主嗣还平城。
现代文：八月，癸卯，北魏国主拓跋嗣回到平城。
English: In August, Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：曹龙请降魏，执送张外，斩之。
现代文：曹龙向北魏请求投降，把张外抓住，送往北魏。
English: Cao Long asked the Northern Wei Dynasty to surrender, seized Zhang Wei and sent him to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：丁丑，魏主嗣如豺山宫。
现代文：北魏杀掉张外。丁丑，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往豺山宫。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty killed Zhang Wai. Ding Ug, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Shaoshan Palace.

古文：癸未，还。
现代文：癸未，回平城。
English: In the afternoon, return to Heijo.

古文：九月，再命太尉裕为太傅、扬州牧；固辞。
现代文：九月，东晋再次任命太尉刘裕为太傅、扬州牧。
English: In September, the Eastern Jin Dynasty once again appointed Lieutenant Liu Yu as Tai Fu and Yangzhou Patriarch.

古文：河南王炽磐击吐谷浑别统掘逵于渴浑川，大破之，虏男女二万三千。
现代文：刘裕坚决推辞。河南王乞伏炽磐进军渴浑川袭击吐谷浑的属下掘逵部落，并把那里攻破，俘虏了当地男女百姓二万三千人。
English: Liu Yu resolutely refused. The king of Henan begged the Blazing Rock to march into the Thirsty Hunchuan River to attack the Tuyuhun's subordinate digger tribe, and broke through there, capturing 23,000 local men and women.

古文：冬，十月，掘逵帅其馀众降于炽磐。
现代文：冬季，十月，掘逵率领他的剩下的部众向乞伏炽磐投降。
English: In the winter, in October, Digger led the rest of his men to surrender to Beggar's Rock.

古文：吐京胡与离石胡出以眷叛魏，魏主嗣命元城侯屈督会稽公刘暠、永安侯魏勤以讨之。
现代文：吐京胡人与离石胡人的首领出以眷背叛北魏，北魏国主拓跋嗣命令元城侯拓跋屈督率会稽公刘、记安侯魏勤等带兵前去讨伐。
English: The leaders of the Hutu people in Tujing and the Hutu people in Shijiazhuang betrayed the Northern Wei Dynasty as soon as possible. The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, ordered the former lord of the city, Tuoba Qu, to lead the governor Liu and the lord of Ji'an, Wei Qin, to lead the troops to fight.

古文：丁巳，出以眷引夏兵邀击暠，禽之，以献于夏；勤战死。
现代文：丁巳，出以眷带领夏国军队拦腰阻击刘，并把刘活捉献给夏国。魏勤战死。
English: Ding Si, as soon as possible, led Xia's army to stop Liu, and captured Liu alive and presented him to Xia. Wei Qin died in the battle.

古文：嗣以屈亡二将，欲诛之；既而赦之，使摄并州刺史。
现代文：拓跋嗣因为拓跋屈损失了两员大将，打算杀了他，但不久又把他赦免了，让他暂时代理并州刺史。
English: Tuoba Zi lost two generals because of Tuoba's treachery and planned to kill him, but soon pardoned him, allowing him to temporarily serve as a deputy and make state history.

古文：屈到州，纵酒废事，嗣积其前后罪恶，槛车征还。斩之。
现代文：拓跋屈来到并州治所，天天酗酒，荒废政事，拓跋嗣把他前前后后的罪恶积累到一起，用囚车将他押解回京，斩首。
English: When Tuoba Ke came to the Anhui Provincial Government, he drank alcohol every day and wasted political affairs. Tuoba He accumulated his previous and subsequent crimes together and sent him back to Beijing in a prison van and beheaded him.

古文：十一月，魏主嗣遣使请昏于秦，秦王兴许之。
现代文：十一月，北魏国主拓跋嗣派遣使节到后秦去求亲。后秦王姚兴答应了。
English: In November, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi sent an envoy to the Later Qin to ask for a relative. The Later Qin King Yao Xing agreed.

古文：是岁，以敦煌索邈为梁州刺史，苻宣乃还仇池。
现代文：这一年，东晋任命敦煌人索邈为梁州刺史，于是苻宣仍回仇池。
English: In this year, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed the Dunhuang man So Ye to be the governor of Liangzhou, so Ye Xuan still returned to Qiqi.

古文：初，邈寓居汉川，与别驾姜显有隙，凡十五年而邈镇汉川；显乃肉袒迎候，邈无愠色，待之弥厚。
现代文：当初，索邈居住在汉川，与梁州别驾姜显有矛盾，过了十五年，索邈反过来镇守汉川。姜显于是脱去衣服，光着上身出来等候迎接他。
English: At first, So Yeon lived in Hancheon and had a conflict with the governor of Liang Province, Jiang Hsien. Fifteen years later, So Yeon in turn became the governor of Hancheon. So Jiang Hsien took off his clothes and came out bare-chested to meet him.

古文：退而谓人曰： 我昔寓此，失志多年，若仇姜显，惧者不少。
现代文：索邈见了姜显，脸没有丝毫不高兴的样子，而且对他还更加优厚。索邈退入内宅之后，对别人说： 我过去在这里居住，有许多年都不如意，如果记恨姜显，那么害怕的人一定还有很多。
English: After retiring to the inner house, Sohu said to others: I used to live here, and for many years I was not happy. If you remember Jiang Xian, then there must be many people who are afraid.

古文：但服之自佳，何必逞志！ 
现代文：只要他能服从就很好了，为什么一定要报仇解恨，逞自己一时的快意呢！ 
English: As long as he can obey, that's fine. Why does he have to take revenge, relieve hatred, and indulge in his own momentary pleasure?

古文：于是阖境闻之皆悦。
现代文：全州境内的百姓官员，听说了他这话之后，都非常高兴。
English: Civil servants across the state were overjoyed to hear him say this.

古文：安皇帝辛义熙十年
现代文：义熙十年
English: Ten Years of the Yixi Dynasty

古文：春，正月，辛酉，魏大赦，改元神瑞。
现代文：春季，正月，辛酉，北魏实行大赦，改年号为神瑞。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Hsinchu, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty, and the new year's name was Shen Rui.

古文：辛巳，魏主嗣如繁畤。
现代文：辛巳，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往繁。
English: Soon after, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, went to Shifang.

古文：二月，戊戌，还平城。
现代文：二月，戊戌，返回平城。
English: In February, she returned to Pingcheng.

古文：夏王勃勃侵魏河东蒲子。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃入侵北魏河东的蒲子。
English: Xia Wang Herlian vigorously invaded the eastern provinces of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：庚戌，魏主嗣如豺山宫。
现代文：庚戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往豺山宫。
English: Emperor Gaozong of the Northern Wei Dynasty traveled to Shaoshan Palace.

古文：魏并州刺史娄伏连袭杀夏所置吐京护军及其守兵。
现代文：北魏并州刺史娄伏连，进攻并杀死了夏国所设置的吐京护军和那里的守卫士卒。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty annexed the state of Shishi and Fuli, attacked and killed the Tuqing Protectorate set up by Xia Guo and the guards there.

古文：司马休之在江陵，颇得江、汉民心。
现代文：东晋司马休之江陵任职，很得江汉一带百姓的民心。
English: The East Jin Dynasty's Sima Xiu served in Jiangling, and won the hearts of the people in the Jianghan area.

古文：子谯王文思在建康，性凶暴，好通轻侠；太尉裕恶之。
现代文：他的儿子谯王司马文思留在建康，性情凶狠残暴，喜欢结交江湖侠士。太尉刘裕非常讨厌他。
English: His son, Shao Wang Sima Wenshi, stayed in Jiankang, with a ferocious and cruel temperament, and liked to make friends with knights of all ranks. Lieutenant Liu Yu hated him very much.

古文：三月，有司奏文思擅捶杀国吏，诏诛其党而宥文思。
现代文：三月，有关部门报告司马文思擅自打死封国的官吏，朝廷下诏杀了他的手下差役，却独独赦免了司马文思。
English: In March, the relevant departments reported that Sima Wensi killed the officials of the vassal state without authorization, and the imperial court killed his subordinates, but pardoned Sima Wensi.

古文：休之上疏谢罪，请解所任；不许。
现代文：司马休之呈上疏奏请求处罚，承认罪过，并要求解除他现在的职务，朝廷不许。
English: The Imperial Court did not allow Sima Xiu's petition to plead for punishment, admit guilt, and request that he be relieved of his current duties.

古文：裕执文思送休之，令自训厉，意欲休之杀之；休之但表废文思。
现代文：刘裕把司马文思抓住，送给司马休之，让他自己训戒惩罚，意思是让司马休之自己把儿子杀了。
English: Liu Yu grabbed Sima Wenshu and gave him to Sima Xiu Zhi, asking him to discipline and punish himself, meaning to let Sima Xiu Zi kill his son himself.

古文：并与裕书陈谢。裕由是不悦，以江州刺史孟怀玉兼督豫州六郡以备之。
现代文：司马休之只上表请求废黜司马文思的爵位，并写信给刘裕陈说谢罪。刘裕因此非常不高兴，任命江州刺史孟怀玉兼任督豫州六郡，用来戒备司马休之。
English: Sima Huizhi only petitioned for the dethronement of Sima Wenshi, and wrote to Liu Yu Chen to express his gratitude. Liu Yu was very unhappy about this and appointed the governor of six counties in Yuzhou, Meng Huaiyu, to serve as a guard for Sima Huizhi.

古文：夏，五月，辛酉，魏主嗣还平城。
现代文：夏季，五月，辛酉，北魏国主拓跋嗣回到平城。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：秦后将军敛成讨叛羌，为羌所败，惧罪，出奔夏。
现代文：后秦后将军敛成，讨伐叛乱的羌族部落，被羌人打败，为此他非常害怕，出去投奔夏国。
English: After the Qin general Qiancheng defeated the rebellious Yao tribe and was defeated by the Yao people, he was very afraid and fled to Xia.

古文：秦王兴有疾，妖贼李弘与氐仇常反于贰城，兴舆疾往讨之，斩常，执弘而还。
现代文：后秦王姚兴有病。妖贼首领李弘与氐人部落首领仇常在贰城反叛，姚兴带病坐在车轿上前去讨伐他们，斩杀了仇常，活捉李弘而回京。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing was ill. Li Hong, the leader of the demon thieves, and Quchang, the leader of the Xiongnu tribe, rebelled in Qincheng. Yao Xing went to fight them while he was ill, killed Quchang, captured Li Hong alive, and returned to Beijing.

古文：秦左将军姚文宗有宠于太子泓，广平公弼恶之，诬文宗有怨言；秦王兴怒，赐文宗死，于是群臣畏弼侧目。
现代文：后秦左将军姚文宗受到太子姚泓的宠爱，广平公姚弼很讨厌他，诬告姚文宗说过不满的话。姚兴大怒，命令姚文宗自杀。于是文武大臣们畏惧姚弼，不敢正眼看他。
English: Later, the Qin Zuo general Yao Wenzong was favored by the prince Yao Jun, the Guangping Gong Yao Jun hated him very much and falsely accused Yao Wenzong of having said dissatisfying words. Yao Xing was furious and ordered Yao Wenzong to commit suicide. Therefore, the ministers of culture and armed forces were afraid of Yao Jun and dared not look him in the eye.

古文：弼言于兴，无不从者；以所亲天水尹冲为给事黄门侍郎，唐盛为治书侍御史，兴左右掌机要者，皆其党也。
现代文：姚弼对姚兴说的，姚兴无不听从，姚弼让他的亲信天水人尹冲为给事黄门侍郎，唐盛为治书侍御史。姚兴身边掌管机要事务的人，都是姚弼的党羽。
English: Yao Zheng told Yao Xing that Yao Xing would do anything for him. Yao Zheng had his close confidant Yin Chong, a man of heavenly water, act as a steward of the Yellow Gate, and Tang Sheng as a steward of history. The people around Yao Xing who were in charge of important affairs were all Yao Zheng's followers.

古文：右仆射梁喜、侍中任廉、亦兆尹尹昭承间言于兴曰： 父子之际，人所难言；然君臣之义，不薄于父子，故臣等不得默然。
现代文：右仆射梁喜、侍中任谦、京兆尹尹昭寻找机会对姚兴说； 父子之间的事情，别人很难插言。但是君臣之间的大义，却不比父子之间的关系疏远，因此，我们不能默然不语。
English: Right-hand man Sha Liangxi, chamberlain Ren Qian, and grand chamberlain Yin Yin Zhao looked for an opportunity to say to Yao Xing: It is difficult for others to meddle in the affairs between father and son. However, the great justice between monarchs and ministers is not as distant as the relationship between father and son. Therefore, we cannot remain silent.

古文：广平公弼，潜有夺嫡之志，陛下宠之太过，假其威权，倾险无赖之徒辐凑附之。
现代文：广平公姚弼暗地里有夺嫡的想法，陛下您对他的宠爱太过分了，又交给他大权，培养他的威势，这样，那些阴险无赖的家伙们便纷纷像车辐那样，集结依附到他那里。
English: Guangping Gong Yao Yao secretly has the idea of seizing the throne. Your majesty, you are too fond of him, and you have given him great power to cultivate his authority. In this way, those insidious scoundrels have gathered like spokes to cling to him.

古文：道路皆言陛下将有废立之计，信有之乎！ 
现代文：路上的人都说陛下有废长立幼的打算，真有这事吗？ 
English: People on the road are saying that His Majesty has plans to abdicate. Is this true?

古文：兴曰： 岂有此邪！ 
现代文：姚兴说： 哪里有这事？ 
English: Yao Xing said: Where did this come from?

古文：喜等曰： 苟无之，则陛下爱弼，适所以祸之；愿去其左右，损其威权，如此，非特安弼，乃所以安宗庙社稷。 
现代文：梁喜等人说： 如果没有这事，那么陛下爱护姚弼，却正是给他惹祸呢。希望把他身边的官员全部除去，减小他的权力和威势，这样的话，不但是保护姚弼，而且也是在保护祖宗祭庙和国家政权的安全呵！ 
English: Liang Xi and others said: "If there is no such thing, then His Majesty's love and protection of Yao Yao is causing trouble for him. I hope to remove all the officials around him and reduce his power and authority. In this case, it is not only to protect Yao Yao, but also to protect the safety of the ancestral temple and the state power!"

古文：兴不应。
现代文：姚兴默不作声。
English: Yao Xing remained silent.

古文：大司农窦温、司徒左长史王弼皆密疏劝兴立弼为太子，兴虽不从，亦不责也。
现代文：大司农窦温、司徒左长史王弼都秘密上奏疏劝说姚兴改立姚弼为太子，姚兴虽然不同意，但是也不责怪他们。
English: The grand secretary Nongdou Wen and the leader of the left wing of the party, Shi Wangyao, both secretly persuaded Yao Xing to change Yao Yao as the crown prince. Although Yao Xing did not agree, he did not blame them.

古文：兴疾笃，弼潜聚众数千人，谋作乱。
现代文：姚兴病重，姚弼暗地里聚集部众几千人阴谋制造叛乱。
English: Yao Xing was seriously ill, and Yao Yao secretly gathered several thousand people to conspire to create a rebellion.

古文：姚裕遣使以弼逆状告诸兄在籓镇者，于是姚懿治兵于蒲孤，镇东将军、豫州牧洸治兵于洛阳，平西将军谌治兵于雍，皆欲赴长安讨弼。
现代文：姚裕派遣使者把姚弼将要叛逆的情形告诉给那些在外地镇守藩地的哥哥。于是姚懿在蒲阪动员部队，镇东将军、豫州牧姚在洛阳动员部队，平西将军姚谌在雍城动员部队，都打算到长安去讨伐姚弼。
English: Yao Yu sent an envoy to tell his brothers who were guarding the territory of the domain in other towns that Yao Yu was going to rebel. So Yao Yu mobilized troops in Busan, Zhen Dong General, Yuzhou Mu Yao mobilized troops in Luoyang, and Pingxi General Yao Yu mobilized troops in Yongcheng. They all planned to go to Chang'an to fight Yao Yu.

古文：会兴疾瘳，见群臣，征虏将军刘羌泣以告兴。
现代文：正好这时姚兴病情好转，召见文武百官，征虏将军刘羌便哭着把这种情况向姚兴作了禀告。
English: It was just at this time that Yao Xing's condition improved, and he summoned hundreds of military and civilian officials. Conscript General Liu Wei cried and made an obituary notice to Yao Xing.

古文：梁喜、尹昭请诛弼，且曰： 苟陛下不忍杀弼，亦当夺其权任。 
现代文：梁喜、尹昭请求诛杀姚弼，又说： 如果陛下不忍心杀姚弼，也应该把他的权力职位全部剥夺。 
English: Liang Xi and Yin Zhao pleaded with him to kill Yao Yao, and added: If His Majesty does not have the heart to kill Yao Yao, he should also be stripped of all his positions of power.

古文：兴不得已，免弼尚书令，使以将军、公还第。
现代文：姚兴万不得已，免去了姚弼的尚书令职务，让他以将军、公爵的身份回家赋闲。
English: As a last resort, Yao Xing relieved Yao Yao of his post of Shang Shuling and allowed him to return home as a general and duke.

古文：懿等各罢兵。
现代文：姚懿等人也都各自停止军事行动。
English: Yao Wei and others also stopped their military operations.

古文：懿、洸、谌与姚宣皆入朝，使裕入白兴，求见，兴曰： 汝等正欲论弼事耳，吾已知之。 
现代文：姚兴的几个儿子姚懿、姚、姚谌与姚宣等都回到都城，让姚裕进宫告诉姚兴，求见父王。姚兴说： 你们几个不过就是打算谈论姚弼的事罢了，我已经知道了。 
English: Yao Xing's sons, Yao Xing, Yao, Yao Xing, and Yao Xuan, all returned to the capital city and asked Yao Yu to go to the palace to tell Yao Xing that he wanted to see his father. Yao Xing said, "You two are just planning to talk about Yao Xing, I already know that."

古文：裕曰： 弼苟有可论，陛下所宜垂听；若懿等言非是，便当置之刑辟，奈何逆抿之！ 
现代文：姚裕说： 姚弼的事如有谈论价值，陛下也应该听一听。如果姚懿等人说的不是属实的，便应该用刑法处罚他们，为什么要凭空猜测因而拒绝和他们谈话呢？ 
English: Yao Yu said, "If the matter of Yao Xuan is worth talking about, Your Majesty should listen to it. If what Yao Xuan and others said is not true, they should be punished by criminal law. Why refuse to talk to them on the basis of speculation?

古文：于是引见懿等于谘议堂。
现代文：于是，姚兴在谘议堂召见姚懿等人。
English: As a result, Yao Xing summoned Yao Yao and others to the consultation hall.

古文：宣流涕极言，兴曰： 吾自处之，非汝曹所忧。 
现代文：姚宣流着眼泪，仗义直言，姚兴说： 我自己决定这事，不用你们担心。 
English: Yao Xuan shed tears and spoke frankly, Yao Xing said: I will decide this myself, don't worry about it.

古文：抚军东曹属姜虬上疏曰： 广平公弼，衅成逆著，道路皆知之。
现代文：抚军东曹属姜虬呈上疏奏说： 广平公姚弼，灾祸已经形成，叛逆的迹象已经明显，路上的人谁都知道。
English: "Guangping Gong Yao Yao, the disaster has already taken shape, the signs of rebellion are already obvious, and everyone on the road knows it.

古文：昔文王之化，刑于寡妻；今圣朝之乱，起自爱子，虽欲含忍掩蔽，而逆党扇惑不已，弼之乱心何由可革！
现代文：过去周文王的教化之所以能够推广，是因为他首先用礼法要求自己的妻子。而今国家的变乱，是缘起于陛下的爱子，虽然打算包涵容忍掩饰庇护，但是那些叛党们却在不停地煽动蛊惑，姚弼的叛乱之心怎么能够消除呢！
English: In the past, the enlightenment of King Chouwen was able to spread because he first used the etiquette to ask his wife. But now the country's turmoil is caused by His Majesty's beloved son. Although he intends to tolerate, conceal and shelter, those rebels are constantly inciting demagoguery. How can Yao Yao's rebellious heart be eliminated?

古文：宜斥散凶徒，以绝祸端。 
现代文：应该驱散姚弼身边的那些恶棍凶徒，以此断绝灾祸的来源。 
English: Those villains and thugs around Yao Wei should be dispersed to cut off the source of the disaster.

古文：兴以虬表示梁喜曰： 天下人皆以吾儿为口实，将何以处之？ 
现代文：姚兴把姜虬的奏书给梁喜看，说： 天下的人都拿我的儿子当动乱的借口，应该怎么办才好呢？ 
English: Yao Xing showed Jiang Chen's music book to Liang Xi and said, "People all over the world use my son as an excuse for turmoil. What should I do?

古文：喜曰： 信如虬言，陛下早宜裁决。 兴默然。
现代文：梁喜说： 真的就像姜虬说的，陛下应该尽早裁决， 姚兴默然不语。
English: Liang Xi said, "Really, just like Jiang Chen said, Your Majesty should make a ruling as soon as possible. Yao Xing remained silent.

古文：唾契汗、乙弗等部皆叛南凉，南凉王傉檀欲讨之，邯川护军孟恺谏曰： 今连年饥馑，南逼炽磐，北逼蒙逊，百姓不安。
现代文：唾契汗、乙弗等部落全都背叛了南凉，南凉王秃发檀打算去讨伐他们。邯川护军孟恺劝阻说： 现在，我们连续几年遭受饥荒，南部有乞伏炽磐威胁，北部又有沮渠蒙逊逼迫，百姓的生活得不到安定。
English: The tribes of Siliqi Khan, Yifu and others all betrayed Nanliang, and the king of Nanliang, Bald-headed Dang, planned to go to fight them. The guardian of the Min River, Meng Yao, dissuaded them: Now, we have suffered famine for several years in a row, there is a threat of rockslides in the south, and monsoon persecution in the north, and the people's lives are not stable.

古文：远征虽克，必有后患；不如与炽磐结盟通籴，慰抚杂部，足食缮兵，俟时而动。 
现代文：这次即使通过遥远的征伐取得了胜利，那也一定会留下后患。不如和乞伏炽磐结成联盟，沟通粮食的贸易，安慰平抚那些各族的部落，积足粮食，训练军队，等候时机再采取行动。 
English: It would be better to form an alliance with the Beggar's Rock, communicate grain trade, comfort and pacify those tribes of all ethnic groups, accumulate grain, train the army, and wait for the time to take action.

古文：傉檀不从，谓太子虎台曰： 蒙逊近去，不能猝来，旦夕所虑，唯在炽磐。
现代文：秃发檀不听从，对太子秃发虎台说： 沮渠蒙逊刚刚回去不久，不会突然再来。早晚值得忧虑的，只有乞伏炽磐。
English: Bald-haired Dang didn't listen, and said to Prince Bald-haired Hottai, "Despondent Mengxun has just returned recently, he won't suddenly come back. Sooner or later, the only thing worth worrying about is the imploding volcano.

古文：然炽磐兵少易御，汝谨守乐都，吾不过一月必还矣。 
现代文：但是乞伏炽磐的兵众却很少，容易抵抗，你只要小心守卫乐都，我不超过一个月一定就能回来了。 
English: However, the number of soldiers lying in wait is small, and it is easy to resist. As long as you carefully guard the capital, I will definitely be able to return in no more than a month.

古文：乃帅骑七千袭乙弗，大破之，获马牛羊四十馀万。
现代文：于是率领七千名骑兵去袭击乙弗，并将它打得大败，缴获了马、牛、羊等四十多万。
English: He then led seven thousand cavalry to attack the Euphrates and defeated it, capturing more than four hundred thousand horses, cattle, and sheep.

古文：河南王炽磐闻之，欲袭东都。群臣咸以为不可。
现代文：河南王乞伏炽磐听说这个消息，打算进攻乐都，文武大臣都认为不可。
English: When the king of Henan Province, Qibul Gaiban, heard the news, he planned to attack Letu, but the Minister of Culture and Martial Arts thought it was impossible.

古文：太府主簿焦袭曰： 傉檀不顾近患而贪远利，我今伐之，绝其西路，使不得还救。则虎台独守穷城，可坐禽也。
现代文：太府主簿焦袭说： 秃发檀不顾眼前的忧患，却去贪图远方的好处，我们今天讨伐他，断绝乐都以西的路，使他没有办法回来援救，那么，秃发虎台单独守卫一座穷困的城市，我们坐着便可以擒获他了。
English: The chief clerk of Taifu said anxiously, "Bald-haired Dangdang disregards the immediate troubles, but covets the benefits of the distant lands. We will fight him today and cut off the road to the west of Le Du, so that he will not be able to come back for help. Then, Bald-haired Dangdang will guard a poor city alone, and we can capture him while sitting.

古文：此天亡之时，必不可失。 
现代文：这是上天覆亡他的时机，一定不能错过。 
English: This is God's opportunity to overthrow him, and it must not be missed.

古文：炽磐从之，帅步骑二万袭乐都。
现代文：乞伏炽磐听从了他的建议，率领步兵、骑兵二万人袭击乐都。
English: Beggar Blazing Rock followed his advice and led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Le Du.

古文：虎台凭城拒守，炽磐四面攻之。
现代文：秃发虎台依靠城防拒敌防守，乞伏炽磐从城的四面发动进攻。
English: Bald Tiger Tower relies on city defense to resist enemy defense, begging Blazing Rock to launch an attack from all four sides of the city.

古文：南凉抚军从事中郎尉肃言于虎台曰： 外城广大难守，殿下不若聚国人守内城，肃等帅晋人拒战于外，虽有不捷，犹足自存。 
现代文：南凉抚军从事中郎尉肃向秃发虎台进言道： 外城太大难以坚守，殿下不如把本国人聚集起来守卫内城，我率领汉族人在外城坚持迎战敌人，虽然可能不会取胜，但也还足可以保存自己。 
English: Nan Liang Fu's army was engaged in Lt. Cmdr. Su's speech to Bald Tiger Tai: The outer city is too big to hold on to. Your highness, it would be better to gather your countrymen to guard the inner city. I led the Han people in the outer city to persist in fighting the enemy. Although we may not win, we can still preserve ourselves.

古文：虎台曰： 炽磐小贼，旦夕当走，卿何过虑之深！ 
现代文：秃发虎台说： 乞伏炽磐这个小毛贼，早晚就要逃走，你何必这么深深地过于忧虑呀！ 
English: Bald Tigress said, "Beggar Blazing Rock, this petty thief, is bound to escape sooner or later. Why should you be so deeply worried?"

古文：虎台疑晋人有异心，悉召豪望有谋勇者闭之于内。
现代文：秃发虎台怀疑汉族人有其他想法，便把汉人中有豪名英望、有勇有谋的人全部召进内城软禁。
English: Bald-faced Hottai suspected that the Han people had other ideas, so he summoned all the famous, prestigious, courageous and resourceful Han people to the inner city for house arrest.

古文：孟恺泣曰： 炽磐乘虚内侮，国家危于累卵。
现代文：孟恺哭着说： 乞伏炽磐乘国内空虚悍然进犯，国家的局势比堆在一起的鸡蛋还危险。
English: Meng Yao wept and said: "Begging the fiery rock to take advantage of the domestic emptiness to brazenly attack, the country's situation is more dangerous than eggs piled together."

古文：恺等进欲报恩，退顾妻子，人思效死，而殿下乃疑之如是邪！ 
现代文：我孟恺等人进则打算报答王家的恩遇，退则还要照顾妻子儿女，人人都想为国家拚死力战，但殿下却怀疑我们如此地步！ 
English: I, Meng Xuan and others, plan to repay the royal family's favor when we advance, and take care of our wives and children when we retire. Everyone wants to fight for the country, but Your Highness doubts that we are up to it!

古文：虎台曰： 吾岂不知君之忠笃，惧馀人脱生虑表，以君等安之耳。 
现代文：秃发虎台说： 我怎能不知道你的忠诚笃厚，害怕的只是别的人出现意外，让你们去安定人心。 
English: Bald Togdai said, "How can I not know that your loyalty is so strong? I am only afraid of other people's accidents, so that you can keep your hearts stable."

古文：一夕，城溃，炽磐入乐都，遣平远将军捷虔帅骑五千追傉檀，以镇南将军廉屯为都督河右诸军事、凉州刺史，镇乐都；秃发赴单为西平太守，镇西平；以赵恢为广武太守，镇广武；曜武将军王基为晋兴太守，镇浩亹；徙虎台及其文武百姓万馀户于枹罕。
现代文：一天晚上，城防崩溃，乞伏炽磐进入乐都，派遣平远将军乞伏捷虔率领五千骑兵迎击秃发檀，任命镇南将军乞伏谦屯为都督河右诸军事、凉州刺史，镇守乐都。任命秃发赴单为西平太守，镇守西平。任命赵恢为广武太守，镇守广武。任命曜武将军王基为晋兴太守，镇守浩。把秃发虎台和他的文武官员、百姓一万多户强行迁移到罕居住。
English: One night, the city's defenses collapsed, and Qibao Blazing Rock entered Le Du, dispatched General Pingyuan Qibao Jieqian to lead five thousand cavalry to meet Bald Hatan, appointed General Zhenan Qibao Qiantun as the military governor of Heyou, the historian of Liangzhou, and the town guard of Le Du, appointed Bald Hatan as the governor of Xiping and the town guard of Xiping, appointed Zhao Guo as the governor of Guangwu and the town guard of Guangwu, appointed General Wang Ji as the governor of Jinxing and the town guard of Hao, and forcibly relocated Bald Hat

古文：赴单，乌孤之子也。
现代文：秃发赴单是秃发乌孤的儿子。
English: Bald-haired Zhidang is the son of bald-haired Wuqiao.

古文：河间人褚匡言于燕王跋曰： 陛下龙飞辽、碣，旧邦族党，倾首朝阳，以日为岁，请往迎之。 
现代文：北燕河间人褚匡向北燕王冯跋进言道： 陛下在辽、碣这里登上帝位，长乐的那些故旧亲友，却在家乡仰头向东，盼望陛下去营救，度日如年，请允许我前去迎接他们。 
English: The people of Yanhe in Northern Yan said to Feng Badu, the King of Northern Yan: Your Majesty ascended to the throne here in Liao and Yan, but those old relatives and friends in Changle, in their hometown, looked to the east, hoping for Your Majesty to come to the rescue, and spent the day like a year, please allow me to go to meet them.

古文：跋曰： 道路数千里，复隔异国，如何可致？ 
现代文：冯跋说： 道路遥远达几千里，中间又隔着别的国家，怎么去呢？ 
English: Feng Baw said: The road is thousands of miles away, and there are other countries in between. How can I get there?

古文：匡曰： 章武临海，舟楫可通，出于辽西临渝，不为难也。 
现代文：褚匡说： 章武郡靠着海边，乘船可以通过，从辽西的临渝穿过，不会太难。 
English: Zou Kuang said: Zhangwu County is by the sea, it can be passed by boat, and it will not be too difficult to cross from Liaoxi's Linyu.

古文：跋许之，以匡为游击将军、中书待郎，厚资遣之。
现代文：冯跋批准了他的计划，任命褚匡为游击将军、中书侍郎，交给他一笔丰厚的费用，派他前去。
English: Feng Baw approved of his plan, appointed Zou Kuang as a guerrilla general, and handed him a large sum of money and sent him on his way.

古文：匡与跋从兄买、从弟睹自长乐帅五千馀户归于和龙，契丹、库莫奚皆降于燕。
现代文：褚匡与冯跋的堂兄冯买、堂弟冯睹，从长乐带领五千多户居民回到和龙。契丹部落和库莫奚部落都向北燕投降。
English: Gong Kuang and Feng Bao's cousins Feng Bai and Feng Gan led more than 5,000 residents from Changle back to Hualong. The Khitan and Kumo tribes surrendered to Beiyan.

古文：跋署其大人为归善王。
现代文：冯跋封他们的首领为归善王。
English: Feng Baw anointed their leader as the King of Goodwill.

古文：跋弟不避乱在高句丽，跋召之，以为左仆射，封常山公。
现代文：冯跋的弟弟冯丕在高句丽躲避战乱，冯跋召他回来，任命他为仆射，封为常山公。
English: Feng Bao's younger brother, Feng Yao, was hiding in Goguryeo to escape the war. Feng Bao called him back and appointed him as a minion, and he was given the title of Lord of Changshan.

古文：柔然可汗斛津将嫁女于燕，斛律兄子步鹿真谓斛律曰： 幼女远嫁忧思，请以大臣树黎等女为媵。 
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾斛律，想把女儿嫁给北燕王冯跋，郁久闾斛律的侄儿郁久闾步鹿真对郁久闾斛律说： 幼女远嫁别的国家，难免忧愁思念，最好是让大臣树黎等人的女儿作为陪嫁的婢妾。 
English: The gentle khan, Yu Jiu Lu, wanted to marry his daughter to the king of the Northern Yan, Feng Bao. Yu Jiu Lu's nephew, Yu Jiu Xunbu Luchuzhen, said to Yu Jiu Lu: If a young girl marries far away in another country, she will inevitably be sad and homesick. It is best to let the daughter of Minister Shuli and others serve as a concubine to accompany the bride.

古文：斛律不许。
现代文：郁久闾斛律没有允许。
English: Singing is not permitted.

古文：步鹿真出，谓树黎等曰： 斛律欲以汝女为媵，远适他国。 
现代文：郁久闾步鹿真出来后，对树黎等人说： 郁久闾斛打算让你的女儿做陪嫁的婢妾，远嫁到别的国家去。 
English: After Ikuhisaemon came out, he said to Shure and the others, "Ikuhisaemon is planning to make your daughter a concubine to accompany you to another country.

古文：树黎恐，与步鹿真谋使勇士夜伏于斛律穹庐之后，伺其出而执之，与女皆送于燕，立步鹿真为可汗而相之。
现代文：树黎非常害怕，与郁久闾步鹿真商量，派勇武的壮士夜里藏在郁久闾斛律的帐篷之后，等郁久闾斛律出来便抓住他，把他和他的女儿一起送到北燕。于是，树黎拥立郁久闾步鹿真为可汗，自己当了宰相。
English: Shuli was very afraid, and in consultation with Ikukyu, sent a brave warrior to hide in the night behind Ikukyu's tent. When Ikukyu came out, he caught him and sent him and his daughter to Beiyan. Thus, Shuli made Ikukyu the khan and himself the prime minister.

古文：初，社仑之徙高车也，高车人叱洛侯为之乡导以并诸部，社仑德之，以为大人。步鹿真与社仑之子社拔共至叱洛侯家，淫其少妻，妻告步鹿真曰： 叱洛侯欲奉大檀为主。 
现代文：当初，郁久闾社仑把高车部落迁走，高车人叱洛侯做他的向导，使他得以兼并了几个部落，郁久闾社仑很感激他，任命他为高车部落的大人，现在，郁久闾步鹿真和郁久闾社仑的儿子郁久闾社拔一起到叱洛侯家，奸淫叱洛侯年轻的妻子，这位妻子告诉郁久闾步鹿真说： 叱洛侯打算拥立郁久闾大檀为可汗。 
English: At first, Ikukyu Shosheron moved the Taka tribe away. The Taka people asked Luo Hou to be his guide, so that he could annex several tribes. Ikukyu Shosheron was very grateful to him and appointed him as the adult of the Taka tribe. Now, Ikukyu Ubu Shizhen and Ikukyu Shosheron's son, Ikukyu Shobaku, went to Luo Hou's house together and raped Luo Hou's young wife. The wife told Ikukyu Ubu Shizhen: "Luo Hou is planning to make Ikukyu Ubu Dadan the khan."

古文：大檀者，社仑季父仆浑之子也，领别部镇西境，素得众心。
现代文：郁久闾大檀是郁久闾社仑的叔父郁久闾仆浑的儿子，他统领着其他部落镇守在西部边境，一向很得人民的拥戴。
English: Ikuhisao Datan was the son of Ikuhisao's uncle, Ikuhisao Pokuhun. He led other tribes to guard the western border and was always popular with the people.

古文：步鹿真归而发兵围叱洛侯，叱洛侯自杀。
现代文：郁久闾步鹿真回去后，便发动军队包围了叱洛侯部落，叱洛侯自杀。
English: After Ikuhisa's return, he launched an army to encircle the Shiloh tribe, and the Shiloh tribe committed suicide.

古文：遂引兵袭大檀，大檀逆击，破之，执步鹿真及社拔，杀之，自立为可汗，号牟汗纥升盖可汗。
现代文：于是，他又带兵去袭击郁久闾大檀，郁久闾大檀迎头痛击，并把郁久闾步鹿真的部队打得大败，抓住郁久闾步鹿真和郁久闾社拔，把他们杀掉，他自立为可汗，称做牟汗纥升盖可汗。
English: As a result, he led his soldiers to attack Ikuhisao Datan, Ikuhisao Datan received a severe blow to the head, and defeated Ikuhisao Bu Shichin's troops, caught Ikuhisao Bu Shichin and Ikuhisao Shibat, and killed them. He became a khan himself, calling himself Mukhan Bu Shingai Khan.

古文：斛律至和龙，燕王跋赐斛律爵上谷侯，馆之辽东，待以客礼，纳其女为昭仪。
现代文：郁久闾斛律抵达和龙，北燕王冯跋封他为上谷侯，并让他在辽东定居，用宾客的礼节招待他，收纳他的女儿为昭仪。
English: When Yu Jiulong arrived in Hulong, Feng Baolu, the king of Northern Yan, made him the lord of Shanggu, settled him in Liaodong, invited him with the etiquette of a guest, and received his daughter as Zhaoyi.

古文：斛律上书请还其国，跋曰： 今度国万里，又无内应，若以重兵相送，则馈运难继。兵少则不足成功，如何可还？ 
现代文：郁久闾斛律呈上奏疏请求允许他回到自己国家去，冯跋就： 现在，你已经离开本国万里之遥，国中又没有内应，如果用大部队去送你，那么军粮物资等又实在难以供应，兵力太少又不足以夺取胜利，你怎么可能回去呢？ 
English: When Yu Jiuyong submitted a formal request to allow him to return to his country, Feng Bao replied: Now, you have left your country thousands of miles away, and there is no internal response in the country. If you use a large army to send you, then it is really difficult to supply military supplies, and the troops are too few and not enough to win victory. How can you possibly go back?

古文：斛律固请，曰： 不烦重兵，愿给三百骑，送至敕勒。国人必欣然来迎。 
现代文：郁久闾斛律坚持请求，说： 不用劳烦大部队，你只要给我三百名骑兵，把我送到敕勒，那么我们国家的人民就一定会高高兴兴地来迎接我。 
English: Yu Jiuyong insisted on the request, saying: "Don't bother with a large army, just give me three hundred cavalry and send me to Mule, then the people of our country will surely welcome me with joy."

古文：跋乃遣单于前辅万陵帅骑三百送之。
现代文：冯跋于是派遣单于前辅万陵率领三百名骑兵护送他。
English: Feng Ba then dispatched 300 cavalrymen to escort him, led by Yuan Fu Wanling.

古文：陵惮远役，至黑山，杀斛律而还。
现代文：万陵害怕远行的劳苦和疲惫，到达黑山，便把郁久闾斛律杀掉，回去了。
English: Wanling was afraid of the toil and exhaustion of the long journey, and when he arrived in Montenegro, he killed Yu Jiuyuan and went back.

古文：大檀亦遣使献马三千匹、羊万口于燕。
现代文：郁久闾大檀也派遣使节向北燕献上好马三千匹，羊一万头。
English: Ikuhisao Datan also sent an envoy to present 3,000 fine horses and 10,000 sheep to Beiyan.

古文：六月，泰山太守刘研等帅流民七千馀家，河西胡酋刘遮等帅部落万馀家，皆降于魏。
现代文：六月，东晋泰山太守刘研等人率领流亡难民七千多家，河西的匈奴部落酋长刘遮等帅领部落的一万多家，都向北魏国投降。
English: In June, more than seven thousand refugees led by Liu Yan, the governor of Taishan in East Jin, and more than ten thousand tribes led by Liu Zha, the chief of the Hun tribe in Hexi, all surrendered to Northern Wei.

古文：戊申，魏主嗣如豺山宫；丁亥，还平城。
现代文：戊申，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往豺山宫。丁亥，回到平城。
English: Boshin, the ruler of Northern Wei, traveled to Shaoshan Palace. Dinghai, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：乐都之溃也，南凉安西将军樊尼自西平奔告南凉王傉檀，傉檀谓其众曰： 今妻子皆为炽磐所虏，退无所归，卿等能与吾籍乙弗之资，取契汗以赎妻子乎？ 
现代文：南凉都城乐都陷落之后，南凉安西将军秃发樊尼从西平逃出，前去报告南凉王秃发檀。秃发檀对他的部下们说： 现在，我们的妻子儿女全部被乞伏炽磐抢走，想撤退也已没有立足之地了，你们能与我一起凭借乙弗的财力物力，攻克契汗，用这来赎回自己的妻子儿女吗？ 
English: After the fall of Nanliang's capital, Ledu, the general of Nanliang Anxi, Baldassini, escaped from Xiping and went to report to the king of Nanliang, Baldassini. Baldassini said to his subordinates: Now, our wives and children have all been snatched away by the rock, and there is no longer any place to retreat to. Can you join me in conquering Chekhan with the financial and material resources of Yifu, and use them to redeem your wives and children?

古文：乃引兵西。众多逃还，傉檀遣镇北将军段苟追之，苟亦不还。于是将士皆散，唯樊尼与中军将军纥勃、后军将军洛肱、散骑侍郎阴利鹿不去。
现代文：于是，他又带兵向西进发，他的部众有很多逃回去了，秃发檀派遣镇北将军段苟去追回他们，段苟也没有回来，就这样，他手下的将领士兵全部逃散，只有秃发樊尼与中军将军秃发纥勃、后军将军秃发洛肱、散骑侍郎阴利鹿没有逃跑。
English: As a result, he again led his troops westward, and many of his subordinates fled back. Bald-haired Tan dispatched Zhenbei General Duan Guo to chase them back, but Duan Guo did not return. In this way, all the generals and soldiers under his command fled. Only Bald-haired Zuni, Chinese General Bald-haired Zibo, Rear Army General Bald-haired Luo, and straggling horseman Li Degu did not escape.

古文：傉檀曰： 蒙逊、炽磐昔皆委质于吾，今而归之，不亦鄙乎！
现代文：秃发檀说： 沮渠蒙逊、乞伏炽磐过去都曾经把人质交给我们，向我们称臣，今天我如果去投靠他们，不有些可耻吗？
English: Bald Sandal said, "In the past, both Despondent and Supplicant have given us hostages and praised us as their vassals. If I were to go to them for help today, wouldn't that be a little shameful?"

古文：四海之广，无所容身，何其痛也！
现代文：四海之内，大地之广，没有我容身的地方，这是多么令人痛心的事呵！
English: Within the four seas, the breadth of the earth, there is no place for me, what a sad thing!

古文：与其聚而同死，不若分而或全。
现代文：我们与其聚在一起一同死掉，不如就此分手，或者还可以保全生命。
English: We die together with it, it is better to break up with it, or we can save our lives.

古文：樊尼，吾长兄之子，宗部所寄；吾众在北者户垂一万，蒙逊方招怀士民，存亡继绝，汝其从之；匕勃、洛肱亦与尼俱行。
现代文：秃发樊尼是我大哥的儿子，是我们宗族部落的希望所在。我们的部众在北方还有将近一万户，现在沮渠蒙逊正在招抚士大夫和老百姓，扶助将要灭亡的部落，维持他们的生存；你应该投奔他。秃发纥勃、秃发洛肱，也应与秃发樊尼一道去。
English: The bald-headed Zou Bo is the son of my eldest brother, and he is the hope of our clan tribe. There are nearly ten thousand of our followers in the north, and now the despondent Monsoon is bringing up the scholars and the people, supporting the tribes that will perish, and keeping them alive; you should go to him. The bald-headed Zou Bo and the bald-headed Luo Zou should also go with the bald-headed Zou Bo.

古文：吾年老矣，所适不容，宁见妻子而死！ 
现代文：我年纪老了，到哪里也不会有人接纳，宁愿见妻子儿女以后便死。 
English: I am old, and no one will take me anywhere. I would rather die after seeing my wife and children.

古文：遂归于炽磐，唯阴利鹿随之。
现代文：于是，归降了西秦王乞伏炽磐，只有阴利鹿跟随前往。
English: As a result, the West Qin King surrendered and begged the Blazing Rock, and only the Qin Deer followed.

古文：傉檀谓利鹿曰： 吾亲属皆散，卿何独留？ 
现代文：秃发檀对阴利鹿说： 我的亲人和部属全都各自散去，你为什么独自一个人留下来？ 
English: "My relatives and subordinates have all left separately, why did you stay alone?

古文：利鹿曰： 臣老母在家，非不思归；然委质为臣，忠孝之道，难以两全。
现代文：阴利鹿说： 我家里有老母在堂，不是不想回家；既然委身为臣，忠孝就难以两全。
English: Yin Lilu said, "I have an old mother in my family, so I don't want to go home. Since I have devoted myself to being a vassal, it is difficult to be both loyal and filial.

古文：臣不才，不难为陛下泣血求救于邻国，敢离左右乎！ 
现代文：我没有什么才能，不能为陛下两眼哭出血来向邻国求救，但怎么能够离开您的左右呢？ 
English: I don't have any talent, I can't cry blood for His Majesty's two eyes and ask for help from neighboring countries, but how can I leave your right and left?

古文：亻辱檀叹曰： 知人固未易。大臣亲戚皆弃我去，今日忠义终始不亏者，唯卿一人而已！ 
现代文：秃发檀叹息说： 真正了解一个人实在不易，如今大臣亲戚都弃我而去，直到现在，忠诚仗义自始至终完美无缺的只有你一个人！ 
English: Bald-haired Tan sighed and said, "It's really not easy to truly understand a person. Now my ministers and relatives have all abandoned me. Until now, you alone have been loyal and perfect from beginning to end!

古文：傉檀诸城皆降于炽磐，独尉贤政屯浩宜，固守不下。
现代文：南凉王秃发檀所属的各城守将，都投降了乞伏炽磐，唯独驻守在浩的尉贤政坚守城池，不肯出降。
English: All the castle keepers belonging to the king of the Southern Liang Dynasty, Bald-Faced Donkey, surrendered and begged for help. However, the castle keeper stationed in Gao, Lieutenant Xian Zheng, held fast to the castle and refused to surrender.

古文：炽磐遣人谓之曰： 乐都已溃，卿妻子皆在吾所，独守一城，将何为也？ 
现代文：乞伏炽磐派人质问他说： 乐都已经陷落，你的妻子儿女都被我们俘虏，你固守一座孤城，究竟是为什么？ 
English: The Beggars of Blazing Rock questioned him, "Le Du has fallen, your wife and children have all been captured by us, you are clinging to a lonely city, what is it all about?

古文：贤政曰： 受凉王厚恩，为国籓屏。虽知乐都已陷，妻子为禽；先归获赏，后顺受诛。然不知主上存亡，未敢归命；妻子小事，岂足动心！
现代文：尉贤政说： 我蒙受凉王的厚恩，作为国家的藩镇屏障，虽然知道乐都已经陷落，妻子儿女已经被擒，先投降可以得到奖赏，后归顺难免被杀，但是，我现在并不知道主上是存是亡，所以还不敢前去归附受命。妻子儿女与国家来比，实在是小事，怎能足以使我动摇信念呢？
English: Lieutenant Xian Zheng said: I have received the kindness of Liang Wang, as the state's barrier, although I know that the capital has fallen, my wife and children have been captured, first surrender can be rewarded, and later surrender will inevitably be killed, but now I don't know whether to live or die, so I don't dare to go forward to surrender and receive orders. Compared to the country, my wife and children are really small things, how can they be enough to shake my faith?

古文：若贪一时之利，忘委付之重者，大王亦安用之！ 
现代文：如果贪图一时的小利，而却忘了朝廷托付给我的重任，你们大王又怎么能擢用我呢？ 
English: If you are greedy for momentary petty profit, but forget the important task entrusted to me by the court, how can your great king promote me?

古文：炽磐乃遣虎台以手书谕之，贤政曰： 汝为储副，不能尽节，面缚于人，弃父忘君，堕万世之业。贤政义士，岂效汝乎！ 
现代文：乞伏炽磐于是命令秃发虎台亲手写信让他投降，尉贤政说： 你身为国家的王储副手，不能尽守操节，却被人两手反绑，抛弃老父忘记国君，使国家的万世伟业受到摧折，我尉贤政是忠义之士，怎么能效法你呢！ 
English: He then ordered Bald Tiger Tai to write a letter in his own hand to make him surrender, and Lieutenant Xian Zheng said: You, as the deputy of the crown prince of the country, can not fully observe the discipline, but you are tied by two hands, abandon your father and forget the sovereign, so that the great cause of the country is devastated. My lieutenant Xian Zheng is a loyal person, how can I imitate you?

古文：闻傉檀至左南，乃降。
现代文：等到他听说秃发檀已经到左南城，这才投降。
English: He did not surrender until he heard that Bald-Haired Sandalwood had arrived in Zuancheng.

古文：炽磐闻傉檀至，遣使郊迎，待以上宾之礼。
现代文：乞伏炽磐听说秃发檀来到，使派遣使节到郊外迎接，用对待上宾的礼节对待他。
English: When the Begging Blazing Rock heard that the Bald-Faced Sandalwood was coming, it sent an envoy to the outskirts to welcome him, and treated him with the etiquette of an honored guest.

古文：秋，七月，炽磐以傉檀为骠骑大将军，赐爵左南公。南凉文武，依才铨叙。
现代文：秋季，七月，乞伏炽磐任命秃发檀为骠骑大将军，赐封为左南公爵，其他南凉的文武官员也都按照他们各自的才能，依次录用。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Beggar Blazing Rock appointed Bald-Faced Dancer as the cavalry general and granted him the title of Zuo Nan Duke. Other civil and military officials in Nanliang were also recruited in accordance with their respective talents.

古文：岁馀，炽磐使人鸩傉檀；左右请解之，傉檀曰： 吾病岂宜疗邪！ 
现代文：一年多以后，乞伏炽磐派人用药酒去毒杀秃发檀，他的左右侍从请求为他解毒，秃发檀说： 我的病难道还要去治吗？ 
English: After more than a year, Beggar Blazing Rock sent someone to poison Bald Eagle with medicinal wine. His right and left attendants asked to detoxify him. Bald Eagle said: Do I still have to cure my illness?

古文：遂死，谥曰景王。
现代文：于是死去，谥号为景王。
English: He died as a result, and his nickname was King of Scenery.

古文：虎台亦为炽磐所杀。
现代文：秃发虎台也被乞伏炽磐杀死。
English: Bald Tigress was also killed by Begging Blazing Rock.

古文：傉檀子保周、贺，俱延子覆龙，利鹿孤孙副周，乌孤孙承钵，皆奔河西王蒙逊；久之，又奔魏。
现代文：秃发檀的其他几个儿子秃发保周、秃发贺，秃发俱延的儿子秃发覆龙，秃发利鹿孤的孙子秃发副周，秃发乌孤的孙子秃发承钵，都逃去投奔河西王沮渠蒙逊，很久之后，又投奔北魏。
English: Several other sons of Bald-haired Sandan, Bald-haired Baozhou, Bald-haired He, son of Bald-haired Guyan, Bald-haired Zhe Long, grandson of Bald-haired Lixiao, Bald-haired Vice Zhou, grandson of Bald-haired Wu Qiao, all fled to Hexi Wang Deqiu Mengsong, and after a long time, to Northern Wei.

古文：魏以保周为张掖王，覆龙为酒泉公，贺西平公，副周永平公，承钵昌松公。
现代文：北魏封秃发保周为张掖王，封秃发覆龙为酒泉公，封秃发贺为西平公，封秃发副周为永平公，封秃发承体为昌松公。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the baldness protection week was Zhang Xuan Wang, the baldness covering the dragon was Jiuquan Gong, the baldness blessing was Xiping Gong, the baldness vice-week was Yongping Gong, and the baldness bearing body was Changsong Gong.

古文：魏主嗣爱贺之才，谓曰： 卿之先与朕同源。 赐姓源氏。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣喜爱秃发贺的才能，对他说： 你的祖先与我是同一个起源，就赐你姓源吧！ 
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, loved the talent of Bald He and said to him: Your ancestors and I are of the same origin, so give your surname Yuan!

古文：八月，戊子，魏主嗣遣马邑侯陋孙使于秦。辛丑，遣谒者于什门使于燕，悦力延使于柔然。
现代文：八月，戊子，北魏国主拓跋嗣派遣马邑人侯陋孙去后秦出使，辛丑，又派遣谒者于什门去北燕出使，派遣悦力延去柔然出使。
English: In August, Wu Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent Ma Yibin's son and grandson-in-law to go to the Qin Dynasty to send an envoy, Xin Qiu, and also sent Yu Shimen to go to the Northern Yan Dynasty to send an envoy, and sent Yue Li to go to the Southern Han Dynasty to send an envoy.

古文：于什门至和龙，不肯入见，曰： 大魏皇帝有诏，须冯王出受，然后敢入。 
现代文：于什门抵达和龙，不肯进去拜见，说： 大魏国皇帝有诏，必须冯王出来受诏之后，我才敢进去。 
English: When Hushmen arrived at Hulong, he refused to go in to pay his respects, saying, "The Emperor of the Great Wei State has issued an edict, and I dare not go in until King Feng has come out to receive the edict."

古文：燕王跋使人牵逼令入，什门见跋不拜。
现代文：北燕王冯跋派人牵着他迫使他进来。
English: Feng Ba, the king of the Northern Yan, sent someone to lead him and force him to come in.

古文：跋使人按其项，什门曰： 冯王拜受诏，吾自以宾主致敬，何若见逼邪！ 
现代文：于什门看见冯跋又不跪拜施礼，冯跋让人按他的脖子，强行使礼，于什门说： 冯王先来拜受诏书，我自己使会以宾主的礼仪向你致敬，何苦这般逼迫我呢？ 
English: Yu Shimen saw that Feng Bao did not kneel and bow, but Feng Bao had someone press his neck and force him to bow. Yu Shimen said, "Feng Wang came first to bow and receive the edict, I myself will make the association salute you with the etiquette of a guest, why do you persecute me like this?

古文：跋怒，留什门不遣，什门数众辱之。
现代文：冯跋大怒，把于什门扣留下来，不让他回去。于什门几次当众侮辱冯跋。
English: Feng Baw was so angry that he kept the lock on Hush's door to prevent him from going back. Hush's door insulted Feng Baw several times in public.

古文：左右请杀之，跋曰： 彼各为其主耳。 
现代文：冯跋的侍从们请求杀了他，冯跋说： 他这不过是为效忠自己的主人罢了。 
English: Feng Bao's servants asked to kill him. Feng Bao said, "He only did it to be loyal to his master."

古文：乃幽执什门，欲降之，什门终不降。
现代文：于是，把于什门软禁起来，打算招降他，于什们最终也没有投降。
English: As a result, they put Hushmen under house arrest, intending to recruit him, but in the end Hushmen did not surrender.

古文：久之，衣冠弊坏略尽，虮虱流溢。跋遗之衣冠，什门皆不受。
现代文：过了很久，他的衣服帽子完全破旧，虱子、虮子到处都是，冯跋送给他新的衣帽，于什门全不接受。
English: After a long time, his clothes and hat were completely worn out, and lice and lice were everywhere. Feng Badu gave him a new coat and hat, but Hushmen did not accept it at all.

古文：魏主嗣以博士王谅为平南参军，使以平南将军、相州刺史尉太真书与太尉裕相闻。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣任命博士王谅为平南参军，让他以平南将军、相州刺史尉太真的名义写信给东晋太尉刘裕，致以问侯。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, appointed Dr. Wang Peng to join the army of Pingnan, and asked him to write a letter to the Eastern Jin Taifu Liu Yu in the name of the Pingnan General and the Songzhou Sashifu Taizhen.

古文：丰真，古真之弟也。
现代文：尉太真是尉古真的弟弟。
English: Lt. Tazan is Lt. Gusan's younger brother.

古文：九月，丁已朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，丁巳逆，出现日食。
English: In September, on the other hand, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：冬，十月，河南王炽磐复称秦王，置百官。
现代文：冬季，十月，河南王乞伏炽磐再一次号称 秦王 ，设置文武百官。
English: In the winter, in October, the king of Henan once again claimed to be the king of Qin, setting up a hundred civil and military officials.

古文：燕主跋与夏连和，夏王勃勃遣御史中丞乌洛孤如燕莅盟。
现代文：北燕王冯跋与夏国联合，夏王赫连勃勃派遣御史中丞乌洛孤前往北燕签订盟约。
English: Feng Bao, the king of the Northern Yan, allied with Xia Guo, and Xia Wang Heren vigorously dispatched Uluo Guo, the Imperial Historian, to the Northern Yan to sign a treaty.

古文：十一月，壬午，魏主嗣遣使者巡行诸州，校阅守宰资财，非家所赍者，悉薄为赃。
现代文：十一月，壬午，北魏国主拓跋嗣派遣使者到各州巡察，检查核对守宰等地方官的资产钱财，凡不是从家里自己带出来的东西，全部当作赃物记录下来。
English: On the afternoon of November, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to inspect all the states, check the assets and money of local officials such as the governor, and record everything that was not brought from home as stolen goods.

古文：西秦王炽磐立妃秃发氏为后。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐册立妃子秃发氏为皇后。
English: The king of the Western Qin Dynasty begged for the princess of the Bald Clan to become the empress.

古文：十二月，丙戌朔，柔然可汗大檀侵魏。
现代文：十二月，丙戌朔，柔然可汗郁久闾大檀进犯北魏。
English: In December, the pro-Guan Shuo and the soft-hearted Khan Yu Jiuyong of the Great Danes invaded the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：丙申，魏主嗣北击之。
现代文：丙申，北魏国主拓跋嗣向北进军，迎击他。
English: Bishin, the ruler of Northern Wei, marched north to meet him.

古文：大檀走，遣奚斤等追之，遇大雪，士卒冻死及堕指者什二三。
现代文：郁久闾大檀逃走，拓跋嗣派遣奚斤等人追击，路遇大雪，士卒冻死及冻掉手指的，十人当中约有二三人。
English: Yu Jiuyong and Datan fled, and Tuoba Zi and others were dispatched to pursue them. On the way, there was heavy snowfall, and about two or three of the ten soldiers froze to death and lost their fingers.

古文：河内人司马顺宰自称晋王，魏人讨之，不克。
现代文：北魏国河内人司马顺宰自称为晋王，北魏军队讨伐他，没有攻克。
English: Sima Shunzai, a native of Hanoi in Northern Wei, called himself the King of Jin. The Northern Wei army fought against him, but did not conquer him.

古文：燕辽西安素弗卒，燕王跋比葬七临之。
现代文：北燕辽西公冯素弗去世，北燕王冯跋到安葬他的时候，已经前去吊唁了七次。
English: When Northern Yan King Feng Su Fu passed away, Northern Yan King Feng Bao went to his funeral seven times.

古文：是岁，司马国璠兄弟聚众数百，潜渡淮，夜入广陵城。
现代文：这一年，叛离东晋的司马国兄弟，聚集几百个部众，偷偷渡过淮河，趁夜混入广陵城。
English: In that year, the Sima brothers, who had defected from the Eastern Jin Dynasty, gathered several hundred followers, secretly crossed the Huai River, and took advantage of the night to sneak into Guangling City.

古文：青州刺史檀祗领广陵相，国璠兵直上听事，祗惊出，将御之，被射伤而入，谓左右曰： 贼乘暗得入，欲掩我不备；但击五鼓，彼惧晓，必走矣。 
现代文：青州刺史檀祗兼任广陵相。司马国带兵直接冲向官署的大厅，檀祗惊觉之后走出来，正要抵抗，被乱箭射伤退回去，对左右的侍从说： 贼人趁天黑冲了进来，打算在我没防备的情况下袭击我们。只要敲击五鼓，他们害怕天亮，一定会逃跑。 
English: Sima Guo led the soldiers to rush directly to the hall of the government office. When Sima Guo woke up, he came out and was about to resist. He was wounded by arrows and retreated, saying to the attendants on his right and left: Thieves took advantage of the darkness to rush in, intending to attack us when I was unprepared. As long as they beat five drums, they were afraid of the dawn and would surely escape.

古文：左右如其言，国璠兵果走，追杀百馀人。
现代文：侍从们听从他的吩咐去做了，司马国的兵果然逃走。
English: The attendants obeyed his orders and did so, and the Sima soldiers did indeed escape.

古文：魏博士祭洒崔浩为魏主嗣讲《易》及《洪范》，嗣因问浩天文、术数。
现代文：北魏博士祭酒崔浩给国主拓跋嗣讲解《易经》和《尚书·洪范》，拓跋嗣于是向崔浩询问天文、术数等知识。
English: The Northern Wei doctor, Cui Hao, offered wine and explained the "I Ching" and "Shang Shu Hong Fan" to the sovereign, Tuoba Zi. Tuoba Zi then asked Cui Hao about astronomy, magic numbers and other knowledge.

古文：浩占决多验，由是有宠，凡军国密谋皆预之。
现代文：崔浩占卜的结果大多数都应验了，从此，他得到了国主的宠信，凡是国家的和军事上的秘密计划，他都参预意见。
English: Most of the results of Cui Hao's divination came true. From then on, he gained the patronage of the sovereign, and he participated in all secret national and military plans.

古文：夏王勃勃立夫人梁氏为王后，子璝为太子；封子延为阳平公，昌为太原公，伦为酒泉公，定为平原公，满为河南公，安为中山公。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃册立夫人梁氏为王后，册立儿子赫连为太子。册封儿子赫连延为阳平公，赫连昌为太原公，赫连伦为酒泉公，赫连定为平原公，赫连满为河南公，赫连安为中山公。
English: Emperor Xia's son, Emperor He Lian, appointed his wife, Empress Liang, as his queen, Emperor Xia's son, Emperor He Lian, as his prince, Emperor Xia's son, Emperor He Lian Yan, as Yang Ping, Emperor He Lian Chang, as Taiyuan, Emperor He Lian Lun, as Jiuquan, Emperor He Lian as Pingyuan, Emperor He Lian Man as Henan, Emperor He Lian An as Zhongshan.

