古文：《温公诗话》云： 唐之中叶，文章特盛，其姓名湮没不传于世者甚众，如：河中府鹳雀楼有王之奂、畅诸二诗。
现代文：《温公诗话》说： 唐代中期，文学创作蔚然成风，作家姓名湮没无闻，不传于世的，非常之多，比如：河中府鹤雀楼题有王之奂、畅诸的两首诗。
English: "Wengong Shiwa" said: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, literary creation became very popular, and there were many writers whose names were unknown and not passed down to the world. For example, there were two poems titled Wang Zhiqi and Chang Zhu in Henqi Tower in Hechu Prefecture.

古文：二人皆当时所不数，而后人擅诗名者，岂能及之哉？ 
现代文：这两人都是当时数不着的，可是后代具有诗名的一些人，哪儿能比得上他们呢！ 
English: Both of them were few and far between at the time, but what can you say about some of their descendants with poetic names!

古文：予观《少陵集》中所载违迢、郭受诗，少陵酬答，至有 新诗锦不如 、 自得随珠觉夜明 之语，则二人诗名可知矣，然非编之杜集，几于无传焉。
现代文：我看到《少陵集》中载有违迢、郭受的诗，杜甫酬答的诗中，以至有 新诗锦不如 、 自得随珠觉夜明 的句子，那么，二人的作诗的名气就可以想见了，可是要不是编到杜甫的文集里面，那就几乎一点也流传不下来了。
English: I saw that the "Shoryo Collection" contained poems that violated the imperial edict and were censored, and that Du Fu's poems for reward and punishment even included sentences such as "New poetry is not as good as the best," and "Self-acceptance is the dawn of a new day," so I can imagine the fame of the two men's poetry, but if it had not been compiled into Du Fu's anthology, it would hardly have been passed down at all.

古文：又有严恽《惜花》一绝云： 春光冉冉归何处，更向花前把一杯。
现代文：还有严恽的绝句《惜花》一首： 春光冉冉归何处，更向花前把一杯。
English: There is also a strict last sentence of "Spare the Flower": "Wherever the spring light rushes to, it is better to put a cup in front of the flower."

古文：尽日问花花不语，为谁零落为谁开？ 
现代文：尽日问花花不语，为谁零落为谁开？ 
English: Asking questions all day long, for whom is the piecemeal for whom?

古文：前人多不知谁作，乃见于皮、陆《唱和集》中。
现代文：以前的人不知是谁作的，原农上现在皮日休、陆龟蒙的《唱和集》中。
English: In the past, people didn't know who had made it, but the original farmers are now in the "Song and Song" of Pei Rixiu and Lu Kame Meng.

古文：大率唐人多工诗，虽小说戏剧，鬼物假托。莫不宛转有思致，不必颛门名家而后可称也。
现代文：大体上说，唐代人大多工于作诗，但即使创作小说戏剧，假话鬼物影射现实，也无不情节曲折、富于情致，不一定非为作家之后才值得称道。
English: Generally speaking, most people in the Tang Dynasty were good at writing poetry, but even if they created novels and plays, and even if they told lies and insinuated ghosts and monsters into reality, they still had plot twists and turns, and were full of emotion. It is not necessary to be a writer to be worthy of praise.

