古文：苏代自齐使人谓燕昭王曰： 臣闻离齐、赵，齐、赵已孤矣，王何不出兵以攻齐？
现代文：苏秦从齐国派人对燕昭王说： 臣下离间齐国、趑国，观在齐、赵两国都已经孤立了。大王为什么还不出兵进攻齐国？
English: Su Qin sent an envoy from Qi to King Yan Zhao and said, "Your vassals have separated Qi and Shao, while Guan in Qi and Zhao have already been isolated. Why hasn't the great king sent troops to attack Qi?"

古文：臣请王弱之。 
现代文：请让臣下替大王使齐国更加衰弱。 
English: Please let your vassals take the place of the great king and weaken Qi even more.

古文：燕乃伐齐攻晋。
现代文：燕国于是讨伐齐国进攻晋地。
English: As a result, Yan's state led a crusade against Qi and attacked Jin.

古文：令人谓闵王曰： 燕之攻齐也，欲以复振古地也。
现代文：苏秦让人对齐阂王说： 燕国进攻齐国，想收复以往的失地。
English: Su Qin had someone say to the king of Qi: Yan attacked Qi and wanted to recover the lost territory.

古文：燕兵在晋而不进，则是兵弱而计疑也。
现代文：观在燕军在晋地停滞不前，这是由于兵力弱小犹疑不决。
English: It was observed that Yan's army was stagnating in Jin, which was due to the weakness and indecision of the army.

古文：王何不令苏子将而应燕乎？
现代文：大王为什么不派苏秦率兵抗击燕军呢？
English: Why didn't the great king send Su Qin and his soldiers to fight against Yan's army?

古文：夫以苏子之贤，将而应弱燕，燕破必矣。
现代文：凭苏秦的才能，率兵抗击弱小的燕军，一定能攻破燕国。
English: With the talent of Su Qin, leading soldiers to fight against the weak Yan army, they will surely be able to break through the Yan country.

古文：燕破则赵不敢不听，是王破燕而服赵也。 
现代文：燕国被攻破，那么赵国就不敢不听命，这样大王既攻破了燕国，又制服了赵国。 
English: If Yan was defeated, then Zhao would not dare to disobey his orders. In this way, the great king defeated Yan and subdued Zhao.

古文：闵王曰： 善。 
现代文：齐闵王说： 好。 
English: King Qi said, "Good.

古文：乃谓苏子曰： 燕兵在晋，今寡人发兵应之，愿子为寡人为之将。 
现代文：就对苏秦说： 燕军打到了晋地，现在寡人发兵抗击它，希望您替寡人做军队的大将。 
English: He said to Su Qin, "Yan's army has reached Jin, and now only a few people have sent troops to fight against it. I hope you will be the general of the army for a few people."

古文：对曰： 臣之于兵，何足以当之，王其改举。
现代文：苏秦回答说： 臣下对指挥军队的事不通，哪里配得上抗击燕军，大王还是改任别人吧。
English: Su Qin replied: His vassals do not understand the command of the army. If anyone is worthy of fighting against Yan's army, the great king should be reassigned to someone else.

古文：王使臣也，是败王之兵，而以臣遗燕也。战不胜，不可振也。 王曰： 行，寡人知子矣。 
现代文：大王派臣下为将，这会使大王的军队遭到失败，也会把臣下交给燕国，打不赢，就不能挽救败局了。 齐王说： 您去吧，寡人了解您。 
English: The great king sent his vassals as generals, which would lead to the defeat of the great king's army, and he would also hand over his vassals to Yan Guo. If you can't win, you can't save the defeat. King Qi said: You go, few people know you.

古文：苏子遂将，而与燕人战于晋下，齐军败，燕得甲首二万人。
现代文：苏秦于是率领齐军同燕国人在晋城之下交战，齐军大败，燕军砍下两万齐军士兵的头颅。
English: Su Qin then led the Qi army to fight with the Yan people under Jincheng, the Qi army was defeated, and the Yan army cut off the heads of twenty thousand Qi soldiers.

古文：苏子收其余兵，以守阳城，而报于闵王曰： 王过举，令臣应燕。
现代文：苏秦收拢齐国的残兵退守阳城，向齐闵王回报说： 大王用错了人，竟派我来抗击燕军。
English: Su Qin gathered the remnants of Qi's soldiers and retreated to Yangcheng, returning to the king of Qi and saying: The great king used the wrong person and sent me to fight against Yan's army.

古文：今军败亡二万人，臣有斧质之罪，请自归于吏以戮！ 
现代文：如今军队伤亡两万人，臣下有杀头之罪，请让我自己回去到执法的官吏那里领受斩刑。 
English: Now that the army has suffered 20,000 casualties, and my vassals are guilty of beheading, please let me go back to the law enforcement officials to receive the beheading.

古文：闵王曰： 此寡人之过也，子无以为罪。 
现代文：齐闵王说： 这是寡人的罪过，您没什么可以怪罪的。 
English: King Qi said: This is the fault of others, you have nothing to blame for.

古文：明日又使燕攻阳城及狸。
现代文：第二天，苏秦又暗中让燕国攻打阳城和狸邑。
English: The next day, Su Qin secretly allowed Yan Guo to attack Yangcheng and Tuxiu.

古文：又使人谓闵王曰： 日者齐不胜于晋下，此非兵之过，齐不幸而燕有天幸也。
现代文：又派人对齐闵王说， 前几天，齐国军队在晋城之下没能取胜，这不是军队的过错，主要是齐军不走运而燕军得到了上天的保佑。
English: They also sent someone to tell King Qi that the Qi army failed to win the battle of Jincheng a few days ago. This was not the fault of the army, but mainly the Qi army was unlucky and the Yan army was blessed by heaven.

古文：今燕又攻阳城及狸，是以天幸自为功也。
现代文：现在燕国又攻打阳城和狸邑，这是把上天的保佑当作自己的功劳。
English: Now Yan's country is attacking Yangcheng and Tuxiu again. This is taking the blessing of heaven as their own merit.

古文：王复使苏子应之，苏子先败王之兵，其后必务以胜报王矣。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：大王再派苏秦抗击燕军，苏秦先前曾使大王的军队失败，失败之后他一定竭力用胜利来报答大王。 齐王说： 好。 
English: The great king again sent Su Qin to fight against Yan's army. Su Qin had previously defeated the great king's army, and after the defeat, he would do his best to reward the great king with victory. King Qi said: Good.

古文：乃复使苏子，苏子固辞，王不听。
现代文：于是再次任用苏秦，苏秦坚决推辞，齐王不听。
English: As a result, Su Qin was reappointed, but Su Qin resolutely declined, and Qi Wang did not listen.

古文：遂将以与燕战于阳城。
现代文：苏秦就率兵在阳城同燕军作战。
English: Su Qin led his soldiers to fight against Yan's army in Yangcheng.

古文：燕人大胜，得首三万。
现代文：燕军大获全胜，斩下敌人首级三万。
English: Yan's army won a complete victory, cutting down 30,000 enemy heads.

古文：齐君臣不亲，百姓离心。
现代文：齐国君臣之间不互相亲信，百姓离心离德。
English: The princes and ministers of Qi did not trust each other, and the people were alienated from each other.

古文：燕因使乐毅大起兵伐齐，破之。
现代文：燕国于是派乐毅大举兴兵进攻齐国，最后攻破了齐国。
English: Yan's state then sent Le Yi to attack Qi with a large number of soldiers, and finally broke through Qi.

