古文：裴满亨斡勒忠张大节张亨韩锡邓俨巨构贺扬庭阎公贞焦旭刘仲洙李完马百禄杨伯珫刘玑康元弼移剌益裴满亨，字仲通，本名河西，临潢府人。其先世居辽海，祖讳虎山者，天辅间移屯东受降城，以御夏人，后徙居临潢。亨性敦敏习儒，大定间，收充奉职，世宗谓曰： 闻尔业进士举，其勿忘为学也。 二十八年，擢第，世宗嘉之，升为奉御。一日问以上古为治之道，亨奏： 陛下欲兴唐、虞之治，要在进贤，退不肖，信赏罚，薄征敛而已。 章宗即位，谕之曰： 朕左右侍臣多以门第显，惟尔由科甲进，且先朝信臣，国家利害，为朕尽言。 
现代文：梁襄，字公赞，是绛州人。梁襄自幼是孤儿，由叔父梁宁收养。梁襄生性颖悟，每天记言论一千多字。大定三年，考中进士，分配到耀州任同官主簿。
English: Liang Xiang, also known as Gongzan, is from Zhangzhou. Liang Xiang was an orphan from a young age and was adopted by his uncle Liang Ning. Liang Xiang has a brilliant mind and can memorize more than a thousand words a day. He passed the junior high school entrance examination three years ago and was assigned to the main office of the Yaozhou government.

古文：俄擢监察御史。
现代文：三次被迁州任淳化令，有优秀的政绩。
English: He was transferred to a new prefecture three times, and had an excellent political record.

古文：内侍梁道儿恃恩骄横，朝士侧目，亨劾奏其奸。迁镐王府尉，出为定国军节度副使，三迁同知大名府事。
现代文：考察认为他勤政廉洁被提升为庆阳府推官，又被召为薛王府的属官。世宗打算巡游金莲川，有司已在办理，梁襄上疏极力劝谏说：
English: The investigation found that he was a diligent and honest politician and was promoted to the highest-ranking official of Qingyang Prefecture. He was also called to be a subordinate official of Xue Wang Prefecture. Shizong planned to tour the Jinlian River, which was already being handled by Yu Si, and Liang Xiang Shang Zuo tried his best to persuade him, saying:

古文：先是，豪猾从衡，前政莫制，亨下车宣明约束，阖境帖然。
现代文： 金莲川在重山之北，地积阴冷日久，五谷不能生长，郡县难以设置，这里自古以来是北部边沿荒凉无人管理的地方。
English: Jinlian River is in the north of the heavy mountains. The land is cold and gloomy for a long time. Five valleys cannot grow, and it is difficult to set up counties. Since ancient times, it has been a desolate and unmanaged place along the northern edge.

古文：承安四年，改河南路按察副使，就迁本路副统军。中都、西京等路按察使。
现代文：气候特殊奇异，夏季中伏降霜，一天之中寒暑交替来到，这样独特的地方，和上京、中都都不相同，尤其不是圣上亲躬驾临的地方。
English: The climate is particularly strange, with frosts falling in the middle of summer, and cold and heat alternating throughout the day. Such a unique place is not the same as Shangjing and Zhongdu, and especially not the place where the saint personally visited.

古文：时世袭家豪夺民田，亨检其实，悉还正之。
现代文：凡是奉养的用具没有不是远路快速运送来的，翻山越岭，加倍费力费时。
English: All the equipment needed for the maintenance of the animals had to be transported long distances at high speed, and it took time and effort to travel over the mountains.

古文：泰和五年，改安武军节度使。岁大雪，民多冻殍，亨输己俸为之周赡，及劝率僚属大姓同出物以济。
现代文：至于安顿宿舍的地方，军骑填塞，主客不分，马、牛跑出去难以赶回，藏匿逃犯别想抓获，抢夺劫掠，杀人奸淫，不能轻易禁止。
English: As for the place where the dormitory is settled, the cavalry is crammed, the hosts and guests are not separated, the horses and cattle run out and are difficult to catch back, the hiding fugitives do not want to be caught, the robbing and looting, the murder and adultery, cannot be easily prohibited.

古文：转河东南北路按察使，卒于官。上闻而惜之，赠嘉议大夫，赙物甚厚。
现代文：公卿、百官、卫士当中，富贵的人仅仅住车帐，贫穷的人居住洞穴或露天之处，舆台皂隶免不了穷困倒毙，饥不得食，寒不得衣，一人生病传染给众人，无辜的人夭折或伤亡与被刀杀有什么不同？
English: Among the nobles, officials, and guards, the rich live only in tents, the poor live in caves or in the open air, the rich cannot avoid poverty and death, hunger cannot be fed, cold cannot be clothed, one person's illness is contagious to everyone, and what is the difference between the death or injury of an innocent person and being killed by a sword?

古文：亨性尤谨密，出入宫禁数年，谠议忠言多所裨益，有稿则焚之，虽家人辈莫知也。
现代文：这只是些细小的事故，更有比这些大的问题。 臣听说高城、峻池、深居、邃禁，是帝王的屏障；壮士、健马、坚甲、利兵，是帝王的爪牙。
English: It is just a small accident, but it is more important than these big problems. The vassal heard that the high city, the steep pond, the deep residence, and the confinement are the barriers of the emperor; the strong man, the strong horse, the strong armor, and the strong soldiers are the minions of the emperor.

古文：所历州郡，皆有政绩可纪云。
现代文：现在行宫的所在地金莲川，没有高殿广宇城池的坚固设施，是废了帝王的屏障啊！
English: Jinlian River, which is now the location of the imperial palace, does not have the solid facilities of the high palace Guangyucheng Pool. It is the barrier of the emperor!

古文：斡勒忠，本名宋浦，盖州人也。
现代文：披挂整齐常被坐骑的马，太阳暴晒，风雨侵蚀，臣知道这样的马必然瘦弱。
English: A horse that is neatly draped and often ridden, exposed to the sun, and eroded by wind and rain, the vassal knows that such a horse is necessarily thin.

古文：习女直、契丹字，历兵部、枢密院、尚书省令史，再转大理寺知法，迁右三部司正。
现代文：路伯达回答说： 从现在开始宣布德行流传教化。请罢免境内打猎，扩大农业以督促本职，轻币重谷，去奢存俭，遵从时节耕种，像这样就不会有农不勤的人、粟不广的地。 
English: Luboda replied: From now on, proclaim the missionaryization of the virtuous lineage. Please abolish hunting in the territory, expand agriculture to supervise the duty, light money heavy valley, go to extravagance and frugality, and follow the time to cultivate. In this way, there will be no farmer who is not diligent, and the land is not wide.

古文：练达边事，尝奉命使北，归致马四千余匹，诏褒谕之。
现代文：此时，采捕禁严，从京郊至真定、沧、冀，北到飞狐，几百里内都为禁地，老百姓有捕杀狐兔的人有罪，所以路伯达逮捕他。
English: At this time, it was strictly forbidden to capture and kill foxes and rabbits. From the outskirts of Beijing to Zhending, Cangzhou and Hebei, and from the north to Feihu, all within a few hundred miles were forbidden. People were guilty of hunting and killing foxes and rabbits, so Luboda arrested him.

古文：大定二十六年，为监察御史，转尚书省都事。
现代文：路伯达多次升迁为刑部侍郎、太常卿，授予安国军节度使，不久，改为镇安武。
English: Lu Boda was promoted many times to the position of the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department and the Grand Secretary, and was awarded the position of the An Guo Jun's delegate to the festival. Soon, he was changed to Zhen An Wu.

古文：章宗立，迁尚书兵部员外郎，出为沧州刺史。
现代文：路伯达曾经出使宋朝回来，上交所得的二百五十两金，一千两白银以助边疆，上奏请求退休，还未来得及呈上就去世了。
English: Lu Boda once sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty and returned with 2502 gold and 1200 silver to help the frontier. He requested to retire, but died before he could submit his request.

古文：河东路提刑副使徒单移刺古举以自代，改滕州刺史。
现代文：路伯达的妻子傅氏说到此事，皇帝表扬他的忠诚，赠授太中大夫，仍把金银还给他，傅氏哭着请求献给国家，未得到批准。
English: When Luberda's wife Fu mentioned the matter, the emperor praised his loyalty, bestowed the title of grand duchess, and still returned the gold and silver to him. Fu cried and asked to donate it to the country, but was not approved.

古文：尝调发黄河船，数以稽期听赎。授北京副留守，入为同签枢密院事，兼沂王傅。
现代文：先前傅氏因为路伯达曾在冀州进修学习，于是卖信都、枣强的田以供应他学习，有司全部把这件事告诉了皇帝，皇帝认为她很贤惠，赐号 成德夫人 。
English: Previously, because Lu Boda had been studying in Jizhou, he sold the capital and Zao Qiang's field to supply him with learning. The emperor thought she was very virtuous and gave her the name Mrs. Chengde.

古文：承安二年，拜武宁军节度使，致仕。
现代文：路伯达的儿子路铎、路钧。路钧，字和叔，登大定二十五年进士第，终于莱州观察判官。
English: Lu Boda's son, Lu Yao, Lu Yao. Lu Yao, nicknamed Uncle, was admitted to the University of Laizhou for 25 years, and finally became a judge.

古文：泰和三年卒，年七十一。
现代文：路铎最知名，另外有传。
English: Cotai is the best known, but there are other legends.

古文：忠性敦悫，通法律，以直自守，不交权贵，故时誉归之。张大节，字信之，代州五台人。
现代文：张大节，字信之，代州五台人。
English: Zhang Dajie, Zhexin Zhi, a resident of Daizhou and Wutai.

古文：擢天德三年进士第，调崞县丞。
现代文：提为天德三年进士及第，调任崞县丞。
English: He was promoted to the 3rd and 4th grade of Tiande Junior High School and transferred to the Shixian Junior High School.

古文：改东京市令。
现代文：改任东京市令。
English: Reassigned to the post of Tokyo city governor.

古文：世宗判留务，甚爱重之。
现代文：世宗让他兼任留务，非常喜爱看重他。
English: Sejong asked him to serve as a concurrent retainer, and he loved and valued him very much.

古文：海陵修汴京，以大节领其役。
现代文：海陵修汴京，用大节主管此工程。
English: Hailing from Beijing, he is in charge of this project.

古文：世宗改元于辽东，或劝赴之，富贵可一朝遂，大节曰： 自有定分，何遽尔。 
现代文：世宗在辽东登位，有人劝大节去跟他，富贵荣华即刻可以到手。大节说： 命运注定，何必着急呢！ 
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne in eastern Liaodong Province, some people urged Da Jie to follow him. He could obtain riches and glory immediately. Da Jie said, "Fate is predetermined. Why should we be in a hurry?"

古文：随例补尚书省令史，擢秘书郎、大理司直。
现代文：按例补为尚书省令史，升秘书郎、大理司直。
English: According to the example, the supplement is Shangshuo Rongshi, Sheng Secretary Lang, Dali Sinao.

古文：会左警巡使阙，世宗谓宰臣曰： 朕得其人矣。 
现代文：正好遇上左警巡使空缺，世宗对宰臣说： 我得到任此职的人了。 
English: Just when there was a vacancy for a left-wing police inspector, Shizong said to Zaisen, "I've got the man for this post."

古文：遂授大节。
现代文：于是授职给大节。
English: As a result, the position was given to Otsu.

古文：俄以杖杀豪民为有司所劾，削一阶解职。
现代文：不久因为杖杀恶霸被有司弹劾，削一级官职。
English: Not long after, he was impeached by a judge for killing a bully with a cane, and was demoted one rank.

古文：未几，授同知洺州防御使事。
现代文：没过多久，授予同知州防御使事。
English: Not long after, he was assigned to the defense of Tongchizhou.

古文：入为太府丞、工部员外郎。
现代文：大节入朝后担任太府丞、工部员外郎。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Otsu, he served as Taifu no jo and Gairo, a member of the Ministry of Works.

古文：卢沟水啮安次，承诏护视堤城。
现代文：卢沟水侵蚀安次，奉命护视城堤。
English: Lu ditch water erosion in Anji, ordered to guard the city wall.

古文：擢修内司使，推排东京路户藉，人服其平。
现代文：提为修内司使，编排东京路户籍，人们信服他的公平。
English: He was mentioned as Shunaishi's envoy and compiled the Tokyo Road household register, and people were convinced of his fairness.

古文：进工部郎中。
现代文：升工部郎中。
English: He was promoted to junior secretary of the engineering department.

古文：时阜通监铸钱法弊，与吏部员外郎麻珪莅其事。
现代文：那时阜通监铸造钱币的方法有弊病，大节和吏部员外郎麻皀管理这事，见堆积的铜都粗劣有毛病，有人想收回原先付给百姓的钱。
English: At that time, the method of minting coins by the Futong Supervisor had drawbacks. Daetong and the clerk, Wai Langmao, managed the matter. The accumulated copper was coarse and defective, and someone wanted to recover the money originally paid to the people.

古文：积铜皆窳恶，或欲征民先所给直，大节曰： 此有司受纳之过，民何与焉。 以其事闻，卒得免征。
现代文：大节说 ：这是有司收进的过失，老百姓怎么能参与呢？ 把这事报告了上去，终于免于追究。
English: Mr. Otsuki said, "This is the fault of the police department, how can the people get involved? I reported the matter and was finally exempted from investigation."

古文：就改户部郎中，定襄退吏诬县民匿铜者十八村，大节廉得其实，抵吏罪，民斫石颂之。
现代文：随即改任户部郎中，定襄的辞职官吏捏造说县民藏铜的有十八村，大节查访到事实情况，判吏有罪，百姓刻石歌颂他。
English: He was immediately appointed as a member of the household department, and the resigning official fabricated that there were eighteen villages in the county where copper was stored by the people of Dingxiang. When the fact was investigated, the official was found guilty, and the people carved stones to sing his praises.

古文：召授工部侍郎，改户部。
现代文：皇帝召见并授予他工部侍郎，又改任户部。
English: The emperor summoned him and gave him the title of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, and he was also appointed to the Ministry of Household.

古文：世宗东巡，徙太府监，谕之曰： 侍郎与太府监品同，以从行支应籍卿办耳。 
现代文：世宗东巡时，任太府监，对他说： 侍郎和太府监同品，因随行供给与应付要凭借你办罢了。 
English: When King Sejong was on a tour to the East, he met the Grand Steward and said to him, "A steward and a Grand Steward are the same thing. Since you will be accompanying him, you will have to handle the supply and payment.

古文：寻为宋生日使，还授横海军节度使，过阙谒谢东宫，显宗抚慰良久，曰： 万事惟中可也。 
现代文：不久担任宋生日使，回来授予横海军节度使，经过皇宫到东宫拜谢，显宗安抚慰问很久，说 ：一切事只要中就行了。 
English: Soon he served as Song's birthday envoy, came back to award the envoy to the naval festival, passed through the Imperial Palace to the East Palace to offer thanks, and appeased and comforted the Emperor for a long time, saying, "Anything as long as it is in the middle is fine."

古文：因榜其公堂曰 惟中 。
现代文：因而把 惟中 写在自己公堂的匾额上。
English: Therefore, he wrote 惟中 on the plaque in his courtroom.

古文：郡境有巨盗久不获，大节以方略擒之。
现代文：郡内有大盗长久没被捕获，大节用计擒住了他。
English: There was a big thief in the county who had not been caught for a long time, and Otsuke caught him with a trick.

古文：后河决于卫，横流而东，沧境有九河故道，大节即相宜缮堤，水不为害。
现代文：后来黄河在卫决口，横流向东，沧境内有不少黄河故道，大节立即相应采取修补河堤的措施，使洪水没有造成灾害。
English: Later, the Yellow River was at the mouth of the Wei River, flowing eastward, and there were many ancient roads of the Yellow River in the Cang territory. Da Jie immediately took corresponding measures to repair the river dike, so that the flood did not cause disasters.

古文：章宗即位，擢中都路都转运使，因言河东赋重宜减，议者或不同，大节以他路田赋质之，遂命减焉。
现代文：章宗即位，大节升为中都路都转运使，就说河东赋重应减，商议的人有的不同意，大节用其他路的田赋标准质问他们，于是章宗命令减少它。
English: When Zhang Zong ascended to the throne and Da Jie was promoted to Zhongdu Rd. and Duyun Rd. Commissar, he said that the land allotment in Hedong should be reduced. Some of the negotiators disagreed, and Da Jie questioned them with the standard of the land allotment in other roads, so Zhang Zong ordered to reduce it.

古文：乞致仕，不许，徙知太原府，以并、代乡郡，故优宠之。
现代文：大节请求辞官退休，皇帝不允许，任知太原府，因为并、代是他家乡的郡，所以优待他。
English: Otsuki requested that the official retire, but the emperor did not allow it. He was allowed to stay in Taiyuan because it was his home county, so he was given preferential treatment.

古文：近郭有男子被杀者，闻其妻哭声不哀，召而审之，果为奸夫所杀，人以为神。
现代文：有次，靠城墙一男子被杀，大节听他妻哭声不悲痛，叫来审问，果为奸夫所杀，百姓把他看作神。
English: On one occasion, a man was killed by the city wall, but he did not grieve when he heard his wife's cries, and he was called in for questioning. As a result, he was killed by an adulterer, and the people regarded him as a god.

古文：西山有晋叔虞祠，旧以施钱输公使库，大节还其庙以给营缮。
现代文：西山有晋代叔虞祠，原来祠中施舍来的钱交公使库，大节还给寺里用作供给、建造和修缮的费用。
English: There is a Shugu ancestral shrine in the West Mountain dating back to the Jin Dynasty. The money donated by the original ancestral shrine was paid to the official treasury, and the greater part was returned to the temple to be used for supplies, construction and repair costs.

古文：选授河东路提刑使，未赴，留知大兴府事，治有能名。
现代文：他被选任河东路提刑使，未赴任，留当知大兴府事，他治理能力很有名。
English: He was selected to be the envoy to the East Hedong Road, but he did not take up the post. He remained in charge of the government affairs. He was famous for his ability to govern.

古文：阅岁，移知广宁府，复请老，授震武军节度使。
现代文：经过几年，改任知广宁府，又请求告老辞官，授予震武军节度使。
English: After a few years, he was reassigned to Zhiguangningfu, and he also asked to be retired from the post, and was awarded the post of festival envoy of the Shock Troops.

古文：部有银冶，有司以为争盗由此生，付河东、西京提刑司与州同议，皆以官榷为便，大节曰： 山泽之利，当与民共，且贫而无业者，虽严刑能禁其窃取乎？
现代文：辖区内有银矿可冶炼，有司认为争斗抢劫由此产生，交给河东、西京提刑司和州官一同商议，都认为官府专营有利，大节说 ：山川河泽的利益应当和百姓一起分享，况且贫而无业的人严惩能禁止他们偷拿吗？
English: There are silver mines in the jurisdiction that can be smelted, and some departments believe that fights and robberies are caused by this. It was handed over to the criminal justice departments of Hedong and Xijing to discuss with the state officials. They all believe that the government's monopoly is advantageous. Daizi said: The interests of mountains, rivers and streams should be shared with the people. Moreover, can the poor and unemployed be severely punished to prevent them from stealing?

古文：宜明谕民，授地输课，则其游手者有所资，于官亦便。 
现代文：应明确告诉百姓，给他们地交纳赋税，那么那些游惰无法从事生产的人有了生活的保障，对官府也有利。 
English: It should be made clear to the people that they should pay taxes to them, so that those who are lazy and unable to engage in production have the security of life, which is also beneficial to the government.

古文：上从其议。
现代文：皇帝听从他的建议。
English: The Emperor followed his advice.

古文：复乞致仕，许之，仍擢其子尚书刑部员外郎岩叟为忻州刺史，以便禄养。
现代文：他再次请求退休，被允许了，仍然提拔他儿子尚书刑部员外郎严叟为忻州刺史，以便有官俸供养。
English: He again asked to retire and was allowed to do so, but still promoted his son, Shang Shuxu, a member of the Criminal Investigation Department, and his son's son, Yan Zheng, to the post of the governor of Zhangzhou, so that he could have an official salary to support him.

古文：访其利病，条为十三事以闻，上嘉纳之。
现代文：承安五年，张大节去世，享年八十岁。大节一向廉洁勤奋好学，能鼓励后辈，自以为从任倜那里得到学问，对待任倜的儿子比亲生的还好。
English: In the fifth year of Cheng'an, Zhang Datai died at the age of 80. Datai had always been honest, diligent and eager to learn. He was able to encourage the younger generation. He thought that he had learned from Ren Yao. He treated Ren Yao's son better than his own.

古文：亨在职每事存大体、略苛细，御史以宽缓不事事劾之，降授蔡州防御使。
现代文：又善下棋，当世推为第一，曾被召与礼部尚书张景仁下棋。世宗曾对宰臣说 ：人们大多说王袺是有才能的官，依我看，他凡事不肯尽心，是一个老奸巨猾的人罢了。张大节禀性刚强正直，参与政事果断，远在王袺之上，可惜用他太晚。 
English: He was also good at playing chess. He was promoted to the first in the world, and was once called to play chess with the ceremonial secretary, Shangshu Zhang Jingren. Shizong once said to the vice-minister: Most people say that Wang Xi is a talented official. In my opinion, he is not willing to do his best in everything, he is just a cunning person. Zhang Dati is tough, honest, and decisive in politics. He is far above Wang Xi, but it is too late to use him.

古文：明年，迁南京路转运使，转知归德府事，致仕。泰和二年卒，年七十八。
现代文：又多次告诉近臣说 ：某某不是没有才干，然而赶不上张大节忠实。 
English: He also repeatedly told his close vassal: "So-and-so is not incompetent, but he is not as faithful as Zhang Daizi."

古文：亨才识强敏，明达吏事，终始有可称云。韩锡，字难老，其先自析津徙蓟之渔阳。
现代文：世宗对大节的了解就是这样。韩锡，字难老，他的祖先从析津迁移到蓟州的渔阳。
English: This is how Sejong understands the festival. Han Xi, whose family name means "difficult to grow old," whose ancestors migrated from Seijin to Yuyang in Ganzhou.

古文：祖贻愿，辽宣徽北院使。
现代文：祖父贻愿，是辽宣徽北院使。
English: My grandfather's long-cherished wish was to become an envoy to the North Academy of Liao Xuan Hui.

古文：父秉休，归朝，领忠正军节度使。
现代文：父亲秉休，归附朝廷，任忠正军节度使。
English: His father, Bing Hui, was attached to the imperial court and appointed as the envoy of the Zhouzheng Army.

古文：锡以荫补阁门祗候。
现代文：韩锡因为先代当官补任门祗候。
English: Han Xi is waiting in the wings to fill the post vacated by the previous incumbent.

古文：天会中，南伐，锡从军掌礼仪，俄以母，老乃就监差。
现代文：天会中，讨伐宋朝，锡随军掌管礼仪，不久因母亲年老于是成了监差。
English: In the heavenly assembly, in the fight against the Song Dynasty, Xi followed the army to take charge of the etiquette, and soon became a supervisor due to his mother's old age.

古文：久之，授神锐军都指挥使，入为宫苑使。
现代文：过了较长一段日子，授神锐军都指挥使，入朝为宫苑使。
English: After a long period of time, all the troops under the command of Jianjing Rui were dispatched, and the imperial envoy was sent to the imperial court.

古文：天德元年，擢尚书工部员外郎，领燕都营缮。
现代文：天德元年，提拔为尚书工部员外郎，管理燕都的建造修缮。
English: In the first year of the Tiande era, he was promoted to Shang Shuxigong member Wai Rong, managing the construction and repair of Yan Du.

古文：特赐胡砺榜进士及第，四迁尚书户部侍郎，以母丧解。
现代文：特别赏锡他为胡砺那一榜进士及第，四次调动为尚书户部侍郎，因为母亲去世而解除。
English: He was awarded a special award for being one of the most-promoted cadres in Hu Rong's army and was transferred for the fourth time to be an attendant of the Household Division of the Ministry of Education, but was relieved of his duties after his mother passed away.

古文：旋起复旧职，付金牌一、银牌十、籍水手于山东。
现代文：随后起用恢复原来的职务，给金牌一面、银牌十面，到山东登记水手。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed to resume his original duties, given a gold medal and ten silver medals, and registered as a sailor in Shandong.

古文：时苏保衡为水军都统制，趋杭州，俾锡部船三百会广陵。适保衡败还，丧船过半，令锡补足之。
现代文：当时苏保衡为水军都统制，赶到杭州，让锡统率三百战船在广陵会合，恰好保衡战败回来，丧失船只过半，命令韩锡补足数量。
English: At that time, Su Baoheng was the commander-in-chief of the naval forces. He rushed to Hangzhou and asked Xi Jun to lead 300 warships to meet in Guangling. It just so happened that Baoheng came back defeated, losing more than half of the ships, and ordered Han Xi to replenish the number.

古文：时水浅，船不得进，海陵遣使急责之，众稍亡，锡召诸豪谕之曰： 今连保法严，逃将安往，纵一身偶脱，其如妻子何？ 
现代文：当时水浅，船只不能前进，海陵派使者加急责问他，众人稍有逃亡，锡召见各部有威信的人告诉他们说 ：现在连坐法很严，逃跑后将要到哪里去？即使一人偶然逃脱，那把妻子儿女怎么安置？ 
English: At that time, the water was shallow and the ships could not move forward. The envoys sent by Hailing hurriedly asked him about it. The people fled a little, but he summoned authoritative people from various departments to tell them: Now even the law is very strict, where will you go after escaping? Even if one person escapes by chance, how will the wife and children be placed?

古文：众悟，亡者稍止。
现代文：众人醒悟，逃跑的慢慢停止。
English: Everyone wakes up and slowly stops running away.

古文：改侍御史，四迁都水监，以治河防劳进官一阶，授西京路转运使，卒。
现代文：世宗在辽东改元大定，锡跑到世宗所在地方，下诏恢复原先的职务。第二年，授予同知河间府事，世宗在香接见他，告诫他说： 听说皇族住在那儿的十分放纵，你应当依法纠正他们。 
English: In Liaodong, Sejong changed the era name to Datong. Xi ran to Sejong's place and issued an edict to restore his former position. The following year, Sejong met Sejong at Xiang after conferring the post of prefectural governor to Sejong's friend, He, and warned him, "I heard that the imperial family living there is very indulgent. You should correct them according to the law."

古文：旭性警敏，练达时政，与王翛，刘仲洙辈世称能吏云。
现代文：锡下车宣布皇帝的话，之后没有打扰政事危害百姓的人。升任孟州防御使，累进拜为绛阳军节度使，改任知济南府事，告老，允许他辞官。明昌五年死，享年八十三岁。
English: Xi got off the train and announced the emperor's words, after which he did not disturb those who harmed the people with political affairs. He was promoted to the defense envoy of Mengzhou, gradually became the festival envoy of the Shenyang Army, was transferred to the Chijinan prefectural government, became old, and was allowed to resign. Mingchang died five years later, at the age of eighty-three.

古文：刘仲洙，字师鲁，大兴宛平人。
现代文：刘仲洙，字师鲁，大兴宛平人。
English: Liu Zhongyao, Lu Zhishi, Daxing Wanping.

古文：大定三年，登进士第。
现代文：大定三年，考中进士。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination in three years.

古文：历龙门主簿、香河酒税使，再调深泽令。
现代文：历任龙门主簿、香河酒税使，再调深泽令。
English: Successive Longmen master book, Xianghe liquor tax authorities, and then transferred to Fukasawa.

古文：县近滹沱河，时秋成，水忽暴溢，仲洙极力护塞，竟无害。
现代文：县城靠近滹沱河，当时是秋天庄稼成熟时，河水忽然暴涨，仲洙竭力护堤查堵缺口，终于没有造成灾害。
English: The county seat is close to the Wei River. It was autumn, when the crops were ripe, and the river suddenly surged. Zhonglu tried his best to check the gap with a berm, but it did not cause any disasters.

古文：有盗夜发，居民震惊，仲洙率县卒生执其一，余众遂溃，旦日掩捕皆获。
现代文：有强盗夜间出现，居民震惊，仲洙率领县卒活捉其中一个，其他歹徒于是散逃，白天乘其不备进行搜捕全被抓获。
English: Some robbers appeared at night, residents were shocked. Zhong Wei led the county officers to capture one of them alive. The other gangsters then scattered. During the day, they took advantage of their unpreparedness to conduct a manhunt and were all captured.

古文：寻以廉能进官一阶，升河北西路转运司支度判官，入为刑部主事，六迁右司员外郎，俄转吏部。
现代文：随即因廉洁有才能升官一级，升任河北西路转运司支度判官，入朝为刑部主事，第六次提升为右司员外郎，不久转到吏部。
English: He was immediately promoted to the first level for his integrity and talent, and was promoted to the judge of the preparation of the West Hebei Road Transportation Department. He entered the court as the head of the criminal department, and was promoted for the sixth time to the right officer, and was soon transferred to the personnel department.

古文：世宗谓宰臣曰： 人有言语敏辩而庸常不正者，有语言拙讷而才智通达、存心向正者，如刘仲洙颇以才行见称，然而口语甚讷也。 
现代文：世宗对宰臣说 ：人有说话敏捷动听却平庸不正直的，有言辞笨拙迟钝而才智通达、一心向正的，像刘仲洙颇因才能品行突出被赞许，可是说话不善表达。 
English: Sejong said to the prime minister, "There are people who speak quickly and beautifully, but are mediocre and dishonest. There are people whose speech is clumsy and dull, but who are intelligent and single-minded. Like Liu Zhongyao, he is praised for his talent and outstanding conduct, but his speech is not good at expressing himself.

古文：右丞张汝霖曰： 人之若是者多矣，愿陛下深察之。 
现代文：右丞张汝霖说 ：人中像这样的人多了，希望皇上深层地观察。 
English: Ujicho Zhang Rulin said, "There are many people like this among the people, and I hope the emperor will take a deeper look."

古文：二十九年，出为祁州刺史，以六善为教，民化之。
现代文：二十九年，出任祁州刺史，用六善来教育民众，百姓被感化。
English: In the 29th year, he served as the governor of Zhangzhou, using the six virtues to educate the people, and the people were influenced.

古文：章宗即位，除中都、西京等路提刑副使。
现代文：章宗即位，授予刘仲洙为中都、西京等路提刑副使。
English: Zhang Zong was enthroned, and Liu Zhongyao was awarded the title of vice-envoy of the Central Capital and West Beijing.

古文：先是，田珏等以党罪废锢者三十余家，仲洙知其冤，上书力辨，帝从之，乃复珏官爵而党禁遂解。
现代文：先前，田珏等因为结党的罪名被黜废禁止做官的有三十多家，仲洙知道他们冤枉，上书极力申辩，皇帝听从他的意见，于是恢复了田珏的官爵，并解除了对这批人的禁令。
English: Previously, there were more than thirty people, including Tian Qi, who had been banned from holding public office for the crime of forming a political party. Zhong Qi knew that they had been wronged and sent a letter to vigorously defend themselves. The emperor listened to his opinion and restored Tian Qi's peerage and lifted the ban on this group of people.

古文：明昌二年，授并王傅、兼同知大同府事，寻改平阳，移德州防御使。
现代文：明昌二年，授职并王傅，兼同知大同府事，不久改任平阳，调任德州防御使。
English: In the second year of the Ming and Chang Dynasties, he was given the post of Wang Fu (王傅) as well as the post of Tongzhi Datong (同知大同府事). He was soon reassigned to Pingyang and transferred to the post of Texas Defense Envoy.

古文：转运郭邦杰、节度李晏皆举仲洙以自代。
现代文：转运使郭邦杰、节度使李晏都推荐刘仲洙代替自己。
English: Guo Bangjie, the leader of Transshipment, and Li Yao, the leader of the Festival, both recommended Liu Zhongyao to replace him.

古文：升为定海军节度使。
现代文：升为定海军节度使。
English: He was promoted to the post of naval attaché.

古文：章宗立，尊孝懿皇后为皇太后，以元弼旧臣诏充副卫尉。
现代文：这年饥荒，仲洙上表请求开仓济民，没等答复，先行救济出借粮食，有司弹劾他，判他用财物赎罪。
English: During the famine of that year, Zhong Xuan made a request on the table to open a warehouse to help the people, but did not wait for a reply. He asked for advance relief and loaned grain. A judge impeached him and sentenced him to use his property to atone for his sins.

古文：再转大理卿，以丧去，起复为尚书刑部侍郎，兼郓王傅，迁南京路转运使。
现代文：当时仲洙兄仲渊因罪被责罚到石州，仲洙上书请求用莱州换石州，朝廷议论了没有同意。
English: At that time, Zhongyu's brother, Zhong Yuan, was punished to Shizhou for his crime. Zhongyu sent a letter requesting that Laizhou be exchanged for Shizhou, and the court discussed whether to agree.

古文：承安三年致仕，卒。
现代文：过了较长一段日子，因为年老请求辞官，多次上表才被接受。
English: After a long period of time, because of old age, he asked to be discharged, and was only accepted after he had been discharged several times.

古文：移剌益，字子迁，本名特末阿不，中都路胡鲁土猛安人也。
现代文：泰和八年去世，享年七十五岁。仲洙性情刚强正直，参与政事果断，尤其善长治理百姓，任职的地方都有功绩，是当时的能吏。移剌益，字子迁，本名特末阿不，中都路胡鲁土猛安人。
English: He died in the eighth year of the Taihe era, at the age of seventy-five. Zhong Qi had a strong and upright disposition, participated in political affairs decisively, and was especially good at governing the people. He had achievements in all places he served, and was a capable official at that time. He was born with the name Temu Ah No, and was a native of Hulutsu and Meng'an in Zhongdu.

古文：以荫补国史院书写，积劳调徐州录事，召为枢密院知法，三迁翰林修撰。
现代文：因祖上当官补任国史院书写，累积功劳后调为徐州录事，接着召任枢密院知法，第三次升为翰林修撰。
English: Due to his father's position as a high-ranking official, he was appointed to write for the National Academy of History. After accumulating merits, he was transferred to the Xuzhou Record, then appointed to the Privy Council to study the law, and for the third time he was promoted to the Hanlin Revision.

古文：时北边有警，诏百官集尚书省议之，太尉克宁锐意用兵，益言天时未利，宜俟后图。
现代文：当时北边有紧急情况，皇帝诏令百官在尚书省商议，太尉克宁力主用兵，益说天时不利，应等待以后再谋划。
English: At that time, there was an emergency situation in the north. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering hundreds of officials to discuss the situation in Shangshu Province. Taifu Kening made the main use of soldiers, and Yi said that the weather was unfavorable and that they should wait and plan later.

古文：御史台举益刚正可任，遂兼监察御史。
现代文：御史台推荐益刚强正直可担重任，于是兼监察御史。
English: The Imperial Historian's Office recommended that Yigangqiang Honesty could take on the heavy responsibility, so he also supervised the Imperial Historian.

古文：未几，改户部员外郎。
现代文：没多久，改为户部员外郎。
English: Not long after, he was changed to Gairo, a member of the household department.

古文：明昌三年，畿内饥，擢授霸州刺史，同授刺史者十一人，既入谢，诏谕之曰： 亲民之职，惟在守令，比岁民饥，故遣卿等往抚育之。
现代文：明昌三年，京城地区饥荒，提拔任命益为霸州刺史，同授刺史的有十一人，不久入朝谢恩，下诏告诉他们说： 亲近百姓的职务只有郡守县令，连年百姓饥荒，所以派你们前去安抚养育他们。
English: In the third year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, there was a famine in the Beijing area, and the promotion and appointment of Yi as the chief historian of Bazhou, and there were eleven people who were awarded the same degree of history, and soon he entered the court and thanked them, and told them: The only positions that are close to the people are county governors and county magistrates, and the people are starving year after year, so they sent you to pacify and nurture them.

古文：其资序有过者有弗及者，朕不计此，但以材选，尔其知之。 
现代文：你们中的资历有超过的有没有达到的，我不考虑这些，只按照才能选用，你们应知道这些。 
English: Some of you have more seniority than others, whether you have achieved it or not, I don't think about these things, I only choose according to ability. You should know these things.

古文：既至，首出俸粟以食饥者，于是倅以下及郡人递出粟以佐之，且命属县视以为法，多所全活。
现代文：不久移剌益到达霸州，首先拿出俸禄中的粮食给饥饿的人吃，于是副职以下和郡中人依次拿出粮食来帮助饥民，而且命令属下县视之为法，多处地方百姓全活了下来。
English: Soon after, Xinyi arrived in Bazhou. First, he took out the grain from his salary to feed the starving people. Then, the vice-ministers and people in the county took out the grain to help the starving people, and ordered the subordinate counties to regard it as the law. In many places, all the local people survived.

古文：郡东南有堤久颓圮，水屡为害，益增修之，民以为便，为益立祠。
现代文：郡东南有河堤长久坍塌，大水多次成灾，益加修了它，百姓生活变为安逸，为益建立祠堂。
English: In the southeast of the county, there was a river embankment that had collapsed for a long time, and the heavy water caused many disasters. It was repaired more and more, the people's life became comfortable, and an ancestral hall was built for the benefit.

古文：升辽东路提刑副使。
现代文：升任辽东路提刑副使。
English: He was promoted to Deputy Envoy of Liaodong Road Traffic Penalty.

古文：五年，宋主新立，诏以泗州当使客所经，守臣宜择人，宰臣进拟数人，皆不合上意，上曰： 特末阿不安在？
现代文：五年，宋主刚登位，皇帝下诏说泗州处在使臣经过的地方，防守的官员应挑选好，宰臣拟定几人，都不合皇上心意，皇上说 ：特末阿不在什么地方？
English: Five years later, when Emperor Song had just ascended to the throne, the emperor issued an edict saying that Zhangzhou was located where the envoys had passed, and that the officials responsible for the defense should be carefully selected. The number of vice-ministers drafted was not in accordance with the emperor's wishes. The emperor said, "Where is Temua?

古文：此人可也。 
现代文：这人可以。 
English: This guy can.

古文：即授防御使。
现代文：马上授予防御使。
English: Assign a defense attache immediately.

古文：召为尚书户部侍郎，寻转兵部。
现代文：移剌益被召任尚书户部侍郎，不久转兵部。
English: Ikuyamasu was appointed as a chamberlain of the Household Division of the Imperial Household Agency, and was soon transferred to the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：属群牧人叛，命益同殿前都点检兖往招降之。
现代文：隶属的众牧人反叛，命令益和殿前都点检兖前去招降他们。
English: All the shepherds who belonged to him rebelled, and he ordered Ip and Tuan to go to the front to invite them to surrender.

古文：承安二年，边鄙弗宁，上御便殿，召朝官四品以上入议，益谓 守为便。
现代文：承安二年，边疆不安宁，皇帝亲临便殿，召集四品以上朝官来商议，益提出： 防守有利。
English: In the second year of Cheng'an, when the frontier was restless, the emperor himself came to Ben Hall, summoned more than four imperial officials to discuss, and proposed the following: Defense is advantageous.

古文：天子之兵当取万全，若王师轻出，少有不利，非惟损大国之威，恐启敌人侵玩之心。 
现代文：天子的军队应取得绝对安全，如果我军轻易出动，稍遭受不利，不只损害大国的威严，恐怕引发敌人轻视及侵犯之心。 
English: The army of the Son of God should obtain absolute security. If our army is easily dispatched and suffers a slight disadvantage, it will not only damage the majesty of the great power, but may also cause the enemy to despise and infringe.

古文：出为山东西路转运使。
现代文：他出任山东西路转运使。
English: He served as the mountain east-west road transfer envoy.

古文：有敕使按鹰于山东，益奏： 乞止令调于近甸，何必惊远方耳目。 
现代文：有皇帝的使者在山东试鹰，益进言说： 请求只在都城郊外训练，何必惊动远方人呢？ 
English: An emissary of the emperor tested the eagle in Shandong, and Yixin said: "Ask for training only on the outskirts of the capital, why should you alarm people far away?

古文：书闻，上命有司治使者罪。
现代文：听到报告，皇帝命有司惩处使者。
English: Upon hearing the report, the emperor ordered the magistrate to punish the messenger.

古文：迁河东南北路按察使。
现代文：升任河东南北路按察使。
English: He was promoted to the post of inspector of the North-South Road of Hedong.

古文：旧制，在位官有不任职，委所属上司体访。
现代文：原先制度，在职的官员有不胜任的，委托他的上司据实查访。
English: Under the previous system, if an incumbent official was found to be incompetent, his superior would be entrusted to make a fact-based inspection.

古文：州府长贰幕职，许互相举申。
现代文：州府的正副职和幕府官员，允许互相举报申述。
English: The officials and deputies of the prefectural government and the officials of the shogunate were allowed to report complaints to each other.

古文：益上言以为： 伤礼让之风，亦恐同官因之不睦，别生奸弊。
现代文：益上言认为 ：这损害礼让之风，也恐怕同官为此不和，另外生出弊病来。
English: This damages the style of courtesy, and I am afraid that colleagues will not get along with each other because of this, and other ills will arise.

古文：乞止令按察司纠劾，似为得体 。
现代文：请求仅令按察司纠正揭发，似乎更为恰当。 
English: It would seem more appropriate for the request to be directed only to the IAD to correct the disclosure.

古文：又言： 随路点军官与富人饮会，公通献遗，宜依准监临官于所部内犯罪究治。 
现代文：又说 ：随路点军官和富人饮酒聚会，公开通报进献赠送，应得到准许由监察官在所部内追究当事人的犯法行为。 
English: He also said that officers and rich people should be allowed to have drinking parties along the way, publicly announce donations and gifts, and allow the inspector to investigate the offenses of the parties within the department.

古文：上皆纳焉。
现代文：皇上都采纳了。
English: The Emperor accepted all of them.

古文：泰和二年，卒于官。
现代文：泰和二年，在官任上去世。
English: He died in office two years later.

