古文：◎世宗中十二年正月庚午朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定十二年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twelfth year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia separately sent envoys to pay homage.

古文：戊寅，诏有司： 凡陈言文字，皆国政利害，自今言有可行，以其本封送秘书监，当行者录副付所司。 
现代文：九日，皇上诏令有司： 凡是陈述文字，都是与国家政事有利害关系，从今天起如果要陈述事情，拿它的原封送到秘书监，应当处理的录副本交付给所该管的部门。 
English: On the 9th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: "All written statements are of interest to national politics. From today, if you want to make a statement, take its original envelope and send it to the secretary, and deliver the copy of the record to the department in charge.

古文：丙申，以水旱，免中都、西京、南京、河北、河东、山东、陕西去年租税。
现代文：二十七日，因为水灾和旱灾，免去中都、西京、南京、河北、河东、山东、陕西去年的租税。
English: On the 27th, due to floods and droughts, last year's taxes were exempted from Zhongdu, Xijing, Nanjing, Hebei, Hedong, Shandong and Shaanxi.

古文：二月壬寅，上召诸王府长史谕之曰： 朕选汝等，正欲劝导诸王，使之为善。
现代文：二月三日，皇上召见各王府长史向他们宣告： 朕选用你们，正是打算劝导各位王爷，让他们做好事。
English: On February 3rd, the emperor summoned the prefects of the royal courts to declare to them: I have chosen you precisely to persuade the princes to do good deeds.

古文：如诸王所为有所未善，当力陈之，尚或不从，则具某日行某事以奏。
现代文：如果诸王所作所为有什么不好的，应当尽力劝说他们，如果有的人不听从，那么将他们某日做某事具体拿来禀奏。
English: If there is something wrong with what the kings are doing, you should try to persuade them, and if some people don't listen, then you should make a concrete case of them doing something one day.

古文：若阿意不言，朕惟汝罪。 
现代文：如果顺承他们的意思而不说，朕只拿你们问罪。 
English: If you do what they want and don't tell them, I'll only hold you responsible.

古文：丙午，尚书省奏，廉察到同知城阳军事山和尚等清强官，上曰： 此辈暗察明访皆著政声，可第其政绩，各进官旌赏。
现代文：七日，尚书省禀奏，廉政考察得知同知城阳军事山和尚等人是清官、强官，皇上说 ：这类人明访暗察为政都有显著的声誉，可以按他们政绩的等次，分别进升官级，并表彰奖励。
English: On the 7th, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology announced that the investigation into corruption in politics had learned that the Chengyang Military Mountain Monk and others known to him were clean officials and strong officials. The emperor said, "These types of people have a remarkable reputation for their political activities. They can be promoted to higher ranks according to the order of their political achievements, and they will be commended and rewarded."

古文：其速议升除。 
现代文：要尽快讨论他们进升的事。 
English: We need to discuss their promotion as soon as possible.

古文：庚戌，上如顺州春水。
现代文：十一日，皇上到顺州春水去。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor went to Shunzhou Chunshui.

古文：癸丑，还都。
现代文：十四日，返回京都。
English: On the 14th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：丙辰，诏： 自今官长不法，其僚佐不能纠正又不言上者，并坐之。 
现代文：十七日，皇上诏令： 从今天起官长有不法行为，他的幕僚辅佐既不能纠正又不向上报告的，一并判罪。 
English: On the 17th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: From today, if a government official commits an illegal act and his staff assistant can neither correct it nor report it to the higher-ups, both of them will be convicted.

古文：户部尚书高德基滥支朝官俸钱四十万贯，杖八十。
现代文：户部尚书高德基滥支朝官俸钱四十万贯，被打八十杖。
English: The head of the household, Shangshu Gao Deji, was fined 80 strokes of the cane for spending 400,000 yuan of the salary of a government official.

古文：三月己巳朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate each other.

古文：乙亥，诏尚书省： 赃污之官，已被廉问，若仍旧职，必复害民。
现代文：七日，皇上诏令尚书省 ：贪赃枉法的官吏，已经被考察探访清楚的，如果仍然担任旧职，必定继续坑害百姓。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor issued an imperial edict to the Ministry of Education: the corrupt officials who have been investigated and visited clearly, if they still hold their old positions, will certainly continue to harm the people.

古文：其遣使诸道，即日罢之。 
现代文：要派遣使者分别到诸道，当天罢免他们。 
English: Let messengers be sent out into the highways, and let them be gathered together on the same day.

古文：丁丑，诏遣宿直将军乌古论思列，册封王皓为高丽国王。
现代文：九日，皇上诏令派遣宿直将军乌古论思列，册封王鰑为高丽国王。
English: On the 9th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to dispatch General Ugu Thongthul to Korea, and proclaimed Wang Quan as the King of Korea.

古文：庚寅，雨土。
现代文：二十二日，雨土。
English: On the 22nd, it rained.

古文：癸巳，以前西北路招讨使移剌道为参知政事。
现代文：二十五日，任命前西北路招讨使移剌道为参知政事。
English: On the 25th, the former Northwest Road Zhaotong Road Zhaotong Road Zhaotong Road was appointed as a political advisor.

古文：回纥遣使来贡。
现代文：回纥遣使来朝贡。
English: The envoys from Edo came to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，北京曹贵等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，北京曹贵等人阴谋造反，伏法被诛。
English: On the 29th, Beijing Cao Gui and others plotted to rebel, and Fufa was arrested.

古文：四月，旱。
现代文：四月，天旱。
English: In April, there was a drought.

古文：癸卯，尚书右丞孟浩罢。
现代文：五日，尚书右丞孟浩被罢官。
English: On the 5th, Meng Hao, Shang Shuyuan, was dismissed.

古文：丁巳，西北路纳合七斤等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十九日，西北路纳合七斤等阴谋造反，伏法被诛。
English: On the 19th, Northwest Luna and Seven Jins conspired to rebel, and Fuba was arrested.

古文：癸亥，以久旱，命铸祠山川。
现代文：二十五日，因为久旱，皇上命令向山川祈祷。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, because of the long drought, the emperor ordered to pray to the mountains and rivers.

古文：诏宰臣曰： 诸府少尹多阙员，当选进士虽资叙未至而有政声者，擢用之。 
现代文：诏令宰相大臣说 ：各位府中少尹大多缺员，应当从进士中选拔虽然资历不足然而有政绩声名的人，提升任用他们。 
English: The prime minister said in his edict, "There are many vacancies in the middle and lower echelons of the government, and it is necessary to select from among the new recruits those who, although lacking qualifications, have a reputation for political achievements, and promote and appoint them.

古文：以宿直将军唐括阿忽里为横赐夏国使。
现代文：派宿直将军唐括阿忽里为横赐夏国使。
English: He appointed the general of the Tang Dynasty, Ah Kuli, as the envoy to Xia.

古文：乙丑，大名尹荆王文以赃罪夺王爵，降授德州防御使。
现代文：二十七日，大名府尹荆王文因为犯贪赃罪而被剥夺王爵，降职授予德州防御使。
English: On the 27th, the daimyofu, Yin Jing Wangwen, was stripped of his title for committing the crime of embezzlement, and was demoted to the post of Texas defense envoy.

古文：回纥使使来贡。
现代文：回纥派使者来进贡。
English: The Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙寅，尚书右丞相纥石烈志宁薨。
现代文：二十八日，尚书右丞相纥石烈志宁逝世。
English: On the 28th, Minister of the Right of the Shoshu Sect, Shoseki Reshinin, passed away.

古文：丁卯，宋、高丽遣使贺尊号。
现代文：二十九日，宋国、高丽派遣使者来恭贺皇上受尊号。
English: On the 29th, Song and Goryeo sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：阻珝来贡。
现代文：阻卜来朝贡。
English: The imperial tribute was delayed.

古文：五月癸酉，上如百花川。
现代文：五月五日，皇上到百花川。
English: On May 5th, the Emperor went to the Hyakka River.

古文：甲戌，命赈山东东路胡剌温猛安民饥。
现代文：六日，命令赈济山东东路胡剌温猛安饥民。
English: On the sixth day, he ordered the starving people in Huye Wenmongan, Dongdong Road, Shandong, Fujian Province.

古文：丁丑，次阻居。
现代文：九日，到达阻居。
English: On the 9th, they arrived at the detention center.

古文：久旱而雨。
现代文：久旱以来下了雨。
English: It has rained since the drought.

古文：戊寅，观稼。
现代文：十日，皇上视察庄稼。
English: On the 10th, the Emperor inspected the crops.

古文：禁扈从蹂践民田。禁百官及承应人不得服纯黄油衣。
现代文：禁止护驾随从人员蹂践民田，禁止百官以及承应人员穿纯黄油衣。
English: It is forbidden for escorts to trample on people's fields, and it is forbidden for officials and contractors to wear pure butter clothing.

古文：癸未，谕宰臣曰： 朕每次舍，凡就秣马之具皆假于民间，多亡失不还其主。
现代文：十五日，皇上向宰相大臣宣谕： 朕每当到达住宿处，凡是秣马的器具都从民间借来，大多丢失没有归还它的主人。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor declared to the prime minister: Whenever I arrive at the lodging place, I borrow all the horse-riding equipment from the people, and most of it is lost and has not been returned to its owner.

古文：此弹压官不职，可择人代之。
现代文：这是弹压官不尽职，可以选择人代替他。
English: This is the bouncer not doing his job, you can choose someone to replace him.

古文：所过即令询问，但亡失民间什物，并偿其直。 
现代文：所经过的地方即让人询问一下，凡是丢失民间什物，一并按价赔偿。 
English: People should inquire about the places they pass by. Any lost folk things should be compensated at the same time.

古文：乙酉，诏给西北路人户牛。
现代文：十七日，诏令给西北路人户发牛。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict issued to the households of Northwest Road.

古文：六月甲寅，如金莲川。
现代文：六月十七日，到金莲川。
English: On June 17th, they arrived in Jinlianchuan.

古文：九月丙子，至自金莲川。
现代文：九月十日，从金莲川返回。
English: On September 10, he returned from Jinlianchuan.

古文：辛巳，以右副都点检来谷清臣等为贺宋生日使，右卫将军粘割斡特剌为夏国生日使。
现代文：十五日，让右副都点检夹谷清臣等人作为贺宋生日使，右卫将军粘割斡特剌作为夏国生日使。
English: On the fifteenth day, let the right vice-governor, Jinggu Qingchen, and others act as the birthday envoy of He Song, and the right guard general, Gui Kui, as the birthday envoy of Xia Guo.

古文：丁亥，太白昼见，在日前。
现代文：二十一日，太白金星白日显现，在日前。
English: On the twenty-first day, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime, a few days ago.

古文：鄜州李方等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：州李方等人阴谋造反，伏法被诛。
English: State Li Fang and others conspired to rebel, and Fuba was arrested.

古文：十月，高丽国王王皓遣使谢封册。
现代文：十月，高丽国王王鰑派遣使者来朝感谢册封。
English: In October, the King of Goryeo, Wang Yi, sent an envoy to the DPRK to thank and seal the book.

古文：乙未，临奠故右丞相纥石烈志宁丧，志宁妻永安县主进铠甲、弓矢、鹰鹘、重彩。
现代文：十日，皇上亲临祭奠已故右丞相纥石烈志宁丧事，志宁的妻子、永安县主进献铠甲、弓矢、鹰鹘、彩绸。
English: On the 10th, the Emperor himself came to pay his respects at the funeral of the late Minister of the Right, Shishile Shining, and Shining's wife, the head of Yong'an County, presented armour, bows and arrows, eagles, and colored silk.

古文：壬子，召皇太子及赵王永中上殿，上顾谓宰臣曰： 京尝图逆，今不除之，恐为后患。 
现代文：十七日，召皇太子及赵王永中上殿，皇上环顾诸位宰相大臣并对他们说 ：京曾经图谋叛逆，现在不除掉他，恐怕要成为后患。 
English: On the 17th, the crown prince and Zhao Wang Yongzhong were summoned to the palace. The emperor looked around at the prime ministers and ministers and said to them: Beijing once plotted to rebel, and if they do not get rid of him now, I am afraid they will become a problem in the future.

古文：又曰： 天下大器归于有德。
现代文：又说 ：天下成大器的都归于德行。
English: He also said: Virtue is what makes the world great.

古文：海陵失道，朕乃得之。
现代文：因为海陵失道，朕才得天下。
English: Because Hailing lost his way, I came to the world.

古文：但务修德，余何足虑。 
现代文：所以务必修养德性，如果都这样，朕还有什么足以忧虑的？ 
English: Therefore, it is imperative to cultivate virtue. If everything is like this, what else should I be worried about?

古文：皇太子及永中皆曰： 诚如圣训。 
现代文：皇太子和永中都说 ：诚如圣训。 
English: Both the crown prince and Yongzhong said, "Honesty is like a hadith.

古文：遂释之。
现代文：于是让他们回去了。
English: As a result, Wang Hanzhang was captured and presented to the emperor.

古文：丙辰，以德州防御使文赀产赐其兄之子咬住，且谕其母： 文之罪，汝等皆当连坐。
现代文：二十一日，把德州防御使文赀的资产赐给他兄长的儿子咬住，并且告诉文赀的母亲： 按文赀的罪行，你们都应当一并判罪。
English: On the 21st, the Texas Defense Force seized the assets of Wenyi, gave them to his brother's son, and told Wenyi's mother: According to Wenyi's crime, you should all be sentenced together.

古文：念宋王有大功于国，故置不问，仍以家产赐汝子。 
现代文：念宋王对国家有大功，所以放下不问，仍然把文赀的家产赐给你的儿子。 
English: Nian Song Wang has made great contributions to the country, so don't ask, but still give Wenyi's family property to your son.

古文：十一月甲戌，上谓宰臣曰： 宗室中有不任官事者，若不加恩泽，于亲亲之道，有所未弘。
现代文：十一月九日，皇上对宰相大臣们说： 宗室中有不担任国家官事的，如果不对他们惠加恩泽，对于亲亲之道，发扬有所不足。
English: On November 9, the emperor said to the prime ministers and ministers: If we do not favor those in the imperial family who are not government officials, we are not doing enough to promote the way of being close to relatives.

古文：朕欲授以散官，量予廪禄，未知前代何如？ 
现代文：朕打算授予他们闲散官职，酌情给予俸禄，不知前朝对这类事是怎么办理的？ 
English: I intend to grant them idle official positions and pay them a salary as appropriate. I don't know how the previous government handled such matters.

古文：左丞石琚曰： 陶唐之亲九族，周家之内睦九族，见于《诗》、《书》，皆帝王美事也。 
现代文：左丞石琚说： 陶唐的亲善九族，周天子的内睦九族，从《诗经》、《书经》中即可看出，都是帝王的美德善举。 
English: Zuo Shiqi said, "Tao Tang's friendship with nine ethnic groups and Zhou Tianzi's conciliation with nine ethnic groups can be seen from "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Books" as the emperor's virtue and benevolence.

古文：丙子，上以曹国公主家奴犯事，宛平令刘彦弼杖之，主乃折辱令，既深责公主，又以台臣徇势偷安，畏忌不敢言，夺俸一月。
现代文：十一日，皇上因为曹国公主的家奴犯事，宛平令刘彦弼杖打了这个家奴，而受到公主的折辱，于是深责公主，又因为台臣徇势偷安，畏惧忌讳不敢说话，而剥夺他们一个月的俸禄。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Wenping ordered Liu Yan to beat the slave of Princess Cao's family with a cane, because the slave had committed a crime. The slave was humiliated by the princess, so the Emperor deeply reprimanded the princess, and deprived them of one month's salary, because the Taiwanese officials were too timid to speak out for fear of the taboo.

古文：以陕西统军使璋为御史大夫。
现代文：任命陕西统军使璋为御史大夫。
English: The envoy of the Shaanxi Unification Army, Zou, was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：以户部尚书曹望之为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：派遣户部尚书曹望之为贺宋正旦使。
English: He Song Zhengtan envoy dispatched by Shang Shuxiao Cao Wangjing of the Household Department.

古文：壬午，同州民屈立等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十七日，同州人屈立等人谋划造反，伏法被杀。
English: On the 17th, Tongzhou people such as Qu Li and others plotted a rebellion, and Fuba was killed.

古文：戊子，上屏侍臣，与宰臣议事，记注官亦退，上曰： 史官记人君善恶，朕之言动及与卿等所议，皆当与知。其于记录无或有隐，可以朕意谕之。 
现代文：二十三日，皇上屏退了侍臣，和宰相大臣议事，记注官也退避了。皇上说： 史官记载为人君的善行和恶行，朕的言行以及和卿等人所议论的话，你们都应当让他们知道，哪些在记录中没有的要补充，或有的要隐去不记的，可以把朕的旨意告诉他们知道。 
English: On the 23rd, the emperor dismissed his attendants and ministers, and the notetaker also withdrew. The emperor said: Historians record the good deeds and bad deeds of people, my words and deeds, and the discussions with my lords and other people. You should let them know what is not in the record to be added, or some things to be hidden and not remembered, you can tell them my will.

古文：十二月乙未朔，以济南尹刘萼在定武军贪墨不道，命大理少卿张九思鞫之。
现代文：十二月一日，因为济南尹刘萼在定武军中贪图财利逆行不道，皇上命令大理寺少卿张九思审理他的事。
English: On December 1, the emperor ordered Zhang Jiusi, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, to investigate Jinan Yin Liu Cai's activities in the Dingwu army.

古文：丁酉，诏遣官及护卫二十人，分路选年二十以上四十以下有门地才行及善射者，充护卫，不得过百人。
现代文：三日，诏令派遣官员以及护卫二十人，分路选拔年龄在二十岁以上、四十岁以下的，有门第才行并且善射的人，充实护卫，但不得超过一百人。
English: On the third day, the imperial edict dispatched officials and twenty guards. Those who were over the age of twenty and under the age of forty, those who were talented and good at shooting, were selected to supplement the guards, but not more than a hundred people.

古文：冀州王琼等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：冀州王琼等人谋划造反，伏法被杀。
English: Jizhou Wang Qiong and others plotted a rebellion, and Fufao was killed.

古文：德州防御使文以谋反，伏诛。
现代文：德州防御使文因为谋反，也伏法被诛。
English: Texas defense emissary Wen was also arrested for plotting a rebellion.

古文：辛丑，出宫女二十余人。
现代文：七日，宫女二十余人被遣出宫。
English: On the seventh day, more than twenty maids of honor were sent out of the palace.

古文：己酉，枢密副使移剌成罢。
现代文：十五日，枢密副使移剌成罢官。
English: On the 15th, the vice-minister of the privy council was dismissed.

古文：辛亥，禁审录官以宴饮废公务。
现代文：十七日，禁止审录官因为宴饮而荒废公务。
English: On the 17th, the court clerk was prohibited from abandoning his official duties because of the banquet.

古文：诏金、银坑冶听民开采，毋得收税。
现代文：诏令金、银坑冶听任人民开采，不得征收税金。
English: According to the edict, gold and silver pits were to be mined by the people, and no taxes were to be levied.

古文：癸丑，猎于近郊。
现代文：十八日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 18th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：以殿前都点检徒单克宁为枢密副使。
现代文：任命殿前都点检徒单克宁为枢密副使。
English: Appointed the former imperial inspector Shan Kening as a privy vice-envoy.

古文：己未，诏自今除名人子孙有在仕者并取奏裁。
现代文：二十四日，诏令从今天起除了名人子孙以外有任现职官员的要一起上奏裁减。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict decreed that from today, in addition to the descendants of famous people, the incumbent officials should be reduced together.

古文：十三年正月乙丑朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定十三年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia separately sent envoys to pay homage.

古文：癸酉，尚书省奏，南客车俊等因榷场贸易，误犯边界，罪当死。
现代文：九日，尚书省禀奏，南方客商车俊等人因在边疆市场搞贸易，误犯边界，罪当处死。
English: On the 9th day of the month, Shang Shuxu, Chejun, a Southern passenger merchant, and others were sentenced to death for engaging in trade in the frontier market, violating the border by mistake.

古文：上曰： 本非故意，可免罪发还，毋令彼国知之，恐复治其罪。 
现代文：皇上说 ：本来他们不是故意的，可以免罪放他们回去，不要让他们国家知道这件事，恐怕再治他们的罪。 
English: The emperor said, "They didn't mean to do it. They can be released without charge. Don't let their country know about this. I'm afraid they'll be punished again."

古文：诏有司严禁州县坊里为民害者。
现代文：诏令有司严格禁止州县坊里危害百姓的人和事。
English: The edict strictly forbids people and things that endanger the people in counties and counties.

古文：闰月壬子，诏太子詹事曰： 东宫官属尤当选用正人，如行检不修及不称职者，具以名闻。 
现代文：闰正月十九日，诏令太子詹事说： 东宫的官员们尤其应当选用正派的人，如果有行为不检点没修养不称职的，要具体把名字告诉我。 
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the leap year, Prince Zhan Zhi said: The officials of the East Palace should especially choose decent people. If there is a person who behaves inappropriately, is not well-groomed and is not competent, they should specifically tell me the name.

古文：辛酉，太白昼见。
现代文：二十八日，太白金星白日显现。
English: On the 28th, the too-white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：洛阳县贼聚众攻卢氏县，杀县令李庭才，亡入于宋。
现代文：洛阳县贼寇聚众攻打卢氏县，杀死县令李庭才，然后逃到宋国去了。
English: Thieves and robbers from Luoyang County gathered to attack Lu County, killed the county magistrate Li Tingcai, and then fled to Song.

古文：三月癸巳朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate each other.

古文：乙卯，上谓宰臣曰： 会宁乃国家兴王之地，自海陵迁都永安，女直人浸忘旧风。
现代文：二十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：会宁是国家兴起称王之地，自从海陵迁都永安，女真人逐渐遗忘旧的风俗。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: Hoeryong is the place where the country rose to glory. Since the relocation of the capital to Yongan, the Jurchens have gradually forgotten the old customs.

古文：朕时尝见女直风俗，迄今不忘。
现代文：朕过去曾经见过女真风俗，至今不忘。
English: In the past, I have seen feminine customs, and I have never forgotten them.

古文：今之燕饮音乐，皆习汉风，盖以备礼也，非朕心所好。
现代文：今天的宴饮音乐，都是沿袭汉代风俗，全要备礼，不是朕心里所喜欢的。
English: Today's banquet music, all of which follow the customs of the Han Dynasty, all of which require preparation, is not what I like in my heart.

古文：东宫不知女直风俗，第以朕故，犹尚存之。
现代文：东宫不知道女真风俗，因为朕的缘故，还暂且保存一些女真风俗。
English: The East Palace didn't know about the custom of Nymphomania. Because of me, they temporarily preserved some of the customs of Nymphomania.

古文：恐异时一变此风，非长久之计。
现代文：恐怕过些时候改变了这种风俗，不是长久之计。
English: I'm afraid that changing this custom after some time is not a long-term solution.

古文：甚欲一至会宁，使子孙得见旧俗，庶几习效之。 
现代文：很想到一次会宁，让子孙得以见到旧俗，也许可以学习仿效。 
English: I would like to have a reunion so that my children and grandchildren can see the old customs and perhaps learn to imitate them.

古文：太子詹事刘仲诲请增东宫牧人及张设，上曰： 东宫诸司局人自有常数，张设已具，尚何增益。
现代文：太子詹事刘仲诲请示增加东宫的管理人员以及各种陈设，皇上说： 东宫各司局人员自有规定的数额，铺张陈设已经完备，还有什么必要增加？
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Liu Zhongren asked for instructions to increase the management staff of the East Palace and various furnishings. The emperor said: The staff of each department of the East Palace has its own specified amount, the furnishings have been completed, what else needs to be added?

古文：太子生于富贵，易入于侈，惟当导以淳俭。
现代文：太子出生在富贵环境，容易走入奢侈，只应当引导他俭朴。
English: Prince was born in a wealthy environment, easy to walk into luxury, only should guide him to be frugal.

古文：朕自即位以来，服御器物，往往仍旧，卿以此意谕之。 
现代文：朕自从即位以来，穿衣服及御用器物，往往沿用旧的，卿把朕的意思告诉东宫。 
English: Since ascending the throne, I have often worn old clothes and used old utensils. Sir, please tell the East Palace what I meant.

古文：四月己巳，定出继子所继财产不及本家者，以所继与本家财产通数均分制。
现代文：四月七日，定出制度：出继子所继承的财产不如本家多的，拿所继承的与本家的财产放在一起平均分配。
English: On April 7, a system was established: if the property inherited by the stepchild is not as much as that of the family, the inherited property and the family's property should be put together and divided equally.

古文：以有司言，特授洺州孝子刘政太子掌饮丞。
现代文：因为有司提议，特别授予州孝子刘政为太子掌饮丞。
English: Because it was proposed by a division, Liu Zheng, a filial son of the state, was specially awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：乙亥，上御睿思殿，命歌者歌女直词。
现代文：十三日，皇上御临睿思殿，命令唱歌的人唱女真词。
English: On the thirteenth day, Emperor Lin Rui Si marched to the palace and ordered the singers to sing the truth.

古文：顾谓皇太子及诸王曰： 朕思先朝所行之事，未尝堑忘，故时听此词，亦欲令汝辈知之。
现代文：并环顾皇太子以及各位王说 ：朕考虑先朝所施行的事，不曾有暂时的忘记，所以时常听这歌词，也想让你们了解这歌词。
English: He looked around at the crown prince and the other kings and said, "I have never temporarily forgotten what I did during the previous reign, so I often listen to this song, and I want you to understand this song.

古文：汝辈自幼惟习汉人风俗，不知女直纯实之风，至于文字语言，或不通晓，是忘本也。
现代文：你们自幼只学习汉人风俗，不知道女真族纯朴诚实的民风，至于文字语言，有的人不通晓，那是忘本。
English: You have only learned Chinese customs since childhood, and do not know the simple and honest folk customs of the Jurchen people. As for the written language, some people are not familiar with it, it is a forgotten book.

古文：汝辈当体朕意，至于子孙，亦当遵朕教诫也。 
现代文：你们应当体察朕的意思，至于子孙，也应当遵从朕的教诲训诫。 
English: Give ear to my counsel, and hearken to my teaching and my admonition, O ye children.

古文：辛巳，更定盗宗庙祭物法。
现代文：十九日，修定盗宗庙祭物法。
English: On the 19th, the Law on the Sacrifices of the Juche Unification Church was amended.

古文：五月壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月一日，有日食现象发生。
English: On May 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：戊戌，禁女直人毋得译为汉姓。
现代文：七日，下禁令女真人不得译成汉族姓氏。
English: On the 7th, the ban on translating Jurchen surnames into Han surnames went into effect.

古文：壬寅，真定尹孟浩薨。
现代文：十一日，真定府尹孟浩逝世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yin Menghao of Jindingfu passed away.

古文：甲辰，尚书省癸，邓州民范三殴杀人，当死，而亲老无侍。
现代文：十三日，尚书省禀奏，邓州人范三打死人，应当处死，然而他的老人无人侍奉。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, according to the Song of Song, the man from Dangzhou, Fan San Du, killed three people and should be put to death, but there was no one to serve his old man.

古文：上曰： 在丑不争谓之孝，孝然后能养。
现代文：皇上说 ：逆来顺受才叫作孝，孝顺然后才能养老。
English: The emperor said, "It is called filial piety to be obedient, and filial piety to be able to retire."

古文：斯人以一朝之忿忘其身，而有事亲之心乎？
现代文：这个人因为一时的愤怨而忘掉自己的性命，还有侍奉双亲之心吗？
English: Did this man forget his own life and his heart to serve his parents because of a momentary grudge?

古文：可论如法，其亲，官与养济。 
现代文：可以按法论处。他的双亲，官府给与救济抚养。 
English: He can be dealt with according to the law. His parents are supported by the government.

古文：六月，枢密使完颜思敬薨。
现代文：六月，枢密使完颜思敬逝世。
English: In June, the Privy Counsellor Kang Yan Si Kei passed away.

古文：七月庚子，复以会宁府为上京。
现代文：七月九日，又把会宁府作为上京。
English: On July 9th, he also made Hoeryongfu the capital.

古文：庚戌，罢岁课雉尾。
现代文：十九日，罢除每年收缴的雉尾税。
English: On the 19th, the Shanwei tax collected every year was cancelled.

古文：八月丁卯，以判大兴尹赵王永中为枢密使。
现代文：八月七日，任命判大兴府尹赵王永中为枢密使。
English: On August 7th, Yin Zhao Wang Yongzhong was appointed as a privy councilor.

古文：诏赐诸猛安谋克廉能三等官赏。
现代文：诏令赐予各猛安谋克廉能三等官赏。
English: The imperial edict awarded the third-class official award to each of the fierce amulets.

古文：己卯，御史大夫璋罢。
现代文：十九日，御史大夫璋被罢免。
English: On the 19th, Dr. Mishi was removed from his post.

古文：丙戌，以左副都点检襄等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：二十六日，派遣左副都点检襄等人当贺宋生日使。
English: On the 26th, the left vice-premier Du Dang Jianxiang and others were dispatched as He Song's birthday envoys.

古文：丁亥，秋猎。
现代文：二十七日，开始秋季打猎行动。
English: On the 27th, the autumn hunting operation began.

古文：九月辛卯朔，以宿直将军胡什赉为夏国生日使。
现代文：九月一日，派遣宿直将军胡什赉当夏国生日使。
English: On September 1, General Hu Shizhen was dispatched as an envoy to celebrate the birthday of Xia Guo.

古文：辛亥，还都。
现代文：二十一日，返回京都。
English: On the 21st, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：大名府僧李智究等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：大名府的僧人李智究等人谋划造反，伏法被杀。
English: Daimyo-fu monk Li Zhicheng and others plotted a rebellion, and Fubao was killed.

古文：十月乙丑，岁星昼见。
现代文：十月六日，岁星白天显现。
English: On October 6th, the year star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙子，以前南京留守唐括安礼为尚书右丞。
现代文：十七日，任命前南京留守唐括安礼为尚书右丞。
English: On the 17th, he appointed the former Tang governor Anlei, who stayed in Nanjing, as his right-hand man.

古文：十一月，以大兴尹璋为贺宋正旦使，引进使大洞为高丽生日使。
现代文：十一月，派遣大兴府尹璋为贺宋正旦使，引进使大洞为高丽生日使。
English: In November, Daxingfu sent Yin Qi to be the envoy of He Song Zhengdan, and introduced the envoy of Datong to be the envoy of Goryeo's birthday.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 外路正五品职事多阙员，何也？ 
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：外路正五品官职大多缺员，为什么呢？ 
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Most of the positions in the Fifth Rank are vacant. Why is that?

古文：太尉李石对曰： 资考少有及者。 
现代文：太尉李石回答说： 考查资历很少有够条件的。 
English: Captain Li Shi replied, "There are rarely sufficient conditions for the examination of qualifications.

古文：上曰： 苟有贤能，当不次用之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：如果有贤能的人，应当不分等级任用他们。 
English: The emperor said: If there are capable people, they should be appointed regardless of rank.

古文：壬子，吏部尚书梁肃请禁奴婢服罗绮。
现代文：二十三日，吏部尚书梁肃请示禁止奴婢穿罗绮服装。
English: On the 23rd, Shang Shuliang Su of the Ministry of Personnel requested that slaves and maids be prohibited from wearing Luo Yao clothing.

古文：上曰： 近已禁其服明金。行之以渐可也。
现代文：皇上说 ：最近已经禁止他们穿明金色，这样逐渐实行可以了。
English: The emperor said, "Recently, they have been prohibited from wearing bright gold, so it can be gradually implemented."

古文：且教化之行，当自贵近始。
现代文：况且教化人们的行为，应当从贵族近亲开始。
English: Moreover, the education of people's behavior should begin with close relatives of aristocrats.

古文：朕宫中服御，常自节约，旧服明金者，已减太半矣！
现代文：朕在宫中的御用服装，常常要求自己节约，过去穿明金色服装的人，已经减去大半了。
English: I often ask myself to economize on the royal clothing used in the palace. People who used to wear bright gold clothing have already lost most of their hair.

古文：近民间风俗，比正隆时闻稍淳俭，卿等当更务从俭素，使民知所效也。 
现代文：最近民间的风俗，听说比正隆年间稍微淳正俭朴些了，卿等应当更加从俭从素，让百姓知道他们所应当效法的是什么。 
English: Recently, folk customs are said to be a little more honest and frugal than during the Zhenglong era. The lords and others should be more frugal and let the people know what they should follow.

古文：十四年正月已丑朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定十四年正月一日，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者分别前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 14th year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the new year.

古文：二月壬戌，以大兴尹璋使宋有罪，杖百五十，除名，仍以所受礼物入官。
现代文：二月五日，因为大兴府尹璋出使宋国犯有罪过，杖笞一百五十，革除功名，把他所收受的礼物归入官府。
English: On February 5th, because Daxingfu's Yin Xuan sent an envoy to Song Guo to commit a crime, he was fined 150 baht, stripped of his honorary title, and the gifts he received were classified as official gifts.

古文：丙寅，以刑部尚书梁肃等为宋详问使。
现代文：九日，派遣刑部尚书梁肃等人为赴宋国详问使。
English: On the 9th, the criminal department dispatched Shang Shul, Liang Su and others to go to Song to interrogate the envoy.

古文：庚午，以太尉、尚书令李石为太保，致仕。
现代文：十三日，任命太尉、尚书令李石为太保，任职期满。
English: On the 13th, Li Shi was appointed as Tai Po, and his term of office expired.

古文：戊寅，诏免去年被水旱百姓租税。
现代文：二十一日，诏令免除去年遭水、旱灾害百姓的租税。
English: On the 21st, the edict exempted the people who suffered from floods and droughts last year from paying taxes.

古文：三月戊子朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来庆贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：甲午，上谓大臣曰： 海陵纯尚吏事，当时宰执止以案牍为功。
现代文：七日，皇上对大臣说 ：海陵纯粹崇尚当官的事，当时宰执仅限以案牍为功。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor said to the minister: "Hailing is purely a matter of advocating officials. At that time, the chief executive was limited to the merits of the case.

古文：卿等当思经济之术，不可狃于故常也。 
现代文：卿等应当思考经济的术略，不可以拘泥于往常的习惯。 
English: Sirs and others should think about economic strategies and not stick to the usual habits.

古文：又诏： 猛安谋克之民，今后不许杀生祈祭。
现代文：又诏令道： 猛安谋克的人民，今后不许杀生祈祭。
English: The emperor also ordered: "The people of Meng'an and Mok'e are not allowed to kill and pray in the future.

古文：若遇节辰及祭天日，许得饮会。
现代文：如果遇到节辰以及祭天的日子，允许饮酒聚会。
English: If there is a festival or a day of worship, drinking parties are allowed.

古文：自二月一日至八月终，并禁绝饮燕，亦不许赴会他所，恐妨农功。
现代文：从二月一日起到八月终止，一并禁绝宴饮，也不许到别处赴会，恐怕妨碍农功。
English: From February 1st to the end of August, banqueting is also prohibited, and it is not allowed to go elsewhere to attend the meeting, which may hinder the agricultural gong.

古文：虽闲月亦不许痛饮，犯者抵罪。
现代文：虽说是闲月也不许痛饮，违犯者治罪。
English: Although it is a leisure time, it is not allowed to drink heavily, and violators will be punished.

古文：可遍谕之。 
现代文：可以把这话遍告人们知道。 
English: You can tell people all about it.

古文：又命： 应卫士有不闲女直语者，并勒习学，仍自后不得汉语。 
现代文：又命令 ：侍应卫士中有不懂女真语的，一并勒令他们学习，自今以后不得讲汉语。 
English: He also ordered that if any of the attendants and guards did not understand the Jurchen language, they should be ordered to learn it as well. From now on, they were not allowed to speak Chinese.

古文：辛丑，太白、岁星昼见。
现代文：十四日，太白星、岁星白日显现。
English: On the 14th, Taibai Star and Year Star appeared in broad daylight.

古文：甲辰，上更名雍，诏中外。
现代文：十七日，皇上改名叫雍，诏告中外。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor changed his name to Yong and announced it to the world.

古文：丙辰，太白、岁星昼见，经天。
现代文：二十九日，太白星、岁星白天显现，经过天空。
English: On the 29th, the Taibai Star and the Year Star appeared in the daytime and passed through the sky.

古文：四月乙丑，上谕宰臣曰： 闻愚民祈福，多建佛寺，虽已条禁，尚多犯者，宜申约束，无令徒费财用。 
现代文：四月九日，皇上告诉宰相大臣说： 听说愚民祈求幸福，建了许多佛寺，虽然已明令禁止，还有许多违犯规定的，应当重申条令约束，不要让他们白白浪费财用。 
English: On April 9, the emperor told the prime minister: "I have heard that the foolish people pray for happiness and have built many Buddhist temples. Although it has been expressly prohibited and there are still many violations of regulations, it is necessary to reiterate the regulations and restraints, and do not let them waste money.

古文：戊辰，有事于太庙，以皇太子摄行事。
现代文：十二日，皇上有事去太庙，让皇太子管摄行政事务。
English: On the 12th, the emperor had to go to the Imperial Temple, leaving the crown prince in charge of administrative affairs.

古文：乙亥，以劝农副使完颜蒲涅为横赐高丽使。
现代文：十九日，任命劝农副使完颜蒲涅作为横赐高丽使。
English: On the 19th, he appointed the vice-agricultural envoy Kangyanpunye as the envoy to Korea.

古文：上御垂拱殿，顾谓皇太子及亲王曰： 人之行，莫大于孝弟，孝弟无不蒙天日之佑。
现代文：皇上御临垂拱殿，环视并对皇太子以及亲王说： 人们的行为，莫大于孝弟。孝弟无不承蒙天日的保佑。
English: The Emperor stood in front of the main hall, looked around, and said to the Crown Prince and the Prince: "People's actions are no greater than their brothers and sisters. Brothers and sisters must be blessed by the sun.

古文：汝等宜尽孝于父母，友于兄弟。
现代文：你们应当在父母面前尽孝，和兄弟友爱相处。
English: You shall be dutiful to your father and to your mother, and shall love your brother and your sister.

古文：自古兄弟之际，多因妻妾离间，以至相违。
现代文：自古以来兄弟之间的关系，大多因为妻妾从中挑拨离间，以至于互相背离。
English: Since ancient times, the relationship between brothers, mostly because of the wife and concubine to sow discord among them, so that they deviate from each other.

古文：且妻者乃外属耳，可比兄弟之亲乎？
现代文：况且为妻的人不过是外属罢了，难道可以和兄弟的亲近相比吗？
English: Besides, is the closeness of a brother to his wife comparable to the closeness of a brother to his wife, who is only a relative?

古文：若妻言是听，而兄弟相违，甚非理也。
现代文：如果凡是妻的话都听，而兄弟反目，是很没有道理的。
English: If all the wife's words are listened to, but the brothers are against each other, it is very unreasonable.

古文：汝等当以朕言常铭于心。 
现代文：你们应当把朕的话常常铭记在心。 
English: You should always keep my words in mind.

古文：戊子，以枢密副使徒单克宁兼大兴尹。
现代文：七日，任命枢密副使徒单克宁兼任大兴府尹。
English: On the seventh day, he appointed the vice-apostle of the Privy Council, Shan Kening, who also held the post of Daxingfu Yin.

古文：五月丙戌朔，详问使梁肃等还自宋。
现代文：五月一日，详问使梁肃从宋国归来。
English: On May 1st, Liang Su returned from Song.

古文：甲午，如金莲川。
现代文：九日，皇上动身去金莲川。
English: On the 9th, the emperor left for Jinlian River.

古文：六月乙未，太白昼见。
现代文：八月二日，皇上到礣里舌。
English: On August 2nd, the emperor went to the imperial palace.

古文：八月丁已，次糺里舌。日中，白龙见御帐东小港中，须臾，乘云雷而去。
现代文：当天中午，有白龙在御帐东边小港中显现，不一会儿，乘云伴雷声而去。
English: At noon on the same day, a white dragon appeared in the small harbor east of the Imperial Palace, and in a short time, it took the clouds and thunder to leave.

古文：癸亥，猎于弥离补。
现代文：九日，皇上在弥离补打猎。
English: On the 9th, the Emperor went hunting to make up for his absence.

古文：己卯，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 23rd, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：九月丁亥，还都。
现代文：九月三日，皇上返回京都。
English: On September 3, the Emperor returned to Kyoto.

古文：朕知而不问。朕之欺心，此一事耳，夙夜思之，其如有疾。 
现代文：十一日，派遣兵部尚书完颜让等作为贺宋生日使，宿直将军崇肃为夏国生日使，十九日，皇上退朝的时候，对侍臣说 ：朕自即位前以及即位后直到今天，对于亲属旧友不曾有欺心徇私的行为。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he dispatched General Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs to be the birthday envoy of He Song and General Su Su Su of the General Staff to be the birthday envoy of Xia. On the 19th day of the month, when the emperor retired, he said to his courtiers, "From before and after my enthronement until today, I have never been deceitful and selfish to my relatives and old friends.

古文：己酉，宋遣使报聘。十月乙卯朔，诏图画功臣二十人衍庆宫圣武殿之左右庑。十一月甲申朔，日有食之。
现代文：最近御史台禀奏，枢密使永中曾经给河南统军使完颜仲写信，托他卖马，朕知道这件事却不管不问。朕的欺心，只这一件事而已，但通夜思考这件事，就像害了病似的。 十月一日，皇上令在衍庆宫圣武殿的左右廊屋，为二十名功臣画像。十一月一日，有日食出现。
English: Recently, it was reported by the official history channel that the imperial envoy Yongzhong once wrote a letter to the Henan United Army Envoy Gan Yanzhong, asking him to sell horses. I knew about this but did not ask about it. My deception was only this one thing, but thinking about it through the night was like getting sick. On October 1, the emperor ordered the galleries on the left and right sides of the Yanqing Palace Hall of War to display the portraits of twenty heroes. On November 1, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丙申，御史中丞刘仲诲等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十三日，派遣御史中丞刘仲诲等担当贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 13th, the envoy of He Song Zhengtan was dispatched to take charge of Liu Zhongyun, the Imperial Historian.

古文：戊戌，召尚食局使，谕之曰； 太官之食，皆民脂膏。
现代文：十五日，召见尚食局使，告诉他说： 太官的食物，都是民脂民膏。
English: On the fifteenth day, the envoy of the Shang Food Bureau was summoned and told him: The food of the eunuchs is all people's fat and cream.

古文：九月戊子，至自金莲川。
现代文：每天品味太多，不可遍举，白白浪费。
English: There are too many tastes every day, it is impossible to list them all, and it would be a waste.

古文：辛卯，高丽西京留守赵位宠叛其君，请以慈悲岭以西，鸭渌江以东四十于城内附，不纳。
现代文：从今天起仅限进可口的几种品味而已。 二十五日，任命仪鸾局使曹士元为高丽国生日使。十二月二十五日，任命平章政事完颜守道为右丞相，枢密副使徒单克宁为平章政事。大定十五年九月十日，皇上从金莲川返回。
English: From today, only a few kinds of delicious tastes are allowed to enter. On the 25th, Cao Shiyuan, an envoy of the Ceremonial Affairs Bureau, was appointed as the birthday envoy of the Republic of Korea. On December 25th, Pingzhang Zhengji Guanyin Shudo was appointed as the Minister of the Right, and the Vice-Apostle of the Privy Council Shan Kening was appointed as Pingzhang Zhengji. On September 10, 1515, the emperor returned from Jinlianchuan.

古文：丙申，幸新宫。闰月己酉朔，定应禁弓箭枪刀路分品官家奴客旅等许带弓箭制。
现代文：十三日，高丽国西京留守赵位宠背叛他的君主，请求把慈悲岭以西、鸭绿江以东的四十多座城池归他所有，高丽国君不采纳。闰九月一日，皇上亲定在禁止携带刀箭的地方允许官奴及旅客携带弓箭的制度。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Yidong, who stayed in Xijing, Koryo Province, betrayed his sovereign and asked for more than forty cities west of the Mercy Ridge and east of the Yalu River to be given to him. The Koryo sovereign did not accept. On the 1st of September, the emperor decided to allow officials and passengers to carry bows and arrows in places where it was forbidden to carry swords and arrows.

古文：上谓左丞相良弼曰： 今之在官者，须职位称惬所望，然后始加勉力。
现代文：皇上对左丞相良弼说 ：今天在官位的人，必须是所任职位和他的愿望相符，然后他才开始勤勉出力。
English: The Emperor said to the Minister of the Left, Yoshitaka: "A person who is in an official position today must have a position that matches his wishes, and only then will he begin to work diligently.

古文：其或稍不如意，则止以度日为务，是岂忠臣之道耶？ 
现代文：职位或许稍有不如意的，那么只以混日子为公务，这难道是忠臣的道理吗？ 
English: The position may be a little unsatisfactory, so is it the principle of a loyal subject to only work as a civil servant?

古文：丁巳，又谓良弼曰： 海陵时，领省秉德、左丞相言皆有能名，然为政不务远图，止以苛刻为事。
现代文：九日，又对良弼说 ：海陵的时候，领省秉德、左丞相言都有贤能的名声，然而他们为政不重视从长远考虑，只把苛刻作为行事的标准。
English: On the 9th, he also said to Liang Qi: When Hai Ling was at the top, the leader of the province, Bing De, and the left prime minister, Zuo Rong, both had a reputation for virtue. However, they did not attach importance to long-term considerations in politics, and only took harshness as the standard for action.

古文：言及可喜等在会宁时，一月之间，杖而杀之者二十人，罪皆不至于死，于理可乎？
现代文：言和可喜等人在会宁的时候，一月之间，用杖刑而打杀的有二十人，这些人的罪都不至于死，于理允许吗？
English: At the time of the meeting between Deng and Gu Xi and others, between one month and the next, there were twenty people who were beaten to death with a cane. These people's crimes were not worthy of death. Is this allowed by reason?

古文：海陵为人如虎，此辈尚欲以术数要之，以至卖直取死，得为能乎？ 
现代文：海陵为人如虎，这种人尚且要把数术看得很重要，以至于卖身取死，你能做到这一点吗？ 
English: Hailing is a tiger of a person. This kind of person would even consider mathematics to be so important that he would sell himself to death. Can you do this?

古文：己未，以归德尹完颜王祥等为贺宋生日使，符宝郎斜卯和尚为夏国生日使。
现代文：十一日，派遣归德尹完颜王祥等为贺宋生日使，符宝郎斜卯和尚为夏国生日使。
English: On the 11th day, Wang Xiang, who returned to De, Yin and Guan, was sent as the birthday envoy of He Song, and Fu Baoluo, Shabu Monk, was sent as the birthday envoy of Xia.

古文：辛酉，高丽国王奏告赵位宠伏诛，诏慰答之。
现代文：十三日，高丽国王奏告赵位宠伏法被诛，皇上下诏慰问他。
English: On the 13th, the King of Goryeo reported that Zhao Jiabufu had been arrested, and the Emperor sent a message of condolence to him.

古文：诏亲王、百官傔人所服红紫改为黑紫。
现代文：皇上诏令亲王、百官侍从原来所穿红紫色衣服改为黑紫色。
English: The emperor decreed that the prince and the attendants of the hundred officials should change from the red and purple clothes they were wearing to black and purple.

古文：甲戌，诏年老之人毋注县令。
现代文：二十五日，诏令年纪老迈的人不要再注册县令。
English: On the 25th, the prefectural government ordered elderly people not to register for county orders.

古文：年老而任从政，其佐亦择壮者参用。
现代文：年老而任其从政，他的辅佐也选择强壮的人参考使用。
English: He was allowed to enter politics in his old age, and his aides also chose strong people as a reference.

古文：戊午，以右宣征使靖等为贺宋正旦使。甲子，太白昼见。
现代文：十一月八日，皇上驾临东宫。当初，唐古部族节度使移剌毛得的儿子杀了他的妻子而后逃跑了，皇上命令逮捕他。
English: On November 8th, the emperor arrived at the East Palace. At the beginning, the son of Empress Dowager Guo killed his wife and then ran away, and the emperor ordered him to be arrested.

古文：戊辰，以宿直将军阿典蒲鲁虎为高丽生日使。
现代文：到了现在，皇姑梁国公主请求赦免他。皇上对宰相大臣说： 公主是个妇道人家，不懂得典法，罪过还可以宽恕。毛得请人托情到这地步，难道可以宽恕原谅？ 
English: Now, the Emperor's aunt, Princess Liang Guo, asked for him to be pardoned. The Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "The princess is a womanizer, she does not know the law, and her sins can still be forgiven. Mao had to ask for mercy to such an extent, can she be forgiven?"

古文：十六年正月戊申朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：不允许赦免。大定十六年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 16th year of the Daejeon era, Song, Goryeo, and Hsia separately sent envoys to offer congratulations.

古文：甲寅，诏免去年被水、旱路分租税。
现代文：初七，皇上诏令免除去年遭受水灾、旱灾各路分配的租税。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Emperor issued a decree to exempt the tax distributed to all roads that suffered from floods and droughts last year.

古文：甲子，诏宗属未附玉牒者并与编次。
现代文：十七日，诏令皇家宗属没有附玉牒的一起予以编排登记。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered the royal lineage to be registered without the imperial edict.

古文：丙寅，上与亲王、宰执、从官从容论古今兴废事，曰： 经籍之兴，其来久矣，垂教后世，无不尽善。
现代文：十九日，皇上和亲王、宰执、从官一起从容地谈论古今兴废事，说： 经史典籍的兴盛，其由来已久了，垂教后世，没有不认为好的。
English: On the 19th, the emperor, together with the prince, the vice-regent, and the officials, calmly talked about the rise and fall of ancient and modern things, saying: The prosperity of historical classics has a long history, it has been taught to future generations, and there is nothing that is not considered good.

古文：今之学者，既能诵之，必须行之。
现代文：当今的学者，能诵读它们，还必须能按经籍中说的去做。
English: Today's scholars, to be able to recite them, must also be able to do what is said in the scriptures.

古文：然知而不能行者多矣，苟不能行，诵之何益？
现代文：然而能读而不能行的人多了。假如不能实行，诵读又有什么用处？
English: However, there are more people who can read than can walk. If you can't practice, what's the use of reciting?

古文：女直旧风最为纯直，虽不知书，然其祭天地，敬亲戚，尊耆老，接宾客，信朋友，礼意款曲，皆出自然，其善与古书所载无异。
现代文：女真族传统风俗最为纯朴正直，虽然不知书中的道理，然而他们祭天地，敬亲戚，尊耆老，接宾客，信朋友，礼意款曲，皆出自然，他们好的风俗和古书所记载的没有不同。
English: The traditional customs of the Jurchen people are the most pure, simple and honest. Although they do not know the truth in the book, however, they sacrifice heaven and earth, respect relatives, respect the elderly, receive guests, write to friends, and play ceremonial songs. They are all natural. Their good customs are no different from those recorded in ancient books.

古文：汝辈当习学之，旧风不可忘也！ 
现代文：你们应当学习女真的这些传统，旧的风俗不可忘了。 
English: You should learn these traditions of the Immaculate Conception, and do not forget the old customs.

古文：戊辰，宫中火。
现代文：二十一日，宫中失火。
English: On the 21st, a fire broke out in the palace.

古文：庚午，上按鹰高桥，见道侧醉人堕驴而卧，命左右扶而乘之，送至其家。
现代文：二十三日，皇上在高桥按鹰，看见道旁一个人喝醉了从驴子上掉下来卧在那里，便命令左右随行人员扶他上驴，送他回到家。
English: On the twenty-third day, the emperor rang an eagle at Takahashi, and when he saw a drunken man by the roadside who had fallen off his donkey and was lying there, he ordered his entourage to help him onto the donkey and take him home.

古文：辛未，皇姑邀上至私第，诸妃皆从，宴饮甚欢。
现代文：二十四日，皇姑邀请皇上到自己的私宅，各位皇妃都跟随着，设宴饮酒非常欢乐。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Empress Dowager invited the Emperor to her private residence, and all the empresses followed. The banquet and drinking were very joyful.

古文：公主每进酒，上立饮之。
现代文：每当公主敬酒，皇上立刻喝下。
English: Whenever the princess makes a toast, the emperor immediately drinks it.

古文：二月庚寅，皇子豳王妃徒单氏以奸，伏诛。
现代文：二月十四日，皇子豳王妃徒单氏因为奸淫，伏法被杀。
English: On February 14th, the Prince's son, the Prince's wife, the Prince's mother, was killed for adultery.

古文：己亥，平章政事单克宁罢，以女故。
现代文：二十三日，平章政事徒单克宁因为女儿的缘故，辞去官职。
English: On the 23rd, because of his daughter, Pingzhang Shankening resigned from his official post.

古文：三月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月一日，发生日食。
English: On March 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：是日，万春节，改用明日，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：当天，是万春节，改用第二天，宋国、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On the same day, the day of the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate each other.

古文：戊申，雨豆于临潢之境。戊午，上御广仁殿，皇太子、亲王皆侍膳，上从容训之曰： 大凡资用当务节省，如其有余，可周亲戚，勿妄费也。 
现代文：十三日，皇上御临广仁殿，皇太子、亲王都陪侍用膳，皇上从容地训诫他们说 ：大凡资用应当力求节省，如果能有节余，可以周济亲戚，不要随意浪费。 
English: On the thirteenth day, the Emperor came to the Hirohito Hall, and the Crown Prince and the Crown Prince both accompanied the attendants to the meal. The Emperor calmly admonished them, saying, "You should strive to save a lot of money. If you can save money, you can give it to your relatives. Don't waste it."

古文：因举所御服曰： 此服已三年未尝更换，尚尔完好，汝等宜识之。 
现代文：顺便举所用御服为例说 ：这衣服已经三年不曾更换，还挺完好，你们应当了解这些。 
English: By the way, to give an example of the clothes he uses, he said: "These clothes have not been replaced for three years, they are still in good condition, you should understand this.

古文：壬申，复置吾都碗部秃里。
现代文：二十七日，再次设置吾都木宛部秃里。
English: On the 27th, we set up again in Wudu, Wanbu, and Zali.

古文：四月丙戌，诏京府设学养土，及定宗室、宰相子程试等第。
现代文：四月十一日，皇上诏令京府设置学府养士，以及规定宗室、宰相的子弟程试等第。
English: On April 11, the emperor issued an imperial edict to set up a school nurse in Beijing, as well as to stipulate that Cheng Xian, the son of the patriarch and the prime minister, should be appointed.

古文：戊子，制商贾舟车不得用马。
现代文：十三日，订立商贾舟车不得用马的制度。
English: On the 13th, a system was established that no horse could be used for the merchant Jia's boat.

古文：以东京留守崇尹为枢密副使。
现代文：任命东京留守崇尹为枢密副使。
English: He appointed the Tokyo resident, Takayasu, as Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：壬寅，如金莲川。
现代文：十七日，到金莲川去。
English: On the 17th, I went to Jinlian River.

古文：五月戊申，南京宫殿火。
现代文：五月四日，南京宫殿失火。
English: On May 4, the Nanjing Palace caught fire.

古文：甲寅，太白昼见。
现代文：十日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Taibai Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：庚申，遣使祷雨静宁山神，有顷而雨。
现代文：十六日，派遣使者向静宁山神祈祷下雨，不长时间即下雨了。
English: On the 16th, an envoy was sent to pray to the mountain god Jingning for rain, and it soon began to rain.

古文：六月，山东两路蝗。
现代文：六月，山东两路遭受蝗灾。
English: In June, two roads in Shandong Province were hit by locusts.

古文：七月壬子，夏津县令移剌山往坐赃，伏诛。
现代文：七月九日，夏津县令移剌山住贪赃获罪，伏法被杀。
English: On July 9th, Xiajin County magistrate Zhu Shanshan was found guilty of corruption, and Fuba was killed.

古文：八月辛巳，次霹雳泺。
现代文：八月九日，皇上到霹雳泊。
English: On August 9, the emperor arrived in Oshidomari.

古文：其孛论出等遗骸，仰逐处访求，官为收葬。 
现代文：九月三日，从金莲川回到宫中。七日，告诉左丞相纥石烈良弼说： 西部边疆从来不准备储蓄，要命令他们在当地协商籴进粮食，拿来作为应急的储备。 
English: On September 3, he returned to the Imperial Palace from Jinlianchuan, and on the 7th, he told the Minister of the Left, Zou Shile Liangyao, that: the western frontier was never prepared to save, and they should be ordered to negotiate locally to import grain and use it as an emergency reserve.

古文：辛酉，以南京宫殿火，留守、转运两司皆抵罪。
现代文：十七日，派遣殿前都点检蒲察通等人充当贺宋生日使，宿直将军完颜觌古速充当夏国生日使。皇上告诉左丞相良弼说 ：海陵无理杀戮臣下，死者很应该哀悯。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the imperial court dispatched a number of courtiers, including Pu Zhantong, to act as the birthday envoy for Emperor He Song, and General Su Jian to act as the birthday envoy for Emperor Xia. The emperor told the Minister of the Left, Liang Qi, that Hailing had killed his vassals without reason, and that the dead should be pitied.

古文：十月丙申，诏谕宰执曰： 诸王小字未尝以女直语命之，今皆当更易，卿等择名以上。 十一月壬寅朔，参知政事王蔚罢。
现代文：孛论出等人的遗骸，仰仗卿派人各处访查寻找，由官府收葬。 十九日，因为南京宫殿失火，留守、转运两司官员都被治罪。十一月一日，参知政事王蔚被罢免官职。
English: On the 19th, because the Nanjing Palace caught fire, the officials of the two departments of stay-behind and transfer were punished. On November 1, Wang Wei, the governor and political secretary, was dismissed from his post.

古文：尚书省奏，河北东路胡剌温猛安所辖谋克孛术鲁舍厮，参谋克让其兄子蒲速列。
现代文：尚书省禀奏，河北东路胡剌温猛安所管辖谋克孛术鲁舍厮，把谋克的职位转让给他兄长的儿子蒲速列。
English: Shang Shuxu, the governor of Hebei Province, transferred the post of the governor to his brother's son, Pu Hao Lai, who was under the jurisdiction of the Hebei East Road Hubei Wen Meng'an Office.

古文：上贤而从之，仍令议加舍厮恩赏。
现代文：皇上贤明而顺从了这件事，仍然命令讨论加予舍厮恩赏。
English: The emperor wisely complied with this matter, and still ordered the discussion to be given a reward.

古文：戊午，以同知宣徽院事刘珫等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十七日，派遣同知宣徽院事刘糵等为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he dispatched Liu Xuan, an official of the Xuanhui Academy, and other friends to act as envoys for He Song Zhengdan.

古文：庚申，以吏部尚书张汝弼为参知政事。
现代文：十九日，任命吏部尚书张汝弼为参知政事。
English: On the 19th, Shangshu Zhang Ruxuan, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：甲子，以粘割韩奴之子详古为尚辇局直长，娄室为武器直长。
现代文：二十五日，任命粘割韩奴的儿子详古为尚辇局直长，娄室为武器直长。
English: On the 25th, the son of Han Nong, the son of Han Nong, was appointed as the director-general of the Shangyuan Bureau and the director-general of the Weaponry Office.

古文：初，韩奴被旨招契丹大石，后不知所终，至是因粘拔恩部长撒里雅寅特斯等来，询知其死节之详，故录其后。
现代文：当初，韩奴受旨招抚契丹大石，后来不知所终，至现在因为粘拔恩部长撒里雅寅特斯等人前来，询问他们才知道韩奴已死的详细情节，所以录用他的后人。
English: At first, Han Nu was instructed to woo Khitan Dashi, but later he did not know what to do, and now, because of the persistence of the Minister of Grace, Saria Yates, and others, they came to inquire about the details of Han Nu's death, so they hired his descendants.

古文：遣兵部郎中移剌子元为高丽生日使。
现代文：派遣兵部郎中移剌子元为高丽国生日使。
English: He dispatched Hyobusho Chuchu Shishimoto as the birthday envoy of Korea.

古文：十二月壬申朔，诏诸科人出身四十年方注县令，年岁太远，今后仕及三十二年，别无负犯赃染追夺，便与县令。
现代文：十二月一日，诏令各科所取之士年满四十岁者方可授予县令之职，年岁太远，从今以后做官到三十二年，没有犯过贪赃掠夺罪，便给予县令职位。
English: On December 1st, the imperial edict decreed that the post of county magistrate could only be granted to those who had reached the age of forty, which was too old, and from now on, if they had been an official for thirty-two years and had not committed the crime of corruption and plunder, they would be given the post of county magistrate.

古文：丙子，诏诸流移人老病者，官与养济。
现代文：五日，诏令对于各地流浪人中的年老有病的，官府予以抚养救济。
English: On the 5th, the government issued a decree to provide support and relief for the elderly and sick among the homeless in various regions.

古文：上谕宰臣曰： 凡已经奏断事有未当，卿等勿谓已行，不为奏闻改正。
现代文：皇上告诉宰相大臣说 ：凡是已经禀奏裁断过的事情有不恰当的，卿等不要说已经施行了，不再禀奏是否改正的情况。
English: The Emperor told the Prime Minister, "If it is not proper to repeat what has already been decided, my lord, do not say that it has been implemented, and do not repeat whether it has been corrected or not."

古文：朕以万几之繁，岂无一失？
现代文：朕因为日理万机的繁忙，怎么会万无一失？
English: How can I be absolutely sure because of the busy schedule of the Japan International Airport?

古文：卿等但言之，朕当更改，必无吝也！ 
现代文：卿等只管说出来，朕应当更改，一定不要吝啬啊。 
English: Sir, just say it, I should change it, don't be stingy.

古文：庚寅，定榷场香茶罪赏法。
现代文：七日，确定边贸市场香、茶罪赏法。
English: On the seventh day, the border market incense and tea crime reward method was determined.

古文：十七年正月壬寅朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定十七年正月初一，宋国、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventeenth year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：高丽并表谢不纳赵位宠。
现代文：高丽并且表示感谢不容纳赵位宠。
English: Goryeo also expressed its gratitude for not accommodating Zhao Yidong.

古文：丙午，有司奏，高丽所进玉带乃石似玉者，上曰： 小国无能辨识者，误以为玉耳！
现代文：五日，有司上奏，高丽国所进献的玉带实际上是像玉的石头，皇上说： 小国没有能够辨别确认的人，误以为是玉罢了。
English: On the fifth day, there was a report that the jade belt presented by Goryeo was actually a stone resembling jade. The emperor said: The small country did not have anyone who could identify it, and mistakenly thought it was jade.

古文：且人不易物，惟德其物，若复却之，岂礼体耶？ 
现代文：况且人不换物，惟德其物，如果再退回去，难道符合礼体吗？ 
English: Moreover, people don't exchange things, they just take something else. If they go back, is that proper etiquette?

古文：戊申，诏于衍庆宫圣武殿西建世祖神御殿，东建太宗、睿宗神御殿。
现代文：七日，皇上诏令在衍庆宫圣武殿西边兴建世祖神御殿，东面兴建太宗、睿宗神御殿。
English: On the 7th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to build the Sezu Shrine on the west side of the Shenwu Hall of Yanqing Palace, and the Taizong and Ruizong Shrines on the east side.

古文：诏西北路招讨司契丹民户，其尝叛乱者已行措置，其不与叛乱及放良奴隶可徙乌古里石垒部，令及春耕作。
现代文：诏令西北路招讨司契丹民户，那些曾经参与叛乱的已经采取措施处置了，那些没有参与叛乱的以及放良奴隶，可以迁徙到乌古里石垒部去，等到春天从事耕作。
English: The edict ordered the Northwest Road to invite the households of Shichidan. Those who had participated in the rebellion had already taken measures to deal with it. Those who did not participate in the rebellion, as well as the freed slaves, could migrate to the Uguri stone bastion and wait until spring to engage in farming.

古文：壬戌，诏宰臣： 海陵时，大臣无辜被戮家属籍没者，并释为良。
现代文：尚书省禀奏，吾都木宛部体土胡鲁雅里密斯请求入宫进献，皇上允许了。九日，诏令各大臣家应该申请功臣称号的人，不允许他们的子孙自己陈述，吏部考功郎详细考查他们的功绩，应当赐予称号的，立刻把情况报上来。
English: On the 9th, the imperial edict ordered that the ministers who should apply for the title of meritorious subject should not allow their children and grandchildren to make their own statements, and that the officials should examine their merits in detail, and those who should be awarded the title should immediately report the situation.

古文：辽豫王、宋天水郡王被害子孙，各葬于广宁、河南旧茔。 
现代文：十一日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 宗室中年龄高的人，往往没有官称。
English: On the 11th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Older members of the imperial family often do not have official titles.

古文：其后复昭： 天水郡王亲属于都北安葬外，咸平所寄骨殖，官为葬于本处。辽豫王亲属未入本茔者，亦迁祔之 。
现代文：他们的先人都对国家有功，朕想稍加给他们些官级，让他们有名位可以称呼，怎么样？ 宰臣们回答说： 亲亲报功，先王之令则。 
English: Their forefathers have all contributed to the country. I would like to give them a little bit of official rank, so that they can be called famous. How about that? The vice-ministers replied: It is the king's order to reward their relatives.

古文：三月辛丑朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，宋国、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On March 1, Song, Goryeo and Xia separately sent envoys to offer congratulations.

古文：辛亥，诏免河北、山东、陕西、河东、西京、辽东等十路去年被旱、蝗租税。
现代文：十一日，诏令免除河北、山东、陕西、河东、西京、辽东等十路去年遭受旱、蝗灾害而拖欠的租税。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial decree exempted ten provinces including Hebei, Shandong, Shaanxi, Hedong, Xijing and Liaodong from tax arrears due to drought and locust disaster last year.

古文：赈东京、婆速、曷速馆三路。
现代文：赈济东京、婆速、曷速馆三路的灾民。
English: To help the victims of the disaster in Tokyo, Obaseki and Obaseki Hall.

古文：乙丑，尚书省奏，三路之粟，不能周给。
现代文：二十五日，尚书省禀奏，三路的粮食，不能给予周济。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Shangshu Province issued an edict that the three-way grain could not be given to Zhou.

古文：上曰： 朕尝语卿等，遇丰年即广籴以备凶歉。
现代文：皇上说： 朕曾经对卿等人说过，遇到丰收年景就要广籴粮食用以防备灾荒欠收年。
English: The emperor said: I once said to my lord and others that in the event of a bumper harvest, it is necessary to have a vast amount of grain to prevent disaster and famine in the year of poor harvest.

古文：卿等皆言天下仓廪盈溢。
现代文：卿等都说天下仓库充盈饱和。
English: Sirs and others all say that the world's warehouses are full and saturated.

古文：今欲赈济，乃云不给。
现代文：现在要赈济，又说不给。
English: Now they want to give us money, and we say no.

古文：自古帝王皆以蓄积为国家长计，朕之积粟，岂欲独用之耶？
现代文：自古以来帝王都是把积蓄当成治理国家的长久之计，朕的积蓄粮食的想法，难道是要自己独用吗？
English: Since ancient times, emperors have regarded savings as a long-term strategy for governing the country. Is my idea of saving grain for my own exclusive use?

古文：今既不给，可于邻道取之以济。
现代文：今天既然不给予三路，可以在邻近各道取些粮食来周济他们。
English: Since the three roads are not open today, we can take some grain from the neighboring roads and give it to them.

古文：自今预备，当以为常。 
现代文：从今天起预备荒年，应当作为经常的事办。 
English: From now on, preparing for a lean year should be a regular affair.

古文：四月甲戌，制世袭猛安谋克若出仕者，虽年未及六十，欲令子孙袭者，听。
现代文：四月五日，规定世袭猛安谋克中如果出任官职的，虽然年纪不到六十岁，想让自己的子孙承袭的，可以听从。
English: On April 5th, it was stipulated that if a person holding an official post in the hereditary succession plan, although less than sixty years old, wanted his or her descendants to inherit, he or she could obey.

古文：戊寅，谕宰臣曰： 郡县之官虽以罪解，一二岁后，亦须再用。
现代文：九日，告诉宰相大臣说 ：郡县的官员虽然因为犯罪解职了，一、二年以后，也可以再起用。
English: On the 9th, he told the Prime Minister that although county officials were dismissed for crimes, they could be reinstated after one or two years.

古文：五月，尚书省奏，定皇家袒免以上亲燕飨班次，并从唐制。
现代文：猛安谋克都是太祖创业之际对国家辛勤劳动有功的人，他们世袭官职，不应当因为小的罪过而剥夺罢免。 五月，尚书省禀奏，规定皇家袒免以皇亲的名义按班次等级设宴款待官员，一并按唐制办理。
English: All of them are people who have contributed to the country's hard work at the time of their great-grandfather's entrepreneurship. They inherited their official positions and should not be deprived of them because of minor offenses. In May, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology issued a decree stipulating that the royal family should be exempted from holding banquets and entertaining officials in the name of the imperial family according to the shift level, and all of them should be handled according to the Tang system.

古文：癸卯，幸姚村淀，阅七品以下官及宗室子、诸局承应人射柳，赏有差。
现代文：四日，皇上驾临姚村淀，观看七品以下官员以及宗室子弟、诸局承应人射柳，分别给予不同奖赏。
English: On the fourth day, the emperor drove to Yao Village, Yandong, to watch the officials below the seventh grade, as well as the sons and daughters of the family, and the persons in charge of various departments shoot willows, and separately give different rewards.

古文：六月乙卯，谓宰臣曰： 朕年老矣！
现代文：六月十一日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕年纪老了。
English: On June 11, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "I am getting old.

古文：恐因一时喜怒，处置有所不当，卿等即当执奏，毋为面从，成朕之失。 
现代文：恐怕因为一时的喜或怒，处置事情有所不当，卿等应当立刻奏明，不要当面顺从，造成朕的过失。 
English: I am afraid that because of the momentary joy or anger, the handling of the matter is improper, sir, etc. should be reported immediately, do not obey in person, resulting in my fault.

古文：乙未，以英王爽之子思列为忠顺军节度副使。
现代文：二十七日，任命英王爽的儿子思列为忠顺军节度副使。
English: On the 27th, Yingwang Shuang's son, Si Tong, was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Loyalty Army.

古文：爽入谢，上曰： 朕以卿疾故，特任卿子，所冀卿因喜而愈也。
现代文：爽入朝谢恩，皇上说： 朕因为卿有病的缘故，特地任命了卿的儿子，所希望的是卿会因为高兴而痊愈。
English: When he entered the court, the emperor thanked him and said, "I have specially appointed your son because you are ill. I hope that you will be happy and recover.

古文：欲即加峻授，恐思列年幼，未闲政事。
现代文：想现在就加以委授重任，恐怕思列年幼，还不能理解政事。
English: If you want to entrust him with important responsibilities now, I'm afraid you're too young to understand politics.

古文：汝当训之，使有善可观，更当升擢。 
现代文：你应当训教他，让他有好的表现，可以进一步提升。 
English: You should train him so that he can perform well and improve further.

古文：七月壬子，尚书省奏，岁以羊三万赐西北路戍兵，上问如何运致，宰臣不能对。
现代文：七月十五日，尚书省禀奏，每年用三万头羊赐给西北路戍守部队，皇上问是如何运到那里的，宰臣回答不上来。
English: On the 15th of July, Shangshu Province issued a proclamation that 30,000 sheep would be given to the Northwest Road garrison every year. The emperor asked how they were transported there, but the vice-minister could not answer.

古文：上曰： 朕虽退朝，留凡政务，不遑安宁。
现代文：皇上说 ：朕虽然退朝，仍然留心政务，不敢安宁。
English: The emperor said, "Although I have retired from the throne, I still pay attention to government affairs and dare not rest.

古文：卿等勿谓细事非帝王所宜问，以卿等于国家之事未尝用心，故问之耳。 
现代文：卿等不要说细微的事情不是帝王所应该问的，因为卿等对国家的事不曾用心，所以要问这些琐事罢了。 
English: Sirs, do not say that trifling matters are not for the emperor to inquire into, for sirs do not concern themselves with the affairs of the state, and only ask about trifling matters.

古文：是月，大雨，河决。
现代文：当月，天降大雨，黄河决口。
English: That month, heavy rain fell and the Yellow River burst its banks.

古文：八月己巳，观稼于近郊。
现代文：八月二日，皇上在近郊视察庄稼。
English: On August 2, the emperor inspected crops in the suburbs.

古文：壬申，以监察御察御史体察东北路官吏，辄受讼牒，为不称职，笞之五十。
现代文：五日，派遣监察御史去体察东北路官吏，仗恃妄自收受讼牒，是不称职的，打了他五十杖。
English: On the fifth day, inspector Mishi was dispatched to inspect the officials of the Northeast Road. They were found to be delusional, self-incriminating, and incompetent, and he was beaten with fifty canes.

古文：庚辰，上谓宰臣曰： 今之在官者，同僚所见，事虽当理，必以为非，意谓从之则恐人谓政非己出。
现代文：十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 今天在官位上的，同僚所看见的，事情虽然应当办理，一定认为不是这样，意思是顺从他就怕人家说政非己出。
English: On the thirteenth day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Today, my colleagues in official positions, although they see things that should be handled, must think that this is not the case. This means that they must obey him for fear that others will say that they are not in politics.

古文：如此者多，朕甚不取。
现代文：像这样的事很多，朕认为很不可取。
English: There are a lot of things like that, which I think are very undesirable.

古文：癸卯，以兵部郎中石抹忽土为夏国生日使。
现代文：现在看大理寺所断的案件，虽然都依据律条，于理上行不通的另外具有情况，朕只取其所长。做人的道理，服从他人的好的方面，就可以说是好人了。 
English: Now look at the cases decided by Dali Temple, although they are all based on the law, there are other circumstances that are not reasonable, I only take their director. The principle of being a person, obeying the good aspects of others, can be said to be a good person.

古文：戊申，秋猎。庚戌，岁星、荧惑、太白聚于尾。
现代文：十九日，皇上对御史中丞纥石烈邈说 ：台臣纠察吏治之能否，务去其扰民，并且希望能得到贤人。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor said to the Grand Historian Chujo Shisekiretsu, "The courtiers should picket the officials to see if they are capable of governing, so as not to disturb the people, and in the hope of gaining wise men."

古文：甲子，还都。十月己巳，夏国进百头帐，诏却之境上。
现代文：现在他们所到之处妄自收受讼牒，听他们妄告，让为政的人如何办才行呢？ 十月三日，夏国进献百条帐，诏令在边境上推辞他们。
English: Now, wherever they go, they arrogantly accept the summons to appear in court, and listen to their false accusations, so how can the politicians deal with them? On October 3, Xia Guo presented a hundred accounts, and the imperial edict rejected them at the border.

古文：癸酉，有司奏： 衍庆宫所画功臣二十人，惟五人有谥，今考检余十五人功状，拟定谥号以进。 
现代文：七日，有司禀奏： 衍庆宫所画二十名功臣中，只有五人有谥号，现在考察检验其余十五人功状，拟定谥号来报请。 
English: On the seventh day, there was a sermon: Of the twenty heroes painted by Yanqing Palace, only five have honorary titles. Now, we will inspect and test the merits of the remaining fifteen, and prepare honorary titles to report.

古文：诏可，诏以羊十万付乌古里石垒部畜牧，其滋息以予贫民。
现代文：皇上下诏许可了。皇上诏令把十万只羊交付乌古里石垒部畜牧，这些羊的滋息用来给予贫民。
English: The Emperor's edict allowed it. The Emperor's edict ordered that 100,000 sheep be given to the Uguri Stone Fort Department for animal husbandry, and the nourishment of these sheep was used to feed the poor.

古文：丁丑，制诸猛安，父任别职，子须年二十五以上方许承袭。
现代文：十一日，规定各位猛安父任别职，儿子必须年龄在二十五岁以上才允许承袭父职。
English: On the 11th, it was stipulated that all Meng'an fathers would be appointed to other positions, and sons must be over the age of twenty-five before being allowed to inherit their father's position.

古文：辛巳，上谓宰臣曰： 今在位不闻荐贤，何也？
现代文：十五日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 现在朕在位却听不到荐举贤人，是为什么呢？
English: On the 15th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Now that I am on the throne, I don't hear any wise men being recommended. Why is that?

古文：昔狄仁杰起自下僚，力扶唐祚，使既危而安，延数百年之永。仁杰虽贤，非娄师德何以自荐乎？ 
现代文：昔日狄仁杰出身于下层官吏，鼎力扶助唐君主的地位，使唐王朝转危为安，延续数百年之久，狄仁杰虽然贤良，不是娄师德拿什么自荐呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, Di Renjie was a low-level official, and he did his best to support the position of the Tang monarch, so that the Tang Dynasty turned the corner and lasted for hundreds of years. Although Di Renjie was a good man, he was not a great teacher. Why should he recommend himself?

古文：癸未，更护送罪人逃亡制。
现代文：十七日，修订护送罪人逃亡的有关制度。
English: On the 17th, the relevant system of escorting criminals to escape was revised.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 近观上封章者，殊无大利害。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：最近看向上上书言事的，没有特别大的利害。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Recently, there has not been a great deal of interest in writing to the Emperor.

古文：且古之谏者既忠于国，亦以求名，今之谏者为利而已。
现代文：况且古代的谏议者既忠于国家，又用这种表现求得名声，今天的谏议者仅仅是为了私利而已。
English: Moreover, the ancient dissenters were both loyal to the country and used this performance to gain fame, today's dissenters are only for self-interest.

古文：如户部尚书曹望之、济南尹梁肃皆上书言事，盖觊觎执政耳，其于国政竟何所补。
现代文：比如户部尚书曹望之、济南府尹梁肃都上书言事，全是希望执政罢了，那些意见对于国家政务究竟有什么补益？
English: For example, the head of the household department, Cao Wangzhi, and the head of the Jinan government, Yin Liangsu, both wrote letters and made speeches, all hoping to govern. What are the benefits of those opinions for national government affairs?

古文：达官如此，况余人乎！
现代文：达官如此，何况其余的人！
English: Not to mention the rest of us!

古文：昔海陵南伐，太医使祁宰极谏，至戮于市，此本朝以来一人而已。 
现代文：往昔海陵南伐，太医使祁宰极力劝谏，招致在市上被杀，这在本朝开元以来仅此一人。 
English: In the past, when the Southern Expedition of Hailing was carried out, the Taiheiji (Grand Physician) strongly advised him and he was killed in the market. This is the only one person since the founding of this dynasty.

古文：丁亥，上命宰臣曰： 监察御史田忠孺尝上书言事，今当升擢，以励其余。 
现代文：二十一日，皇上命令宰相大臣说： 监察御史田忠孺曾经上书言事，现在应当提拔，以此来勉励其余的人。 
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor ordered the prime minister to say, "The inspector, Tadahiro Tsuchida, should be promoted to encourage the rest of the people.

古文：十一月戊戌，以南京留守徒单克宁为平章政事。
现代文：十一月三日，任命南京留守徒单克宁为平章政事。
English: On November 3, the leader of the Nanjing left-behinds, Shan Kening, was appointed as the political leader of Pingzhang.

古文：庚戌，上谓宰臣曰： 朕常恐重敛以困吾民，自今诸路差科之烦细者，亦具以闻。 
现代文：十五日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：朕常恐怕过重征收赋税会让我的人民陷入困境，从今天起，各路差科的烦细之事，也详细报给我听。 
English: On the 15th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "I am often afraid that excessive taxation will put my people in a difficult situation. From today, I will also be informed in detail about the troublesome details of each road.

古文：有司奏，夏国进御帐使因边臣恳求进入，乃许之。
现代文：有司禀奏，夏国进献御帐使通过边臣恳求进入国境，皇上允许了。
English: There was a ceremony, and the Emperor allowed Xia Guo to enter the country through the entreaty of a vassal.

古文：以尚书左丞石琚为平章政事。
现代文：任命尚书左丞石琚为平章政事。
English: He appointed Shangshu Zuojo Shizhao to be the political secretary of the Taira clan.

古文：丙辰，以延安尹完颜蒲剌睹等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：二十一日，派遣延安府尹完颜蒲剌睹等人为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Yan'an government dispatched Yin Kanyan and others to act as envoys for He Song Zhengdan.

古文：壬申，以尚书右丞唐括安礼为左丞，殿前都点检蒲察通为右丞。
现代文：十二月三日，因为渤海旧俗男女婚娶大多不用聘礼，一定是先偷偷私奔，皇上诏令禁绝这种做法，违犯者以通奸论处。七日，任命尚书右丞唐括安礼为左丞，殿前都点检蒲察通为右丞。
English: On December 3, because most of the men and women who married in the old customs of Bohai did not have to pay a bride price, they must have secretly eloped first. The Emperor's edict forbade this practice, and violators were punished with adultery. On the 7th, he appointed Shangshu Yuanzheng Tang Kuanli as Zuo Zheng, and Duan Dangguan Pu Zhan Tong as Yuanzheng.

古文：上谓宰执曰： 朕今年已五十有五，若年逾六十，虽欲有为，而莫之能矣！
现代文：皇上对宰执说 ：朕今年已经五十五岁，如果过了六十岁，虽然想有所作为，却也不能实现了。
English: The emperor said to the chief priest, "I am fifty-five years old this year. If I live past sixty, even though I want to make a difference, I won't be able to.

古文：宜及朕之康强，其女直人猛安谋克及国家政事之未完，与夫法令之未一者，宜皆修举之。
现代文：应该趁着朕现在健康有力，那些女真人猛安谋克以及国家政事中未完成的，还有法令中不完善的，应该都修订完成它。
English: We should take advantage of the fact that we are now healthy and powerful, and those who have not yet completed the national political affairs, as well as the incomplete laws and regulations, should revise and complete it.

古文：凡所施行，朕不为怠。 
现代文：凡是所施行的，朕不会懈怠。 
English: Whatever I do, I will not slacken.

古文：十八年正月丙申朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定十八年正月初一，宋国、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 18th year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to pay homage.

古文：壬寅，定杀异居周亲奴婢、同居卑幼，辄杀奴婢及妻无罪而辄殴杀者罪。
现代文：七日，给擅杀奴婢及无罪之妻者定罪。十五日，修起居注移剌杰上书说 ：每当摒退人讨论事情，虽说是史官也不让听，没有事由可以记录。 
English: On the 7th day, those who killed slaves and innocent wives were convicted, and on the 15th day, the settlement was established, and the transfer note was issued, saying: "Whenever someone is excluded from discussing a matter, even if it is a historian, they are not allowed to listen, and there is no reason to record the matter.

古文：庚戌，修起居注移剌杰上书言： 每屏人议事，虽史官亦不与闻，无由纪录。 
现代文：皇上拿这件事询问平章政事石琚、左丞唐括安礼，他们回答说 ：古代的时候，天子把史官安置在自己左右，有话必定书写下来，所以儆戒人君，差不多有可畏惧之处。 
English: The emperor inquired about this matter with the high-ranking officials Pingzhang Zhengji, Shijian and Zuo of the Tang Dynasty. They replied, "In ancient times, God placed historians around Himself, and He must have written down what He said. Therefore, there is almost something to be afraid of when He chastises people.

古文：上以问平章政事石琚、左丞唐括安礼，对曰： 古者，天子置史官于左右，言动必书，所以儆戒人君，庶几有所畏也。 庚申，免中都、河北、河东、山东、河南、陕西等路前年被灾租税。壬戌，如春水。
现代文：二十五日，因为中都、河北、河东、山东、河南、陕西等路受灾而免除前年的租税。
English: On the 25th, because Zhongdu, Hebei, Hedong, Shandong, Henan, Shaanxi and other roads were affected by the disaster, the previous year's tax was exempted.

古文：二月丙寅朔，次管庄。
现代文：二十七日，皇上抵达春水。二月一日，皇上到管庄。
English: On the 27th, the emperor arrived in Chunsui. On the 1st of February, the emperor went to Guanzhuang.

古文：丙子，次华港。
现代文：十一日，到华港。
English: On the 11th, it arrived at Hua Gang.

古文：己丑，还宫。
现代文：二十四日，返回宫中。
English: On the 24th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月乙未朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋国、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：乙巳，命戍边女直人遇祭祀、婚嫁、节辰许自造酒。
现代文：十一日，命令允许戍守边疆的女真人遇到祭祀、婚嫁、节辰自己造酒。
English: On the 11th day, the order allowed the Jurchens who guarded the frontier to make their own wine for sacrifices, weddings, and festivals.

古文：丁未，上谓宰执曰： 县令之职最为亲民，当得贤材用之。
现代文：十三日，皇上对宰执说： 县令的职位与人民最为亲近，应当选得贤才任用。
English: On the 13th, the emperor said to the leader: The position of county magistrate is the closest to the people, and the best talents should be selected and appointed.

古文：迩来犯法者众，殊不闻有能者。
现代文：近来犯法的多，单单听不到有贤能的人。
English: Lately, there have been many violations of the law, and it is simply not possible to listen to people of virtue.

古文：比在春水，见石城、玉田两县令，皆年老，苟禄而已。
现代文：朕在春水，见到石城、玉田两位县令，都年事已高，苟且领取俸禄而已。
English: In Chunshui, I saw the two county magistrates of Shicheng and Tamada, both of whom are very old and only receive a salary.

古文：畿甸尚尔，远县可知。 
现代文：京都附近尚且如此，远县的情景可想而知。 
English: This is still the case in the vicinity of Kyoto, and the situation in outlying prefectures can be imagined.

古文：平章政事石琚对曰： 良乡令焦旭、庆都令李伯达皆能吏，可任。 
现代文：平章政事石琚回答说 ：良乡令焦旭、庆都令李伯达都能当官，可以任用。 
English: Pingzhang political affairs Shi Hao replied: Liangxiang's Jiao Xu and Qingdu's Li Boda can both be appointed officials and can be appointed.

古文：上曰： 审如卿言，可擢用之。 
现代文：皇上说： 审查如卿所说，可以提升任用他们。 
English: The Emperor said, "The examination, as your Lordship said, can elevate and appoint them.

古文：自今再犯不以赃数多寡，并除名。 
现代文：十六日，禁令民间不得兴建寺观。献州人殷小二等人阴谋造反，伏法被诛。
English: On the 16th, there was a ban on the construction of temples by the general public. Yin Xiaoji, a person from Xianzhou, and others plotted to rebel, and Fuba was arrested.

古文：八月乙巳，至自金莲川。
现代文：四月五日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕巡抚视察所到之地，一定要体访官吏是否贪赃枉法。
English: On April 5th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "When I inspect a place, I must ask officials whether they are corrupt.

古文：丙辰，以尚书右丞相完颜守道为左丞相，平章政事石琚为右丞相。
现代文：玉田知主簿石抹杳能当官，可授予本县县令的职务。 五月十三日，皇上到金莲川去。六月七日，尚书左丞相纥石烈良弼逝世。七月十五日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 在职官员初犯贪污罪，容许有过失，至于再犯，就是没有改过之心。
English: On May 13th, the Emperor went to Jinlianchuan. On June 7th, the Minister of Education and Culture, Shi Lerong Liang, passed away. On July 15th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "The first time a serving official commits a crime of corruption, he admits his mistake. As for the second time, he has not changed his mind."

古文：九月辛未，以大理卿张九思等为贺宋生日使，侍御史完颜蒲鲁虎为夏国生日使。癸酉，以尚书左丞唐括安礼为平章政事。
现代文：从今以后再犯不论赃数多少，一并除名。 八月十四日，皇上从金莲川返回宫中。二十五日，任命尚书右丞相完颜守道为左丞相，平章政事石琚为右丞相。九月十三日，任命尚书左丞唐括安礼为平章政事。
English: On August 14, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Palace from Jinlianchuan; on the 25th, he appointed Shoshu Ujisho Kanen Shudo as Ujisho, and Heijo Seiji Sekiguchi as Ujisho; on the 13th of September, he appointed Shoshu Ujisho Tangbuanrei as Heijo Seiji.

古文：乙亥，以右丞蒲察通为左丞，参知政事移剌道为右丞，刑部尚书粘割斡特剌为参知政事。
现代文：十五日，任命右丞蒲察通为左丞，参知政事移剌道为右丞，刑部尚书粘割斡特剌为参知政事。
English: On the fifteenth day, Pu Zha Tong, the right-hand man, was appointed as the left-hand man, Guan Dao, the right-hand man, and Shang Shuxu, the special adviser to the Minister of Justice, was appointed as the Minister of Justice.

古文：十月庚寅朔，陕州防御使石抹靳家奴以罪除名。
现代文：十月一日，陕州防御使石抹靳家奴因为犯罪被解除职务。
English: On October 1st, the Shaanxi Defense Force relieved Shi Magu of his duties for committing a crime.

古文：甲午，御史中丞刘仲诲、侍御史李瑜坐失纠察大长公主事，各削官一阶。
现代文：五日，御史中丞刘仲诲、侍卿史李瑜坐失纠察大长公主事，各被削官一阶。
English: On the fifth day, the Imperial Historian Liu Zhongyun and the Chamberlain Shi Liyu lost their seats to picket the Grand Elder Princess, and were each demoted one rank.

古文：十一月庚申朔，尚书省奏，拟同知永宁军节度使事阿可为刺史，上曰： 阿可年幼，于事未练，授佐贰官可也。 
现代文：十一月一日，尚书省禀奏，拟任同知永宁军节度使事阿可为刺史。皇上说： 阿可年幼，对于世事还不练达，授予辅佐官吏就可以了。 
English: On November 1st, the Imperial Household Agency announced that Ako, the festival envoy of the Yongning Army, was to be appointed. The emperor said: Ako is young, he is not experienced in worldly affairs, it is enough to grant him the title of assistant official.

古文：平章政事唐括安礼奏曰： 臣等以阿可宗室，故拟是职。 
现代文：平章政事唐括安礼禀奏说 ：臣等因为阿可是皇亲宗室，所以拟任他这个职务。 
English: Taira no Shosho, a political officer of the Tang Dynasty, said, "Since Akechi is the sibling of the imperial family, my ministers and I intend to appoint him to this position."

古文：上曰： 郡守系千里休戚，安可不择人而私其亲耶？
现代文：皇上说 ：郡守与千里地域休戚相关，怎么可以不选择人才而因私情任用自己的亲戚呢？
English: The emperor said, "County governors are closely related to thousands of miles of regions. How can you not choose talent, but appoint your own relatives for personal reasons?"

古文：若以亲亲之恩，赐与虽厚，无害于政。
现代文：如果是亲亲之恩，赐与他再丰厚，对于国家政事没有妨害。
English: If it is a relative's favor, bestow it on him abundantly, and there will be no hindrance to national politics.

古文：使之治郡而非其才，一境何赖焉。 
现代文：让他治理州郡而他不是那种人才，一方之地依赖什么？ 
English: Let him govern the state and he is not that kind of talent, on the other hand, what does the country depend on?

古文：壬申，以静难军节度使乌延查剌等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十七日，尚书省禀奏，崇信县令石安节向部族内百姓买木材，三天不给人家钱，应当削去一阶官职，解除现任职务。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the provincial government of Shangshu and the county government of Chongxin issued an order to the people in the tribe to buy wood from the people in the tribe on the Shi'an Festival, and not to give money to the people for three days. The first-tier officials should be removed and the current officials should be dismissed.

古文：丙子，尚书省奏，崇信县令石安节买车材于部民，三日不偿其直，当削官一阶，解职。上因言： 凡在官者，但当取其贪污与清白之尤者数人黜陟之，则人自知惩劝矣。夫朝廷之政，太宽则人不知惧，太猛则小玷亦将不免于罪，惟当用中典耳。 
现代文：皇上就这件事说道： 凡在职的官员，应当从中拿出贪污最多和最为清白的各几人，罢黜或留任，那么，人们自然知道惩罚和劝进的标准了。朝廷的为政之道，太宽了则人们不知道惧怕，太猛了则有小的玷污也将不免获罪，只应当取其中而制定典章。 
English: Regarding this matter, the Emperor said, "All officials in office should select the most corrupt and the most innocent among them, and remove or retain them. Then, people will naturally know the standard of punishment and persuasion. If the way the imperial court conducts politics is too broad, people will not know to be afraid, and if it is too violent, people will not be exempted from punishment if there is a small defilement. It is only necessary to take one of them and formulate regulations.

古文：戊寅，上责宰臣曰： 近问赵承元何故再任，卿等言，曹王尝遣人言其才能干敏，故再任之。
现代文：十九日，皇上斥责宰相大臣说 ：最近问赵承元什么原因再次任职，卿等说，曹王曾经派人来讲他才能干练敏捷，所以再次任用他。
English: On the 19th, the emperor reprimanded the prime minister and minister and said, "Recently, when I asked Zhao Chengyuan why he was reappointed, he said that Cao Wang had sent someone to say that he was able to practice and be agile, so he was reappointed.

古文：官爵拟注，虽由卿辈，予夺之权，当出于朕。
现代文：官职爵位拟用解释，虽然由着卿辈，但定夺的权力，应当出于朕。
English: The explanation to be used for the official titles and ranks is that although it is up to the nobles, the power to decide should come from me.

古文：曹王之言尚从之，假皇太子有所谕，则其从可知矣。
现代文：曹王的话尚且听从，假如皇太子有什么传谕，那么，你们听从可以想见了。
English: Cao Wang's words are still being obeyed. If the crown prince has any edicts, then you can imagine how they will be obeyed.

古文：此事因卿言始知，其不知者知复几何？
现代文：这件事因为卿等说了才知道，那些不知道的谁知还有多少！
English: I only know about this because you told me, and who knows how many others don't know!

古文：且卿等公受请属，可乎？ 
现代文：况且卿等公受请属，可以吗？ 
English: What's more, sir, is it okay for us to be publicly invited?

古文：丙戌，以吏部尚书乌古论元忠为御史大夫，以东上阁门使左光庆为高丽生日使。
现代文：赵承元以前是曹王府文学，和王府内的婢女通奸，被打一百五十杖除名，而再次任用。
English: Zhao Chengyuan used to be the literature of Cao Wangfu, and he committed adultery with a maid in the royal palace. He was beaten with one hundred and fifty rods and expelled, but he was reappointed.

古文：十二月庚戌，封孙吾都补温国公，麻达葛金源郡王，承庆道国公。
现代文：十二月二十一日，皇上封自己的孙子吾都补为温国公，麻达葛为金源郡王，承庆为道国公。
English: On December 21st, the emperor appointed his grandson Wu Du Du as the Duke of Wen, Ma Dagu as the King of Jinyuan County, and Cheng Qing as the Duke of Dao.

古文：乙丑，尚书省奏，亏课院务官颜葵等六十八人，各合削官一阶。
现代文：二十三日，群臣奉上 大金受命万世之宝 。大定十九年正月初一，宋国、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。八日，皇上到春水去。二月二十一日，皇上返回宫中。
English: On the 23rd, a group of courtiers were presented with a large sum of money and ordered to make it a treasure for all time. On the first day of the first month of the 19th year of the Taisho era, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the emperor. On the 8th, the emperor went to Chunsui. On the 21st of February, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：上曰： 以承废人主榷沽，此辽法也。
现代文：三月七日，尚书省禀奏，亏课院务官颜葵等六十八人，各合削官一阶。皇上说 ：以承荫人主榷沽，这是辽代的法令。
English: On the 7th of March, sixty-eight people, including the vice-governor of Shangshu and the vice-governor of Liao, each of whom was a first-class official, came to the imperial court and said, "The emperor decreed that the emperor should appoint a successor to the throne. This was a decree of the Liao Dynasty.

古文：法弊则当更张，唐、宋法有可行者则行之。 
现代文：法令有弊端就应当更改施行，唐、宋的法令有可行的就实行。 
English: If there are defects in the decrees, they should be amended and implemented. If the decrees of the Tang and Song Dynasties are feasible, they should be implemented.

古文：己巳，上与宰臣论史事，且曰： 朕观前史多溢美。
现代文：十一日，皇上与宰臣讨论史事，说： 朕看前朝历史大多是溢美之词。
English: On the 11th day, the Emperor discussed historical matters with the Vice-Minister and said, "I think that the history of the previous dynasty is mostly praise.

古文：大抵史书载事贵实，不必浮辞谄谀也。 
现代文：大抵上讲史书记载事件贵在实字，不必使用虚浮言辞来献媚阿谀。 
English: For the most part, the events recorded in the historical record are real, and there is no need to use false words to flatter the grandma.

古文：辛未，上谓宰臣曰： 奸邪之臣，欲有规求，往往私其党与，不肯明言，托以他事，阳不与而阴为之力。
现代文：十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 奸邪的臣子，想有所求，往往对自己同党施与私情，又不肯明说，就假托其他的事情，表面上不给予而背地里替他出力。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Treacherous vassals, when they want something, often indulge in personal relationships with their own party members, but do not want to say so. They pretend to do other things, do not give on the surface, but secretly work hard for him."

古文：朕观古之奸人，当国家建储之时，恐其聪明不利于己，往往风以阴事，破坏其议，惟择昏懦者立之，冀他日可弄权为功利也。
现代文：朕观察古代的奸人，当国家建储之时，恐怕那些聪明的人不利于自己，往往在背地里吹阴风，破坏正确的谏议，只选择昏庸懦弱的人树立起来，希图他日可以玩弄权术攫取功利。
English: I observed the ancient traitors. When the country was building reserves, I am afraid that those clever people did not benefit themselves. They often blew the gale behind the scenes, undermined the correct discussion, and only chose the dim and weak people to build up, hoping that they could play power tricks and seize utilitarian benefits.

古文：如晋武欲立其弟，而奸臣沮之，竟立惠帝，以致丧乱，此明验也。 
现代文：如晋武帝要立他的弟弟，然而奸臣阻止他，竟然立了惠帝，以导致丧乱，这就是明证。 
English: If Emperor Jinwu wanted to appoint his younger brother, but his treacherous vassal prevented him from doing so, and instead appointed Emperor Hui, leading to chaos, this is clear evidence.

古文：丁丑，上谓宰臣曰： 朕观前代人臣将谏于朝，与父母妻子决，示以必死。
现代文：十九日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：朕纵观前代作为臣子的将要向当朝谏议的时候，和父母妻子诀别，表示必死的决心。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "I, as a courtier of the previous generation, will say goodbye to my parents and wife when I go to the Imperial Court for deliberation, expressing my determination to die.

古文：同列目睹其死，亦不顾身，又为之谏。
现代文：同僚们目睹他死，也奋不顾身，又为他去请谏。
English: When his colleagues witnessed his death, they also went out of their way to pray for him.

古文：此尽忠于国者，人所难能也。 
现代文：这是为国尽忠的人，一般人所难能做到的。 
English: This is something that people who are loyal to their country, ordinary people, can hardly do.

古文：己卯，制纠弹之官知有犯法而不举者，减犯人罪一等科之，关亲者许回避。
现代文：二十一日，规定管纠察弹劾的官员知道有犯法的然而不举报的，减去犯人罪一等判给他，有关亲戚的案子允许回避。
English: On the 21st, it was stipulated that if the officials in charge of picketing and impeachment knew that there was a violation of the law but did not report it, the first-class crime of the prisoner would be reduced to him, and the case of the relative concerned would be allowed to be avoided.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 人多奉释老，意欲徼福。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：人们大多奉行释老，意思是想得到幸福。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Most people practice Shiro, which means they want to be happy.

古文：朕蚤年亦颇惑之，旋悟其非。
现代文：朕早年也很迷恋这个，随后悟出并不是这样。
English: I was obsessed with it in the early days and then I realised it wasn't.

古文：且上天立君，使之治民，若盘乐怠忽，欲以侥幸祈福，难矣！
现代文：况且上天立君，让他治民，如果迷恋欢乐而怠慢疏忽政务，想以侥幸祈求幸福，难啊。
English: Moreover, Heaven has set up a prince, let him govern the people, if you are infatuated with joy and neglect government affairs, if you want to pray for happiness by chance, it is difficult.

古文：癸亥，秋猎。
现代文：果然能爱抚育养下民，上当天心，福必报之。 
English: It is indeed a blessing to be able to love and nurture one's subordinates, with the same heart as the previous day.

古文：癸未，还都。十月辛卯，西南路招讨使哲典以赃罪，伏诛。
现代文：七月十五日，有司奏报拟任赵王的儿子石古乃当随从，皇上不同意，对宰相说 ：儿辈尚且年幼，如果奉承太过分，使他的奢侈之心滋长，最后将难以节制，这件事不可助长。
English: On the 15th of July, there was a report that Shigu, the son of King Zhao, was to be appointed as an attendant. The emperor did not agree and said to the prime minister, "My children are still young. If the flattery is too excessive and makes his extravagant heart grow, it will eventually be difficult to control. This matter cannot be encouraged."

古文：辛亥，制知情服内成亲者，虽自首仍依律坐之。
现代文：诸儿每入宫当侍奉，正当他们笑语娱乐之际，朕必须深沉静默，用严肃的态度面对他们，让他们知道朕教育训诫的意思，使他们经常敬畏谨慎而少犯过失。 
English: Every time you enter the palace to serve, just as they are laughing and having fun, I must face them with a deep silence and a serious attitude, let them know the meaning of my education and discipline, and let them always fear caution and commit fewer mistakes.

古文：十一月壬戌，改葬昭德皇后，大赦。
现代文：八月七日，尚书右丞相石琚任满辞官。
English: On August 7, Minister of the Right Sho Shojo Seki resigned from his post.

古文：以御史中丞移剌綎等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十月七日，西南路招讨使哲典因为贪污获罪，伏法被杀。
English: On October 7th, Zhaozhong Zhaozhong was found guilty of corruption, and Fufa was killed.

古文：戊辰，以西上阁门使卢拱为高丽生日使。
现代文：二十七日，裁定知情服内成亲的，虽然自首仍依照法律判罪。十一月八日，改葬昭德皇后，大赦天下。
English: On the 27th, it was ruled that those who knowingly married while in uniform would be convicted in accordance with the law, even though they had turned themselves in. On November 8th, Empress Zhao De's funeral was changed and she was pardoned.

古文：壬申，上如河间冬猎。
现代文：十八日，皇上到河间开展冬猎。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor went to Kawama to carry out the winter hunt.

古文：癸未，至自河间。
现代文：二十九日，从河间返回京都。
English: On the 29th, he returned to Kyoto from Kawama.

古文：二十年正月甲寅朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。戊午，定试令史格。
现代文：大定二十年正月初一，宋国、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来朝贺，五日，规定试令史的格次。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 20th year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to pay homage, and on the 5th day, they set a precedent in the history of imperial edicts.

古文：壬戌，命岁以钱五千贯造随朝百官节酒及冰、烛、药、炭，视品秩给之。
现代文：九日，命令每年用五千贯钱制造朝廷百官过节所用酒以及冰、烛、药、炭，按品级发给他们。
English: On the 9th, an order was issued to spend five thousand crowns each year on the production of liquor, ice, candles, medicine, and charcoal, which were used by the hundreds of officials of the imperial court to celebrate the festival, and to distribute them according to quality.

古文：己巳，如春水。
现代文：十六日，皇上到春水去。
English: On the 16th, the emperor went to Chunshui.

古文：四月丁亥，定冒荫罪赏。
现代文：二十三日，驾临石城县行宫。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived at the Imperial Palace in Shicheng County.

古文：己亥，制宗室及外并一品命妇，衣服听用明金。
现代文：二十四日，把玉田县行宫所在地的偏林改为御林，大淀泊改为长春淀。二月二十五日，返回京都。三月七日，诏令凡犯罪被问的官员，虽然遇到赦免，也不得复职。
English: On the 24th, he changed the location of Gyogu in Tamada County from Kyorin to Goryo, and the location of Oyododomari to Chosun-Yodo. On the 25th of February, he returned to Kyoto. On the 7th of March, he issued an edict that no official who had been questioned for a crime could be reinstated, even if he was pardoned.

古文：以西上阁门使郭喜国为横赐高丽使。太宁宫火。
现代文：二十九日，任命平章政事徒单克宁为尚书右丞相，御史大夫乌古论元忠为平章政事。四月五日，太宁宫失火。
English: On the 29th, Taira no Shosho was appointed to the post of minister of state, and Goshi no daifu Uguon Mototada was appointed to the post of minister of state. On the 5th of April, the Taining Palace caught fire.

古文：乙巳，上谓宰臣曰： 女直官多谓朕食用太俭，朕谓不然。
现代文：二十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：女真族官员多数人说朕食用太俭，朕说不然。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Most Jurchen officials say that I am too frugal in my diet, but I say otherwise.

古文：夫一食多费，岂为美事。
现代文：如果衣食多费，难道是美事？
English: If food and clothing cost more, is that a good thing?

古文：况朕年高，不欲屠宰物命。
现代文：况且朕年事已高，不想屠宰生物。
English: Besides, I am old and don't want to slaughter living beings.

古文：贵为天子，能自节约，亦不恶也。
现代文：贵为天子，能自觉节约，也不是坏事。
English: It is not a bad thing that you are a son of heaven and can consciously save money.

古文：以太府监李佾等为贺宋生日使，少府少监赛补为夏国生日使。
现代文：朕穿衣有的很旧，常让漂洗，以至于破碎，才开始更换。以前所用的帐幕常用涂金作为装饰，现在则不这样，只让够用就行了，何必要求纷繁豪华呢？ 二十八日，到金莲川去。五月十五日，京师地震，生黑白毛。
English: Some of my clothes are very old, and I often have them washed until they are broken before replacing them. The tents that I used to use in the past were often painted with gold as decoration, but this is not the case now. Just let it be enough, why do you need to be extravagant and luxurious? On the 28th, I went to Jinlianchuan. On the 15th of May, the earthquake in Beijing caused black and white hair.

古文：丙子，蒲速宛群牧老忽谋叛，伏诛。十月庚辰朔，更定铨注县令丞簿格。
现代文：九月十三日，从金莲川返回京都。十月一日，更定铨注县令丞簿格。
English: On September 13th, he returned to Kyoto from Jinlianchuan, and on October 1st, he was registered as a Ryozen priest.

古文：诏西北路招讨司每进马驼鹰鹘等，辄率敛部内，自今并罢之。
现代文：原来西北路招讨司每次进献马驼鹰鹘等，都要率人到部内收敛，皇上诏令从今以后一并免除。
English: Originally, every time the Northwest Road Invitation Division presented horse, camel, eagle and so on, they had to lead people to the department to converge, and the emperor's edict was exempted from now on.

古文：壬午，上谓宰臣曰： 察问细微，非人君之体，朕亦知之。
现代文：三日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：察问细微，不是为人君的得体的处事办法，朕也知道这一点。
English: On the third day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "It is not proper for a prince to inquire into details, and I know this.

古文：然以卿等殊不用心，故时或察问。
现代文：然而因为卿等人特不用心，所以时常查问。
English: However, because Sir and others are particularly careless, they often ask questions.

古文：如山后之地，皆为亲王、公主、权势之家所占，转和于民，皆由卿等之不察。
现代文：比如山后的土地，都是亲王、公主、权势的人家所分占，转手租给人民，这都是由于卿等人不查问而造成的。
English: For example, the land behind the mountain is all occupied by princes, princesses, and powerful families, and leased to the people. This is all caused by the fact that nobles and others do not inquire.

古文：卿等当尽心勤事，毋令朕之烦劳也。 
现代文：卿等应当尽心勤恳办事，不要让朕烦心操劳。 
English: Sirs, you should work diligently, don't let me worry about it.

古文：诏徙遥落河、移马河两猛安于大名、东平等路安置。
现代文：诏令遥落河、移马河两猛安迁徙到大名、东平等路安置。
English: The imperial edict ordered Yuan Luohe and Yangmahe to move to Daimyo and Dongping Road respectively.

古文：戊戌，上谓宰臣曰： 凡人在下位，欲冀升进，勉为公廉贤肖何以知之。
现代文：十九日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 凡是人处在下位的时候，希望升迁上进，勉励自己为公清廉，贤还是不贤怎么能够知道呢？
English: On the 19th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Whenever a person is in a lower position, hopes to be promoted, and encourages himself to be honest, how can he know whether he is virtuous or not?

古文：及其通显，观其施为，方见本心。
现代文：等到仕途通达显赫，观察他的作为，才看见他的本心。
English: Wait until his career is well established, observe his actions, and you will see his true heart.

古文：如招讨哲典，初任定州同知，继为都司，未尝少有私徇，所至皆有清名，及为招讨，不固守。
现代文：例如招讨哲典，起初任定州同知，接着担任都司，不曾稍有徇私行为，所到之处都有清廉的名声。等他做招讨，不坚持原来的清廉。
English: For example, Zhaotong Zhexian, who was first appointed as the leader of Dingzhou Tongzhi, and then served as the governor of the capital, never had any selfish behavior, and had a reputation for integrity everywhere he went. When he did Zhaotong Zhexian, he did not adhere to the original integrity.

古文：人心险于山川，诚难知也。 
现代文：人心险恶犹如山川一样难测，实在是难以了解。 
English: The wickedness of the human heart is as difficult to fathom as a mountain stream. It is really difficult to understand.

古文：壬寅，上谓宰臣曰： 近览《资治通鉴》，编次累代废兴，甚有鉴戒，司马光用心如此，古之良史无以加也。
现代文：二十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 最近阅览《资治通鉴》，按顺序编写各朝代兴废的事，很值得借鉴，司马光用心如此，古代的良史没有超过他的。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Recently, I have been reading "The General Guide to the Governance of Capital" and have been compiling the history of the restoration of the dynasties in order. It is worth learning from. Sima Guang is so dedicated, and the good history of ancient times has not surpassed him.

古文：校书郎毛麾，朕屡问以事，善于应对，真该博老儒，可除太常职事，以备讨论。 
现代文：校书郎毛麾，朕屡次拿一些事情问他，他很善于应对，真是博学的老儒，可以授予太常职事，来让他准备讨论。 
English: School teacher Mao Yao, I repeatedly asked him about some things. He was very good at dealing with things. He is really a learned old man. I can give him the post of superintendent to prepare for the discussion.

古文：甲辰，以殿前都点检襄为御史大夫。
现代文：二十五日，任命殿前都点检襄为御史大夫。
English: On the 25th, he was appointed Imperial Historian.

古文：十一月丁巳，尚书右丞移剌道罢。
现代文：十一月九日，尚书右丞移剌道罢官。
English: On November 9th, Shang Shuyujo was transferred to Shandong Province and dismissed.

古文：乙丑，以真定尹单守素等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十七日，派真定府尹徒单守素等人为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 17th, Jin Dingfu sent Yin Tutu Shan Shou Su and others as envoys to He Song Zhengdan.

古文：癸酉，以御史大夫襄为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十五日，任命御史大夫襄为尚书右丞。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he appointed Mishi no daibu Jo as Shoshu ujo.

古文：乙亥，上谕宰臣曰： 郡守选人，资考虽未及，廉能者则升用之，以励其余。 
现代文：二十八日，皇上告诉宰相大臣说 ：郡守选拔人才，考察资历虽不够格，是廉洁贤能的人则提升任用他，以此来勉励其余的人。 
English: On the 28th, the emperor told the prime minister: "County governors are the best at selecting talents. Although the qualifications are not qualified, those who are honest and capable are promoted and appointed, in order to encourage the rest of the people."

古文：以太常少卿任倜为高丽生日使。十二月辛巳，上谓宰臣曰： 岐国用人，但一言合意便升用之，一言之失便责罚之。
现代文：十二月三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 岐国用人，只是一句话合意便提升任用这个人，一句话说错便斥责惩罚这个人。
English: On December 3rd, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "In matters of state appointments, it only takes one word of agreement to promote and appoint this person, and one word of error to reprimand and punish this person.

古文：凡人言辞，一得一失，贤者不免。
现代文：凡是人们的言辞，一得一失，贤者也不可避免。
English: All people's words have one gain and one loss, and the wise person is also inevitable.

古文：自古用人咸试以事，若止以奏对之间，安能知人贤否？
现代文：自古以来选用人才都用考试的办法，如果只拿禀报回答事情的表现来考察，怎么能知道此人是否贤能？
English: Since ancient times, the selection of talents have used the method of examination. If we only take the performance of answering questions to investigate, how can we know whether this person is capable?

古文：朕之取人，众所与者用之，不以独见为是也。 
现代文：朕选取人的标准，众人所同意授予的任用他，不把个人独见当成标准。 
English: The criteria for selecting a person, the appointment of which is agreed upon by all, does not take the individual's unique opinion as a standard.

古文：己亥，河决卫州。
现代文：二十一日，黄河在卫州决口。
English: On the 21st, the Yellow River burst its banks in Weizhou.

古文：辛丑，猎于近郊。
现代文：二十三日，皇上在近郊打猎。
English: On the 20th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：癸卯，特授袭封衍圣公孔总兖州曲阜令，封爵如故。
现代文：二十五日，特授袭封衍圣公孔总为兖州曲阜令，封爵如故。
English: On the 25th, Sheng Kung Kong Zang was awarded the Zhangzhou Qufu Ruling. He remains a knight.

