古文：十有四年春，西狩获麟。
现代文：十四年春季，鲁国友人在西面打猎，猎获一只麒麟。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, Lu Guotong went hunting in the west and caught a unicorn.

古文：小邾射以句绎来奔。
现代文：小邾国的射献上句绎逃亡到鲁国来。
English: The last sentence of Xiao Ying's eulogy was that he had fled to Lu.

古文：夏四月，齐陈恒执其君，寘于舒州。
现代文：夏季四月，齐国的陈恒拘捕了自己的国君，将其安置在舒州。
English: In the summer of April, Chen Heng of Qi arrested his sovereign and placed him in Shuzhou.

古文：庚戌，叔还卒。
现代文：庚戌日，叔还去世。
English: On the day of the Geng Xu anniversary, my uncle also passed away.

古文：五月庚申朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月庚申初一这天，发生了日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of Koshin in May.

古文：陈宗竖出奔楚。
现代文：陈国的宗竖逃到楚国。
English: The patriarch of Chen fled to Chu.

古文：宋向魋入于曹以叛。
现代文：宋国的向魋进入曹地并发生了叛乱。
English: Song Dynasty's Xiang Yao entered Cao Di and led a rebellion.

古文：莒子狂卒。
现代文：莒子狂去世。
English: The dice maniac is dead.

古文：六月，宋向魋自曹出奔卫。
现代文：六月，宋国的向魋从曹地逃到卫国。
English: In June, Xiang Yao of Song fled from Cao Di to Wei.

古文：宋向巢来奔。
现代文：宋国的向巢逃到鲁国。
English: Song Dynasty's Emperor Xiangnu fled to Lu.

古文：齐人弑其君壬于舒州。
现代文：齐国人在舒州杀掉了自己的君主。
English: The people of Qi killed their monarch in Shuzhou.

古文：秋，晋赵鞅帅师伐卫。
现代文：秋季，晋国的赵鞅率领军队攻打卫国。
English: In the autumn, Zhao Jun of Jin led an army to attack and defend the country.

古文：八月辛丑，仲孙何忌卒。
现代文：八月辛丑日，仲孙何忌去世。
English: In August, on the Day of the Ugly Duckling, the middle grandson passed away.

古文：冬，陈宗竖自楚复入于陈，陈人杀之。
现代文：冬季，陈国的宗竖从楚国再次进入陈国，陈国人将其杀死。
English: In winter, the patriarch of Chen again entered Chen from Chu, and the people of Chen killed him.

古文：陈辕买出奔楚。
现代文：陈国的辕买逃到楚国。
English: Chen fled to Chu.

古文：有星孛。
现代文：有彗星出现。
English: A comet appears.

古文：饥。
现代文：鲁国发生饥荒。
English: A famine has broken out in Russia.

古文：十四年春，西狩于大野，叔孙氏之车子鉏商获麟，以为不祥，以赐虞人。
现代文：十四年春季，在西部的大野打猎，叔孙氏的驾车人子鉏商猎获一只麒麟，认为不吉利，赏赐给管山林的人。
English: In the spring of the fourteenth year, while hunting in Ono in the west, the uncle's driver, the son of a merchant, hunted down a unicorn, which was considered unlucky and was given to the person in charge of the forest.

古文：仲尼观之，曰： 麟也。 然后取之。
现代文：孔子细看后，说 这是麒麟 ，然后收下它。
English: Confucius took a closer look and said, "This is a unicorn," and accepted it.

古文：小邾射以句绎来奔，曰： 使季路要我，吾无盟矣。 
现代文：小邾国的射献上句绎逃亡到鲁国来，说： 派季路和我约定，可以不用盟誓了。 
English: Xiao Yan Guo's speech ended with a sentence about fleeing to Lu Guo, saying: "Send Qi Lu to make an appointment with me, you don't have to swear an oath."

古文：使子路，子路辞。
现代文：派子路去，子路推辞。
English: Send a child away, and the child refuses.

古文：季康子使冉有谓之曰： 千乘之国，不信其盟，而信子之言，子何辱焉？ 
现代文：季康子派冉有对子路说： 一千辆战车的国家，不相信盟誓，反而相信您的话，您有什么屈辱呢？ 
English: Ji Kangzi sent Ran You to the right path and said: A country of a thousand chariots does not believe in oaths, but believes in your words. What humiliation do you have?

古文：对曰： 鲁有事于小邾，不敢问故，死其城下可也。
现代文：子路回答说： 鲁国如果和小邾国发生战事，我不敢询问原因曲直，战死在城下就行了。
English: Zilu replied: "If there is a war between Lu and Xiaoyang, I won't dare to inquire about the cause. I'll just die under the castle."

古文：彼不臣而济其言，是义之也。
现代文：他不尽臣道，而使他的话得以实现，这是把他的不尽臣道当成正义了，我不能那么办。 
English: To make his words come true because he was insubordinate is to treat his insubordination as justice, and I can't do that.

古文：由弗能。 齐简公之在鲁也，阚止有宠焉。及即位，使为政。
现代文：齐简公在鲁国的时候，阚止受到宠信。等到简公即位，就让阚止执政。
English: When Qi Jian Gong was in the State of Lu, Yao Zhe was favored. When Yao Jian Gong ascended the throne, he allowed Yao Zhe to govern.

古文：陈成子惮之，骤顾诸朝。
现代文：陈成子惧怕他，在朝廷上屡次回头看他。
English: Chen Cheng Zi was afraid of him and repeatedly looked back at him in court.

古文：诸御鞅言于公曰： 陈、阚不可并也，君其择焉。 
现代文：御者鞅对齐简公说： 陈氏、阚氏不能并列，你还是选择一个。 
English: "You can't put Mr. Chen and Mr. Zou side by side. You still have to choose one," said Jian Gong.

古文：弗听。
现代文：齐简公不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：子我夕，陈逆杀人，逢之，遂执以入。
现代文：阚止晚上朝见齐简公，陈逆杀人，阚止碰见，就把他逮捕，带进公宫。
English: When he saw Qi Jian Gong in the morning, Chen Qi killed him. When he met him, he arrested him and took him to the palace.

古文：陈氏方睦，使疾而遗之潘沐，备酒肉焉，飨守囚者，醉而杀之而逃。子我盟诸陈于陈宗。
现代文：陈氏一族正好和睦团结，族人就让陈逆假装生病，并送去洗头的淘米水，备有酒肉。陈逆请看守的人吃喝，看守喝醉以后陈逆就杀了他，然后逃走，阚止和陈氏族人在陈氏宗主家里结盟。
English: The Chen clan just happened to be in harmony and unity. The tribe members asked Chen Chou to pretend to be sick and sent him rice water to wash his hair, with wine and meat. Chen Chou invited the guards to eat and drink. After the guards got drunk, Chen Chou killed him, and then fled, making an alliance with the Chen clan members at the home of the patriarch of the Chen clan.

古文：初，陈豹欲为子我臣，使公孙言己，已有丧而止。
现代文：当初，陈豹想要当阚止的家臣，让公孙推荐自己。
English: At first, Chen Pan wanted to be a retiring vassal, so he asked his grandson to recommend him.

古文：既而言之，曰： 有陈豹者，长而上偻，望视，事君子必得志。
现代文：不久陈豹有丧事，就停下来，丧事完了，公孙又对阚止谈起这件事说： 有一个叫陈豹的人，身高背驼，眼睛仰视，事奉君子一定能让人满意，想要当您的家臣。
English: Soon after, Chen Leopard had a funeral, so he stopped. When the funeral was over, the grandson-in-law also spoke to Zou Zhizhi about this matter, saying, "There is a man named Chen Leopard. He is tall, has a hunchback, and his eyes look up. He is sure to satisfy people as a gentleman, and he wants to be your vassal.

古文：欲为子臣，吾惮其为人也，故缓以告。 
现代文：我怕他人品不好，所以没有立即告诉您。 
English: I didn't tell you right away because I was afraid of his bad character.

古文：子我曰： 何害？
现代文：阚止说 这有什么害处？
English: Still, what's the harm?

古文：是其在我也。 
现代文：这都在于我。 
English: It's all up to me.

古文：使为臣。
现代文：就要陈豹做了家臣。
English: He wanted Chen Pan to become his vassal.

古文：他日，与之言政，说，遂有宠。
现代文：过了些日子，阚止和他谈政事，很高兴，于是就宠信他。
English: After a few days, I stopped talking to him about politics, I was happy, so I trusted him.

古文：谓之曰： 我尽逐陈氏，而立女，若何？ 
现代文：阚止对陈豹说： 我把陈氏全部驱逐而立你做继承人，怎么样？ 
English: Yao Zhi said to Chen Bao: How about I expel the entire Chen clan and make you the heir?

古文：对曰： 我远于陈氏矣。且其违者，不过数人，何尽逐焉？ 
现代文：陈豹回答说： 我在陈氏族中是远支，而且他们不服从的不过几个人，为什么要把他们全部驱逐呢？ 
English: Chen Leopard replied: I am a distant branch of the Chen clan, and they only disobeyed a few people, why expel them all?

古文：遂告陈氏。子行曰： 彼得君，弗先，必祸子。 
现代文：就把话告诉了陈氏，子行对陈成子说： 他得到国君信任，不先下手，必然要加祸于您。 
English: He told Chen what he had said, and Zi Xing said to Chen Chengzi, "He has gained the trust of the sovereign, and if he does not strike first, he will certainly bring disaster upon you."

古文：子行舍于公宫。
现代文：子行就在公宫里住下。
English: In order to accommodate them, Tago lived in the sovereign's palace.

古文：夏五月壬申，成子兄弟四乘如公。
现代文：夏季，五月十三日，成子兄弟四人坐车到齐简公那里去。
English: On Jinshin Day in the summer of May, the Tian Chang brothers took four cars to see Jian Gong.

古文：子我在幄，出逆之。遂入，闭门。
现代文：阚止正在帐幕里，出来迎接他们，成子兄弟就走进去，把阚止关在门外。
English: While he was still in the tent, he came out to meet them, and his brothers came in and shut him out.

古文：侍人御之，子行杀侍人。
现代文：侍者抵御他们，子行杀了侍者。
English: The waiter resisted them and the son-in-law killed the waiter.

古文：公与妇人饮酒于檀台，成子迁诸寝。
现代文：齐简公和女人在檀台上喝酒，成子要让他迁到寝室里去。
English: Jian Zheng and his wife and concubine were drinking alcohol on the balcony, and Tian Zheng took him to his bedroom.

古文：公执戈将击之。
现代文：简公拿起戈，就要击打他们。
English: If Jian Gong picked up a fight, he would have to beat them.

古文：大史子馀曰： 非不利也，将除害也。 
现代文：太史子馀说： 不是要对国君不利，而是要除掉有害的人。 
English: Tai Shi Zi Yu said, "It is not to be unfavorable to the sovereign, but to get rid of harmful people."

古文：成子出舍于库，闻公犹怒，将出，曰： 何所无君？ 
现代文：成子搬出去住在府库里，听说简公还在生气，就准备逃亡，说： 哪个地方没有国君？ 
English: Cheng Zi moved out to live in the prefectural treasury. Hearing that Jian Gong was still angry, he prepared to flee, saying: "Where is there no sovereign?

古文：子行抽剑曰： 需，事之贼也。
现代文：子行抽出剑，说： 迟疑软弱，反害大事。
English: Zi Xing took out his sword and said, "Hesitating is weak, opposing is harmful."

古文：谁非陈宗？
现代文：您要走了，谁不能做陈氏的宗主？
English: You're leaving, who can't be the patriarch of the Chen clan?

古文：所不杀子者，有如陈宗！ 
现代文：您走，我要是不杀您，有历代宗主为证！ 
English: You go, if I don't kill you, the patriarchs of all times will bear witness!

古文：乃止。
现代文：陈成子就不出走了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：子我归，属徒攻闱与大门，皆不胜，乃出。
现代文：阚止回去，集合部下，攻打宫墙的小门和大门，都没有得胜就逃走了。
English: He stopped and went back, gathered his men, attacked the small doors and gates of the palace wall, and fled without victory.

古文：陈氏追之，失道于弇中，適豐丘。
现代文：陈氏追赶他，阚止在弇中迷了路，到了丰丘。
English: Mr. Chen chased after him, but he got lost in the snow and ended up in Fengqiu.

古文：豐丘人执之以告，杀诸郭关。
现代文：丰丘人拘捕他，报告陈成子，把他杀死在外城城关。
English: The people of Fengqiu arrested him, reported him to Chen Chengzi, and killed him at the city gate.

古文：成子将杀大陆子方，陈逆请而免之，以公命取车于道。及耏，众知而东之。
现代文：陈成子准备杀大陆子方，陈逆请求而赦免了。子方用简公的名义在路上得到一辆车，到达耏地，大家发现了就逼他向东去。
English: Chen Chengzi was going to kill the mainlander Zifang, but he was pardoned at the request of Chen Congtu. Zifang used the name of Jian Gong to get a car on the road, and when he arrived in Handan, everyone found out and forced him to go east.

古文：出雍门，陈豹与之车，弗受，曰： 逆为余请，豹与余车，余有私焉。
现代文：出了雍门，陈豹给他车子，他不接受，说： 逆为我请求，豹给我车子，我和他们有私交。
English: After leaving Yongmen, Chen Leopard gave him a car, but he didn't accept it, saying, "You asked for me, Leopard gave me a car. I have a personal relationship with them."

古文：事子我而有私于其仇，何以见鲁、卫之士？ 
现代文：事奉子我而和他的仇人有私交，怎么能和鲁国、卫国人士相见？ 
English: How can I meet with the people of the Russian Federation and the defenders of the country when I serve my son and have a personal relationship with his enemy?

古文：东郭贾奔卫。
现代文：子方就逃亡到卫国。
English: His son fled to the defense of the country.

古文：庚辰，陈恒执公于舒州。
现代文：二十一日，陈成子在舒州拘捕了齐简公。
English: On the 21st, Chen Cheng Zi arrested Qi Jian Gong in Shuzhou.

古文：公曰： 吾早从鞅之言，不及此。 
现代文：简公说： 我要早听了御鞅的话，不会到这一地步。 
English: Jian Gong said, "I should have listened to you earlier, and I wouldn't have come to this point.

古文：宋桓魋之宠害于公。
现代文：宋国桓魋受宠而扩充势力，发展到损害宋景公。
English: Song Guo Huanqian was favored and expanded his power, which developed to the detriment of Song Jinggong.

古文：公使夫人骤请享焉，而将讨之。未及，魋先谋公，请以鞌易薄，公曰： 不可。薄，宗邑也。 
现代文：宋景公让夫人突然邀请桓魋参加享礼，准备乘机讨伐他，还没有来得及，桓魋先打宋景公的主意，请求用鞌地交换薄地。宋景公说： 不行，薄地，是宋国殷商祖庙的所在地。 
English: Song Jing Gong asked his wife to suddenly invite Huan Qi to attend the ceremony, ready to take advantage of the opportunity to fight him. Before it was too late, Huan Qi first hit Song Jing Gong's idea and asked to exchange the thin land with the rich land. Song Jing Gong said: No, thin land, is the location of Song Guo's Yin Shang Ancestral Temple.

古文：乃益鞌七邑，而请享公焉。以日中为期，家备尽往。
现代文：于是就把七个城邑并入鞌地，而请求设享礼答谢宋景公，以太阳正中作为期限，私家的武装全都开去了。
English: Therefore, he annexed seven cities and towns to Handan, and requested the establishment of a ceremony to thank Song Jing, with the middle of the sun as the deadline, and all the private arms were opened.

古文：公知之，告皇野曰： 余长魋也。今将祸余，请即救。 
现代文：宋景公知道了，告诉皇野说： 我把桓魋养育大了，现在他要加祸于我，请马上救我。 
English: When Song Jinggong learned of this, he told the emperor: "I have raised Huan Yao, and now he wants to do me harm. Please save me immediately."

古文：司马子仲曰： 有臣不顺，神之所恶也，而况人乎？
现代文：皇野说： 臣下不服从，这是神明都厌恶的，何况人呢？
English: The emperor said, "If a vassal does not obey, it is detestable to the gods, and how much more to man?

古文：敢不承命。
现代文：岂敢不接受命令。
English: How dare they not take orders.

古文：不得左师不可。请以君命召之。 
现代文：但不得到左师的同意是不行的，请用您的名义召见他。 
English: However, it is not possible without the consent of the left division, please use your name to summon him.

古文：左师每食击钟。
现代文：左师每次吃饭，要敲打乐钟。
English: Every time Zuo Shi has a meal, he has to strike a musical bell.

古文：闻钟声，公曰： 夫子将食。 
现代文：听到钟声，宋景公说： 那一位快要吃饭了。 
English: Hearing the bell, Song Jinggong said: That one is about to eat.

古文：既食，又奏。
现代文：吃完饭以后，又奏乐。
English: After the meal, there was more music.

古文：公曰： 可矣。 
现代文：宋景公说： 行了。 
English: Song Jinggong said, "That's enough.

古文：以乘车往，曰： 迹人来告曰： 逢泽有介麇焉。 
现代文：皇野坐一辆车子去了，说： 猎场的人来报告说： 逢泽有一只麋鹿。 
English: Hirono went in a car and said, "The people at the hunting ground came to report that there is a moose in Aizawa.

古文：公曰： 虽魋未来，得左师，吾与之田，若何？ 
现代文：国君说： 即使桓魋没有来，有了左师，我和他一起打猎，怎么样？ 
English: The sovereign said, "Even if Huan Yu doesn't come, with Zuo Shuang, I'll go hunting with him, how about that?"

古文：君惮告子。野曰： 尝私焉。 
现代文：国君难于直接告诉您，野说： 我试着私下和他谈谈。 
English: "It's hard for the emperor to tell you directly," Noh said. "I'll try to talk to him privately."

古文：君欲速，故以乘车逆子。 
现代文：国君想要快一点，所以用一辆车子来接您。 
English: The governor wants to go a little faster, so he's bringing a car to pick you up.

古文：与之乘，至，公告之故，拜不能起。
现代文：左师和皇野同乘一辆车，到达，宋景公把原因告诉他，左师下拜，不能起立。
English: Zuo Shi and Wang Ye arrived in the same car. Song Jing Gong told him the reason why Zuo Shi bowed down and could not stand up.

古文：司马曰： 君与之言。 
现代文：皇野说： 君王和他盟誓。 
English: The crown prince said, "The king swore an oath to him."

古文：公曰： 所难子者，上有天，下有先君。 
现代文：宋景公说： 如果要使您遭到祸难，上有天，下有先君。 
English: Song Jinggong said: If you want to be plagued by calamity, there is a heaven above and an emperor below.

古文：对曰： 魋之不共，宋之祸也。
现代文：左师回答说： 魋不恭敬，这是宋国的祸患。
English: Zuo replied, "This is the scourge of the Song Dynasty.

古文：敢不唯命是听。 
现代文：岂敢不唯命是听。 
English: How dare you disobey orders?

古文：司马请瑞焉，以命其徒攻桓氏。
现代文：皇野请求兵符，以命令他的部下攻打桓魋。
English: Konno requested a military order to order his men to attack Kanen.

古文：其父兄故臣曰： 不可。 
现代文：他的父老兄长和旧臣说： 不行。 
English: His father, his brothers, and his former ministers said, "No."

古文：其新臣曰： 从吾君之命。 
现代文：他的新臣说： 服从我们国君的命令。 
English: His new minister said: Obey the orders of our sovereign.

古文：遂攻之。
现代文：皇野就进攻。
English: Konno went on the offensive.

古文：子颀骋而告桓司马。
现代文：子颀纵马奔告桓魋。
English: Zixuan long-striding horse galloped to Huancheng.

古文：司马欲入，子车止之，曰： 不能事君，而又伐国，民不与也，祗取死焉。 
现代文：桓魋想要往宫里攻打宋景公，子车劝阻他，说： 不能事奉国君，而又要攻打公室，百姓是不会亲附你的，只能找死。 
English: Huan Yu wanted to attack Song Jing Gong in the palace, but Zichai dissuaded him, saying, "You can't serve the sovereign and attack the official residence at the same time. The people won't follow you, they can only seek death."

古文：向魋遂入于曹以叛。
现代文：桓魋就进入曹地叛变。
English: Therefore, Kanen entered the Cao Di Rebellion.

古文：不能。亦入于曹取质。魋曰： 不可。
现代文：六月，宋景公派左师巢攻打桓魋，左师想要得到大夫做人质而回来，没有办到，也进入曹地，取得人质。
English: In June, Song Jing Gong sent Zuo Shizhao to attack Huanluo. Zuo Shizhao wanted to get the doctor as a hostage and return, but failed to do so. He also entered Cao Di to get the hostage.

古文：既不能事君，又得罪于民，将若之何？ 
现代文：桓魋说： 不行，既不能事奉国君，又得罪了百姓，打算怎么办？ 
English: Huan Yu said, "No, I can neither serve the sovereign nor offend the people. What are you going to do?"

古文：乃舍之。民遂叛之。
现代文：于是就释放了人质，百姓就背叛了他们。
English: So they released the hostages, and the people revolted against them.

古文：向魋奔卫。
现代文：桓魋逃亡到卫国。
English: Kanenobu fled to the defense of the country.

古文：向巢来奔，宋公使止之，曰： 寡人与子有言矣，不可以绝向氏之祀。 
现代文：向巢逃亡到鲁国来，宋景公派人留下他，说： 我跟您有盟誓了，不能断绝向氏的祭祀。 
English: When Xiang Xun fled to Lu Province, Song Jing Gong sent someone to stay with him, saying, "I have sworn an oath with you, and I cannot break off Xiang's sacrificial rites.

古文：辞曰： 臣之罪大，尽灭桓氏可也。
现代文：向巢辞谢说： 我的罪过大，君王把桓氏全部灭亡也是可以的。
English: He thanked the nest and said, "My sin is too great. The king can destroy the entire Huan clan."

古文：若以先臣之故，而使有后，君之惠也。
现代文：如果由于先臣的缘故，而让桓氏有继承人，这是君王的恩惠。
English: If, for the sake of the vanguard, the Huan clan has an heir, this is the king's favor.

古文：若臣则不可以入矣。 
现代文：像我，那就不能再回来了。 
English: Like me, you can't come back from that.

古文：司马牛致其邑与珪焉，而適齐。
现代文：司马牛把他的封邑和玉圭交还给宋景公，就到了齐国。
English: Sima Niu returned his fiefdom and Yugu to Song Jing Gong and went to Qi.

古文：向魋出于卫地，公文氏攻之，求夏后氏之璜焉。
现代文：桓魋逃亡到卫国，公文氏攻打他，向他索取夏后氏的玉璜。
English: Kanenobu fled to the northern part of the country, where the Kumon clan attacked him and demanded that he return the Summer Palace's jade scepter.

古文：与之他玉，而奔齐，陈成子使为次卿。司马牛又致其邑焉，而適吴。吴人恶之而反。
现代文：桓魋给了公文氏别的玉，就逃亡到齐国，陈成子让桓魋做次卿，司马牛又把封邑交还齐国而去到吴国，吴国人讨厌他，他就回到宋国。
English: Kuan Yat gave the other jade to the Kumon clan and fled to Qi. Chen Cheng Zi made Kuan Yat the second secretary. Sima Niu returned the fief to Qi and went to Wu. The people of Wu hated him, so he returned to Song.

古文：赵简子召之，陈成子亦召之。卒于鲁郭门之外，阬氏葬诸丘舆。
现代文：晋国的赵简子召唤他去，齐国的陈成子也召唤他去，在途中死在鲁国国都的外城门外，阬氏把他葬在丘舆。
English: Zhao Jianzi of Jin summoned him to go, Chen Chengzi of Qi also summoned him to go. On the way, he died outside the outer gate of the capital of Lu. He was buried in Qiuyu.

古文：甲午，齐陈恒弑其君壬于舒州。孔丘三日齊，而请伐齐三。
现代文：六月初五，齐国的陈桓在舒州杀了他们的国君壬。孔子斋戒三天，三次请求攻打齐国。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, Chen Huan of Qi killed their ruler Ren in Shuzhou. Confucius fasted for three days and made three requests to attack Qi.

古文：公曰： 鲁为齐弱久矣，子之伐之，将若之何？ 
现代文：哀公说： 鲁国被齐国削弱已经很久了，您攻打他们，打算怎么办？ 
English: Aiko said, "It has been a long time since Lu was weakened by Qi. What do you plan to do about attacking them?"

古文：对曰： 陈恒弑其君，民之不与者半。
现代文：孔子回答说： 陈桓杀了他们的国君，百姓不亲附他的有一半。
English: Confucius replied, "Chen Huan killed their sovereign, and half of the people disapprove of him.

古文：以鲁之众，加齐之半，可克也。 
现代文：以鲁国的群众加上齐国不服从陈桓的一半，是可以战胜的。 
English: The masses in Yilu and half of the disobedient people in Qi can be defeated.

古文：公曰： 子告季孙。 
现代文：哀公说： 您告诉季孙。 
English: Aiko said, "Tell that to Kisun."

古文：孔子辞。退而告人曰： 吾以从大夫之后也，故不敢不言。 
现代文：孔子辞谢，退下去告诉别人说： 我由于曾经列于大夫之末，所以不敢不说话。 
English: Confucius declined and retreated to tell the others, "I dare not remain silent, for I was once at the bottom of the list of doctors.

古文：初，孟孺子洩将圉马于成。成宰公孙宿不受，曰： 孟孙为成之病，不圉马焉。 
现代文：当初，孟孺子泄准备在成地养马，成地的宰臣公孙宿不接受，说： 孟孙由于成地百姓贫困，不在这里养马。 
English: At first, Meng Yao Zi Le was preparing to raise horses in Chengdu, but Chengdu's vice-minister, Meng Sun, did not accept the accommodation, saying: Meng Sun did not raise horses here because of the poverty of Chengdu's people.

古文：孺子怒，袭成。从者不得入，乃反。
现代文：孺子发怒，侵袭成地，跟从的人们没能攻入，就回去了。
English: The mule got angry and attacked Chengdu. The people who followed him could not get in, so they went back.

古文：成有司使，孺子鞭之。
现代文：成地的官员派人去，孺子鞭打了来人。
English: Chengdu officials sent someone, and the mule whipped the person.

古文：秋八月辛丑，孟懿子卒。
现代文：秋季，八月十三日，孟懿子死了。
English: In the autumn, on August 13, Meng Rongzi died.

古文：成人奔丧，弗内。
现代文：成地的人去奔丧，孺子不接纳。
English: Chengdu people go to the funeral, and the cripple does not accept it.

古文：袒免哭于衢。听共，弗许。惧，不归。
现代文：成地的人脱去上衣、帽子而在大路上号哭，表示愿供驱使，孺子不答应。
English: Chengdi people take off their tops and hats and cry on the road, expressing their willingness to drive, but the mule does not agree.

