古文：魏知古起诸吏，为姚崇所引用，及同升也，崇颇轻之。
现代文：原文唐朝人魏知古出身于低级官吏，受姚崇推荐任用，后来虽然两人职位相当，而姚崇却颇为轻视他。
English: Originally from the Tang Dynasty, Wei Zhigu was a low-ranking official who was recommended for appointment by Yao Chong. Later, although the two held the same position, Yao Chong despised him.

古文：无何，知古拜吏部尚书，知东道选事。
现代文：后来魏知古升任吏部尚书，负责东都官员的考选任职。
English: Later, Wei Zhi Gu was promoted to the post of secretary of the personnel department and was responsible for the selection of Dongdu officials.

古文：崇二子并分曹洛邑，会知古至，恃其蒙恩，颇顾请托。知古归，悉以闻。
现代文：姚崇的两个儿子都在洛阳，魏知古到洛阳后，两个人仗着父亲对魏知古的恩惠，一再要他做这做那。
English: Yao Chong's two sons are in Luoyang. After Wei Zhigu arrived in Luoyang, the two men repeatedly asked him to do this and that, relying on their father's favor to Wei Zhigu.

古文：上召崇，从容谓曰： 卿子才平？皆何官也？
现代文：魏知古回朝后，全都禀奏皇帝。皇帝于是召姚崇来，从容地说： 你的儿子才能怎么样，有没有担任什么官职？
English: After Wei Zhi Gu returned to the imperial court, they all played the emperor. The emperor then summoned Yao Chong and calmly said: What is your son's talent, has he held any official position?

古文：又安在？ 
现代文：现在人在何处呢？ 
English: Where are they now?

古文：崇揣知上意，因奏曰： 臣有三子，两人分司东都矣。其为人多欲而寡交，以是必干知古，然臣未及闻之耳。 
现代文：姚崇揣测到皇帝的心意，因而奏道： 微臣有三个儿子，都在东都任职，欲望多而少与人交往，所以一定会去找魏知古求取职位，但我还没听到确实的消息。 
English: Yao Chong guessed the emperor's intention, and thus wrote: We have three sons, all of whom work in Dongdu. They have more desire than not to socialize with people, so they will definitely go to Wei Zhigu to seek a position, but I haven't heard any definite news.

古文：上始以丞相子重言之，欲微动崇意，若崇私其子，或为之隐；及闻所奏，大喜，且曰： 卿安从知之？ 
现代文：皇帝是以 丞相儿子应该重用 之类的话来试探姚崇的心意。如果姚崇偏私自己的儿子，一定会想办法帮他儿子掩饰说好话。
English: The emperor tried to probe Yao Chong's mind with words such as "the son of the prime minister should reuse." If Yao Chong favored his own son, he would definitely find a way to help his son cover up and say good words.

古文：崇曰： 知古微时，是臣荐以至荣达。
现代文：等到听了姚崇的奏言，皇帝信以为真，很高兴地说： 你怎么猜到的？ 姚崇说： 知古本来出身低微，是微臣推荐他而有今日的荣显。
English: After listening to Yao Chong's speech, the emperor believed it to be true and happily said: How did you guess? Yao Chong said: Zhigu was originally from a lowly background, it was Weixin who recommended him and had today's glory.

古文：臣子愚，谓知古见德，必容其非，故必干之。 
现代文：微臣的儿子无知，认为知古会顾念我对他的恩德，必能应许不情之请，所以一定忙着去求取职位。 
English: Ignorance, the son of a minor vassal, thought that Chiko would be mindful of my kindness to him and would be able to promise a merciless invitation, so he must be busy looking for a position.

古文：上于是明崇不私其子之过，而薄知古之负崇也，欲斥之。
现代文：皇帝见姚崇不偏自己儿子的过失，于是反倒不齿魏知古辜负姚崇，想免除魏知古的官职。
English: The emperor saw that Yao Chong was not partial to the fault of his son, so he did not want Wei Zhigu to live up to Yao Chong, and wanted to exempt Wei Zhigu from the official post.

古文：崇为之请曰： 臣有子无状，挠陛下法，陛下欲特原之，臣为幸大矣。
现代文：姚崇为他请求说： 微臣的孩子不肖，扰乱陛下的法令，陛下能特别宽谅他们，已经是微臣的大幸了。
English: Yao Chong pleaded for him, saying: The children of Weizhong are not handsome, and they disturb His Majesty's decrees. If His Majesty can especially forgive them, it is already a great blessing for Weizhong.

古文：而由臣逐知古，海内臣庶，必以陛下为私子臣矣，非所以裨玄化也。 
现代文：如果因为微臣而免除知古的官职，全国的官员百姓一定认为陛下偏私微臣，这样就妨碍皇上以德化育天下的美意。 
English: If the emperor were to exempt Chiko from his official duties because he was a Weizhong, officials and people throughout the country would certainly think that his majesty favored the Weizhong, thus hindering the emperor from nurturing the world's goodwill with virtue.

古文：上久之乃许。
现代文：皇帝答应了他。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：翌日，以知古为工部尚书，罢知政事。姚崇与张说同为相，而相衔颇深。
现代文：第二天下诏，罢除魏知古参知政事的宰相职位，改调为工部尚书。姚崇与张说同时为相，但彼此非常不和，互相嫉恨。
English: The next day, it was announced that Wei Zhiguo was removed from the post of prime minister in charge of political affairs and transferred to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. Yao Chong and Zhang said that they were at the same time, but they were very different from each other and hated each other.

古文：崇病，戒诸子曰： 张丞相与吾不协，然其人素侈，尤好服玩。
现代文：姚崇病重时，告诫儿子们说： 张丞相与我不和，他一向都很奢侈，更爱好服装珍玩。
English: When Yao Chong was gravely ill, he admonished his sons, saying: "I don't get along with Premier Zhang. He's always been extravagant and likes to play with rare clothes.

古文：吾身没后，当来吊，汝具陈吾平生服玩、宝带、重器罗列帐前。
现代文：我死了以后，他会来吊祭，你们把我平生珍藏的宝物全部陈列出来。
English: When I die, he will come to the funeral, and you will display all the treasures I have treasured all my life.

古文：张若不顾，汝曹无类矣。若顾此，便录致之，仍以神道碑为请。既获其文，即时录进，先砻石以待，至便镌刻进御。张丞相见事常迟于我，数日后必悔，若征碑文，当告以上闻，且引视镌石。 
现代文：如果他都看都不看一眼，你们就活不了了；如果他留意再三，你们就把宝物全送给他，并请他写墓碑碑文，碑文拿到后，立即抄写一份进呈皇上，先磨好碑石等着，等皇上看完立刻就刻字，再进呈皇上，张丞相想事情比我慢，几天后一定会后悔，想拿回碑文，你们就告诉他已经奏报呈给皇上，再带他去看刻好的石碑。 
English: If he does not look at all, you will not survive; if he pays attention repeatedly, you will give all the treasures to him and ask him to write the tombstone inscription. After getting the inscription, immediately copy a copy and present it to the emperor. First, polish the stone and wait. When the emperor finishes reading, immediately engrave it. Then present it to the emperor. Zhang Rongxiang thinks things are slower than me and will regret it in a few days. If you want to get the inscription back, you should tell him that it has been reported to the emperor and then take him to see the engraved stone.

古文：崇没，说果至，目其服玩者三四。崇家悉如崇戒。及文成，叙致该详，时谓 极笔 。
现代文：姚崇死后，张说果然来吊祭，见了陈列的珍玩徘徊不舍，姚家人完全遵照姚崇的告诫行事，碑文完成，对姚崇的生平功业叙述得非常详尽，当时的人都认为是一流的佳作。
English: After Yao Chong's death, Zhang said that he really came to the hanging ceremony, and was reluctant to see the rare toys on display. Yao's family fully complied with Yao Chong's admonition. The inscription was completed, and the life and work of Yao Chong were described in great detail. People at the time thought it was a first-class masterpiece.

古文：数日，果遣使取本，以为辞未周密，欲加删改。姚氏诸子引使者视碑，仍告以奏御。使者复，说大悔恨，抚膺曰： 死姚崇能算生张说，吾今日方知才之不及! 
现代文：过了几天，张说果然派人来要回碑文，说是辞意不够周密，想再增减删改，姚崇的儿子们带着使者去看石碑，告诉他已经奏报皇上了，使者回去报告，张说非常后悔，抚着胸口说： 死姚崇能算计活张说，我现在才知道自己的智力不如他。 
English: A few days later, Zhang said that he had indeed sent someone to ask for the inscription back, saying that the wording was not thorough enough and that he wanted to add, delete, and change it again. Yao Chong's sons took an emissary to see the stone monument and told him that it had been reported to the emperor. The emissary went back to report. Zhang said that he regretted it very much and stroked his chest and said: Yao Chong can calculate his death. Zhang said that I now know that my intelligence is not as good as his.

