古文：戊申，密州刺史王万敢奏，奉诏领兵入海州界，至荻水镇，俘掠焚荡，更请益兵。
现代文：乾祐三年春正月一日，隐帝不受朝贺。凤翔行营都部署赵晖上奏，上月二十四日，收复凤翔，逆贼王景崇全家自焚而死。十日，密州刺史王万敢上奏，奉诏领兵进入海州境内，直到荻水镇，贼人抢掠烧杀，请朝廷予以增兵应急。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Emperor Qianyu, Emperor Yin did not accept the morning greetings. The Fengxiang marching camp was deployed by Zhao Xuan. On the 24th day of the previous month, Fengxiang was recovered, and the whole family of the rebel king Jingsong self-immolated and died. On the 10th day, the king of Mizhou, Shishi Wang, dared to lead the troops into the territory of Haizhou, until the town of Lishui, the thieves looted and burned, and asked the court to increase the number of troops as a contingency.

古文：诏前沂州刺史郭琼率禁军赴之。
现代文：隐帝令沂州刺史郭琼领禁军前往。
English: Emperor Ying ordered Guo Qiong, the governor of Zhangzhou, to lead the forbidden army.

古文：庚午，前永兴军节度副使安友规除名，流登州沙门岛。
现代文：十二日，前永兴军节度副使安友规被除名，流放到登州沙门岛。
English: On the 12th, the former Yongxing Army deputy commander An Yougui was removed from the list and exiled to Danzhou Shamen Island.

古文：先是，友规权知永兴军府事，及赵思绾之奔冲，友规失守城池，至是乃正其罪焉。
现代文：此前，安友规临时主持永兴军政事务，当赵思绾奔突横行时，安友规失守城池，到现在才定他的罪。
English: Previously, An Youjie temporarily presided over Yongxing's military and political affairs. When Zhao Sijun ran amok, An Youjie lost control of the city, and only now has he been convicted.

古文：癸亥，以前邠州节度使宋彦筠为太子太师致仕。丙寅，分命使臣赴永兴、凤翔、河中，收葬用兵已来所在骸骨。时已有僧聚髑髅二十万矣。前沂州刺史郭琼奏，部署兵士，深入海州贼界。是月，有狐登明德楼，主者获之，狐毛长而腹下别有二足。
现代文：二十八日，命使臣分赴永兴、凤翔、河中，收葬用兵以来各地的骸骨，当时已经有僧人收聚骷髅二十万了。前沂州刺史郭琼上奏，已部署士兵，深入海州贼人境内。本月，有狐狸爬上明德楼，管理者抓获它，狐毛长而腹部另有两只脚。
English: On the 28th, the envoys were ordered to go to Yongxing, Fengxiang and Hechuang to collect and bury the skeletons from all over the country since the soldiers were used. At that time, the monks had already collected more than 200,000 skeletons. Guo Qiong, the former governor of Zhangzhou, has deployed soldiers to go deep into the territory of the Hezhou thieves. This month, a fox climbed to the Mingde Building, and the manager caught it. The fox has long hair and two legs in the abdomen.

古文：二月辛巳，青州奏，郭琼部署兵士，自海州回至当道。
现代文：二月十三日，青州上奏，郭琼部署兵士，从海州回到沂州。
English: On February 13th, Qingzhou went to war, Guo Qiong deployed soldiers and returned from Haizhou to Zhangzhou.

古文：甲申，枢密使郭威巡边回。
现代文：十六日，枢密使郭威巡边回京。
English: On the 16th, the envoy Guo Wei returned to Beijing.

古文：夏四月戊辰朔，邢州薛怀让移镇同州，相州郭谨、河阳李晖并进邑封。庚午，府州折从阮移镇邓州。
现代文：三月二日，徐州押送所俘淮南都将李晖等三十三人游街示众，然后给予衣帽放归本地。本月，邺都留守高行周、兖州符彦卿、郓州慕容彦超、西京留守白文珂、镇州武行德、安州杨信、潞州常思、府州折从阮从藩镇来京朝见，是因为嘉庆节的缘故。
English: On March 2, Huainan, Xuzhou, and Huai'an, all of which were under the custody of the Xuzhou Detention Center, released 33 prisoners, including Li Jun, to the public. This month, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing, Gao Xing,

古文：辛未，故深州刺史史万山赠太傅。
现代文：夏四月四日，已故深州刺史史万山被追赠为太傅。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of summer, the late Shinshu poet Shi Wanshan was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：先是，契丹入边，万山城守，郭威遣索万进率骑七百屯深州。
现代文：此前，契丹人侵入深州边境，史万山守卫州城，郭威派索万进领骑兵七百屯驻深州。
English: Previously, the Khitan invaded the border of Shenzhou, Shi Wanshan guarded the city of Shenzhou, and Guo Wei sent Suo Wanjin to lead seven hundred cavalry stationed in Shenzhou.

古文：以鄜州留后王饶为华州节度使，以其来朝故也。
现代文：一天，契丹数千骑兵迫近深州州城东门，史万山父子率领百多名士兵袭击他们。
English: One day, when thousands of Khitan cavalry approached the east gate of the city of Shenzhou, Shi Wanshan and his son led more than a hundred soldiers to attack them.

古文：丁丑，尚食奉御王绍隐除名，流沙门岛，坐匿军营女口也。
现代文：契丹人佯装撤退十多里，然后伏兵齐出，史万山浴血奋战，紧急向索万进求救，索万进拥兵不出，史万山阵亡，契丹人也解兵而去。
English: The Khitans pretended to retreat more than ten miles, and then ambushed the soldiers, and Shi Wanshan fought with bloodshed and urgently went to Sowan for help. Sowan did not go to support the soldiers, Shi Wanshan was killed, and the Khitans also disbanded and left.

古文：辛巳，以宣徽北院使吴虔裕为郑州防御使。
现代文：时论认为索万进有罪，所以加赠史万山。十四日，以宣徽北院使吴虔裕为郑州防御使。
English: On the 14th, Wu Qianyu was appointed as the defense envoy of Zhengzhou by the Northern Court of Xuanhui.

古文：时枢密使杨邠上章乞解枢机，帝命中使谕之曰： 枢机之职，舍卿用谁？
现代文：当时枢密使杨上章请求解除自己职务，隐帝派宫中使者劝说他说： 枢密使之职，除了您还有谁能胜任？
English: At that time, Yang Shangzhang, the privy councillor, requested to be relieved of his duties. The Emperor sent an emissary to the palace to persuade him, saying, "If the privy councillor is to be appointed, who else but you is qualified?

古文：忽有此章，莫有人离间否？ 
现代文：突然递上辞呈，莫非有人离间？ 
English: Suddenly tendering his resignation, could it be that someone has fallen out with him?

古文：虔裕在傍扬言曰： 枢密重地，难以久处，俾后来者迭居，相公辞让是也。 
现代文：吴虔裕在旁边扬言说 ：枢密重地，难以久处，让后来人轮流居处，相公的辞让即为此。 
English: Wu Qianyu threatened at his side, saying, "It's a confidential place, and it's hard to stay there for a long time. Let those who come after you take turns living there. That's why your father-in-law resigned."

古文：中使还具奏，帝不悦，故有是命。
现代文：宫中使者回来禀告隐帝，隐帝不高兴，所以有此任命。
English: An emissary from the court came back to complain about Emperor Inti, and Emperor Inti was not happy, which is why he made this appointment.

古文：郑州奏，河决原武县界。
现代文：十五日，以枢密使郭威为邺都留守，仍兼前枢密使职。
English: On the fifteenth day, Guo Wei, the Privy Counsellor, stayed behind, still holding his former post.

古文：乙卯，司天台上言，镇星逆行，至太微左掖门外，自戊申年八月十二日，入太微西垣，犯上将屏星执法，勾己往来，至己酉年十一月十二日夜，方出左掖门顺行，自今年正月十日夜，复逆行入东垣，至左掖门。
现代文：诏令黄河以北各州，凡兵甲、钱帛、粮草全受郭威掌管。闰五月二十七日，京师有暴风雨，毁坏房屋，将郑门门板刮起，飞行十多步才掉下。暴风拔起数十棵大树，被雷震死的有六七人，平地水深一尺多，城池皆漫溢。本月，宫中有怪物，抛掷瓦石，撞击门窗，人不能制伏它。六月七日，郑州上奏，黄河冲决原武县堤防。
English: On the 27th day of the fifth month, there was a storm in Beijing, which destroyed houses and blew up the door of Zhengmen, and it took more than ten steps to fall down. Dozens of large trees were uprooted by the storm, 67 people were killed by lightning, the water depth of the flat land was more than one foot, and the city pools were overflowing. This month, there was a monster in the palace, throwing stones and hitting doors and windows, and people could not subdue it. On the 7th day of the 6th month, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Yuanwu County in Zhengzhou.

古文：秋七月庚午，河阳奏，河涨三丈五尺。
现代文：秋七月五日，河阳上奏，黄河水涨三丈五尺。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, the rising of the sun caused the water level of the Yellow River to rise three meters and five feet.

古文：乙亥，沧州奏，积雨约一丈二尺。
现代文：十日，沧州上奏，积水深约一丈二尺。
English: On the 10th, Cangzhou upstream, the depth of the water is about one and a half feet.

古文：壬戌，以兵部侍郎于德辰为御史中丞，边蔚为兵部侍郎。
现代文：安州上奏，沟河泛滥涨溢，州城内水深七尺。八月十六日，以蒙州城隍神为灵感王，这是听从湖南的请求。
English: Anzhou played the first game, the ditch river flooded and overflowed, and the water depth in the city of Anzhou was seven feet. On August 16th, Mengzhou city took the god of thunder as the inspiration king, which was to listen to the request of Hunan.

古文：九月辛巳，朗州节度使马希萼奏请于京师别置邸院。不允。
现代文：当时海州贼寇进攻蒙州州城，州人向城隍祈祷，州城得以保全，所以有这一请求。九月十七日，朗州节度使马希萼奏请在京城另置宅院，不允。
English: At that time, the pirates of Haizhou attacked the city of Mengzhou, and the people of the state prayed to the god of the city, and the city was preserved, so there was this request. On September 17th, the Langzhou Festival asked the Ma Xi calypso to please set up another house in the capital, but it was not allowed.

古文：是时，希萼与其弟湖南节度使希广方构阋墙之怨，故有是请。
现代文：这时，马希萼与他弟弟湖南节度使马希广正兄弟仇怨，所以有这一请求。
English: At this time, Ma Xicai and his brother Hunan Jiedu made the Mashi Guangzheng brothers hate each other, so there was this request.

古文：帝以湖南已有邸务，不可更置，由是不允，仍命降诏和解焉。
现代文：隐帝因为马希萼在湖南已有宅院，不能再购置，因此不允，仍降诏命他们和解。
English: Because Ma Xicai already had a mansion in Hunan, he could no longer buy it, so he did not allow it, but still ordered them to reconcile.

古文：己巳，日南至，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。辛未，诏侍卫步军都指挥使王殷将兵屯澶州。
现代文：冬十月六日，隐帝在近郊狩猎。十二日，湖南马希广派使者上奏章，又说荆南、淮南、广南三道相勾结，想瓜分湖、湘，请姑且发兵以为援助。
English: On the 12th, Hunan Mashi Guang sent an envoy to make a report, saying that the three provinces of Jingnan, Huainan, and Guangnan were colluding to divide the lake and Hunan, so please send troops to help.

古文：丙子，诛枢密使杨邠、侍卫都指挥使史宏肇、三司使王章，夷其族。
现代文：当时朝廷正商议起兵，恰逢发生内难，终于没有起兵。十一月一日，日食。十三日，诛杀枢密使杨、侍卫都指挥使史弘肇、三司使王章，夷灭他们全族。
English: At that time, the imperial court was deliberating on raising an army, which coincided with the occurrence of internal difficulties, and finally did not raise an army. On November 1, the solar eclipse. On the 13th, they killed the Privy Councilor Yang, the Commander of the Imperial Guards Shi Hongzhao, and the Third Secretary Wang Zhang, and destroyed their entire family.

古文：是日平旦，甲士数十人由广政殿出，至东庑下，害邠等于阁内，死于乱刃之下。
现代文：这天平明时分，甲士几十人从广政殿突出，到东廊下，杀害杨等人于阁内，三人都死于乱刀之下。
English: In the early hours of this day, dozens of warriors protruded from the Guangzheng Hall to the east corridor, killing Yang and others in the attic. All three died under the sword.

古文：又诛宏肇弟小底军都虞候宏朗、如京使甄彦奇、内常侍辛从审、杨邠子比部员外郎廷侃、右卫将军廷伟、右赞善大夫廷倚、王章侄右领卫将军旻、子婿户部员外郎张贻肃、枢密院副承宣郭颙、控鹤都虞候高进、侍卫都承局荆南金、三司都勾官柴训等。
现代文：又诛杀史弘肇的弟弟小底军都虞候史弘朗、如京使甄彦奇、内常侍辛从审、杨之子比部员外郎杨廷侃、右卫将军杨廷伟、左赞善大夫杨廷倚、王章侄子右领卫将军王、女婿户部员外郎张贻肃、枢密院副承宣郭、控鹤都虞候高进、侍卫都承局荆南金、三司都勾官柴训等。
English: In addition, the younger brother of the assassinated Shi Hongzhao, Xiao Di, the military commander of the capital, Shi Honglang, as well as the Beijing envoy, Zhen Yanqi, the inner chamberlain, Xin Zheng, Yang's son, Yang Tingkan, the brother of the military commander of the capital, Yang Tingwei, the general of the right guard, Yang Tingyi, the doctor of the left guard, Wang Zang, the nephew of the general of the right guard, Wang, the son-in-law of the member of the household staff, Zhang Yuxu, the vice-chairman of the Privy Council, Zhen Guo, the

古文：分兵收捕邠等家属及部曲傔从，尽戮之。
现代文：分兵收捕杨等人的家属及部下随从，全杀死他们。
English: Detachments of soldiers rounded up the family members and subordinates of Yang and the others and killed them all.

古文：少顷，枢密承旨聂文进急召宰臣百僚，班于崇元殿，庭宣曰： 杨邠、史宏肇、王章等同谋叛逆，欲危宗社，并斩之，与卿等同庆。 
现代文：紧接着，枢密承旨聂文进急召宰臣百官，排列于崇元殿，当庭宣布说： 杨、史弘肇、王章等人同谋叛逆，将危害朝廷社稷，现今被斩杀，与众卿共同庆贺。 
English: Immediately afterwards, the Privy Council, acting on the order of Emperor Wenjin, urgently summoned hundreds of aides-de-camp, who were lined up in front of the Chongyuan Palace, and announced in court that: Yang, Shi Hongzhao, Wang Zhang and others had conspired to commit treason and endanger the imperial court, and now they had been beheaded, and they were celebrating together with the nobles.

古文：班退，召诸军将校至万岁殿，帝亲谕史宏肇等欲谋逆乱之状，且言： 宏肇等欺朕年幼，专权擅命，使汝辈常怀忧恐，自此朕自与汝等为主，必无横忧也。 
现代文：宰臣百官退下后，召各军将校到万岁殿，隐帝亲自诉告史弘肇等人将图谋叛逆的情状，又说： 弘肇等人欺负朕年幼，专权擅命，使你们常怀忧恐，从今以后朕亲自为你们做主，必无不测之祸。 
English: After Zai Zhen and hundreds of officials withdrew, he called all the army officers to Wanzhe Dian. Emperor Jing personally accused Shi Hongzhao and others of plotting to rebel. He also said, "Hongzhao and others have bullied me when I was young, and they have exercised their power arbitrarily, which has caused you to always be worried. From now on, I will personally be the master of you, and there will be no calamity.

古文：诸军将校拜谢而退。
现代文：各军将校拜谢而退。
English: The officers of each army bowed and withdrew.

古文：召前任节度使、刺史、统军等上殿谕之。
现代文：召前任节度、刺史、统军等上殿将事变告诉他们。
English: He summoned his predecessors to the Great Hall of the People to tell them about the incident.

古文：帝遣军士守捉宫城诸门，比近日旰，朝臣步出宫门而去。
现代文：隐帝派军士把守宫城各门，将近天晚，朝臣步出宫门而去。
English: Emperor Hakuin sent sergeants to guard each gate of the palace. Towards evening, the courtiers walked out of the palace gate.

古文：是日晴霁无云，而昏雾濛濛，有如微雨，人情惴恐。
现代文：这天晴空无云，而昏暗迷氵蒙，就像下小雨，人心恐惧不安。
English: On this day, the sky is clear and cloudless, but the darkness is hazy, like a light rain, and people's hearts are fearful and uneasy.

古文：日将午，载杨邠等十余尸，分暴于南北市。
现代文：将到中午时，载着杨等十多具尸体，分别扔在南北街市上。
English: By noon, carrying more than a dozen corpses, including Yang's, they threw them separately on Nanbei Street Market.

古文：是日，帝遣腹心赍密诏往澶州、鄴都，令澶州节度使李洪义诛侍卫步军都指挥使王殷，令鄴都屯驻护圣左厢都指挥使郭崇、奉国左厢都指挥使曹英害枢密使郭威及宣徽使王峻。
现代文：这天，隐帝派心腹带着密诏前往澶州、邺都，令澶州节度使李洪义诛杀侍卫步军都指挥使王殷，令邺都屯驻护圣左厢都指挥使郭崇、奉国左厢都指挥使曹英诛杀枢密使郭威及宣徽使王峻。
English: On this day, Emperor Yin sent his henchmen to Luzhou and Luzhou with secret edicts. The Luzhou Festival ordered Li Hongyi to kill Wang Yin, commander of the Foot Guards, Guo Chong, commander of the Left Wing Guards stationed in Luzhou, and Cao Yingtao, commander of the Left Wing Guards stationed in Fengguo, to kill Guo Wei, the Privy Councillor, and Wang Jun, commander of the Heraldic Emblem.

古文：急诏郓州高行周、青州符彦卿、永兴郭从义、兗州慕容彦超、同州薛怀让、郑州吴虔裕、陈州李穀等赴阙。
现代文：急诏郓州高行周、青州符彦卿、永兴郭从义、兖州慕容彦超、同州薛怀让、郑州吴虞裕、陈州李谷等到京城。
English: Qizhou Gao Xing Zhou, Qingzhou Fu Yan Jing, Yongxing Guo Zong Yi, Qizhou Murong Yan Chao, Qizhou Xue Huai Zhang, Zhengzhou Wu Yu Yu, Chenzhou Li Gu and so on to Beijing.

古文：殷乃锢业，送密诏于周祖。郭威得之，即召王峻、郭崇、曹英及诸军将校，至牙署视诏，兼告杨、史诸公冤枉之状，且曰： 汝等当奉行诏旨，断予首以报天子，自取功名。 
现代文：以宰臣苏逢吉临时主持枢密院事务，前青州刘铢临时主持开封府事务，侍卫马军都指挥使李洪建主管侍卫司事，内客省使阎晋卿临时任侍卫马军都指挥使。十四日，澶州节度使李洪义收得密诏，知事情不能成功，便带使者去见王殷，王殷与李洪义派本州副使陈光穗携带所受密诏，飞驰到邺都。郭威收到密诏后，立即召王峻、郭崇、曹英及各军将校，到官府来看密诏，兼诉告杨、史诸公的冤情，又说： 你们当奉诏行事，砍下我的头去回报天子，各自获取功名。 
English: On the 14th day of the Bozhou Festival, Li Hongyi received a secret imperial edict. Knowing that the matter could not succeed, he took the envoy to see Wang Yin. Wang Yin and Li Hongyi sent Chen Guanghui, the vice-envoy of the state, to carry the received secret imperial edict and rushed to the capital. After receiving the secret imperial edict, Guo Wei immediately summoned Wang Jun, Guo Chong, Cao Ying and the officers of the various armies to the government office to see the secret imperial edict and also to sue.

古文：郭崇等与诸将校前曰： 此事必非圣意，即是李业等窃发，假如此辈便握权柄，国得安乎！
现代文：郭崇等人与众将校上前说 ：这事必非圣上主意，当为李业等私下做出，假如让这帮人掌权，国家能安定吗！
English: Guo Chong and others went to the officers and said, "This must not be a sacred idea. It should be done privately for Li Ye and others. If these people are allowed to take power, will the country be stable?"

古文：事可陈论，何须自弃，致千载之下被此恶名。
现代文：事情可讲清楚，何必自抛自弃，致使千年之下仍担当这种恶名。
English: Things can be explained clearly, so why give up, resulting in a thousand years still bear the stigma.

古文：教以易其语，云诛将士，以激怒众心。
现代文：郭崇等愿随明公入朝，当面洗刷澄清。 
English: Guo Chong et al. are willing to accompany Ming Gong to the DPRK and clarify the situation face to face.

古文：太祖纳其言。翌日，郭威以众南行。
现代文：于是将校等请郭威入京朝见，以清除君王身边奸臣，共同安定天下。第二天，郭威领着部众南下。
English: As a result, the officers and others invited Guo Wei to visit the imperial court in Beijing in order to remove the traitorous vassals around the monarch and jointly stabilize the world. The next day, Guo Wei led the troops south.

古文：戊寅，鄴兵至澶州。
现代文：十五日，邺都部队到达澶州。
English: On the 15th, the Shidu troops arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：庚辰，至滑州，节度使宋延渥开门迎降。
现代文：十七日，到滑州，滑州节度使宋延渥开门迎接投降。
English: On the seventeenth day, Song Yanwo opened the door to welcome the surrender.

古文：是日，诏前开封尹侯益、前鄜州节度使张彦超、权侍卫马军都指挥使阎晋卿、郑州防御使吴虔裕等，率禁军赴澶州守捉。
现代文：这天，隐帝令前开封府尹侯益、前州节度使张彦超、临时侍卫马军总指挥使阎晋卿、郑州防御使吴虔裕等，率领禁军奔赴澶州捉拿叛逆。
English: On this day, Yin Houyi, the former governor of Kaifeng, Zhang Yanchao, the former governor of Shandong, Yan Jinqing, the temporary commander-in-chief of the Horse Guards, and Wu Qianyu, the governor of Zhengzhou, led the imperial army to rush to Zhangzhou to capture the rebels.

古文：辛巳，帝之小竖嵒脱自北回。
现代文：十八日，隐帝的小僮龙鸟脱从北边回来。
English: On the eighteenth day, Emperor Yingdi's little dragon bird came back from the north.

古文：先是，帝遣嵒脱侦鄴军所至，为游骑所获，郭威即遣回，因令附奏赴阙之意，仍以密奏置嵒脱衣领中。
现代文：此前，隐帝派龙鸟脱侦察邺军的动向，被邺军游骑抓获，郭威立即放他回去，令他顺便向隐帝陈告自己前往京城的意图，又将密奏藏在龙鸟脱的衣领中。
English: Previously, Guo Wei had sent Longjiao Du to spy on the movement of the Shao army, but he was caught by the Shao army's cavalry. Guo Wei immediately let him go back, and asked him to inform the Emperor of his intention to go to Beijing. He also hid the secret music in Longjiao Du's collar.

古文：帝览奏，即召李业示之，聂文进、郭允明在傍，惧形于色。
现代文：隐帝看完密奏，立即召来李业给他看，聂文进、郭允明在旁边，害怕的心情见于颜色。
English: After seeing the secret recital, Emperor Inti immediately summoned Li Ye to show him, with Nie Wenjin and Guo Yunming at his side. The frightened mood can be seen in the colors.

古文：初议车驾幸澶州，及闻鄴兵已至河上，乃止。
现代文：开始隐帝准备前往澶州，当听到邺军已到黄河岸边，才作罢。
English: At first, Emperor Inti was preparing to go to Zhangzhou, but he stopped when he heard that the Zhang army had reached the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：益献计曰： 王者无敌于天下，兵不宜轻出，况大名戍卒，家属尽在京城，不如闭关以挫其锐，遣其母妻发降以招之，可不战而定。 
现代文：隐帝大惊，私下对宰臣窦贞固等人说 ：往日诛杀杨等人这件事，太草率了！ 李业等人请隐帝拿出仓库的所有钱财以供给各军，宰相苏禹王圭认为不可。李业就在隐帝前跪拜苏禹王圭，说 ：相公为了朝廷，不要舍不得财物啊！ 
English: Emperor Yin was shocked, and privately said to his vassal Dou Zhenggu and others, "The killing of Yang and others in the past was too hasty! Li Ye and others asked Emperor Yin to take out all the money in the warehouse to supply the armies, but Prime Minister Su Yu Wang Gui thought it was impossible. Li Ye knelt before Emperor Yin and bowed to Su Yu Wang Gui, saying, "Comrade, for the sake of the imperial court, don't be reluctant to acquire wealth!

古文：慕容彦超以为益衰老，作懦夫计，沮之。
现代文：于是下令侍卫军每人分给二十缗钱，下军每人十缗。十九日，邺军抵达封丘。慕容彦超从兖州赶到，隐帝就将军事委托给他。
English: He then ordered that each of the bodyguards be given twenty monme, and each of the lower ranks ten monme. On the 19th, the lower ranks arrived at Fengqiu. Murong Yanchao arrived from Zhangzhou, and the Emperor entrusted him with military affairs.

古文：彦超谓帝曰： 陛下勿忧，臣当生致其魁首。 
现代文：彦超对隐帝说： 陛下别怕，臣将活捉叛军魁首。 
English: Hikocho said to Emperor Inchi, "Don't be afraid, Your Majesty, I will capture the rebel leader alive."

古文：彦超退，见聂文进，询北来兵数及将校名氏，文进告之。
现代文：彦超退下后，会见聂文进，询问北方来兵的数量及将校姓名，聂文进告诉他。
English: After Yan Chao retreated, he met with Yu Wenzhin and asked about the number of soldiers from the north and the names of the officers. Yu Wenzhin told him everything.

古文：彦超惧，曰： 大是剧贼，不宜轻耳！ 
现代文：彦超惊惧，说： 贼势强大，不应轻视！ 
English: Surprised, Hikocho said, "Thieves are powerful and should not be taken lightly!

古文：翌日，慕容彦超扬言曰： 官家宫中无事，明日再出，观臣破贼。 
现代文：又派袁山义、刘重进、王知则等出兵，以接应前军。慕容彦超领大军驻扎在七里郊，挖堑壕以自卫。二十日，隐帝慰劳军队，当天回宫。第二天，慕容彦超扬言说 ：皇上在宫中安然无事，明天再来，看我破贼。 
English: He also sent Yuan Shanyi, Liu Chongjin, Wang Chize and other soldiers to meet the front army. Murong Yanchao led a large army stationed in Qili Suburb and dug trenches for self-defense. On the 20th, the emperor's comfort troops returned to the palace on the same day. The next day, Murong Yanchao threatened: "The emperor is safe and sound in the palace, come back tomorrow and see me break the thieves."

古文：甲申，车驾复出，幸七里店军营。
现代文：二十一日，隐帝又出宫，到七里店军营。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Emperor went out of the palace again and went to the military camp in Qili.

古文：王师阵于刘子陂，与鄴军相望。
现代文：朝廷军队在刘子陂列阵，与邺军相望。
English: The imperial army is lined up in Liu Zibao, facing the Han army.

古文：太后以帝至晚在外，遣中使谓聂文进曰： 贼军在近，大须用意！ 
现代文：太后因隐帝极晚还在外面，便派宫中使者对聂文进说： 贼军近在咫尺，须注意！ 
English: The empress dowager was out late because the Emperor was still out, so she sent an emissary from the palace to say to Xing Wenjin: The thief army is close at hand, be careful!

古文：文进曰： 有臣在，必不失策，纵有一百个郭威，亦当生擒之耳！ 
现代文：聂文进说： 有臣在，必不失策，即使有一百个郭威，也当活捉了他！ 
English: Xing Wenjin said: If there is a vassal, we must not make a mistake. Even if there are a hundred Guowei, we should catch him alive!

古文：彦超轻脱，先击北军，郭威命何福进、王彦超、李筠等大合骑以乘之。彦超退却，死者百余人，于是诸军夺气，稍稍奔于北军。
现代文：慕容彦超轻率出战，先攻击邺军，郭威命何福进、王彦超、李筠等大合骑兵以攻打他，慕容彦超败退，战死一百多人，于是各军失去士气，逐渐投奔邺军。
English: Murong Yanchao rashly went to war and attacked the Han army first. Guo Wei ordered He Fuchin, Wang Yanchao, Li Yao and other Daihe cavalry to attack him. Murong Yanchao was defeated and more than a hundred people died in the battle. As a result, all the armies lost their morale and gradually joined the Han army.

古文：吴虔裕、张彦超等相继而去，慕容彦超以部下十数骑奔兗州。
现代文：吴虔裕、张彦超等相继而去，慕容彦超领部下十多位骑兵奔往兖州。
English: Wu Qianyu, Zhang Yanchao and others left one after another, and more than ten cavalrymen led by Murong Yanchao rushed to Zhangzhou.

古文：是夜，帝与宰臣从官宿于野次，侯益、焦继勋潜奔鄴军。
现代文：这天夜晚，隐帝与宰臣随从官员在野外住宿，侯益、焦继勋偷偷投奔邺军。
English: On this night, the Emperor and his attendant officials stayed in the open, and Hou Yi and Jiao Jixun secretly joined the army.

古文：乙酉旦，帝策马至元化门，刘铢在门上，问帝左右： 兵马何在？ 
现代文：二十一日早晨，隐帝策马来到玄化门，刘铢在门楼上，问隐帝身边人说 ：兵马何在？ 
English: On the morning of the twenty-first day, Emperor Inti came to the Xuanhua Gate with his horse. Liu Ye was on the gate tower and asked the people around Emperor Inti, "Where are the soldiers and horses?"

古文：乃射左右。
现代文：即射击隐帝身边人。
English: That is to say, he shot the people around him.

古文：帝回，与苏逢吉、郭允明诣西北村舍，郭允明知事不济，乃剚刃于帝而崩，时年二十。
现代文：隐帝回避，与苏逢吉、郭允明到西北边村庄，郭允明知道大事已完，即杀死隐帝，当时隐帝年二十岁。
English: Guo Yunming and Su Fengji and Guo Yunming went to the village on the northwest side, and Guo Yunming knew that the big event was over, that is, he killed the Emperor, who was twenty years old at the time.

古文：苏逢吉、郭允明皆自杀。
现代文：苏逢吉、郭允明都自杀而死。
English: Su Fengji and Guo Yunming both committed suicide.

古文：是日，周太祖自迎春门入，诸军大掠，烟火四发，翌日至晡方定。
现代文：这天，郭威从迎春门进城，各军大肆抢掠，烟火四起，第二天天晚才安定。
English: On this day, Guo Wei entered the city from the Yingchun Gate, the armies plundered and pillaged, fireworks were set off everywhere, and the situation stabilized late the next day.

古文：前滑州节度使白再筠为乱兵所害，吏部侍郎张允坠屋而死。
现代文：前滑州节度使白再荣被乱兵杀害，吏部侍郎张允从屋上掉下摔死。
English: On the eve of the Slippery Slope Festival, Baizhe Rong was killed by rioting soldiers, and Zhang Yun, a servant of the cadre, fell from the roof and died.

古文：周太祖既入京城，命有司迁帝梓宫于太平宫。
现代文：郭威进入京城后，命有关官员将隐帝灵柩迁往太平宫。
English: After Guo Wei entered Beijing, he ordered the relevant officials to move Emperor Yingdi's coffin to the Taiping Palace.

古文：或曰： 可依魏高贵乡公故事，以公礼葬之。 
现代文：有人说可依魏高贵乡公旧例，以公的礼仪葬他。
English: Some people said that he could be buried according to the old custom of the noble townships in Wei and Wei, with public etiquette.

古文：皇帝法驾未至，庶事方殷，百辟上言，请予莅政，宜允舆议，权总万机，止于浃旬，即复明辟 云。
现代文：郭威说： 我在战乱之中，不能保卫皇上，以至于此，如果再加贬降，别人将怎样说我！ 于是下令择日举行哀祭。
English: Guo Wei said: I am in the midst of the war, unable to defend the emperor, so much so that if this is further degraded, what will others say about me! So he ordered a day of mourning.

古文：按前代故事，太上皇称诰，太皇太后、皇太后曰令，今云诰，有司误也。
现代文：枢密使郭威因为祸起萧墙，晋室宗庙无人奉祀，便率群臣候见太后，请她确定继位之人，又说： 开封尹刘承勋，是高祖的爱子，请立他为继位之君。 
English: Guo Wei, the privy councillor, because of the disaster caused by the collapse of the wall and the fact that there was no one to worship in the Jin family temple, led a group of ministers to see the empress dowager and asked her to determine the successor, and said: Kaifeng Yin Liu Chengxun is the beloved son of Gao Zu, please appoint him as the successor.

古文：以宣徽南院使王峻为枢密使，右神武统军袁鳷为宣徽南院使，陈州刺史李穀权判三司，步军都指挥使王殷为侍卫亲军马步都指挥使，护圣左厢都指挥使郭崇为侍卫马军都指挥使，奉国左厢都指挥使曹英为侍卫步军都指挥使。
现代文：太后告诉说承勋长期生病瘦弱，不能维持自身，郭威与众将请求看看承勋的日常生活，到看见后，才相信，于是商议立高祖的侄子、徐州节度使刘斌贝为君。二十六日，太后诰令有关部门择日准备御驾奉迎刘斌贝即皇帝位。当天，派前太师冯道等前往徐州奉迎。郭威因新君未到之时，万事不可暂停，于是率群臣请太后临朝，太后诰答应允。以宣徽南院使王峻为枢密使，右神武统军袁山义为宣徽南院使，陈州刺史李谷临时主持三司事务，步军都指挥使王殷为侍卫亲军马步都指挥使，护圣左厢都指挥使郭崇为侍卫马军都指挥使，奉国左厢都指挥使曹英为侍卫步军都指挥使。
English: The empress dowager told him that Zheng Xun had been weak and sick for a long time and could not sustain himself. Guo Wei and the crowd asked to see Zheng Xun's daily life. Only after seeing it did they believe, so they discussed appointing Gao Zu's nephew, Xuzhou Jiedu, to make Liu Binbei the emperor. On the 26th, the empress dowager ordered the relevant departments to choose a day to prepare for the enthronement of Liu Binbei, that is, the emperor's throne. On that day, the former grandmaster Feng Dao and others were sent to Xuzhou for the enthronement. Guo

古文：镇州、邢州驰奏，契丹寇洺州，陷内丘县。
现代文：镇州、邢州飞报，契丹寇犯氵名州，攻下内丘县。
English: Zhenzhou, Zhangzhou Fei Bao, Qidanqo committed Zhangmeizhou, and conquered Neiqiu County.

古文：时契丹永康王乌裕率部族两道入边，内丘城小而固，契丹攻之，五日不下，敌人伤者甚众。
现代文：当时契丹永康王兀欲率领部族分两路入境，内丘城小但坚固，契丹进攻它，五天都没攻下，敌人受伤很多。
English: At that time, the Khitan Yongkang Wang Yao wanted to lead the tribe to enter the country in two ways. Neiqiu City was small but strong. The Khitan attacked it and did not conquer it for five days. The enemy was injured a lot.

古文：时有官军五百，在城防戍，攻急，官军降于敌，屠其城而去。
现代文：当时有官军五百人，在城中防卫，攻击急切时，官军投降了敌人，敌军屠戮全城而去。
English: At that time, there were five hundred government troops defending the city, and when the attack was urgent, the government troops surrendered to the enemy, and the enemy troops slaughtered the whole city and left.

古文：庚寅，枢密使郭威奏，左军巡勘得飞龙使后赞款伏，与苏逢吉、李业、阎晋卿、聂文进、郭允明等同谋，令散员都虞候奔德等下手杀害史宏肇等。
现代文：二十七日，枢密使郭威上奏，左军巡查到飞龙使后赞的口供，供认与苏逢吉、李业、阎晋卿、聂文进、郭允明等同谋，令散员都虞候奔德等下手杀害了史弘肇等人。
English: On the 27th, the confidential envoy Guo Wei made a report, and the inspection of the left army found the testimony of the flying dragon envoy Huzan, who confessed to being a co-conspirator with Su Fengji, Li Ye, Yan Jinqing, Yu Wenzhin, Guo Yunming, and others, and ordered the scatterers Du Yu, Hou Bende, and others to kill Shi Hongzhao and others.

古文：权开封尹刘铢具伏，朋附李业为乱，屠害将相家属。
现代文：临时开封府尹刘铢供认，朋附李业为乱，屠杀将相家属。
English: The provisional governor of Kaifeng, Yin Liuqi, confessed that his subordinate, Li Ye, had instigated the riot and massacred the families of the generals.

古文：其刘铢等准诰旨处置讫，并苏逢吉、郭允明、阎晋卿、聂文进首级，并枭于南北市，其骨肉放弃。
现代文：刘铢等依照诰旨处置，与苏逢吉、郭允明、阎晋卿、聂文进首级，一并割下悬挂在南北街市，抛弃他们的尸首。
English: In accordance with the imperial edict, Liu Bei and others, together with Su Fengji, Guo Yunming, Yan Jinqing, and Xing Wenjin, had their heads cut off and hung in the Nanbei Street Market, and their corpses were abandoned.

古文：辛卯，河北诸州驰报，契丹深入。
现代文：二十八日，黄河以北各州飞报，契丹深入内地。
English: On the 28th, all the states north of the Yellow River reported that the Khitan had penetrated deep into the interior.

古文：太后诰曰： 王室多故，边境未宁，内难虽平，外寇仍炽。
现代文：太后诰令说： 王室多变故，边境不安宁，内难难平息，外寇又猖獗。
English: The Empress Dowager's edict said: The royal family is changeable, the border is restless, internal difficulties have subsided, and foreign invaders are rampant.

古文：据北面奏报，强敌奔冲，继发兵师，未闻平殄，须劳上将，暂自临戎。
现代文：据北方奏告，强敌横行，接连发兵，未曾平定，须动用上将，暂时出征。
English: According to the northern report, the strong enemy is rampant, sending troops one after another, and has not been pacified. An admiral must be used to temporarily go to war.

古文：陕州李洪信奏，马步都指挥使聂召、奉国指挥使杨德、护圣指挥使康审澄等，与节度使判官路涛、掌书记张洞、都押衙杨绍勍等，同情谋叛，并杀之。
现代文：当令枢密使郭威统率大军，及早筹划扑灭，其他军国众务，暂交宰臣窦贞固、苏禹王圭，枢密使王峻等商量主持，在京马步兵士，委托王殷总管。 十二月一日，郭威领大军北征。陕州李洪信报告，马步军都指挥使聂召、奉国指挥使杨德、护圣指挥使康审澄等，与节度使判官路涛、掌书记张洞、都押衙杨绍京力等，同心谋反，全被杀死。
English: On December 1st, Guo Wei led the army northward. Li Hongxin of Shaanxi reported that the army of horse-drawn carriages was led by the commander Zhao Zhao, the commander Feng Guo, the commander Yang De, and the commander Kang Xizhen, and that the commander of horse-drawn carriages was led by the commander Zhao Zhao, the commander Feng Guo, the commander Yang De, and the commander Kang Xizhen, and that the commander of horse-drawn carriages was led by the commander of horse-drawn carriages, the commander of horse-drawn carriages was led by the commander of horse-drawn carriages Lu Tao

古文：惟康审澄夜中放火斩关，奔归京师。
现代文：仅康审澄夜中放火斩关，奔回京师。
English: Only Kang Xiancheng set fire to the gate in the middle of the night and ran back to Beijing.

古文：初，朝议以诸道方镇皆是勋臣，不谙政理，其都押衙孔目官，令三司军将内选才补之，籓帅不悦，故洪信因朝廷多故，诬奏加害焉。
现代文：此前，朝廷因各道方镇都是武臣，不懂政治，他们的都押衙孔目官，在三司军将内选拔有才智的人补任，藩帅们不高兴，因而李洪信趁朝廷多故，诬告加害他们。
English: Previously, the imperial court did not like the fact that all the provincial governors were samurai retainers and did not understand politics. They were all appointed by the emperor, and the generals of the three armies were replaced by talented people. The generals were not happy, so Li Hongxin took advantage of the imperial court to falsely accuse them.

古文：《东都事略·郭崇传》：王峻遣崇率七百骑拒，遇于睢阳，崇曰： 澶州兵变，遣崇来卫乘舆，非有他也。 具言军情有属，天命已定，执崇手而泣，崇即送就馆。己未，太后诰曰： 比者，枢密使郭威，志安社稷，议立长君，以徐州节度使赟，高祖近亲，立为汉嗣，爰自籓镇，征赴京师。
现代文：此前，枢密使王峻因为湘阴公刘斌贝已在宋州，担心听到澶州兵变后，刘斌贝身边发生变乱，即派侍卫马军指挥使郭崇领七百骑兵前往保卫。二十六日，太后诰令说： 不久前，枢密使郭威，志在安定社稷，议立君主，因徐州节度使刘斌贝，是高祖的近亲，故立为汉室嗣君，于是前往徐州，召赴京师。
English: On the 26th, the Empress Dowager's imperial edict said: "Not long ago, the imperial envoy Guo Wei, who aspired to stabilize society, proposed a monarch, but because of the Xuzhou Festival, Liu Binbei, who was a close relative of Gaozu and was therefore designated as Han's heir, went to Xuzhou and was summoned to Beijing.

古文：虽诰命寻行，而军情不附，天道在北，人心靡东，适当改卜之初，俾膺分土之命。
现代文：虽然诰命已行，然而军心不附，天命在北方，人心不向东，故当改变当初所立，使他顺应镇守藩镇的命运。
English: Although his dying wish had been fulfilled, his heart was not in it, his destiny was in the north, and his heart was not in the east. Therefore, he should change what he had originally set out to do, so that he would conform to the fate of a town guarding a domain.

古文：赟可降授开府仪同三司、检校太师、上柱国，封湘阴公，食邑三千户，食实封五百户。 
现代文：刘斌贝可降授以开府仪同三司、检校太师、上柱国官爵，封为湘阴公，食邑三千户，食实封五百户。 
English: Liu Binbei could be conferred with the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, Kengyo Taishi, Shangzhuang Guozhuangzhe, and was awarded the title of Hunan Yin Gong, with 3,000 households of food and 500 households of food.

古文：明年正月丁卯，太后诰，奉符宝于监国，可即皇帝位。
现代文：第二年正月五日，太后诰令，奉符印国宝给监国郭威，可让他即皇帝位。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the second year, the empress dowager issued an order to present the national treasure to Guo Wei, the supervisor of the country, so that he could become the emperor.

古文：周太祖践阼，奉太后为母，迁于西宫，上尊号曰昭圣太后。
现代文：周太祖郭威登上帝位，奉汉室太后为母，迁到西宫，上尊号叫昭圣太后。
English: Zhou Taizong's ancestor Guo Weideng ascended to the throne, and moved to the West Palace, taking the Han Dynasty's empress dowager as his mother. His posthumous name was Zhaosheng Dowager.

古文：是月十五日，周太祖与百僚诣帝殡宫，成服亲奠，不视朝七日。
现代文：本月十五日，周太祖与百官到停放隐帝灵柩的太平宫，服丧祭奠，停止上朝七天。
English: On the fifteenth day of this month, Zhou Taizu and hundreds of officials went to the Taiping Palace, where the coffin of the Hidden Emperor was parked, to attend the funeral and pay tribute.

古文：又诏太常定谥曰 隐 。
现代文：又诏令太常确定谥号叫隐。
English: In addition, the imperial edict often determined that the family name was Ying.

古文：以其年八月二日，复遣前宗正卿刘皞护灵輴，备仪仗，葬于许州阳翟县之颍陵，祔神主于高祖之寝宫。
现代文：于当年八月二日，又派前宗正卿刘皋护卫灵车，具办仪仗，将隐帝葬在许州阳翟县的颍陵，置神主于高祖的寝宫附祭。
English: On August 2 of the same year, Liu Ye, the former Zongzhengqing, was also sent to escort the hearse and hold a ceremonial battle to bury the emperor in the imperial mausoleum in Xuzhou Yangpi County and place the god in the sleeping palace of Gao Zu.

古文：帝姿貌白晰，眉目疏朗，未即位时，目多闪掣，唾洟不止，即位之始，遽无此态，及内难将作，复如故。
现代文：隐帝姿貌白皙，眉目清秀，未即位时，目光闪烁不定，涎液鼻涕不停，即帝位之后，马上就没有了这副神态，到内乱将起，神态又恢复如初。
English: The Hidden Emperor is fair-skinned and has a clear brow. When he was not enthroned, his eyes flickered erratically and his runny nose was incessant. Immediately after his enthronement, he lost this appearance. When the civil war broke out, his appearance returned to normal.

古文：帝自关西平定之后，稍自骄易，然畏惮大臣，未至纵恣。
现代文：隐帝从关西平定之后，逐渐骄佚轻慢，但畏惧大臣，尚不致放纵无度。
English: After Emperor Inshi was subdued in Kansai, he gradually became arrogant and careless, but he was afraid of his ministers and did not indulge in excesses.

古文：迩后与聂文进、郭允明、后赞狎习，信其邪说，以至于败。
现代文：后与聂文进、郭允明、后赞等人轻近而失尊，相信他们的邪说，以至于失败。
English: Later, he became close to and disrespected Yu Wenzhong, Guo Yunming, and Houzan, and believed in their heresies to the point of failure.

古文：高祖之征鄴城也，一日，帝语太祖曰： 我夜来梦尔为驴，负我升天，既舍尔，俄变为龙，舍我南去，是何祥也？ 
现代文：高祖征伐邺城时，一天，隐帝对郭威说 ：我夜里梦见你变为驴子，背着我上天，在离开你后，你立刻变为龙，丢下我南去，这是什么征兆呢？ 
English: When Gao Zu was conquering the city of Handan, one day, Emperor Jing said to Guo Wei: "I dreamed at night that you turned into a donkey and carried me up to the sky. After leaving you, you immediately turned into a dragon and left me to go south. What is the sign of this?"

古文：周太祖抚掌而笑。冥符肸蚃，岂偶然哉！
现代文：郭威拍手而笑，梦境成真，哪里又是偶然的呢！
English: Guo Wei claps his hands and laughs, the dream comes true, where is the coincidence!

