古文：李绅，字公垂，中书令敬玄曾孙。
现代文：李绅的字叫公垂，是中书令李敬玄的曾孙。
English: The character "Li Sheng" is called "Gonglu" and is the great-grandson of the Chinese calligrapher Li Jingxuan.

古文：世宦南方，客润州。
现代文：因世代在南方做官，因此客居润州。
English: Due to generations of government service in the south, he lives as a guest in Rongzhou.

古文：绅六岁而孤，哀等成人。
现代文：李绅六岁失去了父亲，他像成人一样哀痛。
English: When Li Sheng lost his father at the age of six, he grieved like an adult.

古文：母卢，躬授之学。
现代文：母亲卢氏，亲自教他读书。
English: His mother, Lu, taught him to read herself.

古文：为人短小精悍，于诗最有名，时号 短李 。
现代文：他生来矮小精明能干，写诗最有名，当时号称 矮李 。
English: He was born short, shrewd and capable. He was most famous for writing poetry and was known as "Dwarf Li" at that time.

古文：苏州刺史韦夏卿数称之。
现代文：苏州刺史韦夏卿多次称赞他。
English: Suzhou poet Wei Xiaqing praised him many times.

古文：葬母，有乌衔芝坠輤车。
现代文：他安葬母亲时，有乌鸦衔着灵芝落到灵车上。
English: When he was burying his mother, a crow carrying a reishi mushroom landed on the hearse.

古文：元和初，擢进士第，补国子助教，不乐，辄去。
现代文：元和初年，他考中了进士，被任命为国子监助教，他不乐意，就离职了。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and He passed the entrance examination and was appointed as a tutor assistant, but he was not happy and left the job.

古文：客金陵，李锜爱其才，辟掌书记。
现代文：他客居金陵，李钅奇喜欢他的才干，任命他为掌书记官。
English: He lived as a guest in Jinling. Li Rongqi liked his talent and appointed him as the chief secretary.

古文：锜浸不法，宾客莫敢言，绅数谏，不入；欲去，不许。
现代文：李钅奇渐渐不守国法，幕僚没人敢说，李绅多次劝告，他不听；李绅想离职，他又不让。
English: Li Rongqi gradually did not abide by the law of the country, and no one in the staff dared to say anything. Li Sheng repeatedly advised him, but he did not listen; Li Sheng wanted to leave the post, but he did not let him.

古文：会使者召锜，称疾，留后王澹为具行，锜怒，阴教士脔食之，即胁使者为众奏天子，幸得留。
现代文：遇上皇帝派使者召唤李钅奇，他称病不去，留后王澹给他准备行装，他发怒了，暗地派兵把王澹杀死吃掉了，接着胁迫使者为众人奏报皇帝，希望让自己留下。
English: When the emperor sent an envoy to summon Li Yanqi, he said that he was too sick to go, leaving Wang Yao to prepare for him. He got angry and secretly sent soldiers to kill Wang Yao and eat him, and then forced him to report to the emperor for everyone, hoping to stay.

古文：锜召绅作疏，坐锜前，绅阳怖栗，至不能为字，下笔辄涂去，尽数纸。锜怒骂曰： 何敢尔，不惮死邪？ 
现代文：李钅奇叫李绅写奏疏，他坐在李钅奇面前，假装害怕战抖，以致不能写字，写几笔就涂掉，写坏了几张纸，李钅奇发怒骂道： 你怎敢这样，不怕死吗？ 
English: He sat in front of him, pretending to be afraid and trembling, so that he couldn't write. After writing a few strokes, he blotted them out, and several pieces of paper were damaged. Li Yanqi scolded angrily, "How dare you do this, aren't you afraid of death?"

古文：对曰： 生未尝见金革，今得死为幸。 
现代文：他答道 ：生平没有见过兵器铠甲，今天死得成了。 
English: He replied: "I have never seen weapons and armor in my life, today I am dead."

古文：即注以刃，令易纸，复然。
现代文：李钅奇用刀指着他，命他换纸写，但还是那样。
English: Li Rongqi pointed a knife at him and ordered him to change the paper, but it was still like that.

古文：或言许纵能军中书，绅不足用。
现代文：有人说许纵会写军中文书，李绅不值得任用。
English: Some people say that Xu Gang will write military Chinese books, and that Li Sheng is not worth appointing.

古文：召纵至，操书如所欲，即囚绅狱中，锜诛，乃免。
现代文：李钅奇把许纵召来，许纵按要求执笔写了，李钅奇就把李绅关进监狱，李钅奇被杀死后他才被释放了。
English: Li Rongqi summoned Xu Zheng, Xu Zheng wrote a letter as required, Li Rongqi put Li Sheng in prison, and he was only released after Li Rongqi was killed.

古文：或欲以闻，谢曰： 本激于义，非市名也。 
现代文：有人想将这事报告皇上，他谢绝说： 我本受仁义激励，不是图名声。 
English: Someone wanted to report this to the emperor, but he refused, saying, "I was inspired by benevolence, not by fame."

古文：乃止。
现代文：那人就没报告。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：久之，从辟山南观察府。穆宗召为右拾遗、翰林学士，与李德裕、元稹同时，号 三俊 。
现代文：很久以后，他被山南观察府任用，唐穆宗又召他进京任右拾遗、翰林学士，他和李德裕、元稹同事，号称 三俊才 。
English: After a long time, he was appointed by the Shannan Observatory, and Tang Muzong also called him to Beijing to serve as the Right Reverend and the Hanlin Scholar. He and his colleagues Li Deyu and Yuan Qi were known as the Three Talents.

古文：累擢中书舍人。
现代文：多次升官后任中书舍人。
English: He was promoted several times and later became a middle school teacher.

古文：稹为宰相，而李逢吉教人告于方事，稹遂罢；欲引牛僧孺，惧绅等在禁近沮解，乃授德裕浙西观察使。
现代文：元稹当宰相，李逢吉派人报告于方的案件，元稹就被罢免了；李逢吉想推荐牛僧孺，担心李绅等人在皇帝面前阻拦，就任命李德裕为浙西观察使。
English: When Yuan Xuan was the prime minister, Li Fengji sent someone to report the case to the party, and Yuan Xuan was dismissed; Li Fengji wanted to recommend Niu Xiangyao, and was worried that Li Sheng and others would obstruct him in front of the emperor, so he appointed Li Deyu as the Western Zhejiang Observer.

古文：僧孺辅政，以绅为御史中丞，顾其气刚卞，易疵累，而韩愈劲直，乃以愈为京兆尹，兼御史大夫，免台参以激绅。
现代文：牛僧孺当了宰相，任命李绅为御史中丞，是看到他性格刚强急躁，容易出问题，又看到韩愈执著直率，就任命韩愈为京兆尹，兼任御史大夫，不需参谒台臣来激怒李绅。
English: When Niu Zengqi became the prime minister, he appointed Li Sheng as the vice-president of the imperial history, because he saw that his character was strong and impetuous and prone to problems, and also saw that Han Yu was persistent and forthright, he appointed Han Yu as Jing Zhaoyun, also serving as the vice-president of the imperial history, without having to consult the Taiwanese minister to irritate Li Sheng.

古文：绅、愈果不相下，更持台府故事，论诘往反，诋讦纷然，繇是皆罢之，以绅为江西观察使。
现代文：李绅和韩愈果然互不相让，轮番援引双方官府旧例，往来论辩，互相指责，为这把他们都免职，任命李绅为江西观察使。
English: Li Sheng and Han Yu did not concede to each other. They took turns to invoke the old practices of the two governments, argued back and forth, and blamed each other. As a result, they were both removed from their posts and Li Sheng was appointed as the Jiangxi Observer.

古文：帝素厚遇绅，遣使者就第劳赐，以为乐外迁，绅泣言为逢吉中伤。
现代文：皇帝一向对李绅很好，派使者到他家里去慰问赏赐，认为他愿意出京任官，他哭着说是被李逢吉陷害。
English: The emperor had always been very kind to Li Sheng. He sent an envoy to his home to offer condolences and rewards, believing that he was willing to go to Beijing to serve as an official. He cried and said that he had been framed by Li Fengji.

古文：入谢，又自陈所以然，帝悟，改户部侍郎。
现代文：他进宫谢恩，又自己诉说原因，皇帝醒悟了，改命他为户部侍郎。
English: When he entered the palace, he thanked the emperor and told him the reason. The emperor came to his senses and changed his name to the Household Attendant.

古文：逢吉终欲陷之。
现代文：李逢吉终究想陷害他。
English: After all, Li Fengji wanted to frame him.

古文：绅族子虞，有文学名，隐居华阳，自言不愿仕，时来省绅，雅与柏耆、程昔范善。
现代文：他同族的儿子李虞，在文章学术上有名气，作为隐士住在华阳，自称不愿做官，不时来探望李绅，一向和柏耆、程昔范要好。
English: His son of the same family, Li Yu, is famous for his academic articles. He lives as a hermit in Huayang. He claims that he does not want to be an official. He comes to visit Li Sheng from time to time. He has always been better than Baojun and Chengxifan.

古文：及耆为拾遗，虞以书求荐，绅恶其无立操，痛诮之。
现代文：到柏耆当了左拾遗，李虞写信请求推荐，李绅讨厌他志向不定，狠狠地责备他。
English: When he came to Baojun, Li Yu wrote to him to ask for a recommendation. Li Sheng hated Baojun's ambivalence and severely rebuked him.

古文：虞失望，后至京师，悉暴绅所言于逢吉。
现代文：他失望了，后来到了京城，把李绅说过的坏话告诉了李逢吉。
English: Disappointed, he later went to Beijing and told Li Fengji the bad things that Li Sheng had said.

古文：逢吉滋怒，乃用张又新、李续等计，擢虞、昔范与刘栖楚皆为拾遗，以伺绅隙，内结中人王守澄自助。
现代文：李逢吉更恼怒了，就采纳了张又新、李续等人的计谋，提升李虞、程昔范和刘栖楚都任拾遗，来挑李绅的毛病，又结交宦官王守澄帮助自己。
English: Li Fengji was even more angry, so he adopted the strategies of Zhang Yanshin, Li Zhuang and others, promoted Li Yu, Cheng Xuan Fan and Liu Qi Chu to pick up the remains, to pick up the problems of Li Sheng, and to make friends with eunuch Wang Shoucheng to help himself.

古文：会敬宗立，逢吉知绅失势可乘，使守澄从容奏言： 先帝始议立太子，杜元颖、李绅劝立深王，独宰相逢吉请立陛下，而李续、李虞助之。 
现代文：遇到唐敬宗即位，李逢吉看到李绅失去了依靠可以算计，让王守澄乘便上奏说： 故世皇帝当初讨论立太子时，杜元颖、李绅劝立深王为太子，只有宰相李逢吉请求立皇上，李续、李虞赞成他。 
English: When Tang Jingzong ascended the throne, Li Fengji saw that Li Sheng had lost his reliance and could be calculated, so he asked Wang Shoucheng to make a report: When the deceased emperor initially discussed the appointment of the crown prince, Du Yuanying and Li Sheng advised the appointment of Wang Sheng as the crown prince. Only the prime minister Li Fengji requested the appointment of the emperor, and Li Cong and Li Yu agreed with him.

古文：逢吉乘间言绅尝不利于陛下，请逐之。
现代文：李逢吉也乘机说李绅曾做不利于皇帝的事，请求把他赶出京城。
English: Li Fengji also took the opportunity to say that Li Sheng had done something unfavorable to the emperor, and requested that he be driven out of the capital.

古文：帝初即位，不能辨，乃贬绅为端州司马。
现代文：皇帝刚登基，不能辨别，就贬李绅任端州司马。
English: When the emperor had just ascended to the throne, he could not distinguish between the two, so he demoted Li Sheng to the position of Danzhou Sima.

古文：栖楚等怒得善地，皆切齿。
现代文：刘栖楚等人因他得到好地方，都恨得咬牙切齿。
English: Liu Qi Chu and others gritted their teeth because he got a good place.

古文：诏下，百官贺逢吉，唯右拾遗吴思不往，逢吉斥思，令告大行丧于吐蕃。
现代文：贬官诏书颁下，群臣向李逢吉道贺，只有右拾遗吴思没去。李逢吉排斥吴思，派他到吐蕃去报丧。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, the courtiers congratulated Li Fengji, but Wu Si did not go. Li Fengji rejected Wu Si and sent him to Tuyun to report the funeral.

古文：此时，人无敢言者，惟韦处厚屡言绅枉，折逢吉之奸。
现代文：这时人们没有敢说话的，只有韦处厚多次说李绅冤枉，驳斥李逢吉的诡计。
English: At this time, people did not dare to speak, only Wei Shukhou repeatedly said that Li Sheng was wronged and refuted Li Fengji's trick.

古文：后天子于禁中得先帝手缄书一笥，发之，见裴度、元颖、绅三疏请立帝为嗣，始大感悟，悉焚逢吉党所上谤书。
现代文：后来皇帝在宫中找到去世皇帝亲手装的一箱奏章，打开后，看到裴度、杜元颖、李绅多次上奏请求立他为太子，皇帝才非常感动地醒悟了，把李逢吉一伙呈上的诽谤奏章都烧了。
English: Later, the emperor found in the palace a box of music composed by the deceased emperor himself. After opening it, he saw that Pei Du, Du Yuanying, and Li Sheng had repeatedly petitioned to make him the crown prince. The emperor was very moved and woke up. He burned all the slanderous music composed by Li Fengji and his gang.

古文：始，绅南逐，历封、康间，湍濑险涩，惟乘涨流乃济。康州有媪龙祠，旧传能致云雨，绅以书祷，俄而大涨。
现代文：起初，李绅贬去南方，走到封州、康州，那里有座媪龙祠，过去传说能呼风唤雨，李绅写文章祷告，不久河水猛涨。
English: At first, Li Sheng went to the south, went to Fenzhou and Kangzhou, where there was a dragon temple. In the past, it was said that it could call for wind and rain. Li Sheng wrote articles and prayed, and soon the river water surged.

古文：宝历赦令不言左降官与量移，处厚执争，诏为追定，得徙江州长史，迁滁、寿二州刺史。
现代文：宝历年大赦令没提才被贬官的可移近任职，韦处厚坚持争取，皇帝追回诏书更改后，李绅得以调任江州长史，后升任滁、寿两州刺史。
English: Bao Lianyuan's amnesty decree did not mention that the demoted official could be moved closer to the post, and Wei Shuanhou insisted on fighting for it. After the emperor recovered the edict and changed it, Li Sheng was able to be transferred to the post of governor of Jiangsu Province, and later promoted to the post of governor of Shou and Shou two states.

古文：霍山多虎，撷茶者病之，治机阱，发民迹射，不能止。
现代文：霍山老虎多，采茶的害怕老虎，挖陷坑、召人追踪射猎，都不能制服。
English: There are many tigers in Huoshan, and tea pickers are afraid of tigers. They can't subdue them by digging pits, calling people to track and shoot.

古文：绅至，尽去之，虎不为暴。
现代文：李绅去了，把这些都撤除了，老虎也不伤人了。
English: Li Sheng went and removed all of these, and the tiger did not hurt anyone.

古文：以太子宾客分司东都。
现代文：后来他任太子宾客分管洛阳分署。
English: Later, he was in charge of the Luoyang branch of the Prince's Guest House.

古文：太和中，李德裕当国，擢绅浙东观察使。
现代文：大和年间，李德裕掌权，提升他任浙东观察使。
English: During the Yamato era, when Li Deyu was in power, he was promoted to the post of East Zhejiang Observer.

古文：李宗闵方得君，复以太子宾客分司。
现代文：后李宗闵受皇帝宠信，又命他任太子宾客分管洛阳分署。
English: Later, Li Zonglu was favored by the emperor, who also ordered him to be in charge of the Luoyang branch of the prince's guest.

古文：开成初，郑覃以绅为河南尹。
现代文：开成初年，郑覃任命他为河南府尹。
English: In the first year of Kaifeng, Zheng He appointed him as the leader of Henan Province.

古文：河南多恶少，或危帽散衣，击大球，尸官道，车马不敢前。
现代文：河南府有很多小无赖，有时戴着高帽子敞着衣裳，打大球，拦住大路，车辆马匹不敢通过。
English: Henan has a lot of little ruffians, sometimes wearing high hats and revealing their clothes, playing large balls, blocking the road, vehicles and horses dare not pass.

古文：绅治刚严，皆望风遁去。
现代文：李绅治理坚决严厉，他们都吓跑了。
English: Li Sheng's governance was resolutely strict, and they were all scared away.

古文：迁宣武节度使。
现代文：后升任宣武节度使。
English: He was later promoted to the position of Xuanwu Xingduo envoy.

古文：大旱，蝗不入境。
现代文：那年天大旱，蝗虫不到他的辖境去。
English: That year, there was a severe drought, and the locusts did not migrate to his territory.

古文：武宗即位，徙淮南，召拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，进尚书右仆射、门下侍郎，封赵郡公。
现代文：唐武宗登基，他调任淮南，后召进朝廷任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，又升任尚书右仆射、门下侍郎，被封为赵郡公爵。
English: Tang Wuzong ascended to the throne, he was transferred to Huainan, and then summoned to the imperial court to serve as the attendant of the middle book, the subordinate of the middle book, and the subordinate of the book, and was promoted to the right of the book, the subordinate of the book, and was named the Duke of Zhao County.

古文：居位四年，以足缓不任朝谒，辞位，以检校右仆射平章事，复节度淮南。
现代文：任职四年后，因脚无力不能上朝，辞去职位，以检校右仆射、同中书门下平章事身份，再任淮南节度使。
English: After four years of service, he was unable to go to the imperial court due to weakness in his feet, resigned his post, and was reappointed as the Huainan Festival envoy with the status of inspecting the school and signing documents at the entrance of the school.

古文：卒，赠太尉，谥文肃。
现代文：后去世了，赠官太尉，赐谥号叫文肃。
English: After he died, he was given the title of second lieutenant, and his posthumous name was Bunsu.

古文：始，沣人吴汝纳者，韶州刺史武陵兄子也。
现代文：此前，澧州人吴汝纳是韶州刺史吴武陵哥哥的儿子。
English: Previously, Wu Runa, a native of Zhangzhou, was the son of the elder brother of the famous Zhangzhou poet Wu Wuling.

古文：武陵坐赃贬潘州司户参军死，汝纳家被逐，久不调。时李吉甫任宰相，汝纳怨之，后遂附宗闵党中。
现代文：吴武陵因贪赃被贬为潘州司户参军去世了，吴汝纳家被流放，长期没有调回，当时李吉甫任宰相，吴汝纳恨他，后来就参加了李宗闵集团。
English: Wu Wuling died after he joined the army and was demoted to the position of Pan State Secretary due to corruption. The Wu Runa family was exiled and did not return for a long time. At that time, Li Jifu was the prime minister. Wu Runa hated him and later joined the Li Zongyao group.

古文：会昌时，为永宁尉，弟湘为江都尉。
现代文：会昌年间，他担任永宁县尉，弟弟吴湘任江都县尉。
English: During the Huichang period, he served as the Yongning County Lieutenant, while his brother Wu Xiang served as the Jiangdu County Lieutenant.

古文：部人讼湘受赃狼籍，身娶民颜悦女。
现代文：辖区人告吴湘受赂不法，自己娶百姓颜悦的女儿。
English: People in the jurisdiction sued Wu Xiang for illegally accepting bribes and marrying the daughter of Yan Yue, a commoner.

古文：绅使观察判官魏铏鞫湘，罪明白，论报杀之。
现代文：李绅派观察判官魏钅刑审讯吴湘，罪状清楚，上报处决了他。
English: Li Sheng sent Judge Wei Wei to observe the criminal trial of Wu Xiang. The charges were clear, and he was reported to have been executed.

古文：时，议者谓吴氏世与宰相有嫌，疑绅内顾望，织成其罪。
现代文：当时，有议论的人说吴家世代和宰相有仇，怀疑李绅取悦宰相，罗织判他的罪。
English: At that time, some people said that the Wu family generation had a grudge against the prime minister. They suspected that Li Sheng was pleasing the prime minister, and Luo Wei judged him guilty.

古文：谏官屡论列，诏遣御史崔元藻覆按，元藻言湘盗用程粮钱有状，娶部人女不实，按悦尝为青州衙推，而妻王故衣冠女，不应坐。
现代文：谏官多次上奏，有诏派御史崔元藻复查，崔元藻说吴湘挪用官府钱粮有证据，娶辖区民女不真实，说颜悦曾任青州衙推，他妻子王氏是官宦人家的女儿，不应判罪。
English: The eunuch was reported many times, and there was a re-examination by the imperial envoy Cui Yuanmao. Cui Yuanmao said that there was evidence that Wu Xiang had misappropriated government money and grain, and that it was not true that he had married a local woman. He also said that Yan Yue had once been the governor of Qingzhou, and that his wife Wang was the daughter of a family of officials and eunuchs, and should not be convicted.

古文：德裕恶元藻持两端，奏贬崖州司户参军。
现代文：李德裕讨厌崔元藻两边讨好，上奏贬他为崖州司户参军。
English: Li Deyu hated Cui Yuanmao's attempts to please both sides, so he had him join the army as the governor of Yazhou.

古文：宣宗立，德裕去位，绅已卒。
现代文：唐宣宗登基，李德裕被免职，李绅已经去世了。
English: Tang Xuan Zong ascended to the throne, Li Deyu was dismissed, and Li Sheng has passed away.

古文：崔铉等久不得志，导汝纳使为湘讼，言： 湘素直，为人诬蔑，大校重牢，五木被体，吏至以娶妻资媵结赃。 
现代文：崔铉等人长期没能掌权，引诱吴汝纳，叫他为吴湘申冤说 ：吴湘生平梗直，被人诬告，关进监狱，身受重刑，官吏们甚至将他娶妻时陪嫁的财产和奴仆算成是赃物。 
English: Cui Gan and others, who had not been in power for a long time, lured Wu Runa and asked him to plead for Wu Xiang, saying, "Wu Xiang lived an upright life, was falsely accused, imprisoned, and suffered heavy punishment. The officials even considered the property and servants he had with his wife when they married to be stolen goods.

古文：且言： 颜悦故士族，湘罪皆不当死，绅枉杀之。 
现代文：又说 ：颜悦过去是官宦人家，吴湘的罪都不该处死，李绅冤枉杀死了他。 
English: He also said: Yan Yue used to be a bureaucrat, Wu Xiang's crimes should not have been punished by death, and Li Sheng killed him unjustly.

古文：又言： 湘死，绅令即瘗，不得归葬。
现代文：还说： 吴湘死了，李绅命马上埋掉，不让回家乡安葬。
English: He also said: Wu Xiang is dead, Li Shengmin should be buried immediately, and he should not be allowed to be buried in his hometown.

古文：按绅以旧宰相镇一方，恣威权。
现代文：李绅以故宰相身份镇守一片地方，任意弄权耍威风。
English: With the status of the late prime minister, Li Sheng guarded a piece of land, arbitrarily wielding power and arrogance.

古文：凡戮有罪，犹待秋分；湘无辜，盛夏被杀。 
现代文：一般真有罪，还要等秋分后；吴湘没有罪，盛夏被处死了。 
English: Generally, those who were really guilty had to wait until after the autumn equinox; Wu Xiang was not guilty and was executed in midsummer.

古文：崔元藻衔德裕斥己，即翻其辞，因言： 御史覆狱还，皆对天子别白是非，德裕权轧天下，使不得对，具狱不付有司，但用绅奏而寘湘死。 
现代文：崔元藻恨李德裕贬自己的官，也改变过去的话，附和说： 御史复查回来，对皇帝都说清了是和非，李德裕权势极大，使我不能面见皇帝，我的判决不交有关部门执行，只根据李绅的报告把吴湘处死了。 
English: Cui Yuanmao hated Li Deyu for disparaging his own officials, and also changed his past words, adding: "When the imperial history review came back, it clarified the emperor's rights and wrongs. Li Deyu was extremely powerful, so I could not meet the emperor. I did not submit my judgment to the relevant departments for implementation, and only executed Wu Xiang according to Li Sheng's report.

古文：是时，德裕已失权，而宗闵故党令狐綯、崔铉、白敏中皆当路，因是逞憾，以利诱动元藻等，使三司结绅杖钺作籓，虐杀良平，准神龙诏书，酷吏殁者官爵皆夺，子孙不得进宦，绅虽亡，请从《春秋》戮死者之比。
现代文：这时，李德裕已经罢相，李宗闵过去的党羽令狐、崔铉、白敏中都掌权，乘这机会报复，用好处引诱崔元藻等人，要三司使判决李绅受命镇守一方，虐待、杀害好人，按神龙年间的诏令，酷虐的官吏死后要剥夺官职爵位，后代不能做官，李绅虽已去世，请求遵从《春秋》惩罚去世者的榜样。
English: At this time, Li Deyu had already retired from public life, and Li Zongya's past party members including Linghu, Cui Wei and Bai Minzhong were all in power. They took this opportunity to take revenge, using benefits to lure Cui Yuanmao and others, asking the three departments to sentence Li Sheng to be ordered to guard one side of the town, abuse and kill good people. According to the edict of the Dragon Dynasty, cruel officials should be deprived of official titles after death, and descendants should not be allowed to be officials. Although Li Sheng had passed away, he requested to follow the example of "Spring and Autumn" to punish the deceased.

古文：诏削绅三官，子孙不得仕。
现代文：有诏免去李绅的三种官职，后代不许做官。
English: An edict exempted Li Sheng from three kinds of official posts, and his descendants were not allowed to hold any official posts.

古文：贬德裕等，擢汝纳左拾遗，元藻武功令。
现代文：又贬李德裕的官；提升吴汝纳为左拾遗，崔元藻为武功县令。
English: Li Deyu was also demoted; Wu Runa was promoted to Zuo Zhi Rui, and Cui Yuanmao was promoted to Wu Gong County.

古文：始，绅以文艺节操见用，而屡为怨仇所拫却，卒能自伸其才，以名位终。
现代文：当初，李绅靠文学才能和气节被任用，虽多次被仇人排斥贬官，最终能发挥自己的才干，任高官去世。
English: At the beginning, Li Sheng was appointed by virtue of his literary talent and temperament. Although he was repeatedly ostracized and demoted by his enemies, he was eventually able to give full play to his talents and died as a high-ranking official.

古文：所至务为威烈，或陷暴刻，故虽没而坐湘冤云。
现代文：有人说他所到之处都很严厉，有时过于暴虐苛刻，所以死后因吴湘案受了冤枉。
English: Some people say that he was very strict everywhere he went, sometimes too tyrannical and harsh, so after his death he was wronged by the Wu Xiang case.

