古文：先王疆理天下，司牧黎元，刑法以禁其奸，礼教以防其欲。
现代文：古代的帝王治理天下，管理百姓，以刑法禁绝各种奸邪之事，以礼教防犯人的各种欲念。
English: Ancient emperors ruled the world and governed the people, using criminal law to prohibit all kinds of treachery and evil, and using etiquette to prevent criminals from indulging in all kinds of desires.

古文：故分职命官，共理天下。
现代文：所以把职权分给各级官吏，共同治理天下。
English: Therefore, the powers and duties were assigned to officials at all levels to jointly govern the world.

古文：书云： 知人则哲，能官人安人则惠。 睿哲之君，必致清明之臣，昏乱之朝，多有贪残之吏。
现代文：《尚书》上说： 知人则明，任用人安定人则惠。 圣明的君主，一定能吸引用清明大臣，昏乱之朝，多贪婪残暴之官。
English: "Shangshu" said: Acquaintance is better, appointment is better, stability is better. A saintly monarch will surely be able to attract a clean and bright minister, a confused morning, and a greedy and cruel official.

古文：高祖拨乱反正，以□隐为怀，故守令之徒，才多称职。
现代文：高祖拨乱反正，以体恤为怀，所以太守县令等官，大都称职。
English: Gao Zu was determined to put an end to the turmoil and acted with compassion, which is why most of the officials, such as the county magistrate, were competent.

古文：仍以战功诸将，出牧外藩，不识治体，无闻政术。
现代文：有战功的将领，出外镇治州郡，但不明白治国之道，不懂治术。
English: Generals who have distinguished themselves in battle go out to govern the county, but they do not understand the way of governing the country, they do not understand the art of governing.

古文：非唯暗于前言往行，乃至始学依判付曹，聚敛无厌，淫虐不已，虽或直绳，终无悛革。
现代文：不仅对前人的言行不清楚，甚至学着把应该处理的事情交给手下去办，聚敛财物贪得无厌，邪恶残暴，即使有的被绳之以法，最终也没有人悔改。唉!
English: Not only are they unclear about the words and deeds of their predecessors, but they even learn to delegate the things that should be handled to others, accumulate wealth with insatiable greed, and commit evil with cruelty. Even if some are brought to justice, in the end no one repents. Alas!

古文：于戏！此朝廷之大失。
现代文：这是朝廷的一大过错。
English: This was a big mistake on the part of the imperial court.

古文：大宁以后，风雅俱缺，卖官鬻狱，上下相蒙，降及末年，黩货滋甚。
现代文：大宁以后，雅正的风气丧失，卖官受贿，上下相欺，到了末年，贪污更加严重。
English: After Danying, the culture of elegance was lost, officials were bribed, and the upper and lower echelons cheated each other. By the end of the year, corruption had become even more serious.

古文：齐氏循良，如辛术之徒非一，多以官爵通显，别有列传。
现代文：北齐一朝的官吏大多能奉公守法，像辛术之类的人很多，因为官居显位，本书另有列传。
English: Most of the officials of the Northern Qi Dynasty were able to abide by the law, and there were many people like Xinzhu, because the official residence was prominent, this book has another list.

古文：如房仲干之属，在武平之末能卓尔不□，斯固弥可嘉也。
现代文：像房仲干等人，在武乎末年依然能卓尔不群，确实值得嘉奖。
English: Like Fang Zhonggan and others, they are still able to stand out from the crowd in the last years of Wuhu, and are indeed worthy of commendation.

古文：今掇张华原等列于循吏云。
现代文：现选择张华原等人列入《循吏传》。
English: Now, Zhang Huahuan and others have been selected to be included in the "Biography of Officials."

古文：张华原，字国满，代郡人也。
现代文：张华原，字国满，代郡人。
English: Zhang Hua Yuan, surnamed Guoman, was a representative of the county.

古文：少明敏，有器度。
现代文：年轻时聪明，有器量和风度。
English: Smart when young, with poise and grace.

古文：高祖开骠骑府，引为法曹参军，迁大丞相府属，仍侍左右。
现代文：高祖设骠骑府，引荐他为法曹参军，升大丞相府属，得以随侍在高祖左右。
English: Gao Zu set up a cavalry headquarters, recommended him to join the army as a legal officer, and became a member of the prime minister's office, so that he could follow Gao Zu around.

古文：从于信都，深为高祖所亲待，高祖每号令三军，常令宣谕意旨。
现代文：随从到信都，深受高祖宠幸和优待，高祖向军队颁布命令，常常叫他来宣布。
English: Accompanied to Xindu, he was favored and treated favorably by Gaozu. Gaozu issued orders to the army and often asked him to announce them.

古文：周文帝始据雍州也，高祖犹欲以逆顺晓之，使华原入关说焉。
现代文：周文帝占据雍州时，高祖还想向他说明叛乱和归顺的利弊，派华原进关去劝说他。
English: When Zhou Wendi occupied Yongzhou, Gaozu also wanted to explain to him the pros and cons of rebellion and submission, and sent Hua Yuan Jinguan to persuade him.

古文：周文密有拘留之意，谓华原曰： 若能屈骥足于此，当共享富贵，不尔命悬今日。 华原曰： 渤海王命世诞生，殆天所纵，以明公蕞尔关右，便自隔绝，故使华原衔喻公旨。
现代文：周文帝暗中要把他扣留，对他说： 如果先生能够委屈留下来，一定和你共享富贵，如果不归降，今天就杀了你。 华原说： 渤海王是天意所降生的，受上天的支派，因为你占据关右，彼此隔绝，所以派我来陈述他的意旨。
English: Emperor Zhou Wenzhu secretly wanted to detain him and said to him: "If my master can be wronged and stay, he will certainly share the wealth with you, if he does not surrender, he will kill you today." Hua Yuan said: "King Erhai was born by the will of heaven, by the tribe of heaven, because you occupy the right and the left, and are isolated from each other, so he sent me to state his intention.

古文：明公不以此日改图，转祸为福，乃欲赐胁，有死而已。 周文嘉其亮正，乃使东还。
现代文：你却不趁此机会改变态度，转祸为福，竟然威胁我，我惟有一死。 周文帝夸奖他忠诚，允许他回去。
English: However, you did not take this opportunity to change your attitude and turn misfortune into a blessing, and even threatened me that I would only die. Emperor Zhou praised him for his loyalty and allowed him to return.

古文：高祖以华原久而不返，每叹惜之，及闻其来，喜见于色。
现代文：高祖因为他去了很长时间不回来，常感叹惋惜，听说他回来了，不禁喜形于色。
English: Gaozu, because he went away for a long time and did not return, often lamented and regretted. When he heard that he had returned, he couldn't help but be overjoyed.

古文：累迁为兖州刺史，人怀感附，寇盗寝息。
现代文：经多次升迁任兖州刺史，人心归附，盗寇匿迹。
English: After being promoted many times, he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou. He was loved by the people and disappeared as a thief.

古文：州狱先有囚千余人，华原皆决遣。
现代文：州狱中本来有一千多名犯人，华原为他们一一判决发遣。
English: Originally, there were more than a thousand prisoners in the state penitentiary, and Hua Yuan sentenced and dispatched them one by one.

古文：至年暮，唯有重罪者数十人，华原亦遣归家申贺，依期至狱。
现代文：到了年底，仅剩下几十名重罪犯人，他还允许犯人回家庆贺，犯人都按期回到狱中。
English: By the end of the year, only a few dozen felons remained. He also allowed the prisoners to go home to celebrate. The prisoners all returned to prison on schedule.

古文：先是州境数有猛兽为暴，自华原临州，忽有六驳食之，咸以化感所致。
现代文：原先境内经常有猛兽伤人的事，自从他上任后，忽然有传说中的吃虎猛兽出现，吃掉了猛兽，都认为是他的感化造成的。
English: Originally, there were often cases of ferocious beasts injuring people in the territory. Since he took office, a legendary tiger-eating beast suddenly appeared and ate the ferocious beast, which was thought to be caused by his influence.

古文：后卒官，州人大小莫不号慕。
现代文：后来华原死于任上，全州大小无不思念号哭。
English: Later, Hua Yuan died in office, and people all over the state cried.

古文：宋世良，字符友，广平人。
现代文：宋世良，字元友，广平人。
English: Song Shiliang, Zhiyuan You, Guang Pingren.

古文：年十五，便有胆气，应募从军北讨，屡有战功。
现代文：十五岁时，就有胆量，应招入伍参加北伐，多次立下战功。
English: At the age of fifteen, he had the courage to enlist in the army to participate in the Northern Expedition, and made war achievements many times.

古文：寻为殿中侍御史，诣河北括户，大获浮惰。
现代文：不久任殿中侍御史，到黄河以北登记户口，发现了很多隐满不报的情况。
English: Soon after taking up the post of palace chamberlain, he went north of the Yellow River to register for a hukou, and discovered many hidden and unreported cases.

古文：还见汲郡城旁多骸骨，移书州郡，令悉收瘗。
现代文：回来时见汲郡外有许多尸骨，就下令给州郡，命他们全都收殓埋葬。
English: When he came back, he saw that there were many bones outside the county, so he ordered the prefectural government to collect and bury them all.

古文：其夜，甘雨□□。
现代文：当晚，下了一场大雨。
English: That night, it rained heavily.

古文：还，孝庄劳之曰： 知卿所括得丁倍于本帐，若官人皆如此用心。便是更出一天下也。 
现代文：回到朝中，孝庄帝慰劳他说： 我知道你登记的户口敷比账簿上多了一倍，如果作官治民都像你这样用心，就又能创出一个天下。 
English: Returning to the court, Emperor Xiaozhuang consoled him, saying, "I know that you have registered more than twice as many hukou-shiki as there are in the account books. If all officials and citizens were as diligent as you, we could create a whole new world."

古文：出除清河太守。
现代文：出任遣回太守。
English: He was sent back to the position of governor-general.

古文：世良才识闲明，尤善治术，在郡未几，声问甚高。
现代文：世且才识俱佳，尤其擅长治理州郡，上任时间不长，就博得了好名声。
English: He is well-versed in the ways of the world. He is especially good at governing the state and county. He has gained a good reputation after being in office for a short time.

古文：郡东南有曲堤，成公一姓阻而居之，□盗多萃于此。
现代文：在郡东南有个曲堤，被成公一家占据，强盗多在那裹聚集。
English: In the southeast of the county, there is a curved embankment, occupied by the Chenggong family, where robbers mostly gather.

古文：人为之语曰： 宁度东吴、会稽，不历成公曲堤。 世良施八条之制，盗奔他境。
现代文：人们都说： 宁可经束吴、会稽，也不经过盛公曲堤。 世皇颁行了条措施，强盗都跑到了其他地方。
English: People all said: It is better to go through Shouwu and Hefei, rather than go through Shengong. The emperor issued a measure, and the robbers all ran to other places.

古文：民又谣曰： 曲堤虽险贼何益，但有宋公自屏迹。 后齐天保中大赦，郡先无一囚，□吏拜诏而已。
现代文：老百姓又谣说： 曲堤虽险贼何益，但有宋公自屏迹。 后来齐天保年间大赦天下，而清河郡的监牢竟没有囚犯，仅是官员拜领诏书而已。
English: It was also rumored by the common people that although bending the dike was of no benefit to the robbers, there was a copy of Song Gong's self-portrait on it. Later, during the reign of Emperor Qianlong, there was a general amnesty, and the prison in Qinghe County actually had no prisoners, only officials receiving imperial edicts.

古文：狱内稆生，桃树、蓬蒿亦满。
现代文：监狱到处是野生的庄稼，桃树和蓬蒿长满了院子。
English: The prison is full of wild crops, with peach trees and maples growing all over the yard.

古文：每日衙门虚寂，无复诉讼者。
现代文：每天衙门空无一人，再没有来打官司的。
English: Every day, there is no one at the gate, and no one comes to sue.

古文：其冬，醴泉出于界内。
现代文：冬天，境内出现了甘泉。
English: In winter, there is a spring in the area.

古文：及代至，倾城祖道。
现代文：任期将满，全城人都来送行。
English: His term of office is coming to an end, and the whole city is coming to see him off.

古文：有老人丁金刚泣而前，谢曰： 己年九十，记三十五政，君非唯善治，清亦彻底。
现代文：有一位叫丁金刚的老人，哭着走上前来，拜谢说： 我已经九十岁了，记得经历了三十五任太守，先生不仅善于治理，又极其清廉。
English: An old man named Ding King Kong came forward, crying, and said to Bai Xie: "I am already ninety years old, and I remember that I have experienced thirty-five governors-general. My teacher is not only good at governance, but also extremely incorruptible.

古文：今失贤君，民何济矣。 莫不攀援涕泣。
现代文：今天你要走了，以后百姓还能依靠谁呢。 
English: If you leave today, who will the people be able to rely on in the future?

古文：除东郡太守，卒官。
现代文：大家全都攀着轿杆失声痛哭。又任柬郡太守，死在任上。
English: They all climbed onto the palanquin and wept bitterly. He was also appointed the governor of Cambodia and died in office.

古文：世良强学，好属文，撰字略五篇、宋氏别录十卷。
现代文：世良极其好学，喜好作诗文，编撰《字略》五篇、《宋氏别录》十卷。
English: Se-ryo was extremely studious and liked to write poetry. He compiled five volumes of "Shorthand" and ten volumes of "Song's Biography."

古文：与弟世轨俱有孝友之誉。
现代文：和弟弟世轨都以孝顺友爱闻名。
English: Both he and his younger brother were known for their filial piety and friendliness.

古文：世轨，幼自严整。
现代文：世轨，年幼时就严谨。
English: In today's world, children are expected to be strict from a young age.

古文：好法律，稍迁廷尉卿。
现代文：喜好法律，逐渐升至廷尉卿。
English: He was fond of law and gradually rose to the rank of Lord-Lieutenant.

古文：洛州民聚结欲劫河桥，吏捕案之，连诸元徒党千七百人。
现代文：洛州百姓集合起来要抢劫河桥，官吏逮捕了一批人加以审讯，牵连了元姓家族党羽一千七百多人。
English: Locals in Lozhou gathered to rob a river bridge. Officials arrested and interrogated a group of people, implicating more than 1,700 members of the Yuan family.

古文：崔暹为廷尉，以之为反，数年不断。
现代文：崔暹任廷尉，认为是谋反，连续几年不能断案。
English: Cui Siem, a courtier, was considered to have plotted a rebellion, and the case could not be closed for several years.

古文：及世轨为少卿，判其事为劫。于是杀魁首，余从坐悉舍焉。
现代文：世轨为少卿，判定为抢劫，于是杀掉了罪魁祸首，其他受牵连的人全部予以释放。
English: He was a Shaoqing in his life, and it was judged to be robbery, so he killed the culprit, and all the other people involved were released.

古文：时大理正苏珍之亦以平干知名。
现代文：当时大理正苏珍之也以公正干练闻名，大理寺中的人说： 决定嫌疑苏珍之，由表及裹宋世轨。 
English: At that time, Dali Zheng Su Zhenzhi was also famous for his fairness and ability. The people in Dali Temple said: The decision to suspect Su Zhenzhi should be made from the table and the Song dynasty.

古文：寺中为之语曰： 决定嫌疑苏珍之，视表见里宋世轨。 时人以为寺中二绝。
现代文：奉为大理寺的二绝。
English: It is revered as one of the two shrines of Dali Temple.

古文：南台囚到廷尉，世轨多雪之。
现代文：南台的囚犯送到廷尉，世轨大多能为他们昭雪。
English: The prisoners from Nantai were sent to Tingfei, and most of them were able to turn their lives around.

古文：仍移摄御史，将问其滥状，中尉毕义云不送，移往复不止。
现代文：于是移送御史，要问滥用刑罚的罪行，中尉毕义云不送，文书往来不绝。
English: As a result, Lieutenant Bi Yiyun was not sent to the transfer of the imperial history, and the crime of abusing the penalty was asked, and the correspondence was incessant.

古文：世轨遂上书，极言义云酷擅。
现代文：世轨给皇帝上书，极力说毕义云残酷专权。
English: He wrote a letter to the emperor, urging him to abolish the cruel dictatorship.

古文：显祖引见二人，亲□世轨曰： 我知台欺寺久，卿能执理与之抗衡，但守此心，勿虑不富贵。 □义云曰： 卿比所为诚合死，以志在疾恶，故且一恕。 仍顾谓朝臣曰： 此二人并我骨鲠臣也。 及疾卒，廷尉、御史诸系囚闻世轨死，皆哭曰： 宋廷尉死，我等岂有生路！ 
现代文：颢祖召见他俩，亲自劝解他说： 我知道南台欺压大理寺已经很久，你能依据法律和他们抗衡，如果能永远有此心，不愁不会富贵。 又对义云说： 你素来所作所为实在该死，但因为你疾恶如仇，姑且宽恕你。 又对众位大臣说： 遣两人都是我刚直不阿之臣。 世轨因病去世，廷尉、御史台中羁押的囚犯听说后，都大哭着说： 宋廷尉死了，我们哪还有生路呢! 
English: I know that Nantai has been oppressing Dali Temple for a long time, can you compete with them according to the law, if you can always have this heart, you will not be rich and famous. He also said to Yiyun: What you have done is really worthy of death, but because you are so evil, I will forgive you. He also said to the ministers: The two who were sent are my loyal and honest servants. Shiraishi passed away due to illness, and after hearing this, the court lieutenant and the prisoners detained in Goshidai said with tears in their eyes: Song Tingjun is dead, how can we still live?

古文：世良从子孝王，学涉，亦好缉缀文藻。
现代文：世良的侄子孝王，稍有学问，也喜欢写文章。
English: Sera's nephew, Takao, is slightly more educated and also likes to write articles.

古文：形貌短陋而好臧否人物，时论甚疾之。
现代文：他身材矮小容貌丑陋却好评价人物，人们对此很憎恨。
English: He's short and ugly, but he's a good judge of character, which people hate.

古文：为段孝言开府参军，又荐为北平王文学。
现代文：任段孝言的开府参军，又被推荐任北平王文学。
English: He was appointed by Duan Xiaojin to join the army in Kaifu, and was also recommended by King Peiping of literature.

古文：求入文林□不遂，因非毁朝士，撰别录二十卷，会平齐，改为关东风俗传，更广见闻，勒成三十卷以上之。
现代文：请求入文林馆未能如愿，就诽谤朝中大臣，撰写二十卷《别录》，周灭齐时，又改名为《关东风俗传》，又增加了些见闻，成三十卷呈送给皇帝。
English: When his request to enter the Wenlin Museum did not meet his expectations, he slandered the ministers of the DPRK and China, and wrote twenty volumes of "Special Record." When Zhou Qi died, he changed the name to "History of Kanto Customs" and added some insights, and presented thirty volumes to the emperor.

古文：言多妄谬，篇第冗杂，无著述体。
现代文：言辞大多虚妄荒谬，篇章冗杂，毫无著述体例。
English: Most of the words are false and absurd, the chapters are complicated, and there is no writing style.

古文：郎基，字世业，中山人。
现代文：郎基，字世业，中山人。
English: Ranki, Shyo, Nakayamajin.

古文：身长八尺，美须髯，泛涉坟典，尤长吏事。
现代文：身高八尺，胡须漂亮，精通典籍，尤其擅长政事。
English: He is eight feet tall, has a beautiful beard, is well versed in classics, and is particularly good at politics.

古文：起家奉朝请，累迁海西镇将。
现代文：初为奉朝请，多次升迁任海西镇将。
English: At first, he was asked to serve the imperial court, and was promoted several times to be the commander of Haixi Town.

古文：梁吴明彻率□攻围海西，基□励兵民，固守百余日，军粮且罄，戎仗亦尽，乃至削木为箭，剪纸为羽。
现代文：梁吴明彻率领人马围攻海西，郎基勉励军民，固守一百多天，军粮将要告罄，装备也将用完，以致削木做箭，剪纸做羽。
English: Liang Wu Mingcher led the troops and horses to besiege the west coast of the sea, and Langji encouraged the soldiers and civilians to stay for more than a hundred days. The military food will run out, and the equipment will also run out, so that the wood will be cut into arrows, and the paper will be cut into feathers.

古文：围解还朝，仆射杨愔迎劳之曰： 卿本文吏，遂有武略。
现代文：解围后回到朝中，仆射杨情迎接慰劳他说： 你本是文官，竟然有武将的谋略。
English: After the relief of the siege, he returned to the court and greeted Yang Rong with words of consolation, saying, "You are a civilian official, yet you have the strategy of a military commander.

古文：削木剪纸，皆无故事，班、墨之思，何以相过。 
现代文：削木剪纸，都没有先例，鲁班、墨子的奇想都比不上你。 
English: There is no precedent for whittling wood and cutting paper. The whims of Luban and Mozi are no match for you.

古文：后带颍川郡，积年留滞，数日之中，剖判咸尽，而台报下，并允基所陈。
现代文：后来兼管颖川郡，多年积存的案件，他在几天之内，都分判完毕，御史台批覆，也同意他的判决。
English: Later, he was also in charge of Yingchuan County, where cases that had accumulated for many years were all adjudicated within a few days. The History Channel approved and agreed with his decision.

古文：条纲既疏，狱讼清息，官民遐迩，皆相庆悦。
现代文：法令宽，诉讼案件相对减少，远近的官吏百姓，都互相庆幸。
English: The law is broad, the number of lawsuits has been relatively reduced, and officials and people from near and far have congratulated each other.

古文：基性清慎，无所营求，曾语人云： 任官之所，木枕亦不须作，况重于此事。 唯颇令写书。
现代文：郎基为人清廉审慎，没有私欲，曾对人说： 我到任所，连木枕都不做，更何况更贵重的呢。 他很喜欢写书。
English: Lanki was a man of integrity and prudence, with no selfish desires. He once said to someone, "When I arrived at my post, I didn't even make a wooden pillow, let alone a more valuable one. He loved to write books.

古文：潘子义曾遗之书曰： 在官写书，亦是风流罪过。 基答书曰： 观过知仁，斯亦可矣。 后卒官，柩将还，远近将送，莫不攀辕悲哭。
现代文：有一次潘子义在写给他的信中说： 做官写书，也算是风流罪过。 他答覆说： 见错知仁，也就可以了。 后来死于任上，灵柩将要运回时，远近的人都来护送，全都拉着车辕伤心痛哭。
English: Once, Pan Ziyi said in a letter to him: "Being an official and writing a book is also a sin of womanizing." He replied: "If you see the wrong person, it's okay." Later, when he died in office, when the coffin was about to be transported back, people from far and near came to escort him, all of them pulling the cart and crying with sorrow.

古文：孟业，字敬业，巨鹿安国人。
现代文：孟业，字敬业，钜鹿安国人。
English: Mengye, the Chinese character for dedication, is a native of Elk'an.

古文：家本寒微，少为州吏。
现代文：出身贫寒，年轻时任本州小吏。
English: He came from a poor family, and when he was young, he was a minor official in Honshu.

古文：性廉谨，同僚诸人侵盗官绢，分三十疋与之，拒而不受。
现代文：为人廉洁谨慎，同僚侵吞公家绸缎，分给他三十匹，他拒绝接受。
English: An honest and prudent man, he refused to accept his colleague's embezzlement of public silk and satin and his allocation of thirty horses.

古文：魏彭城王韶拜定州，除典签。
现代文：魏彭城王元韶在定州任职时，任他为典签。
English: When Wei Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun was in charge of Dingzhou, he appointed him as a signer.

古文：长史刘仁之谓业曰： 我处其外，君居其内，同心戮力，庶有济乎。 未几仁之征入为中书令，临路启韶云： 殿下左右可信任者唯有孟业，愿专任之。
现代文：长史刘仁之对他说： 我主外，你主内，齐心协力，也许会成就大事。 不久刘仁之调入朝廷任中书令，临上路前对元韶说： 殿下左右可以信任的惟有孟业，希望委以重任。
English: Liu Renzhi, the chief historian, said to him, "My lord and your lord, if we work together, perhaps we can achieve great things." Liu Renzhi was soon transferred to the imperial court to serve as the second secretary, and before he left, he said to Yuan Shao, "Mengye is the only one around whom Your Highness can trust, and I hope to be entrusted with an important task.

古文：余人不可信也。 又与业别，执手曰： 今我出都，君便失援，恐君在后，不自保全。
现代文：其他人都不可信。 又和孟业告别，拉着他的手说： 如今我到京城去，你就失去了依靠，恐怕你以后不能保全自身。
English: He also said goodbye to Mengye, taking his hand and saying, "Now that I'm going to Beijing, you've lost my trust, and I'm afraid you won't be able to protect yourself in the future."

古文：唯正与直，愿君自勉。 业唯有一马，因瘦而死。
现代文：祇有正和直，希望你能自勉。 盂业仅有一匹马，因为瘦弱死了。
English: There is only Zheng He Zhi, I hope you can control yourself. Zou Ye only has one horse, because he is thin and weak, he died.

古文：韶以业家贫，令州府官人同食马肉，欲令厚偿，业固辞不敢。
现代文：元韶因为他家中贫困，命令州府中的官吏一起吃马肉，想补偿他，孟业却推辞不受。
English: Because of his family's poverty, Yuan Xuan ordered the officials in the state government to eat horse meat together and wanted to compensate him, but Meng Ye did not accept the refusal.

古文：韶乃戏业曰： 卿邀名人也。 对曰： 业以微细，伏事节下，既不能裨益，宁可损败清风。 后高祖书与韶云： 典签姓孟者极能用心，何不置之目前。 韶，高祖之□也。
现代文：元韶和他开玩笑说： 你是想博取名声。 他回答说： 我出身贫贱，在你手下供职，已经不能对你有什么帮助了，怎么能败坏清廉之风。 后来产担在写给五趋的信中说： 那位姓重的典签做事极其用，何不把他留在身边。 元韶是高祖的女婿。
English: He replied, "I come from a poor family and work under you, so I can't be of any help to you, how can I corrupt the culture of honesty?" Later, the production manager said in a letter to Wucheng, "That man with the heavy surname works extremely hard, why not keep him around?" Wucheng was Gaozu's son-in-law.

古文：仁之后为兖州，临别谓吏部崔暹曰： 贵州人士，唯有孟业，宜铨举之，他人不可信也。 崔暹问业曰： 君往在定州，有何政绩，使刘西兖如此钦叹？ 答曰： 禀性愚直，唯知自修，无他长也。 
现代文：刘仁之后来守西兖州，临行前对吏部崔逞说： 你们州的人，惟孟箠是人才，应该举荐选拔他，其他人不可信。 崔暹问孟业： 过去你在定州，有什么政绩，让刘仁之这样佩服呢? 他说： 我禀性愚昧率直，仅知加强自身修养，没有其他政绩。 
English: After Liu Ren, he came to guard Xishuanzhou, and before leaving, he said to the cadre department of Cui Ganglu: People in your state, except for Meng Yao, are talented people, they should recommend and select him, others cannot be trusted. Cui Siam asked Meng Ye: In the past, when you were in Dingzhou, what were your political achievements that made Liu Ren admire you so much? He said: I am stubborn, ignorant and straightforward, I only know how to strengthen my self-cultivation, and I have no other political achievements.

古文：天保初，清河王岳拜司州牧，闻业名行，复召为法曹。
现代文：天保初，清河王高岳任司州牧，听说了他的言行，征召他任法曹。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, King Gao Yue of Qinghe served as the chief magistrate. Hearing of his words and deeds, he was conscripted to serve as a law officer.

古文：业形貌短小，及谒见，岳心鄙其眇小，笑而不言。
现代文：他身材短小，拜见时，高岳小看他的矮小，笑着不说话。
English: Meng Ye is short in stature, so when he visits, his wife despises his smallness in her heart, only laughs but does not speak.

古文：后寻业断决之处，乃谓业曰： 卿断决之明，可谓有过躯貌之用。 寻迁东郡守，以宽惠着。
现代文：后来决断事务时，才对他说： 你决断明快，可以说超过了你的容貌用途。 不久升任束郡太守，以宽大仁义著称。
English: Later, when he was deciding matters, he said to him, "Your clear-sighted decision-making may be said to exceed the use of your appearance." He was soon promoted to the position of Saku County Governor, and was known for his generosity and benevolence.

古文：其年，麦一茎五穗，其余三穗四穗共一茎，合郡人以为政化所感。
现代文：当年，一棵麦杆长出了五穗，其他也有长三四穗的，全郡人都认为是政治清明感动了上天导致的。
English: In that year, a wheat stalk grew five ears, and others also had three or four ears. The whole county believed that the political clearness had been moved by heaven.

古文：寻以病卒。
现代文：不久因病去世。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards.

古文：崔伯谦，字士逊，博陵人。
现代文：崔伯谦，字士逊，博陵人。
English: Cui Boqian, the son of a scholar, comes from Boling.

古文：父文业，巨鹿守。
现代文：父亲文业，任钜鹿太守。
English: His father, Bungei, was appointed as the governor of Elk Province.

古文：伯谦少孤贫，善养母。
现代文：伯谦小时候父亲去世家中贫困，用心侍奉母亲。
English: When Bo Qian was a child, his father died. The family was poor and he served his mother with all his heart.

古文：高祖召赴晋阳，补相府功曹，称之曰： 清直奉公，真良佐也。 迁瀛州别驾。
现代文：高祖征召他到晋阳，补授相府功曹，称赞他说： 清廉奉公，真是好佐吏。 升瀛州别驾。
English: Gao Zu conscripted him to Jinyang and gave him the supplementary award of "Sofu Gong Cao" and praised him saying, "Being honest and serving the public, he is really a good officer. Don't go to Zhangzhou.

古文：世宗以为京畿司马，劳之曰： 卿骋足瀛部，己着康歌，督府务殷，是用相授。 族弟暹，当时宠要，谦与之僚旧同门，非吉凶，未曾造请。
现代文：世宗授为京畿司马，慰劳说： 你在瀛州施展才能，治理得很太平，我府中事务繁多，因此将此职授你。 族弟崔暹当时受到皇上宠幸而显要，伯谦和他同在朝廷为官，若非遇到婚丧大事，绝不到他家中去。
English: Emperor Taizong conferred the title of Gyeonggi Sima, and comforted him by saying, "You have demonstrated your ability in Yeongju, and the governance is very peaceful. There are many affairs in our government, so I have conferred this position on you. The younger brother, Choe Siem, was favored by the emperor and was prominent at the time. Bo Qian and he were both officials in the imperial court. If it were not for the wedding and funeral, they would never have gone to his home.

古文：后除济北太守，恩信大行，乃改鞭用熟皮为之，不忍见血，示耻而已。
现代文：后来任济北太守，遍行恩德，把鞭子改为熟皮制作，不忍心见罪人流血，表明耻辱而已。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Jibei Province, and he practiced benevolence everywhere. He changed the whip to be made of leather. He could not bear to see the blood of sinners, which only showed his shame.

古文：有朝贵行过郡境，问人太守治政何如。
现代文：有当朝权贵从郡中经过，询问太守政绩如何。
English: There was a time when high-ranking dignitaries passed through the county, inquiring about the performance of the governor.

古文：对曰： 府君恩化，古者所无。
现代文：那人回答说： 太守用恩德教化我们，从古未有。
English: He replied, "Since ancient times, no one has been able to match the Emperor's benevolence and enlightenment."

古文：因诵民为歌曰： 客曰： 既称恩化，何由复威？ 曰： 长吏惮威，民庶蒙惠。 征赴邺，百姓号泣遮道。
现代文：所以老百姓作的歌谣说： 崔太守，能治政，换皮鞭，施威德，民不争。  客人说： 既然是恩德教化，为什么又说有威严呢? 回答说： 官吏害怕威严，百姓蒙受恩德。 征召到邺时，百姓都哭着挤在路上。
English: Therefore, the ballads composed by the common people said: Cui Taizhou, able to govern, change the whip, Shweide, the people do not dispute. The guests said: Since it is benevolence and enlightenment, why is it said to have majesty? He replied: The officials are afraid of majesty, and the people receive grace. When the conscription came, the people were crying and crowded on the road.

古文：以弟让在关中，不复居内任，除南巨鹿守，事无巨细，必自亲览。
现代文：因为弟弟崔让在关中任职，不能再在内做官，任南钜鹿太守。事情无论大小，一定要亲自过问。
English: Because his younger brother, Cui Zhan, is serving in the Guanzhong, he can no longer serve as an official in the Guanzhong, but as the governor of Nanlu. No matter how big or small the matter is, he must personally inquire about it.

古文：民有贫弱未理者，皆曰： 我自有白须公，不虑不决。 后为银青光禄大夫，卒。
现代文：百姓中有因家贫体弱而不能诉讼的，都说： 我们有白胡子太守作主，不用发愁决断不了。 后来任银青光禄大夫，去世。
English: Among the common people, those who were unable to litigate because their families were poor and weak all said, "We have the white-bearded daimyo as our master, we don't have to worry, we can make a decision." Later, he served as a doctor of silver and blue light, and passed away.

古文：苏琼，字珍之，武强人也。父备，仕魏至□尉少卿。
现代文：蓝卢，字至缒，逮强人。父亲鉴僙，瑟时任卫尉少卿。
English: Lan Lu, the Chinese character for "strong," was a strong man. His father, Jian Lu, was a junior captain of the Imperial Guards at the time.

古文：琼幼时随父在边，尝谒东荆州刺史曹芝。
现代文：壬蝗年轻时和父亲在边境上，曾拜访塞型业刺史萱芝。
English: When he was young, Ren Loco and his father were on the border, and they once visited Shizhi, an industrial city in Sichuan Province.

古文：芝戏问曰： 卿欲官不？ 对曰： 设官求人，非人求官。 芝异其对，署为府长流参军。
现代文：萱芝开玩笑地问他： 想做官吗? 他回答说： 设立官职是为寻求人，并不是要人去找官做。 曹芝认为他很奇特，授为本府长流参军。
English: "Do you want to be an official?" he jokingly asked, to which Cao Zhi replied, "Official positions were created to find people, not for people to find officials." Cao Zhi thought he was very special, and he was assigned to join the army as the head of the local government.

古文：文襄以仪同开府，引为刑狱参军，每加勉劳。
现代文：文襄为仪同开府时，引荐他为刑狱参军，常加以鼓励慰劳。
English: When Wen Xiang was the ceremonial head of the government, he recommended him to join the army, and often encouraged him to work hard.

古文：并州尝有强盗，长流参军推其事，所疑贼并已拷伏，失物家并识认，唯不获盗赃。
现代文：并州发生一起抢劫案，长流参军审问这个案子，疑犯经过用刑都已招认，失主也已确认，仅是找不到赃物。
English: In addition, a robbery case occurred in the state. Changliu joined the army to interrogate this case. The suspects have confessed after being punished, and the owner has also been confirmed. The only problem is that the stolen goods could not be found.

古文：文襄付琼更令穷审，乃别推得元景融等十余人，并获赃验。
现代文：文襄命苏琼进一步审讯，另外发现了元景融等十几人，并起获了脏物。
English: Wen Xiang ordered Su Qiong to further interrogate, in addition, more than a dozen people such as Yuan Jing Rong were found, and dirt was found.

古文：文襄大笑，语前妄引贼者曰： 尔辈若不遇我好参军，几致枉死。 
现代文：文襄大笑，对那些被胡乱株连成强盗的人说： 你们若不是碰到我们的好参军，几乎要冤枉而死。 
English: Wen Xiang laughed loudly and said to those who had been made into robbers by the disorderly gangs: If you do not join the army when you meet us, you will almost die unjustly.

古文：除南清河太守，其郡多盗，及琼至，民吏肃然，奸盗止息。
现代文：任南清河太守，郡中多盗贼，等他一上任，吏民整肃，盗贼的事也都停止了。
English: When he was appointed governor of South Qinghe, there were many thieves in the county. As soon as he took office, the officials and people were purged, and the thieves stopped.

古文：或外境奸非，辄从界中行过者，无不捉送。
现代文：有人在境外犯了法，而从境内经过，也被捉获送交。
English: Sometimes the treacherous and lawless people from outside the county illegally pass through the territorial boundary of Nanqinghe County, and no one is not caught and sent to the government.

古文：零县民魏双成失牛，疑其村人魏子宾，送至郡，一经穷问，知宾非盗者，即便放之。
现代文：零县百姓魏双成丢了牛，怀疑是同村魏子宾偷的，扭送到郡府，他一审问，知道并不是魏子宾偷的，马上放了他。
English: Zero County people Wei Shuangcheng lost a cow, suspected that it was stolen by Wei Zibin from the same village, and sent it to the county government. He first questioned, knew that it was not stolen by Wei Zibin, and immediately released him.

古文：双成诉云： 府君放贼去，百姓牛何处可得？ 琼不理，密走私访，别获盗者。
现代文：双成说： 太守把贼放走，我的牛到何处去找呢? 苏琼不再审理，微服私访。另外捉住了盗牛的罪犯。
English: Shuangcheng said, "The governor let the thief go, so where can I find my cow?" Su Qiong no longer held trials, and only allowed a few private visits. In addition, he caught the criminal who stole the cow.

古文：从此畜牧不收，多放散，云： 但付府君。 有邻郡富豪将财物寄置界内以避盗，为贼攻急，告曰： 我物已寄苏公矣。 贼遂去。
现代文：从此百姓放牧牲畜不用再赶回家，大多分散放养，说： 衹要交给太守就可以了。 邻郡有一富翁把财物寄存在此郡以防备盗贼，被贼人逼迫急了，就告诉他们说： 我的东西已寄托给苏公了。 贼人只好离去。
English: From then on, the people no longer had to rush home to graze their livestock, and most of them dispersed their stocking, saying, "If you want to give it to the governor, that's fine." A rich man in a neighboring county stored his belongings in this county to guard against thieves, and when he was forced to hurry by the thieves, he told them, "My belongings have been entrusted to Su Gong." The thieves had no choice but to leave.

古文：平原郡有妖贼刘黑狗，构结徒侣，通于沧海。
现代文：平原郡的妖贼刘黑狗，聚众结党，势力扩展到海边。
English: Liu Heggu, the villain of Plains County, gathered a large number of followers and expanded his power to the coast.

古文：琼所部人连接村居，无相染累。
现代文：珍之率领人把村庄连成一片，丝毫不受影响。
English: Zhenzhi led the people to connect the villages into one, without being affected in the slightest.

古文：邻邑于此伏其德。
现代文：邻郡官员都很钦佩他的德行。
English: Neighbouring county officials admired his virtues.

古文：郡中旧贼一百余人，悉充左右，人间善恶，及长吏饮人一杯酒，无不即知。
现代文：郡中原来有一百多贼人，都归顺了他，百姓中发生的各种事，甚至长吏喝了人家一杯酒，他也能立即知道。
English: Originally, there were more than a hundred thieves in the county, all of whom submitted to him, and he could immediately know everything that happened among the people, even if the officials drank a glass of wine.

古文：琼性清慎，不发私书。
现代文：珍之为人清廉谨慎，从来不写私信。
English: Su Qiong is honest and prudent, and never looks at the letter asking him to handle private affairs.

古文：道人道研为济州沙门统，资产巨富，在郡多有出息，常得郡县为征。
现代文：僧人道研是济州僧侣首领，有大批资财，在郡中有很多产业，常常被郡县征税。
English: The leader of the monks in Jeju, the Monk Humanistic Research Institute, has a large amount of wealth and owns many properties in the county, which are often taxed by the county.

古文：及欲求谒，度知其意，每见则谈问玄理，应对肃敬，研虽为债数来，无由启口。
现代文：每次他来求见，苏琼知道他的来意，接见时就谈论玄理，态度严肃，道研虽然多次为债务来拜见，却一直没有机会开口。
English: Every time he came to ask for an audience, Su Qiong knew what he wanted. When he was interviewed, he talked about the metaphysics with a serious attitude. Although Taoist studies came to see him many times for debts, he never had a chance to speak.

古文：其弟子问其故，研曰： 每见府君，径将我入青云间，何由得论地上事。 郡民赵颍曾为乐陵太守，八十致事归。
现代文：他的弟子问他是什么缘故，他说： 每次见了太守，他就领着我直接到了青云之上，怎有机会谈地上的事呢。 郡中的赵续做过乐陵太守，八十岁的时候退休回乡。
English: His disciple asked him why, and he said: Every time I saw the grand abbot, he led me directly to Qingyun, so how could I have the opportunity to talk about earthly things.Zhao Cui in the county served as the grand abbot of Le Ling, and retired to his hometown at the age of eighty.

古文：五月初，得新瓜一双自来送。
现代文：五月初，收获两只新瓜亲自为太守送来。
English: At the beginning of May, he personally harvested two new melons and sent them to the Emperor.

古文：颍恃年老，苦请，遂便为留，仍致于听事梁上，竟不剖。
现代文：赵颢依仗自己上了年纪，苦苦请求收下。苏琼祇得留下，放到大厅的梁上，始终没有打开吃。
English: Zhao Wei, relying on his old age, begged him to accept it. Su Qiong had to stay and put it on the beam of the hall, and never opened it.

古文：人遂竞贡新果，至门间，知颍瓜犹在，相顾而去。
现代文：人们于是争着送来时新瓜果，走到大门口，知道赵颢的瓜还在，只好面面相觑地离开。
English: As a result, people scrambled to send the new melon and fruit. When they reached the gate, they knew that Zhao Yao's melon was still there, so they had to leave face to face.

古文：有百姓乙普明兄弟争田，积年不断，各相援引，乃至百人。
现代文：百姓乙普明兄弟争夺田产，多年不能裁决，各自寻找证人，竟然有近百人。
English: There are nearly a hundred people, including the common people, who have been unable to reach a verdict for many years, and each of them is looking for witnesses.

古文：琼召普明兄弟对□人谕之曰： 天下难得者兄弟，易求者田地，假令得地失兄弟心如何？ 因而下泪，□人莫不洒泣。
现代文：苏琼叫来普明兄弟二人劝告众人说： 天下难得的就是兄弟，容易获得的是土地，如果得到土地却失去兄弟之情怎么样? 说完流下了眼泪，众人也流泪哭泣。
English: Su Qiong called the two brothers to advise the crowd, saying, "What is rare in the world is a brother, what is easy to get is land, what if you get the land but lose the brotherly feeling?" After saying this, she shed tears, and the crowd also shed tears and cried.

古文：普明弟兄叩头乞外更思，分异十年，遂还同住。
现代文：普明兄弟磕头请求到外面再商议，分家了十年以后，又搬到一起住。
English: After ten years of separation, the two brothers moved in together again.

古文：每年春，总集大儒□觊隆、田元凤等讲于郡学，朝吏文案之暇，悉令受书，时人指吏曹为学生屋。
现代文：每年春天，苏琼把有名的儒生卫觊隆、田元凤等人召集来，在郡学中讲学，官吏办完公事，都要来学习，当时人们把官吏住的地方叫学生屋。
English: Every spring, Su Qiong called famous Confucian scholars Wei Yulong, Tian Yuanfeng and others to give lectures at the county school, and government officials came to study after doing their official duties. At that time, people called the places where government officials lived "student houses."

古文：禁断淫祠，婚姻丧葬皆教令俭而中礼。
现代文：他又下令禁止淫祠，婚丧嫁娶都要节俭而合乎礼法。
English: He also issued an order to ban brothels, and all marriages and funerals were to be frugal and in accordance with etiquette.

古文：又蚕月预下绵绢度样于部内，其兵赋次第并立明式，至于调役，事必先办，郡县长吏常无十杖稽失。
现代文：到了养蚕的时候预先在部内定好丝绸的数量，兵役、赋税的顺序也都明白规定，到了调派差役的时候，事情一定提前办好，郡县长吏不再出错受罚。
English: When it came to raising silkworms, the number of silkworms was determined in advance within the ministry, and the order of military service and taxation was also clearly stipulated. When it came to assigning dispatchers, things must be done in advance, and county officials would no longer be punished for making mistakes.

古文：当时州郡无不遣人至境，访其政术。
现代文：当时其他州县派人来到南清河郡，学习治理的方法。
English: At that time, other states and counties sent people to Nanqinghe County to learn the methods of governance.

古文：天保中，郡界大水，人灾，绝食者千余家。
现代文：天保年间，郡中发了大水，百姓受了灾，没有粮食吃的有一千多家。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenxuan in the Tenpo era, floods occurred in Nanqinghe County, the people were affected by the disaster, and more than a thousand families were short of grain and food.

古文：琼普集部中有粟家，自从贷粟以给付饥者。
现代文：他召集郡中有粮食的人家，自己借贷出粮食发给没有粮食的人家。
English: He called together the families in the county who had grain, and he borrowed grain to give to the families who did not have grain.

古文：州计户征租，复欲推其贷粟。
现代文：州中按人户征收租税，又想用借贷粮食的事推托。
English: The state is levying taxes on a per-capita basis and wants to borrow money to pay for food.

古文：纲纪谓琼曰： 虽矜饥餧，恐罪累府君。 琼曰： 一身获罪，且活千室，何所怨乎？ 遂上表陈状，使检皆免，人户保安。
现代文：手下人对他说： 这样做虽然是同情挨饿的人，但恐怕会连累太守。 他说： 我一人获罪，却能使千家人活命，还有什么怨恨的呢。 于是上表陈述了情况，上面派人核查属实就免去了租税，百姓都得到了保全。
English: His subordinates said to him, "Although this is done out of sympathy for the starving people, I'm afraid it will also burden the governor."He said, "I alone have been found guilty, but I can save the lives of a thousand people, so what grudge do I have?"So the table above stated the situation, and when the people above were sent to verify the truth, they were exempted from paying taxes, and the people were protected.

古文：此等相抚儿子，咸言府君生汝。
现代文：这些受惠的人抱着儿子说是太守给了你们活命。
English: These beneficiaries hugged their sons and said that the governor had given them their lives.

古文：在郡六年，人庶怀之，遂无一人经州。
现代文：苏琼在郡中任职六年，百姓感恩，再没有人到州裹去上诉。
English: Su Qiong has been in Nanqinghe County for six years, and the people have all turned to him, so no one has complained to the state about the case.

古文：前后四表，列为尤最。
现代文：先后四道表章，被列为最好。
English: Su Qiong has been ranked the highest in the four times of the above table report on political achievements.

古文：遭忧解职，故人赠遗，一无所受。
现代文：因服丧而解职，朋友的馈赠，丝毫不受。
English: Later, when he left his job due to bereavement, he did not accept any property sent by his old friend.

古文：寻起为司直、廷尉正，朝士嗟其屈。
现代文：不久起用为司直、廷尉正，朝中大臣都为他抱屈。
English: He was soon promoted to Shizunao and Teijinjojo, and all the ministers of the Imperial Court bowed down to him.

古文：尚书辛述曰： 既直且正，名以定体，不虑不申。 
现代文：尚书辛述说： 他为人正直，按名定官，不用担心不能施展才能。 
English: Shang Shuxin said: He is an honest person, appointed by name, do not worry about not being able to display talent.

古文：初琼任清河太守，裴献伯为济州刺史，酷于用法，琼恩于养人。
现代文：当初麸琼任南清河太守时，苤墼伯任挤业刺史，动用刑法很严酷，苏琼对人却很有恩德。
English: At the beginning, when Su Qiong was the governor of the South Qinghe, he was the one who tried to rewrite history. The criminal law was very harsh, but Su Qiong was very kind to people.

古文：房延佑为乐陵郡，过州。裴问其外声，佑云： 唯闻太守善，刺史恶。 裴云： 得民誉者非至公。 佑答言： 若尔，黄霸、龚遂君之罪人也。 后有□，州各举清能。
现代文：房延茧到銮堡登上任，经过州中，苤问自己在外面名声怎么样，房延佑说： 我听说太守好、刺史恶。 
English: After passing through the middle school of the prefecture, he asked how his reputation was outside. He said, "I heard that I was too good at guarding and bad at history.

古文：裴以前言，恐为琼陷，琼申其枉滞，议者尚其公平。
现代文：裴说： 在百姓中有声誉的不能秉公办事。 延拉说： 照你所说，茎玺、龚遂在你眼中都成了罪人。 
English: Pei Xianbo was afraid of being framed by Su Qiong because he had said such a thing before, but Su Qiong complained about the grievance of not being promoted for a long time. People who talked about this matter praised Su Qiong as a fair person.

古文：毕义云为御史中丞，以猛暴任职，理官忌惮，莫敢有违。琼推察务在公平，得雪者甚□，寺署台案，始自于琼。
现代文：后来皇上下韶，命各州举荐清正的人，冬麸侦因为有前面的话，恐怕蓝琼会陷害他，藓琼申理受到裴冤枉而留滞的案件，人们都认为决断公平。毕义云任御史中丞时，处理事情过于激烈，大理寺的官员对他很忌惮，不敢违抗。苏琼审讯务求公平，昭雪的人很多，由大理寺处理御史台案件的惯例，就从苏琼开始。
English: Later, the emperor made an imperial edict, ordering each state to recommend a person of integrity, and the Donglu investigator was afraid that Lan Qiong would frame him because of his previous words. In the case of Yan Qiong Shenli, who was unjustly detained by Pei, people all thought that the decision was fair. When Bi Yiyun was appointed as the vice-chairman of the Imperial Historian, the handling of the matter was too intense, and the officials of the Dali Temple were very wary of him and dared not defy him. Su Qiong's trial sought to be fair, and there were a lot of people, and the practice of handling the Imperial Historian

古文：迁三公郎中。
现代文：后升三公郎中。
English: He was promoted to Shosho Sanko Junior High School.

古文：赵州及清河、南中有人频告谋反，前后皆付琼推捡，事多申雪。
现代文：趟州、清河和南中地区多次有人告发谋反，前后都交给苏琼审理，大都得以昭雪。
English: In Wuzhou, Qinghe and Nanzhong areas, there were many reports of people plotting to rebel, all of which were handed over to Su Qiong for trial, and most of them were cleared.

古文：尚书崔昂谓琼曰： 若欲立功名，当更思余理，仍数雪反逆，身命何轻？ 琼正色曰： 所雪者怨枉，不放反逆。 昂大惭。
现代文：尚书崔昂对他说： 如果想成就功名，应该想别的办法，如果靠着给叛逆昭雪，把自己的身家性命就看得太轻了。 他严正地说： 我昭雪的都是受到冤枉的人，叛逆者不会放过。 说得崔昂非常惭愧。
English: Shangshu Cuiang said to him: "If you want to achieve fame, you should think of other ways. If you rely on giving rewards to the traitors, you will regard your own wealth and life too lightly." He said solemnly: "I reward those who have been wronged, and I will not let the traitors go." Cuiang was very ashamed to say that.

古文：京师为之语曰： 断决无疑苏珍之。 
现代文：为此京城人都说： 断决无疑苏珍之。 
English: People in Beijing praised him, saying, "The verdict is undoubtedly Su Zhen's."

古文：迁左丞，行徐州事。
现代文：升左丞，行徐州事。
English: Rise to the left of the chancellor, go to Xuzhou.

古文：徐州城中五级寺忽被盗铜像一百躯，有司征检，四邻防宿及纵迹所疑，逮系数十人，琼一时放遣。
现代文：徐州城中五级寺的铜像突然被盗走了一百尊，有关部门检查后，把左右四邻、守夜人员及涉嫌疑犯，逮捕了几十人。苏琼却同时放了。
English: A hundred bronze statues were suddenly stolen from a five-level temple in the city of Xuzhou. After inspection by the relevant departments, dozens of neighbors, night watchmen and suspects were arrested. However, Su Qiong was released at the same time.

古文：寺僧怨诉不为推贼，琼遣僧，谢曰： 但且还寺，得像自送。 尔后十日，抄贼姓名及赃处所，径收掩，悉获实验，贼徒□引，道俗叹伏。
现代文：寺中的僧侣埋怨他不认真审问，他遣走僧人，说： 你们暂且回到寺裹等候，发现了佛像就送回去。 过了十天，抄绿了盗贼的姓名和埋藏赃物的地方，直接去捉拿，全部捉获归案，盗贼相互惊叹，僧俗百姓都赞叹佩服。
English: The monks in the temple complained that he did not seriously interrogate them, and he sent the monks away, saying, "You should return to the temple to wait, and if you find a Buddha statue, send it back." After ten days, he copied the names of the thieves and the places where the stolen goods were buried, and went directly to catch them. All of them were caught and brought to justice. The thieves marveled at each other, and the monks and ordinary people all admired and admired them.

古文：旧制以淮禁不听商贩辄度。
现代文：按照旧例淮河两岸被封锁后不允许商贩随意往来。
English: According to the old practice, merchants are not allowed to come and go at will after the two sides of the Huaihe River are blocked.

古文：淮南岁俭，启听淮北取籴。
现代文：这一年淮南歉收，苏琼奏明朝廷，允许商人到淮北耀粮。
English: This year, Huainan had a poor harvest, and Su Qiong appealed to the Ming court to allow merchants to go to Huaibei Yaogang.

古文：后淮北人饥，复请通籴淮南，遂得商估往还，彼此兼济，水陆之利，通于河北。
现代文：后来淮北发生灾荒，他又请求允许商人去淮南耀粮，于是双方的商人可以来往，互相调济，水陆交通一直沿伸到河北。
English: Later, when a disaster and famine occurred in Huaibei, he also requested that merchants be allowed to go to Yaogang in Huainan. As a result, merchants from both sides could come and go, exchange aid, and land and water transportation extended all the way to Hebei.

古文：后为大理卿而齐亡，仕周为博陵太守。
现代文：后来苏琼任大理卿时北齐灭亡，他在周任博陵太守。
English: Later, when Su Qiong was appointed as Daliqing, Bei Qi died, and he became the governor of Boling in Zhou.

古文：房豹，字仲干，清河人。祖法寿，魏书有传。
现代文：廛塾，字健登，翅人。曾祖父造画，《魏书》有传。
English: His great-grandfather created paintings, and the "Weishu" is said to have been created by him.

古文：父翼宗。
现代文：父亲翼宗。
English: His father, Tsubotsune.

古文：豹体貌魁岸，美音仪。
现代文：房豹身材魁伟，声旨清亮仪表俊美。
English: The house leopard has a large body, a clear voice, and a beautiful appearance.

古文：释褐开府参军，兼行台郎中，随慕容绍宗。
现代文：初任开府参军，兼行台郎中，跟随慕容绍宗。
English: He joined the army at the beginning of the Kaifu era, and was also a member of the Taira clan, following Murong Shaosong.

古文：绍宗自云有水厄，遂于战舰中浴，并自投于水，冀以厌当之。
现代文：基眯说自己有溺水之灾，就在战船上沐浴，并跳到水中，希望能压制厄运。
English: Saying that he had a water calamity, Shaozong took a bath in the warship and jumped into the water himself, hoping to use this method to replace the bad luck he would encounter.

古文：豹曰： 夫命也在天，岂人理所能延促。
现代文：房豹说： 人命由天，人怎能延长或缩短。
English: The house-leopard said: Man's life depends on the heavens, how can man lengthen or shorten it?

古文：公若实有灾眚，恐非禳所能解，若其实无，何禳之有。 绍宗笑曰： 未能免俗，为复尔耳。 未几而绍宗遇溺，时论以为知微。
现代文：你如果真的有灾难，恐怕除邪消灾之祭也不能解除，如果确实没有，就不用祭拜。 
English: If you really have a disaster, I'm afraid you can't get rid of the evil by removing the evil-eliminating sacrifice, and if you really don't, you don't have to worship.

古文：迁乐陵太守，镇以凝重，哀矜贫弱，豹阶庭简静，圄囹空虚。
现代文：升任碧递太守，做事稳重，同情孤苦，庆垫的官衙冷冷清清，监狱中空空荡荡。
English: He was promoted to the position of the governor of Bihai Province. He was steady in his work, sympathized with the lonely, and the officials who were congratulating him were cold and indifferent. The prison was empty.

古文：郡治濒海，水味多咸苦，豹命凿一井，遂得甘泉，遐迩以为政化所致。
现代文：乐陵濒临海边，水又苦又咸，他命人挖了一井，发现了甘甜的泉水，远近的人们都认为是政德教化所致。
English: Le Ling is near the sea. The water is bitter and salty. He ordered a man to dig a well and found a sweet spring. People near and far believe that it is the result of political and moral enlightenment.

古文：豹罢归后，井味复咸。
现代文：他罢官回去后，井水又变得苦咸。
English: After the landlord was dismissed and left, the well water turned salty again.

古文：齐灭，还乡园自养，频征辞疾。终于家。
现代文：韭查灭亡后，回到家乡自食其力，多次征召都托辞有病，最后终老在家。
English: After the death of Gongcha, he returned to his hometown to earn his living. He was repeatedly called up on the pretext that he was ill, but he ended up staying at home.

古文：路去病，阳平人也。
现代文：路去病，垦迁入。风神俊秀，仪表堂堂。
English: The road goes to illness, the grasshopper moves in. Feng Shen Junxiu, the appearance is magnificent.

古文：风神□朗，仪表异。释褐开府参军。
现代文：起初任开府参军。
English: At first, he joined the army from Kaifu.

古文：□用士人为县宰，以去病为定州饶阳令。
现代文：朝廷下令任用士人任县令，授任他龟出馋荡县令。
English: The imperial court ordered the appointment of a scholar as a county magistrate, and he was appointed as a county magistrate.

古文：去病明闲时务，性颇严毅，人不敢欺，然至廉平，为吏民叹服。
现代文：蹬圭痞通晓政务，性格严厉刚毅，旁人都不敢欺骗他，但为人廉正公平，受到百姓的尊敬。
English: Gong Guijuan was well-versed in government affairs. He had a stern and strong personality. No one dared to deceive him, but he was honest and fair, and was respected by the people.

古文：擢为成安令。
现代文：提升为成安县令。
English: Promoted to the post of Cheng'an County magistrate.

古文：京城下有邺、临漳、成安三县，辇毂之下，旧号难治，重以政乱时难，纲维不立，功臣内戚，请嘱百端。
现代文：京城下辖三县：邺、堕违、盛窒，天子脚下，一向以难以治理着称，而且时世艰难，朝政混乱，纲纪不立，功臣和皇亲国戚，到处营私请托。
English: The three counties under the jurisdiction of the capital city: Zhengzhou, Zhuangzhuang, Shengzhuang, at the foot of the heavenly son, have always been famous for being difficult to govern, and the times are difficult, the imperial government is chaotic, the rules and regulations are not established, and the heroes and relatives of the emperor and the country are everywhere asking for help.

古文：去病消息事宜，以理抗答，势要之徒，虽□养小人莫不惮其风格，亦不至嫌恨。
现代文：去病到任后排除矛盾，以理抗争，权贵之家，即使是家中的厮役仆人也都忌惮他的作风，但又不至于恨他。
English: After he became ill and took office, he eliminated contradictions and fought with reason. The families of the powerful and the nobility, even the servants in the family, were afraid of his style of work, but they did not hate him.

古文：自迁邺以还，三县令治术，去病独为称首。
现代文：自从都城迁到了邺，考察三县令的功绩，去病排名第、一。
English: Since the capital was moved to Handan, the achievements of the three county magistrates have been examined, and ranked first and first.

古文：周武平齐，重其能官，与济阴郡守公孙景茂二人不被替代，发诏褒扬。
现代文：周武帝平定韭蛮，看重他居官的才能，和济；壁郡太守公孙景茂两人没有被替换，反而下诏予以表扬。
English: Zhou Wudi pacified the barbarians, valued his ability as an official, and was economical; the two viceroys of Bixian County, Sun Jingmao, were not replaced, but were praised by imperial edict.

古文：隋大业中，卒于冀氏县令。
现代文：堕太墓年间，死于冀戏圣令任上。
English: In the year of his fall into the grave, he died while holding the post of Ji Ying Sheng Rong.

