古文：起屠维赤奋若，尽昭阳大荒落，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共五年。
English: A total of five years.

古文：孝献皇帝辛建安十四年
现代文：汉献帝建安十四年
English: The 14th year of Emperor Jianan's reign

古文：春，三月，曹操军至谯。
现代文：春季，三月，曹操大军到达谯县。
English: In the spring, in March, Cao Cao's army arrived in Jixian.

古文：孙权围合肥，久不下。
现代文：孙权包围合肥，很久未能攻克。
English: Sun Quan surrounded Hefei and failed to conquer it for a long time.

古文：权率轻骑欲身往突敌，长史张纮谏曰： 夫兵者凶器，战者危事也。
现代文：孙权率领轻骑准备亲自突击敌人，长史张劝阻说： 武器是不吉祥的器物，战争是很危险的事情。
English: Sun Quan led the light cavalry to prepare to personally attack the enemy. Chang Shi Zhang dissuaded him, saying: Weapons are inauspicious objects, and war is a very dangerous thing.

古文：今麾下恃盛壮之气，忽强暴之虏，三军之众，莫不寒心。
现代文：如今将军倚仗着锐气，轻视强大凶暴的敌人，使得三军上下，无不为您担心。
English: Today, the general relies on his courage and despises the powerful and ferocious enemy, causing the three armies to worry about you.

古文：虽斩将搴旗，威震敌场，此乃偏将之任，非主将之宜也。
现代文：即使能杀死敌将，俘获战旗，威震敌军，这不过是一个偏将的责任，不是主将所该作的事情。
English: Even if you can kill the enemy general, capture the battle flag, and shake the enemy army, this is only the responsibility of a general, not what the commander should do.

古文：愿抑贲、育之勇，怀霸王之计。 
现代文：愿您抑制一下像孟贲、夏育那样的勇气，而胸怀争霸天下的王者谋略。 
English: I hope that you will restrain the recklessness of Meng Wei and Xia Yu, and have the strategy of achieving hegemony in your heart.

古文：权乃止。
现代文：孙权才停止出击。
English: Only then did Sun Quan stop his attack.

古文：曹操遣将军张喜将兵解围，久而未至。
现代文：曹操派将张喜率军解救合肥，时间很长还未到。
English: Cao Cao sent Zhang Xi and his army to rescue Hefei, but it was a long time before they arrived.

古文：扬州别驾楚国蒋济密白刺史，伪得喜书，云步骑四万已到雩娄，遣主簿迎喜。
现代文：扬州别驾楚国人蒋济秘密向刺史建议：假装收到张喜的书信，声称四万步、骑兵已经到达雩娄，派主簿去迎接张喜。
English: Jiang Jie, a citizen of Chu, secretly proposed to Zhang Xi: pretend to have received Zhang Xi's letter, claim that the cavalry has arrived in Yan after 40,000 paces, and send the master book to meet Zhang Xi.

古文：三部使赍书语城中守将，一部得入城，二部为权兵所得。
现代文：又三次派信使携带写有这一消息的书信去通知城中的守将。其中有一次到了城里，另外两次被孙权部下的兵士俘获。
English: Three more times he sent messengers with letters bearing this news to inform the city's warden, one of which reached the city, and the other two were captured by soldiers under Sun Quan.

古文：权信之，遽烧围走。
现代文：孙权相信了这个假情报，赶快烧毁围城的器械撤走。
English: Sun Quan believed this false information and quickly removed the equipment that had burned down the besieged city.

古文：秋，七月，曹操引水军自涡入淮，出肥水，军合肥，开芍陂屯田。
现代文：秋季，七月，曹操统率水军自涡水进入淮河，在肥水登岸，驻屯合肥，重新修整芍陂的水利设施，在周围地区屯田。
English: In the autumn, in July, Cao Cao led the navy from the vortex water into the Huai River, disembarked in the fertile water, stationed in Hefei, renovated the water conservancy facilities, and settled in the surrounding areas.

古文：冬，十月，荆州地震。
现代文：冬季，十月，荆州地区发生地震。
English: In winter, in October, an earthquake occurred in Jingzhou District.

古文：十二月，操军还谯。
现代文：十二月，曹操的军队返回谯县。
English: In December, Cao Cao's army returned to Shixian.

古文：庐江人陈兰、梅成据灊、六叛，操遣荡寇将军张辽讨斩之；因使辽与乐进、李典等将七千馀人屯合肥。
现代文：庐江人陈兰、梅成占据县、六安进行叛乱，曹操派荡寇将军张辽讨伐，斩杀陈兰、梅成等。曹操即命张辽与乐进、李典等率七千余人屯驻合肥。
English: Lijiang people Chen Lan and Mei Cheng occupied the county and Lu'an to carry out the rebellion. Cao Cao sent roving general Zhang Liao to fight and kill Chen Lan and Mei Cheng. Cao immediately ordered Zhang Liao, Lejin, Li Dian and more than seven thousand people to stay in Hefei.

古文：周瑜攻曹仁岁馀，所杀伤甚众，仁委城走。
现代文：周瑜率军围攻曹仁一年有余，杀伤曹军甚多，曹仁弃城撤走。
English: Zhou Yu led the army to besiege Cao Ren for more than a year, killing and wounding many of Cao Ren's soldiers. Cao Ren abandoned the city and withdrew.

古文：权以瑜领南郡太守，屯据江陵；程普领江夏太守，治沙羡；吕范领彭泽太守；吕蒙领寻阳令。
现代文：孙权任命周瑜兼任南郡太守，屯驻江陵；程普兼任江夏太守，设郡府在沙羡；吕范兼任彭泽太守；吕蒙兼任寻阳县令。
English: Sun Quan appointed Zhou Yu to concurrently serve as the governor of Nan County, stationed in Gangneung; Cheng Pu to concurrently serve as the governor of Jiangxia, with the county seat in Shaanxi; Lv Fan to concurrently serve as the governor of Pengze; and Lv Meng to concurrently serve as the governor of Xiangyang County.

古文：刘备表权行车骑将军，领徐州牧。
现代文：刘备向朝廷上表，推荐孙权代理车骑将军，兼任徐州牧。
English: Liu Bei went up to the table and asked Sun Quan to be the acting chariot and cavalry general, and also served as the Xuzhou herdsman.

古文：会刘琦卒，权以备领荆州牧，周瑜分南岸地以给备。
现代文：正在这时，刘琦去世，孙权让刘备兼任荆州牧，周瑜将荆州长江以南的地区分给刘备。
English: At this time, Liu Bei died. Sun Quan asked Liu Bei to serve as the governor of Jing Province, and Zhou Yu assigned the area south of the Yangtze River to Liu Bei.

古文：备立营于油口，改名公安。
现代文：刘备将军营设在油口，并把那里改名为公安。
English: Liu Bei set up a military camp in Yaukou and renamed it the Public Security Camp.

古文：权以妹妻备。
现代文：孙权把妹妹嫁给刘备。
English: Sun Quan married his sister to Liu Bei.

古文：妹才捷刚猛，有诸兄风，侍婢百馀人，皆执刀侍立，备每入，心常凛凛。
现代文：孙权的妹妹才思敏捷，性情刚猛，有她兄长们的风度。她的侍婢一百余人，都手执利刀在旁站着侍候。刘备每次进入内宅，心都很恐惧。
English: Sun Quan's younger sister was quick-witted, strong-willed, and had the demeanor of her older brothers. More than a hundred of her maids stood by, all holding swords. Every time Liu Bei entered the inner house, his heart was filled with fear.

古文：曹操密遣九江蒋幹往说周瑜。
现代文：曹操秘密派遣九江人蒋干去游说周瑜。
English: Cao Cao secretly sent Jiang Gan, a man from Jiujiang, to lobby Zhou Yu.

古文：幹以才辨独步于江、淮之间，乃布衣葛巾，自托私行诣瑜。
现代文：蒋干以才能、机辩闻名于长江、淮河之间，没有人能胜过他。蒋干换上平民穿的布衣，戴上葛布制成的头巾。自称因私人交谊来看望周瑜。
English: Between the Yangtze River and the Huai River, Jiang Gan is famous for his talent and cunning, and no one can beat him. Jiang Gan changed into civilian clothes and wore a headscarf made of ge cloth. He said he came to visit Zhou Yu for personal friendship.

古文：瑜出迎之，立谓幹曰： 子翼良苦，远涉江湖，为曹氏作说客邪？ 
现代文：周瑜出来迎接他，站着对他说： 蒋子翼，你真是很辛苦，涉水远道而来，是为曹操作说客吗！ 
English: Zhou Yu came out to meet him and stood up and said to him, "Chiang Ziying, you have worked very hard and come all the way here. Are you a lobbyist for Cao?"

古文：因延幹，与周观营中，行视仓库、军资、器仗讫，还饮宴，示之侍者服饰珍玩之物。因谓幹曰： 丈夫处世，遇知己之主，外托君臣之义，内结骨肉之恩，言行计从，祸福共之，假使苏、张共生，能移其意乎？ 
现代文：遂邀请蒋干进来，与他一同参观军营，巡视仓库、军用物资与武器装备之后。回来设宴款待蒋干，洒席间让蒋干看自己的侍女、服装、饰物以及各种珍贵的宝物，并对他说： 大丈夫生活在世上，遇到知已的君主，外表上有君臣关系，内心却情同骨肉，言听计从，有福共享，有难同当，即使苏秦、张仪重生，能转移他的心意吗！ 
English: He then invited Jiang Gan to come in and visit the military camp with him, after inspecting the warehouse, military supplies and weapons and equipment. After returning, he set up a banquet to entertain Jiang Gan. During the banquet, he let Jiang Gan see his maids, clothes, ornaments and various precious treasures, and said to him: It's okay to live in the world, meet a monarch you already know, and have a monarch-servant relationship on the outside, but in your heart, you are of the same flesh and blood, listen to each other, share blessings, and have difficulties. Even if Su Qin and Zhang Yi are reborn, can you divert his heart?

古文：幹但笑，终无所言。
现代文：蒋干只是笑，一直不谈私人关系之外的话。
English: Jiang Gan just laughed and never talked about anything other than personal relationships.

古文：还白操，称瑜雅量高致，非言辞所能间也。
现代文：他回来向曹操汇报，称颂周瑜胸襟宽广，志向远大，不是言语所能挑拔离间的。
English: He came back to report to Cao Cao, praising Zhou Yu's broad-mindedness and lofty aspirations. Words cannot drive a wedge between them.

古文：丞相掾和洽言于曹操曰： 天下之人，材德各殊，不可一节取也。
现代文：丞相掾和洽向曹操提出建议说： 天下的人，才干和品德各不相同，不能只用一个标准来选拔人才。
English: Zheng Hechao, the minister of justice, made a suggestion to Cao Cao, saying: People all over the world have different talents and moral qualities, and it is impossible to use only one standard to select talents.

古文：俭素过中，自以处身则可，以此格物，所失或多。
现代文：以过分的节俭朴素来约束自己是可以的，但用这标准来限制别人，或许就会出现许多失误。
English: It is all right to restrain oneself by excessive frugality and simplicity, but to restrain others by this standard may lead to many mistakes.

古文：今朝廷之议，吏有著新衣、乘好车者，谓之不清；形容不饰、衣裘敝坏者，谓之廉洁。
现代文：如今朝廷上的舆论是官吏中穿新衣服，乘好车的人，就被称为不清廉；而不修饰仪表，穿破旧衣服的人，则被赞为廉洁。
English: Nowadays, the public opinion in the imperial court is that officials who wear new clothes and ride in a good car are called incorruptible; those who do not decorate their appearance and wear worn-out clothes are praised as incorruptible.

古文：至令士大夫故污辱其衣，藏其舆服；朝府大吏，或自挈壶飧以入官寺。
现代文：致使士大夫故意弄脏自己的衣裳，收藏起车子、服饰。朝廷各部门的高级官员，有的还自己携着饭罐，到官府上班。
English: Senior officials from various departments of the Imperial Court, some of whom even brought their own lunch cans, went to work at government offices.

古文：夫立教观俗，贵处中庸，为可继也。
现代文：树立榜样以供人仿效，最好采用中庸之道，这样才能坚持下去。
English: Only by establishing enlightenment and observing customs, and through compromise and compromise, can it continue.

古文：今崇一概难堪之行以检殊涂，勉而为之，必有疲瘁。
现代文：如今一概提倡这些使人难以忍受的行为，用它来约束各阶层的人士，勉强施行，必然会疲惫不堪。
English: The insufferable acts now advocated to test the conduct of officials, even if they are carried out reluctantly, are bound to wear them out.

古文：古之大教，务在通人情而已。凡激诡之行，则容隐伪矣。 
现代文：古人的教化，只是务求通达人情；凡是偏激怪异的行为，则会包藏虚伪。 
English: The edification of the ancients was only in order to reach human feelings; any extreme and strange behavior would hide hypocrisy.

古文：操善之。
现代文：曹操认为他的见解很好。
English: Cao Cao thought his opinion was good.

古文：孝献皇帝辛建安十五年
现代文：建安十五年
English: Fifteen years of Jianan

古文：春，下令曰： 孟公绰为赵、魏老则优，不可以为滕、薛大夫。
现代文：春季，曹操下令说： 从前，孟公绰做晋国赵、魏两家贵族的家臣首领是才力有余的，但不能胜任滕、薛等小国大夫的职务。
English: In the spring, Cao Cao issued an order: In the past, Meng Gongtuo, as the head of the vassals of the two noble families of Zhao and Wei in Jin Province, was more than capable, but he was not able to perform the duties of small provincial governors such as Teng and Xue.

古文：若必廉士而后可用，则齐桓其何以霸世！
现代文：假如必须是清廉的人才能使用，那么，齐桓公又怎么能称霸于世！
English: If an honest person must be appointed, then how can King Qigong dominate the world?

古文：二三子其佐我明扬仄陋，唯才是举，吾得而用之！二月，乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：大家要帮助我显扬高明人士，即使身份卑微，也要推举，只要有才能就进荐上来，让我能够任用他们！ 二月，乙巳朔，出现日食。
English: Everyone should help me promote talented people, even if they are lowly, they should be nominated, and if they have talent, they should be recommended so that I can appoint them! In February, at the new moon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：冬，曹操作铜爵台于鄴。
现代文：冬季，曹操在邺城修建铜爵台。
English: In winter, Cao Cao built a bronze platform in Lucheng.

古文：十二月，己亥，操下令曰： 孤始举孝廉，自以本非岩穴知名之士，恐为世人之所凡愚，欲好作政教以立名誉，故在济南，除残去秽，平心选举。
现代文：十二月，已亥，曹操下令说： 我最初被推荐为孝廉时，自以为本来不是隐居深山的知名之士，恐怕被世人看作平庸无能，打算好好处理政务，推行教化，以树立名誉，故在济南国任国相时，铲除残暴邪恶势力，公正地选拔人才。
English: In December, already in the winter, Cao Cao ordered: "When I was first recommended as a filial piety, I thought that I was not originally a famous person who lived in seclusion deep in the mountains, I am afraid that the world would regard me as mediocre and incompetent. I intended to properly handle government affairs, promote enlightenment, and establish my reputation. Therefore, when I served as minister of state in Jinan Province, I eradicated the brutal evil forces and fairly selected talents.

古文：以是为强豪所忿，恐致家祸，故以病还乡里。
现代文：由于这样，受到强门豪族的忌恨，我恐怕给家中招来灾祸，就借口有病，回到家乡。
English: Because of this, I was hated by the powerful local clans, and I was afraid that I would bring disaster to my family, so I used the excuse that I was ill and returned to my hometown.

古文：时年纪尚少，乃于谯东五十里筑精舍，欲秋夏读书，冬春射猎，为二十年规，待天下清乃出仕耳。
现代文：当时年纪还不大，就在谯县县城以东五十里处修建书房，打算秋季与夏季读书，冬季与春季射猎，计划这样过二十年，等天下安定以后，再出来做官。
English: At that time, when he was still young, he built a study fifty miles east of the county seat of Min County, planning to study in the fall and summer, and hunt in the winter and spring. He planned to do this for twenty years, and after the world was stable, he would come out to work as an official.

古文：然不能得如意，征为典军校尉，意遂更欲为国家讨贼立功，使题墓道言 汉故征西将军曹侯之墓 ，此其志也。
现代文：但我未能如愿，被朝廷征召为典军校尉，于是改变主意，想为国家讨贼立功，使墓道的石碑上可以题写 汉朝故征西将军曹侯之墓 ，这就是我的志愿。
English: But I didn't get my wish, I was called up by the imperial court to be a lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, so I changed my mind and wanted to do something for the country, so that the tombstone of the cemetery could be inscribed with "Tomb of Cao Hou, the Han Dynasty's former Western Conquest General," which is my wish.

古文：而遭值董卓之难，兴举义兵。
现代文：而后遇到董卓之乱，我兴起义兵。
English: Later, when I encountered the Dong Zhuo Rebellion, I raised a volunteer army.

古文：后领兗州，破降黄巾三十万众；又讨击袁术，使穷沮而死；摧破袁绍，枭其二子；复定刘表，遂平天下。
现代文：以后，我任兖州牧，击败黄巾军，迫使三十万黄巾军投降；又讨伐袁术，使他走投无路，穷困而死；击败袁绍，将他的两个儿子斩首示众；再消灭刘表，于是平定天下。
English: After that, I was appointed as the herdsman of Zhangzhou, defeated the Yellow Turban Army and forced 300,000 Yellow Turban Army to surrender; I also fought against Yuan Shou, leaving him with no choice but to die in poverty; I defeated Yuan Shao and beheaded his two sons in public; I then eliminated Liu Biao and thus pacified the world.

古文：身为宰相，人臣之贵已极，意望已过矣。
现代文：我身为宰相，作为臣子达到尊贵的顶点，也已超出了我的愿望。
English: As prime minister and as a vassal, I have reached the pinnacle of dignity, and it has exceeded my expectations.

古文：设使国家无有孤，不知当几人称帝，几人称王！
现代文：假设国家没有我，不知会几个人称帝，几个人称王？
English: Assuming that the country does not have me, I do not know how many people will be called emperor, how many people will be called king?

古文：或者人见孤强盛，又性不信天命，恐妄相忖度，言有不逊之志，每用耿耿，故为诸君陈道此言，皆肝鬲之要也。
现代文：或许有人看到我势力强盛，又生性不信天命，恐怕会随便猜测，说我有篡位的野心，每一想到这些，心中就感到不安。
English: Perhaps some people, seeing that I am powerful and do not believe in predestination by nature, may guess that I have ambitions to usurp the throne. Every time I think about this, my heart feels uneasy.

古文：然欲孤便尔委捐所典兵众以还执事，归就武平侯国，实不可也。
现代文：所以，向你们述说这些话，都是我的肺腑之言。然而，想要我就这样放弃所统领的军队，交还给主管部门，回到我的封地武平侯国，实在是不可能的。
English: Therefore, I am telling you these words from my heart, but it is impossible for me to give up the army I am leading, return it to the authorities, and return to my fiefdom, Wuping.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诚恐己离兵为人所祸，既为子孙计，又己败则国家倾危，是以不得慕虚名而处实祸也！
现代文：我确实害怕自己一离开军队就会被人谋害，既是为我的子孙打算，又因为我一失败就会使国家危亡，所以，我不能追求虚名，而遭受实际的灾祸。
English: I really fear that I will be assassinated as soon as I leave the army, both for the sake of my children and grandchildren, and because I will endanger the country if I fail, so I can't pursue a false name and suffer a real disaster.

古文：然兼封四县，食户三万，何德堪之！
现代文：然而，我的封地共有四个县，享有收取三万户百姓租税的权利，我的品德怎么能配得上呢？
English: However, my fiefdom has a total of four counties, and I have the right to collect taxes from 30,000 households. How can my character be worthy of this?

古文：江湖未静，不可让位；至于邑土，可得而辞。
现代文：天下尚未安定，我不可以辞去官位；至于封地，是可以退让的。
English: As the world is not yet stable, I cannot resign my post; as for the fief, it can be conceded.

古文：今上还阳夏、柘、苦三县，户二万，但食武平万户，且以分损谤议，少减孤之责也！ 
现代文：如今，我把阳夏、柘、苦三县的二万户封地归还给国家，只享受武平的一万户百姓的租税，姑且以此来减少对我的诽谤议论，同时也稍微减轻我的责任！ 
English: Today, I have returned the 20,000 households of the three counties of Yangxia, Handan and Qiu to the state, and only enjoy the tax of 10,000 households in Wuping. I hope this will reduce the slanderous talk about me, and at the same time slightly reduce my responsibility!

古文：刘表故吏士多归刘备，备以周瑜所给地少，不足以容其众，乃自诣京见孙权，求都督荆州。
现代文：刘表原来的部属大多数归附刘备，刘备因为周瑜拔给他的土地太少，不足以容纳自己的部下，就亲自到京口去面见孙权，请求把荆州全部交给自己管理。
English: Most of Liu Biao's former subordinates belonged to Liu Bei. Since the land given to him by Zhou Yuba was too small to accommodate his subordinates, Liu Bei personally went to Beijing to meet with Sun Quan and asked him to hand over all of Jingzhou to his management.

古文：瑜上疏于权曰： 刘备以枭雄之姿，而有关羽、张飞熊虎之将，必非久屈为人用者。
现代文：周瑜上书给孙权说： 刘备是一代枭雄，而且有关羽、张飞这些熊、虎一样的猛将辅佐，肯定不能长久屈居，为人所用。
English: Zhou Yu sent a letter to Sun Quan saying: Liu Bei is a generation of heroes, and these bears and tigers, such as Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, will certainly not be able to stay for a long time and be used by people.

古文：愚谓大计宜徙备置吴，盛为筑宫室，多其美女玩好，以娱其耳目；分此二人各置一方，使如瑜者得挟与攻战，大事可定也。
现代文：我认为，从大计考虑，应当把刘备迁走，安置在吴郡，为他大兴土木地建造住宅，多给他供应美女和其它玩赏娱乐的物品，使他耳目迷恋。同是，把关羽和张飞这两个人分开，派他们各驻一地，使像我周瑜这样的将领能统率他们的攻战，天下大事就可以安定了。
English: I think that, from the perspective of the overall plan, Liu Bei should be relocated and placed in Wuxi County, and a residential building should be built for him, and more beautiful women and other entertainment items should be provided to him, so that his eyes and ears will be captivated. Similarly, the two people of Guan Yu and Zhang Fei should be separated, and they should be stationed in the same place, so that generals like me Zhou Yu can lead their offensive, and the world's affairs can be stable.

古文：今猥割土地以资业之，聚此三人俱在疆场，恐蛟龙得云雨，终非池中物也。 
现代文：如今滥割土地给他作为资本，使这三人都聚在疆界，恐怕就会像蛟龙得到云雨的赞助，终究不会再留在水池中了。 
English: Now, the land is given to him as capital, so that all three of them are gathered at the border, I am afraid that they will be like the dragon and get the support of the clouds and rain, and eventually they will no longer stay in the pool.

古文：吕范亦劝留之。
现代文：吕范也劝孙权留下刘备。
English: Lu Fan also advised Sun Quan to leave Liu Bei behind.

古文：权以曹操在北，方当广揽英雄，不从。
现代文：孙权认为曹操在北方，正应该广为招揽英雄豪杰，没有听从他们的建议。
English: Sun Quan thought that Cao Cao was in the north and should be widely recruiting heroes and did not listen to their advice.

古文：备还公安，久乃闻之，叹曰： 天下智谋之士，所见略同。时孔明谏孤莫行，其意亦虑此也。
现代文：刘备回到公安后，过了很久才听到这些内幕，叹息说： 天下的智谋之士，看法都差不多，当时诸葛亮劝我不要去，也是担心发生这样的事情。
English: After Liu Bei returned to the public security bureau, it took him a long time to hear the inside story. He sighed and said, "The world's wizards all have similar opinions. At that time, Zhuge Liang advised me not to go because he was worried about something like this happening.

古文：孤方危急，不得不往，此诚险涂，殆不免周瑜之手！ 
现代文：我正在危急中，不得不去，这实在是走险路，几乎逃不出周瑜之手！ 
English: I am in a critical situation, I have to go, this is really a dangerous path, I can hardly escape Zhou Yu's hand!

古文：周瑜诣京见权曰： 今曹新折衄，方忧在腹心，未能与将军连兵相事也。乞与奋威俱进，取蜀而并张鲁，因留奋威固守其地，与马超结援，瑜还与将军据襄阳以蹙操，北方可图也。 
现代文：周瑜到京口去拜见孙权，说： 现在，曹操新近在赤壁大败而归，担心内部有人叛变，不能同将军用军队交战，我请求与奋威将军一起进军，夺取蜀地，并吞张鲁，然后，留奋威将军牢固地守卫那里，与马超结成联盟。我回来与将军据守襄阳，紧逼曹操，这样，就可以规划进取北方了。 
English: Zhou Yu went to Jingkou to meet Sun Quan and said: Now that Cao Cao has recently returned from his great defeat in the Red Cliffs, and is worried that someone inside has mutinied and cannot fight with the general's army, I request that you march with General Fenwei to seize Shu and swallow up Zhanglu, and then leave General Fenwei firmly guarding there and form an alliance with Ma Chao. I will return with the general to guard Xiangyang and press Cao Cao, so that we can plan to enter the north.

古文：权许之。
现代文：孙权同意这个计划。
English: Sun Quan agreed with this statement.

古文：奋威者，孙坚弟子奋威将军、丹杨太守瑜也。
现代文：奋威将军，是指孙坚弟弟的儿子，丹阳太守孙瑜。
English: General Fenwei is the son of Sun Jian's younger brother, Danyang Governor Sun Yu.

古文：周瑜还江陵为行装，于道病困，与权笺曰： 修短命矣，诚不足惜；但恨微志未展，不复奉教命耳。
现代文：周瑜回到江陵准备行装，在途中病势沉重，上书给孙权说： 人寿的长短都是由命运决定的，实在不足惋惜。我只恨心中的微小志愿尚未实现，再也不能执行您的命令罢了。
English: Zhou Yu returned to Gangneung to prepare for the journey. On the way, she fell seriously ill and wrote to Sun Quan, saying: "The length of life is determined by fate, it is really not enough to regret. I only hate that the small voluntary in my heart has not been realized, and I can no longer carry out your order.

古文：方今曹操在北，疆场未静；刘备寄寓，有似养虎。
现代文：现在，曹操在北方，疆场并没有平静；刘备寄居在荆州，好像是在家里养了一只老虎。
English: Now, Cao Cao is in the north, the battlefield is not calm; Liu Bei lives in Jingzhou, it seems that he has raised a tiger at home.

古文：天下之事，未知终始，此朝士旰食之秋，至尊垂虑之日也。
现代文：天下的大局，还在动荡不定，这正是大臣和将士们奋发忘食之时，也是您思虑运筹之日。
English: The overall situation in the world is still turbulent and uncertain. This is exactly the time for ministers and soldiers to work hard, and it is also the day for you to think about and plan operations.

古文：鲁肃忠烈，临事不苟，可以代瑜。
现代文：鲁肃为人忠烈，临事不苟，可以接替我的职务。
English: Lu Su is a loyal and diligent person. He can take over my duties.

古文：傥所言可采，瑜死不朽矣！ 
现代文：假如我的建议可以被采纳，我就虽死不朽了。 
English: If my proposal is accepted, I will become immortal.

古文：卒于巴丘。
现代文：周瑜在巴丘去世。
English: Zhou Yu passed away in Bachu.

古文：权闻之哀恸，曰： 公瑾有王佐之资，今忽短命，孤何赖哉！ 
现代文：孙权得到消息后，十分悲痛，大哭着说： 周瑜有辅佐帝王的才能，现在忽然短命而死，我依靠谁呢？ 
English: After Sun Quan received the news, he was very sad and cried loudly, saying: Zhou Yu had the ability to assist the emperor, but now he suddenly died of a short life, who should I rely on?

古文：自迎其丧于芜湖。
现代文：孙权亲自到芜湖去迎接周瑜的录柩。
English: Sun Quan himself went to Wuhu to welcome Zhou Yu's recording.

古文：瑜有一女、二男，权为长子登娶其女；以其男循为骑都尉，妻以女；胤为兴业都尉，妻以宗女。
现代文：周瑜有一个女儿、两个儿子，孙权为自己的大儿子孙登娶周瑜的女儿为妻；任命周瑜的儿子周循为骑都尉，把自己的女儿嫁给他；又任命周瑜的另一个儿子周胤为兴业都尉，把自己宗族的一个姑娘嫁给他。
English: Zhou Yu had a daughter and two sons. Sun Quan married his eldest son, Sun Deng, to Zhou Yu's daughter; appointed Zhou Yu's son, Zhou Xun, as a cavalry captain and married his own daughter to him; and appointed Zhou Yu's other son, Zhou Yan, as a captain of industry and married a girl from his own clan to him.

古文：初，瑜见友于孙策，太夫人又使权以兄奉之。
现代文：起初，周瑜是孙策的朋友，孙权的母亲吴太夫人又曾让孙权把周瑜当作兄长来尊敬。
English: At first, Zhou Yu was a friend of Sun Ce, and Sun Quan's mother, Lady Wu Tai, had asked Sun Quan to respect Zhou Yu as an elder brother.

古文：是时权位为将军，诸将、宾客为礼尚简，而瑜独先尽敬，便执臣节。
现代文：当时，孙权的职位只是讨虏将军，部下将领与宾客们对他的礼节还较为简单，而只有周瑜带头，以臣属礼节事奉孙权。
English: At that time, Sun Quan's position was only that of a general, and his subordinate generals and guests had a relatively simple etiquette for him. Only Zhou Yu took the lead and served Sun Quan with the etiquette of a subordinate.

古文：程普颇以年长，数陵侮瑜，瑜折节下之，终不与校。
现代文：程普自以为年龄比周瑜大，多次凌辱周瑜，周瑜却降低自己的身份来对待程普，始终不与他计较。
English: Cheng Pu thought that he was older than Zhou Yu and repeatedly insulted Zhou Yu. However, Zhou Yu lowered his status to treat Cheng Pu and never considered him.

古文：普后自敬服而亲重之，乃告人曰： 与周公瑾交，若饮醇醪，不觉自醉。 
现代文：后来，程普佩服周瑜，对周瑜亲近敬重，于是告诉别人说： 与周公瑾交往，好象喝下醇厚的美酒，不知不觉就已沉醉。 
English: Later, Cheng Pu admired Zhou Yu, was close to and respected Zhou Yu, so he told others: "Interacting with Zhou Gongyao is like drinking a mellow wine, and you are already drunk without realizing it."

古文：权以鲁肃为奋武校尉，代瑜领兵，令程普领南郡太守。
现代文：孙权任命鲁肃为奋武校尉，接替周瑜，统领军队，命令程普兼任南郡太守。
English: Sun Quan appointed Lu Su as Lieutenant of Fenwu School to succeed Zhou Yu and command the army, and ordered Cheng Pu to concurrently serve as the governor of Nan County.

古文：鲁肃劝权以荆州借刘备，与共拒曹操，权从之。乃分豫章为番阳郡，分长沙为汉昌郡；复以程普领江夏太守，鲁肃为汉昌太守，屯陆口。
现代文：鲁肃劝孙权把荆州借给刘备，与刘备共同抵抗曹操，孙权同意，于是，从豫章郡中分出一部分土地，设立番阳郡；从长沙郡分出一部分土地，设立汉昌郡；又任命程普兼任江夏郡太守，鲁肃为汉昌郡太守，率军驻在陆口。
English: Lu Su advised Sun Quan to lend Jingzhou to Liu Bei, and to jointly resist Cao Cao with Liu Bei. Sun Quan agreed. Therefore, he allocated a part of land from Yuzhang County to establish Panyang County; allocated a part of land from Changsha County to establish Hanchang County; and appointed Cheng Pu to concurrently serve as the governor of Jiangxia County, and Lu Su as the governor of Hanchang County, and stationed his army in Lukou.

古文：初，权谓吕蒙曰： 卿今当涂掌事，不可不学。 
现代文：起初，孙权对吕蒙说： 你现在担任要职，执掌权力，不能不学习。 
English: At first, Sun Quan said to Lv Meng: You are now holding an important position and wielding power, you must study.

古文：蒙辞以军中多务。
现代文：吕蒙推辞说军中事多，没有时间学习。
English: Lv Meng said that there were too many things to do in the army and he did not have time to study.

古文：权曰： 孤岂欲卿治经为博士邪！
现代文：孙权说： 我难道是要你研究儒家经典，去做博士吗？
English: Sun Quan said: Do I want you to study Confucian classics and become a doctor?

古文：但当涉猎，见往事耳。
现代文：我只是要你去浏览书籍，了解过去发生过的事情。
English: I just want you to go through the books and find out what happened in the past.

古文：卿言多务，孰若孤！
现代文：你说事多，但谁会像我这样忙？
English: You talk a lot, but who is as busy as I am?

古文：孤常读书，自以为大有所益。 
现代文：我经常读书收，自以为得到很多好处。 
English: I often read books and thought I was getting a lot of benefits.

古文：蒙乃始就学。
现代文：于是吕蒙开始读书。
English: So Lv Meng began to study.

古文：及鲁肃过寻阳，与蒙论议，大惊曰： 卿今者才略，非复吴下阿蒙！ 
现代文：等到鲁肃经过寻阳时，与吕蒙谈话，大吃一惊说： 你今天的才干谋略，再不是吴郡那里的阿蒙了！ 
English: While waiting for Lu Su to pass Huan Yang, he had a conversation with Lu Meng and said in surprise, "Your brilliant strategy today is no better than that of Amun in Wuxi County!"

古文：蒙曰： 士别三日，即更刮目相待，大兄何见事之晚乎！ 
现代文：吕蒙说： 士别三日，就应该重新刮目相看，大哥为什么对这个道理明白得这么晚呢！ 
English: Lv Meng said, "The three-day farewell should reawaken mutual respect. Why did the eldest brother understand this truth so late?

古文：肃遂拜蒙母，结友而别。
现代文：鲁肃就去拜见吕蒙的母亲，与吕蒙结为好友才分手。
English: Lu Su went to meet Lu Meng's mother, and became good friends with Lu Meng before breaking up.

古文：刘备以从事庞统守耒阳令，在县不治，免官。
现代文：刘备任命从事庞统为耒阳县县令，庞统在任时政务荒废，被免官。
English: Liu Bei appointed Pang Tong as the county magistrate of Fenyang County. When Pang Tong was in office, government affairs were in disarray and he was removed from office.

古文：鲁肃遗备书曰： 庞士元非百里才也。使处治中、别驾之任，始当展其骥足耳！ 
现代文：鲁肃写信给刘备，说： 庞统的才干不适于管理一个方圆百里的小县，让他处在治中、别驾的职务上，才能发挥他的才干。 
English: Lu Su wrote a letter to Liu Bei, saying: "Pang Tong's talent is not suitable for managing a small county with a hundred-mile radius, so he should be in the middle of the administration, in a different position, in order to give play to his talent.

古文：诸葛亮亦言之。
现代文：诸葛亮也谈到庞统的才干。
English: Zhuge Liang also talked about the colossal talent.

古文：备见统，与善谭，大器之，遂用统为治中，亲待亚于诸葛亮，与亮并为军师中郎将。
现代文：刘备召见庞统，与他详细谈论天下大势后，大为器重，就任命他为治中，对他的亲信程度及待遇仅次于诸葛亮，委任庞统与诸葛亮同时担任军师中郎将。
English: Liu Bei summoned Pang Tong and talked with him in detail about the general trend of the world. He was so impressed that he appointed him as the second-in-command. The degree of trust and treatment of him was second only to Zhuge Liang. He appointed Pang Tong and Zhuge Liang to serve as the second-in-command at the same time.

古文：初，苍梧士燮为交趾太守。
现代文：起初，苍悟人士燮担任交趾郡太守。
English: At first, the enlightened people served as the governor of Koji County.

古文：交州刺史硃符为夷贼所杀，州郡扰乱，燮表其弟壹领合浦太守，领九真太守，武领南海太守。
现代文：交州刺史朱符被夷人乱贼杀死，州郡陷入混乱。士燮上表推荐他的弟弟士壹代理合浦郡太守，士代理九真郡太守，士武代理南海经郡太守。
English: Jiaozhou magistrate Zhu Fu was killed by barbarian bandits, and the county fell into chaos. The table of magistrates recommended his younger brother, magistrate I, as acting magistrate of Hepu County, magistrate I as acting magistrate of Jiu Zhen County, and magistrate Wu as acting magistrate of Nanhaijing County.

古文：燮体器宽厚，中国人士多往依之。
现代文：士燮性情宽厚，有很多中原地区的士大夫都去投奔他。
English: Shi Yan is generous in nature, and many scholars and doctors in the Central Plains have gone to him.

古文：雄长一州，偏在万里，威尊无上，出入仪卫甚盛，震服百蛮。
现代文：士燮在交州地区权势显赫，与朝廷又相隔万里，他在那里的威望与尊严都到了至高无上的程度，出入时的仪仗警卫十分盛大，威震当地的各蛮族，使他们顺服。
English: Shisheng's power in the Jiaozhou region is prominent, and he is separated from the imperial court by thousands of miles. His prestige and dignity there have reached the highest level. The guard of honor at the entrance and exit is very grand, shaking the local barbarians and making them obedient.

古文：朝廷遣南阳张津为交州刺史。津好鬼神事，常著绛帕头，鼓琴、烧香，读道书，云可以助化，为其将区景所杀。
现代文：朝廷派遣南阳人张津担任交州刺史，张津迷信鬼神，经常用绛色头巾包头，弹琴、烧香，读道家的书籍，说可以有助于得道。
English: The imperial court sent Zhang Jin, a native of Nanyang, to serve as the chief historian of Jiaozhou. Zhang Jin was superstitious about ghosts and gods. He often wrapped his head in an ochre headscarf, played the piano, burned incense, and read Taoist books, saying that they could help him attain the Tao.

古文：刘表遣零陵赖恭代津为刺史。
现代文：张津被他的部将区景杀死，刘表派遣零陵人赖恭代替张津担任刺史。
English: Zhang Tian was killed by his subordinate, General Guo Jing, and Liu Bei dispatched the Ziling person, Lai Qiong, to replace Zhang Tian as the scribe.

古文：是时苍梧太守史璜死，表又遣吴巨代之。
现代文：这时，苍梧郡太守史璜逝世，刘表又派吴巨代理苍梧太守。
English: At this time, Cangwu County Governor Shi Yan passed away, and Liu Biao sent Wu Jiu to act as Cangwu Governor.

古文：朝廷赐燮玺书，以燮为绥南中郎将，董督七郡，领交趾太守如故。
现代文：朝廷赐给士燮诏书，任命他为绥南中郎将，管理七郡的军务，同时仍兼任交趾太守。
English: The imperial court issued an imperial edict to Shizhen, appointing him as the general of the Southern Song Dynasty to manage the military affairs of the seven counties, while still serving as the governor of Jiaozuo.

古文：后巨与恭相失，巨举兵逐恭，恭走还零陵。
现代文：吴巨与赖恭关系恶化，吴巨发兵进攻赖恭。赖恭逃回零陵。
English: The relationship between Wu Jiu and Lai Gong deteriorated, Wu Jiu sent soldiers to attack Lai Gong, and Lai Gong fled back to Luling.

古文：孙权以番阳太守临淮步骘为交州刺史，士燮率兄弟奉承节度。
现代文：孙权任命番阳郡太守临淮人步骘为交州刺史，士燮率领自己的兄弟们都听从步骘的命令。
English: Sun Quan appointed the governor of Panyang County, Lin Huai, to be the governor of Jiaozhou, and Shijie and his brothers all obeyed the order of Shijie.

古文：吴巨外附内违，骘诱而斩之，威声大震。
现代文：吴巨表面上服从，心里却另有打算，步骘把他引诱出来杀死，声威大震。
English: Wu Jiu obeys on the surface, but in his heart he has other plans. Bu Yao lures him out and kills him, causing a great shock.

古文：权加燮左将军，燮遣子入质。
现代文：孙权提升士燮为左将军，士燮派遣自已的儿子到孙权那里充当人质。
English: Sun Quan promoted Shih Kuo to General of the Left. Shih Kuo sent his son to Sun Quan as a hostage.

古文：由是岭南始服属于权。
现代文：从此，王岭以南的地区开始归属于孙权。
English: From then on, the area south of Wangling began to belong to Sun Quan.

古文：孝献皇帝辛建安十六年
现代文：建安十六年
English: Jianan 16

古文：春，正月，以曹操世子丕为五官中郎将，置官属，为丞相副。
现代文：春，正月，以曹操世子丕为五官中郎将，置官属，为丞相副。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Cao Cao's heir, Cao Cao's son, was appointed to the post of five-ranked middle-ranking general, and was promoted to the post of vice-minister of the imperial court.

古文：三月，操遣司隶校尉钟繇讨张鲁，使征西护军夏侯渊等将兵出河东，与繇会。
现代文：三月，曹操派遣司隶校尉钟繇讨伐张鲁，命令征西护军夏侯洲等率领大军从河东出发，与钟繇会合。
English: In March, Cao Cao dispatched Lieutenant Colonel Zhong Qi to fight against Zhang Lu, and ordered Xia Houzhou, the leader of the West Garrison, to lead a large army from Hedong to meet with Zhong Qi.

古文：仓曹属高柔谏曰： 大兵西出，韩遂、马超疑为袭己，必相扇动。
现代文：丞相仓曹属高柔劝曹操说： 大军向西进发，韩遂、马超会疑心是袭击他们，必然互相煽动。
English: Cao Cao's minister Cao Zhen Gao Rong advised Cao Cao, saying, "The great army is heading westward, so Han and Ma Chao will be suspicious of attacking them, and they will inevitably instigate each other.

古文：宜先招集三辅，三辅苟平，汉中可传檄而定也。 
现代文：应当先安定三辅地区，如果三辅地区平定，只需发布文书，就能平定汉中。 
English: The Sanfu area should be stabilized first. If the Sanfu area is pacified, it is only necessary to issue a document to pacify Hanzhong.

古文：操不从。
现代文：曹操不听。
English: Cao Cao did not listen to these suggestions.

古文：关中诸将果疑之，马超、韩遂、侯选、程银、杨秋、李堪、张横、梁兴、成宜、马玩等十部皆反，其众十万，屯据潼关；操遗安西将军曹仁督诸将拒之，敕令坚壁勿与战。
现代文：关中的将领们果然起了疑心，马超、韩遂、侯选、程银、杨秋、李堪、张横、梁兴、成宜、马玩等十部都起来造反，合起来有十万人马，据守潼关。曹操派遣安西将军曹仁统率诸将抵挡，令他们坚守营寨，不要出战。
English: The generals of Guanzhong were suspicious, and ten units including Ma Chao, Han Sui, Hou Xuan, Cheng Yin, Yang Qiu, Li Kan, Zhang Heng, Liang Xing, Cheng Yi, and Ma Yu rebelled. Altogether, there were one hundred thousand soldiers guarding Guanzhong. Cao Cao sent Anxi General Cao Ren to lead the soldiers to resist, so that they would hold on to the camp and not go to war.

古文：命五官将丕留守鄴，以奋武将军程昱参丕军事，门下督广陵徐宣为左护军，留统诸军，乐安国渊为居府长史，统留事。
现代文：命令五官中郎将曹丕留守邺城，委任奋武将军程昱协助曹丕处理军务；任命门下督广陵人徐宣为左护军，留在邺城统率留守部队；任命乐安人国渊为丞相府的居府长史，负责留守事务。
English: He ordered the five official middlemen to leave Cao Pi to stay in Lucheng, and appointed General Cheng Pi of Fenwu to assist Cao Pi in handling military affairs; appointed Xu Xuan of Guangling to be the left guard and stay in Lucheng to lead the left-behind troops; appointed Guoyuan of Le'an to be the chief resident of the Prime Minister's Office and be responsible for the left-behind affairs.

古文：秋，七月，操自将击超等。
现代文：秋季，七月，曹操亲统大军，进攻马超等。
English: In autumn and July, Cao Cao's whole army attacked Ma Chao.

古文：议者多言： 关西兵习长矛，非精选前锋，不可当也。 
现代文：许多参预军务讨论的人都说： 函谷关以西的士兵善于使用长矛，不挑选精锐部队作前锋，会抵抗不住的。 
English: Many people who participated in the pre-military discussion said: The soldiers west of Hakodate Pass are good at using spears, and they will not be able to resist selecting elite troops as forwards.

古文：操曰： 战在我，非在贼也。
现代文：曹操说： 战争的决定权控制在我手中，而不在敌人手中。
English: Cao Cao said: The decision-making power of the war is in my hands, not in the hands of the enemy.

古文：贼虽习长矛，将使不得以刺，诸君但观之。 
现代文：他们虽然善于使用长矛，我将使他们的长矛无法刺杀，你们只管着看吧。 
English: Although they are good at using spears, I will make their spears unable to stab, you just watch.

古文：八月，操至潼关，与超等夹关而军。
现代文：八月，曹操来到潼关，与马超等隔着潼关扎营。
English: In August, Cao Cao came to Shaoguan, and camped with Ma Chao and others across Shaoguan.

古文：操急持之，而潜遣徐晃、硃灵以步骑四千人渡浦阪津，据河西为营。
现代文：曹操表面上对马超急剧施加压力，暗中却派遣徐晃、朱灵率领步、骑兵四千人渡过蒲阪渡口，到黄河以西扎营。
English: On the surface, Cao Cao sharply put pressure on Ma Chao, but secretly he sent Xu Ak, Zhu Ling, and 4,000 cavalry across the Busan Ferry to camp west of the Yellow River.

古文：闰月，操自潼关北渡河。
现代文：闰八月，曹操从潼关向北渡过黄河。
English: On leap August, Cao Cao crossed the Yellow River from Shaoguan to the north.

古文：兵众先渡，操独与虎士百馀人留南岸断后。
现代文：士兵先过河，曹操单独与虎贲武士一百余人留在黄河南岸断后。
English: The soldiers crossed the river first, leaving Cao Cao alone on the south bank of the Yellow River with more than a hundred Tigress warriors.

古文：马超将步骑万馀人攻之，矢下如雨，操犹据胡床不动。
现代文：马超率领步、骑兵一万余人前来进攻，箭如雨下，曹操仍坐在折凳上不动。
English: Ma Chao led the way, more than ten thousand cavalry came to attack, arrows rained down, Cao Cao was still sitting on a folding stool and did not move.

古文：许褚扶操上船，船工中流矢死，褚左手举马鞍以蔽操，右手刺船。
现代文：许褚扶曹操上船。船工被流箭射中而死，许褚左手举起马鞍来为曹操抵挡乱箭，右手撑船。
English: Xu Yan helped Cao Cao onto the boat. The boatman was hit by a stray arrow and died. Xu Yan held up his saddle with his left hand to fend off the arrows for Cao Cao, and propped up the boat with his right hand.

古文：校尉丁斐，放牛马以饵贼，贼乱取牛马，操乃得渡。
现代文：校尉丁斐，把曹军的牛马放出来引诱箸人，马超军大乱，兵士纷纷去抢牛马，曹操才得以渡过黄河。
English: Lieutenant Ding Fei released the horses and cattle of Cao Cao's army to lure the people of Hashi. The horses overran the army, and the soldiers rushed to grab the horses and cattle. Only then was Cao Cao able to cross the Yellow River.

古文：遂自蒲阪渡西河，循河为甬道而南。
现代文：曹操大军就从蒲阪渡过西河，沿河作甬道，向南推进。
English: Cao Cao's large army crossed the West River from Busan, made a diversion along the river, and pushed southward.

古文：超等退拒渭口，操乃多设疑兵，潜以舟载兵入渭，为浮桥，夜，分兵结营于渭南。
现代文：马超等退守渭水流入黄河的渭口。曹操于是多设疑兵，暗中用船装载士兵进入渭水，修造浮桥。夜里，分兵到渭水南岸修筑营垒。
English: Ma Chao and others retreated to defend the mouth of the Yellow River flowing into Surabaya. Cao Cao then sent more suspicious soldiers, secretly loaded soldiers into Surabaya by boat, and built a pontoon bridge. At night, the detachment of soldiers went to the south bank of Surabaya to build a camp.

古文：超等夜攻营，伏兵击破之。
现代文：马超等乘夜攻营，被伏兵击败。
English: Ma Chao and others attacked the camp at night and were defeated by the ambush.

古文：超等屯渭南，遣信求割河以西请和，操不许。
现代文：马超等在渭南驻军，派遣使者请求割让黄河以西土地，请求和解。曹操不答应。
English: Ma Chao and others garrisoned troops in southern Wei and sent envoys to request the cession of land west of the Yellow River and to ask for reconciliation. Cao Cao did not agree.

古文：九月，操进军，悉渡渭。
现代文：九月，曹操进军，全部渡过渭水。
English: In September, Cao Cao marched into the country, crossing all of Surabaya.

古文：超等数挑战，又不许；固请割地，求送任子。
现代文：马超等几次挑战，但曹操仍然不许应战。马超等一再请求割让土地，并请求送儿子去作人质。
English: Ma Chao and others challenged Cao Cao several times, but Cao Cao still refused to fight. Ma Chao and others repeatedly requested that the land be ceded and that his son be sent as a hostage.

古文：贾诩以为可伪许之。操复问计策，诩曰： 离之而已。 
现代文：贾诩部队认为可以假装同意，曹操再问他下一步的策略，贾诩说： 离间他们的联盟而已。
English: Jia Wei's troops thought they could pretend to agree. Cao Cao then asked him about the next strategy. Jia Wei said, "It's just to break up their alliance."

古文：操曰： 解！ 
现代文：曹操说： 我明白了。 
English: Cao Cao said: I understand.

古文：韩遂请与操相见，操与遂有旧，于是交马语移时，不及军事，但说京都旧故，拊手欢笑。
现代文：韩遂请求与曹操相见，曹操与韩遂本来是老朋友，于是，他们两人来到阵前，马头相交，在一起说了很长时间，没有说到军事，只是谈论京都的往事与老朋友们，高兴时拍手欢笑。
English: Han Sui asked to meet Cao Cao. Cao Cao and Han Sui were originally old friends, so the two of them came to the front of the battle, crossed horses, and talked for a long time together. They did not talk about the military, but only talked about the past of Kyoto and old friends, and clapped their hands and laughed when they were happy.

古文：时秦、胡观者，前后重沓，操笑谓之曰： 尔欲观曹公邪！
现代文：当时，马超等部队中的关中人与胡人都来围观，前后重重叠叠，曹操笑着对他们说： 你们是想来看曹操吗？
English: At that time, Guanzhong people and Hu people in Ma Chao and other troops came to watch, overlapping back and forth. Cao Cao smiled and said to them: Do you want to see Cao Cao?

古文：亦犹人也，非有四目两口，但多智耳！ 
现代文：我也是一个人，并没有四只眼两张嘴，只是智谋多一些罢了。 
English: I'm also a person, I don't have four eyes and two mouths, I'm just more resourceful.

古文：既罢，超等问遂： 公何言！ 
现代文：会面结束后，马超等人问韩遂说： 曹操说了些什么？ 
English: After the meeting, Ma Chao and others asked Han Sui: What did Cao Cao say?

古文：遂曰： 无所言也。 
现代文：韩遂说： 没有说什么。 
English: Han Sui replied: I didn't say anything.

古文：超等疑之。
现代文：马超等有了疑心。
English: As a result, Ma Chao and others became suspicious of him.

古文：他日，操又与遂书，多所点窜，如遂改定者；超等愈疑遂。
现代文：另一天，曹操又给韩遂写了一封信，信中圈改涂抹了许多地方，好象是韩遂所改的，马超等更加怀疑韩遂。
English: The next day, Cao Cao wrote another letter to Han Sui. In the letter, Ma Chao and others were even more suspicious of Han Sui.

古文：操乃与克日会战，先以轻兵挑之，战良久，乃纵虎骑夹击，大破之，斩成宜、李堪等。
现代文：曹操于是与马超等约定日期，进行会战。曹操先派轻装部队进行挑战，与马超等大战多时，才派遣精锐骑兵进行夹击，大破马超等，斩杀成宜、李堪等。
English: Cao Cao then agreed on a date with Ma Chao and others to conduct a battle. Cao Cao first sent light troops to challenge, with Ma Chao and others fighting for a long time, only to send elite cavalry to make a pincer attack, break Ma Chao and others, and kill Cheng Yi and Li Kan.

古文：遂、超奔凉州，杨秋奔安定。
现代文：韩遂、马超逃奔凉州，杨秋逃奔安定。
English: Han Sui and Ma Chao fled to Liangzhou, and Yang Qiu fled to Pingyao.

古文：吾顺言许之，所以从其意，使自安而不为备，因畜士卒之力，一旦击之，所谓疾雷不及掩耳。
现代文：将领们问曹操说： 开始，敌军主力据守潼关，渭水以北的道路都空虚无备。但您不从河东进攻冯翊，反而屯兵在潼关之下，过了些日子再北渡黄河，是为什么？ 
English: The generals asked Cao Cao: At the beginning, the main force of the enemy was defending Shaoguan, and the roads north of Surabaya were unprepared. But why did you not attack Fengye from the east of the river, but instead stationed troops under Shaoguan, and then crossed the Yellow River to the north a few days later?

古文：兵之变化，固非一道也。 
现代文：曹操说： 敌军据守潼关，如果我军进入河东，敌军就会分兵把守各处渡口，我们便不能渡过西河。
English: Cao Cao said, "The enemy army is guarding Shaoguan. If our army enters the east of the river, the enemy army will divide its troops to guard all the ferry ports, and we will not be able to cross the West River.

古文：始，关中诸将每一部到，操辄有喜色。
现代文：我故意以重兵集中在潼关，敌军就集中力量在南防守潼关，西河的戒备空虚，所以徐晃、朱灵两位将军能轻易取得西河。
English: I deliberately concentrated on Shaoguan with heavy troops. The enemy concentrated on defending Shaoguan in the south, and the guard of the West River was empty. Therefore, the two generals Xu Xiao and Zhu Ling could easily capture the West River.

古文：诸将问其故，操曰： 关中长远，若贼各依险阻，征之，不一二年不可定也。
现代文：开始时，关中联军的每一部将领率军来到，曹操都面有喜色，部下将领们询问缘故，曹操说： 关中地区辽阔广大，如果他们各自据险坚守，我们征讨他们，没有一两年平定不了。
English: At the beginning, the generals of each part of the Guanzhong coalition army came to lead the army, Cao Cao was happy, his subordinate generals asked the reason, Cao Cao said: Guanzhong area is vast and vast, if they stick to their respective strongholds, we will fight them, and we will not be able to settle it in a year or two.

古文：今皆来集，其众虽多，莫相归服，军无适主，一举可灭，为功差易，吾是以喜。 
现代文：现在，他们全都集中在一起，人数虽多，但互不相下，军队没主帅，可以一举消灭，比逐一征讨要容易，所以我心中喜悦。 
English: Now they are all gathered here, although there are many people, but they are not satisfied with each other, there is no unified coach. In this way, it is easy to succeed in eliminating the enemy, so I am happy.

古文：冬，十月，操自长安北征杨秋，围安定。
现代文：冬季，十月，曹操从长安出发，向北讨伐杨秋，包围安定。
English: In the winter, in October, Cao Cao set out from Chang'an to fight Yang Qiu in the north and encircle Ding'an.

古文：秋降，复其爵位，使留抚其民。
现代文：杨秋投降，曹操恢复杨秋的爵位，让他留下来安抚部众。
English: Yang Qiu surrendered, and Cao Cao restored Yang Qiu's peerage, allowing him to stay on to appease his subordinates.

古文：十二月，操自安定还，留夏侯渊屯长安。以议郎张既为京兆尹。
现代文：十二月，曹操从安定班师，留夏侯渊驻守长安，任命议郎张既为京兆尹。
English: In December, Cao Cao left Xia Houyuan stationed in Chang'an and appointed Zhang Ye as the leader of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：既招怀流民，兴复县邑，百姓怀之。
现代文：张既用怀柔的政策招集流亡在外的难民重返家乡，兴建恢复县城与村镇，受到百姓的拥戴。
English: Zhang Ye used the policy of Huairou to invite exiled refugees to return to their hometowns, build and restore county towns and villages, and was loved by the people.

古文：遂、超之叛也，弘农、冯翊县邑多应之，河东民独无异心。
现代文：韩遂、马超叛变朝廷时，弘农、冯翊属下的县邑多起来响应，只有河东郡的百姓没有异心。
English: When Han Sui and Ma Chao rebelled against the imperial court, many counties and towns under the control of Hong Nong and Feng Ye responded, but only the people of Hedong County had no objection.

古文：操与超等夹渭为军，军食一仰河东。
现代文：曹操与马超等隔渭水相持，军粮全靠河东郡供给。
English: Cao Cao and Ma Chao were so far away from each other, and the supply of military grain was entirely dependent on Hedong County.

古文：及超等破，馀畜尚二十馀万斛，操乃增河东太守杜畿秩中二千石。
现代文：到马超等被击败后，还剩下二十余万斛军粮。曹操因此提高河东郡太守杜畿的官秩为中二千石。
English: After Ma Chao and others were defeated, there were still more than two hundred million baht of military rations left. Cao Cao therefore raised the official rank of the governor of Hedong County, Du Gui, to middle two thousand koku.

古文：扶风法正为刘璋军议校尉，璋不能用，又为其州里俱侨客者所鄙，正邑邑不得志。
现代文：扶风人法正担任益州牧刘璋的军议校尉，但未受到刘璋的重用，又受到与他一起客居益州同州老乡们的鄙视，法正心情郁闷而不得志。
English: Fa Zheng, the wind-bearer, was serving as the military council lieutenant of Liu Xuan, the pastor of Yizhou, but he was not reused by Liu Xuan, and he was despised by the fellow villagers of Yizhou who stayed with him. Fa Zheng was depressed and discouraged.

古文：益州别驾张松与正善，自负其才，忖璋不足与有为，常窃叹息。
现代文：益州别驾张松与法正关系亲密，张松对自己的才干十分自负，觉得刘璋庸庸碌碌，不能同他一起有所作为，经常暗中叹息。
English: Zhang Song, the governor of Yizhou, has a close relationship with Fa Zheng. Zhang Song is very proud of his talent. He feels that Liu Yingyong is a mediocrity and cannot make a difference with him. He often secretly sighs.

古文：松劝璋结刘备，璋曰： 谁可使者？ 
现代文：张松劝刘璋与刘备结交，刘璋说： 谁可以充当使者？ 
English: Zhang Song advised Liu Xuan to make friends with Liu Bei. Liu Xuan said: Who can act as an emissary?

古文：松乃举正。
现代文：于是张松推荐法正。
English: As a result, Zhang Song recommended Fa Zheng.

古文：璋使正往，正辞谢，佯为不得已而行。
现代文：刘璋派法正担任使者，法正推辞，然后假装是不得已而接受任务出发。
English: Liu Bei sent Fa Zheng as an envoy, Fa Zheng declined, and then pretended to be forced to accept the mission and set off.

古文：还，为松说备有雄略，密谋奉戴以为州主。
现代文：法正回来后，对张松说刘备有雄才大略，他们两人密谋策划奉迎刘备作为益州之主。
English: After Fa Zheng returned, he told Zhang Song that Liu Bei had great talent, and the two of them plotted to welcome Liu Bei as the lord of Yizhou.

古文：会曹操遣钟繇向汉中，璋闻之，内怀恐惧。
现代文：正在这时，曹操派遣钟繇率军讨伐占据汉中的张鲁，刘璋听到消息后，心中恐惧。
English: It was at this time that Cao Cao sent Zhong Kui and his army to fight against Zhang Lu, who occupied Hanzhong. Liu Kui was terrified when he heard the news.

古文：松因说璋曰： 曹公兵无敌于天下，若因张鲁之资以取蜀土，谁能御之！
现代文：张松乘机劝他说： 曹操的兵马天下无敌，如果攻下汉中后，利用张鲁的库存物资来进攻益州，谁能抵抗得住！
English: Zhang Song took the opportunity to persuade him: Cao Cao's soldiers and horses are invincible in the world. If, after conquering Han Zhong, Zhang Lu's inventory materials are used to attack Yizhou, who can resist!

古文：刘豫州，使君之宗室而曹公之深仇也，善用兵。若使之讨鲁，鲁必破矣。
现代文：刘备是您的同宗，曹操的大仇人，又善于用兵，如果让刘备讨伐张鲁，一定能击破张鲁。
English: Liu Bei is from the same family as you, Cao Cao's great enemy, and he is also good at using soldiers. If Liu Bei is allowed to fight Zhang Lu, he will surely defeat Zhang Lu.

古文：鲁破，则益州强，曹公虽来，无能为也。
现代文：张鲁一破，则益州势力增强，曹操即使来攻，也无能为力了。
English: Once Zhang Lu was defeated, Yizhou's power increased, and Cao Cao was powerless to attack.

古文：今州中诸将庞羲、李异等，皆恃功骄豪，欲有外意。
现代文：现在本州的将领们如庞羲、李异等都自恃功劳，骄横不法，想要向外投靠。
English: Now, the generals in Honshu, such as Pang Jun and Li Ying, are proud of their achievements, arrogant and lawless, and want to seek outside help.

古文：不得豫州，则敌攻其外，民攻其内，必败之道也。 
现代文：如果得不到刘备的帮助，则敌人在外面进攻，百姓在内叛变，一定会失败。 
English: If Liu Bei's help is not obtained, then the enemy will attack from the outside and the people will rebel from within, and it will certainly fail.

古文：璋然之，遣法正将四千人迎备。
现代文：刘璋同意他的见解，派法正率领四千人去迎接刘备。
English: Liu Ye agreed with his opinion and sent Fa Zheng to lead four thousand people to meet Liu Bei.

古文：主簿巴西黄权谏曰： 刘左将军有骁名，今请到，欲以部曲遇之，则不满其心；欲以宾客礼待，则一国不容二君，若客有泰山之安，则主有累卵之危。
现代文：主簿巴西人黄权劝谏刘璋说： 刘备以骁勇闻名于世，现在把他请来，要把他当作部曲来看待，则他不会满意；要以宾客的礼节接待，则一国不容二主。如果客人安如泰山，则主人就会危如累卵。
English: The host, the Brazilian Huang Quan, advised Liu Bei: "Liu Bei is famous for his bravery. If you invite him now, he will not be satisfied if you treat him like a puppet. If you want to receive him with the etiquette of a guest, a country cannot tolerate two masters. If the guest is as safe as Mount Tai, the host will be in danger.

古文：不若闭境以待时清。 
现代文：不如关闭边界，以等待时局安定。 
English: It is better to close the border and wait for the situation to stabilize.

古文：璋不听，出权为广汉长。
现代文：刘璋不听，把黄权调出，去担任广汉县县长。
English: Liu Bei did not listen and transferred Huang Quan to be the head of Guanghan County.

古文：从事广汉王累，自倒县于州门以谏，璋一无所讷。
现代文：从事广汉人王累，把自己倒吊在成都城门来劝阻刘璋，刘璋一概不听。
English: Engaged in Guanghan people Wang tired, hung himself upside down at the Chengdu city gate to dissuade Liu Ye, Liu Ye did not listen at all.

古文：法正至荆州，阴献策于刘备曰： 以明将军之英才，乘刘牧之之懦弱；张松，州之股肱，响应于内；以取益州，犹反掌也。 
现代文：法正到荆州后，暗中向刘备献计说： 以将军的英明才干，正应利用刘璋的懦弱无能；张松是益州的主要官员，在内响应；这样来攻取益州，易如反掌。 
English: After Fa Zheng arrived in Jingzhou, he secretly proposed a plan to Liu Bei, saying: With the general's wisdom and ability, it is right to take advantage of Liu Bei's cowardice and incompetence; Zhang Song is the main official of Yizhou, and he will respond to this; in this way, it is easy to capture Yizhou.

古文：备疑未决。
现代文：刘备迟疑不决。
English: Liu Bei hesitated.

古文：庞统言于备曰： 荆州荒残，人物殚尽，东有孙车骑，北有曹操，难以得志。
现代文：庞统对刘备说： 荆州荒凉残破，人才已尽，东有孙权，北有曹操，难以得志。
English: Pang Tong said to Liu Bei: "Jingzhou is desolate and ruined, talent has been exhausted, there is Sun Quan in the east and Cao Cao in the north, it is difficult to achieve aspirations.

古文：今益州户口百万，土沃财富，诚得以为资，大业可成也！ 
现代文：如今，益州的户口有一百万，土地肥沃，财产丰富，如果真得到益州作为资本，可成大业！ 
English: Today, there are one million registered households in Yizhou, the land is fertile, and property is abundant. If you really get Yizhou as capital, it can be a great career!

古文：备曰： 今指与吾为水火者，曹操也。
现代文：刘备说： 现在，与我势同水火的，只有曹操。
English: Liu Bei said: Now, Cao Cao is the only one who is on the same level with me.

古文：操以急，吾以宽；操以暴，吾以仁；操以谲，吾以忠。每与操反，事乃可成耳。
现代文：曹操严厉，我则宽厚，曹操凶暴，我则仁慈；曹操诡诈，我则忠信；总与曹操相反，事情才能成功。
English: Cao Cao is stern, I am lenient; Cao Cao is ferocious, I am kind; Cao Cao is cunning, I am loyal; always contrary to Cao Cao, things can be successful.

古文：今以小利而失信义于天下，奈何？ 
现代文：如果现在因为贪图小利而对天下失去信义，怎么办？ 
English: What if we lose faith in the world because of our greed for small profits?

古文：统曰： 乱离之时，固非一道所能定也。
现代文：庞统说： 天下大乱之时，本不是靠一种方法就能平定的。
English: Pang Tong said: When the world is in turmoil, it is not possible to pacify it by one method.

古文：且兼弱攻昧，逆取顺守，古人所贵。
现代文：而且兼并弱小，进攻愚昧，用不合礼义的方法取得，再用合乎礼义的方法加以治理，这些行为都是古人所崇尚的。
English: Moreover, annexing the weak and the small, attacking the foolish, acquiring by improper means, and then governing by proper means, these actions were all admired by the ancients.

古文：若事定之后，封以大国，何负于信！
现代文：如果在事定之后，赐给刘璋面积广大的封地，对信义有什么违背！
English: If, after the matter is settled, Liu Bei is given a vast fiefdom, what a breach of trust!

古文：今日不取，终为人利耳。 
现代文：今天咱们不去夺取，终究会落入别人手中。 
English: If we do not seize it today, it will eventually fall into the hands of others.

古文：备以为然。
现代文：刘备同意他的看法。
English: Liu Bei agreed with him.

古文：乃留诸葛亮、关羽等守荆州，以赵云领留营司马，备将步卒数万人入益州。
现代文：于是，留下诸葛亮、关羽等守卫荆州，任命赵云兼任留营司马，刘备亲自率领几万名步兵进入益州。
English: As a result, Zhuge Liang, Guan Yu and others were left to guard Jingzhou, Zhao Yun was also appointed as the commander of the camp, and Liu Bei personally led tens of thousands of infantry into Yizhou.

古文：孙权闻备西上，遣舟船迎妹，而夫人欲将备子禅还吴，张飞、赵云勒兵截江，乃得禅还。
现代文：孙权听到刘备西入益州的消息，派船来接妹妹；孙夫人打算带刘备的儿子刘禅返回吴郡娘家，张飞、赵云部署军队在长江拦截孙权的船队，才把刘禅带回荆州。
English: When Sun Quan heard the news of Liu Bei Xi's entry into Yizhou, he sent a ship to pick up his sister; Mrs. Sun planned to take Liu Bei's son, Liu Zhen, back to her daughter's home in Wu County; Zhang Fei and Zhao Yun deployed troops to intercept Sun Quan's fleet in the Yangtze River, and then brought Liu Zhen back to Jingzhou.

古文：刘璋敕在所供奉备，备入境如归，前后赠遗以巨亿计。
现代文：刘璋命令沿途各郡、县为刘备提供所需物资，刘备进入益州境内，好像回到家中，刘璋前后赠送各种物资数以亿计。
English: Liu Bei ordered all counties and counties along the way to provide Liu Bei with the necessary materials. Liu Bei entered the territory of Yizhou, as if returning home, and Liu Bei gave away hundreds of millions of various materials before and after.

古文：备至巴郡，巴郡太守严颜拊心叹曰： 此所谓 独坐穷山，放虎自卫 者也。 
现代文：刘备到达巴郡，巴郡太守严颜扶胸叹息说： 这正是应验了 独自坐在深山中，放出老虎来自卫 的谚语。 
English: Liu Bei arrived in Ba County, Ba County Governor Yan Yan patted his chest and sighed: This is exactly the fulfillment of the proverb of sitting alone in the mountains and releasing tigers to defend themselves.

古文：备自江州北由垫江水诣涪。
现代文：刘备自江州向北经垫江水到达涪县。
English: Liu Bei traveled from Jiangzhou to the north via the Jianjiang River and arrived in Handan County.

古文：璋率步骑三万馀人，车乘帐幔，精光耀日，往会之。
现代文：刘璋率领步、骑兵三万余人，车辆悬挂着帐帷，耀眼生辉，与阳光互映，到涪县来会见刘备。
English: Liu Bei led more than thirty thousand cavalrymen, and vehicles hung with curtains, dazzlingly bright and reflecting the sun, to meet Liu Bei in Jixian.

古文：张松令法正白备，便于会袭璋。
现代文：张松让法正向刘备建议，就在会面时袭击刘璋。
English: Zhang Song let Fa Zheng suggest to Liu Bei to attack Liu Xuan during the meeting.

古文：备曰： 此事不可仓猝！ 
现代文：刘备说： 这件事不可仓猝！ 
English: Liu Bei said: This matter should not be taken by surprise!

古文：庞统曰： 今因会执之，则将军无用兵之劳而坐定一州也。 
现代文：庞统说： 现在，乘会面时捉住刘璋，则将军不必动用武力，就可坐得一州。 
English: Pang Tong said, "Nowadays, if Liu Ye is caught during a meeting, then the general does not need to use force, he can sit in one state.

古文：备曰： 初入他国，恩信未著，此不可也。 
现代文：刘备说： 刚刚进入别人的地盘，恩德与信义尚未表现出来，不能这样做。 
English: Liu Bei said, "If you have just entered someone else's territory, and you have not yet demonstrated your benevolence and good faith, you cannot do so.

古文：璋推备行大司马，领司隶校尉；备亦推璋行镇西大将军，领益州牧。
现代文：刘璋推举刘备代理大司马，兼任司隶校尉；刘备也推举刘璋代理镇西大将军，兼任益州牧。
English: Liu Bei also recommended Liu Bei to be the acting general of Zhenxi, and he was also appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：所将将士，更相之适，欢饮百馀日。
现代文：两人部下的官兵，也相互交往，在一起欢宴一百余日。
English: The officers and soldiers of the two subordinates also interacted with each other and feasted together for more than a hundred days.

古文：璋增备兵，厚加资给，使击张鲁，又令督白水军。
现代文：刘璋给刘备增兵，拨给大量军用物资，让他去进攻张鲁，又命刘备指挥驻在白水的益州部队。
English: Liu Bei was given additional troops and a large amount of military supplies by Liu Bei to attack Zhang Lu. Liu Bei was also ordered to command the Yizhou troops stationed in Baishui.

古文：备并军三万馀人，车甲、器械、资货甚盛。
现代文：加上刘璋拨来的部队，刘备部下已有三万余人，车辆、甲胄、器械及粮草钱财等都很充足。
English: In addition to the troops sent by Liu Bei, there are more than 30,000 people under Liu Bei's command, and there are plenty of vehicles, armor, equipment, grain and grass money, etc.

古文：璋还成都，备北到葭萌，未即讨鲁，厚树恩德以收众心。
现代文：刘璋回到成都，刘备向北进发，到达葭萌，没有立即进攻张鲁，先广施恩德，收买人心。
English: Liu Wei returned to Chengdu, Liu Bei headed northward and reached Qimeng. He did not immediately attack Zhang Lu, but first Guangxi, to win the hearts of the people.

古文：孝献皇帝辛建安十七年
现代文：建安十七年
English: 17th year of Jian'an

古文：春，正月，曹操还鄴。诏操赞拜不名，入朝不趋，剑履上殿，如萧何故事。
现代文：春季，正月，曹操回到邺城，献帝下诏，命令在曹操拜见皇帝时，司仪官只称他的官职，不称名字；准许曹操入朝见到皇帝时，不必迈小步向前急走，并可以佩剑穿鞋上殿，遵照汉初丞相萧何的先例。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Cao Cao returned to Shicheng, presented the imperial edict to the emperor, and ordered that when Cao Cao met the emperor, the master of ceremonies would only call him by his official position, not his name; allowed Cao Cao to enter the court to see the emperor, without having to take a small step forward, and could wear a sword and shoes to the palace, following the precedent of Han's first prime minister, Emperor Xiao He.

古文：操之西征也，河间民田银、苏伯反，扇动幽、冀。
现代文：曹操西征关中时，河间人田银、苏伯造反，煽动幽州、冀州的百姓，引起混乱。
English: When Cao Cao was in the middle of the Western Expedition, Tianyin and Su Bo rebelled, inciting the people of Yuzhou and Jizhou, causing chaos.

古文：五官将丕欲自讨之，功曹常林曰： 北方吏民，乐安厌乱，服化已久，守善者多；银、伯犬羊相聚，不能为害。
现代文：五官中郎将曹丕打算亲自率军去征讨，功曹常林说： 北方的官员和百姓，乐于安定，厌恶战乱，服从朝廷的时间已很久，遵守法令的占多数。田银、苏伯等不过是聚集在一起的狗和羊，造不成多大的伤害。
English: The middle-ranking official of the five ministries, Cao Pi, planned to personally lead an army to fight the rebels. Gong Cao Changlin said, "The officials and people in the north enjoy stability and abhor war and chaos. They have obeyed the imperial court for a long time, and the majority of them abide by the laws. Tian Yin and Su Bo are just dogs and sheep gathered together. They cannot do much harm."

古文：方今大军在远，外有强敌，将军为天下之镇，轻运远举，虽克不武。 
现代文：现在，我们的大军在远方，境外有强敌，将军镇守邺城，身系天下安危，轻率出军进行征讨，即使平定，也不足以显示威武。 
English: Now, our great army is far away, there is a strong enemy outside the country, the general is guarding Lucheng, his body is safe and sound, and he rashly goes out to recruit troops. Even if he is pacified, it is not enough to show his might.

古文：乃遣将军贾信讨之，应时克灭。
现代文：于是，曹丕派遣将军贾信去讨伐，随即消灭叛军。
English: As a result, Cao Pi dispatched General Jia Xin to fight, and the rebels were immediately eliminated.

古文：馀贼千馀人请降，议者皆曰： 公有旧法，围而后降者不赦。 
现代文：还剩一千余人，请求投降，参预讨论的人都说： 曹公从前下过命令，凡是被包围后再投降的，一律不赦免。 
English: There were still more than a thousand people left, asking for surrender. The participants in the pre-discussion all said: Cao Gong had previously issued an order that anyone who surrendered after being surrounded would not be pardoned.

古文：程昱曰： 此乃扰攘之际，权时之宜。
现代文：程昱说： 这是在战乱时期所采取的一种临时应变策略。
English: Cheng Wei said: This is a temporary contingency strategy adopted in times of war.

古文：今天下略定，不可诛之；纵诛之，宜先启闻。 
现代文：现在天下已基本平定，不能随便杀戮；即使要杀，也应当先向曹公报告。 
English: Now that the country has been basically pacified, it is impossible to kill at will; even if you want to kill, you should first report to Cao Gong.

古文：议者皆曰： 军事有专无请。 
现代文：那些人都说： 军事上的举动，可以专断，不必请示。 
English: Those people all said: Military moves can be made arbitrarily, without having to ask for instructions.

古文：昱曰： 凡专命者，谓有临时之急耳。
现代文：程昱说： 专断是指临时发生紧急情况。
English: Cheng Wei said: Arbitrary means that there is a temporary emergency.

古文：今此贼制在贾信之手，故老臣不愿将军行之也。 丕曰： 善。 
现代文：必须当机立断。现在，这些叛民控制在贾信手中，因此，我不愿将军擅作决定。 曹丕说： 对。 
English: It is necessary to make a quick decision. Now, these rebels are controlled by Jia Xin, so I don't want the general to make decisions without my permission. Cao Yu said, "Yes."

古文：即白操，操果不诛。
现代文：立即派人向曹操报告，曹操果然下令赦免不杀。
English: Immediately sent someone to report to Cao Cao, Cao Cao indeed ordered to pardon and not to kill.

古文：既而闻昱之谋，甚悦，曰： 君非徒明于军计，又善处人父子之间。 
现代文：后来，听到程昱的建议，非常高兴，说： 你不仅明了军事策略，还善于处理别人父子之间的关系。 
English: Later, he was very pleased to hear Cheng Yao's suggestion and said: You not only understand military strategy, but are also good at handling the relationship between other people's father and son.

古文：故事：破贼文书，以一为十。
现代文：过去的惯例，在击败敌军的文告中，杀死一人要报成十人。
English: In the past, it was customary to report the killing of one person as ten in the announcement of the defeat of the enemy army.

古文：国渊上首级，皆如其实数，操问其故，渊曰： 夫征讨外寇，多其斩获之数者，欲以大武功，耸民听也。
现代文：而国渊在报告斩杀人数时，都据实上报。曹操询问他原因，国渊说： 征讨境外的敌寇，多报杀死及俘虏人数，是为了炫耀武力，耸人听闻。
English: When Guoyuan reported the number of people killed and captured, he reported it truthfully. Cao Cao asked him why, and Guoyuan said: To recruit foreign invaders, to overreport the number of people killed and captured, is to show off force, and is sensational.

古文：河间在封域之内，银等叛逆，虽克捷有功，渊窃耻之。 
现代文：河间在咱们的疆界以内，田银等进行叛乱，虽然取得胜利，建立战功，我心中却感到羞耻。 
English: Kawama district was within the fiefdom, Tian Yin and others rebelled, and although there was merit in breaking through and defeating them, I was privately ashamed of such a thing.

古文：操大悦。
现代文：曹操大为高兴。
English: Cao Cao was very happy.

古文：夏，五月，癸未，诛卫尉马腾，夷三族。
现代文：夏季，五月，癸未，诛杀卫尉马腾，并把他的三族一齐处死。
English: In the summer, in May, on the eve of the New Year, he killed Lieutenant Marten and put his three clans to death together.

古文：六月，庚寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：六月，庚寅晦，出现日食。
English: In June, the year of the rooster, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋，七月，螟。
现代文：秋季，七月，发生螟灾。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a hailstorm.

古文：马超等馀众顿蓝田，夏侯渊击平之。
现代文：马超等人的残余部众驻守蓝田，夏侯渊率军讨伐，全部平定。
English: The remnants of Ma Chao and others were stationed in Lantian, and Xia Houyuan led the army to fight, and all were pacified.

古文：鄜贼梁兴寇略冯翊，诸县恐惧，皆寄治郡下，议者以为当移就险阻。
现代文：县盗贼梁兴在冯翊抢掠。各县的官员十分害怕，都把县府移到郡府所在地。议论此事的人认为应当迁移到险要的地方去据守。
English: Liang Xing, the county thief, plundered Fengyuan. The officials of each county were so afraid that they moved the county seat to the county seat. People who discuss this matter believe that it should be moved to a critical place to defend.

古文：左冯翊郑浑曰： 兴等破散，藏窜山谷，虽有随者，率胁从耳。
现代文：左冯翊郑浑说： 梁兴等已经破散，陷藏逃窜到高山深谷，虽然还有人跟随，但大多数是被他胁迫的。
English: Zuo Fenglu Zhenghun said: Liang Xing and the others have broken up, hiding and fleeing to the high mountains and deep valleys. Although there are still people following, most of them are coerced by him.

古文：今当广开降路，宣喻威信。而保险自守，此示弱也。 
现代文：现在，应当广开招降的途径，宣扬朝廷的威信，而据险自守这种作法是示弱。 
English: At this time, it is necessary to open a wide range of channels to invite surrender, and to promote the prestige of the imperial court, while the practice of risking one's own safety is a sign of weakness.

古文：乃聚吏民，治城郭，为守备，募民逐贼，得其财物妇女，十以七赏。
现代文：于是，郑浑聚集官吏百姓，修整城郭，严加守备，招募百姓攻击叛民，获得叛民的财物和妇女，十分之七赏赐给夺取者。
English: As a result, Zheng Hun gathered officials and commoners, repaired the city walls, maintained a strict defense, recruited commoners to attack the rebels, obtained the rebels' property and women, and gave seven-tenths of the reward to those who captured them.

古文：民大悦，皆愿捕贼；贼之失妻子者皆还，求降，浑责其得他妇女，然后还之。
现代文：百姓大为高兴，都愿意追捕叛民。失去妻子的叛民，都回来请求投降，郑浑责令他们送来叛民所俘获的其他妇女，然后才还给他们的妻子。
English: The people were so happy that they were willing to chase the rebels. The rebels who had lost their wives all came back to ask for surrender, and Zheng Hun ordered them to bring other women captured by the rebels before returning them to their wives.

古文：于是转相寇盗，党与离散。
现代文：于是，这些叛民互相攻击，梁兴的党羽纷纷离散。
English: As a result, these rebels attacked each other, and Liang Xing's followers scattered.

古文：又遣吏民有恩信者分布山谷告谕之，出者相继。
现代文：郑浑又派有威望的官员和百姓分别到山谷去宣传朝廷的旨意，出来投降的人络绎不绝。
English: Zheng Hun also sent prestigious officials and ordinary people to the valley separately to promote the will of the imperial court, and the people who came out to surrender were endless.

古文：乃使诸县长吏各还本治，以安集之。
现代文：郑浑于是命令各县的官员都把县府迁回本地，安抚百姓及投降的叛民。
English: Zheng Hun then ordered the officials of each county to move the county seat back to the local area to appease the people and the rebels who had surrendered.

古文：兴等惧，将馀从聚鄜城。操使夏侯渊助浑讨之，遂斩兴，馀党悉平。
现代文：梁兴等恐惧，率领残部聚集在城，曹操派夏侯渊率军协助郑浑进行征讨，于是斩杀梁兴，余党全部平定。
English: Fearing Liang Xing and others, he led the remnants to gather in the city. Cao Cao sent Xia Houyuan to lead the army to assist Zheng Hun in the conquest, and then killed Liang Xing, and the rest of the party were all subdued.

古文：浑，泰之弟也。
现代文：郑浑是郑泰的弟弟。
English: Zheng Hun is Zheng Tai's younger brother.

古文：九月，庚戌，立皇子熙为济阴王，懿为山阳王。邈为济北王，敦为东海王。
现代文：九月，庚戍，献帝封皇子刘熙为济阴王，刘懿为山阳王，刘邈为济北王，刘敦为东海王。
English: In September, Emperor Gaozong offered to crown Prince Liu Xi as the King of Jilin, Liu Bei as the King of Shanyang, Liu Bei as the King of Jibei, and Liu Dun as the King of the East Sea.

古文：初，张纮以秣陵山川形胜，劝孙权以为治所；及刘备东过秣陵，亦劝权居之。
现代文：起初，张认为秣陵山川雄伟，地势险要，劝孙权把秣陵作为治所。到刘备向东经过秣陵时，也曾劝孙权到那里居住。
English: At first, Zhang believed that the mountains and rivers of Fuling were majestic and the terrain was dangerous, and advised Sun Quan to use Fuling as a place to govern. When Liu Bei passed through Fuling to the east, he also advised Sun Quan to live there.

古文：权于是作石头城，徙治秣陵，改末陵为建业。
现代文：孙权于是修建石头城，把治所迁到秣陵，将秣陵改称建业。
English: Sun Quan then built Stone Town, moved the government office to Fuling, and renamed Fuling as Jianye.

古文：吕蒙闻曹操欲东兵，说孙权夹濡须水口立坞。
现代文：吕蒙听说曹操打算再次东征，劝说孙权在濡须水口的两岸修建营寨。
English: Lu Meng heard that Cao Cao planned to march east again, and persuaded Sun Quan to build a camp on both banks of the Nusu Channel.

古文：诸将皆曰： 上岸击贼，洗足入船，何用坞为！ 
现代文：将领们都说： 上岸攻击敌军，洗洗脚就上船了，要营寨有什么用？ 
English: The generals all said: If you go ashore to attack the enemy, wash your feet and get on the ship, what is the use of a camp?

古文：蒙曰： 兵有利钝，战无百胜，如有邂逅，敌步骑蹙人，不暇及水，其得入船乎？ 权曰： 善！ 
现代文：吕蒙说： 军事有顺利之时，也有失利之时，不会百战百胜，如果敌人突然出现，步骑兵紧紧逼迫，我们连水边也到不了，难道能上船吗？ 孙权说： 很对！ 
English: Lv Meng said, "In military affairs, there are times of success and times of failure. There will not be a hundred victories in every battle. If the enemy suddenly appears and the infantry is in close pursuit, we will not even be able to reach the water's edge. Will we be able to board the ship?" Sun Quan said, "That's right!

古文：遂作濡须坞。
现代文：于是，下令修筑营寨，就称作濡须坞。
English: As a result, he ordered the construction of a camp, known as Nusu dock.

古文：冬，十月，曹操东击孙权。
现代文：冬季，十月，曹操率军东征孙权。
English: In the winter, in October, Cao Cao led the army to the east to conquer Sun Quan.

古文：董昭言于曹操曰： 自古以来，人臣匡世，未有今日之功；有今日之功，未有久处人臣之势者也。
现代文：董昭对曹操说： 自古以来，人臣拯救国家的功劳，从来没有您今天的功业这样大；有您今天功业的人，没有长久居于臣属的。
English: Dong Zhao said to Cao Cao, "Since ancient times, there has never been a time when a vassal saved the country. Your achievements today are so great. No one with your achievements today has been a vassal for a long time.

古文：今明公耻有惭德，乐保名节。然处大臣之势，使人以大事疑己，诚不可不重虑也。 
现代文：现在，您以惭愧为耻，乐于保持名节；然而您处在大臣的地位，会使人为这件大事怀疑您，实在不可不多加考虑。 
English: Now, you are ashamed of being ashamed and are happy to keep the name; however, you are in the position of a minister, which will make people doubt you in this matter, it is really not a small consideration.

古文：乃与列侯诸将议，以丞相宜进爵国公，九锡备物，以彰殊勋。
现代文：于是，与列侯及将领们商议，认为丞相曹操应该进爵为国公，由皇帝赐给他表示特权的九锡，来表彰曹操的特殊功勋。
English: Therefore, after discussing with the lords and generals, he thought that Cao Cao, the prime minister, should be knighted as the prince of the country, and the emperor should give him the privilege of Jiuxi to commend Cao Cao's special merits.

古文：荀彧以为： 曹公本兴义兵以匡朝宁国，秉忠贞之诚，守退让之实。
现代文：荀认为： 曹公原来是为了拯救朝廷，安定天下而发起义兵的，怀有忠贞的诚心，严守退让的实意。
English: Zou thought: Cao Gong originally initiated the volunteer army in order to save the imperial court and stabilize the world. He had a sincere heart of loyalty and strictly adhered to the real intention of conceding.

古文：君子爱人以德，不宜如此。 
现代文：君子以德爱人，不应当这样。 
English: A gentleman should be ethical in his love. It shouldn't be like this.

古文：操由是不悦。
现代文：曹操因此很不高兴。
English: Cao Cao was very unhappy about this.

古文：及击孙权，表请彧劳军于谯，因辄留彧，以侍中、光禄大夫、持节、参丞相军事。
现代文：到东征孙权时，曹操上表请求献帝派荀到谯县来慰劳军队。荀到后，曹操就借机留下他，让他以侍中、光禄大夫的身份，持符节，参预丞相府的军事。
English: When Cao Cao went to the east to conquer Sun Quan, he asked Emperor Xian to send him to Shixian to comfort the troops. After he arrived, Cao Cao took the opportunity to leave him behind and let him take part in the military of the prefectural government as an attendant and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：操军向濡须，彧以疾留寿春，饮药而卒。
现代文：曹操大军向濡须进发，荀因病留在寿春，喝下毒药而死。
English: Cao Cao's army marched towards Nushu, but Zou stayed in Shuchun due to illness, drank poison and died.

古文：彧行义修整而有智谋，好推贤进士，故时人皆惜之。
现代文：荀品德高尚，行为端正，而且有智谋，喜欢推荐贤能的士人，因此，当时人对他的去世都很惋惜。
English: He was a man of high moral character, upright conduct, and wisdom, who liked to recommend capable scholars. Therefore, people at that time were very sorry to hear of his death.

古文：臣光曰：孔子之言仁也重矣，自子路、冉求、公西赤门人之高第，令尹子文、陈文子诸侯之贤大夫，皆不足以当之，而独称管仲之仁，岂非以其辅佐齐桓，大济生民乎！
现代文：臣司马光曰： 孔子对于评价仁德是非常重视的。即使是子路、冉求、公西赤这些杰出的门人，令尹子文、陈文子这些诸侯的贤能大夫，都不够资格，而唯独称赞管仲的仁德，岂不是因为他辅佐齐桓公，对百姓有很大的恩德吗？
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Confucius attaches great importance to the evaluation of benevolence. Even Zilu, Ranqiu, Gongxi, these outstanding disciples, Yin Ziwen, Chen Wenzi, these noble doctors of princes, are not qualified, but only praise the benevolence of Guanzhong, is not it because he assisted Qi Huan, and has great benevolence to the people?

古文：齐桓之行若狗彘，管仲不羞而相之，其志盖以非桓公则生民不可得而济也，汉末大乱，群生涂炭，自非高世之才不能济也。
现代文：齐桓公的行为像猪狗一样，但管仲并不以为羞耻而辅佐他，是因为他知道，没有齐桓公，百姓就不能得到拯救。汉末天下大乱，百姓灾难深重，假如没有绝顶的才能，便不能拯救百姓。
English: Prince Qi Huan behaved like a pig and a dog, but Guanzhong was not ashamed to assist him, because he knew that without Prince Qi Huan, the people could not be saved. At the end of the Han Dynasty, the world was in turmoil, and the people were in deep disaster. If there was no supreme talent, it would not be possible to save the people.

古文：然则荀彧舍魏武将谁事哉！
现代文：既然这样，那么荀舍弃曹操，还能去辅佐谁呢？
English: Since this is the case, who can I help if I give up Cao Cao?

古文：齐桓之时，周室虽衰，未若建安之初也。
现代文：齐桓公的时代，周期王室虽已衰败，但还没有像建安初期的汉朝王室那样。
English: In the era of Prince Qi Huan, although the periodical royal family had fallen into decay, it had not yet become like the royal family of the Han Dynasty in the early days of Jian'an.

古文：建安之初，四海荡覆，尺土一民，皆非汉有。
现代文：建安初期，全国大乱，汉朝朝廷连一尺土地、一个百姓都没有。
English: In the early days of Jianan, the country was in turmoil, and the Han Dynasty imperial court did not have a single foot of land or a single commoner.

古文：荀彧佐魏武而兴之，举贤用能，训卒厉兵，决机发策，征伐四克，遂能以弱为强，化乱为治，十分天下而有其八，其功岂在管仲之后乎！
现代文：荀辅佐曹操而使他兴起，推荐任用贤能的人才，训练军队，裁决机要，制定策略，征伐四方，连续获胜。于是转弱为强，化乱为治，占有了天下的十分之八，荀的功劳难道还不如管仲吗！
English: He supported Cao Cao and made him rise, recommended the appointment of talented people, trained the army, adjudicated opportunities, formulated strategies, conquered the four directions, and won successively. So he turned weakness into strength, turned chaos into rule, and occupied eight-tenths of the world. Isn't his merit better than Guanzhong?

古文：管仲不死子纠而荀彧死汉室，其仁复居管仲之先矣！
现代文：管仲没有为子纠而死，但荀却为汉朝王室而死，他的仁德又在管仲之上了！
English: Guanzhong did not die for his son, but Zou died for the Han Dynasty royal family, and his benevolence is on top of Guanzhong!

古文：而杜牧乃以为 彧之劝魏武取兗州则比之高、光，官渡不令还许则比之楚、汉，及事就功毕，乃欲邀名于汉代，譬之教盗穴墙发匮而不与同挈，得不为盗乎？ 
现代文：可是，杜牧却认为： 荀在劝曹操攻取兖州时，把他比作高祖刘邦与光武帝刘秀；在官渡之战时不让曹操撤退回许都，则比作楚汉相争。等到大事已经完成，荀才想在汉代留下尽忠的声名。这就好比教小偷去挖墙破柜而不与小偷分赃，能说他不是小偷吗？ 臣认为，孔子说： 文胜质则史。 
English: However, Du Mu thought: When he advised Cao Cao to attack Zhangzhou, he compared him to the great-grandfather Liu Bang and the Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu; when he did not allow Cao Cao to retreat to Hechu during the Battle of Guandu, he compared him to Chu and Han. When the great event was completed, he wanted to leave a reputation of loyalty in the Han Dynasty. This is like teaching a thief to dig through a wall and break a cabinet without sharing the loot with the thief. Can he say that he is not a thief? The minister thought that Confucius said: "Writing quality is history."

古文：臣以为孔子称 文胜质则史 ，凡为史者记人之言，必有以文之。
现代文：所有撰写历史的人，在记载历史人物的言语时，都会加以修饰。
English: All writers of history embellish the words of historical figures when they record them.

古文：然则比魏武于高、光、楚、汉者，史氏之文也，岂皆彧口所言邪！
现代文：那么，把曹操比作刘邦、刘秀以及楚汉相争等，只是史学家的文字，怎么会都是荀所说的话呢！
English: So, comparing Cao Cao to Liu Bang, Liu Xiu, and Chu Han competing with each other, etc., is just a historian's words, how can they all be the words spoken by Yao!

古文：用是贬彧，非其罪矣。
现代文：根据这些话来贬低荀，是冤枉人。
English: It would be unfair to disparage the cormorant on the basis of these words.

古文：且使魏武为帝，则彧为佐命元功，与萧何同赏矣；彧不利此而利于杀身以邀名，岂人情乎！
现代文：而且，假使曹操称帝，那么荀将成为最大的开国功臣，会受到与萧何一样的赏赐。荀不贪图这样的富贵，而牺牲生命换取的名声，难道是人之常情吗！
English: Moreover, if Cao Cao were to be crowned emperor, then Yan would become the greatest hero of the founding of the country, and would receive the same reward as Xiao He. Is it human nature for Yan not to covet such riches, but to sacrifice his life in exchange for fame?

古文：十二月，有星孛于五诸侯。
现代文：十二月，有异星出现在五诸侯星座。
English: In December, a strange star appeared in the constellation of the Five Princes.

古文：刘备在葭萌，庞统言于备曰： 今阴选精兵，昼夜兼道，径袭成都，刘璋既不武，又素无豫备，大军卒至，一举便定，此上计也。
现代文：刘备驻军在葭萌，庞统向刘备建议说： 现在，应暗中挑选精兵，昼夜不停地兼程赶路，直接袭击成都，刘璋既不懂军事，又一向没有预备，大军突然到达，可以一举平定，这是上策。
English: Liu Bei's garrison was in Shumeng, and Pang Tong suggested to Liu Bei: Now, it is necessary to secretly select elite soldiers, travel non-stop day and night, and directly attack Chengdu. Liu Bei does not understand military affairs, and has never been prepared. If a large army suddenly arrives, it can be pacified in one fell swoop. This is the best strategy.

古文：杨怀、高沛，璋之名将，各杖强兵，据守关头，闻数有笺谏璋，使发遣将军还荆州。
现代文：杨怀、高沛都是刘璋部下的名将，各领强兵，据守关头，听说他们多次上书，劝刘璋把将军送回荆州。
English: Yang Huai and Gao Pei were both famous generals under Liu Xuan's command. Each of them led a strong army, and when it came to the crunch, I heard that they repeatedly sent letters to persuade Liu Xuan to send the general back to Jingzhou.

古文：将军遣与相闻，说荆州有急，欲还救之，并使装束，外作归形，此二子既服将军英名，又喜将军之去，计必乘轻骑来见将军，因此执之，进取其兵，乃向成都，此中计也。
现代文：将军派人去告诉他们，说荆州有紧急情况，您打算回军救援，并让人打点行装，表面上作出要回去的样子。这两个人既佩服将军的英名，又高兴将军离去，我想他们一定会轻装骑马来见将军。乘机把他们捉住，吞并他们的部队，再向成都进军，这是中策。
English: The general sent someone to tell them that there was an emergency in Jingzhou and that you were planning to go back to the army for rescue, and had them pack their things and pretend to go back. These two people both admired the general's reputation and were happy that the general was leaving. I think they will definitely come to see the general lightly loaded on horseback. It is the middle strategy to catch them at the right time, absorb their troops, and then march to Chengdu.

古文：退还白帝，连引荆州，徐还图之，此下计也。
现代文：退回白帝城，与荆州力量联合在一起，再慢慢策划进取益州的办法，这是下策。
English: Return Baidicheng, contact Jingzhou soldiers and horses, and slowly try to gain Yizhou. This is the next step.

古文：若沉吟下去，将致大困，不可久矣。 
现代文：如果迟疑着不离去，将会陷入严重困境，不能再耽误了。 
English: If you hesitate to leave, you will be in serious trouble, and you can't delay any longer.

古文：备然其中计。
现代文：刘备同意采用庞统的中策。
English: Liu Bei agreed to adopt the grand strategy.

古文：及曹操攻孙权，权呼备自救。
现代文：等到曹操进攻孙权，孙权要求刘备回军援救。
English: When Cao Cao attacked Sun Quan, Sun Quan asked Liu Bei to come to the rescue.

古文：备贻璋书曰： 孙氏与孤本为脣齿，而关羽兵弱，今不往救，则曹操必取荆州，转侵州界，其忧甚于张鲁。
现代文：刘备写信给刘璋，说： 孙权和我本是唇齿的相依，而关羽兵力薄弱，现在不在援救，曹操就一定夺取荆州，进而侵犯益州边界，这远比张鲁更值得担心。
English: Liu Bei wrote to Liu Bei, saying: Sun Quan and I have always been close to each other, but Guan Yu's army is weak. If he does not come to the rescue now, Cao Cao will definitely seize Jingzhou and then encroach on the border of Yizhou, which is far more worrying than Zhang Lu.

古文：鲁自守之贼，不足虑也。 
现代文：张鲁是个只求自保的贼寇，不足以使人忧虑。 
English: Zhang Lu is a bandit who only seeks self-preservation, which is not enough to worry people.

古文：因求益万兵及资粮，璋但许兵四千，其馀皆给半。
现代文：乘机要求刘璋给他增拨一万名士兵和军用物资，刘璋只允许拨给四千人，军用物资也都只给一半。
English: He took the opportunity to ask Liu Bei to allocate him an additional ten thousand soldiers and military supplies, but Liu Bei only allowed him to allocate four thousand soldiers and only half of the military supplies.

古文：备因激怒其众曰： 吾为益州征强敌，师徒勤瘁，而积财吝赏，何以使士大夫死战乎！ 
现代文：刘备就以此为借口，激怒他部下的将士说： 我们为益州讨伐强敌，士卒劳苦，而刘璋却爱惜财物，如此吝啬，怎么能使士大夫为他死战呢！ 
English: Liu Bei used this as an excuse to rile up his subordinates, saying, "We are fighting a strong enemy for Yizhou, and our officers are working hard, but Liu Bei is so stingy with his wealth, how can he make his officers fight to the death for him!"

古文：张松书与备及法正曰： 今大事垂立，如何释此去乎！ 
现代文：张松写信给刘备和法正说： 现在，大事马上就可完成，怎么能放弃这里离去呢？ 
English: Zhang Song wrote a letter to Liu Bei and Fa Zheng saying: Now, the great event can be completed immediately, how can I give up and leave here?

古文：松兄广汉太宗肃，恐祸及己，因发其谋。
现代文：张松的哥哥、广汉郡太守张肃知道张松的密谋后，恐怕祸事会连累自己，就告发了张松的阴谋。
English: After Zhang Song's brother, Guanghan County Governor Zhang Su, learned of Zhang Song's plot, he was afraid that he would be implicated in the evil, so he denounced Zhang Song's plot.

古文：于是璋收斩松，敕关戍诸将文书皆勿复得与备关通。
现代文：于是刘璋逮捕张松，把他处斩，同时，向各关口要塞守将发布文书，命令他们都不要再与刘备往来。
English: As a result, Liu Bei arrested Zhang Song and executed him. At the same time, he issued a document to the keepers of the checkpoints and fortresses, ordering them to stop dealing with Liu Bei.

古文：备大怒，召璋白水军督杨怀、高沛，责以无礼，斩之；勒兵径至关头，并其兵，进据涪城。
现代文：刘备大怒，召见刘璋部下的白水军督杨怀、高沛，责备他们对客人无礼，把这两人处斩。刘备率领军队直接进驻关头，吞并了杨怀、高沛的部队。继续进军，占领涪城。
English: Liu Bei was furious and summoned Yang Huai and Gao Pei, the commanders of the White Water Army under Liu Bei's command, and accused them of being disrespectful to the guests, and had the two men beheaded. Liu Bei led the army directly to Guangtou, and absorbed Yang Huai and Gao Pei's troops. He continued to march and occupied Handan City.

古文：孝献皇帝辛建安十八年
现代文：建安十八年
English: 18th year of Jianan

古文：春，正月，曹操进军濡须口，号步骑四十万，攻破孙权江西营，获其都督公孙阳。
现代文：春季，正月，曹操大军攻到濡须口，号称步、骑兵四十万人，攻破孙权设在长江西岸的营寨，俘获孙权部下的都督公孙阳。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Cao Cao's army attacked Nuxukou, boasting 400,000 infantry and cavalry, broke through Sun Quan's camp on the west bank of the Yangtze River, and captured Sun Yang, the governor of Sun Quan's subordinates.

古文：权率众七万御之，相守月馀。
现代文：孙权率领七万人抵抗曹军，两军相持一个多月。
English: Sun Quan led seventy thousand people to resist Cao's army, and the two armies held out for more than a month.

古文：操见其舟船器仗军伍整肃，叹曰： 生子当如孙仲谋；如刘景升儿子，豚犬耳！ 
现代文：曹操看到孙权的战船、武器精良，军队严整，叹息说： 生儿子应当像孙权，至于刘表的儿子，不过是猪狗！ 
English: Cao Cao saw Sun Quan's warships, sophisticated weapons, and well-organized army, and sighed and said, "A son should be like Sun Quan. As for Liu Biao's son, he is nothing but a pig dog!"

古文：权为笺与操，说： 春水方生，公宜速去。 
现代文：孙权写信给曹操，说： 春水正要上涨，您应当赶快撤军。 
English: Sun Quan wrote to Cao Cao, saying, "The spring water is about to rise, you should withdraw your troops as soon as possible.

古文：别纸言： 足下不死，孤不得安。 
现代文：另附的一张纸上写着： 您不死，我就不能安宁。 
English: Another piece of paper read: "Unless you die, I can't be at peace."

古文：操语诸将曰： 孙权不欺孤。 
现代文：曹操对部将们说： 孙权不欺骗我。 
English: Cao Cao said to his generals: Sun Quan will not deceive me.

古文：乃彻军还。
现代文：于是撤军返回北方。
English: The retreating army then returned to the north.

古文：庚寅，诏并十四州，复为九州。
现代文：庚寅，献帝下诏，把全国的十四个州合并，恢复为九个州。
English: Goyin issued an imperial edict to merge the country's fourteen states and restore them to nine states.

古文：夏，四月，曹操至鄴。
现代文：夏季，四月，曹操到达邺城。
English: In the summer, in April, Cao Cao arrived in Handan.

古文：初，曹操在谯，恐滨江郡县为孙权所略，欲徙令近内，以问扬州别驾蒋济，曰： 昔孤与袁本初对军官渡，徙燕、白马民，民不得走，贼亦不敢钞。
现代文：当初，曹操在谯县时，恐怕沿长江一带的郡县受到孙权的侵略，打算把百姓迁徙现内地，问扬州别驾蒋济对这个问题的看法，说： 从前，我与袁绍在官渡对峙时，曾迁徙过燕县与白马县的百姓，百姓没有走散，敌军也不敢抢掠。
English: At first, when Cao Cao was in Gu County, he was afraid that the counties and counties along the Yangtze River would be invaded by Sun Quan, and he planned to migrate the people to the inland. He asked Yangzhou Bei Kai Jiang Ji's opinion on this issue, saying: In the past, when Yuan Shao and I were in confrontation in Guandu, I had migrated the people of Yan County and Baima County. The people did not disperse, and the enemy army did not dare to loot.

古文：今欲徙淮南民，何如？ 
现代文：现在，我想迁徙淮河南岸的百姓，怎么样？ 
English: Now you want to relocate the people in the Huainan region, how about that?

古文：对曰： 是时兵弱贼强，不徙必失之。
现代文：蒋济回答说： 当年我弱敌强，不迁徒就会失去那些百姓。
English: Jiang Zi replied: At that time, I was weak and the enemy was strong. If I didn't move, I would lose those people.

古文：自破袁绍以来，明公威震天下，民无他志，人情怀土，实不乐徙，惧必不安。 
现代文：自从攻破袁绍以来，您威震天下，百姓没有二心，而且人情依恋故乡，实在不愿意迁徙，我担心一定会使百姓不安。 
English: Since defeating Yuan Shao, you have held sway over the world. The people have no second thoughts, and they are attached to their hometowns. They really don't want to move. I'm worried that this will make the people uneasy.

古文：操不从。
现代文：曹操没有听从。
English: Cao Cao did not listen to these suggestions.

古文：既而民转相惊，自庐江、九江、蕲春、广陵，户十馀万皆东流江，江西遂虚，合淝以南，惟有皖城。
现代文：不久，百姓互相转告，惊恐不安，从庐江、九江、蕲春到广陵，十余万户全部东渡长江。长江以西于是空无人烟，在合肥以南，只剩皖城还有百姓。
English: Soon, the people told each other, alarmed and uneasy, that from the Minjiang, Jiujiang, Hunchun to Guangling, more than 100,000 households had all crossed the Yangtze River to the east. West of the Yangtze River, there was no one left, and south of Hefei, there were only people left in Shicheng.

古文：济后奉使诣鄴，操迎见，大笑曰： 本但欲使避贼，乃更驱尽之！ 
现代文：后来，蒋济奉命出使到邺城，曹操接见他，大笑着说： 我本来只是想让百姓避开敌军，却反而把他们全驱赶到敌人那里去了！ 
English: Later, Jiang Jie was ordered to send an envoy to Lucheng. Cao Cao received him and said with a big smile: I originally just wanted the people to avoid the enemy army, but instead drove them all to the enemy!

古文：拜济丹杨太守。
现代文：任命蒋济为丹阳郡太守。
English: Jiang Ji was appointed as the new governor of Danyang County.

古文：五月，丙申，以冀州十郡封曹操为魏公，以丞相领冀州牧如故。
现代文：五月，丙申，献帝封曹操为魏公，把冀州属下的十个郡作为他的封地，曹操仍继续担任丞相，兼任冀州牧。
English: In May, Bishen offered Cao Cao the title of Wei Gong and made the ten counties under Jizhou his fief. Cao Cao still continued to serve as chancellor and also served as the pastor of Jizhou.

古文：又加九锡：大辂、戎辂各一，玄牡二驷；兗冕之服，赤舄副焉；轩县之乐，八佾之舞；硃户以居；纳陛以登；虎贲之士三百人；鈇、钺各一；彤弓一，彤矢百，玈弓十，玈矢千；秬鬯一卣，珪、瓚副焉。
现代文：同时，加 九锡 ：御用大车和兵车各一辆，各配有四匹黑色雄马驾车；龙袍、冠冕并配上红色的礼鞋；诸侯享用的三面悬挂的乐器和三十六个人演出的方阵舞；住宅的大门可以漆成红色；登堂的台阶可以修在檐下；虎贲卫士三百人；象征权威的兵器斧、钺各一柄；朱红色的弓一把，朱红色的箭一百支，黑色的弓十把，黑色的箭一千支；祭神用的美酒一罐，并配有玉圭和玉勺。
English: At the same time, add Jiu Xi: a royal carriage and a chariot each, each with four black male horses driving; dragon robes, crowns and red shoes; musical instruments hanging on three sides and square dances performed by thirty-six people enjoyed by the princes; the door of the house can be painted red; the steps to the church can be repaired under the armpits; three hundred guards of the vise; one handle each of the axe and plough, symbolic weapons of authority; one vermilion bow, one hundred vermilion arrows, ten black bows, one thousand black arrows; one jar of wine for the gods, and equipped with a jade arrow and a jade

古文：大雨水。
现代文：天降大雨。
English: It rained heavily.

古文：益州从事广汉郑度闻刘备举兵，谓刘璋曰： 左将军悬军袭我，兵不满万，士众未附，军无辎重，野谷是资。
现代文：益州从事、广汉人郑度听到刘备起兵的消息，对刘璋说： 左将军刘备孤军深入，远道来袭，他部下士兵不到一万人，而且将士并未全心归附他，军队又没有辎重，只能靠抢掠田野的庄稼为食。
English: In Yizhou, the Guanghan people Zhengdu heard the news of Liu Bei's army, and said to Liu Bei: The left general Liu Bei's isolated army went deep and attacked far away. His subordinates were less than ten thousand soldiers, and the soldiers did not wholeheartedly join him. The army was not heavy, and could only feed on the crops plundered from the fields.

古文：其计莫若尽驱巴西、梓潼民内、涪水以西，其仓廪野谷，一皆烧除，高垒深沟，静以待之。
现代文：因此，最好的办法是把巴西与梓潼境内的百姓全部驱赶到内水、涪水以西，把巴西与梓潼仓库中的粮食物资以及田野里的庄稼全部烧掉，咱们高垒深沟，静待变化。
English: Therefore, the best way is to drive all the people in the territory of Brazil and Zaozhuang to the west of Inner Water and Surabaya, burn all the grain and foodstuffs in the warehouses of Brazil and Zaozhuang and the crops in the fields, and wait for change.

古文：彼至，请战勿许。
现代文：刘备率军前来挑战，咱们坚守不出。
English: Liu Bei led an army to challenge us, but we could not hold out.

古文：久无所资，不过百日，必将自走，走而击之，此必禽耳。 
现代文：他们无处抢掠粮草，不过一百天，必然会自动撤退，等他们后退时咱们再出击，一定可以捉到刘备。 
English: They have nowhere to loot grain and grass, but after a hundred days, they will inevitably retreat automatically. When they retreat, we will attack again, and we will surely catch Liu Bei.

古文：刘备闻而恶之，以问法正。正曰： 璋终不能用，无忧也。 
现代文：刘备听到消息后，十分忧虑，向法正询问对策，法正说： 刘璋最终不会采用郑度的计策，您不必担心。 
English: After hearing the news, Liu Bei was very worried and asked Fa Zheng for a countermeasure. Fa Zheng said: Liu Bei will not adopt Zheng Du's strategy in the end, you don't have to worry.

古文：璋果谓其群下曰： 吾闻拒敌以安民，未闻动民以避敌也。 
现代文：刘璋果然对部下说： 我听说过抵抗敌人以保护百姓；从未听说要迁徙百姓来躲避敌人的。 
English: Liu Bei said to his subordinates: I have heard of resisting the enemy to protect the people; I have never heard of moving the people to escape the enemy.

古文：不用度计。
现代文：不用郑度的计策。
English: No need for Zhengdu's stratagem.

古文：璋遣其将刘璝、冷苞、张任、邓贤、吴懿等拒备，皆败，退保绵竹；懿诣军降。
现代文：刘璋派部将刘、冷苞、张任、邓贤、吴懿等抵抗刘备，都被击败，退守绵竹，吴懿向刘备大军投降。
English: Liu Bei sent Liu, Leng Rong, Zhang Ren, Deng Xian, Wu Gan and others to resist Liu Bei, but they were all defeated and retreated to Mianzhu, and Wu Gan surrendered to Liu Bei's army.

古文：璋复遣护军南阳李严、江夏费观督绵竹诸军，严、观亦率其众降于备。
现代文：刘璋又派护军南阳人李严、江夏人费观统帅驻在绵竹的各路军马，但李严、费观也率领自己的部下向刘备投降。
English: Liu Bei also sent the Nanyang commander Li Yan and the Jiangxia commander Feikan to escort the troops stationed in Mianzhu. However, Li Yan and Feikan also led their subordinates to surrender to Liu Bei.

古文：备军益强，分遣诸将平下属县。
现代文：刘备军队的势力更加强大，分派部下将领去占领周围各县。
English: Liu Bei's army was more powerful, and he sent his subordinate generals to occupy the surrounding counties.

古文：刘璝、张任与璋子循退守雒城，备进军围之。
现代文：刘、张任与刘璋的儿子刘循退守雒城，刘备进军把雒城围住。
English: Liu, Zhang Ren and Liu Bei's son Liu Xuan retreated to defend Lucheng, while Liu Bei marched in to encircle Lucheng.

古文：任勒兵出战于雁桥，军败，任死。
现代文：张任率军出城，在雁桥与刘备军大战，张任军战败，张任战死。
English: Zhang Ren led his army out of the city and fought with Liu Bei's army at Yanqiao. Zhang Ren's army was defeated and Zhang Ren died in battle.

古文：秋，七月，魏始建社稷、宗庙。
现代文：秋季，七月，魏国开始建立祭祀土神与谷神的社稷坛和曹氏祖先的宗庙。
English: In the autumn, in July, the State of Wei began to build the sacrificial altars of the gods of the soil and the valley and the ancestral temple of the ancestors of Cao.

古文：魏公操纳三女为贵人。
现代文：曹操进献三个女儿给献帝作妃嫔，都被封为贵人。
English: Cao Cao presented three daughters to the emperor as concubines, all of whom were ennobled.

古文：初，魏公操追马超至安定，闻田银、苏伯反，引军还。
现代文：当初，曹操追赶马超到安定，听到田银、苏伯起兵的消息，率军返回。
English: At first, Cao Cao chased Ma Chao to the stable, heard the news of Tian Yin and Su Bo raising an army, and led the army back.

古文：参凉州军事杨阜言于操曰： 超有信、布之勇，甚得羌、胡心；若大军还，不设备，陇上诸郡非国家之有也。 
现代文：参凉州军事杨阜对曹操说： 马超有韩信、英布那样勇猛，很得羌人和胡人的信服，如果大军撤回，又不加以防备，陇山以西的各郡恐怕就不能再属于朝廷了。 
English: Yang Fu, a military official from the Liangshan Prefecture, said to Cao Cao: Ma Chao is as brave as Han Xin and Ying Bu, and is very convincing to the Xiong and Hu people. If the large army withdraws and does not take precautions, the counties west of Lushan will probably no longer belong to the imperial court.

古文：操还，超果率羌、胡击陇上诸郡县，郡县皆应之，惟冀城奉州郡以固守。
现代文：曹操撤军后，马超果然率领羌人，胡人进攻陇山以西的各郡县，各郡县都起来响应，只有作为凉州州府及汉阳郡府所在地的冀城坚守不降。
English: After Cao Cao's withdrawal, Ma Chao led the Lushan and Hu people to attack the counties west of Lushan. Each county rose to respond, but Jicheng, the seat of the state capital of Liangzhou and the county capital of Hanyang, held firm.

古文：超尽兼陇右之众，张鲁复遣大将杨昂助之，凡万馀人，攻冀城，自正月至八月，救兵不至。
现代文：马超兼并了陇山以西的所有部队，张鲁又派大将杨昂率军援助马超，共有有一万余人，进攻冀城，从正月直攻到八月，朝廷救兵也没有到。
English: Ma Chao annexed all the troops west of Lushan, Zhang Lu also sent General Yang Ang to lead the army to assist Ma Chao, with a total of more than 10,000 people attacking Jicheng. From the first month to August, the imperial army did not arrive.

古文：刺史韦康遣别驾阎温出，告急于夏侯渊，外围数重，温夜从水中潜出。
现代文：凉州刺史韦康派别驾阎温出城，向夏侯渊求救。马超军在冀城外包围了好几层，阎温乘夜从水里秘密游出城去。
English: Liangzhou assassin Shi Wei Kang sent Yan Wen out of the city to seek help from Xia Houyuan. Ma Chao's army surrounded several layers outside Jicheng, and Yan Wen secretly swam out of the city at night.

古文：明日，超兵见其迹，遣追获之。
现代文：第二天，马超部下士兵看到足迹，派人追踪，把阎温捉住。
English: The next day, soldiers under Ma Chao saw the footprints and sent someone to track and catch Yan Wen.

古文：超载温诣城下，使告城中云： 东方无救。 
现代文：马超把阎温带到城下，命令阎温告诉城中守军说： 东方没有救兵。 
English: Ma Chao took Yan Wen to the outskirts of the city and ordered Yan Wen to tell the defenders in the city: There is no rescue in the east.

古文：温向城大呼曰： 大军不过三日至，勉之！ 城中皆泣，称万岁。
现代文：阎温向城中大喊： 大军不过三天就会来到，你们努力坚守！ 
English: Yan Wen shouted to the city: The great army will arrive in just three days, you must hold fast!

古文：超虽怒，犹以攻城久不下，徐徐更诱温，冀其改意。
现代文：城中守军都流下眼泪，高呼万岁。马超虽然恼怒，但由于冀城很久攻不下，仍慢慢地进一步引诱阎温，希望他回心转意。
English: The defenders in the city shed tears and shouted "long live." Although Ma Chao was angry, since Jicheng could not be conquered for a long time, he slowly lured Yan Wen further, hoping that he would change his mind.

古文：温曰： 事君有死无二，而卿乃欲令长者出不义之言乎！ 
现代文：阎温说： 奉事君主，只有一死，没有二心。而你竟想让长者说出那种违背道义的话吗！ 
English: Yan Wen said, "There is only one death in serving the sovereign, and there is no double-mindedness. And you actually want the elders to say such immoral words!

古文：超遂杀之。
现代文：马超于是杀死阎温。
English: Ma Chao killed him.

古文：已而外救不至，韦康太守欲降。杨阜号哭谏曰： 阜等率父兄子弟以义相励，有死无二，以为使君守此城。
现代文：过了些时候，外面的救兵仍没有来，刺史韦康及太守打算投降，杨阜大哭着劝阻他们说： 我们率领自己的父兄子弟，以大义互相勉励，誓死没有二心，就是为了协助你们守住此城。
English: After some time, the outside rescuers still did not come, and the commander Shi Wei Kang and the governor intended to surrender. Yang Fu dissuaded them by crying loudly, saying, "We are leading our own brothers and sisters, encouraging each other with great righteousness, and swearing to die without a second thought, just to help you keep this city."

古文：今奈何弃垂成之功，陷不义之名乎！ 
现代文：现在，怎么能放弃这唾于可得的功勋，陷入不义的罪名呢？ 
English: Now, how can one give up this prized achievement and fall into the trap of unjust accusation?

古文：刺史、太守不听，开城门迎超。
现代文：刺史、太守中听杨阜的劝阻，打开城门迎接马超。
English: Sashi and Taisho listened to Yang Fu's dissuasion and opened the city gate to welcome Ma Chao.

古文：超入，遂杀刺史、太守，自称征西将军、领并州牧、督凉州军事。
现代文：马超入城后，就杀死刺史、太守，自称征西将军，兼任并州牧、督凉州军事。
English: After Ma Chao entered the city, he killed Jishi, the governor, claimed to be the general of the Western Conquest, and concurrently served as the state herdsman and the military governor of Liangzhou.

古文：魏公操使夏侯渊救冀，未到而冀败。
现代文：曹操命令夏侯渊率军援救冀城，还没到，冀城已经投降。
English: Cao Cao ordered Xia Houyuan to lead the army to rescue Jicheng. Before they arrived, Jicheng had already surrendered.

古文：渊去冀二百馀里，超来逆战，渊军不利。
现代文：夏侯渊率冀城还有二百余里时，马超出军迎战，夏侯渊作战失利。
English: When Xia Houyuan led Jicheng still had more than two hundred miles to go, the horse exceeded the army to meet the battle, and Xia Houyuan lost the battle.

古文：氐王千万反应超，屯兴国，渊引军还。
现代文：这时，号称氐王的氐人首领千万又起兵响应马超，驻军兴国，夏侯渊率军撤回。
English: At this time, the leader of the Xiongnu people, known as the King of the Xiongnu, raised an army of ten thousand in response to Ma Chao, stationed troops in Xingguo, and Xia Houyuan led the army to withdraw.

古文：会杨阜丧妻，就超求假以葬之。
现代文：正在这时，杨阜的妻子去世，杨阜向马超请假去安葬妻子。
English: At this time, Yang Fu's wife passed away, and Yang Fu asked Ma Chao for leave to bury his wife.

古文：阜外兄天水姜叙为抚夷将军，拥兵屯历城。
现代文：杨阜的表兄、天水人姜叙担任抚夷将军，率军驻在历城。
English: Yang Fu's cousin, the Tianshui man Jiang Xiu, served as the Fuxi general and stationed his army in Licheng.

古文：阜见叙及其母，歔欷悲甚。
现代文：杨阜见到姜叙和姜叙的母亲，抽泣不止，十分悲痛。
English: When Yang Fu saw Jiang Xiu and Jiang Xiu's mother, she sobbed uncontrollably and was very sad.

古文：叙曰： 何为乃尔？ 
现代文：姜叙说： 你为什么这样悲痛？ 
English: Jiang Shu asked: Why is this?

古文：阜曰： 守城不能完，君亡不能死，亦何面目以视息于天下！
现代文：杨阜说： 守城而没能守住，长官被杀而不能同死，我还有什么脸活在世上！
English: Yang Fu said, "I defended the city but failed to hold it, the commander was killed but I can't die with him, what kind of face do I have living in the world!"

古文：马超背父叛君，虐杀州将，岂独阜之忧责，一州士大夫皆蒙其耻。
现代文：马超背叛父亲与皇上，残酷杀死本州的长官，这岂是我杨阜一个人忧心自责的问题，一州的士大夫都因此蒙受到耻辱。
English: Ma Chao disobeyed his father, rebelled against the monarch, and brutally killed a state lieutenant general. How is it that I am the only one to bear this responsibility, when all the state's senior officials have suffered this disgrace?

古文：君拥兵专制而无讨贼心，此赵盾所以书弑君也。
现代文：你拥有重兵，受命全权管理这一地区，而没有讨伐逆贼之心，从前，赵盾正是因为这样做而被史官记载为弑君的。
English: You have an army, an autocratic decision, but no determination to fight against the thieves. This is what the history books call the situation of Zhao Dun's rise to power.

古文：超强而无义，多衅，易图耳。 
现代文：马超虽然强大，但不讲道义，弱点很多，容易对付。 
English: Although Ma Chao is powerful, he is not moralistic, has many weaknesses, and is easy to deal with.

古文：叙母慨然曰： 咄！
现代文：姜叙的母亲慨然说： 好了！
English: Jiang Xiu's mother said with emotion, "That's it!

古文：伯奕，韦伯君遇难，亦汝之负，岂独义山哉！
现代文：姜叙，韦刺史遇难，也有你的责任，难道只是杨阜一个人吗！
English: Jiang Xiu, Wei Zhishi was killed, you also have a responsibility, isn't Yang Fu the only one?

古文：人谁不死，死于忠义，得其所也。
现代文：谁能不死，能死于忠义，就是死得其所。
English: Who can not die, can die of loyalty, is to die in place.

古文：但当速发，勿复顾我；我自为汝当之，不以馀年累汝也。 
现代文：你只应快些行动，不要再管我；我自会为你担当，不会以我的余年牵累你。 
English: All you have to do is hurry up and leave me alone; I'll take care of you myself and won't burden you with my remaining years.

古文：叙乃与同郡赵昂、尹奉、武都李俊等合谋讨超，又使人至冀，结安定梁宽、南安赵衢使为内应。
现代文：姜叙就与同郡人赵昂、尹奉、武都人李俊等人，共同商议讨伐马超，又派人到冀城，结交安定人梁宽、南安人赵衢，让他们做内应。
English: Jiang Xiu, together with people from the same county, Zhao Ang, Yin Bong, and people from Wudu, Li Jun, and others, jointly discussed how to fight Ma Chao. He also sent people to Jicheng to make friends with Liang Guang, a person of stability, and Zhao Wei, a person from Nan'an, and let them do internal correspondence.

古文：超取赵昂子月为质，昂谓妻异曰： 吾谋如是，事必万全，当奈月何？ 
现代文：马超命令赵昂交出儿子赵月作为人质，赵昂对妻子士异说： 我们已经如此谋划，事情一定能成功，应当把赵月怎么办？ 
English: Ma Chao ordered Zhao Ang to hand over his son Zhao Yue as a hostage. Zhao Ang said to his wife Shi Yan: We have planned this way, things will definitely succeed, what should we do with Zhao Yue?

古文：异厉声应曰： 雪君父之大耻，丧元不足为重，况一子哉！ 
现代文：士异厉声回答： 能昭雪君父的大耻，就是掉脑袋也不足惜，何况一个儿子！ 
English: Shiyi replied sharply, "If I can bring disgrace to Father Xuexue, even losing my head would not be enough, let alone a son!"

古文：九月，阜与叙进兵，入卤城，昂、奉据祁山，以讨超。
现代文：九月，杨阜与姜叙进兵，进入卤城，赵昂、尹奉占据祁山，以讨伐马超。
English: In September, Yang Fu and Jiang Xiu marched into the city of Halogen, and Zhao Ang and Yin Bong occupied Lushan to fight Ma Chao.

古文：超闻之，大怒，赵衢因谲说超，使自出击之。
现代文：马超听到消息，大怒，赵衢乘势编造理由，劝马超自己率军去进攻杨阜等人。
English: When Ma Chao heard the news, he was furious. Zhao Jun took advantage of the situation to fabricate a reason, and persuaded Ma Chao to lead his own army to attack Yang Fu and others.

古文：超出，衢与梁宽闭冀城门，尽杀超妻子。
现代文：马超出城后，赵衢与梁宽等关闭冀城城门，把马超的妻子儿女全部杀死。
English: After Ma left the city, Zhao Wei and Liang Guang closed the gate of Jicheng and killed all of Ma Chao's wives and children.

古文：超进退失据，乃袭历城，得叙母。
现代文：马超进退失据，于是袭击历城，捉到姜叙的母亲。
English: Ma Chao lost control, so he attacked Licheng and caught Jiang Xiu's mother.

古文：叙母骂之曰： 汝背父之逆子，杀君之桀贼，天地岂久容汝！而不早死，敢以面目视人乎！ 
现代文：姜叙的母亲痛骂马超，说： 你这个背叛父亲的逆子，杀害长官的恶贼，天地岂能长久容你，你不早死，还敢见人！ 
English: Jiang Xiu's mother scolded Ma Chao, saying, "You son of a traitor who betrayed his father and killed his superior, how can heaven and earth tolerate you for long? If you don't die soon, how can you dare to see people!

古文：超杀之，又杀赵昂之子月。
现代文：马超杀死她，又把赵昂的儿子赵月杀死。
English: Ma Chao killed her, and he also killed Zhao Yong's son, Zhao Yue.

古文：杨阜与超战，身被五创。
现代文：杨阜与马超大战，身受五处重伤。
English: Yang Fu and Ma Chaoda fought, suffering five serious injuries.

古文：超兵败，遂南奔张鲁。
现代文：马超被杨阜等打败，就向南投奔张鲁。
English: After Ma Chao was defeated by Yang Fu and others, he fled south to Zhang Lu.

古文：鲁以超为都讲祭酒，欲妻之以女。
现代文：张鲁任命马超为都讲祭酒，打算把自己的女儿嫁给马超。
English: Zhang Lu appointed Ma Chao as the preacher of the sacrificial wine and planned to marry his daughter to Ma Chao.

古文：或谓鲁曰： 有人若此，不爱其亲，焉能爱人！ 
现代文：有人对张鲁说： 像这样的人，不爱自己的父母，怎么能爱别人！ 
English: Someone said to Zhang Lu: People like this don't love their own parents, how can they love others!

古文：鲁乃止。
现代文：张鲁才打消嫁女的念头。
English: It took Zhang Lu to dispel the idea of marrying off his daughter.

古文：操封讨超之功，侯者十一人，赐杨阜爵关内侯。
现代文：曹操封赏讨伐马超的功臣，封十一个人为侯爵，杨阜被封为关内侯。
English: Cao Cao rewarded the meritorious vassals who fought against Ma Chao by making eleven of them marquesses, and Yang Fu was made the Marquis of Guanai.

古文：冬，十一月，魏初置尚书、侍中、六卿；以荀攸为尚书令，凉茂为仆射，毛玠、崔琰、常林、徐奕、何夔为尚书，王粲、杜袭、卫觊、和洽为侍中，钟繇为大理，王修为大司农，袁涣为郎中令、行御史大夫事，陈群为御史中丞。
现代文：冬季，十一月，魏国开始设置尚书、侍中和六卿等官职。任命荀攸为尚书令，凉茂为尚书仆射，毛、崔琰、常林、徐奕、何夔为尚书，王粲、杜袭、卫觊、和洽为侍中，钟繇为大理，王为大司农，袁涣为郎中令，并代理御史大夫事务，陈群为御史中丞。
English: In the winter, in November, the State of Wei began to set up the official positions of Shangshu, Zhizhong and Liujing, and appointed Zou You as Shangshu Ling, Liangmao as Shangshu Buxia, Mao, Cui Wei, Changlin, Xu Yi and He Wei as Shangshu, Wang Wei, Du Wei, Wei Wei, and He Cha as Zhizhong, Zhong Wei as Dali, Wang Wei as Daishi Nong, Yuan Wei as Langzhong Ling, and acting as Goshi Daifu affairs, and Chen Qun as Goshi Zhongzheng.

古文：袁涣得赏赐，皆散之，家无所储，乏则取之于人，不为皦察之行，然时人皆服其清。
现代文：袁涣得到赏赐，都散给亲戚、朋友，家中没有积蓄。当家用不足时，就向别人索取，从来不故作清白，详察小事，然而当时人都佩服他的清廉。
English: When Yuan Xuan received rewards, he distributed them to his relatives and friends. There was no savings in his family. When there was not enough money in the household, he asked others for it. He never pretended to be innocent and scrutinized trifles. However, at that time, everyone admired his integrity.

古文：时有传刘备死者，群臣皆贺，唯涣独否。
现代文：这时，有刘备已死的传言，群臣都为此道驾，只有袁涣不这样做。
English: At this time, there was a rumor that Liu Bei had died, and all the courtiers followed suit. Only Yuan Shao did not do so.

古文：魏公操欲复肉刑，令曰： 昔陈鸿胪以为死刑有可加于仁恩者，御史中丞能申其父之论乎？ 
现代文：曹操打算恢复肉刑，下令说： 从前，大鸿胪陈纪认为死刑有仁慈的一面，御史中丞陈群，能申说你父亲的理论吗？ 
English: Cao Cao intended to resume corporal punishment, and issued the following order: Once upon a time, the great scholar Chen Ji believed that the death penalty had a benevolent side. Historian Chen Qun, can you explain your father's theory?

古文：陈群对曰： 臣父纪以为汉除肉刑而增加于笞，本兴仁恻而死者更众，所谓名轻而实重者也。名轻则易犯，实重则伤民。
现代文：陈群回答说： 我父亲陈纪认为，汉代废除肉刑而增加笞刑，本来是出于仁慈的目的，但死于鞭杖之下的人更多，这就是所谓名义上减轻，而实质上加重，名义上轻，则使百姓容易犯法；实质上重，则伤害百姓。
English: Chen Qun replied: My father Chen Ji believed that the abolition of corporal punishment and the increase of flogging in the Han Dynasty was originally for the purpose of mercy, but more people died under the whip. This is the so-called nominally lightening, but substantially increasing. Nominally light, it makes the people easy to break the law; substantially heavy, it hurts the people.

古文：且杀人偿死，合于古制；至于伤人，或残毁其体，而裁翦毛发，非其理也。
现代文：而且，杀人偿命，是符合古代法制的；至于伤人，或者残害身体，或者剪去头发，者不合理。
English: Moreover, it is in accordance with the ancient legal system to kill a person in exchange for his or her life, but it is unreasonable to hurt a person, mutilate a body, or cut off a person's hair.

古文：若用古刑，使淫者下蚕室，盗者刖其足，则永无淫放穿窬之奸矣。
现代文：如果恢复古代刑法，对犯强奸罪的施用宫刑，把偷盗者的脚砍去，就会永远没有淫荡和挖洞越墙偷盗的罪犯了。
English: If they used the ancient punishments of locking adulterers in a silkworm's cocoon and cutting off the feet of thieves, they would never have the evil thoughts of adultery and theft.

古文：夫三千之属，虽未可悉复，若斯数者，时之所患，宜先施用。
现代文：古代的三千条刑法，虽然不能全部恢复，但像上在所举的几种罪，正是现在的社会问题，应当先施行。
English: Of the 3,000 crimes punishable by five punishments, although not all can be restored, the crimes mentioned above are now feared to occur and should be implemented first.

古文：汉律所杀，殊死之罪，仁所不及也，其馀逮死者，可易以肉刑。
现代文：汉朝法律，对判处斩首的罪人，不能讲求仁爱；除此之外，其余判死刑的人，可以改判肉刑。
English: According to Han Dynasty law, a criminal sentenced to beheading cannot plead for mercy; in addition, the rest of the people sentenced to death can be sentenced to corporal punishment.

古文：如此，则所刑之与所生足以相贸矣。
现代文：这样，施加刑罚与保存生命就足以相抵了。
English: In this way, the crime committed and the punishment received are sufficient to cancel each other out.

古文：今以笞死之法易不杀之刑，是重人支体而轻人躯命也。 
现代文：现在，以鞭笞致死的刑法替换不杀人的肉刑，是重视人的肢体，而轻视人的生命。 
English: To replace corporal punishment with flogging now is to value the human body and despise human life.

古文：当时议者，唯钟繇与群议同，馀皆以为未可行。
现代文：当时参与讨论的人，只有钟繇与陈群意见相同。其余人的都认为不能恢复肉刑。
English: Of those who took part in the discussion at the time, only Zhong Rong shared the same opinion as Chen Qun. All the others believed that corporal punishment could not be resumed.

古文：操以军事未罢，顾众议而止。
现代文：曹操因为四方征战还没有停止，顾虑众人的意见，停止了恢复肉刑的打算。 。
English: Cao Cao, because the four-sided war had not yet stopped, considered the opinions of many people and stopped the plan to resume corporal punishment.

