古文：十七年春，卫侯为虎幄于藉圃，成，求令名者，而与之始食焉。
现代文：十七年春季，卫庄公在藉圃建造了一座刻有虎兽纹的小木屋，造成了，要寻找一位有好名誉的人和他在里边吃第一顿饭。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, Lord Weizhuang built a small wooden house with a tiger and beast pattern in a borrowed garden. As a result, it was necessary to find a person with a good reputation to have the first meal with him.

古文：大子请使良夫。
现代文：太子请求找浑良夫。
English: The prince asked to see Hunryaf.

古文：良夫乘衷甸两牡，紫衣狐裘，至，袒裘，不释剑而食。
现代文：浑良夫坐在两匹公马驾着的车子上，穿上紫色衣服和狐皮袍。来到以后，敞开皮袍，没有解下佩剑就吃饭。
English: Hungry Horse sat on a chariot driven by two stallions, put on purple clothes and a fox-skin robe. When he arrived, he opened the robe and ate without taking off his sword.

古文：大子使牵以退，数之以三罪而杀之。
现代文：太子派人牵着他退下，举出三条罪状就杀死了他。
English: The crown prince sent someone to lead him back down and killed him after he had made three accusations.

古文：三月，越子伐吴。吴子御之笠泽，夹水而陈。
现代文：三月，越王发兵进攻吴国，吴王发兵在笠泽抵御，隔着一条河摆开阵势。
English: In March, King Yue sent an army to attack the State of Wu, while King Wu sent an army to resist in Kasazawa, setting up a position across a river.

古文：越子为左右句卒，使夜或左或右，鼓噪而进。
现代文：越王将越军编成左右两支部队，让他们在夜里忽左忽右，击鼓呐喊前进。
English: Yue Wang organized the Yue army into two units, left and right, and let them advance in the night, beating drums and shouting.

古文：吴师分以御之。
现代文：吴军分兵抵御。
English: The detachment of the Wu army resisted.

古文：越子以三军潜涉，当吴中军而鼓之，吴师大乱，遂败之。
现代文：越王带领三军偷渡，对准吴国的中军击鼓进攻。吴军大乱，于是越军就打败了吴军。
English: Yue Wang led the three armies to sneak across the border and attack the Chinese army of Wu with drums. The Wu army was in chaos, so the Vietnamese army defeated the Wu army.

古文：寡君其曰，志父之为也。 
现代文：现在请君王或者太子来一趟，以免除我的罪过。不这样，寡君恐怕会说这是我授意这样做的。 
English: Now therefore, I pray you, let the king or the prince come down to me, and I will be guiltless; otherwise the baron will say that I did it of my own accord.

古文：卫侯辞以难。大子又使椓之。
现代文：卫庄公以国内有祸难加以推辞，太子又派人在使者面前诽谤卫庄公。
English: Prince Weizhuang dismissed it as a domestic calamity, and the prince sent someone to slander Prince Weizhuang in front of the envoy.

古文：夏六月，赵鞅围卫。
现代文：夏季，六月，赵鞅包围卫国。
English: In the summer, in June, Zhao Wei encircled the defense of the country.

古文：齐国观、陈瓘救卫，得晋人之致师者。
现代文：齐国的国观、陈瓘救援卫国，俘虏了晋国单车挑战的人。
English: Qi Guo's view of the country, Chen Yao's rescue and defense of the country, captured the person who challenged Jin Guo's bicycle.

古文：子玉使服而见之，曰： 国子实执齐柄，而命瓘曰： 无辟晋师。 岂敢废命。
现代文：陈瓘让被俘者穿上本来的服装然后接见他，说： 国子掌握齐国政权，命令我说 不要逃避晋军 ，我哪里敢废弃这个命令？
English: Chen Zhe let the captive put on his original clothes and then received him, saying: "The son of the country has seized the Qi regime and ordered me not to evade the Jin army. How dare I abandon this order?"

古文：子又何辱？ 
现代文：哪里又用得着劳驾您呢？ 
English: Where do I have to drive you to?

古文：简子曰： 我卜伐卫，未卜与齐战。 
现代文：赵鞅说： 我为攻打卫国占卜过，没有为和齐国作战占卜。 
English: Zhao Wei said: I have divined for attacking and defending the country, but I have not divined for fighting against Qi.

古文：乃还。
现代文：于是就撤兵回国。
English: So I came back.

古文：楚白公之乱，陈人恃其聚而侵楚。
现代文：楚国白公的那次动乱，陈国人仗着自己有积蓄而侵袭楚国。
English: During the turmoil of Baikong in Chu, the people of Chen used their savings to invade Chu.

古文：楚既宁，将取陈麦。
现代文：楚国安定以后，准备夺取陈国的麦子。
English: After Chu was stabilized, they prepared to seize Chen's wheat.

古文：楚子问帅于大师子穀与叶公诸梁。子穀曰： 右领差车与左史老，皆相令尹、司马以伐陈，其可使也。 
现代文：楚国向太师子穀和叶公诸梁询问统帅的人选，子穀说： 右领差车和左史老都辅佐过令尹、司马攻打陈国，大概是可以派遣的。 
English: The State of Chu asked the grandmaster Zikoku and Ye Gong Zhu Liang about the selection of the commander. Zikoku said, "The right-collar caboose and the left-collar caboose both assisted General Yin and Sima in attacking the State of Chen, so they can probably be dispatched."

古文：子高曰： 率贱，民慢之，惧不用命焉。 
现代文：子高说： 这两个人都是被俘虏过的，百姓轻慢他们，怕不会听从命令。 
English: Zigao said, "Both of these men have been captured, and the people despise them, fearing that they won't follow orders.

古文：子穀曰： 观丁父，鄀俘也，武王以为军率，是以克州，蓼，服随、唐，大启群蛮。
现代文：子穀说： 观丁父，做过鄀国俘虏，武王让他做军帅，因此战胜州国、蓼国，使随国、唐国顺服，大大地开导了各部蛮人。
English: Zikoku said, "Kunding's father had been a prisoner in the State of Chu, and King Wu made him the commander of the army. As a result, he defeated the State of Chu and the State of Chu, made the State of Sui and the State of Tang submit, and greatly enlightened the barbarians in all parts of the country.

古文：彭仲爽，申俘也，文王以为令尹，实县申、息，朝陈、蔡，封畛于汝。
现代文：彭仲爽，做过申国俘虏，文王让他做令尹，使申国、息国成为我国的两县，使陈国、蔡国前来朝见，开拓封疆到达汝水。
English: Peng Zhongshao, who had been a prisoner of Sheng, was asked by King Wen to make him a commander of Yin, so that Sheng and Xin became two counties of our country, so that Chen and Cai came to see the emperor, and opened up the fenced territory to reach Riushui.

古文：唯其任也，何贱之有？ 
现代文：只要他们能够胜任，做过俘虏有什么关系？ 
English: As long as they are competent, what does it matter if they have been prisoners?

古文：子高曰： 天命不謟。
现代文：子高说： 上天的意志不容怀疑。
English: Zigao said, "God's will cannot be doubted."

古文：令尹有憾于陈，天若亡之，其必令尹之子是与，君盍舍焉？
现代文：令尹对陈国有遗恨，上天如果要灭亡陈国，一定会保佑令尹儿子去完成，您何不任命他呢？
English: Ling Yin has a grudge against Chen Guo. If heaven wants to destroy Chen Guo, it will surely bless Ling Yin's son to complete it. Why don't you appoint him?

古文：臣惧右领与左史有二俘之贱，而无其令德也。 
现代文：我害怕右领和左史有俘虏的卑贱而没有他们的美德。 
English: I fear that the Right and Left have the meanness of captives without their virtue.

古文：王卜之，武城尹吉。使帅师取陈麦。
现代文：楚惠王占卜，公孙朝吉利，就派他带兵夺取陈国的麦子。
English: King Chu Hui divined that his grandson would bring good luck, so he sent him to lead an army to seize the wheat in Chen Province.

古文：陈人御之，败。遂围陈。
现代文：陈国人抵抗，战败，公孙朝就包围了陈国。
English: The people of Chen resisted and were defeated, and the Gongsun Dynasty encircled Chen.

古文：秋七月己卯，楚公孙朝帅师灭陈。
现代文：秋季，七月初八日，公孙朝领兵灭亡陈国。
English: In the autumn, on the 8th day of the 7th month, the Gongsun Dynasty led the troops to defeat Chen Guo.

古文：王与叶公枚卜子良以为令尹。
现代文：楚惠王和叶公为让子良做令尹而占卜。
English: Chu Hui Wang and Ye Gong divined for the sake of letting Ziliang do Yin's bidding.

古文：沈尹朱曰： 吉，过于其志。 
现代文：沈尹朱说： 吉利。超过了他的期望。 
English: Shen Yin Zhu said: Geely. exceeded his expectations.

古文：叶公曰： 王子而相国，过将何为？ 
现代文：叶公说： 以王子的地位而辅助国王，超过这地位将会做什么？ 
English: Ye Gong said: With the position of prince to assist the king, what will be done beyond this position?

古文：他日，改卜子国而使为令尹。
现代文：过了几天，改为子国占卜而让他做了令尹。
English: A few days later, it was changed to the son of the country's divination and let him do it.

古文：卫侯梦于北宫，见人登昆吾之观，被发北面而噪曰： 登此昆吾之虚，绵绵生之瓜。
现代文：卫庄公在北宫做梦，梦见一个人登上昆吾之观，披头散发脸朝着北面叫嚷说： 登上这昆吾之墟，有绵延不断生长的大瓜小瓜。
English: Weizhuang Gong had a dream in the North Palace. He dreamed of a man climbing to the top of the Kunwu Mountain. He turned his head to the north and shouted, "If you climb to the top of the Kunwu Mountain, there is a large melon that grows continuously.

古文：余为浑良夫，叫天无辜。 
现代文：我是浑良夫，向上天呼诉无辜。 
English: I am Hunryafu, calling out to the heavens, innocent.

古文：公亲筮之，胥弥赦占之，曰： 不害。 
现代文：卫庄公亲自占筮，胥弥赦预测说： 没有妨碍。 
English: Weizhuang Gong himself took part in the ceremony, and predicted that there would be no obstacles.

古文：与之邑，置之，而逃奔宋。
现代文：封给胥弥赦城邑，他不接受而逃亡到宋国。
English: He did not accept the pardon and fled to Song.

古文：卫侯贞卜，其《繇》曰： 如鱼尾，衡流而方羊裔焉。
现代文：卫庄公又占卜，繇辞说： 像一条浅色的红尾鱼，穿过急流而犹豫不安。
English: Weizhuang Gong also divined, quipping: Like a light-colored redtail fish, hesitant and uneasy to cross the rapids.

古文：大国灭之，将亡。
现代文：靠近大国，消灭它，将要灭亡。
English: Draw near to a great nation to destroy it, and you will perish.

古文：阖门塞窦，乃自后逾。 
现代文：关门塞洞，就越过后墙。 
English: Close the door, plug the hole, go over the back wall.

古文：冬十月，晋复伐卫，入其郛。
现代文：冬季，十月，晋国再次攻打卫国，进入外城。
English: In the winter, in October, Jin attacked and defended the country again, entering the outer city.

古文：将入城，简子曰： 止。
现代文：将要进入内城，赵简子说： 停止！
English: About to enter the inner city, Zhao Jianzi said: Stop!

古文：叔向有言曰，怙乱灭国者无后。 
现代文：叔向说过： 依仗着动乱而灭亡别国的没有后嗣。  
English: My uncle used to say: Those who rely on turmoil to destroy other countries have no heirs.

古文：卫人出庄公而与晋平，晋立襄公之孙般师而还。
现代文：卫国人赶走了庄公而和晋国讲和。晋国人立了卫襄公的孙子般师为君然后回国。
English: The defenders of the country drove out Zhuang Gong and made peace with the Jin Dynasty. The Jin Dynasty established the grandson of Wei Xiang Gong and then returned to China.

古文：十一月，卫侯自鄄入，般师出。
现代文：十一月，卫庄公从鄄地回国，般师出走。
English: In November, Prince Weizhuang returned to the country from Shunde, and his teacher ran away.

古文：初，公登城以望，见戎州。
现代文：当初，卫庄公登城远望，见到戎州。
English: At first, Weizhuang Gong went to the city to look far and wide and saw Ebisuchu.

古文：问之，以告。
现代文：他问是怎么回事，有人告诉他是戎人的居邑。
English: He asked what was going on, and was told that it was the home of the soldiers.

古文：公曰： 我，姬姓也，何戎之有焉？ 
现代文：卫庄公说： 我是姬姓，哪里有什么戎人？ 
English: Weizhuang Gong said: I am surnamed Ji, where are there any soldiers?

古文：翦之。
现代文：就派人毁平了戎州。
English: and sent people to destroy Ebisucho.

古文：公使匠久。
现代文：卫庄公使用匠人，长久不让休息。
English: Weizhuang used craftsmen and did not let them rest for a long time.

古文：公欲逐石圃，未及而难作。
现代文：他又想要驱逐国卿石圃，没有来得及而祸难发生了。
English: He also tried to oust Secretary of State Stone, but disaster struck before he could do so.

古文：辛巳，石圃因匠氏攻公，公阖门而请，弗许。
现代文：十二日，石圃联合匠人攻打卫庄公。卫庄公关上门请求饶命，石圃不答应。
English: On the twelfth day, the stone nursery and the craftsmen attacked Weizhuang. Weizhuang's public relations asked for mercy, but the stone nursery did not agree.

古文：逾于北方而队，折股。
现代文：卫庄公超过北墙掉下去，折断了大腿骨。
English: Weizhuang Gong fell over the north wall and broke his thigh bone.

古文：戎州人攻之，大子疾、公子青逾从公。戎州人杀之。
现代文：戎州人攻打卫庄公，太子疾、公子青越墙跟从卫庄公，戎州人杀死了他们。
English: The people of Ebisuchu attacked Prince Weizhong. Prince Zhi and Prince Qing crossed the wall to follow Prince Weizhong. The people of Ebisuchu killed them.

古文：公入于戎州己氏。
现代文：卫庄公逃到戎州己氏那里。
English: Weizhong fled to his family in Ebisuchu.

古文：初，公自城上见己氏之妻发美，使髠之，以为吕姜髢。
现代文：当初，卫庄公从城上看到己氏的妻子头发很漂亮，派人让她剪下来，作为自己夫人吕姜的假发。
English: At first, Lord Weizhuang saw from the castle that his wife's hair was very beautiful and sent someone to have her cut it off to make a wig for his wife, Lu Jiang.

古文：既入焉，而示之璧，曰： 活我，吾与女璧。 
现代文：这时庄公到了己氏家里，把玉璧给己氏看，说： 救我的命，给你玉璧。 
English: At this time, Zhuang Gong arrived at his family's home, showed the jade gem to his family and said, "Save my life, give you the jade gem."

古文：己氏曰： 杀女，璧其焉往？ 
现代文：己氏说： 杀了你，玉璧会那里去？ 
English: He said, "If I kill you, where will Tamaki go?

古文：遂杀之而取其璧。
现代文：就杀死了卫庄公并获得了他的玉璧。
English: He killed Lord Weizhuang and obtained his jade gem.

古文：卫人复公孙般师而立之。
现代文：卫国人让公孙般师回国并立他为君。
English: The defenders of the country let Gongsun return to the country and made him king.

古文：十二月，齐人伐卫，卫人请平。
现代文：十二月，齐国人进攻卫国，卫国人请求讲和。
English: In December, the people of Qi attacked the defenders of the motherland, and the defenders asked for peace.

古文：立公子起，执般师以归，舍诸潞。
现代文：齐国人立了公子起为卫君，拘捕了般师回去，让他住在潞地。
English: The people of Qi set up the nobleman as the guardian, arrested the teacher and sent him back to live in Shunde.

古文：公会齐侯，盟于蒙，孟武伯相。
现代文：哀公在蒙地会见齐平公并且结盟，孟武伯相礼。
English: Prince Aiko met Prince Qi Ping in Mongolia and formed an alliance, and Prince Mengwu reciprocated.

古文：齐侯稽首，公拜。
现代文：齐平公叩头，哀公弯腰作揖，齐国人发怒。
English: Qiping kowtowed, and Aigong stooped to make a bow. The people of Qiping were furious.

古文：齐人怒，武伯曰： 非天子，寡君无所稽首。 武伯问于高柴曰： 诸侯盟，谁执牛耳？ 
现代文：孟武伯说： 不是天子，寡君没法叩头。 孟武伯问高柴说： 诸侯结盟，谁执牛耳？ 
English: Mengwubo said, "If you are not the son of heaven, you can't be a vassal." Mengwubo asked Gao Chai, "If the lords make an alliance, who will hold the reins of power?

古文：季羔曰： 鄫衍之役，吴公子姑曹；发阳之役，卫石魋。 
现代文：高柴说： 鄫衍那一次盟誓，执牛耳的是吴国公子姑曹，发阳那一次，是卫国石魋。 
English: Gao Chai said, "At the time of the oath, it was Wu Guozhongzi's aunt who held the reins of power. At the time of the sun rising, it was Wei Guo Shiqi.

古文：武伯曰： 然则彘也。 
现代文：孟武伯说： 那么这次就是我了。 
English: Meng Wubo said, "Then it's me this time."

古文：宋皇瑗之子麇，有友曰田丙，而夺其兄酁般邑以与之。
现代文：宋国皇瑗的儿子麇有个朋友叫田丙，麇夺取了他哥哥酁般的封邑给了田丙。
English: Emperor Song's son, Yao, had a friend named Tian He. Yao seized his brother's fief and gave it to Tian He.

古文：酁般愠而行，告桓司马之臣子仪克。
现代文：酁般含怒出走，告诉桓司马的家臣子仪克。
English: He angrily ran away and told Kansima's vassal, Zi Yike.

古文：子仪克適宋，告夫人曰： 麇将纳桓氏。 
现代文：子仪克去到宋国，告诉夫人说： 麇打算接纳桓氏。 
English: Ziyi Ke went to Song and told his wife: "I am going to adopt Huan."

古文：公问诸子仲。
现代文：宋景公询问子仲。
English: Song Jinggong asked Zizhong.

古文：初，子仲将以杞姒之子非我为子。
现代文：当初，子仲打算把杞姒的儿子非我作为嫡子。
English: At first, Zizhong planned to take Zou's son, Fenyu, as his legitimate son.

古文：麇曰： 必立伯也，是良材。 
现代文：麇说： 一定要立老大，这是好材料。 
English: Zou said, "We must establish a boss, this is good material."

古文：子仲怒，弗从。故对曰： 右师则老矣，不识麇也。 
现代文：子仲发怒，不听从，所以回答说： 右师已经老了，不会作乱，对麇就不了解了。 
English: Zi Zhong was angry and would not listen, so he replied: "The right-hand man is already old, he won't make trouble, and he doesn't understand the yakitori."

古文：公执之。
现代文：宋景公抓了麇。
English: Song Jinggong caught the cormorant.

古文：皇瑗奔晋，召之。
现代文：皇瑗逃亡到晋国，宋景公又派人把他召唤回来。
English: Emperor Qian fled to Jin Province, and Song Jing Gong sent someone to summon him back.

