古文：萧瑀，字时文。
现代文：萧瑀字时文。
English: Xiao Yao Zi Jiwen.

古文：高祖梁武帝，曾祖昭明太子，祖察，后梁宣帝。父岿，明帝。
现代文：高祖父是南朝梁武帝萧衍。曾祖父是昭明太子萧统。祖父名鮞，是后梁宣帝，父亲名岿，是后梁明帝。
English: His great-great-grandfather was Liangwu Emperor Xiaoyan of the Southern Dynasty. His great-great-grandfather was Zhaoming Prince Xiaotong. His grandfather, Mingsheng, was Emperor Xuan of the Later Liang Dynasty, and his father, Mingsheng, was Emperor Xuan of the Later Liang Dynasty.

古文：瑀年九岁，封新安郡王，幼以孝行闻。
现代文：萧瑀九岁那年，被封为新安郡王，年轻时以讲孝道闻名。
English: When Xiao Yao was nine years old, he was named the King of Xin'an County. When he was young, he was known for his filial piety.

古文：姊为隋晋王妃，从入长安。
现代文：姐姐是隋朝晋王杨广的妃，他跟他们进入长安。
English: His sister was the wife of King Yang Guang of the Sui and Jin dynasties, and he entered Chang'an with them.

古文：聚学属文，端正鲠亮。
现代文：萧瑀学习勤奋会写文章，为人刚正不阿光明磊落。
English: Xiao Yao is a diligent learner and can write an article. He is an upright and honest person.

古文：好释氏，常修梵行，每与沙门难及苦空，必诣微旨。
现代文：他爱好佛学，一向注重静心养性，每当跟和尚们就佛家认为的人间一切皆苦皆空的问题进行辩论，必然阐发出奥秘的意义。
English: He is fond of Buddhism and has always paid attention to the cultivation of meditation. Whenever he debates with monks on the problem that Buddhists believe that all human beings are empty of suffering, he will inevitably elucidate the meaning of the mystery.

古文：常观刘孝标《辩命论》，恶其伤先王之教，迷性命之理，乃作《非辩命论》以释之。
现代文：经常研读刘孝标的《辩命论》，讨厌它损害前辈圣贤的教化，搅乱有关 性命 的理论，就撰写《非辩命论》来分析它。
English: He often read Liu Xiaobiao's "Defense of Life" and disliked that it harmed the enlightenment of predecessors and sages and disrupted the theory of life, so he wrote "Non-Defense of Life" to analyze it.

古文：大旨以为： 人禀天地以生，孰云非命，然吉凶祸福，亦因人而有，若一之于命，其蔽已甚。 
现代文：大意认为 ：人靠天地的赐予而生存，谁说这不是天命，但是吉凶祸福，却因人而异，如果一概归结到天命上去，那就十分糊涂了。 
English: To wit: Man survives by the gift of heaven and earth. Anyone who says that this is not predestination, but that fortune and misfortune vary from person to person, if it all comes down to predestination, is completely confused.

古文：时晋府学士柳顾言、诸葛颖见而称之曰： 自孝标后数十年间，言性命之理者，莫能诋诘。
现代文：当时的晋王府学士柳顾言、诸葛颖看到这篇文章称赞说 ：从刘孝标以后几十年里，谈论关于性命道理的，没有谁能击中要害。
English: When Liu Guyan and Zhu Geying, the scholars of Jinwangfu at that time, saw this article, they praised it and said: In the decades since Liu Xiaobiao, when talking about the principle of life and death, no one can hit the key.

古文：今萧君此论，足疗刘子膏肓。 
现代文：现在时文先生的这篇文章，足以纠正《辩命论》的根本错误。 
English: Now, Mr. Jiwen's article is enough to correct the fundamental error of "Defense Theory."

古文：炀帝为太子也，授太子右千牛。
现代文：隋炀帝杨广当太子时，萧瑀被任命为太子右千牛。
English: When Emperor Yang Guang of the Sui Dynasty was crown prince, Xiao Yao was appointed crown prince.

古文：及践祚，迁尚衣奉御，检校左翊卫鹰扬郎将。
现代文：到他登位后，萧瑀改任为炀帝主管衣服的尚衣奉御，加了个检校左翊卫鹰扬郎将的头衔。
English: After he ascended to the throne, Xiao Wei was appointed as Shang Yi Bong, who was in charge of clothing for Emperor Gong, and added the title of the left guard of the inspection school, Ying Yang Lang.

古文：忽遇风疾，命家人不即医疗，仍云： 若天假余年，因此望为栖遁之资耳。 
现代文：突然患风湿病，叫家属不请医生治疗，还说 ：如果老天给我一个晚年，就用这病作为退隐的理由。 
English: Suddenly suffering from rheumatism, he told his family members not to seek medical treatment, adding: "If God gives me old age, I will use this illness as a reason to retire."

古文：萧后闻而诲之： 以尔才智，足堪扬名显亲，岂得轻毁形骸而求隐逸？
现代文：他姐姐知道后来开导他 ：凭你的才智，完全可以播扬名声光耀父母，怎能轻率地损害身体去求退隐呢？
English: His sister knew and later enlightened him: With your talent, you can completely spread fame and shine parents, how can you rashly damage your body to seek retreat?

古文：若以此致谴，则罪在不测。 
现代文：如果这事受到追究，那么就会犯下不可推测的大罪。 
English: If this goes to trial, a crime of incalculable proportions will have been committed.

古文：病且愈，其姊劝勉之，故复有仕进志。
现代文：疾病快要好时，他姐姐又鼓励他，所以再次立下了任职进取的志向。
English: When his illness was on the mend, his sister encouraged him and he once again set his sights on a career in management.

古文：累加银青光禄大夫、内史侍郎。
现代文：连续升任为银青光禄大夫、内史侍郎。
English: He was successively promoted to the posts of silver Qingguanglu doctor and Naishi chamberlain.

古文：既以后弟之亲，委之机务，后数以言忤旨，渐见疏斥。
现代文：凭着皇后弟弟的亲近关系，炀帝把机要政务交给了他，后来多次说了些触犯炀帝心意的话，就逐渐被疏远了。
English: By virtue of the close relationship of the queen's brother, Emperor Zhou handed over the important government affairs to him. Later, he repeatedly said something that offended Emperor Zhou's heart, and was gradually alienated.

古文：炀帝至雁门，为突厥所围，瑀进谋曰： 如闻始毕托校猎至此，义成公主初不知其有违背之心。
现代文：炀帝巡视雁门关，被突厥围困，萧瑀献计说 ：听说始毕可汗借口圈兽打猎来到这里，义成公主一点也不知道他怀有叛变的意图。
English: Emperor Qian inspected the Gate of Wild Goose, which was besieged by the Turks. Xiao Yan said: I heard that Shibi Khan came here on the pretext of hunting wild animals. Princess Yicheng did not know at all that he had the intention of mutiny.

古文：且北蕃夷俗，可贺敦知兵马事。
现代文：按照北方少数民族的习惯，义成公主作为可汗的妻子可贺敦主持战争的事。
English: According to the custom of the northern ethnic minorities, Princess Yicheng presided over the war as the wife of the khan, Khotan.

古文：昔汉高祖解平城之围，乃是阏氏之力。
现代文：当年汉高祖解除平城的包围，就是靠匈奴单于的妻子阏氏的帮助。
English: It was with the help of Xiongnu Zhanyu's wife, Zou, that the Han Emperor Gaozu lifted the siege of Pingcheng.

古文：况义成以帝女为妻，必恃大国之援。
现代文：何况义成公主是我隋朝皇帝的女儿去当了可贺敦，有我大隋作为后盾。
English: What's more, Princess Yicheng was the daughter of the Emperor of the Sui Dynasty, and she went to serve as Kehetun, backed by the Sui Dynasty.

古文：若发一单使以告义成，假使无益，事亦无损。
现代文：如果派一名使者去向义成公主报告这事，即使没有效果，也不会有损失。
English: If an emissary is sent to report the matter to Princess Yicheng, even if there is no effect, there will be no loss.

古文：臣又窃听舆人之诵，乃虑陛下平突厥后更事辽东，所以人心不一，或致挫败。
现代文：我还私下里听到人们的怨言，就是担心陛下平定突厥之后又要去打高丽，因此人心不齐，也许就是造成挫折的一个原因。
English: I also heard complaints from people in private that they were worried that His Majesty would have to go to Korea again after he had pacified the Turks, so people were not on the same page, which may be one reason for the setback.

古文：请下明诏告军中，赦高丽而专攻突厥，则百姓心安，人自为战。 
现代文：请陛下颁发诏书告知部队，放弃高丽只打突厥，那么大家的情绪就安定了，会人人主动奋战。 
English: Ask Your Majesty to issue an edict to inform the troops to abandon Korea and only fight the Turks, then everyone's mood will be stable and everyone will take the initiative to fight.

古文：炀帝从之，于是发使诣可贺敦谕旨。
现代文：炀帝采纳了这个意见，于是派遣使者去向义成公主传达炀帝的旨意。
English: Emperor Xuan accepted this suggestion and sent an envoy to convey Emperor Xuan's will to Princess Yicheng.

古文：俄而突厥解围去，于后获其谍人，云：义成公主遣使告急于始毕，称北方有警，由是突厥解围，盖公主之助也。
现代文：不久突厥就撤走了，后来抓到了一个突厥密探，他说：义成公主派人向始毕可汗告急，说是北边出现了紧急情况，因此就撤了军，这是义成公主的帮助。
English: Soon after, the Turks withdrew. Later, a Turkish spy was caught. He said, "Princess Yicheng sent someone to Shibikhan in a hurry, saying that there was an emergency in the north, so they withdrew their troops. This was Princess Yicheng's help."

古文：炀帝又将伐辽东，谓群臣曰： 突厥狂悖为寇，势何能为？
现代文：炀帝还是要征讨高丽，对朝臣们说： 突厥猖狂侵扰，又能怎样。
English: Emperor Yao still wanted to conquer Korea, and said to his courtiers: "What can we do with the rampant Turkish invasion?

古文：以其少时未散，萧瑀遂相恐动，情不可恕。 
现代文：因它一时没有溃散，萧瑀就恐吓我改变主意，这事不能宽恕。 
English: Because it did not break up immediately, Xiao Wei threatened me to change my mind, which is unforgivable.

古文：因出为河池郡守，即日遣之。
现代文：于是让他出任河池郡太守，当天离开京城。
English: As a result, he was appointed governor of Kappa County and left Kyoto on the same day.

古文：既至郡，有山贼万余人寇暴纵横，瑀潜募勇敢之士，设奇而击之，当阵而降其众。
现代文：到河池郡后，发现一万多个山林盗匪抢劫奸淫，肆无忌惮，萧瑀秘密招募勇士，定下奇计进行剿灭，当场制服了他们。
English: After arriving in Hechi County, he discovered that there were more than 10,000 mountain and forest bandits who robbed, raped, and were unscrupulous. Xiao Yao secretly recruited warriors, set up a plan to exterminate them, and subdued them on the spot.

古文：所获财畜，咸赏有功，由是人竭其力。
现代文：缴获的财物，全部赏给有功人员，因此人人竭力效劳。
English: All the seized property was awarded to meritorious personnel, so everyone worked hard.

古文：薛举遣众数万侵掠郡境，瑀要击之，自后诸贼莫敢进，郡中复安。
现代文：叛军首领薛举派遣他的小儿子薛仁越率领几万兵众到河池郡骚扰，萧瑀迎头截击赶走了他们，从此都不敢进犯，那里恢复了安宁。
English: The rebel leader Xue Jiu sent his youngest son Xue Ren Yue to lead tens of thousands of soldiers to harass Hechi County. Xiao Yao drove them away with a head-on volley. Since then, they have not dared to attack, and peace has been restored there.

古文：高祖定京城，遣书招之。
现代文：唐高祖平定长安后，派人送信招聘萧瑀。
English: After Tang Gaozu conquered Chang'an, he sent someone to recruit Xiao Yao.

古文：瑀以郡归国，授光禄大夫，封宋国公，拜民部尚书。
现代文：萧瑀献出河池郡投奔唐朝，被授光禄大夫头衔，封宋国公爵号，任民部尚书官职。
English: Xiao Yao offered Hechi County to the Tang Dynasty, was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor, was given the title of Duke of Song, and was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：太宗为右元帅，攻洛阳，以瑀为府司马。
现代文：太宗李世民担任右元帅，进攻洛阳，任命萧瑀为秦王府司马。
English: Emperor Taizong Li Shimin served as the right field marshal, attacked Luoyang, and appointed Xiao Yu as the secretary of Qin Wangfu.

古文：武德五年，迁内史令。
现代文：武德元年，改任内史令。
English: In the first year of the Wude era, he was reassigned to the position of Naishi ryo.

古文：时军国草创，方隅未宁，高祖乃委以心腹，凡诸政务，莫不关掌。
现代文：当时军务国政处在开创时期，边境还没有平定，高祖竟把机要的事情委托给他，凡是各项政务，没有不让他参与主管的。
English: At that time, the military, national and political affairs were in the pioneering period, and the border had not yet been pacified. Gaozu actually entrusted him with important matters, and there was nothing to prevent him from participating in the management of various government affairs.

古文：高祖每临轩听政，必赐升御榻，瑀既独孤氏之婿，与语呼之为萧郎。
现代文：高祖每当到殿前处理政务，一定会赐他坐上御榻，萧瑀是独孤氏的女婿，谈话时就亲切地喊他为 萧郎 。
English: Whenever Gao Zu came to the palace to deal with government affairs, he would certainly give him a seat on the couch. Xiao Yao was the son-in-law of Du Guo, and he affectionately called him Xiao Lang when talking.

古文：国典朝仪，亦责成于瑀，瑀孜孜自勉，绳违举过，人皆惮之。
现代文：国家的典章制度，朝廷的礼仪，也交给萧瑀主持制订，萧瑀勤勤恳恳，毫不懈怠，揭露和纠正过失错误，人们都畏惧他。
English: The state's award system and the etiquette of the imperial court were also entrusted to Xiao Yu to preside over and formulate. Xiao Yu diligently and earnestly, without slacking, exposed and corrected mistakes, and people were afraid of him.

古文：常奏便宜数十条，多见纳用，手敕曰： 得公之言，社稷所赖。
现代文：他经常提出几十条建议，多半被采用，高祖亲手写给诏令说： 您的意见，有利于国家。
English: He often put forward dozens of suggestions, most of which were adopted. Gaozu personally wrote to the imperial edict saying: Your opinion is beneficial to the country.

古文：运智者之策，以能成人之美；纳谏者之言，以金宝酬其德。
现代文：您贡献机智的谋略，用才能帮助我成就好事；我采纳批评意见，用金银酬谢您的美德。
English: You contribute your wit and skill to help me achieve good; I accept criticism and reward your virtue with silver and gold.

古文：今赐金一函，以报智者，勿为推退。 
现代文：现在赏赐一函黄金，来感谢您，不要推让。 
English: Now award me a letter of gold to thank you, and do not budge.

古文：瑀固辞，优诏不许。
现代文：萧瑀坚持推辞，高祖没有同意。
English: Xiao Wei insisted on withdrawing, but Gaozu did not agree.

古文：其年，州置七职，务取才望兼美者为之。及太宗临雍州牧，以瑀为州都督。
现代文：那年，要在七个州设置官署，必须选拔才能声望都优秀的人担任职务，太宗担任雍州牧时，任命萧瑀为雍州都督。
English: That year, in order to set up government offices in seven prefectures, it was necessary to select people who were excellent in reputation. When Taizong served as the pastor of Yongzhou, he appointed Xiao Jun as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：高祖常有敕而中书不时宣行，高祖责其迟，瑀曰： 臣大业之日，见内史宣敕，或前后相乖者，百司行之，不知何所承用。
现代文：高祖发出的诏令，中书省常常不及时宣布执行，高祖批评他们拖拉，萧瑀说 ：我在隋朝炀帝大业年间，发现内史宣布的诏令，有的前后矛盾，各有关部门执行起来，不知道应当遵照哪个诏令。
English: Gaozu often did not announce the implementation of the edict issued by Gaozu in time, Gaozu criticized their delay, Xiao Yu said: During the great career of the Sui Dynasty, I found that the edict announced in history had some inconsistencies, and the relevant departments began to implement it, and I did not know which edict should be followed.

古文：所谓易必在前，难必在后，臣在中书日久，备见其事。
现代文：人们常说容易办的先办，不好办的后办，我在中书省的时间很长，各种情况都遇到过。
English: People often say that what is easy to do should be done first, and what is hard to do should be done later. I have spent a long time in the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and have encountered all kinds of situations.

古文：今皇基初构，事涉安危，远方有疑，恐失机会。
现代文：如今皇家的基业开始建造，事情关系到安危成败，边地还有疑虑，担心贻误机遇。
English: Now that the construction of the royal foundation has begun, the matter is related to safety, success and failure, and there are still doubts on the edge, worried about missed opportunities.

古文：比每受一敕，臣必勘审，使与前敕不相乖背者，始敢宣行。
现代文：比如每接到一道诏令，我一定进行核对，对那些前后没有矛盾的诏令，才敢宣布执行。
English: For example, every time I receive a decree, I must check it, and only dare to announce the implementation of those decrees that are consistent.

古文：迟晚之愆，实由于此。 
现代文：拖延的过失，就是这样造成的。 
English: It was the fault of the delay that caused this.

古文：高祖曰： 卿能用心若此，我有何忧？ 
现代文：高祖说： 你能这样尽心竭力，我担心什么呢？ 
English: Gaozu said, "If you can work so hard, what am I worried about?

古文：初，瑀之朝也，关内产业并先给勋人。
现代文：萧瑀入朝时，关内的田产家业都垫付了立功人员的奖赏。
English: When Emperor Xiao Rong ascended to the throne, the fields and farms in Guanzhong were all rewarded for meritorious personnel.

古文：至是特还其田宅，瑀皆分给诸宗子弟，唯留庙堂一所，以奉烝尝。
现代文：到这时特地归还给他土地房屋，他都分送给了族间的子侄，惟独留下一幢祠堂，以便祭祀祖先。
English: At this time, the land and houses were specially returned to him, and he gave them all to his sons and nephews among the tribes, but he left only an ancestral hall to worship his ancestors.

古文：及平王世充，瑀以预军谋之功，加邑二千户，拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：平定王世充后，萧瑀因参与制定军事谋略的功劳，增封收纳两千户租税，授予尚书右仆射官职。
English: After Wang Shichong was subdued, Xiao Qi, for his contribution to the formulation of the military strategy, increased the amount of taxes collected by two thousand households, and awarded Shang Shu the position of the right-hand man of the shooting officer.

古文：内外考绩皆委之司会，为群僚指南，庶务繁总。
现代文：朝廷内外官员政绩的考核工作全部交给他主持，掌管财政经济，他是百官的指导，众多的政务由他统管。
English: He presided over all the work of assessing the political performance of officials inside and outside the court, and was in charge of finance and economy. He was the guide of hundreds of officials, and he was in charge of many government affairs.

古文：瑀见事有时偏驳，而持法稍深，颇为时议所少。
现代文：萧瑀看待事物有时片面，执行法令又很严，当时的舆论很是鄙视。
English: Xiao Yao's view of things was sometimes one-sided, the enforcement of laws and regulations was very strict, and the public opinion at that time was very despised.

古文：瑀尝荐封伦于高祖，高祖以伦为中书令。
现代文：萧瑀曾向高祖推荐封伦，高祖任命封伦为尚书令。
English: Xiao Wei had recommended Feng Lun to Gao Zu, and Gao Zu appointed Feng Lun as Shang Shuling.

古文：太宗即位，迁尚书左仆射，封伦为右仆射。
现代文：太宗登位，改任萧瑀为尚书左仆射，封伦为尚书右仆射。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he appointed Xiao Jie as Shang Shu's left-hand retainer and Feng Lun as Shang Shu's right-hand retainer.

古文：伦素怀险诐，与商量将为可奏者，至太宗前尽变易之。
现代文：封伦一向怀着凶险不正的念头，跟萧瑀商量确定禀奏的事，在太宗面前却都任意更改。
English: Feng Lun always had a sinister and dishonest thought, and discussed with Xiao Yao to determine the performance, but changed it arbitrarily in front of Taizong.

古文：于时房玄龄、杜如晦既新用事，疏瑀亲伦，瑀心不能平，遂上封事论之，而辞旨寥落。
现代文：这时房玄龄、杜如晦开始主持政务，疏远萧瑀亲近封伦，萧瑀心里不满，于是呈递密封的奏章进行抨击，但内容空洞。
English: At this time, Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao began to preside over government affairs, alienating Xiao Yao from being close to Furen. Xiao Yao was dissatisfied, so he submitted a sealed record to criticize, but the content was empty.

古文：太宗以玄龄等功高，由是忤旨，废于家。
现代文：太宗由于房玄龄等人都有大功劳，因此认为萧瑀违背旨意，让他免职回家。
English: Taizong thought that Xiao Yao was going against his will because Fang Xuanling and others had made great contributions, so he dismissed Xiao Yao and sent him home.

古文：俄拜特进、太子少师。
现代文：很快又任命他为特进、太子少师。
English: He was soon appointed as a special trainee and junior teacher to the Crown Prince.

古文：未几，复为尚书左仆射，赐实封六百户。
现代文：没过多久，恢复了尚书左仆射官职，赐给收纳六百户租税的实封。
English: Not long after, he restored the post of Shangshu's left-hand man, and gave him a sealed envelope for the collection of taxes from 600 households.

古文：太宗常谓瑀曰： 朕欲使子孙长久，社稷永安，其理如何？ 
现代文：太宗曾问萧瑀： 我想让子孙长久继承帝位，天下永远安宁，究竟该怎样办呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong once asked Xiao Yu: I want my children and grandchildren to inherit the imperial throne for a long time and the world to be peaceful forever. What should I do?

古文：瑀对曰： 臣观前代国祚所以长久者，莫若封诸侯以为盘石之固。
现代文：萧瑀回答说： 我观察前代圣贤使得国运久长的办法，不如分封诸侯来使政权固若磐石。
English: Xiao Wei replied: I observed that the previous generation of sages and wise men made the national fortune last longer. It is better to divide the feudal lords to make the political power rock-solid.

古文：秦并六国，罢侯置守，二代而亡；汉有天下，郡国参建，亦得年余四百。魏、晋废之，不能永久。
现代文：秦朝统一六国，废除诸侯设置郡县，两代就灭亡了；汉朝夺取天下，既设郡县又封诸侯，国运也有四百多年；曹魏、晋朝废除了诸侯，又不能长久。
English: The Qin Dynasty unified the six countries, abolished the vassals and set up counties, and the two generations perished; the Han Dynasty conquered the world, set up counties and vassals, and had a national movement for more than 400 years; the Cao Wei and Jin Dynasties abolished the vassals, but not for long.

古文：封建之法，实可遵行。 
现代文：分封诸侯的制度，实在应该遵照执行。 
English: The system of apportioning lordships should really be implemented.

古文：太宗然之，始议封建。
现代文：太宗认为正确，开始商议分封国公刺史。
English: Taizong thought it was right and began to discuss the history of the division of fiefs.

古文：寻坐与侍中陈叔达于上前忿诤，声色甚厉，以不敬免。
现代文：不久因与侍中陈叔达在太宗面前愤怒争执，声调脸色非常严厉，就以不尊重皇上为由免去萧瑀的职务。
English: Soon, because of an angry dispute with the chamberlain Chen Shuda in front of Emperor Taizong, the tone of his face was very harsh, and he dismissed Xiao Yao from his duties on the grounds of disrespecting the emperor.

古文：岁余，授晋州都督。
现代文：年底，任命为晋州都督。
English: At the end of the year, he was appointed the governor of Jinzhou.

古文：明年，征授左光禄大夫，兼领御史大夫。
现代文：第二年，调回朝廷任左光禄大夫，兼任御史大夫，跟宰相们一起参与商议朝政。
English: In the second year, he was transferred back to the Imperial Court to serve as Sakoroku no daibu, concurrently serving as goshi no daibu, and participated in the deliberation of the imperial government together with the prime ministers.

古文：与宰臣参议朝政，瑀多辞辩，每有评议，玄龄等不能抗。然心知其是，不用其言，瑀弥怏怏。
现代文：萧瑀经常争辩，有的意见，房玄龄等人也不能抗衡，心里明知是正确的，但不采纳，萧瑀更是怏怏不乐。
English: Xiao Yao often argues, some opinions, Fang Xuanling and others can not compete, knowing in his heart is correct, but does not adopt, Xiao Yao is even more unhappy.

古文：玄龄、魏徵、温彦博尝有微过，瑀劾之，而罪竟不问，因此自失。
现代文：房玄龄、魏征、温彦博曾犯小错误，萧瑀上表弹劾，但竟然没有追究，反给自己造成损害。
English: Fang Xuanling, Wei Zheng, and Wen Yanbo once made a small mistake and were impeached by Xiao Yao, but they did not pursue the matter and caused damage to themselves.

古文：由是罢御史大夫，以为太子少傅，不复预闻朝政。
现代文：为这事罢免了御史大夫，任命为太子少傅，不再参与朝政。
English: For this matter, the Imperial Historian was dismissed, and the Crown Prince was appointed as a junior minister, and no longer participated in the imperial government.

古文：六年，授特进，行太常卿。
现代文：贞观六年，授予特进这个闲散官衔，行使太常卿职务。
English: Zhenguan for six years, awarded the idle official title of special promotion, and exercised the duties of Tai Changqing.

古文：八年，为河南道巡省大使，人有坐当推劾苦未得其情者，遂置格置绳，以至于死，太宗特免责之。
现代文：贞观八年，任河南道巡省大使，有个应当审问判罪的犯人不肯交待犯罪情节，于是放在铜格上用火烤，用绳索捆绑吊打，一直整死了，太宗特地免于处分。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, when he was the Henan Provincial Inspection Ambassador, a criminal who should have been interrogated and convicted refused to disclose the circumstances of the crime, so he was roasted with fire on a copper grate, tied with a rope and hanged, and died all the time. Taizong was specially exempted from punishment.

古文：九年，拜特进，复令参预政事。
现代文：贞观九年，调回朝廷任命为特进官衔，又让他参与朝政。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, he was transferred back to the imperial court and appointed as a special promotion official, and he was allowed to participate in imperial politics.

古文：太宗尝从容谓房玄龄曰： 萧瑀大业之日，进谏隋主，出为河池郡守。
现代文：太宗曾经亲切随和地对房玄龄说： 萧瑀在隋朝大业年间，劝阻炀帝征讨高丽，被赶出京城任河池郡太守。
English: Emperor Taizong once said to Fang Xuanling in a friendly and easy-going manner: During the Sui Dynasty, Xiao Yu dissuaded Emperor Xuan from recruiting Koryo and was driven out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Hechi County.

古文：应遭割心之祸，翻见太平之日，北叟失马，事亦难常。 
现代文：本应陪同炀帝遭到杀身之祸，反而遇上了平安的机会，这真是塞翁失马，祸福无常啊。 
English: He was supposed to accompany Emperor Xian who was killed, but instead he got a chance of peace. This is really a lost cause, misfortune and fortune are fickle.

古文：瑀顿首拜谢。
现代文：萧瑀听到这番议论，对着太宗叩头感谢。
English: Xiao Yao heard this discussion and thanked Taizong for his kowtow.

古文：太宗又曰： 武德六年以后，太上皇有废立之心而不之定也，我当此日，不为兄弟所容，实有功高不赏之惧。
现代文：太宗又说： 武德六年以后，太上皇有废除建成立我为太子的想法又拿不定主意，在这期间，我不被建成、元吉宽容，确实产生了功劳丰伟而得不到奖赏的忧虑。
English: Emperor Taizong also said, "After six years of Wu De, Emperor Taizong had the idea of abolishing Jian Jian and making me the crown prince, but he couldn't make up his mind. During this time, I wasn't respected, I wasn't treated well, and I was really worried that I wouldn't be rewarded for my great achievements.

古文：此人不可以厚利诱之，不可以刑戮惧之，真社稷臣也。 因赐瑀诗曰： 疾风知劲草，版荡识诚臣。 
现代文：萧瑀这人不被他们的丰厚财物所引诱，不被他们的严酷威胁所吓倒，真是个关系国家安危的大臣。 接着写诗赐给萧瑀说： 疾风知劲草，版荡识诚臣。 
English: Xiao Wei, who was not seduced by their abundant wealth, nor intimidated by their harsh threats, was truly a minister who was concerned about the safety of the country. He then wrote a poem for Xiao Wei, saying: The wind knows the strength of the grass, and the wise and honest minister knows the wind.

古文：又谓瑀曰： 卿之守道耿介，古人无以过也。
现代文：又对萧瑀说： 您守志不移刚正不阿，古代圣贤也不能超过。
English: He also said to Xiao Yu: You are steadfast and upright, and you cannot surpass the ancient sages.

古文：然而善恶太明，亦有时而失。 
现代文：但是善恶分得太仔细了，也有失去分寸的时候。 
English: But good and evil are too carefully separated, and there are times when we lose our sense of proportion.

古文：瑀再拜谢曰： 臣特蒙诫训，又许臣以忠谅，虽死之日，犹生之年也。 
现代文：萧瑀拜了两拜感谢说： 我特蒙皇上教导，又肯定了我的忠诚，虽然到了快死的年龄，却如新生一样。 
English: Xiao Yao bowed twice in thanks and said, "I have been specially taught by the emperor and affirmed my loyalty. Although I have reached the age of dying, I am like a newborn.

古文：魏徵进而言曰： 臣有逆众以执法，明主恕之以忠；臣有孤特以执节，明主恕之以劲。
现代文：魏征对太宗说 ：有违背众人心愿而坚持法度的臣子，圣明的君主因为忠诚而原谅他；有孤立无援而坚持节操的臣子，圣明的君主因为刚正而原谅他。
English: Wei Zheng said to Emperor Taizong: "If there is a vassal who goes against the wishes of the people and upholds the law, the sacred monarch will forgive him because he is loyal; if there is a vassal who is alone and defiant and upholds discipline, the sacred monarch will forgive him because he is upright."

古文：昔闻其言，今睹其实，萧瑀不遇明圣，必及于难！ 
现代文：从前听到有关他的传闻，如今见到他的实际情况，萧瑀不是遇到圣明的君主，必然遭受祸患！ 
English: Having heard rumors about him in the past, and now seeing his actual situation, Xiao Wei is not a monarch who has encountered the Holy Light, and will inevitably suffer misfortune!

古文：太宗悦其言。
现代文：太宗对魏征的话很感兴趣。
English: Taizong was very interested in Wei Zheng's words.

古文：十七年，与长孙无忌等二十四人并图形于凌烟阁。
现代文：贞观十七年，萧瑀同长孙无忌等二十四人一起绘制肖像陈列在专为表彰功臣而建造的凌烟阁。
English: In the 17th year of Zhenguan, Xiao Yao, together with his eldest grandson Wu Bo, and 24 other people, painted portraits and displayed them in Lingyan Pavilion, which was specially built to commend heroes.

古文：是岁，立晋王为皇太子，拜瑀太子太保，仍知政事。
现代文：当年，立晋王李治为太子，任命萧瑀为太子太保，仍旧参与朝廷政务。
English: In that year, Emperor Jin established Prince Riji as Crown Prince and appointed Prince Xiao Jun as Crown Prince and Protector, and he still participated in the government affairs of the imperial court.

古文：太宗之伐辽东也，以洛邑冲要，襟带关、河，以瑀为洛阳宫守。
现代文：太宗御驾亲征高丽时，因为洛阳是军事交通要地，关隘、黄河环绕，就安排萧瑀担任洛阳宫留守。
English: When Emperor Taizong led his relatives to invade Korea, he arranged for Xiao Qi to stay behind at Luoyang Palace because Luoyang was an important military transportation hub, surrounded by the Yellow River.

古文：车驾自辽还，请解太保，仍同中书门下。
现代文：太宗从辽东回朝后，批准萧瑀的请求免去太子太保职务，保留同中书门下职位。
English: After Taizong returned to the imperial court from Liaodong, he approved Xiao Yao's request to be relieved of the duties of the prince's bodyguard and retain his position under the tutelage of Tong Zhongshuo.

古文：太宗以瑀好佛道，尝赉绣佛像一躯，并绣瑀形状于佛像侧，以为供养之容。
现代文：太宗因为萧瑀喜爱佛学，曾赐给他一幅彩丝绣成的佛像，并把萧瑀的形象绣在佛像旁边，作为供奉的样子。
English: Emperor Taizong gave Xiao Yao a silk embroidered Buddha statue because he loved Buddhism, and embroidered Xiao Yao's image next to the Buddha statue as an offering.

古文：又赐王褒所书《大品般若经》一部，并赐袈裟，以充讲诵之服焉。
现代文：又赐给王褒书写的《大品般若经》一部，同时赐给袈裟，作为讲述佛经的服装。
English: He also gave Wang Hongshu a copy of the "Great Prajna Sutra" written by Wang Hongshu, and at the same time gave Zou a costume for reciting the sutra.

古文：瑀尝称： 玄龄以下同中书门下内臣，悉皆朋党比周，无至心奉上。 
现代文：萧瑀曾说： 自房玄龄以下的同中书门下的朝臣们，全都结党营私排斥异己，不是以至诚之心事奉皇上。 
English: Xiao Wei once said: The courtiers under the tutelage of Tongzhongshu, from the age of Fusa to the age of Xuanling, all formed a party to exclude outsiders, and did not serve the emperor with a sincere heart.

古文：累独奏云： 此等相与执权，有同胶漆，陛下不细谙知，但未反耳。 
现代文：连续多次地单独禀奏说： 这帮人一块主持朝政，如胶似漆般地结成死党，陛下并不了解底细，他们只是还没有造反而已。 
English: "This group of people presides over the imperial court together, and like glue, they have formed a deadly alliance. Your Majesty doesn't know the details, they just haven't rebelled yet.

古文：太宗谓瑀曰： 为人君者，驱驾英材，推心待士，公言不亦甚乎，何至如此！ 
现代文：太宗对萧瑀说： 作为国君，要善于使用优异人才，真诚地对待下级官吏，您的话不是说得太严重了吗，哪里会到这种样子！ 
English: Taizong said to Xiao Yao, "As the sovereign, you should be good at using excellent talents and sincerely treat lower-level officials. Isn't what you said too serious? Where would this happen?

古文：太宗数日谓瑀曰： 知臣莫若君，夫人不可求备，自当舍其短而用其长。
现代文：太宗一连几天对萧瑀说： 没有谁比国君更了解臣子，对别人不能够求全责备，应当忽略他的不足，运用他的特长。
English: Taizong said to Xiao Yao for several days in a row: No one knows the vassal better than the sovereign, he cannot seek full blame on others, he should ignore his shortcomings and use his strengths.

古文：朕虽才谢聪明，不应顿迷臧否。 
现代文：我的才能虽然谈不上聪慧明智，但是在善恶的品评方面不能模糊不清。 
English: My talents, while not particularly bright or wise, are not fuzzy when it comes to judging good and evil.

古文：因数为瑀信誓。
现代文：还多次向萧瑀表明坚信他的忠诚。
English: He also repeatedly expressed to Xiao Jun that he firmly believed in his loyalty.

古文：瑀既不自得，而太宗积久衔之，终以瑀忠贞居多而未废也。
现代文：萧瑀已感到失意，太宗也长久地怨恨他，到底是因为萧瑀的忠诚坚贞占主导地位而没有抛弃他。
English: Xiao Yao was already disappointed, and Taizong had long resented him. In the end, it was because Xiao Yao's loyalty and steadfastness prevailed that he did not abandon him.

古文：会瑀请出家，太宗谓曰： 甚知公素爱桑门，今者不能违意。 
现代文：恰好萧瑀申请出家当和尚，太宗对他说 ：非常了解您一向喜爱僧人，现在不能违背您的心愿。 
English: Just as Xiao Yao was applying to become a monk, Emperor Taizong said to him: I know very well that you have always loved monks, and now I cannot go against your wishes.

古文：瑀旋踵奏曰： 臣顷思量，不能出家。 
现代文：萧瑀转身之间又禀奏说： 我近来考虑，不能出家。 
English: Xiao Yao turned around and said, "I've been thinking lately that I can't become a monk.

古文：太宗以对群臣吐言，而取舍相违，心不能平。
现代文：太宗因为对朝臣们宣布了这事而最后的结果相反，心里很不满意。
English: Emperor Taizong was very dissatisfied because he had announced this to his courtiers, but the final result was the opposite.

古文：瑀寻称足疾，时诣朝堂，又不入见，太宗谓侍臣曰： 瑀岂不得其所乎，而自慊如此？ 
现代文：萧瑀不久又声称腿脚生病，却经常到百官理事的朝堂里来，又不拜见太宗，太宗对身边的臣子说： 萧瑀难道没有得到合适的位置吗，竟不知足到这种地步？ 
English: Xiao Yao soon claimed that his legs and feet were ill, but he often came to the court of the Centurion and did not visit Taizong. Taizong said to the courtiers around him, "Didn't Xiao Yao get the right position, yet he is not satisfied to such an extent?"

古文：遂手诏曰：
现代文：于是亲手写诏书说：
English: So he wrote an edict with his own hand, saying:

古文：朕闻物之顺也，虽异质而成功；事之违也，亦同形而罕用。
现代文： 我听说办事配合协调，即使不同一个质体也能成功；办事相互扯皮，就是同在一个质体也无效果。
English: I've heard that if you work together and coordinate, you can succeed even if you're not in the same material body; if you work against each other, even if you're in the same material body, it won't work.

古文：是以舟浮楫举，可济千里之川；辕引轮停，不越一毫之地。
现代文：因此船浮水上木桨划水，可以渡过千里江河；车辕在拉车轮不动，不能移动丝毫距离。
English: Therefore, the boat floats on the water and paddles the water, and can cross thousands of rivers and rivers; the trolley does not move when pulling the wheel, and cannot move the slightest distance.

古文：故知动静相循易为务，曲直相反难为功，况乎上下之宜、君臣之际者矣。
现代文：所以知道动静合拍容易办事，曲直相反难得成功，何况是理顺上下之间、君臣之间的关系就更重要了。
English: Therefore, knowing that it is easy to coordinate the dynamic and the static, but it is difficult to achieve success in the opposite direction. Moreover, it is more important to straighten out the relationship between the upper and the lower, and between the monarch and the minister.

古文：朕以无明于元首，期托德于股肱，思欲去伪归真，除浇反朴。
现代文：正因为我这国君不算圣明，所以对朝臣们抱着厚望，想要排除虚假追求真诚，清除浮薄返回质朴。
English: It is precisely because I, the sovereign, am not a saint, that I have high hopes for my courtiers. I want to eliminate the false pursuit of sincerity, remove the superficial and return to simplicity.

古文：至于佛教，非意所遵，虽有国之常经，固弊俗之虚术。
现代文：至于佛教，我并不真心信奉，虽然有了法定的佛教经书，那本来是浅陋庸俗的虚假技艺。
English: As for Buddhism, I don't really believe in it. Although there is a legal Buddhist scripture, it was originally a shallow and vulgar false art.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：求其道者，未验福于将来；修其教者，翻受辜于既往。
现代文：祈求佛教道术的人，无法验证来世的幸福；修养佛家身心的人，反而遭受现世的祸殃。
English: Those who pray to Buddhist Taoism cannot verify the happiness of the afterlife; those who cultivate the Buddhist body and mind, on the other hand, suffer the misfortunes of this world.

古文：至若梁武穷心于释氏，简文锐意于法门，倾帑藏以给僧祗，殚人力以供塔庙。
现代文：以致像梁武帝萧衍对佛教竭尽心力，梁简文帝萧纲对佛门专心致志，花光国库钱财来供给和尚尼姑，征尽民间劳役来修建佛塔寺院。
English: So much so that Liangwu Emperor Xiaoyan devoted himself to Buddhism, Liang Jianwen Emperor Xiaogang devoted himself to Buddhism, spent all the money in the national treasury to supply monks and nuns, and conscripted laborers to build pagodas and temples.

古文：及乎三淮沸浪，五岭腾烟，假余息于熊蹯，引残魂于雀谷。
现代文：直到三淮大地诵经的声浪滚滚，五岭高峰拜佛的香烟腾腾，想挽留死前的短暂喘息，延长残存的微弱魂魄。
English: Until the sound of sutra chanting in the Three Huai Mountains and the smoke of Buddha worship in the Five Ridge Mountains, they want to retain the short respite before death and prolong the remaining weak soul.

古文：子孙覆亡而不暇，社稷俄顷而为墟，报施之征，何其缪也！
现代文：子孙覆灭都无暇顾及，宗庙顷刻就变为废墟，酬报辛劳的效应，该是多么背谬。
English: There is no time to take care of the children and grandchildren, and the ancestral temple will turn into ruins in an instant. How absurd it is to reward the effect of hard work.

古文：而太子太保、宋国公瑀践覆车之余轨，袭亡国之遗风。
现代文： 然而太子太保、宋国公萧瑀走翻车的老路，继承亡国的陋习。
English: However, Prince Taibo and Song Guogong Xiao Yao took the old road of overturning the car, inheriting the bad habits of the dead country.

古文：弃公就私，未明隐显之际；身俗口道，莫辩邪正之心。
现代文：抛弃公心迁就私念，不明白收敛和表现的机遇；身处俗世口谈佛学，分不清偏邪和正直的心术。
English: Abandoning righteousness to accommodate selfishness, they do not understand the opportunities of convergence and performance; being in the secular world to talk about Buddhism, they do not know the difference between deviance and honesty.

古文：修累叶之殃源，祈一躬之福本，上以违忤君主，下则扇习浮华。
现代文：宣扬历代的祸患根源，追求自己的幸福根基，对上触犯君主旨意，对下倡导虚浮不实。
English: They propagate the root causes of calamities throughout the ages and the pursuit of their own happiness. On the one hand, they violate the will of the monarch, and on the other hand, they advocate falsehood.

古文：瑀乃端然自应，请先入道，朕即许之，寻复不用。
现代文：以前我对张亮说 ：你既然信仰佛教，为什么不出家？ 
English: I used to say to Zhang Liang: Since you believe in Buddhism, why don't you become a monk?

古文：一回一惑，在于瞬息之间；自可自否，变于帷扆之所。
现代文：萧瑀就郑重地主动应声，要求带头进入佛门，我立即答应了他，很快他又不去。瞬息之间，七说八说，在宫殿上，出尔反尔。
English: Xiao Yu solemnly took the initiative to respond, asking to take the lead in entering the Buddhist gate, I immediately agreed to him, soon he would not go. In a blink of an eye, seven or eight said, in the palace, out of control.

古文：乖栋梁之大体，岂具瞻之量乎？
现代文：失去朝臣的体统，哪有宰相的器量？
English: If you lose the image of a courtier, how can you be a prime minister?

古文：朕犹隐忍至今，瑀尚全无悛改。
现代文：我还克制忍耐到现在，萧瑀却完全没有悔改。
English: I have restrained my patience until now, but Xiao Yao has not repented at all.

古文：宜即去兹朝阙，出牧小籓，可商州刺史，仍除其封。
现代文：应当立即离开京城，到地方去任个小职，可以当商州刺史，按惯例取消封号。 
English: They should immediately leave the capital and go to the provinces to take up a minor post. They can make history in Shangzhou and cancel the sealed number according to the usual practice.

古文：二十一年，征授金紫光禄大夫，复封宋国公。
现代文：贞观二十一年，调回朝廷授予金紫光禄大夫官衔，恢复宋国公封号。
English: In the 21st year of Zhenguan, he was transferred back to the imperial court and awarded the official title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and the official title of Song was restored.

古文：从幸玉华宫，遘疾薨于宫所，年七十四。
现代文：跟随太宗到新建的玉华宫休养，在这里得病去世，享年七十四岁。
English: He followed Emperor Taizong to the newly built Jade Palace to recuperate, where he fell ill and died at the age of 74.

古文：太宗闻而辍膳，高宗为之举哀，遣使吊祭。
现代文：太宗知道后伤心得停止进餐，太子李治为他举行悼念，派遣使者吊唁祭奠。
English: When Emperor Taizong learned of this, he was so heartbroken that he had to stop eating. Crown Prince Li Zhi held a memorial service for him and sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：太常谥曰 肃 。
现代文：太常寺拟定谥号叫肃。
English: Taijo-ji Temple's proposed nickname is Su.

古文：太宗曰： 易名之典，必考其行。
现代文：太宗说： 为死者确定谥号，一定要考察他的品行特点。
English: Taizong said: To determine the posthumous name of the deceased, it is necessary to examine his moral characteristics.

古文：瑀性多猜贰，此谥失于不直，更宜摭实。 
现代文：萧瑀的习性是猜忌过多，肃这个谥号不恰当，要重新据实确定。 
English: Xiao Yao's habit is to suspect too much. The nickname "Shu" is not appropriate. It should be confirmed again.

古文：改谥曰贞褊公。
现代文：于是改谥号为贞褊公。
English: As a result, his posthumous name was changed to Zhen Rong Gong.

古文：册赠司空、荆州都督，赐东园秘器，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：行文追认为司空、荆州都督，赐给棺木，安葬在太宗为自己预先修造的昭陵墓地。
English: He was given a coffin and buried in the Zhaoling Cemetery that Taizong had built for himself in advance.

古文：临终遗书曰： 生而必死，理之常分。
现代文：萧瑀临终写遗嘱说： 有生必然有死，这是不变的规律。
English: On his deathbed, Xiao Yao wrote his last will and testament: "There is life and there is death, this is an unchangeable law.

古文：气绝后可著单服一通，以充小敛。
现代文：我死后可穿一套单层的衣服，算作换衣仪式。
English: When I die, I get to wear a one-piece suit, which counts as a cross-dressing ceremony.

古文：棺内施单席而已，冀其速朽，不得别加一物。
现代文：棺内铺一张席子就行了，巴望尽快腐烂，不准再多一样东西。
English: It's enough to put a mat inside the coffin, hoping to rot as soon as possible, and not allow one more thing.

古文：无假卜日，惟在速办。
现代文：埋葬不要选择日期，只是要从速办理。
English: Don't choose a date for the burial, just do it immediately.

古文：自古贤哲，非无等例，尔宜勉之。 
现代文：自古以来贤能明智的人，不是没有同样的事例，你们要努力照办。 
English: Do your best to follow the example of wise and virtuous people from ancient times.

古文：诸子遵其遗志，敛葬俭薄。
现代文：儿子们遵照他的遗愿，装棺安葬都很节俭。
English: In accordance with his last wishes, his sons were frugal with the coffin and burial.

古文：子锐嗣，尚太宗女襄城公主，历太常卿、汾州刺史。
现代文：儿子萧锐继承官职，娶太宗的女儿襄城公主为妻，官至太常卿、汾州刺史。
English: His son, Xiao Rui, succeeded to the official post and married Princess Xiangcheng, the daughter of Emperor Taizong. He was promoted to the position of Grand Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：公主雅有礼度，太宗每令诸公主，凡厥所为，皆视其楷则。
现代文：襄城公主很讲礼仪，太宗经常告诫各位公主，所作所为，都要把她作为榜样。
English: Princess Xiangcheng was very particular about etiquette, and Emperor Taizong often admonished the princesses to follow her example in everything they did.

古文：又令所司别为营第，公主辞曰： 妇人事舅姑如事父母，若居处不同，则定省多阙。 
现代文：还命令有关部门另外为他们建造宅第，襄城公主辞谢说： 媳妇伺候公公婆母，如同伺候父亲母亲，如果分开居住，那么早晚问安常会耽误。 
English: He also ordered the relevant departments to build a separate house for them. Princess Xiangcheng thanked him and said, "A daughter-in-law serves her father-in-law and mother-in-law, just as she serves her father and mother. If they live separately, there will always be a delay in greeting them in the morning and evening.

古文：再三固让，乃止，令于旧宅而改创焉。
现代文：再三坚决辞谢，才算作罢，命令对老住宅进行改建。
English: Only after he repeatedly and emphatically declined to do so was he deemed to have given up and ordered the old house to be rebuilt.

古文：永徽初，公主薨，诏葬昭陵。
现代文：永徽初年，襄城公主去世，高宗命令安葬在昭陵。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Princess Xiangcheng died, and Gaozong ordered her to be buried in Zhaoling.

古文：瑀兄璟，亦有学行。
现代文：萧瑀的哥哥萧王景，也有学问德行。
English: Xiao Yao's brother, Xiao Wangjing, was also a scholar.

古文：武德中为黄门侍郎，累转秘书监，封兰陵县公。
现代文：高祖武德年间任黄门侍郎，连续调任到秘书监，封为兰陵县公。
English: During Gao Zuwude's reign, he served as the Yellow Gate chamberlain, was successively transferred to the secretary supervisor, and was appointed Lanling County official.

古文：贞观中卒，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：太宗贞观年间去世，追认为礼部尚书。
English: Taizong Zhenguan died in the same year, and was later regarded as the founder of the etiquette.

古文：瑀兄子钧，隋迁州刺史、梁国公珣之子也。博学有才望。
现代文：萧瑀的侄儿萧钧，是他哥哥一一一隋朝迁州刺史、梁国公萧王旬的儿子，学识渊博很有才能名望。
English: Xiao Yu's nephew, Xiao Yu, is the son of his elder brother, Xiao Wang Shun, the Prince of Liang, who was the first prince of the Sui Dynasty to move to a new province. He is well-educated, talented and famous.

古文：贞观中，累除中书舍人，甚为房玄龄、魏徵所重。
现代文：太宗贞观年间，官至中书舍人，很得房玄龄、魏征看重。
English: During the reign of Taizong Zhenguan, officials were reluctant to use Chinese calligraphy, and placed great importance on the House of Xuanzang and Wei Zheng.

古文：永徽二年，历迁谏议大夫，兼弘文馆学士。
现代文：高宗永徽二年，官至谏议大夫，兼任弘文馆学士。
English: Gao Zongyonghui was promoted to the rank of doctor in the second year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong Yonghui. He also served as a scholar of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：时有左武候别驾卢文操，逾垣盗左藏库物，高宗以别驾职在纠绳，身行盗窃，命有司杀之。
现代文：当时有个左武侯引驾叫卢文操的人翻墙盗窃左藏库的东西，高宗因为引驾的职责就是举报惩处盗窃的人，却自己进行盗窃，命令有关部门处死他。
English: At that time, there was a Zuowu marquis who drove a person called Lu Wenqiu over the wall to steal things from the Zuo storage. Gaozong, because the duty of the driver was to report and punish the thief, but he himself stole and ordered the relevant department to execute him.

古文：钧进谏曰： 文操所犯，情实难原。
现代文：萧钧向高宗劝谏说： 卢文操犯的罪过，按情节实在不能原谅。
English: Xiao Wei advised Gao Zong that: Lu Wenxiu's crime cannot be forgiven according to the circumstances.

古文：然恐天下闻之，必谓陛下轻法律，贱人命，任喜怒，贵财物。
现代文：不过恐怕天下人听到这事，必然说陛下轻视法律，轻视生命，办事任性，看重财物。
English: However, I am afraid that when the world hears about this, they will inevitably say that His Majesty despises the law, despises life, is capricious, and values possessions.

古文：臣之所职，以谏为名，愚衷所怀，不敢不奏。 
现代文：我的职责，就是劝谏，心里的想法，不敢不向陛下禀奏。 
English: My duty is to advise you, and I would not dare not to express my thoughts to Your Majesty.

古文：帝谓曰： 卿职在司谏，能尽忠规。 
现代文：高宗说道 ：你的职务就是进行劝谏，能够尽忠规劝我。 
English: Gaozong said, "Your duty is to advise me, and you can advise me faithfully."

古文：遂特免其死罪，顾谓侍臣曰： 此乃真谏议也。 
现代文：于是特地免除卢文操的死罪，对身边的臣子们说： 萧钧确实是个称职的谏议大夫。 
English: Therefore, he specifically exempted Lu Wenqiu from the death penalty, and said to the courtiers around him: Xiao Wei is indeed a competent doctor.

古文：寻而太常乐工宋四通等，为宫人通传信物，高宗特令处死，乃遣附律，钧上疏言： 四通等犯在未附律前，不合至死。 
现代文：不久太常寺乐师宋四通等人替宫女传递符信，高宗特地命令先将他们处死，再制订一项相应的法律，萧钧呈递奏疏说 ：宋四通等人是在还没有制订这项法律之前犯的罪错，不应当判处死刑。 
English: Not long after, Song Sittong, the musician of Taejong Temple, and others passed the letters on behalf of the concubines. Gao Zong specifically ordered that they be put to death first, and then a corresponding law would be formulated. Xiao Yu presented a report saying: Song Sittong and others committed the crime before this law was formulated, and should not be sentenced to death.

古文：手诏曰： 朕闻防祸未萌，先贤所重，宫阙之禁，其可渐欤？
现代文：高宗亲手写诏书说 ：我听说防止祸患要在它还没有出现之前，这是前代圣贤看重的事，皇宫里的规章，怎能随意变更呢？
English: Gaozong wrote the edict in his own hand and said, "I have heard that we must prevent the evil before it appears. This is a matter that the sages of the previous generation valued. How can the rules in the imperial palace be changed at will?

古文：昔如姬窃符，朕用为永鉴，不欲今兹自彰其过，所搦宪章，想非滥也。
现代文：战国时代魏安亻喜王的侍妾如姬盗窃兵符发兵援救赵国的事，我把它作为永久的警戒，没有想到如今我自己表现了那样的过失，掌握典章制度，是想不要越轨。
English: In the Warring States period, the concubine of Wei Anqixi Wang, Ruki, stole the soldiers' insignia and sent troops to rescue Zhao Guo. I took it as a permanent warning. I did not think that I had made such a mistake. I grasped the award system and wanted not to go off the rails.

古文：但朕翘心紫禁，思觌引裾，侧席硃楹，冀旌折槛。
现代文：但我一心挂念着宫廷，思慕着良相，侧身坐在厅堂前边，希望得到直谏的朝臣。
English: But I was preoccupied with the court, longing for good luck, sitting sideways at the front of the hall, hoping to get a straight-backed courtier.

古文：今乃喜得其言，特免四通等死，远处配流。 
现代文：今天才算听到直谏，特地免除宋四通等人的死罪，将他们流放到边远的地方去。 
English: It was only today that we heard that Naosuke had specifically exempted Song Shitong and others from the death penalty and exiled them to a remote place.

古文：钧寻为太子率更令，兼崇贤馆学士。
现代文：萧钧不久任太子率更令，兼任崇贤馆学士。
English: Not long after he became the crown prince, Xiao Yao was promoted to the highest rank and concurrently served as an academician of the Chongxian Academy.

古文：显庆中卒。
现代文：于高宗显庆年间去世。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Gaozongxianqing.

古文：所撰《韵旨》二十卷，有集三十卷行于代。
现代文：他著有《韵旨》二十卷，有文集三十卷流行于当代。
English: He is the author of 20 volumes of "Rhyme" and 30 volumes of anthologies, which are popular in contemporary times.

古文：子瓘，官至渝州长史。
现代文：萧钧的儿子萧馞，官至渝州长史。
English: Xiao Yao's son, Xiao Yao, became the governor of Yuqing.

古文：母终，以毁卒。
现代文：母亲去世时，由于悲伤过度而死。
English: When his mother died, he died of grief.

古文：瓘子嵩，别有传。
现代文：萧馞的儿子萧嵩，另外有传。
English: Xiao Wei's son, Xiao Song, is also said to have had a horn.

古文：钧兄子嗣业，少随祖姑隋炀帝后入于突厥。
现代文：萧钧哥哥的儿子萧嗣业，年幼时跟随姑祖母隋炀帝萧皇后到了突厥。
English: Xiao Zhuye, the son of Xiao Zhuye's brother, followed his aunt, Empress Xiao of the Sui Dynasty, to Turkey when he was young.

古文：贞观九年归朝，以深识蕃情充使，统领突厥之众。
现代文：太宗贞观九年，回到唐朝，因为十分熟悉北方各民族的情况，担任特使统帅突厥族的部队。
English: In the ninth year of Taizong Zhenguan, he returned to the Tang Dynasty, and because he was very familiar with the situation of the northern peoples, he served as a special envoy and commander of the Turkic troops.

古文：累转鸿胪卿，兼单于都护府长史。
现代文：连续提升为鸿胪卿，兼任单于都护府长史。
English: He was successively promoted to the position of Hongyuqing, and concurrently served as the governor of Dugou Prefecture.

古文：调露中，单于突厥反叛，嗣业率兵战，败，配流岭南而死。
现代文：高宗调露年间，匈奴、突厥背叛唐朝，萧嗣业率领军队征讨吃了败仗，流放到岭南死去。
English: During Gaozong's reign, the Xiongnu and Turks betrayed the Tang Dynasty, and Xiao Ziye led the army to fight a losing battle and was exiled to Lingnan where he died.

