古文：昭成子孙
现代文：实君，是昭成皇帝的庶出长子。
English: Sadakimi was the eldest illegitimate son of Emperor Akechi.

古文：实君者，昭成皇帝之庶长子也。性愚戆，安忍不仁。昭成季年，苻坚遣其行唐公苻洛等来寇南境，昭成遣刘库仁逆战于子岭。昭成时不胜，不能亲勒众军，乃率诸部避难阴山，度漠北。
现代文：禀性愚昧，残忍无仁道。昭成帝末年，苻坚派遣其行唐公苻洛等人来侵犯南部疆域，昭成帝派遣刘库仁在石子岭迎战。昭成帝这时有病，不能亲自统领各军，就率领各部落避难到阴山，越过漠北。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Zhaocheng, He Jian sent his emissary Tang Gong Rongluo and others to invade the southern territory, and Emperor Zhaocheng sent Liu Kuren to fight in Shiziling. At that time, Emperor Zhaocheng was ill and could not personally lead the army, so he led the tribes to take refuge in Yinshan and crossed the desert north.

古文：高车四面寇抄，复度漠南。
现代文：高车四面侵犯，又越过漠南。
English: Due to the encirclement of the high-speed train in the four-sided attack, it returned to the south of the desert.

古文：苻洛军退，乃还云中。
现代文：苻洛的军队撤退，昭成帝才回到云中。
English: It was only after the withdrawal of the Shiloh troops that they returned to the clouds.

古文：初，昭成以弟孤让国，乃以半部授孤。
现代文：当初，昭成帝因弟元孤推让国家，就把一半部落授予元孤。
English: At first, Emperor Akechi gave up the right to inherit the state to his brother, Koku, and he then gave half of his subjects to Koku.

古文：孤卒，子斤失职怀怨，欲伺隙为乱。
现代文：元孤去世后，其子元斤失去官职心怀怨恨，想伺机作乱。
English: After the death of Yuan Guo, his son Yuan Jin lost his official position and harbored resentment, waiting for an opportunity to make trouble.

古文：是时，献明皇帝及秦明王翰皆先终，太祖年六岁，昭成不豫，慕容后子阏婆等虽长，而国统未定。
现代文：这时，献明皇帝和秦明王元翰都先去世，太祖年仅六岁，昭成帝患病，慕容后的儿子板婆等人虽然年长，但嗣君没确定。
English: At this time, Emperor Xianming and King Yuanhan of Qinming both died first, the grandfather was only six years old, Emperor Zhaocheng was ill, and Murong's son Banba and others were older, but the heir was not certain.

古文：斤因是说实君曰： 帝将立慕容所生，而惧汝为变，欲先杀汝，是以顷日以来，诸子戎服，夜持兵仗，绕汝庐舍，伺便将发。吾愍而相告。 
现代文：元斤于是游说塞君说： 皇帝要立慕容氏所生的儿子，而畏惧你作乱，想先杀你，所以近日以来，各人穿着军衣，夜晚拿着兵器，围绕着你的房舍，就要伺机发难，我同情你而相告。 
English: Yuan Jin then lobbied Sejun, saying, "The emperor wants to appoint a son born of Murong, but he is afraid of you causing trouble and wants to kill you first. Therefore, in recent days, everyone has been wearing military uniforms and carrying weapons at night, surrounding your house, waiting for an opportunity to start trouble. I sympathize with you and tell you.

古文：时苻洛等军犹在君子津，夜常警备，诸皇子挟仗傍徨庐舍之间。
现代文：这时苻洛等人的军队还驻扎在君子津，夜晚时常警惕戒备，各个皇子挟带兵器来往于房舍之间。
English: At this time, the troops of Shiloh and others were still stationed in Junzizu, and they were often on alert at night, and the various princes carried weapons between the houses.

古文：实君视察，以斤言为信，乃率其属尽害诸皇子，昭成亦暴崩。
现代文：宫君观察，以为元斤的话是真的，就率领部属谋害所有皇子，昭成帝也突然逝世。
English: Miyakimi observed that, thinking that Yuanjin's words were true, he led his subordinates to murder all the princes, and Emperor Zhaocheng also died suddenly.

古文：其夜，诸皇子妇及人奔告苻洛军。坚将李柔、张蚝勒兵内逼，部从离散。
现代文：逭天夜晚，各位皇子的妻子和宫女跑去告诉苻洛的军队，苻坚的将领李柔、张蚝统领兵马向内逼近，部众离散。
English: In the evening of the same day, the wives and concubines of the princes ran to tell the troops in Minluo that the generals Li Rong and Zhang Qian, who were leading the troops, were approaching and the troops were dispersing.

古文：苻坚闻之，召燕凤问其故，以状对。
现代文：董坚得知后，征召趣凰询问原因，遮凰以实相告。
English: After Dong Jian learned of this, he summoned Funhuang to inquire about the reason, and Funhuang told him the truth.

古文：坚曰： 天下之恶一也。 
现代文：登学说： 天下的邪恶是共同的。 
English: Yu Jian said: The ugliness of the world is all the same.

古文：乃执实君及斤，轘之于长安西市。
现代文：于是拘捕富君和元斤，在长安西市车裂处死。
English: As a result, Tomijun and Yuanjin were arrested and executed in Chezong, West Chang'an.

古文：实君孙勿期，位定州刺史，赐爵林虑侯。
现代文：皇昼的孙子纽塑，担任室州刺史，获赐爵位为林虑侯。
English: Emperor Niu's grandson, Niu Shuo, served as the Muromachi sashimi, and was given the title of Lin Xianhou.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子六状，真定侯。
现代文：儿子左挞，爵位为真宣堡。
English: His son, Zuo Jie, was given the peerage of Zhenxuanbao.

古文：秦明王翰，昭成皇帝第三子。
现代文：秦明王元翰，是昭成皇帝的第三个儿子。
English: Qin Ming Wang Yuanhan was the third son of Emperor Zhaocheng.

古文：少有高气，年十五便请率骑征讨。帝壮之，使领二千骑。
现代文：年轻时有高尚的气概，十五岁时就请求率领骑兵征讨，皇帝认为他很勇敢，派他率领二千骑兵。
English: When he was young, he had a noble spirit. At the age of fifteen, he asked to lead a cavalry charge. The emperor thought he was very brave and sent him to lead two thousand cavalry.

古文：及长统兵，号令严信，周旋征讨，多有克捷。
现代文：等到成人统领兵马，号令严明，四处征讨，多有战功。
English: Wait until the adults are in command of the soldiers and horses, the order is clear, they are solicited everywhere, and there are many war achievements.

古文：建国十年卒。
现代文：建国十年去世。
English: He died ten years after the founding of the People's Republic.

古文：太祖即位，追赠秦王，谥曰明。
现代文：太祖即位，追赠元翰为秦王，谧号为明。
English: The great-grandfather ascended to the throne, posthumously awarded the title of King of Qin to Yuanhan, and his posthumous name was Ming.

古文：子仪，长七尺五寸，容貌甚伟，美须髯，有算略，少能舞剑，骑射绝人。
现代文：儿子元仪，高七尺五寸，身体十分魁伟，有美丽的胡须，有算计谋略，年轻时能舞剑，骑马射箭超过常人。
English: His son, Yuan Yi, is seven feet and five inches tall, has a very strong body, a beautiful beard, has the ability to calculate and strategize, was able to sword dance when he was young, and can ride a horse and shoot arrows better than ordinary people.

古文：太祖幸贺兰部，侍从出入。
现代文：太祖前往贺兰部，随从出入。
English: The great-grandfather went to Horanbe, and his attendants followed him in and out.

古文：登国初，赐爵九原公。
现代文：登国初年，获赐爵九原公。
English: In the first year of his ascension to the throne, he was given the title of Lord of Kujihara.

古文：从破诸部，有谋战功。
现代文：随从打败各部落，有谋略和征战的功劳。
English: When he followed Emperor Daowu to defeat the various clans, he was praised for his strategy and skill in battle.

古文：及太祖将图慕容垂，遣仪观衅。
现代文：等到太祖将要图谋慕容垂，派遣元仪伺隙而欲有圆。
English: Wait until the great-great-grandfather will try to plot Murongdiao, send the Yuan instrument to seek a gap and want to have a circle.

古文：垂问仪太祖不自来之意。仪曰： 先人以来，世据北土，子孙相承，不失其旧。
现代文：慕容垂向元仪询问太祖不亲自来的用意，元仪说： 先辈以来，世代占据北方土地，子孙相继，不失旧业。
English: Murong asked Yuan Yi about the great-grandfather's intention not to come in person. Yuan Yi said: Since our ancestors, generations have occupied the northern land, and their descendants have followed one after another, without losing the old business.

古文：乃祖受晋正朔，爵称代王，东与燕世为兄弟。
现代文：祖宗接受晋国的统辖，爵位称代王，束和燕国世代为兄弟。
English: My ancestors were titled by the Jin Dynasty and called the acting king. Dong and Yan Guo were brothers for generations.

古文：仪之奉命，理谓非失。 
现代文：我奉命而来，道理是没有错的。 
English: I'm here on orders, and there's nothing wrong with that.

古文：垂壮其对，因戏曰： 吾威加四海，卿主不自见吾，云何非失？ 
现代文：慕容垂认为他的回答有胆量，因之开玩笑说： 我的声威遍于四海，你的君主不亲自来见我，怎能不是错误? 
English: Murongtie thought his answer was very impressive, and jokingly said, "I am now the most powerful man in the world. Your sovereign did not want to meet me in person. How can I say that I was not rude?"

古文：仪曰： 燕若不修文德，欲以兵威自强，此乃本朝将帅之事，非仪所知也。 
现代文：元仪说： 燕国如不整饬文德，想用军威来增强自己，这是本朝将帅的事，不是我所知道的。 
English: Yi replied: If Yan's country does not cultivate morality and prepare to use military power to strengthen itself, then the generals of this dynasty should consider what to do. This is not something I can know.

古文：及还，报曰： 垂死乃可图，今则未可。 
现代文：等到返回，禀报说： 慕容垂死了才可以动手，现在不行。 
English: When he returned to China, he reported: "Mulong can only seek after death, now is not the time.

古文：太祖作色问之。
现代文：太祖严肃地问他。
English: Grandfather asked him seriously.

古文：仪曰： 垂年已暮，其子宝弱而无威，谋不能决。
现代文：元仪说： 慕容垂年纪已老，他的儿子慕容宝软弱而没有威信，谋略不能决断。
English: Yuan Yi said: Murong Lue is old, his son Murong Bao is weak and has no prestige, and his strategy is indecisive.

古文：慕容德自负才气，非弱主之臣。
现代文：慕容德自恃有才华，不是软弱君主的臣子。
English: Murongde considered himself a talented person, not a weak monarch's vassal.

古文：衅将内起，是可计之。 
现代文：嫌隙将在内部发生，那时可以图谋他们。 
English: The rift will happen internally, and then you can plot against them.

古文：太祖以为然。
现代文：太祖认为是这样。
English: That's what my great-grandfather thought.

古文：后改封平原公。
现代文：后来改封为平原公。
English: Later, his title was changed to the Prince of the Plain.

古文：太祖征卫辰，仪出别道，获卫辰尸，传首行宫。
现代文：太祖征讨卫辰，元仪从另外的道路出兵，获得了卫辰的尸首，传送首级到行宫。
English: The great ancestor conquered and killed Wei Chen, and Yuan Yi sent troops from another road to obtain Wei Chen's corpse and bring it to the imperial palace.

古文：太祖大喜，徙封东平公。
现代文：太祖大喜，徙封元仪为东平公。
English: The great-great-grandfather was overjoyed, and the migratory seal of Yuan Yi was Dongping Gong.

古文：命督屯田于河北，自五原至棝杨塞外，分农稼，大得人心。
现代文：命令元仪在黄河以北督促屯田，从五原到梱杨塞外，分派人员耕种，很得人心。
English: It was very popular to order Yuan Yi to supervise and urge the cultivation of fields north of the Yellow River, and to assign personnel to cultivate fields from Wuhuan to Baling Yangse.

古文：慕容宝之寇五原，仪摄据朔方，要其还路。
现代文：摹查窒侵犯互愿，玉仪紧随其后占据赃，截断他的退路。
English: Yu Cha Nian encroached on the mutual will, and Yu Yi immediately occupied Yu Cha Nian and cut off his escape route.

古文：及并州平，仪功多，迁尚书令。
现代文：等到并州平定，元仪的功劳大，升尚书令。
English: When the unified state was pacified, Yi was given the most credit and was appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：从围中山。
现代文：跟随包围中山。
English: He also followed the emperor to besiege Zhongshan.

古文：慕容德之败也，太祖以普驎妻周氏赐仪，并其僮仆财物。
现代文：慕容德失败后，太祖把萱壁的妻子垦区赐给亘仪，以及奴仆和财物。
English: After Murongde's defeat, the great-great-grandfather gave the wife of Yanbei, Yan Qu, to Wai Yi, as well as slaves and property.

古文：寻迁都督中外诸军事、左丞相，进封卫王。
现代文：不久升为都督中外诸军事、左丞相，晋封为卫王。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces and the Minister of the Left, and was promoted to the position of the King of Guards.

古文：中山平，复遣仪讨鄴，平之。
现代文：虫量平定，又派遣五仪讨伐邺城，平定了锂城。
English: After Zhongshan was subdued, he sent Yi to subdue the Liao.

古文：太祖将还代都，置中山行台，诏仪守尚书令以镇之，远近怀附。
现代文：太祖将回到代都，设置中山行台，诏令元仪兼尚书令来镇守中山，远近归附。
English: The great-great-grandfather will return to the capital, set up the Zhongshan marching platform, issue the imperial edict of the Yuan Dynasty and the imperial edict of the Shang Dynasty to guard Zhongshan, and annex it far and near.

古文：寻徵仪以丞相入辅。
现代文：不久征召元仪以丞相入朝辅佐。
English: Soon after, Genji was called up to become a choshojo (chancellor) and a choshu no suke (assistant to the emperor).

古文：又从征高车。
现代文：又跟随征讨高车。
English: This was followed by the requisition of high-speed trains.

古文：仪别从西北破其别部。
现代文：元仪另从西败高车别部。
English: The Yuan Dynasty also conquered other parts of Gaocheng from the west.

古文：又从讨姚平，有功，赐以绢布绵牛马羊等。
现代文：又跟随讨伐姚平，有功劳，赐给绢布绵牛马羊等等。
English: He also followed Yao Ping's crusade and, for his meritorious service, bestowed upon Yao cloth sheep and cattle, horses and sheep, and so on.

古文：仪膂力过人，弓力将十石；陈留公虔，槊大称异。
现代文：元仪四肢力气超过常人，拉弓的力量将近十石；陈留公元虔，长矛大得出奇。
English: The strength of the four limbs of Yuan Yi exceeded that of an ordinary person, and the strength of the bow was nearly ten stone; Chen Liu was a pious man, and his spear was surprisingly large.

古文：时人云： 卫王弓，桓王槊。 
现代文：所以当时的人说： 卫王的弓，桓王的矛。 
English: Therefore, the people at that time said: "The bow of the king of Wei, the spear of the king of Kuan."

古文：世祖之初育也，太祖喜，夜召仪入。
现代文：世祖初生时，太祖喜悦，夜晚召元仪入宫。
English: When the founder of the world was born, the great-grandfather was overjoyed and summoned Yuan Yi to the palace in the evening.

古文：太祖曰： 卿闻夜唤，乃不怪惧乎？ 
现代文：太祖说： 你听到夜晚召唤，竟不奇怪畏惧吗? 
English: She said, "Do you not fear when you hear the call of the night?

古文：仪曰： 臣推诚以事陛下，陛下明察，臣辄自安。
现代文：元仪说： 臣下诚心事奉陛下，陛下明察，臣下就自然安心了。
English: Yuan Yi said, "If your vassals sincerely serve your majesty, your majesty will see clearly, and your vassals will naturally feel at ease."

古文：忽奉夜诏，怪有之，惧实无也。 
现代文：夜晚忽然接到韶令，奇怪是有的，畏惧实在没有。 
English: I suddenly received an imperial order in the evening. It was strange, but I wasn't really afraid.

古文：太祖告以世祖生，仪起拜而歌舞，遂对饮申旦。
现代文：太祖把世祖出生的事告诉他，元仪起身叩拜而歌唱起舞，于是对饮到早晨。
English: The great-grandfather told him about the birth of the great-grandfather. Yuan Yi got up, bowed, sang and danced, and then drank until morning.

古文：召群臣入，赐仪御马、御带、缣锦等。
现代文：召群臣进宫，赐皇帝用的马和皮带、缣锦等物给元仪。
English: He summoned a group of courtiers to the palace and gave the emperor's horse, belt, brocade and other items to Yuan Yi.

古文：先是，上谷侯岌、张衮，代郡许谦等有名于时，学博今古，初来入国，闻仪待士，先就仪。
现代文：在这以前，上谷人侯岌、张衮，代郡人许谦等有名于当时，学问博通古今，开始来到都城，听说元仪善待士人，先到元仪那裹。
English: Prior to this, the people of Shanggui, such as Hou Rui, Zhang Xuan, and the people of Dai County, such as Xu Qian, were famous at that time, and their knowledge was extensive from ancient times to the present. They began to come to the capital. They heard that Yuan Yi was kind to scholars, and they came to Yuan Yi first.

古文：仪并礼之，共谈当世之务，指画山河，分别城邑，成败要害，造次备举。
现代文：元仪都尊重他们，一起谈论当代事务，指点河山，分辨城乡。各处的成败要害，仓猝之间一一列举。
English: The Yuan dynasty respected them all, discussed contemporary affairs together, pointed out rivers and mountains, and distinguished between urban and rural areas. The key points of success and failure everywhere were enumerated one by one.

古文：谦等叹服，相谓曰： 平原公有大才不世之略，吾等当附其尾。 
现代文：许谦等人叹服，相互间说： 平原公有不可每世出现的雄才大略，我们应当依附在他后面。 
English: Xu Qian and others sighed and said to each other: "Plain has a great talent that cannot appear in every generation, we should cling to him."

古文：太祖以仪器望，待之尤重，数幸其第，如家人礼。
现代文：太祖因元仪有才器声望，对他尤其尊重，多次前往他的宅第，如同家人的礼仪。
English: The great-great-grandfather had great respect for him because of his reputation as a talented musician, and visited his house many times, as was the family custom.

古文：仪矜功恃宠，遂与宜都公穆崇谋为乱，伏武士伺太祖，欲为逆。
现代文：元仪仗恃功劳宠信，于是和宜都公穆崇阴谋作乱，埋伏武士窥伺太祖，想杀死他。
English: Yuan believed in honour and merit, so he plotted with Yidukong Musong to create a disturbance, and ambushed the samurai to spy on Taizu, intending to kill him.

古文：崇子遂留在伏士中，太祖召之，将有所使。
现代文：穆崇的儿子遂留在埋伏的武士中，太祖征召他，将要有所派遣。
English: Mu Chong's son then remained among the ambushed warriors, and the grandfather conscripted him to be dispatched.

古文：遂留闻召，恐发，逾墙告状，太祖秘而恕之。
现代文：遂留听到征召，恐怕事情败露，翻墙报告，太祖保密而宽恕了他。
English: Then, upon hearing of his conscription, he was afraid that the matter would be exposed, so he reported the matter to the Great Ancestor. The Great Ancestor kept it confidential and forgave him.

古文：天赐六年，天文多变，占者云 当有逆臣伏尸流血 。
现代文：天赐六年，天象变化多，占卜的人说 将有叛臣被杀 。
English: God has given us six years, and the signs have changed a lot. The soothsayers say that some traitors will be killed.

古文：太祖恶之，颇杀公卿，欲以厌当天灾。
现代文：太祖心中厌恶，杀了很多公卿，想以此来消除天灾。
English: The great-grandfather was disgusted in his heart and killed many nobles, hoping to eliminate the natural disaster in this way.

古文：仪内不自安，单骑遁走。
现代文：元仪心内不安，单人匹马逃跑。
English: Uneasy in her heart, Yuan Yi ran away single-handed.

古文：太祖使人追执之，遂赐死，葬以庶人礼。仪十五子。
现代文：太祖派人捉住他，就赐他自杀，以平民礼仪安葬。元仪有十五个儿子。
English: The great-grandfather sent someone to catch him, but he was allowed to commit suicide and was buried according to the customs of the common people. Yuan Yi had fifteen sons.

古文：子纂，五岁，太祖命养于宫中。
现代文：儿子元纂，五岁时，太祖命令在宫中抚养。
English: When his son, Gensan, was five years old, the great-grandfather ordered that he be raised in the palace.

古文：少明敏，动止有礼，太祖爱之，恩与诸皇子同。
现代文：年轻时聪明敏捷，举止有礼节，太祖喜爱他，恩典和各皇子相同。
English: When he was young, he was clever and quick, and his manners were courteous. His great-grandfather loved him, and his grace was the same as that of other princes.

古文：世祖践阼，除定州刺史，封中山公，进爵为王，赐步挽几以优异之。
现代文：世祖登位，授任为定州刺史，封中山公，升爵位为王，赐给人力车和几案表示优待。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, was awarded the title of Dingzhou Zhisheng, was given the title of Zhongshan Gong, was promoted to the rank of king, and was given a rickshaw and several cases of preferential treatment.

古文：纂好酒爱佞，政以贿成。世祖杀其亲嬖人。
现代文：元纂好饮酒多谄谀，政事以行贿而成，世祖杀死他亲近宠爱的人。
English: The founder drank too much, his government was built on bribery, and he killed his nearest and dearest.

古文：后悔过修谨，拜内大将军。
现代文：后来后悔过失修饰谨慎，被任命为内大将军。
English: Later, he regretted his carelessness and was appointed Inner Senior General.

古文：居官清约简慎，更称廉平。
现代文：在任清廉节约简要慎重，又有廉正公平之称。
English: While in office, he was scrupulously clean and frugal, and was known for his integrity and fairness.

古文：纂于宗属最长，宗室有事，咸就谘焉。
现代文：五箠在同宗亲属中最年长，宗室有事，都向他咨询。
English: Wujing is the oldest relative of the same family, and whenever there is a problem in the family room, he is consulted.

古文：薨，谥曰简。
现代文：逝世，谧号为筵。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Shosei.

古文：纂弟良，性忠笃。
现代文：五籑的弟弟：铋，性格忠诚笃实。
English: Wuzhen's younger brother: Zhou, loyal and honest.

古文：太宗追录仪功，封南阳王以绍仪后。
现代文：左塞追录元仪的功劳，封五皇为直垦旺来继承重堡为其后嗣。
English: Zuo Ce recorded the merits of Yuan Yi, and the fifth emperor was Naosuke Wang, who inherited the fortress as his heir.

古文：良弟干，机悟沉勇，善弓马，少有父风。
现代文：元良的弟弟元干，机敏善悟沉稳勇敢，善于射箭骑马，年轻时有父亲的风范。
English: Motoyoshi's younger brother, Motokane, was quick-witted, good at archery and horseback riding, and had his father's demeanor when he was young.

古文：太宗即位，拜内将军、都将，入备禁中。
现代文：太宗即位，任命他为内将军、都将，入宫防卫。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the general of the palace guard.

古文：太宗出游于白登之东北，干以骑从。
现代文：太宗出游到白登山的东北，元干骑马随从。
English: Taizong traveled to the northeast of Mount Paektu, accompanied by Yuan Gan on horseback.

古文：有双鸱飞鸣于上，太宗命左右射之，莫能中。
现代文：有两只鹧鸺飞在空中呜叫，太宗命左右的人射它们，没人能射中。
English: There were two crickets flying in the air, whining. Too many people were trying to shoot them, but no one could hit them.

古文：鸱旋飞稍高，干自请射之，以二箭下双鸱。
现代文：随鸺旋转飞翔渐高，元干自己请求射击，用二箭射下两只鹃鸠。
English: As the dragonfly spins and flies higher and higher, Yuan Gang shoots at his own request, shooting down two dragonflies with two arrows.

古文：太宗嘉之，赐御马弓矢金带一，以旌其能。军中于是号曰 射鸱都将 。
现代文：太宗嘉奖他，赐给皇帝用的马匹弓箭金带各一件，以表彰他的能力，军中于是称他为 射鸱都将 。
English: Emperor Taizong praised him and gave the emperor a horse with a golden bow and arrow each, in recognition of his ability, and the army then called him "shooting the crossbow."

古文：从世祖南巡，进爵新蔡公。
现代文：跟随世祖向南巡视，升爵位为新蔡公。
English: He followed his ancestor on a tour of the south and was promoted to the peerage as the new Cai Gong.

古文：高宗即位，拜都官尚书。
现代文：高宗即位，任命他为都官尚书。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne and appointed him as the top official of the capital.

古文：卒，谥曰昭。
现代文：去世，谧号为昭。
English: Yi Sheng has fifteen sons.

古文：子祯，通解诸方之语，便骑射。
现代文：儿子元祯，理解各地的语言，善于骑马射箭。
English: His son, Yuan Zang, understands the languages of various regions and is good at horseback archery.

古文：世祖时，为司卫监。
现代文：世祖时，担任司卫监。
English: At the time of the founder, he served as the superintendent of public health.

古文：从征蠕蠕，忽遇贼别部，多少不敌，祯乃就山解鞍放马，以示有伏。贼果疑而避之。
现代文：跟随征伐蠕蠕，忽然遇到贼寇的别部，敌众我寡，元祯于是在山上解开马鞍放马，以显示有埋伏，贼寇果然怀疑而回避他们。
English: Following the conquest of the Cree, he suddenly encountered the other part of the thieves and robbers, the enemies were few and far between, so he unsaddled his horse on the mountain to show that there was an ambush, and the thieves and robbers really suspected and avoided them.

古文：高祖初，赐爵沛郡公。
现代文：高祖初年，获赐爵位为沛郡公。
English: In the first year of Gaozu, he was given the title of Pei County.

古文：后拜南豫州刺史。
现代文：后来被任命为南豫州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief historian of South Henan Province.

古文：大胡山蛮时时钞掠，前后守牧多羁縻而已。
现代文：大胡山蛮人时常抄掠，前后的郡守州牧大多维系而已。
English: The barbarians of Dahushan often plundered and pillaged, and most of the county governors and pastors before and after them only maintained the system.

古文：祯乃设画，召新蔡、襄城蛮魁三十余人，祯盛武装，于州西为置酒，使之观射。
现代文：元祯于是设下谋略，召集新蔡、襄城蛮人魁首三十多人，元祯全副武装，在州城西为他们设酒宴，让他们观看射箭。
English: Yuan Shao then devised a strategy, gathering more than thirty people, including Xin Cai and the leader of the Xiangcheng barbarians. Yuan Shao was fully armed and held a banquet for them in the west of the city to let them watch archery.

古文：先选左右能射者二十余人，祯自发数箭皆中，然后命左右以次而射，并中。
现代文：先选择左右能射击的二十多人，元祯自己射了几箭都中了靶，然后命令左右依次射击，都射中了。
English: First, he selected more than 20 people who could shoot left and right. Yuan Qi shot several arrows himself and hit the target. Then he ordered to shoot left and right in turn, and they all hit the target.

古文：先出一囚犯死罪者，使服军衣，亦参射限。命射不中，祯即责而斩之。
现代文：预先放出一个犯死罪的囚徒，命他穿上军服，也参加射击的行列，命他射击射不中，元祯当即斥责而杀了他。
English: He pre-released a prisoner who had committed a capital crime, ordered him to put on a military uniform and take part in the firing line, ordered him to shoot and miss, and immediately reprimanded him and killed him.

古文：蛮魁等伏伎畏威，相视股忄栗。
现代文：蛮人魁首等信服元祯的技能畏惧元桢的威风，互相看着发抖。
English: The leaders of the barbarians all admired his archery, feared his majesty, and looked at each other with trembling legs.

古文：又预教左右取死囚十人，皆著蛮衣，云是钞贼。
现代文：又预先教左右的人选取死罪囚犯十人，都穿上蛮人衣服，说是抄掠的贼寇。
English: He also had ten prisoners on death row taken out of prison in advance, and they were all dressed in the clothes of barbarians, pretending to be thieves who had come out to plunder.

古文：祯乃临坐，伪举目瞻天，微有风动，祯谓蛮曰： 风气少暴，似有钞贼入境，不过十人，当在西南五十里许。 
现代文：元祯于是到座位上，假装抬眼看天，略微有风吹动，元祯对蛮人说： 风稍微暴烈，似乎有抄掠的贼寇进入境内，不过十来人，当在西南五十来里的地方。 
English: So Yao sat there, pretending to look up at the sky. When he saw a little wind blowing, Yuan Yao said to the barbarians: The atmosphere is somewhat violent. It seems that there are robbers entering the country. There are no more than ten of them, and they should be more than fifty miles to the southwest.

古文：即命骑追掩，果缚送十人。
现代文：就命令骑兵追击，果然捆绑送上十人。
English: He immediately ordered the cavalry to go in pursuit, and ten men were bound.

古文：祯告诸蛮曰： 尔乡里作贼如此，合死以不？ 
现代文：元祯对蛮人们说： 你们乡间有人如此抄掠，该不该处死? 
English: Yuan Xuan said to the barbarians, "Someone in your countryside has plundered so much, should they be put to death?

古文：蛮等皆叩头曰： 合万死。 
现代文：蛮人都叩头说： 罪该万死。 
English: The barbarians all prostrated themselves and said, "The crime deserves death."

古文：祯即斩之。
现代文：元祯就杀了十人。
English: Yuan Shao immediately beheaded them.

古文：乃遣蛮还，并加慰谕。
现代文：于是放蛮人返回，并加以慰问告谕。
English: So he let the man go and returned with a message of consolation.

古文：诸蛮大服，自是境无暴掠。
现代文：蛮族大为信服，从此境内没有残暴的掳掠。
English: The barbarians were very convinced, and from then on there were no more brutal kidnappings and robberies in the territory.

古文：淮南之人相率投附者三千余家，置之城东汝水之侧，名曰归义坊。
现代文：淮水以南的人相继归附的有三千多户，安置在城束汝水的旁边，名叫归义坊。
English: People from south of Huai Shui successively annexed more than three thousand households, which were placed next to the city's water supply, called Guiyi Fang.

古文：初，豫州城豪胡丘生数与外交通。
现代文：当初，豫州城中豪强胡丘生多次和外人勾结。
English: At the beginning, Hu Qiusheng, a powerful warrior in the city of Yuzhou, repeatedly colluded with outsiders.

古文：及祯为刺史，丘生尝有犯，怀恨图为不轨，诈以婚进城人告云： 刺史欲迁城中大家，送之向代。 
现代文：等到元祯担任刺史，丘生曾经犯罪，心怀仇恨图谋不轨，假装结婚聚集市民告诉大家说： 刺史想迁移城内大户人家，送到代京。 
English: By the time Geng Yao assumed the post of chief magistrate, Qiu Sheng had committed a crime, hating and plotting against others, pretending to be married, and citizens gathered to tell everyone: the chief magistrate wanted to relocate large households in the city to Daikyo.

古文：共谋翻城。
现代文：共同谋划在城中造反。
English: They conspired to rebel.

古文：城人石道起以事密告祯，速掩丘生并诸预谋者。
现代文：市民石道起将事情秘密报告给元祯，建议快速掩袭丘生和所有参预谋划的人。
English: Citizen Shi Doga secretly reported the matter to Yuan Shao, suggesting a quick cover-up of Qiu Sheng and all those involved in the planning.

古文：祯曰： 吾不负人，人何以叛？
现代文：元祯说： 我不辜负别人，别人凭什么叛乱?
English: Yuan Zang said: I am not inferior to others, why do others betray me?

古文：但丘生诳误。
现代文：衹是丘生欺骗了大家。
English: Only because he was deceived by Hu Qiusheng and made a mistake.

古文：若即收掩，众必大惧。
现代文：如果马上逮捕，众人必定大为畏惧。
English: If they were arrested immediately, people would be very afraid.

古文：吾静以待之，不久自当悔服。 
现代文：我平静地等待他们，不久自己将后悔归服。 
English: I calmly wait for them, and soon I myself will regret surrendering.

古文：语未讫，而城中三百人自缚诣州门，陈丘生谲诳之罪。
现代文：话没说完，城中三百人自己捆绑到了州府门前，陈述丘生狡谲欺骗的罪行。
English: Before the speech was over, three hundred people in the city had tied themselves up in front of the state capital to report the crime of deceit and deception committed by Qiu Sheng.

古文：丘生单骑逃走。
现代文：丘生单人匹马逃跑。
English: He ran away single-handedly.

古文：祯恕而不问。
现代文：元祯宽恕而不追究。
English: Yuan Xuan pardoned without investigation.

古文：后徵为都牧尚书。
现代文：后来征召为都牧尚书。
English: Later, he was conscripted to the capital city of Shangshu.

古文：薨，赠侍中、仪同三司，谥简公。
现代文：逝世，追赠为侍中、仪同三司，谧号为简公。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Officer and Ceremonial Third Officer, and his posthumous name was Janko.

古文：有八子。
现代文：有八个儿子。
English: They had eight sons.

古文：第五子瑞。
现代文：第五个儿子叫元瑞。
English: The fifth son is named Yuan Rui.

古文：初瑞母尹氏，有娠致伤。
现代文：当初元瑞的母亲尹氏，怀孕时受伤。
English: Originally, Yuan Rui's mother, Yin, was injured when she was pregnant.

古文：后昼寝，梦一老翁具衣冠告之曰： 吾赐汝一子，汝勿忧之。 
现代文：后来白天睡觉，梦见一个老头带着衣帽告诉她说： 我赐给你一个儿子，你不要忧虑。 
English: Later, when she was sleeping during the day, she dreamt of an old man in a robe telling her: "Don't worry, I'm giving you a son.

古文：寤而私喜。
现代文：醒后私下喜悦。
English: After waking up, I was privately delighted.

古文：又问筮者，筮者曰： 大吉。 
现代文：又询问占卜的人，占卜人说： 很吉利。 
English: And they asked the diviners, and the diviners said, It is good.

古文：未几而生瑞，祯以为协梦，故名瑞，字天赐。
现代文：不久就生下元瑞，元祯认为与梦相合，所以起名为瑞，字为天赐。
English: Soon after, she gave birth to Yuan Rui. Yuan Rui thought it matched his dream, so he named her Rui. The name was a godsend.

古文：位太中大夫。
现代文：担任太中大夫。
English: He served as the First Vice-Minister of Health.

古文：卒，赠太常卿。
现代文：去世，追赠为太常卿。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Tai Chang Ching.

古文：仪弟烈，刚武有智略。
现代文：亘仪的弟弟五型，刚强勇武有智慧谋略。
English: Watari's younger brother is a 5th type, strong and brave, with wisdom and strategy.

古文：元绍之逆，百僚莫敢有声，惟烈行出外，诈附绍募执太宗。
现代文：五绉作乱，百官不敢说话，仅重型行走到外面，假称依附元绍去寻找拘捕立塞。
English: Five magistrates made a ruckus, hundreds of officials did not dare to speak, only the heavy-duty line went outside, pretending to follow Yuan Shao to find the arresting officer.

古文：绍信之，自延秋门出，遂迎立太宗。
现代文：豆面相信了他，他从延歪姐出来，于是迎立塞塞。
English: Mame noodles believed him, he came out from Yanqiao sister, so he confronted Jie Jie.

古文：以功进爵阴平王。
现代文：因功劳升爵为堕王王。
English: He was knighted for his services and became a fallen king.

古文：薨，谥曰熹。
现代文：逝世，谧号为画。
English: After his death, his nickname became a picture.

古文：子裘袭。
现代文：儿子五昼继承爵位。
English: His son will inherit the title in five days.

古文：烈弟觚，勇略有胆气，少与兄仪从太祖，侍卫左右。
现代文：五型的弟弟丞觚，勇敢聪明有胆量气魄，年轻时和哥哥亘仪跟随左担，在左右侍奉保卫。
English: The younger brother of the fifth type, Zheng Zheng, brave, clever and courageous. When he was young, he and his older brother, Wai Yi, followed the left shoulder and served as guards on the right and left.

古文：使于慕容垂。垂末年，政在群下，遂止觚以求赂。
现代文：出使基窒垂，摹容垂晚年，大权在群臣手中，于是留住五蛆来求取财货。
English: The emissary was dying, the envoy was getting old, and the power was in the hands of the ministers, so he kept five envoys to ask for money and goods.

古文：太祖绝之。
现代文：塞担不同他们来往。
English: They come and go as they please.

古文：觚率左右数十骑，杀其卫将走归。
现代文：五拯率领左右几十个骑兵，杀死他们的守卫将要逃回。
English: Five guards lead dozens of cavalrymen left and right, and the guards who kill them will flee back.

古文：为慕容宝所执，归中山。垂待之逾厚。
现代文：被慕容宝捉住，带回中山，慕容垂对待他更优厚。
English: He was caught by Murong Bao and brought back to Zhongshan. Murong Diao treated him more generously.

古文：觚因留心学业，诵读经书数十万言，垂之国人咸称重之。
现代文：元觚于是留心学业，熟读经书几十万字，慕容垂的宗室成员都称道尊重他。
English: As a result, Yuan Qi paid attention to his studies and read hundreds of thousands of words of scriptures. The members of Murongtui's family praised and respected him.

古文：太祖之讨中山，慕容普驎既自立，遂害觚以固众心。太祖闻之哀恸。
现代文：太祖讨伐中山时，慕容普骈已自己登位，就谋害元觚来坚定众人的心，太祖听说后哀伤悲恸。
English: When the great-grandfather fought against Zhongshan, Murong Pu'er had already ascended to the throne, and he plotted to kill Yuan Zang to strengthen the hearts of the people. The great-grandfather was saddened and grieved after hearing this.

古文：及平中山，发普驎柩，斩其尸，收议害觚者高霸、程同等，皆夷五族，以大刃锉杀之。
现代文：等到平定中山，发掘普骈的棺材，砍断他的尸体，逮捕商议谋害元觚的高霸、程同等人，都灭五族，用大刀砍伤杀死他们。
English: They waited until they had pacified Zhongshan, unearthed Pu Yao's coffin, chopped up his body, arrested Gaoba and Cheng, who had plotted to kill Yuan Shao, exterminated the five ethnic groups, and killed them with machete wounds.

古文：乃改葬觚，追谥秦愍王，封子夔为豫章王以绍觚。
现代文：随之改葬元觚，追谧为秦愍王，封他的儿子元夔为豫章王来继承元觚。
English: Subsequently, the funeral of Yuan Shao was changed, and Chou Shao became the king of Qin and his son Yuan Shao became the king of Yuzhang to succeed Yuan Shao.

古文：常山王遵，昭成子寿鸠之子也。
现代文：常山王元遵，是昭成皇帝的儿子寿鸠的儿子。
English: Wang Yuan Zun of Changshan was the son of Emperor Shoucheng's son Shouwen.

古文：少而壮勇，不拘小节。
现代文：年轻时强壮勇敢，不拘小节。
English: When young, strong and brave, no matter how small.

古文：太祖初，有佐命勋，赐爵略阳公。
现代文：太祖初年，有辅佐登位的功勋，赐爵位为略阳公。
English: In the first year of the great-grandfather's reign, he was awarded the title of Ryo Yang Gong (略阳公).

古文：慕容宝之败也，别率骑七百邀其归路，由是有参合之捷。
现代文：慕容实失败时，元遵另外率领七百骑兵截断他的退路，因此有参合陂的大胜。
English: When Murongshi failed, Yuan Zun led another seven hundred cavalry to cut off his escape route, resulting in a great victory.

古文：及平中山，拜尚书左仆射，加侍中，领勃海之合口。
现代文：等到中山平定后，任命他为尚书左仆射，加授侍中，镇守勃海的合。
English: After Zhongshan was pacified, he appointed him as Shangshu Zuopu, Zhaozhong, and Zhengu Bohai.

古文：及博陵、勃海群盗起，遵讨平之。
现代文：到博陵、勃海盗贼纷起时，元遵讨伐平定了他们。
English: When pirates and thieves swarmed to Boling, Bu, Yuan Zun's counterattack pacified them.

古文：迁州牧，封常山王。
现代文：调任州牧，封常山王。
English: He was transferred to the post of provincial herdsman and given the title of Changshan King.

古文：遵好酒，天赐四年，坐醉乱失礼于太原公主，赐死，葬以庶人礼。
现代文：元遵爱饮酒，天赐四年，因醉酒乱性对太原公主失礼，赐他自杀，以平民礼仪安葬。
English: Yuan Zunai loved to drink alcohol. He was blessed with four years of life. Due to his drunken and disorderly behavior, he was rude to Princess Taiyuan. He committed suicide and was buried according to commoner's etiquette.

古文：子素，太宗从母所生，特见亲宠。
现代文：儿子元素，是太宗的姨母所生，特别受到亲近宠信。
English: The son element, born to Taizong's aunt, is especially close to him.

古文：少引内侍，频历显官，赐爵尚安公，拜外都大官。
现代文：年轻时进入宫中侍奉，频繁担任显要官职，赐爵位为尚安公，任命为外都大官。
English: When he was young, he entered the palace to serve, frequently held important official positions, was given a knighthood for Shang An, and was appointed as a foreign capital official.

古文：世祖初，复袭爵。
现代文：世祖初年，又继承爵位。
English: In the first year of his reign, he also inherited the title of nobility.

古文：休屠郁原等叛，素讨之，斩渠率，徙千余家于涿鹿之阳，立平原郡以处之。
现代文：休屠郁原等反叛，元素讨伐他们，杀死魁首，迁徙一千多家到涿鹿的南面，设立平原郡来安置他们。
English: Hui Tu, Ikuhara and other rebels, the elements fought them, killed the leader, migrated more than a thousand to the south of the elk, and set up a plain county to settle them.

古文：及平统万，以素有威怀之略，拜假节、征西大将军以镇之。
现代文：等到平定统万，因元素有声威怀柔的谋略，任命他为假节、征西大将军来镇守。
English: After he had pacified Doman, he appointed him as the general of the Western Conquest to guard the town.

古文：后拜内都大官。
现代文：后来任命为内都大官。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Inner-Capital Major.

古文：高宗即位，务崇宽征，罢诸杂调。
现代文：高宗即位，一意崇尚减少征发，罢除各种杂调。
English: When Gao Zong ascended the throne, he was adamant in advocating the reduction of requisition and dispatch, and the removal of all kinds of miscellaneous taxes.

古文：有司奏国用不足，固请复之。惟素曰： 臣闻： 百姓不足，君孰与足？  帝善而从之。
现代文：有关官员上奏国家用度不足，一再请求恢复旧税额，仅元素说： 我听说 百姓不充足，君主跟谁充足。 ，皇帝认为他说得对而听从。
English: The officials concerned complained about the insufficient state expenditure and repeatedly requested the restoration of the old tax amount, only the element said: I heard that the people are not sufficient, the monarch is sufficient with whom., The emperor thought he was right and obeyed.

古文：诏群臣议定皇子名，素及司徒陆丽议曰： 古帝王之制名，其体有五：有信，有义，有象，有假，有类。
现代文：韶令群臣商议决定皇子的名字，远塞和司徒陆丽议论说： 古代帝王起名，体式有五种：有信实，有德义，有物象，有假藉，有仿照父名。
English: The emperors ordered the courtiers to discuss and decide on the prince's name, and Yuan Ce and Stulli discussed: There are five styles of naming ancient emperors: there is faithfulness, there is virtue, there is an object image, there is falsehood, and there is imitation of the father's name.

古文：伏惟陛下当盛明之运，应昌发之期，诞生皇子，宜以德命。 
现代文：伏惟陛下处于盛大光明的国运，顺应昌乐发达的气数，诞生了皇子，应以德义命名。 
English: His Majesty Fubei was in a grand and bright period of national prosperity, and in accordance with the qi number of prosperity and development, a prince was born, who should be named after Deyi.

古文：高宗从之。
现代文：直塞听从建议。
English: Gaozong followed his advice.

古文：素宗属之懿，又年老，帝每引入，访以治国政事。
现代文：五童在宗室有德行，又年纪老，皇帝每次接进宫，都询问治国政事。
English: The five children in the family were virtuous and old, and every time the emperor received them into the palace, he asked them about the affairs of state.

古文：固辞疾归第。
现代文：亘塞执意推称有病回到宅第。
English: Watase insisted that he was ill and returned to his home.

古文：雅性方正，居官五十载，终始如一，时论贤之。
现代文：一向性格端方正直，任官五十年，始终如一，当时舆论赞美他。
English: He has always been honest and upright, and has been in office for 50 years. At that time, the public praised him.

古文：薨，谥曰康，陪葬金陵，配飨庙庭。
现代文：逝世，谧号为康，在金陵陪葬，在庙庭配祭。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Kang, and he was buried in the Jinling Mausoleum and enshrined in the temple courtyard.

古文：长子可悉陵，年十七，从世祖猎，遇一猛虎，陵遂空手搏之以献。
现代文：长子可悉陵，十七岁时，跟随世祖狩猎，遇到一头猛虎，可悉陵于是空手击倒它而献给世祖。
English: At the age of seventeen, the eldest son Kesirei went hunting with his grandfather and encountered a fierce tiger. Kesirei knocked it down with his bare hands and dedicated it to his grandfather.

古文：世祖曰： 汝才力绝人，当为国立事，勿如此也。 
现代文：世祖说： 你的才华力量超越常人，应当为国办事，不要如此。 
English: The ancestor said, "Your talent and strength exceed that of an ordinary person. You should work for the country. Don't do that.

古文：即拜内行阿干。
现代文：就任命他为内行阿干。
English: and appointed him as the inner expert, Agan.

古文：又从平凉州。
现代文：又跟随平定凉州。
English: It also followed the pacification of Liangzhou.

古文：沮渠茂虔令一骁将与陵相击，两槊皆折。
现代文：沮渠茂虔派一名勇将和可悉陵相斗，两个长矛都折断了。
English: Despondent, Maoxian sent a brave general to fight with Xie Ling, and both spears were broken.

古文：陵抽箭射之，坠马。陵恐其救至，未及拔剑，以刀子戾其颈，使身首异处。
现代文：可悉陵抽箭射击对方，对方落马，可悉陵恐怕对方的救兵到来，来不及拔剑，就用刀子扭对方的颈子，使对方的头离开了身子。
English: It can be seen that Ling draws an arrow to shoot the other party, the other party falls off the horse, it can be seen that Ling is afraid that the other party's rescuers will arrive, and before he can draw his sword, he twists the other party's neck with a knife, causing the other party's head to leave the body.

古文：世祖壮之，即日拜都幢将，封暨阳子。
现代文：世祖认为他勇敢，当天任命他为都幢将，封为暨阳子。
English: The patriarch thought he was brave, and on the same day, he appointed him as the general of the capital, with the title of cum yangzi.

古文：卒于中军都将。
现代文：任中军都将时去世。
English: All of them died at the same time.

古文：弟陪斤，袭爵，坐事国除。
现代文：弟弟陪斤，继承爵位，因事获罪被削除封国。
English: His younger brother, Baojin, who inherited the title, was stripped of his title after being convicted of a crime.

古文：陪斤子昭，小字阿倪，尚书张彝引兼殿中郎。
现代文：陪斤的儿子元昭，小名叫阿倪，尚书张彝召他兼殿中郎。
English: Accompanying Jin's son, Yuan Zhao, whose nickname was Anni, Shangshu Zhang Ye summoned him to be concubine of the palace.

古文：高祖将为齐郡王简举哀，而昭乃作宫悬。
现代文：高祖将为齐郡王元简举办丧事而元昭却悬挂乐器在四壁。
English: Gaozu will hold a funeral for Wang Yuanjian of Qi County, but Yuan Zhao will hang musical instruments on the four walls.

古文：高祖大怒，诏曰： 阿倪愚騃，谁引为郎！ 
现代文：高祖大发脾气，下诏说： 阿倪愚笨，谁召他为郎! 
English: Gaozuda lost his temper and said: Anni is stupid, who called him a son!

古文：于是黜彝白衣守尚书，昭遂停废。
现代文：于是贬张彝穿白衣代理尚书，元昭被停职。
English: As a result, Zhang Ye was demoted to a white-clad deputy, and Yuan Zhao was suspended from his post.

古文：世宗时，昭从弟晖亲宠用事，稍迁左丞。
现代文：世宗时，元昭的堂弟元晖受宠当权，元昭逐渐升到左丞。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Yuan Zhao's cousin Yuan Shao was favored to take power, and Yuan Zhao was gradually promoted to the position of Left Junior Secretary.

古文：世宗崩，于忠执政，昭为黄门郎，又曲事之。
现代文：世宗逝世，于忠当权，元昭担任黄门郎，又曲意侍奉他。
English: After the death of Sejong, Yuzhong assumed power, and Yuan Zhao served as Huangmenro, and also served him.

古文：忠专权擅威，枉陷忠贤，多昭所指导也。
现代文：于忠专权耍威风，诬陷忠良，多是元昭所指使的。
English: It was mostly directed by Yuan Zhao to play the role of an autocrat over the loyalists and frame up the loyalists.

古文：灵太后临朝，为尚书、河南尹。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，元昭担任尚书、河南尹。
English: Lingdai Hou Lin listened to politics, and Yuan Zhao served as Shang Shu and Henan Yin.

古文：聋而佷，理务峭急，所在患之。
现代文：耳聋而残忍暴戾，处事一意峻刻急躁，各处憎恶他。
English: Deaf, cruel and violent, he is impatient to get things done and is hated everywhere.

古文：寻出为雍州刺史，在州贪虐，大为人害。
现代文：不久出任雍州刺史，在州中贪婪暴虐，为人民的大祸害。
English: He was soon appointed as Yongzhou's chief historian. Greed and tyranny were rampant in the prefecture, which was a great scourge to the people.

古文：后入为尚书，谄事刘腾，进号征西将军。
现代文：后来入京担任尚书，谄谀侍奉刘腾，升为征西将军。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as Shangshu, and Zou served Liu Teng, and was promoted to General of the Western Expedition.

古文：卒，赠尚书左仆射。
现代文：去世，追赠尚书左仆射。
English: Passed away, posthumously awarded the title of Shoshu Zuopujiao.

古文：纳货元叉，所以赠礼优越。
现代文：因向元叉行贿，所以追赠礼优厚。
English: Because he paid a bribe to Motoharu, he received a generous reward.

古文：昭子玄，字彦道，以节俭知名。
现代文：元昭的儿子元玄，字彦道，以节俭闻名。
English: Yuan Zhao's son, Yuan Xuan, also known as Yan Dao, was famous for his frugality.

古文：庄帝时，为洛阳令。
现代文：庄帝时，担任洛阳令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhuang, he served as the governor of Luoyang.

古文：及前废帝即位，玄上表乞葬庄帝，时议善之。
现代文：等到前废帝即位，元玄上奏疏乞求安葬庄帝，当时议论赞美他。
English: When the former deposed emperor ascended the throne, Yuan Xuan Shangsoo begged Zhuangdi to be buried. At that time, he was praised.

古文：后除尚书左丞。
现代文：后来授任尚书左丞。
English: Later, he was given the post of Shoshu-zojo.

古文：出帝即位，以孙腾为左仆射，腾即齐献武王心膂。
现代文：出帝即位，任命孙腾为左仆射，孙腾是齐麸武王的心腹。
English: He was enthroned as emperor and appointed Sun Teng as his left-hand man. Sun Teng was the confidant of King Qianwu.

古文：仗入省，玄依法举劾，当时咸为玄惧，出帝重其强正，封临淄县子。
现代文：孙腾带兵器进尚书省，元玄依法令纠举弹劾他，当时人都为元玄担心，出帝看重他的刚强正直，封为临淄县子。
English: Sun Teng took weapons into Shangshu Province, and Yuan Xuan impeached him in accordance with the law. At that time, people were worried about Yuan Xuan, and the emperor valued his strength and honesty, and made him the son of Linyi County.

古文：后从帝入关。
现代文：后来跟随皇帝进入关西。
English: Later, he followed the emperor into Kansai.

古文：昭弟绍，字丑伦。
现代文：元昭的弟弟元绍，字丑伦。
English: The younger brother of Motoaki, Moto Sho, is called Uguren.

古文：少聪慧。
现代文：年轻时聪明有智慧。
English: When you're young, you're smart and wise.

古文：迁尚书右丞。
现代文：升尚书右丞。
English: He was promoted to Shoshu Ujo.

古文：绍断决不避强御。
现代文：元绍决断不回避有权势的人。
English: Yuan Shao is determined not to shy away from powerful people.

古文：世宗诏令检赵脩狱，以脩妄幸，因此遂加杖罚，令其致死。
现代文：世宗韶令核查趟脩的案件，元绍因赵脩以谄媚而得宠，因此就用棍棒责罚，使他致死。
English: Shizong ordered to check the case of Wanzhong, and Yuan Shao was favored by Zhao Ying's flattery, so he punished him with a club and killed him.

古文：帝责绍不重闻。
现代文：皇帝责备元绍不再禀报。
English: The emperor scolded Yuan Shao not to make any more false reports.

古文：绍曰： 脩奸佞甚于董贤，臣若不因衅除之，恐陛下复被哀帝之名。 
现代文：元绍说： 趟脩好诈谄谀超过董贤，臣下如不因他的过失除掉他，恐怕陛下又要背上哀帝的名声。 
English: Yuan Shao said, "Tong Xian is more devious than Dong Xian. If his vassals do not get rid of him because of his faults, I am afraid that his majesty will once again have the reputation of mourning the emperor."

古文：以其言正，遂不罪焉。
现代文：因元绍言语正直，于是不治罪。
English: Because Yuan Shao's words were honest, he was not punished.

古文：及出，广平王怀拜绍，贺曰： 阿翁乃皇家之正直，虽朱云、汲黯何以仰过？ 
现代文：等到出宫，广平王元怀叩拜元绍，道贺说： 阿翁是皇室的正直之士，即使朱云、汲黯如何能超过? 
English: When he left the palace, Guangping Wang Yuan Hui bowed to Yuan Shao Rong and said, "Aweng is an honest member of the royal family. Even if Zhu Yun and Qiu Qiu, how can they surpass him?"

古文：绍曰： 但恨戮之稍晚，以为愧耳。 
现代文：元绍说： 衹遗憾杀他稍晚，以为惭愧而已。 
English: Yuan Shao replied: I only wish I had killed him a little later, and I feel ashamed for that.

古文：卒于凉州刺史。
现代文：任凉州刺史时去世。
English: He died when he was appointed as the historian of Liangzhou.

古文：陪斤弟忠，字仙德。
现代文：陪斤的弟弟元忠，字仙德。
English: Accompanying Jin's younger brother, Yuan Zhong, played by Xian De.

古文：少沉厚，以忠谨闻。
现代文：年轻时沉稳朴实，以忠诚谨慎闻名。
English: Calm and unpretentious in his youth, he was known for his loyalty and discretion.

古文：高祖时，累迁右仆射，赐爵城阳公，加侍中、镇西将军。有赞选之勤，百僚咸敬之。
现代文：高祖时，屡经升迁至尚书右仆射，赐爵为城阳公，加授侍中、镇西将军，有辅佐的辛勤，百官都尊敬他。
English: At the time of Gaozu, he was repeatedly promoted to Shang Shuxu Umenchu, given the title of Shiyanggu, awarded the title of Zhanzhong, Zhenxi General, and assisted by the hard work, and all officials respected him.

古文：太和四年，病笃辞退，养疾于高柳。
现代文：太和四年，病重辞职，在高柳养病。
English: After four years at Taihe, she resigned due to serious illness and recuperated in Takayanagi.

古文：舆驾亲送都门之外，赐杂彩二百匹，群僚侍臣执别者，莫不涕泣。
现代文：皇帝亲自送到都门外，赐予各种丝织品二百匹，同僚侍臣握手告别者，无不流泪。
English: The emperor himself sent them outside the capital, bestowing 200 pairs of various silks. Colleagues and courtiers all shed tears as they shook hands and bade farewell.

古文：及卒，皆悼惜之。
现代文：到他去世，都哀悼怜惜。
English: By the time of his death, everyone was in mourning.

古文：谥曰宣，命有司为立碑铭。
现代文：谧号为宣，命有关官员为他立碑刻石。
English: His posthumous name was Xuan, and the relevant officials were ordered to erect a monument for him.

古文：有十七子。
现代文：有十七个儿子。
English: They had seventeen sons.

古文：子盛，字始兴，袭爵，位谒者仆射。
现代文：儿子元盛，字始兴，继承爵位，担任谒者仆射去世。
English: Motomori's son, known as Shih Hsing, who succeeded to the peerage and served as an eunuch, passed away.

古文：卒。盛弟寿兴，少聪慧好学。
现代文：元盛的弟弟寿兴，年轻时聪明好学。
English: Yuan Sheng's younger brother Shuxing was bright and eager to learn when he was young.

古文：世宗初，为徐州刺史，在官贪虐，失于人心。
现代文：世宗初年，担任徐州刺史，在任时贪婪暴虐，失去民心。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he served as the governor of Xuzhou Province. During his tenure, he was greedy and tyrannical and lost the hearts of the people.

古文：其从兄侍中晖，深害其能，因谮之于帝，诏尚书崔亮驰驿检覆。
现代文：他的堂兄侍中元晖，深深地妒忌他的能力，于是向皇帝诬陷他，诏令尚书崔亮乘驿站马匹去核查。
English: His cousin, the attendant of Emperor Yuan, was deeply jealous of his ability, so he slandered him to the emperor and ordered Shangshu Cui Liang to take the horses from the stable to check.

古文：亮发日，受晖旨，遂鞭挞三寡妇，令其自诬，称寿兴压己为婢。
现代文：崔亮出发时，接受元晖的意旨，就鞭打三个寡妇，命她们诬陷自己，称寿兴欺压自己为婢女。
English: When Cui Liang set out, he was instructed by Yuan Shao to whip three widows to make them make a false accusation that Shuxing forced them to be slaves.

古文：寿兴终恐不免，乃令其外弟中兵参军薛脩义将车十乘，运小麦经其禁之旁。
现代文：寿兴恐怕终究不会免予死刑，就让他的妻弟中兵参军薛脩义带领十辆车，运输小麦经过囚牢的旁边。
English: Fearing that Shuxing would not be spared the death penalty after all, he had his wife's younger brother, a soldier in the People's Liberation Army, Xue Bingyi, lead ten vehicles to transport wheat past the prison.

古文：寿兴因逾墙出。
现代文：寿兴趁机翻墙出来。
English: Shuxing took the opportunity to climb over the wall.

古文：脩义以大木函盛寿兴，其上加麦，载之而出。
现代文：脩义用大木盒装上寿兴，上面盖小麦，载着他逃出来。
English: Zhai Yi packed Shuxing in a large wooden box, covered it with wheat, and carried him out.

古文：遂至河东，匿脩义家。
现代文：于是到河东，躲藏在脩义家。
English: So he went to the east of the river and hid in the house of Zou Yi.

古文：逢赦，乃出见世宗，自陈为晖所谮，世宗亦更无所责。
现代文：逢到大赦，就出来拜见世宗，自己陈述被元晖所诬陷，世宗也就不再有所责罚。
English: Whenever there was an amnesty, he would come out to see Sejong, and he would say that he had been framed by the Yuan Shao, and Sejong would no longer be punished.

古文：初，寿兴为中庶子时，王显在东宫，贱，因公事寿兴杖之三十。
现代文：当初，寿兴担任中庶子时，王显在东宫，地位低贱，因公事寿兴打了他三十棒。
English: At first, when Shuxing served as the middle child, Wang Xian was in the East Palace, with a lowly status, and Shuxing beat him with thirty sticks because of business.

古文：及显有宠，为御史中尉，奏寿兴在家每有怨言，诽谤朝廷。
现代文：等到王显受宠幸，担任御史中尉，举奏寿兴在家时常有怨言，诽谤朝廷。
English: When Wang Xian became a favorite and was appointed lieutenant of imperial history, he reported that Shuxing often complained at home and slandered the imperial court.

古文：因帝极饮，无所觉悟，遂奏其事，命帝注可，直付寿兴赐死。
现代文：利用皇帝饮酒过多头脑麻木时，就举奏这件事，使皇帝批注同意，直接交给寿兴赐令自杀。
English: He drank a lot of wine with the emperor, and when his mind was not clear, he talked about the matter and asked the emperor to sign the death of Shuxing directly.

古文：帝书半不成字，当时见者亦知非本心，但惧晖等威，不敢申拔。
现代文：皇帝写的一半不成字形，当时见到的人也知道不是皇帝的本意，衹是畏惧元晖等人的威势，不敢表示。
English: Half of the emperor's handwriting was illegible, and everyone who saw it at the time knew that it was not because of the emperor's original wish, but because he was afraid of the arrogance of Yuan Shao and others and did not dare to declare his deliverance.

古文：及行刑日，显自往看之。
现代文：等到行刑的日子，王显亲自前往监督。
English: Wang Xian went to watch the execution in person.

古文：寿兴命笔自作《墓志铭》曰： 洛阳男子，姓元名景，有道无时，其年不永。 
现代文：寿兴提笔自作《墓志铭》说： 洛阳男子，姓元名景，天下有道而无机运，生命不长久。 
English: Shou Xing wrote his own "Epitaph" and said: Luoyang man, surnamed Yuan Mingjing, there is virtue in the world but no opportunity, life is not long.

古文：余文多不载。
现代文：其余的文字长不加记载。
English: Most of the remaining characters are not recorded.

古文：顾谓其子曰： 我棺中可著百张纸，笔两枚，吾欲讼显于地下。
现代文：他回头对儿子说： 我的棺材中可以放一百张纸，两只笔，我要在地下控诉王显。
English: He also said to his son: "Put a hundred layers of paper and two pens inside my coffin. I plan to go underground and tell Wang Xian."

古文：若高祖之灵有知，百日内必取显。如遂无知，亦何足恋。 
现代文：如果高祖的灵魂有知，一百天之内必定取王显，如果无知觉，那还有什么可留恋的? 
English: If Gao Zu's soul has knowledge, it will surely take Wang Xian within a hundred days. If it is unconscious, then what is there to be nostalgic about?

古文：及世宗崩，显寻被杀。
现代文：等到世宗逝世，王显不久被杀。
English: Wang Xian was killed shortly after Sejong's death.

古文：寿兴之死，时论亦以为前任中尉弹高囗谗讽所致。
现代文：寿兴的死，当时的舆论也以为是前任中尉弹劾高阙谗言嘲讽所导致。
English: Shuxing's death, the public opinion at that time also thought that it was caused by the former lieutenant's mockery of Gao Xuan's impeachment.

古文：灵太后临朝，三公郎中崔鸿上疏理寿兴，诏追雪，赠豫州刺史，谥曰庄。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，三公郎中崔鸿上奏疏为寿兴伸冤，下诏昭雪，追赠寿兴为豫州刺史，谧号为庄。
English: Grandmother Ling went to the imperial court to listen to the government, and Choi Hong, one of the three princes, went to the imperial court to plead for Shuxing's redress, and received the imperial edict of Zhao Xue. Shuxing was posthumously awarded the title of Henan Provincial Historian, and his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：寿兴弟益生，少亡。
现代文：寿兴的弟弟益生，年轻时亡故。
English: Shuxing's younger brother, Yisheng, died young.

古文：忠弟德，封河间公。
现代文：元忠的弟弟元德，被封为河问公。
English: Mototada's younger brother, Motode, was given the title of Kawaramachi.

古文：卒于镇南将军，赠曹州刺史。
现代文：担任镇南将军时去世，追赠为曹州刺史。
English: He died while serving as Zhenan General, and was posthumously awarded the title of Caozhou Sashihong.

古文：德子悝，颍川太守。
现代文：元德的儿子元悝，担任颖太守。
English: Yuan De's son, Yuan Hui, served as the governor of Ying.

古文：卒于光州刺史，谥曰恭。
现代文：担任光州刺史时去世，谧号为恭。
English: He died while serving as Gwangju's chief historian, and his nickname was Jung Kyong.

古文：子嶷，字子仲。
现代文：儿子元嶷，字于仲。
English: His son, Yuan Qi, became Yu Zhong.

古文：出帝初，授兗州刺史。
现代文：出帝初年，授任兖州刺史。
English: In the first year after the emperor's abdication, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：于时城人王奉伯等相扇谋逆。
现代文：这时市民王奉伯等人互相煽动谋反。
English: At this time, citizen Wang Fengbo and others incited each other to rebel.

古文：弃城出走，悬门发断嶷要囗而出。
现代文：元嶷放弃城池出走，门闸发动折断元嶷腰阙而出城。
English: Yuan Shao abandoned the city and ran away. The gate was opened, breaking Yuan Shao's waist and he left the city.

古文：诏齐州刺史尉景、本州刺史蔡隽各部在州士往讨之。嶷返，复任。
现代文：诏令齐州刺史尉景、本州刺史蔡俊各率州中兵士前去讨伐，元嶷返回，又任兖州刺史。
English: The imperial edict ordered the states of Qi and Honshū to go to the crusade with their middle-school soldiers, and Yuan Shao returned to serve as the statesman.

古文：封濮阳县伯。
现代文：封为濮阳县伯。
English: He was given the title of Zengbo of Fenyang County.

古文：孝静时，转尚书令，摄选部。
现代文：孝静帝时，调任尚书令，兼管选部。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu died, Wang Xian was also killed soon after.

古文：嶷虽居重任，随时而已。
现代文：元嶷虽担任重要职位，顺应时势而已。
English: At the time of Shuxing's death, commentators also said that it was caused by the impeachment of his predecessor, Lieutenant Goshi.

古文：薨于瀛州刺史，赠司徒公，谥曰靖懿。
现代文：担任瀛州刺史时逝世，追赠为司徒公，谧号为靖懿。
English: When the Empress Dowager Ling was in the imperial court to listen to the government, Choi Hong, one of the three princes, was sent to replace Shuxing to plead the grievances. The Empress Dowager Ling issued an imperial decree to give him the title of Zhao Xue, the posthumous title of Zhaishi of Yuzhou, and the posthumous title of Zhuang.

古文：忠子晖，字景袭。
现代文：元忠的儿子元晖，字景袭。
English: Mototada's son, Motonari, is at the center of the scene.

古文：少沉敏，颇涉文史。
现代文：年轻时沉稳机敏，较多地涉猎过文史。
English: Since childhood, he has been profound and astute, reading literary and historical classics.

古文：世宗即位，拜尚书主客郎。
现代文：世宗即位，任命他为尚书主客郎。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he appointed him as the guest of Shoshu.

古文：巡省风俗，还，奏事称旨，为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：巡视观察风俗，返回，奏事合乎旨意，担任给事黄门侍郎。
English: He made a tour to observe the customs, returned, reported the matter in accordance with the intention, and served as a Yellow Gate waiter.

古文：初，高祖迁洛，而在位旧贵皆难于移徙，时欲和合众情，遂许冬则居南，夏便居北。
现代文：当初，高祖迁都到洛阳，而在位的旧臣显贵都以迁徙为难事，当时想调和众人的心，就同意冬天住在南方，夏天便住在北方。
English: At first, Gao Zu moved the capital to Luoyang, but all the former ministers and dignitaries in power found it difficult to move. At that time, in order to reconcile the hearts of everyone, he agreed to live in the south in winter and in the north in summer.

古文：世宗颇惑左右之言，外人遂有还北之问，至乃榜卖田宅，不安其居。
现代文：世宗很受左右的言论诱惑，外面的人于是有回到北方的疑问，以致有人出卖农田房屋，不安心居住。
English: Sejong is very tempted by the rhetoric of the right and left, and people outside are therefore doubtful about returning to the north, so that some people sell farmland houses and live in anxiety.

古文：晖乃请间言事。
现代文：元晖就请求在闲暇之时言事。
English: Motohiro requested to speak at his leisure.

古文：世宗曰： 先皇迁都之日，本期冬南夏北，朕欲聿遵成诏，故有外人之论。 
现代文：世宗说： 先帝迁都的时候，本来约定冬南夏北，我想遵循成命，所以有外人的舆论。 
English: Sejong said: When the former emperor moved the capital, it was originally agreed that the capital would be moved to the south in winter and to the north in summer, and I wanted to follow the order, so there was public opinion from outsiders.

古文：晖曰： 先皇移都，为百姓恋土，故发冬夏二居之诏，权宁物意耳。
现代文：元晖说： 先帝迁都，因百姓留恋故土，所以发布冬夏二地居住的诏令，是权且安定人心而已。
English: Yuan Shao said: The previous emperor moved the capital, because the people were nostalgic for their homeland, so issuing the edict to live in two places in winter and summer was just a power and a way to stabilize people's minds.

古文：乃是当时之言，实非先皇深意。
现代文：这是当时的话，实在不是先帝内心的本意。
English: This is just what he said at the time, and is not what the First Emperor really thought.

古文：且北来迁人，安居岁久，公私计立，无复还情。
现代文：而且北方迁来的人，安居岁月已久，公私生计已确立，不再有返回的心愿。
English: Moreover, people who have moved to the north have been living safely for a long time, their private and public livelihoods have been established, and they no longer have the desire to return.

古文：陛下终高祖定鼎之业，勿信邪臣不然之说。 
现代文：陛下应完成高祖迁都的大业，不要相信邪僻臣属不正确的说法。 
English: His Majesty should complete the great cause of moving the capital to Gaozhu, and do not believe the incorrect statement that the wicked vassals are the root.

古文：世宗从之。
现代文：世宗听从了他的意见。
English: Sejong accepted his opinion.

古文：再迁侍中，领右卫将军。虽无补益，深被亲宠。
现代文：又升为侍中，兼领右卫将军，虽然对政事没有弥补增益，却深受亲近宠信。
English: He was also promoted to chamberlain, concurrently leading the right guard general, although he did not make up for the gain in politics, he was deeply loved and trusted.

古文：凡在禁中要密之事，晖别奉旨藏之于柜，唯晖入乃开，其余侍中、黄门莫有知者。
现代文：凡是在宫中机密的事情，元晖另外奉命藏在柜中，仅元晖进去才能打开，其他的侍中、黄门没有知道的。
English: For all confidential matters in the palace, Yuan Xuan was also ordered to hide them in a cabinet. Only Yuan Xuan could open it, and the other attendants and the Yellow Gate did not know.

古文：侍中卢昶亦蒙恩眄，故时人号曰 饿虎将军，饥鹰侍中 。
现代文：侍中卢昶也受到恩爱青睐，所以当时人称为 饿虎将军，饥鹰侍中 。
English: Lu Wei, the middle attendant, was also favored by Enai, so at that time people called him "Hungry Tiger General" and "Hungry Eagle Middle Attendant."

古文：迁吏部尚书，纳货用官，皆有定价，大郡二千匹，次郡一千匹，下郡五百匹，其余官职各有差，天下号曰 市曹 。
现代文：调任吏部尚书，收受财货任用官员，都有定价，大郡太守二千匹，次郡太守一千匹，下郡太守五百匹，其余官职多少不等，天下称吏部为 市曹 。
English: The transfer of officials to Shangshu, the appointment of officials to receive money and goods, all have a price. The county magistrate has two thousand horses, the county magistrate has one thousand horses, the county magistrate has five hundred horses, and the remaining officials vary in number. The world calls the clerk a mayor.

古文：出为冀州刺史，下州之日，连车载物，发信都，至汤阴间，首尾相继，道路不断。
现代文：外任为冀州刺史，到州的时候，接连用车载物资，从信都出发，到汤阴之间，首尾相接，道路上不断。
English: The expatriate was making history in Jizhou. When he arrived in Jizhou, he successively used vehicle-borne materials, starting from Xindu and ending in Tangyin.

古文：其车少脂角，即于道上所逢之牛，生截取角以充其用。
现代文：车上脂角少，就在道路上将所遇到的牛，活生生地截取它的角来使用。
English: There are fewer horns on the car, so the cow encountered on the road is captured alive and its horns are used.

古文：晖检括丁户，听其归首，出调绢五万匹。
现代文：元晖核查人户，准许自首，缴纳调绢五万匹。
English: When the Yuan government inspected the small households, they allowed them to return to their original places, and found out that there were 50,000 horses that should be transferred.

古文：然聚敛无极，百姓患之。
现代文：然而聚敛没有极限，百姓憎恶他。
English: But he was insatiably greedy, scrounging around for money, and people found it a headache.

古文：肃宗初，徵拜尚书左仆射，诏摄吏部选事。
现代文：肃宗初年，征召任命元晖为尚书左仆射，诏令他兼管吏部选拔事务。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, he conscripted and appointed Yuan Xuan as Shang Shuxi's second-in-command, and ordered him to be in charge of the selection of officials.

古文：上疏曰： 臣闻治人之本，实委牧守之官。
现代文：元晖上奏疏说： 臣下听说治民的根本，实在于委派州牧郡守之类官员。
English: The Emperor's envoy to the Yuan Dynasty said, "Our subjects have heard that the essence of governing the people lies in appointing officials such as county magistrates.

古文：得其才则政平物理，失其人则讼兴怨结。
现代文：得到合适的人就政事公平民众得到治理，人选不合适就诉讼兴起仇怨结成。
English: If the right person is chosen, the people will be governed in a fair and just manner. If the right person is not chosen, lawsuits will be filed, and resentment will build up.

古文：自非察访善恶，明加贬赏，将何以黜彼贪怠，陟此清勤也！窃以大使巡省，必广迎送之费；御史驰纠，颇回威滥之刑。
现代文：除非考察好坏，明确加以贬斥赏赐，将如何罢黜那些贪婪懈怠的人，提升这些清廉勤奋的人呢私下以为大使的巡视考察，必然增加迎送的费用；御史奔往纠察，非常违背威严的刑罚。
English: Unless the inspection is good or bad, and it is clearly denounced and rewarded, how will those who are greedy and slack be ousted, and those who are honest and diligent be promoted? Privately, I thought that the ambassador's inspection tour would inevitably increase the cost of the welcome; the ambassador rushed to the picket, which was very contrary to the majesty of punishment.

古文：且暂尔往还，理不委悉，纵有简举，良未平当。
现代文：而且短暂的来往，事理不周到，纵然有检举，实在不公平恰当。
English: Moreover, the short-term contacts are unreasonable, and even if there is a report, it is really unfair and inappropriate.

古文：愚谓宜令三司、八座、侍中、黄门，各布耳目，外访州镇牧将、治人、守令能不。
现代文：我以为应该命令三公、尚书省长官八座、侍中、黄门，各自分布耳目，在外访求州牧镇将，治理民众的郡守县令有没有能力。
English: I thought that I should order the three princes, the eight provincial governors of Shangshu, the chamberlains, and the Yellow Gate, each with their own cloth ears and eyes, to visit the state pasture towns abroad, and whether the county governors and county governors are capable of governing the people.

古文：若德教有方，清白独著，宜以名闻，即加褒陟。
现代文：如果文德教化有方略，清白显著，应将姓名上报，当以褒扬擢升。
English: If the literary and moral education has a strategy and the innocence is obvious, the name should be reported and promoted with praise.

古文：若治绩无效，贪暴远闻，亦便示牒，登加贬退。
现代文：如果治理没有成效，贪婪暴虐的名声远扬，也马上出示在簿录上，加以贬斥免职。
English: If the governance is not effective, the reputation of greed and tyranny will spread far and wide, and it will also be immediately shown in the book, and it will be demeaned and dismissed.

古文：如此则不出庭户，坐知四方，端委垂拱，明赏审罚矣。 
现代文：如此就可以足不出户，坐在屋中知道四方的事，端正地坐着垂衣拱手，明白地赏赐正确地处罚了。 
English: In this way, you can stay indoors, sit in the house and know things in all directions, sit neatly with your clothes hanging down, and reward clearly and punish correctly.

古文：又表以 御史之职，鹰鹯是任，必逞爪牙，有所噬搏。
现代文：又上奏以为 御史的职位，专任凶猛的，必然施展爪牙，有所吞噬搏击。
English: It is also believed that the position of the imperial historian, full-time fierce, will inevitably exert its minions, devouring the fight.

古文：若选后生年少、血气方刚者，恐其轻肆劲直，伤物处广。
现代文：如果选拔年轻的后辈、性情刚烈的人，恐怕他们轻率地使用力量锐气，伤人的地方就多。
English: If the younger generation and people with a strong temperament are selected, I am afraid that they will use their strength and sharpness carelessly, and there will be more places to hurt people.

古文：愚谓宜简宿官经事、忠良平慎者为之。 
现代文：我认为应该挑选经过事务的旧官员、忠诚善良公乎谨慎的人担任。 
English: I believe that experienced former officials, loyal, kind and prudent people should be selected for the post.

古文：诏付外，依此施行。
现代文：诏令交付外朝，依照这些施行。
English: The imperial edict was delivered to the Outer Court and implemented in accordance with these.

古文：后诏晖与任城王澄、京兆王愉、东平王匡共决门下大事。
现代文：后来诏令元晖和任城王元澄、京兆王元愉、束千王元匡共同决断门下省大事。
English: Later, the imperial edict ordered Yuan Shao, Rencheng Wang, Yuan Cheng, Jingzhao Wang, Yuan Yu, and Sokchen Wang, Yuan Kuang, to jointly decide the provincial affairs under their leadership.

古文：晖又上书论政要： 其一曰：御史之职，务使得贤。必得其人，不拘阶秩，久于其事，责其成功。
现代文：元晖又上奏疏论述行政要点： 其一是：御史的职位，务必要得到贤人，果真选到合适的人，不拘泥于品级，长久处于这个职位，要求他成功。
English: Yuan Xuan also made a short speech on the administrative points: First, the position of imperial historian must be filled by a wise person, and the right person must be selected, regardless of the grade, and he must be in this position for a long time, and he must be successful.

古文：其二曰：安人宁边，观时而动。顷来边将，亡远大之略，贪万一之功，楚梁之好未闻，而蚕妇之怨屡结，斯乃庸人所为，锐于奸利之所致也。
现代文：其二是：安定民众和边境，观察时机而行动，近来边境的将领，没有远大的谋略，贪图侥幸的功劳，荆楚大梁的和好没有听到，而养蚕妇女的怨恨不断产生，这是庸人所做，专意于奸邪利益所导致的。
English: The second is: to stabilize the people and the border, to observe the opportunity and act, recently the generals at the border have no grand strategy, and are greedy for the credit of luck, the peace of Jingchu and Dalian has not been heard, and the resentment of the silkworm women is constantly arising, which is done by the philistines, and is caused by the special interests of treachery.

古文：平吴之计，自有良图，不在于一城一戍也。
现代文：平定吴的计划，自然有良好的打算，不在于一城一地。
English: The plan to pacify Wu naturally has a good intention, and is not limited to one city and one place.

古文：又河北数州，国之基本，饥荒多年，户口流散。
现代文：又黄河以北的几个州，是国家的根基，饥荒发生多年，户口流动失散。
English: In addition, several states north of the Yellow River are the foundation of the country. Famine has occurred for many years, and the flow of hukou has been dispersed.

古文：方今境上兵复徵发，即如此日，何易举动。
现代文：当今边境上兵士又开始征发，就像现在这样，哪裹容易调动?
English: Today, soldiers on the border are being called up again, as they are now. How easy is it to move them?

古文：愚谓数年以来，唯宜静边以息占役，安人劝农，惠此中夏。
现代文：我以为几年以来，仅应该稳定边境来停息兵役，安抚人心鼓励农耕，施恩惠于中原。
English: I thought that for several years, it was only necessary to stabilize the border to suspend military service, appease the people, encourage farming, and benefit the Central Plains.

古文：请严敕边将，自今有贼戍求内附者，不听辄遣援接，皆须表闻，违者虽有功，请以违诏书论。
现代文：请求严厉命令边境将领，从今以后有贼寇请归附的，不准许擅自派兵接应，都必须上疏报告，违犯的人即使有功劳，也请以违背诏书论处。
English: Request to sternly order the border generals, from now on, if there are any bandits, they are not allowed to send troops to meet them without authorization, they must report to the police, and violators, even if they have merit, should be punished for violating the edict.

古文：三曰：国之资储，唯藉河北。
现代文：其三是：国家的物资储蓄，仅依靠黄河以北。
English: The third is: the country's material savings, only rely on the north of the Yellow River.

古文：饥馑积年，户口逃散，生长奸诈，因生隐藏，出缩老小，妄注死失。
现代文：发生饥荒多年，户口逃散，产生出奸诈，于是有人隐瞒人口，多计算老小，随意标注死亡。
English: Famine occurred for many years, the hukou was dispersed, resulting in fraud, so some people concealed the population, counted more old and young, and marked deaths at will.

古文：收人租调，割入于己。
现代文：收人家的租调，剥夺入私库。
English: Receiving rent transfers from others, depriving them into private coffers.

古文：人困于下，官损于上。
现代文：民众在下受困苦，官府在上受损失。
English: Officials are corrupt at the top, and the people are poor at the bottom.

古文：自非更立权制，善加检括，损耗之来，方在未已。
现代文：除非另立权宜的制度，妥善加以考查，否则损耗的发生，将不会停止。
English: If we do not set up a separate system and do a good job of verification, the way of loss is still in the ascendant.

古文：请求其议，明宣条格。 
现代文：请求征求意见，明确宣布条例。 
English: Request for discussion in the morning, promulgation of regulations.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：晖颇爱文学，招集儒士崔鸿等撰录百家要事，以类相从，名为《科录》，凡二百七十卷，上起伏羲，迄于晋、宋，凡十四代。
现代文：五肿很爱好文学，招集儒生崔递等人编撰各派学说的大事，以类别相区分，名叫《科绿》，共二百七十卷，上起伏羲，下到晋、宋，共十四代。
English: Goyu was very fond of literature, and he summoned Confucian scholar Cui Diao and others to compile the major doctrines of each school, divided into categories, called "Kehulun," a total of 270 volumes, from the Qin dynasty to the Jin and Song dynasties, a total of 14 generations.

古文：晖疾笃，表上之。
现代文：五坠病重，上奏表献《科录》。
English: When Yuan Zang was seriously ill, he still played the emperor.

古文：神龟元年卒，赐东园秘器，赠使持节、都督中外诸军事、司空公，谥曰文宪。
现代文：控龟元年去世，赠给棺材，追赠使持节、都督中外诸军事、司空公，谧号为塞童。
English: Kengame died in the first year of the year, was presented with a coffin, and was posthumously awarded the title of envoy of the military, governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and governor of the sky, and his nickname was Saido.

古文：将葬，给羽葆、班剑、鼓吹二十人，羽林百二十人。
现代文：将安葬时，赐给仪仗、带剑、鼓吹二十人，羽林骑一百二十人。
English: When he was laid to rest, he was given a ceremonial chariot, a sword, and twenty preachers, and one hundred and twenty horsemen.

古文：陈留王虔，昭成子纥根之子也。
现代文：陈留王元虔，是昭成帝的儿子纥根的儿子。
English: Chen Liu Wangyuanqian was the son of Shao Chengdi's son, Huan Gen.

古文：少以壮勇知名。
现代文：年轻时以强壮勇敢闻名。
English: He was known for being strong and brave when he was young.

古文：登国初，赐爵陈留公。
现代文：登国初年，赐爵位为陈留公。
English: In the first year of his ascension to the throne, Chen Liu Gong was given a knighthood.

古文：与卫王仪破黜弗部。
现代文：和卫王元仪打败黜弗部。
English: and Wei Wang Yuan Yi defeated Zou Fube.

古文：从攻卫辰。
现代文：跟随道武帝攻打卫辰。
English: He followed Emperor Daowu to attack Wei Chen.

古文：慕容宝来寇，虔绝其左翼。
现代文：慕容宝前来侵犯，元虔断绝他的左翼部队。
English: Murong Bao came to invade, and Yuan Qian cut off his left-wing troops.

古文：宝败，垂恚愤来桑乾。
现代文：慕容宝失败，慕容垂气愤地来到桑干。
English: Murong Bao failed, and Murong came to Sangan angrily.

古文：虔勇而轻敌，于陈战没。
现代文：元虔勇敢而轻视敌人，在战阵中死去。
English: Yuan Qian bravely despised the enemy and died in battle.

古文：虔姿貌魁杰，武力绝伦。
现代文：元虔身体魁伟出众，武艺力量超越常人。
English: Yuan Qian's physical strength is outstanding, and his martial arts strength surpasses that of ordinary people.

古文：每以常槊细短，大作之犹患其轻，复缀铃于刃下。
现代文：常因通常的矛既细又短，制作得很大还嫌轻，又在刃下连缀铃铛。
English: Often because the usual spears are thin and short, made large and light, and have bells under the blade.

古文：其弓力倍加常人。
现代文：他拉弓的力量几倍于平常的人。
English: He can also draw a bow with twice the strength of an ordinary person.

古文：以其殊异于世，代京武库常存而志之。
现代文：因他的兵器在同代中格外特殊，代京的兵器库房中时常保存作为纪念。
English: Because his weapon was exceptionally special among his contemporaries, it is often preserved as a memorial in the arsenal of Daikyo.

古文：虔常临阵，以槊刺人，遂贯而高举。
现代文：元虔常亲临战阵，用矛刺人，刺穿后高高举起来。
English: Yuan Qian often personally came to the battle, stabbed people with spears, and held them up high after piercing them.

古文：又尝以一手顿槊于地，驰马伪退，敌人争取，引不能出。虔引弓射之，一箭杀二三人，摇槊之徒亡魂而散。徐乃令人取槊而去。
现代文：又曾用一只手猛插矛到地上，乘马假装退走，敌人争相夺取，拔不出来，元虔拉弓射他们，一箭杀死二三人，摇矛的人如丢魂似地逃散，才慢慢派人取矛离去。
English: He once thrust a spear into the ground with one hand, pretending to retreat on horseback. The enemy scrambled to seize it, but could not pull it out. Yuan Qian drew his bow and shot them, killing two or three with one arrow. The spear-wavers fled like lost souls, and only then did he slowly send someone to take the spear and leave.

古文：每从征讨，常先登陷阵，勇冠当时，敌无众寡，莫敢抗其前者。
现代文：每每跟随征伐，时常先登城冲阵，勇敢在当时称第一，敌人不分多少，没有谁能抵抗他的前进。
English: Every time he followed a campaign, he was often the first to storm the city. At that time, he was the first to be brave. No matter how many enemies there were, no one could resist his advance.

古文：及薨，举国悲叹，为之流涕。
现代文：到他逝世时，全国悲伤叹息，为他流下眼泪。
English: By the time of his death, the whole country was mourning and weeping for him.

古文：太祖追惜，伤恸者数焉。
现代文：太祖追念可惜，多次伤心哀恸。
English: It is a pity to miss the great-grandfather, and I have grieved many times.

古文：追谥陈留桓王，配飨庙庭。封其子悦为朱提王。
现代文：追谧为陈留桓王，在庙庭配祭，封他的儿子元悦为朱提王。
English: He was crowned as King Chen Liu Kuan, and his son, Yuan Yue, was crowned as King Zhu Ti.

古文：悦外和内佷，太祖常以桓王死王事，特加亲宠。
现代文：元悦外表和蔼内心狠毒。太祖时常因桓王为国事而死，特地加以亲近宠信。
English: Gen Yue is kind on the outside, but vicious on the inside. Grandfather often died because of King Kan for national affairs, so he was especially close to Petron.

古文：为左将军，袭封。
现代文：担任左将军，继承封爵。
English: He served as the Left General, inheriting the knighthood.

古文：后为宗师。
现代文：后来担任宗师。
English: Later, he served as the head teacher.

古文：悦恃宠骄矜，每谓所亲王洛生之徒言曰： 一旦宫车晏驾，吾止避卫公，除此谁在吾前？ 
现代文：元悦仗恃宠信骄傲自夸，时常对所亲近的王洛生之流说： 一旦皇帝逝世，我仅避让卫王，除此之外谁在我前面? 
English: Yuan Yueqi was proud and boastful, and often said to the Wang Lousheng family he was close to: Once the emperor dies, I will only avoid Wei Wang. Besides, who is ahead of me?

古文：卫王仪，美髯，为内外所重，悦故云。
现代文：牡元仪，有美丽的胡须，为内外的人所敬重，所以盈隘这么讲。
English: Mengyuan Yi, with beautiful whiskers, is respected by people at home and abroad, so Yingji said so.

古文：初，姚兴之赎狄伯支，悦送之。
现代文：当初，姚兴赎回狄伯支，元悦送他，路过肿置，盈噬于是背地引诱奸猾的豪强，以博取他们的欢心。
English: At first, Yao Xing ransomed Di Bo Zhi, Yuan Yue sent him away, passed by the swamp, and then seduced the treacherous heroes to win their favor.

古文：路由雁门，悦因背诱奸豪，以取其意，后遇事谴，逃亡，投雁门，规收豪杰，欲为不轨，为土人执送，太祖恕而不罪。
现代文：后来遇事受谴责，逃跑，投往历盟，打算招集豪强，要做叛逆的事，被当地人捉住送到京城，太祖宽恕而不加罪。
English: Later, he was condemned in an incident, ran away, threw himself into the League of Legends, planned to summon the brave and the strong, wanted to do something rebellious, was caught by the locals and sent to the capital, and the great-grandfather forgave him without adding to his guilt.

古文：太宗即位，引悦入侍，仍怀奸计，说帝云： 京师杂人，不可保信，宜诛其非类者。
现代文：太塞即位，召盈噬入宫侍奉，又心怀诡计，游说皇帝说： 京城人员杂，不可相信，应该诛杀不同类的人。
English: When Emperor Taisei ascended to the throne, he summoned Ying Zhao to serve in the imperial court, and with cunning, he lobbied the emperor, saying, "It is unbelievable that there are so many people in the capital, we should kill different types of people."

古文：又雁门人多诈，并可诛之。 
现代文：另外历盟的人奸计多，都可诛杀。 
English: In addition, there are many traitors in the alliance, and they can all be killed.

古文：欲以雪其私忿。
现代文：想以此来报他的私仇。
English: He wanted to avenge his death.

古文：太宗不从。
现代文：太宗不听从。
English: Taizong did not listen.

古文：悦内自疑惧，怀刀入侍，谋为大逆。
现代文：元悦内心怀疑恐惧，藏着刀入宫侍奉，阴谋做大逆不道的事。
English: In her heart, Yuan Yue suspected fear, hid a knife to enter the palace to serve, and plotted to do things that were unethical.

古文：叔孙俊疑之，窃视其怀，有刀，执而赐死。
现代文：叔孙俊怀疑他，偷看到他的怀中有一把刀，捉住后赐他自杀。
English: Uncle Sun Jun suspected him, secretly saw a knife in his arms, caught him and told him to commit suicide.

古文：弟崇，世祖诏令袭桓王爵。
现代文：弟弟元崇，世祖诏令他继承桓王爵位。
English: His younger brother, Mototaka, was ordered by the founder to succeed to the title of Kano.

古文：崇性沉厚。
现代文：元崇性格沉稳忠厚。
English: Tuoba Chong's character is deep and steady.

古文：初，卫王死后，太祖欲敦宗亲之义，诏引诸王子弟入宴。
现代文：当初，卫王死后，太祖想增强宗室亲属的情感，下诏召各王子弟入宫饮宴。
English: At first, after the death of King Wei, the great-grandfather wanted to strengthen the feelings of the relatives of the family, and issued an edict to invite all the princes and brothers to the palace for a banquet.

古文：常山王素等三十余人咸谓与卫王相坐，疑惧，皆出逃遁，将奔蠕蠕，唯崇独至。
现代文：常山王元素等三十多人都以为与卫王相连坐，怀疑畏惧，都出城逃跑，将要投奔蠕蠕，仅元崇独自前去。
English: More than thirty people, including the king of the mountain elements, thought that they were sitting together with the king of Wei, but they were suspicious and afraid. They all fled out of the city and were going to rush to the city. Only Yuan Chong went alone.

古文：太祖见之甚悦，厚加礼赐，遂宠敬之，素等于是亦安。
现代文：太祖见到他十分高兴，优厚地加以恩待赏赐，就宠信尊敬他，元素等人也由此安下心来。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy to see him, and rewarded him generously. He was favored and respected by him, and the elements and others were also reassured by this.

古文：久之，拜并州刺史，有政绩。
现代文：很久之后，任命他为并州刺史，有政绩。
English: After a long time, he was appointed to serve as the governor of the state, with great political achievements.

古文：从征蠕蠕，别督诸军出大泽，越涿邪山，威慑漠北。
现代文：跟随世祖征伐蠕蠕，另外统领各军从大泽出兵，越过涿邪山，威风震慑沙漠北面。
English: He followed his ancestor in the conquest of Cm Cm. In addition, he led the armies from Osawa to send troops, crossed the Jiezhai Mountains, and shook the north side of the desert.

古文：薨，谥曰景王。
现代文：逝世，谧号为景王。
English: After his death, his nickname was King Gyeongjo.

古文：子建，袭，降爵为公。
现代文：儿子元建，继承爵位，降爵位为公。
English: His son, Yuan Jian, inherited the title of nobility, and the reduction of the title of nobility became official.

古文：位镇北将军、怀荒镇大将。
现代文：担任镇北将军、怀荒镇大将。
English: He served as the general of Zhenbei Town and the general of Huaira Town.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：建子琛，位恆朔二州刺史。
现代文：元建的儿子元琛，担任恒朔二州刺史。
English: Yuan Jian's son, Yuan Shun, served as the chief historian of the two states of Hengshuo.

古文：琛子翌，尚书左仆射。
现代文：元琛的儿子元翌，担任尚书左仆射。
English: Geng Yao, the son of Geng Yao, served as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man.

古文：虔兄顗，性严重少言，太祖常敬之。
现代文：元虔的哥哥元颢，性格严肃稳重言语不多，太祖常常尊敬他。
English: The elder brother of Yuan Qian, Yuan Xuan, had a serious and steady personality and did not speak much. The great-grandfather often respected him.

古文：雅有谋策，从平中山，以功赐爵蒲城侯、平卢太守，特见宠厚，给鼓吹羽仪，礼同岳牧。
现代文：一向有谋略，跟随平定中山，因功劳赐爵为蒲城侯、平卢太守，特别受宠信厚待，赐给鼓吹和卫兵仪仗，待遇同于州牧。
English: He always had a strategy, followed the pacification of Zhongshan, and was awarded a knighthood for his meritorious service as the governor of Putian and the governor of Pinglu. He was especially favored and treated well. He was given the title of preacher and guard, and his treatment was the same as that of a state herdsman.

古文：莅政以威信著称。
现代文：处理政事以声威信实著称。
English: He is known for handling political affairs with dignity and trustworthiness.

古文：居官七年，乃以元易干代顗为郡。
现代文：在任七年，就任用元易干代替元颢为郡守。
English: After seven years in office, Yuan Yigang was appointed as the county governor in place of Yuan Qi.

古文：时易干子万言得宠于太祖，易干恃其子，轻忽于顗，不告其状，轻骑卒至，排顗坠床而据顗坐。
现代文：当时易于的儿子万言得到太祖的宠信，易干仗恃他的儿子，轻视元颢，不告诉详情，率轻装骑兵突然赶到，将元频推下坐床而占据元颢的座位。
English: At that time, Yuan Fang's son Wan Yan was favored by his great-grandfather, and Yuan Fang's son Yi Gan fought and beat his son, despised Yuan Fang, did not tell details, and led light cavalry suddenly arrived, pushed Yuan Fang off the bed and occupied Yuan Fang's seat.

古文：顗不知代己，谓以罪见捕。既而知之，耻其侮慢，谓易干曰： 我更满被代，常也；汝无礼见辱，岂可容哉！ 
现代文：元颢不知道他取代自己，以为是因罪被捕，不久知道情形，对他的侮辱傲慢感到耻辱，就对易干说： 我任期已满被取代，是正常的；你没有礼节侮辱我，怎可容忍呢? 
English: Yuan Xuan did not know that he was replacing himself, thinking that he was arrested for a crime. Soon he knew the situation and felt ashamed of his insult and arrogance. He said to Yi Gan: My term of office has expired and I have been replaced, which is normal. You have no etiquette to insult me, how can you tolerate it?

古文：遂搏而杀之，以状具闻。
现代文：就捕捉杀了他，将情况上报。
English: They caught and killed him and reported the situation to the police.

古文：太祖壮之。
现代文：太祖认为他勇敢。
English: His great-grandfather praised his bravery.

古文：万言累以诉请，乃诏顗输赎。
现代文：万宣多次申诉，左狙就下诏令豆题输纳赎命物。
English: Wan Xuan appealed several times, but was ordered to pay the ransom.

古文：顗乃自请罪，太祖赦之，复免其赎。
现代文：元题于是自己请予以治罪，太祖赦免他，又免去赎资。
English: So he asked to be punished, and his great-grandfather pardoned him and waived the ransom.

古文：病卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: He died of illness.

古文：子仑，世祖时袭父爵，以功除统万镇将。
现代文：儿子元喻，世祖时继承父亲的爵位，因功劳授任铲菖镇将。
English: His son, Yuan Yu, who inherited his father's title at the time of the founder, was awarded the title of Shovel Town General for his merits.

古文：后从永昌王仁南征，别出汝阴。
现代文：后来跟随永昌王元仁向南征伐，另外从达脍出兵。
English: Later, he followed Yongchang Wang Yuanren to the south and sent troops from Dadu.

古文：济淮，刘义隆将刘康祖屯于慰武亭以邀军路。
现代文：渡过进丞，刘盏建的将领刘庐担驻守在慰迭皇来截断军队的退路，将士们很忧虑。
English: After crossing the Jinsheng River, Liu Xidan, the general of Liu Xianjian, stationed in the comfort of the emperor to cut off the retreat of the army, the soldiers were very worried.

古文：师人患之。仑曰： 今大风既劲，若令推草车方轨并进，乘风纵烟火，以精兵自后乘之，破之必矣。 
现代文：元蝓说： 现在大风强劲，如命令推草车并行齐进，趁风施放烟火，以精锐的兵士从后面进攻，打败他们是必然的。 
English: Yuan Zang said: Now that the wind is strong, it is necessary to order the grass carts to advance in parallel, take advantage of the wind to set off fireworks, and attack from behind with elite soldiers to defeat them.

古文：从之。
现代文：大家听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：斩康祖，传首行宫。
现代文：杀死康祖，传送首级到行宫。
English: He killed Kang Zu and sent his head to the Imperial Palace.

古文：高宗即位，除秦州刺史，进爵陇西公。
现代文：高宗即位，授任他为秦州刺史，升爵位为陇西公。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, he was appointed as Qin State Historian, and he was promoted to the peerage as the Prince of Shaanxi.

古文：卒，谥定公。
现代文：去世，谧号为定公。
English: He died, and his nickname was Sadamasa.

古文：子琛袭爵。
现代文：儿子元琛继承爵位。
English: His son, Geng Yao, succeeded to the title.

古文：毗陵王顺，昭成子地干之子也。
现代文：毗陵王元顺，是昭成帝的儿子地干的儿子。
English: Viling Wang Yuan Shun was the son of Di Gan, the son of Emperor Zhao Chengdi.

古文：性疏佷。
现代文：性格粗疏狠毒。
English: His character is coarse and venomous.

古文：登国初，赐爵南安公。
现代文：登国初年，赐爵位为南安公。
English: In the first year after ascending to the throne, he was given the title of Nan'an Gong.

古文：及太祖讨中山，留顺守京师。
现代文：等到太祖讨伐中山，留下元顺守卫京城。
English: Wait until the great-grandfather conquers Zhongshan, leaving Yuan Shun to guard the capital.

古文：柏肆之败，军人有亡归者，言大军奔散，不知太祖所在。顺闻之，欲自立，纳莫题谏，乃止。
现代文：柏肆失败时，有逃回的军人，说大军逃散，不知道太祖的去向元顺听说后，想要自己登位，接受莫题的规劝，才作罢。
English: When the siege failed, there were soldiers who fled back, saying that the army had dispersed. After hearing that they did not know where their great-grandfather had gone to, they wanted to ascend to the throne themselves and accept unsolicited advice.

古文：时贺力眷等聚众作乱于阴馆，顺讨之不克，乃从留宫自白登南入繁畤故城，阻氵垒水为固，以宁人心。
现代文：当时贺力眷等在阴馆聚集民众作乱，元顺讨伐他们不能取胜，就从留守宫廷自白登向南进入繁峙旧城，阻隔漫水固守，来安定人心。
English: At that time, the relatives of He Li and others gathered the people in the Yinyuan to make a disturbance, but they could not win the battle against the Yuan Shun, so they confessed to stay at the palace and went south to enter the bustling old city, blocking the water to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：太祖善之，进封为王，位司隶校尉。
现代文：太祖称赞他，升封爵为王，担任司隶校尉。
English: The great-grandfather praised him, promoted him to the rank of knight, and made him a lieutenant of the regiment.

古文：太祖好黄老，数召诸王及朝臣亲为说之。在坐莫不祗肃，顺独坐寐欠伸，不顾而唾。
现代文：太祖喜好黄老之术，多次召集各王和朝臣亲自为他们解说，在座的人无不恭敬严肃，惟独元顺躺着打呵欠，不回头而吐唾沫。
English: The great-grandfather was fond of Huanglao's magic, and many times he summoned kings and courtiers to personally explain it to them. Everyone present was respectful and serious, but Yuan Shun lay down and yawned, not turning around to spit.

古文：太祖怒，废之。
现代文：太祖发怒，废黜他。
English: The great-grandfather got angry and deposed him.

古文：以王薨于家。
现代文：元顺以王的身份在家中逝世。
English: Yuan Shun died at home as king.

古文：辽西公意烈，昭成子力真之子也。
现代文：辽西公意烈，是昭成帝的儿子力真的儿子。
English: Liaoxi Gongyi Liang is the son of Emperor Zhao Zhengde's son Liang Zhen.

古文：先没于慕容垂，太祖征中山，弃妻子迎于井陉。
现代文：先前沦落到慕容垂国内，太祖征伐中山，他抛弃妻子儿女到井陉迎接。
English: Previously relegated to the country of Murongliao, the great-grandfather conquered Zhongshan, abandoning his wife and children to welcome Jingyu.

古文：及平中原，有战获勋，赐爵辽西公，除广平太守。
现代文：等到平定中原，有征战俘获的功勋，赐爵位为辽西公，授任为广平太守。
English: When the Central Plains were pacified, he was awarded the title of Prince of West Liaoning Province and the title of Governor of Guangping Province.

古文：时和跋为鄴行台，意烈性雄耿，自以帝属，耻居跋下，遂阴结徒党，将袭鄴，发觉赐死。
现代文：当时和跋担任邺城行台，意烈性格英勇刚硬，自以为是皇帝亲属，以位居和跋之下属耻，就暗地勾结党与，将要袭击邺城，泄露后被赐令自杀。
English: At that time, he and Waba were in charge of the siege of Lucheng. He was a strong-willed, heroic and tough character. He thought he was a relative of the emperor, and it was a disgrace to live under Waba. He secretly colluded with the party and planned to attack Lucheng. After it was leaked, he was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：子拔干，博知古今。
现代文：儿子拔干，博通古今。
English: His son, Prabhangan, is a well-versed expert on the past and present.

古文：父虽有罪，太祖以拔干宗亲，委之心腹。
现代文：父亲虽然有罪，但太祖以拔干是宗室近亲，委任他为心腹。
English: Although the father was guilty, the great-great-grandfather, who was a close relative of the family, appointed him as a confidant.

古文：有计略，屡效忠勤。
现代文：有计谋，屡次贡献忠诚勤奋。
English: Scheming, repeatedly contributing, loyal and diligent.

古文：太宗践阼，除勃海太守，吏人乐之。
现代文：太宗登位，授任勃海太守，官吏百姓喜爱他。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne and was appointed the governor of Bohai. The officials and the people loved him.

古文：赐爵武遂子。
现代文：赐爵位为武遂子。
English: The title of nobility was bestowed on Takeda Sueko.

古文：转平原镇将，得将士心。
现代文：改任平原镇将，得到将领士兵的欢心。
English: He was reassigned as the general of Pingyuan Town and won the favor of the general's soldiers.

古文：卒，谥曰灵公。
现代文：去世，谧号为灵公。
English: He died, and his nickname was Linggong.

古文：子受洛，袭，进爵武邑公，卒。
现代文：儿子受洛，继承爵位，升爵位为武邑公。去世。
English: His son won the lottery, inherited a peerage, and was raised to the peerage as the Duke of Wuyi. He died.

古文：子叱奴，武川镇将。
现代文：儿子叱奴，担任武川镇将。
English: Son scold, served as the general of the town of Takekawa.

古文：叱奴子洪超，颇有学涉。
现代文：吐丝的儿子滥墓，颇有学问。
English: Tu Si's son, Zangbo, is quite learned.

古文：大乘贼乱之后，诏洪超持节兼黄门侍郎绥慰冀部。
现代文：佛教徒叛乱之后，诏令送超秉持符节兼黄门侍郎安抚慰劳冀州。
English: After the rebellion of the Buddhists, the imperial edict sent Chao, the adherent of the Rune Festival and the attendant of the Yellow Gate, to pacify and comfort Jizhou.

古文：还，上言： 冀土宽广，界去州六七百里，负海险远，宜分置一州，镇遏海曲。 
现代文：返回，上奏说： 冀州土地辽阔，边界离州城六七百里，靠近海边险要遥远，应分开设置一州，镇守阻遏海湾。 
English: Returning, Shang Zuo said: Jizhou is a vast land, the border is six or seven hundred miles away from the state capital, and it is far away from the coast. It is necessary to set up a separate state and guard the bay.

古文：朝议从之，后遂立沧州。
现代文：朝廷议论听从了他，后来就设置沧州。
English: The imperial court listened to him, and later set up Cangzhou.

古文：卒于北军将、光禄大夫。
现代文：任北军将、光禄大夫时去世。
English: He died when he was serving as the Northern Army General and Guanglu Doctor.

古文：意烈弟勃，善射御，以勋赐爵彭城公。
现代文：意烈的弟弟元勃，善于射箭骑马，以功勋赐爵位为彭城公。
English: His strong-willed younger brother, Yuan Bo, who was good at archery and horseback riding, was awarded the title of Pengcheng Prince.

古文：卒，陪葬金陵。
现代文：去世，在金陵陪葬。
English: After his death, he was buried with Jinling.

古文：长子粟，袭。
现代文：长子元粟，继承爵位。
English: The eldest son, Genko, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：世祖时，督诸军屯漠南。
现代文：世祖时，统领各军驻守在沙漠南。
English: At the time of the founder, he was stationed in the south of the desert at the head of all the armies.

古文：蠕蠕囗表闻。
现代文：蠕蠕阙上奏疏报告。
English: Creep creep creep creep creep creep.

古文：粟亮直，善驭众，抚恤将士，必与之同劳逸。
现代文：元粟忠诚耿直，善于统御部众，安抚将领士兵，一定和他们同甘苦。
English: Geng Zhao was loyal and upright, and was good at leading his subordinates and pacifying his generals and soldiers. He must have been with them through thick and thin.

古文：征和龙，以功进封为王。
现代文：征讨和龙，因功劳升爵位为王。
English: He fought against dragons and was promoted to the peerage for his efforts.

古文：薨，陪葬金陵。
现代文：逝世，在金陵陪葬。
English: He died and was buried in Jinling.

古文：粟弟浑，少善弓马，世祖嘉之。
现代文：元粟的弟弟元浑，年轻时善于射箭骑马，世祖赏识他。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Mao, Yuan Hun, was good at archery and horseback riding when he was young, and the ancestors appreciated him.

古文：会有诸方使命，浑射兽三头，发皆中之，举坐咸以为善。
现代文：遇上各方使者到朝廷，元浑射三头野兽，每次发射都射中，满座的人都认为很好。
English: Envoys from all sides came to the imperial court, and Yuan shot the three-headed beast indiscriminately. Every shot hit, and everyone in the audience thought it was great.

古文：及为宰官尚书，颇以骄纵为失，坐事免。
现代文：等到担任宰官尚书，因骄傲放纵造成过失，因事获罪免官。
English: When he became vice-governor, he was found guilty of negligence due to pride and self-indulgence, and was removed from office.

古文：徙长社，为人所害。
现代文：流放到长社，被别人谋害。
English: He was exiled to Chosha and murdered by others.

古文：子库汗，为羽林中郎将。
现代文：儿子库汗，担任羽林中郎将。
English: His son, Kuhan, served as Uebayashi churo shogun.

古文：从北巡，有兔起乘舆前，命库汗射之，应弦而毙。
现代文：跟随世祖向北巡视，有只兔子在皇帝车驾前跳出来，命库汗射击，兔子随弦声而倒下。
English: Following the ancestor on a tour to the north, a rabbit jumped out in front of the emperor's chariot, the life bank was fired, and the rabbit fell down with the sound of the strings.

古文：世祖悦，赐一金兔以旌其能。
现代文：世祖高兴，赐予一个金兔来表彰他的才能。
English: The patriarch was delighted and gave him a golden rabbit in recognition of his talent.

古文：高宗起恭宗庙，赐爵阳丰侯。
现代文：高宗修建恭宗庙，库汗被赐爵位为阳丰侯。
English: Gaozong built the Gongzong Temple, and Kuhan was given the title of Yangfeng Prince.

古文：显祖即位，复造高宗庙，拜殿中给事，进爵为公。
现代文：显祖即位，又修建高宗庙，任命库汗为殿中给事，升爵位为公。
English: Emperor Xianzu ascended to the throne, built the Gaozong Temple, appointed Kuhan to be in charge of the palace, and promoted to the peerage.

古文：库汗明于断决，每奉使察行州镇，折狱以情，所历皆称之。
现代文：库汗善于决断，时常奉命为使者巡视州镇，依实情判案，所经之处都称赞他。
English: Kuhan was good at making decisions. He was often ordered to patrol the state towns as an emissary, judging cases according to the facts, and he was praised everywhere he went.

古文：秦州父老诣阙乞库汗为刺史者前后千余人，朝廷许之。
现代文：秦州民众前往朝廷请求库汗担任刺史的前后一千多人，朝廷准许了。
English: More than a thousand people from Qinzhou went to the imperial court to ask Ku Khan to serve as the crown prince, and the court granted the request.

古文：未及遣，遇病卒。
现代文：没来得及派遣，库汗遇疾病去世。
English: Before it could be dispatched, Cuhan died of illness.

古文：子古辰袭。
现代文：儿子古辰继承爵位。
English: His son, Guchen, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：昭成子窟咄。
现代文：昭成帝的儿子窟咄。
English: Emperor Shosho's son, Watto.

古文：昭成崩后，苻洛以其年长，逼徙长安，苻坚礼之，教以书学。
现代文：昭成帝逝世后，苻洛因他年长，逼迫他迁到长安，苻坚以礼待他，教给他学问。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhaocheng, Gong Luo forced him to move to Chang'an because he was too old. Gong Jian treated him with courtesy and taught him knowledge.

古文：因乱随慕容永东迁，永以为新兴太守。
现代文：因祸乱跟随慕容永向东迁徙，慕容永任命他为新兴太守。
English: Due to the calamity, he followed Murong Yong to migrate to the east, and Murong Yong appointed him as the new crown prince.

古文：刘显之败，遣弟亢泥等迎窟咄，遂逼南界。于是诸部骚动。
现代文：刘显失败后，派遣弟弟亢垄等人迎接窟咄，于是逼近南部疆域，这时各部落骚动。
English: After Liu Xian's defeat, he dispatched his younger brother Zhaorong and others to meet the enemy, and then approached the southern territory. At this time, the tribes were in turmoil.

古文：太祖左右于桓等谋应之，同谋人单乌干以告。
现代文：太祖的左右工但等人密谋响应直咄，同谋人里旦王将事情幸皓太祖。
English: Great-grandfather's right-hand man and left-hand man, Dan, and others conspired to respond directly, and the co-conspirator, King Litan, took the matter to his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖虑骇人心，沉吟未发。
现代文：太祖担心震骇人心，深思不采取行动。
English: The great-grandfather was so worried that he did not take any action.

古文：后三日，桓以谋白其舅穆崇，崇又告之。
现代文：三天后，于桓把计划告诉他的舅舅穆崇，穆崇又报告太祖。
English: Three days later, Yu Huan told his uncle Mu Chong about the plan, and Mu Chong reported back to his grandfather.

古文：太祖乃诛桓等五人，余莫题等七姓，悉原不问。
现代文：太祖于是诛杀于桓等五人，其余莫题等七姓，都宽恕而不追究。
English: The great-grandfather then killed five people, including Yu Huan, and pardoned the remaining seven people, including Moji, without investigating.

古文：太祖虑内难，乃北逾阴山，幸贺兰部，遣安同及长孙贺徵兵于慕容垂。
现代文：太祖担心内乱，就向北翻越阴山，前往贺兰部，派遣安同和长孙贺向慕容垂征集军队。
English: The great-grandfather was worried about civil unrest, so he climbed over the gloomy mountains to the north and went to Horanbe, sending Andong and his eldest grandson He to Murongtang to recruit troops.

古文：贺亡奔窟咄，安同间行遂达中山。
现代文：长孙贺逃跑投奔窟咄，安同抄小道到达中山。
English: He, the eldest grandson, ran away to a cave and took a path to Zhongshan.

古文：慕容垂遣子贺驎步骑六千以随之。
现代文：慕容垂派遣儿子贺骈率领步兵骑兵六千人跟随安同。
English: Murong Du sent his son He to lead six thousand infantry and cavalry to accompany An Tong.

古文：安同与垂使人兰纥俱还，达牛川，窟咄兄子意烈捍之。
现代文：安同和慕容垂的使者兰纥一同返回，到达牛，窟咄哥哥的儿子意烈防堵他。
English: Andong and Murongdiao's emissary, Lan Xun, returned together, and when they reached Niu River, the elder brother's son bravely came out to stop them.

古文：安同乃隐藏于商贾囊中，至暮乃入空井，得免，仍奔贺驎。
现代文：安同于是隐藏在商人的袋子中，到晚上就躲进空井，得以免死。随之投奔贺膦。
English: Andong then hid in a merchant's bag, and in the evening he hid in an empty well and was able to avoid death. He then fled to Hefei.

古文：军既不至，而稍前逼。
现代文：贺骈的军队既不到，窟咄逐渐向前逼近。
English: As soon as He Zhen's army did not arrive, the cave gradually approached.

古文：贺染干阴怀异端，乃为窟咄来侵北部。
现代文：贺染干暗中怀有二心，就为窟咄前来侵犯北部疆域。
English: He Dyeing and Drying secretly harbored ambivalence, and came to invade the northern territory for the sake of the caves.

古文：人皆惊骇，莫有固志。
现代文：人们都惊讶害怕，没有稳固的志向。
English: People's hearts are in turmoil, and there is no determination to stick to it.

古文：于是北部大人叔孙普洛节及诸乌丸亡奔卫辰。
现代文：这时北部大人叔孙普洛节和各乌丸部落逃跑投奔卫辰。
English: As a result, the northern adults, uncles, and grandsons of Purosai and all the Kumars fled to Yechen.

古文：贺驎闻之，遽遣安同、朱谭等来。
现代文：贺骈听说后，马上派遣安同、朱谭等人前来。
English: After hearing this, He Zheng immediately sent Andong, Zhu Tan and others to come.

古文：既知贺驎军近，众乃小定。
现代文：得知贺骈的军队靠近，众人才稍微安定。
English: When they learned that He Xuan's army was approaching, the crowd became a little more stable.

古文：太祖自弩山幸牛川。
现代文：太祖从弩山前往牛川。
English: Taizu traveled from Lushan to Ushikawa.

古文：窟咄进屯高柳。
现代文：窟咄进军驻守高柳。
English: The army marched into the cave and garrisoned Takayanagi.

古文：太祖复使安同诣贺驎，因克会期。
现代文：太祖又派安同前往贺骈那裹，因而约定会合的日期。
English: The great-grandfather also sent An Tong to Hi Năm Văn to set a date for the meeting.

古文：安同还，太祖逾参合，出代北与贺驎会于高柳。
现代文：安同返回，太祖越过参合陂，出兵代郡北和贺骈在高柳会合。
English: Andong returned, Taizu crossed the Sanhe Pass, and dispatched troops on behalf of the county north and the He Pass to meet in Gaoliu.

古文：窟咄困迫，望旗奔走，遂为卫辰杀之，帝悉收其众。
现代文：窟咄困窘急迫，望旌旗而奔跑，于是被卫辰杀死，皇帝收集了他全部的部众。
English: Embarrassed and desperate, he ran to look for the banner. He was killed by Wei Chen, and the emperor gathered all of his subordinates.

古文：贺驎别帝，归于中山。
现代文：贺骈告别皇帝，回到中山。
English: He Xuan bid farewell to the emperor and returned to Zhongshan.

