古文：留侯张良者，其先韩人也。
现代文：留侯张良，他的先人是韩国人。
English: Liu Hou Zhang Liang, whose ancestors were Korean.

古文：大父开地，相韩昭侯、宣惠王、襄哀王。
现代文：他的祖父在开地做过韩昭侯、宣惠王、襄哀王的相国。
English: His grandfather had been the fatherland of Han Zhaohong, Xuan Hui Wang and Xiang Lei Wang.

古文：父平，相釐王、悼惠王。
现代文：父亲张平，做过釐王、悼惠王的宰相。
English: His father, Zhang Ping, served as the prime minister of Shao Wang and Lai Hui Wang.

古文：悼惠王二十三年，平卒。
现代文：悼惠王二十三年，父亲张平去世。
English: In the 23rd year of mourning for Hui Wang, his father Zhang Ping passed away.

古文：卒二十岁，秦灭韩。
现代文：张良的父亲死后二十年，秦国灭亡了韩国。
English: Twenty years after the death of Zhang Liang's father, the Qin Dynasty fell and Korea was lost.

古文：良年少，未宦事韩。
现代文：张良当时年纪轻，没有在韩国做官。
English: Zhang Liang was a young man at the time and had never been an official in South Korea.

古文：韩破，良家僮三百人，弟死不葬，悉以家财求客刺秦王，为韩报仇，以大父、父五世相韩故。
现代文：韩国灭亡后，张良家有奴仆三百人，张良的弟弟死了不厚葬，用全部财产寻求勇士谋刺秦王，为韩国报仇，这是因为他的祖父、父亲任过五代韩王之相的缘故。
English: After the fall of Korea, Zhang Liang's family had 300 slaves. Zhang Liang's brother died without a proper burial, and he used all of his wealth to seek warriors to assassinate King Qin and take revenge for Korea. This was because his grandfather and father had been five generations of the King of Korea.

古文：良尝学礼淮阳。东见仓海君。
现代文：张良曾经在淮阳学习礼法，到东方见到了仓海君。
English: Zhang Liang once studied etiquette in Huaiyang and met Canghai Jun in the East.

古文：得力士，为铁椎重百二十斤。
现代文：他找得一个大力士，造了一个一百二十斤重的铁锤。
English: He found a strong man and made a hammer weighing one hundred and twenty kilos.

古文：秦皇帝东游，良与客狙击秦皇帝博浪沙中，误中副车。
现代文：秦始皇到东方巡游，张良与大力士在博浪沙这个地方袭击秦始皇，误中了副车。
English: Qin Shihuang went on a tour to the East. Zhang Liang and Hercules attacked Qin Shihuang in Bolangsha and hit the second car by mistake.

古文：秦皇帝大怒，大索天下，求贼甚急，为张良故也。
现代文：秦始皇大怒，在全国大肆搜捕，一定要速速捉拿刺客，这正是张良所引起的事。
English: Qin Shihuang was furious and conducted a nationwide manhunt to catch the assassin. This is exactly what happened to Zhang Liang.

古文：良乃更名姓，亡匿下邳。
现代文：张良于是改名换姓，逃到下邳躲藏起来。
English: Zhang Liang then changed his name and fled to the Lower Yangtze River to hide.

古文：良尝间从容步游下邳圯上，有一老父，衣褐，至良所，直堕其履圯下，顾谓良曰： 孺子，下取履！ 
现代文：张良闲暇时徜徉于下邳桥上，遇见一个老人，穿着粗布衣裳，走到张良跟前，故意把他的鞋甩到桥下，看着张良对他说： 小子，下去把鞋捡上来！ 
English: In his spare time, Zhang Liang was walking on the lower pier of the bridge. He met an old man, dressed in coarse cloth, who walked up to Zhang Liang, deliberately threw his shoes under the bridge, looked at Zhang Liang and said to him: Kid, go down and pick up your shoes!

古文：良鄂然，欲殴之。为其老，彊忍，下取履。
现代文：张良有些惊讶，想打他，因为见他年老，勉强地忍了下来，下去捡来了鞋。
English: Zhang Liang was a bit surprised and wanted to hit him. Seeing that he was old, he reluctantly put up with it and went down to pick up the shoes.

古文：父曰： 履我！ 
现代文：老人说： 给我把鞋穿上！ 
English: The old man said: Put my shoes on!

古文：良业为取履，因长跪履之。
现代文：张良既然已经替他把鞋捡了上来，就跪着替他穿上。
English: Since Zhang Liang had already picked up the shoes for him, he knelt down to put them on for him.

古文：父以足受，笑而去。
现代文：老人把脚伸出来穿上鞋，笑着离去了。
English: The old man stretched out his foot, put on his shoes, smiled and left.

古文：良殊大惊，随目之。
现代文：张良十分惊讶，随着老人的身影注视着他。
English: Zhang Liang was very surprised and followed the shadow of the old man to watch him.

古文：父去里所，复还，曰： 孺子可教矣。
现代文：老人离开了约有一里路，又返回来，说： 你这个孩子可以教导教导。
English: The old man walked away for about a mile and then came back and said, "You, child, can teach.

古文：後五日平明，与我会此。 良因怪之，跪曰： 诺。 
现代文：五天以后天刚亮时，跟我在这里相会。 张良觉得这件事很奇怪，跪下来说： 嗯。 
English: Five days later, at first light, he met me here. Zhang Liang thought this was very strange, knelt down and said: Well.

古文：五日平明，良往。
现代文：五天后的拂晓，张良去到那里。
English: At dawn five days later, Zhang Liang went there.

古文：父已先在，怒曰： 与老人期，後，何也？ 
现代文：老人已先在那里，生气地说： 跟老年人约会，反而后到，为什么呢？ 
English: The old man had been there first, and angrily said, "I'm supposed to be dating an old man, but I'm late. Why?

古文：去，曰： 後五日早会。 
现代文：老人离去，并说： 五天以后早早来会面。 
English: The old man left and said, "Come early in five days for a meeting."

古文：五日鸡鸣，良往。
现代文：五天后鸡一叫，张良就去了。
English: Five days later, as soon as the rooster crows, Zhang Liang leaves.

古文：父又先在，复怒曰： 後，何也？ 
现代文：老人又先在那里，又生气地说： 又来晚了，这是为什么？ 
English: The old man was there first and said angrily: "You're late again, why is that?

古文：去，曰： 後五日复早来。 
现代文：老人离开说： 五天后再早点儿来。 
English: The old man left, saying: Come back in five days, but earlier.

古文：五日，良夜未半往。
现代文：五天后，张良不到半夜就去了。
English: Five days later, Zhang Liang left before midnight.

古文：有顷，父亦来，喜曰： 当如是。 
现代文：过了一会儿，老人也来了，高兴地说： 应当像这样才好。 
English: After a while, the old man also came and said happily: "It should be like this."

古文：出一编书，曰： 读此则为王者师矣。
现代文：老人拿出一部书，说： 读了这部书就可以做帝王的老师了。
English: The old man took out a book and said, "If you read this book, you can be the emperor's teacher."

古文：後十年兴。
现代文：十年后定有所发展。
English: After ten years, there is bound to be some development.

古文：十三年孺子见我济北，穀城山下黄石即我矣。 
现代文：十三年后你小子到济北见我，谷城山下的黄石就是我。 
English: Thirteen years later, your son came to see me in northern Jeju. The yellow stone under the mountain in Goseong is me.

古文：遂去，无他言，不复见。
现代文：说完便走了，没有别的话留下，从此也没有见到这位老人。
English: After saying this, he left without saying anything else, and the old man has not been seen since.

古文：旦日视其书，乃太公兵法也。
现代文：天明时一看老人送的书，原来是《太公兵法》。
English: At first glance, the book sent by the old man at dawn turned out to be "Tai Gong Hei Ho."

古文：良因异之，常习诵读之。
现代文：张良因而觉得这部书非同寻常，经常学习、诵读它。
English: As a result, Zhang Liang found this book unusual and often studied and read it.

古文：居下邳，为任侠。
现代文：张良住在下邳时，行侠仗义。
English: When Zhang Liang lived in Jiaozuo, he was a chivalrous warrior.

古文：项伯尝杀人，从良匿。
现代文：项伯曾经杀了人，跟随张良躲藏起来。
English: Xiang Bo once killed someone and went into hiding with Zhang Liang.

古文：後十年，陈涉等起兵，良亦聚少年百馀人。
现代文：过了十年，陈涉等人起兵反秦，张良也聚集了一百多个青年。
English: Ten years later, Chen Zhan and others raised an army against Qin, and Zhang Liang also gathered more than a hundred young people.

古文：景驹自立为楚假王，在留。
现代文：景驹自立为代理楚王，驻在留县。
English: Jingyao established himself as the agent of King Chu and settled in Liushen.

古文：良欲往从之，道还沛公。
现代文：张良打算前去跟随他，在半道上遇见了沛公。
English: Zhang Liang planned to follow him and met Pei Gong halfway.

古文：沛公将数千人，略地下邳西，遂属焉。
现代文：沛公率领几千人，夺取下邳以西的地方，张良便归附了他。
English: Pei Gong led several thousand people to seize the area west of the Lower Yangtze River, and Zhang Liang then joined him.

古文：沛公拜良为厩将。
现代文：沛公任命张良做厩将。
English: Pei Gong appointed Zhang Liang as the stable master.

古文：良数以太公兵法说沛公，沛公善之，常用其策。
现代文：张良多次根据《太公兵法》向沛公献策，沛公很赏识他，经常采用他的计谋。
English: Zhang Liang repeatedly gave advice to Pei Gong according to the "Tai Gong Hei Law." Pei Gong appreciated him very much and often used his strategies.

古文：良为他人言，皆不省。
现代文：张良对别人讲《太公兵法》，别人都不能领悟。
English: Zhang Liang told others about the "Law of Tai Kung Hei," but no one could understand it.

古文：良曰： 沛公殆天授。 
现代文：张良说： 沛公大概是上天授予人间的。 
English: Zhang Liang said, "Pei Gong is probably bestowed on human beings by heaven.

古文：故遂从之，不去见景驹。
现代文：所以张良就跟随了沛公，不去投奔景驹了。
English: Therefore, Zhang Liang followed Pei Gong and did not go to Jingyao.

古文：及沛公之薛，见项梁。
现代文：等到沛公到了薛地，会见项梁。
English: When Pei Gong arrived at Xue Di, he met with Xiang Liang.

古文：项梁立楚怀王。
现代文：项梁拥立了楚怀王。
English: Xiang Liang supported King Chu Huai.

古文：良乃说项梁曰： 君已立楚後，而韩诸公子横阳君成贤，可立为王，益树党。 
现代文：张良于是劝说项梁道： 您已经拥立了楚王的后人，而韩国各位公子中横阳君韩成贤能，可以立为王，增加同盟者的力量。 
English: Zhang Liang then persuaded Xiang Liang: You have already supported the descendants of King Chu, and among the noblemen of Korea, you can make Hengyangjun Han Chengxian able to become king and increase the strength of the allies.

古文：项梁使良求韩成，立以为韩王。
现代文：项梁派张良寻找到韩成，拥立他为韩王。
English: Xiang Liang sent Zhang Lianghui to find Han Cheng and support him as the King of Han.

古文：以良为韩申徒，与韩王将千馀人西略韩地，得数城，秦辄复取之，往来为游兵颍川。
现代文：任命张良为韩国司徒，随韩王率领一千多人向西攻取韩国原来的领地，夺得几座城邑，秦军不久又重新夺了回去，韩军只在颍川一带往来游击作战。
English: He appointed Zhang Liang as the Korean Setter, and he led more than a thousand people westward to conquer the original territory of Korea, capturing several cities and towns. The Qin Army soon recaptured it, and the Korean Army only fought guerrilla warfare in and around the Li River.

古文：沛公之从雒阳南出轘辕，良引兵从沛公，下韩十馀城，击破杨熊军。
现代文：沛公从洛阳向南穿过轘辕山时，张良率兵跟从沛公，攻下韩地十余座城邑，击败了杨熊的军队。
English: When Pei Gong was crossing Lushan from Luoyang to the south, Zhang Liang and his soldiers followed Pei Gong, captured more than ten cities and towns in Korea, and defeated Yang Xiong's army.

古文：沛公乃令韩王成留守阳翟，与良俱南，攻下宛，西入武关。
现代文：沛公于是让韩王成在阳翟留守，自己和张良一起南下，攻打宛县，向西进入武关。
English: Pei Gong then let Han Wangcheng stay behind in Yangshuo, and he and Zhang Liang went south together, attacked Wan County, and entered Wuguan to the west.

古文：沛公欲以兵二万人击秦峣下军，良说曰： 秦兵尚彊，未可轻。
现代文：沛公想用两万人的兵力攻打秦朝峣关的军队，张良劝告说： 秦军还很强大，不可轻视。
English: When Pei Gong wanted to use 20,000 troops to attack the army of the Qin Dynasty at Shiguan, Zhang Liang advised: The Qin Army is still very powerful and should not be despised.

古文：臣闻其将屠者子，贾竖易动以利。
现代文：我听说峣关的守将是屠户的儿子，市侩容易以利相诱。
English: I've heard that the keeper of Shimonoseki will be the son of a butcher, and that it's easy for merchants to lure each other with profits.

古文：原沛公且留壁，使人先行，为五万人具食，益为张旗帜诸山上，为疑兵，令郦食其持重宝啗秦将。 
现代文：希望沛公暂且留守军营，派人先去，给五万人预备吃的东西，在各个山头上多增挂旗帜，作为疑兵，命令鹂食其带着贵重的宝物利诱秦军的将领。 
English: He hoped that Pei Gong would stay in the military camp for the time being, send someone to go first, prepare food for fifty thousand people, hang more flags on each hilltop, and as a suspicious soldier, order the generals of the Qin Army to take advantage of their valuable treasures.

古文：秦将果畔，欲连和俱西袭咸阳，沛公欲听之。
现代文：秦军的将领果然叛变了，打算跟沛公联合一起向西袭击咸阳，沛公想听从秦将的计划。
English: The generals of the Qin army indeed mutinied, intending to join forces with Pei Gong to attack Xianyang to the west. Pei Gong wanted to follow Qin General's plan.

古文：良曰： 此独其将欲叛耳，恐士卒不从。
现代文：张良说： 这只是峣关的守将想反叛罢了，恐怕部下的士兵们不听从。
English: Zhang Liang said, "It's just the commander of Shaoguan who wants to rebel. I'm afraid his soldiers won't listen to him."

古文：不从必危，不如因其解击之。 
现代文：士兵不从必定带来危害，不如趁着他们懈怠时攻打他们。 
English: It is better to attack soldiers when they are slack, rather than when they are dangerous.

古文：沛公乃引兵击秦军，大破之。
现代文：沛公于是率兵攻打秦军，大败敌兵。
English: Pei Gong then led an army to attack the Qin army, defeating the enemy soldiers.

古文：北至蓝田，再战，秦兵竟败。
现代文：然后追击败军到蓝田，第二次交战，秦兵终于崩溃。
English: Then he chased the defeated army to Lantian, and in the second battle, the Qin soldiers finally collapsed.

古文：遂至咸阳，秦王子婴降沛公。
现代文：沛公于是到了咸阳，秦王子婴投降了沛公。
English: Pei Gong then went to Xianyang, where Qin Prince Baby surrendered to Pei Gong.

古文：沛公入秦宫，宫室帷帐狗马重宝妇女以千数，意欲留居之。
现代文：沛公进入秦宫，那里的宫室、帐幕、狗马、贵重的宝物、美女数以千计，沛公的意图是想留下住在宫里。
English: Pei Gong entered the Qin Palace, where there were thousands of palace rooms, tents, dogs and horses, precious treasures, and beautiful women. Pei Gong's intention was to stay and live in the palace.

古文：樊哙谏沛公出舍，沛公不听。
现代文：樊哙劝谏沛公出去居住，沛公不肯听从。
English: Zou urged Zou Pei Gong to go and live there, but Pei Gong refused to listen.

古文：良曰： 夫秦为无道，故沛公得至此。
现代文：张良说： 秦朝正因暴虐无道，所以沛公才能够来到这里。
English: Zhang Liang said, "The Qin Dynasty was doomed by tyranny, so Pei Gongcai was able to come here.

古文：夫为天下除残贼，宜缟素为资。
现代文：替天下剷除凶残的暴政，应该以清廉朴素为本。
English: To rid the world of murderous tyranny, it should be based on honesty and simplicity.

古文：今始入秦，即安其乐，此所谓 助桀为虐 。
现代文：现在刚刚攻入秦都，就要安享其乐，这正是人们说的 助桀为虐 。
English: Now that we have just entered the Qin capital, we must enjoy it peacefully. This is what people call "helping others to commit crimes."

古文：且 忠言逆耳利於行，毒药苦口利於病 ，愿沛公听樊哙言。 
现代文：况且 忠言逆耳利于行，良药苦口利于病 ，希望沛公能够听进樊哙的意见。 
English: Moreover, it is better to listen to advice than to act on it, and good medicine is better than bad medicine. I hope that Mr. Pei can listen to Mr. Jin's opinion.

古文：沛公乃还军霸上。
现代文：沛公这才回车驻在霸上。
English: It was only then that Pei Gong returned to his car and parked it on the highway.

古文：项羽至鸿门下，欲击沛公，项伯乃夜驰入沛公军，私见张良，欲与俱去。
现代文：项羽来到鸿门下，想要攻打沛公，项伯于是连夜急驰到沛公的军营，私下与张良会面，想让张良跟他一起离开。
English: Xiang Yu came to Honmen and wanted to attack Pei Gong, so Xiang Bo hurried to Pei Gong's military camp overnight, met privately with Zhang Liang, and wanted Zhang Liang to leave with him.

古文：良曰： 臣为韩王送沛公，今事有急，亡去不义。 
现代文：张良说： 我是替韩王伴送沛公的，如今情况紧急，逃离而去是不合道义的。 
English: Zhang Liang said: I accompanied Han Wang to see off Pei Gong. The situation is urgent now, and it is immoral to flee.

古文：乃具以语沛公。
现代文：于是就将情况全都告诉了沛公。
English: So he told Pei Gong the whole situation.

古文：沛公大惊，曰： 为将柰何？ 
现代文：沛公非常吃惊，说： 对此将怎么办呢？ 
English: Pei Gong was very surprised and said: What will be done about this?

古文：良曰： 沛公诚欲倍项羽邪？ 
现代文：张良说： 沛公果真想背叛项羽吗？ 
English: Zhang Liang said: Did Pei Gongguo really want to betray Xiang Yu?

古文：沛公曰： 鲰生教我距关无内诸侯，秦地可尽王，故听之。 
现代文：沛公说： 浅薄无知的小人教我封锁函谷关不要让诸侯们进来，说这样秦朝的土地就可以全部主宰了，所以就听从了这种意见。 
English: Pei Gong said: The shallow and ignorant villain told me to seal off the Hangu Pass and not to let the princes enter, saying that in this way the land of the Qin Dynasty could be completely dominated, so I listened to this opinion.

古文：良曰： 沛公自度能卻项羽乎？ 
现代文：张良说： 沛公自己揣度一下能够打退项羽吗？ 
English: Zhang Liang said: Can Pei Gong figure out how to defeat Xiang Yu on his own?

古文：沛公默然良久，曰： 固不能也。
现代文：沛公沉默了后一会儿，说： 应当是不能的，现在该怎么办呢？ 
English: After a moment of silence, Pei Gong said, "It should be impossible. What should we do now?"

古文：今为柰何？ 良乃固要项伯。
现代文：张良于是坚决邀请项伯见沛公。
English: Zhang Liang then resolutely invited Xiang Bo to meet Pei Gong.

古文：项伯见沛公。
现代文：项伯会见了沛公。
English: Xiang Bo met with Pei Gong.

古文：沛公与饮为寿，结宾婚。
现代文：沛公与项伯同饮，为他敬酒祝福，并结为亲家。
English: Pei Gong had a drink with Xiang Bo, toasted his blessing, and became a family.

古文：令项伯具言沛公不敢倍项羽，所以距关者，备他盗也。
现代文：沛公请项伯向项羽详细说明沛公不敢背叛项羽，沛公之所以封锁函谷关，是为了防备其他的强盗。
English: Pei Gong asked Xiang Bo to explain to Xiang Yu in detail that Pei Gong did not dare to betray Xiang Yu. The reason why Pei Gong sealed off Hangu Pass was to prevent other robbers.

古文：及见项羽後解，语在项羽事中。
现代文：等到沛公会见项羽以后，双方取得了和解，这些情况记载在《项羽本记》中。
English: After Pei Gong met with Xiang Yu, the two sides reached a reconciliation, which is recorded in "Xiang Yu's Diary."

古文：汉元年正月，沛公为汉王，王巴蜀。
现代文：汉元年正月，沛公做了汉王，统治巴蜀地区。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Han Dynasty, Pei Gong became the king of the Han Dynasty and ruled the Bashu region.

古文：汉王赐良金百溢，珠二斗，良具以献项伯。
现代文：汉王赏赐张良黄金百镒，珍珠二斗，张良把它们都赠送给了项伯。
English: The Han king rewarded Zhang Liang with a hundred ounces of gold and two ounces of pearls. Zhang Liang gave them all to Xiang Bo.

古文：汉王亦因令良厚遗项伯，使请汉中地。
现代文：汉王也因此让张良厚赠项伯，使项伯代他请求项王将汉中地区分给他。
English: As a result, the Han king also gave Zhang Liang Hou the gift of Xiang Bo, so that Xiang Bo asked the Han king to give him the Hanzhong region on his behalf.

古文：项王乃许之，遂得汉中地。
现代文：项王应允了汉王的请求，汉王于是得到了汉中地区。
English: Xiang Wang agreed to Han Wang's request, and Han Wang then obtained the Hanzhong region.

古文：汉王之国，良送至襃中，遣良归韩。
现代文：汉王到封国去，张良送汉王到褒中，汉王让张良返回韩国。
English: Han Wang went to Fongguo, Zhang Liang sent Han Wang to Baozhong, Han Wang let Zhang Liang return to Korea.

古文：良因说汉王曰： 王何不烧绝所过栈道，示天下无还心，以固项王意。 
现代文：张良便劝告汉王说： 大王为何不烧断所经过的栈道，向天下表示不再回来的决心，以此稳住项王的内心。 
English: Zhang Liang then advised the Han king, saying: "Why doesn't the great king burn down the boardwalk he passed through, and show the world his determination not to come back, in order to stabilize the heart of King Xiang?

古文：乃使良还。
现代文：汉王便让张良返回韩国。
English: Han Wang then let Zhang Liang return to Korea.

古文：行，烧绝栈道。
现代文：汉王行进中，烧断了所经过的的栈道。
English: While Han Wang was marching, he burned down the boardwalk he was passing.

古文：良至韩，韩王成以良从汉王故，项王不遣成之国，从与俱东。
现代文：张良到了韩国，因为韩王成让张良跟随汉王，项王没有派遣韩成到封国去，而是让他跟随自己一起东去。
English: Zhang Liang went to South Korea, because Han Wangcheng let Zhang Liang follow Han Wang, and Xiang Wang did not send Han Cheng to Fengguo, but let him follow himself to the east.

古文：良说项王曰： 汉王烧绝栈道，无还心矣。 
现代文：张良向项王解说到： 汉王烧断了栈道，已经没有返回的意思了。 
English: Zhang Liang explained to Xiang Wang: Han Wang burned down the boardwalk and has no intention of returning.

古文：乃以齐王田荣反，书告项王。
现代文：张良便把齐王田荣反叛之事上书报告项王。
English: Zhang Liang then reported the rebellion of Qi Wang Tian Rong to King Xiang in writing.

古文：项王以此无西忧汉心，而发兵北击齐。
现代文：项王由此不再担忧西边的汉王，因而起兵北上攻打齐国。
English: As a result, King Xiang was no longer worried about the Han king in the west, so he marched north to attack Qi.

古文：项王竟不肯遣韩王，乃以为侯，又杀之彭城。
现代文：项王始终不肯派韩王回韩国，而是将韩王贬为侯，又在彭城杀了他。
English: King He refused to send King Han back to Korea. Instead, he demoted King Han to marquess and killed him in Pengcheng.

古文：良亡，间行归汉王，汉王亦已还定三秦矣。
现代文：张良逃跑，抄小路隐秘地回到汉王那里，汉王这时也已回军平定三秦了。
English: Zhang Liang ran away and secretly returned to the Han king, who had already returned to the army to pacify Sanqin.

古文：复以良为成信侯，从东击楚。
现代文：汉王又封张良为成信侯，跟着东征楚国。
English: The Han king also sealed Zhang Liang as Chengxin Hou, followed by the Eastern Expedition of Chu.

古文：至彭城，汉败而还。
现代文：到了彭城，汉军战败而归。
English: When they reached Pengcheng, the Chinese army was defeated and returned home.

古文：至下邑，汉王下马踞鞍而问曰： 吾欲捐关以东等弃之，谁可与共功者？ 
现代文：行至下邑，汉王下马倚着马鞍问道： 我打算舍弃函谷关以东等一些地方作为封赏，谁能够同我一起建功立业呢？ 
English: On his way to Shimo-eup, Han Wang dismounted from his horse, leaned on his saddle and asked, "I am planning to give up some places such as the area east of the Hangeul Pass as a reward. Who can work with me to build my career?"

古文：良进曰： 九江王黥布，楚枭将，与项王有郄；彭越与齐王田荣反梁地：此两人可急使。
现代文：张良进言说： 九江王黥布是楚国的猛将，同项王有隔阂；彭越与齐王田荣在梁地反楚。这两个人可立即利用。
English: Zhang Liang said, "Jiujiang Wang Zhibu is a fierce general of the state of Chu, and there is a gap between the two kings; Peng Yue and Qi Wang Tian Rong are in Liangdi Anti-Chu. These two people can be used immediately.

古文：而汉王之将独韩信可属大事，当一面。
现代文：汉王的将领中唯有韩信可以托付大事，独当一面。
English: Among the generals of the Han Dynasty, only Han Xin could be entrusted with important matters.

古文：即欲捐之，捐之此三人，则楚可破也。 
现代文：如果要舍弃这些地方，就把它们送给这三个人，那么楚国就可以打败了。 
English: If you want to give up these places, give them to these three people, then Chu can be defeated.

古文：汉王乃遣随何说九江王布，而使人连彭越。
现代文：汉王于是派随何去游说九江王黥布，又派人去联络彭越。
English: Therefore, the Han king sent Su Shi to persuade the King of Jiujiang to abdicate, and also sent someone to contact Peng Yue.

古文：及魏王豹反，使韩信将兵击之，因举燕、代、齐、赵。
现代文：等到魏王豹反汉，汉王派韩信率兵攻打他，乘势攻占了燕、代、齐、赵等国的领地。
English: When the king of Wei turned against Han, the king of Han sent Han Xin and his soldiers to attack him, and seized the territory of Yan, Dai, Qi, Zhao and other countries.

古文：然卒破楚者，此三人力也。
现代文：而最终击溃楚国的，是这三个人的力量。
English: However, it was the power of these three men that finally defeated Chugoku.

古文：张良多病，未尝特将也，常为画策，时时从汉王。
现代文：张良多病，不曾独立带兵作战，一直作为出谋划策的臣子，时时跟从汉王。
English: Zhang Liang was often ill and did not lead soldiers in battle independently. He always followed the Han king as a courtier who made plans and suggestions.

古文：汉三年，项羽急围汉王荥阳，汉王恐忧，与郦食其谋桡楚权。
现代文：汉三年，项羽把汉王紧急地围困在荥阳，汉王惊恐忧愁，与郦食其商议削弱楚国的势力。
English: In the third year of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Yu urgently besieged the Han king in Fenyang. The Han king was alarmed and saddened, and negotiated with Xiang Yu to weaken the power of Chu.

古文：食其曰： 昔汤伐桀，封其後於杞。
现代文：郦食其说： 昔日商汤讨伐夏桀，封夏朝后人于杞国。
English: He said: In the past, merchants and merchants fought against Xia Yao, and after the summer dynasty, people came to Yao.

古文：武王伐纣，封其後於宋。
现代文：周武王讨伐商纣，封商朝后人于宋国。
English: King Zhou Wu fought against the merchants, and the descendants of the feudal merchants came to the Song Dynasty.

古文：今秦失德弃义，侵伐诸侯社稷，灭六国之後，使无立锥之地。
现代文：如今秦朝丧失德政、抛弃道义，侵伐诸侯各国，消灭了六国的后代，使他们没有一点立足的地方。
English: Today, the Qin Dynasty has lost its virtue, abandoned its morality, invaded the countries of the princes, and wiped out the descendants of the Six Kingdoms, leaving them without a foothold.

古文：陛下诚能复立六国後世，毕已受印，此其君臣百姓必皆戴陛下之德，莫不乡风慕义，原为臣妾。
现代文：陛下果真能够重新封立六国的后裔，使他们都接受陛下的印信，这样六国的君臣百姓一定都感戴陛下的恩德，无不归顺服从，仰慕陛下道义，甘愿做陛下的臣民。
English: Your Majesty can really re-christen the descendants of the Six Kingdoms, so that they all accept Your Majesty's seal, so that the monarchs, subjects and people of the Six Kingdoms will certainly feel Your Majesty's grace, obey without fail, admire Your Majesty's morality, and be willing to be Your Majesty's subjects.

古文：德义已行，陛下南乡称霸，楚必敛衽而朝。 汉王曰： 善。
现代文：随着恩德道义的施行，陛下就可以面南称霸，楚王一定整好衣冠恭恭敬敬地前来朝拜了。 汉王说： 好。
English: With the implementation of benevolence and morality, His Majesty will be able to dominate the south, and King Chu will certainly have his robe and crown in order and come to pay homage respectfully.

古文：趣刻印，先生因行佩之矣。 
现代文：赶快刻制印信，趁先生这次出行的机会就给他们带去。 
English: Quickly engrave a stamped letter and take advantage of this trip to take it to them.

古文：食其未行，张良从外来谒。
现代文：郦食其还没有出行，张良外出回来拜见汉王。
English: Although he had not yet traveled, Zhang Liang went out and came back to visit Han Wang.

古文：汉王方食，曰： 子房前！
现代文：汉王刚好在吃饭，说： 张良上前来！
English: Han Wang happened to be eating and said: Zhang Liang, come forward!

古文：客有为我计桡楚权者。 
现代文：食客中有人能帮助我出谋划策削弱楚军力量。 
English: There is someone among the diners who can help me devise a strategy to weaken the Chu army.

古文：其以郦生语告，曰： 於子房何如？ 良曰： 谁为陛下画此计者？
现代文：于是将郦食其的话都告诉了张良，并询问张良说： 你看这个计谋怎么样？ 张良说： 这是谁给陛下筹谋的计策？
English: So he told Zhang Liang everything he had heard, and asked Zhang Liang, "What do you think of this scheme?" Zhang Liang said, "Who has planned this scheme for Your Majesty?"

古文：陛下事去矣。 
现代文：假如您真的这样做，那么陛下的大事就全毁了。 
English: If you do so, your Majesty's business will be ruined.

古文：汉王曰： 何哉？ 
现代文：汉王说： 为什么这么说呢？ 
English: Han Wang said, "Why do you say that?

古文：张良对曰： 臣请藉前箸为大王筹之。 
现代文：张良回答说： 请允许我借助面前的筷子来帮助大王筹划一下形势。 
English: Zhang Liang replied: Please allow me to use the chopsticks in front of me to help the king plan the situation.

古文：曰： 昔者汤伐桀而封其後於杞者，度能制桀之死命也。
现代文：张良接着说： 昔日商汤讨伐暴桀而在杞地分封夏的后裔，是因为他估计到自己可以置夏桀于死地。
English: Zhang Liang went on to say, "The descendants of Shang Tang, who used to fight the violent cormorants in the past and divided the summer in the summer, because he estimated that he could put the summer cormorant to death.

古文：今陛下能制项籍之死命乎？ 
现代文：如今陛下能够确定将项籍置于死地吗？ 
English: Now, can His Majesty be sure of putting the matter to rest?

古文：曰： 未能也。 
现代文：汉王说： 不能。 
English: Han Wang said, "No."

古文： 其不可一也。
现代文：张良说： 这就是不能分封六国后代的第一个原因。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the first reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：武王伐纣封其後於宋者，度能得纣之头也。
现代文：昔日武王伐纣而在宋地分封商的后代，是因为他估计自己可以得到纣王的人头。
English: He was the descendant of a merchant from the Song Dynasty who had been appointed by King Wu in the past, because he thought he could get the head of the king.

古文：今陛下能得项籍之头乎？ 
现代文：如今陛下有把握得到项籍的人头吗？ 
English: Now, is your majesty certain of getting the head of this man?

古文：曰： 未能也。 
现代文：汉王说： 不能。 
English: Han Wang said, "No."

古文： 其不可二也。
现代文：张良说： 这就是不能分封六国后代的第二个原因。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the second reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：武王入殷，表商容之闾，释箕子之拘，封比干之墓。
现代文：武王进入商朝的都城，在商容所居住的大门口表彰他，释放了被囚禁的箕子，重新修建了比干的坟墓。
English: King Wu entered the capital city of the Shang Dynasty, commended him at the gate of the residence of the merchants, released the prisoners, and rebuilt the tombs.

古文：今陛下能封圣人之墓，表贤者之闾，式智者之门乎？ 
现代文：如今陛下可以重建圣人坟墓，在有贤能的人的门口表彰他，在有智慧的人的门口低头扶按车前木对他表示尊敬吗？ 汉王说： 不能。 
English: Now, can your majesty rebuild the tomb of the sage, praise him at the door of the man of virtue, and bow your head at the door of the man of wisdom to show respect for him?

古文：曰： 未能也。  其不可三也。
现代文：张良说： 这是不能分封六国后代的第三个原因。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the third reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：发钜桥之粟，散鹿台之钱，以赐贫穷。
现代文：周武王曾经发放钜桥仓的粮食和鹿台府库的钱财给贫穷的人。
English: King Zhou Wu once distributed grain from the Qianqiao granary and money from the Ludaifu treasury to the poor.

古文：今陛下能散府库以赐贫穷乎？ 
现代文：如今陛下能将府库里的钱粮散发给贫穷的人吗？ 
English: Can His Majesty now distribute the money and grain from the treasury to the poor?

古文：曰： 未能也。 
现代文：汉王说： 不能。 
English: Han Wang said, "No."

古文： 其不可四矣。
现代文：张良说： 这是不能分封六国后代的第四个原因。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the fourth reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：殷事已毕，偃革为轩，倒置干戈，覆以虎皮，以示天下不复用兵。
现代文：周武王消灭商朝以后，废弃了战车，将战车修改成载人的车，将战争武器全部倒着堆放，用虎皮把它们遮盖起来，告诉全天下的人从此不再打仗。
English: After King Zhou Wu eliminated the Shang Dynasty, he scrapped the chariot, modified the chariot into a manned vehicle, stacked all the weapons of war upside down, covered them with tiger skins, and told the whole world that they would no longer fight.

古文：今陛下能偃武行文，不复用兵乎？ 
现代文：如今陛下能放弃武力崇尚文治，不再打仗吗？ 
English: Now, can His Majesty renounce the use of force, advocate the rule of law, and no longer wage war?

古文：曰： 未能也。 
现代文：汉王说： 不能。 
English: Han Wang said, "No."

古文： 其不可五矣。
现代文：张良说： 这是不能分封六国后代的第五个原因。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the fifth reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：休马华山之阳，示以无所为。
现代文：周武王曾经将所有的战马都放到华山南面去牧养，以此来表示自己不再打仗。
English: King Zhou Wu once put all his war horses to graze in the south of Huashan Mountain to show that he would no longer fight.

古文：今陛下能休马无所用乎？ 
现代文：如今陛下能让战马休息不再使用吗？ 
English: Now, Your Majesty, can you let the horses rest and not be used?

古文：曰： 未能也。 
现代文：汉王说： 不能。 
English: Han Wang said, "No."

古文： 其不可六矣。
现代文：张良说： 这是不能分封六国后代的第六个原因。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the sixth reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：放牛桃林之阴，以示不复输积。
现代文：周武王曾经将运粮草的牛放到桃林的北面去牧养，以此表示自己不再需要运输和积储军粮。
English: King Zhou Wu once put the cattle of grain transport grass to the north of the peach grove to graze, in order to show that he no longer needed to transport and store military grain.

古文：今陛下能放牛不复输积乎？ 
现代文：如今陛下能放牧牛群而不再用它们运输和积储粮草吗？ 
English: Can His Majesty now graze his cattle instead of using them to transport and store grain and grass?

古文：曰： 未能也。 
现代文：汉王说： 不能。 
English: Han Wang said, "No."

古文： 其不可七矣。
现代文：张良说： 这是不能分封六国后代的第七个原因。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the seventh reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：且天下游士离其亲戚，弃坟墓，去故旧，从陛下游者，徒欲日夜望咫尺之地。
现代文：天下的游士远离他们的亲人，放弃了他们的祖坟，告别了自己的故乡朋友，跟随陛下四处征战，日盼夜盼只是渴望能够得到一块封地。
English: The wanderers of the world are far away from their relatives, abandon their ancestral graves, bid farewell to their hometown friends, follow His Majesty to fight everywhere, day and night just longing to get a fief.

古文：今复六国，立韩、魏、燕、赵、齐、楚之後，天下游士各归事其主，从其亲戚，反其故旧坟墓，陛下与谁取天下乎？
现代文：现在陛下重新分封六国后代，立韩、魏、燕、赵、齐、楚的后代为诸侯王，天下的游士都回去侍奉自己的君主，和他们久别的亲人团聚，回到他们的老朋友和祖坟所在的故乡，陛下同谁一起去夺取天下呢？
English: Now, Your Majesty has redistributed the descendants of the Six Kingdoms and established the descendants of Han, Wei, Yan, Zhao, Qi, and Chu as princes and kings. The wanderers of the world have all returned to serve their monarchs, reunite with their long-lost relatives, and return to their old friends and hometowns where their ancestral tombs are located. Who will Your Majesty go with to conquer the world?

古文：其不可八矣。
现代文：这是不能分封六国后代的第八个原因。
English: This is the eighth reason why the descendants of the Six Kingdoms cannot be divided.

古文：且夫楚唯无彊，六国立者复桡而从之，陛下焉得而臣之？
现代文：而且目前楚国无敌于天下，您重新分封的六国后代就会全部屈服于楚国，陛下又有什么办法让他们臣服呢？
English: Moreover, at present, the State of Chu is invincible in the world, and the descendants of the six countries you re-enfranchised will all submit to the State of Chu. What can Your Majesty do to make them submit?

古文：诚用客之谋，陛下事去矣。 
现代文：假如陛下真的采用了那个食客的计谋，陛下的大事就全毁了。 
English: If your majesty had really adopted the diner's stratagem, your majesty's cause would have been ruined.

古文：汉王辍食吐哺，骂曰： 竖儒，几败而公事！ 
现代文：汉王停止吃饭，将嘴里的饭吐了出来，骂道： 这个没有见识的人，险些坏了我的大事！ 
English: Han Wang stopped eating, spit the food out of his mouth, and cursed, "This ignorant person almost ruined my big event!

古文：令趣销印。
现代文：立即下令赶紧销毁印信。
English: He immediately ordered the destruction of the seal.

古文：汉四年，韩信破齐而欲自立为齐王，汉王怒。
现代文：汉四年，韩信攻下齐国后想自立为齐王，汉王大怒。
English: In the fourth year of the Han Dynasty, Han Xin wanted to become the King of Qi after conquering Qi. The King of Han was furious.

古文：张良说汉王，汉王使良授齐王信印，语在淮阴事中。
现代文：张良劝告汉王，汉王才派张良授予韩信 齐王信 的印信，此事记载在《淮阴侯列传》中。
English: Zhang Liang advised the Han king, and the Han king sent Zhang Liang to award Han Xin Qi Wang Xin's seal letter, which was recorded in "Huaiyin Hou Lianchuan."

古文：其秋，汉王追楚至阳夏南，战不利而壁固陵，诸侯期不至。
现代文：这年秋天，汉王追击楚军到阳夏南面，因为战事失利而坚守固陵营垒，诸侯到了约定的日期也没有赶来。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Han king chased the Chu army to the south of Yangxia. Because of the defeat in the war, they held fast to the Guryong Camp. The princes did not arrive at the agreed date.

古文：良说汉王，汉王用其计，诸侯皆至。
现代文：张良向汉王进计，汉王采用了他的计策，诸侯才都来到。
English: Zhang Liang made a plan to the Han king, the Han king adopted his strategy, and all the princes came.

古文：语在项籍事中。
现代文：此事记载在《项羽本纪》中。
English: This event is recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：汉六年正月，封功臣。
现代文：汉六年正月，高帝封赏功臣。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao rewarded meritorious vassals.

古文：良未尝有战斗功，高帝曰： 运筹策帷帐中，决胜千里外，子房功也。
现代文：张良不曾有战功，高帝说： 出谋划策于营帐之中，决定胜负在千里之外，这就是子房的功劳。
English: Zhang Liang did not have any war achievements, Gao Di said: Zhang Liang made plans and suggestions in the middle of the camp, and decided to win or lose thousands of miles away. This is the merit of Zifo.

古文：自择齐三万户。 
现代文：让张良自己从齐国选择三万户作为封邑。 
English: Let Zhang Liang himself choose thirty thousand households from Qi Province as fiefs.

古文：良曰： 始臣起下邳，与上会留，此天以臣授陛下。
现代文：张良说： 当初我在下邳起事，在留县与陛下相遇，这是上天把我交给陛下。
English: Zhang Liang said, "At the beginning, I rose up in the Lower Yunnan Province, and I met His Majesty in Lvuxian County. This was God's way of handing me over to His Majesty.

古文：陛下用臣计，幸而时中，臣原封留足矣，不敢当三万户。 
现代文：陛下采用我的计谋，侥幸有预料对了的时候，我只愿受封留县就足够了，不敢承受三万户。 
English: His Majesty adopted my stratagem, and when, by a stroke of luck, my prediction was right, I was only willing to accept a fiefdom, and did not dare to accept thirty thousand households.

古文：乃封张良为留侯，与萧何等俱封。
现代文：于是封张良为留侯，同萧何等人一起受封。
English: As a result, Zhang Liang was placed under house arrest, together with Xiao He and others.

古文：上已封大功臣二十馀人，其馀日夜争功不决，未得行封。
现代文：皇上已经封赏大功臣二十多人，其余的人日夜争功，不能决定高下，未能进行封赏。
English: The emperor has already rewarded more than twenty great heroes, and the rest of the people are competing day and night, unable to decide which is the best, and unable to reward the best.

古文：上在雒阳南宫，从复道望见诸将往往相与坐沙中语。
现代文：皇上在洛阳南宫，从桥上望见一些将领常常坐在沙地上彼此议论。
English: The emperor was in the Southern Palace of Luoyang. From the bridge, he could see some generals often sitting on the sandy ground and discussing with each other.

古文：上曰： 此何语？ 
现代文：皇上说： 这些人在议论什么？ 
English: The emperor said, "What are these people talking about?

古文：留侯曰： 陛下不知乎？
现代文：留侯说： 陛下不知道吗？
English: Lingering said, "Doesn't Your Majesty know?

古文：此谋反耳。 
现代文：这是在商议反叛呀。 
English: This is a negotiated rebellion.

古文：上曰： 天下属安定，何故反乎？ 
现代文：皇上说： 天下已接近安定，为什么还要谋反呢？ 
English: The emperor said: The world is close to stability, why should there be a rebellion?

古文：留侯曰： 陛下起布衣，以此属取天下，今陛下为天子，而所封皆萧、曹故人所亲爱，而所诛者皆生平所仇怨。
现代文：留侯说： 陛下以平民身分起事，靠着这些人取得了天下，现在陛下做了天子，而所封赏的都是萧何、曹参这些陛下所亲近宠幸的老友，所诛杀的都是一生中仇恨的人。
English: Liu Hou said, "Your majesty started out as a commoner and gained the world by relying on these people. Now your majesty has become the son of heaven, and those who have been awarded are Xiao He and Cao San, who are your majesty's close and favored old friends, and those who have been killed are those who have hated you all your life.

古文：今军吏计功，以天下不足遍封，此属畏陛下不能尽封，恐又见疑平生过失及诛，故即相聚谋反耳。 
现代文：如今军官们计算功劳，认为天下的土地不够一一封赏的，这些人怕陛下不能全部封到，恐怕又被怀疑到平生的过失而至于遭受诛杀，所以就聚在一起图谋造反了。 
English: Now the officers are counting their merits, thinking that there is not enough land in the world to reward them one by one. These people are afraid that His Majesty will not be able to seal them all, and they are afraid that they will be suspected of lifelong mistakes and even killed, so they have gathered together to plot a rebellion.

古文：上乃忧曰： 为之柰何？ 
现代文：皇上于是忧心忡忡地说： 这件事该怎么办呢？ 
English: The Emperor said anxiously, "What should we do about this?"

古文：留侯曰： 上平生所憎，群臣所共知，谁最甚者？ 
现代文：留侯说： 陛下平生最憎恨的，群臣都知道的，属谁最突出？ 
English: Remain said: Your Majesty's life-long most hated, all the ministers know, who is the most prominent?

古文：上曰： 雍齿与我故，数尝窘辱我。
现代文：皇上说： 雍齿与我有宿怨，曾多次使我受窘受辱。
English: The emperor said, "Yongjie and I have a long-standing grudge, and he has embarrassed and humiliated me many times.

古文：我欲杀之，为其功多，故不忍。 
现代文：我原想杀掉他，因为他的功劳多，所以不忍心。 
English: I wanted to kill him, because he deserves a lot of credit, so I couldn't bear it.

古文：留侯曰： 今急先封雍齿以示群臣，群臣见雍齿封，则人人自坚矣。 
现代文：留侯说： 现在赶紧先封赏雍齿来给群臣看，群臣见雍齿都被封赏，那么每人对自己能受封就坚信不疑了。 
English: Liu Hou said, "Now, hurry up and seal the Yong Zi first to show it to the courtiers. When the courtiers see that the Yong Zi have all been sealed, then everyone will firmly believe that they can be sealed."

古文：於是上乃置酒，封雍齿为什方侯，而急趣丞相、御史定功行封。
现代文：于是皇上便摆设酒宴，封雍齿为什方侯，并紧迫地催促丞相、御史评定功劳，施行封赏。
English: As a result, the emperor held a wine banquet to decide who should be given the title of vassal lord, and urgently urged the prime minister and the emperor's historian to evaluate their services and reward them.

古文：群臣罢酒，皆喜曰： 雍齿尚为侯，我属无患矣。 
现代文：群臣吃过酒后，都高兴地说： 雍齿尚且被封为侯，我们这些人就不担忧了。 
English: After drinking, the ministers said happily, "Even though Yongjie has been given the title of marquess, we are not worried.

古文：刘敬说高帝曰： 都关中。 
现代文：刘敬劝告高帝说： 要以关中为都城。 
English: Liu Jing advised Gao Di: "We should make Guanzhong the capital.

古文：上疑之。
现代文：皇上对此心有疑虑。
English: The Emperor had misgivings about this.

古文：左右大臣皆山东人，多劝上都雒阳： 雒阳东有成皋，西有殽黾，倍河，向伊雒，其固亦足恃。 
现代文：皇上左右的大臣都是关东地区的人，多数劝皇上定都洛阳，他们说： 洛阳东面有成皋，西面有崤山、渑池，背靠黄河，面向伊水、洛水，它地形的险要和城郭的坚固也足可以依靠。 
English: The ministers around the emperor were all from the Kanto region, and most of them advised the emperor to set the capital in Luoyang. They said: Luoyang has Chengyi in the east, Shaoshan and Dianchi in the west, it is backed by the Yellow River and faces the Yishui and Luoshui rivers. Its terrain is precarious and the strength of the castle can be relied on.

古文：留侯曰： 雒阳虽有此固，其中小，不过数百里，田地薄，四面受敌，此非用武之国也。
现代文：留侯说： 洛阳虽然坚固，但它中间的境域狭小，不过几百里方圆，土地贫瘠，四面受敌，这里不是用武之地。
English: Liu Hou said: Although Luoyang is strong, the territory in the middle of it is narrow, but it is several hundred miles in circumference, the land is barren, and it is surrounded by enemies. This is not a place to use force.

古文：夫关中左殽函，右陇蜀，沃野千里，南有巴蜀之饶，北有胡苑之利，阻三面而守，独以一面东制诸侯。
现代文：关中东面有崤山、函谷关，西面有陇山、岷山，肥沃的土地方圆千里，南面有富饶的巴、蜀两郡，北面有利于放牧的胡苑，依靠三面的险阻来固守，只需控制东方一面的诸侯。
English: On the east side of Guanzhong, there are Lushan and Hanzhongguan. On the west side, there are Lushan and Lushan. The fertile land stretches for thousands of miles. On the south side, there are rich Ba and Shu counties. On the north side, there is Huyuan, which is conducive to grazing. They rely on the dangers and obstacles on the three sides to hold fast. They only need to control the princes on the east side.

古文：诸侯安定，河渭漕輓天下，西给京师；诸侯有变，顺流而下，足以委输。
现代文：如果诸侯安定，可由黄河、渭河运输天下粮食，往西供给京都；如果诸侯发生变故，可顺流而下，足以运送物资。
English: If the lords are stable, they can transport the world's grain from the Yellow River and the Min River to the west to supply Kyoto; if the lords change, they can go down the river, which is enough to transport materials.

古文：此所谓金城千里，天府之国也，刘敬说是也。 
现代文：这正是所谓 金城千里，天府之国 ，刘敬的建议是对的。 
English: This is precisely the so-called golden city of a thousand miles, the country of heaven, Liu Jing's suggestion is right.

古文：於是高帝即日驾，西都关中。
现代文：于是高帝当即决定起驾，往西关定都关中。
English: As a result, Gao Di immediately decided to drive to the west of Guanzhong.

古文：留侯从入关。
现代文：留侯跟随高帝入关。
English: He stayed in Luhou and followed Emperor Gao into the pass.

古文：留侯性多病，即道引不食穀，杜门不出岁馀。
现代文：他生性体弱多病，便施行道引之术，不食五谷，整整一年多闭门不出。
English: He was frail and sickly by nature, so he practised Taoism, refused to eat grain, and did not leave his house for more than a whole year.

古文：上欲废太子，立戚夫人子赵王如意。
现代文：皇上想废掉太子，立戚夫人生的儿子赵王如意。
English: The emperor wanted to abolish the crown prince, but Zhao Wangrui, the son of his cousin's wife, was chosen instead.

古文：大臣多谏争，未能得坚决者也。
现代文：很多大臣进谏劝阻，都没能改变高帝确定不移的想法。
English: Many ministers tried to dissuade him, but failed to change Gao's unshakable mind.

古文：吕后恐，不知所为。
现代文：吕后很惊恐，不知该怎么办。
English: Lü Guo was very frightened and didn't know what to do.

古文：人或谓吕后曰： 留侯善画计筴，上信用之。 
现代文：有人对吕后说： 留侯善于出谋划策，皇上很信任他。 
English: Someone said to Empress Lyu, "Ryuhou is good at making plans. The emperor trusts him very much."

古文：吕后乃使周吕侯吕泽劫留侯，曰： 君常为上谋臣，今上欲易太子，君安得高枕而卧乎？ 
现代文：吕后就派建成侯吕泽胁迫留侯说： 您一直是皇上的谋臣，现在皇上打算更换太子，您怎么能高枕无忧呢？ 
English: Lyu Hou sent Lyu Ze, a Jiancheng vassal, to coerce him to stay, saying, "You have always been the emperor's adviser. Now the emperor is planning to replace the crown prince. How can you rest easy?

古文：留侯曰： 始上数在困急之中，幸用臣筴。
现代文：留侯说： 当初皇上多次处在危急之中，采用了我的计谋。
English: Rumo said: At the beginning, the emperor was in danger many times, and he used my strategy.

古文：今天下安定，以爱欲易太子，骨肉之间，虽臣等百馀人何益。 
现代文：如今天下安定，由于偏爱的原因想更换太子，这些至亲骨肉之间的事，即使同我一样的有一百多人进谏又有什么益处。 
English: If the present situation is stable, and I want to change the crown prince for reasons of preference, these matters between blood relatives, even if there are more than a hundred people like me, what is the benefit?

古文：吕泽彊要曰： 为我画计。 
现代文：吕泽竭力要挟说： 一定得给我出个主意。 
English: Lü Ze tried his best to blackmail him, saying, "You must give me an idea."

古文：留侯曰： 此难以口舌争也。
现代文：留侯说： 这件事是很难用口舌来争辩的。
English: "It's hard to argue with words," Mr. Rouhou said.

古文：顾上有不能致者，天下有四人。
现代文：皇上不能招致而来的，天下有四个人。
English: There are only four people in the world whom the Emperor cannot invite.

古文：四人者年老矣，皆以为上慢侮人，故逃匿山中，义不为汉臣。
现代文：这四个人已经年老了，都认为皇上对人傲慢，所以逃避躲藏在山中，他们按照道义不肯做汉朝的臣子。
English: The four men were old and thought the emperor was arrogant, so they ran away and hid in the mountains. They morally refused to be Han Dynasty courtiers.

古文：然上高此四人。
现代文：但是皇上很敬重这四个人。
English: However, the Emperor held these four people in high esteem.

古文：今公诚能无爱金玉璧帛，令太子为书，卑辞安车，因使辩士固请，宜来。
现代文：现在您若果真能不惜金玉壁帛，让太子写一封信，言辞要谦恭，并预备安车，再派有口才的人恳切地聘请，他们应当会来。
English: Now, if you really can spare the jeweled niche, let the prince write a letter, the words should be humble, and prepare a safe car, and then send eloquent people to earnestly hire, they should come.

古文：来，以为客，时时从入朝，令上见之，则必异而问之。
现代文：来了以后，把他们当作贵宾，让他们时常跟着入朝，叫皇上见到他们，那么皇上一定会感到惊异并询问他们。
English: When they come, treat them as honored guests, let them accompany you to the Imperial Palace from time to time, let the Emperor see them, then the Emperor will surely be surprised and inquire about them.

古文：问之，上知此四人贤，则一助也。 
现代文：一问他们，皇上知道这四个人贤能，那么这对太子是一种帮助。 
English: I asked them if the Emperor knew that these four people were capable, then this would be a help to the Crown Prince.

古文：於是吕后令吕泽使人奉太子书，卑辞厚礼，迎此四人。
现代文：于是吕后让吕泽派人携带太子的书信，用谦恭的言辞和丰厚的礼品，迎请这四个人。
English: So Queen Lyu asked Lyu Ze to send someone to carry the prince's letter and welcome the four people with courteous words and rich gifts.

古文：四人至，客建成侯所。
现代文：四个人来了，就住在建成侯的府第中为客。
English: Four people came and stayed as guests in the newly built guesthouse.

古文：汉十一年，黥布反，上病，欲使太子将，往击之。
现代文：汉十一年，黥布反叛，皇上此时患重病，打算派太子率兵前往讨伐叛军。
English: In the eleventh year of the Han Dynasty, Zibo rebelled. At this time, the emperor was seriously ill and planned to send the crown prince and his soldiers to fight the rebels.

古文：四人相谓曰： 凡来者，将以存太子。太子将兵，事危矣。 
现代文：这四个人互相商议说： 我们之所以来，是为了要保全太子，太子如若率兵平叛，事情就危险了。 
English: The four men discussed among themselves and said, "The reason why we have come is to protect the crown prince. If the crown prince leads an army to put down the rebellion, things will be dangerous."

古文：乃说建成侯曰： 太子将兵，有功则位不益太子；无功还，则从此受祸矣。
现代文：于是劝告建成侯说： 太子率兵出战，如立了功，那么权位也不会高过太子；如无功而返，那么从这以后就是遭受祸患了。
English: Therefore, he advised Jiancheng Hou, saying, "The prince led the troops into battle. If he did a good job, then the power would not be higher than the prince. If he did not do a good job, then he would suffer misfortune from then on.

古文：且太子所与俱诸将，皆尝与上定天下枭将也，今使太子将之，此无异使羊将狼也，皆不肯为尽力，其无功必矣。
现代文：再说跟太子一起出征的各位将领，都是曾经同皇上平定天下的猛将，如今让太子统率这些人，这和让羊指挥狼有什么两样，他们决不肯为太子卖力，太子不能建功是必定的了。
English: Furthermore, all the generals who went to war with the crown prince were once fierce warriors who pacified the world together with the emperor. Now, letting the crown prince lead these people is no different from letting a sheep command a wolf. They will never work hard for the crown prince. It is inevitable that the crown prince will not be able to make contributions.

古文：臣闻 母爱者子抱 ，今戚夫人日夜待御，赵王如意常抱居前，上曰 终不使不肖子居爱子之上 ，明乎其代太子位必矣。
现代文：我们听说 爱其母必抱其子 ，现在戚夫人日夜侍奉皇上，赵王如意常被抱在皇上面前，皇上说 终归不能让不成器的儿子居于我的爱子之上 ，显然，赵王如意取代太子的宝位是必定的了。
English: We have heard that a mother who loves her son must hold him, and now the relative's wife serves the emperor day and night. Zhao Wang Rongyi is often held in front of the emperor, and the emperor said, "In the end, I can't let my son live on my beloved son." Obviously, Zhao Wang Rongyi's replacement of the crown prince's throne is inevitable.

古文：君何不急请吕后承间为上泣言： 黥布，天下猛将也，善用兵，今诸将皆陛下故等夷，乃令太子将此属，无异使羊将狼，莫肯为用，且使布闻之，则鼓行而西耳。
现代文：您何不赶紧请吕后打机会向皇上哭诉： 黥布是天下的猛将，很会用兵，现今的各位将领都是陛下过去的同辈，您却让太子统率这些人，这和让羊指挥狼没有两样，没有人肯为太子效力，而且如让黥布听说这个情况，就会大张旗鼓地向西进犯。
English: Why don't you hurry up and ask Lu Huan to take the opportunity to cry to the emperor: Zibo is the world's fierce general, very good at using soldiers. All the current generals are the same generation as His Majesty in the past, but you let the prince lead these people. This is no different from letting the sheep command the wolf. No one is willing to serve the prince, and if Zibo hears about this situation, he will march to the west with great fanfare.

古文：上虽病，彊载辎车，卧而护之，诸将不敢不尽力。
现代文：皇上虽然患病，还可以勉强地乘坐辎车，躺着统辖军队，众将不敢不尽力。
English: Although the emperor was ill, he could still manage to ride a carriage and command the army while lying down. The generals did not dare not to do their best.

古文：上虽苦，为妻子自彊。  
现代文：皇上虽然受些辛苦，为了妻儿还是要自己奋发图强一下。  
English: Although the emperor suffered some hardships, for the sake of his wife and children, he still had to work hard to strengthen himself.

古文：於是吕泽立夜见吕后，吕后承间为上泣涕而言，如四人意。
现代文：于是吕泽立即在当夜晋见吕后，吕后找机会向皇上哭诉，说了四个人授意的那番话。
English: So Lü Ze immediately went to see Lü Guo that night. Lü Guo took the opportunity to cry to the emperor and said the words that the four of them had agreed upon.

古文：上曰： 吾惟竖子固不足遣，而公自行耳。 
现代文：皇上说： 我就想到这小子本来不能派遣他，老子自己去吧。 
English: The emperor said, "I thought that this young man couldn't have sent him, so let Lao Zi go himself."

古文：於是上自将兵而东，群臣居守，皆送至灞上。
现代文：于是皇上亲自带兵东征，群臣留守，都送到灞上。
English: As a result, the emperor personally led the troops to the east, and the retainers left behind were all sent to the capital.

古文：留侯病，自彊起，至曲邮，见上曰： 臣宜从，病甚。
现代文：留侯患病，自己勉强支撑起来，送到曲邮，谒见皇上说： 我本应跟从前往，但病势沉重。
English: He stayed behind, fell ill, and barely managed to support himself. He sent a letter to the emperor saying, "I should have gone with you, but I am seriously ill."

古文：楚人剽疾，原上无与楚人争锋。 
现代文：楚国人马迅猛敏捷，希望皇上不要跟楚国人斗个高低。 
English: The horses of the people of Chu are swift and agile. I hope that the emperor will not fight with the people of Chu.

古文：因说上曰： 令太子为将军，监关中兵。 
现代文：留侯又趁机规劝皇上说： 让太子做将军，监守关中的军队吧。 
English: He also took advantage of the opportunity to persuade the emperor, saying: Let the prince be a general and guard the troops in Guanzhong.

古文：上曰： 子房虽病，彊卧而傅太子。 
现代文：皇上说： 子房虽然患病，也要勉强在卧床养病时辅佐太子。 
English: The emperor said, "Although the Empress Dowager is ill, she has to stay in bed to nurse the prince.

古文：是时叔孙通为太傅，留侯行少傅事。
现代文：这时叔孙通做太傅，留侯任少傅之职。
English: At this time, Uncle Sun Tong became the grand steward and stayed in the position of junior steward.

古文：汉十二年，上从击破布军归，疾益甚，愈欲易太子。
现代文：汉十二年，皇上随着击败黥布的军队回来，病势更加沉重，更加想要更换太子。
English: In the twelfth year of the Han Dynasty, the emperor returned after defeating the troops of Xibu, his condition became more serious, and he wanted to replace the crown prince even more.

古文：留侯谏，不听，因疾不视事。
现代文：留侯劝谏，皇上不听，留侯就托病不再理事。
English: The emperor did not listen to his advice to stay on, so he stayed on sick leave and was no longer a director.

古文：叔孙太傅称说引古今，以死争太子。
现代文：叔孙太傅引证古今事例进行劝说，死命争保太子。
English: Uncle Sun Taifu quoted ancient and modern cases for persuasion and fought to the death to protect the crown prince.

古文：上详许之，犹欲易之。
现代文：皇上假装答应了他，但还是想更换太子。
English: The emperor pretended to agree, but still wanted to change the crown prince.

古文：及燕，置酒，太子侍。
现代文：等到安闲的时候，设置酒席，太子在旁侍侯。
English: When it was time to relax, they set up a bar, with the crown prince waiting nearby.

古文：四人从太子，年皆八十有馀，须眉皓白，衣冠甚伟。
现代文：那四人跟着太子，他们的年龄都已八十多岁，须眉洁白，衣冠非常壮美奇特。
English: The four of them followed the prince. They were all in their eighties, with white beards and very magnificent and unique crowns.

古文：上怪之，问曰： 彼何为者？ 
现代文：皇上感到奇怪，问道： 他们是干什么的？ 
English: The emperor was puzzled and asked, "What do they do?"

古文：四人前对，各言名姓，曰东园公，角里先生，绮里季，夏黄公。
现代文：四个人向前对答，各自说出姓名，叫东园公、角里先生、绮里季、夏黄公。
English: The four people answered forward, each saying their names, called Dongyuan Gong, Mr. Kakuri, Qili Ji, Xia Huang Gong.

古文：上乃大惊，曰： 吾求公数岁，公辟逃我，今公何自从吾兒游乎？ 
现代文：皇上于是大惊说： 我访求各位好几年了，各位都逃避着我，现在你们为何自愿跟随我儿交游呢？ 
English: The emperor was shocked and said: "I have been visiting you for several years, and you have all been avoiding me. Now why are you voluntarily following my son?

古文：四人皆曰： 陛下轻士善骂，臣等义不受辱，故恐而亡匿。
现代文：四人都说： 陛下轻慢士人，喜欢骂人，我们讲求义理，不愿受辱，所以惶恐地逃躲。
English: All four of them said, "Your Majesty despises braggarts and likes to abuse people. We are seeking justice and do not want to be insulted, so we fled in fear."

古文：窃闻太子为人仁孝，恭敬爱士，天下莫不延颈欲为太子死者，故臣等来耳。 
现代文：我们私下闻知太子为人仁义孝顺，谦恭有礼，喜爱士人，天下人没有谁不伸长脖子想为太子拼死效力的。因此我们就来了。 
English: Privately, we have heard that the prince is a benevolent, dutiful, humble and courteous person, who loves scholars. There is no one in the world who does not want to work hard for the prince. Therefore, we have come.

古文：上曰： 烦公幸卒调护太子。 
现代文：皇上说： 烦劳诸位始终如一地好好调理保护太子吧。 
English: The emperor said, "Please take the trouble to consistently take care of and protect the crown prince."

古文：四人为寿已毕，趋去。
现代文：四个人敬酒祝福已毕，小步快走离去。
English: The four of them have finished toasting and blessing. They walk away quickly.

古文：上目送之，召戚夫人指示四人者曰： 我欲易之，彼四人辅之，羽翼已成，难动矣。
现代文：皇上目送他们，召唤戚夫人过来，指着那四个人给她看，说道： 我想更换太子，他们四个人辅佐他，太子的羽翼已经形成，难以更动了。
English: The Emperor saw them off, called his wife over, pointed to the four people and said, "I want to replace the Crown Prince. The four of them are assisting him. The wings of the Crown Prince are already formed, and it is difficult to change them."

古文：吕后真而主矣。 
现代文：吕后真是你的主人了。 
English: Lyu Hou is really your master.

古文：戚夫人泣，上曰： 为我楚舞，吾为若楚歌。 
现代文：戚夫了哭泣起来，皇上说： 你为我跳楚舞，我为你唱楚歌。 
English: Relatives began to cry, and the emperor said: You dance the Chu dance for me, and I will sing the Chu song for you.

古文：歌曰： 鸿鹄高飞，一举千里。
现代文：皇上唱道： 天鹅高飞，振翅千里。
English: The emperor sang: The swan flies high and flutters its wings far and wide.

古文：羽翮已就，横绝四海。
现代文：羽翼已成，翱翔四海。
English: Wings have been made, soaring over the four seas.

古文：横绝四海，当可柰何！
现代文：翱翔四海，当可奈何！
English: Soaring over the four seas, what a thrill!

古文：虽有矰缴，尚安所施！ 
现代文：虽有短箭，何处施用！ 
English: Although there are short arrows, where to apply them!

古文：歌数阕，戚夫人嘘唏流涕，上起去，罢酒。
现代文：皇上唱了几遍，戚夫人抽泣流泪，皇上起身离去，酒宴结束。
English: The emperor sang several times, his wife sobbed and shed tears, the emperor got up and left, and the banquet ended.

古文：竟不易太子者，留侯本招此四人之力也。
现代文：皇上最终没更换太子，原本是留侯招致这四个人发生了效力。
English: In the end, the emperor did not replace the crown prince. Originally, these four people were invited to stay, which had an effect.

古文：留侯从上击代，出奇计马邑下，及立萧何相国，所与上从容言天下事甚众，非天下所以存亡，故不著。
现代文：留侯跟随皇上进攻代国，在马邑城下出妙计，以及劝皇上立萧何为相国，他跟皇上平常随意谈论天下的事情很多，但由于不是关于国家存亡的大事，所以未予记载。
English: He often talked freely with the emperor about many things in the world, but because they were not important matters concerning the survival of the country, they were not recorded.

古文：留侯乃称曰： 家世相韩，及韩灭，不爱万金之资，为韩报雠彊秦，天下振动。今以三寸舌为帝者师，封万户，位列侯，此布衣之极，於良足矣。
现代文：留侯宣称道： 我家世代为韩相，到韩国灭亡，不惜万金家财，替韩国向强秦报仇，天下为此震动，如今凭借三寸之舌为帝王统师，封邑万户，位居列侯，这对一个平民是至高无上的，我张良已经非常满足了。
English: Rumo declared, "My family's generation was the ruler of Korea. They went to Korea to die, and they spared all their money and property to avenge Korea against the strong Qin. The whole world was shocked by this. Now, with my three-inch tongue, I am the ruler of the emperor, I am the ruler of all households, and I am in the line of lords. This is supreme for a commoner. I, Zhang Liang, am very satisfied.

古文：原弃人间事，欲从赤松子游耳。 
现代文：我愿丢却人世间的事情，打算随赤松子去遨游。 
English: I would like to leave the things of this world behind and plan to travel with Akamatsuzu.

古文：乃学辟穀，道引轻身。
现代文：张良于是学辟谷学术，行道引轻身之道。
English: Zhang Liang thus learned the way of avoiding the valley of learning and the way of being frivolous.

古文：会高帝崩，吕后德留侯，乃彊食之，曰： 人生一世间，如白驹过隙，何至自苦如此乎！ 
现代文：正值高帝驾崩，吕后感激留侯，便竭力让他进食，说： 人生一世，时光有如白驹过隙一样迅速，何必自己苦行到这种地步啊！ 
English: At the time of Emperor Gao's death, Lu Hou was grateful to stay behind, so she tried her best to make him eat, saying, "In one lifetime, time passes as quickly as the egrets, why do you have to work so hard to get to this point!

古文：留侯不得已，彊听而食。
现代文：留侯不得已，勉强听命进食。
English: As a last resort, he had to stay and eat what he was told.

古文：後八年卒，谥为文成侯。
现代文：过后八年，留侯去世，定谥号叫文成侯。
English: Eight years later, Rui Hou passed away, and his posthumous name was Wen Cheng Hou.

古文：子不疑代侯。
现代文：他儿子张不疑袭封为侯。
English: His son Zhang undoubtedly succeeded him as marquis.

古文：子房始所见下邳圯上老父与太公书者，後十三年从高帝过济北，果见穀城山下黄石，取而葆祠之。
现代文：张子房当初在下邳桥上遇见那个给他《太公兵法》的老丈，在别后十三年他随高帝经过济北，果然见到谷城山下的黄石，便把它取回，奉若至宝地祭祀它。
English: Zhang Zifang originally met his father-in-law, who gave him the "Law of Tai Gong Hei," on the lower bridge. Thirteen years later, he followed Gao Di through Jibei, and indeed saw the Yellow Stone under the mountain of Gu Cheng. He retrieved it and worshiped it as a treasure.

古文：留侯死，并葬黄石。
现代文：留侯去世，一起安葬了黄石。
English: When Liu Hou died, he was buried together with Huang Shi.

古文：每上冢伏腊，祠黄石。
现代文：以后每逢扫墓以及冬夏节日蔡祀张良的时候，也同时蔡祀黄石。
English: From then on, whenever there was a grave-sweeping or a winter or summer festival, when Cai worshipped Zhang Liang, Cai also worshipped Huang Shi.

古文：留侯不疑，孝文帝五年坐不敬，国除。
现代文：留侯张不疑，在孝文帝五年因犯了不敬之罪，封国被废除。
English: Liu Hou Zhang did not doubt that in the five years of Emperor Xiaowen, because he committed the crime of disrespect, the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：太史公曰：学者多言无鬼神，然言有物。
现代文：太史公说：学者大多说没有鬼神，然而又说有精怪。
English: Taishikong said: Most scholars say there are no ghosts and gods, but they also say there are eccentricities.

古文：至如留侯所见老父予书，亦可怪矣。
现代文：至于像留侯遇见老丈赠书的事，也够神奇的了。
English: As for the story of how she met her husband-to-be and was given a book as a gift, it's pretty amazing.

古文：高祖离困者数矣，而留侯常有功力焉，岂可谓非天乎？
现代文：高祖遭遇困厄的情况有多次了，而留侯常在这种危急时刻建功效力，难道可以说不是天意吗？
English: Gao Zu has been in trouble many times, and he often makes contributions at such critical times. Can it be said that this is not God's will?

古文：上曰： 夫运筹筴帷帐之中，决胜千里外，吾不如子房。 
现代文：皇上说： 出谋划策于营帐之中，决定胜负在千里之外，我比不了子房。 
English: The emperor said, "I am no better than Zifu, for I can devise a plan in the middle of the camp, and decide whether to win or lose a thousand miles away.

古文：余以为其人计魁梧奇伟，至见其图，状貌如妇人好女。
现代文：我原以为此人大概是高大威武的样子，等到看见他的画像，相貌却像个美丽的女子。
English: I thought he must be tall and powerful, but when I saw his picture, he looked like a beautiful woman.

古文：盖孔子曰： 以貌取人，失之子羽。 
现代文：孔子说过： 按照相貌来评判人，在对待子羽上就有所失。 
English: Confucius said, "If you judge a man by his appearance, you will be disappointed in your treatment of him."

古文：留侯亦云。
现代文：对于留侯也可以这样说。
English: The same can be said for staying.

