古文：周处年少时，凶强侠气，为乡里所患。
现代文：周处年轻时，为人蛮横强悍，任侠使气，是当地一大祸害。
English: When everyone around him was young, he was a very domineering and powerful person. He was a local scourge.

古文：又义兴水中有蛟，山中有邅迹虎，并皆暴犯百姓，义兴人谓为三横，而处尤剧。
现代文：义兴的河中有条蛟龙，山上有只跛足老虎，一起祸害百姓。义兴的百姓称他们是三大祸害，三害当中周处最为厉害。
English: In Yixing, there is a dragon in the river and a lame tiger on the mountain, both of which plague the people. The people of Yixing say that they are three major plagues, and among the three plagues, the surrounding area is the most severe.

古文：或说处杀虎斩蛟，实冀三横唯余其一。
现代文：有人劝说周处去杀死猛虎和蛟龙，实际上是希望三个祸害相互拼杀后只剩下一个。
English: Some people persuade others to kill tigers and dragons, hoping that after the three evils fight each other, only one will remain.

古文：处即刺杀虎，又入水击蛟，蛟或浮或没，行数十里，处与之俱。
现代文：周处立即杀死了老虎，又下河斩杀蛟龙。蛟龙在水里有时浮起有时沉没，漂游了几十里远，周处始终同蛟龙一起搏斗。
English: Everyone immediately killed the tiger, and then went down to the river to kill the dragon. The dragon sometimes floated and sometimes sank in the water, drifted dozens of miles away, and everyone always fought with the dragon.

古文：经三日三夜，乡里皆谓已死，更相庆，竟杀蛟而出。
现代文：经过了三天三夜，当地的百姓们都认为周处已经死了，轮流着对此表示庆贺。结果周处杀死了蛟龙从水中出来了。
English: After three days and three nights, the local people all thought that everyone around them was dead, and they took turns to celebrate this. As a result, everyone around them killed the dragon and came out of the water.

古文：闻里人相庆，始知为人情所患，有自改意。
现代文：他听说乡里人以为自己已死而对此庆贺的事情，才知道大家实际上也把自己当作一大祸害，因此，有了悔改的心意。
English: When he heard that people in his village were celebrating the fact that they thought he was dead, he realized that they actually thought of themselves as a great evil, and therefore, they had a desire to repent.

古文：乃自吴寻二陆，平原不在，正见清河，具以情告，并云： 欲自修改，而年已蹉跎，终无所成。 
现代文：于是便到吴郡去找陆机和陆云两位有修养的名人。当时陆机不在，只见到了陆云，他就把全部情况告诉了陆云，并说： 自己想要改正错误，可是岁月已经荒废了，怕终于没有什么成就。 
English: So he went to Wu County to look for Lu Jie and Lu Yun, two well-educated celebrities. At that time, Lu Jie was not there, and he only saw Lu Yun. He told Lu Yun the whole situation, and said: I want to correct my mistakes, but the years have been wasted, and I'm afraid I won't be able to achieve anything.

古文：清河曰： 古人贵朝闻夕死，况君前途尚可。
现代文：陆云说： 古人珍视道义，认为 哪怕是早晨明白了道理，晚上就死去也甘心 ，况且你的前途还是有希望的。
English: Lu Yun said: The ancients treasured morality. They believed that even if you understood the truth in the morning, you would be willing to die in the evening. Moreover, your future is still promising.

古文：且人患志之不立，亦何忧令名不彰邪？ 
现代文：再说人就怕立不下志向，只要能立志，又何必担忧好名声不能传扬呢？ 
English: Besides, people are afraid of not being able to set an aspiration. As long as you can set an aspiration, why worry about not being able to spread a good reputation?

古文：处遂改励，终为忠臣孝子。
现代文：周处听后就改过自新，终于成为一名忠臣。
English: After listening to everyone around, he reformed himself and finally became a loyal subject.

古文：戴渊少时，游侠不治行检，尝在江、淮间攻掠商旅。
现代文：戴渊年轻时，很侠义，不注意品行，曾在长江、淮河间袭击、抢劫商人和旅客。
English: When Dai Yuan was young, he was very chivalrous and did not pay attention to moral conduct. He attacked and robbed merchants and passengers between the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River.

古文：陆机赴假还洛，辎重甚盛。
现代文：陆机度假后回洛阳，行李很多，戴渊便指使一班年轻人去抢劫。
English: After returning to Luoyang by land plane after vacation, with a lot of luggage, Dai Yuan instructed a group of young people to rob.

古文：渊使少年掠劫，渊在岸上，据胡床，指麾左右，皆得其宜。
现代文：他在岸上，坐在马扎儿上指挥手下的人，安排得头头是道。
English: He was on the shore, sitting on a horse-drawn carriage, directing his men, and arranging everything perfectly.

古文：渊既神姿峰颖，虽处鄙事，神气犹异。
现代文：戴渊原本风度仪态挺拔不凡，虽然是处理抢劫这种事，神气仍旧与众不同。
English: Dai Yuan's original demeanor was unusually upright, and although he was dealing with a robbery, his aura was still unique.

古文：机于船屋上遥谓之曰： 卿才如此，亦复作劫邪？ 
现代文：陆机在船舱里远远地对他说： 你有这样的才能，还要做强盗吗？ 
English: The lander said to him from far away in the cabin: "You have such talent, do you still want to be a robber?

古文：渊便泣涕，投剑归机，辞厉非常。机弥重之，定交，作笔荐焉。
现代文：戴渊感悟流泪，便扔掉剑投靠了陆机。他的谈吐非同一般，陆机更加看重他，和他结为朋友，并写信推荐他。
English: Dai Yuan was moved to tears, so he threw away his sword and sided with the land machine. His conversation was extraordinary, the land machine valued him more, made friends with him, and wrote a letter to recommend him.

古文：过江，仕至征西将军。
现代文：过江以后，戴渊做官做到征西将军。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River, Dai Yuan became a general of the Western Expedition.

