古文：龟
现代文：龟
English: Turtle

古文：陶唐氏禹葛洪张广定赣县吏郗了孟彦晖营陵兴业寺
现代文：陶唐氏禹葛洪张广定赣县吏郗了孟彦晖营陵兴业寺
English: Tang Dynasty officials from Yuege, Hong, Zhang, Guangding and Lu counties visited Meng Yanying Mausoleum of Xingye Temple

古文：唐太宗刘彦回吴兴渔者唐明皇帝宁晋民史论徐仲高崇文
现代文：唐太宗刘彦回吴兴渔者唐明皇帝宁晋民史论徐仲高崇文
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, Liu Yan, Returns to Wu Xing, a Fisherman; Emperor Ning Jin of Tang Dynasty, Discusses the History of the People; and Xu Zhonggao, a Reverend

古文：汴河贾客南人阎居敬池州民李宗
现代文：汴河贾客南人阎居敬池州民李宗
English: Yan Ju, a native of Jiaqi in the south of the Wei River, and Li Zong, a native of Jingchi Prefecture

古文：陶唐氏
现代文：陶唐氏
English: The Tao Tang Clan

古文：陶唐之世，赵裳国献千岁神龟，方三尺余，背上有文，皆科斗书，记开辟以来，帝命录之龟历，伏滔述帝功德铭曰： 朱书龟历之文。 
现代文：远古陶唐氏时代，有个赵裳国献上一只千年神龟，三尺多见方，背上有字，全都是科斗文，记载了天地开辟以来，帝命令记下来历法，伏滔记述黄帝功德的铭文说，那龟甲上的历法是用红笔写的。
English: In the time of the ancient Tao and Tang dynasties, there was a turtle presented by Zhao Xiangguo. It was more than three feet square and had words on its back, all of which were scientific treatises. It recorded that since the heavens and earth were opened, the emperor had ordered the calendar to be written down. The inscription, which described the merits of the Yellow Emperor, said that the calendar on the turtle was written with a red pen.

古文：禹
现代文：禹
English: Yu Zhen

古文：禹尽力渠沟，导川夷岳，黄龙曳尾于前，玄龟负青泥于后。
现代文：大禹尽全力挖沟排水，疏通河道，铲平山峰。黄龙拖着尾巴走在前面，玄龟背着青泥走在后面。
English: Dayu did his best to dig ditches and drains, dredge the river, and level the mountain. Huanglong walked in front with his tail, and the tortoise walked behind with the blue mud.

古文：玄龟，河精之使者也。
现代文：玄龟，是河神的使者。
English: The tortoise is the messenger of the river god.

古文：龟颔下有印文，皆古言，作九州山水之字。
现代文：玄龟的颔下印有文字，全是远古文字，记载着九州的山山水水。
English: Under the tortoise's beak, there is writing, all in ancient script, recording the landscape of Kyushu.

古文：禹所穿凿之处，皆以青泥封记其所，使玄龟印其上。
现代文：凡是大禹开凿的地方，都用青泥把那个地方封住作上记号，让玄龟把印文印在上面。
English: Wherever Dayu dug, he sealed the place with blue mud to make a mark, and let the tortoise print the seal on it.

古文：今人聚土为界，此之遗像也。
现代文：现在的人堆土作为边界的记号，就是由此遗传下来的。
English: The present man-made mounds, which mark the border, are a legacy of this.

古文：葛洪
现代文：葛洪
English: Ge Hong

古文：葛洪云： 千岁灵龟，五色具焉。
现代文：葛洪说： 千年的灵龟，身上有五种颜色。
English: Ge Hong said, "The Millennium Spirit Turtle has five colors on its body.

古文：其雄，额上两骨起，似角。
现代文：那雄性的，额上有两块骨头突起，象角一样。
English: The male has two bones protruding from his forehead, like horns.

古文：以未朱浴之，乃剔取其甲，火炙，捣服。方寸七日三，尽一具，寿千岁。
现代文：用未朱洗浴龟，再剔除肉用它的甲壳，用火烧，研成粉末吃下去，七分大小的一块一日吃三块吃完一个龟的甲壳，就能活一千岁。 
English: Wash the turtle with vermilion, then remove the flesh and use its carapace, burn it with fire, grind it into powder and eat it. If you eat three pieces of a turtle's carapace a day, you can live for a thousand years.

古文：张广定
现代文：张广定
English: Zhang Guangding

古文：陈仲弓《异闻记》曰，张广定遭乱避地，有一女四岁，不能步，又不忍弃之，乃县笼于古冢中，冀他日得收其骨。
现代文：陈仲弓《异闻记》里说：张广定遇到战乱找地方躲避，有一个四岁的女儿，不能走路，又不忍心抛弃她就把她装进笼子悬挂在一个古墓里，希望以后能收拾她的骨头。
English: Chen Zhongyun said in "A Strange Story": Zhang Guangding encountered a war and looked for a place to hide. He had a four-year-old daughter who couldn't walk. He couldn't bear to abandon her, so he put her in a cage and hung her in an ancient tomb, hoping to collect her bones later.

古文：及三年，归取之，见其尚活。问之，女答曰： 食尽即馁，见其傍有一物，引颈呼吸，效之，故能活。 
现代文：等到第三年，他回到古墓里取女儿的骨头，看见她还活着，问她原因，女儿回答说： 东西吃光了就觉得饿，我看见旁边有一个动物，伸着脖子呼吸，就学它的样子，所以才活下来。 
English: In the third year, he went back to the tomb to retrieve his daughter's bones. He saw that she was still alive and asked her why. His daughter replied, "When I run out of things to eat, I get hungry. I see an animal next to me, breathing with its neck stretched out, and I learn what it looks like. That's why I survived."

古文：广定入冢视之，乃一龟也。
现代文：张广定进到墓里去查看，原来是一只乌龟。
English: Zhang Guangding went into the tomb to check it out. It turned out to be a turtle.

古文：陈实之言，固不妄矣。赣县吏
现代文：陈仲弓说的是真事，一点也不假。赣县吏
English: Chen Zhongyun is telling the truth, it's not a lie at all.

古文：晋义熙中，范寅为南康郡。
现代文：晋代义熙年间，范寅担任南康郡的郡守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, Fan Yin served as the governor of Nankang County.

古文：时赣县吏说，先入山采薪，得二龟，皆如二尺盘大。
现代文：当时的赣县有个官吏说他小时候进山砍柴，捉到两只乌龟，都象二尺见方的圆盘那么大。
English: At that time, there was an official in Jixian County who said that when he was a child, he went into the mountains to cut firewood and caught two turtles, both of which were as big as a two-foot-square disk.

古文：薪未足，遇有两树骈生，吏以龟侧置树间，复行采伐。
现代文：柴没有砍够，遇到两棵紧靠着生长的树，他就把乌龟偏侧着放在两树之间，又去砍柴。
English: He did not cut enough wood, and when he came across two trees growing close together, he put the turtle sideways between the two trees and went to cut wood again.

古文：去龟处稍远，天雨，懒复取。
现代文：他离放乌龟的地方稍远一点，天又下了雨，懒得去取。
English: He moved a little further away from the place where the turtle was released, and it rained again, so he didn't bother to retrieve it.

古文：后经十二年，复入山，见先龟，一者甲已枯，一者尚生，极长。树木夹处，可厚四寸许，两头厚尺余，如马鞍状。
现代文：后来又过了十二年，他再次进山，看见先前捉的那两只乌龟，一只龟的甲壳已经干枯了，另一只乌龟还活着，长得很大，树木夹着的地方，有四寸多厚，两头厚一尺多，象马鞍的样子。
English: Twelve years later, he went into the mountains again and saw the two tortoises he had caught earlier. One of the tortoise's carapace had dried out, the other tortoise was still alive and grew very large. The area between the trees was more than four inches thick, and the two ends were more than a foot thick, resembling a saddle.

古文：郗世了
现代文：郗世了
English: He's gone.

古文：郗世了在会稽造墓，其地多石，后破大石，得一龟，长尺二寸许，在石中，石了无孔也，得非龟石俱生乎？
现代文：郗世了在会稽修建坟墓。那个地方石头多，后来破开一块大石头，得到一只乌龟，长一尺二寸左右。龟在石头的中间，石头却一点孔隙也没有。奇怪，难道它和石头是一起生长的吗？
English: Once upon a time, a man was building a tomb in Xuefeng. There was a lot of stone in that area. Later, he cracked open a large stone and got a turtle, about one foot two inches long. The turtle was in the middle of the stone, but the stone had no pores at all. Isn't it strange that it grew together with the stone?

古文：既破出之，龟行动如常龟无异。
现代文：破开石头之后，那乌龟的行动象平常的乌龟一样。
English: After breaking the stone, the turtle behaved like a normal turtle.

古文：石受龟，如人刻安之。
现代文：这石头容纳此龟，就象人刻好了石头再把它放进去似的。
English: The stone held the turtle, as if someone had carved the stone and placed it there.

古文：孟彦晖
现代文：孟彦晖
English: Meng Yanyuan

古文：武成三年庚午，六月五日癸亥，广汉太守孟彦晖奏，西湖有金龟径寸，游于荷叶之上，画图以上闻。
现代文：五代前蜀武成第三年是庚午年。这年的六月五日癸亥，广汉太守孟彦晖向朝廷报告，西湖有直径一寸的金龟，在荷叶上游玩，并画成图画给皇上王建看。
English: The third year of the fifth generation of the former Shu Wucheng was the year of the Heian era. On June 5th of this year, the Guanghan governor Meng Yanyan reported to the imperial court that there was a golden turtle with a diameter of one inch in the West Lake, playing on the lotus leaves, and drawing a picture for the emperor Wang Jian to see.

古文：营陵
现代文：营陵
English: Yingling

古文：道州营陵中鼍，甲长八尺，下自然有文字，前后四足，各踏一龟。
现代文：道州营陵中有一只鼍，甲壳长八尺，腹部有自然生成的文字。它前后四只脚，各踩着一只乌龟。
English: There is a centipede in the Yingling Mausoleum in Daozhou. Its carapace is eight feet long, and it has a naturally-occurring writing on its abdomen. It has four legs in front and behind, each of which is stepping on a turtle.

古文：踏龟有时行，或逾山越水，俗莫敢犯。
现代文：有时踩着乌龟行走，有时翻山渡水，世人没有谁敢惹它。
English: Sometimes walking on turtles, sometimes crossing mountains and rivers, no one in the world dares to mess with it.

古文：兴业寺
现代文：兴业寺
English: Shokei-ji Temple

古文：九曲灵龟池，在襄阳县东北三里遍学寺东。
现代文：九曲灵龟池，在襄阳县东北三里处遍学寺的东面。
English: Jiuqu Lingcage Pond is located three miles northeast of Yangyang County, east of the Penghu Temple.

古文：古城旧有兴业寺，今并入遍学寺。
现代文：古城在从前有个兴业寺，现在合并到遍学寺。
English: In the old town, there used to be a Buddhist temple, which has now been merged into the Buddhist temple.

古文：唐景龙元年有陈留阮氏，寓居襄阳，舍财，于此寺东院。
现代文：唐代景龙元年有个陈留人阮氏，寄居在襄阳，拿出钱来做善事，在这个庙的东院建造堂宇。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Chen resident named Ruan, who lived in Yangyang as a sojourner, and took out money to do good deeds and build a hall in the east courtyard of this temple.

古文：创造堂宇，时岁旱池涸，即掘广深之，急暴雨池溢，乃是一大龟，高数尺，如半张床大，岸侧而行。众即惊呼，龟遂跃入池中。
现代文：当时天旱，水池干涸，就扩大挖掘面积，并深挖了一下，突然象下了一场大暴雨，水池也满出来了，原来是一只大乌龟，高好几尺，象半张床那么大，在池边行走，大家就吃惊地呼喊，乌龟就又跃回池中。
English: At that time, the weather was dry and the pool was dry, so they expanded the excavation area and dug a little deeper. Suddenly, it was like a heavy rainstorm, and the pool was full. It turned out to be a large turtle, several feet tall, as big as half a bed, walking by the pool. Everyone shouted in surprise, and the turtle jumped back into the pool.

古文：寺僧灵岫云，院有折碑，云兴业寺碑。
现代文：庙里有个叫灵岫的和尚说：院子里有块折断的石碑，说是兴业寺碑，碑文是梁国的散骑常侍庾元威撰写的。
English: In the temple, a monk named Lingya said, "There is a broken stone monument in the courtyard. It is said to be the monument of Xingye Temple. The inscription was written by Liang Guo's horseback rider, Zou Yuanwei.

古文：碑文梁散骑常侍庾元威撰，其文可传者云，此寺有灵龟一头，长三尺五寸，冬潜春现，多历年所；随众上堂，应时而食。
现代文：那个碑留传下来的文字说，这个庙里有一只灵龟，三尺五寸长，冬天潜藏，春天出现，经历的年头多了，能随着众人到堂上来，按时吃东西，刺史安陆人王照多次遇见这只龟。
English: The inscription left behind says that there is a turtle in this temple, three feet and five inches long, lurking in winter, appearing in spring, experienced for many years, able to come up to the hall with everyone and eat on time. Wang Zhao met this turtle many times.

古文：刺史安陆王照频遇此龟，其坏碑因即扶竖，今在遍学寺东院。
现代文：那块损坏了的碑因为及时地扶好竖立着，现在仍保存在遍学寺的东院。
English: The damaged monument was erected in time and is still preserved in the east wing of the temple.

古文：阮氏所修寺堂，庭中浮屠前，池见在，深五尺，方二十步。
现代文：阮氏修建的庙堂，以及院子里佛塔前面的那个水池还在，深五尺，周长二十步。
English: The temple built by Mr. Nguyen and the pool in front of the pagoda in the courtyard are still there, five feet deep and twenty paces in circumference.

古文：唐太宗
现代文：唐太宗
English: Tang Taizong

古文：唐武德末，太宗欲平内难，苑池内有白龟，游于荷叶之上。
现代文：唐代武德末年，唐太宗将要平息内乱时，御花园的水池里有一只白龟，在荷叶上游玩。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, when Emperor Taizong was about to quell civil unrest, there was a white turtle in the pond of the imperial garden, playing on the lotus leaves.

古文：太宗取之，化为白石，莹洁如玉，登极之后，降制曰： 皇天眷祐，锡以宝龟。 
现代文：唐太宗捉到它，就变成了白石，晶莹洁白象玉石一样。登上皇位之后，太宗传下命令说： 是上天保祐我，才赐给我宝龟。 
English: When Emperor Taizong of Tang captured it, it turned into a white stone, crystal clear and white like jade. After ascending the throne, Emperor Taizong passed down an order saying, "It was Heaven that protected me and gave me the treasure turtle."

古文：刘彦回
现代文：刘彦回
English: Back to Liu Yan

古文：唐刘彦回父为湖州刺史，有下寮于银坑得一龟，长一尺，持献刺史。
现代文：唐代刘彦回的父亲做湖州刺史，有个下属在银坑里得到一只龟，长一尺，拿去献给刺史。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Liu Yanfu's father was the chief historian of Huzhou. One of his subordinates found a one-foot-long turtle in a silver pit and dedicated it to the historian.

古文：群官毕贺云： 得此龟食，寿一千岁。 
现代文：所有的官吏都祝贺说： 得到这只乌龟并把它吃了，能活一千岁。 
English: All the officials congratulated him, saying, "If you get this turtle and eat it, you will live for a thousand years."

古文：使君谢己非其人，故自骑马，送龟即至坑所。
现代文：刺史以自己不是那样的人辞绝了众人。当即又亲自骑马，把乌龟送回银坑。
English: Tsuishi dismissed the crowd, saying that he was not that kind of person. Immediately, he rode on horseback himself and sent the turtle back to the silver pit.

古文：其后十余年，刺史亡。
现代文：十多年以后，刺史去世了，刘彦回做了房州司士，带着家属赴任。
English: More than ten years later, Sashi passed away, and Liu Yan became the secretary of Fangzhou again, taking his family members with him.

古文：彦回为房州司士，将家属之官，属山水泛溢，平地尽没，一家惶惧，不知所适。
现代文：他管辖的地方，山洪泛滥，平地全都被淹没了，他们一家人惶恐不安，不知该怎么办。
English: The area under his jurisdiction was flooded by mountain torrents, and all the flat land was submerged. The whole family was terrified and anxious, and did not know what to do.

古文：俄有大龟来引其路，彦回与家人谋曰： 龟乃灵物，今来相导，状若神。 
现代文：不久，有只大乌龟来为他们引路。刘彦回和家人商量说，龟本来是有灵性的动物，现在来为我们引路，样子象是个神灵于是，三十多口人跟随着乌龟行走，全是水浅的地方。
English: Soon, a large turtle came to guide them. Liu Yanfu and his family discussed that the turtle was originally a spiritual animal, and now it came to guide us, looking like a god. Therefore, more than thirty people walked with the turtle, all in shallow water.

古文：三十余口随龟而行，悉是浅处，历十余里，乃至平地，得免水难，举家惊喜，亦不知其由。
现代文：走了十多里，就到了平地，免除了水灾。全家人又惊又喜，也不知道究竟是什么原因。
English: After walking more than ten miles, they reached flat land and were spared from flooding. The whole family was surprised and happy, and did not know what the reason was.

古文：至此夕，彦回梦龟云： 己昔在银坑，蒙先使君之惠，故此报恩。 
现代文：到了这天晚上，刘彦回梦见乌龟对他说： 我从前在银坑，因蒙受了已故刺史的恩惠，所以这次来报恩。 
English: That night, Liu Yan had a dream of a turtle, which said to him: "I was once in the silver pit, and because I received the favor of the deceased, I have come to repay the favor.

古文：吴兴渔者
现代文：吴兴渔者
English: Wu Xing fisherman

古文：唐开元中，吴兴渔者，于苕溪上每见大龟，四足各踏一龟而行。
现代文：唐代开元年间，吴兴这地方有个渔夫，在苕溪上常常看见一只大龟，四只脚各踩着一只乌龟在水上行走。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a fisherman in this place, Wu Xing. He often saw a large turtle on the Li River, walking on the water with one turtle on each of his four feet.

古文：渔者知是灵龟，持石投之，中而获焉。
现代文：渔夫知道这是个有神灵的乌龟，拿石头打它，打中并捉住了。
English: The fisherman knew that this was a turtle with a spirit. He hit it with a stone, hit it and caught it.

古文：久之，以献州从事裴。裴召龟人，龟人云： 此王者龟，不可以卜小事，所卜之物必死。 
现代文：后来，他把龟献给州里一个姓裴的从事官，裴从事官找来识龟的人，识龟的人说： 这是龟中之王，不能用来占卜小事。否则，用它占卜的东西一定会死。 
English: Later, he presented the turtle to a prefectural official surnamed Pei. Pei asked the official to find someone to identify the turtle. The person who identified the turtle said, "This is the king of turtles. It cannot be used for divination of small things. Otherwise, the thing that uses it for divination will surely die."

古文：裴素狂妄，时庭中有鹊，其雏尚珗，乃验志之，令卜者钻龟焉。
现代文：姓裴的平时就很狂妄，当时，庭院中有窝喜鹊，幼雏还很小，他就用它们来验证，让占卜的人钻龟壳占卜。
English: Pei is usually very arrogant. At that time, there was a nest of magpies in the courtyard, and the chicks were still small. He used them to verify, and let the diviner drill the turtle shell for divination.

古文：数日，大风损鹊巢，鹊雏皆死。
现代文：几天，刮大风弄坏了鹊巢，鹊雏全死了。
English: A few days later, a strong wind damaged the nest, and all the chicks died.

古文：寻又命卜其婢，所怀娠是儿女，兆云： 当生儿。 儿生，寻亦死。
现代文：接着他又让给自己的婢女占卜，问怀孕的是儿子还是女儿，占卜的预兆说应当生儿子，儿子生了下来，接着又死了。
English: Then he also divined his maidservant, and asked her whether she should bear a son or a daughter; and the divination said, She shall bear a son; and he was born, and died.

古文：裴后竟进此龟也。唐明皇帝
现代文：姓裴的后来竟把这只乌龟献给了皇上。唐明皇帝
English: Bae later presented the turtle to the emperor. Emperor Tang Ming

古文：唐明皇帝尝有方士献一小龟，径寸而金色可爱，云： 此龟神明而不食，可置之枕笥之中，辟巨蛇之毒。 
现代文：唐明皇帝时曾有个方士献给他一只小龟，直径一寸，而浑身金色，非常可爱。还说： 这只龟有神灵，还不吃东西，可以把它放在枕头或竹筐里，能够躲避大蛇的毒气。 
English: At the time of Emperor Tang Ming, there was a sorcerer who presented him with a small turtle, one inch in diameter, and golden all over, very lovely. He also said: This turtle has a god, does not eat, can be placed on a pillow or in a bamboo basket, and can avoid the poisonous gas of a big snake.

古文：上常贮巾箱中，有小黄门恩渥方深，而坐亲累，将窜南徼，不欲屈法免之，密授此龟曰： 南荒多巨蟒，常以龟置于侧，可以无苦。 
现代文：皇上常常把龟放在衣巾箱里。
English: The emperor often put the turtle in the towel box.

古文：阉者拜受之。及象郡之属邑，里市馆舍，悄然无一人，投宿于旅馆。
现代文：有个正受到皇上宠信的小太监，因为亲戚的牵连而被判罪，将要发配到南疆去。皇上不想枉法使他免去惩罚，暗中把这只乌龟给他，说； 南疆巨蟒多，你经常把龟放在身边，就可以免灾。 
English: There was a little eunuch who was being favoured by the emperor, who had been convicted because of the involvement of a relative, and was about to be sent to Southern Xinjiang. The emperor did not want to do him a disservice by letting him go unpunished, and secretly gave him this turtle, saying: There are many giant salamanders in Southern Xinjiang, and if you keep the turtle with you, you will be spared from disaster.

古文：是夜，月明如昼，而有风雨之声，其势渐近。
现代文：小太监叩头接了过去。等到了象郡的属邑，见街上集市和馆舍，均静无一人，只好在旅馆里住了下来。
English: The little eunuch followed him with his head bowed. When they arrived at the town belonging to Xiang County, there was no one in the market or the buildings on the street, so they had to stay in a hotel.

古文：因出此龟，置于阶上，良久，神龟伸颈吐气，其火如綖，直上高三四尺，徐徐散去。
现代文：这天晚上，月光皎洁，象白天一样，可突然却传来风雨的声音；声音越来越近，于是他拿出这只龟，放在台阶上。很久，神龟伸着脖子吐着气，象火焰象绸布，直上空中三四尺，然后再慢慢地散开。
English: That night, the moon was as bright as day, but suddenly there was the sound of wind and rain; the sound was getting closer and closer, so he took out the turtle and placed it on the steps. For a long time, the divine turtle stretched his neck and breathed, like a flame like a silk cloth, straight up three or four feet into the air, and then slowly spread out.

古文：已而龟游息如常，向之风雨声，亦已绝矣。
现代文：不久，龟的呼吸恢复正常，刚才的风雨声也没有了。
English: Soon, the turtle's breathing returned to normal, and the wind and rain no longer sounded.

古文：及明，驿吏稍稍而至，罗拜庭下曰： 昨知天使将至，合备迎奉，适缘行旅误杀一蛇。众知报冤蛇必此夕为害，侧近居人，皆出三五十里外，避其毒气。
现代文：等到天亮，驿站的官吏们差不多都来了，在庭院里跪了一圈说： 昨天知道你要来，应当准备好迎接你的，可正好赶上一个旅游者错杀了一条蛇，大家都知道报仇的蛇一定在今晚来干坏事，附近的居民，都走出三五十里外去，好躲避毒气。
English: By dawn, almost all of the station's officials had arrived, knelt in a circle in the courtyard, and said: "Yesterday we knew you were coming, and we should have been ready to welcome you, but we just happened to catch a tourist accidentally killing a snake. Everyone knows that the vengeful snake is sure to come tonight to do bad things. The nearby residents have all gone out thirty to fifty miles away to avoid the poison gas.

古文：某等不敢远出，止在近山岩穴之中，伏而待旦。
现代文：我们不敢走远，只是在附近的山上岩穴中躲藏，等待天亮。
English: We didn't dare to go far, we just hid in the nearby mountain caves and waited for dawn.

古文：今则天使无恙，乃神明所祐，非人力也。 
现代文：现在你没受伤害，真是神明的保祐，不是凡人所能做到的。 
English: Now that you are unharmed, it is truly divine protection, which is not something that mere mortals can do.

古文：久之，行人渐至，云当道有巨蛇十数，皆已糜烂。自此无复报冤之物，人莫测其由。
现代文：有顷，走出去躲灾的人也渐渐地回来了，都说在道的中间有十几条大蛇，全都腐烂了，从此再也没有蛇报仇的事情发生，人们却不知道其中原因。
English: Suddenly, the people who went out to hide from the disaster gradually came back. They all said that there were more than a dozen large snakes in the middle of the road, all of which were rotten. Since then, there has been no snake revenge, but people do not know the reason.

古文：逾年，黄门召归长安，复以金龟进上，泣而谢曰： 不独臣之性命，赖此生全，南方之人，永祛毒类。
现代文：过了一年，小太监被皇上召回长安，他又把金龟献给皇上，哭着感谢说： 不单是我自己靠着金龟才活着回来；就连南方的百姓，也永远祛除了毒虫之害！
English: A year later, the little eunuch was called back to Chang'an by the emperor. He then presented the golden turtle to the emperor, weeping and thanking him, saying, "It wasn't just me who came back alive thanks to the golden turtle; even the people of the south have been forever rid of the pestilence of poisonous insects!"

古文：所全人命，不知纪极。实圣德所及，神龟之力也。 
现代文：保全下来的性命，不知究竟有多少，这是皇上的恩德，也是神龟的力量。 
English: I don't know how many lives have been saved, but this is a blessing from the emperor and the power of the divine turtle.

古文：宁晋民
现代文：宁晋民
English: Ning Jinmin

古文：唐建中四年，赵州宁晋县沙河北，有大棠梨，百姓常祈祷。
现代文：唐代建中四年，赵州宁晋县沙河的北面，有棵大棠梨树，百姓们常常在树下祈祷。
English: In the fourth year of Jian Middle School in the Tang Dynasty, north of Shahe, Ningjin County, Zhao Province, there was a large pear tree. People often prayed under the tree.

古文：忽有群蛇数千，自东南来，渡北岸，集棠梨树下为二积，留南岸者为一积，俄见三龟径寸，才绕行，积蛇尽死。
现代文：一次，忽然有一群蛇共好几千条，从东南方爬来，渡过沙河的北岸，集中到棠梨树下形成两堆，留在南岸的形成一堆。不一会只见三只直径一寸的乌龟，仅仅绕着蛇爬一圈，堆蛇全死了，于是各自爬上蛇堆。
English: Suddenly, a group of several thousand snakes, crawling from the southeast, crossed the north bank of the Sand River, concentrated under the pear trees to form two piles, and remained on the south bank to form a pile. Not infrequently, only three one-inch-diameter turtles were seen, just crawling around the snakes. The pile of snakes were all dead, so they each climbed onto the snake pile.

古文：乃各登积，视蛇腹悉有疮，若矢所中。
现代文：人们看见蛇腹全都有疮，象是被箭射中。
English: People saw sores all over the snake's abdomen, as if it had been shot with an arrow.

古文：刺史康日知图甘棠梨三龟来献。
现代文：刺史康日知画下甘棠梨和三只乌龟的形象献给皇上。
English: The image of a mandarin orange pear and three tortoises was painted by the sculptor Kang Nichi and dedicated to the emperor.

古文：史论
现代文：史论
English: History

古文：唐史论作将军时，忽觉妻所居房中有光，异之，因与妻索房中，且无所见。
现代文：唐代史论当将军的时候，忽然觉得妻子住的房中有光，很奇怪。因而与妻子在房中搜索，结果却什么也没看见。
English: When he was a general, he suddenly thought it was strange that there was light in the room where his wife lived, so he and his wife searched the room, but they saw nothing.

古文：一日，妻早妆开奁，奁中忽有金色龟，如钱，吐五色气，弥满一室。
现代文：有一天，妻子早晨起来打开奁盒梳妆，奁盒中竟然有一只金色的乌龟！它象一枚铜钱那么大，能吐出五色的气体，使一屋子都充满了。
English: One day, his wife got up in the morning and opened her dressing-up box. In the dressing-up box, there was a golden turtle! It was as big as a copper coin and could exhale five-coloured gas, filling the whole room.

古文：后常养之。
现代文：后来，他们经常喂它。
English: Later, they often fed it.

古文：徐仲福州，唐贞元末，有村人卖一笼龟，其数十三。
现代文：徐仲福州，唐贞元末，有村人卖一笼龟，其数十三。
English: Xu Zhong Fuzhou, Tang Zhen Yuan late, there are villagers selling a cage of turtles, of which dozens of three.

古文：贩药人徐仲以五锾获之，村人云： 此圣龟，不可杀。 
现代文：贩药人徐仲以五锾获之，村人云： 此圣龟，不可杀。 
English: Drug trafficker Xu Zhong obtained it with five cormorants, and the villagers said: This sacred turtle must not be killed.

古文：徐置庭中，一龟藉龟而行，八龟为导，悉大六寸。
现代文：徐仲把龟放在院子里，其中一只龟靠踩另外四只龟来行走，余下八只龟在前面做向导，全都六寸长。
English: Xu Zhong put the turtles in the yard. One of the turtles walked by stepping on four other turtles, and the remaining eight turtles were guides in front, all six inches long.

古文：徐遂放于乾元寺后林中，一夕而失。
现代文：徐仲就把龟放在乾元寺后的树林中。一天晚上，它们一齐失踪了。
English: Xu Zhong put the turtles in the woods behind the Qianyuan Temple. One night, they all disappeared.

古文：高崇文
现代文：高崇文
English: Gao Chongwen

古文：唐赞皇公李德裕曰： 蜀传张仪筑成都城，屡有颓坏。
现代文：唐代的赞皇公李德裕说： 蜀地传说张仪修建成都城的时候，总是有倒塌毁坏的地方。
English: Li Deyu, the Tang Dynasty's Prince of Praise, said: Shu legend has it that when Zhang Yi was building Chengdu City, there were always places that collapsed and were destroyed.

古文：时有龟周行旋走，至是一龟行路筑之，既而城果就。
现代文：当时有只乌龟围着城旋转着行走，于是在龟走过的地方修建城墙，不久果然把城建成功了。
English: At that time, there was a turtle walking around the city, so the city wall was built in the place where the turtle walked, and soon the city was successfully built.

古文：予未至郡日，尝闻龟壳犹在城内，昨询访意旧，有军资库官宇文遇者，言比常在库中。元和初，节度使高崇文知之，命工人截为腰带胯具。 
现代文：我没到成都郡的时候，曾经听说龟壳还在城内，昨天访问那些老人，有个军资库官叫宇文遇的说：从前还在库里保存，元和初年，节度使高崇文知道了这件事，命令工匠截开做成腰带和胯具了。 
English: When I did not arrive in Chengdu County, I once heard that the turtle shell was still in the city. When I visited those old people yesterday, a treasury officer named Yu Wen said: It was still kept in the storehouse. In the Yuan and the first year, the governor made Gao Chongwen know about it and ordered craftsmen to cut it into belts and harnesses.

古文：自张仪至崇文千余载，龟壳尚在，而武臣毁之，深可惜也。
现代文：从张仪到高崇文经过了一千多年，龟壳还在，却被一个武将给毁了，实在可惜。
English: From Zhang Yi to Gao Chongwen, more than a thousand years have passed. The turtle shell is still there, but it was destroyed by a warlord. It's a shame.

古文：汴河贾客
现代文：汴河贾客
English: Songhe Jiaqi

古文：唐有贾客维舟汴河上，获了一巨龟，于灶火中煨之。
现代文：唐代有个商人把船停在汴河上，抓获一只大乌龟，放到灶火中烧它。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, a merchant stopped his boat on the Li River, captured a large turtle, and put it in the stove to burn it.

古文：是夕，忘出之，明日取视，壳已焦矣。
现代文：这天晚上，忘了把它拿出来，第二天他拿出来看，龟壳已经被烧焦了。
English: That night, he forgot to take it out. The next day, he took it out to see that the turtle shell had been burned.

古文：拂拭去灰，置于食床上，欲食。
现代文：他拂去上面的灰，放在饭桌上，想吃它。
English: He brushed the ash off and put it on the dining table, intending to eat it.

古文：良久，伸颈足动，徐行床上，其生如常，众共异之，投于水中，游泳而去。
现代文：过了好一会儿，那乌龟竟然伸出了脖子，脚也动起来，在桌上慢慢地爬行，象活着的时候一样。大家都觉得这件事很奇怪，把龟又放到水里，它便游着离开了。
English: After a while, the turtle actually stretched out his neck and his feet moved, slowly crawling on the table, as if he were alive. Everyone thought it was strange, put the turtle back in the water, and it swam away.

古文：南人
现代文：南人
English: Southern people

古文：南人采龟溺，以其性妒而与蛇交。
现代文：南方人采取龟尿，因为龟的性情好嫉妒并且与蛇交媾。
English: Nanfang people take turtle urine, because turtles are jealous and have sex with snakes.

古文：或雌蛇至，有相趁斗噬，力小致毙者。采时，取雄龟置瓷碗及小盘中，于龟后，以镜照之，既见镜中龟，即淫发而失溺。
现代文：有时雌蛇来了，于是就互相地打斗撕咬起来，力气小的蛇便死亡了，采龟尿的时候，把雄龟拿过来放在瓷碗和小盘中，在龟的后面，用镜子照着龟，看见镜子里的龟之后，就会淫性发作因而流出尿来。
English: Sometimes the female snake comes, so they fight and bite each other, and the snake with little strength dies. When taking turtle urine, take the male turtle and put it in a porcelain bowl and small dish. Behind the turtle, look at the turtle with a mirror. After seeing the turtle in the mirror, it will have an erotic attack and thus urine will flow out.

古文：又以纸炷火上焰热，点其尻，亦致失溺，然不及镜照也。
现代文：又有人用纸放到火上点着，烧它的尻部，也能导致流尿，可是数量比不上用镜子照来的多。
English: Another person lit it with a piece of paper and put it on the fire, burning its buttocks, which can also cause urine to flow, but the amount is not as much as that of a mirror.

古文：得于道士陈钊。
现代文：这个办法是从道士陈钊那里学来。
English: This method was learned from the Taoist Chen Yu.

古文：又海上人云，龙生三卵，一为吉吊也。
现代文：另外，有个经常出海的人说： 龙生下三只卵，一个卵就生出 吉吊 ，这个 吉吊 上岸来与鹿交配。
English: In addition, a person who often goes to sea said: A dragon gives birth to three eggs, and one egg gives birth to a stag, and the stag comes ashore to mate with the deer.

古文：其吉吊上岸与鹿交，或于水边遗精，流槎遇之，粘裹木枝，如蒲桃焉。
现代文：有时，它在水边上遗留下精液，被行走的船碰上了，就会粘连上树枝，象蒲桃一样。
English: Sometimes, it leaves its semen on the water's edge, and when it is hit by a moving boat, it sticks to the branches, like a peach.

古文：色微青黄，复似灰色，号紫稍花，益阳道，别有方说。
现代文：颜色稍有点青黄，又象灰色，人们称它叫紫稍花。这个东西有益于壮阳，听说还可做别的药方。 
English: Slightly yellowish-blue and greyish in colour, it is known as the violet flower. It is said to be good for the male aphrodisiac and can be used in other recipes.

古文：阎居敬
现代文：阎居敬
English: Yan Ju Kee

古文：新安人阎居敬，所居为山水所浸，恐屋坏，移榻于户外而寝。
现代文：新安人阎居敬，住房被山水浸淹，担心屋子倒塌，就把床移到门外睡觉。
English: Yan Juqing, a resident of Xin'an, whose house was flooded by the mountain torrent, was worried that the house would collapse, so he moved his bed outside the door to sleep.

古文：梦一乌人曰： 君避水在此，我亦避水至此，于君何害？
现代文：他梦见一个黑衣人说： 你是为了避水而在这里睡觉，我也是因为避水到了这里，对你有什么伤害？
English: He dreamed of a black-clothed man saying: You sleep here to avoid the water, I also came here to avoid the water, what harm can it do to you?

古文：而迫迮我如是，不快甚矣？ 
现代文：却如此地逼迫我，令人太不愉快了。 
English: It's disgusting that they're hounding me like this.

古文：居敬寤，不测其故。
现代文：阎居敬醒来，不明白其中缘故。
English: Yan Jiejing woke up and did not understand the reason.

古文：尔夕三梦，居敬曰： 岂吾不当止此耶？ 
现代文：这天晚上他一共作了三次同样的梦。居敬说： 难道我不应当睡在这里吗？ 
English: He had the same dream three times that night. "Shouldn't I sleep here?" he said.

古文：池州民杨氏以卖鲊为业，尝烹鲤鱼十头，令儿守之。
现代文：于是让人把床移开，原来是一只乌龟被床脚斜着压在门槛的外面，就把它放走了。池州民池州的百姓杨氏以卖加工后的鱼类食品为职业。
English: As a result, the bed was removed, and it turned out to be a turtle, which had been pressed diagonally against the outside of the threshold by the foot of the bed, and was then released. Mr. Yang, a citizen of Minchi, Chizhou, sells processed fish food as his profession.

古文：将熟，忽闻釜中乞命者数四，儿惊惧，走告其亲。共往视之，釜中无复一鱼，求之不得。
现代文：曾经煮了十条鲤鱼，让儿子看着，快熟的时候，忽然听见锅里几次喊叫救命。儿子又惊又怕，跑去告诉父亲，一起去看，锅中连一条鱼也没有了，找也没找到。
English: Once I cooked ten eels and let my son watch. When they were almost done, I suddenly heard the eel in the pan shouting for help several times. My son was shocked and afraid, so he ran to tell his father and we went to look. There wasn't even a single fish left in the pan, and I couldn't find it.

古文：期年，所畜犬恒窥户限下而吠，数日，其家人曰： 去年鲤鱼，得非在此耶？ 
现代文：第二年，家里养的狗总是冲着门槛的下面叫，叫了几天，他的家人说： 去年丢的鲤鱼，莫不是在这里面？ 
English: The following year, the family dog always barked at the bottom of the threshold. After barking for a few days, his family members said, "Isn't the eel we lost last year in here?"

古文：即撒户视之，得龟十头，送之水中，家亦无恙。
现代文：便拆下门来看，结果得到了十只龟，就把它们送到水里去了。后来，家里也没发生什么事。
English: He took down the door to have a look, and ended up with ten turtles, which he sent into the water. Later, nothing happened to the house.

古文：李宗
现代文：李宗
English: Li Zong

古文：李宗为楚州刺史，郡中有尼方行于市，忽据地而坐，不可推挽，不食不语者累日。
现代文：李宗做楚州刺史时，郡中有个尼姑正在街市上行走，忽然盘到地上坐下，推不动，拽不动，不吃饭不说话，一连坐了好几天。
English: When Li Zong was doing the history of Chuzhou, there was a nun in the county who was walking on the street market, suddenly sitting down on the ground, unable to push, unable to pull, unable to eat, unable to speak, and sat for several days.

古文：所由司以告宗，命武士扶起，掘其地，得大龟长数尺，送之水中，其尼乃愈。
现代文：管事的部门把这事报告给李宗，李宗让武士扶起尼姑，挖掘那个地方，结果挖出一只好几尺长的大乌龟。把龟送到水里之后，那个尼姑才好。
English: The administrative department reported the matter to Li Zong. Li Zong asked the samurai to lift up the nun and excavate the place. As a result, a large turtle several feet long was dug out. After the turtle was sent into the water, the nun was fine.

