古文：王杰，金城直城人也，本名文达。
现代文：王杰，是金城直城人，原名文达。
English: Wang Jie, originally named Wenda, is a native of Jincheng.

古文：高祖万国，魏伏波将军、燕州刺史。
现代文：高祖王万国，为北魏伏波将军、燕州刺史。
English: Gao Zu Wang Wan Guo was a general of the Northern Wei Fu Bo and a historian of Yanzhou.

古文：父巢，龙骧将军、榆中镇将。
现代文：父亲王巢，为龙骧将军、榆中镇将。
English: His father, Wang Xue, was the general of Longyu County and the general of Yuzhong Town.

古文：杰少有壮志，每以功名自许。
现代文：王杰少有壮志，常自信功名可得。
English: Wang Jie had little ambition and was always confident that he could achieve great things.

古文：善骑射，有膂力。
现代文：他善于骑马射箭，身强力壮。
English: He is good at horseback archery and is physically strong.

古文：魏孝武初，起家子都督。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，从家中被征召出来，授任子都督。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was conscripted from his family and appointed as the son of the governor.

古文：后从西迁，赐爵都昌县子。
现代文：后来从驾西迁，赐爵都吕县子。
English: Later, he moved westward and was given the title of Duke of Lv County.

古文：太祖奇其才，擢授扬烈将军、羽林监，寻加都督。
现代文：太祖赏识他的才能，提拔为扬烈将军、羽林监，不久又担任都督。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated his talent and promoted him to General Yang Rong and Forest Supervisor, and soon he became the governor.

古文：太祖尝谓诸将曰： 王文达万人敌也，但恐勇决太过耳。 复潼关，破沙苑，争河桥，战邙山，皆以勇敢闻。
现代文：太祖曾对诸将说： 王文达有万夫不挡之勇，衹是担心他勇敢果断太过分了。 收复潼关，攻破沙苑，争夺河桥，大战邙山，他都以勇敢而闻名。
English: The great-grandfather once said to the generals: Wang Wenda has the courage of a thousand men, but I am worried that he is too brave and decisive. He is famous for his bravery in recovering Shaoguan, breaking through Sha Yuan, fighting for river bridges, and fighting in Lushan.

古文：亲待日隆，赏赐加于伦等。
现代文：朝廷亲近优待一天天隆厚，赏赐多于同辈人。
English: Closer to the imperial court, he was treated more generously day by day, and received more awards than his peers.

古文：于是赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：于是赐姓宇文氏。
English: As a result, he was given the surname Umun.

古文：除岐州刺史，加抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，进爵为公，邑八百户。
现代文：授任岐州刺史，加授抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，晋爵为公，封邑八百户。
English: He was awarded the title of Qizhou Sashishi, and was also given the title of General of the Military Assistance Corps, the title of Silver Qingguanglu Doctor, the title of Jinjie, and 800 fiefs.

古文：累迁大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：又连升大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was also promoted to Grand Governor, General of Chariots and Cavalry, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, Junior Chamberlain, General of Horse and Cavalry, and General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies.

古文：魏恭帝元年，从于谨围江陵。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，随从于谨围攻江陵。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he followed Yu Ji as he besieged Jiangling.

古文：时栅内有人善用长矛，战士将登者，多为所毙。
现代文：当时营寨内有人善用长稍，战士快登栅顶的，多被稍刺死。
English: At that time, there were people in the camp who made good use of the ladders, and the soldiers who quickly climbed to the top of the grate were mostly stabbed to death.

古文：谨令杰射之，应弦而倒。
现代文：于谨令王杰射敌，敌人应弦而倒。
English: Wang Jie was ordered to shoot the enemy, and the enemy complied.

古文：登者乃得入，余众继进，遂拔之。
现代文：先登的战士才进了城，后续的接着进城，江陵就打下了。
English: The soldiers who entered the city first entered the city, and the subsequent ones entered the city, and Jiangling was defeated.

古文：谨喜曰： 济我大事者，在公此箭也。 
现代文：工谨欢喜道： 我的大事得以成功，取决于你这一箭。 
English: "My success in this great undertaking depends on you, the arrow," the hard worker said with joy.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵张掖郡公，增邑一千户，出为河州刺史。
现代文：孝阂帝嗣位，王杰晋爵为张掖郡公，增加食邑一千户，出任河州刺史。
English: Wang Jiejinjie became the prince of Zhangye County, increasing the number of counties by a thousand and serving as the prefect of Hezhou.

古文：朝廷以杰勋望俱重，故授以本州。
现代文：朝廷因为他功高望重，所以授以本州之任。
English: The Imperial Court awarded him the post of Honshu because of his high reputation.

古文：保定三年，进位大将军。
现代文：保定三年，被提升为大将军。
English: After three years in Baoding, he was promoted to general.

古文：三年，诏杰与随公杨忠自北伐齐，至并州而还。
现代文：这一年，诏令王送与堕公眯自遵韭伐查，至莲业而回。
English: In the same year, the emperor sent Wang Zeng and the fallen prince Zizong to investigate and return to Lianye.

古文：天和三年，除宜州刺史，增邑通前三千六百户。
现代文：玉迦三年，授任宣业刺史，增加食邑累计达三千六百户。
English: In the third year of Yuca, he was awarded the title of history of publicity, and the number of restaurants increased to a total of 3,600.

古文：六年，从齐公宪东御齐将斛律明月，进位柱国。
现代文：六年，跟从变公圭塞塞向东抵御变将斛律明月，晋升为柱国。
English: In the sixth year, he followed the changgu Guisesei to the east to resist the changguo Baolu Mingyue, and was promoted to the pillar country.

古文：建德初，除泾州总管。
现代文：逊初年，授任迳业总管。
English: In his first year, he was appointed as the general manager of the candy industry.

古文：杰少从军旅，虽不习吏事，所历州府，咸以忠恕为心，以是颇为百姓所慕。
现代文：王杰年轻时就从军参战，虽不熟悉政事，但所经州府，都以忠恕之道谋政。因此很受百姓爱戴。
English: Wang Jie joined the army when he was young, and although he was not familiar with politics, he was very popular with the people because he was always loyal to the state government.

古文：宣帝即位，拜上柱国。
现代文：宣帝即位，他官拜上柱国。
English: When Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne, he officially bowed to Shangzhu.

古文：大象元年，薨，时年六十五。
现代文：大象元年逝世，时年六十五岁。
English: He died in the first year of the elephant, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：赠河鄯邓延洮宕翼七州诸军事、河州刺史，追封鄂国公。谥曰威。
现代文：荣赠河鄯邓延洮宕翼七州诸军事、河州刺史，追封鄂国公谧号威。
English: He was awarded the military titles of the seven states of Hebei, the military titles of the seven states of Henan, the military titles of the seven states of Henan, and the military titles of the seven states of Henan.

古文：子孝僊，大象末，位至开府仪同大将军。
现代文：子孝价，大象末年，位至开府仪同大将军。
English: Zi Xiaojian, late in life, rose to the rank of General of Kaifu County.

古文：王勇，代武川人也，本名胡仁。
现代文：王勇，代州武川人，本名胡仁。
English: Wang Yong, a native of Daizhou, Wuchuan, whose real name is Hu Ren.

古文：少雄健，有胆决，便弓马，膂力过人。
现代文：年少时英雄壮健，有胆略能决断，弓马娴熟，气力超人。
English: When he was young, the hero was robust, daring and decisive, skilled in archery and horsemanship, and possessed superhuman strength.

古文：魏永安中，万俟丑奴等寇乱关陇，勇占募随军讨之，以功授宁朔将军、奉车都尉。
现代文：北魏永安年间，万俟丑奴等侵扰关陇，王勇招募士兵随军讨伐，因功授任宁朔将军、奉车都尉。
English: During the Northern Wei Yong'an period, Wang Yong recruited soldiers to accompany the army in the crusade, and was awarded the title of Ningshuo General and Fengche Captain.

古文：又数从侯莫陈悦、贺拔岳征讨，功每居多，拜别将。
现代文：又数度跟从侯莫陈悦、贺拔岳征讨，功勋卓着，官拜别将。
English: He also followed Hou Mo Chen Yue and He Batyue several times to solicit contributions. He was highly meritorious, and was highly respected by officials.

古文：及太祖为丞相，引为帐内直荡都督，加后将军、太中大夫，封包信县子，邑三百户。
现代文：等到太祖做丞相，荐举他担任帐内直荡都督，加授后将军、太中大夫，封包信县子，食邑三百户。
English: When the great-great-grandfather became chancellor, he recommended him to serve as the governor of the capital, and he was promoted to the post of general, grand vice-governor, and sent to 300 households in the counties and towns.

古文：大统初，增邑四百户，进爵为侯。
现代文：大统初年，增加食邑四百户，晋升为侯爵。
English: In the first year of unification, he increased the number of shokuhachi to 400 and was promoted to marquis.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，战沙苑，气盖众军，所当必破。
现代文：跟随大军擒获宝泰，收复弘农，苦战沙苑，气势压倒众军士，抵挡他的必定被打败。
English: He won Baotai, recovered Hongnong, and fought hard in Sha Yuan with a large army. His momentum overwhelmed all the soldiers, and those who resisted him were sure to be defeated.

古文：太祖叹其勇敢，赏赐特隆。
现代文：太祖赞叹其勇敢，赏赐特厚。
English: The great-grandfather praised his bravery and rewarded him generously.

古文：进爵为公，邑一千五百户，拜镇南将军，授帅都督。
现代文：晋爵为公，食邑一千五百产，官拜镇南将军，授任帅都督。
English: He was promoted to the peerage as a public official, received 1,500 yakitori as food, paid official homage to General Zhenan, and was awarded the title of Shuai Dudu.

古文：从讨赵青雀，平之，论功居最，除卫大将军、殷州刺史，加通直散骑常侍，兼太子武卫率。
现代文：从征讨伐赵青雀，平定了他，评功居首，授任卫大将军、殷州刺史，加授通直散骑常侍，兼太子武卫率。
English: He led the expedition to subdue and defeat Zhao Qingzhu, and was awarded the first place in the evaluation of merit. He was awarded the title of General of the Imperial Guard, the title of the Prince of Yin Province, the title of the Prince of the Imperial Horse, and the title of the Prince of Wuwei.

古文：邙山之战，勇率敢死之士三百人，并执短兵，大呼直进，出入冲击，杀伤甚多，敌人无敢当者。
现代文：邙山大战，王勇率领敢死队三百人，都拿着短兵器，大呼直进，出入冲击，杀伤甚多，敌人没有敢抵挡的。
English: In the Battle of Lushan Mountain, Wang Yong led a death squad of three hundred people, all holding short weapons, shouting straight ahead, entering and exiting the impact, a lot of damage, the enemy did not dare to resist.

古文：是役也，大军不利，唯勇及王文达、耿令贵三人力战，皆有殊功。
现代文：这场战役，大军失利，祇有王勇及王文达、耿令贵三人力战，都有特殊的功劳。
English: Wang Yong, Wang Wenda, and Geng Linggui are the only three people to have distinguished themselves in this battle, in which a large army was defeated.

古文：太祖于是赏帛二千疋，令自分之。
现代文：太祖于是赏布帛二千匹，令三人自己去分。
English: So the great-grandfather rewarded the three men with two thousand horses and told them to divide the booty among themselves.

古文：军还，皆拜上州刺史。
现代文：回师，都拜官上州刺史。
English: Back to their teachers, they all worship officials and go to the state to make history.

古文：以雍州、岐州、北雍州拟授勇等，然州颇有优劣，又令探筹取之。
现代文：拟议以雍、岐、北雍三州授王勇等人，然而三州的优劣差别很大，于是就令他们抽签定选。
English: It was proposed to award Wang Yong and others from the three prefectures of Yong, Qi, and Bei Yong. However, the advantages and disadvantages of the three prefectures were very different, so they were selected by drawing lots.

古文：勇遂得雍州，文达得岐州，令贵得北雍州。
现代文：结果王勇得雍州，文达得岐州，令贵得北雍州。
English: As a result, Wang Yong won Yongzhou, Wenda won Qizhou, and Ling Gui won Beiyongzhou.

古文：仍赐勇名为勇，令贵名豪，文达名杰，以彰其功。
现代文：并赐王勇名为勇，令贵名为塞，塞达名为馑，以表彰他们的功劳。
English: In recognition of their services, Wang Yong was given the title of Yong, Ling Gui the title of Zi, and Xeda the title of Yao.

古文：十三年，授大都督，迁使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十三年，授任大都督，升任使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was appointed as the grand governor of the capital, and was promoted to the position of the envoy, the general of the cavalry, and the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：十五年，进侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十五年，晋升为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Fifteen years later, he was promoted to Samurai Junior Officer, General of Horse Cavalry, and Kaifu Ceremonial and Three Departments.

古文：魏恭帝元年，从柱国赵贵征茹茹，破之。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，跟随柱国赵贵征讨茧苞族人，打败他们。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, Zhao Guizong of the State of Chu led a campaign against the Yi people and defeated them.

古文：勇追击，获杂畜数千头。
现代文：王垦追击，获杂畜数千头。
English: Wang Yao chased and caught thousands of animals.

古文：进爵新阳郡公，增邑通前二千户，仍赐姓库汗氏。
现代文：晋爵属新阳郡公，增加食邑累计二千产，并赐姓库汗氏。
English: Jinzhe belonged to the Xinyang County government, increased the total of two thousand food products, and was given the surname of Kuhan.

古文：六官建，拜稍伯中大夫。
现代文：六官建立时，拜稍伯中大夫。
English: When the six official positions were established, he was promoted to assistant middle doctor.

古文：又论讨茹茹功，别封永固县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：又评赏征讨茹茹的战功，另加封永固县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In addition, 500 households in Yonggu County and food villages were awarded for their war exploits.

古文：时有别封者，例听回授次子，勇独请封兄子元兴，时人义之。
现代文：当时凡另封的人，照例允许转封次子，王勇却请封兄长的儿子元兴，时人赞其高义。
English: At that time, anyone with a different title was usually allowed to transfer the title to his second son, but Wang Yong asked his elder brother's son, Yuan Xing, and people at the time praised his high-mindedness.

古文：寻进位大将军。
现代文：不久晋升为大将军。
English: He was soon promoted to general.

古文：世宗初，岷山羌豪巩廉俱和叛，勇帅师讨平之。
现代文：世宗初年，岷山羌人豪强巩廉俱和叛乱，王勇带兵平息了他。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the brave and strong people of Lushan County rebelled, and Wang Yong led an army to quell the rebellion.

古文：勇性雄猛，为当时骁将。
现代文：王勇生性刚猛，是当时的骁将。
English: Wang Yong was born with a strong character and was the best player at that time.

古文：然矜功伐善，好扬人之恶，时论亦以此鄙之。
现代文：然而喜欢夸耀自己的功劳和长处，爱播扬别人的短处，舆论也以此鄙视他。
English: However, he likes to boast about his own merits and strengths, and likes to publicize the shortcomings of others, and public opinion despises him for this.

古文：柱国侯莫陈崇，勋高望重，与诸将同谒晋公护，闻勇数论人之短，乃于众中折辱之。
现代文：柱国侯莫陈崇，功高望重，曾与诸将同去拜见晋公宇文护，听说王勇爱数说别人的短处，便当众羞辱他。
English: Zhu Guo Hou Mo Chen Chong, whose achievements are highly respected, once went with the generals to pay homage to Jin Gong Yu Wenzhou. Hearing that Wang Yong liked to point out the shortcomings of others, he humiliated him in front of everyone.

古文：勇遂惭恚，因疽发背而卒。
现代文：王勇于是愧愤交加，毒疮发背而死。
English: Wang Yong was so mortified and angry that he died of a poisonous ulcer on his back.

古文：子昌嗣，官至大将军。
现代文：子王昌嗣，官至大将军。
English: His son, Prince Masatsugu, rose to the rank of general.

古文：宇文虬字乐仁，代武川人也。
现代文：宇文虬字乐仁，是代州武川人氏。
English: Uwensho, also known as Rakujin, was a member of the Daishu-Bukawa clan.

古文：性骁悍，有胆略。
现代文：生性骁勇强悍，有胆略。
English: By nature, he is brave, strong, and daring.

古文：少从军征讨，累有战功。
现代文：年轻时从军征讨，屡立战功。
English: When he was young, he was conscripted into the army and repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：魏永安中，除征虏将军、中散大夫，加都督。
现代文：垫丞砉年间，授职征虏将军、中散大夫，兼任都督。
English: During the years of Matanojo's reign, he was awarded the post of conscript general, Chusan doctor, and concurrently served as governor.

古文：魏孝武初，从独孤信在荆州，破梁人于下溠，遂平欧阳、酇城。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，跟从独孤信在荆州，在下搓打败凿人，终于平定了匦阳、郑城。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he followed Dukuxin in Jingzhou, defeated the chiselers in Jiaozuo, and finally leveled Fenyang and Zhengcheng.

古文：虬俘获甚多。
现代文：宇文虬俘获很多。
English: Uwen Zang captured a lot.

古文：又攻南阳、广平二城，擒郡守一人。
现代文：又攻南阳、广平二城，擒获郡守一人。
English: They also attacked two cities, Nanyang and Guangping, and captured one county governor.

古文：以功加安西将军、银青光禄大夫、员外、直合将军、合内都督，封南安县侯，邑九百户。
现代文：因功加官安西将军、银青光禄大夫、员外、直合将军、合内都督，封为南安县侯，食邑九百户。
English: For his achievements, he was promoted to the positions of Anxi general, Yin Qing Guanglu doctor, non-commissioned officer, Zhouga general, and Hanei governor, and was named the lord of Nan'an County, with 900 households.

古文：及孝武西迁，以独孤信为行台，信引虬为帐内都督。
现代文：等到孝亘逊西迁，任命独巫值为行台，独巫揎引荐宇文虬为帐内都督。
English: When Takahata died and moved to the west, he appointed Dokushige as the governor, and Dokushige recommended Uwenya as the next governor.

古文：破田八能及擒东魏荆州刺史辛纂，虬功居多。
现代文：打败田八能及擒获束魏回州刺史圭籑，主塞虬功劳居多。
English: He defeated Tian Hachinohe and won the Wei Huzhou and Shixi Guizhou titles, with most of the credit going to his master.

古文：寻随信奔梁。
现代文：不久跟随独孤信投奔梁人。
English: Soon after, Du Guoxin defected to the Liang people.

古文：大统三年，归阙。
现代文：左筮三年，回归酉翘。
English: Three years later, the left eyelid returns to the eyelid.

古文：朝廷论前后功，增邑四百户，进爵为公。
现代文：朝廷评定他的前后功，增加食邑四百户，晋爵为公。
English: The imperial court evaluated his achievements and increased the number of food villages by 400, and promoted him to the peerage.

古文：擒窦泰，复弘农，及沙苑、河桥之战，皆有功。
现代文：擒获宝壶，收复弘屋，以及沙苞、蜡两大战役，他都有功。
English: He was instrumental in winning the pot of gold, recovering Hongya, and the two major battles of Sandan and Wax.

古文：增邑八百户，进车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：增加食邑八百户，晋升为车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: He increased the number of restaurants to 800, and was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and Doctor of the Left Hand.

古文：七年，除汉阳郡守，又从独孤信讨梁仚定，破之。
现代文：七年，授任选区塑守，又跟从独延值讨伐梁仑定，打败了他。
English: In seven years, he was awarded the position of the constituency's plastic guardian, and he followed the independent extension value to fight against Liang Lunding, and defeated him.

古文：十一年，出为南秦州刺史，加车骑大将军、仪同三司，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十一年，调外任南秦州刺史，兼任车骑大将军、仪同三司，晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the eleventh year, he was transferred to the post of South Qin State Chief Historian, concurrently served as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonial, and was promoted to the General of Horse and Cavalry and the Third Division of Kaifu Ceremonial.

古文：追论斩辛纂功，增邑一千户。
现代文：追评斩除辛纂的功劳，增加食邑一千户。
English: After evaluating the merits of abolishing sin tsuo, increase the number of food villages by one thousand.

古文：十七年，与大将军王雄征上津、魏兴等，并平之。
现代文：十七年，与大将军工雄一起征讨上津、魏兴，都平定了他们。
English: In the seventeenth year, together with the great general Kuo Xiong, he fought against Shangjin and Wei Xing and defeated them.

古文：又于白马与武陵王萧纪将杨干运战，破之。
现代文：又在白马城与武陵王萧纪属将杨干运交战，打败了他。
English: In Baima City, he also fought against Yang Ganjun, the general of King Xiao Jizhen of Wuling, and defeated him.

古文：虬每经行阵，必身先卒伍，故上下同心，战无不克。
现代文：宇文虬每次上阵，必定身先士卒，所以能上下同心，战无不胜。
English: Every time Yu Wenjun goes into battle, he must lead the way, so he can be up and down with the same heart, and the battle is invincible.

古文：寻而魏兴复叛，虬又与王雄讨平之。
现代文：不久魏兴又反叛，宇文虬又与王雄讨伐平定了它。
English: Soon after, Wei Xing rebelled again, and Wu Wenyi fought with Wang Xiong to pacify it.

古文：俄除金州刺史，进位大将军。
现代文：很快就授任金州刺史，晋升为大将军。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Jinzhou chief historian and promoted to general.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：宇文盛字保兴，代人也。
现代文：室塞盛，字塑，是住业人。
English: Murotsamori, a word sculptor, is a resident.

古文：曾祖伊与敦、祖长寿、父文孤，并为沃野镇军主。
现代文：曾祖鱼些邀、祖父垦画、父亲塞巫，都当遇送墅垄军主。
English: Zeng's ancestors were invited, his grandfather was a painter, and his father was a sorcerer, all of whom were to be sent to the villa.

古文：盛志力骁雄。
现代文：宇文盛力壮心雄。
English: Yuwen Shengli is a strong-willed man.

古文：初为太祖帐内，从破侯莫陈悦，授威烈将军，封渔阳县子，邑三百户。
现代文：初为太祖侍卫，从征打败侯莫陈悦，授威烈将军，封渔阳县子。食邑三百户。
English: At first, it was the ancestor's bodyguard, defeated Hou Mo Chen Yue from the expedition, awarded General Wei Li, and sealed Yuyang County. There are three hundred households in the food village.

古文：大统三年，兼都督。
现代文：大统三年，兼任都督。
English: He served as the grand vizier for three years and concurrently as the governor-general.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，授都督、平远将军、步兵校尉，进爵为公，增邑八百户。
现代文：从征擒获宝泰，收复弘农，攻破沙苑，授任都督、平远将军、步兵校尉，晋爵为公，增加食邑八百户。
English: He won Baotai from the conquest, recovered Hongnong, defeated Shayuan, was awarded the governor, general Pingyuan, infantry lieutenant, promoted to the peerage, and increased 800 households.

古文：除冯翊郡守，加帅都督、西安州大中正、通直散骑常侍、抚军将军，增邑三百户。
现代文：授任冯翊郡守，兼任帅都督、西安州大中正、通直散骑常侍、抚军将军，增加食邑三百户。
English: He was awarded the title of Fengye County Governor, and concurrently served as the Commander-in-Chief, Xi'an Provincial Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor, Vice-governor.

古文：累迁大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、盐州刺史。
现代文：屡次升任为大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、盐州刺史。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to Grand Governor, General of Chariots and Cavalry, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, General of Cavalry, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, General of Cavalry, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry.

古文：及楚公赵贵谋为乱，盛密赴京告之。
现代文：等到楚公赵贵阴谋叛乱，宇文盛秘密赴京告发。
English: When Chu Gong Zhao Gui plotted a rebellion, Yu Wensheng secretly went to Beijing to report it.

古文：贵诛，授大将军，进爵忠城郡公，除泾州都督，赐甲一领、奴婢二百口、马五百疋，牛羊及庄田、什物等称是。
现代文：赵贵伏诛，授任宇文盛为大将军，进爵忠城郡公，官拜泾州都督，赐钟甲一副、奴婢二百人、马五百匹，牛羊及庄田、杂物等与此相当。
English: Zhao Guifu was awarded the title of Grand General by Yu Wensheng, the title of Lord of Zhongcheng County, and the title of Governor of Zhangzhou. He was also given a pair of jingle bells, 200 slaves, 500 horses, and the same amount of cattle, sheep, farmland, and miscellaneous goods.

古文：仍从贺兰祥平洮阳和二城，别封一子甘棠县公。
现代文：随后从贺兰祥军平定洮阳、洪和二城，另封其一子为甘棠县公。
English: Subsequently, He Lanxiang's army subdued Fenyang, Honghe and two cities, and his son was appointed the governor of Gangtang County.

古文：转延州总管，进位柱国。
现代文：转任延州总管，进位柱国。
English: He was transferred to the post of the governor of Yanzhou and promoted to the post of the pillar state.

古文：天和五年，入为大宗伯。
现代文：天和五年，入朝担任大宗伯。
English: Ten years and five years later, he entered the imperial court as the grand patriarch.

古文：六年，与柱国王杰从齐公宪东讨。
现代文：六年，舆柱国王杰跟从齐公宇文宪东讨。
English: In six years, the public opinion pillar King Jie followed the Qigong Uwen Xian to the East.

古文：时汾州被围日久，宪遣盛运粟以给之。
现代文：当时汾州被围日久，宇塞宪派宇文盛运粮去接济。
English: At that time, Bozhou was besieged for a long time, and the U.S.S.R. sent Uwen Sheng to transport grain to help.

古文：仍赴姚襄城，受宪节度。
现代文：然后赶赴姚襄城，听宇文宪调遣。
English: Then he rushed to Yao Xiangcheng to listen to Yu Wenxian's dispatch.

古文：齐将段孝先率兵大至，盛力战拒之。
现代文：北齐将军段孝先率大兵掩至，宇文盛奋力作战抵拒他。
English: North Qi general Duan Xiaoqian led the soldiers to cover up, and Uwen Sheng fought hard to resist him.

古文：孝先退，乃筑大宁城而还。
现代文：段孝先撤退，宇文盛于是构筑大宁城而还。
English: Duan Xiao retreated first, and then Uwen Sheng built Danying City to fight back.

古文：建德二年，授少师。
现代文：建德二年，授任少师。
English: In the second year of Jiande, he was appointed as a junior teacher.

古文：五年，从高祖东伐，率步骑一万，守汾水关。
现代文：五年，跟从高祖束伐，率步兵骑兵一万人，把守汾水闽。
English: In the fifth year, he followed Gao Zu and led 10,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the Yanshui Fort.

古文：宣帝即位，拜上柱国，增邑通前四千六百户。
现代文：宣童即位时，官拜上柱国，增加食邑累计四千六百户。
English: When Xuan Tong ascended to the throne, the government paid homage to Shangzhuo, increasing the total of 4,600 households.

古文：大象中，薨。
现代文：大象年间去世。
English: He died in the Year of the Elephant.

古文：子述嗣。
现代文：他的儿子宇文述嗣位。
English: His son, Uwenshu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：大象末，上柱国、濮阳公。
现代文：太基末年，授任上柱国、遐堡公。
English: At the end of Taiki's life, he was given the title of Shangzhu Guo and Jianbao Guo.

古文：盛弟丘。丘字胡奴，起家襄威将军、奉朝请、都督，赐爵临邑县子。稍迁辅国将军、大都督。
现代文：宇文盛弟宇文丘，字胡奴，从家中被征召出来担任襄威将军、奉朝请、都督，赐爵临邑县子逐步升迁任辅国将军、大都督。
English: Uwen Sheng's younger brother, Uwenqiu, nicknamed Hu Niu, was conscripted from his family to serve as General Xiang Wei, Minister of the North, Governor of Lin'yi County, and was gradually promoted to the position of Vice-Governor General and Grand Governor.

古文：预告赵贵谋，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵安义县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：参预告发赵贵叛乱阴谋，拜官车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵安义县侯，食邑一千户。
English: The pre-announcement of Zhao Gui's rebellion plot, the official car ride, the general, the three departments of etiquette, the lord of Anyi County, and a thousand households in the food village.

古文：加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公，除咸阳郡守。
现代文：加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋升为公爵，授任咸阳郡守。
English: He was promoted to the rank of duke and appointed governor of Xianyang County.

古文：迁汾州刺史。
现代文：升任汾州刺史。
English: Promoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：入为左宫伯，进位大将军。
现代文：入朝任左宫伯，晋升为人将军。
English: Entered the imperial court as a member of the Left Court and was promoted to general.

古文：出为延绥丹三州三防诸军事、延州刺史。
现代文：出任延绥丹三 三防诸军事、延州刺史。
English: Yancheng Danzi, Sanbo, and other military officers were appointed to the post, and the history of Yanzhou was written.

古文：转凉甘瓜三州诸军事、凉州刺史，加柱国大将军。
现代文：改调凉甘瓜三州诸军事、凉州刺史，加授柱国大将军。
English: He transferred Liangguan Gua to the three states of military and Liangzhou Zhishi, and was awarded the title of grand general.

古文：建德元年薨，时年六十。
现代文：建德元年去世，时年六十岁。
English: Jian De died in the first year of the year, at the age of sixty.

古文：赠柱国、宜鄜等州刺史。
现代文：赠封柱国及宜鄘等州刺史。
English: It has been awarded the seal of the pillar country and the state of Yixing.

古文：子陇嗣。
现代文：他的儿子宇文陇嗣位。
English: His son, Uwen, succeeded him.

古文：耿豪，钜鹿人也。本名令贵。
现代文：坠塞，是鱼迷人。本名全皇。
English: His real name is Zenghuang.

古文：其先避刘、石之乱，居辽东，因仕于燕。
现代文：祖上躲避刘逦、互勤暴乱，隐居逮塞，于是出仕游厘。
English: Ancestors hid from Liu Ye, mutual work riots, secluded arrest, and then went to work.

古文：曾祖超，率众归魏，遂家于神武川。
现代文：曾祖玺逦，率领部众投奔逸国，就安家在控亘则。
English: Zeng Zuyi led his followers to flee to Yunnan Province, and settled down in Wuzhen.

古文：豪少粗犷，有武艺，好以气凌人。
现代文：耿豪年少时粗悍，有武艺，好盛气凌人。
English: When he was young, Geng Hao was rough and tough, had martial arts skills, and was very domineering.

古文：贺拔岳西征，引为帐内。
现代文：贺拔岳西征，用为近佐。
English: He was recruited to accompany the accountant in the Western Expedition of He Baturake.

古文：岳被害，归太祖，以武勇见知。
现代文：贺拔岳被害，耿豪归附太祖，凭藉武勇受到赏识。
English: Geng Hao was awarded the title of Grandfather for his bravery when Mt. He Batur was destroyed.

古文：豪亦自谓所事得主。
现代文：耿豪也自认为所事得主。
English: Geng Hao also considered himself the winner.

古文：从讨侯莫陈悦及迎魏孝武，录前后功，封平原县子，邑三百户，除宁朔将军、奉车都尉。
现代文：从征侯莫陈悦及迎接魏孝武帝，记前后功，封平原县子，食邑三百户，授任宁朔将军、奉车都尉。
English: Mo Chen Yue was awarded the title of Ningshuo General and the title of Fengche First Lieutenant for his achievements in recruiting and welcoming Emperor Wei Xiaowu and enclosing 300 households in Pingyuan County.

古文：迁征虏将军，加通直散骑常侍，进爵为侯，增邑七百户。
现代文：升任征虏将军，加授通直散骑常侍，晋升为侯爵，增加食邑七百户。
English: He was promoted to Conscript General, given the additional post of Consul-General's Equerry, promoted to Marquis, and increased the number of households to 700.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，豪先锋陷阵，加前将军、中散大夫。
现代文：从征擒获宝泰，收复弘农，耿豪冲锋陷阵，加授前将军、中散大夫。
English: He won Baotai from the conquest, recovered Hongnong, Geng Hao charged into the battle, and was awarded the title of former general and Zhongshan doctor.

古文：沙苑之战，豪杀伤甚多，血染甲裳尽赤。
现代文：沙苑之战，耿豪杀伤敌人甚多，鲜血把钟甲、衣裳都染红了。
English: In the Battle of Sha Yuan, he killed and injured the most enemy soldiers. The blood of the enemy soldiers dyed his armor red.

古文：太祖见之，叹曰： 令贵武猛，所向无前，观其甲裳，足以为验，不须更论级数也。 于是进爵为公，增邑通前一千五百户。
现代文：太祖见到后，赞叹道： 令贵武猛，所向披靡，观看他的锷甲衣裳，足以作为验证，不用计算砍多少头了。 于是晋升为公爵，增加食邑累计一千五百户。
English: When the great-grandfather saw him, he said with admiration, "You have made your nobles and warriors invincible, and it is enough to look at his armor to verify that there is no need to count how many heads he has cut off." So he was promoted to the rank of duke, increasing the total number of households to 1,500.

古文：除镇北将军、金紫光禄大夫、南郢州刺史。
现代文：授任镇北将军、金紫光禄大夫、南郢州刺史。
English: He was awarded the titles of Zhenbei General, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and Nan Xizhou Sashi.

古文：九年，从太祖战于邙山，豪谓所部曰： 大丈夫见贼，须右手拔刀，左手把矛，直刺直斫，慎莫皱眉畏死。 遂大呼独入，敌人锋刃乱下，当时咸谓豪殁。
现代文：九年，跟随太祖大战邙山，耿豪对部下说： 大丈夫遇敌，要右手拔刀，左手把稍，直刺直砍，切莫皱眉怕死。 说罢大叫着独冲敌阵，敌人锋刃交加，当时都以为耿豪死了。
English: In the ninth year, following his great-grandfather's great battle in Lushan, Geng Hao said to his subordinates: "When an able-bodied man encounters an enemy, he should draw his sword with his right hand, hold it slightly with his left hand, stab straight, and do not frown for fear of death.

古文：俄然奋刀而还。
现代文：不久却见他奋力挥刀杀了回来。
English: He suddenly reappears brandishing a sword.

古文：战数合，当豪前者，死伤相继。又谓左右曰： 吾岂乐杀人，但壮士除贼，不得不尔。
现代文：这样连战数合，他面前的敌人死伤相继他又对旁边的人说： 我哪裹乐意杀人，衹是壮士歼敌，不得不如此。
English: In this way, in a series of battles, the enemy in front of him was killed and wounded one after another, and he said to the people next to him: I am not willing to kill, but I am a strong man to destroy the enemy, I have to do so.

古文：若不能杀贼，又不为人所伤，何异逐坐人也。 太祖嘉之，拜北雍州刺史。
现代文：如果不能杀敌，又不被敌人所伤，那么与驱逐座上之人又有何不同呢? 太祖嘉许他，授任他为北雍州束史。
English: If you cannot kill the enemy and are not injured by the enemy, then what is the difference with the person on the throne of expulsion? The great-grandfather praised him and appointed him as the governor of Beiyang Province.

古文：十三年，论前后战功，进授车骑大将军、仪同三司，增邑通前一千八百户。
现代文：十三年，总评前后战功，升任车骑大将军、仪同三司，增加食邑累计一千八百户。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was commended for his war exploits, promoted to the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and the three departments of etiquette and etiquette, and increased the number of restaurants to a total of 1800.

古文：十五年，赐姓和稽氏，进位侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十五年，赐姓和稽氏，晋升为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司
English: Fifteen years later, he was given the family name of Waki and promoted to Chamberlain, General of Cavalry, Keifu Rites and Three Departments

古文：豪性凶悍，言多不逊。
现代文：耿豪性情凶悍， 言多不逊。
English: Geng Hao's temperament is fierce, and his words are harsh.

古文：太祖惜其骁勇，每优容之。
现代文：太祖爱惜他的骁勇，常宽容他。
English: His great-grandfather cherished his bravery and often indulged him.

古文：豪亦自谓意气冠群，终无所屈。
现代文：耿豪也自以为意气超群，一贯不为人所屈。
English: He also believes that his willpower is second to none, so he never gives in to anyone.

古文：李穆、蔡佑初与豪同时开府，后并居豪之右。
现代文：李穆、蔡佑先前与耿豪同时被授任开府，后来官位都比耿豪高。
English: Li Mu and Cai You had previously been appointed to head the government at the same time as Geng Hao, and later their official ranks were higher than Geng Hao's.

古文：豪意不平，谓太祖曰： 外闻物议，谓豪胜李穆、蔡佑。 太祖曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：耿豪心中不平，对太祖说： 我在外面听到人们的议论，说我比李穆、蔡佑强。 太祖说： 为什么这样说? 
English: Uneasy at heart, Geng Hao said to his great-grandfather, "I have heard people say outside that I am better than Li Mu and Cai You." His great-grandfather said, "Why do you say that?

古文：豪曰： 世言李穆、蔡佑，丞相臂膊；耿豪、王勇，丞相咽项。
现代文：耿豪说： 世人说李穆、蔡佑，是丞相臂膊；耿豪、王勇，是丞相咽项。
English: Geng Hao said: People say that Li Mu and Cai You are the arms of the prime minister; Geng Hao and Wang Yong are the throat of the prime minister.

古文：以咽项在上，故为胜也。 豪之粗猛，皆此类。
现代文：因为咽项在上，所以胜过他们。 耿豪之粗莽，都如这般。
English: Because he has the upper hand, he is superior to them. Geng Hao's recklessness is like this.

古文：十六年，卒，时年四十五。太祖痛惜之，赠以本官，加朔州刺史。
现代文：十六年，去世，时年四十五岁太祖痛惜他，赐赠本官，加授朔州刺史。
English: Sixteen years later, he passed away, at the age of forty-five, his great-grandfather felt sorry for him, bestowed him with the title of nobility, and awarded him the title of "Shuozhou Sashishi."

古文：子雄嗣，位至大将军。
现代文：他的儿子耿雄嗣位，位至大将军。
English: His son, Geng Xiong, succeeded him and rose to the rank of general.

古文：高琳字季珉，其先高句丽人也。
现代文：高琳字季珉，祖先是高句丽人。
English: Gaolin Zi Jie, ancestor of the Gogul people.

古文：六世祖钦，为质于慕容廆，遂仕于燕。
现代文：六世祖高钦，作为人质留在慕容魔那裹，于是出仕燕国。
English: The sixth generation ancestor, Gao Qin, was kept as a hostage by Murong Miao, so he went to serve Yan Guo.

古文：五世祖宗，率众归魏，拜第一领民酋长，赐姓羽真氏。
现代文：五世祖高宗，带部众投归魏国，官拜第一领民酋长，赐姓羽真氏。
English: The fifth generation, Zu Gaozong, led the people to return to Wei, and officially worshiped the first leader of the people, and was given the surname Yazhen.

古文：祖明、父迁仕魏，咸亦显达。
现代文：祖父高明、父亲高迁出仕魏国，也都显达。
English: His grandfather, Gao Ming, and his father, Gao Miao, both emigrated from Wei.

古文：琳母尝祓禊泗滨，遇见一石，光彩朗润，遂持以归。
现代文：高琳的母亲曾到泅水祭神，见一美石，光彩朗润，便带回家。
English: Gao Lin's mother once went to Surabaya to offer sacrifices to the gods, and when she saw a beautiful stone with a radiant luster, she took it home.

古文：是夜梦见一人，衣冠有若仙者，谓其母曰： 夫人向所将来之石，是浮磬之精。
现代文：当夜梦见一人，衣着打扮如同仙人，对他的母亲说： 夫人间拿回之石，是浮磬之精。
English: That night, I dreamed of a man dressed as a fairy, who said to his mother, "The stone that my wife took back is the spirit of the floating raft.

古文：若能宝持，必生令子。 其母惊寤，便举身流汗，俄而有娠。
现代文：若能珍重保存，必生贵子 其母惊醒，浑身流汗，不久便怀孕。
English: If it can be carefully preserved, the precious child will be born. The mother wakes up, sweats profusely, and soon becomes pregnant.

古文：及生，因名琳字季珉焉。
现代文：生子，因而取名高琳，字季珉。
English: She gave birth to a son and named him Gao Lin (高琳).

古文：魏正光初，起家卫府都督。
现代文：魏正光初年，从家中征召出来任卫府都督。
English: In the first year of Wei Zhengguang, he was summoned from his home to serve as the governor of the imperial guard.

古文：从元天穆讨邢杲,破梁将庆之，以功转统军。
现代文：跟从互型娄征讨亚基，打败凿将速庆之，因功调任统军。
English: Following the pattern of mutual conquest and subjugation, defeating the chisel will hasten the celebration, and he will be transferred to the unified army.

古文：又从尔朱天光破万俟丑奴，论功为最，除宁朔将军、奉车都尉。
现代文：又跟从尔朱天光打败万俟丑奴，评功最大，授任宁朔将军、奉车都尉。
English: He also followed Zhu Tianguang from Erzhu to defeat Wanzhong Ugliness, and was awarded the greatest merit, and was awarded the title of Ningshuo General and Fengche Captain.

古文：后随天光败于韩陵山，琳因留洛阳。
现代文：后随剔出战败于韩陵山，高琳因而留在洛阳。
English: After being eliminated, the team was defeated in Hanling Mountain, so Gao Lin stayed in Luoyang.

古文：魏孝武西迁，从入关。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，高琳随从入关。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, and Gao Lin followed him.

古文：至溱水，为齐神武所追，拒战有功，封钜野县子，邑三百户。
现代文：至溱水，被齐神武帝追击，拒战有功，封钜野县子，食邑三百户。
English: To Surabaya, he was chased by Emperor Qizhenwu, resisted the war, and was rewarded with the fiefdom of Surabaya, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：大统初，进爵为侯，增邑四百户，转龙骧将军。
现代文：大统初年，进爵为侯，增加食邑四百户，调升龙骧将军。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was raised to the peerage as a marquis, increased the number of households to 400, and was promoted to the rank of Longjing general.

古文：顷之，授直阁将军，迁平西将军，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：不久，授任直合将军，升任平西将军，加授通直散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the general of Zhihe, promoted to the general of Pingxi, and given the additional title of the general of Zhihe.

古文：三年，从太祖破齐神武于沙苑，转安西将军，进爵为公，增邑八百户。
现代文：三年，跟从太祖在沙苑战败齐神武帝，升任安西将军，进爵为公，增加食邑八百产。
English: Three years later, he followed his great-grandfather in defeating Emperor Qishenwu in Shayuan, was promoted to General of Anxi, was ennobled, and increased the production of food by 800 yuan.

古文：累迁卫将军、银青光禄大夫、右光禄大夫。
现代文：接连升任卫将军、银青光禄大夫、右光禄大夫。
English: He was successively promoted to General of the Guards, Silver Qingguanglu Doctor, and Uguanglu Doctor.

古文：四年，从擒莫多娄贷文。
现代文：四年，从征擒获莫多娄贷文。
English: Four years later, he received a loan from Modo Bank.

古文：仍战河桥，琳先驱奋击，勇冠诸军。
现代文：随后战于河桥，高琳前行开路奋勇出击，勇冠诸军。
English: Subsequently, the battle was fought in the river bridge, and Gaolin went ahead to open the way and bravely attacked, leading the troops.

古文：太祖嘉之，谓之曰： 公即我之韩、白也。 拜太子左庶子。
现代文：太祖大加赞赏，对他说： 公即我之韩、白也。 授任太子左庶子。
English: The great-grandfather was very appreciative and said to him, "The public is my Han and Baiya.

古文：寻以本官镇玉壁。
现代文：不久，又以本官职坐镇玉壁。
English: Not long after, he took up his post as a magistrate in the town of Tamakabe.

古文：复从太祖战邙山，除正平郡，加大都督，增邑三百户。
现代文：又跟从太祖战于邙山，授任正平郡守，加授大都督，增加食邑三百户。
English: He also followed his great-great-grandfather to fight in Lushan, and was awarded the title of Zhenping County Governor, as well as the title of Grand Governor, increasing the number of food villages to 300.

古文：齐将东方老来寇，琳率众御之。
现代文：齐将东方老来犯，高琳率众抵御。
English: Qi will attack the East, and Gao Lin will lead the crowd to resist.

古文：老恃其勇健，直前趣琳。
现代文：东方老自恃勇健，一直向前逼近高琳。
English: Dongfang, who prides himself on his bravery, has been moving forward and closing in on Gaolin.

古文：短兵接，琳击之，老中数疮而退，谓其左右曰： 吾经阵多矣，未见如此健儿。 后乃密使人劝琳东归，琳斩其使以闻。
现代文：用短兵器接战，高琳攻击他，东方老身中数创而退，对他左右的人说： 我经历的战阵很多了，未见如此健儿。 后来就秘密派人劝高琳束归齐，高琳斩他的来使上奏。
English: They fought with short weapons, and Gao Lin attacked him, and Dongfang Chuang retreated, saying to the people around him, "I have experienced many battles, and I have never seen such a skillful person." Later, he secretly sent someone to persuade Gao Lin to fall into line, and Gao Lin killed him to make the first move.

古文：进使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：晋升为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted to Jizhi Section, General of Chariot and Cavalry, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, General of Cavalry.

古文：除鄜州刺史，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中。
现代文：任鄘州刺史，加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, the title of General of the Imperial Household, the title of Third Secretary, and the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵犍为郡公，邑一千户。
现代文：孝闵帝继位，高琳晋爵犍为郡公，食邑一千户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun succeeded to the throne, and Gao Lin Jinjie became the county magistrate, leading a thousand households in the county.

古文：武成初，从贺兰祥征吐谷浑，以勋别封一子许昌县公，邑一千户，除延州刺史。
现代文：武成初年，跟从贺兰祥征讨吐谷浑，凭藉功劳另封一子为许昌县公，食邑一千户，授任延州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he followed in the footsteps of Horan Xiangzheng to enlist Tugu Hun, and on the basis of his merits, another son was made the governor of Xuchang County, with a population of one thousand households, and was appointed the governor of Yanzhou.

古文：又从柱国豆卢宁讨稽胡郝阿保、刘桑德等，破之。
现代文：又跟从柱国豆卢宁征讨稽胡郝阿保、刘桑德等，打败他们。
English: He also followed Hu Yaobao, Liu Sande, and others from Zhu Guozhuang and Luning to defeat them.

古文：二年，文州氐酋反，诏琳率兵讨平之。
现代文：二年，文州氐族酋长造反，诏令高琳率兵讨平了他们。
English: Two years later, when the chiefs of the Wenzhou Yi people rebelled, Gao Lin led an army to defeat them.

古文：师还，帝宴群公卿士，仍命赋诗言志。
现代文：班师回来，帝宴会群公卿士，并命赋诗言志。
English: When the class teacher returned, the emperor held a banquet for a group of nobles, and ordered him to write a poem.

古文：琳诗末章云： 寄言窦车骑，为谢霍将军，何以报天子？
现代文：高琳诗的末章说： 寄言宝车骑，为谢霍将军，何以报天子?
English: The last chapter of Gao Lin's poem said: "If you send a message and ride a chariot, for General Xie Huo, how can you report to God?

古文：沙漠静妖氛。 帝大悦曰： 獯猃陆梁，未时款塞，卿言有验，国之福也。 
现代文：沙漠静妖氛。 帝非常高兴地说： 獯殓横行，不按时来通好，你说的话若灵验，是国家的福气。 
English: The desert was calm and serene. The emperor was very pleased and said, "The grasshoppers are rampant, and it is not good to arrive on time. If what you say is effective, it will be a blessing for the country."

古文：保定初，授梁州总管、十州诸军事。天和二年，徙丹州刺史。
现代文：锤初年，任銮总管、十州诸军事。玉迦二年，调任丹州刺史。
English: In the first year of Hammer, he was appointed as the general manager of Jianye and the military of ten states. In the second year of Jade, he was transferred to Danzhou.

古文：三年，迁江陵总管。
现代文：三年，升任江陵副总管。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to vice-governor of Gangneung.

古文：时陈将吴明彻来寇，总管田弘与梁主萧岿出保纪南城，唯琳与梁仆射王操固守江陵三城以抗之。昼夜拒战，凡经十旬，明彻退去。
现代文：这时陈将吴明彻来犯，总管田弘与梁主萧嶎出保纪南城，惟产继与銮仆射王凿固守辽尘三城以抵抗昼夜拒战，共经十旬，明彻退去。
English: At this time, Chen sent Wu Mingche to invade, and the general manager, Tian Hong, and the leader of the Liang Clan, Xiao Yao, marched out of the southern city of Baoji. However, Pang Sui and his henchman, Sha Wang Jie, held fast to the three cities of Liaodan, resisting day and night and refusing to fight. After a total of ten years, Ming Che retreated.

古文：岿表言其状，帝乃优诏追琳入朝，亲加劳问。
现代文：萧厅上表述说战斗情状，皇帝于是下诏优待请产避入朝，亲自加以劳问。
English: Xiao Zhan said that the situation of the battle was described above, and the emperor then issued an edict to give preferential treatment to those who had fled to the North, and personally interrogated them.

古文：进授大将军，仍副卫公直镇襄州。
现代文：晋升他为大将军，仍然辅佐蛮公宇文直坐镇窒业。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general, and continued to assist the barbarian lord Uwen Zhi Zi Zhen.

古文：六年，进位柱国。
现代文：六年，晋升他为柱国。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to columbarium.

古文：建德元年，薨，时年七十六。
现代文：建德元年去世，时年七十六岁。
English: Jian De died in the first year of the year, at the age of seventy-six.

古文：赠本官，加冀定齐沧州五州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥曰襄。
现代文：赠封本官，加冀宣变涂等五州诸军事、冀业刺史，谧号曰塞。
English: His official title was bestowed, and the military of the five states including Hebei Province and Hebei Province were added, and his posthumous name was cancelled.

古文：子儒，少以父勋赐爵许昌公，拜左侍上士。
现代文：于高儒，年少时凭藉父功赐爵许昌县公，官拜左侍上士。
English: At Gaoru, when he was young, he was given the title of Xuchang County due to his father's merits, and he was promoted to the rank of Left-Handed Staff Sergeant.

古文：后袭爵犍为郡公，位至仪同大将军。
现代文：后袭爵犍为郡公，位至仪同大将军。
English: Later, he was given the title of county magistrate and rose to the rank of general.

古文：李和本名庆和，其先陇西狄道人也。
现代文：李和本名庆和，祖先是陇西狄道人。
English: Li He's real name is Qing He, and his ancestor was a Taoist from Shaanxi.

古文：后徙居朔方。
现代文：后来移居朔方。
English: Later, he moved to Shuo Fang.

古文：父僧养，以累世雄豪，善于统御，为夏州酋长。
现代文：父亲李僧养，因为累代雄豪，又善于治民，担任了夏州酋长。
English: His father, Li Sangye, served as the chief of Xiazhou because he was a great warrior and good at governing the people.

古文：和少敢勇，有识度，状貌魁伟，为州里所推。
现代文：李和少年勇敢，有见识气度，状貌魁伟，为州裹所推重。
English: Li and the boy are brave, insightful, and handsome, and are promoted by the state.

古文：贺拔岳作镇关中，乃引和为帐内都督。
现代文：贺拔岳任关中镇守时，举荐他为帐内都督。
English: When He Batyue was appointed as the keeper of Guanzhong Town, he recommended him as the governor of the county.

古文：以破诸贼功，稍迁征北将军、金紫光禄大夫，赐爵思阳公。
现代文：因讨平诸贼有功，渐升征北将军、金紫光禄大夫，赐爵思阳公。
English: Siyang was awarded the title of General of the Northern Expedition and the title of Doctor of the Jin Zi Guanglu, for his achievements in fighting against the bandits.

古文：寻除汉阳郡守。
现代文：不久升为汉阳郡守。
English: He was soon promoted to Hanyang County Governor.

古文：治存宽简，百姓称之。
现代文：为政宽简，百姓称扬。
English: He was praised by the people for being a moderate politician.

古文：至大统初，加车骑将军、左光禄大夫、都督，累迁使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、夏州刺史，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：到大统初年，加授车骑将军、左光禄大夫、都督，连升使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、夏州刺史，赐姓宇文氏。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was given the additional titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Doctor of the Left Hand of the Light, and Governor of the Capital; he was promoted consecutively to Envoy of the Empress Dowager, General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Master of Ceremonies, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of the Horse, Grand Officer of

古文：太祖尝谓诸将曰： 宇文庆和，智略明赡，立身恭谨，累经委任，每称吾意。 遂赐名意焉。
现代文：太祖曾对诸将说： 宇文庆和才智谋略异常高明，立身恭谨，屡经委任，总让我称心如意。 于是赐名为意。
English: The great-grandfather once said to the generals: "Uwen Qing and Cai Zhizhi are extremely clever in strategy, upright and respectful, and have been appointed many times. They always make me happy. Therefore, I gave them my name.

古文：改封永丰县公，邑一千户。
现代文：改封永丰县公，食邑一千户。
English: Yongfeng County was renamed Yongfeng County, with 1,000 households in the food village.

古文：保定二年，除司宪中大夫，进爵义城郡公。寻又改封德广郡公，出为洛州刺史。
现代文：保定二年，授任司宪中大夫，进爵义城郡公不久又改封德广郡公，出任洛州刺史。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was awarded the title of Jian Zhong Dafu, and was promoted to the title of Yicheng County Governor, and soon he was renamed Deguang County Governor, and served as the governor of Luozhou.

古文：和前在夏州，颇留遗惠，及有此授，商洛父老，莫不想望德音。
现代文：李和以前治理夏州，留给百姓不少恩惠，等到有此任命，商洛父老，无不对他的美好的声誉充满想望。
English: Li He used to govern Xiazhou and left a lot of favors to the people. When this appointment was made, Shang Luo and his father were full of hope for his good reputation.

古文：和至州，以仁恕训物，狱讼为之简静。
现代文：李和到了洛州，以爱心与宽容教民，诉讼案件大减。
English: After Li He arrived in Lozhou, he taught the people with love and tolerance, and the number of lawsuits dropped significantly.

古文：天和三年，进位大将军，拜延绥丹三州武安伏夷安民三防诸军事、延州刺史。
现代文：天和三年，晋升为大将军，授任延绥丹三州武安伏夷安民三防诸军事、延蚶刺史。
English: At the age of three, he was promoted to the rank of general, and was given the command of the military of the three provinces of Yan'an, Wu'an, Fei'an, and Min'an, as well as the history of Yan'an.

古文：六年，进柱国大将军。
现代文：六年，晋升为柱国大将军。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to General of the Pillar Country.

古文：建德元年，改授延绥银三州文安伏夷安民周昌梁和五防诸军事。
现代文：建德元年，改授延绥银三州文安伏夷安民周昌梁和五防诸军事。
English: In the first year of Jiande, Zhou Changliang and Wu Bo were awarded the Yancheng Silver, Sanzhou Wenan, Fuyi, Anmin, and Zhou Changliang and Wu Bo, respectively.

古文：以罪免。
现代文：因罪罢官。
English: Dismissed for misconduct.

古文：寻复柱国。
现代文：不久复授柱国官衔。
English: Soon after, he was re-awarded the official rank of Shiguo.

古文：隋开皇元年，迁上柱国。
现代文：臆胆皇元年，升任上柱国。
English: In the first year of the Cowardly Emperor, he was promoted to Shoshu no kuni.

古文：和立身刚简，老而逾励，诸子趋事，若奉严君。
现代文：奎和立身坚强朴直，老而更加刚烈，儿辈有事请示，如奉严君。
English: Kuihe is strong and straightforward, older and more rigid, and his children have something to ask for, such as Bong Yanjun.

古文：以意是太祖赐名，市朝已革，庆和则父之所命，义不可违。
现代文：因为塞是左担所赐之名，帝朝都已经改换，而庆翅则为父之所命，义不可违。
English: Because "Sai" is the name given by the left shoulder, the imperial dynasty has been changed, and "Gyeongyeong" is the name given by the father, which cannot be violated.

古文：至是，遂以和为名。
现代文：到此便以塑为名。
English: At this point, he became known as Shou.

古文：二年，薨，赠本官，加司徒公、徐兖邳沂海泗六州刺史。
现代文：二年，逝世，赠本官荣衔，加授司徒公、涂查邳近涂回六州刺史。
English: Two years later, he passed away, and was given the honorary title of his position, as well as the title of Shitokong, and the title of Shitokong of the Six Provinces.

古文：谥曰肃。
现代文：谧号盘。
English: His posthumous name is Su.

古文：子彻嗣。
现代文：子奎邀继承爵禄。
English: Zi Kui was invited to inherit the peerage.

古文：伊娄穆字奴干，代人也。
现代文：伊娄穆，字奴干，代国人。
English: Yimou, the Chinese character for slave, represents the Chinese people.

古文：父灵，善骑射，为太祖所知。
现代文：父伊娄灵，善骑射，为太祖赏识。
English: His father, Ip Ling, was a skilled horseman and archer, which was appreciated by his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖尝谓之曰： 昔伊尹保衡于殷，致主尧舜。
现代文：太祖曾对他说： 古时伊尹辅佐殷商，使国君像尧、舜一样圣贤。
English: The great-grandfather once said to him, "In ancient times, Yi Yin Su assisted Yin merchants, making the sovereign as holy and wise as Yao and Zou."

古文：卿既姓伊，庶卿不替前绪。 于是赐名尹焉。
现代文：你既姓伊，想必不辱先人之宏业吧。 于是赐名也叫尹。
English: Since your family name is Yi, you should not disparage the great achievements of your predecessors. Therefore, you were given the name Yin.

古文：历金紫光禄大夫、卫将军、隆州刺史，赐爵卢奴县公。
现代文：历任金紫光禄大夫、卫将军、隆州刺史，赐爵卢奴县公。
English: Successive Jin Zi Guanglu doctors, Wei generals, Longzhou magistrates, and Lu Nu County officials were given peerages.

古文：穆弱冠为太祖内亲信，以机辩见知，授奉朝请，常侍左右。
现代文：伊娄穆二十岁为太祖内廷亲信，以机智善辩受重用，授任奉朝请，常侍左右。
English: At the age of twenty, Yimou was a close confidant of the great-grandfather's inner court. He was highly valued for his wit and good arguments, and was appointed to serve the imperial court. He was a regular attendant.

古文：邙山之役，力战有功，拜子都督、丞相府参军事，转外兵参军。
现代文：邙山战役，力战有功，拜官于都督、丞相府参军事，改任外兵参军。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, he fought bravely and meritoriously. He served as an officer at the capital and the prime minister's office and joined the military. He was reassigned as a foreign soldier to join the army.

古文：累迁帅都督、平东将军、中散大夫，历中书舍人、尚书驾部郎中、抚军将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：接连升任帅都督、平东将军、中散大夫，历任中书舍人、尚书驾部郎中、抚军将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was successively promoted to the posts of Shuai-totoku, General Pingdong, and Chusan-tokufu, and successively to the posts of Chusho-sojin, Shosho-kakibu-ro, Fushun-shogun, Daitoku, and Tsuchidana-sanzai.

古文：尝入白事，太祖望见悦之，字之曰： 奴干作仪同面见我矣。 于是拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，赐封安阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：曾入宫禀告事情，太祖望见他很高兴，直呼他的小名说： 奴干作仪同面见我了。 于是官拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，赐封安阳县伯，食邑五百户。
English: When he went to the palace to report the matter, the great-grandfather was very happy to see him, and called him by his nickname, saying, "I saw you, the servant, at the same time as I saw you." Therefore, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, and the three divisions of the cavalry were given to the 500 households in Anyang County and the 500 households in the food village.

古文：转大丞相府掾，迁从事中郎，除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：改任大丞相府掾，晋升从事中郎，改任给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was reappointed as the grand secretary of the minister of the prefectural government, promoted to engage in churo, and reappointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：魏废帝二年，穆使于蜀。
现代文：魏废帝二年，伊娄穆出使入蜀。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei's dethronement, Yimou was sent to Shu.

古文：属伍城郡人赵雄杰与梓潼郡人王令公、邓朏等构逆，众三万余人，阻涪水立栅，进逼潼州。
现代文：恰值伍城郡人赵雄杰与梓潼郡人王令公、邓肶等联谋叛逆，组军三万余人，封锁涪水，修建寨栅，进逼潼州。
English: At the right time, Zhao Xiongjie, a native of Wucheng County, conspired with Wang Linggang, a native of Zizhou County, and Deng Yao, a native of Zizhou County, to rebel. They formed an army of more than 30,000 men, blockaded Shishui, built a stockade, and forced their way into Shanzhou.

古文：穆遂与刺史叱罗协率兵破之。
现代文：于是伊娄穆与刺史叱罗协率兵平息了叛乱。
English: As a result, Izanmu and Sashi Shiro led the troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：增邑五百户。
现代文：增加食邑五百户。
English: Increase the number of restaurants to 500.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜兵部中大夫，治御正，进爵为侯，增邑五百户。
现代文：孝闵帝继位，官拜兵部中大夫，治御正。晋升为侯爵，增加食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Xiaojun succeeds to the throne. He is promoted to the rank of Marquis, and 500 households are added to his household.

古文：寻进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry and appointed to the Third Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：保定初，授军司马，进爵为公。
现代文：保定初年，授衔军司马，晋升为公爵。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was awarded the title of Sima and promoted to Duke.

古文：四年，除金州总管、八州诸军事、金州刺史。
现代文：四年，授任金州总管、八州诸军事、金州刺史。
English: In four years, he was appointed as the general manager of Jinzhou, the military commander of eight states, and the chief historian of Jinzhou.

古文：天和二年，增邑二千一百户。
现代文：天和二年，增加食邑二千一百户。
English: In the past two years, the number of food-producing counties has increased by 2,100.

古文：又为民部中大夫。
现代文：又为民部中大夫。
English: He is also a junior doctor in the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：卫公直出镇襄州，以穆为长史。
现代文：堑公宇文直出镇塞业，以伊娄穆为长史。
English: Gongyuan Uwen came straight from the town of Xieye, with a long history in Yimou.

古文：郢州城民王道肯反，袭据州城。
现代文：坚铋城民工龌造反，袭据州城。
English: The workers of Jianye City rebelled and attacked Zhouzhuang.

古文：直遣穆率百余骑驰往援之。
现代文：主塞直派伊娄穆率领一百多骑兵赶去救援。
English: Chief Saizai dispatched more than a hundred cavalrymen led by Izumo to rush to the rescue.

古文：穆至城下，频破肯众。
现代文：伊娄穆到城下，连连挫败王道胥兵。
English: Yimou went to the outskirts of the city and repeatedly defeated Wang Daoxuan's soldiers.

古文：会大将军高琳率众军继进，肯等乃降。
现代文：恰巧大将军高琳率大军接应，王道胥等才投降。
English: It just so happened that the great general Gao Lin led a large army to respond, and Wang Daoxuan and others surrendered.

古文：唐州山蛮恃险逆命，穆率军讨之。
现代文：唐州山蛮凭藉地形险峻，违抗朝廷命令，伊娄穆率军讨伐。
English: Due to the steep terrain, the Tangzhou Mountain Barbarians defied the imperial order, and Imu led the army in a crusade.

古文：蛮酋等保据石窟一十四处，穆分军进讨，旬有四日，并破之，虏获六千五百人。六年，进位大将军。
现代文：蛮酋保据石窟十四处，伊娄穆分兵进讨，十四全部攻破，俘虏六千五百人。六年，晋升为大将军。
English: The barbarian chieftain secured fourteen points in the grottoes, and the Izumo detachment marched in. They broke through all fourteen, capturing six thousand five hundred people. In six years, he was promoted to general.

古文：建德初。授荆州，复以穆为总管府长史。
现代文：建德初年，授任荆州，又以伊娄穆为总管府长史。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was given the post of Jingzhou, and Imu was appointed as the chief administrator of the prefecture.

古文：穆频贰戚藩，甚得匡赞之誉。
现代文：伊娄穆多次辅佐近亲藩王，甚得好助手的名声。
English: Iwamu assisted the king's close relative many times, and gained a reputation as a good assistant.

古文：入为小司马。
现代文：召入朝中任小司马。
English: Summoned to the imperial court to serve as a petty steward.

古文：从柱国李穆平轵关等城，赏布帛三百疋、粟三百石、田三十顷。
现代文：随柱国李穆平定轵关等城，受赏布帛三百匹、粟三百石、田三十顷。
English: Accompanying the pillar country Li Mu Ping Ding Shouguan and other cities, he was awarded three hundred pieces of cloth, three hundred grains of millet, and thirty hectares of land.

古文：五年，从皇太子讨吐谷浑。
现代文：五年，随皇太子讨伐吐谷浑。
English: Five years later, he accompanied the crown prince on a crusade against the Tukuhun.

古文：还，穆殿，为浑人围。
现代文：班师回朝，伊娄穆任后卫，被吐谷浑人包围。
English: When the team returned to the imperial court, Imu served as a guard and was surrounded by the Tugu Huns.

古文：会刘雄救至，乃得解。
现代文：正好刘雄的救兵赶到，才解了围。
English: Liu Xiong's rescuers arrived just in time to break the siege.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：杨绍字子安，弘农华阴人也。
现代文：杨绍字子安，是弘农华阴人。
English: Yang Shao Zi'an is a Hongnong Hua Yin.

古文：祖兴，魏新平郡守。
现代文：祖父杨兴，是魏新干郡守。
English: His grandfather, Yang Xing, was the Wei Xinggan County Governor.

古文：父国，中散大夫。
现代文：父杨国，任中散大夫。
English: His father, Yang Guo, was a doctor in Zhongshan.

古文：绍少慷慨有志略，屡从征伐，力战有功。
现代文：杨绍少年时性格豪爽，有志向、谋略，多次随军征伐，奋力作战，立有战功。
English: When he was a young boy, Yang Shao had a heroic personality, had aspirations and strategies, accompanied the army to conquer many times, fought hard, and made war exploits.

古文：魏永安中，授广武将军、屯骑校尉、直荡别将。
现代文：魏永安年问，授衔广武将军、屯骑校尉、直荡别将。
English: In the year of Wei Yong'an, he was awarded the titles of Guangwu General, Tuncai Lieutenant, and Zhihuang General.

古文：普泰初，封平乡男，邑一百户，加征西将军，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：普泰初年，封平乡男，食邑一百户，加授征西将军，金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was awarded the title of Pingxiangnanzi, with a hundred households of food villages, and was awarded the title of Western General, and the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：魏孝武初，迁卫将军、右光禄大夫，进爵冠军县伯，邑百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，升任卫将军、右光禄大夫，晋爵冠军县伯，食邑百户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was promoted to General of the Guards, Doctor of the Right Hand, Champion of the County, and hundreds of households in the food villages.

古文：大统元年，进爵为公，增邑六百户。
现代文：大统元年，晋升为公爵，增加食邑六百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to Duke, and 600 households were added.

古文：累迁车骑将军、通直散骑常侍、骁卫将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：连升车骑将军、通直散骑常侍、骁卫将军、左光禄大夫。
English: Lian Sheng Chariot Riding General, Tsundu Zhanzhong Riding Attendant, Xie Wei General, Zuo Guanglu Doctor.

古文：四年，出为鄜城郡守。
现代文：四年，出任鄘城郡守。
English: For four years, he served as the governor of Zhangcheng County.

古文：绍性恕直，兼有威惠，百姓安之。
现代文：杨绍性情宽容直率，威惠并济，百姓安宁。
English: Yang Shao's disposition is tolerant and straightforward, dignified and prosperous, and the people are peaceful.

古文：稽胡恃众与险，屡为抄窃。
现代文：稽胡恃众据险，频频抄掠。
English: He cheated people out of their life insurance and frequently stole from them.

古文：绍率郡兵从侯莫陈崇讨之，疋马先登，破之于默泉之上。
现代文：杨绍领兵随侯莫陈崇讨伐，匹马前冲，破敌于默泉之上。
English: Yang Shao led the troops to fight with Hou Mo Chen Chong, and rushed forward on horseback to defeat the enemy on the top of Muxuan.

古文：加帅都督、骠骑、常侍、朔州大中正。
现代文：加授帅都督、散骑常侍、朔州大中正。
English: In addition, he was awarded the titles of the governor of the capital, the knight errant, and the president of the middle school of Shuozhou University.

古文：十三年，录前后功，增邑通前二千二百户，除燕州刺史。
现代文：十三年，总计前后功，增加食邑累计二千二百户，授任燕州刺史。
English: In the 13th year, with a total of achievements, a total of 2,200 households have been added, and he was awarded the title of Yanzhou sashimi history.

古文：累迁大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：连升大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to the rank of grand governor, grand general of cavalry and cavalry, and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：复从大将军达奚武征汉中。
现代文：又跟从大将军达垦远征伐还中。
English: He was also in the middle of the expedition to return from the great general Dadu.

古文：时梁宜丰侯萧循固守梁州。
现代文：当时坚宣丰堡萧循固守鎏业。
English: At that time, Jian Xuan Fengbao Xiao Cun adhered to the practice of cultivation.

古文：绍以为悬军敌境，围守坚城，旷日持久，粮饟不继，城中若致死于我，惧不能归，请为计以诱之。
现代文：握趋认为孤军深入敌境，围守坚城，旷持久，会粮食不继，被敌拖死，担心不能回师，便请设计诱敞开城出战。
English: Grasp the trend that a lone army deep into the enemy territory, besieging a strong city, protracted, there will be food shortages, dragged to death by the enemy, worried about not being able to return to the division, then please design to entice the city to go to war.

古文：乃频至城下挑战，设伏待之。
现代文：于是常至城下挑战，设下埋伏等待敌人。
English: As a result, he often went to the outskirts of the city to challenge and set up ambushes to wait for the enemy.

古文：循初不肯出。
现代文：萧遁起初不肯出来。
English: At first, Xiao Yao refused to come out.

古文：绍又遣人骂辱之，循怒，果出兵，绍率众伪退。
现代文：杨绍屡次派入辱骂他，萧循恼怒，果然出兵，扰纽率军伪退。
English: Yang Shao repeatedly sent troops to insult him, but he was so angry that he actually sent troops and led the troops to retreat.

古文：城降。
现代文：最终凿业城败降。
English: In the end, Jiecheng was defeated and surrendered.

古文：以功授辅国将军、中散大夫，听回授一子。
现代文：握钮因功授衔辅国将军、中散大夫，听凭他转授一子。
English: He was awarded the rank of vice-governor general and Zhongshan doctor for his achievements, and he had one of his sons receive the same title.

古文：又从柱国、燕国公于谨围江陵。
现代文：又从柱国、燕国公于谨包围江陵。
English: They also encircled Gangneung from Jiu Guo and Yan Guo Guo.

古文：绍斗于枇杷门，流矢中股而力战不衰。
现代文：杨绍在枇把门战斗时，流矢中股而力战不衰。
English: When Yang Shao was fighting at the gate, he kept fighting.

古文：事平，赏奴婢一百口，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，除衡州刺史，赐姓叱利氏。
现代文：事平，赏奴婢一百人，晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，授任衡州刺史，赐姓叱利氏。
English: Zheping rewarded one hundred slaves and maidservants, promoted Zhou to General of Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, awarded the title of Hengzhou Sashishi, and given the surname of Shuli.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进位大将军。
现代文：孝闵帝继位，晋升为大将军。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：保定二年，卒，赠成文等八州刺史。
现代文：保定二年去世，追赠成文等八州刺史。
English: Baoding died two years later, posthumously awarded a written history of eight states.

古文：谥曰信。
现代文：谧曰信。
English: 曰信.

古文：子雄嗣，大象末，上柱国、邽国公。
现代文：子杨雄嗣，大象末年，为上柱国、邮国公。
English: His son, Yang Xiongzi, was the last year of the elephant's life, and became the ruler of Shangzhu Province and the Post Office Province.

古文：王雅字度容，阐熙新人也。
现代文：王雅字度容，是阐熙新国人。
English: Wang Ya Zi Du Rong is a native of Heixin.

古文：少而沉毅，木讷寡言，有胆勇，善骑射。
现代文：年少沉着坚毅，为人质朴，不善辞令，少言寡语，有胆量勇力，善于骑射。
English: He is calm and resolute at a young age, he is a simple person, he is not good with words, he is a man of few words, he has courage and is good at riding and shooting.

古文：太祖闻其名，召入军，累有战功。
现代文：太祖听说他的名字，召入军中，多次立有战功。
English: When the great-grandfather heard his name, he was called into the army and distinguished himself in battle many times.

古文：除都督，赐爵居庸县子。
现代文：授任都督，赐爵居庸县子。
English: He was appointed as the governor of the capital and given a peerage as the son of Juyang County.

古文：东魏将窦泰入寇，雅从太祖擒之于潼关。
现代文：东魏将领窦泰入侵，王雅跟从太祖在潼关擒获了他。
English: The Eastern Wei general Dou Tai invaded, and Wang Ya followed his great-grandfather to capture him in Shaoguan.

古文：沙苑之战，雅谓所部曰： 彼军殆有百万，今我不满万人，以常理论之，实难与敌。
现代文：沙苑大战时，王雅对部下说： 敌军约近百万，我军不满万人，以常理比量，实难与之对抗。
English: During the Sha Yuan War, Wang Ya said to his subordinates: The enemy army is about one million, and our army is less than ten thousand. It is really difficult to fight against it.

古文：但相公神武命世，股肱王室，以顺讨逆，岂计众寡。
现代文：但相公以神异武勇闻名于世，鼎力王室，以顺讨逆，难道需要计算众寡?
English: However, the Prince Consort is famous for his extraordinary bravery in the world, and the royal family is known for its strength in dealing with adversity. Is it necessary to count the number of people?

古文：丈夫若不以此时破贼，何用生为！ 乃擐甲步战，所向披靡，太祖壮之。
现代文：大丈夫不趁此时破贼，活着何用! 说罢披甲步战，所向无敌，太祖叹其英勇。
English: If an able-bodied man does not take advantage of this time to break the thief, what is the use of being alive! Saying, "Let's put on armor and march into battle," he will be invincible, and the great-grandfather will sigh for his bravery.

古文：又从战邙山。
现代文：又从战邙山。
English: He also participated in the Battle of Shaoshan.

古文：时大军不利，为敌所乘，诸将皆引退，雅独回骑拒之。
现代文：当时大军失利，为敌掩袭，诸将皆引退，王雅独回骑拒敌。
English: At that time, the great army was defeated, covered for the enemy, all generals retired, and Wang Ya rode back alone to repel the enemy.

古文：敌人见其无继，步骑竞进。
现代文：敌人见他没有跟上大部队，就以步兵骑兵竞相进击。
English: When the enemy saw that he could not keep up with the large army, he attacked with infantry and cavalry.

古文：雅左右奋击，频斩九级，敌众稍却，雅乃还军。
现代文：王雅左右奋击，连砍九个首级，敌兵渐退，王雅才回军。
English: Wang Ya fought hard from left to right, cutting nine heads in succession, the enemy soldiers gradually retreated, and Wang Ya only returned to the army.

古文：太祖叹曰： 王雅举身悉是胆也。 
现代文：太祖叹道： 王雅浑身都是胆啊! 
English: Grandfather sighed: Wang Ya is full of gall!

古文：录前后功，进爵为伯，除帅都督、鄜城郡守。
现代文：总计前后功劳，晋升为伯爵，授任帅都督、鄘城郡守。
English: In total, he was promoted to count, given the positions of marshal and governor, and governor of Shicheng County.

古文：政尚简易，吏人安之。
现代文：他治理政事崇尚简易，吏民都很安宁。
English: He advocated the simplicity of governance, and the officials and people were very peaceful.

古文：迁大都督、延州刺史，转夏州刺史，加车骑大将军、仪同三司，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：升任大都督、延州刺史，转任夏州刺史，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to the position of the grand governor, the governor of Yanzhou, transferred to the position of the governor of Xiazhou, and promoted to the position of the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry.

古文：世宗初，除汾州刺史。
现代文：世塞初年，授任垃业刺史。
English: In the first year of the World Chess Championship, he was awarded the title of history of chess.

古文：励精为治，人庶悦而附之，自远至者七百余家。
现代文：励精图治，民众都感到欣悦而依附他。从远方投附而来的有七百余家。
English: He worked hard to govern, and the people were pleased and attached to him. More than seven hundred families came from far away to attach themselves to him.

古文：保定初，复为夏州刺史，卒于州。
现代文：惺宣初年，复任夏业刺史，死于任所。
English: In the first year of Xuan Xuan's reign, he was reinstated as Xia Ye Zhishi, but died in office.

古文：子世积嗣。
现代文：子王世积承袭爵禄。
English: The son of a king inherits a peerage.

古文：少倜傥有文武干略。
现代文：风神朗练，才兼文武。
English: If you are good at wind and martial arts, you will be good at literature and martial arts.

古文：大象末，上大将军、宜阳郡公。
现代文：友墓末年，官至上大将军、宜阳郡公。
English: In the last years of Tomobaka's life, he became the highest-ranking general and the governor of Yiyang County.

古文：达奚寔字什伏代，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：达奚写字什伏代，是河南洛阳人。
English: Dadun, who wrote in Shifu, was from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：高祖凉州，魏征西将军、山阳公。
现代文：高祖达奚凉州，是魏征西将军、山阳公。
English: Gao Zu Da was born in Liangzhou. He was a general of the Western Wei Dynasty and a prince of Sanyang.

古文：父显相，武卫将军。
现代文：父达奚显相，是武卫将军。
English: His father, Tatsunobu Hensho, was a general in the Imperial Japanese Army.

古文：寔少修立，有干局。
现代文：达奚蹇年少便知奋发，胸有大器。
English: At a young age, he knows how to work hard and has a big heart.

古文：起家给事中，加冠军将军。
现代文：从家中被征召出来任给事中，加授冠军将军。
English: In addition to being called up from home, he was awarded the title of champion general.

古文：魏孝武初，授都督，镇弘农。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，授任都督，坐镇弘农。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was appointed as the governor of the capital and became a farmer.

古文：后从西迁，封临汾县伯，邑六百户。
现代文：后来随驾西迁，封临汾县伯，食邑六百户。
English: Later, he moved west with his family, and 600 households in the food village of Bo, Linfen County, were established.

古文：迁大行台郎中，仍与行台郎神镇潼关。
现代文：升任大行台郎中，随后与行台郎神镇守潼关。
English: He was promoted to the middle rank of Daigodairo, and later became the keeper of Shingenshin Pass together with Daigodairo.

古文：及潼关失守，即与大都督阳山武战于关，东魏人甚惮之。
现代文：等到潼关失守时，就与大都督阳山武在潼关拒敌作战，东魏人很怕他。
English: When Shaoguan fell into disarray, he fought against Yang Shanwu, the grand duke, to repel the enemy in Shaoguan. The Eastern Wei people were very afraid of him.

古文：从太祖擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，皆力战有功，增邑三百户，加车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：随从太祖擒获窦泰，收复弘农，攻下沙苑，都力战有功，增加食邑三百户，加授车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: He gained Dou Tai, recovered Hongnong, and captured Shayuan, all of which contributed to the success of the war. He increased the number of food villages by 300, and was awarded the titles of General of Chariots and Cavalry and Doctor of the Left Hand.

古文：十三年，又授大行台郎中、相府掾，转从事中郎。
现代文：十三年，又授任大行台郎中、相府掾，转任从事中郎。
English: Thirteen years later, he was also given the positions of daigyo tairou chujo and shofu sho, and transferred to the position of chujo.

古文：寔性严重，太祖深器之。
现代文：达奚窟禀性认真持重，太祖十分赏识他。
English: Daju Grottoes has a very serious attitude towards nature, and his great-grandfather appreciated him very much.

古文：累迁大都督、持节、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：连升大都督、持节、通直散骑常侍。
English: Successively promoted to the position of grand governor, he was a faithful and loyal retainer of the emperor.

古文：魏废帝二年，除中外府司马。
现代文：魏废帝二年，授任中外府司马。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei's dethronement, he was awarded the post of Sima of the Middle and Outer Provinces.

古文：大军伐蜀，以寔行南岐州事，兼都军粮。
现代文：大军伐蜀，命达奚定掌管南岐州事务，兼筹粮饷。
English: A large army was sent to conquer Shu, and he was appointed to be in charge of the affairs of southern Qizhou, as well as to collect grain.

古文：先是，山氐生犷，不供赋役，历世羁縻，莫能制御。
现代文：原先山氐蛮横不驯，不供赋役，累世笼络，没有谁能控制。
English: Originally, the mountain yakitori was wild and unruly, not for enslavement, entangled for generations, and no one could control it.

古文：寔导之以政，氐人感悦，并从赋税。
现代文：达奚定以适当的政策引导，氐人悦服，赋税齐纳，军粮足备。
English: Darjeeling will be guided by appropriate policies to make people happy, pay taxes, and have enough grain for the army.

古文：于是大军粮饩，咸取给焉。寻征还，仍为司马。六官建，拜蕃部中大夫，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵平阳县公。武成二年，授御正中大夫，治民部，兼晋公护司马。
现代文：不久调回，仍为司马。朝廷设置六官时，官拜蕃部中大夫，加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋爵干阳县公。武虚二年，授任御正中大夫，掌管民部，兼任晋公宇文护司马。
English: When the imperial court set up six officials, he was given the official title of Shibu Chudofu (Junior Doctor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs), and was also given the titles of General of the Imperial Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji (Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs), and Kanyang County official. In the second year of Wuhu, he was awarded the title of Goseong Chudofu (Senior Doctor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs), in charge of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and concurrently served as Shibu Chudofu Sima (Junior Doctor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs).

古文：保定元年，出为文州刺史，卒于州，时年四十九。
现代文：蝗元年，出任塞业刺史，死于任所，时年四十九岁。
English: In the first year of the locusts, he served as the history of the silk industry, and died at his post, at the age of forty-nine.

古文：赠文康二州刺史。
现代文：追赠塞尘二州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the dust of two states.

古文：谥曰恭。子丰嗣。
现代文：谧茎。子达要丰承袭爵禄。
English: The children should inherit the peerage.

古文：刘雄字猛雀，临洮子城人也。
现代文：刘雄字猛雀，是临洮子城人。
English: Liu Xiong Zi Mengjia is a resident of Linfen City.

古文：少机辩，慷慨有大志。
现代文：年轻时机敏善辩，慷慨有大志。
English: Young, opportunistic, argumentative, generous and ambitious.

古文：大统中，起家为太祖亲信。
现代文：大统年间，从家中被征召出来成为太祖亲信。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taito, he was conscripted from his family to become a close confidant of his grandfather.

古文：寻授统军、宣威将军、给事中，除子城令，加都督、辅国将军、中散大夫，兼中书舍人，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：不久授任统军、宣威将军、给事中，担任子城令，加授都督、辅国将军、中散大夫，兼中书舍人，赐姓宇文氏。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the unified army, General Xuan Wei, and in the middle of the war, he served as the commander of the sub-district, and was additionally appointed as the governor of the capital, the general of the auxiliary province, the doctor of Zhongshan, and the scholar of the middle school, and was given the surname Uwen.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，加大都督，历司市下大夫，齐右下大夫，治小驾部，进车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，加衔大都督，历任司市下大夫，齐右下大夫，掌管小驾部，进位车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, was promoted to the rank of grand governor, successively held the positions of chief magistrate, deputy chief magistrate, deputy chief magistrate, in charge of the small driver's department, promoted to the position of chariot and cavalry general, and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：保定四年，治中外府属，从征洛阳。
现代文：保定四年，掌管中外府属，从征洛阳。
English: In Baoding for four years, he was in charge of the middle and outer prefectures, and went to conquer Luoyang.

古文：天和二年，迁驾部中大夫，四年，兼齐公宪府掾，从宪出宜阳，筑安义等城。
现代文：天和二年，升任驾部中大夫。四年，兼任齐公宇文宪府掾，跟从宇文宪出征宜阳，筑安义等城。
English: In 1902, he was promoted to the position of the middle doctor of the driving department. Four years later, he also served as the governor of Qigong Uwen Xianfu, and followed Uwen Xian to Yiyang, Chikuan Yi and other cities.

古文：五年，齐相斛律明月率众筑通关城以援宜阳。
现代文：五年，齐丞相斛律明月率军筑通关城来救援宜阳。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Qizong, the minister of justice, Yao Rui Mingyue, led the army to build a pass to rescue Yiyang.

古文：先是，国家与齐通好，约言各保境息民，不相侵扰。
现代文：先前，北周与高齐修好，相约各自保境安民，不相侵扰。
English: Previously, North Zhou and Gao Qi had made an agreement to keep the border and the people safe and not to interfere with each other.

古文：至是，宪以齐人失信，令雄使于明月，责其背约。
现代文：到此时，宇文宪认为齐国人失信，便派刘雄出使到斛律明月军中，谴责他背约。
English: At this time, Yu Wenxian thought that the people of Qi were untrustworthy, so he sent Liu Xiong as an envoy to the Mingyue Army in Balochistan to condemn him for breaking the agreement.

古文：雄辞义辩直，齐人惮焉。
现代文：刘雄辞义劲直，齐人胆怯。
English: Liu Xiong is honest and straightforward, Qi people are timid.

古文：使还，兼中外掾。
现代文：出使回来，兼任中外府掾。
English: When he returned from his secondment, he concurrently served as the Chugai prefectural governor.

古文：寻加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，封周昌县伯，邑六百户。
现代文：不久又加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，封周昌县伯，食邑六百户。
English: Soon, he was also awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, the title of Kaifu with three divisions, the title of Zhouchang County, and more than 600 households in food villages.

古文：齐人又于姚襄筑伏龙等五城，以处戍卒。
现代文：齐人又在姚襄筑伏龙等五城，以安顿守境士卒。
English: Qi people also built five cities such as Fulong in Yao Xiang to settle border guards.

古文：雄从齐公宪攻之，五城皆拔。
现代文：刘雄随齐公宇文宪攻打他们，攻陷他们五城。
English: Liu Xiong followed Qi Gong and Wen Xian to attack them and captured five of their cities.

古文：宪复遣雄与柱国宇文盛于齐长城已西，连营防御。
现代文：宇文宪又派遣刘雄与柱国宇文盛在齐长城以西连营防御。
English: Uwen Xian also sent Liu Xiong and pillar state Uwen Sheng to the west of the Qi Great Wall to defend the camp.

古文：齐将段孝先等率众围盛。
现代文：齐将段孝先等领兵包围字文盛。
English: Qi surrounded the leading soldiers such as Duan Xiaoqian and Wensheng.

古文：营外先有长堑，大将军韩欢与孝先交战不利，雄身负排，率所部二十余人，据堑力战，孝先等乃止。
现代文：营外先前有长长的壕沟，大将军韩欢与孝先交战不利，刘雄亲自背上排梯，率领部下二十余人，凭依壕沟奋力作战，段孝先等才停止进犯。
English: Previously, there was a long trench outside the camp, which was unfavorable for the battle between the general Han Huan and Xiao Xian. Liu Xiong personally carried a ladder on his back and led more than 20 subordinates to fight hard in the trench, and Duan Xiao Xian stopped the attack.

古文：军还，迁军司马，进爵为侯，邑一千四百户。
现代文：回军后，升任军司马，晋升为侯爵，食邑一千四百户。
English: After returning to the army, he was promoted to the position of the army's steward, and was promoted to the rank of marquis. He served 1,400 households.

古文：建德初，授纳言，转军正，复为纳言。
现代文：建德初年，授任纳言，转任军正，复任纳言。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was awarded the post of Nagan, transferred to the post of military commander, and reinstated as Nagan.

古文：二年，转内史中大夫，除正。
现代文：二年，转任内史中大夫，任候正。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the post of junior doctor of internal history, and was appointed to the post of vice-president.

古文：高祖尝从容谓雄曰： 古人云： 富贵不归故乡，犹衣锦夜游。 今以卿为本州，何如？ 雄稽首拜谢。
现代文：高祖曾从容对刘雄说： 古人云： 富贵不回故乡，犹如穿着锦衣夜游。 我想派你回本州当官，怎么样? 刘雄叩头拜谢。
English: Gao Zu once calmly said to Liu Xiong, "The ancients said that if a rich person did not return to his hometown, it would be like going on a night trip wearing a brocade dress. I want to send you back to Honshu to be an official, how about it? Liu Xiong bowed his head in thanks.

古文：于是诏以雄为河州刺史。
现代文：于是下诏以刘雄为河州刺史。
English: As a result, Liu Xiong was proclaimed as the historical figure of Hezhou.

古文：雄先已为本县令，复有此授，乡里荣之。
现代文：刘雄先已为本县令，今复有此授，乡里以此为荣耀。
English: Liu Xiong has been the county magistrate, and now he has this award, which is an honor for the township.

古文：四年，从柱国李穆出轵关，攻邵州等城，拔之。
现代文：四年，随柱国李穆出轵关，攻邵州等城，攻占了它们。
English: In four years, he followed the pillar country Li Mu out of Shaoguan, attacked Shaozhou and other cities, and conquered them.

古文：以功获赏。
现代文：因功获赏
English: Rewarded for meritorious service

古文：五，皇太子西征吐谷浑，雄自凉州从滕王逌率军先入浑境，去伏侯城二百余里，逌遣雄先至城东举火，与大军相应。
现代文：五年，皇太子西征吐谷浑，刘雄自凉州随滕王宇文迪率军先入吐谷浑境，离伏侯城二百余里，宇文迪派刘雄先到城束纵火，响应大军。
English: In the fifth year, the crown prince Xi Zhaozhong entered the valley of Tuyun, and Liu Xiong from Liangzhou followed the army led by Teng Wang Uwendi and entered the valley of Tuyun first, more than two hundred miles away from Fuhou City. Uwendi sent Liu Xiong to the castle first to set fire to respond to the large army.

古文：浑洮王率七百余骑逆战。
现代文：吐谷浑洮王率七百余骑迎战。
English: More than seven hundred horsemen led by King Hunso of Tugu rode out to meet the battle.

古文：雄时所部数百人先并分遣斥候，在左右者二十许人。
现代文：当时刘雄所部数百人先已分派侦察布哨，身边衹留二十来人。
English: At that time, hundreds of people from Liu Xiong's headquarters had already been assigned to the reconnaissance sentry, and about twenty people were left behind.

古文：雄即率与交战，斩首七十余级，雄亦亡其三骑。
现代文：刘雄就率领他们与敌人交战，斩首七十余级，刘雄也丧失三个骑兵。
English: Liu Xiong then led them into battle with the enemy, beheading more than seventy of them. Liu Xiong also lost three cavalrymen.

古文：自是从逌连战之，雄功居多，赏物甚厚。
现代文：此后从宇文迪连战吐谷浑人，刘雄功劳居多，赏物甚厚。
English: Since then, Liu Xiong has received a great deal of praise for his service in the Battle of Uwendi against the Huns of Tugu.

古文：及军还，伊娄穆殿，为贼所围。
现代文：收军时，伊娄穆压后，被敌人包围。
English: At the time of the army's withdrawal, after the pressure of Imu, it was surrounded by the enemy.

古文：皇太子命雄救之。
现代文：皇太子命刘雄救他。
English: The crown prince ordered Liu Xiong to save him.

古文：雄率骑一千解穆围。
现代文：刘雄率千骑驰援，于是解除伊娄穆的包围。
English: Liu Xiong led thousands of horsemen to the rescue, thus lifting the siege of Yimou.

古文：增邑三百户，加上开府仪同三司。
现代文：增加食邑三百户，加授上开府仪同三司。
English: Three hundred households of food villages will be added, and the ceremony of opening the government and the three departments will be awarded.

古文：其年，大军东讨，雄从齐王宪拔洪洞，下永安。
现代文：这 年，大军束讨高齐，刘雄从齐王宇文塞夺取逃回，攻占丞壁。
English: In this year, Liu Xiong led a large army to Gaoqi, captured and fled back from the king of Qi, Yu Wensai, and captured the wall.

古文：军还，仍与宪回援晋州。
现代文：回军时，又与皇塞塞绕道支援晋州。
English: When he returned to the army, he made a detour with Emperor Xie to support Jinzhou.

古文：未至，齐后主已率大兵亲自攻围，晋州垂陷。
现代文：未至，齐后主已率大兵亲自攻围，晋州快陷落了。
English: Prior to this, the lord of Qihuang had personally led the soldiers to attack and besiege, and Jinzhou was about to fall.

古文：宪遣雄先往察其军势。
现代文：宇文宪派刘雄前往察看敌人的军势。
English: Yu Wenxian sent Liu Xiong to inspect the enemy's military situation.

古文：雄乃率步骑千人，鸣鼓角，遥报城中。
现代文：刘雄于是率领步兵骑兵千人，呜鼓吹角，令城中得闻。
English: Liu Xiong then led a thousand infantry and cavalry to blow the trumpet, which was heard in the city.

古文：寻而高祖兵至，齐主遁走。
现代文：不久高祖兵到，齐主退走。
English: Soon after, Gao Zu's soldiers arrived, and the leaders retreated.

古文：从平并州，拜上大将军，进爵赵郡公，邑二千户，旧封回授一子。
现代文：从征平定并州，官拜上大将军，晋爵趟郡公，食邑二千户，旧封转授一子。
English: From the conquest and annexation of the state, the official worship of the general, the promotion of the peerage to the county, the food village of two thousand households, and the transfer of the old title to one son.

古文：明年，从平邺城，进柱国。
现代文：次年，从征平定邺城，晋升柱国。
English: The following year, it was promoted to a pillar state after conquering and leveling Shicheng.

古文：其年，从齐王宪总北讨稽胡。
现代文：那年又随齐王宇文宪率兵北讨稽胡。
English: In the same year, Wang Uwen, accompanied by the gendarmerie, led the soldiers to the north to discuss Jihu.

古文：军还，出镇幽州。
现代文：军回，出镇幽州。
English: Back from the army, out of the town of Yuzhou.

古文：宣政元年四月，突厥寇幽州，拥略居民。
现代文：宣苏元年四月，塞腿入侵幽业，抓人抢物。
English: In April of the first year of Xuan Su's reign, Jie Jie invaded Youye and grabbed people and things.

古文：雄出战，为突厥所围，临阵战殁。
现代文：型雄出战，被塞腿包围，临阵战死。
English: Katao went into battle, was encircled by the leg blockers, and died in the battle.

古文：赠亳州总管、七州诸军事、亳州刺史。
现代文：赠衔台业总管、七州诸军事、亳州刺史。
English: He was awarded the titles of the General Manager of Taiwan Industry, the Military Commander of the Seven Provinces, and the Military Historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：子升嗣。
现代文：子刘升承袭爵禄。
English: His son Liu Sheng inherited the peerage.

古文：以雄死王事，大象末，授仪同大将军。
现代文：因型雄为国捐躯，大象末年，型昱荫授仪同大将军。
English: Because of the male form, he sacrificed his life for the country, and at the end of the elephant's life, the male form was awarded with the title of general.

古文：侯植字仁干，上谷人也。
现代文：尽擅字仁整，是上查人。
English: If you are good at spelling and grammar, you are a high-ranking official.

古文：燕散骑常侍龛之八世孙。
现代文：他是恋厘散骑常侍堡垒的八世孙。
English: He is the eighth-generation descendant of the fortress's most famous warrior.

古文：高祖恕，魏北地郡守。
现代文：高祖蝗恕，为魏韭衄守。
English: Gao Zu locusts, for the Wei Dynasty.

古文：子孙因家于北地之三水，遂为州郡冠族。
现代文：因而子孙在韭迤的三丞安家，于是成为州郡豪门世族。
English: As a result, his children and grandchildren settled in Sanjo, Gifu, and became a member of the family of powerful families in the prefecture.

古文：父欣，州刺史、奉义县公。
现代文：父堡腿，是童业刺史、奉义县公。
English: His father, Castle Leg, was a child prodigy and the governor of Bongye County.

古文：植少倜傥，有大节，容貌奇伟，武艺绝伦。
现代文：堡擅自少洒脱不羁，有大节，容貌奇伟，武艺绝伦。
English: The castle is free and uninhibited, with a large section, a magnificent appearance, and excellent martial arts.

古文：正光中，起家奉朝请。
现代文：正光年间，从家中被征召出来任奉朝请。
English: During the reign of Masamitsu, he was called up from his home to serve as a court usher.

古文：寻而天下丧乱，群盗蜂起，植乃散家财，率募勇敢讨贼。
现代文：不久天下丧乱，盗贼蜂起，侯植于是散发家财，率募勇士讨贼。
English: Soon after, the whole country was in turmoil, and the thieves rose up. Therefore, Hou Zhi distributed his family's wealth and recruited warriors to fight the thieves.

古文：以功拜统军，迁清河郡守。
现代文：因功官拜统军，升任清河郡守。
English: He was promoted to Qinghe County Governor for his meritorious service to the United Front.

古文：后从贺拔岳讨万俟丑奴等，每有战功，除义州刺史。
现代文：后随贺拔岳征讨万俟丑奴等，常有战功，授任盏业刺史。
English: Later, with He Baduyue's conquest of Manchukuo, he was awarded the title of "Professor of History" for his frequent military exploits.

古文：在州甚有政绩，为夷夏所怀。
现代文：在州甚有政绩，为夷夏百姓所拥戴。
English: He has made a lot of political achievements in the prefecture and is well-liked by the people of Yixia.

古文：及齐神武逼洛阳，植从魏孝武西迁。
现代文：及齐神武帝兵逼迢盟，僮擅跟从魏孝武帝西迁。
English: and Emperor Qishenwu's soldiers forced him to move to the west, and he followed Emperor Wei Xiaowu.

古文：大统元年，授骠骑将军、都督，赐姓侯伏侯氏。
现代文：太统元年，授任骠骑将军、都督，赐姓侯伏堡区。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was awarded the posts of general of cavalry and governor of the capital, and was given the surname of Houfubo.

古文：从太祖破沙苑，战河桥，进大都督，加左光禄大夫。
现代文：跟从左担破边兹，战困，晋升为大都督，加左光禄大夫。
English: He followed from the left shoulder to break through the border, the war was in trouble, he was promoted to the grand governor, and he was promoted to the doctor of the left light.

古文：凉州刺史宇文仲和据州作逆，植从开府独孤信讨擒之，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，封肥城县公，邑一千户。又赐姓贺屯。
现代文：凉州刺史宇文仲和据州作乱，堡擅跟从开府独孤信讨伐并擒获了他，授任车骑大将军、仪同三司，封肥城县公，食邑一千户，又赐姓画迤。
English: Liangzhou assassin Yu Wenzhong and Guizhou rioted, and the castle followed the Kaifu Duyukin to fight and capture him. He was awarded the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the county seat of Feicheng County, a thousand households of food villages, and the surname of painting.

古文：魏恭帝元年，从于谨平江陵，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐奴婢一百口，别封一子汧源县伯。
现代文：魏莶壹元年，跟从于谨平定江仅，晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐奴婢一百人，另封一子沂源县伯。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he followed Yu Jianping Dingjiang only to be promoted to the general of the cavalry, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, the one hundred slaves and maidservants, and the one son of Yuyuan County.

古文：六官建，拜司仓下大夫。
现代文：朝廷建置六官时，授司仓下大夫。
English: When the Imperial Court created six offices, the position of Jushi-Kangashita-Daifu was created.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵郡公，增邑通前二千户。
现代文：耋闵帝登位时，晋爵郡公，增加食邑累计达二千产。
English: When Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, he increased the number of counties and prefectures to a total of two thousand.

古文：时帝幼冲，晋公护执政，植从兄龙恩为护所亲任。
现代文：当时皇帝年幼，晋公字文护执政，侯植堂兄龙恩为宇文护所亲信。
English: At that time, the emperor was young and Jin Gong, also known as Wen Rong, was in power. Hou Zhi's cousin Long En was a close confidant of Wen Rong.

古文：及护诛赵贵，而诸宿将等多不自安。
现代文：及宇文护诛赵贵，诸老将多不白安。
English: As well as Yuwen's bodyguard Zhao Gui, the veterans are more than happy.

古文：植谓龙恩曰： 今主上春秋既富，安危系于数公。
现代文：侯植对龙恩说： 今主上年纪尚轻，国之安危全靠诸公。
English: Hou Zhi said to Long En: The Lord is still young, and the safety of the country depends entirely on the princes.

古文：共为唇齿，尚忧不济，况以纤介之间，自相夷灭！
现代文：休戚相依，尚忧不济，何必以细微隔阂，白相残杀!
English: It's not enough to support each other, but it's not enough to worry about each other. Why do we have to create subtle barriers and kill each other?

古文：植恐天下之人，因此解体。
现代文：我担心天下人因此解体。
English: I fear that the world will fall apart because of this.

古文：兄既受人任使，安得知而不言。 龙恩竟不能用。
现代文：吾兄既蒙重用，怎可知危不告? 龙恩没有采纳忠言。
English: How could my brother not tell me he was in danger when he had been used so many times? Long En did not take my advice.

古文：植又乘间言于护曰： 君臣之分，情均父子，理须同其休戚，期之始终。
现代文：侯植又乘机对晋公宇文护说： 君臣之分，情同父子，理当休戚与共，贯彻始终。
English: Hou Zhi also took the opportunity to say to Jin Gong Yu Wenyu: As far as princes and ministers are concerned, they are like father and son, and they should be in solidarity with each other, all the way through.

古文：明公以骨肉之亲，当社稷之寄，与存与亡，在于兹日。
现代文：明公以骨肉之亲，受社稷重托，存亡与共，在于今。
English: Ming Gong, as a flesh-and-blood relative, was entrusted by the company to survive and die together, and it is now.

古文：愿公推诚王室，拟迹伊、周，使国有泰山之安，家传世禄之盛，则率土之滨，莫不幸甚。 护曰： 我蒙太祖厚恩，且属当犹子，誓将以身报国，贤兄应见此心。
现代文：愿公推诚王室，学习伊尹、周公，使国运安如泰山，永保世禄之盛，则四方臣民，莫不幸甚。 宇文护说： 我蒙太祖厚恩，况且又是侄辈，誓将以身报国，贤兄当知我心。
English: May the king promote the sincerity of the royal family, learn from Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, make the national movement as safe as Mount Tai, and keep the prosperity of the world, then the four-party subjects will not be unhappy.Uwen You said: I have the great favor of the ancestors, and moreover, I am a nephew, I will swear to serve the country, and the wise brother should know my heart.

古文：卿今有是言，岂谓吾有他志耶。 又闻其先与龙恩言，乃阴忌之。
现代文：您如今说这话，莫非疑我有异志啊! 又得知他先前对龙恩讲的话，于是暗暗猜忌侯植。
English: When you say this now, there is no doubt that I have a dream! I also learned that he had previously spoken to Long En, so I secretly suspected Hou Zhi.

古文：植惧不免祸，遂以忧卒。
现代文：侯植怕大祸临头，竟愁苦而死。
English: Hou Zhi was afraid that a great calamity was about to happen, so he died of grief.

古文：赠大将军、光三州诸军事、平州刺史，谥曰节。
现代文：追赠大将军、平扬光三州诸军事、干州刺史。谧曰节。
English: The posthumous gift of the general, the military of the three states of the three states, and the history of the three states.

古文：子定嗣。
现代文：子侯定承袭爵禄。
English: His children are set to inherit the peerage.

古文：及护伏诛，龙恩与其弟大将军、武平公万寿并预其祸。
现代文：等到主塞谨被诛杀，童退与其弟大将军、逮王公万蠢全都牵连上祸殃。
English: By the time the chief was killed, Tongtai and his younger brothers, the general and the prince, were all implicated in the calamity.

古文：高祖治护事，知植忠于朝廷，乃特免其子孙。
现代文：产担审理室壬盏案，知锤忠于朝廷，于是特意赦免了他的子孙。
English: He was loyal to the imperial court and pardoned his children and grandchildren.

古文：定后位至车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：堡宣后位至车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: After the announcement of the castle, he was promoted to the general of the chariot and cavalry and the third division of the ceremony.

古文：史臣曰：王杰、王勇、宇文虬之徒，咸以果毅之姿，效节于扰攘之际，终能屠坚锐，立御侮之功，裂膏壤，据势位，固其宜也。
现代文：史臣曰：王杰、王勇、宇文虬这些人，都凭藉果敢刚毅的资质，在混乱的时节竭尽忠诚，最终能够攻破坚城倾覆劲旅，建立抗御侵侮的功勋，被分封土地，占据显赫的官位，本来就是应当的。
English: Shichen said: Wang Jie, Wang Yong, and Yu Wenyi, all of these people, by virtue of their courage and fortitude, have been loyal in the chaotic season, and finally able to break through the stronghold of the overthrow of the stronghold, establish the merit of resisting the encroachment, be assigned land, and occupy a prominent official position, which is what they should be.

古文：仲尼称 无求备于一人 ，信矣。
现代文：孔子说 不要对一个人苟求完备 ，确实如此。
English: Confucius said, "Don't look for perfection in a person," and it's true.

古文：夫文士怀温恭之操，其弊也懦弱；武夫禀刚烈之质，其失也敢悍。
现代文：文士怀有温良恭敬的情操，他们的缺陷是懦弱；武夫禀受刚烈的气质，他们的错失是粗悍。
English: Scribes have a gentle and respectful temperament, and their defect is cowardice; warriors have a tough temperament, and their fault is rough.

古文：故有使酒不逊之祸，拔剑争功之尤。
现代文：所以有藉酒使性、傲慢无礼、拔剑争功的过失。
English: Therefore, there is a fault of using alcohol to make sex, arrogance and rudeness, and drawing a sword to compete for merits.

古文：大则莫全其生，小则仅而获免。
现代文：情况严重的不能保全性命，情况较轻的侥幸得以免罪。
English: In serious cases, it is not possible to save lives, while in less serious cases, it is possible to be exonerated.

古文：耿豪、王勇，不其然乎。
现代文：耿豪、王勇，不就是这样吗?
English: Geng Hao, Wang Yong, isn't that how it goes?

