古文：范延光，字子环，鄴郡临漳人也。
现代文：范延光，字子环，邺郡临漳人。
English: Fan Yanguang, Zhizihuan, Linyi County, Linyi people.

古文：少隶于郡牙，唐明宗牧相州，收为亲校。
现代文：小时候在郡府干事，后唐明宗任相州长官时，收容为亲校。
English: When he was a child, he was a prefectural official, and later, when Tang Mingzong was a minister-governor, he was taken in by his school.

古文：同光中，明宗下郓州，梁兵屯杨刘口以扼之，先锋将康延孝潜使人送款于明宗。
现代文：同光年间，明宗攻下郓州，后梁军队驻扎在杨刘口以扼制明宗，梁军先锋将康延孝暗地派人与明宗讲和。
English: In the same year, the Ming Dynasty conquered Bozhou. Later, Liang's army was stationed in Yang Liukou to suppress the Ming Dynasty. The vanguard of Liang's army secretly sent Kang Yanxiao to make peace with the Ming Dynasty.

古文：明宗欲使人达机事于庄宗，方难其选，延光请行，遂以蜡书授之。
现代文：明宗想派人向庄宗传达这件事，正难于选择合适人选，范延光请求前去，明宗便以蜡封信交给他。
English: Mingzong wanted to send someone to tell Zhuangzong about this, but it was difficult to choose the right person. Fan Yanguang asked him to go, and Mingzong gave him a wax letter.

古文：延光既至，奏庄宗曰： 杨刘渡控扼已定，未可图也。
现代文：范延光到了之后，上奏庄宗说： 杨刘渡口已被牢牢控制住，不可图谋。
English: After Fan Yanguang arrived, Shangso Zhuangzong said: Yang Liu's crossing has been firmly controlled and cannot be attempted.

古文：请筑垒马家口，以通汶阳之路。 
现代文：请在马家口构筑营垒，以打通汶阳的道路。 
English: Please build a camp at Majiakou to open the road to Wenyang.

古文：庄宗从之，复遣归郓州。
现代文：庄宗听从他的意见，又派他回郓州。
English: Zhuang Zong listened to his advice and sent him back to Zhangzhou.

古文：俄而梁将王彦章攻马家口所筑新垒，明宗恐城中不备，又遣间行告庄宗，请益兵。
现代文：不多时，后梁将领王彦章进攻马家口所构筑的新营垒，明宗担心城中没有防备，又派他抄小路禀报庄宗，请求增派军队。
English: Not long after, the general Wang Yanzhang attacked the new camp built by Ma Jiakou. Mingzong was worried that there was no defense in the city, and sent him to report to Zhuangzong, requesting additional troops.

古文：中夜至河上，为梁兵所获，送夷门下狱，榜笞数百，威以白刃，终不泄其事。
现代文：他半夜走到黄河边上，被后梁军队抓获，送往夷门投入监牢，棒打几百下，用刀威胁，最终他都没有泄露这件事。
English: He walked to the edge of the Yellow River in the middle of the night, was captured by Hou Liang's army, sent to Yimen to be put in prison, beaten several hundred times with a stick, threatened with a knife, and ultimately he did not disclose the matter.

古文：复为狱吏所护，在狱半年，不复理问。
现代文：又受到狱吏的保护，在监狱里呆了半年，不再被提审追问。
English: He was also protected by prison guards and spent half a year in prison, and was no longer arraigned for questioning.

古文：及庄宗将至汴城，狱吏即去其桎梏，拜谢而出之，乃见于路侧。
现代文：当庄宗将到达汴城时，狱吏就除去了他的枷锁，拜揖道歉之后就放了他，还在路边为他送行。
English: When Zhuangzong was about to arrive in Handan, the prison officers removed his shackles, released him after he apologized, and saw him off on the side of the road.

古文：庄宗喜，授银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书。
现代文：庄宗高兴，任命他为银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书。
English: Zhuangzong was pleased and appointed him as the silver Qingguanglu doctor and inspector of the school inspection department.

古文：明宗登极，擢为宣徽使。
现代文：明宗即位，提拔他任宣徽使。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the post of heraldic envoy.

古文：与霍彦威平青州王公俨，迁检校司徒。
现代文：他与霍彦威一起平定青州王公俨，调任检校司徒。
English: Together with Huo Yanwei, he subdued the Qingzhou Wang Gongyi and was transferred to the post of school inspector.

古文：明宗之幸夷门也，至荥阳，闻硃守殷拒命，延光曰： 若不急攻，贼坚矣。请骑兵五百，臣先赴之，则人心必骇。 
现代文：明宗幸临夷门时，行至荥阳，听说朱守殷抗旨谋反，范延光说： 如不即刻进攻叛贼，贼寇就牢固了，请给五百骑兵，我先奔赴那里，他们必然人心惊骇。 
English: When Ming Zongxing was at the Yiwu Gate, he went to Fenyang. He heard that Zhu Shouyin was planning a rebellion. Fan Yanguang said: "If we don't attack the traitors immediately, the bandits will be strong. Please give me five hundred cavalry. I will go there first. They will certainly be shocked."

古文：明宗从其请。
现代文：明宗准允了他的请求。
English: Emperor Mingzong granted his request.

古文：延光自酉时至夜央，驰二百余里，奄至城下，与贼交斗。
现代文：范延光从酉时出发到半夜，驰骋二百多里，掩杀到城下，与贼兵交战。
English: Fan Yanguang set out from dusk to midnight, traveled more than two hundred miles, hid under the city, and fought with the bandits.

古文：翌日，守陴者望见乘舆，乃相率开门，延光先入，与贼巷战，至厚载门，尽歼其党，明宗喜之。
现代文：第二天，守城的人看见皇上御驾，便争着打开城门，范延光于是进入城内，与城中贼兵展开巷战，杀到厚载门，全部歼灭了叛军党羽，明宗十分高兴。
English: The next day, when the defenders of the city saw the emperor driving by, they fought to open the city gate. Fan Yanguang then entered the city, started a street battle with the thieves in the city, killed the thick gate, and completely wiped out the rebel party. Mingzong was very happy.

古文：明年，迁枢密使，权知镇州军府事，寻正授节旄，加检校太保。
现代文：第二年，迁任枢密使，临时主管镇州军府事务，不久正式授任为节度使，加封检校太保。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the post of Privy Envoy, temporarily in charge of the affairs of the Zhenzhou Military Government, and soon he was officially appointed to the post of the Festival Envoy, as well as the post of the Inspector of Schools.

古文：长兴中，以安重诲得罪，再入为枢密使，加同平章事。
现代文：长兴年间，因安重诲获罪，再次入朝任枢密使，加封同平章事。
English: During the reign of Changxing, he was convicted of disturbing the peace and was re-appointed to the imperial court as a privy envoy. He was also awarded the title of nongpyeong.

古文：既而以秦王从荣不轨，恐及其祸，屡请外任，明宗久之方许，遂出镇常山。
现代文：接着，因秦王李从荣图谋不轨，范延光担心祸及自身，多次请求出朝外任，明宗过了很久才答应，于是出镇常山。
English: Then, because Qin King Li Zongrong was plotting and scheming, Fan Yanguang was worried about the calamity and himself, and repeatedly requested to be sent to the outside world. It took Mingzong a long time to agree, so he left the town of Changshan.

古文：清泰中，复诏为枢密使，未几，出为汴州节度使。
现代文：清泰年间，又被召回担任枢密使，不多时，便外出担任汴州节度使。
English: During the Qing and Thai dynasties, he was recalled to serve as a privy envoy, and not long after, he went out to serve as an envoy of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：会魏府屯将张令昭逐其帅刘延皓，据城以叛，唐末帝命延光讨而平之，遂授鄴都留守，加检校太师、兼中书令。
现代文：碰上魏府屯将张令昭赶走统帅刘延皓，据城叛乱，唐末帝命令范延光讨伐平定，任命他为邺都留守，加检校太师、兼中书令。
English: When Zhang Ling Zhao drove the commander Liu Yanqi out of Weifutun, according to the city's rebellion, the last emperor of Tang ordered Fan Yanguang to fight and pacify, appointed him to stay in the capital, and promoted him to the post of inspector of schools and the post of chancellor.

古文：门下有术士张生者，自云妙通术数，当延光微时，言将来必为将相，延光既贵，酷信其言。
现代文：他的门下有个叫张生的术士，自称精通术数，当范延光卑微时，预言将来必定成为将相，范延光显贵之后，非常相信他的话，历任数镇，都把他带着安置在上等馆舍中。
English: Under his tutelage was a sorcerer named Zhang Sheng, who claimed to be proficient in magic numbers. When Fan Yanguang was lowly, the prediction was that he would become a general in the future. After Fan Yanguang became a dignitary, he believed in his words so much that successive towns took him and placed him in high-ranking buildings.

古文：历数镇，尝馆于上舍，延光谓之曰： 余梦大蛇，自脐入腹，半而掣去之，是何祥也？ 
现代文：范延光对他说： 我梦见一条大蛇，从肚脐眼进入腹中，进到一半后又把它拉出丢开，这是什么预兆？ 
English: Fan Yanguang said to him, "I dreamt that a big snake entered my belly through my navel, and when it was halfway inside, I pulled it out and threw it away. What is the omen?"

古文：张生曰： 蛇者龙也，入腹为帝王之兆明矣。 
现代文：张生说： 蛇这东西，属于龙类，进入腹中显然是帝王君主的预兆。 
English: Zhang Sheng said, "This snake, which belongs to the dragon family, entering the belly is obviously an omen of the emperor.

古文：延光自是稍萌僭窃之意。
现代文：范延光从此逐渐萌生非份窃位之想。
English: From then on, Fan Yanguang gradually began to think about stealing the position.

古文：及高祖建义于太原，唐末帝遣延光以本部二万屯辽州，与赵延寿掎角合势，及延寿兵败，延光促还，故心不自安。
现代文：到晋高祖在太原树立义旗，唐末帝派范延光率领所部二万兵士屯守辽州，与赵延寿构成掎角合围之势，当赵延寿战败后，范延光急忙退回，因此心中不安。
English: When Emperor Jin Gao Zu set up a banner of righteousness in Taiyuan, the late Tang Emperor sent Fan Yanguang to lead 20,000 soldiers to defend Liaozhou, forming a close encirclement with Zhao Yanshou. When Zhao Yanshou was defeated, Fan Yanguang hurriedly returned, so he was uneasy.

古文：高祖入洛，寻封临清王，以宽其反侧。
现代文：高祖进入洛都，即封他为临清王，以此来缓和他的反叛。
English: Gaozu entered Lodu and was crowned the King of Linqing in order to appease his rebellion.

古文：后延光擅杀齐州防御使秘琼，而聚兵部下，复收部内刺史入城，高祖甚疑之，乃东幸夷门。
现代文：后来范延光擅自杀死齐州防御使秘琼，而把兵马收容在自己部下，又接纳所部刺史进入齐州城，高祖对他非常怀疑，便东往夷门。
English: Later, Fan Yanguang killed himself without permission in order to prevent the invasion of Qizhou, but he kept the soldiers and horses under his command. He also allowed the commander to enter the city of Qizhou. Gaozu was very suspicious of him and went to Yimen.

古文：时延光有牙校孙锐者，与延光有乡曲之旧，军机民政，一以委焉。
现代文：当时范延光有个叫孙锐的牙校，与范延光是同乡故旧，军机民政，一概委托给他。
English: At that time, Fan Yanguang had a dental school named Sun Rui, and Fan Yanguang was a fellow countryman. Military and civil affairs were all entrusted to him.

古文：故魏博六州之赋，无半钱上供，符奏之间，有不如意者，锐即对延光毁之，其凶戾也如此。
现代文：所以魏博六州的赋税，没有半文钱上缴，在与朝廷的交涉之中，有不如己意的，孙锐就在范延光面前加以诋毁，其凶悍暴戾就是这样。
English: Therefore, the taxation of the six states of Weibo did not have a penny to pay, and in the negotiations with the imperial court, it was not as good as he wanted. Sun Rui denigrated it in front of Fan Yanguang, and his ferocious violence was just like that.

古文：《通鉴》云：延光以冯晖为都部署，以孙锐为兵马都监。
现代文：当初，朝廷派使臣封范延光为临清王时，因宴请臣僚，范延光突然得病，卧病十来天，孙锐便暗地里煽动小人，召来澶州刺史冯晖等，逼迫范延光叛逆，范延光也被术士张生的话所蛊惑，因而听从了他们。
English: At first, when the imperial court sent an envoy to anoint Fan Yanguang as the king of Linqing, Fan Yanguang suddenly fell ill due to a banquet for his ministers and was bedridden for ten days. Sun Rui secretly incited villains and summoned Zhangzhou assassin Feng Qi and others to force Fan Yanguang to rebel. Fan Yanguang was also bewitched by the words of the sorcerer Zhang Sheng, so he obeyed them.

古文：时锐以女妓十余辈从之，拥盖操扇，必歌吹而后食，将士烦热，睹之解体，寻为王师所败，贼众退还鄴城。
现代文：天福二年夏六月，范延光派孙锐和冯晖率领二万步骑，南行抵达黎阳。当时孙锐让十几个女妓跟随，拥着车盖拿着羽扇，一定要歌舞之后才吃饭，将帅士兵都烦闷躁动，见后斗志瓦解，不久便被朝廷军队打败，贼军退回邺城。
English: In the summer of June of the second year of Tianfu, Fan Yanguang sent Sun Rui and Feng Xuan to ride southbound at 20,000 paces, arriving in Liyang. At that time, Sun Rui had more than a dozen prostitutes follow him, hugging the car cover and holding a feather fan. They must not eat until after singing and dancing. The soldiers were restless and restless. After seeing this, their fighting spirit collapsed. Soon they were defeated by the imperial army, and the invaders returned to Licheng.

古文：高祖继遣杨光远讨之，延光知事不济，乃杀孙锐以归其罪，发人赍表待罪，且邀姑息，高祖不许。
现代文：高祖接着派杨光远讨伐，范延光知道事情不能成功，便杀孙锐以推脱谋反的罪过，并打发人带降表入朝认罪，并要求朝廷姑息宽容，高祖不予答应。
English: Gaozhu then sent Yang Guangyuan to fight. Fan Yanguang knew that the matter could not succeed, so he killed Sun Rui to shirk the crime of plotting a rebellion, and sent someone with a written confession to the court, and asked the court to be lenient and tolerant. Gaozhu did not agree.

古文：及经岁受围，城中饥窘，高祖以师老民劳，思解其役，遣谒者入谓之曰： 卿既危蹙，破在旦夕。能返掌转规，改节归我，我当以大籓处之。如降而杀之，则何以享国？
现代文：到被围一年多，城里饥荒窘迫，高祖也因军队疲惫，百姓劳苦，准备化解这次战役，便派使者进城对范延光说： 你已经十分危急了，攻破城池是早晚的事，如能改弦更辙，洗心革面归顺我，我当用大的藩镇来安置你；如果你归顺后我杀掉了你，那怎么能享有国家呢？
English: After being besieged for more than a year, the city was starving and in distress. Gaozu, also due to the exhaustion of the army and the hardships of the people, was preparing to resolve this battle. He sent an envoy to the city to say to Fan Yanguang: You are already in a very critical situation. Breaking through the city is a matter of time. If you can change your course, wash your heart and face, and surrender to me, I should use a large town to settle you. If you surrender and I kill you, then how can you enjoy the country?

古文：明明白日，可质是言。 
现代文：苍天在上，可为这话作证。 
English: Heaven and earth can testify to this.

古文：因赐铁券，改封高平郡王，移镇太平。
现代文：因此赏赐给他可免死罪的丹契铁券，改封为高平郡王，移镇天平。
English: As a result, he was awarded the Danchi Iron Coupon, which exempted him from the death penalty, and his title was changed to the King of Takahira County, and he moved to the town of Tenpyo.

古文：延光谓门人李式曰： 主上敦信明义，言无不践，许以不死，则不死矣。 
现代文：范延光对门客李式说 ：主上敦信明义，从不食言，答应不处死我，我就一定不会被处死。 
English: Fan Yanguang said to his disciple Li Shiguo, "Lord, I believe in the Lord, I never go back on my word, I promise not to execute me, I will not be executed."

古文：因撤去守备，《通鉴》：延光犹迁延未决，宣徽南院使刘处让复入谕之，延光意乃决。素服请降。
现代文：便撤除守备，穿着素服请求投降。
English: He then removed his armor and, dressed in plain clothes, asked for surrender.

古文：及赴汶上，逾月入觐。
现代文：及奔赴汶水后，过了一个多月入朝觐见。
English: and rushed to Wenshui. More than a month later, they met at the Imperial Palace.

古文：寻表请罢免，高祖再三答谕方允，制以延光为太子太师致仕。居阙下期岁，高祖每召赐饮宴，待之与群臣无间。
现代文：不久上表请求免除官职，诏令范延光以太子太师退休。居在京城一年，高祖常常召唤赐宴，待他与群臣没有差别。
English: Soon after, Gaozu requested to be exempted from his official duties, and the emperor ordered Fan Yanguang to retire from the position of Grand Master. Gaozu lived in the capital for a year, and often called for a banquet. There was no difference between him and his vassals.

古文：一日，从容上奏，愿就河阳私邸，以便颐养，高祖许之。延光携妻子辇奇货从焉，每过郡邑，多为关吏所纠。
现代文：一天，范延光从容上奏，希望回到河阳私宅，以颐养天年，高祖答应了他，范延光携妻带子，用车子装着奇物宝货相属而行，每过一个州郡，大都被守关官吏所纠查。
English: One day, Fan Yanguang calmly played, hoping to return to the private house in Heyang to take care of the elderly, Gao Zu agreed to him. Fan Yanguang took his wife's belt and used the car to carry the strange treasures. Every time he passed a state and county, he was mostly pestered by customs officials.

古文：时杨光远居守洛下，兼领孟、怀，既利其财，复渐测朝廷密旨，遂奏云： 延光国之奸臣，若不羁縻，必北出塞，南入吴，请召令西都居止。 
现代文：这时，杨光远镇守洛阳，兼管孟、怀二州，既贪图范延光的钱财，又逐渐探明朝廷密旨，于是上奏道： 范延光是国家的奸臣，如果不管束牵制他，一定向北逃往胡地，或向南奔往吴国，请令他到西都居住。 
English: At this time, Yang Guangyuan was in charge of Luoyang, and also in charge of Meng and Huai two states. He coveted Fan Yanguang's money and gradually discovered the secret of the imperial court. Therefore, he said: Fan Yanguang is a treacherous vassal of the state. If he is not restrained, he must flee to the north to Hu Di, or to the south to Wu Guo. Please let him live in Xidu.

古文：高祖允之。
现代文：高祖准允了。
English: Gaozu agreed.

古文：光远使其子承勋以兵环其第，逼令自裁。
现代文：杨光远派他的儿子杨承勋率兵围住范延光的宅第，逼迫他自杀。
English: Yang Guangyuan sent his son Yang Chengxun and his soldiers to surround Fan Yanquan's house and force him to commit suicide.

古文：延光曰： 明天子在上，赐金书许我不死，尔之父子何得胁制如此？ 
现代文：范延光说： 圣明天子在上，赏赐我丹书铁券，准我不死，你们父子怎能如此威胁？ 
English: Fan Yanguang said, "Holy Son of the Morning Star is above, bestow on me the Iron Voucher, grant me immortality. How can your father and son make such a threat?"

古文：明旦，则以白刃驱之，令上马之浮桥，排于水中。
现代文：第二天早晨，杨承勋则用刀剑驱赶他们，命令他上马走到浮桥上，推入水中。
English: The next morning, Yang Chengxun drove them away with his sword and ordered him to mount his horse, walk onto the pontoon bridge and push it into the water.

古文：光远绐奏云： 延光投河自溺而死。 
现代文：杨光远欺骗上奏朝廷说 ：范延光自己投河淹死了。 
English: Yang Guangyuan lied to the imperial court and said: Fan Yanguang drowned himself by jumping into the river.

古文：水运军使曹千获其尸于郡东缪家滩。
现代文：水运军使曹千在郡城东面的缪家滩找到了范延光的尸体。
English: The water transport army sent Cao Qian to find Fan Yanguang's body at Mujiatang on the east side of the county seat.

古文：高祖闻之，辍朝二日，诏许归葬于鄴，仍赠太师。
现代文：高祖听说后，停止上朝二天，下诏准许送回安葬在邺都，又追赠他为太师。
English: After hearing this, Gaozu stopped his journey to the capital for two days, and was allowed to be sent back to the capital for burial. He was also posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：延光初为近臣，及领重镇，礼贤接士，动皆由礼，故甚获当时之誉。
现代文：范延光从开始担任皇帝身边的臣子，到统领重镇、接待贤者士人，都以礼相待，所以很是得到当时的赞誉。
English: From serving as a courtier at the emperor's side, to commanding an important town and receiving sages, Fan Yanguang treated everyone with courtesy, so he was highly praised at the time.

古文：车驾幸汴，遣兼洛京巡检使。
现代文：而在镇守常山的时候，却因部下将领梁汉唐得到王都的名马，他治了梁汉唐的罪而获取了名马。
English: However, when he was in charge of the town of Changshan, his subordinate general, Liang Hantang, received the famous horse of the capital because he cured Liang Hantang's crime and obtained the famous horse.

古文：张从宾作乱，令延播知河南府事。从宾败，伏诛。
现代文：在魏州的时候，当齐州防御使秘琼得到了董温琪的珠玉金帛妓妾，经过他的辖境时，他又杀了秘琼，夺取财物妓妾，舆论因此指责他。
English: During his time in Weizhou, when the defense of Qizhou enabled He Qiong to get Dong Wenqi's precious gold and enamel prostitute, when passing through his jurisdiction, he killed He Qiong and seized the prostitute's property, and the public opinion blamed him for it.

古文：杨光远，小字阿檀，及长，止名檀，唐天成中，以明宗改御名为亶，以偏傍字犯之，始改名光远，字德明，其先沙陀部人也。
现代文：等到因害怕获罪而谋反后，又忍受耻辱苛且偷生，不能引决自杀，以至于死于非命，怎么会有这等懦夫！杨光远，小时字阿檀，长大后，只叫檀，后唐天成年间，明宗改御名为，因他名字的偏旁与御名相犯，才改名光远，字德明，他的祖先是沙陀人。
English: How can there be such cowards! Yang Guangyuan, whose childhood name was Adan, was only called "Dang" when he grew up. After he became an adult in the Tang Dynasty, he changed his name to Mingzong, and because his middle name conflicted with his given name, he changed his name to Guangyuan, whose family name was Deming. His ancestors were Sadu people.

古文：父阿噔啜，后改名瑊，事唐武皇为队长。
现代文：父亲阿噔啜，后改名王咸，事奉唐武皇担任队长。
English: His father, Aqisul, later changed his name to Wang Xian and served Tang Emperor Wu as a captain.

古文：光远事庄宗为骑将，唐天祐中，庄宗遣振武节度使周德威讨刘守光于幽州，因令光远隶于德威麾下。
现代文：杨光远事奉庄宗担任骑将，唐天年间，庄宗派振武军节度使周德威到幽州讨伐刘守光，便让杨光远划归在周德威部下。
English: Yang Guangyuan served Zhuangzong as a cavalry commander. During the Tang Dynasty, Zhuangzong sent Zhenwu's army to Yuzhou to fight Liu Shuguang, so Yang Guangyuan was assigned to Zhou Dewei.

古文：后与德威拒契丹于新州，一军以深入致败，因伤其臂，遂废，罢于家。
现代文：后来又与周德威一起在新州抵御契丹，他率领一支军队深入敌阵而战败，因臂膀受伤，于是成了残废，免官居家。
English: Later, together with Zhou Dewei, he resisted the Khitan in Xinzhou. He led an army deep into the enemy lines and was defeated. Because of his arm injury, he became disabled and was dismissed from his post.

古文：庄宗即位，思其战功，命为幽州马步军都指挥使、检校尚书右仆射，戍瓦桥关久之。
现代文：庄宗即位，记念他的战功，任命他为幽州马步军都指挥使、检校尚书右仆射，长期戍守瓦桥关。
English: Zhuangzong ascended the throne, and in memory of his war exploits, he appointed him as the commanding officer of the Yuzhou Horse and Foot Troops, and the inspector of the school, Shang Shuxu, and the long-term keeper of the tile bridge.

古文：明宗朝，历妫、瀛、易、冀四州刺史。
现代文：明宗朝，历任妫、瀛、易、冀四州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mingzong, the four prefectures of Shandong, Fujian, Yunnan, and Hebei made history.

古文：光远虽不识字，然有口辩，通于吏理，在郡有政声，明宗颇重之。
现代文：杨光远虽然不识字，但有口才，精通为官之道，在州郡有政绩名望，明宗很器重他。
English: Although Yang Guangyuan was illiterate, he had eloquence, was proficient in the way of government, and had political achievements and reputation in the county. Mingsong highly valued him.

古文：长兴中，契丹有中山之败，生擒其将扎拉等数十人，送于阙下，其后契丹既通和，遣使乞归之，明宗与大臣谋议，特放还蕃。
现代文：长兴年间，契丹在中山被打败，活捉了李和等将领几十人，送到朝廷，后来与契丹互通和好之后，契丹派使臣乞请送还李和等人，明宗与大臣谋划商议，准备特赦放回蕃地。
English: During the Changxing period, the Khitan were defeated in Zhongshan, and dozens of generals such as Li He were captured alive and sent to the imperial court. Later, after the reconciliation with the Khitan, the Khitan sent envoys to beg for the return of Li He and others. Mingzong and the minister discussed the plan and prepared an amnesty to return them to Shantian.

古文：一日，召光远于便殿言其事，光远曰： 扎拉等北土之善战者，彼失之如丧手足；又在此累年，备谙中国事，若放还非便。 
现代文：一天，明宗在便殿召见杨光远谈起这件事，杨光远说： 李和等是北蕃善于打仗的人，他们失去了李和等人就像丧失了手足一样，再加上这些人在朝廷有了好几年，备知中原的情况；如果放归是没有好处的。 
English: One day, Mingzong summoned Yang Guangyuan in the hall to discuss the matter. Yang Guangyuan said: Li He and others were good at fighting in Beilun. Losing Li He and others was like losing a limb. Plus, these people had been in the imperial court for several years, so they knew the situation in the Central Plains. If they were released, there would be no benefit.

古文：明宗曰： 蕃人重盟誓，既通欢好，必不相负。 
现代文：明宗说： 蕃人看重盟约誓言，既然已经通好和欢，一定不会背约的。 
English: Mingzong said: "Han people attach great importance to the oath of the covenant, since they have been friendly and happy, they will not violate the covenant.

古文：光远曰： 臣恐后悔不及也。 
现代文：杨光远说： 我担心将来后悔莫及啊。 
English: Yang Guangyuan said: I'm worried that I'll regret it in the future.

古文：明宗遂止，深嘉其抗直。
现代文：明宗便中止了这件事，很是嘉奖他的耿直。
English: Mingzong then suspended the matter, much to his chagrin.

古文：后自振武节度使移镇中山，累加检校太傅，将兵戍蔚州。
现代文：后来从振武节度使调镇中山，加封检校太傅，率军戍守蔚州。
English: Later, he transferred the town of Zhongshan from Zhenwu Jiedu, added a seal inspection school taifu, and led the army to defend Ulshu.

古文：高祖举义于太原，唐末帝遣光远与张敬达屯兵于城下，俄而契丹大至，为其所败，围其寨久之，军中粮绝，光远乃与次将安审琦等杀敬达，拥众归命。
现代文：晋高祖在太原举义，唐末帝派杨光远与张敬达屯兵太原城下，不多时，契丹军队大量到来，唐军被契丹人打败，契丹人长久地围困了唐军的营寨，军中粮尽，杨光远便与副将安审琦杀掉了张敬达，带着众人投降晋军。
English: Emperor Jin Gao Zu raised the banner in Taiyuan. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor sent Yang Guangyuan and Zhang Jingda to garrison the city of Taiyuan. Soon, the Khitan army arrived in large numbers. The Tang army was defeated by the Khitan. The Khitan besieged the camp of the Tang army for a long time. The army ran out of food. Yang Guangyuan then killed Zhang Jingda with the vice-commander An Ji, and surrendered to the Jin army with everyone.

古文：从高祖入洛，加检校太尉，充宣武军节度使、同平章事，判六军诸卫事。
现代文：后跟随晋高祖进入洛阳，加封检校太尉，兼宣武军节度使、同平章事，判六军诸卫事。
English: Later, he followed his father-in-law into Luoyang, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the inspection of the school, and was also appointed as the messenger of the proclamation of the festival of the armed forces, the official of the same rank, and the guard of the six armies.

古文：是时，光远每对高祖，常悒然不乐，高祖虑有不足，密遣近臣讯之。
现代文：这时，杨光远每次面对高祖，常显得忧郁不高兴，高祖认为他有不能满足的事，秘密派贴身侍臣询问他。
English: At this time, every time Yang Guangyuan confronted Gaozu, he often appeared melancholy and unhappy. Gaozu thought that he had something he could not satisfy, and secretly sent a close attendant to inquire about him.

古文：光远附奏曰： 臣贵为将相，非有不足，但以张生铁死得其所，臣弗如也，衷心内愧，是以不乐。 
现代文：杨光远捎信上奏 ：我贵为将相，没有不满足的，只因张生铁死得其所，我不如他，心中内疚，因此不高兴。 
English: Yang Guangyuan's letter began, "I am a valuable general, and I am not dissatisfied, only because Zhang Shengtie died in his place. I am not as good as him, and I feel guilty, so I am not happy."

古文：生铁，盖敬达之小字也。
现代文：生铁，是张敬达的小字。
English: "Shengfei" is Zhang Jingda's nickname.

古文：高祖闻其言，以光远为忠纯之最者也。
现代文：高祖听了他的话，认为杨光远最有诚心纯情。
English: Gaozu listened to his words and thought that Yang Guangyuan was the most sincere and pure.

古文：其实光远故为其言，以邀高祖之重信也。
现代文：其实杨光远是故意说这些话，以获取高祖的完全信任。
English: In fact, Yang Guangyuan deliberately said these words in order to gain Gao Zu's complete trust.

古文：明年，范延光据鄴城叛，高祖命光远率师讨之。将济河，会滑州军乱，时军众欲推光远为主。
现代文：第二年，范延光凭借邺城叛乱，高祖命令杨光远率兵讨伐，将要渡过黄河，又碰上滑州军队叛乱，当时军中士众想推举杨光远为君主。
English: In the second year, Fan Yanguang took advantage of the rebellion in Lucheng, Gao Zu ordered Yang Guangyuan to lead the troops in the crusade, and they were about to cross the Yellow River. They also encountered the rebellion of the army in Nanzhou. At that time, the army sergeants wanted to elect Yang Guangyuan as the monarch.

古文：光远曰： 自古有折臂天子乎？
现代文：杨光远说 ：从古至今有断臂的天子吗？
English: Yang Guangyuan said, "Has there ever been a divine son with a broken arm since ancient times?"

古文：且天子岂公辈贩弄之物？
现代文：再说，天子难道是你们这些人随意改换玩弄的东西？
English: Besides, isn't the Son of God something you people change and play with at will?

古文：晋阳之降，乃势所穷迫，今若为之，直反贼也。 
现代文：我在晋阳投降，那是受形势所逼，现在如果再那样做，当是反叛贼寇。 
English: I surrendered in Jinyang, it was forced by the situation, now if you do that again, you are a rebel thief.

古文：由是其下惕然，无复言者。
现代文：从此他的部下提心吊胆，不再说这事。
English: From then on, his men were too afraid to speak of it.

古文：高祖闻之，尤加宠重。
现代文：高祖听说后，更加宠幸重用他。
English: When Gaozu heard about it, he was even more pleased to reuse it.

古文：光远既围延光，寻授魏博行府节度使。
现代文：杨光远包围范延光之后，不久被任命为魏博行府节度使。
English: After Yang Guangyuan encircled Fan Yanguang, he was soon appointed as Wei Bo's envoy to the capital.

古文：兵柄在手，以为高祖惧己，稍干预朝政，或抗有所奏，高祖亦曲从之。
现代文：他兵权在握，认为高祖害怕自己，逐渐开始干预朝政，有时违抗朝命上奏，高祖也屈从他。
English: He held military power in his hands and believed that Gaozu was afraid of him. He gradually began to interfere in court politics, sometimes defying court orders. Gaozu also submitted to him.

古文：复下诏以其子承祚尚长安公主，次子承信皆授美官。恩渥殊等，为当时之冠。
现代文：又下诏让他的儿子杨承祚娶长安公主为妻，次子杨承信等也都任命为美官，恩泽非同一般，为当时之冠。
English: He also issued an edict to let his son Yang Chengyao marry Princess Chang'an, and his second son Yang Chengxin and others were also appointed as beauty officials. The reward was extraordinary and was the crowning glory of the time.

古文：桑维翰为枢密使，往往弹射其事，光远心衔之。
现代文：桑维翰担任枢密使，经常指责影射这件事，杨光远便怀恨在心。
English: Sangvikhan, who served as a confidential envoy, often accused Yang Guangyuan of insinuating this matter, and Yang Guangyuan held a grudge.

古文：及延光降，光远入朝，面奏维翰擅权。高祖以光远方有功于国，乃出维翰镇相州，光远为西京留守，兼镇河阳，因罢其兵权。
现代文：到范延光投降后，杨光远入朝，当面上奏桑维翰专横擅权，高祖因为杨光远对国家有功，便派桑维翰出镇相州，让杨光远担任西京留守，兼镇河阳，顺便罢免了他的兵权。
English: After the surrender of Fan Yanguang, Yang Guangyuan entered the imperial court, and in front of his face, he played the role of San Weihan's arbitrary power. Gaozu, because Yang Guangyuan had contributed to the country, sent San Weihan out of the town of Xiangzhou, and let Yang Guangyuan serve as the West Beijing left-behind, as well as the town of Heyang, and incidentally dismissed his military power.

古文：光远由此怨望，潜贮异志，多以珍玩奉契丹，诉己之屈，又私养部曲千余人，挠法犯禁，河、洛之人，恆如备盗。
现代文：杨光远从此怨恨在胸，深藏异心，多次把珍藏宝玩奉送给契丹，诉说自己的冤屈；又私自收养家兵一千多人，扰乱刑法违反禁令，河、洛之间的百姓，常常像防范盗贼一样防备他们。
English: From then on, Yang Guangyuan harbored grudges and harbored animosity. He repeatedly sent precious treasures to the Khitans and told them of his grievances. He also secretly adopted more than a thousand soldiers from his family, violated the prohibition of disturbing the criminal law, and the people between Hebei and Luo often guarded them as if they were thieves.

古文：寻册拜太尉、兼中书令。
现代文：不久，册拜为太尉、兼中书令。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of captain and also to the rank of junior secretary.

古文：时范延光致仕，辇囊装妓妾，居于河阳。光远利其奇货，且虑为子孙之雠，因奏延光不家汴、洛，出舍外籓，非南走淮夷，则北走契丹，宜早除之。
现代文：当时范延光辞官退休，用车子装着妓妾财宝，住到河阳，杨光远贪图他的珍宝奇货，又担心他将是子孙后代的仇人，便上奏说范延光不在汴、洛安家，而居住到外邑，不南奔淮夷，则会北逃契丹，应该及早除掉他。
English: At that time, Fan Yanguang retired from the post of official and used his car to carry the treasures of prostitutes and concubines and lived in Heyang. Yang Guangyuan coveted his precious and wonderful goods, and worried that he would be the enemy of future generations. He made a report saying that Fan Yanguang was not in Luo and Luo'an, but lived in Waiyun. If he did not go south to Huaiyi, he would flee north to escape the Khitan. He should be eliminated as soon as possible.

古文：高祖以许之不死，铁券在焉，持疑未允。
现代文：高祖因已经答应不治范延光死罪，丹书铁券保存在他手里，就迟疑未决。
English: Gao Zu hesitated because he had already promised not to punish Fan Yanguang with the death penalty, and the certificate was still in his hands.

古文：光远乃遣子承勋以甲士围其第，逼令自裁。
现代文：杨光远便派自己的儿子杨承勋率军队包围范延光的宅第，逼着让他自杀。
English: Yang Guangyuan then sent his son Yang Chengxun and his army to surround Fan Yanquan's house, forcing him to commit suicide.

古文：延光曰： 天子在上，安得如此！ 
现代文：范延光说： 天子在上，岂能如此！ 
English: Fan Yanguang said, "Son of heaven above, how can this be?"

古文：乃遣使者乞移居洛下，行及河桥，摈于流而溺杀之，矫奏云延光自投河，朝廷以适会其意，弗之理。
现代文：杨光远便派使臣向高祖请求把范延光移居到洛阳，走到河桥时，把范延光抛入急流中淹死了，他又欺君上奏说范延光自己投河而死，朝廷为顺应他的用意，不予治罪。
English: Yang Guangyuan then sent an envoy to Gao Zu to request that Fan Yanguang be moved to Luoyang. When he reached the river bridge, he threw Fan Yanguang into the rapids and drowned. He also lied to the emperor and said that Fan Yanguang had thrown himself into the river and died. The court did not punish him for complying with his intention.

古文：后逾岁入觐，高祖为置曲宴，教坊伶人以光远暴敛重赋，因陈戏讥之，光远殊无惭色。
现代文：一年多后入朝觐见，高祖为他准备了私宴，教坊伶人因杨光远暴敛重税，便演戏讥刺他，杨光远全无羞惭的脸色。
English: More than a year after he entered the imperial court, Gao Zu prepared a private banquet for him. Because of Yang Guangyuan's heavy taxation, the courtiers mocked him. Yang Guangyuan did not look ashamed at all.

古文：高祖谓光远曰： 元城之役，卿左右皆立功，未曾旌赏，今各与一郡，俾厘任以荣之。 
现代文：高祖对杨光远说： 元城那次战役，你的部下都立了功，但不曾赐节封赏，今天每人赏给他们一郡之任，使他们治理并以此荣耀其身。 
English: Gao Zu said to Yang Guangyuan: In the battle of Yuancheng, your subordinates all made contributions, but they did not give out awards. Today, each of them was awarded a county post, so that they could govern and glorify themselves.

古文：因命为刺史者凡数人。
现代文：因此便有几个人被任命为刺史。
English: As a result, several people have been named as suspects.

古文：时王建立自青州移镇上党，乃以光远为平卢军节度使，封东平王。
现代文：当时王建立从青州移镇上党，于是任命杨光远为平卢军节度使，封为东平王。
English: At that time, Wang Jian moved the party from Qingzhou to Shangzhen, so he appointed Yang Guangyuan as the commander of the Pinglu Army and named him the King of Dongping.

古文：光远面奏，请与长子同行，寻授承勋莱州防御使。
现代文：杨光远当面上奏，请求和他的长子一同前行，不久任命杨承勋为莱州防御使。
English: Yang Guangyuan played in front of him, asked him to go forward with his eldest son, and soon appointed Yang Chengxun as the defense envoy of Laizhou.

古文：及赴任，仆从妓妾至千余骑，满盈僭侈，为方岳之最。
现代文：等到前去上任，仆从妓妾达到一千多骑，满载充盈，过分奢侈，为地方长官之最。
English: By the time he took office, he had more than a thousand servants, prostitutes and concubines. He was loaded with wealth and extravagance, the most extravagant of all local governors.

古文：下车之后，惟以刻剥为事。
现代文：上任之后，只以苛刻收敛为事。
English: After taking office, he only pursued a policy of harsh austerity.

古文：后因景延广上言，请取光远麾下所借官马二百匹，光远怒曰： 此马先帝赐我，何以复取？
现代文：少帝即位，册拜为太师，封为寿王。后来因为景延广上奏，请收回杨光远部下所借官府马匹三百匹。杨光远愤怒地说： 这些马是先帝赏赐给我的，凭什么又取回？
English: The young emperor ascended the throne, was revered as the Grand Master, and was given the title of Shouwang. Later, because of Jing Yanguang's insubordination, Yang Guangyuan's subordinates were asked to take back the three hundred horses they had borrowed from the government. Yang Guangyuan angrily said, "These horses were given to me by the former emperor. Why did you take them back?

古文：是疑我也。 
现代文：这是不信任我。 
English: It's because they don't trust me.

古文：遂遣人潜召取子承祚自单州奔归，朝廷乃就除淄州刺史，以从其便。
现代文：于是，派人暗地里把儿子杨承祚从单州召唤回来，朝廷便任命杨承祚为淄州刺史，以顺从他的意思。
English: As a result, someone was sent to secretly summon his son Yang Chengyao back from Shan State, and the imperial court appointed Yang Chengyao as the governor of Shan State to comply with his wishes.

古文：光远益骄，因此构契丹，述少帝违好之短，且言大饥之后，国用空虚，此时一举可以平定。
现代文：杨光远更加骄横，因此与契丹交好，叙说少帝违背和好的过失，并且说大饥荒之后，国库费用空虚，这时一举可以平定后晋。
English: Yang Guang was far more arrogant, so he made friends with Khitan, recounted the young emperor's transgression of reconciliation, and said that after the great famine, the treasury expenses were empty, and then he could pacify Houjin in one fell swoop.

古文：开运元年正月，契丹南牧，陷我博陵，少帝幸澶渊。
现代文：开运元年一月，契丹南侵，攻破后晋博陵，少帝驾临澶渊。
English: In January of the first year of the movement, Khitan invaded the south, broke through the Jinbo Mausoleum, and the young emperor drove to Suiyuan.

古文：三月，契丹退，命李守贞、符彦卿率师东讨。
现代文：三月，契丹退回，少帝命令李守贞、符彦卿率兵东征。
English: In March, Khitan retreated, and the young emperor ordered Li Shuzhen and Fu Yanqing to lead the army to the east.

古文：光远素无兵众，惟婴城自守，守贞以长连城围之。
现代文：杨光远平常就没有兵马士众，只有绕城自己防守，因此李守贞把城池长期围困起来。
English: Yang Guangyuan usually did not have a large number of soldiers and horses, and only defended himself around the city, so Li Shouzhen besieged the city for a long time.

古文：冬十一月，承勋与弟承信、承祚见城中人民相食将尽，知事不济，劝光远乞降，冀免于赤族。
现代文：冬十一月，杨承勋与他的弟弟杨承信、杨承祚见城中人民相互蚕食殆尽，知道事情不能成功，便劝杨光远请求投降，希望免于诛灭全族。
English: In the winter of November, Yang Chengxun and his younger brothers, Yang Chengxin and Yang Chengyu, saw that the people in the city were devouring each other. Knowing that things could not succeed, they advised Yang Guangyuan to request surrender, hoping to avoid the annihilation of the whole family.

古文：光远不纳，曰： 我在代北时，尝以纸钱驼马祭天池，皆沉没，人言合有天子分，宜且待时，勿轻言降也。 
现代文：杨光远不予采纳，说： 我在代北的时候，曾经用纸钱驼马祭祀天池，都沉入池中，人们说有做天子的福分，应该暂且等待时机，不要轻易谈论投降之事。 
English: Yang Guang was far from being accepted, saying: When I was representing the North, I used paper money to sacrifice camels to the Heavenly Pool, and they all sank into the pool. People say that there is a blessing of being a son of Heaven, and we should wait for the opportunity, and not easily talk about surrender.

古文：承勋虑祸在朝夕，与诸弟同谋，杀节度判官邱涛，亲校杜延寿、杨瞻、白延祚等，枭其首，乃遣承祚送于守贞。
现代文：杨承勋担心祸在旦夕，便与各位弟弟共同计划，杀掉节度叛官丘涛，以及亲校杜延寿、杨赡、白延祚等，割下他们的头颅，派杨承祚送给李守贞。
English: Yang Chengxun was worried that the calamity was imminent, so he made a plan with his brothers to kill the rebel of the festival, Qiu Tao, as well as his schoolmates, Du Yanshou, Yang Yan, Bai Yanjun, and cut off their heads, and sent Yang Chengxun to Li Shouzhen.

古文：因纵火大噪，劫其父幽于私第，以城纳款，遣即墨县令王德柔贡表待罪，光远亦上章自首。
现代文：趁便放火大声呐喊，劫持他们的父亲杨光远，幽禁在私宅里，献城投降，派即墨县令王德柔进降表等待治罪，杨光远也上表自首。
English: They took the opportunity to set fire and shout loudly, abducted their father Yang Guangyuan, confined him in a private house, surrendered the city, and sent Wang Deju to wait for the crime to be punished. Yang Guangyuan also surrendered.

古文：少帝以顷岁太原归命，欲曲全之，执政曰： 岂有逆状滔天而赦之也？ 
现代文：少帝因近年他从太原归顺，想保全他。执政官员说： 难道有叛逆滔天而被赦免的吗？ 
English: The young emperor wanted to keep him safe because he had recently converted from Taiyuan. The ruling official said, "Is there such a thing as a traitor who is pardoned?"

古文：《欧阳史》：守贞遣客省副使何延祚杀之于其家。
现代文：于是命令李守贞自行处置。李守贞派人杀了杨光远，以病死的名义上奏朝廷。
English: So he ordered Li Shouzhen to deal with the matter on his own. Li Shouzhen sent someone to kill Yang Guangyuan, and reported the matter to the imperial court under the pretext that he had died of illness.

古文：汉高祖即位，诏赠尚书令，追封齐王，仍令立碑。
现代文：后汉高祖登上帝位，下诏追赠为尚书令，追封为齐王，又下令为他立碑。
English: After Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty ascended to the throne, he issued a posthumous imperial edict awarding him the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and Qi Wang (齐王), and also ordered a monument to be erected in his honor.

古文：未几，其碑石无故自折，可知其阴责也。
现代文：不久，那碑石无故自行断折，可知上天是报应不爽的。
English: Not long after, the stele broke off of its own accord without any reason. Heaven must have been displeased.

