古文：史宏肇，字化元，郑州荥泽人也。
现代文：史宏肇，字元化，郑州荥泽人。
English: Shi Hongzhao, characterization, Zhengzhou Heze people.

古文：父潘，本田家。宏肇少游侠无行，拳勇健步，日行二百里，走及奔马。
现代文：父亲史潘，本为种田人，宏肇少年时任侠而无品行，勇壮善行，日行二百里，跑起来就像奔马。
English: His father, Spahn, was originally a farmer. As a young boy, Hong Zhao was a daredevil, but he was not virtuous. He was brave and did good deeds. He ran 200 miles a day. He ran like a galloping horse.

古文：梁末，每七户出一兵，宏肇在籍中，后隶本州开道都，选入禁军。
现代文：后梁末年，每七家出一人当兵，宏肇即在军中，后隶属本州开道都，被选入禁军。
English: At the end of Liang's life, one person from every seven families became a soldier. Hongzhao was in the army, and later he was subordinated to the provincial capital of Honshu, and was selected into the forbidden army.

古文：尝在晋祖麾下，遂留为亲从，及践阼，用为控鹤小校。
现代文：曾在晋高祖麾下，用为亲信随从，到晋高祖称帝后，任控鹤小校。
English: He was once used as a trusted follower under Emperor Jinguo, and after Emperor Jinguo was proclaimed emperor, he was appointed as a small school for controlling cranes.

古文：高祖镇太原，奏请从行，升为牙校，后置武节左右指挥，以宏肇为都将，遥领雷州刺史。
现代文：汉高祖镇守太原时，上奏请让史宏肇随行，升为牙校，后设置武节左右指挥，以史宏肇为都将，遥任雷州刺史。
English: When Henkel's ancestor was in charge of Taiyuan, he asked Shi Hongzhao to accompany him to the first performance, and he was promoted to the dental school. After that, he was appointed as the commander of the martial arts festival, with Shi Hongzhao as the commander, and he was appointed to the post of Leizhou historian.

古文：高祖建号之初，代州王晖叛，以城归契丹，宏肇征之，一鼓而拔，寻授许州节度使，充侍卫步军都指挥使。
现代文：汉高祖立国初年，代州王晖反叛，献城归顺契丹，史宏肇征讨他，一举攻下代州城，接着任许州节度使，兼任侍卫步军都指挥使。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, Daizhou Wang Yao rebelled and surrendered the city to Shun Qidan. Shi Hongzhao led a force to fight against him and captured Daizhou City in one fell swoop. He was then appointed as the delegate to the Xuzhou Festival and concurrently the delegate to command the palace guards.

古文：会王守恩以上党求附，契丹主命大将耿崇美率众登太行，欲取上党，高祖命宏肇以军应援。
现代文：遇上王守恩以上党请求归附，而契丹国主命大将耿崇美领兵登上太行山，将夺取上党，高祖命史宏肇领兵接应援助王守恩。
English: When Wang Shouen's party requested to be annexed, Geng Chongmei, the commander-in-chief of the Khitan State, led the troops to climb Taigang Mountain and captured the upper party. Gaozu Shihong led the troops to assist Wang Shouen.

古文：军至潞州，契丹退去，翟令奇以泽州迎降。
现代文：部队到潞州时，契丹兵退走，翟令奇献泽州投降汉军。
English: When the troops arrived in Ganzhou, the Khitan soldiers retreated, and Hailing Qi offered Zhezhou to surrender to the Chinese army.

古文：会河阳武行德遣人迎宏肇，遂率众南下，与行德合。
现代文：这时河阳武行德派人迎接史宏肇，宏肇即领兵南下，与武行德会合。
English: At this time, Kheyang Wu Xingde sent people to meet Shi Hongzhao, and Hongzhao led the soldiers to the south and met with Wu Xingde.

古文：故高祖由蒲、陕赴洛如归，宏肇前锋之功也。
现代文：所以汉高祖由蒲州、陕州到洛阳一路顺风无阻，都是史宏肇充当前锋的功劳。
English: Therefore, the success of Henkel's founder from Puzhou and Shaanxi to Luoyang is all the credit of Shi Hongzhao as the front runner.

古文：宏肇严毅寡言，部辖军众，有过无舍，兵士所至，秋毫不犯。
现代文：史宏肇严峻刚毅，很少言语，统率部众，有过必罚，而兵士所到之处，秋毫无犯。
English: Shi Hongzhao was a stern man of fortitude, rarely spoke, led his subordinates, and had the necessary punishment, but wherever the soldiers went, they did not commit any crimes.

古文：部下有指挥使，尝因指使少不从命，宏肇立挝杀之，将吏股栗，以至平定两京，无敢干忤。
现代文：部下有位指挥使，曾因为稍不听从指挥，史宏肇立时杖杀他，将官们怕得两腿发抖，以至平定两京，无人敢冒犯他。
English: His subordinates had a commanding officer, once because he slightly disobeyed the command, Shi Hong killed him with a stick when he stood up, the generals were so afraid that their legs trembled, and even pacified the two cities, no one dared to offend him.

古文：从驾征鄴回，加同平章事，充侍卫亲军都指挥使，兼镇宋州。
现代文：随驾征伐邺都回来后，加封为同平章事，兼任侍卫亲军都指挥使，兼镇守宋州。
English: After returning from the expedition, he was awarded the title of Tongping, and also served as the commander of the palace guards and the town guard of Songzhou.

古文：高祖大渐，与枢密使杨邠、周太祖、苏逢吉等同受顾命。
现代文：高祖病危时，史宏肇与枢密使杨、郭威、苏逢吉等一同接受遗命。
English: When Gao Zu was critically ill, Shi Hongzhao accepted his death together with Yang, Guo Wei, Su Fengji and others.

古文：隐帝嗣位，加检校太师、兼侍中。
现代文：隐帝即位后，加封为检校太师、兼侍中。
English: After the enthronement of the Hidden Emperor, Gafon became a procurator, and also a chamberlain.

古文：居无何，河中、永兴、凤翔连横谋叛，关辅大扰，朝廷日有征发，群情忧揣，亦有不逞之徒，妄构虚语，流布京师。
现代文：不多久，河中、永兴、凤翔三镇联合叛乱，长安一带大受惊扰，朝廷天天征兵发卒，人心惊惧，也有不法之徒，制造谣言，流播京城。
English: Not long after, the three towns of Hechu, Yongxing, and Fengxiang jointly rebelled, and the Chang'an area was greatly disturbed. The imperial court conscripted soldiers every day, and the people were alarmed. There were also criminals who created rumors and spread them in Beijing.

古文：宏肇都辖禁军，警卫都邑，专行刑杀，略无顾避，无赖之辈，望风匿迹，路有遗弃，人不敢取。
现代文：史宏肇统辖禁军，警卫都城，大行刑法杀戮，全无顾忌回避，无赖不法之徒，望风而逃，路上有掉下的东西，没有人敢拾起。
English: Shi Hongzhao presided over the Forbidden Army, the guards of the capital, a large number of criminal law killings, no scruples to avoid, rogue outlaws, looking to the wind and fleeing, there are things falling on the road, no one dares to pick up.

古文：然而不问罪之轻重，理之所在，但云有犯，便处极刑，枉滥之家，莫敢上诉。
现代文：然而不问罪行轻重和有无缘由道理，只要听说有过失，便处以极刑，被冤枉滥杀的家庭，没有人敢上诉。
English: However, regardless of the seriousness of the crime and whether there is any reason, as long as it is heard that there is a fault, it will be sentenced to capital punishment, and no one dares to appeal to the family of the unjustly killed.

古文：时太白昼见，民有仰观者，为坊正所拘，立断其腰领。
现代文：巡逻执法的军官，因此作奸犯科，嫁祸威胁别人，不可胜数。当时太白星在白昼出现，百姓有的抬头观看，被官吏抓住后，立时砍断他们的腰和脖子。
English: There are countless numbers of officers on patrol enforcing the law who have committed criminal acts and threatened others with blame. At that time, the white star appeared in the daytime, some people looked up, and after being caught by officials, they immediately cut off their waists and necks.

古文：又有醉民抵忤一军士，则诬以讹言弃市。
现代文：又有喝醉酒的人抵牾了一位军士，就诬告他传播谣言而被处死在大街上。
English: Another drunken man attacked a sergeant, falsely accusing him of spreading rumours, and was executed in the street.

古文：其他断舌、决口、斫筋、折足者，仅无虚日。
现代文：其他如被割下舌头、撕破嘴巴、砍断筋骨、折断腿脚的人，无日不有。
English: Others, such as those who have had their tongues cut out, their mouths ripped open, their bones and sinews chopped off, and their legs and feet broken, never see the light of day.

古文：故相李崧为部曲诬告，族戮于市，取其幼女为婢。
现代文：前宰相李崧被家奴诬告，全家被处死在大街上，又抢去他的小女儿做奴婢。
English: The former prime minister Li Wei was falsely accused by a family slave, the whole family was executed in the street, and his little daughter was taken away to be a slave.

古文：自是仕宦之家畜仆隶者，皆以姑息为意，而旧勋故将失势之后，为厮养辈之所胁制者，往往有之。
现代文：从此官宦人家收养仆隶，都不敢得罪他们，而故旧功臣大将失势之后，被仆隶所挟制的，经常都有。
English: Since then, officials and families have adopted flunkeys and lackeys, not daring to offend them. Therefore, after the former great general lost power, he was often held hostage by flunkeys and lackeys.

古文：军司孔目吏解晖，性狡而酷，凡有推劾，随意锻炼。
现代文：军司孔目军解晖，奸猾残暴，凡有被他审理的，由他随意捏造罪名。
English: The commander of the army, Confucius, was ruthless, cunning, and cruel. He fabricated charges against anyone who came before him.

古文：人有抵军禁者，被其苦楚，无不自诬以求死所，都人遇之，莫敢仰视。
现代文：送往军禁之中的人，遭受他的荼毒，没有人不自己编造罪行以求一死的，京城中的人遇到他，没有人敢仰视。
English: People who were sent to military detention suffered from his venom, and no one would not fabricate a crime in order to die. When people in the capital met him, no one dared to look up.

古文：有燕人何福殷者，以商贩为业。尝以十四万市得玉枕，遣家僮及商人李进卖于淮南，易茗而回。
现代文：燕地人何福殷，以商贩为业，曾用十四万钱买到一个玉枕，派家僮和商人李进卖到南唐，买回茶叶。
English: He Fuyin, a native of Yan, was a merchant by trade. He once bought a jade pillow with 140,000 yuan and sent Jiayu and merchant Li Jin to sell it to Nantang and buy back tea leaves.

古文：家僮无行，隐福殷货财数十万，福殷责其偿，不伏，遂杖之。
现代文：家僮没有品行，隐瞒了何福殷的货财几十万，何福殷追他偿还，家僮不服罪，何福殷就用棍子打他。
English: Jiayu was immoral and concealed hundreds of thousands of He Fookin's goods and money. He Fookin chased him for repayment. Jiayu did not admit guilt, so He Fookin beat him with a stick.

古文：未几，家僮诣宏肇上变，言契丹主之入汴也，赵延寿遣福殷赍玉枕阴遗淮南，以致诚意。
现代文：不久后，家僮找到史宏肇，说契丹国主进汴京时，赵延寿曾派何福殷带着玉枕，暗中要他到南唐以表达诚意。
English: Soon after, Jiayu found Shi Hongzhao, who said that when the Khitan ruler entered Beijing, Zhao Yanshou had sent He Fuyin with a jade pillow, secretly asking him to go to South Tang to express his sincerity.

古文：宏肇即日遣捕福殷等系之。
现代文：史宏肇当天就派人捉拿何福殷等人关起来。
English: Shi Hongzhao sent people to arrest He Fuyin and others on the same day.

古文：解晖希旨，榜掠备至，福殷自诬，连罪者数辈，并弃市。
现代文：解晖迎合史宏肇的意思，施用各种刑法，何福殷被迫自己编造罪行，牵连获罪的有多人，全被处死在街市上。
English: In order to appease Shi Hongzhao, various criminal laws were applied, forcing He Fuyin to fabricate crimes himself. Many people were implicated and convicted, and they were all executed on the street.

古文：妻女为宏肇帐下分取之，其家财籍没。
现代文：妻子儿女被史宏肇手下人瓜分，家财全被没收。
English: His wife and children were divided up among Shi Hongzhao's subordinates, and all of the family's wealth was confiscated.

古文：宏肇不喜宾客，尝言： 文人难耐，轻我辈，谓我辈为卒，可恨可恨！ 
现代文：史宏肇不喜欢宾客幕僚，曾说： 文人简直难以容忍，瞧不起我们，说我们是卒，可恨，可恨！ 
English: Shi Hongzhao did not like the guest staff, once said: The literati are simply unbearable, look down on us, say we are pawns, hateful, hateful!

古文：宏肇虽怒甚，竟亦无以屈也。周太祖平河中班师，推功于众，以宏肇有翊卫镇重之功，言之于隐帝，即授兼中书令。
现代文：史宏肇统辖下的睢阳，那些属于官府的收入利益，史宏肇委派亲信官吏杨乙到官府去检查，杨乙贪暴凶狠，仗势生事，官民都怕他。聚敛盘剥，无所不至，月获万缗钱财，都交给史宏肇，境内的人民，恨之如仇。郭威平定河中回师后，将功劳分与众人，认为史宏肇有辅佐皇上镇守京城之功，告诉隐帝，便任史宏肇为中书令。
English: In Shenyang, which was under the control of Shi Hongzhao, the revenue and interests that belonged to the government, Shi Hongzhao's committee sent Yang Yi, a trusted official, to the government to inspect. Yang Yi was greedy and violent, causing trouble, and the government and the people were afraid of him. He gathered and plundered, did everything he could, and made a lot of money every month, all of which were handed over to Shi Hongzhao, and the people in the territory hated him like an enemy. After Guo Weidong returned from the river, he shared the credit with everyone, believing that Shi Hongzhao had the merit of assisting the emperor in the defense of

古文：隐帝自关西贼平之后，昵近小人，太后亲族，颇行干托，宏肇与杨邠甚不平之。
现代文：隐帝自关西贼寇平定后，亲近小人，太后的亲族，大肆干预朝政，史宏肇与杨很不满。
English: After the suppression of the Kansai banditry, the Hidden Emperor became close to the villains, the relatives of the empress dowager, and interfered in the government of the dynasty. Shi Hongzhao and Yang were very dissatisfied.

古文：太后有故人子求补军职，宏肇怒而斩之。
现代文：太后有一故人的儿子请求补任军中职务，史宏肇发怒而杀了他。
English: One of the deceased's sons asked the empress dowager to fill his position in the military, and Shi Hongzhao became enraged and killed him.

古文：帝始听乐，赐教坊使玉带，诸伶官锦袍，往谢宏肇，宏肇让之曰： 健兒为国戍边，忍寒冒暑，未能遍有沾赐，尔辈何功，敢当此赐！ 
现代文：隐帝开始听乐，赐给教坊使玉带，又赐给各位伶官锦袍，史宏肇指责他们说： 将士为国戍边，忍寒冒暑，都未能遍沾恩泽，你们有什么功劳，敢当如此赏赐！ 
English: The Hidden Emperor began to listen to music, and gave the eunuchs a jade belt to wear, and also gave each eunuch a brocade robe. Shi Hongzhao reproached them, saying: "The eunuchs have served the country, braved the cold and the heat, but have not been able to enjoy all the blessings. What merit do you have, how dare you be rewarded like this!"

古文：尽取袍带还官，其凶戾如此。
现代文：将玉带锦袍全收回官府。
English: All of the gongs were returned to the government.

古文：周太祖有镇鄴之命，宏肇欲兼领机枢之任，苏逢吉异其议，宏肇忿之。
现代文：郭威有镇守邺都的任务，史宏肇还想要他兼任枢密要职，苏逢吉不同意，史宏肇很生气。
English: Guo Wei has the task of guarding the capital, Shi Hongzhao also wants him to serve as a privy councillor, Su Fengji does not agree, Shi Hongzhao is very angry.

古文：翌日，因窦贞固饮会，贵臣悉集，宏肇厉色举爵属周太祖曰： 昨晨廷论，一何同异！
现代文：第二天，到窦贞固家相聚喝酒，各位贵臣全都来了，史宏肇拿起酒杯厉声敬郭威说 ：昨天早晨在朝廷的辩论，分歧多么大！
English: The next day, all the dignitaries gathered at Dou Zhenggu's house for a drink. Shi Hongzhao picked up his glass and said in a sharp voice to Guo Wei, "Yesterday morning's debate at the imperial court, how great the differences were!

古文：今日与弟饮此。 
现代文：今天与弟喝了这杯。 
English: I drank this with my brother today.

古文：杨邠、苏逢吉亦举大爵曰： 此国家之事也，何足介意！ 
现代文：杨、苏逢吉也举起大杯说： 这是国家的事，何足介意！ 
English: Yang and Su Fengji also raised their glasses and said, "This is a matter for the state, what do you care!

古文：俱饮釂。
现代文：都一起干杯。
English: Let's all have a toast.

古文：宏肇又厉声言曰： 安朝廷，定祸乱，直须长枪大剑，至如毛锥子，焉足用哉！ 
现代文：史宏肇又说 ：安定朝廷，平息祸乱，只须长枪大剑，至于拿笔的儒生，有什么用！ 
English: Shi Hongzhao also said: To stabilize the imperial court and quell the calamity, all that is needed is a long gun and a big sword. As for the Confucian with a pen, what is the use!

古文：三司使王章曰： 虽有长枪大剑，若无毛锥子，赡军财赋，自何而集？ 
现代文：三司使王章说 ：虽有长枪大剑，如无读书人，供给军用的财富，从何而来？ 
English: The third secretary sent Wang Zhang to say: Although there are long guns and large swords, if there are no readers, where does the wealth that supplies the military come from?

古文：宏肇默然，少顷而罢。
现代文：史宏肇无言，不久便退席。
English: Shi Hongzhao was speechless and soon left the meeting.

古文：未几，三司使王章于其第张酒乐，时宏肇与宰相、枢密使及内客省使阎晋卿等俱会。
现代文：不久，王章在家里安排酒乐，史宏肇与宰相、枢密使及内客省使阎晋卿等都出席酒会。
English: Soon after, Wang Zhang arranged a drinking party at his home. Shi Hongzhao, the prime minister, the privy councilor and the provincial envoy Yan Jinqing all attended the party.

古文：酒酣，为手势令，宏肇不熟其事，而阎晋卿坐次宏肇，屡教之。
现代文：酒至半醉，行手势令，史宏肇不熟悉行令，而阎晋卿坐在史宏肇旁边，多次教他。
English: He was half-drunk and gestured orders. Shi Hongzhao was not familiar with the orders, but Yan Jinqing sat next to Shi Hongzhao and taught him many times.

古文：苏逢吉戏宏肇曰： 近坐有姓阎人，何忧罚爵！ 
现代文：苏逢吉开史宏肇的玩笑说： 你身边就坐着与阎王同姓的人，何必担心罚酒！ 
English: Su Fengji made a joke of Shi Hongzhao and said: You are sitting next to a person with the same surname as the king of hell, why worry about being fined for drinking!

古文：逢吉不校，宏肇欲殴逢吉，逢吉策马而去，宏肇遽起索剑，意欲追逢吉。
现代文：史宏肇的妻子阎氏，原来就是陪酒的妓女，史宏肇认为苏逢吉在讥刺他，大怒，用丑话骂苏逢吉，苏逢吉不与他相骂，史宏肇便要揍苏逢吉，苏逢吉骑马逃去。史宏肇立即起身找剑，要追杀苏逢吉。
English: Shi Hongzhao's wife, Yan, turned out to be a prostitute who had been drinking with him. Shi Hongzhao thought that Su Fengji was mocking him, and he flew into a rage, cursing Su Fengji with foul language. Su Fengji did not curse him, so Shi Hongzhao wanted to beat Su Fengji, and Su Fengji fled on horseback. Shi Hongzhao immediately got up and looked for a sword to chase Su Fengji.

古文：杨邠曰： 苏公是宰相，公若害之，致天子何地，公细思之！ 
现代文：杨说： 苏公是宰相，您要杀他，把天子放在什么位置，请仔细想想。 
English: Yang said, "Su Gong is the prime minister. If you want to kill him, please think carefully about where to put Tianzi.

古文：邠泣下。
现代文：杨眼泪都流下了。
English: Yang's tears flowed.

古文：宏肇索马急驰而去，邠虑有非常，连镳而进，送至第而还。
现代文：史宏肇找来了匹马急驰而去，杨担心发生意外，就与他一同骑马并驱，把他送到家才回。
English: Shi Hongzhao found a horse and galloped away. Yang, worried about an accident, rode alongside him and drove him home.

古文：自是将相不协如水火矣。
现代文：从此将相不和就像水火一般了。
English: From now on, discord will be like water and fire.

古文：隐帝遣王峻将酒乐于公子亭以和之，竟不能解。
现代文：隐帝派王峻在公子亭设酒乐让他们和解，最终还是不能。
English: The Hidden Emperor sent Wang Jun to set up a banquet at the Prince's Pavilion for them to reconcile, but in the end they couldn't.

古文：其后李业、郭允明、后赞、聂文进居中用事，不悦执政。
现代文：后来李业、郭允明、后赞、聂文进在朝中掌权，不高兴史宏肇执政。
English: Later, Li Ye, Guo Yunming, Houzan, and Nie Wenjin took power in the dynasty, and Shih Hongzhao was not happy to be in power.

古文：又见隐帝年渐长，厌为大臣所制，尝有忿言，业等乃乘间谮宏肇等，隐帝稍以为信。
现代文：又见隐帝年纪渐大，厌恶受大臣控制，曾说出生气的话，李业等人乘机间离史宏肇等人，隐帝逐渐相信他们的话。
English: He also saw that Emperor Yingdi was getting older, detested being controlled by ministers, and had once said that he was born angry. Li Ye and others took the opportunity to leave Shi Hongzhao and others, and Emperor Yingdi gradually believed their words.

古文：业等乃言宏肇等专权震主，终必为乱，隐帝益恐。
现代文：李业等人又说史宏肇等人专权震主，终将作乱，隐帝更加害怕。
English: Li Ye and others also said that Shi Hongzhao and other autocratic shock leaders would eventually cause chaos, and the Hidden Emperor was even more afraid.

古文：尝一夕，闻作坊锻甲之声，疑外有兵仗卒至，达旦不寐。
现代文：曾在一天夜里，听见有作坊中铸造兵甲的响声，怀疑外面有兵仗士卒攻来，到天亮都睡不着。
English: One night, hearing the sound of armour being cast in a workshop, and suspecting that soldiers were attacking outside, I couldn't sleep until dawn.

古文：自是与业等密谋禁中，欲诛宏肇等。
现代文：从此与李业等在宫禁中密谋，想诛灭史宏肇等人，商量好后，禀告太后。
English: From then on, he plotted with Li Ye and others during the palace ban to eliminate Shi Hongzhao and others. After discussion, he reported to the empress dowager.

古文：议定，入白太后，太后曰： 此事岂可轻发耶！更问宰臣等。 李业在侧，曰： 先皇帝言，朝廷大事，莫共措大商量。 
现代文：太后说： 这种事哪能轻举妄动！再问问宰臣等人。 李业在旁边，说： 先皇帝说过，朝廷大事，不要跟书呆子商量。 
English: The empress dowager said, "How can such a thing be done so carelessly! Ask the vice-ministers and others." Li Ye, who was nearby, said, "The emperor said earlier, don't discuss important matters of the imperial court with a nerd.

古文：太后又言之，隐帝怒曰： 闺门之内，焉知国家之事！ 
现代文：太后又重申，隐帝生气地说 ：闺中妇女，哪懂国家的大事！ 
English: The empress dowager reiterated, and Emperor Inti said angrily, "Girl-child women, how can they understand the important things of the country!

古文：拂衣而出。
现代文：拂袖而去。
English: He stormed off.

古文：汝史家故吏也，为我求其近属，我将恤之。 
现代文：内客省使阎晋卿偷知他们的事情，于是到史宏肇的家里，准备告诉他，史宏肇因为其他的事而没见他。
English: Neikaku asked Yan Jinqing to find out about them, so he went to Shi Hongzhao's home to tell him that Shi Hongzhao had not seen him because of other matters.

古文：崇矩上其母弟福。崇矩素主其家，尽籍财产以付福，周祖嘉之。杨邠，魏州冠氏人也。
现代文：乾佑三年冬十一月十三日，史宏肇入宫朝见，与枢密使杨、三司使王章一同坐在广政殿东边廊庑下，这时有甲士几十人从殿内涌出，在阁中杀死史宏肇等人，夷灭了他们全家。郭威登上帝位后，追封史宏肇为郑王，按礼仪安葬，官府为他立碑。杨邠，魏州冠氏人。
English: On the 13th day of the 11th month in the winter of the 3rd year of the Qianyu era, Shi Hongzhao entered the palace for a meeting with the emperor, and sat under the east gallery of the Guangzheng Hall together with Yang, the Privy Envoy, and Wang Zhang, the Third Envoy. At that time, dozens of warriors poured out of the hall, killed Shi Hongzhao and others in the pavilion, and destroyed their entire family. After Guo Weiden ascended the throne, he posthumously named Shi Hongzhao as King Zheng and buried him according to the etiquette, and the government office erected a monument for him. Yang Wei,

古文：少以吏给事使府，后唐租庸使孔谦，即其妻之世父也。
现代文：年少时为州府掌管名籍的官吏，后唐租庸使孔谦，就是他妻子的伯父。
English: When he was young, he was a government official in charge of names and surnames at the prefectural government. After the Tang Dynasty, he was the uncle of his wife, Kong Qian.

古文：谦领度支，补勾押官，历孟、华、郓三州粮料使。
现代文：孔谦任度支官时，补杨邠为勾押官，历任孟、华、郓三州粮料使。
English: When Kong Qian was appointed as the official in charge of grain distribution, Fu Yangjun was the official in charge of grain distribution, and successively held the posts of Meng, Hua, and Zou as the official in charge of grain distribution in the three states.

古文：高祖为鄴都留守，用为左都押衙，高祖镇太原，益加亲委。
现代文：晋高祖任邺都留守时，任杨邠为右都押衙，高祖镇守太原时，更加亲近信任他。
English: When Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche was away, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche was his right-hand man. When Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche was guarding Taiyuan, he trusted him more closely.

古文：汉国建，迁检校太保、权枢密使。
现代文：后汉建国，迁升为检校太保、临时枢密使。
English: After the founding of the Han Dynasty, he was promoted to school inspector and temporary privy councilor.

古文：汴、洛平，正拜枢密使、检校太傅。
现代文：汴、洛一带平定后，正式任枢密使、检校太傅。
English: After the areas of Shandong and Luo were pacified, he was officially appointed as a privy envoy and inspector of schools.

古文：及高祖大渐，与苏逢吉、史宏肇等同受顾命，辅立嗣君。
现代文：到汉高祖病重时，与苏逢吉、史弘肇等一同接受顾托遗命，辅佐拥立即位新君。
English: When Han Gao Zu fell seriously ill, he accepted Gu Tuo's last will and testament together with Su Fengji and Shi Hongzhao, and immediately became the new ruler.

古文：隐帝即位，宰臣李涛上章，请出邠与周太祖为籓镇，邠等泣诉于太后，由是罢涛而相邠，加中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事，仍兼枢密使。
现代文：汉隐帝即位后，宰臣李涛上奏章，请求将杨邠与郭威调出京城到藩镇任职，杨邠等人向太后哭诉，因此罢黜李涛而任用杨邠，加封为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事，仍兼枢密使。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Han Yin, the Vice-Minister Li Tao made a petition to request the transfer of Yang Jie and Guo Wei from the capital to the towns of the domain. Yang Jie and others complained to the empress dowager, so Li Tao was dismissed and Yang Jie was appointed, and he was also appointed as the secretary of the Central Secretariat and the Secretary of the General Office of the Central Secretariat, and the Secretary of the General Office of the Central Secretariat of the Central Secretariat of the People's Republic of China.

古文：时中书除吏太多，讹谬者众。及邠居相位，帝一以委之，凡南衙奏事，中书除命，先委邠斟酌，如不出邠意，至于一簿一掾，亦不听从。
现代文：当时中书省任命官员太滥，错任误任的很多，到杨邠居相位后，隐帝将事务全交给他，凡是南衙报告事情，中书任免职务，都先交杨邠斟酌。如不合杨邠心意，就是一封文书一个掾吏，也不听从。
English: At that time, the appointment of officials by the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy was too extravagant, and there were many wrongful appointments. After Yang Xiu took the throne, Emperor Ying gave all the affairs to him. Whenever Nanzhang reported a matter, the appointment and dismissal of officials by the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy were first submitted to Yang Xiu for consideration. If it did not suit Yang Xiu's mind, it would be a letter to a magistrate, and he would not listen.

古文：时史宏肇恣行惨酷，杀戮日众，都人士庶，相目于路，邠但称宏肇之善。
现代文：杨邠虽擅长处理政务，却不识大体，经常说 ：治理国家，只要钱财丰富、兵甲强盛就行，至于文章礼乐，都是不实在的东西，不值得留意。 这时史弘肇恣意施行严刑峻法，被他杀戮的人每天都有很多，京城中的人民道路以目，而杨邠仅称举史弘肇的长处。
English: Although Yang Hui was good at handling government affairs, he did not know the big picture. He often said: to govern the country, as long as the money is rich and the military is strong, as for the articles and music, they are not real things and are not worth paying attention to. At this time, Shi Hongzhao arbitrarily implemented the severe criminal law, and there were many people killed by him every day. The people in Beijing saw the road with their eyes, and Yang Hui only referred to the strengths of Shi Hongzhao.

古文：太后弟武德使李业求为宣徽使，隐帝与太后重违之，私访于邠，邠以朝廷内使，迁拜有序，不可超居，遂止。
现代文：太后的弟弟武德使李业请求担任宣徽使，隐帝与太后意见相违，私下询问杨邠。杨邠认为朝廷内使，迁升任命要有次序，不能越级提举，于是此事废止。
English: The empress dowager's brother, Wu De, asked Li Ye to serve as the envoy for the proclamation of the imperial emblem, but Emperor Ying disagreed with the empress dowager's opinion and privately asked Yang Jie. Yang Jie believed that the appointment of envoys within the imperial court should be done in an orderly manner, and they should not be promoted beyond their ranks, so the matter was abolished.

古文：隐帝所爱耿夫人，欲立为后，邠亦以为太速。
现代文：隐帝宠爱耿夫人，想立她为皇后，刘邠也认为太快了。
English: Emperor Inti loved Lady Geng and wanted to make her the empress, but Liu Ye also thought it was too soon.

古文：夫人卒，隐帝欲以后礼葬，邠又止之，隐帝意不悦，左右有承间进甘言者，隐帝益怒之。
现代文：耿夫人去世后，隐帝想用皇后的礼仪安葬她，杨邠又阻止他。
English: After the death of Mrs. Geng, the Emperor wanted to use the queen's etiquette to bury her, but Yang Xuan stopped him.

古文：案：此下疑有阙文。
现代文：隐帝内心不悦。隐帝身旁又有人乘机离间，隐帝更加气愤他。
English: Emperor Hakuin was not pleased. Someone else took the opportunity to create a rift with Emperor Hakuin, and Emperor Hakuin became even more angry with him.

古文：邠缮甲兵，实帑廪，俾国用不阙，边鄙粗宁，亦其功也。
现代文：杨邠修造兵甲，充实国库，使国家所用不缺，边疆大体安宁，也是有功劳的。
English: It is also commendable for Yang Xuan to build armour and replenish the national treasury, so that the country does not lack what it needs, and the border is generally peaceful.

古文：《宣和书谱》云：邠末年留意缙绅，延客门下，知经史有用，乃课吏传写。王章，大名南乐人也。
现代文：王章，大名南乐人。
English: Wang Zhang, the famous Southern Musician.

古文：少为吏，给事使府。同光初，隶枢密院，后归本郡，累职至都孔目官。
现代文：少年时为官吏。同光初年，在枢密院做事，后回归大名，历官至都孔目官。
English: When he was a boy, he was a government official. In the first year of his reign, he worked at the Privy Council, and after his return to the daimyo, he became a Confucian official.

古文：后唐清泰末，屯驻捧圣都虞候张令昭作乱，逐节度使刘延皓，自称留后，章以本职为令昭役使。
现代文：后唐清泰末年，屯驻大名的捧圣都虞候张令昭作乱，赶走节度使刘延皓，自称为留后，王章仍任原官职，为张令昭所役使。
English: In the last years of the late Tang and Qing dynasties, Zhang Ling Zhao, who was stationed in the sacred capital of Damena, caused a riot, drove away Liu Yanqi, the governor of the festival, and claimed to stay behind. Wang Zhang still held his original official position and served as Zhang Ling Zhao's envoy.

古文：末帝遣范延光讨平之，搜索叛党甚急。
现代文：唐末帝派范延光征讨平定张令昭，搜索叛党很严。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Tang sent Fan Yanguang to subdue Zhang Lingzhao, and the search for rebels was very strict.

古文：章之妻即白文珂之女也，文珂与副招讨李敬周善，以章为托。
现代文：王章的妻子就是白文珂的女儿，白文珂与副招讨使李敬周很要好，便将王章托付给李敬周。
English: Wang Zhang's wife was Bai Wenke's daughter. Bai Wenke was very friendly with Li Jing Zhou, so he entrusted Wang Zhang to Li Jing Zhou.

古文：及攻下逆城，敬周匿之，载于橐驼褚中，窜至洛下，匿于敬周之私第。
现代文：当攻下逆贼城池后，李敬周把王章藏起来，装在袋子里放在骆驼背上，运到洛阳，藏在李敬周的家里。
English: After the capture of the rebel city, Li Jing Zhou hid Wang Zhang, put him in a bag on a camel's back, transported him to Luoyang, and hid him in Li Jing Zhou's home.

古文：及末帝败，章为省职，历沔阳粮料使。
现代文：到唐末帝失败后，王章任宫中职务，历任河阳粮料使。
English: After the defeat of the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Zhang held a position in the palace, and successively served as the grain envoy of Heyang.

古文：高祖典侍卫亲军，诏为都孔目官，从至河东，专委钱谷。
现代文：汉高祖掌管侍卫亲军时，任他为都孔目官，王章跟从汉高祖到河东，专管钱粮。
English: When Emperor Gaozu was in charge of the imperial guard, he appointed him as the governor of the capital, and Wang Zhang followed Emperor Gaozu to the east of the river to be in charge of money and grain.

古文：国初，授三司使、检校太傅，从征杜重威于鄴下。
现代文：后汉建国初年，授予三司使、检校太傅，跟随杜重威到邺下征伐。
English: In the first year after the founding of the Han Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Sanji envoy and Jiankui taifu, and followed Du Chongwei to the conquest.

古文：明年，高祖崩，隐帝即位，加检校太尉、同平章事。
现代文：第二年，高祖去世，隐帝即位，加封检校太尉、同平章事。
English: The following year, Emperor Gaozu died, Emperor Inshi ascended to the throne, and Gaozu was awarded the title of "Kengyo Taifu" and "Donghei Shoshoji."

古文：居无何，蒲、雍、岐三镇畔。
现代文：不久，蒲、雍、岐三镇反叛。
English: Soon, the three towns of Pu, Yong and Qi rebelled.

古文：是时，契丹去汴之后，国家新造，物力未充。章与周太祖、史宏肇、杨邠等尽心王室，知无不为，罢不急之务，惜无用之费，收聚财赋，专事西征，军旅所资，供馈无乏。
现代文：这时，在遭受契丹寇犯京城之后，国家方兴，物力不充足，王章与郭威、史弘肇、杨等尽心忠于王室，知无不为，罢免不急需的事务，节省无用的开支，收聚财赋，致力于西征，军队所需的费用，供给没有缺乏。
English: At this time, after the Khitan invasion of Beijing, the country was on the rise, but the material resources were insufficient. Wang Zhang, Guo Wei, Shi Hongzhao, Yang and others were devotedly loyal to the royal family, knowing what to do, dismissing non-urgent matters, saving useless expenses, collecting financial resources, and devoting themselves to the Western Expedition. There was no shortage of expenses and supplies needed by the army.

古文：及三叛平，赐与之外，国有余积。
现代文：到三镇叛乱平定后，除犒赏之外，国家尚有多余的积蓄。
English: After the Three Towns Rebellion was quelled, the country still had surplus savings in addition to the reward.

古文：然以专于权利，剥下过当，敛怨归上，物论非之。
现代文：然而王章专权谋求钱财，盘剥百姓过份，激起下民对朝廷的怨愤，舆论都指责他。
English: However, Wang Zhang sought money and power, exploited the people excessively, and aroused the resentment of the people against the imperial court. Public opinion blamed him.

古文：旧制，秋夏苗租，民税一斛，别输二升，谓之 雀鼠耗 。
现代文：以前的制度，秋夏两季禾苗的租赋，农民每交一斛时，再附交二升，叫 鼠雀耗 。
English: Under the previous system, farmers had to pay an additional two liters of rent for seedlings in the autumn and summer. This was called "mouse consumption."

古文：今市井交易，又克其五，谓之 依除 。
现代文：到乾佑年间，交一斛时，又另交两斗，叫 省耗 。
English: During the Qianyou era, when one cormorant was delivered, another two cormorants were delivered, which was called "saving consumption."

古文：民有诉田者，虽无十数户，章必命全州覆视，幸其广有苗额，以增邦赋，曾未数年，民力大困。
现代文：百姓深受其苦。又，官府借贷放出缗钱，都以八十缗为一陌，到王章时人民交给官府仍以八十缗为一陌，而官府给予人民时却以七十七缗为一陌，成为常例。百姓有为田产诉之于官时，虽然不过十数户，王章必令在全州普查田地面积，以期多量出田地数量，以增加税收，不到几年，百姓大为困苦。
English: The people suffered a lot from this. Moreover, when the government borrowed and loaned money, the amount was 80 baht per mu, and when the people handed it over to the government, it was still 80 baht per mu, but when the government gave it to the people, it was 77 baht per mu, which became a common practice. When the people complained to the government about the land production, although there were only a dozen households, the king ordered to survey the land area in the whole state, with a view to increasing the number of fields in order to increase the tax revenue. Within a few years, the people were very poor.

古文：章与杨邠不喜儒士，郡官所请月俸，皆取不堪资军者给之，谓之 闲杂物 ，命所司高估其价，估定更添，谓之 抬估 ，章亦不满其意，随事更令更添估。
现代文：王章与杨不喜欢文士，郡官请求月俸，王章都将一些不能用于军中的物资给他们，称这些物资为 闲杂物 ，命有关部门高估闲杂物的价值，估定后还要抬高，叫作 抬估 ，王章仍不满意，随意再令添估。
English: Wang Zhang and Yang did not like the scribes. The county official asked for a monthly salary, and Wang Zhang gave them some materials that could not be used in the army, calling these materials "idlery." He ordered the relevant departments to overestimate the value of the idlery, and to raise it after the assessment, called "revaluation." Wang Zhang was still not satisfied, and ordered additional assessment at will.

古文：章急于财赋，峻于刑法，民有犯盐矾酒曲之令，虽丝毫滴沥，尽处极刑。
现代文：王章急敛财赋，严用刑法，人民有违犯盐、矾、酒曲的禁令者，即使是丝毫点滴，也全处以极刑。
English: Wang Zhang hastily amassed wealth, strictly used criminal law, and people who violated the ban on salt, lees, and liquor, even if it was the slightest drop, were all sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：吏缘为奸，民不堪命。
现代文：官吏因此为奸，人民难以活命。
English: As a result, government officials became traitors, and it was difficult for the people to survive.

古文：章与杨邠同郡，尤为亲爱，其奖用进拔者，莫非乡旧。
现代文：王章与杨邠同郡，尤其亲密，奖励提拔的人，没有不是老乡的。
English: Wang Zhang and Yang Jie are particularly close to each other, and there is no one who is not a fellow villager who has been rewarded and promoted.

古文：常轻视文臣，曰： 此等若与一把算子，未知颠倒，何益于事！ 
现代文：总是轻视文官，说： 这些人如给他一把算盘，连正反都不懂，有什么用！ 
English: He always looked down on civil servants, saying: "If these people are given an abacus, they don't even know right from wrong, what's the use!

古文：后因私第开宴席，召宾客，史宏肇、苏逢吉乘醉喧诟而罢。
现代文：后来在家中设宴，招待宾客，因史弘肇、苏逢吉乘醉相争而作罢。
English: Later, a banquet was held at home to invite guests, but it was cancelled because Shi Hongzhao and Su Fengji got drunk and quarreled.

古文：章自是忽忽不乐，潜求外任。邠与宏肇深沮其意。
现代文：王章从此闷闷不乐，暗中寻求到地方任职，杨与史弘肇极力劝阻他。
English: Wang Zhang has been sullen and unhappy ever since, secretly seeking a local post. Yang and Shi Hongzhao tried their best to dissuade him.

古文：而私第数有怪异，章愈怀忧恐。
现代文：而家中经常出现怪异，王章更加心怀忧恐。
English: But strange things often happen at home, and Wang Zhang is even more worried.

古文：乾祐三年冬，与史宏肇、杨邠等遇害，夷其族。
现代文：乾佑三年冬天，与史弘肇、杨等一同遇害，被灭了全家。
English: In the winter of the third year of Qian You's reign, he was killed together with Shi Hongzhao, Yang and others, and his entire family was wiped out.

古文：妻白氏，祸前数月而卒。
现代文：妻子白氏，在祸前几个月就死了。
English: His wife, Mrs. Bai, died a few months before the disaster.

古文：无子，惟一女，适户部员外郎张贻肃，羸疾逾年，扶病就戮。
现代文：没有儿子，只有一女，嫁给户部员外郎张贻肃，生病多年，带病受戮。
English: He had no son, only one daughter, who was married to his brother-in-law, Zhang Shuxu, a member of the household department. He had been ill for many years and suffered from illness.

