古文：孔子曰： 六艺于治一也。
现代文：孔子说： 六经对于治理国家，作用是相同的。
English: Confucius said: The Six Classics play the same role in governing a country.

古文：礼以节人，乐以发和，书以道事，诗以达意，易以神化，春秋以义。 
现代文：《礼》是用来规范人的言行，《乐》是用来促进人的和谐，《书》是用来记述往古事迹和典章制度的，《诗》是用来抒情达意的，《易》是用来窥探天地万物的神奇变化的，《春秋》是用来通晓微言大义、衡量是非曲直的。 
English: "Li" is used to regulate people's words and deeds, "Le" is used to promote human harmony, "Shu" is used to record ancient deeds and the legal system, "Poetry" is used to express lyricism, "Yi" is used to spy on the magical changes of heaven and earth, and "Spring and Autumn" is used to understand the subtleties of words and measure the rights and wrongs.

古文：太史公曰：天道恢恢，岂不大哉！
现代文：太史公说： 世上的道理广阔无垠，难道不伟大么！
English: Taishigong said: The world's reason is vast and boundless, isn't it great!

古文：谈言微中，亦可以解纷。
现代文：言谈话语如能稍稍切中事理，也是能排解不少纷扰的。 
English: If words and conversation can be a little more rational, they can also resolve a lot of troubles.

古文：淳于髡者，齐之赘婿也。
现代文：淳于髡是齐国的一个入赘女婿。
English: Jun Yuxuan was the son-in-law of a ruler of Qi.

古文：长不满七尺，滑稽多辩，数使诸侯，未尝屈辱。
现代文：身高不足七尺，为人滑稽，能言善辩，多次出使诸侯之国，从未受过屈辱。
English: He was less than seven feet tall, funny, eloquent, and had been sent on several missions to foreign countries. He had never been humiliated.

古文：齐威王之时喜隐，好为淫乐长夜之饮，沈湎不治，委政卿大夫。
现代文：齐威王在位时，喜好说隐语，又好彻夜宴饮，逸乐无度，沉溺于饮酒之中，不理国事，把政事委托给卿大夫。
English: When King Qi Wei was on the throne, he was fond of speaking esoteric languages, feasting all night, indulging in excessive pleasure, indulging in drinking, ignoring state affairs, and entrusting government affairs to the noble doctor.

古文：百官荒乱，诸侯并侵，国且危亡，在於旦暮，左右莫敢谏。
现代文：文武百官荒淫放纵，诸侯各国都来侵犯，国家危亡，就在旦夕之间。齐王身边近臣都不敢进谏。
English: Hundreds of civil and military officials indulged in debauchery, princes from all over the country invaded, and the country was in danger of dying. It was between a rock and a hard place. None of King Qi's close advisers dared to enter the palace.

古文：淳于髡说之以隐曰： 国中有大鸟，止王之庭，三年不蜚又不鸣，不知此鸟何也？ 
现代文：淳于髡用隐语来规劝讽谏齐威王，说： 都城中有只大鸟，落在了大王的庭院里，三年不飞又不叫，大王知道这只鸟是怎么一回事吗？ 
English: "There is a big bird in the capital that landed in the king's courtyard and has not flown or called for three years. Does the king know what happened to this bird?

古文：王曰： 此鸟不飞则已，一飞冲天；不鸣则已，一鸣惊人。 
现代文：齐威王说： 这只鸟不飞则已，一飞就直冲云霄；不叫则已，一叫就使人惊异。 
English: King Qiwei said, "This bird does not fly, but when it flies, it flies straight into the sky; it does not call, but when it calls, it surprises people.

古文：於是乃朝诸县令长七十二人，赏一人，诛一人，奋兵而出。诸侯振惊，皆还齐侵地。
现代文：于是就诏令全国七十二个县的长官全来入朝奏事，奖赏了一人，诛杀了一人；又发兵御敌，各诸侯国大为震惊，都把侵占的土地归还齐国。
English: He then issued an edict ordering the governors of all the country's seventy-two counties to report to the emperor, rewarded one person, and killed one person. He also dispatched troops to fight the enemy. The various provinces were greatly shocked, and all returned the occupied land to Qi.

古文：威行三十六年。
现代文：齐国的声威持续了三十六年。
English: The prestige of Qi lasted for 36 years.

古文：语在田完世家中。
现代文：这些事全记载在《田完世家》里。
English: All these events are recorded in "Tankan Seika."

古文：威王八年，楚大发兵加齐。
现代文：齐威王八年，楚国派遣大军侵犯国边境。
English: In the eighth year of King Qi Wei, the State of Chu sent a large army to invade the national border.

古文：齐王使淳于髡之赵请救兵，赍金百斤，车马十驷。
现代文：齐王派淳于髡出使赵国请求救兵，让他携带礼物黄金百斤，驷马车十辆。
English: The king of Qi sent out the envoy Junyu to Zhao Guo to request a rescue, and asked him to bring a gift of 100 catties of gold and ten horse-drawn carriages.

古文：淳于髡仰天大笑，冠缨索绝。
现代文：淳于髡仰天大笑，将系帽子的带子都笑断了。
English: Jun Yuqin laughed so loudly that he broke the straps of his hat.

古文：王曰： 先生少之乎？ 
现代文：威王说： 先生是嫌礼物太少么？ 
English: Wei Wang said, "Is it because you don't want to get too few gifts?"

古文：髡曰： 何敢！ 
现代文：淳于髡说： 怎么敢嫌少！ 
English: Jun Yuxuan said, "How dare you hate a few!

古文：王曰： 笑岂有说乎？ 
现代文：威王说： 那你笑，难道有什么说辞吗？ 
English: Wei Wang said, "Then smile, do you have anything to say?"

古文：髡曰： 今者臣从东方来，见道傍有禳田者，操一豚蹄，酒一盂，祝曰： 瓯窭满篝，汙邪满车，五穀蕃熟，穰穰满家。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 今天我从东边来，看到路旁有个祭祀田神的人，拿着一个猪蹄、一杯酒，祈祷说： 高地上收获的谷物盛满篝笼，低田里收获的庄稼装满车辆；五谷繁茂丰熟，米粮堆积满仓。 
English: "Today, when I came from the east, I saw a man on the side of the road who was offering a sacrifice to the god of the field. He was holding a pig's trotter and a glass of wine, and he was praying, saying, 'The grain harvested in the highlands is full of straw cages, the crops harvested in the lowlands are full of vehicles; the grain is flourishing and ripe, and the rice grains are piled up in storehouses.

古文：臣见其所持者狭而所欲者奢，故笑之。 
现代文：我看见他拿的祭品很少，而所祈求的东西太多，所以笑他。 
English: I laughed at him when I saw how little he sacrificed and how much he asked for.

古文：於是齐威王乃益赍黄金千溢，白璧十双，车马百驷。
现代文：于是齐威王就把礼物增加到黄金千镒、白璧十对、驷马车百辆。
English: As a result, King Qi Wei increased the gifts to a thousand pieces of gold, ten pairs of white gems, and one hundred horse-drawn carriages.

古文：髡辞而行，至赵。
现代文：淳于髡告辞起行，来到赵国。
English: Jun Yuxuan started his journey with a farewell speech and came to Zhao.

古文：赵王与之精兵十万，革车千乘。
现代文：赵王拨给他十万精兵、一千辆裹有皮革的战车。
English: King Zhao assigned him one hundred thousand elite soldiers and one thousand chariots wrapped in leather.

古文：楚闻之，夜引兵而去。
现代文：楚国听到这个消息，连夜退兵而去。
English: When Chu heard the news, he left the army overnight.

古文：威王大说，置酒后宫，召髡赐之酒。
现代文：齐威王非常高兴，在后宫设置酒肴，召见淳于髡，赐他酒喝。
English: King Qi Wei was very pleased. He set up wine dishes in the harem, summoned Chunyu and gave him wine to drink.

古文：问曰： 先生能饮几何而醉？ 
现代文：问他说： 先生能够喝多少酒才醉？ 
English: Ask him: How much alcohol can a teacher drink before getting drunk?

古文：对曰： 臣饮一斗亦醉，一石亦醉。 
现代文：淳于髡回答说： 我喝一斗酒也能醉，喝一石酒也能醉。 
English: Jun Yuxuan replied, "I can get drunk by drinking a bucket of wine, and I can get drunk by drinking a stone of wine.

古文：威王曰： 先生饮一斗而醉，恶能饮一石哉！
现代文：威王说： 先生喝一斗就醉了，怎么能喝一石呢？
English: Wei Wang said, "My teacher gets drunk after drinking a bucket of water, how can he drink a stone?"

古文：其说可得闻乎？ 
现代文：能把这个道理说给我听听吗？ 
English: Can you explain this to me?

古文：髡曰： 赐酒大王之前，执法在傍，御史在后，髡恐惧俯伏而饮，不过一斗径醉矣。
现代文：淳于髡说： 大王当面赏酒给我，执法官站在旁边，御史站在背后，我心惊胆战，低头伏地地喝，喝不了一斗就醉了。
English: Chun Yuxuan said, "The king rewarded me with wine in front of me, the magistrate stood next to me, and the historian stood behind me. My heart was terrified, and I drank with my head down. I couldn't drink more than one glass before I was drunk.

古文：若亲有严客，髡韝鞠鯱，待酒於前，时赐馀沥，奉觞上寿，数起，饮不过二斗径醉矣。
现代文：假如父母有尊贵的客人来，我卷起衣袖，曲身跪坐，奉酒敬客，客人不时赏我残酒，屡次举杯敬酒应酬，喝不到两斗就醉了。
English: If my parents have a distinguished guest, I roll up my sleeves, bend over, kneel down, and serve wine to the guest. The guest occasionally rewards me with leftover wine, repeatedly raises a toast, and gets drunk before drinking two buckets.

古文：若朋友交游，久不相见，卒然相睹，欢然道故，私情相语，饮可五六斗径醉矣。
现代文：假如朋友间交游，好久不曾见面，忽然间相见了，高兴地追溯往事，倾吐衷肠，大约喝五六斗就醉了。
English: If friends travel together, haven't seen each other for a long time, suddenly see each other, happily retrace the past, pour out their hearts, drink about five or six bucks and get drunk.

古文：若乃州闾之会，男女杂坐，行酒稽留，六博投壶，相引为曹，握手无罚，目眙不禁，前有堕珥，后有遗簪，髡窃乐此，饮可八斗而醉二参。
现代文：至于乡里之间的聚会，男女杂坐，彼此敬酒，没有时间的限制，又作六博、投壶一类的游戏，呼朋唤友，相邀成对，握手言欢不受处罚，眉目传情不遭禁止，面前有落下的耳环，背后有丢掉的发簪，在这种时候，我最开心，可以喝上八斗酒，也不过两三分醉意。
English: As for the gatherings in the countryside, the men and women sit together, toast each other, there is no time limit, and they play games such as six-pointers and pots, call friends and invite friends, invite each other in pairs, shake hands without being punished, look at each other without being banned, there are falling earrings in front of me, there are lost hairpins behind me, at this time, I am the happiest, I can drink eight barrels of wine, and I am only two or three points drunk.

古文：日暮酒阑，合尊促坐，男女同席，履舄交错，杯盘狼藉，堂上烛灭，主人留髡而送客，罗襦襟解，微闻芗泽，当此之时，髡心最欢，能饮一石。
现代文：天黑了，酒也快完了，把残余的酒并到一起，大家促膝而坐，男女同席，鞋子木屐混杂在一起，杯盘杂乱不堪，堂屋里的蜡烛已经熄灭，主人单留住我，而把别的客人送走，绫罗短袄的衣襟已经解开，略略闻到阵阵香味，这时我心里最为高兴，能喝下一石酒。
English: It's dark, the wine is almost finished, the leftover wine is put together, everyone sits on their knees, men and women sit together, shoes and clogs are mixed together, cups and plates are cluttered, the candles in the hall have been extinguished, the owner keeps me alone and sends the other guests away, the collar of the short-sleeved shirt has been untied, and I can smell the fragrance. At this time, my heart is the happiest, I can drink a stone of wine.

古文：故曰酒极则乱，乐极则悲；万事尽然，言不可极，极之而衰。 
现代文：所以说，酒喝得过多就容易出乱子，欢乐到极点就会发生悲痛之事。所有的事情都是如此。 这番话是说，无论什么事情不可走向极端，到了极端就会衰败。
English: Wherefore it is said, That in much wine there is a falling away, and in much joy there is grief, but in all things it is this, That whatsoever things are not in excess, but in excess, they are corrupted.

古文：以讽谏焉。
现代文：淳于髡以此来婉转地劝说齐威王。
English: So, Junyuxuan used this tact to persuade King Qi Wei.

古文：齐王曰： 善。 
现代文：威王说： 好。 
English: After listening, Qi Wang suddenly understood and said: Good.

古文：乃罢长夜之饮，以髡为诸侯主客。
现代文：于是，威王就停止了夜夜欢饮，并任用淳于髡为接待诸侯宾客的宾礼官。
English: As a result, King Wei stopped the nightly drinking and appointed Junyuxuan as the guest of honor to receive the guests of the princes.

古文：宗室置酒，髡尝在侧。
现代文：齐王宗室设置酒宴，淳于髡常常作陪。
English: King Qi's family held wine feasts, and Jun Yuxuan often accompanied them.

古文：其后百馀年，楚有优孟。
现代文：在淳于髡之后一百多年，楚国出了个优孟。
English: More than a hundred years after the birth of Junyushan, the state of Chu produced a great man.

古文：优孟，故楚之乐人也。
现代文：优孟原是楚国的歌舞艺人。
English: Yu Mengyuan is a singer and dancer from the state of Chu.

古文：长八尺，多辩，常以谈笑讽谏。
现代文：他身高八尺，富有辩才，时常用说笑方式劝诫楚王。
English: He was eight feet tall, a talented debater, and often used humor to admonish King Chu.

古文：楚庄王之时，有所爱马，衣以文绣，置之华屋之下，席以露床，啗以枣脯。
现代文：楚庄王的时候，他有一匹喜爱的马，给它穿上锦绣衣服，养在富丽堂皇的屋子里，睡在没有帐幔的床上，用蜜饯的枣干来喂它。
English: When he was the king of Chuzhuang, he had a favorite horse. He dressed it in embroidered clothes, kept it in a magnificent house, slept on a bed without curtains, and fed it with candied dried dates.

古文：马病肥死，使群臣丧之，欲以棺椁大夫礼葬之。
现代文：马因为肥胖而得病死亡，楚庄王派群臣给马办丧事，要用棺槨盛殓，依照大夫那样的礼仪来葬埋它。
English: The horse died of illness due to obesity, and the king of Chu Zhuang sent a group of courtiers to hold a funeral for the horse. They had to bury it in a coffin and according to the doctor's etiquette.

古文：左右争之，以为不可。
现代文：庄王左右近臣争着对这件事进行劝谏，认为不可以这样做。
English: Zhuang Wang and his close vassals all tried to dissuade him from doing so.

古文：王下令曰： 有敢以马谏者，罪至死。 
现代文：庄王下令说： 有谁再敢以葬马的事来进谏，就处以死刑。 
English: Zhuang Wang gave an order: Anyone who dares to sue Zhuang Wang for burying his horse will be sentenced to death.

古文：优孟闻之，入殿门。仰天大哭。
现代文：优孟听到此事，走进殿门，仰天大哭。
English: Hearing this, You Meng walked into the gate of the palace and burst into tears.

古文：王惊而问其故。
现代文：庄王吃惊地问他哭的原因。
English: Zhuang Wang was surprised and asked him why he was crying.

古文：优孟曰： 马者王之所爱也，以楚国堂堂之大，何求不得，而以大夫礼葬之，薄，请以人君礼葬之。 
现代文：优孟说： 马是大王的心爱之物，凭着楚国这样强大的国家，有什么事情办不到，却用大夫的礼仪来埋葬它，太薄待了，请用人君的礼仪来埋葬它。 
English: Yu Meng said, "The horse is the beloved object of the great king. With such a powerful country as Chu, there is nothing that can be done, but to bury it with the etiquette of a doctor is too short-sighted. Please bury it with the etiquette of a nobleman."

古文：王曰： 何如？ 
现代文：庄王问： 那怎么办？ 
English: Zhuo Wang asked: How about that?

古文：对曰： 臣请以彫玉为棺，文梓为椁，楩枫豫章为题凑，发甲卒为穿壙，老弱负土，齐赵陪位於前，韩魏翼卫其后，庙食太牢，奉以万户之邑。
现代文：优孟回答说： 我请求用雕刻花纹的美玉做棺材，用细致的梓木做套材，用楩、枫、豫、樟等名贵木材做护棺的木块，派士兵给它挖掘墓穴，让老人儿童背土筑坟，齐国、赵国的使臣在前面陪祭，韩国、魏国的使臣在后面护卫，为马建立祠庙，用牛羊猪祭祀，封给万户大邑来供奉。
English: Yu Meng replied, "I request that the coffin be made of beautiful jade with carved patterns, the cover be made of fine azusa wood, and the coffin block be made of precious wood such as maple, maple, henbane, and alder, and that soldiers be sent to dig a grave for it, and that the elderly and children build a grave on its back. The envoys of Qi and Zhao will accompany the sacrifice in the front, and the envoys of South Korea and Wei will escort it in the back. An ancestral temple will be built for the horse, and it will be sacrificed with cattle, sheep, and pigs. It will be sealed to all

古文：诸侯闻之，皆知大王贱人而贵马也。 
现代文：诸侯听到这件事，就都知道大王轻视人而看重马了。 
English: When the princes heard about this, they all knew that the great king despised people and valued horses.

古文：王曰： 寡人之过一至此乎！
现代文：庄王说： 我的过错竟然到了这种地步吗？
English: Zhuang Wang said, "Is it my fault that it has come to this?

古文：为之柰何？ 
现代文：对它该怎么办呢？ 
English: What should be done with it?

古文：优孟曰： 请为大王六畜葬之。以垅灶为椁，铜历为棺，赍以姜枣，荐以木兰，祭以粮稻，衣以火光，葬之於人腹肠。 
现代文：优孟说： 请大王准许按埋葬畜牲的办法来葬埋它：在地上堆个土灶当做套材，用大铜锅当做棺材，用姜枣来调味，用香料来解腥，用稻米作祭品，用火作衣服，把它安葬在人的肚肠中。 
English: Yu Meng said, "I would like to ask the king's permission to bury it in the same way as burying an animal: pile an earthenware pot on the ground as a casing, use a large copper pot as a coffin, use ginger jujube to season, use spices to deodorize, use rice as a sacrifice, use fire to make clothes, and bury it in a person's stomach.

古文：於是王乃使以马属太官，无令天下久闻也。
现代文：于是庄王派人把马交给了主管宫中膳食的太官，不让天下人长久传扬此事。
English: As a result, King Zhuang sent someone to deliver the horse to the eunuch in charge of meals in the palace, and did not allow the world to spread the news for a long time.

古文：楚相孙叔敖知其贤人也，善待之。
现代文：楚国宰相孙叔敖知道优孟是位贤人，待他很好。
English: Sun Shuxuan, the prime minister of Chu, knew that Yu Menglu was a wise man and treated him well.

古文：病且死，属其子曰： 我死，汝必贫困。
现代文：孙叔敖病重快要去世的时候，叮嘱他的儿子说： 我死后，你一定会贫困。
English: When Sun Shujuan was seriously ill and about to die, he told his son: "After my death, you will certainly be poor."

古文：若往见优孟，言我孙叔敖之子也。 
现代文：那时，你就去拜见优孟，说 我是孙叔敖的儿子。  
English: At that time, you went to see You Meng and said, "I am the son of Sun Shuxuan."

古文：居数年，其子穷困负薪，逢优孟，与言曰： 我，孙叔敖子也。
现代文：过了几年，孙叔敖的儿子果然穷困得靠背柴度日。一次路上遇到优孟，就对优孟说： 我是孙叔敖的儿子。
English: After a few years, Sun Shujun's son was so poor that he had to live on the back of a log. Once, when he met You Meng on the road, he said to You Meng: I am Sun Shujun's son.

古文：父且死时，属我贫困往见优孟。 
现代文：父亲临终前，嘱咐我贫困时就去拜见优孟。 
English: Before my father died, he told me to visit You Meng when I was poor.

古文：优孟曰： 若无远有所之。 
现代文：优孟说： 你不要到远处去。 
English: Yu Meng said: You don't have to go far.

古文：即为孙叔敖衣冠，抵掌谈语。岁馀，像孙叔敖，楚王及左右不能别也。
现代文：于是，他就立即缝制了类似孙叔敖的衣服帽子穿戴起来，模仿孙叔敖的言谈举止，音容笑貌。
English: As a result, he immediately sewed clothes and a hat similar to Sun Shuxuan's and put them on, imitating Sun Shuxuan's speech, appearance, and smile.

古文：庄王置酒，优孟前为寿。
现代文：过了一年多，模仿得活像孙叔敖，连楚庄王左右近臣都分辨不出来。
English: After more than a year, the imitation was so lifelike as to resemble Sun Shuxuan that even the close vassals around the King of Chuzhuang could not tell them apart.

古文：庄王大惊，以为孙叔敖复生也，欲以为相。
现代文：楚庄王设置酒宴，优孟上前为庄王敬酒祝福。庄王大吃一惊，以为孙叔敖又复活了，想要让他做楚相。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang set up a wine banquet, and Yu Meng came forward to toast Zhuang Wang. Zhuang Wang was very surprised, thinking that Sun Shuxuan had been resurrected, and wanted to make him a Chu Xiang.

古文：优孟曰： 请归与妇计之，三日而为相。 
现代文：优孟说： 请允许我回去和妻子商量此事，三日后再来就任楚相。 
English: Yu Meng said: Please allow me to go back and discuss the matter with my wife, and come back three days later to take office as prime minister.

古文：庄王许之。
现代文：庄王答应了他。
English: Zhuo Wang agreed.

古文：三日后，优孟复来。
现代文：三日后，优孟又来见庄王。
English: Three days later, Yu Meng came to see Zhuang Wang again.

古文：王曰： 妇言谓何？ 
现代文：庄王问： 你妻子怎么说的？ 
English: Zhuang Wang asked: What did your wife say?

古文：孟曰： 妇言慎无为，楚相不足为也。
现代文：优孟说： 妻子说千万不要做，楚国的宰相不值得去做。
English: Yu Meng said: My wife said never to do it, the prime minister of Chu is not worth doing.

古文：如孙叔敖之为楚相，尽忠为廉以治楚，楚王得以霸。
现代文：像孙叔敖那样身为楚国宰相，忠正廉洁地治理楚国，楚王才得以称霸。
English: As the prime minister of the State of Chu, just like Sun Shuxuan, he governed the State of Chu with honesty and integrity, and it was only then that the King of Chu was able to reign supreme.

古文：今死，其子无立锥之地，贫困负薪以自饮食。
现代文：如今他死了，他的儿子竟无立锥之地，贫困到每天靠背柴为生。
English: Now that he is dead, his son has nowhere to live and is so poor that he has to make a living by carrying firewood.

古文：必如孙叔敖，不如自杀。 
现代文：如果要像孙叔敖那样做楚相，还不如自杀。 
English: If you want to be like Sun Shuxuan, you might as well commit suicide.

古文：因歌曰： 山居耕田苦，难以得食。
现代文：优孟接着唱道： 住在山野，耕田受苦，难以生活。
English: Yu Meng went on to sing: Living in the mountains and fields, suffering in the fields, it is difficult to live.

古文：起而为吏，身贪鄙者馀财，不顾耻辱。
现代文：出外做官，自身贪脏卑鄙的，积有余财，不顾廉耻。
English: They go out to work as officials, they are greedy and despicable, they accumulate surplus wealth, and they are shameless.

古文：身死家室富，又恐受赇枉法，为奸触大罪，身死而家灭。
现代文：自己死后家室虽然富足，但又恐惧贪脏枉法，干非法之事，犯下大罪，自己被杀，家室也遭诛灭。
English: After his death, although his family was rich, he was afraid of being greedy, doing illegal things, and committing serious crimes. He was killed, and his family was also destroyed.

古文：贪吏安可为也！
现代文：贪官哪能做呢？
English: What can corrupt officials do?

古文：念为廉吏，奉法守职，竟死不敢为非。
现代文：想要做个清官，遵纪守法，忠于职守，到死都不敢做非法之事。
English: If you want to be a clean-up officer, follow the rules, abide by the law, and be loyal to your duties, you will not dare to do anything illegal until you die.

古文：廉吏安可为也！
现代文：唉，清官又哪能做呢？
English: Alas, what can the police do?

古文：楚相孙叔敖持廉至死，方今妻子穷困负薪而食，不足为也！ 
现代文：像楚相孙叔敖，一生坚持廉洁的操守，现在妻儿老小却贫困到打柴为生。
English: Like Chu Xiangsun Shuxuan, he adhered to the principle of integrity throughout his life, but now his wife and children are too poor to make a living by collecting firewood.

古文：於是庄王谢优孟，乃召孙叔敖子，封之寝丘四百户，以奉其祀。
现代文：清官实在不值得做啊！ 于是，庄王向优孟表示了歉意，当即召见孙叔敖的儿子，把寝丘这个四百户之邑封给他，以供祭祀孙叔敖之用。
English: As a result, Zhuo Wang apologized to Yu Meng and immediately summoned Sun Shuxuan's son to give him the 400-household town of Xieqiu as a place to worship Sun Shuxuan.

古文：后十世不绝。
现代文：自此之后，十代不曾断绝。
English: Since then, the ten generations have not been cut off.

古文：此知可以言时矣。
现代文：优孟的这种聪明才智，可以说是正得其宜，抓住了发挥的时机。
English: This cleverness of Yu Meng can be said to be just right, seizing the opportunity to play.

古文：其后二百馀年，秦有优旃。
现代文：在优孟以后二百多年，秦国出了个优旃。
English: More than two hundred years after Yu Meng, Qin State had a great leader.

古文：优旃者，秦倡侏儒也。
现代文：优旃是秦国的歌舞艺人，个子非常矮小。
English: Yuxuan is a very short singer and dancer from Qin.

古文：善为笑言，然合於大道，秦始皇时，置酒而天雨，陛楯者皆沾寒。
现代文：他擅长说笑话，然而都能合乎大道理。秦始皇时，宫中设置酒宴，正遇上天下雨，殿阶下执楯站岗的卫士都淋着雨，受着风寒。
English: He is good at telling jokes, but they are all consistent with the truth. When Qin Shi Huang was the first emperor, a wine banquet was held in the palace. It was raining all day, and the guards who stood guard under the palace steps were drenched in rain and cold.

古文：优旃见而哀之，谓之曰： 汝欲休乎？ 
现代文：优旃看见了十分怜悯他们，对他们说： 你们想要休息么？ 
English: Seeing them full of compassion, Youjun said to them, "Do you want to rest?"

古文：陛楯者皆曰： 幸甚。 
现代文：卫士们都说： 非常希望。 
English: The guards all said: "We are very hopeful."

古文：优旃曰： 我即呼汝，汝疾应曰诺。 
现代文：优旃说： 如果我叫你们，你们要很快地答应我。 
English: Youjun said, "If I ask you to leave, you must quickly agree to my request."

古文：居有顷，殿上上寿呼万岁。
现代文：过了一会儿，宫殿上向秦始皇祝酒，高呼万岁。
English: After a while, the palace gave a toast to Qin Shi Huang and shouted "Long live!"

古文：优旃临槛大呼曰： 陛楯郎！ 
现代文：优旃近栏干旁大声喊道： 卫士！ 
English: A superior eunuch near the column shouted loudly: "Guardian!

古文：郎曰： 诺。 
现代文：卫士答道： 有。 
English: The guard replied: Yes.

古文：优旃曰： 汝虽长，何益，幸雨立。
现代文：优旃说： 你们虽然长得高大，有什么好处？
English: Youjun said, "Even though you are tall, what good are you?

古文：我虽短也，幸休居。 
现代文：只有幸站在露天淋雨。我虽然长得矮小，却有幸在这里休息。 
English: I'm just lucky to be standing in the open in the rain. Even though I'm short, I'm lucky enough to rest here.

古文：於是始皇使陛楯者得半相代。
现代文：于是，秦始皇准许卫士减半值班，轮流接替。
English: As a result, Qin Shihuang allowed the guards to halve their shifts and take turns.

古文：始皇尝议欲大苑囿，东至函谷关，西至雍、陈仓。
现代文：秦始皇曾经计议要扩大射猎的区域，东到函谷关，西到雍县和陈仓。
English: The First Emperor of Qin had planned to expand the area of shooting, to the east to Hankow Pass, and to the west to Yongxian and Chencang.

古文：优旃曰： 善。
现代文：优旃说： 好。
English: Youjun said, "Good."

古文：多纵禽兽於其中，寇从东方来，令麋鹿触之足矣。 
现代文：多养些禽兽在里面，敌人从东面来侵犯，让麋鹿用角去抵触他们就足够了。 
English: It is enough to keep some more animals inside, and let the elk use its horns to resist the enemy invading from the east.

古文：始皇以故辍止。
现代文：秦始皇听了这话，就停止了扩大猎场的计划。
English: Upon hearing this, Qin Shihuang stopped his plans to expand the hunting grounds.

古文：二世立，又欲漆其城。
现代文：秦二世皇帝即位，又想用漆涂饰城墙。
English: Emperor Qin II ascended to the throne and wanted to paint the city walls with lacquer.

古文：优旃曰： 善。
现代文：优旃说： 好。
English: Youjun said, "Good."

古文：主上虽无言，臣固将请之。
现代文：君主即使不说，我本来也要请您这样做的。
English: I would have asked you to do it even if you hadn't, Your Majesty.

古文：漆城虽於百姓愁费，然佳哉！
现代文：漆城墙虽然给百姓带来愁苦和耗费，但是很美呀！
English: Although the lacquered city wall brings sorrow and expense to the people, it is very beautiful!

古文：漆城荡荡，寇来不能上。
现代文：城墙漆得滑溜溜的，敌人来了也爬不上来。
English: The walls are painted so slippery that the enemy can't climb them.

古文：即欲就之，易为漆耳，顾难为廕室。 
现代文：要想成就这件事，涂漆倒是容易的，但是难办的是要找一所大房子，把漆过的城墙搁进去，使它阴干。 
English: To accomplish this, it is easy to paint, but it is difficult to find a large house, put the painted walls inside and let it dry in the shade.

古文：於是二世笑之，以其故止。
现代文：于是二世皇帝笑了起来，因而取消了这个计划。
English: The Emperor II laughed and cancelled the plan.

古文：居无何，二世杀死，优旃归汉，数年而卒。
现代文：不久，二世皇帝被杀死，优旃归顺了汉朝，几年后就去世了。
English: Soon after, Emperor II was killed, and Youyou surrendered to the Han Dynasty and died a few years later.

古文：太史公曰：淳于髡仰天大笑，齐威王横行。
现代文：太史公说：淳于髡仰天大笑，齐威王因而模行天下。
English: Tai Shikong said: "Chun Yu Yan looked up to heaven and laughed, and King Qi Wei thus became a model for the whole world."

古文：优孟摇头而歌，负薪者以封。
现代文：优孟摇头歌唱，背柴为生的人因而受到封赏。
English: Yu Meng shakes his head and sings, and the people who earn their living by carrying firewood are thus rewarded.

古文：优旃临槛疾呼，陛楯得以半更。
现代文：优旃凭栏高呼，殿阶下执盾的卫士因而得以减半值勤，轮流倒休。
English: The superior eunuchs shouted from the banners, and the guards holding shields under the palace were thus able to halve their duty and take turns to rest.

古文：岂不亦伟哉！
现代文：这些难道不都是伟大而可颂扬的么！
English: Aren't these all great and praiseworthy things!

古文：褚先生曰：臣幸得以经术为郎，而好读外家传语。
现代文：褚少孙先生说：我有幸能因通晓经学而做了郎官，也爱好读六经以外的史传杂说。
English: Mr. Zou Shosun said: I am fortunate to be able to be a vassal because of my knowledge of the scriptures, and I also like to read historical stories other than the six sutras.

古文：窃不逊让，复作故事滑稽之语六章，编之於左。
现代文：我自不能谦逊虚让，又写了六章滑稽故事，编在太史公原著的后面。
English: Unable to humble myself, I wrote another six chapters of funny stories, which were compiled at the back of Taishi's original work.

古文：可以览观扬意，以示后世好事者读之，以游心骇耳，以附益上方太史公之三章。
现代文：可供阅览，扩充见闻，以便流传给后代不怕絮烦的人浏览，以舒畅心胸，警醒听闻，特把它增附在上面太史公三则滑稽故事的后面。
English: It can be used for reading, expanding the story, so that it can be passed on to future generations of people who are not afraid of boring. With a comfortable heart and alert hearing, it is specially added to the back of the above three funny stories of Taishi.

古文：武帝时有所幸倡郭舍人者，发言陈辞虽不合大道，然令人主和说。
现代文：汉武帝时，有个受宠爱的艺人姓郭，他发言讲话虽然不合乎大道理，却能使皇上听了心情和悦。
English: In the time of Emperor Hanwu, there was a beloved entertainer surnamed Guo. Although his speech was unreasonable, it could make the emperor listen to his mood and pleasure.

古文：武帝少时，东武侯母常养帝，帝壮时，号之曰 大乳母 。
现代文：武帝年幼时，东武侯的母亲曾经乳养过他，武帝长大后，就称她为 大乳母 。
English: When Emperor Wu was young, Dongwu's mother used to breastfeed him. When Emperor Wu grew up, he called her the "big nanny."

古文：率一月再朝。
现代文：大概每月入朝两次。
English: I visit North Korea about twice a month.

古文：朝奏入，有诏使幸臣马游卿以帛五十匹赐乳母，又奉饮Я飧养乳母。
现代文：每次入朝的通报呈送进去，必有诏旨派宠爱的侍臣马游卿拿五十匹绸绢赏给乳母，并备饮食供养乳母。
English: Every time the notification of entering the imperial court was sent in, Ma Youqing, a favorite attendant of the imperialists, would reward the nanny with fifty silk cocoons and prepare food to feed the nanny.

古文：乳母上书曰： 某所有公田，原得假倩之。 
现代文：乳母上书说： 某处有块公田，希望拨借给我使用。 
English: The nanny wrote: There is a piece of public land somewhere, I would like to borrow it.

古文：帝曰： 乳母欲得之乎？ 
现代文：武帝说： 乳母想得到它吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Does the nanny want it?

古文：以赐乳母。
现代文：便把公田赐给了她。
English: So he gave her the field.

古文：乳母所言，未尝不听。
现代文：乳母所说的话，没有不听的。
English: There was no reason not to listen to what the nanny had to say.

古文：有诏得令乳母乘车行驰道中。
现代文：又下诏乳母所乘坐的车子可以在御道上行走。
English: It also decreed that the car in which the nanny was travelling could be driven on public roads.

古文：当此之时，公卿大臣皆敬重乳母。
现代文：在这个时候，公卿大臣都敬重乳母。
English: At this time, nobles and ministers all respected nannies.

古文：乳母家子孙奴从者横暴长安中，当道掣顿人车马，夺人衣服。
现代文：乳母家里的子孙奴仆等人在长安城中横行霸道，当道拦截人家的车马，抢夺别人的衣物。
English: The sons and grandsons of the nanny's family and other servants ran amok in Chang'an City, intercepting other people's cars and horses, and stealing other people's clothes.

古文：闻於中，不忍致之法。
现代文：消息传入朝中，武帝不忍心用法律来制裁乳母。
English: When the news reached the court, Emperor Wu had no choice but to use the law to punish the nanny.

古文：有司请徙乳母家室，处之於边。
现代文：主管的官吏奏请把乳母一家迁移到边疆去。
English: The responsible official requested that the nanny's family be moved to the border.

古文：奏可。
现代文：武帝批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：乳母当入至前，面见辞。
现代文：乳母理当进宫到武帝前面辞行。
English: The nanny should have entered the palace and resigned in front of Emperor Wu.

古文：乳母先见郭舍人，为下泣。
现代文：乳母先会见了郭舍人，为此而流泪。
English: The nanny first met with Guo Shiren, and shed tears for this.

古文：舍人曰： 即入见辞去，疾步数还顾。 
现代文：郭舍人说： 马上进去面见辞行，快步退出，多回过身来望几次皇帝。 
English: Guo She said, "Immediately go in to meet and resign, quickly exit, and turn around several times to look at the emperor."

古文：乳母如其言，谢去，疾步数还顾。
现代文：乳母照他说的做了，面见武帝辞行，快步退出，屡屡转过身来看武帝。
English: The nanny did as he said, and when she saw Emperor Wu resigning, she quickly left, repeatedly turning around to look at Emperor Wu.

古文：郭舍人疾言骂之曰： 咄！
现代文：郭舍人大声骂乳母说： 啐！
English: Guo Sheren loudly scolded the nanny and said: "Shame!

古文：老女子！何不疾行！
现代文：老婆子，为什么不快点走！
English: Old woman, why don't you hurry up and leave!

古文：陛下已壮矣，宁尚须汝乳而活邪？
现代文：皇上已经长大了，难道还要等你喂奶才能活命么？还转身看什么！ 
English: The emperor has already grown up, does he have to wait for you to breastfeed him to stay alive? And he turns around to see what!

古文：尚何还顾！ 於是人主怜焉悲之，乃下诏止无徙乳母，罚谪谮之者。
现代文：于是武帝可怜她，不禁悲伤起来，就下令制止，不准迁移乳母一家，还处罚了说乳母坏话的人。
English: So Emperor Wu took pity on her and couldn't help but feel sad, so he ordered to stop the relocation of the nanny's family, and also punished those who spoke ill of the nanny.

古文：武帝时，齐人有东方生名朔，以好古传书，爱经术，多所博观外家之语。
现代文：汉武帝时，齐地有个人叫东方朔，因喜欢古代流传下来的书籍，爱好儒家经术，广泛地阅览了诸子百家的书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, there was a man in Qi named Dongfang Shuo, who liked the books handed down from ancient times, was fond of Confucian classics, and extensively read hundreds of books.

古文：朔初入长安，至公车上书，凡用三千奏牍。
现代文：东方朔刚到长安时，到公车府那里上书给皇帝，共用了三千个木简。
English: When Dongfang Shuo first arrived in Chang'an, he went to the bus station to send a letter to the emperor, using a total of three thousand wooden slips.

古文：公车令两人共持举其书，仅然能胜之。
现代文：公车府派两个人一起来抬他的奏章，刚好抬得起来。
English: The bus authority sent two people to carry his medal, and he was just able to lift it.

古文：人主从上方读之，止，辄乙其处，读之二月乃尽。
现代文：武帝在宫内阅读东方朔的奏章，需要停阅时，便在那里划个记号，读了两个月才读完。
English: Emperor Wu read Dongfangshuo's musical score in the palace. When he needed to stop reading, he marked it there. It took him two months to finish reading it.

古文：诏拜以为郎，常在侧侍中。
现代文：武帝下令任命东方朔为郎官，他经常在皇上身边侍奉。
English: Emperor Wu ordered the appointment of Dongfang Shuo as a vassal, and he often served at the emperor's side.

古文：数召至前谈语，人主未尝不说也。
现代文：屡次叫他到跟前谈话，武帝从未有过不高兴的。
English: Repeatedly calling him to come and talk to him, Emperor Wu was never displeased.

古文：时诏赐之食於前。
现代文：武帝时常下诏赐他御前用饭。
English: Emperor Wu often gave him a meal in front of the emperor.

古文：饭已，尽怀其馀肉持去，衣尽汙。
现代文：饭后，他便把剩下的肉全都揣在怀里带走，把衣服都弄脏了。
English: After the meal, he took all the leftover meat away in his arms, soiling his clothes.

古文：数赐缣帛，檐揭而去。
现代文：皇上屡次赐给他绸绢，他都是肩挑手提地拿走。
English: The emperor repeatedly gave him silks and satins, which he took with both hands.

古文：徒用所赐钱帛，取少妇於长安中好女。
现代文：他专用这些赐来的钱财绸绢，娶长安城中年轻漂亮的女子为妻。
English: He used the money and silk to marry a beautiful young woman from Chang'an City.

古文：率取妇一岁所者即弃去，更取妇。
现代文：大多娶过来一年光景便抛弃了，再娶一个。
English: Most of them get married for a year and then abandon the situation and marry someone else.

古文：所赐钱财尽索之於女子。
现代文：皇上所赏赐的钱财完全用在女人身上。
English: The money and riches bestowed by the emperor were spent entirely on women.

古文：人主左右诸郎半呼之 狂人 。
现代文：皇上身边的侍臣有半数称他为 疯子 。
English: Half of the courtiers around the emperor called him a "madman."

古文：人主闻之，曰： 令朔在事无为是行者，若等安能及之哉！ 
现代文：武帝听到了说： 假如东方朔当官行事没有这些荒唐行为，你们哪能比得上他呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu heard this and said, "If Dongfang Shuo, a high-ranking official, did not commit these absurd acts, how can you compare to him?

古文：朔任其子为郎，又为侍谒者，常持节出使。
现代文：东方朔保举他的儿子做郎官，又升为侍中的谒者，常常衔命奉使，公出办事。
English: Dongfang Shuo Bao raised his son to be a vassal, and he was also promoted to the eunuch of the attendants, often serving as an envoy, and going out to work.

古文：朔行殿中，郎谓之曰： 人皆以先生为狂。 
现代文：一天东方朔从殿中经过，郎官们对他说： 人们都以为先生是位狂人。 
English: One day, Dongfang Shuo was passing through the palace, and his retainers said to him, "People all think that my master is a madman.

古文：朔曰： 如朔等，所谓避世於朝廷间者也。
现代文：东方朔说： 像我这样的人，就是所谓在朝廷里隐居的人。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: People like me are the so-called people who live in seclusion in the imperial court.

古文：古之人，乃避世於深山中。 
现代文：古时候的人，都是隐居在深山里。 
English: In ancient times, people lived in seclusion deep in the mountains.

古文：时坐席中，酒酣，据地歌曰： 陆沈於俗，避世金马门。
现代文：他时常坐在酒席中，酒喝得畅快时，就爬在地上唱道： 隐居在世俗中，避世在金马门。
English: He often sat in the middle of the banquet, and when the wine was well drunk, he crawled on the ground and sang: Seclusion in the world, seclusion in the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：宫殿中可以避世全身，何必深山之中，蒿庐之下。 
现代文：宫殿里可以隐居起来，保全自身，何必隐居在深山之中，茅舍里面。 
English: You can live in seclusion in a palace and preserve yourself, why not live in seclusion deep in the mountains, in a hut.

古文：金马门者，宦署门也，门傍有铜马，故谓之曰 金马门 。
现代文：所谓金马门，就是宦者衙署的门，大门旁边有铜马，所以叫做 金马门 。
English: The so-called Golden Horse Gate is the gate of the Criminal Investigation Department. There is a bronze horse next to the gate, so it is called the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：时会聚宫下博士诸先生与论议，共难之曰： 苏秦、张仪一当万乘之主，而都卿相之位，泽及后世。
现代文：当时正值朝廷召集学宫里的博士先生们参与议事，大家一同诘难东方朔说： 苏秦、张仪偶然遇到大国的君主，就能居于卿相的地位，恩泽留传后世。
English: At that time, the imperial court was convening the doctors and gentlemen of the academic palace to participate in the deliberation, and they all worked together to solve the difficulties. Dongfang Shuo said: Su Qin and Zhang Yi accidentally met the monarch of a great power, and they could live in the status of nobles, and the benefits would be passed down to future generations.

古文：今子大夫修先王之术，慕圣人之义，讽诵诗书百家之言，不可胜数。
现代文：现在您老先生研究先王治国御臣的方术，仰慕圣人立身处世的道理，熟习《诗》《书》和诸子百家的言论，不能一一例举。
English: Now, your old master is studying the methods of the previous kings and emperors, admiring the wisdom of the sages, and familiarizing himself with "Poetry," "Books" and the speeches of hundreds of scholars. It is not possible to give examples.

古文：著於竹帛，自以为海内无双，即可谓博闻辩智矣。
现代文：又有文章著作，自以为天下无双，就可以称是见多识广、聪敏才辩了。
English: There are also articles and books, and they think that there is no match in the world, so they can be said to be well-informed and intelligent.

古文：然悉力尽忠以事圣帝，旷日持久，积数十年，官不过侍郎，位不过执戟，意者尚有遗行邪？
现代文：可是您竭尽全力、忠心耿耿地事奉圣明的皇帝，旷日持久，累积长达数十年，官衔不过是个侍郎，职位不过是个卫士，看来您还有不够检点的行为吧？
English: But you did your best to loyally serve the Holy Emperor for a long time, accumulating for decades. Your official title is just a steward, and your position is just a guard. It seems that you have not been sufficiently disciplined, right?

古文：其故何也？ 
现代文：这是什么原因呢？ 
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：东方生曰： 是固非子所能备也。
现代文：东方朔说： 这本来就不是你们所能完全了解的。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: This is not something you can fully understand.

古文：彼一时也，此一时也，岂可同哉！
现代文：那时是一个时代，现在是另一个时代，怎么可以相提并论呢？
English: Then it was one era, now it is another era, how can it be compared?

古文：夫张仪、苏秦之时，周室大坏，诸侯不朝，力政争权，相禽以兵，并为十二国，未有雌雄，得士者彊，失士者亡，故说听行通，身处尊位，泽及后世，子孙长荣。
现代文：张仪、苏秦的时代，周朝十分衰败，诸侯都不去朝见周天子，用武力征伐夺取权势，用军事手段相互侵犯，天下兼并为十二个诸侯国，势力不相上下，得到士人的就强大，失掉士人的就灭亡，所以对士人言听计从，使士人身居高位，恩译留传后代，子孙长享荣华。
English: In the era of Zhang Yi and Su Qin, the Zhou Dynasty was very decadent. The princes did not go to the court to see Zhou Tianzi. They used force to conquer and seize power, and used military means to encroach on each other. The world was merged into twelve principalities, and their powers were on a par. If you get a scholar, you will be strong, and if you lose a scholar, you will perish. Therefore, you should listen to the scholar, and the scholar will occupy a high position, and the translation will be passed down to future generations, and the descendants will enjoy glory.

古文：今非然也。
现代文：如今不是这样。
English: This is no longer the case.

古文：圣帝在上，德流天下，诸侯宾服，威振四夷，连四海之外以为席，安於覆盂，天下平均，合为一家，动发举事，犹如运之掌中。
现代文：圣明的皇帝在上执掌朝政，恩泽遍及天下，诸侯归顺服从，威势震慑四方，将四海之外的疆土连接成像坐席那样的一片乐土，比倒放的盘盂还要安稳，天下统一，融为一体，凡有所举动，都如同在手掌中转动一下那样轻而易举。
English: The emperor of the holy light presides over the imperial government in heaven, grace pervades the world, the princes submit and obey, the power shocks the four directions, the territory beyond the four seas is connected like a piece of paradise like a seat, it is more stable than the upside-down anchor, the world is unified and integrated, and any action is as easy as turning it in the palm of your hand.

古文：贤与不肖，何以异哉？
现代文：贤与不贤，凭什么来辨别呢？
English: What is the basis for distinguishing between the virtuous and the wicked?

古文：方今以天下之大，士民之众，竭精驰说，并进辐凑者，不可胜数。
现代文：当今因天下广大，士民众多，竭尽精力，奔走游说，就如辐条凑集到车毂一样，竞相集中到京城里向朝庭献计献策的人，数也数不清。
English: Today, due to the vastness of the world and the large number of people in the world, they have exhausted their energy and rushed to lobby. Just as the spokes are gathered to the hub, the number of people competing to gather in the capital to present plans and suggestions to the imperial court is also countless.

古文：悉力慕义，困於衣食，或失门户。
现代文：尽管竭力仰慕道义，仍不免被衣食所困，有的竟连进身的门路也找不到。
English: Despite their efforts to admire morality, they are still trapped by food and clothing, and some can't even find a way to enter the body.

古文：使张仪、苏秦与仆并生於今之世，曾不能得掌故，安敢望常侍侍郎乎！
现代文：假使张仪、苏秦和我同生在当今时代，他们连一个掌管旧制旧例等故事的小官都得不到，怎么敢期望做常侍郎呢？
English: If Zhang Yi, Su Qin and I were born at the same time, in today's era, they can't even get a minor official in charge of the old system and old cases, how dare they expect to be a regular attendant?

古文：传曰： 天下无害菑，虽有圣人，无所施其才；上下和同，虽有贤者，无所立功。 
现代文：古书上说： 天下没有灾害，即使有圣人，也没有地方施展他的才华；君臣上下和睦同心，即使有贤人，也没有地方建立他的功业。 
English: An ancient book said: There is no disaster under heaven, even if there is a saint, there is no place to display his talent; monarchs and ministers are in harmony with each other, even if there is a wise man, there is no place to build his career.

古文：故曰时异则事异。
现代文：所以说，时代不同，事情也就随之而有所变化。
English: Therefore, the times are different, and things will change accordingly.

古文：虽然，安可以不务修身乎？
现代文：尽管如此，怎么可以不努力去修养自身呢？
English: In spite of this, how can you not make an effort to cultivate yourself?

古文：诗曰： 鼓锺于宫，声闻于外。
现代文：《诗》说： 在宫内敲钟，声音可以传到外面。 
English: "Poetry" says: If you ring the bell inside the palace, the sound can be heard outside.

古文：鹤鸣九皋，声闻于天。 。
现代文： 鹤在遥远的水泽深处鸣叫，声音可以传到天上。 
English: Cranes chirp in the distant depths of Mizusawa, and the sound can reach the sky.

古文：苟能修身，何患不荣！
现代文：如果能够修养自身，还担忧什么不能获得荣耀！
English: If you can cultivate yourself, you still worry about what can't be glorified!

古文：太公躬行仁义七十二年，逢文王，得行其说，封於齐，七百岁而不绝。
现代文：齐太公亲身实行仁义七十二年，遇到周文王，才得以施行他的主张，封在齐国，其思想影响留传七百年而不断绝。
English: It took seventy-two years for Emperor Qi to personally practice benevolence and righteousness, and it was only when he met King Zhouwen that he was able to implement his proposal and seal it in Qi. His ideological influence has been passed down for seven hundred years and continues to exist.

古文：此士之所以日夜孜孜，修学行道，不敢止也。
现代文：这就是士人所以日日夜夜，孜孜不倦，研究学问，推行自己的主张，而不敢停止的原因。
English: This is the reason why scholars work tirelessly day and night, studying and promoting their own ideas, and dare not stop.

古文：今世之处士，时虽不用，崛然独立，塊然独处，上观许由，下察接舆，策同范蠡，忠合子胥，天下和平，与义相扶，寡偶少徒，固其常也。
现代文：如今世上的隐士，一时虽然不被任用，却能超然自立，孑然独处，远观许由，近看接舆，智谋如同范蠡，忠诚可比伍子胥，天下和平，修身自持，而却寡朋少侣，这本来是件很平常的事情。
English: Today's hermits in the world, although they are not appointed for a while, are able to transcend self-reliance, stay alone, see the reasons from afar, see the reasons up close, have wisdom like Fan Zhao, loyalty comparable to Wu Zi Ya, world peace, self-cultivation, but few friends, this is originally a very common thing.

古文：子何疑於余哉！ 
现代文：你们为什么对我有疑虑呢？ 
English: Why do you have doubts about me?

古文：於是诸先生默然无以应也。
现代文：于是那些先生们一声不响，无话回答了。
English: Then the gentlemen fell silent, and made no answer.

古文：建章宫后閤重栎中有物出焉，其状似麋。
现代文：建章宫后阁的双重栏杆中，有一只动物跑出来，它的形状像麋鹿。
English: In the double railing of the pavilion behind the Imperial Palace, an animal shaped like a moose ran out.

古文：以闻，武帝往临视之。
现代文：消息传到宫中，武帝亲自到那里观看。
English: The news spread to the palace, where Emperor Wu himself came to watch.

古文：问左右群臣习事通经术者，莫能知。
现代文：问身边群臣中熟悉事物而又通晓经学的人，没有一个人能知道它是什么动物。
English: When he asked the courtiers around him who were familiar with things and well-versed in the scriptures, none of them could tell him what kind of animal it was.

古文：诏东方朔视之。
现代文：下诏叫东方朔来看。
English: The following edict calls for Dongfangshuo to come and see.

古文：朔曰： 臣知之，原赐美酒粱饭大飧臣，臣乃言。 诏曰： 可。 
现代文：东方朔说： 我知道这个东西，请赐给我美酒好饭让我饱餐一顿，我才说。 武帝说： 可以。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: I know this thing, please give me good wine and good rice so that I can have a full meal, I just said.

古文：已又曰： 某所有公田鱼池蒲苇数顷，陛下以赐臣，臣朔乃言。 
现代文：吃过酒饭，东方朔又说： 某处有公田、鱼池和苇塘好几顷，陛下赏赐给我，我才说。 
English: After eating wine and rice, Dongfang Shuo also said: Somewhere there are public fields, fish ponds and Qutang several hectares, Your Majesty gave it to me, I just said.

古文：诏曰： 可。 
现代文：武帝说： 可以。 
English: Emperor Wu said: Yes.

古文：於是朔乃肯言，曰： 所谓驺牙者也。
现代文：于是东方朔才肯说道： 这是叫驺牙的动物。
English: Therefore, Dongfang Shuo was willing to say: This is an animal called a fangtooth.

古文：远方当来归义，而驺牙先见。
现代文：远方当有前来投诚的事，因而驺牙便先出现。
English: When someone from far away comes to pay their respects, the tooth decay appears first.

古文：其齿前后若一，齐等无牙，故谓之驺牙。 
现代文：它的牙齿前后一样，大小相等而没有大牙，所以叫它驺牙。 
English: Its teeth are the same in front and behind, the size is the same and there are no large teeth, so it is called a bucktooth.

古文：其后一岁所，匈奴混邪王果将十万众来降汉。
现代文：后来过了一年左右，匈奴混邪王果然带领十万人来归降汉朝。
English: Later, after about a year, the Xiongnu-mixed evil king led a hundred thousand people to return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：乃复赐东方生钱财甚多。
现代文：武帝于是又赏赐东方朔很多钱财。到了晚年。
English: Emperor Wu then rewarded Dongfangshuo with a great deal of money. He lived to a ripe old age.

古文：至老，朔且死时，谏曰： 诗云 营营青蝇，止于蕃。
现代文：东方朔临终时，规劝武帝说： 《诗经》上说 飞来飞去的苍蝇，落在篱笆上面。
English: When Dongfang Shuo was on his deathbed, he persuaded Emperor Wu to say: "The Book of Songs says that flies flying around will land on the fence.

古文：恺悌君子，无信谗言。
现代文：慈祥善良的君子，不要听信谗言。 
English: Kind-hearted gentleman, don't listen to gossip.

古文：谗言罔极，交乱四国 。
现代文： 谗言没有止境，四方邻国不得安宁。 
English: There is no end to the insults, and the neighboring countries in the four directions are restless.

古文：原陛下远巧佞，退谗言。 
现代文：希望陛下远离巧言谄媚的人，斥退他们的谗言。 
English: I hope His Majesty will stay away from flatterers and reject their insults.

古文：帝曰： 今顾东方朔多善言？ 
现代文：武帝说： 今天看东方朔怎么大多是良善的言论？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Looking at Dongfangshuo today, how are most of the comments kind?

古文：怪之。
现代文：对此感到惊奇。
English: I was surprised by this.

古文：居无几何，朔果病死。
现代文：过了不久，东方朔果然病死了。
English: Not long after, Dongfang Shuo died of illness.

古文：传曰： 鸟之将死，其鸣也哀；人之将死，其言也善。 
现代文：古书上说： 鸟到临死时，它的叫声特别悲哀；人到临终时，它的言语非常善良。 
English: An ancient book says: When a bird is dying, its cry is particularly sad; when a person is dying, its words are very kind.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思吧。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：武帝时，大将军卫青者，卫后兄也，封为长平侯。
现代文：汉武帝时，大将军卫青是卫皇后的哥哥，被封为长平侯。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, General Wei Qing was the older brother of Empress Wei and was given the title of Changping Hou.

古文：从军击匈奴，至余吾水上而还，斩首捕虏，有功来归，诏赐金千斤。
现代文：他带领军队出击匈奴，追到余吾水边才返回，斩杀大量敌兵，捕获许多俘虏，立下战功，胜利归来，武帝下令赏赐黄金千斤。
English: He led the army to attack the Xiongnu, chased them to the water's edge before returning, killed a large number of enemy soldiers, captured many prisoners, made war exploits, returned victorious, and Emperor Wu ordered the award of a thousand pounds of gold.

古文：将军出宫门，齐人东郭先生以方士待诏公车，当道遮卫将军车，拜谒曰： 原白事。 
现代文：大将军从宫门出来，齐地人东郭先生以方士身分在公车府候差，当道拦住卫将军的车马，拜见说： 有事禀告大将军。 
English: When the grand general came out of the palace gate, Mr. Dong Guo, a native of Qi Province, who was on duty at the bus station as a messenger, stopped the general's car and horse on the road and said, "I have something to report to the grand general."

古文：将军止车前，东郭先生旁车言曰： 王夫人新得幸於上，家贫。
现代文：卫将军停在车前，东郭先生在车旁说： 王夫人新近得到皇帝的宠爱，家里贫困。
English: General Wei stopped in front of the car, and Mr. Dongguo said next to the car: Mrs. Wang has recently been favored by the emperor, and the family is poor.

古文：今将军得金千斤，诚以其半赐王夫人之亲，人主闻之必喜。
现代文：如今将军获得黄金千斤，如果用其中的一半送给王夫人的父母，皇上知道了一定很高兴。
English: Now that the general has won a gold coin, the emperor will be very happy if he uses half of it to give to Mrs. Wang's parents.

古文：此所谓奇策便计也。 
现代文：这就是所谓巧妙而便捷的计策啊。 
English: This is the so-called clever and convenient strategy.

古文：卫将军谢之曰： 先生幸告之以便计，请奉教。 
现代文：卫将军感谢他说： 先生幸亏把这便捷的计策告诉我，一定遵从指教。 
English: General Wei thanked him and said, "It is fortunate that you told me about this convenient strategy. I will definitely follow your advice."

古文：於是卫将军乃以五百金为王夫人之亲寿。
现代文：于是卫将军就用五百斤黄金作为给王夫人父母的赠礼。
English: So General Wei used five hundred catties of gold as a gift to Mrs. Wang's parents.

古文：王夫人以闻武帝。
现代文：王夫人将此事告诉了武帝。
English: Mrs. Wang told Emperor Wu about this.

古文：帝曰： 大将军不知为此。 
现代文：武帝说： 大将军不懂得做这件事。 
English: Emperor Wu said: The great general does not know how to do this.

古文：问之安所受计策，对曰： 受之待诏者东郭先生。 
现代文：问卫青从哪里得来的计策，回答说： 从候差的东郭先生那里得来的。 
English: When asked where Wei Qing got his strategy from, he replied, "I got it from Mr. Dong Guo, who was on leave."

古文：诏召东郭先生，拜以为郡都尉。
现代文：于是下令召见东郭先生，任命他为郡都尉。
English: He then ordered Mr. Dongguo to be summoned and appointed him as the county's lieutenant.

古文：东郭先生久待诏公车，贫困饥寒，衣敝，履不完。
现代文：东郭先生长期在公车府候差，贫困饥寒，衣服破旧，鞋子也不完好。
English: Mr. Dongguo has been waiting for a long time in the bus station, poor, hungry and cold, his clothes are worn out, and his shoes are not in good condition.

古文：行雪中，履有上无下，足尽践地。
现代文：走在雪地里，鞋子有面无底，脚全都踩在地上。
English: Walking in the snow, the shoes are bottomless, the feet are all on the ground.

古文：道中人笑之，东郭先生应之曰： 谁能履行雪中，令人视之，其上履也，其履下处乃似人足者乎？ 
现代文：过路人嘲笑他，东郭先生回答他们说： 谁能穿鞋走在雪地里，让人看去，鞋上面是鞋子，鞋子下面竟像人的脚呢？ 
English: Passers-by laughed at him, and Mr. Dongguo replied to them: "Who can walk in the snow with shoes on, for people to see, shoes on top of shoes, but underneath the shoes look like human feet?

古文：及其拜为二千石，佩青緺出宫门，行谢主人。故所以同官待诏者，等比祖道於都门外。
现代文：等到他被任命为俸禄二千石的官，佩带着青绶，走出宫门，去辞谢他的主人时，旧时同他一起候差的，都分批的在都城郊外为他饯行。
English: When he was appointed as an official with a stipend of two thousand koku, he walked out of the palace gate with a young donkey to thank his master. Those who had been on duty with him in the past were all waiting for him in groups on the outskirts of the capital.

古文：荣华道路，立名当世。
现代文：一路荣华显耀，名扬当代。
English: All the way glory shines, fame is contemporary.

古文：此所谓衣褐怀宝者也。
现代文：这就是所谓的身穿粗布衣服，怀里却揣着珍宝的人。
English: This is the so-called person wearing coarse cloth clothes, but carrying treasures in his arms.

古文：当其贫困时，人莫省视；至其贵也，乃争附之。
现代文：当他贫困时，大家都不理睬他；等到他显贵时，就争着去依附他。
English: When he is poor, everyone ignores him; when he is famous, they cling to him.

古文：谚曰： 相马失之瘦，相士失之贫。 
现代文：俗话说： 相马因其外表消瘦而漏掉良马，相士因其外貌贫困而漏失人才。 
English: As the saying goes: the soma loses good horses because of its thin appearance, and the soma loses talents because of its poor appearance.

古文：其此之谓邪？
现代文：难道说的就是这种情景吗？
English: Is that what is being referred to?

古文：王夫人病甚，人主至自往问之曰： 子当为王，欲安所置之？ 
现代文：王夫人病重，皇上亲自探望，问她说： 你的儿子应当封为王，你要封他在哪里呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager was seriously ill, and the Emperor himself visited her and asked her: "Your son should be crowned king. Where do you want to crown him?"

古文：对曰： 原居洛阳。 
现代文：回答说： 希望封在洛阳。 
English: He replied: I hope it will be sealed in Luoyang.

古文：人主曰： 不可。
现代文：皇上说： 不行。
English: The emperor said, "No."

古文：洛阳有武库、敖仓，当关口，天下咽喉。
现代文：洛阳有兵器库、大粮仓，又位于交通关口，是天下的咽喉要道。
English: Luoyang has an arsenal, a large granary, and is also located at the traffic junction, which is the throat of the world.

古文：自先帝以来，传不为置王。
现代文：从先帝以来，相传不在洛阳一带封王。
English: Since the last emperor, it is said that no one has been crowned king in the Luoyang area.

古文：然关东国莫大於齐，可以为齐王。 
现代文：不过关东一带的封国，没有比齐国更大的，可以封他为齐王。 
English: However, there is no greater fukoku in the Kanto region than Qi, and he can be named the king of Qi.

古文：王夫人以手击头，呼 幸甚 。
现代文：王夫人用手拍着头，口呼： 太幸运了 。
English: Mrs. Wang patted her head with her hand and said, "I'm so lucky."

古文：王夫人死，号曰 齐王太后薨 。
现代文：王夫人死后，就称为 齐王太后逝世 。
English: After the death of Mrs. Wang, it was known as the death of Queen Mother Qi.

古文：昔者，齐王使淳于髡献鹄於楚。
现代文：从前，齐王派淳于髡去楚国进献黄鹄。
English: Once upon a time, the king of Qi sent Jun Yuxuan to Chu to present the Yellow Dragonfly.

古文：出邑门，道飞其鹄，徒揭空笼，造诈成辞，往见楚王曰： 齐王使臣来献鹄，过於水上，不忍鹄之渴，出而饮之，去我飞亡。
现代文：出了都城门，中途那只黄鹄飞走了，他只好托着空笼子，编造了一篇假话，前去拜见楚王说： 齐王派我来进献黄鹄，从水上经过，不忍心黄鹄干竭，放出让它喝水，不料离开我飞走了。
English: After leaving the gate of the capital, halfway through, the yellow dragonfly flew away. He had to hold the empty cage, made up a lie, and went to see King Chu and said: King Qi sent me to present the yellow dragonfly, passed through the water, could not bear to let the yellow dragonfly dry out, let it drink water, and unexpectedly left me and flew away.

古文：吾欲刺腹绞颈而死。恐人之议吾王以鸟兽之故令士自伤杀也。
现代文：我想要刺腹或勒脖子而死，又担心别人非议大王因为鸟兽的缘故致使士人自杀。
English: I wanted to die by stabbing myself in the stomach or strangling myself, and I was worried that others would blame the king for causing the scholar to commit suicide because of the birds and beasts.

古文：鹄，毛物，多相类者，吾欲买而代之，是不信而欺吾王也。
现代文：黄鹄是羽毛类的东西，相似的很多，我想买一个相似的来代替，这既不诚实，又欺骗了大王。
English: Jaundice is a feathery thing, there are many similar ones, I want to buy a similar one to replace it, which is not honest and deceives the great king.

古文：欲赴佗国奔亡，痛吾两主使不通。
现代文：想要逃奔到别的国家去，又痛心齐楚两国君主之间的通使由此断绝。
English: He wanted to flee to another country and was heartbroken when the envoys between the two monarchs were cut off.

古文：故来服过，叩头受罪大王。 
现代文：所以前来服罪，向大王叩头，请求责罚。 
English: So they came to confess their sins, bow to the great king, and ask for punishment.

古文：楚王曰： 善，齐王有信士若此哉！ 
现代文：楚王说： 很好，齐王竟有这样忠信的人。 
English: King Chu said, "It's great that King Qi has such a loyal person.

古文：厚赐之，财倍鹄在也。
现代文：用厚礼赏赐淳于髡，财物比进献黄鹄多一倍。
English: Jun was rewarded with a generous gift, and his property was twice as much as that of Huang Qi.

古文：武帝时，徵北海太守诣行在所。
现代文：汉武帝时，召北海郡太守到皇帝行宫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, he summoned the governor of Beihai County to the imperial palace.

古文：有文学卒史王先生者，自请与太守俱， 吾有益於君 ，君许之。
现代文：有个执掌文书的府吏王先生，自动请求与太守一同前往，说： 我会对您有好处。 
English: Mr. Wang, a government official in charge of documents, spontaneously asked to go with the governor, saying: I will be good for you.

古文：诸府掾功曹白云： 王先生嗜酒，多言少实，恐不可与俱。 
现代文：太守答应了他。太守府中的许多府吏、功曹禀告说： 王先生爱喝酒，闲话多，务实少，恐怕不宜同行。 
English: The governor-general agreed. Many officials in the governor-general's office, including Gong Cao, complained: "Mr. Wang likes to drink, gossips a lot, and is not very practical, so I'm afraid it's not appropriate for him to accompany us."

古文：太守曰： 先生意欲行，不可逆。 
现代文：太守说： 王先生想要去，不好违背他的意愿。 
English: The abbot said, "If Mr. Wang wants to go, it's not good to go against his wishes."

古文：遂与俱。
现代文：于是就和他一同去了。
English: So she went with him.

古文：行至宫下，待诏宫府门。
现代文：来到宫门外，在宫府门待命。
English: Come to the outside of the palace gate, stand by at the palace gate.

古文：王先生徒怀钱沽酒，与卫卒仆射饮，日醉，不视其太守。
现代文：王先生只顾揣着钱买酒，与卫队长官叙饮，整天醉醺醺的，不去看望太守。
English: Mr. Wang only cares about buying alcohol with money, drinking with the captain of the guard, and being drunk all day, and does not visit the governor.

古文：太守入跪拜。
现代文：太守入宫拜见皇上。
English: The daimyō enters the palace to meet the emperor.

古文：王先生谓户郎曰： 幸为我呼吾君至门内遥语。 
现代文：王先生对守门郎官说： 请替我呼唤我们太守到宫门口来，跟他远远地讲几句话。 
English: Mr. Wang said to the doorkeeper: Please call our doorkeeper to the palace gate for me, and say a few words to him from a distance.

古文：户郎为呼太守。
现代文：守门郎官替他去呼唤太守。
English: The gatekeeper went to call the governor on his behalf.

古文：太守来，望见王先生。
现代文：太守出来，看见了王先生。
English: He came out of hiding and saw Mr. Wang.

古文：王先生曰： 天子即问君何以治北海令无盗贼，君对曰何哉？ 
现代文：王先生说： 皇上假如问您如何治理北海郡，使那里没有盗贼，您对答些什么呢？ 
English: Mr. Wang said: Emperor, if I were to ask you how to govern Beihai County so that there are no thieves there, what would your answer be?

古文：对曰： 选择贤材，各任之以其能，赏异等，罚不肖。 
现代文：太守回答说： 选择贤能的人，按照他们的能力分别任用，奖赏才能超群的，处罚不图上进的。 
English: The governor replied, "Choose capable people and appoint them separately according to their ability, reward those with superior talent, and punish those who do not strive to advance.

古文：王先生曰： 对如是，是自誉自伐功，不可也。
现代文：王先生说：这样对答是自己称颂自己，自己夸耀功劳，不行啊。
English: Mr. Wang said, "This kind of answer is self-praise, self-praise, it's not acceptable.

古文：原君对言，非臣之力，尽陛下神灵威武所变化也。 太守曰： 诺。 
现代文：希望您回答说：不是臣的力量，完全是陛下神明威武发生的作用。 太守说： 好吧。 
English: I hope you will answer, "It was not the power of the vassal, it was entirely the effect of His Majesty's divine power." The daimyō said, "Okay."

古文：召入，至于殿下，有诏问之曰： 何於治北海，令盗贼不起？ 
现代文：太守被召进宫中，走到殿下，有诏令问他说： 你是怎么治理北海郡，使盗贼不敢泛起的？ 
English: The daimyō was summoned to the palace, walked up to His Imperial Highness, and asked him by imperial edict: How do you govern Hokkai County so that thieves don't dare to break in?

古文：叩头对言： 非臣之力，尽陛下神灵威武之所变化也。 
现代文：太守叩头回答说： 这不是臣的力量，完全是陛下神明威武发生的作用。 
English: Taishou Kuchitou replied, "This is not the power of a vassal, it is entirely the effect of His Majesty's divine power.

古文：武帝大笑，曰： 於呼！
现代文：武帝大笑说： 啊呀！
English: Emperor Wu laughed loudly and said: Ah!

古文：安得长者之语而称之！
现代文：那里学得长者的言语而称颂起来？
English: Where did they learn the language of the elders and glorify it?

古文：安所受之？ 
现代文：何处听来的？ 
English: Where did you hear that?

古文：对曰： 受之文学卒史。 
现代文：太守回答说： 是文学卒史教给的。 
English: The Empress Dowager replied: I was taught by a literature and history graduate.

古文：帝曰： 今安在？ 
现代文：武帝说： 他现在何处？ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Where is he now?

古文：对曰： 在宫府门外。 
现代文：太守回答说： 在宫府门外。 
English: The governor replied, "Outside the palace gate."

古文：有诏召拜王先生为水衡丞，以北海太守为水衡都尉。
现代文：武帝下诏召见，任命王先生为水衡丞，北海太守做水衡都尉。
English: Emperor Wu summoned him with an imperial edict and appointed Mr. Wang as Shui Heng Cheng, and the governor of the North Sea as Shui Heng Duifeng.

古文：传曰： 美言可以市，尊行可以加人。
现代文：古书上说： 美好的言辞可以出卖，高贵的品行可以超人。
English: An ancient book says: Beautiful words can be sold, noble deeds can be superhuman.

古文：君子相送以言，小人相送以财。 
现代文：君子用美言赠人，小人以钱财送人。 
English: A gentleman gives gifts with kind words, while a rascal gives gifts with money.

古文：魏文侯时，西门豹为鄴令。
现代文：魏文侯的时候，西门豹做邺县令。
English: At the time of Wei Wenhou, Xi Mengpao was the chief magistrate of Jixian County.

古文：豹往到鄴，会长老，问之民所疾苦。
现代文：西门豹到了邺县，召集年高而有名望的人，询问民间感痛苦的事情。
English: Ximenleopard went to Jixian County and gathered the old and famous people to inquire about the painful things that people felt.

古文：长老曰： 苦为河伯娶妇，以故贫。 
现代文：那些人回答说： 苦于给河神娶媳妇，因为这个缘故弄得贫困。 
English: Those people replied, "Suffering from marrying a daughter-in-law to a river god, because of this they are impoverished."

古文：豹问其故，对曰： 鄴三老、廷掾常岁赋敛百姓，收取其钱得数百万，用其二三十万为河伯娶妇，与祝巫共分其馀钱持归。
现代文：西门豹问其原因，回答说： 邺地的三老、廷掾常年向百姓征收赋税，收取他们的钱达数百万之多，用其中的二三十万为河神娶媳妇，再同庙祝、巫婆一同瓜分其余的钱，拿回家去。
English: Ximen Leopard asked the reason for this, and replied: The three elders of Loudi and Tingyu have been levying taxes on the people all year round, collecting millions of their money, and using two or three hundred thousand of it to marry a daughter-in-law for the river god, and then dividing the rest of the money with the temple priest and the witch, and taking it home.

古文：当其时，巫行视小家女好者，云是当为河伯妇，即娉取。
现代文：那期间，巫婆四处巡视，见到贫苦人家的女儿中长得漂亮的，就说这应该做河神的媳妇，当即下聘礼娶走。
English: During that time, the sorceress looked around, and when she saw a beautiful girl from a poor family, she said that she should be the daughter-in-law of the river god, and immediately married her off.

古文：洗沐之，为治新缯绮縠衣，间居斋戒；为治斋宫河上，张缇绛帷，女居其中。
现代文：为她洗澡沐浴，给她缝制新的绸绢衣服，独住下来，静心养性，替她在河边盖起斋居的房子，挂上大红厚绢的帐子，让女孩住在里面。
English: He bathed and washed her, sewed new silk and satin clothes for her, lived alone, meditated and nurtured himself, built a house for her to live in by the river, hung a big red thick curtain, and let the girl live in it.

古文：为具牛酒饭食，十馀日。
现代文：又给她宰牛造酒准备饭食，折腾十几天。
English: He also slaughtered a cow for her to make wine, prepared meals, and worked tirelessly for a dozen days.

古文：共粉饰之，如嫁女床席，令女居其上，浮之河中。
现代文：到时，大家一同来装点乘浮之具，像出嫁女儿的床帐枕席一样，让这女孩坐在上面，放到河中漂行。
English: At that time, everyone came together to decorate a floatation device, like a married daughter's bedspread pillow, let the girl sit on it, and let it float in the river.

古文：始浮，行数十里乃没。
现代文：起初漂在水面，漂流几十里就沉没了。
English: At first it floated on the surface of the water, but after drifting for dozens of miles it sank.

古文：其人家有好女者，恐大巫祝为河伯取之，以故多持女远逃亡。
现代文：那些有漂亮女子的人家，害怕大巫婆替河神娶他们的女儿，因此大多带着女儿远远的逃离了。
English: Those who had beautiful daughters were afraid that the great witch would marry their daughters to the river god, so most of them fled far away with their daughters.

古文：以故城中益空无人，又困贫，所从来久远矣。
现代文：所以城里越来越空虚，人越来越少，更加贫困了，这种情况已经很久了。
English: So the city is getting emptier and emptier, less and less people, more and more poverty, and this has been the case for a long time.

古文：民人俗语曰 即不为河伯娶妇，水来漂没，溺其人民 云。 
现代文：民间俗话说： 假如不给河神娶媳妇，河水冲来淹没田产，淹死那些老百姓。  
English: There is a folk saying: If the river god is not allowed to marry a daughter-in-law, the river will flood the fields and drown the people.

古文：西门豹曰： 至为河伯娶妇时，原三老、巫祝、父老送女河上，幸来告语之，吾亦往送女。 
现代文：西门豹说： 等到为河神娶媳妇时，请三老、巫婆、父老们到河边去送新娘，也希望来告诉我，我也要去送新娘。 
English: Simon Leopard said: When the time comes for the river god to marry his daughter-in-law, please invite the three old men, the witch, and the fathers to go to the river to send the bride, and also hope to come and tell me that I am also going to send the bride.

古文：皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：大家说： 是。 
English: Everyone said: Yes.

古文：至其时，西门豹往会之河上。
现代文：到了那一天，西门豹到河边同大家相会。
English: On that day, Simon the leopard came to the river to meet everyone.

古文：三老、官属、豪长者、里父老皆会，以人民往观之者三二千人。
现代文：三老、官吏、豪绅以及乡间的父老们都到了，连同观看的百姓共二三千人。
English: The three elders, government officials, wealthy gentry, and village fathers and grandfathers all arrived, along with a total of 23,000 people who watched.

古文：其巫，老女子也，已年七十。
现代文：那个大巫婆是个老太婆，年纪已有七十岁。
English: The great witch was an old woman, seventy years old.

古文：从弟子女十人所，皆衣缯单衣，立大巫后。
现代文：随从的女弟子十几个，都穿着绸子单衣，站在大巫婆后面。
English: More than a dozen female disciples, all dressed in silk singlets, stand behind the great witch.

古文：西门豹曰： 呼河伯妇来，视其好丑。 
现代文：西门豹说： 叫河神的媳妇过来，看看她美不美。 
English: Simon the Leopard said: Let the daughter-in-law of the river god come and see whether she is beautiful or not.

古文：即将女出帷中，来至前。
现代文：巫婆们就将新娘从帐子里扶出，来到西门豹面前。
English: So the witches took the bride out of the tent and brought her to Simeon.

古文：豹视之，顾谓三老、巫祝、父老曰： 是女子不好，烦大巫妪为入报河伯，得更求好女，后日送之。 
现代文：西门豹看了看，回头对三老、庙祝、巫婆及父老们说： 这个女孩不美，烦劳大巫婆到河中报告河神，需要调换一个漂亮女孩，后天送她来。 
English: Simeon the leopard looked at her and turned to the three elders, the priest, the sorceress, and the parents and said, "This girl is not beautiful. The sorceress, who is very tired, went to the river to report to the river god. We need to exchange her for a beautiful girl and bring her back the day after tomorrow."

古文：即使吏卒共抱大巫妪投之河中。
现代文：就让士兵一齐抱起大巫婆投进河里。
English: Let the soldiers pick up the witch and throw her into the river.

古文：有顷，曰： 巫妪何久也？
现代文：过了一会儿，西门豹说： 大巫婆怎么一去这么久，还不回来呢？
English: After a while, Simon the Leopard said, "How come the great witch has been gone for so long and hasn't come back?"

古文：弟子趣之！ 
现代文：徒弟去催促她一下。 
English: The apprentice went to urge her.

古文：复以弟子一人投河中。
现代文：又把一个徒弟投进河中。
English: He also threw another apprentice into the river.

古文：有顷，曰： 弟子何久也？
现代文：过了一会儿，又说： 徒弟怎么一去这么久不回来呢？
English: After a while, he added: "How come the apprentice has been gone for so long and hasn't come back?

古文：复使一人趣之！ 
现代文：再派一个人去催促她们！ 
English: Send another man to hurry them up!

古文：复投一弟子河中。
现代文：又把一个徒弟投进河里。
English: He also threw another apprentice into the river.

古文：凡投三弟子。
现代文：总共投进河里三个徒弟。
English: A total of three apprentices were thrown into the river.

古文：西门豹曰： 巫妪弟子是女子也，不能白事，烦三老为入白之。 
现代文：西门豹说： 巫婆、徒弟是女人，不会禀告事由，烦劳三老替我进去禀告河神。 
English: Simon the Leopard said, "The sorceress and her apprentice are women. They can't accuse me of anything. It's too much trouble for me to go and accuse the river god."

古文：复投三老河中。
现代文：又把三老投进河里。
English: He also threw the three old men into the river.

古文：西门豹簪笔磬折，乡河立待良久。
现代文：西门豹头上插着笔，弯着腰，面对河水站着等了很长时间。
English: Ximen leopard stuck a pen in his head, bent over, stood facing the river and waited for a long time.

古文：长老、吏傍观者皆惊恐。
现代文：长者、官吏和旁观者都非常害怕。
English: Elders, officials and bystanders were terrified.

古文：西门豹顾曰： 巫妪、三老不来还，柰之何？ 
现代文：西门豹回头说： 巫婆、三老不回来，怎么办？ 
English: Ximen Leopard looked back and said, "What if the witch and the three old men don't come back?"

古文：欲复使廷掾与豪长者一人入趣之。
现代文：想再派廷掾和一个豪绅进去催促他们。
English: I'd like to send another courtesan and a rich gentleman in to urge them on.

古文：皆叩头，叩头且破，额血流地，色如死灰。
现代文：廷掾和豪绅都跪在地上磕头，把头都磕破了，血流在地上，脸色如死灰一样。
English: Both the eunuch and the gentleman knelt on the ground and bowed their heads. Their heads were broken, blood flowed on the ground, and their faces were as white as ashes.

古文：西门豹曰： 诺，且留待之须臾。 
现代文：西门豹说： 好吧，暂且等待一会儿。 
English: The western leopard said, "Okay, wait for a moment."

古文：须臾，豹曰： 廷掾起矣。
现代文：待了一会儿，西门豹说： 廷掾起来吧。
English: After waiting for a while, Ximen Leopard said, "Ting Yao, get up."

古文：状河伯留客之久，若皆罢去归矣。 
现代文：看情景河神留客太久了，你们都离开这里回家吧。 
English: Look at the scene, the river god has been a guest for too long. You should all leave here and go home.

古文：鄴吏民大惊恐，从是以后，不敢复言为河伯娶妇。
现代文：邺县的官吏、百姓都很害怕，从此以后，不敢再说替河神娶媳妇了。
English: The officials and the people of Handan County were very afraid. From then on, they dared not say that they would marry a daughter-in-law for the river god.

古文：西门豹即发民凿十二渠，引河水灌民田，田皆溉。
现代文：西门豹就征发百姓开凿了十二条渠道，引漳河水浇灌农田，农田都得到灌溉。
English: The West Gate Leopard conscripted and dispatched people to dig twelve channels, diverting river water to irrigate farmland, and the farmland was irrigated.

古文：当其时，民治渠少烦苦，不欲也。
现代文：在开凿河渠时，老百姓开渠多少是有些劳苦的，不很愿意干。
English: When it comes to digging canals, the common people are somewhat laborious and not very willing to do it.

古文：豹曰： 民可以乐成，不可与虑始。
现代文：西门豹说： 百姓可以同他们安享其成，却不可以同他们谋划事业的开创。
English: Simeon the Leopard said: The people can enjoy their achievements with them, but they cannot plan the creation of undertakings with them.

古文：今父老子弟虽患苦我，然百岁后期令父老子孙思我言。 
现代文：现在父老子弟虽然以为我给他们带来辛苦，但是百年以后，希望让父老子弟们再想想我所说的话。 
English: Although my parents and children now think I caused them hardship, a hundred years later, I hope to make my parents and children think again about what I said.

古文：至今皆得水利，民人以给足富。
现代文：直到现在，那里都得到河水的利益，百姓因此富裕起来。
English: Until now, they have benefited from the river's water and the people have become rich.

古文：十二渠经绝驰道，到汉之立，而长吏以为十二渠桥绝驰道，相比近，不可。
现代文：十二条河渠横穿御道，到汉朝建立时，地方官吏认为十二条河渠上的桥梁截断了御道，彼此相距又很近，不行。
English: Twelve canals cross the imperial road. When it was built in the Han Dynasty, local officials thought that the bridges on the twelve canals cut off the imperial road and were too close to each other.

古文：欲合渠水，且至驰道合三渠为一桥。
现代文：想要合并渠水，并且把流经御道的那段，三条渠水合为一条，只架一桥。
English: They want to combine the canal water, and the section that flows through the main road, the three canal water will be combined into one, and only one bridge will be built.

古文：鄴民人父老不肯听长吏，以为西门君所为也，贤君之法式不可更也。
现代文：邺地的百姓不肯听从地方官吏的意见，认为那些渠道是经西门先生规划开凿的，贤良长官的法度规范是不能更改的。
English: The people of Handan did not want to listen to the opinions of local officials, and believed that those channels were opened through Mr. Simon's planning, and that the legal norms of virtuous officials could not be changed.

古文：长吏终听置之。
现代文：地方长官终于听取了大家的意见，放弃了并渠计划。
English: The local governor finally listened to everyone's opinions and abandoned the merger plan.

古文：故西门豹为鄴令，名闻天下，泽流后世，无绝已时，几可谓非贤大夫哉！
现代文：所以西门豹做邺县令，名闻天下，恩德流传后世，难道能说他不是贤大夫吗？
English: Therefore, Ximen leopard was the magistrate of Jixian County, famous all over the world, and Ende was passed down to posterity. Can we say that he is not a wise doctor?

古文：传曰： 子产治郑，民不能欺；子贱治单父，民不忍欺；西门豹治鄴，民不敢欺。 
现代文：古书上说： 子产治理郑国，百姓不能欺骗他；子治理单父，百姓不忍心欺骗他；西门豹治理邺县，百姓不敢欺骗他。 
English: An ancient book said: "If a son governs Zheng Guo, the people cannot deceive him; if a son governs a single father, the people cannot bear to deceive him; if a leopard governs Xiamen County, the people dare not deceive him."

古文：三子之才能谁最贤哉？
现代文：他们三个人的才能，谁最高明呢？
English: Of the three of them, who is the most talented?

古文：辨治者当能别之。
现代文：研究治道的人，当会分辨出来。
English: Those who study the Tao should be able to tell the difference.

