古文：庞师古，曹州南华人，初名从。以中涓从太祖，性端愿，未尝离左右。
现代文：庞师古，曹州南华人，初名叫从，以中涓官身份追随太祖，性情诚挚愚忠，未曾离开太祖左右。
English: Pang Shigu, a South Chinese from Caozhou, whose first name was Zong, followed his grandfather as a middle eunuch. He was a sincere and loyal person and never left his grandfather's side.

古文：及太祖镇汴，树置戎伍，始得马五百匹，即以师古为偏将，援陈破蔡，累有战功。
现代文：到太祖镇守汴州时，建立武装，才得战马五百匹，即以庞师古为偏将，援助陈州，攻破蔡州，屡有战功。
English: When Taizu Town guarded Luzhou, it was only after the establishment of armed forces that 500 war horses were obtained, that is, with Pang Shigu as a partial general, he assisted Chenzhou and broke through Caizhou, and had many war exploits.

古文：及硃珍以罪诛，遂用师古为都指挥使。
现代文：到朱珍因罪而被诛杀，便任庞师古为都指挥使。
English: After Zhu Zhen was beaten to death for his crime, he was appointed as the commander of the Pang division of the ancient capital.

古文：乃渡淮，饷军于庐寿，攻滁州，破天长，下高邮，沿淮转战，所至克捷。
现代文：于是渡过淮河，到庐寿饷军，攻滁州，破天长，下高邮，沿淮河转战，所到之处都能获捷。
English: So he crossed the Huaihe River, went to the Shouyi Army, attacked Shanzhou, broke through the heavens, went to Gaoyou, and fought along the Huaihe River. He was successful everywhere he went.

古文：寻代硃友裕领军，攻下徐州，斩时溥首以献。
现代文：旋即取代朱友裕统帅军队，攻下徐州，砍下时溥首级献上。
English: He immediately replaced Zhu Youyu as the commander of the army, captured Xuzhou, and presented the dagger when it was cut down.

古文：遂移军伐兗州，入中都，寨于梁山，败于硃瑄之众，袭至垒下；又破硃瑾于清河。
现代文：接着转移军队攻打兖州，攻入中都，结营梁山，打败朱王宣的部队，袭至城下，又在清河打败朱瑾。
English: Next, the army was transferred to attack Bozhou, invaded Zhongdu, encamped in Liangshan, defeated Zhu Wangxuan's troops, attacked under the city, and defeated Zhu Xi in Qinghe.

古文：从讨汶阳，与硃瑄、硃瑾及晋将史俨兒战于故乐亭，大捷而回。
现代文：跟从太祖攻伐汶阳，与朱王宣、朱瑾及晋军将领史俨儿在故乐亭交战，大胜而回。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather to attack Wenyang, and fought with Zhu Wangxuan, Zhu Xi and the Jin army general Shi Xun Er in the Old Music Hall, and returned with a great victory.

古文：乾宁四年正月，复统诸军伐郓，拔之，擒其帅硃瑄以献，始表为天平军节度留后，寻授徐州节度使，官至检校司徒。
现代文：乾宁四年正月，又领各军攻伐郓州，占领了郓州城，活捉了郓军首领朱王宣献上，始得上表推荐任天平军节度留后，旋即任徐州节度使，官至检校司徒。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Qianning, he also led the army to attack Zhangzhou, occupied Zhangzhou City, and captured the leader of the Zhang army, Zhu Wang Xuanxian. After being recommended to stay at the Tianping Army Festival, he was immediately appointed as the Xuzhou Festival envoy, and became the official of the school inspection.

古文：太祖受禅后，委兵柄，与康怀英等攻潞州，以 蚰蜓堑 缭之，飞鸟不度。
现代文：八月，与葛从周分领大军，渡过淮河攻伐杨行密。十一月，庞师古在清口扎营，营地地势低下，有人请求迁移营址，庞师古不听。
English: In August, with Ge from Zhouwen leading a large army, he crossed the Huai River to attack Yang Xingmi. In November, Pang Shigu camped in Qingkou, the camp was low, some people requested to move the camp site, Pang Shigu did not listen.

古文：既逾岁，晋人援至，王师大败，道昭为晋军所杀。
现代文：接着有人告诉淮南吴人挖决淮河上流堤岸，说： 大水来了！ 庞师古怒他惑众，杀了他。
English: Then someone told the Huainan Wu people to dig up the embankment of the upper reaches of the Huai River, saying: The flood is coming! Pang Shigu was angry with him for deceiving the public and killed him.

古文：徐怀玉，本名琮，亳州焦夷县人。少以雄杰自任，随太祖起军。
现代文：紧接着梁军便陷于洪水泥淖之中，不能战斗，而吴军乘机攻袭，所以被打败，庞师古死于战阵之中。徐怀玉，本名叫琮，亳州焦夷县人。小时以雄勇俊杰自任，跟随太祖起军。
English: Immediately afterwards, Liang's army was stuck in the muddy flood and could not fight, while Wu's army took the opportunity to attack, so it was defeated, and Pang Shigu died in the battle. Xu Huayu, whose real name was Yao, was from Jiaoyi County, Zhangzhou. When he was young, he set himself up as a hero and followed his great-grandfather to join the army.

古文：唐中和末，从至大梁。
现代文：唐朝中和末年，跟随太祖到大梁。
English: In the middle and late years of the Tang Dynasty, he followed his great-grandfather to Dalian.

古文：光启初，蔡寇屯金堤驿，怀玉将轻骑连破之，由是累迁亲从副将，改左长剑都虞候。
现代文：光启初年，蔡州贼人屯驻金堤驿，徐怀玉带领轻装骑兵接连打败他们，因而不断升迁直到亲从副将，改任左长剑都虞候。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, the Caizhou bandits were stationed in Jintaiyu, and Xu Huayu led the light cavalry to defeat them one after another, so he was constantly promoted until he was promoted from vice-general to the left long sword.

古文：又从破蔡贼于板桥，收秦宗权八寨，奏加检校右散骑常侍。
现代文：又随从太祖在板桥打败蔡州贼寇，占取秦宗权八座营寨，太祖上奏朝廷加封他为检校右散骑常侍。
English: He also followed his great-great-grandfather to defeat the Caizhou bandits in Banqiao and occupy eight encampments of the Qin Dynasty. The great-great-grandfather appealed to the imperial court and was awarded the title of a regular attendant of the imperial inspection.

古文：文德初，同诸军解河阳之围，复从破徐、宿。
现代文：文德初年，同众军解除河阳之围，从太祖攻下徐州、宿州。
English: In the first year of Wende, the same army lifted the siege of Heyang and conquered Xuzhou and Suzhou from Taizu.

古文：乾宁中，奏加检校刑部尚书，太祖赐名怀玉。
现代文：乾宁年间，上奏加封为检校刑部尚书，太祖赐名怀玉。
English: During the Qianning era, Shangso Gafeng was appointed as the inspector of the school's disciplinary department, and the great-grandfather gave her the name Huaiyu.

古文：破硃瑾于金乡南，擒宗江以献，表授金紫光禄大夫、检校右仆射。
现代文：在金乡南边打败朱瑾，活捉宗江献上，上表授与金紫光禄大夫、检校右仆射。
English: In the south of Jinxiang, Zhu Xi was defeated, Zongjiang was captured alive and presented, and the above table was awarded to Jin Zi Guanglu, the doctor, and the school inspector.

古文：乾宁四年，庞师古失利于清口，怀玉独完军以退。
现代文：乾宁四年，庞师古在清口失利，仅徐怀玉保全军队退回。
English: In the fourth year of Qianning, Pang Shigu was defeated at Qingkou, and only Xu Huayu preserved the army and retreated.

古文：光化初，转滑州右都押牙兼右步军指挥使，俄奏授沂州刺史。
现代文：光化初年，转任滑州右都押牙兼右步军指挥使，不久上奏授与沂州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Gwanghwamun era, he was transferred to the post of the commander of the right march army and the right capital of Gwanghwamun Province, and was soon awarded the title of the history of Gwanghwamun Province.

古文：顷之，王师范以青州叛，屡出兵侵轶，怀玉击退之。
现代文：随后，王师范据青州反叛，屡次出兵侵犯沂州，徐怀玉击退他。
English: Subsequently, Wang Shifan rebelled against Qingzhou and repeatedly sent troops to invade Zhangzhou. Xu Huaiyu repelled him.

古文：天复四年，转齐州防御使，加检校司空，从大军迎驾于岐下。
现代文：天复四年，转任齐州防御使，加封检校司空，跟随大军到岐下迎驾。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to the post of the defense envoy of Qizhou, added the post of the inspector of the school, and followed the army to Qishie.

古文：归署华州观察留后。
现代文：回来后暂任华州观察留后。
English: After returning, he temporarily stayed in Huazhou for observation.

古文：一年，复领所部兵戍雍州，寻召赴河中，补晋、绛、同、华五州马步都指挥使。
现代文：一年后，又领部下士兵戍守雍州，接着应召赴河中，补任晋、绛、同、华五州马军步军都指挥使。
English: A year later, he led his subordinate soldiers to defend Yongzhou, and then went to Hezhong in response to the call, and was appointed as the commander of the Jin, Qi, Tong and Hua five-state horse army.

古文：天祐三年，授左羽林统军，转右龙虎统军，领六军之士赴泽州。
现代文：天三年任左羽林统军，转任右龙虎统军，领六军士兵奔赴泽州。
English: Tian served as the Left Feather Forest United Army for three years, transferred to the Right Dragon and Tiger United Army, and led the soldiers of the Sixth Army to rush to Zezhou.

古文：寻为晋军所攻，昼夜冲击，穴地而入，怀玉率亲兵逆杀于隧中，晋军遂退。
现代文：旋即被晋军攻击，昼夜冲击，挖地而入，徐怀玉率亲兵迎杀敌军于隧道之中，晋军于是后退。
English: Immediately attacked by the Jin army, day and night impact, digging into the ground, Xu Huaiyu led his own soldiers to kill the enemy army in the tunnel, the Jin army then retreated.

古文：开平元年，授曹州刺史，加检校司徒。
现代文：开平元年，任曹州刺史，加封检校司徒。
English: In the first year of Kaiping, he was appointed as Caozhou stabbing historian and Jiafeng school inspector.

古文：明年，除晋州刺史。
现代文：第二年，任晋州刺史。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the governor of Jinzhou.

古文：其秋，晋军大至，已乘其墉，怀玉选亲兵五十余人，拥杀下城。
现代文：那年秋天，晋军大举扑来，已经登上城墙，徐怀玉挑选亲兵五十多人，一拥而上将敌人杀下城墙。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Jin army made a large-scale attack and had already climbed the city wall. Xu Huayu selected more than fifty of his own soldiers, and they swarmed up to kill the enemy under the city wall.

古文：晋军既退，出家财以赏战士。
现代文：晋军后退后，徐怀玉拿出家财来奖赏战士。
English: After the Jin army retreated, Xu Huaiyu took out his family wealth to reward the soldiers.

古文：岁中，晋军又至，怀玉领兵败之于洪洞。
现代文：这年中，晋军再一次攻来，徐怀玉领兵在洪洞打败他们。
English: In the middle of the year, the Jin army attacked again, and Xu Huaiyu led the troops to defeat them in Hongdong.

古文：三年，制授鄜坊节度使、特进、检校太保，练兵缮壁，人颇安之，加检校太傅。
现代文：开平三年，诏令授与坊节度使、特进、检校太保，徐怀玉训练士兵，修缮城墙，人人都感安心，徐怀玉被加封为检校太傅。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, the Emperor issued an edict awarding the title of Grand Marshal, Special Envoy, and Inspector of Schools. Xu Huaiyu trained soldiers and repaired the city wall. Everyone felt at ease. Xu Huaiyu was awarded the title of Inspector of Schools.

古文：乾化二年，庶人友珪既篡立，河中硃友谦拒命，遣兵袭鄜州，怀玉无备，寻为河中所掳，囚于公馆。
现代文：乾化二年，庶人朱友王圭已经篡夺帝位，河中朱友谦抗拒朝令，派兵袭击州，徐怀玉没有防备，旋即被河中军俘虏，囚禁在公馆。
English: In the second year of Qianhua, the commoner Zhu You Wang Gui had usurped the imperial throne. In the middle of the river, Zhu Youqian resisted the imperial order and sent troops to attack the state. Xu Huaiyu was unprepared and was immediately captured by the Chinese army and imprisoned in a mansion.

古文：贼知密州虚弱，援兵未至，昼夜急攻，遂陷，康乂出为贼所害。
现代文：到朱友王圭派康怀英领兵包围河中时，朱友谦担心徐怀玉有变，于是杀害他。
English: When Zhu Youwang Gui sent Kang Huaiying to lead an army to encircle Hechu, Zhu Youqian was worried that Xu Huaiyu had changed, so he killed him.

古文：王彦章，字贤明，郓州寿张县人也。
现代文：徐怀玉才质气概刚健英勇，临阵未曾受挫败退，平生创伤遍体，有战将的英名。王彦章，字贤明，郓州寿张县人。
English: Xu Huaiyucai was a brave and courageous man. He had never been defeated in the front line, and suffered from lifelong trauma. He was a famous general. Wang Yanzhang, known as Xianming, was from Zhang County, Zhangzhou.

古文：祖秀，父庆宗，俱不仕。以彦章贵，秀赠左散骑常侍，庆宗赠右武卫将军。
现代文：祖父王秀，父亲王庆宗，都没有做过官，后因为王彦章显贵，追封王秀为左散骑常侍，追封王庆宗为右武卫将军。
English: His grandfather, Wang Xiu, and his father, Wang Qingzong, did not hold any official posts. Later, because Wang Yanzhang was a prominent person, Wang Xiu was posthumously awarded the title of Left Cavalryman, and Wang Qingzong was posthumously awarded the title of Right Guard General.

古文：彦章少从军，隶太祖帐下，以骁勇闻。
现代文：王彦章少小从军，隶属于太祖手下，因骁勇善战而闻名。
English: Wang Yanzhang was a young soldier who was subordinate to the great-grandfather. He was famous for his bravery and skill in battle.

古文：稍迁军职，累典禁兵。
现代文：逐渐提升军职，接连升到掌管禁卫军。
English: He gradually rose through the ranks and was successively promoted to be in charge of the Praetorian Guard.

古文：从太祖征讨，所至有功，常持铁枪冲坚陷阵。
现代文：跟随太祖征战时，所到之处都立有战功，常手持铁枪冲锋陷阵。
English: When he went to war with his great-grandfather, he achieved military exploits everywhere he went, often charging into battle with an iron gun in his hand.

古文：开平二年十月，自开封府押牙、左亲从指挥使授左龙骧军使。
现代文：开平二年十月，从任开封府押衙、左亲从指挥使升任左龙骧军使。
English: In October of the second year of the Heian period, Zuo Jian was promoted from the position of Kaifeng prefectural governor, and Zuo Jian was promoted from the position of commander to the position of military envoy of Zuo Longjing.

古文：三年，转左监门卫上将军，依前左龙骧军使。
现代文：三年，转任左监门卫上将军，仍兼任左龙骧军使。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of the left supervisor of the gate guards, still serving as the military envoy of the Left Dragon Dynasty.

古文：乾化元年，改行营左先锋马军使，加金紫光禄大夫、检校司空，依前左监门卫上将军。
现代文：乾化元年，改任行营左先锋马军使，又加封金紫光禄大夫、检校司空，仍兼任左监门卫上将军。
English: In the first year of the Qianhua era, he was reassigned to the left vanguard of the camp, the horse army envoy, and was also given the titles of Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, school inspector, and still concurrently served as the left supervisor of the gate guard.

古文：二年，庶人友珪篡位，加检校司徒。
现代文：二年，太祖庶子朱友王圭弑父篡位，加封王彦章为检校司徒。
English: Two years later, the great-great-grandfather's illegitimate son, Zhu You Wang Guixuan's father, usurped the throne and appointed Wang Yan Zhang as the school inspector.

古文：三年正月，授濮州刺史、本州马步军都指挥使，依前左先锋马军使。
现代文：三年正月，授与濮州刺史、本州马步军都指挥使，仍兼任左先锋马军使。
English: In the first month of the third year, he was awarded the commanding envoy of both the Bozhou Sashishi and the Honshu Horse Infantry Army, and still served as the left vanguard horse army envoy.

古文：未几，改先锋步军都指挥使。
现代文：不久改任先锋步军都指挥使。
English: He was soon appointed commander of the vanguard infantry.

古文：《通鉴》云：晋人夜袭澶州，陷之。
现代文：四年，任澶州刺史，进封为开国伯。
English: In four years, he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and was promoted to the position of the founding count.

古文：九月，授汝州防御使、检校太保，依前行营先锋步军都指挥使。贞明二年四月，改郑州防御使。
现代文：五年三月，朝廷商议将魏州分为两镇，担心魏州人不听从，就派遣王彦章率领五百名精锐骑兵驻扎在邺城的金波亭，以防备不平常的事变发生。同月二十九日夜晚，魏州军队叛乱，首先攻击在金波亭馆舍的王彦章，王彦章南逃。七月，晋军攻陷澶州，王彦章家人全落入晋军手中。
English: In March of the same year, the imperial court discussed dividing Weizhou into two towns. Fearing that the Weizhou people would not listen, Wang Yanzhang sent five hundred elite cavalrymen stationed in Jinbo Pavilion in Handan to prevent unusual events from occurring. On the evening of the 29th of the same month, the Weizhou army rebelled, first attacking Wang Yanzhang in Jinbo Pavilion, and Wang Yanzhang fled south. In July, the Jin army invaded Handan, and Wang Yanzhang's entire family fell into the hands of the Jin army.

古文：三年十二月，授西面行营马军都指挥使，加检校太傅，依前郑州防御使。
现代文：晋王将他家人迁到晋阳，待他们非常优厚，派遣奸细偷偷地诱降王彦章，王彦章立即杀了派来的奸细以拒绝晋王李存勖。几天以后，他的家人被杀害。九月，授与汝州防御使、检校太保，仍任行营先锋步军都指挥使。贞明二年四月，改任郑州防御使。
English: The King of Jin moved his family to Jinyang and treated them very generously. He sent Wang Yanzhang to secretly seduce them by sending spies. Wang Yanzhang immediately killed the spies sent to reject the King of Jin, Li Cunxu. A few days later, his family was killed. In September, he was awarded the title of Defense Minister of Ruzhou and the title of Inspector of Schools. He was still the commander of the vanguard marching troops. In April of the second year of Zhenming, he was appointed the Defense Minister of Zhengzhou.

古文：顷之，授行营诸军左厢马军都指挥使。
现代文：不久，授与行营诸军左厢马军都指挥使。
English: Soon, all the left-wing horse-drawn carriages of the troops marching to the encampment were commanded by envoys.

古文：五年五月，迁许州两使留后，军职如故。
现代文：五年五月，调任许州两使留后，军职依前不变。
English: In May of the fifth year, after the transfer of the two envoys to Hezhou, the military post remained unchanged.

古文：六年正月，正授许州匡国军节度使，充散指挥都头都军使，进封开国侯。
现代文：六年正月，授与许州匡国军节度使，兼任散指挥都头都军使，进封为开国侯。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, he was awarded the post of the military envoy of the Xu Province Kuangguo, and concurrently served as the commander of the capital city of the capital city, and became the founding lord.

古文：未几，授北面行营副招讨使。
现代文：不久，授与北面行营副招讨使。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the post of deputy envoy to the North.

古文：七年正月，移领滑州。
现代文：七年正月，调任领管滑州。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, he was transferred to be the governor of Slough.

古文：三年四月晦，晋师陷郓州，中外大恐。
现代文：龙德三年四月三十日，晋军攻陷郓州，朝廷内外都非常震惊。
English: On April 30th, the third year of the Longde Dynasty, the Jin army invaded and occupied Zhangzhou. Both inside and outside the imperial court were very shocked.

古文：五月，以彦章代戴思远为北面招讨使。
现代文：五月，梁末帝以王彦章代替戴思远为北面招讨使。
English: In May, Emperor Liang Mucu replaced Dai Siyuan with Wang Yanzhang as the envoy to the north.

古文：拜命之日，促装以赴滑台，遂自杨村寨浮河而下，水陆俱进，断晋人德胜之浮梁，攻南城，拔之。晋人遂弃北城，并军保杨刘。
现代文：王彦章在接受任命的当天，匆忙整理行装赶赴华台，就从杨村砦坐船顺黄河而下，士兵水陆两路一起进发，截断了晋军建在德胜的浮桥，攻击南城，占领了它，晋军于是放弃了北城，合并军力保守杨刘。
English: On the day of his appointment, Wang Yanzhang hurriedly packed up and rushed to Huatai. He sailed down the Yellow River from the Yangcun Fort. The soldiers marched together on land and water, cut off the pontoon bridge built by the Jin army in Desheng, attacked Nancheng and occupied it. The Jin army then abandoned the North City and combined forces to protect Yang Liu.

古文：彦章以舟师沿流而下，晋人尽彻北城，拆屋木编筏，置步军于其上，与彦章各行一岸。每遇转滩水汇，即中流交斗，流矢雨集，或舟筏覆没，比及杨刘，凡百余战。
现代文：当王彦章带领水军沿河而下时，晋军全部拆毁北城，锯开房屋木料编成木筏，将步兵安置在黄河岸上，与王彦章部队各走一边，每当遇到转滩回水的地方，两军的步兵就在黄河中流交战，飞奔的箭矢就像雨点一样密集，有时连船和筏子都翻过来沉入水中，等到达杨刘时，一路交战共有一百多次。
English: When Wang Yanzhang led the naval force down the river, the Jin army completely demolished Beicheng, sawed the houses and made wooden rafts, placed the infantry on the banks of the Yellow River, and went to one side with Wang Yanzhang's troops. Whenever they encountered a turning point, the infantry of the two armies fought in the middle of the Yellow River. The flying arrows were as dense as raindrops. Sometimes even the boat and raft were overturned and sank into the water. By the time they reached Yang Liu, there were more than a hundred battles along the way.

古文：彦章急攻杨刘，昼夜不息，晋人极力固守，垂陷者数四。
现代文：王彦章急攻杨刘，昼夜不停，晋军竭尽全力固守，有四次差点被攻陷。
English: Wang Yanzhang attacked Yang Liu in a hurry, day and night, and the Jin army tried its best to hold on, and was almost captured four times.

古文：六月，晋王亲援其城，彦章之军，重壕复垒，晋人不能入。
现代文：六月，晋王李存勖亲自领兵援救杨刘城，王彦章的部队挖成重重战壕，筑成层层堡垒，晋王的援军不得进入杨刘城。
English: In June, the Jin king Li Cunxu personally led troops to rescue Yang Liu City. Wang Yanzhang's troops dug trenches and built fortresses. The Jin king's reinforcements were not allowed to enter Yang Liu City.

古文：晋王乃于博州东岸筑垒，以应郓州。
现代文：晋王于是派军队在博州东岸筑起堡垒，以接应郓州。
English: The Jin king then sent troops to build a fortress on the east coast of Bozhou to meet Bozhou.

古文：彦章闻之，驰军而至，急攻其栅，自旦及午，其城将拔，会晋王以大军来援，彦章及退。
现代文：王彦章得知后，派军队赶到，急忙攻击他们的营栅，从早晨到中午，晋军阵地快被攻下，这时晋王带领大军来援救，王彦章才撤退。
English: When Wang Yanzhang learned of this, he sent troops to attack the Jin camp. From morning to noon, the Jin army's position was about to be captured. At this time, the Jin king led a large army to rescue, and Wang Yanzhang retreated.

古文：七月，晋王至杨刘，彦章军不利，遂罢彦章兵权，诏令归阙，以段凝为招讨使。
现代文：七月，晋王到了杨刘，王彦章军队失利，末帝于是罢免了王彦章的兵权，下令返回朝廷，以段凝做招讨使。
English: In July, the king of Jin arrived in Yang Liu, and Wang Yanzhang's army was defeated. The late emperor then dismissed Wang Yanzhang's military power, ordered him to return to the imperial court, and appointed Duan Jeng as a recruiting agent.

古文：先是，赵、张二族挠乱朝政。彦章深恶之，性复刚直，不能缄忍。
现代文：在这以前，赵岩、张汉杰两伙人扰乱朝政，王彦章非常痛恨他们，性格又刚正，不能缄默容忍。
English: Prior to this, two groups of people, Zhao Yan and Zhang Hanjie, disrupted the imperial government. Wang Yanzhang hated them very much. He was an upright person and could not tolerate their silence.

古文：及授招讨之命，因谓所亲曰： 待我立功之后，回军之日，当尽诛奸臣，以谢天下。 
现代文：当他受命任北面招讨使时，对他身边的亲近说： 等我立下这次战功之后，班师回军的那天，将杀尽奸臣，以报答天下人。 
English: When he was assigned to be the envoy to the north, he said to those close to him, "After I have achieved this military success, the day my division returns to the army, I will kill all the traitorous vassals to repay the people of the world."

古文：赵、张闻之，私相谓曰： 我辈宁死于沙陀之手，不当为彦章所杀。 
现代文：赵、张两人听说后，私下商议说： 我们宁愿死在沙陀人李存冒力的手中，也不能被王彦章杀掉。 
English: After hearing this, Zhao and Zhang privately discussed: "We would rather die at the hands of Li Cunxu, a Sado, than be killed by Wang Yanzhang."

古文：因协力以倾之。
现代文：因此协力倾轧王彦章。
English: That's why we're all pulling together to support Wang Hanzhang.

古文：时段凝以贿赂交结，自求兵柄，素与彦章不协，潜害其功，阴行逗挠，遂至王师不利，竟退彦章而用段凝。未及十旬，国以之亡矣。
现代文：这时段凝贿赂勾结赵、张两人，自己谋求兵权，一向与王彦章不协调，暗地里贬损王彦章的功劳，背着干些延误阻挠的事，以至梁朝军队失利，终于罢免了王彦章而任用段凝，不到一百天，梁朝就因此而灭亡了。
English: At this time, Duan Zheng bribed and colluded with Zhao and Zhang to seek military power on his own. He always disagreed with Wang Yanzhang, secretly belittled Wang Yanzhang's merits, and did some delaying and obstructing things behind his back, so that the Liang Dynasty's army failed. Finally, he dismissed Wang Yanzhang and appointed Duan Zheng. In less than 100 days, the Liang Dynasty died because of this.

古文：是岁秋九月，朝廷闻晋人将自兗州路出师，末帝急遣彦章领保銮骑士数千于东路守捉。且以郓州为敌人所据，因图进取，令张汉杰为监军。
现代文：这年秋天九月，朝廷听到晋人将经过兖州出兵，末帝急忙派王彦章率领朝廷禁卫军骑兵几千人到东路守候截获，又因为郓州被敌人占据，想乘机进攻夺取，命令张汉杰做监军。
English: In the autumn and September of that year, the imperial court heard that the Jin people would send troops through Zhangzhou. The last emperor hurriedly sent Wang Yanzhang to lead several thousand cavalrymen of the Imperial Guard to the east road to wait and intercept them, and because Zhangzhou was occupied by the enemy and wanted to take the opportunity to attack and seize it, he ordered Zhang Hanjie to be the supervisor of the army.

古文：一日，彦章渡汶，以略郓境，至递坊镇，为晋人所袭，彦章退保中都。
现代文：一天，王彦章渡过汶水，去夺取郓州，到递坊镇时，遭晋人袭击，王彦章退回据守中都。
English: One day, Wang Yanzhang crossed the Wenshui River to seize Zhangzhou. When he arrived at Dibang Town, he was attacked by the Jin people. Wang Yanzhang returned to his base in Zhongdu.

古文：十月四日，晋王以大军至，彦章以众拒战，兵败，为晋将夏鲁奇所擒。
现代文：十月四日，晋王率领大军来到，王彦章率领部下抵御交战，被打败，被晋军将领夏鲁奇俘获。
English: On October 4th, the Jin king led a large army to the battle, Wang Yanzhang led his subordinates to resist the battle, was defeated, and was captured by the Jin army general Sharuchi.

古文：鲁奇尝事太祖，与彦章素善，及彦章败，识其语音，曰： 此王铁枪也。 
现代文：夏鲁奇曾经服事过梁太祖，与王彦章一向友好，当王彦章战败时，夏鲁奇听出了他的口音，说： 这就是王铁枪呀。 
English: Xialuqi had once served Liang Taizu and had always been friendly with Wang Yanzhang. When Wang Yanzhang was defeated, Xialuqi recognized his accent and said, "This is Wang Tiegun."

古文：挥槊刺之，彦章重伤，马踣，遂就擒。
现代文：挥动长矛刺来，王彦章受了重伤，战马跌倒，于是被活捉了。
English: Brandishing a spear, Wang Yanzhang was seriously wounded, his horse fell, and he was captured alive.

古文：晋王见彦章，谓之曰： 尔常以孺子待我，今日服未？ 
现代文：晋王李存勖看到王彦章，对他说： 你常常把我看作乳臭小儿，今天服不服我？ 
English: When the Jin king Li Cunxu saw Wang Yanzhang, he said to him, "You have often regarded me as a spoiled brat. Will you obey me today?

古文：又问： 我素闻尔善将，何不保守兗州？
现代文：又问 ：我一向听说你善于带兵，为什么不据守兖州？
English: He also asked, "I have always heard that you are good at leading soldiers. Why don't you stay to defend Zhangzhou?"

古文：此邑素无城垒，何以自固？ 
现代文：中都一向没有城墙堡垒，怎么能据以自守？ 
English: Zhongdu has never had a fortified city wall, so how can it defend itself?

古文：彦章对曰： 大事已去，非臣智力所及。 
现代文：王彦章回答说： 大事已经去了，不是我的才智所能挽回的。 
English: Wang Yanzhang replied, "The important thing has already happened, and it is beyond my ability to recover.

古文：晋王恻然，亲赐药以封其创。
现代文：晋王心下怜悯，亲自赐给他药物以敷治创伤。
English: Jin Wang took pity on him and personally gave him medicine to heal the wound.

古文：晋王素闻其勇悍，欲全活之，令中使慰抚，以诱其意。
现代文：晋王平素听说他勇敢强悍，想保全他的性命，命令中使慰问安抚，以诱惑他的意志。
English: Jin Wang Ping had heard that he was brave and strong, and wanted to save his life. In his order, he tried to appease him with consolation to tempt his will.

古文：彦章曰： 比是匹夫，本朝擢居方面，与皇帝十五年抗衡；今日兵败力穷，死有常分，皇帝纵垂矜宥，何面目见人！
现代文：王彦章说 ：以前我是一介平民，梁朝提升我为独当一面的大将，与晋王相抗衡，今天兵败势衰，死是应有的本分，晋王即使垂恩可怜赦宥我，我有什么脸面见人？
English: Wang Yanzhang said, "Previously, I was a commoner. The Liang Dynasty promoted me to be the sole general to compete with the Jin King. Today, I am defeated and weakened. Death is my duty. Even if the Jin King is merciful and forgives me, what kind of face do I have?

古文：岂有为臣为将，朝事梁而暮事晋乎！
现代文：难道有作为臣子作为将领的人，早上服事梁皇而晚上服事晋王的吗？
English: Is there anyone who, as a vassal or a general, serves Emperor Liang in the morning and King Jin in the evening?

古文：得死，幸矣！ 
现代文：能得到一死就是我的荣幸了。 
English: It would be an honor to get one.

古文：晋王又谓李嗣源曰： 尔宜亲往谕之，庶可全活。 
现代文：晋王又对李嗣源说： 你可以亲自去劝导他，或者还可劝降而保全他的性命。 
English: Jin Wang also said to Li Siyuan: You can persuade him in person, or you can persuade him to surrender and save his life.

古文：时彦章以重伤不能兴，嗣源至卧内以见之，谓嗣源曰： 汝非邈佶烈乎？ 
现代文：这时王彦章因受重伤不能起身，李嗣源亲自到他卧室里去见他，王彦章对李嗣源说 ：你不就是邈佶烈吗？ 
English: At this time, Wang Yanzhang could not get up due to serious injuries. Li Siyuan went to his bedroom to see him in person. Wang Yanzhang said to Li Siyuan: Aren't you just fierce?

古文：邈佶烈，盖嗣源小字也。彦章素轻嗣源，故以小字呼之。
现代文：邈佶烈，原来是李嗣源的小名，王彦章一向瞧不起李嗣源，所以用小名称呼他。
English: Wang Yanzhang had always looked down on Li Siyuan, so he called him by his nickname.

古文：既而晋王命肩舆随军至任城，彦章以所伤痛楚，坚乞迟留，遂遇害，时年六十一。
现代文：不久晋王命令用轿子抬着他随部队到任城去，王彦章因为所受创伤疼痛，坚决要求留下不走，于是被杀害，当时年龄六十一岁。
English: Soon after, the king of Jin ordered that he be carried in a palanquin to accompany the troops to Rencheng. Wang Yanzhang, who was 61 years old at the time, insisted on staying because of the pain from the trauma he had suffered, and was killed.

古文：彦章性忠勇，有膂力，临阵对敌，奋不顾身。
现代文：王彦章性格忠烈勇猛，很有臂力，临阵对敌，奋不顾身。
English: Wang Yanzhang's character is loyal and brave, he has a lot of arm strength, he fights against the enemy, and he does not care about himself.

古文：尝谓人曰： 李亚子斗鸡小兒，何足畏！ 
现代文：闲时曾对人说： 晋王李亚子只不过是一个斗鸡小儿，哪值得顾虑害怕！ 
English: In his spare time, he used to say to people: "King Li Yazi of Jin is just a cockfighting child, which is worth worrying about and fearing!

古文：初，晋王闻彦章授招讨使，自魏州急赴河上，以备冲突，至则德胜南城已为所拔。
现代文：当初，晋王得知王彦章被授与北面招讨使时，从魏州急忙赶到黄河岸边，以应付他的冲击，等到达时德胜南城早已被攻克。
English: At first, when the Jin king learned that Wang Yanzhang had been awarded the post of the northern envoy, he hurried from Weizhou to the bank of the Yellow River to cope with his impact. By the time he arrived, the southern city of Desheng had already been conquered.

古文：晋王尝曰： 此人可畏，当避其锋。 
现代文：晋王曾经说 ：这人太可怕了，应避开他的锋芒。 
English: Jin Wang once said: "This man is too terrible, you should avoid his sharpness."

古文：一日，晋王领兵迫潘张寨，大军隔河，未能赴援，彦章援枪登船，叱舟人解缆，招讨使贺瑰止之，不可。
现代文：一天，晋王领兵逼近梁军潘张寨。梁朝大军隔着黄河，不能赶赴救援，这时王彦章操起铁枪登上一条船，喝令船工解开缆绳，招讨使贺瑰阻止他，不听。
English: One day, the leader of the Jin army approached the Liang army Pan Zhangzhai. The Liang army was across the Yellow River and could not rush to the rescue. At this time, Wang Yanzhang took up an iron gun and boarded a boat, shouted for the boatman to untie the cable, and invited He Gui to stop him, but he did not listen.

古文：晋王闻彦章至，抽军而退，其骁勇如此。
现代文：晋王听说王彦章杀来了，就撤军后退。他的骁勇竟然能这样。
English: When the Jin king heard that Wang Yanzhang was coming to kill him, he withdrew his troops and retreated. How could he be so brave?

古文：及晋高祖迁都夷门，嘉彦章之忠款，诏赠太师，搜访子孙录用。
现代文：当后晋高祖石敬瑭迁都至夷门时，嘉奖王彦章的忠挚诚恳，下诏书追赠为太师，搜求他的子孙录取任用。
English: When the capital was moved to Yimen, the founder of Jingu University, Keiho Seki, praised Wang Yanzhang's loyalty and sincerity, posthumously awarded him the title of Grand Master, and sought his descendants for appointment.

