古文：《程才》、《量知》之篇，徒言知学，未言才力也。
现代文：本书《程材篇》和《量知篇》，只论说了知识学问，没有谈才能力量。
English: In this book, "Course Material" and "Quantity Knowledge" only talk about knowledge and learning, but do not talk about talent and ability.

古文：人有知学，则有力矣。
现代文：人有了知识学问就有力量。
English: With knowledge and learning, one has power.

古文：文吏以理事为力，而儒生以学问为力。
现代文：文吏以处理官府事务作力量，而儒生以学问作力量。
English: The clerks deal with government affairs as their strength, while the Confucians deal with learning as their strength.

古文：或问扬子云曰： 力能扛鸿鼎、揭华旗，知德亦有之乎？ 
现代文：有人问杨子云： 有力气的人能扛大鼎、拔大旗，有智慧和道德的人也能这样吗？ 
English: Someone asked Yang Ziyun: A person with strength can carry a large tripod and hoist a large flag, but can a person with wisdom and morality do the same?

古文：答曰： 百人矣。 
现代文：回答说： 要一百个人才行。 
English: And he answered, It is enough for a hundred men.

古文：夫知德百人者，与彼扛鸿鼎、揭华旗者为料敌也。
现代文：看来，一百个有智慧有道德的人的力气，才跟那个扛大鼎、拔大旗的人的力气估计是相等的。
English: It seems that the strength of a hundred wise and moral people is only equal to the strength of the person who carries the big top and hoists the big flag.

古文：夫壮士力多者，扛鼎揭旗；儒生力多者，博达疏通。
现代文：壮士的力气，能扛大鼎、拔大旗；儒生的精力强，能博览群书，通晓古今，注释说明，融会贯通。
English: The strength of a strong man can carry a big tripod and hoist a big flag; the energy of a Confucian is strong, can read a lot of books, know the past and the present, annotate, and integrate.

古文：故博达疏通，儒生之力也；举重拔坚，壮士之力也。
现代文：所以能博览群书通晓古今，注释说时融会贯通，是儒生精力的表现；举重鼎，拔大旗，是壮士力量的表现。
English: Therefore, to be able to read and understand ancient and modern books, and to be able to integrate and penetrate the commentary on the times is a manifestation of Confucian energy; lifting weights and hoisting flags is a manifestation of the strength of a strong man.

古文：《梓材》曰： 强人有王开贤，厥率化民。 
现代文：《尚书·梓材》上说： 贤臣辅佐君王任用贤能的人，他能率领教化百姓。 
English: "Shangshu · Zizai" said: The king appoints a virtuous person who can lead and educate the people.

古文：此言贤人亦壮强於礼义，故能开贤，其率化民。
现代文：这话是说贤臣在礼义方面很突出，所以能任用贤能的人，并率领他们教化百姓。
English: This is to say that the wise men are very prominent in terms of etiquette, so they can appoint wise men and lead them to educate the people.

古文：化民须礼义，礼义须文章， 行有余力，则以学文 。
现代文：教化百姓需要礼义，学习礼义需要经书。干完事情有多余的精力，就要学习经书。
English: Educating the people requires etiquette, and studying etiquette requires scriptures. If you have extra energy after doing things, you must study scriptures.

古文：能学文，有力之验也。
现代文：能够学懂经书，就是有力量的证明。
English: To be able to study and understand scriptures is proof of one's power.

古文：问曰： 说一经之儒，可谓有力者？ 
现代文：有人问： 能讲解一种经书的儒生，可以称得上有力量的人吗？ 
English: Some people asked: Can a Confucian scholar who can explain a scripture be called a powerful person?

古文：曰：非有力者也。
现代文：我说：不是有力量的人。
English: I said: not someone with power.

古文：陈留庞少都每荐诸生之吏，常曰： 王甲某子，才能百人。 
现代文：陈留郡的庞少都每次推荐儒生去做官，往往说： 王某某人，才能超过百人。 
English: Many people in Chenliu County always recommend Confucian scholars to become officials. They often say, "Only a king can have more than a hundred people."

古文：太守非其能，不答。
现代文：太守不以为这人有如此能力，不作声。
English: The daimyō didn't think he was capable of such a thing, so he kept quiet.

古文：少都更曰： 言之尚少，王甲某子，才能百万人。 
现代文：少都又说： 说得还不够，王某某人，才能超过百万人。 
English: "It's not enough to say, 'Wang, so-and-so, so-and-so,' to get more than a million people," Xiaodu added.

古文：太守怒曰： 亲吏妄言！ 
现代文：太守发脾气说： 我的好官，乱说假话。 
English: The daimyō lost his temper and said, "My good officer, you are telling lies.

古文：少都曰： 文吏不通一经一文，不调师一言；诸生能说百万章句，非才知百万人乎？ 
现代文：庞少都说： 文吏没有弄通经书上的每篇文章，又没有理解老师讲的每句话，儒生能把经书按章句讲解到百万言，这不是才智超过百万人吗？ 
English: Pang Shao Du said: The clerics did not get through every article in the scriptures, and did not understand every sentence spoken by the teacher. Confucianism can explain the scriptures to a million words, isn't this the intelligence of more than a million people?

古文：太守无以应。
现代文：太守无法用话回答。
English: The abbot could not answer in words.

古文：夫少都之言，实也，然犹未也。
现代文：其实，少都的话是确实的，但还不全面。
English: In fact, what Shodou said is true, but it is not comprehensive.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诸生能传百万言，不能览古今，守信师法，虽辞说多，终不为博。
现代文：儒生能解释百万言，不能通古今，墨守和相信老师对经书的解释。虽然话说得很多，但始终不广博。
English: Confucianism can explain a million words, but it can't explain the past and the present. Confucianism adheres to and believes in the teacher's interpretation of the scriptures. Although there are a lot of words, they are still not extensive.

古文：殷、周以前，颇载《六经》，儒生所不能说也。
现代文：殷、周以前的事情，六经上略有记载，所以儒生能够解说。
English: The events before Yin and Zhou are slightly recorded in the Six Classics, so Confucianism can explain them.

古文：秦、汉之事，儒生不见，力劣不能览也。
现代文：秦、汉的事情，儒生不明白，是因为他们能力不足，不能博览的缘故。
English: The reason why Confucians do not understand the Qin and Han dynasties is that they lack the ability to learn about them.

古文：周监二代，汉监周、秦，周、秦以来，儒生不知；汉欲观览，儒生无力。
现代文：周朝要借鉴夏代和殷代的事迹，汉朝要借鉴周朝和秦朝的事迹，但周、秦以来的事迹，儒生不知道，汉朝想借鉴周、秦的事迹，儒生却无能为力。
English: The Zhou Dynasty wanted to learn from the deeds of the Xia and Yin Dynasties, the Han Dynasty wanted to learn from the deeds of the Zhou Dynasty and the Qin Dynasty, but the deeds since the Zhou and Qin Dynasties were unknown to the Confucians. The Han Dynasty wanted to learn from the deeds of the Zhou and Qin Dynasties, but the Confucians were powerless.

古文：使儒生博观览，则为文儒。
现代文：假使儒生能广泛考察，就能成为鸿儒。
English: If Confucians can study widely, they can become great Confucians.

古文：文儒者，力多於儒生，如少都之言，文儒才能千万人矣。
现代文：鸿儒，能力比儒生强，正像少都说的，鸿儒的才能能够超过百万人。
English: The ability of a Hongru is stronger than that of a Confucian student. As Shodou said, the talent of a Hongru can exceed one million people.

古文：曾子曰： 士不可以不弘毅，任重而道远。
现代文：曾子说： 读书人不可以心胸不宽广，意志不坚强，因为他们担子重，道路遥远。
English: Zeng Zi said: An aspiring person must have a broad mind and a strong will, because he has a great mission and a long way to go.

古文：仁以为己任，不亦重乎！
现代文：把实现仁作为自己的责任，担子不也很重大吗？
English: Taking the realization of benevolence as one's own responsibility, isn't the burden also very heavy?

古文：死而後己，不亦远乎！ 
现代文：死后才停止，道路不也很遥远吗？ 
English: It only stops after death, isn't it a long way to go?

古文：由此言之，儒者所怀，独己重矣，志所欲至，独己远矣。
现代文：像这样说来，唯独儒生所怀的抱负是非常重大的，唯独儒生志向所希望达到的理想是非常远大的。
English: In this way, only the aspirations of Confucianism are very important, and only the ideals that Confucianism aspires to are very far-reaching.

古文：身载重任，至於终死，不倦不衰，力独多矣。
现代文：他们身上担负着重大的责任，直到老死，不疲倦不衰退，唯独精力很强。
English: They are burdened with heavy responsibilities until they die of old age. They are not tired and do not decline, but they are very energetic.

古文：夫曾子载於仁而儒生载於学，所载不同，轻重均也。
现代文：曾子担负着仁义，儒生负担着学问，虽然负担的方面不同，但重要性却是一样的。
English: Zengzi bears the burden of benevolence and righteousness, while Confucianism bears the burden of learning. Although the burden is different, the importance is the same.

古文：夫一石之重，一人挈之，十石以上，二人不能举也。
现代文：一石的重量，一个人能提得起，十石以上的重量，两个人是不可能举起来的。
English: The weight of one stone can be lifted by one person, but the weight of more than ten stones cannot be lifted by two people.

古文：世多挈一石之任，寡有举十石之力。
现代文：世上很多人能提起一石的担子，很少有能举起十石重量的力气。
English: Many people in the world can lift a stone, but few have the strength to lift a ten-stone weight.

古文：儒生所载，非徒十石之重也。
现代文：儒生负担的东西，不仅仅是十石的重量。
English: The burden of Confucianism is not just the weight of ten stones.

古文：地力盛者，草木暢茂。一亩之收，当中田五亩之分。
现代文：地力旺盛，草本就长得茂密，一亩的收成，相当于中等四五亩的产量。
English: The land is fertile, the herbs grow thickly, and the harvest of one mu is equivalent to the production of four or five mu.

古文：苗田，人知出谷多者地力盛。不知出文多者才知茂，失事理之实矣。
现代文：种庄稼的地，人们知道出产粮食多的地力旺盛，却不懂得写文章多的才智高超，这不符合事理的真实情况。
English: In the land of crops, people know that the land that produces more grain is vigorous, but they do not know how to write more articles. This does not correspond to the truth of the matter.

古文：夫文儒之力过於儒生，况文吏乎？
现代文：鸿儒的能力超过儒生，何况是不如儒生的文吏呢？
English: The ability of Hongru surpasses that of Confucianism, how much more that of Confucianism's literati?

古文：能举贤荐士，世谓之多力也。
现代文：能被推荐的贤人，世人都认为他们能力强。
English: A wise man who can be recommended is regarded as a man of great ability.

古文：然能举贤荐士，上书记也。
现代文：这样说，能被推荐的贤人，都会给君主或长官上奏记了。
English: In this way, the wise men who can be recommended will all report to the monarch or the chief.

古文：能上书记者，文儒也。
现代文：能给君主或长官上奏记的是鸿儒。
English: It is Hong Ru who can report to the monarch or the superior.

古文：文儒非必诸生也，贤达用文则是矣。
现代文：鸿儒不一定是儒生，凡能贤明通达著书写文章的就是鸿儒。
English: A Confucian scholar is not necessarily a Confucian scholar. Anyone who can write and write intelligently is a Confucian scholar.

古文：谷子云、唐子高章奏百上，笔有余力，极言不讳，文不折乏，非夫才知之人不能为也。
现代文：谷子云和唐子高上了近百次章奏，笔下有功夫，能毫不隐讳地说尽自己要说的话，而不缺乏文采，这不是有才智的人是不可能做到的。
English: Yan Ziyun and Tang Zi high-pitched nearly a hundred chapters, the pen has effort, can say what they want to say without any concealment, without lack of literary style, this is not a talented person is impossible to do.

古文：孔子，周世多力之人也。作《春秋》，删《五经》，秘书微文，无所不定。
现代文：孔子是周代能力很强的人，他写《春秋》，删改五经，对罕见的书籍文章，没有不删定的。
English: Confucius was a man of great ability in the Zhou Dynasty. He wrote "Spring and Autumn" and edited and revised the Five Classics. For rare books and articles, there was nothing that could not be edited.

古文：山大者云多，泰山不崇朝辩雨天下。
现代文：山大云就多，泰山最大，它的云形成的雨，不到一个早晨就下遍了天下。
English: Mount Taishan is the largest, and its clouds form rain, which falls all over the world in less than a morning.

古文：夫然则贤者有云雨之知，故其吐文万牒以上，可谓多力矣。
现代文：那么贤人都有像泰山云雨般的智慧，所以他们能写出万片以上木简的文章，可以说是能力相当强了。
English: Then the sages have wisdom like Mount Tai, so they can write more than ten thousand pieces of woodcut articles, which can be said to be quite capable.

古文：世称力者，常褒乌获，然则董仲舒、扬子云，文之乌获也。
现代文：社会上称赞大力士，常常赞扬乌获，像这样，那么董仲舒、扬子云著书写文章也该像称赞乌获样受到赞扬了。
English: The society praises Hercules, and often praises Wu Guo. Therefore, Dong Zhongshu and Yang Ziyun writing articles should also be praised like Wu Guo.

古文：秦武王与孟说举鼎不任，绝脉而死。
现代文：秦武王跟大力士孟说比举鼎，不能胜任，筋脉崩断而死。
English: King Qinwu told Meng that he was too incompetent and died of a ruptured artery.

古文：少文之人，与董仲舒等涌胸中之思，必将不任，有绝脉之变。
现代文：文才差的人跟董仲舒同样抒发胸中的文思，一定会不胜任，有血脉枯竭的危险。
English: A person with poor literary talent who expresses his thoughts in the same way as Dong Zhongshu is bound to be incompetent and run the risk of exhausting his blood.

古文：王莽之时，省《五经》章句皆为二十万，博士弟子郭路夜定旧说，死於烛下，精思不任，绝脉气减也。
现代文：王莽的时候，删定五经的解说，每经都是二十万字，年轻博士郭路晚上删定原来五经的解说，死在灯烛之下，这是因为精力智慧不能胜任，血脉枯竭元气不存的缘故。
English: When Wang Mang deleted the commentary of the Five Classics, each sutra was 200,000 words. In the evening, the young doctor Guo Lu deleted the original commentary of the Five Classics and died under the candlelight. This was because his energy and wisdom were not up to the task, and his blood was drained and his vitality was exhausted.

古文：颜氏之子，已曾驰过孔子於涂矣，劣倦罢极，发白齿落。
现代文：颜渊，已曾在德行的 路 上超过了孔子，弄得精疲力尽，发白齿落。
English: Yan Yuan, who had already surpassed Confucius on the path of virtue, was exhausted and his teeth were white.

古文：夫以庶几之材，犹有仆顿之祸，孔子力优，颜渊不任也。
现代文：以接近孔子的才能，尚且还有仆倒力竭的灾祸，可见孔子精力很强，颜渊不能胜任。
English: With a talent close to that of Confucius, but still suffering from the scourge of exhaustion, it can be seen that Confucius was very energetic and Yan Yuan was not up to the task.

古文：才力不相如，则其知不相及也。
现代文：这不仅是才能精力不如孔子，就是他的智慧也赶不上孔子。
English: Not only is his talent and energy inferior to that of Confucius, but his wisdom is also inferior to that of Confucius.

古文：勉自什伯，鬲中呕血，失魂狂乱，遂至气绝。
现代文：勉强做超过自己十倍、百倍能力的事情，会胸中吐血，神魂颠倒，直至气绝。
English: If you try to do something that is ten times or a hundred times more than you are capable of, you will vomit blood in your chest, and you will be overwhelmed until you are exhausted.

古文：书五行之牍，十之记，其才劣者，笔墨之力尤难，况乃连句结章，篇至十百哉！
现代文：写五行字的书信，上头十个字的奏记，那些才能差的人，笔墨功夫还感觉困难，更何况是连结章句写成文章，达到十篇百篇呢！
English: Writing a five-line letter, the first ten words of a musical notation, those with poor talent, pen and ink still feel difficult, let alone writing a linked chapter into an article, reaching ten hundred articles!

古文：力独多矣！
现代文：可见，只有这种人的能力才算强盛。
English: It can be seen that only this kind of person's ability is strong.

古文：江河之水，驰涌滑漏，席地长远，无枯竭之流，本源盛矣。
现代文：长江、黄河的水，汹涌奔驰地滚滚流泻，顺着地势，流得很远，没有枯竭的干流，可见水源旺盛。
English: The water of the Yangtze River and the Yellow River flows furiously and swiftly, following the topography and flowing far away. There are no exhausted main streams, and abundant water sources can be seen.

古文：知江河之流远，地中之源盛，不知万牒之人，胸中之才茂，迷惑者也。
现代文：知道长江、黄河流得很远，是发源地水源旺盛，却不知道能写万简文章的人是由于胸中的才能旺盛，这是缺乏判断力的人。
English: People who know that the Yangtze River and the Yellow River are very far away and are the source of abundant water, but do not know that the person who can write a simple article is due to the talent in his chest, this is a person who lacks judgment.

古文：故望见骥足，不异於众马之蹄，蹑平陆而驰骋，千里之迹，斯须可见。
现代文：所以有人看见千里马的蹄子，却分不出跟普通马蹄的差别，只有在平地上飞奔，千里马的样子，才立刻可以看出。
English: Therefore, some people see the hooves of the draught horse, but they can't tell the difference from ordinary horses' hooves. It is only when they gallop on the plain that the appearance of the draught horse can be seen immediately.

古文：夫马足人手，同一实也，称骥之足，不荐文人之手，不知类也。
现代文：其实，马蹄与人的手，是同类东西，只称赞千里马的蹄子，却不推崇人的手，这是不懂得类推的缘故。
English: In fact, the horse's hoof and the human hand are the same kind of thing. People only praise the horse's hoof, but do not respect the human hand. This is because they do not understand the analogy.

古文：夫能论筋力以见比类者，则能取文力之人立之朝庭。
现代文：要是能用评论体力的方法来发现经过类比的人，那么就能选择有写文章能力的人到朝廷去做官了。
English: If it were possible to discover men by analogy, by means of a comment on physical strength, then it would be possible to select men with the ability to write articles to become officials in the imperial court.

古文：故夫文力之人，助有力之将，乃能以力为功。
现代文：于是乎，有写文章能力的人，得依靠有能力的地方长官推荐，才能使自己的能力发挥作用。
English: As a result, people who have the ability to write articles have to rely on the recommendation of competent local officials in order to make their ability work.

古文：有力无助，以力为祸。
现代文：有能力而没有有能力的人推荐，反而会因为有能力受到排斥、打击。
English: Those who are capable but do not have the ability to recommend will be rejected and attacked because of their ability.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：长巨之物，强力之人乃能举之。
现代文：又长又大的东西，要力大的人才能举起它。
English: It takes a strong man to lift something that long and big.

古文：重任之车，强力之牛乃能挽之。
现代文：装着重物的车子，要力大的牛才能拉动。
English: It takes a strong ox to pull a cart loaded with heavy objects.

古文：是任车上阪，强牛引前，力人推後，乃能升逾。
现代文：因此装着重物的车子上坡，要力大的牛在前面拉，力大的人在后面推，才能爬上去。
English: Therefore, when a cart loaded with heavy objects goes uphill, it needs a strong ox to pull it in front and a strong person to push it behind in order to climb up.

古文：如牛羸人罢，任车退却，还堕坑谷，有破覆之败矣。
现代文：如果牛瘦弱，人精疲力竭，装着重物的车子后退，反而会落进坑谷中，有翻车摔碎的恶果。
English: If the cow is thin and weak, the person is exhausted, and the car loaded with heavy objects backs up, it will fall into the pit valley, and there will be the evil consequences of the car overturning and crashing.

古文：文儒怀先王之道，含百家之言，其难推引，非徒任车之重也。
现代文：鸿儒胸怀先王之道，肚藏各家学说，他们很难推举，不仅仅是装着重物的车子可比。
English: It's hard to pick out the great minds who hold the teachings of the past kings in their hearts. It's not just a car with a heavy load that can be compared.

古文：荐致之者，罢羸无力，遂却退窜於岩穴矣。
现代文：要是推荐的人，软弱无力，于是就会被迫流落到偏僻的地方去。
English: If the recommenders are weak and feeble, then they will be forced to migrate to remote areas.

古文：河发昆仑，江起岷山，水力盛多，滂沛之流，浸下益盛，不得广岸低地，不能通流入乎东海。
现代文：黄河发源于昆仑山，长江起源于岷山。水力丰盛，浩浩荡荡的流水，逐渐往下流水势越大，但没有广阔的河岸低下的地势，就不能通畅地流入东海。
English: The Yellow River originates from Mount Kunlun, and the Yangtze River originates from Mount Lushan. Water power is abundant, and the more powerful the flowing water is, the greater the potential for water to flow down. However, without a broad riverbank and low-lying terrain, it cannot flow smoothly into the East Sea.

古文：如岸狭地仰，沟洫决泆，散在丘墟矣。
现代文：如果河岸狭窄地势较高，河水会倒灌支流，造成决口泛滥，漫流在空旷荒凉的地方。
English: If the river bank is narrow and the terrain is high, the river water will backfill the tributary, causing the breach to flood and wandering in the empty desolate place.

古文：文儒之知，有似於此。
现代文：鸿儒的学问，有点像上面说的一样。
English: Hongru's learning is a bit like the above.

古文：文章滂沛，不遭有力之将援引荐举，亦将弃遗於衡门之下，固安得升陟圣主之庭，论说政事之务乎？火之光也，不举不明。
现代文：文章写得气势滂礴、波澜壮阔，不遇到有能力的地方长官提拔举荐，也要被遗弃在一文不值的地方，因此怎么能登上 圣主 的朝廷做官，并议论国家大事呢？火光，不高举不会明亮。
English: The article is written with great vigor and grandeur, without encountering the promotion and recommendation of capable local governors, it will also be abandoned in a worthless place, so how can it ascend to the imperial court of the Lord and discuss national affairs?

古文：有人於斯，其知如京，其德如山，力重不能自称，须人乃举，而莫之助，抱其盛高之力，窜於闾巷之深，何时得达？
现代文：这里有人，他的知识像座高丘，他的道德像山样高大，但能力大不能自我举荐，需要有人来推举，没有人的帮助，只好胸怀那旺盛高超的能力，流落到偏僻的地方，什么时候才能飞黄腾达呢？
English: There are people here whose knowledge is as high as a hill, whose morality is as lofty as a mountain, but whose ability is so great that they cannot recommend themselves. They need someone to recommend them, and without anyone's help, they have no choice but to go to remote places with that strong and superb ability in their hearts. When will they be able to fly high?

古文：奡、育，古之多力者，身能负荷千钧，手能决角伸钩，使之自举，不能离地。
现代文：奡和夏育都是古代的大力士，身体能担负千钧重量，手能扭断牛角，拉直铜钩，要是让他自己举自己，身体却不能离开地面。
English: Zou and Xia Yu are both ancient Hercules. Their bodies can bear the weight of thousands of cormorants. Their hands can break a bull's horn and straighten a copper hook. If they let themselves be lifted, their bodies would not be able to leave the ground.

古文：智能满胸之人，宜在王阙，须三寸之舌，一尺之笔，然後自动，不能自进，进之又不能自安，须人能动，待人能安。
现代文：智慧和能力满腹的人，适合在朝廷做官，但必须有能说会写的人推荐，然后才能开始去朝廷做官，而不能一开始就做官，做官也不会一开始就地位稳固，必须靠人推荐才能去朝廷，必须靠人保护才能地位稳固。
English: People who are full of wisdom and ability are suitable for serving as officials in the imperial court, but they must be recommended by someone who can speak and write before they can begin to serve as officials in the imperial court. They cannot serve as officials from the beginning, and they will not have a stable position from the beginning. They must rely on people's recommendation before they can go to the imperial court, and they must rely on people's protection before they can have a stable position.

古文：道重知大，位地难适也。
现代文：这是因为具有先王之道多，学问大，难于得到适合自己能力的地位。
English: This is because it is more difficult to obtain a position suitable for one's own ability if one has a lot of experience and knowledge.

古文：小石附於山，山力能得持之；在沙丘之间，小石轻微，亦能自安。
现代文：小石头附着在山上，山的力量能够支撑它；在沙丘之间，小石头由于轻微，也能自然安稳。
English: Small stones are attached to the mountain, and the strength of the mountain can support it; between the dunes, small stones can also be naturally stable due to their lightness.

古文：至於大石，沙土不覆，山不能持，处危峭之际，则必崩坠於坑谷之间矣。
现代文：至于很大的石头，没有泥沙覆盖，山又不能支撑，处在悬崖峭壁的边上，就必然会崩塌坠落到坑谷里去。
English: As for large stones, if they are not covered with silt and the mountain cannot support them, and if they are on the edge of a cliff, they will inevitably collapse and fall into the valley.

古文：大智之重，遭信之将，无左右沙土之助，虽在显位，将不能持，则有大石崩坠之难也。
现代文：智慧很高的人分量大，遇上才能差的地方长官，又没有周围人的帮助，虽然处在显赫地位，地方长官不能支持，就会有大石崩塌的灾难。
English: A man of great wisdom is of great weight. If he meets a local magistrate with poor ability, and without the help of the people around him, although he is in a prominent position, and the local magistrate cannot support him, there will be a disaster of rock collapse.

古文：或伐薪於山，轻小之木，合能束之。
现代文：有人在山上砍柴，能把轻小的树枝合在一起捆起来。
English: Someone was chopping wood on the mountain and was able to tie the light branches together.

古文：至於大木十围以上，引之不能动，推之不能移，则委之於山林，收所束之小木而归。
现代文：至于十抱粗以上的大树，拉它不动，也推它不走，只好就丢在山林里，收拾起捆好的小树枝回家。
English: As for the big tree, which is more than ten times the size of a man's arm, if you pull it and it does not move, or if you push it and it does not move, you have no choice but to leave it in the mountain forest, pick up the bundled twigs and go home.

古文：由斯以论，知能之大者，其犹十围以上木也，人力不能举荐，其犹薪者不能推引大木也。
现代文：由此说来，智慧能力高的人，他们就像十抱粗以上的大树，一般人的力量不可能举荐，就像砍柴的人不可能推走、拉动大树一样。
English: From this perspective, people with high intelligence and ability are like big trees that are more than ten times as thick. The strength of an average person cannot be recommended, just as a woodcutter cannot push away or pull a big tree.

古文：孔子周流，无所留止，非圣才不明，道大难行，人不能用也。
现代文：孔子周游列国，没有地方留用他，并不是圣人的才能不高明，而是他的道义太深奥很难实行，人们无法任用他的缘故。
English: Confucius traveled around the countries, but there was no place to employ him. It was not that the saint's talent was not good, but that his morality was too profound and difficult to practice, so people could not employ him.

古文：故夫孔子，山中巨木之类也。
现代文：这样看来，孔子是山中巨大树木一类的人。
English: From this perspective, Confucius is like a giant tree in the mountains.

古文：桓公九合诸侯，一匡天下，管仲之力。
现代文：齐桓公多次召集诸侯会盟，一齐来扶正天下，这是靠管仲的能力。
English: Prince Qi Kuan repeatedly convened the association of lords to support the world together, which is the ability to rely on management.

古文：管仲有力，桓公能举之，可谓壮强矣。
现代文：管仲有能力，齐桓公能选拔他，可以说是很了不起。
English: Guanzhong is capable, and it can be said that it is very remarkable that Qi Kuan Gong can select him.

古文：吴不能用子胥，楚不能用屈原，二子力重，两主不能举也。
现代文：吴王不能任用伍子胥，楚王不能任用屈原，是他们二人能力太强，两国君主无法选拔他们。
English: The King of Wu could not appoint Wu Zixuan, and the King of Chu could not appoint Qu Yuan. Both of them were too powerful for the monarchs of the two countries to select them.

古文：举物不胜，委地而去可也，时或恚怒，斧斫破败，此则子胥、屈原所取害也。
现代文：推举重物不能胜任，把它丢在地上而自己离开，这算好的。有时有人忿恨发怒，用斧头砍破弄坏，这就是伍子胥、屈原遭到杀害的原因。
English: It's all right if you can't lift a heavy object, throw it on the ground and walk away. Sometimes, someone gets angry and cuts it with an axe, which is why Wu Zixuan and Qu Yuan were killed.

古文：渊中之鱼，递相吞食，度口所能容，然後咽之；口不能受，哽咽不能下。
现代文：深水中的鱼，顺次大鱼吞吃小鱼，估计口中能容纳，然后就吞吃掉它，要是口中不能容纳，就会哽咽吞不下去。
English: Fish in deep water, big fish swallow small fish one after another, estimate the mouth can accommodate, and then swallow it. If the mouth cannot accommodate, it will choke and cannot swallow.

古文：故夫商鞅三说孝公，後说者用，前二难用，後一易行也。
现代文：所以商鞅三次劝说秦孝公，后一次劝说被采用，是因为前二次采用有困难，后一次的容易施行。
English: Therefore, the negotiators persuaded Qin Xiaogong three times, and the latter persuasion was adopted because there were difficulties in adopting the first two times, and the latter was easy to implement.

古文：观管仲之《明法》，察商鞅之《耕战》，固非弱劣之主所能用也。
现代文：看管仲的《管子·明法》，商鞅的《商君书·耕战》，本来就不是能力低劣的君主所能采用的。
English: The Guanzi Mingfa of Guanzhongzhong, and the Shangjun Shu Gongzheng of Shangguan, were not originally able to be used by a monarch with inferior ability.

古文：六国之时，贤才之臣，入楚楚重，出齐齐轻，为赵赵完，畔魏魏伤。
现代文：六国的时候，贤能的大臣，去到楚国，楚国就强大；离开齐国，齐国就衰弱；帮助赵国，赵国就保全；背离魏国，魏国就削弱。
English: During the Six Kingdoms period, if a wise minister went to Chu, Chu would be strong; if he left Qi, Qi would be weak; if he helped Zhao, Zhao would be preserved; if he turned away from Wei, Wei would be weakened.

古文：韩用申不害，行其《三符》，兵不侵境，盖十五年。
现代文：韩国任用申不害，施行他的《三符》，别国军队不敢侵犯韩国国土，大概有十五年。
English: It has been about 15 years since South Korea appointed Shin Shin and implemented his "three signs" so that other countries' troops would not dare to invade South Korea's territory.

古文：不能用之，又不察其书，兵挫军破，国并於秦。
现代文：但由于不能任用韩非，又不看他的书，于是军队打败，国家被秦国吞并。
English: However, since Han Fei could not be appointed and his books were not read, the army was defeated and the country was annexed by Qin.

古文：殷、周之世，乱迹相属，亡祸比肩，岂其心不欲为治乎？
现代文：殷周时代，动乱的事情接连不断，诸侯亡国的灾祸一个接着一个，难道这些亡国之君心里不想治理国家吗？
English: During the Yin and Zhou Dynasties, the turbulent events continued one after another, and the calamities of the ruined states followed one after another. Did these ruined princes not want to govern the country in their hearts?

古文：力弱智劣，不能纳至言也。
现代文：是他们能力弱智慧差，不能接受高明的意见。
English: It is they who are weak in ability, weak in wisdom, and unable to accept high-level opinions.

古文：是故碓重，一人之迹不能蹈也；大，一人之掌不能推也。
现代文：所以碓重，靠一个人的脚是不能踩很久的；石磨很大，靠一个人的手是不能推很久的。
English: Therefore, a heavy stone cannot be stepped on for a long time by a person's foot; a large stone mill cannot be pushed for a long time by a person's hand.

古文：贤臣有劲强之优，愚主有不堪之劣，以此相求，禽鱼相与游也。
现代文：贤臣有能力很强的长处，愚蠢的君主有不能使用贤臣的短处，贤能的大臣跟愚蠢的君主这样相处在一起，就跟飞禽和鱼类在一起游玩一样。
English: A wise minister has the advantage of great ability, a foolish prince has the disadvantage of not being able to use a wise minister, and a wise minister and a foolish prince get along like this, just like birds and fishes.

古文：干将之刃，人不推顿，菰瓠不能伤；筱之箭，机不动发，鲁缟不能穿。
现代文：宝剑干将的锋刃，人不抽出来使用，连瓜和瓠都不会被损坏；用筱、簵做的箭，弩机不扣动，连鲁缟也不会被射穿。
English: The cutting edge of the sword will not be pulled out and used by people, and even the melon and gourd will not be damaged; the arrow made of gourd and gourd will not move, and even the beak will not be pierced.

古文：非无干将、筱之才也，无推顿发动之主。菰瓠、鲁缟不穿伤，焉望斩旗穿革之功乎？
现代文：不是没有宝剑干将、好箭筱簵的才干，而是没有抽剑扣机的人，瓜瓠、鲁缟都没有受损射穿，还怎么能指望它们发挥砍倒敌人军旗射穿敌人皮盔甲的作用呢？
English: It's not that they don't have the ability to wield a sword or shoot an arrow well, but they don't have a sword-drawing machine. Neither the melon nor the gourd has been damaged, so how can they be expected to play the role of cutting down the enemy's flag and shooting through the enemy's armor?

古文：故引弓之力不能引强弩。
现代文：所以有一般拉弓的力气，就不要去拉强弩。
English: So if you have the strength to draw a bow, don't try to pull a kite.

古文：弩力五石，引以三石，筋绝骨折，不能举也。
现代文：要五石力气拉开的弩，却用只有三石力气的人去拉，就会折断筋骨，还不能拉开。
English: A yoke that takes five stone of strength to pull apart, but is pulled by a person with only three stone of strength, will break the sinews and bones, and still cannot be pulled apart.

古文：故力不任强引，则有变恶折脊之祸；知不能用贤，则有伤德毁名之败。
现代文：所以力气不能胜任而要强行去拉，就会有恶变造成脊骨折断的灾祸；才智达不到不要任用贤人，否则会有损伤自己道德，败坏自己名誉的恶果。
English: Therefore, if the strength is not up to the task and you want to forcibly pull it, there will be an evil transformation that will cause the scourge of a broken spine; if the intelligence is not up to the task, do not appoint a wise man, otherwise it will damage your morals and ruin your reputation.

古文：论事者不曰才大道重，上不能用，而曰不肖不能自达。
现代文：评论事情的人不说贤人才能强道义深，君主不能任用，而说是由于不贤，不能靠自己飞黄腾达。
English: Those who comment on the matter do not say that a wise person is able to be strong, moral, and righteous, and cannot be appointed by the monarch, but say that due to unethical behavior, he cannot become famous on his own.

古文：自达者带绝不抗，自衒者贾贱不仇。案诸为人用之物，须人用之，功力乃立。
现代文：想依靠自己能力飞黄腾达的人，是终身得不到提拔任用的，就像炫耀自己货好的商人，没有买主欣赏，价钱再便宜，也卖不出去一样。考察凡是人使用的东西，都需要有人使用它，其作用才能发挥出来。
English: People who want to rely on their own ability to make a name for themselves will not be promoted for life, just as a businessman who shows off his goods is not appreciated by buyers and cannot be sold, no matter how cheap the price.

古文：凿所以入木者，槌叩之也，锸所以能撅地者，跖蹈之也。
现代文：凿子所以能进入木头里，是槌子敲打它；锸所以能掘地，是有脚掌踩它。
English: For the chisel to go into the wood, the hammer must strike it; for the plough to dig into the earth, the foot must tread it.

古文：诸有锋刃之器，所以能断斩割削者，手能把持之也，力能推引之也。
现代文：凡有锋刃的器物，所以能断开、斩断、割掉、削去东西，是有手能够拿住它们，用力推拉的缘故。
English: All sharp-edged objects can be broken, chopped, cut, and scraped because the hand can hold them and push and pull them hard.

古文：韩信去楚入汉，项羽不能安，高祖能持之也。
现代文：韩信离开楚去汉，是因为项羽不能重用他，而刘邦能掌握和使用他。
English: Han Xin left Chu for Han because Xiang Yu could not reuse him, while Liu Bang could master and use him.

古文：能用其善，能安其身，则能量其力、能别其功矣。
现代文：能使用他的长处，能安排他的地位，就能衡量他的能力，能识别他的功绩。
English: Can use his strength, can arrange his position, can measure his ability, can recognize his merit.

古文：樊、郦有攻城野战之功，高祖行封，先及萧何，则比萧何於猎人，同樊、郦於猎犬也。
现代文：樊哙和郦商都有攻打城池野外作战的功绩，汉高祖论功行赏，最先给了萧何，而且把萧何比作猎人，同样把樊哙和郦商比作猎犬。
English: Gao and Gao Shang both had the merit of attacking the city and fighting in the field. The Han Emperor Gao Zu first gave Xiao He the merit award, and compared Xiao He to a hunter, and also compared Gao and Gao Shang to a hunting dog.

古文：夫萧何安坐，樊、郦驰走，封不及驰走而先安坐者，萧何以知为力，而樊、郦以力为功也。
现代文：那萧何安稳地坐着，樊哙和郦商奔驰疆场，封赏轮不到奔驰疆场的却先奖励坐着指挥的人，萧何是用自己的智慧作力量，而樊哙和郦商是用他们的武力当作功绩。
English: Xiao He used his wisdom as his strength, while Zou and Zang Shang used their strength as their merits.

古文：萧何所以能使樊、郦者，以入秦收敛文书也。
现代文：萧何所以能差遣樊哙和郦商，是因为他进入秦都时收集了与战争有关的公文档案和地图。
English: The reason why Xiao He was able to send the envoys and merchants was because he collected documents and maps related to the war when he entered the Qin capital.

古文：众将拾金，何独掇书，坐知秦之形势，是以能图其利害。
现代文：当时众将领都拾取金银，萧何偏偏收集文书，因此知道了秦军的形势，所以能掌握其利害关系。
English: At that time, all generals were collecting gold and silver, and Xiao He was collecting documents, so he knew the situation of the Qin Army, so he could grasp its interests.

古文：众将驰走者，何驱之也。
现代文：众将领驱使士卒，萧何则指使他们。
English: The generals drove the envoys, and Xiao He ordered them to march.

古文：故叔孙通定仪，而高祖以尊；萧何造律，而汉室以宁。
现代文：所以叔孙通制定朝仪，汉高祖因此受尊崇；萧何制定法律，汉朝因此得安宁。
English: Therefore, Uncle Sun Tong established the imperial etiquette, and Han Gao Zu was revered for it; Xiao He established the law, and the Han Dynasty was peaceful as a result.

古文：案仪律之功，重於野战，斩首之力，不及尊主。
现代文：考察朝仪、法律的功绩，重于打仗；斩杀敌首的能力，比不上尊崇君主。
English: Examining the merits of court rituals and laws is more important than fighting wars; the ability to decapitate the enemy is not as important as honoring the monarch.

古文：故夫垦草殖谷，农夫之力也；勇猛攻战，士卒之力也；构架斫削，工匠之力也；治书定簿，佐史之力也；论道议政，贤儒之力也。
现代文：因此可见，耕田除草种植五谷，是农夫的能力；勇猛打仗，是士卒的能力；架屋削梁，是工匠的能力；处理公文，是佐史的能力；评论先王之道，议论国家大事，是鸿儒的能力。
English: Therefore, it can be seen that the ability to plow fields, weed, and plant crops is the ability of a farmer; the ability to fight bravely is the ability of a soldier; the ability to build houses and cut beams is the ability of a craftsman; the ability to handle official documents is the ability of a historian; the ability to comment on the way of the former king and discuss national affairs is the ability of a scholar.

古文：人生莫不有力，所以为力者，或尊或卑。
现代文：人生来都有一定的能力，只是用来发挥能力的工作，有贵有贱。
English: All of us have a certain ability in our lives, but the work that is used to develop that ability varies from high to low.

古文：孔子能举北门之关，不以力自章，知夫筋骨之力，不如仁义之力荣也。
现代文：孔子能举起北门的闸门，并不因为有此力气而自我炫耀，他知道身体的力气，不如仁义的力量荣耀。
English: Confucius could lift the gate of the North Gate, but he did not show off because he had such strength. He knew that the strength of the body was not as glorious as the strength of benevolence and righteousness.

