古文：夫风化者，自上而行于下者也，自先而施于后者也。
现代文：教育感化这件事，是从上向下推行的，是从先向后施行影响的。
English: The matter of educational influence is carried out from top to bottom, and the influence is exerted from the beginning to the end.

古文：是以父不慈则子不孝，兄不友则弟不恭，夫不义则妇不顺矣。
现代文：所以父亲不慈爱，子女就不会孝顺；兄长不友爱，弟弟就不会恭敬；丈夫不仁义，妻子就不会温顺了。
English: Therefore, if the father is not merciful, the children will not be filial; if the elder brother is not friendly, the younger brother will not be respectful; if the husband is not kind, the wife will not be docile.

古文：父慈而子逆，兄友而弟傲，夫义而妇陵，则天之凶民，乃刑戮之所摄，非训导之所移也。
现代文：至于父亲慈爱而子女忤逆，哥哥友爱而弟弟倨傲，丈夫仁义而妻凶悍，那就是天生的凶暴之民，要用刑罚杀戮来使他畏惧，而不是用训诲诱导能改变的了。
English: For as a father is merciful, and his children rebellious; as a brother is gracious, and his brother is proud; as a husband is merciful, and his wife fierce; so are the children of violence born; whom the fear of the sword, and not of correction, doth terrify.

古文：笞怒废于家，则竖子之过立见；刑罚不中，则民无所措手足。治家之宽猛，亦犹国焉。
现代文：家庭内部如果取消体罚，那童仆的过错就会马上出现；刑罚施用如果不当，那老百姓就会手足无措；治家的宽仁和严格，也好比治国一样。
English: If corporal punishment is abolished in the family, the fault of the child servant will immediately appear; if the punishment is improperly applied, the common people will be helpless; the leniency and strictness of the family is like the governance of the country.

古文：孔子曰： 奢则不孙，俭则固。
现代文：孔子说： 奢侈了就不恭顺，俭朴则显得鄙陋。
English: Confucius said, "If you are extravagant, you will not be obedient, and if you are frugal, you will be despicable."

古文：与其不孙也，宁固。 
现代文：与其不恭顺，宁可固陋。 
English: It is better to be shabby than deferential.

古文：又云： 如有周公之才之美，使骄且吝，其余不足观也已。 
现代文：又说： 假如有一个人有周公那样的才能，但只要他既骄傲又吝啬，余下的也就不值得称道了。 
English: He also said: If there is a person who has the same talent as Zhou Gong, but as long as he is both proud and stingy, the rest is not worthy of praise.

古文：然则可俭而不可吝已。
现代文：这样说来是可以俭省而不可以吝啬了。
English: In this way, it is possible to be thrifty and not miserly.

古文：俭者，省约为礼之谓也；吝者，穷急不恤之谓也。
现代文：节俭，是合乎礼的节省；吝啬，是面对困难危急也不救济。
English: Frugality is a polite economy; stinginess is no relief in the face of difficulties.

古文：今有施则奢，俭则吝；如能施而不奢，俭而不吝，可矣。
现代文：现在肯施舍的人常常奢侈无度，奉行节俭的人却又吝啬小气。如果能做到肯施舍而不奢侈，能节俭而不吝啬，那就最好了。
English: Nowadays, those who are generous are often extravagant, while those who are frugal are stingy. If you can be generous without being extravagant, and frugal without being stingy, that's the best.

古文：生民之本，要当稼稽而食，桑麻以衣。
现代文：老百姓生活最根本的事情，是要春天播种秋天收获粮食，种植桑麻得到衣服。
English: The most fundamental thing in the lives of ordinary people is to sow in the spring and harvest grain in the fall, and to grow mulberry to get clothes.

古文：蔬果之畜，园场之所产；鸡豚之善，树圈之所生。
现代文：所贮藏的蔬菜果品，是果园菜圃的出产；所食用的鸡肉猪肉，是鸡窝猪圈之所畜养。
English: The vegetables and fruits stored are the produce of the orchard vegetable garden; the chicken and pork eaten are the livestock raised in the chicken coop.

古文：复及栋宇器械，樵苏脂烛，莫非种殖之物也。
现代文：还有那房屋器具，柴草蜡烛，没有一样不是通过耕种养殖获得的。
English: And there is not a single household utensil, not even a firewood candle, that was not obtained through farming.

古文：至能守其业者，闭门而为生之具以足，但家无盐井耳。
现代文：那种善于打理家业的人，不出门都能保证生活必需品的充足，只是家里没有口盐井而已。
English: Those who are good at housekeeping can ensure the sufficiency of daily necessities without leaving home, but there is no salt well at home.

古文：令北土风俗，率能躬俭节用，以赡衣食。
现代文：如今北方地区的家庭都能做到省俭节用，能够保证温饱就满意了。
English: Nowadays, families in the northern region can achieve thrift and frugality, and they are satisfied if they can ensure food and clothing.

古文：江南奢侈，多不逮焉。
现代文：江南一带的风气奢侈，在节省方面多数比不上北方。
English: The southern part of the Yangtze River has a luxurious culture, but most of them are not as economical as those in the north.

古文：梁孝元世，有中书舍人，治家失度，而过严刻。
现代文：梁朝孝元帝的时候，有一位中书舍人，治家没有法度，待家人过于严苛。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaoyuan of the Liang Dynasty, there was a person who did not believe in Chinese calligraphy. He ruled his household without any rules and treated his family members too harshly.

古文：妻妾遂共货刺客，伺醉而杀之。
现代文：妻妾就买通刺客，乘他喝醉时杀了他。
English: His wife and concubine then bribed the assassin to kill him while he was drunk.

古文：世间名士，但务宽仁，至于饮食饷馈，僮仆减损，施惠然诺，妻子节量，狎侮宾客，侵耗乡党，此亦为家之巨蠹矣。
现代文：世上的一部分名士，只求宽厚仁爱，以致款待客人馈赠的食品，僮仆都敢私下减损，承诺接济亲友的东西，都由妻子把持控制，甚至发生狎弄侮辱宾客、侵犯乡里的事，这也是治家的一大弊端啊。
English: Some of the world's celebrities only ask for leniency and benevolence, so much so that they treat guests with gifts of food, and their servants dare to compromise privately. The things they promise to give to relatives and friends are controlled by their wives. They even tease, insult guests, and encroach on the countryside. This is also a major drawback of housekeeping.

古文：齐吏部侍郎房文烈，未尝嗔怒，经霖雨绝粮，遣婢籴米，因尔逃窜，三四许日，方复擒之。
现代文：齐国的吏部侍郎房文烈生性宽厚，从来不发怒。经过很多天的下雨之后，家里没有粮食了，派遗了他家的婢女去市场上买米，但是这个婢女就趁机逃跑了，大约过了三四天，才将地擒拿回来。
English: After many days of rain, there was no food in the house, so he sent his maid to the market to buy rice, but the maid took the opportunity to run away, and it took about three or four days to get the mantle back.

古文：房徐曰： 举家无食，汝何处来？ 
现代文：房文烈慢慢地说： 全家人都没有粮食吃了，你到哪里去了，从哪里来？
English: Fang Wenlie said slowly: The whole family has no food to eat. Where did you go and where did you come from?

古文：竟无捶挞。
现代文：最后竟然都没有惩罚婢女。
English: In the end, they didn't even punish the maid.

古文：尝寄人宅，奴婢彻屋为薪略尽，闻之颦蹙，卒无一言。
现代文：房文烈曾经把自己的房子借给别人住，这人家的奴婢竟把房家的房子拆掉当柴烧，他听了以后就皱皱眉，却什么都没有说。
English: Fong Wen Rong had once lent his house to someone else to live in. This person's slaves and maidservants actually tore down Fong's house to use as firewood. When he heard this, he frowned, but did not say anything.

古文：裴子野有疏亲故属饥寒不能自济者。皆收养之。
现代文：裴子野有远亲故旧饥寒不能自救的，他全部都收养了下来。
English: Peizhino has distant relatives who used to be so hungry and cold that they couldn't help themselves, and he has adopted them all.

古文：家素清贫，时逢水旱，二石米为薄粥，仅得遍焉，躬自同之，常无厌色。
现代文：他的家里本来就贫困，有时遇上水灾旱灾，用二石米煮成稀粥，才能勉强让大家都吃上，他也和大家一起吃，从没有厌倦。
English: His family was poor to begin with, and sometimes they were hit by floods and droughts. They had to boil two kilos of rice into gruel in order to force everyone to eat it. He ate it with everyone and never got tired of it.

古文：邺下有一领军，贪积已甚，家童八百，誓满一千，朝夕每人肴膳，以十五钱为率，遇有客旅，更无以兼。
现代文：京城邺下有个大将军，非常贪财，家中僮仆已有了八百人，还发誓要凑满一千，早晚每人的饭菜，以十五文钱为标准，遇到客人来，也不会增加。
English: There is a great general under the command of the capital, who is very greedy for money. There are already eight hundred servants in his family, and he has vowed to make up to a thousand. The meal for each person in the morning and evening is fifteen pennies as a standard, and it will not increase when guests come.

古文：后坐事伏法，籍其家产，麻鞋一屋，弊衣数库，其余财宝，不可胜言。
现代文：后来犯事被处死，朝廷派人没收他的家产时，发现他有一屋子的麻鞋，几库房的烂衣服，其余的财宝多不胜数。
English: Later, the criminal was executed, and when the court sent someone to confiscate his family's property, they found that he had a roomful of pockmarked shoes, several warehouses of rotten clothes, and countless other treasures.

古文：南阳有人，为生奥博，性殊俭吝。冬至后女婿谒之，乃设一铜瓯酒，数脔獐肉，婿恨其单率，一举尽之，主人愕然，俯仰命益，如此者再，退而责其女曰： 某郎好酒，故汝常贫。 
现代文：南阳地方有个人，家中财务丰厚，但是非常吝啬，冬至后女婿来看他，他只给准备了一铜瓯的酒，还有几块獐子肉，女婿嫌太简单，一下子就吃尽喝光了。这个人很吃惊，只好勉强应付添上一点，这样添过几次，回头责怪女儿说： 你丈夫太爱喝酒，才弄得你如此贫穷。 
English: There was a man in the Nanyang region whose family was well-to-do, but very stingy. His son-in-law came to visit him after the winter solstice. He only prepared a coppers' worth of wine and a few pieces of minced meat. The son-in-law thought it was too simple, so he ate and drank it all at once. The man was very surprised, and had to barely cope with adding a little more, adding it several times, and then blaming his daughter, saying, "Your husband likes to drink too much, that's why you're so poor."

古文：及其死后，诸子争财，兄遂杀弟。
现代文：等到他死后，几个儿子为争夺遗产，竟发生了兄杀弟的事情。
English: After his death, several of his sons fought over the inheritance, and one brother actually killed the other.

古文：妇主中馈，惟事酒食衣服之礼耳，国不可使预政，家不可使干蛊。
现代文：妇女主持家中饮食之事，就是操办一些有关酒食、衣服等礼仪方面的事罢了。国家层面不能让她们过问大政，家庭层面不能让她们主持家政。
English: For women to preside over eating and drinking at home is just to manage some ceremonial matters such as wine, food, and clothing. At the national level, they cannot be allowed to interfere in politics, and at the family level, they cannot be allowed to preside over domestic affairs.

古文：如有聪明才智，识达古今，正当辅佐君子，助其不足。
现代文：如果真有聪明才智，见识通达古今，也只应辅佐丈夫，对他达不到的做点帮助。
English: If you are really clever and have insight into the past and present, you should only assist your husband and do something to help him.

古文：必无牝鸡晨鸣，以致祸也。
现代文：一定不要母鸡晨鸣，招致祸殃。
English: Don't let the hen cackle in the morning, it's bad luck.

古文：江东妇女，略无交游，其婚姻之家，或十数年间来相识者，惟以信命赠遗，致殷勤焉。
现代文：江东的妇女，很少对外交往，在结成婚姻的辛家中，有十几年还不相识的，只派人传达音信或送礼品，来表示殷勤。
English: Women in eastern Jiangsu rarely make foreign contacts. In the married Xin family, some have not met for more than ten years. They only send someone to convey messages or send gifts to show their attentiveness.

古文：邺下风俗，专以妇持门户，争讼曲直，造请逢迎，车乘填街衢，绮罗盈府寺，代子求官，为夫诉屈，此乃恒代之遗风平？
现代文：邺城的风俗，专门让妇女当家，争讼曲直，谒见迎候，驾车乘的填塞道路，穿给罗的挤满官署，替儿子乞求官职，给丈夫诉说冤屈，这应是恒代的遗风吧？
English: The custom in Lucheng is to let women take the lead in the family, settle disputes, meet and greet each other, fill the roads with cars, fill government offices, beg for official positions for their sons, and complain to their husbands. This should be the legacy of the Heng Dynasty, right?

古文：南间贫素，皆事外饰，车乘衣服，必贵整齐，家人妻子，不免饥寒。
现代文：南方的贫素人家，都注意修饰外表，车马、衣服，一定讲究整齐，而家人妻子，反不免饥寒。
English: The poor and uneducated families in the south all pay attention to beautifying their appearance. Their cars, horses, and clothes must be neat and tidy, but their wives are always hungry and cold.

古文：河北人事，多由内政，绮罗金翠，不可废阙，羸马悴奴，仅充而已，倡和之礼，或尔汝之。
现代文：河黄河以北一带的交际应酬，多凭妇女，绮罗金翠，不能短少，而马匹瘦弱奴仆憔悴，勉强充数而已，夫妇之间交谈，有时 尔  汝 ，相称，用词并不拘泥于此。
English: North of the Yellow River, most of the social entertainment relies on women. Women are the most important, and they should not be neglected. The horses are thin and weak, and there are only enough of them. Conversations between couples are sometimes appropriate, and the words are not stuck to this.

古文：河北妇人，织任组训之事，黼黻锦绣罗绮之工，大优于江东也。太公曰： 养女太多，一费也。 
现代文：黄河以北一带的妇女，论纺织、刺绣一类的手艺，要比江东的妇女强得多。姜太公说： 养女儿太多，是一种耗费。 
English: Women in the area north of the Yellow River are much better at crafts such as weaving and embroidery than women in the east of the river. Jiang Taigong said: Raising too many daughters is a waste.

古文：陈蕃曰： 盗不过五女之门。 
现代文：后汉大臣陈蕃说过： 盗贼都不愿偷窃有五个女儿的家庭。 
English: Later Han minister Chen Qi said: Thieves are reluctant to steal from families with five daughters.

古文：女之为累，亦以深矣。
现代文：女儿办嫁妆使人耗资、受害也够深重了。
English: A daughter's dowry costs a lot of money and causes a lot of suffering.

古文：然天生蕃民，先人传体，其如之何？
现代文：但天生芸芸众生，又是先人的遗体，能对她怎么样呢？
English: But what can innate beings, who are also the remains of their ancestors, do to her?

古文：世人多不举女，贼行骨肉，岂当如此而望福于天乎？
现代文：世人多有生了女儿不养育，残害亲生骨肉，这样岂能盼望上天降福吗？
English: There are many people in the world who have given birth to daughters without raising them, destroying their own flesh and blood, so can they hope for the blessing of heaven?

古文：吾有疏亲，家饶妓媵，诞育将及，便遣阍竖守之，体有不安，窥窗倚户，若生女者，辄持将去，母随号泣，使人不忍闻也。
现代文：我有个远亲，家里有许多妓妾，将要生育，就派童仆守候着，临产时，看着窗户靠着门柱，如果生了女婴，马上拿走弄死，产妇随即哭号，真叫人不忍心听。
English: I have a distant relative. There are many prostitutes and concubines in the family. When she is about to give birth, she sends a servant to wait for her. When she is about to give birth, she looks at the window against the doorpost. If she gives birth to a baby girl, she immediately takes her away to die. The mother then cries, which is really unbearable to listen to.

古文：妇人之性，率宠子婿而虐儿妇，宠婿则兄弟之怨生焉，虐妇则姊妹之谗行焉。
现代文：妇女的习性，大多宠爱女婿而虐待儿媳妇。宠爱女婿，儿子心中就会产生怨恨；虐待儿媳妇，那女儿的谗言就随之而来。
English: Most women's habits are to pamper the son-in-law and mistreat the daughter-in-law. If the son-in-law is pampered, resentment will arise in the son's heart; if the daughter-in-law is mistreated, the daughter's criticism will follow.

古文：然则女之行留，皆得罪于其家者，母实为之。
现代文：这样看来女的不论出嫁还是娶进都会得罪家人，这其实都是母亲造成的。
English: In this way, it seems that whether a woman is married or not, she will offend her family, which is actually caused by her mother.

古文：至有谚曰： 落索阿姑餐。 
现代文：以至俗话谚语有道： 阿姑吃饭好冷清。 
English: So much so that there is a proverb that says, "Agu is so cold when she eats."

古文：此其相报也。
现代文：说做儿媳妇的以此冷落来相报复婆婆。
English: It is said that the daughter-in-law took revenge on her mother-in-law by snubbing her.

古文：家之常弊，可不诫哉！
现代文：这是家庭里经常出现的弊端，能不警戒吗？
English: This is a common problem in families. Should we be on our guard?

古文：婚姻素对，靖候成规。
现代文：婚姻要找家世清白、贫寒的人家，这是当年先祖靖侯立下的规矩。
English: It is a rule established by the ancestors of Jing Hou in that year that marriage should find a family with a clean and poor pedigree.

古文：近世嫁娶，遂有卖女纳财，买妇输绢，比量父祖，计较锱铢，责多还少，市井无异。
现代文：最近的嫁娶风气，就有接受财礼出卖女儿的，运送绢帛买进儿媳妇的，为子女选配偶时，比量算计对方父辈祖辈的权势地位。计较锱铢钱财、索取多而回报少，这和做买卖没有区别。
English: Recent marriage customs include accepting gifts of money and selling one's daughter, transporting stolen goods to buy a daughter-in-law, and, when choosing a spouse for one's children, calculating the relative power of the other person's parents and grandparents. Compared to stealing money and demanding more for less return, this is no different from doing business.

古文：或猥婿在门，或傲妇擅室，贪荣求利，反招羞耻，可不慎欤？
现代文：以至于有的门庭里弄来个下流女婿，有的屋里娶来媳妇则凶悍擅权，他们贪荣求利，反而给家庭招来耻辱，这样的事能不审慎吗？
English: So much so that in some households, an indecent son-in-law is brought in, while in others, a daughter-in-law is brought in who is a fierce power-monger. They are greedy for glory and profit, but instead bring shame to the family. How can such a thing not be prudent?

古文：借人典籍，皆须爱护，先有缺坏，就为科治，此亦士大夫百行之一也。
现代文：借别人的书籍，一定要好好爱护，如果本来就有缺失损坏卷页，要替他人修补完好，这也是士大夫百种善行之一。
English: If you borrow someone else's book, you must take good care of it. If there is a missing or damaged page, you must repair it for others. This is also one of the hundred kinds of good deeds of Shidafu.

古文：济阳江禄，读书未竟，虽有急速，必待卷束整齐，然后得起，故无损败，人不厌其求假焉。
现代文：济阳人江禄，每当读书未读完时，即使有很紧急的事情，也一定要把书本卷整齐，然后才起身，所以他借的书都不会有损坏，人家对他来求借不感到厌烦。
English: Jiang Lu from Jiyang, whenever he has not finished reading, even if there is a very urgent matter, he must tidy up the books before getting up, so the books he borrows will not be damaged, and people will not get tired of asking him to borrow.

古文：或有狼藉几案，分散部帙，多为童幼婢妾之所点污。风雨虫鼠之所毁伤，实为累德。
现代文：有的人把书籍胡乱堆放在桌上，以致书卷分散，很多被小孩婢妾弄脏，或被风雨虫鼠毁伤，这真是有损道德。
English: Some people piled the books on the table so that the scrolls were scattered, and many were soiled by children and maids, or damaged by wind and rain, which was really immoral.

古文：吾每读圣人之书，未尝不肃敬对之。
现代文：我每读圣人写的书，从没有不严肃恭敬地相对。
English: Whenever I read a book written by a saint, I never treat it without seriousness and respect.

古文：其故纸有《五经》词义及贤达姓名，不敢秽用也。
现代文：废旧纸上有《五经》文义和贤达人的姓名，也不敢用在污秽之处。
English: The waste paper has the names of "Five Classics" and sages on it, and they dare not use it in dirty places.

古文：吾家巫觋祷请，绝于言议；符书章酸，亦无祈焉。
现代文：我们家里从来不讲巫婆或道僧祈祷神鬼之事；也没有用符书设道场去祈求之举。
English: In our family, we never talked about witches or Taoist monks praying to the gods and spirits; nor did we set up a dojo to pray with the help of Chinese characters.

古文：并汝曹所见也，勿为妖妄之费。
现代文：这都是你们看到的，切记不要把钱花费在这些巫妖虚妄的事情上。
English: It's all there for you to see, just remember not to waste your money on any of this wizard nonsense.

