古文：刘穆之徐羡之傅亮檀道济
现代文：随后到了一座山下，山峰秀丽高耸，心里十分高兴。
English: Then I came to the foot of a mountain with a beautiful peak, and I was very happy.

古文：及武帝克京城，从何无忌求府主簿，无忌进穆之。
现代文：后来武帝攻克了京城，向何无忌征求一名府主簿，何无忌推荐刘穆之。
English: Later, when Emperor Wu conquered the capital, he asked for a prefectural governor and recommended Liu Mu.

古文：帝曰： 吾亦识之。 
现代文：武帝说： 我也认识他。 
English: Emperor Wu said: I also know him.

古文：即驰召焉。
现代文：于是派人驰马去召他。
English: So they sent for him on horseback.

古文：时穆之闻京城有叫声，晨出陌头，属与信会，直视不言者久之，反室坏布裳爲裤往见帝，帝谓曰： 我始举大义，须一军吏甚急，谁堪其选？ 
现代文：当时刘穆之听到京城有叫声，早晨走到路边，正好与派来的使者相会，穆之直直地看着，久久没有说话，然后返回房中，毁掉布裙做成裤子，前去见武帝，武帝对他说： 我刚刚开创正义的大业，急迫地需要一位军吏，谁是合适的人选？ 
English: At that time, Liu Muzhi heard a cry from the capital, walked to the roadside in the morning, and just happened to meet the sent messenger. Muzhi looked straight ahead, did not speak for a long time, then returned to the room, destroyed the cloth skirt to make pants, and went to see Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu said to him: I have just created a great cause of justice, urgently need a military official, who is the right person?

古文：穆之曰： 无见踰者。 
现代文：刘穆之说： 没有能超过我的。 
English: Liu Muzhi said, "No one can surpass me.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿能自屈，吾事济矣。 
现代文：武帝笑着说： 卿如果能屈尊就任，我的事业就成功了。 
English: Emperor Wu said with a smile: Sir, if you can deign to take office, my career will be successful.

古文：即于坐受署。
现代文：于是就在座位上受聘。
English: He was hired on the spot.

古文：从平建邺，诸大处分，皆仓卒立定，并穆之所建，遂动见谘询。
现代文：跟随平定建邺，各项大事的处理，都是很快确定，全是刘穆之的建树，于是便经常受到武帝的咨询。
English: Following the pacification of Jianye, the handling of various major events was quickly determined to be entirely the work of Liu Muzhi, so he was often consulted by Emperor Wu.

古文：穆之亦竭节尽诚，无所遗隐。
现代文：刘穆之也竭尽忠诚，没有什么遗漏。
English: Liu Muzhi was also extremely loyal and left nothing out.

古文：时晋纲宽弛，威禁不行，盛族豪家，负势陵纵；重以司马元显政令违舛，桓玄科条繁密。
现代文：当时晋朝的法制松弛，禁令不能实行，大族豪家，依势横行；更加上司马元显政令谬误，桓玄律条繁密。
English: At that time, the legal system of the Jin Dynasty was slack, the ban could not be implemented, and the powerful members of the large ethnic group acted according to their power; moreover, the superior Ma Yuanxian's decree was fallacious, and the rules were complicated.

古文：穆之斟酌时宜，随方矫正，不盈旬日，风俗顿改。
现代文：刘穆之根据实际研讨对策，随着地方特点加以矫正，不满十天，风俗顿改。
English: Liu Muzhi based on the actual discussion of countermeasures, with the local characteristics to be corrected, less than ten days, customs change.

古文：迁尚书祠部郎，复爲府主簿、记室、录事参军，领堂邑太守。
现代文：调任尚书祠部郎，又重任府主簿、记室、录事参军，兼堂邑太守。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shoshu Shoshi-buro, and was also given the important positions of the main book of the government, the record room, the record of joining the army, and the governor of the village.

古文：以平桓玄功，封西华县五等子。
现代文：因为平定桓玄的功劳，封西华县五等子。
English: Because of his contribution to pacifying Kuan Xuan, he was given the title of the fifth-highest ranking official in Xihua County.

古文：及扬州刺史王谧薨，帝次应入辅。
现代文：等扬州刺史王谧死后，武帝按次序应该入朝辅政。
English: After the death of Yangzhou Zishi Wang Qian, Emperor Wu should enter the auxiliary government in the following order.

古文：刘毅等不欲帝入，议以中领军谢混爲扬州，或欲令帝于丹徒领州，以内事付仆射孟昶。
现代文：刘毅等人不想让武帝入辅。提议以中领军谢混为扬州刺史，有人想让武帝在丹徒领州，把朝内的事交给孟昶。
English: Liu Yi and others did not want Emperor Wu to be promoted. It was proposed to make Yangzhou's history with the middle-ranking military leader Xie Ming. Some people wanted Emperor Wu to hand over the affairs of the imperial court to Meng Xi in Dantu's territory.

古文：遣尚书右丞皮沈以二议谘帝。
现代文：派尚书右丞皮沈拿这两种提议去问武帝。
English: He sent Shangshu Yu Zhe Pi Shen to ask Emperor Wu about these two proposals.

古文：沈先与穆之言，穆之僞如厕，即密疏白帝，言沈语不可从。
现代文：皮沈先对刘穆之说了，刘穆之假装上厕所，便秘密地写信告诉了武帝，说皮沈的话不可听从。
English: Pi Shen first told Liu Muzhi, and Liu Muzhi pretended to go to the toilet, then secretly wrote to Emperor Wu, saying that Pi Shen's words should not be obeyed.

古文：帝既见沈，且令出外，呼穆之问焉。
现代文：武帝见了皮沈后，让他暂且出去，叫来刘穆之询问。
English: After Emperor Wu saw Pi Shen, he let him go out temporarily and called Liu Mu Rong to inquire.

古文：穆之曰： 公今日岂得居谦，遂爲守蕃将邪？
现代文：刘穆之说： 您今天怎么还能谦虚，以致变成守卫藩镇的军将呢？
English: Liu Muzhi said, "How can you still be humble today, so that you can become a general guarding the town?"

古文：刘、孟诸公俱起布衣，共立大义，事乃一时相推，非宿定臣主分也。
现代文：刘、孟诸公都是由平民起家，共同创立大业，事情都是一时互相推戴，并不是命中注定的君臣名分。
English: Liu and Meng Zhu Gong both started out as commoners and jointly created a great cause. Things were pushed by each other for a while, and they were not destined to be kings and ministers.

古文：力敌势均，终相吞咀。
现代文：势均力敌，最终要互相吞并。
English: They are evenly matched and will eventually have to absorb each other.

古文：扬州根本所系，不可假人。
现代文：扬州关系着国家的根本，不可以送给别人。
English: Yangzhou is related to the foundation of the country and cannot be given to others.

古文：前授王谧，事出权道，今若复他授，便应受制于人。
现代文：先前授给王谧，事情是出于机变的考虑，现在如果再授给别人，便要受制于别人。
English: Previously, the matter was awarded to Wang Qian for reasons of expediency. Now, if it is awarded to someone else, it will be subject to someone else.

古文：一失权柄，无由可得。
现代文：一旦失去权柄，便没有机会再得到了。
English: Once power is lost, there is no chance of regaining it.

古文：公功高勋重，不可直置疑畏，便可入朝共尽同异。
现代文：您功劳高勋业重，不可以只是令人怀疑畏惧，应该是入朝共同弄清同异。
English: You have made great achievements and distinguished yourself in your career. You can't just arouse suspicion and fear. You should go to the DPRK to jointly clarify the similarities and differences.

古文：公至京邑，彼必不敢越公更授馀人。 
现代文：您到了京城，他们必定不敢越过您另外授给别人。 
English: When you get to the capital, they will certainly not dare to pass you over to someone else.

古文：帝从其言，由是入辅。
现代文：武帝听从了他的话，由此便入朝辅政。
English: Emperor Wu listened to his words, and thus he entered the auxiliary government.

古文：从广固还拒卢循，常居幕中画策。
现代文：从广固回来抵抗卢循，他常常在军幕中策划。
English: When he returned from Guanggu to resist Lu Xun, he often plotted in the military tent.

古文：刘毅等疾之，每从容言其权重，帝愈信仗之。
现代文：刘毅等人很妒忌他，常常很从容地说他的权力过重，武帝则越发信赖和倚仗他。
English: Liu Yi and others were very jealous of him. They often calmly said that his power was too heavy, but Emperor Wu trusted and relied on him more and more.

古文：穆之外所闻见，大小必白，虽闾里言谑，皆一二以闻。
现代文：刘穆之在外面的所见所闻，大小事情一定要报告，即使是街巷中的言谈谑笑，也都挑出一两个来说给他听。
English: Liu Mu Zhi must report what he sees and hears outside, big and small things, even if it is the talk and laughter in the streets, they also pick out one or two to tell him.

古文：帝每得人间委密消息以示聪明，皆由穆之。
现代文：武帝常常说起社会上曲折秘密的消息来显示耳目灵通，都是从刘穆之那里来的。
English: Emperor Wu often talked about the twists and turns of secret information in society to show that he was a good listener. It all came from Liu Muzhi.

古文：又爱宾游，坐客恒满，布林目以爲视听，故朝野同异，穆之莫不必知。
现代文：他又喜欢与宾客交游，客人总是满座，他安排耳目进行观察和听取，所以朝野间的人事关系，刘穆之无不知晓。
English: He also likes to mingle with guests, the guests are always full, he arranges his eyes and ears to observe and listen, so the personal relationship between the field and the field, Liu Mu knows nothing.

古文：虽亲昵短长，皆陈奏无隐。
现代文：即使是亲密朋友的长短之处，他都上奏给武帝，无所保留。
English: Even the merits and demerits of close friends were reported to Emperor Wu without reservation.

古文：人或讥之，穆之曰： 我蒙公恩，义无隐讳，此张辽所以告关羽欲叛也。 
现代文：有人因此讥笑他，刘穆之说： 我受了主公恩惠，为了大义无所隐晦，这也就是张辽所以要告关羽想叛逃的原因。 
English: Some people ridiculed him for this, and Liu Muzhi said: I have received the grace of the Lord, and I have nothing to hide for the sake of righteousness. This is why Zhang Liao wanted to denounce Guan Yu for wanting to defect.

古文：帝举止施爲，穆之皆下节度，帝书素拙，穆之曰： 此虽小事，然宣布四远，愿公小复留意。 
现代文：武帝的举止作为，刘穆之都私下进行规劝，武帝的书法一向很差，刘穆之说： 这虽然是件小事，但却会传布得很远，希望您再稍加注意。 
English: As a result of Emperor Wu's behavior, Liu Muzhi began to privately advise him. Emperor Wu's handwriting has always been poor. Liu Muzhi said: Although this is a small matter, it will spread far and wide. I hope you will pay a little more attention.

古文：帝既不能留意，又禀分有在，穆之乃曰： 公但纵笔爲大字，一字径尺无嫌。
现代文：武帝还是不能留意，他又有责任提醒，刘穆之就说： 您只管放开笔写大字，一个字一尺见方也不要紧。
English: Emperor Wu still couldn't pay attention, he also had the responsibility to remind, Liu Muzhi said: You just let go of the pen to write big words, it doesn't matter if one word is a foot square.

古文：大既足有所包，其势亦美。 
现代文：大就包含了各个方面，笔势也美观。 
English: Large contains all aspects, and the brushstroke is also beautiful.

古文：帝从之，一纸不过六七字便满。
现代文：武帝听从了，一张纸不过写六七个字就满了。
English: Emperor Wu obeyed, and a piece of paper was filled with no more than sixty-seven characters.

古文：穆之凡所荐达，不纳不止。
现代文：刘穆之凡是自己所荐举的人，不纳用便不罢休。
English: Liu Muzhi said that if someone is recommended by him, he will not give up.

古文：常云： 我虽不及荀令君之举善，然不举不善。 
现代文：他常常说： 我虽然比不上荀令君的举荐必是善才，但是却可以不荐不善之才。 
English: He often said: Although I am not as good as the recommendation of Xing Lingjun, I must be a good talent, but I can not recommend a bad talent.

古文：穆之与朱龄石并便尺牍，尝于武帝坐与龄石并答书，自旦至日中，穆之得百函，龄石得八十函，而穆之应对无废。
现代文：刘穆之和朱龄石都善于写作书信，曾经在武帝那里和朱龄石一齐写答复信，从早晨到中午，刘穆之写了一百封，朱龄石写了八十封，而刘穆之的应对没有废品。
English: Liu Muzhi and Zhu Lingshi are both good at writing letters. They once wrote a reply letter together with Zhu Lingshi at Emperor Wu. From morning to noon, Liu Muzhi wrote one hundred letters, Zhu Lingshi wrote eighty letters, and Liu Muzhi's response was no waste.

古文：迁中军、太尉司马，加丹阳尹。
现代文：后来升迁为中军、太尉司马，担任丹阳尹。
English: Later, he was promoted to the middle army, Lieutenant Sima, and served as Danyang Yin.

古文：帝西讨刘毅，以诸葛长人监留府，疑其难独任，留穆之辅之。
现代文：武帝向西方去讨伐刘毅，让诸葛长人监管留府，怀疑他难以独自担当，留下刘穆之辅助他。
English: Emperor Wu went to the West to fight against Liu Yi, leaving the Zhuge Elders to supervise his stay in the capital, suspecting that it would be difficult for him to be in charge alone, leaving Liu Mu to assist him.

古文：加建威将军，置佐吏，配给实力。
现代文：担任建威将军，设置辅佐官吏，配备给实力。
English: He served as General Jianwei, set up assistant officials, and equipped them with strength.

古文：长人果有异谋，而犹豫不能发，屏人谓穆之曰： 悠悠之言，云太尉与我不平，何以至此？ 
现代文：诸葛长人果然有异谋，而犹豫不能起事，便回避开别人对刘穆之说： 流言纷纭，说太尉和我不和，怎么会有这样的议论？ 
English: Zhuge Changren really had a different plan, but hesitating could not cause trouble, he avoided others to say to Liu Muzhi: Rumors abound, saying that the captain and I are not at odds, how can there be such a discussion?

古文：穆之曰： 公泝流远伐，以老母弱子委节下，若一豪不尽，岂容若此。 
现代文：刘穆之说： 太尉溯江远征，把老母弱子委托给将军，如果有一点不信任，哪里能会这样？ 
English: Liu Muzhi said, "The captain went on an expedition to cross the Yangtze River, entrusting his weak son to the general. If there is a little distrust, how could this happen?

古文：长人意乃小安，穆之亦厚爲之备。
现代文：诸葛长人心里才稍微安定一些，刘穆之也充分加以防备。
English: Zhuge Changren was a little more stable in his heart, and Liu Muzhi was also fully prepared.

古文：长人谓所亲曰： 贫贱常思富贵，富贵必践危机。
现代文：诸葛长人对他所亲近的人说： 贫贱常常想要富贵，富贵必定遇到危机。
English: Zhuge Changren said to those close to him: The poor often want to be rich, and the rich are bound to encounter a crisis.

古文：今日思爲丹徒布衣，不可得也。 
现代文：今天再想做丹徒的百姓，已经无法实现了。 
English: Today, people who want to be a Danto can no longer do so.

古文：帝还，长人伏诛。
现代文：武帝回来，诸葛长人被处死。
English: When Emperor Wu returned, the elders of Zhuge were executed.

古文：进前将军。
现代文：刘穆之晋升为前将军。
English: Liu Muzhi promoted to former general.

古文：帝西伐司马休之，中军将军道怜知留任，而事无大小，一决穆之。
现代文：武帝西进讨伐司马休之，中军将军刘道怜担当留任，而事无大小，都由刘穆之决定。
English: Emperor Wu marched to the west to fight against Emperor Ma Xiu, and the Chinese general Liu Daoli remained in charge, and no matter how big or small, it was all decided by Liu Mu.

古文：迁尚书右仆射，领选，将军、尹如故。
现代文：他升迁为尚书右仆射，兼管选拔人才，将军、丹阳尹的职务仍旧不变。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu's right-hand man, and was also in charge of selecting talents. The position of the general, Danyang Yin, remained unchanged.

古文：帝北伐，留世子爲中军将军、监太尉留府。
现代文：武帝北伐，留下世子为中军将军、监太尉留府。
English: Emperor Wu led the Northern Expedition, leaving his descendants as generals of the Chinese army and inspector lieutenants to stay in the capital.

古文：转穆之左仆射、领监军中军二府军司，将军、尹、领选如故，甲仗五十人入殿，入居东穆之内总朝政，外供军旅，决断如流，事无壅滞。
现代文：调刘穆之担任左仆射、兼任监军中军二府军司，将军、丹阳尹、主管选举依旧保留，可以带卫士五十人进殿，进入东城居住。刘穆之对内总理朝政，对外供应军队需求，决断如流，事情毫无阻塞。
English: Liu Mu Zhi was transferred to the position of left-hand gunner, and concurrently served as the supervisor of the Second Army of the Second Army, and the general, Danyang Yin, and the supervisor of the election were still retained. He could bring fifty guards into the palace and live in the East City. Liu Mu Zhi was in charge of the internal affairs of the Prime Minister and the government, and supplied the needs of the army to the outside world. He was decisive, and there was no obstruction.

古文：宾客辐凑，求诉百端，内外谘禀，盈阶满室。
现代文：宾客聚集，求诉极多，朝内外的咨询禀报，台阶房内人都站满。
English: Guests gathered, there were a lot of appeals, consultations and reports from inside and outside the DPRK, and the staircase was full of people.

古文：目览词讼，手答笺书，耳行听受，口并酬应，不相参涉，皆悉赡举。
现代文：眼看讼词，手答来信，耳听诉说，口作应酬，不相混淆，都能做好。
English: It is not to be confused with seeing the pleadings, answering letters by hand, listening to what is said, and giving oral entertainment, all of which can be done well.

古文：又言谈赏笑，弥日亘时，未尝倦苦。
现代文：又言谈欢笑，整天到晚，不曾疲倦困苦。
English: And they were talking and laughing all day long, without getting tired or weary.

古文：裁有闲暇，手自写书，寻览篇章，校定坟籍。
现代文：刚有点闲暇，又动手写书，翻看文章，校订古籍。
English: With just a little bit of free time, he began to write books, read articles, and edit old books.

古文：性奢豪，食必方丈，旦辄爲十人馔，未尝独餐。
现代文：他性格奢侈豪华，吃饭必须十分丰盛，早晨就要做十个人的饭，不曾一个人单独吃。
English: His character is extravagant and luxurious. Meals must be very hearty. In the morning, he has to cook for ten people. He has never eaten alone.

古文：每至食时，客止十人以还，帐下依常下食，以此爲常。
现代文：每到吃饭的时候，客人如果只在十人以内，帐中仍然依照平时做饭，以此为平常。
English: Every time we have dinner, if there are only ten guests or less, we still cook according to the usual schedule, which is normal.

古文：尝白帝曰： 穆之家本贫贱，赡生多阙，叨忝以来，虽每存约损，而朝夕所须，微爲过丰，此外无一豪负公。 
现代文：他曾对武帝说： 穆之家本来贫贱，养生的东西大多缺乏，任职以来，虽然常常注意节约，而每天所需用的东西，稍微有些过于丰盛，此外没有丝毫辜负您的地方。 
English: He once said to Emperor Wu: The House of Mu was originally poor, and most of the things for health maintenance were lacking. Since taking office, although they often paid attention to economy, the things needed for daily use were a little too rich. In addition, there is no place to fail you.

古文：义熙十三年卒。
现代文：义熙十三年去世。
English: Yixi died at the age of thirteen.

古文：帝在长安，本欲顿驾关中，经略赵、魏，闻问惊恸，哀惋者数日。
现代文：武帝住在长安，本来打算驻扎在关中，经营赵、魏一带，闻讯以后，十分惊讶和悲痛，哀痛惋惜了好几天。
English: Emperor Wu lived in Chang'an and originally planned to be stationed in Guanzhong and manage the Zhao and Wei regions. After hearing the news, he was very surprised and saddened, and mourned for several days.

古文：以根本虚，乃驰还彭城。
现代文：因为身体虚弱，便回到了彭城。
English: Because of his weak health, he returned to Pengcheng.

古文：以司马徐羡之代管留台，而朝廷大事常决于穆之者，并悉北谘。穆之前军府文武二万人，以三千配羡之建威府，馀悉配世子中军府。
现代文：让司马徐羡之代管留台，而常常由刘穆之决定的朝廷大事，全都向北府咨询，刘穆之的前军府有文武二万人，以三千人配给徐羡之的建威府，其余的都配给世子的中军府。
English: Let Sima Xu Xian's deputy stay in power, and all the major events of the imperial court, which were often decided by Liu Mu Cang, should be consulted with Beifu. Liu Mu Cang's former military headquarters had 20,000 people, 3,000 people were assigned to Xu Xian's Jian Wei headquarters, and the rest were assigned to his son's military headquarters.

古文：追赠穆之开府仪同三司。
现代文：追赠刘穆之开府仪同三司。
English: Liu Mu was posthumously awarded the ceremony of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：帝又表天子曰： 臣闻崇贤旌善，王教所先，念功简劳，义深追远。
现代文：武帝又上表给天子说： 臣听说崇扬贤人、旌表善者，是王者教化的首要事情，怀念功劳，对不忘忠良意义深远。
English: Emperor Wu also wrote a letter to the Heavenly Son, saying, "It is the first thing for a king to teach his subjects to respect the wise and to honor the virtuous. To remember one's merits and not to forget one's loyalty is of far-reaching significance.

古文：故司勋执策，在勤必记，德之休明，没而弥着。
现代文：所以司勋执掌档案，勤苦者必有记录，道德美善旺盛，人死后更加显明。
English: Therefore, the records are in charge of the archives, the diligent must have records, the morals are good, and the morals are more obvious after death.

古文：故尚书左仆射、前将军臣穆之，爰自布衣，协佐义始，内竭谋猷，外勤庶政，密勿军国，心力俱尽。
现代文：所以尚书左仆射、前将军大臣刘穆之，起自平民家庭，辅佐大业开创，对内竭尽谋划，对外勤于政务，为了国家勤勉努力，精神体力都已用尽。
English: Therefore, the former general and minister Liu Muzhi, who started from a civilian family, worked hard to plan internally, served in government affairs externally, and worked hard for the country, and his mental and physical strength have been exhausted.

古文：及登庸朝右，尹司京畿，敷赞百揆，翼新大猷。
现代文：后来进入朝廷工作，主管京城近郊，百业广兴，革新大计。
English: Later, he worked for the imperial court and was in charge of the suburbs of the capital, promoting a wide range of industries and making innovative plans.

古文：顷戎车远役，居中作捍，抚宁之勋，实洽朝野，识量局致，栋干之器也。
现代文：不久前大军远征，刘穆之留守捍卫，安抚之功，造福朝野，他的见识度量，确是栋梁之材。
English: Not long ago, a large army expedition, Liu Mu Zhe stayed behind to defend, pacify the work, benefit the morning and evening fields, his insight and measurement, is indeed a pillar material.

古文：方宣赞盛化，缉隆圣世，忠绩未究，远迩悼心。
现代文：正当宣扬盛化，发展圣世，忠义功绩，未能完成，不幸逝世，远近痛悼。
English: Rightly preached prosperity, development of the holy world, loyalty and merit, failed to complete, unfortunately died, mourned far and wide.

古文：皇恩褒述，班同三事，荣哀既备，宠灵已泰。
现代文：皇恩给予嘉奖，丧仪等同三公，哀荣具备，英灵安祥。
English: The imperial grace gives awards, the funeral ceremony is equivalent to the three kings, the mourning and the glory are available, and the Yingling is peaceful.

古文：臣伏思寻，自义熙草创，艰患未弭，外虞既殷，内难亦荐，时屯世故，靡有宁岁。
现代文：臣心中寻思，自从义熙年间草创大业，艰难未消，外患既多，内忧相继，时事混乱，不得安宁。
English: Since the great cause was initiated during the reign of Yixi, difficulties have not been eliminated, there have been many external problems, internal worries have followed one after another, current affairs are chaotic, and there is no peace.

古文：臣以寡乏，负荷国重，实赖穆之匡翼之益。
现代文：臣下德才贫乏，身负国家重任，实在是靠穆之辅助的功益。
English: The vassals are deficient in virtue and talent, and are responsible for the heavy responsibilities of the country. It is really the merit and benefit of Mu's assistance.

古文：岂唯谠言嘉谋，溢于人听，若乃忠规密谟，潜虑帷幕，造膝诡辞，莫见其际。
现代文：不仅是正直的言论、良好的谋略不断提供，而且忠诚的规劝、机密的筹划暗中达成，私下的拉拢、诡诈的言词从不参与。
English: Not only honest speech and good strategy are constantly provided, but also loyal persuasion and confidential planning are secretly achieved, and private wooing and deceitful words are never involved.

古文：事隔于皇朝，功隐于视听者，不可胜纪。
现代文：未曾报告朝廷的事迹，群众尚不知道的功劳，不可胜数。
English: There are innumerable achievements of the Imperial Court that have not been reported and that are still unknown to the masses.

古文：所以陈力一纪，遂克有成，出征入辅，幸不辱命。
现代文：因此我努力十二年，有所成就，外出征讨入朝辅政，有幸不辱使命。
English: Therefore, I have been working hard for twelve years, and I have made some achievements. I went out to solicit and enter the auxiliary government, and I was fortunate not to dishonor my mission.

古文：微夫人之左右，未有宁济其事者矣。
现代文：如果没有身边人士的协助，是不可能顺利完成任务的。
English: Without the assistance of those around you, it is impossible to successfully complete the task.

古文：履谦居寡，守之弥固，每议及封爵，辄深自抑绝。
现代文：谦虚工作，不讲条件，恪尽职守，每当议论到封赏爵位，就自己坚决拒绝。
English: He works modestly, does not talk about conditions, and fulfills his duties. Whenever there is talk of awarding him a knighthood, he resolutely refuses.

古文：所以勋高当年，而茅土弗及，抚事永念，胡宁可昧。
现代文：因此当年功勋很大，而王侯未封，他的事迹永远让人怀念，怎么可以掩藏？
English: Therefore, the merits of that year are great, but the prince is not sealed, his deeds will always be remembered, how can it be hidden?

古文：谓宜加赠正司，追甄土宇。
现代文：想来应该加封官爵，追赐土地。
English: If you think about it, he should be given a knighthood and land.

古文：俾忠贞之烈，不泯于身后，大赉所及，永旌于善人。
现代文：使忠臣的功业，不会在身后泯灭，重赏的影响，永远地鼓励善人。
English: so that the deeds of loyal subjects will not be lost forever, and the influence of rewards will forever encourage the virtuous.

古文：臣契阔屯夷，旋观终始，金兰之分，义深情感，是以献其乃怀，布之朝听。 
现代文：臣对他的聚合离散、艰难顺利，全部了解，密友分别，情义深厚，所以呈献自己的情怀，使朝廷得以听到。 
English: His vassals knew all about his amalgamations and separations, his difficulties and successes, his close friends were divided, and his feelings were deep, so he presented his feelings so that the imperial court could hear them.

古文：于是重赠侍中、司徒，封南昌县侯。
现代文：于是重赠刘穆之为侍中、司徒，封为南昌县侯。
English: As a result, Liu Muxin was re-awarded the titles of chamberlain and magistrate, and was made the marquis of Nanchang County.

古文：及帝受禅，每叹忆之，曰： 穆之不死，当助我理天下。
现代文：后来武帝接受了禅让，常常叹息并怀念他，说： 穆之不死，一定会帮助我治理天下。
English: Later, Emperor Wu accepted Zen Zhen, often sighed and missed him, saying: Mu Zhi immortality will surely help me govern the world.

古文：可谓 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁。  
现代文：真的是 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁 。 
English: It really is the death of a nation.

古文：光禄大夫范泰对曰： 圣主在上，英彦满朝，穆之虽功着艰难，未容便关兴毁。 
现代文：光禄大夫范泰回答说： 圣主在上，精英满朝，刘穆之虽然建立功勋十分艰难，但是未必便与兴衰有关。 
English: Guanglu doctor Fan Tai replied: The Lord is on top, the elite are in power, and although it is very difficult to establish the merits of Liu Mu, it is not necessarily related to the rise and fall.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿不闻骥騄乎，贵日致千里耳。 
现代文：武帝笑着说： 你没听说过骥马录这两种骏马吗，它的可贵就在于可以日行千里。 
English: Emperor Wu smiled and said, "Haven't you heard of the two kinds of horses in the Horse and Rider Records? Its value lies in the fact that it can travel thousands of miles a day.

古文：帝后复曰： 穆之死，人轻易我。 
现代文：武帝后来又说： 穆之死了，人们会把我看轻的。 
English: Emperor Wu later said, "People will think less of me now that Mu Zhi is dead.

古文：其见思如此。
现代文：他竟是如此地思念他。
English: He missed him so much.

古文：以佐命元勋，追封南康郡公，諡曰文宣。
现代文：因为是辅佐接受帝位的元勋，追封为南康郡公，谥号为文宣。
English: Because he was the founder of the imperial throne, he was posthumously awarded the title of Nankang County, and his posthumous name was Wenxuan.

古文：穆之少时，家贫诞节，嗜酒食，不修拘检。
现代文：刘穆之年少的时候，家里贫穷而不肯节俭，喜欢酒食，不加约束。
English: When Liu Mu was young, his family was poor and unwilling to be frugal. He liked to eat and drink without restraint.

古文：好往妻兄家乞食，多见辱，不以爲耻。
现代文：他好往妻子的哥哥那里去讨饭吃，多次受到羞辱，却不以为耻。
English: He would beg for food from his wife's brother and was repeatedly humiliated, but he was not ashamed.

古文：其妻江嗣女，甚明识，每禁不令往江氏。
现代文：他的妻子是江嗣的女儿，十分明达识理，常常禁止他不让往江氏家去。
English: His wife, the daughter of Jiang Zemin, was very sensible and often forbade him to go to Jiang's house.

古文：后有庆会，属令勿来。
现代文：后来有庆贺宴会，嘱咐他不要过来。
English: Later, there was a celebratory banquet, and I told him not to come.

古文：穆之犹往，食毕求槟榔。
现代文：刘穆之还是前往，吃过饭后又要槟榔。
English: Liu Muzhi still went, and after eating, he wanted to eat betel nut.

古文：江氏兄弟戏之曰： 槟榔消食，君乃常饥，何忽须此？ 
现代文：江氏兄弟戏弄他说： 槟榔消食，而您却常常饥饿，怎么忽然需要这种东西呢？ 
English: Mr. Jiang's brothers teased him: "If you are always hungry, why do you suddenly need this kind of thing?

古文：妻复截发市肴馔，爲其兄弟以饷穆之，自此不对穆之梳沐。
现代文：他的妻子又割下头发买来酒和菜肴，让她的兄弟来招待刘穆之，从此不再对刘穆之梳洗打扮。
English: His wife also cut off her hair to buy wine and dishes, let her brother invite Liu Mu Zhi, and no longer groomed and dressed Liu Mu Zhi.

古文：及穆之爲丹阳尹，将召妻兄弟，妻泣而稽颡以致谢。
现代文：后来刘穆之担任了丹阳尹，将要把妻子的兄弟招来，妻子哭着以头触地跪拜致谢。
English: Later, Liu Muzhi served as Danyang Yin, and he was going to invite his wife's brother. His wife cried and bowed down with her head touching the ground to thank him.

古文：隆表上五十二事。
现代文：刘穆之说： 本来就没有怀恨，用不着忧虑。 
English: Liu Muzhi said: Originally, there was no grudge, no need to worry.

古文：后致仕，拜光禄大夫，归老于家。
现代文：等他们吃饱喝醉，刘穆之就让厨师用金盘子盛了一斛槟榔送给他们。
English: When they were full and drunk, Liu Muzhi asked the chef to serve them a bowl of betel nuts on a golden plate.

古文：手不释卷，博学多通，特精三礼。
现代文：元嘉二十五年，皇上的车驾视察江宁，经过刘穆之的墓，诏令在他的墓前进行祭祀。
English: In the 25th year of Yuan Jia, the emperor's chauffeur inspected Jiangning, passed Liu Muzhi's tomb, and ordered a ritual to be performed in front of his tomb.

古文：年八十三卒。檀道济，高平金乡人也，世居京口。
现代文：○檀道济檀道济，是高平金乡县人，世代居住在京口。
English: ○Tang Dao JiTang Dao Ji is from Gaoping Jinxiang County and has lived in Jingkou for generations.

古文：少孤，居丧备礼，奉兄姊以和谨称。
现代文：少年时成为孤儿，守丧礼仪齐备，事奉哥哥姐姐以谦和恭谨见称。
English: He became an orphan when he was a boy. He was well-prepared to observe the funeral rites, and was known for serving his elder brothers and sisters with modesty and respect.

古文：宋武帝建义，道济与兄韶祗等从平京城，俱参武帝建武将军事。
现代文：宋武帝树立义旗，道济与兄长檀韶、檀祗等随从平定京城，一同在武帝建武将军府中参谋军事。
English: Emperor Songwu raised the banner of righteousness, and Daoji, along with his elder brothers, Dangun and Dangun, followed suit to pacify the capital, and together they served as military staff officers in Emperor Wu's Jianwu General Headquarters.

古文：累迁太尉参军，封作唐县男。
现代文：逐渐升迁为太尉参军，被封为作唐县男。
English: Gradually, he was promoted to the rank of captain in the army and was given the title of "the man of Tang County."

古文：义熙十二年，武帝北伐，道济爲前锋，所至望风降服。
现代文：义熙十二年，武帝北伐，檀道济为前锋，所到之处望风降服。
English: In the twelfth year of Yixi, Emperor Wu led the Northern Expedition, with Dang Daoji as the vanguard. He waited for the wind to subdue wherever he went.

古文：径进洛阳，议者谓所获俘囚，应悉戮以爲京观。
现代文：径直开进洛阳，一些人认为所抓获的俘虏应该全部杀掉，以作为京城的一大壮观。
English: They drove straight into Luoyang, and some people thought that all the captured prisoners should be killed as a grand spectacle of the capital.

古文：道济曰： 伐罪吊人，正在今日。 
现代文：檀道济说： 讨伐罪人，慰抚民众，正在今天。 
English: "Today is the day to fight the sinners and comfort the people," he said.

古文：皆释而遣之。
现代文：把俘虏全部释放送走。
English: Release all the prisoners and send them away.

古文：于是中原感悦，归者甚衆。
现代文：由此中原人感戴欢悦，归附的人十分众多。
English: As a result, the Central Plains people felt joy, and a large number of people joined in.

古文：长安平，以爲琅邪内史。
现代文：长安平定后，任命他为琅笽内史。
English: After the subjugation of Chang'an, he was appointed as the head of the Inner Palace History.

古文：武帝受命，以佐命功，改封永修县公，位丹阳尹、护军将军。
现代文：宋武帝承受天命，由于他辅佐登基的功劳，改封为永修县公，位居丹阳尹、护军将军。
English: Emperor Songwu received the mandate of heaven, and because of his contribution to the enthronement of the emperor, he was given the title of Yongshu County Governor, Danyang Yin, and General of the Guard.

古文：武帝不豫，给班剑二十人。
现代文：武帝生病，给他配备了仪仗二十人。
English: Emperor Wu was ill, and he was equipped with twenty honor guards.

古文：出爲镇北将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：后来出京担任镇北将军、南兖州刺史。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Nanluozhou.

古文：徐羡之等谋废立，讽道济入朝，告以将废庐陵王义真，道济屡陈不可，竟不纳。
现代文：徐羡之等人谋划废立皇帝，婉言劝说檀道济入朝，告诉他说将要废黜庐陵王刘义真，檀道济屡次述说不可以这样做，到底没有被采纳。
English: Xu Enzhi and others plotted to depose the emperor, and gently persuaded Dang Daoji to enter the imperial court, telling him that he would depose Liu Yizhen, the king of Qinling. Dang Daoji repeatedly said that he could not do this, but in the end it was not adopted.

古文：将废帝夜，道济入领军府就谢晦宿，晦悚息不得眠。
现代文：即将废黜皇帝的那天夜里，檀道济到了领军府，在谢晦那里住宿，谢晦惶恐喘息不能入睡。
English: On the night of the imminent dethronement of the emperor, Dandooji arrived at the military headquarters, where he stayed with Xie Yu. Xie Yu couldn't sleep for fear of breathing.

古文：道济寝便睡熟，晦以此服之。
现代文：而檀道济倒下便睡熟了，谢晦由此对他十分佩服。
English: However, when he fell down, he was fast asleep, which made Xie Yu admire him very much.

古文：文帝即位，给鼓吹一部，进封武陵郡公。
现代文：文帝即位，配给他乐队一部，晋封为武陵郡公。
English: Emperor Wen ascended the throne, gave him a part of the orchestra, and promoted him to Wuling County.

古文：固辞进封。
现代文：他坚持推辞。
English: He insisted on withdrawing his resignation.

古文：道济素与王弘善，时被遇方深，道济弥相结附，每构羡之等，弘亦雅仗之。
现代文：檀道济平时与王弘要好，当时王弘受皇帝知遇正深，檀道济更加拉拢攀附，经常连通徐羡之等人，王弘也非常依靠他。
English: At that time, Wang Hong was well known by the emperor, and Wang Hong also relied heavily on him. He often communicated with Xu Enzhi and others.

古文：上将诛徐羡之等，召道济欲使西讨。
现代文：皇帝将要诛杀徐羡之等人，召见檀道济，想让他率兵西讨。
English: The emperor was going to kill Xu Enzhi and the others, summon Dang Daozhi, and wanted him to lead the troops to the West.

古文：王华曰： 不可。 
现代文：王华说： 不能这样。 
English: Wang Hua said, "This is unacceptable.

古文：上曰： 道济从人者也，曩非创谋，抚而使之，必将无虑。 
现代文：皇上说： 道济是跟从别人的，过去都不是他出的主意，慰抚而任用他，一定用不着担心。 
English: The emperor said, "Doji is someone else's follower. It was not his idea in the past. If you appoint him as a consolation, there is no need to worry."

古文：道济至之明日，上诛羡之、亮。
现代文：檀道济来到的第二天，皇上杀死了徐羡之、傅亮。
English: The next day, the emperor killed Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang.

古文：既而使道济与中领军到彦之前驱西伐，上问策于道济。
现代文：随后派檀道济和中领军到彦之为前驱进行西伐，皇上向檀道济询问策略。
English: Subsequently, the Emperor sent Dandooji and the central leading army to Hikone as a forerunner for the westward march. The Emperor asked Dandooji about the strategy.

古文：对曰： 臣昔与谢晦同从北征，入关十策，晦有其九。
现代文：回答说： 我过去与谢晦一同随从北征，入关的策略若是十条，谢晦所出的就要占其中的九条。
English: He replied: I used to follow the Northern Expedition together with Xie Hui. If there are ten strategies for entering the customs, the strategies proposed by Xie Hui should account for nine of them.

古文：才略明练，殆难与敌；然未尝孤军决胜，戎事恐非其长。
现代文：他的才能谋略精明干练，几乎难以敌对；然而不曾孤军决胜，打仗恐怕不是他的优长。
English: His talent is that he is a shrewd and skillful strategist, almost difficult to oppose; however, he has never won a decisive victory alone, and fighting is probably not his forte.

古文：臣悉晦智，晦悉臣勇。
现代文：我熟悉谢晦的智谋，谢晦熟悉我的勇气。
English: I am familiar with Xie Yu's wisdom, and Xie Yu is familiar with my courage.

古文：今奉王命外讨，必未阵而禽。 
现代文：现在奉了皇上的命令外出征讨，必定是不待列阵就把他捉住。 
English: Now that I have received the emperor's order to go out and recruit, I must capture him without waiting for the line.

古文：时晦本谓道济与羡之同诛，忽闻来上，遂不战自溃。
现代文：当时谢晦本以为檀道济会与徐羡之一同被杀，忽然听说率军杀来，于是不战自溃。
English: At that time, Xie Yu originally thought that both the Taoist Relief Society and Xu En were killed together, but suddenly heard that he had led the army to kill, so he did not fight and self-destructed.

古文：事平，迁征南大将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史。
现代文：事情平定后，改任他为征南大将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史。
English: After the matter was settled, he was reappointed as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：元嘉八年，到彦之侵魏，已平河南，复失之。
现代文：元嘉八年，到彦之侵入魏国，已经平定了黄河以南，后来又丧失了它。
English: Yuan Jia's invasion of Wei in 8 AD had already pacified the south of the Yellow River, which was later lost.

古文：道济都督征讨诸军事，北略地，转战至济上，魏军盛，遂克滑台。
现代文：檀道济担任征讨军队的总指挥，向北攻占地盘，转战到了济水上，魏军强盛，于是攻克了滑台。
English: Tang Daoji was the commander-in-chief of the conscript army, and he attacked the north to occupy the site, and then went to fight on Jishui. The Wei army was strong, so he conquered the slide.

古文：道济时与魏军三十余战多捷，军至历城，以资运竭乃还。
现代文：檀道济当时与魏军打了三十多仗，大多数战胜，进军到历城，因为运输物资用尽而返回。
English: At that time, Dandooji fought more than thirty battles with the Wei army, most of which were victorious, marched to Licheng, and returned because the transportation materials were exhausted.

古文：时人降魏者具说粮食已罄，于是士卒忧惧，莫有固志。
现代文：当时投降魏国的人详细说明粮食已经吃光，因此士卒忧虑恐惧，都没有了坚强的斗志。
English: At that time, the people who surrendered to Wei explained in detail that they had run out of grain, so the soldiers were worried and afraid, and they did not have a strong fighting spirit.

古文：道济夜唱筹量沙，以所余少米散其上。
现代文：檀道济趁夜间喊报时辰，聚量沙土，用所余下的少量米撒在上面。
English: Taking advantage of the night to call out the time, they gathered sand and used the remaining small amount of rice to sprinkle it on top.

古文：及旦，魏军谓资粮有馀，故不复追，以降者妄，斩以徇。
现代文：到了早晨，魏军认为储备的粮食有余，所以不再追赶，以为投降的人是胡说，斩首抵罪。
English: In the morning, the Wei army thought that the grain reserves were more than enough, so they no longer chased after them. They thought that those who surrendered were nonsense and beheaded them to confess their sins.

古文：时道济兵寡弱，军中大惧。
现代文：当时檀道济兵少力弱，军中十分恐惧。
English: At that time, the Tangdao Relief Army was small and weak, and the army was very afraid.

古文：道济乃命军士悉甲，身白服乘舆，徐出周边。
现代文：檀道济就命令军士全都披挂盔甲，外穿白衣服，坐着车子慢慢地出去到外面走动。
English: He ordered the sergeants to put on their armour, dress in white, and slowly get out of the car and walk around.

古文：魏军惧有伏，不敢逼，乃归。
现代文：魏军恐怕有埋伏，不敢逼近，于是他便回来了。
English: The Wei army feared an ambush and did not dare to approach, so he returned.

古文：道济虽不克定河南，全军而反，雄名大振。
现代文：檀道济虽然没有平定黄河以南地区，但是保全了军队安然返回，雄武的名声大振。
English: Although he did not pacify the areas south of the Yellow River, he did ensure the safe return of the troops, and his reputation as a valiant warrior was greatly enhanced.

古文：魏甚惮之，图之以禳鬼。
现代文：魏军对他十分害怕，画他的像用来祛除恶鬼。
English: The Wei army was very afraid of him and used his portrait to drive away evil spirits.

古文：还进位司空，镇寻阳。
现代文：归来以后，晋升为司空，镇守襄阳。
English: After his return, he was promoted to the position of Siku, the town guard of Yangyang.

古文：道济立功前朝，威名甚重，左右腹心并经百战，诸子又有才气，朝廷疑畏之。
现代文：道济立功于前朝，威名很大，左右的心腹都身经百战，他的各个儿子又都很有才气，因而朝廷对他心存畏惧和怀疑。
English: Daoji had made great contributions to the previous dynasty, and his reputation was great. All of his close confidants had been through hundreds of battles, and all of his sons were very talented. As a result, the imperial court was fearful and suspicious of him.

古文：时人或目之曰： 安知非司马仲达也。 
现代文：当时也有人这样看他，说： 怎么能知道他不是司马仲达呢？ 
English: At that time, some people also looked at him in the same way and said, "How can we know that he is not Sima Zhongda?"

古文：文帝寝疾累年，屡经危殆，领军刘湛贪执朝政，虑道济爲异说，又彭城王义康亦虑宫车晏驾，道济不复可制。
现代文：宋文帝卧病多年，多次遇到危险，领军刘湛贪图执掌朝政，恐怕檀道济有不同说法，又彭城王刘义康也害怕皇帝去世，檀道济不再可以控制。
English: Emperor Songwen was bedridden for many years and was in danger many times. The leader Liu Zhan wanted to take charge of the imperial government. I'm afraid there are different opinions about Dangdozhi. Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was also afraid of the emperor's death. Dangdozhi could no longer be controlled.

古文：十二年，上疾笃，会魏军南伐，召道济入朝。
现代文：元嘉十二年，皇上病重，正遇上魏军南伐，召檀道济入朝。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yuan Jia, the emperor was seriously ill and was facing the southern campaign of the Wei army. He summoned Dando to help him enter the imperial court.

古文：其妻向氏曰： 夫高世之勋，道家所忌，今无事相召，祸其至矣。 
现代文：他的妻子向氏说： 功勋高于世人，这是道家的忌讳，现在无事而相召见，该是灾祸到了。 
English: His wife said to him, "It is a taboo in the Taoist family that one's merits are higher than the world's. It is a disaster to be summoned without any reason.

古文：及至，上已间。
现代文：等赶到那里，皇上已经痊愈。
English: By the time they got there, the emperor had already recovered.

古文：十三年春，将遣还镇，下渚未发，有似鹪鸟集船悲鸣。
现代文：十三年春，即将派他返回原镇，走到水边还没出发，有一群好似鹪鹩的鸟聚集在船上悲哀地鸣叫。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, he was about to be sent back to the original town. Before he reached the water's edge and set off, a group of birds resembling cormorants gathered on the boat and sang mournfully.

古文：会上疾动，义康矫诏召入祖道，收付廷尉，及其子给事黄门侍郎植、司徒从事中郎粲、太子舍人混、征北主簿承伯、秘书郎中尊等八人并诛。
现代文：正遇上皇帝疾病发作，刘义康伪造诏书召檀道济入宫，说是为他饯行，将他抓住交给廷尉，他和他的儿子给事黄门侍郎檀植、司徒从事中郎檀粲、太子舍人檀混、征北主簿檀承伯、秘书郎中檀尊等八人一齐被杀。
English: At the time of the emperor's illness, Liu Yikang forged an imperial edict to invite Dando to the palace, saying that it was for his sake, and seized him and handed him over to the imperial lieutenant. He and his son were killed together with eight people, including Huangmen waiter Dan Zhi, Sito engaged in middle-man Danzhao, prince's concubine Dangan, master of the Northern Expedition, Danzheng Bo, and secretary Danzhong Danzhong.

古文：时人歌曰： 可怜白浮鸠，枉杀檀江州。 
现代文：当时的人们唱道： 可怜《白浮鸠》，枉杀檀江州。 
English: People at the time sang: "Poor "White Floating Donkey," you killed Danjiangzhou for nothing."

古文：道济死日，建邺地震白毛生。
现代文：檀道济死的那天，建邺地震，有白毛生长。
English: On the day of Tandooji's death, there was an earthquake in Jianye, and white hair grew.

古文：又诛司空参军薛肜、高进之，并道济心腹也。
现代文：又杀死了司空参军薛肜、高进之，都是檀道济的心腹。
English: He also killed Xue Ying and Gao Jinzhi, both of whom were devotees of the Buddhist path.

古文：道济见收，愤怒气盛，目光如炬，俄尔间引饮一斛。
现代文：檀道济被捕之后，十分愤怒，气势极盛，目光如同火炬，顷刻间拿酒来喝了一斛。
English: After the arrest of Dang Daojie, he was very angry, full of energy, his eyes were like a torch, and he immediately drank a bottle of wine.

古文：乃脱帻投地，曰： 乃坏汝万里长城。 
现代文：然后脱下头巾扔在地下，说： 竟然毁掉你们的万里长城！ 
English: Then he took off his turban and threw it underground, saying: "How dare you destroy your Great Wall!

古文：魏人闻之，皆曰 道济已死，吴子辈不足复惮 。
现代文：魏国人听了这个消息，都说 檀道济已经死去，吴地的小辈们不值得再害怕了。 
English: When the Wei people heard this news, they all said that Dang Daoji had died, and that the younger generation in Wudi was no longer worth being afraid of.

古文：自是频岁南伐，有饮马长江之志。
现代文：从此连年南下攻伐，有饮马长江的志向。
English: Since then, it has been advancing southward year after year, with the goal of reaching the Yangtze River.

古文：文帝问殷景仁曰： 谁可继道济？ 
现代文：文帝问殷景仁说： 谁可以继承道济？ 
English: Emperor Wen asked Yin Jingren, "Who can inherit Taoism?"

古文：答曰： 道济以累有战功，故致威名，余但未任耳。 
现代文：回答说： 道济是因为屡建战功，所以才树立起威名，其余的人只是没有被任用罢了。 
English: He replied, "Dao Ji only became famous because of his many military exploits. The others were just not appointed."

古文：帝曰： 不然，昔李广在朝，匈奴不敢南望，后继者复有几人？ 
现代文：文帝说： 并不是这样的，过去有李广在朝中，匈奴不敢向南侵犯，而后继者又有几人呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen said: This is not the case. In the past, there was Li Guang in the middle of the North, the Xiongnu did not dare to invade the south, and how many successors were there?

古文：二十七年，魏军至瓜步，文帝登石头城望，甚有忧色。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，魏军到达瓜步，文帝登上石头城远望，脸色非常忧愁。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, the Wei army reached Guapu, and Emperor Wendi climbed the stone city and looked into the distance, his face very sad.

古文：叹曰： 若道济在，岂至此！ 
现代文：慨叹道： 如果有道济在世，那会弄到这种地步！ 
English: He sighed, "If there were a Taoist priest alive, it would have come to this!"

