古文：子曰： 雍也可使南面。 
现代文：孔子说： 冉雍啊，可以让他去做官。 
English: Confucius said, "Ranyong, you can make him an official.

古文：仲弓问子桑伯子，子曰： 可也，简。 
现代文：仲弓问孔子桑伯子这个人怎么样，孔子说： 这个人还可以，他办事简要。 
English: When Zhongyun asked Confucius how Sambozi was, Confucius said, "This man is still good. He keeps things simple.

古文：仲弓曰： 居敬而行简，以临其民，不亦可乎？
现代文：仲弓说： 居心恭敬严肃而行事简要，像这样来治理百姓，不是也可以吗？
English: Zhongyun said, "Isn't it possible to govern the people by being respectful, serious, and concise?

古文：居简而行简，无乃大简乎？ 子曰： 雍之言然。 
现代文：如果态度马虎粗疏，又以简要的方法办事，那不是太简单了吗？ 孔子说： 这话你说得对。 
English: If the attitude is sloppy and rough, and the work is done in a concise manner, isn't that too simple? Confucius said: You are right.

古文：哀公问： 弟子孰为好学？ 
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子： 你的弟子中谁最爱学习？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked Confucius: Which of your disciples loves to study the most?

古文：孔子对曰： 有颜回者好学，不迁怒，不贰过，不幸短命死矣，今也则亡，未闻好学者也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 有一个叫颜回的弟子最好学，他从不迁怒于别人，也不重犯同样的过错。只是很不幸他早早去世了。
English: Confucius replied, "There is a disciple named Yan Hui who is the best to learn from. He never takes his anger out on others, nor does he repeat the same mistakes. Unfortunately, he passed away early.

古文：子华使于齐，冉子为其母请粟，子曰： 与之釜。 
现代文：现在已经没有他那样的人了，再也没听到谁爱好学习的了。 子华出使齐国，冉有替他的母亲向孔子请求补助一些谷米。孔子说： 给她六斗四升。 
English: Now there is no one like him, and we never hear of anyone who likes to study. Zihua sent an envoy to Qi, and Ran asked Confucius to subsidize some grain for his mother. Confucius said: Give her six doos and four liters.

古文：请益，曰： 与之庾。 冉子与之粟五秉。
现代文：冉求请求再增加一些。孔子说： 再给她二斗四升。 
English: Ranqiu asked for a little more. Confucius said, "Give her another two buckets and four liters."

古文：子曰： 赤之适齐也，乘肥马，衣轻裘。
现代文：冉求却给他八百斗。孔子说： 公西赤到齐国去，乘坐着健壮的马匹驾的车子，穿着又暖和又轻便的皮袍。
English: Ranqiu, however, gave him eight hundred ducats. Confucius said, "Gong Xiaka went to Qi Province, riding in a chariot driven by sturdy horses, wearing a warm and light leather robe.

古文：吾闻之也，君子周急不继富。 
现代文：我听人说：君子只周济急需救济的人，而不是帮助别人致富。 
English: I've heard people say: A gentleman only gives money to those in urgent need of relief, not to help others get rich.

古文：原思为之宰，与之粟九百，辞。
现代文：原思做孔子家的总管，孔子给他的酬劳是九百斗小米，原思推辞不要。孔子说： 不要推辞。
English: Originally he wanted to be the head of the Confucius family. Confucius gave him a reward of nine hundred barrels of millet. Originally he did not want to refuse. Confucius said: Do not refuse.

古文：子曰： 毋，以与尔邻里乡党乎！ 
现代文：如果多了就给你的乡亲们吧。 
English: If you have more, give it to your fellow countrymen.

古文：子谓仲弓曰： 犁牛之子骍且角，虽欲勿用，山川其舍诸？ 
现代文：孔子在评论仲弓的时候说： 耕牛产下的牛犊长着红色的毛，角也长得整齐端正，人们虽想不用它做祭品，但山川之神难道会舍弃它吗？ 
English: Confucius said, commenting on the intermediate bow: The calf born from the oxen has red hair, and the horns are neat and tidy. Although people do not want to use it as a sacrifice, will the gods of the mountains and rivers abandon it?

古文：子曰： 回也，其心三月不违仁，其余则日月至焉而已矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 颜回这个人，他的心中长久地不离开仁德，其余的学生则只能短暂的做到这样。 
English: Confucius said: Yan Hui this person, his heart for a long time does not leave the benevolence, the rest of the students can only do so for a short time.

古文：季康子问： 仲由可使从政也与？ 
现代文：季康子问孔子： 仲由可以让他参与国家政事吗？ 
English: Ji Kangzi asked Confucius: Can Zhongyou allow him to participate in national politics?

古文：子曰： 由也果，于从政乎何有？ 
现代文：孔子说： 仲由做事果断，参与国家政事有什么困难呢？ 
English: Confucius said: If Zhong Rong is determined to do things, what is the difficulty in participating in national politics?

古文：曰： 赐也可使从政也与？ 
现代文：季康子又问： 端木赐可以让他参与国家政事吗？ 
English: Ji Yasuko also asked: Can you allow him to participate in national politics?

古文：曰： 赐也达，于从政乎何有？ 
现代文：孔子说： 端木赐通达事理，对于参与政事有什么困难呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "If you have the ability to reason, what is the difficulty in participating in politics?

古文：曰： 求也可使从政也与？ 
现代文：又问： 冉求可以让他参与国家政事吗？ 
English: He also asked: Can Ranqiu allow him to participate in national politics?

古文：曰： 求也艺，于从政乎何有？ 
现代文：孔子说： 冉求有才能，对于参与国家政事有什么困难呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "If one is talented, what is the difficulty in participating in national politics?

古文：季氏使闵子骞为费宰，闵子骞曰： 善为我辞焉。
现代文：季氏派人请闵子骞去做费邑的长官，闵子骞对着来的人说： 请好好的替我推辞吧！
English: Ji sent someone to ask Zizigao to be the governor of Feiyu. Zizigao said to the person who came, "Please kindly excuse me!

古文：如有复我者，则吾必在汶上矣。 
现代文：如果再来召我，那我一定跑到汶水那边去了。 
English: If they call me again, I'll definitely go to the other side of the river.

古文：伯牛有疾，子问之，自牖执其手，曰： 亡之，命矣夫！
现代文：伯牛生病了，孔子就去探望他，从窗户外面握着他的手说： 没有办法呀，这是命里注定的吧！
English: When Uncle Niu fell ill, Confucius went to visit him, shook his hand from outside the window and said, "There's no way, this is destined by fate!"

古文：斯人也而有斯疾也！斯人也而有斯疾也！ 
现代文：这样的人竟会得这样的病啊，这样的人竟会得这样的病啊！ 
English: How could such a person get such a disease, how could such a person get such a disease!

古文：子曰： 贤哉回也！
现代文：孔子说： 颜回的品质是多么高尚啊！
English: Confucius said: How noble is the quality of Yan Hui!

古文：一箪食，一瓢饮，在陋巷，人不堪其忧，回也不改其乐。
现代文：一竹篮饭，一瓢水，住在简陋的小巷子里，别人都忍受不了这种穷困清苦，颜回却没有改变他好学的乐趣。
English: They eat rice from a small bamboo basket, drink a bowl of water, and live in a humble hutong. The average person can't bear this kind of hardship, but it doesn't change their enjoyment.

古文：贤哉，回也！ 
现代文：颜回的品质是多么高尚啊！ 
English: How noble is the quality of Yan Hui!

古文：冉求曰： 非不说子之道，力不足也。 
现代文：冉求说： 我不是不喜欢老师您所讲的学说，而是我的能力不够呀。 
English: Ran Qiu said, "I don't dislike the theory your teacher taught, but my ability is not enough."

古文：子曰： 力不足者，中道而废，今女画。 
现代文：孔子说： 能力不够的人是到半路才停下来，而你却画地为牢，不肯前进。 
English: Confucius said: "A person who lacks ability only stops halfway, but you paint the ground as a prison and refuse to move forward."

古文：子谓子夏曰： 女为君子儒，无为小人儒。 
现代文：孔子对子夏说： 你要做君子儒，不要做小人儒。 
English: Confucius said to Zixia: You should be a gentleman, not a villain.

古文：子游为武城宰，子曰： 女得人焉尔乎？ 
现代文：子游做了武城的长官。孔子说： 你在那里得到了人才没有？ 
English: Ziyou became the governor of Wucheng. Confucius said: Where did you get the talent?

古文：曰： 有澹台灭明者，行不由径，非公事，未尝至于偃之室也。 
现代文：子游回答说： 有一个叫澹台灭明的人，从来不走邪路，没有公事从不到我屋子里来。 
English: Zoyu replied, "There is a person who calls Xingtai to destroy the Ming Dynasty, never takes the wrong path, and never comes to my house without official business.

古文：子曰： 孟之反不伐，奔而殿，将入门，策其马曰： 非敢后也，马不进也。  
现代文：孔子说： 孟之反不喜欢夸耀自己。
English: Confucius said: Meng Zhimo does not like to boast.

古文：子曰： 不有祝鮀之佞，而有宋朝之美，难乎免于今之世矣。 
现代文：战败时，他留在最后掩护全军撤退。快进城门的时候，他鞭打着自己的马说， 不是我敢于殿后，是我的马跑不快。  孔子说： 如果没有祝鮀那样的口才，只有宋国公子朝那样的美貌，在当今的社会里就难以避免祸害了。 
English: Confucius said: If there were no eloquence like Zhu Xi, and only beauty like that of the Song Dynasty, it would be difficult to avoid disaster in today's society.

古文：子曰： 谁能出不由户？
现代文：孔子说： 谁能不经过屋门而走出屋子呢？
English: Confucius said: Who can get out of the house without passing through the door?

古文：何莫由斯道也？ 
现代文：为什么没有人走这条道路呢？ 
English: Why has no one followed this path?

古文：子曰： 质胜文则野，文胜质则史。
现代文：孔子说： 质朴多于文采，就会显得粗野，文采多于质朴，就难免流于浮夸。
English: Confucius said: If simplicity is more important than prose, it will appear coarse; if prose is more important than simplicity, it will inevitably flow into pomposity.

古文：文质彬彬，然后君子。 
现代文：只有质朴和文采配合适当，才能成为君子。 
English: It is only through the proper combination of simplicity and literature that one can become a gentleman.

古文：子曰： 人之生也直，罔之生也幸而免。 
现代文：孔子说： 一个人因为正直，所以在人世上能够生存，不正直的人有时也能在人世上生存，那只是因为他侥幸地躲避了灾难罢了。 
English: Confucius said: A person can survive in the human world because he is honest, and a dishonest person can sometimes survive in the human world, but that is only because he has luckily avoided disaster.

古文：子曰： 知之者不如好之者，好之者不如乐之者。 
现代文：孔子说： 知道学习的人比不上爱好学习的人，爱好学习的人比不上以学习为快乐的人。 
English: Confucius said: "Those who know how to study are not as good as those who love to study, and those who love to study are not as good as those who enjoy studying."

古文：子曰： 中人以上，可以语上也；中人以下，不可以语上也。 
现代文：孔子说： 具有中等以上资质的人，可以给他讲授高深的学问；在中等资质以下的人，不可以给他讲高深的学问。 
English: Confucius said: A person with above-average qualifications can teach him profound knowledge; a person with below-average qualifications cannot teach him profound knowledge.

古文：樊迟问知，子曰： 务民之义，敬鬼神而远之，可谓知矣。 
现代文：樊迟问孔子怎样才算聪明，孔子说： 专心致力于老百姓应该遵从的道德，尊敬鬼神，但要远离它们，就可以称得上聪明了。 
English: When he asked Confucius how to be wise, Confucius said, "To devote oneself to the morals that people should follow, to respect ghosts and gods, but to stay away from them, can be called wise.

古文：问仁，曰： 仁者先难而后获，可谓仁矣。 
现代文：樊迟又问怎样才叫做有仁德，孔子说： 面对困难的事，仁人是先做而后得，这可以说是仁了。 
English: When asked what it means to have benevolence, Confucius said, "In the face of difficulties, a benevolent person does first and obtains later. This can be said to be benevolence."

古文：子曰： 知者乐水，仁者乐山。
现代文：孔子说： 聪明人喜爱水，有仁德的人喜爱山。
English: Confucius said: "A wise man loves water, and a benevolent man loves mountains."

古文：知者动，仁者静。
现代文：聪明人活动，有仁德的人沉静。
English: A wise man is active, a benevolent man is quiet.

古文：知者乐，仁者寿。 
现代文：聪明的人活得快乐，仁德的人长寿。 
English: Clever people live happily, benevolent people live long.

古文：子曰： 齐一变至于鲁，鲁一变至于道。 
现代文：孔子说： 如果齐国的政治改变一下，可以达到鲁国的水平；鲁国的政治改变一下，就可以达到合符大道的境界了。 
English: Confucius said: If the politics of Qi changes, it can reach the level of Lu; if the politics of Lu changes, it can reach the level of Hefu Avenue.

古文：子曰： 觚不觚，觚哉！
现代文：孔子说： 觚不像个觚了，这还叫觚吗！
English: Confucius said, "A baboon is no longer a baboon, is it still a baboon?"

古文：觚哉！ 
现代文：这也算是觚吗？ 
English: Does this count as a swindle?

古文：宰我问曰： 仁者，虽告之曰： 井有仁焉。 其从之也？ 
现代文：宰我问道： 对于有仁德的人，别人告诉他井里掉下去一位仁人，他是不是也会跳下去？ 
English: Zai Me asked: For someone with benevolence, if someone tells him to fall down a well, will he jump?

古文：子曰： 何为其然也？
现代文：孔子说： 为什么要这样做呢？
English: Confucius said, "Why do you want to do this?

古文：君子可逝也，不可陷也；可欺也，不可罔也。 
现代文：君子可以到井边去救，却不能让自己陷入井中；君子可能被欺骗，但不可能被人愚弄。 
English: A gentleman can go to the well to rescue, but can not let himself fall into the well; a gentleman may be deceived, but can not be fooled.

古文：子曰： 君子博学于文，约之以礼，亦可以弗畔矣夫。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子广泛地学习文献典籍，再用礼来约束自己，这样就不会离经叛道了。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman should extensively study literature and classics, and then use etiquette to discipline himself, so that he will not deviate from the classics.

古文：子见南子，子路不说，夫子矢之曰： 予所否者，天厌之！
现代文：孔子去见卫灵公夫人南子，子路不高兴。孔子发誓说： 假如我做了什么不正当的事的话，让上天厌弃我吧！
English: When Confucius went to see Lady Nanzi, the wife of the Duke of Wei Ling, he was not happy. Confucius swore, "If I have done anything improper, may Heaven reject me!"

古文：天厌之！ 
现代文：让上天厌弃我吧！ 
English: Let the heavens abhor me!

古文：子曰： 中庸之为德也，其至矣乎！
现代文：孔子说： 中庸作为德的体现，应该是最完美的了！
English: Confucius said: Moderation, as the embodiment of virtue, should be the most perfect!

古文：民鲜久矣。 
现代文：而人们缺少这种美德已经很久了。 
English: And people have been lacking this virtue for a long time.

古文：子贡曰： 如有博施于民而能济众，何如？
现代文：子贡说： 假若一个人能给老百姓带来很多好处又能够帮助众人生活得很好，那这个人怎么样？
English: Zigong said: If a person can bring a lot of benefits to the people and can help everyone live well, then what about this person?

古文：可谓仁乎？ 
现代文：可以说他是有仁德的人吗？ 
English: Can we say that he is a benevolent person?

古文：子曰： 何事于仁，必也圣乎！
现代文：孔子说： 哪里仅仅是有仁德，简直是圣人了！
English: Confucius said: Where there is only benevolence, there is almost a saint!

古文：尧、舜其犹病诸！
现代文：就连尧、舜大概都很难做到呢。
English: Even,  are probably difficult to achieve.

古文：夫仁者，己欲立而立人，己欲达而达人。
现代文：至于仁人，就是要想自己站得住，也要帮助人家一同站得住；自己想立足时也帮助别人立足，自己想发达时也帮助他人发达。
English: As for the benevolent person, it is to want to stand up for oneself, but also to help others to stand up together; when you want to stand up for yourself, you also help others to stand up, and when you want to develop yourself, you also help others to develop.

古文：能近取譬，可谓仁之方也已。 
现代文：能够根据自身的情况去设想他人，就可以说是行仁的方法了。 
English: Being able to imagine others according to one's own situation can be said to be a method of benevolence.

