古文：赛典赤赡思丁赛典赤赡思丁，一名乌马儿，回回人，别庵伯尔之裔。
现代文：赛典赤赡思丁，一名乌马儿，回回人，别庵伯尔之后裔。
English: Sae-Din, an Umar, a Hui-Hui man, a descendant of Beian-Bol.

古文：其国言赛典赤，犹华言贵族也。
现代文：回回族语 赛典赤 ，即汉语贵族之意。
English: Back to the Hui language, Saiten red, that is, the meaning of Chinese aristocracy.

古文：太祖西征，赡思丁率千骑以文豹白鹘迎降，命入宿卫，从征伐，以赛典赤呼之而不名。
现代文：太祖西征时，赡思丁率千骑奉文豹、白鹘迎降。太祖命他参加宿卫军，随太祖征伐，只呼他为赛典赤而不叫他本名。
English: When the great-great-grandfather went to the Western Expedition, Yan Siding led a thousand horsemen to serve the Wenbao and Baiyao. The great-great-grandfather ordered him to join the Home Guard Army and follow the great-great-grandfather's expedition, and only called him Saetian Red instead of his real name.

古文：太宗即位，授丰净云内三州都达鲁花赤；改太原、平阳二路达鲁花赤；入为燕京断事官。
现代文：太宗即位后，授他为丰、净、云内三州都达鲁花赤；后改任太原、平阳二路达鲁花赤；以后又入朝燕京为断事官。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was awarded the title of "Feng," "Jing" and "Daruhua" of the three states of Yunnan; later he was appointed as "Daruhua" of Taiyuan and "Daruhua" of Pingyang; later he entered the court of Yanjing as adjudicator.

古文：宪宗即位，命同塔剌浑行六部事，迁燕京路总管，多惠政，擢采访使。
现代文：宪宗即位后，命他与塔剌浑同理六部政事；后调任燕京路总管，因多行惠政，擢升为采访使。
English: After Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne, he ordered him to be in charge of six ministries in the same way as Ta Binghun. Later, he was transferred to the post of the head of Yanjing Road, and because of his many favorable policies, he was promoted to the position of an envoy.

古文：帝伐蜀，赛典赤主馈饷，供亿未尝阙乏。
现代文：宪宗伐蜀，赛典赤主持军饷供应，始终尽职尽责，军饷不缺。
English: Kenzong felled Shu, Saiten Red presided over the supply of military pay, and always did his duty, and there was no shortage of military pay.

古文：世祖即位，立十路宣抚司，擢燕京宣抚使。
现代文：世祖即位，设立十路宣抚司，升赛典赤为燕京宣抚使。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, the Ten-Road Mission Division was established, and Shosai Denshaku was appointed as the envoy of Yanjing.

古文：中统二年，拜中书平章政事，皆降制奖谕。
现代文：中统二年，拜中书平章政事。
English: In the second year of the unification of China, Bai Zhongshu and Ping Zhang came to power.

古文：至元元年，置陕西五路西蜀四川行中书省，出为平章政事。莅官三年，增户九千五百六十五、军一万二千二百五十五、钞六千二百二十五锭、屯田粮九万七千二十一石，撙节和买钞三百三十一锭。
现代文：至元元年，设置陕西五路西蜀四川行中书省，以赛典赤为平章政事，在任三年，该省增户九千五百六十五户、军一万二千二百五十五、钞六千二百二十五锭、屯田粮九万七千二十一石，节省官府购买民间物品的钞三百三十一锭。
English: By the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shaanxi No. 5 Road, West Shuxi, Sichuan, and Central Shuxi Provinces were set up, with Sai Dianchi as the governor. During his three years in office, the province added 9,565 households, 12,255 soldiers, 62,025 banknotes, and 97,021 tons of grain, saving the government 331 banknotes for the purchase of folk goods.

古文：中书以闻，诏赏银五千两，仍命陕西五路四川行院大小官属并听节制。
现代文：中书省上报朝廷，朝廷赏银五千两，并命陕西五路四川行院大小官员均受赛典赤管辖指挥。
English: The Imperial Court awarded 5,000 taels of silver and ordered that officials of all ranks and sizes in the five provincial capitals of Shaanxi and Sichuan should be under the command of the Red Guard.

古文：七年，分镇四川，宋将昝万寿拥强兵守嘉定，与赛典赤军对垒，一以诚意待之，不为侵掠，万寿心服。
现代文：至元七年，赛典赤镇守四川，宋将昝万寿拥强兵驻守嘉定，与赛典赤军对峙。赛典赤待之以诚，不侵掠宋国，万寿心服。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Saiten Chzhen guarded Sichuan, while Song general Wan Shou garrisoned Jiading with strong soldiers and confronted Saiten Red Army. Saiten Red Army was sincere and did not invade Song Province. Wan Shou was pleased.

古文：未几，赛典赤召还，万寿请置酒为好，左右皆难之，赛典赤竟往不疑。
现代文：不久，赛典赤将召还京师，万寿在宋营为他设宴饯行。左右都疑惧，赛典赤竟往宋营不疑。
English: Soon after, Saitenakago was summoned back to the capital, and Manshū held a banquet for him at Songyeong. Both sides were suspicious, but Saitenakago did not hesitate to go to Songyeong.

古文：酒至，左右复言未可饮，赛典赤笑曰： 若等何见之小耶。昝将军能毒我，其能尽毒我朝之人乎！ 
现代文：宴席上左右劝他不要饮酒，赛典赤笑曰： 你们见识真小，昝将军即使能毒死我，岂能尽毒死我朝之人吗？ 
English: At the banquet, Saiten advised him not to drink alcohol. Saiten said with a red smile, "You people are so short-sighted. Even if General Zhai can poison me, can he really poison the people of my dynasty?

古文：万寿叹服。
现代文：万寿叹服。
English: Manju sighing clothes.

古文：八年，有旨：大军见围襄阳，各道宜进兵以牵制之。
现代文：八年，朝廷传旨：大军现正围攻襄阳，各道应进兵以牵制敌军。
English: In the eighth year, the imperial court sent a message: a large army is now besieging Yangyang, and each province should send troops to contain the enemy army.

古文：于是赛典赤偕郑鼎率兵水陆并进，至嘉定，获宋将二人，顺流纵筏，断其浮桥，获战舰二十八艘。
现代文：于是赛典赤偕同郑鼎率兵水陆并进，至嘉定，俘宋将二人。乘筏顺岷江而下，断宋军浮桥，缴获战舰二十八艘。
English: As a result, Saiten Chakotay and Zheng Ding led their soldiers and marched to Jiading, where they captured two Song generals. They sailed down the Li River on rafts, broke the Song army's pontoon bridge, and captured twenty-eight warships.

古文：寻命行省事于兴元，专给粮饷。
现代文：不久，命他至兴元执行行省职务，专供军粮。
English: Soon, he ordered him to Xingyuan to carry out the duties of the province, and to supply military grain.

古文：十一年，帝谓赛典赤曰： 云南朕尝亲临，比因委任失宜，使远人不安，欲选谨厚者抚治之，无如卿者。 
现代文：至元十一年，太祖对赛典赤说： 云南朕曾亲临其境，近来因委人不当，使那里的百姓不安，打算选派一位谨慎厚道的官员去安抚，而舍卿无人。 
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the great-grandfather said to Sai Dianchi, "I have been to Yunnan myself. Recently, the people there have been unsettled due to the improper appointment of an official. I plan to appoint a prudent and kind official to pacify them, but there is no one like Sheqing.

古文：赛典赤拜受命，退朝，即访求知云南地理者，画其山川城郭、驿舍军屯、夷险远近为图以进，帝大悦，遂拜平章政事，行省云南，赐钞五十万缗、金宝无算。
现代文：赛典赤当即受命，退朝后便去访求熟知云南地理者，命他绘出云南的山川、城郭、驿舍、军屯营地及远近险要的地图，呈进朝廷，世祖大喜，立即拜赛典赤为平章政事，负责云南政务，赐钞五十万缗以及无数金宝。
English: Saetian Chia immediately received the order, and after retiring from the imperial court, he went to seek out someone who was familiar with Yunnan geography. He ordered him to draw a map of Yunnan's mountains and rivers, castles, outhouses, military camps and important places near and far, and present it to the imperial court. The patriarch was overjoyed. He immediately appointed Saetian Chia as the governor of Pingzhang, responsible for Yunnan's government affairs, and gave him 500,000 baht in banknotes and countless gold and treasure.

古文：时宗王脱忽鲁方镇云南，惑于左右之言，以赛典赤至，必夺其权，具甲兵以为备。
现代文：这时，宗王脱忽鲁正镇守云南，听了左右的谗言，以为赛典赤来后必会夺去他的权力，于是整军严阵以防。
English: At this time, King Takhlu was on the defensive in Yunnan, and after listening to the criticism from both sides, he thought that Saiten would surely take away his power after he turned red, so he organized his army to prevent this from happening.

古文：赛典赤闻之，乃遣其子纳速剌丁先至王所，请曰： 天子以云南守者非人，致诸国背叛，故命臣来安集之，且戒以至境即加抚循，今未敢专，愿王遣一人来共议。 
现代文：赛典赤闻知，派遣其子纳速剌丁先到王府去说明 ：天子有鉴于云南的守臣不得其人，致使诸族背叛，故命臣来安抚。今来到云南，不敢专断独行，请王派一人来共同商议大计。 
English: Saiten Akavanchi sent his son, Nahawading, to the king's palace first to explain that the emperor had ordered his vassal to pacify Yunnan in view of the fact that Yunnan's vassal had not been able to do so, leading to the betrayal of all ethnic groups. Now that he had come to Yunnan, he did not dare to act arbitrarily, so he asked the king to send someone to discuss the overall plan.

古文：王闻，遽骂其下曰： 吾几为汝辈所误！ 
现代文：王闻言，立即斥骂下人： 吾几乎为你们所误！ 
English: Wang Wenyan immediately scolded his subordinates: I almost made a mistake!

古文：明日，遣亲臣撒满、位哈乃等至，赛典赤问以何礼见，对曰： 吾等与纳速剌丁偕来，视犹兄弟也，请用子礼见。 
现代文：第二天，派亲臣撒满、位哈乃等去赛典赤的官府。赛典赤问应以何礼相见。来人回答说 ：我等与纳速剌丁一同来，视为兄弟，请用父子之礼相见。 
English: The next day, he sent his relatives Samman, Ihana, and others to Saitenakorn's government office. Saitenakorn asked how they should greet each other. The visitors replied, "We have come together with Naso Keding, and we consider each other as brothers. Please greet each other as father and son."

古文：皆以名马为贽，拜跪甚恭，观者大骇。
现代文：二人以名马为进献行跪拜礼，见者大为惊异。
English: The two of them knelt down to offer the famous horse as an offering, and the onlookers were astonished.

古文：乃设宴陈所赐金宝饮器，酒罢，尽以与之，二人大喜过望。
现代文：赛典赤设宴款待，宴罢将皇上所赐金宝饮具都送与此二人，二人大喜过望。
English: A banquet was held in celebration of the victory, and the golden drinking vessels given by the emperor were presented to the two men. They were overjoyed.

古文：明日来谢，语之曰： 二君虽为宗王亲臣，未有名爵，不可以议国事，欲各授君行省断事官，以未见王，未敢擅授。 
现代文：第二天辞谢，赛典赤道： 二君虽是宗王亲臣，但未有名爵，不能商议国事。我本想授二位为行省断事官，但因未见到宗王，不敢擅自授职。 
English: Resignation the next day, Saiten, Equator: Although the two princes were relatives of the king, they were not titled and could not discuss state affairs. I wanted to appoint the two as provincial adjudicators, but since I did not see the king, I did not dare to appoint them without authorization.

古文：令一人还，先禀王，王大悦。
现代文：于是先令一人还府，禀告宗王。宗王大喜。
English: So one shilling came back to the house and complained to the king. The king was overjoyed.

古文：又奏： 哈剌章、云南壤地均也，而州县皆以万户、千户主之，宜改置令长。 
现代文：从此云南政令全听赛典赤一人的指示。至元十二年，赛典赤向朝廷呈奏道： 云南诸夷未归附者还有许多，今准备让宣慰司兼行元帅府事，听行省指挥。 还建议将大理、云南地方的万户、千户改为州县长官。
English: From then on, all Yunnan government decrees were issued under the direction of one person, Saiten Chia. In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Saiten Chia presented a report to the imperial court: There are still many Yunnan Zhuyi who have not returned, and now they are preparing to let the consolation secretary also serve as the marshal of the government and listen to the command of the province. It is also recommended that 10,000 households and 1,000 households in Dali and Yunnan be changed to prefectural governors.

古文：并从之。十三年，以所改云南郡县上闻。
现代文：这些建议都被朝廷采纳，第二年即将云南所改郡县上报朝廷。
English: All of these suggestions were accepted by the imperial court, and the following year, the counties to be reformed in Yunnan were reported to the imperial court.

古文：云南俗无礼仪，男女往往自相配偶，亲死则火之，不为丧祭。
现代文：云南风俗：男女往往自相配偶，父母死则实行火葬，也不祭奠。
English: Yunnan customs: Men and women often marry each other, and when parents die, they are cremated and there is no memorial service.

古文：无秔稻桑麻，子弟不知读书。
现代文：当地不种植稻谷桑麻，子弟也不知读书。
English: There is no local cultivation of rice or mulberry, and the children do not know how to read.

古文：赛典赤教之拜跪之节，婚姻行媒，死者为之棺椁奠祭，教民播种，为陂池以备水旱，创建孔子庙明伦堂，购经史，授学田，由是文风稍兴。
现代文：赛典赤教他们行跪拜礼，婚姻由媒人从中介绍结合，死者以棺安葬，进行祭奠，教民种植，挖塘建池以防水旱灾害，建立孔庙和明伦堂，购置经史书籍，授与学田。从此文风稍兴。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, they were taught to worship on their knees, marriages were arranged by matchmakers, the dead were buried in coffins, memorial services were held, churches were planted, ponds were dug to prevent droughts, a Confucius Temple and a Ming Lun Hall were built, books on the history of the scriptures were purchased, and students were awarded scholarships. From then on, there was a slight revival of the literary style.

古文：云南民以贝代钱，是时初行钞法，民不便之，赛典赤为闻于朝，许仍其俗。
现代文：云南民间以贝为钱，政府欲行钞法，人民反而感到不便，赛典赤如实报告朝廷，请允许仍通行贝币。
English: Yunnan people use shellfish as money. The government wants to implement the banknote law, but the people feel inconvenienced. Sai Dianchi truthfully reported to the imperial court. Please allow shellfish coins to still be used.

古文：既至，脱其械，且谕之曰： 若曹不知上以便宜命我，故诉我专僣，我今不汝罪，且命汝以官，能竭忠自赎乎？ 
现代文：云南山路险远，盗贼出设，旅客通行不便。赛典赤在一些适当地方建立城镇，每镇以土人酋长一人为吏，一人为百夫长，负责治安，如果行人遭到抢劫，问二人之罪。有少数土著官吏抱怨赛典赤，向朝廷诬告他专断独行。
English: Yunnan's mountain roads are far and narrow, thieves are out in force, and it is inconvenient for travelers to pass. Sai Dianchi established towns in some suitable places. Each town had an aboriginal chief as an official and a centurion responsible for public security. If a pedestrian was robbed, two people would be charged. A few aboriginal officials complained about Sai Dianchi and falsely accused him of arbitrarily going his own way to the court.

古文：皆叩头拜谢曰： 某有死罪，平章既生之而又官之，誓以死报。 
现代文：朝廷知是诬告，将他们押回云南送赛典赤处治。赛典赤把他们释放了，仍旧委任他们为官。这伙人叩头拜谢道 ：我们诬告，本有死罪，今平章不杀，还让我们为官，我等当誓死报效。 
English: The imperial court knew that it was a false accusation, and sent them back to Yunnan to be punished by Saiten Chih. Saiten Chih released them, but still appointed them as officials. This group of people bowed their heads and said, "We made a false accusation, which is a capital crime. Now, Pingzhang won't kill us, but he still made us officials. We should pledge our lives to do our duty."

古文：交趾叛服不常，湖广省发兵屡征不利，赛典赤遣人谕以逆顺祸福，且约为兄弟。
现代文：交趾叛服无常，湖广省多次派兵征讨，都不利。赛典赤派人去交趾讲明叛必招祸，服必有福的道理，并约定结为兄弟。
English: It is unfavorable to repeatedly send troops from Hougang Province to recruit soldiers. Saiten sent people to Kotaishi to explain the truth that rebellion will bring disaster and obedience will be blessed, and they agreed to become brothers.

古文：交趾王大喜，亲至云南，赛典赤郊迎，待以宾礼，遂乞永为藩臣。
现代文：交趾国王大喜，亲至云南，赛典赤到郊外迎接，以贵宾相待。国王请求永为大元朝的藩臣。
English: The king was overjoyed to meet him and went to Yunnan to meet him. Saiten Chung went to the suburbs to welcome him and treated him as an honored guest. The king asked him to always be a vassal of the Great Yuan Dynasty.

古文：萝盘甸叛，往征之，有忧色，从者问故，赛典赤曰： 吾非忧出征也，忧汝曹冒锋镝，不幸以无辜而死；又忧汝曹劫虏平民，使不聊生，及民叛，则又从而征之耳。 
现代文：萝甸反叛，赛典赤领兵讨伐，面有忧色，随行者问他何故，他说 ：我并非为出征而忧，忧的是你们可能在战争中牺牲，忧的是你们会掳掠平民，使他们不得聊生，必将重新反叛，则又要兴兵征讨。 
English: When Lodya rebelled and Sedensky led the Red Army into battle, his face was gloomy. When a follower asked him why, he said, "I'm not worried about going to war. I'm worried that you may be killed in the war. I'm worried that you will kidnap civilians and make it impossible for them to make a living. I'm sure you will rebel again, and then you will have to raise an army to fight."

古文：师次萝盘城，三日不降，诸将请攻之，赛典赤不可，遣使以理谕之。
现代文：蒙军围困萝城三日，守军不降，诸将要求攻打，赛典赤不准，遣使去劝降。
English: The Mongolian army besieged Lucheng for three days. The defenders did not surrender. The generals demanded an attack. Sai Dian was not allowed, and sent an envoy to persuade them to surrender.

古文：萝盘主曰： 谨奉命。 
现代文：萝酋长答应归降，但过了三天仍无行动。
English: Chief Law agreed to surrender, but after three days there was still no action.

古文：越三日又不降，诸将奋勇请进兵，赛典赤又不可。俄而将卒有乘城进攻者，赛典赤大怒，遽鸣金止之，召万户叱责之曰： 天子命我安抚云南，未尝命以杀戮也。无主将命而擅攻，于军法当诛。 
现代文：诸将再次请求进攻，赛典赤还是不准。有将士不听，发起进攻，赛典赤大怒，立即鸣锣收兵，召万户斥责道： 天子命我安抚云南，未曾命我杀戮。没有主将命令而擅自攻城，当按军法处死。 
English: The generals once again requested an attack, but Saiten Chah was still not allowed. Some generals did not listen and launched an attack, which made Saiten Chah furious. He immediately called for reinforcements and summoned all households to rebuke him, saying, "Heaven's Son ordered me to pacify Yunnan, but He did not order me to kill. If you attack the city without the order of the commander-in-chief, you should be executed according to military law."

古文：命左右缚之。
现代文：命左右推出斩首。
English: He was beheaded right before his death.

古文：诸将叩首，请俟城下之日从事。
现代文：诸将忙叩头请求待城攻下之日再加惩治。
English: The generals will hastily kowtow and ask to wait until the day the city is taken and then punish them.

古文：萝盘主闻之曰： 平章宽仁如此，吾拒命不祥。 
现代文：萝酋长闻此事，不禁叹息道 ：平章如此宽大仁义，我若拒不投诚是不应该的。 
English: When Chief Luo heard about this, he couldn't help but sigh: "Pingzhang is so generous and benevolent, I shouldn't have refused to surrender.

古文：乃举国出降。
现代文：于是举国出降。
English: As a result, the entire country surrendered.

古文：将卒亦释不诛。
现代文：原不听命而擅自进攻的将卒，也释放不杀。
English: The soldiers who had disobeyed orders and attacked without authorization were also released.

古文：由是西南诸夷翕然款附。
现代文：从此以后，西南诸夷都相继归顺。
English: From then on, all the states in the southwestern part of the country surrendered one after another.

古文：夷酋每来见，例有所献纳，赛典赤悉分赐从官，或以给贫民，秋毫无所私；为酒食劳酋长，制衣冠袜履，易其卉服草履。酋皆感悦。
现代文：各族酋长每次来拜见，照例有所贡献，赛典赤都分给随从官员或贫民，自己丝毫不取；设宴慰劳各酋长，以上好的衣服鞋袜更换酋长们的蓑衣草鞋，酋长们无不心悦诚服。
English: Every time the chiefs of all ethnic groups come to visit, they usually make some contribution. The red rations are all distributed to the officials or the poor, and they do not take any of it for themselves. A banquet is held to console the chiefs, and the above-mentioned good clothes, shoes and socks are replaced by the chiefs' straw-colored dress shoes. The chiefs are sincerely pleased.

古文：赛典赤居云南六年，至元十六年卒，年六十九，百姓巷哭，葬鄯阐北门。
现代文：赛典赤在云南主政六年，至元十六年卒，百姓为之痛哭，葬于鄯阐北门。
English: Saiten Chak ruled Yunnan for six years, and died in the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty. The people wept for him, and he was buried at the North Gate of Yunnan.

古文：交趾王遣使者十二人，齐绖为文致祭，其辞有 生我育我，慈父慈母 之语，使者号泣震野。
现代文：交趾国王遣使十二人身着丧服来吊唁，其祭文中有 生我育我，慈父慈母 之语，吊唁使者哭声震野。
English: King Kota sent twelve people dressed in mourning clothes to offer condolences. In his ritual, there are the words "Born and raised me, loving father and mother" and the cries of the condolence messengers.

古文：至元十六年，迁帅大理，以军抵金齿、蒲、骠、曲蜡、缅国，招安夷寨三百，籍户十二万二百，定租赋，置邮传，立卫兵，归以驯象十二入贡，有旨赏金五十两、衣二袭，麾下士赏银有差。
现代文：太祖思念赛典赤的功劳，诏令云南省的大臣，完全遵行赛典赤的成规，不得任意改变。大德元年，赠守仁佐运安远济美功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、咸阳王，谥 忠惠 。有子五人，长子纳速剌丁，三子忽辛各有传。纳速剌丁，赛典赤赡思丁之长子，官至中奉大夫、云南诸路宣慰使都元帅。至元十六年调任大理元军统帅，率军至金齿、蒲、骠、曲蜡、缅国，招安夷寨三百座，计人口十二万二百户，规定租赋，设置邮传，建立卫兵。回朝时以驯象十二头入贡。世祖赏金五十两，衣二套，对所部士卒亦各有赏银。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, Emperor Taizu thought about the merits of Saiten Chao, and ordered the ministers of Yunnan Province to fully comply with the rules of Saiten Chao, and not to change them arbitrarily. In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, he bestowed the title of Ninsazun Anyuan Jimei meritorious minister, grand master, Kaifu Yi with three divisions, Shangzhu Guo, Xianyang Wang, and Zou Zhonghui. There were five sons, the eldest son was Nahao Ding, and the third son was Ku Xin. Nahao Ding, the eldest son of Saiten Chao

古文：会其父赡思丁殁，云南省臣于诸夷失抚绥之方，世祖忧之，近臣以纳速剌丁为言。
现代文：赛典赤赡思丁死后，云南省臣对于诸夷又无抚绥策略，世祖为之忧虑。左右近臣推荐纳速剌丁。
English: After the death of Sai Dian Chia Ying Ding, the governor of Yunnan Province was worried about Zhu Yi's no-pickup strategy. His close advisers on both sides recommended Nahao Pickup Ding.

古文：十七年，授资德大夫、云南行中书省左丞，寻升右丞。
现代文：至元十七年，授纳速剌丁为资德大夫、云南行中书省左丞，不久升为右丞。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hayabusa Ding was awarded the title of Zi De Daifu, and was promoted to Yunnan Province in the middle of the year as Shusho Zuojo, and was soon promoted to Ujo.

古文：建言三事：其一谓云南省规措所造金簿贸易病民，宜罢；其一谓云南有省，有宣慰司，又有都元帅府，近宣慰司已奏罢，而元帅府尚存，臣谓行省既兼领军民，则元帅府亦在所当罢；其一谓云南官员子弟入质，臣谓达官子弟当遣，余宜罢。
现代文：纳速剌丁向朝廷提出三条建议：其一，云南省规定以所造金簿进行贸易，于民不利，应废；其二，云南省有宣慰司，又有都元帅府，近来宣慰司已奏准撤销，而元帅府尚存，臣认为行省既兼领军民，则元帅府也应当撤销；其三，云南官员子弟入京师作为人质，臣认为达官子弟当送京作为人质，其他一般官员子弟就不必了。
English: Naso Ding put forward three suggestions to the imperial court: First, the regulations of Yunnan Province to trade with the made gold books were unfavorable to the people and should be abolished; second, Yunnan Province had a Consolation Division and a General Marshal's Office. Recently, the Consolation Division had been approved and revoked, but the General Marshal's Office still existed. The minister believed that since the province led both the military and the people, the General Marshal's Office should also be revoked; third, the children of Yunnan officials entered Beijing as hostages. The minister believed that the children of high-ranking officials should be sent to Beijing as hostages, and other general

古文：奏可。
现代文：朝廷允准其所奏三事。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：二十一年，进荣禄大夫、平章政事。
现代文：至元二十一年，晋升纳速剌丁为荣禄大夫、平章政事。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Naxing Ding was promoted to honor doctor, and Ping Zhang to political affairs.

古文：奏减合剌章冗官，岁省俸金九百余两；屯田课程专人掌之，岁得五千两。
现代文：他奏请裁减合剌章地方的冗官，每年可省俸金九百余两；屯田课税由专人管理，每年可收入五千两。
English: He submitted a petition to reduce the number of redundant officials in the Heshizhang region, which can save more than 900 yuan per year in salaries; the taxation of the military cantonment is managed by a special person, and can earn 5,000 yuan per year.

古文：二十三年，以合剌章蒙古军千人，从皇太子脱欢征交趾，论功赏银二千两。二十八年，进拜陕西行省平章政事。
现代文：二十八年，拜陕西行省平章政事。
English: In the 28th year, Bai Shaanxi went to the provincial government of Pingzhang.

古文：二十九年，以疾卒。
现代文：二十九年病卒。
English: He had been ill for 29 years.

古文：赠推诚佐理协德功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、中书左丞相，封延安王。
现代文：赠推诚佐理协德功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、中书左丞相，封延安王。
English: He was given the titles of a meritorious vassal, grand master, Keifu giri to Sanji, Shangzhu Guo, Chushu Zuojo, and Yan'an Wang.

古文：子十二人：伯颜，中书平章政事；乌马儿，江浙行省平章政事；紥法儿，荆湖宣慰使；忽先，云南行省平章政事；沙的，云南行省左丞；阿容，太常礼仪院使；伯颜察儿，中书平章政事，佩金虎符，赠太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、中书左丞相、奉元王，谥忠宪。忽辛，至元初以世臣子备宿卫，世祖善其应对。
现代文：有子十二人，著名者为伯颜、乌马儿、答刂法儿、忽先、沙的、阿容、伯颜察儿。忽辛，赛典赤赡思丁之第三子，至元初即以功臣贵族之子而入宿卫军。
English: He had twelve sons, the most famous of whom were Boyan, Umar, Dagonfar, Khuzen, Sadi, Arong, and Boyanchar. Khuzin, the third son of Saitenakasiddin, entered the Home Guard at the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty as the son of a meritorious nobleman.

古文：至元十四年，授兵部郎中。
现代文：至元十四年，授兵部郎中。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he became a junior member of the Military Training Department.

古文：明年，出为河南等路宣慰司同知。
现代文：十五年，出任河南等路宣慰司同知。
English: For fifteen years, he served as the head of the Henan and other provinces' Propaganda and Consolation Department.

古文：俾侍左右，出入房闼无间，悉放还，令遍谕其党。
现代文：河南地方多强盗，往往群聚山林，劫杀过往旅客，官军无力剿捕。忽辛实行招安政策，遣土豪持官府文书去晓谕盗贼。
English: There are many robbers in Henan Province, and they often gather in the mountains and forests, robbing and killing passing travelers, and the government army is powerless to catch them. The recruitment policy is implemented in haste, and local heroes are sent with official documents to tell the thieves.

古文：数日后，招集其为首者十辈来，身长各七尺余，罗拜庭下，顾视异常，众悉惊怖失措。
现代文：不久，贼二人自动投诚，忽辛赐他们冠巾，对他们说： 过去你们做贼，如今既然投诚，就是良民，要安分守己。 
English: Before long, the two thieves voluntarily surrendered, and he hastily gave them a kerchief and said to them, "In the past, you were thieves, but now that you have surrendered, you are good people, and you should keep to yourselves."

古文：忽辛命吏籍其姓名为民，俾随侍左右，夜则令卧户外，时呼而饮食之，各得其欢心。
现代文：把他们放回，令他们将政府招降的告示转告其同党。数日后，又招来为首的盗贼十来人。忽辛命下属官吏登记其姓名，使他们侍奉于左右，夜间住在户外，时常召他们入室赐予饮食，皆大欢喜。
English: A few days later, a dozen or so thieves, led by the leader, were summoned again. The officials under the order of Hu Xin registered their names, made them serve on the left and right, live outdoors at night, and often called them into the house to give them food. They were all very happy.

古文：群盗闻之，相继款附。
现代文：其他盗贼也相继前来投诚。
English: Other thieves also came one after another.

古文：二十一年，授云南诸路转运使。
现代文：至元二十一年，授云南诸路转运使。
English: In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the post of Yunnan Provincial Road Transport Envoy.

古文：明年，转陕西道。
现代文：二十二年，转为陕西道转运使。
English: Twenty-two years later, he was transferred to the post of Shaanxi Provincial Transportation Envoy.

古文：又明年，授燕南河北道宣慰司同知，寻除南京总管。
现代文：二十三年，授燕南河北道宣慰司同知，不久任命为南京总管。
English: In 233, he was awarded the title of Yangnan and Hebei Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Secretary, and was soon appointed as the head of Nanjing.

古文：三十年，授两浙盐运使。
现代文：三十年，授两浙盐运使。
English: For 30 years, he was awarded the title of "Zhejiang Salt Transport Envoy."

古文：大德九年，进江东道宣慰使，改陕西行台御史中丞，再改云南行省右丞。
现代文：大德元年，晋升为江东道宣慰使，后改任陕西行台御史中丞，再改为云南行省右丞。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, he was promoted to the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Consolation of Jiangxi Province, and later he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History of Shaanxi Province, and then he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Right of Yunnan Province.

古文：既至，条具诸不便事言于宗王，请更张之，王不可，忽辛与左丞刘正驰还京师，有旨令宗王协力施行。
现代文：忽辛至云南后，向宗王呈报许多不便于民的政务，请改革更张，宗王不同意。忽辛与左丞刘正返回京师报告朝廷，朝廷旨令宗王协力施行忽辛所提改革建议。
English: After Qu Hsin went to Yunnan, he reported to King Zong that there were many government affairs that were inconvenient for the people. He requested that the reforms be changed, but King Zong did not agree. Qu Hsin and Zuo Liu were returning to Beijing to report to the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered King Zong to work together to implement the reform proposals proposed by Qu Hsin.

古文：由是一切病民之政，悉革而新之。
现代文：从此，一切有害于民的政务全加革新。
English: Since then, all government affairs that are harmful to the people have been completely reformed.

古文：豪民规避徭役，往往投充王府宿卫，有司不胜供给，忽辛按朝廷元额所无者，悉籍为民，去其宿卫三分之二。
现代文：豪民为逃避官府徭役，往往投入王府充当宿卫，官府对他们供应不暇。忽辛按朝廷原所规定王府宿卫人数，凡超出规定数额者，全登记为民，如此减去宿卫三分之二。
English: In order to escape the service of the government, wealthy people often entered the royal palace to serve as guards, and the government had no time to supply them. According to the original provisions of the imperial court, the number of guards in the royal palace was increased, and all those who exceeded the specified amount were registered as citizens, thus reducing the number of guards by two-thirds.

古文：马龙州酋谋叛，阴与外贼通，持所受宣敕纳贼以示信，事觉，宗王为左右所蔽，将释不问，忽辛与刘正反覆研鞫，反状尽得，竟斩之。
现代文：马龙州酋长谋反，暗中与外贼勾结。事情被揭发后，宗王为左右所蒙蔽，拟将已逮捕谋叛分子开释不问。忽辛与刘正反复审讯，尽得其反叛的罪状，一律处斩。
English: The chief of Malong County plotted a rebellion and secretly colluded with foreign thieves. After the affair was exposed, King Zong was deceived by the left and right, and planned to release the arrested conspirators without question. Hu Xin and Liu are being repeatedly interrogated, and they have been found guilty of rebellion, and they will all be executed.

古文：军粮支给，地理远近不同，吏夤缘为奸，忽辛籍军户姓名及仓廪处所，为更番支给，吏奸始除。
现代文：军粮的供应，地理远近不同，官吏从中作弊，忽辛登记军户姓名及仓廪处所，轮流支给，官吏不能从中舞弊。
English: The supply of military rations varies widely from place to place. Officials should not cheat in this regard. The names of military households and the locations of storehouses should be registered in a timely manner. Payments should be made on a rotating basis. Officials should not cheat in this regard.

古文：先是，赡思丁为云南平章时，建孔子庙为学校，拨田五顷，以供祭祀教养。
现代文：原先赡思丁为云南平章时，曾建立孔庙作为学校，拨田五顷以供祭祀教育费用。
English: Originally, when Yan Siding was the Yunnan Pingzhang, he had established a Confucius Temple as a school, allocating five hectares of land to cover the cost of sacrificial education.

古文：赡思丁卒，田为大德寺所有，忽辛按庙学旧籍夺归之。
现代文：赡思丁死后，学田为大德寺所占，忽辛仍按学庙旧日籍册，夺归学庙。
English: After the death of Yi Siding, the school field was occupied by the Daede Temple, and Huxing still followed the old Japanese register of the school temple and returned to the school temple.

古文：乃复下诸郡邑遍立庙学，选文学之士为之教官，文风大兴。
现代文：又在诸郡县普遍设立学校，选文学之士为教官，于是文风大兴。
English: In addition, schools were generally established in various counties, and literary figures were selected as instructors. As a result, the literary style flourished.

古文：王府畜马繁多，悉纵之郊，败民禾稼，而牧人又在民家宿食，室无宁居。
现代文：王府养马繁多，都牧放于城郊，损害民间庄稼，而且牧马人又在百姓家食宿，扰害平民。
English: There are many horses kept in the royal palace, all of which are pastured on the outskirts of the city, damaging folk crops. Moreover, the wranglers eat and sleep in people's homes, disturbing the civilians.

古文：广南酋沙奴素强悍，宋时尝赐以金印，云南诸部悉平，独此梗化。忽辛遣使诱致，待之以礼，留数月不遣，酋请还，忽辛曰： 汝欲还，可纳印来。 
现代文：忽辛在适当地方建立牧场，建屋数十间作为牧所，人民因此得以安宁。蒙古军平定云南后，沙奴顽梗不服。忽辛派人去把他请来，待之以礼，留住数月。沙奴要求回去，忽辛说： 回去可以，但必须交出印来。 
English: After the Mongolian army subdued Yunnan, Shanu stubbornly refused to submit. Huxin sent someone to invite him, and he stayed for several months. Shanu asked to go back, and Huxin said, "You can go back, but you must hand over the seal."

古文：乌蛮等租赋，岁发军征索乃集，忽辛以利害榜谕诸蛮，不遣一卒，而租赋咸足。
现代文：沙奴不得已而把印交出。忽辛设酒宴款待，并劝他入朝去拜见皇帝。世祖大喜。大德五年，缅国国王恃其地形险固，不肯向元朝称臣，忽辛遣人去告谕说 ：我是老赛典赤平章之子，一心遵循先父的遗训，凡我官府对你国有不便的事，完全为你们更改。 
English: In the 5th year of the Great German Era, the king of Burma, fearing that his territory was too dangerous, refused to offer his allegiance to the Yuan Dynasty, and sent a messenger to Huksin to say, "I am the son of the old Saiten Red Banner, and I wholeheartedly follow my father's last instruction, and I will completely change for you all the inconvenient things that my government has done to your country."

古文：俄有为飞语及符谶以惑宗王者，忽辛引刘正密为奏驰报，朝廷遣使临问，凡造言之徒悉诛之，忽辛偕使者还觐。大德八年，出为四川行省左丞，改江浙行省。
现代文：缅国国王闻知，便与使者同来，献白象一头给朝廷，成宗赐国王以 世子 称号。乌蛮等部应交租赋，每年要派军队去索取，忽辛榜示诸部，说明利害，不派一兵一卒，租赋都送来了。大德八年，出任四川行省左丞，后改任江浙行省左丞。
English: When the king of Burma heard of this, he came with an emissary to offer a white elephant to the imperial court, and Chengzong gave the king the title of heir. The barbarian and other departments should pay the rent, and every year they should send troops to collect it. He showed the departments and explained the interests, and did not send a soldier, but sent the rent. In the eighth year of the Great German Empire, he served as Sichuan Provincial Secretary, and later he was appointed as Jiangsu Provincial Secretary.

古文：至大元年，拜荣禄大夫、江西行省平章政事。
现代文：至大元年，拜荣禄大夫、江西行省平章政事。
English: By the first year of the Great Leap Forward, Dr. Bai Ronglu went to Jiangxi Province for political affairs.

古文：明年，以母老谢职归养。
现代文：至大二年，辞职回家奉养老母。
English: Two years into her sophomore year, she quit her job to be a stay-at-home mom.

古文：又明年正月卒。
现代文：至大三年正月卒。
English: He graduated in the first month of his third year of university.

古文：天历元年，赠守德宣惠敏政功臣、上柱国、雍国公，谥忠简。
现代文：天历元年，赠守德宣惠敏政功臣、上柱国、雍国公，谥 忠简 。
English: In the first year of the Tenryaku era, he bestowed the title of De Xuan Huimin to the political hero, Shangzhu Guo, Yong Guo Guo, and Zou Zhongjian.

古文：布鲁海牙，畏吾人也。
现代文：布鲁海牙，畏兀族人。
English: Blue Hague, fear of the Yao people.

古文：祖牙儿八海牙，父吉台海牙，俱以功为其国世臣。
现代文：祖父名牙儿八海牙，父名吉台海牙，均为本国有功世臣。
English: His grandfather, Nagara Hachi Hague, and his father, Yoshitai Hague, were both meritorious national dignitaries.

古文：布鲁海牙幼孤，依舅氏家就学，未几，即善其国书，尤精骑射。
现代文：布鲁海牙年幼丧父，寄学于母舅家中，很快就能识读本族文字，尤其精于骑射。
English: Bru Hague lost his father at a young age and was sent to boarding school at his maternal uncle's house. He was soon able to read the local language and was particularly good at riding and shooting.

古文：年十八，随其主内附，充宿卫。
现代文：十八岁时随本国国王归附于太祖，充当宿卫。
English: At the age of eighteen, he followed his country's king to join his great-grandfather and served as a night watchman.

古文：太祖西征，布鲁海牙扈从，不避劳苦，帝嘉其勤，赐以羊马毡帐，又以居里可汗女石抹氏配之。
现代文：太祖西征，布鲁海牙扈从，不辞劳苦。太祖为嘉奖其勤勉，除赐羊马毡帐外，还将居里可汗之女石抹氏许配他为妻。
English: The great-great-grandfather went to the West to conquer, and Bruhaigars followed him, and worked tirelessly. To reward his diligence, the great-grandfather, in addition to giving him a yakitori tent, also betrothed his wife to Shi Maki, the daughter of Kuri Khan.

古文：太祖崩，诸王来会，选使燕京总理财币。
现代文：太祖崩后，受命到燕京去总理财政。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, he was ordered to go to Yanjing to visit the Prime Minister of Finance.

古文：使还，庄圣太后闻其廉谨，以名求之于太宗，凡中宫军民匠户之在燕京、中山者，悉命统之，又赐以中山店舍园田、民户二十，授真定路达鲁花赤。
现代文：后又受命统领庄圣太后在燕京、中山等处的军民匠户。随后授任真定路达鲁花赤。
English: Later, he was also ordered to lead the military and civilian artisan households in Yanjing, Zhongshan and other places by Empress Dowager Zhuang Sheng. Subsequently, he was given the post of Zhending Lu Daruhana.

古文：辛卯，拜燕南诸路廉访使，佩金虎符，赐民户十。
现代文：太宗三年，拜燕南诸路廉访使，佩金虎符。不久又授为断事官。
English: In the third year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Bai Yan Nan Zhu Lu, a corrupt envoy, was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge. Soon after, he was awarded the post of adjudicator.

古文：未几，授断事官，使职如故。时断事官得专生杀，多倚势作威，而布鲁海牙小心谨密，慎于用刑。
现代文：当时，有些断事官凭借其生杀予夺之权来作威作福，而布鲁海牙则小心谨慎，不滥用刑，执法公允。
English: At that time, some judges used their power of life and death to make threats, while Bru-Hague was careful not to abuse punishment and enforced the law fairly.

古文：既而不惧，乃曰： 误殴人死，情有可宥，子而能孝，义无可诛。 
现代文：有个百姓误杀了人，官府要将他置以重刑，而其子请求代父受罪。布鲁海牙说： 误打死了人，情有可原；子孝代父受罪，也不应诛。 
English: There was a commoner who killed a man by mistake, and the government wanted to impose a heavy sentence on him, but his son asked that his father be punished instead. BruHague said: If you kill a man by mistake, there is no reason for it; if your son is punished instead of your father, you should not be punished either.

古文：遂并释之，使出银以资葬埋，且呼死者家谕之，其人悦从。
现代文：把父子二人都释放了，只是让他们出钱安葬被误杀的人，并将死者家属叫来说明道理。
English: They released both father and son, only to make them pay for the burial of the man who was killed by mistake, and called the dead man's family to explain the reason.

古文：是时法制未定，奴有罪者，主得专杀，布鲁海牙知其非法而不能救，尝出金赎死者数十人。
现代文：大家都口服心服。当时，法制未备，奴婢有罪，主人有权处死。布鲁海牙明知被主人处死的奴婢并无死罪，但又不能援救，便出钱为奴婢赎罪，被他赎出的有数十人。
English: At that time, the legal system was not ready, slaves and maids were guilty, and the master had the right to execute. Bru Hague, knowing that the slaves and maids who were executed by their master did not have the death penalty, but could not save them, offered money to atone for the slaves and maids, and he redeemed dozens of people.

古文：有窃妓逃者，吏论当死，布鲁海牙曰： 败乱纲常，罪固宜死；此妓也，岂可例论！ 命杖之。
现代文：每有军事行动，服兵役者往往募人代替，这些人入伍后又多逃跑。于是朝廷规定：凡雇人代服兵役者，杖刑一百，逃跑者处死。
English: Whenever there was a military operation, those who had served in the military were often recruited to replace them, and more of these people ran away after enlisting in the army. Therefore, the Imperial Court stipulated that anyone who hired someone to serve in the military would be sentenced to 100 strokes of the cane, and those who ran away would be put to death.

古文：其执法平允类如此。世祖即位，择信臣宣抚十道，命布鲁海牙使真定。
现代文：布鲁海牙与断事官卜只儿在顺天路募兵，雇人代役者有一万一千户，入伍后逃跑者十二人，按法令都要受到惩处。布鲁海牙怜悯他们，向朝廷呈请，减轻了对他们的惩罚。世祖即位，挑选一些诚实可靠的官员任十道宣抚使，命布鲁海牙为真定宣抚使。
English: Blue Hague and the adjudicator, Bu Tiao'er, were on their way to recruit soldiers. There were eleven thousand families who hired substitutes, and twelve people who ran away after enlisting in the army were punished according to the law. Blue Hague took pity on them, petitioned the imperial court, and mitigated their punishment. When the founder ascended the throne, he selected some honest and reliable officials to serve as ten-way envoys, and ordered Blue Hague to be the true envoy.

古文：真定富民出钱贷人者，不逾时倍取其息，布鲁海牙正其罪，使偿者息如本而止，后定为令。
现代文：真定的富豪人家放高利贷，虽不过期也要加倍取息。布鲁海牙将他们治罪，使债务人付息不超过本钱，定为制度。
English: The Bru-Hague made it a rule to criminalize the truly wealthy who made usurious loans and charged double the interest even if the loan did not mature. The debtor had to pay no more interest than the principal.

古文：中统钞法行，以金银为本，本至，乃降新钞。
现代文：朝廷行中统钞法，规定以金银为本，有本的地方才发行新钞。
English: The Imperial Court issued the Centralized Banknote Law, stipulating that gold and silver should be used as the base, and new banknotes should be issued only in places with a base.

古文：时庄圣太后已命取真定金银，由是真定无本，钞不可得。
现代文：而庄圣太后已将真定的金银取走，新钞不能在真定发行。
English: However, the Empress Dowager Zhuang Sheng has already taken away the gold and silver of the real setting, and the new banknotes cannot be issued in the real setting.

古文：布鲁海牙遣幕僚邢泽往谓平章王文统曰： 昔奉太后旨，金银悉送至上京。
现代文：布鲁海牙派幕僚邢泽去报告平章政事王文统，说真定的金银全为太后取走送到上京。
English: Blue Hague sent a staff member, Heze, to report to the governor of Pingzhang Province, Wang Wenzhong, that all the gold and silver had been taken away by the empress dowager and sent to Beijing.

古文：俄迁顺德等路宣慰使，佩金虎符。
现代文：真定为南北交通要地，居民商贾甚多，今旧钞已经废除，而新钞又不能发行流通，如何办理政事。
English: Now that the old banknotes have been abolished, and the new banknotes cannot be issued and circulated, how should political affairs be handled?

古文：来朝，帝命坐，慰劳之，赐以海东青鹘。
现代文：王文统立即向真定发行新钞五千锭，民商两便。不久，调布鲁海牙为顺德等路宣慰使，佩金虎符。
English: Wang Wenzhong immediately issued a new 5,000-baht banknote to Zhending, which was used by both citizens and merchants. Soon after, the city of The Hague was changed to Shunde and other cities, and the gold tiger emblem was added.

古文：至元二年秋卒，年六十九。
现代文：至元二年卒，享年六十九岁。
English: He passed away two years later, at the age of 69.

古文：布鲁海牙性孝友，造大宅于燕京，自畏吾国迎母来居，事之，得禄不入私室。
现代文：布鲁海牙禀性对父母孝敬，对人友爱，在燕京造一大宅，将母亲从畏兀国接来奉养。
English: Blu Haiga had a strong sense of filial piety towards his parents and love for others. He built a large house in Yanjing and brought his mother from the country of Wuyi to look after him.

古文：幼时叔父阿里普海牙欺之，尽有其产，及贵显，筑室宅旁，迎阿里普海牙居之。
现代文：年幼时虽曾受叔父阿里普海牙的欺侮，把他家中的财产完全占有，但布鲁海牙成为显贵之后，不计前嫌，还是把他的叔父接来京师居住。
English: Although he had been bullied by his uncle Arip Hague when he was young and had taken over his family's property completely, after Bru Hague became a dignitary, he still brought his uncle to live in Beijing, regardless of his previous misgivings.

古文：弟益特思海牙以宿憾为言，常慰谕之，终无间言。帝尝赐以太府绫绢五千匹，丝絮相等，弟求四之一纳其国赋，尽与之，无吝色。
现代文：其弟益特思海牙与他不和睦，布鲁海牙还常常开导他，又把皇帝赏赐的绫绢丝絮，全部给其弟去交纳国赋，兄弟终于相处无间。
English: His younger brother, Eötvös Häggi, did not get along with him, but Bru Häggi often enlightened him, and he gave his younger brother all the money the emperor had given him to pay the state tribute. The brothers finally got along well.

古文：初布鲁海牙拜廉使，命下之日，子希宪适生，喜曰： 吾闻古以官为姓，天其以廉为吾宗之姓乎！ 
现代文：朝廷拜布鲁海牙为廉访使。下诏任命的那天，正是其子希宪出生之日，布鲁海牙非常高兴地说： 吾闻古代以官为姓，受任为廉访使，是上天以 廉 为我宗族之姓。 
English: On the day of his appointment by imperial edict, which coincided with the birth of his son He Xian, Bru Hague said with great pleasure: "I have heard that in ancient times officials were called by their surnames, and that I was appointed as an envoy to investigate corruption.

古文：子希闵、希宪、希恕、希尹、希颜、希愿、希鲁、希贡、希中、希括，孙五十三人，登显仁者代有之，希宪自有传。
现代文：所以其后代子孙皆以廉为姓。布鲁海牙去世后，大德初年，赠仪同三司、大司徒，追封魏国公，谥 孝懿 。有子十人，其中廉希宪自有传。
English: Therefore, his descendants and descendants all have the surname of Lian. After the death of Bru Hague, in the first year of the Great German Empire, he bestowed the title of the Third Division, the Grand Steward, the title of the Duke of Wei, and the title of the Filial Piety. He had ten children, of whom Lian Xixian is his own biography.

古文：高智耀高智耀，河西人，世仕夏国。曾祖逸，大都督府尹；祖良惠，右丞相。
现代文：高智耀，河西人，世代在西夏为官，曾祖高逸为大都督府尹，祖父高良惠为右丞相。
English: Gao Zhiyao, a native of Hexi, has been an official in Western Xia for generations. His great-great-grandfather Gao Yiyi was the Grand Governor Fu Yin, and his grandfather Gao Liang Hui was the Minister of the Right.

古文：智耀登本国进士第，夏亡，隐贺兰山。
现代文：智耀亦考中西夏进士，西夏亡后，隐居贺兰山中。
English: Zhi Yao also passed the middle school entrance examination as Xixia Jin Shi. After Xixia's death, he lived in seclusion in the mountains of Helan.

古文：太宗访求河西故家子孙之贤者，众以智耀对，召见将用之，遽辞归。皇子阔端镇西凉，儒者皆隶役，智耀谒藩邸，言儒者给复已久，一旦与厮养同役，非便，请除之。
现代文：太宗应河西众人的推荐，召他出来做官，智耀坚决推辞。皇太子阔端镇守西凉时，命儒生服徭役，智耀至王府对皇太子说，儒生从来是免于服役的，如今把他们与一般人对待，不当，请收回成命。
English: In response to the recommendation of many people in the west of the river, Emperor Taizong called him to come out to be an official, and Zhiyao firmly refused. When the crown prince, Kuo Duan, was guarding the west, he ordered the Confucian students to serve as guards. Zhiyao went to the royal palace and said to the crown prince that the Confucian students had always been exempt from service, but now they were treated like ordinary people, which was inappropriate. Please take back their lives.

古文：皇子从其言。
现代文：皇子听取了他的意见。
English: The prince listened to his opinion.

古文：欲奏官之，不就。宪宗即位，智耀入见，言： 儒者所学尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之道，自古有国家者，用之则治，不用则否，养成其材，将以资其用也。宜蠲免徭役以教育之。 
现代文：宪宗即位后，智耀入朝拜见皇帝，再次奏请免除儒生徭役，他说： 儒生所学的是尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武治国之道，自古为君王的，用他们则国家强盛，不用则国家衰败。今天应注意培养人材，以备将来任用，所以应免除儒生徭役，让他们能多受教育。 
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xianzong, Zhi Yao went to the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor and once again appealed for the exemption of Confucian eunuchs. He said, "Confucian scholars have learned the way of governing the country through the teachings of Confucius, Confucius, Confucius, Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu. Since ancient times, emperors have used them to make the country strong, and those who do not use them have made the country weak. Today, we should pay attention to the training of human resources for future appointments, so we should exempt Confucian eunuchs so that they can receive more education.

古文：帝问： 儒家何如巫医？ 
现代文：宪宗也采纳了他的意见，诏令免除海内儒士徭役。
English: Emperor Gensong also adopted his opinion and issued a decree exempting Confucian scholars at sea from military service.

古文：智耀又言： 国初庶政草创，纲纪未张，宜仿前代，置御史台以纠肃官常。 
现代文：世祖即位前就闻知智耀贤能，即位后召见他，与他反复辩论儒家学说对治国的重要，智耀引古证今滔滔不绝，世祖佩服他见识渊博，专铸官印，用以签发免除儒士徭役的公文。
English: Before his enthronement, the founder of the dynasty had heard of the wisdom and virtue of Zhi Yao. After his enthronement, he was summoned to meet him and repeatedly debated with him the importance of Confucianism in governing the country. Zhi Yao's testimonies are now voluminous. The founder of the dynasty admired his profound knowledge and specially cast official seal, which was used to issue official documents exempting Confucianists from the post of eunuch.

古文：至元五年立御史台，用其议也。
现代文：这时，淮、蜀一带儒生被俘者，均降为奴隶，智耀奏请释放，世祖允准，并拜他为翰林学士，巡视各县郡。
English: At this time, all the Confucian prisoners in the Huai and Shu regions were reduced to slavery. Zhi Yaosong asked for their release, which was granted by the patriarch, and he toured every county as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：擢西夏中兴等路提刑按察使。会西北藩王遣使入朝，谓： 本朝旧俗与汉法异，今留汉地，建都邑城郭，仪文制度，遵用汉法，其故何如？ 帝求报聘之使以析其问，智耀入见，请行，帝问所答，画一敷对，称旨，即日遣就道。至上京，病卒，帝为之震悼。
现代文：西北藩王遣使入朝，奏问本朝为何要采行汉人的文化和各项制度，世祖派智耀去进行解释说明，行至上京病卒。世祖为之哀悼。
English: The king of the northwestern domain sent an envoy to the imperial court to inquire as to why the Chinese culture and various systems were to be adopted by the imperial court. The ancestor sent Zhi Yao to explain the situation, and Zhi Yao became ill and died in Kyoto. The ancestor mourned for him.

古文：后赠崇文赞治功臣、金紫光禄大夫、司徒、柱国，追封宁国公，谥文忠。
现代文：后赠崇文赞治功臣、金紫光禄大夫、司徒、柱国，追封宁国公，谥 文忠 。
English: Later, he presented Chongwen Zanzhi to his meritorious vassal, Jin Zi Guanglu to his doctor, Sitou to his disciple, Zhu Guo to his son-in-law, Ning Guo to his son-in-law, and Wenzhong to his son-in-law.

古文：子睿。
现代文：子高睿。
English: Zi Gao Rui.

古文：睿，资廪直亮，智耀之北使也，携之以行。及卒，帝问其子安在，近臣以睿见，时年十六。
现代文：高睿禀性耿直，为人光明磊落。高智耀死后，世祖问其子何在，近侍之臣引睿进见，当时才十六岁。
English: After Gao Zhiyao's death, the ancestor asked his son where he was. He was only 16 years old at the time.

古文：授符宝郎，出入禁闼，恭谨详雅。
现代文：世祖授他为符宝郎，很久以后又授为唐兀卫指挥副使。
English: He was awarded the title of "Fu Baolang" by the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor of the Ancestor."

古文：久之，授唐兀卫指挥副使，历翰林待制、礼部侍郎。
现代文：嗣后历任翰林待制、礼部侍郎。
English: Subsequently, he was successively appointed as a member of the Kanrin wait staff and a member of the ceremonial staff.

古文：除嘉兴路总管，境内有宿盗，白昼掠民财，捕者积十数辈莫敢近。
现代文：高睿任嘉兴路总管时，境内老练的强盗白昼掠夺民财，官府虽派出衙役捕卒，亦将他们无可奈何。
English: When Gao Rui was appointed as the head of Jiaxing Road, experienced robbers in the territory plundered people's wealth in the daytime. Although the government sent officers to arrest them, they were helpless.

古文：睿下令，不旬日，生擒之，一郡以宁。
现代文：睿下令追捕，不到十天就生擒归案，全郡得以安宁。
English: Rui ordered a manhunt, and less than ten days later, the fugitive was apprehended, bringing peace to the entire county.

古文：擢江东道提刑按察使，部内草窃陆梁，声言围宣城。
现代文：升为江东道提刑按察使，境内草寇嚣张，声言要围攻宣城，州郡官胆小如鼠，不敢打开城门。
English: He was promoted to the post of inspector general of the Jiangshuo District, and the local bandits became arrogant and claimed to besiege Xuancheng. The prefectural and county officials were so timid that they did not dare to open the city gate.

古文：郡将怯懦，城门不开，睿召责之曰： 寇势方炽，官先示弱，民何所凭？ 即命密治兵卫，而洞开城门，听民出入贸易自便。既而寇以有备，不敢进，遂讨平之。
现代文：睿斥责他们： 寇势大张，将官们先示弱，老百姓去依靠谁？ 他密布卫军，洞开城门，听百姓自便出入贸易。盗寇知宣城有备，不敢冒进，睿派兵讨平之。
English: Rui reprimanded them: The bandits have made a great show of strength, the generals have shown weakness first, who will the people rely on? He has set up guards, opened the city gate, and listened to the people go out and come in for trade. The robbers know that Xuancheng is prepared, but they dare not enter, Rui sent soldiers to settle the dispute.

古文：除同佥行枢密院事，迁浙西道肃政廉访使。
现代文：委他为同佥行枢密院事，调升浙西肃政廉访使，拜为江南行召御史，晋升御史中丞，委为淮东道肃政廉访使。
English: He was appointed as a peer of the Privy Council, promoted to the envoy of Zhe Xi Sui Zhengyi, invited to the south of the Yangtze River, promoted to the vice-president of history, and appointed as the envoy of Huai Dao Sui Zhengyi.

古文：未几，果得真盗。
现代文：真州库钞三万缗被盗，官府大肆搜索，逮捕平民数百人。
English: Thirty-thousand baht of Manchukuo treasury notes were stolen, and the authorities conducted an extensive search, arresting hundreds of civilians.

古文：复拜南台御史中丞，务持大体，有儒者之风焉。
现代文：睿亲自详审，终得实情，当即释放。不久真盗缉拿归案。
English: Rui personally investigated in detail, finally got the truth, and was immediately released. Soon, he was arrested for theft.

古文：延祐元年卒，年六十有六。
现代文：复拜睿为南台御史。
English: Fubai Rui is the leader of Nantai Imperial History.

古文：累赠推忠佐理功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封宁国公，谥贞简。
现代文：高睿于延元年卒，六十六岁，累赠推忠佐理功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封宁国公，谥 贞简 。
English: Gao Rui, who was 66 years old when he graduated in the first year of the Yan era, was awarded the honorary titles of "loyal sari meritorious vassal," "taifu," "Kafu Yi Tong San Shi," "Shangju Guo," "posthumously awarded the title of "Ning Guo Guo" and "deceased Zhen Jian."

古文：子纳麟，官至太尉、江南诸道行御史台大夫。
现代文：子纳麟，官至太尉、江南诸道行御史台大夫。
English: His son, Nalin, rose to the rank of lieutenant and became the chief historian of the Southern Jiangsu provinces.

古文：铁哥铁哥，姓伽乃氏，迦叶弥儿人。
现代文：铁哥，姓伽乃氏，西域筑乾国人。
English: Tiege, surname Gano, a native of western Chikuken Province.

古文：迦叶弥儿者，西域筑乾国也。父斡脱赤与叔父那摩俱学浮屠氏。
现代文：父斡脱赤与叔父那摩都信奉佛教。
English: Both his father, Yuzuru Tokucha, and his uncle, Namo, are Buddhist.

古文：斡脱赤兄弟相谓曰： 世道扰攘，吾国将亡，东北有天子气，盍往归之。 
现代文：宪宗尊那摩为国师，授玉印，总管中国佛教事。斡脱赤也被重用，因去筑乾国劝其国王归附蒙古而被杀。元贞元年封代国公，谥 忠遂 。
English: Gensong respected Nama as the state teacher, bestowed the Jade Seal, and became the chief administrator of Chinese Buddhism. His good offices were also put to good use, and he was killed for going to Qian to persuade its king to join Mongolia. In the first year of Yuan Zhen's reign, he was appointed acting governor of the country, and served loyally.

古文：乃偕入见，太宗礼遇之。
现代文：斡脱赤死时，铁哥才四岁，禀性聪颖。
English: At the time of his death, Iron Brother was only four years old, and he was very intelligent.

古文：定宗师事那摩，以斡脱赤佩金符，奉使省民瘼。
现代文：随叔父那摩进见太宗。太宗知其为斡脱赤之子，甚是宠爱，世祖即位后召见他，命在孛罗丞相府充当卫士。
English: He accompanied his uncle Namo to see Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong knew that Namo was a favored son of Emperor Taizong. After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was summoned to Emperor Taizong's palace to serve as a guard.

古文：宪宗尊那摩为国师，授玉印，总天下释教。
现代文：至元十七年升铁哥为正议大夫、尚膳监，诏赐住宅于大明宫左侧，靠近皇宫，以便随时召见。十九年，调任同知宣徽院事，领尚膳监事。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Brother Tie was promoted to the position of the chief councilor and supervisor of meals. He was given a residence on the left side of the Daming Palace, close to the imperial palace, so that he could be summoned at any time. In the nineteenth year, he was transferred to the position of Tongzhi Xuanhui Academy official and supervisor of meals.

古文：铁哥谏曰： 臣鞫庾人，其母病，盗粳欲食母耳，请贷之。 牧人有盗割驼峰者，将诛之。铁哥曰： 生割驼峰，诚忍人也。
现代文：后又进升中奉大夫、司农寺达鲁花赤。有猎人误杀骆驼，守仓库的人偷盗粳米，牧人割取驼峰，世祖均命处死，铁哥认为用刑过重，力劝免除死刑，世祖一一听从。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of middle school doctor and the head of the farmers' temple. There was a hunter who killed a camel by mistake, a warehouse keeper who stole glutinous rice, a shepherd who cut off a camel's head. The patriarchs were all put to death. The iron brother thought that the punishment was too severe and urged that the death penalty be exempted. The patriarchs obeyed.

古文：然杀之，恐乖陛下仁恕心。 诏皆免死。二十二年，进正奉大夫，奏： 司农寺宜升为大司农司，秩二品，使天下知朝廷重农之意。 
现代文：至元二十二年，晋升正奉大夫，奏请将司农寺升为大司农司，其主管官员应为二品，使天下皆知朝廷重农之心。
English: In the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of Zheng Bong Daifu, and requested that the Sino-Temple be promoted to the Grand Secretary of Agriculture, and that the responsible officials should be second-class, so that the whole world would know the heart of the court's focus on agriculture.

古文：制可。
现代文：世祖允准。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：进资善大夫、司农。
现代文：铁哥又进为资善大夫、司农。
English: Tiege went on to become a senior doctor and a farmer.

古文：他日，又赐以玛瑙碗，谓铁哥曰： 此器先皇所用，朕今赐卿，以卿久侍先皇故也。 
现代文：建议宫廷膳食所需物品，由政府设立屯田供应，不取于民。桓州闹饥荒，百姓鬻儿卖女，铁哥奏请发官钱赎回民间被卖儿女。二十四年，从世祖征乃颜，兵至撒儿都时忽然遇到叛王塔不台领兵迎战，铁哥奏请皇上设疑兵打退敌人。
English: It was suggested that the goods needed for the palace diet should be supplied by the government through the establishment of military camps, not by the people. There was a famine in Hanzhou, the people sold their daughters and sons, and Tie Goseo asked the officials to pay money to redeem the people's sold sons and daughters. In the 24th year, from the time of the ancestor's enlistment, when the soldiers came to Saredu, they suddenly encountered the traitor Tubo Tai leading the soldiers to fight, and Tie Goseo asked the emperor to set up a suspect soldier to repel the enemy.

古文：辽王脱脱入朝，从者执兵入大明宫，铁哥劾止之，王惧谢。
现代文：二十九年晋升荣禄大夫、中书平章政事。成宗大德元年加光禄大夫。三年仍授平章政事、议中书省事。七年，复拜中书平章政事，平滦遭水灾，铁哥奏请官府赈恤灾民。
English: In 1929, he was promoted to Ronglu Daifu and Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji. In the first year of Chengzongdaede, he was promoted to Jia Guanglu Daifu. In the third year, he was still awarded Pingzhang Zhengji and discussed Zhongshu Zhengji. In the seventh year, Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji was revoked, Pingzhu was flooded, and Tiego asked the government to pay condolences to the victims.

古文：从幸缙山，饥民相望，铁哥辄发廪赈之，既乃陈疏自劾，帝称善不已。
现代文：十年随皇帝至缙山，时当地大灾，铁哥自行决定开仓济民，然后向皇帝请罪，皇帝认为他做得对，不加谴责。
English: After following the emperor to Lushan for ten years, when a local disaster occurred, Brother Tie decided on his own to open a warehouse to help the people, and then pleaded guilty to the emperor. The emperor thought he had done the right thing and did not condemn him.

古文：武宗即位，赐金一百两，加金紫光禄大夫，遥授中书右丞相。
现代文：武宗即位，赐铁哥金一百两，加金紫光禄大夫，遥授中书右丞相。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, and bestowed upon Tiege a hundred taels of gold, as well as upon Ziguanglu, a doctor of medicine, and conferred upon him the title of chancellor.

古文：从之。二年，奉命诣万安寺祀世祖，感疾归，皇太后令内臣问疾，铁哥附奏曰： 臣死无日，愿太后辅陛下布惟新之政，社稷之福也。 是年薨，赐赙礼加厚，敕有司治丧事，赠太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封秦国公，谥忠穆。
现代文：有人控告宁远王阔阔出有谋反罪，武宗命诛杀，铁哥察知此是诬告，在朝廷上极力为宁远王辩护，终于澄清事实。至大二年命铁哥领度支院。仁宗皇庆元年授开府仪同三司、太傅、录军国重事。二年奉命至万安寺祭祀世祖，因病，不久去世。赠太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封秦国公，谥 忠穆 。
English: Some people accused King Ningyuan of conspiring to commit treason, and Emperor Wuzong ordered him to be killed. Emperor Tetsugo knew that this was a false accusation, and he defended King Ningyuan vigorously in the imperial court, finally clarifying the facts. In the second year of his sophomore year, Emperor Wuzong ordered King Tetsugo to lead the branch hospital. In the first year of Emperor Nizong's reign, Emperor Nizong was awarded the title of Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Master,

古文：加赠推诚守正佐理翊戴功臣，封延安王，改谥忠献。
现代文：后又加赠推诚守正佐理翊戴功臣，封延安王，改谥 忠献 。
English: Later, he also gave a gift to a meritorious subject named Chengcheng Shou Zhengzari, and a gift to a meritorious subject named Yan'an Wang, and a gift to a loyal subject.

