古文：窦瑗，字世珍，辽西阳洛人也。
现代文：窦瑗字世珍，辽西阳洛人。
English: Dou Xuan Zi Shizhen, a native of Yangluo in western Liaoning.

古文：自言本出扶风平陵，汉大将军武曾孙崇为辽西太守，遂家焉。
现代文：自称祖籍扶风平陵，汉时大将军窦武的曾孙窦崇曾做辽西太守，于是就在辽西安家。
English: Fu Fu Pingling, the great-grandson of the Han Dynasty general Dou Wu, who claimed to be his ancestor, was once the governor of western Liaoning Province, so he settled in western Liaoning Province.

古文：曾祖堪，慕容氏渔阳太守。
现代文：曾祖父窦堪，是慕容氏渔阳太守。
English: His great-grandfather Dou Kan was the governor of Yuyang of the Murong clan.

古文：祖表，冯弘城周太守，入魏。
现代文：祖父窦表，冯弘城周太守，后入魏。
English: Grandfather Dou watch, Feng Hongcheng Zhou Taishou, later into the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父冏，举秀才，早卒。
现代文：父亲窦同，选为秀才，早年下世。
English: His father, Dou Tong, was selected as an outstanding talent and died at an early age.

古文：普泰初，瑗启以身阶级为父请赠，诏赠平州刺史。
现代文：普泰初年，窦瑗上书以自身地位为父亲请求追封爵位，皇帝下诏追封窦同为平州刺史。
English: In the first year of Putai, Dou Xuan wrote a letter to his father to request a knighthood, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to pursue Dou for the history of Pingzhou.

古文：瑗年十七，便荷帙从师，游学十载，始为御史。
现代文：窦瑗十七岁时，就挟带书卷外出投师，求学十年，才做御史。
English: When Dou Yu was 17 years old, he took his books with him when he went out to teach. He studied for 10 years before he became an imperial historian.

古文：后兼太常博士，拜太原王尔硃荣官，荣留为北道大行台左丞。
现代文：后来兼职太常博士，拜访太原王尔朱荣求职。尔朱荣留他做了北道大行台左丞。
English: Later, he worked part-time as a doctor at the Imperial Household Agency and visited the King of Taiyuan, Er Zhu Rong, to look for a job.

古文：以拜荣官，赏新昌男。
现代文：因为任尔朱荣的官职，赏爵新昌男。
English: Because of Ren Er Zhu Rong's official position, Xin Chang'an was awarded a knighthood.

古文：从荣东平葛荣，封容城县伯。
现代文：后来跟随尔朱荣东行平定葛荣叛军，封为容城县伯。
English: Later, he followed Er Zhu Rong eastward to quell Ge Rong's rebel army and was awarded the title of Yongcheng County magistrate.

古文：瑗乞以容城伯让兄叔珍，诏听以新昌男转授之。
现代文：窦瑗请求将容城县伯之位让给兄长窦叔珍，皇上诏书同意将新昌男转授给叔珍。
English: Dou Xuan requested to give the title of Yongcheng County Count to his brother Dou Shuzhen, and the imperial edict agreed to transfer Xinchangan to Shuzhen.

古文：叔珍由是位至太山太守。
现代文：叔珍因此而官至太山太守。
English: As a result, Shuzhen was promoted to the position of Taiyama Taishu.

古文：尔硃世隆等立长广王晔为主，南赴洛阳。
现代文：尔朱世隆等人拥立长广王元晔为主，南下洛阳。
English: Zhu Shilong and others mainly supported the Changguang Wangyuan, and went south to Luoyang.

古文：至东郭外，世隆等遣瑗奏废之，瑗执鞭独入禁内，奏愿行尧、舜事，晔遂禅广陵。
现代文：行至东郊外，世隆等人派窦瑗奏请废去元晔，窦瑗持鞭驾车独自进入宫内，奏请元晔沿袭尧、舜禅位制，元晔于是禅位给广陵王元恭。
English: When they went to the eastern suburbs, Shilong and others sent Dou Yu to ask for the abolition of the Yuan Dynasty, Dou Yu drove into the palace alone with a whip, and asked the Yuan Dynasty to follow the,  zen system, and the Yuan Dynasty gave the zen system to Guangling Wang Yuan Qiong.

古文：由是除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：因此窦瑗授职给事黄门侍郎。
English: As a result, Dou Xuan gave the post to Huangmen Zhi Rong.

古文：孝武帝时，为廷尉卿。
现代文：魏孝武帝时，窦瑗是廷尉卿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, Dou Yu was a courtier.

古文：及释奠开讲，瑗与温子升、魏季景、李业兴并为擿句。
现代文：在祭师讲习时，窦瑗与温子癉、魏季景、李业兴一同选文。
English: During the seminar for priests, Dou Jun, along with Wen Zi Jun, Wei Ji Jing, and Li Ye Xing, selected texts.

古文：天平中，除广宗太守，政有清白之称。
现代文：天平年间，任广宗太守，为政有清正廉洁的赞誉。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Guangzong was appointed as the de facto ruler and was praised for his clean and honest politics.

古文：广宗人情凶戾，累政咸见告讼。
现代文：广宗一带人情凶恶暴戾，以前官府都受理不少诉讼案件。
English: People in the Guangzong area are vicious and violent. Previously, the government accepted many lawsuits.

古文：唯瑗一人，终始全洁。
现代文：只有窦瑗一任，始终清静。
English: Only Dou Xuan was in charge, and it was always quiet.

古文：转中山太守，声誉甚美，为吏人所怀。
现代文：调任中山太守后，声名很好。常被吏卒想念。
English: After he was transferred to the position of Zhongshan Taishou, his reputation was very good. He was often missed by officials.

古文：及齐神武班书州郡，称瑗政绩，以为劝励。
现代文：齐神武颁诏州郡，称赞窦瑗政绩，以示劝告勉励。
English: Qi Shenwu awarded Zhaozhou County, praised Dou Jun's political achievements, and encouraged him.

古文：后授平州刺史，在州政如临郡。
现代文：后授任平州刺史，在州府为政一如在郡县。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Pingzhou, and was as active in politics in the state capital as he was in the county.

古文：又为神武丞相府右长史。
现代文：后来又做了神武丞相府右长史。
English: Later, he also served as the Minister of the Cabinet of the Right of Emperor Jimmu.

古文：瑗无军府断割才，不甚称职。
现代文：窦瑗缺乏军府裁断的才能，不太称职。
English: Dou Ye lacked the ability to make decisions for the military government, and was not very competent.

古文：又行晋州事。
现代文：于是又兼任晋州政务。
English: As a result, he also held the post of Jinzhou government affairs.

古文：及还鄴，上表曰： 臣伏读《麟趾新制》至三公曹第六十六条： 母杀其父，子不得告，告者死。 
现代文：回到邺城，上表说： 臣读《麟趾新制》到三公曹第六十六条： 母亲杀死父亲，儿女不得控告，控告者处死。 
English: Back in Lucheng, the above table said: Subordinates, read "Tinti New System" to the Three Wise Men Article 66: If a mother kills her father, her children may not sue her, and the suitor shall be put to death.

古文：三返覆之，未得其门。
现代文：多次考虑，不能理解。
English: On second thought, I don't get it.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：案律： 子孙告父母、祖父母者，死。 
现代文：依照法律： 子孙有控告父母、祖父母的，处死。 
English: According to the law: If a descendant sues his parents or grandparents, he will be put to death.

古文：又汉宣云： 子匿父，孙慝大父母，皆勿论。 
现代文：又汉宣说 ：儿女包庇父亲，孙子包庇祖父母者，都不追究。 
English: Han Xuan also said: "If a son or daughter covers up for their father, or a grandchild covers up for their grandparents, they will not be investigated."

古文：盖谓父母、祖父母小者攘羊，甚者杀害之类，恩须相隐，律抑不言，法理如是，足见其直，未必指母杀父，止子不言也。
现代文：这是指父母、祖父母小到偷羊，大到杀人害命之类，从恩情上讲必须隐瞒，从法律上也不追究，道理如此，可见其正确。并不是说母亲杀害父亲，只让孩子不告发。
English: This refers to parents and grandparents as small as stealing a sheep or as large as murdering and causing death, and must be concealed from the point of view of kindness, and not pursued from the point of view of law. The reason is so, and it can be seen that it is correct. It does not mean that the mother killed the father, only that the child did not report it.

古文：今母杀父而子不告，便是知母而不知父，识比野人，义近禽兽。
现代文：如果母亲杀死父亲而孩子不告发，便是知有母而不知有父，识见如同野人，义理近于禽兽。
English: If the mother kills the father and the child does not denounce it, then he knows his mother but not his father; his knowledge is like that of a savage and his reason is like that of a beast.

古文：且母之于父，作合移天，既杀己之天，复杀子之天，二天顿毁，岂容顿默？
现代文：况且母亲对于父亲来说，如同嫁天，既杀害自己的天，又杀害儿女的天，二天毁伤，怎样容忍沉默？
English: Moreover, for the father, the mother is like the bridegroom, both the god who kills himself and the god who kills his children, two days of destruction, how to tolerate silence?

古文：此母之罪，义在不赦；下手之日，母恩即离。仍以母道不告，鄙臣所以致惑。
现代文：这种母亲的罪过，义理上不应赦免，下手的时候，母亲的恩义便已结束，仍要以母子之义而不告发，鄙臣因此迷惑。
English: This kind of mother's sin should not be pardoned by the principle of justice. When the crime is committed, the mother's kindness has ended. The crime should still be not reported in the name of the mother's and son's righteousness, thus confusing the despicable minister.

古文：如或有之，可临时议罪，何用豫制斯条，用为训诫？
现代文：如果出现这种情况，可以临时商议治罪，为什么要事先制定这条法律，用作训诫呢？
English: If there is such a situation, it is possible to discuss the crime temporarily, why should this law be made in advance to be used as a warning?

古文：恐千载之下，谈者喧哗，以明明大朝，有尊母卑父之论。
现代文：恐怕千年之后，论者纷纷，认为昭明圣朝，竟然有尊母贱父之说。
English: I'm afraid that after a thousand years, there are many commentators who think that the Zhaoming Holy Dynasty actually had the saying of "noble mother and humble father."

古文：以臣管见，实所不取。 
现代文：依我粗浅之见，实在不应采用。 
English: In my humble opinion, it really shouldn't be used.

古文：诏付尚书。
现代文：皇上下诏交给尚书。
English: The imperial edict was handed over to Shang Shu.

古文：三公郎封君义立判云： 母杀其父，子复告母，母由告死，便是子杀。
现代文：三公郎封君义随即裁决说 ：母亲杀死父亲，孩子告发母亲。母亲因为孩子告发而处死，便是孩子所杀。
English: The third prince, Fong Junyi, immediately ruled that: the mother killed the father, the child denounced the mother, and the mother was executed because of the child's denunciation, and was killed by the child.

古文：天下未有无母之国，不知此子，将欲何之？
现代文：天下没有无母之国，不知道这种孩子，将到什么地方？
English: There is no motherless country in the world. I don't know where this child will go.

古文：既于法无违，于事非害，宣布有司，谓不宜改。 
现代文：既对法无碍，又对事无害，就通告官府，说不应更改。 
English: Not only is it not harmful to the law, but it is also not harmful to the case, so they notified the government that it should not be changed.

古文：瑗复难云： 局判云 母由告死，便是子杀。
现代文：窦瑗又驳难说 ：官署裁断说 ：母亲因孩子的告发而处死，便是孩子所杀。
English: Dou Wei also said that it was difficult to refute: the government office ruled that: the mother was killed because of the child's complaint, and the child killed her.

古文：天下未有无母之国，不知此子，将欲何之。 
现代文：天下没有无母之国，不知道这种孩子，将到什么地方？ 
English: There is no motherless country in the world. I don't know where this child will go.

古文：瑗案典律，未闻母杀其父而子有隐母之义。
现代文：瑗参照法典律文，没有听说母亲杀死父亲，孩子要隐瞒母罪的道理。
English: Referring to the legal text of the Code, it is not heard that the mother killed the father, and the child should conceal the crime of the mother.

古文：既不告母，便是与杀父同。
现代文：既不告发母亲，便是和杀父相同。
English: Not to denounce the mother is the same as killing the father.

古文：天下可有无父之国，此子独得有所之乎？ 
现代文：天下难道有无父之国，这种孩子却能有所去处的吗？ 
English: Is there a fatherless country in the world where such a child can find a place?

古文：事虽停寝。
现代文：事情就此了结。
English: And that was the end of the matter.

古文：除大宗正卿。
现代文：窦瑗任职大宗正卿，宗室贵族因他出身寒微，都轻视他。
English: Dou Xuan held the position of Daizong Zhengqing, and the aristocrats despised him because of his humble background.

古文：宗室及其寒士，相与轻之，瑗案法推正，甚见仇疾。官虽通显，贫窘如初，清尚之操，为时所重。
现代文：窦瑗执法公正，招致很多仇怨。官位虽然通达显赫，但贫穷依旧，清廉高尚的节操，为时人推重。
English: Dou Xuan's enforcement of justice has caused a lot of hatred. Although he has achieved a prominent position, he is still poor, and his integrity is highly valued by the people.

古文：领本州大中正，兼廷尉卿，卒官。
现代文：任本州大中正，兼廷尉卿，死于官任。
English: He served as the president of the Honshu University Junior High School, and also as a courtier, and died in office.

古文：家本寒微，少为州吏，性廉谨。
现代文：追赠太仆卿，济州刺史，谥号为明。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taichu-kyo, Jeju Sashimi, and his posthumous name was Meng.

古文：同僚诸人，侵盗官绢，分三十匹与业，拒而不受。
现代文：孟业字敬业，钜鹿安国人。家庭原本贫寒低微。年轻时做州吏，性情廉洁谨慎，同僚中一些人，侵吞盗窃公家绢帛，分给孟业三十匹，他拒绝接受。
English: Meng Yeh was a dedicated worker and a native of Elk'an. His family was originally poor and humble. When he was young, he worked as a state official and was honest and prudent. Some of his colleagues embezzled and stole public funds and gave Meng Yeh thirty horses, which he refused to accept.

古文：行台郎中郭秀相礼接，方欲荐之，会秀卒。
现代文：行台郎中郭秀对他很是以礼相待，刚要向上推荐他，恰巧郭秀死去。
English: Guo Xiu, the concierge, treated him with great courtesy. Just as he was about to recommend him to his superiors, Guo Xiu died.

古文：魏彭城王韶，齐神武之婿也，拜定州刺史，除业为典签。
现代文：魏彭城王韶，是齐神武帝的女婿，被任命为定州刺史，他安排孟业为典签。
English: Wei Pengcheng Wang Yao, the son-in-law of Emperor Qishenwu, was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, and he arranged for Mengye to be his signature.

古文：长史刘仁之谓业曰： 我处其外，君居其内，同心戮力，庶有济乎？ 
现代文：长史刘仁之对孟业说： 我在州衙之外，您在州衙之内，同心协力，或许会有成就吧？ 
English: Liu Renzhi, the chief historian, said to Meng Ye: I am outside the State Council, you are inside the State Council, work together, maybe there will be achievements?

古文：未几，仁之入为中书令，临路启韶云： 殿下左右可信任者，唯有孟业，愿专任之，余人不可信也。 
现代文：不久，刘仁之入朝做了中书令，临上路时提醒韶说： 殿下身边可以信任的人，只是孟业，希望专心任用他，其他人不可信任。 
English: Soon after, Liu Renzhi made a written order to the emperor, and when he was on his way, he reminded Zou that: The only person around His Highness who can be trusted is Mengye. He hoped to concentrate on appointing him, and others should not be trusted.

古文：又与业别，执手曰： 令我出都，君便失援，恐君在后，不自保全，唯正与直，愿君自勉。 
现代文：又与孟业告别，拉着手说： 现在我离开彭城，您就失去了援助，担心您以后不能自我保全，只有忠正耿直，希望您勉励自己。 
English: He also bade farewell to Meng Ye, holding out his hand and saying, "Now that I am leaving Pengcheng, you will lose your assistance. I am afraid that you will not be able to protect yourself in the future. I only hope that you will be loyal and honest. I hope you will encourage yourself."

古文：业唯有一马，瘦死。韶以业贫，令州府官人，同食马肉，欲令厚相酬偿。
现代文：孟业只有一匹马，瘦死，韶以孟业家贫为由，让州府官员差役一起吃马肉，想让他们重重地酬谢孟业。
English: Mengye had only one horse, which died of starvation. On the pretext that Mengye's family was poor, the king ordered the state government officials to eat horse meat together, hoping that they would reward Mengye generously.

古文：业固辞不敢。
现代文：孟业坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: Meng Ye resolutely refused to accept the refusal.

古文：韶乃戏业曰： 卿邀名人也。 
现代文：韶就和孟业开玩笑说 ：您这是想做名人啊。 
English: Zhai joked with Meng: "You want to be a celebrity."

古文：对曰： 业为典签，州中要职，诸人欲相贿赡，止患无方便耳。
现代文：孟业回答说 ：孟业身为典签，是州中的重要职位，那些人想贿赂我财物，只担心没有机会罢了。
English: Meng Ye replied: Meng Ye is a bookmark, an important position in the state, those people want to bribe my property, just worried about not having a chance.

古文：今唤食肉，恐致聚敛，有损声名，所以仰违明教。 
现代文：现在让他们吃肉，恐怕导致聚财征物，有损于名声，因此违背您的英明教诲。 
English: Now, to make them eat meat, I am afraid, will lead to the accumulation of wealth, damage their reputation, and thus go against your wise teachings.

古文：后未旬日，韶左右王四德、董惟金并以马死托肉，为长史裴英起密启。神武有书与韶，大致诮让。
现代文：后来不过十天，韶身边的王四德、董惟金都因马死送人马肉，被长史裴英起密奏，神武帝给韶写有一封信，大致意思是讥诮责备。
English: Later, just ten days later, Wang Shide and Dong Wei Jin, both of whom were close to Zou, sent horse meat to people because of the horse's death. They were secretly played by Changshi Pei Ying. Emperor Shenwu wrote a letter to Zou, roughly meaning mockery and reproach.

古文：业寻被谮，出外行县事。
现代文：孟业不久被谮毁，出外巡行县中事务。
English: Mengye was soon destroyed and went on a tour of county middle school affairs.

古文：后神武书责韶云： 典签姓孟者，极能用心，何乃令出外也！ 
现代文：后来神武帝写信责备韶说 ：姓孟的那个典签，非常用心，为什么让他出外呢？ 
English: Later, Emperor Shenwu wrote a letter of reproach to Zou, saying, "That signature with the surname Meng is very careful. Why did you let him go abroad?

古文：及韶代下，业亦随还，赠送一无所受。
现代文：等韶代为转达，孟业也就跟着回去了，赠送物品一点也没接受。
English: After the gift was delivered, Meng Ye also went back, and did not accept the gift items at all.

古文：仁之后为西兗州，临别谓吏部郎中崔暹曰： 贵州人士，唯有孟业，铨举之次，不可忘也。 
现代文：刘仁之后来在西兖州做官，临走时对吏部郎中崔暹说： 你们州中的人士，只有孟业一人，选拔举荐的时候，不要忘记他。 
English: After Liu Ren, he came to work as an official in Xishuanzhou. Before leaving, he said to Choi Siam, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs: There is only one person in your state, Meng Ye. When selecting and recommending, don't forget him.

古文：暹问业曰： 君往在定州，有何政，使刘西兗如此钦叹？ 
现代文：崔暹问孟业说： 您以前在定州，有什么政绩。让刘西兖如此钦佩叹服？ 
English: Cui Siam asked Meng Ye: You were in Dingzhou before, what were your political achievements that made Liu Xizhao admire and admire you so much?

古文：业答曰： 唯知自修也。 
现代文：孟业回答说 ：只懂得自身修养罢了。 
English: Mengye replied: I only know how to cultivate myself.

古文：韶为并州刺史，业复为典签，仍兼长史。
现代文：韶做并州刺史，孟业又为典签，仍旧兼任长史。
English: Mengye is also a signatory, and still serves as a long history.

古文：齐天保初，清河王岳拜司州牧，召为法曹。
现代文：齐天保初年，清河王岳授职为司州牧，召孟业为法曹。
English: In the first year of Qi Tianbo, Wang Yue of Qinghe was appointed as the governor of Shizhou Province, and Meng Ye was appointed as the legal expert.

古文：业形貌短小，及谒见，岳心鄙其眇小，笑而不言。
现代文：孟业身材矮小，等拜见时，岳心里鄙视他渺小，只笑而不说话。
English: Meng Ye is short in stature, so when he visits, his wife despises his smallness in her heart, only laughs but does not speak.

古文：后寻业断决处，谓曰： 卿断决之明，可谓有过躯貌之用。 
现代文：后来在孟业判决案件时，对他说： 您判案英明，可以说有超过您身体的用处。 
English: Later, when he was judging a case in Mengye, he said to him: You have judged the case wisely, so to speak, more than the use of your body.

古文：补河间王国郎中令。清贫自守，未曾有失。
现代文：补用为河间王国郎中令，清贫自守，不曾出现过失。
English: He was appointed as the second-in-command of the Kawama Kingdom, and he kept a clean slate and never made a mistake.

古文：文宣谓侍中裴英起曰： 卿识河间王郎中孟业不？
现代文：文宣帝对待中裴英起说 ：您认识河间王郎中孟业吗？
English: Emperor Wenxuan said to Zhong Pei Yingqi: Do you know the king of Kawama, Zhong Mengye?

古文：一昨见其国司文案，似是好人。 
现代文：前些日子见到他办理的文籍档案，像是好人。 
English: A few days ago, I saw him handling the archives of literature and culture, and he seemed like a nice guy.

古文：对曰： 昔与臣同事魏彭城王元韶。其人清忠正直，世所希有。 
现代文：裴英起回答说 ：过去孟业与我一同侍奉魏彭城王韶，这个人清廉忠心，正直耿介，当世少有。 
English: Pei Yingqi replied, "In the past, Meng Ye and I served together with Wei Pengcheng Wang Yao. This man is honest, honest, and honest, which is rare in this world.

古文：帝曰： 如公言者，比来便是大屈。 
现代文：帝说： 真像你这种说法，一直是太委屈他了。 
English: The emperor said, "It's just like what you're saying, I've always been too hard on him.

古文：除中书舍人。
现代文：授职中书舍人。
English: A person who skips school during the conferment of a post.

古文：文宣初唯得姓名，及因奏事，见其羸老，又质性敦朴，无升降之容，加之平缓，寡于方便。
现代文：文宣帝当初只是知道孟业的姓名，等到他因事上奏，才见他身体老弱。而且本性淳厚朴实，没有升官降职的喜怒表现，加上平稳缓和，很少有机会。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wenxuan only knew Meng Xian's name. It was not until he became involved in the matter that he saw Meng Xian's old and weak body. Moreover, his nature was simple and unpretentious. He did not have the emotions of promotion and demotion, and he was calm and easy-going, so he rarely had the opportunity.

古文：有一道士由吾道荣以术艺被迎，将入内，业为通名。忽于众中抗声奏云： 由吾道士不食五谷。 
现代文：有一个道士由吾道荣因道术被皇上迎请，将要进入朝中，孟业替他通报名姓，忽然在人群中大声奏道 ：由吾道士不吃五谷。 
English: There was a Taoist named Yugo Do-Rong, who was invited by the emperor because of his Taoism, and was about to enter the imperial court. Meng Ye announced his name and surname for him, and suddenly the crowd loudly chanted: "Yugo Do-Rong does not eat grain."

古文：帝命推而下之。
现代文：帝命令人将孟业推下。
English: The emperor ordered people to push Meng Ye down.

古文：又令点检百官，敷奏失所，帝遣人以马鞭击业头，至于流血。
现代文：又令点检百官，陈奏他的失职不当之处，帝派人用马鞭抽打孟业头部，以至流出血来。
English: He also ordered a hundred inspectors to investigate his misconduct, and the emperor sent someone to beat Mengye's head with a horsewhip until it bled.

古文：然亦体其衰老，非力所堪。
现代文：然而又体恤他年老体衰，不能承受武力。
English: However, he also sympathized with his old age and weakness, and could not bear the force.

古文：皇建二年，累迁东郡太守，以宽惠著名。
现代文：北齐昭帝皇建二年，升为东郡太守，以宽厚仁惠闻名。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jian of Northern Qi Zhao, he was promoted to the governor of Dong County, known for his generosity and benevolence.

古文：其年夏，五官张凝因出使，得麦一茎五穗，其余或三穗四穗共一茎者，合郡咸以政化所感，因即申上。
现代文：这年夏天，五官张凝因为出使外地，得到一棵茎杆长有五个穗的麦子，还有三个穗或四个穗长在一棵麦杆的，全郡的人都以为是政令感化的结果。
English: In the summer of that year, Zhang Jian, an official of the Five Departments of the People's Government, received a five-spike stalk of wheat on a mission to a foreign country. If there were three spikes or four spikes on a stalk of wheat, the people of the whole county thought it was the result of the government's order.

古文：至秋，复有东燕县人班映祖，送嘉禾一茎九穗。
现代文：随即上报皇帝。到秋天，又有东燕县人班映祖，送来一株上面长有九个麦穗的好庄稼。
English: He immediately reported the matter to the emperor. In the autumn, a person from Dongyan County sent a good crop of nine ears of wheat to the emperor.

古文：河清三年，敕人间养驴，催买甚切。
现代文：北齐武帝河清三年，皇帝命令民间养驴，催购相当急迫。
English: In the third year of the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Heqing, the emperor ordered the people to raise donkeys, and the purchase was quite urgent.

古文：业曰： 吾既为人父母，岂可坐看此急。
现代文：孟业说： 我既然是百姓的父母官，怎么能坐看百姓的这种急难？
English: Meng Ye said: Since I am the people's parent and official, how can I sit and watch the people's plight?

古文：令宜权出库钱，贷人取办，后日有罪，吾自当之。 
现代文：应该拿出国库中的钱财，贷给百姓购买。今后有了过错，我自己承担下来。 
English: I should take out the money in the treasury and lend it to the people to buy. In the future, if there is a mistake, I will take it upon myself.

古文：后为宪司所劾。
现代文：后来被宪司弹劾。
English: He was later impeached by the Constitutional Court.

古文：被摄之日，郡人皆泣而随之，迭相吊慰。
现代文：被捕那天，郡中百姓都哭着跟随他，不断地慰问。
English: On the day of his arrest, the people of the county followed him in tears, constantly offering their condolences.

古文：送业度关者，有数百人，至黎阳郡西，方得辞决。攀援号哭，悲动行路。
现代文：送孟业出关的，有几百人，到黎阳郡西边，才得以辞别，拉手痛哭，悲惨之景感动了行路的人。
English: There are several hundred people who sent Meng Ye out of the customs. They had to go to the west side of Liyang County to say goodbye. They held hands and cried. The tragic scene moved the travelers.

古文：诣阙诉冤者非一人，敕乃放还。
现代文：到朝廷诉冤的不只一人，皇上于是下令将他放回。
English: More than one person came to the imperial court to complain about the injustice, and the emperor then ordered him to be released.

古文：郡中父老，扣河迎接。
现代文：郡中父老百姓，到黄河边迎接。
English: The middle-class people of the county went to the Yellow River to welcome him.

古文：武成亲戎，自洛还鄴，道由东郡。
现代文：武成结交戎人，从洛阳回到邺城，路途经过东郡。
English: Wu Cheng made friends with the Ebis people, and returned to Lucheng from Luoyang, passing through Dong County on the way.

古文：业具牛酒，率人吏拜谒路旁，自称： 粪土臣孟业，伏惟圣驾亲行，有征无战，谨上微礼。 
现代文：孟业备办牛肉与酒，带领吏卒百姓在路旁拜谒，自称道： 粪土之臣孟业，俯伏恩惟圣主亲自北行，出征而无战斗，谨献薄礼。 
English: Mengye prepared beef and wine, and led the officials and the people to pay homage on the roadside. He said to himself, "Mengye, the vassal of the dung, prostrated himself, but the Lord himself went north, went to war without a battle, and offered a thin salute."

古文：便与人吏俱唱万岁，导引前入，帝大嘉之。
现代文：就和百姓官吏齐呼万岁。在前面做向导引入城中，皇帝非常称赏。
English: The emperor was very appreciative of the fact that he was introduced to the city as a guide at the front.

古文：后除广平太守，年既老，理政不如在东郡时。
现代文：后来任命为广平太守，年纪已老，处理政事不如在东郡时。
English: Later, he was appointed Guangping Dazhong, he was already old, and his handling of political affairs was not as good as when he was in Dongshun.

古文：武平九年，为太中大夫，加卫将军，寻卒。
现代文：北齐后主武平九年，做太中大夫，增封卫将军，不久死去。
English: Nine years after the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Ping died, he served as the Grand Physician to the Emperor and the General of the Imperial Guards, and died soon after.

古文：业志守质素，不尚浮华。
现代文：孟业立志恪守质朴本性，不崇尚浮华。
English: Mengye is determined to adhere to the simple nature and does not worship the flashy.

古文：为子结婚，为朝肺腑吒罗氏。
现代文：给儿子备办婚事，对方是朝中近亲叱罗氏。
English: To prepare a marriage for his son, the other party is a close relative of Luo in the middle of the morning.

古文：其子以廕得为平原王段孝先相府行参军，乃令作今世服饰绮襦纨袴。
现代文：他儿子蒙受恩荫，做平原王段孝先相府行参军，就让人制作当世富家子弟穿戴的绮丽服饰。
English: His son was favored, and as the king of the plains, Duan Xiaoxian, went to the capital to join the army, he had people make beautiful clothes worn by the rich children of the day.

古文：吒罗家又恃姻娅，炫曜矜夸。
现代文：叱罗家又倚仗这种婚姻关系，炫耀自夸。
English: The Liao family also relied on this marriage relationship to show off and boast.

古文：业知而不禁，素望颇贬。
现代文：孟业知道而没有禁止，平日的声望大为降低。
English: Mengye knew but did not prohibit, and the reputation of ordinary people was greatly reduced.

古文：苏琼，字珍之，长乐武强人也。父备，仕魏，至卫尉少卿。
现代文：苏琼，字珍之，长乐武强人，父亲苏备，在魏做官，官至卫尉少卿。
English: Su Qiong, Zi Zhenzhi, Changle martial strongman, father Su Bei, served as an official in the Wei Dynasty, and rose to the rank of Lieutenant of the Guards.

古文：琼幼时随父在边，尝谒东荆州刺史曹芝，芝戏问曰： 卿欲官不？ 
现代文：苏琼幼年时跟随父亲在边境，曾经拜见东荆州刺史曹芝，曹芝开玩笑地问他说 ：你想做官不？ 
English: When Su Qiong was a child, she followed her father across the border. Once, she met Cao Zhi, the governor of East Jingzhou. Cao Zhi jokingly asked him, "Do you want to be an official?"

古文：对曰： 设官求人，非人求官。 
现代文：苏琼回答说 ：设立官职选人充任。并不是要人去找官做。 
English: Su Qiong replied, "Setting up an official position and appointing people to fill it is not the same as asking people to run for office."

古文：芝异其对，署为府长流参军。
现代文：曹芝对他的回答感到惊异，便安排他做了自己府中的长流参军。
English: Cao Zhi was surprised by his answer, so he arranged for him to join the army as a long-term member of his government.

古文：齐文襄以仪同开府，引为刑狱参军，每加勉劳。
现代文：北齐文襄帝以仪同的名号建府设置属官，召苏琼为刑狱参军，并经常鼓励慰劳他。
English: The Northern Qi Emperor Wenzhong set up a subordinate official with the name of Yidong, called Su Qiong to join the army as a prisoner, and often encouraged him to work.

古文：并州尝有强盗，长流参军张龙推其事，所疑贼徒，并已拷伏，失物家并识认，唯不获盗赃。
现代文：并州曾经有强盗出没，长流参军张龙追查此事。被怀疑为强盗的人经过拷问已经招认，丢失财物人家也都认定这些强盗，只是没有找到抢劫的赃物。
English: Zhang Long, a long-time member of the military, was sent to investigate the matter. After being tortured, the suspected robber confessed, and people who lost property also identified these robbers, but did not find the stolen goods.

古文：文襄付琼，更令穷审，乃别推得元景融等十余人，并获赃验。文襄大笑，语前妄引贼者曰： 尔辈若不遇我好参军，几致枉死。 
现代文：文襄帝把这个案子交给苏琼，要求他彻底审查，于是另外追查元景融等十多个人，同时也得到了赃物和证据，文襄帝大笑，对先前那些被胡乱牵连为强盗的人说 ：你们这些人如果没有遇到我的好参军，差一点被冤枉而死。 
English: Emperor Wenzhong gave the case to Su Qiong and asked him to thoroughly investigate it. He also investigated more than ten people including Yuan Jing Rong, and also obtained stolen goods and evidence. Emperor Wenzhong laughed loudly and said to those who had previously been arbitrarily implicated as robbers: "If you people hadn't met me and joined the army, you would have almost died unjustly."

古文：除南清河太守。郡多盗贼，及琼至，奸盗止息。
现代文：后来被任命为南清河太守，该郡盗贼很多，等到苏琼上任，犯法偷盗的事再也没有发生过。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Nanqinghe. There were many thieves in the county. When Su Qiong took office, the crime of theft never happened again.

古文：或外境奸非，辄从界中行过者，无不捉送。
现代文：有时外郡的奸诈不法之徒，擅自从南清河郡的地界经过，没有不被捉送官府的。
English: Sometimes the treacherous and lawless people from outside the county illegally pass through the territorial boundary of Nanqinghe County, and no one is not caught and sent to the government.

古文：零陵县人魏双成，住处与畿内武城交错，失牛，疑其村人魏子宾，列送至郡。
现代文：零县人魏双成，住处与京城地区的武城交界，丢失一头牛，怀疑是同村人魏子宾所偷，便把他押送到郡上。
English: Zero County resident Wei Shuangcheng, who lives on the border with Wucheng in the Beijing area, lost a cow and suspected that fellow villager Wei Zibing had stolen it, so he was escorted to the county.

古文：一经穷问，知宾非盗，而便放之。
现代文：但苏琼经过仔细审问，知道魏子宾不是偷牛贼，便把他放了。
English: However, after careful interrogation, Su Qiong knew that Wei Zibing was not a cattle thief and released him.

古文：双成云： 府君放贼去，百姓牛何处可得？ 
现代文：魏双成说： 府君您把贼放跑，老百姓的牛去哪儿找呢？ 
English: Wei Shuangcheng said, "Governor, you let the thief run away, where are you going to find the people's cattle?

古文：琼不理其语，密遣访获盗者。
现代文：苏琼没有理睬他的话，暗中派人下去查访，找到了偷牛的人。
English: Su Qiong ignored his words and secretly sent someone to investigate and found the cow thief.

古文：从此畜牧不收，云： 但存府君。 
现代文：从此以后，百姓放牧牲畜都不加收检，说： 只管交给苏府君。 
English: Since then, the people have not inspected the grazing of livestock, saying: Just hand it over to Su Fookun.

古文：其邻郡富家，将财物寄置界内以避盗。
现代文：邻郡的富豪将财物存放在南清河郡以躲避盗贼。
English: Wealthy people from neighboring counties store their belongings in Nanqinghe County to avoid thieves.

古文：冀州绎幕县人成氏大富，为贼攻急，告曰： 我物已寄苏公矣 ，贼遂去。
现代文：冀州绎幕县人成氏很富有，被盗贼追得很紧，就对他们说 ：我的财物已经寄放在苏公处了。 盗贼便离去了。
English: Mr Cheng, a wealthy man from Jizhou's Yidam County, was chased hard by the thieves. He said to them, "My belongings have been deposited with the Soviet government." The thieves then left.

古文：平原郡有妖贼刘黑苟，构结徒侣，通于沧海。
现代文：平原郡有一个会法术的贼刘黑苟，招纳党徒，勾结海外。
English: In Pingyuan County, there is a magic thief Liu Heiguo, who recruits party members and colludes overseas.

古文：琼所部人，连接村居，无相染累。
现代文：苏琼治下的百姓，和刘黑苟村子连靠村子而住，都没有牵连进去。
English: The people under Su Qiong's rule, and Liu Heiguo's villagers, even though they lived close to the village, were not involved.

古文：邻邑于此伏其德绩。
现代文：邻郡的人因此佩服他的德行政绩。
English: People in the neighbouring county therefore admire his moral achievement.

古文：郡中旧贼一百余人，悉充左右，人间善恶及长吏饮人一杯酒，无不即知。
现代文：南清河郡以前做过贼的一百多个人，都充为苏琼的耳目，民间好事坏事，甚至连官吏们喝百姓一杯酒，苏琼无不立刻知道。
English: More than a hundred people in Nanqinghe County who had been thieves before all served as Su Qiong's eyes and ears. When the people did something good or bad, even when the officials drank a glass of wine from the people, Su Qiong immediately knew everything.

古文：琼性清慎，不发私书。
现代文：苏琼生性清廉谨慎，从不拆看找他办私事的信。
English: Su Qiong is honest and prudent, and never looks at the letter asking him to handle private affairs.

古文：道人道研为济州沙门统，资产巨富，在郡多出息，常得郡县为征。
现代文：道士道研做济州沙门统，财产极多。在郡中放了不少债。以前常请郡县官吏帮他催债。
English: Doushido Ken is the head priest of Jeju Samdang and has a lot of property. He has accumulated a lot of debts in the county. In the past, he often asked county officials to help him collect debts.

古文：及欲求谒，度知其意，每见则谈问玄理。
现代文：等到他来求见时，苏琼已知他的意图，见面就谈论佛法。
English: When he came to see her, Su Qiong knew his intention and they met to talk about Buddhism.

古文：研虽为债数来，无由启口。
现代文：道研虽然为催债多次前来，都没法说出口。
English: Although the Road Research Institute has come to collect the debt many times, it has not been able to speak out.

古文：其弟子问其故，研曰： 每见府君，径将我入青云间，何由得论地上事。 
现代文：他的弟子问其中的原因，道研说 ：每次见到苏府君，他就直接把我带到青云之中，哪有可能谈论地上俗事？ 
English: His disciple asked the reason for this, and Dao Yan said, "Every time I see Su Fookun, he brings me directly to Qingyun. How is it possible to talk about mundane things on earth?"

古文：师徒还归，遂焚责券。
现代文：师徒回家后，便焚烧了债券。
English: After the students and teachers returned home, they burned the bonds.

古文：郡人赵颍，官至乐陵太守，年余八十，致事归。
现代文：郡中人赵颍，官至乐陵太守，八十多岁辞官归家。
English: County middle-aged man Zhao Zhen, the official Zhi Le Ling Taishu, retired in his eighties and returned home.

古文：五月中，得新瓜一双，自来奉。
现代文：五月间，他摘了两只刚产的瓜，亲自送给苏琼。
English: In May, he picked two new-born melons and personally gave them to Su Qiong.

古文：颍恃年老，苦请，遂便为留。
现代文：赵颍仗着自己年纪大，竭力请求苏琼收留，苏琼于是把瓜留下。
English: Zhao Yao, taking advantage of his age, tried his best to ask Su Qiong to take him in. Su Qiong then left the melon.

古文：乃致于事梁上，竟不割。
现代文：他把瓜放到大堂的梁上，竟不切开。
English: He put the melon on the beam of the lobby, but did not cut it.

古文：人闻受赵颍饷瓜，欲贡新果，至门，问知颍瓜犹在，相顾而去。
现代文：人们听说苏琼接受了赵颍馈赠的瓜，也想进贡新摘的瓜果，来到门前，打听到赵颍送的瓜仍放在那儿，便相视离去。
English: People heard that Su Qiong had accepted a gift of melons from Zhao Ye, and also wanted to pay tribute to the newly picked melon fruits. They came to the door, found out that the melons sent by Zhao Ye were still there, and then left.

古文：有百姓乙普明，兄弟争田，积年不断，各相援据，乃至百人。
现代文：有个名叫乙普明的百姓，兄弟俩争夺土地，多年没有裁决。都各自寻找证人，竟有一百多个。
English: There was a commoner named Epmin. Two brothers were fighting over land, and for many years there was no decision. Each of them looked for witnesses, but there were more than a hundred.

古文：琼召普明兄弟，对众人谕之曰： 天下难得者兄弟，易求者田地。
现代文：苏琼把普明兄弟叫来，告诉众人说： 天下难以得到的是兄弟，容易得到的是土地。
English: Su Qiong called the brothers to her and told them, "What is hard to get in the world is brothers, but what is easy to get is land."

古文：假令得地失兄弟心，如何？ 
现代文：如果让你们得到了土地而失去了兄弟情谊，怎么样呢？ 
English: What if you get the land and lose the brotherhood?

古文：因而下泪，诸证人莫不洒泣。普明兄弟叩头，乞外更思，分异十年，遂还同住。
现代文：说着便掉下了眼泪，那些证人也无不哭泣，乙普明兄弟磕头请求让他们出去再想一想，两个人已经分开十年，现在又住在一起。
English: Tears fell as they spoke, and the witnesses wept as well. The Epmin brothers pleaded with them to go out and think again. The two had been separated for ten years and were now living together again.

古文：每年春，总集大儒卫觊隆、田元凤等讲于郡学，朝吏文案之暇，悉令受书。
现代文：每年春季，苏琼召集大儒生卫觊隆、田元凤等在郡学堂讲学，郡吏们处理公务后的闲暇时间，苏琼都让他们来读书。
English: Every spring, Su Qiong gathers the great Confucian scholars Wei Yulong and Tian Yuanfeng to give lectures at the county school. When the county officials have leisure time after handling their official duties, Su Qiong has them come to study.

古文：时人指吏曹为学生屋。
现代文：当时人们把官署称为学生宿舍。
English: At that time, people called the government office a student dormitory.

古文：禁断淫祠，婚姻丧葬，皆教令俭而衷礼。
现代文：禁止不合礼法的祭祀。婚礼丧葬，也都要节省节约，遵守礼仪。
English: Sacrifices that do not conform to etiquette are prohibited. Both weddings and funerals should be economical and respectful of etiquette.

古文：又蚕月预下绵绢度样于部内，其兵赋次第，并立明式。
现代文：另外养蚕的月份预先公布绵绢的长度式样，徭役赋税的先后次序也都明确规定。
English: In addition, the month of silkworm rearing is announced in advance, the length of the silkworm cocoon is announced in advance, and the order of the cocoon tax is also clearly defined.

古文：至于调役，事必先办，郡县吏长，恆无十杖稽失。
现代文：每当征派徭役时，苏琼总是先把事情办好，郡县官吏一般没有因延误而受到轻度处罚。
English: Whenever recruiting officials, Su Qiong always did things well first, and county officials generally did not receive light punishment for delay.

古文：当时州郡，无不遣人至境，访其政术。
现代文：当时其他州郡无不派人到南清河郡，询问处理政事的方法。
English: At that time, all other states and counties sent people to Nanqinghe County to inquire about how to handle political affairs.

古文：天保中，郡界大水，人灾，绝食者千余家。
现代文：文宣帝天保年间，南清河郡内发大水，百姓受灾，缺粮少食的有千余家。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenxuan in the Tenpo era, floods occurred in Nanqinghe County, the people were affected by the disaster, and more than a thousand families were short of grain and food.

古文：琼普集郡中有粟家，自从贷粟，悉以给付饥者。
现代文：苏琼把郡内有粮食的人家都召集来，亲自向他们贷粮，全都分给那些挨饿的人。
English: Su Qiong called together all the households in the county that had grain and personally loaned them grain, all of which was distributed to those who were starving.

古文：州计户徵租，复欲推其贷粟，纲纪谓琼曰： 虽矜饥馁，恐罪累府君。 
现代文：州府按户征收租税，并且想追究贷粮的事，郡主簿对苏琼说： 虽然是可怜那些饥饿的百姓，恐怕还要连累府君。 
English: The prefectural government levied taxes per household, and wanted to investigate the matter of grain loans, the county register said to Su Qiong: Although I pity those hungry people, I am afraid I will have to sue the prefect.

古文：琼曰： 一身获罪且活千室，何所怨乎？ 
现代文：苏琼说 ：一人获罪，而能救活千家，还有什么值得怨恨的呢？ 
English: Su Qiong said, "If one person is punished, but a thousand families can be saved, what is there to hate?"

古文：遂上表陈状，使检皆免，人户保安。
现代文：于是给朝廷上表陈述情况，使征税查问得以免除，受灾人家也能平安生活。
English: As a result, the situation was reported to the imperial court, so that the tax investigation was exempted, and the affected families could live safely.

古文：此等相抚兒子，咸言 府君生汝 。
现代文：这些人抚爱儿女时都说 ：是府君使你们活了下来。 
English: When these people cuddle their children, they all say: it was the governor who kept you alive.

古文：在郡六年，人庶怀之，遂无一人经州。
现代文：苏琼在南清河郡六年，百姓都归向他，所以没有一个人向州申诉案情。
English: Su Qiong has been in Nanqinghe County for six years, and the people have all turned to him, so no one has complained to the state about the case.

古文：前后四表，列为尤最。
现代文：前后四次上表报告政绩，苏琼都名列最上等。
English: Su Qiong has been ranked the highest in the four times of the above table report on political achievements.

古文：遭忧解职，故人赠遗，一无所受。
现代文：后来因居丧离职，老朋友送来的财物，他一点也不接收。
English: Later, when he left his job due to bereavement, he did not accept any property sent by his old friend.

古文：寻起为司直、廷尉正，朝士嗟其屈，尚书辛术曰： 既直且正，名以定体，不虑不申。 
现代文：不久苏琼又出任司直、廷尉正，朝中官员都感叹对他不公平。尚书辛述说： 苏琼为人正直，名实相符，不必忧虑他不能升迁。 
English: Soon after, Su Qiong was appointed to the posts of Secretary of the Central Military Commission and First Lieutenant of the Central Military Commission. Officials in both the DPRK and the People's Republic of China lamented that it was unfair to him. Shang Shuxin said: Su Qiong is an honest person, his reputation is consistent with reality, and there is no need to worry that he cannot be promoted.

古文：初，琼任清河太守，裴献伯为济州刺史。献伯酷于用法，琼恩于养人。
现代文：当初，苏琼任南清河郡太守时，裴献伯做济州刺史，裴献伯为政严厉，擅用刑法，苏琼则施行恩惠以养育百姓。
English: At the beginning, when Su Qiong was the governor of South Qinghe County, Pei Jianbo was in charge of the history of Jeju, Pei Jianbo was strict and used criminal law, while Su Qiong was doing favors to nurture the people.

古文：房延祐为乐陵郡，过济州。
现代文：房延出任乐陵郡太守时，从济州经过。
English: Fang Yan passed through Jeju when he became the governor of Leling County.

古文：裴问其外声，延祐云： 唯闻太守善，刺史恶。 
现代文：裴献伯向他询问自己的外界声誉，房延说： 只听说太守善良而刺史残暴。 
English: When Pei Xianbo asked him about his reputation in the outside world, Fang Yan said, "I only heard that Taishu was kind but cruel.

古文：裴云： 得人誉者非至公。 
现代文：裴献伯说 ：受到人们称颂的并非很公正。 
English: Bae Jianbo said: "It's not fair that people are praising me.

古文：答云： 若尔，黄霸、袭遂，君之罪人也。 
现代文：房延回答说： 这样说来，黄霸、龚遂这样的清官倒成了你眼中的罪人了。 
English: Fang Yan replied, "In this way, such officials as Huang Ba and Zou Sui have become sinners in your eyes."

古文：后有敕，州各举清能。
现代文：后来朝廷下令，让各州推荐清廉而有才干的人。
English: Later, the imperial court ordered that each state should recommend a clean and talented person.

古文：裴以前言，恐为琼陷，琼申其枉滞，议者尚其公平。
现代文：裴献伯因为先前曾说过那种话，害怕被苏琼陷害，而苏琼却替他申诉长期不得提升的委屈，谈论这件事的人都推崇苏琼为人公正。
English: Pei Xianbo was afraid of being framed by Su Qiong because he had said such a thing before, but Su Qiong complained about the grievance of not being promoted for a long time. People who talked about this matter praised Su Qiong as a fair person.

古文：毕仪云为御史中丞，以猛暴任职，理官忌惮，莫敢有违。
现代文：毕义云任御史中丞，以凶猛残暴为己任，法官们都畏惧他，不敢违背他的意图。
English: Bi Yiyun was appointed as the chief justice of the imperial court, and he took ferocity and brutality as his duty. The judges were afraid of him and did not dare to go against his intention.

古文：琼推察务在得情，雪者甚众。
现代文：苏琼推审案子务必保证符合实情，得到昭雪的人很多。
English: Su Qiong's review of the case must ensure that it conforms to the facts, and there are many people who have been awarded.

古文：寺署台案，始自于琼。
现代文：大理寺各衙门处审理的案子要经尚书省复查，就是从苏琼开始实行的。
English: The cases that are heard at the various gate offices of Dali Temple must be reviewed by the Ministry of Education and Culture, which has been implemented since Su Qiong.

古文：迁三公郎中。
现代文：升任尚书三公郎中。
English: He was promoted to Shosho Sanko Junior High School.

古文：赵州及清河、南中有人频告谋反，前后皆付琼推检，事多申雪。
现代文：赵州与清河、南中等地有人多次报告将有谋反事情发生，前后都交给苏琼追查，很多人事被平反昭雪。
English: Some people in Zhaozhou, Qinghe, and the south and middle regions repeatedly reported that there would be a rebellion, and they were all handed over to Su Qiong for investigation, and many people were rehabilitated.

古文：尚书崔昂谓琼曰： 若欲立功名，当更思余理。
现代文：尚书崔昂对苏琼说 ：你如果想建立功名，应当再想想其他法子。
English: Shangshu Cuiang said to Su Qiong: If you want to build a reputation, you should think about other ways.

古文：仍数雪反逆，身命何轻？ 
现代文：你还多次为谋反作乱的人洗雪罪名，怎么把自己的生命看得那么不值钱？ 
English: How can you value your own life so little when you have repeatedly covered up the crimes of the rioters?

古文：琼正色曰： 所雪者冤枉，不放反逆。 
现代文：苏琼严肃地说 ：我所昭雪的都是被冤枉的人，并没放过谋反作乱的人。 
English: Su Qiong said solemnly, "All the people I have forgiven are those who have been wronged, and I have not forgiven those who plotted to rebel and cause turmoil."

古文：昂大惭。
现代文：崔昂很羞愧。
English: Choi Aung was ashamed.

古文：京师为之语曰： 断决无疑苏珍之。 
现代文：京师里的人称颂他说 ：判案无疑苏珍之。 
English: People in Beijing praised him, saying, "The verdict is undoubtedly Su Zhen's."

古文：皇建中，赐爵安定县男、徐州行台左丞，行徐州事。
现代文：皇建年间，封赐爵位安定县男，徐州行台左丞，代理徐州刺史的职务。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jian, the man from Anding County, Xuzhou Xingtai Zuo, was given a title of nobility, and he assumed the position of acting governor of Xuzhou.

古文：徐州城中五级寺忽被盗铜像一百躯。
现代文：徐州城中五级寺突然被盗走一百座铜像。
English: A hundred bronze statues were suddenly stolen from a five-level temple in Xuzhou city.

古文：有司徵检，四邻防宿及踪迹所疑，逮系数十人。
现代文：官署追查结果，在五级寺四周防守住宿以及有迹象而受到怀疑的人，被逮捕的有数十人。
English: As a result of the investigation by the government office, dozens of people were arrested in the vicinity of the five-level temple for defensive accommodation and those who were suspected of having signs.

古文：琼一时放遣，寺僧怨诉不为推贼。
现代文：苏琼把他们全都释放，寺院僧人抱怨苏琼不替他们追查盗贼。
English: Su Qiong released them all, and the monks of the temple complained that Su Qiong would not investigate the thieves for them.

古文：琼遣僧，谢曰 但且还寺，得像自送。 
现代文：苏琼送僧回去，告诉他们说： 只管暂时回去，得到铜像后自会送还。 
English: Su Qiong sent the monk back and told them: Just go back for a while, you will return the bronze statue after you get it.

古文：尔后十日，抄贼姓名及赃处所，径收掩，悉获实验。
现代文：之后十天，苏琼将盗贼姓名与赃物存放处写出来，派人直接去搜捕，全部得到真实凭据。
English: Ten days later, Su Qiong wrote down the thief's name and the place where the stolen goods were stored, and sent someone directly to search and arrest, and obtained all the real evidence.

古文：贼徒款引，道俗叹伏。
现代文：盗贼们从实招供，僧人百姓都惊叹敬服。
English: The thieves confessed truthfully, and the monks and common people were astonished and impressed.

古文：旧制，以淮禁不听商贩辄度。淮南岁俭，启听淮北取籴。
现代文：先前曾规定，淮河两岸商贩不得擅自过河交易，淮南收成不好。
English: Previously, it was stipulated that merchants on both sides of the Huaihe River were not allowed to cross the river without authorization, and the harvest in southern Huaihe was not good.

古文：少子文让，初封阳城县公，后为鹰扬郎将。从卫玄击杨玄感于东都，力战而死，赠通议大夫。
现代文：苏琼上书请求允准淮南人到淮北买粮。后来淮北人又受饥荒，他又奏请让淮北人到淮南买粮，于是淮河两岸商贸往来，互相都得到好处，水陆物产竟运到黄河以北。后来苏琼任大理卿时北齐灭亡，在北周做官。任博陵太守。
English: Su Qiong requested in a letter that the people of Huainan be allowed to go to Huaibei to buy grain. Later, when the people of Huaibei suffered from famine, he also requested that the people of Huaibei go to Huainan to buy grain. As a result, the trade between the two sides of the Huaihe River was mutually beneficial, and the water and land products were actually transported to the north of the Yellow River. Later, when Su Qiong was appointed as Daliqing, Bei Qi perished, and he worked as an official in the north of Zhou. He was appointed as the governor of Boling.

古文：樊叔略，陈留人也。
现代文：隋开皇初年死去。樊叔略，是陈留人。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Gao died.

古文：父观，仕魏，为南兗州刺史、河阳侯，为高氏所诛。
现代文：父亲樊观，在魏朝做官时，任南兖州刺史，河阳侯，被高氏所杀。
English: His father, Gongguan, when he was an official in the Wei Dynasty, served as the governor of Nan'anzhou and the governor of Heyang, and was killed by Gao Yu.

古文：叔略被腐刑，给使殿省。
现代文：樊叔略被处以腐刑，在殿省供役使。
English: Zou Shuliao was sentenced to corruption and forced to work in the palace.

古文：身长九尺，有志气。
现代文：身高九尺，很有志气。
English: He is nine feet tall and very ambitious.

古文：颇见忌，内不自安，遂奔关西。
现代文：颇遭嫉妒。内心不安，于是逃到函谷关西。
English: Envious and insecure, he fled to Hakodate, Kansai.

古文：周文器之，引置左右，授都督，袭爵为侯。
现代文：周文帝器重他，安置在自己身边，授职都督，荫袭爵位为侯。
English: Emperor Zhouwen valued him highly, placed him at his side, appointed him as the capital's governor, and gave him the title of marquis.

古文：大冢宰宇文护执政，引为中尉。渐被委信，兼督内外，位开府仪同三司。
现代文：大冢宰宇文护执掌政权时，召用他为中尉，逐渐受到信任，兼管宫内事情，任职开府仪同三司。
English: When the Grand Empress Dowager Uwenfo was in power, he was appointed as a lieutenant and gradually gained trust. He was also in charge of palace affairs and served as the head of the Imperial Household Agency and the Third Division.

古文：护诛，齐王宪引为园苑监。
现代文：宇文护被杀后。齐王宪召用他为园苑监。
English: After the murder of Uwen Guo, Qi Wang Xian called him to be the garden supervisor.

古文：数进兵谋，宪甚奇之。
现代文：多次进献用兵谋略，宪很惊异他的才能。
English: He repeatedly devoted himself to military strategy, and Xian was amazed at his talent.

古文：从武帝平齐，以功加上开府，封清乡县公，拜汴州刺史，号为明决。
现代文：跟随武帝平定齐朝。因功封职为上开府，清河县公，任汴州刺史，当时被称为决事明断。
English: He followed Emperor Wu to subdue the Qi Dynasty. He was awarded the title of Shangkaifu (上開府) and the title of Qinghexian (清河县公) for his meritorious service, and was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou (州刺史). At that time, he was known as the decisive one.

古文：宣帝营建东都，以叔略有巧思，拜营构监。
现代文：宣帝建造东都，以叔略常有奇妙构想，授他为营构监。
English: Emperor Xuan constructed Dongdu, and gave him the position of construction supervisor.

古文：宫室制度，皆叔略所定。
现代文：宫室规模标准，都是他制定的。
English: He set the standard for the size of the Imperial Household.

古文：尉迟迥之乱，镇大梁，以军功拜大将军，复为汴州刺史。
现代文：尉迟迥叛乱时，樊叔略镇守大梁，因军功授为大将军，又做汴州刺史。
English: When his subordinates rebelled, Zou Shuliao was in charge of the garrison and was awarded the title of general for his military exploits. He was also made the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：隋文帝受禅，加位上大将军，进爵安定郡公。
现代文：隋文帝受禅即位后，升任上大将军，晋封爵位为安定郡公。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Sui Wen, he was promoted to the rank of senior general and given the title of Prince of Ding'an County.

古文：在州数年，甚有声称。
现代文：在汴州数年间，很有声名称誉。
English: During several years in Zhangzhou, it has a very good reputation.

古文：迁相州刺史，政为当时第一。
现代文：调为相州刺史，政绩在当时为第一。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Sangju County, and his political achievements were the best at that time.

古文：上降玺书褒美之，赐以粟帛，班示天下。
现代文：皇帝发下玺书嘉奖，赐予粟帛，布告天下官民。
English: The emperor issued a letter of commendation, bestowed the poppy, and announced that the government and the people of the world had won.

古文：百姓为之语曰： 智无穷，清乡公；上下正，樊安定。 
现代文：老百姓因此说到： 智慧无穷，清乡公；上下公正，樊安定。 
English: Therefore, the common people said: wisdom is infinite, the countryside is clean, the upper and lower levels are fair, and the country is stable.

古文：征拜司农卿，吏人莫不流涕，相与立碑颂德。
现代文：征授司农卿，吏卒无不流泪伤别，商议立碑歌颂他的功德。
English: He was awarded the title of Sino-Farmer, and all the officials bade him a tearful farewell, and discussed erecting a monument to praise his merits.

古文：自为司农，凡所种植，叔略别有条制，皆出人意表。
现代文：自从做了司农，凡属种植的东西，樊叔略都另有条律规定，都出人意表。
English: Since he became the chief farmer, there are different rules and regulations for everything that belongs to planting, which is surprising.

古文：朝廷有疑滞，公卿所未能决，叔略辄为评理。
现代文：朝廷有疑难不通的问题，公卿大臣不能裁决的，樊叔略就根据道理评判是非曲直。
English: The imperial court has problems that are difficult to understand, and if the minister of the court cannot make a ruling, then Zou Shuliao will judge the rights and wrongs according to reason.

古文：虽无学术，有所依据，然师心独见，暗与理合。
现代文：虽然没有学问，可以有所依据，但是以心意为师，独出己见，与理暗合，很得皇上亲宠信任。
English: Although there is no learning, there can be a basis, but with the mind as a teacher, unique opinions, and reason, it is very trusted by the emperor's favorite.

古文：甚为上所亲委，高颎、杨素礼遇之。叔略虽为司农，往往参督九卿事。
现代文：高赹、杨素对他以礼相待。樊叔略虽然是司农，也常常参管九卿事务。
English: Gao Yao and Yang Su treated him with courtesy. Although Gao Shu Li was a farmer, he often took part in the affairs of the Nine Lords.

古文：性颇豪侈，每食方丈，备水陆。
现代文：性情喜爱奢侈，每当饮宴，一定肴馔丰盛，水陆所产很齐全。
English: The temperament likes luxury. Whenever there is a banquet, the dishes must be plentiful. The production of land and water is very complete.

古文：十四年，从祠太山。至洛阳，上令录囚徒。
现代文：隋文帝开皇十四年，随皇帝祭祠泰山，到洛阳，皇帝让他审查囚犯罪状。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Sui, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty went to Luoyang with the Emperor to visit the temple of Taishan. The Emperor asked him to examine the criminal status of the prisoners.

古文：将奏，晨至狱门，于马上暴卒，上嗟悼久之。赠亳州刺史，谥曰襄。
现代文：准备奏呈，早晨到监狱门口，在马上突然死去，皇上哀伤感叹很久，追封亳州刺史，谥号襄。
English: Prepared to report, arrived at the prison gate in the morning, died suddenly right away, the emperor mourned for a long time, and was posthumously awarded the title of the history of Zhangzhou, and the nickname of Xiang.

