古文：士师之职，掌国之五禁之法，以左右刑罚，一曰宫禁，二曰官禁，三曰国禁，四曰野禁，五曰军禁，皆以木铎徇之于朝，书而县于门闾。
现代文：士师的职责，掌管有关五禁之法，以辅助刑罚禁止民众为非作歹：一是有关王宫的禁令，二是有关官府的禁令，三是有关都城的禁令，四是有关都城外田野的禁令，五是有关军中的禁令。都摇响木铎宣示于外朝，并书写出来悬挂在各处的闾巷门前。
English: The duties of the judges, in charge of the law of the five prohibitions, prohibit the people from committing crimes with the help of supplementary punishments: the first is the ban on the royal palace, the second is the ban on the government, the third is the ban on the capital city, the fourth is the ban on the fields outside the capital, and the fifth is the ban on the army.

古文：以五戒先后刑罚，毋使罪丽于民：一曰誓，用之于军旅；二曰诰，用之于会同；三曰禁，用诸田役；四曰纠，用诸国中；五曰宪，用诸都鄙。
现代文：用五戒辅助刑罚而预先告诫民众，不要使民众因不知而犯罪：一是用誓的形式来告诫，用于军旅；二是用诰的形式来告诫，用于会同；三是用禁令的形式来告试；四是用纠的形式来告诫，用于都城中；五是用宪的形式来告诫，用于采邑。
English: Use the five precepts to supplement the punishment and warn the people in advance, so that the people do not commit crimes because they do not know: First, use the form of oath to warn, for the military; Second, use the form of shackle to warn, for the association; Third, use the form of ban to warn; Fourth, use the form of correction to warn, for the capital; Fifth, use the form of constitution to warn, for the mining towns.

古文：掌乡合州党族闾比之联，与其民人之什伍，使之相安相受，以比追胥之事，以施刑罚庆赏。
现代文：掌管六乡的州、党、族、闾、比的联合，以及民众从军组成什伍的联合，使他们相互亲和、相互托付，以相互配合进行追击外寇和抓捕盗贼的事，以共受刑罚、共享庆赏。
English: The union of the state, the party, the ethnic group, the clan and the tribe in charge of the six townships, as well as the union of the people from the army to form a group, so that they are close to each other, entrust each other, and cooperate with each other to pursue the foreign invaders and arrest the thieves, so as to share the punishment and share the celebration.

古文：掌官中之政令，察狱讼之辞，以诏司寇断狱弊讼，致邦令。
现代文：掌管大司寇官府中的政令，研究疑难案件的讼辞，以向司寇提供断案的参考意见，并提供所依据的王国的有关法令。
English: In charge of supervising the decrees issued by the Grand Secretary of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, studying the litigation terms of difficult cases to provide reference opinions to the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and providing the relevant laws and regulations of the kingdom on which to base.

古文：掌士之八成：一曰邦汋，二曰邦贼，三曰邦谍，四曰犯邦令，五曰挢邦令，六曰为邦盗，七曰为邦朋，八曰为邦诬。
现代文：掌管司法官断案的八个方面的成例：一是有关盗取国家机密案件的成例，二是有关叛国作乱案件的成例，三是有关为外国作间谍案件的成例，四是有关违犯王的教令案件的成例，五是有关诈称王命案件的成例，六是有关盗取国家宝藏案件的成例，七是有关结党营私案件的成例，八是有关诬蔑国君或大臣案件的成例。
English: There are eight aspects of cases decided by the judicial officers in charge: the first is the case of stealing state secrets, the second is the case of treason and sedition, the third is the case of spying for a foreign country, the fourth is the case of violating the king's edict, the fifth is the case of fraudulently claiming the king's mandate, the sixth is the case of stealing national treasures, the seventh is the case of forming a political party, and the eighth is the case of defaming the sovereign or a minister.

古文：若邦凶荒，则以荒辩之法治之令，令移民通财，纠守缓刑。
现代文：如果国家发生大灾荒，就用荒年减损之法来处理有关事宜：命令灾区移民，运输财物救灾，加强纠察守备以防盗贼，减缓刑罚。
English: If there is a major disaster or famine in the country, it will use the method of reducing losses in the year of the disaster to deal with the relevant matters: ordering immigrants in the disaster area, transporting property and goods for disaster relief, strengthening the picket guard to prevent thieves, and easing the punishment.

古文：凡以财狱讼者，正之以傅别约剂。
现代文：凡因财物诉讼的，依据契约、合同来裁决。
English: All lawsuits involving property shall be adjudicated on the basis of the contract.

古文：若祭胜国之社稷，则为之尸。
现代文：如果祭祀亡国的社稷，就充当尸以代神受祭。
English: If a shrine dedicated to a deceased country is dedicated, the corpse will be used as a substitute deity.

古文：王燕出入，则前驱而辟。
现代文：王闲暇时出入宫门或国都，就为王做前导并清除行人。
English: When the king enters and leaves the palace gate or the national capital at his leisure, he acts as a guide for the king and clears pedestrians.

古文：祀五帝，则沃尸及五盥，洎镬水。
现代文：祭五帝时，就浇水供尸和王盥手，并负责给镬添水。
English: When the Five Emperors were sacrificed, he poured water for the corpse and the king's severed hand, and was responsible for adding water to the urn.

古文：凡刉珥，则奉犬牲。
现代文：凡举行衅礼，就奉进犬牲以便取其血。
English: Whenever there is a provocation, a dog is sacrificed in order to take its blood.

古文：诸侯为宾，则帅其属而跸于王宫。
现代文：诸侯作为王的宾客而接受王的款待时，就率领下属在王宫中禁止闲人通行。
English: When princes, as the king's guests, received the king's hospitality, they led their subordinates to prohibit the passage of idlers in the royal palace.

古文：大丧，亦如之。
现代文：有大丧时也这样做。
English: This is also done in times of great mourning.

古文：大师帅其属而禁逆军旅者，与犯师禁者而戮之。
现代文：有大规模军事行动时，率领下属严禁违反军令者，以及干扰行伍军阵者，而对这种人加以诛杀。
English: When there is a large-scale military operation, he will lead his subordinates to strictly prohibit those who violate military orders, as well as those who interfere with the marching army, and kill such people.

古文：岁终，则令正要会。
现代文：夏历年终，就命令下属统计整理所审理案件的簿书以备考核。
English: At the end of the year of the lunar calendar, he ordered that the books of the cases tried by the subordinate statistical collation institute be removed for examination.

古文：正岁，帅其属而宪禁令于国及郊野。
现代文：夏历正月，率领下属在国都及郊野悬挂禁令。
English: In the first month of the lunar year, he led his subordinates to suspend the ban in the capital and the countryside.

古文：乡士掌国中，各掌其乡之民数而纠戒之，听其狱讼，察其辞，辨其狱讼，异其死刑之罪而要之。
现代文：乡土掌理六乡以及国都中的诉讼，各掌所属乡的人民数并对乡民加以纠察和禁戒，受理他们的诉讼，审察他们的讼辞，辨别罪状的轻重，区别死罪或施刑之罪而写出判决意见，过十天再在外朝对案件加以审断。
English: The township magistrate shall preside over the lawsuits in the six townships and the national capital, count the number of people in the townships belonging to each magistrate and impose pickets and prohibitions on the villagers, accept their lawsuits, examine their pleadings, distinguish the severity of the crime, distinguish the crime of capital punishment or the crime of imposing punishment and write a judgment opinion, and then adjudicate the case in the foreign country in ten days.

古文：旬而职听于朝，司寇听之，断其狱，弊其讼于朝，群士司刑皆在，各丽其法，以议狱讼，狱讼成，士师受中。
现代文：大司寇主持审断，在外朝对重案、轻案作出判决。掌诉讼和掌刑法的官员们都在场，各自提出法律依据，以参议判决。案件判决后，士师接受判决书加以保存。
English: The chief judge presided over the adjudication and made a judgment on the serious case and the minor case in the foreign country. The officials in charge of litigation and criminal law were present, and each proposed a legal basis to consult the judgment. After the case was decided, the judge accepted the judgment and preserved it.

古文：协日刑杀，肆之三日。
现代文：由乡土挑选合适的日期施刑或诛杀，杀后陈尸三日。
English: The local people will choose a suitable date for the punishment or killing, and the body will be kept for three days after the killing.

古文：若欲免之，则王会其期。
现代文：如果王有想要赦免的罪犯，王就在大司寇主持外朝审断的日期前往参预议罪。
English: If Wang has a criminal he wants to pardon, Wang will go to the pre-trial conference on the date of the trial presided over by the grand secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：大祭祀、大丧纪、大军旅、大宾客，则各掌其乡之禁令，帅其属夹道而跸。
现代文：如果有大祭祀、大丧事、大的军事行动，以及迎送来朝诸侯等事，各自掌管所属乡的禁令，率领下属站在道路两边禁止闲人通行。
English: If there is a large-scale religious ceremony, a large-scale funeral, a large-scale military operation, as well as the welcoming of princes to the DPRK, etc., they will each be in charge of the prohibition of their respective townships, and lead their subordinates to stand on both sides of the road to prohibit idle people from passing.

古文：三公若有邦事，则为之前驱而辟。
现代文：三公如有国事外出，就为他们做前导并清除行人。
English: If the three princes go out on state affairs, they will lead the way and clear pedestrians.

古文：其丧，亦如之。
现代文：三公有丧事时也这样做。
English: The Six Lords also do this when there is a funeral.

古文：凡国有大事，则戮其犯命者。
现代文：凡王国有大事时，就负责诛杀违犯禁令的人。
English: Whenever there is a major event in the kingdom, he is responsible for fighting and killing those who violate the ban.

古文：遂士掌四郊，各掌其遂之民数而纠其戒命，听其狱讼，察其辞，辨其狱讼，异其死刑之罪而要之。
现代文：遂土掌理六遂以及四郊的诉讼，各掌所属遂的人民数，并纠察他们遵守戒令的情况，受理他们的诉讼，审察他们的讼辞，辨别案情的轻重，区别死罪或施刑之罪而写出判决意见，过二十天再在外朝对案件加以审判。
English: Sui and Tu took charge of the lawsuits in the six counties and four suburbs, and the number of people under their jurisdiction, and picketed their compliance with the restraining order, accepted their lawsuits, examined their pleadings, distinguished the seriousness of the case, distinguished the crime of capital punishment or the crime of imposing punishment and wrote a judgment opinion, and then tried the case in the foreign country in twenty days.

古文：二旬而职听于朝，司寇听之，断其狱，弊其讼于朝，群士司刑皆在，各丽其法，以议狱讼。
现代文：大司寇主持审断，在外朝对重案、轻案作出判决，掌诉讼和掌刑法的官员们都在场，各自提出法律依据以参议判决。
English: The chief judge presided over the trial and made a judgment on the serious case and the minor case in the foreign country. The officials in charge of litigation and criminal law were present, and each of them proposed the legal basis for the judgment.

古文：狱讼成，士师受中，协日就郊而刑杀，各於其遂肆之三日。
现代文：案件判决后，士师接受判决书加以保存。由遂士挑选合适的日期就国郊施刑或诛杀，杀后各在本遂陈尸三日。
English: After the case is adjudicated, the judge will accept the verdict and keep it. The executioner will choose a suitable date to execute or kill the criminal, and the bodies will be displayed for three days after each killing.

古文：若欲免之，则王令三公会其期。
现代文：如果王有想要赦免的罪犯，王就命三公在大司寇主持外朝审断的日期前往参预议罪。
English: If the king has a criminal who wants to be pardoned, the king will order the three brothers to go to the pre-trial crime on the date of the foreign court's adjudication presided over by the grand magistrate.

古文：若邦有大事聚众庶，则各掌其遂之禁令，帅其属而跸。
现代文：如果王国有大事要聚集六遂的民众，就各掌有关本遂民众的禁令，率领下属禁止闲人通行。
English: If there is an important event in the kingdom that requires the gathering of the people of the six realms, each of them will issue a ban on the people of the six realms and lead his subordinates to prohibit the passage of idlers.

古文：六卿若有邦事，则为之前驱而辟。
现代文：六卿如果有国事而来到遂地，就为他们做前导并清除路上的行人。
English: If the six lords come to Suiji for a state affair, they will lead the way and clear the road of pedestrians.

古文：其丧，亦如之。
现代文：六卿有丧事时也这样做。
English: The Six Lords also do this when there is a funeral.

古文：凡郊有大事，则戮其犯命者。
现代文：凡郊地有大事，就诛杀那些违犯命令的人。
English: Whenever there is a big event in the suburbs, they fight and kill those who disobey orders.

古文：县士掌野，各掌其县之民数，纠其戒令而听其狱讼，察其辞，辨其狱讼，异其死刑之罪而要之。
现代文：县士掌理野地公邑的诉讼，各掌所属公邑的人民数，并纠察他们遵守戒令的情况，而受理他们的诉讼，审察他们的讼辞，辨别案情的轻重，区别死罪或施刑之罪而写出判决意见，过三十天再在外朝对案件加以审断。
English: The county magistrate handled the lawsuits of the field communes, counted the number of people in the communes belonging to each magistrate, and picketed their compliance with the restraining order, while accepting their lawsuits, examining their pleadings, distinguishing the seriousness of the case, distinguishing the crime of death or the crime of imposing punishment and writing a judgment opinion, and then adjudicating the case in the foreign country after 30 days.

古文：三旬而职听于朝，司寇听之，断其狱，弊其讼于朝，群士司刑皆在，各丽其法，以议狱讼。
现代文：大司寇主持审断，在外朝对重案、轻案作出判决，掌诉讼和掌刑法的官员们都在场，各自提出法律依据以参议判决。
English: The chief judge presided over the trial and made a judgment on the serious case and the minor case in the foreign country. The officials in charge of litigation and criminal law were present, and each of them proposed the legal basis for the judgment.

古文：狱讼成，士师受中，协日刑杀，各就其县肆之三日。
现代文：案件判决后，士师接受判决书加以保存，由县士挑选合适的日期施刑或诛杀，各就本公邑行刑，杀后陈尸三日。
English: After the case is adjudicated, the judge will accept the verdict and keep it. The county magistrate will choose a suitable date for the punishment or killing. The punishment will be carried out in the county, and the body will be cremated three days after the killing.

古文：若欲免之，则王命六卿会其期。
现代文：如果王想要赦免某罪犯，王就命六卿在大司寇主持外朝审断的日期前往参预议罪。
English: If the king wants to pardon a criminal, the king will order the six nobles to go to the pre-trial crime on the date of the trial of the foreign court presided over by the grand secretary.

古文：若邦有大役聚众庶，则各掌其县之禁令。
现代文：如果王国有大规模劳役要聚集公邑民众，就各掌有关本公邑民众的禁令。
English: If the kingdom has a large-scale labor service to gather the people of the commune, the ban on the people of the commune will be imposed.

古文：若大夫有邦事，则为之前驱而辟。
现代文：如果大夫有国事而来到公邑，就为他们做前导并清除路上的行人。
English: If the doctor comes to the commune on state business, he leads the way and clears the road of pedestrians.

古文：其丧亦如之。
现代文：大夫有丧事时也这样做。
English: Doctors do the same when there is a death.

古文：凡野有大事，则戮其犯命者。
现代文：凡野地有大事，就诛杀违犯命令的人。
English: Whenever there is a major incident, they kill those who disobey orders.

古文：方士掌都家，听其狱讼之辞，辨其死刑之罪而要之。
现代文：方土掌理采邑的诉讼，听察他们的讼辞，区别死罪或施刑之罪而写出判决意见，过三个月而后把案件上报王朝。
English: Fang Tuo presided over the lawsuits of the villages, listened to their arguments, distinguished between the crime of death or the crime of punishment and wrote a judgment opinion, and then reported the case to the dynasty after three months.

古文：三月而上狱讼于国，司寇听其成于朝，群士、司刑皆在，各丽其法，以议狱讼。
现代文：大司寇在外朝审理方士的评断意见，掌诉讼和掌刑法的官员们都在场，各自提出法律依据以参议判决。
English: The judges' opinions of the grand marshal were heard by the grand marshal in the foreign court. The officials in charge of litigation and criminal law were present, and each of them proposed a legal basis for the advisory judgment.

古文：狱讼成，士师受中，书其刑杀之成，与其听狱讼者。
现代文：案件判决后，士师接受判决书加以保存，而由方士记暴所判的罪刑以及参与审判案件的官吏。
English: After the case is adjudicated, the judge accepts the verdict and keeps it, while the court clerk records the crime and punishment of the case, as well as the officials involved in the trial.

古文：凡都家之大事聚众庶，则各掌其方之禁令，以时修其县法。
现代文：凡都家因有大事聚集民众，就各掌有关本方民众的禁令。
English: Due to large gatherings of people, each side imposed a ban on its own people.

古文：若岁终，则省之而诛赏焉，凡都家之士所上治，则主之。
现代文：按四季贯彻施行县法，到了夏历年终就检查县法的执行情况，而对采邑的官吏进行奖惩。凡都士、家士所上报的有疑难的案件，就负责初审而后上报大司寇。
English: According to the four seasons, the county law will be implemented, and the implementation of the county law will be checked at the end of the year according to the lunar calendar, and the officials of the county will be rewarded and punished. If there are difficult cases reported by ordinary people and scholars, they will be responsible for the preliminary examination and then reported to the grand secretary.

古文：讶士掌四方之狱讼，论罪刑于邦国。
现代文：讶士掌理四方诸侯的诉讼，向诸侯国解释刑法条文议及制定刑法的本意。
English: He took charge of the litigation of the four princes, and explained to the princes the original intention of the criminal law and the formulation of the criminal law.

古文：凡四方之有治於士者造焉，四方有乱狱，则往而成之。
现代文：凡四方诸侯国有疑难案件或问题需向士师请示的，都先见讶士由讶士通报士师。
English: Whenever there was a difficult case or a problem that needed to be referred to a judge in the four-party state, it was first reported to the judge by the judge.

古文：邦有宾客，则与行人送逆之。
现代文：四方诸侯如果发生君臣淫乱、上下相虐之类的案件，就前往审断。王国有宾客，就与小行人一起迎送。
English: The lords of the four directions would go to adjudicate if there was a case of lasciviousness between a prince and a vassal, or sexual abuse between a prince and a vassal. If there were guests in the kingdom, they would send them off together with the peddlers.

古文：入于国，则为之前驱而辟。
现代文：宾客入王都，就为宾客做前导并清除行人。
English: When the guests enter the royal capital, they will guide the guests and clear the pedestrians.

古文：野亦如之。
现代文：在野地也这样做。
English: Do the same in the field.

古文：居馆，则帅其属而为之跸，诛戮暴客者。
现代文：宾客居住馆舍，就率领下属在周围禁止行人通行。诛杀侵暴宾客的人。
English: He led his subordinates to prohibit pedestrians from passing around the guest residence, and fought and killed those who abused the guests.

古文：客出入则道之。有治则赞之。
现代文：宾客出入王朝就做前导，有事询问或提出请求就帮助转达。
English: Guests enter and leave the dynasty, and he acts as a guide. If there are any questions or requests, he will help convey them.

古文：凡邦之大事聚従庶，则读其誓禁。
现代文：凡王国有大事聚集民众，就宣读誓辞和禁令。
English: Whenever there is a great gathering in the kingdom, the oaths and prohibitions are read.

古文：朝士掌建邦外朝之法。
现代文：朝士负责建立王国的外朝之法。
English: Court nobles were responsible for establishing the foreign laws of the kingdom.

古文：左九棘，孤、卿、大夫位焉，群士在其后。
现代文：左边种有九棵棘树，是孤、卿、大夫的朝位，群士的朝位在他们后边。
English: On the left, there are nine thorn trees, which are the morning seats of the lonely, the noble, and the doctor, and the morning seats of the group are behind them.

古文：右九棘，公侯、伯、子、男位焉，群吏在其后。
现代文：右边种有九棵棘树，是公、侯、伯、子、男的朝位，群吏的朝位在他们后边。
English: On the right side, there are nine thorn trees planted, which are the morning seats of the prince, lord, great-grandfather, son, and son-in-law, and the morning seats of the officials are behind them.

古文：面三槐，三公位焉，州长众庶在其后。
现代文：前边种有三棵槐树，是三公的朝位，州长与民众代表的朝位在他们后边。
English: In front, there are three eucalyptus trees, which are the thrones of the three princes, and behind them, the thrones of the governor and the representatives of the people.

古文：左嘉石，平罢民焉。
现代文：朝门左边设置嘉石，用以使不良之民改过向善。
English: On the left side of the morning gate, there is a precious stone, which is used to turn bad people into good ones.

古文：右肺石，达穷民焉。
现代文：朝门右边设置肺石，用以使穷苦无告之民的冤辞能够上达。
English: There is a lung stone on the right side of the morning gate, which is used to make it possible for the grievances of the destitute people to be heard.

古文：帅其属而以鞭呼趋且辟。
现代文：率领下属在外朝巡行，拿着鞭子呼喊着清除行人。
English: He led his subordinates on a patrol in the Outer Court, holding a whip and shouting to clear pedestrians.

古文：禁慢朝、错立、族谈者。
现代文：禁止在朝而不肃敬、擅离朝位，以及招聚交谈的人。
English: It is forbidden to be disrespectful in the court, to leave the court without permission, and to invite people to talk.

古文：凡得获货贿人民六畜者，委于朝，告于士。旬而举之，大者公之，小者庶民私之。
现代文：凡拾得财物、捕获逃亡的奴婢和牲畜，送交外朝，报告朝士，过十天无人认领而加以没收：大物归公，小物归拾得的民众私人所有。
English: All the property that was found and the captured runaway slaves and livestock were sent to the foreign court, reported to the court officials, and confiscated after ten days without being claimed: the large items were returned to the public, and the small items were returned to the private ownership of the people who collected them.

古文：凡士之治有期日，国中一旬，郊二旬，野三旬，都三月，邦国期，期内之治听，期外不听。
现代文：凡司法官受理诉讼有日期规定：都城中十天，城郊二十天，野地三十天，诸侯国一年。在期限之内就受理，在期限之外就不受理。
English: Where a judicial officer accepts a lawsuit, there is a time limit: ten days in the capital, twenty days in the suburbs, thirty days in the countryside, and one year in the provinces. It is accepted within the time limit, and is not accepted outside the time limit.

古文：凡有责者，有判书以治，则听。
现代文：凡有债务纠纷，有借赁契劲而诉讼就受理。
English: If there is a debt dispute, the case will be accepted if there is a lease agreement.

古文：凡民同货财者，令以国法行之。犯令者，刑罚之。
现代文：凡民众有收购或抛售货物的，命他们按照国家规定的赢利法经营，违反命令的处以刑罚。
English: Where the public has purchased or sold goods, they are ordered to operate in accordance with the profit-making law stipulated by the state, and those who violate the order will be punished.

古文：凡属责者，以其地傅而听其辞。凡盗贼军乡邑及家人，杀之无罪。
现代文：凡接受已故债主的嘱托而收债的，如果负债人拒不偿还而发生诉讼，通过与受委托人居处相近的人证明他确实接受过债主的委托，而后受理他们的诉讼。凡盗贼攻略杀害乡遂、公邑以及平民人家，杀死这些盗贼无罪。
English: Those who accept the dead creditor's commission to collect debts, if the debtor refuses to repay and a lawsuit occurs, prove that he has indeed accepted the creditor's commission through a person similar to the entrusted living place, and then accept their lawsuit. If thieves attack and kill townships, townships and civilian homes, they are not guilty of killing these thieves.

古文：凡报仇雠者，书于士，杀之无罪。
现代文：凡报仇的人，事先书面报告司法官，杀死仇人无罪。
English: Anyone who takes revenge must inform the magistrate in writing in advance and is not guilty of killing the enemy.

古文：若邦凶荒、札丧、寇戎之故，则令邦国、都家、县鄙虑刑贬。
现代文：如果国家有大灾荒、瘟疫或军事行动，就命令诸侯国、采邑、公邑考虑减缓刑罚和经费开支。
English: If there is a major disaster, plague or military action in the country, it will order the provinces, counties and towns to consider easing the penalties and expenses.

