古文：王僧虔陈悝宫亭庙安世高曲阿神谢奂李滔树伯道侯褚卢循陈臣张舒萧惠明柳积赵文昭河伯邵敬伯吴兴人刘子卿
现代文：王僧虔陈悝宫亭庙安世高曲阿神谢奂李滔树伯道侯褚卢循陈臣张舒萧惠明柳积赵文昭河伯邵敬伯吴兴人刘子卿
English: Wang Monk Qian Chen, the palace pavilion, the temple, the world peace, the high-pitched melody, Ah Sheng Xie, Li Tao, the tree, the monk, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road, the road

古文：王僧虔
现代文：王僧虔
English: King Seon Kyi

古文：晋王僧虔秉政，使从事宗宝，统作长沙城。
现代文：晋代王僧虔主持政事，派从事宗宝统镇长沙城。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, Wang Zengqian presided over the government affairs and sent officials to Changsha City, the capital of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：忽见一传教官语曰： 君何敢坏吾宫室？
现代文：一日，宗宝忽然看见一个传教官跑过来对他说： 你怎么敢破坏我的宫室呢？ 
English: One day, Zongbao suddenly saw a missionary running up to him and saying, "How dare you destroy my palace?"

古文：司命官相诛。 
现代文：伺机命人相杀。
English: Waiting for an opportunity to kill each other.

古文：寻时宗宝乃坠马。
现代文：旋即，宗宝从马上摔了下来。
English: Instantly, Zongbao fell off the horse.

古文：其夜，僧虔梦见一贵人来通，宾从鲜盛，语僧虔曰： 吾是长沙王吴君。
现代文：当天夜里，王僧虔梦见一位贵人来登门拜访，其随从之多之排场，是很少见的。那贵人对王僧虔说： 我是长沙王吴君呵。
English: That night, Wang Zengqian had a dream that a dignitary came to visit him. It is rare to see such a large number of dignitaries. The dignitary said to Wang Zengqian, "I am the King of Changsha, Wu Jun."

古文：此所居之处。公何意苦我？
现代文：这里是我住的地方，你何必要难为我？
English: This is where I live, why do you have to be mean to me?

古文：若为我速料理，当位至三公。 
现代文：你如果能快点把这事处理好，我保你位至太尉、司徒、司空三公。 
English: If you can quickly deal with this matter, I'll keep you in the rank of captain, Satoru, and Siku.

古文：僧虔于是立庙。
现代文：于是，王僧虔为他修起一座庙。
English: As a result, Wang Sangyan built a temple for him.

古文：自后祈祷无不应。
现代文：此后，凡是来祈祷没有不应验的。
English: After that, anyone who came to pray did not go unanswered.

古文：陈悝
现代文：陈悝
English: Chen Yao

古文：隆安中，丹徒民陈悝，于江边作鱼簄。潮去，于簄中得一女，长六尺，有容色，无衣裳，水去不能动，卧沙中。
现代文：东晋隆安年间，丹徒县有个百姓叫陈悝，在江边编放了一个鱼篓子，退潮之后，在鱼篓里有一个女子，六尺高，颇有姿色，裸体，水退去之后不能动弹，躺在沙滩上。
English: During the Longan period of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a citizen in Dantu County named Chen Yu, who placed a fishing net on the edge of the river. After the ebb tide, there was a woman in the net, six feet tall, quite handsome, naked, unable to move after the water receded, lying on the beach.

古文：与语不应。有一人就奸之。
现代文：有一个人上前把她奸污了。
English: A man came forward and raped her.

古文：悝夜梦云： 我江神也。
现代文：陈悝晚上做了个梦，梦见那女子对他说： 我是江神呵。
English: Chen Yao had a dream in the evening. He dreamt that the woman said to him, "I am the god of the river.

古文：昨失路，落君簄中，小人辱我。
现代文：昨天迷了路，落入你的鱼篓里，被小人奸污了。
English: Yesterday I lost my way, fell into your net, and was raped by a villain.

古文：今当白尊神，杀之。 
现代文：今天我要报告尊神，杀了这个小人！ 
English: Today I'm going to report to God, kill this villain!

古文：悝不敢归，得潮来，自逐水而去。
现代文：陈悝不敢放她回去。等到涨潮的时候，她便随水而逝。
English: Chen Yao did not dare to let her go back. When the tide rose, she died with the water.

古文：奸者寻亦病死矣。
现代文：不久，那个奸污她的人就病死了。
English: Soon after, the man who raped her fell ill and died.

古文：宫亭庙
现代文：宫亭庙
English: Gion-tei Temple

古文：南康宫亭庙，殊有神验。
现代文：南康郡有座宫亭庙，有神且非常之灵验。
English: Nankang County has a palace and temple, which is divine and very effective.

古文：晋孝武世，有一沙门至庙。神像见之，泪出交流。
现代文：东晋孝武帝在位时，有一佛教徒来到庙前，庙里的神像看见他，不由泪水交流。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty was on the throne, a Buddhist came to the front of the temple. When the statues in the temple saw him, they could not help but exchange tears.

古文：因摽姓字，则是昔友也。
现代文：于是他们道出姓名字号，原来从前是一对好朋友。
English: So they gave their first names and last numbers. They used to be good friends.

古文：自说： 我罪深，能见济脱不？ 
现代文：那神自己说： 我罪孽深重，能不能帮助我早日解脱？ 
English: The god himself said: I am deeply sinful, can you help me get rid of it as soon as possible?

古文：沙门即为斋戒诵经，语曰： 我欲见卿真形。 
现代文：那僧人当即为他斋戒诵经，并说： 我想看看你的真面目。 
English: The monk immediately broke his fast and chanted for him, saying, "I want to see the real you."

古文：神云： 禀形甚丑，不可出也。 
现代文：神说： 我长得很丑，不可现原形呀。 
English: God said: I am very ugly, I cannot appear in my original form.

古文：沙门苦请，遂化为蛇，身长数丈，垂头梁上，一心听经，目中血出。
现代文：僧人再三请求，神便变成一条蛇，好几丈长，把头垂在房梁上，聚精会神地听僧人诵经。
English: After repeated requests from the monk, the god turned into a snake, several feet long, hung his head on the beam of the house, and listened attentively to the monk chanting.

古文：至七日七夜，蛇死，庙亦歇绝。
现代文：后来，这蛇的眼睛里冒出血来，到七天七夜时，它死了，这座宫亭庙也关了门。
English: Later, the snake's eyes began to bleed, and at the end of seven days and seven nights, it died, and the temple closed its doors.

古文：安世高
现代文：安世高
English: Ansei High School

古文：安侯世高者，安息国王子。与大长者共出家，学道舍卫城。
现代文：有位王侯叫安世高，本是安息国太子，和大长者一同出家为僧，在舍卫城里学道。
English: There was a prince named An Shigao, who was originally the prince of Saba, who became a monk together with the great elder and studied in Shewei.

古文：值主不称，大长者子辄恚，世高恒呵戒之。
现代文：遇上个主持不称心，大长者之子便常常发脾气，安世高总是呵责警告他。
English: The son of a great elder often loses his temper when he is dissatisfied with a host, and An Shigao always scolds and warns him.

古文：周旋二十八年。云当至广州。
现代文：安世高与他打了二十八年的交道，后来说自己应该到广州去。
English: An Shigao had a relationship with him for 28 years, and later said that he should go to Guangzhou.

古文：值乱，有一人逢高，唾手拔刀曰： 真得汝矣。 
现代文：正值战乱，有一个人遇上他，唾手拔刀说： 果然找到你了！ 
English: During the war, there was a man who met him, drew his sword and said: I have found you!

古文：高大笑曰： 我宿命负对，故远来相偿。 
现代文：安世高大笑道： 我命中注定要负于对手，因此远道而来使你得到满足。 
English: An Shigao laughed loudly, "I was destined to lose to my opponent, so I came all the way here to satisfy you."

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：那人遂将安世高杀了。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：有一少年云： 此远国异人，而能作吾国言，受害无难色，将是神人乎？ 
现代文：有一个少年说： 这位从遥远国度里来的奇人，能够说我们国家的话，而且临死不惧，就会变成神人呀！ 
English: A boy said, "This strange man from a faraway land, who can speak the language of our country and is not afraid of dying, will become a god-man!"

古文：众皆骇笑。
现代文：众人都惊异地笑起来。
English: Everyone laughed in surprise.

古文：世高神识还生安息国，复为王作子，名高。
现代文：安世高的神魂回到安息国，又托生为王子，名高。
English: The spirit of An Shigao returned to the Land of Rest and was reborn as a prince with a high reputation.

古文：安侯年二十，复辞王学道。
现代文：他二十岁的时候，又告别父王去学道。
English: When he was twenty years old, he said goodbye to his father and went to study Taoism.

古文：十数年，语同学云： 当诣会稽毕对。 
现代文：十九年过去了，他对同学们说： 我应当去会稽山毕对。 
English: Nineteen years later, he said to his classmates: I should have gone to the examination hall.

古文：过庐山，访知识，遂过广州。
现代文：于是，他们经过庐山，访寻有造诣的人，随后来在广州。
English: So they went through Lushan to look for accomplished people, and then to Guangzhou.

古文：见少年尚在，径投其家，与说昔事，大欣喜。便随至会稽。
现代文：安世高得知当年那个说他会变成神人的少年还在，便径直来到他家，跟他说起当年自己被杀的往事，那少年欣喜若狂，便随安世高到会稽山稽山庙前。
English: When An Shigao learned that the boy who said he would become a god was still alive, he went straight to his house and told him about the time he was killed. The boy was overjoyed and followed An Shigao to the front of the Jishan Temple.

古文：过稽山庙，呼神共语。庙神蟒形，身长数丈，泪出。
现代文：少年喊庙神说话，那庙神现出蟒的原形，好几丈长，眼里在流泪。
English: The boy called out to the god of the temple to speak, and the god of the temple appeared in the original form of a skull, several feet tall, with tears in his eyes.

古文：世高向之语，蟒便去。世高亦还船。
现代文：安世高对它说了几句什么，那蟒便走了，世高也回到船上。
English: An Shigao said something to it, then the dragonfly left, and Shigao returned to the boat.

古文：有一少年上船，长跪前受咒愿，因遂不见。
现代文：这时，有一个少年跳上船来，长跪在安世高面前，接受他的祝告和希望。
English: At this time, a boy jumped onto the boat and knelt in front of An Shigao to receive his wishes and hopes.

古文：世高曰： 向少年即庙神，得离恶形矣。 
现代文：然后，那少年竟不见了踪影。安世高说： 刚才那个少年，就是庙神；他难得脱开那个丑恶的体形呀！ 
English: Then, the boy disappeared without a trace. An Shigao said, "That boy just now is the god of the temple; he can hardly get rid of that ugly body!

古文：云庙神即是宿长者子。
现代文：他又说庙神就是当年那个大长者之子。
English: He also said that the temple god was the son of that great elder.

古文：后庙祝闻有臭气，见大蟒死，庙从此神歇。
现代文：后来，到庙上来祈祷的人闻到一股腥臭气，才发现那条大蟒死了，庙也从此关门。
English: Later, people who came to the temple to pray smelled a foul stench, only to find out that the cocoon was dead, and the temple has since closed its doors.

古文：前至会稽，入市门，值有相打者。
现代文：安世高来到会稽，进了城门，正赶上有人在打架。
English: An Shigao came to the auditorium and entered the city gate, just in time to see someone fighting.

古文：误中世高头，即卒。
现代文：不慎，误中安世高的脑袋，他当即毙命。
English: Inadvertently, he accidentally hit Andsengo in the head, killing him instantly.

古文：广州客遂瘗之于佛舍。
现代文：广州客一一那位少年随即把他埋葬在寺庙旁。
English: The boy from Guangzhou buried him next to the temple.

古文：曲阿神
现代文：曲阿神
English: Qu Ah Shen

古文：曲阿当大埭下有庙。
现代文：曲阿县境内，面对着大坝有一座庙。
English: In Qua County, there is a temple facing the dam.

古文：晋孝武世，有一逸劫，官司十人追之。
现代文：东晋孝武帝当朝时，有一个劫匪逃跑，官府派出十个人追捕他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, a robber escaped, and the government sent ten men to chase him.

古文：劫迳至庙，跪请求救，许上一猪。
现代文：那劫匪径直跑进庙里，跪下求助神人保祐救他一命，并许愿说过些日子送来一头猪。
English: The robber ran straight into the temple, knelt down and begged the godman to save his life, and promised to send a pig some day.

古文：因不觉忽在床下。
现代文：于是，不知不觉忽然就滚进了床底下。
English: As a result, he unknowingly rolled under the bed.

古文：追者至，觅不见。
现代文：追捕他的人赶到了，怎么也找不到他。
English: His pursuers arrived and couldn't find him.

古文：群吏悉见入门，又无出处。因请曰： 若得劫者，当上大牛。 
现代文：捕吏们全都看见他进了这个门，又没有别的出口，于是也向庙神祈祷说： 如果你能让我们捕到劫匪，过几天给你送条大牛来！ 
English: The officers all saw that he had entered through this gate and had no other way out, so they also prayed to the god of the temple and said, "If you can let us catch the robbers, in a few days we will send you a large ox!"

古文：少时劫形见，吏即缚将去。
现代文：有顷，那劫匪露出马脚，捕吏们立即绑住他就要走。
English: Suddenly, the robber showed his true colors, and the arresting officers immediately tied him up and were about to leave.

古文：劫因云： 神灵已见过度，云何有牛猪之异？
现代文：劫匪于是说道： 你作为神灵这样做大过分了，你说牛和猪对于你有什么不同？
English: The robber then said: You have gone too far as a god, what difference do you think there is between a cow and a pig?

古文：而乖前福。 
现代文：为什么违背先前的许诺？ 
English: Why renege on previous promises?

古文：言未绝口，觉神像面色有异。
现代文：话未说完，只见那神像的脸色有了变化。
English: Before the words were out of his mouth, I saw the face of the statue change.

古文：既出门，有大虎张口而来，迳夺取劫，衔以去。
现代文：出门之后，有只大老虎张着大嘴扑将过来，径直夺下劫匪，衔着他跑掉了。
English: After he left the house, a big tiger with its mouth wide open pounced on him, grabbed the robber and ran away with him.

古文：谢奂
现代文：谢奂
English: Xie Yao

古文：青溪小姑庙，云是蒋侯第三妹。
现代文：青溪县境内有座小姑庙，说是为蒋侯的三妹所建。
English: There is a small temple in Qingxi County, which is said to have been built for Jiang Hou's three younger sisters.

古文：庙中有大穀扶疏，鸟常产育其上。
现代文：庙里有株大树扶疏，鸟儿们经常在上面生儿育女。
English: There are large trees in the temple, and birds often give birth and raise their young on them.

古文：太元中，谢庆弹杀数头，即觉体中慄然。
现代文：东晋太元年间，谢庆用弹弓杀死几只鸟儿后，当即觉得体内颤栗不已。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, after Xie Qing killed several birds with a slingshot, he immediately felt trembling in his body.

古文：至夜，梦一女子，衣裳楚楚，怒云： 此鸟是我所养，何故见侵？ 
现代文：到了晚上，他梦见一个女人，衣裳楚楚动人，对他怒气冲冲地说： 这些鸟儿是我养的，你为什么要伤害它们？ 
English: In the evening, he dreamt of a woman in a beautiful dress, who angrily said to him: "I raised these birds, why are you hurting them?

古文：经日谢卒。
现代文：过了几天，谢庆就死了。
English: A few days later, Xie Qing passed away.

古文：庆名奂，灵运父也。
现代文：谢庆名为奂，他就是谢灵运的父亲呵。
English: Xie Qing's name is Yao, he is Xie Lingyun's father.

古文：李滔
现代文：李滔
English: Li Tao

古文：吴郡桐庐，有徐君庙，吴时所立。
现代文：吴郡桐庐县，有座徐君庙，东吴时所建。
English: In Tonglu County, Wuxi County, there is a Xu Jun Temple, which was built in the Eastern Wu Dynasty.

古文：左右有为劫道非法者，便如拘缚，终至讨执。
现代文：附近有抢劫的盗窃的等犯法的人，便像被逮捕时那样把自己绑起来，临死前到这里忏悔并讨要牵引柩车的绳索。
English: People who have committed crimes such as robbery, theft, etc. in the vicinity tie themselves up as they did when they were arrested, and come here to repent and ask for the rope to pull the forklift before they die.

古文：东阳长山吏李滔，以义熙中，遭事在都。
现代文：东阳郡长山县的官吏李滔，于东晋义熙年间摊上了事，被困在京都。
English: Li Tao, a government official from Changshan County, Dongyang County, had an affair during the Eastern Jin Dynasty and was trapped in Kyoto.

古文：妇自出料理。
现代文：他的妻子只好自己出来料理一些事情。
English: His wife had to take matters into her own hands.

古文：过庙请乞恩，拔银钗为愿。
现代文：一次，她从徐君庙前经过，便进去祈祷请庙神施恩，并拔下头上的银钗奉上，算作还愿。
English: Once, when she passed by the Xu Jun Temple, she went inside to pray for the grace of the temple deity, and plucked the silver fern from her head and offered it to the deity, which was counted as a wish.

古文：未至富阳，有鱼跳落妇前。剖腹，还得所愿钗。
现代文：没等她走到富阳，有条鱼跳落到她的面前，等到把鱼剖腹，鱼腹中有庙神送还的那支银钗。
English: Before she walked to Fuyang, a fish jumped down in front of her. When the fish was disemboweled, the temple god had given back the silver ingot.

古文：夫事寻散。
现代文：不久，她丈夫所摊之事也烟消云散了。
English: Soon, her husband's affair fizzled out, too.

古文：树伯道
现代文：树伯道
English: Shu Bo Road

古文：余杭县有仇王庙，由来多神异。
现代文：余杭县有座仇王庙，从建庙以来发生不少神奇怪异之事。
English: There is a Qiuwang Temple in Yuhang County, and many strange things have happened since the temple was built.

古文：隆安初，县人树伯道为吏，得假将归。
现代文：东晋隆安初年，县里有个叫树伯道的人，在官府中当小吏。
English: In the first year of East Jin Longan, there was a man in the county called Shu Bo Dao, who worked as a minor official in the government.

古文：于汝南湾觅载，见一朱舸，中有贵人。
现代文：一天，他请假回家，在汝南湾待渡时，看见来了只红船，上面有位贵人。
English: One day, he asked for leave to go home. While waiting for the ferry in Runan Bay, he saw a red boat with a dignitary on it.

古文：因求寄。
现代文：于是，他向贵人求载。
English: So he asked the gentleman for a lift.

古文：须臾如睡，犹闻有声，若剧甚雨。
现代文：不一会儿，他昏昏沉沉，如同睡着了一般，还听到一种声音，像下大雨似的。
English: After a while, he felt drowsy, as if he had fallen asleep, and heard a sound that sounded like heavy rain.

古文：俄而至家。
现代文：俄顷，他便回到家中。
English: Suddenly, he was back home.

古文：以问船工，亦云仇王也。
现代文：他向船夫询问，亦说那贵人便是仇王。
English: He inquired of the boatman, and was told that the nobleman was the king's enemy.

古文：伯道拜谢而还。
现代文：树伯道望着远去的红船拜谢一番，才进到屋里。
English: Shu Bo looked at the red boat in the distance and bowed before entering the house.

古文：侯褚
现代文：侯褚
English: Hou Xuan

古文：郯县西乡，有杨郎庙。县有一人先事之。
现代文：郯县的西乡，有一座杨郎庙，县里有一个人先来奉祀之。
English: In Xixiang, Handan County, there is a Yang Lang Temple. One person in the county was the first to worship it.

古文：后就祭酒侯褚，求入大道。
现代文：后来，他便与任祭酒的诸侯就伴，一起祈祷以期得道。
English: Later, he accompanied the lords who were serving the sacrificial wine and prayed together with the hope of attaining the Way.

古文：遇谯郡楼无陇诣褚，共至祠舍，烧神坐器服。
现代文：不久，逢谯郡的楼无陇拜会侯褚，三人便一同来到庙里，烧神坐器服。
English: Soon, the three of them went to the temple together to worship the god of fire, dressed in ceremonial clothing.

古文：无陇乞将一扇。
现代文：楼无陇乞得了一把扇子。
English: Lou Muxuan begged for a fan.

古文：经岁，无陇闻有乘马人呼楼无陇数四声，云： 汝故不还杨明府扇耶？ 
现代文：一年之后，楼无陇听见一个骑马的人连喊他四声 楼无陇 ，并说道： 你为什么不还我们杨郡守的扇子呢？ 
English: A year later, Lou Muxuan heard a man on horseback call him four times, "Lou Muxuan," and said: "Why don't you return the fan to our Yang Guanzhong?"

古文：言毕，回骑如去。
现代文：说完，调转马头而去。
English: With that, he turned his horse around and rode away.

古文：陇遂得瘘病而死。
现代文：不久，楼无陇患瘘病而死。
English: Soon after, Lou Muxuan died of rickets.

古文：卢循
现代文：卢循
English: Lu Xun

古文：义熙四年，卢循在广州，阴规逆谋。潜遣人到南康庙祈请，既奠牲奏鼓。
现代文：东晋义熙四年，卢循在广州阴谋造反，偷偷派人到南康庙祈祷祭祀，并奏起鼓乐奉上牺牲。
English: In the fourth year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Lu Xun plotted a rebellion in Guangzhou, secretly sent people to the Nankang Temple to pray and offer sacrifices, and played drum music to offer sacrifices.

古文：使者独见一人，武冠朱衣，中筵而坐曰： 卢征虏若起事，至此，当以水相送。 
现代文：被派去的亲信在庙中只见一人，戴着武将的帽子穿着红色的衣服，往中间的席位上一坐，说： 征虏大将军卢循如果想造反起事，来到此外，我奉送给他的是水。 
English: The close confidant who had been sent saw only one person in the temple, wearing a warrior's cap and red clothes. He sat down in the middle seat and said, "If Conscript General Lu Xun wants to rebel, come to me. In addition, I sent him water."

古文：六年春，循遂率众直造长沙，遣徐道覆逾岭。至南康，装艗十二，艟楼十丈余。
现代文：义熙六年的春天，卢循率领人马直奔长沙，派徐道覆等过岭去南康，装了十二船军需品，每船都有十多丈高。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Yixi's reign, Lu Cun led his men straight to Changsha, sent Xu Daohui and others to cross the ridge to Nankang, and loaded twelve ships of military supplies, each ship more than ten meters high.

古文：舟装始办，大雨一日一夜，水起四丈，道覆凌波而下，与循会巴陵。
现代文：船装完开始出发，天突然下起大雨，一天一夜，江水上涨四丈，徐道覆率船队顺流而下，与卢循在巴陵会师。
English: After the ships were loaded, they set off. Suddenly, it rained heavily. One day and one night, the river water rose four meters, and the fleet sailed down the river at a slow rate to join Lu Xun in Baling.

古文：至都而循战败。
现代文：直逼京都建康后，却多次战败，卢循投水而死。
English: After Kyoto was restored to health, he was defeated several times, and Lu Xun drowned.

古文：不意神速其诛，洪潦之降，使之自送也。
现代文：想不到他这么快就完了。雨水及山洪，使他自己断送了自己。
English: I didn't expect him to finish so quickly. The rain and flash floods made him kill himself.

古文：陈臣
现代文：陈臣
English: Chen Chen

古文：临川陈臣家大富。
现代文：临川县陈臣家十分富有。
English: The Chen family in Linchuan County is very rich.

古文：永初元年，臣在斋中坐，其宅内有一町筋竹，白日忽见一人长丈许，面如方相，从竹中出，径语陈臣： 我在家多年，汝不知，今去，当令汝知之。 
现代文：南北朝时，宋武帝永初元年，陈臣在书房里端坐，望着院子里那片瘦竹。忽然，大白天只见一个一丈多高的人，从竹林中走出来，长得十分凶恶可怕。他径直对陈臣说： 我在你家里多年了，可你还不知道。今天我要走了，应该让你知道知道。 
English: During the Southern and Northern Dynasties, at the beginning of the first year of Emperor Songwu Yong's reign, Chen Chen was sitting in his study, looking at the thin bamboo in the courtyard. Suddenly, in broad daylight, he saw a very tall man come out of the bamboo forest, looking very fierce and terrible. He said directly to Chen Chen: I've been in your home for many years, but you still don't know. I'm leaving today, I should let you know.

古文：去一月许日，家大失火，奴婢顿死，一年中便大贫。
现代文：那人走了一个月零几天，陈臣家里起了大火，奴婢们当即都烧死了。一年之内，他家一下子就变得十分贫穷。
English: After the man had been gone for a month and a few days, a fire broke out in Chen Chen's home, and all the slaves and maidservants were immediately burned to death. Within a year, his family suddenly became very poor.

古文：张舒
现代文：张舒
English: Zhang Shu

古文：长山张舒，以元嘉九年二月二十四日奄见一人，著朱衣平上帻。手捉青柄马鞭。
现代文：长山县有个张舒，在南北朝宋文帝元嘉九年二月二十四日忽然看见一个人，穿着大红衣服，围着一般的头巾，手执一支黑色的马鞭。
English: Zhang Shu, a resident of Changshan County, suddenly saw a person on February 24th, the ninth year of the Southern and Northern Dynasties Song Emperor Wen and Yuan Jia, wearing bright red clothes, a common headscarf, and holding a black whip.

古文：云： 汝可教，便随我去。 
现代文：他对张舒说： 你适宜学道法。想学，就随我来吧！ 
English: He said to Zhang Shu, "You are suitable to learn Daoism. If you want to learn, follow me!

古文：见素丝绳系长梯来下，舒上梯，仍造大城。
现代文：这时，只见一架用白丝绳系制的长梯从空中降下，张舒便登上了梯子，跟着那人来到一座大城。
English: At this time, a long ladder made of white silk ropes was seen descending from the sky. Zhang Shu climbed the ladder and followed the man to a big city.

古文：绮堂洞室，地如黄金。
现代文：走过绮丽的殿堂，进入一个幽深的洞室。
English: Walk through the beautiful hall of fame and enter a deep cave room.

古文：有一人长大，不巾帻，独坐绛纱帐中，语舒曰： 主者误取汝，赐汝秘术卜占，勿贪钱贿。 
现代文：这里的地面闪烁着金光，有一位又高又大的人，没有戴头巾，独自坐在深红色的纱帐中，对张舒说： 主持此事的人错误地选取了你。我教一套秘术给你，回去以占卜为生吧。
English: The ground here glitters with gold. A tall and big man, without a headscarf, sits alone in a crimson gauze curtain and says to Zhang Shu: "The person in charge of this matter has chosen you by mistake. I will teach you a set of secret arts. Go back to divination for a living."

古文：舒亦不觉受之。
现代文：张舒也就在不知不觉中学会了。
English: Zhang Shu also unknowingly learned to sing.

古文：萧惠明
现代文：萧惠明
English: Xiao Huiming

古文：宋萧惠明为吴兴太守，郡界有卞山，山下有项羽庙。
现代文：南北朝刘宋时，萧惠明任吴兴郡太守。在郡的边界处有座卞山，卞山下有座项羽庙。
English: During the Northern and Southern Dynasties of Liu Song, Xiao Huiming served as the governor of Wuxing County. At the border of the county, there is a Lushan Mountain, and under the Lushan Mountain, there is a Xiangfei Temple.

古文：相承云： 羽多居郡厅事，前后太守不敢上厅。
现代文：相传说，那项羽总住在郡府的厅堂里，所以前后几任太守不敢上大厅。
English: According to legend, the feather always lived in the hall of the county government, so several governors-general did not dare to go to the hall.

古文：惠明谓纲纪曰： 孔季恭曾为此郡，未闻有灾。 
现代文：萧惠明向综理府事的纲纪说： 孔季恭也曾经管理过这个郡，没听说他遇到什么灾。 
English: Xiao Huiming said to the general secretary of the General Administration of the People's Republic of China: Kong Jikong also once managed this county, and I have not heard of any disasters that he has encountered.

古文：遂命盛设筵榻。
现代文：随即，他命人在厅里摆上坐席和床榻，非常讲究地装饰起来。
English: Immediately, he ordered people to set up seats and beds in the hall, which was very elaborately decorated.

古文：未几，惠明忽见一人，长丈余，张弓挟矢向之，既而不见。
现代文：未等完成，他忽然看见一个人，一丈多高，拉弓搭箭地射向自己，旋即却不见了。
English: Before he had finished, he suddenly saw a man, as tall as he was, draw a bow and shoot an arrow at him. He immediately disappeared.

古文：因发背，旬日殒。
现代文：于是，萧惠明的背部就长出个痈疽，十天后就死了。
English: As a result, a gangrene grew on Xiao Huiming's back, and he died ten days later.

古文：柳积
现代文：柳积
English: Yu Jie

古文：柳积，字德封。勤苦为学，夜燃木叶以代灯。
现代文：柳积字德封，学习起来十分勤奋、刻苦，晚上读书时点燃树枝树叶照亮。
English: Liu Zi Zi Defeng is very diligent and hardworking when studying. When reading at night, he lights up the branches and leaves to illuminate.

古文：中夕，闻窗外有呼声，积出见之，有五六人。各负一囊，倾于屋下，如榆荚。
现代文：一天半夜，他听见窗外有呼喊声，便出门望去，只见有五六个人，各背来一个口袋，把里面的东西倒在了屋檐下，像榆树钱儿。
English: One night, in the middle of the night, he heard shouting outside his window. He went outside and looked in. He saw five or six people, each with a bag on his back, emptying the contents under the eaves, like money from a birch tree.

古文：语曰： 与君为书粮，勿忧业不成。 
现代文：那些人对柳积说： 这些东西送给你，就算给你的粮食；不必担心学业不成。 
English: Those people said to Liu Qi: These things are given to you, even if they are given to you as food; you don't have to worry about failing your studies.

古文：明日视之，皆汉古钱，计得百二十千。
现代文：第二天早晨一看，全是汉代的古钱币，合如今一百二十千钱。
English: When I looked the next morning, it was all old coins from the Han Dynasty, which is equivalent to one hundred and twenty thousand today.

古文：乃终其业。
现代文：柳积有了这些钱，终于完成学业。
English: With this money, Liu Qi finally finished his studies.

古文：宋明帝时，官至太子舍人。
现代文：南朝宋明帝时，他的职位升到太子舍人。
English: During the Southern Dynasty of Emperor Song Ming, he was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：赵文昭
现代文：赵文昭
English: Zhao Wenzhao

古文：宋文帝元嘉三年八月，吴郡赵文昭，字子业，为东宫侍讲。
现代文：南朝宋文帝元嘉三年八月，吴郡的赵文昭，字子业，为太子当侍讲。
English: In August of the third year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Southern Song Dynasty, Zhao Wenzhao of Wuxian County, a scholar, became the prince's assistant lecturer.

古文：宅在清溪桥北，与吏部尚书王叔卿，隔墙南北。
现代文：他的家住在清溪桥北，与吏部尚书王叔卿家仅隔一道墙，成南北邻居。
English: His family lived in the north of Qingxi Bridge, separated by only one wall from the family of Shang Shou Wang Shucing, the head of the personnel department, making them neighbors to the north and south.

古文：尝秋夜，对月临溪，唱《乌栖》之词，意旨闲怨。
现代文：有一个深秋之夜，赵文昭对月临溪，唱《乌栖曲》，音旨显得寂寞幽怨。
English: On a late autumn night, Zhao Wenzhao sang "Wuqi" to Yue Linxi. The melody was lonely and melancholy.

古文：忽有一女子，衣青罗之衣，绝美，云： 王尚书小娘子，欲来访君 。
现代文：忽然，有一个穿着青丝衣的小女子走了过来。十分美丽，她对赵文昭说： 王尚书的小娘子，想来看一看你。 
English: Suddenly, a little girl in a blue silk dress came over. She was very beautiful, and she said to Zhao Wenzhao: "Wang Shangshu's little daughter, I'd like to come and see you."

古文：文昭问其所以，答曰： 小娘子闻君歌咏，有怨旷之心，著清凉之恨，故来愿荐枕席。 
现代文：赵文昭问其缘故，她回答说： 小娘子听你咏唱的声音，就知道你的内心旷凉而凄苦，有怨也有恨因此，想来侍寝于你。 
English: Zhao Wenzhao asked the reason for this, and she replied: "Little maiden, when I listen to your singing voice, I know that your heart is desolate and bitter, and there is resentment and hatred. Therefore, I want to come and serve you.

古文：言讫而至，姿容绝世。
现代文：她刚说完，那位小娘子就到了。
English: No sooner had she finished speaking than the little girl arrived.

古文：文昭迷误恍惚，尽忘他志，乃揖而归。
现代文：她姿容盖世，使赵文昭被迷得神情恍惚，把别的一切全忘了。
English: Her appearance was so dazzling that Zhao Wenzhao was so mesmerized that he forgot everything else.

古文：从容密室，命酒陈筵，递相歌送，然后就寝。
现代文：他向小娘子拱手行礼，并从容地把她带回家中密室。然后，他让人摆上酒席，一边饮酒一边对唱，当夜便睡在一起。
English: With a wave of his hand, he led the little girl home to the inner sanctum, where they drank, sang, and slept together that night.

古文：至晓请去，女解金缨留别，文昭答琉璃盏。
现代文：到天亮之后，小娘子与他辞别，并解下自己的金缨带留作纪念。赵文昭回赠她一只琉璃杯。
English: After dawn, the little girl said goodbye to him, and untied her gold ribbon to leave as a souvenir. Zhao Wenzhao gave her a glass in return.

古文：后数夜，文昭思之不已。
现代文：之后一连数夜，赵文昭思念不已。
English: After that, for several nights in a row, Zhao Wenzhao pined for her.

古文：偶游清溪神庙，忽见所与琉璃盏，在神女之后，及顾其神，与画侍女，并是同宿者。
现代文：一天，他偶然游经清溪神庙，忽然发现他的那只琉璃杯在神女像的身后放着。他走过去仔细观察那神像与画上的侍女，原来正是那天侍寝的主仆二人。
English: One day, he happened to travel through the Qingxi Temple and suddenly found his glass placed behind the statue of the goddess. He walked over to take a closer look at the statue and the maid on the painting, which turned out to be the two servants who were sleeping that day.

古文：河伯
现代文：河伯
English: Hebei Province

古文：余杭县南有上湖，湖中央作塘。
现代文：余杭县南边有一个湖，湖中央筑起堤坝。
English: There is a lake in the south of Yuhang County, and a dam has been built in the middle of the lake.

古文：有一人乘马看戏，将三四人至岑村饮酒，小醉，暮还。
现代文：有一个人骑马看戏回来，领三四个人到岑村喝酒，微醉，傍晚才向自己家走去。
English: A man came back from watching a play on horseback and led three or four people to the village of Handan to drink. He was slightly intoxicated and only left for his home in the evening.

古文：时炎热，因下马入水中，枕石眠。
现代文：当时天气炎热，他便下马跳入水中，过一会儿就枕着水边石头睡着了。
English: It was a hot day, so he dismounted and jumped into the water, and after a while he fell asleep on the rocks by the water's edge.

古文：马断走归，从人悉追马，至暮不返。
现代文：马挣断绳子往回跑，这人的随从全追马去了，直到天黑也没有返回。
English: The horse broke the rope and ran back. The man's entire entourage went after the horse and did not return until dark.

古文：眠觉，日已向晡，不见人马。见一妇来，年可十六七，云： 女郎你好。
现代文：这人睡醒后，已经过了申时，仍不见随从牵马回来，却看见从远处走来一个女子，年纪大约十六七岁。这人说： 女郎再拜！
English: When the man woke up, it was already past midnight, and he still hadn't seen his horse-drawn carriage return, but he saw a woman, about sixteen or seventeen years old, coming from a distance.

古文：日既向暮，此间大可畏。
现代文：天色既然已经很晚，这地方十分可怕，你到这干什么呢？ 
English: What are you doing here, when it's so late and the place is so scary?

古文：君作何计？ 问： 女郎姓何？
现代文：这人又问女郎姓氏。
English: The man then asked the girl her last name.

古文：那得忽相闻？ 
现代文：远处忽然传来声响，又有一个少年乘坐新车奔过来。
English: Suddenly, there was a noise in the distance, and another boy came running in a new car.

古文：复有一年少，年十三四，甚了了，乘新车，车后二十人至，呼上车。云： 大人暂欲相见。 
现代文：他十三四岁，很聪明的样子。随即，车后面的二十人也赶到了，喊这人上车，说： 我家大人暂且想见你一面。 
English: He was thirteen or fourteen years old and looked very intelligent. Immediately, twenty people in the back of the car arrived, called this man to get on the car and said: My family wants to see you for a while.

古文：因回车而去。
现代文：他只好上车随之而去。
English: He just got in the car and drove away.

古文：道中络绎把火，见城郭邑居。
现代文：途中，路旁火把络绎不绝。俄顷，前面闪出城市和民房。
English: On the way, the roadside torches were incessant. Suddenly, the city and houses flashed in front of me.

古文：既入城，进厅事，有信幡，题云 河伯 。
现代文：他们入城之后，进了厅堂，只见长条的信旗上写着 河伯 二字。
English: After they entered the city, they entered the hall and saw a long banner with the word "Hebei" written on it.

古文：俄见一人，年三十许，颜色如画，侍卫繁多。
现代文：旋即，这人见到一个人，年纪大约三十几岁，脸色像画的一样，侍者和卫士众多。
English: Immediately, the man saw a man, about thirty years old, with a face like a painting, a lot of waiters and guards.

古文：相对欣然，敕行酒炙，云： 仆有小女，颇聪明，欲以给君箕帚。 
现代文：二人相视，不由一阵欣喜。主人吩咐端酒肉上来招待客人，并对这人说： 我有个小女儿，很聪明，想许配你作妻子，如何？ 
English: The host ordered wine and meat to be brought up for the guests, and said to the man, "I have a little daughter who is very clever, and I would like to make her your wife.

古文：此人知神，不敢拒逆。便敕备办，令就郎中婚。承白已办。
现代文：这个人知道他乃是个神，不敢拒绝，便令手下人准备操办婚礼，并说去女方家中办，一再讲明一切由自己办。
English: The man, knowing that he was a god and not daring to refuse, ordered his men to prepare for the wedding, and said that he would go to the woman's home to do it, repeatedly stating that he would do everything himself.

古文：进丝布单衣及袷、绢裙、纱衫褌、履屐，皆精好。
现代文：送去的丝布单衣和夹衣，绢裙纱衫裤子和鞋，全都是最好最精美的。
English: The silk blouses and jackets, pleated skirts, shirts, trousers and shoes that were sent were all the best and most exquisite.

古文：又给十小吏，青衣数十人。
现代文：又送上十个小吏，几十个女仆。
English: He also sent ten servants and dozens of maids.

古文：妇年可十八九，姿容婉媚。
现代文：那神的女儿十八九岁，姿容美丽妩媚。
English: The god's daughter was eighteen or nineteen years old, beautiful and charming.

古文：便成礼。三日，经大会客，拜阁。
现代文：于是，在送上聘礼三日之后，大摆筵席，拜堂成亲。
English: As a result, three days after the betrothal ceremony, they held a grand banquet and married in the church.

古文：四日云： 礼既有限，当发遣去。 
现代文：婚后第四天，神的女儿说： 你的聘礼既然有限，我们的缘分也不能长久，你应当送我回去了。 
English: On the fourth day after the wedding, the daughter of God said: Since your betrothal gift is limited, our fate cannot last long. You should send me back.

古文：妇以金瓯、麝香囊与婿别，涕泣而分。
现代文：她把自己的金瓯麝香囊送给丈夫作纪念，痛哭着分手。
English: She gave her husband her golden musk bag as a souvenir, and they parted in tears.

古文：又与钱十万、药方三卷，云： 可以施功布德 。
现代文：最后，又给了他十万钱和三卷药方，说： 今后，你可以用它行善积德，建功立业。 
English: Finally, he also gave him 100,000 yuan and three volumes of prescriptions, saying, "From now on, you can use it to do good deeds, accumulate virtues, and make achievements."

古文：复云： 十年当相迎。 
现代文：又说十年之后你再迎接我吧。
English: Say you'll see me again in ten years.

古文：此人归家，遂不肯别婚。辞亲，出家作道人。
现代文：这人回家之后，便没有再婚，告别亲人，出家做了道人。
English: After this person returned home, he did not remarry, said goodbye to his relatives, and became a Taoist.

古文：所得三卷方：一卷脉经，一卷汤方，一卷丸方。
现代文：他所得到的三卷方子包括：一卷脉经，一卷汤药方，一卷丸药方。
English: The three volumes of formulas he obtained include: one volume of pulse, one volume of soup formula, one volume of pill formula.

古文：周行救疗，皆致神验。
现代文：他四处周游，救命治病，都十分神奇灵验。
English: He travels around, saving lives and curing diseases, all with amazing efficiency.

古文：后母老兄丧，因还婚宦。
现代文：后来母亲年迈，兄长又死了，他才回家结婚步入仕途。
English: Later, when his mother became old and his brother died, he returned home to get married and start his career.

古文：邵敬伯
现代文：邵敬伯
English: Shao Jingbo

古文：平原县西十里，旧有社林，南燕太上时，有邵敬伯者，家于长白山。
现代文：平原县西边十里处，有一片敬神的社林。晋代南燕太上年间，有一个叫邵敬伯的人，家住长白山里。
English: Ten miles to the west of Pingyuan County, there is a sacred grove. During the last year of the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Shao Jingbo, who lived in the Changbai Mountains.

古文：有人寄敬伯一函书，言： 我吴江使也，令吾通问于齐伯。吾今须过长白，幸君为通之。
现代文：有人寄给他一封信，上面说： 我是吴江的使者，他令我和齐伯互通言讯，我今天需要从长白山经过，希望你能为我帮帮忙。 
English: Someone sent him a letter, which said: I am the messenger of the Wujiang River. He made me and Zibo exchange messages. I need to pass through the Changbai Mountain today. I hope you can help me.

古文：仍教敬伯，但至社林中，取树叶投之于水，当有人出。 
现代文：然后告诉敬伯说，只要到那片社林中，摘下一片树叶投入水中就可以了。
English: Then he told Jing Bo that all he had to do was to go to the grove, pick up a leaf and throw it into the water.

古文：敬伯从之，果见人引入。
现代文：敬伯便照他说的去做了。
English: Jing Bo did as he was told.

古文：伯惧水，其人令敬伯闭目，似入水中，豁然宫殿宏丽。
现代文：邵敬伯送上带来的信函，那老翁打开书信，看了看，便说了一句话： 裕兴超灭。 
English: Shao Jingbo brought a letter, the old man opened the letter, looked at it, and said one sentence: Yu Xing Zhaohui.

古文：见一翁，年可八九十，坐水精床，发函开书曰： 裕兴超灭。 
现代文：敬伯惑然不解。侍卫们全瞪着圆圆的眼睛，穿着厚厚的甲胄。
English: Jing Bo was puzzled. The guards were all staring with round eyes and wearing thick armor.

古文：侍卫者皆圆眼，具甲胄，敬伯辞出，以刀子赠敬伯曰： 好去，但持此刀，当无水厄矣。 
现代文：邵敬伯告辞出来，那老翁拿出一把刀子赠给他，说： 好好去吧，只要拿上这把刀，就该不会受到水的危害了。 
English: When Shao Jingbo said goodbye, the old man took out a knife and gave it to him, saying, "Go ahead. As long as you take this knife, you should not be harmed by the water."

古文：敬伯出，还至社林中，而衣裘初无沾湿。
现代文：邵敬伯从水中走出来，又回到社林中，而衣服一点也没有湿！
English: Shao Jingbo came out of the water and returned to the forest, and his clothes were not wet at all!

古文：果其年宋武帝灭燕。
现代文：果然如老翁所言，当年宋武帝刘裕就把南燕的慕容超灭掉了。
English: As the old man said, that year, Emperor Liu Yu of the Song Dynasty eliminated Nanyan's Murong Chao.

古文：敬伯三年居两河间，夜中忽大水，举村俱没，唯敬伯坐一榻床，至晓著岸，敬伯下看之，床乃是一大鼋也。
现代文：邵敬伯在两条河中间一个村落里居住了三年。一天半夜忽然发了大水，整个村子都淹没了，只剩邵敬伯自己坐在一床榻上得以脱险，到拂晓时靠到岸上。他下来一看，才发现那床榻乃是一只大老鳖！
English: Shao Jingbo lived for three years in a village in the middle of two rivers. One day, in the middle of the night, there was a sudden flood, and the entire village was submerged. Shao Jingbo was the only one who was able to escape by sitting on a bed, and he reached the shore at dawn. When he looked down, he found that the bed was a big toad!

古文：敬伯死，刀子亦失。
现代文：敬伯死后，那把刀子也丢失了。
English: After Jing Bo's death, the knife was also lost.

古文：世传社林下有河伯家。
现代文：世代传说，那片社林下面就是河神的家呵。
English: Legend has it for generations that the river god's home lies beneath the grove.

古文：吴兴人
现代文：吴兴人
English: Wu Xingren

古文：晋隆安中，吴兴有人，年可二十，自号圣公，姓谢。
现代文：晋代隆安年间，吴兴县有个人，年纪大约二十岁，自称圣公，姓谢。
English: During the Longan period of the Jin Dynasty, there was a man in Wuxing County, about twenty years old, who called himself Shingong, with the surname Xie.

古文：死已百年，忽诣陈氏宅，言： 是己旧宅，可见还，不尔烧汝。 
现代文：他死了一百年之后，忽然来到陈家的宅院，说这是他的老房子，应该还给他，不然就用火烧你们。
English: A hundred years after his death, he suddenly came to the Chen family's courtyard and said that this was his old house and should be returned to him, otherwise he would burn you with fire.

古文：一夕大火，烧尽，因有鸟毛插地，绕宅周匝数重，百姓乃起庙。
现代文：一天晚间起了大火，把这里烧个一干二净。这时，便有不少鸟毛插在地上，绕宅院的废墟围了好几重。于是，老百姓们就在这里修起一座庙。
English: One night, a fire broke out and burned the place to the ground. At that time, a lot of bird feathers were planted on the ground, surrounding the ruins of the courtyard several times. So, the people built a temple here.

古文：刘子卿
现代文：刘子卿
English: Liu Ziqing is gone

古文：宋刘子卿，徐州人也。居庐山虎溪。
现代文：南北朝刘宋时，有个叫刘子卿的人，徐州人氏，住在庐山的虎溪。
English: During the Northern and Southern Dynasties of Liu Song, there was a man named Liu Ziqing, Mr. Xuzhou Ren, who lived in Huxi, Lushan.

古文：少好学，笃志无倦。
现代文：他年轻好学、志向专一且孜孜不倦。
English: He is young, eager to learn, single-minded and tireless.

古文：常慕幽闲，以为养性。
现代文：他平时也羡慕那种幽静闲适的环境和生活，认为那样可以陶冶性情。
English: He also envied the quiet and leisurely environment and life, believing that it could cultivate temperament.

古文：恒爱花种树，其江南花木，溪庭无不值者。
现代文：他一惯喜欢养花种树，凡是江南一带的花木，虎溪边的庭院里应有尽有。
English: He has always liked to grow flowers and trees, and there are all kinds of flowers and trees around the south of the Yangtze River in the courtyard on the edge of Tiger Creek.

古文：文帝元嘉三年春，临玩之际，忽见双蝶，五彩分明，来游花上，其大如燕，一日中，或三四往复。
现代文：文帝元嘉三年的春天，到了赏花之际，忽然看见一双蝴蝶，五彩分明，来到花间飞舞，像燕子那么大。
English: In the spring of the third year of Emperor Wen, when it was time to enjoy the flowers, he suddenly saw a pair of butterflies, multicolored, come to the flowers to fly, as big as swallows.

古文：子卿亦讶其大。
现代文：一天之内，它们差不多能来三四趟。
English: In one day, they can come three or four times.

古文：九旬有三日，月朗风清。
现代文：这么大的蝴蝶，使刘子卿也感到十分惊讶。
English: Liu Ziqing was also very surprised by such a big butterfly.

古文：歌吟之际，忽闻扣扃，有女子语笑之音。
现代文：四月三日晚上，月朗风清，他正在吟唱的时候，忽然听见敲门声，有女子在门前说说笑笑。
English: On the evening of April 3, the moon was bright and the wind was blowing. While he was chanting, he suddenly heard a knock at the door. A woman was talking and laughing in front of the door.

古文：子卿异之，谓左右曰： 我居此溪五岁，人尚无能知，何有女子而诣我乎？
现代文：刘子卿十分惊异，对手下仆人说： 我住在这里五年，人们现在还都不了解我，为什么会有女子来找我呢？
English: Liu Ziqing was very surprised, and said to his servant: I have lived here for five years, and people still don't know me. Why would a woman come to me?

古文：此必有异。 
现代文：这里定有异常。 
English: There's got to be something wrong here.

古文：乃出户，见二女。各十六七，衣服霞焕，容止甚都。
现代文：于是就走出门去，看见两个女子，都十六七岁，服饰艳丽，焕然一新，容貌和举止都很美。
English: So he went out of the door and saw two women, both of whom were sixteen or seventeen years old, dressed in bright, new clothes, and beautiful in appearance and manner.

古文：谓子卿曰： 君常怪花间之物。
现代文：她们对刘子卿说道： 你常对花间的那双蝴蝶感到惊奇，是吧？
English: They said to Liu Zicheng: You are often surprised by the pair of butterflies in the flower room, aren't you?

古文：感君之爱，故来相诣，未度君子心若何。 
现代文：那就是我们呀。为感谢你的怜爱之情，所以来找你，却不知你意下如何？ 
English: That's us. To thank you for your compassion, we came to you, but I don't know what you think?

古文：子卿延之坐，谓二女曰： 居止僻陋，无酒叙情，有惭于此。 
现代文：刘子卿将她们引进屋里坐下，对她们说： 这地方偏僻简陋，又无酒以抒情怀，真是惭愧呀！ 
English: Liu Zicheng led them into the room, sat down, and said to them: "This place is remote and simple, and there is no wine with lyrical feelings. I'm really ashamed!"

古文：一女曰： 此来之意，岂求酒耶？
现代文：一个女子说： 我们这次来的目的，难道是为了喝酒吗？
English: One woman said: "Are we here for drinking this time?

古文：况山月已斜，夜将垂晓，君子岂有意乎？ 
现代文：况且山月已斜，天很快就要亮了，你到底有没有意吧？ 
English: Besides, the mountain and the moon have been tilted, the sky will soon be bright, do you really care?

古文：子卿曰： 鄙夫唯有茅斋，愿申缱绻。 
现代文：刘子卿说： 我虽然只有这茅屋，但也想缠绵一番。 
English: Liu Ziqing said: Although I only have this cottage, I also want to hang around.

古文：二女东向坐者笑谓西坐者曰： 今宵让姊，余夜可知。 
现代文：向东坐的女子对向西坐的女子笑了笑，说： 今天晚上让给姐姐了。 当夜之事可想而知。
English: The woman sitting to the east smiled at the woman sitting to the west and said, "Tonight I'm giving it to my sister.

古文：因起，送子卿之室。入谓子卿曰： 郎闭户双栖，同衾并枕；来夜之欢，愿同今夕。 
现代文：起床之后，那位姐姐同刘子卿告别说： 你关起门来与我同床共枕，男欢女乐，今天晚上，也希望能同昨天一样。 
English: After getting up, the sister said goodbye to Liu Zicheng and said, "You shared a bed with me behind closed doors. I hope tonight will be the same as yesterday.

古文：及晓，女乃请去。子卿曰： 幸遂缱绻，复更来乎？
现代文：到天亮的时候，她临走之前，刘子卿说： 遂了我缠绵一番的心愿，十分欣幸！你还能再来吗？
English: At dawn, before she was about to leave, Liu Ziqing said, "I have finally fulfilled my most cherished wish. I am very happy! Can you come again?

古文：一夕之欢，反生深恨。 女抚子卿背曰： 且女妹之期，后即次我。 
现代文：一夜之欢，反而令人感到深深的遗憾 她抚摸着刘子卿的后背说： 今晚的时间是属于我妹妹的，后一次是我的。 
English: She stroked Liu Ziqing's back and said: Tonight's time belongs to my sister, the last time was mine.

古文：将出户，女曰： 心存意在，特望不忧。 
现代文：她正要出门，又回过头来说： 你心中装着这份情意是对的，但希望你不必为此忧伤。 
English: She was about to leave the house when she turned to me and said: You are right to feel this way, but I hope you don't have to be sad about it.

古文：出户不知踪迹。
现代文：她出门之后便不见了踪影。
English: She went out of the house and disappeared.

古文：是夕二女又至，宴如前。
现代文：这天晚上，那两个女子又来了，刘子卿如同上次一样款待她们。
English: That evening, the two women came again, and Liu Zicheng treated them as before.

古文：姊谓妹曰： 我且去矣。昨认之欢，今留与汝。
现代文：姐姐对妹妹说： 我暂且离去，昨天晚上那种欢悦，今天就留给你了。
English: She said to her sister, "I am going away for the time being, and the joy of last night is reserved for you today."

古文：汝勿贪多误，少惑刘郎。 
现代文：对于那种男欢女乐，你不要过于贫恋而误事，不要把刘郎给迷惑住哟！ 
English: For that kind of male-female music, you should not be too miserly and make a mistake, do not confuse Liu Lang!

古文：言讫大笑，乘风而去。
现代文：说罢大笑，乘风而去。
English: Laugh it up and ride the wind.

古文：于是同寝。
现代文：于是，刘郎与妹妹睡在了一起。
English: As a result, Liu Lang slept with his sister.

古文：卿问女曰： 我知卿二人，非人间之有。
现代文：刘子卿对她探问： 我知道你们二人，不是凡间之女，那么你们到底是什么呢？
English: Liu Ziqing asked her: "I know that you two are not ordinary girls, so what exactly are you?

古文：愿知之。 
现代文：我想知道。 
English: I want to know.

古文：女曰： 但得佳妻，何劳执问？ 
现代文：妹妹说： 你凭空得到了美丽的妻子，还问什么呢？ 
English: My sister said: You got a beautiful wife out of thin air, what more do you want?

古文：乃抚子卿曰： 郎但申情爱，莫问闲事。 
现代文：便指刘子卿的身子，又说， 你只管展情作爱吧，不要多问闲事。 
English: He then pointed to Liu Ziqin's body and said, "You just need to make love, don't ask too many questions."

古文：临晓将去，谓卿曰： 我姊实非人间之人，亦非山精物魅，若说于郎，郎必异传，故不欲取笑于人代。
现代文：拂晓之前，她临走时对刘子卿说： 我们姐妹实在不是凡间之人，也不是山精和物怪，如果把实话告诉你，你必然会传出去而且会走样所以，我们不想被人类取笑。
English: Before dawn, as she was about to leave, she said to Liu Ziqing: "Our sisters are really not ordinary people, nor are they mountain spirits or monsters. If you tell the truth, you will inevitably spread it and go wrong. Therefore, we don't want to be made fun of by humans.

古文：今者与郎契合，亦是因缘。
现代文：今天晚上，我与你合欢，也是缘分，望你把这事深藏于心，不要让别人知道。 
English: Tonight, I'm partying with you, it's also fate, I hope you keep this deep in your heart and don't let others know.

古文：慎迹藏心，无使人晓，即姐妹每旬更至，以慰郎心。 
现代文：之后，她姐妹二人每十天轮流来一次，以使刘子卿的心得到慰藉，然后就离去。
English: After that, her two sisters took turns to come once every ten days to comfort Liu Zicheng's heart, and then left.

古文：乃去，常十日一至，如是数年会寝。
现代文：经常十天一来，就这样在一起睡了好几年。
English: Often after ten days, they slept together like this for several years.

古文：后子卿遇乱归乡，二女遂绝。
现代文：后来刘子卿遇战乱回到故乡，那两个女子也从此绝了踪迹。
English: Later, Liu Ziqing returned to her hometown during the war, and the two women disappeared.

古文：庐山有康王庙，去所居二十里余。
现代文：庐山上有座康王庙，距离刘子卿原来住的地方二十多里。
English: There is a Kangwang Temple on Lushan Mountain, more than 20 miles away from where Liu Zicheng used to live.

古文：子卿一日访之，见庙中泥塑二女神，并壁画二侍者，容貌依稀，有如前遇，疑此是之。
现代文：一天，刘子卿前去拜谒，见到庙中前两座泥塑的女神像，墙壁上还画了二位女侍者。这二位女侍者容貌美丽，刘子卿依稀觉得在哪里见过，仿佛前几年遇见的那对女子。
English: One day, Liu Ziqing went to pay homage and saw the first two clay statues of goddesses in the temple, and two waitresses were also painted on the walls. These two waitresses were beautiful, and Liu Ziqing vaguely felt that he had seen them somewhere, as if they were the pair of women he had met a few years before.

