古文：兵不刑天，兵不可动；不法地，兵不可措；不法人，兵不可成。
现代文：不懂得天时，就不可以兴兵；不懂得地利，就不能指挥作战；不了解人事，就不会取得战功。
English: If you don't know the time, you can't raise an army; if you don't know the location, you can't command the battle; if you don't know the personnel, you won't get the war merit.

古文：参于天地，稽之圣人。
现代文：因此必须考察天时地利，并且取法于圣人之道。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to examine the time and place, and take the sage's way.

古文：人自生之，天地刑之，圣人因而成之。
现代文：兵功是人为的，但它由天地主宰着，圣人因为能够因顺天道、地道、人道所以能成就其功。
English: Military exploits are man-made, but they are dominated by heaven and earth. Saints can accomplish their exploits because they can follow the heavenly way, the earthly way, and the humane way.

古文：圣人之功，时为之庸，因时秉宜，兵必有成功。
现代文：而圣人的成功，就是因为掌握了时宜并为之所用。因顺天时而把握时宜，作战就能够成功。
English: And the success of the sage is because he grasped the right time and used it. By grasping the right time in accordance with the heavens, the battle can be successful.

古文：圣人不达刑，不襦传。
现代文：作为圣人，他们能够恰当地掌握军纪刑法，而且处事果决不背信弃义。
English: As saints, they are able to properly grasp the military discipline and criminal law, and never act treacherously.

古文：因天时，与之皆断；当断不断，反受其乱。
现代文：而关键的是，要顺应天时，当机立断；该果断的时候却犹豫不决，反而会自取其祸。
English: But the key is to be flexible and decisive when the time comes; if you hesitate when it's time to be decisive, you'll only bring misfortune on yourself.

古文：天固有夺有予，有祥福至者也而弗受，反随以殃。
现代文：有剥夺有赐予这是天道本然具有的客观规律，天赐祥福如不能顺而受之，结果只能是反受其祸。
English: There is deprivation and there is bestowal. This is an objective law inherent in the heavenly way. If you cannot accept the blessings of heaven, the result can only be to suffer its misfortune.

古文：三遂绝从，兵无成功。
现代文：如果拒绝因顺天道、地道、人道，则不会有兵功。
English: If you refuse to fight for the sake of heaven, earth and humanity, you will not receive any military merit.

古文：三遂绝从，兵有成功者，不飨其功，环受其殃。
现代文：如果因顺天时、地利、人心，就会有兵功。如果不能顺受天赐之功的话，会反受其殃的。
English: If it is due to favorable weather, location, and people's will, there will be military merit. If it is not due to favorable weather, location, and people's will, there will be misfortune.

古文：国家有幸，当者受殃；国家无幸，有延其命。
现代文：倘使国家幸运，则战争的首先发动者本人会受到应有的惩罚；假使国家不幸，那么战祸的肇事者会仍然高居其位。
English: If the country is fortunate, the first instigator of the war will himself be duly punished; if the country is unfortunate, the perpetrator of the war will still be in power.

古文：茀茀阳阳，因民之力，逆天之极，又重有功，其国家以危，社稷以匡，事无成功，庆且不飨其功。
现代文：如果统治者声势浩大地去发动战争，借助于民力去违反天道，再加上好大喜功，那么其结果便是国家危险，天下惶乱不安，做事不会成功，庆赏虽多也仍然不会有兵功。
English: If the ruler starts a war with great fanfare, violates the heavenly law with the help of the people's power, and rejoices in his military exploits, the result will be that the country will be in danger, the world will be in turmoil, the work will not be successful, and although there will be much celebration, there will still be no military exploits.

古文：此天之道也。
现代文：天道决定了这一切。
English: The course of the heavens determined all this.

