古文：《齐民要术》：宜高平之地，近山阜尤是所宜，下田得水即死。
现代文：《齐民要术》：种植竹子的地应当高而平，靠近山麓土丘的地方是最合适的。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": The land where bamboo is planted should be high and flat, and the place near the mound at the foot of the mountain is the most suitable.

古文：黄白软土为良。
现代文：种在低洼地的，竹根一旦遇上地下水，便会马上死掉。
English: Planted in low-lying areas, once the bamboo roots encounter groundwater, they will die immediately.

古文：正月、二月中，剧取西南引根并茎，芟去叶，于园内东北角种之。
现代文：黄色或白色的沙壤土较适宜。正月或二月的时候，掘取向西南方向生长的竹鞭和竹母，剪掉竹叶，在竹园中的东北角栽种。
English: Yellow or white sandy loam soil is more suitable. In the first month of the year or in February, dig up the bamboo whip and mother bamboo growing in the southwest direction, cut off the bamboo leaves, and plant them in the northeast corner of the bamboo garden.

古文：令坑深二尺许，覆土厚五寸。
现代文：挖的坑约二尺深，盖上五寸厚的土。
English: Dig a hole about two feet deep and cover it with five inches of soil.

古文：竹性爱向西南引，故于园东北角种之，数岁之后，自当满园。
现代文：竹的特性喜欢向西南方胤生，所以应种在园子的东北角。几年过后，自然会满园都是竹子。
English: Bamboo likes to grow in a south-west direction, so it should be planted in the north-east corner of the garden. After a few years, the garden will naturally be full of bamboo.

古文：谚云： 东家种竹，西家治地。 
现代文：谚语说： 东邻种竹，西邻忙着整地。 
English: A proverb says: The eastern neighbor is planting bamboo, while the western neighbor is busy preparing the land.

古文：为滋蔓而来生也。
现代文：就是说准备好竹子会胤生蔓延过来。
English: That is to say, get ready for the bamboo shoots to spread.

古文：其居东北角者，老竹，种不生，生亦不能滋茂；故须取其西南引少根也。
现代文：东北角上的，都是老竹子，用来栽种不会长出新竹，即使有新竹长出，亦不会繁衍茂盛；所以要掘取向西南方蔓延的新生竹鞭供栽种。
English: In the northeast corner, all are old bamboo, used for planting will not grow new bamboo, even if new bamboo grows, it will not reproduce luxuriantly; therefore, it is necessary to dig up the new bamboo shoots spreading to the southwest for planting.

古文：稻麦糠粪之。
现代文：用稻糠和麦糠作肥料。
English: Use rice straw and wheat straw as fertilizer.

古文：二糠各自堪粪，不令和杂。
现代文：两种糠可单独使用，不要混合使用。
English: The two lozenges can be used separately and should not be mixed.

古文：不用水浇。浇则淹死。
现代文：不用浇水，浇水一定会将其淹死。
English: Don't water it, watering will drown it.

古文：勿令六畜入园。
现代文：不要让各种家畜进入竹园。
English: Do not allow all kinds of livestock to enter the bamboo garden.

古文：三月食淡竹笋；四月、五月，食苦竹笋。
现代文：三月吃淡竹笋，四月、五月吃苦竹笋。
English: Eat light bamboo shoots in March, eat bitter bamboo shoots in April and May.

古文：其欲作器者，经年乃堪杀。
现代文：若想做器具，必须生长满一年以上的竹子，才可以砍伐。
English: If you want to make utensils, you must grow bamboo for more than a year before you can cut it.

古文：未经年者，软，未成也。
现代文：没有长满一年的，竹质软，没有长成。
English: It hasn't grown for a full year, the bamboo is soft and hasn't grown.

古文：《四时类要》：移竹，五月十三日及辰日，可以移之。
现代文：《四时类要》：移竹，宜在五月十三日和辰日移栽。
English: "Four-hour class important": moving bamboo, it is advisable to transplant on May 13th and 15th.

古文：种竹，去梢叶，作稀泥于坑中，下竹栽，以土覆之；杵筑定，勿令脚踏。
现代文：种竹应剪去竹梢和叶子，往坑中灌水搅拌成稀泥，将竹栽种下去，用土覆盖，用木杠捣实，不要用脚踩踏。
English: For planting bamboo, you should cut off the bamboo tips and leaves, pour water into the pit and stir it into a thin mud, plant the bamboo, cover it with soil, and tamp it down with a wooden bar. Do not step on it with your feet.

古文：土厚五寸。
现代文：盖上五寸厚的土。
English: Cover with five inches of soil.

古文：竹忌手把，及洗手面脂水浇著，即枯死。
现代文：竹子忌用手扶摩，和用洗手洗脸的脂水浇灌，不然便会枯萎而死。
English: Bamboos should not be rubbed by hand or watered with greasy water used for washing hands and face, otherwise they will wither and die.

古文：《博闻录》：《月庵种竹法》深阔掘沟；以干马粪和细泥，填高一尺。
现代文：《博闻录》引用《月庵种竹法》的话说：掘沟应当深、宽，用干马粪和成细泥，填入坑中一尺厚。
English: "Houwen Huo" quoted the words of "Gueian Bamboo Cultivation Method": the trench should be deep and wide, and the dry horse manure should be mixed with fine mud and filled into the pit one foot thick.

古文：无马粪，砻糠亦得。
现代文：无马粪，用舂米的砻糠也可以。
English: No horse manure, you can also use glutinous rice bran.

古文：夏月稀，冬月稠。
现代文：夏天，泥要稀，冬天泥要稠。
English: In summer, the mud should be thin, and in winter the mud should be thick.

古文：然后种竹。
现代文：然后将竹种下。
English: The bamboo is then planted.

古文：须三四茎作一丛；亦须土松浅种，不可增土于株上，泥若用打实，则不生笋。
现代文：要三四棵竹子作一窝。土宜虚松，入土宜浅，不可用土壅培竹的茎杆。若用把泥捣实，便不会生长出竹笋。
English: It is necessary to have three or four bamboo trees to make a nest. The soil should be loose pine, the soil should be shallow, and the stem of the bamboo should not be cultivated with soil. If the mud is tamped down with a pestle, the bamboo shoots will not grow.

古文：梦溪云：种竹，但林外取向阳者，向北而栽。
现代文：沈梦溪说：栽种竹子，选取竹林外边向阳的竹子，往北面栽，因为竹根没有不向南引生。
English: Shen Mengxi said: to plant bamboo, select the bamboo that faces the sun on the outside of the bamboo forest and plant it to the north, because the bamboo root does not lead to the south.

古文：盖根无不向南，必用雨下；遇 火日 及有西风则不可。花木亦然。
现代文：必须等到雨天栽种，逢 火日 和吹西风日不可种。栽种花卉林木，皆是如此。
English: You have to wait until it rains to plant, and you can't plant on a rainy day or a windy day. It's the same with planting flowers and trees.

古文：谚云： 栽竹无时，雨下便移。多留宿土，记取南枝 
现代文：谚语说： 栽竹无定时，遇雨即可移；多多带宿土，记取向南枝 。
English: A proverb says: There is no set time for planting bamboo, and it can be moved in the event of rain; as much as possible, plant with the original soil, and remember to take the branch to the south.

古文：《志林》云：竹有雌雄，雌者多笋，故种竹常择雌者，物不逃于阴阳，可不信哉？
现代文：《志林》说：竹子有雌竹和雄竹的分别，雌竹的竹笋多，所以种竹时常选择雌竹。生物皆离不开有阴阳的分别，这是不可不相信的。
English: "Zhilin" said: Bamboo has a difference between female and male bamboo, female bamboo has more bamboo shoots, so female bamboo is often chosen for planting. All living things are inseparable from yin and yang, this is not to be believed.

古文：凡欲识雌雄，当自根上第一枝观之，有双枝者，乃为雌竹，独枝者为雄竹。
现代文：凡是要识别雌雄，应当观看竹竿下部的第一个小枝，有生双枝的即为雌竹，生单枝的为雄竹。
English: If you want to identify the male and female, you should look at the first small branch at the bottom of the bamboo pole. If there are two branches, it is a female bamboo, and if there is a single branch, it is a male bamboo.

古文：竹有花，辄槁死，花结实如稗，谓之 竹米 。
现代文：竹子开花，便将枯死。竹花结的子像稗子，叫做 竹米 。
English: When the bamboo flowers, it will wither and die. The shoots of the bamboo flowers look like braids and are called "bamboo rice."

古文：一竿如此，久之则举林皆然。
现代文：一棵竹子开了花，时间长了，整个林子都要开花。
English: A bamboo has blossomed, and it will take a long time for the entire forest to blossom.

古文：其治之法，于初米时，择一竿稍大者，截去近根三尺许，通其节，以粪实之，则止。
现代文：救治的方法，是在刚开始结竹米时，选择一棵比较大的，在离竹根三尺左右将其截掉，打通节间，往里面灌粪，便可停止再开花。
English: The method of treatment is to choose a relatively large tree at the beginning of the bamboo shoot, cut it off about three feet from the bamboo root, open the joints, and pour feces into it, and then stop flowering.

古文：《琐碎录》云：引笋法：隔篱埋狸或猫于墙下，明年笋自迸出。
现代文：《琐碎录》说：引生竹笋的方法，可隔着篱垣在墙下埋狐狸或猫，到明年竹笋便会自行迸发出来。
English: "Trivia" said: the method of inducing bamboo shoots can bury a fox or a cat under the wall across the fence, and the bamboo shoots will burst out by themselves next year.

古文：竹，以三伏内及腊月中斫者不蛀。
现代文：在三伏天和腊月内砍伐的竹子不生蛀虫。
English: Bamboos felled in the Sanvo-tian and Lazy-yue do not produce aphids.

古文：一云用 血忌日 。
现代文：一说，在 血忌日 伐竹。
English: One said that on the anniversary of the massacre, they would cut down the bamboo.

