古文：夫情动而言形，理发而文见，盖沿隐以至显，因内而符外者也。
现代文：人的感情如果激动了，就形成为语言，道理如果要表达，便会在文章中有所体现。
English: If people's emotions are aroused, they will form a language, and if they want to express the truth, it will be reflected in the article.

古文：然才有庸俊，气有刚柔，学有浅深，习有雅郑，并情性所铄，陶染所凝，是以笔区云谲，文苑波诡者矣。
现代文：这是把隐藏在心中的情和理发表为明显的语言文字，表里应该是一致的。不过人的才华有平凡和杰出之分，气质有刚强和柔弱之别，学识有浅薄及湛深之异，习惯有雅正跟邪僻之差。这些都是由人的情性所决定，并受后天的熏陶而成；这就造成创作领域内千变万化，奇谲如天上流云，诡秘似海上波涛。
English: This is to express the hidden feelings and reasons in the heart as obvious language and letters, and the appearance should be consistent. However, human talent is ordinary and outstanding, temperament is strong and weak, knowledge is shallow and profound, and habits are elegant and eccentric. These are determined by human emotions and influenced by the day after tomorrow; this has led to the ever-changing creative field, strange as the clouds in the sky, and mysterious as the waves in the sea.

古文：故辞理庸俊，莫能翻其才；风趣刚柔，宁或改其气；事义浅深，未闻乖其学；体式雅郑，鲜有反其习：各师成心，其异如面。
现代文：那么，在写作上，文辞和道理的平凡或杰出，总是同作者的才华相一致的；作品的教育作用和趣味的刚健或柔弱，难道会和作者的气质有差别？所述事情和意义的浅显或湛深，也不会和作者的学识相反；所形成的风格的雅正或邪僻，很少和作者的习惯不同。
English: In writing, then, the commonness or excellence of the diction and reason is always in accordance with the talent of the author; the education and taste of the work, the hardness or softness, will be different from the temperament of the author? The shallowness or profundity of the things and meanings will not be contrary to the knowledge of the author; the elegance or eccentricity of the style formed is rarely different from the habits of the author.

古文：若总其归涂，则数穷八体：一曰典雅，二曰远奥，三曰精约，四曰显附，五曰繁缛，六曰壮丽，七曰新奇，八曰轻靡。
现代文：各人按照自己本性来写作，作品的风格就像人的面貌一样彼此互异。归根结底，主要可以分为八种风格：第一种是典雅，第二种是远奥，第三种是精约，第四种是显附，第五种是繁缛，第六种是壮丽，第七种是新奇，第八种是轻靡。
English: Each person writes according to his or her own nature, and the styles of works are as different as people's faces. In the final analysis, there are eight main styles: the first is elegant, the second is profound, the third is concise, the fourth is expressive, the fifth is complex, the sixth is magnificent, the seventh is novel, and the eighth is light.

古文：典雅者，熔式经诰，方轨儒门者也；远奥者，馥采典文，经理玄宗者也；精约者，核字省句，剖析毫厘者也；显附者，辞直义畅，切理厌心者也；繁缛者，博喻酿采，炜烨枝派者也；壮丽者，高论宏裁，卓烁异采者也；新奇者，摈古竞今，危侧趣诡者也；轻靡者，浮文弱植，缥缈附俗者也。
现代文：典雅，就是根据经书而学习，走与儒家相同的路。远奥，也就是文采比较含蓄却有一定的规则，说理主要以道家学说为主。
English: Elegance is to study according to the scriptures and follow the same path as Confucianism. Profound, that is, the literature is more subtle but has certain rules, and the theory is mainly based on Taoist theory.

古文：故雅与奇反，奥与显殊，繁与约舛，壮与轻乖，文辞根叶，苑囿其中矣。
现代文：精约，就是词句精简，分析得当。显附，就是文辞比较直白，意义畅达，切合情理，让人满意。繁缛，就是寓意深远，文采出众，善于铺陈。
English: Refined means that the words are concise and the analysis is proper. Obvious means that the wording is relatively straightforward, the meaning is smooth, it is reasonable and satisfying. Complex means that the meaning is far-reaching, the writing is outstanding, and it is good at laying out.

古文：若夫八体屡迁，功以学成，才力居中，肇自血气；气以实志，志以定言，吐纳英华，莫非情性。
现代文：壮丽，就是讨论高超，论断宏伟，文采鲜明而突出。新奇，也就是舍古趋新，以诡奇怪异为重点。轻靡，就是辞藻华丽，内容空洞无力，文章轻浮不实而庸俗。
English: Magnificence means that the discussion is superb, the argumentation is magnificent, and the writing is vivid and prominent. Novelty means that the old is replaced by the new, with the emphasis on the strange and bizarre. Frivolity means that the words are gorgeous, the content is empty and weak, and the article is frivolous and vulgar.

古文：是以贾生俊发，故文洁而体清；长卿傲诞，故理侈而辞溢；子云沈寂，故志隐而味深；子政简易，故趣昭而事博；孟坚雅懿，故裁密而思靡；平子淹通，故虑周而藻密；仲宣躁锐，故颖出而才果；公干气褊，故言壮而情骇；嗣宗俶傥，故响逸而调远；叔夜俊侠，故兴高而采烈；安仁轻敏，故锋发而韵流；士衡矜重，故情繁而辞隐。
现代文：这八种风格中，典雅与新奇正好相反，远奥与显附有所差别，繁缛与精约是不同的，壮丽与轻靡是有差异的。
English: Among these eight styles, elegance is the opposite of novelty, profoundness is different from conspicuousness, complexity is different from refinement, and grandeur is different from frivolity.

古文：触类以推，表里必符，岂非自然之恒资，才气之大略哉！
现代文：文章的各种风格，都逃不出这个范围。至于这八种风格常常变迁，只有靠学问才能成功掌握，作者的才华，是先天气质带来的。
English: As for these eight styles, which are subject to frequent change and can only be successfully mastered through study, the author's talent was brought about by the weather.

古文：夫才由天资，学慎始习，斫梓染丝，功在初化，器成采定，难可翻移。
现代文：这不就是作者天生的资质与才气对作品风格产生影响的大致情况吗？作者的才华虽有一定的天赋，但学习则一开始就要慎重；好比制木器或染丝绸，要在开始时就决定功效；若等到器具制成，颜色染定，那就不易再改变了。
English: Isn't this the general situation where the author's innate ability and talent have an impact on the style of the work? Although the author's talent has a certain talent, the study must be cautious at the beginning; like making wood or dyeing silk, it is necessary to determine the effect at the beginning; if the color is dyed when the appliance is made, it is not easy to change it.

古文：故童子雕琢，必先雅制，沿根讨叶，思转自圆。
现代文：因此，少年学习写作时，应先从雅正的作品开始；从根本来寻究枝叶，思路便易圆转。
English: Therefore, when a boy learns to write, he should first start with the works of Masanobu; by studying the branches and leaves from the root, his thoughts can be easily rounded.

古文：八体虽殊，会通合数，得其环中，则辐辏相成。
现代文：上述八种风格虽然不同，但只要能融会贯通，就可合乎法则；正如车轮有了轴心，辐条自然能聚合起来。
English: Although the above-mentioned eight styles are different, as long as they can be integrated, they can conform to the law; just as the wheel has an axis, the spokes can naturally be aggregated.

古文：故宜摹体以定习，因性以练才，文之司南，用此道也。
现代文：所以应该学习正确的风格来培养自己的习惯，根据自己的性格来培养写作的才华。所谓创作的指南针，就是指的这条道路。总结：
English: Therefore, you should learn the correct style to cultivate your habits, and cultivate the talent of writing according to your personality. The so-called creative compass refers to this path. Summary:

古文：赞曰∶才性异区，文体繁诡。
现代文：由于作者的才华和性格有区别，因而作品的风格也是多种多样的。
English: Because the author's talent and personality are different, the style of the work is also diverse.

古文：辞为肌肤，志实骨髓。
现代文：但文辞只是次要的枝叶，而作者的情志才是主要的骨干。
English: However, the words are only secondary, and the author's sentiments are the main backbone.

古文：雅丽黼黻，淫巧朱紫。
现代文：正如古代礼服上的花纹是雍正而华丽的，过分追求奇巧就会使杂色搅乱正色。
English: Just as the patterns on ancient dresses are elegant and gorgeous, the excessive pursuit of eccentricity will make the variegated colors disturb the positive colors.

古文：习亦凝真，功沿渐靡。
现代文：在写作上，作者的才华和气质是可以培养的，不过需要长期地观摩浸染才见功效。
English: In writing, the author's talent and temperament can be cultivated, but it takes a long time to see the effect.

