古文：《艺文类聚》：京邑士人妇大妒，尝以长绳系夫脚，唤便牵绳。
现代文：《艺文类聚》记载，京城有个士人，他的妻子心性狭窄、疑心病重。
English: According to the "Collection of Arts and Literature," there was a scholar in Beijing whose wife had a narrow mind and was suspected of having a serious heart disease.

古文：士密与巫妪谋，因妇眠，士以绳系羊，缘墙走避。
现代文：平时睡觉用一根长绳绑在丈夫脚上，有事呼唤丈夫，就拉动长绳。
English: She usually sleeps with a long rope tied to her husband's feet. If she needs to call her husband, she pulls the long rope.

古文：妇觉，牵绳而羊至，大惊，召问巫。
现代文：士人实在无法忍受，就暗中与巫婆商量，回到家后，趁老婆熟睡后，将自己脚上的绳子解下来绑在羊腿上，偷偷爬墙离家。
English: The scholar couldn't bear it, so he secretly discussed with the witch, and when he got home, he took advantage of his wife's deep sleep to untie the rope from his feet and tie it to the leg of the lamb, and secretly climbed the wall to leave home.

古文：巫曰： 先人怪娘积恶，故郎君变羊，能悔，可祈请。 
现代文：妇人睡醒后，拉动绳子，竟然来的是一只羊，震惊不已，就召来巫婆占卜。巫婆说： 你家列祖列宗怪你平日不善待丈夫，因此把你丈夫变成一只羊，如果你能悔过，就该诚心祈求上苍饶恕。 
English: When the woman woke up, she pulled the string and discovered that it was a sheep. Shocked, she summoned a witch to tell her fortunes. The witch said, "Your ancestors have told me that you are not kind to your husband on a daily basis, so they turned your husband into a sheep. If you can repent, you should sincerely ask God for forgiveness."

古文：妇因抱羊痛哭悔誓，巫乃令七日斋。
现代文：妇人听了，抱着羊儿痛哭，立誓悔过。
English: When the woman heard this, she wept bitterly, clutching the sheep, and vowed to repent.

古文：举家大小悉诣神前祈祝，士徐徐还，妇见，泣曰： 多日作羊，不辛苦耶？ 
现代文：巫婆于是把羊牵走，要妇人斋戒七天，斋戒期间全家大小都要在神前祝祷谢罪。士人回家后，妇人见了他，哭着问： 你变成羊有好多天了，辛不辛苦？ 
English: The witch then took the sheep away and told the woman to fast for seven days. During the fasting period, the whole family should pray and give thanks before God. After the judge returned home, the woman saw him and asked in tears: You have been a sheep for many days, isn't it hard work?

古文：士曰： 犹忆啖草不美，时作腹痛。 
现代文：士人说： 一想到那股草味，我肚子就痛。 
English: The nobleman said, "I feel sick to my stomach when I think about the smell of grass.

古文：妇愈悲哀，后略复妒，士即伏地作羊鸣，妇惊起，永谢不敢。
现代文：妇人听了更是难过。以后，妇人只要稍显妒意，士人就趴在地上学羊叫，妇人每次都立即惊慌地拉起士人，向天谢罪不敢再犯。
English: The woman was even more upset when she heard this. After that, whenever the woman showed the slightest hint of jealousy, the scholar would lie down on the ground and learn to howl like a sheep. The woman would immediately pull up the scholar in panic every time, thanking God that she did not dare to commit the sin again.

