古文：毛修之，字敬文，荥阳阳武人也。
现代文：毛修之字敬文，荥阳阳武人。
English: Mao Xiu Zhi, the character Jing Wen, and Shenyang Yangwu Ren.

古文：祖虎生，伯父璩，并益州刺史。
现代文：他的祖父毛虎生，伯父毛璩，都是益州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Mao Torsen, and his uncle, Mao Tong, both hailed from Yizhou.

古文：父瑾，梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：父亲毛瑾，官至梁、秦二州刺史。
English: His father, Mao Kun, was a high-ranking official of the Liang and Qin Erzhou Dynasties.

古文：修之有大志，颇读史籍，荆州刺史殷仲堪以为宁远参军。
现代文：毛修之心怀大志，读了不少史书。荆州刺史殷仲堪用他当宁远参军。
English: Mao Xiu's heart was ambitious, and he read a lot of history books. Jingzhou's famous historian Yin Zhong could use him to join the army.

古文：桓玄克荆州，仍为玄佐，历后军、太尉、相国参军。
现代文：桓玄攻下荆州，毛修之便当了桓玄的官佐，历任后军参军、太尉参军、相国参军。
English: Huan Xuan conquered Jingzhou, and Mao Xiuzhi became Huan Xuan's official aide-de-camp. Successive successors joined the army, the captain joined the army, and the neighboring country joined the army.

古文：解音律，能骑射，玄甚遇之。
现代文：毛修之颇通音乐，又能骑马和射箭，桓玄待他很好。
English: Maoshu is quite good at music, can ride a horse and shoot arrows, and Kuan Xuan treats him well.

古文：及篡位，以为屯骑校尉。
现代文：到桓玄篡位时，让毛修之当屯骑校尉。
English: When Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, he appointed Mao Xiu as the cavalry lieutenant.

古文：随玄西奔，玄败于峥嵘洲，复还江陵，人情离散，议欲西奔汉川。
现代文：毛修之随同桓玄逃到西方，桓玄在峥嵘洲溃败，再回到江陵，人心离散，商议准备西逃到汉川。
English: Mao Shuzhi fled to the west with Huan Xuan, Huan Xuan was defeated in Luzhou, and then returned to Gangneung. People were scattered, and they discussed preparing to flee west to Hanchuan.

古文：修之诱令入蜀，冯迁斩玄于枚回洲，修之力也。
现代文：毛修之引诱桓玄到四川，以至冯迁在枚回洲将桓玄斩首。
English: Mao Xiu lured Kuan Xuan to Sichuan, and Feng Qian decapitated Kuan Xuan on Hekizhou.

古文：晋安帝反正于江陵，除骁骑将军。
现代文：这是毛修之的功劳。晋安帝在江陵恢复帝位，任毛修之为骁骑将军。
English: This was Mao Xiu's achievement. Emperor Jin restored the imperial throne in Gangneung and appointed Mao Xiu as the general of the cavalry.

古文：下至京师，高祖以为镇军咨议参军，加宁朔将军。
现代文：毛修之东下到京师，高祖用他为镇军谘议参军，又加号宁朔将军。
English: Mao Xiuzhi went east to the Beijing Division, Gao Zu used him to advise the town army to join the army, and he was given the title of Ningshuo General.

古文：旬月，迁右卫将军。
现代文：一月之间，迁任右卫将军。
English: In January, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division.

古文：既有斩玄之谋，又伯、父并在蜀土，高祖欲引为外助，故频加荣爵。
现代文：毛修之一方面有斩桓玄的计谋之功，另一方面是祖父和伯父都曾任益州刺史，高祖想引用他作为外助，所以连连加给他官职。
English: On the other hand, both his grandfather and uncle had served as the governor of Yizhou, and Gaozu wanted to use him as a foreign aid, so he gave him official posts one after another.

古文：及父瑾为谯纵所杀，高祖表为龙骧将军，配给兵力，遣令奔赴。
现代文：到毛修之的父亲毛瑾被谯纵杀了，高祖表奏毛修之当龙骧将军，配给他部队，叫他奔赴四川赴援。
English: When Mao Shuxi's father, Mao Xuan, was killed by the Long March, Gao Zu presented Mao Shuxi as the Long March general, assigned him troops, and told him to rush to Sichuan to help.

古文：又遣益州刺史司马荣期及文处茂、时延祖等西讨。
现代文：又派益州刺史司马荣期和文处茂、时延祖等西向讨伐。
English: In addition, he dispatched the Ikshushan scholar Sima Rongji and the scholars Wenchuan Shigeru, Shi Yanzu and others to fight in the west.

古文：修之至宕渠，荣期为参军杨承祖所杀，承祖自称镇军将军、巴州刺史。
现代文：毛修之到宕渠，司马荣期被参军杨承祖杀了，杨承祖自称镇军将军、巴州刺史。
English: Mao Xiu arrived at the ditch, Sima Rong was killed by Yang Chengzu, who joined the army. Yang Chengzu called himself the general of the town army and stabbed the history of Bazhou.

古文：修之退还白帝，承祖自下攻之，不拔。
现代文：毛修之退回白帝，杨承祖从下方进攻白帝，不能攻下。
English: Mao Xiu retreated back to the White Emperor, Yang Chengzu attacked the White Emperor from below, but could not capture him.

古文：修之使参军严纲等收兵众，汉嘉太守冯迁率兵来会，讨承祖斩之。
现代文：毛修之派参军严纲等收集兵力，汉嘉太守冯迁率兵来会合，讨击杨承祖并杀了他。
English: Mao Xiuzhi sent troops to join the army to collect troops, and the Han Jia governor Feng Qian led the troops to come to the meeting to fight Yang Chengzu and kill him.

古文：时文处茂犹在邑郡，修之遣振武将军张季仁五百兵系处茂等。
现代文：当时文处茂还在巴郡，毛修之叫振武将军张季仁带五百兵士增援文处茂等人。
English: At that time, Munsho Shigeru was still in Ba County, and Mao Shushi called on Zhenwu General Zhang Qiren to bring five hundred soldiers to reinforce Munsho Shigeru and others.

古文：荆州刺史道规又遣奋武将军原导之领千人，受修之节度。
现代文：荆州刺史刘道规又派奋武将军原导之带一千人，接受毛修之指挥。
English: Liu Daojun, the governor of Jingzhou, also sent Gen. Fenwu Yuan with 1,000 men to accept Mao Xiu's command.

古文：修之遣原导之与季仁俱进。
现代文：毛修之派原导之和张季仁一同前进。
English: The original leader of the Maoist faction and Zhang Qiren marched together.

古文：时益州刺史鲍陋不肯进讨，修之下都上表曰： 臣闻在生所以重生，实有生理可保。臣之情地，生途已竭，所以未沦于泉壤，借命于朝露者，以日月贞照，有兼映之辉，庶凭天威，诛夷仇逆。
现代文：当时益州刺史鲍陋不肯前往讨伐，毛修之回京上表说： 我听说活着的人所以看重生命，是因为还有生路，我的情况是生路已没有了，之所以还没有到黄泉之下，苟且于朝夕之间，是因为有日月在照耀，天下万物都蒙恩泽，或者说我希望借助皇上的威风，消灭仇敌。
English: At that time, Yizhou poet Baohui did not want to go to the crusade, and Mao Xiuzhong returned to Beijing and said: I heard that people who are alive value life because there is a way to live. My situation is that there is no way to live. The reason why I have not yet reached the underworld, and it is between morning and evening, is because the sun and the moon shine, and all things in the world are blessed. Or I hope to use the emperor's authority to eliminate the enemy.

古文：自提戈西赴，备尝时难，遂使齐斧停柯，狡竖假息。
现代文：从我带兵向西，尝到了很多艰难，使刀斧不能施展它的力量，狡猾的敌人得以继续存在。
English: Since I led the troops to the west, I have experienced a lot of hardships, so that the sword and axe cannot exert its power, and the cunning enemy can continue to exist.

古文：诚由经路有暨，亦缘制不自己。
现代文：确实是由于经过的路途非常崎岖，也是因为被其他人掣肘。
English: Indeed, it is because of the very rough road, but also because of being constrained by others.

古文：抚影穷号，泣望西路。
现代文：我对着自己的影子不断地哭泣，西望蜀汉。
English: I keep crying to my shadow, Xiwang Shuhan.

古文：益州刺史陋始以四月二十九日达巴东，顿白帝，以俟庙略。
现代文：益州刺史鲍陋开始在四月二十九日抵巴东，屯驻白帝，等待朝廷的命令。
English: On the 29th of April, Yizhou scholar Baohui arrived in Badong and settled in Baidi, waiting for the order from the imperial court.

古文：可乘之机宜践，投袂之会屡愆。
现代文：可以乘隙进攻的机会很容易放弃，奋勇冲击的时期往往错过。
English: It is easy to give up the opportunity to take advantage of a gap attack, and the period of braving the impact is often missed.

古文：臣虽效死寇庭，而理绝救援，是以束骸载驰，诉冤象魏。
现代文：我虽然想在敌境以身殉国，但没有援救的部队，所以连忙到京投诉，向皇上乞求援助。
English: Although I wanted to die for my country on the enemy's territory, there were no troops to rescue me, so I hurried to Beijing to complain and beg the emperor for help.

古文：昔宋害申丹，楚庄有遗履之愤，况忘家殉国，鲜有臣门，节冠风霜，人所矜悼。
现代文：当年宋国人害死申丹，楚庄王愤怒得几乎掉了鞋子，况且我家先人为国捐躯，使我家留下不多的人，栉冠风霜，是人们都非常痛悼的。
English: At that time, the Song people killed Shentan, and King Chu Zhuang was so angry that he almost lost his shoes. Moreover, the ancestors of my family sacrificed their lives for the country, so there are not many people left in my family. The crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown.

古文：伍员不亏君义，而申包不忘国艰，俟会伫锋，因时乃发。
现代文：伍员不损害君臣大义，而申包胥不忘国仇，等待机会乘机奋进。
English: A soldier does not harm the great interests of the emperor and the people, but he does not forget the national enmity and waits for the opportunity to advance.

古文：今臣庸逾在昔，未蒙宵迈之旗，是以仰辰极以希照，眷西土以洒泪也。
现代文：今日，臣下我才德赶不上古人，也未尝获得过独立进军的指挥权力，所以仰望皇上回想到我，想到西方将士捐躯而洒一掬同情之泪。
English: Today, I, a vassal, am not as virtuous as the ancients, nor have I gained the command authority to march independently, so I look up to the emperor to think of me, and shed a tear of sympathy when I think of the Western soldiers who lost their lives.

古文：公私怀耻，仰望洪恩，岂宜遂享名器，比肩人伍。
现代文：于公于私我都怀有深仇大恨，上蒙圣上大恩，怎么能享受官职爵位和一般人并列。
English: I have a deep hatred for both the public and myself. How can I enjoy the official title and rank alongside ordinary people when I have been blessed with great grace?

古文：求情既所不容，即实又非所继，但以方仗威灵，要须综摄，乞解金紫宠私之荣，赐以鹰扬折冲之号。臣之于国，理无虚请。
现代文：求情又不容许，希望得到实在的兵权又没有援助部队，只因为正凭借皇上神威，最终必须打败敌人，我请求解除我的金紫光禄大夫这种光荣的宠遇，赐给我鹰扬将军、折冲将军这样的名号，我这个人对于国家，按道理是不会白白地申请的。
English: Pleading for mercy is not allowed, hoping to obtain real military power without supporting troops, just because it is by virtue of the emperor's divine power that the enemy must ultimately be defeated. I request that I be relieved of the glorious privilege of being Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, and that I be given the titles of General Eagle Yang and General Orichong. I, as a person, will not apply for the country in vain.

古文：自臣涉道，情虑荒越，疹毒交缠，常虑性命陨越，要当躬先士卒，身驰贼庭，手斩凶丑，以摅莫大之衅。然后就死之日，即化如归，阖门灵爽，岂不谢先帝于玄宫。 
现代文：从我上路以来，情性慌张，疾病交加，常担心性命不保，总希望身先士卒，攻入敌人的堡垒，亲手杀掉仇人，消灭叛乱首领，然后去死，好比回到家一样，我全家的灵魂，怎么能不在玄宫谢恩先帝呢？ 
English: Since I have been on the road, my temper has been in a panic, I have been plagued by illness, I have often feared for my life, and I have always hoped to be the first to break into the enemy's fortress, kill the enemy with my own hands, eliminate the rebel leader, and then die, just like back home. How can the soul of my whole family not thank the former emperor in the Imperial Palace?

古文：高祖哀其情事，乃命冠军将军刘敬宣率文处茂、时延祖诸军伐蜀。
现代文：高祖很同情他的境况，于是叫冠军将军刘敬宣带文处茂、时延祖等部队攻打蜀国。
English: Gaozu was very sympathetic to his plight, so he ordered the champion general Liu Jingxuan to lead the troops of Wenchuan Shao, Shi Yanzu and others to attack Shu.

古文：军次黄虎，无功而退。
现代文：大军驻屯黄虎，无功而退。
English: A large army was stationed at Huanghu, but retreated in vain.

古文：谯纵由此送修之父、伯及中表丧，口累并得俱还。
现代文：谯纵因此送回毛修之的父亲、伯父和表兄们的尸首，其余亲戚也得以返回故乡。
English: As a result, the bodies of Mao Xiuqi's father, uncle and cousins were repatriated, and other relatives were able to return to their hometowns.

古文：卢循逼京邑，修之服未除，起为辅国将军，寻加宣城内史，戍姑孰。
现代文：卢循进逼京城，毛修之丧服还未解除，便被起用为辅国将军，不久加官宣城内史，戍守姑孰。
English: Lu Xun forced his way into the capital. Mao Xiu's mourning clothes had not yet been removed, and he was appointed as an auxiliary general, and soon he was promoted to the post of proclamation of the history of the city and guarding Gu Ye.

古文：为循党阮赐所攻，击破之。
现代文：卢循的将领阮赐来进攻，毛修之打败了他。
English: Lu Xun's general Ruan Ji attacked, and Mao Xiuzhi defeated him.

古文：循走，刘毅还姑孰，修之领毅后军司马，坐长置吏僮，免将军、内史官。
现代文：卢循南逃，刘毅回到姑孰，毛修之任刘毅的后军司马，因为长期把部下当家仆使用，被免除将军、内史官。
English: Lu Xun fled to the south, Liu Yi returned to Gushan, Mao Xiu was appointed as Liu Yi's post-army Sima, because he used his subordinates as domestic servants for a long time, he was exempted from being a general and an internal historian.

古文：毅西镇江陵，以为卫军司马、辅国将军、南郡太守。
现代文：刘毅西镇江陵，以毛修之为卫军司马、辅国将军、南郡太守。
English: Liu Yi Xizhen Jiangling, with Mao Xiu as the Sima of the Guards, the General of the Auxiliary State, and the Governor of Nan County.

古文：修之虽为毅将佐，而深自结高祖。
现代文：毛修之虽然当刘毅的将官，但却深深地结交刘裕。
English: Although Mao Shuzhi was Liu Yi's top general, he was deeply acquainted with Liu Yu.

古文：高祖讨毅，先遣王镇恶袭江陵，修之与咨议参军任集之等并力战，高祖宥之。
现代文：高祖讨伐刘毅，先派王镇恶袭击江陵，毛修之和谘议参军任集之合力抵抗，高祖原谅了他。
English: Gaozu fought against Liu Yi, first sent Wang Zhen to attack Jiangling, Mao Xiu's peace and consultation to join the army led to the joint resistance of Ren Ji, Gaozu forgave him.

古文：时遣硃龄石伐蜀，修之固求行，高祖虑修之至蜀，必多所诛残，士人既与毛氏有嫌，亦当以死自固，故不许。
现代文：当时派朱龄石进军四川，毛修之坚决请求让自己参与，高祖担心毛修之到蜀地，必然多杀蜀人，当地人既然和毛氏有仇，必然死守难攻，所以不许他参与。
English: At that time, Zhu Lingshi was sent to march into Sichuan, Mao Shiu's resolute request was to let himself participate. Gao Zu was worried that if Mao Shiu came to Shu, he would inevitably kill more Shu people. Since the local people had a grudge against Mao, it was inevitable that they would defend themselves, so he was not allowed to participate.

古文：还都，除黄门侍郎，复为右卫将军。
现代文：毛修之回到京城，被用为黄门侍郎，再当右卫将军。
English: Mao Shuzhi returned to Beijing and was used as a Yellow Gate attendant, and then as a right guard general.

古文：修之不信鬼神，所至必焚除房庙。
现代文：毛修之不相信鬼神，每到一个地方，必然焚毁庙寺。
English: Mao Shuzhi did not believe in ghosts and gods, and whenever he went to a place, he would inevitably burn down a temple.

古文：时蒋山庙中有佳牛好马，修之并夺取之。
现代文：当时蒋山庙中有好牛好马，毛修之都强夺到手。
English: At that time, there were good cattle and good horses in Jiangshan Temple, and Mao Xiu's capital was won by force.

古文：高祖讨司马休之，以为咨议参军、冠军将军、领南郡相。
现代文：高祖讨伐司马休之，用他当谘议参军、冠军将军，兼任南郡相。
English: Gao Zu fought against Sima Xiu Zhi, and used him as an adviser to join the army, a champion general, and also served as the South County Minister.

古文：高祖将伐羌，先遣修之复芍陂，起田数千顷。
现代文：高祖将讨伐羌人，先派毛修之开辟芍陂，垦田几千顷。
English: Gao Zu will fight against the Xiong people, and first send Mao Xiu to open up the Xiong, and the Xiong field is several thousand hectares.

古文：及至彭城，又使营立府舍，转相国右司马，将军如故。
现代文：到彭城后，又叫毛修之建立府中房屋，接着转任毛修之为相国右司马，将军照旧。
English: After arriving in Pengcheng, he also called on Mao Xiu to build a house in the government, and then he was transferred to Mao Xiu as the right-hand man of the country, the general as before.

古文：时洛阳已平，即本号为河南、河内二郡太守，行西州事，戍洛阳，修治城垒。
现代文：当时洛阳已打下，毛修之以冠军将军职兼河南、河内二郡太守，代理司州刺史，戍守洛阳，修城治堡。
English: At that time, Luoyang had already been defeated, and Mao Tse-tung became the champion general and also the governor of two counties in Henan and Hanoi, acting as the governor of the province, defending Luoyang, and building the city.

古文：高祖既至，案行善之，赐衣服玩好，当时计直二千万。
现代文：高祖到洛阳检查了一通，对毛修之大为奖赏，赐给他很多衣服和各种珍贵物品，当时值二千万。
English: Gaozu went to Luoyang to check it out, and rewarded Mao Xiu with a large sum of money, giving him many clothes and various precious items, worth 20 million at the time.

古文：先是，刘敬宣女嫁，高祖赐钱三百万，杂彩千匹，时人并以为厚赐。
现代文：这之前，刘敬宣的女儿出嫁，高祖赏钱三百万，杂绸千匹，当时人们认为是极深厚的赏赐。
English: Prior to this, when Liu Jingxuan's daughter got married, Gao Zu rewarded her with three million yuan and a thousand pieces of silk. At that time, it was considered to be a very rich reward.

古文：王镇恶死，修之代为安西司马，将军如故。
现代文：王镇恶死后，毛修之代他为安西司马，将军还照旧。
English: After the death of Wang Zhenxuan, Mao replaced him with Anxi Sima, and the general remained the same.

古文：值桂阳公义真已发长安，为佛佛虏所邀，军败。
现代文：恰遇桂阳公刘仪真已从长安起身出发，被赫连勃勃所拦击，宋军溃败。
English: Liu Yizhen, the Duke of Guiyang, happened to set out from Chang'an. He was stopped by Herengong, and the Song army was routed.

古文：修之与义真相失，走将免矣。
现代文：毛修之和刘义真相互离散。
English: Mao Shuzhi and Liu Yizhen are separated from each other.

古文：始登一坂，坂甚高峻，右卫军人叛走，已上坂，尝为修之所罚者，以戟掷之，伤额，因坠坂，遂为佛佛所擒。
现代文：即将脱离险境，刚登上一山岗，其中有一个曾被毛修之惩罚的，用画戟向毛修之扔去，划破了毛修之的额角，毛修之落到岗下，被赫连氏活捉。
English: On the verge of getting out of danger, they had just climbed a mountain post. One of them, who had been punished by Mao Xiu, threw a thumbtack at Mao Xiu, cutting the corner of Mao Xiu's forehead. Mao Xiu fell under the post and was captured alive by Herian.

古文：佛佛死，其子赫连昌为索虏托跋焘所获，修之并没。
现代文：赫连勃勃死后，他儿子赫连昌被魏人拓跋焘俘虏。毛修之也落入魏人之手。
English: After the death of Herengong, his son Herengchang was captured by the Wei. Mao Shuzhi also fell into the hands of the Wei.

古文：初，修之在洛，敬事嵩高山寇道士，道士为焘所信敬，营护之，故得不死，迁于平城。
现代文：当初毛修之在洛阳，恭谨地伺候嵩山寇道士，寇道士很得拓跋焘信服，寇道士想法保护毛修之，所以毛修之才得保命，被带到平城。
English: At the beginning, Mao Shuzhi was in Luoyang, respectfully waiting for Songshan Qiao Taoist, Qiao Taoist was very convinced, Qiao Taoist wanted to protect Mao Shuzhi, so Mao Shuzhi had to save his life and was taken to Pingcheng.

古文：修之尝为羊羹，以荐虏尚书，尚书以为绝味，献之于焘；焘大喜，以修之为太官令。
现代文：毛修之曾做过一次羊羹汤，送给魏国一个尚书品尝，那尚书认为味道非常好，便献给了拓跋焘。拓跋焘大喜，便让毛修之当了太官令。
English: Mao Shuzhi once made yakitori soup and gave it to a Wei official for tasting. The official thought the taste was very good and dedicated it to Tuobao. Tuobao was overjoyed and made Mao Shuzhi a grand marshal.

古文：稍被亲宠，遂为尚书、光禄大夫、南郡公，太官令、尚书如故。
现代文：慢慢得到拓跋焘的爱宠。于是毛修之也当了尚书、光禄大夫、南郡公，太官令还照旧。
English: Gradually, he came to be loved by Tuobao. As a result, Mao Shuzhi also became Shangshu, Guanglu Doctor, and Nangongong, and the position of Taikan was still the same.

古文：其后硃修之没虏，亦为焘所宠。
现代文：之后朱修之也陷身魏国，也很得拓跋焘宠爱。
English: After that, Zhu Xiuzhi was also trapped in Wei, and was also very much favored by Tuobao.

古文：修之相得甚欢。
现代文：两位修之关系很好。
English: The relationship between the two monks is very good.

古文：修之问南国当权者为谁，硃修之答云： 殷景仁。 
现代文：毛修之问朱修之南国当权的人是哪个？朱修之说： 殷景仁。 
English: Mao Xiuqi asked Zhu Xiuqi who was the person in power in the south? Zhu Xiuqi said: Yin Jingren.

古文：修之笑曰： 吾昔在南，殷尚幼少，我得归罪之日，便应巾韝到门邪！ 
现代文：毛修之笑道： 我当年在南方，殷还是小孩，我以后如果回到南方，还要穿戴衣帽到他门下伺侯吗？ 
English: Mao Xiuzhi smiled, "I was in the south when Yin was still a child. If I return to the south in the future, will I still have to wear a cap and gown to wait at his door?

古文：经年不忍问家消息，久之乃讯访，修之具答，并云： 贤子元矫，甚能自处，为时人所称。 
现代文：一年多不敢问家中消息，好久后才询问，朱修之回答很详细，并且说： 令郎元矫，颇能自理，很得舆论好评。 
English: For more than a year, he did not dare to ask his family for news, and only inquired after a long time. Zhu Xiuzhi's answer was very detailed, and said: "Liang Yuan Jiao is quite able to take care of himself, and has been well received by public opinion.

古文：修之悲不得言，直视良久，乃长叹曰： 呜呼！ 
现代文：毛修之悲痛得几乎说不出话，直直地看着远方，长叹一声 呜呼！ 
English: Mao Xiu's grief was so intense that he could hardly speak. He looked straight ahead into the distance and let out a long sigh.

古文：自此一不复及。
现代文：从这以后，再也没问家中信息。
English: After that, he never asked his family for information again.

古文：初，荒人去来，言修之劝诱焘侵边，并教焘以中国礼制，太祖甚疑责之。
现代文：当初两国流民往来，都说毛修之劝诱拓跋焘侵扰宋国边境，并且传教他有关中国的礼乐制度等。太祖很怀疑他，不断地加以谴责。
English: At the beginning of the exchanges between the exiles of the two countries, it was said that Mao Xiu's advice induced Tuobao to invade the border of Song and taught him about China's ritual music system. Taizu was very suspicious of him and constantly condemned him.

古文：修之后得还，具相申理，上意乃释。
现代文：朱修之后来回到南方对这些冤枉都力加洗刷，文帝才释然不问。
English: After Zhu Xiu returned to the south, he tried hard to clean up these wrongs, but Emperor Wen did not ask.

古文：修之在虏中，多畜妻妾，男女甚多。
现代文：毛修之在魏国时，兼收并蓄了一大群妻妾，儿女很多。
English: When Mao Xuzhi was in Wei, he received and kept a large group of wives and concubines, and had many children.

古文：元嘉二十三年，死于虏中，时年七十二。
现代文：元嘉二十三年，毛修之在魏国去世，享年七十二岁。
English: In the 23rd year of Yuan Jia, Mao Xuzhi died in Wei, at the age of seventy-two.

古文：元矫历宛陵、江乘、溧阳令。
现代文：毛元矫历任宛陵、江乘、溧阳等县令。
English: Mao Yuanxiao was appointed as the county magistrate of Wanling, Jiangren and Fenyang.

