古文：王之望，字瞻叔，襄阳谷城人，后寓居台州。
现代文：王之望字瞻叔，襄阳谷城人，后来移居台州。
English: Wang Zhiwang's uncle, a resident of Yangyang Valley City, later moved to Taizhou.

古文：父纲，登元符进士第，至通判徽州而卒。
现代文：父亲王纲，中元符年间进士第，官至徽州通判而去世。
English: His father, Wang Gang, was promoted to the post of judge in the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, and passed away after being promoted to the post of judge in Huizhou.

古文：之望初以荫补，绍兴八年，登进士第。
现代文：王之望当初因荫补得官，绍兴八年，中进士第。
English: Wang Zhiwang was initially promoted due to shadowing, and in Shaoxing in eight years, he was promoted to junior high school.

古文：教授处州，入为太学录，迁博士。
现代文：任处州教授，入朝任太学录，升为博士。
English: He was appointed as a prefectural professor, entered the Imperial Academy of Sciences, and was promoted to doctor.

古文：久之，出知荆门军，提举湖南茶盐，改潼川府路转运判官，寻改成都府路计度转运副使、提举四川茶马。
现代文：过了很长时间，出朝知荆门军，提举湖南茶盐，改任潼川府路转运判官，不久又改任成都府路计度转运副使。提举四川茶马。
English: After a long time, he went to the Jingmen army in the morning, promoted Hunan tea salt, and was appointed as the judge of the transportation of Luchuan Road, and soon he was appointed as the deputy envoy of the transportation of Chengdu Road. He promoted the Sichuan tea horse.

古文：朝臣荐其才，召赴行在，除太府少卿，总领四川财赋。
现代文：朝廷中有大臣推荐王之望的才能，诏令他到朝廷，任太府少卿，总管四川财赋。
English: There was a minister in the imperial court who recommended Wang Zhifang's talent, and ordered him to go to the imperial court to serve as the Taifu Shaoqing, the head of the Sichuan treasury.

古文：金人渝盟，军书旁午，调度百出，之望区画无遗事。第括民质剂未税者，搜抉隐匿，得钱为缗四百六十八万，众咸怨之。
现代文：金朝毁弃盟约，军事文书接连不断，各种调度层出不穷，王之望从容处理事无遗漏，搜刮贸易券契没有交纳税赋的，搜查抉摘隐瞒逃匿，得到四百六十八万缗钱，众人都怨恨他。
English: The Kim dynasty abrogated the treaty, military documents were issued one after another, various dispatches were issued one after another, Wang Zhimang handled everything calmly and did not omit anything, searched for trade certificates that did not pay taxes, searched and decided to hide and escape, and obtained 4.68 million baht. Everyone resented him.

古文：后升太府卿。
现代文：后升任太府卿。
English: He was later promoted to Dafu-kyo.

古文：孝宗即位，除户部侍郎，充川、陕宣谕使。
现代文：孝宗即位以后，任户部侍郎，充任川、陕宣谕使。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, he was appointed as a chamberlain of the household, and served as the envoy of the envoys to Sichuan and Shaanxi.

古文：先是，敌帅合喜寇凤州之黄牛堡，吴璘击走之，遂取秦州，连复商、陕、原、环等十七郡。
现代文：早先，金将合喜侵犯凤州的黄牛堡，吴瞞将敌人击退，于是收复秦州，并接连收复商、陕、原、环等十七州。
English: Earlier, King Hexi invaded the Yellow Cattle Fort in Fengzhou, and Wu Xie repulsed the enemy, and then recovered Qinzhou, and successively recovered 17 states including Shang, Shaan, Yuan and Huan.

古文：敌以璘精兵皆在德顺，力攻之。
现代文：金军由于吴王精兵都在德顺，全力进攻他。
English: As all the elite soldiers of the King of Wu were in Deshun, the Golden Army attacked him with all their might.

古文：时陈康伯秉政，方议罢德顺戍，虞允文为宣谕使，力争不从，上以手札命璘退师。
现代文：当时陈康伯主持朝政，正在议论撤罢德顺戍兵，虞允文是宣谕使，极力争论不服从，孝宗亲自写信命令吴王退兵。
English: At that time, Chen Kangbo, who presided over the imperial government, was discussing the withdrawal of the troops from De Shunhui, and Yu Yunwen was the envoy, vigorously arguing disobedience. Xiaozong personally wrote a letter to order Wu Wang to withdraw the troops.

古文：之望既代允文宣谕使，赞璘命诸将弃德顺，仓卒引退。
现代文：王之望代替虞允文任宣谕使，赞同吴王下令众将放弃德顺，仓促撤退。
English: Wang Zhimang replaced Yu Yunwen as the envoy, and agreed with Wu Wang's order to abandon Deshun and make a hasty retreat.

古文：敌乘其后，正兵三万，还者仅七千人，将校所存无几，连营恸哭，声震原野。
现代文：金军乘机在后追击，致使吴王军正规部队三万人，回来的仅有三千人，将校军官活下来的寥寥无几，全军痛哭，声震原野，孝宗听说深感后悔。
English: The Chinese army took the opportunity to pursue, resulting in 30,000 regular troops of the King of Wu's army, only 3,000 returned, few officers survived, the whole army cried bitterly, the sound shook the plain, and Xiaozong heard that he deeply regretted it.

古文：上闻而悔之。隆兴初，右谏议大夫王大宝疏之望罪，除集英殿修撰、提举江州太平兴国宫。
现代文：隆兴初年，右谏议大夫王大宝上疏弹劾王之望罪行，降任集英殿修撰、提举江州太平兴国宫。
English: In the first year of prosperity, Wang Dabao Shangso, a right-wing doctor, impeached Wang Zhifang for the crime, and was demoted to the post of compiling the imperial edict, and Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace was promoted.

古文：未几，权户部侍郎、江淮都督府参赞军事。
现代文：不久，权任户部侍郎、江淮都督府参赞军事。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the Household Attendant and the Military Counselor of the Jianghuai Governor's Office.

古文：之望雅不欲战，请朝，因奏： 人主论兵与臣下不同，惟奉承天意而已。
现代文：王之望很不愿意同金交战，请求入朝，因而上奏 ：皇帝论兵与臣下不同，不过奉承天意罢了。
English: Wang Zhiwang was very reluctant to fight against Kim and asked to enter the imperial court. Therefore, it was announced that the emperor's treatment of soldiers was different from that of his subjects, but he was only flattering God's will.

古文：窃观天意，南北之形已成，未易相兼，我之不可绝淮而北，犹敌之不可越江而南也。
现代文：臣私下观察天意，南北分离的局面已经形成，不能轻易互相兼并，我不可渡过淮河北进，就像敌军不能越过长江南下一样。
English: Privately, the minister observed the will of heaven. The situation of separation between the north and the south had already been formed. They could not easily annex each other. I could not cross the Huaihe River to the north, just as the enemy army could not cross the Yangtze River to the south.

古文：移攻战之力以自守，自守既固，然后随机制变，择利而应之。 有旨留中。
现代文：应将进攻的力量转而自守，自守既然稳固，然后随机制变，择利以应付它。 
English: It is necessary to turn the strength of the attack to self-defense. Since self-defense is stable, it will change with the mechanism and choose the advantage to cope with it.

古文：俄兼直学士院。
现代文：孝宗下旨留他在朝中，不久兼直学士院。
English: Takamune ordered him to stay in the Imperial Court, and he soon became a member of the Imperial Academy.

古文：汤思退力主息兵，奏除之望吏部侍郎、通问使。
现代文：汤思退力主休兵，奏请任命王之望为吏部侍郎、通问使。
English: Tang Si refused to withdraw from the army, and requested that Wang Zhifang be appointed as the secretary of the personnel department and the envoy.

古文：寻议先遣小使觇敌，召之望还。
现代文：接着又议定先派一名官位低下的使节前去观察敌情，召还王之望。
English: Next, it was agreed that a low-ranking envoy would be sent to observe the hostile situation and recall the king's hope.

古文：之望首以守备不足恃为告，上亟罢都督府，以之望为淮西宣谕使，甫拜命，又擢右谏议大夫。
现代文：王之望首先上报边境守备不足依赖，孝宗急忙撤罢都督府，任命王之望为淮西宣谕使，刚刚任命，又擢升他为右谏议大夫。
English: Wang Zhifang was the first to report the lack of border defense and dependence, and Xiaozong hurriedly dismissed the governor's office and appointed Wang Zhifang as the Huaixi envoy. He had just been appointed and promoted to the doctor of the right wing.

古文：之望因上章极言廷臣执偏见为身谋，乞明诏在庭，平其心于议论之际。
现代文：王之望于是上章极力论述朝廷大臣各执一辞以为自身考虑，乞求明令在朝大臣，在议论之际应公正无偏。
English: Wang Zhiwang then tried his best in the last chapter to discuss the fact that the ministers of the imperial court each made a speech for their own consideration, and begged that the ministers of the imperial court should be fair and unbiased in their discussions.

古文：时思退主和议，浚主恢复，之望言似善，实阴为思退地也。
现代文：当时汤思退力主和议，张浚力主恢复中原。王之望的议论看上去好像不错，实际上是暗中偏向汤思退。
English: At that time, Tang Si withdrew from the main peace talks, and Zhang Jianli withdrew from the main restoration of the Central Plains. Wang Zhiwang's discussion seemed to be good, but in fact it was secretly biased towards Tang Si's withdrawal.

古文：既而视师江上。
现代文：不久到长江沿线视察军队。
English: Soon after, he went to inspect the troops along the Yangtze River.

古文：金复犯边，遂上和、战二策，且言措置守御之备，疏奏未达，拜参知政事。
现代文：金军再次侵犯边境，于是献上和、战两策，并且报告安排守御防备情况，疏章没有到达，朝廷任命他为参知政事。
English: The Chinese army invaded the border again, so he presented two policies, one for peace and one for war, and reported on the arrangements for defense and preparedness. However, the reply did not arrive, and the imperial court appointed him as a political advisor.

古文：既入，俄兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：王之望入朝后，接着兼任同知枢密院事。
English: After Wang Zhiwang entered the imperial court, he also served as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：敌兵交至，濠、楚守将或弃城遁，上命汤思退督江、淮师；未行，复令之望督视，改同都督。
现代文：金兵交相而来，濠、楚州守将有的弃城而逃，孝宗命令汤思退前去监督江、淮地区军队；汤思退没去，又令王之望前去督促巡视，权同都督。
English: When the gold soldiers came into contact with each other, some of the governors of Min and Chuzhou abandoned the city and fled. Xiaozong ordered Tong Si to retreat to supervise the troops in the Jiang and Huai regions. When Tong Si did not retreat, he also ordered Wang Zhubang to advance to supervise the inspection, with the same power as the governor.

古文：力辞不行。
现代文：王之望极力推辞不去。
English: Wang Zhwang tried his best not to go.

古文：会太学诸生上书，上怒，欲加罪，之望救解之。
现代文：恰逢太学众位学生上书论事，孝宗大怒，打算处治，王之望解救了他们。
English: When a group of students from Taigaku came to discuss the matter, Takamune flew into a rage and planned to punish them. Wang Zhonran rescued them.

古文：遂以参知政事劳师江、淮。
现代文：于是以参知政事的身份到江淮地区慰问军队。
English: As a result, he went to the Jianghuai region to offer condolences to the troops as a member of the prefectural government.

古文：之望先尝贻书敌帅。
现代文：王之望早先曾送信给敌军将领。
English: Wang Zhiwang had earlier sent a telegram to the enemy general.

古文：至是，王抃使敌军，并割商、秦地；许归被俘人，惟叛亡不预；世为叔侄之国。
现代文：到这时，王扌卞出使敌军，割让商、秦土地，答应归还被俘的敌军，双方世代约为叔侄之国。
English: At this time, Wang Hui dispatched the enemy army, ceded the merchants and Qin land, and promised to return the captured enemy army. Both sides have been fighting for the country of the uncle and nephew for generations.

古文：敌皆听许，讲解而罢。
现代文：金皆答应，讲和解兵而去。
English: Kim agreed, and they parted ways amicably.

古文：上闻敌师退，令督府择利击之，之望下令诸将不得妄进。
现代文：孝宗听说金国退兵，下令都督府选择有利时机出击，王之望下令众将不得随便前进。
English: Hearing of the withdrawal of the Chinese troops, Xiaozong ordered the governor's office to choose a favorable time to attack, and Wang Zhobang ordered the general staff not to advance at will.

古文：朝廷趣行，之望言： 王抃既还，不可冒小利，害大计。 言者论罢为端明殿学士、提举江州太平兴国宫，居天台。
现代文：朝廷催促行动，王之望说： 王扌卞既然回来，不能因贪图小利，而损害和好大计。 言官弹劾罢免为端明殿学士、提举江州太平兴国宫，居住天台。
English: Urging the imperial court to take action, Wang Zhwang said: "Since Wang Xi is back, he cannot be greedy for small profits and damage the grand plan of reconciliation. He was impeached and removed from the post of speaker, became a scholar of the Duanming Palace, was promoted to the Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace, and lived in the rooftop.

古文：乾道元年，起知福州、福建路安抚使。
现代文：乾道元年，起复任知福州、福建路安抚使。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was reinstated as the pacifying envoy to Fuzhou and Fujian.

古文：罢去以卒。先是，汝文在密，桧为郡文学，汝文荐其才，故桧引用之。然汝文性刚不为桧屈，对案相诟，至目桧为 浊气 。
现代文：逮捕海上贼寇王大老，捷报传来，转任资政殿大学士，移知温州，不久又被罢免。乾道六年冬天，去世。王之望有文艺才能，秦桧当政时，没有同秦桧同流合污，有人说他有操守。
English: Wang Zhifang was arrested as a sea thief and robber, and was transferred to a position as a member of the Academy of Capital and Political Affairs, and was transferred to Wenzhou, and was soon dismissed. He died in the winter of the sixth year of his reign. Wang Zhifang had literary talent, but when Qin Hui was in power, he did not collude with Qin Hui, and some people said that he had integrity.

古文：汝文风度翘楚，好古博雅，精于篆籀，有文集行于世。王庶，字子尚，庆阳人。
现代文：绍兴末年，极力附和同金讲和，与汤思退互为表里，专门以割让土地给敌人为得计，但土地被割让而敌人气势更加嚣张，王之望终于因此而被废黜。王庶字子尚，庆阳人。
English: In the late years of Shaoxing, he tried his best to make peace with Jin, and he and Tang Siyi were on the same page, especially in terms of ceding land to the enemy. However, the land was ceded and the enemy became more arrogant. Wang Zhubang was finally dethroned because of this. Wang Zhezi Shang, Qingyang people.

古文：崇宁五年，举进士第，改秩，知泾州保定县。
现代文：崇宁五年，中进士及第，改变官秩，知泾州保定县。
English: In the fifth year of Chongning, he was promoted to the junior high school and the first grade, changed his official rank, and was promoted to Baoding County, Chibi Prefecture.

古文：以种师道荐，通判怀德军。
现代文：因种师道推荐，通判怀德军。
English: Due to the recommendation of the seed teacher, the German army was awarded.

古文：契丹为金人所破，举燕云地求援，诏师道受降。
现代文：辽朝被金军攻破，以归还燕京地区到宋求援，诏令种师道前去接收。
English: The Liao Dynasty was defeated by the Jin Army, and in order to return the Yanjing region to the Song Dynasty, the Liao Dynasty asked for help, and the Emperor ordered Shidao to go to the Song Dynasty to receive it.

古文：庶谓师道曰： 国家与辽人百年之好，今坐视其败亡不能救，乃利其土地，无乃基女直之祸乎？ 不听。
现代文：王庶对种师道说 ：国家与辽朝百年和好，今天坐视它败亡不加救援，反而贪图得到土地，这岂不是引发金朝的祸患吗？ 种师道不听。
English: Wang Shizhu said to Tao Zongshi, "The country is happy with the hundredth anniversary of the Liao Dynasty. Today, it is sitting back and watching its downfall without any rescue, but instead is greedy for land. Isn't this what caused the disaster of the Jin Dynasty? Tao Zongshi didn't listen.

古文：宣和七年，金果入寇。
现代文：宣和七年，金军果然入寇。
English: Seven years after the declaration of peace, the Chinese army did indeed invade.

古文：太宰李邦彦夜召庶问计，庶曰： 宿将无如种师道，且夷虏畏服，宜付以西兵，使之入援。 邦彦以语蔡攸，攸不然。
现代文：太宰李邦彦连夜召见王庶询问对策，王庶说： 过去的名将没有人超过种师道，他被敌军敬畏佩服，应该将西部的兵力交给他，让他前来救援。 李邦彦将他的话转达给蔡攸，蔡攸不以为然。
English: Dazai Li Bangyan summoned Wangzhu overnight to inquire about countermeasures. Wangzhu said, "In the past, no one was more famous than a kind of teacher. He was revered and admired by the enemy army. It was necessary to hand over the western troops to him and let him come to the rescue. Li Bangyan conveyed his words to Cai You. Cai You was not impressed.

古文：以庶为陕西运判兼制置解盐事。
现代文：任命王庶为陕西转运判官兼制置解盐事。
English: Appointed Wang Shiao as the Shaanxi transshipment adjudicator and the production and disposal of salt.

古文：疆事益棘，钦宗欲幸襄、邓，先命席益为京西安抚使，益求庶自副。
现代文：战事更加棘手，钦宗想逃到襄阳、邓州，先任命席益为京西安抚使，席益请求让王庶为自己的副手。
English: The war was even more difficult. Qinzong wanted to escape to Xiangyang and Dengzhou. First, he appointed Shi Yixing as the Beijing-Xi pacification envoy. Shi Yixing requested that Wang Zhe as his deputy.

古文：高宗即位，除直龙图阁、鄜延经略使兼知延安府。
现代文：高宗即位，任命王庶直龙图阁、延路经略使兼知延安府。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne and appointed Wang's son-in-law, Zhaolong Tu Ge, and Yanluo Jing's envoy to Yan'an.

古文：累立战功，进集英殿修撰，升龙图阁待制，节制陕西六路军马。
现代文：多次建立战功，进为集英殿修撰、龙图阁待制，负责指挥陕西六路军马。
English: He repeatedly established his war exploits, and was promoted to the position of Shuei Dian Shuxuan and Longtuge, and was responsible for commanding the Sixth Route Army in Shaanxi Province.

古文：先是，河东经制使王〈王燮〉既遁归，东京留守宗泽承制以庶权陕西制置使。
现代文：早先，河东经制使王王燮逃归之后，东京留守宗泽承制任命王庶暂充陕西制置使。
English: Earlier, after Wang Wangyao was forced to flee back to China by the Hengtong Emperor, the Emperor's son-in-law, Munezawa Shosei, who was staying in Tokyo, appointed Wang Shosei as the temporary Shaanxi Emperor's envoy.

古文：会宣谕使谢亮入关，庶移书曰： 夏人之患小而缓，金人之患大而迫，秋高必大举，盍杖节率兵举义，驱逐渡河，徐图恢复。 亮不能从。
现代文：恰逢宣谕使谢亮入关，王庶送信给他说 ：西夏为害小又和缓，金军为患大又急迫，秋天必大举入侵，何不杖节率兵举起义旗，驱逐敌人渡过黄河，再慢慢图谋恢复失地。 谢亮没有听从。
English: At the same time that the proclamation sent Xie Liang into the customs, Wang Shizhu sent him a message: "The Western Xia is small and gentle, the Golden Army is large and urgent, and the autumn will be a large-scale invasion. Why not raise the flag of righteousness with the soldiers, expel the enemy across the Yellow River, and then slowly try to recover the lost land. Xie Liang did not obey.

古文：金人大入，庶调兵自沿河至冯翊，据险以守。
现代文：金军大举入侵，王庶调动军队自沿河至冯翊，占据险隘守御。
English: The Jin army invaded on a large scale, and Wang Shiao mobilized troops from along the river to Fenglu, occupying the narrow defenses.

古文：金人先已乘冰渡河犯晋宁，侵丹州，又渡清水河，破潼关，秦、陇皆震。
现代文：金军先已乘黄河结冰渡河进犯晋宁，侵犯丹州。又渡过清水河，攻破潼关，秦、陇地都受到震动。
English: The Chinese army first used the frozen Yellow River to cross the river to attack Jinning and invade Danzhou. It also crossed the Clear Water River and broke through Shaoguan. Both Qin and Shandong were shaken.

古文：庶传檄诸路，会期讨贼。
现代文：王庶传告各路，约定日期讨伐敌人。
English: Wang Shou called out to everyone to set a date to fight the enemy.

古文：泾原统制曲端雅不欲属庶，以未受命辞；居数日，告身至，又辞。
现代文：泾原路统制曲端很不愿意隶属王庶，以没有接到朝廷命令为借口推辞；过了数天，委任王庶官职的文告来到，曲端又不接受。
English: Qu Duan, the regent of the Xingyuan Road, was very reluctant to be subordinate to Wang Shiao, and declined on the pretext that he had not received an order from the imperial court; a few days later, the announcement of the appointment of Wang Shiao as an official came, and Qu Duan did not accept it.

古文：金人知端与庶不协，并兵寇鄜延。
现代文：金朝知道曲端同王庶不和，集中兵力进攻延。
English: The Kim dynasty knew that Qu Duan was at odds with Wang Shiao, and concentrated its forces to attack Yan.

古文：庶在坊州闻之，夜趋鄜延以遏其冲。
现代文：王庶在坊州听到消息，连夜奔赴延以阻遇敌军冲击。
English: Wang Shizhu heard the news in Fangzhou and rushed to Yancheng overnight to avoid the enemy's attack.

古文：金人诡道陷丹州，州界鄜、延之间，庶乃自当延安路。
现代文：金军用诈谋攻陷丹州，丹州界于、延之间，王庶于是自己担当防卫延安路的任务。
English: The Jin army plotted to invade Danzhou by deception. The border between Danzhou and Yancheng was between Danzhou and Yancheng, so Wang Zhe himself took on the task of defending Yan'an Road.

古文：时端尽统泾原劲兵，庶屡督其进，端讫不行，遂陷延安。
现代文：当时曲端统率了全部泾原路的劲兵。王庶多次督促他进兵，曲端最终没有行动，于是延安失守。
English: At that time, Qu Duan led all the strong soldiers of Yuyuan Road. Wang Shiao repeatedly urged him to enter the army, but in the end, Qu Duan did not act, so Yan'an was lost.

古文：语在端传。
现代文：这些记载在《曲端传》中。
English: These records are in "Song of Songs."

古文：初，庶闻围急，自收散亡往援。
现代文：当初，王庶听说延安被围告急，亲自收罗失散的士兵前往增援。
English: At first, Wang Shiao heard that Yan'an was surrounded and warned of an emergency, and personally collected the scattered soldiers from Luo and went to reinforce.

古文：观察使王〈王燮〉亦将所部发兴元。
现代文：观察使王王燮也率所部从兴元出发。
English: The observation prompted Wang Wangyao to leave Xingyuan with his staff.

古文：庶至甘泉而延安已不守，既无所归，遂以军付〈王燮〉，而自将百骑驰至襄乐劳军，尚倚端为助。
现代文：王庶到甘泉时延安已失守，既已没有去处，于是把军队交给王王燮，而自率百骑奔驰到襄乐慰问军队，希望倚靠曲端作为辅助。
English: When Wang Shizhu arrived at Ganquan, Yan'an had already lost its defense, and since there was no place to go, he handed over the army to Wang Wangyao, while he rode a hundred horses to Xiangle to console the army, hoping to rely on the curved end as an aid.

古文：庶至，端令每门减从骑之半，比至帐下，仅数骑。
现代文：王庶来到，曲端下令每座城门减少他的一半随从，等到帐下，仅剩下数骑。
English: When the king's son-in-law arrived, Qu ordered each gate to reduce his entourage by half, and by the time he was done, there were only a few horsemen left.

古文：端厉声问庶延安失守状，且曰： 节制固知爱身，不知为天子爱城乎？ 庶曰： 吾数令不从，谁其爱身者！ 端怒，谋即军中诛庶而夺其兵，乃夜走宁州，见谢亮曰： 延安，五路襟喉，今既失矣。
现代文：曲端厉声追问王庶延安失守的情况，并且说： 节制只知道爱惜己身，而不知为皇上爱惜城池吗？ 
English: Qu Duan sharply asked Wang Shobang about Yan'an's loss of defense, and said: Does restraint only know how to cherish oneself, but not know how to cherish the city for the emperor?

古文：《春秋》大夫出疆之义得以专之，请诛庶。 亮曰： 使事有指，今以人臣而擅诛于外，是跋扈也，公则自为之。 端沮而归，乃夺庶节制使印，又拘縻其官属。
现代文：王庶说： 我多次下令你不服从，是谁爱惜自身？ 曲端大怒，计划就在军中诛杀王庶而吞并他的部队，于是连夜到宁州，会见谢亮说： 延安，是五路咽喉之地，今天既然已经失守。《春秋》记载大夫出兵在外可以擅专，请诛杀王庶。 谢亮说 ：他肩负朝廷使命，今以臣下而在外擅杀大臣，是骄横跋扈，你要干就自己一人干。 曲端沮丧而归，夺取王庶节制使印，又拘留他的官属。
English: Wang Shizhe said: I have ordered you to disobey many times, who cares about himself? Qu Duang was furious and planned to kill Wang Shizhe in the army and annex his troops, so he went to Ningzhou overnight to meet Xie Liang and said: Yan'an is a five-way throat land, and today it has been lost. "Spring and Autumn" records that doctors who send troops abroad can be expert, please kill Wang Shizhe. Xie Liang said: He shoulders the mission of the court, and now he is a subject and is killing ministers outside, it is arrogant, you have to do it yourself. Qu Duang was frustrated and returned, seized Wang

古文：会诏庶守京兆，庶先以失律自劾得罢。
现代文：恰逢诏令王庶守卫京兆，王庶先以失败自做检讨被罢免。
English: It coincided with the imperial edict ordering Wang's subordinates to guard the imperial palace, and Wang's subordinates were first dismissed for failing to conduct their own review.

古文：丁内艰。
现代文：母亲去世。
English: My mother died.

古文：时张浚自富平败归，始思庶及端之言可用，乃并召之。
现代文：这时张浚从富平失败归来，才想起王庶和曲端的见解可以采用，于是一并召见他们。
English: At this time, Zhang Jun returned from the defeat of Fuping, only to remember that Wang Shiao and Qu Duan's opinions could be used, so he summoned them together.

古文：庶地近先至，力陈抚秦保蜀之策，劝浚收熙河、秦凤之兵，扼关、陇以为后图。
现代文：王庶距离近先到，极力陈述安抚秦陇保卫四川的计策，劝说张浚收集熙河、秦凤的兵力，扼守关、陇以便以后图谋。
English: Wang Shizhu arrived first, and tried his best to explain the strategy of appeasing Qin and protecting Sichuan, and persuaded Zhang Jun to gather the forces of Heihe and Qinfeng, and closely guard the pass and the pass in order to plot later.

古文：浚不纳。
现代文：张浚没有采纳。
English: Zhang Jun was not adopted.

古文：求终制，不许，乃版授参议官。
现代文：请求服完丧期，张浚不许，授予他任参议官。
English: After the period of mourning, Zhang Jun was not allowed to request the service, and he was awarded the post of senator.

古文：浚念端与庶必不相容，端未至，但复其官，移恭州。
现代文：张浚考虑到曲端和王庶必然互不相容，曲端没到，只恢复他的官职，移到恭州。
English: Zhang Jun took into account that Qu and Wang's offspring would inevitably be incompatible with each other. When Qu did not arrive, he only resumed his official post and moved to Gongzhou.

古文：庶因谓浚曰： 端有反心。 浚亦畏端得士，始有杀端意矣。
现代文：王庶因而对张浚说 ：曲端有反叛之心。 张浚也害怕曲端得到士卒拥护，开始有了杀曲端的念头。
English: As a result, Wang Shizhu said to Zhang Jun: Qu Quan has a rebellious heart. Zhang Jun was also afraid that Qu Quan would be supported by the soldiers, and began to have the idea of killing Qu Qu Quan.

古文：语在《端传》。
现代文：这些记载在《曲端传》中。
English: These records are in "Song of Songs."

古文：绍兴五年，起复知兴元府、利夔路制置使。
现代文：绍兴五年，丧期未满起任知兴元府、利夔路制置使。
English: Shaoxing five years, before the expiration of the period of mourning, he was appointed to Chixing Yuanfu and Lijiao Road.

古文：庶以士卒单寡，籍兴、洋诸邑及三泉县强壮，两丁取一，三丁取二，号 义士 ，日阅于县，月阅于州，厚犒之，不半年，有兵数万。
现代文：王庶由于士卒寡少，登记兴、洋各地和三泉县强壮居民，两丁取一，三丁取二，号称 义士 ，每天在县里训练，每月到州里训练，对他们给予优厚的待遇，不到半年，有兵达到数万人。
English: Due to the scarcity of soldiers, Wang Shizhu registered strong residents from all over Xinghai, Yangzhou and Sanquan counties, two to one, three to two, known as "righteous," trained in the county every day, trained in the state every month, and gave them favorable treatment. In less than half a year, there were tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：浚言于朝，升徽猷阁直学士。
现代文：张浚报告给朝廷，升徽猷阁直学士。
English: Zhang Jun reported to the imperial court, and he was promoted to a direct bachelor of Huizhou Academy of Fine Arts.

古文：有谗于浚者，徙庶知成都，改嘉州。
现代文：有人对张浚进谗言，张浚将王庶移知成都，又改任嘉州。
English: Some people criticized Zhang Junjin, and Zhang Jun transferred Wang Shizhu to Chengdu and changed his post to Jiashu.

古文：明年，浚劾庶轻率倾险，落职奉祠。
现代文：绍兴六年，张浚弹劾王庶为人轻率险诈，被落职任宫观官。
English: Six years ago in Shaoxing, Zhang Jun impeached Wang Shiao for being imprudent and treacherous, and he was dismissed from his post as palace inspector.

古文：寻起知遂宁，固避得请。六年，除湖北安抚使、知鄂州。
现代文：不久，被起用知遂宁。绍兴六年，任湖北安抚使、知鄂州。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to Chisuning and Shaoxing for six years, and served as the pacifying envoy to Hubei and Chizhou.

古文：趋阙，上因燕见，庶言： 陛下欲保江南，无所事；如曰绍复大业，都荆为可。
现代文：到朝廷，高宗在宴中接见他，王庶说 ：陛下要保守江南，那就没有什么事；如果说要继承恢复大业，就应该在荆州立都。
English: At the imperial court, Gaozong received him at a banquet. Wang Shao said, "If your majesty wants to protect the south of the Yangtze River, there is nothing to worry about; if you want to inherit the great cause of restoration, you should be in the capital of Jing Province."

古文：荆州左吴右蜀，利尽南海，前临江、汉，出三川，涉大河，以图中原，曹操所以畏关羽者也。 上大异之。
现代文：荆州左边是吴右边是四川，尽得南海之利，前临江、汉，出三川，渡大河，以图谋中原，这是曹操畏惧关羽的根源所在。 
English: To the left of Jingzhou is Wuzhou, to the right is Sichuan. Cao Cao tried his best to take advantage of the South China Sea. He went to the Linyi River and the Han River, went out of the Three Rivers, crossed the Great River, and attempted to conquer the Central Plains. This is the root of Cao Cao's fear of Guan Yu.

古文：复显谟阁待制、知荆南府、湖北经略安抚使，又复直学士。
现代文：次年春，入朝策对，高宗说 ：召你回朝时，张浚已离开朝廷，赵鼎还没有入朝，这是我亲自拔擢，没有旁人在左右帮助你。 
English: In the spring of the following year, Gaozong said, "When I called you back to the imperial court, Zhang Jun had already left the imperial court, and Zhao Ding had not yet entered the imperial court. I personally selected you, and there was no one else around to help you.

古文：七年十月，以兵部侍郎召。明年春，入对，上曰： 召卿之日，张浚已去，赵鼎未来，此朕亲擢，非有左右之助。 庶顿首谢，因奏： 恢复之功十年未立，其失在偏听，在欲速，在轻爵赏，是非邪正混淆。
现代文：王庶叩头拜谢。因而上奏 ：恢复之功十年没能建立，其原因在于偏听，在于欲速不达，在于轻视爵赏，在于是非正邪混杂。
English: Therefore, the following is played: the restoration work has not been established for ten years, and the reason is that it is biased, that it does not reach quickly, that it despises the award, and that it is a mixture of right and wrong.

古文：诚能赏功罚罪，其谁不服？
现代文：如果真能赏功罚过，谁敢不服从听命？
English: If you can really reward and punish, who would dare to disobey orders?

古文：昔汉光武以兵取天下，不以不急夺其费，不知兵者不可使言兵。 又口陈手画秦、蜀利害。
现代文：过去汉光武帝刘秀以武力夺取天下，不以不急之事夺去其费用，不了解军事的人不能让他谈论军事。 又口陈手画秦、蜀地区地形的利害得失。
English: In the past, Emperor Liu Xiu of the Han Dynasty used force to conquer the world, and did not take advantage of things that were not urgent. People who did not understand the military could not let him talk about the military. He also talked about the advantages and disadvantages of hand-painting the topography of Qin and Shu regions.

古文：上大喜，即日迁本部尚书。
现代文：高宗大喜，当天升他为兵部尚书。
English: Gao Zong was overjoyed, and on the same day, he was promoted to be a member of the military.

古文：阅月，拜枢密副使。
现代文：过了一个月，拜任枢密副使。
English: A month later, he was appointed Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：议者乞遣重臣行边，遂命庶措置江、淮边防。
现代文：言者请求派重臣行视边境，于是命令王庶安排江、淮边防事务。
English: The speaker requested that a senior minister be sent to observe the border, so he ordered Wang Shiao to arrange the border defense affairs of Jiang and Huai.

古文：京、湖宣抚使岳飞闻庶行边，遗书曰： 今岁若不出师，当纳节请闲。 庶壮之。
现代文：京、湖宣抚使岳飞听说王庶巡视边防，送信给他说： 今年如不出师，我当交还兵权请求赋闲。 王庶鼓励他。
English: Beijing and Lake Xuanfu told Yuefei that Wang Shizhu was inspecting the border, and sent him a message saying: "If you don't leave the division this year, I should hand back my military powers and ask for a leave of absence." Wang Shizhu encouraged him.

古文：庶还朝，论金人变诈，自渝海上之盟，因及飞纳节之语。
现代文：王庶回朝，论述金朝机变诡诈，自毁海上之盟约定，并转达了岳飞交还兵权等语。
English: Wang Shuo returned to the DPRK and expounded on the Kim dynasty's cunning and self-destruction of the maritime alliance agreement, and conveyed Yuefei's surrender of the right to return soldiers and other words.

古文：当是时，秦桧再相，以和戎为事。
现代文：当这时，秦桧再次担任丞相，专门以同金讲和为务。
English: At this time, Qin Hui once again served as chancellor, focusing on making peace with Kim.

古文：金使乌陵思谋至，诏趣庶还。
现代文：金朝使者乌陵思谋来到宋朝，诏令催促王庶回来。
English: The envoy of the Kim Dynasty, Ulin Sipo, came to the Song Dynasty and issued a decree to urge Wang Shuo to return.

古文：庶力诋和议，乞诛金使，其言甚切。
现代文：王庶极力抵制和议，请求诛杀金朝使者，言辞十分恳切。
English: Wang Shiao tried his best to resist the peace talks and asked to kill the envoy of the Kim dynasty, his words were very sincere.

古文：金又遣张通古来许割地，还梓宫，归太后。
现代文：金朝又派张通古来答应交还失地，归还棺椁，交归太后。
English: The Kim dynasty also sent Zhang Tonggu to promise to return the lost land, return the coffin, and return the empress dowager.

古文：庶曰： 和议之事，臣所不知。 凡七疏乞免官，乃以资政殿学士知潭州。
现代文：王庶说： 同金讲和的事情，是我所不知道的。 共上七次奏章请求免去自己官职，于是朝廷任命他以资政殿学士的身份出知潭州。
English: Wang Shiao said: I did not know about the matter of making peace with Kim. A total of seven times he requested to be exempted from his official duties, so the court appointed him as a scholar of the House of Councillors.

古文：御史中丞勾龙如渊劾庶本赵鼎所荐，欺君罔上。
现代文：御史中丞勾龙如渊弹劾王庶本是赵鼎推荐，欺骗君主蒙蔽皇上。
English: It was Zhao Ding who recommended the impeachment of Wang Shizhong, deceiving the monarch and hoodwinking the emperor.

古文：庶罢归，至九江，被命夺职，徙家居焉。
现代文：王庶被罢免回朝，至九江，又被命夺去职务，迁徙居处。
English: Wang Shiao was removed from office and sent back to Jiujiang. He was also ordered to lose his position and relocate.

古文：十三年，御史胡汝明论庶讥讪朝政，责响德军节度副使，道州安置。
现代文：绍兴十三年，御史胡汝明弹劾王庶讥议朝政，贬为向德军节度副使，安置到道州。
English: In the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, Grand Historian Hu Ruming impeached Wang Zhe for criticizing the imperial government, demoted him to deputy envoy to the German army, and placed him in Doushou.

古文：至贬所卒。
现代文：到达贬所时去世。
English: He died on arrival at hospital.

古文：孝宗思庶言，追复其官，谥敏节。
现代文：孝宗追思王庶言论，追复他的官职，谥号 敏节 。
English: Xiaozong pondered Wang Shao's speech, recovered his official post, and changed his nickname to Min Jie.

