古文：丁丑六月十二日晨餐后登舟，顺流而南，曲折西转，二十里，小江口，为永福界。
现代文：丁丑年六月十二日早餐后登船，顺流往南行，曲曲折折向西转，二十里，到小江口，是永福县的辖境。
English: On the twelfth day of June in the year of the fox, after breakfast, we boarded the ship, sailed south along the river, and made a tortuous turn to the west. Twenty miles away, at the mouth of the small river, was the jurisdiction of Yongfu County.

古文：又二十里，过永福县。
现代文：又行二十里，路过永福县。
English: Another twenty miles, passing through Yongfu County.

古文：县城在北岸，舟人小泊而市蔬。
现代文：县城在北岸，船夫临时停船去买菜。
English: The county seat is on the north shore, and the boatman temporarily stopped the boat to buy vegetables.

古文：又西南三十五里，下兰麻滩。
现代文：又向西南行船三十五里，下了兰麻滩。
English: We sailed another thirty-five miles to the southwest and got off Llama Beach.

古文：其滩悬涌殊甚，上有兰麻岭，行者亦甚逼仄焉。
现代文：这个河滩悬浪腾涌得特别厉害，河岸上有兰麻岭，行路的人也感到这里非常狭窄。
English: The tidal swell on this beach is particularly strong. There is Lanma Ridge on the riverbank, and travelers also feel very cramped here.

古文：又二十里，下陟滩为理定，其城在江北岸。
现代文：又行二十里，下了险滩是理定，理定城在江北岸。
English: After another twenty miles, the dangerous beach is Liding, and the Liding City is on the north bank of the river.

古文：又十五里而暮。
现代文：又行十五里天便黑下来了。
English: After another fifteen miles it got dark.

古文：又十五里，泊于新安铺。
现代文：又行十五里，停泊在新安铺。
English: Another fifteen miles, anchored in Shin-Anpu.

古文：十三日，昧爽行四十里，上午过旧街，已入柳州之洛容界矣，街在江北岸。
现代文：十三日黎明行船四十里，上午经过旧街，已进入柳州府洛容县的境内了，街在江北岸。
English: At dawn on the 13th, the boat traveled forty miles. In the morning, it passed through the old street and entered the territory of Lorong County, Liuzhou Province. The street is on the north bank of the river.

古文：又四十里，午过牛排。
现代文：又行四十里，中午过了牛排。
English: Another forty miles and it's past steak o'clock.

古文：又四十里，下午抵洛容县南门。
现代文：又行四于里，下午抵达洛容县的南门。
English: In the afternoon, they arrived at the South Gate of Lorong County.

古文：今为新县，西南抵柳州五十里。
现代文：县虽然有城，可街市店铺荒凉冷落，城中有草房数十家，县城门唯有一个老妇人住在里面。
English: Although there is a town in the county, the street market shops are desolate and deserted. There are dozens of grass houses in the city, and only one old woman lives in the county gate.

古文：是晚宿于舟中。
现代文：晚上住在船上。
English: Overnight on board.

古文：预定马为静闻行计。
现代文：预定了马匹为静闻上路做准备。
English: The horses have been booked and are being prepared for the journey.

古文：十四日，昧爽起饭，觅担夫肩筐囊，倩马驼静闻，由南门外绕城而西。
现代文：十四日黎明起床吃饭，找来挑夫担着筐子包袱，让马驮着静闻，由南门外绕过城往西走。
English: On the 14th day, he got up at dawn to eat, found a porter to carry his basket and luggage, let his horse trot quietly, and walked around the city from the south gate to the west.

古文：静闻甫登骑，辄滚而下。
现代文：静闻刚一登上坐骑，马上翻滚而下。
English: As soon as Jing Huan got on the horse, he immediately tumbled down.

古文：顾仆随静、担夫先去，余携骑返换，再易而再不能行，计欲以车行，众谓车之屼嵲甚于马，且升降坡岭，必须下车扶挽，益为不便。
现代文：顾仆跟随静闻、挑夫先离开，我带着坐骑返回来调换，换了两次马可两次都不能走。打算乘车走，大家认为车子上下颠簸甚于马，而且上坡下岭时，必须下车来扶着拉着，更为不便。
English: Gu minions followed Jing Wen, and the porter left first. I returned with the horse and changed it twice, but Mark couldn't go both times. If we planned to go by car, everyone thought that the car was more bumpy than the horse, and when going uphill and downhill, we had to get off the car to support and pull, which was more inconvenient.

古文：乃以重价觅肩舆三人，餍其欲尽量让他们吃饱而后行，已上午矣。
现代文：只得用重金找来三个人抬轿子，让他们尽量吃饱后上路，已是上午了。
English: We had to spend a lot of money to find three people to carry the palanquin, so that they could eat as much as possible and go on their way. It was already morning.

古文：余先独行，拟前铺待之，虑轿速余不能踵其后也。
现代文：我独自先走，打算在前边的骚站等他们，是担忧轿子走得快我不能跟在它后面走。
English: I went ahead alone, intending to wait for them at the station in front, fearing that the palanquin was moving too fast for me to follow it.

古文：共一里，过西门，西越一桥而西，即升陟坡坂。
现代文：共走一里，路过西门，向西越过一座桥往西行，立即上登斜坡。
English: A total of one mile, passing the West Gate, west over a bridge to the west, immediately up the slope.

古文：四顾皆回冈复岭，荒草连绵，惟路南隔冈有山尖耸，露石骨焉。
现代文：四面环顾都是环绕的冈峦重叠的山岭，荒草连绵，唯有路南隔着山冈处有座山尖尖耸起，露出锋利的石棱来。
English: Looking around on all sides are the overlapping ridges of the surrounding mountains, the wild grasses are continuous, only south of the road, across the mountains, there is a mountain peak, exposing sharp stone edges.

古文：踄荒莽共十八里，逾高岭，回望静闻轿犹不至。
现代文：跋涉在荒原草莽中共十八里，翻越一座高岭，回头望去静闻的轿子还没来。
English: A total of eighteen miles of trekking in the grasslands of the wasteland, climbing over a high ridge, looking back and listening to the sedan chair has not yet come.

古文：下岭又西南二里，为高岭铺，始有茅舍数家，名孟村。
现代文：下岭又向西南行二里，是高岭铺，这才有茅屋数家，名叫孟村。
English: The lower ridge is another two miles to the southwest, and is Gaolingpu, which has several thatched cottages, called Mengcun.

古文：时静闻犹未至，姑憩铺肆待之。
现代文：此时静闻仍未来到，暂且歇在店铺中等他。
English: At this time, Jing Huan still hasn't arrived, and is waiting for him in the store.

古文：久之乃来，则其惫弥甚。
现代文：过了很久他才来到，却见他疲惫得更加厉害。
English: It was a long time before he arrived, and he looked even more exhausted.

古文：于是复西一里，乃南折而登岭，迤逦南上，共四里，抵南寨山之西，则柳江逼其四崖矣。
现代文：于是再向西一里，就折向南登岭，曲曲折折向南上爬，共四里，到达南寨山之西，就见柳江逼近它西面的山崖了。
English: So I walked another mile to the west, turned south to Dengling, and climbed southward in a zigzag pattern for a total of four miles. When I reached the west of Nanzhai Mountain, I saw the Liujiang River approaching the cliff to its west.

古文：乃西向下，舟人舣舟以渡。
现代文：于是往西下去，船夫停船靠岸渡过江。
English: So they went west, and the boatman stopped the boat to cross the river.

古文：江之东为洛容界，江之西为马平界。
现代文：有条小溪自南寨冲出壑谷，向西注入柳江，叫做山门冲。江的东岸是洛容县的辖境，江的西岸是马平县的属地。
English: There is a small stream from Nanzhai that rushes out of Shugu and flows into the west of the Liujiang River. It is called Shanmenchong. The east bank of the river is under the jurisdiction of Lorong County, and the west bank of the river is under the jurisdiction of Ma Ping County.

古文：登西岸，循山濒江南向行，是为马鹿堡。
现代文：登上西岸，顺着山势濒江向南行，这是马鹿堡。
English: Climb up the west bank and follow the mountains along the river to the south. This is Mala Castle.

古文：东望隔江，石崖横亘其上，南寨山分枝耸干，亭亭露奇。
现代文：隔江往东望去，石崖横亘在江上，南寨山分出支脉，主峰耸立，亭亭玉立露出奇秀。
English: Looking across the river to the east, the stone cliff stretches across the river, the Nanzhai Mountain branches out, the main peak rises, and the pavilion stands out.

古文：共五里，乃西向逾坳入，则石峰森立，夹道如双阙。
现代文：共行五里，就向西越过山坳入山，就见石峰森然矗立，夹在道路两边好像双阀。
English: After walking for five miles together, they crossed the mountains to the west and entered the mountains. They saw the stone peaks standing starkly, sandwiched between the two sides of the road like a double valve.

古文：其南峰曰罗山，山顶北向，有洞斜骞，侧裂旁开两门，而仰眺无跻攀路，西麓又有洞骈峙焉。
现代文：那南面的山峰叫罗山，山顶向北处有个斜斜的山洞，旁边开有两个洞口，可抬头远眺没有可攀登上去的路，西麓又有洞并列在那里。
English: The mountain peak to the south is called Luoshan. There is a sloping cave at the top of the mountain to the north. There are two openings next to it. You can look up and see that there is no way to climb up. There are also caves side by side at the western foot.

古文：其北峰曰李冯山，而南面峭削尤甚。
现代文：那北面的山峰叫李冯山，而南面尤其峻峭陡削得厉害。
English: The peak to the north is called Mount Li Feng, while the one to the south is particularly steep.

古文：又二里，双阙之西，有小峰当央当中而立，曰独秀峰。
现代文：又走二里，双胭的西边，有座小峰当中而立，叫做独秀峰。
English: After another two miles, on the west side of Shuangyao, there is a small peak in the middle, called Duxiu Peak.

古文：行者共憩树下，候静闻舆不至。
现代文：与走路的人一同在树下休息，等候静闻的轿子，不见来到。
English: Resting under a tree with the walkers, waiting for the silent hearse, it never came.

古文：问后至者，言途中并无肩舆，心甚惶惑。
现代文：询间后面走来的人，说途中并无轿子，心里十分惶惑。
English: The person who came after the inquiry room said that there was no palanquin on the way, and he was very confused.

古文：然回眺罗山西麓之洞，心异之。
现代文：不过回头眺望罗山西麓的山洞，心里觉得它很奇异。
English: However, looking back at the cave at the western foot of Luoshan Mountain, I thought it was very strange.

古文：同憩者言： 从其南麓转山之东，有罗洞岩焉，东面有坊，可望而趋也。 
现代文：一同休息的人说： 从罗山南麓转到山的东面，有个罗洞岩在那里，东面有座牌坊，可望着山走去。 
English: A person who was resting with him said, "If you go from the southern foot of Luoshan to the eastern side of the mountain, there is a Luodong Rock, and on the eastern side there is an archway, from which you can look at the mountain.

古文：余闻之益心异，仰视日色尚未令昃，遂从岐东南披宿草行。
现代文：我听了这话心里越加觉得奇异，仰面看天色太阳还未偏西，于是从岔路向东南分开积年深草前行。
English: Hearing this, I felt more and more strange in my heart. Looking back, I saw that the sun had not yet set in the west, so I set off from Kushiro to the southeast and walked through the deep grass.

古文：一里，抵罗山西南角，山头丛石叠架，侧窦如圭，横穴如梁。
现代文：一里，抵达罗山的西南角，山头成丛的岩石叠架着，侧上的洞穴如玉圭，横卧的洞穴如桥梁。
English: After one mile, we arrived at the southwest corner of Luoshan. The mountain top was covered with clumps of rock, with caves on the sides such as Yugui, and caves lying on their sides such as bridges.

古文：从此转而南，东循其南麓，北望山半亦有洞南向，高少逊于北巅，而面背正相值也。
现代文：从此处转向南，往东沿山的南麓走，望见北边半山腰也有个洞向南，高处稍低于北山的山顶，可前后正好互相面对着。
English: From here, turn south and walk east along the southern foot of the mountain. You can see a cave to the south in the northern half of the mountainside. The height is slightly lower than the top of the North Mountain, but the front and back face each other.

古文：东南望一小山濒江，山之南隅，石剖成罅，上至峰顶，复连而为门。
现代文：往东南望去一座小山濒临江流，山的南隅，岩石剖成裂隙，上边裂到峰顶，又连成门洞。
English: Looking southeast, there is a hill on the edge of the river. In the southern corner of the hill, the rock is cut into cracks, the upper edge is cracked to the peak, and it is connected to a door hole.

古文：其时山雨忽来，草深没肩，不虞上之倾注，而转苦旁之淋漓矣。
现代文：此时山雨忽然来临，草深没过肩头，不担忧雨水倾注，却反而为身旁草上淋漓的雨水而苦恼了。
English: At this time, the mountain rain suddenly came, the grass was not too deep, I was not worried about the pouring rain, but I was troubled by the rainwater dripping on the grass next to me.

古文：转山之东，共约一里，遂逾坳北入，一坪中开，自成函盖。
现代文：转到山的东麓，约共走一里，便越过山坳向北进去，一块平地在当中铺开，自然形成盒盖样的地形。
English: Turn to the eastern foot of the mountain, walk for about a mile, then go over the ridge to the north, and a flat area spreads out in the middle, naturally forming a box-like terrain.

古文：右峰之北，有巨石斜叠而起，高数十丈，俨若一人北向端拱，衣褶古甚。
现代文：右侧山峰的北面，有块巨石斜斜地叠架而起，高数十丈，俨然一个人向北端端正正拱着手，衣服上的褶皱十分古朴。
English: To the north of the mountain peak on the right, a boulder rises diagonally stacked, dozens of meters high, as if a person is arching his hand to the north end, and the folds on his clothes are very quaint.

古文：左崖之北，有双门坠峡而下，内洞北向，深削成渊，底有伏流澄澈，两旁俱峭壁数十丈，南进窅然不知其宗。
现代文：左边山崖的北面，有两个洞口向下坠入峡中，里边的洞向北，深削成深渊，底下有伏流清彻透明，两旁都是几十丈深的峭壁，往南伸展进去深远得不知通往何处。
English: On the north side of the cliff on the left, there are two holes that fall down into the gorge. The inner hole faces north and is deeply cut into the abyss. Underneath, there are clear and transparent undercurrents. On both sides are cliffs that are dozens of feet deep. They stretch far into the south and I don't know where to go.

古文：北抵洞口，壁立斩绝，上有横石栏洞口如阈，可坐瞰其底，无能逾险下坠，亦无虞失足陨越也。
现代文：向北来到洞口，石壁耸立悬绝，上边有块横卧的岩石，高二尺，挡在洞口如像门槛，可坐下来俯瞰深渊底部，不能越过险阻下坠，也不必担忧越过去失足坠落下去了。
English: Coming north to the mouth of the cave, the stone wall is towering and overhanging, and there is a rock lying on top, two feet high, blocking the mouth of the cave like a threshold. You can sit down and overlook the bottom of the abyss, you can't fall over the precipice, and you don't have to worry about falling over.

古文：阈之左壁，有悬绠数十丈，圈而系之壁间，余疑好事者引端悬崖以游洞底者。
现代文：门槛的左壁上，有根几十丈长的粗绳悬挂着，绕成圈系在石壁上，我怀疑是好事的人从悬崖顶端引下来去游览洞底的绳子。
English: On the left wall of the threshold, there are dozens of long thick ropes hanging, tied in a circle on the stone wall. I suspect that it is a good thing to bring people down from the top of the cliff to visit the rope at the bottom of the cave.

古文：惜余独行无偶，不能以身为辘轳，汲此幽嫱也。
现代文：可惜我独自一人走路没有同伴，不能用身体来当做辘护，到这个幽深隐秘的地方去汲水了。
English: Unfortunately, I was walking alone, without a companion, unable to use my body as a shield, and had to go to this deep and secret place to draw water.

古文：既龙出峡门上，复西眺西峰，有道直上，果有石坊焉砚台。
现代文：向北出到峡口之上，又向西眺望西峰，有路一直上去，果然有座石牌坊在那里。
English: Go north to the mouth of the gorge, and look west to the west peak, there is a road all the way up, and sure enough, there is a stone archway there.

古文：亟趋之，石坊之后，有洞东向，正遥临端拱石人，坊上书 第一仙区 ，而不署洞名。
现代文：急忙赶到那儿，石牌坊的后面，有个洞向东，正远远面对着正身拱手的石人，牌坊上写着 第一仙区 ，但没写洞名。
English: I hurried there. Behind the stone archway, there was a cave to the east, far away from the stone man who was holding out his hand. On the archway, it said the First Immortal District, but the name of the cave was not written.

古文：洞内则列门设锁，门之上复横栅为栏，从门隙内窥，洞甚崆峒，而路无由入。
现代文：洞内却安了门设了锁，门的上方又横着栅栏作为护栏，从门缝中向内窥视，洞中非常空阔，可无路可以进去。
English: Inside the cave, however, there was a door with a lock, and above the door there was a fence as a guardrail, peering in from the cracks in the door. The cave was very empty, but there was no way to get in.

古文：乃攀栅践壁逾门端入，则洞高而平，宽而朗，中无佛像，有匡床、木几，遗管城手笔、墨池焉。
现代文：只得攀着栅栏踩着石壁越过门头进去，就见洞又高大又平坦，宽敞而明朗，洞中无佛像，有方床、木几，留有毛笔、砚台。
English: You just have to climb the fence and step on the stone wall to get past the door, and you will see that the cave is tall and flat, spacious and clear. There is no Buddha statue in the cave, there is a square bed, a wooden table, and a brush and a table.

古文：探其左，则北转渐黑而隘；穷其右，则西上愈邃而昏。
现代文：探测它的左边，就转向北去逐渐变得又黑又窄；穷究它的右侧，却越往西上去就愈加深邃昏暗。
English: Detect its left side, turn north and it gradually becomes dark and narrow; investigate its right side, but the further west you go, the deeper the gloom.

古文：余冀后有透明处，摸索久之不得。
现代文：我希望后面有透光的地方，摸索了很久找不到。
English: I hoped there would be some light behind me, but I couldn't find it for a long time.

古文：出，仍逾门上栅，至洞前。
现代文：出来，仍翻过门上的栅栏，来到洞前。
English: out, still overturned the fence on the door, came to the cave.

古文：见洞右有路西上，拨草攀隙而登，上蹑石崖数重，则径穷莫前，乃洞中剪薪道也。
现代文：见洞右有路向西上去，拨开草丛攀着石缝而登，上登数重石崖，则小径到了头无法前进，是洞中人砍柴火的小道。
English: On the right side of the cave, there is a path leading to the west. The path climbs up through a gap in the grass and climbs up several stone cliffs. At the end of the path, it is impossible to move forward. It is a path for people in the cave to cut firewood.

古文：山雨复大至，乃据危石倚穹崖而坐待之。
现代文：山雨又狂至，只得靠着高岩倚着弯隆的山崖坐着等雨停。
English: It was raining like crazy again, and I had to sit against the high rocks, leaning against the steep cliffs, and wait for the rain to stop.

古文：忽下见洞北坪间翠碧茸茸，心讶此间草色独异，岂新禾沐雨而然耶？
现代文：忽然见到下边山洞北面的平地上翠色绿茸茸的，心中诧异这里的草颜色为什么唯独不同，莫非是新栽的禾苗淋雨后才这样的吗？
English: Suddenly, I saw the emerald green mushrooms on the plain to the north of the cave below, and wondered why the grass color was different here. Could it be that the newly planted grass seedlings were only like this after the rain?

古文：未几，则圆绕如规，五色交映，平铺四壑，自上望之，如步帐回合，倏忽影灭。
现代文：不多久，就见绕成圆圈如同圆规，五色交映，平铺在四周的壑谷上，从上边望它，如像筛幕环绕合拢来，倏忽之间光影幻灭了。
English: It didn't take long to see that it had formed a circle like a compass, with the five colors intersecting and spreading out flatly over the surrounding reed valley. Looking at it from above, it was like being surrounded by a screen, with the light and shadows disappearing in the blink of an eye.

古文：雨止乃下，仍从石坊逾南坳，共二里，转是山西麓。
现代文：雨停了才下来，仍由石牌坊越过南边的山坳，共走二里，转到这座山的西麓。
English: When it stopped raining, I still walked two miles from Shibeibo across the southern ridge to the western foot of the mountain.

古文：先入一洞，其门西向，竖若合掌，内洼以下，左转而西进，黑不可扪；右转而东下，水不可穷，乃峻逼之崖，非窈窕之宫也。
现代文：先走进一个洞，洞口向西，竖立着好像合起的手掌，洞内洼下去，左转后往西进去，黑得摸不到东西；向右转后往东下走，有水走不到头，是陡峻逼窄的石崖，不是幽深优美的宫室。
English: First, go into a hole. The mouth of the hole faces west. It stands up like the palm of a hand. Go down inside the hole. Turn left and go west. It's too dark to touch anything. Turn right and go east. If there's water, you can't reach the top. It's a steep, narrow cliff, not a deep, beautiful palace.

古文：出洞又北，即向时大道所望之洞。
现代文：出洞又往北走，就到了前些时候在大道上望见的洞。
English: After exiting the cave, I walked north and arrived at the cave I had seen earlier on the main road.

古文：洞门亦西向，连叠两重。
现代文：洞口也是向西，一连重叠着两层。
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the west, with a series of overlapping layers.

古文：洞外有大石，横卧当门，若置阈焉，峻不可逾。
现代文：洞外有块大石头，横卧着挡住洞口，像设置的门槛一样，陡峻不可翻越。
English: Outside the cave there is a large stone, lying on its side, blocking the entrance to the cave. Like a set threshold, it is too steep to climb over.

古文：北有隘，侧身以入，即为下洞。
现代文：北面有个隘口，侧着身子才能进去，这便是下洞。
English: On the north side, there is a narrow passage, and you have to bend over to get in, which is the lower hole.

古文：洞中有石中悬，复间为两门，南北并列。
现代文：洞中有岩石悬在中央，又隔成两个洞口，南北并列。
English: There is a rock hanging in the middle of the cave, and it is separated into two openings, north and south side by side.

古文：先从南门入，稍洼而下，其南壁峻裂斜骞，非攀跻可及；其北崖有隙，穿悬石之后，通北门之内焉。
现代文：先从南边的洞口进去，慢慢低洼而下，它南面石壁上陡峻的裂口斜举着，不是攀登能到达的；它北面的石崖上有缝隙，穿到悬垂的岩石后边，通到北洞的里面。
English: First, enter the cave from the south side and slowly descend. The steep crack on the stone wall on the south side is inclined and cannot be reached by climbing; there is a gap in the cliff on the north side, which penetrates behind the overhanging rock and leads to the inside of the north cave.

古文：其内亦下坠，而东入洞底，水产汩汩，与南洞右转之底，下穴潜通。
现代文：北洞内也是向下坠，而向东走入洞底，水声潺潺，与南洞向右转的洞底，下面有洞穴暗中相通。
English: In the north cave, you also fall downwards, but when you go to the east and enter the bottom of the cave, the water is noisy, and the bottom of the cave where the south cave turns to the right, there are caves secretly connected below.

古文：由北门出，仰视上层，石如荷时，下覆虚悬，无从上跻。
现代文：由北洞口出来，仰视上层，岩石如荷叶下覆，悬在虚空中无从上登。
English: Coming out of the north mouth of the cave, looking up at the upper layer, the rock is like the undercoat of a lotus leaf, hanging in the void with no way up.

古文：复从南门之侧，左穿外窍，得一旁龛。
现代文：再从南洞口的侧边，向左穿过外边的石窍，找到一个开在旁边的石完。
English: Then, from the side of the south mouth of the cave, go to the left through the outer stone nook and find a stone end that opens next to it.

古文：龛外有峡对峙，相距尺五，其上南即龛顶尽处，北即覆叶之端。
现代文：石完外有峡谷对峙，峡壁相距一尺五，峡谷上方南面就是石完顶的尽头，北面就是下覆荷叶的顶端。
English: There is a canyon face-off outside the stone canyon, the canyon walls are one and a half feet apart, the south side above the canyon is the end of the stone canyon top, and the north side is the top of the underlaying lotus leaf.

古文：从峡中手攀足撑，遂从虚而凌其上。
现代文：从峡谷中用手攀用脚撑，终于从虚空中登到峡顶之上。
English: From the canyon, he climbed by hand and foot, and finally climbed from the void to the top of the canyon.

古文：则上层之洞，东入不深，而返照逼之，不可向迩；惟洞北裂崖成窦，环柱通门，石质忽灵，乳然转异；攀隙西透，崖转南向，连开二楹，下跨重楼，上悬飞乳，内不深而宛转有余，上不属而飞凌无碍。
现代文：就见上层的洞，往东进去不深，可反射的光线逼射着它，不可接近；唯有洞北的石崖裂成洞穴，环列的石柱通到洞口，岩石的质地忽然美妙起来，像乳汁一样变得不同寻常；攀着缝隙向西钻进去，石崖转向南，一连开出两间石室，下面高跨如重楼，上边悬着高飞的钟乳石，里面不深可曲折有余，上不相连而飞凌高空无遮无碍。
English: I saw the upper level of the cave. It was not deep to enter the cave from the east, and the light that could be reflected forced it, making it inaccessible. Only the stone cliff to the north of the cave broke into a cave. A ring of stone pillars led to the mouth of the cave, and the texture of the rock suddenly became beautiful and unusual, like milk. I climbed through the gap to the west, and the cliff turned to the south. Two stone chambers opened in a row. The lower one was as high as a multi-storey building, and high-flying stalactites hung from the upper side. It was not deep inside, but there were many twists and turns

古文：岩之以凭虚驾空为奇者，阳朔珠明之外，此其最矣。
现代文：岩洞以凌驾虚空为奇的，除阳朔珠明洞之外，这里是最奇妙的了。
English: Except for the Yangshuo Pearl Cave, the caves here are the most amazing.

古文：坐憩久之，仍以前法下。
现代文：坐下休息了很久，仍用先前的方法下来。
English: After sitting down and resting for a long time, he still used the previous method to get down.

古文：出洞前横阈，复西北入大道，一里抵独秀峰下。
现代文：出了洞前横着的门槛，再往西北走上大道，一里路抵达独秀峰下。
English: I walked out of the threshold in front of the cave, then walked northwest on the avenue, and reached the foot of the Duxiu Peak after one mile.

古文：又西向而驰五、六里，遇来者，问无乘肩舆僧，止有一卧牛车僧。
现代文：又向西疾行了五六里，遇到过来的人，向他打听，没见乘轿子的和尚，只有一个躺在牛车上的僧人。
English: He also traveled five or six miles to the west, where he met a man who came to inquire about him. He did not see a monk on a palanquin, only a monk lying on an ox cart.

古文：始知舆人之故迟其行，窥静闻可愚，欲私以牛车代易也。
现代文：这才明白轿夫故意慢慢走的原因，是窥探出静闻可以愚弄，打算私下用牛车来替换轿子。
English: Only then did it become clear that the reason why the coachman was deliberately walking slowly was that he had spied out the fact that silence can be deceptive, and he intended to replace the coach with an ox cart in private.

古文：其处北望有两尖峰亭亭夹立，南望则群峰森绕，中有石缀出峰头，纤幻殊甚，而不辨其名。
现代文：此处往北望去，有两座相夹的尖峰亭亭玉立，南望则见群峰森然环绕，其中有岩石点缀露出峰头，极为纤巧变幻，但辨不出它的名字。
English: Here, looking to the north, there are two pinnacles clamped together. Looking to the south, you can see a group of peaks surrounded by mountains. Among them, there is a rock embellishment that exposes the peak head. It is extremely slender and changeable, but its name cannot be distinguished.

古文：又西五、六里，则柳江自南而北，即郡城东绕之滨矣。
现代文：又向西走五六里，就见柳江自南往北流，就是绕到府城东面的江滨了。
English: After another five or six miles to the west, you will see the Liujiang River flowing from south to north, which is the riverfront around the eastern part of the capital.

古文：江东之南山，有楼阁高悬翠微，为黄氏书馆。
现代文：江东的南山，有楼阁高悬在青翠的山色之中，是黄氏书馆。
English: On the Nanshan Mountain in the east of the Yangtze River, a mansion hangs high in the midst of the verdant mountains. It is the Huang Library.

古文：即壬戌会魁黄启元。时急于追静闻，遂西渡江，登涯即阛闠连络；从委巷二里入柳州城。
现代文：此时急于去追静闻，便向西渡江，登岸后就有街市连接，从曲折的小巷中走二里进柳州城。
English: At this time, anxious to follow Jingwen, he crossed the river to the west. After landing, there was a street market connection. He walked two miles from the winding alley into Liuzhou City.

古文：东门以内，反寥寂焉。
现代文：东门以内，反而寂静了。
English: Inside the East Gate, on the other hand, there was silence.

古文：西过郡治，得顾仆所止寓，而静闻莫可踪迹。
现代文：往西路过府衙，找到顾仆投宿的寓所，但却无法找到静闻的踪迹。
English: He passed Fuchu on his way west and found the apartment where Gu's servants were staying, but he was unable to find any trace of Jing He.

古文：即出南门，随途人辄问之，有见有不见者。
现代文：立刻出了南门，沿途见人便打听静闻的消息，有人见到有人没见到。
English: I immediately went out of the south gate. Along the way, if I saw someone, I would inquire about the news quietly heard, if someone had seen someone or not.

古文：仍过东门，绕城而北，由唐二贤祠蹑之开元寺。
现代文：仍然经过东门，绕着城往北走，由唐二贤祠追踪到开元寺。
English: I still passed the East Gate and walked around the city to the north, tracing from the Tang Dynasty Ancestral Hall to Kaiyuan Temple.

古文：知由寺而出，不知何往，寺僧言： 此惟千佛楼、三官堂为接众之所，须从此觅。 
现代文：知道静闻由寺中出去，不知去了哪里，寺中僧人说： 此地唯有千佛楼、三官堂是接待众人的场所，必须到那里去寻找。 
English: Knowing that Jingwen had left the temple, but not knowing where he had gone, a monk in the temple said, "In this place, only the Thousand-Buddha Pagoda and the Three Great Hall are places that receive many people. We must go there to look for him."

古文：乃出寺，由其东即北趋，里余而得千佛楼，已暮矣。
现代文：于是出了寺，由寺东马上向北赶去，一里多后找到了千佛楼，已是傍晚了。
English: So I left the temple and immediately headed north from the east of the temple. After more than a mile, I found the Thousand Buddha Pagoda. It was already late afternoon.

古文：问之僧，无有也。
现代文：向僧人打听静闻，没有啊。
English: There's no need to ask the monks for advice.

古文：又西趋三官堂。
现代文：又向西赶到三官堂。
English: They also rushed westward to Sankando.

古文：入门，众言有僧内入，余以为是矣；抵僧栖，则仍乌有。
现代文：进门后，众人说有和尚进里面去了，我以为是了；到了僧房，却仍然没有。
English: After entering the door, people said that a monk had gone inside, which I thought was true; however, when I got to the monk's quarters, he was still gone.

古文：急出，复南抵开元东，再询之途人，止一汲者言，曾遇之江边。问： 江边有何庵？ 曰： 有天妃庙。 
现代文：急忙出来，又向南走到开元寺东边，再次向过路人打听静闻，只有一个汲水的人说，曾经在江边遇见过静闻。我问： 江边有什么寺庵？  答道： 有个天妃庙。 
English: I hurried out, walked south again to the east side of Kaiyuan Temple, and again asked passers-by about Shizhen. Only one person who was drawing water said that he had once met Shizhen by the river. I asked: What are the temples and hermitages by the river? He replied: There is a temple of the Heavenly Princess.

古文：暗中东北行，又一里，则庙在焉。入庙与静闻遇。
现代文：在黑暗中往东北行，又一里，便见寺庙在那里了：进庙后与静闻相遇。
English: In the darkness, I traveled northeast, another mile, and saw that the temple was there. After entering the temple, I met Shizun.

古文：盖舆人以牛车代舆，而车不渡江，止以一人随携行李，而又欲重索静闻之资，惟恐与余遇，故迂历城外荒庙中，竟以囊被诒ì遗留僧抵钱付去。
现代文：原来轿夫用牛车来顶替轿子，而车子没有渡江，只派一个人带着行李随行，而且又想重重勒索静闻的钱财，惟恐与我相遇，故意绕到城外的荒庙中，竟然把静闻的包袱被盖拿给寺中僧人抵为食宿费，然后离去。
English: It turned out that the coachman had used an ox cart to replace the palanquin, but the cart did not cross the river, only one person was sent along with the luggage, and he also wanted to repeatedly extort money and wealth from Jingwen. In order to avoid meeting me, he deliberately went around to the deserted temple outside the city, and actually gave Jingwen's luggage to the monks in the temple to cover the cost of food and accommodation, and then left.

古文：静闻虽病，何愚至此！
现代文：静闻虽然生病，怎么愚蠢到这个地步！
English: Jing Huan, although ill, how stupid to get to this point!

古文：时庙僧以饭饷，余、舆同卧庙北野室中，四壁俱竹篱零落，月明达旦。
现代文：此时庙中的僧人拿饭来吃了，我躺在庙北野外的小屋里，四面墙壁都是零零落落的竹篱笆，月光一直亮到天明。
English: At this time, the monks in the temple brought rice to eat, and I lay in a hut outside the north yard of the temple. The four walls were made of scattered bamboo fences, and the moonlight shone until dawn.

