古文：杜伯公孙圣一作胜燕臣庄子仪游敦王宏宋皇后徐光王陵夏侯玄金玄经旷万默曲俭太乐伎邓琬孔基昙摩忏支法存张超袁粲幼子庾宏奴魏辉俊真子融
现代文：杜伯公孙圣一作胜燕臣庄子仪游敦王宏宋皇后徐光王陵夏侯玄金玄经旷万默曲俭太乐伎邓琬孔基昙摩忏支法存张超袁粲幼子庾宏奴魏辉俊真子融
English: Du Bo Gong's grandson Sun Sheng I made a great victory over Yan Zhen Zhuang Zi Yi You Dun Wang Hong Song Empress Xu Guang Wang's tomb Xia Hou Xuan Jin Xuan Jing vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast vast

古文：杜伯
现代文：杜伯
English: Dubbo

古文：杜伯名曰恒，入为周大夫。
现代文：杜伯又名叫恒，为周大夫。
English: Du Bo, also known as Heng, is Zhou's doctor.

古文：宣王之妾曰女鸠，欲通之，杜伯不可。
现代文：宣王的妾叫女鸠，想要同杜伯私通，杜伯没有答应。
English: Xuan Wang's concubine, called the concubine, wanted to have sexual intercourse with Du Bo, but Du Bo did not agree.

古文：女鸠诉之宣王曰： 窃与妾交。 
现代文：女鸠怀恨在心，有一天告诉宣王说： 杜伯偷偷地想和我交欢。 
English: The wench held a grudge, and one day told King Xuan: "Dub secretly wants to have sex with me.

古文：宣王信之，囚杜伯于焦，使薛甫与司空锜杀杜伯，其友左儒九谏而王不听。
现代文：宣王就相信了，把杜伯囚禁在焦地。派薛甫和司空锜杀掉杜伯。杜伯的朋友左儒九次劝谏宣王的话告诉了他。
English: Xuan Wang believed him and imprisoned Du Bo in the scorched earth. He sent Xue Fu and Sikuo Yao to kill Du Bo. Du Bo's friend Zuo Ru told him what Xuan Wang had told him nine times.

古文：王曰： 司空锜也。 
现代文：祝说： 开始杀杜伯时，是谁给你出的主意？ 宣王说： 是司空锜。 
English: Zhu said, "Who gave you the idea to start killing Du Bo?" Xuan Wang said, "It was Sikuo Yao."

古文：祝曰： 何以不杀锜以谢之？ 
现代文：祝说： 为什么不杀掉司空锜表示道歉呢？ 
English: Zhu said, "Why don't you kill Sikyong to apologize?"

古文：宣王乃杀锜，使祝以谢之。伯犹为人而至，言其无罪。
现代文：宣王就又杀了司空锜。可杜伯还是变成人来，说他没有罪。
English: King Xuan then killed Sikuang again, but Du Bo still turned into a human and said that he was not guilty.

古文：司空又为人而至曰： 臣何罪之有？ 
现代文：司空锜也变成人来说： 臣有什么罪？ 
English: Sikyong also turned into a human and said, "What is the vassal guilty of?"

古文：宣王告皇甫曰： 祝也为我谋而杀人，吾杀者又皆为人而见诉，奈何？ 
现代文：宣王把这事又告诉了皇甫，说祝给我出主意让我杀人。我杀的人又都变成人来向我诉冤，怎么办呢？
English: King Xuan also told this to the imperial father-in-law, saying, "I wish you would advise me to kill someone. All the people I killed have turned into people to sue me. What should I do?"

古文：皇甫曰： 杀祝以谢，可也。 
现代文：皇甫说： 只好杀了祝来道歉，就可以了。 
English: The crown prince said, "If I have to kill Zhuge to apologize, that's fine.

古文：宣王乃杀祝以兼谢焉，又无益，皆为人而至，祝亦曰： 我焉知之，奈何以此为罪而杀臣也？ 
现代文：宣王就杀了祝向前二人道歉，还是没有用，他们又都变成人来找宣王，祝还说： 我怎么知道以前的事，为什么又以这些罪名杀我？ 
English: Xuanwang killed Zhuge and apologized to the first two people, but it was no use. They all turned into humans again and came looking for Xuanwang. Zhuge also said, "How did I know about what happened before, and why did you kill me on these charges?"

古文：后三年，宣王游圃田，从人满野。日中，见杜伯乘白马素车，司空锜为左，祝为右，朱冠起于道左，执朱弓彤矢，射王中心，折脊，伏于弓衣而死。
现代文：三年以后，宣王到野外游猎，跟从的人遍布山野，中午时分，只见杜伯乘着白马拉着白色的车，司空锜护左，祝护右，戴着红帽子从道边奔驰而来，他拿着红弓搭红箭，正好射中宣王心窝，脊梁都射断了，扑伏在箭囊上死了。
English: Three years later, Xuan Wang went hunting in the wild, and his followers were all over the mountains and fields. At noon, he saw Dube riding a white horse in a white carriage, accompanied by Sikuo on the left and Zhuo on the right, wearing a red hat. He came speeding from the side of the road, holding a red bow and red arrows. He just hit Xuan Wang's heart, and his spine was broken. He fell on the quiver and died.

古文：公孙圣
现代文：公孙圣
English: Gongsun Sheng

古文：吴王夫差，杀其臣公孙圣而不以罪。
现代文：吴王夫差无缘无故杀掉了他的大臣公孙圣。后来越国讨伐吴国，吴王败逃。
English: Wu Wangfu killed his minister, Gongsun Sheng, without any reason. Later, Vietnam invaded Wu, and Wu Wang was defeated and fled.

古文：后越伐吴，王败走，谓太宰嚭曰： 吾前杀公孙圣，投于胥山之下，今道由之。
现代文：他对太宰嚭说： 我以前杀了公孙圣，并把他扔到胥山下，现在我们必须经过那里。
English: He said to the grand vizier: I once killed Gongsun Sheng and threw him to the foot of Lushan Mountain, and now we have to go through there.

古文：吾上畏苍天，下惭于地，吾举足而不能进，心不忍往。
现代文：我对上害怕苍天，对下又有愧于土地，我抬脚不能前进，实在是不忍心往前走。
English: On the one hand, I am afraid of the sky, and on the other hand, I am ashamed of the land. I can't move forward, I really can't bear to move forward.

古文：子试唱于前，若圣犹在，当有应声。 
现代文：你可以在前面招呼一下，如果公孙圣还在，就会有答应的声音。 
English: You can say hello in front, and if Gongsun Sheng is still there, there will be a voice of approval.

古文：圣即从上应曰： 在。 三呼而三应。
现代文：太宰嚭就登上余杭山，在山上大呼： 公孙圣！ 
English: Dazai Zang climbed Yuhang Mountain and shouted on the mountain: Gongsun Sheng!

古文：吴王大惧，仰天叹曰： 苍天乎，寡人岂可复归乎！ 
现代文：公孙圣就在上面答应说： 在！ 三呼三应，吴王非常害怕，仰天长叹说： 苍天啊！我难道还能够再回去吗？ 
English: Gongsun Sheng promised above and said, "Yes! Three calls, three responses." King Wu was very scared and sighed for a long time, saying, "Oh my God! Will I be able to go back?

古文：吴王遂死不返。
现代文：吴王以后死了也没有再返回。
English: After King Wu died, he never returned.

古文：燕臣庄子仪
现代文：燕臣庄子仪
English: Yanshen Zhuo Zi Yi

古文：燕臣庄子仪，无罪而简公杀之，子仪曰： 死者无知则已 若其有知，不出三年，当使君见之。 
现代文：燕国大臣庄子仪，没有犯罪而被简公杀了。子仪临死时说： 死了若是没知觉也就罢了，若是有知觉，不超过三年，就会让你看见我。 
English: Zhuang Ziyi, the Minister of Yan Province, was killed by Jian Gong without committing a crime. When dying, Ziyi said: "If you die without consciousness, it's enough. If you are conscious, it will take no more than three years for you to see me."

古文：明年，简公将祀于祖泽。燕之有祖泽。犹宋之有桑林，国之太祀也，男女观之。
现代文：第二年，简公将要到祖泽去祭祀，燕国有祖泽，就象宋国有桑林一样，很出名，是国家的大祭祀活动。男男女女都来观看。
English: In the second year, Jian Gong will go to Zuze to make a sacrifice. Zuze in the State of Yan is very famous, just like the mulberry grove in the State of Song. It is a big national sacrifice activity. Both men and women come to watch.

古文：子仪起于道左，荷朱杖击公。公死于车上。
现代文：这时子仪从道旁冲出来，手里拿着红木杖打简公，简公死在车上。
English: At this time, Ziyi rushed out from the roadside and hit Jian Gong with a mahogany cane in his hand. Jian Gong died in the car.

古文：游敦
现代文：游敦
English: Yodong

古文：游敦，字幼齐，汉世为羽林中郎将。
现代文：游敦，字幼齐。汉朝世代为羽林中郎将。
English: You Tun, Zha Yu Qi. Han Dynasty generation was Ulin Chung Lang.

古文：先与司隶校尉胡轸有隙，遂诬敦杀之。
现代文：以前同司隶校尉胡轸有些矛盾。于是就诬陷游敦并把他杀了。
English: In the past, he had some conflicts with Lieutenant Hu Yao, so he framed You Dong and killed him.

古文：敦死月余，轸病，目睛遂脱，但言伏罪，游幼齐将鬼来，于是遂死。
现代文：游敦死了一个多月以后。胡轸就得了病，眼珠都掉了，只说他有罪。说是游幼齐领着鬼来了。于是胡轸死。
English: More than a month after You Dun's death, Hu Yao fell ill and lost his eyes. All he could say was that he was guilty, and that it was You Xiaoqi who led the ghosts here. As a result, Hu Yao died.

古文：王宏
现代文：王宏
English: Wang Hong

古文：汉王宏，字长文，为扶风太守，与司徒王允俱为李耒等所害。
现代文：汉朝的王宏，字长文。任扶凤太守。他和司徒王允同被李耒等人陷害。
English: Wang Hong of the Han Dynasty, a famous writer. He was appointed as Fu Feng Taishu. He and Sidu Wang Yun were set up by Li Xuan and others.

古文：宏素与司隶校尉胡伸不相能，伸因就狱竟其事，宏临死叹曰： 胡伸小子，勿乐人之祸，祸必及汝。 
现代文：王宏平素与司隶校尉胡伸不对付，胡伸因此就进监狱陷害他，王宏临死时感叹地说： 胡伸你这个小子，不要看到别人有祸你就高兴，早晚祸要降到你头上。 
English: Wang Hongping and Sili Lieutenant Hu Shin did not get along, so Hu Shin went to prison to frame him. Wang Hong said with a sigh as he was about to die: Hu Shin, you are a boy, don't be happy to see others in trouble, sooner or later the trouble will fall on your head.

古文：伸后病，头不得举，眼若睡，见宏来，以大杖击之，数日死，
现代文：胡伸后来病了，头抬不起来，眼睛睁不开，像睡觉一样。他看见王宏进来，用大木棍打他，几天时间就死了。
English: Hu Shin later fell ill, unable to lift his head or open his eyes, as if he were sleeping. He saw Wang Hong come in, beat him with a large wooden stick, and died a few days later.

古文：宋皇后
现代文：宋皇后
English: Empress Song

古文：汉灵帝宋皇后，无宠而居正位，后宫幸姬，众共谮毁。
现代文：汉灵帝宋皇后，不受宠幸却居正位，后宫的姬妾们都诽谤诬陷她。
English: Hanling Emperor Song Empress, not favored but in the right position, the concubines of the harem have slandered and framed her.

古文：初，中常侍王甫枉诛渤海王悝及妃，妃即后之姑也。
现代文：当初，中常侍王甫诋毁渤海王悝和王妃，使他们冤屈地被杀害，王妃就是皇后的姑母。
English: At first, the middle-ranking attendant Wang Fu slandered the king and queen of Bohai, and they were unjustly killed. The queen was the aunt of the queen.

古文：甫恐后怒，乃与大中大夫程何，共诬后执左道咒诅。
现代文：王甫恐怕皇后生气报复，就和大中大夫程何共同诬陷皇后，说皇后用左道旁门等不正手段诅咒灵帝。
English: Wang Fu was afraid that the empress would be angry and take revenge, so he and Dr. Cheng jointly framed the empress, saying that the empress had cursed Ling Di with illegal means such as the side door.

古文：灵帝信之，收后玺绶。
现代文：灵帝相信了，收回皇后的玉玺和绶带。
English: Lingdi believed it and took back the queen's jade bracelet and sash.

古文：后自致暴室，以忧死，父及兄弟俱被诛。诸常侍大小黄门在省署者，皆怜宋氏无罪。
现代文：皇后自从到了冷宫，因为整天忧郁愁苦而死。皇后的父亲以及兄弟全部被杀，各个常侍大小黄门在省署的人，都可怜宋皇后无罪。
English: Since the Empress arrived at Lenggong, she died because she was sad and depressed all day. The Empress's father and brothers were all killed, and all the attendants, big and small, at Huangmen in the provincial office, all felt sorry for Empress Song and were not guilty.

古文：帝后梦见桓帝曰： 宋皇后何罪过？
现代文：灵帝后来梦见桓帝。桓帝说： 宋皇后有什么罪过？
English: Ling Di later dreamed of Emperor Kuan. Emperor Kuan said: What is the sin of Empress Song?

古文：而听用邪嬖，使绝其命。 昔渤海王悝，既已自贬，又受诛毙。
现代文：你听信任用奸邪的大臣和嬖姬，使宋皇后绝命，以前渤海王悝，既然已经自贬了，但还是被杀死了。
English: You listened to and trusted the treacherous ministers and the wicked concubines, who caused the death of the Song Empress. Formerly, Erhai Wangye, since he had already self-deprecated, was still killed.

古文：今宋后及悝，皆诉于天，上帝震怒，罪在难救。 
现代文：现在宋皇后和悝都到天帝那儿告你，天帝非常气愤，你的罪过太大很难救你。 
English: Now Empress Song and Zou have both gone to the Heavenly Emperor to sue you. The Heavenly Emperor is very angry. Your sins are too great and it is difficult to save you.

古文：梦殊明察，帝既觉而惧，以事问羽林左监许永： 此为何祥？其可禳乎？ 
现代文：梦中情景历历在目，灵帝醒了以后很害怕。把这件事说给羽林左监许永，问他这是什么征兆，可以祭祀消灾吗？
English: The scene in the dream was vivid, and Lingdi was very scared when he woke up. Tell this to Ulin Zuoyong, and ask him what kind of sign this is, and if it is possible to make a sacrifice to eliminate the disaster.

古文：永对以宋后及渤海无辜之状，并请改葬，以安冤魂，还宋家之徙，复渤海之封，以消灾咎。
现代文：许永就把宋后和渤海王无罪的情况说给他听，并且请求改葬，使冤魂安宁，找回宋家外逃的人，恢复渤海王的封号，用来消除灾祸的根源。
English: Xu Yong told him about the innocence of Queen Song and King Erhai, and asked for a change of burial, to pacify the wrongdoers, to find the fugitives of the Song family, to restore the seal of King Erhai, and to eliminate the root cause of the disaster.

古文：帝弗能用，寻亦崩焉。
现代文：灵帝并没有采纳他的意见，不久就驾崩了。
English: Lingdi did not accept his opinion and died soon after.

古文：徐光
现代文：徐光
English: Xu Guang

古文：徐光在吴，常行术市里间。
现代文：徐光在吴国，常常在集市和街巷里施展法术。
English: In Wuxi, Xu Guang often performed magic in markets and streets.

古文：种梨桔枣栗，立得食，而市肆卖者，皆已耗矣。
现代文：种梨桔枣栗，马上就可以吃到。而集市和店铺里那些卖这些东西的都有损耗。
English: Those who grow pears, oranges, dates and chestnuts can be eaten right away, while those who sell these things in markets and shops are losing money.

古文：凡言水旱甚验，常过大将军孙綝门，褰衣而趋，左右唾践。
现代文：凡是他所说的洪水和干旱等事都很灵验。他曾在大将军孙綝门前经过。撩起衣服往前走，并且左右唾弃不已。
English: All the things he said about floods and droughts were very effective. He once passed in front of the door of the great general Sun Yat-sen, picked up his clothes and walked forward, and spit them out left and right.

古文：或问其故，答曰： 流血臭腥不可耐。 
现代文：有人问这是为什么，他说： 到处流血臭腥实在让人受不了。 
English: Asked why, he said: "The smell of blood everywhere is unbearable.

古文：綝闻而杀之。斩其首无血。
现代文：孙綝听说后把他杀了，砍了他的头却不出血。
English: After hearing this, Sun Yat-sen killed him and cut off his head, but it did not bleed.

古文：及綝废幼帝，更立景帝，将拜陵，上车，车为之倾。
现代文：等到孙綝废掉幼帝，改立景帝。将要去拜陵墓，他上了车。车就翻了。
English: He waited until Sun Yat-sen abolished the young emperor and replaced him with Emperor Jing. When he was about to visit the mausoleum, he got into a car. The car overturned.

古文：因顾见徐光在松柏树上，附手指挥，嗤笑之。
现代文：孙綝回头一看，只见徐光站在松柏树上附手指挥，并且嘲笑他。
English: When Sun Yat-sen looked back, he saw Xu Guang standing on a pine tree, waving his hand and laughing at him.

古文：綝恶之，俄而景帝诛綝。
现代文：孙綝问左右侍从的人，都说没看见，孙綝很讨厌这件事。不久，景帝杀了孙綝。
English: When Sun Yat-sen asked the attendants on his right and left, they all said they didn't see it. Sun Yat-sen hated this. Soon, Emperor Jing killed Sun Yat-sen.

古文：王陵
现代文：王陵
English: The royal mausoleum

古文：司马宣王功业日隆，又诛魏大将军曹爽，篡夺之迹稍彰。
现代文：司马宣王的功业一天一天兴隆，又杀了魏国的大将军曹爽，篡权夺位的迹象日益明显。
English: Sima Xuan Wang's work flourished day by day, and he killed the great general Cao Shuang of Wei, and the signs of usurping power became increasingly obvious.

古文：王陵时为扬州刺史，以魏帝制于强臣，不堪为主，楚王彪年长而有才，欲迎立之。
现代文：王陵当时任扬州刺史，因魏帝被强臣所制，是扶不起来的天子，没有能力当魏主。楚王彪年纪大又有才能，王陵就想迎他立他为魏主。
English: At that time, Wang Ling was the Yangzhou chief historian, because the Wei emperor was controlled by strong ministers. He was the son of heaven who could not be supported, and had no ability to be the ruler of Wei. King Biao of Chu was old and talented, and Wang Ling wanted to welcome him and make him the ruler of Wei.

古文：兖州刺史董莘，以陵阴谋告宣王。宣王自将中军讨陵，卒至，陵自知势穷。乃单舸出迎。
现代文：兖州刺史董莘把王陵的计划告诉了宣王，宣王亲自率领军队讨伐王陵，王陵自己知道形势不可挽救了，就自己驾着小船迎接宣王。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Dong Hao, told King Xuan of the plan for the tomb. King Xuan personally led the army to attack the tomb. King Xuan himself knew that the situation was hopeless, so he drove a small boat to meet King Xuan.

古文：宣王遂送陵还京师，至项城，过贾逵庙侧，陵呼曰： 贾梁道，吾固尽心于魏之社稷，唯尔有神知之。 
现代文：宣王就押送王陵回京师。到项城时，经过贾逵庙旁边，王陵大声呼叫说： 贾梁道，我本来是尽心尽力为国家着想的，只有你的神灵知道这些事。 
English: When they arrived at Xiangcheng, they passed by the Jia Rong Temple, and the mausoleum called out in a loud voice, "Jia Liang, I was trying my best for the sake of the country, only your gods know these things.

古文：陵遂饮药酒死，三族皆诛。
现代文：王陵于是就喝药酒死了，王陵的三族都被杀死。
English: Wang Ling then drank the medicinal wine and died. Wang Ling's three clans were all killed.

古文：其年，宣帝有病，白日见逵来，并陵为祟，因呼陵字曰： 彦云缓我！ 
现代文：那一年，宣帝得了病，大白天就看见贾逵来到，和王陵一起为祟。宣王就招呼王陵的字说： 彦云饶了我吧！ 
English: In that year, Emperor Xuan fell ill, and in broad daylight he saw Jia Zhang coming, and he was haunted together with the royal mausoleum. Emperor Xuan called out the words of the royal mausoleum and said: "Yan Yun, spare me!"

古文：宣王身亦有打处，少时遂卒。
现代文：宣王的身上也有被打的地方，不长时间就死了。
English: Xuanwang was also beaten on his body, and he died not long after.

古文：夏侯玄
现代文：夏侯玄
English: Xia Houxuan

古文：魏夏侯玄，字太初，以当时才望，为司马景王所忌而杀之。
现代文：魏国的夏侯玄，字太初。凭当时的才能和名望，被司马景王所忌妒而杀了。
English: Xia Houxuan of Wei was the first. With his talent and fame at that time, he was killed by the jealousy of Sima Jing Wang.

古文：玄宗族为之设祭，见玄来灵座，脱头置其旁，悉敛果肉食物以纳头，既而还自安颈而言曰： 吾得诉于上帝矣，司马子元无嗣也。 
现代文：夏侯玄的亲属同族们给他祭奠。见到夏侯玄来到灵墓前，把头摘下来放在一边，把果肉食物都收起来装到头里，又自己把头安在颈上，然后说： 我将到天帝那里去控诉，司马子元没有后代了。 
English: Xia Houxuan's relatives and compatriots paid tribute to him. They saw Xia Houxuan come to the tomb, take off his head and put it to one side, put all the meat and fruit food into his head, and put his head on his neck, and then said: I will go to the Heavenly Emperor to complain, Sima Ziyuan has no descendants.

古文：既而景王薨，遂无子。
现代文：接着景王就死了。
English: Then King Gyeongbokgung died.

古文：文王封次子攸为齐王，继景王后，攸薨。
现代文：因为他没有儿子，文王封他的次子攸为齐王，继承景王，攸也死了。
English: Because he did not have a son, King Wen designated his second son You as King Qi to succeed King Jing, but You also died.

古文：攸子冏嗣立，又被杀。
现代文：攸的儿子冏立为王，又被杀了。
English: Youa's son became king and was killed.

古文：及永嘉之乱，有巫见宣王泣云： 我国倾覆，正由曹爽、夏侯玄二人，诉冤得申故也。 
现代文：等到永嘉之乱时，有个巫人看见宣王哭着说： 我们国家灭亡，正是由于曹爽、夏侯玄两个人，是他们诉冤得到申张的缘故。 
English: At the time of the Yongjia Rebellion, a sorcerer saw Xuan Wang crying and said, "Our country was destroyed because of Cao Shuang and Xia Hou Xuan, because they sued for grievances and received complaints.

古文：金玄
现代文：金玄
English: Jin Xuan

古文：晋明帝杀力士金玄，谓持刀者曰： 我头多筋，斫之必令即断，吾将报汝。 
现代文：晋明帝杀力士金玄。金玄对持刀杀他的人说： 我的头上筋多，你砍的时候一定要立刻让头断，我将报答你。 
English: Jin Xuan, the assassin of Emperor Jinming, said to the man who killed him with a sword: My head has many sinews, when you cut it, be sure to let the head break immediately, I will repay you.

古文：刀者不能留意，遂斫数疮，然后绝。
现代文：持刀的人并没有留心，结果砍了很多创口然后头才掉下来死了。
English: The knife-wielding man was not paying attention and ended up slashing a number of wounds before his head fell off and he died.

古文：后见玄绛冠朱服，赤弓彤矢，射持刀者，呼云： 金玄缓我！ 
现代文：后来持刀的人见到金玄穿着绛色帽红色裤子，红弓红箭，射持刀人，持刀人大呼： 金玄饶了我！ 
English: Later, the person holding the knife saw Jin Xuan wearing an ochre hat, red trousers, a red bow and red arrows, shooting the person holding the knife, and the person holding the knife shouting: "Jin Xuan, spare me!"

古文：少时而死。
现代文：不一会儿就死了。
English: He died a short time later.

古文：经旷
现代文：经旷
English: After a long journey

古文：河间国兵张粗、经旷，二人相与谐善。
现代文：河间国兵士张粗、经旷两个人友善。
English: The soldiers of Kawama country, Zhang Rough and Jing Kuo, are two friendly people.

古文：晋太元十四年五月五日，共升钟岭，坐于山椒。
现代文：晋朝太元十四年五月五日那天，二人共登钟岭坐在山巅。
English: On the 5th day of the 5th month of the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Taigen, the two of them climbed the bell ridge and sat on the top of the mountain.

古文：粗酒酣失性，拔刀斩旷。
现代文：张粗喝酒多了失了本性，拔刀杀了经旷。
English: Zhang Rong drank too much and lost his temper. He pulled out a knife and killed Jing Kuang.

古文：旷托梦于母，自说为粗所杀，尸在涧间，脱裳覆腹，寻觅之时，必难可得，当令裳飞起此处也。
现代文：经旷托梦给母亲，自己说： 被张粗杀了，尸体在山涧里，被脱掉了衣裳盖在肚子上，你们寻找的时候一定很困难，我就让衣裳在那地方飞起来。 
English: After recounting the dream to his mother, he said: "I was killed by Zhang Rong, the body was in the mountains, I was stripped of my clothes and placed on my stomach. It must have been very difficult for you to find it. I let my clothes fly in that place."

古文：明晨追捕，一如所言。
现代文：第二天派人追捕，全都象经旷说的一样。
English: The next day they sent out a manhunt, and everything turned out just as they said it would.

古文：粗知事露，将谋叛逸，出门，见旷手执双刀，来拟其面，遂不得去。
现代文：张粗知道事情败露，想要逃避，他刚一出门，看见经旷手拿双刀，比划着要杀张粗，张粗就不敢动了。
English: Zhang Rong knew that the matter had been exposed and wanted to escape. As soon as he went out, he saw Jing Rong holding a pair of knives in his outstretched hands and making a gesture to kill Zhang Rong. Zhang Rong did not dare to move.

古文：母遂报官，粗伏辜。
现代文：经旷母亲立刻报告了官府。张粗伏了罪。
English: Zhang's distraught mother immediately reported the matter to the government. Zhang was found guilty of gross negligence.

古文：万默
现代文：万默
English: Wanmo

古文：晋山阴县令石密，先经为御史，枉奏杀句容令万默。
现代文：晋山阴县令石密，以前曾当过御史，因歪曲事实使句容县令万默被杀。
English: The governor of Jin-Sanyin County, Shi-Ming, who had previously served as imperial historian, had the governor of Gu-Rong County, Wanmei, killed for distorting the facts.

古文：密寻白日见默来，杀密死。
现代文：石密不久就看见万默大白天找他来，最后把石密杀死了。
English: Shi Mi soon saw Wan Mu coming to look for him in broad daylight, and finally killed Shi Mi.

古文：曲俭
现代文：曲俭
English: Qu Jian

古文：前凉张天锡元年，西域校尉张颀杀曲俭。
现代文：前凉张天锡元年，西域校尉张颀杀了曲俭。
English: In the first year of the former Liang Zhang Tianxi, the West Region Lieutenant Zhang Xi killed Qu Jian.

古文：俭临死，具言取之。
现代文：曲俭临死的时候就对张颀说我早晚要报复，取你的头。
English: When Qu Jian was about to die, he said to Zhang Xuan, "Sooner or later, I will take revenge and take your head."

古文：后颀后见白狗，以刀斫之，不中，颀便倒地不起。
现代文：后来张颀发现他身后有只白狗跟着，他就用刀砍那只狗，没有砍中，张颀却倒在地上爬不起来。
English: Later, Zhang Ye found that a white dog was following him. He used a knife to cut the dog, but did not hit it. Zhang Ye fell to the ground and could not get up.

古文：左右见俭在旁，遂暴卒。
现代文：左右随从都看见曲俭在他身旁。
English: Followers on both sides saw Qu Jian walking beside him.

古文：太乐伎
现代文：于是张颀突然死了。太乐伎
English: As a result, Zhang Ye suddenly died.

古文：宋元嘉中，李龙等夜行掠劫。
现代文：宋朝元嘉年间，李龙等人在夜间抢劫掠夺。
English: During the Song Dynasty and Yuan Jia Dynasty, Li Long and others robbed and plundered at night.

古文：于时丹阳陶继之为秣陵县令，令人密寻捕，遂擒龙等，引人是太乐伎。
现代文：当时正是丹阳人陶继之任秣陵县令，他命人秘密寻查追踪，不久就擒获了李龙等人。引导的人是太乐伎。
English: At that time, it was Danyang resident Tao Jizhong who was the magistrate of Fuling County. He ordered someone to secretly search and track, and soon caught Li Long and others. The person who guided was Tai Legi.

古文：劫发之夜，此伎与同伴往就人宿，共奏音声。
现代文：李龙等人作案那天夜里，太乐伎和同伴们去别人家住宿，一起奏乐歌唱，结果也被抓去了。
English: On the night of the crime committed by Li Long and others, Tai Legi and his companions went to stay at someone else's home and played music and sang together. As a result, they were also arrested.

古文：陶不详审，为作款引，随例申上。
现代文：陶继之没有认真审理，给他判了个是这伙强盗引导的不真实罪状，随着李龙等人一起上报了。
English: Tao Jizhi did not seriously examine the case, and he was convicted of an untrue charge of being led by the gang of robbers. He reported the case together with Li Long and others.

古文：而所宿主人及宾客，并相明证。
现代文：尽管太乐伎所住宿的房主和宾客们都证明太乐伎没有参加，也没有起作用。
English: Despite the fact that the owners of the houses and the guests who stayed at the Tai Lek Gi proved that the Tai Lek Gi did not participate and did not work.

古文：陶知枉滥，但以文书已行，不欲自为通塞，并诸劫十人，于郡门斩之。
现代文：后来陶县令也知道自己冤枉了太乐伎，上报材料不真实。但是上报的文书已经发走了，他又不想自找麻烦，怕对自己不利，就将错就错了，太乐伎和李龙等十名抢劫犯被判在郡门斩首。
English: Later, the Tao County magistrate also knew that he had wronged Tai Lek Gi and that the reported material was not true. However, the reporting document had already been sent out, and he did not want to make trouble for himself, fearing that he would be unfavorable to himself, so he just made a mistake. Ten robbers, including Tai Lek Gi and Li Long, were sentenced to beheading at the county gate.

古文：此伎声价艺态，又殊辨慧，将死之日曰： 我虽贱隶，少怀慕善，未尝为非，实不作劫。
现代文：太乐伎的声调姿态都很出众，又才华过人。他将要被处死那天说： 我虽是个贫贱的下等人，但是少年时心里就羡慕善良的人，从来没作过坏事。
English: On the day he was to be executed, he said, "Although I am a poor, low-class person, when I was young, I envied good people and never did anything bad.

古文：陶令已当具知，枉见杀害。
现代文：我实在没有参与抢劫，陶县令已经全都知道了。
English: I really didn't take part in the robbery, the county magistrate already knows everything.

古文：若无鬼则已。有鬼必自陈诉。 
现代文：现在我冤枉也被杀害，如果没有鬼也就罢了，如果有鬼我一定要到天府去告状。 
English: Now I have been wrongfully killed. If there is no ghost, that's it. If there is a ghost, I must go to the Heavenly Capital to file a complaint.

古文：因弹琵琶，歌数曲而就死。
现代文：然后弹着琵琶，唱了几首歌被处死了。
English: He then played the lute and sang a few songs before he was executed.

古文：众知其枉，莫不陨泣。
现代文：大家都知道他太冤枉，没有不掉眼泪的。
English: Everyone knew that he had been so wronged that there was no way he would not shed tears.

古文：经月余，陶遂梦伎来至案前云： 昔枉见杀，实所不忿，诉天得理，今故取君。 
现代文：经过一个多月，陶县令就梦到太乐伎来到他的桌案前说： 过去我冤枉被杀，实在是气不忿呀，现在我告到天帝那已经得理，所以今天来杀你。 
English: After more than a month had passed, the magistrate of Tao County had a dream in which Tai Leji came to his desk and said, "In the past, I was unjustly killed, and I am really angry. Now I have reported to the Heavenly Emperor, and he has taken action, so I am going to kill you today."

古文：便跳入陶口，乃落腹中。
现代文：说完便跳到陶继之的嘴里，然后就落到肚子里，陶继之立刻吓醒了。
English: After saying this, it jumped into Tao Jizhi's mouth, and then fell into his stomach. Tao Jizhi immediately woke up.

古文：陶即惊寤，俄而倒，状若风癫，良久苏醒。有时而发，发即夭矫，头乃著背，四日而亡。
现代文：不一会倒在地上，象得了疯癫病一样，很长时间才苏醒，不一定什么时候发病，发病时身子不是后倒就是前倾，头可以挨着后背，四天就死了。
English: After a while he fell to the ground, as if he had gone mad. It took him a long time to wake up. It didn't matter when he fell ill. When he fell ill, his body would either fall backwards or forwards, his head could be next to his back. He died four days later.

古文：亡后家便贫瘁，二儿早死，余有一孙，穷寒路次。
现代文：他死以后家里变穷了，两个儿子也死得早，还剩下个孙子，穷得在路边受冻。
English: After his death, the family became poor, two sons also died early, and a grandson was left, too poor to freeze on the side of the road.

古文：邓琬
现代文：邓琬
English: 邓

古文：宋泰始元年，江州刺史邓琬，立晋安王子勋为帝，作乱。
现代文：宋朝泰始元年，江州刺史邓琬立晋安王的儿子勋作皇帝，于是发动了叛乱。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty and the beginning of the Tai Dynasty, the son of the King of Jinan, Emperor Xun, was appointed by the governor of Jiangzhou, Deng Rong, who then launched a rebellion.

古文：初南郡太守张悦得罪，锁归扬都，及湓口，琬赦之，以为冠军将军，共纲纪军事，袁顗既败，张悦惧诛，乃称暴疾，伏甲而召邓琬。既至，谓之曰： 卿首唱此祸，今事急矣，计将安出？ 
现代文：当初南郡太守张悦犯了罪，戴上枷锁押回扬都，到了湓口，邓琬放了他，任命他作冠军将军，共同管理军中大事，袁顗遭到惨败以后，张悦害怕被杀，谎说自己得了急病，埋伏了甲兵召邓琬来，邓琬来到，张悦对他说： 你提出立勋作皇帝造成了这样的灾祸，现在事情非常紧迫了，有什么计策呢？ 
English: At that time, Zhang Yue, the governor of Nan County, committed a crime. He was shackled and sent back to Yangdu. When he arrived at the Hukou, Deng Xiao released him and appointed him as a champion general to jointly manage the major events in the army. After Yuan Shao suffered a crushing defeat, Zhang Yue was afraid of being killed. He lied that he had a sudden illness and ambushed the armored soldiers to summon Deng Yue. When Deng Yue arrived, Zhang Yue said to him: You proposed to make him an emperor and caused such a disaster. Now things are very urgent. What are your plans?

古文：琬曰： 斩晋安王以待王师，或可以免。 
现代文：邓琬说： 杀了晋安王等官兵到来，也许可以免灾。 
English: Deng Yao said, "If we kill Jin An Wang and other officers and soldiers, we may be able to avoid disaster."

古文：悦怒曰： 卿始此祸，而欲卖罪少帝乎？ 
现代文：张悦气愤地说： 你引来的灾祸，怎么想嫁祸给少帝吗？ 
English: Zhang Yue said angrily: How can you blame the young emperor for the disaster you have caused?

古文：命斩于床前，并杀其子，以琬头降。
现代文：命令左右的卫士把邓琬杀死在床前，并且杀了邓琬的儿子。用邓琬的头作了投降的献礼。
English: He ordered the guards on his right and left to kill Deng Yao in front of his bed, and also killed Deng Yao's son. Deng Yao's head was used as a surrender offering.

古文：至五年，悦卧疾，见琬为厉，遂死。
现代文：到第五年，张悦卧病在床，看见邓琬变作厉鬼，随即张悦就死了。
English: In the fifth year, Zhang Yue was sick in bed and saw Deng Yao turn into a fierce ghost. Zhang Yue then died.

古文：孔基
现代文：孔基
English: Borehole

古文：会稽孔基勤学有志操，族人孔敞使其二子从基为师。
现代文：会稽的孔基勤学而且品行高洁，同族人孔敞就让他的两个儿子拜他为师，跟着他学习。
English: Kong Ji, the auditor, studied hard and had a high moral character. His compatriot Kong Chan let his two sons worship him as a teacher and study with him.

古文：而敞子并凶狠，趋向不轨，基屡言于敞，此儿常有忿志。
现代文：但孔敞的两个儿子都很凶狠，行动不轨。孔基多次向孔敞提到这些事，这两个儿子有怨恨在心。
English: But Kong Kee's two sons were very violent and did not behave well. Kong Kee mentioned these things to Kong Kee many times. The two sons had grudges in their hearts.

古文：敞寻丧亡，服制既除，基以宿旧，乃赍羊酒往看二子。
现代文：孔敞不久就死了。等到孝服除去之后，孔基以老朋友的身份，带着羊肉好酒来看望孔敞的两个儿子。
English: Kongzhang died soon after. After the removal of filial piety, Kongji visited Kongzhang's two sons as an old friend, bringing mutton and good wine.

古文：二子犹怀宿怨，潜遣奴路侧杀基。
现代文：可这二儿子还怀着旧怨，偷偷地派奴仆在路上杀了孔基。
English: However, the two sons still harbored old grudges and secretly sent a slave to kill Kongji on the road.

古文：奴还未至，乃见基来，张目攘袂，厉声言曰： 奸丑小竖，人面兽心，吾蒙顾存昔，敦旧平生，有何怨恶，候道见害，反天忘父，人神不容，要当断汝家种。
现代文：奴仆们还没有到家，就见孔基走过来，瞪着眼睛挽起袖子，厉声说： 奸丑的小子，人面兽心。我不忘同你父亲的老交情，我平生厚道，有什么怨恨，派人等在路上害我，违背天理忘掉了你父亲，人和神都不会宽容你，该断了你家的后代。 
English: The servants had not yet arrived home when they saw Kong Kee approaching. He rolled up his sleeves, stared into his eyes, and said sharply: "Ugly little traitor, with the heart of a beast. I will not forget my old friendship with your father. I have been kind all my life. What grudge do I have? I have sent people to harm me on the road. I have forgotten your father in violation of the laws of heaven. Neither man nor god will tolerate you. It is time to break off the descendants of your family."

古文：从此之后，数日见形孔氏。
现代文：从此以后好多天都显形于孔家。
English: Since then, it has appeared in the Kong family for many days.

古文：无几，大儿向厕，忽便绝倒，络绎往看，已毙于地。
现代文：不久，大儿子上厕所，忽然昏过去倒在地上，人来人往地先后来看，早已经死在地上了。
English: Soon after, the eldest son went to the toilet, suddenly fainted and fell to the ground. People came and went, looking back and forth. He was already dead on the ground.

古文：次者寻复病疽而死，卒致兄弟无后。
现代文：次子不久又得了恶疮病死了。终于导致兄弟都没有后人。
English: The second son soon got a malignancy and died. Finally, the brothers had no descendants.

古文：昙摩忏
现代文：昙摩忏
English: 摩忏

古文：沮渠蒙逊时，沙门昙摩忏者，博达多识，为蒙逊之所信重，魏氏遣李顺拜蒙逊为凉王，乃求昙摩忏，蒙逊怯而不与。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊时，有个和尚昙摩忏，博学多识，被蒙逊所信用。魏国派李顺拜蒙逊为凉王，趁机要求昙摩忏去魏国。
English: At the time of the dethronement of Monson, there was a monk named Zhamakhen, who was learned and knowledgeable, and was trusted by Monson. Wei sent Li Shunbei to Zhamakhen as a cool king, and took the opportunity to ask Zhamakhen to go to Wei.

古文：昙摩忏意欲入魏，屡从蒙逊请行，蒙逊怒杀之。
现代文：蒙逊怕昙摩忏到魏对自己不利而不放行。昙摩忏很想去魏，多次跟蒙逊请求放他走。蒙逊很生气就把他杀了。
English: Monsoon was afraid that Wei would harm him, so he did not let him go. He wanted to go to Wei very much, and he pleaded with Monsoon many times to let him go. Monsoon was very angry and killed him.

古文：既而左右当白日中，见昙摩忏以剑击蒙逊，因以疾而死。
现代文：不久蒙逊左右的侍从们在大白天就看见昙摩忏用剑刺蒙逊。蒙逊因此得病而死。
English: Before long, the attendants around Monson saw him stabbed with a sword in broad daylight. Monson became ill and died.

古文：支法存
现代文：支法存
English: Subsidiary legislation

古文：支法存者，本自胡人，生长广州，妙善医术，遂成巨富。
现代文：支法存本来是胡人，生长在广州，医术高明，很快就成了巨富。
English: He was originally a Wu people, grew up in Guangzhou, was skilled in medicine, and soon became very rich.

古文：有八九尺毾毲。百种形象，光彩曜目。又有沉香八尺板床，居常芬馥。
现代文：家里有八九尺长的毛毯，上面织成各种图形，光彩夺目，还有一张八尺长的沉香木板床，居室芳香四溢格外芬馥。
English: At home, there is an 89-foot-long blanket, woven into various patterns, with dazzling brilliance, as well as an eight-foot-long, incense-scented wooden plank bed, making the room particularly fragrant.

古文：王谭为广州刺史，大儿劭之，屡求二物，法存不与。
现代文：王谭任广州刺史，他的大儿子邵之多次向支法存索要这两件东西，法存不给。
English: Wang Tan is the chief historian of Guangzhou, and his eldest son Shao Zhi has repeatedly requested these two things from the legal deposit, but the legal deposit is not given.

古文：王因状法存豪纵，杀而籍没家财焉。
现代文：王邵之因此就诬告法存豪横放纵，杀了法存并没收家财。
English: As a result, Wang Shao Zhi falsely accused the legal depositor of indulgence, killed the legal depositor and confiscated the family property.

古文：死后，形见于府内，辄打阁下鼓，似若称冤，如此经月。王寻得病，恒见法存守之，少时遂亡。
现代文：法存死后，他的形体却经常在刺史府内出现，一出现就打阁下的大鼓，好象要叫冤，如此经过一个月，王谭不久就得了病，常常看见法存守着他，没几天就死了。
English: After Fa Cunxuan's death, his form often appeared in Zhishi Prefecture. As soon as he appeared, he would play a large drum, as if to call for revenge. After a month of this, Wang Tan soon fell ill. He often saw Fa Cunxuan guarding him, and died within a few days.

古文：劭之比至扬都，又死焉。
现代文：邵之紧接着回到扬都，也死了。
English: Shao Zhi immediately returned to Yangdu and also died.

古文：张超
现代文：张超
English: Zhang Chao

古文：高平金乡张超，先与同县翟愿不和。
现代文：高平金乡县的张超，以前和同县的翟愿不和。
English: Zhang Chao of Gaoping Jinxiang County had previously been at odds with his fellow countymen.

古文：愿以宋元嘉中，为方舆令，忽为人所杀。咸疑是超。
现代文：翟愿在宋元嘉年间任方舆县令，忽然被人杀害，都怀疑是张超所杀。
English: It is suspected that Zhang Chao was responsible for the sudden death of Gong Zhan, who served as the commander of Fang Yixian County during the Song and Yuan Dynasties.

古文：超后除金乡县令，解职还家，入山伐材。
现代文：张超后来解除了金乡县令的职务回到家里，上山伐木。
English: Zhang Chao was later relieved of his duties as county magistrate of Jinxiang County and returned home to go up the mountain to cut trees.

古文：翟兄子铜乌，执弓持矢，并赍酒礼，就山馈之。
现代文：翟愿哥哥的儿子叫铜乌，这天带着弓和箭，并携着酒等礼品，在山上赠给张超，二人在山上吃喝完毕。
English: I wish my brother's son was named Tong Wu. On this day, he brought a bow and arrows, as well as wine and other gifts, to present to Zhang Chao on the mountain. The two of them finished eating and drinking on the mountain.

古文：斟酌已毕，铜乌曰： 明府昔害我叔，无缘同戴天日。 
现代文：铜乌说： 明府您过去杀害了我叔叔，现在我们无缘同戴天日。 
English: Tong Wu said, "Ming Fu, you killed my uncle in the past, now we have no chance to be together.

古文：即引弓射之，超乃死。
现代文：说完就拉弓射死张超。
English: After saying that, he drew his bow and shot Zhang Chao to death.

古文：铜乌其夜见超云： 我不杀汝叔，横见残害。今已上诉，故来相报。 
现代文：铜乌在当天晚上看见张超说： 我没有杀你叔，却凶狼地被残杀，现在我已经上告到天帝，所以来报仇。 
English: That evening, Tongwu saw Zhang Chao and said, "I didn't kill your uncle, but I was brutally killed. Now I've appealed to the Heavenly Emperor, so I've come to take revenge."

古文：引刀刺之，吐血而死。
现代文：拔出刀刺铜乌，铜乌吐血而死。
English: He pulled out his knife and stabbed the copperhead. The copperhead vomited blood and died.

古文：袁粲幼子
现代文：袁粲幼子
English: Yuan Shao's young son

古文：齐高祖欲禅，宋尚书令袁粲举兵不从，被害。
现代文：齐高祖想要出家。宋尚书令袁粲起兵不从，结果被害。
English: Qi Gaozu wanted to become a monk. Song Shangshu ordered Yuan Shao to raise an army, but Yuan Shao disobeyed and was killed as a result.

古文：其幼子，乳母潜将投粲门生狄灵庆，灵庆杀之。
现代文：袁粲的小儿子被乳母偷着带走，投奔袁粲的门生狄灵庆那里。灵庆却把孩子杀了。
English: Yuan Xuan's youngest son was stolen away by his nanny and taken to Yuan Xuan's protégé, Di Lingqing. Lingqing, however, killed the child.

古文：经年，忽见儿骑狗戏如常，后复有一狗，走入灵庆家。
现代文：一年后，狄灵庆忽然看见袁粲的幼子骑着狗玩，象往常一样，他的后面还有一条狗走进灵庆的家。
English: A year later, Di Lingqing suddenly saw Yuan Qi's young son riding a dog to play. As usual, a dog walked into Lingqing's home behind him.

古文：遇灵庆，便噬杀之，其妻子并死于狗。
现代文：遇到灵庆，便咬死了狄灵庆。狄灵庆的妻子和儿子一起也被狗咬死。
English: When he met Lingqing, he bit and killed Dillingqing. Dillingqing's wife and son were also bitten to death by the dog.

古文：庾宏奴
现代文：庾宏奴
English: by 宏奴

古文：庾宏为竟陵王府佐，家在江陵。
现代文：庾宏是竟陵王府的辅佐，家住在江陵。
English: Zou Hong is an assistant of the King's Palace of Jingling, and his family lives in Jiangling.

古文：宏令奴无患者，载米饷家。未达三里，遭劫被杀。
现代文：有一天，庾宏让奴仆无患装了一车米送回家去，还没走出三里路，遭到强盗抢劫被杀害。
English: One day, Zou Hong had his servant safely load a cart of rice and send it home. Before he had walked three miles, he was robbed and killed.

古文：尸流泊查口村，时岸旁有文欣者，母病。医云： 须得髑髅屑服之，即差。 
现代文：无患的尸首漂流到查口村。那时在岸边住户中有个叫文欣的人，他母亲有病，医生说必须用髑髅的骨屑作药吃，吃后立刻就能好。
English: The unharmed body drifted to Chakou village. At that time, there was a man named Wen Xin in a household on the shore. His mother was ill, and the doctor said that he must use the bones of the dragonfly as medicine. He would be better immediately after eating it.

古文：欣重赏募索。
现代文：文欣于是悬重赏求索。
English: Wen Xin then asked for a heavy reward.

古文：有邻妇杨氏见无患尸，因断头与欣。
现代文：这时邻居有个姓杨的妇女，看见了无患的尸体，就砍断了头送给文欣。
English: At this time, a neighbor, a woman surnamed Yang, saw the harmless corpse and cut off the head and gave it to Wenxin.

古文：欣烧之，欲去皮肉，经三日夜不焦，眼角张转。欣虽异之，犹惜不弃，因刮耳颊骨，与母服之。
现代文：文欣得到头后就用火烧，想去掉皮肉。烧烤了三天三夜也不枯焦，眼睛还能睁开转动，文欣虽然很奇怪，但还是觉得来之不易不舍得扔掉。
English: After Wen Xin got the head, she used fire to burn it, and wanted to remove the skin. After three days and three nights of grilling, it was not charred, and her eyes could still open and turn around. Although Wen Xin was very strange, she still felt that it was hard-won and was not willing to throw it away.

古文：即觉骨停喉中，经七日而卒。
现代文：后来刮下耳颊骨给母亲服下，他母亲立刻觉得有骨头卡在喉咙里，经过七天就死了。
English: Later, he scraped off the ear-cheek bone and gave it to his mother, who immediately felt a bone stuck in her throat and died seven days later.

古文：寻而杨氏得疾，通身洪肿，形如牛马，见无患头来骂云： 善恶之报，其能免乎？ 
现代文：不久杨氏妇人也得了病，通身肿胀，形状象牛马一样。她看见无患的头来找她骂她： 善有善报，恶有恶报，你能免了吗？ 
English: Soon after, Ms. Yang's wife also fell ill, her whole body swollen and shaped like a cow and horse. She saw the harmless head come to her and scolded her: "Good is rewarded with good, evil with evil, can you be spared?"

古文：杨氏以语儿，言终而卒。
现代文：杨氏妇人把事情经过告诉了他儿子。话刚说完就死了。
English: Mr. Yang's wife told her son what had happened and died shortly after.

古文：魏辉俊
现代文：魏辉俊
English: Wei Huijun

古文：北齐阳翟太守张善，苛酷贪叨，恶声流布。兰台遣御史魏辉俊，就郡治之，赃贿狼籍，罪当合死。
现代文：北齐的阳翟太守张善，苛薄残酷而又贪婪，他的坏名声流传很广，兰台遣御史魏辉俊到郡上治理，发现张善贪赃枉法的事情很多，论罪该死。
English: Zhang Zhen, the impotent emperor of Northern Qi, was harsh, cruel and greedy. His bad reputation spread far and wide. The Lantai Emperor sent Shi Wei Huijun to govern the county. He found that Zhang Zhen had been corrupt and had committed many crimes. He should be condemned to death.

古文：善于狱中，使人通诉，反诬辉俊为纳民财，枉见推缚。
现代文：于是就把张善押到狱中。但张善买通了上下，反过来诬陷辉俊为了收刮民财才把张善押进狱中。
English: As a result, Zhang Shan was sent to prison. However, Zhang Shan bought his way in, and in turn framed Huijun for sending Zhang Shan to prison in order to extort money from the people.

古文：文宣帝大怒，以为法司阿曲，必须穷正，令尚书令左丞卢斐复验之。
现代文：文宣帝很气愤。认为法纪被歪曲了，必须拨乱反正，派尚书令左丞卢斐复查这个案子。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was very angry. He thought that the legal code had been distorted and that it was necessary to set things right. He sent Shang Shuling and Zuo Rufei to review the case.

古文：斐遂希旨，成辉俊罪状，奏报，于州斩决。
现代文：卢斐就接受了皇上的旨意，构成了辉俊的罪状后上奏。然后文宣帝下旨在州府处斩。
English: Lu Fei accepted the emperor's will, which constituted the postlude of Huijun's crime. Then Emperor Wenxuan ordered the execution at the state capital.

古文：辉俊遗语令史曰： 我之情理，是君所见，今日之事，可复如之。当办纸百番，笔二管，墨一绽，以随吾尸，若有灵祗，必望报卢。 
现代文：辉俊对令史留下遗言说： 我的情况你都看得清清楚楚，现在这件事，又能怎样呢，你给我准备一百番纸，二管笔，一锭墨，让我带在身上随着我尸体，如果天地真有神灵，我一定要报复卢斐。 
English: Huijun left his last words to Ling Shi, saying, "You can see my situation very clearly. What can I do about it now? Prepare a hundred pieces of paper, two pens, and a bunch of ink for me. Let me carry my corpse with me. If there really are gods in heaven and earth, I must avenge Lu Fei."

古文：令史哀悼，为之殡敛，并备纸笔。
现代文：令使也很哀悼，给他收尸安葬并备了纸笔等。
English: The emperor was also in mourning, his body was taken away for burial, and pens and paper were prepared.

古文：十五日，善得病，唯云叩头，旬日而死。
现代文：十五天以后，张善得了病，只说磕头，没出十天就死了。
English: Fifteen days later, Zhang Shan fell ill and only spoke of steamed bread. He died ten days later.

古文：才两月，卢斐坐讥驳魏使，为魏收奏，文宣帝鸩杀之。
现代文：才过了两个月，卢斐出使魏国犯了讥驳犯上的罪，被魏国收押并奏明齐国，文宣帝用毒酒杀了他。
English: Only two months later, Lu Fei sent an envoy to Wei, who committed the crime of ridiculing, was detained by Wei and sent to Ming and Qi, and Emperor Wenzhong killed him with poisoned wine.

古文：真子融
现代文：真子融
English: Mako Toru

古文：真子融，北齐世尝为井陉关收租使，脏货甚，为人所纠。
现代文：真子融在北齐时曾任井陉关收租使，赃款赃物很多，被人控告追究。
English: When Makiko Rong was in North Qi, she worked as a rent collector in Jingyuguan. She embezzled a lot of money and goods, and was accused and investigated.

古文：齐主欲以行法。
现代文：齐王想要严肃法纪，予以根治。
English: King Qi wanted to take legal discipline seriously and eradicate it.

古文：意在穷治，乃付并州城局参军崔法瑗，与中书舍人蔡晖，共拷其狱。然子融罪皆在赦前，法瑗等观望上意，抑为赦后。
现代文：就交给并州城局参军法瑗和中书舍人蔡晖其同审理此案追查真子融的罪状，然而审理之后发现真子触犯的罪都是在齐王发整顿纲纪的赦令以前干的。法瑗等人看齐王的用意很明显，就决定改为赦令下达以后。
English: The case was handed over to the Military Law Division of the State and Municipal Bureau of the People's Republic of China, and the person in charge of the case, Cai Xuan, who was from the People's Republic of China, tried the case together with him to investigate the guilt of Meng Zi Rong. However, after the trial, it was found that the crimes committed by Meng Zi Rong were all committed before the amnesty order of the King of Qi to rectify the discipline. The people in the Military Law Division saw the intention of the King of Qi clearly, and decided to change it to after the amnesty order was issued.

古文：子融临刑之际，怨诉百端，既不得理，乃曰： 若使此等平直，是无天道。 
现代文：子融临到被杀的时候百般诉冤，还是没有理会。真子融就说： 如果让这些人这样下去，怎能有事非曲直，真是没有公道。 
English: When the time came for Sonny to be killed, he still paid no attention to the many appeals for justice. Sonny said, "If we let these people go on like this, how can there be anything right or wrong? It's really not fair."

古文：后十五日，法瑗无病死。
现代文：过了十五天，法瑗没有得病就死了。
English: Fifteen days later, Faju died without having contracted the disease.

古文：经一年许，蔡晖患病，肤肉烂堕都尽，苦楚日加，方死。
现代文：经过一年多的时间，蔡晖得了病，皮肤和肉都烂掉了，痛苦一天比一天严重，遭了很长时间的罪才死。
English: After more than a year, Cai Xuan fell ill, her skin and flesh rotted away, and the pain became more severe day by day. It took her a long time to die.

