古文：襄王使邵公过及内史过赐晋惠公命，吕甥，郤芮相晋侯不敬，晋侯执玉卑，拜不稽首。
现代文：周襄王派召公过与内史过向晋惠公颁赐任命，吕甥、郤芮随从晋惠公行礼的时候不恭敬，晋惠公把礼器拿得很低，跪拜的时候头不触地。
English: King Zhou Xiang sent a summoning official and an internal history official to present the appointment to Jin Huigong. Lu Nephew and Zou followed Jin Huigong and did not show respect when they performed the salute. Jin Huigong held the ceremonial instrument very low and did not touch his head to the ground when he knelt.

古文：内史过归，以告王曰： 晋不亡，其君必无后。且吕、郤将不免。 
现代文：内史过回来以后，将这件事情告诉了襄王，说： 如果晋国不亡，那他的国君一定会绝后，而且吕甥、郤芮将不能免祸。 
English: After Naishi returned, he told Xiang Wang about this matter, saying, "If Jin does not perish, then his sovereign will surely die, and his nephews Lu and Yao will not be spared.

古文：王曰： 何故？ 
现代文：襄王问： 这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Zhou Dingwang asked: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 《夏书》有之曰： 众非元后，何戴？
现代文：内史过答道： 《夏书》上说： 民众没有好君王，拥戴谁？
English: Naishi replied, "The Summer Book says: If the people do not have a good king, who should they support?

古文：后非众，无与守邦。 
现代文：君王没有民众，就没有人一起保守基业。 
English: If the monarch has no people, there is no one to jointly preserve the foundation.

古文：在《汤誓》曰： 余一人有罪，无以万夫；万夫有罪，在余一人。 
现代文：《汤誓》中说： 我君王有罪，不连累百姓；百姓有罪，责任在我君王。 
English: In the "Thousand Oaths," he said: "My king is guilty, I will not implicate the people; the people are guilty, the responsibility lies with my king."

古文：在《盘庚》曰： 国之臧，则惟女众。
现代文：《盘庚》则说： 国家好，是大家的功劳。
English: "Pan Geng" said: "If the country is good, it is thanks to everyone.

古文：国之不臧，则惟余一人，是有逸罚。 
现代文：国家不好，是我一个人的过失，罪当在我。 
English: If the country is not good, it is my fault alone. The blame lies with me.

古文：如是则长众使民，不可不慎也。
现代文：据此，做万民之主、役使百姓时，不能不小心谨慎。
English: According to this, when you are the master of the people and the servant of the people, you cannot be careless and cautious.

古文：民之所急在大事，先王知大事之必以济众也，是故祓除其心，以和惠民。
现代文：民众所关心的是祭祀、战争之类的大事，先王懂得这样的大事必须靠民众才能办到，因此清除心中的邪念团结民众，将心比心地来处理政务，以明确的准则来教诲他们，施行民众拥护的事情。
English: The people were concerned with important matters such as religious services and war, and the former king understood that such important matters could only be accomplished by the people. Therefore, he purged his heart of evil thoughts, united the people, handled government affairs with a heart for the people, taught them with clear principles, and carried out the things that the people supported.

古文：考中度衷以莅之，昭明物则以训之，制义庶孚以行之。
现代文：清除邪念，是精；将心比心，是忠；明确准则，是礼；众人拥护，是信。
English: To purify evil thoughts is refinement; to compare heart to heart is loyalty; to have a clear standard is courtesy; to be supported by everyone is faith.

古文：祓除其心，精也；考中度衷，忠也；昭明物则，礼也；制义庶孚，信也。然则长众使民之道，非精不和，非忠不立，非礼不顺，非信不行。
现代文：如此，做万民之主、役使百姓的关键在于：不清除邪念不能团结民众，不将心比心不能处理政务，准则不明确就行不通，众人不拥护就无法行事。
English: In this way, the key to being the master of all the people and the servant of the people lies in: the people cannot be united without eliminating evil thoughts, the government affairs cannot be handled without heart-to-heart communication, the guidelines cannot be implemented without clarity, and the people cannot act without support.

古文：今晋侯即位而背外内之赂，虐其处者，弃其信也；不敬王命，弃其礼也；施其所恶，弃其忠也；以恶实心，弃其精也。
现代文：现在晋侯刚继位就违背了对与国、大臣许下的诺言，杀害与自己共事的人，是背离了信；不尊重王命，是背离了礼；把自己所厌恶的事施加于人，是背离了忠；心中充满了邪念，是背离了精。
English: Now, as soon as he succeeded to the throne, the prince broke his promise to the country and the minister. Killing those who worked with him was a breach of faith; disrespecting the king's order was a breach of etiquette; inflicting what he disliked on others was a breach of loyalty; his heart was filled with evil thoughts and he was a traitor.

古文：四者皆弃，则远不至而近不和矣，将何以守国？
现代文：这四条都违背了，关系远的就不来交往，关系近的也不相和睦，将凭什么来保全国家？
English: If all four of these are violated, if distant relations do not come into contact, and if close relations are not in harmony, on what basis will the country be preserved?

古文： 古者，先王既有天下，又崇立于上帝、明神而敬事之，于是乎有朝日、夕月以教民事君。
现代文： 以前，先王得了天下，又尊崇上天、神灵而敬奉他们，于是有祭祀日、月这样的仪式来教导民众事奉君王。
English: In the past, when the first king conquered the world, he also revered the gods and worshiped them, so there were rituals such as the day and month of sacrifice to teach the people to serve the king.

古文：诸侯春秋受职于王，以临其民；大夫、士日恪位著，以儆其官；庶人、工、商各守其业，以共其上。
现代文：诸侯在春、秋两季受命于天子治理百姓，大夫、士天天在自己的官位上小心供职，庶人、工、商各守其业来为君王效劳。
English: In spring and autumn, lords were ordered by the Son of Heaven to govern the people. Doctors and magistrates carefully served in their official positions every day. Commoners, workers, and merchants each kept their jobs to serve the king.

古文：犹恐其有坠失也，故为车服、旗章以旌之，为贽币、瑞节以镇之，为班爵、贵贱以列之，为令闻嘉誉以声之。
现代文：尚且担心有所疏漏，所以制定了舆服、旗帜来区分标志，规定了贽币、瑞节来强调等级，定下了爵位、贵贱来确立秩序，设下了美名、荣誉来嘉奖功臣。
English: In addition, they were worried about omissions, so they developed public uniforms and flags to distinguish the signs, stipulated the coins and festivals to emphasize the level, set the titles and ranks to establish the order, and set the reputation and honor to reward the heroes.

古文：犹有散、迁、懈慢而著在刑辟，流在裔土，于是乎有蛮、夷之国，有斧钺、刀墨之民，而况可以淫纵其身乎？夫晋侯非嗣也，而得其位，亹亹怵惕，保任戒惧，犹曰未也。
现代文：但仍然有散慢、失职、懈怠、懒惰而受到刑法惩处、流放到边地的人，于是就有了蛮、夷这样的国家，有了受到刑罚制裁的罪民，而作为诸侯，自己又怎么可以过分放纵呢？ 晋侯本不该继位而得以当上了国君，勤勉地任事、小心地供职，还怕不行呢。
English: However, there are still people who are sluggish, derelict in duty, slack, and lazy, who are punished by criminal law and exiled to outlying areas. As a result, there are countries such as barbarians and barbarians, and there are criminals who are subject to criminal sanctions. As lords, how can they indulge themselves excessively? Jin Hou should not have succeeded to the throne and was able to become the king. He should be diligent in his duties and careful in his service.

古文：若将广其心而远其邻，陵其民而卑其上，将何以固守？夫执玉卑，替其贽也。拜不稽首，诬其王也。
现代文：假如放纵自己，疏远邻国，欺压人民，不敬天子，将怎么确保基业？ 礼器拿得低，是废弃执贽之礼，跪拜不稽首，是欺瞒君王。
English: If you indulge yourself, alienate your neighbors, oppress the people, and disrespect the Son of God, how will you secure your inheritance? If you hold the ceremonial utensils low, it is a waste of the ceremony of holding the scepter, if you kneel and do not show your head, it is deceiving the king.

古文：替贽无镇，诬王无民。
现代文：废弃执贽就无法制约，欺诓君王就会失去百姓。
English: Abandoning the rule of law cannot be controlled, and a tyrannical king will lose the people.

古文：夫天事恒象，任重享大者必速及，故晋侯诬王，人亦将诬之；欲替其镇，人亦将替之。
现代文：行事往往象征了上天降下的吉凶，责任重大而贪图享受必定很快遭到报应。所以晋侯欺诓君王，别人也将欺诓他；想废弃制约，别人也将废弃他。
English: Actions often symbolize the fortunes and misfortunes that come down from the heavens, the responsibility is great and the desire to enjoy must be quickly retaliated. Therefore, if Jin Hou bullies the king, others will also bully him; if he wants to abandon the restrictions, others will also abandon him.

古文：大臣享其禄，弗谏而阿之，亦必及焉。 
现代文：大臣享受君王的俸禄，不劝谏反而附从，也一定会遭到报应。 
English: A minister who enjoys the king's salary and follows the king instead of advising him is sure to suffer retribution.

古文：襄王三年而立晋侯，八年而陨于韩，十六年而晋人杀怀公。
现代文：周襄王三年晋侯即位，襄王八年就在韩原被俘虏，襄王十六年晋人杀了他的儿子怀公。
English: Zhou Xiang Wang ascended to the throne in the third year of his reign, Xiang Wang was captured in Han Yuan in the eighth year, and in the sixteenth year of his reign, the Jin people killed his son Huai Gong.

古文：怀公无胄，秦人杀子金、子公。
现代文：晋怀公没有后代，秦人杀死了吕甥和郤芮。
English: Jin Huai Gong had no descendants, and the Qin people killed his nephew Lu and his nephew Yao.

