古文：魏知古，深州陆泽人也。
现代文：魏知古，深州陆泽人。
English: Wei Zhi Gu, Shenzhou Lu Ze people.

古文：性方直，早有才名。
现代文：秉性正直，早有才名。
English: Honest by nature, he was already famous for his talent.

古文：弱冠举进士，累授著作郎，兼修国史。
现代文：二十岁中进士，授官著作郎，兼修国史。
English: At the age of twenty, he entered the junior high school, was awarded the title of scholar, and also studied national history.

古文：长安中，历迁凤阁舍人、卫尉少卿。
现代文：长安年中，他升迁任凤阁舍人、卫尉少卿。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an era, he was promoted to the position of Fengge's assistant and the junior secretary of the imperial guards.

古文：时睿宗居籓，兼检校相王府司马。
现代文：当时睿宗在藩国为相王，魏知古兼任相王府司马。
English: At that time, Ruizong was the crown prince in the domain, and Wei Zhigu also served as the crown prince's steward.

古文：神龙初，擢拜吏部侍郎，仍并依旧兼修国史，寻进位银青光禄大夫。
现代文：神龙初年，他升任吏部侍郎，依旧兼修国史，不久晋升荣誉职位银青光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Shenlong, he was promoted to the position of the secretary of the cadre department, still concurrently studied national history, and was soon promoted to the honorary position of the silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：明年，丁母忧去职，服阕授晋州刺史。
现代文：第二年，母亲去世离职守孝，期满授晋州刺史。
English: In the second year, his mother died and he left the position of Shouhyo. At the end of his term, he was awarded the History of Jinzhou.

古文：睿宗即位，以故吏召拜黄门侍郎，兼修国史。
现代文：睿宗即位，以老臣召拜黄门侍郎，兼修国史。
English: When Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, he summoned the Yellow Gate attendant as an old retainer, and also studied national history.

古文：此皆兴化立理之教，为政养人之本。今陛下为公主造观，将树功德以祈福祐。
现代文：景云二年，他任右散骑常侍。睿宗女金仙、玉真二公主入道门，睿宗下令为她们各造一道观，当时正是夏季盛暑时节，还是不停工。魏知古上疏力谏，请求皇上 ：以安养百姓为治政之本。为两公主造道观，原本是树功德来祈福佑。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, he was appointed as the right riding attendant. Ruizong ordered to build a Taoist temple for each of his daughters, the princesses Jinxian and Yuzhen. At that time, it was the summer heat, so he did not stop working. Wei Zhi Guo Shang Soso Liang, asked the emperor: to keep the people safe as the basis of governance. To build a Taoist temple for the two princesses, originally it was a tree of merit to pray for blessings.

古文：但两观之地，皆百姓之宅，卒然迫逼，令其转移，扶老携幼，投窜无所，发剔椽瓦，呼嗟道路。乖人事，违天时，起无用之作，崇不急之务，群心摇摇，众口籍籍。
现代文：但建两道观之地，都是百姓的住宅，匆忙迫逼，令他们迁移，他们扶老携幼，投靠无门，怨叹于道路，这既背人事，也违天时，兴无用的劳作，重不急之事务，群心摇摇，众口藉藉。
English: However, the construction of the two views of the land, are the people's homes, hastily forced them to relocate, they help the elderly with their children, have no door to rely on, and complain about the road. This is not only against the people, but also against the times, the enthusiasm of useless labor, the weight of matters that are not urgent, the hearts of the group are shaken, and everyone is talking about it.

古文：陛下为人父母，欲何以安之？
现代文：陛下为人之父母，心下怎么能安呢？
English: How can His Majesty be at peace with being a parent?

古文：且国有简册，君举必记，动则左史书之，言则右史书之。
现代文：况且国有简册，君王的一举一动都要记载，动则左史书之，言则右史书之。
English: Moreover, the monarch's every move had to be recorded in a state-owned booklet. Movements were recorded in the left history book, while words were recorded in the right history book.

古文：是以非礼勿言，非礼勿动。
现代文：因此非礼勿言，非礼勿动。
English: Therefore, it is not polite to speak or move.

古文：夫如是，则君之所举，可不慎欤！
现代文：只有这样，国君的举动，才算是慎重的。
English: Only in this way can the actions of the sovereign be considered prudent.

古文：微臣备位谏诤，兼秉史笔，书而不法，后嗣何观？
现代文：小臣所在之职责就是谏诤，再加上拿着史笔，如写下陛下不合常礼的举动，后人会怎么看？
English: The duty of a vassal is to serve, and what will posterity think of him holding a historical pen, for example, and writing down His Majesty's unseemly behavior?

古文：臣愚必以为不可。
现代文：臣认为盛暑修观不行。
English: The minister thought that it was not possible to practice contemplation in the heat.

古文：伏愿俯顺人欲，仰稽天意，降德音，下明策，速罢功役，收之桑榆。
现代文：伏愿陛下俯顺人欲，仰察天意，降圣旨，下德音，速罢功役，在晚年能为民众造福。 
English: May His Majesty bow to the will of the people, look up to the will of heaven, surrender to the sacred will, lower the tone of the German language, and quickly retire from active service, so that he can benefit the people in his later years.

古文：疏奏不纳。
现代文：睿宗未采纳魏知古的意见。
English: Zhang Kamshi's appeal is not accepted.

古文：顷之，又进谏曰： 臣闻人以君为天，君以人为本。人安则政理，本固则邦宁。
现代文：不久，他又进谏： 臣闻百姓以君为天，君以百姓为本，百姓安定就是治政之理，根基稳固国家就安宁。
English: Not long after, he said: "Subordinates should know that the people take the emperor as their god, the emperor takes the people as his base, the stability of the people is the principle of governance, and a country with a solid foundation is peaceful."

古文：自陛下翦除凶逆，君临宝位，苍生颙颙，以为朝有新政。
现代文：自从陛下翦除凶逆，君临宝位，百姓仰慕其德，以为朝有新政。
English: Ever since His Majesty got rid of the ruffians and ascended to the throne, the people have admired his virtue and thought that the government had a new policy.

古文：今风教颓替，日甚一日，府库空虚，人力凋弊，造作不息，官员日增。
现代文：但现在风教衰败，日甚一日，府库空虚，人力凋敝，劳役不止，官员日增。
English: But now the morals are decaying, day by day, the treasury is empty, the manpower is withering, there are more and more laborers, and the number of officials is increasing.

古文：今诸司试及员外、检校等官，仅至二千余人，太府之布帛以殚，太仓之米粟难给。又金仙、玉真等观造作，咸非急务，臣先奏请停，竟仍未止。
现代文：现在朝廷各部门官差不多有二千余人，太府的布帛已尽，太仓的米粮难以供给，又加上给二位公主造道观这一非急务之役，臣先前请求停止这一劳役，但仍未停止。
English: At present, there are more than 2,000 officials in various departments of the Imperial Court. The supply of cloth from Taifu has been exhausted, and the supply of rice from Taicang is difficult. In addition, there is the non-urgent task of creating a Taoist monastery for the two princesses. The minister previously requested to stop this labor service, but it has not been stopped yet.

古文：今岁前水后旱，五谷不熟，若至来春，必甚饥馑。
现代文：今年，前水灾后旱灾，五谷不熟，若到明年春天，一定有饥荒。
English: This year, after floods and droughts, the crops are not ripe. If it continues into next spring, there will certainly be a famine.

古文：陛下为人父母，欲何方以赈恤？
现代文：陛下为人父母，想什么方法来拯救呢？
English: Your Majesty, as a parent, what methods do you have in mind to save them?

古文：疗饥拯溺，须及其时。
现代文：疗饥拯溺，须及时。
English: Treating hunger and saving lives must be done in a timely manner.

古文：又突厥为患，其来自久，本无礼仪，焉有诚信。
现代文：现在又加上突厥为患，时间很久了，他们本无礼仪，哪里会有诚信呢？
English: Now add the Turks to the mix, it's been a long time, they have no manners, where is the integrity?

古文：今虽遣使，来请结婚，豺狼之心，首鼠何定。
现代文：今即使派遣使节，来请求结姻亲，但豺狼之人，哪里会稳定呢？
English: Now, even if envoys are sent to request the marriage of relatives, but where will the wolf be stable?

古文：弱则卑顺，强则骄逆。属草衰月满，弓劲马肥，乘中国饥虚，在和亲际会，倘或窥犯亭障，国家何以防之？
现代文：他们乘中国饥虚，在和亲之际，倘若窥测侵犯，国家怎么提防呢？
English: They are taking advantage of China's hunger. While making friends, if they spy on the infringement, how can the country guard against it?

古文：臣所论者，事甚急切，伏愿特垂详察。 
现代文：臣所论及之事，很是急切，伏愿陛下特垂详察。 
English: What the minister has discussed is very urgent, and I hope His Majesty will pay close attention to it.

古文：睿宗嘉其切直，寻令同中书门下平章事。
现代文：睿宗嘉其恳切直言，不久命他为代理宰相。
English: Ruizong Jiaqi spoke frankly and earnestly, and soon after his death he became the acting prime minister.

古文：玄宗在春宫，又令兼左庶子。
现代文：玄宗在当太子的时候，魏知古兼任左庶子。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was crown prince, Wei Zhigu also served as the second son.

古文：未几，迁户部尚书，余如故。
现代文：没多久，又迁任户部尚书，其他职务如故。
English: Not long after, he was transferred to the Household Department of the Imperial Household Agency, and his other duties remained the same.

古文：明年，擢拜侍中。
现代文：第二年拜侍中。
English: The next year, he became a junior high school student.

古文：先天元年冬，从上畋猎于渭川，因献诗讽曰： 尝闻夏太康，五弟训禽荒。我后来冬狩，三驱盛礼张。
现代文：先天元年冬，魏知古跟随玄宗在渭川打猎，因献诗讽喻： 曾闻复太康，五弟训禽荒；工后来冬狩，三驱盛礼张。
English: In the winter of the year before yesterday, Wei Zhi Gu followed Xuanzong to hunt in the Li River. The reason for the poem is a parable: He once heard of Taikang, and his fifth brother trained wild birds; he later went on a winter hunting trip, and drove three times to Shengli Zhang.

古文：顺时鹰隼击，讲事武功扬。
现代文：顺时鹰隼击，讲事武功扬。
English: The eagle swoops down at the right time, and the lecture on martial arts begins.

古文：奔走未及去，翾飞岂暇翔。
现代文：奔走未及去，飞鸟岂暇翔。
English: A bird has no time to fly before it is too late.

古文：非熊从渭水，瑞雀想陈仓。
现代文：非熊从渭水，瑞雀想陈仓。
English: If the bear doesn't come from Surabaya, the sparrow will.

古文：此欲诚难纵，兹游不可常。
现代文：此欲诚难纵，兹游不可常。
English: This desire is hard to indulge, so it is not common to travel.

古文：子云陈《羽猎》，僖伯谏渔棠。
现代文：子云陈羽猎，僖伯谏鱼棠。
English: Ziyun Chenfei hunts, Zibo fishes.

古文：得失鉴齐、楚，仁恩念禹、汤。
现代文：得失鉴齐楚，仁恩念禹汤。
English: Failure to learn from one's mistakes is commonplace, benevolence is unheard of.

古文：邕熙谅在宥，亭毒匪多伤。
现代文：邕愿谅在宥，亭毒匪多伤。
English: I hope you'll forgive me, but I'm really hurt.

古文：《辛甲》今为史，《虞箴》遂孔彰。 
现代文：《辛甲》今为史，《虞箴》遂礼彰。 
English: "Xin Jia" is now history, and "Yu Zhen" has been awarded.

古文：手制褒之曰： 夫诗者，志之所以，写其心怀，实可讽谕君主。
现代文：玄宗看了，亲笔加以褒扬： 诗，志之所凭借，写出自己的心怀，实际可以讽喻君王。
English: Xuanzong saw it and praised it with his own hand: "Poetry, by virtue of what you aspire to, to write your own heart, can actually be likened to a king.

古文：是故扬雄陈《羽猎》，马卿赋《上林》，爰自《风雅》，率由兹道。
现代文：因此扬雄陈述《羽猎》，马卿赋写《上林》，从诗经的《风》、《雅》，大都因此道理。
English: Therefore, Yang Xiong's statement of "Hunting," Ma Qingfu's writing of "Going to the Forest," from the poems "Wind" and "Beauty," are mostly justified.

古文：予顷向温泉，观省风俗，时因暇景，掩渭而畋，方开一面之罗，式展三驱之礼，躬亲校猎，聊以从禽。
现代文：我顷向温泉，观风省俗，时乘闲暇，畋猎于渭川，网开一面，展三驱之礼，亲自校猎，逐追鸟兽自乐。
English: I immediately went to the hot spring, watching the customs and saving the customs, taking advantage of leisure time, hunting in the Lugu River, opening a side of the net, performing the three-drive ceremony, personally hunting, chasing birds and animals for fun.

古文：岂意卿有箴规，辅予不逮，自非款诚夙著，其孰能继于此耶？
现代文：未料卿有箴规，无时不忘助我，不是真诚心怀，哪能如此？
English: The Lord has a precept, never forget to help me, not a sincere heart, how can this be?

古文：今赐卿物五十段，用申劝奖。 
现代文：今赐卿五色绸五十段，用来表达我对箴规的奖励。 
English: I now give you fifty strips of five-coloured silk to express my reward for your obedience.

古文：二年，累封梁国公。
现代文：先天二年，魏知古封为梁国公。
English: Two years ago, Wei Zhi Guofeng became Liang Guogong.

古文：窦怀贞等将谋逆也，知古独密奏其事。
现代文：窦怀贞等将谋反，魏知古密奏此事。
English: Dou Huai Zhen and others would plot a rebellion, and Wei Zhi Gu secretly orchestrated the matter.

古文：及怀贞诛，赐实封二百户、物五百段。
现代文：窦怀贞诛杀，玄宗赐知古实封二百户，彩绸五百段。
English: After Dou Huai Zhen's assassination, Emperor Xuanzong bestowed two hundred households with ancient seals and five hundred pieces of colored silk.

古文：仍以前赏犹薄，又手敕曰： 魏知古去年十月已前，屡申启沃，每竭忠诚，奸臣有谋，预奏其兆。
现代文：仍觉得前面的赏赐太少，又亲下诏书： 魏知古去年七月以前，多次陈善道来助我，竭尽忠诚，奸臣有谋，事先奏其征兆。
English: He still felt that the previous reward was too little, and he personally issued an edict: Wei Zhigu, before July last year, repeatedly came to my aid in a virtuous way, tried his best to be loyal, was a cunning traitor, and played his signs in advance.

古文：其年冬，令往东都知吏部尚书事，深以为称职，手制曰： 卿以宰臣，往知大选，官人之委，情寄尤切。
现代文：事君之节，良有可嘉。
English: There is much to be thankful for on the Day of the Dead.

古文：遂能端本革弊，忘私徇公，正色而行，厝心不挠。
现代文：可加赐实封一百户。 这年冬天，玄宗派他到洛阳主持吏部尚书之事务，认为他很称职，并亲笔表扬他 能端本革弊，忘私徇公，正色而行，忠心不屈。
English: This winter, Emperor Xuanzong sent him to Luoyang to preside over the affairs of the Records Department, deeming him very competent and praising him in person for his ability to deal with the real problems of the revolution, forget about selfishness and favoritism, be upright, and be loyal.

古文：镜已澈则妍媸必鉴，衡已举则轻重罔违。
现代文：镜面光净则妍媸都可反映出来，衡量已经做的事则轻重分得清清楚楚。
English: If the mirror is clean, then everything can be reflected, and if what has been done is measured, then the weight can be clearly distinguished.

古文：朕远闻之，益用嘉叹。今赐卿衣裳一副，以示所怀。 
现代文：朕远闻卿的政绩，很是称叹，今赐卿衣裳一套，以示我的关怀。 
English: I've heard a lot about his political achievements, and I'm very impressed. I'm giving him a set of clothes to show my concern.

古文：开元元年，官名改易，改为黄门监。
现代文：开元元年，官名改换，魏知古任黄门监。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the official name was changed, and Wei Zhi Gu became the Yellow Gate Supervisor.

古文：二年，还京，上屡有顾问，恩意甚厚，寻改紫微令。
现代文：开元二年，魏知古还京，玄宗经常向他咨询，恩意很厚，不久又改任紫微令。
English: In the second year of the first century, Wei Zhigu returned to Beijing, and Xuanzong often consulted him. He was very grateful, and soon he was reappointed as Zi Weiling.

古文：姚崇深忌惮之，阴加谗毁，乃除工部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：姚崇很忌妒畏惧他，暗加诽谤，后改任工部侍郎，罢免了宰相之职。
English: Yao Chong was very jealous and afraid of him, and he slandered him. Later, he was transferred to the position of the secretary of the Ministry of Labor, and he was removed from the position of the prime minister.

古文：三年卒，时年六十九。
现代文：开元三年去世。享年六十九岁。
English: He died in the third year of the first century, at the age of sixty-nine.

古文：御史大夫宋璟闻而叹曰： 叔向古之遗直，子产古之遗爱，能兼之者，其在魏公。 
现代文：御史大夫宋王景闻知而叹息说： 叔向直道而行，有古之遗风；子产爱及后世，有古之遗风；能二者兼有的，恐怕应是魏公！ 
English: When Song Wangjing, the chief historian, heard about it, he sighed and said, "The uncle's walking on a straight path is an ancient tradition; the offspring's love and the afterlife are ancient traditions; if you can have both, I'm afraid it should be Wei Gong!

古文：赠幽州都督，谥曰忠。
现代文：朝廷追赠幽州都督，谥号忠。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Yuzhou governor.

古文：源乾曜，相州临漳人。
现代文：魏知古当初任黄门侍郎时，上表推荐洹水县令吕太一、蒲州司功参军齐遆、前右内率府骑曹参军柳泽；到主持吏部尚书事务，又提拔人才用密县县尉宋遥、左补阙袁晖、右补阙封希颜、伊阙尉陈希然，后来这些人都一直处在清要地位，时论认为他有知人的好眼光。他有文集七卷。源乾曜，相州临漳人。
English: When Wei Zhigu was originally a Huangmen waiter, the above table recommended that Liushui County Commander Lv Taiyi, Puzhou Secretary Gong to join the army Qi Qi, and the former Inner Right to lead the prefectural cavalry Cao to join the army Liu Ze; to preside over the personnel department Shangshu affairs, and promote talents to use Mi County Lieutenant Song Yao, Left Supplementary Li Yuan Yao, Right Supplementary Li Feng Xiyan, and Yi County Lieutenant Chen Xiran. Later, these people have always been in an important position, and it is believed that he has a good eye for acquaintances. He has seven volumes of works. Yuan Qian You,

古文：隋比部侍郎师之孙也。
现代文：隋朝比部侍郎源师的孙子。
English: He was the grandson of Genji, a chamberlain of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：父直心，高宗时为司刑太常伯，坐事配流岭南而卒。
现代文：父源直心，高宗时曾任司刑太常伯，因犯错误流配岭南而去世。
English: His father, MINAMOTO no Tadakatsu, who had been the chief magistrate at the time of Emperor Gaozong, died because he made a mistake in appointing Lingnan.

古文：乾曜举进士，景云中，累迁谏议大夫。
现代文：乾曜中进士，在景云年中，任谏议大夫。
English: He was promoted to doctor in the middle of the Heian and Joseon dynasties, and in the middle of the Heian and Joseon dynasties.

古文：时久废公卿百官三九射礼，乾曜上疏曰： 夫圣王之教天下也，必制礼以正人情，人情正则孝于家，忠于国。
现代文：当时公卿百官三九射礼已久废，源乾曜却上疏道： 圣王教天下百姓，必制礼来正人情，人情正则家有孝子，国有忠臣。
English: At that time, the three-nine-gun salute of the nobles and officials had been abolished for a long time, but Yuan Qianyou went on to say: The holy king teaches the people of the world, and it is necessary to make the salute to rectify people's feelings, and it is necessary to rectify people's feelings to have filial children and loyal subjects.

古文：此道不替，所以理也。
现代文：这一道理经久不衰，因为有理。
English: It endures because it makes sense.

古文：所以君子三年不为礼，礼必坏；三年不为乐，乐必崩。
现代文：因此君子三年不为礼，礼法一定会损坏；三年不为乐，乐一定崩坏。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman is not polite for three years, the etiquette will certainly be damaged; if he is not happy for three years, the happiness will certainly collapse.

古文：窃以古之择士，先观射礼，以明和容之义，非取一时之乐。
现代文：窃以为古代择士，先观射礼，来看清其和容之仪，并不是取一时之乐。
English: It is not a moment's pleasure to steal from the ancient selection of scholars, to observe the salute first, and to see its harmony.

古文：夫射者，别正邪，观德行，中祭祀，辟寇戎。
现代文：关于射，可以区别正和邪，观德行，符合祭祀，打击敌人。
English: With regard to shooting, it is possible to distinguish between positive and evil, to observe virtue, to comply with the ritual, and to strike the enemy.

古文：古先哲王，莫不递袭。
现代文：古代圣王没有哪一个不相承袭的。
English: None of the ancient holy kings did not inherit.

古文：臣窃见数年已来，射礼便废，或缘所司惜费，遂令大射有亏。
现代文：臣窃见数年以来，射礼已废，有的因有关部门吝惜费用，便使大射有亏。
English: Over the past few years, courtiers have noticed that the shooting ceremony has been abolished. In some cases, because the relevant departments are stingy with expenses, the big shooting is at a loss.

古文：臣愚以为所费者财，所全者礼。
现代文：臣愚以为所费的是财，所保全的却是礼。
English: The foolish vassal thinks that what he spends is wealth, but what he preserves is courtesy.

古文：故孔子云： 尔爱其羊，我爱其礼。 今乾坤再辟，日月贞明，臣望大射之仪，春秋不废，圣人之教，今古常行，则天下幸甚。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 尔爱其羊，我爱其礼 ，现在时代更新，天下清明，臣望大射之礼仪不要废弃，圣人之教，始终进行，这样，天下就幸甚。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: "Love your sheep, love your rituals. Now that the times have changed, the world is clear. Don't discard the etiquette of obeying the emperor, and always carry out the teachings of the saints. In this way, the world will be more fortunate."

古文：乾曜寻出为梁州都督。
现代文：源乾曜不久调任梁州都督。
English: Yuan Qianyou was soon transferred to the post of governor of Liangzhou.

古文：开元初，邠王府僚吏有犯法者，上令左右求堪为王府长史者，太常卿姜皎荐乾曜公清有吏干，因召见与语。乾曜神气清爽，对答皆有伦序，上甚悦之，乃拜少府少监，兼邠王府长史。
现代文：开元初年，王府的官吏中有犯法的。玄宗令左右的人寻求一个能做王府长史的人，太常卿姜皎荐举源乾曜，说他公正清明有才干，因此被召见与玄宗交谈，源乾曜交谈得神清气爽，对答得有条不紊，玄宗很是赏识，便拜为少府少监，兼王府长史。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, some officials of the royal court broke the law. The people around Xuanzong's order were looking for a person who could be the chief historian of the royal court. Jiang Xi, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, recommended that Yuan Qianyou be promoted, saying that he was fair, clear and talented. Therefore, he was summoned to have a conversation with Xuanzong. Yuan Qianyou had a refreshing conversation and answered questions in an orderly manner. Xuanzong was very appreciative, and he was worshiped as the minor inspector of the royal court and the chief historian of the royal court.

古文：寻迁户部侍郎、兼御史中丞。
现代文：不久迁任户部侍郎、兼御史中丞。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Household Attendant and also to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：无几，转尚书左丞。
现代文：没多久，调任尚书左丞。
English: Not long after, he was transferred to the position of Shosho-zojo.

古文：四年冬，擢拜黄门侍郎、同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：开元四年冬，源乾曜任黄门侍郎，代理宰相职务。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the founding of the Republic of China, Yuan Qianyou served as Huangmen's chamberlain and assumed the post of acting prime minister.

古文：旬日，与姚元之俱罢知政事。
现代文：仅十天，又与姚元之一同罢免了宰相职务。
English: Just ten days later, he was removed from the post of prime minister together with Yao Yuan.

古文：时行幸东都，以乾曜为京兆尹，仍京师留守。乾曜政存宽简，不严而理。
现代文：当时玄宗要去洛阳，以源乾曜为京兆尹，为京师留守，源乾曜治政宽厚简朴，不严但合理。
English: At that time, Xuanzong wanted to go to Luoyang, with Yuan Qianyou as Jing Zhaoyun and leaving for Beijing. Yuan Qianyou's governance was generous and simple, not strict but reasonable.

古文：尝有仗内白鹰，因纵遂失所在，上令京兆切捕之。
现代文：曾有仗内白鹰，因放飞时失其所在，玄宗令京兆官员捕捉。
English: There was once a white eagle in the war, but it lost its place when it was released, so Xuanzong ordered the officials of the Beijing and Zhuang Autonomous Region to capture it.

古文：俄于野外获之，其鹰挂于丛棘而死，官吏惧得罪，相顾失色。
现代文：没多久在野外捕获，但那只白鹰挂在荆棘中死去，官吏都惧怕得罪，相顾失色。
English: It wasn't long before it was captured in the wild, but the white eagle died hanging in the thorns, and the officials were afraid of offending and losing face.

古文：乾曜徐曰： 事有邂逅，死亦常理，主上仁明，当不以此置罪。
现代文：乾曜却慢慢地说： 事有巧的情况，死也有常理，主上仁明，应当不以此来罪责人。
English: On the other hand, Qianyang said slowly, "Things happen by chance, and death has its own logic. It is wise and reasonable not to use this as a way to blame someone."

古文：必其获戾，吾自当之，不须惧也。 
现代文：如果一定要处罚，我自认了，不须惧怕。 
English: If I have to be punished, I admit it, I don't have to be afraid.

古文：遂入自请失旨之罪，上一切不问之，众咸伏乾曜临事不慑，而能引过在己也。
现代文：于是源乾曜便入朝自请失旨之罪，玄宗对所有情况全不问。大家佩服源乾曜临事不惧怕，并且能引过在己。
English: As a result, Yuan Qianyou went to the court to plead guilty to the crime of losing the imperial edict, and Xuanzong did not ask about all the circumstances. Everyone admired Yuan Qianyou for not being afraid of the situation, and for being able to lead others by the nose.

古文：在京兆三年，政令如一。
现代文：他任京兆尹三年，政令始终如一。
English: He held the post of General Secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) for three years.

古文：八年春，复为黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品，寻加银青光禄大夫，迁侍中。
现代文：开元八年春，又任黄门侍郎，代理宰相。不久又加银青光禄大夫，升任侍中。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was also appointed Huangmen waiter, acting prime minister. Soon after, he was promoted to silver medalist, Qingguanglu doctor, and rose to the position of chamberlain.

古文：久之，上疏曰： 臣窃见形要之家并求京职，俊乂之士多任外官，王道平分，不合如此。
现代文：过了较长一段时间，源乾曜上疏 ：臣见显要官员的家中都是谋求京中的职务，贤才之士多任外官，王道要公平，不应如此。
English: After a long period of time, the Yuan, Qian, Yue and Shang dynasties faded away. In the homes of important officials, it was common for them to seek positions in Beijing, and many talented people served as foreign ministers. The royal way was to be fair, and this should not be the case.

古文：臣三男俱是京任，望出二人与外官，以叶均平之道。 
现代文：臣有三男都在京城任职。望调出二人为外官，来协调均平之道。 
English: The minister has three sons, all of whom work in the capital. He hopes to appoint two of them as foreign ministers to coordinate the way to equality.

古文：上从之，于是改其子河南府参军弼为绛州司功，太祝絜为郑尉。
现代文：玄宗同意这意见，于是把他的儿子源弼由河南府参军调出任绛州司功，源薭由太祝调任郑尉。
English: Xuanzong agreed with this opinion, so he transferred his son, Yuan Qi, from Henan Province to join the army to serve as the Jingzhou Shigong, and Yuan Qi was transferred from Tai Zhu to Zhengfei.

古文：因下制曰： 源弼等父在枢近，深惟谦挹，恐代官之咸列，虑时才之未序，率先庶僚，崇是让德，既请外其职，复降资以授。《传》不云乎： 晋范宣子让，其下皆让。 
现代文：玄宗同时还下旨 ：源弼等人的父亲在朝廷任要职，但很是谦虚严己，他担心的是在官吏之中不能用才失序，带头显谦让之德，请求将自己的二子调外职。左传中不是说过吗 ：晋范宣子让，其下皆让。 
English: At the same time, Emperor Xuanzong also issued the following order: the father of Geng Yao and others held an important position in the imperial court, but he was very modest and strict. He was worried that he would not be able to use his talents and would be out of order among the officials. He took the lead in showing the virtue of modesty and asked that his two sons be transferred to other positions. Didn't he say in the left-hand translation: "If Jin Fan Xuan Zi gives in, everyone else will give in."

古文： 晋国之人，于是大和。 
现代文： 晋国之人，于是大和。 
English: The people of Jin, then Yamato.

古文：道之或行，仁岂云远！ 
现代文：道之能行，仁哪里会远呢？ 
English: Where there is a will, there is a way.

古文：因令文武百僚父子兄弟三人并任京司者，任自通容，依资次处分，由是公卿子弟京官出外者百余人。
现代文：因此令文武百官父子兄弟三人并在京师任职的，随自己通容，依年龄资历处理，由此公卿子弟有一百余人由京官调出。
English: Therefore, the three brothers of the father and son of the 100 civil and military officials who served in the Beijing division were allowed to serve as they pleased, according to their age and seniority. As a result, more than a hundred children of noblemen were transferred from the Beijing officials.

古文：俄又有上书者，以为 国之执政，同其休戚，若不稍加崇宠，何以责其尽心？ 
现代文：不久，又有上书者，认为 国之执政，休戚相关，若不稍加恩宠，怎么能让他们尽心尽力呢 ？
English: Soon, there were also petitioners who thought that ruling the country was a matter of solidarity. Without a little grace, how could they be allowed to do their best?

古文：十年十一月，敕中书门下共食实封三百户，自乾曜及张嘉贞始也。
现代文：开元十年十一月，玄宗下旨凡中书门下均共食实封三百户。这一实封是由源乾曜和张嘉贞开始的。
English: In November of the 10th year of the first century, Xuanzong issued an order that all the scholars of the Middle School should eat together and seal 300 households. This sealing was started by Yuan Qianyou and Zhang Jiazhen.

古文：乾曜后扈从东封，拜尚书左丞相，仍兼侍中。
现代文：源乾曜后又从玄宗东往泰山封禅，拜尚书左丞相，仍兼侍中。
English: After Yuan Qianyou, he went to Taishan Fuzhen from the east of the Xuanzong, and became the left chancellor of the Shangshu, and was still a chamberlain.

古文：乾曜在政事十年，时张嘉贞、张说相次为中书令，乾曜不敢与之争权，每事皆推让之。
现代文：乾曜在执政的十年中，张嘉贞、张说相继任中书令，源乾曜不与他们争权，每事必推让。
English: During Qianyou's ten years in power, Zhang Jiazhen and Zhang He were successively appointed as middle-ranking officials. Yuan Qianyou did not compete with them for power, and had to make concessions in everything.

古文：及李元纮、杜暹知政事，乾曜遂无所参议，但唯诺署名而已。
现代文：到李元、杜暹主持政事，源乾曜便不参议，只是同意签名而已。
English: When Li Yuan and Du Siam presided over government affairs, Yuan Qianyou did not participate in the discussion, but only agreed to sign.

古文：初，乾曜因姜皎所荐，遂擢用；及皎得罪，为张嘉贞所挤，乾曜竟不救之，议者以此讥焉。
现代文：当初，源乾曜由姜皎所引荐，才被重用。等姜皎获罪，被张嘉贞排挤，源乾曜竟然不相救援，当时人们以此讥讽源乾曜。
English: At first, Yuan Qianyou was recommended by Jiang Jie, and was only reused. When Jiang Jie was found guilty and was ousted by Zhang Jiazhen, Yuan Qianyou did not come to the rescue. At that time, people made fun of Yuan Qianyou.

古文：十七年夏，停兼侍中事。
现代文：开元十七年秋，停止了他兼任的侍中职务。
English: In the autumn of the seventeenth year of the first century, he stopped his concurrent position as an aide-de-camp.

古文：其秋，迁太子少师，以祖名师，固辞，乃拜太子少傅，封安阳郡公。
现代文：这年秋天，迁任太子少师，他以他的祖父名字为师而坚决辞谢，便任太子少傅，封安阳郡公。
English: In the autumn of that year, he was transferred to the position of the prince's apprentice, but he resolutely refused to take his grandfather's name as his apprentice, and was appointed the prince's apprentice, with the title of Anyang County.

古文：久之，拜户部尚书，仍听致仕。二十一年疾瘳，起为太子詹事，旬日而卒。
现代文：开元十九年，玄宗到东都洛阳，源乾曜以年老多病，不堪随从，而留在京城养病。
English: In the 19th year of the first century, Xuanzong went to the eastern capital Luoyang. Yuan Qianyou was too old and sick to accompany him, and stayed in Beijing to recover.

古文：赠太子少傅，谥曰文忠。
现代文：这年冬天去世。诏追赠幽州大都督。
English: He died this winter and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Governor of Yuzhou.

古文：杜暹，濮州濮阳人也。
现代文：玄宗在洛阳城南门举哀，停止朝会两天。杜暹，濮州濮阳人。
English: Xuanzong held a mourning ceremony at the south gate of Luoyang City and suspended the imperial meeting for two days. DuSiam, a native of Luoyang, Zhangzhou, was at the forefront.

古文：父承志，则天初为监察御史。
现代文：父杜承志，在武则天称帝之初做过监察御史。
English: His father, Du Chengzhi, was the inspector of imperial history at the beginning of the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian.

古文：时怀州刺史李文暕以皇枝近属，为雠人所告，承志推出之。
现代文：当时，怀州刺史李文日柬为皇枝近属，被仇人所告，杜承志为他辩解。
English: At that time, Li Wenri, the Prince of Waizhou, who was a close relative of the emperor, was accused by his enemies, and Du Chengzhi defended him.

古文：俄而文暕得罪，承志坐贬，授方义令。
现代文：不久，李文日柬获罪，杜承志也受牵连，贬为方义县令。
English: Soon after, Li Wen, Nichikam and Du Chengzhi were convicted, and Du Chengzhi was implicated and demoted to the position of Fangyi County magistrate.

古文：累转天官员外郎。
现代文：后又任天官员外郎。
English: Later, he was appointed as the second son of a high-ranking government official.

古文：既罗织事起，承志恐惧，遂称疾去官而归，卒于家。
现代文：接着来俊臣等罗织罪名，陷害无辜扩大化，杜承志恐惧，便称病离官还乡，在家中去世。
English: Next came Junshen and others to fabricate charges and frame innocent people. Du Chengzhi was afraid, so he claimed to be ill and returned home, where he died at home.

古文：自暹高祖至暹，五代同居，暹尤恭谨，事继母以孝闻。
现代文：自杜暹的高祖父到杜暹，五代同居，杜暹特别恭敬长辈，对继母孝顺，闻名乡里。
English: From Du Siem's great-great-grandfather to Du Siem, five generations have lived together. Du Siem is particularly respectful of his elders and filial to his stepmother, and is well-known in the village.

古文：初举明经，补婺州参军，秩满将归，州吏以纸万余张以赠之，暹惟受一百，余悉还之。
现代文：开始，中举授婺州参军，任满将还乡，州吏赠送他万余张纸，杜暹只接受了一百张，其余全还给他们。
English: At the beginning, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) gave Zhangzhou the right to join the army, and the newly appointed general returned to his hometown. The state officials presented him with more than 10,000 pieces of paper. Du Siam only accepted 100 pieces, and the rest were all returned to them.

古文：时州僚别者，见而叹曰： 昔清吏受一大钱，复何异也！ 
现代文：当时他的同僚来告别的，见了叹道： 这与过去清廉的官吏接受一个大钱，有什么不同？ 
English: At that time, his colleagues came to say goodbye and sighed: What is the difference between this and the corrupt officials in the past accepting a large sum of money?

古文：俄授郑尉，复以清节见知。
现代文：不久，杜暹授郑县县尉，又以清廉节俭为世人称扬。
English: Soon after, Du Siew was awarded the title of Zhengxian County Lieutenant, and was praised by the world for his honesty and frugality.

古文：华州司马杨孚，公直士也，深赏重之。
现代文：华州司马杨孚，公正耿直之官，他很赏识看重杜暹。
English: Huazhou Sima Yangfu, a fair and upright official, appreciates the importance of Du Siam.

古文：寻而孚迁大理正，暹坐公事下法司结罪，孚谓人曰： 若此尉得罪，则公清之士何以劝矣？ 
现代文：不久杨孚升任大理正，杜暹因公事受牵累送法司断罪，杨孚对人说 ：如果这样好的县尉都获罪，那么公正清廉之士怎么不灰心呢？ 
English: Soon after, Yang Fu was promoted to the position of Dali Zheng, and Du Siam was implicated in a business matter and sent to the legal department for sentencing. Yang Fu said to people: If such good county lieutenants are convicted, then how can people who are fair and clean not be discouraged?

古文：特荐之于执政，由是擢拜大理评事。
现代文：并特此向执政推荐杜暹，由此杜暹授大理评事。
English: He also recommended Du Siem to the government, and Du Siem became a prominent commentator.

古文：开元四年，迁监察御史，仍往碛西覆屯。
现代文：开元四年，杜暹升任监察御史，前往碛西屯田驻军。
English: In the fourth year of the first year of the year, Du Siem was promoted to the post of inspector general of history and went to the Tonden Garrison in Shaanxi Province.

古文：会安西副都护郭虔瓘与西突厥可汗史献、镇守使刘遐庆等不叶，更相执奏，诏暹按其事实。
现代文：正碰上安西副都护郭虔馞和西突厥可汗史献、镇守使刘遐庆等不和，互相上奏指责。朝廷令杜暹查其实际情况。
English: Anxi Vice-Capital Protector Guo Qianqian and Western Turkic Khan Shikken, town guard Liu Jieqing, and others were at odds, trading accusations. The imperial court ordered Du Siam to investigate the actual situation.

古文：时暹已回至凉州，承诏复往碛西，因入突厥骑施，以究虔赍等犯状。
现代文：当时杜暹已在返回途中，已到凉州。他接到诏令又往碛西，进入突骑施，来考核郭虔馞等错误实况。
English: At that time, Du Siam was already on his way back and had arrived in Liangzhou. Upon receiving the imperial decree, he went to Shaanxi and entered Tujiishi to assess the real situation of Guo Qianqian and other errors.

古文：蕃人赍金以遗，暹固辞不受。左右曰： 公远使绝域，不可失蕃人情。 
现代文：藩人送给他黄金，杜暹坚决不受，左右的人说 ：公远道出使这边远的地方，不可失藩人的情。 
English: The people of the domain gave him gold, but Du Siem resolutely refused to accept it. People on both sides said, "If you are sent to this faraway place, you must not lose the affection of the people of the domain."

古文：暹不得已受之，埋幕下，既去出境，乃移牒令收取之。
现代文：杜暹不得已，接受了。后将黄金埋下，出境以后，才通知藩人去收取。
English: As a last resort, Du Siem accepted. He then buried the gold, and only after leaving the country did he inform the people of the domain to collect it.

古文：蕃人大惊，度碛追之，不及而止。
现代文：藩人大惊，过沙漠追赶不到，才罢了。
English: The people of the domain were shocked. They couldn't catch up across the desert, that's all.

古文：暹累迁给事中，丁继母忧去职。
现代文：杜暹后升任给事中，因继母去世守丧而离职。
English: After Du Siam was promoted to the post, he left the post due to the death of his stepmother.

古文：十二年，安西都护张孝嵩迁为太原尹，或荐暹往使安西，蕃人伏其清慎，深思慕之，乃夺情擢拜黄门侍郎，兼安西副大都护。
现代文：开元十二年，安西都护张孝嵩调任太原尹，有人推荐杜暹出使安西，因藩人伏其清正廉洁办事慎重，很佩服他，于是特殊对待，升拜黄门侍郎，兼安西副大都护。
English: In the 12th year of the first century, Zhang Xiaosong, the protector of Anxi, was transferred to Taiyuan Yin. Some people recommended Du Siam to send an envoy to Anxi. Because the people of the domain admired him for his honesty and prudence, he was given special treatment and promoted to Huangmen waiter and vice-protector of Anxi.

古文：暹单骑赴职。
现代文：杜暹单骑赴任。
English: Du Siem took office single-handedly.

古文：明年，于阗王尉迟眺阴结突厥及诸蕃国图为叛乱，暹密知其谋，发兵捕而斩之，并诛其党与五十余人，更立君长，于阗遂安。
现代文：第二年，于阗王尉迟眺私下勾结突厥和一些藩国图谋叛乱，杜暹秘密探知其谋，便带兵逮捕并处死，诛其党羽五十余人，另外立了君长，于阗才安定下来。
English: In the second year, Prince Yuxuan secretly colluded with the Turks and some of the feudal states to plot a rebellion. Du Siam secretly discovered his plot, arrested and executed him with his soldiers, killed more than 50 members of his party, and set up a regent. Only then did Yuxuan settle down.

古文：暹以功特加光禄大夫。
现代文：杜暹以功特加授光禄大夫的荣誉职务。
English: Du Siam was awarded the honorary position of Guanglu Doctor for his outstanding achievements.

古文：暹在安西四年，绥抚将士，不惮勤苦，甚得夷夏之心。
现代文：杜暹在安西四年，安抚将士，不怕劳苦，很得汉人和各族人的爱戴。
English: During his four years in Anxi, Du Siem appeased the soldiers and was not afraid of hard work. He was greatly loved by the Han people and people of all ethnic groups.

古文：十四年，诏暹同中书门下平章事，仍遣中使往迎之。
现代文：开元十四年，朝廷任命杜暹代理宰相，并派中使前往迎接。
English: In the 14th year of the first century, the imperial court appointed Du Siam as acting prime minister and sent a Chinese envoy to meet him.

古文：及谒见，又赐绢二百匹、马一匹、宅一区。
现代文：玄宗见他，赐绢二百匹，马一匹，住宅一区。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong saw him, he gave him two hundred donkeys, one horse, and a residential area.

古文：后与李元纮不叶，罢知政事，出为荆州大都督府长史。
现代文：后来他与李元不和，罢免了宰相，出任荆州大都督府长史。
English: Later, he fell out with Li Yuan, dismissed the prime minister, and became the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：又历魏州刺史、太原尹。
现代文：后又历任魏州刺史、太原尹。
English: Later, Wei Zhou and Taiyuan Yin were successively appointed.

古文：二十年，上幸北都，拜暹为户部尚书，便令扈从入京。
现代文：开元二十年，玄宗到北都，拜杜暹为户部尚书，便令扈从入京。
English: In the 20th year of the Heian period, when Xuanzong went to the northern capital, he asked Duxu to be his household secretary, and then ordered him to go to Beijing.

古文：行幸东都，诏暹为京留守。
现代文：到东都，任杜暹为京都留守。
English: When he arrived in the eastern capital, Du Siem stayed behind in Kyoto.

古文：暹因抽当番卫士，缮修三宫，增峻城隍，躬自巡检，未尝休懈。
现代文：杜暹抽调值班的卫士，修缮三宫，加固城池，亲自巡逻检查，从不懈怠。
English: Du Siem dispatched guards on duty, repaired the three palaces, strengthened the castle, personally patrolled and inspected, and never slacked.

古文：上闻而嘉之，赐敕书曰： 卿素以清直，兼之勤干。
现代文：玄宗得知此情特嘉奖他，赐敕书道 ：卿一向以清廉耿直，加之勤奋能干出名。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong learned of this, he gave him a special award and bestowed upon him the title of Shodo: "Sir, you have always been known for your honesty and integrity, as well as your diligence and ability.

古文：自委居守，每事多能，政肃官僚，惠及黎庶。
现代文：自从委任为留守，每事多能，治政使下属整肃，恩惠能施及百姓。
English: Since he was appointed as a stay-at-home, he has been able to do a lot of things. He has cleaned up the subordinates of the political leaders and has been able to do favors for the people.

古文：城隍宫室，随事修营，且有成功，不疲人力。
现代文：城池宫室，时时修饰，很有成绩，也不过分劳累人力。
English: The palace room of the castle, always decorated, is very successful, and does not overwork the manpower.

古文：甚善甚善，慰朕怀也。 
现代文：甚善甚善，很慰我心。 
English: Very good, very good, very comforting.

古文：俄代李林甫为礼部尚书，累封魏县侯。
现代文：不久代李林甫为礼部尚书，封魏县侯。
English: The late Li Linfu was the head of the etiquette department, and he was also the lord of Wei County.

古文：二十八年，病卒，年六十余，诏赠尚书右丞相。
现代文：开元二十八年病逝，享年六十余岁，诏赠尚书右丞相。
English: In the 28th year of the first month of the year, he died of illness at the age of more than 60 years old, and the imperial edict presented him with the title of Minister of the Right.

古文：暹在家孝友，爱抚异母弟昱甚厚。然素无学术，每当朝谈议，涉于浅近。
现代文：杜暹在家孝敬长辈爱弟妹，对他继母弟杜昱爱抚甚厚，但是昱平素不学无术，每当朝谈论，言谈肤浅。
English: At home, Du Siam respected his elders and loved his younger brothers and sisters. He was very fond of his step-brother Du Xi, but Du Xi was uneducated and inexperienced. Whenever he talked about it in the morning, his talk was superficial.

古文：常以公清勤俭为己任，时亦矫情为之。
现代文：杜暹常以公正清廉勤劳节俭为己任，有时也有免不过情分而为的事。
English: Du Siem often takes it as his duty to be fair, honest, hard-working and frugal, and sometimes there are things that are unavoidably emotional.

古文：弱冠便自誓不受亲友赠遗，以终其身。
现代文：他二十岁就自己发誓不受亲友馈赠，一生如此。
English: At the age of twenty, he swore to himself that he would never accept gifts from relatives and friends, and he remained true to this throughout his life.

古文：及卒，上甚悼惜之，遣中使就家视其丧事，内出绢三百匹以赐之。尚书省及故吏赙赠者，其子孝友遵其素约，皆拒而不受。
现代文：到去世时，玄宗很怜惜，派中使就家中吊丧，赐绢三百匹。尚书省和老同僚，也赠财物助丧葬，他的儿子遵父亲生前的教导，皆拒绝不受。
English: At the time of his death, Xuanzong was very compassionate. He sent a middle-ranking official to hang a wreath at his home and gave him three hundred yakitori. Shangshu and his old colleagues also donated money and goods to help with the funeral. His son followed his father's teachings during his lifetime, but they all refused to accept it.

古文：太常谥曰 贞肃 。
现代文：太常给杜暹谥号为贞肃。
English: DuSiam is often referred to as ZhenShu.

古文：右司员外郎刘同升、都官员外郎韦廉以暹有忠孝之美，所谥不尽其行，建议驳之。
现代文：右司员外郎刘同升、都官员外郎韦廉以杜暹有忠孝之美，认为所谥没有完全表现他的品行，建议更改。
English: Liu Tongsheng, the right secretary's son-in-law, and Wei Lian, the son-in-law of the capital official, thought that Du Siem's loyalty and filial piety were not fully reflected in his behavior, and suggested a change.

古文：太常博士裴总执曰： 杜尚书往以墨缞受职事，虽云奉国，不得为孝。请依旧为定。 
现代文：太常博士裴总坚持说： 杜尚书因居丧受职，虽然为了国家，但不能称孝，请依旧为定。 
English: Dr. Bae always insisted: Du Shangshu lost his position because of his residence. Although it is for the sake of the country, it is not possible to commend filial piety. Please remain the same.

古文：孝友又诣阙陈诉上闻，而更令所司详定，竟谥曰贞孝。
现代文：他的儿子杜孝友上到朝廷向玄宗陈诉，才令所司仔细审定，终于谥贞孝。
English: His son, Du Xiaoyu, went to the imperial court to complain to Xuanzong, only to be carefully examined by the director, and finally he was removed.

古文：韩休，京兆长安人。
现代文：韩休，京兆长安人。
English: Han Xiu, a resident of Chang'an, Beijing.

古文：伯父大敏，则天初为凤阁舍人。
现代文：伯父韩大敏，在武则天称帝之初为凤阁舍人。
English: Uncle Han Damin was a resident of Fengge at the beginning of Emperor Wu Zetian's reign.

古文：时梁州都督李行褒为部人诬告，云有逆谋，则天令大敏就州推究。
现代文：当时梁州都督李行褒为部下诬告，说他有反意。武则天令韩大敏到梁州审理。
English: At that time, Li Xingbo, the governor of Liangzhou, falsely accused his subordinates, saying that he had the opposite intention. Wu Zetian ordered Han Damin to Liangzhou for trial.

古文：或谓大敏曰： 行褒诸李近属，太后意欲除之，忽若失旨，祸将不细，不可不为身谋也。 
现代文：有人对韩大敏说 ：李行褒是李姓的近属，太后的本意就是要除掉他们，你不小心而违逆了她的旨意，祸将不小，不可不为自身考虑。 
English: Someone said to Han Damin: Li Xingbao is a close relative of the surname Li, the intention of the empress dowager is to get rid of them, if you are careless and violate her will, the disaster will not be small, you must consider yourself.

古文：大敏曰： 岂有求身之安而陷人非罪！ 
现代文：韩大敏说 ：哪里有求自身安全而陷人非罪的？ 
English: Han Damin said: "Where are those who seek their own safety and blame others?

古文：竟奏雪之。
现代文：竟上奏为李行褒申雪。
English: In fact, it was Li Xing who praised Shen Xue at the performance.

古文：则天俄又命御史重覆，遂构成其罪，大敏坐推反失情，与知反不告同罪，赐死于家。
现代文：武则天又命御史复审，便构成其罪。韩大敏因审案失情而有罪，这一罪与知反不告等同，因此赐死于家中。
English: Wu Zetian also ordered a review of history, which constituted his crime. Han Damin was guilty of losing his temper during the trial, which is the same crime as refusing to report, so he was sentenced to die at home.

古文：父大智，官至洛州司功。
现代文：韩休的父亲韩大智，官至洛州司功。
English: Han Xiu's father, Han Dazhi, was a high-ranking official in Luozhou.

古文：休早有词学，初应制举，累授桃林丞。
现代文：韩休早年，词学很好。初应举，授桃林县丞。
English: In Han Xiu's early years, he was a good learner of composition. He was first to be promoted, and was awarded the title of Taolin County Young Master.

古文：又举贤良。玄宗时在春宫，亲问国政，休对策与校书郎赵冬曦并为乙第，擢授左补阙。
现代文：又在举贤良时，唐玄宗亲自在春宫问国政治理，韩休与校书郎赵冬曦同时中举人，授左补阙。
English: In addition, when promoting the virtuous, Tang Xuan Zong personally asked the Spring Palace for the country's political principles, and Han Xiu and school teacher Zhao Dongxi simultaneously promoted people and awarded the left supplement.

古文：寻判主爵员外郎，历迁中书舍人、礼部侍郎，兼知制诰，出为虢州刺史。
现代文：不久被任为主爵员外郎，历任中书舍人、礼部侍郎，兼主管制诰，后外任虢州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the lord's attendant, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the etiquette department, and the supervisor of the etiquette, and later he was appointed as the eunuch of Zhangzhou.

古文：时虢州以地在两京之间，驾在京及东都，并为近州，常被支税草以纳闲厩。
现代文：当时虢州因地在两京之间，皇上总在京都或东都，是最近的州，所以常常被支派税草来充实未用的马厩。
English: At that time, Bozhou was the closest prefecture because it was located between the two capitals, and the emperor was always in Kyoto or the eastern capital. Therefore, tax grass was often sent to replenish the unused stables.

古文：休奏请均配余州，中书令张说驳之曰： 若独免虢州，即当移向他郡，牧守欲为私惠，国体固不可依。 
现代文：韩休奏请税草能均配各州，中书令张说驳道： 如果独免虢州，就要移给另外的州，作为地方官欲为私惠，就国情而论本来不可依从。 
English: Han Xiu asked for the tax to be distributed equally among all the states, but Zhang said that if the tax was to be exempted only from Zhangzhou, it would have to be transferred to another state. As a local official, his desire was for personal benefit, and it was not possible to comply with the national conditions.

古文：又下符不许之。
现代文：于是下令不许。
English: So the order was given not to do it.

古文：休复将执奏，僚吏曰： 更奏必忤执政之意。 
现代文：韩休又将上奏，僚吏说： 连续上奏一定会违逆执政之意。 
English: Han Xiu is going to perform again, and his colleagues said, "Continuous performances will surely violate the will of the government."

古文：休曰： 为刺史不能救百姓之弊，何以为政！
现代文：韩休说 ：为刺史不能救百姓之弊，怎么来治政！
English: Han Xiu said, "Since history cannot save the people from the evils of history, how can we govern?"

古文：必以忤上得罪，所甘心也。 
现代文：如一定会逆上得罪，我也心甘情愿。 
English: If I have to take the blame, I'll take it willingly.

古文：竟执奏获免。
现代文：韩休竟坚持提出而获免治罪。
English: Han Hui was exempted from punishment because he insisted on raising the issue.

古文：岁余，以母艰去职，固陈诚乞终礼，制许之。
现代文：过了一年多，以母丧离职，坚持陈述诚心要求终丧礼，得到同意。
English: After more than a year, she resigned from her position due to her mother's death, insisted on making a sincere request for a final funeral, and received approval.

古文：服阕，除工部侍郎，仍知制诰，迁尚书右丞。
现代文：守丧完，韩休授工部侍郎，仍主管制诰，升迁尚书右丞。
English: After the funeral, Han Hui was awarded the title of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, still in charge of the imperial edict system, and was promoted to Senior Secretary.

古文：开元二十一年，侍中裴光庭卒，上令萧嵩举朝贤以代光庭才，嵩盛称休志行，遂拜黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：开元二十一年，侍中裴光庭去世，玄宗令肖嵩推荐贤人来代替裴光庭。肖嵩很是称扬韩休心志和品行，于是便拜黄门侍郎，任代理宰相。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, the chamberlain Pei Guangting died, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered Xiao Song to recommend a wise man to replace Pei Guangting. Xiao Song highly praised Han Xiu's spirit and conduct, so he bowed to Huangmen's chamberlain and served as acting prime minister.

古文：休性方直，不务进趋，及拜，甚允当时之望。
现代文：韩休生性耿直，不会趋炎附势，任职后，很符当时民望。
English: Han Kyu was born with a straightforward nature and would not become inflamed. After taking office, he was very much in line with the popular expectations at that time.

古文：俄有万年尉李美玉得罪，上特令流之岭外，休进曰： 美玉卑位，所犯又非巨害，今朝廷有大奸，尚不能去，岂得舍大而取小也！
现代文：不久，有万年尉李美玉得罪，上特令流配岭外，韩休上奏说： 李美玉小官，所犯的又不是大罪，现今朝廷有大罪，尚不能去，怎么能舍大而取小呢！
English: Not long after, there was the case of Li Meiyu, a ten-thousand-year-old lieutenant, who committed a crime, and Han Xiu said in his report: Li Meiyu, a minor official, did not commit a great crime, but now the imperial court has a great crime, and she cannot go, how can she give up the great and take the small!

古文：臣窃见金吾大将军程伯献，依恃恩宠，所在贪冒，第宅舆马，僭拟过纵。
现代文：臣窃以为金吾大将军程伯献，恃皇上的恩宠，任职贪图财利，住宅车马，超越身份过分放纵。
English: The vassals thought that Kingu's great general Cheng Bo was a gift, coveted the emperor's favor, coveted money and profit, lived in expensive houses, and overindulged beyond their status.

古文：臣请先出伯献而后罪美玉。 
现代文：臣请先出程伯献，然后给李美玉治罪。 
English: Minister, please first go out for the offering, and then punish Li Meiyu.

古文：上初不许之，休固争曰： 美玉微细犹不容，伯献巨猾岂得不问！
现代文：玄宗开始不同意。韩休坚持提意见 ：李美玉这样的小官都不能容，那么像程伯献这样的巨猾怎能不问！
English: Xuanzong began to disagree. Han Xiu insisted on making a suggestion: minor officials such as Li Meiyu cannot be tolerated, so how can we not ask about such a great cunning as Cheng Boqian!

古文：陛下若不出伯献，臣即不敢奉诏流美玉。 
现代文：陛下如不出程伯献，臣就不敢奉诏流放李美玉。 
English: If His Majesty did not go to offer the offering, the vassal would not dare to issue an edict to banish Li Meiyu.

古文：上以其切直，从之。
现代文：玄宗认为韩休率直忠诚，就同意了。
English: Xuanzong agreed, believing that Han Hui was straightforward and loyal.

古文：初，萧嵩以休柔和易制，故荐引之。
现代文：当初，肖嵩认为韩休柔和易控制，所以引荐他。
English: At first, Xiao Song thought that Han Xiu was soft and easy to control, so he recommended him.

古文：休既知政事，多折正嵩，遂与休不叶。宋璟闻之曰： 不谓韩休乃能如是，仁者之勇也。 
现代文：韩休既主政事，对肖嵩的意见多有矫正，于是他与韩休不和，宋王景闻知说 ：未料道韩休竟能如此，这真是仁者之勇啊！ 
English: Since Han Xiu was in charge of politics, he often corrected Xiao Song's opinions. As a result, he and Han Xiu did not get along. Song Wangjing Hunchi said, "It was unexpected that Han Xiu could do such a thing. This is truly the courage of a benevolent person!"

古文：其年夏，加银青光禄大夫。十二月，转工部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：这年夏天，韩休加银青光禄大夫的职称，十二月，调任工部尚书，罢免宰相职务。
English: In the summer of that year, Han Xiuqin was given the title of Qingguanglu Doctor, and in December, he was transferred to the Ministry of Industry and removed from the post of prime minister.

古文：二十四年，迁太子少师，封宜阳子。
现代文：开元二十四年，调任太子少师，封宜阳子。
English: In the 24th year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was transferred to the position of the young prince's teacher and given the title of "Yangzi."

古文：二十七年病卒，年六十八，赠扬州大都督，谥曰文忠。
现代文：开元二十七年病卒。年六十八岁。追赠扬州大都督，谥号文忠。
English: He died of illness on the 27th day of the first month of the year, at the age of 68. He was posthumously awarded the title of Yangzhou's grand governor, with the posthumous name of Wenzhong.

古文：宝应元年，重赠太子太师。
现代文：宝应元年重赠太子太师。
English: In the first year of the Baoying Dynasty, the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master was re-awarded.

