古文：真君曰：乾为大父，坤为大母，含宏覆载，胞与万有，群类咸遂，各得其所。赋形为物，禀理为人，超物最灵，脱离蠢劫，戴高履厚，俯仰自若，相安不觉，失其真性。
现代文：于是万物都得以顺利生长，各得其所。天地赋予形体以成就万物，人秉承性理以成之为人。于是人能够超过万物之上，成为万物之灵，脱离愚笨蠢物。人头顶天，脚立地，俯察于下，仰观于上，得以自然地顺从其本性。人们如果安于现实，不知不觉，就会迷失自己的自然本性。
English: As a result, all things are able to grow smoothly and find their proper place. Heaven and earth endow the form to achieve all things, and man adheres to the nature to become a man. Thus, man can surpass all things, become the spirit of all things, and get rid of stupid things. Man's head is above the sky, his feet are on the ground, he is looking down and looking up, and he can naturally obey his nature. If people are satisfied with reality, they will lose their natural nature without noticing.

古文：父兮母兮，育我者宏，两大生成，一小天地，世人不悟，全不知孝，吾今阐明，以省大众。
现代文：父母生育我的恩情最宏大。天地与父母两大，生成人身一小天地。世人不自省悟，完全不知道行孝。我今天清楚阐明，以警醒大众。
English: My parents gave birth to me with the greatest of feelings of gratitude. Heaven and earth and parents are two great things, but the human body is a small world. The world does not reflect on itself and is completely unaware of the practice of filial piety. I am clarifying this today to alert the public.

古文：乾坤养物，劳而不劳；父母生子，不劳而劳，自字及妊，自幼迄壮，心力所注，无有休歇。
现代文：天地养育万物，似辛劳而又不辛劳；父母生育子女，似不辛劳而又辛劳。自怀孕到生产，自幼年至壮年，父母所倾注的心力，没有休止。
English: Heaven and earth nurture all things, it seems to be hard work but not hard work; parents give birth to children, it seems to be not hard work but hard work. From pregnancy to birth, from childhood to adulthood, the effort poured by parents does not stop.

古文：十月未生，在母腹中，母呼亦呼，母吸亦吸，耽娠如山，筋疼血滞，寝处不舒。
现代文：胎儿在母腹中没生下来的十月间，母亲呼气，胎儿也呼气；母亲吸气，胎儿也吸气。母亲身怀妊娠之苦，如同身体压着一座山一样，周身筋骨疼痛，血脉凝滞，坐卧都不舒坦。
English: During October, when the fetus was not born in the mother's womb, the mother breathed out and the fetus breathed out; the mother breathed in and the fetus breathed in. The mother was suffering from pregnancy, as if the body was pressing down on a mountain, with muscle and bone pain all over her body, blood clotting, and she was not comfortable sitting or lying down.

古文：临盆性命，若不自保，父心关恻，母体担虞，纵令易诞，费尽劳苦。
现代文：分娩之时，母亲性命都难以自保。父亲关心悲伤，母亲身体担着忧患。即使容易生产，也是受尽各种忧劳苦楚。
English: At the time of delivery, it is difficult for the mother to save her own life. The father is concerned about sadness, and the mother is physically burdened with sorrow. Even if it is easy to give birth, it is full of all kinds of sorrow and suffering.

古文：若或迟久，不行分娩，艰难震恐，死中幸生，几舍其母，始获其子。
现代文：如果长久在母腹中，不能分娩，母亲就更艰难恐惧。死里逃生，几乎丢掉母亲的性命，方才得到孩子。
English: If the fetus is in the womb for a long time and cannot be delivered, the mother will have even more difficulties and fears. To escape death, almost losing the mother's life, only to get the child.

古文：一月暗居，三年乳哺，啼即怀抱，犹恐不调，睡令安寝，戒勿动摇，含食以饲，帖衣以裹，谅其饥饱，适其寒暑，痘疹关煞，急遽惊悸，咿唔解语，匍匐学行，手不释提，心不释护。子既年长，恐其不寿，多方保持，幸而克佑，筹划有无，计其婚媾，厥龄多少，诸务未晓，一出一入，处处念之，绸缪咨嗟，谆谆诫命，亲心惆怅，子方燕乐，教之生计，教之成业。
现代文：教授子女谋生之计，教授子女如何成就事业。
English: Teach your children how to make a living, teach your children how to make a career.

古文：母诞维艰，父诲匪易。
现代文：母亲生育子女非常艰难，父亲教诲子女也不容易。
English: It is very difficult for a mother to give birth to a child, and it is not easy for a father to teach his children.

古文：虽至英年，恤若孩提，食留子餐，胜如己餐；衣留子衣，胜如己衣。
现代文：尽管子女已经长大成人，父母仍然像对待幼童一样对其体贴入微。留作子女吃的饭食，胜过自己的食物；留作子女穿着的衣服，胜过自己的衣服。
English: Although the children have grown up, the parents still treat them with the same care as they did when they were young. The food they keep for their children is better than their own food, and the clothes they keep for their children are better than their own clothes.

古文：子若有疾，有可代者，己所甘受。
现代文：子女若有疾病，比自己得病还要担忧。
English: If your child has an illness, you worry more than if you get sick yourself.

古文：子若远游，行旅风霜，梦寐通之；逾期不归，睛穿肠断。
现代文：如有能够代替子女承受的病痛，自己则甘愿忍受。子女如果远行，旅途风霜劳苦，父母放心不下，常在睡梦中梦到。逾期不归，父母则眼睛望穿，肝肠望断。
English: If there is a disease that can replace the pain of their children, they are willing to endure it. If their children travel far, the journey is windy and laborious, the parents can not rest assured, they often dream in their sleep. If they do not return on time, the parents will look through their eyes, and their liver and intestines will be broken.

古文：子有寸善，夸扬乐与；子有小过，回护遮盖，暗自伤心，恐其名败。
现代文：子女有微小的优点，父母就会赞美宣扬；如果子女有小的过错，父母总会袒护遮掩，并暗自伤心，唯恐其名声败坏。
English: If their children have minor merits, their parents will praise and publicize them; if their children have minor faults, their parents will always protect and cover up, and secretly grieve, lest their reputation be tarnished.

古文：子惟贤能，父母有赖；子若不肖，父母谁倚？
现代文：子女只有贤良能干，父母才有依靠；子女如果无德无才，那么父母还能依靠谁呢？
English: Parents can only rely on their children if they are virtuous and capable; if their children are not virtuous or capable, who can parents rely on?

古文：子若妄为，父母身危，作事未事，俱切亲情。
现代文：子女如果胡作妄为，就会连累父母，使其处于危险的境地。
English: If a child misbehaves, it will implicate the parents and put them in danger.

古文：芽栽茁培，堂基构植，母勤子生，父作子述，其行其志，不厌其苦，怜子念子，何时放置，形或暂离，心恒无间。
现代文：就像生物萌芽，就必须栽育；要让其茁壮成长，就必须培育；子女长大后，还要为他们建筑庭堂，植立根基。母亲勤劳，不过是希望子女能够顺利成长；父亲有所创造，无非是希望子女能够传承于后。父母养育子女，不厌其苦。父母怜惜挂念子女，没有放下之时。既使身体暂时分离，父母的心也永远不会远离子女。
English: Just like biological buds, they must be planted; to make them thrive, they must be nurtured; when children grow up, they must also build a garden and plant a foundation for them. Mothers are hardworking, but they hope that their children can grow smoothly; fathers create something, nothing more than hope that their children can pass it on to the future. Parents raise their children, do not get tired of it. Parents pity and miss their children, do not give up. Even if the body is temporarily separated, the parents' hearts will never be far away from their children.

古文：贵如帝王，神如天亶，显如公卿，贱如编户，愚如齐氓，皆如是心。
现代文：即使是如帝王般尊贵，如圣贤般聪明，如公卿般显赫，又或者如平民般贫贱，如未开化之人般愚钝，其爱子女之心，无不如此。
English: Even if he is as noble as an emperor, as wise as a sage, as prominent as a nobleman, or as poor as a commoner, as stupid as an uncivilized person, his love for his children is no less than that.

古文：混沌初分，亘古及今，普天匝地，绵绵恻怛，父母之心，无不如是。
现代文：不管是困厄还是显达，不管是愁苦还是喜乐，不管是活着的还是已经去世的，也不管是在人世还是在阴间，父母的心也都如此。天地初开，从古至今，普天遍地，爱子女之心真切连绵，作父母的无不如此。
English: No matter whether it is distress or prosperity, no matter whether it is sorrow or joy, no matter whether it is alive or dead, and no matter whether it is in the world or in the underworld, the hearts of parents are also the same. Since the beginning of the world, from ancient times to the present, all over the world, the love of children is truly continuous, and this is true of parents.

古文：即说偈曰：万般劳瘁有时休，育子辛勤无尽头，字怀耐苦终无厌，训诲循徐不惮求，一叶灵根非易植，穷年爱护几曾忧，子俱亲自身栽养，亲老心犹为子寿。
现代文：如同上天覆盖万物，如同大地承载万物，温和慈爱流盈，充满天地之间。再大的慈悲，也比不过父母爱子之心。于是说偈道：万般劳累都有停止的时候，只有养育子女的辛劳没有尽头。怀孕生育，忍受苦痛，从不厌烦。训导告诫，循序渐进，不怕索求。培养子女智慧聪明不是容易的事情，父母终日爱护从来没有犹豫过。子女都是父母自身养育的，父母人老后心里仍在为子女操心筹划。
English: Just as the heavens cover all things, just as the earth bears all things, gentle love flows and abounds, filling the space between heaven and earth. No greater mercy is there than that of a parent's love for a child. So said the guru: All kinds of toil come to an end, only the toil of raising children has no end. Pregnancy and childbirth, enduring pain, never get bored. Teaching and admonishing, step by step, not afraid to ask. It is not easy to cultivate children's wisdom and intelligence, and parents have never hesitated to love them all day long. Children are raised by their parents themselves, and parents are still planning for their children in their hearts.

古文：又说偈曰：真诚一片结成慈，全无半点饰虚时，慈中栽养灵根大，生生不已自无涯。
现代文：又说偈道：一片真诚结成慈爱心，完全没有半点矫饰虚伪。慈爱中养育子女聪慧成长，生生不已没有尽头。
English: He also said, "The way of the guru: a sincere and loving heart, without any pretense or hypocrisy. There is no end to raising children to grow up with wisdom in love.

古文：灵慈神咒：佛菩萨菩提心，大罗会上陀罗尼，一切救苦难，无过我亲心，圣主仁君，救济生灵，不忍一匹之不生，无如爱子心，靡所不至诚，推极仁惠者，孰能逾二人。
现代文：灵慈神咒：佛菩萨的菩提心，大罗会上的陀罗尼，一切救苦救难的菩萨，都不会超越我父母的爱心。圣明仁慈的君主，救济生灵，不忍心一个生物不能生长，这都不如父母的爱子之心，父母的爱子之心，没有不出于至诚之心的。
English: Compassionate God's Curse: The bodhicitta of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, the Dharani of the Great Assembly, and all the Bodhisattvas who save suffering and help the needy, will not surpass the love of my parents. The holy and benevolent monarch, who helps living beings, cannot bear to see a living being unable to grow. This is not as good as the parents' love for their child. The parents' love for their child is not without sincerity.

