古文：盛王创业，必有同德之英辅，成垂世久长之计，不如是，不足以为一代宗臣。
现代文：帝王创业之时，必须有同心同德的杰出的辅佐之臣，能使一代王朝垂世长久，否则，就不足称为一代杰出的大臣。
English: When an emperor starts a business, there must be an outstanding supporting vassal who is of the same mind and spirit, who can make the dynasty last for a long time. Otherwise, it is not enough to be called a generation of outstanding ministers.

古文：伊尹、周公之事见于《诗》、《书》，可考也。
现代文：伊尹、周公就是这样两个人物，他们的事迹可以从《诗经》、《尚书》考知。
English: Yi Yin and Zhou Gong are two such figures, and their deeds can be seen from the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs."

古文：汉萧何佐高祖，其始入关，即收秦丞相御史律令图书，以周知天下阸塞，户口多少，强弱处，民所疾苦。
现代文：汉时，萧何辅佐汉高祖，他们才进入关中，萧何就把秦朝宰相府、御史大夫府中的律令图册收集起来，认真研究，以便详细了解当时天下的要塞，全国户口的多少，强弱之所在，百胜疾苦。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Xiao He assisted the Han Emperor Gaozu. It was not until they entered Guanzhong that Xiao He collected the books of laws and regulations from the Prime Minister's Office and the Imperial Historian's Office of the Qin Dynasty, and carefully studied them in order to understand in detail the fortresses around the world at that time, the number of national hukou, the strengths and weaknesses, and the ups and downs.

古文：高祖失职为汉王，欲攻项羽，周勃、灌婴、樊哙皆劝之，何独曰： 今众弗如，百战百败，愿王王汉中，收用巴蜀，然后还定三秦。 
现代文：汉高祖最初被项羽分为汉王后，想攻项羽，大将周勃、灌婴、樊会都支持他的想法，而萧何独有自己的见解，他说： 现在我们军队不如项羽，已是百战百败了，我希望大王您先称王汉中，夺取巴蜀之地作为后方，然后收复关中。 
English: Han Gao Zu was initially divided into Han queens by Xiang Yu, and he wanted to attack Xiang Yu. Generals Zhou Bo, Guan Yu and Yan Hui all supported his idea, while Xiao He Du had his own opinion. He said: Now our army is not as good as Xiang Yu, it has been defeated in a hundred battles. I hope that you, the great king, will first call yourself Wang Hanzhong, seize the land of Bashu as the rear, and then recover Guanzhong.

古文：王用其言。
现代文：汉王采纳了他的建议。
English: Han Wang accepted his suggestion.

古文：此刘氏兴亡至计也。进韩信为大将，使当一面，定魏、赵、燕、齐、高祖得颛心与楚角，无此顾忧；且死，引曹参代已，而画一之法成；约三章以蠲秦暴，拊百姓以申汉德。四百年基业，此焉肇之。
现代文：这是刘氏兴亡的最为重要的一个谋略，萧何又推荐出身卒伍的韩信为大将，让他独当一面，平定了魏、赵、燕，齐等国故地，使汉高祖刘邦无后顾之忧，得以专心与楚项羽决战；萧何死时，引荐曹参代替白己为宰相，使汉初政策较为稳定地执行下去；萧何还在入关中后与百姓约法三章，废除秦朝的许多暴政，以此收抚百姓之心，申明汉朝之德，他的所做所为，为四百年的汉王朝，奠定了基础。
English: This was one of the most important strategies for the rise and fall of the Liu clan. Xiao He also recommended Han Xin, who was born as a cadet, as a general, and let him take the lead. He pacified the ancestral lands of Wei, Zhao, Yan, Qi and other countries, so that Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, had no worries and could concentrate on the decisive battle with Chu Xiang Yu. When Xiao He died, he recommended Cao Zhan to replace Bai Ji as prime minister, so that the policy of the early Han Dynasty could be implemented more stably. Xiao He also made a three-chapter agreement with the people after entering the middle

古文：唐房玄龄佐太宗，初在秦府，已独收人物致幕下，与诸将密相申结，引杜如晦与参筹帷。
现代文：在唐代，房玄龄辅佐唐太宗也是如此，房玄龄最初在秦王李世民府，他吸收很多有才干的人物，把他们招致到秦王府中，在争夺皇位斗争中，他为秦王秘密交结诸将，又引荐杜如晦参与运筹帷幄。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, this was also the case for Fang Xuanling, the assistant of Tang Taizong. Fang Xuanling was initially in the Qin King Li Shimin's palace. He absorbed many talented people and invited them to the Qin King's palace. In the struggle for the throne, he secretly intertwined the generals for the Qin King, and also introduced Du Rubei to participate in the operation planning.

古文：及为宰相，粲然兴起治功，以州县成天下之治，以租庸调天下之财，以八百府、十六卫本天下之兵，以谏争付王、魏，以兵事付靖、勣，御夷狄有道，用贤材有术。
现代文：等到李世民即皇位，房玄龄则为宰相，他又致力于国家治理，使地方安定从而使天下大治，用租庸之制使天下财阜殷丰，用八百府、十六卫的府兵制作为国家的基本军制，他又把谏的职责长付给王硅、魏征，把兵权托付给李靖、李勣，他统御夷狄之族，任用贤才都很有办法。
English: When Li Shimin ascended the throne, Fang Xuanling became the prime minister. He devoted himself to governing the country, stabilizing the localities to make the country strong. He used the rent-and-tax system to make the country rich. He used the military system of eight hundred prefectures and sixteen military districts as the basic military system of the country. He also assigned the duties of the commander of the imperial army to Wang Si and Wei Zheng, and entrusted the military power to Li Jing and Li Xi. He ruled the Yi Di people, and he was very good at appointing talents.

古文：三百年基业，此兵事付靖、勣，御夷狄有道，用贤材有术。
现代文：可以说，唐朝三百年的基础是房玄龄奠定的。后来，唐朝在地方设置节度使从而破坏了地方上的安定，变租庸调制为二税法使国家财政受到影响，改府兵为旷骑、诸卫为神策军，使原来的军政遭到破坏。
English: It can be said that the foundation of the three hundred years of the Tang Dynasty was laid by Fang Xuanling. Later, the Tang Dynasty destroyed local stability by setting restrictions in local areas, affected the national finance by changing the rent and tax system to the second tax law, and changed the palace soldiers to the cavalry and the guards to the divine policy army, so that the original military government was destroyed.

古文：三百年基业，此焉肇之。
现代文：在这种情况下，唐王朝虽有名臣良辅，也难以挽救其灭亡的命运。
English: Under these circumstances, even though the Tang Dynasty had a famous vassal, Liang Fu, it was difficult to salvage its doomed fate.

古文：其后制节度使而州县之治坏，更二税法而租庸之理坏，变府兵为彍骑、诸卫为神策而军政坏，虽有名臣良辅，不能救也。赵韩王佐艺祖，监方镇之势，削支郡以损其强，置转运、通判使掌钱谷以夺其富，参命京官知州事以分其党，禄诸大功臣于环卫而不付以兵，则天下骁锐于殿岩而不使外重。
现代文：大宋朝韩王赵普辅佐太祖也是如此，为了控制方镇，削减方镇的地盘，抑制其势力，设置转运使、通判等官职掌握地方财权，使地方无财力与中央抗衡，又命京官为地方的知州、知县，使地方官不能结党营私，把那些功臣宿将集中到中央只给他们些虚职，不让他们掌握军权，把天下的晓勇军队都集中在京师，强干弱枝，不使地方拥兵自重。
English: The same is true of the Great Song Dynasty's King of Korea, Zhao Puxu, and his great-great-grandfather. In order to control Fangzhen, reduce Fangzhen's territory and restrain its power, he set up officials such as transporters and judges to control local financial power, so that localities without financial power could compete with the central government. He also ordered Beijing officials to be local chizhou and chixian, so that local officials could not form parties and fight for private interests. He concentrated those heroes and heroes to the central government only to give them some false duties, not to let them control military power, and concentrated the world's brave armies in Beijing, strong and

古文：建法立制，审官用人，一切施为，至于今是赖。
现代文：此外，关于建法立制，量官用人等，他的所做所为，直到今天我朝还有赖于此。
English: In addition, with regard to the establishment of the legal system, the appointment of officials, etc., what he has done and what he has done still depends on this to this day.

古文：此三君子之后，代天理物，硕大光明者，世有其人，所谓一时之相尔。
现代文：这三位君子以后，以天下为己任，光明正大者，历代都有，这就是所说的一时之良相。
English: After these three gentlemen, those who take the whole world as their own responsibility and are honest and upright have existed throughout the ages. This is the so-called good omen of the moment.

古文：萧之孙有罪及无子，凡六绝国，汉辄绍封之。国朝褒录韩王苗裔，未尝或忘。
现代文：萧何的孙子有罪且无后代，传六世而国绝，汉朝就继续封他，我大宋朝对韩王赵普的后代也很照顾，从不曾忘却。
English: Xiao He's grandson is guilty and has no descendants. He is said to be the sixth generation and the country is extinct. The Han Dynasty will continue to seal him. My Great Song Dynasty also takes care of the descendants of Han King Zhao Pu and has never forgotten.

古文：唯房公之亡未十年，以其子故，夺袭爵、停配享，讫唐之世不复续，唐家亦少恩哉！
现代文：只有房玄龄死后不到十年，因其子犯罪，被收回封爵，停止其在宗庙中配享的特权，到唐亡为止也没有续封其后人，唐王朝对功臣的恩患也太少了。
English: Only less than ten years after the death of Fang Xuanling, because of his son's crime, his knighthood was revoked, the privileges he enjoyed in the ancestral temple were stopped, and his descendants did not renew the title until the end of the Tang Dynasty. The Tang Dynasty also had too few favors for heroes.

