古文：朱震，字子发，荆门军人。
现代文：朱震字子发，荆门军人。
English: Zhu Zhen Zi Zi hair, Jingmen soldiers.

古文：登政和进士第，仕州县以廉称。
现代文：登徽宗政和年间的进士第，到州县做官都以廉洁著称。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zongzheng of the Tang Dynasty and the Zongzheng era, the officials who were promoted to prefectural and county-level officials were all known for their integrity.

古文：胡安国一见大器之，荐于高宗，召为司勋员外郎，震称疾不至。
现代文：胡安国一见到他就非常器重，将他推荐给宋高宗，高宗征召他为司勋员外郎，朱震称病不赴召。
English: As soon as Juan Guo saw him, he was very impressed and recommended him to Song Gao Zong. Gao Zong conscripted him as an honorary member of the imperial court, while Zhu Zhen said that he was too ill to be conscripted.

古文：会江西制置使赵鼎入为参知政事，上谘以当世人才，鼎曰： 臣所知朱震，学术深博，廉正守道，士之冠冕，使位讲读，必有益于陛下。 上乃召之。
现代文：后值江西制置使赵鼎入朝中参知政事，高宗问以当代的人才，赵鼎说： 我所了解的朱震这个人，学问渊博，清廉正直遵守正道，是读书人的冠冕，叫他担任讲读的职位，肯定有益于陛下。 
English: After the establishment of Jiangxi Province, Zhao Ding was appointed to the position of political advisor in the middle of the dynasty. Gao Zong inquired about contemporary talents. Zhao Ding said: I know Zhu Zhen, who is well-educated, honest and abides by the right path. He is the crown of a reader. It is certainly beneficial to His Majesty to have him hold the position of a lecturer.

古文：既至，上问以《易》、《春秋》之旨，震具以所学对。
现代文：高宗听了很高兴，就下命令召见朱震。朱震来了后，高宗问以《易经》、《春秋》的旨意，朱震尽以所学的回答。
English: Gao Zong was very pleased to hear this, and gave the order to summon Zhu Zhen. After Zhu Zhen arrived, Gao Zong asked the will of "I Ching" and "Spring and Autumn," and Zhu Zhen answered with what he had learned.

古文：上说，擢为祠部员外郎，兼川、陕、荆、襄都督府详议官。
现代文：高宗非常高兴，提拔他为祠部员外郎，兼川、陕、荆、襄都督府的详议官。
English: Gao Zong was very pleased, and promoted him to the member of the ancestral hall, and the detailed discussion officer of the governor's office of Sichuan, Shaanxi, Jing and Xiang.

古文：震因言： 荆、襄之间，沿汉上下，膏腴之田七百余里，若选良将领部曲镇之，招集流亡，务农种谷，寇来则御，寇去则耕，不过三年，兵食自足。
现代文：朱震因而上书说 ：荆、襄之间，沿着汉江上下，肥沃的田地有七百多里，假若挑选一优秀将帅率领军队在这里镇守，招集四方流亡的老百姓，发展农业生产，种植粮食，敌人来了就防御，敌人去了就耕作，不过三年，军民粮食就足以自给。
English: Zhu Zhen therefore wrote: Between Jing and Xiang, up and down along the Han River, there are more than seven hundred miles of fertile fields. If an excellent general were to be selected to lead the army to defend the town here, summon the people who have been exiled in all directions, develop agricultural production, and grow grain, the enemy would come and defend, and the enemy would go and farm, but in three years, the military and the people would be self-sufficient in grain.

古文：又给茶盐钞于军中，募人中籴，可以下江西之舟，通湘中之粟。
现代文：然后又发给军队茶叶、盐和钱钞，募人购买，可以用它们换取江西的船舶，沟通湖南的粮食。
English: Then the army was given tea, salt and banknotes, and recruited people to buy them. They could be used to exchange ships from Jiangxi for grain from Hunan.

古文：观衅而动，席卷河南，此以逸待劳，万全计也。 
现代文：从而选择有利的时机出兵，席卷黄河以南，这是以逸待劳、万无一失的计策。 
English: Therefore, he chose a favorable time to send troops to sweep south of the Yellow River, which is a foolproof strategy.

古文：迁秘书少监兼侍经筵，转起居郎。
现代文：不久朱震升任秘书少监兼侍经筵，又转起居郎。
English: Soon after, Zhu Zhen was promoted to secretary, junior superintendent and aide-de-camp, and then he became curator.

古文：建国公出就傅，以震为赞读，仍赐五品服。
现代文：皇子建国公赵瑗出就师傅学习，以朱震为赞读官，仍赐五品官服。
English: The prince and founder of the country, Zhao Xingde, studied under the master, with Zhu Zhen as the commended reader, and was still given five official uniforms.

古文：迁中书舍人兼翊善。
现代文：后朱震升任中书舍人兼翊善官。
English: Later, Zhu Zhen was promoted to the post of middle school teacher and teacher's aide.

古文：时郭千里除将作监丞，震言： 千里侵夺民田，曾经按治，愿寝新命。 从之。
现代文：这时郭千里也升将作监丞，朱震上书说： 郭千里侵夺老百姓的田地，曾经经司法部门按治，请停止对他的新的任命。 
English: At this time, Guo Qianli was also promoted to the post of superintendent, and Zhu Zhen wrote: Guo Qianli invaded the fields of the common people and was punished by the judicial department. Please stop his new appointment.

古文：转给事中兼直学士院，迁翰林学士。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的意见。他因而转给事中兼直学士院，升翰林学士。
English: The emperor accepted his opinion, and he was transferred to the Central Academy of Arts and Crafts, and promoted to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：是时，虔州民为盗，天子以为忧，选良太守往慰抚之。
现代文：这时，虔州老百姓为盗，皇帝因此担忧，于是挑选优秀的太守官到虔州去上任以安抚百姓。
English: At this time, the people of Kyeongju were stealing, and the emperor was worried, so he selected excellent officials to take office in Kyeongju to appease the people.

古文：将行，震曰： 使居官者廉而不扰，则百姓自安，虽诱之为盗，亦不为矣。
现代文：新太守将要上任，朱震对皇帝说： 假使当官的人能够廉洁奉公不扰乱老百姓，那老百姓自然就会安宁，即使引诱他们为强盗，他们也不会做的。
English: When the new governor-general was about to take office, Zhu Zhen said to the emperor: If the officials could serve the public with integrity and not disturb the people, then the people would naturally be at peace. Even if they were tempted to become robbers, they would not do it.

古文：愿诏新太守到官之日，条具本郡及属县官吏有贪墨无状者，一切罢去，听其自择慈祥仁惠之人，有治效者优加奖劝。 上从其言。
现代文：希望皇帝命令新太守，到任之日，把本郡和其所属的各县的官吏有贪赃枉法无政状的人全部罗列上奏，把他们全部罢掉，让老百姓自选慈祥仁爱有恩惠的人做官，有政绩的加以优待奖励。 皇帝采纳了他的意见。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will order the new grand vizier, on the day of his arrival, to list all the officials of this county and all the counties to which it belongs who are corrupt and lawless, and remove them all, so that the people can choose the kind, benevolent, and benevolent people to be officials, and give preferential treatment to those with political achievements. The emperor adopted his opinion.

古文：故事，当丧无享庙之礼。
现代文：以往的规矩，皇帝正逢丧事没有祭祀庙堂的礼节。
English: As was the custom in the past, the emperor did not have the etiquette to make a temple offering at the time of his death.

古文：时徽宗未祔庙，太常少卿吴表臣奏行明堂之祭。
现代文：当时徽宗死还没有合食于祖庙，太常少卿吴表臣就奏请皇帝行明堂的祭礼。
English: At that time, Emperor Huizong's death had not yet been celebrated in the ancestral temple, and Emperor Taizong's Shaoqing, Wu Yuxin, invited the emperor to perform the ritual in the Ming Hall.

古文：震因言： 《王制》： 丧三年不祭，惟天地社稷为越绋而行事。
现代文：朱震因而上书说 ：根据《礼记？王制篇》： 天子居丧三年不举行祭礼，只祭天地社稷为越绋行事。 
English: Zhu Zhen therefore wrote a letter saying: According to "The Book of Rites? The King's System": There will be no festival for three years after the death of the heavenly son, only the festival of heaven and earth will be held.

古文：《春秋》书 夏五月乙酉，吉，禘于庄公 ，《公羊传》曰： 讥始不三年也。
现代文：《春秋》书上说 ：夏五月乙酉，吉祥，大祭于庄公。 《公羊传》解释说 ：这是讥讽开始不实行三年的丧啊。 
English: The "Spring and Autumn" book said: "Summer and May are both auspicious, and the grand festival is held in Zhuangguo." "The Ram" explained: "It is ironic that the three-year mourning period has not been implemented.

古文：国朝景德二年，真宗居明德皇后丧，既易月而除服，明年遂享太庙，合祀天地于圜丘。
现代文：我朝景德二年，真宗居明德皇后丧，过了一个月就解除了丧服，明年遂祭献太庙，并合祭天地于圆丘。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Jingde, the Empress Mingde was mourned by the Emperor Jinsongju. After a month, the mourning clothes were removed. Next year, the Imperial Temple was dedicated, and heaven and earth were united in a round mound.

古文：当时未行三年之丧，专行以日易月之制可也，在今日行之则非也。 诏侍从、台谏、礼官参议，卒用御史赵涣、礼部侍郎陈公辅言，大飨明堂。
现代文：当时没有实行三年的丧制，只是实行以日易月的制度，是可以这样做的，今天实行了三年丧制这样就是错误的。 皇帝遂下令，命侍从、台谏和礼官参议这件事情，最后还是采用了御史赵涣、礼部侍郎陈公辅的意见，大张旗鼓地祭祀了明堂。
English: At that time, the three-year mourning system was not implemented, but the system of using the day of the month was implemented, which could be done. Today, the three-year mourning system has been implemented, which is wrong. The emperor then ordered the attendants, the eunuchs and the etiquette officers to discuss the matter, and finally adopted the opinion of the imperial historian Zhao Wei and the etiquette attendant Chen Gongyu, and the Ming Hall was sacrificed with great fanfare.

古文：七年，震谢病丐祠，旋知礼部贡举，会疾卒。
现代文：宋高宗绍兴七年，朱震就谢病请求退休做祠禄官，不久皇帝任命他知礼部贡举，这时他已经生病，接着就去世。
English: In the seventh year of Song Gaozong's reign in Shaoxing, Zhu Zhen requested retirement as an official of the ancestral hall due to illness. Soon after, the emperor appointed him as a tribute to the Ministry of Ceremonies. At that time, he was already ill, and then he passed away.

古文：震经学深醇，有《汉上易解》云： 陈抟以《先天图》传种放，放传穆修，穆修传李之才，之才传邵雍。
现代文：朱震经学深刻醇厚，他撰写的《汉上易解》说： 陈抟的《先天图》传种放，种放传穆修，穆修传李之才，李之才传邵雍。
English: Zhu Zhen's study of the classics is profound and mellow. He wrote "Hanshang Yi Luo" which said: Chen Xi's "Antecedent Chart" was passed down from generation to generation, from generation to generation, from generation to generation, from generation to generation, from generation to generation, from generation to generation, from generation to generation.

古文：放以《河图》、《洛书》传李溉，溉传许坚，许坚传范谔昌，谔昌传刘牧。
现代文：种放以《河图》、《洛书》传李溉，李溉传许坚，许坚传范谔昌，范谔昌传刘牧。
English: "The River Map" and "The Book of Lu" were passed down to Li Rili, Li Rili passed down to Xu Jian, Xu Jian passed down to Fan Yuchang, Fan Yuchang passed down to Liu Mu.

古文：穆修以《太极图》传周惇颐，惇颐传程颢、程颐。
现代文：穆修以《太极图》传周敦颐，周敦颐传程颢、程颐。
English: Mu Xiu used "Taiji Map" to pass on Zhou Dunyao, Zhou Dunyao passed on Chengyao, Chengyao.

古文：是时，张载讲学于二程、邵雍之间。
现代文：这时，张载讲学于二程和邵雍之间。
English: At this time, Zhang Zai lectured between Ercheng and Shaoyong.

古文：故雍著《皇极经世书》，牧陈天地五十有五之数，惇颐作《通书》，程颐著《易传》，载造《太和》、《参两》篇。
现代文：所以邵雍撰写了《皇极经世书》，刘牧陈述了天地五十有五之数，周敦颐写了《通书》，程颐写了《易传》，张载著述了《太和？参两篇》。
English: Therefore, Shao Yong wrote "The Book of the Emperor's Last Words," Liu Mu Rong stated that the number of heaven and earth is fifty-five, Zhou Dunyao wrote "The Book," Cheng Yao wrote "Easy to Teach," and Zhang Jie wrote "The Two Treatises of Taihe Zhanshan."

古文：臣今以《易传》为宗，和会雍、载之论，上采汉、魏、吴、晋，下逮有唐及今，包括异同，庶几道离而复合。 盖其学以王弼尽去旧说，杂以庄、老，专尚文辞为非是，故其于象数加详焉。
现代文：臣今天以《易传》为宗，融汇邵雍、张载的论述，上采汉、魏、吴、晋的有关著作，下及有唐及现在的观点，包罗异同，这样才差不多有可能使已经离开的道而再一次地恢复。 朱震的经学认为王弼全部摒弃汉儒的学说，杂以庄、老的思想，专门讲究文辞，这种做法不正确，所以他对《易经》的象数方面特别加以详细地说明。
English: Today, the minister takes "I Ching" as his text, integrating the discussion of Shao Yong and Zhang Zai, the relevant works of the Han, Wei, Wu and Jin, and the views of the Tang and the present, including the differences and similarities, so that it is almost possible to restore the path that has been left. Zhu Zhen's study of scripture believes that Wang Qian completely abandoned the doctrine of Han and Zhu, mixed with Zhuang and old thoughts, and paid special attention to literature. This approach is not correct, so he explained in detail the aspect of the number of images in "I Ching."

古文：其论《图》、《书》授受源委如此，盖莫知其所自云。
现代文：他论述的《河图》、《洛书》的传授情况方面大概如此，不知道他是根据哪家的传授。
English: This is probably the case with the teaching of "Hetao" and "Luo Shu" that he discusses. I don't know whose teaching he is basing on.

古文：胡安国，字康侯，建宁崇安人。
现代文：胡安国字康侯，建宁崇安人。
English: He was from Jianning and Chong'an in Jiang'an Province.

古文：入太学，以程颐之友朱长文及颍川靳裁之为师。
现代文：进入太学后，以程颐之友朱长文和颍川靳裁之为师。
English: After entering Taigaku, he studied under Cheng Yu's friends Zhu Changwen (朱長文) and Lu Chuan (川裁).

古文：裁之与论经史大义，深奇重之。
现代文：靳裁之给他讲经史大义，并十分器重他。
English: The magistrate gave him a lecture on the great principles of history and treated him with great respect.

古文：三试于礼部，中绍圣四年进士第。
现代文：胡安国曾三次应试于礼部，终于在绍圣四年考中进士。
English: Hu'an Guo passed the examination for the Ministry of Rites three times, and finally he was promoted to a priest in the four-year examination of Shaosheng.

古文：初，廷试考官定其策第一，宰职以无诋元祐语，遂以何昌言冠，方天若次之，又欲以宰相章惇子次天若。
现代文：起初，廷试考官定其策为第一，而宰职认为胡安国的策论中没有诋毁元之政的话语，遂以何昌言为第一，以方天若为第二，并打算以宰相章之子列第三。
English: At first, the court examiner decided that his strategy was the first, and the vice-minister thought that there was no discrediting of Yuan's politics in the strategy of Hu'an, so He Changyan was the first, Fang Tianra was the second, and he planned to be the third son of Prime Minister Zhang.

古文：时发策大要崇复熙宁、元丰之制，安国推明《大学》，以渐复三代为对。
现代文：当时考试题目要求回答如何崇复熙宁、元丰之制，胡安国以重视《大学》，渐复三代为主要内容作答。
English: At that time, the examination question asked for an answer on how to restore the system of Xianning and Yuanfeng, and Hu'an Guo answered with the emphasis on "university" and gradual three generations as the main content.

古文：哲宗命再读之，注听称善者数四，亲擢为第三。
现代文：哲宗命再读这份答卷，并多次称胡安国答得好，于是，哲宗亲擢胡安国为第三名。
English: Zhezong ordered to re-read the answer sheet, and repeatedly said that Huang Guo's answer was good, so Zhezong personally promoted Huang Guo to the third place.

古文：为太学博士，足不蹑权门。
现代文：胡安国为太学博士，从没拜访权势之家。
English: Juan Guo, a doctor of science, has never visited the powerful family.

古文：提举湖南学事，有诏举遗逸，安国以永州布衣王绘、邓璋应诏。
现代文：胡安国提举湖南学事，时皇帝下诏要求举拔未被发现的有才能的人，胡安国便将永州布衣王绘、邓璋推荐给朝廷，以响应皇上之诏。
English: When the Emperor issued an edict demanding the promotion of undiscovered talents, the State of Hunan recommended Yongzhou Buyi Wangpai and Deng Xi to the Imperial Court in response to the Emperor's edict.

古文：二人老不行，安国请命之官，以劝为学者。
现代文：王绘、邓璋二人年老不能赴朝，胡安国请求命之为官，以劝为学者。
English: Wang Peng and Deng Yao were too old to go to the DPRK, so they requested to be appointed as officials by the State of Hu'an, and were persuaded to become scholars.

古文：零陵簿称二人党人范纯仁客，而流人邹浩所请托也。
现代文：零陵主簿说此二人为党人范纯仁之客，又为流放之人邹浩所请托。
English: The main register of the cemetery said that the two were guests of the party member Fan Chunren, and were also invited by the exiled person Hao Hao.

古文：蔡京素恶安国与己异，得簿言，大喜，命湖南提刑置狱推治，又移湖北再鞫，卒无验，安国竟除名。
现代文：蔡京一向厌恶胡安国与他作对，所以听到零陵主簿之言后大喜，他命湖南提刑对胡安国追究刑事责任，又将胡安国移往湖北再行审讯，然而始终未找到什么证据，但胡安国仍被除名。
English: Cai Jing had always disliked Huang Guo for opposing him, so he was overjoyed after hearing the words of the Zero Mausoleum Master Book. He ordered Hunan to bring criminal charges against Huang Guo, and moved Huang Guo to Hubei for retrial. However, no evidence was ever found, but Huang Guo was still removed from the list.

古文：未几，簿以他罪抵法，台臣直前事，复安国元官。
现代文：不久，零陵主簿因为犯罪而伏法，台官追究其诬损胡安国之事，恢复了胡安国的原官。
English: Not long after, the owner of the tomb was arrested for committing a crime, and the Taiwanese officials investigated him for falsely defaming the State of Juan and reinstated the original official of the State of Juan.

古文：政和元年，张商英相，除提举成都学事。
现代文：政和元年，张商英为宰相，胡安国拜为提举成都学事。
English: In the first year of the Chinese New Year, Zhang Shangying was appointed as the Prime Minister, and Huang Guobai was promoted to the position of Chengdu Scholar.

古文：二年，丁内艰，移江东。父没终丧，谓子弟曰： 吾昔为亲而仕，今虽有禄万钟，将何所施？ 遂称疾不仕，筑室墓傍，耕种取给，盖将终身焉。
现代文：政和二年，由于母亲去世，胡安国离职移往江东，不久，其父也去世了，胡安国对子弟说 ：我以前是为双亲而进入仕途的，现在，双亲既去，我纵有万钟俸禄又有何用呢？ 于是，胡安国称病不再为官，并在双亲墓旁筑屋而居，种田自食，打算如此终了一生。
English: In the second year of Zheng He, due to the death of his mother, Juan Guo left his post and moved to the east of the Yangtze River. Soon, his father also died. Juan Guo said to his son: I used to enter the career for my parents, but now that my parents are gone, even if I have 10,000 hours of salary, what is the use? Therefore, Juan Guo said that he was sick and would no longer be an official, and built a house next to his parents' grave and lived there, farming and feeding himself, intending to live like this for the rest of his life.

古文：宣和末，李弥大、吴敏、谭世勣合荐，除屯田郎，辞。
现代文：到宣和末年，李弥大、吴敏、谭世责力三人联名荐举胡安国，拜其为屯田郎，胡安国坚辞不就。
English: Towards the end of the Xuanhe era, three people, Li Yida, Wu Min and Tan Shili, jointly recommended the elevation of Huang Guo, and worshiped him as Tun Tian Lang. However, Huang Guo refused.

古文：靖康元年，除太常少卿，辞；除起居郎，又辞。
现代文：靖康元年，朝廷拜胡安国为太常少卿，不就；再拜起居郎，又不就。
English: In the first year of the Yasuko era, it was not enough for the imperial court to pay homage to Juan Guo as a too-frequent minor lord; it was not enough to pay homage to Kojiro again.

古文：朝旨屡趣行，至京师，以疾在告。
现代文：朝廷多次发旨催胡安国赴朝上任，胡安国无奈到了京师，并再次向朝廷表白自己有疾病的情况。
English: The imperial court repeatedly issued orders to urge Juan Guo to go to the DPRK to take office. Juan Guo reluctantly arrived in Beijing and once again confessed to the imperial court that he was ill.

古文：一日方午，钦宗亟召见，安国奏曰： 明君以务学为急，圣学以正心为要。
现代文：一天中午，钦宗紧急召见了胡安国，胡安国对钦宗说： 明君以务学为急，先儒之学以正心为要。
English: One day at noon, Qinzong urgently summoned Huang Guo. Huang Guo said to Qinzong, "Ming Jun is concerned with practical learning, and the early Confucianism is concerned with sincerity.

古文：心者万事之宗，正心者揆事宰物之权。
现代文：心乃万事之宗，心正才能正确对待万事万物。
English: Mind is the source of all things, and it is only when the mind is upright that it can treat all things correctly.

古文：愿擢名儒明于治国平天下之本者，虚怀访问，深发独智。 又言： 为天下国家必有一定不可易之计，谋议既定，君臣固守，故有志必成，治功可立。
现代文：望朝廷能起用那些懂得治国平天下之本的名儒，虚心向他们请教，发挥他们的智慧。 胡安国还说： 治理天下国家，必须要有一个不可变更的原则和方针，谋议一当确定，君臣共同遵守，如此，才会有志必成，治功可立。
English: It is hoped that the imperial court can make use of those famous Confucians who understand the basics of governing the country and the world, humbly ask them for advice, and give play to their wisdom.Huang Guo also said: In order to govern the country, there must be an unchangeable principle and policy. Once the deliberation is determined, the monarch and the minister will jointly abide by it. In this way, there will be a will to succeed, and achievements can be made.

古文：今南向视朝半年矣，而纪纲尚紊，风俗益衰，施置乖方，举动烦扰。大臣争竞，而朋党之患萌；百执窥觎，而浸润之奸作。用人失当，而名器愈轻；出令数更，而士民不信。
现代文：现在，金国对我虎视眈眈既久，而我朝仍纲纪紊乱，世风日下，措置无方，举动烦扰；大臣争相荣进，而朋党之患渐生；百官投机，奸佞之人渐行；用人不当，而名气愈轻；发出的命令时常更改，从而失信于士民。
English: Now, the State of China has been eyeing me for a long time, but my reign is still disorderly, the world is getting worse, the measures are ineffectual, and the actions are troublesome; the ministers are competing for glory, but the problems of the party are gradually emerging; the officials are speculating, and the traitors are gradually moving; the employment is improper, but the reputation is getting lighter; the orders issued are often changed, thus losing the trust of the people.

古文：若不扫除旧迹，乘势更张，窃恐大势一倾，不可复正。
现代文：如果不扫除这些弊端，趁势改弦更张，我担心大势倾斜，不可复正。
English: If we do not sweep away these drawbacks and take advantage of the situation to change the situation, I am worried that the general trend is tilted and cannot be corrected.

古文：乞访大臣，各令展尽底蕴，画一具进。
现代文：希望圣上询访大臣，让大臣尽展其才，然后统一让他们进言。
English: It is hoped that the saint will inquire and visit the minister, let the minister do his best, and then let them make a unified proposal.

古文：先宣示台谏，使随事疏驳。
现代文：先宣示台谏，使其随事疏驳大臣之言。
English: First of all, the cabinet was announced so that it could be used to refute the minister's words.

古文：若大臣议绌，则参用台谏之言；若疏驳不当，则专守大臣之策。
现代文：如果大臣之议不妥，就参用台谏之言；如果疏驳不当，则专门采纳大臣的策略。
English: If the minister's proposal is not appropriate, the words of the Taishin will be used; if it is inappropriate to refute, the minister's strategy will be specially adopted.

古文：仍集议于朝，断自宸衷，按为国论，以次施行。
现代文：然后将众多选定之策集中起来进行讨论，分轻重缓急，依次施行。
English: Then, a number of selected measures will be brought together for discussion, prioritized, and implemented in turn.

古文：敢有动摇，必罚无赦。
现代文：敢有变更动摇者，必罚无赦。
English: Those who dare to change or waver will be punished without mercy.

古文：庶几新政有经，可冀中兴。 钦宗曰： 比留词掖相待，已命召卿试矣。 语未竟，日昃暑甚，汗洽上衣，遂退。
现代文：要不了多长时间，新政有蓝图，中兴就有希望了。 
English: It won't be long before the New Deal has a blueprint, and ZTE will have hope.

古文：时门下侍郎耿南仲倚攀附恩，凡与己不合者，即指为朋党。
现代文：钦宗说： 你的建议留待侍臣研究，不妨一试。 钦宗未把话说完，因天气酷热，汗流浃背，便退朝了。当时，门下侍郎耿南仲倚恩侍宠，对与其意见不合之人，皆指为朋党。
English: Qinzong said, "Your suggestion is to be studied by the courtiers, so you may as well give it a try." Qinzong did not finish his speech, because the weather was very hot and he was sweating profusely, he retired to the palace. At that time, his servant Geng Nanzhong was a favorite, and everyone who disagreed with him was referred to as a friend.

古文：见安国论奏，愠曰： 中兴如此，而曰绩效未见，是谤圣德也。 乃言安国意窥经筵，不宜召试。
现代文：他见到胡安国的论奏后，恼怒地说： 中兴如此，而胡安国说未见成效，这是有意诬谤圣德。 于是，指责胡安国意在获取经筵之职，不宜召试。
English: After seeing Juan Guo's argument, he angrily said: "ZTE is like this, and Juan Guo says that it has not been effective, which is intentional defamation of morality. Therefore, accusing Juan Guo of intending to obtain the post of Minister of Economic Affairs is not appropriate.

古文：钦宗不答。
现代文：钦宗没有理睬南仲之言。
English: Qinzong ignored Nanzhong's words.

古文：安国屡辞，南仲又言安国不臣。钦宗问其状，南仲曰： 往不事上皇，今又不事陛下。 钦宗曰： 渠自以病辞，初非有向背也。 每臣僚登对，钦宗即问识胡安国否，中丞许翰曰： 自蔡京得政，士大夫无不受其笼络，超然远迹不为所污如安国者实鲜。 钦宗叹息，遣中书舍人晁说之宣旨，令勉受命，且曰： 他日欲去，即不强留。 既试，除中书舍人，赐三品服。
现代文：胡安国曾多次辞拜不就任，耿南仲也据此指责他不臣不忠，钦宗问南仲根据何在，南仲说： 过去胡安国不事上皇，现在又多次不愿事奉陛下。 钦宗辩解说 ：胡安国是因为有病而辞拜，并非有意那样。 每次有臣僚轮对，钦宗都问其是否认识胡安国，御史中丞许翰说： 自从蔡京为相后，士大夫无不受其拉拢，像胡安国那样超然远迹，不为蔡京所笼络的人几乎没有。 钦宗叹息，遣中书舍人晁说之宣旨，劝勉胡安国受命，钦宗还说 ：胡安国如果将来想去官，并不强留。 胡安国既试，被授为中书舍人，得三品官服。
English: Huang Guo had resigned several times, and Geng Nanzhong also accused him of being disloyal. Qin Zong asked Nanzhong what the reason was, and Nanzhong said: In the past, Huang Guo did not go to the emperor, and now he has repeatedly refused to serve His Majesty. Qin Zong explained: Huang Guo resigned because of illness, and it was not intentional. Every time there was a round of ministers, Qin Zong asked him if he knew Huang Guo. Guo Shi Zhongzheng Xu Han said: Since Cai Jing became the consort, there is no scholar who is not attracted by him. Like Huang Guo, he

古文：南仲讽台谏论其稽命不恭，宜从黜削。
现代文：耿南仲暗示台谏说胡安国受命时叩拜不恭，应当削黜。
English: Geng Nanzhong hinted that the Taiwanese government said that when Juan Guo was ordered to bow, he should have bowed.

古文：疏奏不下，安国乃就职。
现代文：南仲的意见未被采纳，胡安国乃就职。
English: Nanzhong's opinion was not adopted, and Juan Guo took office.

古文：南仲既倾宰相吴敏、枢密使李纲，又谓许景衡、晁说之视大臣升黜为去就，怀奸徇私，并黜之。
现代文：耿南仲倾陷宰相吴敏、枢密使李纲，又指责许景衡、晁说之以大臣的升黜为自己去留的根据，怀奸徇私，应一并罢黜。
English: Geng Nanzhong overthrew the prime minister Wu Min and the confidential envoy Li Gang, and also accused Xu Jingheng, saying that he used the promotion of the minister as the basis for his stay, harboring treachery and favoritism, and should be dismissed together.

古文：安国言： 二人为去就，必有陈论。怀奸徇私，必有实迹。
现代文：胡安国说 ：说此二人依大臣的升黜为自己的去就，必须要有证据；说他们徇私怀奸，必须拿出事实。
English: Hu'an Guo said, "If you say that these two men are acting on their own because of the promotion of the minister, you must have evidence; if you say that they are self-serving and treacherous, you must have facts.

古文：乞降付本省，载诸词命。 不报。
现代文：如果有，就请将他们的罪行公布出来。 
English: If so, please publish their crimes.

古文：叶梦得知应天府，坐为蔡京所知，落职奉祠。
现代文：胡安国的意见没有得到答复。叶梦得知应天府，因是蔡京授职而获罪，去职奉祠。
English: Hu'an Guo's opinion was not answered. Ye Meng learned that Ying Tianfu was found guilty because it was Cai Jing who conferred the post, and went to the post to serve the shrine.

古文：安国言： 京罪已正，子孙编置，家财没入，已无蔡氏矣。
现代文：胡安国道： 蔡京有罪，已被正法，其子孙被流放，家财被没收，现在已无蔡氏了。
English: Hu'an National Highway: Cai Jing is guilty, has been punished, his children and grandchildren have been exiled, family wealth has been confiscated, and now there is no Cai clan.

古文：则向为京所引者，今皆朝廷之人，若更指为京党，则人才见弃者众，党论何时而弭！ 乃除梦得小郡。
现代文：然则原来为蔡京所收罗之人，现在皆在朝廷为官，若将他们都定为蔡京之党徒，就会有大批的人才被抛弃，党论何时休矣。 于是，拜叶梦得守小郡。
English: However, the people who were originally recruited by Cai Jing are now all officials in the imperial court, and if they are all identified as Cai Jing's party members, a large number of talents will be abandoned, and the party will end.

古文：中书侍郎何建议分天下为四道，置四都总管，各付一面，以卫王室、捍强敌。
现代文：中书侍郎何建议分天下为四道，设置四都总管，使其各领一方，以卫王室，抗强敌。
English: He suggested that the world should be divided into four realms, and that the governors of the four capitals should be placed at the head of each realm, so that they could defend the royal family and resist strong enemies.

古文：安国言： 内外之势，适平则安，偏重则危。
现代文：胡安国说： 内外之势，平衡则安，偏重则危。
English: Hu'an Guo said: The internal and external situation is good, the balance is good, and the bias is dangerous.

古文：今州郡太轻，理宜通变。
现代文：现在州郡之势太轻，理当变通。
English: At present, the state and county situation is too weak, and it is reasonable to be flexible.

古文：一旦以二十三路之广，分为四道，事得专决，财得专用，官得辟置，兵得诛赏，权恐太重。万一抗衡跋扈，何以待之？
现代文：但一旦以二十三路之广，合分为四道，使其事得专决，财得专用，官得自行任免，兵得自行赏惩，难免权力过重；万一出现与朝廷抗衡跋扈的情形，如何应付得了？
English: However, once the country is divided into four parts with the width of 23 provinces, so that affairs can be decided exclusively, money can be used exclusively, officials can be appointed and removed by themselves, and soldiers can be rewarded and punished by themselves, it is inevitable that power will be too heavy; in the unlikely event that there is a situation of competing with the imperial court, how can it be dealt with?

古文：乞据见今二十三路帅府，选择重臣，付以都总管之权，专治军旅。
现代文：望根据现有二十三路帅府的情况，从中选择重臣，付以都总管之权，专门负责军事。
English: It is hoped that, according to the current situation of the 23rd governor-general's office, senior ministers will be selected from among them and given the power of the general manager of the capital, specifically responsible for military affairs.

古文：或有警急，即各率所属守将应援，则一举两得矣。 寻以赵野总北道，安国言魏都地重，野必误委寄。
现代文：如遇战事，即令其各率所属守将应援，这样便可一举两得。 不久，以赵野总管北道，胡安国认为魏都之地重要，赵野不能胜任，定会辜负寄托。
English: In the event of war, he would order his subordinate commanders to come to his aid, so that he could achieve two things at once.Soon, with Zhao Ye as the general manager of the North Road, Huang Guo believed that the Wei capital was important, Zhao Ye was not competent, and he would certainly live up to his trust.

古文：是冬，金人大入，野遁，为群盗所杀，西道王襄拥众不复北顾，如安国言。
现代文：这年冬天，金人大举南侵，赵野果然逃遁，并为群盗所杀，西道王襄拥兵自重，不愿出兵抗金，应验了胡安国所言。
English: This winter, the Jin launched a large-scale invasion of the south. Zhao Ye successfully escaped and was killed by the bandits. West Dao Wang Xiang supported the soldiers with self-respect and did not want to send troops to resist the Jin, fulfilling the words of Huang Guo.

古文：李纲罢，中书舍人刘珏行词，谓纲勇于报国，数至败衄。
现代文：李纲罢相，中书舍人刘珏行词，说李纲勇于报国，数次挫败敌人。
English: Li Gang retired from politics, and Liu Xingxing, a Chinese scholar, said that Li Gang was brave in reporting the country and defeated the enemy several times.

古文：吏部侍郎冯澥言珏为纲游说，珏坐贬。
现代文：吏部侍郎冯氵解攻击刘珏为李纲辩护，刘珏因而被贬。
English: Feng Lijie, the head of the personnel department, attacked Liu Yao for defending Li Gang, and Liu Yao was demoted as a result.

古文：安国封还词头，以为 侍从虽当献纳，至于弹击官邪必归风宪。今台谏未有缄默不言之咎，而澥越职，此路若开，臣恐立于朝者各以好恶胁持倾陷，非所以靖朝著。 南仲大怒，何从而挤之，诏与郡。
现代文：胡安国封还词头，以为： 侍从虽然可以提建议，但弹劾百官之失必归台谏，现在台谏没有缄默不言之咎，而冯氵解越职攻击刘珏，至为不当，此路若开，我担心朝中之人各以自己的好恶相互倾陷，这是极不利于朝廷安定的。 耿南仲大怒，何趁机排挤了胡安国，下诏授一州郡官职。
English: Huang Guofeng retorted, saying: Although a retainer can make suggestions, the loss of impeaching a hundred officials must be attributed to the Taiyuan. Now the Taiyuan is not guilty of silence, and Feng Rong's removal from duty to attack Liu Ye is so inappropriate. If this path opens, I am afraid that people in the DPRK will fall into each other with their own likes and dislikes, which is extremely unfavorable to the stability of the imperial court. Geng Nanzhong was furious. Why did he take the opportunity to push out Huang Guofeng and award the official post of Yizhou County?

古文：以安国素苦足疾，而海门地卑湿，乃除安国右文殿修撰、知通州。
现代文：何以安国平素害足疾，而海门之地卑湿，乃任胡安国为右文殿修撰，知通州。
English: Why is it that the land of An Guo Ping suffers from a foot disease, while the land of Haimen is extremely humid? It is because Hu'an Guo was appointed as the editor of the Right Literature Hall, and he knew Tongzhou.

古文：安国在省一月，多在告之日，及出必有所论列。
现代文：胡安国在中书省一月，经常请假在家，每当上班，必有所论列。
English: In January, Hu'an Guo was in China's Shandong Province. He often took leave at home, and whenever he went to work, he would always have something to discuss.

古文：或曰： 事之小者，盍姑置之？ 安国曰： 事之大者无不起于细微，今以小事为不必言，至于大事又不敢言，是无时而可言也！ 
现代文：有人对他说 ：有些小事，何必去管它？ 胡安国说： 大事无不起于细微，今以小事为不必言，到它变为大事又不敢言，是无时而可言也。 
English: Someone said to him, "There are some small things, why should we care about them?" Juan Guo said, "Big things are nothing more than small things. It is not necessary to talk about small things now. When they become big things, we dare not talk about them. We can talk about them all the time."

古文：安国既去逾旬，金人薄都城。
现代文：胡安国离朝十天后，金人围都城。
English: Ten days after the departure of Huang from the imperial court, the Jin besieged the capital.

古文：子寅为郎，在城中，客或忧之，安国愀然曰： 主上在重围中，号令不出，卿大夫恨效忠无路，敢念子乎！ 敌围益急，钦宗亟召安国及许景衡，诏竟不达。
现代文：其子胡寅尚在城中，有人替他担忧，他却伤感地说： 圣上也在重围之中，如今圣上号令发不出来，卿大夫恨效忠无路，我能只惦记胡寅吗？ 金敌攻城更紧，钦宗急召胡安国及许景衡，但诏书却不能送达。
English: His son Hu Yin was still in the city, some people were worried about him, but he said sadly: The emperor is also under heavy siege, now the emperor's order cannot be issued, the noble doctor hates loyalty, can I only remember Hu Yin? The enemy's siege of the city is tighter, Qin Zong urgently summoned Huang Guo and Xu Jingheng, but the imperial edict could not be delivered.

古文：高宗即位，以给事中召。安国言： 昨因缴奏，遍触权贵，今陛下将建中兴，而政事弛张，人才升黜，尚未合宜，臣若一一行其职守，必以妄发，干犯典刑。 黄潜善讽给事中康执权论其托疾，罢之。
现代文：高宗即位，拜胡安国为给事中，安国说 ：以前所奏，多触犯权贵，现在陛下将建中兴，而政事弛张，人才外黜，尚未适宜，我若一一行其职守，必以妄发，干犯刑典。 黄潜善授意给事中康执权指责胡安国装病，将胡安国罢去。
English: When Gao Zong ascended the throne and paid homage to Juan Guo, An Guo said, "As I have said before, many crimes have been committed against the powerful and the noble. Now, Your Majesty will build up the country, but the political situation is unstable and the talents are foreign, and it is not yet appropriate. If I were to carry out my duties one by one, I would be committing crimes against the criminal code." Huang Qianxian gave his consent to the execution of power, accused Juan Guo of feigning illness, and dismissed Juan Guo.

古文：三年，枢密张浚荐安国可大用，再除给事中。
现代文：建炎三年，枢密使张浚荐胡安国可大用，高宗再拜其为给事中。
English: After three years of construction, the recommendation of Huang Guo by the confidential envoy Zhang Jun can be of great use, and Gao Zong is in the process of giving it.

古文：赐其子起居郎寅手札，令以上意催促。既次池州，闻驾幸吴、越，引疾还。
现代文：赐其子起居郎胡寅亲笔信，令胡寅以圣上之意催促胡安国赴任，胡安国起程到了池州，听说皇上驾幸吴、越，遂称疾而返。
English: He gave a handwritten letter to Hu Yin, his son-in-law, and ordered Hu Yin to urge Juan Guo to take office with the highest meaning. Juan Guo left for Chizhou, and when he heard that the emperor was going to Wu and Yue, he said he would hurry back.

古文：绍兴元年，除中书舍人兼侍讲，遣使趣召，安国以《时政论》二十一篇先献之。论入，复除给事中。
现代文：绍兴元年，拜胡安国为中书舍人兼侍讲，并遣使请胡安国就任。胡安国以《时政论》二十一篇先献皇上，论入，复任给事中。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, he sent an envoy to invite Huang Guo to take office. Huang Guo first presented the emperor with the twenty-first article of the "Political Theory of the Times," and was reinstated.

古文：二年七月入对，高宗曰： 闻卿大名，渴于相见，何为累诏不至？ 安国辞谢，乞以所进二十一篇者施行。其论之目，曰《定计》、《建都》、《设险》、《制国》、《恤民》、《立政》、《核实》、《尚志》、《正心》、《养气》、《宏度》、《宽隐》。
现代文：绍兴二年七月受皇上召见，高宗说： 久闻你的大名，渴于相见，为何屡诏不至？ 胡安国表示了歉意，建议高宗施行自己所献《时政论》，其论之题目有：定计、建都、设险、制国、恤民、立政、核实、尚志、正心、养气、宏度、宽隐。
English: When Gao Zong was summoned by the emperor in July of the second year of Shaoxing, he said: "I have heard of your daimyo for a long time, I am eager to meet you, why do you repeatedly fail to appear? Hu'an Guo expressed his apologies and suggested that Gao Zong implement his own "Political Theory of the Times," the topics of which are: fixed calculation, capital construction, risk management, national construction, people protection, political establishment, verification, ambition, righteousness, spirit building, magnanimity, and broadmindedness.

古文：论《定计》略曰： 陛下履极六年，以建都，则未有必守不移之居；以讨贼，则未有必操不变之术；以立政，则未有必行不反之令；以任官，则未有必信不疑之臣。
现代文：胡安国在《定计》篇中说 ：陛下立国六年来，以建都而言，还未找到必守不移之居；以讨贼而言，还未找到稳操胜券之术；以立政而言，还未找到必行不变之令；以任官而言，还未找到深信不疑之臣。
English: Hu'an Guo said in the "Final Estimate" article: In the six years since the founding of the country, His Majesty has not yet found a must-keep residence in terms of building a capital; in terms of catching thieves, he has not yet found a stable winning strategy; in terms of establishing a government, he has not yet found a must-do order; in terms of appointing officials, he has not yet found a deeply convinced minister.

古文：舍今不图，后悔何及！ 论《建都》谓： 宜定都建康以比关中、河内，为兴复之基。 论《设险》谓： 欲固上流，必保汉、沔；欲固下流，必守淮、泗；欲固中流，必以重兵镇安陆。 论《尚志》谓： 当必志于恢复中原，祗奉陵寝；必志于扫平仇敌，迎复两宫。 论《正心》谓： 戡定祸乱，虽急于戎务，而裁决戎务，必本于方寸。
现代文：在今天不图改变，则后悔莫及。 胡安国在《建都》篇中说 ：宜定都建康以比连关中、河内，将其作为复兴基地。 在《设险》篇中说： 欲巩固上流，必须保住汉、沔；欲巩固下流，必守住淮、泗；欲巩固中流，必须以重兵把守安陆。 在《尚志》篇中说： 应当立志恢复中原，祗奉陵寝；立志扫平仇敌，迎复两宫。 在《正心》篇中说 ：戡定祸乱，虽急于军务，然裁决军务，也必须本于方寸。
English: Today, if you do not try to change, you will regret it. Huang Guo said in the "Building the Capital" article: It is advisable to build a healthy capital with Biryang, Zhong and Hanoi as a revival base. In the "Establishing Risks" article, he said: If you want to consolidate the upstream, you must keep Han, Qu; if you want to consolidate the downstream, you must keep Huai, Qu; if you want to consolidate the midstream, you must keep Anlu with heavy troops. In the "Shangshi" article, he said: You should aspire to restore the Central Plains, sleep in the tomb; aspire to wipe out the enemy,

古文：愿选正臣多闻识、有志虑、敢直言者置诸左右，日夕讨论，以宅厥心。 论《养气》谓： 用兵之胜负，军旅之强弱，将帅之勇怯，系人君所养之气曲直何如。
现代文：望圣上选用有见识、有志虑、敢直言者安排在身边，时常讨论，以定本心。 在《养气》篇中说： 用兵之胜负，军队之强弱，将帅之勇怯，与人君所养之气的曲直有关，望强于为善，益新厥德，使信于诸夏，闻于夷狄者，无曲可议，则至刚可以塞两间，一怒可以安天下。 
English: He said in "Raising the Spirits," "The victory or defeat of the soldiers, the strength or weakness of the army, and the bravery of the generals are all related to the temper of the people. It is better to be strong than to be good, and it is better to have new wisdom and virtue. It is better to have faith in the summer, and it is better to have faith in the summer, and it is better to have faith in the summer, and it is better to have faith in the summer, and it is better to have faith in the summer, and it is better to have faith in the summer, and it is better to have faith in the summer.

古文：愿强于为善，益新厥德，使信于诸夏、闻于夷狄者，无曲可议，则至刚可以塞两间，一怒可以安天下矣。 安国尝谓： 虽诸葛复生，为今日计，不能易此论也。 居旬日，再见，以疾恳求去。高宗曰： 闻卿深于《春秋》，方欲讲论。 遂以《左氏传》付安国点句正音。安国奏： 《春秋》经世大典，见诸行事，非空言比。今方思济艰难，《左氏》繁碎，不宜虚费光阴，耽玩文采，莫若潜心圣经。 高宗称善。
现代文：现在圣上思考摆脱艰难之策，由于《左传》繁碎，所以不宜在它上面虚废光阴。耽玩文采，不如潜心于圣人之经。 
English: Now the saint is thinking about how to get out of the difficult situation. Since the "Left-Handed" is broken, it is not appropriate to waste time on it. It is better to concentrate on the saint's scripture.

古文：寻除安国兼侍读，专讲《春秋》。
现代文：高宗称好，很快拜胡安国兼侍读，专讲《春秋》。
English: Gao Zong said that he liked it, and soon he became a disciple of Huang Guo and an attendant, specializing in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：时讲官四人，援例乞各专一经。
现代文：当时讲官有四人，他们根据旧例请求各专一经。
English: At that time, there were four lecturers, and they each requested a specific sutra according to the old custom.

古文：高宗曰： 他人通经，岂胡安国比。 不许。
现代文：高宗认为： 他人虽然通经，但都不能与胡安国相比。 因此不许。
English: Gao Zong thought: Although others have studied the classics, none of them can compare with Huang Guo, so it is not allowed.

古文：会除故相朱胜非同都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事，安国奏： 胜非与黄潜善、汪伯彦同在政府，缄默附会，循致渡江。尊用张邦昌结好金国，沦灭三纲，天下愤郁。及正位冢司，苗、刘肆逆，贪生苟容，辱逮君父。
现代文：朝廷拜故相朱胜非同都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事，胡安国为此上奏说 ：朱胜非与黄潜善、汪伯彦同在政府，缄默附会，因循致渡江；他尊用张邦昌结好于金，可谓沦灭三纲，天下愤郁；及为相，在苗、刘兵变中贪生怕死，有辱君父。
English: Zhu Shengfei, the imperial court's courtier, had been with the military governors of Jiang, Huai, Jing, and Zhejiang, and the State of Hu'an made a report to this effect: Zhu Shengfei had been in the government with Huang Kuanshan and Wang Bohian, and had been a silent member of the meeting, and had therefore traveled to Jiang; he respected Zhang Bangchang and was better than gold, which could be said to be the downfall of the three classes, and the world was angry; and as a courtier, he was greedy for life and afraid of death in the Miao and Liu mutinies, and he had humiliated his father.

古文：今强敌凭陵，叛臣不忌，用人得失，系国安危，深恐胜非上误大计。 胜非改除侍读，安国持录黄不下，左相吕颐浩特令检正黄龟年书行。
现代文：现在，强敌凭陵，叛臣不忌，用人得失，系国安危，深恐朱胜非误了圣上大计。 于是，朱胜非改拜侍读，胡安国持笔不书写，左相吕颐浩特命检正黄龟年书写。
English: Now, when a strong enemy holds the mausoleum, a traitor is not to be feared, the gains and losses of employing people, and the safety of the country are at stake, it is deeply feared that Zhu Shengfei has misjudged the sacred grand plan. Therefore, Zhu Shengfei changed to worship and attend the reading, Juan Guo did not write with a pen, and the left phase of Lv Hao's special mission was to check and correct the year of the yellow turtle.

古文：安国言：  有官守者，不得其职则去 。
现代文：胡安国说 ： 有官守者，不得其职则去。 
English: Hu'an Guo said: If there is an official guard, if he is not allowed to do his job, he will go.

古文：臣今待罪无补，既失其职，当去甚明。
现代文：我现在待罪无补，已失其职，当去职才算明智。
English: I am now beyond reproach, I have lost my position, and it is wise for me to step down.

古文：况胜非系臣论列之人，今朝廷乃称胜非处苗、刘之变，能调护圣躬。
现代文：况且朱胜非是我数落之人，今朝廷称其在苗、刘之变时，能调护圣上。
English: Moreover, Zhu Sheng is not the person I counted down. This time, the imperial court said that he could protect the emperor when Miao and Liu changed.

古文：昔公羊氏言祭仲废君为行权，先儒力排其说。
现代文：过去，公羊氏说祭仲废君为行使权宜，先儒力排其说。
English: In the past, the Ram clan said that it was expedient to sacrifice the middle and abolish the king, and Confucius first ruled it out.

古文：盖权宜废置非所施于君父，《春秋》大法，尤谨于此。
现代文：因为权宜废置非所施于君父，《春秋》大法，特别强调这一点。
English: The "Spring and Autumn" Great Law particularly emphasizes this point, because the expedient abolition is not applied to the king's father.

古文：建炎之失节者，今虽特释而不问，又加选擢，习俗既成，大非君父之利。臣以《春秋》入侍，而与胜非为列，有违经训。 遂卧家不出。
现代文：建炎之失节者，现在不仅不追究，反而加以选用，此非君父之利。我以《春秋》入侍，而要与朱胜非这种人为伍，实在有违经训。 遂卧家不出。
English: Zhu Shengfei's misconduct is now not only not investigated, but selected instead, which is not the benefit of the monarch. I entered the service with "Spring and Autumn," but to be in the company of someone like Zhu Shengfei is really against the teachings of the sutras. So I don't leave home.

古文：初，颐浩都督江上还朝，欲去异己者，未得其策。
现代文：起初，吕颐浩都督江上还朝，打算除掉异己，但未找到适当的借口，有人给他出主意，让他将异己者指为朋党，并说： 党魁在幕后，应当首先予以铲除。 
English: At first, Lv Yinghao, the governor of the Yangtze River, planned to eliminate the dissidents, but he did not find a suitable excuse. Someone gave him a suggestion to designate the dissidents as friends of the party, and said: The party leader is behind the scenes and should be eliminated first.

古文：或教之指为朋党，且曰： 党魁在琐闱，当先去之。 颐浩大喜，即引胜非为助，而降旨曰： 胡安国屡召，偃蹇不至，今始造朝，又数有请。
现代文：吕颐浩听后大喜，即引朱胜非为助，而降旨曰 ：胡安国屡召称疾不至，现在任职于朝，又数有请辞。
English: Upon hearing this, Lyu Binhao was overjoyed, and summoned Zhu Shengfei to help him, and then issued the following order: "Huan Guo has been summoned many times, saying that he is ill, and now he is working for the North Korean government, and he has asked to resign several times.

古文：初言胜非不可同都督，及改命经筵，又以为非，岂不以时艰不肯尽瘁，乃欲求微罪而去，其自为谋则善，如国计何？ 落职，提举仙都观。
现代文：先说朱胜非不可同都督，当改任胜非为侍读后，又表示反对，岂不以时艰不肯尽瘁，乃欲求微罪而去，其自为谋则善，是否考虑过国家社稷呢？ 胡安国因此而落职提举仙都观。
English: First of all, Zhu Shengfei said that he could not be the same as the governor of the capital, and when he was transferred to serve as an attendant to Shengfei, he also expressed his opposition. Would he not take the time to do his best, but go for a minor crime? Is it better for him to do his own thing? Has he considered the national society?

古文：是夕，彗出东南。
现代文：这天夜晚，彗星现于东南天空。
English: On this night, the comet is in the southeastern sky.

古文：右相秦桧三上章乞留之，不报，即解相印去。
现代文：右相秦桧三次上书请求留任胡安国，未得到答复，乃辞相而去。
English: The Minister of the Right, Qin Hui, wrote three times to request that he be allowed to remain in Hu'an, but received no reply, so he resigned and left.

古文：侍御史江跻上疏，极言胜非不可用，安国不当责。
现代文：侍御史江跻上疏，极言朱胜非不可用，胡安国不当责。
English: The courtier Shijiang ranked in the top three, the dictum Zhu Shengfei was not inapplicable, and Hu'an Guo was not responsible.

古文：右司谏吴表臣亦言安国扶病见君，欲行所学，今无故罪去，恐非所以示天下。
现代文：右司谏吴表臣也说胡安国扶病见君，欲行所学，今无故罢去，恐非可以服天下。
English: Wu Biao Chen, the Right Secretary of the State Council, also said that Juan Guo Fuxiong, who wanted to practice what he had learned, had no reason to leave now, and was afraid that he could not serve the world.

古文：不报。
现代文：也没有得到皇帝的答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：颐浩即黜给事中程瑀、起居舍人张焘及跻等二十余人，云应天变除旧布新之象。
现代文：吕颐浩罢黜给事中程王禹、起居舍人张焘、侍御史江跻等二十多人，说是应天变除旧布新之象，台省一空。
English: Lv Hao dismissed more than 20 people, including Wang Yu, the middle-ranking official, Zhang Ye, the head of the living quarters, and Shi Jiang, the attendant, saying that the old cloth was replaced with a new one, and Taizhou was completely emptied.

古文：台省一空，胜非遂相，安国竟归。
现代文：朱胜非为相，胡安国竟归。
English: Zhu Sheng is not a phase, but Huang Guo has returned.

古文：五年，除徽猷阁待制、知永州，安国辞。
现代文：绍兴五年，拜胡安国为徽猷阁待制、知永州，胡安国辞不就。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Bai Juan's state was Huiyangge, and Chiyongzhou, and Juan's resignation was not enough.

古文：诏以经筵旧臣，重闵劳之，特从其请，提举江州太平观，令纂修所著《春秋传》。
现代文：皇上下诏，以经筵旧臣，重闵劳之，特从其请，命胡安国提举江州太平观，并令其特别纂修所著《春秋传》。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, and at the earnest request of his former ministers, he ordered Huang Guo to elevate the Jiangzhou Taiping Guan, and ordered him to compile the "Spring and Autumn Annals" specially written by the institute.

古文：书成，高宗谓深得圣人之旨，除提举万寿观兼侍读。未行，谏官陈公辅上疏诋假托程颐之学者。安国奏曰： 孔、孟之道不传久矣，自颐兄弟始发明之，然后知其可学而至。
现代文：《春秋传》写成后，高宗认为其深得圣人之旨意，拜胡安国提举万寿观兼侍读，未行，谏官陈公辅上疏诋毁假托程颐之学者，胡安国为此上奏曰： 孔、孟之道不传久矣，自程颐兄弟始发扬之，使人们知道孔、孟之道是可以学到的。
English: After the "Spring and Autumn Annals" was written, Gaozong believed that he had deeply won the saint's will. He asked Juan Guo to promote the view of longevity and attend the reading, but he did not do it. The eunuch Chen Gongyu slandered the scholars who had falsely entrusted the book to Qu. For this reason, Juan Guo wrote: "The way of Confucius and Mengzi has not been passed down for a long time. Since the brothers of Qu, it has been promoted, so that people know that the way of Confucius and Mengzi can be learned."

古文：今使学者师孔、孟，而禁不得从颐学，是入室而不由户。
现代文：现在要学者师孔、孟，而又禁止学者不得师从程颐，好比要人进入室内又不得经过门户。
English: It is like asking a scholar to teach Confucius and Mencius, but forbidding him to teach Cheng Xuan. It is like asking a person to enter a room but forbidding him to go through the door.

古文：本朝自嘉祐以来，西都有邵雍、程颢及其弟颐，关中有张载，皆以道德名世，公卿大夫所钦慕而师尊之。会王安石、蔡京等曲加排抑，故其道不行。
现代文：本朝自嘉以来，西都有邵雍、程颢及其弟程颐，关中有张载，皆以道德闻名于世，公卿大夫无不钦慕而师尊之，经王安石、蔡京曲加排抑，其学逐渐不行。
English: In this dynasty, since the time of Jia, there were Shaoyong, Cheng Yao and his brother Cheng Yao in the west, and Zhang Zai in Guanzhong, all of whom were famous for their morality in the world. The noble doctor was admired and respected by all, and after Wang Anshi and Cai Jingqu added and suppressed, his learning gradually failed.

古文：望下礼官讨论故事，加之封爵，载在祀典，比于荀、杨、韩氏，仍诏馆阁裒其遗书，校正颁行，使邪说者不得作。 奏入，公辅与中丞周秘、侍御史石公揆承望宰相风旨，交章论安国学术颇僻。
现代文：望圣上诏礼官讨论故事，加之封爵，载于祀典，将他们与荀子、扬雄、韩愈一样看待，诏馆阁整理他们的遗著，校正颁行，使邪说者不得做。 奏入后，陈公辅与御史中丞周礻必、侍御史石公揆依照宰相的意图，分别上章论胡安国学术乖僻。
English: After the report was submitted, Chen Gongfu, Zhou Xingbi, the vice-minister of history, and Shi Gongfu, the vice-minister of history, respectively discussed the last chapter on the academic eccentricity of Huang Guo, in accordance with the intention of the prime minister.

古文：除知永州，辞，复提举太平观，进宝文阁直学士，卒，年六十五。
现代文：朝廷调胡安国知永州，安国辞不就。后又拜胡安国提举太平观，进宝文阁直学士。胡安国不久去世，终年六十五岁。
English: The imperial court transferred Juan Guo to Zhiyong Prefecture, but his resignation was not accepted. Later, Juan Guo was praised by the imperial court for promoting the Taiping Thought, and he was promoted to the direct bachelor of Baowenge. Juan Guo died not long after, at the age of 65.

古文：诏赠四官，又降诏加赙，赐田十顷恤其孤，谥曰文定，盖非常格也。
现代文：皇帝下诏赠其四官，又降诏加赙，赐田十顷恤其孤，赠谥号曰 文定 ，其礼遇规格不同寻常。
English: The emperor presented four officials to the emperor, and also reduced the imperial edict and the imperial edict, granted ten hectares of land to the emperor, and gave the emperor the title of "Wen Ding," which was an unusual courtesy.

古文：安国强学力行，以圣人为标的，志于康济时艰，见中原沦没，遗黎涂炭，常若痛切于其身。
现代文：胡安国一生，强学力行，以圣人为榜样，志在康济时艰，挽救危难。看到中原沦陷，黎民涂炭，就好像痛在自己身上。
English: Throughout his life, Juan Guo studied hard, followed the example of saints, aspired to prosper in times of hardship, and saved people from danger. Seeing the Central Plains fall and the people of Lai besieged, it was as if he felt pain in his own body.

古文：虽数以罪去，其爱君忧国之心远而弥笃，每有君命，即置家事不问。
现代文：虽然多次以罪罢去，其爱君忧国之心反而更加坚定，每有君命，即置家事于不顾。
English: Although he was punished many times for his crimes, his love for the emperor and concern for the country made him even more determined. Whenever the emperor died, he would put his family affairs aside.

古文：然风度凝远，萧然尘表，视天下万物无一足以婴其心。
现代文：然其风度凝远，萧然尘表，视天下万物无一足以羁绊其心。
English: However, his demeanor is distant and aloof, and he regards everything under the sun as worthless enough to ensnare his heart.

古文：自登第迄谢事，四十年在官，实历不及六载。
现代文：从登第到去世，四十年在官，而实际在位还不足六年。
English: From his accession to his death, he was in office for forty years, but his actual reign was less than six years.

古文：朱震被召，问出处之宜，安国曰： 子发学《易》二十年，此事当素定矣。世间惟讲学论政，不可不切切询究，至于行己大致，去就语默之几，如人饮食，其饥饱寒温，必自斟酌，不可决诸人，亦非人所能决也。
现代文：朱震被召，问应该如何去就得当。胡安国回答说： 你学《易》二十年，此事当素定矣，世间唯有讲学论政，不可不切切询究，至于自己处世态度，去留语默之机，如人之饮食，其饥饱寒温，必是自己斟酌掂量，不可由他人做决定，他人也做不了此决定。
English: Zhu Zhen was summoned and asked how he should go. Huang Guo replied: You have been studying Yi for twenty years, this matter should be determined. In the world, there is only lecturing on politics, which must be carefully investigated. As for one's own attitude in the world, the ability to memorize words, such as one's diet, one's hunger and cold, must be at one's own discretion. It cannot be decided by others, and others cannot make this decision.

古文：吾平生出处皆内断于心，浮世利名如蠛蠓过前，何足道哉！ 故渡江以来，儒者进退合义，以安国、尹焞为称首。
现代文：我平生做人皆内断于心，功名利禄如过眼烟云，不足挂齿。 所以宋朝渡江以来，儒者进退合义，以胡安国、尹火享称首。
English: All my life, I have been a person with a broken heart, and the achievements and benefits are like a passing cloud, lacking teeth. Therefore, since the Song Dynasty's crossing of the Yangtze River, the Confucians have advanced and retreated, and they are headed by Hu'an Guo and Yin Huo.

古文：侯仲良言必称二程先生，他无所许可。后见安国，叹曰： 吾以为志在天下，视不义富贵真如浮云者，二程先生而已，不意复有斯人也。 
现代文：侯仲良言必称二程先生，对其他人无所赞许，后来见到了胡安国，叹曰 ：我以为志在天下，视不义富贵真如浮云者，只有二程先生，没想到还有胡安国也是如此。 
English: Hou Zhong Liang said that he would call Mr. Ercheng, but he did not approve of others. Later, when he saw Juan Guo, he sighed and said, "I thought that I aspired to be in the world, and those who regard injustice and wealth are like floating clouds. There is only Mr. Ercheng, but I did not expect that there would also be Juan Guo."

古文：安国所与游者，游酢、谢良佐、杨时皆程门高弟。
现代文：胡安国所交往的人如游酢、谢良佐、杨时等皆是程门高弟。
English: The people with whom Juan Guo interacted, such as Yu Zui, Xie Liang Zuo, Yang Shi, etc., were all Chengmen high-level disciples.

古文：良佐尝语人曰： 胡康侯如大冬严雪，百草萎死，而松柏挺然独秀者也。 安国之使湖北也，时方为府教授，良佐为应城宰，安国质疑访道，礼之甚恭，每来谒而去，必端笏正立目送之。
现代文：谢良佐曾对人说 ：胡安国如严冬大雪，百草枯萎，而松柏挺然独秀者也。 胡安国出使湖北，杨时方为府教授，谢良佐为应城宰，胡安国质疑访道，礼之甚恭，每次来谒而去，必整装端笏正立目送之。
English: Xie Liangzao once said to people: "Huang'an is like a severe winter with heavy snow, the grass withers, and the pine and cypress are also quite outstanding. Huang'an is dispatched to Hubei, Yang Shifang is a professor, Xie Liangzao is the mayor of the city, Huang'an questions and visits the province, and is very polite. Every time he comes and goes, he must be neatly dressed and look straight ahead.

古文：自王安石废《春秋》不列于学官，安国谓： 先圣手所笔削之书，乃使人主不得闻讲说，学士不得相传习，乱伦灭理，用夏变夷，殆由乎此。 故潜心是书二十余年，以为天下事物无不备于此。
现代文：王安石废《春秋》不列于学官，胡安国说 ：先圣手所笔削之书，乃使人主不得听讲说，学士不得相传习，乱伦灭理，使华夏变为蛮夷，大概由此开始。 胡安国潜心研究《春秋》二十多年，以为天下事物无不包含于《春秋》之中。
English: Wang Anshi scrapped "Spring and Autumn" because it was not listed as a scholar, and Juan Guo said: "The book written by the first holy hand is a book that makes people unable to listen to lectures, scholars are not allowed to learn from each other, incest is eliminated, and Huaxia is turned into a barbarian, which probably started from this." Juan Guo has been studying "Spring and Autumn" for more than 20 years, thinking that everything in the world is included in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：每叹曰： 此传心要典也。 
现代文：每每叹曰 ：此书乃传心之要典也。 
English: Every sigh says: This book is also a key text for conveying the heart.

古文：安国少欲以文章名世，既学道，乃不复措意。
现代文：胡安国少年时想以文章名世，但学道之后，便不再有这种想法。
English: When he was a boy in Huang Guo, he wanted to be famous for his articles, but after studying the Tao, he no longer had this idea.

古文：有文集十五卷、《资治通鉴举要补遗》一百卷。
现代文：著有文集十五卷，《资治通鉴举要补遗》一百卷。
English: He is the author of fifteen volumes of anthologies and one hundred volumes of "Zizhi Tong Jian Ji Zang Zi" (Zizhi Tong Jian Ji Zang Zi).

