古文：汉、魏刺史镇寿春，吴置持节督州牧八人，不见扬州都督所治。
现代文：扬州是京辇膏腴之地。汉、魏二代的刺史治所在寿春，三国时吴国设置持节督州牧八人，看不到扬州都督的官署所在。
English: Yangzhou is the capital city of China. The capital of the Han and Wei dynasties was located in Shuchun. During the Three Kingdoms period, the State of Wu set up eight officials to govern Yangzhou. The Yangzhou governor's office is not visible.

古文：晋太康元年，吴平，刺史周浚始镇江南。
现代文：晋太康元年，吴国被平定，刺史周浚才开始镇守江南。
English: In the first year of Jin Taikang, Wu was pacified, and it was Zhou Jun who began to guard the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：元帝为都督，渡江左，遂成帝畿，望实隆重。
现代文：晋元帝作为都督，渡过长江来到江左，扬州遂成为京畿之地，地望极其隆重。
English: Emperor Jin Yuan, as the governor, crossed the Yangtze River to the left of the river, and Yangzhou eventually became the land of Gyeonggi, with an extremely grand view.

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：扬州统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：丹阳郡
现代文：丹阳郡
English: Danyang County

古文：建康秣陵丹阳溧阳永世湖熟江宁句容
现代文：建康秣陵丹阳溧阳永世湖熟江宁句容
English: Jiankang, Danyang, Shenyang, Yongshih Lake, Jiangning

古文：会稽郡
现代文：会稽郡
English: Kaihei County

古文：山阴永兴上虞余姚诸暨剡鄞始宁句章鄮
现代文：山阴永兴上虞余姚诸暨剡鄞始宁句章鄮
English: Shanyin Yongxing Shangyu Yuyao Zhu Caixi Ning Qu Chapter

古文：吴郡
现代文：吴郡
English: Wu County

古文：吴娄海虞嘉兴海盐钱唐富阳盐官新城建德寿昌桐庐
现代文：吴娄海虞嘉兴海盐钱唐富阳盐官新城建德寿昌桐庐
English: Wuzhong Haiyu Jiaxing Haiyan Qianqian Tang Fuyang Yanquan Xincheng Jiande Shouchang Tonglu

古文：吴兴郡
现代文：吴兴郡
English: Wuxing County

古文：乌程武康余杭东迁长城於潜临安故鄣安吉原乡
现代文：乌程武康余杭东迁长城於潜临安故鄣安吉原乡
English: Wu Cheng Wu Kang Yu Hangzhou East Relocation of the Great Wall in Qianlin Ancestral Village of Anji Yuan Township

古文：东阳郡
现代文：东阳郡
English: Dongyang County

古文：长山太末乌伤永康信安吴宁丰安定阳遂昌
现代文：长山太末乌伤永康信安吴宁丰安定阳遂昌
English: Yongkang Xin'an, Wu Ningfeng, Yang Suichang

古文：新安郡
现代文：新安郡
English: Xin'an County

古文：始新黟遂安歙海宁
现代文：始新黟遂安歙海宁
English: From Shixin to Su'an to Haining

古文：临海郡
现代文：临海郡
English: Linhai County

古文：章安临海宁海始丰乐安
现代文：章安临海宁海始丰乐安
English: Zhang'an is next to Haining Sea, the beginning of a prosperous and happy time

古文：永嘉郡
现代文：永嘉郡
English: Yongjia County

古文：永宁安固松阳横阳乐成
现代文：永宁安固松阳横阳乐成
English: Yongning Anggu Songyang Hengyang Lecheng

古文：南徐州，镇京口。
现代文：南徐州，治所在京。
English: South Xuzhou, governed by Beijing.

古文：吴置幽州牧，屯兵在焉。
现代文：吴国设置幽州牧，在此处驻守军队。
English: The State of Wu set up the Yuzhou Pasture, and stationed troops there.

古文：丹徒水道入通吴会，孙权初镇之。
现代文：丹徒的水道通入吴、会稽二郡，孙权最初把治所设在丹徒。
English: Dantu's waterway passes into Wu and Hui counties, and Sun Quan initially set up a government office in Dantu.

古文：《尔雅》曰： 绝高为京。 
现代文：《尔雅》说： 在绝高处建筑京城。 
English: "Lya" says: Build the capital city at the highest point.

古文：今京城因山为垒，望海临江，缘江为境，似河内郡，内镇优重。
现代文：现在京城依山筑垒，临长江望东海，以长江为边境，像河内郡，防卫特别重要。
English: Nowadays, the capital city is fortified against the mountains, facing the Yangtze River and overlooking the East Sea, with the Yangtze River as the border. Like Hanoi County, defense is particularly important.

古文：宋氏以来，桑梓帝宅，江左流寓，多出膏腴。
现代文：宋代以来，帝宅之乡，寄居之屋多在江左膏腴之地。
English: Since the Song Dynasty, most of the imperial residences and sojourns have been located in Jiangzaoxuan.

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：南东海郡
现代文：南东海郡
English: Nandonghai County

古文：郯祝其襄贲利成西隰丹徒武进
现代文：郯祝其襄贲利成西隰丹徒武进
English: I wish him the best of luck in his future endeavors.

古文：晋陵郡
现代文：晋陵郡
English: Jinling County

古文：晋陵无锡延陵曲阿暨阳南沙海阳
现代文：晋陵无锡延陵曲阿暨阳南沙海阳
English: Jin Mausoleum Wuxi Yanling Mausoleum Quajiyang Nansha Haiyang

古文：义兴郡永明二年，割属扬州，后复旧。
现代文：义兴郡永明二年，割给扬州隶属，后恢复如旧。
English: In the second year of Yongming, Yixing County was assigned to Yangzhou affiliation, and then restored as before.

古文：阳羡临津国山义乡绥安
现代文：阳羡临津国山义乡绥安
English: The sun shines on the mountains of Tsu Province, and the town of Yixiang, Jian'an

古文：南琅邪郡本治金城，永明徙治白下。
现代文：南琅邪郡本来治所在金城，永明年间迁到白下。
English: Nanluye County was originally governed by Jincheng, but moved to Baisha in the middle of last year.

古文：临沂江乘兰陵承建武三年省谯建元二年，平阳郡流民在临江郡者，立宣祚县，寻改为谯。
现代文：临沂江乘兰陵承建武三年撤销。谯建元二年，平阳郡的流民在堕丝登的，设立宣祚县，不久改为尽。
English: In the third year of Lanling's reign, Linfen was revoked. In the second year of Jianyuan, the displaced people of Pingyang County established Xuanwu County in Fudan Shideng, and it was soon abolished.

古文：永明元年，省怀化一县并属。
现代文：丞塱元午，撤销垣丝一县并入谜。
English: In the early afternoon of the first day of the second month of the year, the revocation of the merger of Gaki Si County into a mystery.

古文：临淮郡自此以下，郡无实土。
现代文：临淮郡自此以下各郡没有实际管辖地。
English: Since then, the following counties have no actual jurisdiction over Linhuai County.

古文：海西射阳凌淮阴东阳淮浦建武二年省。
现代文：海西射阳浚淮阴东阳淮浦建武二年撤销。
English: Haixi Zhaoyang Dredging Huaiyin Dongyang Huaipu Jianwu revoked two years ago.

古文：淮陵郡
现代文：淮陵郡
English: Huairing County

古文：司吾武阳建武三年，省泰山郡属。
现代文：司吾武阳建武三年，撤销与泰山郡的隶属关系。
English: Three years later, his brother-in-law, Wuyang Jianwu, revoked his affiliation with Taishan County.

古文：甄城阳乐徐建武三年省
现代文：甄城阳乐徐建武三年撤销。
English: Zhencheng Yangle Xu Jianwu revoked three years later.

古文：南东莞郡
现代文：南东莞郡
English: South Dongguan County

古文：东莞莒姑幕建武三年省。
现代文：东莞莒姑幕建武三年撤销。
English: Dongguan Shugu curtain Jianwu three years revoked.

古文：南清河郡南徐州领冀州
现代文：南清河郡南徐州兼管的冀州领地。
English: Nanqinghe County, South Xuzhou and Jizhou Territory.

古文：东武城清河贝丘绎幕建武二年省。
现代文：束武城清河贝丘绎幕建武二年撤销。
English: The relocation of Sokobu Castle to Qinghe Beiqiu was cancelled two years after its construction.

古文：南彭城郡
现代文：南彭城郡
English: South Pengcheng County

古文：彭城武原傅阳蕃薛开阳洨僮下邳建武三年省吕建武四年省杼秋建武四年省北陵建武四年省
现代文：彭城武原傅阳蕃薛开阳洨僮。下邳建武三年撤销。吕建武四年撤销杼秋建武四年撤销。逃卢建茎四年撤销。
English: Pengcheng Wuyuan Fuyang, Xue Kaiyang, Zeng Jianwu revoked in three years, Lv Jianwu revoked in four years, Qiu Jianwu revoked in four years, Xue Lu Jianzu revoked in four years.

古文：南高平郡宋太始五年侨置，初寄治淮阴，复徙淮南当涂。二县侨属南豫，后属南徐。
现代文：南高：平郡宋太始五年侨置，最初治所寄居在淮阴，又迁淮南、当涂二县寄居隶属南豫州，后又隶属南途丛。
English: South High School: It was established in Ping County by Song Taishi in the first five years. At first, the administrative office was located in Huaiyin. Later, it was moved to Huainan, and then to Dangtu, both of which belong to South Yuzhou, and later to Nantu Cong.

古文：金飨高平
现代文：金乡高平
English: Gaoping, Jinxiang

古文：南济阴郡
现代文：南济阴郡
English: Nanjiyin County

古文：城武单父城阳建武三年省。
现代文：城武单父城阳建武三年撤销。
English: Chengwu single father Chengyang Jianwu revoked three years later.

古文：南濮阳郡
现代文：南濮阳郡
English: Nanluoyang County

古文：廪丘东燕会鄄城建武三年，省济阳郡度属。
现代文：廪丘束燕会鄄城建武三年，解除与济阳郡的隶属关系后并入。
English: It has been three years since the Mengqiu Bamboo Swallow Association was merged into the Mengcheng Jianwu Association after its affiliation with Jiyang County was terminated.

古文：榆次建武二年省
现代文：榆次建武二年撤销。
English: It was revoked two years later.

古文：南鲁郡建武二年省
现代文：南鲁郡建武二年撤销。
English: Jianwu, Nanlu County, revoked in 2002.

古文：鲁樊西安建武二年省
现代文：鲁樊西安建武二年撤销。
English: Luling Xi'an Jianwu was revoked two years later.

古文：南平昌郡建武三年省
现代文：南平昌郡建武三年撤销。
English: Jianwu, Nanpingchang County, revoked for three years.

古文：安丘郡省，属东莞。
现代文：安丘郡撤销后，改属东莞新乐郡撤销后，改属东莞。
English: After the revocation of Anqiu County, it was transferred to Dongguan. After the revocation of Xinle County, it was transferred to Dongguan.

古文：南泰山郡建武三年省
现代文：南泰山郡建武三年撤销。
English: South Taishan County Jianwu three years revoked.

古文：南城郡省，度属平昌，寻又省。
现代文：南城郡撤销后，拟属平昌郡，不久又撤销。
English: After the revocation of Nancheng County, it was proposed to belong to Pyeongchang County, which was soon revoked.

古文：广平
现代文：广平
English: Guangping

古文：南济阳郡建武三年省
现代文：南济阳郡建武三年撤销。
English: Jianwu, South Jiyang County, revoked for three years.

古文：考城郡省，度属鲁，寻又省。
现代文：考城郡撤销后，凝属鲁郡，不久又撤销。
English: After the revocation of Caocheng County, Nengshenlu County was revoked soon after.

古文：豫州。晋元帝永昌元年，刺史祖约避胡贼，自谯还治寿春。
现代文：豫州，晋元帝永昌元年，刺史祖约为躲避胡寇，把治所从谯撤回到寿春。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty in Yuzhou, Shizhu Zuo took refuge from the Huko and withdrew the clinic from Lu to Shuchun.

古文：寿春，淮南一都之会，地方千余里，有陂田之饶。汉、魏以来扬州刺史所治，北拒淮水，《禹贡》云 淮海惟扬州 也。
现代文：寿春是淮南的一大都会，周围千余里，境内有富饶的陂田，汉、魏以来是扬州刺史的治所，北面拒守淮河，《禹贡》说 淮河与大海之间惟扬州 。
English: Shuchun is a big city in Huainan, with more than a thousand miles around it, and there are rich rice paddies in the territory. Since the Han and Wei Dynasties, it has been the seat of Yangzhou history. In the north, it refuses to guard the Huaihe River. "Yugong" said that between the Huaihe River and the sea, there is only Yangzhou.

古文：咸和四年，祖约以城降胡，复以庾亮为刺史，治芜湖。
现代文：咸和四年，祖约献城投降胡寇，又任命庾亮为刺史，治所设在芜湖。
English: In the fourth year of the Haman period, Zhu Yao surrendered the city to the Huko, and appointed Yu Liang as the chief historian, and the government office was set up in Wuhu.

古文：芜湖，浦水南入，亦为险奥。
现代文：芜湖，浦水从南边流入，也是险要之地。
English: Wuhu, where the Pushui River flows in from the south, is also a dangerous place.

古文：刘备谓孙权曰： 江东先有建业，次有芜湖。 
现代文：刘备对孙权说： 江束主要有建业，其次有芜湖。 
English: Liu Bei said to Sun Quan: Jiangzhu mainly has Jianye, followed by Wuhu.

古文：庾亮经略中原，以毛宝为刺史，治邾城，为胡所覆。
现代文：庾亮筹划恢复中原，任命毛宝为刺史，治所在邾城，被胡寇占领。
English: Zou Liang planned to restore the Central Plains, appointed Mao Bao as the chief historian, and governed from Zoucheng, which was occupied by the Huko.

古文：荆州刺史庾翼领州，在武昌。
现代文：荆州刺史庾翼兼管豫州，治所在武昌。
English: Jingzhou Jinshi Xingyi concurrently governs Yuzhou, and the seat of government is in Wuchang.

古文：诸郡失土荒民数千无佃业，翼表移西阳、新蔡二郡荒民就陂田于寻阳。
现代文：各郡失去土地的数千灾民无农活可做，庾翼上表请求迁移西阳、新蔡二郡的灾民到寻阳的陂田劳作。
English: Thousands of disaster victims who have lost land in various counties have no farm work to do, and the request to relocate disaster victims in Xiyang and Xinzai County to work in the rice paddies in Huanyang is on the table.

古文：穆帝永和五年，胡伪扬州刺史王浃以寿春降。而刺史或治历阳，进马头及谯，不复归旧镇也。
现代文：穆帝永和五年，胡寇伪扬州刺史王浃献寿春城投降，然而刺史的治所或在历阳，或进至马头及谯，不再回到旧的治所。
English: In the fifth year of Mu Di Yonghe, the Huko pseudo-Yangzhou Sisi Wangtao surrendered to Spring City. However, Sisi's seat of jurisdiction was either in Liyang, or in Ma Tau and Handan, and he would not return to the old seat of jurisdiction.

古文：哀帝隆和元年，袁真还寿春。
现代文：哀帝隆和元年，袁真回到寿春。
English: Yuan Zhen returned to Shuchun in the first year of the year of mourning for Emperor Longwu.

古文：真为桓温所灭，温以子熙为刺史，戍历阳。
现代文：袁真被桓温消灭，桓温让自己的儿子桓熙任刺史，治所在历隧。
English: Yuan Zhen was annihilated by Kuan Wen, who appointed his son Kuan Xi as his successor.

古文：孝武宁康元年，桓冲移姑熟，以边寇未静，分割谯、梁二郡见民，置之浣川，立为南谯、梁郡。
现代文：孝武帝宁尘元年，但过把治所移至蛙垫，认为边境敌寇入侵不得安静，分割谯、梁二郡现有的百姓，安置到浣川，建立南谯郡、梁郡。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, however, he moved the seat of government to Frog's Pad, believing that the invasion of the border by enemy invaders could not be kept quiet. He divided the existing people of the two counties of Yunnan and Liang, resettled them in Luochuan, and established the counties of South Yunnan and Liang.

古文：十二年，桓石虔还历阳。
现代文：十二年，担石虔回到历阳。
English: In the twelfth year, Banshi Qian returned to Liyang.

古文：庾准为刺史，表省诸权置，皆还如本。
现代文：庾准任刺史，上表请求撤销各临时的设置，都回复到原来。
English: The above table requests the revocation of each temporary setting, and they all return to the original.

古文：义熙二年，刘毅复镇姑熟，上表曰： 忝任此州，地不为旷，西界荒余，密迩寇虏，北垂萧条，土气强犷，民不识义，唯战是习。
现代文：义熙二年，壁邀又在位塾设治所。上表说： 我任此州刺史，土地不广，西界荒远，接近敌寇，北边萧条，风气逞强粗犷，百姓不懂礼义，衹知道练习作战。
English: In the second year of the reign of Yixi, the wall invited him to set up a training school. The above table said: I let this state make history, the land is not wide, the western region is desolate, close to the enemy, the north side is depressed, the ethos is stubborn, strong and rough, the people do not understand courtesy, and do not know how to practice combat.

古文：逋逃不逞，不谋日会。
现代文：逃跑现象不断，几乎每天都有发生。
English: The phenomenon of escape is continuous and occurs almost every day.

古文：比年以来，无月不战，实非空乏所能独抚。
现代文：连年以来，没有一月不打仗，这实在不是我这个才疏学浅的人所能独立治理的。
English: For years on end, there has not been a single month without war. This is really not something that I, a man of limited education, can independently manage.

古文：请辅国将军张畅领淮南、安丰、梁国三郡。 
现代文：请辅国将军张畅兼管淮南、塞丰、銮厘三郡。 
English: I would like to ask Assistant General Zhang Chang to be in charge of Huainan, Saifeng and Bali counties.

古文：时豫州边荒，至乃如此。
现代文：当时邀业的边远地区，竟至如此。
English: At that time, this was the case in the outlying areas that invited industry.

古文：十二年，刘义庆镇寿春，后常为州治。
现代文：十二年，刘义庆镇守寿春，后常作为州的治所。
English: In the 12th year, Liu Yiqing Town took over Shuchun, and later often served as the provincial capital.

古文：慎汝阴宋安阳和城南顿阳夏宋丘《永元元年地志》无樊《永元志》无郑《永元志》无东宋《永元志》无南陈左县《永元志》无边水《永元志》无
现代文：鄞《永元志》中没有。毖《永元志》中没有。趟挝《永元志》中没有。铋《永元志》中没有。
English: Not in the Yongyuan History.  Not in the Yongyuan History.  Not in the Yongyuan History.  Not in the Yongyuan History.

古文：晋熙郡
现代文：晋熙郡
English: Jinxi County

古文：新冶阴安怀宁南楼烦齐兴太湖左县
现代文：新冶阴安怀宁南楼烦齐兴太湖左县
English: Xin Ye Yin An Huaining Nan Lou Dui Qi Xing Taihu Zuo County

古文：颍川郡
现代文：颍川郡
English: Sukawa-gun

古文：临颍邵陵南许昌《永元志》无曲阳
现代文：临颍邵陵南许昌《永元志》无曲阳
English: Linyi Shaoling Nan Xuchang "Yongyuan Zhi" starring Mucuyang

古文：汝阳郡
现代文：汝阳郡
English: Ruyang County

古文：武津汝阳
现代文：武津汝阳
English: Wu Jin Ryu Yang

古文：梁郡《永元元年地志》，南梁郡领睢阳、新汲、陈、蒙、崇义五县。
现代文：梁郡《永元元年地志》，南梁郡领睢阳、新汲、陈、蒙、崇义五县。
English: Liang County, "Landscape of Yongyuan in the First Year of the Yuan Dynasty," Nanliang County is bordered by five counties including Fenyang, Xinqu, Chen, Meng and Chongyi.

古文：北谯梁蒙城父《永元志》属南谯
现代文：北谯梁蒙城父《永元志》属南谯
English: "Yongyuan Zhi" by Liang Mengcheng, the father of Beilun, belongs to Nanxun

古文：北陈郡
现代文：北陈郡
English: North Chen County

古文：阳夏西华苌平项
现代文：阳夏西华苌平项
English: Yang, Xia, Xi, Hua, Jiao, Ping

古文：陈留郡
现代文：陈留郡
English: Chenlu County

古文：浚仪小黄雍丘
现代文：浚仪小黄雍丘
English: A dredger dredges Xiaohuangyongqiu

古文：南顿郡《永元元年地志》无
现代文：南顿郡《永元元年地志》无
English: Nantong County, "Yongyuan Year 1 Geography," none

古文：和城南顿
现代文：和城南顿
English: and Shonan Town

古文：西南顿郡寄治州，《永元元年地志》无
现代文：西南顿郡寄治州，《永元元年地志》无
English: Southwest Dundon County, Yeojizhou, "Yongyuan Year 1 Geography" none

古文：西南顿和城谯平乡
现代文：西南顿和城谯平乡
English: Southwest Donghe Township and Chengyu Pingxiang Township

古文：北梁郡《永元元年地志》无
现代文：北梁郡《永元元年地志》无
English: Beiliang County, "Yongyuan Year 1 Geography," none

古文：北蒙北陈
现代文：北蒙北陈
English: North Meng, North Chen

古文：西汝阴郡
现代文：西汝阴郡
English: Xiruyin County

古文：楼烦汝阴宋陈《永元志》无平豫《永元志》无固始《永元志》无新蔡《永元志》无汝南《永元志》无安城北谯郡
现代文：楼烦汝阴宋陈《永元志》无平豫《永元志》无固始《永元志》无新蔡《永元志》无汝南《永元志》无安城北谯郡
English: 楼烦汝陰Song Chen "Yong Yuan Zhi"无平豫 "Yong Yuan Zi"无固始 "Yong Yuan Zi"无新蔡 "Yong Yuan Zi"无汝南 "Yong Yuan Zi"无安城北郡

古文：宁陵谯蕲《永元志》属南谯
现代文：宁陵谯蕲《永元志》属南谯
English: "Yongyuan Zhi" in Ningling County belongs to the Southern Yunnan Province

古文：汝南郡《永元元年地志》无
现代文：汝南郡《永元元年地志》无
English: "Yongyuan Year 1 Geography" of Runan County has no

古文：瞿阳安城上蔡
现代文：瞿阳安城上蔡
English: Shenyang Ancheng Shangcai

古文：北新蔡郡
现代文：北新蔡郡
English: Beixin Cai County

古文：鲖阳新蔡固始苞信
现代文：鲖阳新蔡固始苞信
English: Shenyang Xin Cai Gu Shi Junxin

古文：弋阳郡
现代文：弋阳郡
English: Jinyang County

古文：期思南新息弋阳上蔡平舆
现代文：期思南新息弋阳上蔡平舆
English: Cai Ping Mei's New Year's Resolution

古文：陈郡
现代文：陈郡
English: Chen County

古文：南陈苌平《永元志》无项《永元志》无西华《永元志》无阳夏《永元志》无
现代文：南陈苌平《永元志》无项《永元志》无西华《永元志》无阳夏《永元志》无
English: South Chen Yuping "Yong Yuan Zhi" no item "Yong Yuan Zi" no Xihua "Yong Yuan Zi" no Yang Xia "Yong Yuan Zi" no

古文：安丰郡
现代文：安丰郡
English: Anfeng County

古文：雩娄新化史水扶阳开化边城松滋《永元志》属北新蔡安丰
现代文：雩娄新化史水扶阳开化边城松滋《永元志》属北新蔡安丰
English: Xinhua History Water Fuyang Civilization Border Town Songzhi "Yongyuan Zhi" belongs to Beixin Cai Anfeng

古文：光城左郡
现代文：光城左郡
English: Guangcheng Zuo County

古文：乐安光城茹田
现代文：乐安光城茹田
English: Le An Guangcheng, Zhoutian

古文：边城郡《永元元年地志》无
现代文：边城郡《永元元年地志》无
English: "Yongyuan Geography in the First Year of the Yongyuan Era" of Biancheng County

古文：建宁郡
现代文：建宁郡
English: Jiankui Juku

古文：阳城建宁
现代文：阳城建宁
English: Yangcheng Jianning

古文：齐昌郡
现代文：齐昌郡
English: Qichang County

古文：阳塘保城齐昌永兴
现代文：阳塘保城齐昌永兴
English: Yangtang Baocheng Qichang Yongxing

古文：右三郡，永明四年割郢州属。
现代文：以上三郡，永明四年割自郢州所辖。
English: The above three counties were separated from the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou in the fourth year of Yongming.

古文：南豫州。晋宁康元年，豫州刺史桓冲始镇姑熟，后迁徙，见《晋书》。
现代文：南豫州，置空尘元年，邃业刺史旦迚最初在姑熟设治所，后又迁走，见于《晋书》。
English: In the year of the first year of the Southern Yuzhou, the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first

古文：宋永初二年，分淮东为南豫州，治历阳，而淮西为豫州。
现代文：宋永初二年，分出淮束作为南豫州，治所在历阳，而把淮西作为豫州。
English: In the second year of Song Yongchun, Huai Zhou was divided into South Henan, governed by Liyang, and Huaixi was divided into Henan.

古文：元嘉七年省并。
现代文：元嘉七年撤并。
English: Yuanjia was annexed seven years later.

古文：大明元年复置，治姑熟。
现代文：大明元年又设置，治所在姑熟。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, it was set up again, and the place of administration was familiar.

古文：泰始二年治历阳，三年治宣城，五年省。
现代文：泰始二年治所在历阳，泰始三年治所在宣城，泰始五年撤销。
English: In the first two years of the reign of King Taizong, the capital was Liyang. In the first three years of the reign of King Taizong, the capital was Xuancheng. In the first five years of the reign of King Taizong, the capital was abolished.

古文：淮西没虏，七年，复分淮东置南豫。
现代文：淮西沦陷。泰始七年，又分出淮东设南豫州。
English: West Huai fell. In the seventh year of the Taizhi era, East Huai was split off to form South Henan.

古文：建元二年，太祖以西豫吏民寡刻，分置两州，损费甚多，省南豫。
现代文：建元二年，太祖认为西豫州官吏百姓都很少，分设两个州，耗费太多，想撤销南豫州。
English: In the second year of the founding of the Republic of China, Taizu thought that there were too few officials and common people in West Henan and that it would cost too much to separate the two provinces, and he wanted to abolish South Henan.

古文：左仆射王俭启： 愚意政以江西连接汝、颍，土旷民希。匈奴越逸，唯以寿春为阻。
现代文：左仆射王俭启奏说： 我认为正因为长江以西连接汝、颖，地广人稀，匈奴入侵，衹有把寿春作为阻挡。
English: His left-hand man, Shaowang Jianqi, said, "I think it is precisely because the Yangtze River connects Ru and Ying to the west, and the land is sparsely populated, that the Xiongnu invaded, and Shuchun was used as a barrier.

古文：若使州任得才，虏动要有声闻，豫设防御，此则不俟南豫。
现代文：如果州刺史用人得当，敌寇一有行动立即报告，事先准备防御，那么不一定要南豫州。
English: If the prefecture employs people properly, immediately reports to the enemy if there is any action, and prepares for defense in advance, then it is not necessary to go to South Henan Province.

古文：假令或虑一失，丑羯之来，声不先闻，胡马倏至，寿阳婴城固守不能断其路，朝廷遗军历阳，已当不得先机。
现代文：但假如谋划有失误，羯人入侵，事先没有得到消息，他们的人马一下子打过来，寿阳固守城池，不能阻断他们的来路，朝廷派遣军队到历阳，也失去了主动。
English: However, if there is a mistake in the planning, if the invaders invade without prior notice, and their troops suddenly attack, Shouyang will hold the city and cannot block their way, and the imperial court will send troops to Liyang and lose the initiative.

古文：戎车初戒，每事草创，孰与方镇常居，军府素正。
现代文：况且兵马刚实施戒备，每件事情都需草创，哪比得上将帅常年驻守，军中一贯整饬。
English: Moreover, the soldiers and horses have just been put on alert, everything needs to be created from scratch, which is comparable to the admiral stationed all year round, and the army has always been rectified.

古文：临时配助，所益实少。安不忘危，古之善政。
现代文：临时配置帮助，益处实在有限，安稳时不忘危险，这是古来的善政。
English: It is an ancient maxim of good government that the temporary provision of aid is of very limited benefit, and that danger should not be forgotten in times of tranquillity.

古文：所以江左屡分南豫，意亦可求。
现代文：因此江左屡次分设南豫州，用意也是可以理解的。
English: Therefore, it is understandable that Jiang Zuo has repeatedly set up South Yuzhou.

古文：如闻西豫力役尚复粗可，今得南谯等郡，民户益薄，于其实益，复何足云。 
现代文：而且听说酉豫州的民力人役大致还可以，现在得到的亩讥等郡，民家更少，对于它的实际帮助，又从何谈起。 
English: Moreover, I have heard that the people's power and manpower in Zhengyuzhou are generally OK, but the counties such as Muqian and other counties have fewer private houses, so how can we talk about its actual help?

古文：太祖不从。
现代文：太祖没有听从。
English: The great-grandfather did not listen.

古文：永明二年，割扬州宣城、淮南，豫州历阳、谯、庐江、临江六郡，复置南豫州。
现代文：永明二年，割出扬州宣球、进直，遂业历屋、盏、庐逗、堕旦六郡，又设置南豫州。
English: In the second year of Yongming, Yangzhou Xuanqiu and Jinzhi were carved out, and six counties of Liya, Zhan, Zizhi, and Guodan were completed, and South Yuzhou was set up.

古文：四年，冠军长史沈宪启： 二豫分置，以桑堁子亭为断。
现代文：永明四年，冠军长史沈宪启奏说： 两个邀州的区划，以桑垛子亭为界。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, Shen Xianqi, the champion of Changshi, said: The division of the two invited states is bounded by Mulberry Garden.

古文：颍川、汝阳在南谯、历阳界内，悉属西豫，庐江居晋熙、汝阴之中，属南豫。
现代文：颖一、这区在卢尽、历荡界内，却全部属西豫州，庐丝处在置凰、这壁之间，却属于南豫州。
English: Yingyi, this area is within the boundaries of Lujin and Liguo, but it all belongs to West Henan Province, while Jinshi is located in Jiaoxing, between these walls, but it belongs to South Henan Province.

古文：求以颍川、汝阳属南豫，庐江还西豫。 
现代文：请求把迩丛、迪屋归属应邀业，把庐丝还给酉辽姐。 
English: The request is to return the cocoon and the tea house to the invited industry, and to return the cocoon to the Liao sisters.

古文：七年，南豫州别驾殷瀰称： 颍川、汝阳，荒残来久，流民分散在谯、历二境，多蒙复除，获有郡名，租输益微，府州绝无将吏，空受名领，终无实益。
现代文：丞塱七年，南豫州别驾昼迩声称： 题丛、这堕，饥荒残破已久，流民分散在谯、历二郡境内，多蒙免除徭役，才有了郡名，交纳的田租非常有限，府州没有一个将领官吏，衹是领受一个空名，根本没有实际利益。
English: In the seventh year of Zheng He's reign, the Southern Henan prefectural governors declared: "The problems, the decline, and the famine have been broken for a long time. The displaced people are scattered in the territory of the two counties of Zheng He and Lijiang. It was only when Domon was exempted from forced labor that the county got its name. The land rent paid is very limited. There is no general or official in the prefecture or state. Zheng He received an empty name, and there is no actual benefit at all.

古文：但寄治谯、历，于方断之宜，实应属南豫。
现代文：把治所寄放在谯、历，还是合适的，实际也应该属于南豫州。
English: It is still appropriate to place the seat of government in the year of the rooster and the horse, and it should actually belong to South Henan Province.

古文：二豫亟经分置，庐江属南豫，滨带长江，与南谯接境，民黎租帛，从流送州，实为便利，远逾西豫，非其所愿，郡领灊舒及始新左县，村竹产，府州采伐，为益不少。
现代文：两个豫州屡经分置，庐辽属于直逊业，滨临垦辽，与直越郡接壤，百姓的田租布帛，经由水路送到州裹，确实是便利，如果输送到西豫州那样远，他们不会愿意，另外庐辽管辖的迁复及验堑、左墨，出产竹子，府州采伐，获利不少。
English: The two provinces of Henan and Liaoning have been separated many times. Henan and Liaoning belong to Zhousong County, and Binlin and Liaoning border Zhousong County. It is really convenient for the people's rice fields to be transported by water to Zhousong County. If they were transported as far as West Henan Province, they would not be willing. In addition, the relocation and inspection of Liaoning and Zuoying under the jurisdiction of Henan and Liaoning, the production of bamboo, and the harvesting in Fuzhou have made a lot of profit.

古文：府州新创，异于旧藩。资役多阙，实希得庐江。
现代文：府州都是新设，不同于旧的府州，资产人役多有欠缺，确实很倚重庐江。
English: The prefectures are all newly established, and unlike the old prefectures, there is a shortage of assets and personnel, and they really rely heavily on the Li River.

古文：请依昔分置。 
现代文：希望依照过去的区划。 
English: It is hoped that this will be done in accordance with the previous zoning.

古文：尚书参议： 往年虑边尘须实，故启回换。
现代文：尚书台商议： 往年考虑边境战事需要充实力量，所以改换区划。
English: Shang Shudai deliberated: In previous years, considering the need to strengthen the strength of the border war, it was necessary to change the zoning.

古文：今淮、泗无虞，宜许所牒。 诏 可 。
现代文：如今淮河、泅水一带没有什么可顾虑的，应该准许殷弥的奏牒。 皇帝下诏说： 可以。 
English: Now that there is nothing to worry about in the Huaihe and Surabaya areas, Yin's ultimatum should be allowed. The emperor issued an edict saying, "Yes."

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：南豫州统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：淮南郡
现代文：淮南郡
English: Huainan County

古文：于湖永明八年，省角城、高平、下邳三县并。
现代文：王趔丞塱八年，撤销鱼继、产垩、工巫三县并入。
English: In the eighth year of Wang Bingzheng, the merger of Yuzhi, Zhoushan and Gongwu into three counties was revoked.

古文：繁昌当涂浚遒定陵襄垣
现代文：繁昌当涂浚遒定陵襄垣
English: Hanchang when painting dredging, Dingling Mausoleum, Xiangyuan

古文：宣城郡
现代文：宣城郡
English: Xuancheng County

古文：广德怀安宛陵广阳石城临城宁国宣城建元泾安吴
现代文：广德怀安宛陵广阳石城临城宁国宣城建元泾安吴
English: Guangde, Huai'an, Wanling, Guangyang, Shicheng, Lincheng, Ningguo, Xuancheng, Jianyuan, An'an, Wu

古文：历阳郡
现代文：历阳郡
English: Liyang County

古文：历阳龙亢雍丘
现代文：历阳龙亢雍丘
English: Liyang Longjing Yongqiu

古文：南谯郡
现代文：南谯郡
English: Nanlu County

古文：山桑蕲北许昌《永元志》无扶阳曲阳嘉平
现代文：山桑蕲北许昌《永元志》中没有。扶阳曲阳嘉干
English: There is no mountain mulberry in Northern Xu Chang's "Yong Yuan Zhi." Fuyang Quyang Jia Gan

古文：庐江郡
现代文：庐江郡
English: Minjiang County

古文：舒建元二年为郡治灊始新和城《永元志》无西华《永元志》无吕亭左县建元二年，割晋熙属。
现代文：舒建元二年是郡的治所。潜始新和城《永元志》中没有。西华《永元志》中没有。吕亭左县建元二年，割白晋熙归属。
English: In the second year of Shu Jian Yuan, it was the county seat. There is no mention of Xinshinhecheng in the "Yongyuan History." There is no mention of it in the "Yongyuan History" of Western China. In the second year of the first year of Shu Jian Yuan, Lutingza County belonged to Bai Jinxi.

古文：谯建元二年，割南谯属。
现代文：谯建元二年，割自南谯归属。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, it was separated from Nanxun and belonged to Nanxun.

古文：临江郡建元二年，罢并历阳，后复置。
现代文：临江郡建元二年，撤销并入历阳，后又设置。
English: Linjiang County was founded in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, revoked and merged into Liyang, and later set up.

古文：乌江怀德酂
现代文：乌辽坏壁墨
English: Wuliao Bad Wall Ink

古文：南兖州，镇广陵，汉故王国。
现代文：南兖州治所在广陵，是汉代的古王国。
English: South Luzhou is governed by Guangling, an ancient kingdom of the Han Dynasty.

古文：有江都浦水，魏文帝伐吴出此，见江涛盛壮，叹云： 天所以限南北也。 
现代文：境内有江都浦水，魏文帝讨伐吴国由此出兵，看到长江波涛汹涌，感叹说： 这是上天要隔断南北啊。 
English: Pushui, the capital of the Yangtze River, is located in the territory. Emperor Wei Wendi sent troops there to fight against the State of Wu. Seeing the turbulent waves of the Yangtze River, he sighed and said, "This is God's will to separate the north and the south."

古文：晋元帝过江，建兴四年，扬声北讨，遣宣城公裒督徐、兖二州，镇广陵。
现代文：晋元帝渡过长江，建兴四年，扬言北伐，派遣宣城公裒督率徐、兖二州，坐镇广陵。
English: Emperor Jin Yuan crossed the Yangtze River, and after four years of construction, he threatened the Northern Expedition and dispatched Xuancheng's procurator-general to lead Xu and Zou to the two prefectures and settle in Guangling.

古文：其后或还江南，然立镇自此始也。
现代文：其后有时撤回江南，但是建立治所是从这时开始的。
English: After that, it was sometimes withdrawn to the south of the Yangtze River, but the establishment of the government office began at this time.

古文：时百姓遭难，流移此境，流民多庇大姓以为客。
现代文：当时百姓遭逢战乱，流亡到此地，流民多托庇大户人家作为佃户。
English: At that time, the people suffered from war and were exiled to this place. Many of the exiles had large families as tenants.

古文：元帝太兴四年，诏以流民失籍，使条名上有司，为给客制度，而江北荒残，不可检实。
现代文：晋元帝大兴四年，下诏令，因为流民失去户籍，让他们具名上报官府，建立给客制度，然而江北荒废残破，不可能检查核实。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Prosperity, Emperor Jin Yuan issued a decree that, because the displaced people lost their household registration, they should report their names to the government and establish a guest system. However, the northern part of the Yangtze River was deserted and ruined, and it was impossible to check and verify.

古文：明帝太宁三年，郗鉴为兖州，镇广陵，后还京口。
现代文：晋明帝太宁三年，郗鉴治理兖州，坐镇广陵，后回到京。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming Dynasties, Shujian governed Bozhou, sat in the town of Guangling, and then returned to Beijing.

古文：是后兖州或治盱眙，或治山阳。桓玄以桓弘为青州，镇广陵。
现代文：此后兖州或以盱眙为治所，或以山阳为治所，桓玄派桓弘治理青州，坐镇广陵。
English: Since then, Bozhou has been governed by either Shun or Sanyang, and Kuan Xuan sent Kuan Hong to govern Qingzhou, and he took up residence in Guangling.

古文：义熙二年，诸葛长民为青州，徙山阳。
现代文：义熙二年，诸葛长民治理青州，治所迁到山阳。
English: In the second year of Yixi, Zhuge Changmin governed Qingzhou, and the government office moved to Sanyang.

古文：时鲜卑接境，长民表云： 此蕃十载衅故相袭，城池崩毁，荒旧散伏，边疆诸戍，不闻鸡犬。
现代文：当时与鲜卑接壤，诸葛长民上表说： 该城连续十年遭受侵扰，城池崩塌毁坏，废弃散置，边界各处营垒，听不到鹦鸣狗叫。
English: At that time, bordering Xianbei, Zhuge Changmin publicly said: The city has been subjected to ten consecutive years of invasion, the city collapsed and destroyed, abandoned and scattered, the border everywhere barricades, can not hear the parrot singing dog.

古文：且犬羊侵暴，抄掠滋甚。 
现代文：而且胡虏入侵逞暴，抢掠越发厉害。 
English: Moreover, the Huns invaded aggressively, and the looting became more and more severe.

古文：乃还镇京口。
现代文：于是回到京口坐镇。
English: So I went back to Kyoguchi to sit in the town.

古文：晋末以广陵控接三齐，故青、兖同镇。
现代文：晋木，因为广陵控制三齐且与之接壤，所以作为青州、兖州共同的治所。
English: Jinmu, because Guangling controls Sanqi and borders it, is the common administrative center of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：宋永初元年，罢青并兖。
现代文：宋永初元年，撤销青州并入兖州。
English: In the first year of Song and Yong, Qingzhou was revoked and merged into Zhangzhou.

古文：三年，檀道济始为南兖州，广陵因此为州镇。
现代文：永初三年，檀道济初治南兖州，广陵因此成为州的治所。
English: At the beginning of the third year of Yongzheng, Dangdoji first governed Nanluozhou, and Guangling thus became the provincial capital.

古文：土甚平旷，刺史每以秋月多出海陵观涛，与京口对岸，江之壮阔处也。
现代文：土地非常平坦开阔，刺史每年秋季多出海陵观涛，与京口隔岸相对，是长江壮阔的地方。
English: The land is very flat and open, and in the autumn of each year, there are more sightings of the sea. Opposite the coast of Beijing, it is a magnificent place on the Yangtze River.

古文：永明元年，刺史柳世隆奏： 尚书符下土断条格，并省侨郡县。
现代文：永明元年，刺史柳世隆上奏说： 尚书台下令不论本地人还是外来户，统一在所居住的郡县编制户，合并撤销侨置郡县。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Liu Shilong, a senior official of the State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television of the People's Republic of China, said: "The State Administration of Press, Film and Television of the People's Republic of China has ordered that all households, regardless of whether they are local residents or foreigners, should be registered in the county where they live.

古文：凡诸流寓，本无定憩，十家五落，各自星处。
现代文：举凡那些寄居他乡的流民，本来就居无定所，十家分布五处，零散居住。
English: For example, all those migrants who live in other towns have no permanent residence. They live in ten families in five places, scattered.

古文：一县之民，散在州境，西至淮畔，东届海隅。
现代文：一个县的百姓，分散在全州，西到淮河岸边，束到大海一角。
English: The people of a county are scattered all over the state, stretching west to the banks of the Huai River and stretching to the edge of the sea.

古文：今专罢侨邦，不省荒邑，杂居舛止，与先不异。
现代文：现在祇是撤销侨置郡县，不撤销荒废的城邑，杂乱居住的状况，与原先没有不同。
English: Now, only the resettlement of overseas Chinese in counties and counties has been revoked, but the abandoned cities and towns have not been revoked, and the chaotic living conditions are no different from before.

古文：离为区断，无革游滥。
现代文：按地区编制户口，并不能革除游荡混乱的状况。
English: Compiling hukou by region cannot eliminate the chaotic situation caused by wandering.

古文：谓应同省，随堺并帖。
现代文：我认为侨置郡县和荒废的城邑都应撤销，依照目前地界安抚百姓。
English: I think that the overseas Chinese-occupied counties and deserted townships should be revoked, and the people should be pacified according to the current territorial boundaries.

古文：若乡屯里聚，二三百家，井甸可修，区域易分者，别详立。 
现代文：如果乡里聚居的民户有二三百家，田地能够整修，区域易于划分，当另外建置。 
English: If there are two or three hundred private households living in the village, the fields can be renovated, the area is easy to divide, and it should be built separately.

古文：于是济阴郡六县，下邳郡四县，淮阳郡三县，东莞郡四县，以散居无实土，官长无廨舍，寄止民村，及州治立，见省，民户帖属。
现代文：于是济阴郡六县，下邳郡四县，淮阳郡三县，东莞郡四县，因为百姓散居各处，没有实际管辖地，长官没有官署，寄居在乡村，等到州的治所建立，就被撤销，民户就地归属。
English: As a result, six counties in Jiyin County, four counties in Heshan County, three counties in Huaiyang County, and four counties in Dongguan County, because the people are scattered everywhere, there is no actual jurisdiction, the chief has no official office, sojourns in the village, and when the state's administrative center is established, it will be revoked, and the households will belong to the place.

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：南兖州统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：广陵郡建元四年，罢北淮阳、北下邳、北济阴、东莞四郡并。
现代文：广陵郡建元四年，撤销北淮阳、北下邳、北济阴、塞差四郡并入。
English: Guangling County was founded in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, and the four counties of North Huaiyang, North Jiaozuo, North Jiyin and Xiezha were merged.

古文：海陵广陵高邮江都齐宁永明元年置
现代文：海陵广陵高邮江都齐宁永明元年置
English: Hailing Guangling Gaopu Jiangdu Qining Yongming Yuan

古文：海陵郡
现代文：海陵郡
English: Hailing County

古文：建陵宁海如皋临江蒲涛临泽齐昌永明元年置海安永明五年罢新郡，并此县度属。
现代文：建陵宁海如皋临江蒲涛临泽齐昌永明元年置。海安永明五年撤销新郡，合并此县归属。
English: The mausoleum of Ninghai Rugao Linyi Putao Linyi Ze Qichang Yongming was built in the first year of the year. Hai'an Yongming revoked the new county in the fifth year and merged with this county.

古文：山阳郡
现代文：山阳郡
English: Sanyang County

古文：东城山阳盐城左乡
现代文：东城山阳盐城左乡
English: Dongcheng, Sanyang, Yancheng, Zuoxiang

古文：盱眙郡
现代文：盱眙郡
English: Zou County

古文：考城盱眙阳城直渎长乐
现代文：考城盱眙阳城直渎长乐
English: Kaocheng, Shenyang, Zhiguo, Changle

古文：南沛郡
现代文：南沛郡
English: Nanpei County

古文：沛萧相
现代文：沛萧相
English: Pei Xiao-sang

古文：北兖州，镇淮阴。
现代文：北兖州，治所在淮阴。
English: North Luzhou, the capital is Huaiyin.

古文：《地理志》云淮阴县属临淮郡，《郡国志》属下邳国，《晋太康地记》属广陵郡。
现代文：《地理志》说淮阴县属临淮郡，《郡国志》中属下邳国，《晋太康地记》中属广陵郡。
English: "Geography" says that Huaiyin County belongs to Linhuai County, "County History" belongs to the subordinate Shandong Province, and "Jin Taikang Geography" belongs to Guangling County.

古文：穆帝永和中，北中郎将荀羡北讨鲜卑，云 淮阴旧镇，地形都要，水陆交通，易以观衅。
现代文：穆帝永和年间，北中郎将荀羡北伐鲜卑，说： 淮阴是从前的治所，地处中枢，水陆交通便利，易于伺机行动。
English: During the reign of Mu Di Yonghe, the Northern Middle Man envied the Northern Crusader Xianbei, saying: Huaiyin was the former capital, located in the center, with convenient land and water transportation, and easy to wait for action.

古文：沃野有开殖之利，方舟运漕，无他屯阻。 
现代文：沃野有垦殖之利，舟船漕运，没有什么阻碍。 
English: Fertile fields have the advantage of germination and propagation, and there are no obstacles to boat and row transportation.

古文：乃营立城池。
现代文：于是营建城池。
English: As a result, a castle was built.

古文：宋泰始二年失淮北，于此立州镇。
现代文：宋泰始二年失掉淮北，在此建立州的治所。
English: Song Taishi lost Huaibei in the second year and established a state government here.

古文：建元四年，移镇盱眙，仍领盱眙郡。
现代文：建元四年，治所移至盱眙，兼管盱眙郡。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Administrative Office was moved to Handan, and also administered Handan County.

古文：旧北对清泗，临淮守险，有阳平石鳖，田稻丰饶。
现代文：原先与北边清泗相对，滨临淮河据守险要，有阳平石鳖，田中稻谷丰饶。
English: Originally, in contrast to the north side of Qingdao, the coast near the Huaihe River was considered to be dangerous, with Yangping Rock and rich rice fields in Tanaka.

古文：所领唯阳平一郡，永明七年，光禄大夫吕安国启称： 北兖州民戴尚伯六十人诉 旧壤幽隔，飘寓失所，今虽创置淮阴，而阳平一郡，州无实土，寄山阳境内。
现代文：所统辖的衹有阳平一郡，永明七年，光禄大夫吕安国上奏说： 北兖州百姓戴尚伯六十人陈诉说， 我们失去了原有的土地，流离失所，现在虽然创建了淮阴，然而阳平郡在州裹没有实际统辖地，寄居在山阳境内。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming Dynasty, Lu'an Guo, a doctor of Guanglu, who was in charge of the county of Yangping, said: "Sixty people from Dashanbe in North Luzhou told us that we had lost our original land and were displaced. Although Huaiyin was founded, Yangping County did not actually have a place of jurisdiction in the state, and they lived in the territory of Shanyang.

古文：窃见司、徐、青三州，悉皆新立，并有实郡。
现代文：我们认为司、徐、青三州，全都是新设置的，都有实在的郡。
English: We believe that the three prefectures of Si, Xu and Qing are all newly established and have real counties.

古文：东平既是望邦，衣冠所系。
现代文：束平既然是有名望之地，许多士绅与它相关。
English: Since Sokuhira is a prestigious place, many gentry are related to it.

古文：希于山阳、盱眙二界间割小户置此郡，始招集荒落，使本壤族姓，有所归依。 
现代文：希望在山阳、盱眙两郡的边界之间，割一些小户设置东平郡，开始招集人充实荒废的村落。使束平本上的士绅百姓，有地方归依 。
English: It is hoped that between the borders of Shanyang and Handan counties, some small households will be set up in Dongping County, and people will be recruited to replenish the abandoned villages.

古文：臣寻东平郡既是此州本领，臣贱族桑梓，愿立此邦。 
现代文：我寻思束平郡既然本是北兖少所属，我家族的故里，希望设置此郡。 
English: I'm thinking about Sokping County, since it used to belong to Beilun Minority, my family's hometown, I hope to set up this county.

古文：见许。
现代文：被准许。
English: Permission was granted.

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：北兖州统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：阳平郡寄治山阳
现代文：阳平郡治所寄居山阳。
English: The Yangping County Juvenile Detention Center is located in Sanyang.

古文：泰清永阳安宜丰国
现代文：泰清永阳安宜丰国
English: Taiqing, Yongyang, Angi, Fengguo

古文：东平郡
现代文：东平郡
English: Dongping County

古文：寿张割山阳官渎以西三百户置淮安割直渎、破釜以东，淮阴镇下流杂一百户置。
现代文：寿张分割山阳官渎以西三百户设置。淮安分割直渎、破釜以束，淮阴镇治所属下一百户流民设置。
English: Shou Zhang was divided into three hundred households west of the Sanyang official encroachment. Huai An was divided into direct encroachment, breaking the kettle with a bundle, and the next hundred households belonging to Huai Yin Zhenji were set up.

古文：高平郡
现代文：高平郡
English: Gaoping County

古文：济北郡
现代文：济北郡
English: Jeonbuk-gun

古文：泰山郡
现代文：泰山郡
English: Taishan County

古文：新平郡
现代文：新平郡
English: Xinping County

古文：鲁郡
现代文：鲁郡
English: Lu County

古文：右荒。
现代文：以上各郡荒置。
English: All of the above counties are vacant.

古文：北徐州，镇钟离。
现代文：北徐州，治所在钟离。
English: North of Xuzhou, the capital is Zhongli.

古文：《汉志》锺离县属九江郡，《晋太康二年起居注》置淮南钟离，未详此前所省令。
现代文：《漠志》中钟离县属九江郡，《晋太康二年起居注》中设置淮南钟墼，不了解此前的沿革。
English: Zhongli County belongs to Jiujiang County in "Moshi," and Huainan Zhongyi County is set up in "Jin Taikang's Second Year of Residence," but the previous history is not known.

古文：《晋地记》属淮南郡。
现代文：《晋地记》中属淮南郡。
English: It belongs to Huainan County in "Jin Di Ji."

古文：宋泰始末年属南兖。
现代文：塞童丝末年归属南兖州。
English: At the end of his life, Sedong Si belonged to Nanxizhou.

古文：元徽元年置州，割为州治，防镇缘淮。
现代文：五邀元年设州，割出来成为州的治所，沿淮河防卫镇守。
English: It was set up as a prefecture-level city in the first year of the fifth lunar month. It was carved out as a prefecture-level city and became a defense town along the Huai River.

古文：永明元年，省北徐谯、梁、魏、阳平、彭城五郡。
现代文：永明元年，撤销北徐州的谯、梁、魏、阳平、彭城五郡。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the five counties of Min, Liang, Wei, Yangping and Pengcheng in North Xuzhou were abolished.

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：北徐州统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：锺离郡
现代文：锺离郡
English: Zhili County

古文：燕县郡治朝歌虞永明元年，割马头属。
现代文：燕县郡治朝歌虞永明元年，割马头属。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, Yan County was ruled by the Song Dynasty, and belonged to the Ma Tou Dynasty.

古文：零永明元年，割马头属。
现代文：零永明元年，割马头属。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the horse's head was cut off.

古文：马头郡
现代文：马头郡
English: Ma Tau Wai

古文：已吾永明元年，罢谯郡属。
现代文：已吾永明元年，罢谯郡属。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, it was removed from the county.

古文：二年，刺史戴僧静又以济县并之。
现代文：二年，刺史戴僧静又以济县并之。
English: Two years later, Ji County was merged with Ji County.

古文：济阴郡
现代文：济阴郡
English: Zhiyin County

古文：顿丘永明元年，罢定陶并。
现代文：顿丘永明元年，罢定陶并。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, Dongqiu was conquered by Taobao.

古文：睢陵乐平永明元年，割钟离属。
现代文：睢陵乐平永明元年，割钟离属。
English: In the first year of Yongming, Fuling Leping was separated from the bell.

古文：济安永明元年，割钟离属。
现代文：济安永明元年，割钟离属。
English: In the first year of Jian Yongming, the bell was separated from the bell.

古文：新昌郡
现代文：新昌郡
English: Xinchang County

古文：顿丘谷熟尉氏
现代文：顿丘谷熟尉氏
English: Dongqiu Valley Lieutenant

古文：沛郡
现代文：沛郡
English: Pei County

古文：相萧沛
现代文：相萧沛
English: Ai Xiaopei

古文：青州，宋泰始初淮北没虏，六年，始治郁州上。
现代文：壹业，塞童始初进韭陷入敌手，童并六年，直丛治所才设在郁丛岛上。
English: In the first year, the children of Sa fell into the hands of the enemy at the beginning of the school year. It took the children six years to set up the Zhichangzhu Institute on Yucuzhu Island.

古文：郁州在海中，周回数百里，岛出白鹿，土有田畴鱼盐之利。
现代文：郁业在海中，周围数百里，岛上出产白鹿，境内有田地鱼盐之利。
English: Ikuye is in the sea, surrounded by hundreds of miles, the island produces white deer, and there are fields of fish and salt in the territory.

古文：刘善明为刺史，以海中易固，不峻城雉，乃累石为之，高可八九尺。
现代文：刘善塱任刺史，认为海中容易固守，不修筑险峻的城墙，祇是垒石作为城墙，高约八九尺。
English: Liu Shanzhao was a history buff who believed that it was easier to hold fast in the middle of the sea. He did not build a precipitous wall, but only a foundation stone as a wall, about eighty-nine feet high.

古文：后为齐郡治。
现代文：后来成为变虽的治所。
English: Later, it became the seat of government.

古文：建元初，徙齐郡治瓜步，以北海治齐郡故治，州治如旧。
现代文：纽初年，查登的治所迁到巫步，以韭复的治所设在查邓的旧治所，州的治所仍旧。
English: In the first year of the New Year, the Chadong office was moved to Wubo, the Tongfu office was set up in the old office of Chadong, and the state office is still there.

古文：流荒之民，郡县虚置，至于分居土著，盖无几焉。
现代文：由于百姓流亡土地废弃，郡县成为虚设，至于本分安居的土著百姓，大概没有多少了。
English: As a result of the abandonment of the land by the people in exile, the counties have become empty. As for the indigenous people who live in peace and security, there is probably not much left.

古文：建元四年，移镇朐山，后复旧。
现代文：建五四年，治所移到朐山，后又回到旧治所。
English: Built in 1954, the government office was moved to Lushan, and then returned to the old government office.

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：青州统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：齐郡永明元年，罢秦郡并之，治瓜步。
现代文：查登丞塱元年，撤销奎邵合并进来，治所在步。
English: In the first year of Cha Dengzheng, the revocation of Qui Shao and the merger came in, and the governance was in progress.

古文：临淄永明二年，省华城县并齐安永明元年罢西安宿豫尉氏平虏昌国泰益都
现代文：堕赵丞型二年，撤销垄球逊并入。盘丞塱元年撤销。迺篮堕堕慰旦垩卢星回台益都
English: Two years after the fall of Zhao Zheng, the annexation of Rengqubo was revoked. The annexation of Pan Zheng was revoked in the first year of the year.

古文：北海郡都昌宋郁县，建元改用汉名也。广饶赣榆胶东剧下密平寿东莞琅邪二郡治朐山也
现代文：苞遏苤时的堑墨，至纽时改用迈名。龌赣榆胶束剧下密平寿东莞琅邪二郡治所设在朐山。
English: The two-county government office of Dongguan Miping Co., Ltd. is located in Lushan.

古文：即丘南东莞永明元年，以流户置。
现代文：即丘南东莞永明元年，用流民设置。
English: Namely, in the first year of Yongming in the south of Dongguan, it was set up with migrants.

古文：北东莞
现代文：北东莞
English: North Dongguan

古文：冀州，宋元嘉九年分青州置。
现代文：冀州，宋元嘉九年从青州分出设置。
English: In Jizhou, Songyuanjia was separated from Qingzhou nine years ago.

古文：青州领齐、济南、乐安、高密、平昌、北海、东莱、太原、长广九郡，冀州领广川、平原、清河、乐陵、魏郡、河间、顿丘、高阳、勃海九郡。
现代文：青州辖齐、济南、乐安、高密、平昌、北海、柬莱、太原、长广九郡，冀州辖广川、平原、清河、乐陵、魏郡、河闲、顿丘、高阳、勃海九郡。
English: Qingzhou has jurisdiction over nine counties: Qi, Jinan, Le'an, Gaomi, Pyeongchang, Beihai, Kamlai, Taiyuan, and Changguang, and Jizhou has jurisdiction over nine counties: Guangchuan, Pingyuan, Qinghe, Le Ling, Wei, Heyun, Dongqiu, Gaoyang, and Bohai.

古文：泰始初，遇虏寇，并荒没。
现代文：泰始初年，遭胡虏入侵，都沦落敌手。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, they were invaded by the Huns and became enemies.

古文：今所存者，泰始之后更置立也。
现代文：现在所存的，是泰始之后重新设置的。
English: What we have now was re-established after Taizhi.

古文：二州共一刺史。
现代文：两个州共一个刺史。
English: The two states share a common history.

古文：郡县十无八九，但有名存，案《宋志》自知也。
现代文：郡县十个中没了八九个，衹存下了名字，查一下《宋书郡县志》白会知道。
English: Of the ten counties, eight or nine have disappeared, but their names have been preserved. Check the "Songshu County History" to find out.

古文：建元初，以东海郡属冀州。
现代文：建元初年，把东海郡隶属冀州。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Donghai County was subordinated to Jizhou.

古文：全领一郡：
现代文：总共辖一个郡：
English: It administers a total of one county:

古文：北东海郡治连口
现代文：北东海郡治所在塑。
English: The county seat of Beidonghai County was established.

古文：襄贲僮下邳厚丘曲城
现代文：塞童僮工邳星丘迪球
English: Children's playground, craftsmen's workshop, Star Chudi ball

古文：江州，镇寻阳，中流衿带。
现代文：江州，治所在寻阳，地处长江中游的显要之地。
English: Jiangzhou, with its capital at Xuanyang, is located in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：晋元康元年，惠帝诏： 荆、扬二州，疆土旷远。
现代文：晋元康元年，惠帝下诏说： 荆、扬二州，疆土旷远。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Hui issued a decree saying: Jing and Yang are two states, and the territory is far away.

古文：有司奏割扬州之豫章、鄱阳、庐陵、临川、南康、建安、晋安为新州。
现代文：主管部门奏请割扬州的豫章、鄱阳、庐陵、临川、南康、建安、晋安建立新的州。
English: The competent departments requested the establishment of new prefectures including Yuzhang, Fenyang, Fuling, Linchuan, Nankang, Jian'an and Jin'an.

古文：新安、东阳、宣城旧豫章封内，豫章之东北，相去悬远，可如故属扬州。
现代文：新安、束阳、宣城过去在豫章境内，地处豫章的东北，相距遥远，可仍旧隶属扬州。
English: Xin'an, Sokyang and Xuancheng used to be in the territory of Yuzhang, located in the northeast of Yuzhang, far away from each other, but still belong to Yangzhou.

古文：又割荆州之武昌、桂阳、安成并十郡，可因江水之名为江州，宜治豫章。 
现代文：另割荆州的武昌、桂阳、安成合并成十个郡，可依据长江之名建立江州，治所应设在豫章。 
English: In addition, Wuchang, Guiyang and Ancheng in Jingzhou should be merged into ten counties. Jiangzhou can be established according to the name of the Yangtze River, and the administrative center should be located in Yuzhang.

古文：庾亮领刺史，都督六州，云以荆、江为本，校二州户口，虽相去机事，实觉过半，江州实为根本。
现代文：庾亮领刺史，都督六州，说把荆州、江州作为根本，校核二州户口，虽然二州都远离中央，实际江州在感觉上要近一半多，江州其实是根本。
English: Liang Liangzhi, the governor of six states, said that Jingzhou and Jiangzhou should be regarded as the foundation, and the household registration of the two states should be verified. Although the two states are far away from the center, the actual Jiangzhou is more than half in terms of feeling, and Jiangzhou is actually the foundation.

古文：临终表江州宜治寻阳，以州督豫州新蔡、西阳二郡，治湓城，接近东江诸郡，往来便易。
现代文：庾亮临终上表认为江州的治所应设在寻阳，因为江州督领豫州的新蔡、西阳二郡，治所设在湓城，接近东江各郡，往来便利。
English: On his deathbed, Zou Liang said that the Jiangzhou government office should be located in Huanyang, because Jiangzhou governs the two counties of Xin Cai and Xiyang in Yuzhou. The government office is located in Lucheng, close to the counties of the East River, and it is convenient to travel.

古文：其后庾翼又还豫章。
现代文：此后庾翼又回到豫章。
English: After that, Xingyi returned to Yuzhang.

古文：义熙后，还寻阳。
现代文：义熙以后，回到寻阳。
English: After Yixi, he returned to Xiangyang.

古文：何无忌表： 竟陵去治辽远，去江陵正三百里，荆州所立绥安郡民户，参入此境，郡治常在夏口左右，欲资此郡助江滨戍防，以竟陵还荆州。
现代文：何无忌上表说： 竟陵离州的治所遥远，离江陵仅三百里，荆州的绥安郡民产，参杂在竟陵境内，竟陵的治所常设在夏口附近。要依赖竟陵郡协助长江沿岸的防卫，就得把它归还荆州。
English: There is nothing to be afraid of, the above table says: Qingting is far away from the provincial capital of the state, only three hundred miles away from Jiangling. The private property of Lu'an County in Jingzhou is mixed in the territory of Qingting. The provincial capital of Qingting is often located near Xiakou. To rely on Qingting County to assist in the defense of the Yangtze River coast, it must be returned to Jingzhou.

古文：又司州弘农、扬州松滋二郡，寄寻阳，人民杂居，宜并见督。 
现代文：另外司州的弘农、扬州的松滋二郡，治所寄居寻阳，百姓杂居，应一并归江州统辖。 
English: In addition, the two counties of Hongnong in Sizhou and Songzhi in Yangzhou should be under the jurisdiction of Jiangzhou.

古文：今九江在州镇之北，彭蠡在其东也。
现代文：现在九江在州治所的北边，彭蠡在东边。
English: Now, Jiujiang is in the north of the State Administration Center, and Pengye is in the east.

古文：领郡如左：寻阳郡。
现代文：江州统辖的郡卜：寻阳郡。
English: County B under the jurisdiction of Jiangzhou: Xiangyang County.

古文：柴桑彭泽
现代文：柴桑彭泽
English: Chai Sang Peng Tse

古文：豫章郡
现代文：豫章郡
English: Yuanzhang County

古文：南昌新淦艾建城建昌望蔡新吴永修吴平康乐豫章丰城
现代文：南昌新淦艾建城建昌望蔡新吴永修吴平康乐豫章丰城
English: Nanchang Xinyi Ai Jiancheng Jianchang Wang Caixin Wu Yongshu Wuping Kangle Yuzhang Fengcheng

古文：临川郡
现代文：临川郡
English: Linchuan County

古文：南城临汝新建永城宜黄南丰东兴安浦西丰
现代文：南城临汝新建永城宜黄南丰东兴安浦西丰
English: Nancheng Linru Newly Built Yongcheng Yiwu Nanfeng Dongxing Anpu Xifeng

古文：庐陵郡
现代文：庐陵郡
English: Fuling County

古文：石阳西昌东昌吉阳巴丘兴平高昌阳丰遂兴
现代文：石阳西昌东昌吉阳巴丘兴平高昌阳丰遂兴
English: Shiyang, Xichang, Dongchang, Jiyang, Bachu, Xingping, Gaochang, Yangfeng, Suixing

古文：鄱阳郡
现代文：鄱阳郡
English: Jinyang County

古文：鄱阳余干葛阳乐安广晋上饶
现代文：鄱阳余干葛阳乐安广晋上饶
English: Shenyang YuGan GeYang LeAn GuangJin ShangRao

古文：安成郡
现代文：安成郡
English: Ancheng County

古文：平都新喻永新萍乡宜阳广兴安复
现代文：平都新喻永新萍乡宜阳广兴安复
English: Pingdu Xinyu Yongxinping Township Yiyang Guangxing Restored to Safety

古文：南康郡
现代文：南康郡
English: Namkang County

古文：赣雩都南野宁都平固陂阳虔化永明八年，罢安远县并。
现代文：赣雩都南野宁都平固陂阳虔化永明八年，罢安远县并。
English: In the eighth year of Yongming, the capital city of Nan'an, Ningdu, Pinggu, Shenyang and Qianhua were merged into Anyuan County.

古文：南康
现代文：南康
English: Nankang

古文：南新蔡郡
现代文：南新蔡郡
English: Nanxin Cai County

古文：慎苞信阳唐左县宋
现代文：慎苞信阳唐左县宋
English: The Song Dynasty in Tangza County, Xinyang

古文：建安郡
现代文：建安郡
English: Jian'an County

古文：吴兴建安将乐邵武建阳绥城沙村
现代文：吴兴建安将乐邵武建阳绥城沙村
English: Wu Xing Jian'an will lead Shaowu Jianyang Lecheng Sha Cun

古文：晋安郡
现代文：晋安郡
English: Jinan County

古文：候官罗江原丰晋安温麻
现代文：候官罗江原丰晋安温麻
English: Candidate Luo Jiangyuan Fengjin An Wenma

古文：广州，镇南海。
现代文：卢州，治所在直涂。
English: In Luzhou, the administrative center is Zengdao.

古文：滨际海隅，委输交部，虽民户不多，而俚獠猥杂，皆楼居山险，不肯宾服。
现代文：滨临海角，沟通交州，虽然民家不多，然而俚僚等民族混杂，都居住在山野之中的竹楼上，不肯臣服。
English: Although there are not many private homes in the coastal area of Cape Town, which is connected to Kota Kinabalu, my colleagues and I, who are of mixed ethnicity, live in a bamboo house in the middle of the mountains and fields, and refuse to submit.

古文：西南二江，川源深远，别置督护，专征讨之。
现代文：西南二江，源远流长，另外设置督护，专门负责征讨。
English: Southwest Erjiang, the source is far and the flow is long, in addition, supervision and protection are set up, specially responsible for the collection.

古文：卷握之资，富兼十世。
现代文：积聚的资财，兼有十代之富。
English: The accumulated wealth is the wealth of ten generations.

古文：尉他余基，亦有霸迹，江左以其辽远，蕃戚未有居者，唯宋随王诞为刺史，领郡如左：
现代文：尉他残留的基业，也有称霸之痕迹。逗左王朝因为广州遥远，宗戚没有人前去，衹有塞堕王刘盏任遇刺史。庐业统辖的郡如下：
English: There are also traces of hegemony in the remaining inheritance. Because Guangzhou is far away, no relative of the Zhiza Dynasty went there, and there is a history of the assassination of the fallen king Liu Zhanren. The counties under the jurisdiction of the inheritance are as follows:

古文：南海郡
现代文：南海郡
English: Nanhai County

古文：番禺熙安博罗增城龙川怀化酉平绥宁新丰罗阳高要安远河源东官郡
现代文：番禺熙安博罗增城龙川怀化酉平绥宁新丰罗阳高要安远河源东官郡
English: Panyu Xi'an Borou Zengcheng Longchuan Huaihua Kunping Ningxia Xinfeng Luoyang Gaoya Anyuan Heyuan Dongguan County

古文：怀安宝安海安欣乐海丰齐昌陆安兴宁
现代文：怀安宝安海安欣乐海丰齐昌陆安兴宁
English: Huai'an, Bao'an, Hai'an, Xinle, Haifeng, Qichang, Lu'an, Xingning

古文：义安郡
现代文：义安郡
English: Yian County

古文：绥安海宁海阳义招潮阳程乡
现代文：绥安海宁海阳义招潮阳程乡
English: Shao'an, Haining, Haiyang, Yiqiao, Chaoyang, Chengxiang

古文：新宁郡
现代文：新宁郡
English: Sunning County

古文：博林南兴临沇甘泉新成威平单牒龙潭城阳威化归顺初兴抚纳平乡
现代文：博林南兴临沇甘泉新成威平单牒龙潭城阳威化归顺初兴抚纳平乡
English: Boling Nanxing Linyi Ganquan Xincheng Weipingan Longtan Chengyang Weifang Shunxin Funaiping Township

古文：苍梧郡
现代文：苍梧郡
English: Cangwu County

古文：广信宁新封兴抚宁遂城丁留怀熙猛陵广宁荡康侨宁思安
现代文：广信宁新封兴抚宁遂城丁留怀熙猛陵广宁荡康侨宁思安
English: GuangxinNingXingFuNingSuiChengDingLiuHuaiHuiMengLingGuangNingHangKangQiaoNingShiAn

古文：高凉郡
现代文：高凉郡
English: Gaoliang County

古文：安宁罗州莫阳西巩思平禽乡平定
现代文：安宁罗州莫阳西巩思平禽乡平定
English: Moyang Xigong Siping Poultry Town, Anningluo County

古文：永平郡
现代文：永平郡
English: Yongping County

古文：夫宁安沂幹安卢平员乡苏平逋宁雷乡开城毗平武林丰城
现代文：夫宁安沂幹安卢平员乡苏平逋宁雷乡开城毗平武林丰城
English: Fu Ning An, Gan An, Lu Pingan Township, Su Ping, Ning Lei Township, Kaicheng, Binping, Wulin, Fengcheng

古文：晋康郡
现代文：晋康郡
English: Jinkang County

古文：威城都城夫阮元溪安遂晋化永始端溪宾江熙宁乐城武定悦城文招义立
现代文：威城都城夫阮元溪安遂晋化永始端溪宾江熙宁乐城武定悦城文招义立
English: Wu Chengdu, the capital of Wuzhong, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn Văn Hi, Nguyn

古文：新会郡
现代文：新会郡
English: Shinkaigun Town

古文：盆允新夷封平初宾封乐义宁新熙永昌始康招集始成
现代文：盆允新夷封平初宾封乐义宁新熙永昌始康招集始成
English: Bonjon New Year's Day New Year's Day New Year's Day New Year's Day New Year's Day

古文：广熙郡
现代文：广熙郡
English: Guangxi County

古文：龙乡罗平宾化宁乡长化定昌永熙宝宁
现代文：龙乡罗平宾化宁乡长化定昌永熙宝宁
English: Longxiang Luoping Binhua Ningxiang Changhua Dingchang Yongxi Baoning

古文：宋康郡
现代文：宋康郡
English: Songkang County

古文：广化石门化隆遂度威覃单城开宁海邻舆定绥定
现代文：广化石门化隆遂度威覃单城开宁海邻舆定绥定
English: Widespread Fossilization and Rapid Urbanization Threaten the Single City of Kaening, the Neighborhood of Haidian and Dingding

古文：宋隆郡
现代文：宋隆郡
English: Songlong County

古文：平兴招兴崇化建宁熙穆崇德海昌郡
现代文：平兴招兴崇化建宁熙穆崇德海昌郡
English: Pingxing Zhaoxing Chonghua Jianning Xi Mu Chongde Haichang County

古文：宁化招怀永建始化新建
现代文：宁化招怀永建始化新建
English: Preferred Recruitment, Permanent Construction, Initial Construction, New Construction

古文：绥建郡
现代文：绥建郡
English: Xinjian County

古文：新招四会化蒙化注化穆
现代文：新招四会化蒙化注化穆
English: New recruits for the Fourth Party Congress of the Communist Party of China

古文：乐昌郡
现代文：乐昌郡
English: Lechang County

古文：始昌乐山宋元义立安乐
现代文：始昌乐山宋元义立安乐
English: The Song Dynasty, the Yuan Dynasty and the Yili Dynasty

古文：郁林郡
现代文：郁林郡
English: Yulin County

古文：布山郁平阿林建安始集龙平宾平新林绥宁中胄领方怀安归化晋平威化
现代文：布山郁平阿林建安始集龙平宾平新林绥宁中胄领方怀安归化晋平威化
English: Bu Shan, Yuping, Aling, Jian'an, Longping, Binping, Xinlin, Nanning, Zhongzheng, Liaoning, Fang, Huai'an, Naturalization, Jinping, Wei

古文：桂林郡
现代文：桂林郡
English: Guilin County

古文：武熙腾溪潭平龙冈临浦中留武丰程安威定潭中安远安化龙定
现代文：武熙腾溪潭平龙冈临浦中留武丰程安威定潭中安远安化龙定
English: Wuxi Tengxi Lake Pinglong Mountain Linpu Middle Remaining Wufeng Cheng Anwei Ding Lake Middle Anyuan Anhua Longding

古文：宁浦郡
现代文：宁浦郡
English: Ningpu County

古文：安广简阳平山宁浦兴道吴安
现代文：安广简阳平山宁浦兴道吴安
English: An Guang, Jianyang, Pingshan, Ningpu, Xing Road, Wu An

古文：晋兴郡
现代文：晋兴郡
English: Jinxing County

古文：晋兴熙注桂林增翊安广广郁晋城郁阳
现代文：晋兴熙注桂林增翊安广广郁晋城郁阳
English: Jin Xingxi, Guilin Zengyuan, Guangyuan, Guangyu, Jincheng, Yuyang

古文：齐乐郡
现代文：齐乐郡
English: Qile County

古文：希平观宁臻安宋平绥南封陵
现代文：希平观宁臻安宋平绥南封陵
English: Xiping Guan Ning Zhen An Song Ping Xuan Nan Fengling

古文：齐康郡乐康
现代文：齐康郡乐康
English: Lekang, Qikang County

古文：齐建郡
现代文：齐建郡
English: Qijian County

古文：初宁永城
现代文：初宁永城
English: Hatsuning Yongcheng

古文：齐熙郡
现代文：齐熙郡
English: Qixi County

古文：交州，镇交阯，在海涨岛中。
现代文：交州，治所在交吐，位于南海的半岛上。
English: Jiaozhou, governed by Jiaozuo, is located on a peninsula in the South China Sea.

古文：杨雄《箴》曰： 交州荒遰，水与天际。 
现代文：杨雄作的箴中说： 交州荒远，水天交接。 
English: Yang Xiong's proverb says: "Jiaozhou is desolate and far away, water and sky are intertwined."

古文：外接南夷，宝货所出。山海珍怪，莫与为比。
现代文：交州对外连接南夷，出产宝物，山珍海怪，别处无法相比。
English: Jiaozhou connects Nanyi to the outside world, producing treasures, rare sea monsters, which cannot be compared anywhere else.

古文：民恃险远，数好反叛。
现代文：百姓依仗地势险要距离遥远，屡好反叛。
English: Relying on the terrain, the people are far away from the danger, and they often rebel.

古文：领郡如左：
现代文：交州统辖的郡如下：
English: The counties under the jurisdiction of Ningzhou are as follows:

古文：九真郡
现代文：九真郡
English: Jiuzhen County

古文：移风胥浦松原高安建初常乐津梧军安吉庞武宁
现代文：移风胥浦松原高安建初常乐津梧军安吉庞武宁
English: Anji Pangwuning, the general of Anji Pangwuning's army, marched into Songpu Songyuan Gao'an Jian

古文：武平郡
现代文：武平郡
English: Wuping County

古文：武定封溪平道武兴根宁南移
现代文：武定封溪平道武兴根宁南移
English: Wudingfengxi Pingdao, Wuxing, Genning moved south

古文：新昌郡
现代文：新昌郡
English: Xinchang County

古文：范信嘉宁封山西道临西吴定新道晋化
现代文：范信嘉宁封山西道临西吴定新道晋化
English: Fan Xin Jia Ning Fengshan West Road adjacent to West Wuding New Road Jinhua

古文：九德郡
现代文：九德郡
English: County Clare

古文：九德咸驩浦阳南陵都洨越常西安
现代文：九德咸驩浦阳南陵都洨越常西安
English: Jiude County, Hamhung, Poyang, Nanling, Ducheng, Yueqing, Chang'an, Xi'an

古文：日南郡
现代文：日南郡
English: Nichinan County

古文：西卷象林寿冷朱吾比景卢容无劳
现代文：西卷象林寿冷朱吾比景卢容无劳
English: The western volume of Xianglin Shouling Zhu Wibing Lu Rong without effort

古文：交止郡
现代文：交止郡
English: Kaohsiung County

古文：龙编武宁望海句漏吴兴西于朱緌南定曲易海平羸娄
现代文：龙编武宁望海句漏吴兴西于朱緌南定曲易海平羸娄
English: Wu Xingxi in the south of Zhu Rong set the melody and the sea level rose.

古文：宋平郡
现代文：宋平郡
English: Songping County

古文：昌国义怀绥宁
现代文：昌国义怀绥宁
English: Changguo Yi Huaihuning

古文：宋寿郡建元二年，割越州属。
现代文：宋寿郡建元二年，自垄割属。
English: Song Shou County was founded in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：义昌郡永元二年，改沃屯置。
现代文：义昌郡永元二年，改迪设置。
English: Yichang County in the second year of the Yongyuan era.

古文：越州，镇临漳郡，本合浦北界也。
现代文：越州，治所设在临漳郡，本是合浦郡的北界。
English: Yuezhou, the administrative center is located in Linyi County, which is the northern border of Hepu County.

古文：夷獠丛居，隐伏岩障，寇盗不宾，略无编户。
现代文：夷僚等族聚居，隐藏在山峦叠障之中，抢劫盗掠，不归顺朝廷，基本上没有编制户籍。
English: The Yi people and other ethnic groups lived together, hidden in the mountains, robbed and plundered, did not submit to the imperial court, and basically did not compile household registration.

古文：宋泰始中，西江督护陈伯绍猎北地，见二青牛惊走入草，使人逐之不得，乃志其处，云 此地当有奇祥 。
现代文：宋泰始年间，西江督护陈伯绍在北部打猎，看到两头青牛受惊逃入草丛中，让人驱赶没有找到，于是在此地立下标志，说 此地应当有奇异吉祥 。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the governor of the Xijiang River, Chen Bechao, was hunting in the north of the country. He saw two young bulls that had been frightened and fled into the grass. They were chased away and could not be found, so he set up a sign here, saying that this place should have strange and auspicious.

古文：启立为越州。
现代文：开始建立越州。
English: Began to build up Yuezhou.

古文：七年，始置百梁、陇苏、永宁、安昌、富昌、南流六郡，割广、交朱緌三郡属。
现代文：泰始七年，最早设置百梁、陇苏、永宁、安昌、富昌、南流六郡，割出广州、交州的朱哉等三郡隶属。
English: In the seventh year of Taizhi, the first six counties were set up, including Bai Liang, Lingsu, Yongning, Anchang, Fuchang and Nanliu, and three counties such as Guangzhou and Zhuya in Jiaozhou were subordinated.

古文：元徽二年，以伯绍为刺史，始立州镇，穿山为城门，威服俚獠。
现代文：元徽二年，任命陈伯绍为刺史，才建立了州的治所，凿山作城门，威镇俚僚各族。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Chen Bashao was appointed as the chief historian, and it was only then that he established the state's administrative center, hewed the mountain to make the city gate, and won the support of all ethnic groups in Weizhen.

古文：土有瘴气杀人。
现代文：当地有瘴气害人。
English: Locally, there is radon gas that is harmful to people.

古文：汉世交州刺史每暑月辄避处高，今交土调和，越瘴独甚。
现代文：汉代交州刺史每到夏季就躲避到高处，如今交州风土调和，惟独越州的瘴气仍很厉害。
English: During the Han Dynasty, people in Jiaozhou used to hide in high places every summer. Nowadays, Jiaozhou's customs have been harmonized, but the bad breath of Yuezhou is still very strong.

古文：刺史常事戎马，唯以战伐为务。
现代文：刺史的日常事务多在军事方面，衹是把抑制征讨土著部族作为要务。
English: Most of the day-to-day business of burying history is on the military side, but suppressing the recruitment of indigenous tribes is a top priority.

古文：临漳郡
现代文：临漳郡
English: Linfen County

古文：漳平丹城劳石容城长石都并缓端
现代文：漳平丹城劳石容城长石都并缓端
English: Pingdan Town, Laoshi Town, Rongcheng Town, Changshi Town, and Jiaozhou Town

古文：合浦郡
现代文：合浦郡
English: Hepu County

古文：徐闻合浦朱卢新安晋始荡昌朱丰宋丰宋广
现代文：徐闻合浦朱卢新安晋始荡昌朱丰宋丰宋广
English: Xu Wenhepu, Zhu Lu, Xinan Jin, Zhu Feng, Song Feng, Song Guang

古文：永宁郡
现代文：永宁郡
English: Yongning County

古文：杜罗金安蒙廖简留城
现代文：杜罗金安蒙廖简留城
English: Durokinan, Mengliu, Jianliu

古文：百梁郡
现代文：百梁郡
English: Baoliang County

古文：百梁始昌宋西
现代文：百梁始昌宋西
English: Bai Liang Shichang Song Xi

古文：安昌郡
现代文：安昌郡
English: Anchang County

古文：武桑龙渊石秋抚林
现代文：武桑龙渊石秋抚林
English: Wusang Longyuan Stone Autumn Forest

古文：南流郡
现代文：南流郡
English: Nanliu County

古文：方度
现代文：方度
English: Directions:

古文：北流郡永明六年立，无属县。
现代文：北流郡永明六年立，无属县。
English: Beilu County Yongming six years, no county.

古文：龙苏郡
现代文：龙苏郡
English: Longsu County

古文：龙苏
现代文：龙苏
English: Long Su

古文：富昌郡
现代文：富昌郡
English: Fuchang County

古文：南立义立归明
现代文：南立义立归明
English: Nanli, Yili, Zhuiming

古文：高兴郡
现代文：高兴郡
English: Gao Xing County

古文：宋和宁单高兴威成夫罗南安归安陈莲高城新建
现代文：宋和宁单高兴威成夫罗南安归安陈莲高城新建
English: Song He Ningdan is pleased that Wei Chengfu Luo Nan'an has returned to An Chen Lian Gaocheng

古文：思筑郡
现代文：思筑郡
English: Szuczuk County

古文：盐田郡
现代文：盐田郡
English: Shiota-gun

古文：杜同
现代文：杜同
English: Dutong

古文：定川郡
现代文：定川郡
English: Jodogawa County

古文：兴昌
现代文：兴昌
English: Xingchang

古文：隆川郡
现代文：隆川郡
English: Longchuan County

古文：良国
现代文：良国
English: Ryogoku

古文：齐宁郡建元二年置，割郁林之新邑、建初二县并。
现代文：齐宁郡建元二年置，割郁林之新邑、建初二县并。
English: Qinling County was established in the second year of Jianyuan, and the new town of Guyu Lin and the first two counties were established.

古文：开城建元二年置延海新邑建初
现代文：开城建元二年置，延海新邑建初。
English: Kaesong was built in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, and Yanhai New Town was built in the first year.

古文：越中郡
现代文：越中郡
English: Yuezhong County

古文：马门郡
现代文：马门郡
English: Marmen County

古文：钟吴田罗马陵思宁
现代文：钟吴田罗马陵思宁
English: Zhongwutian Roman Mausoleum

古文：封山郡
现代文：封山郡
English: Fengshan County

古文：安金
现代文：安金
English: Anjin

古文：吴春俚郡永明六年立，无属县。
现代文：吴春俚郡永明六年设置，没有下属县。
English: Wu Chunhui County Yongming six years set up, there is no subordinate counties.

古文：齐隆郡先属交州，中改为囗囗，永泰元年，改为齐隆，还属囗州。
现代文：齐隆郡最初属于奎业，一度改为口口。丞台元年，改为齐隆，仍旧属于口州。
English: Qilong County originally belonged to Kuye, and was once changed to Kuchu. In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, it was changed to Qilong, and still belongs to Kuchu.

