古文：有天地，然后有万物；有万物，然后有男女；有男女，然后有夫妇；有夫妇，然后有父子；有父子，然后有君臣；有君臣，然后有上下；有上下，然后礼义有所错。
现代文：有天地，然后有万物；有万物，然后有男女；有男女，然后有夫妇；有夫妇，然后有父子；有父子然后有君臣；有君臣，然后有上下；有上下，然后礼义有所错。
English: There is heaven and earth, and then there are all things; there are all things, and then there are men and women; there are men and women, and then there are husbands and wives; there are husbands and wives, and then there are fathers and sons; there are fathers and sons, and then there are princes and ministers; there are princes and ministers, and then there are up and down; there are up and down, and then there are mistakes in etiquette.

古文：夫妇之道，不可以不久也，故受之以《恒》。
现代文：夫妇之道是终生的，要稳定长久。所以接着是恒卦。
English: The couple's way is lifelong, and it should be stable for a long time. Therefore, it is followed by Heng Gua.

古文：《恒》者，久也。
现代文：恒是长久的意思。
English: "Heng" means lasting.

古文：物不可以久居其所，故受之以《遁》。
现代文：事物不可能长久存在而不衰退。事物退藏静养，慢慢的大壮盛。
English: It is impossible for things to exist for a long time without decaying. Things retreat and recuperate, and slowly flourish.

古文：《遁》者，退也。物不可以终遁，故受之以《大壮》。
现代文：事物处于大壮盛，跃跃欲试，不可能始终处壮而不有所前进。
English: Things are in full bloom, eager to try, it is impossible to always be strong and not move forward.

古文：物不可以终壮，故受之以《晋》。
现代文：事物前进过程中，不会一帆风顺，一定会受到伤害。
English: In the process of things moving forward, it will not be smooth sailing, it will definitely be hurt.

古文：《晋》者，进也。
现代文：在外面受到伤害，一定想回家，感受家的温暖。
English: If you get hurt outside, you definitely want to go home and feel the warmth of home.

古文：晋必有所伤，故受之以《明夷》。
现代文：家道穷困，命运一定乖违。性格乖违失德，一定感召灾难。
English: If your family is poor, your fate will surely be against you. If your character is against you, you will surely invite disaster.

古文：夷者，伤也。伤于外者必反其家，故受之以《家人》。
现代文：事物不可以始终处于困难中，解是缓解困难的意思。
English: Things can't always be in difficulty. Solution means to alleviate the difficulty.

古文：家道穷必乖，故受之以《睽》。
现代文：缓解困难的方法，一定要蒙受各种损失。谚：吃亏是福。
English: The way to alleviate difficulties is to suffer all kinds of losses. Proverb: To suffer loss is to be blessed.

古文：《睽》者，乖也。
现代文：损失自己的财富与缺点，增加精神内涵，一定有增益的一天。
English: The loss of one's own wealth and shortcomings, the increase of spiritual connotation, there must be a day of gain.

古文：乖必有难，故受之以《蹇》。
现代文：不停的增益，一定有断裂不续的一天。
English: Continuous gain, there must be a discontinuous day.

古文：《姤》者，遇也。
现代文：不同的人生决断，会有不同的人生境遇。决，决断。垢，遭遇。
English: Different life decisions will have different life situations. Decisions, decisions. Scum, encounters.

古文：物相遇而后聚，故受之以《萃》。《萃》者，聚也。
现代文：事物先相遇，然后有可能相聚在一起。萃，聚集。
English: Things first meet, and then they may come together.

古文：聚而上者谓之升，故受之以《升》。
现代文：物相聚在一起，是向上走，就叫做升。
English: When things come together and go up, it's called a rise.

古文：升而不已必困，故受之以《困》。困乎上者必反下，故受之以《井》。
现代文：不停的上升，一定有困顿的一天。在上位的受困，一定返回到关注下面，任贤井养其民。井，贤也。
English: Constantly rising, there must be a day of trouble. If you are trapped in the upper ranks, you must return to the attention below, and let the virtuous people raise their people. Well, virtuous people also.

古文：井道不可不革，故受之以《革》。
现代文：井道养贤及民之道不可以不随时变革。
English: It is impossible not to reform the well channel and the people channel at any time.

古文：革物者莫若鼎，故受之以《鼎》。
现代文：变革事物没有比鼎更好的了，食入鼎而熟。
English: There is no better way to change things than to be in the middle of it all.

古文：主器者莫若长子，故受之以《震》。
现代文：鼎，器也，定也，喻新的理念、规章、制度。
English: 鼎,器也,定也,喻 new concepts, rules and regulations.

古文：《震》者，动也。
现代文：主社稷重器的人，莫如才德高的长子。长，德能长人。
English: The person in charge of the company's heavy equipment must be the eldest son with high talent and virtue.

古文：物不可以终动，止之，故受之以《艮》。
现代文：所以接着一卦是震卦。震为长子，为动之所出。事物不可以始终处于运动状态而不停止。
English: Therefore, the next one is shock. Shock is the eldest son, caused by movement. Things cannot always be in motion without stopping.

古文：《艮》者，止也。
现代文：事物不可能始终停顿不前，要慢慢的前进。
English: Things can't always stand still, we have to move forward slowly.

古文：物不可以终止，故受之以《渐》。
现代文：事物处于前进时，一定有人、物来归附。
English: When things are on the move, there are bound to be people and things to attach to.

古文：《渐》者，进也。进必有所归，故受之以《归妹》。
现代文：得到人物的归附一定壮大。
English: To get the attachment of the characters is a certain growth.

古文：得其所归者必大，故受之以《丰》。《丰》者，大也。
现代文：丰卦卦名有大的意思。
English: Fengguagua's name has great meaning.

古文：穷大者必失其所居，故受之以《旅》。
现代文：大而穷困的国家，其人民一定失去原有的居所，旅居国外；自身文化文明贬值，对自己的传统失去信心，盲目崇拜别人的文明。
English: For a large and impoverished country, its people are bound to lose their original homes and live abroad; devalue their own culture and civilization, lose confidence in their own traditions, and blindly worship the civilization of others.

古文：旅而无所容，故受之以《巽》。
现代文：谚语：人往高处走。月亮是外国的圆。
English: Proverb: People go to high places. The moon is a foreign circle.

古文：《巽》者，入也。
现代文：旅居在外，寡亲少助不为人容纳，一定想进入某一个群体。
English: Living away from home, widowed relatives are not accommodated, and they must want to enter a certain group.

古文：入而后说之，故受之以《兑》。
现代文：进入了某个群体，有了归宿，心里就高兴了。兑是高兴的意思。
English: When you enter a certain group and have a home, you feel happy. Dui means happy.

古文：《兑》者，说也。说而后散之，故受之以《涣》。
现代文：一群人在一起高高兴兴了，然后分散开，各奔东西。离，离散。
English: A group of people are happy together, then disperse and go their separate ways. Disperse, disperse.

古文：《涣》者，离也。
现代文：谚语：天下没有不散的宴席。
English: Proverb: There is no banquet in the world that does not break up.

古文：物不可以终离，故受之以《节》。
现代文：事物不可以始终离散，要节制。节制产生信心。
English: Things can't always be discrete, there has to be moderation, and moderation breeds confidence.

古文：节而信之，故受之以《中孚》。
现代文：中孚，心中孚信。有信念的人，一定实行自己的理想。
English: "Zhongfu" and "Fuxin" in one's heart. Those who have faith will surely carry out their ideals.

古文：有信者必行之，故受之以《小过》。
现代文：小过，有小事物通过。有正当事物通过实行，一定成功。既，已经。济，渡河，喻成功。
English: If it is small, it will pass. If it is right, it will succeed. If it is already done, it will succeed.

古文：有过物者必济，故受之以《既济》。
现代文：事物的发展，久则穷；而事物不可以久处穷，穷则思变。
English: The development of things is poor for a long time; and things cannot be poor for a long time, and the poor are thinking about change.

古文：物不可穷也，故受之以《未济》终焉。
现代文：所以最后一卦是未济卦，没有成功的意思。未，没有。未济，没有成功。终，最后。
English: Therefore, the last gaga is a failed gaga, which does not mean success. Failed, failed. Failed, failed. Finally, finally.

