古文：鱼俱罗，冯翊下邽人。
现代文：鱼俱罗，冯翊下圭阝人。
English: Fish Club, starring Feng Ye's younger brother Gui Ye.

古文：身长八尺，膂力绝人，声气雄壮，言闻数百步。
现代文：身高八尺，体力过人，声音雄壮，说话声能传到几百步之外。
English: He is eight feet tall, has incredible physical strength, a majestic voice, and his voice can be heard hundreds of paces away.

古文：为大都督，从晋王广平陈，以功拜开府。
现代文：任大都督，跟从晋王杨广平定陈国，因功授开府。
English: He was appointed as the grand governor and followed the Jin king Yang Guang to settle Chen Province, and was awarded the post of governor for his service.

古文：及沈玄懀、高智慧等作乱江南，杨素以俱罗壮勇，请与同行。
现代文：沈玄烩、高智慧等人在江南发动叛乱，杨素因鱼俱罗强壮勇敢，请求让鱼俱罗一同前往平叛。
English: Shen Xuanqian, Gao Zhizhi and others launched a rebellion in the south of the Yangtze River. Yang Su, who was strong and brave because of the Fish Club, asked the Fish Club to go to the rebellion together.

古文：有功，加上开府，封高唐县公，拜叠州总管。
现代文：鱼俱罗平叛有功，加授上开府，封爵高唐县公，任叠州总管。
English: Fish Club Luo Ping rebelled meritoriously, awarded the title of Shangkaifu, knighted Gaotang County official, and appointed as the head of the State Administration of Liaoning Province.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：因守母丧而辞职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：还至扶风，会杨素将出灵州道击突厥，逢之，送与俱行。
现代文：丧满回京，至扶风，适逢杨素准备出兵灵州道打击突厥军，与之相遇，就一同前行。
English: After returning to Beijing, Yang Su was preparing to send troops to Lingshou Road to fight the Turkish army. When he met the Turkish army, he and Yang Su marched together.

古文：及遇贼，俱罗与数骑奔击，瞋目大呼，所当皆披靡。
现代文：及与突厥军相遇，鱼俱罗与数名骑士奔袭敌军，目真目大呼，所向披靡。
English: And met with the Turkish army, the fish club and several knights attacked the enemy army, eyes wide-eyed, all-conquering.

古文：以功进位柱国，拜丰州总管。
现代文：因功晋位柱国，任丰州总管。
English: He was promoted to the position of pillar state for his achievements, and was appointed as the general manager of Fuzhou.

古文：突厥入境，辄禽斩之，自是屏迹，不敢畜牧于塞下。
现代文：突厥人入境，就抓起来杀了。突厥人自此销声匿迹，不敢在塞下放牧。
English: When the Turks entered the country, they were arrested and killed. Since then, the Turks have disappeared and do not dare to graze cattle below the dam.

古文：初，炀帝在籓，俱罗弟赞以左右从，累迁大都督。
现代文：当初，隋炀帝为藩王时，鱼俱罗的弟弟鱼赞因为在炀帝身边侍候，多次升迁至大都督。
English: At first, when Emperor Sui was the king of the Han Dynasty, Yuanzan, the younger brother of the fish club, was promoted to the grand governor many times because he served alongside Emperor Sui.

古文：及帝嗣位，拜车骑将军。
现代文：炀帝继位后，鱼赞任车骑将军。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, Yuzan became the general of chariots and cavalry.

古文：赞凶暴，令左右炙肉，遇不中意，以签刺瞎其眼，温酒不适口者，立断其舌。
现代文：鱼赞凶狠残暴，让身边的人烤肉，碰到不中意的，就用竹签刺瞎那人的眼睛，温酒不对口味，就立刻割断温酒人的舌头。
English: Fish praise ferocious brutality, let the people around them roast meat, if they encounter something they don't like, they will blind the person's eyes with a bamboo stick, if the warm wine is not to their taste, they will immediately cut off the warm wine drinker's tongue.

古文：帝以籓邸之旧，不忍加诛，谓近臣曰： 弟既如此，兄亦可知。 
现代文：炀帝因为鱼赞是他为藩王时的老部下，不忍心诛杀，就对亲近的大臣说 ：其弟既然这样，其兄也就可以知道了。 
English: Because Yuuzan was one of his old subordinates when he was the lord of the domain, Emperor Qian could not bear to fight and kill him, so he said to a close minister, "Since his younger brother is like this, his older brother can also know."

古文：因召俱罗责之，出赞于狱，令自为计。
现代文：于是召见鱼俱罗，加以责备，把鱼赞从狱中提出来，令其自尽。
English: So he summoned the Fish Club, reprimanded them, brought Uozuman out of prison, and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：赞至家，饮药而死。
现代文：鱼赞回到家中，服毒而死。
English: Uozuman returned home, took the poison and died.

古文：帝恐俱罗不安，虑生边患，转安州刺史，迁赵郡太守。
现代文：炀帝恐怕鱼俱罗不安分，生出边患，改任鱼俱罗为安州刺史，贬为赵郡太守。
English: Emperor Qian was afraid that the Fish Club would not be able to keep its balance, and that there would be trouble at the border, so he changed the name of the Fish Club to Anzhou Shishi, and demoted it to Zhao County Dazhou.

古文：后因朝集至东都，与将军梁伯隐有旧，数相往来。
现代文：后来因朝中集会到了东都洛阳，和将军梁伯隐有旧交，多次相互往来。
English: Later, due to the meeting between the DPRK and China, he came to the eastern capital of Luoyang. He had an old friendship with General Liang Boyin, and they interacted with each other many times.

古文：又从郡多将杂物以贡献，帝不受，因遗权贵。
现代文：鱼俱罗又从郡中带来许多特产进贡，炀帝不受，因而送给了权贵。
English: The fish club also brought many special products from the county as tribute, but Emperor Xuan did not accept them, so they were given to the nobility.

古文：御史劾俱罗以郡将交通内臣，帝大怒，与伯隐俱坐除名。
现代文：御史弹劾鱼俱罗以郡将的身份与朝中大臣交结，炀帝大怒，将鱼俱罗和梁伯隐一起坐罪除去名籍。
English: Emperor Go-Shi impeached the Fisherman's Club for associating with the Minister of the Middle Kingdom of Korea in the capacity of a prefectural general. Emperor Go-Shi was furious and removed the Fisherman's Club and Liang Bo-Yin from the Imperial Family.

古文：未几，越巂飞山蛮反，诏俱罗白衣领将，并率蜀郡都尉段钟葵讨平之。
现代文：不久，越隽飞山蛮造反，诏令鱼俱罗以白衣将领的身份率领蜀郡都尉段钟葵讨伐叛兵，平定叛乱。
English: Soon, Yueqi Feishan rebelled violently, and the emperor ordered the Fish Club to lead the Shu County captain Duan Zhongkui as a white-coated general to fight the rebels and quell the rebellion.

古文：大业九年，重征高丽，以俱罗为碣石道军将。
现代文：大业九年，再次出征高丽，任命鱼俱罗为碣石道军将。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiei era, he once again went to Koryo, appointing the Fish Club as the commander of the Shinshido Army.

古文：及还，江南刘元进作乱，诏俱罗将兵向会稽诸郡逐捕之。
现代文：回师后，江南刘元进又兴兵作乱，诏令鱼俱罗率兵前往会稽各郡，平叛捕贼。
English: After returning to his division, Liu Yuanjin in the south of the Yangtze River rioted again, and ordered the Fish Club to lead soldiers to the counties of the auditors to quell the rebellion and catch the thieves.

古文：时百姓思乱，从盗如市，俱罗击贼帅硃燮、管崇等，战无不捷。
现代文：当时，百姓思乱，跟随强盗就像赶集市一样，鱼俱罗打击贼兵统率朱燮、管崇等，战无不胜。
English: At that time, the people were confused, and following the robbers was like rushing to the market. The Fish Club fought against the thieves led by Zhu Xi and Guanzhong, and was invincible.

古文：然贼势浸盛，败而复聚。
现代文：然而，贼兵的势力慢慢强盛，失败了又重新聚集。
English: However, the forces of the robber soldiers slowly grew stronger, failed and regrouped.

古文：俱罗度贼非岁月可平，诸子并在京、洛，又见天下渐乱，终恐道路隔绝。
现代文：鱼俱罗估计贼兵的势力不是短时间内可以平定的。各位儿子都在京城和洛阳，又见天下越来越乱，恐怕道路最终要被阻隔。
English: The Fish Club estimates that the power of the bandits cannot be quelled in a short period of time. Your sons are in Beijing and Luoyang, and the world is becoming more and more chaotic. I am afraid that the road will eventually be blocked.

古文：于时东都饥馑，谷食踊贵，俱罗遣家僮将船米至东都粜之，益市财货，潜迎诸子。
现代文：这时，东都洛阳发生饥荒，谷物价格飞涨，鱼俱罗派遣家僮运一船米到洛阳出售，多换些财物，偷偷把诸子接出来。
English: At this time, there was a famine in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and grain prices were soaring. The fish club sent a family to transport a boatload of rice to Luoyang to sell, exchange some more property, and secretly bring their children out.

古文：又有将军鹿愿、范贵、冯孝慈，俱为将帅，数从征伐，并有名于世。
现代文：朝廷对此事略有所知，恐怕鱼俱罗有异心，查验之后不能构成罪状。炀帝又令大理司直梁敬真到会稽，将鱼俱罗押送到东都洛阳。鱼俱罗相貌异于常人，眼珠有双仁，私下受到炀帝的忌恨。
English: The imperial court had some knowledge of this matter, and it was feared that the fish club had a different intention, which could not constitute a crime after verification. Emperor Xuan also ordered Dali Si Zhiliang Keizhen to appear before the court and escort the fish club to the eastern capital Luoyang. The fish club's appearance was different from that of ordinary people, with double-pierced eyes, and it was privately hated by Emperor Xuan.

古文：事皆亡失，故史官阙云。陈稜，字长威，庐江襄安人也。祖硕，以渔钓自给。
现代文：梁敬真迎合炀帝的旨意，奏劾鱼俱罗的军队白白被战败，将鱼俱罗东都斩首示众，家产人口一并籍没入官。陈稜字长威，庐江襄安人。祖父陈硕，以打鱼为生。
English: Liang Jingzhen pandered to the will of Emperor Xuan, and the army of the Fish Club was defeated in vain. He beheaded the Fish Club Dongdu in public, and the family population did not enter the official. Chen Rongji Changwei, Xiang'an people of the Minjiang River. Grandfather Chen Shuo, made a living from fishing.

古文：父岘，少骁勇，事章大宝为帐内部曲。
现代文：父陈岘，少年时骁悍英勇，侍奉章大宝，任帐内部曲。
English: His father, Chen Yao, was brave and courageous when he was a boy. He was awarded the Grand Order of Merit for his service.

古文：告大宝反，授谯州刺史。
现代文：因告发大宝造反，授任谯州刺史。
English: For denouncing the rebellion of Dabao, he was awarded the title of the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：陈灭，废于家。
现代文：陈国被消灭后，废置在家。
English: After Chen Guo was eliminated, it was abandoned at home.

古文：高智慧、汪文进反，庐江豪杰亦举兵相应。
现代文：高智慧、汪文进造反，庐江的豪强俊杰，也起兵响应。
English: High intelligence, Wang Wenjin's rebellion, and the powerful and talented people of the Minjiang River also raised an army in response.

古文：以岘旧将，共推为主。
现代文：因为都是陈岘昔日的部下，都推举陈岘为主帅。
English: Because they were all Chen Yao's former subordinates, they all nominated Chen Yao as the head coach.

古文：岘欲拒之，稜谓岘曰： 众乱既作，拒之祸且及己，不如伪从，别为后计。 
现代文：陈岘想拒绝他们，陈稜对父亲说： 众乱既已发生，拒绝他们，祸患就要殃及自身。不如假装顺从他们，以后再作打算。 
English: Chen Rong wanted to refuse them, but Chen Rong said to his father, "Since the chaos has already occurred, if you refuse them, you will bring disaster upon yourself. It is better to pretend to obey them and make plans later."

古文：岘然之。
现代文：陈岘听从了儿子的劝告。
English: Chen Yao followed his son's advice.

古文：后潜使稜至柱国李彻所，请为内应。
现代文：后来，陈岘秘密地派陈稜到柱国李彻处，请求作为内应。
English: Later, Chen Zhe secretly sent Chen Ryo to Li Che's place in Zhuguo to make a request as an internal correspondence.

古文：彻上其事，拜上大将军、宣州刺史，封谯郡公，诏彻应接之。
现代文：李彻将此事上奏，任陈岘为上大将军、宣州刺史。封谯郡公，诏令李彻接应陈岘。
English: Li Ch'er reported the matter to the emperor, and Chen Xi was appointed as the supreme general and the governor of Xuanzhou. He was made the county magistrate, and Li Ch'er was ordered to take over from Chen Xi.

古文：彻军未至，谋泄，为其党所杀，稜以获免。
现代文：李彻的军队未到，计谋泄漏了出去，陈岘被其同伙杀害，陈稜仅得幸免。
English: Before the arrival of Li Che's army, the plot was leaked out, Chen Yao was killed by his accomplices, and Chen Rong was only spared.

古文：上以其父之故，拜开府，寻领乡兵。
现代文：因为其父的缘故。任陈稜为开府，不久统领乡兵。
English: Because of his father, Chen Ryo was appointed as the head of the government and soon became the leader of the townspeople.

古文：大业三年，拜武贲郎将。
现代文：大业三年，陈稜任武贲郎将。
English: In the third year of the Taiei era, Chen Ryo was appointed as the general of the army.

古文：后与朝请大夫张镇周自义安泛海击流求国，月余而至。
现代文：后来和朝请大夫张镇周从义安渡海攻击流求国，一个多月才到。
English: Later, he and the Emperor invited Zhang Zhenzhou, a doctor, to cross the sea from Yian to attack the country. He arrived more than a month later.

古文：流求人初见船舰，以为商旅，往往诣军贸易。
现代文：流求国人刚见到船舰时，认为是商贾，常常到军队中买卖货物。
English: When Koreans first saw the ship, they thought it was a merchant ship, and they often went to the army to buy and sell goods.

古文：稜率众登岸，遣镇周为先锋。
现代文：陈稜率领众人上岸，派遣张镇周为先锋。
English: Chen Ryo led the crowd ashore and sent Zhang Zhen Zhou to lead the way.

古文：其主欢斯渴刺兜遣兵拒战，镇周频破之。
现代文：流求国主欢斯渴刺兜派兵迎战，张镇周多次击败之。
English: Zhang Zhen Zhou defeated him many times.

古文：稜进至低没檀洞，其小王欢斯老模拒战，稜败之，斩老模。
现代文：陈稜进军至低没檀尚，流求国小王子欢斯老模迎战，陈稜击败其军，斩老模之首。
English: Chen Ryo marched as low as possible, begging the little prince of the country to welcome the old model to fight. Chen Ryo defeated his army and beheaded the old model.

古文：其日雾雨晦冥，将士皆惧，稜刑白马以祭海神，既而开霁。
现代文：有一天，雾雨氵蒙氵蒙，天色阴暗，将士都很恐惧，陈稜杀白马祭祀海神，不久雾雨停止，天色放晴。
English: One day, the mist and rain were heavy, the sky was gloomy, and the soldiers were very afraid. Chen Rong killed a white horse to worship the sea god. Soon the mist and rain stopped, and the sky cleared.

古文：分为五军，趣其都邑，乘胜逐北，至其栅，破之，斩渴刺兜，获其子岛槌，虏男女数千而归。
现代文：陈稜将军队分作五路，直取其都城，乘胜追击败军，至其栅栏，大破敌军，将渴刺兜斩首，活捉其子岛槌，俘虏男女数千人而归。
English: Chen Ryo divided the army into five routes, taking the capital city directly, chasing the defeated army with victory, reaching its fence, smashing the enemy army, decapitating the thirst thorn, capturing the island hammer alive, and capturing thousands of men and women.

古文：帝大悦。加稜右光禄大夫，镇周金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：炀帝十分高兴，提升陈稜为右光禄大夫，张镇周为金紫光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Qian was very pleased, and promoted Chen Rong to the position of doctor of the Right Guanglu and Zhang Zhen Zhou to the position of doctor of the Golden Purple Guanglu.

古文：辽东之役，以宿卫迁左光禄大夫。
现代文：辽东之战，陈稜由宿卫升为左光禄大夫。
English: In the Battle of Liaodong, Chen Rong was promoted from the post of the guard to the post of the doctor of the left light.

古文：明年，帝复征辽东，稜为东莱留守。
现代文：第二年，炀帝又征讨辽东，陈稜任东菜留守。
English: In the following year, Emperor Xizong once again invaded eastern Liaoning Province, and Chen Rong was left behind in Dongcai.

古文：杨玄感反，稜击平黎阳，斩玄感所署刺史元务本。
现代文：杨玄感造反，陈稜平定黎阳，将杨玄感所辖的刺史元务本斩首。
English: Yang Xuanquan rebelled, Chen Rong suppressed Liyang, and beheaded Yang Xuanquan.

古文：寻奉诏于江南营战舰。
现代文：不久，奉诏在江南制造战舰。
English: Soon, Bongzao began to manufacture warships in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：至彭城，贼帅孟让据都梁宫，阻淮为固。
现代文：到了彭城，贼兵元帅孟讠襄占据都梁宫，把守住淮河，认为防守坚固。
English: When he arrived at Pengcheng, the robber marshal Meng Yuxiang occupied the capital Liang Palace and guarded the Huaihe River, believing that the defense was solid.

古文：稜潜于下流而济，至江都，袭破让。
现代文：陈稜偷偷地从下游渡过淮河，到了江都，突袭击败孟讠襄。
English: Chen Ryo secretly crossed the Huai River from the lower reaches and went to Jiangdu, where he made a surprise attack and defeated Meng Yuxiang.

古文：以功进位光禄大夫，赐爵信安侯。
现代文：因功晋升光禄大夫。赐爵信安侯。
English: He was promoted to Dr. Kōroku for his meritorious service and given the title of Lord Nobuyasu.

古文：后帝幸江都宫，俄而李子通据海陵，左才相掠淮北，杜伏威屯六合，帝遣夌击之，往见克捷，超拜右御卫将军。
现代文：后来，炀帝巡幸江都宫，不久，李子通占据海陵，左才相掠取淮北，杜伏威屯居六合，炀帝派陈稜去平定，一去即得胜利，越级提拔为右御将军。
English: Later, Emperor Gao made a tour of the imperial palace of the Fortunate River. Soon, Li Zi Tong occupied Hailing, Zuo Cai Xiang plundered Huaibei, Du Fu Wei resided in Liuhe, Emperor Gao sent Chen Rong to pacify, and immediately won the victory, and was promoted to the right general.

古文：复度清江，击宣城贼。
现代文：再次渡过清江，打击宣城之地的叛贼。
English: Crossed the Qing River again to fight the traitors in Xuancheng.

古文：俄而帝以弑崩，宇文化及引军北上，召稜守江都。
现代文：很快炀帝被杀，宇文化及率领军队北上，召陈稜守江都。
English: Soon Emperor Xuan was killed, and Emperor Wu and his army marched north, summoning Chen Ryo to defend Jiangdu.

古文：稜集众缟素，为炀帝发丧，备仪卫，改葬于吴公台下，衰杖送丧，恸感行路，论者深义之。
现代文：陈稜集结众兵，身穿白色丧服，为炀帝送葬，准备礼仪卫队，将炀帝改葬在吴公台下，身着重孝，手执竹杖，而为炀帝送葬，悲恸感慨而行，论者认为陈稜很有忠义。
English: Chen Ryo gathered a large number of soldiers, dressed in white mourning clothes, to attend the funeral of Emperor Xizong, prepared a ceremonial guard, and buried Emperor Xizong under the Wu Gong Terrace. He was very filial, holding a bamboo cane in his hand, and attended the funeral of Emperor Xizong, and walked with sadness and emotion. Commentators believe that Chen Ryo was very loyal.

古文：稜后为李子通所陷，奔杜伏威，伏威忌而害之。
现代文：陈稜后被李子通陷害，投奔杜伏威。杜伏威忌恨陈稜，将陈稜杀害了。
English: Chen Ryohe was framed by Li Zhitong and went to Du Fu Wei. Du Fu Wei hated Chen Ryohe and killed him.

