古文：黄帝问曰：有病温者，汗出辄复热，而脉躁疾不为汗衰，狂言不能食，病名为何？
现代文：黄帝问道：有的温热病患者，汗出以后，随即又发热，脉象急疾躁动，其病势不仅没有因汗出而衰减，反而出现言语狂乱，不进饮食等症状，这叫什么病呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Some patients with hyperthermia, after sweating, immediately have fever again, the pulse is like acute agitation, the disease is not only not attenuated by sweating, but there are symptoms such as speech disorder, not eating, etc. What is this disease called?

古文：岐伯对曰：病名阴阳交，交者死也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这种病叫 阴阳交 ，阴阳交是死症。
English: Qi Bo replied, "This disease is called Yin Yang Jiao. Yin Yang Jiao is a fatal disease.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其说。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said: I want to hear the reason.

古文：岐伯曰：人所以汗出者，皆生于谷，谷生于精，今邪气交争于骨肉而得汗者，是邪却而精胜也。精胜则当能食而不复热。
现代文：岐伯说：人所以能够出汗，是依赖于水谷所化生的精气，水谷精气旺盛，便能胜过邪气而出汗，现在邪气与正气交争于骨肉之间，能够得到汗出的是邪气退而精气胜，精气胜的应当能进饮食而不再发热。
English: Qi Bo said: The reason why people can perspire is that they depend on the essence of the water valley. If the water valley essence is strong, it can overcome the evil spirit and perspire. Now the evil spirit and the righteous spirit are in conflict between the bones and the flesh. What can be sweated out is the retreat of the evil spirit and the victory of the spirit. The winner of the spirit should be able to eat and drink without fever.

古文：复热者邪气也，汗者精气也，今汗出而辄复热者，是邪胜也。
现代文：再次发热是邪气引起的，汗是精气形成的，如今出汗后身体又立即发热的原因，是邪气胜过了精气。
English: Again, fever is caused by evil gas, sweat is formed by essence, and now the reason why the body immediately heats up again after sweating is that evil gas prevails over essence.

古文：不能食者，精无俾也。病而留者，其寿可立而倾也。
现代文：不进饮食的病人，精气得不到继续补益而匮乏，这样就会无力抗邪而造成病邪留滞于体内，发展下去，病人的生命就危在旦夕了。
English: Patients who do not eat are deficient in energy because they do not receive continuous supplementation. As a result, they will be unable to resist the evil, causing the disease to remain in the body and continue to develop. The patient's life is in imminent danger.

古文：且夫《热论》曰： 汗出而脉尚躁盛者死。 
现代文：《热论》中也曾说： 汗出而脉仍就躁乱盛大的，是死证。 
English: It was also said in "Heat" that: sweating while the pulse is still manic and grand, is a death certificate.

古文：今脉不与汗相应，此不胜其病也，其死明矣。
现代文：现在其脉象不与出汗后的正常脉象相应，这是精气已经不能胜过邪气，死亡的征象已是很明显的了。
English: Now its pulse does not correspond to the normal pulse after sweating, which is the essence can no longer prevail over the evil, and the signs of death are already very obvious.

古文：狂言者是失志，失志者死。
现代文：况且狂言乱语是神志失常，神志失常是死证。
English: Moreover, ranting and raving is a mental disorder, and mental disorder is a death certificate.

古文：今见三死，不见一生，虽愈必死也。
现代文：现在已出现了三种死证，却没有一点生机，病虽可能因汗出而暂时减轻，但终究是要死亡的。
English: Now there have been three death certificates, but there is not a bit of vitality. Although the disease may be temporarily alleviated by sweating, it will eventually die.

古文：帝曰：有病身热汗出烦满，烦满不为汗解，此为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：有的病全身发热、汗出、烦闷，其烦闷并不因汗出而缓解，这是什么病呢？
English: Huang Di said, "Some diseases cause fever, sweating, and drowsiness all over the body, and the drowsiness is not relieved by sweating. What kind of disease is this?

古文：岐伯曰：汗出而身热者，风也；汗出而烦满不解者，厥也。病名曰风厥。
现代文：岐伯说：汗出而全身发热，是因感受了风邪；汗出而烦闷没有缓解，是由于下气上逆所致，病名叫 风厥 。
English: Qi Bo said: sweating and the whole body fever is due to feeling a cold; sweating and boredom without relief is due to the opposite effect on the breath, the disease is called wind.

古文：帝曰：愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：希望你能详尽地讲给我听。
English: Huang Di said, "I hope you can tell me everything in detail."

古文：岐伯曰：巨阳主气，故先受邪，少阴与其为表里也，得热则上从之，从之则厥也。帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：岐伯说：足太阳膀胱经主管诸阳之气，主管人的一身之表，所以足太阳膀胱经首先感受风邪的侵袭。足少阴肾经与足太阳膀胱经互为表里，表病则里必应之，足少阴肾经受太阳经发热的影响，其气亦从之而上逆，上逆便称为厥。黄帝说：怎样治疗呢？
English: Qi Bo said: the foot sun bladder is affected by the energy of the sun, and the person in charge is the surface of the body, so the foot sun bladder is the first to feel the attack of colds. The foot yin kidney and the foot sun bladder are both in the surface, and the surface disease is inevitable. The foot yin kidney is affected by the heat of the sun, and its gas is also reversed from above, and the upside is called jue. Huangdi said: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：表里刺之，饮之服汤。
现代文：岐伯说：治疗时应同时针刺足太阳膀胱经、足少阴肾经表里两经，并内服汤药。
English: Qi Bo said: the treatment should be at the same time acupuncture foot sun bladder meridian, foot Shao Yin kidney meridian in the two meridians, and take the decoction.

古文：帝曰：劳风为病何如？
现代文：黄帝说： 劳风 的病情是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the illness of labor?

古文：岐伯曰：劳风法在肺下，其为病也，使人强上，冥视，唾出若涕，恶风而振寒，此为劳风之病。
现代文：岐伯说：劳风的受邪部位常在肺下，其发病的症状，使人头颈项足少阴肾经强直，头昏眩而视物不清，唾出粘痰似涕，恶风而寒栗，这就是劳风病的发病情况。
English: Qi Bo said: The affected part of the dysentery is often under the lungs. The symptoms of the onset of the disease are that the head, neck, feet, legs, and kidneys are strong and straight, the head is dizzy and the vision is unclear, the spit is sticky and phlegm-like, and the bad wind is chills. This is the onset of dysentery.

古文：岐伯曰：以救俛仰。
现代文：岐伯说：首先应使其胸中的肺气通畅，这样颈项就能俯仰自如。
English: Qi Bo said: First of all, the lungs in the chest should be smooth, so that the neck can be tilted freely.

古文：巨阳引，精者三日，中年者五日，不精者七日。
现代文：针刺足太阳膀胱经以引肾气外布，青年人三日可愈；中年人须五日可愈；老年人须七日始愈。
English: Young people can recover in three days; middle-aged people can recover in five days; and the elderly can recover in seven days.

古文：咳出青黄涕，其状如脓，大如弹丸，从口中若鼻中出，不出则伤肺，伤肺则死也。
现代文：这种病人，咳出青黄色粘痰，其状似脓，凝结成块，大小如弹丸，应使痰从口中或鼻中排出，如果不能咳出，就要伤其肺，肺伤则死。
English: This kind of patient coughs up blue-yellow sticky phlegm, which looks like pus, condenses into a lump, the size of a projectile. The phlegm should be drained from the mouth or nose. If it cannot be coughed out, it will hurt the lungs, and the lung injury will be fatal.

古文：帝曰：有病肾风者，面、胕痝然壅，害于言，可刺不？
现代文：黄帝说：有患 肾风 的人，面部、足部浮肿壅塞，妨害言语，这种病可以用针刺治疗吗？
English: Huang Di said: People suffering from "kidney wind" have swelling and obstruction of the face and feet, and hinder speech. Can this disease be treated with acupuncture?

古文：岐伯曰：虚不当刺，不当刺而刺，后五日其气必至。
现代文：岐伯说：虚证不能用刺。如果不应当刺而误刺，必伤其真气，使其脏气虚，五天以后，则病气复至而病势加重。
English: Qi Bo said: You can't use a thorn for a false certificate. If you don't prick it and prick it by mistake, it will hurt its true spirit, make it dirty and weak, and after five days, the illness will return and the condition will worsen.

古文：帝曰：其至何如？
现代文：黄帝说：病气至时情况怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the situation when the illness comes?

古文：岐伯曰：至必少气时热，时热从胸背上至头，汗出，手热，口干苦渴，小便黄，目下肿，腹中鸣，身重难以行，月事不来，烦而不能食，不能正偃，正偃则咳，病名曰风水，论在《刺法》中。
现代文：岐伯说：病气至时，病人必感到气短，时常发热，时常觉得热从胸背上至头，汗出，手热，口中干渴，小便色黄，眼睛下面浮肿，腹中鸣响，身体沉重，行动困难。如患者是妇女则月经闭止，心烦而不能饮食，不能仰卧，仰卧就咳嗽的很厉害，此病叫 风水 ，在《刺法》中有所论述。
English: Qi Bo said: When the illness reaches its peak, the patient will feel short of breath, often feverish, often feel hot from the chest and back to the head, sweating, hot hands, dry mouth, yellow urine, puffiness under the eyes, ringing in the abdomen, heavy body, and difficulty in movement. If the patient is a woman, menstruation is closed, she is upset and cannot eat, she cannot lie on her back, and she coughs very badly when lying on her back. This disease is called feng shui, and it is discussed in "Sting Method."

古文：岐伯曰：邪之所凑，其气必虚。
现代文：岐伯说：邪气之所以能够侵犯人体，是由于其正气先已虚弱。
English: Qi Bo said: The reason why the evil spirit can invade the human body is because its righteous spirit is already weak.

古文：阴虚者，阳必凑之，故少气时热而汗出也。
现代文：肾脏属阴，风邪属阳。肾阴不足，风阳便乘虚侵入，所以呼吸气短，时常发热而汗出。
English: The kidney is yin, and the wind is yang. If the kidney is deficient in yin, the wind and the sun will invade it, so shortness of breath, frequent fever and sweating.

古文：小便黄者，少腹中有热也。
现代文：小便色黄，是因为小腹中有热。
English: Yellow urine is caused by heat in the lower abdomen.

古文：不能正偃者，胃中不和也。
现代文：不能仰卧，是因为水气上乘于胃，使胃中不和。
English: You can't lie on your back, because the water vapour rises to the top of the stomach, causing discord in the stomach.

古文：正偃则咳甚，上迫肺也。
现代文：仰卧则咳嗽加剧，是因为水气上迫于肺。
English: When lying on the back, the cough intensifies because the water vapor presses on the lungs.

古文：诸有水气者，微肿先见于目下也。
现代文：凡是水肿病人，眼睛下面先出现微肿。黄帝说：为什么呢？
English: All patients with edema first develop a slight swelling under the eyes. Huang Di said: "Why?

古文：帝曰：何以言？岐伯曰：水者阴也，目下亦阴也，腹者至阴之所居，故水在腹者，必使目下肿也。
现代文：岐伯说：水是属阴的，眼睛下面也是属阴的部位，腹部也是至阴所在之处，所以腹中有水邪的，必使眼睛下面的部位微肿。
English: Qi Bo said: "Water is yin, and the area under the eyes is also yin, and the abdomen is also the place of yin. Therefore, if there is water sickness in the abdomen, it will cause the area under the eyes to swell slightly.

古文：真气上逆，故口苦舌干，卧不得正偃，正偃则咳出清水也。
现代文：水邪之气上泛凌心，迫使脏真火之气上逆，所以口苦咽干，不能仰卧，仰卧则水气上逆而咳出清水。
English: Water evil gas on the pan-breathing heart, forcing the dirty real fire gas on the opposite, so the mouth is dry, can not lie on his back, lying on his back is water gas on the contrary and cough out clear water.

古文：诸水病者，故不得卧，卧则惊，惊则咳甚也。
现代文：凡是有水肿病的人，都因水气上乘于胃而不能卧，卧则水气上凌于心而惊，逆于肺则咳嗽加剧。
English: All people with edema are unable to lie down because the gas rises above the stomach. When lying down, the gas rises above the heart, and the cough intensifies against the lungs.

古文：腹中鸣者，病本于胃也。
现代文：腹中鸣响，是胃肠中有水气窜动，其病本在于胃。
English: The ringing in the abdomen is watery gas pulsation in the gastrointestinal tract, the cause of which lies in the stomach.

古文：薄脾则烦，不能食。
现代文：若水迫于脾，则心烦不能进食。
English: If the water presses against the spleen, the person will be too upset to eat.

古文：食不下者，胃脘隔也。
现代文：饮食不进，是水气阻隔于胃脘。
English: If you don't eat, it's because water vapor is blocking the stomach lining.

古文：身重难以行者，胃脉在足也。
现代文：身体沉重而行动困难，是因为胃的经脉下行于足部，水气随经脉下流所致。
English: The reason why the body is heavy and movement is difficult is because the stomach travels down the meridians to the feet, and the water vapor follows the flow of the meridians.

古文：月事不来者，胞脉闭也。
现代文：妇女月经不来，是因为水气阻滞，胞脉闭塞不通的缘故。
English: A woman's menstruation does not come because of the stagnation of water and gas, and the blockage of the blood vessels.

古文：胞脉者，属心而络于胞中。今气上迫肺，心气不得下通，故月事不来也。
现代文：胞脉属于心而下络于胞中，现水气上迫于肺，使心气不得下通，所以胞脉闭而月经不来。
English: The vas deferens belongs to the heart and descends in the vas deferens. It is forced to the lungs by the water vapor, so that the heart gas cannot descend, so the vas deferens is closed and menstruation does not come.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

