古文：于頔，字允元，河南人也，周太师燕文公谨之后也。
现代文：于頔字允元，河南人，周太师燕文公于谨的子孙。
English: Yu Xizhong Yunyuan, a native of Henan Province, was a descendant of Zhou's grandmaster, Yan Wenguang Yu Jian.

古文：始以廕补千牛，调授华阴尉，黜陟使刘湾辟为判官。
现代文：最初因先人而得官任千牛，调授华阴县尉，黜陟使刘湾召他做判官。
English: At first, because of his predecessors, he was appointed to the position of Qian Niu, transferred to the position of Huayin County Lieutenant, and ordered Liu Wan to call him to be a judge.

古文：又以栎阳主簿摄监察御史，充入蕃使判官。
现代文：又以栎阳主簿之职代理监察御史，担任蕃使判官。
English: He also supervised the history as the agent of the main book of Shenyang and served as the magistrate.

古文：再迁司门员外郎，兼侍御史，赐紫。充入西蕃计会使，将命称旨，时论以为有出疆专对之能。
现代文：再度升任司门员外郎、兼侍御史，赐紫服，担任西蕃计会使，传达诏令圣旨，当时人们都认为他有出使域外交涉应对的才能。
English: He was once again promoted to the position of gatekeeper-outrider and attendant-historian, given a purple robe, served as a member of the Xidi Planning Committee, and conveyed the imperial edict. At that time, people believed that he had the ability to deal with diplomatic issues in the diplomatic field.

古文：历长安县令、驾部郎中。
现代文：于頔历任长安县令、驾部郎中。
English: He served as the county magistrate of Chang'an County and the driver's assistant.

古文：出为湖州刺史。
现代文：后出任湖州刺史。
English: Later, he served as Huzhou chief historian.

古文：因行县至长城方山，其下有水曰西湖，南朝疏凿，溉田三千顷，久堙废。
现代文：因下县巡视，到了方城山，山下有水名西湖，南朝时开凿疏浚，灌溉农田三千顷，因年久堵塞废弃。
English: As a result of the inspection tour of the county, we arrived at Fangcheng Mountain. Under the mountain there is the famous West Lake. During the Southern Dynasties, dredging was carried out to irrigate 3,000 hectares of farmland. It was abandoned because it had been blocked for many years.

古文：頔命设堤塘以复之，岁获粳稻蒲鱼之利，人赖以济。
现代文：于頔命修堤挖塘以恢复旧貌，每年能获稻谷蒲苇鱼类之利，百姓赖以为生。
English: In order to restore the old appearance, they dug a dike to restore the old appearance. Every year, they can get the benefits of rice and paddlefish, and the people rely on it for their livelihood.

古文：州境陆地褊狭，其送终者往往不掩其棺槥，頔葬朽骨凡十余所。
现代文：湖州境内陆地面积狭小，死了人往往无处掩埋棺木，于頔安排葬地共有十余处。
English: The land area in Huzhou is small, and the dead often have nowhere to bury their coffins. A total of more than ten burial sites have been arranged in Yunnan.

古文：改苏州刺史，浚沟渎，整街衢，至今赖之。
现代文：后调任苏州刺史，疏浚沟渎，修整街衢，当地生民至今还仰赖他当初这些举措。
English: Afterward, he was assigned to dig up the history of Suzhou, dredge the ditches, and repair the streets. Local residents still rely on him for these measures.

古文：吴俗事鬼，頔疾其淫祀废生业，神宇皆撤去，唯吴太伯、伍员等三数庙存焉。
现代文：吴地风俗喜敬鬼神，于頔痛恨滥行祭礼荒废正业，便将神庙都撤除，只吴太伯、伍员等几个庙宇留存。
English: The customs of the Wu region revered ghosts and gods, while the Yuans detested the extravagance of rituals and the waste of good deeds, so they removed all the temples. Only several temples, such as Wu Tai Bo and Wu Jian, remained.

古文：虽为政有绩，然横暴已甚，追憾湖州旧尉，封杖以计强决之。
现代文：虽然他治政有功绩，但过于横暴，追恨湖州原任县尉，用计密施杖刑将其强行处决。
English: Although he had some achievements in governance, he was too domineering. He hated the former county lieutenant of Huzhou and had him forcibly executed by means of a secret caning.

古文：观察使王纬奏其事，德宗不省。
现代文：观察使王纬将此事奏报朝廷，德宗不予查究。
English: The observation caused Wang Wei to report the matter to the imperial court, but Dezong did not investigate.

古文：及后頔累迁，乃与纬书曰： 一蒙恶奏，三度改官。 
现代文：此后于頔一再升迁，便致书王纬声称： 承蒙你一次恶意上奏，我得以三度升官。 
English: After that, Yu Zou was promoted again and again, so he sent a letter to Wang Wei, claiming: Thanks to your malicious promotion, I was promoted three times.

古文：由大理卿迁陕虢观察使。自以为得志，益恣威虐。
现代文：他由大理卿升任陕虢观察使，自以为得意，越发恣意逞威施虐。
English: He was promoted to the post of Shaanxi and Fujian Observation Envoy by Lord Dali, and he thought he was good at it. He became more and more arrogant and abusive.

古文：官吏日加科罚，其惴恐重足一迹。
现代文：对官吏日日施加责罚，他们心中恐惧不安甚于被重重地踏上一只脚。
English: Punishments are meted out to officials on a daily basis with more fear and trepidation than being stepped on.

古文：掾姚岘不胜其虐，与其弟泛舟于河，遂自投而死。
现代文：属吏姚岘不堪忍受凌辱，同兄弟泛舟黄河时，投河而死。
English: The subordinate official, Yao Wei, could not bear the humiliation. When he was rafting on the Yellow River with his brothers, he fell into the river and died.

古文：贞元十四年，为襄州刺史，充山南东道节度观察。
现代文：贞元十四年，于頔任襄州刺史，被委派为山南东道节度观察使。
English: In the 14th year of the Zhengyuan, he was appointed as the historian of Xiangzhou and was appointed as the observer of the Shannan Host Festival.

古文：地与蔡州邻。吴少诚之叛，頔率兵赴唐州，收吴房、朗山县，又破贼于濯神沟。
现代文：所辖地域与蔡州毗邻，吴少诚反叛，于頔率兵赴唐州，收吴房、郎山县，又在濯神沟击溃贼人。
English: The area under his jurisdiction was adjacent to Caizhou. Wu Shaocheng rebelled, and Yu Qi led his troops to Tangzhou, taking Wufang and Langshan counties, and defeating the bandits in Maozhengou.

古文：于是广军籍，募战士，器甲犀利，僴然专有汉南之地。
现代文：这时便扩大军队编制，招募战士，兵器犀利甲胄精良，亻严然有独霸汉南之地的架势。
English: At this time, the army was expanded and soldiers were recruited. The weapons were sharp, the armor was sophisticated, and the army was in a strong position to dominate the land of Hannan.

古文：小失意者，皆以军法从事。
现代文：部属中稍有不如他意的，一概以军法处置。
English: If any of his subordinates did not do as well as he wanted, they were all dealt with according to military law.

古文：因请升襄州为大都督府，府比郓、魏。
现代文：于是向朝廷请求襄州为大都督府，级别同于郓州、魏州。
English: Therefore, he asked the imperial court to make Xiangzhou a grand governor's office with the same level as Zhangzhou and Weizhou.

古文：时德宗方姑息方镇，闻頔事状，亦无可奈何，但允顺而已。
现代文：当时德宗正姑息迁就各方镇，听说于頔的奏请，也无可奈何，只有应从而已。
English: At that time, Dezong was accommodating all the towns, and when he heard of Yu's request, he had no choice but to comply.

古文：頔奏请无不从。于是公然聚敛，恣意虐杀，专以凌上威下为务。
现代文：于頔之奏请皇上无不从，于是他公然搜刮钱财，肆意虐杀无辜，专门干些欺上凌下的事。
English: At the Emperor's bidding, he openly scrounged for money, brutally killed innocent people, and made a point of bullying his superiors.

古文：邓州刺史元洪，頔诬以赃罪奏闻，朝旨不得已为流端州，命中使监焉。
现代文：邓州刺史元洪，被于頔诬陷有贪赃之罪上奏，朝廷不得已颁旨将元洪流放端州，命中使监护前往。
English: The imperial court had no choice but to issue an order to banish Yuan Hong, who was falsely accused of corruption by Yu Zhen, to Danzhou, and sent his guardian there.

古文：至隋州枣阳县，頔命部将领士卒数百人，劫洪至襄州，拘留之。
现代文：行至隋州枣阳县，于頔命部将率士卒数百人将元洪劫掠到襄州，拘禁起来。
English: He went to Zaoyang County, Suizhou Province, and led hundreds of officers and men from the Ministry of Public Security to kidnap and detain Yuan Hong in Yangzhou.

古文：中使奔归京师。德宗怒，笞之数十。
现代文：中使奔回京师，德宗大怒，将中使鞭笞数十。
English: The Chinese envoy rushed back to the capital, where he was furious and whipped the envoy dozens of times.

古文：頔又表洪其责太重，复降中使景忠信宣旨慰谕。遂除洪吉州长史，然后洪获赴谪所。
现代文：于頔又上表说对元洪责罚太重，朝廷便派中使景忠信至襄州宣旨抚慰，于是授元洪为吉州长史，然后元洪才得赴贬谪之地。
English: Yu Yao also said on the table that the punishment for Yuan Hong was too heavy, and the imperial court sent a middle-ranking envoy, Jing Zhongxin, to Xiangzhou to issue an order of consolation, and then awarded Yuan Hong the history of the prefectural governor, and then Yuan Hong had to go to the place of humiliation.

古文：又怒判官薛正伦，奏贬峡州长史。
现代文：于頔又恼怒判官薛正伦，奏请贬其为峡州长史。
English: Yu Yao also angered the judge Xue Zhenglun and asked him to relegate it to the history of the governor of the canyon.

古文：及敕下，頔怒已解，复奏请为判官，德宗皆从之。
现代文：等到圣旨下达，于頔怒气已消，再度奏请薛正伦仍做判官，德宗都依从他。
English: By the time the imperial edict was issued, Yu Zhen's anger had dissipated, and he once again asked Xue Zhenglun to still be the judge. All the German emperors obeyed him.

古文：正伦卒，未殡，頔以兵围其宅，令孽男逼娶其嫡女。
现代文：薛正伦去世，尚未殡葬，于頔便率兵包围薛宅，让自己的庶子逼娶薛正伦的嫡生女。
English: When Xue Zhenglun passed away and had not yet been buried, Yu Bin led his soldiers to surround Xue's house and forced his son-in-law to marry Xue Zhenglun's legitimate daughter.

古文：頔累迁至左仆射、平章事、燕国公。
现代文：于頔屡屡升迁至左仆射、平章事、燕国公。
English: Yu Qi was repeatedly promoted to Zuo Fusha, Ping Zhangji, and Yan Guogong.

古文：俄而不奉诏旨，擅总兵据南阳，朝廷几为之旰食。
现代文：不久，便不遵奉诏令圣旨，擅自统兵占据南阳，朝廷为此几乎陷于慌乱。
English: Soon, he disobeyed the imperial edict and occupied Nanyang without authorization. The imperial court was almost in a panic because of this.

古文：及宪宗即位，威肃四方，頔稍戒惧。
现代文：及至宪宗即位，威严振肃四方，于頔稍有警惕畏惧。
English: As far as the enthronement of the Constitutionalist, the majesty shakes the four directions, and there is a little vigilance and fear in Yu Yao.

古文：以第四子季友求尚主。宪宗以长女永昌公主降焉。
现代文：他让第四子季友求娶公主为妻，宪宗降旨将长女永昌公主许配。
English: He asked his fourth son, Ji You, to propose marriage to the princess, and Emperor Xianzong decreed the marriage of his eldest daughter, Princess Yongchang.

古文：其第二子方，屡讽其父归朝入觐，册拜司空、平章事。
现代文：于頔的第二子于方屡次劝父亲回到朝中，他便入朝谒见天子，被册封为司空、平章事。
English: Yu Fan's second son, Yu Fang, repeatedly persuaded his father to return to the imperial court. He went to the imperial court to meet the emperor and was awarded the titles of Siku and Ping.

古文：元和中，内官梁守谦掌枢密，颇招权利。
现代文：元和年间，宦官梁守谦执掌枢密院，颇能招徕权要谋取利益。
English: During the Yuan and He years, the eunuch Liang Shouqian presided over the Privy Council and was quite capable of soliciting power and seeking profit.

古文：有梁正言者，勇于射利，自言与守谦宗盟情厚，頔子敏与之游处。
现代文：有个叫梁正言的人，热衷牟利，自称与梁守谦同族情谊深厚，于頔之子于敏同他有交往。
English: There was a man named Liang Zhengyan, who was keen on making profits. He claimed to have a deep sense of kinship with Liang Shouqian, and Yu Yu's son Yu Min had dealings with him.

古文：正言取頔财贿，言赂守谦，以求出镇。
现代文：梁正言向于頔索取钱财，说去贿赂梁守谦，以求使于頔出朝镇守。
English: Liang Zhengyan asked Yu Xuan for money, saying that he would bribe Liang Shouqian in order to force Yu Xuan to become the town guard.

古文：久之无效，敏责其货于正言。乃诱正言之僮，支解弃于溷中。
现代文：许久不见动静，于敏责备父亲白送钱财给梁正言，便诱骗梁正言的僮仆来家，将他杀死肢解后弃于茅厕之中。
English: After not seeing any movement for a long time, Yu Min scolded his father for sending money and wealth to Liang Zhengyan in vain. He then tricked Liang Zhengyan's manservant to come to the house, killed and dismembered him, and then abandoned him in the toilet.

古文：八年春，敏奴王再荣诣银台门告其事，即日捕頔孔目官沈璧、家僮十余人，于内侍狱鞫问。
现代文：元和八年春，于敏的奴仆王再荣到银台门告发了这件事，当天便拘捕于頔的孔目官沈璧及家僮十余人监禁在宫内候审。
English: In the spring of the 8th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Yu Min's servant Wang Zhaorong went to the Yintai Gate to report the incident. On the same day, Yu Min's Confucius official Shen Bi and more than ten members of his family were arrested and detained in the palace to await trial.

古文：寻出付台狱，诏御史中丞薛存诚、刑部侍郎王播、大理卿武少仪为三司使按问，乃搜死奴于其第，获之。
现代文：随后便押出宫门交付御史台牢狱，诏令御史中丞薛存诚、刑部侍郎王播、大理卿武少仪为三司使负责审案，于是到于頔宅中搜寻死奴，找到了尸体。
English: Subsequently, he was pushed out of the palace gate and handed over to the Gushidai prison, and the imperial edict was issued that the Gushidai chujo, Xue Cuncheng, the criminal department's chamberlain, Wang Bo, and the Dali chancellor, Takeshiori, were the three commissioners responsible for adjudicating the case, so they went to search for the dead slave in his house and found the body.

古文：頔率其男赞善大夫正、驸马都尉季友，素服单骑，将赴阙下，待罪于建福门。
现代文：于頔带领他的儿子赞善大夫于正、驸马都尉于季友，着白衣，自己一人骑马，准备面见皇上，在建福门等候降旨问罪。
English: Yu Zheng led his son, Dr. Zanzan Yu Zheng, and the horse captain Yu Ji You, dressed in white, riding alone, preparing to meet the emperor, waiting at Jianfu Gate for the indictment.

古文：门司不纳，退于街南，负墙而立，遣人进表。
现代文：守门官不接纳，只好退到街南，靠墙站立，派人呈上奏表。
English: The gatekeeper did not accept, so he had to retreat to the south of the street, stand against the wall, and send someone to present the report.

古文：阁门使以无引不受，日没方归。
现代文：阁门使因他无人引荐而不接受，直到日落他们才返回。
English: They did not return until sundown, the messenger having been rejected because he had no one to introduce him to.

古文：明日，复待罪于建福门。宰相喻令还第，贬为恩王傅。
现代文：次日，又到建福门等候降罪，宰相通知让他回宅，贬为恩王傅。
English: The next day, he went to Jianfu Gate again to wait for his sentence to be reduced, and the prime minister ordered him to return home and be relegated to the position of "benevolent tutor."

古文：敏长流雷州，锢身发遣。
现代文：于敏远远流放至雷州，刑具加身遣送。
English: Yu Min was exiled far away to Leizhou, and the torture equipment was sent along with him.

古文：殿中少监、驸马都尉季友，追夺两任官阶，令其家循省。
现代文：殿中少监、驸马都尉于季友追免两任官阶，命他全家离京。
English: The junior superintendent of the palace and the captain of the imperial horse chased and relieved Ji You of his two official ranks, and ordered his whole family to leave Beijing.

古文：左赞善大夫正、秘书丞方并停见任。
现代文：左赞善大夫于正、秘书丞于方一并停任现职。
English: Zuo Zanzan Doctor Yu Zheng and Secretary Yu Fang both resigned from their current positions.

古文：孔目官沈璧决四十，配流封州。
现代文：孔目官沈璧处杖刑四十，流放封州。
English: Kongmoe official Shen Bi was sentenced to forty years on the cane and banished to Fuzhou.

古文：奴犀牛与刘干同手杀人，宜付京兆府决杀。
现代文：奴仆犀牛与刘干共同杀人，当交付京兆府处决。
English: Servant Rhinoceros and Liu Gan jointly committed murder and were executed when they were delivered to Beijing.

古文：敏行至商山赐死。梁正言、僧鉴虚并付京兆府决杀。
现代文：于敏行至商山诏命赐死，梁正言、僧鉴虚一同交付京兆府处死。
English: Yu Minhang and Shangshan Zhao were sentenced to death, while Liang Zhengyan and the monk Jian Hu were both sentenced to death by the Beijing Zhao Prefecture.

古文：頔其年十月，改授太子宾客。
现代文：于頔在那年十月改授太子宾客。
English: In October of that year, Yu Yao was awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：十年，王师讨淮、蔡，诸侯贡财助军。頔进银七千两、金五百两、玉带二，诏不纳，复还之。
现代文：元和十年，王师讨伐淮州、蔡州叛逆，诸侯王贡献钱财资助军队，于頔进奉银七千两、金五百两、玉带二条，诏命不收，又退还于頔。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan and the 10th year of the Heian, Wang Shi led a crusade against the rebels in Huai Zhou and Cai Zhou, and the princes contributed money and resources to support the army. They gave 7,000 taels of silver, 500 taels of gold, and two jade belts to Yunnan, but did not receive the imperial command, and returned them to Yunnan.

古文：十三年，頔表求致仕。宰臣拟授太子少保，御笔改为太子宾客。
现代文：元和十三年，于頔上表请求辞官归家，宰臣拟授他太子少保，皇上御笔改为太子宾客。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and the 13th year of the Heian period, Yu Shishou requested the retired official to return home, and the Vice-Minister planned to award him the title of Junior Protector of the Crown Prince, and the Emperor's pen was changed to Prince's Guest.

古文：其年八月卒，赠太保，谥曰 厉 。
现代文：那年八月于頔去世，追赠太保，谥号为 厉 。
English: He died in August of that year and was posthumously awarded the title of Taibao. His posthumous name was Li.

古文：其子季友从猎苑中，诉于穆宗，赐谥曰 思 。
现代文：其子季友伴随皇上在御苑狩猎，向穆宗诉说，穆宗便赐于頔谥号为 思 。
English: His son, Ji You, accompanied the emperor on a hunting trip in the imperial garden and told Mu Zong that Mu Zong had given him the nickname "Ren Zhe."

古文：右丞张正甫封敕，请还本谥。
现代文：右补阙高钺上疏议论此事道：
English: The Right Rev. Gao Zhisheng commented on the matter:

古文：右补阙高钺上疏论之曰：夫谥者，所以惩恶劝善，激浊扬清，使忠臣义士知劝，乱臣贼子知惧。虽窃位于当时，死加恶谥者，所以惩暴戾，垂沮劝。
现代文： 谥号，是用以惩恶扬善、激浊扬清，使忠臣义士知道努力，乱臣贼子知道畏惧的。虽然生前在当世窃取高位，死后却追加恶谥，那是用以警戒暴戾之人，让奖惩之意延续后世。
English: The nickname is used to punish evil and promote good, to arouse enthusiasm and promote purity, to make loyal and righteous people know how to work hard, and to make unruly and treacherous people know how to fear. Although he stole a high position in his lifetime, he added the nickname after his death. It is used to warn violent people, so that the meaning of reward and punishment will continue in the future.

古文：孔子修《春秋》，乱臣贼子惧，盖为此也。
现代文：孔子做《春秋》，乱臣贼子惧，大概原因就在此吧。
English: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" and the unruly vassal is afraid of the thief. This is probably the reason.

古文：垂范如此而不能救，况又隳其典法乎？
现代文：像这样垂典范于后世尚且不能挽救，何况更去毁坏这种典章法规呢？
English: It is not possible to salvage such an example for future generations, let alone destroy such a code and law.

古文：臣风闻此事是徐泗节度使李愬奏请。
现代文： 臣风闻此事乃徐泗节度使李訫奏请。
English: The subject heard about the matter, and it was Xu Yao who persuaded Li Yao to play the role.

古文：李愬勋臣节将，陛下宠其勋劳，赐其爵禄、车服、第宅则可，若乱朝廷典法，将何以沮劝？
现代文：李訫是勋臣名将，陛下宠爱他的功劳，赐给他爵禄、车马服饰、住宅是可以的，假若破坏朝廷典章法度，今后如何惩恶扬善？
English: Li Qiye is an honored and famous general. His Majesty is fond of his merits. It is possible to give him a knighthood, a chariot and horse costume, and a residence. If he breaks the laws and regulations of the Imperial Court, how will he punish the evil and promote the good in the future?

古文：仲尼曰： 唯名与器，不可以假人。 
现代文：仲尼说： 惟独美名与重器，不可用以送。 
English: Zhongni said, "Only a good name and heavy equipment should not be sent."

古文：名器，君之所司，若以假人，与之政也，政亡则国家从之。
现代文：美名重器，是国君所使用的，若用以送人，等于将政权送人，政权失去，国家跟着就会丢失。
English: Reputation is a heavy weapon used by the sovereign. If it is used to send someone away, it is tantamount to sending away the regime. If the regime is lost, the country will be lost.

古文：頔顷镇襄、汉，杀戮不辜，恣行凶暴。
现代文：于頔镇守襄州、汉南不久，便杀戮无辜，恣意施行凶暴。
English: Not long after Yuzhen guarded Xiangzhou and Hannan, he killed innocent people and arbitrarily carried out violence.

古文：移军襄、邓，迫胁朝廷，擅留逐臣，徼遮天使。
现代文：布署军队在襄州、邓州，胁迫朝廷，擅自扣留被逐之臣，连天子使臣也不放在眼里。
English: He deployed troops in Xiangzhou and Dengzhou, coerced the imperial court, arbitrarily detained the expelled vassals, and did not even pay attention to the envoys of the emperor.

古文：当先朝嗣位之始，贵安反侧，以靖四方。幸免鈇钺之诛，得全腰领而毙，诚宜谥之 缪厉 ，以沮凶邪，岂可曲加美名，以惠奸宄。
现代文：先朝皇上即位之初，为保国家安定，扭转了动乱局面，使得四方宁静，于頔幸免被斩于斧钺之下，得以全尸而死，确实应加谥为 缪厉 ，以警戒凶邪；怎么可以不恰当地追加美名，使奸邪之人得到恩惠呢！
English: At the beginning of the previous emperor's reign, in order to ensure national stability, he reversed the turbulent situation and made the four sides calm. Yu Yao was spared from being beheaded under the axe and was able to die with his whole body. It is indeed necessary to be diligent in order to guard against evil; how can you improperly add a good name so that those who commit evil will be favored?

古文：如此，则是于頔生为奸臣，死获美谥，窃恐天下有识之士，谓圣朝无人，有此倒置。
现代文：像这样做，那么于頔生为奸臣，死获美谥，臣担心天下有识之士说我圣朝无人，才会有这种黑白颠倒的事。
English: If you do this, then you will be born as a treacherous vassal, and you will die as a beautiful vassal. The vassal is worried that people with insight in the world will say that there is no one in the Holy Dynasty, and this kind of black-and-white reversal will happen.

古文：伏请速追前诏，却依太常谥为厉，使朝典无亏，国章不滥。
现代文：臣俯首请求速速追回前诏，仍依太常寺谥于頔为 厉 ，使朝廷典章不受损害，国家法规不遭践踏。 
English: The vassal bowed his head and requested the speedy recovery of the former imperial edict, and continued to act in accordance with the Taiji Temple's edict, so that the imperial edict would not be damaged and the national laws and regulations would not be trampled.

古文：太常博士王彦威又疏曰：
现代文：太常博士王彦威又上疏说：
English: Dr. Wang Yanwei went on to say:

古文：古之圣王立谥法者，所以彰善恶、垂劝诫。
现代文： 古时圣王建立加谥之法，是为了彰扬善恶，表明奖惩。
English: In ancient times, the holy king established the law of adding and subtracting, in order to promote good and evil, and to show reward and punishment.

古文：使一字之褒，赏逾绂冕；一言之贬，辱过朝市。
现代文：使一字之褒，其奖赏超过贵服冠冕；一言之贬，其耻辱超过集市上示众。
English: A word of praise is better than a crown; a word of reproach is better than a market stall.

古文：此有国之典礼，陛下劝惩之大柄也。
现代文：这是立国的重要礼法，陛下劝善惩恶的重大权力。
English: This is an important ceremonial law of the founding of the country, and His Majesty has the great power to exhort good and punish evil.

古文：頔顷拥节旄，肆行暴虐，人神共愤，法令不容。
现代文：于頔一时重权在握，便肆行暴虐，使人神共愤，法令不容。
English: As soon as power was in his hands, he became tyrannical, incurring the wrath of the gods, and was not tolerated by the law.

古文：擅兴全师，僭为正乐，侵辱中使，擅止制囚，杀戮不辜，诛求无度，臣故定谥为厉。
现代文：他擅自兴兵，越级施用宫乐，侵辱中使，擅自扣留钦犯，杀戮无辜，惩罚、勒索没有止境，因此臣给他定谥号为 厉 。
English: He raised an army without authorization, used palace music beyond his rank, insulted the middle envoy, detained the courtier without authorization, killed the innocent, and punished and blackmailed without end. Therefore, the vassal gave him the nickname of "Xi."

古文：今陛下不忍，改赐为 思 ，诚出圣慈，实害圣政。
现代文：现在陛下不忍，改赐为 思 ，的确出于圣上的慈心，但确实损害了圣上的政德。
English: Now His Majesty could not bear it and changed his mind, indeed out of a holy compassion, but it did damage the holy political ethics.

古文：伏以陛下自临宸扆，懋建大中，闻善若惊，从谏不倦。
现代文： 臣俯首以为，陛下自临帝位，建盛世之业，闻善若惊，从谏不倦。
English: The vassal bowed his head, thinking that since His Majesty came to the throne, he had built a prosperous career. He was so good at it that it was astounding. He never tired of it.

古文：况当统天立极之始，所谓执法慎名之时，一垂恩光，大启侥幸。
现代文：何况正当统治天下登立极位之初，即所谓执掌国法珍爱名誉之时，一旦降下恩泽，便能大开侥幸腾达之路。
English: Moreover, at the beginning of the legitimate rule of the world, that is, when the so-called law of holding the country and cherishing the honor, once the grace is lowered, it will be able to open up the road to success.

古文：且如頔之不法，然而陛下不忍加惩，臣恐今后不逞之徒如頔者众矣！死援頔例，陛下何以处之？
现代文：再说像于頔这样不遵法度，但陛下不忍加以惩罚，臣担心今后像他这样的不法之徒就更多了，死后也要依于頔之例奏请美谥，陛下怎样处置呢？
English: Furthermore, like Yu Xuan, he did not obey the law, but His Majesty could not bear to punish him. The minister was worried that there would be more wrongdoers like him in the future. After his death, he would also follow Yu Xuan's example and invite Mei Xuan. What would His Majesty do?

古文：是恩曲于前而弊生于后。
现代文：这样做是圣恩误加于前人，而弊端生发于后世。
English: To do so is to misapply the blessings of the past to the present, and the evils of the present to the future.

古文：若以李吉甫有赐谥之例，则甫之为相也，有犯上杀人之罪乎？
现代文：如果以李吉甫有赐谥之先例，那么李吉甫做宰相时，难道有犯上杀人之罪吗？
English: If Li Jifu has the precedent of being awarded the gong, then did Li Jifu commit the crime of homicide when he was prime minister?

古文：以頔况之，恐非伦类。
现代文：于頔同他相比，恐怕还不是一类的人。
English: Compared to him, I'm afraid Yu Yao is not a first-class person.

古文：如以頔常入财助国，改过来觐，两使绝域，可以赎论，夫伤物害人，剥下奉上，纳贿求幸，尤不可长其渐焉。
现代文：如果凭着于頔时常贡献财物资助国家，改正过错来朝谒拜，两度出使远域，那么可以抵消对他的谴责。但是他伤物害人，剥下奉上，纳贿求宠，长这种日益滋蔓的恶行尤其不可助。
English: If, by relying on Yu Qi, he regularly contributed money and materials to support the country, corrected his mistakes, went to the imperial court to worship, and twice sent out to distant regions, then his condemnation could be offset. However, he harmed things and people, peeled off offerings, took bribes to seek favor, and this kind of growing evil behavior was especially unhelpful.

古文：自两河宿兵，垂七十年，王师憓征，疮痏未息。
现代文：自从河南河北作乱，将近七十年，王师征讨不止，国家创伤不息。
English: In the nearly 70 years since Henan and Hebei went to war, Wang Shi has been the subject of more than one war, and the country has been traumatized.

古文：及张茂昭以易定入觐，程权以沧景归朝，故恩礼殊尤，以劝来者。
现代文：及至张茂昭以易定之地入觐，程权以沧景之地归朝，之所以恩惠礼遇特别厚重，是为了勉励后来的人。
English: When Zhang Maozhao was enthroned in the land of Yi Ding, and Cheng Quan returned to the dynasty in the land of Cangjing, the reason why the favors and courtesies were particularly heavy was to encourage those who came later.

古文：而于頔以文吏之职，居腹心之地，而倔强犯命，不获已而入朝，岂茂昭之比乎！
现代文：而于頔以文官的职位，居处国家腹心之地，却倔强不服，侵犯圣命，没受处罚而让他入朝，哪里能同张茂昭等人相比呢！
English: But how can Yu Zheng compare with Zhang Maozhao and others when he took the position of a civil servant and lived in the place of the country's confidant, but stubbornly refused to accept it, violated the sacred life, and allowed him to enter the imperial court without being punished!

古文：纵有入财使远之勤，何以掩其恶迹！
现代文：纵然有贡献财物出使远域的功劳，又怎能掩盖他的恶迹呢？
English: Even if there is a merit of contributing wealth and resources to send to distant regions, how can his evil deeds be covered up?

古文：伏望陛下恩由义断，泽以礼成，褒贬道存，侥幸路绝，则天下幸甚。
现代文：臣俯首恳望陛下根据义节确定恩宠，根据礼法施予惠泽，使褒贬之正道得以维护，侥幸腾达的路途被断绝，那么天下确实大幸啊。 
English: The subject bowed his head and implored His Majesty to determine the grace according to the festival, to grant the benefit according to the etiquette, so that the right way of praise and blame could be maintained, and the way of getting lucky was cut off, then the world was indeed very lucky.

古文：疏奏不报，竟谥为思。
现代文：奏疏未获上报，最终仍谥于頔为 思 。
English: The case was not reported to the police and eventually remained a mystery.

古文：长庆中，以戚里勋家诸贵引用于方，复至和王傅，家富于财。
现代文：长庆年间，靠着亲戚中诸勋贵引荐，于頔之子于方又官至和王傅，家财富有。
English: During the period of Changqing, with the help of his relatives, who recommended him for various honors, Yu Yao's son, Yu Fang, became a high-ranking official and the king's cupbearer, and the family had great wealth.

古文：方交结游侠，务于速进。
现代文：于方交结游侠，一心致力于迅速升官。
English: Yu Fang, a ranger, is committed to rapid promotion.

古文：元稹作相，欲以其策平河朔群盗，方以策画干稹。
现代文：元稹做了宰相，欲用策略平定河朔盗贼，于方将自己的计策进呈元稹。
English: When Yuan Shao became the prime minister, he wanted to use the strategy to quell the thieves in Hechuo, and Yu Fang presented his own strategy to Yuan Shao.

古文：而李逢吉之党欲倾裴度，乃令人告稹欲结客刺度。
现代文：此时李逢吉一党欲倾覆裴度，便派人诬告元稹企图结交刺客刺杀裴度。
English: At this time, Li Fengji and his party wanted to overthrow Pei Du, so they sent someone to falsely accuse Yuan Qi of attempting to make a deal with an assassin to assassinate Pei Du.

古文：事下法司，按鞫无状，而方竟坐诛。
现代文：事情下交给执法部门，审察未见证据，可是于方竟然获罪被诛。
English: The case was handed over to the law enforcement department under the circumstances, and the investigation found no evidence, but Yu Fang was actually convicted and arrested.

古文：韩弘，颍川人。
现代文：韩弘，颍川人。
English: Han Hong, a native of Hechuan.

古文：其祖、父无闻，世居滑之匡城。
现代文：其祖父、父亲皆无名声，世代居住在滑州之匡城。
English: His grandfather and father are both unknown, and have lived in Kuangcheng, Slanting, for generations.

古文：少孤，依母族。刘玄佐即其舅也。
现代文：少小父母亡故，依附母家亲族，刘玄佐便是他的舅父。
English: After the death of his parents, Xiao Xiao clung to his maternal relatives. Liu Xuanza was his uncle.

古文：事玄佐为州掾，累奏试大理评事。
现代文：他跟随刘玄佐做州府属吏，屡次奏请试官大理评事。
English: He followed Liu Xuanzuo as a state government official, and repeatedly asked the examiner to be a commentator.

古文：玄佐卒，子士宁被逐。弘出汴州，为宋州南城将。刘全谅时为都知兵马使。
现代文：刘玄佐死后，其子刘士宁被逐，韩弘离开汴州，任宋州南城守将，刘全谅当时任都知兵马使。
English: After the death of Liu Xuanzu, his son Liu Shining was exiled, Han Hong left Zhangzhou and was appointed as the governor of the southern city of Songzhou, and Liu Zhenpeng was appointed as the military envoy of Tochi at that time.

古文：贞元十五年，全谅卒，汴军怀玄佐之惠，又以弘长厚，共请为留后，环监军使请表其事，朝廷亦以玄佐故许之。
现代文：贞元十五年，刘全谅去世，汴州军怀念刘玄佐的恩德，又因韩弘为人谨厚，共同请求他为留后，缠着监军使要他上表请求此事，朝廷也因刘玄佐的关系而批准。
English: In the 15th year of Zhenyuan, Liu Zhenpeng passed away. The Zhangzhou Army remembered the kindness of Liu Xuanzuo, and because Han Hong was a dignified person, they jointly asked him to stay behind, and pestered the supervising envoy to ask him to request the matter. The court also approved because of Liu Xuanzuo's relationship.

古文：自试大理评事检校工部尚书、汴州刺史，兼御史大夫、宣武军节度副大使知节度事、宋亳汴颍观察等使。
现代文：韩弘自试官大理评事起，先后任检校工部尚书、汴州刺史、兼御史大夫、宣武军节度副大使知节度事、宋亳汴颍观察使等职。
English: Han Hong, from the time he was an examiner-critic, successively held the positions of inspector of the school inspection department, chief inspector of the school inspection department, chief inspector of the school inspection department, chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department, deputy chief inspector of the school inspection department of the

古文：时吴少诚遣人至汴，密与刘全谅谋，因曲环卒袭陈许。
现代文：当时吴少诚派人到汴州，意图与刘全谅密谋，通过曲环突袭陈州、许州。
English: At that time, Wu Shaocheng sent people to Zhangzhou, intending to conspire with Liu Pengren, to raid Chenzhou and Xuzhou through Quhuan.

古文：会全谅卒，其人在传舍，弘喜获节钺，即斩其人以闻。立出军三千，助禁军共讨少诚。
现代文：恰值刘全谅去世，那使者住在传舍，韩弘喜获兵权，立即斩了那人禀报朝廷，并立刻派兵三千，协助朝廷禁军共同讨伐吴少诚。
English: At the time of Liu Zhenpeng's death, the envoy was living in the mission house. Han Hongxi was granted military power, immediately killed the person who reported to the court, and immediately sent three thousand soldiers to assist the court's forbidden army to jointly fight Wu Shaocheng.

古文：汴州自刘士宁之后，军益骄恣，及陆长源遇害，颇轻主帅。
现代文：汴州自刘士宁被逐之后，军士日益骄横放纵，及至陆长源被害，便将主帅也不放在眼里。
English: Since Liu Shining was expelled from Luzhou, the sergeant has become increasingly arrogant and indulgent, and when Lu Changyuan was injured, he did not pay attention to the coach.

古文：其为乱魁党数十百人。弘视事数月，皆知其人。
现代文：其中作乱之祸首党徒数十百人，韩弘任职数月，将那帮人都弄清楚了。
English: Among them, there are tens of hundreds of party members who are the scourge of chaos, and Han Hong has been in office for several months and has figured out that gang.

古文：有部将刘锷者，凶卒之魁也。
现代文：有一部将名叫刘锷，为这班暴徒之首领。
English: One of them, named Liu Jun, was the leader of the mob.

古文：弘欲大振威望。
现代文：韩弘决心大振威望。
English: Han Hong is determined to boost his prestige.

古文：一日，引短兵于衙门，召锷与其党三百，数其罪，尽斩之以徇，血流道中。弘对宾僚言笑自若。
现代文：一天，他在衙门布署好持短兵器的兵士，然后召集刘锷及其同党三百人，列举他们的罪状，将他们全部斩首以示众，鲜血直流淌到路上，而韩弘对着幕僚们谈笑自若。
English: One day, he posted soldiers with short weapons at the gate of the palace, and then summoned Liu Wei and 300 of his party members, listed their crimes, and beheaded them all for public display. Blood flowed down the road, while Han Hong chatted and laughed with his staff.

古文：自是讫弘入朝，二十余年，军众十万，无敢怙乱者。
现代文：自此直到韩弘入朝，二十余年，十万军士，无人敢作乱取利。
English: From then until Han Hong's accession to the throne, for more than 20 years and 100,000 soldiers, no one dared to make trouble for profit.

古文：累授检校左右仆射、司空。
现代文：韩弘先后授检校左右仆射、司空。
English: Han Hong successively awarded the inspection school to the left and right pawns, and the left and right pawns.

古文：宪宗即位，加同平章事。
现代文：宪宗即位，加授同平章事。
English: Kenzong ascended the throne and was awarded the title of Tongping.

古文：时王锷检校司空、平章事。
现代文：当时王锷任检校司空、平章事。
English: At that time, Wang Qian served as the inspector of the school.

古文：致书于宰臣武元衡，耻在王锷之下。
现代文：韩弘致书宰臣武元衡，说自己耻于位居王锷之下。
English: Han Hong sent a letter to his vice-minister, Take Motohira, saying that he was ashamed to be ranked below Wang Yao.

古文：宪宗方欲用形势以临淮西，乃授以司徒、平章事，班在锷上。
现代文：宪宗正欲趁当下形势驾临淮西，便授韩弘以司徒、平章事，官阶在王锷之上。
English: In order to take advantage of the current situation in Huaxi, Emperor Zhengzong awarded Han Hong the titles of Sidu and Pingzhang, and the official rank was higher than that of Wang Xi.

古文：及用严绶为招讨，为贼所败，弘方镇汴州，当两河贼之冲要，朝廷虑其异志，欲以兵柄授之，而令李光颜、乌重胤实当旗鼓。
现代文：及至用严绶为招讨使，被贼人打败，韩弘正镇守汴州，辖地正当两河叛贼之军事重地，朝廷顾虑他心怀异志，意图虚授兵权给他，而任命李光颜、乌重胤实际掌握军队。
English: When Han Hongzheng, who had been defeated by the bandits, used strict discipline as a means of persuasion, Han Hongzheng was in charge of Bozhou, which was the military center of the Two Rivers rebels. The imperial court was concerned that he harbored dissent and intended to give him military power in vain, and appointed Li Guangyan and Wu Chongyan to actually control the army.

古文：乃授弘淮西诸军行营都统，令兵部郎中、知制诰李程宣赐官告。
现代文：于是授韩弘淮西诸军行营都统，派兵部侍中、知制诰李程宣布赐官诰令。
English: As a result, Han Hong, Huaxi, and other armies marched in unison, and sent Li Cheng, an aide-de-camp of the military department, to announce the granting of official orders.

古文：弘实不离理所，唯令其子公武率师三千隶李光颜军。
现代文：韩弘果然不离署衙，只命其子韩公武率兵三千隶属李光颜军。
English: Han Hong did not leave the police station, but his son Han Gongwu led 3,000 soldiers to join Lee Kuan Yew's army.

古文：弘虽居统帅，常不欲诸军立功，阴为逗挠之计。
现代文：韩弘虽位居统帅之职，实际不想让将领们立功，暗中耍弄手腕阻挠。
English: Although Han Hong holds the position of commander-in-chief, he actually does not want the generals to perform well and secretly plays tricks to obstruct them.

古文：每闻献捷，辄数日不怡，其危国邀功如是。
现代文：每闻报捷，便一连数日不高兴，他只顾自己邀功不惜危害国家到了如此地步。
English: Every time he hears of a success, he is unhappy for days on end. He only cares about his own glory at the expense of harming the country to such an extent.

古文：吴元济诛，以统帅功，加检校司徒、兼侍中，封许国公，罢行营都统。
现代文：吴元济被诛后，韩弘以统帅之功加封检校司徒、兼侍中，封许国公，免去行营都统职务。
English: After Wu Yuanji was taken into custody, Han Hong, with the merit of the commander-in-chief, was awarded the title of inspector of the school, concurrently a chamberlain, awarded the title of prince, and was exempted from the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：十四年，诛李师道，收复河南二州，弘大惧。
现代文：元和十四年，诛李师道，收复河南二州，韩弘十分恐惧。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Han Hong was very afraid of the return of the two states in Henan Province.

古文：其年七月，尽携汴之牙校千余人入觐。对于便殿，拜舞之际，以其足疾，命中使掖之。
现代文：当年七月，韩弘带领汴州全体牙校千余人入朝谒天子，皇上在便殿召见，叩拜舞蹈时，因他有足疾，命宦官搀扶他。
English: In July of that year, Han Hong led more than a thousand people from the entire dental school in Ganzhou to the Imperial Court. The emperor summoned him to the hall to worship the dance, but because he had a foot ailment, the eunuchs had to help him.

古文：宴赐加等，预册徽号大礼。
现代文：皇上赐宴并加授官级，提前举行册封徽号大礼。
English: The emperor gave a banquet and conferred official ranks, and held a grand ceremony of conferring the imperial seal and crest in advance.

古文：进绢三十五万匹、騑三万匹、银器二百七十件。三上章坚辞戎务，愿留京师奉朝请。
现代文：韩弘献绢三十五万匹、粗绸三万匹、银器二百七十件，并三次上表章坚决请求辞去军务，希望留在京师奉请朝命。
English: Han Hong presented three hundred and fifty thousand yakitori, thirty thousand coarse silk, and two hundred and seventy pieces of silverware, and three times firmly requested to resign from the military, hoping to stay in Beijing.

古文：诏曰：
现代文：皇上下诏道：
English: The next edict said:

古文：纳大忠，树嘉绩，为臣所以明极节；锡殊宠，进高秩，有国所以待元臣。
现代文： 胸怀大忠，建树嘉绩，是臣子表明最高节操的方式；赏赐殊宠，擢升高位，是国君给予良臣的恩遇。
English: To be loyal and do good deeds is the way for a vassal to show the highest discipline; to be given special favors and promoted to a higher rank is a favor given by the sovereign to a good vassal.

古文：况乎邦教诞敷，王言总会，百辟攸宪，四方式瞻。
现代文：何况邦教普施，天子圣明，诸侯归顺，四方仰服。
English: What's more, the state teaches universal benevolence, the Son of Heaven is holy, the princes submit, and all sides obey.

古文：永念于怀，久虚其位，载扬成命，佥曰休哉。
现代文：朕心永念臣之勋绩，长久地虚位以待，发布成命，众口称善。
English: I will always remember the merits of my father-in-law. I will wait for him in vain for a long time. I will announce his success, and everyone will praise him.

古文：宣武军节度副大使知节度事、汴宋亳颍等州观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、守司徒、兼侍中、使持节汴州诸军事、汴州刺史、上柱国、许国公、食邑三千户韩弘，降神挺材，积厚成器；中蕴深闳之量，外标严重之姿。
现代文： 宣武军节度副大使知节度事、汴宋亳颍等州观察处置使、开府仪同三司、守司徒、兼侍中、使持节汴州诸军事、汴州刺史、上柱国、许国公、食邑三千户韩弘，如神降世，才能卓异，积蓄深厚，蔚为栋梁，胸中蕴藏深广的器量，外表显示庄重的风姿。
English: Vice-Ambassador of the Xuanwu Army for the Xuanwu Festival, who was familiar with the Xuanwu and Song dynasties and the observation and disposition of the three states, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, Shou Sittu, and the attendants, and the three thousand Hanhong families of the Xuanwu Military, Xuanwu History, Shangzhu Guo, Xu Guo Guo, and Cuisine, were like gods descended from heaven, with outstanding talents, deep savings, and solid pillars. They had deep and wide resources in their chests, and their appearance showed a dignified appearance.

古文：有匡国济时之心，推诚不耀；有夷凶禁暴之略，仗义益彰。
现代文：有扶国济世之忠心，敬献赤诚而不夸耀；有除凶平暴之谋略，仗义行事而美名益彰。
English: They have the loyalty to help the country and benefit the world, and do not boast of their devotion to the Red Army; they have the strategy to eliminate violence, and do good deeds and enhance their reputation.

古文：自镇浚郊，二十余载，师徒禀训而咸肃，吏士奉法而愈明。
现代文：自镇守汴州以来，二十余载，师徒秉承训诫全都专心尽责，吏士奉守法规行为愈益清明。
English: For more than 20 years since the township has been in charge of Luzhou, teachers and students have all been dedicated to their duties while adhering to the precepts, and the behavior of officials in compliance with laws and regulations has become increasingly clear.

古文：俗臻和平，人用庶富，威声之重，隐若山崇。
现代文：民俗臻于平和，百姓因此富庶，威名之重，稳如山岳。
English: Folk customs have reached a level of peace, so the people are prosperous, prestigious, and stable as a mountain.

古文：属者，淮濆濯征，命统群帅，克殄残孽，惟乃有指踪之功。
现代文： 先前，征讨淮西叛乱，奉朝命统领群帅，翦除残贼，有指挥谋划之功劳。
English: Previously, he fought against the rebellion in Huaixi Province, and was ordered by the imperial court to lead the army to eliminate the remnants of the rebels. He had the merit of commanding and planning.

古文：及齐境兴妖，分师进讨，遂枭元恶，惟乃有略地之效。
现代文：及至齐地妖寇兴乱，分兵进讨，终于诛灭元凶，有收复失地之业绩。
English: As far as Qi, there was a disturbance caused by evil spirits and bandits, and soldiers were dispatched to investigate and finally exterminate the culprits, with the result of recovering the lost territory.

古文：既闻旋旆，俄请执珪，深陈魏阙之诚，远继韩侯之志。朝天有庆，就日方伸。
现代文：班师回朝之后，随即请求谒见皇上，深表辅佐天子之忠心，遥继韩侯扶国之志向，朝拜上天即获喜庆，依傍皇上志气得伸。
English: After the class teacher returned to the North, he immediately requested an audience with the emperor, expressed his deep loyalty to the heavenly son, and his aspiration to support the country following the example of the Korean princes. Worshipping the heavens brought him joy, and his ambition to be close to the emperor grew stronger.

古文：又抗表章，固辞戎旅，三加敦谕，所守弥坚。
现代文：又奏表章直言，坚辞军务，虽朝廷屡加敦促晓谕，主意愈益坚定。
English: He also played a straight bat and insisted on military affairs. Although the imperial court repeatedly urged him to speak out, his intention became more and more firm.

古文：于蕃于宣，谅切于注意；我弼我辅，难违其衷恳。
现代文：朕为君主，深切理解为臣的心思；辅佐之臣，难以违背他真诚的请求。
English: As a sovereign, I deeply understand the thoughts of a vassal; as an assistant vassal, it is difficult to go against his sincere request.

古文：式遂良愿，载兼上司。
现代文：宜满足他的良愿，兼及他的上司。
English: It is appropriate to satisfy his good wishes, as well as his superiors.

古文：论道之荣，因之以齐八政；中枢之长，升之以赞万务。
现代文：丰富的治国理论，循此可使八政齐振；辅臣中最优异之人，宜擢升他助理万般国务。
English: A rich theory of governing the country, following this can make the eight political parties rise; the most outstanding person among the vassals should be promoted to the assistant of the universal state.

古文：玄衮赤舄，备于宠光；不有其人，孰膺斯任？
现代文：朕玄服赤鞋，享尽光宠，若不是有此人，谁能担当辅佐的重任。
English: I wear the red shoes and enjoy all the light. If there is no such person, who can take on the important role of assistant?

古文：可守司徒、兼中书令。
现代文：可命其守司徒、兼中书令。 
English: He can be ordered to be a guardian and a chushiro.

古文：乃以吏部尚书张弘靖兼平章事，代弘镇宣武。
现代文：于是命吏部尚书张弘靖兼平章事，替代韩弘镇守宣武。
English: As a result, Zhang Hongjing and Jianping Shanzhong, both members of the Commissariat Department, replaced Han Hong, the commander of the town, with Xuanwu.

古文：宪宗崩，以弘摄冢宰。
现代文：宪宗驾崩，命韩弘兼任冢宰。
English: After the death of Gensong, Han Hong was appointed to be the chief priest.

古文：十五年六月，以本官兼河中尹、河中晋绛节度观察等使。
现代文：元和十五年六月，韩弘以本官兼任河中尹、河中晋绛节度观察使等职。
English: In June of the 15th year of the Yuan and the 15th year of the Heian period, Han Hong, as his own official, concurrently held the positions of Kechu Yin and Kechu Jinjun, and was appointed as an observer of the festival.

古文：时弘弟充为郑滑节度使，子公武为鄜坊节度使。
现代文：当时韩弘弟韩充为郑滑节度使，弘子公武为坊节度使。
English: At that time, Han Hong's younger brother, Han Chong, was Zheng Niu's delegate to the congress, and Hiroko Gongwu was Bo's delegate to the congress.

古文：父子兄弟，皆秉节钺，人臣之宠，冠绝一时。
现代文：父子兄弟，皆掌兵权，为人臣受恩宠，一时无过之者。
English: Father and son brothers, all of them hold military power, are favored as vassals, and are not guilty for a moment.

古文：二年，请老乞罢戎镇，三表从之。
现代文：长庆二年，韩弘以年老请求免去节度使职务，三度上表皇上方才应允。
English: In the second year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Han Hong requested to be relieved of his duties as a ceremonial envoy due to his age, but the emperor only agreed after he had been summoned three times.

古文：依前守司徒、中书令。
现代文：依前例任司徒、中书令。
English: In accordance with the previous precedent, he was appointed as a magistrate and a chusho rei.

古文：其年十二月病卒，时年五十八。赠太尉，赙绢二千匹、布七百端、米粟千硕。
现代文：当年十二月病故，时年五十八，追赠太尉，资助丧事用绢二千匹、布七百端、米粟千石。
English: He died of illness in December of that year, at the age of fifty-eight. He was posthumously awarded the rank of captain, and was given two thousand yakitori, seven hundred pieces of cloth, and a thousand koku of rice.

古文：初，弘镇大梁二十余载，四州征赋皆为己有，未尝上供。有私钱百万贯、粟三百万斛、马七千匹，兵械称是。
现代文：当初，韩弘镇守汴州二十余载，四州征赋皆据为己有，未曾上供朝廷，私积钱财百万贯、粟三百万斛、马七千匹以及与此相称的兵械。
English: At the beginning, Han Hongzhen had been guarding Zhangzhou for more than 20 years. He had appropriated all the requisitions and endowments of the four prefectures, and had never offered them to the imperial court. He had amassed millions of yuan of money, three million yams of millet, seven thousand horses, and the corresponding military equipment.

古文：专务聚财积粟，峻法树威。而庄重寡言，沉谋勇断，邻封如吴少诚、李师道辈皆惮之。
现代文：他专务聚敛钱财积蓄粮食，严于刑法以树威望，而为人庄重寡言，沉稳多谋，勇敢果断，邻郡守官如吴少诚、李师道之辈皆惧怕他。
English: He was dedicated to collecting money and wealth, saving grain, strictly adhering to the criminal law, and gaining prestige. He was dignified and reserved, calm and resourceful, brave and decisive. Neighbouring county officials such as Wu Shaocheng and Li Shidao were all afraid of him.

古文：诏使宣谕，弘多倨待。
现代文：朝廷使臣前来宣诏，韩弘往往傲慢地接待。
English: Imperial envoys came to announce the edict, and Han Hong often received them haughtily.

古文：及齐、蔡贼平，势屈入觐，两朝宠待加等，弘竟以名位始终，人臣之幸也。
现代文：及至平定齐蔡叛贼，威势受抑乃入朝晋见，两朝赐宠加爵，韩弘生前身后均享名位，真是为人臣之大幸啊。
English: As the traitors of Qi Cai were subdued, Han Hong's power was curbed and he was promoted to the court of Emperor Jin. He was favored by both dynasties and was given a peerage. Han Hong enjoyed a prestigious position both before and after his death. He was truly a great fortune of a vassal.

古文：时公武已卒，弘孙绍宗嗣。
现代文：韩弘去世时公武已死，其孙韩绍宗承嗣爵位。
English: At the time of Han Hong's death, Gong Wu had already died, and his grandson Han Shaozong succeeded to the peerage.

