古文：十六日平明，炊饭而行，遵南街出，七里至罗尤邑。
现代文：十六日天亮，做饭吃后出发。沿南街出去，行七里到罗尤邑。
English: On the morning of the 16th, after cooking and eating, we set out. We went out along South Street and walked seven miles to Royo Town.

古文：余以为将滨湖而行，而大道俱西南循坡，竟不见波光渚影。
现代文：我以为将要沿着湖走，而大路都是往西南沿坡走，一点看不到波光水影。
English: I thought I was going to walk along the lake, but the main roads are to the southwest along the slope, and I can't see the sparkling water at all.

古文：途中屡陟冈越涧，皆自西向东，而冈涧俱不巨，皆有村庐。
现代文：途中多次登冈越洞，冈、涧都是从西到东走向，并且都不大，都有村舍。
English: On the way, we went up the hill several times. Both the hill and the ravine go from west to east, and they are not big, and there are village houses.

古文：八里，一聚落颇盛。
现代文：八里，有一个比较大的聚落。
English: Eight miles away, there is a relatively large settlement called Tsumo.

古文：以其南又一里，大路将东转而趋海门桥，有岐西南入，乃石宝山道也，从此始与大道别。
现代文：从聚落南又走一里，大路要往东转然后通往海门桥，有岔路往西南去，是去石宝山的路，从这里就和大路告别。
English: From the south of the settlement, walk another mile. The main road should turn to the east and then lead to Haimen Bridge. There is a side road to the southwest, which is the road to Shibaoshan. From here, say goodbye to the main road.

古文：南瞻印鹤山，尖耸而当湖之南，为一川之南屏。
现代文：往南瞻望印鹤山，尖耸而位于剑川湖之南，是这一平川的南边屏障。
English: Looking southward, Mount Inzhel, towering and located south of Lake Jianchuan, is the southern barrier of this flat river.

古文：其脉自湖东南下伏，而西度复耸，故榆城大道，过海门桥绕湖南而东，由其东伏处南逾而出观音山；湖流所注，由海门桥绕山北而西，由其西尽处南捣而下沙溪。
现代文：印鹤山脉从湖东南低伏，往西延伸后又耸起，所以去榆城的大路，经过海门桥绕湖南岸后往东，从湖东边低伏处往南越，然后走出观音山；湖水流向，从海门桥绕到山北然后往西流，从印鹤山西边尽头处往南冲下沙溪。
English: The Yinghe Mountains are low-lying from the southeast of the lake, and rise again after extending to the west. Therefore, the road to Lucheng passes through the Haimen Bridge, around the southern shore of the lake and then to the east, from the low-lying place on the east side of the lake to South Vietnam, and then out of Guanyinshan; the direction of the lake's flow, from the Haimen Bridge to the north of the mountain and then to the west, from the western end of Yinghe Mountain to the south down the sand creek.

古文：石宝山又在印鹤西南，东隔此溪南下，又西隔驼强江北流，故其路始从此溪北峡入，又从驼强江东峡渡，然后及石宝之麓焉。
现代文：石宝山又在印鹤山西南，东边阻隔沙溪往南流，西边又阻隔驼强江往北流，所以道路就顺沙溪北边的峡谷延伸，又顺驼强江东边的峡谷延伸，然后到石宝山麓。
English: Shibaoshan is also in the southwest of Yinghe Mountain, the east side blocks the southward flow of Shaxi, and the west side blocks the northward flow of Cam Qiang River. Therefore, the road extends along the canyon on the north side of Shaxi, along the canyon on the east side of Cam Qiang River, and then to the foot of Shibaoshan.

古文：由岐路循西坡南下，一里，度一峡，从峡南上，转而西行，二里余，已遥望石宝山尖穹西大峰之南矣。
现代文：从岔路沿西坡往南下，一里，穿过一道峡谷，顺峡谷南面上，转向西行，二里多，已经遥望到石宝山尖耸在西大峰的南面了。
English: From Kushiro along the west slope to the south, one mile, through a canyon, along the south side of the canyon, turning to the west, more than two miles, it has been seen to the south of Shibao Peak.

古文：于是复西南下一里，涉涧，乃南向升层冈，峡中曲折三里，始南逾其脊。
现代文：于是又往西南下一里，越过沟涧，就往南登层叠的冈，在峡谷中曲折地走了三里，才往南越过冈脊。
English: So he walked another mile to the southwest, crossed a gully, climbed a craggy hill to the south, and walked three miles through the canyon before crossing the ridge to the south.

古文：南下二里，有水自西南峡来，至此折而东去，是为驼强江，有大石梁南跨之，桥南环塍连阡。
现代文：往南下二里，有水从西南边的峡谷流来，到这里转向东流去，这是驼强江，江上有大石桥南北横跨，桥南田埂环绕相连。
English: Two miles to the south, water flows from the southwest canyon and turns here to the east. This is the Camel River. There is a large stone bridge across the river from north to south, connected by a bridge encircling the South Field.

古文：南陟之，半里，有村庐倚南坡下，颇盛，是为驼强村。
现代文：往南过桥，半里，有村舍傍靠在南坡下，很大，这是驼强村。
English: Crossing the bridge to the south, half a mile, there is a village house next to the south slope, very large, this is the camel strong village.

古文：从村南复随箐南上，一里余，登岭脊。
现代文：从村南又顺著往南上，一里多，登上岭脊。
English: From the south of the village, I walked southward for more than a mile and climbed the ridge.

古文：从脊上西望，老君山雪色峥嵘，在重峰夹涧之西，始知石宝之脉，犹从金华南下，而尽于驼强北转之处；若老君之脉，则南从横岭而尽于黑会、澜沧之交矣。
现代文：从脊上向西眺望，老君山雪色峥嵘，在重峰夹涧的西面，才知道石宝山脉，还是从金华山往南延伸，然后在驼强江转北流之处结束；至于老君山脉，则南边顺横岭延伸，然后在黑会江、澜沧江交汇处结束。
English: Looking westward from the ridge, Laojun Mountain is covered with snow. On the west side of the heavy peak, it is only known that the Shibao Mountains still extend southward from Jinhua Mountain, and then end at the place where the Cam Jang River turns northward; as for the Laojun Mountains, they extend southward along the ridge, and then end at the confluence of the Heihe River and the Lancang River.

古文：平行脊上一里余，稍南下，度峡坳，半里，东望海门桥之溪，已破峡嵌底而南，有路随箐直下而就之，此沙溪道也；有岐南上盘西峰之南，此石宝道。
现代文：在脊上平行一里多，逐渐南下，越过峡坳，半里，往东眺望海门桥的溪流，已经穿过峡谷，嵌入峡底往南流，有道路顺著直下而沿着溪延伸，这是沙溪道；有岔路往南上，绕到西峰南面，这是石宝山道。
English: More than a mile parallel on the ridge, gradually going south, crossing the gorge, half a mile, looking east at the stream of Haimen Bridge, has passed through the canyon, embedded in the bottom of the canyon to the south, there is a road running straight down and extending along the stream, this is the Shaxi Road; there is a forked road going south, around to the south of Xifeng, this is the Shibao Mountain Road.

古文：乃南上盘峰，一里余，凌峰之南，遂西转而饭。
现代文：于是往南上盘绕峰走，一里多，登凌峰南，就往西转然后吃饭。
English: So I walked south around the peak, more than a mile, climbed the south of Lingfeng, turned west and then had dinner.

古文：从岭头西向行二里，稍下而逾脊西，随之南转西向，一里，又西南逾其北突之崖，始平望石宝之尖，与西峰并峙，而白塔高悬其间。
现代文：从岭头向西走二里，逐渐下然后越到脊西面，顺着路转南往西走，一里，又往西南翻越那北突的山崖，于是平视石宝山尖，和西峰并列对峙，而白塔高悬其中。
English: From the ridge head, walk two miles to the west, gradually descend and then cross to the west of the ridge, turn south along the road to the west, walk one mile, and then go southwest over the steep cliff, and then look at the Shibaoshan peak, and stand side by side with the west peak, while the white tower hangs high in the middle.

古文：南一里，遂坠壑直下，一里，抵崖麓，则驼强江自南而北，奔流石峡中，而两崖东西夹峙，巉石飞骞，古木盘耸，悬藤密箐，蒙蔽山谷，只觉绿云上幕，而仰不见天日，玉龙下驰，而旁不露津涯。
现代文：往南走一里，就坠壑直下，一里，到崖麓，这里驼强江从南向北，在石峡中奔流，而峡谷两边崖石东西对峙，峭石斜飞，古树盘绕高耸，悬藤密竹，蒙蔽山谷。只觉得绿云蒙在上方，而抬头看不见天日；玉龙般的江水在下奔驰，而两旁没有渡口江岸。
English: Walk one mile to the south and you will fall straight down, one mile to the foot of the cliff. Here, the Camel River flows from south to north, rushing through the stone canyon. On both sides of the canyon, the cliff faces east and west, the crags are flying diagonally, the ancient trees are towering, the hanging vines are dense with bamboo, covering the valley. I only feel that the green clouds are above, but I can't see the sun when I look up; the jade dragon-like river water is rushing down, but there is no river bank on either side.

古文：盖西即石宝之麓，东乃北绕之峰，骈夹止容一水，而下嵌上逼，极幽异之势。
现代文：原来西边就是石宝山麓，东边是往北绕的山峰，并列相对，只容一水，而且下面深嵌，上面陡逼，极尽幽异之势。
English: Originally, the west side was the foot of Shibao Mountain, and the east side was the mountain peak that went around to the north. They were juxtaposed opposite each other, with only one body of water, and the bottom was deeply embedded, and the top was steep, with the potential for extreme strangeness.

古文：循东崖南行三里，夹壁稍开，有石梁西度，立梁上四眺，尚不见寺托何处。
现代文：沿东崖往南走三里，狭窄的峡壁逐渐开阔，有石桥跨越江西岸，站在桥上眺望四周，还看不见寺庙在哪里。
English: Walking south along the East Cliff for three miles, the narrow gorge wall gradually widens. There is a stone bridge spanning the west bank of the river. Standing on the bridge and looking around, you can't see where the temple is.

古文：梁南两崖，溯水而上，已无纤径，而桥东有路，南逾东峰，则沙溪之道也。
现代文：桥南两边是山崖，溯水而上，已经没有小路，而桥东有路，往南翻越东峰，就是沙溪道。
English: South of the bridge, there are cliffs on both sides, and there is no path upstream. On the other hand, there is a path to the east of the bridge, and it is the Shaxi Road that crosses the east peak to the south.

古文：度桥西半里，西壁稍开，中坠一坑，甚峻，有巨阁当其口，已倾圮不蔽风雨，而坑中亦无入路，惟仰见其上，盘崖层叠，云回幛拥，如芙蓉十二楼，令人目眩心骇。
现代文：过桥往西走半里，西壁逐渐开阔，中间坠下去一个坑，很陡，坑口有巨阁坐落，已经倾塌，不能遮挡风雨，而坑中也没有进坑的路，只是仰身看坑上面，盘崖层叠，白云缭绕，屏障高耸，如同芙蓉十二楼，令人目眩心惊。
English: After crossing the bridge and walking west for half a mile, the west wall gradually opened up, and a very steep pit fell down in the middle. At the mouth of the pit, there was a huge pavilion, which had collapsed and could not block the wind and rain. There was no way into the pit, but looking up at the top of the pit, the cliffs were stacked, white clouds swirled around, and the barrier towered high, like the twelfth floor of Hibiscus, which was dazzling and shocking.

古文：路循坑右盘崖磴曲折上，一里余而入石宝寺山门。
现代文：路从坑右盘绕崖上的石阶曲折而上，一里多就进入石宝寺山门。
English: The road twists and turns from the pit right around the stone steps on the cliff, and after more than a mile, it enters the mountain gate of Shi Baoji Temple.

古文：门殿三四层，俱东向，荒落不整，僧道亦寂寥；然石阶殿址，固自雄也。
现代文：门、殿共三四层，都向东，荒废零落，没有秩序，僧道也零落稀少；而石阶殿址，确足以称雄。
English: The gate and the hall have a total of three or four floors, all facing east, abandoned and scattered, there is no order, and the monk's way is also scattered and rare; and the stone steps of the temple site are truly magnificent.

古文：余停行李于后殿之右，一老僧栖其后，初不延纳迎接，余不顾，即从殿北盘左腋，穷北岩二重，复下，从殿南盘右腋穷北岩一重，再下，则老僧已炊黄粱相待。
现代文：我把行李停放在后殿右边，一个老僧人住在背后，一开始他不接纳，我不理会，就顺殿北盘绕左侧，穷究二层北岩，又下来，顺殿南盘绕右侧，穷究一层北岩，再下来，而老僧人已经煮好黄米饭等着了。
English: I parked my luggage on the right side of the rear hall. An old monk lived behind it. At first, he did not accept it. I ignored him and went along the north side of the hall, around the left side, down to the second floor of the north rock, down again, along the south side of the hall, around the right side, around the first floor of the north rock, down again, while the old monk had already cooked the yellow rice and was waiting.

古文：时已下午，复从右腋上玉皇阁，穷塔顶，既暮始下。
现代文：这时已是下午，又从右侧上玉皇阁，穷究塔顶，太阳落山后才下来。
English: At this time, it was already afternoon, and I went up to the Jade Emperor's Palace from the right side, exploring the top of the tower, and only came down after the sun had set.

古文：盖后殿正嵌崖脚，其层亘之崖，重重上盘，而路各从两旁腋间，分道横披而入，其前既悬削，不能直上，而上亦中断，不能交通，故殿后第一层分嵌三窍，北窍二重，路从北腋转，南窍一重，路从南腋转，俱回临殿上，而中间不通。
现代文：原来后殿正正嵌在崖脚，崖石重叠往上盘绕，而道路分别从两侧各自横穿而入，往前已是陡峭悬空，不能直上，而往上也中断，不能通过，所以殿后第一层分别嵌入三个洞，北洞二层，路从北侧转，南洞一层，路从南侧转，都迂回到殿上面，但中间不通。
English: Originally, the back hall was directly embedded at the foot of the cliff, the cliff stones overlapped and coiled upwards, while the road entered from both sides separately. It was already steep and overhanging, and it could not go straight up, but it was also interrupted and could not pass, so the first layer behind the hall was separately embedded in three holes, the second layer of the north cave, the road turned from the north side, the first layer of the south cave, the road turned from the south side, all detoured back to the top of the hall, but there was no way in between.

古文：其上又环为第二层，殿后仰瞻不见也。
现代文：这一层上面又绕成第二层，在殿后仰望而看不见。
English: Above this layer, a second layer is formed, which is not visible when looking up from the back of the hall.

古文：路又从玉皇阁北转，即凭临第一层之上，从突崖北陟，蹑北支西上三里余，凌后峰之顶。
现代文：道路又顺玉皇阁往北转，就登凌到第一层上面，顺突崖往北上，踏上北支往西上三里多，登上后峰顶。
English: The road turned north along the Jade Emperor's Palace, climbed up to the first floor, went north along the cliff, stepped on the north branch and went west for more than three miles, and climbed to the top of the back peak.

古文：顶颇平，西半里，有白塔当坪间，又中洼为土塘者二而无水。
现代文：峰顶比较平，往西走半里，平地中立有白塔，又中洼成两个水塘却没有水。
English: The peak is relatively flat, half a mile to the west, there is a white tower on the flat ground, and there are two ponds in the middle, but there is no water.

古文：洼之南，皆石坡外突，平庋如塘堰，而石面有纹如龙鳞，有小洼嵌其上，皆浅而有水。
现代文：洼地南边，都是往外突的石坡，平架如同水塘堤坝，而石面上有龙鳞一样的纹路，有小洼坑嵌在石面上，都浅但有水。
English: On the south side of the depression, there are stone slopes protruding outward, the flat shelf is like a reservoir dam, and there are dragon scales on the stone surface, there are small depressions embedded in the stone surface, all are shallow but have water.

古文：其顶即西并大峰，其峰横列上耸，西拥如屏，欲蹑其上，路绝日暮而止。
现代文：峰顶西边和大峰相连，大峰横列着往上耸，像西边拥起的屏障，我想攀越上去，因没有路天色晚而止步。
English: The west side of the peak is connected to the big peak, and the big peak is lined up horizontally, like a barrier on the west side. I want to climb up, but I stop because there is no road.

古文：僧言其上有天成石像，并不竭石池，余所睹颇不一，亦少就雕刻，不辨孰为天成也。
现代文：僧人说上面有天生的石像，而且还有不会枯竭的池塘，我所看到过的不止一处，也有稍为雕刻过的，分辨不出哪一座是天生的。
English: The monks say that there are statues of monkeys born on it, and there is also a pond that never dries up. I have seen more than one place, and some are slightly carved. I can't tell which one is born.

古文：二里，过一南度之脊，里余，越岭而南，始望见沙溪之坞，辟于东麓。
现代文：十七日在石宝寺吃饭后下山。二里，过桥往东上，很快转东南，走二里，往东越过山脊，就转南行。渐渐往下走，转向西南，三里，又转向东，一里，沿山往南转。二里，越过一道往南延伸的山脊，一里多，越岭往南走，才看到沙溪坞，在东麓敞开。
English: On the 17th day, after eating at Shiboji Temple, I went down the mountain. Two miles, crossed the bridge to the east, quickly turned southeast, walked two miles, east over the ridge, then turned south. Gradually walked down, turned southwest, three miles, turned east again, one mile, turned south along the mountain. Two miles, crossed a ridge extending south, more than one mile, walked south over the ridge, only to see Shaxi dock, open at the eastern foot.

古文：所陟之峰，与东界大山相持而南，中夹大坞，而剑川湖之流，合驼强江出峡贯于川中，所谓沙溪也。
现代文：所攀越的山峰，与东部大山相对立而往南延伸，中间夹着大山坞，剑川湖的水流，汇合驼强江从峡谷流出，纵贯坞中，是所说的沙溪。
English: The mountain peaks to be climbed extend southward in opposition to the eastern mountains, with the large mountain dock in the middle, the water flow of Jianchuan Lake, the confluence of the Camel River flowing out of the canyon, and the so-called Shaxi River running through the dock.

古文：其坞东西阔五六里，南北不下五十里，所出米谷甚盛。剑川州皆来取足焉。
现代文：山坞东西宽五六里，南北不下五十里，出产的米谷十分富裕，剑川州所需粮食都来这里补足。
English: The width of the dock is five or six miles from east to west, and not less than fifty miles from north to south. The rice produced in the valley is very rich, and the grain needed in Jianchuan is supplemented here.

古文：从岭南行又二里，峰头石忽涌起，如狮如象，高者成崖，卑矮小者为级，穿门蹈瓣，觉其有异，而不知其即钟山也。
现代文：又顺岭往南走二里，峰头忽然涌起石块，如狮如象，高的形成崖石，低的形成台阶，我穿过石门，踩着石花瓣，感到其中有异常的景致，却不知道这里就是钟山。
English: I walked two miles south along Shunling again. At the top of the peak, there was a sudden surge of stones, like a lion or an elephant, with high ones forming cliffs and low ones forming steps. I walked through the stone gate and stepped on the stone petals. I felt that there was an unusual landscape, but I didn't know that this was Zhongshan.

古文：去而后知之，欲再返观，已无及矣。
现代文：离开后才知道，想再返回去观览，已经来不及了。
English: After leaving, I realized that it was too late to go back to the exhibition.

古文：又一里，遂东南下，三里及其麓。
现代文：又走一里，就往东南下，三里到山麓。
English: Walk another mile, then go southeast, three miles to the foot of the mountain.

古文：从田塍间东南行，二里，得一大村，曰沙腿。
现代文：从田埂中往东南走，二里，到一个大村庄，名沙腿。
English: From the middle of the rice paddies, walk southeast, two miles, to a large village, famous for its sand.

古文：遇一僧，即石宝山之主僧也，欲留余还观钟山，且言： 从此西四十里，过蕨食坪，即通杨村、兰州，由兰州出五盐井，径从云龙州抵永昌，甚便。 
现代文：遇到一个僧人，就是石宝山的主持，他想挽留我返回去观览钟山，而且说： 从这里往西四十里，经过旅食坪，就通到杨村、兰州，从兰州出五盐井，径直顺云龙州到永昌府，十分方便。 
English: I met a monk, the head of Shibaoshan, who wanted to keep me from going back to see Zhongshan. He said, "From here, it's forty miles to the west, and after passing through Tabashuping, you can go to Yangcun and Lanzhou. From Lanzhou, you can go to Wuxianjing, and then go straight to Yongchangfu in Yunnan. It's very convenient."

古文：余将从之，以浪穹何巢阿未晤，且欲一观大理，更闻此地东去即观音山，为鹤庆、大理通道，若舍此而西，即多未了之愿。
现代文：我想听从他的建议，但因为还没见到浪弯县的何巢阿，而且想看看大理府，另外听说这里往东去是观音山，是去鹤庆府、大理府的通道，如果舍弃这条路而往西走，就有许多未能了却的心愿。
English: I wanted to follow his advice, but because I hadn't yet seen the cranes in Namian County, and I wanted to see Dali Prefecture. In addition, I heard that going east here is Guanyinshan, a passage to Heqing Prefecture and Dali Prefecture. If I abandoned this road and went west, there would be many unfulfilled wishes.

古文：乃别僧东南行塍间，三里至四屯，村庐甚盛，沙溪之水流其东，有木梁东西驾其上，甚长。
现代文：于是和僧人告别，往东南从田埂上走，走了三里到四屯，村落很繁荣，沙溪水从村东流过，有木桥东西横跨溪上，很长。
English: So I said goodbye to the monk and walked southeast from Tianyu to Xitun, walking three miles to Xitun. The village was very prosperous, the sand creek water flowed from the east of the village, and there was a wooden bridge across the creek, which was very long.

古文：度桥，又东南望峡坡而趋，二里，由峡蹑坡东向上者五里，得一坡顶，踞而饭。
现代文：过桥，又往东南看着峡坡走，二里，顺峡登坡往东上五里，到一道坡顶，盘坐着吃饭。
English: After crossing the bridge, I walked two miles to the southeast, looking at the gorge, and climbed five miles eastward along the gorge, to the top of a slope, where I sat down to eat.

古文：又东一里余，见路右有峡西坠如划堑如刀划刻出的沟堑，其南有崖北向，一洞亦北向辟门，艰于坠峡，惟隔崖眺望，不及攀也。
现代文：又往东走一里多，看见路右峡谷西坠、如同割开的沟堑，峡谷南有北向的山崖，一个洞也向北开门，很难坠入峡谷，只有隔着崖眺望，来不及攀登。
English: I walked more than a mile to the east, and saw the canyon on the right of the road falling to the west, like an open gully. There are cliffs to the north in the south of the canyon, and a hole also opens to the north. It is difficult to fall into the canyon, only to look across the cliff, and it is too late to climb.

古文：又东里余，抵东脊之下，有涧自北来，小水流其中，南注西坠峡间。
现代文：又往东走一里多，到东脊下，有沟涧从北伸来，沟中有小水流，往南注入往西坠的峡谷中。
English: Another mile further east, under the east ridge, there is a gully stretching from the north, with small streams of water flowing south into the canyon falling to the west.

古文：大路涉涧而东逾脊，已乃知其为三营道，如欲趋观音山，当溯涧而北入坞。
现代文：大路越过沟涧后往东翻越山脊，过后知道这是去三营的路，如果要到观音山，应当溯涧往北进入山坞。
English: After crossing the ravine, the road climbs over the ridge to the east. Afterwards, it is known that this is the road to Sanying. If you want to get to Guanyinshan, you should follow the ridge to the north and enter the dock.

古文：余乃复返涧西，北向溯之入，行夹中，径甚微，两旁石树渐合。
现代文：我于是又返回涧西，往北溯流而入，在夹缝的沟涧中走，路很细小，两旁崖石和树木渐渐合拢。
English: I then returned to Shaanxi and followed the northward current, walking in the crevice of the gully. The path was very narrow, and the cliffs and trees on both sides were gradually closing.

古文：二里出夹，乃东北蹑坡而上，坡间万松森列，马缨花映日烧林，而不闻人声。
现代文：二里后走出夹缝，就往东北登坡而上，坡间万棵松树森然耸立，马缨花在阳光下映红松林，但没有听到人声。
English: After two miles, I walked out of the gap and climbed up the northeast slope. There were thousands of pine trees between the slopes, and the horse thistle flower reflected the red pine forest in the sun, but I didn't hear any human voices.

古文：五里，转而东，又上五里，始蹑其脊。脊南北俱峰，中反洼而成坳，穿坳一里，始东北向而下。
现代文：走了五里，转向东，又往上走了五里，才登上坡脊，脊南北都是山峰，中间反而洼成山坳，穿坳走一里，才往东北下。
English: Walked five miles, turned east, walked another five miles uphill, and finally climbed a ridge. The ridge is made up of peaks to the north and south, but in the middle there is a depression that forms a ridge. Walked one mile through the ridge, and then went down to the northeast.

古文：望见东界，遥山屏列，上干云汉，而其下支撑陇盘，犹不见下辟之坞也。
现代文：眺望东部，远山屏障般地耸列，上冲云霄，而下面支撑着陇冈盘绕，仍然看不到下面辟有的山坞。
English: Looking to the east, the distant mountains rise like a barrier, soaring up into the sky, while the surrounding ridges support them from below. You still can't see the docks below.

古文：坠峡而下二里，又见东麓海子一围，水光如黛，浮映山谷，然其径芜塞，第望之东下。
现代文：坠入峡谷下二里，又看见东麓有一片湖泊，青黑色的水光，浮映山谷，然而道路荒芜阻塞，只能看着湖泊往东下。
English: I fell two miles into the canyon and saw a lake at the eastern foot of the canyon. The blue-black water reflected the valley. However, the road was deserted and blocked. I could only look at the lake to the east.

古文：又二里，始有路自北顶而下，随之东北降，又五里余，始及山麓。
现代文：又二里，才有路从北顶伸下来，顺路往东北下，又五里多，于是到山麓。
English: It was another two miles before the road stretched down from the northern peak, and another five miles along the road to the northeast, and then to the foot of the mountain.

古文：麓之东，平壑内环，小山外绕，自西大山北麓分支，回环东抱，又转而西，夹于南麓，四周如城，中辟如规，北半衍为平畴，南半潴为海子。
现代文：山麓之东，平坦的壑谷向内绕，小山向外绕，从西部大山北麓分出的支脉，回环东抱，又转向西，夹在南麓对面，如城墙围绕四周，中间如用圆规画出，北半部扩展为平畴，南半部积水为湖泊。
English: To the east of the foot of the mountain, the flat valley runs inwards, the hill runs outwards, the branch that branches off from the northern foot of the big mountain in the west, wraps around to the east, and turns to the west, sandwiched against the southern foot, as if surrounded by a city wall. In the middle, as drawn with a compass, the northern half expands into a flat area, and the southern half of the accumulated water is a lake.

古文：其北冈峰，如负扆ｙǐ屏风独拥于后，而前有庐室倚其阳，是为李氏之居。
现代文：湖中的水，反而朝西南紧靠大山麓，穿过峡谷坠流而去，其中大概是另外一番天地。
English: The water in the lake, on the other hand, heads south-west, close to the foot of the large mountain, and flows down through the canyon, which is probably another world.

古文：李名某，以进士任吏部郎。
现代文：壑谷正中，房舍聚集相连，这是罗木哨。
English: In the middle of Shibuya, the buildings are clustered together. This is the Luo Mu Sentinel.

古文：今其家居。地灵人杰，信有征灵验哉。
现代文：北面的冈峰，如同背靠的屏风，独自耸拥在后面，而前面有房舍傍靠在冈峰南面，这是李氏的家。地灵人杰，确实有应验啊。
English: The mountain peak to the north, like a back-to-back screen, stands alone at the back, while in front there is a house next to the mountain peak to the south, which is the home of the Li family.

古文：东行塍畴间二里，过罗木哨村。
现代文：往东在田埂上走二里，过罗木哨村。
English: To the east, walk two miles on the ridge, passing Luo Mu Sentinel Village.

古文：又东一里余，有大道自西北向东南交过之。
现代文：又往东走一里多，大路从西北向东南交叉而过。
English: Another mile or so to the east, the highway crosses from the northwest to the southeast.

古文：又东半里，抵东冈下，循之而北，半里，乃东向逾坳而上，又半里乃下，及其东麓，数家濒东溪而居。
现代文：又往东走半里，到东冈下，沿冈往北走，半里，就向东越坳而上，又半里就往下走，到冈东麓，数家人濒临东溪居住。
English: Another half mile to the east, to the east of the lower Oka, along the Oka to the north, half a mile, to the east of the upstream, and another half mile down, to the eastern foot of the Oka, several families live on the edge of the Dongxi.

古文：其溪自三岔路涧峡发源，经观音山过此，而西南绕出洞鼻，合浪穹海子及凤羽闷江，而同入普陀崆，南经中所下洱海者也。
现代文：溪水从三岔路涧峡发源，流经观音山后流过这里，然后往西南绕过出洞鼻，与浪弯海子和凤羽闷江会合后，一齐流入普陀峻，往南过中所后注入洱海。
English: The water of the stream originates from the Lugu Gorge on the Sanqi Road, flows through the Guanyinshan Mountain, flows through here, and then goes southwest around the outflow of the cave nose. After meeting with the Wabian Sea and the Fengfei Mujiang River, it flows into the Putuo Mountains, passes through the middle to the south, and then flows into the Bohai Sea.

古文：其时将暮，担者欲止，问村人不得，乃误从村南度小桥，由溪东大道北行。
现代文：这时天快黑了，挑夫想停留，找不到村民留宿，就误从村南过小桥，沿溪东的大路往北走。
English: At this time, it was getting dark, the porter wanted to stay, but could not find a villager to stay, so he mistakenly crossed the bridge from the south of the village and walked north along the road east of the creek.

古文：二里，得观音铺村，已日暮矣，遂宿。
现代文：走了二里，到观音铺村，天已经黑了，于是住宿。
English: After walking two miles to the village of Guanyin, it was already dark, so we had to stay overnight.

古文：十八日昧爽促饭，而担夫逃矣。
现代文：十八日天亮时催促吃饭，但挑夫逃走了。
English: At dawn on the 18th, they urged him to eat, but the porter ran away.

古文：久之，店人厚索余赀ｚī为送浪穹。
现代文：很久，店主人多要我的钱，为我送行李到浪弯县。
English: For a long time, the owner of the store asked me for more money to send my luggage to Nambong County.

古文：遂南行二里，过一石桥，循东山之麓而南，七里，至牛街子。
现代文：于是往南行二里，过一座石桥，沿东山麓往南走，七里，到牛街子。
English: So I went two miles south, over a stone bridge, and walked south along the eastern foot of the mountain, seven miles, to Ushi-gairoko.

古文：循山南去，为三营大道；由岐西南，过热水塘，行坞中，为浪穹间道。
现代文：沿山往南去，是到三营的大路；从岔路向西南，过热水塘，在坞中行走，是到浪穿县的小路。
English: Going south along the mountain is the main road to Sanying; going southwest from Kushiro Road, passing through the hot water pond, and walking in the docks is the small road to Nampo County.

古文：盖此地已为浪穹、鹤庆犬牙错壤矣。
现代文：原来这里已经是浪弯县、鹤庆府犬牙交错的接壤地带了。
English: Originally, this was already the border area of the intertwined canine teeth of Namian County and Heqing Prefecture.

古文：于是西南从支坡下，一里，过热水塘，有居庐绕之。
现代文：于是往西南顺着一支坡下，一里，经过热水塘，有民房环绕。
English: So I walked southwest down a slope for a mile, past a hot-water pond, surrounded by houses.

古文：余南行塍间，其坞扩然大开。
现代文：我往南从田间走，山坞豁然大开。
English: As I walked south from the fields, the dock was suddenly wide open.

古文：土人呼营为 阴 ，遂不免与会稽之邻县同一称谓莫辨矣。又南十里，则大溪自西而东向曲。
现代文：往西南走八里，一条小溪从东向西流。越过小溪又往南走，向东眺望三营，居家很兴盛，傍靠在东山麓，那里山峰更高大；向西眺望溪流，紧逼西山麓，那里土地更肥沃；越过这条横穿山坞的小溪，已经完全属于浪弯县境了。又往南走十里，大溪从西向东弯曲。
English: Eight miles to the southwest, a creek flows from east to west. Cross the creek and go south, look east to the three camps, the home is very prosperous, next to the east foot of the mountain, where the mountain is higher; look west to the stream, close to the west foot of the mountain, where the land is more fertile; cross this creek across the dock, it has completely belonged to the border of Langyan County. Walk ten miles to the south, the creek bends from west to east.

古文：由其西，有木桥南北跨之，桥左右俱有村庐。
现代文：沿大溪往西走，有木桥南北横跨溪上，桥左右都有村舍。
English: Walking west along the creek, there is a wooden bridge spanning the creek from north to south. There are village houses on both sides of the bridge.

古文：南度之，行溪之西三里，溪复自东而西向曲。
现代文：往南过桥，从溪西岸走三里，溪水又从东向西弯曲。
English: Cross the bridge to the south, walk three miles from the west bank of the stream, and the stream bends from east to west.

古文：又度桥而行溪之东三里，于是其溪西逼西山南突之嘴，路东南陟陇而行。
现代文：又过桥从溪东岸走三里，于是溪水向西紧逼西山往南突的山口，道路向东南登陇而行。
English: After crossing the bridge and walking three miles from the east bank of the stream, the water of the stream pressed the mountain mouth of the west mountain to the south, and the road climbed to the southeast.

古文：四里，则大溪又自西而东向曲，有石梁南跨之，而梁已中圮，陟之颇危。
现代文：四里，则大溪又从西往东弯曲，石桥南北横跨溪上，但桥中间已经坍塌，过桥较危险。
English: After four miles, the creek bends from west to east. A stone bridge spans the creek from north to south, but the middle of the bridge has collapsed, making it dangerous to cross.

古文：梁之南，居庐亦盛，有关帝庙东南向，是为大屯。
现代文：桥南住家也兴盛，有座东南向的关帝庙，这是大屯。
English: South of the bridge, the residences are also flourishing. There is a temple of Guan Di in the southeast, which is Datun.

古文：屯之西，一山北自西大山分支南突，其东南又有一山，南自东大山分支北突，若持衡之针，东西交对，而中不接。
现代文：大屯西，一道山北边从西部大山分出支脉往南耸起，其东南又有一道山，南边从东部大山分出支脉往北耸起，像保持平衡的针，东西交错相对，但中间不相连。
English: To the west of Datun, a mountain to the north rises from the branch of the western mountain to the south, and another mountain to the southeast rises from the branch of the eastern mountain to the north, like a needle to maintain balance. East and west are interlaced, but they are not connected in the middle.

古文：大溪之水北捣出洞鼻之东垂，又曲而南环东横山之西麓，若梭之穿其隙者。
现代文：大溪水往北冲向出洞鼻的东垂，又转向南，环绕东部横山的西麓，像梭子那样从山缝穿过。
English: The water of the large stream rushes north to the eastern slope of the outcropping of the cave, and turns south, encircling the western foot of the eastern cross-mountain, passing through the mountain crevice like a shuttle.

古文：两山既分悬坞中，坞亦若界而为二。
现代文：两道山既然分别悬立在坞中，山坞也被分为两部分，
English: Since the two mountains are separately suspended in the dock, the dock is also divided into two parts,

古文：于是又西南行塍间，三里，转而西，三里，过一小石梁，其西则平湖浩然，北接海子，南映山光，而西浮雉堞，有堤界其中，直西而达于城。
现代文：于是又往西南从田间走，三里，转向西，三里，过一座小石桥，桥西是浩荡的平湖，北边和浪弯海子相连，南边映衬山色，而西边城墙耸立，湖中有堤为界，堤一直往西通到城。
English: So he walked southwest from the fields, three miles, turned west, three miles, and crossed a small stone bridge. To the west of the bridge was a vast flat lake. To the north, it was connected to the undulating sea. To the south, it was silhouetted against the mountains. To the west, the city wall stood tall. The lake was bordered by a dike, which led all the way west to the city.

古文：乃遵堤西行，极似明圣苏堤，虽无六桥花柳，而四山环翠，中阜弄珠，又西子之所不能及也。
现代文：于是顺堤往西行，堤和西湖的苏堤极其相似，虽然没有六桥花柳，但四周青山环绕，湖中的小岛如珠串，又是西湖所赶不上的。
English: So I went west along the embankment. The embankment is very similar to the Su crane embankment of the West Lake. Although there are no six bridges and willows, it is surrounded by green mountains. The islets in the lake are like beads, which the West Lake cannot catch up with.

古文：湖中鱼舫泛泛，茸草新蒲，点琼飞翠，有不尽苍茫、无边潋滟水势浩大，水波流动之急，湖名 茈碧 ，有以也。
现代文：湖中鱼船泛泛，新长出的蒲草毛茸茸的，点琼飞翠，有不尽苍茫、无边激艳的意境。湖名 花碧 ，真是名符其实啊。
English: The fish boats in the lake are ubiquitous, the newly grown rushes are furry, the dots are flying green, and there is an inexhaustibly vast, boundlessly brilliant artistic mood.

古文：西二里，湖中有阜中悬，百家居其上。
现代文：往西走二里，湖中有小岛悬在中央，岛上有上百户人家居住。
English: Two miles to the west, there is a small island in the middle of the lake. More than a hundred families live on the island.

古文：南有一突石，高六尺，大三丈，其形如龟。
现代文：岛南有一块石头突起，六尺高，三丈长，形状如龟。
English: In the south of the island there is a stone protrusion, six feet high, three feet long, shaped like a turtle.

古文：北有一回冈，高四尺，长十余丈，东突而昂其首，则蛇石也。
现代文：岛北有一道迂回的山冈，四尺高，十多丈长，东端突起如昂首，是蛇石。
English: In the north of the island there is a round hill, four feet high, more than ten feet long, the eastern end protrudes like a head, it is serpentine.

古文：龟与蛇交盘于一阜之间，四旁沸泉腾溢者九穴，而龟之口向东南，蛇之口向东北，皆张吻吐沸，交流环溢于重湖之内。
现代文：龟和蛇交错盘踞在一岛之间，四周有九个沸泉腾溢的洞穴，而龟口向东南，蛇口向东北，都张着口喷吐沸泉，泉水在湖内交流环溢。
English: The turtle and the snake are interlaced between an island, surrounded by nine caves with boiling springs. The turtle's mouth to the southeast, and the snake's mouth to the northeast, both spout boiling springs with their mouths open, and the spring water circulates and overflows in the lake.

古文：龟之上建玄武阁，以九穴环其下，今名九炁。
现代文：龟石上建有玄武阁，因为下面环绕着九个洞穴，如今名九羔台。
English: Xuanwu Pavilion was built on the tortoise rock, because there are nine caves around it, which is now called Jiulangtai.

古文：余循龟之南，见其腭中沸水，其上唇覆出，为人击缺，其水热不可以濯。
现代文：我沿着龟石南，看见龟胯中泉水沸腾，龟上唇覆盖突出，被人敲缺了，水很热，不可以洗涤。
English: I walked along the south of the turtle heather and saw the spring water boiling in the turtle cocoon. The upper lip of the turtle was covered and protruded. It had been chipped by someone. The water was very hot and could not be washed.

古文：有僧见余远至，遂留饭，且及夫仆焉。
现代文：有个僧人看见我远道而来，就留我吃饭，而且连挑夫、顾仆一道。
English: A monk saw me coming from far away and kept me for dinner, together with a porter and a servant.

古文：其北蛇冈之下，亦新建一庵，余以入城急，不暇遍历。
现代文：岛北蛇冈下，也新建了一座庵，我因为急着进城，无暇遍游。
English: There is also a newly built hermitage at the foot of the Snake Hill in the northern part of the island. Since I am in a hurry to get to the city, I don't have time to travel around.

古文：由台西复行堤间，一里，度一平桥，又二里，入浪穹东门。
现代文：从九炁台西往堤上走，一里，过一座平桥，又走二里，进入浪弯县城东门。
English: From the west of Jiuyantai, walk up the embankment for one mile, cross a flat bridge, and walk another two miles to enter the east gate of Langyan County.

古文：一里，抵西山之下，乃南转入护明寺，憩行李于方丈。
现代文：走了一里，到达西山下，于是往南转进护明寺，把行李放在方丈中。
English: After walking for a mile, I reached the west foot of the mountain, so I turned south into the Fomyo-ji Temple and placed my luggage in the abbot's room.

古文：寺东向，其殿已久敞，僧方修饰之。
现代文：寺向东，大殿已经敝坏了很长时间，僧人正在修整。
English: To the east of the temple, the main hall has been broken for a long time, and the monks are repairing it.

古文：寺之南为文昌阁，又南为文庙，皆东向，而温泉即洋溢于其北。
现代文：寺南部是文昌阁，再南是文庙，都向东，而温泉就从寺北部流出。
English: The southern part of the temple is the Wenchang Pavilion, and the southern part is the Wen Temple, both facing east, while the hot springs flow from the northern part of the temple.

古文：既憩行李，时甫过午，入叩何公巢阿，一见即把臂入林，欣然恨晚，遂留酌及更天黑后打更，仍命其长君送至寺宿焉，何名鸣凤，以经魁初授四川郫县令，升浙江盐运判官。
现代文：放置行李后，时间刚过中午，进城拜访何公巢阿，一见面就握着我的手臂请进去，大家喜悦万分，相见恨晚，于是留我饮酒到天黑打更时，然后让他的长子送我到寺中住宿。何公叫何鸣凤，最初以经魁的身份被任命为四川省郸县知县，后提升为浙江省盐运判官。
English: After leaving my luggage, just after noon, I went to the city to visit He Gongxu. As soon as I met him, he held my arm and invited me in. Everyone was overjoyed and hated to be late, so he let me drink until it was dark, and then let his eldest son take me to the temple for accommodation. He Gongxu is called He Mingfeng. He was initially appointed as the chief magistrate of Jixian County, Sichuan Province, and later promoted to the judge of salt transportation in Zhejiang Province.

古文：尝与眉公道余素履，欲候见不得。
现代文：曾经和眉公说起我是布衣之士，想探望而没能如愿。
English: I once told him that I was a man of the cloth, and I wanted to visit him, but I couldn't.

古文：其与陈木叔诗，有 死愧王紫芝，生愧徐霞客 之句，余心愧之，亦不能忘。
现代文：他写给陈木叔的诗有 死愧王紫芝，生愧徐霞客 的句子，我觉得惭愧，也不能忘怀。
English: The poem he wrote to Uncle Chen Mu included the sentence "I am ashamed to die, Wang Zizhi, I am ashamed to live, Xu Xiake." I felt ashamed and could not forget it.

古文：后公转六安州知州，余即西游出门。
现代文：后何公升任六安州知州，我就出门往西远游。
English: After I was promoted to Chizhou, Lu'an Province, I went on a long trip to the west.

古文：至滇省，得仕籍，而六安已易人而治；讯东来者，又知六安已为流寇所破，心益忡忡。
现代文：到云南省后，看到官吏的名册，而六安知州已经换人担任；间东部来的人，又知道六安州已经被流寇攻破，心中更加忧虑。
English: After arriving in Yunnan Province, they saw the roster of officials, and Lu'an Zhizhou had already been replaced; meanwhile, people from the east were more worried because they knew that Lu'anzhou had been invaded by the bandits.

古文：至晋宁，会教谕赵君，为陆凉人，初自杭州转任至晋宁，问之，知其为杭州故交也，言来时从隔江问讯，知公已丁艰先归。
现代文：到晋宁州时，见到学师赵君，赵君是陆凉州人，当初从杭州转到晋宁州任职，问后，知道是何公在杭州的故交，他说来就任时在与六安州隔江相对的地方打听，得知何公因父母去世已经先回来了。
English: When he arrived in Jinningzhou, he met the scholar Zhao Jun. Zhao Jun was a native of Liangzhou, Lu. He had transferred from Hangzhou to work in Jinningzhou. After asking, he knew that He Gong was an old friend in Hangzhou. When he came to take office, he inquired at the place across the river from Lu'an. He learned that He Gong had returned first due to the death of his parents.

古文：后晤鸡足大觉寺一僧，乃君之戚，始知果归，以忧离任，即城破，抵家亦未久也。
现代文：后来我在鸡足山大觉寺见到一个僧人，是何公的亲戚，于是知道何公真的回来了，因父母去世而离任服丧，六安州城就被攻破了，到家也没多久。
English: Later, I saw a monk at the Jijiao Mountain Jie Temple, who was a relative of He Gong, so I knew that He Gong had really returned. Because his parents had passed away, He Gong had left his post to attend a funeral. The city of Lu'an was broken into, and it didn't take long to get home.

古文：十九日何君复具餐于家，携行李入文庙西庑，乃其姻刘君匏石读书处也。
现代文：十九日何君又在家备下饭，我带着行李来到文庙西厢房，是他的姻亲刘鲍石君读书的地方。
English: On the 19th, He Jun was preparing dinner at home again. I brought my luggage to the west wing room of the temple, where his in-law Liu Bao Shikun was studying.

古文：上午，何君具舟东关外，拉余同诸郎四人登舟。
现代文：上午，何君在东关外准备了船，拉我和他的四个儿子上船。
English: In the morning, He Jun prepared a boat outside Dongguan and pulled me and his four sons onto the boat.

古文：舟小仅容四人，两舟受八人，遂泛湖而北。
现代文：船小，仅能容下四个人，两张船共八个人，于是往北游湖。
English: The boat is small, it can only hold four people, and the two boats hold a total of eight people, so they went to the north of the lake.

古文：舟不用楫，以竹篙刺水而已。
现代文：船不用浆划，只是用竹嵩撑水就行了。
English: You don't have to paddle the boat, just prop it up with a bamboo pole.

古文：渡湖东北三里，湖心见渔舍两三家，有断埂垂杨环之，何君将就其处，结楼缀亭，绾纳湖山之胜，命余豫题联额，余唯唯即答应。
现代文：往东北在湖中行三里，湖心有两三家渔舍，有断埂垂杨环绕着，何君准备就在这个地方建盖楼房，点缀亭阁，收揽湖光山色的美景，让我预先题写对联扁额，我答应了。
English: Three miles to the northeast in the middle of the lake, there are two or three fishing cottages in the center of the lake, surrounded by broken hanging poplars. He Jun is ready to build buildings in this place, decorate pavilions, and collect the beautiful scenery of the lake. Let me write a couplet in advance. I agreed.

古文：眺览久之，仍泛舟西北，二里，遂由湖而入海子。
现代文：观览了很久，然后荡舟往西北行，二里，就从湖进入海子。
English: After watching for a long time, we went boating to the northwest. After two miles, we entered the sea from the lake.

古文：南湖北海，形如葫芦，而中束如葫芦之颈焉。
现代文：南面是湖北面是海，像葫芦形状，而中部狭窄处犹如葫芦的细处。
English: The south side is Hubei, the north side is the sea, shaped like a gourd, and the central narrow place is like the thin part of a gourd.

古文：湖大而浅，海小而深，湖名茈碧，海名洱源。东为出洞鼻，西为剸头村，北为龙王庙，三面山环成窝，而海子中溢，南出而为湖。
现代文：湖大而水浅，海小而水深，湖名花碧，海叫洱源，东边出到洞鼻，西边是例头村，北边是龙王庙，三面环山，形成深窝，而海水从其中溢出，往南流出去形成湖。
English: The lake is large and shallow, the sea is small and deep, the lake is famous for its beauty, and the sea is called the source. The east side goes out to the cave nose, the west side is the Ruitou village, the north side is the Dragon King Temple, surrounded by mountains on three sides, forming a deep cave, and the seawater overflows from it and flows south to form a lake.

古文：海子中央，底深数丈，水色澄莹，有琉璃光，穴从水底喷起，如贯珠联璧，结为柱帏，上跃水面者尺许，从旁遥觑水中之影，千花方蕊，喷成珠树，粒粒分明，丝丝不乱，所谓 灵海耀珠 也。
现代文：海子中央，海底有数丈深，水色清莹，放射出琉璃的光芒，洞穴从水底喷起，如一串串联贯的珍珠美玉，结为水柱筛幕，往上跃出水面一尺多，从旁边遥观水中的影象，千花万蕊，喷成珍珠树，粒粒分明，丝丝不乱，是所说的 灵海耀珠 的景色。
English: In the middle of the sea, the bottom of the sea is several feet deep, the water color is clear and bright, and the light of the glaze is emitted. The cave erupts from the bottom of the water, like a string of connected pearl gems, knotted into a water column screen, jumping up out of the water surface by more than a foot. From the side of the remote viewing, the images in the water, thousands of flowers, sprayed into a pearly tree, granular, silky, are the so-called "Linghai Shining Pearl" scenery.

古文：《山海经》谓洱源出罢谷山，即此。
现代文：《山海经》说洱源发源于罢谷山，就是这里。
English: The "Sankaikyo" says that the source of the dragonfly originates from Mt. Zaidani, which is here.

古文：杨太史有《泛湖穷洱源》遗碑没山间，何君近购得之，将为立亭以志其胜焉。
现代文：杨太史的《泛湖穷洱源》遗碑埋没在山中，何君最近收购到，准备为碑立亭以标明这一佳境。
English: The monument of Yang Taishi's "Pan Lake Poverty Alleviation" is buried in the mountains. He Jun recently acquired it and is preparing to erect a pavilion for the monument to mark this beautiful landscape.

古文：从海子西南涯登陆，西行田间，入一庵，即护明寺之下院也。
现代文：从海子西南岸登陆，往西从田中走，进入一座庵，是护明寺的下院。
English: After landing on the southwest coast of Haizi, walk west from Tanaka and enter a hermitage, which is the lower house of the Fomyo-ji Temple.

古文：何君之戚，已具餐庵中，为之醉饱。
现代文：何君的亲戚，已经在庵中准备了午餐，饭饱酒足。
English: He Jun's relatives have already prepared lunch in the hermitage, and the meal is full of wine.

古文：下午，仍下舟泛湖，西南二里，再入小港，何君为姻家拉去，两幼郎留侍，令两长君同余还，晚餐而宿文庙西庑。
现代文：下午，仍然上船游湖，往西南行二里，又驶入小港，何君被姻亲家拉去，两个小儿子留下来陪着，让两个大儿子和我一起返回，晚饭后住在文庙西厢房。
English: In the afternoon, I still went on the boat to tour the lake, traveled two miles to the southwest, and sailed into a small port. He Jun was pulled by his in-laws. The two younger sons stayed with me, and let the two older sons return with me. After dinner, I stayed in the west wing room of the temple.

古文：二十日何君未归，两长君清晨候饭，乃携盒抱琴，竟堤而东，再为九炁台之游。
现代文：二十日何君没回来，两个大儿子一清早就等候我吃饭，于是携带食盒，怀抱琴，往东走完湖堤，第二次去游九悉台。
English: On the 20th day, He Jun did not come back. My two eldest sons were waiting for me to have dinner in the early morning, so I carried the lunch box, hugged the piano, walked eastward along the lake embankment, and went to visit Jiushidai for the second time.

古文：拟浴于池，而浴池无覆室，是日以街子，浴者杂沓，乃已。
现代文：计划到池里沐浴，但浴池没有房屋覆盖，这一夭因为是街子天，沐浴的人很多，于是不去沐浴。
English: I planned to take a bath in the pool, but the pool was not covered by a building. This time, because it was a city day, there were many people taking a bath, so I did not take a bath.

古文：遂由新庵掬蛇口温泉，憩弄久之，仍至九炁台，抚琴命酌。
现代文：就去新庵用手捧蛇口温泉，休息、玩耍了很久，仍然到九羔台，弹琴小饮。
English: I went to Xin'an to hold Shekou Hot Spring with my hands, rested and played for a long time, and still went to Jiulangtai to play the piano and have a drink.

古文：何长君不特文章擅藻，而丝竹乐器的总称俱精。
现代文：何君的长子不仅擅长文章词藻，而且精通弦乐器、管乐器。
English: He Jun's eldest son is not only good at writing lyrics, but also proficient in stringed instruments and wind instruments.

古文：就龟口泉瀹鸡卵为餐，味胜于汤煮者。
现代文：就着龟口的泉水煮鸡蛋作为午餐，味道比用水煮的好。
English: For lunch, boil an egg in the spring water of Kembuchi. The taste is better than boiling in water.

古文：已而寺僧更出盒佐觞，下午乃返。
现代文：不一会，寺里的僧人又拿出食盒助酒，下午才返回。
English: After a while, the monks in the temple took out their lunch boxes to help with the drinking, and only returned in the afternoon.

古文：西风甚急，何长君抱琴向风而行，以风韵弦，其声泠泠，山水之调，更出自然也。
现代文：西风很急，何君的长子抱着琴迎风走，让风来合弦，琴发出山水之音，更显得自然。
English: The west wind was very strong, and He Jun's eldest son walked against the wind, holding the qin in his arms. He let the wind play the chords, and the qin emitted the sound of the landscape, which was even more natural.

古文：二十一日何君归，饭余于前楼，以其集示余，中有为余咏者。
现代文：二十一日何君回来了，在前楼请我吃饭，把他的文集给我看，其中有为我咏的诗。
English: On the twenty-first day, He Jun came back, invited me to dinner in the front building, and showed me his collection of works, including poems he had written for me.

古文：余亦作二诗以酬之。
现代文：我也作了二首诗酬对。
English: I've also done two verse-chorus pairs.

古文：二十二日何君特设宴宴余。
现代文：二十二日何君专门设宴宴请我。
English: On the 22nd, He Jun specially set up a banquet and invited me.

古文：余以小疾欲暂卧，恳辞不获同意，强起赴酌。
现代文：我因小病想卧床短暂休息，真心推辞而不被获准，勉强起床赴宴。
English: Due to a minor illness, I wanted to stay in bed for a short break. I sincerely declined, but was not allowed to do so. I reluctantly got up to go to the banquet.

古文：何君出所藏山谷真迹、杨升庵手卷示余。
现代文：何君拿出他所收藏的黄山谷真迹、杨升庵手卷给我看。
English: He took out his collection of authentic Huangshan Valley relics and Yang Sheng'an scrolls to show me.

古文：二十三日何长君联骑同为佛光寨之游。
现代文：二十三日何君的长子和我一齐骑马去游佛光寨。
English: On the twenty-third day, He Jun's eldest son and I rode together to visit Fo Guang Zhai.

古文：佛光寨者，浪穹东山之最高险处。
现代文：佛光寨是浪弯县东山的最高最险处。
English: Fo Guang Zhai is the highest and most dangerous place in Dongshan, Langyan County.

古文：东山北自观音山南下，一穹而为三营后山，再穹而为佛光寨，三穹而为灵应山，其势皆崇雄如屏，连障天半，遥望虽支陇，其中实多崩崖叠壁，不易攀跻，故佛光寨夙称天险。
现代文：东山北边从观音山往南延伸，第一次隆起为三营后山，第二次隆起为佛光寨，第三次隆起为灵应山，山势都高大雄伟，如同屏障，连起来遮挡了半边夭，遥望虽然是支陇，其实中间有很多崩崖叠壁，不容易攀登，所以佛光寨向来被称为天险。
English: The northern side of Dongshan extends from Guanyin Mountain to the south. The first uplift is Sanying Houshan, the second uplift is Fo Guangzhai, and the third uplift is Lingyue Mountain. The mountains are tall and majestic, like a barrier, and they are connected to block half of the side. Although the distant view is a support, there are actually many collapsed cliffs in the middle, which is not easy to climb. Therefore, Fo Guangzhai has always been known as a natural hazard.

古文：《名胜志》谓为孟获首寨，然载于邓川，而不载于浪穹，误矣。
现代文：本朝建国初年平定滇西后，有右承叫普颜笃的，又盘踞佛光寨而叛乱，很长时间都没被征服，数年之后才攻克了。
English: In the first year of the founding of this dynasty, after the subjugation of Shaanxi, there was a right successor called Puyan Du, who also rebelled against the encirclement of Buddha Guangzhai. It was not conquered for a long time, and it was only conquered a few years later.

古文：今以其地建灵光寺。
现代文：如今在此地建盖灵光寺。
English: Now Lingguang Temple is being built here.

古文：从寺后而上，有一女关最险，言一女当关，莫之能越也。
现代文：从寺后上去，一女关最险，意为一女当关，没有谁能越过。
English: Going up from the back of the temple, a woman pass is the most dangerous, meaning a woman pass, no one can pass.

古文：颜笃据寨，以诸女子分守峰头，遥望山下，无所不见。
现代文：普颜笃占据灵光寨时，让众女子分守峰头，遥望山下，无所不见。
English: When Puyan Du occupies Lingguang Village, let all the women guard the peak, look down the mountain, and see everything.

古文：从关而上，即通后山之道，北出七坪，南下北牙者也。
现代文：顺关而上，是通往后山的路，往北出到七坪，往南下到北牙。
English: Going up along the pass is the road to the back of the mountain, going north to Qiping and south to Beigu.

古文：余闻其胜，故与长君先及之。
现代文：我听过这一名胜，所以和何公的长子先去。
English: I've heard about this place of interest, so I'm going first with He Gong's eldest son.

古文：仍从九炁台，共十里，过大屯石梁。
现代文：仍然顺九羔台走，共十里，过大屯石桥。
English: I still walked along Jiulangdai, a total of ten miles, crossing Datun Stone Bridge.

古文：其梁已折而重建，横木桥以度。
现代文：石桥断了，正在重建，搭木桥过去。
English: The stone bridge is broken, it is being rebuilt, and a wooden bridge is being built.

古文：遂从东北行五里，转而东，从径路又三里，直抵东山下，乃沿山东北上，又二里而及灵光寺。
现代文：于是往东北走五里，转向东，又从小路走三里，直抵东山下，然后沿山往东北上，又走二里就到灵光寺。
English: So he walked five miles to the northeast, turned to the east, and walked three miles from the path, straight to the east of the mountain, and then up the mountain to the northeast, and walked two miles to Lingguang Temple.

古文：寺门东向，下临遥川，其前坡虽峻而石不多，惟寺前一石，高突如屋。
现代文：寺门东向，下临远方的平川，前面坡虽然陡但石头不多，只是寺前有一块巨石，和房屋一样高耸。
English: The temple gate faces east, with the distant Hirakawa River below. Although the front slope is steep, there are not many stones, but there is a huge rock in front of the temple, which is as tall as the house.

古文：前楼后殿，两庑为炊卧之所，乃何君之伯某府别驾所建，今且就圮矣。
现代文：前楼后殿，两边厢房是做饭睡觉的地方，这是何君的伯父、某府的别驾所建盖的，如今快要倒塌了。
English: The front building, the rear building, and the wing rooms on both sides are places for cooking and sleeping. They were built by He Jun's uncle, the governor of a certain province, and now they are about to collapse.

古文：余至，先有三客在，皆吕姓，一少而麻衣者，为吕挥使子，其二长者，即其叔也。
现代文：我到达时，有三个客人先在这里，都姓吕，其中年少而穿麻衣的，是吕指挥使的儿子，二个年长的，是他的叔父。
English: When I arrived, there were three guests here first, all surnamed Lü. Among them, the youngest, wearing a linen shirt, was the son of Lü's commanding officer, and the two older ones were his uncles.

古文：具餐相饷，为余言一女关之胜，欲即登之，诸君谓日晚不及。
现代文：他们准备了午餐请我吃，对我说一女关胜景，我想立即去攀登，他们说天晚来不及了。
English: They prepared a lunch for me and invited me to eat, telling me that there was a woman's pass and that I wanted to climb it immediately. They said that it was too late.

古文：诸吕留蔬果于僧，令供余，且导余游。
现代文：到下午，姓吕的三人告别而去，何君的长子也去三营亲戚家，我独自留在寺中，为明天一早游遍胜景作考虑。
English: In the afternoon, the three people surnamed Lv bid farewell and left. He Jun's eldest son also went to a relative's house in Sanying. I stayed alone in the temple, thinking about visiting the scenic spots in the morning.

古文：二十四日晨起索饭，即同寺僧从寺后跻危坡而上。
现代文：二十四日早晨起床带上饭，就和寺里的僧人从寺后登陡坡而上。
English: On the morning of the 24th, I got up and brought some food with me. Together with the monks from the temple, I climbed up the steep slope from the back of the temple.

古文：二里余，有岐：北盘入峡者，向寨址道也；历级直上而南越峰头者，向一女关道也。
现代文：二里多，有岔路：往北盘绕进入峡谷的，是去佛光寨遗址的路；沿石阶直上，然后往南翻峰头的，是去一女关的路。
English: It is more than two miles long, and there is a fork in the road: the road that winds north into the canyon is the road to the Fo Guangzhai Ruins; the road that goes straight up the stone steps and then south over the peak is the road to Yijian Pass.

古文：余从其上者，一里余，凌坡之脊，随之南转，俯瞰脊东盘夹中，有遗址围墙，即普颜笃之旧寨也，反在其下矣。
现代文：我顺往上的路走，一里多，登上坡脊，随脊往南转，俯瞰脊东盘绕的峡谷中，有佛光寨遗址的围墙，就是原来普颜笃的山寨，反而在脊下面了。
English: I walked up the road for more than a mile, climbed the ridge, turned south along the ridge, overlooking the canyon winding east of the ridge, there was the wall of the Fo Guangzhai site, which was the original Puyan Du's cottage, but it was below the ridge.

古文：南一里，峰头始有石累累。从其下东转，南突危崖，北临寨底，线径横腰。
现代文：往南走一里，峰头才有较多的石块，从下面往东转，南边突起陡崖，北边对着峡底的山寨，线一样细的小路横穿山腰。
English: One mile to the south, there are more stones at the top of the peak. From the bottom to the east, the south side protrudes a steep cliff, the north side faces the cottage at the bottom of the canyon, and a path as thin as a line crosses the mountainside.

