古文：公都子曰： 外人皆称夫子好辩，敢问何也？ 
现代文：公都子说： 别人都说先生您喜好辩论，请问这是为什么呢？ 
English: He said, "Others say that you, sir, like to debate. Why is that?

古文：孟子曰： 予岂好辩哉？
现代文：孟子说： 我难道喜好辩论么？
English: Mencius said: Do I really like debate?

古文：予不得已也。
现代文：我只是不得已而已！
English: I had to do it!

古文：天下之生久矣，一治一乱。
现代文：天下有人类已经很久了，时而太平，时而动乱。
English: It has been a long time since there has been a human being in the world, sometimes peaceful, sometimes in turmoil.

古文：当尧之时，水逆行泛滥于中国，蛇龙居之，民无所定，下者为巢，上者为营窟。书曰： 洚水警余。 
现代文：在尧的时候，水大到向西流，泛滥于中原地区，到处被龙蛇盘踞，百姓无处安身；住在低地的人在树上搭巢，住在高处的人在山上营造洞穴。《尚书》上说： 洚水警诫了我们。 
English: At the time of the flood, the water was so large that it flowed westward, flooding the Central Plains, and was everywhere entangled by dragons and snakes. The people had nowhere to shelter; people living in the lowlands built nests in trees, and people living in high places built caves in the mountains. "Shang Shu" said: "The flood warned us.

古文：洚水者，洪水也。
现代文：所谓洚水，就是洪水。
English: The so-called flood is a flood.

古文：使禹治之。
现代文：尧派禹治水。
English: Gong sent Yu to control the water.

古文：禹掘地而注之海，驱蛇龙而放之菹，水由地中行，江、淮、河、汉是也。
现代文：禹挖通河道将洪水导入大海，又把龙蛇驱逐到草泽地，水沿着地上的沟道流动，这就是长江、淮水、黄河和汉水。
English: The Yangtze River, the Huai River, the Yellow River and the Han River flow along channels on the ground.

古文：险阻既远，鸟兽之害人者消，然后人得平土而居之。
现代文：水患既已解除，鸟兽不再危害人们，然后百姓们才得以回到平地上来安居。
English: Once the flood has been lifted, and the birds and beasts no longer endanger people, then the people will be able to return to the plains to live in peace.

古文：尧舜既没，圣人之道衰，暴君代作，坏宫室以为污池，民无所安息，弃田以为园囿，使民不得衣食，邪说暴行又作，园囿污池，沛泽多而禽兽至，及纣之身，天下又大乱。
现代文：尧舜去世以后，圣人治国爱民之道逐渐衰微，暴虐的君主接连出现，毁坏了房屋来做池沼，使百姓无处安居；废弃了农田来做园林，使百姓不能谋生。淫邪的学说和暴虐的行为随之兴起，园林、池沼、草泽增多并招来了飞禽走兽。到了殷纣之时，天下又发生大乱。
English: After his death, the sage's way of governing the country and loving the people gradually waned. Tyrannical monarchs appeared one after another, destroying houses to make ponds, so that the people had nowhere to live safely; abandoned farmland to make gardens, so that the people could not make a living. The doctrine of sexual perversion and tyrannical behavior arose, gardens, ponds, and grasses increased and attracted birds and beasts. At the time of Yin and Yang, the world was once again in turmoil.

古文：周公相武王，诛纣伐奄，三年讨其君，驱飞廉于海隅而戮之，灭国者五十，驱虎豹犀象而远之，天下大悦。
现代文：周公辅佐武王诛杀殷纣，讨伐奄国，与这些暴君打了三年，把飞廉追逐到海边处死，消灭殷商的属国五十个，将虎、豹、犀牛、大象驱赶得远远的，天下百姓非常喜欢。
English: Zhou Gongfu assisted King Sawu to kill Yin Zhao, fight against Ami Province, and fight with these tyrants for three years. He chased Fei Liang to the seaside and executed him. He eliminated fifty of Yin Shang's vassal states, and drove away tigers, leopards, rhinoceroses, and elephants. People all over the world liked him very much.

古文：书曰： 丕显哉，文王谟，丕承哉，武王烈，佑启我后人，咸以正无缺。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 伟大光明啊，文王的谋略！继承发扬光大啊，武王的功绩！帮助开导我们后代，都走正路不无缺陷。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Great light, the strategy of King Wen! Inherit and carry forward the glory, the achievements of King Wu! Help enlighten our future generations, all take the right path without defects.

古文：世衰道微，邪说暴行有作，臣弑其君者有之，子弑其父者有之。
现代文：现社会混乱正道衰微，淫邪的学说和暴虐的行为随之兴起，臣子杀君主的事有了，儿子杀父亲的事也有了。
English: In today's chaotic society, the righteous path is waning, and the doctrine of sexual perversion and tyrannical behavior are on the rise. There have been cases of courtiers killing monarchs, and cases of sons killing their fathers.

古文：孔子惧，作春秋。
现代文：孔子为之忧虑，便著述了《春秋》。
English: Confucius was worried about this and wrote "Spring and Autumn."

古文：春秋，天子之事也，是故孔子曰： 知我者，其惟春秋乎；罪我者，其惟春秋乎。 
现代文：《春秋》所记载的是天子的事，所以孔子说： 将使世人了解我的恐怕也只有《春秋》了，将使世人责怪我的恐怕也只有《春秋》了。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" records the things of the Son of Heaven, so Confucius said: "Only "Spring and Autumn" will make the world understand me, and only "Spring and Autumn" will make the world blame me."

古文：圣王不作，诸侯放恣，处士横议，杨朱墨翟之言，盈天下，天下之言，不归杨则归墨。
现代文：圣王不出现了，诸侯们肆无忌惮，在野人士横暴放纵地议论，杨朱、墨翟的言论充斥天下，世上的言论不属于杨朱一派便属于墨翟一派。
English: The holy king did not appear, the princes were unscrupulous, and the oppositionists discussed violently and indulgently. Yang Zhu and Mo Xun's remarks flooded the world. The world's remarks did not belong to Yang Zhu's faction, but to Mo Xun's faction.

古文：杨氏为我，是无君也；墨氏兼爱，是无父也。
现代文：杨氏主张为自己，是不要君王；墨氏主张兼爱，是不要父母。
English: Mr. Yang advocates for himself and does not want a king; Mr. Mo advocates for both love and does not want parents.

古文：无父无君。是禽兽也。
现代文：不要父母不要君王的人，就是禽兽。
English: If you don't want to be a parent or a king, you're an animal.

古文：公明仪曰： 庖有肥肉，厩有肥马，民有饥色，野有饿莩，此率兽而食人也。 
现代文：公明仪说： 厨房里有肥美的肉，马棚里有健壮的马匹，老百姓却面带饥色，田野上有饿死的人，这无异于驱赶着兽类去吃人。 
English: Gongmingyi said: "There is fat meat in the kitchen, strong horses in the stable, but the people are hungry, and there are starving people in the fields. This is tantamount to driving animals to eat people.

古文：杨墨之道不怠，孔子之道不着，是邪说诬民，充塞仁义也。
现代文：杨、墨的学说不破除，孔子的学说不发扬，就是要用邪说欺骗百姓、阻止仁义的施行。
English: If the teachings of Yang and Mo cannot be eradicated, and the teachings of Confucius cannot be promoted, it is to deceive the people with evil theories and prevent the implementation of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：仁义充塞，则率兽食人，人将相食。
现代文：仁义被阻止，就是放任野兽去吃人，人们也将互相残食。
English: If benevolence and righteousness are prevented, that is, if beasts are allowed to eat people, people will also eat each other's leftovers.

古文：吾为此惧。闲先圣之道，距杨墨，放淫辞，邪说者，不得作，作于其心，害于其事，作于其事，害于其政，圣人复起，不易吾言矣。
现代文：我为此感到忧虑，所以要规范先圣的道路，抵制杨、墨的学说，批驳错误夸张的言论，使邪说歪理不能再流行。邪说兴起在人们心中，会危害人们做的事情，事情受了危害，也就会危害政务。即使圣人再出现，也不会改变我的观点。
English: I am worried about this, so I want to standardize the path of the first saint, resist the teachings of Yang and Mo, refute the wrong and exaggerated remarks, and make the heresy and irrationality no longer popular. The rise of heresy in people's hearts will endanger what people do, and if things are endangered, it will also endanger government affairs. Even if a saint reappears, it will not change my view.

古文：昔者禹抑洪水，而天下平；周公兼夷狄，驱猛兽，而百姓宁；孔子成春秋，而乱臣贼子惧。
现代文：从前大禹抑制洪水使天下太平，周公兼并夷族狄族，赶走猛兽使百姓安宁，孔子著成《春秋》使乱臣贼子害怕。
English: Once upon a time, Dayu controlled the floods to bring peace to the world, Zhou Gong annexed the Di people, drove away the wild beasts to bring peace to the people, and Confucius's "Spring and Autumn" made the ruffian thieves afraid.

古文：诗云： 戎狄是膺，荆舒是惩，则莫我敢承。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 戎族狄族的人服从了，荆地楚地被惩罚了，没有人敢抗拒我。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The people of the Emu tribe and the Di tribe obeyed, and were severely punished. No one dared to resist me.

古文：无父无君，是周公所膺也。
现代文：不要父亲不要君主，是周公所要征服的。
English: No father, no monarch, is what Zhou Gong wants to conquer.

古文：我亦欲正人心，息邪说，距诐行，放淫辞，以承三圣者。
现代文：我也想要端正人心，破除邪说，抵制偏颇的行为，批驳错误夸张的言论，来继承大禹、周公、孔子三位圣人。
English: I also want to rectify people's hearts, eliminate evil theories, resist biased behavior, and refute false and exaggerated speech, to inherit the three saints of Dayu, Zhou Gong, and Confucius.

古文：岂好辩哉？
现代文：我怎么是喜好辩论呢？
English: Why do I like to argue?

古文：予不得已也。
现代文：我是不得不如此。
English: I had to do it!

古文：能言距杨墨者，圣人之徒也。
现代文：凡是能够著书立说敢于抵制杨、墨学说的人，便不愧是圣人的学生。 
English: Anyone who can write a book and dare to resist the teachings of Yang and Mo is truly a student of the sage.

