古文：或曰： 士之论高，何必以文？ 
现代文：有人说： 士人的议论高明，为什么一定要依靠借助文采呢？ 
English: Some people say: Since the scholar's discourse is so brilliant, why must he rely on the help of literature?

古文：答曰：夫人有文质乃成。
现代文：回答说： 人要具备文和质两个方面才算完美。
English: He answered: A person needs to have both culture and quality in order to be considered perfect.

古文：物有华而不实，有实而不华者。
现代文：物有只开花不结果的，有只结果不开花的。
English: There are things that only bloom but do not bear fruit, and things that only bear fruit but do not bloom.

古文：《易》曰： 圣人之情见乎辞。 
现代文：《易》上说： 圣人的情感通过文辞表达出来。 
English: Yi said: The feelings of a sage are expressed through words.

古文：出口为言，集札为文，文辞施设，实情敷烈。
现代文：说出口就成了语言，把简札编在一起就成了文章，文辞书写出来，真实的情感就显现了。
English: When you speak, your words become language. When you put together a jotter, it becomes an article. When you write a dictionary, your true emotions come out.

古文：夫文德，世服也。
现代文：体现德行的文采，就是社会的服饰。
English: Literature that embodies virtue is the clothing of society.

古文：空书为文，实行为德，著之於衣为服。
现代文：只见之于文字叫 文 ，实际去做叫 德 ，装饰在衣上叫 服 。
English: It can only be seen in the text called "Wen," the actual doing is called "De," and the decoration on the clothes is called "服."

古文：故曰：德弥盛者文弥缛，德弥彰者人弥明。
现代文：所以说：道德越高的文饰就越多采，道德越明显的文饰就越鲜明。
English: Therefore, it is said that the higher the morality, the more artistic decoration, and the more obvious the morality, the more vivid the artistic decoration.

古文：大人德扩其文炳。小人德炽其文斑。
现代文：官大位尊的人道德丰盈，他的文饰就鲜明；君子的道德高尚，他的文饰就华丽。
English: An official of high rank has rich morals, and his decoration is bright; a gentleman's morals are high, and his decoration is gorgeous.

古文：官尊而文繁，德高而文积。
现代文：官高位尊文饰就繁多，道德高尚文饰就丰盛。
English: There are a wide variety of high-ranking dignitaries, and there are plenty of moral high-ranking dignitaries.

古文：华而晥者，大夫之箦，曾子寝疾，命元起易。
现代文：华丽而又光滑的，是大夫享用的席子，曾子病重卧床，让儿子把这种席子换掉。
English: Zengzi was seriously ill in bed, so he asked his son to replace the gorgeous and smooth mat, which was used by doctors.

古文：由此言之，衣服以品贤，贤以文为差。
现代文：由此说来，以穿的服饰来区别贤人，贤人是以文采的多少来区分高低。
English: Therefore, the difference between a wise man and a wise woman is based on the clothes they wear, and the difference between a wise man and a wise woman is based on how much they are literate.

古文：愚杰不别，须文以立折。
现代文：愚昧杰出不能分别，必须要靠文采来判断。
English: Stupidity and excellence cannot be distinguished, and must be judged by literary skill.

古文：非唯於人，物亦咸然。
现代文：不仅人类是如此，万物也都是这样。
English: This is true not only for human beings, but also for all things.

古文：龙鳞有文，於蛇为神；凤羽五色，於鸟为君；虎猛，毛蚡蚖；龟知，背负文：四者体不质，於物为圣贤。
现代文：龙的鳞上有花纹，在蛇类中是神物；凤的羽毛有五色，在鸟类中是首领；老虎威猛，毛色花纹很多；龟智慧，背甲上有花纹。这四种动物的躯体花色华丽，在动物类中是圣贤。
English: The dragon's scales have patterns, and it is a god among snakes; the phoenix's feathers have five colors, and it is a leader among birds; the tiger is fierce, and its fur has many patterns; the turtle is wise, and its back armor has patterns. These four kinds of animals have gorgeous body colors, and they are sages among animals.

古文：且夫山无林，则为土山，地无毛，则为泻土；人无文，则为仆人。
现代文：如果山没有林木，就是土山；地上不长草木，就是潟土；人没有文采，就是无用的人。
English: If a mountain does not have forest trees, it is a dirt mountain; if plants do not grow on the ground, it is lagoon soil; if a person does not have literary talent, he is a useless person.

古文：土山无麋鹿，泻土无五谷，人无文德，不为圣贤。
现代文：土山上不会有麋鹿，潟土上不会生五谷，人没有体现德行的文采就不会是圣贤。
English: There will be no elk on the mountains, there will be no grain on the lagoon, and people who do not embody the virtues of literature will not be saints.

古文：上天多文而後土多理。二气协和，圣贤禀受，法象本类，故多文彩。
现代文：上天多日月星辰而大地多山川陵谷，阴阳二气协和，圣贤承受此二气，仿效天地，所以文采繁多。
English: Heaven has many suns, moons, and stars, while the earth has many mountains, rivers, and tombs. Yin and yang are in harmony with each other, and sages bear these two energies, imitating heaven and earth. Therefore, there are many literary works.

古文：瑞应符命，莫非文者。
现代文：祥瑞吉兆，没有不以文采来显现的。
English: There is no auspicious sign of prosperity that does not manifest itself in literature.

古文：晋唐叔虞、鲁成季友、惠公夫人号曰仲子，生而怪奇，文在其手。
现代文：晋唐叔虞，鲁成季友，惠公夫人名叫仲子，他们生下来就很奇怪，有字样在他们手上。
English: Jin Tang Shugu, Lu Cheng Jiyu, Huigong's wife was named Zhongzi. They were born very strange, with characters on their hands.

古文：张良当贵，出与神会，老父授书，卒封留侯。
现代文：张良命该显贵，出逃时与神人相会，黄石老人授以兵书，终于被封为留侯。
English: Zhang Liang's life should be illustrious. When he fled, he met with gods and men. The old man of Huangshi awarded him a military certificate, and he was finally given the title of magistrate.

古文：河神，故出图，洛灵，故出书。
现代文：黄河神异，所以出现河图；洛水神灵，所以出现洛书。
English: The Yellow River is mysterious, so there is a river map; love water deities, so there is a love book.

古文：竹帛所记怪奇之物，不出潢洿。
现代文：书籍所记载的怪奇的事物，不会出现在小水坑中。
English: The strange things recorded in books do not appear in small puddles.

古文：物以文为表，人以文为基。
现代文：物以文采为外表，人以文采为根基。
English: Things take literature as their appearance, and people take literature as their foundation.

古文：棘子成欲弥文，子贡讥之。
现代文：棘子成想取消文采，子贡就讥讽他。
English: When the thorn in his side wanted to cancel the performance, the tributary ridiculed him.

古文：谓文不足奇者，子成之徒也。
现代文：认为文采不足为奇的，是棘子成这类人。
English: It's not surprising that literary talent is considered to be a problem for this type of person.

古文：著作者为文儒，说经者为世儒。
现代文：能著书立说的是文儒，能解释经书的是世儒。
English: Those who can write and speak are Confucianists, and those who can interpret scriptures are Confucianists.

古文：二儒在世，未知何者为优。
现代文：两种儒生同在社会上，不知哪一种更优些。
English: Two kinds of Confucianism coexist in society, and I don't know which one is better.

古文：或曰： 文儒不若世儒。
现代文：有人说： 文儒不如世儒。
English: Some people say: Wenru is not as good as Shedu.

古文：世儒说圣人之经，解贤者之传，义理广博，无不实见，故在官常位，位最尊者为博士，门徒聚众，招会千里，身虽死亡，学传於後。
现代文：世儒解释圣人的经书，解释贤人的传述，意义道理广博，没有不见实效的，所以在官府有固定的职位；其中地位最高的是五经博士，聚集了许多门徒，招引会集了千里之外的学生，即使他本人死了，他的学说仍然流传于后代。
English: Confucianism interprets the scriptures of the saints, interprets the narrations of the sages, has a wide range of meanings and is not ineffective, so it has a fixed position in the government; the highest status is the Five Classics Doctor, who has gathered many disciples and attracted students from thousands of miles away. Even if he himself dies, his doctrine will still be passed down to future generations.

古文：文儒为华淫之说，於世无补，故无常官，弟子门徒不见一人，身死之後，莫有绍传，此其所以不如世儒者也。 
现代文：文儒发表的是华而不实的议论，对社会毫无补益，所以没有固定的官职，不见他们有一个弟子门徒，他们本人死亡之后，没有人继承他们的学业。这就是文儒不如世儒的道理。 
English: The reason for this is that they are not as good as the Confucianists. They do not have a fixed official position, they do not have a disciple, and after their death, no one inherits their studies.

古文：答曰：不然。
现代文：回答说：并非如此。
English: He replied: "That is not the case."

古文：夫世儒说圣情，□□□□，共起并验，俱追圣人。
现代文：文儒世儒解释圣人的实情，是出于同一个动机，有同样的效验，目的都是想追随圣人。
English: Confucianism and Confucianism explain the truth of the sage, are motivated by the same motive, have the same effect, and aim to follow the sage.

古文：事殊而务同，言异而义钧。
现代文：事情虽然不同但勉力从事是一致的，说的话不一样但道理却是相同的。
English: Although the things are different, they are the same, and the words are different, but the reason is the same.

古文：何以谓之文儒之说无补於世？
现代文：为什么说文儒的议论对社会没有补益呢？
English: Why is it said that the arguments of the Confucianists are of no benefit to society?

古文：世儒业易为，故世人学之多；非事可析第，故宫廷设其位。
现代文：世儒的学问容易做，所以世人学习的就多，平凡的事情都可以分出高低来，所以官府朝廷中都设置了他们的职位。
English: Confucian learning is easy to do, so the world has a lot to learn, and ordinary things can be divided into high and low, so their positions have been set up in the government and the court.

古文：文儒之业，卓绝不循，人寡其书，业虽不讲，门虽无人，书文奇伟，世人亦传。
现代文：文儒的学问，卓越非凡不循常规，人们很少读他们的书，他们的学问即使没有用来传授，门下即使没有弟子，但他们的著作文章奇伟不凡，世上的人同样流传他们的著述。
English: The knowledge of the literati is extraordinary and unconventional. People rarely read their books. Even if their knowledge is not used to teach, even if they have no disciples, their writings are extraordinary. People in the world also spread their writings.

古文：彼虚说，此实篇。折累二者，孰者为贤？
现代文：那些世儒的都是虚妄的言论，只有这些文儒的才是有实际内容的文章。判断比较这两种儒生，哪一个贤明呢？
English: Those of the Confucian world are all false statements, only these Confucian writers are articles with actual content. Judging by comparing these two types of Confucianism, which one is wise?

古文：案古俊又著作辞说，自用其业，自明於世。
现代文：考察古代贤能的人著书立说，自己用自己的学问，自己在社会上出名。
English: The study of ancient virtuous people wrote books and said that they used their own knowledge to make themselves famous in society.

古文：世儒当时虽尊，不遭文儒之书，其迹不传。
现代文：世儒在当时即使尊贵，如果没有被文儒把他们写进书里，他们的事迹就不会流传。
English: At that time, even if the Confucianists were respected, if they were not written into books by the literati, their deeds would not be passed down.

古文：周公制礼乐，名垂而不灭。
现代文：周公制礼作乐，名声流传而不灭绝。
English: Zhou metric system of etiquette and music, fame spread and did not die out.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，闻传而不绝。
现代文：孔子编写《春秋》，名声流传而不灭绝。
English: Confucius compiled "Spring and Autumn," and his fame spread without dying out.

古文：周公、孔子，难以论言。
现代文：周公、孔子是圣人，难以用他们作例子来论证人才。
English: Zhou Gong and Confucius are saints, and it is difficult to use them as examples to demonstrate talent.

古文：汉世文章之徒，陆贾、司马迁、刘子政、扬子云，其材能若奇，其称不由人。
现代文：汉代写书的人有陆贾、司马迁、刘子政、杨子云等人，他们的才能如同奇人一样，他们的名声不是靠别人得来的。
English: Lu Jia, Sima Qian, Liu Zizheng, Yang Ziyun and others were the authors of books in the Han Dynasty. Their talents were like those of geniuses, and their fame did not depend on others.

古文：世传《诗》家鲁申公，《书》家千乘欧阳、公孙，不遭太史公，世人不闻。
现代文：世人传闻的《诗》家鲁申公，《书》家千乘郡的欧阳生和公孙弘，如果不是遇上太史公将他们记载下来，世上的人也不会知道他们。
English: The world's rumored "poet" family, the Rushen family, and the "book" family, the Ouyang family and the Gongsun family from Qianjiang County, would not have been known to the world if they had not been recorded by the Taishi family.

古文：夫以业自显，孰与须人乃显？
现代文：凭自己的学问出名的人与依赖别人才出名的人相比，哪个更好呢？
English: For who is better, he who is known by his own learning, or he who is known by another man's?

古文：夫能纪百人，孰与廑能显其名？
现代文：能够记载一百个人的事迹使他们出名，与仅仅能使自己出名的人相比，哪个更高明呢？
English: Who is more capable of recording the deeds of a hundred people and making them famous than someone who can only make himself famous?

古文：或曰： 著作者，思虑间也，未必材知出异人也。
现代文：有人说： 从事著述的人，只是有空闲时间来思考罢了，不一定是他才智出众不同于平常人。
English: Some people say: A person who engages in writing only has free time to think, and it is not necessarily that he is intellectually outstanding and different from ordinary people.

古文：居不幽，思不至。
现代文：居住的地方不幽静，文思就不会到来。
English: If the place where you live is not quiet, Vince will not come.

古文：使著作之人，总众事之凡，典国境之职，汲汲忙忙，暇著作？
现代文：如果让从事著述的人，总揽各方面的事，掌管国境之内的职责，心情急切忙忙碌碌，他还有什么空闲去从事著述呢？
English: If a writer is in charge of all aspects of affairs, in charge of domestic duties, and in a hurry, what free time does he have to write?

古文：试使庸人积闲暇之思，亦能成篇八十数。
现代文：假使让一个平庸的人把闲暇时的思虑积累起来，也能写出八十多篇文章。
English: If a mediocre person were allowed to accumulate the thoughts of his leisure time, he would be able to write more than eighty articles.

古文：文王日昃不暇食，周公一沐三握发，何暇优游为丽美之文於笔札？
现代文：周文王忙于政务太阳偏西也没有空吃饭，周公洗一次头要中断三回来接待客人，还有什么空余时间悠闲自在地用笔在简札上写出美丽的文章呢？
English: Zhou Wenwang was so busy with government affairs that he didn't have time to eat even though the sun was setting in the west. Zhou Gong would have to stop washing his hair once and come back three times to receive guests. What spare time did he have to leisurely write a beautiful article with a pen on a piece of paper?

古文：孔子作《春秋》，不用於周也。
现代文：孔子写成了《春秋》，是因为没有被周天子重用。
English: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" because he was not reused by Zhou Tianzi.

古文：司马长卿不预公卿之事，故能作子虚之赋。
现代文：司马长卿因为不能参预公卿的事务，所以能写成《子虚赋》。
English: Because Sima Changqing could not participate in the affairs of the pre-eminent nobles, he was able to write "Zi Hu Fu."

古文：扬子云存中郎之官，故能成《太玄经》，就《法言》。
现代文：扬子云因为只当了中郎这样一个闲官，所以才能写成《太玄经》和《法言》。
English: Because Yang Ziyun was only a middle-ranking official, he was able to write "The Secret Scripture" and "Dharma Sayings."

古文：使孔子得王，《春秋》不作。长卿、子云为相，赋玄不工。 
现代文：如果孔子能当上君王，《春秋》就写不出来；假如司马长卿和扬子云做了丞相，《子虚赋》和《太玄经》就不会有如此的巧妙。 
English: If Confucius could become a king, "Spring and Autumn" could not be written; if Sima Changqing and Yang Ziyun became prime ministers, "Zihu Fu" and "Tai Xuan Jing" would not be so clever.

古文：答曰：文王日昃不暇食，此谓演《易》而益卦。
现代文：回答说：周文王忙得到太阳偏西了还没有空去吃饭，这是为推演《易》和增加卦数。
English: He replied: Zhou Wenwang was busy getting the sun westward and did not have time to go to dinner. This was to deduce "Yi" and increase the number of puzzles.

古文：周公一沐三握发，为周改法而制。
现代文：周公洗一次头要中断三回，这是忙于为周朝改订法度和制礼作乐。
English: Zhou Gong washed his head once and had to stop three times. This was due to the fact that he was busy making music for the Zhou Dynasty to change the rules and etiquette.

古文：周道不弊，孔子不作，休思虑间也！周法阔疏，不可因也。
现代文：周朝的礼制不败坏，孔子就不会写作《春秋》，并不是因为他有空闲时间来思考，而是因为周代的礼制已经不完备，不能再沿用了。
English: Confucius would not have written "Spring and Autumn" if the Zhou Dynasty's etiquette had not deteriorated, not because he had free time to think, but because the Zhou Dynasty's etiquette was already incomplete and could no longer be followed.

古文：夫禀天地之文，发於胸臆，岂为间作不暇日哉？
现代文：他承受了天地的文采，发自内心而写作，哪里是闲着无事而写作以免荒废日月呢？
English: He has inherited the literary talent of heaven and earth, and writes from the bottom of his heart. Where is the idle writing to avoid wasting the sun and the moon?

古文：感伪起妄，源流气。
现代文：这乃是对虚妄有所感触而引起的，就像水源会流淌热气会蒸腾一样非写不可。
English: This is caused by a sense of vanity, just as water can flow and heat can evaporate.

古文：管仲相桓公，致於九合。商鞅相孝公，为秦开帝业。
现代文：管仲辅佐齐桓公，以致于多次召集诸侯会盟；商鞅辅佐秦孝公，为秦国开创了帝王之业。
English: Guan Zhong Fu Zi Qian Gong, so many times to convene the Association of Princes; Shang Zi Fu Zi Qin Xiaogong, for the Qin state to create the emperor's career.

古文：然而二子之书，篇章数十。
现代文：然而他们两人写的书，也有几十篇之多。
English: However, the two of them have also written dozens of books.

古文：长卿、子云，二子之伦也。
现代文：司马长卿和扬子云，也是管仲、商鞅这类人。
English: Sima Changqing and Yang Ziyun are also people like Guan Zhong and Shang Qi.

古文：俱感，故才并；才同，故业钧。
现代文：由于他们都有所感触，因此才干不相上下；才干相同，因此学问相当。
English: Since they both feel something, their talents are comparable; since their talents are the same, their knowledge is comparable.

古文：皆士而各著，不以思虑间也。
现代文：他们都在做官而又各自著书，并不是因为他们有空闲。
English: It is not because they have free time that they are both working as officials and writing books separately.

古文：问事弥多而见弥博，官弥剧而识弥泥。
现代文：过问的事情越多见识也就越广博，官务越繁忙见识也就越深厚。
English: The more things you ask about, the more extensive your knowledge will be, and the busier the government work is, the deeper your knowledge will be.

古文：居不幽则思不至，思不至则笔不利。嚚顽之人，有幽室之思，虽无忧，不能著一字。
现代文：居住的地方不幽静文思就不会到来，文思不来下笔就不流利，顽固愚笨的人，有幽室供他思考，即使他无所忧虑，还是写不出一个字来。
English: If the place where one lives is not quiet, one's thoughts will not come, if one's thoughts do not come, one's pen will not be fluent, a stubborn and stupid person has a secluded room for him to think, even if he has nothing to worry about, he still can't write a word.

古文：盖人材有能，无有不暇。
现代文：人才有能与不能，而不在于有没有空闲。
English: Talent is what you can and can't do, not whether you have free time.

古文：有无材而不能思，无有知而不能著。
现代文：有缺乏才智而不能思考的人，没有具备才智而不能写作的人。
English: There are men without wit who cannot think, and men without wit who cannot write.

古文：有鸿材欲作而无起，细知以问而能记。
现代文：有才智很高想写作而无所缘起的人，没有才智很低而由于有空闲就能记录成文的人。
English: There are people with high intelligence who want to write and have nothing to do, and people with low intelligence who can write because they have free time.

古文：盖奇有无所因，无有不能言，两有无所睹，无不暇造作。
现代文：大概奇才有无从下笔的，没有不会写作的，有看不到的，没有缺乏功夫进行写作的。
English: Perhaps it is a miracle that there is no one who cannot write, no one who cannot write, no one who cannot see, and no one who lacks the effort to write.

古文：或曰： 凡作者精思已极，居位不能领职。
现代文：有人说： 凡是著书立说的人他的精力智慧已经穷尽，居官位就不能胜任职责。
English: Some people say: Anyone who writes and speaks has exhausted his energy and wisdom, and cannot fulfill his duties while in office.

古文：盖人思有所倚着，则精有所尽索。
现代文：大约人的思想偏重于某个方面，那么精力也就会在这方面用尽。
English: If a person's thoughts are focused on a certain aspect, then his energy will be exhausted in this area.

古文：著作之人，书言通奇，其材已极，其知已罢。
现代文：著书立说的人，写的东西精深奇特，他的才智已经到了极限，他的智慧已消耗殆尽。
English: The man of letters writes profound and strange things; his wit has reached its limit, his wisdom is spent.

古文：案古作书者，多位布散盘解，辅倾宁危，非著作之人所能为也。
现代文：考察古代著书立说的人，大多处在闲散无事的地位；至于辅佐将要倾覆的社稷，安定将要危亡的国家，这不是著书立说的人所能做到的。
English: An examination of ancient writers shows that most of them were idle and inactive. As for helping a society that is about to be overthrown and a country whose stability is in danger, this is not something that writers can do.

古文：夫有所逼，有所泥，则有所自，篇章数百。
现代文：有所推动，有所坚持，就会有所开端，写出成百篇的文章来。
English: If you push forward and persist, you will have a start and write hundreds of articles.

古文：吕不韦作《春秋》举家徙蜀；淮南王作道书，祸至灭族；韩非著治术，身下秦狱。
现代文：吕不韦写《吕氏春秋》，全家流放四川；淮南王作《淮南子》，遭祸至全家被处死；韩非著《韩非子》一书，自己被害死在秦国的狱中。
English: Lu Buwei wrote "Lu's Spring and Autumn" and his whole family was exiled to Sichuan; King Huainan wrote "Huainanzi" and his whole family was executed; Han Fei wrote "Han Fei Zi" and was himself killed and died in prison in Qin.

古文：身且不全，安能辅国？
现代文：自身尚且不能保全、怎么能辅佐国家呢？
English: If you cannot protect yourself, how can you help the country?

古文：夫有长於彼，安能不短於此？
现代文：在那方面有所擅长，在这方面怎么能不有所不足呢？
English: If you're good at that, how can you not be bad at this?

古文：深於作文，安能不浅於政治？ 
现代文：精通写文章，怎么能不在政治上有所不足呢？ 
English: If you are good at writing, how can you not be bad at politics?

古文：答曰：人有所优，固有所劣；人有所工，固有所拙。
现代文：回答说：人有优的地方，必然也有劣的地方；人有工巧的时候，必然也有笨拙的时候。
English: He answered, "Where there is excellence, there must also be inferiority; where there is skill, there must also be clumsiness.

古文：非劣也，志意不为也，非拙也，精诚不加也。
现代文：并不是由于低劣，而是心思没放在这方面；并不是由于笨拙，而是精神没有集中于这方面。
English: Not because of inferiority, but because of lack of concentration; not because of clumsiness, but because of lack of concentration.

古文：志有所存，顾不见泰山；思有所至，有身不暇徇也。
现代文：心中存有某种志向，就会连泰山也看不见；思想达到了某种境地，自己就没有空闲来有所谋求。
English: If you have a certain aspiration in your heart, you will not even be able to see Mount Tai; if your mind has reached a certain state, you will not have free time to pursue something.

古文：称干将之利，刺则不能击，击则不能刺，非刃不利，不能一旦二也。
现代文：世人称赞干将的锋利，但它能刺就不能砍，能砍就不能刺，不是剑刃不锋利。而是同时不能起两种作用。
English: The world praises the sharpness of the go-getter, but if it can stab, it cannot cut; if it can cut, it cannot stab; it is not that the blade of the sword is not sharp, but that it cannot play two roles at the same time.

古文：蛢弹雀则失鷃，射鹊则失雁，方员画不俱成，左右视不并见，人材有两为，不能成一。
现代文：用蛢弹雀就不能同时弹■，用弓射鹊就不能同时射雁；方和圆不能同时都画成，眼睛向左右看不能同时两边都看见，一个人如果同时做两件事，结果一件事也做不成。
English: It is not possible to play the ping-pong at the same time. It is not possible to shoot the goose at the same time. It is not possible to draw a square and a circle at the same time. It is not possible to see both sides at the same time. If a person does two things at the same time, the result is that one thing cannot be done.

古文：使干将寡刺而更击，舍鹊而射雁，则下射无失矣。
现代文：如果干将不用来刺而改为砍，不用蛢射鹊而改为射雁，就一定能砍下来，一定能射中而不会失误了。
English: If the stem is changed from stabbing to cutting, and from shooting geese to shooting geese, it will definitely be able to cut it down, and it will definitely be able to hit it without making a mistake.

古文：人委其篇章，专为治，则子产、子贱之迹不足侔也。
现代文：人如果放弃他的写作，专心搞政治，那么子产和子贱的事迹就不值得一比了。
English: If a person abandons his writing and concentrates on politics, then the deeds of his progeny and inferiors are not worth comparing.

古文：古作书者，多立功不用也。
现代文：古代著书的人，很多都是能建立功业的人，只是没有受到重用。
English: Many of the ancient authors were people who were able to establish their careers, but they were not given much importance.

古文：管仲、晏婴，功书并作；商鞅、虞卿，篇治俱为。
现代文：管仲和晏婴，功业和著书都有所建树；商鞅和虞卿，文章和政治都有所成就。
English: Guanzhong and Zou Ying have made achievements in their work and writing; Shangyu and Yuqing have made achievements in writing and politics.

古文：高祖既得天下，马上之计未败，陆贾造《新语》，高祖粗纳采。
现代文：汉高祖得天下之后，使用武力治国的主张没有改变，陆贾写出《新语》，汉高祖大体都采用了。
English: After Henkel's ancestors came to power, the use of force to govern the country did not change. Lu Jia wrote "New Language," and Henkel's ancestors generally adopted it.

古文：吕氏横逆，刘氏将倾，非陆贾之策，帝室不宁。
现代文：吕氏阴谋篡权，刘氏的天下将要倾覆，如果不是陆贾的政策，汉家帝室就不会得安宁。
English: Lv's plot to usurp power, Liu's world will be overturned, if it were not for Lu Jia's policy, the Han imperial family would not have peace.

古文：盖材知无不能，在所遭遇，遇乱则知立功，有起则以其材著书者也。
现代文：有才智的人没有办不到的事情，关键在于他的遭遇如何，如果遇到乱世，就会去建立功业，有所感触，就会以他的才智从事著述。
English: There is nothing that a talented person cannot do. The key lies in how he has suffered. If he encounters a chaotic world, he will build a career. If he feels something, he will use his talent to write.

古文：出口为言，著文为篇。
现代文：说出口就是语言，写成字就是文章。
English: Speaking out is language, writing is writing.

古文：古以言为功者多，以文为败者希。
现代文：古代凭说话建功的人多，为写文章而遭受败家灭族的人极少。
English: In ancient times, there were many people who made achievements by speaking, but very few people suffered defeat and extermination for writing articles.

古文：吕不韦、淮南王以他为过，不以书有非，使客作书，不身自为；如不作书，犹蒙此章章之祸。人古今违属，未必皆著作材知极也。
现代文：吕不韦、淮南王是由于别的事而犯罪，不是因为著书才有罪的。让门客来写书，自己并不写，即使不写书，也仍然要蒙受灾祸，灾祸害人，从古至今接连不断，不一定都是在写作上才智穷尽了的人。
English: Lu Buwei and King Huainan committed crimes for other reasons, not because they wrote books. If they let their servants write books, they would not write themselves, and even if they did not write books, they would still suffer misfortunes. The misfortunes that have plagued people from ancient times to the present are not necessarily those who have exhausted their talents in writing.

古文：邹阳举疏，免罪於梁。徐乐上书，身拜郎中。
现代文：邹阳在狱中上书，被梁孝王免去了罪；徐乐给汉武帝上书，自己被拜为郎中。
English: Shenyang wrote a letter in prison and was pardoned by Liang Xiaowang; Xu Le wrote a letter to Emperor Hanwu and was worshipped as his son-in-law.

古文：材能以其文为功於人，何嫌不能营卫其身？
现代文：才智能以文章的形式有功于人，为什么要怀疑它不能保护自身呢？
English: If the intellect, in the form of an essay, is a credit to man, why should there be any doubt that it cannot protect itself?

古文：韩蚤信公子非，国不倾危。
现代文：韩王安如果早点听从公子韩非的意见，国家不会有倾覆的危险。
English: If Han Wangan had listened to the opinion of his son Han Fei earlier, the country would not be in danger of collapse.

古文：及非之死，李斯如奇，非以著作材极，不能复有为也。
现代文：至于韩非的死，是因为李斯嫉妒他才能出众，并不是由于他著书才智竭尽，不能在政治上再有作为的缘故。
English: As for Han Fei's death, it was because Li Si was jealous of his outstanding talent, not because he had exhausted his writing talent and could no longer do anything in politics.

古文：春物之伤，或死之也，残物不伤，秋亦不长。
现代文：春天植物受到伤害，有的因此而死了；有些被摧残过的植物如果不再受伤害，到秋天也会长大成熟。
English: Spring plants are damaged and some die as a result; some damaged plants will grow to maturity in the autumn if they are no longer damaged.

古文：假令非不死，秦未可知。
现代文：如果韩非不死的话，秦王朝的前途就很难说了。
English: If Han Fei does not die, the future of the Qin Dynasty is hard to say.

古文：故才人能令其行可尊，不能使人必法己；能令其言可行，不能使人必采取之矣。
现代文：所以有才学的人能够使自己的德行受人尊敬，却不能使别人必定效法自己；能够使自己的议论切实可行，却不能使别人必定采纳自己的主张。
English: The learned man, therefore, can make his virtue respectable, but he cannot make others imitate him; he can make his arguments practicable, but he cannot make others adopt his opinions.

古文：或曰： 古今作书者非一，各穿凿失经之实传，违圣人质，故谓之蕞残，比之玉屑。
现代文：有人说： 从古到今写书的人不止一个，各自牵强附会失去了经传的真实内容，违背了圣人的本质意义，所以称之为残缺之物，把它比作玉屑。
English: Some people said: From ancient times to the present, there has been more than one person who wrote books, and each person's far-fetched ideas have lost the true content of the scriptures and violated the essential meaning of the saints, so they call it a fragment and compare it to jade chips.

古文：故曰： 蕞残满车，不成为道；玉屑满箧，不成为宝。 
现代文：因此说： 残缺之物装满车，不能成为什么学说；玉屑装满箱子，不能成为什么宝物。 
English: Therefore it is said: A cart full of broken things cannot become a doctrine; a box full of jade shavings cannot become a treasure.

古文：前人近圣，犹为蕞残，况远圣从後复重为者乎？
现代文：前人最接近圣人，还被称为残缺之物，何况远离圣人随前人之后重新来写书的人呢？
English: The ancients are the closest to the saints, and are also called the remnants, not to mention those who are far from the saints and re-write the books after the ancients?

古文：其作必为妄，其言必不明，安可采用而施行？ 
现代文：他们的著作必定是愚妄的，他们的言论必定是不贤明的，怎么能够采用而用来施行呢？ 
English: Their writings must be foolish, their sayings must be unwise, how can they be adopted and put into practice?

古文：答曰：圣人作其经，贤者造其传，述作者之意，采圣人之志，故经须传也。
现代文：回答说：圣人写经，贤人作传，要阐述著书人的本意，采集圣人的遗志，所以经必须要有传来解释。
English: He replied, "A sage writes a sutra, and a wise man transcribes it. It is necessary to explain the original intention of the scribe and collect the last will and testament of the sage. Therefore, the sutra must be handed down and interpreted.

古文：俱贤所为，何以独谓经传是，他书记非？
现代文：都是贤人所写的，为什么偏认为经传是对的，而其他的书和记都不对呢？
English: They were all written by wise men, so why do they think that the Bible is right and all other books and records are wrong?

古文：彼见经传，传经之文，经须而解，故谓之是。
现代文：那些可以见到的经传以及解释经的文章，说明经必须要传才能解释清楚，所以说它们是对的。
English: The sutras and commentaries on the sutras that can be seen show that the sutras have to be transmitted in order to be explained clearly, so they are correct.

古文：他书与书相违，更造端绪，故谓之非。
现代文：其他书与传上的解释不相符合，别创一说，所以说它们不对。
English: Other books don't agree with the traditional explanation, so don't invent one and say they're wrong.

古文：若此者，韪是於《五经》。使言非《五经》，虽是不见听。
现代文：像这样的话，以五经作为是非标准，假如说的话不符合五经，即使完全正确，也不会被人听信。
English: In this case, the five sutras are used as the standard of right and wrong, and if what is said does not conform to the five sutras, even if it is completely correct, it will not be listened to.

古文：使《五经》从孔门出，到今常令人不缺灭，谓之纯壹，信之可也。
现代文：假使五经从孔子门中出来，至今毫无残缺散失，称得上是纯粹完整的东西，相信它是可以的。
English: If the Five Classics emerged from the door of Confucius, and have not been lost without a trace, and can be said to be a pure and complete thing, it is possible to believe it.

古文：今《五经》遭亡秦之奢侈，触李斯之横议，燔烧禁防，伏生之休，抱经深藏。
现代文：现在五经已经遭受了秦朝的糟踏，受到李斯主张的触犯，焚烧并禁止流传，伏生这类人，怀抱经书深藏在山中。
English: Now that the Five Classics have been trampled on by the Qin Dynasty and violated by Li Si's advocates, burned and forbidden to circulate, people like Fuxiong have embraced the scriptures and hidden them deep in the mountains.

古文：汉兴，收《五经》，经书缺灭而不明，篇章弃散而不具。
现代文：汉朝兴起，征收五经，经书残缺散失而下落不明，篇章亡佚散失而不完备。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty led to the confiscation of the Five Classics, and the whereabouts of the incomplete sutras were unknown.

古文：晁错之辈，各以私意分拆文字，师徒相因相授，不知何者为是。
现代文：晁错这类人，各按自己的想法，分割拆散文字的本意，师徒相继沿袭传授，不知道哪一个是对的。
English: Such people, each according to their own ideas, divide and separate the original meaning of the text, and pass it down from teacher to student, not knowing which one is right.

古文：亡秦无道，败乱之也。
现代文：秦朝无道义，所以就败乱了。
English: The Qin Dynasty had no morals, so it fell into chaos.

古文：秦虽无道，不燔诸子。
现代文：秦朝即使无道，并没有烧诸子的著作。
English: The Qin Dynasty did not burn the works of their sons, even though they were wicked.

古文：诸子尺书，文篇具在，可观读以正说，可采掇以示後人。
现代文：诸子的著作，文章篇目全都存在，可以阅读用来纠正各种言论，可以拿来给后人看。
English: All of his works and articles exist, and they can be read and used to correct all kinds of remarks, and they can be shown to future generations.

古文：後人复作，犹前人之造也。
现代文：后人重新写书，就和前人创作一样。
English: Later generations rewrite books, just as their predecessors did.

古文：夫俱鸿而知，皆传记所称，文义与经相薄。何以独谓文书失经之实？
现代文：都博学而有智慧，全是史书所称道的，文义与经书不相上下，为什么单认为诸子的著作偏离了经书的真实呢？
English: All of them are erudite and wise, all of them are praised by the history books, and the literary meaning is on a par with the scriptures. Why do you think that the writings of the sons alone deviate from the truth of the scriptures?

古文：由此言之，经缺而不完，书无佚本，经有遗篇。
现代文：由此说来，经书残缺而不完整，诸子百家的书没有散失不全的，而经书反而有遗失的篇目。
English: Therefore, the sutras are incomplete and incomplete, and the books of the hundreds of scholars are not incomplete, but the sutras have lost chapters.

古文：折累二者，孰与蕞残？
现代文：分析比较二者，谁是支离破碎的呢？
English: Analysis Comparing the two, who is fragmented?

古文：《易》据事象，《诗》采民以为篇，《乐》须欢，《礼》待民平。
现代文：《易》是根据事物的表象写成的，《诗》是向民间采集而编辑成篇的，《乐》的成书有赖于老百姓的欢愉，《礼》的成文全靠老百姓安乐讲礼节。
English: "Yi" was written based on the appearance of things, "Poem" was collected from the people and edited into a book, "Le" was written based on the joy of the people, and "Li" was written based on the people's happiness and etiquette.

古文：四经有据，篇章乃成。
现代文：四经都有所依据，它的篇章才能写成。
English: The four sutras all have a basis, and only then can their chapters be written.

古文：《尚书》、《春秋》，采掇史记。
现代文：《尚书》和《春秋》，采取了史官的记载。
English: "Shangshu" and "Chunqiu" adopted the records of historians.

古文：史记兴无异，以民事一意，《六经》之作皆有据。
现代文：史官的记载与诸子的著作没有区别，与依据百姓和事象写成的经书是同一个道理。六经的写作全都有所依据。
English: There is no difference between the records of historians and the writings of the sons of men, and it is the same principle as the scriptures written on the basis of people and events. The writing of the Six Classics all have a basis.

古文：由此言之，书亦为本，经亦为末，末失事实，本得道质。
现代文：由此说来，诸子的书是根本，经书则是枝节，枝节偏离了事实，根本却具备了道的实质。
English: Therefore, the sons' books are the foundation, and the scriptures are the branches. The branches deviate from the truth, but the foundation has the essence of the Way.

古文：折累二者，孰为玉屑？
现代文：分析比较二者，谁才是玉屑呢？
English: Analysis and comparison of the two, who is jade chips?

古文：知屋漏者在宇下，知政失者在草野，知经误者在诸子。
现代文：知道房屋漏雨的人在房屋下，知道政治有失误的人在民间，知道经书错误的人在诸子。
English: Those who know that the house leaks are under the house, those who know that there are mistakes in politics are in the people, and those who know that the scriptures are wrong are in the sons.

古文：诸子尺书，文明实是。
现代文：诸子的著述，文句明白，事情真实。
English: Yu Zi's writings, the words are clear, the things are true.

古文：说章句者，终不求解扣明，师师相传，初为章句者，非通览之人也。
现代文：解释经书章句的人不想求得彻底地理解而去问个一清二楚，一代代师承下去，仍就如此解释经书章句的人，就不会是通晓古今的人。
English: The person who interprets a passage of scripture does not want to seek a thorough understanding, but to ask for a clear understanding. The person who interprets a passage of scripture in the same way from generation to generation will not be a person who knows the past and the present.

