古文：汤将放桀于中野，士民闻汤在野，皆委货扶老携幼奔，国中虚。
现代文：商汤放桀以前，住在郊野之中。夏桀的士民百姓听说汤在郊野，纷纷丢弃财物，扶老携幼投奔他，夏桀都城变得空虚无人。
English: Shangtang lived in the countryside before he was released. When the people of Shiyan heard that Shangtang was in the countryside, they abandoned their belongings in droves and took their children with them. Shangtang's capital city became empty and deserted.

古文：桀请汤曰： 国所以为国者，以有家；家所以为家者，以有人也。
现代文：夏桀请求商汤说： 国之所以是国，因为有家；家之所以是家，因为有人。
English: Xia Yao asked Shang Tang to say: A country is a country because it has a family; a family is a family because it has people.

古文：今国无家无人矣，君有人，请致国君之有也。 
现代文：现今我国中无家，家中无人了。您有了人，让我把国交给您，归您所有啊。
English: Now there is no home in our country, there is no one at home. If you have someone, let me give the country to you, it belongs to you.

古文：汤曰： 否。
现代文：商汤说： 不!
English: Tang said: No.

古文：昔大帝作道，明教士民。
现代文：从前大帝禹制定大法，公开教化士民百姓。
English: Once upon a time, the Great Emperor Yu formulated the Great Law and publicly taught it to the common people.

古文：今君王灭道残政，士民惑矣，吾为王明之。 
现代文：今君王毁灭大法，伤害国政，士民百姓迷惑了。我替君王开导他们。 
English: Now the king is destroying Dafa, harming the country's politics, and confusing the scholars and the people. I will enlighten them for the king.

古文：士民复致于桀，曰： 以薄之居，济民之贱，何必君更？ 
现代文：士民百姓只好又回到夏桀那里，说道： 我们以亳地的汤为君王，补充那里百姓的不足，何必又调换桀为君王呢!  
English: The nobles, the people, and the people had to go back to Harran and say: We have made the soup of the ploughlands our king, to supply the lack of the people there. Why should we change the plough for a king?

古文：桀与其属五百人南徙千里，止于不齐，民往奔汤于中野。
现代文：夏桀与其下属五百人向南迁徙一千里，停在不齐。不齐的士民百姓又奔往商汤居住的郊野之中。
English: Xia Yao and his 500 subordinates migrated a thousand miles to the south and stopped at Jizhi. The Jizhi people also rushed to the countryside where Shangtang lived.

古文：桀复请汤，言： 君之有也。 
现代文：桀又请求商汤，说： 国家归您有啊! 
English: Zou also asked Shang Tang, saying: The country belongs to you!

古文：汤曰： 否。
现代文：汤说： 不。
English: Tang said: No.

古文：无为君王明之，士民复重请之。 
现代文：我替君王开导他们。 齐地士民听从商汤回到齐地，再次请求夏桀让国给商汤。
English: I enlightened them on behalf of the king. The people of Qi obeyed Shangtang and returned to Qi, and again asked Xia Yao to cede the country to Shangtang.

古文：桀与其属五百人徙于鲁，鲁士民复奔汤。
现代文：夏桀与其下属五百人迁移到鲁，鲁地士民百姓又投奔商汤。
English: Xia Yao and his 500 subordinates migrated to Lu, and the people of Lu went to Shangtang.

古文：桀又曰： 国君之有也，吾则外。
现代文：夏桀又向商汤请求说： 国家归您有啊!百姓视我是外人。
English: Xia Yao also pleaded with Shang Tang, saying: The country belongs to you! The people regard me as a foreigner.

古文：人有言，彼以吾道是邪，我将为之。 
现代文：有人说， 只有他们认为我的道理对，我才能继续干。 
English: Some say I can only stay on if they think I've got the right stuff.

古文：汤曰： 此君王之士也，君王之民也，委之何？ 
现代文：商汤说： 这些都是君王的士民，君王的百姓，抛弃他们干什么? 
English: Shang Tang said: These are the king's officials and people, the king's people, why abandon them?

古文：汤不能止桀。
现代文：商汤最终不能帮助夏桀停下来。
English: In the end, the soup couldn't help Xia Yao to stop.

古文：汤曰： 欲从者，从君。 
现代文：汤说： 想随君王的随君王! 
English: Tang said, "If you want to follow the king, follow the king!"

古文：桀与其属五百人去居南巢。
现代文：夏桀与其下属五百人就离开了鲁，住在南巢这个地方。
English: Xia Yao and his 500 subordinates left Lu and settled in Nanchao.

古文：汤放桀，而复薄三千诸侯大会，汤退，再拜，从诸侯之位。
现代文：汤放逐夏桀以后回到亳都，约集三千诸侯大聚会。汤取来天子的印玺，放在天子座位的左边。
English: After releasing and expelling Xia Zi, Tang returned to Shidu and gathered a large gathering of about three thousand princes. Tang took the seal of Tianzi and placed it on the left side of Tianzi's seat.

古文：汤曰： 此太子位，有道者可以处之，天下非一家之有也，有道者之有也。
现代文：商汤退下，两拜行礼，然后到诸侯的位次上。商汤说： 这是天子的位置，有道的人可以坐上去。天下，不是一家独有的，而是有道的人所有的。
English: Shang Tang retreated, bowed twice, and then went to the position of the princes. Shang Tang said: This is the position of the Son of Heaven, and people with the Way can sit on it. The world is not exclusive to one family, but is owned by people with the Way.

古文：故天下者，唯有道者理之，唯有道者纪之，唯有道者宜久处之。 
现代文：所以，天下只有有道者治理它，只有有道者经纪它，只有有道者应该长久占有它。 
English: Therefore, only a virtuous person should govern it, only a virtuous person should broker it, and only a virtuous person should possess it for a long time.

古文：汤以此让，三千诸侯莫敢即位，然后汤即天子之位。
现代文：汤因此多次推让，三千诸侯没有谁敢去即位，然后商汤才坐到天子的位置上。
English: As a result, Tang conceded many times, and none of the three thousand lords dared to ascend the throne, and then Shang Tang sat in the position of the son of heaven.

古文：与诸侯誓曰： 阴胜阳即谓之变，而天弗施。雌胜雄即谓之乱，而人弗行。 
现代文：还与众诸侯相约束说： 阴胜阳，就叫做变，一变上天就不佑助；雌胜雄就叫做乱，一乱人们就不依从。
English: He also put the princes in their place, saying, "When the yin conquers the yang, it is called a change, and when there is a change, heaven does not help; when the female conquers the male, it is called a disturbance, and when there is a disturbance, people do not obey."

古文：故诸侯之治，政在诸侯之大夫，治与从。
现代文：所以诸侯治理国政，在于他的大夫的受治与顺从。 
English: Therefore, the governance of state affairs by the lords depends on the acceptance and obedience of his doctor.

