古文：武王问太公曰： 引兵深入诸侯之地，与敌相守，敌人绝我粮道，又越我前后，吾欲战则不可胜，欲守则不可久，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问太公说： 率领军队深人敌国境内，与敌军对峙抗衡，这时敌人截断了我军运输粮食的通道，并迂回到我军后方，从前后两方面夹击我军。我军想要进攻又不能胜利，要防守又不能长久。这种情况应该怎么做呢？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "You led an army deep into enemy territory and confronted the enemy army. At this time, the enemy cut off our army's channel for transporting grain and made a detour to our army's rear, clamping down on our army from both sides. If our army wants to attack, it can't win, and if it wants to defend, it can't last long. What should we do in this situation?"

古文：太公曰： 凡深入敌人之境，必察地之形势，务求便利，依山林、险阻、水泉、林木而为之固，谨守关梁，又知城邑、丘墓地形之利，如是，则我军坚固，敌人不能绝我粮道，又不能越我前后。 
现代文：太公答道： 凡是深入敌国境内作战，一定要观察清楚地理形势，务必占据控制有利地形，依托山林、险阻、水泉，林木以求得阵势的巩固，谨慎严密守卫关隘桥梁，对城邑、坟墓等地形的便利也应了然于心。这样，我军防守就坚不可摧，敌人既不能截断我军粮道，又无法迂回到我军后方，从前后两面夹击我军了。 
English: Taigong replied, "Whenever you fight deep into the enemy's territory, you must observe the geographical situation clearly, occupy and control favorable terrain, rely on mountains, forests, obstacles, springs, and trees to consolidate your position, carefully guard narrow bridges, and be aware of the convenience of towns, tombs, and other terrain. In this way, our army's defense is indestructible. The enemy can neither cut off our army's food supply, nor can it return to our army's rear and attack our army from both sides.

古文：武王曰： 吾三军过大林、广泽、平易之地，吾盟望误失，卒与敌人相薄，以战则不胜以守则不固，敌人翼我两旁，越我前后，三军大恐为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王又问： 我方军队通过高大的山林、宽阔的沼泽地及平坦的地形时，约定到达的盟军误时未至，突然又遭遇敌军，我想要进攻又害怕不能胜利，想要防守又担心不能巩固，这时敌人又从两旁包抄过来，将我军围困住，又迂回到我军深远后方实施夹击，于是我军大为恐惧。遇上这种情况，应该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu also asked: When our army was passing through the tall mountain forests, wide marshlands and flat terrain, the allied forces that were scheduled to arrive were late, and suddenly they encountered the enemy forces. I wanted to attack but was afraid of not being able to win, I wanted to defend but was afraid of not being able to consolidate. At this time, the enemy encircled our army from both sides, trapped our army, and circled back to the far rear of our army to carry out a pincer attack, so our army was very afraid. In this situation, what should we do?

古文：太公曰： 凡帅师之法，当先发远候，去敌二百里，神知敌人所在，地势不利，则以武冲为垒而前，又置两踵军于后，远者百里，近者五十里，既有警急，前后相就。
现代文：太公回答道： 大凡统军作战的方法，应当事先派侦察人员，在距离敌人二百里的地方，详细了解敌人所在的位置。如果地形对我军行动不利，就用武冲车结成营垒向前推进，并派出两支后卫部队紧随其后，后卫部队和主力的间隔可达百里，近的五十里。一旦遇上突发情况，以便前后互相救援。
English: The father-in-law replied: According to the method of fighting of the great unified army, reconnaissance personnel should be sent in advance to a place 200 miles away from the enemy to get a detailed understanding of the location of the enemy. If the terrain is unfavorable for the operation of our army, we will use armored vehicles to form a camp to advance, and send two rearguard troops to follow closely. The distance between the rearguard troops and the main force can reach 100 miles, nearly 50 miles. In the event of an emergency, in order to rescue each other.

古文：吾三军常完坚，必无毁伤。 武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：我军如能经常保持这种完善而坚固的部署，就一定不会遭受伤亡和失败了。 武王说： 讲得真好啊！ 
English: If our army can always maintain this perfect and solid deployment, it will certainly not suffer casualties and defeat.Wu Wang said: That's really good!

