古文：萧韩家奴，字休坚，涅剌部人，中书令安抟之孙。
现代文：萧韩家奴，字休坚，涅剌部人，中书令萧安抟之孙。
English: Xiao Han's manservant, surnamed Xiu Jian, was a member of the Nirvana Club, and was the grandson of the Chinese scholar Xiao Anjun.

古文：少好学，弱冠入南山读书，博览经史，通辽、汉文字。
现代文：少年时好学，成年后到南山读书，博览经史，通晓辽、汉文字。
English: When he was a boy, he was eager to learn, and when he became an adult, he went to Nanshan to study. He was well versed in the history of scripture, and was familiar with Liao and Chinese characters.

古文：统和十四年始仕。
现代文：统和十四年开始出任官职。
English: He has been in office for 14 years.

古文：家有一牛，不任驱策，其奴得善价鬻之。
现代文：家中有一头牛，不听使唤，其奴仆得到好价钱将它卖了。
English: There was a cow in the house, which did not obey the call of the oxen, and the servants sold it for a good price.

古文：韩家奴曰： 利己误人，非吾所欲。 
现代文：韩家奴说： 自己得利，让别人受害，我不能这么做。 
English: Han Jia Nong said, "I can't do this to benefit myself and make others suffer.

古文：乃归直取牛。
现代文：便退了钱取回了牛。
English: He returned the money and retrieved the cow.

古文：二十八年，为右通进，典南京栗园。
现代文：二十八年，为右通进，主管南京栗园。
English: In 1928, he became the director of the Nanjing Chestnut Orchard.

古文：重熙初，同知三司使事。
现代文：重熙初年，同知三司使事。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, Tongzhi Sanji was dispatched.

古文：四年，迁天成军节度使，徙彰愍宫使。
现代文：四年，迁天成军节度使，徙为彰愍宫使。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to be the military envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and later became the envoy to the Zhangye Palace.

古文：帝与语，才之，命为诗友。
现代文：皇上跟他交谈，觉得他有才，让他做个诗友。
English: The emperor talked to him, thought he was talented, and asked him to be his poet friend.

古文：尝从容问曰： 卿居外有异闻乎？ 
现代文：曾经从容地问他 ：你在京外做官有特别的见闻吗？ 
English: I once calmly asked him: Did you have any special experience working as an official outside of Beijing?

古文：韩家奴对曰： 臣惟知炒栗：小者熟，则大者必生；大者熟，则小者必焦。
现代文：韩家奴说 ：臣仅仅只知炒栗子：小的熟了，那么大的一定是生的；大的熟了，则小的一定焦了。
English: Han Jiayu said, "The minister only knows fried chestnuts: if the small ones are ripe, then the big ones must be raw; if the big ones are ripe, then the small ones must be burnt."

古文：使大小均熟，始为尽美。
现代文：要让大栗小栗都熟，这才是尽善尽美。
English: To make both large chestnuts and small chestnuts ripe, this is the best.

古文：不知其他。 
现代文：别的事我就不知道了。 
English: I don't know about anything else.

古文：盖尝掌栗园，故托栗以讽谏。
现代文：因为曾掌管栗园，所以借炒栗之事讽谏。
English: Because he had been in charge of the chestnut orchard, he made a joke about stir-fried chestnuts.

古文：帝大笑。
现代文：皇上大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：诏作《四时逸乐赋》，帝称善。
现代文：诏令做《四时逸乐赋》，皇上夸奖他做的好。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to compose the "Four-Hour Symphony," and the emperor praised him for his work.

古文：时诏天下言治道之要，制问： 徭役不加于旧，征伐亦不常有，年谷既登，帑廪既实，而民重困，岂为吏者慢、为民者惰欤？
现代文：当时诏令天下陈说治国之道的关键，制问： 徭役不曾比从前增加，征伐之事也不常有，谷子丰收了，府库仓廪也充实了，然而百姓受到重重困扰，难道是做官的怠慢疏忽，做百姓的懒惰吗？
English: At that time, the emperor ordered the world to present the key to the way of governing the country, and to ask: Hasn't the number of officials increased more than before, isn't the number of conquests frequent, has the grain harvest been plentiful, has the treasury been enriched, but the people have been plagued by many troubles? Is it the negligence of officials and the laziness of the people?

古文：今之徭役何者最重？
现代文：现在的徭役哪一种最重？
English: Which of the current roles is the most difficult?

古文：何者尤苦？
现代文：哪一种尤其烦苦？
English: Which one is particularly troublesome?

古文：何所蠲省则为便益？
现代文：将哪一项减省则能得益？
English: Which of these savings would you benefit from reducing?

古文：补役之法何可以复？
现代文：用什么办法可以恢复补役之法？
English: By what means can the law of compensation be restored?

古文：盗贼之何害可以止？ 
现代文：用什么办法可以防止盗贼的蠹害？ 
English: What can be done to prevent thieves from causing damage?

古文：韩家奴对曰：
现代文：韩家奴回答说：
English: Han Jia Rong replied:

古文：臣伏见比年以来，高丽未宾，阻卜犹强，战守之备，诚不容已。
现代文： 臣伏见近年以来，高丽不曾宾服，阻卜仍然强大，备战防守之举，实在不能停止。
English: In recent years, Goryeo has not been a guest, the obstruction is still strong, and the preparation and defense cannot be stopped.

古文：乃者选富民防边，自备粮糗。
现代文：前者选派富民防边，自备粮草。
English: The former chose to send rich people to defend the border and prepare their own grain and grass.

古文：道路修阻，动淹岁月；比至屯所，费已过半；只牛单毂，鲜有还者。
现代文：道路甚远，又多险阻，动辄积年累月；等到到达屯所，费用已用去过半；一头牛一驾车，只见人去，很少有回来的。
English: The road is far, and there are many dangers and obstacles. Cattle are accumulated over the years. By the time they reach the camp, half of the cost has already been spent. When driving a cow, they only see people go, and few come back.

古文：其无丁之家，倍直佣僦，人惮其劳，半途亡窜，故戍卒之食多不能给。
现代文：没有男丁的家庭，要用两倍的耗费去雇人租车，人们都害怕劳苦，半途逃亡，所以戍卒的军粮多数不能得到供应。
English: It costs twice as much to hire a car for a family without a male child, and people are afraid of hard work and flee halfway, so most of the soldiers' rations cannot be supplied.

古文：求假于人，则十倍其息，至有鬻子割田不能偿者。
现代文：向人借贷，那么要附加的利息之高，以至于有卖儿子、割让田地而不能偿还者。
English: If you borrow money from someone, the interest rate is so high that you may have to sell your son or give up your land to pay it back.

古文：或逋役不归，在军物故，则复补以少壮。
现代文：有的逃役不回，有的在军中死去，那么就以少壮之人补充。
English: Some deserters do not return, some die in the army, so they are supplemented by young and strong people.

古文：其鸭渌江之东，戍役大率如此。
现代文：在鸭绿江以东，戍役情况大抵如此。
English: In the east of the Yalu River, this is generally the case.

古文：况渤海、女直、高丽合从连衡，不时征讨。
现代文：况且又有渤海、女真、高丽的合纵连横，以至于不时要去征讨。
English: What's more, Bohai, Jurchen, and Goryeo are so close to each other that they have to be fought over from time to time.

古文：富者从军，贫者侦候。
现代文：富家从军，贫穷的人当探子。
English: The rich man is a soldier, the poor man a scout.

古文：加之水旱，菽粟不登，民以日困。
现代文：加上又有水灾旱灾，大豆和谷子歉收，百姓因此日益困苦。
English: In addition, there are floods, droughts, and poor harvests of soybeans and millet, so the people are increasingly suffering.

古文：盖势使之然也。
现代文：这大概要算是外部条件造成他们这样的了。
English: It's probably the external conditions that have made them this way.

古文：方今最重之役，无过西戍。
现代文： 当今最重之役，无过于西戍。
English: Today's most important role is none other than Xi Xi.

古文：如无西戍，虽遇凶年，困弊不至于此。
现代文：如果没有西戍，即使遇上不好的年成，百姓之贫困凋敝也不至于如此。
English: If there is no zucchini, even if there is a bad harvest, the poverty of the people will not be so bad.

古文：若能徙西戍稍近，则往来不劳，民无深患。
现代文：如果能将西戍驻所稍稍移近，那么往来不再劳顿，百姓也就没有过于深重的痛苦。
English: If the Xidi garrison can be moved a little closer, then there will be no more toil and the people will not suffer too much.

古文：议者谓徙之非便：一则损威名，二则召侵侮，三则弃耕牧之地。
现代文：有人说迁西戍不方便：一是自损威名，二是招致侵凌侮辱，三是得放弃农耕放牧之地。
English: Some people say that it is inconvenient to move to Xidi: on the one hand, it is a loss of prestige, on the other hand, it is an insult, and on the third hand, it is necessary to give up the land for farming and grazing.

古文：臣谓不然。
现代文：我认为不是这样。
English: I don't think so.

古文：阻卜诸部，自来有之。
现代文：阻卜各部，自古就有。
English: Obstruction of all parts, since ancient times.

古文：曩时北至胪朐河，南至边境，人多散居，无所统壹，惟往来抄掠。
现代文：早先北至胪朐河，南至边境，众人多是散居，未能统一，只是往来抢劫。
English: In the early days, from the north to the Li River and from the south to the border, most people were scattered, unable to unite, and only robbed each other.

古文：及太祖西征，至于流沙，阻卜望风悉降，西域诸国皆愿入贡。
现代文：待到太祖西征，直到流沙，阻卜见势纷纷降附，西域各国也愿意前来朝贡。
English: Wait until the Western Expedition of Taizu, until the shifting sands, the obstacles have been reduced, and the countries in the western region are also willing to come to pay tribute.

古文：因迁种落，内置三部，以益吾国，不营城邑，不置戍兵，阻卜累世不敢为寇。
现代文：于是离散其种群部落，于内置三部，以增益我国，不造城邑，不设戍兵，阻卜累世不敢侵扰。
English: As a result, its population tribes were dispersed, and three were built in order to benefit our country. They did not build towns, did not set up troops, and did not dare to intrude.

古文：统和间，王太妃出师西域，拓土既远，降附亦众。
现代文：统和年间，皇太妃出师西域，开拓疆土甚远，降附的人也多。
English: During the Unification Era, Empress Dowager Cixi went to the Western Regions to expand the territory far and wide, and many people joined her.

古文：自后一部或叛，邻部讨之，使同力相制，正得驭远人之道。
现代文：这以后如果一部反叛，邻部讨伐之，使得互相制约，正得驾驭远人之良法。
English: After this, if one side rebels and the neighboring side fights against it, it will cause mutual restraint, and it is necessary to control the good law of the distant people.

古文：及城可敦，开境数千里，西北之民，徭役日增，生业日殚。
现代文：及至建可敦城，开拓疆土数千里，西北的百姓，徭役一天比一天增多，生计产业日益穷乏。
English: As far as the construction of Kedun City and the development of thousands of miles of territory, the people in the northwest are increasing day by day, and the livelihood industry is becoming increasingly scarce.

古文：警急既不能救，叛服亦复不恒。
现代文：有警报急事已不能相救，叛服不常的现象就出现了。
English: If there is an alarm and the emergency can no longer be averted, the unusual phenomenon of defection will occur.

古文：空有广地之名，而无得地之实。
现代文：空有土地广漠之名，而没有得地之实惠。
English: Empty land has the reputation of vastness and desolation, but there is no real benefit of land acquisition.

古文：若贪土不已，渐至虚耗，其患有不胜言者。
现代文：如果贪恋土地而无止境，渐渐便会空耗人力物力，其危害真是不敢想象。
English: If the craving for land is endless, it will gradually consume manpower and material resources, and its harm is really unimaginable.

古文：况边情不可深信，亦不可顿绝。
现代文：况且边关之实情不值得过分仰赖，又不能一下子飞渡至彼。
English: Moreover, the reality of the border is not worth relying on too much, and you can't fly to him all at once.

古文：得不为益，舍不为损。
现代文：得到它算不上得到了好处，舍弃它也说不上损失了什么。
English: It is not a gain to get it, and it is not a loss to give it up.

古文：国家大敌，惟在南方。
现代文：国家之大敌，独在于南方。
English: The country's greatest enemy lies solely in the south.

古文：今虽连和，难保他日。
现代文：现在尽管与之讲和，难保将来。
English: Even if we make peace with them now, it will be difficult to do so in the future.

古文：若南方有变，屯戍辽邈，卒难赴援。
现代文：如果南方有变故，屯戍之所过于遥远，仓猝间难以赶去增援。
English: If there is a change in the south, the camp is too far away, and it is difficult to rush to reinforcements in a hurry.

古文：我进则敌退，我还则敌来，不可不虑也。
现代文：我进则敌退，我收兵则敌又来，不可不虑。
English: If I advance, the enemy will retreat; if I withdraw, the enemy will advance again.

古文：方今太平已久，正可恩结诸部，释罪而归地，内徙戍兵以增堡障，外明约束以正疆界。
现代文：现下太平已久，正可以恩义交结诸部，释免其罪，退还其地，将戍兵内徙以增强堡垒屏障，对外申明规约以稳定疆界。
English: Now that the country has been at peace for a long time, it is possible to reach out to various ministries, absolve them of their sins, return them to their land, move the soldiers inside to strengthen the fortress barrier, and declare the statute to the outside world to stabilize the border.

古文：每部各置酋长，岁修职贡。
现代文：每部各立一酋长，使每年修治职贡。
English: Each department shall set up a chief to collect the annual administrative fee.

古文：叛则讨之，服则抚之。
现代文：反叛则讨伐之，顺服则慰抚之。
English: To rebel is to fight, to obey is to be comforted.

古文：诸部既安，必不生衅。
现代文：诸部安定之后，必然不会生事。
English: After the various departments are stabilized, there will inevitably be no trouble.

古文：如是，则臣虽不能保其久而无变，知其必不深入侵掠也。
现代文：这样的话，则我尽管不能保证他们长期不出变乱，然而知道他们一定不会深入我内地来侵扰掠夺。
English: In this case, although I cannot guarantee that they will not cause turmoil for a long time, I know that they will not invade and plunder our inland.

古文：或云弃地则损威，殊不知殚费竭财，以贪无用之地，使彼小部抗衡大国，万一有败，损威岂浅？
现代文：有人说，弃地就会损威。殊不知耗尽钱财，贪求得到无用之土地，造成对方一个小部落就能与我大国相抗衡，万一作战获败，那损威还会浅吗？
English: Some people say that abandoning the land will cause a loss of prestige. After all, we have exhausted money and coveted useless land, causing a small tribe on the other side to be able to compete with our big country. In the event that the battle is defeated, will that loss of prestige be shallow?

古文：或又云，沃壤不可遽弃。臣以为土虽沃，民不能久居，一旦敌来，则不免内徙，岂可指为吾土而惜之？
现代文：又有人说，肥沃之土不可轻易放弃，臣以为土地尽管肥沃，而百姓不能长期居住，一旦敌人来了，则免不了还要向内迁徙，怎么能就把它定为我国的土地而怜惜不舍呢？
English: It was also said that the fertile land should not be given up easily. The vassal thought that although the land was fertile, the people could not live there for a long time. Once the enemy came, they would inevitably migrate inward. How could it be determined to be the land of our country and be spared?

古文：夫帑廪虽随部而有，此特周急部民，一偏之惠，不能均济天下。
现代文： 大凡金库粮仓，尽管各部都有，这只不过是在有限范围内权且周济部民的小恩惠，并不能同时救济天下。
English: The great treasury and granary, although all ministries have them, are only a small boon for those who have power within a limited scope and help their subordinates. They cannot help the whole world at the same time.

古文：如欲均济天下，则当知民困之由，而窒其隙。
现代文：如要同时周济天下，那么应该了解百姓困苦之原由，从而堵塞这些漏洞。
English: If we want to help the world at the same time, then we should understand the reasons for people's hardships, and thus plug these loopholes.

古文：节盘游，简驿传，薄赋敛，戒奢侈。
现代文：节制娱乐游逸，简省驿传数目，减轻赋敛，力戒奢侈。
English: Moderation of entertainment and leisure, simplification of the number of guests, reduction of extravagance, and avoidance of extravagance.

古文：期以数年，则困者可苏，贫者可富矣。
现代文：以数年相期，则困苦无赖之人可望过得顺当，贫穷的人可望变富。
English: In the course of a few years, the wretched scoundrel may hope to live well, and the poor man may hope to become rich.

古文：盖民者国之本，兵者国之卫。
现代文：大抵百姓乃是国之根本，军队乃是国之卫士。
English: Most of the time, the people are the foundation of the country, and the army is the guardian of the country.

古文：兵不调则旷军役，调之则损国本。
现代文：兵不加征发则荒废了军役，征发则又有损国本。
English: If soldiers are not conscripted, the military service will be wasted, and if they are conscripted, the country will be damaged.

古文：且诸部皆有补役之法。
现代文：况且各部均有补役之法。
English: Moreover, each department has its own way of filling vacancies.

古文：昔补役始行，居者行者，类皆富实，故累世从戍，易为更代。
现代文：从前补役法初行时，居家者、出征者一样都能富贵，所以累世从军戍守，易于加以替换。
English: In the past, when the Supplementary Service Law was first implemented, both those who stayed at home and those who went to the front could be wealthy, so it was easy to replace those who had served in the military for many years.

古文：近岁边虞数起，民多匮乏，既不任役事，随补随缺。
现代文：近年边境发生变乱，百姓大多贫乏，已不能忍受役事，则随时补员随时逃役以致最终缺员。
English: In recent years, border turmoil has occurred, most of the people are poor and can no longer endure service, so they are always replenished at any time and escape from service at any time, resulting in a shortage of personnel.

古文：苟无上户，则中户当之。
现代文：假如没有上等户，则由中等户承担之。
English: If there is no upper-class household, it will be borne by the middle-class household.

古文：旷日弥年，其穷益甚，所以取代为艰也。
现代文：旷日持久，经年累月，剩下的人是越来越贫穷，所以取贫代富十分困难。
English: Prolonged, over the years, the remaining people are getting poorer and poorer, so it is very difficult to take poverty and replace it with wealth.

古文：非惟补役如此，在边戍兵亦然。
现代文：不仅补役如此，在边之戍兵也是这样。
English: This is true not only of the reserve, but also of the soldiers on the sidelines.

古文：譬如一杯之土，岂能填寻丈之壑！
现代文：好比一捧土，岂能填平寻丈之深壑！
English: As if a handful of earth could fill the depth of a ditch!

古文：欲为长久之便，莫若使远戍疲兵还于故乡，薄其徭役，使人人给足，则补役之道可以复故也。
现代文：要想做到长久的便利，不如使在远方戍守的疲兵都回到故乡，减轻其徭役，使人人自给自足，则补役之法可以恢复如常。
English: If you want to achieve long-term convenience, it is better to make the exhausted soldiers who are stationed far away return to their hometowns, reduce their labor service, and make everyone self-sufficient. Then the method of supplementary service can be restored as usual.

古文：臣又闻，自昔有国家者，不能无盗。
现代文： 我又听说，自古以来统治国家的人，都不能做到国中没有盗贼。
English: I also heard that those who have been ruling the country since ancient times cannot make sure that there are no thieves in the country.

古文：比年以来，群黎凋弊，利于剽窃，良民往往化为凶暴。
现代文：近年以来，众生凋敝，行抢劫偷盗之事却很方便，良民往往变为凶人暴徒。
English: In recent years, all living beings have become withered, but it is very convenient to rob and steal, and good people often turn into murderous thugs.

古文：甚者杀人无忌，至有亡命山泽，基乱首祸。
现代文：更有甚者杀人无忌，甚至亡命于山泽之中，倡导肇乱，祸及百姓。
English: What's more, there are those who kill without remorse, and even go into exile in the mountains and lakes, advocating chaos and bringing disaster to the people.

古文：所谓民以困穷，皆为盗贼者，诚如圣虑。
现代文：所谓百姓因为穷困，都变成了盗贼，这正如皇上所担心的。
English: The so-called common people have become thieves because of their poverty, just as the emperor feared.

古文：今欲芟夷本根，愿陛下轻徭省役，使民务农。
现代文：现在要想铲除盗根，希望陛下轻徭省役，使百姓专事农耕。
English: Now, if we want to eradicate the roots of banditry, I hope that His Majesty will make light of the provincial service and make the people specialize in farming.

古文：衣食既足，安习教化，而重犯法，则民趋礼义，刑罚罕用矣。
现代文：衣食既已充足，安适、习惯于礼义教化，从而不轻于犯法，那么百姓对于礼义趋之若鹜，刑罚很少有机会动用了。
English: As long as food and clothing are sufficient, people are comfortable, and they are accustomed to being educated in etiquette and righteousness, which is no less than breaking the law, then the people are eager for etiquette and righteousness, and punishments rarely have a chance to be used.

古文：臣闻唐太宗问群臣治盗之方，皆曰： 严刑峻法。 
现代文：我听说唐太宗向群臣请问治盗之方，都说： 严刑峻法。 
English: I heard that when Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty asked his courtiers for advice on how to deal with thieves, they all said "severe punishment and stern law."

古文：太宗笑曰： 寇盗所以滋者，由赋敛无度，民不聊生。
现代文：太宗笑着说： 盗贼之所以滋生，是因为无限制地征收赋税，以致民不聊生。
English: Taizong said with a smile: The reason why thieves breed is because of the unlimited collection of taxes, so that people do not have enough to live on.

古文：今朕内省嗜欲，外罢游幸，使海内安静，则寇盗自止。 
现代文：现在我在内节制嗜欲，在外停止巡游，使天下安静，那么盗贼自然就没有了。 
English: Now that I have restrained my desires within, stopped my wanderings outside, and made the world quiet, the thief naturally no longer exists.

古文：由此观之，寇盗多寡，皆由衣食丰俭，徭役重轻耳。
现代文：由此看来，盗贼之寡多，都是因为衣食之丰俭、徭役之轻重不同所致。
English: From this point of view, the small number of thieves is due to the abundance of food and clothing and the different roles of the guards.

古文：今宜徙可敦城于近地，与西南副都部署乌古敌烈、隗乌古等部声援相接。
现代文： 现在应该迁可敦城于近地，与西南副都部署乌古敌烈、隗乌古等部互相声援、连接。
English: Now it is time to relocate the city of Kedun to a nearby place, and deploy the departments of the Southwest Vice-capital, the ancient enemy, and the ancient city to support and connect with each other.

古文：罢黑岭二军，并开、保州，皆隶东京。益东北戍军及南京总管兵。
现代文：撤销黑岭二军，合并开、保二州，使一概隶于东京；增加东北戍军及南京总管兵。
English: The Heiling Second Army was abolished, and the two prefectures of Kaifeng and Bao were merged, so that they were all subordinated to Tokyo; the Northeast Garrison Army and the Nanjing General Administration Army were increased.

古文：增修壁垒，候尉相望，缮完楼橹，浚治城隍，以为边防。
现代文：增修壁垒，使望台与尉所相望，修缮楼橹，整治城隍，以为边防之用。
English: Additional barriers were built, the watchtower and the captain's house were placed facing each other, the towers were repaired, and the city walls were repaired, all for the purpose of border defense.

古文：此方今之急务也，愿陛下裁之。
现代文：以上乃是当今之急务，请陛下裁定。 
English: These are the pressing matters of the day, Your Majesty is requested to decide.

古文：擢翰林都林牙，兼修国史。
现代文：提升为翰林都林牙、兼修国史。
English: He was promoted to the position of Hanlin Du Lin Ya and concurrently studied national history.

古文：仍诏谕之曰： 文章之职，国之光华，非才不用。
现代文：又下诏晓谕之： 文辞之职，乃是国家之荣耀，非才子不得担任。
English: He also issued the following edict: "The post of literature is the glory of the country, and no one but a man of talent may hold it.

古文：以卿文学，为时大儒，是用授卿以翰林之职。
现代文：以你的文才学识，堪称一时大儒，所以我将翰林之职授予你。
English: With your literary talent and knowledge, you can be called a great scholar for a while, so I will award you the post of Hanlin.

古文：朕之起居，悉以实录。 
现代文：我的起居状况，都要据实记录。 
English: My living conditions must be documented.

古文：厥后累圣相承，自夷离堇湖烈以下，大号未加，天皇帝之考夷离堇的鲁犹以名呼。
现代文：从此日见亲信，每当入内侍候，都要侍坐。遇到节庆之日，皇上同他一起饮酒赋诗，相互敬酒，君臣之互相投合为人所不及。
English: From that day on, whenever he saw his relatives, they had to wait for him when he entered the palace. On the day of the festival, the emperor drank wine with him, recited poems, and toasted each other. It was unprecedented for a monarch and a minister to get along with each other.

古文：臣以为宜依唐典，追崇四祖为皇帝，则陛下弘业有光，坠典复举矣。 疏奏，帝纳之，始行追册玄、德二祖之礼。
现代文：韩家奴知无不言，即使是诙谐戏谑之言，也不忘做规劝讽谏之语。十三年春，上疏请依照唐之旧制，追尊夷离堇湖烈以下四代祖先为皇帝，奏疏上达，皇上加以采纳，开始实行追册玄、德二祖之礼。
English: In the spring of the 13th year, in accordance with the old system of the Tang Dynasty, Shang Su requested that the four generations of ancestors below the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the

古文：韩家奴每见帝猎，未尝不谏。
现代文：韩家奴每次见到皇上出猎，没有一次不加以劝谏的。
English: Every time Han Jia Nong saw the emperor out hunting, he never failed to try to persuade him.

古文：会有司奏猎秋山，熊虎伤死数十人，韩家奴书于册。
现代文：适逢有司上奏，皇上狩猎于秋山，熊、虎致伤致死数十人。韩家奴将此事记于史册上。
English: The Emperor was hunting in Akiyama, and a bear and a tiger injured and killed dozens of people. Han Jiayu recorded this event in the history books.

古文：帝见，命去之。
现代文：皇上见到，命他去掉。
English: When the emperor saw it, he ordered him to remove it.

古文：韩家奴既出，复书。
现代文：韩家奴出宫之后，又记了下来。
English: After Han Jia Nong left the palace, he wrote it down again.

古文：他日，帝见之曰： 史笔当如是。 
现代文：后来一日，皇上见到了，说 ：史笔就该是这样。 
English: One day later, the Emperor saw it and said, "This is how a historical novel should be written."

古文：帝问韩家奴： 我国家创业以来，孰为贤主？ 
现代文：皇上问韩家奴 ：我们国家创业以来谁可以算是贤主？ 
English: The emperor asked Han Jia Nu: Who can be regarded as a wise man since the founding of our country?

古文：韩家奴以穆宗对。
现代文：韩家奴回答说是穆宗。
English: Han Jia Nu replied that it was Mu Zong.

古文：帝怪之曰： 穆宗嗜酒，喜怒不常，视人犹草芥，卿何谓贤？ 
现代文：皇上奇怪，问： 穆宗贪酒，喜怒无常，将人命视如草芥，你为什么说他贤明呢？ 
English: The emperor was puzzled and asked, "Muzong is a drunkard, moody, and regards human life as worthless. Why do you say he is wise?"

古文：韩家奴对曰： 穆宗虽暴虐，省徭轻赋，人乐其生。
现代文：韩家奴回答说： 穆宗尽管暴虐，但能减省徭役，减轻赋税，人人都过得很快乐。
English: Han Jiayu replied, "Although Mu Zong was tyrannical, he was able to reduce the number of forced laborers and taxes, and everyone lived happily.

古文：终穆之世，无罪被戮，未有过今日秋山伤死者。
现代文：总计穆宗一朝，无罪而被杀的，还没有超过现在秋山田猎的死伤之数。
English: In total, the number of innocents killed in the reign of Mu Zong did not exceed the number of deaths and injuries in the current Akiyama field hunt.

古文：臣故以穆宗为贤。 
现代文：所以我就认为穆宗贤明了。 
English: That's why I think Mu Zong is wise.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：皇上无言以对。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：诏与耶律庶成录遥辇可汗至重熙以来事迹，集为二十卷，进之。
现代文：诏令与耶律庶成一道编撰遥辇可汗至重熙以来之史事，合为二十卷，进呈之。
English: Together with Yerutsukosei, Dahiryo compiled the history of the Far Eastern Khanate from its founding to the reign of King Chongxi, which is presented in twenty volumes.

古文：十五年，复诏曰： 古之治天下者，明礼义，正法度。
现代文：十五年，又下诏说： 古时治天下者，申明礼仪，肃正法度。
English: Fifteen years later, he issued another edict: "Those who ruled the world in ancient times should affirm etiquette and strictly enforce laws."

古文：我朝之兴，世有明德，虽中外向化，然礼书未作，无以示后世。
现代文：我朝兴国以来，世世有完美之德，尽管国内外仰慕归化，然而礼书未成，无法垂示后代。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, there has always been a virtue of perfection. Despite the admiration for naturalization both at home and abroad, the gift was not completed and could not be passed down to future generations.

古文：卿可与庶成酌古准今，制为礼典。
现代文：你可跟庶成一道参照古今加以斟酌取舍，制定礼典。
English: You can work with us to develop a ceremony that takes into account the past and the present.

古文：事或有疑，与北、南院同议。 
现代文：事理如果有疑问，就与北院、南院一同探讨。 
English: If there is any doubt about the facts, it should be discussed with the North and South Courts.

古文：韩家奴既被诏，博考经籍，自天子达于庶人，情文制度可行于世，不缪于古者，撰成三卷，进之。
现代文：韩家奴受诏之后，广泛考证经书典籍，自天子以至于常人，质朴或者典雅之制度可流行于世，又不与古制相违背者，撰成为三卷，进呈之。
English: After Han Jia Nong received the imperial edict, he extensively researched the scriptures and classics, from the heavenly son to ordinary people, and compiled a simple or elegant system that could be popular in the world without contradicting the ancient system into three volumes and presented it.

古文：又诏译诸书，韩家奴欲帝知古今成败，译《通历》、《贞观政要》、《五代史》。
现代文：又诏令翻译诸书，韩家奴希望皇上能了解古今成败之迹，译出《通历》、《贞观政要》、《五代史》。
English: He also ordered the translation of books. Han Jia Nong hoped that the emperor could understand the signs of success and failure in the past and present, and translated "The General History," "The Virtue of Chastity" and "The History of Five Dynasties."

古文：时帝以其老，不任朝谒，拜归德军节度使。
现代文：当时皇帝因他年老，不能胜任朝拜之事，拜为归德军节度使。
English: At that time, the emperor, due to his old age, was not able to perform the ritual, so he prayed for the return of the German troops.

古文：以善治闻。
现代文：以善于治理著称。
English: It is known for its good governance.

古文：帝遣使问劳，韩家奴表谢。
现代文：皇上派使者慰问他，韩家奴上表称谢。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to console him, and the Han family publicly thanked him.

古文：召修国史，卒，年七十二。
现代文：召修国史，卒，年七十二岁。
English: He was called to study national history at the age of seventy-two.

古文：有《六义集》十二卷行于世。
现代文：有《六义集》十二卷行于世。
English: Twelve volumes of "Six Virtues Collection" have been published.

