古文：魏兰根崔
现代文：魏兰根，是巨鹿下曲阳人。
English: Wei Langen, is a huge deer down the Yang people.

古文：魏兰根，巨鹿下曲阳人也。
现代文：父亲伯成，是魏代泰山太守。
English: His father, Bo Cheng, was the governor of Mount Tai in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父伯成，魏中山太守。兰根身长八尺，仪貌奇伟，泛览群书，诵《左氏传》、《周易》，机警有识悟。起家北海王国侍郎，历定州长流参军。
现代文：兰根身长八尺，仪表外貌奇伟，博览群书，诵读《左传》、《周易》，机警而有见识与悟性。从家中征召出来授任北海王国侍郎，历任定州长流参军。
English: Rangan is eight feet tall, has a magnificent appearance, is well-read, recites "Zo Zhuan" and "Zhou Yi," is alert and has insight and understanding. He was conscripted from his home and was awarded the title of attendant of the North Sea Kingdom, and has been appointed by the governor to join the army.

古文：丁母忧，居丧有孝称。
现代文：为母亲守丧，其间有孝子的称誉。
English: During his mother's funeral, he was praised as a filial son.

古文：将葬常山郡境，先有董卓祠，祠有柏树。
现代文：准备把母亲埋葬在常山郡境内，那裹先前已有董卓祠，祠旁有柏树。
English: He was preparing to bury his mother in the territory of Changshan County, where there was already a Dong Zhuo ancestral hall with a cypress tree next to it.

古文：兰根以卓凶逆无道，不应遗祠至今，乃伐柏以为郭材。
现代文：兰根认为董卓是凶恶无道的叛逆，不应留有祠庙至今，于是砍伐了柏树做棺材。
English: Langen believed that Dong Zhuo was a vicious and ruthless rebel and that there should not be a temple left to this day, so he cut down a cypress tree to make a coffin.

古文：人或劝之不伐，兰根尽取之，了无疑惧。
现代文：有人劝他不要伐树，但兰根将所有的柏树都砍光了，全无疑惧。
English: Some people advised him not to cut down trees, but Langen chopped down all the cypress trees and was undoubtedly afraid.

古文：遭父丧，庐于墓侧，负土成坟，忧毁殆于灭性。
现代文：为父亲守丧时，兰根在墓地旁搭起草屋居住，自己担土堆坟，忧伤欲绝。
English: At the time of his father's funeral, Langen lived in a row house next to the cemetery, digging his own grave, and was overwhelmed with grief.

古文：后为司空、司徒二府记室参军，转夏州平北府长史，入为司徒掾，出除本郡太守，并有当官之能。
现代文：后任司空、司徒二府记室参军，改任夏州平北府长史，被朝廷召入任司徒掾，后出朝任本郡太守，都居官称职，表现出才干。
English: Later, he joined the army as the second prefectural record office of Siku and Szeto, and was appointed as the prefect of Pingbei in Xia Prefecture. He was called by the imperial court to serve as the governor of Szeto County, and later he was appointed as the governor of this county. All of them were competent officials and showed their talents.

古文：正光末，尚书令李崇为本郡都督，率众讨茹茹，以兰根为长史。
现代文：正光末年，尚书令李崇为本郡都督，率兵讨伐茹茹，以兰根为长史。
English: In the last years of Zheng Guang, Shang Shu ordered Li Chong to be the governor of the county, and led the army to fight against Zhu Ru, with Langen as a long history.

古文：因说崇曰： 缘边诸镇，控摄长远。
现代文：兰根因而劝说李崇道： 缘边各镇，很早就处于朝廷控制之下。
English: Langen thus persuaded Li Chongdao: The towns on the periphery had been under the control of the imperial court for a long time.

古文：昔时初置，地广人稀，或征发中原强宗子弟，或国之肺腑，寄以爪牙。
现代文：过去刚设置时，地广人稀，或是征派去中原强宗子弟，或是派去国家重臣，委以守卫重任。
English: In the past, when it was first set up, the land was sparsely populated, and either the son of the Central Plains strongman was conscripted, or the chief minister of the state was sent, entrusting the guard with important duties.

古文：中年以来，有司乖实，号曰府户，役同厮养，官婚班齿，致失清流。
现代文：中年以来，有司名不副实，号称府户，役使百姓却如同驱使奴仆，官与官联姻，以致失去了清高之士。
English: Over the past few years, some officials have concealed the facts and referred to these fringe families as "fuhu" (households of the prefectural governors), which are just like the military households maintained by the state. They marry officials, only report their age, and do not ask their lineage, so that they have gradually lost their status as a pure stream.

古文：而本宗旧类，各各荣显，顾瞻彼此，理当愤怨。
现代文：然而本宗旧类，各各荣耀颢贵，彼此攀比，理当愤怨。
English: And their original families, all glorious and illustrious, are, by comparison, justifiably angry and resentful.

古文：更张琴瑟，今也其时，静境宁边，事之大者。
现代文：改弦更张，现在是时候了，使边境安宁，是最重要的大事。
English: It's time for a change, and making the border peaceful is the most important thing.

古文：宜改镇立州，分置郡县，凡是府户，悉免为民，入仕次叙，一准其旧，文武兼用，威恩并施。
现代文：应当改镇立州，分置郡县，凡是府户，一律免作平民，按次序做官，一切照旧，文武兼用，恩威并施。
English: Therefore, towns should be changed into prefectures, counties and counties should be set up separately, and all prefectural households should be released as civilians. In terms of recruitment and promotion, they should be the same as before. In this way, civil and military means should be used, and dignity and mercy should be applied.

古文：此计若行，国家庶无北顾之虑矣。 
现代文：这个计策如能实行，国家几乎就没有北方的忧虑了。 
English: If this strategy is implemented, the country will almost be able to relieve the worries of the north.

古文：崇以秦闻，事寝不报。
现代文：李崇将兰根的计策上奏朝廷，事情搁置下来，没有答覆。
English: Li Chong reported Langen's stratagem to the imperial court, but the matter was shelved and there was no response.

古文：军还，除冠军将军，转司徒右长史，假节，行豫州事。
现代文：军队返回，兰根被授任为冠军将军，改任司徒右长史，假节，兼摄豫州事务。
English: When the army returned, Langen was awarded the title of champion general, and was assigned to the post of chief historian of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, as well as the post of deputy chief historian of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：孝昌初，转岐州刺史。
现代文：孝昌初年，改任岐州刺史。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he was reassigned to the post of Qizhou magistrate.

古文：从行台萧宝寅讨破宛川，俘其民人为奴婢，以美女十人赏兰根。
现代文：跟随行台萧宝寅征讨攻破了宛，俘虏当地人为奴婢，萧宝宝将十名美女赏给兰根。
English: Following the parade, Xiao Baoying defeated Wan, captured the local people as slaves, and Xiao Baobao awarded ten beautiful women to Langen.

古文：兰根辞曰： 此县界于强虏，皇威未接，无所适从，故成背叛。
现代文：兰根推辞说： 此县与强虏交界，皇威未至，无所适从，所以背叛了朝廷。
English: Langen said, "This county is on the border with the Qianghu, and the emperor's authority has not yet arrived, so we are at a loss, so we have betrayed the imperial court."

古文：今当寒者衣之，饥者食之，奈何将充仆隶乎？ 
现代文：如今应当给受寒者衣服穿，给挨饿者食物吃，怎么能让他们充当奴仆呢? 
English: Now it is time to clothe the cold and feed the hungry. How can they be used as slaves?

古文：尽以归其父兄。
现代文：于是将美女都归还给她们的父兄。
English: So the beauties were returned to their parents.

古文：部内麦多五穗，邻州田鼠为灾，犬牙不入岐境。
现代文：兰根所辖境内麦子多长有五穗，而邻州却田鼠为灾，却犬牙交错不入岐境。
English: In the territory under the jurisdiction of Langen, the wheat mostly has five ears, while the neighboring states are plagued by field mice, but the dog's teeth are interlaced and do not enter the crossroads.

古文：属秦陇反叛，萧宝寅败于泾州，高平虏贼逼岐州，州城民逼囚兰根降贼。
现代文：适逢秦陇反叛，萧实寅在泾州战败，高平虏贼进逼岐州，岐州城民胁迫并囚禁兰根投降贼人。
English: It coincided with the rebellion of Qin Hui, the defeat of Xiao Shizhong in Zhangzhou, Gaoping's invasion of Qizhou, and the Qizhou people's coercion and imprisonment of Langen's surrendering thieves.

古文：宝寅至雍州，收辑散亡，兵威复振，城民复斩贼刺史侯莫陈仲和，推兰根复任。
现代文：实寅至雍州，收集散失兵将，军威复振，城民又斩杀了贼刺史侯莫陈仲和，推举兰根复任。
English: Real Yin went to Yongzhou to collect the scattered soldiers, and the military power was restored. The townspeople also killed the thief and thug Mo Chen Zhonghe, and elected Langen to resume his post.

古文：朝廷以兰根得西土人心，加持节、假平西将军、都督泾岐东秦南岐四州军事，兼四州行台尚书。
现代文：朝廷因兰根深得西土民心，加授他为持节、假平西将军、都督泾岐束秦南岐四州军事，兼任四州行台尚书。
English: The imperial court deeply won the hearts of the people of the western provinces because of Langen, and awarded him the title of "Hojijie," "False General of the Western Provinces," "Governor of Iki Province," "Governor of Qin Nan Province," and "Military Commander of the Four Provinces," as well as the title of "Regent of the Four Provinces."

古文：寻入拜光禄大夫。
现代文：不久入拜光禄大夫。
English: He was soon promoted to Dr. Bai Guanglu.

古文：孝昌末，河北流人南渡，以兰根兼尚书，使齐、济、二兖四州安抚，并置郡县。
现代文：孝昌末年，河北流亡之人南渡，朝廷以兰根兼任尚书，出使齐、济、二兖四州安抚，并置郡县。
English: In the last years of Xiaochang, the exiles from Hebei went to Nantou, and the imperial court concurrently served as Shangshu with Langen, sent envoys to Qi, Jie and Erqi to pacify the four states, and set up counties.

古文：河间邢杲反于青、兖之间，杲，兰根之甥也，复诏兰根衔命慰劳。杲不下，仍随元天穆讨之。
现代文：河间邢呆在青、光间造反，邢呆，是兰根的外甥。朝廷复韶兰根带命前往安慰问候，邢呆不听劝阻，于是兰根随同元天穆去讨伐邢呆。
English: Kawama 呆 rebelled against blue and light, and 呆 is the nephew of Langen. The imperial court ordered Langen to go to comfort and greet, and Langen did not listen to dissuasion, so Langen went to fight against 呆 with fellow emperor Tenmu.

古文：还，除太府卿，辞不拜。
现代文：返回后，授任太府卿，推辞而未接受。
English: After his return, he was given the post of daifu-kyo, but he did not accept his resignation.

古文：转安东将军、中书令。
现代文：改任安束将军、中书令。
English: He was reassigned to the post of General Anzaku, and retired from the position of Chusho Rei.

古文：庄帝之将诛尔朱荣也，兰根闻其计，遂密告尔朱世隆。
现代文：庄帝准备诛杀尔朱荣，兰根听说了这一计划，于是密告给氽朱世隆。
English: Zhuangdi was preparing to kill Zhu Rong, and when Langen heard of this plan, he tipped off Zhu Shilong.

古文：荣死，兰根恐庄帝知之，忧惧不知所出。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，兰根害怕庄帝知道逭件事，忧虑恐惧不知去哪裹才好。
English: After Le Zhu Rong's death, Langen was afraid that Zhuang Di knew something, and he did not know where to go.

古文：时应诏王道习见信于庄帝，兰根乃托附之，求得在外立功。
现代文：当时应诏王道习受庄帝宠信，兰根于是托付他，求得在外立功。
English: At that time, Wang Daoxi was favored by Emperor Zhuang, so Langen entrusted him with the task of seeking outside contributions.

古文：道习为启闻，乃以兰根为河北行台，于定州率募乡曲，欲防井陉。
现代文：道习为此启奏庄帝，于是任命兰根为河北行台在定州率领招募的乡人，防御井陉。
English: To this end, Daoxi appealed to Emperor Zhuang, and appointed Langen as a villager recruited by Hebei Xingtai in Dingzhou to lead the defense of Jingyao.

古文：时尔朱荣将侯深自范阳趣中山，兰根与战，大败，走依渤海高乾。
现代文：当时氽朱荣的大将侯深自范阳直奔中山，兰根舆他交战，大败，跑去依附渤海高干。
English: At that time, Zhu Rong's general Hou Sheng went straight to Zhongshan from Fanyang. Langen fought with him and was defeated. He ran to attach himself to Bohai Gao Gan.

古文：属乾兄弟举义，因在其中。
现代文：适值高干兄弟起义，因此兰根也在其中。
English: At the right time, the Gaogan brothers revolted, so Langen was also among them.

古文：高祖至，以兰根宿望，深礼遇之。
现代文：高祖至，因兰根平素就有名望，所以对他礼遇有加。
English: Gao Zu Zhi, because Langen has always been famous, so he is treated with courtesy.

古文：中兴初，加车骑大将军、尚书右仆射。
现代文：中兴初年，加封车骑大将军、尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was appointed as the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry.

古文：及高祖将入洛阳，遣兰根先至京师。
现代文：高祖将入洛阳，派遣兰根先至京师。
English: Gaozu will enter Luoyang and send Langen to Beijing first.

古文：时废立未决，令兰根观察魏前废帝。
现代文：当时废立尚未决定，命令兰根观察魏前废帝。
English: At that time, the abdication had not yet been decided, and Langen was ordered to observe the former Emperor Wei's abdication.

古文：帝神采高明，兰根恐于后难测，遂与高乾兄弟及黄门崔同心固请于高祖，言废帝本是胡贼所推，今若仍立，于理不允。
现代文：废帝神采高明，兰根担心后难以揣测，于是与高干兄弟及黄门崔同心在产担面前坚决请求，说庆童本是胡贼推立的，如今若仍立为帝，于理不符。
English: The former emperor was so brilliant that it was difficult for Langen to speculate after he was worried, so he and the Gao Gan brothers and Huangmen Cui Yao made a resolute request in front of the burden-bearers, saying that Qing Tong was originally set up by the Hu bandits, and if he is still set up as an emperor now, it is not consistent with reason.

古文：高祖不得已，遂立武帝。
现代文：直担不得已，遂立亘堕。
English: As a last resort, he had to take on direct responsibility, which led to his downfall.

古文：废帝素有德业，而为兰根等构毁，深为时论所非。
现代文：庐童素有德行功业，而被堕担等人诋毁，深为当时舆论非议。
English: Xing Tong was known for his virtuous deeds, but he was slandered by the corrupt officials and others, and was deeply criticized by the public opinion at that time.

古文：太昌初，除仪同三司，寻加开府，封巨鹿县侯，邑七百户。
现代文：太昌初年，任仪同三司，不久加授开府，封钜鹿县侯，食邑七百户。
English: In the first year of Taichang, Ren Yi was appointed as the third secretary, and soon he was also given the post of the governor of Kaifu, the post of the governor of Menglu County, and 700 households of food villages.

古文：启授兄子同达。
现代文：启奏朝廷，请求授予哥哥的儿子同达。
English: He appealed to the imperial court, requesting that his brother's son be awarded the same rank.

古文：兰根既预义勋，位居端揆，至是始叙复岐州勋，封永兴县侯，邑千户。
现代文：兰根既因参与起义立功，官居相位，至此时又被奖励治理岐州的功勋，封永兴县侯，食邑一千户。
English: Because of his participation in the uprising, Langen was rewarded for his contribution to the governance of Qizhou, he was awarded the title of Yongxing County Governor, and 1,000 households in the county were provided with food.

古文：高乾之死，兰根惧，去宅，避于寺。
现代文：高干之死，使兰根畏惧，离家出走，到寺庙躲避。
English: The death of Gao Gan made Langen afraid, so he ran away from home and hid in a temple.

古文：武帝大加谴责，兰根忧怖，乃移病解仆射。
现代文：武帝大加谴责，兰根忧虑恐怖，于是作书称病辞去仆射官职。
English: Emperor Wu condemned him severely, and Langen was so worried and terrified that he wrote a letter saying that he was ill and resigned from his position as a military officer.

古文：天平初，以病笃上表求还乡里。
现代文：天平初年，因病势沉重上表请求还乡。
English: In the first year of the balance, due to the severity of his illness, he requested to return to his hometown.

古文：魏帝遣舍人石长宣就家劳问，犹以开府仪同，门施行马，归于本乡。
现代文：魏帝派舍人石长宣到家中慰劳问候，仍以对开府仪同的礼节对待兰根，门前设置行马，此后兰根回归本乡。
English: Emperor Wei sent his concubine, Shi Changxuan, to his home to offer condolences and greetings. He still treated Langen with the same courtesy as he did to Kaifu, setting up a procession of horses in front of his door. After that, Langen returned to his hometown.

古文：二年卒，时年六十一。
现代文：天平二年去世，时年六十一岁。
English: Tianping died two years later, at the age of 61.

古文：赠冀定殷三州军事、定州刺史、司徒公、侍中，谥曰文宣。
现代文：被赠封冀定殷三州军事、定州刺史、司徒公、侍中，谧号为文宣。
English: He was awarded the titles of Jizhong Dingyin Sanzhou Military, Jizhong Jizhong History, Jizhong Jizhong, Jizhong Jizhong, and Jizhong Jizhong. His posthumous name was Wenxuan.

古文：兰根虽以功名自立，然善附会，出处之际，多以计数为先，是以不为清论所许。
现代文：兰根虽因功名而自立，然而善于附会，进退之际，多以谋略权术为先，因此不被公正的评论所赞许。
English: Although Langen is self-reliant due to his achievements, he is good at side meetings, and when advancing or retreating, he mostly takes the strategy of power as the first, so he is not praised by fair commentators.

古文：长子相如，秘书郎中。
现代文：兰根的长子相如，任秘书郎中。
English: Langen's eldest son is the same, he is the secretary's younger brother.

古文：以建义勋，寻加将军。
现代文：因树立义旗有功，不久加授为将军。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of general for his service in raising the banner of righteousness.

古文：袭父爵，迁安东将军、殷州别驾，入为侍御史。
现代文：承袭父亲爵位，升任安东将军、殷州别驾，后被朝廷召入任侍御史。
English: He inherited his father's title and was promoted to General of the East and Governor of Yinzhou. Later, he was called by the imperial court to serve as an attendant to the emperor.

古文：武定三年卒。
现代文：武定三年去世。
English: Wu Ding passed away three years later.

古文：次子敬仲。
现代文：次子敬仲。
English: The second son, Takenaka.

古文：肃宗时，佐命功臣配享，而不及兰根。
现代文：肃帝时，佐命功臣配享，而没有兰根的份儿。
English: At the time of the Emperor's abdication, the lives of meritorious vassals were shared equally, but there was no share for Langen.

古文：敬仲表诉，帝以诏命既行，难于追改，擢敬仲为祠部郎中。
现代文：敬仲上表申诉，皇帝因韶令既已发出，难以追回更改，便提拔敬仲为祠部郎中。
English: When Keizhong complained to the emperor, the emperor promoted Keizhong to the position of chief retainer of the ancestral hall because the imperial edict had already been issued and it was difficult to change it.

古文：卒于章武太守。
现代文：在作章武太守时去世。
English: He died while working on "Chapter of the Empress Dowager Wu."

古文：兰根族弟明朗，颇涉经史，粗有文性。
现代文：兰根的族弟明朗，涉猎许多经史，粗有文学才能。
English: Langen's younger brother, Ming Lang, dabbled in many scriptures and had a talent for literature.

古文：累迁大司马府法曹参军，兼尚书金部郎中。
现代文：屡经升迁任大司马府法曹参军，兼尚书金部郎中。
English: After many promotions, he joined the army as the legal officer of Mafu, and also served as a junior member of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：元颢入洛阳，明朗为南道行台郎中，为颢所擒。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，明朗为南道行台郎中，被元颢捉住。
English: Yuan Shao entered Luoyang and was caught by Yuan Shao, who was clearly a member of the Southern Dao Gangtai Lang.

古文：后弃颢逃还，除龙骧将军、中散大夫，赐爵巨鹿侯。
现代文：后来摆脱元颢逃了回来，任龙骧将军、中散大夫，被赐予钜鹿侯爵位。
English: Later, he escaped from the Yuan Dynasty and returned, and was appointed as the general of Longjing and the doctor of Zhongshan, and was given the title of the Marquis of Elk.

古文：永安末，兰根为河北行台，引明朗为左丞。
现代文：永安末年，蓝根任迥北行台，引荐明朗为左丞。
English: At the end of the Yongan era, Langen was assigned to the Northern Expeditionary Force, and Ming Lang was promoted to the position of Left Wing Commander.

古文：及兰根中山之败，俱归高祖。
现代文：到了兰根在中山打败仗时，一同归顺高祖。
English: When Langen was defeated in Zhongshan, they surrendered to Gaozu together.

古文：中兴初，拜抚军将军，出为安德太守。
现代文：中兴初年，被拜授为抚军将军，出京任安德太守。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was awarded the title of General of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and went to Beijing to serve as the Grand Duke of Ande.

古文：后转卫将军、右光禄大夫、定州大中正。
现代文：后改任卫将军、右光禄大夫、定州大中正。
English: Later, he was appointed to the position of General of the Guards, Doctor of the Right Hand, and Junior High School Vice President of Dingzhou University.

古文：武定初，为显祖谘议参军。
现代文：武定初年，任显祖谘议参军。
English: In the first year of Wuding, Ren Xianzu advised him to join the army.

古文：出为平阳太守，为御史所劾，因被禁止。
现代文：出京任平阳太守，被御史弹劾，因而被限制行动自由。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Pingyang, but was impeached by the emperor, and as a result his freedom of movement was restricted.

古文：遇病卒。
现代文：遇病去世。
English: He fell ill and passed away.

古文：明朗从弟恺，少抗直有才辩。
现代文：明朗的堂弟魏恺，年轻时耿直有才智而又机智善辩。
English: When he was young, his bright cousin Wei Yao, Geng Zhi, was intelligent, witty and good at arguing.

古文：魏末，辟开府行参军，稍迁尚书郎、齐州长史。
现代文：魏代末年，被征用为开府行参军，稍后升任为尚书郎、齐州长史。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, he was requisitioned to join the army for the march to the capital, and was later promoted to Shang Shuro and Qi Guo Shi.

古文：天保中，聘陈使副。
现代文：天保年间，出使陈朝任副使。
English: During the Tenpo era, the envoy Chen Zeng served as deputy envoy.

古文：迁青州长史，固辞不就。
现代文：改任青州长史，坚决推辞不到任。
English: He was reappointed as the youth governor of history, but he resolutely refused to resign.

古文：杨愔以闻，显祖大怒，谓愔云： 何物汉子，我与官不肯就！
现代文：杨情告诉了显祖。显祖大怒，对杨情说： 这个男子是什么东西，我给他官做，他竟不肯就任!
English: Yang Jie told Xian Zu. Xian Zu flew into a rage and said to Yang Jie: "What is this man? I gave him an official position, but he refused to take it!

古文：明日将过，我自共语。 
现代文：明日把他叫来，我自己对他说。 
English: I'll call him tomorrow and tell him myself.

古文：是时显祖已失德，朝廷皆为之惧，而恺情貌坦然。
现代文：当时显祖已失德，朝廷上下都惧怕他，而魏恺却神色坦然。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianzu had lost his virtue, and the imperial court was afraid of him, while Emperor Wei was calm.

古文：显祖切责之，仍云： 死与长史孰优，任卿选一处。 
现代文：显祖严辞斥责魏恺，然后说： 死与长史哪样好，任你选一样。 
English: Xianzu severely reprimanded Wei Yao, and then said: Which is better, death or long history, you can choose.

古文：恺答云： 能杀臣者是陛下，不受长史者是愚臣，伏听明诏。 
现代文：魏恺回答说： 能杀死臣子的是陛下您，不接受长史一职的是愚臣我，谨听凭您的韶命。 
English: Wei Wei replied, "It is you, Your Majesty, who can kill your vassal. It is I, the foolish vassal, who do not accept the post of Changshi. I am at your mercy.

古文：显祖谓愔云： 何虑无人作官职，苦用此汉何为，放其还家，永不收采。 
现代文：显祖对杨情说： 何必担心无人做官，非用这个人干什么，放他回家，永不采用。 
English: Xianzu said to Yang Rong: "Why worry that no one will become an official, why not use this person, let him go home, and never employ him."

古文：由是积年沉废。
现代文：魏恺因此沉沦荒废多年。
English: As a result, Weiwuying fell into disrepair for many years.

古文：后遇杨愔于路，微自披陈。
现代文：后来在路上遇见杨情，私下坦言心迹。
English: Later, he met Yang Rong on the road, and spoke frankly about his feelings in private.

古文：杨答曰： 发诏授官，咸由圣旨，非选曹所悉，公不劳见诉。 
现代文：杨情回答说： 发韶书授官职，全凭圣旨，不是主管选官之吏所能知道的，你何不烦劳一下去谒见圣上诉说一番。 
English: Yang Rong replied, "The appointment of officials by imperial edict is entirely based on the imperial edict. It is not something that can be known by the officials in charge of selecting officials. Why don't you take the trouble to go to see the emperor and appeal to him.

古文：恺应声曰： 虽复零雨自天，终待云兴四岳。
现代文：魏恺应声说： 虽然雨白天降，但终待高山兴起风云。
English: Wei Wei said: Although the rain fell during the day, the storm eventually broke out in the mountains.

古文：公岂得言不知？ 
现代文：您岂能说不知道? 
English: Can you say you don't know?

古文：杨欣然曰： 此言极为简要，更不须多语。 
现代文：杨情欣然说道： 你的话极为简要，更不须多说了。 
English: Yang Rong gladly said: Your words are extremely concise, and there is no need to say more.

古文：数日，除霍州刺史。
现代文：数后，魏恺被任命为霍州刺史。
English: A few days later, Wei Wei was appointed as the chief historian of Huzhou.

古文：在职有治方，为边民悦服。
现代文：在任上治理有方，被边民爱戴敬服。
English: He governed well during his term of office and was loved and respected by the border residents.

古文：大宁中，卒于胶州刺史。
现代文：大宁年间，在胶州刺史任上去世。
English: He passed away while serving as Jiaozhou magistrate during the time of Danying.

古文：恺从子彦卿，魏大司农季景之子。
现代文：魏恺的侄子彦卿，是魏代大司农季景的儿子。
English: Wei Zheng's nephew, Yanqing, was the son of the Wei Dynasty Grand Secretary, Nong Qijing.

古文：武平中，兼通直散骑常侍，聘陈使副。
现代文：武平年间，兼通直散骑常侍，出使陈朝任副使。
English: During the Wuping era, he also served as an equerry and was sent as a deputy envoy to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：彦卿弟淡，学识有词藻。
现代文：童翅的弟弟魏遁，有学识，词藻丰富。
English: Tong Ying's younger brother, Wei Wei, is a scholar and a prolific writer.

古文：武平初，殿中御史，迁中书舍人，待诏文林馆。
现代文：亘壁初年，任殿中御史，升任中书舍人，待诏塞丛鑪。
English: In the first year of the Watabe era, he was appointed to the post of Chūjō no goshi, promoted to the post of chūjō no shojo, and was forced to retire.

古文：隋开皇中，太子舍人、著作郎。
现代文：厦伐题皇年间，任太子舍人、著作郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiahuachi, he was appointed as the prince's concubine and literary assistant.

古文：撰《后魏书》九十二卷，甚得史体，时称其善云。
现代文：撰著《后魏书》九十二卷，深得史体，受到时人称赞。
English: He wrote the "Post-Wei Shu" ninety-two volumes, which was praised by the people at the time.

古文：崔，字长孺，清河东武城人也。
现代文：崔饺，字长孺，是清河东武城人。
English: Cui Dumpling, also known as "Changyao Dumpling," is from Dongwucheng, Qinghe.

古文：父休，魏七兵尚书，赠仆射。
现代文：父亲崔休，是魏代七兵尚书，被赠封为仆射。
English: His father, Cui Xiu, was one of the seven soldiers of the Wei Dynasty, and was awarded the title of "puppeteer."

古文：状貌伟丽，善于容止，少有名望，为当时所知。
现代文：崔俊外貌伟岸英俊，言谈举止优雅，年轻时便有名望，在当时很受器重。
English: Cui Jun's appearance was handsome, his speech and manners were elegant, he was famous when he was young, and he was very respected at that time.

古文：初为魏世宗挽郎，释褐太学博士。
现代文：起初任魏世宗挽郎，出仕任太学博士。
English: At first, he served as Wei Shizong's assistant, and later as Taigaku doctor.

古文：永安中，坐事免归乡里。
现代文：永安年间，因事免官回归乡里。
English: During the Yongan era, he was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown.

古文：高祖于信都起义，归焉。
现代文：高祖在信都起义，崔棱前往归附。
English: Gaozu revolted in Xindu, and Cui Ren went to join him.

古文：高祖见之，甚悦，以为谘议参军。
现代文：高祖见到他，非常高兴，让他作证议参军。
English: Gaozu was very happy to see him and let him testify about joining the army.

古文：寻除给事黄门侍郎，迁将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：不久任给事黄门侍郎，升任将军、右光禄大夫。
English: He was soon given the post of Huangmen waiter, promoted to general, and Uguanglu doctor.

古文：高祖入洛，议定废立。
现代文：高祖进入洛阳，议定废立之事。
English: Gaozu entered Luoyang, and they agreed to abolish the position.

古文：太仆綦俊盛称普泰王贤明，可以为社稷主。
现代文：太仆綦俊盛赞普泰主贤明，可以作社稷之主。
English: The Great Servant, Zou Jun, praises Putai as a wise master who can be the master of the company.

古文：曰： 若其明圣，自可待我高王，徐登九五。
现代文：崔忮说： 如果他圣明，自可等待我高王，徐登九五尊位。
English: Cui Wei said: If he is a saint, he can wait for me to become a high king, Xu Deng Jiu Wu.

古文：既为逆胡所立，何得犹作天子。
现代文：他既是逆胡所拥立的人，怎么能够还作天子。
English: How can he be the son of heaven when he is the one who was supported by the rogue Hu?

古文：若从俊言，王师何名义举？ 
现代文：倘若依从綦俊之言，王师以什么名义起义? 
English: If you listen to the words of Yu Neiqun, how can your team be called a righteous act?

古文：由是中兴、普泰皆废，更立平阳王为帝。
现代文：因此中兴、普泰都被废，改立平阳王为帝。
English: As a result, both ZTE and Putai were abolished and replaced by Pingyang King.

古文：以建义功，封武城县公，邑一千四百户，进位车骑大将军、左光禄大夫，仍领黄门郎。
现代文：崔愤因参加起义有功，被封为武城县公，食邑一千四百户，升任车骑大将军、左光禄大夫，仍兼任黄门郎。
English: Cui Qian was awarded the title of Wucheng County official for his meritorious participation in the uprising. He was responsible for 1,400 households in Wucheng County, and was promoted to general of cavalry and cavalry, doctor of the left light, and still concurrently served as Huangmenlang.

古文：居门下，恃预义旗，颇自矜纵。
现代文：崔棱位居黄门侍郎，自恃参预了起义，颇自骄纵。
English: Cui Ren was a Yellow Gate attendant, a self-proclaimed participant in the uprising, and rather arrogant.

古文：寻以贪污为御史纠劾，因逃还乡里，遇赦始出。
现代文：不久便因贪污被御史纠举弹劾，所以逃回乡里，遇到赦免才出来。
English: Soon after, he was impeached for corruption by the Imperial Historical Enquiry, so he fled back to the countryside and only came out when he was pardoned.

古文：高祖以本预义旗，复其黄门。
现代文：高祖因崔愤当初参加了起义，恢复了他黄门官职。
English: Gao Zu initially took part in the uprising because of his anger at Cui, and was reinstated to his position as Yellow Gate official.

古文：天平初，为侍读，监典书。
现代文：天平初年，崔悛为侍读，监典书。
English: In the first year of Tianping, Cui Yao was an attendant, supervising books.

古文：寻除徐州刺史，给广宗部曲三百、清河部曲千人。
现代文：不久任徐州刺史，配给广宗军队三百人、清河军队一千人。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Xuzhou and assigned 300 soldiers to the Guangzong army and 1,000 soldiers to the Qinghe army.

古文：性豪慢，宠妾冯氏，假其威刑，恣情取受，风政不立。
现代文：崔愤生性狂放傲慢，他的宠妾冯氏，凭藉他的威势权力，恣意巧取豪夺，教化政治不得确立。
English: Cui Qinsheng is wild and arrogant, and his favorite concubine, Ms. Feng, by virtue of his power and authority, arbitrarily and skillfully takes plunder. Indoctrination politics must not be established.

古文：初为常侍，求人修起居注。
现代文：当初崔棱为常侍，寻求写起居注的人选。
English: At the beginning, Cui Ren was a regular attendant, and they were looking for someone to write a commentary.

古文：或曰： 魏收可。 
现代文：有人说： 魏收可以。 
English: Some people say: Wei harvest is OK.

古文：曰： 收轻薄徒耳。 
现代文：崔饺说： 魏收是个轻薄之徒。 
English: Cui Dumpling said: Wei Jie is a frivolous person.

古文：更引祖鸿勋为之。
现代文：改而引荐祖鸿勋做逭件事。
English: Instead, he recommended Zu Hongxun to do something else.

古文：既居枢要，又以卢元明代收为中书郎，由是收衔之。
现代文：崔棱既已位居要职，又以卢元明代替魏收为中书郎，因此魏收对崔悛衔恨在心。
English: Cui Ren was already in an important position, and Lu Yuanming replaced Wei Hui as the middle school teacher. Therefore, Wei Hui held a grudge against Cui Yu Tong.

古文：及收聘梁，过徐州，备刺史卤簿而送之，使人相闻魏曰： 勿怪仪卫多，稽古之力也。 
现代文：魏收出访梁朝，经过徐州，崔愤准备了刺史仪仗队送他，派人告诉魏收说： 不要因仪仗卫队如此多而见怪，造全凭研习古事之力。 
English: Wei Hui went to visit the Liang Dynasty. After passing through Xuzhou, Cui Qian prepared a historical honor guard to send him. He sent someone to tell Wei Hui, "Don't be surprised by the large number of honor guards. They are all made by studying ancient history."

古文：收报曰： 白崔徐州，建义之勋，何稽古之有！ 
现代文：魏收回答说： 告诉崔徐州，不过是起义那点功劳，哪裹有什么研习古事! 
English: Wei Jie replied: "Tell Cui Xuzhou that it is only the merit of the uprising, and there is no need to study ancient things!"

古文：自以门阀素高，特不平此言。
现代文：崔饺自以为门阀素来高贵，因此对魏收的话特别感到忿忿不平。
English: Cui Dumpling thought that the gate valve had always been noble, so he was particularly angry at Wei Shu's words.

古文：收乘宿憾，故以挫之。
现代文：魏收因与崔伎有宿怨，所以用话挫伤他。
English: Wei Shuai had a long-standing grudge against Cui Gi, so he used words to frustrate him.

古文：罢州，除七兵尚书、清河邑中正。
现代文：免去州职，任七兵尚书、清河邑中正。
English: He was exempted from the state post, and was appointed to the post of Shichibei Shangshu and the post of Qinghe Zhongzheng.

古文：赵郡李浑尝宴聚名辈，诗酒正欢哗，后到，一坐无复谈话者。
现代文：趟郡李浑曾宴请名流，谈诗饮酒正欢乐喧哗，崔棱后到，在座的再无一人谈话。
English: Count Li Hun Zeng invited celebrities to a banquet, talked about poetry and drank wine amidst the joyous din, Cui Ren arrived later, and no one else was present to talk.

古文：郑伯献叹曰： 身长八尺，面如刻画，謦咳为洪钟响，胸中贮千卷书，使人那得不畏服！ 
现代文：郑伯猷感叹道： 身长八尺，面如刻画，声音如洪钟敲响，胸中藏有千卷书，使人哪能不畏服! 
English: Zheng Boqin sighed: He is eight feet tall, his face is like a portrait, his voice is like a bell, and there are a thousand volumes in his chest, how can people not be awed!

古文：每以籍地自矜，谓卢元明曰： 天下盛门，唯我与尔，博崔赵李，何事者哉！ 
现代文：鲎堡常因出身门第而自傲，对卢元明说： 天下盛门，衹有我和你两家，搂崔、赵奎，又算得了什么。 
English: Bunker was often proud of his family of origin, and said to Lu Yuanming: The world is prosperous, without me and your two families, Xing Cui and Zhao Kui, what would it be?

古文：崔暹闻而衔之。
现代文：崔逞听到这话便对崔堡怀恨在心。
English: Upon hearing this, Cui Gang held a grudge against Cui Bo.

古文：高祖葬后，又窃言： 黄颔小儿堪当重任不？ 
现代文：产担安葬后，崔篮又在私下裹说： 这个黄口小儿能担当重任吗? 
English: After the funeral of the midwife, Cui Bin also said in private: Can this yellow-mouthed child take on heavy responsibilities?

古文：暹外兄李慎以言告暹。
现代文：崔暹的表兄李慎将崔饺的话告诉了崔逞。
English: Choi Siam's cousin Lee Shin told Choi Gang about Choi Dumpling's words.

古文：暹启世宗，绝朝谒。
现代文：崔逞上告给世塞，世塞便拒绝崔堡参加朝谒。
English: Cui Gang appealed to the World Sai, and the World Sai refused to allow Cui Bang to participate in the pilgrimage.

古文：要拜道左，世宗发怒曰： 黄颔小儿，何足拜也！ 
现代文：岜等在道左礼拜世塞。世塞发怒道： 黄口小儿，哪值得礼拜! 
English: The donkey waited on the roadside to worship the god. The god became angry and said, "Little yellow-mouthed one, what is worth worshiping!

古文：于是锁赴晋阳而讯之。
现代文：于是捆锁了崔棱赴置墨审讯，崔不伏罪。
English: As a result, they handcuffed Choe Ryong and took her to the court for questioning. Choe Son did not confess to the crime.

古文：不伏，暹引邢子才为证，子才执无此言。在禁，谓子才曰： 卿知我意属太丘不？ 
现代文：垄暹拉继王主作证，王立坚持说没听到这话。崔被囚禁，对王立说： 您知道我意在太丘吗? 
English: Wang Li insisted that he did not hear this, and Cui Yao, who was imprisoned, said to Wang Li, "Do you know that I meant Taegu?"

古文：子才出告子瞻云： 尊公意正应欲结姻于陈元康。 
现代文：子才出来告诉崔棱的儿子崔盐说： 你父亲正打算与陈元康联姻。 
English: Zi Cai came out to tell Cui Ren's son Cui Yan that: Your father is planning to marry Chen Yuan Kang.

古文：瞻有女，乃许妻元康子，求其父。
现代文：崔胪有女儿，于是许配给孟尘的儿子作妻子，求五尘救父。
English: Cui Yao had a daughter, so he betrothed Meng Chen's son to his wife, and asked Meng Chen to save his father.

古文：元康为言之于世宗曰： 崔名望素重，不可以私处言语便以杀之。 
现代文：五尘为此对世塞说： 崔筐子素很有名望，不能因为私下裹的言语就将他杀掉。 
English: For this reason, Wu Chen said to Shisei, "Cui Queshizhu is very famous, you can't kill him because of his private words.

古文：世宗曰： 若免其性命，犹当徙之遐裔。 
现代文：世塞说： 如果饶他一命，也应当将他流放得远远的。 
English: "If he is to be spared, he should be banished far away," he said.

古文：元康曰： 若在边，或将外叛。以英贤资寇敌，非所宜也。 
现代文：五尘说： 鲎堡如若身处边疆，有可能外叛，将英才贤能之人资助敌寇，遣不合适。 
English: Wuzhen said: If the bunker is on the frontier, it is possible to rebel, and it is not appropriate to send talented and capable people to support the enemy.

古文：世宗曰： 既有季珪之罪，还令输作可乎？ 
现代文：世塞说： 他已犯有重珪之罪，罚他作苦役可以吗? 
English: The world said: He has committed the crime of aggravated robbery, can he be punished with hard labor?

古文：元康曰： 尝读《崔琰传》，追恨魏武不弘。
现代文：五尘说： 我曾经阅读《崔琰传》，追溯往事，很遗憾魏亘生童心胸不弘大。
English: Wu Chen said: I once read "Cui Xuan Biography" and traced back the past. It is regrettable that Wei Wanzheng did not have a big heart.

古文：若在作所而殒，后世岂道公不杀也？ 
现代文：崔倘若死在服役之所，后世岂能说您没杀他? 
English: If Cui Wei were to die in the service, would posterity be able to say that you did not kill him?

古文：世宗曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：世宗说： 那么怎么办? 
English: Sejong said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：元康曰： 崔合死，朝野莫不知之，公诚能以宽济猛，特轻其罚，则仁德弥著，天下归心。 
现代文：元康说： 崔棱该死，朝野上下无人不知，您如果真能以宽济猛，破例减轻对他的处罚，那么就会仁德显著，天下归心。 
English: Yuan Kang said, "Cui Ren deserves to die. No one in the court or outside the court knows about it. If you can really use clemency and leniency to reduce his punishment, it will be a remarkable act of benevolence and the world will come to its senses."

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：世宗于是放了崔堡。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：进谒奉谢，世宗犹怒曰： 我虽无堪，忝当大任，被卿名作黄颔小儿，金石可销，此言难灭！ 
现代文：崔进见世塞表示感谢，世塞仍然愤怒地说： 我虽不堪，愧当大任，被你称作黄小儿，金石可销，此言难灭! 
English: Cui Yujin expressed his gratitude to the world, and the world still said angrily: Although I am unbearable, I am worthy of the great responsibility, you call me Huang Xiaoer, a precious stone, this word is indestructible!

古文：天保初，除侍中，监起居。
现代文：互堡初年，任侍中，监起居。
English: In his first year at the castle, he was appointed as a chamberlain and lived in the prison.

古文：以禅代之际，参掌仪礼，别封新丰县男，邑二百户，回授第九弟约。
现代文：因在禅代之际，参掌仪礼，另封新丰县男，食邑二百户，转授给第九弟鲎曲。
English: Because on the occasion of the Zen era, the Sanzho ceremony was transferred to the ninth brother, Zongqu, a man from Xinfeng County with 200 households.

古文：一门婚嫁，皆是衣冠之美，吉凶仪范，为当时所称。
现代文：鲎堡一门婚嫁时，都穿戴华美，吉凶仪式规范，被当时的人称赞。
English: When a bunker family got married, they all wore gorgeous clothes, which was the norm for auspicious and inauspicious ceremonies, and was praised by the people at the time.

古文：娄太后为博陵王纳妹为妃，敕中使曰： 好作法用，勿使崔家笑人。 
现代文：宴太后为搂陆王纳崖的妹妹为妃子，诏命中使说： 好好按礼法办事，不要使崔家人见笑。 
English: The empress dowager was the concubine of the sister of King Na Yat-seok of Lu, and the envoy said in the imperial edict: "Be sure to act according to etiquette, and don't make the Cui family laugh."

古文：婚夕，显祖举酒祝曰： 新妇宜男，孝顺富贵。 
现代文：新婚之夜，题担举起酒杯祝愿道： 新妇宜男，孝顺富贵。 
English: On the night of the wedding, the officiant held up a glass of wine and made a wish: "The bridegroom is a good man. He is filial and rich."

古文：奏曰： 孝顺出自臣门，富贵恩由陛下。 
现代文：崔上奏说： 孝顺出自臣门，富贵恩由陛下。 
English: Cui Zhen said: Filial piety comes from the vassal, and generosity comes from His Majesty.

古文：五年，出为东兖州刺史，复携冯氏之部。
现代文：型圣五年，外任为塞銮姐刺史，又带着宠妾驱前往。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the foreign minister, Sister Sayu, came to visit, and he also took his favorite concubine with him.

古文：寻遇偏风，而冯氏骄纵，受纳狼藉，为御史所劾，与俱召诣廷尉。
现代文：不久鲎堡患偏风病，而遇旦骄横放纵，胡乱收受贿赂，被御史弹劾，遇压舆崔堡一同被朝廷召回接受廷尉审查。
English: Not long after, Bunker was stricken with leprosy, and in a fit of arrogance and self-indulgence, he took bribes indiscriminately, was impeached by the Emperor, and under pressure from the public, Bunker was recalled to the Imperial Court to be examined by a courtier.

古文：寻有别敕，斩冯于都市。
现代文：不久下达了对二人分别处理的诏命，遇压被斩于市。
English: Soon after, an official order was issued for the two men to be dealt with separately, and under pressure, they were removed from the city.

古文：以疾卒狱中，年六十一。
现代文：崔因病死于狱中，时年六十一岁。
English: Choe Son died of illness in prison at the age of 61.

古文：历览群书，兼有词藻，自中兴立后，迄于武帝，诏诰表檄，多所为。
现代文：崔忮博览群书，兼有文采，自中兴开始，直到武帝年间，韶诰表檄多为崔馁所写。
English: Cui Jie wrote a lot of books, both literary and non-literary. From the beginning of ZTE until the reign of Emperor Wu, most of his works were written by Cui Jie.

古文：然率性豪侈，溺于财色，诸弟之间，不能尽雍穆之美，世论以此讥之。
现代文：然而崔棱的禀性豪放奢侈，贪溺于财色，各位兄弟之间，不能尽和睦之美，对此当时的舆论予以讥讽。
English: However, public opinion at the time ridiculed Cui Ren's stubbornness, extravagance, and greed for money, and the fact that the brothers could not achieve the beauty of harmony.

古文：素与魏收不协，收既专典国史，恐被恶言，乃悦之曰： 昔有班固，今则魏子。 
现代文：崔忮平素舆魏收不和。魏收既已专门修着国史，崔饺惟恐被魏收以恶言记述，于是取悦魏收道： 昔有班固，今有魏子。 
English: Cui Yu-ping did not agree with Wei Zui. Since Wei Zui had already specialized in national history, Cui Yu-ping feared that Wei Zui would use bad words to describe him, so he pleased Wei Zui by saying: In the past, there was Ban Gu, now there is Wei Zi.

古文：收笑而憾不释。
现代文：魏收听罢一笑却未消除怨恨。
English: Wei listened and laughed, but did not dispel the resentment.

古文：子瞻嗣。
现代文：儿子崔瞻继承爵位。
English: His son Cui Zhan succeeded to the title.

古文：瞻字彦通，聪明强学，有文情，善容止，神采嶷然，言不妄发。
现代文：崔瞻，字彦通，聪悟勤学，有文才，容貌英俊举止优雅，神采端庄，不随便发言。
English: Cui Zhan, nicknamed Yan Tong, is intelligent and studious, has literary talent, handsome appearance, elegant demeanor, dignified demeanor, and does not speak casually.

古文：年十五，刺史高昂召署主簿，清河公岳辟开府西阁祭酒。
现代文：十五岁时，被刺史高昂召去任主簿，清河公高岳征用崔瞻为开府西合祭酒。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was called to serve as chief steward by the chief steward Gao Ang, and Qinghe Gong Gao Yue requisitioned Cui Zhan for the Kaifu Xihai Festival wine.

古文：崔暹为中尉，启除御史，以才望见收，非其好也。
现代文：崔暹为中尉，启奏朝廷任崔瞻为御史，这是因崔瞻有才气与名望的缘故，并非出于对他的喜爱。
English: Cui Siam was a lieutenant, and the imperial court appointed Cui Zhan as the imperial historian. This was due to Cui Zhan's talent and fame, not out of love for him.

古文：高祖入朝，还晋阳，被召与北海王晞陪从，俱为诸子宾友。
现代文：高祖入朝，崔瞻回到晋阳，与北海王晞同被召作陪从，都是诸公子的宾友。
English: Gao Zu entered the imperial court, Cui Zhan returned to Jinyang, and was called to accompany with Beihai Wang Yao. They were all the friends of the noblemen.

古文：仍为相府中兵参军，转主簿。
现代文：随后作相府中兵参军，改任主簿。
English: Subsequently, he joined the army as a cabinet minister, and was appointed chief clerk.

古文：世宗崩，秘未发丧，显祖命瞻兼相府司马使邺。
现代文：世宗驾崩，秘未发丧，显祖任命崔瞻兼作相府司马出使邺。
English: When King Sejong passed away, but his death was not publicly announced, Emperor Xianzu appointed Cui Zhan to be both the prefectural governor and the envoy.

古文：魏孝静帝以人日登云龙门，其父侍宴，又敕瞻令近御坐，亦有应诏诗，问邢邵等曰： 此诗何如其父？ 
现代文：魏耋静帝于人日登云龙门，崔瞻的父亲崔棱陪同宴饮，又命崔瞻坐在孝静帝近边，也让崔瞻作应诏诗，孝静帝问邢邵等人道： 此诗舆他父亲作的诗相比怎么样? 
English: Emperor Wei Shizhen ascended to the Dragon Gate of the Cloud on the day of human beings, Cui Zhan's father Cui Ren accompanied the banquet, and ordered Cui Zhan to sit near Emperor Xiao Jing, and also asked Cui Zhan to write a poem. Emperor Xiao Jing asked Zhao Shao and others: How does this poem compare to the poem written by his father?

古文：咸云： 博雅弘丽，瞻气调清新，并诗人之冠。 
现代文：众人都说： 崔饺的诗博雅弘丽，崔瞻的诗格调清新，都可被称为诗人之冠。 
English: Many people said: Cui Dumpling's poetry is poetic and beautiful, and Cui Zhan's poetic style is fresh, both of which can be called the poet's crown.

古文：宴罢，共嗟赏之，咸云： 今日之宴，并为崔瞻父子。 
现代文：宴会结束后，众人共同感叹赞赏他们，都说： 今天的宴会是同时为崔瞻父子举办的。 
English: After the banquet was over, everyone shared their admiration and said: Today's banquet was held for both Mr. Cui and his son.

古文：天保初，兼并省吏部郎中。
现代文：天保初年，崔瞻兼任并省吏部郎中。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, Cui Zhan also served as the provincial secretary's assistant.

古文：寻丁忧，起为司徒属。
现代文：不久还家守丧，后被起用为司徒属。
English: Soon after, he also attended a family funeral, after which he was appointed as a member of the Stowe family.

古文：杨愔欲引瞻为中书侍郎。
现代文：杨情准备引荐崔瞻为中书侍郎。
English: Yang Jie is preparing to recommend Cui Zhan as a Chinese calligraphy waiter.

古文：时卢思道直中书省，因问思道曰： 我此日多务，都不见崔瞻文藻，卿与其亲通，理当相悉。 
现代文：当时卢思道在中书省当值，所以杨惰问思道说： 我今天处理了许多事务，都没有见到崔瞻的文字，您舆他亲近往来，理当了解他。 
English: At that time, Lu Sidao was on duty in the Chinese Book Ministry, so Yang Lian asked Sidao, "I have handled many affairs today, but I haven't seen Cui Zhan's writings. You are familiar with him and should know him.

古文：思道答曰： 崔瞻文词之美，实有可称，但举世重其风流，所以才华见没。 
现代文：墨道回答说： 崔盐文词之美，的确有值得称赞之处，但世人都看重他的风流，所以他的才华被埋没了。 
English: The calligrapher replied, "The beauty of Cui Yanwen's words is indeed praiseworthy, but the world values his demeanor, so his talent has been buried.

古文：愔云： 此言有理。 
现代文：杨情说： 此话有理。 
English: Yang Rong said: This is reasonable.

古文：便奏用之。
现代文：于是上奏朝廷任用崔瞻。
English: As a result, Choizhan was appointed by the imperial court.

古文：事既施行。
现代文：事情办成了。
English: It's done.

古文：愔又曰： 昔裴瓒晋世为中书郎，神情高迈，每于禁门出入，宿卫者肃然动容。
现代文：杨情又说： 过去裴壁在晋世为中书郎，神情高迈，常在禁门出入，卫兵们见了他都肃然起敬。
English: Yang Rong also said, "In the past, Pei Bi was a high-ranking scholar in the Jin Dynasty. He had a lofty appearance and often went in and out of restricted areas. The guards were awestruck when they saw him.

古文：崔生堂堂之貌，亦当无愧裴子。 
现代文：崔生的堂堂相貌，也应当无愧于裴子。 
English: Cui Sheng's handsome appearance should also be worthy of Peizi.

古文：皇建元年，除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：皇建元年，任给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed to the post of Huangmen waiter.

古文：与赵郡李概为莫逆之友。
现代文：崔瞻与赵郡奎极为莫逆之友。
English: Cui Zhan and Zhao Gui Kui are very close friends.

古文：概将东还，瞻遗之书曰： 仗气使酒，我之常弊，诋诃指切，在卿尤甚。
现代文：奎周即将东还，崔堕送去书信说： 任性发酒疯，是我的老毛病，申斥指责我的，你尤其厉害。
English: Kui Zhou is about to return to the East, and Cui Han sends a letter to Miao, saying: Willful drunkenness is my old problem, and you are especially bad at reprimanding and accusing me.

古文：足下告归，吾于何闻过也？ 
现代文：你走了，我到哪儿才能听到别人批评我的过错呢? 
English: Now that you're gone, where can I go to hear others criticize my faults?

古文：瞻患气，兼性迟重，虽居二省，竟不堪敷奏。
现代文：崔瞻患有气喘病，加上性情迟重，虽位居二省，竞不能忍受上书陈奏之事。
English: Cui Zhan suffers from asthma, coupled with a sluggish temperament, although he is in the second province, he can't stand the thing of writing Chen Zhan.

古文：加征虏将军，除清河邑中正。
现代文：加授征虏将军，任清河邑中正。
English: He was also awarded the title of Conscript General and appointed as the Vice-governor of Qinghe.

古文：肃宗践祚，皇太子就傅受业，诏除太子中庶子，征赴晋阳。
现代文：肃宗登位，皇太子要从师受业，诏命崔瞻为太子中庶子，崔胪应征赶赴置匮。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne, the crown prince had to learn from his teacher, the imperial edict ordered Cui Zhan to be the prince's middle child, and Cui Xi to be conscripted to go to Qian.

古文：敕专在东宫，调护讲读，及进退礼度，皆归委焉。
现代文：卢塞命崔盐专在束宫，调教护理太子为其讲读，以及举止行动的礼仪，都委派给崔盐来做。
English: Lu Xie ordered Cui Yan to stay at the Imperial Palace. Cui Yan was assigned to teach the prince how to read, as well as how to behave.

古文：太子纳妃斛律氏，敕瞻与鸿胪崔劼撰定婚礼仪注。
现代文：太子纳魁塑为妃，卢塞命崔堕与鸿胪鲎垫撰定婚礼仪式礼节。
English: Prince Naqui was made the princess, and Luce ordered Choi Hoi to draw up the wedding ceremony etiquette with Hung Hoi Mat.

古文：仍面受别旨曰： 虽有旧事，恐未尽善，可好定此仪，以为后式。 
现代文：并面授旨意说： 虽有旧的典章制度，惟恐不能尽善，你们可要好好制定这次的仪式，以它作为后世的典范。 
English: In addition, the face-to-face conferment of the will said: Although there is an old ceremony system, for fear of not being able to do well, you should make this ceremony well and use it as a model for future generations.

古文：大宁元年，除卫尉少卿，寻兼散骑常侍，聘陈使主。
现代文：太宁元年，任卫尉少卿，不久兼任散骑常侍，出使速塑时任主使。
English: In the first year of Tainin, he was appointed to the position of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Guards, and soon he was also appointed to the position of Knight's Equerry, and he was the chief envoy of the Rapid Plastic Molding Company.

古文：瞻词韵温雅，南人大相钦服，乃言： 常侍前朝通好之日，何意不来？ 
现代文：崔盐词韵温雅，南人非常钦佩他，就说： 常侍在前朝通好之，为什么不来? 
English: Cui Yan's words and rhymes are gentle, and the Nan people admire him very much. They said, "The regular attendant was well-liked in the previous dynasty, why not come?"

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：可见他是如此被看重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：还除太常少卿，加冠军将军，转尚书吏部郎中。
现代文：回来后任太常少卿，加授冠军将军，改任尚书吏部郎中。
English: After his return, he was appointed as a junior secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, was awarded the title of champion general, and was reassigned as a junior secretary of the Ministry of Education.

古文：因患急十余日。
现代文：因病请假十余日。
English: He took more than 10 days off due to illness.

古文：旧式，百日不上解官，吏部尚书尉瑾性褊急，以瞻举指舒缓，曹务繁剧，遂附驿奏闻，因而被代。
现代文：旧时制度，一百不上朝便被解职，吏部尚书尉奋性情狭隘急躁，因崔瞻举止舒缓，而公务极其繁重，于是派驿使奏报朝廷，崔盐的官职因此被取代。
English: Under the old system, officials who failed to reach 100 points were dismissed from their posts. The head of the personnel department, Shang Shufeng, was narrow-minded and impatient, while Cui Zhan's demeanor was relaxed and his official duties were extremely heavy. Therefore, an envoy was sent to report to the imperial court, and Cui Yan's official post was replaced.

古文：瞻遂免归乡里。
现代文：崔瞻于是免官回乡。
English: As a result, Cui Zhan was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown.

古文：天统末，加骠骑大将军，就拜银青光禄大夫。
现代文：天统末年，加授骠骑大将军，就任银青光禄大夫。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was awarded the title of General of Horse Cavalry and was appointed as the Silver Qingguanglu Doctor.

古文：武平三年卒，时年五十四。
现代文：武垩三年去世，时年五十四岁。
English: Wu Yao died three years later, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：赠使持节、都督济州军事、大理卿、刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：赠封使持节、都督适业军事、大理卿、刺史，谧号为文。
English: His posthumous titles included Jijisai, the military governor Shigeyoshi, the lord of Dali, and Sashi, and his posthumous name was Wen.

古文：瞻性简傲，以才地自矜，所与周旋，皆一时名望。
现代文：崔脍性情傲慢，因有才能和门第而自傲，所交往的都是当时有名望的人。
English: Cui Gan was arrogant by nature, proud of his talent and lineage, and associated with people who were famous at the time.

古文：在御史台，恒于宅中送食，备尽珍羞，别室独餐，处之自若。
现代文：在御史台，一直由家中送饭，山珍海味齐备，在单间裹独自用餐，处之自若。
English: At Goshidai, meals have always been sent from home, with mountain delicacies and seafood available, and you can dine alone in a single room and feel at ease.

古文：有一河东人士姓裴，亦为御史，伺瞻食，便往造焉。
现代文：有一位河东人士姓裴，也是御史，探察到崔膪用餐，便前去造访。
English: A person from the east of the river with the surname of Pei, who is also a historian, observed Cui Yao having a meal and went to pay a visit.

古文：瞻不与交言，又不命匕箸。
现代文：崔瞻不与他交谈，也不让人给他羹匙和筷子。
English: Cui Zhan would not talk to him, nor would anyone give him a spoon or chopsticks.

古文：裴坐观瞻食罢而退。
现代文：裴御史便坐观崔瞻吃完然后告退。
English: Pei then watched as Cui Zhan finished eating and then left.

古文：明日，裴自携匕箸，恣情饮啖。
现代文：第二天，裴御史自带匙筷，纵情吃喝。
English: The next day, Pei Yishi brought his own spoon and chopsticks and indulged in eating and drinking.

古文：瞻方谓裴云： 我初不唤君食，亦不共君语，君遂能不拘小节。
现代文：崔盐此时才对箠壬蝗说： 我起初不让您吃饭，也不同您讲话，您于是才能不拘小节。
English: It was only at this time that Cui Yan said to Yan Ren Locust: At first, I didn't let you eat, and I didn't speak to you, so that you could act freely.

古文：昔刘毅在京口，冒请鹅炙，岂亦异于是乎？君定名士。 
现代文：过去型堑在塞旦，冒然地请求吃烤鹅，难道与您的作法有什么不同吗?您肯定是位名士。 
English: Is it any different from what you used to do in Sedan, when you used to ask for roast goose? You must be a celebrity.

古文：于是每与之同食。
现代文：于是每日与裴御史一起用餐。
English: As a result, he dined with Bae every day.

古文：昆季仲文，有学尚，魏高阳太守、清河内史。
现代文：崔棱的弟弟仲文，有学议，曾任魏高阳太守、清河内史。
English: Cui Ren's younger brother, Zhong Wen, was a scholar who served as the governor of Gaoyang in the Wei Dynasty and the governor of Hanoi in the Qing Dynasty.

古文：兴和中，为丞相掾。
现代文：兴和年间，任丞相掾。
English: During the Heian period, he served as chancellor.

古文：沙苑之败，仲文持马尾以渡河，波中乍没乍出。
现代文：沙苑战败，仲文手抓马尾渡河，在波浪中忽没忽出。
English: Sha Yuan was defeated, Zhong Wen grabbed Ma Mei to cross the river, and suddenly disappeared in the waves.

古文：高祖望见曰： 崔掾也。 
现代文：高祖望见后说： 是崔掾。 
English: Gao Zu looked at him and said, "It's Cui Ye."

古文：遽遣船赴接。
现代文：立即派船去接他。
English: Send a ship to pick him up immediately.

古文：既济，劳之曰： 卿为亲为君，不顾万死，可谓家之孝子，国之忠臣。 
现代文：过河后，高祖慰劳仲文说： 你为了亲人为了国君，万死不顾，可称得上是家庭的孝子，国家的忠臣。 
English: After crossing the river, Gao Zu consoled Lao Zhongwen and said, "You are a filial son of the family and a loyal vassal of the country, regardless of death for the sake of your relatives and for the sake of the sovereign.

古文：加中军将军。
现代文：加授中军将军。
English: He was also awarded the title of General of the Chinese Army.

古文：天保初，拜散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
现代文：天保初年，授任散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was awarded the position of Sanzhi (free-riding) regular attendant and Guanglu doctor.

古文：七年卒，年六十。
现代文：天保七年去世，时年六十岁。
English: Tenpo died seven years later at the age of sixty.

古文：子偃，武平中，历太子洗马、尚书郎。
现代文：儿子崔僵，武平年间，历任太子洗马、尚书郎。
English: His son Cui Zi, during the years of Wu Ping, the successive princes Shema and Shang Shuro.

古文：偃弟儦，学识有才思，风调甚高。
现代文：崔偃的弟弟崔俨，学识广博有才气，品格情调高洁。
English: Cui Wei's younger brother, Cui Wei, is well-educated, talented, and has a high moral character.

古文：武平中，琅琊王大司马中兵参军。
现代文：武垩年间，任噩玺王大司马中兵参军。
English: During the reign of King Wu of Wuyuan, he was appointed as the grand secretary of the King of Wuyuan and joined the army.

古文：参定五礼，待诏文林馆。
现代文：参定五礼，待诏塞林馆。
English: Attend the ceremony and perform the five rites, and then leave for the Saling Pavilion.

古文：隋仁寿中，卒于通直散骑常侍。
现代文：隋仁寿年间，在通直散骑常侍任上去世。
English: During Sui Ren Shou's lifetime, he passed away while serving as a regular attendant of Tongzhi Sanzhi.

古文：叔仁，魏颍州刺史。
现代文：叔仁，曾任魏续州刺史。
English: Shujin, once served as Wei and Liaoning prefectural governor.

古文：子彦武，有识用，朝歌令。
现代文：儿子彦武，有学识舆才能，作过朝歌令。
English: His son, Hikotake, has a talent for learning and public speaking, and has composed a morning song.

古文：隋开皇初，魏州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇初年，任毯业刺史。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, the carpet industry made history.

古文：子侃，魏末兼通直常侍，聘梁使。
现代文：儿子崔伹，龚末兼任通直常侍，出访梁朝时作使官。
English: His son, Cui Yao, also served as Tsun Zhi's aide-de-camp at the end of his life, and was sent as an envoy to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：子极，武平初太子仆，卒于武德郡守。
现代文：儿子崔极，武平初年任太子仆，在任武德郡守时去世。
English: His son, Cui Ji, who served as a servant to the crown prince in the early years of Wu Ping, died while serving as the governor of Wude County.

古文：子聿，魏东莞太守。
现代文：儿子崔皇，是龚塞差太守。
English: His son, Emperor Cui, was the pretender to the throne.

古文：子约，司空祭酒。
现代文：儿子崔约，曾任司空祭酒。
English: His son, Cui You, was once a priest of the Sky Festival.

古文：族叔景凤，字鸾叔，五世祖逞玄孙也。
现代文：崔的族叔量凰，字銮拯，是崔堡五世袒崔逞的玄孙。
English: Cui Gan's ancestor, named Cui Zheng, was the great-great-grandson of Cui Gan, the fifth generation of the Cui family.

古文：景凤涉学，以医术知名。
现代文：基凰好学，以医术而出名。
English: Jihuang was a studious person and was famous for his medical skills.

古文：魏尚药典御，天保中谯州刺史。
现代文：曾任魏尚药典御，天保年间任谯州刺史。
English: He once served as Wei Shang's pharmacist, and during the Tenpo era, he served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：景凤兄景哲，魏太中大夫、司徒长史。
现代文：景凤的哥哥景蜇，曾任魏太中大夫、司徒长史。
English: Jing Feng's elder brother, Jing Hao, was once Wei Taizhong's chief physician, as well as the tutor of Emperor Jiajing.

古文：子国，字法峻，幼好学，泛览经传，多伎艺，尤工相术。
现代文：儿子崔国，字这些，自幼好学，博览经史，掌握多种技艺，尤其擅长相术。
English: The son of Cui Guo, these characters, since childhood, are eager to learn, are well versed in history, master a variety of skills, and are particularly good at the art of physiognomy.

古文：天保初尚药典御，乾明拜高阳郡太守、太子家令，武平假仪同三司，卒于鸿胪卿。
现代文：天保初年任尚药典御，干明年间授任高阳郡太守、太子家令，亘丰年间被任命为假仪同三司，在任鸿膻卿时去世。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the Emperor of Medicine, and in the next year, he was appointed as the Governor of Goyang County and the Prince of the Prince's Household. During the Wanfeng era, he was appointed as the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and he died while he was serving as the Lord of Hung Hom.

古文：法峻以武平六年从驾在晋阳，尝语中书侍郎李德林云： 此日看高相王以下文武官人相表，俱尽其事，口不忍言。
现代文：法峻于武平六年随同御驾在晋阳，曾对中书侍郎李德林说： 今天观看产担王以下文武官员的面相，都能尽心尽力成就高相王的事业，我不忍讲。
English: In the six years that Fa Jun accompanied Wu Ping to Jinyang, he once said to Li Delin, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters: Today, when I look at the faces of the civil and military officials from the production manager to the king, I can't help but say that they can do their best to achieve the cause of the high-ranking king.

古文：唯弟一人，更应富贵，当在他国，不在本朝，吾亦不及见也。 
现代文：衹有兄弟你一个人，更应富贵，当会在他国，不在本朝，我也来不及看见了。 
English: If thou hadst a brother, he were richer than thou, and mightest have found him in another country, but not here, and I have not seen him since.

古文：其精妙如此。
现代文：他的相术就是如此精妙。
English: His reading is just so exquisite.

古文：族子肇师，魏尚书仆射亮之孙也。
现代文：崔同族兄弟之子箜胚，是盏尚书仆射崔台的孙子。
English: He is the son of Choe Ryong's brothers and the grandson of Choe Son's servant Choe Tae.

古文：父士太，谏议大夫。
现代文：他的父亲主，曾任谏议大夫。
English: His father, Lord, was a doctor in the Imperial College of Physicians.

古文：肇师少时疏放，长遂变节，更成谨厚。
现代文：刍随年轻时疏散狂放，成年后有了改变，变得谨慎敦厚。
English: As a young man, he was wild and free, but as an adult, he changed and became cautious and prudent.

古文：涉猎经史，颇有文思。
现代文：涉猎经史，颇有文思。
English: He dabbles in the history of scripture and is quite thoughtful.

古文：袭父爵乐陵男。
现代文：承袭了父亲銮陵昱的爵位。
English: He inherited his father's peerage from his father.

古文：释褐开府东阁祭酒，转司空外兵参军，迁大司马府记室参军。
现代文：出仕，任开府束合祭酒，改任司空外兵参军，升任大司马府记室参军。
English: He served in the army, and was appointed as the Keifu Sokai Sake brewer, and then he was appointed as the Air Force Foreign Soldier to join the army, and was promoted to the Chief Secretary of the Mafu Records Office to join the army.

古文：天平初，转通直侍郎，为尉劳青州使。
现代文：天平初年，改任通直侍郎，为慰劳青州使。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, he was reassigned as Tsunenao Jiro, and sent to Qingzhou as a consolation prize.

古文：至齐州界，为土贼崔迦叶等所虏，欲逼与同事。
现代文：行至齐州界内，被土贼崔迦叶等人俘虏，贼人打算逼迫肇师同他们共事。
English: He went as far as within the boundaries of Chizhou and was captured by the local thieves Cui Jiaye and others. The thieves intended to force Zhao Shi to work with them.

古文：肇师执节不动，谕以祸福，贼遂舍之。
现代文：肇师坚守节操不动摇，并对贼人讲明祸福，贼人于是放了他。
English: The instigator was unwavering in his adherence to ethics, and explained the benefits and drawbacks to the thief, who then released him.

古文：乃巡慰青部而还。
现代文：肇师得以巡行慰问了青部后返回。
English: The perpetrator was able to make a tour of condolences to the youth and then returned.

古文：元象中，数以中舍人接梁使。
现代文：元象年间，多次以中舍人的身份接待梁朝使者。
English: During Yuan Xiang's reign, he received the envoys of the Liang Dynasty several times as a Chinese resident.

古文：武定中，复兼中正员郎，送梁使徐州。
现代文：武定年间，又兼中正员郎，送梁使到徐州。
English: During the Wuding era, he also served as the vice-commander of the Central Military Commission, and sent Liang to Xuzhou.

古文：还，敕修起居注。
现代文：回来后，韶令撰写起居注。
English: After returning, he was ordered to write a residence notice.

古文：寻兼通直散骑常侍，聘梁副使。
现代文：不久兼通直散骑常侍，出使梁任副使。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of knight, and sent Liang to serve as vice-envoy.

古文：转中书舍人。
现代文：改任中书舍人。
English: He was reassigned to the position of middle school teacher.

古文：天保初，参定禅代礼仪，封襄城县男，仍兼中书侍郎。
现代文：天保初年。参定禅代礼仪，封襄城县男，仍兼任中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he became a member of the Sangding Zen-Dynasty etiquette, a man from Xiangcheng County, and still served as a junior secretary.

古文：二年卒，时年四十九。
现代文：天保二年去世，时年四十九岁。
English: He died two years later, at the age of 49.

古文：史臣曰：兰根早有名行，为时论所称；长孺才望之美，见重当世。
现代文：史臣曰：兰根名声品行早已闻名，被当时的舆论所称颂；长孺才能名望的美好，被当世看重。
English: Shichen said: Langen's reputation and performance have long been famous and were praised by the public opinion at that time; the beauty of Nagase's talent and reputation were valued by the contemporary world.

古文：并功参霸迹，位遇通显，与李元忠、卢文伟盖义旗之人物欤？
现代文：都因参预霸业而立功，地位显赫，与李元盅、卢主伟一样不都是举起义旗的人物吗?
English: All of them have distinguished themselves by participating in the hegemony, and their status is prominent. Aren't they the same as Li Yuanhui and Lu Zhuhei who raised the banner of righteousness?

古文：魏之要幸附会，崔以门地骄很，虽有周公之美，犹以为累德，况未足喻其高下也。
现代文：魏菌担邀取恩宠荣利依附权贵，崖凭藉门第骄横，虽然有周公之美，仍认为有损于德行，相比之下还未足以喻其高下。
English: Wei fungus takes the lead in taking the grace, glory, wealth, clinging to the powerful, and the cliff is the first to be arrogant. Although it has the beauty of Zhou Gong, it is still considered to be detrimental to virtue, and it is not enough to compare its high and low.

古文：瞻词韵温雅，风神秀发，亦一时之领袖焉。
现代文：崔瞻词韵温雅，风采焕发，也是一时的领袖人物啊。
English: Cui Zhan's lyrics have a gentle rhyme, and his style is radiant. He was also a leader at the time.

古文：赞曰：崔、魏才望，见重霸初。
现代文：赞曰：崔、魏的才能名望，在开创霸业时被看重。
English: Zang said: Cui and Wei's talent and fame were highly valued when they pioneered hegemony.

古文：名教之迹，其犹病诸。
现代文：遵循名教，他们还是有所损害的。
English: They are still harmed by following the cult.

古文：彦通尚志，家风有余。
现代文：彦通崇尚志高，家有余风。
English: Hikotsu is a man of high ideals, and there is a lot of energy in his family.

