古文：令狐德棻，宜州华原人。
现代文：令狐德棻，宜州华原人。
English: Ling Fuxude, a native of Huafu, Yizhou.

古文：父熙，隋鸿胪卿。
现代文：父亲名熙，在隋朝曾任鸿胪卿。
English: His father, Meixi, was once a member of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：其先乃炖煌右姓。
现代文：他祖先是敦煌县的豪门大姓。
English: His ancestor was a wealthy family from Dunhuang County.

古文：德棻博贯文史。
现代文：令狐德棻通晓文艺、史学。
English: Ling Foo Deyao was well versed in literature, art and history.

古文：大业末，为药城长，属乱，不就官。
现代文：隋炀帝大业末年，要他当聄城长，碰上时局动荡，没去上任。
English: In the last years of Emperor Sui's reign, he was asked to be the mayor of Handan, but he did not take up the post when the situation was turbulent.

古文：淮安王神通据太平宫起兵，立总管府，署德棻府记室。
现代文：淮安王李神通占据太平宫起兵响应高祖李渊，成立总管府，安排令狐德棻任总管府记室。
English: Huai'an King Li Shentong occupied the Taiping Palace and raised an army in response to Gaozhu Li Yuan, established the General Administration Office, and arranged for Jing Deyu to serve as the General Administration Office's secretary.

古文：高祖入关，引直大丞相府记室。
现代文：高祖进入关中，推荐他担任大丞相府记室。
English: Gaozu entered Guanzhong and recommended him to serve as the secretary of the Grand Council of State.

古文：武德初，为起居舍人，迁秘书丞。
现代文：高祖武德初年，任起居舍人，提升为秘书丞。
English: In Gao Zuwude's first year, he was promoted to secretary.

古文：帝尝问： 丈夫冠，妇人髻，比高大，何邪？ 
现代文：高祖曾经问道： 男人的帽子、女人的发髻、一样高大，为什么呢？ 
English: Gaozu once asked: A man's hat and a woman's hair bun are the same height, why?

古文：德棻对曰： 冠髻在首，君之象也。
现代文：令狐德棻回答说 ：帽子、发髻在头上，是君主的象征。
English: Ling Deyao replied, "The hat and the hairpin on his head are the symbols of the monarch.

古文：晋之将亡，君弱臣强，故江左士女，衣小而裳大。
现代文：晋朝将要灭亡时，君主权势弱小，臣子权势强大，所以江北的女子，上衣窄小、裙子长大。
English: When the Jin Dynasty was about to fall, the sovereign power was weak and the vassal power was strong. Therefore, the women in the northern part of the Yangtze River wore narrow blouses and long skirts.

古文：宋武帝受命，君德尊严，衣裳随亦变改。
现代文：南朝宋武帝刘裕登位，君主恩德庄重威严，上衣和裙子的大小比例随着也改变了。
English: Emperor Liu Yu of the Southern Song Dynasty ascended to the throne, the monarch Ende was solemn and majestic, and the size ratio of the blouse and skirt changed accordingly.

古文：此近事验也。 
现代文：这是近代的例证。 
English: This is a modern example.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：高祖认为是这样。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：方是时，大乱后，经藉亡散，秘书湮缺，德棻始请帝重购求天下遗书，置吏称录。
现代文：这时正是大乱过后，经典书籍散失，宫中资料残缺，令狐德棻就请求高祖重新征购流散在各地的书籍资料，设立机构任命官吏整理补录。
English: It was at this time, after the Great Turmoil, that the classic books were lost and the information in the palace was incomplete, which made the fox Decheng request Gao Zu to re-acquire the books and materials scattered all over the country, set up an agency to appoint officials to sort out the supplements.

古文：不数年，图典略备。
现代文：没几年工夫，图书典籍大致齐全。
English: Within a few years, the library was almost complete.

古文：又建言： 近代无正史，梁、陈、齐文籍犹可据，至周、隋事多脱损。
现代文：他又建议 ：最近几个朝代没有编纂正式历史，梁、陈、北齐的文史资料还可做依据，至于北周、隋朝的史事记录大多脱漏缺损。
English: He also suggested that the recent dynasties have not compiled official histories, and the literary and historical materials of Liang, Chen and Beiqi can still be used as a basis. As for the historical records of the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties, most of them are incomplete.

古文：今耳目尚相及，史有所冯；一易世，事皆汩暗，无所掇拾。
现代文：如今还有耳闻目睹的人在，编纂史书可做依据；一旦时过境迁，事情都模糊不清，无法收集。
English: Today, there are still people who have heard and witnessed, which can be used as a basis for compiling history books; once the time has passed, things are vague and cannot be collected.

古文：陛下受禅于隋，隋承周，二祖功业多在周，今不论次，各为一王史，则先烈世庸不光明，后无传焉。 
现代文：陛下从隋朝接过帝位，隋朝继承北周的帝位，两代皇祖的功业多半建立在北周，如果不评议次第，各编一部正史，那么祖先的业绩、历代的功劳不能发扬光大，后世就不能流传了。 
English: His Majesty took over the imperial throne from the Sui Dynasty, and the Sui Dynasty inherited the imperial throne from the Northern Zhou Dynasty. The achievements of the two generations of imperial ancestors were mostly built on the Northern Zhou Dynasty. If they do not review and compile a proper history, then the achievements of the ancestors and the merits of the past generations cannot be carried forward, and they cannot be passed down to future generations.

古文：帝谓然。
现代文：高祖认为是这样。
English: Gaozu thought so.

古文：于是诏中书令萧瑀、给事中王敬业、著作郎殷闻礼主魏，中书令封德彝、舍人颜师古主隋，大理卿崔善为、中书舍人孔绍安、太子洗马萧德言主梁，太子詹事裴矩、吏部郎中祖孝孙，秘书丞魏征主齐，秘书监窦璡、给事中欧阳询、文学姚思廉主陈，侍中陈叔达、大史令庾俭及德棻主周。
现代文：于是诏令中书令萧蠫、给事中王敬业、著作郎殷闻礼主编魏史，中书令封德彝、舍人颜师古主编隋史，大理卿崔善为、中书舍人孔绍安、太子洗马萧德言主编梁史，太子詹事裴矩、吏部郎中祖孝孙、秘书丞魏征主编齐史，秘书监窦、给事中欧阳询、文学姚思廉主编陈史，侍中陈叔达、太史令庾俭以及令狐德棻主编北周史。
English: As a result, in the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict of the edict

古文：整振论譔，多历年不能就，罢之。
现代文：搜集整理讨论撰写，大多过了一年也没有编纂成功，便停顿下来。
English: After collecting, sorting, discussing and writing, most of them did not succeed in compiling after a year, and then paused.

古文：贞观三年，复诏撰定。
现代文：太宗贞观三年，又下诏命令撰写定稿。
English: Three years later, Taizong Zhenguan issued another order to write the final draft.

古文：议者以魏有魏收、魏澹二家，书为已详，惟五家史当立。
现代文：有人认为魏史已有魏收、魏澹编撰的两种版本，写得已很详细完备，但北周、齐、梁、陈、隋五朝的历史应当编纂。
English: Some people think that the history of the Wei Dynasty has been compiled in two versions, the Wei Collection and the Wei Dynasty Compilation, and has been written in great detail. However, the history of the Northern Zhou, Qi, Liang, Chen and Sui Dynasties should be compiled.

古文：德棻更与秘书郎岑文本、殿中侍御史崔仁师次周史，中书舍人李百药次齐史，著作郎姚思廉次梁、陈二史，秘书监魏征次隋史，左仆射房玄龄总监。
现代文：令狐德棻又与秘书郎岑文本、殿中侍御史崔仁师编北周史，中书舍人李百药编齐史，著作郎姚思廉编梁史、陈史，秘书监魏征编隋史，左仆射房玄龄主持这项工作。
English: Linghu Decheng also compiled the history of the Northern Zhou Dynasty with his secretary Lang Wei, the palace attendant Shi Cui Ren, and the Chinese scholar Li Baiyao, the author of the history of the Liang Dynasty, the author of the history of the Liang Dynasty, the author of the history of the Chen Dynasty, the secretary of the Wei Dynasty and the editor of the history of the Sui Dynasty, and the left-hand servant Shifang Xuanling presided over this work.

古文：脩撰之原，自德棻发之，书成，赐绢四百匹。
现代文：编纂这些史书的提议，由令狐德棻提出，史书编写成功后，赏赐给他四百匹绢。
English: The proposal to compile these history books was put forward by Ling Xudejun. After the success of compiling the history books, he was awarded four hundred horses.

古文：迁礼部侍郎，兼修国史。
现代文：他被提升为礼部侍郎，兼职编写本朝历史。
English: He was promoted to the position of etiquette attendant and worked part-time compiling the history of the dynasty.

古文：累进爵彭城县子。
现代文：逐步加封爵位为彭城县子。
English: Gradually, he was awarded the title of Pengcheng County.

古文：转太子右庶子。
现代文：后又改任太子右庶子。
English: Later, he was reappointed as the second son of the Crown Prince.

古文：太子承乾废，坐除名为民。
现代文：太子李承乾被废除，令狐德棻受株连罢官成为普通百姓。
English: The crown prince, Li Chengqian, was abolished, and Foo Deyu became an ordinary citizen after being dismissed from his post.

古文：召拜雅州刺史，又坐事免。
现代文：后来召回任命为雅州刺史，又因事获罪免职。
English: Later, he was recalled and appointed as the governor of Yashu, but he was also removed from office for his crime.

古文：会修晋家史，房玄龄奏起之。
现代文：碰上编纂晋史，房玄龄奏请起用他。
English: When it comes to compiling the history of the Jin Dynasty, please use Fang Xuanling.

古文：预柬凡十有八人，德棻为先进，故类例多所诹定。
现代文：参加撰写的共十八人，令狐德棻是老前辈，所以分类、条例多半由他拟定。
English: A total of eighteen people participated in the writing, and Ling Deyu is an old-timer, so the classification and regulations are mostly drafted by him.

古文：除秘书少监。
现代文：授予秘书少监职务。
English: The secretary was given the post of junior superintendent.

古文：永徽初，复为礼部侍郎、弘文馆学士，监修国史，迁太常卿。
现代文：高宗永徽初年，又任礼部侍郎、弘文馆学士，主持编写本朝历史，提升为太常卿。
English: In the first year of Gao Zongyonghui, he also served as an attendant of the etiquette department and a scholar of the Hongwen Museum, presided over the compilation of the history of this dynasty, and was promoted to the Tai Changqing.

古文：高宗尝召宰相及弘文学士坐中华殿，问： 何脩而王？
现代文：高宗曾经召集宰相和弘文学士在中华殿论辩，问： 怎样做才是王道？
English: Gao Zong once summoned the prime minister and the scholar of literature to argue in the Great Hall of the People, asking: How to do is the royal road?

古文：若而霸？
现代文：怎样做才是霸道？
English: How to be domineering?

古文：又当孰先？ 
现代文：又应该把哪种摆在前头？ 
English: Which one should be put first?

古文：德棻曰： 王任德，霸任刑。
现代文：令狐德棻说： 王道采用德政，霸道采用刑罚。
English: Ling Fuxude said: The kingly way is to adopt virtue politics, and the domineering way is to adopt punishment.

古文：夏、殷、周纯用德而王，秦专刑而霸，至汉杂用之，魏、晋以降，王霸两失。
现代文：夏朝、商朝、周朝纯粹采用德政就是王道，秦朝专门采用刑罚就是霸道，到了汉朝王道、霸道都用，曹魏、晋朝以后，王道、霸道都丢失了。
English: In the Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties, the pure use of German politics was the king's way, while the Qin dynasty's special use of punishment was the domineering way. In the Han dynasty, the king's way and the domineering way were both used, but after the Cao Wei and Jin dynasties, the king's way and the domineering way were lost.

古文：若用之，王为先，而莫难焉。 
现代文：如果要用，先用王道，但最难用好。 
English: If you want to use, first use the royal road, but the most difficult to use.

古文：帝曰： 今兹何为而要？ 
现代文：高宗说： 如今什么最为重要？ 
English: Gao Zong said: What is the most important thing now?

古文：对曰： 古者为政，清心简事为本。
现代文：令孤德棻回答说 ：古人主持朝政，把清心寡欲，减轻百姓负担作为根本。
English: Ling Kuo replied, "The ancients presided over the imperial government, and took the principles of being pure-hearted and having few desires, and lightening the burden on the people, as the foundation.

古文：今天下无虞，年谷丰衍，惟薄赋敛、省征役为要。 
现代文：如今天下很太平，全年粮食大丰收，只有减少税收、减轻劳役最为重要。 
English: If the current situation is very peaceful and the grain harvest is large throughout the year, only the reduction of taxes and the reduction of labor service are the most important.

古文：又问禹、汤、桀、纣所以兴亡，对曰： 《传》称： 禹、汤罪己，其兴也勃焉；桀、纣罪人，其亡也忽焉。 
现代文：高宗又问夏禹、商汤兴盛，夏桀、纣王衰亡的原因，令狐德棻回答说： 《左传》上讲： 夏禹、商汤遇事归罪于自己，他们兴盛就迅速；夏桀、纣王凡事归罪于他人，他们衰亡也就很快。 
English: Gao Zong also asked Xia Yu and Shang Tang about the reasons for their prosperity and for the decline and fall of Xia Yao and Shao Wang. Ling Xude Yao replied: "Zo Zhuan" said: Xia Yu and Shang Tang blamed themselves for their misfortunes, and they prospered quickly; Xia Yao and Shao Wang blamed others for everything, and they also declined quickly.

古文：然二主惑嬖色，戮谏者，造砲烙之刑，此所以亡也。 
现代文：这两位国君迷恋女色，杀戮劝谏的人，开创炮烙的酷刑，这就是他们灭亡的原因。 
English: These two emperors were infatuated with women, killed those who tried to dissuade them, and pioneered the torture of branding, which is the reason for their demise.

古文：卒，后曰： 琮不幸，令虽不举哀，然朕以股肱，特废视事一日。 李延寿者，世居相州。
现代文：高宗非常喜悦，用丰厚的赏赐酬谢他的论述。提升他为国子祭酒、崇贤馆学士，封给公的爵位。以金紫光禄大夫的头衔辞职退休。去世时八十四岁，谥号为宪。李延寿，世代居住相州。
English: Gao Zong was very pleased and thanked him with a rich reward for his discussion. He was promoted to the national son's sacrificial wine, the academician of the Chongxian Hall, and given a royal title. He resigned and retired with the title of the Golden Purple Guanglu Doctor. He was eighty-four years old at the time of his death, and his nickname was Xian. Li Yanshu, lived in Xiangzhou for generations.

古文：贞观中，累补太子典膳丞、崇贤馆学士。
现代文：太宗贞观年间，逐步升任太子典膳丞、崇贤馆学士。
English: During the reign of Taizong Zhenguan, he was gradually promoted to Taizi Tenzenzenzhenjo and Chongxian Academy.

古文：以脩撰劳，转御史台主簿，兼直国史。
现代文：由于编写史书有功，改任御史台主簿，代理国史。
English: Due to his achievements in compiling history books, he was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of the Imperial History Museum, acting as the representative of national history.

古文：初，延寿父太师，多识前世旧事，常以宋、齐、梁、陈、齐、周、隋天下参隔，南方谓北为 索虏 ，北方指南为 岛夷 。
现代文：当初，李延寿的父亲李大师，记得很多前朝旧事，一直认为宋、齐、梁、陈、北齐、北周、隋朝天下阻隔，南方称北方为 索虏 ，北方称南方为 岛夷 。
English: At the beginning, Li Yanshou's father, Master Li, remembered many things about the previous dynasties, and always believed that the Song, Qi, Liang, Chen, Northern Qi, Northern Zhou, and Sui dynasties were separated from the rest of the world. The south called the north "Sokru" and the north called the south "Shima Yi."

古文：其史于本国详，佗国略，往往訾美失传，思所以改正，拟《春秋》编年，刊究南北事，未成而殁。
现代文：它们的史料对本国记载得详细，对别国记载得简略，往往褒贬失实，考虑修改订正，打算仿照《春秋》的编年体例，校正探求南北史实。还没有编成就去世了。
English: Their historical records are detailed for their own country, but they are brief for other countries, and they often praise or disparage the truth, consider revising and revising, and intend to follow the chronology of "Spring and Autumn" to correct and explore the historical facts of the north and south. They have not yet died.

古文：延寿既数与论譔，所见益广，乃追终先志。
现代文：李延寿多次参与评议撰述工作，见闻更加广博，要继续实现他父亲的遗愿。
English: Li Yanshou has participated in the review and writing of the work many times, and his knowledge is more extensive. He wants to continue to realize his father's last wish.

古文：本魏登国元年，尽隋义宁二年，作本纪十二、列传八十八，谓之《北史》；本宋永初元年，尽陈祯明三年，作本纪十、列传七十，谓之《南史》。
现代文：他从北魏拓跋王圭登国元年起，到隋恭帝杨侑义宁二年止，撰写本纪十二篇，列传八十八篇，称为《北史》；从宋武帝刘裕永初元年起，到陈后主陈叔宝祯明三年止，撰写本纪十篇、列传七十篇，叫作《南史》。
English: From the first year of the reign of the Northern Wei Emperor Gui Dengguo to the second year of the reign of the Sui Emperor Yang Pi Yining, he wrote 12 chapters of this history and listed 88 chapters, called "Northern History"; from the first year of the reign of the Song Emperor Liu Yu Yong to the third year of the reign of the Chen Empress Chen Shubao Ming, he wrote 10 chapters of this history and listed 70 chapters, called "Southern History."

古文：凡八代，合二书百八十篇，上之。
现代文：共写了八个朝代，两套书合计一百八十篇，进献给皇上。
English: He wrote a total of eight dynasties, two sets of books with a total of one hundred and eighty articles, which he dedicated to the emperor.

古文：其书颇有条理，删落酿辞，过本书远甚。
现代文：这两套书很有条理，删改润色，大大超过原书。
English: These two sets of books are very well organized, and the editing and polishing greatly exceed the original books.

古文：时人见年少位下，不甚称其书。
现代文：当时人们见他年纪轻，地位低，不大赞赏这两套书。
English: At that time, people saw him as a young man with a low status and did not appreciate these two sets of books.

古文：迁符玺郎，兼脩国史，卒。
现代文：提升为符玺郎，兼职编写本朝历史，直到去世。
English: He was promoted to the position of Fushiro and worked part-time compiling the history of this dynasty until his death.

古文：尝撰《太宗政典》，调露中，高宗观之，咨美直笔，赐其家帛五十段，藏副秘阁，仍别录以赐皇太子云。
现代文：他写了篇《太宗政典》，调露年间，高宗看到后，对他记事真实大加赞美，赐给他家五十段帛，把复制本藏进了宫庭图书库，还另抄了一套赐给皇太子。
English: He wrote an article, "Taizong's Political Code," and when Gaozong saw it years later, he praised the veracity of his memoirs, gave his family fifty pages of it, hid a copy of it in the palace library, and also copied another set to give to the crown prince.

