古文：十有三年春，晋侯使郤锜来乞师。
现代文：十三年春季，晋侯派遣郤锜来鲁国请求援兵。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Jin Dynasty, the Jin emperors sent the envoys to Lu to request reinforcements.

古文：三月，公如京师。
现代文：三月，鲁成公到京师。
English: In March, Lu Chenggong went to Beijing to study.

古文：夏五月，公自京师，遂会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、邾人、滕人伐秦。
现代文：夏季五月，成公改道而行，去与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、邾人、滕人一起征讨秦国。
English: In the summer of May, Chengong changed his path and went to conquer Qin with Jin, Qi, Song, Wei, Zheng, Cao, Qin and Teng.

古文：曹伯卢卒于师。
现代文：曹宣公庐在军中去世。
English: Cao Xuan Gongjun died in the army.

古文：秋七月，公至自伐秦。
现代文：秋季七月，鲁成公从征讨秦国的战场上回来。
English: In the autumn of July, Lu Chenggong returned from the battlefield to conquer Qin.

古文：冬，葬曹宣公。
现代文：冬季，安葬曹宣公。
English: In winter, Cao Xuan Gong was buried.

古文：十三年春，晋侯使郤锜来乞师，将事不敬。
现代文：十三年春季，晋厉公派遣郤犫来鲁国请求援兵，处理事情态度不严肃。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Jin Dynasty, Jin Liguo sent his envoy to Lu to request reinforcements, but he did not take the matter seriously.

古文：孟献子曰： 郤氏其亡乎！
现代文：孟献子说： 郤氏恐怕要灭亡了吧！
English: Meng Xianzi said, "Shao is about to perish!

古文：礼，身之干也。敬，身之基也。
现代文：礼仪，是身体的躯干；恭敬，是身体的基础。
English: Etiquette is the trunk of the body; respect is the foundation of the body.

古文：郤子无基。
现代文：郤子却没有基础。
English: The ministry has lost its foundation.

古文：且先君之嗣卿也，受命以求师，将社稷是卫，而惰，弃君命也。不亡何为？ 
现代文：而且作为先君的嗣卿，接受命令而来请求出兵，想保卫国家，但却怠惰，这是不顾国君的命令，不灭亡还做什么？ 
English: Moreover, as the heir of the former king, he received orders to come and request the dispatch of troops, he wanted to defend the country, but he was lazy, this was in spite of the king's orders, what else could he do if he did not perish?

古文：三月，公如京师。
现代文：三月，鲁成公到京师。
English: In March, Lu Chenggong went to Beijing to study.

古文：宣伯欲赐，请先使，王以行人之礼礼焉。
现代文：宣伯想要得到赏赐，请求先行出使。周简王用对普通外交官的礼仪来接待他。
English: Xuanbo wanted to be rewarded and asked to be sent first. Zhou Jianwang received him with the etiquette of an ordinary diplomat.

古文：孟献子从，王以为介，而重贿之。
现代文：孟献子跟从成公，周简王把他作为成公的第一位外交官，而重重地赠给他财礼。
English: Meng Xianzi followed Chenggong, and King Zhou Jian treated him as Chenggong's first diplomat and presented him with many gifts.

古文：公及诸侯朝王，遂从刘康公、成肃公会晋侯伐秦。
现代文：成公和诸侯朝觐周简王，接着就跟从刘康公、成肃公会合晋厉公进攻秦国。
English: Cheng Gong and the princes made a pilgrimage to Zhou Jian Wang, and then followed Liu Kang Gong and Cheng Su Gong to join Jin Liguo in attacking Qin.

古文：成子受脤于社，不敬。
现代文：成肃公在社神庙接受祭肉的时候，不恭敬。
English: When Cheng Su Gong received the sacrificial meat at the shrine temple, he was not respectful.

古文：刘子曰： 吾闻之，民受天地之中以生，所谓命也。
现代文：刘康公说： 我听说：百姓得到天地的中和之气而降生，这就是所谓生命。
English: Liu Kang said, "I have heard that people are born when they receive the neutralizing energy of heaven and earth. This is called life.

古文：是以有动作礼义威仪之则，以定命也。
现代文：因此就有动作、礼义、威仪的准则，用来固定天命。
English: Therefore, there is a code of action, etiquette, and dignity, which is used to fix the destiny.

古文：能者养之以福，不能者败以取祸。
现代文：有能力的人保持这些可以得福，没有能力的人败坏这些足以取祸。
English: Those who have the ability to maintain these can be blessed, and those who do not have the ability to corrupt these are enough to cause trouble.

古文：是故君子勤礼，小人尽力，勤礼莫如致敬，尽力莫如敦笃，敬在养神，笃在守业。
现代文：所以君子勤于礼法，小人竭尽力量。勤于礼法莫过于恭敬，竭尽力量莫过于敦厚笃实。恭敬在于供奉神灵，笃实在于各安本分。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is diligent in the etiquette, and a villain exhausts his strength. There is nothing more diligent in the etiquette than respect, and there is nothing more exhausting than being dignified. Respect lies in offering to the gods, and being dignified lies in fulfilling one's duties.

古文：国之大事，在祀与戎，祀有执膰，戎有受脤，神之大节也。
现代文：国家的大事情，在于祭祀和战争。祭祀有分祭肉之礼，战争有受祭肉之礼，这是和神灵交往的大节。
English: The great affairs of the state lie in sacrifice and war. In sacrifice, there is the rite of offering sacrificial meat; in war, there is the rite of receiving sacrificial meat. This is the great festival of communion with the gods.

古文：今成子惰，弃其命矣，其不反乎？ 
现代文：现在成子表现出懒惰不恭，丢弃天命了，恐怕回不来了吧！ 
English: Now Cheng Zi is showing laziness and disrespect, he has thrown away his destiny, I'm afraid he won't be able to come back!

古文：夏四月戊午，晋侯使吕相绝秦，曰： 昔逮我献公，及穆公相好，戮力同心，申之以盟誓，重之以昏姻。
现代文：夏季，四月初五日，晋厉公派遣吕相去和秦国断绝外交关系，说： 从前我先君晋献公和贵国先君秦穆公互相友好，合力同心，用盟誓来表明，再用婚姻加深两国关系。
English: In the summer, on the 5th day of the 4th month of the year, Jin Li Gong sent Lv Xiang to break off diplomatic relations with Qin, saying: In the past, my predecessor Jin Xian Gong and your predecessor Qin Mu Gong were friendly to each other, worked together, and used oaths to show that they would use marriage to deepen relations between the two countries.

古文：天祸晋国，文公如齐，惠公如秦。
现代文：上天降祸于晋国，文公到了齐国，惠公到了秦国。
English: Heaven's curse fell on Jin Province, while Wen Gong came to Qi Province and Huigong came to Qin Province.

古文：无禄，献公即世，穆公不忘旧德，俾我惠公用能奉祀于晋。又不能成大勋，而为韩之师。
现代文：不幸，献公去世。穆公不忘记过去的恩德，使我们惠公因此能在晋国主持祭祀，但又不能完成重大的勋劳，却和我国有了韩地之战。
English: Unfortunately, Mu Gong passed away. Mu Gong did not forget the kindnesses of the past, which allowed our Huigong to preside over the sacrificial rites in Jin Province, but he was unable to complete the important work, and our country had the Korean War.

古文：亦悔于厥心，用集我文公，是穆之成也。
现代文：后来心里又有些懊悔，因此成就了我们文公回国为君，这都是秦穆公的功劳。
English: Later, there was some remorse in my heart, so we achieved the return of Wen Gong to the country for you, which is all the merit of Qin Mu Gong.

古文：文公躬擐甲胄，跋履山川，踰越险阻，征东之诸侯，虞、夏、商、周之胤，而朝诸秦，则亦既报旧德矣。
现代文：文公亲自身披甲胄，登山涉水，经历艰难险阻，征服东方的诸侯，虞、夏、商、周的后代都向秦国朝见，也就已经报答过去的恩德了。
English: The descendants of Yu, Xia, Shang and Zhou, who wore armor, climbed mountains and waded through water, experienced hardships and dangers, and conquered the eastern princes, have all met the Qin Dynasty, and have already repaid the past grace.

古文：郑人怒君之疆埸，我文公帅诸侯及秦围郑。秦大夫不询于我寡君，擅及郑盟。
现代文：郑国人侵犯君王的边界，我们文公率领诸侯和秦国共同包围郑国，秦国的大夫不和我们国君商量，擅自和郑国订立了盟约。
English: The people of Zheng invaded the king's borders. We, the princes, led by Wen Gong, and Qin jointly encircled Zheng. The doctors of Qin did not consult with our king, but entered into a treaty with Zheng without authorization.

古文：诸侯疾之，将致命于秦。文公恐惧，绥静诸侯，秦师克还无害，则是我有大造于西也。
现代文：诸侯痛恨这件事，打算和秦国拚命，文公恐惧，安抚诸侯，使秦军得以平安回国而没有受到损害，这就是我国有大功劳于西方秦国之处。
English: The lords hated this, and planned to fight to the death with Qin. The princes were afraid, and appeased the lords, so that the Qin army could return home safely without being harmed. This is where our country has great merit in western Qin.

古文： 无禄，文公即世，穆为不吊，蔑死我君，寡我襄公，迭我殽地，奸绝我好，伐我保城，殄灭我费滑，散离我兄弟，挠乱我同盟，倾覆我国家。
现代文：不幸，文公去世，穆公不善，蔑视我们故去的国君，以我们晋襄公为软弱可欺，突然侵犯我们的殽地，断绝我们同友好国家的往来，攻打我们的城堡，绝灭我们的滑国，离散我们的兄弟之邦，扰乱我们的同盟之国，颠覆我们的国家。
English: Unfortunately, Wengong passed away, Mu Gong was not good, despised our deceased sovereign, took our Jin Xiang Gong as weak and deceitful, suddenly invaded our land, cut off our contacts with friendly countries, attacked our castle, destroyed our sliding country, separated our brotherly countries, disturbed our allied countries, and subverted our country.

古文：我襄公未忘君之旧勋，而惧社稷之陨，是以有殽之师。犹愿赦罪于穆公，穆公弗听，而即楚谋我。
现代文：我们襄公没有忘记君王过去的勋劳，而又害怕国家的颠覆，这样才有殽地的这一战役，但还是愿意在穆公那里解释以求赦免罪过。穆公不听，反而亲近楚国来谋害我们。
English: We Xiangong did not forget the past distinguished service of the king, but feared the subversion of the country, so there was this battle in Shunde, but we were still willing to explain to Mu Gong to seek forgiveness for our sins. Mu Gong did not listen, but instead approached the State of Chu to plot against us.

古文：天诱其衷，成王陨命，穆公是以不克逞志于我。
现代文：天意保佑我国，楚成王丧命，穆公因此不能在我国称心如意。
English: Providence has blessed our country. King Chu Cheng lost his life. Therefore, Mu Gong cannot be happy in our country.

古文： 穆、襄即世，康、灵即位。
现代文：穆公、襄公去世，康公、灵公即位。
English: Mu Gong and Xiang Gong passed away, and Kang Gong and Ling Gong ascended the throne.

古文：康公，我之自出，又欲阙翦我公室，倾覆我社稷，帅我蝥贼，以来荡摇我边疆。我是以有令狐之役。
现代文：康公，是我国穆姬所生的，但又想损害我们的公室，颠覆我们的国家，率领我国的内奸，以动摇我们的边疆，因此我国才有了令狐这一战役。
English: Kang Gong was born from our country's Mu Ji, but he also wanted to damage our office, subvert our country, and lead our country's mole to shake our border, so our country had the battle of Linghu.

古文：康犹不悛，入我河曲，伐我涑川，俘我王官，翦我羁马。我是以有河曲之战。
现代文：秦康公还是不肯改悔，又进入我国河曲，攻打我国涑川，掠取我国王官，割断我国的羁马，因此我国才有了河曲这一战役。
English: Qin Kangong still refused to repent, and entered our country Hequ, attacked our country Yingchuan, plundered our king's officials, and cut off our country's horses. Therefore, our country only had the battle of Hequ.

古文：东道之不通，则是康公绝我好也。
现代文：东边的道路不通，那是由于康公同我们断绝友好所造成的。
English: The road to the east is impassable, which is caused by Kang Gong's severing of friendship with us.

古文：及君之嗣也，我君景公引领西望曰： 庶抚我乎！ 
现代文：等到君王继位以后，我们的国君晋景公伸着脖子望着西边说： 也许要安抚我们了吧！ 
English: After the king's succession, our sovereign, Jin Jing Gong, craned his neck and looked to the west and said, "Perhaps he wants to appease us!"

古文：君亦不惠称盟，利吾有狄难，入我河县，焚我箕、郜，芟夷我农功，虔刘我边垂。我是以有辅氏之聚。
现代文：但君王也不考虑和我们结盟，却利用我国有狄人的祸难，侵入我国的河县，焚烧我国的箕地、郜地，抢割我国的庄稼，骚扰我国边境，我国因此而有辅氏的战役。
English: However, the monarch did not even consider an alliance with us, but took advantage of the misfortune of our people, invaded our rivers and counties, burned our ploughed land and ploughed land, robbed our crops, and harassed our borders. As a result, there was a battle of Fu in our country.

古文：君亦悔祸之延，而欲徼福于先君献、穆，使伯车来，命我景公曰： 吾与女同好弃恶，复修旧德，以追念前勋。 
现代文：君王也后悔战祸的蔓延，而想求福于先君晋献公和秦穆公，派遣伯车前来命令我们景公说： 我跟你重修旧好、丢弃怨恨，恢复以往的关系，以追念以前的勋劳。 
English: The king also regretted the spread of the war disaster, and wanted to seek blessings from his predecessors Jin Xian Gong and Qin Mu Gong. He sent a messenger car to come and order us to Jing Gong and said: I will rebuild the old friendship with you, discard the resentment, restore the past relationship, and remember the previous honors.

古文：言誓未就，景公即世。我寡君是以有令狐之会。
现代文：盟誓还没有完成，我晋景公就去世了，因此我们国君才和秦国有令狐的会见。
English: The oath has not yet been completed, and I, Jinjing Gong, have passed away. Therefore, our country's prince has just met with Qin's state-owned fox.

古文：君又不祥，背弃盟誓。
现代文：君王又不善，背弃了盟誓。
English: And the king was not a good man, and he broke his oath.

古文：白狄及君同州，君之仇雠，而我之昏姻也。
现代文：白狄和君王同在雍州境内，他们是君王的仇敌，却是我们的亲戚。
English: Paidi and the king are both in Yongzhou. They are enemies of the king, but they are our relatives.

古文：君来赐命曰： 吾与女伐狄。 
现代文：君王前来命令说： 我跟你攻打狄人。 
English: The king came forward and gave the order: "I'll go with you to fight the Di people."

古文：寡君不敢顾昏姻，畏君之威，而受命于吏。
现代文：寡君不敢顾及亲戚，畏惧君王的威严，就给官吏下令攻打狄人。
English: The tyrant did not dare to take his relatives into consideration, fearing the majesty of the king, so he ordered the officials to attack the Di people.

古文：君有二心于狄，曰： 晋将伐女。 
现代文：但君王又对狄人有了别的念头，告诉他们说： 晋国将要攻打你们。 
English: But the king had other ideas for the Di people and told them: Jin will attack you.

古文：狄应且憎，是用告我。
现代文：对君王的做法，狄人接受而又厌恶，因此就告诉了我们。
English: What the king did was both accepted and abhorred by the people, so they told us about it.

古文：楚人恶君之二三其德也，亦来告我曰： 秦背令狐之盟，而来求盟于我，昭告昊天上帝、秦三公、楚三王曰，余虽与晋出入，余唯利是视。
现代文：楚国人讨厌君王的反复无常，也来告诉我们说： 秦国背弃了令狐的盟约，而来向我国请求结盟： 对着皇天上帝、秦国的三位先公、楚国的三位先王发誓：我虽然和晋国有往来，我只是唯利是图。 
English: The people of Chu hated the king's capriciousness, and they also came to tell us: Qin has reneged on its treaty with Lingfo, and has come to ask for an alliance with our country: I swear to the Emperor God, the three forefathers of Qin, and the three forefathers of Chu: Although I have dealings with Jin, I am only interested in profit.

古文：不穀恶其无成德，是用宣之，以惩不壹。 
现代文：楚国人讨厌秦君反复无常，因此把事情公布出来，以惩戒言行不一的人。  
English: The people of Chu hated Qin's capriciousness, so they made the matter public to punish those who did not live up to their words.

古文：诸侯备闻此言，斯是用痛心疾首，暱就寡人。
现代文：诸侯们都听到你在楚国说的这些话，对你痛恨到极点，都亲近我们晋国。
English: The lords all heard these words you said in Chu and hated you to the extreme. They are all close to us in Jin.

古文：寡人帅以听命，唯好是求。
现代文：我们仍然率领着他们听从你的命令，只想求得同你们友好。
English: We are still leading them to obey your orders, and we only want to be friends with you.

古文：君若惠顾诸侯，矜哀寡人，而赐之盟，则寡人之愿也。其承宁诸侯以退，岂敢徼乱。
现代文：你如果能很好地体谅照顾各位诸侯，同情怜悯我们，而给予订立盟约的机会，那就是我们的愿望了，可以让诸侯退兵，哪里敢寻求战乱呢？
English: If you can well understand and take care of your lords, sympathize and pity us, and give us the opportunity to conclude a covenant, that is our wish, we can let the lords withdraw, where dare we seek war?

古文：君若不施大惠，寡人不佞，其不能以诸侯退矣。
现代文：你如果不肯施予大的恩惠，我没有才能，那也就不能让诸侯们退兵了。
English: If you are not willing to grant me a great favor, I have no talent, so I can't let the lords withdraw.

古文：敢尽布之执事，俾执事实图利之！ 
现代文：请将这些都向你们执掌权力者公布，以便让你们那些执掌权力的人好好考虑怎样有利。
English: Please make this known to those of you in positions of power so that those of you in positions of power can consider the benefits.

古文：秦桓公既与晋厉公为令狐之盟，而又召狄与楚，欲道以伐晋，诸侯是以睦于晋。
现代文：秦桓公已经和晋厉公在令狐结盟，而又召来狄人和楚人，要引导他们进攻晋国，诸侯因此跟晋国和睦。
English: Emperor Qin Huan had already allied with Emperor Jin Li in the Battle of Linghu, and summoned the Di people and the Chu people to lead them to attack Jin, so the princes made peace with Jin.

古文：晋栾书将中军，荀庚佐之。士燮将上军，郤锜佐之。韩厥将下军，荀佐之。赵旃将新军，郤至佐之。
现代文：晋国的栾书率领中军，荀庚作为辅佐；士燮率领上军，郤锜作为辅佐；韩厥率领下军，荀罃作为辅佐；赵旃率领新军，郤至作为辅佐。
English: Jin's Zishu led the Central Army, with Jian Geng as an assistant; Shi Jian led the Upper Army, with Jian as an assistant; Han Jue led the Lower Army, with Jian as an assistant; Zhao Jian led the New Army, with Jian as an assistant.

古文：郤毅御戎，栾鍼为右。
现代文：郤毅驾御战车，栾鍼作为车右。
English: Zou Yi is driving the chariot, Zou Jing is driving on the right.

古文：孟献子曰： 晋帅乘和，师必有大功。 
现代文：孟献子说： 晋国的将领和甲士上下一致，军队必然建立大功。 
English: Meng Xianzi said: The generals and knights of Jin are the same, and the army will inevitably achieve great success.

古文：五月丁亥，晋师以诸侯之师及秦师战于麻隧。
现代文：五月初四日，晋军率领诸侯的军队和秦军在麻隧作战。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month, the Jin army led by the armies of the princes and the Qin army fought in Ma Tunnel.

古文：秦师败绩，获秦成差及不更女父。
现代文：秦军大败，俘虏了秦国的成差和不更女父。
English: The Qin army suffered a crushing defeat and captured Qin's Chengzha and Nongwen's father.

古文：曹宣公卒于师。
现代文：曹宣公死在军中。
English: Cao Xuan Gong died in the army.

古文：师遂济泾，及侯丽而还。
现代文：军队就渡过泾水，到达侯丽然后回去。
English: The army would cross Surabaya, reach Houli and then return.

古文：迓晋侯于新楚。
现代文：军队在新楚迎接晋厉公。
English: The army is in Xinchu to welcome Jin Liguo.

古文：成肃公卒于瑕。
现代文：成肃公死在瑕地。
English: Cheng Su Gong died in a blemish.

古文：六月丁卯夜，郑公子班自訾求入于大宫，不能，杀子印、子羽。反军于市。
现代文：六月十五日夜里，郑国公子班从訾地请求进入祖庙，没有做到，就杀了子印、子羽，回来驻扎在市上。
English: On the night of June 15th, Zheng Guo Gongziban requested to enter the ancestral temple from Handan. When he failed to do so, he killed Zi Yan and Zi Yu and came back to stay in the city.

古文：己巳，子驷帅国人盟于大宫，遂从而尽焚之，杀子如、子、孙叔、孙知。
现代文：十七日，子驷率领国内的人们在祖庙结盟，跟着就全部烧了它，杀了公子班、子駹、孙叔、孙知。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zixuan led the people of the country to form an alliance in the ancestral temple, and then they all burned it, killing Gongziban, Zixuan, Sunshu, and Sun Zhi.

古文：曹人使公子负刍守，使公子欣时逆曹伯之丧。
现代文：曹国人派公子负刍留守，派公子欣时去迎接曹宣公尸体。
English: The people of Cao sent their nobles to stay behind, and sent their nobles to welcome the body of Cao Xuan.

古文：秋，负刍杀其大子而自立也。
现代文：秋季，公子负刍杀了曹宣公的太子而自立为国君，诸侯就请求讨伐他。
English: In the autumn, the prince killed the prince of Cao Xuan Gong and became the sovereign, and the lords asked to fight him.

古文：诸侯乃请讨之，晋人以其役之劳，请俟他年。冬，葬曹宣公。
现代文：晋国人由于他在和秦国作战中有功劳，请求等到以后再讨伐。冬季，安葬曹宣公。
English: The people of Jin, because of his merits in the war with Qin, asked him to wait until later. In winter, Cao Xuan Gong was buried.

古文：既葬，子臧将亡，国人皆将从之。
现代文：安葬以后，子臧准备逃亡，国内的人都要跟着他逃亡。
English: After the burial, Zixuan prepared to flee, and everyone in the country fled with him.

古文：成公乃惧，告罪，且请焉。
现代文：曹成公负刍才感到恐惧，承认罪过，而且请求子臧留下来不要出走。
English: It was only when Cao Chenggong was forced to leave that he felt fear, admitted his guilt, and asked his son to stay and not run away.

古文：乃反，而致其邑。
现代文：子臧这才返回来，然后把采邑还给曹成公。
English: It was only then that Zixuan returned, and then he returned the mining town to Cao Chengguo.

