古文：二十八日，平明，饭而行。
现代文：二十八日夭大亮，吃过饭动身。
English: The twenty-eighth day dawned bright and early. After eating, we set off.

古文：二里，西南出涧口，渡水，逾一小岭，又三里得平畴，则白爽村也。
现代文：二里，往西南出涧口，渡过涧水，越过一座小岭，又走三里见到平坦的田野，就是白爽村了。
English: Two miles to the southwest, out of the gate, across the stream, over a ridge, and then three miles to see the flat fields, is Bai Shuang village.

古文：由白爽村之西复上岭，是为长冲。
现代文：由白爽村的西边又上岭，这是长冲。
English: From the west side of Bai Shuang Village to Shangling, this is Changchong.

古文：五里，转北坳，望西北五峰高突，顶若平台，可夺五台之名。
现代文：五里，转入北边的山坳，望见西北方高高突起五座山峰，峰顶好像平台，可以夺走五台山的名字。
English: Five miles away, turning into the mountains on the north side, you can see the five peaks protruding high in the northwest. The peak looks like a platform, which can take away the name of Mount Wutai.

古文：又西五里，直抵五峰之南，乱尖叠出，十百为群，横见侧出，不可指屈。
现代文：又向西五里，径直来到五座山峰的南面，杂乱的尖峰层层叠叠显露出来，十座百座成群，横着侧着的显现出来，不能屈指计算。
English: Another five miles to the west, straight to the south of the five peaks, the chaotic spikes appeared in layers, and ten hundred groups appeared side by side, which could not be counted.

古文：其阳即为镕村，墟上聚落甚盛，不特山谷所无，亦南中所见者。
现代文：山南就是榕村，集市上聚居了居民十分热闹，不仅是山谷中所没有，也是南部地区少见的地方。
English: Shannan is the village of Zou. The market is crowded with residents and is very lively. This is not only a rarity in the valley, but also a rare place in the southern region.

古文：市多鬻面、打胡麻为油者，因市面为餐，以代午饭焉。
现代文：市场上有很多卖面、榨芝麻油的人，于是买了面当饭，用来代替午饭。
English: There are many people selling noodles and sesame oil on the market, so I bought noodles as a meal to replace lunch.

古文：又西五里为上桥，有水自东北丛尖山之南，西过桥下，即分为二。
现代文：东南方三十里处，有个灵襟洞；南边二里，有座阳流岩。又往西行五里是上桥，有水流源自东北成群的尖山南麓，向西流过桥下，马上分为两条。
English: Thirty miles to the southeast, there is a lingliao cave; two miles to the south, there is a yang flow rock. And five miles to the west is the upper bridge, with water flowing from the southern foot of the northeastern group of pointed mountains, flowing westward under the bridge and immediately dividing into two.

古文：一南去，一西去。又西南三里，过廖村。
现代文：又向西南穿过石山侧面，共走三里，路过廖村。
English: I also walked southwest across the side of the stone mountain for a total of three miles, passing through Liao Village.

古文：其西北有山危峙，又有尖丛亭亭，更觉层叠。
现代文：村西北有山高高耸立，又有成群尖峰亭亭玉立，更觉得层层叠叠。
English: In the northwest of the village, there are towering mountains and clusters of pinnacles, which feel like they are stacked on top of each other.

古文：问之，谓危峙者为金山，而其东尖丛者不能名焉。
现代文：打听地名，说是高高耸立的山是金电，可它东面成群的尖峰叫不出名字来。
English: When asked the name of the place, it is said that the towering mountain is Jintai, but the clusters of spikes to the east of it cannot be named.

古文：又二里，有水自金山东腋出，堰为大塘。
现代文：又行二里，有水流从金山东侧流出冬筑了堤坝成为大水塘。
English: For another two miles, a stream of water flowed out of the eastern side of Jinshan Mountain, and a dam was built in winter to become a large reservoir.

古文：历堰而西，又三里，复穿石山峡而西，则诸危峰分峙叠出于前，愈离立献奇，联翩角胜矣。
现代文：经过堤坝往西，又行三里，再穿过石山山峡往西，就有重重叠叠的险峰分别耸峙在前方，独自矗立，更献奇观，险峰延绵不断，争奇斗胜。
English: Passing the dike to the west, another three miles, and then passing through the Shishanshan Gorge to the west, there are overlapping dangerous peaks towering in front of each other, standing alone, and even more spectacular, dangerous peaks continue to stretch and compete for victory.

古文：石峰之下，俱水汇不流，深者尺许，浅仅半尺。
现代文：石峰之下，都有水汇积不流，深处约一尺左右，浅的仅有半尺。
English: Under the stone peak, there is water accumulation and no flow, the depth is about one foot, and the shallow is only half a foot.

古文：诸峰倒插于中，如出水青莲，亭亭直上。
现代文：群峰倒插在水中，如露出水面的青莲，亭亭玉立，笔直向上。
English: The group of peaks are inverted in the water, such as the blue lotus on the surface of the water, the pavilion stands straight up.

古文：初二大峰夹道，后又二尖峰夹道，道俱叠水中，取径峰隙，令人应接不暇。
现代文：最初有两座大石峰夹道而立，后又有两座尖峰对峙道旁，道路全垒砌在水中，取道山峰之间的空隙，令人应接不暇。
English: At first, there were two large stone peaks standing next to each other, and later there were two sharp peaks next to the confrontation road. The road was built in the water, and the gap between the peaks was very busy.

古文：但石俱廉厉凿足，不免目有余而足不及耳。
现代文：但是铺路的石头全都棱角锋利直刺脚底，不免眼睛看见的有余可脚来不及避开了。
English: But the paving stones were all sharp-edged and stabbed the soles of my feet, so I couldn't avoid them.

古文：其峰曰雷劈山。以其全半也；曰万岁山，以尖圆特耸也。
现代文：其中的山峰有叫雷劈山的，因为它全然是半座山；叫万岁山的提由于它又尖又圆独自耸立着。
English: Among them, there is a peak called Thunder Cleft Mountain, because it is only half a mountain, and a peak called Long Live Mountain, because it is sharp and round, and stands alone.

古文：其间不可名者甚多。
现代文：这中间不能叫出名字的山峰非常多。
English: There are a lot of unnamed peaks in between.

古文：共五里，始舍水磴而就坦坡。
现代文：共走五里，这才离开水中的石瞪而走上了平坦的坡路。
English: A total of five miles later, they left the watery rock and walked up a flat slope.

古文：又五里，姑得平畴，为河塘村，乃就村家瀹茗避日，下舂而后行。
现代文：又行五里，开始走到平旷的田野中，是河塘村，就到庄户人家去煮茶喝躲避烈日旧落之后才动身走路。
English: I walked another five miles, starting out in the middle of a flat field, ending up in Kato village. I went to a farmer's house to make tea and drink and avoid the scorching sun before setting off on my walk.

古文：河塘西筑塘为道，南为平畴，秧绿云铺，北为汇水，直浸北界丛山之麓，蜚晶漾碧，令人尘胃一洗。
现代文：河塘村西边修筑了堤坝作为道路，南面是平旷的田野，绿色的稻秧像云层一样铺开，北边是汇积的塘水，一直浸泡到北面群峰山麓，飞闪着晶莹的亮光，荡漾着碧绿的水波，令人尘心一洗而空。
English: On the west side of Hetang Village, an embankment has been built as a road, on the south side is a flat field, green rice stalks spread out like clouds, and on the north side is the accumulated pond water, soaking all the way to the foot of the mountains in the north, flashing with crystal bright light, rippling with turquoise water waves, making the dusty heart wash away.

古文：过塘，循山南麓而西，五里，渡一石梁，遂登冈陀行。
现代文：过了水塘，顺着山的南麓往西走，五里，走过一座石桥，便登山坡而行。
English: After passing the pond, walk west along the southern foot of the mountain, five miles, walk over a stone bridge, then climb the slope.

古文：又五里，直抵两山峡中，其山南北对峙如门。
现代文：又行五里，一直抵达两座山之间的峡谷中，那两座山南北对峙如同大门。
English: After another five miles, we reached the canyon between the two mountains. The north-south confrontation between the two mountains was like a gate.

古文：北山之东垂，有石峰分岐而起，尖峭如削，其岐峰尤亭亭作搔首态，土人呼为妇女娘峰。
现代文：北山的东垂之处，有座石峰分岔而起，尖峭如刀削一般，那座支峰尤其亭亭玉立，作出搔首弄姿的姿态，当地人称为妇女娘峰。
English: In the eastern slope of the North Mountain, there is a stone peak that rises sharply, as sharp as a knife. That peak, in particular, stands tall, making a dagger-like posture. Locals call it the Woman's Daughter Peak.

古文：崖半有裂隙透明，惟从正南眺之，有光一繖通 闪 ，少转步即不可窥矣。
现代文：山崖半中腰有条裂缝透出亮光，只有从正南方眺望它，才有一线闪动的光亮，略移动几步立即就看不见了。
English: Halfway down the cliff, a crack in the middle of the cliff lets light through. It is only when you look at it from due south that there is a glimmer of light. Move a few steps and it is immediately invisible.

古文：南山之首，又有石突缓，人行其下，左右交盼，亦复应接不暇。
现代文：南山的山头，又有岩石突起点缀着，人走在山下，左顾右盼，又再一次应接不暇了。
English: The top of Nanshan Mountain is dotted with rocky outcrops. People walk under the mountain, look left and right, and once again have no time to respond.

古文：时日色已暮，且不知顾仆下落，亟问浮桥而趋。
现代文：此时天色已晚，而且不知顾仆的下落，连忙打听浮桥后赶路。
English: By this time it was late in the day, and not caring about the whereabouts of his servant, he hurriedly inquired about the pontoon and hurried on his way.

古文：西过大石梁，再西即浮桥矣。
现代文：往西走过大石桥，再往西就是浮桥了。
English: Walk west across the large stone bridge, and further west is the pontoon bridge.

古文：北门在宝积、华景二山。
现代文：漓江流到这里水势已极其浩大，从北边自皇泽湾转向南，省城桂林向东面临着江上。
English: When the Li River flows here, the water potential is already extremely huge. From the north, it turns south from Hwangze Bay, and the provincial city of Guilin faces the river to the east.

古文：浮桥贯江而渡，觅顾仆寓不得，遂入城，循城南去，宿于逆旅。
现代文：浮桥横贯江流而渡，寻找顾仆住的寓所找不到，便进了城，顺城墙往南走去，住宿在旅店中。
English: Floating across the river on a pontoon bridge, they couldn't find the apartment where Gu lived, so they entered the city, walked south along the city wall, and stayed in a hotel.

古文：二十九日，从逆旅不待餐而行。
现代文：二十九日从旅店中等不及吃饭便出发。
English: On the 29th, I left the hotel before dinner.

古文：自楼上俯眺，朱门粉堞，参差绿树中，潮水中涵，群峰外绕，尽括一城之胜。
现代文：于是往西经过都司衙门前，又向西走，就是靖江王府门前的雨道了。又往西，便有条大街自北而南，就在市场上的店铺中吃了饭。又向南登上一座楼。
English: So I walked west past the front of the Imperial Palace, and then west again, which was the rainy road in front of the Jingjiang Palace. I walked west again, and there was a street from north to south, and I ate at a shop in the market. I also climbed a building to the south.

古文：中层供真武像。时亟于觅顾仆，遂转遵大街北行，东过按察司前，遂东出就日门。
现代文：此时急于寻找顾仆，于是转向顺着大街往北走，向东路过按察使司门前，就往东出了就日门。
English: At this time, he was in a hurry to find a servant, so he turned to go north along the main street, passed eastward in front of the door of the inspector, and went east out of the Jichimen Gate.

古文：计顾仆舟自北来，当先从城北濒江觅，而南从城下北行。
现代文：估计顾仆乘的船从北边来，应当先从城北濒江处找起，就自南从城墙下往北行。
English: It is estimated that if the boat Gu Min took came from the north, it should first start from the north of the city near the river, and then go from the south under the city wall to the north.

古文：已而城上一山当面而起，石脚下插江中，路之在城外者，忽穿山而透其跨下，南北岈然，真天辟关津也。
现代文：不久见城墙上一座山峰迎面而起，石脚下插到江中，在城墙外的道路，忽然穿过山脚下，呈南北向，十分深邃，真是天然开辟的关口呀！
English: Soon I saw a mountain peak on the city wall rise up in front of me, and at the foot of the stone it was inserted into the river. The road outside the city wall suddenly passed through the foot of the mountain, facing north and south, very deep, it was really a natural pass!

古文：穿洞出，下临江潭，上盘山壁，又透腋而入，是为木龙洞。
现代文：西边就顺着山势筑城，城墙以内就是叠彩山的东角。穿过洞出来，下方面临深深的江水，上面是盘绕的山壁，又穿过山侧进去，这就是木龙洞。
English: On the west side, the city was built along the mountain, and within the city wall is the east corner of the superimposed Cai Mountain. Coming out through the hole, the bottom faces the deep river water, the top is the coiled mountain wall, and it goes through the mountain side. This is the dragon cave.

古文：其洞亦自南穿北，高二丈，南北透门约十余里。
现代文：此洞也是自南穿到北，高二丈，穿过南北两个洞口之间约有十多里。
English: This cave also runs from south to north, with a height of two meters, and there are more than ten miles between the north and south entrances.

古文：其东开窗剖隙，屡逗天光，其外濒江有路，行者或内自洞行，或外由江岸，俱可北达。
现代文：洞壁东侧剖裂开一些窗口和裂缝，屡屡透着天光，洞外濒江处有路，走路的人或者在内从洞中走，或者在外边由江岸上走，都可到达北边。
English: On the east side of the cave wall, some windows and cracks have been cut open, often revealing the sky. Outside the cave, there is a road along the river, and people walking either inside the cave, or outside on the river bank, can reach the north side.

古文：出洞，有片石夹峙，上架一穹石，其形屈曲，其色青红间错，宛具鳞腮，似非本山之石，不知何处移架于此。
现代文：出洞后，有片状的岩石夹峙两旁，上面有一块隆起的石头，石头的形状弯弯曲曲，石头的颜色青红错杂，宛如鱼的鳞甲和腮，似乎不是此山原有的石头，不知是从何处移来架在这里的。
English: After coming out of the cave, there are flaky rocks sandwiched on both sides, with a raised stone on top. The shape of the stone is curved, and the color of the stone is mixed, like the scales and gills of a fish. It seems that this is not the original stone of the mountain. I don't know where it came from.

古文：廊上以木雕二龙插崖间，北压江水。廊北有庵、有院。
现代文：洞的北面辟成山崖，用飞空的长廊连接着，前临大江，后靠悬崖，休息和凭眺胜景，没有能超过这里的。
English: The north side of the cave is a mountain cliff, connected by a sky-high promenade. In front of the river, behind the cliff, there is no better place to rest and enjoy the view.

古文：又循城溯北一里，过东镇门。
现代文：又沿城墙溯江往北走一里，路过东镇门。
English: I also walked one mile north along the city wall to the river, passing the East Town Gate.

古文：又北过城东北隅，入驿，问顾仆所附江舟，知舟泊浮桥北。
现代文：又向北走过城墙东北角，是东江释。绎站面向东，位于皇泽湾南下的要冲上。进入绎站，打听顾仆搭乘的江船，知道船停泊在浮桥北边。
English: He also walked northward past the northeast corner of the city wall, which is the Dongjiang Canal. The diversion station faces east and is located at the southern end of the King's Bay. He wanted to rush up. He entered the diversion station, inquired about the river boat that his servant was riding, and learned that the boat was moored on the north side of the pontoon bridge.

古文：出驿，北望泽湾，有二江舟泊山下，因令静闻往视，余暂憩路口。
现代文：出释站来，北望皇泽湾，有两艘江船停泊在山下，疑心顾仆或许在这两条船上，于是要静闻前往察看，我暂时在路口休息。
English: Coming from the release station, looking north to Wangze Bay, there are two river boats moored at the bottom of the mountain. I suspect that my servant may be in these two boats, so I want to listen quietly and go to inspect. I temporarily rest at the intersection.

古文：见城北隅，俱因山为城，因从环堵之隙，退视其下，有一大洞北向穹然，内深邃而外旁穿。
现代文：见到城墙的北隅，全是依山建城，于是从环绕的城墙空隙中，逼视城下，有一个大山洞向北隆起，洞内深邃而外面有旁洞。
English: Looking at the northern corner of the city wall, the city was built entirely on the hill, so from the gap in the surrounding city wall, looking down at the city, there is a large cave rising to the north, the cave is deep and there are side caves outside.

古文：有童子方以梯探历其上，盖其附近诸户积薪贮器，俱于是托也。
现代文：有个儿童正用梯子爬到洞上探看，大概是附近的住户堆积柴火贮藏器物，全都寄放在洞里了。
English: A child is using a ladder to climb up to the cave to investigate. It is likely that nearby residents have piled up firewood storage containers and stored them all in the cave.

古文：恐静闻返，急出待路口。
现代文：担心静闻返回来，急忙出到路口等待。
English: Worried about Jing He's return, he hurried out to the intersection to wait.

古文：久之不至，乃濒江北行觅之，直抵泊舟之山，则静闻从松阴中呼曰： 山下有洞，其前有亭，其上有庵，可急往游。 
现代文：等了很长时间没有来，于是沿江向北寻找他，径直来到停船的山下，就听到静闻在松树林中呼叫： 山下有个洞，洞前有亭子，亭子上方有寺庵，值得赶快前去游一游。 
English: After waiting for a long time, he did not come, so he searched for him along the river to the north. He went straight to the bottom of the mountain where the boat was docked, and heard Jinghan calling in the pine forest: There is a cave at the bottom of the mountain, a pavilion in front of the cave, and a temple above the pavilion. It is worth taking a quick trip.

古文：余从之。
现代文：我听从了他的话。
English: I listened to him.

古文：先沿江登山，是为薰风亭。
现代文：首先沿江流登山，这是薰风亭。
English: First of all, climbing along the river, this is the Feng Feng Pavilion.

古文：曹学佺附书。亭四旁多镌石留题，拂而读之，始知是为虞山，乃帝舜南游之地。
现代文：亭子四旁有很多石刻题记，拂试后一读，才知道这是虞山，是大舜帝南游的地方。
English: There are many stone inscriptions on all sides of the pavilion. It was only on first reading after brushing one's teeth that one knew that this was Mount Yue, the place where Emperor Taobao made his southern tour.

古文：仍从洞内西出，乃缘磴东上，有磨崖，碑刻朱紫阳所撰《舜祠记》，为张松建祠作。乃吕好问所书，亦尚可摹，第崖高不便耳。
现代文：山下的大殿是舜祠，祠后就是韶音洞，洞东临江处就是薰风亭。亭子前临皇泽湾之上，后靠虞山的山崖。的《韶音洞记》，字还值得摹拓。仍从洞内向西出来，便沿着石瞪往东上山，有摩崖碑，刻有朱紫阳撰写的《舜祠记》，是吕好问书写的，也还值得摹拓，只是崖壁太高不方便罢了。
English: The main hall at the bottom of the mountain is the Jinying Ancestral Hall. Behind the hall is the Jinying Cave. To the east of the cave, by the river, is the Fengfeng Pavilion. In front of the pavilion is the Wangze Bay, and behind it is the cliff of the Yushan Mountain. The words of the "Jinying Ancestral Hall" are still worth exploring. Still coming out of the cave to the west, they go along the stone wall to the east of the mountain. There is a cliff monument, engraved with the "Jinying Ancestral Hall" written by Zhu Ziyang. It was written by Lü Haoq

古文：从此上跻，有新叠石为级者，宛转石隙间，将至山顶，置静室焉，亦新构，而其僧已去。
现代文：从此处上登，有新近垒石砌成的石阶，宛转在石缝之间，将要到山顶的地方，建了一处静室，也是新建的，然而静室里的僧人已经离开。
English: Climbing up from here, there are stone steps made of new near-wall stone, and turning between the stone cracks, where the top of the mountain is to be reached, there is a meditation room, also newly built, but the monks in the meditation room have left.

古文：窗楞西向，户榻洒然，室不大而洁。
现代文：窗户向西，门户卧床都自然脱俗，屋子不大却很清洁。
English: The windows facing west, the doorway and the bed are all natural, and the house is small but very clean.

古文：乃与静闻解衣凭几，啖胡饼而指点西山，甚适也。
现代文：于是与静闻脱去外衣靠着茶几，吃着烧饼指点着西面的山川，真惬意呀！
English: So he and Jing Wen took off their coats and leaned against the coffee table, eating burnt cakes and pointing at the mountains and rivers to the west. How pleasant it was!

古文：久之，舜殿僧见客久上不下，乃登顶招下山待茶。
现代文：很久之后，舜殿的僧人见客人上去很久不见下来，就登上山顶招呼下山款待茶水。
English: After a long time, the monks of Shoden saw that the guests had been up for a long time and had not come down, so they went up to the top of the mountain to invite them down to treat them to tea.

古文：余急于觅顾仆，下山竟南，循旧路，二里入就日门。
现代文：我急于去找顾仆，下山后就往南走，沿着原路，二里路进了就日门。
English: I was anxious to find Gu, and after descending the mountain, I walked south, along the original road, and entered the Jizhimen Gate after two miles.

古文：从门内循城南行半里，由伏波山下出桂水门，门以内为伏波祠，门以外为玩珠洞。由城外南行又半里，为行春门，又南半里，为浮桥门，始遇顾仆于门外肆中。
现代文：从城门内沿着城墙往南行半里，由伏波山下出了桂水门，从城外往南行又是半里，是行春门，又向南半里，是浮桥门，这才在城门外的店铺中遇到了顾仆。
English: From inside the city gate, I walked half a mile south along the city wall. From under Mt. Fubo, I came to the Katsura Water Gate. From outside the city, I walked another half mile south, to the Spring Gate, and another half mile south, to the Floating Bridge Gate. It was only then that I met the servant in a shop outside the city gate.

古文：时已过午，还炊饭于城内所宿逆旅。
现代文：此时已过了正午，返回到城内住宿的旅店烧饭。
English: By this time it was past midday, and I returned to the hotel where I was staying in the city to cook dinner.

古文：下午，大雨大至，既霁，乃迁寓于都司前赵姓家，以其处颇宽洁也。
现代文：下午，大雨暴降，转晴之后，就搬到都司衙门前一家姓赵的人家去住，这是因为那个地方十分宽敞整洁。
English: In the afternoon, it rained heavily. After the weather cleared, they moved to a house named Zhao in front of Doushi Gate to live. This was because the place was very spacious and tidy.

古文：五月初一日，晨餐后，留顾仆浣衣涤被于寓。
现代文：五月初一日早餐后，留顾仆在寓所里洗衣被。
English: On the first day of May, after breakfast, I left my servant to wash the quilt in the apartment.

古文：门额书 北牖洞天 ，亦为曹能始书。
现代文：我与静闻就往北走一里，来到东华门外的靖江王府。沿着王城往北行，又走一里，登上叠彩山。
English: I walked one mile north with Jing Huan and arrived at the Jingjiang Royal Palace outside the Donghua Gate. I walked north along the royal city, walked another mile and ascended the Stacked Colorful Mountain.

古文：按北牖为隐山六洞之名，今借以颜此，以此山在城北，且两洞俱透空成牖也。
现代文：叠彩山雄踞在省城东北角，山门正当两座山峰之间，乱石层层叠叠，错杂矗立，如浪涛腾涌，似花尊攒聚，令人眼花，这就是所谓的 叠彩 了。山门上的匾额写着 北墉洞天 ，也是曹能始书写的。
English: In the northeast corner of the provincial capital, the mountain gate is right between the two peaks, and the rocks are piled up and mixed, standing like waves, gathering like flowers, and dazzling. This is the so-called superposition. The plaque on the mountain gate reads "Beilun Dongtian," which was also written by Cao Nengshi.

古文：其上为佛殿，殿后一洞屈曲穿山之背，其门南向，高二丈，深五丈。
现代文：山门上边是佛殿，殿后一个洞穴弯弯曲曲穿到山背面，洞口向南，高二丈，深五丈。
English: Above the mountain gate is the Buddha hall. Behind the hall, a cave winds its way through to the back of the mountain. The mouth of the cave is to the south, two stories high and five stories deep.

古文：北透小门，忽转而东辟。
现代文：往北穿过一个小门，忽然转而向东开阔起来。
English: He went north through a small gate, which suddenly opened wide to the east.

古文：前架华轩，后叠层台，上塑大士像。
现代文：前边架着华美的轩廊，后面叠着层层高台，上边塑着观音菩萨的像。
English: The front side is decorated with an ornate hallway, the back is stacked with layers of high platforms, and the top is sculpted with the image of Guanyin Bodhisattva.

古文：洞前下瞰城东，江水下绕，直漱其足。
现代文：在洞前下瞰城东，江水下绕，直接冲刷着城脚。
English: In front of the cave, looking down to the east of the city, the river goes around under the water, directly washing the foot of the city.

古文：洞内石门转透处，风从前洞扇入，至此愈觉凉飔ī凉风逼人，土人称为风洞。
现代文：洞内石门转弯通过之处，风从前洞吹入，到这里愈加觉得凉风逼人，本地人称为风洞。
English: The wind blows in from the front of the cave where the stone door in the cave turns and passes. The cool breeze feels more and more oppressive here. Locals call it the wind tunnel.

古文：石门北向，当东转之上，有一石刻卧像横置窦间，迦风曲肱，偃石鼓腹，其容若笑，使人见之亦欲笑。
现代文：石门向北，正当向东转的上面，有一尊石刻卧像横放在一小石洞中，卧像袭装飘逸，鼓起肚子、曲着手臂仰卧石上，那容貌似乎在笑，使人见到他也想笑。
English: Above the stone gate facing north and turning due east, there is a stone-carved reclining statue placed horizontally in a small stone cave. The reclining statue is elegantly dressed, lying on its back on the stone with its belly puffed out and arms bent. The figure seems to be smiling, and one can see that it also wants to smile.

古文：因见其上有石板平庋，又有圆窦上透，若楼阁之层架，若窗楞之裂。
现代文：随即看见卧像上有块石板平架着，又有个圆圆的小石洞通到上面，好像层层楼阁架着，有如窗户一样敞开。
English: Then I saw that there was a slab of stone on top of the statue, and a small round stone cave leading to it. It looked like it had been built in layers, and it was open like a window.

古文：急与静闻择道分趋，余从卧像上转攀石脊，静闻从观音座左伏穿旁窍，俱会于层楼之上。
现代文：急忙与静闻找路分头赶上去，我从卧像上方转过去攀登石脊，静闻从观音坐像左侧弯腰穿过旁洞，都在层楼之上相会。
English: I hurried to find a way to catch up with Jing Hun. I turned from the top of the statue to climb the ridge. Jing Hun bent down from the left side of the statue and went through the side hole. They met on the upper floor.

古文：其处东忽开隙，远引天光，西多垂乳，近穿地肺。
现代文：此处东边忽然裂开缝隙，远远透进天光，西面有很多下垂的钟乳石，贴近钻出地面肺叶样的石笋。
English: Here, on the eastern side, a gap suddenly opens up, far into the daylight, and on the western side, there are many sagging stalactites, close to the lung-like stalagmites that drill out of the ground.

古文：余复与静闻披乳房而穿肺叶，北出而瞰观音之座，已在足下。
现代文：我又与静闻分开钟乳石穿过肺叶状的石笋，向北出来，俯瞰观音坐像，已在脚下。
English: I also separated from Jing He from the stalactites, passed through the lung-shaped stalagmites, and came out to the north, overlooking the seated statue of Guanyin, which was already at my feet.

古文：以衣置层楼隙畔，乃复还其处，从圆窦中坠下。
现代文：由于衣服放在了层楼上的裂缝旁，就再返回到那里，从小圆洞中坠下来。
English: As the clothes were placed near a crack in the floor, he returned there and fell down the small round hole.

古文：《志》云五代时马殷所筑，有岩桂生其巅，今已无。其前一石峰支起，或谓之四望山，当即叠彩岩。
现代文：于是往东出到前边的轩廊，由洞左登石瞪，顺着墙向上走，就到了拱极亭的旧址。由亭址往南越过洞顶，登石瞪，半里，便登上了绝顶，就是越王坛了，这就是桂山，又叫北山。山顶上岩石似花尊绽放，山顶侧面有两块平整的石板，难道就是所谓的 石坛 吗？山前有一石峰独立，有人把它称为四望山，应当就是叠彩岩了。
English: So I went out to the east to the front of the gallery, climbed up the rock ledge from the left side of the cave, and walked up the wall to the old site of the archway pavilion. From the pavilion, I went south over the top of the cave, climbed the rock ledge, half a mile, and climbed to the top, which is the king's altar. This is Mount Katsura, also known as the North Mountain. The rock on the top of the mountain looks like a flower blooming, and there are two flat stone slabs on the side of the top of the mountain. Is it the so-called stone altar? There is a stone peak in front of the

古文：其西一石峰高与此峰并，峰半有洞高悬，望之岈然中空。
现代文：它西面有一座石峰与此峰同样高，山峰半腰有洞高悬，望去洞很空十分深邃。
English: On the west side of it, there is a stone peak that is almost as high as this peak. There is a high-hanging cave halfway up the peak. Looking down, the cave is very empty and very deep.

古文：亟下，仍认风洞出寺左，有轩三楹，为官府燕之所。
现代文：急忙下山，仍从风洞出来，寺左有轩廊三间，是官府休养的场所。
English: Rushing down the mountain, still coming out of the wind tunnel, there are three galleries on the left of the temple, which are places for government officials to recuperate.

古文：前临四望，后倚绝顶，余时倦甚，遂憩卧一觉，去羲皇伏羲氏真不远。
现代文：前边面临四望山，后靠绝顶，我此时十分疲倦，就躺下睡了一觉，觉得离伏羲皇帝时代真是不远了。
English: With Mount Siwang in front of me and the peak behind, I was very tired at this time, so I lay down and slept for a while. I felt that the era of Emperor Fuxi was really not far away.

古文：由寺中右坳复登西峰，一名于越山。
现代文：从寺中经过右侧的山坳再登西峰，又叫于越山。
English: From the middle of the temple, it passes through the mountains on the right and then climbs to the west peak. It is also called Yu Yue Mountain.

古文：上登峰半，其洞穹然东向，透峰腰而西，径十余丈，高四丈余。
现代文：上登到山峰半腰上，那山洞十分弯隆面向东方，往西穿透山峰腰部，宽十多丈，高四丈多。
English: Climbing up to halfway up the mountain, the cave is very high and faces the east, penetrating the waist of the mountain to the west, more than ten meters wide and more than four meters high.

古文：由其中望之，东西洞然，洞西坠壑而下，甚险而峻。
现代文：由洞中往两头望去，东西两边都空荡荡的，山洞往西下坠到壑谷中，非常险峻。
English: Looking from both ends of the cave, both the east and west sides are empty. The cave falls into the valley to the west, which is very steep.

古文：其环砖为门，上若门限，下若关隘，瞰之似非通人行者。
现代文：洞口用砖砌成环形的门，从上看像门槛，从下看如关隘，俯瞰那里似乎不是人行走的地方。
English: At the mouth of the cave, there is a circular door made of bricks. From the outside, it looks like a threshold, but from the inside, it looks like a narrow pass. Looking down, it doesn't look like a place for people to walk.

古文：乃仍东下至寺右，有大路北透两峰之间。
现代文：于是仍往东下到寺右，有大路向北穿过两峰之间。
English: So I still went east to the right of the temple, and there was a big road going north between the two peaks.

古文：下至其麓，出一关门，其东可趋东镇，其北径达北门。
现代文：下到山麓，出了一道关门，由关门往东可通往东镇门，由关门向北可直达北门。
English: Down to the foot of the mountain, there is a closed gate. From the closed gate to the east, you can go to the East Town Gate, and from the closed door to the north, you can go straight to the North Gate.

古文：乃循山西行，一里，仰见一洞倚山向北，遂拾级而登。其下先有一洞，高可丈五，而高广盘曲，亦多垂柱，界窍分岐，而土人以为马房，数马散卧于其中，令人气阻。
现代文：于是沿山往西行，一里，抬头望见一个山洞依山向北，就沿石阶上登，可高处宽处都弯弯曲曲，洞下先有一个洞，高约一丈五，臼局处觅处孙弓弓四四，很多下垂的石柱，隔在洞中分出岔洞，而当地人把它当做马厩，儿匹马散卧在洞中，令人喘不上气来。
English: So I walked west along the mountain for one mile. Looking up, I saw a cave to the north along the mountain. I climbed up the stone steps, but the height and width were all crooked. There was a cave at the bottom of the cave, about one and a half meters high. At the mortuary, I found a place for the sun bow and arrow, and a lot of sagging stone pillars separated the grotto from the cave. The locals used it as a stable, and the horses were lying around in the cave, which took my breath away.

古文：由其左跻级更上，透洞门而入，其洞北向，以峰顶平贯为奇。
现代文：由洞左登石阶再向上走，穿过洞口进去，此洞向北，以平平地横贯峰顶算是它奇特之处。
English: From the left side of the cave, go up the stone steps and go through the cave entrance. This cave faces north, and it is a strange place to cross the peak on a flat surface.

古文：而是山之洞，西又以山腰叠透为胜，各标一异，直无穷之幻矣。
现代文：而这座山的洞穴，在西面又以在山腰重叠着穿过去作为它优美之处，外边裂开重重洞口，里面架起层层洞穴，各自显示出一种奇异之处，简直是变幻无穷了。
English: And the cave of this mountain, in the west, overlapping and penetrating the mountainside as its beautiful place, the outside is cracked with many holes, the inside is lined with caves, each showing a strange place, it is almost endless.

古文：既下，又西行，始见峰顶洞门西坠处，第觉危峡空悬，仰眺不得端倪边际，其下有遥墙环之，则藩府之别圃也。
现代文：下山后，又向西行，这才看见峰顶洞口向西下坠之处，只觉得高峡空悬，抬头眺望看不出头绪，山下有长长的墙垣围绕着它，是王府的园圃。
English: After descending the mountain, I headed west again. It was only then that I saw where the mouth of the cave on the peak dips down to the west. I only felt that the canyon was suspended in the air. Looking up, I couldn't see a clue. There was a long wall surrounding it at the bottom of the mountain. It was the garden of the royal palace.

古文：又西出大街，有大碑在侧，大书 桂岭 二字。
现代文：又向西走上大街，有块大碑在街边，写着 桂岭 两个大字。
English: I walked up the main street to the west again. There was a large monument on the side of the street, with the words "Kweiling" written on it.

古文：转北行一里，则两山耸峡，其中雉堞为关，而通启闭焉，是为北门。
现代文：转向北行一里，就见两旁山峰耸峙成峡谷，在中间修筑了城墙作为关口，以供过往出入，这是北门。
English: Turning north for one mile, you can see the peaks on both sides jutting out into a canyon. In the middle, the city wall was built as a gate to allow people to pass in and out. This is the north gate.

古文：出门有路，静闻前觅素食焉。
现代文：城门在两山的耸夹之间，城门外两旁的山全都陡峭挺拔，就是华景山、宝积山诸处胜景了。出城门后有路。
English: The city gate is sandwiched between two mountains, and the mountains on both sides of the city gate are all steep and straight, that is, Huajing Mountain and Baojishan Mountain. There is a road behind the city gate.

古文：既而又南一里，过按察司，觅静闻不得。
现代文：静闻往前走去寻找素食。随后又向南走一里，路过按察使司，找静闻找不到。
English: Jing Wen walked forward to look for vegetarian food. Then he walked one mile to the south, passed the inspector, and could not find Jing Wen.

古文：乃东从分巡司经靖藩后宰门，又东共一里，至王城东北隅，转而西向后宰门内。
现代文：于是往东从分巡道衙门经过靖江王府的后宰门，又向东共一里，走到王府城墙的东北角，转向西走进后宰门内。
English: So he walked eastward from the gate of the sub-tour road, passed through the gate of the Jingjiang royal palace, walked eastward for a mile, walked to the northeast corner of the royal palace wall, turned west and entered the gate of the royal palace.

古文：靖藩方结坛礼《梁皇忏》，置栏演《木兰传奇》，市酒传餐者，夹道云集，静闻果在焉。
现代文：靖江王府正搭起高台礼佛念诵《梁皇忏》经文，安设了围栏上演《木兰传奇》，买酒传递饮食的人，夹道云集，静闻果然在人群中。
English: The Jingjiang Royal Palace is erecting a high platform to worship Buddha and recite the scriptures of "The Confession of Emperor Liang," and a fence has been set up to stage "The Legend of Mulan." People who buy wine and pass on food are crowded together, and Jingwen is indeed in the crowd.

古文：余拉之东半里，出癸水门，仍抵庆真观下，觅小舟一叶，北渡入玩珠岩。
现代文：我拉着他往东走了半里，出了癸水门，仍旧来到庆真观下，找到一艘小船，向北渡江进入玩珠岩。
English: I took him half a mile to the east, out of Surabaya Water Gate, still came to Qingzheng, found a small boat, and entered the Pearl River to the north.

古文：岩即伏波之东麓，石壁下临重江，裂隙两层，一横者下卧波上，一竖者上穹山巅。
现代文：玩珠岩就是伏波山的东麓，石壁下临两道江流，有两层裂隙，横着的一层在山下卧在水波之上，竖着的一层向上隆起到山顶。
English: Zhouzhuang Rock is the eastern foot of Mount Fuba. Two rivers flow down the rock wall, and there are two layers of cracks. The horizontal layer lies above the waves at the bottom of the mountain, and the vertical layer rises up to the top of the mountain.

古文：卧波上者，下石浮敞为台，上石斜骞覆之。
现代文：卧在水波上的一层，脚下的岩石浮出水面成为宽敞的平台，顶上的岩石斜吊着覆盖着下方。
English: Lying one level above the waves, the rocks beneath rise to the surface as a spacious platform, the rocks on top hanging diagonally over the water below.

古文：一石柱下垂覆崖外，直抵下石，如莲萼倒挂，不属于下者，仅寸有余焉。是名 伏波试剑石 ，盖其剑非竖劈，向横披者也。
现代文：一根石柱下垂在覆崖外边，直垂到下面的石台，如同莲花倒挂着，与下面不相连接之处的距离，只有一寸多点，这里名叫 伏波试剑石 ，原来那砍下的一剑不是竖着劈，而是横向劈开的。
English: A stone pillar hangs down on the outside of the cliff, hanging straight down to the stone platform below, like a lotus upside down, and the distance from the place not connected below is only a little more than an inch. This place is called Fubo Sword Stone. Originally, the sword that was cut down was not split vertically, but was split horizontally.

古文：后壁上双纹若缕，红白灿然，蜿蜒相向。
现代文：岩洞后壁上有两条纹路如像丝带，红白相间鲜明耀眼，蜿蜒相对。
English: On the back wall of the cave there are two striped roads like ribbons, bright and dazzling between red and white, winding against each other.

古文：有圆岩三晕，恰当其首，如二龙戏珠，故旧名 玩珠 ，宋张维易曰还珠。
现代文：有三个模模糊糊的圆孔，恰好正当它们的头顶，如二龙戏珠，所以它原来的名字叫 玩珠 ，宋代的张维改叫还珠。
English: There are three fuzzy round holes, just right at the top of their heads, like two dragons playing beads, so its original name is "play beads," and Zhang Wei Jia of the Song Dynasty called it "return beads."

古文：双纹之后，有隙内裂，直抵竖峡下岩；嵌梯悬级，可直蹑竖峡而上垂柱之西。
现代文：双纹的后边，有缝隙向内裂去，直达竖峡下面的岩石；如果砌了台阶或悬了梯子，可以直接登上竖峡就上到下垂石柱的两边。
English: At the back of the double stripe, there is a crack cracking inward, reaching the rock below the vertical gorge; if steps are built or ladders are hung, you can directly climb the vertical gorge to the two sides of the sagging stone pillar.

古文：石台中坼，横石以渡，更北穿小窦，下瞰重江，渊碧无底，所云伏波沉着苡处也。
现代文：石台中裂，横石而过，再往北穿过小洞，下瞰两条江流，渊深碧绿看不见底，就是传说的伏波将军马援沉意茵的地方了。
English: The stone platform is cracked in the middle, the cross-stone passes, and further north through the small hole, overlooking the two rivers, the abyss is deep and green and the bottom cannot be seen. It is the place where the legendary Fubo General Ma Yuan meditated.

古文：更南入山腹，穹然中虚，有光西转，北透前门，是其奥矣。
现代文：再往南进入山腹，弯隆中空，有光线从西边转射进来，向北穿到前洞口，这是洞中的幽深之处了。
English: Further south into the mountainside, the slope is hollow, and light is reflected from the west, passing north to the front of the cave, which is a deep place in the cave.

古文：徘徊久之，渡子候归再三，乃舍之登舟。
现代文：但这里的石色波光，都赶不上外边的岩洞那样玲珑剔透、映照清澈了。徘徊了很久，渡船的船夫等着回去催促再主，这才离洞登船。
English: However, the stone color of the waves here is not as exquisite and clear as that of the rock cave outside. I lingered for a long time, and the ferryman waited for me to go back and urge me to return, and only then did I leave the cave and board the boat.

古文：鼓枻ì短桨回樯，濯空明而凌返照，不意身世之间有此异境也。
现代文：摇桨回帆，驶舟在明澈的江水，乘着落日，意想不到人世之间有此等奇异的胜境呀！
English: Swinging the oars back to the sails, sailing in the clear water of the river, riding the sunset, it is unexpected that there is such a strange win-win situation between people!

古文：登涯，由浮桥门入城，共里余，返赵寓。
现代文：登岸后，由浮桥门进城，共一里多，返回赵家窝所。
English: After disembarking, he entered the city through the floating bridge gate, a total of more than one kilometer, and returned to Zhao's home.

古文：静闻取伞往观《木兰》之剧。
现代文：静闻取了伞前去观看《木兰传奇》的戏。
English: Jing Wen took an umbrella and went to watch the play of "Mulan Legend."

古文：余憩寓中，取《图》、《志》以披翻阅、查寻桂林诸可游者。
现代文：我在寓所中休息，取出地图、志书来翻阅桂林各地值得游览的地方。
English: I rested in my apartment and took out a map and a book to browse through the places worth visiting in Guilin.

