古文：海陵王海陵恭王昭文，字季尚，文惠太子第二子也。
现代文：海陵恭王萧昭文字季适，是文惠太子的第二个儿子。
English: Hailing Gong Wang Xiao Zhao is the second son of Prince Wen Hui.

古文：永明四年，封临汝公，邑千五百户。
现代文：永明四年，被封为临汝公，食邑一千五百产。
English: In the fourth year of Yongming, he was given the title of Lin Ru Gong, with a harvest of fifteen hundred yuan.

古文：初为辅国将军、济阳太守。
现代文：最初任辅国将军、济阳太守。
English: He was initially appointed as the general of Fu Guo, and later became the Jiyang governor.

古文：十年，转持节、督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：永明十年，转任持节、督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史，将军头衔仍旧保留。
English: In the tenth year of Yongming, he was transferred to Jisai, the governor of South Yuzhou Military and South Yuzhou History, and the title of general was still retained.

古文：十一年，进号冠军将军。
现代文：丞塱十一年，进封号为冠军将军。
English: In the eleventh year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was given the title of Champion General.

古文：文惠太子薨，还都。
现代文：文惠太子去世，回到都城。
English: Prince Wen Hui died and returned to the capital.

古文：郁林王即位，为中军将军，领兵置佐。
现代文：郁林王即位后。任中军将军，享受领兵及设置佐史的特权。
English: After the enthronement of King Yulin, he served as the general of the Chinese army, enjoying the privilege of leading the troops and setting up the history.

古文：封新安王，邑二千户。
现代文：被封为新安王，食邑二千户。
English: He was given the title of the King of Xin'an and fed 2,000 households.

古文：隆昌元年，为使持节、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、扬州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：隆昌元年，任使持节、都督扰壶途二州诸军事、扬州刺史，将军头衔仍旧保留。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, the title of general was still retained.

古文：其年，郁林王废，尚书令西昌侯鸾议立昭文为帝。
现代文：这年，郁林王被废黜，尚书令西旦堡芦銮提议立麸为皇帝。
English: In the same year, King Yulin was deposed, and Shang Shuling ordered Xitanbao Lushan to propose that Zeng Rong be made emperor.

古文：延兴元年秋，七月，丁酉，即皇帝位。
现代文：延兴元年秋七月丁酉，萧昭文即皇帝位。
English: In the autumn and July of the first year of Yanxing, Ding Jun, Xiao Zhaowen became the emperor.

古文：以尚书令、镇军大将军、西昌侯鸾为骠骑大将军、录尚书事、扬州刺史、宣城郡公。
现代文：任命尚书令镇军大将军西昌侯萧鸾为骠骑大将军、绿尚书事、握业刺史、宣城郡公。
English: He appointed Shang Shuling, the general of the town's army, Xichang Hou Xiaoqi, as the general of the cavalry, Green Shang Shuling, Grip Yip Shi Shi, and Xuancheng County.

古文：诏曰： 太祖高皇帝英谋光大，受命作齐；世祖武皇帝宏猷冠世，继晖下武；世宗文皇帝清明懿铄，四海宅心：并德漏下泉，功昭上象，声教所覃，无思不洽。
现代文：下诏书说： 太祖高皇帝才德出众，谋略光明正大，受命于天创建变塑；世祖武皇帝谋略宏大，冠绝当世，承继祖业步周武帝后尘；世宗文皇帝清静明朗，道德美好，天下归心：且德业渗及黄泉之下，功绩昭明于天象，声威教化所及，没有不和睦。
English: The following edict said: Emperor Taizu Gao had outstanding talent and virtue, his strategy was bright and upright, and he was ordered by heaven to create transformations; Emperor Shizuo Wu had a grand strategy, he was the best in the world, he followed in the footsteps of his ancestors, Emperor Zhou Wu followed in the footsteps of the emperors; Emperor Zongwen was calm and clear, his morality was beautiful, and his heart was in the world; moreover, his virtuous deeds penetrated to the underworld, his achievements were obvious to the heavenly beings, and there was no discord as far as he was revered and educated.

古文：洪基式固，景祚方融，而天步多阻，运钟否剥。
现代文：至此宏伟的基业得以稳固，帝位正趋向久远，然而国运多艰，适逢气数不济。
English: So far, the magnificent foundation has been stable, and the imperial throne is becoming long-lasting. However, the national fortune is arduous, and it is not easy.

古文：嗣君昏忍，暴戾滋多，弃侮天经，悖灭人纪。朝野重足，遐迩侧视，民怨神恫，宗祧如缀。
现代文：继位的国君昏庸残忍，暴虐乖戾滋长，抛弃轻慢天道，违背毁灭人伦纲纪，朝野畏惧，远近不敢正视，百姓怨恨神灵痛惜，宗庙犹如废止。
English: The kings who succeeded to the throne were dull and cruel, tyranny and perversion grew, the light-hearted heavenly way was abandoned, the moral code was destroyed, the emperor and the people were afraid, they dared not face the far and near, the people resented and pitied the gods, and the ancestral temple was abolished.

古文：赖忠谟肃举，霄汉廓清，俾三后之业，绝而更纽，七百之庆，危而复安。
现代文：幸赖忠诚谋划肃然起事，天空才得以澄清，使三代帝王的基业，绝后重续，七百年的国运，危机过后再度安定。
English: It was thanks to the faithful planning of the uprising that the sky could be cleared, so that the inheritance of three generations of emperors could be renewed, and the seven-hundred-year national movement could be stable again after the crisis.

古文：猥以冲人，入纂乾绪，载怀驭朽，若坠诸渊，思与黎元，共绥戬福。 
现代文：我以年幼之身，苟且承继帝业，负担着抚慰衰老的重任，如坠深渊，想和黎民百姓一起，共享吉祥幸福。 
English: As a young person, I am eager to succeed to the throne and bear the heavy responsibility of soothing the aging, such as falling into the abyss, and I want to share the auspicious happiness with the people of Lai.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：实行大赦，改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：文武赐位二等。
现代文：文武官员赏赐官位二等。
English: Civil and military officials were awarded the second-class official rank.

古文：八月，甲辰，以新除卫尉萧谌为中领军，司空王敬则进位太尉，新除车骑大将军陈显达为司空，尚书左仆射王晏为尚书令，左卫将军王广之为豫州刺史，骠骑大将军鄱阳王锵为司徒。
现代文：八月甲辰，以新任命的卫尉萧谌为中领军，司空王敬则进宫位为太尉，新任命的车骑大将军陈显达为司空，尚书左仆射王晏为尚书令，左卫将军工庐之为逸业刺史，骠骑大将军鄱阳王芦锵为司徒。
English: In August Jia Chen, with the newly appointed guard lieutenant Xiao Jian as the central leader, the cavalry officer Wang Jing entered the palace as the first lieutenant, the newly appointed cavalry general Chen Xianda as the cavalry officer, the left-hand servant Sha Wang Jian as the cavalry officer, the left-hand guard general Gong Jian as the outstanding career, and the cavalry general Shanyang Wang Jian as the cavalry officer.

古文：诏遣大使巡行风俗。
现代文：韶令派大使巡行各地考察风俗。
English: The imperial edict sent ambassadors on a tour of various regions to study customs.

古文：丁未，诏曰： 新安国五品以上，悉与满叙；自此以下，皆听解遣。
现代文：丁未，下诏令说： 新安国五品以上的官员，任职期满全部予以进职叙用，白此以下，全部听其解职遣散。
English: Ding Wei, the next imperial edict said: All officials of Xin'an who have reached the rank of five or above will be promoted to higher posts upon the expiration of their term of office, and all officials below this rank will be dismissed.

古文：其欲仕者，适其所乐。 
现代文：那些希望做官的，满足他们的心愿。 
English: Those who wish to become officials, fulfill their wishes.

古文：以骁骑将军河东王铉为南徐州刺史，西中郎将临海王昭秀为车骑将军，南徐州刺史永嘉王昭粲为荆州刺史。
现代文：任命骁骑将军河东王萧铉为南徐州刺史，西中郎将堕延盖；驴为车骑将军，南徐州刺史丞嘉王萧昭粲为荆州刺史。
English: He appointed the horse-riding general, Hedong Wang Xiaoqi, as the governor of South Xuzhou, and the west middle-aged man, Yan Jie, as the vice-governor; the donkey as the carriage-riding general, and the South Xuzhou governor, Jia Wang Xiaoqi, as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：戊申，以辅国将军王诩为广州刺史，中书郎萧遥欣为兖州刺史。
现代文：戊申，任命辅国将军王翔为广州刺史，中书郎萧遥欣为兖州刺史。
English: Wushin, appointed the auxiliary general Wang Xiang as the Guangzhou scribe, and the middle school teacher Xiao Yaoxin as the Zhangzhou scribe.

古文：庚戌，以车骑板行参军李庆综为宁州刺史。
现代文：庚戌，任命车骑板行参军李庆综为宁州刺史。
English: Geng Yao appointed Li Qingsumi, who participated in the military parade on a bicycle and a skateboard, to write the history of Ningzhou.

古文：辛亥，以安西将军王玄邈为中护军，新除后军司马萧诞为徐州刺史。
现代文：辛亥。任命安西将军王玄邈为中护军，新晋升的后军司马萧诞为徐州刺史。
English: Xinhai. Anxi General Wang Xuanqian was appointed as the middle guard, and the newly promoted post-army secretary Ma Xiaozhong was appointed as the history of Xuzhou.

古文：壬子，以冠军司马臧灵智为交州刺史。
现代文：壬子，任命冠军司马臧灵智为交州刺史。
English: Ren Zi, appointed the champion Sima Zang Ling Zhi as the history of Jiaozhou.

古文：乙卯，申明织成、金薄、彩花、锦绣履之禁。
现代文：乙卯，重申对织成、金箔、彩花、锦绣履的禁令。
English: Second, reiterate the ban on woven, gold leaf, colored flowers and brocade shoes.

古文：九月，癸酉，诏曰： 顷者以淮关徭戍，勤瘁于行役，故覃以荣阶，薄酬厥劳。
现代文：九月癸酉，下诏令说： 近来因为淮河沿岸关口服役戍卫的人，奔波服役过度劳累，所以广泛地赐予荣誉官阶，作为对他们劳苦的微薄酬谢。
English: At the end of September, the following edict was issued: "Recently, because the people who served and guarded the pass along the Huai River have been overworked, they have been widely awarded honorary ranks as a meager reward for their hard work.

古文：勋状淹留，未集王府，非所以急舍爵之典，趣报功之旨。
现代文：但是功勋状长期滞留，没能集中到王府，可见不是为急求赏赐爵位的典礼，趋附报功的旨意。
English: However, the long-term stay of the order of merit, which could not be concentrated in the royal palace, shows that it is not a ceremony for the urgent award of a knighthood, but the intention of rewarding merit.

古文：便可分遣使部，往彼铨用。 
现代文：可以分别把他们派遣到使部，到那裹选拔任用。 
English: They can be sent separately to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for selection and appointment.

古文：辛巳，以前九真太守宋慈明为交州刺史。
现代文：辛巳。任命前九真太守宋慈明为交州刺史。
English: Xin Si. appointed the former Jiu Zhen Empress Song Ciming as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：癸未，诛新除司徒鄱阳王锵、中军大将军随郡王子隆。
现代文：癸未，处决新上任的司徒鄱阳王萧锵、中军大将军随郡王萧子隆。
English: Not long after, the newly-appointed King of Shitu and Yang, King Xiaoyan, was executed, and the general of the Chinese army, King of Gu, King Xiao Zilong, followed.

古文：遣平西将军王广之诛南兖州刺史安陆王子敬。
现代文：派遣平西将军王广之处死南兖州刺史安陆王萧子敬。
English: The dispatch of the Pingxi general Wang Guang led to the death of the southern Zhangzhou prince Anlu Wang Xiao Zi Jing.

古文：于是江州刺史晋安王子懋起兵，遣中护军王玄邈讨之。
现代文：于是江州刺史晋安王萧子懋起兵反叛，朝廷派遣中护军王玄邈讨伐他。
English: As a result, the prince of Jinan, King Xiao Zixuan of Jiangzhou rebelled, and the imperial court sent the middle protector, King Xuanzang, to fight against him.

古文：乙未，骠骑大将军鸾假黄铖，内外纂严。
现代文：乙未，骠骑大将军萧鸾以象征权力的黄铁，在宫廷内外实行戒严。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei, General Xiao Wei, riding a horse, used the yellow iron, a symbol of power, to impose martial law inside and outside the court.

古文：又诛湘州刺史南平王锐、郢州刺史晋熙王钅求、南豫州刺史宜都王铿。
现代文：又处死湘州刺史南平王萧锐、郢州刺史晋熙王萧銶、南豫州刺史宜都王萧铿。
English: In addition, Nanping Wang Xiao Rui, who stabbed Jinxi Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yidu Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Nanping Wang Xiao Rui, who stabbed Jinxi Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yidu Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Nanping Wang Xiao Rui, who stabbed Yanping Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yanping Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yanping Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yanping Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yanping Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yanping Wang Xiao Luo, who stabbed Yanping

古文：丁亥，以卫将军庐陵王子卿为司徒，抚军将军桂阳王铄为中军将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁亥，任命卫将军庐陵王萧子卿为司徒，抚军将军桂阳王萧铄为中军将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Dinghai appointed the general of the Wei army, Guiling Wang Xiao Ziqing, as the tutor, the general of the Fuzhou army, Guiyang Wang Xiao Yao, as the general of the Chinese army, and the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：冬，十月，癸巳，诏曰： 周设媒官，趣及时之制，汉务轻徭，在休息之典，所以布德弘教，宽俗阜民。
现代文：冬十月癸巳，下诏书说： 周设置媒官，顺应及时婚嫁的制度，汉致力于减轻徭役，列入与民休息的典章，为的都是布施道德弘扬教化，使风俗宽容，百姓富裕。
English: In the winter of October, the next imperial edict said: Zhou set up a matchmaker to comply with the system of timely marriage, Han was committed to alleviating the corvee, and included in the ceremony of resting with the people, for the purpose of spreading morality, promoting enlightenment, making customs tolerant, and enriching the people.

古文：朕君制八纮，志敷九德，而习俗之风，为弊未改，静言多愠，无忘昏昃。
现代文：朕君临天下，立志施行诸种美德，然而习俗风气，造成的弊端未能改变，巧饰之言多令人恼怒，终日难忘。
English: When I came into the world, I was determined to practice all kinds of virtues. However, the customs and customs, the drawbacks caused by them could not be changed, and the clever words were often infuriating and unforgettable.

古文：督劝婚嫁，宜严更申明，必使禽币以时，摽梅息怨。
现代文：督促劝说男女婚嫁，应该更加严厉地申明，一定要按时聘娶，平息已到婚嫁年龄女子的怨恨。
English: When urging and persuading men and women to get married, it should be more strictly affirmed that they must get married on time to quell the resentment of women who have reached the age of marriage.

古文：正厨诸役，旧出州郡，徵吏民以应其数，公获二旬，私累数朔。
现代文：宫内庖厨之类劳役，过去都由州郡派出，征召吏人百姓充任其数，官方本来衹要求服役二十天，可实际却累至数月。
English: In the past, laborers such as palace cooks were sent from prefectures and counties, and officials and commoners were conscripted to fill their number. The official requirement was to serve for twenty days, but it actually took several months.

古文：又广陵年常递出千人以助淮戍，劳扰为烦，抑亦苞苴是育。今并可长停，别量所出。
现代文：另外广陵郡每年常轮流派千人协助淮河沿岸戍卫，干扰烦劳百姓，也助长了行贿现象，现在可一并长期停止，另外考虑所派的人。
English: In addition, Guangling County annually sends a thousand people in rotation to help defend the coast of the Huai River, interfering with the toil of the people, and also contributing to the phenomenon of bribery. Now it can be stopped for a long time, and the people sent can be considered separately.

古文：诸县使村长路都防城直县，为剧尤深，亦宜禁断。 
现代文：各县役使村民百姓长年奔波戍卫，为害尤其严重，也应该禁止。 
English: It should also be prohibited for county officials to make villagers and common people rush to defend themselves for many years, which is particularly harmful.

古文：丁酉，解严。
现代文：丁酉，解除戒严。
English: Ding Xi, lift the martial law.

古文：进骠骑大将军、扬州刺史宣城公鸾为太傅，领大将军、扬州牧，加殊礼，进爵为王。
现代文：提升骠骑大将军、扬州刺史宣城公萧鸾为太傅，领大将军、扬州牧，给予特殊的礼遇，进爵号为王。
English: Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xuancheng Xuancheng Xiao Wei was promoted to Taifu, Yangzhou Mu, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xuancheng Xuancheng, Yangzhou Mu, Yangzhou Mu, Yangzhou Zhi Xuancheng, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xuancheng Xuancheng, Yangzhou Zhi Xuancheng Xuancheng, Yangzhou Zhi Xuancheng Xuancheng, Yangzhou Zhi Xuancheng Xuancheng, Yangzhou Zhi Xuancheng Xuancheng, Yangzhou Zhi Xuancheng Xuancheng, Yangzhou Zhi Xuancheng Xuanchen

古文：戊戌，诛新除中军将军桂阳王铄、抚军将军衡阳王钧、侍中秘书监江夏王锋、镇军将军建安王子真、左将军巴陵王子伦。
现代文：戊戌，处死新任中军将军桂阳王萧铄、抚军将军衡阳王萧钩、侍中秘书监江夏王萧锋、镇军将军建安王萧子真、左将军巴陵王萧子伦。
English: In Wuyi, the newly appointed general of the Chinese army, Guiyang Wang Xiaohui, the general of the Fuzhou army, Hengyang Wang Xiaohui, the secretary of the Chamberlain, Jiangxia Wang Xiaofeng, the general of the town army, Jianan Wang Xiaozizhen, and the left general, Baling Wang Xiaozilun were executed.

古文：癸卯，以宁朔将军萧遥欣为豫州刺史，新除黄门郎萧遥昌为郢州刺史，辅国将军萧诞为司州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命宁朔将军萧遥欣为豫州刺史，新任黄门郎萧遥昌为郢州刺史，辅国将军萧诞为司州刺史。
English: At the same time, Ningshuo General Xiao Yuxin was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou, the newly appointed Huangmen Lang Xiao Yuchang was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou, and the auxiliary general Xiao Guo was appointed as the historian of Shizhou.

古文：宣城王辅政，帝起居皆谘而后行。
现代文：宣城王辅助朝政，皇帝的起居都要征询其意见然后才去做。
English: The king of Xuancheng assisted the imperial government, and the emperor's residence had to seek his advice before doing it.

古文：思食蒸鱼菜，太官令答无录公命，竟不与。
现代文：皇帝想吃蒸鱼菜，太官令回答没有得到宣城王的命令，竟然不给。
English: The emperor wanted to eat steamed fish and vegetables, but the eunuch replied that he had not received the order from the king of Xuancheng and refused to give it.

古文：辛亥，皇太后令曰： 司空、后将军、丹阳尹、右仆射、中领军、八座：夫明晦迭来，屯平代有，上灵所以眷命，亿兆所以归怀。
现代文：辛亥，皇太后下令说：司空、后将军、丹阳尹、右仆射、中领军、八座：昼夜更替，艰难平定相代，上天因此眷爱授命，百姓因此归附。
English: In Xinhai, the empress dowager ordered: Siku, Houzheng, Danyangyin, Uguisai, Zhonglianjun, eight seats: day and night change, it is difficult to pacify the same generation, so the heavens are fond of giving orders, and the people are attached to it.

古文：自皇家淳耀，列圣继轨，诸侯官方，百神受职。
现代文：自从皇家淳美光耀，诸位圣王继承前代伟业，诸侯谨守为官之道，众神安于职守。
English: Since the glory of the royal family, the holy kings have inherited the great achievements of the previous generation, the princes have kept to the official way, and the gods have kept to their duties.

古文：而殷忧时启，多难荐臻，隆昌失德，特紊人鬼，非徒四海解体，乃亦九鼎将移。
现代文：然而深切的忧虑不时到来，众多灾难频频降临，隆昌帝德行不好，阴阳世界都出现极大的混乱，不仅天下分裂，社稷也将被颠覆。
English: However, deep worries come from time to time, many disasters come frequently, Longchang Emperor's moral conduct is not good, and the yin and yang world are in great chaos. Not only is the world divided, but society will also be subverted.

古文：赖天纵英辅，大匡社稷，崩基重造，坠典再兴。
现代文：幸赖上天劝勉英雄辅佐，大大匡正社稷，崩塌的基业得以重新营造，废亡的典制再度兴起。
English: Fortunately, thanks to Heaven's exhortation and the hero's assistance, the collapse of the foundation was able to be rebuilt, and the abandoned award system reemerged.

古文：嗣主幼冲，庶政多昧，且早婴尪疾，弗克负荷，所以宗正内侮，戚藩外叛，觇天视地，人各有心。
现代文：继位的国君年幼，各种政务多不明了，且本来就身患疾病，不能胜任负荷，因此宗亲在内欺侮，亲属藩国在外背叛，窥伺天下，人人各有私心。
English: The sovereign who succeeds to the throne is young, many of the various government affairs are unknown, and he is already suffering from illness and is not competent to bear the burden. Therefore, relatives bully inside, relatives betray the country outside, spy on the world, and everyone has their own selfishness.

古文：虽三祖之德在民，而七庙之危行及。
现代文：虽然太祖、世祖有德于百姓，但是宗庙的危亡行将到来。
English: Although the great-grandfathers and great-great-grandfathers had virtue in the people, the danger of the death of the ancestral temple will come.

古文：自非树以长君，镇以渊器，未允天人之望，宁息奸宄之谋！
现代文：这自然是因为没有立年长的国君，没有起用大才镇守国家，有负上天及国人的期望，未能平息奸诈恶人的阴谋。
English: This is naturally because they did not install an elderly sovereign, did not employ great talents to defend the country, failed to live up to the expectations of heaven and the people, and failed to quell the plots of treacherous evildoers.

古文：太傅宣城王胤体宣皇，钟慈太祖，识冠生民，功高造物，符表夙著，讴颂有在，宜入承宝命，式宁宗祏。
现代文：太傅宣城王是宣皇的后代，受到太祖的钟爱，才识超出常人，功绩高过造物，表现为符瑞显扬于日常生活，受到歌颂，应当入宫秉承天命，告慰祖宗。
English: Taifu Xuancheng Wang is a descendant of Emperor Xuan, beloved by the great-grandfathers, his talent is beyond ordinary people, his achievements are higher than the creation, his performance is brilliant in daily life, he is praised, and he should enter the palace to uphold the heavenly destiny and comfort the ancestors.

古文：帝可降封海陵王，吾当归老别馆。
现代文：皇帝可降位封为海陵工，我也当回到别馆养老。
English: The emperor can be demoted to the title of Hailing King, and I myself have retired due to old age and no longer care about the imperial court.

古文：昔宣帝中兴汉室，简文重延晋祀，庶我鸿基，于兹永固。
现代文：当年宣帝中兴汉朝，简文帝重新延续晋朝的王业，希望我朝的宏大基业，从此永远稳固。
English: In that year, Emperor Xuanxu revived the Han Dynasty, and Emperor Jianwen renewed the royal cause of the Jin Dynasty. I hope that the great cause of my dynasty will be stable forever.

古文：言念家国，感庆载怀。 
现代文：言语之中念及宗族国家，满怀感激庆幸。
English: He spoke of his ancestral country with gratitude and happiness.

古文：建武元年，诏 海陵王依汉东海王彊故事，给虎贲、旄头、画轮车，设钟虡宫县，供奉所须，每存隆厚。 
现代文：建武元年，下诏令说 海陵王依照汉束海王彊的旧事，赐给虎贲、旄头、画轮车，可在居处四壁悬挂编钟之类乐器，供奉所需物品，且每每要从优丰厚 。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, a royal edict was issued, stating that King Hailing, in accordance with the old story of the Han dynasty's King Hailing, would be given a vise, a hammer, and a wheeled cart, and could hang musical instruments such as chimes on the four walls of his residence to offer the necessary items, and should always be generous.

古文：十一月，称王有疾，数遣御师占视，乃殒之。
现代文：十一月，说海陵王有病，多次派御医察看，就去世了。
English: In November, it was said that King Hailing was ill, and he sent his doctor to see him several times, and then he passed away.

古文：给温明秘器，衣一袭，敛以衮冕之服。
现代文：赐给温明棺材，一套衣服，用衮服冕旒殓葬。
English: Wenming was given a coffin, a set of clothes, and was buried with a cassock.

古文：大鸿胪监护丧事。
现代文：大鸿胪监护丧事。
English: Da Hongtao oversaw the funeral.

古文：葬给辒辌车，九旒大辂，黄屋左纛，前后部羽葆鼓吹，挽歌二部，依东海王故事。
现代文：下葬时赐给韫掠车，九旒大辖，黄屋左纛，前后部羽葆鼓吹，挽歌二部，依照东海王旧例。
English: At the time of burial, he was given a wreath-carrying chariot, nine wreaths of great jurisdiction, the left yoke of the yellow house, the front and rear parts of the feathered trumpet, and two parts of the elegy, according to the old example of the East Sea King.

古文：谥曰恭王。
现代文：谧号为恭王。
English: His posthumous name was King Gong.

古文：年十五。
现代文：终年十五岁。
English: She is fifteen years old.

古文：史臣曰：郭璞称永昌之名，有二日之象，而隆昌之号亦同焉。
现代文：史臣曰：郭璞称永昌年号，昌字有两个字，而隆昌的年号也是如此。
English: Shichen said: Guo Gan said Yongchang year, Chang has two words, and Longchang's year is also the same.

古文：案汉中平六年，献帝即位，便改元为光熹，张让、段圭诛后，改元为昭宁，董卓辅政，改元为永汉，一岁四号也。
现代文：查考漠中平六年，献帝即位，便改年号为光熹，张让、段珪被杀后，改年号为昭宁，董卓辅佐朝政，改年号为永汉，一年中有四个年号。
English: In the sixth year of the Middle Kingdom, when Emperor Xian ascended to the throne, the year name was changed to Guangyao. After Zhang Zhan and Duan Yu were killed, the year name was changed to Zhaoning, and Dong Zhuo Fu assisted the imperial government. The year name was changed to Yonghan. There are four year names in a year.

古文：晋惠帝太安二年，长沙王鳷事败，成都王颖改元为永安；颖自邺夺，河间王颙复改元为永兴，一岁三号也。
现代文：晋惠帝太安二年。长沙王又事情败露，成都王颖改年号为永安，颖在邺地被削去权力，河间王颐又改年号为永兴，一年中有三个年号。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taian of the Jin and Hui Dynasties, the King of Changsha was betrayed again. Chengdu Wang Ying changed his era name to Yongan, Ying was stripped of his power in Handan, and Kawama Wang Xi changed his era name to Yongxing. There are three eras in a year.

古文：隆昌、延兴、建武，亦三改年号。
现代文：隆昌、延兴、建武，也三次改变年号。
English: Longchang, Yanxing and Jianwu have also changed their names three times.

古文：故知丧乱之轨迹，虽千载而必同矣。
现代文：因此可以知道丧乱的轨迹，即便千年都必定相同。
English: So you can see the trajectory of devastation, even if it's the same for thousands of years.

古文：赞曰：穆穆海陵，因亡代兴。
现代文：赞曰：仪表美好的海陵王，因前君被废黜而继位。
English: Zang said, "The handsome King of Hailing succeeded to the throne after the former king was deposed.

古文：不先不后，遭命是膺。
现代文：不早不晚，遭受此种命运。
English: Sooner or later, they will suffer this fate.

