古文：文宣四王太原王绍德范阳王绍义西河王绍仁陇西王绍廉
现代文：太原王绍德范阳王绍义西河王绍仁陇西王绍廉昭六王
English: King of Taiyuan, King of Shao De, King of Fan Yang, King of Shao Yi, King of the West River, King of Shao Ren, King of the West, King of Shao Lian Zhao, Six Kings

古文：◎孝昭六王乐陵王百年始平王彦德城阳王彦基定阳王彦康汝阳王彦忠汝南王彦理
现代文：乐陵王百年始平王彦德城阳王彦基定阳王彦康汝阳王彦忠汝南王彦理成十二王
English: The hundred-year reign of King Le Ling began with King Heping, followed by King Chengyang, King Yan, King Ji Dingyang, King Yan Kang, King Ryu Yang, King Yan Zhong, King Nan Rong, King Yan Licheng, and twelve kings.

古文：◎武成十二王
现代文：南阳王绰琅邪王俨孥安王廓北平王贞
English: The king of Nanyang, the king of Chu, the king of An, the king of Gu, the king of Peiping, the king of Zhen

古文：南阳王绰琅邪王俨齐安王廓北平王贞高平王仁英淮南王仁光西河王仁几乐平王仁邕颍川王仁俭安阳王仁雅丹阳王仁直东海王仁谦
现代文：高平王仁英淮南王仁光西河王仁几乐平王仁邕颍川王仁俭安阳王仁雅丹阳王仁直东海王仁谦
English: Gaoping Wang Renying Huainan Wang Ringuang West River Wang Renying Qianle Ping Wang Renying Huichuan Wang Renying Anyang Wang Renyang Danyang Wang Renzhong Donghai Wang Renying

古文：文宣五男：李后生废帝及太原王绍德，冯世妇生范阳王绍义，裴嫔生西河王绍仁，颜嫔生陇西王绍廉。
现代文：文宣有五个儿子：奎旦生了废童和左愿王直绍德，冯世妇生了范阳王高绍义，裴嫔生了西河王直超仁，题炉生了膳酉王直钮虚。
English: Wen Xuan had five sons: Kui Dan gave birth to Wasted Boy and Zuo Jian Wang Zhi Dao, Feng Shiyu gave birth to Fan Yang Wang Gao Zhi Yi, Pei Xuan gave birth to West River King Zhi Chaoren, and Zhi Huo gave birth to Jian Ye Wang Zhi Nuo.

古文：太原王绍德，文宣第二子也。
现代文：太原王高绍德，文宣的第二个儿子。
English: Gao Shao De, King of Taiyuan, is the second son of Wen Xuan.

古文：天保末，为开府仪同三司。
现代文：天保末年，任开府仪同三司。
English: In the last year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed to the post of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：武成因怒李后，骂绍德曰： 你父打我时，竟不来救！ 
现代文：武成因对李后发怒，骂高锤德说： 你父亲打我时，竟不来救! 
English: Wu Cheng became angry with Queen Li and scolded Gao Hammerde, saying, "When your father beat me, he didn't even come to my rescue!

古文：以刀环筑杀之，亲以土埋之游豫园。
现代文：用刀头上的环打死了他，亲自用土埋在游豫园。
English: He killed him with the ring on his knife and buried him in the soil in Yuyuan Garden.

古文：武平元年，诏以范阳王子辨才为后，袭太原王。
现代文：武平元年，下诏书将范阳王的儿子高辨才作为后嗣，继承太原王。
English: In the first year of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, the next imperial edict named King Fan Yang's son Gao Bencai as the heir to succeed King Taiyuan.

古文：范阳王绍义，文宣第三子也。
现代文：范阳王产钮盏，文宣的第三个儿子。
English: Fan Yang Wang gave birth to Nujing, the third son of Wen Xuan.

古文：初封广阳，后封范阳。
现代文：起初封为卢旦眶，后封为茎垦旺。
English: At first, the seal was Lu Danzhong, and later it was Zhu Zhuangwang.

古文：历位侍中、清都尹。
现代文：历任侍中、渣都尹。
English: Successive chamberlains, the Qing Dynasty Yin.

古文：好与群小同饮，擅置内参，打杀博士任方荣。
现代文：喜欢和众小人一同饮酒，擅自设置太监，打死博士任方荣。
English: He likes to drink with villains, set up eunuchs without permission, and beat Dr. Ren Fang Rong to death.

古文：武成尝杖之二百，送付昭信后，后又杖一百。
现代文：武成曾经用棍棒打了他二百下，送交昭信后，昭信后又用棍棒打了一百下。
English: Emperor Wucheng gave him two hundred sticks and gave them to Gao Zhaoxin. Zhaoxin gave him one hundred sticks.

古文：及后主奔邺，以绍义为尚书令、定州刺史。
现代文：等到后主逃奔邺城，任命高绍义为尚书令、定州刺史。
English: After the master fled to Lucheng, Gao Shao Yi was appointed as the chief secretary and Dingzhou as the chief historian.

古文：周武帝克并州，以封辅相为北朔州总管。
现代文：周武帝攻克并州，任命封辅相为北朔州总管。
English: Emperor Zhou Wucheng conquered and annexed the prefecture, and appointed Feng Yuxiang as the governor of North Shuozhou.

古文：此地齐以重镇，诸勇士多聚焉。
现代文：这个地方是齐国的重镇，很多勇士聚集到这裹。
English: This place is the capital of Qi, and many warriors have gathered here.

古文：前长史赵穆、司马王当万等谋执辅相，迎任城王于瀛州。
现代文：前长史赵穆、司马王当万等人图谋抓住封辅相，在瀛州迎接任城王。
English: Former governor of North Qi, Shi Zhao Mu, Sima Wang Dangwan, and others plotted to arrest the assistant minister of fief, and went to Ganzhou to meet the king of the city.

古文：事不果，便迎绍义。
现代文：事情不能成功，便迎接高绍义。
English: If things don't work out, Gao Shaoyi will be waiting for you.

古文：绍义至马邑。
现代文：高绍义到了马邑。
English: He reached Mayup.

古文：辅相及其属韩阿各奴等数十人皆齐叛臣，自肆州以北城戍二百八十余尽从辅相，及绍义至，皆反焉。
现代文：封辅相及其部属韩阿各奴等几十人都是齐国的叛臣，从肆州以北的边防城堡二百八十多个全都跟从封辅相，等高绍义一来，全都反叛。
English: Dozens of people, including the vassal minister and his subordinate Han Agong, were traitors to the State of Qi. More than 280 border fortresses north of Zhouzhou all followed the vassal minister, and when Gao Shao Yi came, they all rebelled.

古文：绍义与灵州刺史袁洪猛引兵南出，欲取并州，至新兴而肆州已为周守。
现代文：高绍义和灵州刺史袁洪猛带领军队向南出发，想夺取并州，到了新兴而肆州已被周国把守。
English: Gao Shao Yi and Lingshou assassin Yuan Hong led the army to the south, trying to seize the annexation of the state, and to the emerging Zhouzhou has been guarded by Zhou Guoliang.

古文：前队二仪同以所部降周。
现代文：前队的二仪同带领部下投降了周国。
English: The second rank of the former team surrendered to Zhou Guo together with their subordinates.

古文：周兵击显州，执刺史陆琼，又攻陷诸城。
现代文：周国军队攻打显州，活捉了刺史陆琼，又攻陷各城。
English: The Zhou army attacked Xianzhou, captured the assassin Shi Lu Qiong, and captured many cities.

古文：绍义还保北朔。
现代文：高超盏返回守卫韭塑。
English: Shao Yi led the troops to withdraw from the defense of Beishuo.

古文：周将宇文神举军逼马邑，绍义遣杜明达拒之，兵大败。
现代文：且厘将领宇文神举的军队进逼马邑，高绍义派遣杜明达抵抗，军队大败。
English: Zhou sent Yuwen Shen to lead the army to force Ma'e, he sent Qi to resist Duminda, and Qi's army was defeated.

古文：绍义曰： 有死而已，不能降人。 
现代文：高绍义说： 有一死罢了，不能投降别人。 
English: He said: "We can only die, we cannot surrender to the enemy."

古文：遂奔突厥。
现代文：于是投奔突厥。
English: He fled to Turkey, accompanied by more than three thousand people.

古文：众三千家，令之曰： 欲还者任意。 
现代文：众人三千家，命令他们说： 想回去的人任意。 
English: They came from three thousand homes and ordered them: "Anyone who wants to go back is free to do so."

古文：于是哭拜别者太半。
现代文：于是哭着行礼告别的有一大半。
English: As a result, most of them left crying and bowing their heads.

古文：突厥他钵可汗谓文宣为英雄天子，以绍义重踝似之，甚见爱重，凡齐人在北者，悉隶绍义。
现代文：突厥他钵可汗称文宣是英雄天子，因产圣盏双重脚踝和文宣相似，很受喜爱敬重，凡是齐国人在北方的，全都归属高绍义。
English: The Turkic Tatar khan called Wen Xuan a hero and son of heaven. He was very loved and respected because he was born with a double ankle, similar to Wen Xuan. All the people of Qi in the north belong to Gao Shao Yi.

古文：高宝宁在营州，表上尊号，绍义遂即皇帝位，称武平元年。
现代文：高实宁在营州，上表称皇帝的尊号，高绍义于是登皇帝位，称武干元年。
English: Gao Shining in Yingzhou, the above table called the emperor's honorary title, Gao Shao Yi then ascended the throne, called the first year of Wukan.

古文：以赵穆为天水王。
现代文：任命趟穆为天水王。
English: Appointed Wat Mu as the king of heaven and water.

古文：他钵闻宝宁得平州，亦招诸部，各举兵南向，云共立范阳王作齐帝，为其报仇。
现代文：他钵听说高宝宁得到平州，也招集各部，各自带兵南向，说共同拥立范阳王作查国皇帝，为他报仇。
English: When the Khans heard that Gao Bao Ning had captured Pingzhou, they also called up soldiers and horses from all the tribes and raised an army to attack the south, saying that everyone should jointly support Fan Yang Wang Gao Shao Yi as the emperor of North Qi and take revenge for him.

古文：周武帝大集兵于云阳，将亲北伐，遇疾暴崩。
现代文：周武帝在云阳集结大量兵力，将要亲自北伐，遇病突然崩逝。
English: Emperor Zhou Wudi concentrated a large number of troops in Yunyang, preparing to personally march north, and died suddenly due to illness.

古文：绍义闻之，以为天赞己。
现代文：高绍义听说后，认为上天帮助自己。
English: After hearing about it, Shao Yi thought it was heaven's help.

古文：卢昌斯据范阳，亦表迎绍义。
现代文：卢昌期占据范阳，也上表迎接直钮盏。
English: Lu Chang period occupied Fan Yang, also on the table to meet the straight button.

古文：俄而周将宇文神举攻灭昌期。
现代文：不久且厘将领宇文神举攻打消灭了卢昌翅。
English: Soon after, Zhou sent Yuwen Shen to attack Fanyang, eliminating the Lu Chang period.

古文：其日，绍义适至幽州，闻周总管出兵于外，欲乘虚取蓟城，列天子旌旗，登燕昭王冢，乘高望远，部分兵众。
现代文：这一天，高绍义刚到幽州，听说周国总管出兵在外，想乘虚夺取蓟城，排列天子的旌旗，登上燕昭王的陵墓，登高望远，指挥军队。
English: On this day, Gao Shao Yi had just arrived in Yuzhou when he heard that Zhou Guozhong had sent troops to take advantage of the situation. He wanted to take advantage of the situation to seize Shicheng, line up the flags of the sons of heaven, climb the mausoleum of Yan Zhao Wang, climb high and far, and command the army.

古文：神举遣大将军宇文恩将四千人驰救幽州，半为齐军所杀。
现代文：宇文神举派遣大将军宇文恩带领四千人奔驰救援幽，有一半被齐厘军队杀掉。
English: Uwen Shen dispatched General Uwen En and four thousand horses to rescue Yuzhou, and half of them were killed by the Northern Qi army.

古文：绍义闻范阳城陷，素服举哀，回军入突厥。
现代文：产钮盏听说茎盐城被攻陷，穿上白衣表示哀悼，军队返回进入室题。
English: When Shao Yi heard that Fanyang City had fallen, he put on white clothes to mourn and led his army back to Turkey.

古文：周人购之于他钵，又使贺若谊往说之。
现代文：旦厘人向继悬赏捉拿茵钮盏，又派贺羞谊前往游说。
English: Zhou asked Khan to bribe him to buy Shao Yi, and sent an envoy, He Ruoyi, to persuade Khan.

古文：他钵犹不忍，遂伪与绍义猎于南境，使谊执之，流于蜀。
现代文：他鲑还是不忍心，于是假装和直组盏到南部边境打猎，让贺羞茎捉住了他。流放到蜀地。
English: He still couldn't bear it, so he pretended to go hunting with Zhiqiu to the southern border, and let He Shizhu catch him. He was exiled to Shu.

古文：绍义妃渤海封孝琬女，自突厥逃归。
现代文：高绍义的妃子是困人堑孝昭的女儿，从塞题逃了回去。
English: Gao Shao Yi's concubine was the daughter of a poor man, Zou Xiao Zhao, and she ran away from the siege.

古文：绍义在蜀，遗妃书云： 夷狄无信，送吾于此。 
现代文：高绍义在蜀地，给妃子写信说： 夷狄不讲信义，把我送到遣裹。 
English: Gao Shao Yi was in Shu and wrote to his concubine: "If the Yidi don't believe in me, send me to the capital."

古文：竟死蜀中。
现代文：最终死在墨中。
English: He eventually died in the ink.

古文：西河王绍仁，文宣第四子也，天保末，为开府仪同三司。
现代文：西河高绍仁，文宣的第四个儿子。型呈末年，任开府仪同三司。
English: Xihe Gao Shaoren, the fourth son of Wen Xuan. He was in his last years, and was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：寻薨。
现代文：不久薨。
English: Soon after, Hayabusa passed away.

古文：陇西王绍廉，文宣第五子也。
现代文：陇西王高绍廉，文宣的第五个儿子。
English: Gao Shaolian, King of Shaanxi, was the fifth son of Wen Xuan.

古文：初封长乐，后改焉。
现代文：起初封为长乐王，后改为陇西王。
English: At first, he was given the title of Changle King, but later he was given the title of Shaanxi King.

古文：性粗暴，尝拔刀逐绍义，绍义走入厩，闭门拒之。
现代文：性情粗暴，曾拔出刀追逐高绍义，高绍义跑进马厩襄，关上门挡住他。
English: Rough temper, once pulled out a knife to chase Gao Shao Yi, Gao Shao Yi ran into the stables, closed the door to block him.

古文：绍义初为清都尹，未及理事，绍廉先往，唤囚悉出，率意决遣之。
现代文：高绍义起初任清都尹，没来得及处理事务，高绍廉先去，把囚犯全都唤出来，任意决断遣散他们。
English: Gao Shao Yi was initially appointed as the Qing Du Yin, but he did not have time to deal with affairs. Gao Shao Lian went first, called all the prisoners out, and arbitrarily decided to dismiss them.

古文：能饮酒，一举数升，终以此薨。
现代文：能喝酒，一次喝几升，最终因喝酒薨。
English: Able to drink alcohol, drink several liters at a time, and eventually become intoxicated from drinking.

古文：孝昭七男：元后生乐陵王百年，桑氏生襄城王亮，出后襄城景王，诸姬生汝南王彦理、始平王彦德、城阳王彦基、定阳王彦康、汝阳王彦忠。
现代文：孝昭有七个儿子：五后生了銮盐工产亘互，圣压生了禀拉王直台，过继给襄城景王作后嗣，各姬妾生了迪蓖匡直产理、盘王王直产擅、垣盐王高彦基、室垦旺直彦尘、迪垦旺产产盅。
English: Xiao Zhao had seven sons: the fifth daughter gave birth to Wang Hui, a salt mine worker; the holy concubine gave birth to Wang Zhitai, the king of Bala; the holy concubine gave birth to Xiangcheng Jing Wang as his heir; each concubine gave birth to Di Zhen Kuang Zhi, Pan Wang Zhi Guo, Qigong Zhi Wang Gao Yan Ji, Muro Zhen Wang Zhi Guo, and Di Zhen Wang Zhi Guo.

古文：乐陵王百年，孝昭第二子也。
现代文：乐陵王高百年，孝昭的第二侗儿子。
English: Le Ling Wang Gao is 100 years old, the second son of Xiao Zhao.

古文：孝昭初即位，在晋阳，群臣请建中宫及太子，帝谦未许，都下百僚又有请，乃称太后令立为皇太子。
现代文：孝昭刚登皇帝位，在晋阳，大臣们请求建立中宫以及太子，皇帝谦虚没答应，都城百官又请求，于是称太后的命令立为皇太子。
English: Xiao Zhao had just ascended to the imperial throne. In Jinyang, the ministers requested the establishment of a middle palace and a crown prince. The emperor modestly did not agree, and the capital's hundred officials also requested, and then said that the order of the empress dowager was established as the crown prince.

古文：帝临崩，遗诏传位于武成，并有手书，其末曰： 百年无罪，汝可以乐处置之，勿学前人。 
现代文：皇帝临终前，下遣韶传位给武成，并有亲笔信，信的末尾说： 百年无罪，你可以在快乐的地方安置他，不要仿效前人。 
English: Before the emperor's death, he sent a posthumous letter to Wu Cheng, and there was a handwritten letter at the end of the letter saying: "He is innocent for a hundred years, you can place him in a happy place, don't follow the example of his predecessors."

古文：大宁中，封乐陵王。
现代文：大宁年间，封为乐陵王。
English: At the time of Taining, Emperor Wucheng was crowned as the king of tombs for a hundred years.

古文：河清三年五月，白虹围日再重，又横贯而不达。
现代文：河清三年五月，白色的虹围住太阳两重，又横贯而不通达。
English: In May of the third year of Heqing, a white rainbow encircled the sun in two layers. It was also transverse and impassable.

古文：赤星见，帝以盆水承星影而盖之，一夜盆自破。
现代文：红色的星星出现，皇帝用一盆水接住星星的影子又盖上，一夜后盆自己破裂。
English: Red stars appear, the emperor catches the shadow of the star with a basin of water and covers it, and the basin breaks itself after one night.

古文：欲以百年厌之。
现代文：想用高百年镇压住它。
English: He was disgusted by the thought that he had been crowned prince for a hundred years.

古文：会博陵人贾德胄教百年书，百年尝作数 敕 字，德胄封以奏。
现代文：适逢双堕人贾德胄教产亘年写字，产亘年曾经写了几个 敕 字，贾德胄封好上奏。
English: It was a good time for the double-deceased Jia Deyu to teach his progeny to write for years. Jia Deyu had written several  characters over the years, and Jia Deyu was able to play them.

古文：帝乃发怒，使召百年。
现代文：皇帝于是发怒，派人召高百年。
English: The emperor was so angry that he sent someone to summon Gao Jianlin.

古文：百年被召，自知不免，割带玦留与妃斛律氏。
现代文：高百年被召，自知不能免死，把佩带的玉块割下来留给妃子斛律氏。
English: At the age of 100 he was summoned, and knowing that he could not avoid death, he cut off the piece of jade he was wearing and left it to his wife, the Empress Dowager.

古文：见帝于玄都苑凉风堂，使百年书 敕 字，验与德胄所奏相似，遣左右乱捶击之，又令人曳百年绕堂且走且打，所过处血皆遍地。气息将尽，曰： 乞命，愿与阿叔作奴。 
现代文：在玄墨蕴痉凰堂见到皇帝，让高百年书写 敕 字，查验和买德胄奏的相似。派身边的人把台亘年乱打一顿，又命令人拉着高百年绕着堂一边走一边打，所经过的地方血流得遍地都是，奄奄一息将要丧命，说： 乞求饶命，愿意给阿叔作奴隶。 
English: Seeing the emperor in the Hall of the Black Dragon and the White Dragon, he asked Gao Baizhong to write the  character, which was found to be similar to the  played by Baide. He sent people around him to beat the table for years, and ordered people to drag Gao Baizhong around the hall and beat him. The blood flowed everywhere, and he was about to die. He said, "I beg for my life to be spared, I am willing to be a slave to my uncle."

古文：遂斩之，弃诸池，池水尽赤，于后园亲看埋之。
现代文：于是斩了他，扔在池子裹，池子的水都红了，在后园亲自看着把他埋了。
English: Emperor Wucheng beheaded him and dumped him in a pool of water that turned red. Emperor Wucheng watched as he buried him in his backyard.

古文：妃把玦哀号，不肯食，月余亦死，玦犹在手，拳不可开，时年十四，其父光自擘之，乃开。
现代文：妃子握着玉块哀号，不肯吃东西，一个多月也死了，玉块还在手裹，拳头不能分开，当时年龄十四岁，他的父亲斛律光亲自掰她的拳头，才掰开。
English: The concubine held the jade block and wailed, refused to eat, and died for more than a month. The jade block was still wrapped in her hands, and her fist could not be separated. At that time, she was fourteen years old, and her father, Bao Riguang, personally broke her fist before breaking it open.

古文：后主时，改九院为二十七院，掘得一小尸，绯袍金带，一髻一解，一足有靴。
现代文：后主时，把九院改成二十七院，挖出一个小孩的尸体红袍金带，一个发髻另一个解开了，一只脚有靴子。
English: After the Lord's Prayer, he changed the Ninth Ward to the Twenty-seventh Ward, and dug up the corpse of a child with a red robe and gold belt, one bun and the other untied, and a boot on one foot.

古文：诸内参窃言，百年太子也，或言太原王绍德。
现代文：太监们偷偷地说，是百年太子，也有人说是太原王高绍德。
English: The eunuchs secretly said that he was a hundred-year-old prince, and some people said that he was King Gao Shao De of Taiyuan.

古文：诏以襄成王子白泽袭爵乐陵王。
现代文：下诏书让襄成王的儿子高白泽继承乐陵王的爵位。
English: The following edict allowed Gao Baizhe, the son of King Xiangcheng, to inherit the title of King of Leling.

古文：齐亡，入关，徙蜀死。
现代文：齐围灭亡，进入关内，迁徙到蜀地死去。
English: Qi Wai perished, entered Guanai, migrated to Shudi and died.

古文：汝南王彦理，武平初封王，位开府、清都尹。
现代文：汝南王高彦理，武平初年封为王，官位开府、清都尹。
English: Takahikori, the king of the south of Japan, was crowned king in the first year of Buhei, and the official rank of Kaifu, the capital of the Qing Dynasty, was transferred to Yin.

古文：齐亡，入关，随例授仪同大将军，封县子。
现代文：齐国灭亡，进入关内，依随旧例授予仪同大将军，封为县子。
English: After the fall of the State of Qi, Guanzhong was awarded the title of General in accordance with the old custom, and became the county seat.

古文：女入太子宫，故得不死。
现代文：女儿进入太子宫，故能够不死。
English: The daughter enters the uterus of the crown prince, so she can not die.

古文：隋开皇中，卒并州刺史。
现代文：隋代开皇年间，死在并州刺史任上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of the Sui Dynasty, he died while he was in the position of state secretary.

古文：始平王彦德、城阳王彦基、定阳王彦康、汝阳王彦忠，与汝南同受封，并加仪同三司，后事阙。
现代文：阳王高彦康汝阳王高彦忠、始平王高彦德、城阳王高彦基、定阳王高彦康、汝阳王高彦忠和汝南王同时受封，并加授仪同三司，后来的事迹阙失。
English: Yang Wang Gao Yan Kang, Ruyang King Gao Yan Zhong, Shi Ping King Gao Yan De, Chengyang King Gao Yan Ke, Dingyang King Gao Yan Kang, Ruyang King Gao Yan Zhong, and Ruan King were also given the title, and were awarded the same three titles, but their subsequent deeds were lost.

古文：武成十三男：胡皇后生后主及琅邪王俨，李夫人生南阳王绰，后宫生齐安王廓、北平王贞、高平王仁英、淮南王仁光、西河王仁几、乐平王仁邕、颍川王仁俭、安乐王仁雅、丹阳王仁直、东海王仁谦。
现代文：武成有十三个儿子：胡皇后生了后主以及琅邪王高俨，李夫人生了南阳王高绰，后宫姬妾生了齐安王高廓、北平王高贞、高乎王高仁英、淮南王高仁光、西河王高仁几、乐平王高仁邕、颖川王高仁俭、安乐王高仁雅、丹阳王高仁直、东海王高仁谦。
English: Wu Cheng had thirteen sons: Empress Hu gave birth to the queen mother and the evil king Gao Qi, Mrs. Li gave birth to the Nanyang king Gao Qu, and the concubine of the harem concubine gave birth to the Qian king Gao Kuo, the Beiping king Gao Zhen, the Gaohu king Gao Ren Ying, the Huainan king Gao Ringuang, the West River king Gao Ringu, the Leping king Gao Renzhong, the Yingchuan king Gao Renzhong, the Anle king Gao Renya, the Danyang king Gao Renzhong

古文：南阳王绰，字仁通，武成长子也。
现代文：南阳王高绰，字仁通，武成的大儿子。
English: Nanyang Wang Gaoqiao, also known as Ren Tong, is the eldest son of Emperor Wu Chengdi.

古文：以五月五日辰时生，至午时，后主乃生。
现代文：在五月五日辰时出生，到午时，篷圭才生下来。
English: He was born on the 5th of May in the early morning, and his successor, Gao Wei, was born in the afternoon.

古文：武成以绰母李夫人非正嫡，故贬为第二，初名融，字君明，出后汉阳王。
现代文：盏盛因直绰的母亲不是正妻，所以贬为第二，起初名叫融，字叠塱，过继给莲逛作后嗣。
English: Because the mother of Zhiqiao was not his legal wife, Zhan Sheng was relegated to second place. At first, his name was Rong, the characters were superimposed, and he was succeeded by Lianhuang as his heir.

古文：河清三年，改封南阳，别为汉阳置后。
现代文：蜡三年，改封宜旦旺，另外给选驻安排后嗣。
English: In the third year of Heqing, he was changed to Nanyang King, and the imperial court found another heir for Hanyang King.

古文：绰始十余岁，留守晋阳。
现代文：产鳇开始在十多岁时，留守置堡。
English: Gao Baozhu was just over ten years old when he was ordered to stay in Jinyang.

古文：爱波斯狗，尉破胡谏之，欻然斫杀数狗，狼藉在地。破胡惊走，不敢复言。
现代文：喜爱迤堑狗，旦茎塑规劝他，他突然砍死几只狗，散乱地倒在地上，尉茎翅惊吓地逃走，不敢再说。
English: He liked to walk his dog, but when the sculptor advised him to stop, he suddenly killed several dogs, fell to the ground in disarray, ran away in fright, and dared not speak again.

古文：后为司徒、冀州刺史，好裸人，使踞为兽状，纵犬噬而食之。
现代文：后来任司徒、冀刺史，喜欢裸露人的身体，让人蹲坐着成野兽的样子，放出狗撕咬吃人的肉。
English: Later, Ren Shitou and Ji Zhanshi liked to expose people's naked bodies, make people squat and sit in the shape of beasts, and let dogs tear and bite people's flesh.

古文：左转定州，汲井水为后池，在楼上弹人。
现代文：转任定州，汲取井水作后池，在楼上用弹弓弹人。
English: He was also appointed as the chief historian of Dingzhou, and ordered people to extract well water to fill the back pond in the middle of the house. He sat upstairs and hit passers-by with a slingshot.

古文：好微行，游猎无度，恣情强暴，云学文宣伯为人。
现代文：喜欢换装出行，游赏打猎没有节制，任意施行强暴，说是学文宣伯伯的为人。
English: He liked to go about in casual clothes, and even went hunting without restraint. He was wantonly reckless and ferociously cruel, and was said to be a man who emulated his uncle, Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：有妇人抱儿在路，走避入草，绰夺其儿饲波斯狗。
现代文：有个妇女抱着孩子走在路上，看到高绰跑着躲进草丛裹，高绰抢去她的孩子喂波斯狗。
English: A woman walking down the road with her child in her arms saw Gao running and hiding in the bushes. Gao grabbed her child to feed the Persian dog.

古文：妇人号哭，绰怒，又纵狗使食，狗不食，涂以儿血，乃食焉。
现代文：妇女号哭，高绰发怒，又放狗要它们吃这个妇女，狗不吃，涂上孩子的血，就吃了。
English: The woman cried out, and the high priest was enraged, and set the dogs on the woman to eat her; but the dogs would not eat her; they smeared themselves with the blood of the child, and ate it.

古文：后主闻之，诏锁绰赴行在所。
现代文：后主听说了这事，下诏书锁住高绰去皇帝所在的地方。
English: After the lord heard about it, he ordered him to be locked up and taken to the palace.

古文：至而宥之。
现代文：到了后又原谅了他，问在州裹干什么最快乐。
English: When he arrived, she forgave him and asked him what he was happiest doing in the state.

古文：问在州何者最乐，对曰： 多取歇将蛆混，看极乐。 
现代文：回答说： 多取些蝎子将蛆混在一起，看了极为快乐。 
English: He replied, "Take more scorpions and mix the maggots together. It looked very happy."

古文：后主即夜索歇一斗，比晓得三二升，置诸浴斛，使人裸卧斛中，号叫宛转。
现代文：后主当夜就索要蝎子一斗，等到天亮得到二三升，放在浴斛裹，要人光着身子躺在斛裹，号叫转动。
English: Later that night, the master asked for a bucket of scorpions, and when he got two or three liters in the morning, he wrapped them in a bath towel, and asked the man to lie naked in the towel and turn around.

古文：帝与绰临观，喜噱不已，谓绰曰： 如此乐事，何不早驰驿奏闻。 
现代文：皇帝和高绰临近观看，高兴得大笑不止，对高绰说： 这样快乐的事，为什么不早些乘驿马奏上。 
English: The emperor and Gao Zhe watched closely and laughed with joy. He said to Gao Zhe, "This is such a happy event, why didn't you get on the horse sooner?"

古文：绰由是大为后主宠，拜大将军，朝夕同戏。
现代文：高绰因此很受后主宠爱，授任大将军，早晚一同嬉戏。
English: Since then, Gao Piao has been the favorite of his heirs and has been given the title of general. The two of them have fun together in the morning and evening.

古文：韩长鸾间之，除齐州刺史。
现代文：韩长鸾离间他们，任命为齐州刺史。
English: Han Changyu managed to sever the relationship between the two of them, and the imperial court transferred Gao Pu to become the governor of Qizhou.

古文：将发，长鸾令绰亲信诬告其反，奏云： 此犯国法，不可赦。 
现代文：将要出发，韩长鸾命令高绰的亲信诬告他谋反，上奏说： 这是触犯国法，不能赦免。 
English: He was about to take office, and Han Chang's close confidant, who had risked his life, falsely accused Gao Pu of plotting a rebellion. The Chang Pu Son Newspaper said, "This is a violation of state law and cannot be pardoned."

古文：后主不忍显戮，使宠胡何猥萨后园与绰相扑，搤杀之。
现代文：后主不忍心处决他示众，派受宠的胡人何猥萨在后园和高绰相扑；掐死了他。
English: His successor couldn't bear to execute him in public, so he sent the favored Hu man He Yinsa to wrestle Gao Zuo in the backyard; he strangled him to death.

古文：瘗于兴圣佛寺。
现代文：埋在兴圣佛寺。
English: He was buried at the Xingsheng Buddha Temple.

古文：经四百余日乃大敛，颜色毛发皆如生，俗云五月五日生者脑不坏。
现代文：过了四百多天才将尸体裹好装入棺材，脸色毛发都像活着的一样，俗话说五月五日出生的人头不会腐烂。
English: It took more than 400 days to wrap the body and load it into the coffin. The face and hair were as if they were alive. As the saying goes, the head of a person born on May 5th will not rot.

古文：绰兄弟皆呼父为兄兄，嫡母为家家，乳母为姊姊，妇为妹妹。
现代文：高绰兄弟都称呼父亲为兄兄，嫡母为家家，乳母为姊姊，妻子为妹妹。
English: Gao Pu and his brothers called their father, Emperor Wu Chengdi, "brother" and "brother," their mother "mother," their nurse "sister" and their wives "sister."

古文：齐亡，妃郑氏为周武帝所幸，请葬绰。
现代文：齐国灭亡，妃子郑氏受到周武帝的宠爱，请求安葬高绰。
English: After the fall of the State of Qi, Emperor Zhou's favorite concubine, Empress Zheng, requested that Gao Pu be buried.

古文：敕所司葬于永平陵北。
现代文：诏令主管部门葬在永平陵北。
English: The authorities in charge of the imperial edict were buried in Yongping Mausoleum North.

古文：琅邪王俨，字仁威，武成第三子也。
现代文：琅邪王高俨，字仁威，武成的第三个儿子。
English: The third son of Wu Cheng, the evil king Gao Gan, the word Ren Wei.

古文：初封东平王，拜开府、侍中、中书监、京畿大都督、领军大将军、领御史中丞，迁司徒、尚书令、大将军、录尚书事、大司马。
现代文：起初封为束平王，授任开府、侍中、中书监、京畿大都督、领军大将军、领御史中丞，升任司徒、尚书令、大将军、绿尚书事、大司马。
English: At first, he was given the title of King Sukehira, and was given the positions of Kaifu, Samurai Junior Officer, Middle Library Supervisor, Gyeonggi Grand Governor, Leading General, Leading Historian Junior Secretary, and was promoted to Sito, Senior Library Officer, Senior General, Green Senior Library Officer, and Senior Secretary.

古文：魏氏旧制，中丞出，清道，与皇太子分路行，王公皆遥住车，去牛，顿轭于地，以待中丞过，其或迟违，则赤棒棒之。
现代文：魏国旧的制度，中丞出行，清理道路，和皇太子分路走，王公都速远地停住车，卸去牛，把轭放在地上，以等待中丞过去，他们有的延迟或违规，就用红色的棒子打他们。
English: In the old system of Wei, when the middle-ranking officials traveled, cleared the road, and separated from the crown prince, the prince would quickly stop the car, unload the cattle, and put the plow on the ground to wait for the middle-ranking officials to pass. If they delayed or violated the rules, he would beat them with a red stick.

古文：自都邺后，此仪浸绝，武成欲雄宠俨，乃使一依旧制。
现代文：自从定都邺城后，这种仪式逐渐消失，武成想突出地宠信高俨，就让他一切依照旧的制度。
English: Since the establishment of the capital, this kind of ceremony has gradually disappeared, and Wu Cheng wanted to favor Gao Gan prominently, so he let him do everything according to the old system.

古文：初从北宫出，将上中丞，凡京畿步骑，领军之官属，中丞之威仪，司徒之卤簿，莫不毕备。
现代文：起初从北宫出来，带上宫中官员，凡是京畿的步兵骑兵，领军的官属，宫中官员威武的仪仗，司徒随从的仪仗队，无不具备。
English: At first, they came out from the North Palace and brought the palace officials with them. All the infantry and cavalry of Gyeonggi, the officials and subordinates of the army leaders, the powerful ceremonial battle of the palace officials, and the honor guard of the attendants were all present.

古文：帝与胡后在华林园东门外张幕，隔青纱步障观之。
现代文：皇帝和胡后在华林园束门外支起帐幕，隔着青纱步障观看。
English: The emperor and the empress dowager set up a tent outside the gate of the Waring Garden and watched from across the blue screen.

古文：遣中贵骤马趣仗，不得入，自言奉敕，赤棒应声碎其鞍，马惊人坠。
现代文：派显贵的宦官快马奔到仪仗那襄，不能进入，自称是奉行诏令，红棒应声打碎了他的马鞍，马受惊人掉在地上。
English: The eunuchs were sent on horseback to a ceremonial battle on stilts. Unable to enter, the eunuchs said they had come on their own. With a roar, a man with a red wooden stick broke the eunuch's saddle. The horse was startled and the man was thrown down.

古文：帝大笑，以为善。
现代文：皇帝大笑，认为好。
English: Emperor Wucheng laughed loudly and thought it was very good.

古文：更敕令驻车，传语良久，观者倾京邑。
现代文：又诏令停车，传话传了很久，观看的人挤满了京城。
English: He also ordered Gao Jun to stop his vehicle for a ceremonial battle. After word spread, the entire Beijing Division came out to watch.

古文：俨恒在宫中，坐含光殿以视事，诸父皆拜焉。
现代文：高俨一直在宫中，坐在含光殿上处理事务，各叔父都向他行礼。
English: Gao Yao has always been in the palace, sitting on the Hall of Light to deal with affairs, and all the uncles bow to him.

古文：帝幸并州，俨常居守，每送驾，或半路，或至晋阳，乃还。
现代文：皇帝到并州，高俨经常留守，每次送皇帝出行，或者在半路，或者到晋阳，才回来。
English: When the emperor went to Bozhou, Gao Yao often stayed behind. Every time he sent the emperor on a trip, he would come back either halfway or in Jinyang.

古文：王师罗常从驾，后至，武成欲罪之，辞曰： 臣与第三子别，留连不觉晚。 
现代文：王师罗经常跟随皇帝，晚到了，武成想治他的罪，王师罗说： 臣和第三子告别，留恋不舍不知不觉晚了。 
English: Wang Shilao often followed the emperor. When he arrived late, Wu Cheng wanted to punish him for his sins. Wang Shilao said: "The minister and the third son bid farewell. I'm so nostalgic that I don't realize it's too late."

古文：武成忆俨，为之下泣，舍师罗不问。
现代文：武成思念高俨，为此流下了眼泪，放了王师罗不再问罪。
English: Emperor Wucheng missed Gao Yao, and after listening to his tears, he no longer held any grudge against him.

古文：俨器服玩饰，皆与后主同，所须悉官给。
现代文：高俨的器具衣服玩物饰品，都和后主一样，所需要的都由官府供给。
English: Gao Yao's utensils, clothes, toys, and ornaments are all provided by the government, just like his heirs.

古文：于南宫尝见新冰早李，还，怒曰： 尊兄已有，我何意无！ 
现代文：在南宫曾看到新冰的早熟李子，回来，发怒说： 尊兄已经有了，我为什么没有! 
English: In the Southern Palace, he had seen the newly-frozen early-ripening plums. When he came back, he was angry and said, "My elder brother already has them, why don't I!"

古文：从是，后主先得新奇，属官及工匠必获罪。
现代文：从此，后主先得新奇的东西，所属官以及工匠定会遭受惩罚。
English: From now on, officials and craftsmen who send things must be punished if the successor gets the novelty first.

古文：太上、胡后犹以为不足。
现代文：太上、胡后还认为不够。
English: In spite of this, Emperor Taejong and Empress Dowager Hu were still not satisfied.

古文：俨常患喉，使医下针，张目不瞬。
现代文：高俨曾经患喉病，让医生针灸治疗，睁着眼睛眨也不贬。
English: Gao Yao once suffered from laryngeal disease. The doctor treated him with acupuncture and moxibustion. Gao Yao did not hesitate to blink his eyes.

古文：又言于帝曰： 阿兄懦，何能率左右？ 
现代文：又对皇帝说： 阿兄懦弱，怎么能带领身边的人? 
English: He also said to the emperor: My elder brother is weak, how can he lead the people around him?

古文：帝每称曰： 此黠儿也，当有所成。 
现代文：皇帝经常称赞说： 这是个聪明的儿子，会有所成就。 
English: The emperor often praised and said: This is a clever son, he will achieve something.

古文：以后主为劣，有废立意。
现代文：认为后主不好，有废掉另立的念头。
English: He thought the successor was not good, and had the idea of abolishing it and setting up a new one.

古文：武成崩，改封琅邪。
现代文：武成崩逝，改封为琅邪王。
English: After the death of Emperor Wucheng, Gao Qi was given the title of "King of Evil."

古文：俨以和土开、骆提婆等奢恣，盛修第宅，意甚不平，尝谓曰： 君等所营宅早晚当就，何太迟也。 
现代文：高俨因和士开、骆墨婆等人恣意奢侈，大修住宅，心裹很不平，曾经对他们说： 你们修造宅第早就该完工了，怎么拖延了这么久? 
English: Gao Rong was very upset with Shi Kai, Luo Moba and others for their extravagant extravagance and major house repairs. He once said to them: Your house should have been completed a long time ago, why did you delay it for so long?

古文：二人相谓曰： 琅邪王眼光奕奕，数步射人，向者暂对，不觉汗出，天子前奏事尚不然。 
现代文：两人私下说： 琅邪王的眼睛神采奕奕，几步以外向人射去，以前和他相对一会儿，不觉汗出，天子面前陈奏事宜还不这样。 
English: The two said in private: "The evil king's eyes sparkle, and he shoots at people a few steps away. Before, when he stood opposite him for a while, he would break out in a sweat. This is not the way to behave in front of the Son of Heaven.

古文：由是忌之。
现代文：因此忌恨他。
English: From then on, they both hated him.

古文：武平二年，出俨居北宫，五日一朝，不复得每日见太后。
现代文：武平二年，让高俨出来住在北宫，五天一上朝，不再能每天见到太后。
English: In the second year of Wu Ping, Gao Yao was allowed to live in the North Palace. Five days later, he was no longer able to see the empress dowager every day.

古文：四月，诏除太保，余官悉解，犹带中丞，督京畿。
现代文：四月，下诏令授任太保，其余官职都被解除，仍然带上宫中官员，都督京畿。
English: In April, he was given the post of Taiho by imperial edict, and all other official positions were abolished, but he still brought with him officials from the court, including the governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：以北城有武库，欲移俨于外，然后夺其兵权。
现代文：因北城有武器库，想把高俨移到城外，然后夺取他的兵权。
English: Because Beicheng had a weapons depot, his heirs wanted to move him to another place to live, and then take back his military power.

古文：治书侍御史王子宜与俨左右开府高舍洛、中常侍刘辟疆说俨曰： 殿下被疏，正由士开间构，何可出北宫入百姓丛中也。 
现代文：治书侍御史王子宜和高俨身边的开府高舍洛、中常侍刘辟疆向高俨游说说： 殿下被疏远，正是由于和士开挑拨离间，怎么可以出北宫进入老百姓的人群中。 
English: Gao Yao was lobbied by Gao Xianglu, the Keifu Gaoshelo, and Liu Bijian, the Vice-Regent of the Imperial Household Agency, both of whom were close to Gao Yao. They said, "His Imperial Highness has been alienated, and it is precisely because he and Shi Kai are driving a wedge between them, how can he leave the Northern Palace and enter the crowd of ordinary people?"

古文：俨谓侍中冯子琮曰： 士开罪重，儿欲杀之。 
现代文：高俨对侍中冯子琮说： 和士开罪恶深重，我想杀了他。 
English: Gao Yao said to Feng Zi Yao, an aide-de-camp, "He committed a serious crime. I want to kill him."

古文：子琮心欲废帝而立俨，因赞成其事。
现代文：冯王签心襄想废掉皇帝而立直堡，于是赞成造件事。
English: Feng Zixuan wanted to abolish the young master and support Gao Yao, so he agreed to this matter.

古文：俨乃令子宜表弹士开罪，请付禁推。
现代文：茵俨就命令王子宜上表弹劾和士开的罪状，请求交给宫内追究。
English: Gao Gan then ordered the prince to submit to the imperial court for interrogation.

古文：子琮杂以他文书奏之，后主不审省而可之。
现代文：冯子琮把奏章掺杂在其他文书襄上奏，后主没有察觉就批准了。
English: Feng Zixuan also used other documents to report the impeachment and dismissal, and the successor did not examine them and agreed to their report.

古文：俨诳领军厍狄伏连曰： 奉敕令军收士开。 
现代文：高俨欺骗领军库狄伏连说： 奉诏书命令领军逮捕和士开。 
English: Gao Yao deceived the leader of the army, Kudivolian, saying, "Follow the order of the imperial edict to arrest the leader of the army and Shikai."

古文：伏连以咨子琮，且请覆奏。
现代文：犀狄伏连询问冯子琮，并请求再上奏。
English: The rhinoceros Diwulian questioned Feng Ziqin and asked him to play it again.

古文：子琮曰： 琅邪王受敕，何须重奏。 
现代文：冯子琮说： 琅邪王接受韶令，何必再奏。 
English: Feng Zixuan said, "If the evil king accepts my order, why do I have to play it again?"

古文：伏连信之，伏五十人于神兽门外，诘旦，执士开送御史。
现代文：库狄伏连相信了他，埋伏五十个人在神兽门外，清晨，捉住了和士开送到御史台。
English: Fuliang believed it, and ambushed fifty people outside the gate of the gods and beasts. At dawn, he arrested He Shikai and sent him to the Imperial Historian for disposition.

古文：俨使冯永洛就台斩之。
现代文：高俨派冯永洛在御史台杀了他。
English: Gao Jun sent Feng Yonglu to execute him on the historical stage.

古文：俨徒本意唯杀士开，及是，因逼俨曰： 事既然，不可中止。 
现代文：高俨的党徒本意衹是杀掉和士开，到逭时，于是逼迫高俨说： 事已如此，不能中途停止。 
English: Gao Yao's party members intended to kill him, but when they arrived, they forced Gao Yao to say: "This is it, we can't stop halfway.

古文：俨遂率京畿军士三千余人屯千秋门。
现代文：高俨就率领京畿军士三千多人驻扎在千秋门。
English: Gao Jun led more than 3,000 Gyeonggi soldiers stationed at Qianqiu Gate.

古文：帝使刘桃枝将禁兵八十人召俨。
现代文：皇帝派刘桃枝带领禁兵八十人召高俨。
English: The emperor sent Liu Tao Zhi to lead eighty soldiers to summon Gao Yao.

古文：桃枝遥拜，俨命反缚，将斩之，禁兵散走。
现代文：刘桃枝远远行礼，高俨命令反绑起来将要斩杀他，禁兵散开逃走。
English: Liu Tao Zhi saluted from a distance. Gao Yao ordered his soldiers to tie him up and behead him. The soldiers dispersed and fled.

古文：帝又使冯子琮召俨，俨辞曰： 士开昔来实合万死，谋废至尊，剃家家头使作阿尼，故拥兵马欲坐着孙凤珍宅上，臣为是矫诏诛之。
现代文：皇帝又派冯子琮召高俨，高俨推辞说： 和士开以前确实应该死一万次，图谋废掉皇帝，剃掉家家的头发让她作尼姑，所以聚集兵马打算居留在孙凤珍的住宅，臣为此假藉诏令杀了他。
English: The emperor also sent Feng Zixuan to summon Gao Yao. Gao Yao refused, saying, "Before He Shikai, I really should have died ten thousand times. I plotted to depose the emperor and shave off my family's hair to make her a nun. Therefore, I gathered soldiers and horses and planned to stay at Sun Fengzhen's residence. The minister killed him with a fake edict.

古文：尊兄若欲杀臣，不敢逃罪，若放臣，愿遣姊姊来迎臣，臣即入见。 
现代文：尊兄如果想杀了臣，不敢逃避罪责，如果放了臣，希望派姊姊来迎接臣，臣立即进宫见面。 
English: If a respected elder brother wanted to kill a vassal, he would not dare to evade his responsibility. If a vassal was released, he would hope to send his sister to meet the vassal. The vassal would immediately go to the palace to meet him.

古文：姊姊即陆令萱也，俨欲诱出杀之。
现代文：姊姊就是陆令萱，高俨想诱出来杀掉她。
English: The nanny was Lu Lingyao, and Gao Yao wanted to lure her out and kill her.

古文：令萱执刀帝后，闻之战栗。
现代文：陆令萱拿着刀在皇帝背后，听到后浑身颤抖。
English: Lu Lingyao, holding a steel knife, hid behind his master. Hearing these words, he trembled with fear.

古文：又使韩长鸾召俨，俨将入，刘辟疆牵衣谏曰： 若不斩提婆母子，殿下无由得入。 
现代文：又派韩长鸾召高俨，高俨将要进宫，刘辟疆拉住衣服规劝道： 如果不杀骆提婆母子，殿下凭什么能够进宫。 
English: He also sent Han Changyu to summon Gao Yao. Gao Yao was about to enter the palace. Liu Bijiang tugged at his clothes and advised: If you don't kill Luo Dibba and her son, how can your royal highness enter the palace?

古文：广宁、安德二王适从西来，欲助成其事，曰： 何不入？ 
现代文：广宁、安德二王刚从西边来，想帮助促成这件事，说： 为什么不进去? 
English: Guangning and King Andrew II just came from the west, wanting to help Gao Gan succeed, and asked: Why don't you rush over?

古文：辟疆曰： 人少。 
现代文：刘辟疆说： 人少。 
English: Liu Bijian said: There are fewer people.

古文：安德王顾众而言曰： 孝昭帝杀杨遵彦，止八十人，今乃数千，何言人少？ 
现代文：安德王回头看了大家一眼说： 孝昭帝杀掉挝遵产，衹有八十个人，现在有几千人，为什么说人少? 
English: King Ande looked back at everyone and said: Emperor Xiaozhao killed Lao Zun Production, there were only eighty people, now there are several thousand, why say there are fewer people?

古文：后主泣启太后曰： 有缘更见家家，无缘永别。 
现代文：后主哭着告诉太后说： 有缘再见到家家，无缘就永别了。 
English: The lady-in-waiting cried and told the empress dowager, "If I have the chance, I will see my family again, but if I don't, I will say goodbye forever."

古文：乃急召斛律光，俨亦召之。
现代文：于是急忙召来斛律光，高堡也召他。
English: He hurriedly summoned Liguang, and Gao Yao also summoned him.

古文：光闻杀士开，抚掌大笑曰： 龙子作事，固自不似凡人。 
现代文：斛律光听说杀了和士开，拍掌大笑说： 龙子做事，自然不像平常人。 
English: Hearing that he had killed Kazuchika, Zhaoliguang slapped his hands together and laughed, saying, "Dragon sons don't do things like ordinary people.

古文：入见后主于永巷。
现代文：进宫在永巷见到后主。
English: He entered the palace and met his successor in Yongxiang.

古文：帝率宿卫者步骑四百，授甲将出战。
现代文：皇帝率领值宿警卫步兵骑兵四百人，发给镗甲准备出来迎战。
English: The emperor led the four hundred guards, infantry and cavalry on duty, and sent them to the armor to prepare for the battle.

古文：光曰： 小儿辈弄兵，与交手即乱。
现代文：斛律光说： 小孩子们舞弄兵器，和他们一交手就会乱。
English: Zhaoliguang said: Children play with weapons, and if you fight with them, there will be chaos.

古文：鄙谚云 奴见大家心死 ，至尊宜自至千秋门，琅邪必不敢动。 
现代文：俗谚说 奴见主心死 ，皇帝应该亲自到千秋门，琅邪王一定不敢动。 
English: As the saying goes, when one's master dies, the emperor should go to Qianqiu Gate in person. The evil king would not dare to move.

古文：皮景和亦以为然，后主从之。
现代文：皮景和也认为是这样，后主听从了他们。
English: Pichenghe also thought that it should be like this, and his successor obeyed.

古文：光步道，使人出曰： 大家来。 
现代文：斛律光徒步走在路上，派人出来说： 皇帝来了。 
English: Pelikan walked along the road on foot and sent out a man to say, "The emperor has come.

古文：俨徒骇散。
现代文：高俨的党徒吓得四散而逃。
English: The stilted crowd scatter in fright.

古文：帝驻马桥上，遥呼之，俨犹立不进。
现代文：皇帝在桥上停住马，远远地呼唤他，高俨还是站着不走近。
English: Then the Lord stopped the carriage and called him from a distance, and he stood still.

古文：光就谓曰： 天子弟杀一汉，何所苦。 
现代文：斛律光就对他说： 天子的弟弟杀一个人，有什么可怕的。 
English: Pelican Light said to him, "What's so terrible about a god's younger brother killing someone?

古文：执其手，强引以前。
现代文：拉着他的手，强行带着走过来。
English: She took him by the hand and forced him to walk with her.

古文：请帝曰： 琅邪王年少，肠肥脑满，轻为举措，长大自不复然，愿宽其罪。 
现代文：请求皇帝说： 琅邪王年少，脑满肠肥，轻举妄动，长大后自然不再这样，希望宽恕他的罪。 
English: The petition to the emperor said: "The evil king is young, his brain is full of fat, and he acts rashly. When he grows up, this will naturally no longer be the case. I hope his sins will be forgiven."

古文：帝拔俨带刀环乱筑辫头，良久乃释之。
现代文：皇帝拔出高俨佩带的刀用刀头上的环乱打一气，绞住他的头发，好久才放开他。
English: The emperor pulled out the knife Gao Jue was wearing and struck him with the ring on the tip of the knife, twisting his hair. It took him a long time to let go.

古文：收伏连及高舍洛、王子宜、刘辟疆、都督翟显贵于后园，帝亲射之而后斩，皆支解，暴之都街下。
现代文：在后园拘捕了库狄伏连以及高舍洛、王子宜、刘辟疆、都督翟显贵，皇帝亲自用箭射他们然后把他们斩了，全都支解身体，暴尸街头。
English: In the backyard, they arrested Cudivolen, as well as Gaoshelo, Prince Yi, Liu Bijiang, and Tudor Zou Xiangui. The emperor personally shot them with arrows and then beheaded them. All of them were dismembered, and their bodies were found in the streets.

古文：文武职吏尽欲杀之。
现代文：文武官员想全都杀掉。
English: Military and civilian officials want to kill them all.

古文：光以皆勋贵子弟，恐人心不安，赵彦深亦云《春秋》责帅，于是罪之各有差。
现代文：斛律光因为都是功臣权贵的子弟，担心人心不安，赵彦深也说《春秋》费陆元帅的道理，于是惩罚他们各有差别。
English: Because Bao Riguang was the son of a meritorious and powerful person, he was worried about the uneasiness of the people. Zhao Yanshen also said that "Spring and Autumn" was the reason for the Marshal Fei, so they were punished differently.

古文：俨之未获罪也，邺北城有白马佛塔，是石季龙为澄公所作，俨将修之。
现代文：高俨没有受到惩罚，邺北城有白马佛塔，是石季龙为澄公建造的，高俨打算修缮逭座塔。
English: Gao Gan was not punished. There is a white horse pagoda in the northern city of Handan. It was built by Shi Jilong for Chenggong. Gao Gan plans to repair the tower.

古文：巫曰： 若动此浮图，北城失主。 
现代文：巫师说： 如果动这佛塔，北城失去主人。 
English: The sorcerer said, "If you move this pagoda, Beicheng will lose its owner."

古文：不从，破至第二级，得白蛇长数丈，回旋失之，数旬而败。
现代文：高俨不听从，掘开到第二级，得到长数丈的白蛇，盘绕一下就不见了，几十天后高俨失败。
English: Gao Gan didn't listen, dug down to the second level, and obtained a long white snake. It disappeared as soon as it was coiled. Gao Gan failed after a few dozen days.

古文：自是太后处俨于宫内，食必自尝之。
现代文：从此太后把高俨留在宫内，食物一定自己先尝一尝。
English: From then on, the empress dowager kept sorghum in the palace, and she always tasted the food first.

古文：陆令萱说帝曰： 人称琅邪王聪明雄勇，当今无敌，观其相表，殆非人臣。
现代文：陆令萱游说皇帝说： 人们说琅邪王聪明勇武，当今没有第二个，观察他的相貌仪表，大概不是作人臣的。
English: Lu Lingyao lobbied the emperor, saying: People say that the evil king is clever and brave, and there is no second today. Observing his appearance, he is probably not a minister.

古文：自专杀以来，常怀恐惧，宜早为计。 
现代文：自从擅自杀戮以来，常常怀着恐惧，应该早点定下计策。 
English: Ever since his last killing spree, I've had a nagging fear in the back of my mind that you should have planned ahead.

古文：何洪珍与和士开素善，亦请杀之。
现代文：何洪珍和和士开一向关系很好，也请求杀掉他。
English: He Hongzhen usually had a close relationship with He Shikai, and he also asked the latter to kill Gao Yao.

古文：未决，以食舆密迎祖珽问之，珽称周公诛管叔，季友鸩庆父，帝纳其言。
现代文：没有决断，用装食物的箱子秘密迎来祖埏询问他，祖埏说周公杀掉管叔，季友毒死庆父，皇帝采纳了他的话。
English: Undecided, he secretly ushered in the ancestor with a box of food and questioned him. The ancestor said that Zhou Gong killed Uncle Guan, Ji You poisoned Father Qing, and the emperor accepted his words.

古文：以俨之晋阳，使右卫大将军赵元侃诱执俨。
现代文：因高俨到晋阳，派右卫大将军趟元侃引诱抓住高俨。
English: Because Gao Rong went to Jinyang, the master sent the right guard general Zhao Yuan Kan to lure and capture Gao Rong.

古文：元侃曰： 臣昔事先帝，日见先帝爱王，今宁就死，不能行。 
现代文：赵元侃说： 臣以前事奉先帝，天天看到先帝宠爱王，现在宁愿去死，也不能这样做。 
English: Zhao Yuankan said: "I used to serve the former emperor, and every day I saw that the former emperor favored the king. Now I would rather die than do that.

古文：帝出元侃为豫州刺史。
现代文：皇帝调出赵元侃任豫州刺史。
English: Later, the master transferred Yuan Kan out of Beijing and appointed him as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：九月下旬，帝启太后曰： 明旦欲与仁威出猎，须早出早还。 
现代文：九月下旬，皇帝告诉太后说： 明天早上打算和仁威出去打猎，必须早出去早回来。 
English: In late September, the emperor told the empress dowager, "If you plan to go hunting with Ren Wei tomorrow morning, you must go out early and come back early."

古文：是夜四更，帝召俨，俨疑之。
现代文：逭夜四更，皇帝召高俨，高俨感到怀疑。
English: On this night, there were four choirs, and the principal invited Gao Jun to perform.

古文：陆令萱曰： 兄兄唤，儿何不去？ 
现代文：陆令萱说： 兄兄召唤，你为什么不去。 
English: Lu Lingyao said, "Brother and brother are calling, why don't you go?"

古文：俨出至永巷，刘桃枝反接其手。俨呼曰： 乞见家家、尊兄！ 
现代文：高俨出来到永巷，刘桃枝反过来抓住他的手，高俨呼喊道： 乞求见家家、尊兄! 
English: Gao Yao came out to Yong Xiang, Liu Tao Zhi in turn grabbed his hand, and Gao Yao shouted: "Beg to see your family, brother!"

古文：桃枝以袂塞其口，反袍蒙头负出，至大明宫，鼻血满面，立杀之，时年十四。
现代文：刘桃枝用袖子塞住他的口，把衣袍反过来蒙住头背出去，到了大明宫，鼻血流得满脸都是，立刻杀死了他，当时年纪十四岁。
English: Liu Taoji stuffed his mouth with his sleeve, turned his robe inside out and went out with his head covered. When he arrived at the Daming Palace, his nose was bleeding all over his face, and he killed him immediately. He was 14 years old at the time.

古文：不脱靴，裹以席，埋于室内。
现代文：不脱掉靴子，用席子裹住，埋在室内。
English: They didn't take off his shoes, wrap him in a straw mat and bury him in the house.

古文：帝使启太后，临哭十余声，便拥入殿。
现代文：皇帝派人告诉太后，太后前去哭了十几声，就拥着她进入殿内。
English: After the master sent someone to tell the empress dowager, the empress dowager cried more than a dozen times and was pushed into the palace.

古文：明年三月，葬于邺西，赠谥曰楚恭哀帝，以慰太后。
现代文：第二年三月，埋葬在邺城西面，赠给谧号称楚恭哀帝，以安慰太后。
English: In March of the following year, he was buried on the west side of Lucheng, and given the posthumous name Chu Gong Ying Di to comfort the empress dowager.

古文：有遗腹四男，生数月，皆幽死。
现代文：有死后才出生的四个儿子，出生几个月都囚禁而死。
English: There were four sons who were born posthumously, and all of them died in captivity a few months after their birth.

古文：以平阳王淹孙世俊嗣。
现代文：将平阳王直适的孙子高世俊作为后嗣。
English: He made Gao Shijun, the grandson of King Pingyang, his heir.

古文：俨妃，李祖钦女也，进为楚帝后，居宣则宫。
现代文：产堡的妃子，是奎里筮的女儿，进升为茎童后，住在宣旦喧。
English: The concubine of the castle is the daughter of Querida, who lives in Xuandan Town after being promoted to a child.

古文：齐亡，乃嫁焉。
现代文：变国灭亡，就改嫁了。
English: When a country dies, people remarry.

古文：齐安王廓，字仁弘，武成第四子也。
现代文：变室王直尘，字瘤厶，亘眯的第四个儿子。
English: The fourth son of Watanabe's fourth son, Zhanwu Wang, Zhanwu Wang.

古文：性长者，无过行。
现代文：性格就像年高有德的人，没有过失行为。
English: His character is like that of a man of ripe years, and he does no wrong.

古文：位特进、开府、仪同三司、定州刺史。
现代文：官位特进、开府仪同三司、室州刺史。
English: Official rank special promotion, Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, Muroshu stabbing history.

古文：北平王贞，字仁坚，武成第五子也。
现代文：北平王高贞，字仁坚，武成的第五个儿子。
English: Beiping King Gao Zhen, also known as Ren Jian, was Wu Cheng's fifth son.

古文：沉审宽恕。
现代文：沉稳明察宽厚待人。
English: Be calm, clear-sighted and generous in your treatment of others.

古文：帝常曰： 此儿得我凤毛。 
现代文：皇帝常说： 这儿子有我的风范。 
English: The emperor often said, "This son has my manners."

古文：位司州牧、京畿大都督，兼尚书令、录尚书事。
现代文：官位司州牧、京畿大都督，兼尚书令、录尚书事。
English: He held the official rank of Shoushu Maki and Gyeonggi Grand Governor, and also held the posts of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and Luo Shuling (录尚書事).

古文：帝行幸，总留台事。
现代文：皇帝出行，留下统领官署事务。
English: The emperor travels, leaving behind the affairs of the General Office.

古文：积年，后主以贞长大，渐忌之。
现代文：过了多年，后主因高贞长大，渐渐对他有了猜忌之心。
English: After many years, the queen mother grew suspicious of Gao Zhen as she grew older.

古文：阿那肱承旨，令冯士干劾系贞于狱，夺其留后权。
现代文：高阿那肱接受旨意，命令冯士干弹劾高贞把他关进监狱，剥夺了他保留后嗣的权力。
English: Gao Ananyan accepted the will and ordered Feng Shigang to impeach Gao Zhen, put him in prison, and deprive him of the right to retain his heirs.

古文：高平王仁英，武成第六子也。
现代文：高平王高仁英，逮成的第六个儿子。
English: Gao Ping Wang Gao Ren Ying, the sixth son to be arrested.

古文：举止轩昂，精神无检格。
现代文：一举一动情绪饱满气度不凡，精神不受约束。
English: His every move is full of emotion, his temperament is extraordinary, and his spirit is unconstrained.

古文：位定州刺史。
现代文：官位宣业刺史。
English: The history of the official rank of propagandist is over.

古文：淮南王仁光，武成第七子也。
现代文：平王高仁邕颖川王高仁俭安乐王高仁雅淮南王高仁光，武成的第七个儿子。
English: The seventh son of Wu Cheng, the Taira King Gao Ren, the Yingchuan King Gao Ren, the Frugal King Gao Ren, the Peaceful King Gao Ren, the Elegant King Gao Ren, and the Southern King Gao Ren Guang.

古文：性躁且暴，位清都尹。
现代文：性情急躁而且凶暴，官位清都尹。
English: He was quick-tempered and violent, and his official title was Qingdu Yin.

古文：次西河王仁几，生而无骨，不自支持；次乐平王仁邕；次颍川王仁俭；次安乐王仁雅，从小有喑疾；次丹阳王仁直；次东海王仁谦。
现代文：其次西河王高仁几，生下来没有骨头，不能自己支撑身体；其次乐平王高仁邕；其次颖川王高仁俭；其次安乐王高仁雅，从小有哑病；其次丹阳王高仁直；其次东海王高仁谦。
English: Secondly, the West River King Gao Renqian was born without bones and could not support his body by himself; secondly, the Leping King Gao Renqian; secondly, the Yingchuan King Gao Renqian; secondly, the Anle King Gao Renya had mute disease since childhood; secondly, the Danyang King Gao Ren Zhi; secondly, the East Sea King Gao Ren Qian.

古文：皆养于北宫。
现代文：都养在北宫。
English: They are all raised in Hokugu.

古文：琅邪王死后，诸王守禁弥切。
现代文：琅邪王死后，各王恪守禁令更加苛刻。
English: After the death of the evil king Gao Jiong, the empress made the imprisonment of the remaining kings more severe.

古文：武平末年，仁邕已下始得出外，供给俭薄，取充而已。
现代文：武乎末年，高仁邕以下开始能够出外，供给微薄，得到的够用罢了。
English: Towards the end of Wu's life, people from Gao Rensheng downwards were able to go abroad. Supplies were meagre, and what they had was just enough.

古文：寻后主穷蹙，以廓为光州，贞为青州，仁英为冀州，仁俭为胶州，仁直为济州刺史。
现代文：不久后主困迫，任命高廓为光州刺史，高贞为青州刺史，高仁英为冀州刺史，高仁俭为胶州刺史，高仁直为济州刺史。
English: Soon after, under pressure from the emperor, Gao Kuo was appointed as the governor of Gwangju, Gao Zhen as the governor of Qingzhou, Gao Ren Ying as the governor of Jizhou, Gao Ren Jian as the governor of Jiaozhou, and Gao Ren Zhi as the governor of Jeju.

古文：自廓已下，多与后主死于长安。
现代文：自高廓以下，大多和后主死在长安。
English: From Gao Kuo on down, most of the concubines died in Chang'an.

古文：仁英以清狂，仁雅以喑疾，获免，俱徙蜀。
现代文：直仁英因癫狂，高仁雅因哑病，免去一死，都迁徙到蜀地。
English: Nao-Ren-Ying due to insanity, Gao-Ren-Ya due to dumbness, were spared death, and both migrated to Shu.

古文：隋开皇中，追仁英，诏与萧琮、陈叔宝修其本宗祭礼。
现代文：隋代开皇年间，追回高仁英，诏令和萧琮、陈叔实操持自己本宗族的祭祀。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao in the Sui Dynasty, Gao Renying and Xiao Yao and Chen Shushi carried out the sacrificial rites of their own clan.

古文：未几而卒。
现代文：不久死去。
English: Soon after, Baikai died.

古文：后主五男：穆皇后生幼主，诸姬生东平王恪，次善德，次买德，次质钱。
现代文：后主的五个儿子：穆皇后生了幼主，各姬妾生了东平王高恪，其次高善德，其次高买德，其次高质钱。
English: The five sons of the late lord: Empress Mu gave birth to the young lord, and each concubine gave birth to Dongping Wang Gao Ke, followed by Gao Shan De, followed by Gao Bai De, followed by Gao Jian Qian Qian.

古文：胡太后以恪嗣琅邪王，寻夭折。
现代文：胡太后将高恪作为琅邪王的后嗣，不久夭折。
English: Empress Dowager Hu chose Gao Jia as the heir of the evil king, but he died soon after.

古文：齐灭，周武帝以任城已下大小三十王归长安，皆有封爵。
现代文：齐国灭亡，周武帝将任城王以下大小三十个王带回长安，都有封爵。
English: After the fall of the State of Qi, Emperor Zhou Wu brought back to Chang'an thirty kings and queens, all of whom were knighted.

古文：其后不从戮者散配西土，皆死边。
现代文：后来没被杀的分散发配到西部，都死在边远的地方。
English: Later, those who were not killed were dispersed to the west and died in remote areas.

古文：论曰：文襄诸子，咸有风骨，虽文雅之道，有谢间平，然武艺英姿，多堪御侮。
现代文：论曰：文襄的儿子们，都有刚直的骨气，虽然礼乐教化的措施，比汉代河间献王刘德、束平宪王刘苍有不足，然而作战的技能和英武的姿态，大多能胜任抵御外来的侵侮。
English: On the other hand, Wenxiang's sons all have a firm backbone. Although the measures to teach them music and etiquette are not as good as the Han Dynasty's King Liu De and King Liu Cang, most of them are capable of resisting foreign encroachments with their military skills and heroic posture.

古文：纵咸阳赐剑，覆败有征，若使兰陵获全，未可量也，而终见诛翦，以至土崩，可为太息者矣。
现代文：即使咸阳赐给宝剑，倾覆灭亡仍有征兆。如果让兰陵王获得保全，就不可预测了，可是终究被诛杀剪除，以至土崩瓦解，可为此叹息啊。
English: Even if Xianyang gives the sword, there are still signs of overthrow and destruction. If Lanling Wang is preserved, it will be unpredictable, but after all, it will be killed and cut off, and it will collapse. You can sigh for this.

古文：安德以时艰主暗，匿迹韬光，及平阳之阵，奋其忠勇，盖以临难见危，义深家国。
现代文：安德王因时局艰难君主昏昧，隐匿形迹敛藏光彩，等到在平阳的阵地上，奋发他的忠诚勇敢，大概因面临艰难看到危急，于家于国大义影响深远。
English: Due to the difficult situation, King Ande was a dim monarch, hiding his traces and hiding his glory. When he was in the position of the sun, his loyalty and bravery were aroused. Probably because of the difficulties, he saw the crisis, which had a far-reaching impact on the family and the country.

古文：德昌大举，事迫群情，理至沦亡，无所归命。
现代文：德昌登临帝位，事情是群情所迫，结果是导致失败，无处投靠。
English: Dechang ascended to the throne, the matter was forced by the crowd, the result was a failure, and there was nowhere to go.

古文：广宁请出后宫，竟不获遂，非孝珩辞致有谢李同，自是后主心识去平原已远。
现代文：广宁王请求拿出后宫的宫女珍宝，竟然不能达到愿望，不是高孝珩言辞的表达比不上李同，自是后主的见识离平原君已经很远。
English: Guangning Wang's request to take out the harem's treasure of the palace maiden was not able to achieve the wish, not the expression of the words of high filial piety was not comparable to that of Li Tong, and the vision of being the heir apparent was already far away from Plains Jun.

古文：存亡事异，安可同年而说。
现代文：一存一亡事情不同，怎么可以同日而语。
English: Life and death are different, how can they be the same.

古文：武成残忍奸秽，事极人伦。
现代文：武成残忍淫秽，在人伦关系上达到了极点。
English: Wu Cheng is cruel and obscene, and has reached an extreme in terms of human relations.

古文：太原迹异猜嫌，情非衅逆，祸起昭信，遂及淫刑。
现代文：太原王看到形迹反常心生猜嫌，情理上不是挑衅叛道，灾祸起于昭信宫，于是遭受酷刑，可叹啊!
English: When King Taiyuan saw the unusual appearance, he was suspicious. It was not a provocation to treason. The disaster occurred in the Shoshin Palace, so he was tortured. What a pity!

古文：嗟乎！欲求长世，未之有也。
现代文：想要求得长生，是没有过的。
English: To ask for eternal life is out of the question.

古文：以孝昭德音，庶可庆流后嗣，百年之酷，盖济南之滥觞。
现代文：因孝昭有恩的韶令，希望可以庆幸流传后嗣，高百年的惨状，大概济南王的死是起因。
English: Because of Xiao Zhao's benevolent edict, it is hoped that he can be fortunate enough to pass on to his heirs the misery of the last hundred years, probably caused by the death of the King of Jinan.

古文：其云 莫效前人 之言，可为伤叹，各爱其子，岂其然乎？
现代文：他说 不要仿效前人 的话，可为此感伤叹息，各自爱自己的儿子，难道就是这样吗?
English: He said, "Do not imitate what your fathers did, but weep and lament over it, and each of you love your own son." Is that it?

古文：琅邪虽无师傅之资，而早闻气尚。
现代文：琅邪王虽然没有老师指导的资质，但早就听到过气节风尚。
English: Although he does not have the qualifications to be a teacher, he has long heard about the customs of the Air Festival.

古文：士开淫乱，多历岁年，一朝剿绝，庆集朝野，以之受毙，深可痛焉。
现代文：和士开淫乱，经历了很多年，一时间杀灭，朝野相聚庆贺，因为逭被杀，实在令人痛惜。
English: He and his wife had an affair and lived together for many years. They were killed at the same time, and the whole country gathered to celebrate. It was really regrettable that he was killed.

古文：然专戮之衅，未之或免，赠帝谥恭，矫枉过直，观过知仁，不亦异于是乎？
现代文：然而擅自杀戮的祸端，或许不能避免，赠给帝位谧号称苤，纠正偏差做得过了分，观察过失可知道仁德，不也和遣不一样吗?
English: However, the scourge of unscrupulous killing, perhaps can not be avoided, presented to the imperial throne, the nickname is known, the correction of the deviation is overdone, the observation of the fault can know the benevolence, is not it also different from the expulsion?

