古文：樊知古，字仲师，其先京兆长安人。
现代文：樊知古，字仲师，其祖先为京兆长安人。
English: His ancestor was a member of the Jingzhao Chang'an people.

古文：曾祖偁，濮州司户参军。
现代文：他的曾祖樊翶，为濮州司户参军。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zou, joined the army as a member of the Jingzhou family.

古文：祖知谕，事吴为金坛令。
现代文：他的祖父樊知谕，在吴国任金坛县令。
English: His grandfather, Zou Zhizhu, was the governor of Jintan County in the State of Wu.

古文：父潜，事李景，任汉阳、石埭二县令，因家池州。
现代文：他的父亲樊潜，事奉南唐李景，任汉阳、石埭二县令，因而居家池州。
English: His father, Qianqian, served Li Jing in the Southern Tang Dynasty and was the governor of two counties, Hanyang and Shijiazhuang. As a result, he lived in Chizhou.

古文：知古尝举进士不第，遂谋北归，乃渔钓采石江上数月，乘小舟载丝绳，维南岸，疾棹抵北岸，以度江之广狭。
现代文：樊知古曾参加进士考试落第，就谋划回到北方。于是在采石江上垂钓几个月，乘着小船装载丝绳，把丝绳系在南岸，迅速地划到北岸，用以计算江面的宽窄。
English: After failing the entrance examination, Zou Zhigu planned to return to the north. So he fished on the quarry river for several months, loaded the rope with a small boat, tied the rope to the south bank, and quickly rowed to the north bank to calculate the width and narrowness of the river.

古文：开宝三年，诣阙上书，言江南可取状，以求进用。
现代文：开宝三年，他到朝廷上书，说明江南可以攻取的情形，以期求得提拔任用。
English: Three years after the discovery of the treasure, he wrote to the imperial court to explain the situation in which the southern part of the Yangtze River could be conquered, with a view to obtaining promotion and appointment.

古文：太祖令送学士院试，赐本科及第，解褐舒州军事推官。
现代文：宋太祖令人把他送到学士院考试，赐予本科及第，授官舒州军事推官。
English: Song Taizu had him sent to the academy for examination, and he was awarded a bachelor's degree and a second degree, and promoted to Shuzhou military commander.

古文：尝启于上，言老母亲属数十口在江南，恐为李煜所害，愿迎至治所。
现代文：他曾向皇帝陈述，说他老母亲属几十人在江南，担心被李煜所害，希望迎接他们来自己的治所。
English: He once told the emperor that there were dozens of members of his mother's family in the south of the Yangtze River, and that he was worried about being victimized by Li Qiye and hoped to welcome them to his place of jurisdiction.

古文：即诏煜令遣之。
现代文：宋太祖立即诏令李煜送人回来。
English: Song Taizu immediately issued an edict ordering Li Xi to send someone back.

古文：煜方闻命，即厚给赍装，护送至境上。
现代文：李煜刚听到宋太祖的诏命，立即厚给财物护送他们到边境上。
English: Upon hearing Song Taizu's imperial edict, Li Yinggang immediately gave them a large amount of money and escorted them to the border.

古文：七年，召拜太子右赞善大夫。
现代文：开宝七年，召拜樊知古为太子右赞善大夫。
English: In the seventh year of Kaibao, Zou Zhigu was summoned to serve as the prince's doctor.

古文：会王师征江表，知古为乡导，下池州。
现代文：恰巧宋军征伐江南，樊知古当向导，攻下池州。
English: Coincidentally, the Song Army invaded the south of the Yangtze River, with Zou Zhi Gu as a guide, and conquered Chizhou.

古文：八年，以知古领州事。
现代文：开宝八年，任命樊知古领池州事。
English: In the eighth year of the Kaibao era, he was appointed as the provincial governor of Shuchi ancient territory.

古文：先是，州民保险为寇，知古击之，连拔三砦，擒其魁以献，余皆溃散。
现代文：先前，池州人据险为寇，樊知古攻之，接连攻下三个砦，捉住其首领进献皇帝，其余的人则都一溃而散。
English: Previously, the Chizhou people had taken advantage of the danger and attacked Shichigu, capturing three forts in succession, capturing their leader, Emperor Jinxian, and the rest of the people were scattered.

古文：方议南征，命高品石全振往湖南造黄黑龙船，以大舰载巨竹縆，自荆南而下，遣八作使郝守浚濬等率丁匠营之。
现代文：朝廷正在商议南征，命令高官石全振去湖南造黄黑龙船，用大船运载大竹纟亘，从荆南顺江而下，派八作使郝守浚等人率领工匠造船。
English: The imperial court was discussing the Southern Expedition, and ordered high-ranking officials to go to Hunan to build a yellow and black dragon boat, to carry a large bamboo raft with a large boat, to go down the river from Jingnan, and to send eight craftsmen to lead craftsmen in shipbuilding.

古文：议者以谓江涛险壮，恐不能就，乃于石碑口试造之，移至采石，三日桥成，不差尺寸，从知古之请也。
现代文：讨论中有人认为长江波浪汹涌，担心难以成功，于是就在石牌口试验造船，移置到采石，三天建成了桥，尺寸分毫不差，这是皇帝听从了樊知古的请求的缘故。
English: During the discussion, some people thought that the Yangtze River was rough and feared that it would be difficult to succeed, so they tested the shipbuilding at the stone plate mouth, moved it to the quarry, and built the bridge in three days. The size was not bad, which was the reason why the emperor listened to the request of Zou Zhigu.

古文：金陵平，擢拜侍御史，令乘传按行江南诸州，询访利民，复命知江南东路转运事。
现代文：平定金陵后，升樊知古为侍御使，令他乘车巡视江南诸州，询访民情，又命樊知古知江南东路转运事。
English: After the pacification of Jinling, he appointed Sheng Yao Zhigu as an envoy and ordered him to tour the states south of the Yangtze River by car to inquire about the people's conditions. He also ordered Sheng Yao Zhigu to transfer traffic on the south-east road of the Yangtze River.

古文：数日，改授江南转运使，赐钱一百万。
现代文：几天后，又改授他任江南转运使，赏赐钱一百万。
English: A few days later, he was re-assigned to the post of Jiangnan transshipment envoy with a reward of one million yuan.

古文：先是，江南诸州官市茶十分之八，复征其余分，然后给符听其所往，商人苦之。
现代文：先前，江南诸州十分之八的茶被官府收购，还要征收剩余部分的税，此后才给通行证允许卖到他地，商人苦于此事。
English: Previously, eight-tenths of the tea in the southern Jiangsu provinces was purchased by the government, and the remaining part had to be taxed, after which the pass was allowed to be sold elsewhere. Merchants suffered from this.

古文：知古请蠲其税，仍差增所市之直，以便于民。
现代文：樊知古请求免除茶税，仍旧按级增加官府收购价，以便于民。
English: Zou Zhigu requested to be exempted from tea tax, but the government purchase price was still increased in order to make it easier for the people.

古文：江南旧用铁钱，十当铜钱之一，物价翔踊，民不便，知古亦奏罢之。
现代文：江南过去使用铁钱，十个铁钱相当于一个铜钱，物价昂贵，百姓不方便，樊知古也奏请朝廷令停止使用铁钱。
English: Jiangnan used to use iron money in the past. Ten iron coins were equivalent to one copper coin. The price was expensive and inconvenient for the people. Shichigu also appealed to the imperial court to stop using iron money.

古文：先是，李煜用兵，权宜调敛，知古悉奏为常额。
现代文：以前，南唐李煜用兵，临时征调赋敛，樊知古都上奏为按常额征收。
English: In the past, the Southern Tang Dynasty's Lishan used soldiers, temporarily levied taxes and levied taxes, and the ancient capital of Nanzhi was levied according to a fixed amount.

古文：豫章洪氏尝掌升州榷酤，逋铁钱数百万。
现代文：豫章洪氏曾掌管癉州酒的专卖，拖欠铁钱几百万。
English: Yu Zhanghong once presided over the exclusive sale of Zhangzhou liquor, and owed tens of millions of iron coins.

古文：至是，知古挟微时尝辱于洪氏，责偿铜钱以快意。
现代文：先前，樊知古无地位时曾被洪氏侮辱，此时便责洪氏偿还铜钱，使自己高兴地出了口气。
English: Previously, when Zou Zhigu had no status, he had been insulted by Hong. At this time, he accused Hong of repaying the copper money, which made him happy.

古文：太宗即位，授库部员外郎。召归，换金紫，赐钱百万，命为京西北路转运使。
现代文：宋太祖登皇帝位，授樊知古任库部员外郎，召他回京，更换金紫，赏钱百万，命他任京西北路转运使。
English: When Emperor Song Taizu ascended to the throne, he bestowed the title of treasurer to Gairo, a member of the treasury department, summoned him back to Beijing, replaced him with Jin Zi, rewarded him with millions of money, and appointed him as the Beijing Northwest Road Transport Envoy.

古文：太平兴国六年，加虞部郎中，就改知邠州，移凤翔府。入为盐铁判官，出领荆湖转运使。
现代文：太平兴国六年，樊知古又增职任虞部郎中，随即改任知州，移任凤翔府，入朝为盐铁判官，出京兼荆湖转运使。
English: In the sixth year of the Taiping Xingguo, Zou Zhigu was promoted again to the position of the middle son of Yu Bu, and was immediately reassigned to Zhizhou, transferred to Fengxiangfu, entered the court as a salt iron adjudicator, and went to Beijing as well as a transfer envoy to Jinghu.

古文：雍熙初，迁比部郎中。
现代文：雍熙初年，他升迁比部郎中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, he was promoted to the position of Hibu roju.

古文：会河朔用兵，分诸郡为两路，以给漕輓。
现代文：逢河朔一带用兵，分各郡为两路，以便水运陆运供给。
English: Whenever troops were used in the Hexuo area, it was divided into two routes for each county, so that supplies could be transported by water and land.

古文：迁知古为东路转运使，迁驾部郎中，赐钱五十万。
现代文：升樊知古任东路转运使，升驾部郎中，赏钱五十万。
English: Sheng Xizhi was appointed as the East Road Transfer Envoy, and promoted to the driver's assistant, with a reward of 500,000 yuan.

古文：知古本名若水，字叔清，因召见，上问之曰： 卿名出何书？ 对曰： 唐尚书右丞倪若水亮直，臣窃慕之。 上笑曰： 可改名 知古  。
现代文：樊知古原名樊若水，字叔清，由于皇上召见，皇上问他说 ：爱卿你的名字出于什么书？ 他回答说 ：唐代尚书丞倪若水诚信正直，我私下仰慕他。 皇上笑道 ：你可改名为 知古 。 
English: As the emperor summoned him, he asked him, "What book is your name from?" He replied, "In the Tang Dynasty, Shang Shuzhen Ni Ruoshui was honest and upright, and I privately admired him." The emperor laughed and said, "You can change your name to Zhigu."

古文：知古顿首奉诏。
现代文：樊知古叩头奉诏改名。
English: The name of Shichigou kowtow was changed by imperial edict.

古文：倪若水实名 若冰 ，知古学浅，妄引以对，人皆笑之。
现代文：倪若水实名为 若冰 ，樊知古学识浅，乱引用以答皇上，他人都笑话樊知古。
English: Niwakamizu's real name was Wakabing, but he was not well-versed in ancient knowledge, and he used random quotations to reply to the emperor. Everyone else laughed at him.

古文：端拱初，迁右谏议大夫、河北东西路都转运使，赐白金千两。
现代文：端拱初年，樊知古升任右谏议大夫，河北东西路都转运使，被赏赐白金千两。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, Zou Zhigu was promoted to the doctor of the right side, the east and west roads of Hebei were transferred to the envoy, and he was awarded a thousand taels of platinum.

古文：两路各置转运副使，都转运使之名自知古始。
现代文：两路各设置转运副使，都转运使之名从樊知古开始。
English: Each of the two routes has set up a transit deputy envoy, both of which have their names starting from Shichigou.

古文：二年，诏加河北西路招置营田使。
现代文：端拱二年，皇帝诏令樊知古加任河北西路招置营田使。
English: In the second year of Duan Gong, the emperor issued an imperial edict to Zou Zhigu to be appointed as the envoy of the west road of Hebei Province.

古文：奏请修城木五百余万、牛革三百万。
现代文：樊知古上奏要修城树木五百多万，牛皮三百万。
English: More than five million trees and three million cow hides are needed to rebuild the city.

古文：上曰： 万里长城岂在于此？
现代文：皇帝说 ：万里长城不也只有此数吗？
English: The emperor said, "Isn't this the only number of the Great Wall?"

古文：自古匈奴、黄河，互为中国之患。
现代文：自古以来匈奴、黄河，互为中原的祸患。
English: Since ancient times, the Huns and the Yellow River have been the scourge of the Central Plains.

古文：朕自即位以来，或疆埸无事，则有修筑圩堤之役。
现代文：我从即皇位以来，间或没有战事，那么才组织修筑黄河大堤的工程。
English: Since I came to the throne, there has been no war from time to time, so it was only then that I organized the construction of the Yellow River embankment.

古文：近者边烽稍警，则黄河安流无害，此盖天意更迭垂戒，常令惕励。
现代文：目前边境战事稍有戒备，而黄河安全畅流没有灾害，这大概是天意使二者互相更迭以示警戒，常令我警惕。
English: At present, there is a slight war alert on the border, and the Yellow River flows safely and smoothly without any disasters. It is probably God's will to make the two change each other to show vigilance, which often makes me alert.

古文：然而预备不虞，古之善教，深沟高垒，亦王公设险之义也。
现代文：虽是这样但事先准备好方可不担忧，这是古人的好教导，掘深沟筑高垒，也是王公设险防备的行为。
English: Although this is the case, there is no need to worry about preparing in advance. This is a good teaching of the ancients, digging a deep ditch to build a high barrier, and it is also the behavior of the king to set up emergency preparedness.

古文：所请过当，不亦重困吾民乎？ 乃诏有司量以官物给之。
现代文：你所奏请过分，不也使我百姓加重困苦吗？ 于是皇帝诏令官吏量力以官府物资供给之。
English: Do you not add to the misery of my people by demanding too much of them? So the emperor gave orders to the officials to supply them as much as they could from the treasury.

古文：会度支使李惟清上言河北军储无备，请发河南十七军州转粟以赴。
现代文：恰逢度支使李惟清上书说河北的军储没有准备，请求发河南十七军州转运粟粮前往。
English: Coincidentally, Li Weiqing, the imperial envoy, wrote a letter saying that Hebei's military reserve was unprepared and requested that the 17th military region of Henan be sent to transport the grain.

古文：太宗谓： 农事方殷，岂可更兴此役？ 惟清固以为请，上遣左正言冯拯乘传与知古计之。
现代文：宋太宗说： 农事正忙，怎能再兴此役？ 李惟清坚持请求朝廷发粟，皇帝派左正言冯拯乘车与樊知古计议这事。
English: Song Taizong said: "Agriculture is very busy, how can this campaign be revived? Li Weiqing insisted on requesting the imperial court to sow poppies, and the emperor sent Zuo Zhenggen Feng Zheng by car to discuss the matter with Zou Zhigu.

古文：知古即言： 河北军储可以均济足，俟农隙令民转饷。 拯复命，太宗曰： 不细筹之，则民果受弊矣。 未几，入朝奏事称旨，拜给事中。俄为户部使。
现代文：樊知古即说 ：河北的军储可以用均匀接济暂时满足，等到农闲令百姓转运军饷。 冯拯回京复命，太宗说： 不仔细筹谋，则百姓果然要受害了。 没多久，樊知古入朝陈奏政事合皇帝心意，拜官给事中，不久任户部使。
English: Zou Zhigu immediately said: Hebei's military reserves can be temporarily satisfied with uniform aid, until the farmers' idleness causes the people to transfer military funds. Feng Zheng returned to Beijing to resume his life, and Taizong said: If you do not carefully plan, then the people will really suffer. Not long after, Zou Zhigu entered the court to play politics in accordance with the emperor's will, and in the process of giving officials, he was soon appointed as a household envoy.

古文：知古有才力，累任转运使，甚得时誉。
现代文：樊知古有才干和魄力，他累任转运使，很得时人的称赞。
English: Zou Zhiguo has talent and courage. He has served as a transfer envoy for many years and has been highly praised by the people of his time.

古文：后因奏事，知古遂自解。上问： 从何得知？ 曰： 陈恕告臣。 上怒恕泄禁中语，且嫉知古轻佻，故两罢之。
现代文：等到他在户部任职时，接连因职务内的事得不到治理，皇帝下诏书严加责问，他的名声越来越减小。他平素与陈恕亲近友好，陈恕当时任参知政事，宋太宗说及计司事有违反命令的人，陈恕都把这些告诉了樊知古。后来樊知古趁着上奏政事，就自我辩解。皇帝问： 你从哪里知道这些？ 他回答说 ：陈恕告诉我的。 皇帝不高兴陈恕泄露宫廷中的话，而且憎恨樊知古轻率，故罢去两人官职。
English: When he served in the household department, he was successively unable to govern because of his duties. The emperor issued an edict severely reprimanding him, and his reputation became less and less. He had always been close and friendly with Chen Shou. Chen Shou was a member of the council of governors at that time. Song Taizong said that there were people who violated orders in the council of governors. Chen Shou told this to Nian Zhigu. Later, Nian Zhigu took advantage of the report of the council of governors to defend himself. The emperor asked: Where did you know this? He replied: Chen Shou told me. The emperor was not happy with Chen Shou

古文：出知古知梓州，未至，改西川转运使。
现代文：降樊知古知梓州，他还未到任，改任西川转运使。
English: He had not yet arrived in Zizhou when he was demoted to the position of the Nishikawa transit envoy.

古文：知古自以尝任三司使，一旦掌漕运剑外，郁郁不得志，常称足疾，未尝按行郡县。
现代文：樊知古自己认为曾任三司使，一天之间降职而在剑外掌管漕运，郁郁不得志，常常自称脚有病，未曾巡视诸郡县。
English: Zou Zhigu himself thought that he had been the Third Divisional Envoy, but he was demoted in one day and took charge of rowing outside the sword. He was depressed and discouraged. He often said that he had a foot disease and had never inspected counties.

古文：蜀中富饶，罗纨锦绮等物甲天下，言事者竞商榷功利。
现代文：蜀中富饶，罗纨锦绮等丝织品天下第一，议事人员竞相从商专营功利。
English: Shuzhong is rich in resources, and silk products such as loquat brocade and satin rank first in the world. The council members are competing to be the sole traders of utilitarian goods.

古文：又土狭民稠，耕种不足给，由是兼并者益籴贱贩贵以规利。
现代文：而且蜀地田地少百姓多，耕种田地不足供给生活，由此被兼并土地的人渐渐地贱买贵卖以谋求利润。
English: Moreover, there are fewer fields and more people in Shu, and there is a shortage of cultivated fields to supply life. As a result, the people who have been annexed land are gradually buying and selling cheaply and expensively to seek profits.

古文：淳化中，青城县民王小波聚众为乱，谓其众曰： 吾疾贫富不均，今为汝辈均之。 附者益众，遂攻陷青城县，掠彭山，杀其令齐元振。
现代文：淳化年间，青城县百姓王小波聚众反对宋廷，王小波对众人说： 现在的弊端正是贫富不均，如今我替你们这些人均之。 归附王小波的人渐渐多起来，于是他攻陷青城县，攻彭山，杀彭山县令齐元振。
English: During the Junhua era, Wang Xiaobo, a citizen of Qingcheng County, gathered a crowd to oppose Song Ting. Wang Xiaobo said to the crowd, "The current drawback is the inequality between the rich and the poor. Now I will make it equal for all of you." The number of people who followed Wang Xiaobo gradually increased, so he attacked Qingcheng County, attacked Pengshan, and killed Qi Yuanzhen, the leader of Pengshan County.

古文：巡检使张玘与斗于江源县，射小波，中其额，旋病创死，玘亦被杀。
现代文：宋军巡检使张王巳与王小波战于江源县，用箭射王小波，射中王小波的头额，王不久因箭伤发病死去，张王巳也被杀死。
English: The Song Army patrol sent Zhang Wang Si to fight Wang Xiaobo in Jiangyuan County. He shot Wang Xiaobo with an arrow and hit Wang Xiaobo on the forehead. Wang died soon after from the arrow wound. Zhang Wang Si was also killed.

古文：众遂推小波妻弟李顺为帅。
现代文：于是众人就推选王小波妻子之弟李顺为头领。
English: As a result, everyone elected Li Shun, the younger brother of Wang Xiaobo's wife, as the leader.

古文：初，小波党与裁百人，州县失于备御，故所在蜂起，至万余人。
现代文：起初，王小波的部下才百人，州县没怎么防备，所以王一呼而众人蜂拥而起，达到一万多人。
English: At first, Wang Xiaobo's subordinates were only a hundred people, and the prefectures were not well prepared, so Wang called out and everyone flocked up, reaching more than ten thousand people.

古文：攻蜀州，杀监军王亮及官吏十余人。陷邛州，害知州桑保绅、通判王从式及诸僚吏，逐都巡检使郭允能。
现代文：李顺领导王小波部下攻蜀州，杀死监军王亮及官吏十几人；攻陷邛州，处死知州桑保绅、通判王从式和其他官吏，赶走都巡检使郭允能。
English: Li Shun led Wang Xiaobo's subordinates to attack Shuzhou, killing the supervisor of the army, Wang Liang, and more than a dozen officials; invaded Zhangzhou, executed Zhizhou Sangbo Sheng, Tongzhan Wang Congshih and other officials, and drove away the capital inspector Guo Yuneng.

古文：允能率麾下与战新津江口，为贼所杀，同巡检、殿直毛俨徒步以身免。
现代文：郭允能率部下与李顺战于新津江口，被李顺杀死，同巡检、殿直毛俨步行免于丢命。
English: Guo Yunneng led his subordinates to fight with Li Shun at the mouth of the Xinjin River, and was killed by Li Shun. He was saved from losing his life by walking with the patrol inspector and the palace hairdresser.

古文：贼势益张，众至数万人，陷永康军、双流、新津、温江、郫县，纵火大掠，留其党守之。
现代文：李顺军势日益扩张，部众达几万人，攻陷永唐军、双流、新津、温江、郫县，取官府财物后放火烧之，留部下留守攻下的县城。
English: Li Shun's army was expanding day by day, numbering tens of thousands, and they captured the Yongtang army, Shuangliu, Xinjin, Wenjiang, and Handan counties. They took the government's property and set it on fire, leaving their subordinates to guard the captured county seat.

古文：往攻成都，烧西郭门，不利，引去。
现代文：李顺前往攻成都，烧成都西郭门，战事不利，李顺退去。
English: Li Shun went to attack Chengdu, burned the West Gate of Chengdu, the war was unfavorable, Li Shun retreated.

古文：陷汉州、彭州，旋陷成都。
现代文：李顺率众攻陷汉州、彭州，不久，攻下成都。
English: Li Shun led his troops to invade Hanzhou and Pengzhou, and soon captured Chengdu.

古文：时已诏知梓州、右谏议大夫张雍代知古为转运使。
现代文：当时皇帝已诏令知梓州、右谏议大夫张雍替代樊知古为转运使。
English: At that time, the emperor had decreed that Zhi Zizhou and Zhang Yong, the doctor of the Right Division, should replace Zhi Gu as the transfer envoy.

古文：雍未至，知古与知府郭载及属官走东川。
现代文：张雍没到任，樊知古与知府郭载及属下官吏逃到东川。
English: Zhang Yong did not take up his post, and Zou Zhigu, Guo Zai, and his subordinate officials fled to Dongchuan.

古文：诏复令掌两川漕运。
现代文：皇帝下诏又令樊知古掌管两川漕运。
English: The emperor also issued an imperial edict ordering Zou Zhigu to be in charge of the two rivers' transportation.

古文：知古具伏擅离所部，制置无状，上特宥之，以本官出知均州。视事旬日，忧悸卒，年五十二。
现代文：樊知古全部接受擅离职守、治理无方的罪过，皇帝特别宽恕他，让他以原官职出任知均州，樊知古视事十天，在万分忧虑恐惧中死去，终年五十二岁。
English: Zou Zhigu fully accepted the sin of leaving office without permission and governing no side. The emperor especially forgave him and let him take up the post of Zhizhong Prefecture with his original official position. Zou Zhigu observed the matter for ten days and died in great anxiety and fear, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：上犹嗟悯，赐其子汉公同学究出身。
现代文：皇帝仍嗟叹怜悯他，赐给他的儿子樊汉公同学究出身。
English: The emperor still lamented and pitied him, bestowing on his son the title of Shihangong.

古文：知古明俊有吏干，辞辨捷给，及任西川，不能弭盗而逃，虽获宥，终以惭死云。
现代文：樊知古精明能干有当官的才干，言词答辩敏捷，他到西川任职，不能平息百姓反抗而逃，虽然得到皇帝的宽恕，终究因惭愧而死去。
English: Zou Zhigu was shrewd and capable of being an official, and his words and arguments were quick. He served in Xichuan, but he could not quell the people's resistance and fled. Although he was forgiven by the emperor, he eventually died of shame.

