古文：成年，年谷足宾祭，祭以盛。
现代文：丰年粮食充足，宴享宾客与祭祀都用盛大仪式。
English: In good years, food is plentiful, and grand ceremonies are held for guests to feast and for sacrifices.

古文：大驯锺绝，服美义淫。
现代文：训言与演奏的声音洪亮；服饰华美，礼仪超过平常。
English: The exhortation and the music are loud; the costumes are sumptuous, and the etiquette surpasses the ordinary.

古文：阜畜约制，余子务艺。
现代文：供品中要有鲜美的菜蔬。养牲畜的要修饰他的设施，庶子要从事各种技艺。
English: Among the offerings, there should be fresh vegetables and vegetables. Livestock breeders should decorate their facilities, and bastards should engage in various skills.

古文：宫室城廓修为备，供有嘉菜，于是日满。
现代文：宫室城廓或维修或新造，务使完备。在丰收之年，日子要过得充实。
English: Miyamuro Castle, whether repaired or newly built, must be completed. In the year of the harvest, life must be fulfilled.

古文：古年俭谷不足，宾祭以中盛。
现代文：歉年粮食不充裕，宴享宾客与祭祀都用中等盛典。
English: In a bad year, food is not plentiful, so the feasting guests and the rituals are limited to a medium-sized celebration.

古文：乐唯锺鼓，不服美。
现代文：奏乐只用钟鼓，不穿彩服。
English: The music is played using only bells and drums, and no costumes are worn.

古文：三牧五库补摄，凡美不修，余子务穑，于是糺秩。
现代文：三种马以及五种库房管理人互相补充兼管，所有美善之物不给修治。庶子要从事农活。
English: The three kinds of horses and the five kinds of storehouse managers complement and control each other, and all the good things are not subject to cultivation. The illegitimate child should be engaged in farm work.

古文：民饥则勤而不宾，举祭以薄。
现代文：在歉年时候，分等次督察，其所占有不得超越。饥年则慰问宾客而不宴享，祭祀时供品要少。
English: In years of famine, guests should be comforted rather than feasted upon, and offerings should be small at the time of sacrifice.

古文：乐无锺鼓。凡美禁，畜不阜群。
现代文：奏乐不用钟鼓，所有华美之物都禁用。
English: The music does not use bells and drums, and all ornate objects are prohibited.

古文：车不雕攻，兵备不制，民利不淫。
现代文：牲畜不成群地饲养，车子不用雕饰，兵器不用新造。
English: Livestock are not raised in herds, cars do not need to be decorated, and weapons do not need to be newly made.

古文：征当商旅，以救穷乏，问随乡，不鬻熟。
现代文：民众之用不过费，赋税征收以商旅为主，以救济缺粮的人。了解灾情，随乡而异，不准出售熟食。
English: It is not expensive for the public to use, and the tax is mainly levied on business travelers to help those who are short of food. To understand the disaster situation, it varies from village to village, and it is not allowed to sell cooked food.

古文：分助有匡，以绥无者。
现代文：分别资助与匡救，以安定缺粮的人。
English: Subsidies and relief, respectively, to stabilize food-insecure people.

古文：于是救困大荒，有祷无祭。
现代文：刑罚宽缓，不造刑具。施舍用物以赈济穷困。
English: Punishments are lenient, no instruments of torture are made, and alms are given to help the poor.

古文：国不称乐，企不满壑，刑法不修，舍用振穹，君亲迅方，卿参告籴，余子倅运，开□同食，民不藏粮，日有匡。
现代文：国君亲自巡察各方灾情，卿大夫参与告籴，庶子协助运粮。开仓同吃，民不藏粮，叫做有匡。使百姓养畜只养牛羊。
English: The sovereign personally inspected the disaster situation of all parties, the doctor participated in the report, and the son-in-law assisted in the transportation of grain. Open the warehouse and eat together, the people do not hide grain, it is called yukonin. Let the people raise livestock and only raise cattle and sheep.

古文：俾民畜，唯牛羊，与民大疾惑，杀一人无赦。
现代文：对劫民的盗贼及惑民的左道用严刑杀伐，一个也不赦免。
English: The thieves who robbed the people and the leftists who misled the people will be killed with severe punishment, and no one will be pardoned.

古文：男守疆，戎禁不出，五库不膳，丧处无度，察以薄资。
现代文：男子守边疆，兵戎禁止出境。五库不修缮，丧礼不遵常度，祭奠用少量粢米。
English: Men guard the borders, soldiers are forbidden to leave the country. Five libraries are not repaired, funerals do not follow the norm, and only a small amount of glutinous rice is used for worship.

古文：礼无乐，宫不帏，嫁娶不以时，宾旅设位有赐。
现代文：礼仪不奏乐，宫室不设惟。嫁娶不拘时日，来访宾客依照身份予以赠赐。
English: The etiquette does not play music, the palace does not have an exception. Regardless of the date of marriage, visiting guests are given gifts according to their status.

