古文：大夫七十而致事，谓之得谢，美名也。
现代文：士大夫七十岁辞官退位，称为 得谢 ，这是美好的名声。
English: It is a fine reputation for a scholar-official to abdicate his post at the age of seventy, and this is called "Deshie" (得谢).

古文：汉韦贤、薛广德、疏广、疏受，或县安车以示子孙，卖黄金以侈君赐，为荣多矣。
现代文：汉朝韦贤、薛广德、疏广、疏受这些人，有的悬挂所坐的马车来向子孙们夸示，有的变卖黄金来显示君主的恩赐之多，表现的荣耀多了。
English: Wei Xian and Xue Guangde of the Han Dynasty were neglected and neglected by these people. Some of them hung up the carriage they were sitting in to boast to their children and grandchildren, while others sold gold to show the monarch's many gifts and show more glory.

古文：至于龚胜、郑弘辈，亦诏策褒表，郡县存问，合于三代敬老之义。
现代文：至于龚胜、郑弘这班人，也受到皇上的诏令表彰，郡守、县令给予慰问，符合三代尊敬元老的本义。
English: As for Shansheng and Zheng Hong, they were also commended by the Emperor's edict, and the county governor and county magistrate gave condolences, which is in line with the original meaning of the three generations of respect for the elders.

古文：本朝尤重之。大臣告老，必宠以东宫师傅、侍从。
现代文：宋朝尤其重视这一点，大臣年老辞官，一定优宠为东宫师傅或侍从。
English: The Song Dynasty paid special attention to this point. The minister was an old official, and he must have been favored as a master or attendant of the East Palace.

古文：耆艾若晁迥、孙奭、李柬之亦然。
现代文：象晃迥、孙爽、李柬之这样高寿的人也是这样。
English: This is also the case for people with a long life expectancy, such as Jiao Jiao, Sun Shuang, and Li Kamzhi.

古文：宣和以前，盖未有既死而方乞致仕者，南渡之后，故实散亡，于是朝奉、武翼郎以上，不以内外高卑，率为此举。
现代文：宣和年以前，大概没有死后才封官的事，南渡以后，可效法的旧事散失亡佚，于是朝奉、武翼郎以上的，不分朝廷内外、地位高低，一律都这样做。
English: Prior to the year of the declaration of peace, there was probably no such thing as appointing officials only after death, but after the arrival of the emperor to the south, the old practice, which could be emulated, was lost. Therefore, the court servants and those above the rank of Wu Yulang, regardless of their status inside and outside the court, all did the same.

古文：其最甚而无理者，虽宰相辅臣，考终于位，其家发哀即服，降旨声钟给赙，既已阅日，方且为之告廷出命，纶书之中，不免有亲医药、介寿康之语。
现代文：其中最严重而又没有道理的是，即使是宰相辅政大臣在职期间老死，他家里发出哀声，穿上丧服，降下旨意敲响计声，让人补给助丧之资，已过了一天了，正要为他报告朝廷。下诏追封时，皇上的诏书已经到了，里面还不免有亲近医生药物，祝福长寿康健的话。
English: One of the most serious and unreasonable is that even if the Prime Minister and Vice-Minister of State died of old age while in office, his family would cry out in grief, put on mourning clothes, make a will, sound the alarm, and have someone replenish the funds to help with the funeral. A day had passed, and they were about to report to the imperial court. When the imperial rescript was sealed, the emperor's imperial rescript had already arrived, and it inevitably contained medicines for doctors and words of blessing for a long and healthy life.

古文：如秦太师、万俟丞相、陈鲁公、沈必先、王时亨、郑仲益是已。
现代文：象秦太师、万侯宰相、陈鲁公、沈必先、王时亨、郑仲益就是这样的。
English: This was the case with the emperors Qin Taishi, Wan Hou, Chen Lukong, Shen Bisen, Wang Shihong, and Zheng Zhongyi.

古文：其在外者，非易箦属纩，不复有请，间千百人中有一二焉，则知与不知，骇惜其死，子弟游宦远地，往往饮泣不宁，谒急奔命，故及无事日，不敢为之。
现代文：那些在京城之外的，若不是临终病重，就不再请求辞职，间或千百人中有一两个辞职的，那么跟他相知和不相知的人，都为他的死而惊骇叹惜，子孙兄弟在远地游学为官的，往往哭泣不安，拼命奔走急于赶回去见面，所以在没有发生什么事时，人们不敢告老辞官。
English: Those who are outside the capital, if they are not terminally ill, no longer ask for resignation. Occasionally, one or two out of a thousand people resign, so those who know him and those who do not know him are shocked and lamented for his death. Sons and grandsons of officials who travel to distant places to study are often crying and anxious, desperately running to rush back to meet, so when nothing happens, people do not dare to resign.

古文：绍兴二十九年，予为吏部郎，因轮对，奏言： 乞令吏部立法，自今日以往，当得致仁恩泽之人物故者，即以告所在州，州上省部，然后夷考其平生，非有赃私过恶于式有累者，辄官其后人。
现代文：宋绍兴二十九年，我作为吏部郎，趁着向皇上奏明政事，奏道： 请求皇上命令吏部建立制度：从今以后，应当获得辞官待遇的人死去时，应马上报告所在的州，州上报省或部，然后考察他的一生，如果没有贪赃拘私没有过失恶迹，没有在原则上犯毛病的话，就给他的后人封官。
English: In the 29th year of Song Shaoxing, I, as an official, took advantage of the opportunity to report to the emperor on political affairs. I said, "I request the emperor to order the official to establish a system: from now on, when a person who should receive the treatment of a diplomat dies, he should immediately report to the state where he is, and the state should report to the province or ministry, and then examine his life. If there is no corruption, there is no fault, and there is no fault in principle, then his descendants should be appointed.

古文：若真能陈义引年，或辞荣知止者，乞厚其节礼，以厉风谷，贤于率天下为伪也。 
现代文：如果真能陈述大义告老辞官，或者推辞荣耀而知退知止的话，请加重对他的礼节，好激励风气习俗，这比起整个社会做假来要强得多。 
English: If you can truly make a statement of righteousness and retire from the post of a senior official, or refuse glory and retire, please strengthen your etiquette for him, so as to encourage customs and customs. This is much stronger than the whole society pretending.

古文：太上览奏，欣纳曰： 朕记得此事之废，方四十年，当如卿语。 
现代文：皇上看了奏文后欣然接纳说： 我记得这件事的废止才四十年，应该依你的建议做。 
English: After reading the petition, the Emperor gladly accepted it, saying, "I remember that it has only been forty years since this matter was abolished, and it should be done according to your suggestion.

古文：既下三省，诸公多以为是，而首相汤岐公独难之，其议遂寝，今不复可正云。
现代文：奏文下发到三省，诸位首长多数认为是对的，唯独宰相汤歧公却认为这事困难，这项提议于是被扣压下来，现在不再能够改正了。
English: The report was sent to the three provinces, and most of the leaders thought it was right, but Prime Minister Tang Qigong thought it was difficult, so the proposal was suppressed and can no longer be corrected.

