古文：子墨子言曰： 仁者之为天下度也，辟之无以异乎孝子之为亲度也。 
现代文：墨子说道： 仁者为天下谋划，就像孝子给双亲谋划一样没有分别。 
English: Mozi said, "A benevolent person plans for the world, just as a filial son plans for his parents, there is no difference.

古文：今孝子之为亲度也，将奈何哉？
现代文：现在的孝子为双亲谋划，将怎么样呢？
English: What will happen now that the filial son is planning for his parents?

古文：曰：亲贫则从事乎富之；人民募，则从事乎众之；众乱，则从事乎治之。
现代文：即是：双亲贫穷，就设法使他们富裕；人数少了，就设法使其增加；人多混乱，就设法治理。
English: That is to say, if your parents are poor, you should try to make them rich; if the number of people is small, you should try to increase it; if the number of people is chaotic, you should try to manage it.

古文：当其于此也，亦有力不足，财不赡，智不智，然后已矣。
现代文：当他在这样做的时候，也有力量不足、财用不够、智谋不足知，然后才罢了的。
English: When he does so, there is also a lack of strength, lack of money, lack of wisdom, and then it is over.

古文：无敢舍余力，隐谋遗利，而不为亲为之者矣。
现代文：但没有人敢于舍弃余力，隐藏智谋、遗留财利，而不为双亲办事的。
English: But no one dares to give up the rest, to hide the wit, the legacy of wealth, and not to work for their parents.

古文：若三务者，孝子之为亲度也，既若此矣。
现代文：像上面这三件事，孝子为双亲打算，已经如此了。
English: Like the above three things, filial sons and daughters have already planned for their parents.

古文：虽仁者之为天下度，亦犹此也。
现代文：即使仁者为天下谋划，也像这样。
English: Even if a benevolent person plans for the world, it is like this.

古文：曰：天下贫，则从事乎富之；人民寡，则从事乎众之；众而乱，则从事乎治之。
现代文：即是：天下贫穷，就设法使之富足；人民稀少，就设法使之增多；人多混乱，就设法治理。
English: That is to say, if there is poverty in the world, we should try to make it rich; if there is a scarcity of people, we should try to increase the number of people; if there is a lot of chaos, we should try to control it.

古文：当其于此，亦有力不足，财不赡，智不智，然后巳矣。
现代文：当他在这样做的时候，也有力量不足、财用不够、智力不足知，然后才罢了的。
English: When he does so, there is also a lack of strength, lack of money, lack of intelligence, and then it's over.

古文：无敢舍余力，隐谋遗利，而不为天下为之者矣。
现代文：但没有人敢舍弃余力、隐藏智谋、遗留财利，而不为天下办事的。
English: However, no one dares to give up their spare effort, hide their wisdom, and leave behind their wealth and profit, instead of doing things for the world.

古文：若三务者，此仁者之为天下度也，既若此矣。
现代文：像上面这三件事，仁者为天下谋划，已经如此了。
English: Like the above three things, benevolent people are planning for the world, and it is already so.

古文：今逮至昔者，三代圣王既没，天下失义。
现代文：到了往古三代圣王已死的今天，天下丧失了义。
English: To this day, three generations of ancient holy kings have passed away, and the world has lost its righteousness.

古文：后世之君子，或以厚葬久丧，以为仁也义也，孝子之事也；或以厚葬久丧，以为非仁义，非孝子之事也。
现代文：后世的君子，有的以厚葬久丧为仁、义，是孝子的事；有的以厚葬久丧为不仁、不义，不是孝子的事。
English: In later generations, some gentlemen regarded a long and rich funeral as benevolent and righteous, and a matter of filial piety; others regarded a long and rich funeral as uncharitable and unrighteous, and not a matter of filial piety.

古文：曰二子者，言则相非，行即相反，皆曰吾上祖述尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、之道者也。
现代文：这两种人，言论相攻，行为相反，都说： 我是上法尧、舜，禹、汤、文王、武王的大道。 
English: These two kinds of people, their words contradict each other and their actions are opposite, both say: I am on the high road of the Fa, Tao, Yu, Tang, King Wen and King Wu.

古文：而言即相非，行即相反，于此乎后之君子，皆疑惑乎二子者言也。
现代文：但是言论相攻，行为相反，于是乎后世的君子都对二者的说法感到疑惑。
English: But words contradict and actions contradict, so later generations of gentlemen were puzzled by both statements.

古文：若苟疑惑乎之二子者言，然则姑尝传而为政乎国家万民而观之。计厚葬久丧，奚当此三利者？
现代文：如果一旦对二人的说法感到疑惑，那么姑且试著把他们的主张广泛地实施于治理国家和人民，从而加以考察，衡量厚葬久丧在哪一方面能符合三种利益。
English: If you have doubts about the two men's statements, then let's try to widely implement their ideas in governing the country and the people, so as to examine and measure the extent to which a long funeral can meet the three interests.

古文：我意若使法其言，用其谋，厚葬久丧，实可以富贫众寡，定危治乱乎！此仁也义也，孝子之事也，为人谋者，不可不劝也。
现代文：假使仿照他们的说法，采用他们的计谋，若厚葬久丧确实可以使贫者富、寡者众，可以使危者安、乱者治，这就是仁的、义的，是孝子应做的事，替人谋划者不能不勉励去做。
English: If we imitate their words and adopt their strategies, if a long funeral can indeed make the poor rich and the poor numerous, can bring peace to those in danger and rule over those who are disorderly, this is benevolent and righteous, and is what a filial son should do. Those who plan for others must be encouraged to do so.

古文：仁者将兴之天下，谁贾而使民誉之，终勿废也。
现代文：仁者将谋求在天下兴办它，设法宣扬而使百姓赞誉它，永不废弃。
English: The benevolent will seek to establish it in the world, try to promote it and make the people praise it, and never abandon it.

古文：意亦使法其言，用其谋，厚葬久丧，实不可以富贫众寡，定危理乱乎！此非仁非义，非孝子之事也。为人谋者，不可不沮也。
现代文：假使仿照他们的说法，采用他们的计谋，若厚葬久丧确实不可以使贫者富、寡者众，不可以使危者安、乱者治，这就是不仁的、不义的，不是孝子应做的事，替人谋划者不能不阻止他去做。
English: If one were to follow their words and adopt their stratagems, it would indeed be impossible to make the poor rich, the poor numerous, the dangerous safe, and the disorderly governed, if the dead were buried for a long time. This would be uncharitable and unjust, not what a filial son should do, and the planner could not help but prevent him from doing it.

古文：仁者将求除之天下，相废而使人非之，终身勿为。
现代文：仁者将谋求在天下除掉它，相互废弃它，并使人们非难它，终身不去做。
English: The benevolent will seek to eliminate it from the world, discard it from each other, and make people blame it, and never do it.

古文：且故兴天下之利，除天下之害，令国家百姓之不治也，自古及今，未尝之有也。
现代文：所以说兴起天下的大利，除去天下的公害，而使国家百姓不能得到治理的，从古至今还不曾有过。
English: Therefore, from ancient times to the present, there has never been anything like the rise of the world's great profits, the elimination of the world's public hazards, and the inability of the country's people to be governed.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：从何知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：今天下之士君子，将犹多皆疑惑厚葬久丧之为中是非利害也。
现代文：现在天下的士君子们，对于厚葬久丧的是非利害，大多疑惑不定。
English: Nowadays, most of the world's gentlemen are uncertain about the pros and cons of a grand funeral.

古文：故子墨子言曰： 然则姑尝稽之，今虽毋法执厚葬久丧者言，以为事乎国家。 
现代文：诸侯死了，使府库贮藏之财为之一空，然后将金玉珠宝装饰在死者身上，用丝絮组带束住，并把车马埋藏在圹穴中，又必定要多多制造帷幕帐幔、钟鼎、鼓、几筵、酒壶、镜子、戈、剑、羽旄、象牙、皮革，置于死者寝宫而埋掉，然后才满意。
English: Princes died, emptying the treasury of stored wealth, and then they decorated the gold and jade jewelry on the dead body, tied it with a silk band, and buried the chariot and horse in a pit, and they must also make a lot of curtains, chandeliers, drums, cymbals, wine jugs, mirrors, gongs, swords, feathers, ivory, and leather, and put them in the deceased's bedroom and bury them, and then they are satisfied.

古文：此存乎王公大人有丧者，曰棺椁必重，葬埋必厚，衣衾必多，文绣必繁，丘陇必巨；存乎匹夫贱人死者，殆竭家室；存乎诸侯死者，虚车府，然后金玉珠玑比乎身，纶组节约，车马藏乎圹，又必多为屋幕、鼎鼓、几梃、壶滥，戈剑、羽旄、齿革，寝而埋之。满意。若送从，曰天子杀殉，众者数百，寡者数十；将军、大夫杀殉，众者数十，寡者数人。
现代文：至于殉葬，天子、诸侯死后所杀的殉葬者，多的数百，少的数十；将军、大夫死后所杀的殉葬者，多的数十，少的数人。
English: As for the martyrs, the martyrs killed after the death of the sons of heaven and princes were more than hundreds, but less than dozens; the martyrs killed after the death of the generals and doctors were more than dozens, but less than a few.

古文：处丧之法，将奈何哉？
现代文：居丧的方法，又将怎么样呢？
English: What will happen to the method of mourning?

古文：曰：哭泣不秩，声翁，缞绖垂涕，处倚庐，寝苫枕块，又相率强不食而为饥，薄衣而为寒。
现代文：即是：哭泣无时，不相更代，披缞系绖，垂下眼泪，住在倚庐中，睡在草垫上，枕著土块。又竞相强忍著不吃而任自己饥饿，衣服穿得单薄而任自己寒冷。
English: That is to say: crying all the time, not changing generations, wearing a cocoon, hanging tears, living in a cocoon, sleeping on a straw mat, with a pillow of soil, and competing to endure not eating and letting oneself be hungry, wearing thin clothes and letting oneself be cold.

古文：使面目陷陬，颜色黧黑，耳目不聪明，手足不劲强，不可用也。
现代文：使自己面目干瘦，颜色黝黑，耳朵不聪敏，眼睛不明亮，手足不强劲，不能做事情。
English: Make yourself thin and withered, with a dark complexion, unintelligent ears, dull eyes, weak limbs, and unable to do things.

古文：又曰：上士之操丧也，必扶而能起，杖而能行，以此共三年。
现代文：又说：上层士人守丧，必须搀扶才能起来，拄著拐杖才能行走。按此方式生活三年。
English: He also said, "Upper-class people attend funerals, and must be helped to get up and walk with a cane. Live this way for three years."

古文：若法若言，行若道，使王公大人行此，则必不能蚤朝五官六府，辟草木，实仓禀。使农夫行此，则必不能蚤出夜入，耕稼树艺。使百工行此，则必不能修舟车，为器皿矣。使妇人行此，则必不能夙兴夜寐，纺绩织纴。
现代文：假若效法这种言论，实行这种主张，使王公大人依此而行，那么必定不能上早朝；使士大夫依此而行，那么必定不能治理五官六府、开辟草木荒地和使仓库粮食充实；使农夫依此而行，那么必定不能早出晚归，耕作种植；使工匠依此而行，那么必定不能修造船、车，制作器皿；使妇女依此而行，那么必定不能早起晚睡，去纺纱绩麻织布。
English: If we follow this kind of speech and implement this kind of idea, and if the princes follow this way, they will not be able to get up early in the morning; if the envoys and doctors follow this way, they will not be able to govern the five ministries and six prefectures, open up the wasteland of plants and trees, and fill the storehouses with grain; if the farmers follow this way, they will not be able to go out early and return late, cultivate and plant; if the craftsmen follow this way, they will not be able to repair ships, cars, and make utensils; if women follow this way, they will not be able to get up early and go to

古文：细计厚葬，为多埋赋之财者也；计久丧，为久禁从事者也。
现代文：仔细计算厚葬之事，实在是大量埋掉钱财；计算长久服丧之事，实在是长久禁止人们去做事。
English: Careful calculation of the heavy funeral is really a large amount of buried money; calculation of the long mourning is really a long ban on people doing things.

古文：财以成者，扶而埋之；后得生者，而久禁之。
现代文：财产已形成了的，掩在棺材里埋掉了；丧后应当生产的，又被长时间禁止。
English: Assets that have already been formed are buried in a coffin; those that should be produced after the death are prohibited for a long time.

古文：以此求富，此譬犹禁耕而求获也，富之说无可得焉。
现代文：用这种做法去追求财富，就好像禁止耕田而想求收获一样。所以，要使国富家足，既已不可能了。
English: To pursue wealth in this way is like trying to make a profit by forbidding the cultivation of the soil; it is therefore no longer possible to make the country rich.

古文：是故求以富家，而既已不可矣，欲以众人民，意者可邪？其说又不可矣！今唯无以厚葬久丧者为政：君死，丧之三年；父母死，丧之三年；妻与后子死者，五皆丧之三年。
现代文：而要以此使人民数量增加，或许可以吧？这种说法又是不行的。现在以厚葬久丧的原则去治理国家，国君死了，服丧三年；父母死了，服丧三年，妻与嫡长子死了，又都服丧三年。
English: But to increase the number of people in this way, is it possible? This kind of argument is not possible. Now to govern the country with the principle of a long funeral, the king died and was in mourning for three years; his parents died and were in mourning for three years, his wife and eldest son died and were in mourning for three years.

古文：然后伯父、叔父、兄弟、孽子其；族人五月；姑姊甥舅皆有月数，则毁瘠必有制矣。
现代文：然后伯父、叔父、兄弟、自己的众庶子死了服丧一年；近支亲属死了服丧五个月；姑父母、姐姐、外甥、舅父母死了，服丧都有一定月数，那么，丧期中的哀毁瘦损必定有制度规定了。
English: Then, when an uncle, uncle, brother, or one's own illegitimate children die, the mourning period is one year; when a close relative dies, the mourning period is five months; when an aunt, sister, nephew, or uncle dies, the mourning period is a certain number of months.

古文：使面目陷，颜色黧黑，耳目不聪明，手足不劲强，不可用也。
现代文：使面目干瘦，颜色黝黑，耳朵不聪敏，眼睛不明亮，手足不强健，因之不能做事情。
English: To make the face dry and thin, the complexion dark, the ears dull, the eyes dim, the limbs weak, and therefore unable to do things.

古文：又曰上士操丧也，必扶而能起，杖而能行，以此共三年。
现代文：又说：上层士人守丧，必须搀扶才能站起，拄著拐杖才能行走。按此方式生活三年。
English: He also said, "Upper-class people attend funerals, and they have to be helped to stand up, and they have to walk with crutches. They have to live like this for three years."

古文：若法若言，行若道，苟其饥约又若此矣；是故百姓冬不仞寒，夏不仞暑，作疾病死者，不可胜计也。
现代文：假如效法这种言论，实行这种主张，则他们饥饿缩食，又像这样了。因此百姓冬天忍不住冷，夏天忍不住酷暑，生病而死的，不可胜数。
English: If they follow this kind of speech and practice this kind of idea, they will starve and shrink and become like this. Therefore, the people can't stand the cold in winter, can't stand the scorching heat in summer, and die of illness in countless numbers.

古文：此其为败男女之交多矣。
现代文：这样就会大量地损害男女之间的交媾。
English: This will greatly damage the sexual intercourse between men and women.

古文：以此求众，譬犹使人负剑而求其寿也。
现代文：以这种做法追求增加人口，就好像使人伏身剑刃而寻求长寿。
English: To seek to increase the population in this manner is like seeking to lengthen the life of a man by making him fall on his sword.

古文：众之说无可得焉。
现代文：人口增多的说法已不可实现了。
English: The argument that the population is increasing is no longer tenable.

古文：是故求以众民人，而既以不可矣。
现代文：所以追求使人口增多，既已不可能了。
English: Therefore, the pursuit of increasing the population is no longer possible.

古文：欲以治刑政，意者可乎？
现代文：而想以此治理刑事政务，也许可以吧？
English: But if you want to govern criminal government affairs in this way, maybe it's okay?

古文：其说又不可矣。
现代文：这种说法又是不行的。
English: That argument doesn't work either.

古文：今唯无以厚葬久丧者为政，国家必贫，人民必寡，刑政必乱。
现代文：现在以厚葬久丧的原则治理政事，国家必定会贫穷，人民必定会减少，刑政必定会混乱。
English: Now, political affairs are governed according to the principle of burying the dead, and the country is bound to become poor, the population is bound to decrease, and the criminal justice system is bound to become chaotic.

古文：若法若言，行若道：使为上者行此，则不能听治；使为下者行此，则不能从事。
现代文：假如效法这种言论，实行这种主张，使居上位的人依此而行，就不可能听政治国；使在下位的人依此而行，就不可能从事生产。
English: If this kind of speech is followed, if this kind of idea is put into practice, and if the people at the top act in accordance with it, it will be impossible to listen to the political state; if the people at the bottom act in accordance with it, it will be impossible to engage in production.

古文：上不听治，刑政必乱；下不从事，衣食之财必不足。
现代文：居上位的不能听政治国，刑事政务就必定混乱；在下位的不能从事生产，衣食之资就必定不足。
English: Those at the top cannot listen to the political state, and the criminal government affairs are bound to be chaotic; those at the bottom cannot engage in production, and the funds for food and clothing are bound to be insufficient.

古文：若苟不足，为人弟者，求其兄而不得，不弟弟必将怨其兄矣；为人子者，求其亲而不得，不孝子必是怨其亲矣；为人臣者，求之君而不得，不忠臣必且乱其上矣。
现代文：假若不足，做弟弟的向兄长求索而没有所得，不恭顺的弟弟就必定要怨恨他的兄长；做儿子的求索父母而没有所得，不孝的儿子就必定要怨恨他的父母；做臣子的求索君主而没有所得，不忠的臣子就必定要叛乱他的君上。
English: If it is not enough, if a younger brother asks his elder brother for something and does not get it, an insubordinate younger brother is bound to resent his elder brother; if a son asks his parents for something and does not get it, an unfilial son is bound to resent his parents; if a vassal asks the sovereign for something and does not get it, a disloyal vassal is bound to rebel against his sovereign.

古文：是以僻淫邪行之民，出则无衣也，入则无食也，内续奚吾，并为淫暴，而不可胜禁也。
现代文：所以品行淫邪的百姓，出门就没有衣穿，回家就没有饭吃，内心积有耻辱之感，一起去做邪恶暴虐之事，多得无法禁止。
English: Therefore, the people who commit sexual immorality have no clothes to wear when they go out, no food to eat when they come home, and they have a sense of shame in their hearts, and they do evil and tyrannical things together, so much so that they cannot be prohibited.

古文：是故盗贼众而治者寡。
现代文：因此盗贼众多而治安好的情况减少。
English: As a result, the number of thieves and the level of security have decreased.

古文：夫众盗贼而寡治者，以此求治，譬犹使人三还而毋负己也。
现代文：倘使盗贼增多而治安不善，用这种做法寻求治理。就好像把人多次遣送回去而要他不背叛自己。
English: If there is an increase of thieves and the security is not good, it is like sending a person back several times and asking him not to betray himself.

古文：治之说无可得焉。
现代文：而使国家治理的说法已是不可实现了。
English: But the idea of national governance is no longer achievable.

古文：是故求以治刑政，而既已不可矣，欲以禁止大国之攻小国也，意者可邪？
现代文：所以追求使刑政得治，既已不可能了。而想以此禁止大国攻打小国，也许还可以吧？
English: Therefore, it is no longer possible to pursue the rule of criminal law. But if you want to use this to prohibit big countries from attacking small countries, maybe it's okay?

古文：其说又不可矣。
现代文：这种说法也是不行的。
English: That argument doesn't work either.

古文：是故昔者圣王既没，天下失义，诸侯力征，南有楚、越之王，而北有齐、晋之君，此皆砥砺其卒伍，以攻伐并兼为政于天下。
现代文：从前的圣王已离开人世，天下丧失了正义，诸侯用武力征伐。南边有楚、越二国之王，北边有齐、晋二国之君，这些君主都训练他们的士卒，用以在天下攻伐兼并、发令施政。
English: The holy kings of the past have passed away, justice has been lost in the world, and the princes have used force to conquer. In the south, there is Chu, the king of the two kingdoms of Yue, and in the north, there is Qi, the prince of the two kingdoms of Jin. These monarchs have trained their soldiers to fight against annexation in the world and to issue orders to administer the government.

古文：是故凡大国之所以不攻小国者，积委多，城郭修，上下调和，是故大国不耆攻之。
现代文：大凡大国不攻打小国的缘故，是因为小国积贮多，城郭修固，上下和协，所以大国不喜欢攻打它们。
English: If great nations do not attack small nations, it is because small nations have more resources, are better fortified, and are more harmonious. Therefore, great nations do not like to attack them.

古文：无积委，城郭不修，上下不调和，是故大国耆攻之。
现代文：如果小国没有积贮，城郭不修固，上下不和协，所以大国就喜欢攻打它们。
English: If small countries do not have reserves, do not fortify their fortresses, and do not cooperate with each other, the big countries like to attack them.

古文：今唯毋以厚葬久丧者为政，国家必贫，人民必寡，刑政必乱。
现代文：现在以主张厚葬久丧的人主持政务，国家必定会贫穷，人民必定会减少，刑事政务必定会混乱。
English: Now that the government is presided over by a person who advocates a long funeral, the country must be poor, the people must be reduced, and the criminal law politics must be chaotic.

古文：若苟贫，是无为积委也；若苟寡，是城郭、沟渠者寡也；若苟乱，是出战不克，入守不固。
现代文：如果国家贫穷，就没有什么东西可以用来积贮；如果人口减少，这样修城郭、沟渠的人就少了；如果刑政混乱，这样出战就不能胜利，入守就不能牢固。
English: If the country is poor, there will be nothing to store; if the population decreases, there will be fewer people to build fortifications and ditches; if the criminal justice system is chaotic, there will be no victory in the war, and the defense will not be solid.

古文：此求禁止大国之攻小国也，而既已不可矣，欲以干上帝鬼神之福，意者可邪？
现代文：用厚葬久丧寻求禁止大国攻打小国，既已不可能了。而想用它求得上天、鬼神赐福，也许可以吧？
English: It is no longer possible to seek to prohibit big countries from attacking small countries with long funerals. But if you want to use it to ask for blessings from heaven and the gods, maybe it's okay?

古文：其说又不可矣。
现代文：这种说法也是不行的。
English: That argument doesn't work either.

古文：今唯毋以厚葬久丧者为政，国家必贫，人民必寡，刑政必乱。
现代文：现在以主张厚葬久丧的人主持政务，国家必定贫穷，人民必定减少，刑法政治必定混乱。
English: Now that the government is presided over by a person who advocates a long funeral, the country must be poor, the people must be reduced, and the criminal law politics must be chaotic.

古文：若苟贫，是粢盛酒醴不净洁也；若苟寡，是事上帝鬼神者寡也；若苟乱，是祭祀不时度也。
现代文：如果国家贫穷，那么祭祀的粢盛酒醴就不能洁净；如果人民减少，那么敬拜上天、鬼神的人就少了；如果刑政混乱，那么祭祀就不能准时了。
English: If the country is poor, then the sacrificial offerings cannot be pure; if the population decreases, then there will be fewer people who worship heaven and ghosts; if the criminal justice system is chaotic, then the sacrifices cannot be made on time.

古文：今又禁止事上帝鬼神，为政若此，上帝鬼神始得从上抚之曰： 我有是人也，与无是人也，孰愈？ 
现代文：现在又禁止敬事上天鬼神。像这样去施政，上天、鬼神便开始从天上发问说： 我有这些人和没有这些人，哪样更好呢？ 
English: Now it is forbidden to show reverence to the gods and devils. If you govern in this way, the gods and devils will begin to ask from the heavens, "Which is better, that I have these people or that I don't have these people?"

古文：曰： 我有是人也，与无是人也，无择也。 
现代文：然后说： 我有这些人与没有这些人，没有区别。 
English: Then he said: I have these people and I don't have these people, there is no difference.

古文：则惟上帝鬼神，降之罪厉之祸罚而弃之，则岂不亦乃其所哉？
现代文：那么，即使上天、鬼神给他们降下罪疠祸罚而抛弃他们，难道不也是应得的吗？
English: So, even if heaven, ghosts and gods give them the punishment of sin and abandon them, isn't it deserved?

古文：是古圣王制为葬埋之法，曰： 棺三寸，足以朽体，衣衾三领，足以覆恶。
现代文：所以古代圣王制定埋葬的原则，即是：棺木三寸厚，足以让尸体在里面腐烂就行；衣衾三件，足以掩盖可怕的尸形就行。
English: Therefore, the ancient sage king formulated the principle of burial, that is: the coffin is only three inches thick, enough for the body to rot inside; three coats are enough to cover the terrible corpse.

古文：以及其葬也，下毋及泉，上毋通臭，垄若参耕之亩，则止矣。 
现代文：及至下葬，下面不掘到泉水深处，上面不使腐臭散发，坟地宽广三尺，就够了。
English: As far as the burial is concerned, do not dig down to the depth of the spring water below, and do not let the rot spread above. A cemetery three feet wide is enough.

古文：死者既以葬矣，生者必无久哭，而疾而从事，人为其所能，以交相利也。
现代文：死者既已埋葬，生人不当久哭，而应赶快就业，人人各尽所能，用以交相得利。
English: Since the dead have already been buried, the living should not cry for a long time, but should be employed as soon as possible, and everyone should do their best to use it for mutual benefit.

古文：此圣王之法也。
现代文：这就是圣王的法则。
English: This is the law of the Holy King.

古文：今执厚葬久丧者之言曰： 厚葬久丧，虽使不可以富贫、众寡、定危、治乱，然此圣王之道也。 子墨子曰： 不然。
现代文：现在坚持厚葬久丧主张的人说道： 厚葬久丧即使不可以使贫者富、寡者众、危者定、乱者治，然而这是圣王之道。 墨子说： 不然。
English: Now, those who hold to the idea of a long funeral say, "A long funeral, even if it cannot make the poor rich, the few numerous, the dangerous stable, or the disorderly governed, is nevertheless the way of a holy king." Mozi says, "No."

古文：昔者尧北教乎八狄，道死，葬蛩山之阴，衣衾三领，谷木之棺，葛以缄之，既犯而后哭，满坎无封。
现代文：从前尧去北方教化八狄，在半路上死了，葬在蛩山的北侧。用衣衾三件，用普通的楮木做成棺材，用葛藤束棺，棺材已入土后才哭丧，圹穴填平而不起坟。
English: Once upon a time, he went to the north of Lushan to educate the Hatti, died on the way, and was buried on the north side of Lushan Mountain. He was buried with three pieces of clothing, a coffin made of ordinary camphor wood, and a coffin made of kudzu. The coffin was buried in the ground before he was mourned, and the grave was filled in without a grave.

古文：巳葬，而牛马乘之。
现代文：葬毕，可以在上面放牧牛马。
English: buried, you can graze cattle and horses on it.

古文：舜西教乎七戎，道死，葬南己之市，衣衾三领，谷木之棺，葛以缄之。
现代文：舜到西方教化七戎，在半路上死了，葬在南己的市场旁，衣衾三件，以普通的楮木做成棺材，用葛藤束棺。
English: He went to the West to be educated, and died on the way. He was buried next to the market in Nanki. He was buried with three pieces of clothing, a coffin made of ordinary birch, and a coffin made of kudzu.

古文：已葬，而市人乘之。
现代文：葬毕，市人可以照常往来于上。
English: After the funeral, the townspeople can come and go as usual.

古文：禹东教乎九夷，道死，葬会稽之山，衣衾三领，桐棺三寸，葛以缄之，绞之不合，通之不坎，土地之深，下毋及泉，上毋通臭。
现代文：大禹去东方教化九夷，在半路死了，葬在会稽山上，衣衾三件，用桐木做三寸之棺，用葛藤束住，虽然封了口但并不密合。凿了墓道，但并不深，掘地的深度下不及泉，上不透臭气。
English: Dayu went to the East to enlighten the nine barbarians. He died on the way and was buried on Mount Kechizan. He was buried with three pieces of clothing, a three-inch coffin made of paulownia wood, and he was bound with kudzu. Although his mouth was sealed, it was not tightly closed. He dug a grave path, but it was not deep. There was no spring below the depth of the excavation, and the stench was not permeable.

古文：既葬，收余壤其上，垄若参耕之亩，则止矣。
现代文：葬毕，将剩余的泥土堆在上面，坟地宽广大约三尺，就行了。
English: After burying, pile the remaining soil on top, and make the grave about three feet wide. That's it.

古文：若以此若三圣王者观之，则厚葬久丧，果非圣王之道。
现代文：如果照这三位圣王来看，则厚葬久丧果真不是圣王之道。
English: According to these three holy kings, it is not the way of a holy king to have a long funeral.

古文：故三王者，皆贵为天子，富有天下，岂忧财用之不足哉？
现代文：这三王都贵为天子，富有天下，难道还怕财用不够吗？
English: These three kings are all precious sons of heaven and rich in the world. Are they afraid that their wealth is not enough?

古文：以为如此葬埋之法。 
现代文：而认为这样做是葬埋的法则。 
English: They think that doing so is the law of burial.

古文：今王公大人之为葬埋，则异于此。
现代文：现在王公大人们葬埋，则与此不同了。
English: Now that the princes have been buried, things are different.

古文：必大棺中棺，革阓三操，璧玉即具，戈剑、鼎鼓、壶滥、文绣、素练、大鞅万领、舆马、女乐皆具，曰：必捶差通，垄虽凡山陵。
现代文：必定要用外棺和内棺，并以饰有文彩的皮带再三捆扎，宝璧宝玉既已具备，戈、剑、鼎、鼓、壶、镜、纹绣、白练、衣衾万件、车马、女乐都具备了。还必须把墓道捶实、涂饰好，坟墓雄伟可比山陵。
English: It is necessary to use an outer coffin and an inner coffin, and repeatedly tie them together with a belt decorated with patterns. Since the precious gems and jewels are already available, Go, sword, tripod, drum, pot, mirror, embroidery, white practice, thousands of clothes, chariot and horse, and women's music are all available. It is also necessary to tamp down the cemetery road and paint it well. The tomb is majestic and comparable to the mountains.

古文：此为辍民之事，靡民之财，不可胜计也，其为毋用若此矣。
现代文：这样荒废人民的事务，耗费人民的资财，多得不可胜数。这厚葬久丧竟如此毫无用处。
English: In this way, the affairs of the people are wasted, the people's resources and wealth are consumed, and there are too many to count. This long funeral is so useless.

古文：是故子墨子曰： 乡者，吾本言曰：意亦使法其言，用其谋，计厚葬久丧，请可以富贫、众寡、定危、治乱乎？则仁也，义也，孝子之事也！
现代文：所以墨子说： 过去，我本来说过：假使效法这种言论，采用这种谋议，计算厚葬久丧，若确实可以使贫者富、寡者众、危者定、乱者治，那就是仁的、义的、孝子应做的事。
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "In the past, I have said that if we follow this kind of speech, use this kind of advice, and calculate the long-term funeral, if we can truly make the poor rich, the few numerous, the dangerous stable, and the chaotic ruled, then that is what a benevolent, righteous, and filial son should do.

古文：为人谋者，不可不劝也；意亦使法其言，用其谋，若人厚葬久丧，实不可以富贫、众寡、定危、治乱乎？则非仁也，非义也，非孝子之事也！
现代文：因之替人谋划的不可不勉励他这样做。假使效法这种言论，采用这种谋议，若人们厚葬久丧，确实不可以使贫者富、寡者众、危者定、乱者治，那就是不仁的、不义的、不是孝子应做的事。
English: Therefore, he who plans on behalf of others must encourage them to do so. If we follow this kind of speech and use this kind of advice, if people are buried for a long time, it is indeed impossible to make the poor rich, the few numerous, the dangerous stable, and the disorderly ruled. That is unkind, unjust, and not what a filial son should do.

古文：为人谋者，不可不沮也。
现代文：因之替人谋划的不可不阻止他这样做。
English: So the mastermind must have prevented him from doing so.

古文：是故求以富国家，甚得贫焉；欲以众人民，甚得寡焉；欲以治刑政，甚得乱焉；求以禁止大国之攻小国也，而既已不可矣；欲以干上帝鬼神之福，又得祸焉。
现代文：所以，寻求以这种说法使国家富足而只能得到更加贫困，想以它增加人民而只能得到更加减少，想用它使刑政治理而只能得到更加混乱，想用它禁止大国攻打小国也已经办不到，想用它求取上帝鬼神的赐福反而又只能得祸。
English: Therefore, seeking to make the country rich with this argument can only lead to more poverty, trying to increase the people with it can only lead to more reduction, trying to use it to make the criminal political system can only lead to more confusion, trying to use it to prohibit large countries from attacking small countries can no longer be done, and trying to use it to seek the blessing of God and ghosts can only lead to disaster.

古文：上稽之尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之道，而政逆之；下稽之桀、纣、幽、厉之事，犹合节也。
现代文：我们就上从尧、舜、禹、汤、周文王、周武王之道来考察它，正好与之相反；就下从桀、纣、周幽王、周厉王之事来考察它，倒是符节相合。
English: On the other hand, if we look at it from the perspective of Zhou, Zhou, Yu, Tang, Zhou Wenwang, and Zhou Wuwang, it is exactly the opposite. If we look at it from the perspective of Zhou, Zhou, Yu, Tang, Zhou Wenwang, and Zhou Wuwang, it is exactly the same.

古文：若以此观，则厚葬久丧，其非圣王之道也。
现代文：照这看来，则厚葬久丧当不是圣王之道。 
English: According to this view, it is not the way of a holy king to have a long funeral.

古文：今执厚葬久丧者言曰： 厚葬久丧，果非圣王之道，夫胡说中国之君子，为而不巳，操而不择哉？ 
现代文：现在坚持厚葬久丧的人说道： 厚葬久丧若果真不是圣王之道，那怎么解释中原的君子行之不已、持而不释呢？ 
English: Now, those who insist on a long funeral say: If a long funeral is not the way of a holy king, then how do you explain the noblemen of the Central Plains who never let go?

古文：子墨子曰： 此所谓便其习、而义其俗者也。 
现代文：墨子说道： 这就所谓的便于习惯、安于风俗 。
English: Mozi said, "This is the so-called ease of habit, ease of custom.

古文：昔者越之东，有輆沭之国者，其长子生，则解而食之，谓之 宜弟 ；其大父死，负其大母而弃之，曰 鬼妻不可与局处。 
现代文：从前，越国的东面有个輆沭国，人的头一个孩子出生后就肢解吃掉，称这种做法为 宜弟 。人的祖父死后，背著祖母扔掉，说： 鬼妻不可与住在一起。 
English: Once upon a time, there was a country to the east of Yue that dismembered and ate a man's first child after birth, calling the practice "good brother." After the man's grandfather died, he threw it away behind his grandmother's back, saying, "A ghost wife must not live with you."

古文：此上以为政，下以为俗，为而不巳，操而不择，则此岂实仁义之道哉？
现代文：这种做法上面持以施政，下面习以为俗，行而不止，持而不释。那么这难道确实是仁义之道吗？
English: This kind of practice is held above as a policy, below as a custom, doing more than doing, holding and not releasing. So is this really the way of benevolence and righteousness?

古文：此所谓便其习，而义其俗者也。
现代文：这就是所谓的便于习惯、安于风俗。
English: This is the so-called ease of habit, ease of custom.

古文：楚之南，有炎人国者，其亲戚死，朽其肉而弃之，然后埋其骨，乃成为孝子。
现代文：楚国的南面有个啖人国，此国人的双亲死后，先把肉刳下来扔掉，然后再埋葬骨头，才能成为孝子。
English: In the south of Chu, there is a country of eunuchs. When the parents of this country die, they first chop off the flesh and throw it away, and then bury the bones, in order to become a filial son.

古文：秦之西，有仪渠之国者，其亲戚死，聚柴薪而焚之，熏上谓之 登遐 ，然后成为孝子。
现代文：秦国的西面有个仪渠国，此国人的双亲死后，聚积柴薪把他烧掉。把烟气上升说成是死者 登仙 ，然后才能成为孝子。
English: In the west of Qin, there was a ceremonial country. After the death of the parents of this countryman, he was burned with firewood. The rising smoke was said to be the deceased ascending to heaven, and then he could become a filial son.

古文：此上以为政，下以为俗，为而不已，操而不择，则此岂实仁义之道哉？
现代文：上面以这种做法作为国政，下面以之作为风俗，行之不已，持而不释，那么这难道确实是仁义之道吗？
English: In the above, this practice is regarded as national policy, and in the following, it is regarded as a custom, and it has been carried out without ceasing, so is it really the way of benevolence and righteousness?

古文：此所谓便其习，而义其俗者也。
现代文：这就是所谓的便于习惯、安于风俗。
English: This is the so-called ease of habit, ease of custom.

古文：若以此若三国者观之，则亦犹薄矣；若中国之君子观之，则亦犹厚矣。
现代文：如果从这三国的情况来看，那么人们对葬丧也还是很微薄的，而从中原君子的情况来看，则又还是很厚重的。
English: If we look at the situation of these three countries, then people are still very meager about funerals, but if we look at the situation of the Zhongyuan gentleman, it is still very heavy.

古文：如彼则大厚，如此则大薄，然则葬埋之有节矣。
现代文：像这样太厚，像那样又太薄，既然如此，那么葬埋就应当有节制。
English: If it is too thick like this and too thin like that, then the burial should be restrained.

古文：故衣食者，人之生利也，然且犹尚有节；葬埋者，人之死利也，夫何独无节于此乎？
现代文：所以，衣食是人活著时利益之所在，然而犹且崇尚节制；葬埋是人死后的利益之所在，为何独不对此加以节制呢？
English: Therefore, food and clothing are the interests of people when they are alive, but they still advocate restraint; burial is the interests of people after death, why not restrain it?

古文：子墨子制为葬埋之法，曰： 棺三寸，足以朽骨；衣三领，足以朽肉。
现代文：墨子制定葬埋的法则说： 棺材厚三寸，衣衾三件，足以使死者的骨肉在里面朽烂。
English: Mozi formulated the rules of burial and said: The coffin is three inches thick and has three coats, which is enough to cause the bones and flesh of the deceased to rot inside.

古文：掘地之深，下无沮漏，气无发泄于上，垄足以期其所，则止矣。
现代文：掘地的深浅，以下面没有湿漏、尸体气味不要泄出地面上为度。坟堆足以让人认识就行了。
English: The depth of the excavation, there are no wet leaks below, and the smell of the corpse should not leak out of the ground. The grave is enough for people to recognize.

古文：哭往哭来，反，从事乎衣食之财，佴乎祭祀，以致孝于亲。 
现代文：哭著送去，哭著回来。回来以后就从事于谋求衣食之财，以助给祭祀之用，向双亲尽孝道。 
English: She went away crying and came back crying. After returning, she was engaged in seeking money for food and clothing to help with the sacrificial rites and to show filial piety to her parents.

古文：故曰子墨子之法，不失死生之利者，此也。
现代文：所以说，墨子的法则，不损害生和死两方面的利益，即此之故。
English: Therefore, Mozi's law does not harm the interests of both life and death, that is why.

古文：故子墨子言曰： 今天下之士君子，中请将欲为仁义，求为上士，上欲中圣王之道，下欲中国家百姓之利，故当若节丧之为政，而不可不察此者也。 
现代文：所以墨子说： 现在天下的士君子，内心确实想行仁义，追求做上士，上想要符合圣王之道，下想要符合国家百姓之利，所以就应当对以节葬来行政的道理，不可不加以考察。 
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "Nowadays, the nobles of the world really want to do benevolence and righteousness in their hearts, and pursue to be a staff sergeant. On the one hand, they want to be in line with the way of the holy king, and on the other hand, they want to be in line with the interests of the people of the country. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the reason for the administration of the funeral.

