古文：有乱君，无乱国；有治人，无治法，羿之法非亡也，而羿不世中；禹之法犹存，而夏不世王。
现代文：有搞乱国家的君主，没有自行混乱的国家；有治理国家的人才，没有自行治理的法制。后羿的射箭方法并没有失传，但后羿并不能使世世代代的人都百发百中；大禹的法制仍然存在，但夏后氏并不能世世代代称王天下。
English: There are monarchs who make a mess of the country, but there is no country that is chaotic on its own; there are talented people who govern the country, but there is no self-governing legal system. Houyu's archery method has not been lost, but Houyu cannot make people from generation to generation have a perfect score; Dayu's legal system still exists, but the Xiaguo clan cannot be the king of the world for generations.

古文：故法不能独立，类不能自行；得其人则存，失其人则亡。
现代文：所以法制不可能单独有所建树，律例不可能自动被实行；得到了那种善于治国的人才，那么法制就存在；失去了那种人才，那么法制也就灭亡了。
English: Therefore, the legal system cannot be built by itself, and laws cannot be implemented automatically. If you get the kind of talent that is good at governing the country, then the legal system will exist; if you lose that kind of talent, then the legal system will perish.

古文：法者、治之端也；君子者、法之原也。
现代文：法制，是政治的开头；君子，是法制的本原。
English: The legal system is the beginning of politics; the gentleman is the origin of the legal system.

古文：故有君子，则法虽省，足以遍矣；无君子，则法虽具，失先后之施，不能应事之变，足以乱矣。
现代文：所以有了君子，法律即使简略，也足够用在一切方面了；如果没有君子，法律即使完备，也会失去先后的实施次序，不能应付事情的各种变化，足够形成混乱了。
English: Therefore, with a gentleman, the law, even if it is simple, is enough to be used in all aspects; if there is no gentleman, the law, even if it is complete, will lose the order of implementation, cannot cope with various changes in things, and is enough to form chaos.

古文：不知法之义，而正法之数者，虽博临事必乱。
现代文：不懂得法治的道理而只是去定法律的条文的人，即使了解得很多，碰到具体事情也一定会昏乱。
English: People who do not understand the principle of the rule of law but only fix the provisions of the law, even if they understand a lot, will certainly be confused when they encounter specific things.

古文：故明主急得其人，而闇主急得其埶。
现代文：所以英明的君主急于得到治国的人才，而愚昧的君主急于取得权势。
English: Therefore, a wise ruler is eager to get talent to govern the country, while a foolish ruler is eager to gain power.

古文：急得其人，则身佚而国治，功大而名美，上可以王，下可以霸；不急得其人，而急得其埶，则身劳而国乱，功废而名辱，社稷必危。
现代文：急于得到治国的人才，就会自身安逸而国家安定，功绩伟大而名声美好，上可以称王天下，下可以称霸诸侯；不急于得到治国的人才，而急于取得权势，就会自身劳苦而国家混乱，功业败坏而声名狼藉，国家政权必然危险。
English: Those who are eager to get the talent of governing the country will be at ease and the country will be stable, the achievements will be great and the reputation will be good, the top can be called the king of the world, and the bottom can be called the overlord of the princes; those who are not eager to get the talent of governing the country, but are eager to gain power, will work hard and the country will be in chaos, the achievements will be corrupted and the reputation will be disgraced, and the state power will inevitably be dangerous.

古文：故君人者，劳于索之，而休于使之。书曰： 惟文王敬忌，一人以择。 
现代文：所以统治人民的君主，在寻觅人才时劳累，而在使用他以后就安逸了。《尚书》说： 要想想文王的恭敬戒惧，亲自去选择人才。 
English: Therefore, the monarch who rules the people is tired when searching for talent, but is at ease after using him. "Shangshu" said: Think about the respect and fear of King Wen, and personally select talent.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种道理啊。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：合符节，别契券者，所以为信也；上好权谋，则臣下百吏诞诈之人乘是而后欺。
现代文：对合符节、辨认契券，是用来造成信用的；但如果君主喜欢搞权术阴谋，那么大臣百官中那些搞欺骗诡诈的人就会乘机跟着搞欺诈。
English: But if the sovereign is fond of intrigues, then those ministers who practice deceit and trickery will take advantage of the opportunity to commit fraud.

古文：探筹、投钩者，所以为公也；上好曲私，则臣下百吏乘是而后偏。
现代文：抽签、抓阄，是用来造成公正的；但如果君主喜欢偏私，那么大臣百官就会乘机跟着搞偏私。
English: Drawing lots and drawing straws are used to create fairness; but if the monarch likes favoritism, then ministers and officials will take the opportunity to engage in favoritism.

古文：衡石称县者，所以为平也；上好覆倾，则臣下百吏乘是而后险。
现代文：用衡器来称量，是用来造成公平的；但如果君主喜欢偏斜颠倒，那么大臣百官就会乘机跟着邪恶不正。
English: To weigh with the balance is to do justice; but if the prince be pleased to tilt it upside down, then the ministers will take advantage of the occasion to do evil and injustice.

古文：斗斛敦概者，所以为啧也；上好贪利，则臣下百吏乘是而后丰取刻与，以无度取于民。
现代文：各种量器量具，是用来造成统一标准的；但如果君主热衷于贪图财利，那么大臣百官就会乘机跟着去多拿少给以致于没有限度地盘剥老百姓。
English: Various measuring instruments are used to create a uniform standard; but if the monarch is keen on greed, then ministers and officials will take the opportunity to take more and give less, so that there is no limit to the exploitation of the common people.

古文：故械数者，治之流也，非治之原也；君子者，治之原也。
现代文：所以各种有助于治理的器物与方法，只是政治的末流，并不是政治的源头；君主，才是政治的源头。
English: Therefore, all kinds of utensils and methods that are conducive to governance are only the end of politics, not the source of politics; the monarch is the source of politics.

古文：官人守数，君子养原；原清则流清，原浊则流浊。
现代文：官吏拘守具体的方法条例，君主则保养源头。源头清澈，那么下边的流水也清澈；源头混浊，那么下边的流水也混浊。
English: Officials adhere to specific method regulations, while the monarch maintains the source. If the source is clear, then the flowing water below is also clear; if the source is cloudy, then the flowing water below is also cloudy.

古文：故上好礼义，尚贤使能，无贪利之心，则下亦将綦辞让，致忠信，而谨于臣子矣。
现代文：所以君主如果爱好礼义，尊重贤德的人、使用有才能的人，没有贪图财利的思想，那么臣下也就会极其谦让，极其忠诚老实，而谨慎地做一个臣子了。
English: Therefore, if the monarch loves propriety and righteousness, respects the virtuous, uses the talented, and has no greed for money, then the vassal will also be extremely humble, extremely loyal and honest, and prudently be a vassal.

古文：如是则虽在小民，不待合符节，别契券而信，不待探筹投钩而公，不待冲石称县而平，不待斗斛敦概而啧。
现代文：像这样，即使是在卑微的老百姓之中，也不等对合符节、辨认契券就能做到有信用，不等抽签、抓阉就能做到公正，不靠衡器来称量就能做到公平，不需要各种量器量具就能做到标准统一。
English: In this way, even among the lowly common people, it is not necessary to wait for the matching of symbols and the identification of deeds to achieve credibility, it is not necessary to wait for the drawing of lots and the grasping of shovels to achieve fairness, it is possible to achieve fairness without relying on weighing instruments, and it is possible to achieve standard unification without the need for various measuring instruments.

古文：故赏不用而民劝，罚不用而民服，有司不劳而事治，政令不烦而俗美。百姓莫敢不顺上之法，象上之志，而劝上之事，而安乐之矣。
现代文：所以不用奖赏而民众就能勤勉，不用刑罚而民众就能服从，官吏不费力而事情就能处理好，政策法令不繁多而习俗就能变好；百姓没有谁敢不顺从君主的法令、依照君主的意志而为君主的事情卖力，而且对此感到安乐。
English: Therefore, the people can be diligent without reward, the people can obey without punishment, the officials can handle things well without effort, the policies and decrees are not numerous, and the customs can be improved; the people do not dare to disobey the monarch's decrees, work for the monarch's affairs according to the monarch's will, and feel at ease with it.

古文：故借歛忘费，事业忘劳，寇难忘死，城郭不待饰而固，兵刃不待陵而劲，敌国不待服而诎，四海之民不待令而一，夫是之谓至平。诗曰： 王犹允塞，徐方既来。 
现代文：所以，民众在纳税时不觉得破费，为国家干事业时忘掉了疲劳，外敌发动战争时能拼死作战；城墙不等修整就坚固，兵器的刀口不用淬炼就坚硬，敌国不等去征服就屈从，天下的民众不用命令就能统一行动。这叫做极其太平。《诗》云： 王道真大满四海，徐国已经来朝拜。 
English: Therefore, the people do not feel burdened when paying taxes, they forget their fatigue when doing business for the country, and they can fight to the death when a foreign enemy starts a war; the city walls are strong when they are not repaired, the blades of weapons are hard without tempering, the enemy countries are submissive when they are not conquered, and the people of the world can act in a unified manner without orders. This is called extremely peaceful. "Poem" cloud: Wang Dao Zhen is full of the four seas, and Xu Guo has come to worship.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情形啊。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：请问为人君？
现代文：请问怎样做君主？
English: What does it take to be a monarch?

古文：曰：以礼分施，均遍而不偏。
现代文：回答说：要按照礼义去施舍，公平而不偏私。
English: He answered, "Give to the needy according to what is just and right, without partiality.

古文：请问为人臣？
现代文：请问怎样做臣子？
English: Excuse me, how do I become a vassal?

古文：曰：以礼侍君，忠顺而不懈。
现代文：回答说：要按照礼义去侍奉君主，忠诚顺从而不懈怠。
English: He replied, "To serve the sovereign according to propriety, to be loyal and obedient, and to never slacken.

古文：请问为人父？
现代文：请问怎样做父亲？
English: How to be a father?

古文：曰：宽惠而有礼。
现代文：回答说：要宽厚仁爱而有礼节。
English: He replied, "Be kind and courteous.

古文：请问为人子？
现代文：请问怎样做儿子？
English: How to be a son, please?

古文：曰：敬爱而致文。
现代文：回答说：要敬爱父母而极有礼貌。
English: "Respect your parents and be very polite," he replied.

古文：请问为人兄？
现代文：请问怎样做哥哥？
English: Excuse me, how do I become a brother?

古文：曰：慈爱而见友。
现代文：回答说：要仁慈地爱护弟弟而付出自己的友爱。
English: And he said, Thou shalt love thy brother, and hate thine enemy.

古文：请问为人弟？
现代文：请问怎样做弟弟？
English: Excuse me, how to be a younger brother?

古文：曰：敬诎而不苟。
现代文：回答说：要恭敬顺服而一丝不苟。
English: "Respectfully, obediently and scrupulously," he replied.

古文：请问为人夫？
现代文：请问怎样做丈夫？
English: How to be a husband?

古文：曰：致功而不流，致临而有辨。
现代文：回答说：要尽力取得功业而不放荡淫乱，尽力亲近妻子而又有一定的界限。
English: He replied, "Do your best to gain merit without debauchery, and do your best to be close to your wife, but within limits."

古文：请问为人妻？
现代文：请问怎样做妻子？
English: How to be a wife?

古文：曰：夫有礼则柔从听侍，夫无礼则恐惧而自竦也。
现代文：回答说：丈夫遵行礼义就温柔顺从听命侍候他，丈夫不遵行礼义就诚惶诚恐而独自保持肃敬。
English: She replied, "If the husband follows the etiquette, she will serve him with gentleness and obedience. If the husband does not follow the etiquette, she will be terrified and keep her dignity.

古文：此道也，偏立而乱，俱立而治，其足以稽矣。
现代文：这些原则，只能部分地做到，那么天下仍会混乱；全部确立了，天下就会大治；它们足够用来作为楷模了。
English: These principles can only be partially achieved, then the world will still be in chaos; all established, the world will be great; they are enough to serve as a model.

古文：请问兼能之奈何？
现代文：请问要全部做到这些该怎么办？
English: What should I do if I want to do all of this?

古文：曰：审之礼也。
现代文：回答说：必须弄清楚礼义。
English: "You have to figure out the etiquette," he said.

古文：古者先王审礼以方皇周浃于天下，动无不当也。
现代文：古代圣王弄明白了礼义而普遍施行于天下，行动没有不恰当的。
English: The ancient holy kings understood the etiquette and universally implemented it throughout the world. There was nothing inappropriate about their actions.

古文：故君子恭而不难，敬而不巩，贫穷而不约，富贵而不骄，并遇变态而不穷，审之礼也。
现代文：所以君子谦恭但不胆怯，肃敬但不恐惧，贫穷却不卑屈，富贵却不骄纵，同时遇到各种事变、也能应付自如而不会束手无策，这都是因为弄明白了礼义的缘故。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is humble but not timid, reverent but not fearful, poor but not abject, rich but not arrogant, and at the same time, when encountering various events, he can also deal with them freely and will not be helpless. This is all because he has understood the reason for courtesy.

古文：故君子之于礼，敬而安之；其于事也，径而不失；其于人也，寡怨宽裕而无阿；其为身也，谨修饰而不危；其应变故也，齐给便捷而不惑；其于天地万物也，不务说其所以然，而致善用其材；其于百官之事伎艺之人也，不与之争能，而致善用其功；其待上也，忠顺而不懈；其使下也，均遍而不偏；其交游也，缘类而有义；其居乡里也，容而不乱。
现代文：所以君子对于礼义，敬重并遵守它；他对于事务，做起来直截了当但不出差错；他对于别人，很少埋怨、宽宏大量但不阿谀逢迎；他做人的原则，是谨慎地加强修养而不险诈；他应付事变，迅速敏捷而不糊涂；他对于天地万物，不致力于解说它们形成的原因而能做到很好地利用其材；他对于各种官府中的官吏和有技术的人材，不和他们竞争技能的高下而能做到很好地利用他们的工作成果；他侍奉君主，忠诚顺从而不懈怠；他使唤下边的人，公平而不偏私；他与人交往，依循道义而有法度；他住在家乡，待人宽容而不胡作非为。
English: Therefore, a gentleman respects and observes etiquette; he is straightforward but does not make mistakes in his business; he rarely complains about others, is generous but does not flatter others; his principle of being a man is to carefully strengthen cultivation without being dangerous; he copes with things, is quick and agile without being confused; he is not committed to explaining the causes of the formation of heaven and earth and can make good use of his material; he is not competing with their skills and can make good use of their work results for officials and skilled personnel in various government offices; he serves the monarch, is loyal and obedient and thus does not slack off; he serves the people below, is fair and not partial

古文：是故穷则必有名，达则必有功，仁厚兼覆天下而不闵，明达用天地理万变而不疑，血气和平，志意广大，行义塞于天地之间，仁智之极也。
现代文：所以君子处境穷困时就一定享有名望，显达时就一定能建立功勋；他的仁爱宽厚之德普照天下而不昏暗，他的明智通达能够整治天地万物、处理各种事变而不疑惑；他心平气和，思想开阔，德行道义充满在天地之间，仁德智慧达到了极点。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman is in a poor situation, he will certainly enjoy fame, and when he is promoted, he will certainly be able to build up merits; his benevolence and generosity will shine on the world without dimming, and his wisdom will be able to rectify all things in the world and deal with all kinds of events without doubt; he is peaceful, open-minded, full of virtues and morals between heaven and earth, and benevolent wisdom has reached the extreme.

古文：夫是之谓圣人；审之礼也。
现代文：这种人就叫做圣人，这是因为他弄明白了礼义的缘故啊。
English: This kind of person is called a sage, because he has understood the meaning of propriety.

古文：请问为国？
现代文：请问怎样治理国家？
English: How should the country be governed?

古文：曰闻修身，未尝闻为国也。
现代文：回答说：我只听说君主要修养自己的品德，不曾听说过怎样去治理国家。
English: He replied, "I have only heard that a prince should cultivate his character, but I have never heard how to govern a country."

古文：君者仪也，民者景也，仪正而景正。
现代文：君主，就像测定时刻的标杆；民众，就像这标杆的影子；标杆正直，那么影子也正直。
English: The sovereign is like the yardstick for measuring time; the people are like the shadow of this yardstick; if the yardstick is honest, then the shadow is also honest.

古文：君者盘也，民者水也，盘圆而水圆。
现代文：君主，就像盘子；民众，就像盘里的水；盘子是圆形的，那么盘里的水也成圆形。
English: The sovereign is like a dish; the people are like the water in the dish; if the dish is round, then the water in the dish is round.

古文：君者盂也，盂方而水方。
现代文：君主，就像盂；民众就像盂中的水；孟是方形的，那么盂中的水也成方形。
English: The ruler is like a bowl; the people are like the water in the bowl; if the moon is square, then the water in the bowl is also square.

古文：君射则臣决。
现代文：君主射箭，那么臣子就会套上板指。
English: If the monarch shoots arrows, then the vassal will put on the ring finger.

古文：楚庄王好细腰，故朝有饿人。
现代文：楚灵王喜欢细腰的人，所以朝廷上有饿得面黄肌瘦的臣子。
English: King Chuling likes people with thin waists, so there are hungry, yellow-skinned courtiers in the court.

古文：故曰：闻修身，未尝闻为国也。
现代文：所以说：我只听说君主要修养身心，不曾听说过怎样治理国家。
English: Therefore, he said: I have only heard that the monarch mainly cultivates the mind and body, but I have never heard how to govern the country.

古文：君者，民之原也；原清则流清，原浊则流浊。
现代文：君主，就像人民的源头；源头清澈，那么下边的流水也清澈；源头混浊，那么下边的流水也混浊。
English: The sovereign is like the source of the people. If the source is clear, the water below is also clear. If the source is cloudy, the water below is also cloudy.

古文：故有社稷者而不能爱民，不能利民，而求民之亲爱己，不可得也。
现代文：所以掌握了国家政权的人如果不能够爱护人民、不能够使人民得利，而要求人民亲近爱戴自己，那是不可能办到的。
English: Therefore, if those who have seized state power are unable to love the people, unable to benefit the people, and require the people to love themselves, it is impossible to do.

古文：民不亲不爱，而求为己用，为己死，不可得也。
现代文：人民不亲近、不爱戴，而要求人民为自己所用、为自己牺牲，那也是不可能办到的。
English: If the people are not close to them and do not love them, and if the people are asked to use them for themselves and sacrifice for themselves, that is also impossible to achieve.

古文：民不为己用，不为己死，而求兵之劲，城之固，不可得也。
现代文：人民不为自己所用、不为自己牺牲，而要求兵力强大、城防坚固，那是不可能办到的。
English: It is impossible for the people not to make use of themselves, not to sacrifice themselves, but to demand a strong army and a strong city defense.

古文：兵不劲，城不固，而求敌之不至，不可得也。
现代文：兵力不强大、城防不坚固，而要求敌人不来侵犯，那是不可能办到的。
English: It is impossible to ask the enemy not to invade if the troops are not strong and the city defenses are not solid.

古文：敌至而求无危削，不灭亡，不可得也。
现代文：敌人来了而要求自己的国家不危险削弱、不灭亡，那是不可能办到的。
English: When the enemy comes and demands that one's own country should not be dangerously weakened and destroyed, that is impossible to do.

古文：危削灭亡之情，举积此矣，而求安乐，是狂生者也。
现代文：国家危险削弱以至灭亡的情况全都积聚在他这里了，却还想求得安逸快乐，这是狂妄无知的人。
English: He is the one who has accumulated all the circumstances of the country's dangerous weakening and even destruction, but he still wants to seek comfort and happiness. This is an arrogant and ignorant person.

古文：狂生者，不胥时而落。
现代文：狂妄无知的人，不要等多久就会衰败死亡的。
English: Arrogant and ignorant people do not have to wait long before they decay and die.

古文：故人主欲强固安乐，则莫若反之民；欲附下一民，则莫若反之政；欲修政美俗，则莫若求其人。
现代文：所以君主想要强大稳固安逸快乐，那就没有什么比得上回到人民上来；想要使臣下归附、使人民与自己一条心，那就没有什么比得上回到政事上来；想要治理好政事、使风俗淳美，那就没有什么比得上寻觅善于治国的人。
English: Therefore, if a prince wants to be strong, stable, comfortable and happy, there is nothing like returning to the people; if he wants to win the allegiance of his vassals and unite the people with himself, there is nothing like returning to politics; if he wants to govern well and make customs beautiful, there is nothing like finding a person who is good at governing the country.

古文：彼或蓄积而得之者不世绝。
现代文：那些善于治国的人或许有所积储，因而得到这种人的君主世世代代没断绝过。
English: Those who are good at governing the country may have accumulated, so the monarchs who have received such people have not been cut off for generations.

古文：彼其人者，生乎今之世，而志乎古之道。
现代文：那些善于治国的人，生在今天的时代而向往着古代的政治原则。
English: Those who are good at governing the country are born in today's era and yearn for the ancient political principles.

古文：以天下之王公莫好之也，然而是子独好之；以天下之民莫为之也，然而是子独为之。
现代文：虽然天下的君主没有谁爱好古代的政治原则，但是这种人偏偏爱好它；虽然天下的民众没有谁想要古代的政治原则，但是这种人偏偏遵行它。
English: Although there is no monarch in the world who likes the ancient political principle, this kind of person likes it; although there is no one in the world who wants the ancient political principle, this kind of person follows it.

古文：好之者贫，为之者穷，然而是子犹将为之也，不为少顷辍焉。
现代文：爱好古代政治原则的会贫穷，遵行古代政治原则的会困厄，但是这种人还是要遵行它，并不因此而停止片刻。
English: Those who love the ancient political principle will be poor, and those who follow the ancient political principle will be in trouble, but such people should still follow it and not stop for a moment.

古文：晓然独明于先王之所以得之，所以失之，知国之安危臧否，若别白黑。
现代文：唯独这种人清楚地明了古代帝王取得国家政权的原因、失去国家政权的原因，他了解国家的安危、政治的好坏就像分辨黑白一样清楚。
English: Only such a person clearly understands the reasons for the ancient emperors to gain state power and the reasons for losing state power. He understands the safety of the country and the good and bad of politics as clearly as distinguishing black and white.

古文：是其人也，大用之，则天下为一，诸侯为臣；小用之，则威行邻敌；纵不能用，使无去其疆域，则国终身无故。
现代文：这种善于治国的人，如果君主重用他，那么天下就能被统一，诸侯就会来称臣；如果君主一般地任用他，那么威势也能扩展到邻邦敌国；即使君主不能任用他，但如果能使他不离开自己的国土，那么国家在他活着的时候也就不会有什么事故。
English: This kind of person who is good at governing the country, if the monarch reuses him, then the world can be unified, and the princes will come to praise the minister; if the monarch generally appoints him, then the authority can also be extended to neighboring enemy countries; even if the monarch cannot appoint him, but if he can keep him from leaving his own land, then the country will not have any accidents when he is alive.

古文：故君人者，爱民而安，好士而荣，两者无一焉而亡。
现代文：所以统治人民的君主，爱护人民就会安宁，喜欢士人就会荣耀，这两者一样都没有就会灭亡。
English: Therefore, the monarch who rules over the people, loves the people will have peace, likes the scholars will have glory, and if they do not have both of these, they will perish.

古文：诗曰： 介人维藩，大师为垣。 
现代文：《诗》云： 贤士就是那屏障，大众就是那围墙。 
English: "Poetry" cloud: The sage is the barrier, the public is the fence.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：道者，何也？
现代文：道这个词，是什么意思？
English: What does the word "road" mean?

古文：曰：君之所道也。
现代文：回答说：是君主所遵行的原则。
English: He replied: "It's a principle that the monarch follows.

古文：君者，何也？
现代文：君这个词，是什么意思？
English: What does the word "you" mean?

古文：曰：能群也。
现代文：回答说：是能够把人组织成社会群体的意思。
English: "It means being able to organize people into social groups," he replied.

古文：能群也者，何也？
现代文：所谓能够把人组织成社会群体，是指什么？
English: What does it mean to be able to organize people into social groups?

古文：曰：善生养人者也，善班治人者也，善显设人者也，善藩饰人者也。
现代文：回答说：是指善于养活抚育人，善于治理人，善于任用安置人，善于用不同的服饰来区分人。
English: "Good at feeding and educating people, good at governing people, good at appointing and placing people, and good at distinguishing people with different clothing," he replied.

古文：善生养人者人亲之，善班治人者人安之，善显设人者人乐之，善藩饰人者人荣之。
现代文：善于养活抚育人的，人们就亲近他；善于治理人的，人们就安心顺从他；善于任用安置人的，人们就喜欢他；善于用服饰来区分人的，人们就赞美他。
English: Good at feeding and nurturing people, people are close to him; good at governing people, people obey him with confidence; good at appointing and placing people, people like him; good at distinguishing people with clothing, people praise him.

古文：四统者俱，而天下归之，夫是之谓能群。
现代文：这四个要领具备了，天下的人就会归顺他，这就叫做能把人组织成社会群体的君主。
English: Once these four requirements are met, people all over the world will submit to him. This is called a monarch who can organize people into social groups.

古文：不能生养人者，人不亲也；不能班治人者，人不安也；不能显设人者，人不乐也；不能藩饰人者，人不荣也。
现代文：不能养活抚育人的，人们就不会亲近他；不能治理人的，人们就不会安心顺从他；不能任用安置人的，人们就不会喜欢他；不能用服饰区分人的，人们就不会赞扬他。
English: If you can't feed and nurture a person, people won't be close to him; if you can't govern a person, people won't obey him with confidence; if you can't appoint and place a person, people won't like him; if you can't distinguish a person with clothing, people won't praise him.

古文：四统者亡，而天下去之，夫是之谓匹夫。
现代文：这四个要领都没有做到，天下的人就会背离他，这就叫做孤身一人的独夫。
English: If these four essentials are not achieved, people all over the world will turn away from him. This is called a lonely man.

古文：故曰：道存则国存，道亡则国亡。
现代文：所以说：正确的政治原则存在，国家就存在；正确的政治原则丧失了，国家就灭亡。
English: Therefore, it is said that if the correct political principles exist, the country will exist; if the correct political principles are lost, the country will perish.

古文：省工贾，众农夫，禁盗贼，除奸邪：是所以生养之也。
现代文：减少手工业者和商人，增多农民人数，禁止小偷强盗，剷除奸诈邪恶之徒，这就是用来养活抚育人的办法。
English: Reduce the number of artisans and merchants, increase the number of farmers, prohibit thieves and robbers, and eliminate treacherous and evil people. This is the way to feed and educate people.

古文：天子三公，诸侯一相，大夫擅官，士保职，莫不法度而公：是所以班治之也。
现代文：天子配备太师、太傅、太保三公，诸侯配备一个相，大夫独掌某一官职，士谨守自己的职责，无不按照法令制度而秉公办事，这就是用来治理人的方法。
English: The Son of Heaven is equipped with three princes, Taishi, Taifu, and Taibo, the princes are equipped with one consul, the doctor is in sole charge of a certain official post, and the judges are careful to perform their duties, and all act in accordance with the legal system and uphold justice. This is the method used to govern people.

古文：论德而定次，量能而授官，皆使人载其事，而各得其所宜，上贤使之为三公，次贤使之为诸侯，下贤使之为士大夫：是所以显设之也。
现代文：审察德行来确定等级，衡量才能来授予官职，使他们每人都承担他们的工作而各人都能得到和他的才能相适合的职务，上等的贤才使他们担任三公，次一等的贤才使他们做诸侯，下等的贤才使他们当大夫，这就是任用安置人的办法。
English: The method of appointing and placing people is to examine their virtue to determine their rank, to measure their ability to grant them official positions, so that each of them can undertake their work and each can get a position suitable for his ability, the superior talents can make them serve as three kings, the second-class talents can make them be princes, and the inferior talents can make them be doctors.

古文：修冠弁衣裳，黼黻文章，琱琢刻镂，皆有等差：是所以藩饰之也。
现代文：修饰帽子衣裳、在礼服上绘画各种彩色花纹、在各种器具上雕刻图案等等都有一定的等级差别，这就是用来打扮装饰人的方法。
English: There is a certain grade difference in decorating hats and clothes, painting various colored patterns on dresses, carving patterns on various utensils, etc. This is the method used to dress and decorate people.

古文：故由天子至于庶人也，莫不骋其能，得其志，安乐其事，是所同也；衣暖而食充，居安而游乐，事时制明而用足，是又所同也。
现代文：从天子一直到普通老百姓，没有谁不想施展自己的才能、实现自己的志向、安逸愉快地从事自己的工作，这是各人都相同的；穿得暖和而吃得饱，住得安适而玩得快乐，事情办得及时、制度明白清楚而财物用度充足，这些又是各人共同的愿望。
English: From the Son of Heaven down to the common people, there is no one who does not want to exert their talents, realize their aspirations, and do their work comfortably and happily. This is the same for everyone. Dressed warmly and well-fed, living comfortably and happily, things are done in a timely manner, the system is clear and clear, and the use of property and goods is sufficient. These are the common wishes of everyone.

古文：若夫重色而成文章，重味而成珍备，是所衍也。
现代文：至于那重叠使用多种颜色而绘成衣服上的彩色花纹，汇集多种食物而烹煮成珍馐美味，这是富饶有余的表现了。
English: As for the overlapping use of multiple colors to draw colorful patterns on clothes, bringing together a variety of foods and cooking them into delicious delicacies, this is a manifestation of abundance.

古文：圣王财衍，以明辨异，上以饰贤良而明贵贱，下以饰长幼而明亲疏。
现代文：圣明的帝王控制好这种富饶有余的东西来彰明区别等级差别，在上用来装饰贤能善良的人而显示各人地位的高低，在下用来装饰老少而表明各人的亲疏关系。
English: The emperor of the holy light controlled this rich and abundant thing to highlight the difference between the levels and differences, and used it to decorate the virtuous and kind people on the top to show the status of each person, and used it to decorate the old and young on the bottom to show the affinity of each person.

古文：上在王公之朝，下在百姓之家，天下晓然皆知其所以为异也，将以明分达治而保万世也。
现代文：这样，上面在君主的朝廷，下面在平民百姓的家庭，天下人都明明白白地知道圣明的帝王并不是要用这些东西故意制造等级差别，而是要用它来明确名分、达到治理的目的，从而保持千秋万代永远太平。
English: In this way, from the monarch's court above, to the common people's families below, everyone in the world clearly knows that the holy emperor does not want to use these things to deliberately create class differences, but to use it to clarify the name and achieve the purpose of governance, thus keeping the ages forever peaceful.

古文：故天子诸侯无靡费之用，士大夫无流淫之行，百吏官人无怠慢之事，众庶百姓无奸怪之俗，无盗贼之罪，其能以称义遍矣。
现代文：所以天子诸侯没有浪费的用度，士大夫没有放荡的行为，群臣百官没有怠慢的政事，群众百姓没有奸诈怪僻的习俗、没有偷盗抢劫的罪行，这就能够称为道义普及了。
English: Therefore, the sons of heaven and lords have no wasteful consumption, the scholars and magistrates have no dissolute behavior, the ministers and officials have no negligent political affairs, the masses and the people have no treacherous and eccentric customs, and there is no crime of theft and robbery. This can be called the spread of morality.

古文：故曰：治则衍及百姓，乱则不足及王公。
现代文：所以说： 国家安定，那么富裕会遍及百姓；国家混乱，那么拮据会延及天子王公。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If the country is stable, then prosperity will spread throughout the people; if the country is chaotic, then poverty will spread to the emperor.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：至道大形：隆礼至法则国有常，尚贤使能则民知方，纂论公察则民不疑，赏克罚偷则民不怠，兼听齐明则天下归之；然后明分职，序事业，材技官能，莫不治理，则公道达而私门塞矣，公义明而私事息矣：如是，则德厚者进而佞说者止，贪利者退而廉节者起。
现代文：最好的政治原则的最大效验：推崇礼义，使法制高于一切，那么国家就会有常规；尊重贤德的人，任用有才能的人，那么民众就会知道努力的方向；集体审查，公正考察，那么民众就不会怀疑了；奖赏勤劳的人，惩罚偷懒的人，那么民众就不会懒惰了；同时听取各种意见，完全明察一切事情，那么天下人就会归顺他。然后明确名分职责，根据轻重缓急的次序来安排工作，安排有技术的人做事，任用有才能的人当官，没有什么得不到治理，那么为公家效劳的道路就畅通了而谋私的门径就被堵住了，为公的原则昌明了而谋私的事情就止息了。像这样，那么品德淳厚的人就得到起用而巧言谄媚的人就受到遏止，贪图财利的人被黜退而廉沽奉公的人被提拔。
English: The greatest effect of the best political principle: to promote courtesy and righteousness, to put the rule of law above everything else, then the country will have a routine; to respect the virtuous, to appoint talented people, then the people will know the direction of efforts; collective review, fair investigation, then the people will not doubt; to reward hard-working people, to punish lazy people, then the people will not be lazy; to listen to various opinions at the same time, to fully inspect everything, then the people of the world will submit to him. Then clearly assign duties and responsibilities, to arrange work according to the order of priorities, to arrange skilled people to do things, to appoint talented people as officials, nothing can

古文：书曰： 先时者杀无赦，不逮时者杀无赦。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 在规定的时刻之前行动的，杀而不赦；没有赶上规定时刻而落后的，杀而不赦。 
English: "Shangshu" said: If you act before the specified time, you will not be forgiven; if you do not catch up with the specified time and fall behind, you will not be forgiven.

古文：人习其事而固，人之百事，如耳目鼻口之不可以相借官也。
现代文：人们往往因为熟悉了自己的工作而固守本职不改行。人们的各种工作，就像耳朵、眼睛、鼻子、嘴巴等不可以互相替代官能一样。
English: People often stick to their jobs because they are familiar with their work and do not change careers. People's various jobs, just like ears, eyes, nose, mouth, etc. cannot replace each other's functions.

古文：故职分而民不慢，次定而序不乱，兼听齐明而百姓不留：如是，则臣下百吏至于庶人，莫不修己而后敢安止，诚能而后敢受职；百姓易俗，小人变心，奸怪之属莫不反悫：夫是之谓政教之极。
现代文：所以，职务划分后，民众就不会再谋求他职；等级确定后，秩序就不会混乱；同时听取各种意见，完全明察一切，那么各种工作就不会拖拉。像这样，那么大臣百官直到平民百姓就无不提高了自己的修养以后才敢安居，真正有了才能以后才敢接受官职；百姓改变了习俗，小人转变了思想，奸邪怪僻之流无不转向诚实谨慎，这就叫做政治教化的最高境界。
English: Therefore, after the division of duties, the people will no longer seek other positions; after the level is determined, the order will not be chaotic; at the same time, listen to all kinds of opinions, fully inspect everything, then all kinds of work will not be delayed. In this way, the ministers and officials will not dare to live in peace until the common people have all improved their self-cultivation, and will not dare to accept official positions until they have real talent; the people have changed their customs, the villains have changed their minds, and the wicked and eccentric have all turned to honesty and prudence. This is called the highest realm of political enlightenment.

古文：故天子不视而见，不听而聪，不虑而知，不动而功，块然独坐而天下从之如一体，如四胑之从心：夫是之谓大形。诗曰： 温温恭人，维德之基。 
现代文：所以天子不用察看就能发现问题，不用打听就能明白真相，不用考虑就能知道事理，不用动手就能功成业就，岿然不动地独自坐着而天下人顺从他就像长在一个身体上一样、就像四肢顺从思想的支配一样，这就是最好的政治原则的最大效验。《诗》云： 温柔谦恭的人们，是以道德为根本。 
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven can find problems without observation, can understand the truth without inquiry, can know the truth without consideration, can accomplish things without hands, and sits alone without moving, and the world obeys him as if he were growing on a body, just as the limbs obey the control of thought. This is the greatest test of the best political principle. "Poem" cloud: Gentle and humble people are based on morality.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种人。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：为人主者，莫不欲强而恶弱，欲安而恶危，欲荣而恶辱，是禹桀之所同也。
现代文：做君主的无不希望强盛而厌恶衰弱，希望安定而厌恶危险，希望荣耀而厌恶耻辱，这是禹和桀所相同的欲望。
English: To be a monarch, one must not wish for strength, but detest weakness; to wish for stability, but detest danger; to wish for glory, but detest disgrace. These are the same desires as those of Yu and Xuan.

古文：要此三欲，辟此三恶，果何道而便？
现代文：要实现这三种愿望，避免这三种厌恶的东西，究竟采取什么办法最便利？
English: What is the most convenient way to achieve these three desires and avoid these three aversions?

古文：曰：在慎取相，道莫径是矣。
现代文：回答说：在于慎重地选取相，没有什么办法比这个更简便的了。
English: He replied: "There is nothing easier than carefully selecting the phase.

古文：故知而不仁，不可；仁而不知，不可；既知且仁，是人主之宝也，王霸之佐也。
现代文：对于相的人选，有智慧而没有仁德，不行；有仁德而没有智慧，也不行；既有智慧又有仁德，这便是君主的宝贵财富，是成就王业霸业的助手。
English: For the candidates of the phase, if they have wisdom but no benevolence, it is not possible; if they have benevolence but no wisdom, it is also not possible; if they have both wisdom and benevolence, this is the precious wealth of the monarch, and is an assistant to the achievement of the king's hegemony.

古文：不急得，不知；得而不用，不仁。
现代文：君主不急于求得相才，是不明智；得到了相才而不重用，是不仁慈。
English: It is unwise for a monarch not to be eager to obtain a match; it is unkind not to reuse a match once it has been obtained.

古文：无其人而幸有其功，愚莫大焉。
现代文：没有那德才兼备的相而希望取得那王霸之功，愚蠢没有比这个更大的了。
English: There is no greater folly than to hope for the crown of tyranny without the crown of virtue.

古文：今人主有大患：使贤者为之，则与不肖者规之；使知者虑之，则与愚者论之；使修士行之，则与污邪之人疑之，虽欲成功，得乎哉！
现代文：现在君主有个大毛病：让贤能的人去做事，却和不贤的人去纠正他；让明智的人去考虑问题，却和愚蠢的人去评判他；让品德美好的人去干事，却和肮脏邪恶的人去评估他。像这样，虽然想成功，能办得到吗？
English: Now, the prince has a big problem: let the virtuous man do the work, but let the wicked man correct him; let the wise man think about the problem, but let the stupid man judge him; let the virtuous man be in charge, but let the dirty and evil man evaluate him. So, even if you want to succeed, can you do it?

古文：譬之，是犹立直木而恐其景之枉也，惑莫大焉！
现代文：打个比方，这就好像是竖起一根笔直的木头而怕它的影子弯曲，糊涂没有比这个更厉害的了。俗话说： 美女的姿色，是丑陋者的灾祸。
English: To use an analogy, it would be like erecting a straight piece of wood and being afraid of its shadow bending. There is no greater confusion than this. As the saying goes: The appearance of a beautiful woman is the scourge of the ugly.

古文：语曰：好女之色，恶者之孽也；公正之士，众人之痤也；修道之人，污邪之贼也。
现代文：公正的贤士，是众人的疖子。
English: The just magistrate is the judge of all.

古文：今使污邪之人，论其怨贼，而求其无偏，得乎哉！
现代文：遵循道义的人，是肮脏邪恶者的祸害。 现在让肮脏邪恶的人来评判他们的冤家祸根而要求他们没有偏见，能办得到吗？
English: Moral people are the scourge of the filthy wicked. Now, is it possible for the filthy wicked to judge their enemies without prejudice?

古文：譬之，是犹立枉木而求其景之直也，乱莫大焉。
现代文：打个比方，这就好像竖起一根弯曲的木头而要求它的影子笔直，昏乱没有比这个更厉害的了。
English: To use an analogy, it is like holding up a crooked log and demanding that its shadow be straight. There is no greater confusion.

古文：故古之人为之不然：其取人有道，其用人有法。
现代文：古代的君主做事就不是这样。他挑选人有一定的原则，他任用人有一定的法度。
English: This is not how the ancient monarchs did things. He had certain principles for selecting people, and he had certain rules for appointing people.

古文：取人之道，参之以礼；用人之法，禁之以等。
现代文：挑选人的原则，是用礼制去检验他们；任用人的法度，是用等级去限制他们。
English: The principle of selecting people is to test them with etiquette; the law of appointing people is to restrict them with rank.

古文：行义动静，度之以礼；知虑取舍，稽之以成；日月积久，校之以功，故卑不得以临尊，轻不得以县重，愚不得以谋知，是以万举而不过也。
现代文：对他们的品行举止，用礼制来衡量；对他们的智慧以及赞成或反对的意见，用最后的成果来考查；对他们日积月累的长期工作，用取得的功绩来考核。所以，地位卑下的人不准用来监督地位尊贵的人，权势轻微的人不准用来评判掌有大权的人，愚蠢的人不准用来计议明智的人，因此一切举措都不会失误。
English: Their manners are to be measured by their etiquette; their wisdom and their opinions, for or against, are to be examined by their final results; their long-term work, accumulated over time, is to be judged by the merits they have achieved. Therefore, the low-ranking people are not allowed to supervise the high-ranking people, the low-ranking people are not allowed to judge the high-ranking people, and the stupid people are not allowed to consider the wise people. Therefore, all measures will not fail.

古文：故校之以礼，而观其能安敬也；与之举措迁移，而观其能应变也；与之安燕，而观其能无流慆也；接之以声色、权利、忿怒、患险，而观其能无离守也。
现代文：所以用礼制来考核他，看他是否能安泰恭敬；给他上下调动来回迁移，看他是否能应付各种变化；让他安逸舒适，看他是否能不放荡地享乐；让他接触音乐美色、权势财利、怨恨愤怒、祸患艰险，看他是否能不背离节操。
English: Therefore, he should be tested by etiquette to see if he can be safe and respectful; he should be moved up and down to see if he can cope with all kinds of changes; he should be comfortable and comfortable to see if he can enjoy without debauchery; he should be exposed to the beauty of music, power and wealth, resentment and anger, and disasters and hardships to see if he can not deviate from the discipline.

古文：彼诚有之者，与诚无之者，若白黑然，可诎邪哉！
现代文：这样，那些真正有德才的人与的确没德才的人就像白与黑一样判然分明，还能进行歪曲吗？
English: In this way, those who are truly virtuous and those who are truly not virtuous are as clear as white and black. Can they still be distorted?

古文：故伯乐不可欺以马，而君子不可欺以人，此明王之道也。
现代文：所以伯乐不可能被马的好坏骗了，而君子不可能被人的好坏骗了。
English: Therefore, it is impossible for Bo Le to be deceived by the quality of a horse, and it is impossible for a gentleman to be deceived by the quality of a person.

古文：人主欲得善射－－射远中微者，县贵爵重赏以招致之。
现代文：以上这些就是英明帝王的政治措施。君主想要得到善于射箭的人一一既射得很远而又能命中微小目标的人，就拿出高贵的爵位、丰厚的奖赏来招引他们。
English: These are the political measures of a wise emperor, who, in order to obtain skilled archers, men who can shoot far and hit small targets, offers them noble titles and rich rewards.

古文：内不可以阿子弟，外不可以隐远人，能中是者取之；是岂不必得之之道也哉！
现代文：对内不准偏袒自己的子弟，对外不准埋没关系疏远的人，能够射中这种目标的人就录取他，这难道不就是一定能求得善射者的办法吗？
English: Internally, they are not allowed to favor their own children, and externally, they are not allowed to bury those who are estranged, and those who can hit such a target will be admitted. Isn't this the only way to get good shooters?

古文：虽圣人不能易也。
现代文：即使是圣人也不能改变它。
English: Not even a saint can change it.

古文：欲得善驭－－及速致远者，一日而千里，县贵爵重赏以招致之。
现代文：君主想要得到善于驾驭车马的人一一既追得上快速奔驰的车子又能到达远方的目的地的人，一天能跑千里，就拿出高贵的爵位、丰厚的奖赏来招引他们。
English: The monarch wanted people who were good at driving horses and chariots - people who could both chase fast-moving cars and reach distant destinations, and who could run a thousand miles a day. He offered them noble titles and rich rewards to attract them.

古文：内不可以阿子弟，外不可以隐远人，能致是者取之；是岂不必得之之道也哉！
现代文：对内不准偏袒自己的子弟，对外不准埋没关系疏远的人，能到达这种目的地的人就录取他，这难道不就是一定能求得善于驾车者的办法吗？
English: It is not allowed to favor one's own children internally, and it is not allowed to bury estranged people externally, and those who can reach such a destination will be admitted to him. Isn't this the only way to get good at driving?

古文：虽圣人不能易也。
现代文：即使是圣人也不能改变它。
English: Not even a saint can change it.

古文：欲治国驭民，调壹上下，将内以固城，外以拒难，治则制人，人不能制也；乱则危辱灭亡，可立而待也。
现代文：君主想要治好国家，管好人民，协调统一上上下下；准备对内用他们来巩固城防，对外用他们来抵抗敌人的侵略。因为国家治理好了，就能制服别人，而别人不能制服自己；国家混乱，那么危险、屈辱、灭亡的局面就能立刻等得到。
English: The monarch wants to heal the country, manage the people well, and coordinate and unify the upper and lower ranks; he is ready to use them internally to consolidate the city defense, and to use them externally to resist the enemy's aggression. Because the country is well governed, it can subdue others, but others cannot subdue themselves; if the country is in chaos, then a dangerous, humiliating, and ruinous situation can be expected immediately.

古文：然而求卿相辅佐，则独不若是其公也，案唯便嬖亲比己者之用也，岂不过甚矣哉！
现代文：但是君主在求取卿相辅佐的时候，他的公正却偏偏不像这样，而只任用些宠爱的小臣以及亲近依附自己的人，这难道不是错得很厉害了吗？
English: But is it not a great mistake for a prince, when he requires the assistance of his nobles, not to do justice in this way, but to appoint only his favorite ministers and those who are closely attached to him?

古文：故有社稷者，莫不欲强，俄则弱矣；莫不欲安，俄则危矣；莫不欲存，俄则亡矣。
现代文：所以掌握了国家政权的君主无不希望强盛，但不久就衰弱了；无不希望安定，但不久就危险了；无不希望国家存在，但不久就灭亡了。
English: Therefore, the monarch who has seized state power does not want to be strong, but soon weak; does not want to be stable, but soon dangerous; does not want the country to exist, but soon perish.

古文：古有万国，今有十数焉，是无他故，莫不失之是也。
现代文：古代有上万个国家，今天只有十几个了，这没有其他的缘故，都是因为这用人不公而丢失了政权啊。
English: In ancient times, there were tens of thousands of countries, but today there are only a dozen or so. There is no other reason for this, but all of them lost their power because they used people unfairly.

古文：故明主有私人以金石珠玉，无私人以官职事业，是何也？
现代文：所以英明的君主有把金银宝石珍珠玉器私下给人的，但从来没有把官职政务私下给人的。
English: That is why wise monarchs have given people gold, silver, precious stones, pearls and jade in private, but they have never given people government jobs in private.

古文：曰：本不利于所私也。
现代文：这是为什么呢？回答说：因为私下给人官职根本不利于那些被偏爱的人。
English: Why is that? he replied, because it is not at all to the advantage of those who are favoured to have the office conferred upon them privately.

古文：彼不能而主使之，则是主闇也；臣不能而诬能，则是臣诈也。
现代文：那些人没有才能而君主任用他，那么这就是君主昏庸；臣子无能而冒充有才能，那么这就是臣子欺诈。
English: If those people do not have talent and the prince uses him, then this is the prince's folly; if the vassal is incompetent and pretends to have talent, then this is the vassal's fraud.

古文：主闇于上，臣诈于下，灭亡无日，俱害之道也。
现代文：君主昏庸于上，臣子欺诈于下，灭亡就要不了几天了。
English: The monarch is drowsy at the top, and the vassal is deceitful at the bottom, and their demise is only a few days away.

古文：夫文王非无贵戚也，非无子弟也，非无便嬖也，倜然乃举太公于州人而用之，岂私之也哉！
现代文：所以这是对君主以及所宠爱的臣子都有害处的做法啊。那周文王，并不是没有皇亲国戚，并不是没有儿子兄弟，并不是没有宠臣亲信，但他却离世脱俗地在别国人之中提拔了姜太公而重用他，这哪里是偏袒他呢？
English: Therefore, this is an approach that is harmful to both the monarch and his favorite vassal. That week, King Wen did not lack imperial relatives, sons and brothers, and favorite vassal relatives, but he promoted Jiang Taigong and reused him in an unorthodox way among other people. Where is his favoritism?

古文：以为亲邪？
现代文：以为他们是亲族吧？
English: Thought they were cousins?

古文：则周姬姓也，而彼姜姓也；以为故邪？
现代文：但周族姓姬，而他姓姜。以为他们是老关系吧？
English: But Zhou's surname is Ji, and his surname is Jiang. Do you think they are old relations?

古文：则未尝相识也；以为好丽邪？
现代文：但他们从来不相识。以为周文王爱漂亮吧？
English: But they have never met. Do you think Zhou Wenwang likes beautiful women?

古文：则夫人行年七十有二，然而齿堕矣。
现代文：但那个人经历的年岁已七十二，光光地牙齿都掉了。
English: But the man was seventy-two years old and had lost all his teeth.

古文：然而用之者，夫文王欲立贵道，欲白贵名，以惠天下，而不可以独也。非于是子莫足以举之，故举是子而用之。
现代文：但是还要任用他，那是因为文王想要树立宝贵的政治原则，想要显扬尊贵的名声，以此来造福天下，而这些是不能单靠自己一个人办到的，但除了这姜太公又没有什么人可以选用，所以提拔了这个人而任用了他。
English: However, he was still appointed because King Wen wanted to establish a valuable political principle, wanted to show his noble reputation, and thus benefit the world, which could not be done by himself alone, but there was no one to choose from except this Jiang Taigong, so he promoted this person and appointed him.

古文：于是乎贵道果立，贵名果白，兼制天下，立七十一国姬姓独居五十三人。周之子孙，苟非狂惑者，莫不为天下之显诸侯，如是者能爱人也。
现代文：于是宝贵的政治原则果然树立起来了，尊贵的名声果然明显卓著，全面控制了天下，设置了七十一个诸侯国，其中姬姓诸侯就独占五十三个，周族的子孙，只要不是发疯糊涂的人，无不成为天下显贵的诸侯。像这样，才算是能宠爱人啊。
English: As a result, the precious political principle was established, the noble reputation was clearly outstanding, the world was controlled in an all-round way, and seventy-one vassal states were established, of which fifty-three were exclusively vassal states, and the descendants of the Zhou family, as long as they were not insane, would all become distinguished vassals of the world. Only in this way could they be considered to be able to pamper people.

古文：故举天下之大道，立天下之大功，然后隐其所怜所爱，其下犹足以为天下之显诸侯。
现代文：所以实施了统一天下的重大原则，建立了统一天下的丰功伟绩，然后再偏私自己所疼所爱的人，那么这些被疼爱的人最差的也还能成为天下的显贵诸侯。
English: Therefore, the great principle of unifying the world was implemented, the great achievements of unifying the world were established, and then the people who were loved by themselves were favored, so the worst of these loved people could also become the world's eminent princes.

古文：故曰：唯明主为能爱其所爱，闇主则必危其所爱。
现代文：所以说： 只有英明的君主才能爱护他所宠爱的人，昏庸的君主就必然会危害他所宠爱的人。 
English: Therefore it is said: Only a wise prince can love those whom he loves, and a foolish prince will certainly harm those whom he loves.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：墙之外，目不见也；里之前，耳不闻也；而人主之守司，远者天下，近者境内，不可不略知也。
现代文：墙壁外面，眼睛看不到；里门前面，耳朵听不到；但君主所掌管的，远的遍及天下，近的国境之内，不可不概略地知道一些。
English: Outside the walls, the eye does not see; in front of the inner door, the ear does not hear; but what the monarch controls, far and wide throughout the world, within the near borders, must be known in outline.

古文：天下之变，境内之事，有弛易齵差者矣，而人主无由知之，则是拘胁蔽塞之端也。
现代文：天下的变化，境内的事情，已经有变动纷乱的了，然而君主却无从知道这种情况，那么这就是被挟制蒙蔽的开端了。
English: Changes in the world, things within the country, have been changing and chaotic, but the monarch has no way of knowing this situation, so this is the beginning of being blinded by coercion.

古文：耳目之明，如是其狭也；人主之守司，如是其广也；其中不可以不知也，如是其危也。
现代文：耳朵眼睛的辨察力，这样的狭窄；君主的掌管范围，这样的广大，其中的情况不可以不知道；不知道其中的情况，就会有被挟制蒙蔽的危险。
English: The ear, the eye, the power of discernment, are so narrow; the monarch's sphere of control, so vast, that it is impossible not to know what is going on; not to know what is going on, is to risk being blinded by the pincer.

古文：然则人主将何以知之？
现代文：既然如此，那么君主将靠什么来了解情况呢？
English: That being the case, how will the sovereign know?

古文：曰：便嬖左右者，人主之所以窥远收众之门户牖向也，不可不早具也。
现代文：回答说：君主身边的亲信和侍从，是君主用来观察远处监督群臣百官的耳目，不能不及早配备好。
English: He replied: The close friends and attendants around the monarch are the eyes and ears that the monarch uses to observe and supervise the hundreds of officials in the distance. They must be equipped well in advance.

古文：故人主必将有便嬖左右足信者，然后可。其知惠足使规物，其端诚足使定物，然后可；夫是之谓国具。
现代文：所以君主一定要有了足可信赖的亲信侍从，然后才行；他们的智慧要足可用来谋划事情，他们的正直诚实要足可用来决定事情，然后才行。这种人叫做治国的工具。
English: Therefore, the sovereign must have trustworthy close attendants, and then it is done; their wisdom must be sufficient to plan things, and their honesty and honesty must be sufficient to decide things, and then it is done. Such people are called tools for governing the country.

古文：人主不能不有游观安燕之时，则不得不有疾病物故之变焉。
现代文：君主不能没有游览安逸的时候，也不可能没有疾病死亡的变故。
English: Monarchs cannot travel without comfort, nor can they travel without illness or death.

古文：如是，国者，事物之至也如泉原，一物不应，乱之端也。
现代文：在这种时候，国家的事情还像源泉一样不断地涌来，一件事情不能应付，就是祸乱的发端。
English: At this time, the affairs of the country are still flowing like a fountain, and if one thing cannot be dealt with, it is the beginning of disaster.

古文：故曰：人主不可以独也。
现代文：所以说：君主不能单枪匹马。
English: That is why it is said: the monarch cannot do everything single-handedly.

古文：卿相辅佐，人主之基杖也，不可不早具也。
现代文：卿相辅佐，是君主的依靠，不能不及早配备好。
English: It is the monarch's duty to have a complement of courtiers, and it is important to equip them well in advance.

古文：故人主必将有卿相辅佐足任者，然后可。其德音足以填抚百姓，其知虑足以应待万变，然后可；夫是之谓国具。
现代文：所以君主一定要有了足可胜任的卿相辅佐，然后才行；他们的道德声望要足可用来安抚百姓、他们的智慧心计要足可用来应付千变万化，然后才行。这种人叫做治国的工具。
English: It is necessary, therefore, that the sovereign should have a sufficiency of competent ministers to assist him; a sufficiency of their moral authority to pacify the people, and a sufficiency of their wisdom and prudence to meet the vicissitudes of the times; and these are called the instruments of government.

古文：四邻诸侯之相与，不可以不相接也，然而不必相亲也，故人主必将有足使喻志决疑于远方者，然后可。其辩说足以解烦，其知虑足以决疑，其齐断足以距难，不还秩，不反君，然而应薄扞患，足以持社稷，然后可，夫是之谓国具。
现代文：四邻诸侯国互相交往，不可能不互相接触，但是不一定都互相友好，所以君主一定要有了足可出使到远方去传达君主旨意、解决疑难问题的人，然后才行；他们的辩说要足可用来消除麻烦，他们的智慧心计要足可用来解决疑难，他们的敏捷果断要足可用来排除危难，他们既不推御职责，也不回到君主身边请示，然而应付紧急情况、抵御患难的时候却足可保住国家政权，只有这样才行。
English: The four neighboring principalities interact with each other, it is impossible not to come into contact with each other, but they are not necessarily friendly to each other. Therefore, the monarch must have enough people who can be sent to a distance to convey the monarch's will and solve difficult problems, and then do it; their arguments must be enough to eliminate troubles, their wisdom and strategy must be enough to solve difficulties, their agility and decisiveness must be enough to eliminate dangers, they neither promote duties nor return to the monarch for instructions, but in dealing with emergencies and resist hardships, they must be enough to maintain national power, and only in this way.

古文：故人主无便嬖左右足信者，谓之闇；无卿相辅佐足任使者，谓之独；所使于四邻诸侯者非其人，谓之孤；孤独而晻，谓之危。
现代文：这种人叫做治国的工具。君主没有足可信赖的亲信侍从叫做不明，没有足可胜任的卿相辅佐叫做单独，被派遣到四邻诸侯国的使者不是那称职的人叫做孤立，孤立、单独而不明叫做危险。
English: Such a man is called an instrument of statecraft; a trusted servant of the sovereign who is not trustworthy is called an unknown; an assistant of the sovereign who is not competent is called a lone; an emissary sent to the four neighboring principalities who is not competent is called isolated; isolated, lone and unknown is called dangerous.

古文：国虽若存，古之人曰亡矣。
现代文：国家虽然似乎存在着，但古代的人却说它灭亡了。
English: Although the state seems to exist, the ancients said that it had perished.

古文：诗曰： 济济多士，文王以宁。 
现代文：《诗》云： 人才济济多精英，文王因此得安宁。 
English: "Poetry" cloud: talent is abundant and there are many elites, so King Wen has peace of mind.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：材人：愿悫拘录，计数纤啬，而无敢遗丧，是官人使吏之材也。
现代文：安排任用人才的原则：诚实勤劳，计算查点时精细拘谨而不敢遗漏，这种人是一般官吏与差役的材料。
English: The principle of arranging the appointment of talents: honest and hard-working, calculating and checking the points carefully and not missing, this kind of person is the material of general officials and dispatchers.

古文：修饬端正，尊法敬分，而无倾侧之心，守职修业，不敢损益，可传世也，而不可使侵夺，是士大夫官师之材也。
现代文：加强修养、端正身心，崇尚法制、尊重名分，而没有偏斜不正的思想；谨守职责、遵循法典，不敢有所增减，使它们世代相传，而不让它们受损被夺，这种人是士大夫和群臣百官的材料。
English: Strengthen self-cultivation, correct body and mind, advocate the legal system, respect the title, and do not deviate from the wrong thought; keep the duties, follow the code, do not dare to increase or decrease, so that they are passed down from generation to generation, and do not let them be damaged and taken away, such people are the material of the shidafu and courtiers.

古文：知隆礼义之为尊君也，知好士之为美名也，知爱民之为安国也，知有常法之为一俗也，知尚贤使能之为长功也，知务本禁末之为多材也，知无与下争小利之为便于事也，知明制度，权物称用之为不泥也，是卿相辅佐之材也，未及君道也。
现代文：知道崇尚礼义是为了使君主尊贵，知道喜爱士人是为了使名声美好，知道爱护民众是为了使国家安定，知道有了固定的法制是为了统一习俗，知道尊重贤士、使用能人是为了增长功效，知道致力于根本性的农业生产而限制非根本的工商业是为了增多国家财富，知道不与下属争夺小利是为了有利于办大事，知道彰明制度、权衡事情要符合实用是为了不拘泥于成规，这种人是做卿相辅佐的材料，还没有能懂得君主之道。
English: He knows that upholding etiquette is to make the monarch noble, that liking scholars is to make the reputation good, that caring for the people is to make the country stable, that having a fixed legal system is to unify customs, that respecting sages and using capable people is to increase efficiency, that devoting himself to fundamental agricultural production and restricting non-fundamental industry and commerce is to increase national wealth, that not competing with subordinates for small profits is to be conducive to doing big things, and that clarifying the system and weighing things are to be practical in order not to be bound by rules. Such people are complementary materials for being a lord, and have not yet been able to understand the way

古文：能论官此三材者而无失其次，是谓人主之道也。
现代文：能够选择任用这三种人才而对他们的安排没有失误，这才可以称为君主之道。
English: To be able to choose to appoint these three talents and not make mistakes in their arrangement can only be called the way of the monarch.

古文：若是则身佚而国治，功大而名美，上可以王，下可以霸，是人主之要守也。
现代文：如果能这样，那么君主自身安逸而国家安定，功业伟大而名声美好；上可以称王天下，下可以称霸诸侯，这是君主的主要职守。
English: If this can be done, then the monarch himself will be at ease and the country will be stable, his work will be great and his reputation will be good; he can be called the king of the world, and he can be called the lord of the lords, which is the main duty of the monarch.

古文：人主不能论此三材者，不知道此道，安值将卑埶出劳，并耳目之乐，而亲自贯日而治详，一日而曲辨之，虑与臣下争小察而綦偏能，自古及今，未有如此而不乱者也。
现代文：君主不能择取这三种人才，不知道遵循这个原则，而只是降低自己的地位而竭尽劳力，抛弃声色娱乐，而亲自连续几天把事情治理得周详完备，一天之内就曲折周到地把事办好，总是想和臣下在细小的方面比精明而使尽某一方面的才能，从古到今，还没有像这样做而国家不混乱的。
English: The monarch cannot choose these three talents, does not know how to follow this principle, but only lowers his own status and exhausts his labor, abandons the sound and entertainment, and personally manages things in detail for several days in a row, handles things well in a day, always wants to be smarter than his subjects in small ways and make full use of a certain aspect of talent. From ancient times to the present, there has never been anything like this without the country being in chaos.

古文：是所谓视乎不可见，听乎不可闻，为乎不可成，此之谓也。
现代文：这就是所谓 看不可能看见的，听不可能听见的，做不可能成功的 。
English: This is what is called seeing the impossible to see, hearing the impossible to hear, and doing the impossible to succeed.

