古文：《齐民要术》：凡黍穄田，新开荒为上；大豆底为次；谷底为下。
现代文：《齐民要术》：凡是种植黍穄的土地，以新开垦的荒地为上等，大豆底为较次，谷底为最下等。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": For all land planted with alfalfa, the newly reclaimed wasteland is the highest grade, the soybean bottom is the lower grade, and the valley bottom is the lowest grade.

古文：地必欲熟。
现代文：土地一定要耕耙柔熟。
English: The land must be cultivated and softened.

古文：再转乃佳，若春、夏耕者，下种后再劳为良。
现代文：耕三遍是最好的，如果是春夏季翻耕的，下过种之后，能再磨劳一次才好。
English: It is best to plough three times. If it is ploughed in spring and summer, it is better to grind once more after sowing.

古文：一亩用子四升。
现代文：一亩地用种子四升。
English: One mu of land can grow four liters of seeds.

古文：三月上旬种者为上时，四月上旬为中时，五月上旬为下时。
现代文：三月上旬播种的为上等农时，四月上旬为中等农时，五月上旬为下等农时。
English: In early March, the sowing time is the highest, in early April, the middle, and in early May, the lowest.

古文：夏种黍穄，与植谷同时；非夏者，大率以椹赤为候。
现代文：夏季播种的黍穄，与早谷同时播种。不是夏季播种的，大都以桑椹变红作为播种的时令。
English: The alfalfa sown in summer is sown at the same time as the early grain. If it is not sown in summer, it is usually sown at the time when the mulberries turn red.

古文：谚曰： 椹釐釐，种黍时。 
现代文：谚语说： 桑葚变红繁盛之际，正是种黍之时。 
English: A proverb says: When the mulberry tree turns red and flourishes, it is the time to plant alfalfa.

古文：燥湿候黄场，种讫不曳挞。今时屯子也。
现代文：土壤燥湿的程度，是黄场时最好，播种完毕不用今天的砘子镇压。
English: The degree of dryness and moisture of the soil is best during the yellow field. After sowing, do not use today's forceps to suppress.

古文：常记十月、十一月、十二月 冻树日 种之，万不失一。
现代文：记住十月、十一月、十二月冻树的那一天种黍，是万分之一的失误都不会有的。
English: Remember that day in October, November, or December when the trees were frozen and the alfalfa was planted. There is no such thing as a one in ten thousand mistake.

古文：冻树者，凝霜封著木条也。
现代文：所谓 冻树 ，是指凝结的霜冻，封闭住树木的枝条。
English: The so-called "frozen tree" refers to the frozen frost that encloses the branches of trees.

古文：假令月三日冻树，还以月三日种黍。他皆仿此。
现代文：假如某月初三日冻树，种黍的日子便选择在初三日，余皆仿此。
English: If a tree freezes on the third day of a month, the date of planting the rootstock will be selected on the first three days, and the rest will follow suit.

古文：十月冻树，宜早黍；十一月冻树，宜中黍；十二月冻树，宜晚黍。
现代文：又十月冻树宜种早黍，十一月冻树宜种中黍，十二月冻树宜种晚黍。
English: In addition, frozen trees in October should be planted with early buds, frozen trees in November should be planted with mid buds, and frozen trees in December should be planted with late buds.

古文：若从十月至正月皆冻树者，早晚黍悉宜也。
现代文：若从十月至正月皆冻树，则早黍晚黍皆可种。
English: If all the trees are frozen from October to the first month of the year, then both early maple and late maple can be planted.

古文：刈穄欲早，黍欲晚，穄晚多零落，黍早米不成。
现代文：收刈穄的时间宜早一些，收刈黍的时间要稍微晚一些。穄刈晚了会落粒，黍刈早了米粒不饱满。
English: The time for reaping the stalks should be earlier, and the time for reaping the stalks should be slightly later. If the reaping is late, the grains will fall, and if the reaping is early, the grains will not be full.

古文：谚曰： 穄青喉，黍折头。 
现代文：农谚说： 穄青喉，黍折头。 
English: An agrarian proverb says: "The throat of a cow is blue, the head of a donkey is broken."

古文：皆即湿践。
现代文：皆应趁湿时碾打。
English: Everyone should take advantage of the wet weather to grind.

古文：久积则浥郁，燥践多兜牟。
现代文：堆积的时间久了，容易浥湿、郁热，干燥后碾打，会使子粒多带兜牟。
English: If it has been stored for a long time, it is easy to become damp and hot. If it is dried and then crushed, it will cause the grains to become more crispy.

古文：穄，践讫即蒸而哀於劫反之。
现代文：穄碾打脱粒毕，应即时蒸一遍，趁湿热裹於劫反之。
English: After the clams are crushed and flaked, they should be steamed again immediately, and the heat and humidity should be taken advantage of.

古文：不蒸者，难舂，米碎，至春又土臭。
现代文：不蒸的难舂，碎米多，到春天有土臭。
English: Unsteamed durum wheat, more broken rice, and earthy smell in spring.

古文：蒸则易舂，米坚；香气经夏不歇也。
现代文：蒸过的，容易舂去糠，米粒坚实，经过夏天依然会有香气。
English: Steamed, it is easy to peel off the stalks, the rice grains are solid, and there will still be an aroma after the summer.

古文：黍，宜晒之令燥。
现代文：黍应随时晒令它干燥。
English: It should be kept dry at all times.

古文：湿聚则郁。
现代文：湿的收聚起来便会郁热。
English: It will be hot and humid when it gathers.

古文：凡黍，黏者收薄；穄，味美者亦收薄，难舂。
现代文：黍子当中，黏黍的产量低；穄子当中，味美的穄产量亦低，而且难舂。
English: Among the hazelnuts, the production of sticky hazelnuts is low; among the hazelnuts, the production of tasty hazelnuts is also low, and it is difficult to sprout.

古文：《孝经援神契》云：黑坟宜黍。
现代文：《孝经援神契》说：黑色的坟土，适合用来种植种黍。
English: "The Filial Piety and Benevolence Pact" says: black grave soil is suitable for planting alfalfa.

古文：《氾胜之书》曰：黍者，暑也；种者必待暑。
现代文：《氾胜之书》说：黍就是暑的意思，种黍必须等待到暑天。
English: "The Book of Overwhelming Victory" says: "Dragonfly is the meaning of heat, seed dragonfly must wait until the heat of the day.

古文：黍心未生，雨灌其心，心伤无实。
现代文：黍心没有长成以前，如果被雨水灌了心，黍心受伤，便不会结果实。
English: If the heart has not grown before, if the heart is filled with rainwater and the heart is injured, it will not bear fruit.

古文：黍心初生，畏天露。
现代文：黍心刚生时害怕露水。
English: When I was born, I was afraid of dew.

古文：令两人对持长索，概去其露，日出乃止。
现代文：叫两个人面对面，拉上一条长的绳索，括去上面的露水，等到太阳出来才停止。
English: Ask two people to face each other, pull a long rope, remove the dew from the top, and wait until the sun comes out before stopping.

古文：凡种黍，覆土锄治，皆如禾法。
现代文：种黍的壅土、锄草等作务方法，皆如同种谷法。
English: The cultivation methods of rammed earth, rushing grass, etc. are all similar to the grain planting method.

古文：稗：既堪水旱，种无不熟之时，又特滋茂，宜种之，备凶年。
现代文：稗：耐干旱水涝，只要种下去，没有不收成的。又生长得特别旺盛，应当种上一些，以防备荒年。
English: Water hyacinth: drought-resistant water hyacinth, as long as it is planted, there is no harvest. It also grows particularly vigorously, and some should be planted to prevent a lean year.

古文：稗中有米；熟时，捣取米炊食之，不减粱米。
现代文：稗的种子中有米，成熟后可以将其舂捣取出煮作饭吃，不比粱米差。
English: There is rice in the seeds of glutinous rice, which can be pounded out and cooked after maturation. It is no worse than glutinous rice.

古文：又可酿作酒。
现代文：还可以用来酿酒。
English: It can also be used to make wine.

古文：酒势美俨，尤逾黍秫。
现代文：酒的气味既美且浓，大大超过黍酒和秫酒。
English: The smell of the wine is both beautiful and strong, far exceeding that of ouzo and ouzo.

古文：魏武使典农种之，顷收二千斛，斛得米三四斗。
现代文：魏武帝曾经令典农校尉种稗，一顷地可收两千斛，每斛捣净米三四斗。
English: Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty once ordered an agricultural officer to grow rice, and one hectare of land could harvest two thousand stalks, with three to four buckets of pure rice per stalk.

古文：大俭，可磨食之，若值丰年，可以饭牛、马、猪、羊。
现代文：荒年可磨成面充饥；丰年可用来喂牛、马、猪、羊。
English: In a bad year, it can be ground into flour to satisfy hunger; in a good year, it can be used to feed cattle, horses, pigs, and sheep.

古文：《务本新书》：种 糯不换 ：糯米价值比黄米价高。
现代文：《务本新书》：种 糯不换 ：糯米的价值要比黄米高。
English: "Ryuhon Shinsho" (The New Book of Economics): The value of glutinous rice is higher than that of yellow rice.

古文：今有与糯米相类者，白黄米是也，旧呼 糯不换 ，宜多种之，造酒为佳。
现代文：现在有一种黄米与糯米近似，那就是 白黄米 ，这种米旧时叫 糯不换 ，应该多种一些，用来酿酒，最为佳美。
English: Now there is a kind of yellow rice that is similar to glutinous rice, that is, white yellow rice, this kind of rice used to be called "fusible rice," it should be more diverse, used to make wine, the most beautiful.

