古文：张山人王夐陆生辅神通孙甑生叶静能袁隐居骡鞭客许君杜巫
现代文：张山人王夐陆生辅神通孙甑生叶静能袁隐居骡鞭客许君杜巫
English: Zhangshan people, Wang Xuan, Lu Sheng, Fu Sheng, Sun Xuan Sheng, Ye Jing Neng, Yuan Yingling, Hui Jun Du Wu

古文：张山人
现代文：张山人
English: Zhang Shanren

古文：唐曹王贬衡州。
现代文：唐朝时曹王被贬到衡州。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Cao Wang was relegated to Hengzhou.

古文：时有张山人，技术之士。
现代文：当时有个张山人，是个会法术的人。
English: At that time, there was a man from Zhangshan who knew magic.

古文：王常出猎，因得群鹿十余头，困已合，计必擒获，无何失之，不知其处，召山人问之。
现代文：曹王经常出去打猎，有一次，因为找到了有十几头鹿的鹿群，已经合围了，估计一定擒获，但没过多久鹿不见了，不知它们隐藏的地方，于是就把张山人找来问他。
English: Cao Wang often went out to hunt. Once, because he found a herd of more than a dozen deer, he had already encircled it and estimated that he would definitely capture it. However, the deer soon disappeared, and he did not know where they were hiding. So he asked Zhang Shanren.

古文：山人曰： 此是术者所隐。 
现代文：张山人说： 这是会法术的人把它们隐藏起来了。 
English: Zhang Shanren said, "It's a spell caster who has hidden them."

古文：遂索水，以刀汤禁之。
现代文：于是张山人要来了水，用刀汤禁咒。
English: As a result, the Zhangshan people asked for water and used a sword and broth to cast a spell.

古文：少顷，于水中见一道士，长才及寸，负囊拄杖，敝敝而行。
现代文：过了一会儿，在水中出现了一个道士，身高才到一寸，背着个口袋，拄着个棍子，穿着破烂衣服正在行走。
English: After a while, a Taoist monk appeared in the water, he was only an inch tall, carrying a bag, carrying a stick, and wearing tattered clothes.

古文：众人视之，无不见者。
现代文：众人往水中一看，全都看到了那个道士。
English: Everyone looked into the water and saw the Taoist monk.

古文：山人乃取布针，就水中刺道士左足，遂见跛足而行。
现代文：张山人就取出一根做衣服用的针，伸进水中刺那个道士的左脚，于是人们就看到那个道士一瘸一拐地走。
English: Zhang Shanren then took out a needle used to make clothes and stuck it into the water to prick the Taoist's left foot. The Taoist was then seen limping.

古文：即告曰： 此人易追，止十余里。 
现代文：张山人就告诉曹王说： 这个人容易追赶，只有十多里地。 
English: The Zhangshan people told Cao Wang, "This person is easy to chase, only more than ten miles away.

古文：遂命走向北逐之，十余里，果见道士跛足行行，与水中见者状貌同，遂以王命邀之。道士笑而来。
现代文：曹王就命人向北跑着去追赶道士。追了十几里地，果然看见一个道士正一瘸一拐地走，与水中看见的那个道士的姿态相貌相同，就用曹王的命令邀请他，道士笑着跟来。
English: Cao Wang ordered his men to run north to chase the Taoist. They chased the Taoist for more than ten miles, and indeed saw a Taoist limping along, with the same posture and appearance as the Taoist they had seen in the water. At Cao Wang's command, they invited him, and the Taoist followed with a smile.

古文：山人曰： 不可责怒，但以礼求请之。 
现代文：张山人对曹王说： 不可发怒责备他，只可按礼节向他求请。 
English: Zhang Shan said to Cao Wang: Don't get angry and scold him, just ask him politely.

古文：道士至，王问鹿何在。
现代文：道士来到了，曹王问他鹿在哪里。
English: When the Taoist arrived, Cao Wang asked him where the deer was.

古文：曰： 鹿在矣。
现代文：道士说： 鹿还在。
English: The priest said, "The deer is still there."

古文：向见诸鹿无故即死，故哀之，所以禁隐；亦不敢放，今在山侧耳。 
现代文：刚才看到那些鹿将无故而死，所以可怜它们，用咒语把它们隐藏起来；也没敢放掉，它们在山的侧面呢。 
English: Just now I saw those deer about to die for no reason, so I took pity on them and used a spell to hide them; I didn't dare let them go, they were on the side of the mountain.

古文：王遣左右视之，诸鹿隐于小坡而不动。
现代文：曹王派左右的人去看那些鹿，那些鹿隐藏在一个小坡上不动。
English: Cao Wang sent people around to see the deer, which were hiding on a small slope and not moving.

古文：王问其患足之由，曰： 行数里，忽患之。 
现代文：曹王问那个道士腿脚不好的原因，道士说： 我走了几里地，忽然间脚就出毛病了。 
English: Cao Wang asked the Taoist the reason for his bad legs and feet. The Taoist said, "I walked a few miles, and suddenly my feet started to hurt.

古文：王召山人，与之相视，乃旧识焉，其足寻亦平复。
现代文：曹王把张山人叫来，让他与道士相见，原来他们是旧相识，道士的脚不久也就好了。
English: Cao Wang called Zhang Shanren and asked him to meet with the Taoist. It turned out that they were old acquaintances, and the Taoist's foot would soon be better.

古文：乃是郴州连山观侯生，即从容遣之。
现代文：原来他是郴州连山观的侯生，曹王也就心平气和地让他走了。
English: It turned out that he was the son-in-law of Zhangzhou Lianshan Guan, and Cao Wang calmly let him go.

古文：未期，有一客过郴州，寄宿此观，缚马于观门，粪污颇甚，观主见而责之。
现代文：没过多久，有一个客人经过郴州，到连山观借宿，把马拴在观门前，马粪把门前弄得很脏，观主看见了就责备那个客人。
English: Not long after, a guest passed through Zhangzhou and stayed at Lianshan Mountain View. He tied a horse's bridle in front of the viewing gate, and the horse manure made the front of the gate very dirty. When the viewer saw it, he blamed the guest.

古文：客大怒，诟骂道士而去。
现代文：客人大怒，把道士大骂一通就走了。
English: The guest flew into a rage, swore at the priest and left.

古文：未十日，客忽遇张山人。
现代文：不到十天，那个客人遇到了张山人。
English: Less than ten days later, the guest met Zhang Shanren.

古文：山人谓曰： 君方有大厄，盖有所犯触。 
现代文：张山人对他说： 您正有大难，原因是您触犯了什么人。 
English: Zhang Shan people said to him: You are in great difficulty because you have offended someone.

古文：客即说前日与道士争骂之由。
现代文：那个客人就说出前些日子与道士争执辱骂的情由。
English: The guest gave the reason for the argument and abuse with the priest the other day.

古文：山人曰： 此异人也，为君致祸，却速往辞谢之。增强走去不然，不可脱也。
现代文：张山人说： 这个人是个异人，为您带来祸患，回去赶快向他用好话道歉，不然的话，您的灾难就不能解脱了。
English: Zhang Shan said, "This man is a stranger and has brought disaster to you. Go back and quickly apologize to him with kind words. Otherwise, you will not be able to get rid of your disaster."

古文：此为震厄。
现代文：这是雷灾。
English: This is a lightning disaster.

古文：君今夕所至，当截一柏木，长与身齐，致所卧处，以衣衾盖之；身别处一屋，以枣木作钉子七枝，钉地依北斗状，仍建辰位，身居第二星下伏，当免矣。 
现代文：您今天晚上之处，截取一段柏木，与您的身高一样长，放到您睡觉的地方，用衣被把它盖上；再用枣木制作七根钉子，依照北斗七星的形状钉到地上，设立辰星的位置，您的身子在第二星的下面趴伏着，就能避免了。 
English: This evening, take a piece of cypress, as long as your height, put it in the place where you sleep, cover it with clothes; then make seven nails with date wood, nail them to the ground according to the shape of the Big Dipper, set the position of the hour star, and your body is lying under the second star, you can avoid it.

古文：客大惊，登时即回，求得柏木，来郴州，宿于山馆，如言设法。
现代文：那个客人大吃一惊，立刻往回走，找到了柏木，来到郴州，住在山上的旅馆里。
English: The surprised guest immediately went back, found the cypress tree, and came to Zhangzhou to stay in a hotel on the mountain.

古文：半夜，忽大风雨，雷电震于前屋，须臾电光直入所止。
现代文：半夜的时候，忽然刮起大风下了大雨，雷电在前屋震响，不一会儿，电光直入客人所伏之处。
English: In the middle of the night, a gale suddenly blew up and it rained heavily. Thunder and lightning shook the front room, and in a short time, the lightning went straight into the place where the guests were lying.

古文：客伏于星下，不敢动。
现代文：客人趴在星下，一动也不敢动。
English: Guests lie under the stars, not daring to move.

古文：电入屋数四，如有搜获之状，不得而止。
现代文：雷电再三再四地进入屋内，好像有所搜索擒获的样子，没有击到也就停止了。
English: Lightning repeatedly entered the house, as if it was searching for something, and stopped when it didn't find anything.

古文：比明前视，柏木已为粉矣。
现代文：等天亮到前屋一看，柏木已经变成粉末了。
English: When I got to the front room in the morning, I saw that the cypress had turned to powder.

古文：客益惧，奔谢观主，哀求生命，久而方解。
现代文：客人更加害怕，赶快跑去向观主道歉，哀求饶他活命，哀求了很久才缓解。
English: The guest was even more afraid, and quickly ran to apologize to the onlooker, pleading for his life to be spared. It took a long time for the pleading to subside.

古文：谓客曰： 人不可轻也。
现代文：观主对那个客人说： 人不可以轻薄呀。
English: The onlooker told the guest: 'You can't be frivolous.

古文：毒蛇之辈，尚能害人，岂合无状相仵乎！
现代文：毒蛇之辈，尚且能够害人，难道应该无礼触犯我吗？
English: O generation of vipers, who are able to harm others, should they offend me with impertinence?

古文：今已舍子矣。 
现代文：现在我已经饶了你了。 
English: Now I have spared you.

古文：客首罪而去，遂求张山人，厚报之也。
现代文：那个客人叩头谢罪之后才离去，然后就去找张山人，重重地报答他。
English: The guest bowed and thanked him before leaving, and then went to Zhang Shanren to repay him.

古文：王旻
现代文：王旻
English: Wang Yao

古文：太和先生王旻，得道者也。常游名山五岳，貌如三十余人。
现代文：太和先生王旻是个得道之人，经常到名山五岳去云游，面貌像是三十多岁的人。
English: His wife and teacher, Wang Yao, is a well-versed person. She often goes hiking in the famous Five Mountains. She looks like a person in her thirties.

古文：其父亦道成，有姑亦得道，道高于父。
现代文：他的父亲修道也成功了，有个姑姑也得道成仙了，道行比他父亲还高。
English: His father's asceticism was also successful, and an aunt also became a Taoist, with a higher level of Taoism than his father.

古文：旻常言： 姑年七百岁矣。 
现代文：王旻常说： 我姑姑年龄已经七百岁了。 
English: Wang Qizhong said: My aunt is already seven hundred years old.

古文：有人知其姑者，常在衡岳，或往来天台罗浮，貌如童婴。
现代文：有人知道他的姑姑，经常在南岳衡山，有时往来于天台山和罗浮山，面貌像儿童似的。
English: Someone knew that his aunt, who often went to Hengshan Mountain in Nan Yue, and sometimes went back and forth between Tiantai Mountain and Luo Fu Mountain, looked like a child.

古文：其行比陈夏姬，唯以房中术致不死，所在夫婿甚众。
现代文：她的品行与陈夏姬相近，全凭房中术以致不死，所到之处夫婿很多。
English: Her behavior is similar to that of Chen Xiakhi. She relies entirely on magic to stay alive, and has many husbands and wives wherever she goes.

古文：天宝初，有荐旻者，诏征之，至则于内道场安置。
现代文：天宝初年，有人举荐王旻，唐玄宗下令征召他，到京之后就把他安置到内道场。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, someone recommended Wang Yao, Tang Xuan Zong ordered him to be conscripted, and after he arrived in Beijing, he was placed in the inner dojo.

古文：学通内外，长于佛教。
现代文：他的学问精通内外，对佛教有专长。
English: He is well-versed in both domestic and foreign studies and has expertise in Buddhism.

古文：帝与贵妃杨氏旦夕礼谒，拜于床下，访以道术，旻随事教之。
现代文：唐玄宗与杨贵妃早晚以礼见他，拜倒在他的床下，询问他道术，王旻随着所遇之事指点他们。
English: Tang Xuan Zong and Yang Guifei paid him a courtesy call in the morning and evening, prostrated themselves under his bed, and asked him about Taoism. Wang Yao guided them according to what he encountered.

古文：然大约在于修身俭约，慈心为本，以帝不好释典，旻每以释教引之，广陈报应，以开其志。
现代文：然而大约在于他修身俭朴，以发善心为根本，因为唐玄宗不喜欢佛家经典，王旻常常拿佛教引导他，广泛陈述轮回报应之效，以开启皇帝的心志。
English: However, it was probably because he was self-disciplined and frugal, with a good heart as the foundation, because Tang Xuan Zong did not like Buddhist classics. Wang Xi often used Buddhism to guide him, and extensively stated the effect of reciprocity to open the emperor's mind.

古文：帝亦雅信之。
现代文：皇帝也常常相信他的话。
English: The emperor often took him at his word.

古文：旻虽长于服饵，而常饮酒不止，其饮必小爵，移晷乃尽一杯，而与人言谈，随机应对，亦神者也。
现代文：王旻虽然擅长服食药饵，却常常喝酒喝个不停。他喝酒时必用小杯，日影移动了才把一杯酒喝尽。而与人谈论，能随机应变地回答问题，也够神的了。
English: Although Wang Yao is good at taking medicine, he often drinks non-stop. When he drinks, he always uses a small cup, and only drinks a glass of wine when the sun's shadow moves. And talking to people and being able to answer questions at random is also amazing.

古文：人退皆得所未得。
现代文：人们退去时都得到了从未得到的收获。
English: People are leaving with gains they never had.

古文：其服饰随四时变改。
现代文：他的服饰随着四时的变化而改变。
English: His attire changes with the four o'clock change.

古文：或食鲫鱼，每饭稻米，然不过多，至葱韭荤辛之物、咸酢非养生者，未尝食也。
现代文：有时吃鲫鱼，经常吃稻米饭，但吃得不多，至于大葱、韭菜、荤腥辛辣的东西，咸的酸的不能保养身体的东西，他从来不吃。
English: He sometimes eats squid, and often eats rice, but he doesn't eat much cucumber. As for green onions, leeks, salty and spicy things, salty and sour things that can't maintain the body, he never eats them.

古文：好劝人食芦菔根叶，云： 久食功多力甚，养生之物也。 
现代文：他喜欢劝别人吃芦根、萝卜一类根状菜，他说： 常吃功效多，体力强壮，是养生之物。 
English: He likes to advise others to eat root vegetables such as asparagus root and radish. He said: "Eating often has many effects, it builds up physical strength, and is good for health."

古文：人有传世世见之，而貌皆如故，盖及千岁矣，在京多年。
现代文：有人传说世世代代见到过他，而他的面貌总是没有变化，大概快到一千岁，在京城已有许多年了。
English: Some people say that they have seen him for generations, and his appearance has never changed. He is probably close to a thousand years old and has been in the capital for many years.

古文：天宝六年，南岳道者李遐周，恐其恋京不出，乃宣言曰： 吾将为帝师，授以秘篆。 
现代文：天宝六年，南岳有个道士叫李遐周，恐怕他留恋京城不出来，就扬言说： 我将要当皇帝的老师，把秘笈授给他。 
English: In the sixth year of Tianbao, there was a Taoist monk in Nanyue called Li Yizhou. Afraid that he would not be able to come out of the capital, he threatened: I will be the emperor's teacher and teach him the secret.

古文：帝因令所在求之。
现代文：皇帝就令他所在之处的官员寻找他。
English: The emperor ordered officials to search for him wherever he was.

古文：七年冬而遐周至，与旻相见，请曰： 王生恋世乐，不能出耶？
现代文：天宝七年的冬天，李遐周到了京城，与王旻相见，请求说： 王生留恋世俗之乐不能出京吗？
English: In the winter of the seventh year of Tianbao, Li Zhaozhou arrived in Beijing, met with Wang Yao, and asked: Can Wang Sheng's nostalgia for secular music not go to Beijing?

古文：可以行矣。 
现代文：可以走了。 
English: You can go now.

古文：于是劝旻令出。
现代文：于是劝说王旻让他出京。
English: So he persuaded Wang Yao to let him go to Beijing.

古文：旻乃请于高密牢山合炼，玄宗许之，因改牢山为辅唐山，许瀍居之。
现代文：王旻这才请求到高密的牢山去合药炼丹，玄宗答应了他，就把牢山改名为辅唐山，特许王旻住在那里。
English: It was only then that Wang Yao requested to go to Gaomi's dungeon mountain to mix the medicine and distill the dan. Xuanzong agreed to his request and changed the dungeon mountain's name to Fu Tang Mountain, allowing Wang Yao to live there.

古文：旻尝言：张果天仙也，在人间三千年矣；姜抚地仙也，寿九十三矣。
现代文：王旻曾经说过： 张果是天仙，在人间三千年了，姜抚是地仙，寿数九十三岁了。
English: Wang Yao once said: Zhang Guo is a celestial being who has been on earth for three thousand years, while Jiang Fuzhi is an earthly being who has reached the age of ninety-three.

古文：抚好杀生命，以折己寿，是仙家所忌，此人终不能白日升天矣。 
现代文：姜抚好杀生命，而损折了自己的寿命，这是仙家忌讳的事，因此这个人最终不能白日升天啊。 
English: It is a taboo in the immortals' family for a ginger to kill a living being, thereby shortening his own lifespan. Therefore, this person will not be able to ascend to heaven in broad daylight.

古文：陆生
现代文：陆生
English: Terrestrial students

古文：唐开元中，有吴人陆生，贡明经举在京。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，有个吴郡人陆生，被举荐为贡生参加明经科考试，住在京城。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a native of Wuxi County who was recommended as a tribute student to participate in the examination of Chinese classics and lived in Beijing.

古文：贫无仆从，常早就识，自驾其驴。
现代文：因为家贫没有仆人随从，曾经在早晨去找熟识的人，自己骑着毛驴走。
English: Because the family was poor and had no servants to accompany them, he used to go in the morning to find people he knew and ride a donkey himself.

古文：驴忽惊跃，断缰而走。
现代文：那头驴突然受惊跳起来，挣断缰绳就跑了。
English: The donkey suddenly jumped up in fright, broke the bridle and ran away.

古文：生追之，出启夏门。直至终南山下，见一径，登山，甚熟。
现代文：陆生追赶毛驴，出了启夏门，一直追到终南山下，看到一条小道，登上山，觉得这里很熟悉。
English: The land-dweller chased the donkey, went out of the summer gate, and chased it all the way to the bottom of the mountain. He saw a trail and climbed up the mountain, feeling very familiar here.

古文：此驴直上，生随之上，五六里至一处，甚平旷，有人家，门庭整肃。
现代文：这头驴径直上去，陆生也跟着驴上去。走了五六里，来到了一个地方，很平坦空阔，有个人家，门庭整齐严肃。
English: The donkey went straight up, and the villagers also followed the donkey. After walking for five or six miles, they came to a place that was very flat and open, with a private house and a neat and serious courtyard.

古文：生窥之，见茅斋前有葡萄架，其驴系在树下。
现代文：陆生偷偷往院里看，看到茅草房前面有个葡萄架，他的驴就拴在树下。
English: The land-dweller peeked into the courtyard and saw a rack of grapes in front of the thatched cottage, and his donkey tethered under a tree.

古文：生遂叩门。
现代文：陆生就敲门。
English: Terrestrial students knock on the door.

古文：良久，见一老人开门，延生入，颜色甚异，颇修敬焉。
现代文：过了很久，看到一个老人来开门。老人请陆生进去，脸色很不一般。
English: After a long time, I saw an old man open the door. The old man invited Lu Sheng inside, his face was very unusual.

古文：遂命生曰： 坐。 
现代文：陆生对他很恭敬，老人就命令陆生说： 你坐下。 
English: The land-dweller was very respectful to him, so the old man ordered the land-dweller: "Sit down."

古文：生求驴而归。
现代文：陆生请求把驴给他好回去。
English: The land dweller pleaded for the donkey to be returned to him.

古文：主人曰： 郎君止为驴乎？
现代文：主人说： 郎君仅仅为驴才来的吗？
English: His master said, "Did your master come here just for a donkey?"

古文：得至此，幸会也。
现代文：能到这里，是幸会呀！
English: It's a lucky meeting to be here!

古文：某故取驴以召君，君且少留，当自悟矣。 
现代文：我是故意取驴而把你召来，你姑且稍留，自己就会醒悟了。 
English: I brought you here on purpose to get the donkey. If you stay here for a while, you'll come to your senses.

古文：又延客入宅，见华堂邃宇，林亭池沼，盖仙境也。
现代文：老人又把陆生请入宅院，只见厅堂华丽，屋宇深邃，园林亭台池沼俱全，原来是仙境呀！
English: The old man invited the land-dwellers into the mansion, only to see the magnificent hall, the deep house, the garden pavilion, the pond and the swamp. It turned out to be a fairyland!

古文：留一宿，馈以珍味，饮酒欢乐，声技皆仙者。
现代文：老人留陆生住了一夜，拿珍奇的美味给他吃，一起饮酒欢乐，唱歌表演的都是仙人。
English: The old man stayed on land for one night, bringing him rare delicacies to eat, drinking and having fun together, and all the singers and performers were hermits.

古文：生心自惊骇，未测其故。
现代文：陆生自己心里惊异，猜不出其中缘故。
English: Lu Sheng himself was surprised in his heart and could not guess the reason.

古文：明日将辞，主人曰： 此实洞府。以君有道，吾是以相召。 
现代文：第二天将要告辞时，主人说： 这里实在是洞府，因为你有道，我因此把你召来。 
English: The next day, when it was time to say goodbye, the owner said: "This really is a cave, because you have a way, that's why I called you here."

古文：指左右童隶数人曰： 此人本皆城市屠沽，皆吾所教，道成者能兴云致雨，坐在立亡，浮游世间，人不能识。
现代文：又指着左右几个仆隶说： 这些人本来都是城里集市中卖肉卖酒的人，都是我教出来的。道修成了的人能兴云布雨，坐时还在，站起来就没影了。在人世间漫游，没有人能认出他们。
English: He also pointed to several servants on his right and left and said, "These people were originally people who sold meat and wine in the city bazaar, and I taught them. Those who have completed the Tao can create clouds and rain, and when they sit, they are still, and when they stand up, they are gone. They roam the world, and no one can recognize them.

古文：君当处此，而寿与天地长久，岂若人间浮荣盅菌之辈！
现代文：你应当住在这里，寿命会与天地一样长久，哪里像人间那些只知道追求瞬间的荣华富贵、生命却短暂得如同菌虫之辈呢！
English: You should live here, life expectancy will be as long as heaven and earth, what is like those on earth who only know how to pursue momentary glory and wealth, but life is as short as a fungus!

古文：子愿之乎？ 
现代文：你愿意住在这里吗？ 
English: Would you like to live here?

古文：生拜谢曰： 敬授教。 
现代文：陆生下拜道谢说： 我恭听您的指教。 
English: Lu Sheng bowed and said, "I will listen to your advice."

古文：老人曰： 授学师资之礼，合献一女。
现代文：老人说： 按照尊重老师的礼节，你应该献给我一个女子。
English: The old man said: According to the etiquette of respecting teachers, you should dedicate a girl to me.

古文：度君无因而得，今授君一术求之。 
现代文：估计你没有机会得到，现在我教给你一个法术去找她。 
English: Guess you didn't get a chance, so now I'll teach you a spell to find her.

古文：遂令取一青竹，度如人长，授之曰： 君持此入城，城中朝官，五品以上、三品以下家人，见之，投竹于彼，而取其女来。
现代文：就让人拿来一根青竹子，量一量和人一般长，就把它交给陆生，说： 您拿这根青竹进城去，城中朝廷官员，五品以上、三品以下家里的人，见到姑娘，把竹杖放在那里，便可把那个姑娘领来。
English: Then let a man take a green bamboo, and measure out a length equal to that of a man, and give it to the land-dweller, and say: Take this green bamboo and go into the city, and let the officials of the court in the city, and the people of families of more than five goods and less than three goods, who see a girl, put the bamboo cane there, and then they can bring the girl.

古文：但心存吾约，无虑也；然慎勿入权贵家，力或能相制伏。 
现代文：只要心里记住我约定的话，就不必顾虑。但是千万不要进入权贵人家，他们或许有力量能制服你。 
English: As long as you keep in mind what I've said, you don't have to worry. But don't go into the homes of powerful people. They may have the power to subdue you.

古文：生遂持杖入城。
现代文：陆生就拿着竹杖进了城。
English: Lu Sheng took a bamboo cane and went into the city.

古文：生不知公卿第宅，已入数家，皆无女，而人亦无见其形者。
现代文：陆生也不知道哪是公卿府第宅院，已经进了几家，都没有姑娘，而人们也没有见到他的形影。
English: The average person doesn't even know which is the residence of the court noble. He has already entered several homes, but none of them have girls, and people haven't seen his shadow.

古文：误入户部王侍郎宅，复入阁，正见一女临镜晨妆。生投杖于床，携女而去。
现代文：后来陆生误入户部王侍郎的宅院，又进入闺阁，正看到了一个女郎对着镜子梳妆，陆生就把竹杖扔到床上。拉着女郎就走。
English: Later, Lu Sheng mistakenly entered the mansion of Hubeo Wang Jiro, and then entered the boudoir. Just as he saw a girl putting on her makeup in front of the mirror, Lu Sheng threw his bamboo cane onto the bed. He pulled the girl and left.

古文：比下阶顾，见竹已化作女形，僵卧在床。一家惊呼云： 小娘子卒亡！ 
现代文：待到下台阶时回头一看，只见那竹杖已经变成了女郎的形体，僵卧在床上，全家人惊呼着说： 小娘子突然死了！ 
English: When they reached the bottom of the steps, they looked back and saw that the bamboo cane had turned into the shape of a girl, lying stiffly on the bed. The whole family exclaimed, "The little girl died suddenly!"

古文：生将女去，会侍郎下朝，时权要谒请盈街，宅门重邃，不得出，隐于中门侧。
现代文：陆生领着女郎走，正赶上王侍郎下朝，这时权贵要人拜请的人挤满了大街。王侍郎宅门重叠深邃，陆生没能出去，就隐藏在中门附近。
English: Lu Sheng led the girl away and was just catching up with Wang Ji Rong's departure in the morning, when the people who were invited by the dignitaries crowded the main street. The gate of Wang Ji Rong's house overlapped deeply, and Lu Sheng could not get out, so he hid near the middle gate.

古文：王闻女亡，入宅省视，左右奔走不绝。须臾，公卿以下，皆至门矣。
现代文：王侍郎听说女儿死了，进宅去看，左右的人奔走不绝，不一会儿，公卿以下的官员都到了王家大门了。
English: When Wang Jilang heard that his daughter had died, he went to the house to see for himself. People around him were running incessantly. In a short time, officials from the nobility on down arrived at the royal gate.

古文：时叶天师在朝，奔遣邀屈。生隐于户下半日矣。
现代文：当时叶天师在朝中，王侍郎速派人邀他屈驾光临，陆生隐藏在门楼下已经半天了。
English: At that time, Ye Tianshi was in the middle of the morning, and Wang Shilang quickly sent someone to invite him to visit. Lu Sheng had been hiding under the gate for half a day.

古文：少顷，叶天师至，诊视之曰： 此非鬼魅，乃道术者为之尔。 
现代文：时过不久，叶天师来了，为王侍郎女儿诊视之后，说： 这不是鬼魅干的，乃是有道术的人做的把戏。 
English: After a while, Ye Tianshi came, and after examining Wang Zhi Lang's daughter, he said, "This was not done by a ghost, but a trick done by a person with Taoism."

古文：遂取水喷咒死女，立变为竹。
现代文：于是取水喷咒死去的女郎，女郎立刻变成竹杖。
English: So he fetched water and sprayed the dead girl, who immediately turned into a bamboo cane.

古文：又曰： 此亦不远，搜尚在。 
现代文：叶天师又说： 此人还未走远，搜一下还在。 
English: Ye Tianshi also said, "This person hasn't gone far, he's still there after a search.

古文：遂持刀禁咒，绕宅寻索，果于门侧得生。
现代文：于是拿着刀念起禁咒，绕着宅院搜索，果然在门旁找到了陆生。
English: So he recited the forbidden spell with his sword, searched around the house, and finally found Terrestrial next to the door.

古文：生既被擒，遂被枷锁捶拷，讯其妖状，生遂述其本情。
现代文：陆生被擒以后，就披枷带锁遭到拷打，审问他妖术情况，陆生就原原本本地把事情经过叙述了一遍。
English: After Lu Sheng was arrested, he was tortured with shackles and chains. When he was interrogated about the sorcery, Lu Sheng recounted the whole story.

古文：就南山同取老人，遂令锢项。
现代文：叶天师让他带路一起到南山去捉拿老人，就令人锁住陆生的脖子，领着从人到了山下。
English: Ye Tianshi asked him to lead the way together to Nanshan to catch the old man, so he locked Lu Sheng's neck and led him to the foot of the mountain.

古文：领从人至山下，往时小径，都已无矣。所司益以为幻妄，将领生归。
现代文：这时，往时的小路，都已经没有了。主管此事的官吏更加认为陆生不老实。打算把陆生领回去。
English: At this time, the byways of the past are all gone. The officials in charge of this matter are even more convinced that Lu Sheng is not honest. They plan to take Lu Sheng back.

古文：生向山恸哭曰： 老人岂杀我耶！ 
现代文：陆生对着南山痛哭着说： 老人难道眼看着我被杀吗？ 
English: The land-dweller cried bitterly to Nanshan and said: Did the old man watch me being killed?

古文：举头望见一径，见老人杖策而下，至山足，府吏即欲前逼。
现代文：说完这话，抬头就望见了一条小路，看到老人拄着拐杖走下山来，到了山脚下，官吏就想要往前逼近。
English: After saying this, I looked up and saw a path. I saw an old man walking down the mountain on crutches. At the foot of the mountain, the officials wanted to get closer.

古文：老人以杖画地，遂成一水，阔丈余。
现代文：老人用拐杖往地上一画，就变成了一条河，有一丈多宽。
English: The old man drew a line on the ground with his cane, and it turned into a river, more than a meter wide.

古文：生叩头哀求，老人曰： 吾去日语汝，勿入权贵家。故违我命，患自掇也；然亦不可不救尔。 
现代文：陆生磕着头哀求老人。老人说： 我在你去的时候就告诉你，不要进入权贵人家，你故意违背我的命令，祸患是你自取的；但是也不能不救你。 
English: The old man said, "I will tell you when you go, don't enter the homes of the powerful, you deliberately disobeyed my orders, you brought this on yourself, but I can't help you.

古文：从人惊视之次，老人取水一口噀之，黑雾数里，白昼如暝，人不相见。
现代文：正当跟来的那些人惊异地看着的时候，老人取来水喝了一口喷过去，出现黑雾有几里地一片大，白天像夜晚一样，人们互相看不见。
English: While those who were just arriving looked on in amazement, the old man took a sip of water and sprayed it, creating a black mist several miles wide. The day was like night, and people couldn't see each other.

古文：食顷而散，已失陆生所在，而枷锁委地，山上小径与水，皆不见矣。
现代文：吃顿饭的工夫雾散了，众人已经找不到陆生在哪里，而枷锁扔在地上，山上的小路和面前的河也都不见了。
English: By the time the meal was over, the fog had cleared, and people could no longer find where the land was, and the shackles were thrown to the ground, and the mountain path and the river in front of them were gone.

古文：辅神通
现代文：辅神通
English: Fu Sheng Tong

古文：道士辅神通者，家在蜀州，幼而狐贫，恒为人牧牛以自给。
现代文：道士辅神通，家住蜀州，小时候失去父母，生活很贫穷，经常给人放牛来养活自己。
English: Taoist Fu Sheng Tong, who lives in Shuzhou, lost his parents when he was a child, lives a very poor life, and is often given cattle to feed himself.

古文：神通牧所，恒见一道士往来，因尔致敬相识。
现代文：神通放牛的地方，经常看到一个道士往来，因生出敬意，认识了那个道士。
English: In the place where Shintō used to graze his cattle, he often saw a Taoist priest passing by. Out of respect, he got to know the priest.

古文：数载，道士谓神通曰： 能为弟子否？ 
现代文：几年以后，道士对神通说： 你愿作为我的弟子吗？ 
English: A few years later, the Taoist said to Shintō, "Would you like to become my disciple?"

古文：答曰： 甚快。 
现代文：神通回答说： 很高兴。 
English: The psychic replied, "I'm very happy."

古文：乃引神通入水中，谓通曰： 我入之时，汝宜随之，无惮为也。 
现代文：道士就领着神通进入水中，对神通说： 我进去的时候，你应当跟随我，不要害怕。 
English: The priest then led the genie into the water and said to the genie: "When I go in, you should follow me. Don't be afraid."

古文：既入，使至其居所，屋宇严洁，有药囊丹灶，床下悉大还丹。
现代文：进去之后，道士让神通到他居住的地方，那里屋宇严整洁净，有药囊和炼丹的炉灶，床下全是大还丹。
English: After entering, the Taoist asked Shintong to go to his place of residence, where the house was very neat and clean, with a medicine bag and an alchemist's stove, and a large alchemist's box under the bed.

古文：遂使神通看火，兼教黄白之术。
现代文：道士就让神通看守烧火，并教给他点石成金之术。
English: The Taoist priest asked the supernatural guardian to light a fire and taught him the art of turning stones into gold.

古文：经三年，神通已年二十余，思忆人间，会道士不在，乃盗还丹，别贮一处。
现代文：经过三年，神通已经二十多岁了，就有些想念人间。有一次，恰逢道士不在，神通就偷了大还丹，把它隐藏在另外一个地方。
English: After three years, Shintō was already in his twenties, and he began to miss the human world. Once, when a Taoist priest was away, Shintō stole a large yakitori and hid it in another place.

古文：道士归，问其丹何在，神通便推不见。
现代文：道士回来以后，问他丹药在哪里，神通就推脱说没看见。
English: After the spiritualist came back, he asked him where the elixir was, but the magician said that he did not see it.

古文：道士叹息曰： 吾欲授汝道要，汝今若是，曷足授？
现代文：道士叹息说： 我本打算教给你道家要诀，你今天这样，怎么能教你？
English: The Taoist sighed and said, "I had planned to teach you the essentials of Taoism, but how can I teach you today?

古文：我虽备解诸法，然无益长生也。 
现代文：我虽然全面了解各种法术，然而对长生却没有益处啊。 
English: Although I have a thorough understanding of all kinds of spells, they are not beneficial to longevity.

古文：引至他道逐去。
现代文：说完就把神通领到别的路上把他赶走了。
English: After saying this, he led the supernatural being to another road and drove him away.

古文：便出，神通甚悦，崎岖洞穴，以药自资，七十余日，方至人间。
现代文：神通出了洞府，觉得很高兴，洞穴崎岖难走，神通就凭药来资助体力，走了七十多天，才到人间。
English: Shintō came out of the cave and felt very happy. The cave was rugged and difficult to walk through, so Shintō relied on medicine to support his physical strength. It took him more than seventy days to reach the human world.

古文：其后厌世事，追思道士，闻其往来在蜀州开元观，遂请配度，隶名于是。
现代文：其后，神通厌倦世俗之事，追念道士，听说他往来于蜀州开元观，就请求出家修行，名籍隶属于开元观。
English: After that, Shintong was tired of worldly things and missed the Taoist. When he heard that Shintong went to and from Shuzhou Kaiyuan, he asked to become a monk, and his family name was affiliated with Kaiyuan.

古文：其后闻道士至，往候后，辄云已出。
现代文：从那以后，听说那个道士来了，就去等候，常常去晚，他一去人家就说那道士已经出去了。
English: After that, when he heard that the Taoist priest had come, he went to wait. He often went late, and as soon as he went to someone's house, he said that the Taoist priest had already left.

古文：如是数十度，终不得见。
现代文：这样去了几十次，总也没能见到。
English: I've done this dozens of times, but I've never been able to see them.

古文：神通私以金百斤与房中奴，令道士来可驰报。
现代文：神通用金子一百斤买通道观房中的奴仆，让他们在道士来时赶快报告他。
English: The god used a hundred catties of gold to buy the servants in the viewing room, so that they could quickly report the Taoist when he came.

古文：奴得金后，频来报，更不得见。
现代文：从那个奴仆得到金子后，频繁来报告，但神通再也没能见到那道士。
English: After receiving the gold from the servant, he frequently reported to him, but Shintō never saw the Taoist again.

古文：蜀州刺史奏神通晓黄白，玄宗试之皆验。
现代文：蜀州刺史向皇帝陈奏说神通懂得点金术，唐玄宗让他试验，都很灵。
English: Shuzhou Shishi told the emperor Chen Suo that Shintong understood the point of gold, and Tang Xuan Zong let him try it. Both were very clever.

古文：每先以土锅煮水银，随帝所请，以少药投之，应手而变。
现代文：每次试验他都先用土锅煮上水银，随着唐玄宗要求的数量，把少量的药投进锅里，银子就应手变成了。
English: For each experiment, he first boiled mercury in an earthenware pot. According to the amount required by Tang Xuan Zong, he threw a small amount of medicine into the pot, and the silver turned into silver.

古文：帝求得其术，会禄山之乱，乃止。
现代文：唐玄宗想求得这个点金术，正赶上安禄山叛乱，就中止了。
English: Tang Xuan Zong wanted to obtain this point of gold and was just in time for the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, so he called it off.

古文：孙甑生
现代文：孙甑生
English: Sun Yat-sen

古文：唐天宝中，有孙甑生者，深于道术。玄宗召至京师。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，有个叫孙甑生的人，对道术造诣很深，唐玄宗就把他征召到京城。
English: During the Tang Dynasty's Tenpo era, there was a man named Sun Yat-sen who was very proficient in Taoism. Emperor Xuanzong conscripted him to the capital.

古文：甑生善辏石累卵，折草为人马，乘之东西驰走。
现代文：甑生擅长把石头像车辐条那样聚集起来，把鸡蛋一个接一个迭起来，把草折断变成人马，人可以乘那个马东奔西跑。
English: Twins are good at gathering stones like spokes, stacking eggs one on top of the other, and breaking grass to turn it into a horse, which people can run around on.

古文：太真妃特乐其术，数召入宫试之。
现代文：杨贵妃非常喜欢他的法术，屡次把他召进宫中试验法术。
English: Yang Guifei was very fond of his magic, and repeatedly summoned him to the palace to test his magic.

古文：及禄山之乱，不知所亡。
现代文：到安禄山叛乱的时候，这个孙甑生不知跑哪儿去了。
English: At the time of the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, this Sun Yat-sen did not know where to go.

古文：叶静能
现代文：叶静能
English: Ye Jingneng

古文：唐汝阳王好饮，终日不乱，客有至者，莫不留连旦夕。
现代文：唐朝汝阳王喜好饮酒，喝一整天也不醉，有到王府来的客人，无不从早留到晚。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, King Ruyang liked to drink alcohol. He could drink for a whole day without getting drunk. When guests came to the royal palace, they would stay from morning to night.

古文：时术士叶静能常过焉，王强之酒，不可，曰： 某有一生徒，酒量可为王饮客矣。
现代文：当时有个术士叫叶静能，常常到王府拜访，汝阳王逼他喝酒，他不喝，说： 我有一个门徒，酒量极大，可以做大王的饮客。
English: At that time, there was a sorcerer named Ye Jingneng, who often visited the royal palace. King Ruyang forced him to drink alcohol, but he would not drink. He said, "I have a disciple who drinks an enormous amount of alcohol, and he can be the king's drinking companion."

古文：然虽侏儒，亦有过人者。
现代文：然而虽说他是个侏儒，也有过人之处。
English: However, even though he is a dwarf, he is also an extraordinary person.

古文：明日使谒王，王试与之言也。 
现代文：明天让他来拜见大王，大王试着与他谈谈。 
English: Let him come to see the great king tomorrow, and the great king will try to talk to him.

古文：明旦，有投刺曰： 道士常持蒲。 
现代文：第二天早晨，有人投进名片，上写 道士常持蒲 。
English: The next morning, someone dropped in a business card with the words "Daoist, often holding a pooh" written on it.

古文：王引入，长二尺。
现代文：汝阳王让他进来，一看这道士才二尺高。
English: Ruyang Wang let him in. At first glance, the Taoist was only two feet tall.

古文：既坐，谈胚浑至道，次三皇五帝、历代兴亡、天时人事、经传子史，历历如指诸掌焉。王旻口不能对。
现代文：坐下以后，谈论深切至道，接着又谈三皇五帝、历代兴亡、天时人事、经传子史，清清楚楚，了如指掌，汝阳王张口结舌不能应付。
English: After sitting down, they talked about the profound Tao, and then about the three emperors and five emperors, the rise and fall of successive dynasties, the man of the times, and the history of heredity. It was so clear and well-known that King Ruyang couldn't keep his mouth shut.

古文：既而以王意未洽，更咨话浅近谐戏之事，王则欢然。
现代文：不久，小道士因为王爷的意思谈不拢，就更换话题，谈论一些浅近的幽默戏耍的故事，汝阳王就高兴起来了。
English: Before long, the little Taoist changed the topic because the prince did not want to talk about it, and talked about some shallow humorous play stories. Ruyang Wang was happy.

古文：谓曰： 观师风度，亦常饮酒乎？ 
现代文：汝阳王对小道士说： 我观看法师的风度，也常饮酒吗？ 
English: Ruyang Wang said to the little Taoist: I admire the demeanor of the teacher, do you often drink alcohol?

古文：持蒲曰： 唯所命耳。 
现代文：常持蒲说： 只听你的吩咐了。 
English: Changzhibu said, "I'm just following your orders."

古文：王即令左右行酒。
现代文：汝阳王就令左右的人行酒。
English: Ruyang Wang ordered the people around him to drink.

古文：已数巡，持蒲曰： 此不足为饮也，请移大器中，与王自挹而饮之，量止则已，不亦乐乎！ 
现代文：已酒过数巡，持蒲说： 这样喝不够劲，请把酒移到大器皿中，我和大王自己舀着喝，量尽为止，不是太快乐了吗！ 
English: After several rounds of wine, Mochipu said: "This is not enough to drink, please move the wine to a large vessel, I and the king himself sip and drink until it is measured out, isn't it too happy!

古文：王又如其言，命醇酹数石，置大斛中，以巨觥取而饮之。
现代文：汝阳王便按照他所说的那样，命人搬出几石醇厚的美酒，倒进大斛中，用巨杯取酒来喝。
English: In accordance with what he said, King Ruyang ordered someone to carry out several stones of mellow wine, pour it into a large jar, and drink it in a huge glass.

古文：王饮中醺然，而持蒲固不扰，风韵转高。
现代文：汝阳王喝酒中间就醉醺醺的了，而常持蒲安然不乱，容颜姿态更显得高昂。
English: Ruyang Wang was drunk in the middle of drinking, but he was always calm and composed, and his appearance and posture were even more dignified.

古文：良久，忽谓王曰： 某止此一杯，醉矣。 
现代文：又喝了很久，常持蒲忽然对汝阳王说： 我只喝这一杯了，我醉了。 
English: After drinking for a long time, Changzhi Pu suddenly said to Yu Yang Wang, "I only drank this cup, I'm drunk."

古文：王曰： 观师量殊未可足，请更进之。 
现代文：汝阳王说： 我看你的酒量根本还没有喝足，请你再喝几杯。 
English: Ruyang Wang said, "I think you haven't drunk enough alcohol at all. Please drink a few more glasses."

古文：持蒲曰： 王不知度量有限乎？
现代文：常持蒲说： 大王不知道度量有限吗？
English: Changzhi Pu said: Doesn't the great king know that there is a limit to how much can be measured?

古文：何必见强。 
现代文：何必勉强我。 
English: Don't make me get up.

古文：乃复尽一杯，忽倒，视之，则一大酒榼，受五斗焉。
现代文：于是又喝尽一杯，忽然倒下了，再看那小道士，原来是一个大酒桶，里面装了五斗酒了。
English: So he drank another glass and suddenly collapsed. Look again at the little monk. It turned out to be a large wine barrel, which contained five barrels of wine.

古文：袁隐居
现代文：袁隐居
English: Yuan Yingju

古文：贞元中，有袁隐居者，家于湘楚间，善《阴阳占诀歌》一百二十章。
现代文：贞元年间，有个叫袁隐居的人，家住在湘楚一带，擅长《阴阳占诀歌》一百二十章。
English: During the Zhengyuan era, there was a man named Yuan Yingju, who lived in the Hunan-Chu region, and was good at the 120 chapters of the "Song of Yin and Yang."

古文：时故相国李公吉甫，自尚书郎谪官东南。
现代文：当时故相国李吉甫。从尚书郎贬到东南做官。
English: At that time, he was the son-in-law of the late Li Jifu. He was demoted from Shang Shulang to work as an official in the southeast.

古文：一日，隐居来谒公。公久闻其名，即延与语。
现代文：有一天，袁隐居来拜见李吉甫，李吉甫久闻袁隐居的名声，就请他进来与他谈话。
English: One day, Yuan Yingjie came to visit Li Jifu. Li Jifu had heard of Yuan Yingjie's reputation for a long time and invited him to come in and talk with him.

古文：公命算己之禄仕，隐居曰： 公之禄真将相也！公之寿九十三矣。 
现代文：李吉甫叫他给自己算算官职运数，袁隐居说： 您的官运真是可以做到将相啊，您的寿数是九十三。 
English: Li Jifu asked him to calculate the number of his career as an official, and Yuan Yingju said: Your career as an official can really be done, your life expectancy is ninety-three.

古文：李公曰： 吾之先未尝有及七十者，吾何敢望九十三乎？ 
现代文：李吉甫说： 我的先辈不曾有活到七十岁的，我怎么敢指望活到九十三呢？ 
English: Li Jifu said, "My ancestors did not live to be seventy years old, how can I expect to live to be ninety-three?"

古文：隐居曰： 运算举数，乃九十三耳。 
现代文：袁隐居说： 我按运数占算出的命数，就是九十三岁。 
English: Yuan Yingju said: I am 93 years old according to the number of operations.

古文：其后李公果相宪宗皇帝，节制淮南，再入相而薨，年五十六，时元和九年十月三日也。校其年月日，亦符九十三之数，岂非悬解之妙乎？
现代文：后来李吉甫果然做了唐宪宗的相国，镇守淮南，再次入朝拜相而死，年龄五十六，时间是元和九年十月三日，把它的年、月、日数字连在一起，也符合九十三这个数字，难道不是悬解的巧妙吗？
English: Later, Li Jifu did indeed become the consort of Tang Xianzong, the town guard of Huainan, and died after entering the court again to worship the consort. He was 56 years old. The time was October 3rd, Yuan and 9 years. Connecting its year, month and day numbers together, it also corresponds to the number 93. Isn't it a clever puzzle?

古文：隐居著《阳阴占诀歌》，李公序其首。
现代文：袁隐居著《阴阳占诀歌》，李吉甫曾在卷首为它作序。
English: Yuan Yingling wrote the "Song of Yin and Yang," and Li Jifu wrote the preface for it at the beginning of the book.

古文：骡鞭客
现代文：骡鞭客
English: The Whipping Post

古文：茅山黄尊师，法箓甚高。于茅山侧，修起天尊殿，讲说教化，日有数千人。
现代文：茅山黄尊师道术很高，在茅山旁边修建天尊殿，讲说道义，教化百姓，每天都有几千人听讲。
English: Maoshan Huang Rongshi was very skilled in the art of Taoism. He built the Temple of Heaven next to Maoshan. He preached righteousness and enlightened the people. Every day, several thousand people listened to his lectures.

古文：时讲筵初合，忽有一人排闼叫呼，相貌粗黑，言辞鄙陋，腰插骡鞭，如随商客骡驮者。
现代文：有一天，讲席刚刚开始，忽然有一个人推开门大喊大叫。这个人相貌粗黑，说话粗野，腰上插着赶骡的鞭子，好象是跟随经商的老客赶骡子驮货物的人。
English: One day, when the lecture was just beginning, a man suddenly pushed open the door and shouted. This man was dark-skinned, rough-spoken, and had a whip on his waist, as if he was chasing the mules carrying the goods.

古文：骂曰： 道士，汝正熟睡邪！
现代文：他骂骂咧咧地说： 道士！你睡糊涂了吗？
English: He scolded and said grimly: Taoist! Are you sleepy?

古文：聚众作何物？
现代文：把众人聚集起来想干什么？
English: What do you want to do by bringing people together?

古文：不向深山学修道，还敢谩语邪！ 
现代文：你不去深山修学道术，还敢用谎话骗人吗？ 
English: You don't go deep into the mountains to study Taoism, and you dare to deceive people with lies?

古文：黄尊师不测，下讲筵逊词。众人悉惧，不敢抵牾。
现代文：黄尊师猜不出他是什么人，就从讲席上下来向他说些恭顺的话，众人也都害怕他，不敢顶撞他。
English: Huang Zongshi could not guess who he was, so he came down from the lectern to say some respectful words to him. Everyone was afraid of him and did not dare to confront him.

古文：良久，词色稍和，曰： 岂不是修一殿，却用几钱？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，那个人脸色言辞稍稍缓和，问黄尊师： 你难道不是想修一座殿吗？要用多少钱？ 
English: After a while, the man softened his tone and asked Huang Zunshi, "Don't you want to build a temple? How much will it cost?

古文：曰： 要五千贯。 
现代文：黄尊师说： 需早五千贯。 
English: Huang Zongshi said, "We need to raise five thousand yuan.

古文：曰： 尽搬破甑釜及杂铁来。 
现代文：那个人说： 你们把破锅和杂铁全都搬来！ 
English: The man said: Bring all the broken pots and sundry iron!

古文：约八九百斤，掘地为炉，以火销之。
现代文：黄尊师照办了，大约有八九百斤铁，就在地上掘坑当炉子，用火把铁熔化了。
English: Huang Zongshi did as he was told. He dug a pit on the ground and used it as a furnace, melting the iron with fire.

古文：探怀中取葫芦，泻出两丸药，以物搅之。
现代文：那个人从怀中拿出一个葫芦，倒出两丸药，放到铁水中，用棍子搅拌。
English: The man took a gourd from his bosom, poured out two pills, put them in iron water and stirred them with a stick.

古文：少顷去火，已成上银。
现代文：过一阵儿，把炉火撤去，铁已经变成上好的银子。
English: After a while, remove the fire, iron has become a good silver.

古文：曰： 此合得万余贯，修观计用有余。
现代文：那个人说： 这些银子折合能有一万多贯钱，修个道观估计用不尽。
English: The man said: These pieces of silver can be converted into more than ten thousand yuan, and it is estimated that there is no end to the Taoism.

古文：讲则所获无多，但罢之。 
现代文：讲道所获不多，就免了吧！ 
English: The sermon didn't achieve much, so let's skip it!

古文：黄生与徒弟皆相谢。
现代文：黄生与徒弟都向他道谢。
English: Huang Sheng and his apprentice both thanked him.

古文：问其所欲，笑出门去，不知所之。
现代文：问他想要什么，骡鞭客笑着出门而去，不知到哪里去了。
English: After asking him what he wanted, the flogger laughed and walked out of the house, I don't know where he went.

古文：后十余年，黄生奉诏赴京，忽于长街西，见插骡鞭者，肩一幞子，随骑驴老人行，全无茅山气色。
现代文：十几年后，黄生奉圣旨进京，忽然在长街西面见到了腰插骡鞭的那个人，肩上搭着一条幞头，跟着一个骑驴的老人走，完全没有在茅山时那种神色气概。
English: A dozen years later, Huang Sheng entered Beijing according to his holy will. Suddenly, on the west side of the long street, he saw the man with the whip in his waist, with a hoe on his shoulder, following an old man riding a donkey. He did not have the same appearance as he did in Mao Shan.

古文：黄生欲趋揖。乃摇手，指乘驴者，复连叩头。
现代文：黄生想要过去给他作揖，他就摆摆手，指一指骑驴的老人，又连连叩头。
English: When Huang Sheng wanted to go over and give him a ride, he waved his hand, pointed to an old man riding a donkey, and bowed his head repeatedly.

古文：黄生但遥榼礼而已。
现代文：黄生只能在远处行礼而已。
English: Huang Sheng can only salute in the distance.

古文：老人发白如丝，颜若十四五女子也。
现代文：那个骑驴老人头发白得如蚕丝，容颜却像十四五岁的少女似的。
English: The old man on the donkey had hair as white as silk, but his face looked like that of a girl of fourteen or fifteen.

古文：许君
现代文：许君
English: Xu Jun

古文：仙人许君，君世之时，尝因修观，动用既毕，欲刻石记之。
现代文：仙人许君在君临人世的时候，曾经因为修建台观，竣工以后，想要刻石碑来记载这件事。
English: At the time of his death, Xu Jun, a hermit, wanted to carve a stone monument to record this event after the construction of the platform was completed.

古文：因得古碑，文字勅保缺，不可识，因划去旧文，刊勒记。
现代文：得到一块古碑，那上面的文字磨损缺漏，不能再识别，就把旧文削去，在上面刻上新的碑文。
English: If you get an ancient monument, and the writing on it is worn, missing, and unrecognizable, you cut off the old writing and engrave a new inscription on it.

古文：自是恍惚不安，暇日徐步庭砌，闻空中言曰：许君许君，速诣水官求救，不然，即有不测之衅。 
现代文：自从这样做了以后，许君觉得心里忧惚不安，闲暇的时候在院子里漫步，听到空中有人说： 许君许君！赶快到水官那里去求救，不然的话，就有估计不到的事端。 
English: After doing this, Xu Jun felt melancholy and uneasy in his heart. When he was taking a leisurely stroll in the courtyard, he heard someone say in the air: "Xu Jun, Xu Jun! Hurry up and go to the water official for help, otherwise, there will be an unexpected incident."

古文：许愕然异之，又闻其事，杳不复答。
现代文：许君愕然觉得这事奇异，又问怎么回事，空中静悄悄地没人再回答。
English: Xu Jun was stunned to find this strange, and asked what was going on. No one answered quietly in the air.

古文：乃焚香虔祀，愿示求救之由。
现代文：他就焚香虔诚地祭祀，希望天上的人指点他求救的缘由。
English: He would burn incense and worship devoutly, hoping that the man in the sky would point out to him the reason for seeking help.

古文：良久，复语曰： 所刻碑旧文虽已磨没，而此时为文之人。见诣水官相讼，云： 夺我之名，显己之名。 
现代文：过了很久，天上的人告诉他说： 你刊刻的那块石碑虽然原来的文字已经磨灭了，而先前写碑文的人，现在到水官那里控告你，说： 换去我的名字，显示自己的名字。 
English: After a long time, the man in the sky said to him, "Although the original text of the stone tablet you engraved has been worn away, the person who previously wrote the inscription is now suing you to the water official, saying, "Change my name and show your own name."

古文：由此水官将有执对之命，速宜求之。 
现代文：由于这个原因，水官将有对质的命令，你应当赶快去求他。 
English: For this reason, the officer will have a confronting order, and you should go to him quickly.

古文：许君乃讶得旧文，立石刊纪。
现代文：许君就请人找到旧文，立碑刊刻纪念。
English: Xu Jun asked someone to find the old article and erect a monument to commemorate it.

古文：一夕，梦神人相谢： 再显名氏，无以相报，请作水陆大醮，普告山水万灵，得三官举名，可以证道。 
现代文：一天夜里，梦见神人来感谢他，说： 你使我的姓名再次显扬，我没有什么用来报答，请你作水陆大祭，普告山水万灵，得到三官举荐姓名，可以成仙得道。 
English: One night, he had a dream in which a godman came to thank him, saying, "You have made my name famous again, and I have nothing to repay you with. I ask you to perform the Great Water and Land Festival, to preach to the spirits of the land and sea, and to get the names recommended by the three officials, so that I can become a Taoist."

古文：许君依教修之，遂成道果。
现代文：许君依照神的教导修行，终于成就道果。
English: Xu Jun practiced in accordance with the teachings of God, and finally achieved the results of his path.

古文：自此水陆醮法，传于人间。
现代文：从此修水陆道场来祭祀的方法传到了人间。
English: From then on, the method of performing the ritual at the land and water dojo was passed down to the human world.

古文：杜巫
现代文：杜巫
English: Du Wu

古文：杜巫尚书年少未达时，曾于长白山遇道士，贻丹一丸，即令服讫，不欲食，容色悦怿，轻健无疾。
现代文：尚书杜巫在年轻没做官的时候，曾经在长白山遇到一个道士，给他一丸丹药，立即让他吃下去，从此杜巫不想吃饭，脸色和悦，身体轻灵矫健没有疾病。
English: When Shangshu Duwu was young and not an official, he once met a Taoist in Changbai Mountain. He gave him a pill of herbal medicine and immediately let him eat it. From then on, Duwu did not want to eat, his face was pleasant, and his body was light and agile without disease.

古文：后任商州刺史，自以既登太守，班位已崇，而不食，恐惊于众，于是欲去其丹，遇客无不问其法。
现代文：后来他担任商州刺史，自己认为既然登上太守官位，品级已高，不吃饭，怕大家惊怪，于是想要把丹药除去，遇到客人时，总是询问除丹之法。
English: Later, he served as the sheriff of Shangzhou. He thought that since he had ascended to the position of eunuch, his rank was high, and he did not eat, fearing that everyone would be surprised. Therefore, he wanted to remove the herbal medicine. When he met guests, he always asked about the method of removing the herbal medicine.

古文：岁余，有道士至，甚年少，巫询之。
现代文：一年多以后，有个道士来到了，很年轻，杜巫向他询问除丹之法。
English: More than a year later, a very young Taoist priest arrived, and Du Wu asked him about the method of removing the stains.

古文：道士教以食猪肉，仍吃血。巫从之食吃。
现代文：那个道士教给他让他吃猪肉喝猪血，杜巫听从他的指教吃猪肉喝猪血。
English: The Taoist told him to eat pork and drink pig's blood, and Du Wu followed his advice to eat pork and drink pig's blood.

古文：道士命挲罗。
现代文：道士命他按摩腹部。
English: The Taoist ordered him to massage his abdomen.

古文：须臾，巫吐痰涎至多，有一块物如栗。
现代文：不一会儿，杜巫吐出很多痰涎，当中有一块东西像栗子似的。
English: After a while, Du Wu spit out a lot of spittoons, among which there was a piece of something like a chestnut.

古文：道士取之，甚坚固。道士剖之，若新胶之未干者，丹在中。
现代文：道士把那个东西拿去，那个东西很坚固，道士把它剖开，好象没干的新胶一样，丹药就在其中。
English: The Taoist took that thing away. That thing was very strong, and the Taoist opened it up. It was like a new piece of dry glue, and the elixir was inside.

古文：道士取以洗之，置于手中，其色绿莹。
现代文：道士把丹药拿出来洗净，放在手中，丹药的颜色绿而发光。
English: The Taoist took out the herbal medicine, washed it, and placed it in his hands. The herbal medicine was green in color and glowed.

古文：巫曰： 将来，吾自收之，暮年服也。 
现代文：杜巫说： 拿来吧，我自己收着它，等晚年时服用。 
English: Du Wu said: Bring it, I will keep it for myself and take it when I am old.

古文：道士不与曰： 长白吾师曰： 杜巫悔服吾丹，今愿出之。
现代文：道士不给他，说： 长白山我的师父说： 杜巫后悔吃了我的丹药，现在愿意把它取出来。
English: The Taoist refused to give it to him, saying, "From Changbai Mountain, my master said, "Du Wu regrets having eaten my elixir, and now he is willing to take it out."

古文：汝可教之，收药归也。 
现代文：你可以去指点他，把药收回来。 
English: You can point him in the right direction and get the pills back.

古文：今我奉师之命，欲去其神物，今既去矣，而又拟留至耄年，纵收得，亦不能用也。自宜息心。 
现代文：今天我是奉师父的命令，你想要除去那个神物，现在已经去掉了，却又打算留到晚年，即使你收得此药，也不能用了，自应打消这个念头。 
English: Today I'm following Master's order. You want to get rid of that god, which has now been removed, but you plan to keep it until your old age. Even if you receive this medicine, you can't use it. You should get rid of this idea.

古文：遂吞之而去。
现代文：于是把丹药吞下去就走了。
English: So he swallowed the medicine and left.

古文：巫后五十余年，罄产烧药，竟不成。
现代文：后来五十多年，杜巫卖尽家产烧炼丹药，终究没有炼成。
English: More than fifty years later, Du Wu sold all of his family's property to distill the elixir, but in the end it was not distilled.

