古文：曰：维哉其时，告汝□□道，恐为深灾，欢哉，民乎，朕则生汝，朕则刑汝。
现代文：说道：想一想啊!
English: He said, "Think about it!

古文：朕则经汝，朕则亡汝，朕则寿汝，朕则名汝。
现代文：把这个意思告诉你们：不明道理，恐怕要灾难及身。百姓们，欢呼吧!
English: Let me tell you what this means: if you don't understand, I'm afraid disaster will strike you. People, rejoice!

古文：故曰：文之美而以身剥，自谓智也者，故不足。
现代文：我能使你们生，我能使你们受刑，我能治理你们，我能使你们财富多，我能叫你们死，我能使你们长寿，我能使你们成名。
English: I can make you live, I can make you suffer, I can govern you, I can make you rich, I can make you die, I can make you live long, I can make you famous.

古文：角之美，杀其牛，荣华之言，后有茅。
现代文：所以说：毛皮漂亮，就会从身上剥下来；认为自己聪明的本来就很欠缺。牛角漂亮，就会杀那头牛，花言巧语最后会招致污秽。
English: Therefore, it is said that if the fur is beautiful, it will be peeled off from the body; if you think you are clever, you are already deficient; if the horn is beautiful, you will kill the cow; and if you are a charlatan, you will eventually attract filth.

古文：凡彼济者，必不怠。观彼圣人，必趣时。
现代文：凡是那些渡河的，一定不敢懈怠；看那些圣人，一定是善于抓住时机。
English: All those who cross the river must not slacken; look at those saints, they must be good at seizing the opportunity.

古文：石有玉伤其山，万民之患在□言及。
现代文：岩石中有玉，就会损伤山体；众人的祸患，本来就在胡言乱语。
English: If there is a bead in the rock, it will damage the mountain body; the scourge of all people is originally in gibberish.

古文：时之行也，勤以徙，辟召道者，福为祸。
现代文：时间的运行，在于不停地移动；不懂道理的人，福也会变为祸。
English: The operation of time is to keep moving; those who do not understand the reason, the blessing will turn into a disaster.

古文：时之从也，勤以行，不知道者以福亡。
现代文：时间一时接一时，在于不停地运作；不懂道理的人，会因福而死亡。
English: Time, moment by moment, consists in ceaseless operation; those who do not understand reason will die of happiness.

古文：故曰：费豕必烹，甘泉必竭，直木必伐。
现代文：所以说：肥猪一定遭烹煮，甘泉一定被喝干，端直的的树木一定遭砍伐。
English: Therefore it is said, "Fat pigs must be boiled, sweet water must be drunk, and straight trees must be cut down."

古文：地出物而圣人是时，鸡鸣而人为时，观彼万物，且何为求？
现代文：土地生万物，人人追求它，雄鸣按时叫，人们用它报时。看那些万物，生出来于什么呢?
English: The earth gives birth to all things, and everyone pursues it. The male voice calls out the time, and people use it to tell the time. Look at those things, what are they born from?

古文：故他有时，人以为正；地出利，而民是争。
现代文：因此，天有时辰，人们用来作纪时的标准；土地产生财物，百姓就争夺它。
English: Therefore, there is a time of day that people use as a standard of discipline; the land produces wealth, and the people compete for it.

古文：人出谋，圣人是经，陈五刑，民乃敬。
现代文：人出智谋，圣人就治理它。设置五种刑法，百姓才会顺从。
English: Wisdom comes from people, and sages govern it. Set up five kinds of criminal law, and the people will obey.

古文：教之以礼，民不争，被之以刑，民始听。
现代文：用礼义教化，百姓就不会争夺；加之以刑法，百姓才会听命。
English: If people are educated with etiquette and righteousness, they will not fight for power; if they are punished with criminal law, they will obey orders.

古文：因其能，民乃静。
现代文：利用他们的才干，百姓才会服从。
English: Use their talents, and the people will obey.

古文：故狐有牙而不敢以噬，豲有蚤而不敢以撅。势居小者，不能为大。
现代文：所以，狐狸有牙齿却不敢用来咬人；豪猪有爪子却不敢用来抓人：处于力小不能办大事。
English: Therefore, the fox has teeth but does not dare to use them to bite people; the porcupine has claws but does not dare to use them to catch people: when the strength is small, it cannot do big things.

古文：特欲正中，不贪其害。
现代文：处事中正，不会受害。
English: You're in the middle of something, you're not going to get hurt.

古文：凡势道者，不可以不大。
现代文：凡是有德的人，不能认为不高大。
English: No one who is virtuous can be regarded as less than great.

古文：故木之伐也，而木为斧贼，难之起，自近者。
现代文：所以，树木遭砍伐，用的是木头做的斧柄；杀身之祸是从自己身边引来的。
English: Therefore, trees are cut down, ax handles made of wood are used; the scourge of suicide is brought from one's own side.

古文：二人同术，谁昭谁暝；二虎同穴，谁死谁生。
现代文：两个人技巧相同，谁将显达谁将埋没?两只老虎同穴；哪只死哪只活?
English: Two people with the same skills, who will reveal and who will bury? Two tigers in the same hole; which one will die and which one will live?

古文：故虎之猛也，而陷于获；人之智也，而陷于诈。
现代文：所以，老虎虽然凶猛却陷入机关，人虽然聪明却陷于诈骗。
English: Therefore, although tigers are ferocious, they fall into institutions, and although people are smart, they fall into fraud.

古文：曰之美也，解其柯；柯之美也，离其枝；枝之美也，拔其本。
现代文：叶子漂亮，会分解主干；主干漂亮，会使枝节分离；枝节漂亮，会拔出它的根。
English: If the leaves are beautiful, it will break up the trunk; if the trunk is beautiful, it will separate the branches; if the branches are beautiful, it will pull out its roots.

古文：俨矢将至，不可以无盾。
现代文：飞箭将要射来，不能没有盾牌。
English: The arrows will come, but not without a shield.

古文：故泽有兽而焚其草木，大威将至，不可为巧。
现代文：所以，沼泽里有野兽就会焚烧草木；巨大威胁将要到来，就不能施用小巧。
English: Therefore, if there are wild animals in the swamp, they will burn the grass and trees; if a huge threat is coming, you can't apply a small amount.

古文：焚其草木则无种，大威将至，不可以为勇。
现代文：烧掉草木，草木就没有种子。巨大威胁将要到来，不可能施展勇力。
English: Burn the grass, and the grass has no seed. A great threat is coming, and it is impossible to show courage.

古文：故天之生也，固有度；国家之患，离之以故。地之生也，国有植，国家之患，离之以谋。
现代文：所以，自然的生息本来就有法度，国家的祸患、蒙难都有缘故；土地的生长本来就与种植有关，国家的祸患、蒙难是因为智谋。
English: Therefore, the natural growth of the land has a natural law, and the country's disasters and sufferings are caused by it; the growth of the land is related to the planting, and the country's disasters and sufferings are caused by the wisdom.

古文：故时之还也，无私貌；日之出也，无私照。时之行也，顺至无逆。为天下者，用大略。
现代文：所以，时间的周转对人都一样，太阳出来阳光普照；时间的运行，只向前不向后，治理天下的讲究简要。
English: Therefore, the turnaround of time is the same for everyone, the sun comes out and the sun shines; the running of time is only forward, not backward, and the governance of the world is simple.

古文：火之燀也，固定上。为天下者，用牧。水之流也，固走下。不善，故有桴。
现代文：火的燃烧本来就火势向上，治理天下的用放牧之法；水的流动原本是往下，不好的人所以就用罚。
English: The burning of fire was originally upward, and the world was governed by the method of grazing; the flow of water was originally downward, so bad people were punished.

古文：故福之起也，恶别之；祸之起也，恶别之。
现代文：所以，福的产生从何处辨别?祸的产生又从何处辨别?
English: Therefore, from where can we distinguish the generation of blessings? And from where can we distinguish the generation of disasters?

古文：故平国若之何？
现代文：承平安定的国家该如何办?
English: How should a country that accepts the armistice act?

古文：须国覆国事国孤国屠，皆若之何？
现代文：倾危之国、覆灭之国、多事之国、孤立之国、受宰割之国，都该怎么办呢?
English: What should a country in peril, a ruined country, a troubled country, an isolated country, a slaughtered country do?

古文：故日之中也，仄月之望也。食威之失也，阴食阳。
现代文：所以，太阳到中天就偏斜，月亮圆了就亏缺，威严一失大臣凌驾君之上。
English: Therefore, when the sun reaches the middle of the sky, it will be tilted, when the moon is round, it will be deficient, and if the majesty is lost, the minister will overpower you.

古文：善为国者，使之有行。
现代文：善于治国的，要使百姓有生路。
English: If you are good at governing the country, you must give the people a way of life.

古文：是彼万物，必有常。国君而无道，以微亡。
现代文：看那些万物一定有常规，国君无道会逐渐败亡。
English: Looking at those things, there must be a routine, and the country's ruler will gradually perish without a way.

古文：故天为盖，地为轸。善用道者，终无尽。
现代文：所以，天如车盖，地如车轸，善于用道的始终不穷尽。
English: Therefore, the sky is like a car cover, the ground is like a rickshaw, and it is always inexhaustible to be good at using roads.

古文：地为轸，天为盖，善用道者，终无害。
现代文：地当车轸，天当车盖，善于用道的始终无祸害。
English: The earth is the hub, the sky is the lid, and there is always no harm in being good at using the road.

古文：天地之间，有沧热，善用道者，终不竭。
现代文：天地之间有寒有热，善于用道的始终不枯竭。
English: Between heaven and earth, there is cold and heat, and those who are good at using the Tao are never exhausted.

古文：陈彼五行，必有胜，天之所覆，尽可称。
现代文：推出那五行一定相生相胜，天下的万物都尽称其名。
English: It is said that the five elements are intertwined, and all things in the world are called by their names.

古文：故万物之所生也，性于从；万物之所反也，性于同。
现代文：所以，万物相生其性相从，万物相反其性相同。所以，哪里幽暗，哪里明亮?
English: Therefore, all things are born with the same nature, and all things, on the contrary, have the same nature. Therefore, where is dark and where is bright?

古文：故恶姑幽，恶姑明，恶姑阴阳，恶姑短长，恶姑刚柔。故海之大也，而鱼何为可得？
现代文：哪里阴、哪里阳?哪里短、哪里长?哪里柔、哪里刚?所以，海很大，而鱼为什么还能得到?
English: Where is yin, where is yang? Where is short, where is long? Where is soft, where is hard? So, the sea is big, but why can fish still get in?

古文：山之深也，虎豹貔貅何为可服？
现代文：山林很深，虎豹貔貅为什么还能捕获?
English: The mountain forest is very deep, why can tiger leopards still be caught?

古文：人智之邃也，奚何为可测？
现代文：人的智慧那样深邃，为什么还能揣测?
English: Human wisdom is so profound, why can we still speculate?

古文：跂动哕息，而奚为可牧？
现代文：用蹄子行走、用嘴呼吸的鸟兽为什么还可牧养?
English: Why can birds and beasts that walk on their hooves and breathe through their mouths still be kept as livestock?

古文：玉石之坚也，奚可刻？
现代文：玉石那样坚硬，为什么还可雕刻?
English: If jade is so hard, why can it be carved?

古文：阴阳之号也，孰使之？
现代文：阴阳的名号是谁命名的?
English: Who named yin and yang?

古文：牝牡之合也，孰交之？
现代文：雌雄的结合是谁让他们交配的。
English: The male-female bond is what makes them mate.

古文：君子不察，福不来。
现代文：所有这些，君子不加审察，福分就不会到来。
English: All of this, without the examination of the gentleman, the blessing will not come.

古文：故忌而不得，是生事；故欲而不得，是生诈。
现代文：所以，嫉妒而不能得，就产生事端；贪心而不如愿，就产生欺诈。
English: Wherefore envy that bringeth not forth, bringeth forth strife; and covetousness that bringeth not forth, bringeth forth deceit.

古文：欲伐而不得，深斧柯；欲鸟而不得，生网罗；欲彼天下，是生为。
现代文：想砍树又砍不了，就生出斧子；想那个鸟又得不到，就出现网罗；欲得那个天下，就生出了取天下的办法。
English: If you want to chop down a tree and can't, an axe will be born; if you want to catch a bird and can't, a snare will appear; if you want to capture the whole world, a way to capture the whole world will be born.

古文：维彼幽心，是生包；维彼大心，是生雄；维彼忌心，是生胜。
现代文：只有那幽暗的心才生出阴谋，只有男黔伟大的心才产生雄杰之人，只有那嫉妒之心才生出胜于人的想法。
English: It is only the dark heart that hatches conspiracies; it is only the great heart of man that produces great men; it is only the jealous heart that produces superhuman ideas.

古文：故天为高，地为下，察汝躬，奚为喜怒。
现代文：所以，天在高处，地在下面，审视你自己为何喜、为何怒?
English: So, heaven above, earth below, examine yourself, why are you happy, why are you angry?

古文：天为古，地为久，察彼万物，名于始。
现代文：天算是古远，地算是久长，审视那万物的名称一开始就有。
English: Heaven is long ago, and earth is long ago; for the names of all things are from the beginning.

古文：左名左，右名右。视彼万物，数为纪。
现代文：在左叫左，在右叫右，看那万物都有定数作为纲纪。
English: On the left is called left, on the right is called right, see that all things have a constant as a category.

古文：纪之行也，利而无方，行而无止，以观人情。
现代文：纲纪的变化，既自然又无定准，而且变化不停。用以观察人情，自然而有等次。
English: The changes in the classifications are both natural and unpredictable, and they are constantly changing. In order to observe the human condition, there is naturally a hierarchy.

古文：利有等维，彼大道成而弗改，用彼大道知其极，加诸事，则万物服。
现代文：只有那天地之道，形成而不可改变。利用那天地之道，掌握它的根本要害，用来处事就会万事顺心。
English: Only the Way of Heaven and Earth can be formed and cannot be changed. If you use the Way of Heaven and Earth, grasp its fundamental essence, and use it to do things, everything will go your way.

古文：用其则必有群，加诸物则为之君，举其修则有理，加诸物则为天子。
现代文：利用它的准则，就一定会团聚人群，用来处理人事就能成为人君。举用它的条例，就会有条理；用来处理人事，就能成为天子。
English: Using its principles, you will surely reunite the crowd, use it to deal with personnel and you can become a leader. Use its regulations and you will be organized; use it to deal with personnel and you can become a godson.

