古文：窦融字周公，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：◆窦融传窦融字周公，扶风郡平陵县人。
English: ◆ Dou Rong passed on the Dou Rong character to Zhou Gong, a native of Pingling County, Fufeng County.

古文：七世祖广国，孝文皇后之弟，封章武侯。
现代文：七世祖窦广国，是孝文皇后的弟弟，封为章武侯。
English: Zu Dou Guangguo, the seventh, was the younger brother of Empress Xiaowen, and was given the title of Zhangwu Hou.

古文：融高祖父，宣帝时以吏二千石自常山徙焉。
现代文：他的高祖父，宣帝时以吏二千石从常山迁来。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Emperor Xuan, moved from Changshan with a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：融早孤。
现代文：窦融从小就是个孤儿。
English: Dou Rong has been an orphan since childhood.

古文：王莽居摄中，为强弩将军司马，东击翟义，还攻槐里，以军功封建武男。
现代文：王莽居摄年间，为强弩将军王俊的司马。东击翟义，还攻槐里，以军功被封为建武男。
English: During Wang Mangju's reign, he was the second-in-command of the strong general Wang Jun. He attacked Shiyi in the east and Shili in the west, and was awarded the title of Jianwu Man for his military exploits.

古文：女弟为大司空王邑小妻。
现代文：妹妹为大司空王邑的小妻。
English: His younger sister is the younger wife of Daishi Kuo Wanyi.

古文：家长安中，出入贵戚，连结闾里豪杰，以任侠为名；然事母兄，养弱弟，内修行义。
现代文：家住长安中，出入贵戚，交结乡里豪杰，以任侠行义驰名；然而服侍母亲兄长，抚养弱小的弟弟，在修仁行义。
English: He lived in Chang'an Middle School. He was in and out of high-ranking relatives' homes, and befriended local heroes. He was well-known for his heroic deeds. However, he served his mother's elder brother, raised his weak younger brother, and performed acts of righteousness in the course of cultivating benevolence.

古文：王莽末，青、徐贼起，太师王匡请融为助军，与共东征。
现代文：王莽末年，青州、徐州一带贼起，太师王匡请窦融为助军，一起东征。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, the areas of Qingzhou and Xuzhou were in turmoil. Grandmaster Wang Kuang asked Dou Rong to join the army and go to the East together.

古文：及汉兵起，融复从王邑败于昆阳下，归长安。
现代文：等到汉兵起，窦融又从王邑败于昆阳下，归长安。
English: When the Han soldiers arrived, Dou Rong was defeated in Kunyang and returned to Chang'an.

古文：汉兵长驱入关，王邑荐融，拜为波水将军，赐黄金千斤，引兵至新丰。
现代文：汉兵长驱入关，王邑举荐窦融，拜为波水将军，赏黄金千斤，引兵到新丰。
English: The Chinese commander drove into the pass, Wangyi recommended Dou Rong, worshiped him as General Bosui, rewarded him with a thousand pounds of gold, and led the troops to Xinfeng.

古文：莽败，融以军降更始大司马赵萌，萌以为校尉，甚重之，荐融为巨鹿太守。
现代文：王莽败，窦融率军降更始大司马赵萌，赵萌以窦融为校尉，很器重他，举荐窦融为巨鹿太守。
English: Wang Mangfei was defeated, Dou Rong led the army to fall and was replaced by the first secretary Ma Zhao Meng. Zhao Meng took Dou Rong as a school lieutenant, held him in high esteem, and recommended Dou Rong as the grand marshal of the Giant Deer.

古文：融见更始新立，东方尚扰，不欲出关，而高祖父尝为张掖太守，从祖父为护羌校尉，从弟亦为武威太守，累世在河西，知其土俗，独谓兄弟曰： 天下安危未可知，河西殷富，带河为固，张掖属国精兵万骑，一旦缓急，杜绝河津，足以自守，此遗种处也。 兄弟皆然之。
现代文：窦融见更始新立，东方还在扰乱，不想出关，想到高祖父曾为张掖太守，从祖父为护羌校尉，从弟也为武威太守，几代人都在河西，知道当地的风俗习惯，就独对兄弟们说： 现在天下的安危还不可知，河西富饶，以黄河为带很是牢固，张掖属国有精兵万骑，一旦发生紧急事变，杜绝黄河渡口，就足以自守，这是我们遗留子孙后代的好地方啊。 
English: Dou Rong saw a new beginning, the East was still disturbed, and did not want to leave the customs. He thought of his great-great-grandfather, who had been the Zhangye governor, his grandfather, a military lieutenant, and his younger brother, the Wuwei governor. They had been in Hexi for several generations, and knew the local customs and habits. So he said to his brothers, "Nowadays, the safety of the world is still unknown. Hexi is rich, and the Yellow River is a very strong belt. Zhangye belongs to the state, and there are many elite soldiers. In the event of an emergency, it is enough to defend ourselves and prevent the Yellow River ferry. This is

古文：融于是日往守萌，辞让巨鹿，图出河西。
现代文：兄弟们都同意。窦融就在当天求见赵萌，辞去巨鹿太守，要求到河西去。
English: The brothers all agreed. Dou Rong asked to see Zhao Meng on the very same day, resigned from the position of Koga daimyō, and requested to go to Hexi.

古文：萌为言更始，乃得为张掖属国都尉。
现代文：赵萌向更始说了，于是得为张掖属国都尉。
English: Zhao Meng said to the commander, so he had to be Zhang Ye's provincial captain.

古文：融大喜，即将家属而西。
现代文：窦融大喜，即带着家属到西北去了。
English: Dou Rong was overjoyed and took his family to the northwest.

古文：既到，抚结雄杰，怀辑羌虏，甚得其欢心，河西翕然归之。
现代文：到了张掖，安抚结交当地豪杰，与少数民族和睦相处，很得四方民众的欢心，河西很快地归附于他。
English: When he came to Zhangye, he appeased and befriended the local heroes, lived in harmony with the ethnic minorities, and won the favor of the people in the four directions. Hexi quickly attached to him.

古文：是时，酒泉太守梁统、金城太守厙钧、张掖都尉史苞、酒泉都尉竺曾、敦煌都尉辛肜，并州郡英俊，融皆与为厚善。
现代文：这时酒泉太守梁统、金城太守厍钧、张掖都尉史苞、酒泉都尉竺曾、敦煌都尉辛肜和所有州郡豪杰，窦融都与他们厚交善待。
English: At this time, Dou Rong was on friendly terms with Jiuquan Governor Liang Tong, Jincheng Governor Gao, Zhangye Lieutenant Shi Gao, Jiuquan Lieutenant Gao Zeng, Dunhuang Lieutenant Xin Gao and all the heroes of the state and county.

古文：及更始败，融与梁统等计议曰： 今天下扰乱，未知所归。
现代文：等到更始败，窦融与梁统等计议说： 今天下扰乱，不知结局如何。
English: Waiting for the first defeat, Dou Rong and Liang Tong said in their deliberation: "If we make a fuss today, I don't know what the outcome will be."

古文：河西斗绝在羌湖中，不同心戮力则不能自守；权钧力齐，复无以相率。
现代文：河西险要处在羌胡中间，不同心协力就不能自守。权力都是一般大，又没有一个统率。
English: Hexi Insurance is in the middle of Zhuhu, and it cannot protect itself without concerted efforts. The power is generally large, and there is no leader.

古文：当推一人为大将军，共全五郡，观时变动。 议既定，而各谦让，咸以融世任河西为吏，人所敬向，乃推融行河西五郡大将军事。
现代文：应当推举一人为大将军，共保五郡安全，以观察时局的变化。 商议已定，对大将军人选互相谦让，都以窦融世代任河西官吏，受大家敬重向往，于是就共推窦融代理河西五郡大将军职务。
English: One person should be nominated as the grand general to jointly ensure the safety of the five counties and observe the changes in the current situation. The discussion has been decided that the grand general candidates should be mutually acceptable, and all of them should be Dou Rong, who has been an official in Hexi for generations and is respected and yearned for by everyone. Therefore, Dou Rong was jointly nominated for the post of deputy grand general of the five counties in Hexi.

古文：是时，武威太守马期、张掖太守任仲并孤立无党，乃共移书告示之，二人即解印绶去。
现代文：这时武威太守马期、张掖太守任仲都是孤立无所党属，就共同以书信告示他们，二人即解下印绶辞去。
English: At this time, Wuwei Taizhong and Zhang Xuan Taizhong were both isolated and had no party affiliation, so they jointly notified them by letter, and both of them dismissed the seal and resigned.

古文：于是以梁统为武威太守，史苞为张掖太守，竺曾为酒泉太守，辛肜为敦煌太守，厙钧为金城太守。
现代文：于是以梁统为武威太守，史苞为张掖太守，竺曾为酒泉太守，辛肜为敦煌太守，厍钩为金城太守。
English: As a result, Liang Tong was appointed as the Wuwei governor, Shi Tong as the Zhangye governor, Zeng Zeng as the Jiuquan governor, Xin Tong as the Dunhuang governor, and Zhaohua as the Jincheng governor.

古文：融居属国，领都尉职如故，置从事监察五郡。
现代文：窦融仍居属国，兼任都尉职务不变，配备从事监察五郡。
English: Dou Rong still resides in the country, concurrently holds the position of captain unchanged, and is equipped to monitor five counties.

古文：河西民俗质朴，而融等政亦宽和，上下相亲，晏然富殖。
现代文：河西民俗朴实，而窦融等政治也宽和，上下相亲，安然富裕。
English: The folk customs of Hexi are simple, and the politics such as Dou Rong are also amicable, the upper and lower levels are close to each other, and it is safe and prosperous.

古文：修兵马，习战射，明烽燧之警，羌胡犯塞，融辄自将与诸郡相救，皆如符要，每辄破之。
现代文：修兵马，习战射，明边防烽火警报，遇到羌胡侵犯边塞，窦融经常亲自率军与诸郡一起赴救，都能如期到达，常常打败入侵者。
English: Dou Rong often personally led the army to rescue together with the counties. They could arrive on schedule and often defeated the invaders.

古文：其后匈奴惩乂，稀复侵寇，而保塞羌胡皆震服亲附，安定、北地、上郡流人避凶饥者，归之不绝。
现代文：后来匈奴也吸取了教训，很少再来侵扰。而依附在塞内的羌胡都震慑亲附，安定、北地、上郡等地遭到凶饥的流浪人口，都络绎不绝地来归。
English: Later, the Xiongnu also learned a lesson and rarely came to invade again. And the beards that clung to Seinai were a deterrent to relatives, and the wandering population that had been starved in places such as Ding'an, Hokkien, and Shanggun came back in droves.

古文：融等遥闻光武即位，而心欲东向，以河西隔远，未能自通。
现代文：窦融等远道听说光武即位，就心想东向洛阳，因河西相隔遥远，无法自通。
English: When Dou Rong and others heard of Guangwu's accession to the throne, they wanted to go east to Luoyang, but because of the distance to the west of the river, they could not make their own way.

古文：时，隗嚣先称建武年号，融等从受正朔，嚣皆假其将军印绶。
现代文：这时隗嚣先用建武年号，窦融等人受正朔，隗嚣都假其将军印绶。
English: At this time, Yanran first used the Jianwu year name, Dou Rong and others were subject to Zhengshuo, and Yanran all faked their general seal.

古文：嚣外顺人望，内怀异心，使辩士张玄游说河西曰： 更始事业已成，寻复亡灭，此一姓不再兴之效。
现代文：隗嚣外顺人望，内怀异心，派辩士雍率游说河西说： 更始当了皇帝，很快就败亡了，这是一姓不能再兴的效验。
English: He said, "Once I became emperor, I was soon defeated. This is the proof that a family name cannot be revived."

古文：今即有所主，便相系属，一旦拘制，自令失柄，后有危殆，虽悔无及。
现代文：今如认定一个主子，与其建立依属关系，一旦受其控制，自己手中的权力就丢失了，以后如遇到危险，就后悔莫及了。
English: If you now identify a master and establish a dependent relationship with him, once you are under his control, the power in your hands will be lost, and if you encounter danger in the future, you will regret it.

古文：今豪杰竞逐，雌雄未决，当各据其土宇，与陇、蜀合从，高可为六国，下不失尉佗。 融等于是召豪杰及诸太守计议，其中智者皆曰： 汉承尧运，历数延长。
现代文：现在豪杰竞争，胜负未决，当各据地盘，与陇、蜀合从，高可像六国一样成一国之王，下也可以像赵佗一样做个南海尉哩。 窦融等于是召集豪杰及各太守一同计议，其中胆智之士都说： 汉继承了尧的宗统，历数修久。
English: Now, the heroes and heroines are competing, and the winner or loser is yet to be decided. When the strongholds of the Han and Shu are united, Gao can become the king of a country like the Six Kingdoms, and the next can be a South Sea lieutenant like Zhao Jun. Dou Rong is equivalent to convening the heroes and heroines and the emperors to discuss together. Among them, the courageous and wise people all say: Han has inherited the lineage of Jun, and the calendar has been repaired for a long time.

古文：今皇帝姓号见于图书，自前世博物道术之士谷子云、夏贺良等，建明汉有再受命之符，言之久矣，故刘子骏改易名字，冀应其占。
现代文：现在皇帝姓号见之于河图赤伏符图书，自从前世博物道术之士谷子云、夏贺良等都揭示汉当再受符命，很久以前就说了，所以刘子骏改易名字为刘秀，望能应验符运。
English: Nowadays, the emperor's surname can be found in the book of river maps and red characters. It has been said for a long time since the past generation of naturalists and magicians, such as Gu Ziyun and Xia He Liang, revealed that Han Dang would receive the fate of the characters. Therefore, Liu Zixuan changed his name to Liu Xiu, hoping to fulfill the fate of the characters.

古文：及莽末，道士西门君惠言刘秀当为天子，遂谋立子骏。
现代文：到了王莽末年，道士西门君惠说刘秀当为天子，于是准备立刘子骏。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, the Taoist Simon Junhui said that Liu Xiudang was the son of heaven, so he was ready to set up Liu Zixu.

古文：事觉被杀，出谓百姓观者曰： 刘秀真汝主也。
现代文：事情发觉后刘子骏被杀，观看的老百姓说 ：刘秀真是你们的主子啊。 
English: After the incident was discovered, Liu Zixuan was killed, and the people watching said, "Liu Xiu is really your master."

古文：皆近事暴著，智者所共见也。
现代文：这是不久前暴露出来的，有智之士所共见的。
English: This was revealed not long ago, and is shared by all intelligent people.

古文：除言天命，且以人事论之：今称帝者数人，而洛阳土地最广，甲兵最强，号令最明。
现代文：不讲天命，我们姑且以人事来评论：现在称帝的有数人，而洛阳土地最广，甲兵最强，号令最明。
English: Not to mention the fate of heaven, let's just comment on the personnel: there are several people who claim to be emperors now, but Luoyang has the widest land, the strongest armored soldiers, and the clearest call.

古文：观符命而察人事，它姓殆未能当也。 诸郡太守各有宾客，或同或异。
现代文：观符命而察人事，天子之位他姓大概是不相敌的。 诸郡太守各有宾客，有的赞成，有的反对。
English: His surname is probably no match for the position of the Son of Heaven. Each county magistrate has guests, some in favor, some against.

古文：融小心精详，遂决策东向。
现代文：窦融详加比较分析，于是决策东向。
English: Dou Rong made a detailed comparative analysis, and the decision was made to go eastward.

古文：五年夏，遣长史刘钧奉书献马。
现代文：五年夏，派遣长史刘钧向光武呈上书信献上马匹。
English: In the summer of the fifth year, Liu Ye, the chief historian, was dispatched to present a letter and a horse to Guangwu.

古文：先是，帝闻河西完富，地接陇、蜀，常欲招之以逼嚣、述，亦发使遗融书，遇钧于道，即与俱还。
现代文：先是，帝闻河西完整富裕，地接陇、蜀，常想把窦融招来以逼隗嚣和公孙述，派使者向窦融通书信，恰好在路途上遇到刘钧，就一同返回。
English: First of all, Emperor Wen of Hexi, who was completely wealthy and had close connections with the states of Yan and Shu, often wanted to invite Dou Rong to his court to force him to speak to his grandchildren. He sent an emissary to exchange letters with Dou Rong, and just happened to meet Liu Ye on the way, so they returned together.

古文：帝见钧欢甚，礼飨毕，乃遣令还，赐融玺书曰： 制诏行河西五郡大将军事、属国都尉：劳镇守边五郡，兵马精强，仓库有蓄，民庶殷富，外则折挫羌胡，内则百姓蒙福。
现代文：帝见刘钧十分欢喜，很客气地接待了他，就叫他回去，赐窦融玺书说 ：诏令代理河西五郡大将军事、属国都；慰劳你镇守边塞五郡，兵精马壮，仓库充实，百姓富裕，对外挫败了羌胡的入侵，对内使百姓获得了幸福生活。
English: The emperor was very pleased to see Liu Bei. He received him very politely and told him to go back. He gave Dou Rongjian a letter saying, "I hereby order the acting general of the five counties in the west of the river to be the military and national capital; I would like to commend your town for guarding the five counties of the border fortress, your soldiers are strong, your storehouses are full, and your people are rich. You have defeated the invasion of Yan Hu to the outside world, and you have made the people have a happy life to the inside.

古文：威德流闻，虚心相望，道路隔塞，邑邑何已！
现代文：威德流闻，我为之虚心相望，只是道路隔塞，令我悒悒不已！
English: Widely rumored, I am humbly looking forward to it, but the road is blocked, so I can't wait!

古文：长史所奉书献马悉至，深知厚意。
现代文：长史所奉书献马都收到了，深知你的厚意。
English: I have received all of the horses that were offered to me, and I am well aware of your kindness.

古文：今益州有公孙子阳、天水有隗将军，方蜀、汉相攻，权在将军，举足左右，便有轻重。
现代文：今益州有公孙子阳，天水有隗将军。蜀汉相攻，权力在将军手中，你举足左右，就见轻重。
English: Now Ikshou has Gongsun Ziyang, Tianshui has General Zou. Shu and Han are attacking, the power is in the hands of the general, you lift your foot left and right, you see the importance.

古文：以此言之，欲相厚岂有量哉！
现代文：以此而言，想相厚结难道有限度吗？
English: With this in mind, is there a limit to how much you want to be together?

古文：诸事具长史所见，将军所知。
现代文：诸事都为长史所见，将军所知。
English: All things are seen by the long history and known by the general.

古文：王者迭兴，千载一会。
现代文：王者更迭而兴，是千载一时的机会。
English: It is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：欲遂立桓、文，辅微国，当勉卒功业；欲三分鼎足，连衡合从，亦宜以时定。
现代文：如想立齐桓晋文之业，辅佐微国，当努力完成辅佐功业；如要想三分鼎足，连横合纵，也应当视时而定。
English: If you want to establish the cause of Qi Kan Jinwen and support the micro-nation, you should strive to complete the supporting work; if you want to achieve the three-point peak, even the horizontal and vertical, it should also depend on the time.

古文：天下未并，吾与尔绝域，非相吞之国。
现代文：天下没有统一，我与你不在同一地域，不是互相吞并的国家。
English: There is no unification under heaven, I am not in the same region with you, not a country that annexes each other.

古文：今之议者，必有任嚣效尉佗制七郡之计。
现代文：现在的议者，必有任嚣效法赵佗制七郡之计。
English: The current legislators must have the audacity to follow Zhao Ye's plan of creating seven counties.

古文：王者有分土，无分民，自适己事而已。
现代文：王者有分土的但没有分人民的，自己好好处理自己的事情罢了。
English: The king has a share of the land but not of the people, he just has to deal with his own affairs properly.

古文：今以黄金二百斤赐将军，便宜辄言。 因授融为凉州牧。
现代文：今以黄金二百斤赐将军，有便来信。 于是授窦融为凉州牧。
English: Now he has given the general two hundred kilos of gold, and a letter has come from him. So he has given Dou Rong to the Liangzhou herdsmen.

古文：玺书既至，河西咸惊，以为天子明见万里之外，网罗张立之情。
现代文：玺书既到，河西都感惊震，以为天子明见万里之外，网罗张立之情。
English: As soon as the imperial edict arrived, all of Hexi was shocked, thinking that the Son of Heaven was clearly visible thousands of miles away.

古文：融即复遣钧上书曰： 臣融窃伏自惟，幸得托先后末属，蒙恩为外戚，累世二千石。
现代文：窦融即再派刘钧上书说： 窦融暗自思忖，有幸托先君的末属，蒙恩为外戚，世代二千石。
English: Dou Rong then sent Liu Ye a letter saying, "Dou Rong has been thinking about this for a long time. I was fortunate enough to be entrusted with my father-in-law's subordinates, and I have been blessed to be a maternal relative. I am a member of the 2,000 koku generation.

古文：至臣之身，复备列位，假历将帅，守持一隅。
现代文：到我这一代，又列都尉，滥充将帅，守卫西北一隅。
English: In my generation, there are more captains and generals, guarding the northwest corner.

古文：以委质则易为辞，以纳忠则易为力。
现代文：以委质于郡就易为辞说，以纳忠于君就易于出力。
English: It is easy to say that if you are committed to the county, you will succeed, and if you are loyal to the county, you will be able to contribute.

古文：书不足以深达至诚，故遣刘钧口陈肝胆。
现代文：书信不足以深达至诚，所以派遣刘钧口头向你披肝沥胆。
English: A letter is not enough to be sincere, so send Liu Ye to verbally insult you.

古文：自以底里上露，长无纤介。
现代文：我把表里都显露出来，丝毫没有隐瞒。
English: I was completely open and didn't hide anything.

古文：而玺书盛称蜀、汉二主，三分鼎足之权，任嚣、尉佗之谋，窃自痛伤。
现代文：而玺书却盛称蜀、汉二主，三分鼎足之权，任嚣、尉佗之谋，令我痛伤。
English: On the other hand, I was hurt by the fact that the book praised Shu and Han as the two masters, the power of the three points, the arrogance, and the machinations of the subordinates.

古文：臣融虽无识，犹知利害之际，顺逆之分。
现代文：我窦融虽没有见识，还知道利害的分界、顺逆的区分。
English: Although I have no insight into Dou Rong, I still know the demarcation of interests and the distinction between forward and backward.

古文：岂可背真旧之主，事奸伪之人；废忠贞之节，为倾覆之事；弃已成之基，求无冀之利。
现代文：岂可背真旧之主，侍奉奸伪之人；废弃忠贞之节，而为倾覆郡国之逆行。抛弃已成之基业，而求毫无希望的利益呢。
English: Shall he forsake the Lord that is true, and serve a false god? Shall he forsake the law of faithfulness, and go about to overthrow kingdoms? Shall he forsake his inheritance, and seek after dishonest gain?

古文：此三者虽问狂夫，犹知去就，而臣独何以用心！
现代文：这三者虽然是问一个狂夫，还知道何去何从，而我窦融独何以用心呢！
English: Although these three are asking a madman, they still know where to go and where to come from, but I do not have the heart to do so!

古文：谨遣同产弟友诣阙，口陈区区。 友至高平，会嚣反叛，道绝，驰还，遣司马席封间行通书。
现代文：谨遣同母兄弟窦友到京，口头陈述我区区之意。 窦友到高平刚好隗嚣反叛，道路阻绝，只得返回，另派司马席封从小道到洛阳呈上书信。
English: I have the honor to send my brother Douyou to Beijing to verbally state our intentions. Douyou just happened to rebel in Gaoping, the road was blocked, and he had to return. In addition, he sent Sima Xifeng from Xiaodu to Luoyang to submit a letter.

古文：帝复遣席封赐融、友书，所以慰藉之甚备。
现代文：帝再遣席封赐书窦融、窦友兄弟，对他们安慰鼓励非常周到。
English: Emperor Zhaozhong bestowed the imperial seat to brothers Dou Rong and Dou You, consoling and encouraging them very thoughtfully.

古文：融既深知帝意，乃与隗嚣书责让之曰：伏惟将军国富政修，士兵怀附。
现代文：窦融既已深知帝意，就写信给隗嚣责让他说： 将军国富政修，士兵怀附。
English: Since Dou Rong was well aware of the emperor's intention, he wrote a letter to Xuan Rong and asked him to say: General of the army, the country is prosperous and the soldiers are attached.

古文：亲遇厄会之际，国家不利之时，守节不回，承事本朝，后遣伯春委身于国，无疑之诚，于斯有效。
现代文：亲遇危运之世，国家不利之时，将军守节不邪，奉事本朝，并长子隗恂委身于国，无疑的诚心，于此可见。
English: In a time of crisis, when the country was in a bad situation, the general kept the festival, served the government, and the eldest son was committed to the country. The sincerity of the doubt can be seen here.

古文：融等所以欣服高义，愿从役于将军者，良为此也。
现代文：窦融等所以欣然敬佩将军崇高的忠义，愿意为将军效力，正是为了这个缘故。
English: It is for this reason that Dou Rong and others gladly admire the general's lofty loyalty and are willing to serve the general.

古文：而忿悁之閒，改节易图，君臣分争，上下接兵。
现代文：而后来将军为了一时的私忿，改变节气另图大事，君臣之间兵戎相争。
English: But later, the general changed the solar terms for the sake of a momentary personal grudge, creating a major event, and warring between the monarchs and their retainers.

古文：委成功，造难就，去从义，为横谋，百年累之，一朝毁之，岂不惜乎！
现代文：抛弃已成之功，另造难成之业，背山东之义，通西蜀之谋，百年累计起来的成果，毁之一旦，岂不可惜！
English: Would it not be a pity to abandon what has already been accomplished, to create another difficult undertaking, to turn one's back on the righteousness of Shandong and the wisdom of Shuxi, to destroy the accumulated achievements of a hundred years?

古文：殆执事者贪功建谋，以至于此，融窃痛之！
现代文：是不是你下面的人贪功献计，以至如此呢？融实在为之痛惜！
English: Are the people below you so greedy for merit that they do this? I really deplore it!

古文：当今西周地势局迫，人兵离散，易以辅人，难以自建。
现代文：当今西州地势局促，人兵离散，辅助别人容易，自创局面很难。
English: Today's Xizhou is a cramped area with scattered soldiers and soldiers. It is easy to assist others, but it is difficult to create one's own situation.

古文：计若失路不反，闻道犹迷，不南合子阳，则北入文伯耳。夫负虚交而易强御，恃远救而轻近敌，未见其利也。
现代文：假如走错了路还不回头，听到道理还在迷惑，不是被南面的公孙述所吞并，就只有加入北面卢芳的一伙了，依靠虚交而改变强劲对手，依赖远方的救援而轻视眼前的劲敌，看不到有什么好处。
English: If you take the wrong path and do not turn back, if you are still confused when you hear the truth, if you are not swallowed up by the Southern Gongsun Shu, you can only join the group of the Northern Lu Fang, rely on false contacts to change the strong opponent, rely on the distant rescue and despise the immediate rival, and do not see any benefits.

古文：融闻智者不危众以举事，仁者不违义以要功。
现代文：融听说智者不危害众人来举事，仁者不造忠义来徼功。
English: It is said that a wise man does not harm others in order to accomplish a task, and a benevolent man does not create loyalty in order to gain merit.

古文：今以小敌大，于众何如？
现代文：今以小敌大，对众人安危怎么说呢？
English: Now, with a small enemy and a big one, how can we say that everyone is safe?

古文：弃子徼功，于义何如？
现代文：弃子徼功，对你子之义又怎么说呢？
English: If you abandon your son, what does that say about your son's righteousness?

古文：且初事本朝，稽首北面，忠臣节也。
现代文：而且你当初臣事本朝，稽首北拜，是忠于臣节。
English: Moreover, you were a vassal of the Imperial Court at that time, and you were loyal to the Imperial Court.

古文：及遣伯春，垂涕相送，慈父恩也。
现代文：后来遣子入朝，流着眼泪送别，是慈父的恩情。
English: Later, he sent his son to the Imperial Court, bidding him farewell with tears streaming down his face, which was a gracious act on the part of his father.

古文：俄而背之，谓吏士何？
现代文：一下子把忠臣之节慈父之恩全都抛弃，叫吏士们怎样看你呢？
English: How would the magistrates look at you if you suddenly threw away all your loyalty and fatherly kindness?

古文：忍而弃之，谓留子何？
现代文：忍心抛弃骨肉，叫留子又怎样想你呢？
English: How can I bear to give up my own flesh and blood, so that my son may live?

古文：自兵起以来，转相攻击，城郭皆为丘墟，生人转于沟壑。今其存者，非锋刃之余，则流亡之孤。
现代文：自起兵以来，转相攻击，郭城都成了丘墟，生人多死于沟壑，今天残存下来的，不是从刀缝中逃过来的，就是些流亡的单身。
English: Since the army was raised, attacks have come one after another, Guocheng has become a heap of rubble, and most of the living have died in the ravines. Today's survivors are either those who escaped through the cracks of the sword, or are single people in exile.

古文：迄今伤痍之体未愈，哭泣之声尚闻。
现代文：到现在伤痍之体还没有痊愈，哭泣之声还在耳际哀鸣。
English: To this day, the injured body has not healed, and the sound of crying is still ringing in my ears.

古文：幸赖天运少还，而将军复重于难，是使积疴不得遂瘳，幼孤将复流离，其为悲痛，尤足愍伤，言之可为酸鼻！
现代文：幸赖天运稍为缓和了一点点，而将军又要重生灾难，这是要使久病者不得恢复，幼孤者再罹流离痛苦，其为悲痛，尤足怜悯心伤，言之使人酸鼻！
English: The fortunes of fortune have eased a little bit, and the general wants to bring disaster back again. This is to make the long-term sick unable to recover, the orphaned and displaced suffer again. This is grief, especially pity and heartbreak, and it is sour to say!

古文：庸人且犹不忍，况仁者乎？
现代文：庸人尚且不忍，何况仁者呢？
English: Mediocrity is intolerable, how much more so for the benevolent?

古文：融闻为忠甚易，得宜实难。
现代文：融听说为忠容易，但要忠得适宜实在很难。
English: It is said that it is easy to be loyal, but it is very difficult to be loyal in the right way.

古文：忧人大过，以德取怨，知且以言获罪也。
现代文：替人忧虑得太过分了，难免是以德取怨，我知道我将以言获罪于将军了。
English: I was worrying too much about others, and it was inevitable that I would use my virtue to arouse resentment. I knew that I would offend the general with my words.

古文：区区所献，惟将军省焉。
现代文：区区所献，望将军省悟。 
English: I hope the general will reflect on what he has just said.

古文：嚣不纳。融乃与五郡太守共砥厉兵马，上疏请师期。
现代文：隗嚣不接受，窦融就与五郡太守砥厉兵马，上疏请示出师日期。
English: If he did not accept the request, Dou Rong agreed to fight with the five county governors, and asked Shang Su to show the date of the division.

古文：帝深嘉美之，乃赐融以外属图及太史公《五宗》、《外戚世家》、《魏其侯列传》。
现代文：帝非常嘉美窦融的举动，就赐窦融外属图及太史公《五宗》、《外戚世家》、《魏其侯列传》。
English: The emperor was very appreciative of Dou Rong's actions, and bestowed Dou Rong's foreign map and Taishi Kung's "Five Dynasties," "Family of Foreign Relatives," and "Biography of Wei Qihou."

古文：诏报曰： 每追念外属，孝景皇帝出自窦氏，定王，景帝之子，朕之所祖。
现代文：诏书回报说 ：每追念外戚，孝景皇帝出自窦氏，定王，景帝之子，是我的先祖。
English: The imperial edict replied, "In memory of my maternal relatives, Emperor Xiao Jing was from the Dou clan, and King Ding, the son of Emperor Jing, was my ancestor.

古文：昔魏其一言，继统以正，长君、少君尊奉师傅，修成淑德，施及子孙，此皇太后神灵，上天祐汉也。
现代文：以前因魏其一言，得继正统，长君、少君尊奉师傅，修成很好的德行，延及子孙，这是皇太后神灵，上天保佑汉朝啊。
English: In the past, because of Wei's words, he had to follow the orthodoxy, the eldest and the youngest respected their teachers, cultivated good moral conduct, and extended it to their children and grandchildren. This is the deity of the empress dowager. Heaven bless the Han Dynasty.

古文：从天水来者写将军所让隗嚣书，痛入骨髓。
现代文：从天水来的人，传写将军责让隗嚣的书信，痛入骨髓。
English: People who come from Tianshui, write the letters of the general's command, and it hurts to the bone marrow.

古文：畔臣见之，当股栗惭愧，忠臣则酸鼻流涕，义士则旷若发目蒙，非忠孝悫诚，孰能如此？
现代文：叛臣看到了当股忄栗惭愧，忠臣看到了当酸鼻流涕，义士看到了当心明眼亮，不是忠孝诚恳，怎能这样？
English: The traitor is ashamed when he sees his stock-in-trade plummeting, the loyalist is ashamed when he sees his nose running, and the righteous man is ashamed when he sees his heart shining brightly, but not his loyalty and filial piety. How can this be?

古文：岂其德薄者所能克堪！
现代文：德薄的人怎么能忍受！
English: How can any decent person put up with that!

古文：嚣自知失河西之助，族祸将及，欲设间离之说，乱惑真心，转相解构，以成其奸。
现代文：隗嚣自知失掉河西帮助，族灭之祸就将到来，想进行挑拨离间，造谣惑众，以便转相解说勾结，以成其奸。
English: He knew that if he lost the help of Hexi, the disaster of ethnic extinction would come. He wanted to sow discord, create rumors and mislead the public, so that he could explain and collude in order to become a traitor.

古文：又京师百僚，不晓国家及将军本意，多能采取虚伪，夸诞妄谈，令忠孝失望，传言乖实。
现代文：又京师百官，不了解国家及将军本意，多采取虚伪，夸大荒诞胡说，使忠孝失望，传言失实。
English: In addition, Beijing has trained hundreds of officials who do not understand the country and the general's original intention, and they often resort to hypocrisy, exaggerate absurd nonsense, disappoint the loyal and filial, and distort rumors.

古文：毁誉之来，皆不徒然，不可不思。
现代文：毁誉之来，都不是偶然的，不可不思。
English: The loss of reputation is not accidental. We must think about it.

古文：今关东盗贼已定，大兵今当悉西，将军其抗厉威武，以应期会。 融被诏，即与诸郡守将兵入金城。
现代文：现在关东盗贼已平定，大军今当全部向西，将军请秣马厉兵，以等待会师。 窦融接到诏书，就与诸郡守率兵进入金城。
English: Now that the Kanto thieves have been subdued, the great army should now all move westward. The general asked the horse soldiers to wait for the division. When Dou Rong received the edict, he and the county guards led the soldiers into Jincheng.

古文：初，更始时，先零羌封何诸种杀金城太守，居其郡，隗嚣使使赂遗封何，与共结盟，欲发其众。
现代文：起初，更始时，先零羌封何诸种杀了金城太守，占了金城，隗嚣遣使贿赂封何，与他结盟，准备使用他的部众。
English: At first, at the beginning of the year, he killed the governor of Jincheng, occupied Jincheng, sent envoys to bribe him, allied with him, and prepared to use his subordinates.

古文：融等因军出，进击封何，大破之，斩首千余级，得牛、马、羊万头，谷数万斛，因并河扬威武，伺候车驾。
现代文：窦融等因此出兵，进击封何，大破其军，斩首千余级，得牛马羊万头，谷数万斛，因而依据黄河耀武扬威，以等待光武的到来。
English: As a result, Dou Rong and others sent troops to attack Feng He, defeated his army, beheaded more than a thousand people, killed tens of thousands of cattle, horses and sheep, and killed tens of thousands of people. Therefore, according to the Yellow River, they showed their martial prowess to wait for the arrival of Guangwu.

古文：时，大兵未进，融乃引还。
现代文：后因大兵没有进发，窦融才退还。
English: Later, because the soldiers did not advance, Dou Rong was returned.

古文：帝以融信效著明，益嘉之。诏右扶风修理融父坟茔，祠以太牢。
现代文：帝以窦融说到做到，更为嘉奖，诏令右扶风修理窦融父亲坟墓，用大牢祭祀。
English: The emperor praised Dou Rong even more for doing what he said, and ordered Fu Feng to repair the tomb of Dou Rong's father and use the dungeon as a place of worship.

古文：数驰轻使，致遗四方珍羞，梁统乃使人刺杀张玄，绝与嚣绝，皆解所假将军印绶。
现代文：几次派遣轻骑往来，馈赠四方美味食品。梁统就使人刺杀张玄，因此与隗嚣断绝，都解下所假用的将军印绶。
English: He sent light cavalry several times to exchange gifts of delicious food from the four directions. Liang Tong then had someone assassinate Zhang Xuan, thus breaking off the rivalry, and they both removed the fake seal of the general.

古文：七年夏，酒泉太守竺曾以弟报怨杀人而去郡，融承制拜曾为武锋将军，更以辛肜代之。
现代文：七年夏，酒泉太守竺曾以弟报怨杀人而离郡，窦融秉承帝意拜曾竺为武锋将军，以辛肜代竺曾为酒泉太守。
English: In the summer of the seventh year, Jiuquan Taishu had left the county with his brother to report a grudge killing, Dou Rong adhered to the emperor's will to worship, Zeng Yu was a martial general, and Xin Yu was Jiuquan Taishu.

古文：秋，隗嚣发兵寇安定，帝将自西征之，先戒融期。
现代文：秋，隗嚣发兵侵犯安定，帝准备亲自西征，先告诫窦融出兵日期。
English: In the autumn, there was a clamor to send troops to encroach on stability. The emperor was preparing to personally march to the West, and first warned Dou Rong about the date of sending troops.

古文：会遇雨，道断，且嚣兵已退，乃止。
现代文：正好遇雨，道路阻塞，且隗嚣兵已退，就停止了。
English: Just as it was raining, the road was blocked, and the rebels had retreated, they stopped.

古文：融至姑臧，被诏罢归。
现代文：窦融到了姑臧，被诏罢归。
English: Dou Rong arrived in Gushan and was ordered to leave.

古文：融恐大兵遂久不出，乃上书曰： 隗嚣闻车驾当西，臣融东下，士众骚动，计且不战。
现代文：窦融恐大兵延久不出，就上书说： 隗嚣听说你将率大军西征，窦融派兵东出，士兵骚动，计议不予抵抗。
English: Dou Rong, fearing that the soldiers would not stay long, wrote a letter saying: "It is rumored that you will lead a large army to the west, Dou Rong sent soldiers to the east, the soldiers are agitated, and the plan will not be resisted.

古文：嚣将高峻之属皆欲逢迎大军，后闻兵罢，峻等复疑。
现代文：隗嚣将高峻之流都想逢迎大军，后来听说大军已退，高峻等复起了疑心。
English: Gao Jun's followers all wanted to meet the great army. Later, when they heard that the great army had retreated, Gao Jun's suspicions were revived.

古文：嚣扬言东方有变，西州豪杰遂复附从。嚣又引公孙述将，令守突门。
现代文：隗嚣扬言东方有变，于是西州的豪杰们再往附从隗嚣，隗嚣又引公孙述将领，令他们守城门。
English: The clamor threatened that the East was changing, so the heroes of the West Province followed the clamor. The clamor also led the Sun Su generals to guard the city gate.

古文：臣融孤弱，介在其间，虽承威灵，宜速救助。
现代文：窦融孤弱，介于陇蜀之间，虽有陛下威灵，还须从速救援。
English: Dou Rong was alone and weak, in the middle of Shenshu, although there was His Majesty Weiling, he still needed to be rescued immediately.

古文：国家当其前，臣融促其后，缓急迭用，首尾相资，嚣势排迮，不得进退，此必破也。
现代文：国家当其前，窦融兵促其后，缓急交错使用，首尾互相照应。隗嚣势蹙迫，进退不得，就必定破他了。
English: The state should be in the forefront, Dou Rongfei should be behind, the priorities should be interlaced, and the two sides should take care of each other.

古文：若兵不早进，久生持疑，则外长寇仇，内示困弱，复令谗邪得有因缘，臣窃忧之。
现代文：假如大军不早进，久生疑窦，那么外长寇仇志气，内示困厄虚弱，再使谗邪有机可乘，臣实在忧虑，请陛下哀怜。 
English: If the great army does not advance early, and if there are long-standing doubts, then the foreign minister will take advantage of the enmity of the enemy, secretly show the distress and weakness, and then take advantage of the evil. The minister is really worried, and please pity His Majesty.

古文：惟陛下哀怜！ 帝深美之。
现代文：帝深表赞美。
English: The emperor expressed his deep admiration.

古文：八年夏，车驾西征隗嚣，融率五郡太守及羌虏小月氏等步骑数万，辎重五千余两，与大军会高平第一。融先遣从事问会见仪适。是时，军旅代兴，诸将与三公交错道中，或背使者交私语。
现代文：八年夏，光武亲自西征隗嚣，窦融率五郡太守及羌虏、小月氏等，步骑数万，辎重五千余辆，与大军会师于高平第一城，窦融先派遣从事先问会见礼仪，这时军旅更迭兴起，诸将与三公错于道，有的背着使者喁喁私语。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, Guangwu personally led the Western Expedition, and Dou Rong led the five county governors and their retainers, the Xiao Yue clan, etc. He rode tens of thousands of horses and loaded more than five thousand vehicles, and met with the army in the first city of Gaoping. Dou Rong was first dispatched to engage in the first question and meet etiquette. At this time, the military brigade changed, and all of them were wrong with the Three Kings, and some were whispering behind the back of the messenger.

古文：帝闻融先问礼仪，甚善之，以宣告百僚。
现代文：帝听说窦融先问礼仪，很高兴，就以此向百官宣示。
English: The emperor was pleased to hear that Dou Rong was the first to ask about etiquette, so he announced this to the officials.

古文：乃置酒高会，引见融等，待以殊礼。
现代文：于是大排酒宴举行盛大宴会，引见窦融等，待之以特殊礼节。
English: As a result, a grand banquet was held at the grand banquet, and Dou Rong and others were invited to attend with special etiquette.

古文：拜弟友为奉车都尉，从弟士太中大夫。
现代文：拜其弟窦友为奉车都尉，从弟窦士为太中大夫。
English: Bai's younger brother Dou You became the lieutenant of Fengche, and his younger brother Dou Shi became the junior high school teacher.

古文：遂共进军，嚣众大溃，城邑皆降。
现代文：于是共同进军，隗嚣部众大溃败，所有城邑都归降了。
English: As a result, they marched together, defeated the rebels, and all the towns surrendered.

古文：帝高融功，下诏以安丰、阳泉、蓼、安风四县封融为安丰侯，弟友为显亲侯。
现代文：帝以窦融高功，下诏以安丰、阳泉、蓼、安风四县封窦融为安丰侯，弟窦友为显亲侯。
English: The emperor praised Dou Rong for his great achievements, and issued the following edict naming the four counties of Anfeng, Yangquan, Handan, and Anfeng as Anfeng counties, and his brother Dou You as Hsieng county.

古文：遂以次封诸将帅：武锋将军竺曾为助义侯，武威太守梁统为成义侯，张掖太守史苞为褒义侯，金城太守厙钧为辅义侯，酒泉太守辛肜为扶义侯。
现代文：就依次封诸将帅 ：武锋将军竺曾为助义侯，武威太守梁统为成义侯，张掖太守史苞为褒义侯，金城太守厍钧为辅义侯，酒泉太守辛肜为扶义侯。 
English: The following generals were successively granted the title of grand marshal: General Wu Feng (武锋将军) was the assistant grand marshal, Grand Marshal Wu Wei (武威太守梁統) was the grand marshal, Grand Marshal Zhang Ye (张太守史) was the grand marshal, Grand Marshal Jincheng (金城太守) was the assistant grand marshal, and Grand Marshal Jiuquan (酒泉太守辛) was the grand marshal.

古文：封爵既毕，乘舆东归，悉遣融等西还所镇。
现代文：封爵完毕，光武东归，派窦融等都西还镇抚原郡。
English: After the knighting was completed, Guangwu returned to the east, sent Dou Rong to the west, and returned to Fuzhouyuan County.

古文：融以兄弟并受爵位，久专方面，惧不自安，数上书求代。
现代文：窦融以兄弟并受爵位，久在西北镇抚一方，恐惧不能自安，几次上书请求派人替代。
English: Dou Rong is a brother and received a knighthood. He has been in Northwest Zhenfu for a long time. He is afraid and can't relax. He has written several times to request that someone be sent to replace him.

古文：诏报曰： 吾与将军如左右手耳，数执谦退，何不晓人意？
现代文：诏书回答说 ：我与将军如左右手一样，你几次要求退位，为什么不晓人意呢？
English: The edict replied: I am like the general's right and left hand. You have asked to abdicate several times, why do you not know what people want?

古文：勉循士民，无擅离部曲。 
现代文：希望你勉励循教士民，不可擅自离开部队。 
English: I hope you will follow the teachings of the clergy and the people and not leave the army without permission.

古文：及陇、蜀平，诏融与五郡太守奏事京师，官属宾客相随，驾乘千余两，马、牛、羊被野。
现代文：等到陇、蜀平定，诏窦融与五太守来京师奏事，官属宾客相随，车子千余辆，马牛羊遍野。
English: By the time of the Qing and Shu dynasties, Zhao Dou Rong and the Fifth Patriarch had come to Beijing to report on the matter, accompanied by official guests, more than a thousand cars, horses, cattle and sheep everywhere.

古文：融到，诣洛阳城门，上凉州牧、张掖属国都尉、安丰侯印绶，诏遣使者还侯印绶。
现代文：窦融到，至洛阳城门，呈上凉州牧、张掖郡国都尉、安丰侯印绶，帝令使者退还侯的印绶。
English: Dou Rong arrived at the gate of Luoyang City and presented Shang Liang Zhou Moo, Zhangye County Governor, and Anfeng Hou's seal, and the imperial envoy returned the seal of the Hou.

古文：引见，就诸侯位，赏赐恩宠，倾动京师。
现代文：引见，就诸侯位，赏赐恩宠有加，倾动京师。
English: As a result, he was elevated to the position of vassal lord and received many favors from the emperor.

古文：数月，拜为冀州牧，十余日，又迁大司空。
现代文：数月，拜为冀州牧，十余日，又迁升为大司空。
English: For several months, he served as the pastor of Jizhou, and after more than ten days, he was promoted to the position of the chief priest.

古文：融自以非旧臣，一旦入朝，在功臣之右，每召会进见，容貌辞气卑恭已甚，帝以此愈亲厚之。
现代文：窦融自认为自己不是老臣，一旦入朝，位列功臣之上，每次召会进见，容貌和说话口气卑恭到了极点，帝因此更加亲近厚爱他。
English: Dou Rong believed that he was not a senior minister. Once he entered the imperial court, he was ranked higher than meritorious ministers. Every time he attended church, his appearance and speech were extremely humble. The emperor therefore loved him more.

古文：融小心，久不自安，数辞让爵位，因侍中金迁口达至诚。
现代文：窦融小心翼翼，一直不能自安，几次辞让爵位，并求侍中金迁转达至诚。
English: Dou Rong carefully, has not been able to self-reassure, several resignations to give up the title, and asked the attendant to transfer the money to Zhixing.

古文：又上疏曰： 臣融年五十三。有子年十五，质性顽钝。臣融朝夕教导以经艺，不得令观天文，见谶记。诚欲令恭肃畏事，恂恂循道，不愿其有才能，何况乃当传以连城广土，享故诸侯王国哉？ 因复请间求见，帝不许。
现代文：又上疏说 ：窦融年五十三，有个儿子十五岁，性格顽劣驽钝，融朝夕教他学习经艺，不让他观看天文，见谶记，目的是使他恭敬严肃不惹是非，能循规蹈矩走正道，不愿他有才能，更何况是传给他以连城广士，让他享有诸侯王国的特殊待遇呢？ 因而再次请在闲暇时接见他，帝不许。
English: He also said: Dou Rong was fifty-three years old and had a fifteen-year-old son with a stubborn and obtuse character. Rong taught him to study the classics and sciences in the morning and evening, and did not allow him to watch the sky. The aim was to make him respectful and serious, not to stir up trouble, to be able to follow the rules and walk the right path, and not to have talent. What's more, it was passed down to him that he should be a member of the Chengguang, so that he could enjoy the special treatment of the princely kingdom. Therefore, please receive him again in his leisure time, the emperor does not allow it.

古文：后朝罢，逡巡席后，帝知欲有让，遂使左右传出。
现代文：后来朝事完了，窦融小心翼翼退到座后，帝知窦融又想辞让，就使左右传他出去。
English: Later, after the meeting was over and Dou Rong had carefully retreated to his seat, Di Zhi Dou Rong again wanted to give in, so he sent Dou Rong out.

古文：它日会见，迎诏融曰： 日者知公欲让职还土，故命公暑热且自便。
现代文：他日会见，迎窦融说： 前几天知公想辞职还乡，所以让你大暑天回家自便休息。
English: On the second day of the meeting, Ying Dou Rong said: A few days ago, Zhi Gong wanted to resign and return to his hometown, so let you go home on a hot day and take a break.

古文：今相见，宜论它事，勿得复言。 融不敢重陈请。
现代文：今日相见，宜讨论他事，不得又讲辞职的事。 窦融因此不敢再陈请。
English: Seeing each other today, it is appropriate to discuss other matters, and it is not necessary to talk about resigning. Dou Rong therefore dared not ask again.

古文：二十年，大司徒戴涉坐所举人盗金下狱，帝以三公参职，不得已乃策免融。
现代文：二十年，大司徒戴涉因所荐举的人偷盗黄金下狱，帝以三公参与职事，不得已避嫌免去窦融大司空职。
English: For twenty years, Daishi Tutu Dai was imprisoned for stealing gold from the person recommended for promotion, and the emperor participated in official duties with three officials, and had to avoid the displeasure and go to Dou Rong Daishi vacant post.

古文：明年，加位特进。
现代文：第二年，加位特进。
English: The following year, he was promoted to a higher position.

古文：二十三年，代阴兴行卫尉事，特进如故，又兼领将作大匠。
现代文：二十三年，代阴兴行卫尉事，仍加特进如故，又兼领将作大匠。
English: Twenty-three years later, Daiyin Xing was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and he was still promoted as before. He was also promoted to the rank of Master Craftsman.

古文：弟友为城门校尉，兄弟并典禁兵。
现代文：弟窦友为城门校尉，兄弟并掌管禁兵。
English: His younger brother Douyou is the captain of the castle gate, and the brothers are also in charge of the forbidden soldiers.

古文：融复乞骸骨，辄赐钱、帛，太官致珍奇。
现代文：窦融再次请求辞职回乡，帝经常赏赐钱帛，掌管皇家饮食的太官时常送来珍奇食品。
English: Dou Rong once again asked to resign and return to his hometown. The emperor often rewarded Qian Ye, and the eunuch in charge of the royal diet often sent rare foods.

古文：及友卒，帝愍融年衰，遣中常侍、中谒者即其卧内强进酒食。
现代文：窦友死后，帝怜悯窦融年老气衰，派遣中常侍、中谒者到窦融卧室勉强劝进酒食。
English: After the death of Dou You, the emperor took pity on Dou Rong's old age and decrepitude, and dispatched the middle attendants and middle attendants to Dou Rong's bedroom to reluctantly persuade him to drink and eat.

古文：融长子穆，尚内黄公主，代友为城门校尉。
现代文：窦融长子窦穆，娶内黄公主，代窦友为城门校尉。
English: Dou Mu, the eldest son of Dou Rong, married Princess Nai Huang, and Dou You became the captain of the castle gate.

古文：穆子勋，尚东海恭王彊女沘阳公主，友子固，亦尚光武女涅阳公主。
现代文：窦穆子窦勋，娶东海恭王强女氵比阳公主，窦友子窦固，也娶光武女涅阳公主。
English: Dou Mu Zi Dou Xun married Donghai Gong Wang Qiang's daughter Su Bi Yang Princess, Dou You Zi Dou Gu, and also married Guangwu's daughter Nie Yang Princess.

古文：显宗即位，以融从兄子林为护羌校尉，窦氏一公、两侯、三公主、四二千石，相与并时。
现代文：显宗即位，以窦融从兄之子窦林为护羌校尉。窦氏一家有着一公、两侯、三公主、四二千石的特殊恩宠，都在同一个时期。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and Dou Lin, the son of Dou Rong's brother Dou Rong, became the captain of the imperial guard. The Dou family had one prince, two princes, three princesses, and 42,000 koku of special grace, all at the same time.

古文：自祖及孙，官府邸第相望京邑，奴婢以千数，于亲戚、功臣中莫与为此。
现代文：自祖到孙，在京城官府邸第相望，奴婢上千，在众多亲戚功臣中没有人能与他相比。
English: From his ancestors to his grandchildren, he looked down on them from the official residence in the capital, with thousands of slaves and maidservants. Among the many relatives and heroes, no one can compare to him.

古文：永平二年，林以罪诛，事在《西羌传》。
现代文：永平二年，窦融从兄之子窦林因犯罪被杀。
English: In the second year of Yongping, Dou Rong was killed by his brother's son Dou Lin for committing a crime.

古文：帝由是数下诏切责融，戒以窦婴、田蚡祸败之事。
现代文：帝于是几次下诏书切责窦融，以窦婴、田虫分祸败的历史事实相训戒。
English: Therefore, the emperor issued several edicts to severely reprimand Dou Rong, using the historical fact that Dou Ying and Tian Zi were defeated as a warning.

古文：融惶恐乞骸骨，诏令归第养病。
现代文：窦融惶恐请归乡里，诏令归府第养病。
English: If you are worried, please go back to your hometown. If you are sick, please go back to your hometown.

古文：岁余，听上卫尉印绶，赐养牛，上樽酒。
现代文：岁余，接受窦融呈上卫尉印绶，赐养牛，上樽酒。
English: In his later years, Dou Rong received the title of First Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, was given cattle to raise, and was given barrels of wine.

古文：融在宿卫十余年，年老，子孙纵诞，多不法。
现代文：窦融在宿卫十多年，年老了，子孙放纵胡为，多有不法。
English: Dou Rong has been in Suvarnabhumi for more than ten years. He is old, and his children and grandchildren indulge in immoral behavior, many of which are illegal.

古文：穆等遂交通轻薄，属托郡县，干乱政事。
现代文：窦穆等与一些轻薄儿相交往，属托郡县干扰政事。
English: Dou Mu, etc. interacted with some frivolous children, which is interference in the affairs of the county.

古文：以封在安丰，欲令姻戚悉据故六安国，遂矫称阴太后诏，令六安侯刘盱去妇，因以女妻之。
现代文：因封在安丰，想让姻戚们都占据原来的六安国，就假托阴太后诏，令六安侯刘盱休妻，而以女儿嫁刘盱。
English: Because of his fief in Anfeng, he wanted his relatives-in-law to occupy the original Six An Provinces, so he issued a fake edict from the Empress Dowager, ordering Liu Xuan, the lord of the Six An Provinces, to divorce his wife and marry his daughter to Liu Xuan.

古文：五年，盱妇家上书言状，帝大怒，乃尽免穆等官，诸窦为郎吏者皆将家属归故郡，独留融京师。
现代文：五年，刘盱被弃妻家上书报告情况，帝大怒，就将窦穆等的官职尽行罢免，诸窦中为郎吏的都携带家属回乡下老家，只窦融一人留在京师。
English: In the fifth year, the emperor was enraged when Liu Bei sent a letter to report the situation of his abandoned wife's family, and he dismissed Dou Mu and other officials from their posts. All the officials of Dou were taken back to their hometown in the countryside. Only Dou Rong remained in Beijing.

古文：穆等西至函谷关，有诏悉复追还。
现代文：窦穆等西至函谷关，有诏又将他们全部追回。
English: Dou Mu and others went as far west as Hakodate Pass, but they were all chased back again.

古文：会融卒，时年七十八，谥曰戴侯，赙送甚厚。
现代文：适逢窦融去世，时年七十八岁，谥曰戴侯，送了很多钱财帮助办理丧事。
English: When Dou Rong passed away at the age of 78, he sent a lot of money and resources to help with the funeral.

古文：帝以穆不能修尚，而拥富资，居大第，常令谒者一人监护其家。
现代文：帝以窦穆不能修整高尚自己，而拥有大量财富，就常令谒者一人监护其家。
English: Emperor Doumu could not cultivate and ennoble himself, but he had a lot of wealth, so he often ordered a person to take care of his family.

古文：居数年，谒者奏穆父子自失势，数出怨望语，帝令将家属归本郡，唯勋以沘阳主婿留京师。
现代文：谒者面奏窦穆父子自从失势，几次口出怨言，帝令他带家属回原郡，只有窦勋以氵比阳公主女婿得以留在京师。
English: Since Dou Mu and his son lost power, they complained several times, and the emperor ordered him to take his family back to the original county. Only Dou Xun, the son-in-law of Princess Zou Biyang, was able to stay in Beijing.

古文：穆坐赂遗小吏，郡捕系，与子宣俱死平陵狱，勋亦死洛阳狱。
现代文：窦穆以贿赂小吏的罪名，被郡逮捕归案，与子窦宣都死在平陵狱中，窦勋也死在洛阳狱中。
English: Dou Mu was arrested by the county on charges of bribing minor officials. He and his son Dou Xuan both died in Pingling Prison, and Dou Xun also died in Luoyang Prison.

古文：久之，诏还融夫人与小孙一人居洛阳家舍。
现代文：很久后，诏令接回窦嘉夫人与一个小孙子居洛阳家舍。
English: A long time later, Mrs Dou Jia and a small grandchild were taken back to their Luoyang home by imperial order.

古文：十四年，封勋弟嘉为安丰侯，食邑二千户，奉融后。
现代文：十四年，封窦勋弟窦融为安丰侯，食邑二千户，继奉窦融后嗣。
English: Fourteen years later, Feng Dou's younger brother, Dou Rong, became the Prince of Anfeng, with 2,000 households in the county, and was succeeded by Feng Dou Rong's heir.

古文：和帝初，为少府。
现代文：和帝初，为少府。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, it was called Shofu.

古文：及勋子大将军宪被诛，免就国。
现代文：等到窦勋子大将军窦宪被杀，免就国。
English: When General Dou Xian was killed, he was not allowed to return to the country.

古文：嘉卒，子万全嗣。
现代文：窦嘉卒，子窦万全继嗣。
English: Dou Jia's disciple, Dou Manquan's son and successor.

古文：万全卒，子会宗嗣。
现代文：万全死，子会宗继嗣。
English: Wanquan died, and Zikai Zong became his successor.

古文：万全弟子武，别有传。
现代文：窦万全弟子窦武，别有传。
English: Dou Wanquan's disciple Dou Wu is another legend.

古文：论曰：窦融始以豪侠为名，拔起风尘之中，以投天隙。遂蝉蜕王侯之尊，终膺卿相之位，此则徼功趣势之士也。
现代文：史官评论道：窦融开始以豪侠为名，在风尘中挺拔而出，投会天的间隙，遂由王侯之尊蝉蛲而出，终于荣膺卿相的显位，这真是徼功趋势的人啊。
English: The historian commented: Dou Rong began with the name of a hero, stood out in the wind and dust, and during the intermission of the voting day, he emerged from the throne of the prince, and finally emerged from the throne of Rong Xing Xing. This is really a person with a trend of meritorious service.

古文：及其爵位崇满，至乃放远权宠，恂恂似若不能已者，又何智也！
现代文：等到他爵位崇高完满，又能把权宠搁置在一旁，诚惶诚恐好像自己实在不得已，这又是何等的聪明啊！
English: How clever of him to wait until his lofty title was complete before he could set aside his power-lust, as if he had no choice but to do so.

古文：尝独详味此子之风度，虽经国之术无足多谈，而进退之礼良可言矣。
现代文：我曾经独自详细品味此子的风度，虽然他经纬国家的才能不足多谈，而进退去就之礼则是很值得说说的哩。
English: On my own, I have had a detailed taste of this boy's demeanour, although his international ability is not much to talk about, and his passing is very much worth talking about.

