古文：一曰：孟春之月，日在营室，昏参中，旦尾中。
现代文：孟春孟春正月，太阳的位置在营室宿。初昏时刻，参宿出现在南方中天。
English: In the first month of Mengchun, the position of the sun is in the camp room. At the time of twilight, the camp appeared in the southern sky.

古文：其日甲乙，其帝太皞，其神句芒，其虫鳞，其音角，律中太蔟，其数八，其味酸，其臭膻，其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：拂晓时刻，尾宿出现在南方中天。孟春在天干中属甲乙，它的主宰之帝是太皞，佐帝之神是句芒，它的应时的动物是龙鱼之类的鳞族，声音是中和的角音，音律与太簇相应。这月的数字是八，味道是酸味，气味是膻气，要举行的祭祀是户祭，祭祀时，祭品以脾脏为尊。
English: At the time of dawn, the tail lodge appears in the southern sky. Mengchun belongs to A and B in the heavenly stem. Its ruling emperor is Taishang, the god of Zedi is Jumang, and its corresponding animal is a dragon fish. The sound is a neutral horn sound, and the melody corresponds to Taizu. The number of this month is eight, the taste is sour, and the smell is salty. The sacrifice to be held is a household sacrifice. During the sacrifice, the sacrifice is made of the spleen.

古文：东风解冻，蛰虫始振，鱼上冰，獭祭鱼，候雁北。
现代文：春风吹融了冰雪，蛰伏的动物开始苏醒活动。鱼儿从深水向上游到冰层下，水獭捕到鱼，把它摆在岸边。候鸟火雁从南往北飞行。
English: The spring wind melts the ice and snow, and the animals that have been lying dormant begin to wake up. Fish swim up from deep water to under the ice, otters catch fish and put them on the shore. Migratory birds and geese fly from south to north.

古文：天子居青阳左个，乘鸾辂，驾苍龙，载青旗，衣青衣，服青玉，食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：天子居住在东向明堂的左侧室，乘坐饰有用青凤命名的响铃的车子，车前驾着青色的马，车上插着绘有龙纹的青色的旗帜，天子穿着青色的衣服，佩戴着青色的饰玉，吃的食物是麦子和羊，使用的器物纹理空疏而通达。
English: Tianzi lives in the left room of Dongxiangming Hall. He rides in a car with a bell decorated with the name of Qingfeng. He drives a blue horse in front of the car, and a blue flag with a dragon pattern is placed on the car. Tianzi wears blue clothes and wears blue decorative beads. He eats wheat and sheep. The utensils he uses have a clear and transparent texture.

古文：是月也，以立春。
现代文：这个月有立春的节气。
English: This month's solar term is the first day of spring.

古文：先立春三日，太史谒之天子曰： 某日立春，盛德在木。 
现代文：在立春前三天，太史向天子禀告说： 某日立春，大德在子木。 
English: Three days before the first day of spring, Emperor Taishi announced to the Son of Heaven, "A certain day, the first day of spring, great virtue is in the root of the tree.

古文：天子乃斋。
现代文：天子于是斋戒，准备迎春。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven fasted and prepared for the autumn.

古文：立春之日，天子亲率三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，以迎春於东郊；还，乃赏公卿、诸侯、大夫於朝。命相布德和令，行庆施惠，下及兆民。
现代文：立春那天，天子亲自率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫到东挪去迎接春的降临。迎春礼毕归来，就在朝中赏赐卿，诸侯、大夫，并命令相国宣布教化，发布禁令，实行褒奖，瞻济不足，一直施及所有百姓。
English: On the day of the first day of spring, the heavenly son himself led the three princes, nine lords, princes, and doctors to the east to welcome the arrival of spring. After returning from the Spring Festival, he rewarded the lords, princes, and doctors in the court, and ordered the neighboring countries to declare enlightenment, issue bans, implement rewards, and insufficient aid, and have been applied to all the people.

古文：庆赐遂行，无有不当。
现代文：褒奖赏赐之事，要通达施行，不要有不当之处。
English: The awarding of rewards should be transparent and without any impropriety.

古文：乃命太史，守典奉法，司天日月星辰之行，宿离不忒，无失经纪。以初为常。
现代文：于是命令太史遵奉六典八法，主管推算丑月星辰运行的工作。太阳所在的位置、月亮所经过的地方，从及日月星辰运行的度数和轨迹，要计算得没有一点差错和失误，制定历法仍以冬至点在牵牛初度为准则。
English: Therefore, he ordered the Grand Historian to follow the six-script and eight-method, and supervise the work of calculating the movement of the ugly moon and stars. The position of the sun, the place where the moon passes, and the frequency and trajectory of the movement of the sun, moon and stars should be calculated without any errors and mistakes. The formulation of the calendar is still based on the winter solstice at the beginning of the year.

古文：是月也，天子乃以元日祈谷于上帝。乃择元辰，天子亲载耒耜，措之参于保介之御间，率三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，躬耕帝籍田。
现代文：这个月，天子在吉日向上天祈求五谷丰登，并选择好的时辰，亲自用车装载着耒耜，放在参乘一一车右和御者中问，率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，到帝籍田亲自耕作。
English: This month, on the auspicious day, the heavenly son prayed to the heavens for the abundance of grain, and chose a good time, personally loaded the plow with the car, placed it in the right and driver of the participating car, and led the three princes, nine lords, lords, and doctors to personally cultivate the imperial field.

古文：天子三推，三公五推，卿、诸侯、大夫九推。
现代文：推耒耜人土，天子推三下，三公推五下，卿、诸侯大夫推九下。
English: Pushing the human soil, the heavenly son pushes three times, the three princes push five times, and the lord and the vassal push nine times.

古文：反，执爵于太寝，三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫皆御，命曰 劳酒。 
现代文：礼毕返回，天子在祖庙举行宴饮，慰劳群臣，三公、九卿、谱侯。大夫都去侍酒。这次宴饮命名叫 劳酒 。
English: After returning from the ritual, the heavenly son held a banquet in the ancestral temple, consoling the laboring ministers, the three princes, the nine nobles, and the great nobles. The doctors all went to serve wine. The name of this banquet was "labor wine."

古文：是月也，天气下降，地气上腾，天地和同，草木繁动。
现代文：这个月，上天之气下降，地中之气上升，天地之气混同一体，草木普遍萌发。
English: In this month, the qi of heaven falls, the qi of the earth rises, the qi of heaven and earth are mixed together, and plants and trees generally sprout.

古文：王布农事，命田舍东郊，皆修封疆，审端径术。善相丘陵阪险原隰，土地所宜，五谷所殖，以教道民，以躬亲之。
现代文：国君宣布农功之事，命令农官住在东郊，监督农民整治耕地的疆界，审视并端正田间的小路；很好地考察丘陵、山地、平原，洼地等各种地形，什么土地适宜种什么备物，什么谷物应在什么地方种植，要用这些教诲引导农民，而且务必亲自去做。
English: The king announced the agricultural work, ordered the agricultural officials to live in the eastern suburbs, supervised the farmers to rectify the boundaries of the cultivated land, inspected and straightened the paths between the fields; well examined the hills, mountains, plains, depressions and other landforms, what land is suitable for planting what kind of equipment, what grain should be planted in what place, to guide the farmers with these teachings, and be sure to do it yourself.

古文：田事既饬，先定准直，农乃不惑。
现代文：农功之事布置完毕，先确定田地的界限。路径的宽窄，农民才没有疑惑。
English: The fields have been properly prepared, and due to the standards set in advance, the farming can be carried out in an orderly manner.

古文：是月也，命乐正入学习舞。
现代文：这个月，命令乐官进入太学教国子练习舞蹈。
English: This month, music officials were ordered into Taigaku to teach Kuniko how to dance.

古文：乃修祭典，命祀山林川泽，牺牲无用牝，禁止伐木；无覆巢，无杀孩虫、胎夭、飞鸟，无麛无卵；无聚大众，无置城郭，掩骼霾髊。
现代文：同时修订祭祀的典则，命令祭祀山林河流不用母牲做祭品。禁止砍伐树术，不许捣翻鸟巢，不许杀害幼小的禽兽，不许捕捉小兽和掏取鸟卵，不得聚集民众，不得建立城郭，要掩埋枯骨尸骸。
English: At the same time, the code of sacrificial rites was revised, and it was ordered that the sacrificial rites of mountains, forests and rivers should not use the mother animal as a sacrifice. It was forbidden to cut down trees, not to knock down birds' nests, not to kill small animals, not to catch small animals and take out birds' eggs, not to gather people, not to build castles, and to bury dead bones.

古文：是月也，不可以称兵，称兵必有天殃。
现代文：这个月，不可以举兵征伐，举兵必定遭判天灾。
English: This month, it is not allowed to raise an army for a military campaign. Raising an army is doomed to be a natural disaster.

古文：兵戎不起，不可以从我始。
现代文：在不能兴兵征伐的时节。兵戎之事不可以从我开始。
English: At a time when it is not possible to raise an army for war, I cannot start the war.

古文：无变天之道，无绝地之理，无乱人之纪。
现代文：发布政令不要违背自然的规律，不要无视土地的条件，不要扰乱礼义的纲纪。
English: When issuing decrees, do not violate the laws of nature, do not ignore the conditions of the land, and do not disturb the etiquette.

古文：孟春行夏令，则风雨不时，草木早槁，国乃有恐；行秋令，则民大疫，疾风暴雨数至，藜莠蓬蒿并兴；行冬令，则水潦为败，霜雪大挚，首种不入。
现代文：孟春正月如果发布应在夏天发布的政令，那么，风雨就不能正常来去，草木就会过早地千枯，人民就会感到惶恐。如果发布布在秋天发布的政夸，那么，百姓就会遭受疫情，狂风暴雨就会多次袭来，野草就会蓬生。如果发布应在冬天发布的政令，那么，大水就会毁害生物，霜雪就会严重地伤害庄稼，麦子就不能生成收获。
English: If Meng Chunzheng issued a decree that should be issued in the summer, then the wind and rain would not come and go normally, the plants would die prematurely, and the people would be alarmed. If the political praise issued in the autumn was issued, then the people would suffer from epidemics, violent storms and rains would strike several times, and wild grasses would grow. If the decree that should be issued in the winter was issued, then the flood would destroy living things, frost and snow would seriously damage crops, and wheat could not be harvested.

古文：二曰：始生之者，天也；养成之者，人也。
现代文：本生最初创造出生命的是天，养育生命并使它成长的是人。
English: Originally, it was heaven that created life in the first place, and it was man who nurtured life and made it grow.

古文：能养天之所生而勿撄之谓天子。
现代文：能够保养上天创造的生命而不摧残它，这样的人称作天子。
English: A person who is able to maintain the life created by heaven without destroying it is called a heavenly son.

古文：天子之动也，以全天为故者也。
现代文：天子一举一动都是把保全生命作为要务的。
English: Every move of the Son of God is to preserve life as a top priority.

古文：此官之所自立也。
现代文：这是职官设立的来由。
English: This is the reason why it was set up by officials.

古文：立官者，以全生也。
现代文：设立职官，正是用以保全生命啊。
English: The establishment of officials is precisely for the purpose of preserving life.

古文：今世之惑主，多官而反以害生，则失所为立之矣。
现代文：如今世上糊涂的君主，大量设立官职却反而因此妨害生命，这就失去了设立职官的本来意义了。
English: In today's world of confused monarchs, the establishment of a large number of official positions has actually hindered life, which has lost the original meaning of the establishment of officials.

古文：譬之若修兵者，以备寇也。
现代文：譬如训练军队，是用以防备敌寇的。
English: For example, the training of the army is used to guard against enemy invaders.

古文：今修兵而反以自攻，则亦失所为修之矣。
现代文：可是如今训练军队却反而用以攻杀自己，那就失去了训练军队的本来意义了。
English: But now, instead of training the army, they are using it to attack and kill themselves, and the original meaning of training the army has been lost.

古文：夫水之性清，土者抇之，故不得清。
现代文：水本来是清澈的，泥土使它浑浊，所以水无结保持清澈。
English: The water was originally clear, but the mud muddied it, so the water remained clear without knots.

古文：人之性寿，物者抇之，故不得寿。
现代文：人本来是可以长寿的，外物使他迷乱，所以人无法达到长寿。
English: Man can live a long life, but he is bewildered by external things, so he cannot achieve a long life.

古文：物也者，所以养性也，非所以性养也。
现代文：外物本来是供养生命的，不该损耗生命去追求它。
English: The external object was originally intended to support life, and life should not be wasted in pursuit of it.

古文：今世之人，惑者多以性养物，则不知轻重也。
现代文：可是如今世上糊涂韵人多损耗生命去追求外物，这样做是不知轻重。
English: But in today's world, many people waste their lives in the pursuit of external things, and doing so is meaningless.

古文：不知轻重，则重者为轻，轻者为重矣。
现代文：不知轻重，就会把重的当作轻的，把轻的当作重的了。
English: If you don't know the difference between light and heavy, you will take the heavy as light and the light as heavy.

古文：若此，则每动无不败。
现代文：象这样，无论做什么，没有不失败的。
English: As such, no matter what you do, you can't fail.

古文：以此为君，悖；以此为臣，乱；以此为子，狂。
现代文：持这种态度做君主，就会惑乱胡涂，做臣子，就会败乱纲纪，做儿子，就会狂放无札。
English: With this attitude, if you are a monarch, you will be confused, if you are a courtier, you will destroy discipline, and if you are a son, you will go wild.

古文：三者国有一焉，无幸必亡。
现代文：这三种情况，国家只要有其中一种，就无可幸免，必定灭亡。
English: In any one of these three cases, a country will inevitably perish.

古文：今有声於此，耳听之必慊已，听之则使人聋，必弗听。
现代文：假如有这样一种声音，耳朵听到它旨定感到惬意，但听了就会使耳聋，人们一定不会去听。
English: If there were such a sound, the ear would certainly be pleased to hear it, but listening to it would cause deafness, and people would certainly not listen.

古文：有色於此，目视之必慊已，视之则使人盲，必弗视。
现代文：假如有选样一种颜色，眼睛看到它肯定感到惬意，但看了就会使人眼瞎，人们一定不会看。
English: If there is a sample of a color, the eye will certainly feel comfortable when it sees it, but if it is seen, it will make people blind, and people will not see it.

古文：有味於此，口食之必慊已，食之则使人瘖，必弗食。
现代文：假如有这样一种食物，嘴巴吃到它肯定感到惬意，但吃了就会使人声哑，人们一定不会击吃。
English: If there is such a kind of food, the mouth will certainly feel comfortable when eating it, but eating it will make people mute, and people will certainly not eat it.

古文：是故圣人之於声色滋味也，利於性则取之，害於性则舍之，此全性之道也。
现代文：因比，圣人对于声音、颜色、滋味的态度是，有利于生命的就取用，有害干生命的就舍弃，这是保全生命的方法。
English: Accordingly, the sage's attitude toward sound, color, and taste was to take what is beneficial to life and discard what is harmful to life. This was a method of preserving life.

古文：世之贵富者，其於声色滋味也，多惑者。
现代文：世上富贵的人对于声色滋味的态度大多是胡涂的。
English: The attitude of the world's rich and affluent to the tone of voice is mostly nonsense.

古文：日夜求，幸而得之则遁焉。
现代文：他们日日夜夜地追求这些东西，幸运地得到了，就放纵自己不能自禁。
English: They pursue these things day and night, and when they are fortunate enough to obtain them, they indulge themselves and cannot restrain themselves.

古文：遁焉，性恶得不伤？
现代文：放纵自己不能自禁。生命怎么能不受伤害。
English: You can't restrain yourself from indulging. How can life not be harmed?

古文：万人操弓，共射其一招，招无不中。
现代文：一万人拿着弓箭，共同射向一个目标，这个目标役有不被射中的。
English: Ten thousand people with bows and arrows, shooting together at a target, which serves not to be shot.

古文：万物章章，以害一生，生无不伤；以便一生，生无不长。
现代文：万物繁盛茂美，如果用以伤害一个生命，那么这个生命没有不被伤害的；如果用以养育一个生命，那么这个生命没有不长寿的。
English: All things flourish. If you use it to harm a life, then this life will not be harmed; if you use it to nurture a life, then this life will not be short-lived.

古文：若此人者，不言而信，不谋而当，不虑而得；精通乎天地，神覆乎宇宙；其於物无不受也，无不裹也，若天地然；上为天子而不骄，下为匹夫而不惛。
现代文：所以圣人制约万物，是用以保全自己生命的。生命全然无损，精神就和谐了，眼睛就明亮了，耳朵就灵敏了，嗅觉就敏锐了，口齿就伶俐了，全身的筋骨就通畅舒展了。象这样的人，不用说话就有信义，不用谋划就会得当，不用思考就有所得。他们的精神通达天地，覆盖宇宙。对于外物，他们无不承受，无不包容，就像天地一样。他们上做天子而不骄傲，下做百姓而不忧闷。
English: Therefore, a sage controls all things in order to preserve his own life. Life is not damaged at all, the spirit is harmonious, the eyes are bright, the ears are sensitive, the sense of smell is keen, the mouth is slender, and the bones and sinews of the whole body are smoothly stretched. People like this do not need to speak to be faithful, do not need to plan to be proper, and do not need to think to get something. Their spirit reaches heaven and earth, covering the universe. For foreign things, they are all unbearable, all intolerant, just like heaven and earth. They are not proud to be a heavenly son, and they are not sad to be a commoner

古文：此之谓全德之人。
现代文：像这样的人，称得上是德行完全的人。
English: A man like this can be said to be a man of complete virtue.

古文：贵富而不知道，适足以为患，不如贫贱。
现代文：富贵而不懂得养生之道，正足以成为祸患，与其这样，还不如贫贱。
English: It is bad enough to be rich without knowing how to take care of oneself, but it is even worse to be poor.

古文：贫贱之致物也难，虽欲过之，奚由？
现代文：贫贱的人获得东西根难，即使想要过度地沉两于物质享受之中，又从哪儿去弄到呢？
English: It is difficult for poor people to obtain things. Even if they want to excessively indulge in material enjoyment, where will they get it from?

古文：出则以车，入则以辇，务以自佚，命之曰 招蹶之机 。
现代文：出门乘车，进门坐辇，务求安逸舒适，这种车辇应叫敢 招致脚病的器械 。
English: Go out by car, enter the door to sit on the mat, in order to be comfortable and comfortable, this mat should be called "dare to invite foot disease" equipment.

古文：肥肉厚酒，务以自强，命之曰 烂肠之食 。
现代文：吃肥肉，喝醇酒，极力勉强自己吃喝，这种酒肉应该叫做 腐烂肠于的食物 。
English: Eating fatty meat, drinking strong liquor, and trying hard to force oneself to eat and drink, such liquor and meat should be called "food that rots the intestines."

古文：靡曼皓齿，郑卫之音，务以自乐，命之曰 伐性之斧 。
现代文：迷恋女色，陶醉于淫靡之音，极尽辜乐，这种美色、音乐应该叫做 砍伐生命的利斧 。
English: Infatuated with female beauty, intoxicated with the sounds of debauchery, and making the most of innocent music, this kind of beauty and music should be called "the axe for cutting down life."

古文：三患者，贵富之所致也。
现代文：这三种祸患都是富贵所招致的。
English: All three of these evils are caused by wealth.

古文：故古之人有不肯贵富者矣，由重生故也；非夸以名也，为其实也。
现代文：所以古代就有不肯富贵的人了，这是由于重视生命的缘故，并不是用轻视富贵钓取虚名来夸耀自己，而是为保垒生命。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, there were people who did not want to be rich. This was due to the importance of life. It was not to despise the rich and get a false name to boast, but to protect life.

古文：则此论之不可不察也。
现代文：既然这样，那么以上这些道理是不可不明察的。
English: That being the case, the above-mentioned reasons cannot be ignored.

古文：三曰：倕，至巧也。
现代文：重己
English: Shigemitsu

古文：人不爱倕之指，而爱己之指，有之利故也。
现代文：倕是手最巧的人，但是人们不爱惜他的手指，而是爱惜自己的手指，这是由于它属于自己所有而有利于自己的缘故。
English: The baboon is the most dexterous of hands, but people do not spare his fingers, but their own, because it belongs to them and is useful to them.

古文：人不爱昆山之玉、江汉之珠，而爱己之一苍璧小玑，有之利故也。
现代文：人们不爱惜昆山的宝玉，江汉的明珠，却爱护自己的一块成色不高的宝石，一颗不圆的小珠，这是自己的东西才对自己有用的缘故。
English: People do not cherish Kunshan's precious jade, the pearl of the Han Dynasty, but they cherish their own piece of low-quality gemstone, a small round bead. This is because their own things are only useful to themselves.

古文：今吾生之为我有，而利我亦大矣。
现代文：现在我的生命归我所有，给我带来的好处也很多。
English: Now my life belongs to me, and it has brought me many benefits.

古文：论其贵贱，爵为天子，不足以比焉；论其轻重，富有天下，不可以易之；论其安危，一曙失之，终身不复得。
现代文：从贵贱方面来说，即使地位高到做天子，也不能够和它相比；从轻重方面来说，即使富裕到拥有天下，也不能和它交换；从安危方面来说，一旦有一天失去了它，就一生再也不能得到。
English: From the perspective of nobility and inferiority, even if one's status is high enough to be a heavenly son, one cannot be compared to it; from the perspective of importance, even if one is rich enough to own the whole world, one cannot be exchanged with it; from the perspective of safety and security, once you lose it one day, you can never get it again in your lifetime.

古文：此三者，有道者之所慎也。
现代文：这三个方面，是有道行的人小心的地方。
English: These three aspects are where those with the Way should be careful.

古文：有慎之而反害之者，不达乎性命之情也。
现代文：有虽然小心但却造成损害的人，这是没有领悟人性与生命的情理。
English: There are those who, though careful, cause harm, and this is a failure to understand human nature and the nature of life.

古文：不达乎性命之情，慎之何益？
现代文：不领悟人性、生命的情理，小心又有什么用？
English: Without understanding human nature and the reason for life, what is the use of being careful?

古文：是师者之爱子也，不免乎枕之以糠；是聋者之养婴儿也，方雷而窥之于堂。
现代文：这就像盲人虽然疼爱儿子，但却免不了让他枕在谷糠上；这就像聋子养育婴儿，正在打雷的时候却让他在堂屋里向外观望。
English: It is like a blind man who loves his son dearly, but cannot help resting him on a stump in the valley; it is like a deaf man who brings up a baby, but lets him look out of the house when it is thundering.

古文：有殊弗知慎者？
现代文：这比起不知道小心的人有过之而无不及。
English: This is nothing compared to people who don't know how to be careful.

古文：夫弗知慎者，是死生存亡可不可未始有别也。
现代文：不知道小心的人，对生死存亡、可以不可以，从来没有辨别清楚。
English: People who don't know how to be careful never have a clear understanding of life and death, survival, and what is acceptable and what is not.

古文：未始有别者，其所谓是未尝是，其所谓非未尝非。
现代文：没辨别清楚的人，他们所说的正确不一定是正确的，他们所谓的错误也未必是错误的。
English: People who do not distinguish clearly, what they say is correct is not necessarily correct, and their so-called mistakes are not necessarily wrong.

古文：是其所谓非，非其所谓是，此之谓大惑。
现代文：对的说成不对的，不对的说成对的，这就非常糊涂。像这样的人是上天降祸的对象。
English: It's very confusing to say the right thing in the wrong way, and the wrong thing in the right way. People like this are the object of God's wrath.

古文：若此人者，天之所祸也。以此治身，必死必殃；以此治国，必残必亡。
现代文：用这种态度修身，必定死亡，必定遭祸；用这种态度治理国家，必定衰败，必定灭亡。
English: If you cultivate yourself with such an attitude, you are sure to die and suffer misfortune; if you govern the country with such an attitude, you are sure to decline and perish.

古文：夫死殃残亡，非自至也，惑召之也。寿长至常亦然。
现代文：这种死亡、遭祸、衰败和灭亡不是自动找上门来的，而是糊涂招来的。长寿也常常是这样。
English: This kind of death, misfortune, decay, and ruin are not brought about spontaneously, but are brought about through ignorance, and this is often the case with longevity.

古文：故有道者不察所召，而察其召之者，则其至不可禁矣。
现代文：所以，有道行的人，不察看导致的结果，而察看引起它的原因，那么达到的结果就是不可遏制的了。
English: Therefore, those who have the way of practice do not look at the result of the cause, but at the cause of the cause, and then the result is irrepressible.

古文：此论不可不熟。
现代文：这个道理不能不彻底理解。
English: This principle must be thoroughly understood.

古文：使乌获疾引牛尾，尾绝力勯，而牛不可行，逆也。
现代文：让乌获这样的大力士去拉住牛的尾巴，即使尾巴拽断了，人的力气用完了，牛还是不走，这是由于它违背了牛的性子。
English: Even if the tail is pulled off and the human strength is exhausted, the cow still does not leave, because it violates the nature of the cow.

古文：使五尺竖子引棬竖，而牛恣所以之，顺也。
现代文：让五尺高的小孩子去牵住牛鼻子上的环，让牛去哪里牛就去哪里，这是顺从了牛的性子。
English: Letting a five-foot-tall child hold the ring on the cow's nose, letting the cow go wherever the cow goes, is obeying the nature of the cow.

古文：世之人主贵人，无贤不肖，莫不欲长生久视，而日逆其生，欲之何益？
现代文：世上的君主、贵族，不论好坏，没有不想长寿的，却每天都违反自己生命的本性，这对长生有什么好处呢？
English: The princes and nobles of the world, whether good or bad, do not want to live long, but they violate the nature of their lives every day. What is the benefit of longevity?

古文：凡生之长也，顺之也；使生不顺者，欲也。
现代文：大凡要想长寿的，就得顺从自己的生命本性；而使生命不顺应的就是人的欲望。
English: Anyone who wants to live a long life must obey his own life nature; and it is human desires that make life not conform.

古文：故圣人必先适欲。
现代文：所以圣人一定会先抑制自己的欲望。
English: Therefore, a sage must first restrain his desires.

古文：室大则多阴，台高则多阳；多阴则蹶，多阳则痿。
现代文：房间大了阴气就重，台子高了阳气就多；阴气重了就会生脚病，阳气多了就会肌肉萎缩。
English: If the room is bigger, the yin will be heavier, if the table is higher, the yang will be more; if the yin is heavier, the foot will get sick, and if the yang is more, the muscles will atrophy.

古文：此阴阳不适之患也。
现代文：这是阴阳不适宜所造成的害处。
English: This is the harm caused by the unsuitability of yin and yang.

古文：是故先王不处大室，不为高台，味不众珍，衣不燀热。
现代文：于是先代的君主不住大屋子，不建造高台，不吃珍奇的食物，不穿过于保暖的衣服。
English: As a result, the previous monarchs did not live in large houses, did not build high platforms, did not eat exotic foods, and did not wear clothes that were too warm.

古文：燀热则理塞，理塞则气不达；味众珍则胃充，胃充则中大鞔，中大鞔而气不达。
现代文：穿的衣服过厚就会经脉阻塞，经脉阻塞就会气血不流畅；吃珍奇的食物胃里就会不舒服，胃里撑得慌就会肚子胀气，肚子胀气就会不通畅。
English: If you wear clothes that are too thick, your menstrual blood will be blocked, and if your menstrual blood is blocked, your qi and blood will not flow smoothly; if you eat rare foods, your stomach will be uncomfortable, and if your stomach is in a panic, your stomach will be bloated, and the bloating will not flow smoothly.

古文：以此长生可得乎？
现代文：用这样的方法可以达到长寿的目的吗？
English: Can longevity be achieved in this way?

古文：昔先圣王之为苑囿园池也，足以观望劳形而已矣；其为宫室台榭也，足以辟燥湿而已矣；其为舆马衣裘也，足以逸身暖骸而已矣；其为饮食酏醴也，足以适味充虚而已矣；其为声色音乐也，足以安性自娱而已矣。五者，圣王之所以养性也，非好俭而恶费也，节乎性也。
现代文：以前圣王的院子、池塘，只是够观望和活动而已；他的宫殿亭台，只要避开燥热和阴湿就可以了；他的车马衣服，只是使身体舒服暖和就行了；他的饮食，只是够吃饱就可以了；他的音乐，足够自娱自乐就行了。这五种情况，就是圣王修身养性的方法，不是因为要节俭，而是要控制自己的本性。贵公
English: In the past, the courtyard and pond of the holy king were only enough for observation and activities; his palace pavilion, as long as it was possible to avoid the heat and humidity; his chariot and horse clothes, just to make the body comfortable and warm; his diet, just enough to eat enough; his music, enough to entertain himself. These five situations are the methods of the holy king's self-cultivation, not because of frugality, but to control his own nature. Your Excellency

古文：四曰：昔先圣王之治天下也，必先公。
现代文：从前，先代圣主治理天下，一定把公正无私放在首位。
English: In the past, when the previous generation of saints governed the world, they always put justice and selflessness first.

古文：公则天下平矣。
现代文：做到公正无私，天下就安定了。
English: Be fair and selfless, and the world will be stable.

古文：平得於公。
现代文：天下获得安定是由于公正无私。
English: The world is stable because it is fair and just.

古文：尝试观於上志，有得天下者众矣，其得之以公，其失之必以偏。
现代文：试考察一下古代的记载，曾经取得天下的人是相当多的了。如果说他们取得天下是由于公正无私，那么他们丧失天下必定是由于偏颇有私。
English: If you examine the ancient records, there are quite a number of people who once gained the world. If they gained the world due to fairness and selflessness, then they must have lost the world due to partial selfishness.

古文：凡主之立也，生於公。
现代文：大凡立君的本意，都是出于公正无私。
English: The original intention behind the establishment of the monarchy was out of fairness and selflessness.

古文：故《鸿范》曰： 无偏无党，王道荡荡。
现代文：所以《鸿范》中说； 不要偏私，不要结党，王道多么乎坦宽广。
English: Therefore, "Hong Fan" said: Don't be selfish, don't form a party, the royal road is so smooth and broad.

古文：无偏无颇，遵王之义。
现代文：不要偏私，不要倾侧，遵循先王的法则。
English: Don't be partial, don't take sides, follow the rules of the previous king.

古文：无或作好，遵王之道。
现代文：不要滥逞个人偏好，遵循先王的正道。
English: Do not indulge in personal preferences, but follow the righteous path of the forefathers.

古文：无或作恶，遵王之路。 
现代文：不要滥逞个人怨怒，遵循先王的正路。 
English: Do not indulge in personal grudges and follow the right path of the late king.

古文：天下，非一人之天下也，天下之天下也。
现代文：天下不是某一个人的天下，而是天下人的天下。
English: The world is not the world of one person, but the world of all people.

古文：阴阳之和，不长一类；甘露时雨，不私一物；万民之主，不阿一人。
现代文：阴阳相和，不只生长一种物类。甘露时雨，不偏私一物。万民之主，不偏粗一人。
English: When yin and yang are in harmony, not only one kind of thing will grow. When it is dew or rain, no one will be selfish. When it is the Lord of all people, no one will be rude.

古文：伯禽将行，请所以治鲁。
现代文：伯禽将去鲁国，临行前请示治理鲁国的方法。
English: Poultry will go to Russia, before departure, please advise how to govern Russia.

古文：周公曰： 利而勿利也。 
现代文：周公说。 施利给人民而不要谋取私利。 
English: Zhou Gong said, "We should benefit the people and not seek personal gain."

古文：荆人有遗弓者，而不肯索，曰： 荆人遗之，荆人得之，又何索焉？ 
现代文：有个荆人丢了弓，却不肯去寻找，他说， 荆人丢了它，反正还被荆人得到，又何必寻找呢？ 
English: There was a wren who lost his bow, but refused to go and look for it. He said, "The wren lost it, but it was given to him anyway, so why should he look for it?"

古文：孔子闻之曰： 去其 荆 而可矣。 
现代文：孔子听到这件事，说；他的话中去掉那个 荆 字就合适了。 
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said that it would be appropriate to remove the word "Jing" from his words.

古文：老聃闻之曰： 去其 人 而可矣。 
现代文：老聃听到以后说： 再去掉那个 人 字就合适了。 
English: After hearing this, Lao Zi said, "It would be appropriate to remove the Chinese character."

古文：故老聃则至公矣。
现代文：象老聃选样的人，算是达到公的最高境界了。
English: A person who selects samples like Lao Zi has reached the highest level of the public.

古文：天地大矣，生而弗子，成而弗有，万物皆被其泽，得其利，而莫知其所由始。
现代文：天地是多么伟大啊，生育人民而不把他们作为自己的子孙，成就万物而不占为己有。万物都承受它的恩泽，得到它的好处，然而却没有哪一个知道这些是从哪里来的。
English: How great are the heavens and the earth, which have begotten men, and have not made them their sons; which have brought forth all things, and have not kept any of them for themselves; wherein all things consist, wherein all things consist, wherein all things consist, wherein all things consist, wherein all things consist, wherein all things consist, wherein all things consist, wherein all things consist.

古文：此三皇五帝之德也。
现代文：这也正是三皇五帝的品德。
English: This is exactly the character of the three kings and five emperors.

古文：管仲有病，桓公往问之，曰： 仲父之病矣。
现代文：管仲有病，桓公去探问他，说； 您的病相当重了。
English: Guanzhong was ill, and King Kan went to inquire about him and said, "Your illness is quite serious.

古文：渍甚，国人弗讳，寡人将谁属国？ 
现代文：如果您病情危急，不幸与世长辞，我将把国家托付给谁呢? 
English: If you are gravely ill and unfortunately pass away, to whom will I entrust the country?

古文：管仲对曰： 昔者臣尽力竭智，犹未足以知之也。
现代文：管仲回答说。 过去我尽心竭力，尚且不足以了解这样的人。
English: Guanzhong replied, "In the past, I tried my best, but it was not enough to understand such a person.

古文：今病在於朝夕之中，臣奚能言？ 
现代文：如今病重，危在旦夕，又怎么能谈论这件事呢? 
English: How can I talk about it now, when I'm so ill and in so much danger?

古文：桓公曰： 此大事也，愿仲父之教寡人也。 
现代文：桓公说； 这是大事啊，望您能教导我。 
English: This is an important matter. I hope you can teach me.

古文：管仲敬诺，曰： 公谁欲相？ 
现代文：管仲恭敬地答应了，说：您想用谁为相? 
English: Guanzhong respectfully agreed and said, "Who would you like to use as your partner?"

古文：公曰： 鲍叔牙可乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 鲍教牙：行吗? 
English: Huan Gong said: Bao Jiazu: Is it okay?

古文：管仲对曰： 不可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 不行。
English: Guanzhong replied, "No.

古文：夷吾善鲍叔牙。鲍叔牙之为人也，清廉洁直；视不己若者，不比於人；一闻人之过，终身不忘。勿已，则隰朋其可乎？
现代文：我深知鲍叔牙：鲍叔牙的为人，清白廉正，看待不如自己的人，不屑与之为伍，假一闻知别人的过失，便终生不忘，不得已的话，隰朋大概还行吧?
English: I am well aware of Bao Shugang: Bao Shugang is a person, clean and upright, regards people who are not as good as himself, disdains to be in the same company as him, if he hears the fault of others, he will not forget it for the rest of his life. If it is a last resort, my friend is probably OK, right?

古文：隰朋之为人也，上志而下求，丑不若黄帝，而哀不己若者。
现代文：隰朋的为人，既能记识上世贤人而披效他们，又能不耻下问。自愧其德不如黄帝，又怜惜不如自己的人。
English: A good friend is someone who can not only remember the sages of the past and imitate them, but can also ask questions without shame. He is ashamed that his virtue is not as good as the Yellow Emperor, but also pities those who are not as good as himself.

古文：其於国也，有不闻也；其於物也，有不知也；其於人也，有不见也。勿已乎，则隰朋可也。 
现代文：他对于国政，不该管的，就不去打听；他对于事务，不需要了解的，就不去过问，他对于别人，无关大节的，就装作没看见。不得已的话，那么隰朋还行。 
English: He does not inquire about state affairs that he should not be in charge of; he does not go to inquire about matters that he does not need to understand; he pretends not to see others when it does not matter. If it is a last resort, then it is okay.

古文：夫相，大官也。
现代文：相，是一种很高的职位。
English: phase, is a high position.

古文：处大官者，不欲小察，不欲小智，故曰：大匠不斫，大庖不豆，大勇不斗，大兵不寇。
现代文：居于高位的人，不应该在小的地方花费精力，不应该玩弄小聪明。所以说，手艺高超的木匠不去亲自动手砍削，高超的厨师不去亲自排列食嚣，大勇之人不去亲自格斗厮杀，正义之师不去劫掠为害。
English: People in high positions should not spend energy in small places, should not play with small cleverness. Therefore, a highly skilled carpenter does not go to cut by hand, a superb chef does not go to personally arrange food, a brave person does not go to personally fight and kill, and a teacher of justice does not go to plunder.

古文：桓公行公去私恶，用管子而为五伯长；行私阿所爱，用竖刀而虫出於户。
现代文：桓公行公正，抛却私恨，起用管子而成为五霸之长，行偏私，庇护所爱，任用竖刀而致使死后国家大乱，不得殡殓，尸虫流出门外。
English: Huan Gong acted justly, abandoned personal hatred, used the tube to become the head of the five overlords, acted selfishly, loved the shelter, appointed the vertical knife and caused the country to be in turmoil after his death. He was not allowed to be buried, and the dead insects flowed out of the door.

古文：人之少也愚，其长也智。
现代文：人年轻的时候愚昧，岁数大了聪明。
English: When a man is young, he is stupid; when he is old, he is wise.

古文：故智而用私，不若愚而用公。
现代文：如果聪明而用私，不如愚昧而行公。
English: If you are clever and use me, it is better to be stupid and do public service.

古文：日醉而饰服，私利而立公，贪戾而求王，舜弗能为。
现代文：天天醉醺醺的却要整饬丧纪，自私自利却要树立公正，贪婪残暴却要称王天下，即使舜也办不到。
English: Those who are drunk and disorderly every day should be disciplined, those who are selfish and self-serving should establish justice, and those who are greedy and cruel should be praised as kings of the world, even if they can't do it.

古文：五曰：天无私覆也，地无私载也，日月无私烛也，四时无私行也。
现代文：去私天覆盖万物，没有偏私；地承载万物，没有偏私，日月普照万物，没有偏私，春夏秋冬更选交替，役有偏私。
English: The heavens cover all things, without partiality; the earth supports all things, without partiality; the sun and moon shine on all things, without partiality; spring, summer, autumn and winter alternate, with partiality.

古文：行其德而万物得遂长焉。
现代文：天地、日月，四季施其恩德，于是万物得以成长。
English: Heaven and earth, the sun and the moon, the four seasons are benevolent, so everything can grow.

古文：黄帝言曰： 声禁重，色禁重，衣禁重，香禁重，味禁重，室禁重。 
现代文：黄帝说过； 音乐禁止淫靡，色彩禁止眩目，衣服禁止厚热，香科禁止浓烈，饮食禁止丰美，宫室禁止高大。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said: music is forbidden to be lascivious, color is forbidden to be dazzling, clothes are forbidden to be thick and hot, incense is forbidden to be strong, food is forbidden to be rich, and the palace is forbidden to be tall.

古文：尧有子十人，不与其子而授舜；舜有子九人，不与其子而授禹：至公也。
现代文：尧有十个儿子，但他不把帝位传给自己的儿子而传给了舜，舜有九个儿子，但他不把帝值传给自己的儿子而传绪了禹：他们是最公正无私的了。
English: Yu had ten sons, but he did not pass the imperial throne to his sons, but to Yu. Yu had nine sons, but he did not pass the imperial values to his sons, which sent a message to Yu: they were the most just and selfless.

古文：晋平公问於祁黄羊曰： 南阳无令，其谁可而为之？ 
现代文：晋平公问祁黄羊说； 南阳缺个县令，谁可以担任这个职务? 
English: Jin Ping Gong asked Gong Huangyang: Nanyang lacks a county magistrate, who can hold this position?

古文：祁黄羊对曰： 解狐可。 
现代文：祁黄羊回答说；解狐可以。 
English: The yellow sheep replied, "You can untie the fox."

古文：平公曰： 解狐非子之雠邪？ 
现代文：平公说； 解狐不是你的仇人吗? 
English: Ping Gong said, "Isn't Zhaoxing your enemy?"

古文：对曰： 君问可，非问臣之雠也。 平公曰： 善。 
现代文：祁黄羊回答说： 您问谁可以担任这个职务，不是问谁是我的仇人。 平公称赞说： 好！ 
English: Zou Huangyang replied, "You asked who can hold this position, not who is my enemy." Ping Gong praised and said, "Good!

古文：遂用之。
现代文：就任用了解狐。
English: Appointed to understand the fox.

古文：国人称善焉。
现代文：国人对此都说好。
English: The Chinese people are all in favor of this.

古文：居有间，平公又问祁黄羊曰： 国无尉，其谁可而为之？ 
现代文：过了一段时阆，平公又对祁黄羊说， 国家缺个军尉，谁可以担任这个职务? 
English: After a period of time, Ping Gong said to Zou Huangyang, the country lacks a lieutenant, who can hold this position?

古文：对曰： 午可。 平公曰： 午非子之子邪？ 
现代文：祁黄羊回答说： 祁午可以 平公说。 祁午不是你的儿子吗? 
English: The Yellow Goat replied, "At noon, you can say, 'Isn't your son at noon?

古文：对曰： 君问可，非问臣之子也。 平公曰： 善。 
现代文：回答说； 您问谁可以担任这个职务，不是问谁是我的儿子。 平公称赞说； 好！ 
English: You are asking who can hold this position, not who is my son," he replied.

古文：又遂用之。
现代文：就又任用了祁午。
English: He was reappointed at noon.

古文：国人称善焉。
现代文：国人对此又都说好。
English: The Chinese people are all in favor of this.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 善哉！
现代文：孔子听说了这件事，说： 祁黄羊的这些话太好了！
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said, "Good!

古文：祁黄羊之论也，外举不避雠，内举不避子。祁黄羊可谓公矣。
现代文：推举外人不回避仇敌，推举家人不回避儿子 祁黄羊可称得上公正无私了
English: A foreigner is not shunned by his enemies, a family member is not shunned by his son, Zou Huangyang can be called a just and selfless leader

古文：墨者有钜子腹䵍，居秦，其子杀人，秦惠王曰： 先生之年长矣，非有他子也，寡人已令吏弗诛矣，先生之以此听寡人也。 
现代文：墨家有个太师腹䵍住在秦国，他的儿子杀了人。秦惠王对腹䵍说： 先生您的年纪已经很大了，又没有别的儿子，我已经下令给司法官不杀他了。希望先生您在这件事上听从我的话吧。 
English: Qin Hui Wang said to Diệm: "Sir, you are very old and have no other son. I have already ordered the judicial officer not to kill him. I hope you will listen to me in this matter."

古文：腹鱐对曰： 墨者之法曰： 杀人者死，伤人者刑。 
现代文：腹䵍回答说： 墨家的法律规定， 杀人者处死，伤人者受刑。 
English: Diarrhoea replied, "According to the laws of the Mo family, those who kill are to be put to death, and those who injure are to be punished.

古文：此所以禁杀伤人也。
现代文：这样做为的是严禁杀人、伤人。
English: It is strictly forbidden to kill or injure people.

古文：夫禁杀伤人者，天下之大义也。
现代文：严禁杀人、伤人，这是天下的大理。
English: It is strictly forbidden to kill or injure people. This is the universal truth.

古文：王虽为之赐，而令吏弗诛，腹鱐不可不行墨子之法。 
现代文：大王您虽然赐给我恩惠，命令司法官不杀我的儿子，但是我腹䵍却不可不执行墨家的法律。 
English: Great King, although you have granted me the favor of ordering the magistrate not to kill my son, I cannot disobey the laws of the Moche.

古文：不许惠王，而遂杀之。
现代文：腹黄享没有应允惠王，最终杀了自己的儿子。
English: Hungry Huang Jian did not respond to King Hui, and eventually killed his own son.

古文：子，人之所私也。忍所私以行大义，钜子可谓公矣。
现代文：儿子是人们所偏爱的，墨家大师腹䵍忍心杀掉自己心爱的儿子去遵行天下大理，可算得上公正无私了。
English: The son is the favorite of the people, and it is fair and selfless for the master of the Mok family to have the patience to kill his beloved son to comply with the universal principle.

古文：庖人调和而弗敢食，故可以为庖。
现代文：厨师调和五味而不敢私自食用，所以可以做厨师。
English: A chef blends five flavors and does not dare to eat it himself, so he can be a chef.

古文：若使庖人调和而食之，则不可以为庖矣。
现代文：假使厨师调和五味而私自把它吃掉，那么这样的人就不可以做厨师了。
English: If a chef mixes five flavors and eats it himself, then such a person cannot be a chef.

古文：王伯之君亦然。
现代文：成就王霸之业的君主也是如此。
English: The same is true of monarchs who have achieved great things.

古文：诛暴而不私，以封天下之贤者，故可以为王伯。
现代文：诛杀暴君，自己却不占有他的土地，而是把它分封给有德之人，所以能够成就王霸之业。
English: If you fight and kill a tyrant, but do not own his land yourself, but give it to a virtuous person, you can achieve the cause of a tyrant.

古文：若使王伯之君诛暴而私之，则亦不可以为王伯矣。
现代文：假使他们诛杀暴君而把他的土地占为己有，那么这样的君主就不能成就王霸之业了。
English: If they killed the tyrant and took his land for themselves, then such a monarch would not be able to achieve the cause of a tyrant.

