古文：○王朴王朴，字文伯，东平人也。
现代文：王朴字文伯，束平人。
English: Wang Pak, surnamed Wenbo, was from Sokping.

古文：少举进士，为校书郎，依汉枢密使杨邠。
现代文：年轻时考中进士，任校书郎，依附漠枢密使杨郇。
English: When he was young, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, was appointed as a school scribe, and was attached to the imperial envoy Yang Xuan.

古文：邠与王章、史弘肇等有隙，朴见汉兴日浅，隐帝年少孱弱，任用小人，而邠为大臣，与将相交恶，知其必乱，乃去邠东归。
现代文：杨郇和王章、史弘肇等人有矛盾，王朴眼见汉的建国时间不长，汉隐帝年轻孱弱，任用小人，而杨合作为大臣，和将相们结怨，知道漠一定会乱，于是离开杨郇东归。
English: Yang Hui had conflicts with Wang Zhang, Shi Hongzhao and others. Wang Pak saw that the founding of Han was not long, Emperor Han Yin was young and weak, and appointed villains, while Yang Guo was a minister. He and the generals had a grudge, and knew that chaos was inevitable, so he left Yang Hui and returned to the East.

古文：后李业等教隐帝诛权臣，邠与章、弘肇皆见杀，三家之客多及，而朴以故独免。
现代文：后来李业等人教漠隐帝诛杀权臣，杨郇和王章、史弘肇等人都被杀，这三家的门客多受牵连，而王朴因此一人得以幸免。
English: Later, Li Ye and others tried to persuade Emperor Muyin to assassinate a high-ranking official, and Yang Xi, Wang Zhang, Shi Hongzhao and others were all killed. Most of the clients of these three families were implicated, but Wang Pu was spared as a result.

古文：周世宗镇澶州，朴为节度掌书记。
现代文：周世宗镇守澶州，王朴任节度掌书记。
English: Zhou Shizong served as the governor of Bozhou, and Wang Pak served as the secretary of the festival.

古文：世宗为开封尹，拜朴右拾遗，为推官。
现代文：周世宗任开封尹，拜王朴为右拾遣，任推官。
English: Zhou Shizong held the position of Kaifeng Yin, and Bai Wangpu was the right-hand man, and served as the deputy.

古文：世宗即位，迁比部郎中，献《平边策》，曰：唐失道而失吴、蜀，晋失道而失幽、并。
现代文：周世宗登位，升任比部郎中，进献《平边策》，写道：唐失治国之道而失去昊、蜀，晋失治国之道而失去幽、并二州。
English: Zhou Shizong ascended to the throne and was promoted to the position of Hiburo, and presented the "Plain Edge Strategy," writing: Tang lost the way of governing the country and lost Hao and Shu, Jin lost the way of governing the country and lost Yu, and two states were unified.

古文：观所以失之之由，知所以平之之术。
现代文：观察它们之所以失地的原因，就能懂得平定天下的办法。
English: By observing the reasons why they lost ground, we can understand the way to pacify the world.

古文：当失之时，君暗政乱，兵骄民困，近者奸于内，远者叛于外，小不制而至于僭，大不制而至于滥，天下离心，人不用命，吴、蜀乘其乱而窃其号，幽、并乘其间而据其地。
现代文：当失地的时候，君主昏庸，政治紊乱，军队骄横，百姓贫困，接近皇帝的人在朝廷内做坏事，逮离皇帝的人在外面反叛，小事情不能控制就导致超越本分，大事情不能控制就导致过分，天下离心离德，人们不服从命令，昊、蜀乘乱窃取国号，幽、并利用空隙而占据土地。
English: When there is a loss of territory, the monarch is drowsy, there is political disorder, the army is arrogant, the people are poor, those who are close to the emperor do bad things in the imperial court, those who are caught away from the emperor rebel outside, if small things cannot be controlled, they will exceed their duties, if big things cannot be controlled, they will go too far, the world is alienated from morality, people do not obey orders, Hao and Shu ride in disorder to steal the national name, and occupy land by taking advantage of vacuums.

古文：平之之术，在乎反唐、晋之失而已。
现代文：平定它们的办法，在于纠正唐、晋的过失罢了。
English: The way to pacify them is to correct the mistakes of Tang and Jin.

古文：必先进贤退不肖，以清其时；用能去不能，以审其材；恩信号令，以结其心；赏功罚罪，以尽其力；恭俭节用，以丰其财；徭役以时，以阜其民。俟其仓廪实、器用备、人可用而举之。
现代文：一定要首先进用贤人斥退不贤的人，以便让时政清明；任用能人除去无能的人，以便考察他们的才能；施恩惠讲信用，号令严明，以便让他们同心同德；奖赏功劳，惩罚罪恶，以便让他们尽心尽力；勤俭节约，以便增加财富；按时分派劳役，以便让百姓休养生息等到仓库充实、器物完备、人人愿意效力然后兴兵。
English: First of all, it is necessary to employ the wise to repel the unwise, so as to make the politics of the time clear; to appoint the capable to remove the incompetent, so as to examine their talents; to grant favors, to speak of trust, and to give strict orders, so that they can be of the same mind; to reward merit and punish evil, so that they can do their best; to be diligent and frugal, so as to increase wealth; to assign laborers on time, so that the people can rest and recuperate, wait until the warehouse is full, the utensils are complete, and everyone is willing to work, and then raise an army.

古文：彼方之民，知我政化大行，上下同心，力强财足，人安将和，有必取之势，则知彼情状者愿为之间谍，知彼山川者愿为之先导。
现代文：敌方的老百姓，知道我们政教普遍推行，上下同心，力强财足，人安将和，有必能取胜的形势，那么了解敌情的人愿意做我们的间谍，了解敌方山河的人愿意做我们的先导。
English: The enemy's common people, knowing that we generally promote politics and religion, that we are united at the top and bottom, that we are strong and prosperous, that our people are safe and healthy, and that there is a situation that we can win, then those who understand the enemy's situation are willing to be our spies, and those who understand the enemy's mountains and rivers are willing to be our forerunners.

古文：彼民与此民之心同，是与天意同；与天意同，则无不成之功。
现代文：敌方的百姓和我们这里的百姓同心，这就是和天意一致；和天意一致，就没有不能成就的功业。
English: If the enemy's people and our people here are of the same mind, this is in accordance with the will of Heaven; if it is in accordance with the will of Heaven, there is no work that cannot be accomplished.

古文：攻取之道，从易者始。
现代文：进攻取胜的办法，从容易的着手。
English: The way to attack and win is to start with what is easy.

古文：当今惟吴易图，东至海，南至江，可挠之地二千里。
现代文：现在只有昊容易谋取，束至大海，南到长江，可以骚扰的地方达两千里。
English: Now, only Hao is easy to obtain, stretching to the sea, south to the Yangtze River, and there are up to two thousand miles of places that can be harassed.

古文：从少备处先挠之，备东则挠西，备西则挠东，彼必奔走以救其弊，奔走之间，可以知彼之虚实、众之强弱，攻虚击弱，则所向无前矣。
现代文：先从防备少的地方骚扰，防备束就骚扰西，防备西就骚扰束，他们一定会奔走救援防备差的地方，奔走救援的时候，可以知道对方的虚实、兵众的强弱，攻击对方虚弱之处，就所向无敌了。
English: First, they harass from places with less preparedness, then they harass the west with preparedness, and then they harass the west with preparedness. They will certainly rush to rescue places with poor preparedness. When rushing to rescue, they can know the other side's truth and falsity, the strength and weakness of the troops, and attack the other side's weakness, and they will be invincible.

古文：勿大举，但以轻兵挠之。
现代文：不要大举出兵，只要轻兵骚扰他们。
English: Don't send in the big guns, just harass them with light troops.

古文：彼人怯弱，知我师入其地，必大发以来应，数大发则民困而国竭，一不大发则我获其利。
现代文：对方怯弱，获知我们的军队进入他们的领土，必定会派大军前来应战，多次大举出兵就会导致百姓疲困、国力衰竭，一旦没有大举出兵我们就能取得胜利。
English: The other side is cowardly, and when they learn that our troops have entered their territory, they will certainly send a large army to come and fight. Repeated large-scale troop deployments will lead to fatigue of the people and exhaustion of national strength. Once there is no large-scale troop deployment, we will be able to achieve victory.

古文：彼竭我利，则江北诸州乃国家之所有也。
现代文：敌人衰竭，我们胜利，那么长江以北各州就为我们国家所有。
English: If the enemy is exhausted and we are victorious, then the states north of the Yangtze River will belong to our country.

古文：既得江北，则用彼之民，扬我之兵，江之南亦不难而平之也。
现代文：得到长江以北后，就利用他们的老百姓，显示我们的军威，长江以南也就不难平定了。
English: After gaining the north of the Yangtze River, we used their people to show our military power, and the south of the Yangtze River was not difficult to level.

古文：如此，则用力少而收功多。
现代文：如果这样，那么花费的力气少而取得的战功多。
English: If this is the case, then less effort has been expended and more war achievements have been made.

古文：得吴，则桂、广皆为内臣，岷、蜀可飞书而召之。
现代文：得到昊，那么桂、广二州都成为内臣，岷、蜀就可传信召降了。
English: If you get Hao, then Gui and Guanzhou will both become vassals, and Handan and Shu will be able to send a message to call you down.

古文：如不至，则四面并进，席卷而蜀平矣。
现代文：如不前来投降，那就从四面一起进攻，像卷席子一样平定蜀。
English: If they don't come and surrender, then we will attack them from all four sides and pacify Shu like a rolled mat.

古文：吴、蜀平，幽可望风而至。
现代文：昊、蜀乎定后，幽州会闻讯前来投降。
English: After Hao and Shu were detained, the Yuzhou Association came to surrender after hearing the news.

古文：唯并必死之寇，不可以恩信诱，必须以强兵攻，力已竭，气已丧，不足以为边患，可为后图。
现代文：只有并州那些誓死不投降的盗寇，不能用恩信诱降，必须用强兵进攻，等他们力尽气衰，不足以成为我们的边患时，可最后算计它。
English: Only those bandits in the annexed prefectures who are determined not to surrender cannot use the letter of credence to induce surrender, but must attack with strong soldiers. When they have exhausted their strength and are not strong enough to become our borderlands, we can finally calculate it.

古文：方今兵力精练，器用具备，群下知法，诸将用命，一稔之后，可以平边。
现代文：如今军队精悍干练，武器军需完备充足，部下守法，各将听命，一年之后，就可以平定边患。
English: Today, the army is vigorous and capable, the weapons and military supplies are complete and sufficient, the subordinates abide by the law, and everyone will obey orders. After one year, it will be possible to quell the border problems.

古文：臣书生也，不足以讲大事，至于不达大体，不合机变，惟陛下宽之。
现代文：我是一个书生，不足以谈论大事，以至于不识大体，不合权变，希望陛下谅解！
English: I'm a bookworm, I'm not good enough to talk about big things, so I don't know the big picture, I don't agree with the coup, I hope Your Majesty will understand!

古文：迁左谏议大夫，知开封府事。
现代文：升任左谏议大夫，知开封府事。
English: He was promoted to Zuo Jianli Doctor, and became a member of the cabinet.

古文：岁中，迁左散骑常侍，充端明殿学士。
现代文：一年之中，升任左散骑常侍，充端明殿学士。
English: In the course of a year, he was promoted to Zuo Sanzhong riding attendant, and became a full-fledged Myeongdong scholar.

古文：是时，世宗新即位，锐意征伐，已挠群议，亲败刘旻于高平，归而益治兵，慨然有平一天下之志。
现代文：这时，周世宗刚登位，锐意征伐进取，已经拒绝群臣的议论，亲自在高平打败刘曼，回来后更加用力整治军队，慷慨激昂有平定统一天下的大志。
English: At this time, Zhou Shizong had just ascended to the throne, was determined to conquer and advance, had already rejected the discussion of the ministers, personally defeated Liu Man in Gaoping, and after returning, he made more efforts to rectify the army, and was impassioned with the ambition of pacifying and unifying the country.

古文：数顾大臣问治道，选文学之士徐台符等二十人，使作《为君难为臣不易论》及《平边策》，朴在选中。
现代文：多次向大臣们询问治国之道，挑选文学之士徐台符等二十人，让他们写《为君难为臣不易论》和《平边策》，王朴列在人选中。
English: He repeatedly asked the ministers about the way of governing the country, and selected twenty people, including the literary man Xu Taifu, and asked them to write "It is difficult for a prince to be a subject" and "Plain Edge Strategy." Wang Pak was among the candidates.

古文：而当时文士皆不欲上急于用武，以谓平定僭乱，在修文德以为先。
现代文：而当时的文士都不希望皇上急于用兵打仗，认为平定篡位叛乱的人，首先在于培养文德。
English: However, the scribes at that time did not want the emperor to rush to fight with soldiers, believing that the pacification of those who usurped the throne and rebelled was, first and foremost, the cultivation of literary virtue.

古文：惟翰林学士陶谷窦仪、御史中丞杨昭俭与朴皆言用兵之策，朴谓江淮为可先取。
现代文：只有翰林学士陶谷和寅仪、御史中丞杨昭俭和王朴都谈论用兵的策略，王朴说长江、淮河一带可以首先攻取。
English: Only the scholars Tao Gu and Yin Yi, and the historians Yang Zhaojian and Wang Pak discussed the strategy of using troops. Wang Pak said that the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River area could be captured first.

古文：世宗雅已知朴，及见其议论伟然，益以为奇，引与计议天下事，无不合，遂决意用之。
现代文：周世宗一向了解王朴，当看到他的议论宏伟，更把他看成奇才，召他商计天下大事，意见无不相合，于是下决心重用他。
English: Zhou Shizong had always understood Wang Pu, and when he saw the grandeur of his arguments, he saw him as a genius, called him to discuss the world's major events, and the opinions were all in agreement, so he made up his mind to reuse him.

古文：显德三年，征淮，以仆为东京副留守。
现代文：显德三年，出征淮南，任王朴为束京副留守。
English: In the third year of Xiande, he went to Huainan, and Wang Pu stayed behind as deputy of Sokjing.

古文：还，拜户部侍郎、枢密副使，迁枢密使。
现代文：返回后，拜为户部侍郎、枢密副使，升任枢密使。
English: After his return, Bae was appointed as the Household Attendant, Deputy Privy Envoy, and Privy Envoy.

古文：四年，再征淮，以朴留守京师。
现代文：四年，再次出征淮南，任王朴留守京师。
English: Four years later, he went to Huainan again, while Wang Pu remained in Beijing.

古文：世宗之时，外事征伐，而内修法度。
现代文：周世宗在位的时候，对外从事征伐，而在内讲求法治。
English: When Zhou Shizong was on the throne, he engaged in foreign conquest, but inside he insisted on the rule of law.

古文：朴为人明敏多材智，非独当世之务，至于阴阳律历之法，莫不通焉。
现代文：王朴为人聪明机敏多才多智，不只是当代的事务，至于阴阳律历，都无不精通。
English: Wang Pak is a clever and resourceful person. He is not only familiar with contemporary affairs, but also with the yin and yang calendar.

古文：显德二年，诏朴校定大历，乃削去近世符天流俗不经之学，设通、经、统三法，以岁轨离交朔望周变率策之数，步日月五星，为《钦天历》。
现代文：显德二年，诏令王朴校定大历，于是删除近代附会天命世俗荒诞不经的学说，设置通法、经法、统法，用岁率、轨率离率、交率、朔策、望策、周率、变率等数字，推算日月五星的运行，写成《钦天历》。
English: In the second year of Xiande, the emperor ordered Wang Pak to calibrate the great calendar, thus deleting the doctrine of the modern subsidiary society of the fate of the world, setting up the common law, the law of the law, the unified law, and using the year rate, the orbit rate, the departure rate, the intersection rate, the arrival rate, the expectation rate, the frequency rate, the variation rate and other figures to calculate the movement of the five stars of the sun and the moon, and write the "Qing Heavenly Calendar."

古文：六年，又诏朴考正雅乐，朴以谓十二律管互吹，难得其真，乃依京房为律准，以九尺之弦十三，依管长短寸分设柱，用七声为均，乐成而和。
现代文：六年，又下诏令王朴考正雅乐，王朴认为十二律管互吹，难以反映真实的情况，于是按京房的说法制作律准，以九尺长的弦十三根，依律管长短寸分设柱，用七声为音阶，乐成很和谐。
English: Six years later, he issued an edict ordering Wang Pu to examine the quality of classical music. Wang Pu thought that it was difficult to reflect the real situation because the twelve tuning forks were blowing against each other, so he made a tuning standard according to the saying of the Jing Fang, with thirteen strings of nine feet in length, with columns divided according to the length of the tuning forks, and with seven tones as the musical scale. The result was very harmonious.

古文：朴性刚果，又见信于世宗，凡其所为，当时无敢难者，然人亦莫能加也。
现代文：王朴性格刚强果断，又受到周世宗信任，凡是他做的事，当时没有敢指责为难的人，但人们也不能够超过他。
English: Wang Pak's character was strong and decisive, and he was trusted by Zhou Shizong. Whatever he did, no one dared to criticize him at that time, but people could not surpass him.

古文：世宗征淮，朴留京师，广新城，通道路，庄伟宏阔，今京师之制，多其所规为。
现代文：周世宗出征淮南，王朴留守京师，扩大新城，疏通道路，十分壮伟雄阔，现在京师的格局，大多是他规划建成的。
English: Zhou Shizong went to Huainan, Wang Pu stayed in Beijing, expanded the new city, and cleared the roads. It was very grand and magnificent. Most of the current layout of Beijing was planned and built by him.

古文：其所作乐，至今用之不可变。
现代文：他考订的音乐，用到现在不可改变。
English: The music he composed is still in use today.

古文：其陈用兵之略，非特一时之策。
现代文：他陈述的用兵策略，不只是应付一时的策略。
English: The troop strategy he outlined is not just a stopgap measure.

古文：至言诸国兴灭次第云： 淮南可最先取，并必死之寇，最后亡。 
现代文：至于他论述各国兴亡的次序说： 可以首先攻取淮南，并州是必死的盗寇，最后灭亡。 
English: As for the order in which he discussed the rise and fall of various countries, he said: Huainan can be conquered first, and Bozhou is a deadly bandit, and finally perishes.

古文：其后宋兴，平定四方，惟并独后服，皆如朴言。
现代文：后来宋朝兴起，平定四方，只有并州最后被制服，都像王朴所说的那样。
English: Later, the Song Dynasty arose and pacified the four directions, only the unified states were finally subdued, all as Wang Pu said.

古文：六年春，世宗遣朴行视汴口，作斗门，还，过故相李穀第，疾作，仆于坐上，舁归而卒，年五十四。
现代文：六年春，周世宗派王朴巡枧汴口，建斗门，返回时，拜访旧相李谷的家，发病，倒在座上，被人抬回后就死了、时年五十四岁。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Wang Pak, a member of the Zhou Sect, visited Jiantu Gate. On his return, he visited the home of his old friend Li Gu. He fell ill, collapsed on the seat, and died at the age of fifty-four after being carried back.

古文：世宗临其丧，以玉钺叩地，大恸者数四。赠侍中。
现代文：周世宗亲临吊唁，用玉钹叩地，多次大声痛哭。赠侍中。
English: Zhou Shizong personally came to offer condolences, tapped the ground with a jade hammer, and cried loudly many times. He was awarded the title of attendant.

古文：○郑仁诲郑仁诲，字日新，太原晋阳人也。
现代文：郑仁诲字日新，太原晋阳人。
English: Zheng Renchu is a Risshin, Taiyuan Jinyang people.

古文：初，事唐将陈绍光。
现代文：最初，跟随唐将陈绍光。
English: At first, Chen Shaoguang followed Tang.

古文：绍光为人骁勇而好使酒，尝因醉怒仁诲，拔剑欲杀之，左右皆奔走，仁诲植立不动，无惧色，绍光掷剑于地，抚仁诲曰： 汝有器量，必富贵，非吾所及也。 
现代文：陈绍光为人骁悍勇猛而好因酒使性，曾因喝醉酒对郑仁诲发怒，拔出剑想杀掉他，手下人都逃掉了，郑仁诲直立不动，脸无惧色，陈绍光把剑扔在地上，安抚郑仁诲说： 你有器量，必定会富贵，不是我能赶得上的。 
English: Chen Shaoguang was a tough and brave man, but he was prone to drunkenness. He was angry with Zheng Renya because he was drunk. He pulled out his sword to kill him, and his men all fled. Zheng Renya stood upright and motionless, his face was fearless. Chen Shaoguang threw his sword on the ground to appease Zheng Renya and said, "You have the ability, you will surely be rich. I can't catch up with you."

古文：仁诲后弃绍光去，还乡里，事母以孝闻。
现代文：郑仁诲后来脱离陈绍光而去，回到乡间，侍奉母亲以孝出名。
English: Zheng Renya later broke away from Chen Shaoguang and returned to the countryside, where he served his mother and became famous for his filial piety.

古文：汉高祖为河东节度使，周太祖居帐下，时时往过仁诲，与语甚欢。
现代文：汉高祖任河东节度使，周太祖为部下，常常去拜访郑仁诲，和他交谈很高兴。
English: Henkel's great-grandfather was the Hedong Festival envoy, and Zhou Taizu was his subordinate. He often visited Zheng Renya, and it was a pleasure to talk with him.

古文：每事有疑，即从仁诲质问，仁诲所对不阿，周太祖益奇之。
现代文：每当事情有疑问，就找郑仁诲询问，郑仁诲的回答不曲从迎合，周太祖更觉得他了不起。
English: Whenever there is a doubt about something, he would ask Zheng Renya for an answer. Zheng Renya's answer was always accommodating, and Zhou Taizu thought he was great.

古文：汉兴，周太祖为枢密使，乃召仁诲用之，累官至内客省使。
现代文：汉建立，周太祖任枢密使，于是召用郑仁诲，屡次升迁至内容省使。
English: When the Han Dynasty was established, Zhou Taizu served as the Privy Envoy, and then summoned Zheng Renya, who was repeatedly promoted to the Content Provincial Envoy.

古文：太祖破李守贞于河中，军中机画，仁诲多所参决。
现代文：周太祖在河中攻破李守贞，军中的机务策划，郑仁诲大多参与决定。
English: Zhou Taizu defeated Li Shouzhen in the middle of the river, and Zheng Renya was mostly involved in the decision-making of the military's operational planning.

古文：太祖入立，以仁诲为大内都点检、恩州团练使、枢密副使，累迁宣徽北院使，出为镇宁军节度使。显德元年，拜枢密使。
现代文：周太祖登位，任郑仁诲为大内都点检、恩州团练使、枢密副使，多次升任至宣徽北院使，出任镇宁军节度使显德元年，拜为枢密使。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, and Zheng Renya was appointed as the inspector of the Inner Capital, the envoy of the Enzhou group, and the vice-envoy of the Privy Council. He was promoted to the envoy of the Northern Yuan of Xuanhu several times, and served as the commander of the Zhenning Army in the first year of Xiande, and was worshiped as the envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：世宗攻河东，仁诲留守东都。
现代文：周世宗进攻河东，郑仁诲留守束都。
English: Zhou Shizong attacked Hedong, and Zheng Renya stayed behind in Sokdu.

古文：明年冬，以疾卒。
现代文：第二年冬，因病而死。
English: He died of illness in the winter of the following year.

古文：世宗将临其丧，有司言岁不利临丧，世宗不听，乃先以桃荝而临之。
现代文：周世宗准备亲临致衷，官吏说年岁不利于亲临致哀，周世宗不听，于是先用桃木、笤帚扫除不祥而亲临致哀。
English: Zhou Shizong was preparing to pay his respects in person, but the officials said that his age was not conducive to paying his respects in person. Zhou Shizong did not listen, so he first used peach wood and reeds to sweep away the ominous and then came to pay his respects in person.

古文：仁诲自其微时，常为太祖谋画，及居大位，未尝有所闻，而太祖、世宗皆亲重之，然亦能谦谨好礼，不自矜伐，为士大夫所称。
现代文：郑仁诲从微贱时开始，常常为周太祖策谋规划，到官居要职时，不曾有所建树，而周太祖、周世宗都很亲信重用他，但也能谦谨好礼，不矜持居功，受到士大夫的称赞。
English: From his humble beginnings, Zheng Renya often schemed and planned for Zhou Taizong. When he became an important official, he did not accomplish anything. Zhou Taizong and Zhou Shizong were very close to him and used him, but he was also modest and polite, did not hold back in taking credit, and was praised by the scholar.

古文：赠中书令，追封韩国公，谥曰忠正。
现代文：赠中书令，追封为韩国公，谧号为忠正。
English: He was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun, posthumously awarded the title of Prince of Korea, and given the posthumous name of Tadamasa.

古文：○扈载扈载，字仲熙，北燕人也。
现代文：扈载字仲熙，北燕人。
English: 载字中熙,北燕人.

古文：少好学，善属文。
现代文：年轻时好学，擅长写文章。
English: When young, he was eager to learn and good at writing articles.

古文：广顺初，举进士高第，拜校书郎，直史馆。
现代文：广顺初年，考进士名列前茅，任为校书郎，直史馆。
English: In the first year of Guangshun, he was one of the top candidates for the entrance examination, and was appointed as the school scribe, the direct history museum.

古文：再迁监察御史。
现代文：两次升任至监察御史。
English: He was promoted to the position of inspector general of history.

古文：其为文章，以辞多自喜。
现代文：他写文章，以文辞丰富自呜得意。
English: He writes articles and prides himself on the richness of his language.

古文：常次历代有国废兴治乱之迹为《运源赋》，甚详。
现代文：曾编排历代国家兴亡治乱的事迹为《运源赋》，十分详备。
English: He once compiled a very detailed account of the rise and fall of countries and the handling of turmoil over the ages in "The Source of Prosperity."

古文：又因游相国寺，见庭竹可爱，作《碧鲜赋》，题其壁，世宗闻之，遣小黄门就壁录之，览而称善，因拜水部员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：又因游相国寺，看见庭院中竹子可爱，作《碧鲜赋》，题写在寺壁上，周世宗听说了，派小黄门到壁旁抄录，看了后说好，于是任为水部员外郎、知制诰。
English: Also, because of his visit to Shokoku-ji Temple, he saw the lovely bamboo growing in the courtyard and made "Bishang Fu," which was inscribed on the temple wall. When Zhou Shizong heard about it, he sent Xiao Huangmen to copy it next to the wall. After reading it, he said yes, and was appointed as the water department member Wai Rong and Zhisheng Yao.

古文：迁翰林学士，赐绯，而载已病，不能朝谢。
现代文：升任翰林学士，赐给徘衣，而扈载已生病，不能入朝谢恩。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Hanlin Scholar and given a robe, but he was already ill and could not enter the imperial palace.

古文：居百余日，乃力疾入直学士院。
现代文：过了一百多天，纔强忍病痛去学士院值班。
English: After more than a hundred days, he stubbornly endured the pain and went to the academy on duty.

古文：世宗怜之，赐告还第，遣太医视疾。
现代文：周世宗哀怜他，给假让他回家，派太医给他看病。
English: Zhou Shizong felt sorry for him, gave him leave to go home, and sent a doctor to see him.

古文：初，载以文知名一时，枢密使王朴尤重其才，荐于宰相李穀，久而不用，朴以问穀曰： 扈载不为舍人，何也？ 
现代文：当初，扈载因文章知名一时，枢密使王朴尤其看重他的才能，向宰相李谷推荐他，但很久不受重用，王朴因此询问李谷说： 不任扈载为舍人，为什么呢？ 
English: At first, because of his well-known articles, the Privy Councilor Wang Pu especially valued his talent and recommended him to the Prime Minister Li Gu. However, he was not used for a long time. Wang Pu therefore asked Li Gu: "You don't allow him to be a layman. Why?

古文：穀曰： 非不知其才，然载命薄，恐不能胜。 
现代文：李谷说： 不是不了解他的才能，但扈载薄命，恐怕他不能胜任。 
English: Li Gu said: It's not that I don't understand his talent, but I'm afraid he's not up to the job.

古文：朴曰： 公为宰相，以进贤退不肖为职，何言命邪？ 
现代文：王朴说： 你作为宰相，应以进用贤人斥退不贤的人为职责，为什么谈命相呢？ 
English: Wang Pak said, "As the prime minister, your duty is to promote the wise and expel the unwise. Why are you talking about the oracle?

古文：已而召拜知制诰。
现代文：不久召拜为知制诰。
English: Soon after, he was summoned to serve as chizokui.

古文：及为学士，居岁中病卒，年三十六。
现代文：到任学士后，不到一年就病死，时年三十六岁。
English: After receiving his bachelor's degree, he died of illness less than a year later, at the age of 36.

古文：议者以穀能知人而朴能荐士。
现代文：议事的人认为李谷能了解人而王朴能推荐贤士。
English: The negotiators thought that Li Gu could understand people and Wang Pak could recommend sages.

古文：是时，天子英武，乐延天下奇才，而尤礼文士，载与张昭、窦俨、陶穀、徐台符等俱被进用。
现代文：这时，天子英武，喜好招延天下奇才，而对文士尤其以礼相待，扈载和张昭、窦俨、陶谷、徐台符等人都受到进用。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizong liked to invite the world's greatest wizards, and especially treated scribes with courtesy, and Zhang Zhao, Dou Xuan, Tao Gu, Xutai Fu and others were all used.

古文：穀居数人中，文辞最劣，尤无行。
现代文：陶壳在这几个人当中，文章最差，尤其没有德行。
English: Among these few people, pottery shell is the worst article, especially without virtue.

古文：昭、俨数与论议，其文粲然，而穀徒能先意所在，以进谀取合人主，事无大小，必称美颂赞，至于广京城，为木偶耕人、紫芝白兔之类，皆为颂以献，其辞大抵类俳优。
现代文：张昭、实俨多次和皇上论议，文采明丽，而陶谷只能先揣测皇上心意所在，以便谄媚取悦，事情无谕大小，都必定称颂赞美，以至于扩修京城、做木偶耕夫、紫芝白兔一类的事，都作颂进献，文辞大抵和俳谐戏子差不多。
English: Zhang Zhao and Shizheng repeatedly discussed with the emperor, and the writing was clear and beautiful, while Tao Gu could only guess the emperor's intention first, so as to be charming and pleasing. No matter how big or small, things must be praised and praised, so that the expansion of the capital, the work of the puppet farmer, the purple and white rabbit and other things were all praised and praised, and the words were mostly similar to those of the haiku actor.

古文：而载以不幸早卒，论议虽不及昭、俨，而不为穀之谀也。
现代文：而扈载因不幸早死，论议虽比不上张昭、窦俨，但却不写陶壳那样阿谀奉承的文章。唉！
English: On the other hand, he died prematurely due to misfortune, and although his arguments were not as good as those of Zhang Zhao and Dou Qian, he did not write fawning articles like pottery shells. Alas!

古文：呜呼！作器者，无良材而有良匠；治国者，无能臣而有能君。
现代文：制作器物，没有好的材料却有好的工匠；治理国家，没有能干的臣子却有能干的君主。
English: To make utensils, there are no good materials, but there are good craftsmen; to govern the country, there are no capable courtiers, but there are capable monarchs.

古文：盖材待匠而成，臣待君而用。
现代文：大概材料依靠工匠纔能制成器物，臣子依靠君主纔能受重用。
English: It is likely that materials depend on craftsmen to be able to make utensils, and courtiers depend on the monarch to be able to be reused.

古文：故曰，治国譬之于奕，知其用而置得其处者胜，不知其用而置非其处者败。
现代文：因此说，治理国家就譬如下棋，懂得棋子的作用而把它放到合适的位置的人纔能获胜，不懂得棋子的作用而把它放到不合适的位置的人失败。
English: Therefore, it is said that governing a country is like playing chess. Those who understand the role of the pieces and put them in the right place can win, while those who do not understand the role of the pieces and put them in the wrong place fail.

古文：败者临棋注目，终日而劳心，使善奕者视焉，为之易置其处则胜矣。
现代文：失败的人对着棋子专心注目，成天劳心伤神，如果让善于下棋的人看了，只要替他改变棋子的位置就胜了。
English: The loser concentrates his attention on the chess pieces and works hard all day. If you let a good chess player look at it, he will win as long as he changes the position of the chess pieces.

古文：胜者所用，败者之棋也；兴国所用，亡国之臣也。
现代文：获胜的人所使用的棋子，正是失败的人的棋子；振兴国家所任用的人，正是国家灭亡的臣子。
English: The pawns used by the winners are the pawns of the losers; the men appointed to revitalize the country are the vassals of the country's demise.

古文：王朴之材，诚可谓能矣。
现代文：王朴的才智，确实可叫做能干。
English: Wang Pak's talent can indeed be called ability.

古文：不遇世宗，何所施哉？
现代文：没有遇上周世宗，又到哪里施展呢？
English: If you don't meet last week's sejong, where can you apply it?

古文：世宗之时，外事征伐，攻取战胜；内修制度，议刑法，定律历，讲求礼乐之遗文，所用者五代之士也，岂皆愚怯于晋、汉，而材智于周哉？
现代文：周世宗时，对外从事征伐，攻取战胜；在内完善制度，拟议刑法，考订律历，讲求礼乐遗文，所用的都是五代时的士人，难道都是在晋、汉时愚蠢怯弱，到周时方能才智俱全吗？
English: When Zhou Shizong was in power, he was engaged in conquering and conquering the outside world; when he was in power, he was perfecting the system, proposing a criminal law, establishing a legal calendar, and teaching the remains of ceremonial music. The five generations of scholars were all used. Were they all stupid and timid in the Jin and Han dynasties, and could they be intelligent in the Zhou dynasty?

古文：惟知所用尔。
现代文：周只是懂得怎样用人罢了。
English: Zhou just knows how to use people.

古文：夫乱国之君，常置愚不肖于上，而强其不能，以暴其短恶，置贤智于下，而泯没其材能，使君子、小人皆失其所，而身蹈危亡。
现代文：乱国的君主，常常把愚蠢不贤的人安在重要的位置上，而强求他们做不能胜任的事，暴露他们的缺点和罪恶；把贤智之士安置在下面，而淹没他们的才能，让君子、小人都不能处在他们应处的位置，而使自己陷于危险灭亡。
English: Princes of disorderly nations have often placed fools and ruffians in important positions, and have urged them to do things for which they are not qualified, and have exposed their faults and vices; and have placed wise men beneath them, and have drowned their talents, and have kept both gentlemen and knaves out of their proper places, and have exposed themselves to peril and ruin.

古文：治国之君，能置贤智于近，而置愚不肖于远，使君子、小人各适其分，而身享安荣。
现代文：善于治理国家的君主，能够把贤智之士安置在身旁，而疏远愚蠢不贤的人，让君子、小人各得其所，而身享安乐荣华。
English: A monarch who is good at governing the country can place the wise people next to him, and alienate the stupid and unwise people, let the gentleman and the villain have their own place, and enjoy the peace and glory.

古文：治乱相去虽远甚，而其所以致之者不多也，反其所置而已。
现代文：治与乱相差虽然很远，但导致治乱的原因却相差不多，颠倒任用人才罢了。
English: Although the difference between governance and chaos is very far, the reasons that lead to governance and chaos are similar. It's just a matter of reversing the appointment of talent.

古文：呜呼，自古治君少而乱君多，况于五代，士之遇不遇者，可胜叹哉！
现代文：唉，从古到今治国之君少而乱国之君多，何况在五代时，士人得到君主赏识与得不到君主赏识，哪能感叹得完呢！
English: Alas, from ancient times to the present, there have been few kings who ruled the country, but many kings who ruined the country. What's more, in five generations, whether the nobles were appreciated by the monarch or not, I can't help but sigh!

