古文：蒙恬者，其先齐人也。
现代文：蒙恬，他的祖先是齐国人。
English: Meng Yao, his ancestors were from Qi.

古文：恬大父蒙骜，自齐事秦昭王，官至上卿。
现代文：蒙恬的祖父蒙骜，从齐国来到秦国侍奉秦昭王，官做到上卿。
English: Meng Yao, Meng Yao's grandfather, came from Qi to Qin to serve Qin Zhao, and became a high-ranking official.

古文：秦庄襄王元年，蒙骜为秦将，伐韩，取成皋、荥阳，作置三川郡。
现代文：秦庄襄王元年，蒙骜担任秦国的将领，攻打韩国，占领了成皋、荥阳，设置了三川郡。
English: In the first year of King Xiang of Qinzhuang, Mengye served as the general of Qin, attacked Korea, occupied Chengdu and Shenyang, and set up Sanchuan County.

古文：二年，蒙骜攻赵，取三十七城。
现代文：庄襄王二年，蒙骜攻打赵国，夺取了三十七座城池。
English: In the second year of King Zhuangxiang, Mengye attacked Zhao Province and captured thirty-seven cities.

古文：始皇三年，蒙骜攻韩，取十三城。
现代文：秦始皇三年，蒙骜攻打韩国，夺取了十三座城池。
English: In the third year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang, the Mongols attacked Korea and captured thirteen cities.

古文：五年，蒙骜攻魏，取二十城，作置东郡。
现代文：始皇五年，蒙骜攻打魏国，夺取了二十座城池，设置了东郡。
English: In the first emperor's fifth year, Mengqi attacked Wei, captured twenty cities and set up Dong County.

古文：始皇七年，蒙骜卒。
现代文：始皇七年，蒙骜去世。
English: In the seventh year of the first emperor, Meng Ye passed away.

古文：骜子曰武，武子曰恬。
现代文：蒙骜的儿子叫蒙武，蒙武的儿子叫蒙恬。
English: The son of Mengyao is called Mengwu, the son of Mengwu is called Mengwu.

古文：恬尝书狱典文学。
现代文：蒙恬曾做过狱讼记录工作，并负责掌管有关文件和狱讼档案。
English: Meng Yao had previously worked on prison records and was responsible for managing the relevant documents and prison files.

古文：始皇二十三年，蒙武为秦裨将军，与王翦攻楚，大破之，杀项燕。
现代文：秦始皇二十三年，蒙武担任秦国的列将，和王翦一同攻打楚国，大败楚军，杀死了项燕。
English: In the 23rd year of the reign of Qin Shi Huangdi, Mengwu served as the general of Qin, and together with Wang Xi, he attacked Chu, defeated the Chu army, and killed Xiang Yan.

古文：二十四年，蒙武攻楚，虏楚王。
现代文：始皇二十四年，蒙武又攻打楚国，俘虏了楚王。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of the first emperor, Mengwu again attacked the State of Chu and captured the King of Chu.

古文：蒙恬弟毅。
现代文：蒙恬的弟弟叫蒙毅。
English: Meng Yao's younger brother is called Meng Yi.

古文：始皇二十六年，蒙恬因家世得为秦将，攻齐，大破之，拜为内史。
现代文：秦始皇二十六年，蒙恬由于出身将门做了秦国的将军，率兵攻打齐国，大败齐军。授给他内史的官职。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang, Meng Ye, who was born a general, became the general of Qin, led the army to attack Qi, and defeated the Qi army. He was awarded the official post of Inner History.

古文：秦已并天下，乃使蒙恬将三十万众北逐戎狄，收河南。
现代文：秦国兼并天下后，就派蒙恬带领三十万人的庞大军队，向北驱逐戎狄，收复黄河以南的土地。
English: After Qin's annexation of the whole country, he sent Mengqi to lead a huge army of 300,000 people to expel the Yongdi to the north and recover the land south of the Yellow River.

古文：筑长城，因地形，用制险塞，起临洮，至辽东，延袤万馀里。
现代文：修筑长城，利用地理形势，设置要塞，西起临洮，东到辽东，逶迤绵延一万余里。
English: The construction of the Great Wall, taking advantage of the geographical situation, set up a fortress, from Linyi in the west to Liaodong in the east, stretching more than 10,000 miles.

古文：於是渡河，据阳山，逶蛇而北。
现代文：于是渡过黄河，占据阳山，曲曲折折向北延伸。
English: As a result, they crossed the Yellow River, occupied Yangshan Mountain, and extended northward with twists and turns.

古文：暴师於外十馀年，居上郡。
现代文：烈日寒霜，风风雨雨，在外十余年，驻守上郡。
English: He was stationed in Shang County for more than ten years, enduring the scorching sun, cold and frost, ups and downs.

古文：是时蒙恬威振匈奴。
现代文：这时，蒙恬的声威震摄匈奴。
English: At this time, the muffled sound of thunder shook the Xiongnu.

古文：始皇甚尊宠蒙氏，信任贤之。
现代文：秦始皇特别尊重推崇蒙氏，信任并赏识他们的才能。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang especially respected and admired the Meng family, and trusted and appreciated their talents.

古文：而亲近蒙毅，位至上卿，出则参乘，入则御前。
现代文：因而亲近蒙毅，官至上卿。外出就陪着始皇同坐一辆车子，回到朝廷就侍奉在国君跟前。
English: As a result, he became close to Meng Yi, a high-ranking official. When he went out, he accompanied the first emperor in a car, and when he returned to the imperial court, he served in front of the sovereign.

古文：恬任外事而毅常为内谋，名为忠信，故虽诸将相莫敢与之争焉。
现代文：蒙恬在外担当着军事重任而蒙毅经常在朝廷出谋划策，被誉为忠信大臣。因此，即使是其他的将相们也没有敢和他们争宠的。
English: Meng Yao was in charge of important military tasks abroad, while Meng Yi often advised the imperial court and was known as the Minister of Loyalty. Therefore, even other generals did not dare to compete with them.

古文：赵高者，诸赵疏远属也。
现代文：赵高，是赵国王族中被疏远的亲属。
English: Zhao Gao is an estranged relative of the Zhao royal family.

古文：赵高昆弟数人，皆生隐宫，其母被刑僇，世世卑贱。
现代文：赵高兄弟几人，都是生下来就被阉割而成为宦者的，他的母亲也以犯法而被处以刑罚，所以世世代代地位卑贱。
English: Several of Zhao Gao's brothers were castrated at birth, and his mother was also punished for breaking the law, so his status was low for generations.

古文：秦王闻高彊力，通於狱法，举以为中车府令。
现代文：秦王听说赵高办事能力很强，精通刑狱法令，就提拔他担任了中车府令。
English: Qin Wang heard that Zhao Gao had strong administrative ability and was proficient in prison laws and regulations, so he promoted him to serve as the head of the People's Commissariat of Railways.

古文：高既私事公子胡亥，喻之决狱。
现代文：赵高就私下侍奉公子胡亥，教导胡亥决断讼案。
English: Zhao Gao served his son Hu Hai in private and taught Hu Hai how to adjudicate cases.

古文：高有大罪，秦王令蒙毅法治之。
现代文：赵高犯下了重罪，秦王让蒙毅依照法令惩处他。
English: Zhao Gao committed a serious crime, and the Qin King ordered Meng Yi to punish him according to the law.

古文：毅不敢阿法，当高罪死，除其宦籍。
现代文：蒙毅不敢枉曲法令，依法应当判处死刑，剥夺他的官籍。
English: Meng Yi did not dare to pervert the law, according to the law, he should be sentenced to death and deprived of his official status.

古文：帝以高之敦於事也，赦之，复其官爵。
现代文：始皇因为赵高办事勤勉尽力，赦免了他。恢复了他原来的官职。
English: The first emperor pardoned Zhao Gao for his diligent efforts and restored him to his former official position.

古文：始皇欲游天下，道九原，直抵甘泉，乃使蒙恬通道，自九原抵甘泉，巉山堙谷，千八百里。
现代文：始皇打算巡游天下，路经九原郡，直达甘泉宫。就派蒙恬为他开路，从九原到甘泉，打通山脉，填塞深谷，全长一千八百里。
English: The first emperor planned to travel around the world, passing through Kujihara County and reaching Ganquan Palace. He sent Mengqi to pave the way for him, from Kujihara to Ganquan, opening up mountains and filling deep valleys, with a total length of eighteen hundred miles.

古文：道未就。
现代文：然而，这条通道没能完成。
English: However, the passage was never completed.

古文：始皇三十七年冬，行出游会稽，并海上，北走琅邪。
现代文：始皇三十七年冬天，御驾外出巡游会稽，依傍着大海，向北直奔琅邪。
English: In the winter of the thirty-seventh year of the first emperor, he went out on a parade, along the sea, heading north to the evil.

古文：道病，使蒙毅还祷山川，未反。
现代文：半途得了重病，派蒙毅转回祷告山川神灵。
English: Halfway through, he fell seriously ill, so he turned back to pray to the gods of the mountains and rivers.

古文：始皇至沙丘崩，祕之，群臣莫知。
现代文：没等蒙毅返回，始皇走到沙丘就逝世了。始皇逝世的消息被封锁了，文武百官都不知道。
English: Before Meng Yi returned, the first emperor walked to the sand dunes and died. The news of the death of the first emperor was blocked, and all the civil and military officials did not know.

古文：是时丞相李斯、公子胡亥、中车府令赵高常从。
现代文：这时丞相李斯、公子胡亥、中车府令赵高，经常侍奉在秦始皇左右。
English: At this time, the chancellor Li Si, the prince Hu Hai, and the middle chariot governor Zhao Gao often served around the Qin Shi Huang.

古文：高雅得幸於胡亥，欲立之，又怨蒙毅法治之而不为己也。
现代文：赵高平常就得到胡亥的宠幸，打算立胡亥继承王位，又怨恨蒙毅依法惩处他而没有袒护他，于是就产生了杀害之心。
English: Zhao Gao had always been favored by Hu Hai, he planned to make Hu Hai the heir to the throne, and he resented Meng Yi for punishing him according to the law and not protecting him, so he developed a murderous heart.

古文：因有贼心，乃与丞相李斯、公子胡亥阴谋，立胡亥为太子。
现代文：就和丞相李斯、公子胡亥暗中策划，拥立胡亥为太子。
English: He secretly plotted with Premier Li Si and Prince Hu Hai to make Hu Hai the crown prince.

古文：太子已立，遣使者以罪赐公子扶苏、蒙恬死。
现代文：太子拥立之后，派遣使者，捏造罪名，拟定公子扶苏和蒙恬死罪。
English: After the prince was enthroned, envoys were sent to fabricate charges and prepare charges for the prince's assistance to the Soviet Union and the death penalty.

古文：扶苏已死，蒙恬疑而复请之。
现代文：扶苏自杀后，蒙恬产生怀疑，又请求申诉。
English: After Fu Su's suicide, Meng Yao became suspicious and requested an appeal.

古文：使者以蒙恬属吏，更置。
现代文：使者就把蒙恬交给主管官吏处理，另外派人接替他的职务。
English: The envoy then handed the case over to the officials in charge and sent someone else to take over his duties.

古文：胡亥以李斯舍人为护军。
现代文：胡亥用李斯的家臣担任护军。
English: Hu Hai used Li Si's vassals as bodyguards.

古文：使者还报，胡亥已闻扶苏死，即欲释蒙恬。
现代文：使者回来报告时，胡亥已经听到扶苏的死讯，当下就打算释放蒙恬。
English: When the messenger returned to report, Hu Hai had already heard the news of Fusu's death, and immediately planned to release Meng Yao.

古文：赵高恐蒙氏复贵而用事，怨之。
现代文：赵高唯恐蒙氏再次显贵当权执政，怨恨他们。
English: Zhao Gaowei feared that the Mongols would once again rise to power and resented them.

古文：毅还至，赵高因为胡亥忠计，欲以灭蒙氏，乃言曰： 臣闻先帝欲举贤立太子久矣，而毅谏曰 不可 。
现代文：蒙毅祈祷山川神灵后返回来，赵高趁机表示替胡亥尽忠献策，想要铲除蒙氏兄弟，就对胡亥说： 我听说先帝很久以前就选贤用能，册立您为太子，而蒙毅劝阻说： 不可以。 
English: When Meng Yi returned after praying to the deities of mountains and rivers, Zhao Gao took the opportunity to show his loyalty and offer advice to Hu Hai. He wanted to eradicate the Meng brothers, so he said to Hu Hai: I heard that the former emperor long ago selected and appointed you as the crown prince, but Meng Yi dissuaded him and said: No.

古文：若知贤而俞弗立，则是不忠而惑主也。
现代文：如果他知道您贤明有才能而长久拖延不让册立，那么，就是既不忠实而又盅惑先帝了。
English: If he knew that you were wise and talented, and delayed your appointment for a long time, then he was both unfaithful and deceived the emperor.

古文：以臣愚意，不若诛之， 胡亥听而系蒙毅於代。
现代文：以我愚昧的浅见，不如杀死他。 胡亥听从了赵高的话，就在代郡把蒙毅囚禁起来。
English: According to my stupid and shallow view, it is better to kill him. Hu Hai listened to Zhao Gao's words and imprisoned Meng Yi in Dai County.

古文：前已囚蒙恬於阳周。
现代文：在此以前，已经把蒙恬囚禁在阳周。
English: Prior to this, Meng Rong had been imprisoned in Yang Zhou.

古文：丧至咸阳，已葬，太子立为二世皇帝，而赵高亲近，日夜毁恶蒙氏，求其罪过，举劾之。
现代文：等到秦始皇的灵车回到咸阳，安葬以后，太子就登极即位做了二世皇帝，赵高最得宠信，日日夜夜毁谤蒙氏，搜罗他们罪过，检举弹劾他们。
English: After Emperor Qin Shi Huang's hearse returned to Xianyang and he was buried, the prince ascended to the throne and became the second emperor. Zhao Gao was the most trusted, he slandered the Meng family day and night, collected their sins, and impeached them.

古文：子婴进谏曰： 臣闻故赵王迁杀其良臣李牧而用颜聚，燕王喜阴用荆轲之谋而倍秦之约，齐王建杀其故世忠臣而用后胜之议。
现代文：子婴进言规劝说： 我听说过去赵王迁杀死他的贤明臣子李牧而起用颜聚，燕王喜暗地里采用荆轲的计谋而背弃秦国的盟约，齐王建杀死他前代的忠臣而改用后胜的计策。
English: I heard that in the past, Zhao Wangqian killed his wise minister Li Mu and used Yanju, Yan Wang secretly used the strategy of Jing Yi to renege on the treaty of Qin, and Qi Wang Jian killed his loyal vassal of the previous generation and used the strategy of victory.

古文：此三君者，皆各以变古者失其国而殃及其身。
现代文：这三位国君，都是各自因为改变旧规丧失了他们的国家而大祸殃及他们自身。
English: Each of these three sovereigns lost their country by changing the old rules and brought great disaster upon themselves.

古文：今蒙氏，秦之大臣谋士也，而主欲一旦弃去之，臣窃以为不可。臣闻轻虑者不可以治国，独智者不可以存君。
现代文：如今蒙氏兄弟是秦国的大臣和谋士，而国君打算一下子就抛弃他们，我认为是不可以的，我听说草率考虑问题的人不可以治理国家，独断专行、自以为是的人不可以用来保全国君。
English: Today, the Meng brothers are the ministers and advisers of Qin. I think it is unacceptable that the ruler of the country intends to abandon them all at once. I have heard that people who think about things hastily should not govern the country, and people who are arbitrary and self-righteous should not be used to protect the king of the country.

古文：诛杀忠臣而立无节行之人，是内使群臣不相信而外使斗士之意离也，臣窃以为不可。 
现代文：诛杀忠良臣子而起用没有品行节操的人，那是对内使大臣们不能相互信任而对外使战士们涣散斗志啊，我认为是不可以的。 
English: I don't think it's right to kill a loyal minister and appoint someone with no integrity. That would make ministers at home unable to trust each other, and soldiers abroad lose their fighting spirit.

古文：胡亥不听。
现代文：胡亥听不进子婴的规劝。
English: Hu Hai did not listen to the baby's advice.

古文：而遣御史曲宫乘传之代，令蒙毅曰： 先主欲立太子而卿难之。今丞相以卿为不忠，罪及其宗。朕不忍，乃赐卿死，亦甚幸矣。
现代文：却派遣御史曲宫乘坐驿车前往代郡，命令蒙毅说： 先主要册立太子而你却加以阻挠，如今丞相认为你不忠诚，罪过牵连到你们家族，我不忍心，就赐予你自杀吧，也算是很幸运了。
English: However, he sent Meng Yi to Dai County in a stagecoach, ordering Meng Yi to say, "The previous emperor wanted to appoint a crown prince, but you obstructed him. Now the prime minister thinks you are not loyal, and the crime has involved your family. I can't bear it, so I'll let you commit suicide. You're very lucky."

古文：卿其图之！ 
现代文：你反复地考虑吧！ 
English: Think about it again and again!

古文：毅对曰： 以臣不能得先主之意，则臣少宦，顺幸没世。可谓知意矣。
现代文：蒙毅回答说： 要是认为我不能博得先主的心意，那么，我年轻时作官为宦，就能顺意得宠，直到先主仙逝，可以说是能顺应先主的心意了吧。
English: Meng Yi replied: "If you think that I cannot win the heart of the forefather, then, when I was young and working as an official, I was able to be favored, and until the death of the forefather, I can say that I can comply with the will of the forefather."

古文：以臣不知太子之能，则太子独从，周旋天下，去诸公子绝远，臣无所疑矣。
现代文：要是认为我不了解太子的才能，那么唯有太子能陪侍先主，周游天下，和其他的公子比起来，相差太远了，我还有什么怀疑的。
English: If you think that I do not understand the talent of the prince, then only the prince can accompany the lord, travel around the world, compared to other boys, the difference is too far, I still have some doubts.

古文：夫先主之举用太子，数年之积也，臣乃何言之敢谏，何虑之敢谋！
现代文：先主举用太子，是多年的深思积虑，我还有什么话敢进谏、还有什么计策敢谋划呢！
English: My ancestors' choice of the crown prince was the result of many years of careful deliberation. What other words would I dare to utter, what other strategies would I dare to devise?

古文：非敢饰辞以避死也，为羞累先主之名，原大夫为虑焉，使臣得死情实。
现代文：不是我借口来逃避死罪，只怕牵连羞辱了先主的名誉，希望大夫为此认真考虑，让我死于应有的罪名。
English: It's not an excuse for me to avoid the death penalty, I'm just afraid of implicating and humiliating the honor of the Lord. I hope the doctor will seriously consider this and let me die with the crime I deserve.

古文：且夫顺成全者，道之所贵也；刑杀者，道之所卒也。
现代文：况且顺理成全，是道义所崇尚的；严刑杀戮，是道义所不容的。
English: Moreover, logical perfection is what morality advocates; severe punishment and killing are unacceptable to morality.

古文：昔者秦穆公杀三良而死，罪百里奚而非其罪也，故立号曰 缪 。
现代文：从前秦穆公杀死车氏三良为他殉葬，判处百里奚以不应得的罪名，因此，他死后给予评定为 缪 的称号。
English: Former Qin Mu Gong killed Che Sanliang and buried him as a martyr. He sentenced Bai Lijuan to undeserved charges. Therefore, he was given the title of "Miu" after his death.

古文：昭襄王杀武安君白起。楚平王杀伍奢。
现代文：昭襄王杀死武安君白起，楚平王杀死伍奢。
English: King Zhaoxiang killed Wu Anjun in vain, and King Chuping killed Wu Xiao.

古文：吴王夫差杀伍子胥。
现代文：吴王夫差杀了伍子胥。
English: Wu Wangfu chased and killed Wu Zixuan.

古文：此四君者，皆为大失，而天下非之，以其君为不明，以是籍於诸侯。
现代文：这四位国君，都犯了重大的过失，而遭到普天下人对他们的非议，认为他们的国君不贤明。因此，在各诸侯国中名声狼藉。
English: These four emperors all committed grave faults, and they were criticized by the people of the world, who considered their emperors to be unwise. As a result, they gained a bad reputation among the various principalities.

古文：故曰 用道治者不杀无罪，而罚不加於无辜 。
现代文：所以说： 用道义治理国家的人，不杀害没罪的臣民，而刑罚不施于无辜的人身上。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who govern the country with morality do not kill innocent subjects, and do not punish innocent people.

古文：唯大夫留心！ 
现代文：希望大夫认真地考虑！ 
English: I hope the doctor will seriously consider it!

古文：使者知胡亥之意，不听蒙毅之言，遂杀之。
现代文：使者知道胡亥的意图，听不进蒙毅的申诉，就把他杀了。
English: The messenger knew Hu Hai's intention, but did not listen to Meng Yi's complaint and killed him.

古文：二世又遣使者之阳周，令蒙恬曰： 君之过多矣，而卿弟毅有大罪，法及内史。 
现代文：二世皇帝又派遣使者前往阳周，命令蒙恬说： 您的罪过太多了，而您的弟弟蒙毅犯有重罪，依法要牵连到您。 
English: The second emperor also sent an envoy to Yang Zhou, ordering Meng Yu to say: Your sins are too many, and your brother Meng Yi has committed a serious crime, and you should be implicated according to law.

古文：恬曰： 自吾先人，及至子孙，积功信於秦三世矣。
现代文：蒙恬说： 从我的祖先到后代子孙，为秦国累积大功，建立威信，已经三代了。
English: Meng Yao said: From my ancestors to future generations, it has been three generations that have accumulated great achievements and established prestige for Qin.

古文：今臣将兵三十馀万，身虽囚系，其势足以倍畔，然自知必死而守义者，不敢辱先人之教，以不忘先主也。
现代文：如今我带兵三十多万，即使是我被囚禁，但是，我的势力足够叛乱。然而，我知道必死无疑却坚守节义，是不敢辱没祖宗的教诲，不敢忘掉先主的恩宠。
English: Now I am leading more than 300,000 soldiers. Even if I am imprisoned, my strength is enough to rebel. However, I know that I will undoubtedly die, but I stick to righteousness. I dare not dishonor the teachings of my ancestors, and I dare not forget the grace of the Lord.

古文：昔周成王初立，未离襁褓，周公旦负王以朝，卒定天下。
现代文：从前周成王刚刚即位，还不能完全脱离小儿的背带和布兜，周公姬旦背负着成王接受群臣的朝见，终于平定了天下。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Cheng Wang had just ascended to the throne, and was still unable to completely break away from his child's sash and cloth bag. Zhou Gong Hidan carried Cheng Wang on his back to receive the imperial court's envoys, and finally pacified the world.

古文：及成王有病甚殆，公旦自揃其爪以沈於河，曰： 王未有识，是旦执事。有罪殃，旦受其不祥。 
现代文：到成王病情严重得很危险的时候，公旦剪下自己的指甲沉入黄河，祈祷说： 国君年幼无知，这都是我当权执政，若有罪过祸患，应该由我承受惩罚。 
English: When Cheng Wang's illness became serious and dangerous, the prince cut off his fingernails and sank into the Yellow River, praying: "Your majesty is young and ignorant. I am the one in power. If I am guilty of any evil, I should bear the punishment."

古文：乃书而藏之记府，可谓信矣。
现代文：就把这些祷祠书写下来，收藏在档案馆里，这可以说是非常诚信了。
English: He wrote down these prayer books and stored them in the archives, which can be said to be very honest.

古文：及王能治国，有贼臣言： 周公旦欲为乱久矣，王若不备，必有大事。 
现代文：到了成王能亲自治理国家时，有奸臣造谣说： 周公旦想要作乱已经很久了，大王若不戒备，一定要发生大的变故。 
English: When Cheng Wang was able to personally govern the country, a treacherous vassal spread a rumor saying: Zhou Gongdan has been trying to make trouble for a long time, if the great king is not alert, there must be a big change.

古文：王乃大怒，周公旦走而奔於楚。
现代文：成王听了，就大发雷霆，周公旦逃奔到楚国。
English: Upon hearing this, Cheng Wang flew into a rage, and Zhou Gongdan fled to Chu.

古文：成王观於记府，得周公旦沈书，乃流涕曰： 孰谓周公旦欲为乱乎！ 
现代文：成王到档案馆审阅档案，发现周公旦的祷告书，就流着眼泪说： 谁说周公旦想要作乱呢！ 
English: Cheng Wang went to the archives to review the files, found Zhou Gongdan's prayer book, and said with tears: Who said Zhou Gongdan wanted to make trouble!

古文：杀言之者而反周公旦。
现代文：杀了造谣生事的那个大臣，请周公旦回归。
English: The minister who killed the rumor-monger, please return Zhou Gongdan.

古文：故周书曰 必参而伍之 。
现代文：所以《周书》上说： 一定要参差交互地多方询问，反复审察。 
English: Therefore, the "Weekly Book" said: we must make multiple inquiries in a mixed and interactive manner, and repeatedly examine.

古文：今恬之宗，世无二心，而事卒如此，是必孽臣逆乱，内陵之道也。
现代文：如今我蒙氏宗族，世世代代没有二心，而事情最终落到这样的结局，这一定是谋乱之臣叛逆作乱、欺君罔上的缘故。
English: Today, I have been loyal to my clan and clan for generations, and things have finally come to such an end. This must be the reason why the instigators of the turmoil rebelled, created turmoil, and cheated the emperor.

古文：夫成王失而复振则卒昌；桀杀关龙逢，纣杀王子比干而不悔，身死则国亡。
现代文：周成王犯有过失而能改过振作，终于使周朝兴旺昌盛；夏桀杀死关龙逢，商纣杀死王子比干而不后悔，最终落个身死国亡。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang committed a mistake and was able to change his attitude, finally making the Zhou Dynasty prosperous; Xia Yao killed Guan Longfeng, Shang Yao killed Prince Bi Gan without regret, and eventually died a national death.

古文：臣故曰过可振而谏可觉也。察於参伍，上圣之法也。
现代文：所以我说犯有过失可以改正振作，听人规劝可以察觉警醒，参互交错地审察，是圣明国君治国的原则。
English: Therefore, I said that it is the principle of the rule of the Holy Kingdom to correct one's behavior when committing a fault, to be alert when listening to someone's exhortation, and to participate in the intertwined review.

古文：凡臣之言，非以求免於咎也，将以谏而死，原陛下为万民思从道也。 
现代文：大凡我说的这些话，不是用以逃避罪责，而是要用忠心规劝而死，希望陛下替黎民百姓深思熟虑地找到应遵循的正确道路。 
English: What I am saying is not to evade responsibility, but to die with faithful exhortation, hoping that His Majesty will thoughtfully find the right path for the Lebanese people to follow.

古文：使者曰： 臣受诏行法於将军，不敢以将军言闻於上也。 
现代文：使者说： 我接受诏令对将军施以刑法，不敢把将军的话转报皇上听。 
English: The messenger said: I accept the imperial decree to impose criminal punishment on the general, and I dare not report the general's words to the emperor.

古文：蒙恬喟然太息曰： 我何罪於天，无过而死乎？ 
现代文：蒙恬沉重地叹息说： 我对上天犯了什么罪，竟然没有过错就处死呢？ 
English: Meng Yao sighed heavily and said, "What crime have I committed against Heaven that I should be put to death without any fault?"

古文：良久，徐曰： 恬罪固当死矣。
现代文：很久，才慢慢地说： 我的罪过本来该当死罪啊。
English: It took me a long time to slowly say: My crime should have been a capital crime.

古文：起临洮属之辽东，城巉万馀里，此其中不能无绝地脉哉？
现代文：起自临洮接连到辽东，筑长城、挖壕沟一万余里，这中间能没有截断大地脉络的地方吗？
English: From Linyi to Liaodong, building the Great Wall and digging trenches for more than 10,000 miles, can there be no place in the middle to cut off the earth's veins?

古文：此乃恬之罪也。 
现代文：这就是我的罪过了。 
English: That was my sin.

古文：乃吞药自杀。
现代文：于是吞下毒药自杀了。
English: He then committed suicide by swallowing poison.

古文：太史公曰：吾適北边，自直道归，行观蒙恬所为秦筑长城亭障，堑山堙谷，通直道，固轻百姓力矣。
现代文：太史公说：我到北方边境，从直道返回，沿途实地观察了蒙恬替国修筑的长城和边塞堡垒，挖掘山脉，填塞深谷，贯通直道，本来就是不重视百姓的人力物力。
English: Taishigong said: I went to the northern border and returned from the straight road. Along the way, I observed the Great Wall and border fortresses built by the Mongols for the country, digging mountains, filling deep valleys, and penetrating straight roads. Originally, they did not pay attention to the people's human and material resources.

古文：夫秦之初灭诸侯，天下之心未定，痍伤者未瘳，而恬为名将，不以此时彊谏，振百姓之急，养老存孤，务修众庶之和，而阿意兴功，此其兄弟遇诛，不亦宜乎！
现代文：秦国刚刚灭掉其他诸候的时候，天下人心尚未安定，创伤累累尚未痊愈，而蒙恬身为名将，不在这时候尽力谏诤，赈救百姓的急难，恤养老人，抚育孤儿，致力从事于百姓安定生活的工作，反而迎合始皇心意，大规模地修筑长城，他们兄弟遭到杀身之祸，不也是顺理成章的事吗？
English: When Qin had just eliminated other states, the hearts of the people of the world were not yet stable, and the trauma had not yet healed. However, as a famous general, it was not at this time that he tried his best to save the people's urgent difficulties, support the elderly, raise orphans, and work hard to ensure a stable life for the people. Instead, he catered to the emperor's heart and built the Great Wall on a large scale. Their brothers were killed. Isn't it a matter of course?

古文：何乃罪地脉哉？
现代文：哪里是什么挖断地脉的罪过呢？
English: What is the sin of digging up the ground?

