古文：唐开元、天宝之盛，见于传记歌诗多矣，而张祜所咏尤多，皆它诗人所未尝及者。
现代文：唐朝开元、天宝年间的兴盛，记录在史书和诗歌中的多了，而张祜所作的诗歌尤其多，都是其他诗人所没有涉及的。
English: The prosperity of the Tang Dynasty at the beginning of the 1st century and during the Tianbao era is recorded in many history books and poems, and Zhang Xi wrote a particularly large number of poems, which were not covered by other poets.

古文：如《正月十五夜灯》云： 千门开锁万灯明，正月中旬动帝京。
现代文：例如《正月十五夜灯》写道： 千门开锁万灯明，正月中旬动帝京。
English: For example, "The Lights of the Fifteenth Night of the First Month of the Year" wrote: "Thousand doors open, thousands of lights are lit, and the imperial capital is moved in the middle of the first month of the year."

古文：三百内人连袖舞，一时天上著词声。 
现代文：三百内人连袖舞，一时天上著词声。 
English: Three hundred members of the inner circle danced in tandem, chanting in unison.

古文：《上巳乐》云： 猩猩血染系头标，天上齐声举画桡。
现代文：《上巳乐》写道： 猩猩血染系头标，天上齐声举画桡。
English: "Shang Sile" wrote: The blood-stained heads of the orangutans and chimpanzees were raised to the sky in unison.

古文：却是内人争意切，六宫红袖一时招。 《春莺啭》云： 兴庆池南柳未开，太真先把一枝梅。内人已唱《春莺啭》，花下傞傞软舞来。 
现代文：却是内人争意切，六宫红袖一时招 《春莺嗽》写道： 兴庆池南柳未开，太真先把一枝梅内人已唱《春莺啭》，花下傞傞软舞来。 
English: However, insiders were eager to compete, and Rokugo Red Sleeve wrote in "Spring Drizzle": When the south willow of Xingqing Pond was not yet open, Taizhen first brought a branch of menai people who had already sung "Spring Drizzle" and softly danced under the flower.

古文：又有《大酺乐》、《閤王小管》、《李谟笛》、《宁哥来》、《閤娘羯鼓》、《退宫人》、《耍娘歌》、《悖拏儿舞》、《阿鸨汤》、《雨霖铃》、《香囊子》等诗，皆可补开天遗事，弦之乐府也。
现代文：还有《大酺乐》、《閤王小管》、《李谟笛》、《宁哥来》、《閤娘羯鼓》、《退宫人》、《耍娘歌》、《悖拏儿舞》、《阿鸨汤》、《雨霖铃》、《香囊子》等歌诗，都可以补充开元、天宝年间遗留下来的事迹，配上音乐成为乐府题材。
English: There are also songs and poems such as "Great Gong Music," "King Gong Small Pipe," "Limu Flute," "Ningge Come," "Little Girl Drumming," "Returnee," "Little Girl Song," "Little Girl Dance," "Grandmother Soup," "Rain Bell" and "Scented Capsule," which can supplement the events left over from the founding of the People's Republic of China and the Tianbao period, and are accompanied by music to become the theme of the Music Office.

