古文：○刘昫刘昫，涿州归义人也。
现代文：刘昫，涿州归义人。
English: Liu Wei, a righteous man from Zhangzhou.

古文：昫为人美风仪，与其兄暄、弟皞，皆以好学知名燕、蓟之间。
现代文：刘昫风度仪容优美，和他的哥哥刘喧、弟弟刘嗥，都以好学闻名于燕、蓟一带。
English: Liu Ye has a graceful demeanor, and his older brother Liu Dun and younger brother Liu Ye are both famous for their eagerness to learn in the Yan and Handan regions.

古文：后为定州王处直观察推官。
现代文：后来任定州王处直的观察推官。
English: Later, he was appointed as the observation officer of Dingzhou Wang Shanzhong.

古文：处直为子都所囚，昫兄暄亦为怨家所杀，昫乃避之沧州。
现代文：王处直被儿子王都囚禁，刘啕的哥哥刘喧也被仇象杀死，刘昫于是避难到沧州。
English: Wang Shanzhi was imprisoned by his son Wang Du, and Liu Yao's brother Liu Dun was also killed by an enemy elephant, so Liu Yao took refuge in Cangzhou.

古文：唐庄宗即位，拜昫太常博士，以为翰林学士，明宗时，累迁兵部侍郎居职。明宗素重昫而爱其风韵，迁端明殿学士。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，拜任刘喇为太常博士，任命为翰林学士，唐明宗时，几次升迁至兵部侍郎任职，唐明宗素来看重刘哟而喜爱他的风韵，升任端明殿学士。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong ascended the throne, he appointed Liu La as Taichang Doctor and appointed him as Hanlin Scholar. When Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, he was promoted several times to the position of Hyobu waiter. Tang Mingzong always valued Liu Yo and loved his charm. He was promoted to Duanming Palace Scholar.

古文：长兴三年，拜中书侍郎兼刑部尚书、同中书门下平章事，昫诣中兴殿门谢，是日大祠不坐，句入谢端明殿。
现代文：长兴三年，拜为中书侍郎兼刑部尚书、同中书门下平章事，刘昫到中兴殿门告谢。这天大祭不坐朝，刘啕进端明殿告谢。
English: In the third year of Changxing, Liu Hui went to Zhongxing Hall to express his gratitude for being the attendant of Zhongshu and the head of the criminal department Shangshu, as well as for the signing of the peace treaty with Zhongshu. On this day, when the grand festival was not held, Liu Hui went to Daming Hall to express his gratitude.

古文：昫自端明殿学士拜相，当时以此为荣。废帝入立，迁吏部尚书、门下侍郎，监修国史。
现代文：刘陶从端明殿学士拜马宰相，当时人都以此马荣唐废帝登位，升任吏部尚书、门下侍郎，监修国史。
English: Liu Tao went from being a scholar of the Duanming Palace to the prime minister. At that time, everyone used this horse to ascend to the throne of the deposed emperor of Tang Dynasty, and was promoted to the position of the secretary of the cadre, the attendant of the disciple, and the supervisor of the national history.

古文：初，废帝入，问三司使王玫： 帑廪之数几何？ 
现代文：当初，唐废帝登位，问三司使王玫： 钱库有多少钱？ 
English: At the beginning, when Emperor Tang was enthroned, he asked the third envoy, Wang Mei: How much money is in the treasury?

古文：玫言： 其数百万。 
现代文：王玫说： 有数百万。 
English: Wang Mei said: There are millions of them.

古文：及责以赏军而无十一，废帝大怒，罢玫，命昫兼判三司。
现代文：等到让他拿钱赏赐军队时钱却不到十分之一，唐废帝大怒，罢免王玫，命令刘昫兼判三司。
English: When he was asked to take the money to reward the army, the money was less than one-tenth, and Emperor Tang was furious, dismissed Wang Mei, and ordered Liu Bei to concurrently sentence the three officers.

古文：昫性察，而嫉三司蠹敝尤甚，乃句计文簿，核其虚实，残租积负悉蠲除之。
现代文：刘昫性格明辨，而痛恨三司侵吞之弊太严重，于是在账簿上勾抹计算，核对虚实，把残剩的租赋和积留的欠债全部免除。
English: Liu Wei's character is clear-cut, and he hates that the three companies' misappropriation is too serious. Therefore, he erased the calculation on the account book, checked the truth and falsehood, and completely exempted the remaining rent and accumulated debt.

古文：往时吏幸积年之负盖而不发，因以把持州县求贿赂，及昫一切蠲除，民间欢然以为德，而三司吏皆沮怨。
现代文：过去官吏们侥幸有多年的欠债隐瞒而不上报，藉以把持州县索取贿赂，到刘昫把债务全部免除后，民间欢喜感恩戴德，而三司官吏们都很沮丧怨恨。
English: In the past, government officials were lucky enough to conceal their debts for many years without reporting them, in order to solicit bribes from Zhizhou County. After Liu Bei completely waived the debts, the people were happy and grateful, while the officials of the three departments were frustrated and resentful.

古文：先是，冯道与昫为姻家而同为相，道罢，李愚代之。
现代文：在这之前，冯道和刘昫是亲家而同任宰相，冯道罢相，李愚代替他。
English: Prior to this, Feng Dao and Liu Ye were relatives and the same prime minister. Feng Dao resigned as prime minister, and Li Yu replaced him.

古文：愚素恶道为人，凡事有稽失者，必指以诮昫曰： 此公亲家翁所为也！ 
现代文：李愚素来讨厌冯道的为人，凡有稽考失误的事，必定指斥讥诮刘呦说： 这是你的亲家翁干的！ 
English: Li Yu had always hated Feng Dao as a person. Whenever there was a mistake in the examination, he would certainly point at and ridicule Liu Yao and say: This was done by your relative!

古文：昫性少容恕，而愚特刚介，遂相诋诟。
现代文：刘啕生性缺少宽容，而李愚又特别刚强耿直，于是相互诋毁。
English: Liu Xing Sheng lacked tolerance, while Li Gu was particularly strong-willed, so they slandered each other.

古文：相府史吏恶此两人刚直，因共扬言，其事闻，废帝并罢之，以昫为右仆射。
现代文：宰相府的官吏忌恨两人的刚直，于是共同张扬此事，唐废帝得知后，将两人一起罢免，任命刘昫为右仆射。
English: The officials of the Prime Minister's Office hated the firmness of the two men, so they jointly publicized the matter. After Tang Wulai learned about it, he dismissed the two men together and appointed Liu Bei as his right-hand man.

古文：是时，三司诸吏提印聚立月华门外，闻宣麻罢昫相，皆欢呼相贺曰： 自此我曹快活矣！ 
现代文：这时，三司官吏们提着官印聚集在月华门外，听说下诏罢免刘昫的宰相职位，都相互欢呼庆贺说： 从此我们快活了！ 
English: At this time, the officials of the three departments gathered outside the Yuehua Gate, holding the official seal. When they heard that Liu Wei had been removed from the post of prime minister, they all cheered and congratulated each other, saying, "Now we are happy!"

古文：昫在相位，不习典故。
现代文：刘啕担任宰相，不熟习典故。
English: Liu Wei served as prime minister, and he was not familiar with allusions.

古文：初，明宗崩，太常卿崔居俭以故事当为礼仪使，居俭辞以祖讳蠡。
现代文：当初，唐明宗死，太常卿崔居俭，按旧例当任礼仪使，崔居俭以祖父名蠡应当避讳作推辞。
English: At first, after the death of Emperor Mingzong, Grand Secretary Cui Juzhen was appointed as the ceremonial envoy according to the old practice, and Cui Juzhen used his grandfather's name as an excuse.

古文：冯道改居俭秘书监，居俭怏怏失职。
现代文：冯道改崔居俭任秘书监，崔居俭因失去原有职位而怏怏不乐。
English: Feng Dao replaced Cui Ju Jian as secretary supervisor. Cui Ju Jian was unhappy because he lost his original position.

古文：中书舍人李详为居俭诰词，有 闻名心惧 之语，昫辄易曰 有耻且格 。
现代文：中书舍人李详为崔居俭起草诰词，有 闻名心惧 的话，刘啊就改成 有耻且格 。
English: Li Zhao, the person in charge of the Chinese school of calligraphy, drafted the eulogy for Cui Juzhen. If the eulogy said that Cui Juzhen was "famous and feared," Liu Ah changed it to "shameful and disgraced."

古文：居俭诉曰： 名讳有令式，予何罪也？ 
现代文：崔居俭申诉说： 名字避讳有规定的格式，我有什么罪？ 
English: Cui Juzhen complained: There is a prescribed format for name avoidance, what is my crime?

古文：当时闻者皆传以为笑。
现代文：当时听说的人都传为笑谈。
English: At the time, everyone who heard about it laughed it off.

古文：及为仆射，入朝遇雨，移班廊下，御史台吏引仆射立中丞御史下，昫诘吏以故事，自宰相至台省皆不能知。
现代文：等到任仆射时，入朝遇雨，改在屋廊下列队，御史台官吏带仆射站在中丞御史后，刘昫责问官吏根据什么旧例，从宰相到台省都不知道。
English: When it was time to appoint minions, it was raining in the morning, so they changed to the following line in the gallery. After the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office took the minions and stood in the middle of the Imperial Historian's Office, Liu Xuan asked the officials what the old practice was, and they did not know from the Prime Minister to the Taiwan Province.

古文：是时，冯道罢相为司空。
现代文：这时，冯道罢相任司空。
English: At this time, Feng Dao resigned from the post of Siku.

古文：自隋、唐以来，三公无职事，不特置，及道为司空，问有司班次，亦皆不能知，由是不入朝堂，俟台官、两省入而后入，宰相出则随而出。
现代文：从隋、唐以来，三公没有具体职责，不特别设置，到冯道任司空时。向官吏询问进朝列队的次序，也都不知道，因此不入朝堂，等台官、雨省官吏进去后纔进去，宰相出来就跟着出来。
English: Since the Sui and Tang dynasties, the three princes have had no specific duties and no special set-up. When Feng Dao was appointed as the Empress Dowager, he asked the officials about the order of the procession into the imperial court, but they did not know either. Therefore, he did not enter the imperial court, and waited for the officials from Taiwan and Yunnan Province to enter, and then he entered, and the prime minister came out and followed him.

古文：至昫为仆射，自以由宰相罢，与道同，乃随道出入，有司不能弹正，而议者多窃笑之。
现代文：等到刘昫任仆射时，自认为他从宰相罢职和冯道相同，于是跟着冯道进出朝廷，主管部门不能弹劾纠正，而议事的人私下多笑话他。
English: When Liu Xuan was appointed as a subordinate, he thought that his resignation from the post of prime minister was the same as that of Feng Dao, so he followed Feng Dao in and out of the imperial court. The competent department could not impeach or correct him, and the people in charge of the deliberation laughed at him in private.

古文：晋高祖时，张从宾反，杀皇子重乂于洛阳，乃以昫为东都留守，判盐铁。
现代文：晋高祖时，张从宾反叛，在洛阳杀死皇子李重又，于是任命刘昫为东都留守，掌管盐铁。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozu, Zhang Congbin rebelled and killed the prince Li Chungmai in Luoyang. Therefore, he appointed Liu Bei to stay in Dongdu and take charge of the Salt and Iron Industry.

古文：开运中，拜司空、同中书门下平章事，复判三司。
现代文：开运年问，拜为司空、同中书门下平章事，又判三司。
English: At the beginning of the year of fortune, he was awarded the title of the third division.

古文：契丹犯京师，昫以目疾罢为太保，是岁卒，年六十。
现代文：契丹侵犯京师，刘昫因眼疾罢为太保，这年去世，享年六十岁。
English: The Khitan invaded Beijing, and Liu Ye, who had been appointed to the position of Tai Po due to an eye disease, passed away this year at the age of 60.

古文：○卢文纪卢文纪，字子持，其祖简求，为唐太原节度使，父嗣业，官至右补阙。
现代文：卢文纪字子持，祖父卢筒求，任唐太原节度使，父亲卢嗣业，官做到右补阙。
English: Lu Wenji was the son of Lu Wenji, grandfather of Lu Ziqiu, who was appointed Tang Taiyuan's special envoy, and his father, Lu Ziyi, who was a high-ranking official.

古文：文纪举进士，事梁为刑部侍郎、集贤殿学士。
现代文：卢文纪中进士，奉事梁任刑部侍郎、集贤殿学士。
English: Lu Wenji was promoted to the rank of junior scholar, served Liang Ren as the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, and received a bachelor's degree from Jixian Palace.

古文：唐明宗时，为御史中丞。
现代文：唐明宗时，任御史中丞。
English: When he was a member of the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：初上事，百官台参，吏白诸道进奏官贺，文纪问： 当如何？ 
现代文：刚上任时，众官员到御史台参拜，官吏报告各道进奏官前来祝贺，卢文纪问道： 应当怎样接待？ 
English: When he first took office, officials came to the Imperial History Museum to pay homage. Officials reported that officials from all provinces had come to congratulate him. Lu Wenji asked: How should he be received?

古文：吏对曰： 朝廷在长安时，进奏官见大夫、中丞如胥史。
现代文：官吏回答说： 朝廷在长安时，进奏官像小吏一样拜见大夫、中丞。
English: The official replied, "When the imperial court was in Chang'an, the imperial envoys went to see the doctor and the middle-ranking officials just like the minor officials.

古文：自唐衰，天子微弱，诸侯强盛，贡奉不至，朝廷姑息方镇，假借邸吏，大夫、中丞上事，进奏官至客次通名，劳以茶酒而不相见，相传以为故事。 
现代文：自从唐衰落后，天子微弱无力，诸侯强盛，不来进贡，朝廷迁就方镇，借给他们住所，大夫、中丞上任时，进奏官到客位通报姓名，用茶酒招待他们而不拜见大夫、中丞，相传作为成例。 
English: Since the decline of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor was weak and feeble, the princes were strong and prosperous, but they did not come to pay tribute, the imperial court moved to Fangzhen and lent them a residence. When the doctor and the junior secretary took office, the marching officer went to the guest seat to announce the names, and invited them with tea and wine without visiting the doctor and the junior secretary, which was passed down as a precedent.

古文：文纪曰： 吾虽德薄，敢隳旧制？ 
现代文：卢文纪说： 我虽然德行浅薄，怎敢破坏过去的制度？ 
English: Lu Wenji said: Although I have shallow virtue, how dare I destroy the past system?

古文：因遣吏谕之。
现代文：因而派官吏告知他们进来拜见。
English: So officials were sent to tell them to come and see him.

古文：进奏官奋臂喧然欲去，不得已入见，文纪据床端笏，台吏通名赞拜，既出，恚怒不自胜，诉于枢密使安重诲。
现代文：进奏官们挥臂喧哗想要离去，迫不得已进去拜见，卢文纪坐在床榻上握着手板，御史台官吏通报姓名后唱礼下拜，退出后，进奏官们愤怒难忍，向枢密使安重诲申诉。
English: The ushers waved their arms noisily and wanted to leave, but were forced to go in to pay their respects. Lu Wenji sat on the bed and held the hand board. After the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office announced their names, they sang and bowed. After they left, the ushers were furious and complained to the Privy Council.

古文：重诲曰： 吾不知故事，可上诉于朝。 
现代文：安重诲说： 我不知道惯例怎样，可以向朝廷上诉。 
English: I don't know what the practice is, but I can appeal to the Imperial Court.

古文：即相率诣阁门求见以壮诉。
现代文：于是就一起到合门求见，上状申诉。
English: So they went together to the closed gate to seek an audience and file a complaint.

古文：明宗问宰相赵凤： 进奏吏比外何官？ 
现代文：唐明宗问宰相赵凤： 进奏吏相当于在外的什么官？ 
English: Tang Mingzong asked the prime minister Zhao Feng: What kind of official is the music director equivalent to?

古文：凤曰： 州县发递知后之流也。 
现代文：趟凤说： 相当于州县发递知后一类。 
English: Wafeng said: It is equivalent to the last category of the notice issued by the state and county.

古文：明宗怒曰： 乃吏卒尔，安得慢吾法官！ 
现代文：唐明宗发怒说： 不过是小吏罢了，怎能轻辱我的执法官！ 
English: Tang Mingzong said angrily, "He is just a minor official, how can he insult my magistrate!"

古文：皆杖而遣之。
现代文：都处以杖刑而遣送回去。
English: They were all caned and sent back.

古文：文纪又请悉复中外官校考法，将相天子自书之，诏虽施行，而官卒不考。
现代文：卢文纪又请求全部恢复对朝廷内外官员的校考法，将相由天子亲自书写校考，诏令虽然颁布施行，然而官吏最终没有执行。
English: Lu Wenji also requested the full restoration of the school examination law for officials inside and outside the imperial court, which would be written by the emperor himself. Although the edict was promulgated and implemented, the officials did not implement it in the end.

古文：岁馀，迁工部尚书。
现代文：一年多后，升任工部尚书。
English: More than a year later, he was promoted to the Ministry of Works.

古文：文纪素与宰相崔协有隙，协除工部郎中于鄴，文纪以鄴与其父名同音，大怒，鄴赴省参上，文纪不见之，因请连假。
现代文：卢文纪素来和宰相崔协有矛盾，崔协任于邺为工部郎中，卢文纪因于邺和自己父亲的名同音，非常生气，于邺赴官府参拜上司，卢文纪不见他因而长期请假。
English: Lu Wenji has always been in conflict with Prime Minister Cui Xie. Cui Xie was assigned to Yu Kun as a junior member of the Ministry of Industry. Lu Wenji was very angry because Yu Kun had the same name as his father. Yu Kun went to the government office to visit his boss. Lu Wenji did not see him and therefore took a long leave of absence.

古文：已而鄴奉使未行，文纪即出视事，鄴因醉忿自经死，文纪坐贬石州司马。
现代文：不久于邺奉命出使还没出发，卢文纪就出来处理事务，于邺因愤懑醉酒上吊自杀；卢文纪因此被贬为石州司马。
English: Shortly after Yu was ordered to send the envoy, Lu Wenji came out to deal with the matter, and Yu Yu hanged himself due to anger and drunkenness; Lu Wenji was therefore relegated to Shishu Sima.

古文：久之，为秘书监、太常卿。
现代文：遇了很久，任秘书监、太常卿。
English: For a long time, he served as secretary superintendent and superintendent.

古文：奉使于蜀，过凤翔。时废帝为凤翔节度使，文纪为人形貌魁伟、语音琅然，废帝奇之。
现代文：奉命出使蜀，经过凤翔，当时唐废帝任凤翔节度使，卢文纪身材魁梧、声音宏亮悦耳，唐废帝觉得他不同一般。
English: He was ordered to send an envoy to Shu, passing through Fengxiang. At that time, the Tang Emperor appointed Fengxiang as a special envoy. Lu Wenji was a burly man with a loud and pleasant voice. The Tang Emperor thought he was different from ordinary people.

古文：后废帝入立，欲择宰相，问于左右，左右皆言： 文纪及姚顗有人望。 
现代文：后来唐废帝登位，想挑选宰相，向手下人询问，都说： 卢文纪和姚颤有威望。 
English: Later, when Emperor Tang was enthroned and wanted to choose a prime minister, he asked his subordinates and they all said: Lu Wenji and Yao Tremor have prestige.

古文：废帝因悉书清望官姓名内琉璃瓶中，夜焚香祝天，以箸挟之，首得文纪，欣然相之，乃拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：唐废帝于是写下全部清廉有声望的官吏姓名放进琉璃瓶中，晚上烧香祝天，用筷子挟起写有姓名的纸条，第一张就是卢文纪，高兴地任命他为宰相，于是拜任为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Emperor Tang then wrote down the names of all the honest and prestigious officials and put them in a glass bottle. In the evening, he burned incense to wish for good luck. He held up a piece of paper with names written on it with chopsticks. The first one was Lu Wenji. He was pleased to appoint him as the prime minister. He was then appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：是时，天下多事，废帝数以责文纪。
现代文：这时，天下多事，唐废帝多次因此责备卢文纪。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, and Emperor Tang repeatedly blamed Lu Wenji for this.

古文：文纪因请罢五日起居，复唐故事，开延英，冀得从容奏议天下事。
现代文：卢文纪因而请求废除五天一次进见问安，恢复唐的旧例，开放延英殿，希望能够从容奏议天下大事。
English: Lu Wenji therefore requested the abolition of the five-day inspection and greeting, the restoration of the old Tang practice, and the opening of the Yan Ying Palace, hoping to be able to discuss world events calmly.

古文：废帝以谓五日起居，明宗所以见群臣也，不可罢，而便殿论事，可以从容，何必延英。
现代文：唐废帝认为五天一次进见问安，是唐明宗用来接见群臣的，不能废弃，而在便殿议论国家大事，可以从容不迫，何必要在延英殿。
English: Emperor Tang Wulai thought that the five-day visit to ask for greetings was used by the Tang and Ming dynasties to receive ministers and could not be abandoned, and that national affairs could be discussed in the Ben Hall, so why was it necessary to go to the Yan Ying Hall.

古文：因诏宰相有事，不以时诣阁门请对。
现代文：因而下诏凡是宰相有事，随时可到合门请求同皇帝谈话。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that whenever the prime minister had a problem, he could go to the gate at any time to request a conversation with the emperor.

古文：晋高祖起太原，废帝北征，过拜徽陵，休仗舍，顾文纪曰： 吾自凤翔识卿，不以常人为待，自卿为相，询于舆议，皆云可致太平，今日使吾至此，卿宜如何？ 
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，唐废帝北征，经过徽陵时拜祭，在仪仗驻地休息，望着卢文纪说： 从我在凤翔认识你，就不把你当一般人对待，自从你任宰相以来，询问众人的意见，都说能达到太平无事，如今使我落到这个地步，你该怎么办呢？ 
English: Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, led the Northern Expedition of the deposed Emperor of Tang, paid homage when passing the Mausoleum of Hu, and rested at the ceremonial battle site. Looking at Lu Wenji, he said, "From the time I knew you in Fengxiang, I did not treat you as an ordinary person. Since you became prime minister, you have asked the opinions of many people and said that peace and tranquility can be achieved. Now that I have fallen to this level, what should you do?

古文：文纪皇恐谢罪。
现代文：卢文纪惶恐不安地告罪。
English: Lu Wenji pleaded guilty with trepidation.

古文：废帝至河阳，文纪劝帝扼桥自守，不听。
现代文：唐废帝到达河阳，卢文纪劝皇帝扼守桥梁，没有采纳。
English: When Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty arrived in Heyang, Lu Wenji advised the emperor to guard the bridge, but the advice was not accepted.

古文：晋高祖入立，罢为吏部尚书，累迁太子太师，致仕。
现代文：晋高祖登位，罢为吏部尚书，几次升迁任太子太师，辞官居家。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Gaozu, became a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was promoted several times to the position of the Crown Prince, and retired.

古文：周太祖入立，即拜司空于家。
现代文：周太祖登位，到卢文纪家中拜他为司空。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne and went to Lu Wenji's home to worship him as Siku.

古文：卒，年七十六，赠司徒。
现代文：去世，享年七十六岁，赠司徒。
English: He died at the age of seventy-six and was succeeded by his son.

古文：○马胤孙马胤孙，字庆先，棣州商河人也。
现代文：马胤孙字庆先，棣州商河人。
English: Ma Yinsun, surnamed Qingsen, was a merchant from Hezhou.

古文：为人懦暗，少好学，学韩愈为文章。
现代文：为人懦弱愚昧，年轻时好学，学习韩愈做文章的风格。
English: He is cowardly and ignorant, and is eager to learn when he is young, learning the style of writing articles from Han Yu.

古文：举进士，为唐潞王从珂河中观察支使。
现代文：考中进士，任唐潞王李从珂的河中观察支使。
English: He was admitted to the middle school examination, and was appointed by Tang Dynasty's King Li to be an observer in the middle of the Ke River.

古文：从珂为杨彦温所逐，罢居于京师里第，胤孙从而不去。
现代文：李从珂被杨彦温驱逐，罢任住在京师家襄，马胤孙跟随他没有离开。
English: Li Congke was ousted by Yang Yanwen and lived in his master's house in Beijing. Ma Yinsun did not leave with him.

古文：从珂为京兆尹，徙镇凤翔，胤孙常从之，以为观察判官。
现代文：李从珂任京兆尹，调任镇守凤翔，马胤孙一直跟着他，被任为观察判官。
English: Li was transferred from the post of Jing Zhaoyun to the post of town guard Feng Xiang, and Ma Yinsun followed him all the time and was appointed as an observation judge.

古文：潞王将举兵反，与将吏韩昭胤等谋议已定，召胤孙告之曰： 受命移镇，路出京师，何向为便？ 
现代文：潞王将要举兵反叛，和将吏韩昭胤等人商议已定，召马胤孙告诉他说： 奉命调任，路经京师，向哪里走方便？ 
English: Shao Wang was going to raise an army to rebel, and it was decided to consult with the magistrate Han Zhaotian and others. He called Ma Yansun to tell him: I have been ordered to transfer, I am passing through Beijing Division, where is the best place to go?

古文：胤孙曰： 君命召，不俟驾。
现代文：马胤孙说： 君主召命，不等备车。
English: Ma Yinsun said: The monarch calls for his life, do not wait to prepare the car.

古文：今大王为国宗属，而先帝新弃天下，临丧赴镇，臣子之忠也。 
现代文：如今大王是国家的宗亲，而先帝刚弃天下而去，临丧赶任，是臣子的忠诚。 
English: Nowadays, the great king is the ancestral relative of the country, while the former emperor just abandoned the world and left, and it is the loyalty of the courtiers to rush to the funeral.

古文：左右皆笑其愚，然从珂心独重之。
现代文：手下人都笑他愚蠢，但李从珂心中却偏偏看重他。
English: His subordinates laughed at his stupidity, but Li Congke thought highly of him.

古文：废帝入立，以为户部郎中、翰林学士。
现代文：唐废帝登位，任命他为户部郎中、翰林学士。
English: When Emperor Gaozong ascended the throne, he appointed him as the head of the Household Division and the leading scholar of Hanlin.

古文：久之，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：遇了很久，拜为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: They met for a long time, and he became the attendant of Chusho and the disciple of Chusho under Taira Shoji.

古文：胤孙不通世务，故事多壅塞。
现代文：马胤孙不熟悉世务，因此办事多滞留。
English: Ma Yinsun is not familiar with the world affairs, so he is often delayed in doing things.

古文：是时，冯道罢匡国军节度使，拜司空。
现代文：这时，冯道罢为匡国军节度使，拜为司空。
English: At this time, Feng Dao became the commander of the Kuangguo Army, and Bai became the commander of the Kuangguo Army.

古文：司空自唐已来无特拜者，有司不知故事，朝廷议者纷然，或曰司空三公，宰相职也，当参与大政，而宰相卢文纪独以谓司空之职，祭祀扫除而已。胤孙皆不能决。
现代文：司空从唐以来没有专门拜任的人，官府不知道惯例怎样，朝廷议论纷纷，有的说司空属于三公，是宰相职位，应当参与国家大政，而宰相卢文纪独自认为司空这个职位，不过负责祭祀洒扫而已马胤孙也都不能决断。
English: Since the Tang Dynasty, there has been no one specifically appointed to the post of Siku. The government did not know what the practice was, and the imperial court had many discussions. Some said that Siku belonged to the Three Princes, was the post of prime minister, and should participate in national politics, while Prime Minister Lu Wenji alone thought that Siku was this post, but was responsible for sweeping the sacrificial rites, and Ma Yinsun could not decide.

古文：时刘昫亦罢相为仆射，右散骑常侍孔昭序建言： 常侍班当在仆射前。 
现代文：当时刘昫也罢相任仆射，右散骑常侍孔昭序建议说： 常侍列队候朝时应在仆射前。 
English: At that time, Liu Ye also took on the role of the footman, and the right rider's regular attendant, Kong Zhaozheng, suggested: When the regular attendants wait in line for the morning, they should be in front of the footman.

古文：胤孙责御史台检例，台言： 故事无所见，据今南北班位，常侍在前。 
现代文：马胤孙责令御史台检枧旧例，御史台官吏说： 无处查询旧例，根据现在南北列队候朝的次序，常侍在前面。 
English: Ma Yinsun ordered the Imperial Historian's Office to check the old case. The official of the Imperial Historian's Office said: There is nowhere to check the old case. According to the current order of the north-south queue waiting for the morning, the regular attendants are in front.

古文：胤孙即判台状施行，刘昫大怒。
现代文：马胤孙就决定按御史台的申报执行，刘昫大怒。
English: Ma Yinsun decided to carry out the declaration according to the imperial history station, and Liu Ye was furious.

古文：崔居俭扬言于朝曰： 孔昭序解语，是朝廷无解语人也！
现代文：崔居俭在朝廷上扬言说： 孔昭序要是会说话，朝廷就没有会说话的人了！
English: Cui Juzhen threatened the imperial court, saying, "If Kong Zhaozhuang could speak, the imperial court would have no one who could speak!"

古文：且仆射师长百寮，中丞、大夫就班修敬，而常侍在南宫六卿之下，况仆射乎？
现代文：而且仆射是众官员的师长，中丞、大夫都要对他列队致敬，而常侍排在南宫六卿之下，何况仆射呢！
English: Moreover, Pusha was the division commander of all officials. Junior middle officers and doctors had to line up to pay homage to him, while the regular attendants ranked below the six lords of the Southern Court. How much more Pusha!

古文：昭序痴兒，岂识事体？ 
现代文：孔昭序这个痴儿，难道懂得事体？ 
English: Does Kong Zhaozhou, this idiot, really understand things?

古文：朝士闻居俭言，流议稍息。
现代文：朝廷上的士人听了崔居俭的话，议论纔逐渐平息。
English: The officials at the imperial court listened to Cui Juzhen's words, and the discussion gradually subsided.

古文：胤孙临事多不能决，当时号为 三不开 ，谓其不开口以论议，不开印以行事，不开门以延士大夫也。
现代文：马胤孙临事大多不能决断，当时人称他为 三不开 ，说他不开口议论，不开印办事，不开门招纳士大夫。
English: At that time, people called him "three do not open," saying that he did not open his mouth to discuss, did not open the seal to do business, and did not open the door to the admissions doctor.

古文：晋兵起太原，废帝至河阳，是时势已危迫，胤孙自洛来朝行在，人皆冀其有所建言，胤孙献绫三百匹而已。
现代文：晋在太原起兵，唐废帝到河阳，这时形势已很危急，马胤孙从洛阳到河阳朝见，人们都盼他有所建议，马胤孙不过进献了三百匹绸缎而已。
English: Jin raised an army in Taiyuan, and Emperor Tang went to Kheyang. At that time, the situation was very critical. Ma Yinsun went from Luoyang to Kheyang to see the emperor. People were looking to him for advice, but Ma Yinsun only offered three hundred silken horses.

古文：晋高祖入立，罢归田里。
现代文：晋高祖登位，他被罢免回到乡里。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was deposed and returned to the countryside.

古文：胤孙既学韩愈为文，故多斥浮屠氏之说，及罢归，乃反学佛，撰《法喜集》、《佛国记》行于世。
现代文：马胤孙既然学韩愈做文章，因此常常指斥佛教学说，等到罢任回家后，却反而学佛，着有《法喜集》、《佛国记》传世。
English: Since Ma Yinsun studied Han Yu to write articles, he often rebuked Buddhist teaching, saying that when he returned home after leaving office, he studied Buddhism instead. He wrote "The Collection of Dharmas" and "The Record of the Buddha's Country" and passed them down to the next generation.

古文：时人诮之曰： 佞清泰不彻，乃来佞佛。 
现代文：当时人讥诮他说： 谄媚清泰还不够，于是来谄媚佛教。 
English: At that time, people mocked him, saying, "It's not enough to flatter Qingdao and Taiyuan, so I have to flatter Buddhism."

古文：清泰，废帝年号也。
现代文：清泰是唐废帝的年号。
English: Qing Tai is the year of the dethronement of Emperor Tang.

古文：人有戏胤孙曰： 公素慕韩愈为人，而常诵傅奕之论，今反佞佛，是佛佞公邪，公佞佛邪？ 
现代文：有人对马胤孙开玩笑说： 你素来倾慕韩愈的为人，又常常诵读傅奕的议论，现在反而讨好佛，这是佛讨好你呢，还是你讨好佛？ 
English: Someone jokingly said to Ma Yinsun: You have always admired Han Yu as a person, and often read Fu Yi's discussion, but now you are pleasing the Buddha. Is this the Buddha pleasing you, or are you pleasing the Buddha?

古文：胤孙答曰： 岂知非佛佞我也？ 
现代文：马胤孙回答说； 怎知不是佛讨好我呢？ 
English: Ma Yinsun replied, "How do I know that the Buddha is not trying to please me?"

古文：时人传以为笑。
现代文：当时人传为笑谈。
English: At the time, the rumour was laughed off.

古文：后以太子宾客分司居于洛阳，周广顺中卒。
现代文：后来以太子宾客分司住在洛阳。周广顺年间去世。
English: Later, he lived in Luoyang. Zhou Guangshun died in the same year.

古文：胤孙卒后，其家婢有为胤孙语者。
现代文：马胤孙去世后，他的家婢有学他说话的人。
English: After the death of Ma Yinsun, his maids had to learn to speak like him.

古文：初，崔协为明宗相，在位无所发明，既死，而有降语其家，胤孙又然。
现代文：当初，崔协做唐明宗的宰相，在位时毫无建树，死后，家中有学他说话的人，马胤孙又是这样。
English: At the beginning, Cui Xie was the prime minister of the Tang and Ming dynasties, and he did nothing during his reign. After his death, there were people in his family who learned from him, and this was the case with Ma Yinsun.

古文：时人嘲之曰： 生不能言，死而后语 云。
现代文：当时人嘲讽说： 活着不能说，死了纔说。 
English: At that time, people mockingly said: "You can't say it when you're alive, you can't say it when you're dead."

古文：○姚顗姚顗，字百真，京兆长安人也。
现代文：姚频字百真，京兆长安人。
English: Yao frequency word Baizhen, Beijing Zhao Chang'an people.

古文：少蠢，不修容止，时人莫之知，中条山处士司空图一见以为奇，以其女妻之。
现代文：年轻时愚蠢，不修边幅，当时没有人知道他。中条山隐士司空图一见就觉得他不同一般，把女儿嫁给他。
English: When he was young, he was stupid and unkempt. At that time, no one knew him. Siku, a hermit from Nakajoyama, thought he was different at first sight and married his daughter to him.

古文：举进士，事梁为翰林学士、中书舍人。
现代文：考中进士，在坚做翰林学士、中书舍人。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination, and became a scholar of Hanlin and a scholar of Chinese literature in Jian.

古文：唐庄宗灭梁，贬复州司马，已而以为左散骑常侍兼吏部侍郎、尚书左丞。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭凿，贬为复州司马，不久任命为左散骑常侍兼吏部侍郎、尚书左丞。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was eliminated and demoted to Fuzhou Sima, and soon he was appointed as Zuo Sanzhong (左散騎) regular attendant and the attendant of the cadre department, and Shangshu Zuo.

古文：废帝欲择宰相，选当时清望官知名于世者，得卢文纪及顗，乃拜顗中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：唐废帝想挑选宰相，要挑选当时知名而清廉有声望的人，得到卢文纪和姚颤，于是拜姚颤为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Emperor Tang Wulai wanted to choose a prime minister, and he wanted to choose a person who was well-known, clean and reputable at that time. Lu Wenji and Yao Tremor were chosen, so Bai Yao Tremor became the attendant of Chinese calligraphy and the subordinate of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：顗为人仁恕，不知钱陌铢两之数，御家无法，在相位龊龊无所为。
现代文：姚颤为人仁爱宽容，不懂钱陌铢雨之敷，治家没有法规，在相位碌碌无为。
English: Yao Tremor is a benevolent and tolerant person. He does not understand money and does not know the law. He does not have any rules to govern his family, and he does nothing when he is in power.

古文：唐制吏部分为三铨，尚书一人曰尚书铨，侍郎二人曰中铨、东铨。
现代文：唐的制度吏部分为三铨，尚书一人叫尚书铨，侍郎二人叫中铨、柬铨。
English: Tang's system officials were divided into three groups, with Shang Shu (尚書) being called Shang Shuxu (尚書) and two attendants called Zhong Shuxu (中) and Cam Shuxu ( Kambod).

古文：每岁集以孟冬三旬，而选尽季春之月。
现代文：每年冬天第一个月下旬集中，而挑选官吏到春季最后一个月纔结束。
English: Each year, the concentration is held in the second half of the first month of winter, and the selection of officials ends in the last month of spring.

古文：天成中，冯道为相，建言： 天下未一，选人岁才数百，而吏部三铨分注，虽曰故事，其实徒繁而无益。 
现代文：天成中，冯道任宰相，建议说： 天下没有统一，每年挑选官吏纔几百人，而吏部三铨分剔输送，虽说是惯例，其实枉自繁琐而没有好处。 
English: In the middle of the Tiancheng, Feng Dao, who was appointed as the prime minister, suggested: There is no uniformity in the world. Every year, hundreds of officials are selected, and the personnel department selects and transports them. Although it is a common practice, it is actually tedious and useless.

古文：始诏三铨合为一，而尚书、侍郎共行选事。
现代文：纔下韶把三铨合在一起，而尚书、侍郎共同负责挑选官吏的事情。
English: The lower eunuch put the three bowls together, while the high priest and the chamberlain were jointly responsible for the selection of officials.

古文：至顗与卢文纪为相，复奏分铨为三。
现代文：到姚频和卢文纪任宰相时，又上奏请求分为三铨。
English: When Yao Ping and Lu Wenji were appointed as prime ministers, the request was divided into three parts.

古文：而循资、长定旧格，岁久多舛，因增损之。
现代文：而循资、长定的旧格，时间长了常有错乱，于是进行修改增损。
English: However, the old system of capital-based, long-term, and long-term is often disorderly, so it is necessary to modify and increase the loss.

古文：选人多不便之，往往邀遮宰相，喧诉不逊，顗等无如之何，废帝为下诏书禁止。
现代文：候选的官吏对此多感不便，往往拦留宰相，喧嚷不恭，姚颠等人不知怎么办，唐废帝因此下诏书禁止。
English: The officials of the candidate felt more inconvenient about this, often stopping the prime minister, being noisy and disrespectful, and Yao Bing and others did not know what to do. Therefore, the emperor banned it with an edict.

古文：晋高祖立，罢顗为户部尚书。
现代文：晋高祖登位，罢免姚颠为户部尚书。
English: Jang Gaozu ascended to the throne, and Yao Bang was dismissed as the head of the household.

古文：卒，年七十五，卒之日，家无馀赀，尸不能敛，官为赗赠乃能敛，闻者哀怜之。
现代文：去世，享年七十五岁，去世时家中没有剩余资产，不能收尸，官府为他送去安葬的物品纔得以收尸，听说的人都哀怜他。
English: He died at the age of seventy-five. At the time of his death, the family had no remaining assets and could not collect his body. The government sent him burial goods and was able to collect his body. Everyone who heard about it felt sorry for him.

古文：○刘岳刘岳，字昭辅，洛阳人也。
现代文：刘岳字昭辅，洛阳人。
English: Liu Yuezha, a Luoyang resident.

古文：唐民部尚书政会之八代孙，崇龟、崇望其诸父也。
现代文：唐民部尚书刘政会的第八代孙，刘崇龟、刘崇望是他的伯、叔父。
English: The eighth-generation grandson of Tang Minbu Shangshu Liu Zhengkai, Liu Chongke, Liu Chongwang is his great-uncle.

古文：岳名家子，好学，敏于文辞，善谈论。
现代文：刘岳出身名门，文辞敏捷，善于谈论。
English: Liu Yue was born into a prestigious family. He is a quick talker and good at conversation.

古文：举进士，事梁为左拾遗、侍御史。
现代文：考中进士，在梁任左拾遗、侍却史。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination, and studied under Liang Ren Zuo, and became a waiter.

古文：末帝时，为翰林学士，累官至兵部侍郎。
现代文：梁末帝时，任翰林学士，几次升迁任兵部侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Liang, he served as a scholar of Hanlin, and was promoted several times to the position of attendant of the military department.

古文：梁亡，贬均州司马，复用为太子詹事。
现代文：梁灭亡，贬为均州司马，又任为太子詹事。
English: After Liang's death, he was demoted to the position of Junzhou Sima, and was also appointed as the crown prince of Zhanji.

古文：唐明宗时，为吏部侍郎。
现代文：唐明宗时，任吏部侍郎。
English: During the Tang and Ming dynasties, he served as a chamberlain in the cadre department.

古文：故事，吏部文武官告身，皆输硃胶纸轴钱然后给，其品高者则赐之，贫者不能输钱，往往但得敕牒而无告身。
现代文：旧例，吏部文武官吏的任命状，都是在送上朱胶纸轴钱以后纔发给，那些官位高的人就赐给任命状，贫穷的人不能送钱，往往只得到敕牒而没有任命状。
English: In the old days, the appointment letters of the civil and military officials of the Ministry of Personnel were all issued after the Zhu Jia paper money was sent. Those with high official positions were given appointment letters. Poor people could not send money, and often only received an ultimatum without an appointment letter.

古文：五代之乱，因以为常，官卑者无复给告身，中书但录其制辞，编为敕甲。
现代文：五代动乱，习以为常，官位低的人不再发给任命状，中书只是收录他们的制辞，编成敕甲。
English: Five generations of turmoil have become commonplace. Low-ranking officials are no longer issued appointment letters. The official documents merely contain their prepared speeches, compiled into a suit of armor.

古文：岳建言，以谓 制辞或任其材能，或褒其功行，或申以训诫，而受官者既不给告身，皆不知受命之所以然，非王言所以告诏也。
现代文：刘岳建议，认为 制辞或记载他们的才能，或赞扬他们的功劳，或申明训诚，而接受官职的人不发给任命状，都不知道马什么任命他，背离了王言诏告臣子的本意。
English: Liu Yue suggested that it was contrary to Wang Yan Zhao's intention to inform the vassals that he would make a speech or record their talents, or praise their merits, or affirm the sincerity of the training, but the person who accepted the official post did not issue an appointment letter, and did not know what to appoint him.

古文：请一切赐之。 
现代文：请求全部赐给任命状 。
English: All requests for letters of appointment will be granted.

古文：由是百官皆赐告身，自岳始也。
现代文：从此所有官员都赐给任命状，是从刘岳开始的。
English: Since then, all officials have been given appointment letters, starting with Liu Yue.

古文：宰相冯道世本田家，状貌质野，朝士多笑其陋。
现代文：宰相冯道世代农家，外貌质朴粗野，朝中士人大多笑他鄙陋。
English: The prime minister, Feng Dao, was a farmer for generations. His appearance was rustic and rough, and most of the court officials laughed at his meanness.

古文：道旦入朝，兵部侍郎任赞与岳在其后，道行数反顾，赞问岳： 道反顾何为？ 
现代文：冯道黎明进朝，兵部侍郎任赞和刘岳在他后面，冯道定路经常回头看，任赞问刘岳说： 冯道为什么回头看？ 
English: Feng Dao entered the imperial court at dawn. Ren Zhan and Liu Yue, the attendants of the military department, followed him. Feng Dao Dinglu often looked back. Ren Zhan asked Liu Yue, "Why did Feng Dao look back?"

古文：岳曰： 遗下《兔园册》尔。 
现代文：刘岳说： 丢了《兔园册》而已。 
English: Liu Yue said, "I only lost the "Tusienchong."

古文：《兔园册》者，乡校俚儒教田夫牧子之所诵也，故岳举以诮道。
现代文：《兔园册》，是乡间学校鄙俚儒生教田夫牧童读的书，因此刘岳拿来讥诮冯道。
English: "Rabbit Garden Book" is a book read by Confucian students teaching Tianfu herdsmen in rural schools, so Liu Yue used it to mock Feng Dao.

古文：道闻之大怒，徙岳秘书监。
现代文：冯道听说后大怒，调任刘岳为秘书监。
English: After hearing this, Feng Dao was furious and transferred Liu Yue to the post of secretary supervisor.

古文：其后李愚为相，迁岳太常卿。
现代文：后来李愚任宰相，升任刘岳为太常卿。
English: Later, Li Yu was appointed Prime Minister, and Liu Yue was promoted to General Secretary.

古文：初，郑馀庆尝采唐士庶吉凶书疏之式，杂以当时家人之礼，为《书仪》两卷。
现代文：当初，郑余庆曾采纳唐代士人百姓的吉凶书疏格式，夹杂当时家人的礼仪，着《书仪》两卷。
English: At first, Zheng Yuqing had adopted the format of the Tang Dynasty scholar's people's good luck and bad luck book, including the etiquette of the family at that time, with "Book" two volumes.

古文：明宗见其起复、冥昏之制，叹曰： 儒者所以隆孝悌而敦风俗，且无金革之事，起复可乎？
现代文：唐明宗见其中有为父母守丧没有满期而召任职务、为死去的男女举行婚礼的制度，叹息说： 儒生是用来鼓励孝悌而敦厚风俗的，而且没有战事，为父母守丧没有满期就召任职务行吗？
English: Tang Mingzong saw that among them there was a system of summoning officials for parents' funerals that had not expired and a system of holding weddings for dead men and women. He sighed and said: Confucianism is used to encourage filial piety and strong customs, and there is no war, is there a system of summoning officials for parents' funerals that has not expired?

古文：婚，吉礼也，用于死者可乎？ 
现代文：结婚是吉祥的礼仪，用在死者身上行吗？ 
English: Marriage is an auspicious etiquette. Can it be used on the dead?

古文：乃诏岳选文学通知古今之士，共删定之。
现代文：于是下诏书让刘岳挑选精通古今典章制度的博学之士，共同删定《书仪》。
English: Therefore, the next imperial edict asked Liu Yue to select scholars who were well versed in the ancient and modern award system to jointly delete the "Book."

古文：岳与太常博士段颙、田敏等增损其书，而其事出鄙俚，皆当时家人女子传习所见，往往转失其本，然犹时有《礼》之遗制。
现代文：刘岳和太常博士段颐、田敏等人增删这本书，而内容粗俗鄙俚，都是当时的家人女子传闻习见，往往失去本来面目，但也不时有古代礼制的遗风。
English: Liu Yue and other scholars such as Duan Yu and Tian Min added to and deleted from the book, and the content was vulgar and despicable, all of which were the rumors and habits of family women at that time. They often lost their original appearance, but from time to time there was a legacy of ancient etiquette.

古文：其后亡失，愈不可究其本末，其婚礼亲迎，有女坐婿鞍合髻之说，尤为不经。
现代文：后来亡失了，更加不能考究它们的始末，其中的婚礼迎亲，有女子坐在丈夫马鞍上同打一个发髻的说法，尤其荒诞不经。
English: Later, they were lost, and it was even more impossible to find out what happened to them. Among the wedding receptions, the story of a woman sitting on her husband's saddle and tying a hairpin together was particularly absurd.

古文：公卿之家，颇遵用之。
现代文：公卿士大夫家，往往沿用这种礼仪。
English: This etiquette is often followed by the families of high-ranking officials.

古文：至其久也，又益讹谬可笑，其类甚多。
现代文：时间长了，又更加以讹传讹、错误可笑，这样的例子非常多。
English: The time has lengthened, and there are many more examples of gossip, ridiculous mistakes, and so on.

古文：岳卒于官，年五十六，赠吏部尚书。
现代文：刘岳死在任上，享年五十六岁，赠吏部尚书。
English: Liu Yue died in office, at the age of fifty-six, and was presented with a book of the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：子温叟。
现代文：儿子叫刘温叟。
English: His son's name is Liu Wenjun.

古文：呜呼，甚矣，人之好为礼也！
现代文：唉，人们喜好讲究礼仪已到极点了！
English: Alas, people's penchants for etiquette have reached fever pitch!

古文：在上者不以礼示之，使人不见其本，而传其习俗之失者，尚拳拳而行之。
现代文：在上的人不用礼仪来给人们怍示范，使得人们不能见到礼仪的本来面目，而传布民间习俗中错讹的礼仪，还忠谨恳切地推行它。
English: The people at the top don't use etiquette to show people etiquette, so that people can't see the true face of etiquette, but spread the etiquette of the wrong etiquette in folk customs, and also faithfully and earnestly promote it.

古文：五代干戈之乱，不暇于礼久矣！
现代文：五代干戈动乱，没有时间致力于礼仪已经很久了。
English: It's been a long time since five generations of go-go have been in turmoil, and there has been no time to devote to etiquette.

古文：明宗武君，出于夷狄，而不通文字，乃能有意使民知礼。
现代文：唐明宗是个武君，出身于夷狄，又不懂文字，却能有意使百姓懂得礼仪。
English: Tang Mingzong was a warrior prince, born in Yidi, who did not know the written language, but was able to intentionally make the people understand the etiquette.

古文：而岳等皆当时儒者，卒无所发明，但因其书增损而已。
现代文：而刘岳等人都是当时的儒生，结果无所阐明，只是沿袭那本书加以增删罢了。
English: However, Liu Yue and others were Confucianists at the time, and the results were not clarified, but merely added to and deleted from the book.

古文：然其后世士庶吉凶，皆取岳书以为法，而十又转失其三四也，可胜叹哉！
现代文：但后代士人百姓的吉凶礼仪，都拿刘岳增删的书作标准，而在流传中又遗失十分之三四，能感叹得完吗！
English: However, the auspicious and inauspicious etiquette of future generations of scholars and common people all take Liu Yue's book of additions and deletions as the standard, and three-fourths of it has been lost in the spread. Can it be lamented?

古文：○马缟
现代文：马缟，不知道他的家世。
English: I don't know his family history.

古文：马缟，不知其世家，少举明经，又举宏词。事梁为太常少卿，以知礼见称于世。
现代文：年轻时考中明经科，又考中宏词科。奉事梁朝任太常少卿，以通晓礼仪著称于世。
English: When he was young, he passed the middle school entrance examination in Chinese classics and the middle school entrance examination in Chinese grammar. He served the Liang Dynasty as a junior minister, and was famous for his knowledge of etiquette.

古文：唐庄宗时，累迁中书舍人、刑部侍郎、权判太常卿。
现代文：唐庄宗时，多次升迁任中书舍人、刑部侍郎、权判太常卿。
English: During Tangzhuang Zong's reign, he was promoted several times to the post of middle school librarian, the head of the criminal investigation department, and the chief magistrate.

古文：明宗入立，继唐太祖、庄宗而不立亲庙。
现代文：唐明宗登位，继承唐太祖、唐庄宗却不建亲庙。
English: The Tang Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, inheriting Tang Taizu and Tangzhuang Dynasties, but did not build a family temple.

古文：缟言： 汉诸侯王入继统者，必别立亲庙，光武皇帝立四庙于南阳，请如汉故事，立庙以申孝享。 
现代文：马缟说： 漠代诸侯王继承皇位的人，必定另建亲庙，漠光武皇帝在南阳建了四所亲庙，请依照汉的旧例，建亲庙表示孝道进行祭祀。 
English: Ma Yu said, "Those who succeed to the imperial throne from the princes and kings of the Mu Dynasty must build another family temple. Emperor Mu Guangwu built four family temples in Nanyang. Please follow the old Han custom of building a family temple to show filial piety and perform sacrifices.

古文：明宗下其议，礼部尚书萧顷等请如缟议。
现代文：唐明宗把他的意见下发，礼部尚书萧顷等人请求采纳马缟的建议。
English: Tang Mingzong issued his opinion, and the etiquette department's Shang Shu Xiao He and others requested that Ma Jun's suggestion be adopted.

古文：宰相郑珏等议引汉桓、灵为比，以谓灵帝尊其祖解渎亭侯淑为孝元皇，父苌为孝仁皇，请下有司定谥四代祖考为皇，置园陵如汉故事。
现代文：宰相郑珏等人拟议拿汉桓帝、汉灵帝作比照，认为汉灵帝尊奉他的祖父解渎亭侯刘淑为孝元皇，父亲刘苌为孝仁皇，请求下令让有关部门审定谧号，四代祖父都称皇，依照汉的旧例修建园陵。
English: Prime Minister Zheng Rong and others proposed to use Emperor Han Huan and Emperor Han Ling as a comparison, believing that Emperor Han Rong honored his grandfather Prince Liu Shu as the Emperor Xiaoyuan and his father Liu Ye as the Emperor Xiaoren, and requested that the relevant departments be ordered to verify the imperial title. The four generations of grandfathers all praised the emperor and built a garden mausoleum in accordance with the old Han example.

古文：事下太常，博士王丕议汉桓帝尊祖为孝穆皇帝，父为孝崇皇帝。
现代文：事情下达给太常，博士王丕议论说汉桓帝尊奉他的祖父为孝穆皇帝，父亲为孝崇皇帝。
English: The matter was assigned to Taizang, and Dr. Wang Xi argued that Emperor Han respected his grandfather as Emperor Xiaomu and his father as Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：缟以谓孝穆、孝崇有皇而无帝，惟吴孙皓尊其父和为文皇帝，不可以为法。
现代文：马缟认为孝穆、孝崇有 皇 而无 帝 字，只有昊的孙皓尊奉他的父亲孙和为文皇帝，不能效法。
English: Ma Yu believed that Xiao Mu and Xiao Chong were emperors, not emperors, and only Hao's Sun Yat-sen, who worshipped his father, Emperor Sun Hwa-wen, could not follow suit.

古文：右仆射李琪等议与缟同。
现代文：右仆射李琪等人的意见和马缟相同。
English: Right-hand shooters Li Qi and others have the same opinion as Ma Jun.

古文：明宗诏曰： 五帝不相袭礼，三王不相沿乐，惟皇与帝，异世殊称。
现代文：唐明宗下韶说： 五帝的礼仪不相承袭，三王的乐制不相沿袭，只有 皇 和 帝 ，不同时代称呼不同。
English: Tang Mingzong said: The etiquette of the five emperors is not inherited, the music system of the three kings is not inherited, only the emperor and the emperor, different times call different.

古文：爰自嬴秦，已兼厥号，朕居九五之位，为亿兆之尊，奈何总二名于眇躬，惜一字于先世。 
现代文：从蠃秦开始，就已兼称这两个不同的名号，我身居帝位，为亿兆民众所尊奉，怎么能德皇帝二字于微小的我，而对先世却吝惜一字？ 
English: From the beginning of the Qin Dynasty, these two different names have been used at the same time. I am on the imperial throne and am revered by billions of people. How can the word "Emperor" be used for me, a tiny person, but begrudge a word for the previous generation?

古文：乃命宰臣集百官于中书，各陈所见。
现代文：于是命令宰相大臣召集百官到中书，各抒己见。
English: He then ordered the prime minister to summon a hundred officials to the chancellery to express their views.

古文：李琪等请尊祖祢为皇帝，曾高为皇。
现代文：李琪等人请求尊奉祖庙为皇帝，曾祖、高祖为皇。
English: Li Qi and others requested that the ancestral temple be revered as the emperor, and the great-grandfather and great-grandfather as the emperor.

古文：宰相郑珏合群议奏曰： 礼非天降而本人情，可止可行，有损有益。
现代文：宰相郑珏综合众人意见上奏说： 礼仪不是从天而降而是根据人情，可用可不用，有减少有增加。
English: Summarizing the opinions of the audience, Prime Minister Zheng Yi said: Etiquette does not come down from the sky, but is based on human conditions. It can be used or not, and it can be reduced or increased.

古文：今议者引古，以汉为据，汉之所制，夫复何依？
现代文：现在议事的人引古为证，把汉代作为依据，汉代的制度，又依据什么？
English: The Han Dynasty is used as a basis by those who are currently discussing the issue, and what is the basis of the Han Dynasty system?

古文：开元时，尊皋陶为德明皇帝，凉武昭王为兴圣皇帝，皆立庙京师，此唐家故事也。
现代文：开元时，尊奉皋陶为德明皇帝，凉武昭王为兴圣皇帝，都在京师建庙，这是唐家的旧例。
English: At the time of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, Zong Bong Tao was the Emperor of Deming, and Liang Wu Zhao Wang was the Emperor of Xing Sheng, both of whom built temples in Beijing. This is an old example of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：臣请四代祖考皆加帝如诏旨，而立庙京师。 
现代文：我请求四代祖父都依诏旨加上 帝 字，而在京师建庙。 
English: I request that all four generations of grandfathers add the word "Imperial" in accordance with the imperial edict, and build a temple in Beijing.

古文：诏可其加帝，而立庙应州。
现代文：于是下诏书同意加 帝 字，而在应州建庙。
English: As a result, the imperial edict agreed to add the word "Imperial" and the temple was built in Yingzhou.

古文：刘岳修《书仪》，其所增损，皆决于缟。
现代文：刘岳修改《书仪》，他增删的部分，都由马缟定夺。
English: Liu Yue revised "Calligraphy," and the parts he added and deleted were all decided by Ma Jun.

古文：缟又言： 缞麻丧纪，所以别亲疏，辨嫌疑。
现代文：马缟又说： 缭麻等丧服的礼制，是用来区别亲疏远近，辨明嫌疑误会的。
English: Ma Jun also said: The mourning dress etiquette, such as the dazzle, is used to distinguish between relatives and strangers, and to identify suspicion and misunderstanding.

古文：《礼》，叔嫂无服，推而远之也。
现代文：《礼》书记载，叔嫂间不服丧，是因为推论起来关系疏远的缘故。
English: According to the "Rite" chronicle, the uncle and sister-in-law did not accept the mourning, because of the reason that the relationship was estranged.

古文：唐太宗时，有司议为兄之妻服小功五月，今有司给假为大功九月，非是。 
现代文：唐太宗时，官府拟议为哥哥的妻子穿小功丧服五侗月，现在官府给丧假是穿大功丧服九个月，这是不对的。 
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, the government proposed that the wife of the elder brother should wear a small merit funeral dress for five months. Now, the government is giving the bereavement leave to wear a large merit funeral dress for nine months. This is wrong.

古文：废帝下其议，太常博士段颙议 嫂服给假以大功者，令文也，令与礼异者非一，而丧服之不同者五。
现代文：唐废帝下发他的意见，太常博士段颐议论说： 为嫂子服丧给假穿大功丧服九个月，是令文的规定，令文和礼书的不同不止一处，而有五种不同的丧服。
English: Tang Wulai issued his opinion, and Dr. Taizang Duan commented: It is a requirement of the edict that the sister-in-law be given nine months to wear a fake funeral dress. There is more than one difference between the edict and the book of etiquette, but there are five different funeral dresses.

古文：《礼》，姨舅皆服小功，令皆大功。
现代文：《礼》书记载，姨舅都穿小功丧服，令文中都穿大功丧服。
English: According to the "Rite" record, the uncles all wore small funeral clothes, and they all wore large funeral clothes in the edict.

古文：妻父母婿外甥皆服缌，令皆小功。
现代文：妻父母婿外甥都穿鳃麻丧服，令文中都穿小功丧服。
English: His wife, parents, son-in-law, and nephew all wore nettle mourning clothes, and all of them wore small-gain mourning clothes.

古文：礼、令之不可同如此。 
现代文：礼书、令文的不同就像这样。 
English: The difference between the letter of etiquette and the command is like this.

古文：右赞善大夫赵咸又议曰： 丧，与其易也，宁戚。
现代文：右赞善大夫趟咸又建议说： 丧礼，与其轻易穿丧服，宁肯心中悲戚。
English: Dr. Zuo Zanzan also suggested: "Instead of wearing mourning clothes, it is better to wear mourning clothes at the funeral.

古文：《仪礼》五服，或以名加，或因尊制，推恩引义，各有所当。
现代文：《仪礼》中的五种丧服，有的是从名分上制定的，有的是从尊卑上制定的，推恩引义，各有所当。
English: The five types of funeral attire in the "Rite of Ceremonies," some are based on the name, some are based on superiority and inferiority, some are based on grace, and each has its place.

古文：据《礼》为兄之子妻服大功，今为兄之子母服小功，是轻重失其伦也。
现代文：根据《仪礼》为哥哥的儿媳穿大功丧服，现在为嫂子穿小功丧服，造就轻重失次了。
English: According to the "Ritual," the brother's daughter-in-law wore a great achievement mourning dress, and now she wore a small achievement mourning dress for her sister-in-law, creating a difference in weight.

古文：以名则兄子之妻疏，因尊则嫂非卑，嫂服大功，其来已久。
现代文：从名义上看那么哥哥的儿媳疏远，从尊卑上看那么嫂子并不卑下，为嫂子穿大功丧服，由来已久。
English: From the nominal point of view, then the brother's daughter-in-law is estranged, from the point of view of superiority and inferiority, then the sister-in-law is not inferior, and it has been a long time since the sister-in-law has worn a great achievement.

古文：令，国之典，不可灭也。 
现代文：令文是国家的法典，不能废弃。 
English: The ordinance is the country's legal code and cannot be repealed.

古文：司封郎中曹琛，请下其议，并以《礼》、令之违者定议。
现代文：司封郎中曹琛，请求下发他的意见，并依照礼书、令文的不同之处审订。
English: Cao Jie, the chief steward, requested that his opinion be issued, and it was revised in accordance with the differences between the letter of commendation and the written order.

古文：诏尚书省集百官议。左仆射刘昫等议曰： 令于丧服无正文，而嫂服给大功假，乃假宁附令，而敕无年月，请凡丧服皆以《开元礼》为定，下太常具五服制度，附于令。 
现代文：下诏书让尚书省召集百官议论左仆射刘等人议论说： 令文对丧服没有正式规定，而为嫂嫂服丧给大功假，是假期宁肯依照令文，而敕令没有年月，请凡是丧服都以《开元礼》为准，交由太常草拟五服制度，附在令文中。 
English: The next imperial edict had the Ministry of Education and Culture convene 100 officials to discuss the matter, with Zuojiao Liu and others arguing: "The edict has no formal provisions for mourning clothes, but for the sister-in-law to be given a great service leave, it is a holiday that would rather be in accordance with the edict, and the imperial edict does not have a year. All mourning clothes should be subject to the "Kaiyuan Rite," and it is up to Taizhong to draft a five-service system and attach it to the edict.

古文：令有五服，自缟始也。
现代文：令文中有五服，是从马缟开始的。
English: There are five services in the edict, starting with the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：缟明宗时尝坐覆狱不当，贬绥州司马。
现代文：马缟，唐明宗时曾因复核狱讼不当，贬为绥州司马。
English: Ma Xuan, Tang Mingzong was once demoted to Zhangzhou Sima for improperly reviewing prison cases.

古文：复为太子宾客，迁户部、兵部侍郎。
现代文：又任太子宾客，升任户部、兵部侍郎。
English: He was also appointed as a guest of the Crown Prince, and was promoted to the position of a chamberlain in the household and the military.

古文：卢文纪作相，以其迂儒鄙之，改国子祭酒。
现代文：卢文纪任宰相后，觉得他是迂腐儒生丽看不起他，改任国子祭酒。
English: After Lu Wenji was appointed as prime minister, he felt that he was a pedantic Confucian and looked down on him, and was reappointed as the son of the country.

古文：卒，年八十，赠兵部尚书。
现代文：去世时，享年八十岁，赠兵部尚书。
English: At the time of his death at the age of eighty, he was presented with a military record book.

古文：○崔居俭崔居俭，清河人也。祖蠡、父荛皆为唐名臣。居俭美文辞，风骨清秀，少举进士。
现代文：崔居俭，清河人祖父崔蠡、父亲崔藷都是唐代名臣崔居俭的文辞优美，风骨清秀，年轻时考中进士。
English: Cui Juzhen, Qinghe people's grandfather Cui Wei, and father Cui Wei were all famous Tang Dynasty ministers. Cui Juzhen's words were beautiful, his demeanor was fine, and he passed the junior high school entrance examination when he was young.

古文：梁贞明中，为中书舍人、翰林学士、御史中丞。唐庄宗时，为刑部侍郎、太常卿。崔氏自后魏、隋、唐与卢、郑皆为甲族，吉凶之事，各著家礼。
现代文：梁贞明中，任中书舍人、翰林学士、御史中丞唐庄宗时，任刑部侍郎、太常卿，崔氏自从后魏、隋、唐以来和卢、郑都是一等世家大族，吉凶的事，各自有家礼记载。
English: Liang Zhenming Junior High School, Tang Zhuang Zongshi Junior High School, Tang Zhuang Zongshi Junior High School, and Lu and Zheng have been the first-class family since the late Wei, Sui and Tang Dynasties. They have their own records of family rituals for auspicious and inauspicious events.

古文：至其后世子孙，专以门望自高，为世所嫉。
现代文：到他们的后代子孙，专门以门望自负，受到世人嫉恨。
English: To their descendants, the world envies them for their arrogance.

古文：明宗崩，居俭以故事为礼仪使，居俭以祖讳蠡，辞不受，宰相冯道即徙居俭为秘书监。
现代文：唐明宗逝世，崔居俭按惯例当任礼仪使，崔居俭因祖父名叫蠡，推辞不接受，宰相冯道就调崔居俭任秘书监。
English: After the death of Tang Mingzong, Cui Juzhen was appointed as the ceremonial envoy according to the usual practice. Cui Juzhen did not accept the resignation because his grandfather's name was Yao. Prime Minister Feng Dao transferred Cui Juzhen to the post of secretary-supervisor.

古文：居俭历兵、吏部侍郎、尚书左丞、户部尚书。
现代文：崔居俭历任兵、吏部侍郎、尚书左丞、户部尚书。
English: Cui Juzhen served as a soldier, a chamberlain of the cadre, a secretary of the left, and a secretary of the household.

古文：晋天福四年卒，年七十，赠右仆射。
现代文：晋天福四年去世，享年七十岁，赠右仆射。
English: Jintianfu died four years later, at the age of seventy, and was presented with a right-handed arrow.

古文：居俭拙于为生，居显官，衣常乏，死之日贫不能葬，闻者哀之。
现代文：崔居俭不善谋牛，身居显官，常常缺衣少食，去世时贫穷得不能安葬，听说的人都为他悲展。
English: Cui Ju Jian was not good at procuring cattle. He was a high-ranking official and often lacked food and clothing. When he died, he was so poor that he could not be buried. Everyone who heard about him was saddened for him.

古文：○崔棁崔棁，字子文，深州安平人也。
现代文：崔税字子文，深州安平人。
English: Cui Ze Zi Zi Wen, Shenzhou Anping people.

古文：父涿，唐末为刑部郎中。
现代文：父亲崔涿，唐末任刑部郎中。
English: His father, Cui Yao, was a vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice at the end of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：棁少好学，颇涉经史，工于文辞。
现代文：崔税年轻时好学，涉猎经史，擅长文辞。
English: When he was young, Cui Ze was eager to learn, dabbled in history, and excelled at literature.

古文：遭世乱，寓居于滑台，不游里巷者十馀年，人罕识其面。
现代文：遭逢乱世，寄居在滑台，十多年不去里巷游玩，很少有人认识他。
English: In a troubled world, he lived as a sojourner in Slidai and did not go out to play for more than ten years. Few people knew him.

古文：梁贞明三年，举进士甲科，开封尹王瓚辟掌奏记。
现代文：梁贞明三年，考中进士甲科，开封尹王瓒征召他为掌奏记。
English: In the third year of Liang Zhenming's middle school entrance examination, Yin Wangqi recruited him as a palmist.

古文：棁性至孝，其父涿病，不肯服药，曰： 死生有命，何用药为？ 
现代文：崔税生性很孝顺，他的父亲崔涿患病，不愿吃药，说： 生死有命，吃药做什么？ 
English: Cui Tie is very filial by nature. His father, Cui Yao, was ill and did not want to take medicine. He said, "Life and death are intertwined. What is the use of taking medicine?

古文：棁屡进医药，不纳。
现代文：崔税多次请医送药，都不接受。
English: Ms. Cui repeatedly asked doctors to send her medicine, but they did not accept it.

古文：每宾客问疾者，棁辄迎拜门外，泣涕而告之，涿终不服药而卒。
现代文：每当有探病的宾客，崔税就在门外迎拜，哭泣着告诉他们，崔涿最终不吃药而死。
English: Whenever there is a guest who is sick, Cui Han greets them outside the door, crying and telling them that Cui Yao eventually died without taking medicine.

古文：棁居丧哀毁，服除，唐明宗以为监察御史，不拜，逾年再命，乃拜。
现代文：崔税守丧遇于悲哀伤了身体，守丧期满，唐明宗任命他为监察御史，他不接受，一年多内两次任命，纔接受。
English: When the mourning period of the death of Cui Zhishou was over, Tang Mingzong appointed him as the inspector of imperial history, but he did not accept. He was appointed twice within a year, but he did not accept.

古文：累迁都官郎中、翰林学士。晋高祖时，以户部侍郎为学士承旨，权知天福二年贡举。
现代文：几次升任都官郎中、翰林学士晋高祖时，他以户部侍郎的身份担任学士承旨，权知天福二年贡举。
English: When he was promoted several times to the middle-ranking official of the capital and the father of Hanlin's bachelor's promotion to college, he served as the bachelor's successor in the capacity of the head of the household, and the second-year tribute was given to Quanzhi Tianfu.

古文：初，棁为学士，尝草制，为宰相桑维翰所改。
现代文：当初，崔税任学士时，曾起草制书，被宰相桑维翰修改。
English: At the beginning, when Cui ZeRen was a bachelor, he had drafted a book, which was revised by Prime Minister Sang Wei Han.

古文：棁以唐故事学士草制有所改者当罢职，乃引经据争之，维翰颇不乐。
现代文：崔税因唐代惯例，学士起草的制书如被改动就应当免职，于是援引经典据理力争，桑维翰很不高兴。
English: Due to the Tang Dynasty practice, Cui Jian should be dismissed if the book preparation drafted by the bachelor is changed, so he tried to argue by citing the classics, and San Weihan was very unhappy.

古文：而棁少专于文学，不能莅事，维翰乃命棁知贡举，棁果不能举职。
现代文：而崔税从小致力于文章学问，不能办事，桑维翰于是任命崔税掌管贡举，崔税果然不能称职。
English: However, Choe Son was devoted to literature and learning from a young age, and was unable to do anything, so Sang Wai Han appointed Choe Son to be in charge of the tribute, and Choe Son was indeed unable to perform his duties.

古文：时有进士孔英者，素有丑行，为当时所恶。
现代文：当时有个进士孔英，素来品行丑恶，为当时人憎恶。
English: At that time, there was a young scholar, Kong Ying, who had always behaved badly and was hated by the people at that time.

古文：棁既受命，往见维翰，维翰素贵，严尊而语简，谓棁曰： 孔英来矣。 
现代文：崔税受命管理贡举后，去见桑维翰，桑维翰素来显贵，神态庄严而语言简练，他对崔税说： 孔英来了。 
English: After Cui Jian was assigned to manage the tribute, he went to see San Weihan. San Weihan, who had always been distinguished, had a solemn appearance and concise language. He said to Cui Jian: Kong Ying is coming.

古文：棁不谕其意，以谓维翰以孔英为言，乃考英及第，物议大以为非，即罢学干，拜尚书左丞，迁太常卿。
现代文：崔税不懂他的意思，认为桑维翰属意于孔英，就让孔英考上了，受到众人非议，就被罢免学士，拜为尚书左丞，升任太常卿。
English: Cui Jian did not understand what he meant. He thought that San Weihan meant Kong Ying, so he let Kong Ying pass the exam. He was criticized by everyone, and was dismissed from his bachelor's degree, and was promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of Education and promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：五年，高祖诏太常复文武二舞，详定正、冬朝会礼及乐章。
现代文：五年，晋高祖下诏书命太常恢复文武两种舞蹈，详核考定元旦、冬至朝会礼仪和乐章。
English: In the fifth year, the imperial edict issued by the founder of Jin Gao ordered the restoration of the two kinds of dances, and the detailed examination of the New Year's Day and Winter Solstice morning assembly etiquette and music.

古文：自唐末之乱，礼乐制度亡失已久，棁与御史中丞窦贞固、刑部侍郎吕琦、礼部侍郎张允等草定之。
现代文：从唐末动乱以来，礼乐制度亡失已经很久，崔税和御史中丞实贞固、刑部侍郎吕琦、礼部侍郎张允等人共同草定。
English: Since the upheaval at the end of the Tang Dynasty, the ceremonial music system has been lost for a long time. Cui Ze and Goshi Chujo Shizengo, Gyoseiburo Ryoo, Gyoseiburo Zhang Yun and others jointly drafted it.

古文：其年冬至，高祖会朝崇元殿，廷设宫县，二舞在北，登歌在上。
现代文：逭年冬至，晋高祖在崇元殿朝会，殿廷设置宫悬，文武二舞在北，登歌在上。
English: At the winter solstice in the year of the rooster, Emperor Jingu's ancestor held a court meeting at the Chongyuan Palace, and the palace court set up a palace suspension. The two dances of literature and martial arts were held in the north, and a song was sung in the east.

古文：文舞郎八佾，六十有四人，冠进贤，黄纱袍，白中单，白练衤盖裆，白布大口袴，革带履。
现代文：文舞郎八行，六十四人，戴进贤冠，穿黄纱袍，白色中单，白绢上衣背心，白布大口裤，革带鞋。
English: There are eight lines of dancers, sixty-four of them, wearing crowns, yellow gowns, white singlets, white satin blouses, white trousers, and leather shoes.

古文：左执籥，右秉翟。
现代文：左手执钥，右手持雉羽。
English: He holds the key in his left hand and the feather in his right.

古文：执籥引者二人。
现代文：持引路大旗的二人。
English: Two people holding large flags are leading the way.

古文：武舞郎八佾，六十有四人，服平巾帻，绯丝布大袖、绣裆甲金饰，白练衤盖，锦腾蛇起梁带，豹文大口袴，乌靴。
现代文：武舞郎八行，六十四人，戴平头巾，徘丝布大袖、金饰绣缎坎肩，白练上衣，丝锦腾蛇起梁带，豹文大口裤，乌靴。
English: There are eight lines of martial dancers, sixty-four people, wearing flat headscarves, long silk sleeves, gold embroidered cape shoulders, white training tops, silk brocade snakeskin belts, leopard trousers, black boots.

古文：左执干，右执戚。
现代文：左手拿盾，右手执斧。
English: Shield in the left hand, axe in the right.

古文：执旌引者二人。
现代文：持引路旌旗的二人。
English: Two men holding flags are leading the way.

古文：加鼓吹十二按，负以熊钓，以象百兽率舞。
现代文：加鼓吹十二按，背负熊豹，以象征百兽齐舞。
English: He also preached the Twelve Admonitions, carried a bear on his back, and danced as a symbol of the hundred beasts.

古文：按设羽葆鼓一，大鼓一，金錞一。
现代文：案上设一面羽葆鼓，一面大鼓，一只金锌。
English: There is a feathered gong, a large drum, and a gold and zinc ring on the case.

古文：歌、箫、笳各二人。
现代文：歌唱、吹箫、吹笳各二人。
English: Sing, blow, blow, two of each.

古文：王公上寿，天子举爵，奏《玄同》；三举，登歌奏《文同》；举食，文舞舞《昭德》，武舞舞《成功》之曲。
现代文：王公上寿，天子举起酒杯，演奏《玄同》；举三次，用登歌演奏《文同》；举起食物，文舞演出《昭德曲》，演出武舞《成功曲》。
English: On Wang Gong's birthday, Tian Zi raised his wine glass and played "Xuan Tong"; raised it three times, and played "Wentong" with a song; raised food, and performed "Zhao De" with a song and dance, and performed "Success Song" with a martial dance.

古文：礼毕，高祖大悦，赐棁金帛，群臣左右睹者皆嗟叹之。
现代文：礼仪举行完毕，晋高祖很高兴，赐金帛给崔税，观看的左右群臣都感叹。
English: After the ceremony was over, Emperor Jinguo was very pleased and gave the golden scepter to Cui Jian. The ministers on the left and right who were watching were all in awe.

古文：然礼乐废久，而制作简缪，又继以龟兹部《霓裳法曲》，参乱雅音，其乐工舞郎，多教坊伶人、百工商贾、州县避役之人，又无老师良工教习。
现代文：但是礼乐废弛已久，制作的礼乐简单错讹，又接着演奏龟兹部《霓裳法曲》，使雅音混乱。乐工舞郎，多数是教坊伶人、百工商贾、州县逃避徭役的人，又没有老师良工教他们练习。
English: However, the ceremonial music has been neglected for a long time. The ceremonial music produced is simple and erroneous, followed by the performance of the music department's "Fancy Dress Law Song," which confuses the elegant sound. Musician dancers, most of whom are teachers, hundreds of industrial and commercial people, and people from the state and county who escape the role of eunuchs, do not have a good teacher to teach them to practice.

古文：明年正旦，复奏于廷，而登歌发声悲离烦慝，如《薤露》、《虞殡》之音，舞者行列进退，皆不应节，闻者皆悲愤。
现代文：第二年元旦，又在殿廷演奏，而唱歌发出的声音悲伤烦躁，像《薤露》、《虞殡》的声音，跳舞的人行列进退，都不合节拍，听到的人都很悲愤。
English: On New Year's Day of the following year, they performed at the Imperial Court again, and the sound of the singing was sad and irritable, like the sound of "Dew" and "Buddha's Funeral," and the procession of dancers did not match the rhythm, and the people who heard it were very sad and angry.

古文：其年高祖崩。
现代文：这年晋高祖逝世。
English: In the same year, the founder of Jin Gao passed away.

古文：棁以风痹改太子宾客分司西京以卒。
现代文：崔税因风痹改任太子宾客、分司西京而死。
English: Due to ill-health, Cui Zei was reassigned to be the crown prince's guest and died in the sub-district of West Beijing.

古文：开运二年，太常少卿陶穀奏废二舞。
现代文：开运二年，太常少卿陶谷奏请废除二舞。
English: Two years after the start of the movement, Taizhang Shaoqing Tao Guo requested that the two dances be abolished.

古文：明年，契丹灭晋，耶律德光入京师，太常请备法驾奉迎，乐工教习卤簿鼓吹，都人闻者为之流涕焉。
现代文：第=年，契丹灭晋，耶律德光进入京城，太常请准备法驾迎接，乐工排练卤簿鼓吹，京城的人听到了都为此流泪。
English: In the first year, when Khitan and Jurchen entered the capital, it was customary to prepare a dharma chariot to welcome them, and musicians would rehearse the recitation of sutras. People in the capital shed tears when they heard this.

古文：○李怿
现代文：李悍，京兆人。
English: Li Huan, the founder of Beijing.

古文：李怿，京兆人也。
现代文：年轻时好学，十分擅长文辞。
English: Eager to learn at a young age, very good at rhetoric.

古文：少好学，颇工文辞。唐末举进士，为秘书省校书郎、集贤校理。
现代文：唐末考中进士，任秘书省校书郎、集贤校理。
English: He passed the middle school entrance examination at the end of the Tang Dynasty, and served as secretary, provincial school librarian, and school administrator of Jixian.

古文：唐亡，事梁为监察御史，累迁中书舍人、翰林学士。
现代文：唐灭亡，奉事梁任监察御史，经多次升任为中书舍人、翰林学士。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, he served as Liang's inspector of imperial history, and after several promotions, he became a scholar of Chinese classics and a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：梁亡，责授怀州司马，遇赦量移，稍迁卫尉少卿。
现代文：梁灭亡，贬为怀州司马，遇上大赦酌情调到别处，逐渐升任卫尉少卿。
English: Liang perished, was demoted to Waizhou Sima, and was transferred elsewhere as appropriate in the event of an amnesty, and was gradually promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Guards.

古文：天成中，复为中书舍人、翰林学士，累迁尚书右丞承旨。
现代文：天成年间，又任中书舍人、翰林学士，几次升任尚书右丞承旨。
English: Between the ages of ten and eighteen, he also served as a junior high school teacher and a scholar of Hanlin, and was promoted several times to the position of Shoshu Ujo Shoji.

古文：时右散骑常侍张文宝知贡举，所放进士，中书有覆落者，乃请下学士院作诗赋为贡举格，学士窦梦徵、张砺等所作不工，乃命怿为之，怿笑曰： 年少举进士登科，盖偶然尔。
现代文：当时右散骑常侍张文宝管理贡举，发榜考中的进士，有的被中书省审察落选，于是请求下令学士院作诗赋作为贡举用的范文，学士窦梦征、张砺等人作的诗赋不好，于是让李怿作，李悍笑着说： 我年轻时考中进士，不过是出自偶然而已。
English: At that time, Zhang Wenbao, the right rider's attendant, was in charge of the tribute, and some of the candidates in the middle of the examination were selected, and some were not selected by the examination of the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Therefore, he requested that the academy be ordered to make a poem as a model for the tribute. The poems made by the bachelors Dou Mengzheng and Zhang Jie were not good, so he asked Li Jie to make them. Li Huan said with a smile: I was a junior high school entrance examination candidate when I was young, but it was by chance.

古文：后生可畏，来者未可量，假令予复就礼部试，未必不落第，安能与英俊为准格？ 
现代文：后生可畏，后来的人不可估量，假使让我又参加礼部考试，未必不落选，怎能给英俊少年做范文呢？ 
English: Posterity is formidable, and posterity is incalculable. If I were to take the etiquette exam again, I might not pass. How can I write a model essay for a handsome boy?

古文：闻者多其知体。
现代文：听说的人赞赏他说话得体。
English: Those who heard him spoke well of him.

古文：后迁刑部尚书分司洛阳，卒，年七十馀。
现代文：后来升任刑部尚书，分司洛阳。去世，享年七十多岁。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department's Shangshu, Luoyang branch. He passed away at the age of over 70.

