古文：元年春，王正月，公即位。
现代文：元年春季，周历正月，成公即位。
English: In the spring of the first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Wenkong succeeded to the throne.

古文：二月辛酉，葬我君宣公。
现代文：二月辛酉日，安葬国君宣公。
English: On February 26th, the state funeral and proclamation of the emperor took place.

古文：无冰。
现代文：没有结冰。
English: There was no ice on New Year's Day.

古文：三月，作丘甲。
现代文：三月，鲁国作丘甲一种兵役制度。
English: In March, a new military service system was introduced in Russia.

古文：夏，臧孙许及晋侯盟于赤棘。
现代文：夏季，臧孙许与晋侯在赤棘结盟。
English: In the summer, the grandson Xu and the prince made an alliance at the Red Thorn.

古文：秋，王师败绩于茅戎。
现代文：秋季，东周军队被茅戎打败。
English: In autumn, the Eastern Zhou army was defeated by Mao Rong.

古文：冬十月。
现代文：冬季十月，无事。
English: Winter, October, nothing.

古文：元年春，晋侯使瑕嘉平戎于王，单襄公如晋拜成。
现代文：元年春季，晋景公派遣瑕嘉调解周天子和戎人的冲突，单襄公到晋国拜谢调解成功。
English: In the spring of the first year of the year, Prince Jinjing dispatched Guo Jia to mediate the conflict between Zhou Tianzi and Rongren, and Prince Xiang went to Jin Province to pray for the success of the mediation.

古文：刘康公徼戎，将遂伐之。
现代文：刘康公对戎人心存侥幸，打算乘此进攻他们。
English: Liu Kang's intention was to take advantage of the soldiers' good fortune and attack them.

古文：叔服曰： 背盟而欺大国，此必败。
现代文：叔服说： 背弃盟约而又欺骗大国，这一定失败。
English: Uncle Fu said, "Reneging on the treaty and deceiving a big country is certain to fail."

古文：背盟不祥，欺大国不义，神人弗助，将何以胜？ 
现代文：背弃盟约就是不吉祥，欺骗大国就是不义，神明、百姓都不会帮助，将要如何去取胜利？ 
English: It is not auspicious to renege on the covenant, it is unjust to deceive the great powers, the gods and the people will not help, how are you going to win?

古文：不听，遂伐茅戎。
现代文：刘康公没有听从，于是就进攻茅戎。
English: Liu Kang didn't listen, so he attacked Mao Rong.

古文：三月癸未，败绩于徐吾氏。
现代文：三月十九日，在徐吾氏地方被打得大败。
English: On March 19th, it was soundly defeated in the Xuwu area.

古文：为齐难故，作丘甲。
现代文：鲁国为了防备齐国入侵，定出 丘甲 的制度。
English: In order to guard against the invasion of Qi, the State of Lu set up the system of Qiu Jia.

古文：闻齐将出楚师。
现代文：鲁国听说齐国将要率同楚军前来进攻。
English: Lu heard that Qi would lead the Chu army to attack.

古文：夏，盟于赤棘。
现代文：夏季，在赤棘结盟。
English: In the summer, make an alliance at the Red Thorn.

古文：秋，王人来告败。
现代文：秋季，周定王的使者来鲁国报告战败。
English: In autumn, the envoy of King Zhou Ding came to Lu to report the defeat.

