古文：谢方明，陈郡阳夏人，尚书仆射景仁从祖弟也。
现代文：谢方明，陈郡阳夏人，是尚书仆射谢景仁的叔祖的孙子。
English: Xie Fangming, a native of Yangxia, Chen County, is the grandson of the uncle of Shang Shufu Xie Jingren.

古文：祖铁，永嘉太守。
现代文：谢方明的祖父谢铁，官至永嘉太守。
English: Xie Fangming's grandfather, Xie Tie, rose to the position of Yongjia governor.

古文：父冲，中书侍郎。
现代文：父亲谢冲，官至中书侍郎。
English: His father, Xie Chong, was a high-ranking official and a junior secretary.

古文：家在会稽，谢病归，除黄门侍郎，不就。
现代文：谢冲家在会稽，因病辞官在家，被任为黄门侍郎，谢冲未应命。
English: Xie Chong's family was in the auditor's office, but due to illness, the secretary was at home. He was appointed as the Yellow Gate waiter, but Xie Chong did not comply with the order.

古文：为孙恩所杀，追赠散骑常侍。
现代文：后，被孙恩杀死，被追封散骑常侍。
English: After that, he was killed by Sun En and chased away by the horsemen.

古文：方明随伯父吴兴太守邈在郡，孙恩寇会稽，东土诸郡皆响应，吴兴民胡桀、郜骠破东迁县，方明劝邈避之，不从，贼至被害，方明逃窜遂免。
现代文：谢方明随同伯父吴兴太守谢邈在郡上，孙恩侵犯会稽，东边各郡都响应，吴兴百姓胡粲、郜骠攻破东迁县，谢方明劝谢邈躲避一下，谢邈不听从。起义部队一到，谢邈便被杀了。
English: Xie Fangming accompanied his uncle Wu Xing Taishou Xie Qian in the county, Sun En invaded the county, and all the counties in the east responded. The people of Wu Xing attacked Dong Qian County. Xie Fangming advised Xie Qian to hide for a while, but Xie Qian did not listen. As soon as the insurgent forces arrived, Xie Qian was killed.

古文：初，邈舅子长乐冯嗣之及北方学士冯翊仇玄达，俱往吴兴投邈，并舍之郡学，礼待甚简。
现代文：谢方明逃脱免除祸害。当初谢邈的舅表兄长乐人冯嗣之和北方学士冯翊、仇玄达，都到吴兴投奔谢邈。谢邈把他们安置在本郡学舍，招待很简略。
English: Xie Fangming escaped from the scourge. At the beginning, Xie Yao's uncle-cousin, the elder musician Feng Shizhi, and the northern scholars Feng Yao and Qiu Xenda all went to Wu Xingtuo to visit Xie Yao. Xie Yao placed them in the schoolhouse in this county, and the invitation was very simple.

古文：二人并忿愠，遂与恩通谋。
现代文：二人都很怨愤，于是和孙恩私通。
English: Both of them were very angry, so they had an affair with Sun En.

古文：恩尝为嗣之等从者，夜入郡，见邈众，遁，不悟。
现代文：孙恩曾经冒充冯嗣之的随从人员，半夜到郡城中，看到谢邈手下人员不少，逃跑了，但并没有改变计划。
English: Sun En once pretended to be a member of Feng Cizhi's entourage, went to the county seat in the middle of the night, saw many of Xie Yao's subordinates, ran away, but did not change his plan.

古文：本欲于吴兴起兵，事趣不果，乃迁于会稽。
现代文：孙恩本来打算在吴兴起义，这里没有成功，于是转到会稽。
English: Sun En originally planned to rise up in Wu, but he was not successful here, so he switched to the auditorium.

古文：及郜等攻郡，嗣之、玄达并豫其谋。
现代文：到郜骠等人进攻吴兴时，冯嗣之、仇玄达都参与其事。
English: When Yu and others attacked Wu Xing, Feng Shizhi and Qiu Xenda were both involved.

古文：刘牢之、谢琰等讨恩，恩走入海，嗣之等不得同去，方更聚合。
现代文：刘牢之、谢琰等讨伐孙恩，孙恩逃到海上，冯嗣之等不能一起逃走，于是便聚集一起。
English: Liu Diao Zhi, Xie Qian and others fought Sun En, Sun En fled to the sea, Feng Zhi and others could not escape together, so they gathered together.

古文：方明结邈门生义故得百余人，掩讨嗣之等，悉禽而手刃之。
现代文：谢方明结聚谢邈的门生故吏一百多人，掩袭冯嗣之等，都抓住了，并将他们全部亲手杀死。
English: Xie Fangming gathered more than a hundred of Xie Yao's disciples and officials, including Feng Ci, and caught them all, and killed them all with his own hands.

古文：于时荒乱之后，吉凶礼废。
现代文：当时正当饥荒祸乱之后，喜礼和丧礼的仪式都被废弃不用。
English: At that time, just after the famine disaster, the celebration and funeral ceremonies were abandoned.

古文：方明合门遇祸，资产无遗，而营举凶事，尽其力用；数月之间，葬送并毕，平世备礼，无以加也。
现代文：谢方明全家遇到祸乱，资产全部丧失，但经营安葬事务，竭尽全力，几月之间，安葬事情结束。而这些礼仪在平时候也不会多到哪去。
English: Xie Fangming's whole family encountered calamity and lost all their assets, but they managed the funeral affairs and did their best. Within a few months, the funeral affairs were over. And these etiquettes would not go anywhere in peacetime.

古文：顷之，孙恩重没会稽，谢琰见害。
现代文：不久以后，孙恩再次攻下会稽郡，谢琰被杀。
English: Soon after, Sun En once again captured Hui County, and Xie Jun was killed.

古文：恩购求方明甚急。
现代文：孙恩通缉谢方明，很急迫。
English: Sun En wanted Xie Fangming, very urgent.

古文：方明于上虞载母妹奔东阳，由黄蘖峤出鄱阳，附载还都，寄居国子学。
现代文：谢方明在上虞用车载着母亲和妹妹逃奔东阳，从黄峤奔鄱阳，送母亲和妹妹回到首都，寄居在国子学校。
English: Xie Fangming fled Dongyang in Shangyu with his mother and younger sister in the car, from Huangpi to Shenyang, and sent his mother and younger sister back to the capital to live at the Guozi School.

古文：流离险厄，屯苦备经，而贞立之操，在约无改。
现代文：其中的流落险阻，艰难万分。但谢方明的坚韧独立精神，丝毫不改。
English: But Xie Fangming's tenacity and independent spirit have not changed at all.

古文：元兴元年，桓玄克京邑，丹阳尹卞范之势倾朝野，欲以女嫁方明，使尚书吏部郎王腾譬说备至，方明终不回。
现代文：元兴元年，桓玄攻克京城，丹阳尹卞范之权倾当时，想把女儿嫁给谢方明，叫尚书吏部郎王腾说服开导他，谢方明最终没有顺从。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Huan Xuan conquered the capital city and the power of Danyang Yinshan Fan fell, he wanted to marry his daughter to Xie Fangming, and asked Wang Teng, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, to persuade and enlighten him. Xie Fangming eventually did not obey.

古文：桓玄闻而赏之，即除著作佐郎，补司徒王谧主簿。
现代文：桓玄听说此事，非常称赞他，马上任命他为著作佐郎，补任司徒王谧的主簿。
English: When Kuan Xuan heard about this, he praised him very much and immediately appointed him as Shososaro, to fill in as the chief scribe of the King's Guard.

古文：从兄景仁举为高祖中兵主簿。
现代文：方明的堂兄谢景仁推荐方明为高祖的中兵主簿。
English: Fang Ming's cousin Xie Jingren recommended Fang Ming as Gao Zu's Zhongbei master book.

古文：方明事思忠益，知无不为。
现代文：谢方明碰到任何事都非常忠心卖力，无所不至。
English: Xie Fangming is very loyal and diligent in everything he does.

古文：高祖谓之曰： 愧未有瓜衍之赏，且当与卿共豫章国禄。 
现代文：高祖对他说： 很惭愧，我没有给你什么财物赏赐，姑且和你共享豫章国的俸禄。 
English: Gaozu said to him, "I am very ashamed that I did not give you any reward, let alone share the reward of Yuzhang with you.

古文：屡加赏赐。方明严恪，善自居遇，虽处暗室，未尝有惰容。
现代文：多次赏赐他，谢方明严肃而恭敬，善于自处，即使在暗室中，也未曾表现出懈惰的仪表。
English: Rewarded him many times, Xie Fangming is serious and respectful, good at being himself, even in the dark room, he has never shown a lazy appearance.

古文：无他伎能，自然有雅韵。
现代文：他没有什么特别技能，却天然表现出一副高雅的风度。
English: He has no special skills, but naturally shows a refined demeanor.

古文：从兄混有重名，唯岁节朝宗而已。
现代文：他的堂兄谢混名重天下，谢方明也不过是在逢年过节的时候过去拜谒一下而已。
English: His cousin, Xie Ming, is famous all over the world. Xie Fangming only went to pay his respects to him at the time of the New Year's holiday.

古文：丹阳尹刘穆之权重当时，朝野辐辏，不与穆之相识者，唯有混、方明、郗僧施、蔡廓四人而已；穆之甚以为恨。
现代文：丹阳尹刘穆之权盖当时，朝廷民间人物都惟恐趋奉不及。而未和刘穆之相结交的只有谢混、谢方明、郗僧施、蔡廓四个人而已。刘穆之相当怨恨他们。
English: At that time, when the power of Danyang Yin Liu Mu was at its peak, the people of the imperial court were afraid of being outdone. The only people who did not have a relationship with Liu Mu were Xie Jian, Xie Fangming, Xuan Zang Shi, and Cai Kuo. Liu Mu was quite resentful of them.

古文：方明、廓后往造之，大悦，白高祖曰： 谢方明可谓名家驹。直置便自是台鼎人，无论复有才用。 
现代文：谢方明、蔡廓后来拜访他，刘穆之高兴万分，对高祖说： 谢方明可说是名家的千里马，一任职便可当三公宰相，更不用说他还有其他本领。 
English: Xie Fangming and Cai Kuo later visited him. Liu Mu was overjoyed and said to Gao Zu: Xie Fangming can be said to be a famous horse. Once he is in office, he can become the three princes' prime minister, not to mention that he also has other skills.

古文：顷之，转从事中郎，仍为左将军道怜长史、高祖命府内众事，皆咨决之。
现代文：不久，谢方明转任从事中郎，同时当左将军刘道怜的长史。高祖叫道怜把府中杂事都交谢方明决定。
English: Soon, Xie Fangming was transferred to the post of middle-ranking official, and at the same time, Liu Daorei, the left-wing general, had a long history. Gao Zu asked Daorei to submit all the miscellaneous matters in the government to Xie Fangming for decision.

古文：随府转中军长史。寻更加晋陵太守，复为骠骑长史、南郡相，委任如初。
现代文：随同本府转任中军长史、不久又兼任晋陵太守，再当骠骑长史，南郡国相，对他的委任和当初一样。
English: Along with this government, he was transferred to the position of the Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese Army, and soon he also served as the Governor of Jinling, and then as the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Cavalry, and the Minister of State of Nan County, and his appointment was the same as at the beginning.

古文：尝年终，江陵县狱囚事无轻重，悉散听归家，使过正三日还到。
现代文：当年年终，江陵县的狱中犯人，无论罪行大小，谢方明都把他们放回家，叫他们过了正月初三再来。
English: At the end of that year, Xie Fangming let all the prisoners in the prison in Jiangling County go home, regardless of their crimes, and told them to come back after the third day of the first month of the year.

古文：罪应入重者有二十余人，纲纪以下，莫不疑惧。
现代文：其中重罪的人有二十多名，谢方明的部下各吏无不怀疑而担心。
English: Among them, there are more than 20 people with serious crimes. All of Xie Fangming's subordinates are suspicious and worried.

古文：时晋陵郡送故主簿弘季盛、徐寿之并随在西，固谏以为： 昔人虽有其事，或是记籍过言。
现代文：当时晋陵郡送行前主簿弘季盛、徐寿之都随同到西方，复进谏说： 古人虽然也有这种事，也许是书中的夸大之辞。
English: At that time, before the departure of Jinling County, the main book of Hong Ji Sheng and Xu Shuzhong all went to the west together, and Fuxin Yao said: Although the ancients also had this kind of thing, it may be an exaggeration in the book.

古文：且当今民情伪薄，不可以古义相许。 
现代文：况且当今民心虚伪而刻薄，不能用古人大义来期待他们。 
English: Moreover, today's people are hypocritical and mean-spirited, and we cannot expect them to use the ancient people's great righteousness.

古文：方明不纳，一时遣之。
现代文：谢方明没有采纳这个建议，一下子便把犯人给放了。
English: Xie Fangming refused to accept it and sent them all back at the same time.

古文：囚及父兄皆惊喜涕泣，以为就死无恨。
现代文：犯人及其父兄都惊喜流泪，认为就是死了也没有遗憾。
English: The prisoner and his father and brother were surprised and shed tears, believing that there was no regret even if they died.

古文：至期，有重罪二人不还，方明不听讨捕。
现代文：期限一到，犯有重罪的有两人没有返回，方明不允许讨捕。
English: As soon as the deadline arrived, two people who had committed serious crimes did not return, and Fangming did not allow them to be arrested.

古文：其一人醉不能归，逮二日乃反；余一囚十日不至，五官硃千期请见欲白讨之，方明知为囚事，使左右谢五官不须入，囚自当反。
现代文：原来其中一人喝醉了未能回来，到了第二天才来。另一个犯人十天还不回来，五官朱千期请见谢方明说要逮捕那个人，谢方明知道朱千期为的是犯人事，叫身边的人谢绝五官朱千期，叫他不需进去，犯人自然会返回。
English: Originally, one of them was drunk and couldn't come back until the next day. The other prisoner didn't come back for ten days. The fifth official, Zhu Qianqi, asked to see Xie Fangming to arrest that person. Xie Fangming knew that Zhu Qianqi was a criminal, and asked the people around him to refuse the fifth official, Zhu Qianqi, so that he didn't have to go in, and the prisoner would naturally return.

古文：囚逡巡墟里，不能自归，乡村责让之，率领将送，遂竟无逃亡者。
现代文：那个犯人在村中踯躅不想回去，乡人们责怪他，一起把他送回郡中监狱，最后没有一个逃跑的。
English: The criminal in the village did not want to go back, the villagers blamed him and sent him back to the county prison together. In the end, no one escaped.

古文：远近咸叹服焉。
现代文：远近的人听说此事，又感叹又佩服。
English: People from near and far have heard about this and are both impressed and impressed.

古文：遭母忧，去职。服阕，为宋台尚书吏部郎。
现代文：恰遇他的母亲去世，方明于是辞了官职，服丧期满后，又当宋国的台府的尚书吏部郎。
English: Faced with the death of his mother, Fangming resigned from his post, and after the period of mourning, he became the secretary of the Song Dynasty's Taifu.

古文：高祖受命，迁侍中。
现代文：宋高祖称帝，谢方明迁任侍中。
English: Song Gaozu was proclaimed emperor, and Xie Fangming was transferred to the position of chamberlain.

古文：永初三年，出为丹阳尹，有能名。
现代文：永初三年出外当丹阳尹，很有能干的名声。
English: In the first three years of Yongchu, Danyang Yin was sent abroad. He had a reputation of being very capable.

古文：转会稽太守。
现代文：再转任会稽太守。
English: He is now the Auditor-General of the Reappointment Committee.

古文：江东民户殷盛，风俗峻刻，强弱相陵，奸吏蜂起，符书一下，文摄相续。
现代文：江东地区人口繁盛，风俗刻薄，强欺弱，奸猾小吏到处都是。每次上面文书一下，下面便符令逼迫相继。
English: The population of the Kanto region is booming, the customs are mean, the strong bully the weak, and the treacherous petty officials are everywhere. Every time the above document is issued, the following orders are issued to persecute one after another.

古文：又罪及比伍，动相连坐，一人犯吏，则一村废业，邑里惊扰，狗吠达旦。
现代文：又喜欢株连犯罪的人，一人犯罪，邻人也不放过，以至一村百姓放弃了生活生产，村庄惊动不安，狗叫声日夜不断。
English: They also like people who commit crimes together, one person commits a crime, and the neighbors are not spared, so that the people of a village have given up living and production, the village is alarmed and uneasy, and the dogs are constantly barking day and night.

古文：方明深达治体，不拘文法，阔略苛细，务存纲领。
现代文：谢方明深知政治方法，不按文法办事，无论大事小事，只提纲挈领，大处着眼，小处忽略。
English: Xie Fangming is well aware of political methods, and does not act according to grammar. No matter how big or small the matter is, he only outlines it, focusing on the big things and ignoring the small things.

古文：州台符摄，即时宣下，缓民期会，展其办举；郡县监司，不得妄出，贵族豪士，莫敢犯禁，除比伍之坐，判久系之狱。
现代文：州中的文书一到，他马上公布下去，缓和人民交租的期限，让他们能完成任务。郡县中的官吏不能轻易外出，贵族豪绅没有人敢犯规。除去株连法律，判决长期关押的犯人。
English: As soon as the document arrived in the state, he immediately announced it, easing the time limit for people to pay rent so that they could complete their tasks. Officials in counties and counties could not go out easily, and no one dared to break the rules. Remove the joint-stock company law, and sentence long-term prisoners.

古文：前后征伐，每兵运不充，悉发倩士庶；事既宁息，皆使还本。
现代文：前前后后的征讨，每次后勤兵力不够他都征发士族，庶族人士，事情完成以后，都叫他们回去。
English: During and after the war of conquest, whenever the logistical forces were insufficient, he conscripted and dispatched the nobles and commoners, and after the war was over, he ordered them to go back.

古文：而属所刻害，或即以补吏。
现代文：他的部属做了对不起百姓的事，谢方明便叫那人当小吏。
English: When one of his subordinates did something that displeased the people, Xie Fangming called that person a minor official.

古文：守宰不明，与夺乖舛，人事不至，必被抑塞。
现代文：官员不贤明、处事昏乱、人事弄得不好的，必然被禁锢，不得升迁。
English: Officials who are not wise, who handle affairs in a confused manner, and who do not manage personnel well, will inevitably be imprisoned and may not be promoted.

古文：既早亡，且轻薄多尤累，故官位不显。
现代文：谢方明削减冗员，留下精干官吏，各人明确自己的职责。
English: Xie Fangming cut redundancy, leaving a lean official, each person clear their own responsibilities.

古文：无子。
现代文：东边人民到今天还称赞他。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：弟惠宣，竟陵王诞司徒从事中郎，临川内史。
现代文：他性格非常宽容，记住别人的优点，从未对别人有任何否定，代理前人的事务，不改变其中的方法，有必须更改的，必定以渐近的办法改过来，使无迹可查。
English: His character is very tolerant, remembers the merits of others, never denies anything to others, represents the affairs of his predecessors, does not change the method, and if there is something that must be changed, it must be changed by an asymptotic method, so that there is no trace.

古文：江夷，字茂远，济阳考城人也。
现代文：元嘉三年，他在任上逝世，享年四十七岁。江夷字茂远，济阳考城人。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, he died in office, at the age of forty-seven.

古文：祖霖彡，晋护军将军。
现代文：祖父江，是晋朝的护军将军。
English: Grandfather Jiang was a general of the Jin dynasty.

古文：父敳，骠骑咨议参军。
现代文：父亲江岂攵，官至骠骑谘议参军。
English: His father, Jiang Jiaxuan, was a high-ranking official who advised him to join the army.

古文：夷少自藻厉，为后进之美。
现代文：江夷少年时努力学习，是年轻一辈中出众人才。
English: Jiang Yi studied hard when he was a teenager, and he is an outstanding talent among the younger generation.

古文：州辟主簿，不就。
现代文：本州征用他为主簿，他未应命。
English: The state requisitioned him as chief accountant, but he did not comply with the order.

古文：桓玄篡位，以为豫章王文学。
现代文：桓玄篡位时用他当豫章王文学。
English: When Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, he used him as the king of literature.

古文：义旗建，高祖板为镇军行参军，寻参大司马琅邪王军事，转以公事免。
现代文：义兵奋起时，高祖任他为镇军行参军，不久又当大司马琅王牙王军事。因为公事没处理好，被免职。
English: When the volunteer soldiers rose up, Gao Zu appointed him as the commander of the town army to join the army, and soon he became the military commander of the King of the Horse and the King of the Goat. Because he did not handle the public affairs well, he was dismissed.

古文：顷之，复补主簿。
现代文：不久再补任主簿。
English: I'll be filling in as chief clerk again soon.

古文：豫讨桓玄功，封南郡州陵县五等侯。
现代文：因为参与讨伐桓玄有功，他被封为南郡州陵县五等侯。
English: He was given the title of the fifth-ranked marquis of Shuling County, Nanshan County, for his outstanding contribution to the fight against Kuan Xuan.

古文：孟昶建威府司马，中书侍郎，中军太尉从事中郎，征西大将军道规长史、南郡太守，寻转太尉咨议参军，领录事，迁长史，入为侍中，大司马，从府公北伐，拜洛阳园陵，进至潼关。
现代文：又当孟昶的建威府司马、中书侍郎、中军太尉从事中郎、征西大将军刘道规的长史、南郡太守。不久又转任太尉谘议参军、兼任录事，迁任长史，进宫当侍中、大司马，随从刘裕北伐。江夷拜谒洛阳的晋朝皇陵，进军到潼关。
English: He also served as Meng Wei's Jianwei prefectural steward, secretary of the Central Military Commission, lieutenant of the Central Military Commission, general of the Western Expedition Liu Daojian's Long History, and governor of Nan County. Soon he was transferred to the position of lieutenant to advise on joining the army, concurrently served as a recorder, transferred to the position of Long History, entered the palace as a chamberlain, senior secretary of the Central Military Commission, and followed Liu Yu to the Northern Expedition. Jiang Yi paid homage to the imperial mausoleum of the Jin Dynasty in Luoyang, and marched into Shaoguan.

古文：还领宁远将军、琅邪内史、本州大中正。
现代文：回来又兼宁远将军、琅王牙的内史、本州的大中正。
English: When he came back, he was also the general of Ningyuan, the internal history of Shao Wangya, and the president of the University of Honshu.

古文：高祖命大司马府、琅邪国事，一以委焉。
现代文：高祖委托他管理大司马府和琅王牙国的大小事务。
English: Gaozu entrusted him with the management of large and small affairs in the Great Horse Prefecture and the Kingdom of the Dragon King's Teeth.

古文：宋台初建，为五兵尚书。
现代文：宋国府台机构刚设立，江夷当五兵尚书。
English: The Song prefectural government and the Taiwan organization had just been established, and Jiang Yidang became the leader of the five soldiers.

古文：高祖受命，转掌度支。出为义兴太守，加秩中二千石，以疾去职。
现代文：高祖称帝，转任掌度支，又出外当义兴太守，加俸禄到二千石，因病离职。
English: Gaozhu was proclaimed emperor, transferred to the post of Shudoshi, and went abroad as Yixing Dazhu, increased his salary to two thousand koku, and left the post due to illness.

古文：寻拜吏部尚书，为吴郡太守。
现代文：不久拜任吏部尚书，当吴郡太守。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the position of librarian, and became the governor of Wu County.

古文：营阳王于吴县见害，夷临哭尽礼。
现代文：营阳王在吴县被杀，江夷亲临哭泣，很符合礼节。
English: Yingyang Wang was killed in Wuxian, and Jiang Yi came to cry in person, which was in line with etiquette.

古文：又以兄疾去官。
现代文：又因为兄长病了，离职。
English: He also left his job because his brother was ill.

古文：复为丹阳尹，吏部尚书，加散骑常侍，迁右仆射。
现代文：后又再当丹阳尹、吏部尚书，加官散骑常侍，迁任右仆射。
English: Later, he served again as Danyang Yin, the secretary of the cadre department, the additional officer, the horseback rider and the regular attendant, and was transferred to the post of the right-hand man.

古文：夷美风仪，善举止，历任以和简著称。
现代文：江夷外表美丽，举动洒脱，在历届任职中，以和平简洁著称。
English: Jiang Yi was beautiful in appearance and easy-going in his actions. He was known for his peacefulness and simplicity in his previous posts.

古文：出为湘州刺史，加散骑常侍，未之职，病卒，时年四十八。
现代文：再出为湘州刺史，加官散骑常侍，未到任，便病死了，享年四十八岁。
English: He appeared again as a historian of Hunan Province, and was promoted to the rank of officer in charge of horseback riding. He died of illness before taking office, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：遗命薄敛蔬奠，务存俭约。
现代文：他留下遗言让简单安葬，祭祀用蔬菜，必须节俭朴素。
English: His last words were to be buried in a simple way, with vegetables as offerings, and to be frugal and simple.

古文：追赠前将军，本官如故。
现代文：被追认为前将军，原来官职照旧。
English: He was regarded as a former general, but his official position remained the same.

古文：子湛，别有传。
现代文：他的儿子江湛，另外有传记。
English: His son, Jiang Zhan, also has a biography.

