古文：麒麟客王法进维杨十友金可记杨真伯
现代文：麒麟客王法进维杨十友金可记杨真伯
English: Kirin guest king Fa Jin Wei Yang ten friends Jin Ke Ji Yang Zhen Bo

古文：麒麟客
现代文：麒麟客
English: Kirin guest room

古文：麒麟客者，南阳张茂实客佣仆也。
现代文：麟麒客，是南阳张茂实雇来的仆人。
English: Lin Yongke is a servant hired by Nanyang Zhang Muxiu.

古文：茂实家于华山下，唐大中初，偶游洛中，假仆于南市，得一人焉。
现代文：茂实家住在华山下，唐朝大中初年，偶然出游到洛中，在南市雇仆人，找到一个人。
English: The Mushi family lived at the foot of Huashan Mountain. In the first year of middle school in the Tang Dynasty, they happened to travel to Lozhong, hired a servant in Nanshi, and found a person.

古文：其名曰王夐，年可四十余，佣作之直月五百。
现代文：他名叫王夐，年约四十多岁，佣作的工钱每月五百钱。
English: His name is Wang Qian, he is in his forties, and his wage as a hired hand is 500 yuan a month.

古文：勤干无私，出于深诚，苟有可为，不待指使。
现代文：这个人勤劳干练没有私心，异常忠诚，如果有可做的事，不等主人指使就干了。
English: This man is hard-working, capable, unselfish, and extremely loyal. If there is something to be done, he will do it without waiting for his master's order.

古文：茂实器之，易其名曰大历，将倍其直，固辞，其家益怜之。
现代文：茂实很器重他，给他改名叫大历，打算加倍给他工钱，而王夐却坚决推辞，因此茂实全家更加怜爱他。
English: He changed his name to Dalian and planned to double his salary, but Wang Yao firmly refused, so the whole family pitied him even more.

古文：居五年，计酬直尽。
现代文：住了五年，估计酬劳相抵已尽。
English: After living here for five years, I think I've earned enough.

古文：一旦辞茂实曰： 夐本居山，家业不薄。
现代文：有一天，王夐向茂实告辞说： 我本来住在山里，家业不薄。
English: One day, Wang Yao said to Maoshu, "I used to live in the mountains, and my family business is not bad.

古文：适与厄会，须佣作以禳之，固非无资而卖力者。
现代文：正赶上碰到厄运，必须佣作来消灾，本不是无钱出卖力气的人。
English: They are just catching up when they encounter bad luck and have to work to eliminate the disaster. They are not people who have no money to sell their strength.

古文：今厄尽矣，请从此辞。 
现代文：现在厄运已尽了，请允许我从此告辞。 
English: Now that my bad luck has run its course, please allow me to take my leave.

古文：茂实不测其言，不敢留，听之去。
现代文：茂实猜不透他的话，不敢留他，听凭他离去。
English: Lush guessed his words, did not dare to keep him, and let him go.

古文：日暮，入白茂实曰： 感君恩宥，深欲奉报。夐家去此甚近，其中景趣，亦甚可观，能相逐一游乎。 
现代文：天晚了，王夐又进去告诉茂实说： 感谢您待我宽容有恩，很想奉报，我家离这里很近，其中景趣也很可一观，能跟我去游一次吗？ 
English: It was late in the day, and Wang Yao went in again to tell Muxi, saying, "Thank you for being so tolerant and kind to me. I would like to repay you. My home is very close to here, and the scenery is also very beautiful. Can you take a trip with me?"

古文：茂实喜曰： 何幸，然不欲令家人知，潜一游可乎？ 
现代文：茂实高兴地说： 多么幸运啊，可是我不想让家里人知道，悄悄地游一趟，可以吗？ 
English: He said happily, "How lucky I am, but I don't want my family to know. Can I take a quiet swim?

古文：夐曰： 甚易。 
现代文：王夐说： 这很容易。 
English: Wang Yao said, "It's very easy.

古文：于是截竹杖长数尺，其上书符，授茂实曰： 君杖此入室，称腹痛。左右人悉令取药。
现代文：于是截了一支几尺长的竹杖，竹杖上画了符，交给茂实，他说： 您拄着它进到屋里，假称肚子疼，让左右的人全去取药。
English: So he cut off a bamboo cane several feet long, drew a symbol on it, and handed it to Mozumi. He said, "Take it with you into the house, pretend to have a stomach ache, and have everyone on your right and left fetch the medicine."

古文：去后，潜置竹于衾中，抽身出来可也。 
现代文：他们走后，悄悄地把竹杖放在被子中，抽身出来就行了。 
English: After they leave, quietly put the bamboo cane in the quilt, and just pull yourself out.

古文：茂实从之。
现代文：茂实听从他的指教。
English: MOSHI listens to his advice.

古文：夐喜曰： 君真可游吾居者也。 
现代文：王夐高兴地说： 您真是可以到我的住处一游的人啊。 
English: Wang Yao said happily, "You really are a person who can visit my home."

古文：相与南行一里余，有黄头执青麒麟一，赤文虎二，候于道左。
现代文：一起向南走一里多路，有个黄头仙童牵着一只青麒麟、两只红色花纹的老虎，在道旁等候。
English: Together, they walked more than a mile to the south. There was a yellow-headed fairy child holding a blue unicorn and two red patterned tigers, waiting by the roadside.

古文：茂实惊欲回避，夐曰： 无苦，但前行。 
现代文：茂实害怕想要躲开，王夐说： 不要害怕，只管前行。 
English: Muxi was afraid and wanted to run away, but Wang Yao said, "Don't be afraid, just go ahead."

古文：既到前，夐乘麒麟，茂实与黄头各乘一虎。
现代文：到跟前以后，王夐乘上麒麟，茂实与黄头各骑一只老虎。
English: After arriving in front of him, Wang Yao rode on a giraffe, while Muxi and Huang Tou each rode a tiger.

古文：茂实惧不敢近，曰： 夐相随，请不须畏。
现代文：茂实害怕不敢靠近，王夐说： 我随着你，请不必害怕。
English: Being too scared to approach, Wang Yao said: "I'll follow you, please don't be afraid."

古文：且此物人间之极俊者，但试乘之。 
现代文：而且这东西是人间极出众的动物，只管试着骑它。 
English: And this thing is the most extraordinary animal on earth, just try to ride it.

古文：遂凭而上，稳不可言。
现代文：茂实才靠着老虎跨上去，说不出的稳当。
English: It's only when she leans on the tiger that she straddles it, unspeakably steady.

古文：于是从之上仙掌峰。
现代文：于是跟随王夐上了仙掌峰。
English: So he followed Wang Yao up Cactus Peak.

古文：越壑凌山，举意而过，殊不觉峻险。
现代文：越沟壑凌高山，一转儿就过去了，一点也不觉得险峻。
English: Crossing the ravine and climbing the mountain, I passed it in a flash, and it didn't feel steep at all.

古文：如到三更，计数百里矣。
现代文：好像到了三更天，估计走了几百里了。
English: It seems to have been more than three days, and I estimate that I have walked several hundred miles.

古文：下一山，物众鲜媚，松石可爱，楼台宫观，非世间所有。
现代文：直到一座山，物华鲜媚，松石可爱，楼台宫观，不是人世间所能有的。
English: Up to a mountain, things are gorgeous, pine stones are lovely, and the view of the palace is not something that can be found in this world.

古文：将及门，引者揖曰： 阿郎何来？ 
现代文：将到门前，引导的人就来作揖说： 阿郎从哪里来？ 
English: When he was about to reach the door, the guide came to make the sign and said: Where did Aro come from?

古文：紫衣吏数百人，罗拜道侧。
现代文：几百个穿紫衣的官吏在道边罗拜。
English: Hundreds of purple-clad officials lined the roadside.

古文：既入，青衣数十人，容色皆殊，衣服鲜华，不可名状，各执乐器引拜。
现代文：进去以后，又有青衣几十人，姿色都不一般，衣服鲜艳华贵，无法形容，各拿乐器引拜。
English: After entering, there were dozens of people from Qingyi, their appearance was not ordinary, their clothes were bright and gorgeous, indescribable, and they each brought their musical instruments to worship.

古文：遂于中堂宴席毕，且命茂实坐。
现代文：就在中堂设宴吃完饭，又让茂实坐着。
English: After the meal, a banquet was set up in the middle hall, and Shigemitsu was allowed to sit down.

古文：夐入更衣，返坐，衣裳冠冕，仪貌堂堂然，实真仙之风度也。
现代文：王夐进内室更衣，又回来坐着，衣裳冠冕仪貌堂堂，实在是仙人的风度啊。
English: Wang Yao went into the inner room to change clothes, and came back sitting, his clothes crowning his magnificent appearance. It was truly the demeanor of a fairy godmother.

古文：其窗户阶闼，屏帏茵褥之盛，固非人世所有，歌鸾舞凤，及诸声乐，皆所未闻。
现代文：那里窗户阶闼，屏帏茵褥的繁盛，本来就不是人世所能有，歌鸾舞凤及各种声乐，都闻所未闻。
English: There, the prosperity of the window steps, the screens and screens, was originally not possible, and the songs, dances and all kinds of vocal music were unheard of.

古文：情意高逸，不复思人寰之事，观极。
现代文：这时，茂实情意高逸，不再去想人间的事，欢乐已极。
English: At this time, the rich feelings are high, no longer thinking about human affairs, and the joy is extreme.

古文：主人曰： 此乃仙居，非世人所到。
现代文：主人说： 这就是仙人居住的地方，不是世人所能到处。
English: The master said, "This is the place where the immortals live. It is not possible for people to go everywhere.

古文：以君宿缘，合一到此，故有逃厄之遇。
现代文：凭您宿缘，应当到这里一次，所以有逃避厄运时的际遇。
English: According to your fate, you should come here once, so you have the opportunity to escape bad luck.

古文：仙俗路殊，尘静难杂，君宜归修其心，三五劫后，当复相见。
现代文：但仙俗道路不同，尘世和静修之人难以混杂，您应当回去修养慕道之心，三五劫后，当再相见。
English: However, the path of the celestial world is different from that of the mundane world. It is difficult to mix the mundane world and those who practice meditation. You should go back to cultivate the heart of the Tao. After the Thirty-five Years' War, you should meet again.

古文：夐比者尘缘将尽，上界有名，得遇太清真人，召入小有洞中，示以九天之乐，复令下指生死海波。 
现代文：我近来尘缘将尽，上界有名，得遇太清真人，召我入小有洞中，以九天之乐指示我，又令我下指生死波澜。 
English: Recently, I was at my wit's end. I was famous in the upper world, and I met someone who was too sincere. He called me into a small cave, showed me with the music of nine days, and made me feel the waves of life and death.

古文：且曰： 乐虽难求，苦亦易遣。
现代文：又说： 欢乐虽然难以寻求，痛苦也容易打发。
English: He also said: Although joy is hard to find, pain is easy to dispel.

古文：如为山者，掬土增高，不掬则止，穿则陷。
现代文：像堆山似的，掬土山就增高，不掬山就停止，穿它就透。
English: Like a heap of mountains, the mountain of rammed earth will increase in height, the mountain that is not rammed will stop, and the mountain will be penetrated.

古文：夫升高者，不上难而下易乎？ 
现代文：登高的人，不是上难下容易吗？
English: Isn't it easier to climb up than to climb down?

古文：自是修习，经六七劫，乃证此身，回视委骸，积如山岳。
现代文：从此修习，经过六七劫，就能使此身证果，回头去看看遗留的形骸，堆积如山。
English: From this practice, after sixty-seven years, you can make this body witness the fruit, look back to see the leftover remains, piled up like a mountain.

古文：四大海水，半是吾宿世父母妻子别泣之泪。
现代文：四大海水，有一半是我旧世父母妻子儿女离别悲泣的眼泪。
English: Half of the four great oceans of water are the tears shed by my parents, wife and children in the past, as they wept bitterly at parting.

古文：然念念修之，倏已一世。
现代文：然而我一心一意修道，转眼已经一世。
English: However, I have been a single-minded monk for my entire life.

古文：形骸虽远，此不忘修致，其功即亦非远。
现代文：形骸虽远，依然不忘修致，其功就不会远。
English: Although the skeleton is far away, it still does not forget to cultivate, and its achievements will not be far away.

古文：亦时有心远气清，一言而悟者。
现代文：也时而有心远气清，一句话而悟道的人。
English: There are also those whose minds are far from clear, who are enlightened by a single word.

古文：勉之！ 
现代文：你努力吧！ 
English: Do your best!

古文：遗金百镒，为营身之助，复乘麒麟，令黄头执之，夐步送到家，家人方环泣。
现代文：又送给茂实金百镒，作为营身的资助，又让茂实乘着麒麟，令黄头牵引，王夐步行送他回家。家里的人正环绕哭泣。
English: He also gave him a gold-plated donkey as financial support for his campaign. He also had him ride a unicorn, with Huang leading the way. Wang Yao walked him home. The family members were crying all around.

古文：茂实投金于井中，夐抽去竹杖，令茂实潜卧衾中。
现代文：茂实把金子投到井中，王夐抽去竹杖，让茂实悄悄躺进被子中。
English: MOSHI threw the gold into the well, WANG Yao drew away the bamboo cane, and let MOSHI quietly lie down in the quilt.

古文：夐曰： 我当至蓬莱谒大仙伯。
现代文：王夐说： 我该去蓬莱拜见大仙伯。
English: Wang Yao said: I should go to Penglai to see the Great Immortal.

古文：明旦莲花峰上，有彩云车去，我之乘也。 
现代文：明天早晨莲花峰上有彩云去，就是我的车子。 
English: Tomorrow morning, there will be colorful clouds on Lotus Peak. That's my car.

古文：遂揖而去，茂实忽呻吟，众惊而问之，茂实给之曰： 初腹痛时，忽若有人见召，遂奄然耳，不知其多少时也。 
现代文：于是一揖而去。茂实忽然呻吟，大家惊异地问他，茂实骗他们说： 我刚肚子疼时，忽然好像有人召我，就只剩一口气了，不知道多长时间了。 
English: So he left in a hurry. Motsu suddenly moaned, everyone asked him in surprise, and Motsu lied to them: "I just had a stomach ache, and suddenly it was as if someone was calling me, and I only had one breath left, I don't know how long it's been.

古文：家人曰： 取药既回，呼之不应，已七日矣，唯心头尚暖，故未敛也。 
现代文：家人说： 我取药回来以后，叫你你不答应，已经七天了，只是心头还温暖，所以没有裴殓。 
English: The family member said, "It's been seven days since I came back from picking up the medicine and I asked you not to say yes, but my heart is still warm, so I don't have fever.

古文：明日望之，莲花峰上，果有彩云。遂弃官游名山。
现代文：第二天，张茂实去观望，莲花峰上果然有彩云，就弃官游历名山。
English: The next day, Zhang Mosi went to watch, and there was indeed a colorful cloud on the lotus peak, so he quit his job to travel the famous mountain.

古文：后归，出井中金与眷属，再出游山，后不知所在也。
现代文：后来回家，把井中的金子取出给了眷属，再出去游山，后来不知道他在哪里。
English: Later, he went home, took the gold out of the well and gave it to his relatives, and then went hiking in the mountains. Later, he did not know where he was.

古文：王法进
现代文：王法进
English: Wang Fojin

古文：王法进者，剑州临津人也。
现代文：王法进，是剑州临津人，幼年就好道。
English: Wang Fajin, a native of Imjin in the state of Jianzhou, was a good dancer from a young age.

古文：幼而好道，家近古观，虽无道士居之，其嬉戏未尝轻侮于像设也。
现代文：他家靠近古观，虽然没有道士住在那里，他游戏的时候也不曾对神像轻视侮慢。
English: His home was close to the ancient temple, and although there were no Taoists living there, he never looked down on the statues when he was playing.

古文：十余岁，有女冠自剑州历外邑，过其家，父母以其慕道，托女冠以保护之。
现代文：十多岁时，有个女道士从剑州游历外县，经过他家，父母因为他慕道，托付女道士保护他。
English: When he was more than ten years old, a female Taoist traveled from Jianzhou to other counties, passing by his home. His parents entrusted a female Taoist to protect him because he was a Taoist.

古文：与授正一延生小箓，名曰法进。
现代文：女道士授给他一本《正一延生小箓》，给他起名叫法进。
English: A female Taoist gave him a copy of "Zheng Yi Yan Sheng Xiao Yao," and named him "Fa Jin."

古文：而专勤香火，斋戒护持。
现代文：让他专心香火，斋戒护持。
English: Let him concentrate on incense and fasting.

古文：亦茹柏绝粒，时有感降。
现代文：当时三川歉收闹饥荒，粮价飞涨。
English: At that time, poor harvests in Mikawa caused famine, and grain prices soared.

古文：时三川饥俭，斛斛翔贵，死者十五六，多采野葛山芋以充饥。忽三青童降于其庭，谓法进曰： 上帝以汝夙禀仙骨，归心精诚，不忘于道，敕我迎汝受事于上京也。 
现代文：死的人占十分之五六。多数人采集野葛根山芋来充饥。忽然三个青衣童子降临到他家的院子里，他们对法进说： 上天因为你早有仙骨，皈心精诚，不忘道德，命令我们迎接你到上天去接受差事。 
English: Fifty-six out of ten people died. Most people gathered wild yam to satisfy their hunger. Suddenly, three boys in blue robes came to the courtyard of his house. They said to Fa Jin, "Because you already have a sacred bone, have a sincere heart, and do not forget morality, Heaven orders us to welcome you to Heaven to accept the mission."

古文：不觉腾空。
现代文：法进不觉飞腾到空中，直达玉皇大帝的住所。
English: Fa Jin unconsciously soared into the sky, straight to the Jade Emperor's residence.

古文：迳达大帝之所，命以玉杯霞浆赐之。徐谓曰： 人处三才之大，体天地之和，得人形，生中土，甚不易也。
现代文：大帝命人用玉杯盛霞浆赏给他喝。慢慢地对他说： 人处于天地人三才中最大的一方，体现天地之和谐。获得人形，生于中土，是很不容易的。
English: The great emperor ordered someone to give him a cup of jade to drink. He slowly said to him: Man is the greatest of the three talents in heaven and earth, reflecting the harmony of heaven and earth. It is not easy to get a doll born in the Middle Earth.

古文：天运四时之气，地禀五行之秀，生五谷百果，以养于人。
现代文：天催动春夏秋冬四时的气候，地承受金木水火土五行的灵秀，生长五谷百果，未养育人。
English: The weather in the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter is driven by the heavens. The earth endures the beauty of the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and soil, and grows all kinds of crops and fruits, but does not nurture people.

古文：而人不知天地养育之恩，轻弃五谷，厌舍丝麻，使耕农之夫，纺绩之妇，身勤而不得饱，力竭而不御寒，徒施甚劳。曾无爱惜者，斯固神明所责，天地不佑矣。
现代文：然而人不知天地养育之恩，轻易地抛弃五谷和丝麻，使种地的农夫，纺织的妇女，身体勤劳而不能吃饱，力量用尽而不能御寒，白白地劳作，竟无人爱惜，这本来是神明要责罚的，天地也不保佑了。
English: However, people do not know the blessing of nurturing by heaven and earth. They easily abandon grain and flax, making farmers and weavers work hard without being able to eat enough, exhaust their strength without being able to keep out the cold, and work in vain without being cherished by anyone. This was originally meant to be punished by the gods, and heaven and earth did not bless it.

古文：近者地司岳渎所奏，以世人厌掷五谷，不贵衣食之本。
现代文：近来地司岳渎奏报，认为世人厌弃五谷，不重视衣食的根本。
English: Recently, the district magistrate Yue Zhulong reported that the world abhors grain and does not attach importance to the fundamentals of food and clothing.

古文：我已敕太华之府，收五谷之神，所种不成，下民饥饿，因示罚责，以惩其心。
现代文：我已下令太华之府，收回五谷之神，让所种不收下民挨饿，借此显示责罚，来警诫人们的思想。
English: I have ordered the government of Taihua to take back the god of grain and let the people starve if the grain is not taken back, so as to show punishment and warn people's minds.

古文：然旋奉太上慈旨，以大道好生，务先救物。
现代文：然而不久奉太上慈旨，认为大道爱好生灵，务必先救物。
English: However, it was not long before the Empress Dowager's benevolent will was carried out, and it was decided that since Daido was a lover of living beings, he must first save them.

古文：虽天地神明责之，愚民不知其过所自，固无忏请首原之路。
现代文：虽然天地神明责罚他们，但愚民不知他们的过错从何而来，当然没有忏请首原之路。
English: Although the gods of heaven and earth punished them, the foolish people did not know where their mistakes came from, and of course they did not repent.

古文：汝当为上宫侍童，入侍天府，今且令汝下归于世，告喻下民，使其悔罪，宝爱农桑，此亦汝之阴功也。 
现代文：你当入上宫作侍童，入天府侍奉，今天暂且命你下界回到人世，告诫下界之民，使他们悔罪，象珍宝似地爱惜农桑，这也是你的阴功啊。 
English: You should enter the upper palace as an attendant, enter the heavenly palace to serve, and today temporarily order your lower realm to return to the human world, admonish the people of the lower realm, make them repent, and cherish the agricultural mulberry like a precious treasure. This is also your yin gong.

古文：命侍女以《灵宝清斋告谢天地仪》一轴付之，使传行于世。
现代文：又命侍女拿来《灵宝清斋告谢天地仪》一轴交付给他，使他传行于世。
English: He also ordered his maid to bring him a scroll of the "Spiritual Treasures, Fasting, and Giving Thanks to Heaven and Earth," so that he could pass it on to the world.

古文：曰： 令世人相率于幽山高静之所，致斋悔谢，一年再为之，则宿罪可除，谷父蚕母之神，为致丰衍矣。
现代文：又说： 令世人都到深山高处清静之所，设斋悔谢，一年做两次，那么旧罪可除，谷父蚕母这些神，就会为他们送来丰裕了。
English: He also said: Let the people of the world go to a place of peace deep in the mountains and set up fasting and repentance twice a year, then old sins can be removed, and the gods of grain, father and mother will send them plenty.

古文：龙虎之年，复当召汝。 
现代文：龙虎之年，我当再召你。 
English: In the year of the dragon and the tiger, I shall summon you again.

古文：即今清斋天公告谢之法是也。
现代文：如今清斋向天公告谢的做法就是这样来的。
English: This is how the practice of announcing one's thanks to the heavens at the end of a meal has come to be.

古文：法进以天宝十二年壬辰，遂复升天。
现代文：法进于天宝十二年壬辰终于又升到天上。
English: In the 12th year of the Heavenly Treasure, Fa-jin finally ascended to heaven again.

古文：维杨十友
现代文：维杨十友
English: Wei Yang Shiyu

古文：维杨十友者，皆家产粗丰，守分知足，不干禄位，不贪货财，慕玄知道者也。
现代文：维杨十友，都是家产较丰，安份知足，不求官禄，不贪钱财，仰慕清静知道道义的人。
English: The ten friends of Viyang are all people who are well-off, well-off, do not seek official position, do not covet money, admire tranquility and know morality.

古文：相约为友，若兄弟焉。
现代文：他们相互作为朋友，像兄弟一样。
English: They treat each other as friends, like brothers.

古文：时海内大安，民人胥悦，遽以酒食为娱，自乐其志。
现代文：当时国内很安定，老百姓都安居乐业，他们就用酒饭娱乐，自己为自己的志趣而高兴。
English: At that time, the country was very stable, and the people were living and working peacefully. They enjoyed themselves with wine and rice, and were happy for their hobbies.

古文：始于一家，周于十室，率以为常。
现代文：从一家开始遍及十家，都把这当作常事。
English: Starting with one and spreading to ten, they all took this as a regular occurrence.

古文：忽有一老叟，衣服滓弊，气貌羸弱，似贫窭不足之士也。
现代文：忽然有一个老头，衣服又脏又破，从外表看很瘦弱，好象是个贫寒不丰足的人。
English: Suddenly, there was an old man with dirty and torn clothes. He looked very thin and frail, as if he were a poor man.

古文：亦着麻衣，预十人末，以造其会。
现代文：他也穿着麻衣，跟随十人之末，来到他们聚会的地方。
English: He also, clothed in linen, went with the ten to the place where they were meeting.

古文：众既适情，亦皆悯之，不加斥逐。
现代文：大家既然心情舒畅，也都怜悯这个老头，不赶他走。
English: Since everyone was in a good mood, they all pitied the old man and did not chase him away.

古文：醉饱自去，莫知所之。
现代文：老头吃饱喝足自己走开，没有人知道他到哪里去。
English: The old man had enough to eat and drink, so he left on his own. No one knew where he was going.

古文：一旦言于众曰： 余力困之士也，幸众人许陪坐末，不以为责。
现代文：一天，他向大家说： 我是个能力缺乏的人，幸而大家允许我在末座相陪，不责怪我。
English: One day, he said to everyone: I am a person who lacks ability, fortunately, everyone allowed me to accompany in the back seat, do not blame me.

古文：今十人置宴，皆得预之。
现代文：如今你们十人设宴，我都得到参与。
English: Now, ten of you are having a banquet, and I'm getting to participate.

古文：席既周毕，亦愿力为一会，以答厚恩。
现代文：宴席已经轮流完毕，我也愿意尽力准备一次宴会，用来答谢你们的厚恩。
English: The banquet has been rotated, and I am willing to do my best to prepare a banquet to thank you for your kindness.

古文：约以他日，愿得同往。 
现代文：以另外的日子相约，希望大家能够一同前去。 
English: We have agreed to meet on another day, and I hope that we can move forward together.

古文：至期，十友如其言，相率以待。
现代文：到了约定的日期，十友依老头所说的话，一起等待。
English: When the agreed date arrived, the ten friends waited together according to the old man's words.

古文：凌晨，贫叟果至，相引徐步，诣东塘郊外。不觉为远。
现代文：凌晨，穷老头果然来了，领着他们慢慢走，来到东塘郊外，不觉很远。
English: In the early morning, the poor old man really came, led them to walk slowly, and came to the outskirts of Dongtang, which was far away.

古文：草莽中茆屋两三间，倾侧欲摧，引入其下。
现代文：荒野中有两三间茅屋，歪斜得要倒，老头就把他们领到茅屋之下。
English: In the wilderness there were two or three huts, so crooked that they were falling down, and the old man led them under the huts.

古文：有丐者数辈在焉，皆是蓬发鹑衣，形状秽陋。
现代文：已有几个乞丐在屋里，都是披散着头发穿着补了又补的破衣，样子肮脏丑陋。
English: There are already several beggars in the house, all with disheveled hair, wearing patched and patched rags, looking dirty and ugly.

古文：叟至，丐者相顾而起，墙立以俟其命。
现代文：老头到了，乞丐互相看了看就起来了，象一面墙似地站着等老头吩咐。
English: When the old man arrived, the beggars looked at each other and got up, standing like a wall waiting for the old man's command.

古文：叟令扫除舍下，陈列蘧蒢，布以菅席，相邀环坐。
现代文：老头令他们打扫屋子，铺上柴草，展开草席，邀请他们围成一圈坐下。
English: The old man told them to clean the house, spread firewood and grass, spread out the straw mats, and invited them to sit in a circle.

古文：日既旰矣，咸有饥色。久之，各以醯盐竹箸，置于客前，逡巡，数辈共举一巨板如案，长四五尺，设于席中，以油帕幕之。
现代文：天已经晚了，大家都有饥饿的神色，过了很久，分别拿醯盐竹筷，放到客人面前，一会儿，几个乞丐共同抬着象案子似的一块大板，板长四五尺，摆在草席中央，用油渍渍的布把它盖上。
English: It was late in the day, and everyone looked hungry. After a long time, they each took a bamboo chopstick and placed it in front of the guests. For a while, several beggars jointly carried a large board that looked like a case. The board was four or five feet long, placed in the middle of the straw mat, and covered it with an oil-stained cloth.

古文：十友相顾，谓必济饥，甚以为喜。
现代文：十友互相看看，以为一定能解饥了，为此很高兴。
English: The ten friends looked at each other and thought that they would definitely be able to relieve their hunger, so they were very happy.

古文：既撒油帕。气燑燑然尚未可辨，久而视之，乃是蒸一童儿。可十数岁，已糜烂矣，耳目手足，半已堕落。
现代文：油布撤去以后，热气腾腾地还不能看清，看了很久，原来是一个蒸熟了的小孩，大约十多岁，已经稀烂了，耳目手足，一半已经脱落。
English: After the oilcloth was removed, I could not see the steaming crane clearly. I looked at it for a long time. It turned out to be a well-steamed child, about ten years old, already dilapidated, ears, eyes, hands and feet, half of which had fallen off.

古文：叟揖让劝勉，使众就食，众深嫌之，多托以饫饱，亦有忿恚逃去，都无肯食者。
现代文：老头揖让劝勉，让大家去吃，大家都很怨恨他，多数假装说不饿，也有人生气逃去，都不肯吃。
English: The old man tried to persuade everyone to eat, but everyone resented him. Most people pretended not to be hungry, and some people got angry and ran away, refusing to eat.

古文：叟纵餐啖，似有盈味。
现代文：老头就放开量大吃起来，直到吃得好象有要流出的样子。
English: The old man gobbled it down until it looked like it was going to spill out.

古文：食之不尽，郎命诸丐擎去，令尽食之。
现代文：老头没有吃尽，就让众乞丐拿走，让他们吃光。
English: The old man did not eat it all, so he let the beggars take it and let them eat it all.

古文：因谓诸人曰： 此所食者，千岁人参也，颇甚难求，不可一遇。
现代文：于是老头才对众人说： 这次所吃的东西，是千年的人参啊，很难找到，不能遇到一次。
English: So the old man said to the crowd, "What you have eaten this time is a thousand-year-old ginseng. It's hard to find, and you can't come across it just once.

古文：吾得此物，感诸公延遇之恩，聊欲相报。
现代文：我得到这个东西，为众位筵请相待之恩所感，姑且想用它相报。
English: When I got this, I felt so grateful for everyone's kindness, and I wanted to use it to repay them.

古文：且食之者，白日升天，身为上仙。
现代文：而且吃到它的人，能白日上天，身为上仙。
English: Moreover, people who eat it can go to heaven during the day, as immortals.

古文：众既不食，其命也夫。 
现代文：大家既然不吃，大概是命运吧！ 
English: Since everyone doesn't eat, it's probably fate!

古文：众惊异，悔谢未及。
现代文：大家都很惊异，后悔道歉不及。
English: Everyone was surprised, and it was too late to apologize.

古文：叟促问诸丐，令食讫即来。
现代文：老头催促询问众丐，让他们吃完就来。
English: The old man urged the beggars to come as soon as they finished eating.

古文：俄而丐者化为青童玉女，幡盖导从，与叟一时升天。
现代文：不一会儿，乞丐们变成了金童玉女，旗幡伞盖前导后从，与老头一起同时升天。
English: In a short time, the beggars turned into the golden boy and girl, the flag and umbrella cover leading and following, ascending to heaven at the same time as the old man.

古文：十友刳心追求。更莫能见。
现代文：十友挖空心思去追寻，再也没能见到老头。
English: The ten friends searched in vain and never saw the old man again.

古文：金可记
现代文：金可记
English: Kinko's

古文：金可记，新罗人也，宾贡进士。
现代文：金可记，是新罗国人，宾贡进士。
English: Jin Ke Ke, a native of Silla, is a Bingon Scholar.

古文：性沉静好道，不尚华侈，或服气炼形，自以为乐。
现代文：他性情沉静喜好道术，不崇尚奢华，有时服气炼形，自己以此为乐。
English: His disposition is quiet and likes Taoism, does not advocate luxury, sometimes obeys the spirit of refinement, and takes it as his pleasure.

古文：博学强记，属文清丽。
现代文：他又学问广博记忆力强，写文章风格清丽。
English: He is also well-educated, has a strong memory, and writes articles in a beautiful style.

古文：美姿容，举动言谈，迥有中华之风。
现代文：他的相貌也很美，举动言谈，显然有中华之风。
English: His appearance is also very beautiful, his actions and speech, obviously have the Chinese style.

古文：俄擢第，于终南山子午谷养居，怀隐逸之趣。
现代文：后来考中进士，到终南山子午谷盖草房居住，怀有隐退安逸的志趣。
English: Later, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and lived in a grass-covered house in Zihu Valley in the southern part of the country, with a desire to retreat and relax.

古文：手植奇花异果极多，常焚香静坐，若有思念。又诵《道德》及诸仙经不辍。
现代文：他亲手栽植的奇花异果很多，经常焚香静坐，若有所思，又诵读《道德经》及各种仙经不停。
English: He has planted many exotic flowers and fruits with his own hands, often burns incense, meditates, thinks, and recites the Tao Te Ching and various sutras.

古文：后三年，思归本国，航海而去。
现代文：以后三年，想回归本国，就航海而去。
English: After three years, he wanted to return to his home country, so he sailed away.

古文：复来，衣道服，却入终南。
现代文：重新回来，穿着道士衣服，进入终南山。
English: He came back again, dressed in a Taoist robe, and entered the final Nanshan.

古文：务行阴德，人有所求，初无阻拒，精勤为争，人不可偕也。
现代文：他致力于行阴德，人们有求他之处，向来不拒绝推阻，精心勤恳办事，别人不可同他相比。
English: He is committed to the practice of virtue, people have something to ask him, he has never refused to push back, he is meticulous and diligent, and others cannot be compared to him.

古文：唐大中十一年十二月，忽上表言： 臣奉玉皇诏，为英文台侍郎，明年二月二十五日当上升。 
现代文：唐朝大中十一年十二月，忽然上表章说： 我奉玉皇诏旨，担任英文台侍郎，明年二月二十五日当升天。 
English: In December of the eleventh year of the Tang Dynasty, he suddenly wrote on his epitaph: "In accordance with the edict of the Jade Emperor, I will serve as a waiter of the English stage, and I will ascend to heaven on February 25th next year."

古文：时宣宗极以为异，遣中使征入内，固辞不就。
现代文：当时唐宣宗觉得这事极奇异，派宫中使者征召他入宫，他坚决推辞不来。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong thought this was very strange and sent an envoy to the palace to summon him to enter the palace, but he resolutely refused to come.

古文：又求玉皇诏辞，以为别仙所掌，不留人间，遂赐宫女四人，香药金彩，又遣中使二人，专伏侍者。
现代文：又向他要玉皇诏书辞句，他用被别的仙人所掌管，没留在人间来回答，唐宣宗就赏给他四名宫女，以及香、药、金、缎，又派宫中使者二人，专门服侍他。
English: He also asked him for the words of the Jade Emperor's edict, to which he replied that he had been controlled by other sages and had not remained on earth. Tang Xuanzong rewarded him with four maids of honor, as well as incense, medicine, gold, and money, and sent two messengers from the palace to specially serve him.

古文：可记独居静室，宫女中使，多不接近。
现代文：金可记独自住在静室，宫女和中使，他多不接近。
English: Jin Keke lived alone in a quiet room, away from his concubines and middlemen.

古文：每夜，闻室内常有客谈笑声，中使窥窃之，但见仙官仙女，各坐龙凤之上，俨然相对，复有侍卫非少。
现代文：每天夜里，都听到室内有客人的谈笑声，中使就偷偷地去窥视，只见仙官仙女，各自坐在龙凤之上，庄重地相对，还有不少侍卫。
English: Every night, he heard the laughter of guests in the room, and the middle envoy secretly peeked in, only to see the fairies, each sitting on the dragon and phoenix, solemnly facing each other, and many attendants.

古文：而宫女中使，不敢辄惊。
现代文：而宫女中使都不敢擅自惊动他们。
English: But the palace maidservants did not dare to alarm them.

古文：二月二十五日，春景妍媚，花卉烂漫，果有五云唳鹤，翔鸾白鹄，笙箫金石，羽盖琼轮，幡幢满空。
现代文：二月二十五日，春光明媚景色艳丽，花卉烂漫，果然有五彩祥云仙鹤啼鸣，凤凰白鹄在飞翔，笙箫金石，羽盖琼轮，旗幡招展，遮满天空。
English: On February 25th, the spring was bright and beautiful, the scenery was dazzling, and the flowers were in full bloom. As expected, there were colorful clouds, cranes chirping, phoenixes and egrets flying, honeysuckles, dragonflies and damselflies, and flags fluttering, covering the sky.

古文：仙伏极众，升天而去。
现代文：仙伏极多，金可记升天而去。
English: There are a lot of immortals, but only one can ascend to heaven.

古文：朝列士庶，观者填隘山谷，莫不瞻礼叹异。
现代文：朝中大臣以及士人百姓，观看的人堵塞了山谷，没有人不瞻仰礼拜叹服惊异。
English: The ministers of the two Koreas, as well as the people, blocked the valley, and no one was surprised.

古文：杨真伯
现代文：杨真伯
English: Yang Zhenbo

古文：弘农杨真伯，幼有文，性耽玩书史，以至忘寝食。
现代文：弘农杨真伯，小时候就有文才，每每沉溺书史，以至忘记睡觉和吃饭。
English: Hongnong Yang Zhenbo had a talent for literature when he was a child. He was so engrossed in books and history that he even forgot to sleep and eat.

古文：父母不能禁止，时或夺其脂烛，匿其诗书，真伯颇以为患，遂逃过洪饶间，于精舍空院，肄习半年余。
现代文：父母也不能禁止他，有时夺去灯油蜡烛，把他的诗书藏起来，真伯以此为忧，就来到洪饶一带，在学舍里学习半年多。
English: His parents couldn't stop him either. Sometimes they took away his oil candles and hid his poetry book. Worried about this, Zhen Bo came to the Hongrao area and studied for more than half a year in a schoolhouse.

古文：中秋夜，习读次，可二更已来，忽有人扣学窗牖间，真伯淫于典籍不知也。
现代文：中秋之夜，真伯正在读书，大约二更已过，忽然有人敲他的窗户，由于真伯沉迷于书籍之中没有听到。
English: On the night of the Mid-Autumn Festival, Zhen Bo was reading. About two hours later, someone suddenly knocked on his window, but he did not hear it because Zhen Bo was absorbed in his books.

古文：俄然有人启扉而入，乃一双鬟青衣，言曰： 女郎久栖幽隐，服气茹芝，多往来洞庭云水间。
现代文：突然有人推门而入，乃是一个梳着双鬟的使婢，她说： 女郎很久住在幽深隐秘之地，喝仙气吃灵芝，常常往来于洞庭云水之间。
English: Suddenly, someone pushed through the door. It was a servant girl with a double braid. She said, "The girl has been living in a deep, secret place for a long time. She drinks fairy spirits and eats reishi mushrooms. She often comes and goes between the clouds and water in the cave garden."

古文：知君子近至此，又骨气清净，志操坚白，愿尽款曲。 
现代文：知道君子最近来到这里，又骨气清净，志坚操白，愿尽殷勤的心意。 
English: Knowing that the gentleman has recently come here, he has a clean backbone, a strong will, and is willing to do his best.

古文：真伯殊不应，青衣自反。
现代文：真伯丝毫不应，婢女自己回去了。
English: Zhenbo did not deserve it at all, and the maid went back on her own.

古文：三更后，闻户外珩璜环珮之声，异香芳馥，俄而青衣报女郎且至，年可二八，冠碧云凤翼冠，衣紫云霞日月衣，精光射人。逡巡就坐，真伯殊不顾问一言。久之，于真伯案取砚，青衣荐笺，女郎书札数行，腆然而去。
现代文：那女郎年约十六岁，头上戴着碧云凤翼冠，身上穿着紫云霞日月衣，光彩照人。女郎迟迟疑疑地坐下，真伯根本不回头，一句话也不问。过了很久，女郎在真伯书案上取了砚台，婢女献上纸，女郎写了几行诗，着愧地离去。
English: The girl was about sixteen years old, with a crown of blue clouds and phoenix wings on her head, and she was wearing a purple dress, shining brightly. The girl hesitantly sat down, and Zhen Bo did not look back at all, nor did she ask a word. After a long time, the girl took the podium on Zhen Bo's book case, the maid presented the paper, the girl wrote a few lines of poetry, and left shamefacedly.

古文：真伯因起，乃视其所留诗曰： 君子竟执逆，无由达诚素。
现代文：真伯于是起来，才看到她所留下的诗： 君子竟执逆，无由达诚素。
English: Zhen Bo then got up, only to see the poem she had left behind: A gentleman is actually rebellious, there is no way to achieve sincerity.

古文：明月海上山，秋风独归去？ 
现代文：明月海上山，秋风独归去。 
English: The bright moon over the sea and the autumn wind are the same.

古文：其后亦不知女郎是何人也。
现代文：也不知女郎是什么人？难道是洞庭诸仙吗？
English: I also don't know who the girl is. Could it be the Dongting Immortals?

古文：岂非洞庭诸仙乎，观其诗思，岂人间之言欤？
现代文：观看她诗句的意思，难道是人间的言语吗？
English: Looking at the meaning of her poem, is it a human language?

