古文：黄帝问曰：五脏使人痿，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：五脏都能使人发生痿病，是什么道理呢？
English: Huangdi asked: What is the reason that all five internal organs can cause rickets?

古文：岐伯对曰：肺主身之皮毛，心主身之血脉，肝主身之筋膜，脾主身之肌肉，肾主身之骨髓。
现代文：岐伯回答说：肺主全身皮毛，心主全身血脉，肝主全身筋膜，脾主全身肌肉，肾主全身骨髓。
English: Qi Bo replied: The lungs are the main body fur, the heart is the main body blood, the liver is the main body fascia, the spleen is the main body muscle, and the kidney is the main body bone marrow.

古文：故肺热叶焦，则皮毛虚弱，急薄，着则生痿躄也。心气热，则下脉厥而上，上则下脉虚，虚则生脉痿，枢折挈，胫纵，而不任地也。肝气热，则胆泄口苦，筋膜干，筋膜干则筋急而挛，发为筋痿。脾气热，则胃干而渴，肌肉不仁，发为肉痿。肾气热，则腰脊不举，骨枯而髓减，发为骨痿。
现代文：所以肺脏感受了热邪，灼伤津液，肺叶枯焦，就会皮肤干燥、汗毛焦枯，热邪不去就会发病为四肢痿软无力的 痿躄 ；心脏感受了热邪，可使下部的气血上逆，气血上逆就会引起肢体的血脉空虚，血脉空虚就会发病为 脉痿 ，使膝踝关节不能屈伸，小腿软弱不能站立行走；肝脏感受了热邪，可使胆汁外溢而口苦，筋膜失养而干枯，以至筋脉挛缩拘急，就会发病为 筋痿 ；脾脏感受了热邪，则灼耗胃中津液而口渴，肌肉失养而麻木不仁，就会发病为不知痛痒的 肉痿 ；肾脏感受了热邪，灼伤肾精，就会使髓减骨枯，腰脊不能举动，就会发病为 骨痿 。
English: Therefore, the lungs feel the heat evil, burn the fluid, the lung leaves are scorched, the skin will be dry, the sweat and hair will be scorched, if the heat evil does not go, the limbs will become limp and weak; the heart feels the heat evil, the lower part of the qi and blood can be reversed, the qi and blood can be reversed, the blood vessels of the limbs will be empty, the blood vessels will become empty, so that the knee and ankle joints can not flex, the calf can not stand up and walk; the liver feels the heat evil, the bile can be overflowed and the mouth is bitter, the fascia

古文：帝曰：何以得之？
现代文：黄帝问道：痿病是怎样引起的？
English: Huangdi asked: How is rickets caused?

古文：岐伯曰：肺者，脏之长也，为心之盖也，有所失亡，所求不得，则发肺鸣，鸣则肺热叶焦。
现代文：岐伯说：肺是诸脏之长，又是心脏的华盖。遇有失意的事情，或个人要求得不到满足，则使肺气郁而不畅，于是出现喘息有声，进而气郁化热，使肺叶枯焦。
English: Qi Bo said: "The lung is the long of all the viscera, and also the flower cover of the heart. In case of disappointment, or if personal requirements are not met, the lungs will be depressed and not smooth, so there will be wheezing and noise, and then the depression will turn into fever, and the lung lobes will be scorched.

古文：故曰： 五脏因肺热叶焦，发为痿躄 。
现代文：所以说： 五脏都是因为肺热叶焦，而变生痿躄。 
English: Therefore, he said, "The five viscera are all transformed into maggots because of the hot leaf coke in the lungs."

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：悲哀太甚则胞络绝，胞络绝则阳气内动，发则心下崩，数溲血也。
现代文：如果悲哀过度，就会因气机郁结而使心包络隔绝不通，心包络隔绝不通则导致阳气在内妄动，逼迫心血下崩，于是屡次小便出血。
English: If the sadness is excessive, it will cause the heart envelope to be blocked due to the stagnation of qi, and the blockage of the heart envelope will cause the yang qi to move inside, forcing the blood to collapse, so the urine will bleed repeatedly.

古文：故《本病》曰： 大经空虚，发为肌痹，传为脉痿。 
现代文：所以《本病》中说： 大经脉空虚，发生肌痹，进一步传变为脉痿。 
English: Therefore, "This disease" says: The great meridian is empty, myopathy occurs, and it is further transmitted to the umbilicus.

古文：思想无穷，所愿不得，意淫于外，入房太甚，宗筋弛纵，发为筋痿，及为白淫。
现代文：如果无穷尽地胡思乱想而欲望又不能达到，或意念受外界影响而惑乱，房事不加节制，这些都可致使宗筋弛缓，形成筋痿，甚至变生为遗精。
English: If you are endlessly cranky and unable to achieve your desires, or if your thoughts are confused by external influences, and if your house chores are unrestrained, these can all lead to the relaxation of the nerve, the formation of muscle spasms, and even transformation into effeminacy.

古文：故《下经》曰： 筋痿者，生于肝，使内也。 
现代文：所以《下经》中说： 筋痿，发生于肝，是由于房事太过。 
English: Therefore, the "Lower Sutra" says: Muscle cramps, which occur in the liver, are due to excessive housework.

古文：有渐于湿，以水为事，若有所留，居处相湿，肌肉濡渍，痹而不仁，发为肉痿。
现代文：有的人日渐感受湿邪侵渍，导致了湿邪痹阻而肌肉麻木不仁，最终则发展为肉痿。
English: Some people gradually feel the wetness invasion, resulting in wetness obstruction and muscle numbness, and eventually develop into bruising.

古文：故《下经》曰： 肉痿者，得之湿地也。 
现代文：所以《下经》中说： 肉痿，是久居湿地引起的。 
English: Therefore, the "Lower Sutra" says: "Flesh warts are caused by living in wetlands for a long time."

古文：有所远行劳倦，逢大热而渴，渴则阳气内伐，内伐则热舍于肾。肾者，水脏也，今水不胜火，则骨枯而髓虚，故足不任身，发为骨痿。
现代文：如果长途跋涉，劳累太甚，又逢炎热天气而口渴，于是阳气化热内扰，内扰的邪热侵入肾脏，肾为水脏，如果水不胜火，灼耗阴精，就会骨枯髓空，致使两足不能支持身体，形成骨痿。
English: If you trek for a long distance, you are too tired, and you are thirsty in hot weather, so the yang is vaporized and the heat is disturbed, and the evil heat of the disturbance invades the kidneys, and the kidneys are the water organs. If the water is too hot and burns the yin essence, the bone marrow will be empty, causing the two feet to be unable to support the body and form a skeleton.

古文：故《下经》曰： 骨痿者，生于大热也。 
现代文：所以《下经》中说： 骨痿，是由于大热所致。 
English: Therefore, the "Lower Sutra" says: "The ossuary is caused by great heat."

古文：帝曰：何以别之？
现代文：黄帝问道：用什么办法鉴别五种痿病呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to identify the five kinds of rickets?

古文：岐伯曰：肺热者，色白而毛败；心热者，色赤而络脉溢；肝热者，色苍而爪枯；脾热者，色黄而肉蠕动；肾热者，色黑而齿槁。
现代文：岐伯说：肺有热的痿病，面色白而毛发衰败；心有热的痿病，面色红而浅表血络充盈显现；肝有热的痿病，面色青而爪甲枯槁；脾有热的痿病，面色黄而肌肉蠕动；肾有热的痿病，面色黑而牙齿枯槁。
English: Qi Bo said: the lungs have hot rickets, the complexion is white and the hair is decaying; the heart has hot rickets, the complexion is red and the superficial blood vessels are full; the liver has hot rickets, the complexion is blue and the nail plate is withered; the spleen has hot rickets, the complexion is yellow and the muscles are moving; the kidney has hot rickets, the complexion is black and the teeth are withered.

古文：帝曰：如夫子言可矣。论言： 治痿者，独取阳明。 
现代文：黄帝道：先生以上所说是合宜的。医书中说： 治痿，应独取阳明。 
English: Huang Di said, "What you said above is appropriate. In the medical book, it says, "To cure epilepsy, you should only take the sunshine."

古文：何也？
现代文：这是什么道理呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：岐伯曰：阳明者，五脏六腑之海，主润宗筋，宗筋主束骨而利机关也。
现代文：岐伯说：足阳明胃经是五脏六腑营养的源泉，能濡养宗筋，宗筋主管约束骨节，使关节运动灵活。
English: Qi Bo said: the foot yang bright gastric meridian is the source of nutrition for the five internal organs, can nourish the umbilical cord, and the umbilical cord is responsible for constraining the bones and joints, making the joint movement flexible.

古文：冲脉者，经脉之海也，主渗灌溪谷，与阳明合于宗筋。
现代文：冲脉为十二经气血汇聚之处，输送气血以渗透灌溉分肉肌腠，与足阳明胃经会合于宗筋。
English: The pulse is the place where the twelve meridians of qi and blood converge. It transports qi and blood to infiltrate and irrigate the psoas muscle, and it joins the foot-yang and stomach meridians at the umbilicus.

古文：阴阳摠宗筋之会，会于气街，而阳明为之长，皆属于带脉，而络于督脉。
现代文：三阴三阳十二经脉都总汇于宗筋，再会合于足阳明经的气街穴，故阳明经是它们的统领。诸经又都连属于带脉，系络于督脉。
English: The twelve meridians of the three yin and three yang all converge in the lineage, and then meet in the qi street hole of the foot yang meridian, so the yang meridian is their leader. All meridians also belong to the band vein, and are connected to the dowager vein.

古文：故阳明虚，则宗筋纵，带脉不引，故足痿不用也。
现代文：所以阳明经气血不足则宗筋失养而弛缓，带脉也不能收引诸脉，就使两足痿弱不用了。
English: Therefore, if Yang Ming is deficient in qi and blood, the zong sinew will be weakened and relaxed, and the ligament will not be able to retract the veins, so the two legs will be weak and useless.

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：怎样治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：各补其荥而通其俞，调其虚实，和其逆顺，筋脉骨肉，各以其时受月，则病已矣。
现代文：岐伯说：调补各经五输穴的荥穴，疏通各经五输穴的输穴，以调机体之虚实和气血之逆顺；无论筋、脉、骨、肉的病变，只要在其所合之脏当旺的月份进行治疗，病就会痊愈。
English: Qi Bo said: to adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi, adjust the flow of the body's qi and qi.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：说得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

