古文：李昪，字正伦，徐州人也。
现代文：李昪字正伦，徐州人。
English: Li Yanzhi Zhenglun, a native of Xuzhou.

古文：世本微贱，父荣，遇唐末之乱，不知其所终。
现代文：家世原本微贱，父亲李荣，遭逢唐末动乱，不知他最终如何。
English: Originally from a humble background, his father, Li Rong, was caught up in the turmoil at the end of the Tang Dynasty. I don't know how he ended up.

古文：昪少孤，流寓濠、泗间，杨行密攻濠州，得之，奇其状貌，养以为子。
现代文：李昪年幼成了孤儿，寄居在濠、泗二州间，杨行密攻打濠州，得到他，觉得他外貌不凡。收养他作儿子。
English: Li Yao was orphaned at a young age and lived as a sojourner between the two states of Yao and Handan. Yang Xing made a secret attack on Handan, got him, thought he was extraordinary in appearance, and adopted him as his son.

古文：而杨氏诸子不能容，行密以乞徐温，乃冒姓徐氏，名知诰。
现代文：而杨氏的儿子们容不下他，杨行密把他交给徐温，于是冒姓徐，名叫知诰。
English: But the sons of the Yang clan could not tolerate him. Yang Xingmi handed him over to Xu Wen, so he assumed the surname Xu and was named Zhisheng.

古文：及壮，身长七尺，广颡隆准。
现代文：成年之后，身高七尺，宽额头，高鼻梁。
English: After adulthood, he is seven feet tall, with a broad forehead and a high bridge of the nose.

古文：为人温厚有谋。
现代文：为人温和忠厚、足智多谋。
English: He is gentle, loyal and resourceful.

古文：为吴楼船军使，以舟兵屯金陵。
现代文：任昊楼船军使，率水军屯驻在金陵。
English: He was appointed as the naval envoy of Haolou and stationed in Jinling at the head of the navy.

古文：柴再用攻宣州，用其兵杀李遇，昪以功拜升州刺史。
现代文：柴再用攻打宣州，杀掉李遇，李昪因功拜为昪州刺史。
English: Chai Zai used to attack Xuanzhou and killed Li Yu. Li Yu became the history of Zhangzhou because of his service.

古文：时江淮初定，州、县吏多武夫，务赋敛为战守，昪独好学，接礼儒者，能自励为勤俭，以宽仁为政，民稍誉之。
现代文：当时江淮刚平定，州、县官吏大多是武夫，尽力征收赋税为战备，惟独李昪好学，结交儒士以礼待之，能够以勤劳节俭自勉，以宽厚仁慈焉政，老百姓逐渐称赞他。
English: At that time, Jianghuai had just been pacified, and most of the state and county officials were warriors, trying their best to collect taxes to prepare for battle. However, the common people gradually praised Li Xi, who was good at learning, befriended the Confucians and treated them with courtesy, and was able to govern himself with diligence, thrift and generosity.

古文：徐温镇润州，以升、池等六州为属，温闻昪理升州有善政，往视之，见其府库充实，城壁修整，乃徙治之，而迁昪润州刺史。
现代文：徐温镇守润州，以昪、池等六州为属州，徐温听说李昪治理昪州有政绩，前去视察，见到昪州府仓充实，城墙修整得很好，于是把治所从润州迁移到昪州，而昪任李昪焉润州刺史。
English: Xu Wenzhen guarded Renzhou, with six prefectures including Handan and Chih, belonging to the prefecture. Xu Wen heard that Li Gan had made achievements in the governance of Renzhou, and went to inspect. He saw that the government warehouse of Renzhou was well-stocked and the city walls were well-maintained. Therefore, he moved the government office from Renzhou to Renzhou, and he served as Li Gan's secretary to write the history of Renzhou.

古文：昪初不欲往，屡求宣州，温不与。
现代文：李昪开初不想前往，多次请求去宣州，徐温不同意。
English: At first, Li Rongkai did not want to go, and repeatedly requested to go to Xuanzhou. Xu Wen did not agree.

古文：既而徐知训为硃瑾所杀，温居金陵，未及闻。
现代文：不久徐知训被朱瑾杀掉，徐温住在金陵，还不知道。
English: Soon after, Xu Zhixun was killed by Zhu Xi. Xu Wen lived in Jinling, but he didn't know it.

古文：昪居润州，近广陵，得先闻，即日以州兵渡江定乱，遂得政。
现代文：李昪住在润州，靠近广陵，所以先知道，当天率领州兵渡过长江平定叛乱，于是当政。
English: Li Qian lived in Runzhou, near Guangling, so he knew in advance that he would lead the National Guard across the Yangtze River to quell the rebellion that day, and then he would take office.

古文：昪事徐温甚孝谨，温尝骂其诸子不如昪，诸子颇不能容，而知训尤甚，尝召昪饮酒，伏剑士欲害之，行酒吏刁彦能觉之，酒至昪，以手爪掐之，昪悟起走，乃免。
现代文：李昪事奉徐温很孝顺恭谨，徐温曾骂他的儿子们比不上李昪，儿子们很不能容忍他，而徐知训尤其容不下他，曾召李昪饮酒，埋伏持剑的士兵想谋害他，行酒吏刁彦能察觉了，行酒到李昪时，用手指掐他，李昪明白后起身逃跑，纔幸免。
English: Li Qian served Xu Wen with great filial piety. Xu Wen had once scolded his sons for not being as good as Li Qian. The sons could not tolerate him, and Xu Zhixun especially could not tolerate him. Li Qian had invited Li Qian to drink alcohol. The soldiers with swords tried to ambush and kill him. The liquor store clerk Yan Yan was able to detect this. When Li Qian arrived at the liquor store, he poked him with his finger. Li Qian understood and got up to run away. Li Qian was spared.

古文：后昪自润州入觐，知训与饮于山光寺，又欲害之，徐知谏以其谋告昪，昪起遁去。
现代文：后来李昪从润州前来朝拜，徐知训和他在山光寺饮酒，又想谋害他，徐知谏把他的阴谋告诉李昪，李昪起身逃去。
English: Later, Li Qian came from Runzhou to worship. Xu Zhixun drank alcohol with him at Shanguang Temple and tried to kill him. Xu Zhixun told Li Qian about his plot. Li Qian got up and fled.

古文：知训以剑授刁彦能，使追杀之，及于中途而还，绐以不及，由是得免。
现代文：徐知训把剑交给刁彦能，让他追杀李昪，刁彦能追到途中返回，欺骗说汝追上，李昪因此得以幸免。
English: Xu Zhixun gave the sword to Zou Yanneng, and asked him to chase and kill Li Qian. Zou Yanneng chased Li Qian until he was halfway back, and deceived him by saying that he had caught up with him. As a result, Li Qian was spared.

古文：后昪贵，以彦能为抚州节度使。
现代文：后来李昪颢贵，任刁彦能为抚州节度使。
English: Later, Li Xigui and Ren Zhihan were able to serve as envoys to the Fuzhou Festival.

古文：知训之用事也，尝凌弱杨氏而骄侮诸将，遂以见杀。
现代文：徐知训专权时，曾凌弱杨氏而骄横轻慢将领们，因此被杀掉。
English: When Xu Zhixun had absolute power, he used to bully the weak Yang clan and the arrogant and careless generals, so he was killed.

古文：及昪秉政，欲收人心，乃宽刑法、推恩信，起延宾亭以待四方之士，引宋齐丘、骆知祥、王令谋等为谋客，士有羁旅于吴者，皆齿用之。
现代文：到李界执掌政权时，想笼络人心，于是放宽刑法、推广恩信，建延宾亭礼待四方士人，招来宋齐丘、骆知祥、王令谋等人做谋士，旅居在昊的士人，都依次用他们。
English: When Li Jie was in power, he wanted to win the hearts and minds of the people, so he relaxed the criminal law, promoted the concept of "benevolence," built the Jianyan Bingting Courtyard to treat the Shifang scholars with courtesy, invited Song Qiqiu, Luo Zhixiang, Wang Lingmou and others to serve as advisers, and the scholars who lived in Hao all used them in turn.

古文：尝阴使人察视民间有婚丧匮乏者，往往赒给之。
现代文：曾暗中派人了解民间无力操办婚丧大事的人，常常周济他们。
English: He had secretly sent people to learn about those who were unable to hold weddings and funerals, and often gave them money.

古文：盛暑未尝张盖、操扇，左右进盖，必却之，曰： 士众尚多暴露，我何用此？ 
现代文：酷暑时不曾张伞盖持扇，手下人进献伞盖，必定不接受，说： 人们还有很多暴露在酷暑中，我为什么要用这个？ 
English: If you haven't held a fan with an umbrella cover during the hot weather, your subordinates will certainly not accept the umbrella cover, saying: People still have a lot of exposure to the hot weather, why should I use this?

古文：以故温虽遥秉大政，而吴人颇已归昪。
现代文：因此徐温虽然在遥控大政，而昊人都颇为归向于李昪。
English: Therefore, although Xu Wen is in remote control, Hao people are quite inclined to Li Wei.

古文：武义元年，拜左仆射，参知政事。
现代文：武义元年，拜为左仆射，参知政事。
English: In the first year of Wuyi, Bai was a left-handed shot, and participated in the political affairs of the governor.

古文：温行军司马徐玠数劝温以己子代昪，温遣子知询入广陵，谋代昪秉政。
现代文：徐温的行军司马徐蚧多次劝说徐温用自己的儿子代替李昪，徐温派儿子徐知询入广陵，谋议代替李昪执政。
English: Xu Wen's marching secretary, Ma Xuqi, repeatedly persuaded Xu Wen to use his son to replace Li Xi, and Xu Wen sent his son, Xu Zhisheng, to Guangling to discuss replacing Li Xi in power.

古文：会温病卒，知询奔还金陵，玠反为昪谋，诬知询以罪，斩其客将周廷望，以知询为右统军。
现代文：恰逢徐温病死，徐知询奔回金陵，徐玢反而为李昪出主意，用罪名诬陷徐知询，斩他的客将周廷望，任徐知询为右统军。
English: When Xu Wen died of illness, Xu Zhisheng rushed back to Jinling. On the contrary, Xu Yao made a plan for Li Qian, framed Xu Zhisheng with a crime, killed his guest Zhou Tingwang, and appointed Xu Zhisheng as the right-wing united army.

古文：杨溥僭号，拜昪太尉、中书令。
现代文：杨溥僭位称帟，拜李昪焉太尉、中书令。
English: Yang Xuan was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, while Li Xuan was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：大和三年，出镇金陵，如温之制，留其子景通为司徒同平章事，以王令谋、宋齐丘为左、右仆射同平章事。
现代文：大和三年，出任金陵节镇，依照徐温的规定，留下他的儿子李景通任司徒、同平章事，任王令谋、宋齐丘焉左、右仆射、同平章事。
English: In the third year of the Yamato era, he was appointed as the Jinling Festival Town, and in accordance with the provisions of Xu Wen, he left his son Li Jingtong as the headman and the secretary of Tongping, and appointed Wang Lingmu, Song Qiqiu, Yan Zuo, Yu Ducheng and the secretary of Tongping.

古文：四年，封昪东海郡王。
现代文：四年，封李昪焉束海郡玉。
English: Four years later, he was given the title of "Grand Master" of Sokhaigun.

古文：昪照鉴见白须，顾其吏周宗叹曰： 功业已就，而吾老矣，奈何？ 
现代文：李昪照着镜子看见胡须已白，回望他的役吏周宗感叹说： 功成业就，而我已老了，怎么办呢？ 
English: Looking in the mirror, Li Yao saw that his beard had turned white. Looking back at him, the official Zhou Zong sighed and said: Achievement is enough, but I am already old, what should I do?

古文：宗知其意，驰诣广陵见宋齐丘，谋禅代。
现代文：周宗明白他的心意，驰马到广陵见宋齐丘，商议禅位的事。
English: Zhou Zong understood his intention and rode to Guangling to see Song Qiqiu to discuss the matter of Zen.

古文：齐丘以为未可，请斩宗以谢吴人，昪黜宗为池州刺史。
现代文：宋齐丘认为不行，请求杀掉周宗以向昊人谢罪，李昪贬周宗为迤魁刺史。
English: Song Qiqiu did not think it was possible, and asked for Zhou Zong to be killed in order to apologize to the Hao people. Li Qian denounced Zhou Zong as a traitor.

古文：吴临江王濛者，怨徐氏舍己而立溥，心尝不平，及昪将谋篡国，先废濛为历阳公，使吏以兵守之。
现代文：昊临江王杨蒙，怨恨徐氏抛开自己而拥立杨溥，心中曾忿忿不平，到李昪将要谋取篡国时，先废杨蒙为历阳公，派官吏率兵看守他。
English: Yang Meng, the king of the Hao Linjiang River, resented the fact that the Xu clan had abandoned him and supported Yang Xuan. His heart was angry and disgruntled. When Li Xuan was about to seek to usurp the country, he first abolished Yang Meng as Liyang Gong and sent officials and soldiers to guard him.

古文：濛杀守者，奔庐州节度使周本。
现代文：杨蒙杀掉看守他的人，投奔庐州节度使周本。
English: Yang Meng killed his guards and went to Zhangzhou to help Zhou Ben.

古文：本，吴旧将也，闻濛至，欲纳之，为其子祚所止。
现代文：周本是昊原来的大将，听说杨蒙到了，想收留他，被他的儿子周祚阻止。
English: Zhou was Hao's original general. He heard that Yang Meng had arrived and wanted to take him in, but was stopped by his son Zhou Yu.

古文：本曰： 此吾故主家郎君也，何忍拒之！ 
现代文：周本说： 这是我过去君主家的郎君，怎忍心拒绝他！ 
English: Zhou Ben said, "This is the son-in-law of my former sovereign, how can I refuse him!"

古文：遽自出迎，祚闭门遮本不得出，缚濛送金陵，见杀。
现代文：于是亲自出来迎接，周祚关上门拦住周本不让他出去，捆缚杨蒙送到金陵，杨蒙被杀。
English: So he personally came out to meet them. Zhou Ye closed the door to stop Zhou Ben from letting him out, tied Yang Meng and sent him to Jinling. Yang Meng was killed.

古文：五年，昪封齐王。
现代文：五年，李昪受封齐王。
English: Five years later, he was named the King of Qi.

古文：已而闽、越诸国皆遣使劝进，昪谓人望已归。
现代文：不久闽、越各国都派使臣劝李昪登帝位，李昪认为人心已归附自己。
English: Soon after, all the countries of Vietnam sent envoys to persuade him to ascend to the throne, and he believed that the hearts of the people had been won over to him.

古文：天祚三年，建齐国，置宗庙社稷，以宋齐丘、徐玠为左、右丞相。
现代文：天祚三年，建立齐国，设置宗庙社稷，任宋齐丘、徐玢为左、右丞相。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the State of Qi was established, the patriarchal temples and shrines were set up, and Song Qiqiu and Xu Xi were appointed as the left and right ministers.

古文：十月，溥遣摄太尉杨璘传位于昪，国号齐，改元升元。
现代文：十月，杨溥派代理太尉杨璘传位给李昪，国号为齐，改年号为昪元。
English: In October, Yang Hui sent acting First Lieutenant Yang Hui to pass the position to Li Hui, with the country name of Qi and the year name of Ren Yuan.

古文：昪以册尊溥曰： 受禅老臣知诰，谨上册皇帝为高尚思玄弘古让皇帝。 
现代文：李昪上册书尊奉杨溥说： 接受让位的老臣徐知诰，郑重上册命封皇帝焉高尚思玄弘古让皇帝。 
English: Li Hongzhang wrote a letter to Yang Jie, saying: Accepting the abdication of the old minister Xu Zhisheng, solemnly recorded the appointment of Emperor Yan Gao Shangzhi Xuan Hongzhang.

古文：追尊徐温为忠武皇帝，封子景为吴王，封徐氏子知证江王，知谔饶王。
现代文：追尊徐温为忠武皇帝，封儿子李景为昊王，封徐氏儿子徐知证为江王，徐知夸焉饶王。
English: Emperor Taizong's son, Xu Wen, became Emperor Zhongwu, his son, Li Jing, became King Hao, his son, Xu Zhixian, became King Jiang, and his son, Xu Zhiguo, became King Yanrao.

古文：周本与诸将至金陵劝进，归而叹曰： 吾不诛篡国者以报杨氏，今老矣，岂能事二姓乎！ 
现代文：周本和将领们到金陵祝贺登位，回来后叹息说： 我不能杀掉篡国的人报答杨氏，现在我老了，难道能事奉两个姓氏的君主吗！ 
English: Zhou Ben and his generals went to Jinling to congratulate him on his accession to the throne. After returning, he sighed and said, "I can't kill the usurper to repay the Yang clan. Now that I'm old, can I really serve a monarch with two surnames?"

古文：愤惋而死。
现代文：忧愤哀惋而死去。
English: He died in anguish.

古文：二年四月，迁杨溥于润州丹阳宫。
现代文：二年四月，迁杨溥到润州丹阳宫。
English: In April of the following year, Yang Hui moved to Danyang Palace in Runzhou.

古文：以王舆为浙西节度使、马思让为丹阳宫使，以严兵守之。
现代文：任王舆为浙西节度使，马思让为丹阳宫使，派士兵严格看守他。
English: Appointed Wang Ying as the envoy of the Western Zhejiang Festival, and Ma Sijan as the envoy of the Danyang Palace, and sent soldiers to strictly guard him.

古文：徐氏诸子请昪复姓，昪谦抑不敢忘徐氏恩，下其议百官，百官皆请，然后复姓李氏，改名曰昪。
现代文：徐氏的儿子们请求李昪恢复原姓，李昪谦逊自抑地说不敢忘记徐氏的恩德，把这一建议下达百官商议，百官都请求恢复原姓，然后纔恢复李姓，改名叫李昪。
English: Mr. Xu's sons asked Mr. Li to restore his original surname. Mr. Li humbly said that he did not dare to forget Mr. Xu's kindness. This proposal was discussed by hundreds of officials. All officials requested to restore the original surname. Then Mr. Li restored his surname and changed his name to Mr. Li.

古文：自言唐宪宗子建王恪生超，超生志，为徐州判司；志生荣。
现代文：自称唐宪宗的儿子建王李恪生李超，李超生李志，任徐州判司，李志生李荣。
English: The self-proclaimed Tang Xianzong's son Jian Wang Li Kaosheng Li Chao, Li Chao's son Li Zhi, appointed Xuzhou judge, Li Zhi's son Li Rong.

古文：乃自以为建王四世孙，改国号曰唐。
现代文：于是自认为是建王的第四代子孙，改国号为唐。
English: As a result, he considered himself to be the fourth generation descendant of King Jianwang and changed his country's name to Tang.

古文：立唐高祖、太宗庙，追尊四代祖恪为孝静皇帝，庙号定宗；曾祖超为孝平皇帝，庙号成宗；祖志孝安皇帝，庙号惠宗；考荣孝德皇帝，庙号庆宗。
现代文：建唐高祖、店太宗宗庙，追尊四代祖李恪为孝静皇帝，庙号为定宗；曾祖李超为孝平皇帝，庙号为成宗；祖父李志焉孝安皇帝，庙号焉惠宗；父亲李荣为孝德皇帝，庙号为庆宗。
English: The ancestral temple of Emperor Gaozong and Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty was built. The four-generation ancestor Li Ke was the Emperor Xiaojing, and the temple name was Dingzong; the great-grandfather Li Chao was the Emperor Xiaoping, and the temple name was Chengzong; the grandfather Li Zhiyan was the Emperor Xiaoan, and the temple name was Yan Huizong; the father Li Rong was the Emperor Xiaode, and the temple name was Qingzong.

古文：奉徐温为义父，徐氏子孙皆封王、公，女封郡、县主。
现代文：尊奉徐温为义父，徐氏的子孙都封为王、公，女儿、孙女都封为郡主、县主。
English: He revered Xu Wen as his father-in-law, and the descendants of the Xu clan were all crowned as kings and queens, and their daughters and granddaughters were crowned as countesses and county chiefs.

古文：以门下侍郎张居咏、中书侍郎李建勋、右仆射张延翰同平章事。
现代文：任门下侍郎张居咏、中书侍郎李建勋、右仆射张延翰同平章事。
English: His subordinate chamberlain Zhang Jiuyong, chancellery chamberlain Li Jianxun, and right-hand man Zhang Yanhan were all promoted to the same rank.

古文：十一月，以步骑八万讲武于铜桥。
现代文：十一月，率步兵骑兵八万人在铜桥演练武事。
English: In November, a total of 80,000 infantry and cavalry troops practiced martial arts on the Bronze Bridge.

古文：杨溥卒于丹阳宫。
现代文：杨溥死在丹阳宫。
English: Yang Hui died in Danyang Palace.

古文：溥子琏为吴太子时，昪以女妻之，及昪篡国，封其女永兴公主。
现代文：杨溥的儿子杨琼做昊的太子时，李昪把女儿嫁给他，到李昪篡国后，封他的女儿为永兴公主。
English: When Yang Kun's son Yang Qiong became the crown prince of Hao, Li Qian married his daughter to him. After Li Qian usurped the country, his daughter was crowned Princess Yongxing.

古文：女闻人呼公主，则呜咽流涕而辞，宫中皆怜之。
现代文：他的女儿听见人们称她公主，就呜咽哭泣着推辞，宫中的人都哀怜她。
English: When his daughter heard that people were calling her princess, she sobbed and wept and refused, and everyone in the palace pitied her.

古文：溥卒，以琏为康化军节度使，已而以疾卒。
现代文：杨溥死后，任命杨理为康化军节度使，不久病死。
English: After the death of Yang Hui, Yang Li was appointed as the chief of the Kanghua Army, but he died of illness soon after.

古文：三年四月，昪郊祀昊天上帝于圆丘，礼毕，群臣请上尊号。
现代文：三年四月，李昪在郊外圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，祭礼结束，群臣请求进献尊号。
English: In April of the third year, Li Qiye offered a sacrifice to Haotian God at a round mound in the suburbs. The ceremony was over, and the courtiers asked him to perform the ritual.

古文：昪曰： 尊号非古也。 
现代文：李昪说： 尊号，不是古代的制度。 
English: Li Wei said: the honorific title is not an ancient system.

古文：不许。
现代文：不准许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：州、县言民孝悌五代同居者七家，皆表门闾，复其徭役；其尤盛者江州陈氏，宗族七百口，每食设广席，长幼以次坐而共食，有畜犬百余，共一牢食，一犬不至，诸犬为之不食。
现代文：州、县申报的孝顺父母、敬爱兄长并五代同堂的七家，都赐给门额旌表，免除徭役；其中江州陈家尤其兴盛，宗族七百口人，每次吃饭设大席位，老少按次第而坐共同进食，养狗一百多条，都在一处饲养，一条狗没有来，其余的狗都不吃食。
English: The seven families of filial piety, respect for the elders, and five generations of the same family, declared by the state and county, were all given a plaque on the door and exempted from the service. Among them, the Chen family in Jiangzhou was particularly prosperous. The family of seven hundred people set up large seats for every meal, and the old and the young sat together to eat in order. They raised more than one hundred dogs, all in one place. One dog did not come, and the rest of the dogs did not eat.

古文：四年六月，晋安州节度使李金全叛，送款于昪，昪遣鄂州屯营使李承裕迎之。
现代文：四年六月，晋安州节度使李金全反叛，向李昪投诚，李昪派鄂州屯营使李承裕迎接他。
English: In June of the fourth year, the Jin'an State Festival caused Li Jinquan to rebel, and he surrendered to Li Shizhen. Li Shizhen sent Li Chengyu to camp in Ezhou to welcome him.

古文：承裕与晋将马全节、安审晖战安陆南，三战皆败，承裕与裨将段处恭皆死，都监杜光鄴及其兵五百人被执，送于京师，高祖厚赐之，遣还。
现代文：李承裕和晋将马全节、安审晖在安陆南面交战，三次都被打败了，李承裕和副将段处恭都战死，都监杜光邺和他的士兵五百人被俘押送到晋国京师，晋高祖重重赐予他们，遣送他们回去。
English: Li Chengyu and the Jin generals Ma Quanzhie and An Cunxu fought three times in the south of Anlu. They were defeated three times. Li Chengyu and the vice-general Duan Duan Qiong both died in battle. The provincial governor Du Guangyao and his 500 soldiers were captured and sent to the Beijing Division of Jin Province. The ancestors of Jin Gao gave them a great reward and sent them back.

古文：昪致书高祖，复送光鄴等，请以败军行法，高祖又遣之，昪以甲士临淮拒之，乃止。
现代文：李昪写信给晋高祖，又送回杜光邺等人，请求按败军依法处置，晋高祖又遣送他们回来，李昙派军兵守住淮河拒绝，纔作罢。
English: Li Qiye wrote a letter to Jin Gaozu and sent it back to Du Guangyao and others, requesting that the defeated army be dealt with according to the law. Jin Gaozu also sent them back. Li Qiye refused to send soldiers to guard the Huaihe River, and forbade them to do so.

古文：六年，吴越国火，焚其宫室、府库，甲兵皆尽，群臣请乘其弊攻之，昪不许，遣使吊问，厚赒其乏。
现代文：六年，昊越国发生火灾，烧毁宫室、仓库，武器都被烧光，群臣请求趁机攻打他们，李昪不同意，派使臣哀吊慰问，尽力周济他们。
English: In the sixth year, a fire broke out in Hao Yue, burning the palace and warehouse, and all the weapons were burned out. The ministers requested to take the opportunity to attack them, but Li Yu did not agree, sent envoys to mourn and offer condolences, and tried his best to help them.

古文：钱氏自吴时素为敌国，昪见天下乱久，常厌用兵，及将篡国，先与钱氏约和，归其所执将士，钱氏亦归吴败将，遂通好不绝。
现代文：钱氏自从昊时历来就是敌国，李昪见天下久乱不止，常常厌恶用兵打仗，到将要篡国时，先和钱氏讲和，送回抓获的将士，钱氏也归还了昊的败将，于是不断通好。
English: The Qian clan has always been an enemy country since the time of Hao. Li Lan, seeing the world in turmoil for a long time, often abhorred the use of soldiers to fight. When it came to usurping the country, he first made peace with the Qian clan and sent back the captured soldiers. The Qian clan also returned the defeated soldiers of Hao, so they kept getting along well.

古文：昪客冯延巳好论兵大言，尝诮昪曰： 田舍翁安能成大事！ 
现代文：李昪的客卿冯延巳喜好谈兵、说大话，曾讥诮李昪说： 乡间老头怎能成大事！ 
English: Li Hongzhi's guest Feng Yanmi liked to talk about soldiers and talk big. He once mocked Li Hongzhi, saying: "How can an old man from the countryside become a great man!

古文：而昪志在守吴旧地而已，无复经营之略也，然吴人亦赖以休息。
现代文：而李昪志在守护昊国旧有的土地而已，不再有经营天下的谋略，但昊人也赖以休养生息。
English: But Li Yanzhi is only guarding the old land of Hao. There is no longer a strategy for managing the world, but Hao people also rely on rest and recreation.

古文：七年，昪卒，年五十六，谥曰光文肃武孝高皇帝，庙号烈祖，陵曰永陵。
现代文：七年，李昪死，卒年五十六岁，谧号光文肃武孝高皇帝，庙号为烈祖，陵墓焉永陵。
English: In the seventh year, Li Xi died at the age of fifty-six. His posthumous name was Guang Wenshu Wu Xiaogang Emperor, his temple name was Ruizhu, and his mausoleum was Yan Yongling.

古文：子景立。
现代文：儿子李景登位。
English: His son Li Jing ascended to the throne.

古文：景，初名景通，昪长子也。
现代文：李景，原名李景通，是李昪的长子。
English: Li Jing, formerly known as Li Jingtong, is the eldest son of Li Yong.

古文：既立，又改名璟。
现代文：南唐立国后，又改名李璟。
English: After the founding of the Southern Tang Dynasty, he changed his name to Li Xi.

古文：徐温死，昪专政，以为兵部尚书、参知政事。
现代文：徐温死后，奎昱专权，任命李景焉兵部尚书、参知政事。
English: After Xu Wen's death, Qui Xuan took absolute power and appointed Li Jingyan to be the military commissar and the political commissar.

古文：明年，昪镇金陵，留景为司徒、同平章事，与宋齐丘、王令谋居广陵，辅杨溥。
现代文：第二年，李昪镇守金陵，留下李景任司徒、同平章事，和宋齐丘、王令谋住在广陵，辅佐杨溥。
English: In the second year, Li Qizhen guarded Jinling, leaving Li Jing Ren Sitou, Tongping Zhangji, and Song Qiqiu and Wang Lingmou to live in Guangling, assisted by Yang Hui.

古文：昪将篡国，召景归金陵为副都统。
现代文：李昪将要篡国，召李景回到金陵任副都统。
English: Li Xuan was going to usurp the country and call Li Jing back to Jinling to serve as vice-governor.

古文：昪立，封齐王。
现代文：李昪登位，封李景为齐王。
English: Li Gan ascended to the throne, and Li Jing was crowned King of Qi.

古文：昪卒，嗣位，改元保大。
现代文：李昪死，李景继位，改年号为保大。
English: Li Xuan died and was succeeded by Li Jing, who changed his name to Baodao.

古文：尊母宋氏为皇太后，妃钟氏为皇后。
现代文：尊奉母亲宋氏为皇太后，妃子锺氏为皇后。
English: His mother, the Song clan, was revered as empress dowager, and his wife, the Zou clan, as empress.

古文：封弟寿王景遂为燕王，宣城王景达鄂王，景逷前未王，为保宁王。
现代文：封弟弟寿王李景遂为燕王，宣城王李景达为鄂王，李景遏以前没有封王，封焉保宁王。
English: Li Jing, the younger brother of Shou Wang, was crowned as the King of Yan; Li Jingda, the King of Xuancheng, was crowned as the King of H; Li Jing had never crowned a king before, but crowned the King of Boryeong.

古文：秋，改封景遂齐王、诸道兵马元帅、太尉、中书令，景达为燕王、副元帅，盟于昪柩前，约兄弟世世继立。
现代文：秋，改封李景遂为齐王、诸道兵马元帅、太尉、中书令，李景达为燕王、副元帅，在李昪灵前发誓，约定兄弟代代继位。
English: In the autumn, Li Jingtu changed his title to King Qi, Marshal of the Armies and Horses of All Realms, First Lieutenant, and General of the Chinese Army, and Li Jingda to King Yan, Vice-Marshal, and swore in front of Li Yuling, and agreed that the brothers would succeed to the throne.

古文：封其子冀南昌王、江都尹。
现代文：封他的儿子李冀为南昌王、江都尹。
English: He named his son Li Jie as the King of Nanchang and Jiangdu Yin.

古文：冬十月，破虔州妖贼张遇贤。
现代文：冬天十月，攻破虔州妖贼张遇贤。
English: In the winter of October, Zhang Youxian, the thief of Kenzhou, was defeated.

古文：遇贤，循州罗县小吏也。
现代文：张遇贤，是循州罗县的一个小吏。
English: Zhang Youxian is a petty official in Zhouzhou Luo County.

古文：初，有神降罗县民家，与人言祸福辄中。
现代文：当初，有神降临罗县百姓家，与人谈祸福动辄说中。
English: At the beginning, a god descended on the homes of Luo County people, and talked with them about misfortune and good fortune.

古文：遇贤祷之，神曰： 遇贤是罗汉，可留事我。 
现代文：张遇贤向鬼神祷告，神说： 张遇贤是罗汉，可以留下来事奉我。 
English: Zhang Youxian prayed to the ghosts and gods, and the gods said: Zhang Youxian is a bodhisattva, he can stay and serve me.

古文：是时，南海刘死，子玢初立，岭南盗贼起，群盗千余人未有所统，问神当为主者，神言遇贤，遂共推为帅。
现代文：这时，南海刘龚死去，儿子刘玢刚继位，岭南盗贼并起，盗贼们一千多人，没有统领他们的人，询问神应当由谁为首，神说是张遇贤，于是共同推举他作主帅。
English: At this time, Nanhai Liu Ye died, his son Liu Yigang succeeded to the throne, and the Lingnan thieves also rose up. More than a thousand thieves, who did not rule them, asked God who should be the leader. God said it was Zhang Youxian, so they jointly elected him as the boss.

古文：遇贤自号中天八国王，改元永乐，置官属，群贼盗皆绛衣，攻剽岭外，问神所向，神曰： 当过岭取虔州。 
现代文：张遇贤自称中天八国王，改年号为永乐，设置下属官吏，盗贼们都穿上大红色衣服，攻打剽掠岭外，问神该去哪里，神说： 应当越五岭攻取虔州。 
English: Zhang Yu Xian claimed to be the eighth king of Middle Heaven, changed his name to Yongle, and set up subordinate officials. The thieves all put on big red clothes and attacked the outside of Zhaolangling. They asked God where to go, and God said, "We should cross the Five Ridges to capture Kenzhou."

古文：遂袭南康，节度贾浩不能御。
现代文：于是袭击南康，节度贾浩不能抵御。
English: As a result, Nankang was attacked, and Jia Ho could not resist.

古文：遇贤据白云洞，造宫室，有众十余万，连陷诸县。
现代文：张遇贤占据白云洞，建造宫室，有十多万人，接连攻陷各县。
English: Zhang Youxian occupied Baiyun Cave and built a palace, with more than one hundred thousand people, and successively invaded all counties.

古文：景遣洪州营屯虞候严思、通事舍人边镐率兵攻之。
现代文：李景派洪州营屯虞候严思、通事舍人边镐率兵攻打他。
English: Li Jing sent Hongzhou battalion to attack him.

古文：遇贤问神，神不复语，群盗皆惧，遂执遇贤以降。
现代文：张遇贤询问神，神不再说话，盗贼们都很恐惧，于是抓住张遇贤投降。
English: Zhang Yuxian asked God, God stopped talking, the thieves were very afraid, so they grabbed Zhang Yuxian and surrendered.

古文：景以冯延巳、常梦锡为翰林学士，冯延鲁为中书舍人，陈觉为枢密使，魏岑、查文徽为副使。
现代文：李景任命冯延巳、常梦锡为翰林学士，冯延鲁为中书舍人，陈觉为枢密使，魏岑，查文徽为副使。
English: Li Jing appointed Feng Yanmi and Chang Mengxi as Hanlin Baccalaureate, Feng Yanlu as Chinese Scholar, Chen Jue as Privy Envoy, Wei Wei and Cha Wenhui as Deputy Envoys.

古文：梦锡直宣政殿，专掌密命，而延巳等皆以邪佞用事，吴人谓之 五鬼 。
现代文：常梦锡当值宣政殿，专门掌管机密诰命，而冯延巳等人都靠奸邪谄媚专权，昊人称他们是 五鬼 。
English: Chang Mengxi was on duty at the Xuancheng Palace, specializing in the management of confidential information, and Feng Yanmi and others all relied on treachery to win exclusive power. Hao people called them the Five Ghosts.

古文：梦锡屡言五人者不可用，景不纳。
现代文：常梦锡多次说逭五个人不能任用，李景不采纳。
English: Chang Mengxi repeatedly said that the five people could not be appointed, and Li Jing did not accept it.

古文：十二月，景下令中外庶政委齐王景遂参决，惟陈觉、查文徽得奏事，群臣非召见者不得入。
现代文：十二月，李景下令朝廷内外政务都委托齐王李景遂参预决定，祇有陈觉、查文徽得以奏报事情，群臣没有得到召见，不得入朝。
English: In December, Li Jing ordered that the internal and external government affairs of the imperial court should be entrusted to the king of Qi. Li Jing then participated in the preliminary decision. Only Chen Jue and Chawen Hui were able to report the matter. The ministers were not summoned and were not allowed to enter the imperial court.

古文：给事中萧俨上疏切谏，不报。
现代文：给事中萧俨上疏急切谏阻，没有答复。
English: In the middle of the matter, Xiao Yao raised an urgent objection, but there was no reply.

古文：侍卫军都虞候贾崇诣阁求见景，曰： 臣事先朝三十年，见先帝所以成功业者，皆用众贤之谋，故延接疏远，未尝壅隔，然下情犹有不达者。
现代文：侍卫军都虞候贾崇到合门求见李景，说： 我事奉先朝三十年，知道先帝之所以功成业就，都是因为采用众多贤人的计谋，因此接见疏远的臣子，不曾阻隔，但就是这样还是有下情不能上达的情况。
English: The attendants and guards all waited for Jia Chong to come to the gate to see Li Jing, saying: I have served the former emperor for thirty years, and I know that the reason why the former emperor achieved success is because he used the strategies of many wise men. Therefore, I did not obstruct him from receiving the estranged vassal, but this is still a situation where I cannot reach him.

古文：今陛下新即位，所信用者何人？
现代文：如今陛下刚登位，信任重用的是些什么人？
English: Now that His Majesty has just ascended to the throne, who are the people he trusts?

古文：奈何顿与臣下隔绝！
现代文：怎么一下子就和臣子们隔绝开！
English: How can you suddenly cut yourself off from your subjects!

古文：臣老即死，恐无复一见颜色。 
现代文：我老了快死了，怕是不能再见你一次了。 
English: I'm old and I'm dying, and I'm afraid I won't see you again.

古文：因泣下呜咽，景为之动容，引与坐，赐食而慰之，遂寝所下令。
现代文：于是呜咽哭泣，李景为他感动而改变脸色，召他进来坐下，赐给他食物并安慰他，于是废除了所下达的命令。
English: So, sobbing and weeping, Li Jing, moved by him, changed his face, called him in and sat down, gave him food and comforted him, and then cancelled the order he had given.

古文：初，宋齐丘为昪谋篡杨氏最有力，及事成，乃阳入九华山，昪屡招之，乃出。
现代文：当初，宋齐丘焉李昪谋划篡夺杨氏政权最卖力，事成后，就假意进入九华山，李昪多次招他，纔出来。
English: At first, Song Qiqiu and Li Qiye tried their best to usurp the power of the Yang clan. After the success of the plot, Li Qiye invited Li Qiye to Jiuhashan on the pretext of entering the mountain.

古文：昪僭号，未几，齐丘以病罢相，出为洪州节度使。
现代文：李昪越位称帝，不久，宋齐丘因病罢相，出任洪州节度使。
English: Li Qiye ascended to the throne, and soon after, Song Qiqiu stepped down from his post due to illness, and took up the post of Hongzhou Festival envoy.

古文：景立，复召为相，而陈觉、魏岑等皆为齐丘所引用。
现代文：李景登位，又召为宰相，而陈觉、魏岑等人都是宋齐丘推荐任用的。
English: Li Jing ascended to the throne and was also called to be the prime minister, while Chen Jue, Wei Wei and others were recommended by Song Qiqiu.

古文：而岑与觉有隙，谮觉于景，左迁少府监。
现代文：而魏岑与陈觉有矛盾，在李景面前诋毁陈觉，降职为少府监。
English: However, Wei Wei had a conflict with Chen Jue, slandered Chen Jue in front of Li Jing, and was demoted to the position of Junior Supervisor.

古文：齐丘亦罢相为浙西节度使。
现代文：宋齐丘也罢相任浙西节度使。
English: Song Qiqiu was also appointed as the Western Zhejiang Festival Envoy.

古文：齐丘不得意，愿复归九华山，赐号九华先生，封青阳公，食青阳一县。
现代文：宋齐丘不得志，希望再次回到九华山，赐号焉九华先生，封为青阳公，食邑青阳县。
English: Song Qiqiu was discouraged and hoped to return to Mount Jiuhua again. He was given the title of Mr. Jiuhua, the title of Qingyang, and the food village of Qingyang County.

古文：二年二月，闽人连重遇、硃文进弑其君王延羲，文进自立。
现代文：二年二月，闽人连重遇、朱文进杀死他们的君主王延羲，朱文进自己登位。
English: In February of the second year, when they met again, Zhu Wenzhin killed their monarch, King Yan Xuan, and Zhu Wenzhin himself ascended to the throne.

古文：是时，延羲弟延政亦自立于建州，国号殷。
现代文：这时，王延羲的弟弟王延政也在建州登位，国号为殷。
English: At this time, Wang Yanzheng, the younger brother of Wang Yanyuan, also ascended to the throne in Jianzhou, and the country name was Yin.

古文：王氏兄弟连兵累年，闽大乱，景因其乱遣查文徽及待诏臧循发兵攻建州。
现代文：王氏兄弟多年战事不断，闽中大乱，李景趁他们混乱派查文徽和待韶臧循出兵攻打建州。
English: The Wang brothers have been at war for many years, and Li Jing took advantage of their chaos to send troops to attack Jianzhou.

古文：延政闻唐且攻之，遣人绐福州曰： 唐兵助我讨贼矣。 
现代文：王延政听说唐要攻打他们，派人欺骗福州人说： 唐兵协助我们讨贼了。 
English: When Wang Yanzheng heard that Tang wanted to attack them, he sent someone to deceive the Fuzhou people, saying, "The Tang soldiers have helped us to catch the thieves."

古文：福州信之，共杀文进等以降，延政遣其从子继昌守福州。
现代文：福州人相信了，共同杀掉朱文进等人投降，王延政派他的侄子王继昌把守福州。
English: The people of Fuzhou believed him, and together they killed Zhu Wenzhin and others and surrendered. Wang Yan Zheng sent his nephew Wang Jichang to guard Fuzhou.

古文：文徽军屯建阳，福州将李仁达杀王继昌自称留后，泉州将留从效亦杀其刺史黄绍颇，皆送款于文徽。四年八月，文徽乘胜克建、汀、泉、漳四州，景分延平、剑浦、富沙三县，置剑州，迁王延政之族于金陵。
现代文：查文徽屯兵建阳，福州将领李仁达杀掉王继昌自称留后，泉州将领留从劫也杀掉刺史黄绍颇，都向查文徽投诚四年八月，查文徽乘胜攻克建、汀、泉、漳四州，李景分延平、剑浦、富沙焉三个县，设置剑州，把王延政的家族迁到金陵。
English: Chawenhui sent troops to Jianyang, Fuzhou General Li Renda killed Wang Jichang after he claimed to stay, Quanzhou General Rui also killed the assassin Huang Shapo, and all of them surrendered to Chawenhui. In August of the fourth year, Chawenhui took advantage of the victory to invade four prefectures of Kekian, Ting, Quan, and Zou, and three counties of Li Jingbun, Yanping, Jianpu, and Fushan, and set up Jianzhou, and moved Wang Yanzheng's family to Jinling.

古文：以延政为饶州节度使、李仁达为福州节度使、留从效为清源军节度使。
现代文：任命王延政为饶州节度使、李仁达焉福州节度使、留从劫为清源军节度使。
English: Appointed Wang Yanzheng as the Raozhou Festival Envoy, Li Renda Yan as the Fuzhou Festival Envoy, and Ruijongbao as the Qingyuan Army Festival Envoy.

古文：景遂欲罢兵，而查文徽、陈觉等皆言： 仁达等余孽犹在，不若乘胜尽取之。 
现代文：李景于是想罢兵休战，而查文徽、陈觉等人都说： 李仁达等余党还在，不如乘胜全部消灭他们。 
English: Li Jing then wanted to call a truce, but Chawen Hui, Chen Jue and others said: Li Renda and the rest of the party are still there, it is better to take advantage of the victory and eliminate them all.

古文：陈觉自言可不用尺兵致仁达等。
现代文：陈觉自称可以不用一个兵就能招来李仁达等人。
English: Chen Jue claimed that he could recruit Li Renda and others without a single soldier.

古文：景以觉为宣谕使，召仁达朝金陵，仁达不从。
现代文：李景任陈觉为宣谕使，召李仁达到金陵朝拜，李仁达不从命。
English: Li Jingren Chen Jue was the envoy who called Li Ren to visit Jinling, but Li Renda did not follow his orders.

古文：觉惭，还至建州，矫命发汀、建、信、抚州兵攻仁达。
现代文：陈觉羞愧，回到建州，假称皇帝的命令出动汀、建、信、抚四州的军队攻打李仁达。
English: Chen Jue, ashamed, returned to Jianzhou and pretended that the emperor's order was to send troops from Ding, Jian, Xin and Fuzhou to attack Li Renda.

古文：时魏岑安抚漳、泉，闻觉起兵，亦擅发兵会觉。
现代文：当时魏岑安抚漳、泉二州，听说陈觉起兵，也擅自出兵和陈觉会合。
English: At that time, Wei, Anfu, and Quanzhou heard that Chen Jue had raised an army, and they also sent troops to join Chen Jue without authorization.

古文：景大怒，冯延巳等为言： 兵业行，不可止。 
现代文：李景大怒，冯延巳等人为此说： 军队已经出动，不能停了。 
English: Li Jing was furious, and Feng Yanmi and others said for this reason: The army has been dispatched and cannot be stopped.

古文：乃以王崇文为招讨使、王建封为副使，益兵以会之，以延鲁、魏岑、陈觉皆为监军使。
现代文：于是任王祟文为招讨使、王建封为副使，增兵同他们会合，任冯延鲁、魏岑、陈觉都焉监军使。
English: As a result, Wang Cangwen was appointed as the summoning envoy, Wang Jianfeng as the deputy envoy, Zengfei joined them, and Feng Yanlu, Wei Wei and Chen Jue were appointed as supervising envoys.

古文：仁达送款于吴越，吴越以兵三万应仁达。
现代文：李仁达向昊越投诚，昊越出兵三万人接应李仁达。
English: Li Renda made a sincere offer to Hao Yue, and Hao Yue sent 30,000 soldiers to meet Li Renda.

古文：觉等争功，进退不相应，延鲁与吴越兵先战，大败而走，诸军皆溃归。
现代文：陈觉等人争功，进退不相照应，冯延鲁先和昊越军队交战，大败而逃，各军都溃散逃回。
English: Chen Jue and others fought for merit, advancing and retreating did not correspond, Feng Yanlu and Hao Yue's army fought, defeated and fled, and all the armies scattered and fled back.

古文：景怒，遣使者锁觉、延鲁至金陵。
现代文：李景发怒，派使臣把陈觉、冯延鲁囚禁到金陵。
English: Li Jing became angry and sent an envoy to imprison Chen Jue and Feng Yanlu in Jinling.

古文：而冯延巳方为宰相，宋齐丘复自九华召为太傅，为稍解之，乃流觉蕲州、延鲁舒州。
现代文：而冯延巳正任宰相，宋齐丘又从九华山召回朝任太傅，逐渐替他们开脱，于是流放陈觉到薪州、冯延鲁到舒州。
English: However, Feng Yanmi was serving as prime minister, and Song Qiqiu recalled the imperial taifu from Mount Jiuhuashan to gradually exonerate them. As a result, Chen Jue was exiled to Zhouzhou and Feng Yanlu to Shuzhou.

古文：韩熙载上书切谏，请诛觉等，齐丘恶之，贬熙载和州司马。
现代文：韩熙载上书急切谏阻，请求诛杀陈觉等人，宋齐丘讨厌他，贬韩熙载为和州司马。
English: Han Xizhe wrote a letter to urgently oppose and request the killing of Chen Jue and others. Song Qiqiu hated him and disparaged Han Xizhe as a warmonger.

古文：是岁，契丹陷京师，中国无主，而景方以觉等疲兵东南，不暇北顾。
现代文：这年，契丹攻陷京师，中原王朝没有君主，而李景因陈觉等人在东南使军队疲惫，无力谋取北方。
English: In this year, the Khitan attacked and captured the Beijing division, the Central Plains Dynasty had no monarch, and Li Jing was unable to seek the north because Chen Jue and others had exhausted the army in the southeast.

古文：御史中丞江文蔚劾奏宰相冯延巳、谏议大夫魏岑乱政，与觉等同罪而不见贬黜，言甚切直。
现代文：御史中丞江文蔚上奏弹劾宰相冯延巳、谏议大夫魏岑败乱国政，和陈觉等人有同等罪行却没有受到贬官废黜，言辞十分急切耿直。
English: The chief historian, Jiang Wenwei, reported the impeachment of the prime minister, Feng Yanmi, and the discussion doctor, Wei Wei, for the defeat of national politics, and Chen Jue and others had the same crime but were not demoted and deposed. The rhetoric was very urgent.

古文：景大怒，自答其疏，贬文蔚江州司士参军，亦罢延巳为少傅、岑为太子洗马。
现代文：李景大怒，亲自答复他的上疏，贬江文蔚为江州司士参军，同时罢免冯延巳任为少傅、魏岑为太子洗马。
English: Li Jing was furious and personally replied to his superior, demoting Jiang Wenwei to the rank of Jiangzhou sergeant to join the army, and at the same time dismissing Feng Yanmi as junior sergeant and Wei Wei as prince.

古文：五年，以景遂为太弟；景达为元帅，封齐王；南昌王冀为副元帅，封燕王。
现代文：五年，任命李景遂焉太弟；李景达为元帅，封齐王；南昌王李冀任副元帅，封燕壬。
English: In five years, Li Jing Suyan's younger brother was appointed grand marshal; Li Jingda was appointed marshal and named Qi Wang; Nanchang King Li Jie was appointed deputy marshal and named Yanren.

古文：契丹遣使来聘，以兵部尚书贾潭报聘。
现代文：望丑派使臣来访，派兵部尚书贾潭回访。
English: Wang Jiu sent envoys to visit, and sent the military department Shang Shujia to pay a return visit to Jia Tan.

古文：六年，汉李守贞反河中，遣其客将硃元来求援，景以润州节度使李金全为北面行营招抚使，兵攻沭阳，闻守贞已败，乃还。
现代文：六年，汉李守贞在河中反叛，派他的客将朱元前来求援，李景以润州节度使李金全焉北面行营招抚使，出兵攻打沭阳，听说李守贞已败，纔返回。
English: In the sixth year, Han Li Shouzhen rebelled in the middle of the river and sent his guest Zhu Yuan to ask for help. Li Jing sent Li Jinquan to the north with the Renzhou Festival to recruit envoys, and sent troops to attack Fenyang. Hearing that Li Shouzhen had been defeated, he returned.

古文：是时，汉隐帝少，中国衰弱，淮北群盗多送款于景，景遣皇甫晖出海、泗诸州招纳之。
现代文：这时，汉隐帝年少，中原王朝衰弱，淮北盗贼大多归降李景，李景派皇甫晖出海、泗各州招纳他们。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Yin was young, the Central Plains Dynasty was weak, and most of the Huaibei thieves had surrendered to Li Jing. Li Jing sent Emperor Fuxi out to sea to recruit them from various states.

古文：八年，福州诈言 吴越戍兵乱，杀李仁达而遁 ，遣人请建州节度使查文徽，文徽与剑州刺史陈诲下舟闽江趋应之。
现代文：八年，福州诈称 昊越的戍守军队作乱，杀掉李仁达后逃跑了 ，派人邀请建州节度使查文徽，查文徽和剑州刺史陈诲乘船从闽江顺流而下奔赴接应他们。
English: In the eighth year, Fuzhou falsely claimed that the defending army of Hao Yue made a disturbance, killed Li Renda and fled, and sent people to invite Jianzhou Festival to send Chawen Hui, Chawen Hui and Jianzhou Jishi Chen Yi by boat down the Li River to meet them.

古文：福州以兵出迎。
现代文：福州人率兵出来迎接。
English: The people of Fuzhou came out to greet them, leading an army.

古文：诲曰： 闽人多诈难信，宜驻江岸徐图之。 
现代文：陈诲说： 闽人多诈难以信任，应该在江边驻扎慢慢商议。 
English: Chen Yan said, "It is hard to trust someone who is deceitful. You should stay by the river and discuss the matter slowly."

古文：文徽曰： 久则生变，乘其未定，亟取之。 
现代文：查文徽说： 时间长了就会发生变乱，趁他们没有安定，赶快攻取他们。 
English: Zha Wenhui said: If the time is long, there will be turmoil. Take advantage of their instability and quickly capture them.

古文：留诲屯江口，进至西门，伏兵发，文徽被擒。
现代文：留下陈诲屯驻在江口，前进到西门时，伏兵出动，查文徽被抓获。
English: He left Chen Yutun stationed in Jiangkou, and when he advanced to the West Gate, the ambush troops were dispatched, and Chawen Hui was captured.

古文：诲与越人战，大败之，获其将马先进。
现代文：陈诲和越人交战，大败越人，抓获他们的将领马先进。
English: Chen Yu fought with the Viets, defeated the Viets, and captured their general Ma Xuan.

古文：景送先进还越，越亦归景文徽。
现代文：李景送马先进回到越，越人也把查文徽交还李景。
English: Li Jing sent his horse ahead to return to Yue, and the Yue people also handed the Chawen emblem back to Li Jing.

古文：是岁，楚王马希广为其弟希萼所弑，希萼自立。
现代文：这年，楚王马希广被他的弟弟马希萼杀掉，马希萼自立为楚王。
English: This year, King Ma Xiguang of Chu was killed by his brother Ma Xicai, and Ma Xicai became King of Chu.

古文：九年秋，楚人囚希萼于衡山，立其弟希崇，附于景，楚国大乱。
现代文：九年秋，楚人把马希萼囚禁在衡山，拥立他的弟弟马希崇，归附李景，楚国大乱。
English: In the autumn of the ninth year, the Chu people imprisoned Ma Xichal in Hengshan, supported his younger brother Ma Xitong, annexed Li Jing, and the Chu Kingdom was in turmoil.

古文：景遣信州刺史边镐攻楚，破潭州，尽迁马氏之族于金陵。
现代文：李景派信州刺史边镐攻打楚，攻破潭州，把马氏家族全部迁到金陵。
English: Li Jing sent Xinshou to attack Chu and break through Tanzhou, and moved the entire Ma family to Jinling.

古文：景以希萼为洪州节度使，希崇舒州节度使，以边镐为湖南节度使。
现代文：李景任命马希萼焉洪州节度使，马希崇为舒州节度使，任边镐焉湖南节度使。
English: Li Jing appointed Ma Xicai as the Hongzhou Festival Envoy, Ma Xitong as the Shuzhou Festival Envoy, Ren Bian as the Hunan Festival Envoy.

古文：十年，分洪州高安、清江、万载、上高四县，置筠州。
现代文：十年，把洪州的高安、清江、万载、上高四个县分出来，设置筠州。
English: In ten years, the four counties of Gao'an, Qingjiang, Wanzai and Shanggao in Hongzhou were divided and set up in Ganzhou.

古文：以冯延巳、孙忌为左、右仆射同平章事。
现代文：任冯延巳、孙忌为左、右仆射，同平章事。
English: Feng Yanmi and Sun Boi were appointed as the left and right footmen respectively.

古文：广州刘晟乘楚之乱，取桂管，景遣将军张峦出兵争之，不克。
现代文：广州刘晟乘楚国动乱之机，攻取桂管，李景派将军张峦出兵争夺，没有攻克。
English: Guangzhou Liu Bei seized the opportunity of the turmoil in Chu to capture Guizhou, and Li Jing sent General Zhang Ye to fight for it, but failed to conquer it.

古文：楚地新定，其府库空虚，宰相冯延巳以克楚为功，不欲取费于国，乃重敛其民以给军，楚人皆怨而叛，其将刘言攻边镐，镐不能守，遁归。
现代文：楚地刚刚平定，府库空虚，宰相冯延巳把攻克楚作为自己的功劳，不想花费国家的钱财，于是加重搜括楚地百姓供给军队，楚人都怨恨而反叛，他们的将领刘言进攻边镐，边镐不能守卫，逃回。
English: Chu had just been pacified, the treasury was empty, the chancellor Feng Yanmi took the conquest of Chu as his own merit, not wanting to spend the country's money, so he intensified the search for the people of Chu to supply the army, the Chu people were resentful and rebelled, their general Liu Yan attacked the borderlands, the borderlands could not be guarded, and fled back.

古文：十一年，金陵大火逾月。
现代文：十一年，金陵大火延续一个多月。
English: Eleven years ago, the fire in Jinling lasted for more than a month.

古文：十二年，大饥，民多疫死。
现代文：十二年，大饥荒，很多老百姓害瘟疫而死。
English: In the twelfth year, there was a great famine, and many people died of the plague.

古文：十三年十一月，周师南征，诏曰： 蠢尔淮甸，敢拒大邦，盗据一方，僭称伪号。
现代文：十三年十一月，周军南征，下诏说： 蠢动的淮地，竟敢抗拒大国，盗窃割据一方，越位自称帝号。
English: In November 13th, Zhou's army started to march to the south, and the following edict was issued: "How dare the impetuous Huai Di resist the great powers, steal the territory of one side, and claim to be emperor of the other side.

古文：晋、汉之代，寰海未宁，而乃招纳叛亡，朋助凶逆。
现代文：晋、汉两代，海内没有安定，你们就招纳反叛逃亡的人，勾结协助凶逆。
English: In the Jin and Han dynasties, when there was no stability at sea, you recruited rebels and fugitives, and colluded to assist the rebels.

古文：金全之据安陆，守贞之叛河中，大起师徒，来为应援。
现代文：李金全占据安陆，李守贞在河中反叛时，你们大举出师，前来接应援助。
English: When Li Jinquan occupied Anlu and Li Shouzhen rebelled in the middle of the river, you generously sent your division to come and receive assistance.

古文：迫夺闽、越，涂炭湘、潭，至于应接慕容，凭陵徐部，沭阳之役，曲直可知。
现代文：追迫掠夺闽、越，使湘、潭二州生灵涂炭，至于接应慕容，侵扰徐州，沭阳之战，是非曲直一望而知。
English: The persecution and plundering of Shiyang and Yue, and the burning of the lives of the people of Hunan and Tan in the two states, as well as the attack on Murong, the invasion of Xuzhou, and the battle of Poyang, are all well known.

古文：勾诱契丹，入为边患，结连并垒，实我世仇。
现代文：勾结引诱契丹，成为边患，勾结并州军队，确实是我们的世代仇敲。
English: Colluding to lure the Khitan, to become a border disease, colluding to annex the state army, is indeed our generation's vendetta.

古文：罪恶难名，人神共愤。 
现代文：罪恶难以名状，天神百姓共同愤怒。 
English: The crime is indescribable, and the people of Tenjin are outraged.

古文：乃拜李穀为行营都部署，攻自寿州始。
现代文：于是拜李壳为行营都部署，从寿州开始进攻。
English: As a result, Bai Li Shell was deployed for the encampment, and the attack began from Shoushu.

古文：是时，宋齐丘为洪州节度使，景召齐丘还金陵，以刘彦贞为神武统军，刘仁赡为清淮军节度使，以距周师。
现代文：适时，宋齐丘任洪州节度使，李景召宋齐丘回到金陵，任命刘彦贞为神武统军，刘仁赡为清淮军节度使，以抗拒周军。
English: At the right time, Song Qiqiu was appointed as the Hongzhou Festival envoy, Li Jing called Song Qiqiu back to Jinling, appointed Liu Yanzhen as the Shenwu United Army, and Liu Renyi as the Qing and Huai Army Festival envoy to resist the Zhou Army.

古文：李穀曰： 吾无水战之具，而使淮兵断正阳浮桥，则我背腹受敌。 
现代文：李谷说： 我们没有水战的工具，而假使淮兵截断正阳浮桥，那我们就会腹背两面受敌。 
English: Li Gu said: We do not have the tools of naval warfare, and if the Huai soldiers cut off the Zhengyang floating bridge, then we will be attacked from both sides.

古文：乃焚其刍粮，退屯正阳。
现代文：于是烧毁他们的粮草，退兵屯驻正阳。
English: As a result, they burned their grain and grass and withdrew to Zhengyang.

古文：是时世宗亲征，行至圉镇，闻谷退军，曰： 吾军却，唐兵必追之。 
现代文：遭时周世宗亲自出征，到达圉镇，听说李谷撤军，说： 我们的军队撤退，唐兵必定追击。 
English: At that time, Zhou Shizong personally went to the front and arrived in Handan Town. When he heard that Li Gu was withdrawing his troops, he said, "Our troops are withdrawing, the Tang soldiers must be chasing them."

古文：遣李重进急趋正阳，曰： 唐兵且至，宜急击之。 
现代文：派李重进急奔正阳，说： 唐兵要到了，应当猛打他们。 
English: He sent Li Chongjin to rush to Zhengyang and said, "The Tang soldiers are about to arrive, we should beat them up."

古文：刘彦贞等闻谷退军，果以为怯，急追之。
现代文：刘彦贞等人获知李谷退兵，果然认为他们胆怯了，急忙追击他们。
English: Liu Yanzhen and others learned of Li Gu's retreat and thought they were cowardly, so they hurried to chase after them.

古文：比及正阳，而重进先至，军未及食而战，彦贞等遂败。
现代文：快到正阳时，李重进先到，军队还来不及进食就作战，刘彦贞等人于是被打败。
English: When approaching Zhengyang, Li Chongjin arrived first, and the army did not have time to eat before fighting, so Liu Yanzhen and others were defeated.

古文：彦贞之兵施利刃于拒马，维以铁索；又刻木为兽，号 捷马牌 ；以皮囊布铁蒺藜于地。
现代文：刘彦贞的士兵把快刀放在拒马中，用铁索拴住；又把木头刻成兽形，号称 捷马牌 ；用皮口袋撒铁刺在地上。
English: Liu Yanzhen's soldiers put their swords in the horseshoe and chained them with iron ropes; they also carved wood into animal shapes, known as "Horse Cards"; and used leather bags to scatter iron spikes on the ground.

古文：周兵见而知其怯，一鼓败之。
现代文：周兵见了知道他们胆怯，一鼓作气打败了他们。
English: Seeing them, Zhou Bing knew that they were timid, and he defeated them with all his might.

古文：世宗营于淝水之阳，徙浮桥于下蔡。
现代文：周世宗在淝水北面安营扎寨，移浮桥到下蔡。
English: Zhou Shizong camped in the north of Surabaya and moved the floating bridge to Lower Tsai.

古文：景遣林仁肇等争之不得，而周师取滁州。
现代文：李景派林仁肇等人争夺浮桥没有成功，而周军攻取滁州。
English: Li Jing sent Lin Renzhao and others to fight for the floating bridge without success, while Zhou's army captured Zhangzhou.

古文：景惧，遣泗州牙将王知朗至徐州，称唐皇帝奉书，愿效贡赋，陈兄事之礼，世宗不答。
现代文：李景害怕，派泗州牙将王知朗到徐州，称唐皇帝捧送国书来，愿意献纳贡赋，行事奉兄长的礼节，周世宗不答复。
English: Li Jing was afraid. He sent Wang Zhilang, the governor of Bozhou, to Xuzhou, saying that the Tang Emperor had brought the book of the country, was willing to pay tribute, and acted according to the etiquette of an elder brother. Zhou Shizong did not reply.

古文：景东都副留守冯延鲁、光州刺史张绍、舒州刺史周祚、泰州刺史方讷皆弃城走；延鲁削发为僧，为周兵所获。
现代文：李景的柬都副留守冯延鲁、光州刺史张绍、舒州刺史周祚、泰州刺史方讷都弃城逃跑；冯延鲁剃削头发焉和尚，被周兵抓获。
English: Li Jing's vice governor of Cambodia, Feng Yanlu, the governor of Gwangju, Zhang Shao, the governor of Shuzhou, Zhou Qi, and the governor of Taizhou, Fang Ne, all abandoned the city and fled; Feng Yanlu shaved his head and became a monk, but was captured by Zhou soldiers.

古文：蕲州裨将李福杀其刺史王承隽降周。
现代文：薪州偏将李福杀掉刺史王承隽向周投降。
English: Li Fu was killed by Wang Chengyao, who surrendered to Zhou.

古文：景益惧，始改名璟以避周庙讳，遣其翰林学士钟谟、文理院学士李德明奉表称臣，献犒军牛五百头、酒二千石、金银罗绮数千，请割寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海六州，以求罢兵。
现代文：李景更加害怕，纔改名景以避周的宗庙忌讳；派他的翰林学士锺谟、文理院学士李德明奉表向周称臣，进献犒劳军队的牛五百头、酒二千石、金银绸缎数千，请求割寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海六个州，以乞求休战。
English: Li Jing was even more afraid, so he changed his name to avoid the taboo of Zhou's ancestral temple; he sent his Hanlin Scholar Zou Moo and Academy of Arts and Sciences Scholar Li Deming to Zhou to present 500 heads of cattle, 2,000 kilos of wine, thousands of gold and silver silk brocades, and request the six states of Xuzhou, Yunnan, Fujian, Chu, Guangxi, and Hai to beg for a truce.

古文：世宗不报，分兵袭下扬、泰。
现代文：周世宗不答复，分兵袭击攻克扬、泰二州。
English: Zhou Shizong did not reply, and the detachment attacked and conquered Yang and Tai Erzhou.

古文：景遣人怀蜡丸书走契丹求救，为边将所执。
现代文：李景派人怀揣蜡丸书奔契丹求救，被边将抓获。
English: Li Jing sent a person carrying a wax pill book to rush to Qidan for help, but he was caught by the border guard.

古文：光州刺史张承翰降周。
现代文：光州刺史张承翰向周投降。
English: Zhang Chenghan, the governor of Gwangju, surrendered to Zhou.

古文：十四年三月，景又遣司空孙晟、礼部尚书王崇质奉表，辞益卑服，世宗犹不答，前遣钟谟等并晟、崇质皆留行在。
现代文：十四年三月，李景又派司空孙晟、礼部尚书王崇质向周进奉表奏，言辞更加谦卑顺服，周世宗还是不答复，以前派去的锺谟等人连同孙晟、王崇质都被扣留在行营。
English: In March of the 14th year, Li Jing also sent the Secretary of the Ku Sun Yat and the Minister of Rites and Ceremonies, Wang Shoshu, and Wang Chongyun to Zhou Jin to pay homage, and the words were more humble and obedient. Zhou Shizong still did not answer, and the people who had been sent before, including Zhou Mu, were detained in the camp together with Sun Yat and Wang Chongyun.

古文：而谟等请归取景表，尽献江北地，世宗许之，遣崇质、德明等还，始赐景书曰： 自有唐失御，天步方艰，六纪于兹，瓜分鼎峙。自为声教，各擅蒸黎，交结四夷，凭凌上国。
现代文：而锺谟等人请求回去取来李景的降表，把江北土地全部奉献，周世宗答应了，派王崇质、李德明等人回去，纔赐书李景说： 自徒唐朝衰落，国运艰难，到现在七十多年了，群雄割据，各自颁布政令，拥有百姓，交结四方蛮夷，侵扰中原国土。
English: Zhou Shizong agreed, and sent Wang Chongqing, Li Deming and others back. Li Jing said in his letter of commendation: Since the decline of the Tang Dynasty, the national fortune has been difficult, and now it has been more than 70 years. The strongmen have divided the land, each promulgating decrees, possessing the people, crossing the barbarians in all directions, and invading the Central Plains.

古文：华风不竞，否运所钟，凡百有心，敦不兴愤？
现代文：中华不强，厄运相连，大凡有心之人，谁不愤慨！
English: China is not strong, misfortune is connected, everyone who has a heart, who is not indignant!

古文：朕擅一百州之富庶，握三十万之甲兵，农战交修，士卒乐用，苟不能恢复内地，申画边疆，便议班旋，真同戏剧。
现代文：我拥有百州的富庶土地，拥兵三十万，农战双修，士兵乐于效劳，如果不能够恢复疆土，划定疆域，就谈论回师，真是如同儿戏。
English: I have rich land in all the states, 300,000 soldiers, I have settled both the agrarian war and the civil war, the soldiers are willing to serve, if I cannot restore the territory and delimit the territory, I will talk about returning to the division, it is really like a child's play.

古文：至于削去尊称，愿输臣节，孙权事魏，萧詧奉周，古也虽然，今则不取。
现代文：至于废除帝号，对我称臣，如孙权事奉魏、萧詧事奉周，古代虽有这样的事，现在却不采用。
English: As for abolishing the title of emperor, for me, it means to be a vassal. For example, Sun Quan served the Wei Dynasty, and Xiao Yan served the Zhou Dynasty. Although there was such a thing in ancient times, it is not used now.

古文：但存帝号，何爽岁寒？
现代文：只是保留皇帝的称号，又何关大局？
English: Just keep the title of emperor, what is the big deal?

古文：倘坚事大之心，必不迫人于险。 
现代文：如果决心向我称臣，我也决不相逼。 
English: If you are determined to make me your vassal, I will never force you.

古文：德明等还，盛称世宗英武，景不悦。
现代文：李德明等人返回后，盛赞周世宗的英雄勇武，李景不高兴。
English: After Li Deming and others returned, they praised the heroism of Zhou Shizong. Li Jing was not happy.

古文：宋齐丘、陈觉等皆以割地无益，而德明卖国以图利。
现代文：宋齐丘、陈觉等人都认为割让土地没有好处，而李夔塑卖国谋利。
English: Song Qiqiu, Chen Jue and others all believed that there was no benefit in ceding land, while Li Yongsuo sold the country for profit.

古文：景怒，斩德明。
现代文：李景发怒，靳李德明。
English: Li Jing flew into a rage and beat up Li Deming.

古文：遣元帅齐王景达与陈觉、边镐、许文缜率兵趣寿春，景达将硃元等复得舒、蕲、泰三州。
现代文：派元帅齐王李景达和陈觉、边镐、许文缜率兵奔赴寿春，李景达率朱元等人又夺得舒、薪、泰三个州。
English: Marshal Qi Wang sent Li Jingda and Chen Jue, Bentham, and Xu Wenyu to rush to Shouchun with their soldiers, and Li Jingda and Zhu Yuan also won the three states of Shu, Zhan, and Tai.

古文：夏，大雨，周师在扬、滁、和者皆却，诸将请要其险隘击之。
现代文：夏天大雨，在扬、滁、和三州的周军都退了，将领们请求在险要的地方拦截攻打他们。
English: In the heavy summer rain, the Zhou army in Yang, Handan, and Sanzhou all retreated, and the generals asked to intercept and attack them in critical places.

古文：宋齐丘曰： 击之怨深，不如纵之以为德。 
现代文：宋齐丘说： 攻击他们会加深仇怨，不如放了他们作为恩德。 
English: Song Qiqiu said: Attacking them will only deepen the hatred, it is better to let them go as a blessing.

古文：诫诸将闭壁，无得要战，故周师皆集于寿州。
现代文：告诫将领们关闭营垒，不得拦截作战，因此周军都聚集在寿州。
English: He warned the generals to close the camp and not to intercept the battle, so the Zhou army gathered in Shoushou.

古文：世宗屯于涡口，欲再幸扬州，宰相范质以师老泣谏，乃班师，以李重进攻庐、寿，向训守扬州。
现代文：周世宗屯驻在涡口，想再次到扬州，宰相范质以军队疲劳哭泣着谏阻，纔回师，派李重进进攻庐、寿二州，向训守卫扬州。
English: Zhou Shizong was stationed in Turbidor, and wanted to go to Yangzhou again. The prime minister, crying with military fatigue, rebuffed the resistance, sent Li back to attack Shandong and Shouji, and sent Xun to guard Yangzhou.

古文：训请弃扬州，并力以攻寿春，乃封府库付主者，遣景旧将按巡城中，秋毫不犯而去，淮人大悦，皆负糗粮，以送周师。
现代文：向训请求放弃扬州，并力攻打寿春，于是查封仓库交给主管的人，派李景原来的大将在城中巡查，秋毫不犯而离去，淮人非常高兴，都背着干粮，送给周军。
English: He asked Xun to give up Yangzhou, and attacked Shuchun vigorously. Therefore, he sealed the warehouse and handed it over to the person in charge. He sent Li Jing, the original general, to inspect the city. He left without any offense. The Huai people were very happy. They all carried dry grain on their backs and gave it to the Zhou army.

古文：十五年，景达遣硃元等屯紫金山，筑甬道以饷寿州。
现代文：十五年，李景达派朱元等人屯驻紫金山，修筑通道向寿州供应军饷。
English: Fifteen years later, Li Jingda sent Zhu Yuan and others to settle in Zijin Mountain to build a passage to supply military supplies to Shoushou.

古文：二月，世宗复南征，徙下蔡浮桥于涡口，为镇淮军，筑二城以夹淮。
现代文：二月，周世宗又南征，移下蔡浮桥到涡口，设置镇淮军，夹淮河修筑两个城。
English: In February, Zhou Shizong marched south again, moved down the Cai Floating Bridge to the Vortex, set up the Zhenhuai Army, and built two cities along the Huaihe River.

古文：周师连破紫金诸寨。
现代文：周军接连攻破紫金山各营寨。
English: Zhou's army successively broke through each camp of the Purple Mountain.

古文：景达虽为元帅，兵事皆决于陈觉。
现代文：李景达虽是元帅，但用兵打仗的事都由陈觉决断。
English: Although Li Jingda was a marshal, Chen Jue was the one who decided whether to use soldiers to fight.

古文：觉与硃元素有隙，以元李守贞客，反覆难信，景遣大将杨守忠代元，且召之。
现代文：陈觉和朱元历来有矛盾，因为朱元是李守贞的门客，反复无常难以信任，李景派大将杨守忠接替朱元，而且召他回去。
English: Chen Jue and Zhu Yuan have always been at odds, because Zhu Yuan is a protégé of Li Shouzhen, and is difficult to trust. Li Jing sent General Yang Shouzhong to replace Zhu Yuan, and called him back.

古文：元愤怒，叛降于周，诸军皆溃，许文缜、边镐皆被执，景达以舟兵奔还金陵。
现代文：朱元感到愤怒，反叛降周，各军都溃散了，许文缜、边镐都被抓获，李景达率水兵逃回金陵。
English: Zhu Yuan was outraged, the rebellion collapsed, and all the armies were dispersed. Xu Wenyi and Bianyao were captured, and Li Jingda led the sailors to flee back to Jinling.

古文：刘仁赡病且死，其副使孙羽等以寿州降于周。
现代文：刘仁赡快要病死，他的副使孙羽等人献寿州向周投降。
English: Liu Renyi was about to die of illness, and his deputy ordered Sun Yu and others to surrender Zhoushuang to Zhou.

古文：世宗班师。
现代文：周世宗回师。
English: Zhou Shih-zong was his teacher.

古文：景遣人焚扬州，驱其士庶而去。
现代文：李景派人焚毁扬州，驱迫那里的士人百姓离去。
English: Li Jing sent people to burn Yangzhou and forced the local nobles and common people to leave.

古文：冬十月，世宗复南征，遂围濠州，刺史郭廷谓告于周曰： 臣不能守一州以抗王师，然愿请命于唐而后降。 
现代文：冬天十月，周世宗又南征，于是包围潦州，刺史郭廷谓对周世宗说： 我不能坚守一个州来抗拒朝廷大军，但希望向唐请命然后再投降。 
English: In the winter of October, Zhou Shizong marched south again and encircled Bozhou. Guo Tingzhi said to Zhou Shizong, "I can't hold on to one province to resist the imperial army, but I hope to ask for Tang's order and then surrender."

古文：世宗为之缓攻，廷谓遣人请命于景，景许其降，乃降。
现代文：周世宗为此延缓进攻，郭廷谓派人向李景请命，李景准许他投降，于是投降。
English: Zhou Shizong delayed the attack for this reason, Guo Ting sent someone to Li Jing to plead for his life, Li Jing allowed him to surrender, so he surrendered.

古文：又取泗州。
现代文：又攻取泗州。
English: He also conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：周师步骑数万，水陆齐进，军士作《檀来》之歌，声闻数十里。
现代文：周军步兵骑兵几万人，水陆并进，士兵们作《檀来》歌曲，歌声传到几十里外。
English: Tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry soldiers of the Zhou Army marched on land and sea side by side. The soldiers made "Danglai" songs, and the singing was heard dozens of miles away.

古文：十二月，屯于楚州之北门。
现代文：十二月，屯驻在楚州北门。
English: In December, it was stationed in the North Gate of Chuzhou.

古文：交泰元年正月，大赦改元。
现代文：交泰元年正月，大赦改换年号。
English: In the first month of the year, the amnesty changed the year.

古文：周师攻楚州，守将张彦卿、郑昭业城守甚坚，攻四十日不可破。
现代文：周军攻打楚州，守将张彦卿、郑昭业守城很牢固，进攻四十天没能攻破。
English: Zhou's army attacked Chuzhou, the defenders Zhang Yanqing and Zheng Zhaoye defended the city very firmly, and the attack failed to break through for forty days.

古文：世宗亲督兵以洞屋穴城而焚之，城坏，彦卿、昭业战死，周兵怒甚，杀戮殆尽。
现代文：周世宗亲自督兵在房屋中挖洞穿进城墙点火焚烧，城墙被破坏，张彦卿、郑昭业战死，周兵很愤怒，把城中人差不多杀光了。
English: Zhou Shizong personally supervised the soldiers to dig a hole in the house, pierce the city wall and set it on fire. The city wall was destroyed, Zhang Yanying and Zheng Zhaoye died in the battle. Zhou soldiers were very angry and killed almost all the people in the city.

古文：周师复取海、泰、扬州。
现代文：周军又攻取海、泰、扬三州。
English: Zhou's army also conquered the three states of Hai, Tai and Yang.

古文：世宗幸迎銮以临大江，景知不能支，而耻自屈身去其名号，乃遣陈觉奉表，请传国与其世子而听命。
现代文：周世宗到迎銮亭兵临长江，李景知道不能支撑了，而以自己屈身投降去掉名号为耻辱，于是派陈觉进奉表奏，请求传位给他的长子而听从命令。
English: When Zhou Shizong arrived at the Yangtze River, Li Jing knew that he could no longer support him, so he humiliated himself by bowing down and giving up his title. He then sent Chen Jue to the front to request that the throne be passed on to his eldest son and obeyed the order.

古文：初，周师南征，无水战之具，已而屡败景兵，获水战卒，乃造战舰数百艘，使降卒教之水战，命王环将以下淮。
现代文：当初，周军南征时，没有水战的工具，不久多次打败李景军队，俘获水战士兵，于是修造战船几百艘，让投降的士兵教他们水战，命令王环率领他们沿淮河而下。
English: At first, when Zhou's army marched south, they did not have the tools of water warfare. Soon, they repeatedly defeated Li Jing's army and captured water warfare soldiers. Therefore, they built several hundred warships, let the surrendered soldiers teach them water warfare, and ordered Wang Huan to lead them down the Huai River.

古文：景之水军多败，长淮之舟，皆为周师所得。
现代文：李景的水军大多战败，淮河的战船，都被周军得到。
English: Most of Li Jing's naval forces were defeated, and the warships on the Huai River were all captured by the Zhou army.

古文：又造齐云船数百艘，世宗至楚州北神堰，齐云舟大，不能过，乃开老鹳河以通之，遂至大江。
现代文：又建造齐云船几百艘，周世宗到楚州北神堰，齐云船太大，不能通过，就开老鹳河通过，于是到达长江。
English: He also built hundreds of Qi Yun ships, and Zhou Shizong went to Chuzhou Beishen Weir. The Qi Yun ships were too large to pass through, so they sailed through the Laotian River and reached the Yangtze River.

古文：景初自恃水战，以周兵非敌，且未能至江。
现代文：李景当初自己仗恃水战，认为周兵不是对手，而且不能到长江。
English: At first, Li Jing fought the water war on his own, believing that Zhou Bing was not an opponent and could not go to the Yangtze River.

古文：及觉奉使，见舟师列于江次甚盛，以为自天而下，乃请曰： 臣愿还国取景表，尽献江北诸州，如约。 
现代文：到陈觉奉表出使周时，见到周的水军停靠在长江边很雄壮，以为是从天而降，于是请求说： 我希望回国取来李景的降表，把江北各州全部进献，依照约定。 
English: When Chen Jue was sent by Zhou to present the table, he saw that Zhou's navy was docked on the Yangtze River and was very majestic. He thought it was falling from the sky, so he requested: I hope to return to China to get Li Jing's table and present all the states north of the river, according to the agreement.

古文：世宗许之，始赐景书曰 皇帝恭问江南国主 ，劳其良苦而已。
现代文：周世宗同意了，纔赐书李景说 皇帝恭敬问候江南国主 ，慰劳他的辛苦罢了。
English: Zhou Shizong agreed, and Li Jing said in the imperial edict that the emperor respectfully greeted Jiangnan Guozhong and consoled him for his hard work.

古文：是时，扬、泰、滁、和、寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海等州，已为周得，景遂献庐、舒、蕲、黄，画江以为界。
现代文：这时扬、泰、滁、和、寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海等州，已被周夺得，李景于是进献庐、舒、薪、黄四个州，划长江焉界。
English: At this time, Yang, Tai, Handan, He, Shou, Handan, Handan, Chu, Guang, Hai and other provinces had been conquered by Zhou, and Li Jing then advanced to the four provinces of Handan, Shu, Tong and Huang, and delimited the Yangtze River.

古文：五月，景下令去帝号，称国主，奉周正朔，时显德五年也。
现代文：五月，李景下令去掉皇帝称号，而称为国主，尊奉周的纪年，这时是显德五年。
English: In May, Li Jing ordered to remove the title of emperor and to call him the Lord of the Country, honoring Zhou's anniversary, which was the fifth anniversary of Xian De.

古文：初，孙晟使于周，留不遣，而世宗问晟江南虚实，不对，世宗怒，杀晟。
现代文：当初，孙晟出使到周，被扣留没有送回，而周世宗询问孙晟江南的虚实，孙晟不回答，周世宗发怒，杀了孙晟。
English: At first, Sun Yat-sen sent an envoy to Zhou, but he was detained and not sent back, and Zhou Shizong asked Sun Yat-sen about the truth and falsehood of the south of the Yangtze River. Sun Yat-sen did not answer, and Zhou Shizong got angry and killed Sun Yat-sen.

古文：周已罢兵，景乃赠刘仁赡太师，追封晟鲁国公。
现代文：周罢兵休战后，李景就赠刘仁瞻焉太师，追封孙晟焉鲁国公。
English: After the truce of Zhou's strike, Li Jing presented Liu Renzhong with the title of Grand Master and made Sun Jian the Grand Duke of Lu.

古文：世宗遣钟谟、冯延鲁归国。
现代文：周世宗遣送锺谟、冯延鲁回国。
English: Zhou Shizong sent Zou Mu and Feng Yanlu back to China.

古文：景复遣谟等朝京师，手自书表，称天地父母之恩不可报，又请降诏书同籓镇，遣谟面陈愿传位世子。
现代文：李景又派锺谟等人到京师朝拜。亲自撰写表文，称天地父母的恩德不能报答；又请求下诏书把自己降作藩镇，派锺谟当面陈述希望传位给长子。
English: Li Jing also sent Xiumuo and others to Beijing to pay homage. He personally wrote a petition, saying that the benevolence of the parents of heaven and earth could not be repaid; he also requested the imperial decree to reduce himself to a township, and sent Xiumuo to make a face-to-face statement that he hoped to pass the throne to his eldest son.

古文：世宗遣谟等还国，优诏以劳安之。
现代文：周世宗派锺谟等人回国，以诏书温和地慰劳安抚他。
English: Zhou Shixian sent Zou Miao and others back to China to placate him gently with an imperial edict.

古文：景以谟为礼部侍郎、延鲁户部侍郎。
现代文：李景任命锺谟焉礼部侍郎、冯延鲁焉户部侍郎。
English: Li Jing appointed Zou Mo Yan as the attendant of the ceremonial department and Feng Yanlu Yan as the attendant of the household department.

古文：景为太子时；延鲁等皆出入东宫，礼部尚书常梦锡自昪世屡言不可使延鲁等近太子，及景立，延鲁用事，梦锡每排斥之。
现代文：李景做太子时，冯延鲁等人出入东官，礼部尚书常梦锡自从李昪时就多次说不能让冯延鲁等人接近太子，到李景登位后，冯延鲁专权，常梦锡每每排斥他。
English: When Li Jing was crown prince, Feng Yanlu and others were in and out of the Eastern Office, and the Ministry of Ceremonies repeatedly said that Feng Yanlu and others should not be allowed to approach the crown prince. After Li Jing ascended to the throne, Feng Yanlu had absolute power, and Chang Mengxi always excluded him.

古文：景既割地称臣，有语及朝廷为大朝者，梦锡大笑曰： 君等尝欲致君如尧、舜，今日自为小朝邪？ 
现代文：李景割地称臣，有人谈到周朝廷是大朝，常梦锡大笑说： 你们曾希望使君主成为尧、舜一样的帝君，今天却又自称小朝廷吗？ 
English: Li Jing proudly claimed to be a vassal. Someone said that the Zhou Dynasty was a great dynasty. Chang Mengxi laughed loudly and said, "You once hoped to make the monarch a great emperor, but today you call yourself a small dynasty?"

古文：钟谟素善李德明，既归，而闻德明由宋齐丘等见杀，欲报其冤，未能发。
现代文：锺谟历来和李德明关系很好，回国后，却听说李德明因宋齐丘等人而被杀死，想替他报仇，没能动手。
English: Hao Mo has always had a good relationship with Li Deming. However, after returning to China, he heard that Li Deming was killed by Song Qiqiu and others. He wanted to avenge him, but was unable to do so.

古文：陈觉，齐丘党也，与严续素有隙。
现代文：陈觉，是宋齐丘的同党，和严续历来有矛盾。
English: Chen Jue is a member of the same party as Song Qiqiu and has always been at odds with Yan Lian.

古文：觉尝奉使周，还言世宗以江南不即听命者，严续之谋，劝景诛续以谢罪。
现代文：陈觉曾奉命出使周，回来说周世宗认为江南没有立即听从命令，是由于严续的阴谋，劝李景杀掉严续来谢罪。
English: Chen Jue had been ordered to dispatch Zhou, who returned to say that Zhou Shizong believed that Jiangnan did not immediately obey the order due to Yan Lai's conspiracy, and advised Li Jing to kill Yan Lai and Xie Sin.

古文：景疑之，谟因请使于周，验其事。
现代文：李景对此疑心，锺谟因而请求出使周，核验这件事。
English: Li Jing was suspicious about this, so Zhou Mo requested Zhou to verify the matter.

古文：景已割地称臣，乃遣谟入朝谢罪，言不即割地者，非续谋，愿赦之。
现代文：李景割地称臣后，就派锺谟入朝告罪，说没有立即割地这事，不是严续的阴谋，希望赦免他。
English: After Li Jing announced that he had cut the land, he sent Zou Mo to the court to plead guilty, saying that the fact that he did not immediately cut the land was not a strict conspiracy, hoping to pardon him.

古文：世宗大惊，曰： 续能为谋，是忠其主也，朕岂杀忠臣乎？ 
现代文：周世宗很吃惊，说： 严续能出这样的主意，这是忠于他的君主，我难道会杀忠臣吗？ 
English: Zhou Shizong was very surprised and said, "This is a monarch who is loyal to him, how could Yan Zong come up with such an idea? Would I kill a loyal subject?

古文：谟还，言觉奸诈，景怒，流觉饶州，杀之，宋齐丘坐觉党与，放还青阳，赐死。
现代文：锺谟返回，报告是陈觉奸诈，李景发怒，流放陈觉到饶州，杀了他，宋齐丘因为是陈觉的同党获罪，流放回青阳，赐他自杀。
English: Yan Mu returned and reported Chen Jue's treachery, Li Jing became angry, exiled Chen Jue to Raozhou and killed him, Song Qiqiu was convicted of being Chen Jue's party comrade, exiled back to Qingyang, and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：以太弟景遂为洪州节度使，燕王冀为太子。
现代文：任命太弟李景遂焉洪州节度使，燕王李冀为太子。
English: He appointed his great-brother Li Jing as the Hongzhou Festival envoy, and Yan Wang Li Jie as the crown prince.

古文：景困于用兵，钟谟请铸大钱以一当十，文曰 永通泉货 。
现代文：李景因用兵打仗而很窘困，锺谟请求铸造大钱以一当十，刻上 永通泉货 四个字。
English: Li Jing was embarrassed because he had used soldiers to fight a war. He requested that a large amount of money be minted at a rate of one to ten, engraved with the words "Yongtong Spring Goods."

古文：谟尝得罪，而大钱废。
现代文：锺谟后来获罪，废除了大钱。
English: He was later convicted and the fine was abolished.

古文：韩熙载又铸铁钱，以一当二。
现代文：韩熙载又铸造铁钱，以一当二。
English: Han Xizai minted iron money again and again.

古文：九月，太子冀卒，次子从嘉封吴王，居东宫。
现代文：九月，太子李冀死，次子李从嘉封为昊王，住在束官。
English: In September, Prince Li Jie died, and his second son, Li Jiafeng, became King Hao and lived in Sokhang.

古文：钟谟言从嘉轻肆，请立纪国公从善，景怒，贬谟国子司业，立从嘉为太子。
现代文：锺谟说李从嘉轻佻放肆，请求立纪国公李从善，李景发怒，贬锺谟为国子司业，立李从嘉为太子。
English: Zou Moo said that Li Cong Jia was reckless and impudent, and asked Li Cong Shan to establish the discipline of the country. Li Jing was angry, and denigrated Zou Moo as the son of the country, and established Li Cong Jia as the prince.

古文：世宗使人谓景曰： 吾与江南，大义已定，然虑后世不能容汝，可及吾世修城隍、治要害为子孙计。 
现代文：周世宗派人对李景说： 我和江南，大义已定，但担心后代不能容下你，可以趁我在世修筑城墙，治理要害，为子孙后代作安排。 
English: Zhou Shifu's followers said to Li Jing, "I and the south of the Yangtze River have already decided on a great cause, but I am worried that future generations will not be able to tolerate you. I can take advantage of my life to build city walls, manage key areas, and make arrangements for future generations."

古文：景因营缉诸城，谋迁其都于洪州，群臣皆不欲迁，惟枢密使唐镐赞之，乃升洪州为南昌，建南都。
现代文：李景于是营建各城，商议迁都到洪州，群臣都不想迁都，只有枢密使唐镐赞成，于是昪洪州为南昌，建置南都。
English: Li Jing then built various cities, and discussed moving the capital to Hongzhou. The ministers did not want to move the capital, only the privy council agreed with Tang Jun. Therefore, Hongzhou was renamed Nanchang, and the southern capital was built.

古文：建隆二年，留太子从嘉监国，景迁于南都。
现代文：建隆二年，留下太子李从嘉监护国政，李景迁到南都。
English: In the second year of Jianlong, he left the prince Li Congjia to be the guardian of state affairs, and Li Jing moved to the southern capital.

古文：而洪州迫隘，宫府营廨，皆不能容，群臣日夕思归，景悔怒不已。
现代文：而洪州狭小，官廷官府营寨，都不能容下，群臣日夜思归，李景后悔愤怒不已。
English: However, Hongzhou was too small, and the government could not tolerate the encampment of the government. The courtiers thought about returning home day and night, and Li Jing was full of regret and anger.

古文：唐镐惭惧，发疾卒。
现代文：唐镐羞惭窖怕，发病而死。
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Tang Yao fell ill and died.

古文：六月，景卒，年六十四。
现代文：六月，李景逝世，享年六十四岁。
English: In June, Li Jing passed away at the age of 64.

古文：从嘉嗣立，以丧归金陵，遣使入朝，愿复景帝号，太祖皇帝许之，乃谥曰明道崇德文宣孝皇帝，庙号元宗，陵曰顺陵。
现代文：李从嘉继位，护丧回到金陵，派使臣入朝，希望恢复李景的皇帝称号，宋太祖皇帝准许了，于是赠谧号明道崇德文宣孝皇帝，庙号焉元宗，陵墓为顺陵。
English: Li Zongjia succeeded to the throne, escorted the mourners back to Jinling, and sent envoys to the imperial court, hoping to restore Li Jing's imperial title. Emperor Song Taizu granted permission, so he gave the imperial title of Emperor Mingdao to Emperor Chongdewen Xuanxiao, the temple title to Emperor Yan Yuanzong, and the mausoleum was Shunling.

古文：煜字重光，初名从嘉，景第六子也。
现代文：李煜字重光，原名从嘉，是李景的第六个儿子。
English: Li Yanzi Zi Juguang, whose original name was Zong Jia, was the sixth son of Li Jing.

古文：煜为人仁孝，善属文，工书画，而丰额骈齿，一目重瞳子。
现代文：李煜为人仁厚孝道，善于做文章，擅长书画，而额头饱满，牙齿畸形，一只眼睛有两个瞳子。
English: Li Yao is a benevolent and filial person, good at writing articles, good at painting and calligraphy, but his forehead is full, his teeth are misshapen, and he has two pupils in one eye.

古文：自太子冀已上，五子皆早亡，煜以次封吴王。
现代文：从太子李冀以上，李景的五个儿子都早死，李煜按次序封为昊王。
English: From Prince Li Jie onward, Li Jing's five sons all died young, and Li Xi was crowned Hao Wang in that order.

古文：建隆二年，景迁南都，立煜为太子，留监国。
现代文：建隆二年，李景迁到南都，立李煜为太子，留下他监国。
English: In the second year of Jianlong, Li Jing moved to the southern capital and made Li Xi the crown prince, leaving him in charge of the country.

古文：景卒，煜嗣立于金陵。
现代文：李景死，李煜在金陵继位。
English: Li Jing died and was succeeded by Li Yao in Jinling.

古文：母钟氏，父名泰章。
现代文：母亲锺氏，外祖父名叫锺泰章。
English: His mother's family name was Yu, and his maternal grandfather's name was Yu Taizhang.

古文：煜尊母曰圣尊后；立妃周氏为国后；封弟从善韩王，从益郑王，从谦宜春王，从度昭平郡公，从信文阳郡公。
现代文：李煜尊崇母亲为圣尊后；立妃子周氏为国后；封弟弟李从善为韩王，李从益为郑王，李从谦为宜春王，李从度为昭平郡公，李从信为文阳郡公。
English: Li Hongzong revered his mother as the Queen Mother of Heaven and Earth; he established the Zhou family as the Queen of the country; his younger brothers Li Congshan as the King of Han, Li Congyi as the King of Zheng, Li Cong Qian as the King of Yichun, Li Cong Du as the King of Zhaoping County, and Li Congxin as the King of Wenyang County.

古文：大赦境内。
现代文：在境内实行大赦。
English: An amnesty will be implemented in the country.

古文：遣中书侍郎冯延鲁修贡于朝廷，令诸司四品已下无职事者，日二员待制于内殿。
现代文：派中书侍郎冯延鲁到朝廷进贡。下令各司四品以下没有职事的官员，每天派两人到内殿待命。
English: He sent Feng Yanlu, a middle-ranking courtier, to the imperial court to pay tribute, and ordered that officials with no official duties below the fourth grade in each division should send two people to the inner hall every day to stand by.

古文：三年，泉州留从效卒。
现代文：三年，泉州留从効死。
English: Three years later, he died in Quanzhou.

古文：景之称臣于周也，从效亦奉表贡献于京师，世宗以景故，不纳。
现代文：李景向周称臣时，留从劾也到京师奉表进贡，周世宗因李景的缘故，不接受。
English: When Li Jing declared himself a vassal to Zhou, Zhou Shizong did not accept the tribute because of Li Jing.

古文：从效闻景迁洪州，惧以为袭己，遣其子绍基纳贡于金陵，而从效病卒，泉人因并送其族于金陵，推立副使张汉思。
现代文：留从效听说李景迁都到洪州，害怕他袭击自己，派他的儿子留绍基到金陵进贡，而留从劫病死，泉州人因而把他的家族一并送到金陵，拥立副使张汉思。
English: Remaining obedient, he heard that Li Jing had moved the capital to Hongzhou. Fearing that he would attack him, he sent his son, Liu Shoki, to pay tribute to Jinling. However, Liu Shoki died of illness. As a result, the Quanzhou people sent his family to Jinling together and supported the deputy envoy, Zhang Hansi.

古文：汉思老不任事，州人陈洪进逐之，自称留后，煜即以洪进为节度使。
现代文：张汉思年老不管事，州人陈洪进赶走他，自称留后，李煜就任命陈洪进为节度使。
English: Zhang Hansi did not care about his old age. Chen Hongjin, a man from the state, drove him away. After he said he would stay, Li Qiye appointed Chen Hongjin as the festival envoy.

古文：乾德二年，始用铁钱，民间多藏匿旧钱，旧钱益少，商贾多以十铁钱易一铜钱出境，官不可禁，煜因下令以一当十。
现代文：干德二年，开始使用铁钱，民间多隐藏旧钱，旧钱更少了，商人常用十个铁钱换一个铜钱带出境，官府不能禁止。李煜于是下令一个铜钱值十个铁钱。
English: In the second year of Gande, the use of iron money began. People mostly hid old money, and there was less old money. Merchants often used ten iron coins to exchange for one copper coin to take out of the country. The government could not prohibit it. Li Wei then ordered that one copper coin was worth ten iron coins.

古文：拜韩熙载中书侍郎、勤政殿学士。
现代文：拜韩熙载为中书侍郎、勤政殿学士。
English: Bai Han Xizhe was a Chinese calligrapher and a scholar of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：封长子仲遇清源公，次子仲仪宣城公。
现代文：封长子李仲遇为清源公，次子李仲仪焉宣城坌。
English: Fong's eldest son, Li Zhong, became Qingyuan, and his second son, Li Zhongyi, became Xuancheng.

古文：五年，命两省侍郎、给事中、中书舍人、集贤勤政殿学士，分夕于光政殿宿直，煜引与谈论。
现代文：五年，命令两省侍郎、给事中、中害舍人、集贤殿勤政殿学士，轮流在光政殿留宿当值，李煜和他们商谈国事。
English: In the fifth year, he ordered the attendants of the two provinces, the attendants of the middle and middle-ranking officials, the attendants of the middle and middle-ranking officials, and the scholars of Jixian Palace to take turns to stay at the Guangzheng Palace and discuss state affairs with them.

古文：煜尝以熙载尽忠，能直言，欲用为相，而熙载后房妓妾数十人，多出外舍私侍宾客，煜以此难之，左授熙载右庶子，分司南都。
现代文：李煜曾因韩熙载尽忠，能够直言不讳，想任用他做宰相，而韩熙载后房歌妓小妾有几十人之多，常出外舍私自侍奉实客，李煜因此责难他，降韩熙载焉右庶子，分司南都。
English: Because of Han Xizai's loyalty and ability to be outspoken, Li Qiye once wanted to appoint him as prime minister, but Han Xizai had dozens of concubines, and often went out to serve real guests. Li Qiye reproached him for this, and demoted Han Xizai to the position of an illegitimate son, a division of the Southern Capital.

古文：熙载尽斥诸妓，单车上道，煜喜留之，复其位。
现代文：韩熙载斥退全部歌妓小妾，单车上路，李煜感到高兴留下他，恢复他的官位。
English: Han Xizai drove away all the songstresses and concubines and went on a bicycle ride. Li Yao felt happy to leave him behind and resume his official position.

古文：已而诸妓稍稍复还，煜曰： 吾无如之何矣！ 
现代文：不久妓妾们逐渐又回来了，李煜说： 我拿你役办法了！ 
English: Before long, the prostitutes gradually returned, and Li Yao said: "I've had enough of you!

古文：是岁，熙载卒，煜叹曰： 吾终不得熙载为相也。 
现代文：这年，韩熙载逝世，李煜叹息说： 我最终没能任韩熙载做宰相。 
English: This year, Han Xizai passed away, and Li Rong sighed and said, "In the end, I was not able to appoint Han Xizai as prime minister."

古文：欲以平章事赠之，问前世有此比否，群臣对曰： 昔刘穆之赠开府仪同三司。 
现代文：想用平章事的礼仪追赠他，询问前代有没有这样的例子？群臣回答说： 过去刘穆之赠开府仪同三司。 
English: If they wanted to use the etiquette of awarding honorary titles to him, they asked whether there was any such example in the previous generation. The ministers replied: In the past, Liu Mu's gift was to open the government ceremony and the three departments.

古文：遂赠熙载平章事。
现代文：于是赠韩熙载焉平章事。
English: As a result, Han Xi Zhaoyuan was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：熙载，北海将家子也，初与李穀相善。
现代文：韩熙载，是北海将家的儿子，最初和李谷关系好。
English: Han Xizai, the son of a Beihai general, initially had a good relationship with Li Gu.

古文：明宗时，熙载南奔吴，穀送至正阳，酒酣临诀，熙载谓穀曰： 江左用吾为相，当长驱以定中原。 
现代文：唐明宗时，韩熙载南奔到昊，李谷送他到正阳，饮酒尽兴告别，韩熙载对李谷说： 江南如果用我做宰相，我会长驱而入平定中原。 
English: When Tang Mingzong, Han Xizang ran south to Hao, Li Gu sent him to Zhengyang, drank a farewell drink, and Han Xizang said to Li Gu: If Jiangnan uses me as prime minister, I will drive long into the Central Plains of Pingding.

古文：穀曰： 中国用吾为相，取江南如探囊中物尔。 
现代文：李谷说： 中原王朝如果用我做宰相，夺取江南就像探取口袋中的东西罢了。 
English: Li Gu said: If the Central Plains Dynasty uses me as a prime minister, seizing the southern part of the Yangtze River would be like searching for something in your pocket.

古文：及周师之征淮也，命穀为将，以取淮南，而熙载不能有所为也。
现代文：到周军出征淮时，任李谷做主将，攻取淮南，而韩熙载未能有所作焉。
English: By the time Zhou's army left for Huai, Li Gu was appointed captain to capture Huainan, while Han Xizai failed to do anything.

古文：开宝四年，煜遣其弟韩王从善朝京师，遂留不遣。
现代文：开宝四年，李煜派他的弟弟韩王李从善到京师朝拜，于是被扣留没有送回。
English: In the fourth year of Kaibao, Li Yao sent his younger brother Han Wang Li to Beijing to pay homage, but he was detained and not sent back.

古文：煜手疏求从善还国，太祖皇帝不许。
现代文：李煜亲自写奏疏请求让李从善回国，宋太祖皇帝不准许。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty did not allow Li Zongshan to return to China, even though Li Zongshan personally wrote to Emperor Taizu to request this.

古文：煜尝怏怏以国蹙为忧，日与臣下酣宴，愁思悲歌不已。
现代文：李煜曾怏怏不乐，忧虑国势窘困，每天和臣子们宴饮，愁思悲歌不断。
English: Li Qiye was not happy, worried about the national situation, feasted with his courtiers every day, and was constantly sad.

古文：五年，煜下令贬损制度。
现代文：五年，李煜下令降低规格。
English: Five years later, Premier Li Keqiang ordered to lower the specifications.

古文：下书称教，改中书、门下省为左、右内史府，尚书省为司会府，御史台为司宪府，翰林为文馆，枢密院为光政院，诸王皆为国公，以尊朝廷。
现代文：下诏书改称教，改中书、门下省爵左、右内史府，尚书省焉司会府，御史台为司宪府，翰林为文馆，枢密院为光政院，诸王都为国公，以尊崇朝廷。
English: The next imperial edict changed the name to "Church," the second imperial edict changed the name to "Central Office," the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education," the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education," the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education," the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education," the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education," the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education," the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education," and the next imperial edict changed the name to "Ministry of Education."

古文：煜性骄侈，好声色，又喜浮图，为高谈，不恤政事。
现代文：李煜性格非常奢侈，喜好声色，又喜好佛教，高误阔论，不问政事。
English: Li Lan's character is very extravagant. He is fond of fame and popularity, and also fond of Buddhism. He is highly erroneous and broad-minded, and does not care about politics.

古文：六年，内史舍人潘佑上书极谏，煜收下狱，佑自缢死。
现代文：六年，内史舍人潘佑上书极力论谏，李煜收捕他投入狱中，潘佑上吊而死。
English: In the sixth year, Pan You, the person who gave up the history, tried his best to discuss it in a letter. Li Xi arrested him and put him in prison. Pan You hanged himself and died.

古文：七年，太祖皇帝遣使诏煜赴阙，煜称疾不行，王师南征，煜遣徐铉、周惟简等奉表朝廷求缓师，不答。
现代文：七年，宋太祖皇帝派使臣诏李煜去朝廷，李煜称病不去，宋兵南征，李煜派徐铉、周惟简等人奉表朝廷请求缓兵，不答复。
English: In the seventh year, Emperor Taizu of Song Dynasty sent an envoy, Li Xi, to the imperial court. Li Xi said that he was ill and would not go. Song sent soldiers to the south, and Li Xi sent Xu Xi, Zhou Weijian and others to the imperial court to ask for a delay, but they did not reply.

古文：八年十二月，王师克金陵。
现代文：八年十二月，宋兵攻克金陵。
English: In December of the eighth year, Song soldiers conquered Jinling.

古文：九年，煜俘至京师，太祖赦之，封煜违命侯，拜左千牛卫将军。
现代文：九年，李煜被俘送到京师，宋太祖赦免了他，封李煜为连命侯，拜为左千牛卫将军。
English: In the ninth year, Li Qian was captured and sent to Beijing. Emperor Song Taizu pardoned him, and Li Qian was given the title of "Lieutenant General" and worshipped as "General Zuo Qian Niu Wei."

古文：其后事具国史。
现代文：以后的事记载在本朝国史上。
English: Subsequent events are recorded in the history of this dynasty.

古文：予世家江南，其故老多能言李氏时事，云太祖皇帝之出师南征也，煜遣其臣徐铉朝于京师。
现代文：我家世代住在江南，那里的老人很多能谈当时李氏的事情，说宋太祖皇帝出师南征时，李煜派他的臣子徐铉到京师朝拜。
English: My family has lived in the south of the Yangtze River for generations, and many of the elderly people there can talk about what happened to the Li clan at that time. They say that when Emperor Song Taizu went to conquer the south, Li Yu sent his vassal Xu Yu to worship the emperor in Beijing.

古文：铉居江南，以名臣自负，其来也，欲以口舌驰说存其国，其日夜计谋思虑言语应对之际详矣。
现代文：徐铉在江南，以名臣自负，他来到朝廷，想凭口舌保存他的国家，日夜考虑如何应对可谓详尽之至。
English: Xu Xi in the south of the Yangtze River, with the conceit of a famous minister, he came to the imperial court, wanted to preserve his country by word of mouth, day and night to consider how to deal with can be described as exhaustive.

古文：及其将见也，大臣亦先入请，言铉博学有材辩，宜有以待之。
现代文：到他快要进见时，大臣们也先入朝请求，说徐铉博学多才善于辩论，应当对他有所准备。
English: When he was about to enter the meeting, the ministers also went to the DPRK first to request that they should be prepared for him, saying that Xu Zibo was a scholar and good at debating.

古文：太祖笑曰： 第去，非尔所知也。 
现代文：宋太祖笑着说： 只管去，不是你们所懂的。 
English: Song Taizu smiled and said: Just go, it's not what you know.

古文：明日，铉朝于廷，仰而言曰： 李煜无罪，陛下师出无名。 
现代文：第二天，徐铉在殿廷拜见，抬起头说： 李煜没有罪，陛下出师没有理由。 
English: The next day, Xu Rong paid a visit to the imperial court, looked up and said, "Li Rong is not guilty, there is no reason for His Majesty to become a disciple.

古文：太祖徐召之升，使毕其说。
现代文：宋太祖慢慢召他昪殿，让他说完他的意见。
English: Song Taizu slowly called him to the hall and let him finish his opinion.

古文：铉曰： 煜以小事大，如子事父，未有过失，奈何见伐？ 
现代文：徐铉说： 李煜以小国事奉大国，就像儿子事奉父亲，没有过失，为什么受到讨伐？ 
English: Xu Rong said: Li Rong used a small country to serve a big country, just as a son serves his father, there is no fault, why was he attacked?

古文：其说累数百言。
现代文：他的话共计几百句。
English: His words totaled several hundred sentences.

古文：太祖曰： 尔谓父子者为两家可乎？ 
现代文：宋太祖说： 你说父子俩成了两家人行吗？ 
English: Song Taizu said, "Are you saying that it's okay for a father and son to become two families?

古文：铉无以对而退。
现代文：徐铉无法回答而退下。
English: Unable to answer, Xu Yao retreated.

古文：呜呼，大哉，何其言之简也！
现代文：唉，了不起啊，他的话多么简练！
English: Alas, it is amazing how concise his words are!

古文：盖王者之兴，天下必归于一统。
现代文：帝王的兴起，天下必定归于统一。
English: With the rise of emperors, the world is bound to be unified.

古文：其可来者来之，不可者伐之；僭伪假窃，期于扫荡一平而后已。
现代文：那些可以招徕的，就招徕他们；不能招徕的，就攻伐他们；对于僭位称帝称王的，必定扫荡平定而后作罢。
English: Those who can be invited, invite them; those who cannot be invited, attack them; for those who are called emperor or king, they must be swept and settled and then abandoned.

古文：予读周世宗《征淮南诏》，怪其区区攈摭前事，务较曲直以为辞，何其小也！
现代文：我读周世宗的《征淮南诏》，怪他斤斤计较以前的事情，务必要比较是非曲直作为借口，气量多么狭小！
English: I read Zhou Shizong's "Sequestration of Huainan Zhao," and I blame him for being more careful than before, making sure to compare the rights and wrongs as an excuse. How narrow-minded!

古文：然世宗之英武有足喜者，岂为其辞者之过欤？
现代文：但周世宗的英雄勇武有值得人喜爱的地方，难道是替他写诏书的人的过错吗？
English: But Zhou Shizong's hero Yongwu has something to be loved. Is it the fault of the person who wrote the edict for him?

