古文：量土地肥墝而立邑建城。
现代文：要衡量土地的肥瘠来确定建立城邑。
English: It is necessary to measure the fertility of the land to determine the best time to build a city.

古文：称地，以称人，以人称粟。三相称，则内可以固守，外可以战胜。
现代文：城邑的兴建要和土地面积的大小相适应，城邑的大小要和人口的多少相适应，人口的多少要和粮食的供应相适应。三者互相适应，对内就可以进行固守，对外就可以战胜敌人。
English: The construction of towns should be in accordance with the size of the land area, the size of the town should be in accordance with the number of the population, and the number of the population should be in accordance with the supply of grain. The three should adapt to each other, so that they can adhere to the inside and defeat the enemy outside.

古文：战胜于外，于内，胜相应，犹合符节，无异故也。
现代文：能够战胜敌人于国外，主要在于国内有充分的准备，胜利和准备的一致性，就象符节的相吻合一样，这是两者之间没有差异的原故。
English: The ability to defeat the enemy abroad is mainly due to adequate preparation at home. The consistency of victory and preparation is like the coincidence of symbols, which is the reason why there is no difference between the two.

古文：治兵者，若秘于地，若邃于天，生于无。
现代文：善于治兵的人，就象大地那样深藏不露，就象天空那样深邃莫测，表面无形无影却蕴藏着巨大的力量。
English: Those who are good at military management are like the earth, which is deep and hidden, and like the sky, which is deep and unpredictable. The surface is shapeless and shadowless, but it contains tremendous power.

古文：故之，大不窕；小不恢。
现代文：作战时，大规模用兵不会感到兵力不足，小规模用兵也不会感到兵力过多。
English: During the war, large-scale use of troops will not feel under-strength, and small-scale use of troops will not feel over-strength.

古文：明乎禁舍开塞，民流者亲之，地不任者任之。
现代文：平时必须明确各种应兴应革的事项，对于流散的人民，应安托他们，对于没有利用的土地，应该充分利用起来。
English: In peacetime, it is necessary to clarify various issues that need to be addressed. For the scattered people, they should be supported, and for the unused land, it should be fully utilized.

古文：夫土广而任则国富，民众而则国治。
现代文：土地广大而又能充分利用，国家就富足；人民众多而又有良好的组织，国家就安定。
English: If the land is vast and can be fully utilized, the country will be prosperous; if the people are numerous and well organized, the country will be stable.

古文：富治者，不发轫，不出，而威制天下。
现代文：富足而安定的国家，不必出动军队，凭借声威就可以使天下顺服。
English: A rich and stable country does not need to send troops. It can make the whole world obey by virtue of its prestige.

古文：故曰： 兵胜于朝廷。 
现代文：所以说，军事的胜利，取决于朝廷的政治措施。
English: Therefore, military victory depends on the political measures of the imperial court.

古文：不暴甲而胜者，主胜也。陈而胜者，将胜也。
现代文：不使用武力就取得的胜利，是君主在政治上的胜利；经过战争而取得的胜利，是将帅在指挥上的胜利。
English: Victory achieved without the use of force is the political victory of the sovereign; victory achieved through war is the victory of the general in command.

古文：兵起，非可以忿也。
现代文：进行战争，是不能意气用事的。
English: You can't go to war on a whim.

古文：见胜则兴，不见胜则止。
现代文：预计有胜利的把握就采取行动；预计没有胜利的把握就坚决停止。
English: Anticipate a sure victory and act; anticipate no sure victory and stand down.

古文：患在百里之内，不起一日之师；患在千里之内，不起一月之师；患在四海之内，不起一岁之师。
现代文：祸乱发生在百里之内，不要只作一天的战斗准备；祸乱发生在千里之内，不要只作一月的战斗准备；祸乱发生在四海之内，不要只作一半的战斗准备。
English: If disaster strikes within a hundred miles, do not make battle preparations for only a day; if disaster strikes within a thousand miles, do not make battle preparations for only a month; if disaster strikes within the four seas, do not make battle preparations for only half a day.

古文：将者，上不制于天，下不制于地，中不制于人。
现代文：做将帅的人，必须上不受天时的限制，下不受地形的限制，中不受人为的限制。
English: To be a general, one must be free from the constraints of time and space above, free from the constraints of terrain below, and free from artificial constraints in the middle.

古文：宽不可激而怒，清不可事以财。
现代文：要气量宽宏，不可因刺激而发怒；要清正廉洁，不可被金钱所诱惑。
English: One should be broad-minded and not be irritated by stimuli; one should be honest and not be tempted by money.

古文：夫心狂、目盲、耳聋，以三悖率人者，难矣。
现代文：如果任用态度轻狂，目光短浅，信息不灵的人来统帅军队，那就难于成功了。
English: It is difficult to be successful if you put a frivolous, short-sighted, ill-informed person in charge of the military.

古文：兵之所及，羊肠亦胜，锯齿亦胜，缘山亦胜，入谷亦胜，方亦胜，圆亦胜。
现代文：训练有素的军队，在羊肠小道也能取胜，在高岩峻岭也能取胜，攀登高山也能取胜，深入谷地也能取胜。方阵也能取胜，园阵也能取胜。
English: A well-trained army can also win in the sheep gut path, can also win in the high rock steep mountain, can also win in the mountain climbing, can also win in the deep valley, can also win in the square formation, can also win in the garden formation.

古文：重者如山如林，如江如河；轻者如炮如燔。
现代文：行动稳重时，要象山林那样沉着镇静，象江河那样一往无前；行助急骤时，要象火烧那样急剧猛烈，象墙倒那样有压顶之势，象云层履盖那样无可逃避。
English: When acting steadily, one should be as calm and composed as a mountain forest and as steady as a river; when acting precipitously, one should be as fierce as a fire, as overwhelming as a wall, and as inescapable as a cloud cover.

古文：如垣压之，如云覆之，令之聚不得以散，散不得以聚，左不得以右，右不得以左。
现代文：使集中的敌人来不及分散，分散的敌人来不及集中，左边的敌人来不及救援右边，右边的敌人来不及救援左边。
English: Make the concentrated enemy too late to disperse, the dispersed enemy too late to concentrate, the enemy on the left too late to rescue the right, and the enemy on the right too late to rescue the left.

古文：兵如总木，弩如羊角。人人无不腾陵张胆，绝乎疑虑，堂堂决而去。
现代文：军队刀枪剑戟如林立，万努齐发如旋风，人人斗志昂扬，英勇果敢，一往无前地去决战决胜。
English: The army's swords, guns, and swords stood like a forest, and the battle raged like a whirlwind. Everyone was full of fighting spirit, brave and courageous, and went all the way to the decisive battle and victory.

