古文：夫三皇无言而化流四海，故天下无所归功。
现代文：三皇不需要任何言论，教化便遍及四海，所以天下的人不知道该归功于谁。
English: The three emperors did not need any speech, and enlightenment spread throughout the four seas, so people around the world do not know who to credit.

古文：帝者，体天则地，有言有令，而天下太平；群臣让功，四海化行，百姓不知其所以然。
现代文：五帝效法天地运行，增设言教，制定政令，天下因此太平。君臣相互谦让，都不居功，四海之内，教化顺利实现，黎民百姓却不知其中的原因。
English: The Five Emperors followed the example of heaven and earth in their operations, adding edicts and formulating decrees. As a result, the world was at peace. Monarchs and ministers were humble to each other, and did not take credit. Within the four seas, enlightenment was successfully achieved, but the people of Li did not know the reason.

古文：故使臣不待礼赏；有功，美而无害。
现代文：所以，使用臣属不需依靠礼法和奖赏，就能做到君臣和美无间。
English: Therefore, the use of vassals does not need to rely on etiquette and reward, and can achieve a perfect balance between ruler and vassal.

古文：王者，制人以道，降心服志，设矩备衰，四海会同，王职不废。
现代文：三王用道德治理民众，使民众心悦诚服。三王制定法规，以防衰败，天下诸侯按时朝觐，天子的法度实行不废。
English: The three kings govern the people with morality and make the people's hearts happy and sincere. The three kings formulate laws and regulations to prevent decay, the princes of the world make the pilgrimage on time, and the law of the son of heaven is implemented.

古文：虽有甲兵之备，而无斗战之患。
现代文：虽然有了军备，但并没有战争的祸患。
English: Although there is armament, there is no war.

古文：君无疑于臣，臣无疑于主，国定主安，臣以义退，亦能美而无害。
现代文：君主不怀疑臣属，臣属也不怀疑君主。
English: The sovereign does not doubt the subject, nor does the subject doubt the sovereign.

古文：霸者，制士以权，结士以信，使士以赏；信衰则士疏，赏亏则士不用命。
现代文：国家稳定，君位巩固。大臣适时功成身退，君臣之间也能和睦相处而无猜疑。五霸用权术统御士，以信任结交士，靠奖赏使用士。失去信任，士就会疏远了。缺少奖赏，士便不会用命了。
English: The country is stable, the monarchy is consolidated. The ministers retire in a timely manner, and the monarchs and ministers can live in harmony without suspicion. The five hegemons use power to rule the magicians, trust the magicians, and reward the servants. If the trust is lost, the servants will be alienated. If there is no reward, the servants will not die.

古文：《军势》曰： 出军行师，将在自专；进退内御，则功难成。 
现代文：《军势》说：出兵打仗，统军将领要能独断其事。如果军队的布署进退受君主的牵制，那么很难打胜仗。
English: "Military situation" said: to send troops to fight, the general of the unified army must be able to arbitrarily decide the matter. If the deployment of the army is constrained by the monarch, then it is difficult to win the war.

古文：《军势》曰： 使智、使勇、使贪、使愚：智者乐立其功，勇者好行其志，贪者邀趋其利，愚者不顾其死；因其至情而用之，此军之微权也。 
现代文：《军势》上说：对智者、勇者、贪者、愚者的使用方法各有不同。有智谋的人喜欢建功立业，勇敢的人喜欢实现自己的志向，贪财的人追求利禄，愚鲁的人不惜性命。根据他们各自的特点来使用他们，这就是用人的微妙权术。
English: "Military situation" said: the methods of using the wise, the brave, the greedy and the stupid are all different. The clever people like to make achievements, the brave people like to realize their ambitions, the greedy people pursue profits, and the foolish people spare their lives. Using them according to their respective characteristics is the subtle power of employing people.

古文：《军势》曰： 无使辩士谈说敌美，为其惑众；无使仁者主财，为其多施而附于下。 
现代文：《军势》上说：不要让能说会道的人谈论敌人的长处，因为这样会惑乱人心。不要用仁厚的人管理财务，因为他会曲从于下属的要求而浪费钱财。
English: "Don't let a smooth talker talk about the enemy's strengths, because it will confuse people. Don't use a kind person to manage finances, because he will waste money by bending to the demands of subordinates.

古文：《军势》曰： 禁巫祝，不得为吏士卜问军之吉凶。 
现代文：《军势》上说：军中要禁绝巫祝，不准他们为将士们预测吉凶。
English: "Military situation" said: the army should ban witches and fortune-tellers, and not allow them to predict the fortunes of soldiers.

古文：《军势》曰： 使义士不以财。
现代文：《军势》上说：使用侠义之士不能靠钱财。
English: "Military situation" said: the use of chivalrous men can not rely on money.

古文：故义者，不为不仁者死，智者不为暗主谋。 
现代文：所以，义士是不会替不仁不义的人去卖命的，明智的人是不会替昏聩的君主出谋划策的。
English: Therefore, a righteous man will not sacrifice his life for an unkind and unjust man, and a wise man will not offer advice to a confused monarch.

古文：主，不可以无德，无德则臣叛；不可以无威，无威则失权。
现代文：君主不能没有道德，没有道德大臣就会背叛；君主不能没有威势，没有威势就会丧失权力。
English: A monarch cannot be without morality, and without a minister of morality he will betray; a monarch cannot be without authority, and without authority he will lose power.

古文：臣，不可以无德，无德则无以事君；不可以无威，无威则国弱，威多则身蹶。
现代文：大臣不能没有道德，没有道德就无法辅佐君主；大臣也不能没有威势，没有威势国家就会衰弱。
English: A minister cannot be without morality, and without morality he cannot support the monarch; a minister cannot be without authority, and without authority the country will weaken.

古文：故圣王御世，观盛衰，度得失，而为之制；故诸侯二师，方伯三师，天子六师。
现代文：但是大臣威势过了头则会害了自己。所以圣明的君王治理天下，观察世道的盛衰，衡量人事的得失，然后制定典章制度。所以诸侯辖二军，方伯辖三军，天子辖六军。
English: However, a minister who overdoes his authority will harm himself. Therefore, the king of the holy light governs the world, observes the rise and fall of the world, measures the gains and losses of personnel, and then formulates the award system. Therefore, the second army is under the jurisdiction of the princes, the third army is under the jurisdiction of the governors, and the sixth army is under the jurisdiction of the sons of heaven.

古文：世乱，则叛逆生；王泽竭，则盟誓相诛伐。
现代文：世道乱了，叛逆便产生了。天子的德泽枯竭了，诸侯之间的结盟立誓、互相攻伐也就出现了。
English: When the world was in turmoil, rebellion arose. Deze, the son of heaven, was exhausted, and alliances, vows, and mutual attacks between lords appeared.

古文：德同势敌，无以相倾，乃揽英雄之心，与众同好恶，然后加之以权变。
现代文：诸侯之间，势均力敌，谁也没有办法战胜对手，于是便争相延揽英雄豪杰，与之同好同恶，然后再运用权术。
English: Among the lords, the balance of power is equal, and no one can defeat the opponent, so they compete to recruit heroes and heroines, with whom they share the same likes and dislikes, and then use power techniques.

古文：故非计策，无以决嫌定疑；非谲奇，无以破奸息寇；非阴谋，无以成功。
现代文：所以，不运筹谋划，是没有办法决嫌定疑的；不诡诈出奇，是没有办法破奸平寇的；不秘密谋划，是没有办法取得成功的。
English: Therefore, without planning and plotting, there is no way to resolve suspicions; without deception and surprise, there is no way to break the pingko; without secret planning, there is no way to achieve success.

古文：圣人体天，贤者法地，智者师古。
现代文：圣人能够体察天之道，贤人能够取法地之理，智者能够以古为师。
English: A sage can experience the heavenly way, a wise man can take the law and reason, and a wise man can take the ancient as a teacher.

古文：是故《三略》为衰世作： 上略 设礼赏，别奸雄，著成败； 中略 差德行，审权变； 下略 陈道德，察安危，明贼贤之咎。
现代文：所以，《三略》一书，是为衰微的时代而作的。《上略》设置礼赏，辨识奸雄，揭示成败之理。《中略》区分德行，明察权变。《下略》陈述道德，考察安危，说明残害贤人的罪过。
English: Therefore, the book "Three Sketches" was made for the era of decline. "Upper Sketches" set rewards and rewards, identify villains, and reveal the reason for success or failure. "Middle Sketches" distinguish virtues, and detect power changes. "Lower Sketches" state morality, investigate safety, and explain the sins of destroying sages.

古文：故人主深晓 上略 ，则能任贤擒敌；深晓 中略 ，则能御将统众；深晓 下略 ，则能明盛衰之源，审治国之纪。
现代文：所以，君主深通《上略》，就可以任用贤士、制服敌人了。君主深通《中略》，便可以驾御将帅，统领兵众了。君主深通《下略》，就可以明辨兴衰的根源，熟知治国的纲纪了。
English: Therefore, if the monarch is well-versed in the "Upper Outline," he can appoint wise men and subdue the enemy. If the monarch is well-versed in the "Middle Outline," he can be the commander-in-chief and lead the troops. If the monarch is well-versed in the "Lower Outline," he can clearly distinguish the root causes of prosperity and decline, and is familiar with the discipline of governing the country.

古文：人臣深晓 中略 ，则能全功保身。
现代文：人臣深通《中略》，就可以成就功业，保全身家。
English: If a vassal is well-versed in "Zhongliu," he will be able to achieve his career and protect his family.

