古文：起屠维作噩，尽重光大渊献，凡三年。
现代文：起屠维作噩，尽重光大渊献，一共三年。
English: Since then, Tu Wei has been working hard and making every effort to light up the great abyss, for a total of three years.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之上开皇九年
现代文：隋文帝开皇九年
English: Nine years since the Sui Dynasty was founded

古文：春，正月，乙丑朔，陈主朝会群臣，大雾四塞，入人鼻，皆辛酸，陈主昏睡，至晡时乃寤。
现代文：春季，正月，乙丑朔，陈朝举行元旦朝会，陈后主朝会群臣百官时，大雾弥漫，吸入鼻孔，感到又辣又酸，陈后主昏睡过去，一直到下午申时左右才醒过来。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the second month of the year, the Chen dynasty held the New Year's Day imperial meeting, the Chen empress held the imperial meeting with hundreds of officials, the fog was thick, inhaled the nostrils, felt spicy and sour, the Chen empress fell into a coma, and did not wake up until around noon.

古文：是日，贺若弼自广陵引兵济江。
现代文：这一天，隋吴州总管贺若弼从广陵统帅军队渡过长江。
English: On this day, He Ruoqi, the head of Sui and Wuzhou, crossed the Yangtze River from Guangling.

古文：先是弼以老马多买陈船而匿之，买弊船五六十艘，置于渎内。
现代文：起先，贺若弼卖掉军中老马，大量购买陈朝的船只，并把这些船只藏匿起来，然后又购买了破旧船只五六十艘，停泊在小河内。
English: At first, He Ruoqi sold the old horses in the army, bought a large number of ships of the Chen Dynasty, and hid these ships. Then he bought another fifty or sixty dilapidated ships and moored them in Xiaohe.

古文：陈人觇之，以为内国无船。
现代文：陈朝派人暗中窥探，认为中原没有船只。
English: The Chen Dynasty sent people to spy on Zhongyuan secretly, believing that Zhongyuan had no ships.

古文：弼又请缘江防人每交代之际，必集广陵，于是大列旗帜，营幕被野，陈人以为隋兵大至，急发兵为备，既知防人交代，其众复散；后以为常，不复设备。
现代文：贺若弼又请求让沿江防守的兵士每当轮换交接的时候，都一定要聚集广陵，于是隋军大举旗帜，营幕遍野，陈朝以为是隋朝大军来到，于是急忙调集军队加强戒备，随后知道是隋朝士卒换防交接，就将已聚集的军队解散；后来陈朝对此已习以为常，就不再加强戒备。
English: He also requested that the soldiers defending along the river must gather Guangling whenever there is a rotation handover, so the Sui army raised flags and camped everywhere. The Chen dynasty thought that the Sui dynasty army was coming, so they hurriedly mobilized the army to strengthen their alertness. Later, when they knew that it was the Sui dynasty officers changing the defense handover, they disbanded the assembled army. Later, the Chen dynasty had become accustomed to this and no longer strengthened their alertness.

古文：又使兵缘江时猎，人马喧噪。
现代文：贺若弼又时常派遣军队沿江打猎，人欢马叫。
English: He often sent troops to hunt along the river, and people cheered.

古文：故弼之济江，陈人不觉。
现代文：所以贺若弼渡江时，陈朝守军竟没有发觉。
English: Therefore, when He Ruoqi crossed the river, the Chen Dynasty defenders did not find him.

古文：韩擒虎将五百人自横江宵济采石，守者皆醉，遂克之。
现代文：庐州总管韩擒虎也率领将士五百人从横江浦夜渡采石，陈朝守军全都喝醉了酒，隋军轻而易举就攻下了采石。
English: The general manager of Zhangzhou, Han Binghu, also led 500 soldiers to quarry stone from Hengjiangpu at night. The Chen dynasty defenders were all drunk, and the Sui army easily captured the quarry.

古文：晋王广帅大军屯六合镇桃叶山。
现代文：晋王杨广统帅大军驻扎在六合镇桃叶山。
English: Jin Wang Yang Guang, commander-in-chief of the army, was stationed in the town of Liuhe in the Taobaishan Mountains.

古文：丙寅，采石戍主徐子建驰启告变；丁卯，召公卿入议军旅。
现代文：丙寅，陈朝采石镇戍主将徐子建携带告急文书飞骑赶赴都城报告隋军已渡江的消息；丁卯，陈后主召集公卿大臣进宫商议军务事宜。
English: Hsin Yin, the lord of the quarry town of the Chen Dynasty, sent Xu Zijian to the capital on horseback with urgent documents to report the news that the Sui army had crossed the river; Ding Wu, the queen mother of the Chen Dynasty, summoned the noble ministers to the palace to discuss military affairs.

古文：戊辰，陈主下诏曰： 犬羊陵纵，侵窃郊畿，蜂虿有毒，宜时扫定。
现代文：戊辰，陈后主下诏书说： 隋军胆敢任意兴兵凌逼，侵犯占据我都城近郊，就好似蜂虿有毒，应该及时扫灭。
English: According to the edict issued by the empress dowager Chen at the time, "The Sui army dares to arbitrarily invade and occupy the suburbs of our city. It is like a poisonous wasp, which should be wiped out in time."

古文：朕当亲御六师，廓清八表，内外并可戒严。 
现代文：朕当亲自统帅大军，消灭敌军，廓清天下，并在朝廷内外实施戒备。 
English: I shall personally command the great army, annihilate the enemy army, purify the world, and implement a state of alert inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：以骠骑将军萧摩诃、护军将军樊毅、中领军鲁广达并为都督，司空司马消难、湘州刺史施文庆并为大监军，遣南豫州刺史樊猛帅舟师出白下，散骑常侍皋文奏将兵镇南豫州。
现代文：于是任命骠骑将军萧摩诃、护军将军樊毅、中领军鲁广达三人为都督，任命司空司马消难、湘州刺史施文庆两人为大监军，又派遣南豫州刺史樊猛统帅水军出守白下城，散骑常侍皋文奏统帅军队镇守南豫州。
English: As a result, he appointed three generals, Xiao Miao, the cavalry general, Zou Yi, the escort general, and Lu Guangda, the middle leader of the army, as the governor, appointed two generals, Sima Qidang and Shi Wenqing, as the supervisors of the army, and dispatched the commander of the navy of South Yuzhou, Zishi Qimeng, to guard Baixia City, and the commander of the army of the cavalry general, Zou Wenso, to guard South Yuzhou.

古文：重立赏格，僧、尼、道士，尽令执役。
现代文：陈后主又下令设立重赏，征发僧、尼、道士等出家人服役。
English: Empress Chen also ordered the establishment of a heavy reward to recruit monks, nuns, Taoists and other monastics to serve.

古文：庚午，贺若弼攻拔京口，执南徐州刺史黄恪。
现代文：庚午，隋将贺若弼率军攻克京口，生俘陈朝南徐州刺史黄恪。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Sui general He Ruoqi led an army to conquer Jingkou, and captured Chen Chaonan, Nan Xuzhou, and Shi Huangke.

古文：弼军令严肃，秋毫不犯，有军士于民间酤酒者，弼立斩之。
现代文：贺若弼的军队纪律严明，秋毫不犯，有士卒在民间买酒的，贺若弼即令将他斩首。
English: Horakado's army was highly disciplined and committed no crimes. If a soldier bought alcohol from a civilian, Horakado would have him beheaded.

古文：所俘获六千馀人，弼皆释之，给粮劳遣，付以敕书，令分道宣谕。
现代文：所俘获的陈朝军队六千余人，贺若弼全部予以释放，发给资粮，好言安慰，遣返回乡，并付给他们隋文帝敕书，让他们分道宣传散发。
English: He released all of the more than six thousand captured soldiers of the Chen Dynasty, including He Ruoqi, gave them money and grain, comforted them with kind words, sent them back to their hometowns, and gave them the imperial edict of the Sui Dynasty, so that they could spread propaganda in different directions.

古文：于是所至风靡。
现代文：因此，隋军所到之处，陈朝军队望风溃败。
English: Therefore, wherever the Sui army went, the Chen Dynasty army was defeated.

古文：樊猛在建康，其子巡摄行南豫州事。
现代文：陈朝南豫州刺史樊猛当时还在建康，由他的儿子樊巡代理南豫州事。
English: At that time, Chen Zhaozhou was still in Jiankang, and his son Zhaozhou was in charge of the Southern Henan affairs.

古文：辛未，韩擒虎进攻姑孰。半日，拔之，执巡及其家口。
现代文：辛未，隋将韩擒虎率军进攻姑孰，只用了半天，就攻下了姑孰城，俘虏了樊巡及其全家。
English: In Xinwei, the Sui Dynasty attacked Gushan with the army led by Han Binghu. It took only half a day to capture the city of Gushan and capture Zhaojuan and his entire family.

古文：皋文奏败还。
现代文：皋文奏军败，退还江南。
English: He was defeated and returned to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：江南父老素闻擒虎威信，来谒军门者昼夜不绝。
现代文：江南地区的父老百姓早就听说过韩擒虎的威名，前来军营谒见拜访的人昼夜不绝。
English: The common people in the south of the Yangtze River had long heard of the prestige of Han Xuanhu, and the people who came to the military camp to see and visit him were incessant day and night.

古文：鲁广达之子世真在新蔡，与其弟世雄及所部降于擒虎，遣使致书招广达。
现代文：陈朝都督鲁广达的儿子鲁世真在新蔡，与他弟弟鲁世雄一起率部投降了韩擒虎，并派遣使节持书信招抚鲁广达。
English: Lu Shizhen, the son of Lu Guangda, the governor of the Chen dynasty, surrendered to Han Xinghu together with his brother Lu Shixiong in Xin Cai, and sent envoys with letters to entice Lu Guangda.

古文：广达时屯建康，自劾，诣廷尉请罪；陈主慰劳之，加赐黄金，遣还营。
现代文：鲁广达当时率军驻扎在建康，接到鲁世真劝降信后自己上表弹劾自己，并亲自到廷尉请求治罪；陈后主对他好言慰劳，并额外赏赐他黄金，让他返回军营。
English: At that time, Lu Guangda was stationed in Jiankang with his army. After receiving Lu Shizhen's letter to persuade him to surrender, he impeached himself at the table and personally went to the courtier to request punishment; the Chen empress spoke kindly to him and rewarded him with additional gold to let him return to the military camp.

古文：樊猛与左卫将军蒋元逊将青龙八十艘于白下游弈，以御六合兵；陈主以猛妻子在隋军，惧有异志，欲使镇东大将军任忠代之，令萧摩诃徐谕猛，猛不悦，陈主重伤其意而止。
现代文：樊猛和左卫将军蒋元逊率领青龙船八十艘在白下城附近的江面上游弋，以防御从六合方面发动进攻的隋军；陈后主由于樊猛的妻儿家人都被隋军俘获，恐怕他心怀异意，打算派遣镇东大将军任忠代替他，并让萧摩诃向樊猛慢慢讲明情况，樊猛听后很不高兴，陈后主感到很难违背樊猛的意愿，只好作罢。
English: Zhuang Meng and General of the Left Division Jiang Yuan Song led eighty Qinglong ships to sail on the surface of the river near Baixia Town to defend the Sui army that launched an attack from the Liuhe area; Chen Hou's wife and children were captured by the Sui army, so I am afraid that he had a different intention and planned to send Town East General Ren Zhong to replace him, and let Xiao Meng slowly explain the situation to Zhuang Meng. After listening to Zhuang Meng, he was very unhappy. Chen Hou's master felt it was difficult to go against Zhuang Meng's wishes, and had to give up.

古文：于是贺若弼自北道，韩擒虎自南道并进，缘江诸戍，望风尽走；弼分兵断曲阿之冲而入。
现代文：此时，隋将贺若弼率军从北道，韩擒虎率军从南道，齐头并进，夹攻建康。陈朝沿江的镇戌要塞守军都望风尽逃；贺若弼分兵占领曲阿，隔断了陈朝援军的通道，自己率主力进逼建康。
English: At this time, the Sui general He Ruoqi led the army from the North Road, and Han Xinghu led the army from the South Road, marching side by side to attack Jiankang. The Chen Dynasty's garrison fortress defenders along the river were all hoping to escape; He Ruoqi's detachment occupied Qu'a, cut off the channel for the Chen Dynasty's reinforcements, and led the main force to force Jiankang.

古文：陈主命司徒豫章王叔英屯朝堂，萧摩诃屯乐游苑，樊毅屯耆阇寺，鲁广达屯白土冈，忠武将军孔范屯宝田寺。
现代文：陈后主命令司徒、豫章王陈叔英率军守卫朝堂，萧摩诃率军驻守乐游苑，樊毅率军驻守耆寺，鲁广达率军驻守白土冈，忠武将军孔范率军驻守宝田寺。
English: Empress Chen ordered Sito and Yuanzhang Wang Chen Shuhei to lead the army to guard the imperial palace, Xiao Matsuo to lead the army to guard Le Youyuan, Zou Yi to lead the army to guard Jiu Temple, Lu Guangda to lead the army to guard Baiduoka, and the loyal general Kong Fan to lead the army to guard Baotian Temple.

古文：己卯，任忠自吴兴入赴，仍屯硃雀门。
现代文：己卯，任忠率军自吴兴入援京师，驻守朱雀门。
English: At the same time, Ren Zhong led the troops from Wu Xing into the Beijing Aid Division, stationed at Suzakumen.

古文：辛未，贺若弼进据钟山，顿白土冈之东。
现代文：辛未，隋将贺若弼率军进据钟山，驻扎在白土冈的东面。
English: Soon after, the Sui general He Ruoqi led his army into the stronghold of Zhongshan, and was stationed on the east side of Baidu Hill.

古文：晋王广遣总管杜彦与韩擒虎合军，步骑二万屯于新林。
现代文：晋王杨广派遣总管杜彦和韩擒虎合军，共计步骑两万人驻扎在新林。
English: The Jin king Yang Guang dispatched the general manager Du Yan and Han Xunhu to join forces, and a total of twenty thousand people were stationed in Xinlin.

古文：蕲州总管王世积以舟师出九江，破陈将纪瑱于蕲口，陈人大骇，降者相继。晋王广上状，帝大悦，宴赐群臣。
现代文：隋蕲州总管王世积统帅水军出九江，在蕲口击败陈将纪，陈朝将士大为惊恐，向隋军投降的人接连不断，晋王杨广上表禀报军情，隋文帝非常高兴，于是宴请和赏赐百官群臣。
English: Wang Shijie, the governor-general of the Sui and Yunnan Provinces and the commander-in-chief of the naval forces, sailed from Jiujiang and defeated Chen Jiaji at Hekou. The Chen dynasty generals were greatly alarmed, and those who surrendered to the Sui army continued in succession. The Jin king Yang Guang reported the military situation. The Sui Emperor was very happy, so he invited and rewarded hundreds of officials and ministers.

古文：时建康甲士尚十馀万人，陈主素怯懦，不达军士，唯昼夜啼泣，台内处分，一以委施文庆。
现代文：当时建康还有军队十余万人，但是陈后主生性怯懦软弱，又不懂军事，只是日夜哭泣，台城内的所有军情处置，全部委任给施文庆。
English: At that time, Jiankang still had an army of more than 100,000 people, but Chen Hou was cowardly and weak, and did not understand the military, but cried day and night. All military affairs in Taicheng were entrusted to Shi Wenqing.

古文：文庆既知诸将疾己，恐其有功，乃奏曰： 此辈怏怏，素不伏官，迫此事机，那可专信！ 
现代文：施文庆知道将帅们都痛恨自己，唯恐他们建立功勋，于是向陈后主上奏说： 这些将帅们平时总是心中不满，一向不甘心情愿服事陛下，现在到了危机时刻，怎么可以完全信任他们呢？ 
English: Shi Wenqing knew that the generals all hated themselves, fearing that they would build up merits, so he reported to Empress Chen: These generals are always dissatisfied in their hearts in ordinary times, and have always been unwilling to serve His Majesty. Now that it is a time of crisis, how can we fully trust them?

古文：由是诸将凡有启请，率皆不行。
现代文：因此这些将帅凡是有所启奏请求，绝大部分都未获批准。
English: Therefore, these generals usually have a request for opening, and most of them have not been approved.

古文：贺若弼之攻京口也，萧摩诃请将兵逆战，陈主不许。
现代文：在隋将贺若弼进攻京口时，陈朝都督萧摩诃曾经请求率军迎战，陈后主不许。
English: When the Sui general He Ruojun attacked Jingkou, Xiao Maojun, the governor of the Chen Dynasty, had requested to lead the army into battle, but the Chen empress did not allow it.

古文：及弼至钟山，摩诃又曰： 弼悬军深入，垒堑未坚，出兵掩袭，可以必克。 
现代文：等到贺若弼进至钟山，萧摩诃又上奏说： 贺若弼孤军深入，立足未稳，如果乘机出兵袭击，可保必胜。 
English: When He Ruojun entered Zhongshan, Xiao Maojun made another report, saying: He Ruojun's lone army is deeply entrenched, its footing is not stable, if it takes the opportunity to send troops to attack, it can be sure to win.

古文：又不许。
现代文：陈后主还是不许。
English: Later, the owner did not agree.

古文：陈主召摩诃、任忠于内殿议军事，忠曰： 兵法：客贵速战，主贵持重。
现代文：陈后主招集萧摩诃、任忠在宫中内殿商议军事，任忠说： 兵法上说：来犯之军利在速战，守军利在坚持。
English: Empress Chen summoned Xiao Miao and Ren Zhong to the palace inner hall to discuss military affairs. Ren Zhong said, "In terms of military tactics, the advantage of the invading army is to fight quickly, while the advantage of the defending army is to persist.

古文：今国家足食足兵，宜固守台城，缘淮立栅，北军虽来，勿与交战；分兵断江路，无令彼信得通。
现代文：现在国家兵足粮丰，应该固守台城，沿秦淮河建立栅栏，隋军虽然来攻，不要轻易出战；分兵截断长江水路，不要让隋军音信相通。
English: Now that the national soldiers are well-fed, they should firmly defend Taicheng and build a fence along the Qinhuai River. Although the Sui Army comes to attack, do not go to war easily; divide the army to cut off the Yangtze River waterway, and do not let the Sui Army communicate.

古文：给臣精兵一万，金翅三百艘，下江径掩六合，彼大军必谓其度江将士已被俘获，自然挫气。
现代文：陛下可给我精兵一崐万人，金翅战船三百艘，顺江而下，径直突然袭击六合镇；这样，隋朝大军一定会认为他们渡过江的将士已经被我们俘获，锐气自然就会受挫。
English: Your Majesty can give me ten thousand elite soldiers and three hundred gold-winged warships to go down the river and directly attack the town of Liuhe; in this way, the Sui Dynasty army will certainly think that their soldiers who have crossed the river have been captured by us, and their spirit will naturally be frustrated.

古文：淮南土人与臣旧相知悉，今闻臣往，必皆景从。
现代文：此外，淮南土著居民与我以前就互相熟悉，如今听说是我率军前往，必定会群起响应。
English: In addition, the Huainan indigenous people and I have been familiar with each other before. Now that they have heard that I am leading the army, they will certainly respond in droves.

古文：臣复扬声欲往徐州，断彼归路，则诸军不击自去。
现代文：我再扬言将要率军进攻徐州，断敌退路，这样，各路隋军就会不战自退。
English: I then threatened that I would lead the army to attack Xuzhou and cut off the enemy's retreat. In this way, all the Sui armies would retreat without a fight.

古文：待春水既涨，上江周罗睺等众军必沿流赴援，此良策也。 
现代文：待到雨季春水既涨，上游周罗等军必定顺流而下赶来增援。
English: Wait until the rainy season spring water has risen, the upstream Zhou Luo and other troops will certainly rush down the river to reinforce.

古文：陈主不能从。
现代文：这是一个很好的战略计策。 陈后主也不听从。
English: This was a good strategic plan, but the Empress Chen did not listen.

古文：明日，欻然曰： 兵久不决，令人腹烦，可呼萧郎一出击之。 
现代文：到了第二天，陈后主忽然说： 与隋军长久相持不进行决战，令人心烦，可叫萧摩诃出兵攻打敌军。 
English: On the second day, Empress Chen suddenly said, "It is upsetting not to have a decisive battle with the Sui army for a long time. Xiao Mahu can be called to attack the enemy army."

古文：任忠叩头苦请勿战。
现代文：任忠向陈后主跪地叩头，苦苦请求不要出战。
English: Ren Zhong kneeled down and bowed to Chen Houjun and begged him not to go to war.

古文：孔范又奏： 请作一决，当为官勒石燕然。 
现代文：忠武将军孔范又上奏说： 请求与隋军进行决战，我军必胜，我将为陛下在燕然山刻石立碑纪念战功。 
English: Loyal General Kong Fan also made a report, saying: Request a decisive battle with the Sui army, our army will win, and I will erect a stone monument in Yanran Mountain to commemorate His Majesty's war service.

古文：陈主从之，谓摩诃曰： 公可为我一决！ 
现代文：陈后主听从了孔范的意见，对萧摩诃说： 你可为我率军与敌军一决胜负！ 
English: Chen Hou's master listened to Kong Fan's advice and said to Xiao Ma Jun, "You can lead my army to a showdown with the enemy!

古文：摩诃曰： 从来行陈，为国为身；今日之事，兼为妻子。 
现代文：萧摩诃说： 从来作战都是为了国家与自己，今日与敌决战，兼为妻儿家人。 
English: "I have always fought for my country and myself, but today I am fighting for my wife, my children and my family," said Shaw.

古文：陈主多出金帛赋诸军以充赏。
现代文：于是陈后主拿出很多金钱财物，分配给诸军用作奖赏。
English: As a result, Empress Chen took out a lot of money and property and distributed it to the troops as a reward.

古文：甲申，使鲁广达陈于白土冈，居诸军之南，任忠次之，樊毅、孔范又次之，萧摩诃军最在北。
现代文：甲申，命令鲁广达率军在白土冈摆开阵势，在各军的最南边，由南往北，依次是任忠、樊毅、孔范，萧摩诃的军队在最北边。
English: Gao Shin ordered Lu Guangda and his army to set up a position on Baidu Hill. From south to north, Ren Zhong, Zou Yi, and Kong Fan were on the southernmost side of each army, and Xiao Maqi's army was on the northernmost side.

古文：诸军南北亘二十里，首尾进退不相知。
现代文：陈朝军队所摆开的阵势南北长达二十里，首尾进退互不知晓。
English: The position set up by the army of Chen Dynasty is as long as twenty miles from north to south, and the advance and retreat are unknown to each other.

古文：贺若弼将轻骑登山，望见众军，因驰下，与所部七总管杨牙、员明等甲士凡八千，勒陈以待之。
现代文：隋将贺若弼率领轻骑登上钟山，望见陈朝众军已摆开阵势，于是驰骑下山，与所部七位总管杨牙、员明等将领率兵士共八千人，也摆好阵势准备迎战。
English: The Sui general He Ruoqi led the light cavalry up the Zhongshan Mountain, and when he saw that the Chen Dynasty troops had already set up their positions, he rode down the mountain, with a total of eight thousand soldiers led by the seven general managers of the headquarters, Yang Ya, Yan Ming, and also set up their positions to prepare for battle.

古文：陈主通于萧摩诃之妻，故摩诃初无战意；唯鲁广达以其徒力战，与弼相当。
现代文：因为陈后主私通萧摩诃的妻子，所以萧摩诃一开始就不想为陈后主打仗；只有鲁广达率领部下拚死力战，与贺若弼的军队旗鼓相当。
English: Because Chen's mistress was the wife of Xiao Maqian, Xiao Maqian did not want to fight for Chen's mistress at the beginning; only Lu Guangda led his subordinates in a desperate battle, comparable to He Ruoqian's army.

古文：隋师退走者数四，弼麾下死者二百七十三人，弼纵烟以自隐，窘而复振。
现代文：隋军曾经四次被迫后退，贺若弼部下战死二百七十三人，后来贺若弼部队纵放烟火用来掩护隐蔽，才摆脱困境重新振作起来。
English: The Sui army was forced to retreat four times, and two hundred and seventy-three of He Ruoqi's subordinates were killed in battle. Later, He Ruoqi's troops set off fireworks to cover their hiding place, and only after they got out of the predicament did they cheer up again.

古文：陈兵得人头，皆走献陈主求赏，弼知其骄惰，更引兵趣孔范；范兵暂交即走，陈诸军顾之，骑卒乱溃，不可复止，死者五千人。
现代文：陈朝兵士获得隋军人头，纷纷跑去献给陈后主以求得奖赏，贺若弼看到陈朝军队骄傲轻敌，不愿再苦战，于是再一次率军冲击孔范的军阵；孔范的兵士与隋军刚一交战即败走，陈朝诸军望见，骑兵、步卒也一起纷纷溃逃，互相践踏不可阻止，死了五千人。
English: The soldiers of the Chen Dynasty won the heads of the Sui soldiers and ran to offer them to the Chen Empress in order to obtain the reward. He Ruoqi saw that the Chen Dynasty army was proud and despised the enemy and did not want to fight hard anymore, so he once again led the army to attack the army line of Kong Fan. The soldiers of Kong Fan and the Sui Army were defeated and fled as soon as they were engaged. The troops of the Chen Dynasty saw that the cavalry and foot soldiers also fled together, trampling each other and could not be stopped. Five thousand people died.

古文：员明擒萧摩诃，送于弼，弼命牵斩之。摩诃颜色自若，乃释而礼之。
现代文：总管员明擒获了萧摩诃，把他送交贺若弼，贺若弼命令推出去斩首，萧摩诃神色自若，贺若弼于是给他松绑并以礼相待。
English: The chief steward, Alum, captured Xiao Maqian and sent him to He Ruoqian. He Ruoqian ordered Xiao Maqian to be beheaded. Xiao Maqian looked confident, so He Ruoqian released him and treated him with courtesy.

古文：任忠驰入台，见陈主言败状，曰： 官好住，臣无所用力矣！ 
现代文：任忠驰马进入建康台城，谒见陈后主，叙说了失败经过，然后说： 陛下好自为之，我是无能为力了！ 
English: Ren Zhong rode his horse into Jiankangdaicheng, met the Empress Chen, recounted the story of his defeat, and then said, "Your Majesty is so self-centered, I can do nothing!

古文：陈主与之金两縢，使募人出战。忠曰： 陛下唯当具舟楫，就上流众军，臣以死奉卫。 
现代文：陈后主交给他两串金子，让他再募兵出战，任忠说： 陛下只有赶紧准备船只，前往上游会合周罗等人统领的大军，我当豁出性命护送陛下。 
English: Chen's master gave him two strings of gold and told him to recruit more soldiers for the war. Ren Zhong said, "Your Majesty only needs to quickly prepare the ships and go upstream to meet the large army led by Zhou Luo and others. I should risk my life to escort Your Majesty."

古文：陈主信之，敕忠出部分，令宫人装束以待之，怪其久不至。
现代文：陈后主相信了任忠，敕令他出外布置安排，又下令后宫宫女收拾行装，等待任忠，久等不至，觉得奇怪。
English: Empress Chen believed Ren Zhong, and ordered him to go out and arrange the arrangements. She also ordered the harem maidens to pack up and wait for Ren Zhong, but they did not arrive for a long time, which was strange.

古文：时韩擒虎自新林进军，忠已帅数骑迎降于石子冈。
现代文：当时韩擒虎率军从新林向台城进发，任忠已经率领部下数骑到石子冈去投降。
English: At that time, Han Xunhu led the army from Xinlin to Taicheng, and Ren Zhong had already led a number of his subordinates to ride to Shishioka to surrender.

古文：领军蔡征守硃雀航，闻擒虎将至，众惧而溃。
现代文：当时陈朝领军将军蔡徵率军守卫朱雀航，听说韩擒虎将到，部队惊惧，望风溃逃。
English: At that time, the Chen dynasty's leading general Cai Zheng led the army to guard Zhu Zakhang. Hearing that Han Xuanhu would arrive, the troops panicked and fled.

古文：忠引擒虎军直入硃雀门，陈人欲战，忠挥之曰： 老夫尚降，诸军何事！ 
现代文：任忠带领韩擒虎的军队径直进入朱雀门，还有一些陈军将士想进行抵抗，任忠对他们挥挥手说： 我都投降了隋军，你们还抵抗什么！ 
English: Ren Zhong led Han Xinghu's army straight into the Suzaku Gate, and there were still some Chen soldiers who wanted to resist. Ren Zhong waved his hand at them and said: I have surrendered to the Sui army, why are you still resisting!

古文：众皆散走。
现代文：于是陈军全都逃散。
English: Chen Jun left in a hurry.

古文：于是城内文武百司皆遁，唯尚书仆射袁宪在殿中，尚书令江总等数人居省中。
现代文：此时，台城内文武大臣全都逃跑，只有尚书仆射袁宪在殿内，尚书令江总等数人在尚书省府中。
English: At this time, all the ministers of literature and armed forces in Taicheng fled, only Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Yuan Xian was in the palace, and several people, including Shang Shuling Jiang, were in Shang Shuxu's provincial capital.

古文：陈主谓袁宪曰： 我从来接遇卿不胜馀人，今日但以追愧。
现代文：陈后主对袁宪感叹说： 我从来对待你不比别人好，今日只有你还留在我的身边，对此我感到很惭愧。
English: Chen Houjun sighed to Yuan Xianlu and said, "I have never treated you better than others. Today, you are the only one who remains by my side. I feel very ashamed of this."

古文：非唯朕无德，亦是江东衣冠道尽！ 
现代文：这不只是朕失德无道所致，也是由于江东士大夫的气节全都丧失净尽了。 
English: This is not only due to my lack of morality, but also due to the fact that Dr. Jiang Dongshi's stamina has been completely exhausted.

古文：陈主遑遽，将避匿，宪正色曰： 北兵之入，必无所犯。
现代文：陈朝后主惊慌失措，想要躲藏，袁宪严肃地说道： 隋军进入皇宫后，必不会对陛下有所侵侮。
English: The empress of the Chen dynasty panicked and wanted to hide, Yuan Xian said solemnly: After the Sui army entered the imperial palace, it will not insult His Majesty.

古文：大事如此，陛下去欲安之！
现代文：事已至此，陛下还能躲到什么地方去？
English: Now that this has happened, where can His Majesty go to hide?

古文：臣愿陛下正衣冠，御正殿，依梁武帝见侯景故事。 
现代文：我请求陛下把衣服冠冕穿戴整齐，端坐正殿，依照当年梁武帝见侯景的作法。 
English: I request His Majesty to put on the crown of his robe neatly and sit in the main hall, in accordance with the practice of Emperor Liangwu seeing Houjing that year.

古文：陈主不从，下榻驰去，曰： 锋刃之下，未可交当，吾自有计！ 
现代文：陈后主没有听从，下了坐床飞奔而去，并说： 兵刃之下，不能拿性命去冒然抵挡，我自有办法！ 
English: Chen Hou didn't listen, got off the bed and ran away, saying, "Under the sword, I can't risk my life to resist, I have my own way!"

古文：从宫人十馀出后堂景阳殿，将自投于井，宪苦谏不从；后阁舍人夏侯公韵以身蔽井，陈主与争，久之，乃得入。
现代文：于是跟着十余个宫人逃出后堂景阳殿，就要往井里跳，袁宪苦苦哀求，陈后主不听。后舍人夏侯公韵用自己的身子遮挡住井口，陈后主极力相争，争了很长时间才得以跳进井里。
English: As a result, after more than ten courtiers escaped from the back hall of the Jingyang Palace, they had to jump into the well. Yuan Xian begged and pleaded, but Empress Chen would not listen. Empress Dowager Xia Hou Gongyun blocked the wellhead with her own body, and Empress Chen fought hard and fought for a long time before she could jump into the well.

古文：既而军人窥井，呼之，不应，欲下石，乃闻叫声；以绳引之，惊其太重，及出，乃与张贵妃、孔贵嫔同束而上。
现代文：不久，有隋军兵士向井里窥视，并大声喊叫，井下无人回答，士兵扬言要落井下石，方才听到井下有人呼唤，于是抛下绳索往上拉人，感到非常沉重，十分吃惊，直到把人拉了上来，看见是陈后主与张贵妃、孔贵嫔三人同绳而上。
English: Not long after, a soldier from the Sui army peered into the well and shouted loudly. No one answered from below. The soldier threatened to throw a rock down the well. It was only when he heard someone calling from below that he dropped the rope to pull the person up. He felt very heavy and was very surprised until he pulled the person up and saw that it was the Queen Mother Chen, Zhang Guifei and Kong Guizhou who were climbing up the rope together.

古文：沈后居处如常。
现代文：而沈皇后仍像平常一样，毫不惊慌。
English: Empress Shen's residence and behavior are the same as usual.

古文：太子深年十五，闭邠而坐，舍人孔伯鱼侍侧，军士叩阁而入，深安坐，劳之曰： 戎旅在途，不至劳也！ 
现代文：皇太子陈深当时年方十五岁，关上门，安然端坐，太子舍人孔伯鱼在一旁侍奉，隋军兵士推门而入，陈深端坐不动，好言慰劳说： 你们一路上鞍马劳顿，还不至于过于疲劳吧？ 
English: Crown Prince Chen Sheng was fifteen years old at the time. He closed the door and sat down peacefully. The prince let his servant, Kong Bo Yu, serve on the side. The Sui soldiers pushed the door open. Chen Sheng could not sit still. He comforted and said: "You have been working hard all the way. Aren't you too tired?

古文：军士咸致敬焉。
现代文：隋军兵士都纷纷向他致敬。
English: The soldiers of the Sui Army paid tribute to him one after another.

古文：时陈人宗室王侯在建康者百馀人，陈主恐其为变，皆召入，令屯朝堂，使豫章王叔英总督之，又阴为之备，及台城失守，相帅出降。
现代文：当时陈朝宗室王侯在建康城中有一百余人，陈后主恐怕他们发动政变，就把他们全都召进宫里，命令他们都聚集在朝堂，派遣豫章王陈叔英监督他们，并暗中严加戒备。到台城失守以后，他们都相继出降。
English: At that time, there were more than a hundred people in Jiankang, the capital of the Chen Dynasty. The Chen Empress feared that they would launch a coup, so she called them all into the palace, ordered them to gather in the imperial hall, sent Yu Zhang Wang Chen Shuying to supervise them, and secretly put them on high alert. After losing the defense of Taicheng, they all surrendered one after another.

古文：贺若弼乘胜至乐游苑，鲁广达犹督馀兵苦战不息，所杀获数百人，会日暮，乃解甲，面台再拜恸哭，谓众曰： 我身不能救国，负罪深矣！ 
现代文：隋将贺若弼率军乘胜进至乐游苑，陈朝都督鲁广达仍督率残兵败将苦战不止，共杀死俘虏隋军数百人，赶上天色近晚，鲁广达方才放下武器，面向台城拜了三拜，忍不住失声痛哭，对部下说： 我没有能够拯救国家，负罪深重！ 
English: The Sui general He Ruojun led the army into the Le Youyuan after the victory. The Chen dynasty governor Lu Guangda led the remnants of the defeated soldiers in the bitter battle, killing hundreds of captured Sui soldiers. It was almost too late to catch up with the sky. Lu Guangda only put down his weapons, bowed three times facing Taicheng, could not help but weep bitterly, and said to his subordinates: I was not able to save the country, and I am deeply guilty!

古文：士卒皆流涕歔欷，遂就擒。
现代文：部下兵士也都痛哭流涕，于是被隋军俘获。
English: His subordinate soldiers also cried bitterly, so they were captured by the Sui army.

古文：诸门卫皆走，弼夜烧北掖门入，闻韩擒虎已得陈叔宝，呼视之，叔宝惶惧，流汗股栗，向弼再拜。
现代文：台城的宫门卫士都四散逃走，贺若弼率军在夜间焚烧北掖门而进入皇宫，得知韩擒虎已抓住了陈叔宝，就把他叫来亲自察看，陈叔宝非常害怕，汗流浃背，浑身战栗，向贺若弼跪拜叩头。
English: The palace gate guards of Taichung all scattered and fled. He Ruoqian led his army to burn the Beilun Gate at night and entered the palace. When he learned that Han Xinghu had caught Chen Shubao, he called him to come and see for himself. Chen Shubao was very afraid, sweating profusely, trembling all over, and bowed to He Ruoqian.

古文：弼谓之曰： 小国之君当大国之卿，拜乃礼也。
现代文：贺若弼对他说： 小国的君主见了大国的公卿大臣，按照礼节应该跪拜。
English: He Ruoqi said to him: When the monarch of a small country sees the noble minister of a big country, he should kneel down according to the etiquette.

古文：入朝不失作归命侯，无劳恐惧。 
现代文：阁下到了隋朝仍不失封归命侯，所以不必恐惧。 
English: Don't be afraid to enter my morning as a suitor.

古文：既而耻功在韩擒虎后，与擒虎相訽，挺刃而出；欲令蔡征为叔宝作降笺，命乘骡车归己，事不果。
现代文：过后，贺若弼因耻于功在韩擒虎之后，与韩擒虎发生争吵詈骂，随后怒气冲冲地拔刀而出，想令陈朝前吏部尚书蔡徵为陈叔宝起草降书，又下令陈后主乘坐骡车归附自己，但没有实现。
English: Afterward, He Ruoqi, ashamed of his achievement, quarreled and cursed with Han Xunhu after Han Xunhu, and then angrily pulled out a knife and wanted to order the former official of the Chen Dynasty, Shangshu Caizhen, to draft a letter of surrender for Chen Shubao, and also ordered the Chen empress to take a carriage to attach herself, but it did not happen.

古文：弼置叔宝于德教殿，以兵卫守。
现代文：于是贺若弼将陈后主置于德教殿内，派兵守卫。
English: As a result, Horakuni placed Empress Chen in the Imperial Palace and sent soldiers to guard her.

古文：高颎先入建康，颎子德弘为晋王广记室，广使德弘驰诣颎所，令留张丽华，颎曰： 昔太公蒙面以斩妲己，今岂可留丽华！ 
现代文：隋高先进入建康，当时高的儿子高德弘是晋王府记室参军，杨广就派他驰马来见高，传令留下张丽华，高说： 古时候姜太公吕尚蒙面斩了殷纣王的宠姬妲己，今天岂能留下张丽华！ 
English: Sui Gao entered Jiankang first. At that time, Gao's son, Gao Dehong, was a member of the army of the Jin King's Office of Records. Yang Guang sent him to ride a horse to see Gao. He was ordered to leave Zhang Lihua behind. Gao said: In ancient times, Jiang Taigong Lushang masked and beheaded the favorite of King Yin Xi, today he can't leave Zhang Lihua behind!

古文：乃斩之于青溪。
现代文：于是将张丽华斩于青溪。
English: As a result, Zhang Lihua was beheaded in Qingxi.

古文：德弘还报，广变色曰： 昔人云， 无德不报 ，我必有以报高公矣！ 
现代文：高德弘还报杨广，杨广脸色大变说： 古人云： 无德不报。 我一定有办法回报高公！ 
English: Gao Dehong also reported to Yang Guang, and Yang Guang's face changed dramatically and said: "The ancients said: 'There is no virtue without reporting.' I must have a way to repay Gao Gong!"

古文：由是恨颎。
现代文：因此杨广忌恨高。
English: Therefore, Yang Guangbo hated Gao.

古文：丙戌，晋王广入建康，以施文庆受委不忠，曲为谄佞以蔽耳目，沈客卿重赋厚敛以悦其上，与太市令阳慧朗、刑法监徐析、尚书都令史暨慧皆为民害，斩于石阙下，以谢三吴。
现代文：丙戌，晋王杨广进入建康，认为陈朝中书舍人施文庆接受委命，却不忠心国事，反而谄媚为奸，以蒙蔽天子耳目；前中书舍人沈客卿重赋崐厚敛，盘剥百姓，以博取天子的欢心；与太市令阳慧朗、刑法监徐析、尚书都令史暨慧景等人都是祸国害民的奸臣，一并斩于石阙下，以谢三吴地区百姓。
English: According to the legend, King Yang Guang of Jin Dynasty entered Jiankang, and thought that Shi Wenqing, a scholar of the Chen Dynasty, was not loyal to the state affairs when he received the commission, but was a traitor to deceive the eyes and ears of the emperor; the former scholar of the Middle Kingdom, Shen Keqing, was given more power and influence to exploit the people in order to win the favor of the emperor; and Tai Shi Lingyang Hui Lang, criminal law supervisor Xu Seiling, Shang Shudu Ling Shi and Hui Jing were all traitors who harmed the country and harmed the people, and they were all beheaded under the stone to thank the people of Sanwu

古文：使高颎与元帅府记室裴矩收图籍，封府库，资财一无所取，天下皆称广，以为贤。
现代文：杨广又让高和元帅府记室参军裴矩一道收缴南陈地图和户籍，封存国家府库，金银财物一无所取，因此，天下都称颂杨广，认为他贤明。
English: Yang Guang also let Gao and the Marshal's Office of Records, together with the army member Pei Rong, collect the Nan Chen map and household registration, seal the national treasury, and take nothing of gold, silver and property. Therefore, the world praised Yang Guang and considered him wise.

古文：矩，让之之弟子也。
现代文：裴矩是裴让之弟弟的儿子。
English: Pei Niang is the son of Pei Jang's younger brother.

古文：广以贺若弼先期决战，违军令，收以属吏。
现代文：晋王杨广因为贺若弼率军与陈朝军队先期决战，违犯了军令，下令将他收捕送交执法官吏。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, violated the military order because He Ruoqi led the army to fight against the Chen Dynasty army, and ordered him to be arrested and handed over to the law enforcement officials.

古文：上驿召之，诏广曰： 平定江表，弼与韩擒虎之力也。 
现代文：隋文帝派遣驿使传令召贺若弼入朝，并给杨广下诏书说： 这次平定江表地区，全仗贺若弼和韩擒虎二人之力。 
English: Emperor Sui Wen dispatched an envoy to summon He Ruo into the imperial court, and sent an imperial decree to Yang Guang saying: This time, to pacify the Yangtze River area, the whole battle is the power of He Ruo and Han Ruo.

古文：赐物万段；又赐弼与擒虎诏，美其功。
现代文：还下令赏赐贺若弼布帛等物一万段。不久又赐给贺若弼和韩擒虎诏书，赞美他们二人的功绩。
English: He also ordered that 10,000 pieces of cloth and other items be given to He Ruoqun, and soon after, He Ruoqun and Han Ruoqun were given an imperial edict praising their achievements.

古文：开府仪同三司王颁，僧辩之子也。夜，发陈高祖陵，焚骨取灰，投水而饮之。
现代文：隋开府仪同三司王颁是王僧辩的儿子，在一天夜里，他挖了陈高祖的陵墓，焚毁了陈霸先的尸骨，并将骨灰投进水中然后喝下去，以报杀父之仇。
English: Sui Kaifu Yi and the three kings were the sons of Wang Sangye. One night, he dug up the tomb of Chen Gaozu, burned the bones of Chen Baxian, and threw the ashes into the water and then drank it to avenge his father's death.

古文：既而自缚，归罪于晋王广。广以闻，上命赦之。
现代文：随后把自己捆绑起来，向晋王杨广投案，请求治罪；杨广把此事报告了隋文帝，隋文帝下令赦免了他。
English: He then tied himself up and turned himself in to Yang Guang, the king of Jin, requesting that he be punished; Yang Guang reported the matter to Emperor Sui, who ordered him to be pardoned.

古文：诏陈高祖、世祖、高宗陵，总给五户分守之。
现代文：隋文帝又下诏令给陈高祖、陈世祖、陈高宗安排五户守陵人，分别负责守护陵墓。
English: Sui Emperor Wen also issued a decree to Chen Gaozu, Chen Shizuo and Chen Gaozong to arrange five families to guard the mausoleum, each responsible for guarding the mausoleum.

古文：上遣使以陈亡告许善心，善心衰服号哭于西阶之下，藉草东向坐三日，敕书唁焉。
现代文：隋文帝派遣使节将陈朝灭亡的消息告诉了许善心，许善心穿上丧服在客馆西边的台阶下面放声痛哭，并在干草上面朝东坐了三天；隋文帝下敕书向他表示慰问。
English: Emperor Sui Wen dispatched an envoy to inform Xu Zenshin of the news of the demise of the Chen Dynasty. Xu Zenshin put on mourning clothes and cried loudly at the bottom of the steps on the west side of the guest house and sat on the hay for three days; Emperor Sui Wen sent a letter to him to express his condolences.

古文：明日，有诏就馆，拜通直散骑常侍，赐衣一袭。
现代文：次日，隋文帝又派人持诏书到客馆，拜许善心为通直散骑常侍，并赏赐他朝服一套。
English: The next day, Emperor Sui Wen sent someone to the guest house with an imperial edict, praising Goodheart for being a regular attendant, and awarding him a set of imperial robes.

古文：善心哭尽哀，入房改服，复出，北面立，垂泣，再拜受诏，明日乃朝，伏泣于殿下，悲不能兴。
现代文：许善心又大哭了一场，然后进屋脱掉丧服，改穿隋文帝所赐朝服，再重新出来面北站立，流着眼泪跪拜受诏，第二天才入宫朝见隋文帝，伏在殿下哭泣，悲不能起。
English: Xu Zenshin burst into tears again. He then went into the house, took off his mourning clothes, and put on the imperial robes given by the Sui Emperor. He then came out again, stood facing north, and bowed down with tears to receive the imperial edict. The next day, he went to the palace to see the Sui Emperor, and lay down in front of his royal highness, weeping, unable to be sad.

古文：上顾左右曰： 我平陈国，唯获此人。
现代文：隋文帝看着左右的朝臣说： 我出兵平定陈国，只得到了此人。
English: Emperor Wen said to the people around him, "I pacified Chen Guo, and only gained this one person.

古文：既能怀其旧君，即我之诚臣也。 
现代文：他既然不忘旧日的国君，也就是我的忠臣。 
English: Since he does not forget the former sovereign, he is my loyal vassal.

古文：敕以本官直门下省。
现代文：于是下敕令许善心以本官散骑常侍暂理门下省。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Xu Zenshin to temporarily take charge of the subordinate province as his official horseback riding attendant.

古文：陈水军都督周罗睺与郢州刺史荀法尚守江夏，秦王俊督三十总管水陆十馀万屯汉口，不得进，相持逾月。
现代文：陈朝水军都督周罗和郢州刺史荀法尚率军驻守江夏，隋秦王杨俊督率三十位总管水陆十余万大军驻扎在汉口，不能向前推进，双方相持了一个多月。
English: Zhou Luo, the governor of the Chen dynasty's naval forces, and Zhang Zizhi, the governor of Zhangzhou, led the troops stationed in Jiangxia. Yang Jun, the governor of the Sui and Qin dynasties, led the thirty commanders of the naval and land forces stationed in Hankou. They could not advance, and the two sides held each other for more than a month.

古文：陈荆州刺史陈慧纪遣南康内史吕忠肃屯岐亭，据巫峡，于北岸凿岩，缀铁锁三条，横截上流以遏隋船，忠肃竭其私财以充军用。
现代文：陈荆州刺史陈慧纪派遣南康内史吕忠肃率军驻扎在岐亭，据守巫峡，并在长江北岸岩石上凿孔，跨江系三条铁锁链，横截上流江面以遏制隋军船只。吕忠肃又拿出自己的全部财产充作军饷。
English: Chen Jingzhou stabbed history, Chen Hui Ji dispatched South Kangnai history, Lv Zhongsu led the army stationed in Qiting, guarded Wu Gorge, and drilled holes in the rock on the north bank of the Yangtze River, cross-river system of three iron chains, cross-cut the upstream river to curb the Sui ships. Lv Zhongsu also took out all his property to serve as a military camp.

古文：杨素、刘仁恩奋兵击之，四十馀战，忠肃守险力争，隋兵死者五千馀人，陈人尽取其鼻以求功赏。
现代文：隋元帅杨素、大将军刘仁恩指挥隋军猛攻陈军，前后四十余战，吕忠肃率军据险全力抗拒，隋军损失惨重，阵亡达五千余人，陈军将士将他们的鼻子全部割下拿去邀功求赏。
English: The Sui marshal Yang Su and the general Liu Rien led the Sui army to attack the Chen army. There were more than forty battles before and after. The army led by Lü Zhong Su resisted with all its might. The Sui army suffered heavy losses and more than five thousand people were killed in the battle. The soldiers of the Chen army cut off all their noses to get rewards.

古文：既而隋师屡捷，获陈之士卒，三纵之。
现代文：随后隋军多次取胜，俘获了一些陈军士卒，分三次释放了他们；吕忠肃放弃营栅率军逃走，杨素得以从崐容毁掉跨江锁链。
English: Subsequently, the Sui army won many times, captured some of Chen's soldiers and released them in three stages; Lv Zhongsu abandoned the camp gate and led the army to escape, and Yang Su was able to destroy the cross-river chain from Xulong.

古文：忠肃弃栅而遁，素徐去其锁；忠肃复据荆门之延洲，素遣巴蜑千人，乘五牙四艘，以拍竿碎其十馀舰，遂大破之，俘甲士二千馀人，忠肃仅以身免。
现代文：吕忠肃又退守荆门的延洲，杨素派遣居住在巴中一带的蛮族士卒一千人，乘坐五牙战舰四艘，用拍竿击碎陈军十余艘战船，于是大败陈军，俘获士卒两千余人，吕忠肃侥幸只身逃走。
English: Lv Zhongsu also retreated to defend Yanzhou in Jingmen. Yang Su dispatched a thousand barbarian soldiers living in the vicinity of Bachung, took four warships of the Five Teeth, and smashed more than ten warships of the Chen Army with a club. As a result, he defeated the Chen Army and captured more than two thousand soldiers. Lv Zhongsu luckily escaped alone.

古文：陈信州刺史顾觉屯安蜀城，弃城走。
现代文：南陈信州刺史顾觉率军驻守安蜀城，闻讯弃城逃走。
English: Nan Chen Xinzhou stabbed Shi Gu Jue and led his army to garrison Anshu City, but fled when he heard that the city had been abandoned.

古文：陈慧纪屯公安，悉烧其储蓄，引兵东下，于是巴陵以东无复城守者。
现代文：陈慧纪驻守公安，也全部烧掉物资储备。率领军队顺流东下，于是自巴陵以东，再没有守城抵抗的陈朝军队。
English: Chen Huiji was stationed at the Public Security Bureau, and he also burned all the material reserves. He led the army eastward along the river, so from the east of Baling, there was no more Chen Dynasty army to defend the city.

古文：陈慧纪帅将士三万人，楼船千馀艘，沿江而下，欲入援建康，为秦王俊所拒，不得前。
现代文：陈慧纪统率将士三万人，楼船一千余艘，顺江而下，本来打算入援建康，因为受到隋元帅秦王杨俊的阻拦，无法前进。
English: Chen Hui Ji led 30,000 soldiers and more than 1,000 ships down the river. Originally, he planned to go to Jiankang's aid, but he was blocked by the Sui marshal Qin Wang Yangjun and was unable to advance.

古文：是时，陈晋熙王叔文罢湘州，还，至巴州，慧纪推叔文为盟主。
现代文：这时，陈朝晋熙王陈叔文卸任湘川刺史，返回建康，到了巴州，于是陈慧纪就推举陈叔文为上游各军盟主。
English: At this time, Chen Shuwen, the king of the Jin Dynasty of the Chen Dynasty, resigned from the position of Xiangchuan scribe, returned to Jiankang, and came to Bazhou. Therefore, Chen Huiji elected Chen Shuwen as the commander of the upstream armies.

古文：而叔文已帅巴州刺史毕宝等致书请降于俊，俊遣使迎劳之。
现代文：而此时陈叔文已经率领陈巴州刺史毕宝等人给杨俊写信请求投降，杨俊派出使节迎接并慰劳他们。
English: At this time, Chen Shouwen had already led Chen Bazhou, Zhi Bi Bao and others to write to Yang Jun to request surrender. Yang Jun sent an envoy to welcome and console them.

古文：会建康平，晋王广命陈叔宝手书招上江诸将，使樊毅诣周罗，陈慧纪子正业诣慧纪谕指。
现代文：逢建康已被平定，于是晋王杨广命令陈叔宝亲自写信招抚陈军上江诸位将帅，派遣樊毅到周罗处，陈慧纪的儿子陈正业到陈慧纪处，传达陈后主的命令。
English: Feng Jiankang had been subdued, so the Jin king Yang Guang ordered Chen Shubao to personally write a letter to all the generals of Chen's army on the Yangtze River, sending Zou Yi to Zhou Luo, and Chen Zhengye, the son of Chen Hui Ji, to Chen Hui Ji, to convey the order of Chen's queen.

古文：时诸城皆解甲，罗乃与诸将大临三日，放兵散，然后诣俊降，陈慧纪亦降，上江皆平。
现代文：当时各城陈军都放下武器，周罗和众将帅大哭三天，将部队解散，然后向杨俊投降，陈慧纪也向隋军投降，于是陈朝上江地区被全部平定。
English: At that time, all the cities of the Chen army laid down their weapons, Zhou Luo and the generals cried for three days, disbanded the troops, and then surrendered to Yang Jun, Chen Huiji also surrendered to the Sui army, so the Chen Dynasty Shangjiang region was completely pacified.

古文：杨素下至汉口，与俊会。
现代文：杨素率军顺流而下到达汉口，与杨俊大军会合。
English: Yang Su led the army down the river to Hankou and met with Yang Jun's army.

古文：王世积在蕲口，闻陈已亡，移书告谕江南诸郡，于是江州司马黄偲弃城走，豫章等诸郡太守皆诣世积降。
现代文：隋蕲州总管王世积率军驻扎蕲口，得知陈朝已经灭亡，就派人告谕陈朝江南各郡，于是陈朝江州司马黄弃城逃走，豫章诸郡太守都向王世积投降。
English: Wang Shizhe, the general manager of Sui and Qiang states, stationed his army in Hekou. When he learned that the Chen dynasty had perished, he sent someone to inform the counties south of the Yangtze River of the Chen dynasty. As a result, Chen Zhaozhou Sima Huang abandoned the city and fled, and the governors of the counties of Yuzhang surrendered to Wang Shizhe.

古文：癸巳，诏遣使者巡抚陈州郡。
现代文：癸巳，隋文帝诏令派遣使节巡视安抚陈朝各州郡。
English: Soon after, Emperor Sui Wen issued an imperial edict to dispatch envoys to inspect and pacify the states and counties of the Chen dynasty.

古文：二月，乙未，废淮南行台省。
现代文：二月乙未，隋朝撤消淮南行台省。
English: In February of the same year, the Sui Dynasty abolished Huainan Province.

古文：苏威奏请五百家置乡正，使治民，简辞讼。
现代文：隋纳言苏威上奏请求在地方上每五百家设置乡正一人，管理本乡百姓，审理诉讼纠纷。
English: Sui Na, Sui Yan, Sui Wei petitioned to set up a township official in every five hundred households to manage the local people and hear lawsuits and disputes.

古文：李德林以为： 本废乡官判事，为其里闾亲识，剖断不平，今令乡正专治五百家，恐为害更甚。
现代文：内史令李德林认为： 本来已经废掉乡一级官吏审理案件的权力，是因为他们和案件当事人乡里乡亲，往往判案不公平，现在却令乡正专治一乡五百家，恐怕危害更大。
English: Li Delin, director of the Department of Internal History, believes: Originally, the power of officials at the township level to hear cases was abolished, because they and the villagers involved in the case often judged cases unfairly, but now the township is in charge of a township of 500 households, which is probably more harmful.

古文：且要荒小县，有不至五百家者，岂可使两县共管一乡！ 
现代文：况且有些边远荒僻小县，百姓不满五百家，难道能让两县共管一乡？ 
English: Moreover, there are some remote and desolate small counties with less than 500 households. Can two counties be allowed to jointly manage one township?

古文：帝不听。
现代文：隋文帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：丙申，制： 五百家为乡，置乡正一人；百家为里，置里长一人。 
现代文：丙申，下制书说： 民间五百家为乡，设置乡正一人；一百家为里，设置里长一人。 
English: Bishin, the next edition of the book says: Five hundred non-governmental homesteads are townships, setting up one township chief; one hundred homesteads are villages, setting up one village chief.

古文：陈吴州刺史萧献能得物情，陈亡，吴人推献为主，右卫大将军武川宇文述帅行军总管元契、张默言等讨之。
现代文：陈朝吴州刺史萧甚得民心，陈朝灭亡后，吴地人民推举他为首领，割据自立，隋右卫大将军武川人宇文述统率行军总管元契、张默言等率军讨伐。
English: After the death of the Chen Dynasty, the people of Wu Province elected him as their leader, and they became independent. The march was led by the general of the Sui and Wei Dynasties, Wu Chuanren and Wu Wenshu, and the army was led by the general manager of the march, Yuan Qi and Zhang Mugen.

古文：落丛公燕荣以舟师自东海至。陈永新侯陈君范自晋陵奔献，并军拒述。
现代文：隋落丛公燕荣率领水军从东海赶来参战，陈永新侯陈君范从晋陵投奔萧，合军抗拒宇文述的军队。
English: Yan Rong, the ruler of the Sui Dynasty, led the naval forces from the East Sea to join the war, and Chen Yongxin, the lord of the Chen Dynasty, led the naval forces from the Jin Dynasty to the Xiao Dynasty. The combined forces resisted the army of Yu Wenshu.

古文：述军且至，献立栅于晋陵城东，留兵拒述，遣其将王褒守吴州，自义兴入太湖，欲掩述后。
现代文：宇文述的军队快到时，萧在晋陵城东面建立栅栏，留下军队抗拒宇文述，并派遣部将王褒守吴州，自己则率领大军从义兴进入太湖，打算从背后袭击宇文述的军队。
English: When Yu Wenshu's army was about to arrive, Xiao set up a fence on the east side of Jinling City, leaving the army to resist Yu Wenshu. He sent the general Wang Bao to defend Wuzhou, while he led a large army from Yixing into Taihu Lake, intending to attack Yu Wenshu's army from behind.

古文：述进破其栅，回兵击献，大破之；又遣兵别道袭吴州，王褒衣道士服弃城走。
现代文：宇文述进兵攻破晋陵城东营栅，然后回兵攻打萧，大败萧的军队；又派遣军队从别道攻打吴州，王褒换上道士衣服弃城逃走。
English: Yuwen describes how the marching troops broke through the east camp gate of Jinling City, and then the returning troops attacked Xiao, and defeated Xiao's army; they also sent troops to attack Wuzhou from another road, and Wang Bao changed into Taoist clothes and abandoned the city and fled.

古文：献以馀众保包山，燕荣击破之。
现代文：萧率领残余部队退保包山，又被燕荣打败。
English: Xiao led the remaining troops to withdraw from Baoshan, and was again defeated by Yan Rong.

古文：献将左右数人匿民家，为人所执。
现代文：萧带领左右数人藏匿百姓家中，被人抓获。
English: Xiao led several people to hide in people's homes and was caught.

古文：述进至奉公埭，陈东扬州刺史萧岩以会稽降，与献皆送长安，斩之。
现代文：宇文述率军进至奉公埭，陈朝东扬州刺史萧岩献上会稽城投降，后来与萧都被送往长安斩首。
English: Yuwen Du led the army to Bongguancun, and the Chen dynasty went to the east of Yangzhou to assassinate Xiao Yan, who offered to surrender the city. Later, he and Xiao were both sent to Chang'an to be beheaded.

古文：杨素之下荆门也，遣别将庞晖将兵略地，南至湘州，城中将士，莫有固志。
现代文：隋杨素在攻下荆门后，派遣部下别将庞晖率军略地，庞晖向南进至湘州，城中的陈朝将士都丧失了固守的斗志。
English: After conquering Jingmen, Sui Yang Su dispatched his subordinates to lead the army of Pang Kun to the south to Hunan Province. The Chen Dynasty soldiers in the city lost their fighting spirit.

古文：刺史岳阳王叔慎，年十八，置酒会文武僚吏。
现代文：陈朝湘州刺史岳阳王陈叔慎，年仅十八岁，设置酒席宴请部下文武官吏。
English: Chen Shushan, only 18 years old, set up a banquet to invite the civil and military officials under him.

古文：酒酣，叔慎叹曰： 君臣之义，尽于此乎！ 
现代文：当酒喝到尽兴时，陈叔慎感叹说： 我们之间的君臣关系，到此就算结束了！ 
English: When the wine was drunk to its fullest, Chen Shuxian sighed and said: The relationship between our monarchs and ministers is over!

古文：长史谢基伏而流涕。
现代文：这时湘州长史谢基悲不自胜，伏地流涕。
English: At this time, the governor of Hunan Province, Shi Xieji, was heartbroken and devastated.

古文：湘州助防遂兴侯正理在坐，乃起曰： 主辱臣死，诸君独非陈国之臣乎！
现代文：湘州助防遂兴侯陈正理也在坐，于是站起来说道： 君主受辱，臣子应该以死相报。在坐各位哪个不是陈国的臣子！
English: Chen Zhengli, the deputy governor of Xiangzhou Suixing District, was also sitting, so he stood up and said: If the monarch is insulted, the vassal should repay the insult with his death.

古文：今天下有难，实致命之秋也。纵其无成，犹见臣节。青门之外，有死不能！
现代文：如今天下有难，国家将亡，正是我们以死报国的时候，就是不能够成功，也可以显示出我们陈国臣子的气节，就这样束手就擒，沦为亡国之民，死不瞑目！
English: If there are difficulties today, the country will perish, it is precisely when we die for the country, even if we cannot succeed, we can also show the stamina of our Chen Guozhenzi, just like this, we will fall asleep, become the people of the lost country, and die!

古文：今日之机，不可犹豫，后应者斩！ 
现代文：现在已经到了危急关头，不可再犹豫了，敢有不响应的立即斩首！ 
English: Now that we have reached a critical juncture, we can no longer hesitate, and dare not respond to the immediate decapitation!

古文：众咸许诺。
现代文：酒宴上的众人全都响应。
English: Everyone at the reception cheered.

古文：乃刑牲结盟，仍遣人诈奉降书于庞晖。
现代文：于是陈叔慎和文武官吏杀牲结盟，并派人奉诈降书送交庞晖。
English: As a result, Chen Shushan allied with the civil and military officials to kill animals, and sent someone to submit a fraudulent surrender letter to Pang Yong.

古文：晖信之，克期而入，叔慎伏甲待之。晖至，执之以徇，并其众皆斩之。
现代文：庞晖相信了，约定下日期入城受降，陈叔慎预先埋下伏兵，等宠晖率军来到，就把他抓起来斩首示众，并把他率领的将士也全部杀掉。
English: Pang Yao believed him and agreed on a date to enter the city and accept the surrender. Chen Shushan set an ambush in advance, and when Zhuo Zhen arrived with his army, he was arrested and beheaded in public, and all the soldiers he led were also killed.

古文：叔慎坐于射堂，招合士众，数日之中，得五千人。
现代文：陈叔慎坐在射堂之上，招集士众，扩大队伍，数天之内就得到了五千人。
English: Chen Shushan sat on top of the firing hall, called up the warriors, expanded the team, and got five thousand people within a few days.

古文：衡阳太守樊通、武州刺史邬居业皆请举兵助之。
现代文：衡阳太守樊迪、武州刺史邬居业都请求率军协助陈叔慎抵抗隋军。
English: Both Hengyang's grand marshal He Di and Wuzhou's grand marshal Zishi Xujie requested the army to assist Chen Shuxian in resisting the Sui army.

古文：隋所除湘州刺史薛胄将兵适至，与行军总管刘仁恩共击之；叔慎遣其将陈正理与樊通拒战，兵败。
现代文：这时，隋朝所任命的湘州刺史薛胄率军赶到，与隋行军总管刘仁恩合兵攻打湘州；陈叔慎派遣部将陈正理和樊通率军抵抗，陈军失败。
English: At this time, Xue Yao, the military attaché of Hunan Province appointed by the Sui Dynasty, arrived with his army and attacked Hunan Province together with Liu Rien, the general manager of the Sui marching army; Chen Shuxin dispatched the troops led by Chen Zhengli and Shuntong to resist, and the Chen army failed.

古文：胄乘胜入城，擒叔慎。仁恩破邬居业于横桥，亦擒之。俱送秦王俊，斩于汉口。
现代文：薛胄率军乘胜攻进城中，俘获了陈叔慎，刘仁恩大败邬居业于横桥，也俘获了他，然后把他们押送到隋秦王杨俊那里，在汉口把他们斩首。
English: Xue Bing led the army into the city with the victory, captured Chen Shushan, Liu Rien was defeated and lived in Hengqiao, also captured him, and then escorted them to the Sui and Qin King Yang Jun, and beheaded them in Hankou.

古文：岭南未有所附，数郡共奉高凉郡太夫人洗氏为主，号圣母，保境拒守。
现代文：陈朝灭亡后，岭南地区还没有归属，该地区的几个郡共同推举前陈朝高凉郡太夫人洗氏为首领，号称 圣母 ，保境自守。
English: After the demise of the Chen Dynasty, the Lingnan region has not yet belonged, and several counties in the region jointly elected the former Chen Dynasty Gaoliang County's great-grandmother, Mrs. Zai, as the leader, known as the Virgin Mary, to protect the territory.

古文：诏遣柱国韦洸等安抚岭外，陈豫章太守徐墱据南康拒之，洸等不得进。
现代文：隋文帝派遣柱国韦等人前去安抚岭南，陈朝豫章太守徐据守南康郡抗拒，韦等人无法前进。
English: Emperor Sui Wen dispatched Zhu Guo Wei and others to pacify Lingnan, but Chen Dynasty's Yuzhang Daju Xu refused to defend Nankang County, and Wei and others were unable to advance.

古文：晋王广遣陈叔宝遗夫人书，谕以国亡，使之归隋。
现代文：晋王杨广派遣使节送去陈叔宝写给洗夫人的信，告诉他陈国已经灭亡，让她归附隋朝。
English: King Yang Guang of Jin dispatched an envoy to deliver a letter written by Chen Shubao to Lady Zai, telling him that Chen's country had perished and that she should be annexed to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：夫人集首领数千人，尽日恸哭，遣其孙冯魂帅众迎洸。
现代文：于是洗夫人召集各部首领数千人，痛哭了一整天，然后派遣她的孙子冯魂率军前去迎接韦。
English: So Mrs. Zai gathered thousands of leaders from various ministries, cried bitterly for a whole day, and then sent her grandson Feng Tun to lead the army to meet Wei.

古文：洸击斩徐璒，入，至广州，说谕岭南诸州皆定；表冯魂为仪同三司，册洗氏为宋康郡夫人。
现代文：韦率军打败陈军，并杀了徐，进入岭南地区，到达广州，告谕岭南地区各州，使全部得以平定，韦又上表朝廷授予冯魂仪同三司，册封洗夫人为宋康郡夫人。
English: Wei led the army to defeat the Chen army, and killed Xu, entered the Lingnan region, reached Guangzhou, and told the states in the Lingnan region so that all could be pacified. Wei also presented the court with the award of Feng Gongyi and the three divisions, and the wife of the baptism was the wife of Song Kang County.

古文：洸，夐之子也。
现代文：韦是韦的儿子。
English: Wei is Wei's son.

古文：衡州司马任瓖劝都督王勇据岭南，求陈氏子孙，立以为帝；勇不能用，以所部来降，瑰弃官去。
现代文：陈朝衡州司马任劝说都督王勇出兵占领岭南，然后访求陈氏宗室子孙，立为皇帝；王勇没有听从任的劝告，率领所部归降隋朝，任弃官而去。
English: During the Chen Dynasty, Hengzhou Sima Ren persuaded the governor Wang Yong to send troops to occupy Lingnan, and then visit Chen's descendants to be appointed as emperor; however, Wang Yong did not listen to Ren's advice and led his troops to surrender to the Sui Dynasty, and Ren resigned his post and left.

古文：瑰，忠之弟子也。
现代文：任是任忠弟弟的儿子。
English: Ren is the son of Ren Zhong's younger brother.

古文：于是陈国皆平，得州三十，郡一百，县四百，诏建康城邑宫室，并平荡耕垦，更于石头置蒋州。
现代文：于是陈国被全部平定，隋朝共得到三十个州，一百个郡，四百个县。隋文帝诏令将建康的城邑宫殿房屋，全部毁掉为耕田，又在石头城设置蒋州。
English: As a result, Chen was completely subdued, and the Sui dynasty gained a total of thirty states, one hundred counties, and four hundred counties. Sui Emperor Wen decreed that the palaces and houses in Jiankang's cities and towns would all be destroyed for farmland, and Jiangzhou would be set up in Stone City.

古文：晋王广班师，留王韶镇石头城，委以后事。
现代文：隋晋王杨广下令班师还朝，留下元帅府司马王韶镇守石头城，委托他处理后事。
English: King Yang Guang of the Sui and Jin dynasties ordered his team to return to the court, leaving the marshal of the prefectural government, Ma Wangqin, to guard Stone Town, entrusting him to deal with the aftermath.

古文：三月，己巳，陈叔宝与其王公百司发建康，诣长安，大小在路，五百里累累不绝。
现代文：三月己巳，陈叔宝和他的王公百官大臣从建康起程，去长安，大人小孩陆续上路，连绵不断达五百里。
English: In March, Chen Shubao and Wang Gong, his hundred ministers, started from Jiankang and went to Chang'an. Adults and children successively went on the road, continuously reaching five hundred miles.

古文：帝命权分长安士民宅以俟之，内外修整，遣使迎劳；陈人至者如归。
现代文：隋文帝下令暂时调拨长安士民房舍作为降人住处，将院舍内外都修整一新，并派人负责迎接慰问；陈朝降人来到后有宾至如归之感。
English: Emperor Sui ordered the temporary allocation of the Chang'an Shi Min House as a residence for the deportees, renovated the inside and outside of the hospital, and sent someone to be responsible for receiving condolences; after the arrival of the Chen Dynasty deportees, they felt at home.

古文：夏，四月，辛亥，帝幸骊山，亲劳旋师。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛亥，隋文帝驾幸骊山，亲自慰劳凯旋的将士。
English: In the summer, in April, Xinhai, Sui Emperor Wenxuan drove to Shaoshan, and personally consoled the victorious soldiers.

古文：乙巳，诸军凯入，献俘于太庙，陈叔宝及诸王侯将相并乘舆服御、天文图籍等以次行列，仍以铁骑围之，从晋王广、秦王俊入，列于庙廷。
现代文：乙巳，南征各军奏唱凯歌进入长安，先到太庙举行献俘崐仪式，将陈叔宝和陈朝王侯将相以及他们的车子、服装和陈朝的天文图籍等依次摆开行列，并由带铁甲的骑兵围住，跟着晋王杨广、秦王杨俊入宫，排列在殿庭中。
English: At this time, all the armies of the Southern Expedition entered Chang'an with the singing of the "Song of Songs." They first went to the Imperial Temple to hold a ceremony for the dedication of prisoners of war. They lined up Chen Shubao and the princes and generals of the Chen Dynasty, as well as their cars, clothing, and astronomical books of the Chen Dynasty. They were surrounded by cavalry with iron armor. They followed the Jin King Yang Guang and the Qin King Yang Jun into the palace and lined up in the palace courtyard.

古文：拜广为太尉，赐辂车、乘马、衮冕之服、玄圭、白璧。
现代文：隋文帝任命杨广为太尉，赐给他辂车、乘马、皇帝穿的衮服和冠冕以及象征拥有特殊权力和地位的珍宝玄圭、白璧等。
English: Emperor Sui appointed Yang Guang as the first lieutenant, and gave him a carriage, a horse, the imperial robes and crowns, as well as the precious gems Xuan Gui and Bai Bi, which symbolized special power and status.

古文：丙午，帝坐广阳门观，引陈叔宝于前，及太子、诸王二十八人，司空司马消难以下至尚书郎凡二百馀人，帝使纳言宣诏劳之；次使内史令宣诏，责以君臣不能相辅，乃至灭亡。
现代文：丙辰，隋文帝坐在广阳门观阙上，传令带上陈叔宝和陈朝太子、宗室诸王共二十八人，以及陈朝百官大臣自司空司马消难以下至尚书郎共二百余人，文帝先让纳言宣读诏书对他们加以安抚慰问；接着又让内史令宣读诏书，责备他们君臣不能同心同德，以至于国家灭亡。
English: At the Guangyang Gate, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty was sitting on the viewing platform. A messenger brought a total of 28 people, including Chen Shubao, the prince of the Chen Dynasty, the kings and queens of the dynasty, and more than 200 ministers of the Chen Dynasty, from the Secretary of State Ku Sima Qianhan to Shang Shulang. Emperor Wen first had Nagin read out an imperial edict to appease and console them; then he had the Inner Historian read out an imperial edict to reproach them that the princes and ministers could not be of one mind and one heart, so that the country would perish.

古文：叔宝及其群臣并愧惧伏地，屏息不能对，既而宥之。
现代文：陈叔宝与他的百官群臣都惶愧恐惧、伏在地上，屏息静听，无言以对。
English: Chen Shubao and his hundreds of officials and courtiers were so ashamed and afraid that they lay on the ground, listening with bated breath, speechless.

古文：初，武元帝迎司马消难，与消难结为兄弟，情好甚笃，帝每以叔父礼事之。
现代文：随后文帝赦免了他们。当初，司马消难自北齐叛降北周时，隋文帝的父亲武元帝杨忠曾率军接应，与司马消难结拜为兄弟，两人交情深厚，隋文帝也经常以事奉叔父的礼节对待他。
English: Subsequently, Emperor Wen pardoned them. At the beginning, when Sima Qianfang rebelled from North Qi to North Zhou, Emperor Wuyuan Yang Zhong, the father of Emperor Sui, led the army to meet him. He and Sima Qianfang were brothers, and the two had a deep friendship. Emperor Sui often treated him with the etiquette of serving his uncle.

古文：及平陈，消难至，特免死，配为乐户，二旬而免，犹以旧恩引见；寻卒于家。
现代文：隋朝平定陈后，司马消难也被押送到长安，隋文帝特下令免除一死，将他发配为身份低下的乐户，二十天后，又下令免除了他的乐户身份，并且还由于过去的交情接见过他，不久司马消难就在家中去世了。
English: After the Sui Dynasty had subdued Chen, Sima Qianfang was also escorted to Chang'an. The Sui Emperor ordered that he be spared from death and assigned him to a low-ranking merry-go-round. Twenty days later, he also ordered that his merry-go-round status be removed, and also received him due to past friendship. Soon, Sima Qianfang died at home.

古文：庚戌，帝御广阳门宴将士，自门外夹道列布帛之积，达于南郭。
现代文：庚戌，隋文帝驾到广阳门，宴请出征将士，从门外起夹道堆积布帛物资，一直摆到城南的城墙边，赏赐各有等级差别，一共用去布帛三百余万段。
English: Emperor Genghis Khan and Emperor Sui Wen drove to Guangyang Gate, held a banquet for the soldiers, and piled up cloth materials from the outside of the gate, all the way to the south of the city wall. The rewards were of different levels, with a total of more than three million pieces of cloth.

古文：班赐各有差，凡用三百馀万段、故陈之境内，给复十年，馀州免其年租赋。
现代文：原来陈朝境内地区，免除十年的赋税徭役；其余地区州郡，免除当年的租税。
English: The areas within the territory of the former Chen Dynasty were exempted from ten years of tax service; the remaining areas, counties and counties, were exempted from the current year's tax.

古文：乐安公元谐进曰： 陛下威德远被，臣前请以突厥可汗为候正，陈叔宝为令史，今可用臣言矣。 
现代文：乐安公元谐上言说： 陛下威德流播远方，我以前曾请求过陛下可任用突厥可汗为候正，任用陈叔宝为令史，如今可以采用我的建议了。 
English: Le An said in a harmonious tone: "Your Majesty, since you are traveling far and wide, I have previously asked Your Majesty to appoint the Turkic Khan as the president-in-waiting, and to appoint Chen Shubao as the leader, and now you can use my suggestion.

古文：帝曰： 朕平陈国，本以除逆，非欲夸诞。
现代文：隋文帝回答说： 朕平定陈国，本是为了除掉叛逆无道，而不是为了向世人夸诞炫耀。
English: Sui Emperor Wen replied: I pacified Chen Guo in order to get rid of the rebels, not to show off to the world.

古文：公之所奏，殊非朕心。
现代文：你所奏请的，根本不合我的心意。
English: What you have asked me to play is not at all to my liking.

古文：突厥不知山川，何能警候；叔宝昏醉，宁堪驱使！ 
现代文：突厥可汗不知山川形势，怎么能够侦候报警；陈叔宝昏愦嗜酒，岂能经受驱使？ 
English: The Turkic khan does not know the mountain and river situation, how can he detect the alarm; Chen Shubao is drowsy and drunk, how can he be driven?

古文：谐默然而退。
现代文：元谐无语而退。
English: The original harmony retreated without a word.

古文：辛酉，进杨素爵为越公，以其子玄感为仪同三司，玄奖为清河郡公；赐物万段，粟万石。
现代文：辛酉，隋文帝下令进封杨素为越公，授予杨素的儿子杨玄感为仪同三司，杨玄应为清河郡公；并赏赐给杨素布帛一万段，粟米一万石。
English: At the same time, Emperor Sui ordered Yang Su to be given the title of Prince of Yue, Yang Su's son Yang Xuan Xuan to be given the title of Grand Duke and Yang Xuan to be given the title of Prince of Qinghe County, and Yang Su to be given 10,000 pieces of cloth and 10,000 kilos of corn.

古文：命贺若弼登御坐，赐物八千段，加位上柱国，进爵宋公。
现代文：文帝又令贺若弼登上皇帝的宝座同坐，赏赐给他布帛八千段，越级授予他上柱国，进封爵位为宋公。
English: Emperor Wen also made He Ruoqi ascend to the throne of the emperor and sit together, awarded him eight thousand pieces of cloth, and awarded him the upper pillar country, and the knighthood for Song Gong.

古文：仍各加赐金宝及陈叔宝妹为妾。
现代文：后来文帝对杨素、贺若弼每人又增加赏赐给许多金银财宝和陈叔宝的妹妹为妾。
English: Later, Emperor Wen rewarded Yang Su and He Ruojun with more gold, silver and treasures, and made Chen Shubao's younger sister his concubine.

古文：贺若弼、韩擒虎争功于帝前。弼曰： 臣在蒋山死战，破其锐卒，擒其骁将，震扬威武，遂平陈国；韩擒虎略不交陈，岂臣之比！ 
现代文：贺若弼和韩擒虎在文帝面前争论谁的功大，贺若弼说： 我在蒋山拚死鏖战，打垮了陈朝的精锐部队，俘虏了陈朝骁将萧摩诃、鲁宗达等人，打出了国威和军威，于是才平定了陈国。而韩擒虎和陈朝军队几乎没有交锋过，怎么能与我相比！ 
English: In front of Emperor Wen, He Ruoqi and Han Xunhu were arguing about whose contribution was greater. He Ruoqi said, "I fought to the death in Jiangshan, defeated the elite troops of the Chen Dynasty, captured the Chen Dynasty's generals Xiao Miao, Luzhongda, and others, and won national and military prestige. Only then did I pacify the Chen Dynasty. And Han Xunhu and the Chen Dynasty's army have hardly fought, how can they be compared to me!

古文：擒虎曰： 本奉明旨，令臣与弼同时合势以取伪都，弼乃敢先期，逢贼遂战，致令将士伤死甚多。
现代文：韩擒虎说： 本来接到明确指示，令我和贺若弼同时合兵攻打陈朝都城，可是贺若弼竟敢独自提前进军，遭逢敌军便投入决战，以致于所部将士伤亡很大。
English: Han Binghu said: Originally, I received clear instructions for me and He Ruoqi to attack the capital city of Chen Dynasty at the same time. However, He Ruoqi dared to march ahead alone, and when he encountered the enemy army, he entered the decisive battle, so that there were many casualties in the headquarters.

古文：臣以轻骑五百，兵不血刃，直取金陵，降任蛮奴，执陈叔宝，据其府库，倾其巢穴。
现代文：而我率领轻装骑兵五百人，兵不血刃，直取金陵，降服了任忠，抓获了陈叔宝，占领了陈朝的府库，捣毁了陈后主盘据的老窝。
English: I led five hundred light cavalry, soldiers without blood, directly took Jinling, surrendered to the barbarians, captured Chen Shubao, occupied the treasury of Chen Guo, and destroyed their lair.

古文：弼至夕方扣北掖门，臣启关而纳之。斯乃救罪不暇，安得与臣相比！ 
现代文：贺若弼直到傍晚才进至北掖门，是我打开城门让他入的，贺若弼赎罪还来不及，怎么能与我相比！ 
English: He Ruoqian did not enter the North Gate until the evening. I opened the gate for him to enter. He Ruoqian's atonement was too late. How can he be compared to me!

古文：帝曰： 二将俱为上勋。 
现代文：文帝说： 两位将军都立了上等功勋。 
English: Wen Di said: Both generals have made great achievements.

古文：于是进擒虎位上柱国，赐物八千段。
现代文：于是进级授予韩擒虎上柱国，赏赐布帛八千段。
English: As a result, Han Xuanhu was promoted to Shangzhuang, and Bo Xuan was awarded eight thousand dan.

古文：有司劾擒虎放纵士卒，淫污陈宫；坐此不加爵邑。
现代文：有关官吏弹劾说韩擒虎放纵士卒，奸淫陈朝宫女，因此不崐加封爵邑。
English: The relevant officials impeached that Han Xunhu indulged his subordinates and raped Chen's concubine, and therefore did not want to add a title of nobility.

古文：加高颎上柱国，进爵齐公，赐物九千段。
现代文：隋文帝授予尚书左仆射高上柱国，进封爵位为齐公，赏赐布帛九千段。
English: Emperor Sui Wen granted Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Sho Gao Shangzhuo, the title of Qigong, and the reward of nine thousand baht.

古文：帝劳之曰： 公伐陈后，人言公反，朕已斩之。
现代文：文帝又慰劳他说： 你讨伐陈国出发后，有人上书说你将拥兵造反，朕已将此人处斩。
English: Emperor Wen also consoled him, saying: "After you set out to fight Chen Guo, someone wrote a letter saying that you would lead the army to rebel. I have executed this person.

古文：君臣道合，非青蝇所能间也。 
现代文：你我君臣志同道合，不是谗言所能离间得了的。 
English: Your lordship and I are of the same mind, and cannot be divided by insults.

古文：帝从容命颎与贺若弼论平陈事，颎曰： 贺若弼先献十策，后于蒋山苦战破贼。
现代文：后来文帝又平心静气地让高和贺若弼理论各自在平陈中的功绩，高说道： 贺若弼先提出过平陈十策，后又在蒋山拼死鏖战打败陈军。
English: Later, Emperor Wen also calmly let Gao and He Ruoxi's theories have their own achievements in Pingchen. Gao said: He Ruoxi first proposed the Ten Measures of Pingchen, and then defeated Chen's army in a desperate battle in Jiangshan.

古文：臣文吏耳，焉敢与大将论功！ 
现代文：而我不过是一位文职官吏，怎么敢和他争论功劳大小！ 
English: And I'm just a civil servant, how dare I argue with him about merit!

古文：帝大笑，嘉其有让。
现代文：文帝听后大笑，称赞高有谦让之风。
English: After listening, Emperor Wen laughed loudly and praised Gao for his modesty.

古文：帝之伐陈也，使高颎问方略于上仪同三司李德林，以授晋王广；至是，帝赏其功，授柱国，封郡公，赏物三千段。
现代文：隋文帝在下令伐陈时，曾经派遣高向上仪同三司李德林询问用兵方略，然后授给了晋王杨广；现在，文帝为了酬谢李德林运筹帷幄的功劳，授予他柱国，进封爵位为郡公，赏赐布帛等物三千段。
English: When Sui Emperor Wen ordered the felling of Chen, he once sent a high-ranking official to consult with the third Li Delin about the strategy of using soldiers, and then awarded the Jin King Yang Guang; now, in order to reward the merits of Li Delin's operation planning, Emperor Wen awarded him a pillar country, a knighthood as a county official, and three thousand pieces of cloth and other items.

古文：已宣敕讫，或说高颎曰： 今归功于李德林，诸将必当愤惋，且后世观公有若虚行。 
现代文：宣读过敕令以后，有人对高说： 现在朝廷把胜利归功于李德林，在这次战役中出生入死的各位将帅必定会愤愤不平，况且在后世看来，你亲临前线不过是白跑了一趟而已。 
English: After the proclamation of the imperial edict, someone said to Gao: Now the imperial court is attributing the victory to Li Delin. The generals and admirals who were born and died in this battle will certainly be indignant. Moreover, in the eyes of posterity, your visit to the front line was nothing more than a wasted trip.

古文：颎入言之，乃止。
现代文：高进宫向文帝上言，文帝只好作罢。
English: Gao Jin Gong appealed to Emperor Wen, who had no choice but to give up.

古文：以秦王俊为扬州总管四十四州诸军事，镇广陵。
现代文：隋朝任命秦王杨俊为扬州总管四十四州诸军事，出镇广陵。
English: The Sui Dynasty appointed Qin King Yang Jun as the Yangzhou General Manager of the forty-four military states, and he went to Guangling.

古文：晋王广还并州。
现代文：晋王杨广回并州镇守。
English: King of Jin, Yang Guang, returned and became the governor of the town.

古文：晋王广之戮陈五佞也，未知都官尚书孔范、散骑常侍王瑳、王仪、御史中丞沈瓘之罪，故得免；及至长安，事并露，乙未，帝暴其过恶，投之边裔，以谢吴、越之人。
现代文：晋王杨广在建康处决原陈朝施文庆、沈客卿、阳慧朗、徐析、暨慧景五位佞臣的时候，还不知道都官尚书孔范、散骑常侍王、王仪、御史中丞沈等人的罪行，所以这四位奸臣得以免死；及至他们都被押送到长安，罪行才被揭露出来。乙未，隋文帝公布了他们的罪行，下令将他们四人流放到边疆地区，以谢罪吴越地区的百姓。
English: At the time of Jiankang's execution of the five vassals of the former Chen dynasty, Shi Wenqing, Shen Keqing, Yang Huilang, Xu Jing, and Hui Jing, the king of Jin, Yang Guang, did not know about the crimes of the officials of the capital, Shang Shuxu Kong Fan, Sanzhijizhang Wang, Wang Yi, and Mishi Zhongzheng Shen, so these four treacherous vassals were spared from death; until they were all sent to Chang'an, the crimes were revealed. However, the Sui Emperor announced their crimes and ordered the four of them to be exiled to the border areas to thank the people

古文：瑳刻薄贪鄙，忌害才能；仪颂巧侧媚，献二女以求亲昵；瓘险惨苛酷，发言邪谄，故同罪焉。
现代文：王为人刻薄，贪得无厌，忌才害能；王仪狡诈阴险，阿谀奉承，向陈后主进献两位女儿以邀恩宠；沈心黑手辣，残酷苛暴，而嘴里却好话说尽，投人所好，所以文帝将他们一同治罪。
English: The king was mean, insatiably greedy, and could not be avoided; Wang Yi was cunning, insidious, and flattering, and presented two daughters to Queen Chen to invite grace; he was dark-hearted, cruel, and harsh, but his mouth was full of kind words, and he was kind to others, so Emperor Wen punished them together.

古文：帝给赐陈叔宝甚厚，数得引见，班同三品；每预宴，恐致伤心，为不奏吴音。
现代文：隋文帝赏赐给陈叔宝许多金银财物，又多次接见他，让他和三品以上公卿大臣同班站立；每当陈后主参加宴会时，隋文帝恐怕引起他的亡国之悲，就禁止在宴会上演奏吴地音乐。
English: The Sui Emperor rewarded Chen Shubao with a lot of gold, silver and property, and received him many times, allowing him to stand in the same class as more than three noble ministers; whenever the Chen empress attended a banquet, the Sui Emperor forbade the performance of Wu music at the banquet, fearing that it would cause him the grief of losing his country.

古文：后监守者奏言： 叔宝云， 既无秩位，每预朝集，愿得一官号。  
现代文：后来监护看守陈后主的官吏上奏说： 陈叔宝说： 我没有官秩品位，却得经常参加朝会宴集，希望能得到一个官品。  
English: Later, the official who was the guardian and keeper of Empress Chen said: Chen Shubao said: I do not have an official rank grade, but I often have to participate in the imperial banquet collection, hoping to get an official grade.

古文：帝曰： 叔宝全无心肝！ 
现代文：文帝不高兴地说： 陈叔宝真是没有一点心肝！ 
English: Wen Di said with displeasure, "Chen Shubao really doesn't have a heart!

古文：监者又言： 叔宝常醉，罕有醒时。 
现代文：监护官吏又上奏说： 陈叔宝经常喝得大醉，很少有清醒的时候。 
English: The guardianship officer also reported: Chen Shubao often gets very drunk and is rarely sober.

古文：帝问： 饮酒几何？ 
现代文：文帝于是问道： 他每天喝多少酒？ 
English: Wen Di then asked: How much wine does he drink every day?

古文：对曰： 与其子弟日饮一石。 
现代文：监护官吏回答说： 每天和他的子弟家人能喝一石酒。 
English: The probation officer replied: He can drink a stone of wine a day with his children and family.

古文：帝大惊，使节其酒，既而曰： 任其性；不尔，何以过日！ 
现代文：文帝大惊，下令对陈后主的狂饮滥喝加以限制，不一会又说： 随他去吧，不用管他。
English: Emperor Wen was shocked and ordered to restrict the excessive drinking of Queen Chen, and soon said: Let him go, don't worry about him.

古文：帝以陈氏子弟既多，恐其在京城为非，乃分置边州，给田业使为生，岁时赐衣服以安全之。
现代文：他不如此酗酒，又怎么能打发日子呢！ 文帝因为陈氏宗室子弟很多，恐怕他们在京城长安惹事生非，于是下令把他们分散安置在边远州郡，分配给他们田地产业使他们得以为生，并且每年都派人去赏赐给他们一些衣服以使他们安然度日。
English: Because there were many sons and daughters of the Chen family, Emperor Wen was afraid that they would cause trouble in Beijing Chang'an, so he ordered them to be dispersed to outlying prefectures and counties, assigned them farmland so that they could make a living, and sent someone every year to reward them with some clothes so that they could spend their days safely.

古文：诏以陈尚书令江总为上开府仪同三司，仆射袁宪、骠骑萧摩诃、领军任忠皆为开府仪同三司，吏部尚书吴兴姚察为秘书丞。
现代文：隋文帝诏令授予原陈朝尚书令江总上开府仪同三司，授予尚书仆射袁宪、骠骑将军萧摩诃、领军将军任忠开府仪同三司，并任命吏部尚书吴兴人姚察为秘书丞。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty issued a decree awarding the former Chen Dynasty Shang Shuling River General Shang Kaifu Yi and Three Divisions, awarding Shang Shuling's servant Sha Yuan Xian, general Xiao Ma Jun, and leading general Ren Zhong Kaifu Yi and Three Divisions, and appointing Shang Shuling's clerk Wu Xingren Yao Cha as secretary.

古文：上嘉袁宪雅操，下诏，以为江表称首，授昌州刺史。
现代文：文帝称赞袁宪有高尚正直的品德操行，于是颁下诏书，认为袁是江表地区士大夫的表率，任命他为昌州刺史。
English: Emperor Wen praised Yuan Xian for his noble and upright moral conduct, and then issued an imperial edict, saying that Yuan was the model of a scholar-doctor in the Jiangbei region, and appointed him as the historian of Changzhou.

古文：闻陈散骑常侍袁元友数直言于陈叔宝，擢拜主爵侍郎。
现代文：文帝又听说原陈朝散骑常侍袁元友曾经多次直言规谏陈叔宝，于是提拔任命他为吏部主爵侍郎。
English: Emperor Wen also heard that Yuan Yuan Rongyou, the former imperial equerry of the Chen Dynasty, had repeatedly spoken out against Chen Shubao, so he promoted and appointed him as the Lord Chamberlain of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：谓群臣曰： 平陈之初，我悔不杀任蛮奴。
现代文：文帝还对百官群臣说： 我很后悔在刚刚平定陈的时候，没有处死任忠。
English: Emperor Wen also said to the hundreds of officials and courtiers: I very much regret that I did not execute Ren Zhong when I had just subdued Chen.

古文：受人荣禄，兼当重寄，不能横尸徇国，乃云无所用力，与弘演纳肝何其远也！ 
现代文：任忠在陈享受着荣华富贵，担任着高官显职，不能横尸疆场以报效国家，却在危急关头对陈叔宝说他已经无能为力了，这和春秋时期卫国大臣弘演为战死的卫懿公纳肝而以身殉国的所作所为相差多么遥远。 
English: In Chen, Ren Zhong enjoyed prosperity and wealth, held high-ranking and prominent positions, and could not serve the country in the battlefield. However, at a critical moment, he said to Chen Shubao that he was powerless. How far away is this from the actions of the Minister of National Defense in the Spring and Autumn Period, who played the role of a soldier who died in the war and sacrificed his life for the country.

古文：帝见周罗睺，慰谕之，许以富贵。
现代文：隋文帝又召见原陈朝水军都督周罗，好言安慰他，并答应将会使他富贵荣华。
English: Sui Emperor Wen also summoned Zhou Luo, the governor of the naval forces of the former Chen Dynasty, and consoled him with kind words and promised to make him rich and glorious.

古文：罗睺垂泣对曰： 臣荷陈氏厚遇，本朝沦亡，无节可纪。
现代文：周罗流着眼泪回答说： 我受过陈朝的大恩厚德，现在陈国已灭亡，我不能以死报国，实在是没有节操可言。
English: Shedding tears, Zhou Luo replied, "I have received great grace and virtue from the Chen Dynasty. Now that the Chen Dynasty has perished, I cannot repay the nation with my death. I really have no integrity to speak of."

古文：得免于死，陛下之赐也，何富贵之敢望！ 
现代文：现在得免于一死，是由于陛下的恩惠，还敢再奢望什么富贵荣华？ 
English: Now that I have been spared death, thanks to Your Majesty's grace, how can I dare to hope for any more wealth and glory?

古文：贺若弼谓罗睺曰： 闻公郢、汉捉兵，即知扬州可得。
现代文：贺若弼对周罗说： 我听到您前往郢、汉地区指挥部队，即料到扬州地区唾手可得。
English: He Ruoqi said to Zhou Luo: I heard that you were going to command troops in the Shan and Han regions, so I expected that the Yangzhou region would be at your fingertips.

古文：王师利涉，果如所量。 
现代文：结果隋朝军队很顺利就渡过长江，一如我所预料的那样。 
English: As a result, the Sui Dynasty troops successfully crossed the Yangtze River, as I expected.

古文：罗睺曰： 若得与公周旋，胜负未可知也。 
现代文：周罗回答说： 如果我能够率军和您对阵，那么双方谁胜谁负还很难说呢。 
English: Zhou Luo replied: "If I can lead an army to fight against you, then it is hard to say who will win and who will lose.

古文：顷之，拜上仪同三司。
现代文：不久，隋朝即授予周罗上仪同三司。
English: Soon after, the Sui Dynasty conferred Zhou Luo the title of Shang and the three divisions.

古文：先是，陈将羊翔来降，伐陈之役，使为向导，位至上开府仪同三司，班在罗睺上。
现代文：以前，陈将领羊翔归降隋朝，在伐陈的战役中，令他做隋军的向导，因此位至上开府仪同三司，百官大臣朝会排列时站在了周罗的前面。
English: In the past, General Chen had led Yang Xiang to surrender to the Sui Dynasty. During the Battle of Huancheng, he was ordered to be the guide of the Sui Army. Therefore, he stood in front of Zhou Luo when he was ranked as the highest Kaifu ceremony with three divisions and hundreds of ministers were lined up at the imperial court.

古文：韩擒虎于朝堂戏之曰： 不知机变，乃立在羊翔之下，能无愧乎！ 
现代文：韩擒虎在朝堂上戏笑周罗说： 你不懂得随机应变，所以现在朝会时站在了羊翔的后面，难道不感到惭愧吗？ 
English: Han Binghu teased Zhou Luo in the morning hall and said, "You don't know how to adapt, so now you are standing behind Yang Xiang at the morning meeting. Aren't you ashamed?"

古文：罗睺曰： 昔在江南，久承令问，谓公天下节士；今日所言，殊非所望。 
现代文：周罗回答说： 我过去在江南时，久闻您的好名声，认为您是一位有气节操守的天下名士；可是你今天所说的话，却令我大失所望。 
English: Zhou Luo replied, "When I was in the south of the Yangtze River, I had heard about your good reputation for a long time, and I thought you were a world-famous person with integrity; however, what you said today has greatly disappointed me.

古文：擒虎有愧色。
现代文：说得韩擒虎面有愧色。
English: To put it bluntly, Han Yanhuang is ashamed.

古文：帝之责陈君臣也，陈叔文独欣然有得色。
现代文：当初隋文帝数落陈朝君臣的时候，唯独原晋熙王陈叔文面露喜色。
English: At the beginning of the Sui Dynasty, when Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty overthrew the Chen Dynasty, only the former King of the Jin Dynasty, Chen Shuwen, was happy.

古文：既而复上表自陈： 昔在巴州，已先送款，乞知此情，望异常例！ 
现代文：不久陈叔文又上表陈述说： 以前我在巴州时，已率先向隋请求归降，请求陛下明察这一事实，希望能够给我和普通的陈降人不同的待遇。 
English: Not long after, Chen Shouwen also made a statement on the table, saying: In the past, when I was in Bazhou, I was the first to request the Sui Dynasty to surrender, and I asked His Majesty to clearly see this fact, hoping to give me different treatment from ordinary Chen descendants.

古文：帝虽嫌其不忠，而欲怀柔江表，乃授叔文开府仪同三司，拜宜州刺史。
现代文：文帝虽然厌恶他的为臣不忠，但考虑到需要怀柔江表地区以收揽民心，于是授予陈叔文开府仪同三司，任命他为宜州刺史。
English: Although Emperor Wen detested his disloyalty as a vassal, he considered that it was necessary to win the hearts and minds of the people in the Huairou and Jiangbei regions, so he awarded Chen Shufeng with the title of the Grand Historian of Yizhou.

古文：初，陈散骑常侍韦鼎聘于周，遇帝而异之，谓帝曰： 公当贵，贵则天下一家，岁一周天，老夫当委质于公。 
现代文：以前，陈散骑常侍韦鼎作为使节出使北周时，见到隋文帝，对他的相貌气度大为惊奇，于是就对隋文帝说： 您以后定会大贵，到那时则会四海一统，天下一家，十二年后，老夫将委质称臣。 
English: In the past, when Chen Sanjie's regular attendant Wei Ding was sent as an envoy to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was surprised by the appearance and temperament of the Sui Emperor, so he said to the Sui Emperor: You will surely be great in the future. By then, there will be unity in the four seas and one family in the world. Twelve years later, the old man will praise the quality of his subordinates.

古文：及至德之初，鼎为大府卿，尽卖田宅，大匠卿毛彪问其故，鼎曰： 江东王气，尽于此矣！吾与尔当葬长安。 
现代文：到了陈后主至德初年，韦鼎为陈太府卿时，把自己的田地和住宅全部卖掉，大匠卿毛彪问他为什么这样做，韦鼎回答说： 江南地区的王气已经完全丧失了，我和你都将会埋葬在长安。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Chen's reign, Wei Ding sold all of his fields and residences when he became Chen Taifuqing. Master craftsman Mao Biao asked him why he did this. Wei Ding replied: "The king's power in the south of the Yangtze River has been completely lost. You and I will both be buried in Chang'an."

古文：及陈平，上召鼎为上仪同三司。
现代文：及至陈被平定后，隋文帝召韦鼎并授予他上仪同三司。
English: After Chen was subdued, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty summoned Wei Ding and awarded him the honor of the Third Division.

古文：鼎，睿之孙也。
现代文：韦鼎是韦睿的孙子。
English: Wei Ding is the grandson of Wei Rui.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 今率土大同，含生遂性；太平之法，方可流行。
现代文：壬戌，隋文帝下诏书说： 如今天下大同，四海一统，黎民百姓得以任情随意，安居乐业；太平盛世的法律制度，也能够得以传布天下。
English: According to the imperial edict issued by Emperor Sui Wen, "If today the world is one and the four seas are united, the people of the country can live and work as they please, and the peaceful and prosperous legal system can be spread all over the world.

古文：凡我臣民，澡身浴德，家家自修，人人克念。
现代文：凡我大隋臣民百姓，都要洁身自爱，沐浴德化，家家努力，弘扬德教，人人自崐觉，克制私欲。
English: All of our great Sui and Sui dynasty subjects and people should cleanse themselves, bathe in virtue, work hard at home, carry forward moral education, be self-aware, and restrain selfish desires.

古文：兵可立威，不可不戢，刑可助化，不可专行。
现代文：军队可以树立国威，但也不能不加以节制；刑罚可以帮助推行教化，但也不能肆意专行。
English: The army can establish national prestige, but it cannot be unrestrained; punishment can help to carry out education, but it cannot be carried out arbitrarily.

古文：禁卫九重之馀，镇守四方之外，戎旅军器，皆宜停罢。
现代文：自今以后，除了禁卫京师皇宫和镇守四方重镇要塞的军队之外，其它的军队都要解散，军器物资也一概停止建造或者征用。
English: From now on, except for the troops guarding the Imperial Palace and the garrisons of the major fortresses in the four directions, all other troops will be disbanded, and the construction or requisition of military equipment and materials will be completely stopped.

古文：世路既夷，群方无事，武力之子，俱可学经；民间甲仗，悉皆除毁。
现代文：如今抗拒王命的割据势力已被铲除，天下太平，各方无事，以军旅征伐为业的将帅军人家庭的子弟，都要开始学习经书儒学；民间拥有的兵器刀枪甲仗，要全部予以销毁。
English: Today, the separatist forces that resisted the king's order have been eradicated, the world is at peace, there is no trouble on all sides, the children of the generals and soldiers' families, who are engaged in military expeditions, must begin to study the scriptures and Confucianism; the weapons owned by the people, such as swords, guns and armor, must all be destroyed.

古文：颁告天下，咸悉此意。 
现代文：可将此诏书颁行天下，使黎民百姓都了解朕偃武修文的意愿。 
English: This edict can be promulgated to the whole world, so that the Lebanese people all understand our will to reform the military.

古文：贺若弼撰其所画策上之，谓为《御授平陈七策》。
现代文：贺若弼撰写了他在隋朝出兵伐陈前所提出的方略计策呈奏隋文帝，题名为《御授平陈七策》。
English: He Ruoqi wrote the "Seven Strategies for Pacifying Chen," which he presented to Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：帝弗省，曰： 公欲发扬我名，我不求名；公宜自载家传。 
现代文：隋文帝看也不看，说： 你想提高我的名望，可是我不想求名，你自己把它记载到家史中去吧。 
English: Sui Emperor Wen did not look at it and said, "You want to enhance my reputation, but I do not want to seek fame. You should record it in your family history."

古文：弼位望隆重，兄弟并封郡公，为刺史、列将，家之珍玩，不可胜计，婢妾曳罗绮者数百，时人荣之。
现代文：贺若弼地位高，名望大，他的兄弟们都被封为郡公，担任刺史或者列将职务，家中的珠宝珍玩，多得不可胜计，婢妾使女也都穿戴绫罗绸缎，多达数百人，当时朝廷上下都很羡慕他。
English: He Ruoqian had a high status and great reputation. His brothers were all appointed as county magistrates, held the posts of chief magistrate or general. The family jewels were precious and there were too many to count. Hundreds of maidservants and concubines also wore the silk brocade. At that time, everyone in the imperial court envied him.

古文：其后突厥来朝，上谓之曰： 汝闻江南有陈国天子乎？ 
现代文：后来突厥的使节来长安朝见，隋文帝对他说： 你听说过江南的陈国天子吗？ 
English: Later, a Turkic envoy came to Chang'an to meet the imperial court, and Emperor Sui Wen said to him: Have you heard of Chen Guotianzi from the south of the Yangtze River?

古文：对曰： 闻之。 
现代文：对方回答说： 听说过。 
English: The pearler freely admits: I've heard it all.

古文：上命左右引突厥诣韩擒虎前曰： 此是执得陈国天子者。 
现代文：文帝传令左右侍从带领突厥使节到韩擒虎跟前，对他说： 这位就是抓获陈国天子的将军。 
English: Emperor Wen ordered his attendants to lead the Turkish envoys to Han Xunhu and told him: "This is the general who captured Chen Guotian's son.

古文：擒虎厉色顾之，突厥惶恐，不敢仰视。
现代文：韩擒虎威严地看着突厥使节，突厥使节十分惊恐，不敢抬头看他。
English: Han Xinghu looked at the Turkish envoy with dignity. The Turkish envoy was very frightened and did not dare to look up at him.

古文：左卫将军庞晃等短高颎于上，上怒，皆黜之，亲礼逾密。
现代文：左卫将军庞晃等人在隋文帝面前诋毁高，隋文帝大怒，将庞晃等人免官，而对高愈加亲近。
English: Zuo Wei general Pang Huan and others slandered Gao in front of the Sui Emperor, who was furious and dismissed Pang Huan and others from their posts, while becoming closer to Gao.

古文：因谓颎曰： 独孤公，犹镜也，每被磨莹，皎然益明。 
现代文：文帝对高说： 独孤公就象一面镜子，每经过一次打磨后，就会更加皎洁明亮。 
English: Emperor Wen said to Gao, "Solitary man is like a mirror. Each time it is polished, it becomes more bright and clear."

古文：初，颎父宾为独孤信僚佐，赐姓独孤氏，故上常呼为独孤而不名。
现代文：以前，高的父亲高宾曾经担任过独孤信的僚佐，被赐姓独孤氏，所以隋文帝经常称呼高为独孤公而不直呼其名。
English: In the past, Gao's father, Gao Bin, had served as an aide-de-camp to Du Guoxin and was given the surname Du Guoxin. Therefore, Emperor Sui often called Gao Du Guoxin without mentioning his name.

古文：乐安公元谐，性豪侠，有气调。少与上同学，甚相爱，及即位，累历显仕。
现代文：乐安公元谐性情豪爽，有气概风度，少年时和隋文帝曾同窗学习，非常友好，隋文帝即位后，元谐多次担任显要职位。
English: When he was a boy, he studied with the Sui Emperor and they were very friendly. After the Sui Emperor ascended to the throne, Yuan Xi held many important positions.

古文：谐好排诋，不能取媚左右。
现代文：元谐好诋毁排挤别人，不能讨好文帝左右近臣。
English: The Yuan Dynasty was good at slandering and ousting others, but it could not please the close vassals around Emperor Wen.

古文：与上柱国王谊善，谊诛，上稍疏忌之。
现代文：又与上柱国王谊友善，王谊被诛后，文帝渐渐疏远猜忌他。
English: He was also friendly with the king of Shangzhu, but after the king was imprisoned, Emperor Wen gradually distanced himself from him and distrusted him.

古文：或告谐与从父弟上开府仪同三司滂、临泽侯田鸾、上仪同三司祁绪等谋反，下有司案验，奏： 谐谋令祁绪勒党项兵断巴、蜀。
现代文：后来有人上告元谐和堂弟上开府仪同三司元滂、临泽侯田鸾、上仪同三司祈绪等人谋反，文帝下令有关部门调查，他们上奏说： 元谐密谋使祈绪率领党项人的军队切断通向巴、蜀地区的道路。
English: Later, someone filed a complaint against Yuan Huan and his cousins, Shang Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of Yuan Xuan, Linze Hou Tian Yi, Shang Yi and the three divisions of Qi Xiu, and others for conspiring to rebel. Emperor Wen ordered the relevant departments to investigate. They reported that: Yuan Huan conspired to make Qi Xiu lead the army of party cadres to cut off the roads leading to Ba and Shu regions.

古文：又，谐尝与滂同谒上，谐私谓滂曰： 我是主人，殿上者贼也。 
现代文：其次，元谐曾经和元滂一同谒见皇上，元谐私下对元滂说： 我是主人，在殿上坐的不过是个窃国盗贼。 
English: Secondly, Motohide once went to see the emperor with Motohide. Motohide privately said to Motohide, "I am the master, and the person sitting in the hall is nothing but a thief.

古文：因令滂望气，滂曰： 彼云似蹲狗走鹿，不如我辈有福德云。  
现代文：于是让元滂观望王气，元滂说： 皇上上面的云气就好像是只蹲着的狗和跑动的鹿，而我们上面的是象征福德双全的云气。  
English: So he asked Yuan Zheng to look at the king's qi. Yuan Zheng said: The cloud of qi above the emperor is like a crouching dog and a running deer, while the cloud of qi above us is a symbol of both merit and perfection.

古文：上大怒，谐、滂、鸾、绪并伏诛。
现代文：文帝听后大怒，于是元谐、元滂、祈绪都被处死。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Wen was furious, and executed Yuan Xian, Yuan Xuan, and Jie Xue.

古文：闰月，己卯，以吏部尚书苏威为右仆射。
现代文：闰四月己卯，隋朝任命吏部尚书苏威为尚书右仆射。
English: In April, the Sui Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxu Su Wei as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：六月，乙丑，以荆州总管杨素为纳言。
现代文：六月乙丑，又任命荆州总管杨素为纳言。
English: In June, he also appointed Yang Su, the governor of Jingzhou, as his chief adviser.

古文：朝野皆请封禅，秋，七月，丙午，诏曰： 岂可命一将军除一小国，遐迩注意，便谓太平。
现代文：朝野上下都请求隋文帝举行封禅大典，秋季，七月丙午，文帝下诏书说： 怎么能够因为我们派遣一位将军灭掉了一个小国，引起了内外远近的注意，便说现在已经天下太平。
English: The Emperor Sui and the Empress Wen were requested to hold a grand ceremony for the enthronement of Zen. In the autumn, on the afternoon of the third day of the seventh month, Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "How can it be that because we sent a general to wipe out a small country and attracted attention from far and wide, it is said that the world is now at peace?"

古文：以薄德而封名山，用虚言而干上帝，非朕攸闻。
现代文：以朕的薄德去封禅泰山，拿虚言狂语去祭告上天，这不是朕所愿意听到的建议。
English: It is not a suggestion I am willing to listen to, to use my weak virtue to seal Mount Tai for Zen, and to use empty words and ravings to preach to the heavens.

古文：而今以后，言及封禅，宜即禁绝。 
现代文：从今以后，禁止任何人再提及封禅之事。 
English: From now on, it is forbidden for anyone to ever mention the fuzen again.

古文：左卫大将军广平王雄，贵宠特盛，与高颎、虞庆则、苏威称为四贵。
现代文：左卫大将军广平王杨雄深得隋文帝的宠信，权势显赫，与高、虞庆则、苏威被称为当朝四贵。
English: Zuo Wei's general, Guangping Wang Yangxiong, was deeply trusted by the Sui Emperor, and his power was outstanding. He, Gao, Yu Qingzhe, and Su Wei were known as the four noblemen of the dynasty.

古文：雄宽容下士，朝野倾属，上恶其得众，阴忌之，不欲其典兵马；八月，壬戌，以雄为司空，实夺之权。
现代文：杨雄对待部下宽容，朝野内外都倾慕攀附，文帝嫌恶他深得人心，暗中猜忌他，不想让他继续再掌管兵马。八月壬戌，文帝任命杨雄为司空，其实是剥夺了他的军权。
English: Yang Xiong treated his subordinates with tolerance, and was admired both inside and outside the court. Emperor Wen detested him deeply, secretly suspected him, and did not want him to continue to be in charge of the soldiers and horses. In August, Emperor Wen appointed Yang Xiong as Sikuo, in fact, deprived him of military power.

古文：雄既无职务，乃杜门不通宾客。
现代文：杨雄既然没有实权，于是就闭门闲居，不见宾客。
English: Since Yang Xiong did not have real power, he idled behind closed doors and did not see the guests.

古文：帝践祚之初，柱国沛公郑译请修正雅乐，诏太常卿牛弘、国子祭酒辛彦之、博士何妥等议之，积年不决。
现代文：在隋文帝即位初期，柱国沛公郑译请求修订用于郊庙朝会的传统音乐，于是文帝下诏令太常卿牛弘、国子祭酒辛彦之、博士何妥等人一起讨论研究，好多年没能作出决定。
English: In the early days of the Sui Emperor Wen's reign, Zhu Guo Pei Gong Zheng requested a revision of the traditional music used for the suburban temple morning assembly, so Emperor Wen ordered Tai Changqing Ushi Hong, Kuniko Matsuri Sakuhiko, Dr. He Tuo and others to discuss the research together, and they could not make a decision for many years.

古文：译言： 古乐十二律，旋相为宫，各用七声，世莫能通。 
现代文：郑译上言说： 古乐有十二律，五行运转，更相为宫，每律用宫、商、角、徵、羽、变宫、变徵七个音级，后世没有能通晓的。 
English: Zheng's translation of the preamble said: Ancient music has twelve rhythms, five movements, and even a palate. Each rhythm uses seven tones: palate, voice, horn, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat.

古文：译因龟兹人苏祗婆善琵琶，始得其法，推演为十二均、八十四调，以校太乐所奏，例皆乖越。
现代文：郑译因为龟兹人苏祗婆擅长弹奏瑟琶，就向他学习，于是才弄明白了古乐演奏的方法，推演出十二均、八十四调，用来校正太常寺太乐署乐师所演奏的音乐，发现全都乖异不符。
English: Because Su Shi Ba, a turtle-dweller, was good at playing the sewa, Zheng Zi learned from him, and only then did he figure out the method of playing ancient music, pushing the performance of twelve equal and eighty-four tones, used to correct the music played by the musicians of the Taiji Temple Music Department, and found that everything was different and did not match.

古文：译又于七音之外更立一声，谓之应声，作书宣示朝廷。
现代文：于是郑译又在七个音级之外增加一个音级，称作应声，并把演奏的方法写成文章宣示朝廷。
English: As a result, the Zheng translator added a tone level to the seven tone levels, called the response, and wrote an article to announce the method of performance to the imperial court.

古文：与邳公世子苏夔议累黍定律。
现代文：他又和邳公苏威的长子苏夔商议重新用排列黍粒的方法测量并确定律管的长度，以便重定律调。
English: He also discussed with Su Wei, the eldest son of Su Wei, to re-use the method of arranging tungsten particles to measure and determine the length of the tuning fork in order to increase the tuning.

古文：时人以音律久无通者，非译、夔一朝可定。
现代文：当时的人都认为古乐音律长期以来就无人通晓，不是郑译、苏夔一下子就能够确定的。
English: At that time, people thought that no one had been familiar with the ancient music melody for a long time, and that it was not possible to determine the Zheng translation and Su Shi translation all at once.

古文：帝素不悦学，而牛弘不精音律，何妥自耻宿儒反不逮译等，常欲沮坏其事，乃立议，非十二律旋相为宫及七调，竞为异议，各立朋党；或欲令各造乐，待成，择其善者而从之。
现代文：隋文帝不喜欢读书学习，而牛弘不大精通音乐律调，何妥因为自愧身为饱学宿儒而在古乐方面的造诣反不如郑译等人，所以时常想阻挠修正古乐之事，于是他也提出了一种意见，反对郑译等人古乐十二律更相为宫和七个音级的主张，因此双方互相异议非难，各树朋党；有人提出可让他们各制造出一种乐调，等待完成后，选择其中好的作为标准。
English: Emperor Sui did not like to read and study, and Niu Hong was not very proficient in music tuning. He Tuo often wanted to obstruct the revision of ancient music because he was ashamed to be a learned scholar and his accomplishment in ancient music was not as good as that of Zheng Yue and others. Therefore, he also put forward an opinion to oppose Zheng Yue's and others' ancient music twelve rules are more like a palace and seven tone levels. Therefore, the two sides criticized each other's dissent. Some people suggested that they could each make a tune, wait for it to be completed, and choose the best one as a standard.

古文：妥恐乐成善恶易见，乃请帝张乐试之，先白帝去： 黄钟象人君之德。 
现代文：何妥深怕乐调制成后好坏就会显而易见，于是奏请文帝立即举行演奏会比试各种演奏方法，并且预先对隋文帝说： 各律调中的黄钟调演奏出来的音乐象征君主的德行。 
English: He was afraid that the quality of the rim would be obvious after the tuning was made, so he asked Emperor Wen to immediately hold a concert to test various playing methods, and said to Emperor Wen in advance: The music played by the yellow bell in each tuning symbolizes the virtue of the monarch.

古文：及奏黄钟之调，帝曰： 滔滔和雅，甚与我心会。 
现代文：及至用黄钟调演奏之后，文帝说： 黄钟调演奏的音乐似滔滔洪流，声音宏大响亮，浑厚典雅，非常合我的心意。 
English: After the performance of the Yellow Chimes, Emperor Wen said: The music played by the Yellow Chimes is like a torrent, the sound is grand and loud, rich and elegant, which is very much to my liking.

古文：妥因奏止用黄钟一宫，不假馀律。
现代文：何妥于是奏请只用黄钟一种律调演奏音乐，不得再使用别的律调。
English: Therefore, it would be appropriate to ask the orchestra to play the music using only one of the yellow bells' rhythms. No other rhythms may be used.

古文：帝悦，从之。
现代文：文帝非常高兴，就听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased and heeded his advice.

古文：时又有乐工万宝常，妙达钟律。
现代文：当时又有一位乐师名叫万宝常，非常通晓黄钟律调。
English: At that time, there was also a musician named Wan Baozhong, who was very familiar with the yellow bell rhythm.

古文：译等为黄钟调成，奏之，帝召问宝常，宝常曰： 此亡国之音也。 
现代文：郑译等人确定了演奏黄钟的律调，呈奏给隋文帝，文帝召见万宝常询问效果如何，万宝常回答说： 这是亡国之音。 
English: Zheng Yue and others determined the melody of playing the yellow bell and presented it to the Sui Emperor Wen. The Emperor Wen summoned Wanbao Chang to inquire about the effect. Wanbao Chang replied: This is the sound of the country's downfall.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：文帝听了很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：宝常请以水尺为律，以调乐器，上从之。
现代文：于是万宝常请求使用水尺作为仪器来调理乐器，文帝听从了他的建议。
English: As a result, Wanbao often requested the use of a hydrometer as an instrument to adjust the musical instrument, and Emperor Wen heeded his suggestion.

古文：宝常造诸乐器，其声率下郑译调二律，损益乐器，不可胜纪。
现代文：于是万宝常制造出了各种乐器，用这些乐器演奏出来的音乐大抵比郑译等人确定的律调低两个律调。经他增加或者淘汰的各种乐器，多得不可胜计。
English: As a result, Wanbao Chang made a variety of musical instruments, and the music played by these musical instruments was usually two tones lower than the key determined by Zheng Yue and others. The variety of musical instruments that he added or eliminated were too numerous to count.

古文：其声雅淡，不为时人所好，太常善声者多排毁之。
现代文：用这些乐器演奏出来的音乐雅淡柔和，不为当时人所喜爱，太常寺中擅长音乐的人大都排斥诋毁这种音乐。
English: The music played by these instruments was gentle and soft, and was not popular at the time. Those who were good at music in the Taijo-ji Temple mostly rejected and denigrated this music.

古文：苏夔尤忌宝常，夔父威方用事，凡言乐者皆附之而短宝常，宝常乐竟为威所抑，寝不行。
现代文：苏夔尤其忌恨万宝常，当时苏夔的父亲苏威正执政用事，凡是谈论音乐的人都附合苏夔而攻击万宝常，万宝常制造出的乐调竟被苏威所压制，弃置而未行于世。
English: Su Shi especially hated Wanbao Chang. At that time, Su Shi's father, Su Wei, was in power. Everyone who talked about music followed Su Shi and attacked Wanbao Chang. The music created by Wanbao Chang was suppressed by Su Wei, abandoned and never performed.

古文：及平陈，获宋、齐旧乐器，并江左乐工，帝令廷奏之，叹曰： 此华夏正声也。 
现代文：及至平定陈后，得到了南朝宋、齐的旧乐器和江南地区的乐师，隋文帝让他们在宫廷上演奏，听后感叹说： 这才真正是华夏正音！ 
English: After subduing and settling Chen, he obtained the old musical instruments of the Southern Dynasties of Song and Qi and the musicians from the south of the Yangtze River. Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty let them play at the court. After listening to them, he sighed and said, "This is truly the sound of China!"

古文：乃调五音为五夏、二舞、登歌、房内等十四调，宾祭用之。
现代文：于是下令调理五音为五夏、二舞、登歌、房内十四种律调，在接待宾客和举行祭祀时使用。
English: Therefore, he ordered the tuning of the five tones into five summer, two dance, ascending song, and fourteen rhythms in the room, to be used when receiving guests and holding sacrifices.

古文：仍诏太常置清商署以掌之。
现代文：文帝又诏令在太常寺设置清商署负责掌管乐师和乐器。
English: Emperor Wen also issued a decree to set up the Qing Commerce Department in charge of musicians and musical instruments in Taizhong Temple.

古文：时天下既壹，异代器物，皆集乐府。
现代文：当时天下已经统一，不同时代的器物都全部积聚在乐府。
English: At that time, the whole country had been unified, and all the artifacts from different eras had been accumulated in Lefu.

古文：牛弘奏： 中国旧音多在江左。前克荆州得梁乐，今平蒋州又得陈乐。史传相承以为合古，请加修缉以备雅乐。
现代文：于是牛弘上奏说： 中国的传统音乐多保存在江南地区，以前攻占荆州时得到了梁朝音乐，如今平定蒋州又得到了陈的音乐，这些音乐是历代相传下来的，被认为是符合古乐的，请令人加以修订以作为郊庙朝会演奏的正乐。
English: Therefore, Niu Hong said: China's traditional music is mostly preserved in the south of the Yangtze River. In the past, the music of the Liang Dynasty was obtained when Jingzhou was conquered, and now the music of the Chen Dynasty has been obtained when Jiangzhou was pacified. These music have been passed down from generation to generation and are considered to be in line with ancient music. Please have them revised to be the main music for the performance of the suburban temple's imperial court.

古文：其后魏之乐及后周所用，杂有边裔之声，皆不可用，请悉停之。 
现代文：而北魏和北周所使用的音乐，都杂有边疆夷族的声调，不能再继续使用，请明令全部停止使用。 
English: However, the music used in the Northern Wei and Northern Zhou Dynasties are all mixed with the tones of the frontier barbarians, and can no longer be used. Please stop using them all.

古文：冬，十二月，诏弘与许善心、姚察及通直郎虞世基参定雅乐。
现代文：冬季，十二月，文帝下诏令牛弘和许善心、姚察以及通直郎虞世基参预修定雅乐。
English: In winter, in December, Emperor Wen decreed that Niu Hong, Xu Zenshin, Yao Zha, and Tong Naorang Yu Shiji should participate in the preliminary revision of the elegant music.

古文：世基，荔之子也。
现代文：虞世基是虞荔的儿子。
English: Yu Shiji is the son of Yu Li.

古文：己巳，以黄州总管周法尚为永州总管，安集岭南，给黄州兵三千五百人为帐内，陈桂州刺史钱季卿等皆诣法尚降。
现代文：己巳，隋朝任命黄州总管周法尚为永州总管，前去安抚岭南地区，调拨给他黄州兵三千五百人作为亲兵，原陈桂州刺史钱季卿等人都归降了周法尚。
English: At that time, the Sui Dynasty appointed the governor of Huangzhou, Zhou Fashang, as the governor of Yongzhou. He went to pacify the Lingnan region and assigned him 3,500 soldiers from Huangzhou as his personal soldiers. The former Chen Guizhou, Zhi Qian Jieqing and others all surrendered to Zhou Fashang.

古文：定州刺史吕子廓，据山洞，不受命，法尚击斩之。
现代文：原陈定州刺史吕子廓占据山洞，不接受隋军要他投降的命令，于是周法尚率军打败了吕子廓并杀了他。
English: Former Chen Dingzhou assassin Lv Zi Kuo occupied a cave and refused to accept the Sui army's order to surrender, so Zhou Fashang led the army to defeat Lv Zi Kuo and kill him.

古文：以驾部侍郎狄道辛公义为岷州刺史。
现代文：隋朝任命尚书省驾部侍郎狄道人辛公义为岷州刺史。
English: The Sui Dynasty appointed Di Daojin Xin Jiaoyi, the driver's attendant of Shangshu Province, as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：岷州俗畏疫，一人病疫，阖家避之，病者多死。
现代文：岷州地区的社会风俗，人们特别害怕疾疫，如果一人有病，全家都避免与他接触，因此病人大多死亡。
English: In the social customs of Zhangzhou, people are particularly afraid of diseases. If one person is sick, the whole family avoids contact with him, so most patients die.

古文：公义命皆舆置己之听事，暑月，病人或至数百，厅廓皆满。公义设榻，昼夜处其间，以秩禄具医药，身自省问。
现代文：辛公义下令将病人都抬到自己的厅事大堂内，当时正是炎热季节，病人被送来数百人，厅堂内和外面走廊里都挤满了病人，辛公义就在厅堂内铺设榻床，昼夜守候在病人中间，用自己的俸禄请医买药，亲身一个个省视慰问。
English: Xin Gongyi ordered to carry the patients to his office lobby. At that time, it was the hot season, and hundreds of patients were brought in. The hall and the outside corridors were crowded with patients. Xin Gongyi laid a bed in the hall, waited day and night among the patients, used his salary to buy medicine, and personally sent condolences one by one.

古文：病者既愈，乃召其亲戚谕之曰： 死生有命，岂能相染！
现代文：每当病人痊愈后，就召见他的亲戚家属告诉说： 死生有命，疾病怎么会互相传染呢？
English: Whenever a patient recovers, he calls his relatives and family members to tell them: "Life and death are the same. How can diseases be transmitted from one person to another?

古文：若相染者，吾死久矣。 
现代文：如果会互相传染，我早就死了。 
English: If it was contagious, I'd be dead.

古文：皆惭谢而去。
现代文：病人的亲属都深感惭愧，拜谢而去。
English: The patient's relatives were deeply ashamed and left in disgust.

古文：其后人有病者，争就使君，其家亲戚固留养之，始相慈爱，风俗遂变。
现代文：其后岷州人得病，都争着要住到辛公义身边去，他们的亲属都一定要留下并看护他们，于是人们的关系开始变得和睦慈爱，这一坏风俗也被改变了过来。
English: After that, when people in Zhangzhou fell ill, they all vied to live with Xin Zhongyi, and their relatives had to stay and take care of them. As a result, people's relationships began to become harmonious and loving, and this bad custom was also changed.

古文：后迁并州刺史，下车，先至狱中露坐，亲自验问。十馀日间，决遣咸尽，方还听事受领新讼。
现代文：辛公义后来调任并州刺史，他到并州刚一下车，先到监狱中露天坐下，亲自一个个审问囚犯，在十多天的时间里，就把监狱里的囚犯判决并遣送完毕，然后才回到州衙厅事堂受理新的案件。
English: Xin Zhengyi was later transferred to the Anhui Provincial Court. As soon as he arrived in Anhui Province, he got off the bus, first sat down in the open air in the prison, and personally interrogated the prisoners one by one. In more than ten days, he sentenced and deported the prisoners in the prison, and then returned to the Provincial Court to accept new cases.

古文：事皆立决；若有未尽，必须禁者，公义即宿听事，终不还邠。
现代文：辛公义审理案件都当天立即判决，如果有的案件白天处理不完，案件的当事人必须暂时拘禁的，他就住在厅事堂里，始终不回后室歇息。
English: Xin justice cases are adjudicated immediately on the same day. If some cases cannot be completed during the day, and the parties to the case must be temporarily detained, he will live in the office building and never go back to the back room to rest.

古文：或谏曰： 公事有程，使君何自苦！ 
现代文：有人劝他说： 处理公事都有一定的程序，使君您何必如此劳苦！ 
English: Someone advised him: There is a certain procedure for handling public affairs, so why do you have to work so hard!

古文：公义曰： 刺史无德，不能使民无讼，岂可禁人在狱而安寝于家乎！ 
现代文：辛公义说： 我作为刺史没有德行，不能使老百姓都和睦相处，不打官司，又怎么能把人拘禁在狱中而自己在家安然大睡？ 
English: Xin Zhengyi said, "As a magistrate, I don't have any virtue. I can't make the common people live in harmony without taking legal action. How can I detain people in prison while I sleep peacefully at home?"

古文：罪人闻之，咸自款服。
现代文：犯罪的人听到了辛公义的话后，都深受感动，痛快地认罪服法。
English: After hearing the words of Xin Rongyi, the criminals were deeply moved and cheerfully pleaded guilty to obey the law.

古文：后有讼者，乡闾父老遽晓之曰： 此小事，何忍勤劳使君！ 
现代文：后来再有要上官府诉讼的人，他们的乡里父老赶紧解劝他们说： 这是小事一桩，你们怎么能忍心再去烦劳刺史大人呢？ 
English: Later, there were people who wanted to go to the government to file a lawsuit, and their parents in the village hurried to persuade them, saying, "This is a small matter, how can you bear to bother Mr. Zhanshi again?"

古文：讼者多两让而止。
现代文：于是要去诉讼的人多双方互相谦让而作罢。
English: As a result, many people want to go to court, and both sides should be humble and make concessions to each other.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之上开皇十年春，正月，乙未，以皇孙昭为河南王，楷为华阳王。昭，广之子也。
现代文：开皇十年春季，正月乙未，隋朝册封皇孙杨昭为河南王，杨楷为华阳崐王。杨昭是晋王杨广的儿子。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of the emperor's reign, in the first month of the second year of the emperor's reign, the Sui Dynasty recorded the title of the emperor's grandson Yang Zhao as the king of Henan, and Yang Kai as the king of Huayang. Yang Zhao was the son of the Jin king Yang Guang.

古文：二月，上幸晋阳，命高颎居守。
现代文：二月，隋文帝巡幸晋阳，下令高留守长安。
English: In February, Emperor Sui Wen visited Jinyang and ordered Gao to stay in Chang'an.

古文：夏，四月，辛酉，至自晋阳。
现代文：夏季，四月辛酉，文帝从晋阳回到长安。
English: In the summer, in the middle of April, Emperor Wen returned to Chang'an from Jinyang.

古文：成安文子李德林，恃其才望，论议好胜，同列多疾之；由是以佐命无功，十年不徙级。
现代文：成安文子李德林，倚仗自己有才智和名望，喜好议论争辩，争强好胜，因此同事们大多痛恨他。由于这个原因，他虽然是佐命元勋，却有十年没有晋级升迁。
English: Cheng'an's literary son, Li Delin, relied on his talent and reputation, liked to discuss and argue, and was competitive. Therefore, most of his colleagues hated him. For this reason, although he was a hero, he had not been promoted for ten years.

古文：德林数与苏威异议，高颎常助威，奏德林狠戾，上多从威议。
现代文：李德林多次和尚书右仆射苏威意见不合，而高又常常帮助苏威，并上奏称李德林秉性凶狠暴戾，因此隋文帝多听从苏威的建议。
English: Li Delin repeatedly disagreed with Su Wei's right-hand man, Gao, and often helped Su Wei. Gao said that Li Delin had a ferocious and violent nature. Therefore, Emperor Sui Wen mostly followed Su Wei's advice.

古文：上赐德林庄店，使自择之，德林请逆人高阿那肱卫国县市店，上许之。
现代文：文帝要赏赐李德林一座庄店，让他自己挑选，于是李德林请求北周末年跟随王谦起兵反对隋文帝的逆臣高阿那肱在卫国县的市店，文帝答应了他。
English: Emperor Wen wanted to reward Li Delin with a village store and let him choose it himself, so Li Delin asked the Northern Weekend to follow Wang Qian to take up arms against Emperor Wen's rebellious vassal Gao Anaxuan in the city store of Weiguo County. Emperor Wen agreed.

古文：及幸晋阳，店人诉称高氏强夺民田，于内造店赁之。
现代文：及至文帝到晋阳巡幸，店人上诉说该店是高阿那肱当年强夺民田，在县城内修建的，然后出租出去，收取租金。
English: When Emperor Wen went to Jinyang on a inspection tour, the shopkeeper appealed that the shop was built in the county seat by Gao Ananzhong when he forcibly seized people's fields, and then rented it out to collect rent.

古文：苏威因奏德林诬罔。
现代文：于是苏威上奏说李德林犯了欺君之罪，因为他妄奏说自己将住进这个市店。
English: So Su Wei reported that Li Delin had committed the crime of defrauding the king, because he falsely reported that he would live in this city store.

古文：妄奏自入，司农卿李圆通等复助之曰： 此店收利如食千户，请计日追赃。 
现代文：司农卿李圆通也帮助苏威说： 该店每年收取的租金，跟食邑一千户差不多，请求陛下计算时间追回赃款。 
English: The Secretary of Agriculture, Li Yuntong, also helped Su Wei, saying: The annual rent charged by the store is almost the same as that of a thousand households in the county, and asked His Majesty to calculate the time to recover the stolen money.

古文：上自是益恶之。
现代文：自此以后文帝更加厌恶李德林。
English: From then on, Emperor Wen became even more disgusted with Li Delin.

古文：虞庆则等奉使关东巡省，还，皆奏称 乡正专理辞讼，党与爱憎，公行货贿，不便于民。 
现代文：虞庆则等人奉命出使潼关以东地区巡视检查，回到长安后，都上奏说： 乡正全权处理民间诉讼纠纷，往往按照自己的爱憎，袒护同党，徇私枉法，贿赂公行，对黎民百姓有害无益。 
English: After returning to Chang'an, Yu Qingzhe and others were ordered to inspect the area east of Shaoguan. They all reported: Township officials have full power to deal with civil litigation disputes, often according to their own likes and dislikes, protecting the same party, abusing the law, and bribing officials, which is harmful to the people of Li.

古文：上令废之。
现代文：于是文帝下令废除乡正。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen decreed the abolition of xiangzheng.

古文：德林曰： 兹事臣本以为不可，然置来始尔，复即停废，政令不一，朝成暮毁，深非帝王设法之义。
现代文：李德林说： 这事我本来就认为不可行，只是刚设置不久，复又废除，如此政令不一，朝成暮毁，完全违背了帝王制定法律制度的根本意义。
English: Li Delin said: I originally thought that this was not feasible, but soon after it was set up, it was repealed and abolished, so the decrees were not consistent, and it was ruined, completely violating the fundamental meaning of the emperor's legal system.

古文：臣望陛下自今群臣于律令辄欲改张，即以军法从事；不然者，纷纭未已。 
现代文：因此，我请求陛下明令宣布，自今以后，百官群臣对于已确定的律令制度胆敢动辄随意更改的，即以军法从事。不这样做，以后还会出现朝令夕改之事，纷纷扰扰，没有完结。 
English: Therefore, I request Your Majesty to announce explicitly that from now on, if any of the hundreds of officials and ministers dare to change the established ritsuryo system arbitrarily, they will be dealt with by military law. If this is not done, there will be changes in the morning and evening, and they will be disturbed one after another, and they will not be completed.

古文：上遂发怒，大诟云： 尔欲以我为王莽邪！ 
现代文：文帝听后勃然大怒，大声骂道： 你这是想把我当成王莽吗？ 
English: After hearing this, Emperor Wen flew into a rage and cursed loudly, "Are you trying to treat me like a king?

古文：先是，德林称父为太尉咨议以取赠官，给事黄门侍郎猗氏陈茂等密奏： 德林父终于校书，妄称咨议。 
现代文：以前，李德林向朝廷报称他的父亲曾经担任过太尉府咨议参军，以此取得了赠官，给事黄门侍郎猗氏人陈茂等人密奏说： 李德林的父亲是死在校书郎任上的，李德林却妄称他父亲做过咨议参军。 
English: In the past, Li Delin reported to the imperial court that his father had once served as a captain of the army, and thus obtained a free officer. Chen Mao, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and others said secretly: Li Delin's father died in the position of school secretary, but Li Delin claimed that his father had consulted the army.

古文：上甚衔之。
现代文：于是文帝痛恨李德林。
English: For this reason, Emperor Wen hated Li Delin very much.

古文：至是，上因数之曰： 公为内史，典朕机密，比不可豫计议者，以公不弘耳，宁自知乎！
现代文：这次事情发生后，文帝一一具数李德林的罪行说： 你担任着内史职务，掌管朕的机密政事，近来不让你参预朝政商议决策的原因，是由于你的所作所为不光明正大，难道你自己没感觉到吗？
English: After this incident, Emperor Wen said, "You are in charge of our internal history, and you are in charge of our confidential political affairs. The reason why you have not been allowed to participate in the pre-dictatorial political deliberation and decision-making recently is because your actions are not above board. Don't you feel it yourself?

古文：又罔冒取店，妄加父官，朕实忿之，而未能发，今当以一州相遣耳。 
现代文：你又编造谎言骗取市店，还荒谬地提高父亲的官职，朕其实早已对你愤恨在心，只是还没有发作出来罢了，现在应当把你派遣到一个州去。 
English: You also fabricated lies to defraud the city store, and also absurdly elevated my father's official position. In fact, I have long been angry with you, but it has not yet erupted, and now you should be sent to a state.

古文：因出为湖州刺史。
现代文：于是文帝下令出李德林为湖州刺史。
English: As a result, Li Delin was banished from Beijing and appointed as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：德林拜谢曰： 臣不敢复望内史令，请但预散参。 
现代文：李德林拜谢说： 我不敢再奢望担任内史令，但请允许我以散职参预朝会。 
English: Li Delinbai Xie said, "I don't dare to hope to serve as the Inner Historian any longer, but please allow me to participate in the pre-dawn meeting as a part-time worker."

古文：上不许，迁怀州刺史而卒。
现代文：文帝不答应，又调任他为怀州刺史，不久就去世了。
English: Emperor Wen did not agree to this, and he was transferred to write the history of Waizhou, and died soon after.

古文：李圆通，本上微时家奴，有器干；及为隋公，以圆通及陈茂为参佐，由是信任之。
现代文：司农卿李圆通本是隋文帝过去地位还比较低微时的家奴，很有器度和才干。及至隋文帝承袭了父亲杨忠的隋公爵位后，就提拔李圆通和陈茂作他的僚佐，很信任他。
English: Li Yantong, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, was originally a domestic slave of the Sui Emperor when his status was still relatively low, and he was very competent and talented. And when the Sui Emperor inherited the Sui Dukedom from his father Yang Zhong, he promoted Li Yantong and Chen Mao as his aides, and he trusted him very much.

古文：梁国之废也，上以梁太府卿柳庄为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：在后梁国萧氏被废除以后，文帝任命原后梁太府卿柳庄为给事黄门侍郎。
English: After the Xiao clan in Houliang was abolished, Emperor Wen appointed the former Houliang Taifuqing Liu Zhuang as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：庄有识度，博学，善辞令，明习典故，雅达政事，上及高颎、苏威皆重之。
现代文：柳庄很有识见和风度，又博学多才，善于辞令，晓习历史典故，通达朝廷政事，文帝和尚书左仆射高都非常器重他。
English: Liu Zhuang was very insightful and personable. He was also well-read and versatile. He was good at rhetoric, studied historical allusions, and was well-versed in the affairs of the imperial court. Emperor Wen and Emperor Xizang's right-hand man, Emperor Jia Gao, held him in high esteem.

古文：与陈茂同僚，不能降意，茂谮之于上，上稍疏之，出为饶州刺史。
现代文：柳庄和陈茂是同僚，不能曲意奉承陈茂，因此陈茂向文帝诬陷中伤他，于是文帝逐渐疏远柳庄，后出他为崐饶州刺史。
English: Liu Zhuang and Chen Mao were colleagues, and Chen Mao could not flatter Liu Zhuang. Therefore, Chen Mao slandered and slandered him to Emperor Wen. As a result, Emperor Wen gradually distanced himself from Liu Zhuang, and it was later revealed that he was plotting the history of Zangrao.

古文：上性猜忌，不悦学，既任智以获大位，因以文法自矜，明察临下，恒令左右觇视内外，有过失则加以重罪。又患令史赃污，私使人以钱帛遗之，得犯立斩。
现代文：隋文帝秉性猜忌多疑，又不喜欢读书学习，由于他是完全凭借智谋而获得了君主之位，因此他就以熟悉法律制度而自负，以明察秋毫而驾驭朝臣，经常派遣左右近臣窥视刺探朝廷内外百官大臣，发现某人犯有过失就治以重罪，他又担心负责掌管各种具体事务的令史贪污腐败，于是暗地里派人拿着钱财布帛去贿赂试探，发现某人收受财物则立即处死。
English: Emperor Sui was suspicious by nature and did not like to read or study. Since he gained the throne of the monarchy entirely by means of cleverness, he was proud of his familiarity with the legal system, and controlled his courtiers with his keen observation. He often sent his right and left courtiers to spy on the ministers of the imperial court, and found that someone had committed a serious crime. He was also worried about the corruption of Ling Shi, who was in charge of various specific affairs. Therefore, he secretly sent someone to take money and cloth to try to bribe. If someone was found to accept money, he was immediately executed.

古文：每于殿庭棰人，一日之中，或至数四；尝怒问事挥楚不甚，即命斩之。
现代文：经常在朝堂殿庭中杖打官吏，有时一天之内，多达三四人。有一次他恼怒行刑之人杖打时下手不重，就立即下令将行刑之人斩首。
English: He often beat officials with a cane in the courtyard of the Imperial Palace, sometimes as many as three or four in one day. Once, when he was angry with the executioner's cane, he immediately ordered the executioner to be beheaded.

古文：尚书左仆射高颎、治书侍御史柳彧等谏，以为 朝堂非杀人之所，殿廷非决罚之地。 
现代文：尚书左仆射高、治书侍御史柳等人上言规谏，认为 朝堂不是杀人的处所，殿廷也不是行刑的地方。 
English: Shosho's left-hand servant, Shoko, and Shiryu, Shisho's attendant, were the first to speak out, arguing that the Imperial Court was not a place for murder, nor was it a place for executions.

古文：上不纳。
现代文：文帝不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen.

古文：颎等乃尽诣朝堂请罪，上顾谓领左右都督田元曰： 吾杖重乎？ 
现代文：于是高等百官大臣都来到朝堂请罪，文帝问领左右都督田元说： 我的杖刑重吗？ 
English: As a result, hundreds of high-ranking officials and ministers came to the imperial court to plead guilty. Emperor Wen asked the governor of the capital, Tian Yuan, saying: "Is my cane a heavy punishment?

古文：元曰： 重。 
现代文：田元回答说： 重。 
English: Tamoto replied, "Heavy."

古文：帝问其状，元举手曰： 陛下杖大如指，捶人三十者，比常杖数百，故多死。 
现代文：文帝又问其中情由，田元举起手来回答说： 陛下的杖和指头一样粗，捶打人三十下，就等于普通杖具捶打数百下，所以受刑人多被打死。 
English: Emperor Wen also asked the reason for this, and Emperor Tian raised his hand and replied, "Your Majesty's cane is as thick as your finger, and beating someone thirty times is equivalent to beating them hundreds of times with an ordinary cane, so most of the prisoners were beaten to death."

古文：上不怿，乃令殿内去杖，欲有决罚，各付所由。
现代文：文帝听了很不高兴，但还是下令撤掉殿庭内的杖具，以后要是有所处罚，分送给有关主管部门执行。
English: Emperor Wen was very unhappy to hear this, but he still ordered the removal of the canes in the courtyard. If there is any punishment in the future, it will be sent to the relevant competent department for implementation.

古文：后楚州行参军李君才上言： 上宠高颎过甚。 
现代文：后来楚州行参军李君才上言说： 皇上过于宠信高了。 
English: Later, Li Juncai, who went to Chuzhou to join the army, said: The emperor is too trusting.

古文：上大怒，命杖之，而殿内无杖，遂以马鞭捶杀之，自是殿内复置杖。
现代文：文帝大怒，命令用杖打他，而殿庭内已经没有杖具，于是就用马鞭将李君才打死。从此又在殿庭内放置了杖具。
English: Emperor Wen was furious and ordered to beat him with a cane, but there were no canes in the palace courtyard, so he beat Li Juncai to death with a horsewhip. Since then, canes have been placed in the palace courtyard.

古文：未几，怒甚，又于殿廷杀人；兵部侍郎冯基固谏，上不从，竟于殿廷杀之。
现代文：不几天，文帝由于怒不可遏，又在殿廷中杀人。兵部侍郎冯基苦苦劝谏，文帝根本不听，最后竟又在殿廷内将人活活打死。
English: Not a few days later, Emperor Wen, in an uncontrollable rage, killed another person in the imperial court. Feng Qi, the attendant of the military department, tried hard to dissuade him, but Emperor Wen did not listen at all, and finally he beat the person to death in the imperial court.

古文：上亦寻悔，宣慰冯基，而怒群臣之不谏者。
现代文：事后不久，文帝也有些后悔，于是好言安慰冯基，而恼恨没有进谏的百官群臣。
English: Soon after the incident, Emperor Wen also had some regrets, so he consoled Feng Qi with kind words, but he was angry with the hundreds of officials and ministers who did not succeed.

古文：五月，乙未，诏曰： 魏末丧乱，军人权置坊府，南征北伐，居处无定，家无完堵，地罕包桑，朕甚愍之。
现代文：五月乙未，隋文帝下诏书说： 自北魏末年丧乱以来，在军队建制上设立坊、府，南征北伐，居住没有固定的地方，庭院没有完整的围墙，地里很少多根的桑树，朕对此非常怜悯。
English: In May of the same year, Emperor Suiwen issued an edict saying: "Since the end of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the military organization has been divided into the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, the army, and the army.

古文：凡是军人，可悉属州县，垦田、籍帐，一与民同。
现代文：自今以后，凡是军人，都隶属各州县，垦田种地，户籍及赋税管理与普通百姓完全相同。
English: From now on, all military personnel will be subordinate to each prefecture and county, farm the fields and farm the land, and the household registration and tax administration will be exactly the same as that of ordinary people.

古文：军府统领，宜依旧式。
现代文：军府统领，还沿用原来的编制开式。
English: The leadership of the military government is still the same.

古文：罢山东、河南及北方缘边之地新置军府。 
现代文：废掉崤山以东、黄河以南地区和北方边疆地区新建立的军府。 
English: Shandong, Henan and the newly established military headquarters in the northern border areas will be abolished.

古文：六月，辛酉，制民年五十免役收庸。
现代文：六月辛酉，隋朝规定百姓年满五十岁免除徭役，改为收庸代役。
English: In June of the Xin Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty stipulated that people over the age of fifty would be exempted from corvee service, and would instead receive corvee service.

古文：秋，七月，癸卯，以纳言杨素为内史令。
现代文：秋季，七月癸卯，隋朝任命纳言杨素为内史令。
English: In the autumn, at the end of July, the Sui Dynasty appointed Nagan Yang Su as the Minister of Internal Affairs.

古文：冬，十一月，辛丑，上祀南郊。
现代文：冬季，十一月，隋文帝举行南郊大祀。
English: In winter, in November, Emperor Sui Wen held the Southern Suburbs Grand Ritual.

古文：江表自东晋已来，刑法疏缓，世族陵驾寒门；平陈之后，牧民者尽更变之。
现代文：江南地区自从东晋以来，刑法宽大，执行不严，世家大族凌驾于寒门庶族之上。平定陈以后，隋朝地方官吏完全改变了这种情况。
English: Since the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the criminal law in the south of the Yangtze River region had been lenient and laxly enforced, with the big families dominating the commoners. After the suppression of Chen, the local officials of the Sui Dynasty completely changed this situation.

古文：苏威复作《五教》，使民无长幼悉诵之，士民嗟怨。
现代文：尚书右仆射苏威又撰写了《五教》，令江南百姓不分男女老少都得熟读，因此士民抱怨。
English: Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, She Suwei, also wrote "Five Teachings," so that the people of Jiangnan, both men and women, old and young, had to read it well. Therefore, the scholars and the people complained.

古文：民间复讹言隋欲徙之入关，远近惊骇。
现代文：当时江南民间又传言隋朝将要把百姓都迁徙到关内去，于是远近惊骇。
English: At that time, people in the south of the Yangtze River also heard rumors that the Sui Dynasty was going to migrate the people to Guanai, so they were shocked far and wide.

古文：于是婺州汪文进、越州高智慧、苏州沈玄懀皆举兵反，自称天子。署置百官。
现代文：婺州人汪文崐进、越州人高智慧、苏州人沈玄都起兵造反，各自称天子，设置百官。
English: Wang Wenzhong of Zhangzhou, Gao Zhizhong of Yuezhou, and Shen Xuan of Suzhou all rebelled, each claiming to be the son of heaven and setting up hundreds of officials.

古文：乐安蔡道人、蒋山李凌、饶州吴世华、温州沈孝彻、泉州王国庆、杭州杨宝英、交州李春等皆自称大都督，攻陷州县。
现代文：又有乐安人蔡道人、蒋山人李、饶州人吴世华、温州人沈孝彻、泉州人王国庆、杭州人杨宝英、交州人李春等都自称大都督，起兵攻陷隋朝州县。
English: In addition, Cai Daoran from Le'an, Li from Jiangshan, Wu Shihua from Raozhou, Shen Xiaocher from Wenzhou, Wang Guoqing from Quanzhou, Yang Baoying from Hangzhou, Li Chun from Jiaozhou, and others all claimed to be the grand governor and raised an army to invade Sui Chaozhou County.

古文：陈之故境，大抵皆反。大者有众数万，小者数千，共相影响。执县令，或抽其肠，或脔其肉食之，曰： 更能使侬诵《五教》邪！ 
现代文：在陈原来管辖的境内，几乎都发生了反叛，势力大的有数万人，小的有几千人，他们互相声援，抓获隋朝县令后，或者抽出他的肠子，或者割下他的肌肉作为食物，气愤地发泄道： 看你还能让我们诵读《五教》不能！ 
English: In the territory under Chen's original jurisdiction, almost all revolts took place. There were tens of thousands of powerful people and thousands of small ones. They supported each other. They captured the Sui Dynasty and county magistrate, or extracted his intestines, or cut off his muscles as food, and angrily vented: See if you can make us recite the "Five Teachings"!

古文：诏以杨素为行军总管以讨之。
现代文：隋文帝下诏任命杨素为行军总管，率军前去讨伐。
English: Emperor Sui appointed Yang Su as the general manager of the march and led the army to go to the crusade.

古文：素将济江，使始兴麦铁杖戴束稾，夜，浮渡江觇贼，还而复往，为贼所擒，遣兵仗三十人防之。
现代文：杨素将要渡过长江，先派遣始兴人麦铁杖头戴蒿草，在夜里游过长江去刺探敌情，返回后又去，被反叛的军队抓获，派遣兵士三十人看守他。
English: Yang Su was going to cross the Yangtze River. First, he sent a person from Shih Hsing with a straw hat and a straw cane. He swam across the Yangtze River at night to probe the enemy situation. After returning, he was captured by the rebel army. Thirty soldiers were sent to guard him.

古文：铁杖取贼刀，乱斩防者，杀之皆尽，割其鼻，怀之以归。
现代文：麦铁杖伺机夺取了一个兵士的大刀，一鼓作气把看守他的兵士全部杀死，然后割下他们的鼻子，渡江返回。
English: He seized a soldier's sword, killed all the soldiers guarding him, then cut off their noses and returned across the river.

古文：素大奇之，奏授仪同三司。
现代文：杨素非常惊奇，于是上书奏请朝廷授予他仪同三司。
English: Yang Su was very surprised, so he asked the imperial court to grant him the title of the Three Emperors.

古文：素帅舟师自杨子津入，击贼帅硃莫问于京口，破之。
现代文：杨素率领水军从杨子津进入江南，攻打叛军首领朱莫问于京口，并打败了他。
English: Yang Su led the naval force from Yang Zijin into the south of the Yangtze River, attacked the rebel leader Zhu Moqian in Jingkou, and defeated him.

古文：进击晋陵贼帅顾世兴、无锡贼帅叶略，皆平之。
现代文：随后又进军攻打晋陵叛军首领顾世兴、无锡叛军首领叶略，都被平定。
English: Subsequently, they also marched to attack the rebel leader of Jinling, Gu Shixing, and the rebel leader of Wuxi, Ye Liao, and they were both defeated.

古文：沈玄懀败走，素追擒之。
现代文：叛军首领沈玄兵败逃走，被杨素率军追上抓获。
English: The rebel leader, Shen Xuan, fled in defeat and was caught by Yang Su's army.

古文：高智慧据浙江东岸为营，周亘百余里，船舰被江；素击之。
现代文：叛军首领高智慧据守浙江东岸以为营垒，连绵达一百余里，战船布满江面。
English: The rebel leader Gao Zhisheng defended the east coast of Zhejiang as a fortress, stretching for more than a hundred miles, with warships all over the river.

古文：子总管南阳来护儿言于素曰： 吴人轻锐，利在舟楫，必死之贼，难与争锋，公宜严陈以待之，勿与接刃。
现代文：杨素进军攻打，部将南阳人来护儿对杨素说： 吴地人悍勇敏捷，善于使用战船作战，而且都怀着必死的决心，因此难以与他们争锋。
English: Yang Su marched into the attack, and the commander of the Nanyang people came to protect Yang Su and said: The Wu people are brave and agile, good at using warships to fight, and they are all determined to die, so it is difficult to compete with them.

古文：请假奇兵数千潜渡江，掩破其壁。使退无所归，进不得战，此韩信破赵之策也。 
现代文：您应该率军严阵以待，不要和他们交锋，请给我奇兵数千人，偷偷渡过浙江，袭击敌军的后方营垒，使他们退没有路，进不得战，这就是秦朝末年汉将韩信击破赵军所采取的战术。 
English: You should lead your army in a tight formation and wait, do not engage with them, please give me thousands of miracle soldiers, sneak across Zhejiang, attack the enemy's rear camp, so that they have no way to retreat and cannot enter the battle, this is the tactic taken by Han Hanxin to defeat the Zhao Army at the end of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：素从之。
现代文：杨素听从了他的建议。
English: Yang Su followed his advice.

古文：护儿以轻舸数百直登江岸，袭破其营，因纵火，烟焰张天。
现代文：于是来护儿率领轻型战船数百艘，径直登上浙江东岸，攻破了高智慧的大本营，纵火焚烧敌军营垒，烟焰冲天。
English: As a result, he led hundreds of light warships to board the east coast of Zhejiang, broke through the high-intelligence base camp, set fire to the enemy camp, and the flames soared into the sky.

古文：贼顾火而惧，素因纵兵奋击，大破之，贼遂溃。
现代文：叛军回望后方营垒起火，十分恐惧，杨素乘机率军奋勇进攻，大败敌军，叛军溃败。
English: When the rebels looked back, the rear camp caught fire, and they were very afraid. Yang Su took the opportunity to lead the army to attack bravely, defeated the enemy army, and the rebels were defeated.

古文：智慧逃入海，素蹑之至海曲，召行军记室封德彝计事，德彝坠水，人救，获免，易衣见素，竟不自言。
现代文：高智慧逃入海中，杨素也率军跟踪追击直达海边。杨素召见行军总管府记室参军封德彝商议军事，封德彝失足落水，被人救起得免一死，他换过衣服后就去见杨素，没有说自己落水的事。
English: Gao Zhizhong escaped into the sea, and Yang Su also led the army to follow and chase him all the way to the seashore. Yang Su summoned Feng Deyao to the General Office of the General Administration of the People's Liberation Army to discuss military affairs. Feng Deyao lost his footing and fell into the water. He was rescued and saved from death. After changing his clothes, he went to see Yang Su and did not say that he had fallen into the water.

古文：素后知之，问其故，曰： 私事也，所以不白。 
现代文：杨素后来知道了此事，就问他为什么不说，封德彝回答说： 那是私事，所以没有告诉您。 
English: When Yang Su found out about this later, he asked why she didn't tell him. Feng Dejun replied, "It was a private matter, so I didn't tell you."

古文：素嗟异之。
现代文：杨素不由得叹奇。
English: Yang Su couldn't help but wonder.

古文：德彝名伦，以字行，隆之之孙也。
现代文：封德彝名叫封伦，人们一般都称他的字，他是封隆之的孙子。
English: Feng Delong's name was Feng Lun, and people generally called him by this name. He was the grandson of Feng Longzhi.

古文：汪文进以蔡道人为司空，守乐安，素进讨，悉平之。
现代文：叛军首领汪文进任命蔡道人为司空，守卫乐安，杨素又率军进讨，全都被平定。
English: The rebel leader, Wang Wenzhin, appointed Cai Dao as the second in command, guarding Le An, and Yang Su led the army to advance, all of which were subdued.

古文：密令人说国庆，使斩送智慧以自赎；国庆乃执送智慧，斩于泉州，馀党悉降。
现代文：杨素派遣行军总管史万岁率领军队两千人，从婺州经小道翻岭渡海，攻下了无数叛军盘据的溪洞。前后共经过七百多次战斗，转战一千多里，一百多天毫无消息，人们都认为史万岁已全军覆没。史万岁把书信封进竹筒里，然后放在水中，被挑水的人得到，转告了杨素。
English: Yang Su dispatched the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, Shi Wanlian, to lead an army of two thousand, crossing the sea from Zhangzhou via a trail through the mountains, and captured countless caves where the rebels were entrenched. After more than seven hundred battles, more than a thousand miles of fighting, and more than a hundred days without news, people all thought that Shi Wanlian had lost his entire army. Shi Wanlian put the envelope into a bamboo tube, and then put it in the water. The person who was carrying the water got it and told Yang Su.

古文：江南大定。素班师，上遣左领军将军独孤陀至浚仪迎劳；比到京师，问者日至。
现代文：于是杨素向朝廷上书报告了史万岁的事迹，隋文帝看后连声称奇，赏赐给史万岁家人十万钱。杨素班师回朝，隋文帝派遣左领军将军独孤陀到浚仪迎接慰劳。杨素回到京师后，文帝每天都要派人到他府上问候。
English: As a result, Yang Su reported to the imperial court in a letter the deeds of Shi Wanlong, and the Sui Emperor was surprised to see it and rewarded the family of Shi Wanlong with 100,000 yuan. Yang Su returned to the imperial court, and the Sui Emperor sent the left leader of the army, General Du Guoda, to Dongyi to meet the consolation. After Yang Su returned to Beijing, the Emperor sent someone to his palace every day to greet him.

古文：拜素子玄奖为仪同三司，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：隋文帝又拜授杨素的儿子杨玄奖为仪同三司，并且赏赐给他许多财物。
English: Emperor Wen of Sui also awarded Yang Su's son, Yang Xuan, the Prize of the Three Emperors, and gave him a lot of wealth.

古文：陀，信之子也。
现代文：独孤陀是独孤皇后父亲独孤信的儿子。
English: Dokokuta is the son of Dokokuta Empress's father, Dokokushin.

古文：杨素用兵多权略，驭众严整，每将临敌，辄求人过失而斩之，多者百馀人，少不下十数，流血盈前，言笑自若。
现代文：杨素用兵很有权略计谋，治军严整，军令如山，每当要临敌打仗的时候，就寻找一些士兵的过失而将他们处斩，多的时候达一百多人，少的时候也不下十多人，跟前血流满地，而杨素谈笑自若，毫不在意。
English: Yang Su had the power to strategize with his soldiers, his army was well-organized, and his military orders were like a mountain. Whenever he was about to go to war against an enemy, he would find some soldiers' faults and execute them, sometimes more than a hundred people, sometimes not less than ten people, with blood flowing all over the ground in front of him, while Yang Su talked and laughed freely, not caring at all.

古文：及其对陈，先令一二百人赴敌，陷陈则已，如不能陷而还者，无问多少，悉斩之；又令二三百人复进，还如向法。
现代文：及至双方摆开阵势后，杨素就先派一二百人前去冲击敌阵，能攻破敌阵则罢，如不能攻破敌阵而退回的人，不论多少全部处斩。然后又派二三百人再次冲击敌阵，还像前面那样处置。
English: After both sides had set up their positions, Yang Su first sent one or two hundred men forward to attack the enemy lines. If they could break through the enemy lines, they were allowed to do so. If they could not break through the enemy lines and retreated, they were all executed, no matter how many. Then he sent another two or three hundred men to attack the enemy lines again, and dealt with them as before.

古文：将士股栗，有必死之心，由是战无不胜，称为名将。
现代文：因此，将士们莫不战栗惊恐，都怀有必死之心，奋勇向前，从不后退，因此杨素战无不胜，称为名将。
English: As a result, the generals were shaken and frightened, and they all had a desperate heart, bravely moving forward and never retreating. Therefore, Yang Su was invincible and was called a great general.

古文：素时贵幸，言无不从，其从素行者，微功必录，至他将虽有大功，多为文吏所谴却，故素虽残忍，士亦以此愿从焉。
现代文：杨素深得隋文帝的宠信，对他言听计从，跟随杨素征战的将士，有功必赏，至于别的将士，虽然有大功，却经常受到朝中文官的压制，所以杨素虽然残忍，将士们也愿意跟随他。
English: Yang Su was deeply trusted by the Sui Emperor, and followed his every word. The soldiers who followed Yang Su to war should be rewarded for their merits. As for other soldiers, although they had great merits, they were often suppressed by the North Korean and Chinese officials. Therefore, although Yang Su was cruel, the soldiers were also willing to follow him.

古文：以并州总管晋王广为扬州总管，镇江都，复以秦王俊为并州总管。
现代文：隋朝任命并州总管晋王杨广为扬州总管，镇守江都，重又任命秦王杨俊为并州总管。
English: The Sui Dynasty appointed the governor-general of the annexed state, Jin Wang Yang Guang, as the governor-general of Yangzhou, the town guard of Jiangdu, and reappointed Qin Wang Yangjun as the governor-general of the annexed state.

古文：番禺夷王仲宣反，岭南首领多应多，引兵围广州。
现代文：番禺夷族人王仲宣起兵造反，岭南地区各族首领多起兵响应他，于是王仲宣率军包围了广州。
English: Wang Zhongxuan, a member of the Panyu ethnic group, started a military rebellion, and the leaders of various ethnic groups in the Lingnan region responded by raising more troops, so Wang Zhongxuan led the army to surround Guangzhou.

古文：韦洸中流矢卒，诏以其副慕容三藏检校广州道行军事。
现代文：总管韦中流矢而死，隋文帝下诏令他的副手慕容三藏检校广州道行军事。
English: Wei Zhonglian, the head of the inspection, died suddenly, and Emperor Sui ordered his deputy, Murong Sanzang, to go on a military campaign along the Guangzhou Road.

古文：又诏给事郎裴矩巡抚岭南，矩至南康，得兵数千人。
现代文：文帝又下诏令给事郎裴矩前去巡抚岭南地区，裴矩进至南康，得到军队数千人。
English: Emperor Wen also issued an imperial edict ordering his son-in-law, Pei Mom, to patrol the southern region of Lingnan. Pei Mom went to Nankang and received thousands of troops.

古文：仲宣遣别将周师举围东衡州，矩与大将军鹿愿击斩之，进至南海。
现代文：王仲宣派遣部下别将周师举率军围攻东衡州，裴矩和大将军鹿愿率军打败了周师举并杀死了他，随后率军进至南海。
English: Wang Zhongxuan dispatched his subordinates to besiege Donghengzhou with the army led by Zhou Shihou, and the army led by Pei An and General De Ruyi defeated Zhou Shihou and killed him, and then led the army to the South China Sea.

古文：高凉冼夫人遣其孙冯暄将兵救广州，暄与贼将陈佛智素善，逗留不进；夫人知之，大怒，遣使执暄，系州狱，更遣孙盎出讨佛智，斩之。
现代文：岭南蛮族首领高凉洗夫人派她的孙子冯暄率军救援广州，冯暄一向与叛军将领陈佛智友善，于是故意逗留不进。洗夫人得知后十分愤怒，就派人到军中逮捕了冯暄，关押在州城监狱；又派遣孙子冯盎率军讨伐陈佛智，将他斩首。
English: Mrs. Gao Liangzhi, the leader of the Lingnan barbarians, sent her grandson Feng Rong to lead the army to rescue Guangzhou. Feng Rongzhi had always been friendly with the rebel general Chen Fozhi, so he deliberately stayed away. Mrs. Zai was very angry when she learned of this and sent someone to the army to arrest Feng Rongzhi and detain him in the Shucheng Prison; she also sent her grandson Feng Angzhi to lead the army to fight Chen Fozhi and behead him.

古文：进会鹿愿于南海，与慕容三藏合击仲宣，仲宣众溃，广州获全。
现代文：冯盎率军进至南海，与大将军鹿愿的部队会合，然后与广州守将慕容三藏合兵攻打王仲宣，王仲宣的部队溃败，因此广州得以保全。
English: Feng Ang led the army to the South China Sea, met with the troops of General De Rui, and then attacked Wang Zhongxuan with the Guangzhou garrison commander Murong Sanzanghe. Wang Zhongxuan's troops were routed, so Guangzhou was preserved.

古文：洗氏亲被甲，乘介马，张锦伞，引彀骑卫，从裴矩巡抚二十馀州。
现代文：洗夫人亲自披戴甲胄，乘坐披甲的马，张开用锦缎做的伞盖，率领军队张弓搭箭，禁卫保护，陪同裴矩巡抚岭南地区二十余州。
English: Mrs. Chien herself wore armor, rode on an armor-plated horse, opened an umbrella cover made of brocade, led the army to draw bows and arrows, guarded and protected, and accompanied Pei Mom to patrol more than 20 states in the southern Lingnan region.

古文：苍梧首领陈坦等皆来谒见，矩承制署为刺史、县令，使还统其部落，岭表遂定。
现代文：苍梧首领陈坦等都来拜见裴矩。裴矩根据朝廷的旨意任命他们为刺史、县令，让他们回去统率各自的部落，于是岭南地区被平定。
English: Cangwu leader Chen Tan and others came to see Pei Niang. According to the will of the imperial court, Pei Niang appointed them as magistrate and county magistrate, and let them return to lead their respective tribes. As a result, the Lingnan region was pacified.

古文：矩复命，上谓高颎、杨素曰： 韦洸将二万兵不能早度岭，朕每患其兵少。
现代文：矩复命，上谓高、杨素曰： 韦将二万兵不能早度岭，朕每患其兵少。
English: Moments after his return to life, Yang Su said: "We will not be able to get rid of 20,000 soldiers early, and we will have fewer soldiers."

古文：裴矩以三千弊卒径至南海，有臣若此，朕亦何忧！ 
现代文：裴矩以三千弊卒径至南海，有臣若此，朕亦何忧！ 
English: Pei-Ming went to the South China Sea with three thousand malpractices. If there is a minister here, I am not worried!

古文：以矩为民部侍郎。
现代文：以矩为民部侍郎。
English: He became a chamberlain of the Ministry of Popular Affairs.

古文：拜冯盎高州刺史，追赠冯宝广州总管、谯国公。
现代文：拜冯盎高州刺史，追赠冯宝广州总管、谯国公。
English: Paying tribute to Feng Ung, the history of Gaozhou, and posthumously awarding Feng Bao, the general manager of Guangzhou and the prince of Shandong Province.

古文：册洗氏为谯国夫人，开谯国夫人幕府，置长史以下官属，官给印章，听发部落六州兵马，若有机急，便宜行事。
现代文：册洗氏为谯国夫人，开谯国夫人幕府，置长史以下官属，官给印章，听发部落六州兵马，若有机急，便宜行事。
English: Cang Chao was the Lady of the Six Provinces, and the Lady of the Six Provinces established the Shogunate, placed officials under Changshi, gave seals to officials, and dispatched soldiers and horses from six provinces of the tribe. If there was an emergency, they would act cheaply.

古文：仍敕以夫人诚效之故，特赦暄逗留之罪，拜罗州刺史。
现代文：仍敕以夫人诚效之故，特赦暄逗留之罪，拜罗州刺史。
English: Bayero State has pardoned him for overstaying because of the sincerity of his wife.

古文：皇后赐夫人首饰及宴服一袭，夫人并盛于金箧，并梁、陈赐物，各藏一库，每岁时大会，陈之于庭，以示子孙，曰： 我事三代主，唯用一忠顺之心。今赐物具存，此其报也。汝曹皆念之，尽赤心于天子！ 
现代文：独孤皇后也赏赐给洗夫人一些金银首饰和宴会礼服一套。洗夫人把这些东西都放在一个黄金小箱子里，分别和梁、陈朝廷赏赐的物品各藏在一个库中，每年举行部落大朝会时，拿出来陈列在大厅里，让子孙们看，并对他们说： 我历事梁、陈、隋三代君主，用的只是一颗忠诚的心，现在朝廷赏赐的物品俱在，这就是我得到的酬报，你们应该牢记我的话，对朝廷天子赤胆忠心。 
English: The lonely queen also gave Mrs. Chao some gold and silver jewelry and a set of banquet dresses. Mrs. Chao put all these things in a small gold box, separately with the items given by the Liang and Chen dynasties, each of which was hidden in a warehouse. Every year, when the tribal grand council was held, she took them out and displayed them in the hall for her children and grandchildren to see, and said to them: I have lived through the three generations of Liang, Chen and Sui monarchs, using only a loyal heart. Now the items given by the court are all there. This is the reward I get. You should keep my words in mind and be loyal to the

古文：番州总管赵讷贪虐，诸俚、獠多亡叛。
现代文：后来，番州总管赵讷贪虐残暴，岭南各地的俚族、獠族多逃亡反叛。
English: Later, the general manager of Fanzhou, Zhao Ne, was greedy and cruel, and most of the Yi and Yao people in various parts of Lingnan fled and rebelled.

古文：夫人遣长史张融上封事，论安抚之宜，并言讷罪，不可以招怀远人。
现代文：洗夫人派遣幕府长史张融呈上密封的奏疏，论叙了应该怎样安抚百姓，并揭发了赵讷的罪行，认为赵讷的所作所为不能招抚和怀柔边远地区的各族人民。
English: The Lady of the Immaculate Conception dispatched the shogun's chief historian, Zhang Rong, to submit a sealed report to the emperor, outlining how the people should be appeased, and exposing Zhao Ne's crimes, arguing that Zhao Ne's actions could not be reconciled with the people of all ethnic groups in remote areas.

古文：上遣推讷，得其赃贿，竟致于法；敕委夫人招慰亡叛。
现代文：于是隋文帝派遣使者到番州审查赵讷，取得了他贪赃受贿的证据，将他依法治罪；又委命洗夫人招抚慰问逃亡反叛的百姓。
English: As a result, Emperor Sui sent an envoy to Fanzhou to examine Zhao Ne, obtained evidence of his corruption and bribery, and punished him according to the law; he also ordered Lady Zhao to solicit and comfort the people who had fled and rebelled.

古文：夫人亲载诏书，自称使者，历十馀州，宣述上意，谕诸俚、獠，所至皆降。
现代文：洗夫人亲自带着隋文帝的诏书，自称为朝廷的使节，经过十多个州，宣布文帝的旨意，晓谕各州的俚族、獠族百姓，所到之处都纷纷归降。
English: Lady Chien personally took Emperor Sui's edict and, calling herself an emissary of the imperial court, traveled through more than ten states, proclaiming the emperor's will and telling the Dai and Dai people in each state to surrender wherever they went.

古文：上嘉之，赐夫人临振县为汤沐邑，赠冯仆崖州总管、平原公。
现代文：因此，隋文帝下令嘉奖洗夫人，赏赐给洗夫人临振县作为私用封地，又追赠冯仆为崖州总管、平原公。
English: Therefore, Emperor Sui ordered to reward Lady Sui, awarding Lady Sui Lin Zhen County as a private fiefdom, and posthumously awarding Feng Servant as the head of Yazhou and the plain.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之上开皇十一年
现代文：开皇十一年春季，正月，皇太子杨勇的妃子元氏去世。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Emperor's reign, in the first month, Crown Prince Yang Yong's concubine Genji passed away.

古文：春，正月，皇太子妃元氏薨。二月，戊午，吐谷浑遣使入贡。吐谷浑可汗夸吕闻陈亡，大惧，遁逃保险，不敢为寇。
现代文：二月戊午，吐谷浑派遣使者到隋朝纳贡。吐谷浑可汗夸吕得悉陈亡国，非常害怕，于是逃往远方，依险自保，不敢再来侵犯虏掠。
English: In the afternoon of February, Tugu Hun sent an envoy to the Sui Dynasty to pay tribute. Tugu Hun Khan Kwalu learned of Chen's death and was very afraid, so he fled far away, relying on danger to protect himself and not daring to invade and plunder again.

古文：夸吕卒，子世伏立，使其兄子无素奉表称籓，并献方物，请以女备后庭。
现代文：后来夸吕去世，他的儿子世伏继承汗位。世伏派遣他哥哥的儿子无素向隋朝奉表称藩，献上很多地方物产，并请求将女儿送进隋文帝的后宫。
English: Later, Kauru died, and his son Shifu succeeded to the throne. Shifu sent his brother's son Muxun to the Sui Dynasty to present the title of the clan, presented many local products, and requested that his daughter be sent to the Sui Emperor's harem.

古文：上谓无素曰： 若依来请，它国闻之，必当相效，何以拒之！
现代文：隋文帝对无素说： 如果依从了世伏的请求，那末别的国家听说了，也必定会竞相仿效，到时候用什么理由拒绝他们呢？
English: Sui Emperor Wen said to Wu Su: If you comply with the request of Shifu, then other countries will hear about it and will certainly compete to follow suit. In that case, what reason would you use to refuse them?

古文：朕情存安养，各令遂性，岂可聚敛子女以实后宫乎！ 
现代文：朕想的是如何爱护天下百姓，使他们能够安居乐业，怎么能征取天下美女以充实后宫呢？ 
English: What I want to know is how to cherish the people of the world so that they can live and work in peace. How can I recruit the world's beautiful women to enrich my harem?

古文：竟不许。
现代文：终究没有答应吐谷浑的请求。
English: In the end, Taizong was not allowed to compile the anthology.

古文：平乡令刘旷有异政，以义理晓谕，讼者皆引咎而去，狱中草满，庭可张罗；迁临颍令。
现代文：平乡县令刘旷有突出的政绩，他对前来告状的人晓之以理，使他们都自责而去，以致于监狱中都因为没有犯人而长满了草，判案大厅里也因为没有人来打官司而可以张网捕鸟。刘旷后来调任临颍县令。
English: The governor of Pingxiang County, Liu Heng, had outstanding political achievements. He reasoned with the people who came to complain and made them all go away with self-reproach, so that the prisons were full of grass because there were no prisoners, and the courtroom was full of birds because no one came to sue. Liu Heng was later transferred to the governor of Linyi County.

古文：高颎荐旷清名善政为天下第一，上召见，劳勉之，顾谓侍臣曰： 若不殊奖，何以为劝！ 
现代文：尚书左仆射高荐举刘旷，说他的清名善政是天下第一，于是隋文帝召见了刘旷，对他加以慰问鼓励崐，又对侍卫近臣说： 如果不破格奖赏刘旷，怎么能够勉励天下官吏都勤政爱民呢？ 
English: Shangshu's left-hand servant, Zhao Gao, recommended Liu Kuang, saying that his good name and good governance were the best in the world. Therefore, the Sui Emperor summoned Liu Kuang, gave him condolences and encouragement, and said to the bodyguards and courtiers: If you do not reward Liu Kuang, how can you encourage officials around the world to be diligent in politics and love the people?

古文：丙子，优诏擢为莒州刺史。
现代文：丙子，隋文帝下诏提升刘旷为莒州刺史。
English: According to the imperial edict issued by the Sui Dynasty, Liu Kuang was elevated to the position of prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：辛巳晦，日有食之。
现代文：辛巳晦，出现日食。
English: At dusk, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：初，帝微时，与滕穆王瓚不协。
现代文：当初，隋文帝地位低微时，和滕穆王杨瓒不和睦。
English: At first, when the Sui Emperor's status was low, he was not on good terms with the Tengmu King Yang Xuan.

古文：帝为周相，以瓚为大宗伯，瓚恐为家祸，阴欲图帝，帝隐之。
现代文：后来隋文帝担任北周丞相时，任命杨瓒为大宗伯，杨瓒恐怕招致灭族之祸，曾经暗中谋划除掉隋文帝，隋文帝发现后隐瞒了此事。
English: Later, when Sui Emperor Wen served as the Minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, he appointed Yang Jie as the grand patriarch. Yang Jie is feared to have caused the disaster of extermination. He had secretly plotted to eliminate Sui Emperor Wen, but Sui Emperor Wen found out and concealed the matter.

古文：瓚妃，周高祖妹顺阳公主也，与独孤后素不平，阴为咒诅；帝命出之，瓚不可。
现代文：杨瓒的妃子是北周高祖宇文邕的妹妹顺阳公主，她与独孤皇后一向不和，于是就暗中诅咒独孤皇后；隋文帝命令杨瓒休掉顺阳公主，杨瓒不同意。
English: Yang Hui's concubine was Princess Shunyang, the sister of North Zhou Gao's ancestor Yu Wenyuan. She had always been at odds with the lonely queen, so she secretly cursed the lonely queen; Emperor Sui ordered Yang Hui to divorce Princess Shunyang, but Yang Hui did not agree.

古文：秋，八月，壬申，瓚从帝幸栗园，暴薨，时人疑其遇鸩。
现代文：秋季，八月，杨瓒跟随文帝前往长安城南栗园，得病突然死亡，当时人们怀疑他是被毒死的。
English: In the autumn, in August, Yang Hui followed Emperor Wen to the South Chestnut Orchard in Chang'an City, fell ill and died suddenly. At the time, it was suspected that he had been poisoned.

古文：乙亥，帝至自栗园。
现代文：乙亥，隋文帝自栗园还宫。
English: Emperor Wu of the Sui Dynasty returned to the palace from the Chestnut Garden.

古文：沛达公郑译卒。
现代文：沛达公郑译去世。
English: Pei Dagong Zheng died.

