古文：野史杂说，多有得之传闻及好事者缘饰，故类多失实，虽前辈不能免，而士大夫颇信之。
现代文：野史杂说，大多数是得自传闻和由好奇的人饰粉的，所以故事多失实，虽是前辈也不能免除此弊，然而士大夫价却很相信它。
English: Most of the wild stories are based on hearsay and embellished by curious people, so the stories are often untrue. Although the predecessors are not exempt from this evil, the senior officials believe it very much.

古文：姑摭真宗朝三事于左。
现代文：现且拈出真宗朝三件事，如下：
English: At present, there are three things about the Jinsong Dynasty, as follows:

古文：魏泰《东轩录》云： 真宗次澶渊，语寇菜公曰： 虏骑未退，何人可守天雄军？ 公言参加政事王钦若。
现代文：魏泰《东轩录》说： 真宗驻军澶渊说： 辽兵不退，谁可以固守天雄军？ 寇莱公说参知政事王钦若可以。
English: Wei Tai's "Dong Xuan Lu" said: The Shanyuan of the Shanzong garrison said: If the Liao soldiers do not retreat, who can hold on to the Tianxiong army? Kolei Gong said that the governor and politician Wang Qin can.

古文：退即召王于行府，谕以上意，授敕俾行。王未及有言，公遽酌大白饮之，命曰 上马杯 ，且曰： 参政勉之，回日即为同列也。 
现代文：回到住处立刻在行营中召见王钦若，告诉他真宗的意旨，给他敕书就让出发，王钦若还没有来得及答话，寇莱公就忙斟大杯让王钦若喝酒，名为 上马杯 ，并且说： 请参政好自为之，回来时咱们就是同列了。 
English: Upon returning to his residence, he immediately summoned Wang Qinruo in the encampment, told him the intention of the True Religion, gave him a letter and let him go. If Wang Qinruo did not have time to answer, Kolai was busy pouring a large cup for Wang Qinruo to drink, called the horse cup, and said: "Please participate in politics and do it yourself. When you return, we will be in the same row."

古文：王驰骑入魏，越十一日虏退，召为同中书门下平章事。
现代文：王钦若快马进入魏州，到第十一天辽兵退去，于是便召他作同中书门下平章事。
English: Wang Qin quickly entered Weizhou, and on the eleventh day, the Liao soldiers retreated, so he called him to do the same thing.

古文：或云王公数进疑词于上前，故莱公因事出之。
现代文：有人说王钦若屡次在真宗面前说寇莱公坏话，所以寇莱公借个事由把他排挤出去。
English: Some people said that Wang Qinru had repeatedly spoken ill of Lord Kolai in front of the True Parents, so Lord Kolai used an excuse to force him out.

古文：于按澶渊之役乃景德元年九月，是时莱公为次相，钦若为参政；闰九月，钦若判天雄，二年四月，罢政；三年，莱公罢相，钦若复和枢密院，至天禧元年始拜相，距景德初元凡十四年。
现代文：我考察澶渊这次战役是在真宗景德元年九月，当时寇莱公是副宰相，王钦若是参知政事；闰九月，王钦若任天雄军长官。景德二年四月，罢免参知政事；景德三年，寇莱公免相，王钦若又任枢密使，至直宗天禧元年才任宰相，距离景德元年整整十四年。
English: I examined the Battle of Pengyuan. The battle took place in September of the first year of the reign of King Jingde of the Zhenzong Dynasty, when Prince Kolai was the vice-chancellor and Wang Qin was the co-chancellor; in September of the leap year, when Wang Qin was the commander of the Tianxiong Army; in April of the second year of the reign of King Jingde, he was dismissed as the co-chancellor; in the third year of the reign of King Jingde, Prince Kolai was dismissed as the minister; and in the first year of the reign of King Zhenzong, Wang Qin was appointed as the privy council

古文：其二事者，沈括《笔谈》云： 向文简拜右仆射，真宗谓学士李昌武曰： 朕自即位以来，未尝除仆射，敏中应甚喜。 
现代文：第二件事：沈括《梦溪笔谈》说： 向文简公任右仆射，真宗对学士李昌武说 我从登墓以来，还没有加封过仆射，向敏中一定很高兴。 
English: The second thing: Shen Guan's "Dream Creek Pen Talk" said: Xiang Wenjian was a right-handed archer, Zhenzong said to the bachelor Li Changwu I haven't added a seal since I went to the tomb. Xiang Minzhong must be very happy.

古文：昌武退朝，往候之。门阑悄然。
现代文：李昌武退朝，去看望他，见门很寂静。
English: Li Changwu retired, went to visit him, the door was very quiet.

古文：明日再对，上笑曰： 向敏中大耐官职。  
现代文：第二天报告了皇帝，真宗笑着说 向敏中真恬淡，经得起大官。  
English: The next day, he reported to the emperor, and Zhenzong said with a smile, "Xiangmin Zhong Zhen is light-hearted and can stand up to a high official."

古文：存中自注云： 向公拜仆射，年月未曾考于国史，因见中书记，是天禧元年八月，而是年二月王钦若亦加仆射。 
现代文：沈括自注说： 向君任仆射，年月未曾载于国史，因见内中一书犊，知是真宗天禧元年八月，而这年二月王钦若也加仆射。
English: Shen Kuo made a note to himself: "The year and month of Xiang Jun's appointment to the position of minstrel have not been recorded in the history of the country, because there is only one record in the middle school. It is known that it was in August of the first year of Zhen Zong's heavenly jubilee, and in February of this year, Wang Qin Ruo also added the position of minstrel.

古文：予按真宗朝自敏中之前拜仆射者六人：吕端、李沆、王旦皆自宰相转，陈尧叟以罢枢密使拜，张齐贤以故相拜，王钦若自枢密使转。
现代文：我考察在真宗朝，和敏中前边任仆封的有六个人：吕端、李沉，王亘都是从宰相升的，陈尧史因罢免枢密使转封，张齐贤因系旧宰相加封，王钦若从枢密使迁封。
English: I have investigated six people who held the title of vassal in front of Ho Min Chung during the reign of Emperor Zhenzong: Lütang, Li Shen, and Wang Wua were all promoted from the position of prime minister, Chen Yuxi was transferred from the position of privy councilor due to his dismissal, Zhang Qixian was given the title of vassal due to his lineage to the former prime minister, and Wang Qinra was transferred from the position of privy councilor.

古文：及敏中转右仆射，与钦若加左仆射同日降制，是时李昌武死四年矣。昌武者，宗谔也。
现代文：到向敏中升右仆射，是与王锐若封左仆射同一天下的制书，当时李昌武已死四年，李昌武就是李宗详。
English: To Xiang Min's middle-ranking right-hand man, it was the same day as Wang Rui's left-hand man. At that time, Li Changwu had been dead for four years, and Li Changwu was Li Zongzhi.

