古文：孟季子问公都子曰： 何以谓义内也？ 
现代文：孟季子问公都子说： 为什么说义是内在的呢？ 
English: Meng Jizi asked Gongduzi, "Why do you say that righteousness is internal?

古文：曰： 行吾敬，故谓之内也。 
现代文：公都子说： 它表达我的敬意，所以说是内在的。 
English: The prince said: It expresses my respect, so it is internal.

古文： 乡人长于伯兄一岁，则谁敬？ 曰： 敬兄。 
现代文：孟季子问： 有一个乡里的人比你兄长大一岁，该尊敬谁呢？ 公都子说： 尊敬兄长。 
English: Meng Qizi asked: There is a person in the village who is one year older than your brother, whom should you respect?

古文： 酌则谁先？ 
现代文：孟季子问： 同席饮酒，先给谁斟酒呢？ 
English: Meng Qizi asked: When drinking at the same table, who should be served first?

古文：曰： 先酌乡人。 
现代文：公都子说： 先给乡里人。 
English: "Give it to the villagers first," Koudouko said.

古文： 所敬在此，所长在彼，果在外，非由内也。 
现代文：孟季子说： 你内心尊敬的是兄长，却礼敬年长的乡人，可见义是外在的，不是由内心发出的。 
English: Meng Jizi said, "In your heart, you respect your elder brother, but you pay respect to the older villagers. It can be seen that the meaning is external, not from the heart.

古文：公都子不能答，以告孟子。
现代文：公都子不能应答，便把这事告诉孟子。
English: When the prince could not answer, he told Mencius about it.

古文：孟子曰： 敬叔父乎？
现代文：孟子说： 应该尊敬叔父呢？
English: Mencius said, "Should I respect my uncle?

古文：敬弟乎？
现代文：还是尊敬弟弟呢？
English: Or do you respect your brother?

古文：彼将曰 敬叔父 。
现代文：他会说： 尊敬叔父。 
English: He would say, "Respect your uncle."

古文：曰： 弟为尸，则谁敬？ 彼将曰 敬弟。 
现代文：你说： 弟弟是祭祀时代表死者受祭的人，那该尊敬谁呢？ 他会说： 尊敬弟弟。 
English: You say: My brother is the one who is sacrificed on behalf of the dead at the time of sacrifice, so who should I respect? He will say: Respect your brother.

古文：子曰： 恶在其敬叔父也？ 
现代文：你就说： 为什么又说要尊敬叔父呢？ 
English: You say, "Why do you say that I should respect my uncle?

古文：彼将曰： 在位故也。 
现代文：他会说： 这是因为地位的缘故。 
English: He would say: It's because of the status.

古文：子亦曰： 在位故也。庸敬在兄，斯须之敬在乡人。  
现代文：你就说： 是因为地位的缘故，需要尊敬兄长，但在不同的场合就该恭敬地对待他人。  
English: You say: It's because of status that you need to respect your brother, but you should treat others respectfully in different situations.

古文：季子闻之曰： 敬叔父则敬，敬弟则敬，果在外，非由内也。 
现代文：孟季子听了这些话后，说： 在这种情况下尊敬叔父，在那种情况下尊敬弟弟，这毕竟是外在情况决定的，并不是由内心发出的。 
English: After listening to these words, Meng Jizi said: In this case, respect your uncle, in that case, respect your brother. After all, this is determined by the external situation, not by the heart.

古文：公都子曰： 冬日则饮汤，夏日则饮水，然则饮食亦在外也？ 
现代文：公都子说： 冬天则喝热汤，夏天则喝凉水，那么饮食是由外在的天气所决定的吗？ 
English: He said, "In winter, we drink hot soup, and in summer, we drink cold water, so is our diet determined by the weather outside?

