古文：程季明诸葛恪张湛贺循陆士龙繁钦刘道真祖士言高爽徐之才司马消难马王酒肆卢思道李愔薛道衡解嘲辛亶牛弘侯白
现代文：程季明诸葛恪张湛贺循陆士龙繁钦刘道真祖士言高爽徐之才司马消难马王酒肆卢思道李愔薛道衡解嘲辛亶牛弘侯白
English: Cheng Qiming, Zhuge, Zhang Zhan, He Xian, Lu Shilong, Shengqin, Liu Daozhen, Yuan Shizhen, Gao Shuang, Xu Zi, Sima Qian, Wang Ma, Shuzhuang, Lu Si, Li Jie, Xue Dao, Heng Jie, Qian Xin, Yan Niu, Hong Hou Bai

古文：程季明
现代文：程季明
English: Cheng Qiming

古文：晋程季明嘲热客诗曰：平生三伏时，道路无行车，闭门避暑卧，出入不相过。
现代文：晋代人程季明曾写过一首嘲讽暑天懒人的诗。诗中写道：从来在三伏天的时候，不在路上赶车行走。关上门躺在家中避暑，出来进去懒得与人打招呼。
English: Cheng Jiming, a member of the Jin Dynasty, once wrote a poem mocking people who are lazy in the summer. He wrote in the poem: Never in the summer, do not walk on the road. Close the door and lie at home in the summer, and do not bother to greet people when you go out.

古文：今代愚痴子，触热到人家；主人闻客来，嚬蹙奈此何。
现代文：有这么一个呆子，冒着炎热到这家去。主人听有客到来，皱着眉头不耐烦可又没办法。
English: There is such a dork, braving the heat to go to this house. The host listens to the arrival of guests, frowning impatiently, but there's nothing he can do.

古文：谓当起行去，安坐正咨嗟，所说无一急，沓沓吟何多？
现代文：按说应当赶紧起来去迎候，可是仍坐在那里打哈欠。说了半天也没听到一件急事，何必罗嗦个没完。
English: It is said that you should get up quickly to greet them, but you are still sitting there yawning. You haven't heard anything urgent for half a day. Why do you keep on talking?

古文：摇扇腕中疼，流汗正滂沱。
现代文：摇摇扇子也觉手腕子疼痛，尽管现在是大汗淋漓也不想动手。
English: I also feel pain in my wrists when I shake the fan, and I don't want to use it even though I'm drenched in sweat.

古文：莫谓为小事，亦是人一瑕。
现代文：不要说这是区区小事，这毕竟也是做人的一种缺陷。
English: Don't say it's a trivial matter, after all, it's a defect of being human.

古文：传诫诸朋友，热行宜见呵。
现代文：告诫各位朋友，热天出门应该见怪不怪。
English: Warn your friends that it is not strange to go out on a hot day.

古文：诸葛恪
现代文：诸葛恪
English: Zhuge Ke

古文：吴主引蜀使费祎饮，使诸葛恪监酒。
现代文：吴主请蜀国使者费祎饮酒，派诸葛恪作陪监察。
English: The Lord of Wu asked the emissary of Shu, Fei Yao, to drink alcohol, and sent Zhuge Ke to accompany and supervise.

古文：恪以马鞭拍祎背，甚痛。
现代文：诸葛恪用马鞭拍打费祎的后背。
English: Zhuge Ke used a horse whip to beat Fei Yao's back.

古文：祎启吴主曰：蜀丞相比之周公，都护君侯比之孔子；今有一儿，执鞭之士。
现代文：费祎感觉很痛。启告吴主道：蜀国的诸葛丞相，可以与周公相比，都护君侯；也可以与孔圣人相比，可今有一小儿，竟是举鞭子的人。
English: Fei Yao felt very painful. He told Wu Zhengdao: Zhuge Zheng, the prime minister of Shu, can be compared to Zhou Gong, the tutelary prince; he can also be compared to Kong Shengren, but now he has a son who is actually the one who raises the whip.

古文：恪启曰：君至大国，傲慢天常；以鞭拍之，于义何伤？
现代文：诸葛恪道：你来到大国，还这样傲慢无礼，用鞭子揍你，怎么算有伤大义呢？
English: Zhuge Ke said: When you come to a big country, you are still so arrogant and impolite. How can it be considered a violation of justice to beat you with a whip?

古文：众皆大笑。
现代文：众人都大笑。
English: My colleagues all burst out laughing.

古文：又诸葛瑾为豫州，语别驾向台，曰：小儿知谈，卿可与语。
现代文：又有一次，诸葛瑾镇守豫州时，对别驾说：小儿诸葛恪善谈，你可以和他谈谈。
English: On another occasion, when Zhuge Liuzhen was guarding Yuzhou, he said to another driver: "Little Zhuge is good at talking, you can talk to him."

古文：北往诣恪，不相见。
现代文：北去到了诸葛恪那里，但没有与他相见。
English: He went to Zhuge Ke, but did not meet him.

古文：后张昭坐中相遇，别驾呼恪：咄，郎君！
现代文：后来在张昭的寓中相遇，别驾招呼诸葛恪道：咄，郎！
English: Later, they met in Zhang Zhao's apartment. Zhuge called Zhuge and said, "Hey, brother!

古文：恪因嘲曰：豫州乱矣，何咄之有！
现代文：诸葛恪嘲讽道：豫州已经大乱了，还有什么可 咄 的！
English: Zhuge Ke scoffed: "Yuzhou is already in chaos, what else is there to do!

古文：答曰：君圣臣贤，未闻有乱。
现代文：别驾道：君圣臣贤，没有听说有什么变乱。
English: Don't drive: Your Holiness, I haven't heard of any trouble.

古文：恪复云：昔唐尧在上，四凶在下。
现代文：诸葛恪又道：昔日唐尧在上，四凶在下。
English: Zhuge Ke also said: In the past, Tang Xuan was at the top, and the four villains were at the bottom.

古文：答曰：岂唯四凶，亦有丹朱。
现代文：别驾道：岂只四凶，还有丹朱。
English: Don't drive on the wrong side of the road: there are only four bad guys, including Dan Zhu.

古文：张湛
现代文：张湛
English: Zhang Zhan

古文：晋张湛好于斋前种松柏。袁山松出游，每好令左右挽歌。时人谓：张屋下陈尸，袁道上行殡。
现代文：晋代张湛喜好在书斋前栽种松柏树，而袁山松每次出游，都要叫随从唱挽歌，当时人们称道：张屋下陈尸，袁道上行殡。
English: Zhang Zhan of the Jin Dynasty liked to plant pine and cypress trees in front of his study, while Yuan Shansong had his followers sing elegies every time he went on a trip. At that time, people praised: Zhang Ya was buried, Yuan Da was buried.

古文：贺循
现代文：贺循
English: He Xun

古文：晋太傅贺循作吴郡，初不出门。
现代文：晋代时太傅贺循任职吴郡。刚到任时从不出门。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Taifu He Cui served in Wu County. When he first took office, he never went out.

古文：吴中强族轻之，乃题府门：会稽鸡，不能啼。
现代文：吴郡有势力的家族很轻视他，有人便在他的府门上题道：会稽鸡，不能啼。
English: A powerful family in Wuxi County despised him, and someone inscribed on the gate of his house: "If you can play chicken, you can't play cricket."

古文：贺闻，故出行，至门反顾，索笔答之云：不可啼，杀吴儿。
现代文：贺循听说后，便走出府院。到门口又返回身来看了看，提笔在门上写下答词：不可啼，杀吴儿。
English: After He Xun heard about this, he went out of the courtyard. When he got to the door, he went back and looked around. He picked up a pen and wrote a reply on the door: "Don't beat her, kill Wu Er."

古文：于是至诸屯及邸阁，检校诸顾陆使官兵及藏逋亡，悉以事言上。
现代文：于是便到各军屯和官邸去搜察，查出顾陆诸家役使官兵和收藏逃亡之徒的事，并把此事秉告皇上。
English: So he went to the military camps and official residences to investigate, and found out about Gu Lu's family serving the officers and soldiers and collecting fugitives, and reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：遭罪者众。
现代文：为此事获罪者众多。
English: Many people have been convicted for this.

古文：陆抗时为江陵郡都督，故下自请孙皓，然后得释。
现代文：陆抗此时为江陵郡督都，由于亲自去请了孙皓，才使他们获得释放。
English: At this time, Lu Huan was the governor of Gangneung County. It was only because he personally went to invite Sun Yat-sen that they were released.

古文：陆士龙
现代文：陆士龙
English: Lu Shilong

古文：晋陆士龙、荀鸣鹤，二人未相识。
现代文：晋代时，一个叫陆士龙的，一个叫荀鸣鹤的，两人互不相识。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Lu Shilong and a man named Zou Minghe, but the two did not know each other.

古文：俱会张茂先，令接语，以并有大才，可勿常谈。
现代文：有一次，一起在张茂先家相会。张茂先叫他们一人一句互相接话，看谁更有才华，但话要少而精。
English: Once, they met at Zhang Maoxian's home. Zhang Maoxian asked each of them to talk to each other to see who was more talented, but the words should be few and precise.

古文：陆抗手曰：云间陆士龙。
现代文：陆士龙先说：云间陆士龙。
English: Lu Shilong said first: Lu Shilong in the clouds.

古文：荀曰：日下荀鸣鹤。
现代文：荀鸣鹤说：日下荀鸣鹤。
English: The crane said, "The sun is rising."

古文：陆曰：既开青天，睹白雉，何不张尔弓，布尔矢？
现代文：陆士龙说：既然是晴天，看见了一只白山鸡，为什么不张开你的弓，放出你的箭？
English: Lu Shilong said, "Since it is a fine day and you have seen a white pheasant, why don't you open your bow and release your arrows?"

古文：荀曰：本谓云龙骙骙。乃是山鹿野麋。兽微而弩强，是以发迟。
现代文：荀鸣鹤道：本来说是条粗壮的巨龙，其实不过是只山鹿野麋，兽太小而弓太强，所以箭发迟了。
English: Zhai Minghe said: Originally, it was a massive dragon, but in fact, it was just a mountain deer. The beast was too small and the bow was too strong, so the arrow was too late.

古文：张抚掌大笑而已。
现代文：张茂先听后拍掌大笑。繁钦
English: Zhang Mao first listened and then clapped his hands and laughed.

古文：繁钦魏繁钦嘲杜巨明曰：杜伯玄孙字子巨，皇祖虐暴死射之；神明不听，天地不与；降生之初，状似时鼠，厥性蟊贼，不文不武；粗记粗略，不能悉举。
现代文：三国时魏国的繁钦嘲讽杜巨明道：杜伯的玄孙字子巨，祖宗性情暴虐，非要射死他不可。神明不肯听，天地不相让。子巨刚生下时，样子像个老鼠，其人性如蟊贼，不善文也不习武，对任何事情都是粗记粗略，马马虎虎。
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, Han Qin of the State of Wei ridiculed Du Jiu Ming: Du Bo's great-great-grandson Zi Jiu, the ancestor's violent temperament, had to shoot him dead. The gods would not listen, heaven and earth would not concede. When Zi Jiu was just born, he looked like a mouse, his human nature was like a thief, he was not good at writing and did not practice martial arts, and he was rough and sloppy about everything.

古文：刘道真
现代文：不用一一列举了。刘道真
English: There is no need to list them all. Liu Daozhen

古文：晋刘道真遭乱，于河侧与人牵船，见一老妪操橹，道真嘲之曰：女子何不调机弄杼？因甚傍河操橹？
现代文：晋代的刘道真遭遇变乱，便到河边去给人家拉船，见一老妇也在这里摇橹，他嘲讽道： 女人怎么不在家织布，为什么到河上来摇橹？ 
English: Liu Daozhen of the Jin Dynasty encountered turmoil, so he went to the river to pull boats for other people. Seeing an old woman also rocking a raft here, he mocked: Why don't women weave cloth at home, why do they rock rafts on the river?

古文：女答曰：丈夫何不跨马挥鞭？因甚傍河牵船？
现代文：女人答道： 你是大丈夫，怎么不去骑马挥鞭，为什么来到河上拉船？ 
English: The woman replied, "You are fine. Why don't you ride a horse and wave a whip? Why did you come to the river to pull a boat?

古文：又尝与人共饭素盘草舍中，见一妪将两小儿过，并著青衣，嘲之曰：青羊引双羔。
现代文：又有一次，刘道真与人共用一个盘子在草房中吃饭，见一个女人领着两个孩子从门前走过，那女人穿的是黑衣裳，他便嘲讽人家道： 黑羊领双羔。 
English: On another occasion, Liu Daozhen was sharing a plate with others while eating in a grass hut. When he saw a woman walking in front of the door with her two children, the woman was wearing a black dress. He mocked the family saying, "A black sheep leading two lambs."

古文：妇人曰：两猪共一槽。
现代文：那妇人道： 两猪共一槽。 
English: The woman said, "Two pigs share one trough.

古文：道真无语以对。
现代文：结果刘道真无言以对。
English: As a result, Liu Daozhen was speechless.

古文：祖士言
现代文：祖士言
English: The Ancestor's Tale

古文：晋祖士言与钟雅相嘲，钟云：我汝颖之士利如锥，卿燕代之士钝如槌。
现代文：晋朝的祖士言与钟雅两人相嘲讽，钟雅说： 我是汝颖这地方的人，锋利如锥；你乃燕代的人，愚钝如槌。 
English: The ancestor of the Jin dynasty and Zhongya both mocked each other. Zhongya said, "I am a person from this place in Yuying, sharp as a cone; you are a person from the generation of swallows, dull as a hammer.

古文：祖曰：以我钝槌，打尔利锥。
现代文：祖士言说： 那就用我的钝槌，砸你的利锥。 
English: The ancestor said: Then use my blunt hammer to smash your sharpening cone.

古文：钟曰：自有神锥，不可得打。
现代文：钟雅说： 自有神锥，你打不着。 
English: Zhongya said, "You can't beat your own god-cone."

古文：祖曰：既有神锥，亦有神槌。
现代文：祖士言说： 既然有神锥，也就有神槌。
English: The ancestor said: Since there is a divine cone, there is also a divine mallet.

古文：钟遂屈。
现代文：钟雅于是认输。 
English: Zhongya then conceded defeat.

古文：高爽
现代文：高爽
English: High and dry

古文：高爽辩博多才。
现代文：高爽善辩、见多识广而又有才气。
English: He is articulate, well-informed and talented.

古文：时刘茜为晋陵令，爽经途诣之，了不相接，爽甚衔之。
现代文：当时刘茜正任晋陵县令，高爽路过那里时便顺便去看刘茜，可是刘茜知道他到来却并不出来迎接，高爽怀恨在心。
English: At that time, Liu Xi was serving as the governor of Jinling County. When Gao Shuang passed there, he dropped by to see Liu Xi. However, Liu Xi knew he was coming but did not come out to greet him. Gao Shuang held a grudge.

古文：俄而爽代茜为县，茜追迎，赠遗甚厚，悉受之。
现代文：不久，高爽接替刘茜做了晋陵令，刘茜却迎出去很远，并赠送了很多东西。
English: Soon after, Gao Shuang succeeded Liu Xie as Jinlinglingling, but Liu Xie went far away and gave away a lot of things.

古文：答书云：高晋陵自答。
现代文：高爽一一收下，并写了封信告诉他： 高晋陵一定要回赠。 
English: Gao Shuang received them one by one, and wrote a letter to tell him: Gao Jin's tomb must be returned.

古文：或问其故，曰：刘茜饷晋陵令耳，何关爽事。
现代文：有人问原因，他说： 这是刘茜发给晋陵令的饷钱，跟我有什么关系？ 
English: When someone asked why, he said: This is the stolen money that Liu Xie sent to Jinlingling, what does it have to do with me?

古文：稍迁国子助教。
现代文：不久又调任国子监助教。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of assistant professor.

古文：孙挹为兰陵县，爽又诣之，挹了无故人之怀。
现代文：当时孙挹为兰陵县令，高爽到他那儿去时，孙挹却没有朋友的情谊。
English: At that time, Sun Yat-sen was the governor of Lanling County. When Gao Shuang went to visit him, Sun Yat-sen had no friendship.

古文：爽出从阁下过，取笔题鼓面云：身有八尺围，腹无一寸肠，面皮如许厚，被打未遽央。
现代文：高爽走时从一阁楼下过，便取笔在一个鼓面上题写道： 身子有八尺粗，腹内却无一寸肠子，脸皮厚如鼓面，被打也不知恐惧央求。 
English: When Gao Shuang went down from a loft, he took a pen and wrote an inscription on a drum surface: The body is eight feet thick, but there is not an inch of intestine in the abdomen, the face is as thick as a drum, and it is not afraid to be beaten.

古文：挹体肥壮，腰带十围，故以此激之。
现代文：孙挹身体肥壮，腰带就有十尺长，因而高爽以此来刺激他。
English: Sun Yat-sen's body was fat, and his belt was ten feet long, so Gao Shuang used this to stimulate him.

古文：徐之才
现代文：徐之才
English: Xu Zhicai

古文：北齐徐之才封西阳王，时王欣与之才嘲戏之才即嘲王欣姓曰：王之为字。有言则讧，近犬则狂，加头足而为马，施尾角而成羊。
现代文：北齐时徐之才被封为西阳王。有一次王欣与他互相开玩笑。徐之才便嘲弄王欣的姓说：王这个字，有言则讧，近犬则狂，加头足而为马，按上尾和角而成羊。
English: At the time of the Northern Qi, Xu Zhicai was crowned as the King of Xiyang. Once, Wang Xin and he joked with each other. Xu Zhicai mocked Wang Xin's surname and said: "The word 'king' is like a dog's bark, a horse's head and legs, and a sheep's tail and horns.

古文：欣无以对。
现代文：欣无以答对。
English: There is no right answer.

古文：又尝宴宾客，时卢元明在座，戏弄之才姓云：卿姓徐字，乃未入人。
现代文：又有一回徐之才宴请宾朋，当时卢元明在座。他戏弄之才的姓道：你的姓是个徐字，还没有入人呀。
English: Another time, Lu Yuanming was present at a banquet given by Xu Zi Cai to invite guests. He made fun of Xu Zi Cai's surname: "Your surname is Xu, and you haven't been promoted yet."

古文：之才即嘲元明姓卢字：安亡为虐，在丘为虗，生男成虏，配马成驴。
现代文：徐之才便嘲弄卢元明的姓卢字道：安亡为虐，在丘为虗，生男成虏，配马成驴。
English: Xu Zizai then mocked Lu Yuanming's surname Lu Zidao: Anshi for masochism, in the hill for a donkey, a son for a donkey, and a horse for a donkey.

古文：嘲元明二字：去头则是兀明，出颈则是无明，减半则是无目，变声则是无盲。
现代文：嘲弄元明二字道：去头则是兀明，出颈则是无明，减半则是无目，变声则是无盲。
English: The mockery of the two-character way of the original Ming: the head is clear, the neck is unclear, the halving is blind, and the change of voice is blind.

古文：元明亦无以对。
现代文：元明也无对答。
English: There was no response from Motome.

古文：司马消难
现代文：司马消难
English: Sima out of the woods

古文：周司马消难以安陆附陈，宣帝遇之甚厚，以为司空。
现代文：北周的司马消难因为有把安陆归附陈的功绩，宣帝待他很厚，授于他司空之职。
English: North Zhou's Sima Qianhuang, because of his achievement of attributing Anlu to Chen, was treated very generously by Emperor Xuan and was given the post of Sima Qianhuang.

古文：见朝士皆重学术，积经史，消难切慕之。
现代文：司马消难见朝中的官员都很重视学识，收藏经史典籍，便很仰慕人家。
English: Sima Qian could not help but admire the officials of the dynasty who valued learning and collected historical books.

古文：乃多卷黄纸，加之朱轴，诈为典籍，以矜僚友。
现代文：于是他也弄来许多黄纸，在每沓纸上加上一个朱轴，伪装成书籍，以便在僚友面前炫耀。
English: So he also got a lot of yellow paper, and on each pile of paper he added a scroll, disguised as a book, in order to show off in front of his colleagues.

古文：尚书令济阳江总戏之曰：黄纸五经。赤轴三史。消难，齐司空子如之子。
现代文：尚书令济阳江总讽刺他道：黄纸为五经，赤轴是三史，消难，你真是齐国的司空子如的儿子了。
English: Shang Shu ordered the Jiyang River General to satirize him: "The yellow paper is the Five Classics, the red axis is the Three Histories, eliminate difficulties, you are truly the son of the Empress Dowager of Qi."

古文：马王
现代文：马王
English: Ma Wang

古文：隋姓马王二人尝聚宴谈笑，马遂嘲王曰：王是你，元来本姓二，为你漫走来，将丁钉你鼻。
现代文：隋朝时，一个姓马的，一个姓王的，两人聚宴谈笑。马嘲弄王道：王是你，你原来本姓二，因为你随便地走，就把 丁 钉进了你的鼻子。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, two people, one surnamed Ma and the other surnamed Wang, gathered at a banquet to talk and laugh. Ma mocked Wang: "Wang is you, you originally had two surnames, because you walked casually, I nailed Ding into your nose."

古文：王曰：马是你，元来本姓匡，减你尾子来，背上负王郎。
现代文：王说： 马是你了。 原来本姓匡。那是因为剪掉你的尾巴，背上驮着王郎。
English: The king said, "The horse is you. Originally, your real name was Kuang. That's because you had your tail cut off, and Wang Lang was strapped to your back.

古文：酒肆
现代文：酒肆
English: Liquor stores

古文：隋时，数人入酒肆，味酸且淡，乃共嘲此酒。
现代文：隋朝时，几个人一起到酒店去喝酒，酒味酸而且很淡，于是一起嘲讽起来。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, several people went to a hotel to drink together. The wine tasted sour and was very light, so they started to make fun of each other.

古文：一人云：酒，何处漫行来，腾腾失却酉。
现代文：一人道：酒，是从什么地方漫溢而来，腾腾奔流失去酉？
English: One person: Wine, from where does it overflow and lose its fizz?

古文：诸人问云：此何义？
现代文：大家都问：这是什么意思？
English: Everyone asked: What does this mean?

古文：答曰：有水在。
现代文：那人答道：只有水在了。
English: The man replied: There is only water.

古文：次一人云：酒，头似阿滥包头。
现代文：第二位道：酒字，字头好像阿滥包头。
English: The second said, "Shuji" (酒字) with a prefix similar to "A滥包头" (阿滥包头).

古文：诸人问云：何因酒得似阿滥包头？
现代文：众人问：酒怎么能象阿滥包头呢？
English: People asked: How can wine be like boiled cabbage?

古文：答曰：非鹑头。
现代文：他答道：不是鹑头呀。
English: He replied, "It's not a steamed bun."

古文：又一人云：酒，向他篱得头，四脚距地也独宿。
现代文：又有一个人道：酒，象篱笆杖子得了头，四脚悬地而独宿。
English: There is another kind of humanity: wine, like a hedgerow rod, has a head, four feet above the ground and lives alone.

古文：诸人云：此有何义？
现代文：众人问：这是什么意思？
English: The crowd asked: What does this mean?

古文：答云：更无余义。
现代文：那人答道：更无余意。
English: The man replied, "More than that."

古文：诸人共笑云：此嘲最是无豆。
现代文：众人一起笑道： 你这嘲讽最无豆。 
English: Everyone laughed together and said, "Your mockery is completely baseless."

古文：即答云：我若有豆，即归舍作酱，何因此间饮醋来。
现代文：他接着道： 我要有豆子，早就回家去做酱油了，何必在这里喝醋呀。 
English: He continued, "I want to have beans, I already went home to make soy sauce, why should I drink vinegar here.

古文：众欢大笑。
现代文：众欢声大笑。
English: The crowd roared with laughter.

古文：卢思道
现代文：卢思道
English: Ruth Road

古文：隋卢思道尝共寿阳庾知礼作诗。
现代文：隋朝人卢思道曾与寿阳庾知礼一起作诗。
English: Lu Sidao, a member of the Sui Dynasty, once wrote poetry together with Shouyang Shuchi Li.

古文：已成而思道未就。
现代文：庾知礼先成而卢思道尚未写完。
English: Zou Zhili has been written first, but Lu Si Dao has not yet been written.

古文：礼曰：卢诗何太春日？
现代文：庾知礼道：卢诗何必太迟迟了？
English: Zou Zhili said: Why is Lu Shi so late?

古文：思道答曰：自许编苫疾，嫌他织锦迟。
现代文：卢思道回答说：你以编苫疾，嫌别人织锦迟。
English: Lu Si Dao replied, "You are too lazy to weave a tapestry, while others are too late to weave a tapestry."

古文：思道初下武阳入京，内使李德林向思道揖。
现代文：卢思道初次离开武阳到了京城，宫中内史李德林向他作揖致礼。
English: Lu Si Dao left Wuyang for the first time and came to Beijing. Shi Lidlin, a member of the imperial court, bowed to him.

古文：思道谓人曰：德林在齐，恒拜思道，今日官高，向虽拜，乃作跪状。
现代文：卢思道对人讲道：德林在齐朝时，是经常拜我的，今天做了高官，假如还要拜，仍应跪地而拜。
English: Lu Sidao preached to people: Delin used to worship me when he was in the Qi Dynasty. Today, he has become a high-ranking official. If you still want to worship, you should still kneel down and worship.

古文：思道尝在宾门日中立，德林谓之曰：何不就树荫？
现代文：有一次，卢思道在门外炎日下站立很久，李德林对他说：何不去树荫下？
English: Once, Lu Sidao stood for a long time under the blazing sun outside the door. Li Delin said to him: "Why not go under the shade of a tree?

古文：思道曰：热则热矣，不能林下立。
现代文：卢思道说：热是够热的，即使这样，也决不在林下站立。
English: Lu Si said: The heat is hot enough, even so, never stand under the forest.

古文：思道为《周齐兴亡论》，周则武皇宣帝，悉有恶声；齐高祖太上，咸无善誉。
现代文：卢思道曾写过《周齐兴亡论》，其中写道：周朝的武皇宣帝，名声恶浊。齐朝的高祖太上皇，全无好声誉。
English: Lu Sidao once wrote "On the Rise and Fall of Zhou Qi," in which he wrote: Emperor Wu Xuan of the Zhou Dynasty had a bad reputation. Emperor Gao of the Qi Dynasty had no good reputation at all.

古文：思道尝谒东宫，东宫谓之曰：《周齐兴亡论》。是卿作不？
现代文：他去拜谒东宫太子时，太子问他：《周齐兴亡论》是你所作？
English: When he went to pay his respects to the Crown Prince of the Eastern Palace, the Crown Prince asked him: "Did you write "Zhou Qi Xingzhuan"?

古文：思道曰：是。
现代文：卢思道答说：是。
English: Ruth replied: "Yes."

古文：东宫曰：为卿君者，不亦难乎？
现代文：太子道：作你的君主，不也够难的吗？
English: Taizi said: Isn't it hard enough to be your monarch?

古文：思道不能对。
现代文：卢思道不作答。
English: Lu Si Dao did not answer.

古文：隋文帝以徐陵辩捷，无人酬对，深以为耻。
现代文：隋文帝因南朝使者徐陵善辩敏捷，没人能与酬对，而深以为耻辱。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty was deeply humiliated by the fact that Xu Ling, the envoy of the Southern Dynasty, was so eloquent and agile that no one could match him.

古文：乃访朝官：谁可对使？
现代文：于是向朝官们打听，谁可以应对他？
English: So he asked the imperial officials, who could deal with him?

古文：当时举思道，文帝甚喜。即诏对南使，朝官俱往。
现代文：当时有人推荐了卢思道，文帝很喜悦，立即下诏命他到南朝会谈，朝官们也一起前往。
English: At that time, Lu Si Dao was recommended by someone. Emperor Wen was very pleased and immediately ordered him to go to South Korea for talks. The imperial officials also went there together.

古文：徐陵遥见思道最小，笑曰：此公甚小。
现代文：徐陵远望卢思道最小，笑道：哈哈，此公太小了。
English: Xu Ling looked far and wide at Lu Si Dao, who was the smallest. He laughed and said, "Ha ha, this prince is too small."

古文：思道遥应曰：以公小臣，不劳长者。
现代文：卢思道也远远地应道：以为公是小臣，就别来劳嘉长辈了。
English: Lu Si Dao also responded from afar: If you think that the public is a junior minister, don't come to Laojia elders.

古文：须臾坐定，徐陵谓思道曰：昔殷迁顽人，本居兹邑，今存并是其人。
现代文：不一会儿人们坐下来，徐陵对卢思道说：昔日殷朝时迁移来许多愚人，就居住在这个城市，如今这里全是那些人。
English: After a while, the people sat down, and Xu Ling said to Lu Sidao, "In the past, during the Yin Dynasty, many fools migrated to live in this city, and now it is full of those people.

古文：思道应声笑曰：昔永嘉南渡，尽居江左，今之存者，唯君一人。
现代文：卢思道应声笑道：当年晋怀帝南渡，所有人都住在江左，可今日活着的，唯你一人了。
English: Lu Si said with a smile, "Back in the time of Emperor Jinhuai's southern crossing, everyone lived on the left side of the river, but you are the only one alive today."

古文：众皆大笑。徐陵无以对。
现代文：众人大笑，徐陵再无话可对。
English: Everyone laughs, and Xu Ling is speechless.

古文：又隋令思道聘陈，陈主敕在路诸处，不得共语，致令失机。
现代文：又有一次，隋朝命卢思道出访陈国。陈后主下令凡卢思道路经的各处，不得与他说话，使他失去取笑人的机会。
English: On another occasion, the Sui Dynasty ordered Lu Si Dao to visit the State of Chen. The Empress of Chen ordered that wherever Lu Si traveled, he should not be spoken to, so that he would lose the opportunity to make fun of people.

古文：思道既渡江，过一寺，诸僧与思道设，亦不敢有言，只供索饮食而已。
现代文：卢思道已过了长江，经过一个寺院，僧人们为他准备了饮食。谁也不敢与他说话，只供他吃喝。
English: Lu Si Dao had already crossed the Yangtze River and passed a temple. The monks prepared food and drink for him. No one dared to talk to him, they only offered him food and drink.

古文：于是索蜜浸益智，劝思道尝之。思道笑曰：法师久服无故，何劳以此劝人？
现代文：于是卢思道向法师索要蜜浸，法师劝他先尝尝，他笑道：法师久服无妨，还用这样来劝我么。
English: So Lu Sidao asked the sorcerer for a honey dip, and the sorcerer advised him to taste it first. He laughed and said, "The sorcerer can take it for a long time, can he still advise me in this way?"

古文：僧即违敕，失机且惧。
现代文：法师已经违犯了敕令，因失机而恐惧。
English: The sorcerer had already violated the imperial edict and was terrified by the accident.

古文：思道至陈，手执国信，陈主既见思道，因用《观世音经》语弄思道曰：是何商人，赍持重宝？
现代文：卢思道到了陈国，手拿国书去见陈后主，陈后主便以《观世音经》语捉弄他：你是哪里的商人，带来重宝？
English: Lu Si said that when he arrived in Chen Province, he went to see the Empress Chen with the book of the country in his hand. The Empress Chen then teased him with the words of "Kun Shien Jing": Where are you a merchant, bringing treasures?

古文：思道应声，还以《观世音经》，报曰：忽遇恶风，漂堕罗刹鬼国。
现代文：卢思道也以《观世音经》语秉告道：忽然遇上恶风，漂流坠落到罗刹鬼国。
English: Lu Si Dao also announced in the words of "Kun Shih On Ching": Suddenly encountering a bad wind, he drifted and fell into the land of ghosts of Luo Cha.

古文：陈主大惭，遂无以对。
现代文：陈后主大愧，因而无言以对。
English: Chen Hou was so ashamed that he was speechless.

古文：李愔
现代文：李愔
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：魏高祖山陵既就，诏令魏收、祖孝徽、刘逖、卢思道等，各作挽歌词十首。
现代文：魏高祖的陵墓建成后，皇上下诏令魏收、祖孝徽、刘逖、卢思道等各作挽歌词十首。
English: After the mausoleum of Wei Gao Zu was built, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Wei Jie, Zu Xiaohui, Liu Wei, Lu Si Dao and others to each compose ten poems.

古文：尚书令杨遵彦诠之，魏收四首，祖刘各二首被用，而思道独取八首，故时人号八咏卢郎。
现代文：由尚书令杨遵颜选拔。结果选魏收四首，祖孝徽、刘逖各二首，唯独卢思道被选中八首，因而当时人们称他为八咏卢郎。
English: Yang Zunyan was selected by Shang Shuling. As a result, Wei was selected to receive four poems, Zu Xiaohui and Liu Xuan two poems each, but Lu Sido was selected to receive eight poems, so at that time people called him Eight-Eyed Lu Lang.

古文：思道尝在魏收席，举酒劝刘逖。
现代文：有一次卢思道在魏收家宴饮时，曾举杯劝刘逖。
English: Once, when Lu Sidao was holding a banquet at the Wei family's home, he raised his glass to persuade Liu Xuan.

古文：收曰：卢八劝刘二邪？
现代文：魏收说：卢八劝刘二了。
English: Wei Wei said: Lu Bax persuaded Liu II.

古文：中书郎赵郡李愔，亦戏之曰：卢八问讯刘二。
现代文：中书郎赵郡人李愔也戏之道：卢八在问讯刘二。
English: In the play, Lu Hachi is interrogating Liu II.

古文：逖衔之。
现代文：刘逖记恨在心。
English: Liu Ye has hatred in his heart.

古文：及愔后坐事被鞭扑，逖戏之曰：高槌两下，熟鞭一百，何如言 问讯刘二 时。
现代文：后来李愔因罪被鞭击，刘逖戏弄他道：高槌两下，熟鞭一百！这比起你说 问讯刘二 时的滋味来怎么样？
English: Later, Li Yao was whipped for his crime, and Liu Yao teased him: "Two strokes of the high mallet, one hundred lashes! How does this compare to the taste you had when you interrogated Liu Er?"

古文：薛道衡
现代文：薛道衡
English: Xue Daoheng

古文：隋薛道衡为聘南使，南朝无问道俗，但机辩者，即方便引道衡见之。
现代文：隋朝的薛道衡被派往南朝访问。南朝不问是道还是俗，只要机敏善辩者，就随时引薛道衡去见。
English: Xue Daoheng of the Sui Dynasty was sent to visit the Southern Dynasty. The Southern Dynasty did not ask whether it was a Taoist or a layman, as long as it was a clever and good debater, it would always bring Xue Daoheng to see him.

古文：一僧甚辩捷，令于寺上佛堂中读《法华经》，将道衡向寺礼拜。
现代文：一和尚十分善辩而敏捷，就让他在寺院佛堂中读《法华经》，然后带薛道衡到寺中礼拜。
English: One monk was very eloquent and quick, so he had him read the "Law and Culture" in the temple hall, and then took Xue Doheng to the temple for worship.

古文：至佛堂门，僧大引声读《法华经》云：鸠槃荼鬼，今在门外。
现代文：薛道衡刚走至佛堂门口、那和尚便大声读《法华经》道：鸠盘荼鬼，今在门外。
English: As soon as Xue Daoheng walked to the door of the Buddhist hall, the monk read aloud from the "Law and Culture Sutra," saying, "The demon is now outside the door.

古文：道衡即应声还以《法华经》。答曰：毗舍阇鬼，乃在其中。
现代文：薛道衡立即应声，也以《法华经》回答道：毗舍阇鬼，乃在其中。
English: Xue Daoheng immediately responded, also using the "Law and Culture Sutra" to answer: "Being possessed by ghosts is one of them.

古文：僧徒愧服，更无以报。
现代文：那和尚愧服，更无话可对。
English: That monk is ashamed, and there is nothing more to say.

古文：解嘲
现代文：解嘲
English: De-mockery

古文：隋末，刘黑闼据有数州，纵其威虐，合意者厚加赏赐，违意者即被屠割。
现代文：隋朝末年，刘黑闼占据了数州。他大逞其威势和虐暴，对合他意的人赏赐丰厚，对违背他意愿的人随意屠杀。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Liu Hefei occupied several states. He took great pride in his power and brutality. He rewarded those who agreed with him generously and slaughtered those who opposed his wishes.

古文：尝闲暇，访得解嘲人。
现代文：有一回他有了空余时间，听到有一个专门能解嘲的人，便把他召进庭院来。
English: Once, when he had some spare time, he heard that there was a man who specialized in telling jokes, and he called him into the courtyard.

古文：召入庭前立，须臾，水恶鸟飞过，命嘲之。
现代文：片刻，一只水恶鸟从上面飞过，刘黑闼命他嘲之。
English: For a moment, a water bird flew over from above, and Liu He ridiculed it.

古文：即云：水恶鸟，头如镰杓尾如凿，河里搦鱼无僻错。
现代文：那人道：水恶鸟，头象镰刀杓子，尾巴像个凿子，河里捞鱼无偏错。
English: That person: water viper, head like a sickle, tail like a chisel, fishing in the river without error.

古文：大悦。又令嘲骆驼，嘲曰：骆驼，项曲绿，蹄被他，负物多。
现代文：刘黑闼很高兴，又叫他嘲笑骆驼，那人道：骆驼，脖子弯曲而发绿，走路蹄子 被他、被他 响，载的东西多。
English: Liu Heyao was very happy, and told him to laugh at the camel. The camel's neck was bent and green, and its hoofs walked. It was carried and rattled by him, and carried a lot of things.

古文：因大笑，赐绢五十匹。
现代文：刘黑闼于是大笑，赏绢五十匹。
English: So Liu Heyao laughed loudly and rewarded the 50 centipedes.

古文：拜毕，左膊上负绢走出，未至戟门，倒卧不起。
现代文：那人拜谢之后，把赏绢挎在左臂上走去。还未走到戟门，便倒在地上不起来。
English: After the man said his thanks, he walked away with the medal on his left arm. Before he reached the gate, he fell to the ground and could not get up.

古文：黑闼令问：何意倒地？答云：为是偏檐。
现代文：刘黑闼叫人问他为何倒地不起，他回答说：因为偏坠。
English: Liu Heyao called someone to ask him why he couldn't get up from the ground, and he answered: because of the fall.

古文：更命五十屯绵，置右膊将去，令明更来。
现代文：于是刘黑闼命再赏五十匹绵，放在他右臂上拿去，并叫他明天再来。
English: So Liu Heyao ordered another fifty horses to be placed on his right arm, and told him to come back tomorrow.

古文：及还村，路逢一知识，问云：在何处得此绵绢？
现代文：回到村里，遇到一个熟人，那人问：在哪里得到这么多绵绢？
English: Back in the village, he met an acquaintance who asked: "Where did you get so much silk?"

古文：具说其事。
现代文：解嘲人向他述说了这件事。
English: The commentator told him about it.

古文：乃乞诵此嘲语，并问倒地之由。
现代文：那人求他再背诵一下嘲语，并问明了倒地的缘由，便大喜而归。
English: The man begged him to recite the taunt again, and when he found out why he had fallen to the ground, he was overjoyed.

古文：大喜而归，语其妇曰：我明日定得绵绢。
现代文：回到家告诉他媳妇说：我明天一定能得到绵绢。
English: When he got home, he told his daughter-in-law, "I'm sure I'll be able to get some cottonseed meal tomorrow."

古文：及晓即诣门，言：极善解嘲。
现代文：第二天早，那人来到刘黑闼门前，说自己极善于解嘲。
English: Early the next morning, the man came to Liu Heyao's door and said that he was very good at solving mockery.

古文：黑闼大喜，令引之。
现代文：刘黑闼很高兴，下令领他进来。
English: Liu Heixuan was very happy and ordered to bring him in.

古文：适尾一猕猴在庭，命嘲之。
现代文：恰好此时有一只猕猴在院子里，刘黑闼便命他嘲之。
English: Just at this time, there was a macaque monkey in the yard, and Liu Heyao ordered him to taunt it.

古文：即曰：猕猴，头如镰杓尾如凿，河里搦鱼无僻错。
现代文：那人道：猕猴，头如镰刀杓子，尾巴象个凿子，河里捞鱼无偏错。
English: The man: a macaque monkey, head like a sickle, tail like a chisel, fishing in the river without error.

古文：黑闼已怪，犹未之责。
现代文：刘黑闼心里很怪罪他，但并未斥责他。
English: Liu Heyao felt very guilty about him, but did not reprimand him.

古文：又一鸱飞度，复令嘲之。又云：老鸱，项曲绿，蹄被他，负物多。
现代文：此时又有一只鸱鸟从上空飞过，叫他再嘲弄一番，那人又道：老鸱，脖子弯曲而发绿，走路蹄子 被他被他 响，能驮很多东西。
English: At this time, another ostrich flew over and asked him to mock it some more. The man said, "The ostrich has a long beak, its neck is bent and turns green, and its hoofs are used for walking. It is rattled by the ostrich and can pick up a lot of things."

古文：于是大怒，令割一耳。
现代文：刘黑闼大怒，令割去他一只耳朵。
English: Liu Heyao was so angry that he had one of his ears cut off.

古文：走出至庭，又即倒地。令问之，又云： 偏檐。
现代文：走出庭院，那人倒地不起，刘黑闼叫人问他怎么回事，那人说：偏坠。
English: Coming out of the courtyard, the man fell to the ground and could not get up. Liu Heyao called someone to ask him what had happened. The person said: "He fell sideways."

古文：复令割一耳。
现代文：于是下令再割一只耳朵。
English: He then ordered another ear to be cut off.

古文：还家，妇迎问绵绢何？
现代文：回到家，媳妇迎上来问绵绢在哪儿，那人道：绵绢？
English: Back home, my daughter-in-law came up to ask where Mian Ye was. The man said, "Mian Ye?"

古文：答曰：绵绢，割两耳，只有面。
现代文：割去两只耳朵，只剩下一张脸了！
English: Cut off two ears, only one face is left!

古文：辛亶
现代文：辛亶
English: Xin Xin

古文：隋辛亶为吏部侍郎，选人为之榜，略曰：枉州抑县屈滞乡不申里衔恨先生，问隋吏部侍郎辛亶曰： 当今天子圣明，群僚用命。
现代文：隋朝时，辛亶为吏部侍郎，选人们公开给他贴出告示，简言如下：枉州抑县屈滞乡不申里衔恨先生，质问隋吏部侍郎辛亶道：当今天子圣明，群臣尽心竭力。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Xin Yao was a steward of the cadre department, and the electors publicly posted a notice to him, with the following brief explanation: "Wu Zhou Yi County, Qu Yao Township, do not question Mr. Liang Huan, question the steward of the Sui cadre department, Xin Yao Road: Today is a holy day, the ministers are doing their best.

古文：外拓四方，内齐七政。
现代文：对外疆土四方拓展，国内政行畅通。
English: The four-way expansion to foreign territories and the smooth flow of domestic politics.

古文：而子位处权衡，职当水镜。
现代文：可你位处轻重之地，当如水镜一般明而不污。
English: But when you are in a place of great importance, you should be as clear as a mirror and not dirty.

古文：居进退之首，握褒贬之柄，理应识是识非，知滞知微，使无才者泥伏，有用者云飞。
现代文：何况你居于给官员升降的首脑之职，握有褒贬他们的大权，理应识别是非，明察细微，把没有才能的拿下去，把有用的人提拔上来。
English: What's more, you are in charge of promoting and demoting officials, and you have the power to praise and criticize them. You should be able to distinguish right from wrong, see through subtleties, take down those without talent, and promote those who are useful.

古文：奈何尸禄素餐，滥处上官，黜陟失所，选补伤残。
现代文：可你怎么竟是尸位素餐。滥处高位？对降职升官都处理失当，而选任补缺的都是些有缺陷的人。
English: But how is it that you are a dead man eating a dead man's bread? Abusing high-ranking positions? You have mishandled demotions and promotions, and the people you have appointed to fill vacancies are all flawed.

古文：小人在位，君子駮弹，莫不代子战灼，而子独何以安？ 
现代文：小人可安然在位，君子倒被贬黜。没有人不是对你恨之入骨，而你何以安心？
English: A villain may reign safely, but a gentleman is despised. No one does not hate you to the bone, and how can you be at ease?

古文：辛亶曰： 百姓之子，万国之人，不可皆识。
现代文：辛亶道：百姓之子，万国之人，是不可能全认识的。
English: Xin Xin said, "It is impossible for the sons of the people, the people of all nations, to know everything.

古文：谁厚谁亲？
现代文：怎能说对谁厚对谁亲呢？
English: How can you say to whom to be generous and to whom to be kind?

古文：为桀赏者，不可不喜；被尧责者，宁有不嗔？
现代文：被桀赞赏的人，不能不喜欢；被尧斥责的人，哪有不生气的？
English: Who cannot dislike a man who is praised by others; who cannot be angry with a man who is reproved by others?

古文：得官者见喜，失官者见疾。
现代文：得到官位的人自然欢喜，失去官位的自然表现出痛恨。
English: It is natural for those who have obtained official positions to rejoice, and for those who have lost their official positions to express their hatred.

古文：细而论之，非亶之失。
现代文：细而论之，这不是我的过失。
English: In detail, this is not my fault.

古文：先生曰： 是何疾欤？
现代文：先生又道：为什么要恨你？
English: The teacher also said, "Why should I hate you?

古文：是何疾欤？
现代文：为什么要恨你？
English: Why should I hate you?

古文：不识何不访其名，官少何不简其精，细寻状迹，足识法家；细寻判验，足识文华。
现代文：不认识为什么不去访一访，官少为什么不删繁就简取其精？只要仔细察看文状，一定能找到法家；只要仔细区别验看试卷，完全可以找到有文采的人。
English: If you don't know, why don't you visit once? If you don't know the officials, why don't you cut out the complex and get to the essence? As long as you carefully inspect the documents, you will definitely be able to find a lawyer; as long as you carefully distinguish and inspect the examination papers, you can completely find a person with literary talent.

古文：宁不知石中出玉、黄金出沙？
现代文：难道不知道石中出玉、金出于沙吗？
English: Don't they know that diamonds come from stones and gold from sand?

古文：量子之才，度子之智，祗可投之四裔，以御魑魅。
现代文：量你的才能，度你的智力，仅仅可以到最边远的地方，去抵御那些魑魅魍魉。
English: Measure your talent, measure your intelligence, you can only go to the most remote places, to resist those temptations.

古文：怨嗟不少，实伤和气。
现代文：你还怨叹不少，实在有伤和气。
English: You also complain a lot. You are really hurt and angry.

古文：亶再拜而谢曰： 幸蒙先生见责，实觉多违。
现代文：辛亶再拜而谢道：幸蒙先生见教，实觉多违。
English: Hsin-tao bowed again and said, "Thank you, Mr. Sheng-meng, for your advice. It's contrary to my true feelings.

古文：谨当刮肌贯骨，改过惩非。
现代文：谨当刮肌贯骨，改过惩非。
English: We should scrape the muscle and go through the bone to correct and punish.

古文：请先生纵亶自修，舍亶之罚，如更有违，甘从斧钺。
现代文：请先生允许我改正，免去对我的惩罚，如再有违，甘愿刀劈斧砍。
English: Sir, please allow me to correct myself and avoid punishment. If there is any further violation, I am willing to cut it with a knife and axe.

古文：先生曰：如子之辈，车载斗量，朝庭多少，立须相代。
现代文：先生道：象你等之辈，车载斗量，朝廷有多少人，立即更换。
English: Teacher said: Like you and other generations, the number of car-mounted buckets and the number of people in the imperial court should be changed immediately.

古文：那得久旷天官，待子自作？
现代文：怎么可以长期没有吏部长官，而等待你去自修？
English: How can there be no officials and ministers for a long time, while waiting for you to self-cultivate?

古文：急去急去，不得久住！
现代文：快去快去，不得久留！
English: Hurry up, hurry up, we have to stay a while!

古文：唤取师巫，却行无处。
现代文：唤取师巫，却行无处。
English: Summoning witches and wizards, but getting nowhere.

古文：亶掩泣而言曰： 罪过自招，自灭自消，岂敢更将面目，来污圣朝。
现代文：辛亶掩面哭泣道：罪过自讨，只能自灭自消，哪里还敢再以我的面目来脏污圣朝。
English: Hsin Yao hid his face and wept, "I have to repent for my sins. I can only destroy myself. How dare I defile the Holy Temple with my face?"

古文：先生曳杖而歌曰： 辛亶去，吏部明。开贤路，遇太平。
现代文：先生拖着手杖咏道：辛亶去，吏部明，开贤路，遇太平。
English: The teacher drags his cane along the path: Hsin-tao goes, Li-bu-ming, Kai-hsien goes, Yu-taiping goes.

古文：今年定知不可得，后岁依期更入京。
现代文：今年定知不可得，后岁依期再入京。
English: This year, I'm going to study hard, and next year I'll return to Beijing as scheduled.

古文：牛弘
现代文：牛弘
English: Ushihiro

古文：隋牛弘为吏部尚书。
现代文：隋朝时，牛弘为吏部尚书。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Niu Hong was a member of the cadre.

古文：有选人马敞者，形貌最陋。
现代文：有个叫马敞的人，虽经吏部铨选合格，但尚未授官，因其面貌丑陋，牛弘很轻视他。
English: There was a man named Ma Zhan, who had been selected by the cadre department, but had not yet been appointed. Because of his ugly appearance, Niu Hong disdained him.

古文：弘轻之，侧卧食果子，嘲敞曰：尝闻扶风马，谓言天上下。
现代文：一天，牛弘正侧卧着吃水果时，嘲讽马敞道：曾听扶风马，说可扶摇上天下地。
English: One day, when Niu Hong was lying on his side and eating fruit, he mocked the horse and said: I once heard that a horse that is supported by the wind can be supported by the whole world.

古文：今见扶风马，得驴亦不假。
现代文：今见扶风马，说是驴也一点不假。
English: Now that I have seen the wind-up horse, it is not untrue to say that it is a donkey.

古文：敞应声曰：尝闻陇西牛，千石不用軥。今见陇西牛，卧地打草头。
现代文：马敞应声道：曾闻陇西牛，能驮千石不用车，今见陇西牛，卧在地上打草吃。
English: Ma Zhan replied, "I once heard that the cow could eat a thousand stones without a cart, but now I see the cow lying on the ground and eating grass."

古文：弘惊起，遂与官。
现代文：牛弘吃惊而起。于是授与他官做。
English: Surprised, Ushihiro stood up. So he gave him the job.

古文：侯白
现代文：侯白
English: Hou Bai

古文：陈朝尝令人聘隋，不知其使机辩深浅，乃密令侯白变形貌，著故弊衣，为贱人供承。
现代文：陈国派人出使到隋国，隋国不知那个使者的机智论辩水平如何，于是密令侯白去试探，并让侯白变变形貌，穿上破旧衣裳，装作下贱人来侍奉。
English: Chen Guo sent an envoy to Sui Guo. Sui Guo did not know the level of wit and argumentation of that envoy, so he secretly ordered Hou Bai to test, and let Hou Bai change his appearance, put on shabby clothes, and pretend to be a hussy to serve.

古文：客谓是微贱，甚轻之，乃傍卧放气与之言。
现代文：那使者听说来者是卑微之辈，便十分轻视他，侧卧于床上一边放屁一边与他说话。
English: When the messenger heard that he was a lowly man, he treated him with contempt, lying on his side on the bed and talking to him while farting.

古文：白心颇不平。
现代文：侯白心里很不平静。
English: Hou Bai felt very uneasy.

古文：问白曰：汝国马价贵贱？
现代文：那人问道：你们国家的马价钱贵还是贱啊？
English: The man asked: Are horses expensive or cheap in your country?

古文：报云：马有数等，贵贱不同：若从伎俩，筋脚好。
现代文：侯白答道：马有数等，各不一样，贵贱也不同。若是有伎俩，筋骨脚力好，形貌不丑，又经得住乘骑的，值二十千以上。
English: Hou Bai replied, "There are several kinds of horses, each one is different, and there are different levels of nobility. If it has a trick, has good bone and muscle strength, is not ugly, and can withstand riding, it is worth more than twenty thousand."

古文：形容不恶，堪得乘骑者，值二十千已上；若形容粗壮，虽无伎俩，堪驮物，值四五千已上；若弥尾燥蹄，绝无伎俩，傍卧放气，一钱不值。使者大惊，问其姓名，知是侯白，方始愧谢。
现代文：若是形体很粗壮，虽无伎俩，可是能驮东西，值四五千以上。若是毫无伎俩，又侧卧放屁的，一个钱不值。使者大吃一惊，问他的姓名，知道他是侯白后，才惭愧地向他道歉。
English: If the body is very robust, although there is no trick, but can pick up things, it is worth more than four or five thousand. If there is no trick, but also lying on its side and farting, it is not worth a penny. The messenger was taken aback, asked his name, and after knowing that he was Hou Bai, he was ashamed to apologize to him.

