古文：赵泰袁廓曹宗之孙回璞李强友韦广济郄惠连
现代文：赵泰袁廓曹宗之孙回璞李强友韦广济郄惠连
English: Zhao Tai, Yuan Gu, Cao Zong's grandson, Hui Xuan, Li Qiangyou, Wei Guangji, and Huilian

古文：赵泰
现代文：赵泰
English: Zhao Tai

古文：晋赵泰字文和，清河贝丘人也。祖父京兆太守。
现代文：西晋，清河贝丘人赵泰，字文和。他祖父任京兆太守。
English: Western Jin Dynasty, Zhao Tai, a native of Beichu in the Qing River, wrote the characters "文和." His grandfather served as the governor of Beijing.

古文：泰郡察孝廉，公府辟不就。
现代文：郡府打算举荐他为孝廉，欲征召任职，但赵泰躲在家里不愿做官。
English: The county government plans to recommend him as a filial son and wants to recruit him for a post, but Zhao Tai is hiding at home and does not want to be an official.

古文：精思圣典，有誉乡里。
现代文：他精心钻研圣人经典，在乡里百姓中很有名望。
English: He carefully studied the classics of sages and was well-known among the people in the countryside.

古文：当晚乃仕，终中散大夫。
现代文：直到晚年时才做官，临终时任中散大夫。
English: He did not become an official until late in life, and on his deathbed he was appointed Zhongshan doctor.

古文：泰年三十五时，尝卒心痛，须臾而死。下尸于地，心暖不冷，屈申随意。
现代文：赵泰三十五岁时，曾突然心痛，片刻而死，尸体停放在地上，但心仍热而不冷，四肢可随意屈伸。
English: When Zhao Tai was thirty-five years old, he had a sudden heartache and died for a moment. His body was placed on the ground, but his heart was still warm, not cold, and his limbs could be flexed at will.

古文：既死十日，忽然喉中有声如雨，俄而苏活。
现代文：在他死后第十天的时候，忽然听到他喉咙中有如下雨的声音，倾刻便苏醒活过来。
English: On the tenth day after his death, he suddenly heard the sound of the following rain in his throat, and instantly came to life.

古文：说初死之时，梦有一人，来近心下。复有二人，乘黄马，从者二人，夹持泰腋，径将东行。
现代文：他说他刚死的时候，梦见有一个人来到他心下，又有两人骑黄马，两个随从夹扶着赵泰的两臂径直向东走。
English: He said that when he had just died, he dreamed of a person coming to his heart, two people riding a yellow horse, and two attendants holding Zhao Tai's arms straight to the east.

古文：不知可几里，至一大城，崔峷高峻，城邑青黑色，遂将泰向城门八。
现代文：不知走了多少里，走到一座大城，城镇高大险峻，青黑色，他们便夹扶赵泰进入城门。
English: I don't know how many miles they walked, until they reached a big city. The town was tall, steep, and blue-black. They then helped Zhao Tai to enter the city gate.

古文：经两重门，有瓦室，可数千间。男女大小，亦数千人。行列而吏著皂衣，有五六人，条疏姓字。云： 当以科呈府君。 
现代文：经过两重门后，看到数千间瓦房，还有数千男女老少排列成行，有五六个小吏身穿皂衣，按顺序排列每个人的姓名，并说要分门别类地呈报给府君。
English: After passing through the double doors, I saw thousands of tile-roofed houses, and thousands of men, women, and children lined up in rows. There were five or six petty officials dressed in soaps, arranging the names of each person in order, and saying that they should be reported to the governor in different categories.

古文：泰名在三十，须臾，将泰与数千人男女，一时俱进。府君西向坐，阅视名簿讫，复遣泰南入里门。
现代文：赵泰排在第三十名。一会儿，将赵泰和数千名男女一齐带进地府，府君面西而坐，阅视名册后，又让赵泰向南进入里门。
English: Zhao Tai was in the thirtieth place. A moment later, Zhao Tao brought Zhao Tai and thousands of men and women into the palace together. The governor sat facing west, and after reading the roster, he let Zhao Tai go south to enter the inner gate.

古文：有人著绛衣，坐大屋下，以次呼名。问生时何作罪，行何福善，谛汝等以实言也。
现代文：见有人穿着深红色衣服坐在大屋下，按顺序呼叫名字，并问活着时犯过什么罪，行过什么善事，要详细的如实说明。
English: If you see someone dressed in crimson sitting under a large house, call out their names in order, and ask them what sins they have committed and what good deeds they have done while alive, be sure to give a detailed and truthful explanation.

古文：此恒遣六部使者在人间，疏记善恶，具有条状，不可得虚。
现代文：地府一直派遣六部使者在人间，逐条记录了每个人的善恶，不能说假话。
English: The prefectural government has always sent six emissaries to the human world, who have recorded the good and evil of each person one by one, and cannot tell a lie.

古文：泰答： 父兄仕官皆二千石。我少在家，修学而已，无所事也，亦不犯恶。 
现代文：赵泰回答说： 我父亲和我哥哥当官时都是两千石的俸禄，我年少时在家读书，没有做事，也没犯过什么罪恶。 
English: Zhao Tai replied: When my father and my brother were officials, they both received a salary of 2,000 koku. When I was young, I studied at home, did not work, and did not commit any crimes.

古文：乃遣泰为水官监作吏，将二千余人，运沙裨岸，昼夜勤苦。
现代文：于是便任赵泰为水官监作吏，率两千多人，运沙石修堤岸，昼夜忙碌。
English: As a result, Zhao Tai was appointed as a supervisor of water officials, leading more than two thousand people, transporting sand and stone to repair the embankment, and was busy day and night.

古文：后转泰水官都督，知诸狱事。给泰兵马，令案行地狱，所至诸狱。楚毒各殊。
现代文：后来又让赵泰任水官都督，掌管各地狱中的事务，给他兵马，命他巡视地狱。他所到的各狱，各种毒刑各有不同。
English: Later, he appointed Zhao Tai as the governor of the naval officer, in charge of the affairs of prisons around the country, gave him soldiers and horses, and ordered him to inspect the hell. Each prison he visited had different kinds of torture.

古文：或针贯其舌，流血竟体。或被头露发，裸形徒跣，相牵而行。
现代文：有的针穿舌头，遍身流血；有的披头散发，赤身裸足，相互牵引而行。
English: Some pierce their tongues with needles and bleed all over; some walk barefoot, naked, dragging each other along.

古文：有持大仗，从后催促。
现代文：有人拿着大木棒，在后边催促。
English: Someone with a large wooden stick was urging them on from behind.

古文：铁床铜柱，烧之洞然。驱迫此人，抱卧其上，赴即焦烂，寻复还生。
现代文：铁床铜柱用火烧得能看见火苗，逼迫着有罪的人抱住铁床趴在上面，身体马上被火烧得焦烂，随即又活过来。
English: The iron bed and the copper pillar were burned with fire so that the flames could be seen, forcing the guilty to embrace the iron bed and lie on it. The body was immediately burned to death by the fire, and then came back to life.

古文：或炎炉巨镬，焚煮罪人，身首碎坠，随沸翻转。有鬼持叉，倚于其侧。
现代文：还有火炉和大锅烧煮罪人，身首粉碎，随着沸水翻转，有拿着叉的鬼站在旁边。
English: There is also a furnace and a cauldron for boiling sinners, their necks are crushed, they are turned upside down with boiling water, and a ghost with a fork stands next to them.

古文：有三四百人，立于一面，次当入镬，相抱悲泣。
现代文：有三四百人站在一边，按顺序该进入锅内时，互相拥抱哭泣。
English: Three or four hundred people stood to one side, weeping and hugging each other as they filed into the cauldron.

古文：或剑树高广，不知限极，根茎枝叶，皆剑为之。人众相訾，自登自攀，若有欣竞，而身体割截，尺寸离断。
现代文：有非常高大的剑树，树的根茎枝叶都是用剑做成，人们互相怨恨，各自攀登，好像很高兴似的互相比赛，而身体却被割截成一段一段的。
English: There are very tall sword trees, the roots, branches and leaves of which are all made of swords. People hate each other, climb each other, and compete with each other as if they were happy, but their bodies are cut into pieces.

古文：泰见祖父母及二弟，在此狱中涕泣。
现代文：赵泰看见他的祖父祖母和二弟，在这个狱中哭泣。
English: Zhao Tai saw his grandparents and second brother crying in this prison.

古文：泰出狱门，见有二人，赍文书来。说狱吏。言有三人，其家为于塔寺中悬幡烧香，救解其罪，可出福舍。
现代文：赵泰走出了狱门，看见了两个人抱着文书走来，告诉狱吏说，有三个人，他们家在塔寺中悬挂招魂幡、烧纸，解救他们的罪过，可以走出福舍。
English: Zhao Tai walked out of the prison gate and saw two people walking towards him with documents in their arms. He told the prison officers that there were three people in his family who had hung banners and burnt paper in the pagoda and temple to invite the spirits to free them from their sins, and that they could walk out of the blessed house.

古文：俄见三人，自狱而出，已有自然衣服，完整在身。南诣一门，名开光大舍。有三重门，朱彩照发。
现代文：不一会儿，见三人从狱中走出，穿着原来的衣服，很齐整，向南进入一门，名叫开光大舍，有三重门，红色发光。
English: After a while, I saw the three of them walk out of the prison, dressed in their original clothes, very neat, and head south to enter a door called the Kaiko-taisho, which has three doors and glows red.

古文：见此三人，即入舍中，泰亦随入。
现代文：只见这三人进入开光大舍中，赵泰也随着进去。
English: Seeing the three of them enter the Kaiko mansion, Zhao Tai followed them inside.

古文：前有大殿，珍宝周饰，精光耀目，金玉为床。
现代文：前面有一大殿，用珍宝装饰，精光耀眼，用金玉做的床。
English: In front of it there is a large hall, decorated with precious stones, glittering and dazzling, with a bed made of gold.

古文：见一神人，姿容伟异，殊好非常，坐此座上。边有沙门，立倚甚众。
现代文：看见一个神人，身姿容貌魁伟与众不同，坐在殿中座上，旁边有许多和尚站在那里。
English: He saw a divine man, tall and handsome, sitting on a throne in the middle of the hall, with many monks standing nearby.

古文：见府君来，恭敬作礼。
现代文：府君走来，恭敬地行礼。
English: The prefect walked up and bowed respectfully.

古文：泰问此是何人，府君致敬。
现代文：赵泰问座中人是谁，府君都向他施礼？
English: Zhao Tai asked who the person in the audience was, and the prefect all bowed to him?

古文：吏曰： 号名世尊，度人之师。 
现代文：狱吏说，法号世尊，超度人的法师。
English: The warden said, "His Dharma name is World Honored One, and he is a transcendental master.

古文：有顷，令恶道中人，皆出听经。时有万九千人，皆出地狱，入百里城。
现代文：一会儿，命令作恶的人出来听经，当时有一万九千多人，全都走出地狱，进入百里城。
English: A moment later, the evil-doers were ordered to come out to listen to the sutras. At that time, there were more than 19,000 people, all of whom came out of hell and entered the city of a hundred li.

古文：在此到者，奉法众生也。行虽亏殆，尚当得度，故开经法。
现代文：到这里的人，大都是世间守法的人，虽然他们的作为尚有不足之处，还是可以得到超度的，所以请僧人来讲经说法。
English: Most of the people who come here are worldly law-abiding people. Although their actions still have shortcomings, they can still go beyond, so please ask the monks to talk about the scriptures.

古文：七日之中，随本所作善恶多少，差次免脱。
现代文：七天之中，由本人所做的善恶多少，分别给予超脱。
English: During the seven days, the amount of good and evil done by oneself is given detachment.

古文：泰未出之顷，已见十人，升虚而去。
现代文：赵泰还没出去时，见十个人升空而去。
English: Before Zhao Tai left, he saw ten people take off.

古文：出此舍，复见一城，方二百余里，名为受变形城。
现代文：走出大舍后又见一座城，方圆二百多里，名为受变形城。
English: After walking out of the mansion, I saw another city, more than two hundred miles in circumference, called Deformed City.

古文：地狱考治已毕者，当于此城，更受变报。
现代文：在地狱中受完惩罚的人才能到这座城，接受变形报应。
English: Only those who have completed their punishment in hell can come to this city to receive transfiguration retribution.

古文：泰入其城，见有土瓦屋数千区，各有房舍。正中有瓦屋高壮，栏槛采饰。
现代文：赵泰进入这座城内，看见土瓦房数千处，各处都有房舍，正中的瓦房非常高大，栏槛都用彩色装饰。
English: Zhao Tai entered the city and saw thousands of mud-brick houses. There were houses everywhere. The mud-brick house in the center was very tall, and the balustrades were decorated with colors.

古文：有数百局吏，对校文书。云：杀生者当作蜉蝣，朝生暮死，劫盗者当作猪羊，受人屠割；淫逸者作鹤鹜鹰麋；两舌作鸱枭鸺鹠；捍债者为骡驴牛马。
现代文：有数百名小吏，正在校阅文书，说，前世杀生的人应变作蜉蝣，早晨生晚间死；前世抢劫偷盗者应变成猪羊，任人宰割；前世淫乱放荡的人应变成飞禽走兽；摇舌拔弄是非的人应变成叫声难听的鸟；抗债不还的人变成任人使役的牛马骡驴。
English: There are hundreds of petty officials who are proofreading the document, saying that those who killed animals in a previous life should turn into baboons, and live in the morning and die in the evening; those who robbed and stole in a previous life should turn into pigs and sheep, and be slaughtered; those who were immoral and debauched in a previous life should turn into birds and beasts; those who wagged their tongues should turn into birds with unpleasant cries; and those who refused to repay debts should turn into oxen, horses, and donkeys, and be put to work.

古文：泰案行毕，还水官处。
现代文：赵泰看完之后又回到了他的水官督府，主事的人问赵泰，你是谁的儿子？
English: After Zhao Tai finished reading, he returned to his water official's office. The person in charge asked Zhao Tai, "Whose son are you?"

古文：主者语泰，卿是谁者子，以何罪过，而来在此。泰答： 祖父兄弟，皆二千石。
现代文：因为什么罪过到这里来的？赵泰回答说，我的祖父和兄弟，都是两千石俸禄的官。
English: For what crime did you come here? Zhao Tai replied, "My grandfather and brother were both officials with a salary of two thousand koku.

古文：我举孝廉，公府辟不行。
现代文：我被乡里推举为孝廉，公府召我任职我没去。
English: I was elected by the township as a filial piety, and the government called me to serve, but I didn't go.

古文：修志念善，不染众恶。 
现代文：专心做善事，从不做各种恶事。 
English: Concentrate on doing good deeds, and never do all kinds of evil things.

古文：主者曰： 卿无罪，故相使为水官都督。
现代文：主事人说： 你无罪，所以才派你做水官都督。
English: The officer in charge said, "You are not guilty, that's why I sent you to be the governor of the navy."

古文：不尔，与地狱中人无以异也。 
现代文：不然的话，你和地狱中的人没什么不同。 
English: Otherwise, you are no different from the people in hell.

古文：泰问主者曰： 人有何行，死得乐报？ 
现代文：赵泰又问主事人： 怎样为人才能得到好的报应？ 
English: Zhao Tai also asked the host: How can a person get a good reward?

古文：主者言： 唯奉法弟子，精进持戒，得乐报，无有谪罚也。 
现代文：主事人说： 唯有尊奉佛法的弟子，精心进取，不做坏事的人才能得到好报，而不受惩罚。 
English: The supervisor said, "Only those who respect the disciples of Buddhism, are diligent, and do not do bad things can get a good reward without being punished.

古文：泰复问曰： 人未事法时，所行罪过。事法之后，得以除否？ 
现代文：赵泰又问： 人在不懂佛法时所犯的罪过，懂佛法以后能免除吗？ 
English: Zhao Tai also asked: Can the sins that people commit when they don't understand Buddhism be absolved after they understand Buddhism?

古文：答曰： 皆除也。 
现代文：回答说： 都可以免除。 
English: He replied: "All are exempt."

古文：语毕，主者开藤箧，检年纪，尚有余算三十年在。乃遣泰还。
现代文：说完，主事人打开了藤箱，检视赵泰年纪还有三十年阳寿，便叫赵泰回还人世。
English: After that, the person in charge opened the rattan box, examined Zhao Tai, who was still thirty years old, and then called Zhao Tai back to life.

古文：临别，主者曰： 已见地狱罪报如是，当告世人，皆令作善。
现代文：临别时主事人说： 你已经见过地狱中犯罪报应的情形，你应当告诉世上的人，都要做善事。
English: At parting, the host said: "You have seen the situation of retribution in hell, you should tell the people of the world to do good deeds.

古文：善恶随人，其犹影响，可不慎乎？ 
现代文：善恶与人相随，就像影子和回声一样，能不谨慎吗？ 
English: Good and evil accompany man, like shadows and echoes. Can we not be cautious?

古文：时亲表内外候视泰者，五六十人，同闻泰说。泰自书记，以示时人。
现代文：当时来探视赵泰的有五六十人，都听到了赵泰这样说，赵泰自己亲笔书写此事，用以告示世人。
English: At that time, there were fifty or sixty people who came to visit Zhao Tai. They all heard Zhao Tai say this. Zhao Tai himself wrote the matter in his own handwriting to announce it to the world.

古文：时晋太始五年，七月十三日也。
现代文：当时正是西晋武帝泰始五年七月十三日。
English: It was the 13th day of the 7th month in the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Wu of the Western Jin Dynasty.

古文：乃为祖父母二弟，延请僧众，大设福会。皆命子孙，改意奉法，课观精进。
现代文：他又为祖父母、二弟请了很多和尚大摆福会，又叫自己的子孙改奉佛法，并经常观察督促。
English: He also invited many monks to give blessings to his grandparents and second brother, and asked his own children and grandchildren to convert to Buddhism, and often observed and urged them.

古文：士人闻泰死而复生，多见罪福，互来访问。
现代文：一些读书人听说赵泰死而复生，在阴间见到了许多因果报应的事，便都来访问。
English: Some readers came to visit after hearing that Zhao Tai had been resurrected from the dead and had seen many karmic retributions in the underworld.

古文：时有太中大夫武城孙丰、关内侯常山郝伯平等十人，同集泰会。款曲寻问，莫不惧然。皆即奉法。
现代文：当时有太中大夫武成人孙丰、关内侯常山人郝伯平等十余人，一齐来会见赵泰，诚恳地寻问，听后都很惧怕，都能立即奉法行善。
English: At that time, there were more than ten people such as Sun Feng, the Vice-Middle Doctor of Wuzhong, and Zou Bo, a man from Guanai Hou Changshan, who came together to meet Zhao Tai, sincerely inquired, and were very afraid after listening. They were able to immediately practice the law and do good deeds.

古文：袁廓
现代文：袁廓
English: Yuan Guo

古文：宋袁廓字思度，陈郡人也。元徽中，为吴郡丞。
现代文：北宋陈郡人袁廓，字思度，南朝宋后废帝元徽年间任吴郡丞。
English: In the Northern Song Dynasty, the people of Chen County were Yuan Kuo and Shidu, and in the Southern Song Dynasty, after the abolition of Emperor Yuan Hui, he was Wu Guanzhong.

古文：病经少日，奄然如死，但余息未尽。
现代文：病不多日，像死了似的，只有一息尚存。
English: He had been ill for a few days, and it was as if he had died, with only one breath left.

古文：棺衾之具并备，待毕而殓。
现代文：棺槨被子等物已准备好，只等死后入殓。
English: The coffin, the quilt and other things are ready, just waiting to be buried after death.

古文：三日而能转动视瞬。自说云：有使者称教唤，廓随去。
现代文：三天后却能转动眼珠看视，他自己说：有个使者说有人叫他，他便跟了去。
English: Three days later, he was able to move his eyes and see. He said: "A messenger told me that someone had called him, and he went.

古文：既至，有大城池，楼堞高整，阶闱崇丽。既命廓进。
现代文：到了时看到一座大城，城楼和城墙高大整齐，台阶和小门都很华丽，就叫袁廓进去。
English: When he arrived, he saw a large city, with tall and neat towers and walls, and magnificent steps and gates. He asked Yuan Kuo to enter.

古文：主人南面，与廓温凉毕，命坐。
现代文：见主人面南而坐，与袁廓寒喧后让袁廓坐。
English: Seeing the master sitting facing south, he had a cold talk with Yuan Kuo and then let Yuan Kuo sit down.

古文：设酒炙，果粽菹者等味，不异世中。
现代文：摆设酒席，酒、肴、瓜果等物和世间一样。
English: The banquet table is set up, and the wine, dishes, melons and fruits, etc. are the same as in the world.

古文：酒数行，主人谓廓曰： 主簿不幸有缺，以君才颖，故欲相屈，当能顾怀不？ 
现代文：酒过数巡后，主人对袁廓说： 我这里缺少一个掌管文书典籍的人，知道你很有才华，所以想请你屈尊任此职，不知你是否愿意？ 
English: After several rounds of wine, the host said to Yuan Kuang: I lack a person in charge of the classics here. I know that you are very talented, so I would like to ask you to deign to hold this position. I don't know if you are willing?

古文：廓意知是幽途，乃固辞凡薄，非所克堪。加少穷孤，兄弟零落，乞蒙恩放。
现代文：袁廓知道这是在阴间，于是坚决推辞此事，并说： 这不是能胜任的，我少年时孤苦贫穷，兄弟也都死亡飘零，请求你开恩放我回去。 
English: Yuan Ku knew that this was in the netherworld, so he firmly rejected the matter and said, "This is not competent. When I was young, I was alone and poor, and my brothers all died and drifted away. I ask for your grace to let me go back."

古文：主人曰： 君当以幽显异方，故辞耳。
现代文：主人说： 你可能认为阴间与阳世很不相同，所以才推辞。
English: The master said, "You may think that the world of the dead is very different from the world of the living, which is why you declined.

古文：此间荣禄服御，乃胜君世中，甚贪共事。想必降意，副所期也。 
现代文：这里的荣华富贵吃穿使用，要比你在世间强的多，我很想和你共事，我想你必然会同意，不负我的期望。 
English: The glories and riches here are much more powerful than you in the world. I would very much like to work with you, and I think you will certainly agree, and live up to my expectations.

古文：廓复固请曰： 男女藐然，并在龆龀，仆一旦供任，养视无托。
现代文：袁廓又坚持请求说： 家中儿女尚小，正是幼稚的年龄，我要在这任职，靠谁来养育他们。
English: Yuan Kuo also insisted on his request, saying, "The children in my family are still small, just at the age of infancy. I want to work here. Who will I rely on to raise them?

古文：父子之恋，理有可矜。 
现代文：父子之爱，理应得到怜悯同情。 
English: The love of a father for his son deserves pity and compassion.

古文：廓因流涕稽颡。
现代文：袁廓痛苦流涕跪在地上磕头作揖。
English: Yuan Kuo knelt on the ground in agony and made a skull and crossbones.

古文：主人曰： 君辞让乃尔，何容相逼？愿言不获，深为叹恨。 
现代文：主人说： 你既然这样推辞，我也不能逼迫你，我的愿望没有实现，我深感遗憾。 
English: The master said, "Since you are so reluctant, I cannot force you. I deeply regret that my wish did not come true.

古文：就案上取一卷文书，勾点之。
现代文：主人从案桌上取出一卷文书，用笔勾点。
English: The master takes a roll of paperwork from the desk and dots it with a pen.

古文：既而廓谢恩辞归。
现代文：这时，袁廓要谢恩回去。
English: At this time, Yuan Kuo asked Shane to go back.

古文：主人曰： 君不欲定省先亡乎？ 
现代文：主人说： 你不想看一看先死去的人吗？ 
English: The owner said, "Don't you want to see who died first?"

古文：乃遣人将廓行，经历寺署甚众，末得一垣门，盖囹圄也。
现代文：便派人领袁廓走，一路上寺庙衙署很多，最后到了一个衙署的门前，是一座监狱。
English: He then sent someone to take Yuan Guo away. Along the way, there were many temples and police stations, and finally, in front of one police station, there was a prison.

古文：将廓入中，叙趣一隅有诸屋宇，骈阗相接。
现代文：把袁廓领进去，在一边按顺序建有很多房屋，并排相接。
English: He led Yuan Kuo inside, and on one side, many houses were built in sequence, side by side.

古文：次有一屋弊陋，见其所生母羊氏在焉，容服不佳，甚异平生。
现代文：后又有一屋比较简陋，袁廓看见了自己的生母羊氏在这里，面容很脏，衣服很乱，和活着时很不一样。
English: Later, there was another, more humble house, and Yuan Kuang saw his own mother ewe here. Her face was dirty, her clothes were in disarray, and she was very different from when she was alive.

古文：见廓惊喜。
现代文：看见袁廓又惊又喜。
English: Seeing Yuan Kuo, he was both surprised and pleased.

古文：户边有一人，身面伤疾，呼廓。
现代文：门边还有一人，脸上和身上都有伤痕，她招呼袁廓，袁廓很吃惊问这人是谁？
English: There was another person at the door, with scars on her face and body. She called out to Yuan Kuo. Yuan Kuo was surprised and asked who this person was.

古文：廓惊问谁，羊氏曰： 此王夫人，汝不识耶？ 
现代文：羊氏说： 这是王夫人，你不认识了吗？ 
English: Mr. Yang said: This is Mrs. Wang, don't you recognize her?

古文：王夫人曰： 吾在世时，不信报应。虽无馀罪，正坐鞭挞婢仆过苦，受此罚。亡来痛楚，殆无暂休。今特小时宽隙耳。
现代文：王夫人说： 我在世的时候，不相信报应，虽然没有别的罪，却因为鞭打丫环仆人太厉害，才受到这样的惩罚，死后遭受这样的痛苦，恐怕暂时不能停止，今天特别给了一点时间的宽限。
English: Mrs. Wang said, "When I was alive, I didn't believe in retribution. Although I didn't commit any other crimes, I received this punishment because I whipped my maid so severely. After I die, I'm afraid I won't be able to stop suffering like this for a while. Today, I was given a special grace period.

古文：前唤汝姊来，望以自代，竟无所益，徒为忧聚。 
现代文：前些天唤你姐姐来，本想我自己代替你们受刑罚，看来也是不可能的，也只能在这里痛苦的见见面。 
English: I called your sister here the other day, thinking that I would take the punishment for you myself, but it seems impossible, and I can only meet you here in pain.

古文：言毕涕泗。
现代文：说完便痛哭流涕。
English: And then burst into tears.

古文：王夫人即廓嫡母也，廓娣时亦在侧。
现代文：王夫人是袁廓父亲的正妻，袁廓的妹妹也在旁边。
English: Mrs. Wang is the legal wife of Yuan Kuo's father, and Yuan Kuo's sister is also next to her.

古文：有顷。使人复将廓去，经涉巷陌，闾里整顿，似是民居。
现代文：一会儿，来人又将袁廓带走，经过了很多街巷，房舍建筑很整齐，好像似民房。
English: After a while, someone came to take Yuan Guo away again. They went through many streets and alleys, and the buildings were very neat, as if they were houses.

古文：末有一宅，竹篱茅屋，见父凭案而坐。
现代文：最后有一个宅院，竹篱笆草房，袁廓看见了父亲坐在案桌前。
English: Finally, there was a courtyard, a grass-thatched house with a bamboo fence. Yuan Kuang saw his father sitting at a desk.

古文：廓入门，父扬手遣廓曰： 汝既蒙罢，可速归去，不须迟也。 
现代文：袁廓走进门，父亲挥手告诉他说： 你对这里的情况都明白了，应该急速回去，不能迟误。 
English: Yuan Kuo walked in the door, his father waved his hand and told him, "You have understood the situation here, you should go back quickly, don't delay."

古文：廓跪辞而归，至家即活。
现代文：袁廓跪下辞别了父亲便回去了，到家中便复活了过来。
English: Yuan Kuo knelt down to say goodbye, and his father went back. He came back to life when he got home.

古文：曹宗之
现代文：曹宗之
English: Cao Zongzhi

古文：高平曹宗之，元嘉二十五年，在彭城，夜寝不寤，旦亡。晡时气息还通。
现代文：高平人曹宗之，南朝宋元嘉二十五年时在彭城，晚间睡觉没醒过来，天亮死了，到了下午气息相通，又活了过来。
English: Cao Zongzhi, a Gaoping person, was in Pengcheng in the 25th year of the Southern Dynasty Song Yuanjia. He did not wake up in the evening and died in the morning. In the afternoon, he breathed the same air and came back to life.

古文：自说所见：一人单衣帻，执手板，称北海王使者，殿下相唤。宗之随去。
现代文：自己述说见闻。他说，见一个人身穿单衣，扎头巾，手拿竹板，自称是北海王的使者，说北海王要招唤曹宗之，曹宗之便随他去了。
English: He said that he saw a man dressed in a singlet, wearing a turban, holding a bamboo board, claiming to be an emissary of the North Sea King, saying that the North Sea King wanted to summon Cao Zongzhi, and Cao Zongzhi went with him.

古文：殿前中庭，有轻云，去地数十丈，流荫徘徊。帷幌之间，有紫烟飘摇。风吹近人，其香非常。
现代文：殿前的中庭，离地数十丈处有轻云飘荡，帷幔之间有紫气飘摇，风吹到人前，阵阵异香。
English: In the courtyard in front of the hall, there are light clouds floating dozens of meters above the ground, purple air wafts between the curtains, the wind blows to the front of the people, and the fragrance bursts.

古文：使者曰： 君停阶下，今入白之。 
现代文：使者说， 你在阶下等着，我进去告诉一声。 
English: The messenger said, "Wait at the bottom of the steps and I'll go in and tell them."

古文：须臾，传令谢曹君。 君事能可称，久怀钦迟，今欲相屈为府佐。
现代文：一会儿，传令让曹宗之进去，并对他说： 你很有才干和能力，已经钦佩很久了，今天想委屈你在府中任职。
English: After a while, the messenger let Cao Zongzhu in and said to him: "You are very talented and capable, I have admired you for a long time, and today I want to make you feel wronged by serving in the government."

古文：君今年几，曾经卤簿官未？ 
现代文：你今年多大年龄？曾经做过官没有？ 
English: How old are you this year? Have you ever held public office?

古文：宗之答： 才干素弱，仰惭圣恩。
现代文：曹宗之回答： 我的才干不强，愧对圣贤的恩德。
English: Cao Zong replied: My ability is not strong, I am ashamed of the grace of the sages.

古文：今年三十一，未曾经卤簿官。 
现代文：今年三十一岁，没当过官。 
English: He is 31 years old and has never been an official.

古文：又报曰： 君年算虽少，然先有福业，应受显要，当经卤簿官。
现代文：又对曹宗之说： 你的年龄还小，但祖先有福业，应得到显要的职务，先去做个官。
English: He also said to Cao Zongzhi, "You are still young, but your ancestor has a blessed career and deserves a prominent position. You should become an official first."

古文：乃辞身，可且归家，后当更议也。 
现代文：你现在可以起身回家，以后再说吧。 
English: You can get up and go home now. We'll talk about it later.

古文：寻见向使者送出门，恍惚而醒。
现代文：一会儿，那个使者便把曹宗之送出门，曹宗之恍惚间醒来。
English: After a while, the messenger sent Cao Zongzhi out the door, and Cao Zongzhi woke up in a daze.

古文：宗之后任广州，年四十七。明年职解，遂还州病亡。
现代文：曹宗之后来在广州任官，年龄四十七岁，第二年解职，从广州回来便病故。
English: Cao Zong later came to work as an official in Guangzhou. He was 47 years old. He was relieved of his duties the following year. After returning from Guangzhou, he died of illness.

古文：孙回璞
现代文：孙回璞
English: Composed by Sun Hui

古文：唐殿中侍医孙回璞，济阴人也。
现代文：唐朝宫中侍医孙回璞，济阴人。
English: The court physician of the Tang Dynasty, Sun Yuxuan, was from Jilin.

古文：尝夜二更，闻外有一人，呼孙侍医者。
现代文：唐太宗贞观十三年时，他伴驾皇上到九成宫三善谷，与魏征家相邻。
English: In the thirteenth year of Emperor Taizong of Tang, Zhenguan accompanied the emperor to the Three Good Valleys of Jiucheng Palace, which was adjacent to Wei Seige.

古文：璞谓是魏征之命，既出，见两人谓璞曰： 官唤。 
现代文：当夜二更天，听到外面有一人呼唤孙侍医，孙回璞以为是魏征的命令，便出来了。见两个人对孙回璞说： 当官的叫你。 
English: On the second day of that night, he heard someone outside calling for Sun's personal physician, which he thought was Wei Zheng's order, so he came out. He saw two people saying to Sun: "The officials have called for you."

古文：璞曰： 我不能步行。 
现代文：回璞说： 我不能步行。 
English: Echo said: I can't walk.

古文：即取马乘之。随二人行，乃觉天地如昼日光明，璞怪而不敢言。
现代文：便牵来马骑上随二人走，竟觉得天地间像和白天一样明亮，孙回璞感觉奇怪，但不敢说。
English: So he brought a horse and rode after the two of them. He actually felt that the sky and the earth were as bright as day. Sun Yat-sen felt strange, but did not dare to say so.

古文：出谷，历朝堂东，又东北行六七里，至苜蓿谷。
现代文：出了三善谷，经过朝堂东侧，又往东北走了六七里，到了苜蓿谷。
English: I went out of Sanzen-dani, past the east side of the morning hall, and walked six or seven miles to the northeast, to Shibuya.

古文：遥见有两人，持韩凤方行。语所引璞二人曰： 汝等错追，所得者是，汝宜放彼。 
现代文：远远地看见两个人夹持韩凤方在走，并对领孙回璞的这两个人说： 你们追错了，我们得到的这个才是，你们应放了他。 
English: From a distance, he saw two people holding Han Fengfang walking, and said to the two people who led the grandson back: You are wrong, this is what we got, you should let him go.

古文：人即放璞。
现代文：这两人便放了孙回璞。
English: The two men then released Sun Huijuan.

古文：璞循路而还，了了不异平生行处。
现代文：孙回璞顺着原路往回走，和原来走过的地方一样。
English: Sun Huiqi walked back along the original path, the same as the place he had walked.

古文：既至家，系马，见婢当户眠，唤之不应。
现代文：到了家拴好马，看见丫环在门旁睡觉，招呼也不答应。
English: When he arrived at home to groom his horse, he saw the maidservant sleeping next to the door and did not respond to his greeting.

古文：越度入户，见其身与妇并眠，欲就之而不得。
现代文：他越过丫环进了屋里，看到他的身体和妻子一齐躺着，想上床却上不去。
English: He walked past the maid into the house and saw his body lying with his wife's, wanting to go to bed but unable to.

古文：但著南壁立，大声唤妇，终不应。
现代文：只好靠着南墙站着，大声叫他妇人，却始终不应声。
English: She had no choice but to stand against the south wall and call him a woman in a loud voice, but he remained silent.

古文：屋内极明光，壁角中有蜘蛛网，中二蝇，一大一小。并见梁上所著药物，无不分明，唯不得就床。
现代文：室内特别亮，墙角有蜘蛛网，网上有两个苍蝇，一大一小，还看见了房梁上挂着的药物，样样分明，可就是上不去床。
English: The room is particularly bright, there are spider webs in the corner of the wall, there are two flies on the net, a big one and a small one, I also saw the medicine hanging on the beam, everything is clear, but I don't go to bed.

古文：自知是死，甚忧闷，恨不得共妻别。
现代文：他自己知道是死了，很忧愁，怨恨不能和妻子告别。
English: He himself knew that he was dead, and was very sad, resenting not being able to say goodbye to his wife.

古文：倚立南壁，久之微睡，忽惊觉，身已卧床上，而屋中暗黑，无所见。
现代文：他倚在南墙上慢慢睡着了，忽然惊醒，身体已躺在床上，屋里很暗很黑，什么也看不到。
English: He leaned against the south wall and slowly fell asleep. Suddenly, he woke up. His body was lying on the bed, and the room was very dark. He couldn't see anything.

古文：唤妇，令起然火，而璞方大汗流。起视蜘蛛网，历然不殊。见马亦大汗。
现代文：叫他妇人起来点燃灯火，孙回璞身上在流汗，起来看蜘蛛网，和原来一样，看到马也在流汗。
English: He told his wife to get up and light a lamp. Sun Yat-sen's body was sweating. She got up and looked at the spider's web. As before, she saw that the horse was also sweating.

古文：凤方是夜暴死。
现代文：韩凤方就是在这夜暴病而死。
English: It was on this night that Han Fengfang died of a violent illness.

古文：后至十七年，璞奉敕，驿驰往齐州，疗齐王佑疾。
现代文：后来，到了贞观十七年，孙回璞奉命骑马去齐州，为齐王治病。
English: Later, in the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Sun Huijun was ordered to ride to Qizhou to treat the King of Qizhou.

古文：还至洛州东孝义驿，忽见一人来问曰： 君子是孙回璞。 
现代文：回来时直到洛州东孝义驿站时，忽然见到一个人来问： 你是孙回璞吗？ 
English: When I came back, I went as far as the Luozhou Dongxiao Yili Station, when I suddenly saw a person who asked: Are you Sun Huiqi?

古文：曰： 是。
现代文：孙回璞回答： 是。
English: Sun Yat-sen replied: Yes.

古文：君何问为？ 
现代文：你问我有什么事？ 
English: What's the matter with me?

古文：答： 我是鬼耳，魏太监追君为记室。 
现代文：那人说： 我是鬼，魏太监让你去当记室。 
English: The man said, "I am a ghost. Wei Eunuch asked you to be the recorder.

古文：因出书示璞。
现代文：并拿出文书给孙回璞看。
English: And he took out the document to show it to Sun Yat-sen.

古文：璞视之，则魏征署也。
现代文：孙回璞一看，确是魏征的署名。
English: When Sun Huijuan saw it, it was indeed Wei Zheng's signature.

古文：璞惊曰： 郑公不死，何为遣君送书？ 
现代文：孙回璞吃惊地说： 魏太监没有死，为什么派你来送文书？ 
English: Surprised, Sun Hui said, "The Wei eunuch did not die. Why did he send you to deliver the document?

古文：鬼曰。已死矣，今为太阳都录太监，令我召君。 
现代文：鬼说： 他已经死了，现在任阴间太阳都录太监，让我来召你。 
English: The ghost said, "He has already died, and now he is a eunuch in the underworld. Let me call you."

古文：回璞引坐共食，鬼甚喜谢。
现代文：孙回璞给鬼让坐一齐吃饭，鬼很高兴很感谢。
English: Sun Huijuan let the ghosts sit down to eat together, and the ghosts were very happy and grateful.

古文：璞请曰： 我奉敕使未还，郑公不宜追。我还京奏事毕，然后听命，可乎？ 
现代文：孙回璞请求说： 我是奉皇上的命令出使还没有回去，魏太监不应追我，等我回京向皇上禀奏之后再听命，可以吗？ 
English: Sun Huiqi pleaded: I was sent by order of the emperor and have not yet returned, the Wei eunuch should not chase me, wait until I return to Beijing to play for the emperor before obeying orders, okay?

古文：鬼许之。
现代文：鬼允许了。
English: The devil allowed it.

古文：于是昼则同行，夜便同宿，遂至阌乡。鬼辞曰： 吾今先行，度关待君。 
现代文：于是孙回璞和鬼白天同行，夜间同宿。到了阌乡，鬼告辞说： 我先走了，过了关等你。 
English: Therefore, Sun Hui and the ghost walked together during the day and slept together at night. When they arrived at Xiangxiang, the ghost said, "I'm leaving first, I'll wait for you after passing the customs."

古文：次日度关，出西门，见鬼已在门外。
现代文：第二天过关后出了西门，看见鬼已等在门外。
English: The next day, after passing through the gate, he went out of the west gate and saw the ghost waiting outside the gate.

古文：复同行，到滋水。鬼又与璞别曰： 待君奏事讫，相见也。君可勿食荤辛。 
现代文：到了滋水，鬼又和孙回璞告别说： 等你回京奏事后再见，你可不要吃荤腥辛辣的东西。 
English: When they arrived at Shizu, the ghost bade farewell to Sun again, saying, "I'll see you when you return to Beijing to perform, but don't eat anything spicy."

古文：璞许诺。
现代文：孙回璞答应了。
English: Sun Huixuan agreed.

古文：既奏事毕，访征已薨。校其薨日，则孝义驿之前日也。
现代文：孙回璞回京奏事后，访到魏征确实已死，查对魏征死的日期，正好是孙回璞到孝义驿站的前一天。
English: After Sun Hui's return to Beijing, it was confirmed that Wei Zheng was indeed dead. The date of Wei Zheng's death was found to be the day before Sun Hui arrived at Xiaoyi Railway Station.

古文：璞自以必死，与家人诀别。而请僧行道，造像写经。
现代文：孙回璞自己认为必然要死了，便和家里人诀别，并请和尚做道场，请人画像写经文。
English: Sun Yat-sen himself thought that he would inevitably die, so he said goodbye to his family, and asked a monk to do a dojo, and asked someone to draw a picture and write scriptures.

古文：可六七夜。梦前鬼来召，引璞上高山，山巅有大宫殿。
现代文：过了六七夜，孙回璞梦见以前遇见的鬼来召他，把他领上高山，山顶上有大宫殿。
English: After six or seven nights, Sun Yat-sen dreamt that the ghost he had met before had summoned him and led him to a high mountain with a large palace on the top.

古文：既入，见众君子迎谓曰： 此人修福，不得留之，可放去。 
现代文：他们进去，看到很多君子迎上来并说： 这个人是行善有福的人，不能留在这里，可放他回去。 
English: And when they were come in, they saw a great multitude of people come to meet him, and they said, This man is a blessed man, and he hath done nothing amiss; he shall not tarry here: let him go his way.

古文：即推璞堕山，于是惊悟。遂至今无恙矣。
现代文：立即一推，孙回璞便跌落山下，于是惊醒，至今天无病无灾。
English: With a single push, Sun Huiyan fell down the mountain and woke up, and to this day has been free of illness and injury.

古文：李强友
现代文：李强友
English: Li Qiangyou

古文：李强友者，御史如璧之子。强友天宝末，为剡县丞。
现代文：李强友是御史李如壁的儿子，在唐玄宗天宝末年时任剡县县丞。
English: Li Qiangyou was the son of the imperial historian Li Rubei. He served as the county magistrate of Jixian County in the last years of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang.

古文：上官数日，有素所识屠者，诣门再拜。
现代文：他上任不久，便有一个他平日熟悉的屠夫来登门拜谢。
English: Not long after he took office, a butcher he knew well came to the door to say thank you.

古文：问其故，答曰： 因得病暴死，至地下，被所由领过太山。见大郎做主簿，因往陈诉。未合死至，蒙放得还。故来拜谢。 
现代文：他问为什么谢他，屠夫回答说： 我因得病暴死，到了阴间，被人领过太山，看见了大郎你在那作主簿，我向你请求，还没到死的时候，蒙你开恩放我回来，所以才来向你拜谢。 
English: He asked why he was thanking him. The butcher replied, "I died of a violent illness and went to the underworld. I was led over a very high mountain. I saw you there, my lord, making a ledger. I ask you, before I die, to have the grace to let me return. That is why I have come to thank you."

古文：大郎者，强友也。强友闻，惆怅久之。曰： 死得太山主簿，办复何忧？ 
现代文：大郎就是李强友，强友一听感到很伤感，说： 死后能在太山当主簿，也没什么可忧虑的。 
English: The eldest son is Li Qiangyou. Hearing this, Qiangyou felt very sad and said, "There is nothing to worry about if I can be the head of the family in Taishan after I die.

古文：因问职事何如？
现代文：又问屠夫，在那里主簿都干些什么事？
English: He also asked the butcher what the ledgers were doing there.

古文：屠者云： 太山有两主簿，于人间如判官也，傧从甚盛。鬼神之事，多经其所。 
现代文：屠夫说： 太山有两个主簿，和人间的判官一样，手下随从很多，鬼神的事大都由他办。 
English: The butcher said, "Taoshan has two masters, just like a human judge. He has many subordinates, and he handles most of the affairs of ghosts and gods.

古文：后数日，强友亲人死，得活。复去被收至太山。
现代文：以后又过了几天，强友的一个亲人死了后复活了，又死去，被收到太山。
English: A few days later, one of Qiangyou's relatives died, came back to life, died again, and was given to Taishan.

古文：太山有两主簿，一姓李，即强友也。一姓王。其人死在王下，苦自论别。
现代文：太山有两个主簿，一个姓李，就是强友；一个姓王，强友的亲人就是死在王主簿手下。
English: There are two masters in Taishan, one surnamed Li, that is, Qiangyou; one surnamed Wang, Qiangyou's relatives died at the hands of Wang's master.

古文：年尚未尽，忽闻府君召王主簿，去顷便回。云，官家设斋，须漆器万口。
现代文：他向王主簿苦诉，自己的阳寿还没到头。忽然听到府君召王主簿，去了一会儿便回来了，说，官家要设斋，需要一万多只漆器。
English: He complained bitterly to Wang Muzhuo that he had not yet reached the end of his life. Suddenly, he heard the governor summoning Wang Muzhuo. He left for a while and returned, saying that the officials wanted to set up a restaurant and needed more than ten thousand lacquerware.

古文：谓人曰，君家有此物，可借一用。速宜取之，事了即当放。
现代文：王主簿对强友亲人说，你家有这种器皿，可借来用一用，你快回去取来，事办完后就放你。
English: Wang Muzhuo said to Qiangyou's relatives, "Your family has this kind of utensil, you can borrow it and use it. Go back and get it. You will be released after the work is done."

古文：此人来诣强友云。
现代文：此人来找强友说，借用这么多漆器。
English: This person came to ask me to borrow so much lacquerware.

古文：被借漆器，实无手力。强友为嘱王候，久之未决。
现代文：实在没有人手取。强友听说是王主簿的嘱咐，便犹豫了很久。
English: In fact, no one took it. When the strong friend heard that it was the king's order, he hesitated for a long time.

古文：又闻府君唤李主簿，走去却回。谓亲吏曰： 官家嗔王主簿不了事，转令与觅漆器。
现代文：又听到府君召唤李主簿，强友去了后回来对亲人说： 官家责怪王主簿不会办事，又让我去寻找漆器。
English: I also heard that the governor summoned Li Muzhu. After Qiangyou left, he came back and said to his relatives, "Officials blame Wang Muzhu for not being able to do things, so they asked me to look for lacquerware."

古文：其人不得已，将手力来取。
现代文：这事很急，不能推辞，应该马上去取。 
English: It's urgent, we can't put it off, we should get it right away.

古文：拣阅之声，家人悉闻。
现代文：这人不得已带领众人回家去取，家里人都听到了搬动器皿的声音。
English: The man had no choice but to lead the crowd back home to get it, and everyone in the family heard the sound of moving utensils.

古文：事毕，强友领过府君，因而得放。
现代文：事办完后，强友领亲人去见府君，此人被放还。
English: After the case was over, Qiangyou took his relatives to see Fujun, and the man was released.

古文：既愈，又为强友说之。
现代文：病愈后，又对强友说了这件事。
English: After he recovered from the illness, he told his close friend about it again.

古文：强友于官严毅，典吏甚惧。
现代文：强友为官严厉果断，手下官吏都很惧怕他。
English: As a stern and resolute official, Qiangyou was feared by his subordinate officials.

古文：衙后多在门外。忽传赞府出，莫不罄折。
现代文：衙役都站在门外，忽传强友要出府，都弯腰低头。
English: The eunuchs were all standing outside the door, and when they heard that their powerful friend was leaving, they all bent down and bowed their heads.

古文：有窃视，见强友著帽，从百余人，不可复识。皆怪讶之。
现代文：有人偷看，见强友衣帽整齐，后跟百多人，再看却不见了，都感到奇怪和惊讶。
English: Some people peeked in and saw that Qiangyou was neatly dressed and followed by more than a hundred people. When they looked again, Qiangyou was gone. They all felt strange and surprised.

古文：如是十余日，而强友卒。
现代文：就这样过了十几天，强友便死去了。
English: Just like that, after a dozen days, my strong friend died.

古文：韦广济
现代文：韦广济
English: Wei Guangji

古文：韦广济，上元中，暴死。
现代文：韦广济在唐肃宗上元年间突然死去。
English: Wei Guangji died suddenly in the first year of the Sui Dynasty in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：自言初见使持帖，云，阎罗王追己为判官，己至门下，而未见王。
现代文：自己说他当初看见一个使者拿着帖子对他说，阎王要他去当判官，他到了阎王门前，却没看到阎王。
English: He said that he initially saw a messenger holding a post and telling him that the king of hell wanted him to be a judge. He arrived at the gates of hell, but did not see the king of hell.

古文：须臾，衢州刺史韦黄裳复至。广济拜候。
现代文：不一会儿，衢州刺史韦黄裳也到了这里，韦广济上前拜见问候，黄裳和广济是堂兄弟。
English: A short while later, Zhangzhou's Wei Huangxiang also arrived here. Wei Guangji came forward to say hello. Huangxiang and Guangji are cousins.

古文：黄裳与广济为从兄弟，问汝何由而来。答云： 奉王帖，追为判官。 
现代文：黄裳问广济为什么来到这里，广济答道： 奉阎王的帖子，追我为判官。 
English: Huang Xiang asked Guangji why he had come here. Guangji replied, "By order of the King of Hell, I am the judge.

古文：裳笑曰： 我已为之，汝当得去。 
现代文：黄裳笑说： 我已经当了，你应当回去。 
English: Huang Xiang laughed and said, "I've been cheated, you should go back."

古文：命坐久之，命所司办食。
现代文：叫广济坐一会儿，命人去办伙食。
English: He told Guangji to sit down for a while and ordered someone to prepare a meal.

古文：顷之食至，盘中悉是人鼻手指等。
现代文：顷刻之间饭菜已到，盘中都是人的鼻子、手指等物。
English: In an instant, the meal arrived, and the plate was full of human noses, fingers, and other objects.

古文：谓济曰： 此鬼道中食，弟既欲还，不宜复吃。 
现代文：黄裳对广济说： 这是鬼道中的食物，你既然想回去，不应再吃。 
English: Huang Xiang said to Guangji: This is the food in the ghost road, since you want to go back, you should not eat it again.

古文：因令向前人送广济还。
现代文：又叫带广济来的那人把广济送回去。
English: He also told the man who had brought the money to take it back.

古文：及苏，说其事。而黄裳犹无恙，后数日而暴卒。
现代文：到他醒来时，便说了他的见闻，而韦黄裳却平安无事，几天后才突然暴死。
English: When he woke up, he recounted what he had seen and heard, but Wei Huang Giang was safe and sound, only to die suddenly a few days later.

古文：其年，吕延为浙东节度，有术士谓曰： 地下所由云，王追公为判官。速作功德，或当得免。 
现代文：那年，吕延任浙东节度使，有个江湖术士对他说： 地狱的差役说，阎王追你为判官，你应该速设道场诵经念佛，或许能免除。 
English: That year, when Lü Yan was appointed as the delegate to the Eastern Zhejiang Festival, a sorcerer said to him: "Hell's attendant said, 'The king of hell is pursuing you as a judge, you should quickly set up a dojo to chant the sutras and recite the Buddha's name. Perhaps you can be exempted.'

古文：延之惶惧，大造经像。数十日，术者曰： 公已得免矣，今王取韦衢州，其牒已行。 
现代文：吕延很害怕，大设道场造像诵经，数十天后，那术士对他说： 你已经得到免除，阎王去召韦衢州，文书已经发出。 
English: Lyu Yan was very scared. He set up a large dojo with statues and chanted sutras. After dozens of days, the sorcerer said to him, "You have been exempted. The king of hell has come to summon you to Weizhou. The document has been issued."

古文：延之使人至信安，遽报消息。后十日，黄裳竞亡也。
现代文：吕延派人到信安，命其急速报告消息，十天后，韦黄裳死去。
English: Lyu Yan sent someone to Xin'an and ordered him to quickly report the news. Ten days later, Wei Huangxiao died.

古文：郄惠连
现代文：郄惠连
English: 惠连

古文：大历中，山阳人郄惠连，始居泗上，以其父尝为河朔官，遂从居清河。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，山阳人郄惠连，初住在泗水上游地区，因为他父亲曾在河朔为官，他便随从父亲住在清河。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zong Da Lian, a native of Shanyang, first lived in the upstream area of Surabaya. Because his father had been an official in Hexuo, he followed his father to live in Qinghe.

古文：父殁，惠连以哀瘠闻。廉使命吏临吊，赠粟帛。
现代文：他父亲死后，他由于过分悲痛形容消瘦而闻名，巡察使者到此地派人前去吊唁，赠以粮食布匹。
English: After his father's death, he was known to be emaciated due to excessive grief, and inspectors were sent to the area to offer condolences and donate food and cloth.

古文：既免丧，表授漳南尉。
现代文：守孝结束之后，皇帝下旨，授他为漳南尉。
English: After the end of the filial piety, the emperor issued an order to award him the title of "Junan lieutenant."

古文：岁余，一夕独处于堂，忽见一人，衣紫佩刀，趋至前，谓惠连曰： 上帝有命，拜公为司命主者，以册立阎波罗王。 
现代文：一年多后，一天晚上，他一人独坐堂前，忽然看见一个人，身穿紫衣腰佩刀，到他面前对他说： 天神有命，任你为司命主者是为了册封阎波罗王。 
English: More than a year later, one evening, he was sitting alone in front of the church, when he suddenly saw a man, dressed in purple with a sword at his waist, who came to him and said, "The gods have decreed that you be the one to carry out their orders in order to be crowned King of Hell."

古文：即以锦纹箱贮书，进于惠连曰： 此上帝命也。 
现代文：从锦纹箱中取出文书递给惠连说： 这是天神的命令。 
English: He took out the document from the brocade box and handed it to Huilian, saying, "This is an order from the gods."

古文：轴用琼钿，标以纹锦。又象笏紫绶，金龟玉带，以赐。
现代文：轴是用美玉金银做成，用带花纹的锦绣装裱，又把象牙笏板绶带和金龟玉带，赐给惠连。
English: The shaft was made of fine gold and silver, decorated with patterned brocade, and the ivory ribbon ribbon and golden tortoise ribbon were given to Huilian.

古文：惠连且喜且惧，心甚惶惑，不暇顾问。遂受之。
现代文：他又喜又怕，心里很惶恐，没有时间细问，便接受了。
English: He was both pleased and afraid, his heart was full of trepidation, he didn't have time to ask in detail, so he accepted.

古文：立于前轩，有相者趋入，赞曰： 驱殿吏卒且至。 
现代文：他立在廊前，有个主持礼仪的人上前来说： 驱殿的官吏和士卒到。 
English: He stood in front of the gallery, and a person who presided over the etiquette came forward and said: "The officials and members of the imperial court have arrived.

古文：已而有数百人，绣衣红额，左右佩兵器，趋入，罗为数行，再拜。
现代文：这时有身穿绣衣左右佩兵器的几百人走向前来，站成数行，再拜。
English: At this time, several hundred people wearing embroidered clothes on the left and right and carrying weapons came forward, stood in several rows, and bowed again.

古文：一人前曰： 某幸得为使之吏，敢以谢。 
现代文：有一人上前说： 我有幸为你的下属，表示谢意。 
English: One of them stepped forward and said, "I have the honor of thanking you for your subordinates.

古文：词竟又拜。拜讫，分立于前。
现代文：说完又拜，拜完分别立在前面。
English: After saying this, they bowed again. After bowing, they stood in front of each other.

古文：相者又曰： 五岳卫兵主将。 
现代文：司仪又说： 五岳卫兵主将。 
English: The master of ceremonies also said, "The commander of the guards at Mt.

古文：复有百余人趋入，罗为五行，衣如五方色，皆再拜。
现代文：又有一百多人走向前来，站成五行，衣服也分五种颜色，都再拜。
English: More than a hundred people also came forward, standing in five lines, and their clothes were also divided into five colors, and they all bowed again.

古文：相者又曰： 礼器乐悬吏，鼓吹吏，车舆乘马吏，符印簿书吏，帑藏厨膳吏。 
现代文：司仪又说， 掌管礼仪用品的官、管鼓乐的官、管车轿马匹的官、掌符文书簿网的官、管库藏伙食的官。 
English: The master of ceremonies also said, the official in charge of ceremonial objects, the official in charge of pipe and drum music, the official in charge of chariots, cars and horses, the official in charge of the network of manuscript books, and the official in charge of food storage.

古文：近数百人，皆趋而至。
现代文：将近几百人，都走向前来。
English: Nearly a hundred people, all marching forward.

古文：有顷，相者曰： 诸岳卫兵及礼器东悬车舆乘马等，请使躬自阅之。 
现代文：过了一会儿，司仪说： 各岳卫兵礼仪器皿车轿马匹等请你亲自检阅。 
English: After a while, the master of ceremonies said, "I would like you to inspect the guards, ceremonial instruments, carriages, horses, etc. in person."

古文：惠连曰： 诸岳卫兵安在？ 
现代文：惠连说： 诸岳卫兵在哪？ 
English: Huilian said, "Where are the Zhuge guards?

古文：对曰： 自有所自有所耳。 
现代文：回答说： 各在各的住所。 
English: And they said, To every man his own house.

古文：惠连即命驾，于是控一白马至，具以金玉。
现代文：惠连马上命令出发，于是有人牵一匹白马来，马具都是镶金嵌玉。
English: Huilian immediately gave the order to set off, so someone brought a white horse. The harness was all inlaid with gold and jewels.

古文：其导引控御从辈，皆向者绣衣也。
现代文：前面导引的，后面跟从的都穿着绣衣。
English: Those who lead from the front and those who follow from behind wear embroidered clothes.

古文：数骑夹道前驱，引惠连东北而去，传呼甚严。
现代文：好几个骑兵夹道前导，引领惠连往东北方而去，传递命令非常严格。
English: Several cavalrymen led the way, leading Huilian to the northeast, and the transmission of orders was very strict.

古文：可行数里，兵士万余，或骑或步，尽介金执戈，列于路。
现代文：队伍走出几里路，一万多士兵，有的骑马有的步行，都金甲执戈站在路旁。
English: The procession marched several miles, and more than ten thousand soldiers, some on horseback and some on foot, stood at the side of the road in gold armor.

古文：枪槊旗饰，文繍交焕。
现代文：枪矛旗帜，交相辉映。
English: Guns, spears, flags, they all reflect each other.

古文：俄见朱门外，有数十人，皆衣绿执笏，曲躬而拜者。
现代文：不久，看见朱门外有数十人，都穿着绿衣，手执笏板，弯腰而拜。
English: Soon, I saw dozens of people outside Zhumen, all wearing green clothes, holding cutting boards in their hands, bending down and bowing.

古文：曰： 此属吏也。 
现代文：说： 都是你属下的官吏。 
English: He said: They are all officials under you.

古文：其门内，悉张帷帟几榻，若王者居。
现代文：门内，悬挂着帷幔，摆设着桌几床榻，好似王爷的居室。
English: Inside the door, hanging curtains, decorated with a table and a few beds, it looks like a prince's room.

古文：惠连既升阶，据几而坐。俄绿衣者十辈，各赍簿书，请惠连判署。
现代文：惠连走到阶上，坐在桌几旁，马上有十多个穿绿衣的人，各自带着册簿文书，请惠连判处签署。
English: When Huilian walked up the steps and sat down at a table, there were immediately more than ten people in green, each with a book of documents, asking Huilian to sign the sentence.

古文：己而相者引惠连于东庑下一院，其前庭有车舆乘马甚多，又有乐器鼓箫，及符印管钥。尽致于榻上，以黄纹帊蔽之。
现代文：以后，司仪又领惠连到东厢的一个院内，前庭有很多车轿马匹，又有乐器鼓箫，以及符印钥匙等，都摆放在木案上，用带花的黄绫布盖着，木案四周都有护栏。
English: Later, the master of ceremonies led Huilian to a courtyard in the east wing. In the vestibule, there were many cars and horses, as well as musical instruments, drums, and seal keys. They were all placed on a wooden case, covered with a yellow satin cloth with flowers. The wooden case was surrounded by guardrails.

古文：其榻绕四墉。又有玉册，用紫金填字，以篆籀书，盘屈若龙凤之势。
现代文：又有一个玉册，用紫金写的字，好像篆书，每个字都有龙飞凤舞之势。
English: There is also a jade book, with characters written in purple and gold, like a seal book, each character has the potential of dragon and phoenix dance.

古文：主吏白曰： 此阎波罗王之册也。 
现代文：主管的官吏说： 这是阎波罗王受册封的文书。 
English: The official in charge said, "This is the document in which King Yan Polo was canonized."

古文：有一人具簪冕来谒，惠连与抗礼。
现代文：有一人头戴冠冕前来拜见，惠连与他见过礼后就坐。
English: One person wearing a crown came to see him, and after greeting him, Huiliang sat down.

古文：既坐，谓惠连曰： 上帝以邺郡内黄县南兰若海悟禅师有德，立心画一册。
现代文：他对惠连说，天神说要以邺郡内黄县南边的佛寺中的海悟禅师最有功德，天神心中早有谋划，想立他为阎波罗王。
English: He said to Huiliang that Tenjin said that Haigu Zenji of the Buddhist temple in the southern part of Huangxian County in Lu County should be the most meritorious. Tenjin had long planned in his heart to make him the king of hell.

古文：有阎波罗王礼甚，言以执事有至行，故拜执事为司命主者，统册立使。某幸列宾掾。故得侍左右。 
现代文：因为这个仪式非常重大，我说你有很高的品德，因此拜你为司命主者，统管册立使臣的大权，我有幸列在你的属下，所以能侍奉在你的左右。 
English: Because this ceremony is very important, I say that you have a high moral character, so I bow to you as the commander-in-chief, in charge of the power to appoint envoys, I am fortunate to be among your subordinates, so I can serve at your side.

古文：惠连问曰： 阎波罗王居何？ 
现代文：惠连问道： 阎波罗王管什么事？ 
English: Huilian asked:  What does the King of Hell do?

古文：府掾曰： 地府之尊者也。摽冠岳渎，总幽冥之务。非有奇特之行者，不在是选。 
现代文：府掾说： 他是地府中最尊贵的人，威震山河，总管阴间一切事物，没有奇特品行的人是不能选上的。 
English: The magistrate said, "He is the most honorable person in the underworld. He is the ruler of mountains and rivers. He is in charge of all things in the underworld.

古文：惠连思曰： 吾行册礼于幽冥，岂非身已死乎？ 
现代文：惠连自己想道： 我在阴间掌握册封礼仪，莫非我的身体已死了吗？ 
English: Huilian thought to himself, "I have mastered the etiquette of being canonized in the underworld. Isn't my body already dead?

古文：又念及妻子，怏怏有不平之色。
现代文：又想到了妻子儿女，流露出怏怏不乐的神色。
English: He also thought of his wife and children, and his face showed signs of displeasure.

古文：府掾已察其旨，谓惠连曰： 执事有忧色，得非以妻子为念乎？ 惠连曰： 然。 
现代文：府掾已经觉察出他的心思，对惠连说： 我看你面色忧郁，是不是挂念家中的妻子儿女？ 惠连说： 对。 
English: The prefect already sensed his thoughts and said to Huiliang, "I see that you look sad. Are you worried about your wife and children at home?" Huiliang said, "Yes."

古文：府掾曰： 册命之礼用明日，执事可暂归治其家。
现代文：府掾又说： 册封的礼仪在明天举行，你可以暂时回家看看。
English: The prefect also said: The ceremony of canonization will be held tomorrow, you can go home for a while.

古文：然执事官至崇，幸不以幽显为恨。 
现代文：这里的执事官权力是至高无上的，你不要以为这是在阴间而悔恨。 
English: Here the power of the deacon is supreme, and you should not think that this is in the underworld and repent.

古文：言讫遂起。
现代文：说完起身走了。
English: After saying this, he got up and left.

古文：惠连即命驾出行，而昏然若醉者。
现代文：惠连便命令车马出行，他觉得昏沉沉像醉酒了似的。
English: Huilian then ordered the carriage and horses to set off. He felt drowsy, as if he was drunk.

古文：即据案假寐，及寤，已在县。
现代文：便伏在案上睡着了，等到醒来已经是在县内。
English: He fell asleep while working on the case and woke up in the county.

古文：时天才晓，惊叹且久。
现代文：当时天刚亮，他回想起这段经历惊叹很久。
English: It was just after dawn, and he remembers being amazed by the experience for a long time.

古文：自度上帝命，固不可免。即具白妻子，为理命。
现代文：他也想到，这是天神的命令，是不可免除的，便把这事告诉了妻子，让她赶快准备后事。
English: He also thought that this was an order of the gods, which could not be dispensed with, so he told his wife about this and asked her to quickly prepare for the aftermath.

古文：又白于县令。令曹某不信。
现代文：他又告诉了县令，县令曹某却不相信。
English: He also told the county magistrate, but the county magistrate Cao Mou did not believe him.

古文：惠连遂汤沐，具绅冕，卧于榻。
现代文：惠连便用热水沐浴，穿戴好衣冠，躺卧在床上。
English: Huilian then took a hot bath, put on a cap, and lay down on the bed.

古文：是夕，县吏数辈，皆闻空中有声若风雨，自北来，直入惠连之室。
现代文：这天晚上，县里的好几个官吏，都听到了空中有刮风下雨的声音，从北边来，直到惠连住的屋内。
English: That evening, several officials in the county heard the sound of wind and rain in the air, coming from the north, all the way to the house where Huilian lived.

古文：食顷，惠连卒。又闻其声北向而去，叹骇。
现代文：吃顿饭的时间惠连便死了，又听到了声音往北去了。
English: When it was time for dinner, Hui Lian died. He heard the sound again and went north.

古文：因遣使往邺郡内黄县南问，果是兰若院禅师海悟者，近卒矣。
现代文：大家都感到惊骇，因此又派人到邺郡内黄县南面询问，果然是兰若院禅师海悟最近死亡。
English: Everyone was shocked, so they sent someone to the southern part of Huangxian County in the county to inquire, and it turned out to be Lanjia Academy's Zen master Haiguo who had recently died.

