古文：伯琦自幼从宦，游京师，入国学，为上舍生，积分及高等。
现代文：周伯琦字伯温，饶州人。年幼时就至京师，入国学，为上等生。
English: Zhou Boqin, a native of Raozhou, went to Beijing to study at a young age, and entered the country as an upper-class student.

古文：去，以荫授将仕郎、南海县主簿，三转为翰林修撰。
现代文：离开国学后历任将仕郎，南海县主簿、翰林修撰。
English: After leaving the national school, he became a servant of successive generals, the main book of Nanhai County, and was compiled by Hanlin.

古文：至正元年，改奎章阁为宣文阁、艺文监为崇文监，伯琦为宣文阁授经郎，教戚里大臣子弟，每进讲，辄称旨，且日被顾问。
现代文：至正元年，改奎章阁为宣文阁、艺文监为崇文监，伯琦任宣文阁授经郎，教外戚大臣的子弟，以后又任顾问。
English: In the first year of Zheng He, the Keizhang Pavilion was changed to the Xuanwen Pavilion, and the Art and Literature Supervisor was changed to the Supreme Literature Supervisor. Bo Xuan was appointed as the scribe of the Xuanwen Pavilion, the son of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and later he was appointed as a consultant.

古文：帝以伯琦工书法，命篆 宣文阁宝 ，仍题扁宣文阁；及摹王羲之所书《兰亭序》、智永所书《千文》，刻石阁中。
现代文：帝因伯琦善于书法，命他篆写 宣文阁宝 ，再题匾 宣文阁 ；并仿效王羲之所写的《兰亭序》、智永写的《千文》，刻在石阁中。
English: Di Yingbo, who was good at calligraphy, ordered him to inscribe "Xuanwen Treasure" and "Xuanwen Pavilion" on the stone pavilion. He also engraved "Lanting Preface" written by Wang Xizhi and "Thousand Texts" written by Zhiyong.

古文：自是累转官，皆宣文、崇文之间，而眷遇益隆矣。帝尝呼其字伯温而不名。
现代文：从此每次升官都是在宣文、崇文之间，帝对他的关怀日益深厚，常呼字而不呼名。
English: From then on, every promotion was between proclamation and reverence for literature, and the emperor's concern for him grew deeper and deeper, often calling him by his first name rather than his surname.

古文：会御史奏风宪宜用近臣，特命佥广东廉访司事。
现代文：适逢御史上奏有关监察御史官员，宜用近臣，于是皇帝命他任广东廉访使。
English: When it was time for the imperial edict to appoint the relevant supervising imperial official, it was appropriate to use a close vassal, so the emperor ordered him to serve as a corrupt envoy to Guangdong.

古文：八年，召入为翰林待制，预修后妃、功臣列传，累升直学士。
现代文：至正八年调迁翰林待制，预修《后妃》、《功臣列传》，他一再升官，最后升为直学士。
English: Up to the eighth year of the year, he was transferred to the Hanlin Preparatory School, where he prepared "The Empress" and "The List of Meritorious Servants." He was repeatedly promoted, and finally became a direct bachelor.

古文：十二年，有旨令南士皆得居省台。
现代文：至正十二年，旨令南士皆住中书省和御史台。
English: In the twelfth year of the Taisho era, the Nanshi were ordered to live in the Ministry of Literature and the Imperial History Museum.

古文：除伯琦兵部侍郎，遂与贡师泰同擢监察御史。
现代文：任伯琦为兵部侍郎，随后又与贡师泰同时被选拔为监察御史。
English: Ren Bo Xuan was the attendant of the military department, and then he was selected as the inspector of history at the same time as Gong Shitai.

古文：两人皆南士之望，一时荣之。
现代文：两人都是南方的大族。
English: Both men are from the south.

古文：时御史大夫也先帖木儿以大军南讨，而失律丧师，陕西行台监察御史刘希曾等十人共劾奏之。
现代文：当时御史大夫也先帖木儿带大军讨伐南方，因作战失利军队损失颇大，陕西行台监察御史刘希曾等十人共同上奏弹劾。
English: At that time, the Imperial Historian, Tamerlane, led a large army to fight in the south. Due to the defeat in the battle, the army suffered considerable losses. Liu Xi, the inspector of the Imperial Historian in Shaanxi and Taiwan, and ten others jointly filed an impeachment.

古文：伯琦乃劾希曾等越分干誉，希曾等皆坐左迁，补郡判官，由是不为公论所与。
现代文：伯琦则认为希曾等十人的弹劾是越过了自己的职责，希曾等人都因此而降职，补为郡判官。但伯琦的行动并未被公论所赞许。
English: Hogan, on the other hand, believed that the impeachment of Hickson and ten others exceeded his duties. As a result, Hickson and the others were demoted and replaced as county judges. However, Hogan's actions were not approved by public opinion.

古文：十三年，迁崇文太监，兼经筵官，代祀天妃。
现代文：十三年升迁为崇文太监，兼经筵官，代祭天妃。
English: Thirteen years later, she was promoted to the position of eunuch of Chongwen, concurrently acting as eunuch and acting as the divine consort.

古文：丁内艰。十四年，起复为江东肃政廉访使。
现代文：十四年再起用为江东肃政廉访使。
English: Fourteen years later, he was reappointed as a special envoy to Jiangdong to investigate political corruption.

古文：长枪锁南班陷宁国，伯琦与僚佐仓皇出见之，寻遁走至杭州。
现代文：长枪锁南班叛乱，陷宁国，伯琦和他的僚属仓皇出走，不久逃到杭州。
English: Long gun lock Nanban rebellion, trapped Ningguo, Bo Xuan and his colleagues fled in panic, and soon fled to Hangzhou.

古文：除兵部尚书，未行，改浙西肃政廉访使。
现代文：任命为兵部尚书，未曾启程又改任浙江肃政廉访使。
English: He was appointed as a military attaché, and before he left, he was appointed as the envoy of Zhejiang Suizheng Liancheng.

古文：江南行台监察御史余观纠言伯琦失陷宁国，宜正其罪。
现代文：江南行台监察御史余观，弹劾伯琦失陷宁国，应该治罪。
English: South of the Yangtze River to Taiwan to supervise historical observation, impeach Bo Xilai for losing Ningguo, should be criminalized.

古文：十七年，江浙行省丞相达识帖睦尔承制假伯琦参知政事，招谕平江张士诚。
现代文：十七年江浙行省丞相达识帖睦尔按规定暂委伯琦为参知政事，使招降张士诚。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, the provincial chancellor Zhengtai Mu'er, according to the provisions of the provisional committee, Bo Xuan, was a political adviser to the governor, leading to the recruitment and demotion of Zhang Shicheng.

古文：士诚既降，江南行台监察御史亦辩释伯琦罪，除同知太常礼仪院事，士诚留之，未行，拜资政大夫、江浙行省左丞。
现代文：士诚投降后，江南行台监察御史辩解伯琦罪责，任为同知太常礼仪院事，士诚挽留他，因而未成行，改任资政大夫、江浙行省左丞。
English: After Shicheng's surrender, Jiangnan Xingtai Supervisor Gu Shi justified Bo Xingtai's guilt and appointed him as a member of the Tongzhi Taizhong Rite Academy. Shicheng retained him, so he did not go, and was reappointed as a senior political officer and Jiangsu and Zhejiang Xingtai Zuo Jiao.

古文：于是留平江者十余年。士诚既灭，伯琦乃得归鄱阳，寻卒。
现代文：从此留在平江十多年，张士诚被消灭，伯琦才回鄱阳，不久就去世了。
English: From then on, he stayed in Pingjiang for more than ten years. Zhang Shicheng was eliminated, and it was not until Bo Xuan returned to Fenyang that he passed away.

古文：伯琦仪观温雅，粹然如玉，虽遭时多艰，而善于自保。
现代文：伯琦态度温雅，肤白如玉，即使一生遭到很多磨难，但善于自己保重。
English: He has a gentle attitude and fair skin. He is good at taking care of himself, even though he has suffered a lot of hardships in his life.

古文：博学工文章，而尤以篆、隶、真、草擅名当时。
现代文：他知识广博，又擅文章，尤其精于书法，篆、隶、真、草各体闻名当时。
English: He was very knowledgeable and good at writing, especially at calligraphy. He was famous for his calligraphy of the characters, 隶, 真 and草.

古文：尝著《六书正伪》、《说文字原》二书，又有诗文稿若干卷。
现代文：曾著有《六书正讹》、《说文字原》，还著有诗文稿若干卷。
English: He was the author of "Rokushijojo" and "Saimojigahara," as well as several volumes of poetry.

古文：吴当吴当，字伯尚，澄之孙也。
现代文：吴当字伯尚，吴澄之孙。
English: Wu Dang Zi Bechang, the grandson of Wu Cheng.

古文：当幼承祖训，以颖悟笃实称。
现代文：幼年时继承祖宗遗训，以聪明、诚实为人们称道。
English: He inherited the ancestral teachings at a young age, and was praised for his intelligence and honesty.

古文：长精通经史百家言，侍其祖至京，补国子生。
现代文：长大后，精通经史百家之言，跟随其祖父到京师，补国子生。
English: After growing up, he was well versed in the words of hundreds of schools of history, and followed his grandfather to Beijing to teach and supplement the children of the country.

古文：久之，澄既捐馆，四方学子从澄游者，悉就当卒业焉。
现代文：过了较长一段时间，吴澄去世，曾跟随他游历的四方学生，都以吴当为师，完成其学业。
English: After a long period of time, Wu Cheng passed away. The students from Sifang who had traveled with him all completed their studies with Wu Dang as their teacher.

古文：至正五年，以父文荫，授万亿四库照磨，未上，用荐者改国子助教。
现代文：至正五年，承袭其父吴文的官爵，而授万亿四库照磨，未上任，改任国子助教。
English: In the fifth year of the Taisho era, he succeeded his father, Wu Wen, as an official peer, but he did not take up the post and was appointed as an assistant professor of Kuniko.

古文：勤讲解，严肄习，诸生皆乐从之。
现代文：他能勤讲解、严教学，学生都乐意跟他求学。
English: He can diligently explain and strictly teach, and students are willing to study with him.

古文：会诏修辽、金、宋三史，当预编纂。
现代文：适逢下诏修辽、金、宋三史，吴当参预编纂。
English: At the right time, the Emperor issued the edict to compile the three histories of Liao, Jin and Song, and Wu Dangshan was appointed as pre-editor.

古文：书成，除翰林修撰。
现代文：书成之后，授翰林修撰。
English: After the book was completed, it was assigned to Hanlin Shuxing.

古文：时江南兵起且五年，大臣有荐当世居江西，习知江西民俗，且其才可任政事者，诏特授江西肃政廉访使，偕江西行省参政火你赤、兵部尚书黄昭，招捕江西诸郡，便宜行事。
现代文：七年调任国子博士。第二年升监丞，以后逐年升任司业、翰林待制、礼部员外郎。十三年，升监察御史，不久，再次任国子司业，以后相继任礼部郎中、翰林直学士。当时在江南战争已进行五年，大臣中有人介绍说，吴当因世代居住江西，熟知江西风俗民情，并且他的才能也可以担任政事。于是朝廷下诏特授江西肃政廉访使，协同江西省参政火你赤、兵部尚书黄昭，招降江西各郡，且有自主之权。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to vice-commissioner, and after that, he was promoted to superintendent of studies, attendant of Hanlin, and attendant of etiquette. In the thirteenth year, he was promoted to superintendent of history, and soon after that, he was reappointed to superintendent of studies, and after that, he was successively appointed vice-chairman of etiquette and vice-chairman of Hanlin. At that time, the war in the south of the Yangtze River had been going on for five years, and one of the ministers introduced that Wu Dang had lived in Jiangxi for generations

古文：当以朝廷兵力不给，既受命至江南，即召募民兵，由浙入闽。至江西境建昌界，招安新城孙塔，擒殄李三。
现代文：吴当因朝廷兵力不足，受命至江南召募民兵，由浙入闽，至江西境建昌界，招安了新城孙塔，擒杀了李三。
English: Due to the shortage of troops in the imperial court, Wu Dang was ordered to go to the south of the Yangtze River to recruit militiamen, from Zhejiang to Yunnan, to Jiangxi to build a prosperous world, to recruit Sunta of Xincheng, and to kill Li San.

古文：道路既通，乃进攻南丰，渠凶郑天瑞遁，郑原自刎死。
现代文：接着进攻南丰。反元义军首领郑天瑞逃走，郑原自刎而死。
English: Then they attacked Nanfeng. Zheng Tianrui, the leader of the anti-Yuan rebels, fled, and Zheng Yuan committed suicide.

古文：十六年，调检校章迪率本部兵，与黄昭夹攻抚州，剿杀首寇胡志学，进兵复崇仁、宜黄。
现代文：十六年，调检校章迪率本部兵，与黄昭夹攻抚州，剿杀反元义军首领胡志学，进兵收复了崇仁、宜黄。
English: In the 16th year, Zhang Di, head of the inspection and inspection school, led the headquarters soldiers to attack Fuzhou with Huang Zhao, and killed Hu Zhixue, the leader of the anti-Yuan rebel army. The soldiers recovered Chongren and Yihuang.

古文：于是建、抚两郡悉定。
现代文：于是平定了建、抚两郡。
English: As a result, Jian and Fuzhou counties were pacified.

古文：是时，参知政事朵歹总兵抚、建，积年无功。
现代文：当时，参知政事朵歹在抚、建总领兵，多年未建立功勋。
English: At that time, the prefect of the prefectural government was in charge of military affairs, and he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army. However, he did not receive any merit for many years.

古文：因忌当屡捷，功在己上，又以为南人不宜总兵，则构为飞语，谓当与黄昭皆与寇通。
现代文：因忌妒吴当屡打胜仗，功劳在己之上，又认为南人不应该统领兵马，于是制造流言蜚语，说吴当与黄昭皆通寇。
English: Because of jealousy, Wu Dang repeatedly won the war, and the credit was above him. He also thought that the Nan people should not lead the soldiers and horses, so he created rumors that Wu Dang and Huang Zhao were in collusion.

古文：有旨解二人兵柄，除当抚州路总管，昭临江路总管，并供亿平章火你赤军。
现代文：帝降旨解除二人兵权，吴当改任抚州路总管，黄昭任临江路总管，并负责供应平章火你赤军的军饷。
English: Wu Dang was appointed as the general manager of Fuzhou Road, and Huang Zhao was appointed as the general manager of Linjiang Road. They were also responsible for the supply of military supplies to the Red Army.

古文：火你赤杀当从事官范淳及章迪，将士皆愤怒不平，当谕之曰： 上命不可违也。 
现代文：火你赤杀死吴当的从事官范淳及章迪，将士们都极端愤怒，吴当告诉他们说： 皇帝的命令不可违抗。 
English: Wudang's officers, Fan Chun and Zhang Di, were furious. Wudang told them, "The emperor's order cannot be disobeyed.

古文：而火你赤又上章言： 二人者，难任牧民。 
现代文：火你赤又上奏章说： 吴当和黄昭二人不能胜任官职。 
English: Fu Youkai also issued a statement saying, "Wu Dang and Huang Zhao are not qualified to hold official posts."

古文：寻有旨当与昭皆罢总管，除名。
现代文：不久，皇帝降旨罢了吴当和黄昭的总管职务，削官为民。
English: Soon after, the emperor decreed that Wu Dang and Huang Zhao would no longer hold the posts of general managers, and the officials would be replaced by the people.

古文：十八年，火你赤自瑞州还龙兴，当、昭皆随军不敢去。
现代文：十八年，火你赤自瑞州回龙兴，吴当和黄昭皆随军不敢去龙兴。
English: In 18 years, when the Red Army returned to Longxing from Suzhou, Wu Dang and Huang Zhao did not dare to go to Longxing with the army.

古文：先是，当与昭平贼功状，自广东由海道未达京师，而朵歹、火你赤等公牍乃先至，故朝廷责当、昭，皆左迁。
现代文：以前当与昭平叛立功报告，从广东经海道尚未到达京师，而朵歹、火你赤等的公文先到，所以朝廷责罚当和昭，都降职。
English: In the past, both Dang and Zhao Ping were punished by the imperial court for demotion, because Dang and Zhao had not yet arrived in Beijing from Guangdong via the sea route, and the official documents such as the bad news and the red flag arrived first.

古文：及得当、昭功状，乃始知其诬，诏拜当中奉大夫、江西行省参知政事，昭湖广行省参知政事。
现代文：待接到吴当、黄昭的立功报告后，才知道是诬告，下诏拜吴当为中奉大夫、江西行省参知政事，黄昭任湖广参知政事。
English: It was only after receiving Wu Dang's and Huang Zhao's report that they realized that the accusation was false. Wu Dang was promoted to the position of Zhongfeng Doctor, Jiangxi Province Governor and Huang Zhao was appointed as the Governor of Guangxi Province.

古文：命未下，而陈友谅已陷江西诸郡。
现代文：命令尚未下达，而陈友谅已攻陷江西诸郡。
English: The order has not yet been issued, but Chen Youxuan has already invaded counties in Jiangxi Province.

古文：火你赤弃城遁，当乃戴黄冠，著道士服，杜门不出，日以著书为事。
现代文：火你赤弃城逃跑，吴当就戴上了黄色道士帽，穿道士服，闭门不出，整日写书。
English: When you abandoned the city and ran away, Wu Dang put on a yellow Taoist cap, wore a Taoist robe, shut the door and wrote books all day.

古文：友谅遣人辟之，当卧床不食，以死自誓。
现代文：友谅派人征召他，他卧床绝食，誓死不从。
English: Tomoyasu sent someone to recruit him, and he went on a bedridden hunger strike, vowing to die.

古文：乃舁床载之舟，送江州，拘留一年，终不为屈。
现代文：于是将他连着他的床一块抬到船上，送到江州，拘留一年，始终不屈。
English: So they carried him on a boat with his bed and sent him to Jiangzhou, where he was detained for a year and never gave in.

古文：遂隐居庐陵吉水之谷坪。
现代文：后来就隐居庐陵吉水的谷坪。
English: Later, he lived in seclusion in Gulping, Jishui.

古文：逾年，以疾卒，年六十五。
现代文：一年后病逝，终年六十五岁。
English: He died a year later, aged 65.

古文：所著书，有《周礼纂言》及《学言稿》。
现代文：他著的书有《周礼纂言》及《学言稿》。
English: He is the author of "Zhou Lai Gong" and "Learning Speech."

