古文：高祖睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝，姓刘氏，讳暠，本名知远，及即位改今讳。
现代文：汉高祖睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝，姓刘，讳名詗，本名知远，到登皇帝位时改为现在的讳名。
English: Emperor Han Gao Zu Rui Wen Sheng Wu Zhao Su Xiao, surnamed Liu, alias Liu, real name Zhiyuan, changed to his current alias when he ascended the throne.

古文：其先本沙陀部人也。
现代文：他的祖先本是西突厥的沙陀部族人。
English: His ancestors were originally from the Sado tribe of West Turkistan.

古文：四代祖讳湍，帝有天下，追尊为明元皇帝，庙号文祖，陵曰懿陵；《五代会要》：湍为东汉显宗第八子淮阳王昞之后。
现代文：四代祖讳名湍，当高祖拥有天下时，被追尊为明元皇帝，庙号叫文祖，陵墓叫懿陵；高祖母陇西李氏，追封以明贞皇后的谥号。
English: Four generations of ancestors were famous, and when Gao Zu owned the world, he was revered as the Emperor Mingyuan, the temple was called Wenzhu, the mausoleum was called Gongling; Gao's grandmother, the Xixi Li clan, was posthumously named the Empress Mingzhen.

古文：高祖母陇西李氏，追谥明贞皇后。曾祖讳昂，晋赠太保，追尊为恭僖皇帝，朝号德祖，陵曰沛陵；《五代会要》：懿陵、沛陵皆无陵所，遥申朝拜。
现代文：曾祖父讳名昂，在晋代即追封为太保，到后汉追尊为恭僖皇帝，庙号叫德祖，陵墓叫沛陵；曾祖母虢国太夫人杨氏，追封以恭惠皇后的谥号。
English: His great-grandfather, Shanyuanang, was given the posthumous title of Taibo in the Jin Dynasty, and the posthumous title of Qianlong Emperor in the Later Han Dynasty. His temple was called Dezu, and his tomb was called Peiling. His great-grandmother, the Dowager Empress Yang, was given the posthumous title of Qianhui Empress.

古文：曾祖母虢国太夫人杨氏，追谥恭惠皇后。祖讳僎，晋赠太傅，追尊为昭献皇帝，庙号翼祖，陵曰威陵；祖母鲁国太夫人李氏，追谥为昭穆皇后。
现代文：祖父讳名亻巽，在晋代即追封为太傅，到后汉追尊为昭献皇帝，庙号叫翼祖，陵墓叫威陵；祖母鲁国太夫人李氏，追封以昭穆皇后的谥号。
English: His grandfather, Shumei, was posthumously named Taifu in the Jin Dynasty, and Shoken Emperor in the Later Han Dynasty. His temple was called Yingzu, and his mausoleum was called Weiling. His grandmother, the Empress Dowager of the State of Lu, was posthumously named the Empress Dowager of Shomu.

古文：皇考讳琠，事后唐武皇帝为列校，晋赠太师，追尊为章圣皇帝，庙号显祖，陵曰肃陵；皇妣吴国太夫人安氏，追谥章懿皇后。
现代文：父亲讳名王典，服侍后唐武皇李克用，做列校，晋代追封为太师，到后汉追尊为章圣皇帝，庙号叫显祖，陵墓叫肃陵；母亲吴国太夫人安氏，追封以章懿皇后的谥号。
English: His father, Wang Dian, served the empress dowager of the Tang Dynasty, Li Ke, and was a schoolmaster. In the Jin Dynasty, he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master. In the Later Han Dynasty, he was posthumously awarded the title of Emperor Zhang Sheng. His temple name was Xian Zu, and his mausoleum was called Su Ling. His mother, Lady An of the State of Wu, was posthumously awarded the title of Empress Zhang Rong.

古文：后以唐乾宁二年，岁在乙卯，二月四日生帝于太原。
现代文：章懿皇后在唐朝乾宁二年二月四日在太原生下了汉高祖。
English: Empress Zhangye gave birth to Emperor Gaozu in Taiyuan on February 4, the second year of Qianning of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：帝弱不好弄，严重寡言，及长，面紫色，目睛多白。
现代文：高祖小时不爱好活动，严肃庄重很少说话，长大成人时，脸上呈紫色，眼睛白多黑少。
English: When Gao Zu was a child, he did not like activities and rarely spoke seriously. When he became an adult, his face was purple and his eyes were more white and less black.

古文：初事唐明宗，列于麾下。
现代文：开始时服侍后唐明宗，做了他的属下。
English: At the beginning, he served the late Tang Mingzong and became his subordinate.

古文：明宗与梁人对栅于德胜，时晋高祖为梁人所袭，马甲连革断，帝辍骑以授之，取断革者自跨之，徐殿其后，晋高祖感而壮之。
现代文：明宗与梁人在德胜对阵时，晋高祖石敬瑭被梁军袭击，连接战马铠甲的皮条断了，汉高祖将自己骑的马给石敬瑭骑，自己骑上石敬瑭断了铠甲的马，不慌不忙地留在后面断后，石敬瑭感激他，认为他很勇敢强壮。
English: During the confrontation between Mingzong and Liang Zong in Desheng, Jinguo's ancestor Shi Jingyao was attacked by Liang's army, and the leather strap connecting the armor of the war horse was broken. Han Gaozu gave the horse he was riding to Shi Jingyao to ride, and rode the horse on which Shi Jingyao had broken the armor, and stayed behind unhurriedly after it was broken. Shi Jingyao was grateful to him and thought he was very brave and strong.

古文：帝密遣御士石敢袖鎚立于后，俄顷伏甲者起，敢有勇力，拥晋高祖入一室，以巨木塞门，敢力当其锋，死之。帝解佩刀，遇夜晦，以在地苇炬未然者奋击之，众谓短兵也，遂散走。
现代文：明宗登上帝位时，石敬瑭任北京留守，因为高祖从前有保护援救自己的功劳，奏请明宗将高祖调到自己帐下，担任牙门都校。后唐应顺初年，石敬瑭镇守常山，唐明宗传召他到京师来，碰上闵帝逃奔，与石敬瑭在路上相遇，于是一同到卫州，在传送文书的人所住的邮亭中歇息。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, Shi Jingyu stayed in Beijing, because Gaozu had the merit of protecting and rescuing himself in the past. He asked Emperor Mingzong to transfer Gaozu to his account to serve as the capital school. In the first year after the Tang Dynasty, when Shi Jingyu was in charge of Changshan, Emperor Mingzong summoned him to Beijing. He ran into Emperor Gong and met Shi Jingyu on the road, so they went to Weizhou together and rested in the post office where the courier lived.

古文：帝乃匿身长垣下，闻帝亲将李洪信谓人曰： 石太尉死矣。 帝隔垣呼洪信曰： 太尉无恙。 乃逾垣出就洪信兵，共护晋高祖，杀建谋者，以少主授王宏贽。
现代文：闵帝身旁的人想谋害石敬瑭，高祖悄悄派卫士石敢在袖子里藏着铁锤站在石敬瑭后面，到发生变乱时，石敢拥着石敬瑭躲进一间屋子里，用大木头将门顶住，石敢不久被杀害了，高祖率领众人全部杀死闵帝身边的人，才使石敬瑭免于被害。
English: The people around Emperor Xizong wanted to assassinate Shijian, Gaozu quietly sent his bodyguard Shijian to stand behind Shijian with a hammer hidden in his sleeve. When a riot broke out, Shijian hugged Shijian and hid in a room, holding the door open with a large piece of wood. Shijian was soon killed, and Gaozu led everyone to kill everyone around Emperor Xizong to save Shijian from harm.

古文：清泰元年，晋高祖复镇河东。
现代文：后唐末帝清泰元年，石敬瑭再次镇守河东。
English: After the end of the Tang Dynasty, in the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Shi Jinglian once again took charge of the town of Hedong.

古文：三年夏，移镇汶阳。
现代文：三年夏天，调任镇守汶阳。
English: In the summer of the third year, he was transferred to the town guard of Wenyang.

古文：帝劝晋高祖举义，赞成密计，经纶之始，中外赖之。
现代文：高祖劝石敬瑭起义称帝，辅佐他成事，密谋策划，改朝换代的初期大事，里里外外都依靠他。
English: Gao Zu advised Shi Jinglian to revolt and proclaim himself emperor, assisted him in accomplishing things, plotted and planned, and the early events of the change of dynasty, and relied on him inside and outside.

古文：晋高祖以帝为北京马步军都指挥使。
现代文：晋高祖任他为北京马步军都指挥使。
English: Jin Gao's ancestor appointed him as the commander of the Beijing Horse Guards.

古文：及契丹以全军赴难，大破张敬达之众于晋阳城下，有降军千余人，晋高祖将置之于亲卫，帝尽杀之。
现代文：契丹出动全部兵力同晋军一起与后唐末帝决战，在晋阳城下大败唐军张敬达部队，有投降的士卒一千多人，石敬瑭将他们交给自己的侍卫部队处理，高祖全部杀掉了他们。
English: Khitan dispatched all the troops to fight the decisive battle with the Jin army together with the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, and defeated the Tang army Zhang Jingda's troops at the foot of Jinyang City. There were more than a thousand surrendered soldiers. Shi Jingyao handed them over to his bodyguards to deal with. Gaozu killed them all.

古文：晋国初建，加检校司空，充侍卫马步都指挥使，权点检随驾六军诸卫事，寻改陕州节度使，充侍卫亲军马步都虞候。
现代文：晋国初建时，加封高祖为检校司空，兼任侍卫马步都指挥使，暂时管理随驾六军和负责侍卫工作，不久改任陕州节度使，兼任侍卫亲军马步军都虞候。
English: At the time of the initial construction of Jin Province, Gaozu Jafeng was the inspector of the school, and also served as the commanding officer of the guards, and temporarily managed the escorting six armies and was responsible for the work of the guards. Soon he was appointed as the Shaanxi Festival Commissioner, and also served as the guard of the pro-army horse-and-foot army.

古文：契丹主送晋高祖至上党，指帝谓高祖曰： 此都军甚操剌，无大故不可弃之。 
现代文：契丹国主送别晋高祖到上党时，指着高祖对晋高祖说： 这位都军特别勇猛，没有大的缘故不可遗弃他。 
English: When the head of the Khitan state bade farewell to Jin Gaozu at the upper party, he pointed to Gaozu and said to Jin Gaozu: This capital army is particularly brave, there is no great reason not to abandon him.

古文：晋高祖入洛，委帝巡警，都邑肃然，无敢犯令。
现代文：晋高祖进入洛阳，委任高祖巡逻警戒，大城小邑秩序井然，没有人敢于违背法令。
English: Jin Gaozu entered Luoyang and appointed Gaozu to patrol and keep a watchful eye. There was order in the big city and the small town, and no one dared to violate the law.

古文：天福二年夏四月，加检校太保。
现代文：天福二年夏四月，加封检校太保。
English: In April of the summer of Tenfu's second year, he was given the additional post of school inspector.

古文：八月，改许州节度使，典军如故。
现代文：八月，改任许州节度使，像以前一样主管军队。
English: In August, he was reappointed as Huizhou's military governor, in charge of the military as before.

古文：三年夏四月，加检校太傅。
现代文：三年夏四月，加封检校太傅。
English: In April of the summer of the third year, he was promoted to Jafeng inspection school dean.

古文：冬十月，授侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
现代文：冬十月，授任侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
English: In the winter of October, he was appointed as the commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards.

古文：《通监》：知远自以有佐命功，重威起于外戚，无大功，耻与之同制。
现代文：十一月，调任宋州节度使，加封检校太尉。十二月，加封同平章事。
English: In November, he was transferred to the post of Songzhou Festival Envoy and promoted to the rank of Lieutenant. In December, he was promoted to the rank of General.

古文：制下数日，杜门四表辞不受。晋高祖怒，召宰相赵莹等议落帝兵权，任归私第。
现代文：这时高祖与杜重威一同接受晋高祖施恩加职的诏命，高祖以与杜重威同列为耻而烦闷不乐，恳切推辞不接受诏命，几天闭门不出。晋高祖生了气，传召宰相赵莹等人商议罢免高祖兵权，让他回家。
English: At this time, Gaozu and Du Chongwei together accepted the imperial command to promote Gaozu to a higher position. Gaozu was embarrassed and unhappy to be listed with Du Chongwei. He earnestly refused to accept the imperial command and did not go out for a few days. Jin Gaozu was angry and summoned the prime minister Zhao Ying and others to discuss the removal of Gaozu's military power and let him go home.

古文：莹等以为不可，乃遣端明殿学士和凝就第宣谕，帝乃承命。
现代文：赵莹等人认为这样做不妥，于是派端明殿学士和凝到高祖的住处宣读谕旨，高祖才接受诏命。
English: Zhao Ying and others thought that this was inappropriate, so they sent Duan Mingdian, a scholar and scholar, to Gao Zu's residence to read the imperial decree, and Gao Zu accepted the imperial decree.

古文：五年三月，改鄴都留守兼侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
现代文：五年三月，改任邺都留守兼侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
English: In March of the fifth year, he was reappointed as the commander-in-chief of the Horse Guards and the Horse Guards.

古文：九月，奉诏赴阙，晋高祖幸其第。
现代文：九月，接受诏令到京师，晋高祖驾临他的住所。
English: In September, after receiving the imperial edict to go to Beijing, Emperor Jinguo's ancestor came to his residence.

古文：六年七月，授北京留守、河东节度使。
现代文：六年七月，任北京留守、河东节度使。
English: In July of the sixth year, he left Beijing and served as an envoy to the Hedong Festival.

古文：七年正月，加侍中。
现代文：七年正月，加封侍中。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, he was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：时天下大蝗，惟不入河东界。
现代文：这时天下发生大蝗灾，而蝗虫偏偏不进入河东境内。
English: At this time, a large locust plague occurred in the world, but the locusts did not enter the territory of Hedong.

古文：六月，晋高祖崩于鄴宫，少帝即位，加帝检校太师。
现代文：六月，晋高祖在邺宫驾崩，晋少帝即皇帝位，加封高祖为检校太师。
English: In June, Emperor Gaozu passed away at the Imperial Palace. Emperor Gaozu was enthroned as the Young Emperor, and Gaozu was appointed as the inspector of schools.

古文：八年三月，进位中书令。
现代文：八年三月，提升为中书令。
English: In March of the same year, it was upgraded to Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：开运元年正月，契丹南下，契丹主以大军直抵澶州，遣蕃将伟王率兵入雁门。
现代文：开运元年正月，契丹南下，契丹国主率领大军直抵澶州，派蕃将伟王领兵进入雁门关。
English: In the first month of the first year of the movement, Khitan went south. The Khitan sovereign led a large army straight to Bozhou, and sent Wei Wang to lead the army into the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：朝廷以帝为幽州道行营招讨使，帝大破伟王于忻口。
现代文：朝廷以高祖为幽州道行营招讨使，高祖在忻口大破伟王。
English: The imperial court invited Gao Zu to Yuzhou Road as an envoy, and Gao Zu defeated Wei Wang in Hekou.

古文：寻奉诏起兵至土门，军至乐平，会契丹退，乃还。
现代文：旋即又接受诏令移兵奔赴土门，军队到达乐平时，契丹已经退兵，于是就回来了。
English: He immediately accepted the imperial edict to move troops to Tumen. By the time the troops arrived at Leping, Khitan had already left the army, so he returned.

古文：三月，封太原王。
现代文：三月，封为太原王。
English: In March, he was named King of Taiyuan.

古文：七月，兼北面行营都统。
现代文：七月，兼任北面行营都统。
English: In July, he also served as the head of the Northern District.

古文：二年四月，封北平王。
现代文：二年四月，封为北平王。
English: In April of the following year, he was crowned King of Peking.

古文：犯塞，帝亲率牙兵至朔州南阳武谷，大破之。《东都事略·郭进传》：契丹屠安阳，高祖遣进拒战，契丹败走，以功除刺吏。十一月，契丹主率蕃汉大军由易、定抵镇州，杜重威等驻军于中渡桥以御之。
现代文：三年五月，加封太尉。同月，高祖诛杀吐谷浑白承福等五支部族，共四百人，以另一部族的王义宗统领五族中其余的人。九月，契丹进犯边塞，高祖亲自率领牙兵到朔州南部的阳武关，大破契丹军队。十一月，契丹国主率领蕃族汉族大军从易州、定州抵达镇州，杜重威等将领在中渡桥驻军以抵御契丹大军。
English: In May of the third year, Gaozu killed four hundred people from five tribes, including the Tubo Hunba Chengfu, and another tribe, the Wang Yizong, led the rest of the five tribes. In September, the Khitan invaded the border fortress, Gaozu personally led the tooth soldiers to Yangwuguan in the south of Shuozhou, and defeated the Khitan army. In November, the Khitan ruler led the Shan Han army from Yizhou and Dingzhou to Zhenzhou, and Du Chongwei and other generals stationed troops in Zhongdu Bridge to resist the Khitan army.

古文：十二月十日，杜重威等以全军降于契丹。
现代文：十二月十日，杜重威等人带着全军投降契丹。
English: On December 10, Du Chongwei and others surrendered to Khitan with their entire army.

古文：十七日，相州节度使张彦泽受契丹命，陷京城，迁少帝于开封府。
现代文：十七日，相州节度使张彦泽接受契丹命令，攻陷京城洛阳，将少帝掳掠到汴州。
English: On the 17th, the Xiangzhou Festival made Zhang Yanze accept the Khitan order to attack the capital Luoyang and kidnap the young emperor to Zhangzhou.

古文：帝闻之大骇，分兵守境，以备寇患。
现代文：高祖得知后大为震惊，分兵把守边境，以备敌寇进犯。
English: When Gaozu learned of this, he was greatly shocked. A detachment of soldiers was sent to guard the border in case of an enemy invasion.

古文：天福十二年春正月丁亥朔，契丹主入东京。
现代文：天福十二年春正月一日，契丹国主进入东京汴州城。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the twelfth year of Tianfu, the Khitan sovereign entered Tokyo's Luzhou Castle.

古文：癸巳，晋少帝蒙尘于封禅寺。
现代文：十九日，晋少帝在封禅寺被褫夺了帝位。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Jin Shao was usurped from his throne at Fuzan Temple.

古文：癸卯，少帝北迁。
现代文：二十九日，少帝被挟持到北方。
English: On the 29th, the young emperor was taken to the north.

古文：二月丁巳朔，契丹主具汉法服，御崇元殿受朝，制改晋国为大辽国，大赦天下，号会同十年。
现代文：二月一日，契丹国主具办汉族的礼制衣服，登上崇元殿接受朝拜，诏令改晋国为大辽国，大赦天下，称年号为会同十年。
English: On February 1, the head of the Khitan state donned Han Chinese ceremonial clothing, ascended the Chongyuan Hall to receive the imperial court, issued a decree to change the country to the Great Liao State, granted amnesty to the whole world, and said that the year was the 10th year of reunification.

古文：是月，帝遣牙将王峻奉表于契丹，契丹主赐诏褒美，呼帝为兒，又赐木柺一。
现代文：同月，高祖派牙将王峻持降表到契丹，契丹国主赐给诏令褒扬嘉奖，称高祖为儿子。又赐给一根木拐。
English: In the same month, Gao Zu sent his son Wang Junji to Khitan, and the ruler of Khitan gave Gao Zu a certificate of commendation, called him his son, and gave him a wooden stump.

古文：蕃法，贵重大臣方得此赐，亦犹汉仪赐几杖之比也。
现代文：按契丹礼法，贵重的大臣才能得到这种赏赐，就像按汉族礼仪赐给几杖一样。
English: According to Khitan etiquette, only a high-ranking minister can receive this award, just as a few sticks are given according to Han Chinese etiquette.

古文：王峻持柺而归，契丹望之皆避路。
现代文：王峻拿着木拐，契丹人望见他都纷纷到路边避让。
English: Wang Jun was holding a wooden handle. When the Khitan saw him, they all rushed to the side of the road to avoid him.

古文：及峻至太原，帝知契丹政乱，乃议建号焉。
现代文：当王峻回到太原后，高祖得以知悉契丹政治混乱，于是商议建立国号。
English: When Wang Jun returned to Taiyuan, Gaozu learned about the political turmoil in Khitan and discussed the establishment of a country name.

古文：是月，秦州节度使何建以其地入于蜀。
现代文：同月，秦州节度使何建将秦州土地人民归降蜀国。
English: In the same month, the Qin State Festival made He Jian surrender the land people of Qin State to Shu.

古文：辛未，帝于太原宫受册，即皇帝位，制改晋开运四年为天福十二年。
现代文：十二日，河东行军司马张彦威与他的文武将吏等，认为中原没有主人，高祖的威望日益隆盛，众心所归，写信劝他登上帝位，高祖谦让不答应，此后众官三次上书，诸军将吏、贵臣耆老，一个接一个地恳切陈请，才发布文告应允。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Yanwei, the commander of the Eastern Military District, and his generals and generals, thought that there was no master in the Central Plains, Gao Zu's prestige was increasingly prosperous, and the hearts of the people returned to him. They wrote a letter to persuade him to ascend to the throne of God. Gao Zu humbly refused to agree. After that, the officials wrote three times, and the generals and dignitaries, one after another, earnestly petitioned, before issuing a letter to agree.

古文：《契丹国志》云：汉祖仍称天福年号，曰： 予未忍忘晋也。 甲戌，帝以晋帝举族北迁，愤惋久之。
现代文：十五日，高祖在太原宫殿受册封，登上帝位，诏令改晋代开运四年为天福十二年。十八日，太祖因为晋代皇室全被迁徙到了北方，愤慨惋惜长久。
English: On the 15th, Emperor Gaozhu was invested with the title of emperor in the Taiyuan Palace and ascended to the throne. The imperial edict changed the four years since the start of the Jin Dynasty to the 12th year of Tianfu. On the 18th, Emperor Gaozhu was indignant and regretful for a long time because the entire Jin Dynasty royal family had been moved to the north.

古文：是日，率亲兵趋土门路，邀迎晋帝至寿阳，闻其已过，乃还。
现代文：这一天，率领亲信兵马奔赴土门，想到寿阳拦截迎回晋帝，听说他们已经经过了，才回师。
English: On this day, he led his trusted soldiers and horses to rush to Tuyun, thinking that Shouyang would intercept and welcome back Emperor Jin. When he heard that they had already passed, he returned to his division.

古文：契丹闻帝建号，伪制削夺帝官爵。
现代文：契丹听说高祖已经建立年号，颁布伪诏剥夺高祖的官职爵位。
English: Khitan heard that Gaozu had established the year, and issued a false edict to deprive Gaozu of his official title.

古文：以通事耿崇美为潞州节度使，高唐英为相州节度使，崔廷勋为河阳节度使，以扼要害之地。
现代文：以通事耿崇美为潞州节度使，高唐英为相州节度使，崔廷勋为河阳节度使，以扼守要害之地。
English: With Geng Chongmei as the envoy of the Bozhou Festival, Gao Tangying as the envoy of the Xiangzhou Festival, and Cui Tingxun as the envoy of the Heyang Festival, to protect the key areas.

古文：丁丑，磁州贼帅梁晖据相州。
现代文：二十一日，磁州盗寇首领梁晖占据相州。
English: On the 21st, the leader of the Gwangju bandits, Liang Jun, occupied Sangju.

古文：己卯，帝遣都将史宏肇率兵讨代州，平之。
现代文：二十三日，高祖派都将史弘肇领兵讨伐代州，平定了代州。
English: On the 23rd, the Gaozhu faction sent Shi Hongzhao to lead the troops to fight against Daizhou, and Daizhou was pacified.

古文：初，代州刺史王晖叛归契丹，宏肇一鼓而拔之，斩晖以徇。
现代文：当初，代州刺史王晖背叛晋朝归附契丹。史弘肇一鼓作气攻下了代州，将王晖斩首示众。
English: In the beginning, Daizhou assassin Wang Qi betrayed the Jin Dynasty and joined the Khitan Empire. Shi Hongzhao seized Daizhou with great determination and beheaded Wang Qi in front of the public.

古文：庚辰，权晋州兵马留后张晏洪奏，军乱，杀知州副使骆从朗及括钱使、谏议大夫赵熙，以城归顺。
现代文：二十四日，临时晋州兵马留后张晏洪上奏，晋州军发生变乱，杀死知州副使骆从朗及括钱使、谏议大夫赵熙，将晋州城归顺汉朝。
English: On the 24th, after the Jin soldiers and horses were temporarily left behind, Zhang Binghong made a speech, and the Jin army mutinied, killing Luo Conglang, the deputy envoy of Chizhou, and Zhao Xi, the envoy of Qian, and the doctor of consultation, and returned Jinzhou City to the Shun Han Dynasty.

古文：时晋州留后刘在明赴东京，朝于契丹，从朗知军州事，帝方遣使张晏洪、辛处明等告谕登极，从朗囚之本城。
现代文：当时晋州留后刘在明去东京开封，朝拜契丹，由骆从朗治理军政大事，高祖正派遣张晏洪、辛处明等人去告知晋州他已登上帝位，骆从朗却将张晏洪等人囚在晋州城。
English: At that time, after staying in Jinzhou, Liu Ziming went to Tokyo and Kaifeng to pay homage to Qidan, and Luo Zilang governed the military and political affairs. Gaozu was sending Zhang Shihong, Xin Du Ming and others to inform Jinzhou that he had ascended to the throne, but Luo Zilang imprisoned Zhang Shihong and others in Jinzhou City.

古文：大将药可俦杀从朗于理所，州民相率害赵熙，三军请晏洪为留后，处明为都监。
现代文：晋州大将药可俦在官府杀死了骆从朗，州民们一起协力杀死了赵熙，三军将领请张晏洪做留后，辛处明做都监。
English: Jinzhou general He Keqin killed Luo Zonglang in the government office, the people of the state worked together to kill Zhao Xi, and the generals of the three armies invited Zhang Qihong to stay, and Xin Duming to be the supervisor of the capital.

古文：辛巳，权陕州留后赵晖、权潞州留后王守恩，并上表归顺。
现代文：二十五日，临时陕州留后赵晖、临时潞州留后王守恩，都上奏表归顺汉朝。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Qian, who temporarily stayed in Shaanxi Province, and Wang Shouen, who temporarily stayed in Ganzhou Province, both reported to the Han Dynasty.

古文：癸未，澶州贼帅王琼与其众断本州浮桥，琼败，死之。
现代文：二十七日，澶州贼寇首领王琼与部下毁断澶州浮桥，王琼战败，被杀死。
English: On the 27th, Wang Qiong, the leader of the Zhangzhou bandits, and his subordinates destroyed the Zhangzhou floating bridge. Wang Qiong was defeated and killed.

古文：时契丹以族人朗鄂为澶州节度使，朗鄂性贪虐，吏民苦之。
现代文：当时契丹以本族人朗五做澶州节度使，契丹人性情贪婪暴虐，官吏、百姓都深受其害。
English: At that time, the Khitan used his own people, the Langwu, as the envoy of the Bozhou Festival. The Khitan's human nature was greedy and tyrannical, and both officials and people suffered from it.

古文：琼为水运什长，乃构夏津贼帅张乙，得千余人，沿河而上，中夜窃发，自南城杀守将，绝浮航，入北城，朗悟据牙城以拒之。
现代文：王琼是澶州水运什长，于是勾结夏津贼寇首领张乙，合起来得到一千多人，沿着黄河而上，半夜偷偷发难，从南城杀死守卫将领，绝断用船搭成的浮桥，攻进北城，朗五据守主将所居的牙城以抵御他们。
English: Wang Qiong was the commander of the Zhangzhou Water Transport Company, so he colluded with Zhang B, the leader of the Xiajin Thieves and Robbers, and together they got more than a thousand people. They went up along the Yellow River, secretly attacked in the middle of the night, killed the guard generals from Nancheng, cut off the pontoon bridge built with boats, and invaded Beicheng. Lang Wu had to defend the capital where the master general lived to resist them.

古文：数日，会契丹救至，琼败死焉。
现代文：几天后，遇上契丹救兵赶到，王琼战败而死。
English: A few days later, Wang Qiong was defeated by Khitan soldiers and died.

古文：契丹主初闻其变也，惧甚，由是大河之南无久留之意，寻遣天雄军节度使杜重威归镇。
现代文：契丹国主刚听到这一变乱时，害怕极了，由此无意在黄河以南久留，立即派天雄军节度使杜重威从汴州回到天雄镇。
English: When the Khitan ruler first heard of this upheaval, he was extremely frightened and had no intention of staying south of the Yellow River for long. He immediately sent the Tianxiong Army to escort Du Chongwei from Zhangzhou back to Tianxiong Town.

古文：三月丙戌朔，诏河东管内，自前税外，杂色征配一切除放。
现代文：三月一日，高祖诏令河东管区内，除以前旧有税收外，其他各种杂税征调全部废除。
English: On March 1, Gao Zu's edict abolished all kinds of miscellaneous taxes and levies in the Hedong Administrative Region, except for the old taxes.

古文：是日，契丹主坐崇元殿行入阁之礼，契丹主以舅萧翰为宣武军节度使。
现代文：这一天，契丹国主坐在崇元殿上举行入阁的仪式，契丹国主以舅父萧翰做宣武军节度使。
English: On this day, the Khitan sovereign sat in the Chongyuan Hall to hold the ceremony of entering the cabinet. The Khitan sovereign used his uncle Shaohan as the messenger of the proclamation of the armed forces.

古文：辛卯，权延州留后高允权遣判官李彬奏：本道节度使周密为三军所逐，以允权知留后事，上表归顺。
现代文：六日，临时延州留后高永权派遣判官李彬上奏高祖：本道节度使周密被三军将士驱逐，以高永权暂任留后一职，上表请求归顺。
English: On the 6th, after temporarily staying in Yanzhou, Gao Yongquan dispatched judge Li Bin to report to Gao Zu: the three generals were expelled from the three armies, with Gao Yongquan temporarily remaining in the latter position, and the above table requested to surrender.

古文：未几，帝召密赴行在。
现代文：不久，高祖传召周密到自己出行居住的地方。
English: Not long after, Gao Zu summoned him to the place where he used to live.

古文：壬辰，丹州都指挥使高彦珣杀契丹所命刺史，据城归命。
现代文：七日，丹州总指挥使高彦王旬杀死契丹伪政权任命的刺史，占据州城归顺高祖。
English: On the 7th, the commander-in-chief of Danzhou ordered Takahiko Wangjun to kill the assassin appointed by the Khitan pseudo-regime and occupy the state capital and return it to Shun Gaozu.

古文：《宋史·李穀传》：潜遣河朔酋豪晖入据安阳，契丹主患之，即谋北旋，会有告契丹以城中虚弱者，契丹还攻安阳，陷其城。
现代文：十七日，契丹国主从东京动身回归本国。这一天，高祖在赤岗住宿，到下午四五点钟，有滚雷般的声音从敌方营帐中发出。契丹从黎阳渡过黄河，就直奔相州。四月四日，契丹国主攻取相州，杀害相州留后梁晖。
English: On the 17th, the Khitan sovereign departed from Tokyo to return to his homeland. On this day, Gaozu stayed in Chigang. By four or five o'clock in the afternoon, a thunderous sound was emitted from the enemy camp. The Khitan crossed the Yellow River from Liyang and went straight to Sangju. On April 4, the Khitan sovereign captured Sangju and killed Liang Qi, who stayed in Sangju.

古文：晖，磁州滏阳人，少为盗，会契丹入汴，晖收集徒党，先入磁州，无所侵犯，遣使送款于帝。
现代文：梁晖是磁州滏阳人，年轻时作过强盗，碰上契丹人攻入汴州，梁晖就收集徒党，先攻入磁州，没有侵扰祸害的行为，派遣使者向高祖致意。
English: Liang Hui was from the magnetic state of Shenyang. When he was young, he was a bandit. When the Khitan invaded Shengzhou, Liang Hui gathered the rebels and invaded the magnetic state first. He did not disturb the evil and sent an envoy to pay his respects to Gao Zu.

古文：晖侦知相州颇积兵仗，且无守备，遂以三月二十一日夜与其徒逾垣而入，杀契丹数十人，夺器甲数万计，遂据其城。
现代文：梁晖侦察得知相州很积蓄了一些兵器，而且又无人防守，于是在三月二十一日夜晚与他的徒党们翻越城垣而攻入相州城，杀死几十个契丹人，夺取武器兵甲数以万计，因而占据了相州城。
English: Reconnaissance Liang Qi learned that Siangzhou had accumulated a lot of weapons and was unguarded, so on the evening of March 21st, he and his clique broke through the city walls and invaded Siangzhou City, killing dozens of Khitan and seizing tens of thousands of weapons and armor, thus occupying Siangzhou City.

古文：契丹主先遣相州节度使高唐英率兵讨之。
现代文：契丹国主先派伪相州节度使高唐英领兵征讨他。
English: The Khitan ruler first sent the pseudo-Sangju Setdu to make Gao Tang Ying lead an army to recruit him.

古文：未几，契丹主至城下，是月四日攻拔之，遂屠其城。
现代文：不久，契丹国主亲到城下，在这一月第四天攻陷相州城，于是屠戮全城。
English: Soon after, the ruler of the Khitan Empire came to the city, and on the fourth day of this month, he captured the city of Sangju, and then slaughtered the entire city.

古文：丙寅，以权知潞州军州事、左骁卫大将军王守恩为潞州节度使、检校太保；以权点检延州军州事高允权为延州节度使、检校太保；以岢岚军使郑谦为忻州刺史，遥领应州节度使，充忻、代二州义军都部署。
现代文：第二天，契丹国主回到北方去，命令高唐英镇守相州时，高唐英查检城中活下的人口，仅得到男男女女共七百人而已。乾皊年中，王继弘镇守相州，奏明高祖在城中得到骷髅就有十多万副，契丹杀害人民的数字，从这就可得知。四月二十五日，册封魏国夫人李氏为皇后。
English: The next day, when the Khitan ruler returned to the north and ordered Gao Tang Ying Zang to guard Xiangzhou, Gao Tang Ying inspected the surviving population of the city and only got a total of seven hundred men and women. In the Qianlong year, Wang Jihong Zang guarded Xiangzhou, and it was reported that Gao Zu got more than one hundred thousand pairs in the city. From this we can know the number of people killed by the Khitan. On April 25th, Wei's wife Li was crowned queen.

古文：丁卯，以河东都巡馆驿、沿河巡检使阎万进为岚州刺史，领朔州节度使，充岚、宪二州义军都制置。戊辰，权河阳留后武行德以城来归。
现代文：二十六日，以高祖长子刘承训担任左卫上将军，第二子刘承佑担任左卫大将军，第三子刘承勋担任右卫大将军，高祖女儿彭城郡宋氏封为永宁公主，高祖侄子李承斌贝担任右卫上将军。五月一日，临时河阳留后武行德率领全城归顺高祖。
English: On the 26th, Gao Zu's eldest son Liu Chengxun served as the left guard general, his second son Liu Chengyou served as the left guard general, his third son Liu Chengxun served as the right guard general, Gao Zu's daughter Song Shifeng of Pengcheng County was the Yongning princess, and Gao Zu's nephew Li Chengbin Bei served as the right guard general. On May 1, after temporarily staying in Heyang, Wu Xingde led the whole city to surrender to Gao Zu.

古文：初，契丹主将发东京，船载武库兵仗，自汴浮河，欲置之于北地，遣奉国都虞候武行德部送，与军士千余人并家属俱行。
现代文：当初，契丹国主准备从东京出发北上，用船只装载着武库里的兵甲器械，从汴河运到黄河，想搬往北方，派遣奉国都虞候武行德的部队护送，拨给军士一千多人带着家属们一起上路。
English: At first, the Khitan ruler was preparing to set out from Tokyo to the north, using ships to load the armored equipment in the arsenal, transported from the Min River to the Yellow River, and wanted to move to the north. He sent troops to escort the troops from the capital of the country to the martial arts, and assigned more than a thousand military officers to take their families on the road together.

古文：至河阴，军乱，夺兵仗，杀契丹监吏，众推行德为帅，与河阴屯驻军士合，乃自汜水抵河阳。
现代文：到河阴时，军士变乱，夺取兵器，杀死契丹的监察使者，众人推举武行德为首领，与河阴驻军会合，就从汜水抵达河阳。
English: When they reached Huayin, the sergeants mutinied, seized weapons, and killed the Khitan's monitoring envoy. The people elected Wu Xingde as their leader, met with the Huayin garrison, and arrived in Huayang from Surabaya.

古文：遣其弟行友诣太原劝进。伪命西京留守刘晞弃洛城，南走许州，遂奔东京，洛京巡检使方太自署知留守事。
现代文：河阳伪节度使崔廷勋领兵抵御他们，被打败，武行德等追击败兵，崔廷勋弃城而逃，武行德因此占据河阳城。伪西京留守刘放弃洛阳，向南逃奔许州，又逃奔东京，洛阳巡检使方太自己暂时掌管留守事务。
English: Heyang pseudo-festival made Cui Tingxun lead the troops to resist them and was defeated, Wu Xingde and others chased the defeated soldiers, Cui Tingxun abandoned the city and fled, and Wu Xingde therefore occupied Heyang City. Pseudo-West Beijing left Liu abandoned Luoyang, fled south to Huzhou, and fled to Tokyo, Luoyang patrol envoy Fangtai himself temporarily took charge of the left-behind affairs.

古文：未几，太为武行德所害。
现代文：不久，方太被武行德杀死。
English: Soon after, Fang Tai was killed by Wu Xingde.

古文：是日，蕃将耿崇美屯泽州，史宏肇遣先锋将马诲率兵击之，崇美退保怀州。
现代文：同月，蕃族将领耿崇美驻扎泽州，史弘肇派先锋将领马诲领兵攻击他，耿崇美后退据守怀州。
English: In the same month, the Yi general Geng Chongmei was stationed in Zezhou. Shi Hongzhao sent the vanguard general Ma Yan to attack him, and Geng Chongmei retreated to defend Huaizhou.

古文：崔廷勋以契丹众攻武行德于河阳，行德出战，为廷勋所败。
现代文：崔廷勋率领契丹人在河阳攻打武行德，武行德出战，被崔廷勋打败。
English: Cui Tinghun led the Khitan people to attack Wu Xingde in Hebei, Wu Xingde went to war and was defeated by Cui Tinghun.

古文：汴州萧翰遣蕃将高牟翰将兵援送刘晞复归于洛。牟翰至，杀前澶州节度使潘环于洛阳。
现代文：汴州萧翰派蕃将高牟翰领兵援助护送刘再回到洛阳，高牟翰返回洛阳后，在洛阳杀死前澶州节度使潘环。
English: Zhangzhou Xiaohan sent Gao Mouhan to escort Liu back to Luoyang. After Gao Mouhan returned to Luoyang, Zhangzhou Jiedu sent Pan Huan to Luoyang before he was killed.

古文：丙子，契丹主耶律德光卒于镇之栾城。
现代文：五月九日，契丹国主耶律德光死在镇州的栾城。
English: On May 9, Yerudoglu, the ruler of Khitan, died in the city of Zhangzhou.

古文：赵延寿于镇州自称权知国事。
现代文：赵延寿在镇州自称临时掌管契丹国务。
English: In Zhenzhou, Zhao Yanshou claimed to be temporarily in charge of the Khitan state.

