古文：李植，字汝培。
现代文：李植，字汝培。
English: Li Zhi, Zi Rubei.

古文：父承式，自大同徙居江都，官福建布政使。
现代文：父亲承武，从大同移居江都，官至福建布政使。
English: His father, Chengwu, moved from Datong to Jiangdu and rose through the ranks to become a political envoy in Fujian Province.

古文：植举万历五年进士，选庶吉士，授御史。
现代文：李植万历十五年中进士，选庶吉士，授职御史。
English: In the 15th year of Li Zhe Wanli, he was promoted to the rank of junior high school student, and was elected as an honorary junior high school student.

古文：十年冬，张居正卒，冯保犹用事。其党锦衣指挥同知徐爵居禁中，为阅章奏，拟诏旨如故。
现代文：十年冬，张居正死，冯保还在当道，其党徒锦衣指挥同知徐爵居在禁中，阅览奏章，起草诏书如旧。
English: In the winter of the tenth year, Zhang Ju was dying, Feng Bao was still in charge, and his party member, the commander of Jin Yi, and his comrade, Xu Jie, were under house arrest, reading the musical score and drafting the imperial edict as before.

古文：居正党率倚爵以自结于保，爵势益张。
现代文：张居正的党徒都依靠徐爵与冯保结交，徐爵势力更为嚣张。
English: Zhang Jizheng's party members all rely on Xu Jie to make friends with Feng Bao, and Xu Jie's power is more arrogant.

古文：而帝雅衔居正、保，未有以发。
现代文：可皇上素来怨恨张居正、冯保，还没找到机会发作。
English: However, the emperor has always resented Zhang Juzheng and Feng Bao, and has not yet found an opportunity to attack.

古文：御史江东之首暴爵奸，并言兵部尚书梁梦龙与爵交欢，以得吏部，宜斥。
现代文：御史江东之首先揭发徐爵的奸行，并且说兵部尚书梁梦龙与徐爵勾结，以得到吏部尚书之职，应该贬退。
English: The imperial historian Jiang Dongzhi was the first to expose the treachery of Xu Jue, and said that the military secretary Liang Menglong colluded with Xu Jue to obtain the post of the military secretary, and should be demoted.

古文：帝下爵狱，论死，梦龙罢去。
现代文：皇上将徐爵逮捕入狱，定为死罪，梁梦龙罢官。
English: The emperor had Xu Jue arrested and imprisoned as a capital crime, and Liang Menglong was dismissed.

古文：植遂发保十二大罪。
现代文：李植于是揭露冯保十二大罪状。
English: Li Zhi then exposed Feng Bao's twelve major crimes.

古文：帝震怒，罪保。
现代文：皇上震怒，将冯保定罪。
English: The emperor was furious and convicted Feng Bao.

古文：植、东之由是受知于帝。
现代文：李植、江东之由此为皇帝信用。
English: Li Zhi and Jiang Dongzhi thus gained the emperor's trust.

古文：明年，植巡按畿辅，请宽居正所定百官乘驿之禁，从之。
现代文：第二年，李植巡按畿辅，请求放宽张居正时所制定的百官乘坐驿车的禁令，皇上听从了。
English: In the following year, Li Zhi Jun requested that the ban imposed by Zhang Jizheng on the use of armored cars by government officials be relaxed, and the emperor complied.

古文：帝用礼部尚书徐学谟言，将卜寿宫于大峪山。
现代文：皇上接受礼部尚书徐学谟的意见，将在大峪山占卜寿宫。
English: The emperor accepted the opinion of the etiquette official, Xu Xuemo, and will visit the divination palace in Dalatangshan.

古文：植扈行阅视，谓其地未善。
现代文：李植随行勘查，认为这个地方不好。
English: Li Zhi accompanied the inspection and thought that this place was not good.

古文：欲偕东之疏争，不果。
现代文：他想带江东之上疏争论，没有结果。
English: He tried to bring Jiangdong to the forefront of the dispute, but to no avail.

古文：明年，植还朝。
现代文：第二年，李植回到朝廷。
English: The following year, Li Zhi returned to the imperial court.

古文：时御史羊可立亦以追论居正受帝知。
现代文：当时御史羊可立也因为弹劾张居正被皇帝信用。
English: At that time, the Emperor also trusted Wang Shiyang Keli because of the impeachment of Zhang Ju Zeng.

古文：三人更相结，亦颇引吴中行、赵用贤、沈思孝为重。
现代文：三人更为要好，也与吴中行、赵用贤、沈思孝互相敬重。
English: The three of them are even better, and they also respect each other as much as Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian, and Shen Sihiao.

古文：执政方忌中行、用贤，且心害植三人宠。
现代文：执掌朝政的正恨吴中行、赵用贤，而且心里害怕李植三人得到皇上宠爱。
English: Zheng Huan, who was in charge of the imperial government, hated Wu Zhong Xing and Zhao Yixian, and was afraid that the three Li Zhi would be favored by the emperor.

古文：会争御史丁此吕事及论学谟卜寿宫之非，与申时行等相拄，卒被斥去。
现代文：正好争论御史丁此吕一事和弹劾徐学谟占卜寿宫的不是，李植与申时行互相较劲，最终被贬。
English: It was just right to argue over the matter of this Lu and the impeachment of Xu Xuemo of the Palace of Divination. Li Zhi and Shen Xigang competed with each other and were eventually demoted.

古文：初，兵部员外郎嵇应科、山西提学副使陆檄、河南参政戴光启为乡会试考官，私居正子嗣修、懋修、敬修。
现代文：当初，兵部员外郎嵇应科、山西提学副使陆檄、河南参政戴光启做乡试考官，为张居正的儿子嗣修、懋修、敬修谋私利。
English: At the beginning, the military officer Wai Lang Ying Ke, the deputy envoy of Shanxi Tihar Academy Lu Wei, and the Henan politician Dai Guangqi were the township examiners, seeking personal benefits for Zhang Jizheng's sons, Sui Xiu, Yan Xiu, and Kei Xiu.

古文：居正败，此吕发其事。
现代文：张居正死后，丁此吕揭发这件事。
English: After Zhang Jizheng's death, Ding Guoliu exposed the affair.

古文：又言： 礼部侍郎何雒文代嗣修、懋修撰殿试策，而侍郎高启愚主南京试，至以 舜亦以命禹 为题，显为劝进。 
现代文：又说： 礼部侍郎何雒文代替嗣修、懋修写殿试的对策，而侍郎高启愚主持南京考试，竟然以 舜亦以命禹 为题目，显然是为了劝进。 
English: He also said: The attendant of the Rectification Department, He Qianwen, wrote the countermeasures of the palace examination in place of Succession and Succession, while the attendant, Gao Qigu, presided over the Nanjing examination, even using Succession and Succession as the subject, obviously in order to persuade.

古文：大学士申时行、余有丁、许国皆嗣修等座主也，言考官止据文艺，安知姓名，不宜以此为罪，请敕吏部核官评，以定去留。
现代文：大学士申时行、余有丁、许国都是张嗣修的座主，说考官只根据文章技艺，怎知道姓名，不应该以此定罪，请命令吏部检查考官的评语，以定是去还是留。
English: University scholars Shen Shiguang, Yu Youding, and Xu Guo are the chairmen of Zhang Shixiu, saying that the examiner only knows the name according to the article skill, and should not be convicted. Please order the personnel department to check the examiner's comment to determine whether to go or stay.

古文：尚书杨巍议黜雒文，改调应科、檄，留启愚、光启，而言此吕不顾经旨，陷启愚大逆。
现代文：尚书杨巍建议将何雒文贬退，将嵇应科、陆檄调任，留任高启愚、戴光启，但是说丁此吕不顾旨意，陷害高启愚。
English: Shangshu Yang Qi suggested that He Xuanwen should be demoted, Zou Yingke and Lu Yao should be transferred, and Gao Qigu and Dai Guangqi should remain in office, but said that Ding Guolu disregarded the will and framed Gao Qigu.

古文：此吕坐谪。
现代文：丁此吕被贬官。
English: Ding Guolu was demoted.

古文：植、东之及同官杨四知、给事中王士性等不平，交章劾巍，语侵时行。
现代文：李植、江东之和同官杨四知、给事中王士性等为丁此吕鸣不平，都上奏章弹劾杨巍，言语中侵犯到申时行。
English: Li Zhi, Jiang Dongzhi and his colleague Yang Shizhi, and Wang Shizhen, who was the king in the matter, were not happy about this. They all wrote a petition to impeach Yang Xi, and the words violated the petition.

古文：东之疏言： 时行以二子皆登科，不乐此吕言科场事。
现代文：江东之上疏说： 申时行因为二子皆中进士，不高兴丁此吕说科场中的事。
English: Koto no Kamiosho said, "Shin Shigyo is upset because both of his sons are junior high school graduates, and he is not happy that Ding is talking about things in the science field.

古文：巍虽庇居正，实媚时行。 
现代文：杨巍虽然庇护张居正，实际上是谀媚申时行。 
English: Although Yang Xuan sheltered Zhang Jizheng, he was actually a sycophant.

古文：时行、巍并求去。
现代文：申时行、杨巍一同请求辞职。
English: Shen Shigang and Yang Hui jointly requested to resign.

古文：帝欲慰留时行，召还此吕，以两解之。
现代文：皇上想安慰留下申时行，召回丁此吕，让俩人和解。
English: The emperor wanted to comfort Shen Shih-hong, who was left behind, and call back Ding Guo-lu, so that the two could reconcile.

古文：有丁、国言不谪此吕，无以安时行、巍心。
现代文：余有丁、许国说不贬丁此吕，无法安慰申时行、杨巍。
English: Yu Yuting and Xu Guo said that they would not disparage Ding Xuelu, but could not comfort Shin Shixing and Yang Qi.

古文：国反覆诋言者生事，指中行、用贤为党。
现代文：许国反复诋毁言官多事，指责吴中行、赵用贤结党。
English: Xu Guo repeatedly slandered the spokesman for many things, accusing Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yixian of forming a party.

古文：中行、用贤疏辨求去，语皆侵国，用贤语尤峻。
现代文：吴中行、赵用贤上疏辩解请求解职，言语都触怒到许国，赵用贤用词更为严厉。
English: Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yixian made weak excuses and asked for dismissal. Their words angered Xu Guo. Zhao Yixian's words were even harsher.

古文：国避位不出。
现代文：许国避门不出。
English: Xu Guo couldn't escape.

古文：于是左都御史赵锦，副都御史石星，尚书王遴、潘季驯、杨兆，侍郎沈鲤、陆光祖、舒化、何起鸣、褚鈇，大理卿温纯，及都给事中齐世臣、御史刘怀恕等，极论时行、国、巍不宜去。
现代文：于是左都御史赵锦，副都御史石星，尚书王遴、潘季驯、杨兆，侍郎沈鲤、陆光祖、舒化、何起鸣、褚钅夫，大理卿温纯及都给事中齐世臣、御史刘怀恕等，极力说申时行、许国、杨巍不应当离去。
English: As a result, the Left Metropolitan Zhao Jin, the Vice Metropolitan Shi Xing, Shang Shu Wang Zhan, Pan Ji Jie, Yang Zhao, the attendants Shen Yao, Lu Guangzu, Shu Hua, He Qiming, Yan Fu, Dali Qing Wen Chun, and all the officials, such as Qi Shishi, and the Metropolitan Liu Huai Shun, insisted that Shen Jixing, Xu Guo, and Yang Qi should not leave.

古文：主事张正鹄、南京郎中汪应蛟、御史李廷彦、蔡时鼎、黄师颜等又力攻请留三臣者之失。
现代文：主事张正鸣，南京郎中汪应蛟，御史李廷彦、蔡时鼎、黄师颜等又极力攻击请求留任三大臣之人的过失。
English: Zhang Zhengming, the leader, Wang Yingtao, the son-in-law of Nanjing, Li Tingyan, Cai Shiding, Huang Shiyan, and others also vigorously attacked the faults of those who requested to remain as the three ministers.

古文：中行亦疏言： 律禁上言大臣德政。
现代文：吴中行也上疏说： 法律禁止向上说大臣的德政。
English: Wu Zhongxing also said: The law prohibits the German government of the minister.

古文：迩者袭请留居正遗风，辅臣辞位，群起奏留，赞德称功，联章累牍。
现代文：近来沿袭请求留任张居正的遗风，辅臣辞职，群起上奏请求留任，称赞功德，联章累牍。
English: Recently, the legacy of Zhang Juzheng's request to remain in office, the resignation of the assistant minister, the request to remain in office, the praise of the merits, and the burden of the joint chapter.

古文：此谄谀之极，甚可耻也。
现代文：谄媚之极，特别可耻。
English: It's the height of sycophancy and it's particularly disgraceful.

古文：祖宗二百余年以来，无谏官论事为吏部劾罢者，则又壅蔽之渐，不可长也。 
现代文：祖宗二百余年以来，没有谏官因疏论事情被吏部弹劾罢官的，如果这样，则会逐渐堵塞言路，此风不可长。 
English: In the more than 200 years since the founding of the dynasty, no eunuch has been impeached and removed from office by the Ministry of Civil Affairs due to careless speech. If this happens, the path of speech will be gradually blocked. This trend cannot last long.

古文：帝竟留三臣，责言者如锦等指。
现代文：皇上竟然留任三大臣，如赵锦之意责备言官。
English: The emperor actually kept three ministers, such as Zhao Jin, who meant to reprimand the spokesman.

古文：其后，启愚卒为南京给事中刘一相劾去，时行亦不能救也。
现代文：后来，高启愚终于为南京给事中刘一相弹劾离去，申时行也不能救他。
English: Later, Gao Qigu finally impeached Liu Yixing and left for Nanjing, but the petition could not save him.

古文：帝追仇居正甚，以大臣阴相庇，独植、东之、可立能发其奸，欲骤贵之，风示廷臣。
现代文：皇上特别追恨张居正，因为大臣暗中庇护他，唯独李植、江东之、羊可立能揭发他的奸情，神宗想他们骤然显贵，以暗示朝臣。
English: The emperor especially hated Zhang Jizheng, because the minister secretly sheltered him, but only Li Zhi, Jiang Dongzhi, and Yang Keli could expose his treachery. Shenzong thought they were suddenly distinguished, suggesting courtiers.

古文：一相又劾锦衣都督刘守有匿居正家资。
现代文：刘一相又弹劾锦衣都督刘守有藏匿张居正的家资。
English: Liu Yixiang also impeached the Governor of Jinling, Liu Shou, for hiding Zhang Jizheng's family assets.

古文：帝乃谕内阁黜守有，超擢居正所抑丘橓、余懋学、赵世卿及植、东之凡五人。
现代文：皇上于是命令内阁罢了刘守有的官职，破格提拔张居正所压制的丘木舜、余懋学、赵世卿及李植、江东之共五个人。
English: The emperor then ordered the cabinet to remove Liu Shou from his official position, and promoted five people in total, including Qiu Muxuan, Yu Ying Xue, Zhao Shijing, Li Zhi and Jiangdong, who had been suppressed by Zhang Jizheng.

古文：时行等力为守有解，言橓等不宜骤迁。
现代文：申时行极力为刘守有辩解，说丘木舜等不应当马上提升。
English: Shen Shijie tried his best to justify Liu Shou's promotion, saying that Qiu Muxuan and others should not be promoted immediately.

古文：帝重违大臣意，议虽寝，心犹欲用植等。
现代文：皇上重新违背大臣的意思，议论虽然停止，心里还是想任用李植。
English: The emperor again went against the minister's wishes. Although the discussion stopped, he still wanted to appoint Li Zhi in his heart.

古文：顷之，植劾刑部尚书潘季驯朋党奸逆，诬上欺君，季驯坐削籍。
现代文：立刻，李植弹劾刑部尚书潘季驯结党营私，欺君罔上，潘季驯被削职。
English: Immediately, Li Zhi impeached the criminal department, Shang Shuxu Pan Ji tamed the party, bullied the king, and Pan Ji tamed was removed from office.

古文：帝遂手诏吏部擢植太仆少卿，东之光禄少卿，可立尚宝少卿，并添注。
现代文：皇上于是下诏吏部提拔李植为太仆少卿，江东之为光禄少卿，羊可立为尚宝少卿，并在考察名册上特别予以记录。
English: Therefore, the emperor promoted Li Zhi to the title of Taigu Shaoqing, Jiang Dong to the title of Guanglu Shaoqing, and Yang Ke to the title of Shangbao Shaoqing, and recorded them on the inspection list.

古文：廷臣益忌植等。
现代文：朝臣更加忌恨李植等。
English: The courtier was even more jealous of Li Zhi.

古文：十三年四月旱，御史蔡系周言： 古者，朝有权臣，狱有冤囚，则旱。
现代文：万历十三年四月发生旱灾，御史蔡系周说： 古时候，朝廷如有专权的大臣，狱中有冤枉的囚犯，则一定发生旱灾。
English: When a drought occurred in April of the 13th year of the Wanli calendar, the imperial historian Cai Zhou said: In ancient times, if the imperial court had a minister with absolute power and there were unjust prisoners in prison, a drought would certainly occur.

古文：植数为人言： 至尊呼我为儿，每观没入宝玩则喜我。 
现代文：李植数次对人说： 皇上呼我为儿，每次看到没收的宝物就喜欢我。 
English: Li Zhi told people several times: The emperor called me his son, and every time he saw the confiscated treasures, he liked me.

古文：其无忌惮如此。
现代文：他肆无忌惮到了这样的地步。
English: He was reckless enough to do it.

古文：陛下欲雪枉，而刑部尚书之枉，先不得雪。
现代文：陛下想昭雪冤枉，而刑部尚书之冤，先得不到昭雪。
English: His Majesty wanted to punish Shosetsu unjustly, but the Ministry of Justice wanted to punish Shosetsu first.

古文：今日之旱，实由于植。 
现代文：现在的旱灾，实在是由于李植的缘故。 
English: The current drought is really due to the need to grow plums.

古文：又曰： 植迫欲得中行柄国，以善其后；中行迫欲得植秉铨，而骋其私。
现代文：又说： 李植迫不及待想让吴中行执掌国事，想让自己有个好退路。吴中行想让李植掌管官吏的选拔，是想任意任用他的人。
English: He also said: Li Zhi can't wait to let Wu Zhongxing take charge of state affairs, and wants to have a good way out. Wu Zhongxing wants to let Li Zhi take charge of the selection of officials, and is the one who wants to appoint him at will.

古文：倘其计得行，势必尽毒善类，今日旱灾犹其小者。 
现代文：如果他们的计划得以实行，势必会尽使正直的人受到毒害，现在的旱灾还是小事。 
English: If their plan is carried out, it is bound to poison as many honest people as possible, and the current drought is no small matter.

古文：其他语绝狂诞。
现代文：其他的话狂妄且怪诞。
English: Other words are wild and bizarre.

古文：所称尚书，谓季驯也。
现代文：所称尚书，是指潘季驯。
English: The so-called Shangshu refers to Pan Ji Taming.

古文：疏上，未报，御史龚懋贤、孙愈贤继之。
现代文：奏疏上后，皇上未给予答复。御史龚懋贤、孙愈贤接着又上了奏。
English: The Emperor did not give a reply after the recital. Goshi Shinken and Sun Yuxian then performed the recital again.

古文：东之发愤上疏曰： 思孝、中行、用贤及张岳、邹元标数臣，忠义天植，之死不移，臣实安为之党，乐从之游。
现代文：江东之愤怒地上疏，说： 沈思孝、吴中行、赵用贤及张岳、邹元标数位大臣，忠心耿耿，至死不移，臣实在是安心成为他们一党，高兴与他们来往。
English: Jiangdong's anger was on the surface, saying: Shen Sihong, Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian, Zhang Yue, and Xuan Yuanbo, several ministers, are loyal to the death. The minister is really relieved to be one of them and is happy to deal with them.

古文：今指植与交欢为党，则植犹未若臣之密，愿先罢臣官。 
现代文：现在指责李植与他们为一党，李植实际上还没有我与他们亲密，我愿先罢我的官。 
English: Now they are accusing Li Zhi of being a member of the same party as them. In fact, Li Zhi has never been close to them. I would like to resign from my post first.

古文：不允。
现代文：皇上不允许。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：可立亦抗言： 奸党怀冯、张私惠，造不根之辞，以倾建言诸臣，势不尽去臣等不止。 乞罢职。
现代文：羊可立也上疏说： 奸党怀匿冯保、张居正的私人恩惠，造谣生事，想打击劝谏的大臣，不把臣等全部免职是不会甘心的，我乞求解职。 
English: Yang Keli also went on to say: "If the traitorous party is harboring the private favors of Feng Bao and Zhang Juzheng, creating rumors and causing trouble, and trying to crack down on the minister of persuasion, it will not be willing to dismiss all the ministers. I am begging to be dismissed.

古文：章下内阁，时行等请诘可立奸党主名。
现代文：奏章下到内阁，申时行等要求当面责问羊可立谁是奸党的头目。
English: The petition was sent to the cabinet, and the petitioners demanded that they be asked face to face who was the leader of the traitorous party.

古文：帝仍欲两为之解，寝阁臣奏，而敕都察院： 自今谏官言事，当顾国家大体，毋以私灭公，犯者必罪。 
现代文：皇上还是想两方和解，停止了内阁的上奏，而指示都察院： 自今天起，御史说事情，应当以国家为重，不要以私情损害国家的利益，违反的人一定治罪。 
English: The emperor still wanted to reconcile the two sides, stopped the cabinet's report, and instructed the Duka-in: From today on, when you say things, you should put the country first, do not harm the interests of the country with personal feelings, and those who violate must be punished.

古文：植、东之求去，不许。
现代文：李植、江东之请求回乡，皇上不许。
English: At the request of Li Zhi and Jiangdong, the emperor did not allow them to return home.

古文：给事御史齐世臣、吴定等交章劾可立不当代植辨。
现代文：给事御史齐世臣、吴定等交相上奏弹劾羊可立不应当代替李植辩解。
English: It is not appropriate for Yang Keli to replace Li Zhi in defending the impeachment of Shi Qixian and Wu Ding.

古文：报曰： 朕方忧旱，诸臣何纷争？ 
现代文：皇上回答说： 朕正在为旱灾担心，各大臣为什么要纷纷争论？ 
English: The emperor replied, "I am worried about the drought. Why are the ministers arguing?

古文：乃已。
现代文：于是停止。
English: Stop faking it.

古文：七月，御史龚仲庆又劾植、中行、思孝为邪臣，帝恶其排挤，出之外。
现代文：七月，御史龚仲庆又弹劾李植、吴忠行、沈思孝为邪恶的大臣，皇上讨厌他排挤李植等，把他贬到外地。
English: In July, Grand Historian Gong Zhongqing also impeached Li Zhi, Wu Zhongxing, and Shen Sihiao as evil ministers. The emperor hated him for ousting Li Zhi and others, and banished him to a foreign country.

古文：世臣及御史顾钤等连章论救，不听。
现代文：齐世臣和御史顾钤等连着上奏救他，皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to Qi Shishen and Mishi Gu Xi, who tried to save him.

古文：是时，竟用学谟言，作寿宫于大峪山。
现代文：当时，皇上竟然听从徐学谟的话，在太峪山修建寿宫。八月，开始修建了。
English: At that time, the emperor actually listened to the words of Xu Xuemei and built the Shou Palace in Taishan. In August, the construction began.

古文：八月，役既兴矣，大学士王锡爵，植馆师，东之、可立又尝特荐之于朝，锡爵故以面折张居正，为时所重。
现代文：大学士王锡爵是李植的馆师，江东之、羊可立又曾特地向朝廷推荐，王锡爵过去因为当面驳斥张居正，而为当时人所敬重。
English: Wang Xizhe, a university scholar, was Li Zhi's tutor. He had been specially recommended to the imperial court by Jiang Dongzhi and Yang Keli. Wang Xizhe was respected at the time because he had refuted Zhang Jizheng in person.

古文：三人念时行去，锡爵必为首辅，而寿宫地有石，时行以学谟故主之，可用是罪也，乃合疏上言： 地果吉则不宜有石，有石则宜奏请改图。
现代文：李植等三个人认为申时行一离职，王锡爵必定为首辅，而筑寿宫之地有石头，申时行以徐学谟的缘故主张修建，可用这个原因定他的罪，于是合作上疏说： 那块地如果吉利就不应当有石头，有石头则应请求改变地点。
English: Li Zhi and the other three people thought that as soon as Shin Shih-hong left office, Wang Xizhe must be the first assistant, and the place where the Shou Palace was built had stones. Shin Shih-hong advocated the construction for the sake of Xu Xueming, and could use this reason to condemn him, so he said in cooperation: If the land is auspicious, there should be no stones, and if there are stones, the location should be changed upon request.

古文：乃学谟以私意主其议，时行以亲故赞其成。
现代文：而徐学谟因为替自己考虑而主张这个意见，申时行因为亲近人的关系而赞成他的意见。
English: However, Xu Xu Meng advocated this opinion because he was thinking for himself, and Shin Shixing agreed with his opinion because of their close personal relationship.

古文：今凿石以安寿宫者，与曩所立表，其地不一。
现代文：现在开凿石头以修建寿宫之地，与以前所立标志处，不是一个地方。
English: The place where stones are now being quarried to build a shrine is not the same place as the place where the sign was previously erected.

古文：朦胧易徙，若弈棋然，非大臣谋国之忠也。 
现代文：模模糊糊容易移动，像下棋一样，大臣没有为国的忠心。 
English: Vaguely easy to move, like playing chess, the minister has no loyalty to the country.

古文：时行奏辨，言： 车驾初阅时，植、东之见臣直庐，力言形龙山不如大峪。
现代文：申时行上奏辩解，说： 皇上当初考察时，李植、江东之在住宿的处所见我极力认为形龙山不如大峪山。
English: During the inspection of the Emperor, Li Zhi and Jiang Dongzhi saw me at the lodging place, and I strongly believed that the Shilong Mountain was not as good as the Dafeng Mountain.

古文：今已二年，忽创此议。其借事倾臣明甚。 
现代文：现已二年，忽然提出这样的意见，很明显，他们是想借这件事把我赶走。 
English: It's been two years, and for them to suddenly come out with this, it's clear they're trying to use this as a way to get rid of me.

古文：帝责三人不宜以葬师术责辅臣，夺俸半岁。
现代文：皇帝责备三人不应当以丧葬之师的技艺指责辅臣，停发俸禄半年。
English: The emperor reprimanded the three for using the skills of a funeral director to criticize an aide, and suspended their pay for half a year.

古文：三人以明习葬法荐侍郎张岳、太常何源。
现代文：三个人以熟悉葬法为由推荐侍郎张岳、太常何源。
English: Three people recommended the chamberlain Zhang Yue and the chief priest He Yuan on the grounds that they were familiar with the funeral rites.

古文：两人方疏辞，锡爵忽奏言耻为植三人所引，义不可留，因具奏不平者八事。
现代文：两人正在上疏推辞之时，王锡爵忽然上奏耻于为李植三人推荐，于道义不当留在朝中，因而细细奏明他认为不平的八件事。
English: When the two were in the process of resigning, Wang Xizhe suddenly reported that he was ashamed of recommending three people for Li Zhi, and that it was morally inappropriate to stay in the central government, and thus reported in detail the eight things he considered to be unfair.

古文：大略言： 张、冯之狱，上志先定，言者适投其会，而辄自附于用贤等撄鳞折槛之党。
现代文：大意说： 张居正、冯保被问罪，是陛下先有决定，言官只不过投皇上所好，而自己依附于赵用贤等专门打击别人的人。
English: To wit: Zhang Juzheng and Feng Bao were asked about the crime, it was His Majesty's prior decision, the spokesman merely voted in favor of the emperor, and he attached himself to Zhao Yixian and other people who specifically attacked others.

古文：且谓舍建言别无人品；建言之中，舍采摭张、冯旧事，别无同志。
现代文：而且他们说唯有劝谏的人，其他的人都没有人品，劝谏之中，除了收集张居正、冯保过去的事，别的就没有什么了。
English: Moreover, they said that only those who persuade others have no character. Among the persuaders, there is nothing but collecting the past of Zhang Juzheng and Feng Bao.

古文：以中人之资，乘一言之会，超越朝右，日寻戈矛。
现代文：他们只有常人的才能，乘与陛下相合的言论，破格提拔，矛头四出。
English: They only have the talent of ordinary people, and they have been promoted beyond all recognition by virtue of their speech that is in line with His Majesty's.

古文：大臣如国、巍、化辈，曩尝举为正人。一言相左，日谋剚刃，皆不平之大者。 
现代文：大臣诸如许国、杨巍、舒化等人，过去他们推举为正直的人，只是因为与他们稍有不同意见，就日日谋划算计他们，都是大人们感到不平的。 
English: Ministers such as Xu Guo, Yang Hui, Shu Hua and others, who in the past they praised as honest people, only because they have a slight difference of opinion with them, and they are calculated on day-to-day planning, are all adults feel uneasy.

古文：御史韩国桢，给事中陈与郊、王敬民等因迭攻植等，帝下敬民疏，贬植户部员外郎，东之兵部员外郎，可立大理评事。
现代文：御史韩国桢，给事中陈与郊、王敬民等也迭相攻击李植等，皇上颁布王敬民的奏疏，贬李植为户部员外郎，江东之为兵部员外郎，羊可立为大理评事。
English: According to the official history of Korea, Chen, Suburban, Wang Jingmin and others also attacked Li Zhi and others in succession. The emperor issued a report on Wang Jingmin, denigrating Li Zhi as a member of the household department, Jiangdong as a member of the military department, and Yang Keli as a commentator.

古文：张岳以诸臣纷争，具疏评其贤否，颇为植、东之、可立地，请令各宣力一方，以全终始。
现代文：张岳因诸大臣争斗，上疏评定他们的贤与否，颇为李植、江东之、羊可立鸣不平。请求勉励双方，共全臣节。
English: Zhang Yue, due to the struggle between the ministers, was rated by Shang Su as the most virtuous or not, rather than Li Zhi and Jiang Dong, and the sheep could not stand up. He asked for encouragement from both sides, and the whole minister's day.

古文：于时行、国、锡爵、巍、化、光祖、世臣、定、愈贤皆褒中寓刺，而力诋季驯、懋贤、系周、仲庆，惟中行、用贤、思孝无所讥贬。
现代文：对申时行、许国、王锡爵、杨巍、舒化、陆光祖、齐世臣等都是赞扬中有讽刺，而努力诋毁潘季驯、懋贤、系周、仲庆，只有吴中行、赵用贤、沈思孝没有讥讽。
English: For Shin Shih-hong, Xu Guo, Wang Xizhe, Yang Hui, Shu Hua, Lu Guangzu, Qi Shichen, etc., there are both praise and irony, while efforts are made to discredit Pan Jitai, Yu Xian, Keizhou, and Zhongqing. Only Wu Zhong-hong, Zhao Yixian, and Shen Si-hiao are not ironic.

古文：帝责岳颂美大臣，且支蔓，不足定国是，岳坐免。
现代文：皇上责备张岳颂美大臣，而且于大臣纷争之外又生出枝节，对安定国事不利，张岳被免职。
English: The emperor rebuked Zhang Yue for his praise of the Minister of the United States, and in addition to the dispute between the ministers, another problem arose, which was unfavorable to the stability of state affairs, and Zhang Yue was removed from office.

古文：帝犹以植言寿宫有石数十丈，如屏风，其下皆石，恐宝座将置于石上。
现代文：皇上还是因为李植说过寿宫有石头数十丈大，像屏风下面都是石头，担心宝座将安置在石头上。
English: The emperor was still worried that the throne would be placed on a stone, because Li Zhi said that there were dozens of stones in the Shou Palace, like the stones under the screen.

古文：闰月，复躬往视之，终谓大峪吉，遂调三人于外。
现代文：闰月，皇上又亲自视察，终于认为大峪山吉利，于是将三人调出京城。
English: On the leap month, the emperor personally inspected again, and finally thought that Dabaoshan was auspicious, so he transferred the three people out of the capital.

古文：御史柯梃因自言习葬法，力称大峪之美，获督南畿学政。
现代文：御史柯梃因为自称熟悉葬法，极力称赞大峪山的美丽，获得督南畿学政之职。
English: Because he claimed to be familiar with funerary methods and praised the beauty of Mount Dafu, he was given the post of governor of Nanki Province.

古文：而植同年生给事中卢逵亦承风请正三人罪，士论哂之。
现代文：而李植同年生员给事中庐达也乘机请判定三人的罪责，士大夫都讥笑他。
English: However, Li Zhi's classmate, Zhong Xuda, also took the opportunity to plead guilty to the three people, and the magistrates all laughed at him.

古文：植、东之、可立自以言事见知，未及三岁而贬。
现代文：李植、江东之、羊可立以劝谏为皇帝所知，不到三年被贬。
English: Li Zhi, Jiang Dongzhi, and Yang Keli were known to the emperor, and were demoted in less than three years.

古文：植得绥德知州，旋引疾归。
现代文：李植得到绥德知州之职，不久称病回乡。
English: When Li Zhi was appointed to the post of Shunde Zhizhou, he soon called in sick and returned to his hometown.

古文：居十年，起沅州知州。屡官右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。时二十六年也。
现代文：在家住了十年后，起用为沅州知州，逐渐做到右佥都御史，巡抚辽东，时间是万历二十六年。
English: After living at home for ten years, he was appointed as Zhangzhou Chizhou, and gradually achieved the right to be the governor of Liaodong, the governor of Liaodong. The time is 26 years.

古文：植垦土积粟，得田四万亩，岁获粮万石。
现代文：李植开垦土地，屯积粮食，获得四万亩田，每岁收获数万石粮食。
English: Li Zhi reclaimed land, accumulated grain, obtained 40,000 mu of fields, and harvested tens of thousands of kilos of grain every year.

古文：户部推其法九边。
现代文：户部将他的方法在九边推广。
English: Mr. Tomobe has been promoting his method on nine sides of the country.

古文：以倭寇退，请因师旋，选主、客锐卒，驱除宿寇，恢复旧辽阳。
现代文：因为倭寇被击退，请求班师，精选土、客士卒，驱除旧敌，恢复旧辽阳城。
English: Because the wokou were repulsed, he requested a group of division, selected soil, and guest soldiers to drive away the old enemy and restore the old Liaoyang City.

古文：诏下总督诸臣详议，不果行。
现代文：皇上下诏书让总督诸臣详细讨论，没有听从他的意见。
English: The emperor had the governor and his ministers discuss the imperial edict in detail, but they did not listen to his opinion.

古文：奏税监高淮贪暴，请召还，不报。
现代文：又上奏陈明税监高淮贪婪、残暴，请求把他召回，皇上没有答复。
English: Chen Ming also reported that Gao Huai, the tax inspector, was greedy and cruel, and requested that he be recalled. The emperor did not reply.

古文：后淮激变，委阻挠罪于植。
现代文：后来高淮激起民变，认为是李植阻挠的结果。
English: Later, Gao Huai instigated a people's revolution, which was considered to be the result of Li Zhi's obstruction.

古文：植疏辨乞休，帝慰留之。
现代文：李植上疏乞求退休，皇上安慰他，将其留任。
English: Li Zhi Shang So begged to retire, but the emperor consoled him and allowed him to remain in office.

古文：明年，锦、义失事，巡按御史王业弘劾植及诸将失律。
现代文：第二年，锦州、义州失守，巡按御史王业弘弹劾李植及诸将违反军律。
English: In the second year, Jinzhou and Yizhou were lost, and the inspector-general Wang Yehong impeached Li Zhi and the generals for violating the military code.

古文：植以却敌闻，且诋业弘。
现代文：李植报告他击退了敌人，而且诋毁王业弘。
English: Li Zhi reported that he had repulsed the enemy and slandered Wang Yehong.

古文：东之经纪其丧，提其孤归，乳之。
现代文：王业弘再次上疏弹劾李植隐瞒实情，皇上下诏解去李植的官职听从勘察。
English: Wang Yehong once again impeached Li Zhi for concealing the truth, and the emperor issued an imperial edict dismissing Li Zhi from his official post and ordered him to submit to investigation.

古文：舒氏卒有后。汤兆京，字伯闳，宜兴人。
现代文：勘察完毕，命令他在家居住等候任用，竟然没有再召还。死后，李植被赠为兵部右侍郎。汤兆京，字伯闳，江苏宜兴人。
English: After the investigation was completed, he was ordered to live at home and wait for his appointment, but he was not called back. After his death, Li Zhejie was presented as the right hand man of the military department. Tang Zhaojing, surnamed Bo Xuan, was from Yixing, Jiangsu.

古文：万历二十年进士。除丰城知县。治最，征授御史。
现代文：万历二十年进士，授职丰城知县，治行考核为最优，征召为御史。
English: He was awarded the post of Fengcheng County magistrate after 20 years of hard work. He was the best in the performance evaluation and was conscripted into the imperial history.

古文：连劾礼部侍郎朱国祚、蓟辽总督万世德，帝不问。
现代文：接连弹劾礼部侍郎朱国祚、蓟辽总督万世德，皇上都不理会。
English: The Emperor ignored the successive impeachments of Zhu Guozhen, the attendant of the ceremonial department, and Wan Shide, the governor of Qianliao.

古文：巡视西城，贵妃宫阉竖涂辱礼部侍郎敖文祯，兆京弹劾，杖配南京。
现代文：巡视西城，贵妃、宦官侮辱礼部侍郎敖文祯，汤兆京弹劾他们，遭到廷杖，发配南京。
English: On a tour of the western city, the empress and eunuchs insulted the etiquette attendant, 文, and Tang Zhao Jing impeached them. They were punished with the imperial scepter and sent to Nanjing.

古文：时矿税繁兴，奸人竞言利。
现代文：当时矿税繁兴，奸臣争着说矿税有利可图。
English: At that time, the mining tax was booming, and treacherous vassals argued that the mining tax was profitable.

古文：有谓开海外机易山，岁可获金四十万者，有请征徽、宁诸府契税，鬻高淳诸县草场者，帝意俱向之。
现代文：有人说开凿海外的机易山，每年可以获得四十万两黄金，有的请求征收徽州、宁国等府的契约税，将高淳等县的草场卖掉，皇上都想同意。
English: Some people said that they could get 400,000 taels of gold a year by digging up the Jieyi Mountains overseas. Others asked for the collection of contract tax from Huizhou, Ningguo and other prefectures, and the sale of pastures in Gaochun and other counties. The emperor wanted to agree.

古文：兆京偕同官金忠士、史学迁、温如璋交章力谏，不报。
现代文：汤兆京与同官金忠士、史学迁、温如璋上奏极力劝谏，皇上不予回答。
English: Tong Zhaojing and his colleagues, Jin Zhongshi, Shi Xueqian, and Wen Ruxuan, tried their best to persuade the emperor, but the emperor did not answer.

古文：出按宣府、大同，请罢税使张晔、矿使王虎、王忠，亦不纳。
现代文：出去巡按宣化、大同等府，请求罢免朝廷税收使者张晔、矿税使王虎、王忠，皇上也不接受这个意见。
English: He went on a inspection tour of the Xuanhua and Datong prefectures to request the dismissal of the imperial tax envoys Zhang Xuan, Wang Hu and Wang Zhong, and the emperor did not accept this opinion.

古文：掌河南道。佐孙丕扬典京察，所谴黜皆当，而被黜者之党争相攻击。
现代文：执掌河南道，辅佐孙丕扬掌京官的考察，所贬退的人都很得当，而那些被贬的人争相攻击他们。
English: According to the investigation of the person in charge of Henan Province and the assistant of the person in charge of Beijing, Sun Xiangyang, the people who were demoted were all very proper, and those who were demoted were competing to attack them.

古文：兆京亦十余疏应之。
现代文：汤兆京也上了十余道奏疏，与他们应战。
English: Tong Zhaojing also joined more than ten Taoist schools to challenge them.

古文：其词直，卒无以夺也。
现代文：他的言词直率，这些人终究不能使他免职。
English: He's been outspoken, and these people can't remove him from office.

古文：详具丕扬传中。
现代文：具体情况参见《孙丕扬传》。
English: For details, see "Sun Yat-sen's Biography."

古文：寻出按顺天诸府。
现代文：不久，又出去巡按顺天等府。
English: Soon, he went out again to inspect Shuntian and other prefectures.

古文：守陵中官李浚诬军民盗陵木，逮系无虚日。
现代文：守皇陵的宦官李浚诬赖附近的军民盗窃陵上的木材，每天都要逮捕人。
English: The eunuch guarding the imperial mausoleum, Li Jun, accused the nearby soldiers and civilians of stealing the wood on the mausoleum and arrested people every day.

古文：兆京按宣府时奏之，浚亦诬讦兆京。
现代文：汤兆京巡按宣府时就为这事上奏过，李浚也诬蔑、攻击汤兆京。
English: Li Jun also slandered and attacked Tong Zhaojing.

古文：帝遣使按验，事已白，而诸被系者犹未释，兆京悉纵遣之。
现代文：皇帝派遣使者检验，事情已真相大白，可是那些被抓去的人还没有释放，汤兆京全部把他们放了。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to investigate, and the truth was revealed. However, those who had been arrested were not released, and Tang Zhaojing released them all.

古文：东厂太监卢受纵其下横都市，兆京论如法。
现代文：东厂太监卢受唆使他的部下横行都市，汤兆京按法律弹劾他。
English: Lu, the eunuch of the East Factory, instigated his subordinates to run rampant in the city, and Tang Zhaojing impeached him according to the law.

古文：还复掌河南道。
现代文：回到京城后，又执掌河南道。
English: After returning to Beijing, he took charge of Henan Province.

古文：福王久不之国，兆京倡给事御史伏阙固请，卒不得命。
现代文：福王很久不到藩国就位，汤兆京倡导给事御史坚决请求他回去，终于没有得到皇帝的命令。
English: It took a long time for King Fu to take up his position in the domain, and Tang Zhaojing, as the advocate of giving things back to history, resolutely asked him to go back, but finally did not receive the emperor's order.

古文：南京缺提学御史，吏部尚书赵焕调浙江巡按吕图南补之，寻以年例出三御史于外，皆不咨都察院。
现代文：南京空缺提学御史，吏部尚书赵焕调浙江巡按吕图南补缺，不久以每年惯例调出三位御史到外地，都不咨询都察院。
English: When there was a vacancy in Nanjing for an Imperial Historian, Shangshu Zhao Huan of the Personnel Department was transferred to Zhejiang to fill the vacancy. Soon, the three Imperial Historians were transferred to other places according to the annual practice, without consulting the Duka Academy.

古文：兆京引故事争。
现代文：汤兆京援引旧事争论。
English: Tong Zhaojing cited the old dispute.

古文：图南之调，为给事中周永春所劾，弃官归。
现代文：吕图南的调动，被给事中周永春所弹劾，放弃官职归家。
English: Lyu Tunan was transferred, impeached by Zhou Yongchun in the middle of the matter, gave up his official position and returned home.

古文：兆京及御史王时熙、汪有功为图南申雪，语侵永春，并及焕，二人连章辨，兆京亦争之强。
现代文：汤兆京及御史王时熙、汪有功为吕图南申辩、昭雪，言语中激怒了周永春和赵焕，二人连上奏疏辩解，汤兆京也与他激烈辩论。
English: Tang Zhaojing, Wang Shixi and Wang Yougong argued for Lü Tunan and Zhao Xue respectively, provoking the anger of Zhou Yongchun and Zhao Huan. The two of them went on to argue against each other, and Tang Zhaojing also had a heated debate with him.

古文：帝欲安焕，为稍夺兆京俸。
现代文：皇上想安抚赵焕，稍稍少发了汤兆京的俸禄。
English: The emperor wanted to appease Zhao Huan, and slightly reduced Tang Zhao Jing's salary.

古文：兆京以不得其职，拜疏径归。
现代文：汤兆京认为自己得不到真正的与职务相称的权限，便上疏请求回乡。
English: Tang Zhaojing thought that he could not get the real authority commensurate with his duties, so he requested to return to his hometown.

古文：御史李邦华、周起元、孙居相遂助兆京攻焕。
现代文：御史李邦华、周起元、孙居相于是帮助汤兆京攻击赵焕，皇上也停发了他们的俸禄。
English: Li Banghua, Zhou Qimuan, and Sun Juxiang then helped Tang Zhaojing attack Zhao Huan, and the emperor stopped paying their salaries.

古文：帝亦夺其俸，然焕亦引去。
现代文：然而赵焕也称病离开京城。
English: However, Zhao Huan also claimed to be ill and left Beijing.

古文：兆京居官廉正，遇事慷慨。
现代文：汤兆京做官廉正，遇到事情慷慨上奏。
English: Tong Zhaojing is an honest official, and when things come up, he is generous.

古文：其时党势已成，正人多见齮龁。
现代文：那个时候，阉党势力已形成了，正直的人多被倾轧。
English: At that time, the power of the Kuomintang had already been formed, and many honest people were trampled underfoot.

古文：兆京力维持其间，清议倚以为重。
现代文：汤兆京极力在他们中间维持，批评时政的清明议论特别倚重他。
English: Tong Zhaojing tried his best to maintain his place among them, and he was especially relied on for his clear-cut speech criticizing the current government.

古文：崇祯初，复焉。
现代文：屡遭排挤，但终究没有一个人能诬赖到他。
English: He was repeatedly pushed out, but in the end, no one could blame him.

古文：夏嘉遇，字正甫，松江华亭人。
现代文：天启中，赠为太仆少卿。夏嘉遇，字正甫，上海松江华亭人。
English: In the Apocalypse, he was given the title of Taigu Shaoqing. Xia Jiayun, also known as Zhengfu, was from Shanghai's Songjiang Huating.

古文：万历三十八年进士。授保定推官。
现代文：万历三十八年进士，授职保定推官。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Wanli, and was awarded the post of Baoding magistrate.

古文：四十五年，用治行征。
现代文：万历四十五年夏嘉遇因为政绩突出为皇上征召。
English: In the forty-fifth year of Wanli, Xia Jia was called up by the emperor because of his outstanding political achievements.

古文：当擢谏职，先注礼部主事。
现代文：应当提拔为言官，先做了礼部主事。
English: He should be promoted to the post of speaker, and he should be made the head of the ceremonial affairs department first.

古文：帝久倦勤，方从哲独柄国。
现代文：皇上很久倦怠政事，方从哲一个人大权独揽。
English: The emperor was tired of politics for a long time, and the party seized power from Zhe alone.

古文：碌碌充位，中外章奏悉留中。
现代文：碌碌无为而列居权位，中外奏章全部留于禁中。
English: Rook Rook did nothing and ranked in the power position, and all Chinese and foreign musical compositions remained in the ban.

古文：惟言路一攻，则其人自去，不待诏旨。
现代文：只要言官一攻击，则此人自动离去，不待皇上下旨。
English: As long as the speaker attacks, the person will leave automatically, without waiting for the emperor's order.

古文：台谏之势，积重不返，有齐、楚、浙三方鼎峙之名。
现代文：台谏的势力积重难返，有齐、楚、浙三方面鼎足而立的声名。
English: The influence of Taiwan and Fujian has accumulated to the point of no return, and it has a reputation of standing on its own three legs in Qi, Chu, and Zhejiang.

古文：齐则给事中亓诗教、周永春，御史韩浚。
现代文：齐则指给事中亓诗教、周永春，御史韩浚。
English: Qi also pointed out that Zou Shi Jiao, Zhou Yongchun, and Goshi Han Jun were involved in the case.

古文：楚则给事中官应震、吴亮嗣。
现代文：楚则指给事中官应震、吴亮嗣。
English: Chu then pointed to Wu Liangzi, vice-governor of Yingzhou.

古文：浙则给事中姚宗文、御史刘廷元。
现代文：浙指给事中姚宗文、御史刘廷元。
English: Yao Zongwen and Liu Tingyuan, both of whom are from Zhejiang Province, have been appointed to the post.

古文：而汤宾尹辈阴为之主。
现代文：而汤宾尹等人暗中依附他。
English: However, Tang Bin Yin and others secretly followed him.

古文：其党给事中赵兴邦、张延登、徐绍吉、商周祚，御史骆骎曾、过庭训、房壮丽、牟志夔、唐世济、金汝谐、彭宗孟、田生金、李徵仪、董元儒、李嵩辈，与相倡和，务以攻东林排异己为事。
现代文：其党给事中赵兴邦、张延登、徐绍吉、商周祚，御史骆会、过庭训、房壮丽、牟志夔、唐世济、金汝谐、彭宗孟、田生金、李征仪、董元儒、李嵩等人，与他相互唱和，以攻击东林党人为己任。
English: Zhao Xingbang, Zhang Yandeng, Xu Shaoji, Shang Zhouqi, Gu Shi Luo Hui, Gu Tingxiu, Fang Zhuoli, Muzhi Yao, Tang Shiji, Jin Rucheng, Peng Zongmeng, Tian Shengjin, Li Zhengyi, Dong Yuan Rhu, Li Song and others of his party sang peace with him, and it was their duty to attack Donglin Party members.

古文：其时考选久稽，屡趣不下，言路无几人，盘踞益坚。
现代文：其时考选官吏已停止了很久，屡次催促都没有结果，言官没有几个人，结成团伙更紧密。
English: At that time, the examination and selection of officials had been stopped for a long time, repeated urging had no effect, there were only a few officials, and the group was more closely formed.

古文：后进当入为台谏者，必钩致门下，以为羽翼，当事大臣莫敢撄其锋。
现代文：后来进入台谏的人，必定罗致在自己门下，做自己的党徒，当权的大臣不敢触犯他们。
English: Later, those who entered the throne must have been under their own door, to be their own party members, and the ministers in power did not dare to offend them.

古文：诗教者，从哲门生，而吏部尚书赵焕乡人也。
现代文：亓诗教是方从哲的门生，吏部尚书赵焕的同乡。
English: Zou Shi Jiao was a protégé of Fang Congzhe and a fellow villager of Zhao Huan.

古文：焕耄昏，两人一听诗教。
现代文：赵焕老糊涂了，两人都听诗教的。
English: Zhao Huan is confused. Both of them listen to poetry.

古文：诗教把持朝局，为诸党人魁。
现代文：诗教把持朝政，为各党人的头。
English: Poets and scholars hold the reins of government and are the leaders of all political parties.

古文：武进邹之麟者，浙人党也。先坐事谪上林典簿，至是为工部主事，附诗教、浚。
现代文：武进邹之麟是浙江党人，从前因事被贬为上林典簿，这时为工部主事，依附诗教、韩浚。
English: Wujin Qizilin is a member of the Zhejiang Party. In the past, he was demoted to Shanglin Classic Book due to an incident. At that time, he was the head of the Ministry of Industry, adhering to poetry teaching and Han Jun.

古文：求吏部不得，大恨，反攻之，并诋从哲。
现代文：请求得到吏部官职没成，很恼恨，反而攻击他们，并诋毁方从哲。
English: He was angry that his request for a position in the cadre did not come to fruition. Instead, he attacked them and slandered Fang Congzhe.

古文：诗教怒，焕为黜之麟。
现代文：诗教发了脾气，赵焕贬退了邹之麟。
English: The poetry teacher lost his temper, and Zhao Huan belittled Qin Zhilin.

古文：时嘉遇及工部主事钟惺、中书舍人尹嘉宾、行人魏光国皆以才名，当列言职。
现代文：当时夏嘉遇及工部主事钟惺、中书舍人尹嘉宾、行人魏光国都以才能著称，应当列为言官。
English: At that time, Xia Jia met with the head of the Ministry of Industry Zhong Jun, the Chinese scholar Yin Jiabin, and the pedestrian Wei Guangguo, all of whom were famous for their talents and should be listed as officials.

古文：诗教辈以与之麟善，抑之，俾不与考选。以故嘉遇不能无怨。
现代文：亓诗教等认为他们与邹之麟要好，压制他们，不让他们考选，所以夏嘉遇颇有怨言。
English: Xing Shi Jiao and others thought that they were better than Xing Zilin, suppressed them, and did not let them take the test, so Xia Jia encountered quite a bit of complaints.

古文：四十七年三月，辽东败书闻，嘉遇遂抗疏言： 辽左三路丧师，虽缘杨镐失策，揆厥所由，则以纵贷李维翰故。
现代文：万历四十七年三月，辽东失败的消息传来，夏嘉遇于是上疏说： 辽东三路大败，虽然是杨镐指挥失策，真正的原因，则是放纵李维翰的缘故。
English: In March, 47 B.C., the news of Liaodong's defeat came, and Xia Jia met Shang Shao and said: Although the great defeat of Liaodong Third Road was a commanding blunder of Yang Hui, the real reason was the indulgence of Li Weihan.

古文：夫维翰丧师辱国，罪不容诛，乃仅令回籍听勘。
现代文：李维翰丧师辱国，罪不容诛，只是让他回原籍等候勘察。
English: Li Weihan killed his mentor and humiliated the country, a crime not to be tolerated, but let him return to his place of origin to wait for an investigation.

古文：谁司票拟？
现代文：谁起草的这个命令？
English: Who drafted this order?

古文：则阁臣方从哲也；谁司纠驳？
现代文：阁臣方从哲；谁管理驳议？是兵科赵兴邦。
English: The cabinet ministers side from Zhe; who manages the refutation? It is the military science Zhao Xingbang.

古文：则兵科赵兴邦也。参貂白镪，赂遗绎络，国典边防，因之大坏。
现代文：以人参、貂皮、白银贿赂者络绎不绝，国家大典，边防大计，因此大为败坏。
English: There is an endless stream of people bribed with ginseng, mink fur, and silver, and the country's grand ceremony and border defense plan have been greatly corrupted as a result.

古文：惟陛下立断。 
现代文：唯有陛下立即决断。 
English: Only His Majesty can make an immediate decision.

古文：疏入，未报。
现代文：奏疏呈上，没有回答。
English: There was no reply.

古文：从哲力辨，嘉遇再疏劾之，并及诗教。
现代文：方从哲极力为自己辩解，夏嘉遇再次上疏弹劾他，并一起弹劾了亓诗教。
English: Fang Congzhe tried his best to defend himself, and Xia Jia encountered him again on the street to impeach him, and together they impeached Gong Shi Jiao.

古文：于是诗教、兴邦及亮嗣、延登、壮丽辈交章力攻。
现代文：于是亓诗教与赵兴邦及吴亮嗣、张延登、房壮丽等相继上奏攻击。
English: As a result, Zou Shi Jiao, Zhao Xing Bang, Wu Liang Zi, Zhang Yanden, Fang Zhuoli and others successively played the attack.

古文：诗教谓嘉遇不得考选，故挟私狂逞。
现代文：诗教认为夏嘉遇没有得到考选，所以泄私愤逞狂。
English: Poetic education believes that Xia Jia Rong did not get the examination, so he was furious.

古文：嘉遇言： 诗教于从哲，一心拥戴，相倚为奸。
现代文：夏嘉遇说： 亓诗教对于方从哲，一心一意地拥戴，互相依靠狼狈为奸。
English: Xia Jiayun said: For Fang Congzhe, Yan Shi Jiao adheres to him wholeheartedly, and they rely on each other.

古文：凡枚卜、考选诸大政，百方挠阻，专务壅蔽，遏绝主聪。
现代文：凡是拜相、考选诸大事，百方阻挠，专门堵塞各种意见，不让陛下听到任何事情。
English: Whenever there is a major event such as the investiture of a new prime minister or the selection of a new prime minister, all sides obstruct it, specifically blocking all kinds of opinions and preventing His Majesty from hearing anything.

古文：遂致纲纪不张，戎马驰突，臣窃痛之。
现代文：于是导致纲纪不张，战事纷起，臣暗中深以为恨。
English: As a result, discipline was not enforced, wars broke out, and vassals secretly harbored deep hatred.

古文：今内治尽坏，纵日议兵食、谈战守，究何益于事？
现代文：现在内政腐败，纵使天天议论兵事，谈论战守，究竟有什么好处呢？
English: Now that the internal affairs of the country are corrupt, even if we discuss military affairs and the war effort every day, what good will that do?

古文：故臣为国击奸，冀除祸本，虽死不避，尚区区计升沉得丧哉！ 
现代文：所以我要为国除奸，希望消除灾害之源，虽死不避，更何况去计较区区升官与贬职呢！ 
English: Therefore, I want to root out treason for the country, hoping to eliminate the source of disasters, although death cannot be avoided, let alone considering promotions and demotions!

古文：时兴邦以右给事中掌兵科。
现代文：当时赵兴邦以右给事中执掌兵科。
English: At that time, Zhao Xingbang took charge of the military science in the middle of the incident.

古文：先有旨，俟辽东底宁，从优叙录。
现代文：皇上先有圣旨，等辽东安宁，再从优录用。
English: The emperor first had a sacred decree, such as Liaodong Anning, and then recruited from the excellent.

古文：至是以嘉遇连劾，吏部遂立擢为太常少卿。
现代文：这时，因为夏嘉遇接二连三地弹劾他，吏部于是立刻将他提升为太常少卿。
English: At this time, because Xia Jia encountered his impeachment successively, the cadre department immediately promoted him to the position of too often minor lord.

古文：嘉遇益愤，疏言： 四路奏功，兴邦必将预其赏。
现代文：夏嘉遇更为愤怒，上疏说： 四路上报功劳，赵兴邦必定参预领赏。
English: Xia Jia was even more angry, and Shang Zuo said: Zhao Xingbang must participate in advance to receive the award.

古文：则今日事败，兴邦安得逃其罚？
现代文：现在事情败露，赵兴邦怎能逃脱惩罚呢？
English: Now that things have come to light, how can Zhao Xingbang escape punishment?

古文：且不罚已矣，反从而超陟之。是臣弹章适为荐剡，国家有如是法纪哉！ 
现代文：不但不罚，反而越级提升。臣的弹劾奏章被贬得一钱不值，国家有这样的法纪吗？ 
English: Not only was there no punishment, but he was promoted beyond his rank. The minister's impeachment report was reduced to worthless. Does the country have such legal discipline?

古文：疏奏，诸御史复合词攻嘉遇。
现代文：疏奏上，各御史又一起攻击他。
English: As a diversion, the imperial historians attacked him together.

古文：嘉遇复疏言： 古人有云，见无礼于君者逐之，如鹰鹯之逐鸟雀也。
现代文：嘉遇再次上疏说： 古人云，看见对君无礼的人赶走他，好像老鹰赶走鸟雀。
English: Jiayu went up to the sparrow again and said, "Ancient people saw that those who were rude to you drove them away, just as an eagle drives away a sparrow.

古文：诗教、兴邦谓臣不得台谏而怒。
现代文：亓诗教、赵兴邦说我得不到台谏之职而发火。
English: As a poet, Zhao Xingbang said that I was angry because I did not get the post of Taiwanese poet.

古文：夫爵位名秩，操之天子，人臣何敢干？
现代文：爵位、等级全由皇上操持，与人臣有什么关系？
English: Titles and ranks are all controlled by the emperor, so what does it have to do with ministers?

古文：必如所言，是考选予夺，二臣实专之。此无礼于君者一。
现代文：如像他们所说，则我考选的权力被剥夺就是二位大臣干的，这是他们一对君王的无礼。
English: As they said, it was the two ministers who deprived me of the power of election, which was the rudeness of a pair of kings.

古文：事宁优叙，非明旨乎？
现代文：事情安宁下来再优先录用，这不是皇上的意思吗？
English: Isn't it the emperor's intention to let things settle down and then give priority to recruitment?

古文：乃竟蔑而弃之。此无礼于君者二。
现代文：他们竟然蔑视而置之不理，这是二对君王的无礼。
English: It's disrespectful to the monarchy for them to treat it with such disdain.

古文：魏光国疏论诗教，为通政沮格。夫要截实封者斩。自来奸臣不敢为，而诗教为之。此无礼于君者三。
现代文：魏光国上奏弹劾亓诗教，被当政的人阻止，中途拦截大臣的奏章按理当斩，自古以来奸臣都不敢做这样的事，而亓诗教竟敢做，这是三对君王的无礼。
English: Wei and Guangxi issued a proclamation to impeach Confucianism, but it was blocked by the people in power. If a minister's proclamation was intercepted midway, he should have been executed. Since ancient times, treacherous ministers have not dared to do such a thing, but Confucianism dared to do it. This is the rudeness of the three kings.

古文：二奸每事请托，一日以七事属职方郎杨成乔。成乔不听，遂逐之去。
现代文：二个奸臣每件事找人托办，一天嘱咐职方郎中杨成乔办七件事，杨成乔不听，于是他们将他赶走。
English: The two treacherous vassals look for someone to do everything. One day, they ordered Yang Chengqiao, an official, to do seven things. Yang Chengqiao did not listen, so they drove him away.

古文：诗教以旧憾欲去其乡知府，考功郎陈显道不从，亦逼之去。
现代文：亓诗教因为旧恨而赶走他家乡的知府，考功郎陈显道没有听从他的话，也被他逼走。
English: Because of old hatred, Zou Shi Jiao chased away the prefectural government of his hometown. Chen Xinduo, the winner of the examination, did not listen to his words and was also forced away by him.

古文：夫吏、兵二部，天子所以驭天下也，而二奸敢侵越之。此无礼于君者四。
现代文：吏、兵二部，是皇上统治天下的要害机构，而这二个奸臣竟敢越权插手，这是四对君王的无礼。
English: The two departments of officials and soldiers are the key institutions of the emperor's rule of the world, and these two traitors dared to interfere beyond their authority. This is the disrespect of the four to the king.

古文：有臣如此，臣义岂与俱生哉！ 
现代文：有这样的臣子，我怎能与他们在一起！ 
English: With such courtiers, how can I stay with them!

古文：先是，三党诸魁交甚密，后齐与浙渐相贰。布衣汪文言者，素游黄正宾、于玉立之门，习知党人本末。
现代文：先前，三派的头头交往很密切。后来齐派与浙派逐渐分庭抗礼，平民汪文言平日与黄正宾、于玉立来往，知道这些帮派的来龙去脉。
English: In the past, the leaders of the three factions were in close contact. Later, the Qi faction and the Zhejiang faction gradually separated, and the commoner Wang Wenyan had daily contacts with Huang Zhengbin and Yu Yuling, and knew the ins and outs of these gangs.

古文：后玉立遣之入都，益悉诸党人所为，策之曰： 浙人者，主兵也，齐、楚则应兵。
现代文：后来于玉立派他到京城，更加知道各派别的所作所为，拟定对策说： 浙江人，掌管军事，齐、楚人是响应军事的人。
English: Later, Yu Rongli went to Beijing, knew more about the behavior of each faction, and formulated a countermeasure: Zhejiang people are in charge of the military, and Qi and Chu people are people who respond to the military.

古文：成功之后，主欲逐客矣，然柄素在客，未易逐，此可构也。 
现代文：成功之后，主人想将客人赶走，然而权柄在客人手中，不容易赶走。这可以设计谋。 
English: After success, the host wants to drive the guest away, but the power is in the hands of the guest, and it is not easy to drive away.

古文：遂多方设奇间之，诸人果相疑。
现代文：于是多方设计，离间他们。这些人果然互相怀疑。
English: As a result, various schemes were devised to drive a wedge between them. These people were indeed suspicious of each other.

古文：而邹之麟既见恶齐党，亦交斗其间。
现代文：而邹之麟见自己被齐党讨厌，也在他们中间交战。
English: On the other hand, Gan Zhirin saw that he was hated by the Qi Party and also fought among them.

古文：扬言齐人张凤翔为文选，必以年例斥宗文、廷元。
现代文：扬言说假如齐人张凤翔做了文选郎，一定以年度考核斥退宗文、廷元。
English: He threatened that if Zhang Fengxiang, a member of Qi, became the editor, he would definitely expel Sunwen and Tingyuan with an annual assessment.

古文：于是齐、浙之党大离。
现代文：于是齐、浙党派离心。
English: As a result, the Zhe Party was split down the middle.

古文：及是嘉遇五疏力攻，诗教辈亦窘。
现代文：等到夏嘉遇上了五道奏疏极力攻击，亓诗教等人更为窘迫。
English: By the time Xia Jia encountered the vigorous attack of the five-way play, Zou Shi Jiao and others were even more distressed.

古文：而浙人唐世济、董元儒遂助嘉遇排击。
现代文：而浙江人唐世济、董元儒帮助夏嘉遇排挤他们。
English: However, Zhejiang natives Tang Shiji and Dong Yuanru helped Xia Jiajun to push them out.

古文：自是亓、赵之势顿衰，兴邦竟不果迁，自引去。时论快焉。
现代文：自此以后，亓、赵的势力更小，赵兴邦竟然没有升迁，自己称病离职，时论认为大快人心。
English: Since then, Zhai and Zhao have had even less influence, and Zhao Xingbang has not been promoted at all, claiming to be ill and leaving his post, which is considered to be very popular.

古文：光宗立，嘉遇乞改南部，就迁吏部员外郎。
现代文：光宗继位，嘉遇乞求改任南部，升为吏部员外郎。
English: Guangzong succeeded to the throne, and Jiayu begged to be reassigned to the southern region, and was promoted to the position of the clerk's assistant.

古文：天启中，赵南星秉铨，召为考功员外郎，改文选署选事。
现代文：天启中，赵南星掌管官吏选拔，将他召为考功员外郎，改任文选署选事。
English: In the apocalypse, Zhao Nanxing was in charge of the selection of officials, and he was called to be the examiner, and was appointed to the selection of the Literary Selection Office.

古文：时左光斗、魏大中以嘉遇与之麟、韩敬同年相善，颇疑之。
现代文：当时，左光斗、魏大中因为夏嘉遇与邹之麟、韩敬为同年进士相互关系很好，颇有疑心。
English: At that time, Zuo Guangdou and Wei Da Zhong were suspicious because Xia Jia Rong had a good relationship with Qin Zilin and Han Jing, who entered the same year.

古文：已，见嘉遇公廉，亦皆亲善。
现代文：不久，见夏嘉遇公正廉洁，也和他要好了。
English: Soon, seeing Xia Jia being treated fairly and honestly, he also wanted to be with him.

古文：及陈九畴劾谢应祥，语连嘉遇，镌三级，调外，语具南星传。
现代文：等到陈九畴弹劾谢应祥，言语中牵涉到夏嘉遇，降三级，调离京城，详情见赵南星传。
English: When Chen Jiuzhong impeached Xie Yingxiang, Xia Jia was implicated in the speech, downgraded to the third level, and transferred out of Beijing. For details, see the biography of Zhao Nanxing.

古文：未几，党人张讷诬劾南星，并及嘉遇，遂除名。
现代文：没有多久，党人张讷诬蔑、弹劾赵南星及夏嘉遇，于是两人被除名。
English: It didn't take long for party member Zhang Ne to slander and impeach Zhao Nansing and Xia Jia, and the two were expelled.

古文：寻锻炼光斗、大中狱，诬嘉遇尝行贿。
现代文：不久党人罗织罪名，将左光斗、魏大中逮捕，诬赖夏嘉遇曾经行贿。
English: Soon, party members fabricated charges and arrested Zuo Guangdou and Wei Dazhong, accusing Xia Jiayu of having paid bribes.

古文：逮讯论徒，愤恨发病卒。
现代文：逮捕审问弹劾的人，夏嘉遇愤恨得生病死去。
English: After arresting and interrogating those who impeached him, Xia Jia became so angry that he fell ill and died.

古文：崇祯初，赠太常少卿。
现代文：崇祯初年，赠为太常少卿。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was given the title of Taizhong Shaoqing.

