古文：葵丘之会，献公将如会，遇宰周公，曰： 君可无会也。
现代文：齐桓公发起诸侯们在葵丘盟会，晋献公打算去参加。遇到宰周公，宰周公说： 你可以不去参加盟会。
English: Prince Qi Kuan initiated the princes to join the league in Kwai Chuk, and Prince Jin Xian planned to attend. When he met Prince Zai Zhou, Prince Zai Zhou said: You can not attend the league.

古文：夫齐侯好示务施，与力而不务德，故轻致诸侯而重遣之，使至者劝而叛者慕。
现代文：齐桓公好大喜功，施一些小恩惠，致力于武功而不修德，所以诸侯到他那里只献一些薄礼却满载而归。
English: King Qi Huan was very pleased with the great feats, bestowed some small favors, and devoted himself to martial arts without cultivating virtue, so the lords came to him only to offer some small gifts, but returned with a full load.

古文：怀之以典言，薄其要结而厚德之，以示之信。
现代文：这是为了让到会的诸侯受到鼓励，而使背叛他的诸侯心怀羡慕。每次盟会时只不过重申一下过去的誓约，同时简化其仪式，而多给诸侯些好处，用以显示他的诚信。
English: This was done in order to encourage the princes who were present, and to arouse the envy of the princes who had betrayed him. At each league meeting, he only had to renew the pledges of the past, and at the same time he simplified the ceremonies and gave the princes more benefits to show his sincerity.

古文：三属诸侯，存亡国三，以示之施。
现代文：他主持过三次盟会，保住过三个快要灭亡的国家，用以显示他的热心助人。
English: He presided over three leagues and saved three dying nations to show his zeal for helping others.

古文：是以北伐山戎，南伐楚，西为此会也。
现代文：为此他北伐山戎，南攻楚国，在西边发起了这次盟会。
English: To this end, he scaled the mountains in the north, attacked Chu in the south, and launched this alliance in the west.

古文：譬之如室，既镇其甍矣，又何加焉？
现代文：譬如一件房子，已经在它的栋梁上加盖了屋顶，还能再加什么呢？
English: A house, for example, already has a roof over its beams, what else can be added?

古文：吾闻之，惠难遍也，施难报也。
现代文：我听说，施惠难以普遍，受恩难以报答。
English: I've heard it said that favors are hard to bestow and favors are hard to return.

古文：不遍不报，卒于怨仇。
现代文：不普遍不报答，最终会结下怨气和仇恨。
English: If they don't reciprocate, it will eventually breed resentment and hatred.

古文：夫齐侯将施惠如出责，是之不果奉，而暇晋是皇，虽后之会，将在东矣。
现代文：那齐桓公施的恩惠好像放出的债希望得到回报，这种想法是行不通的。
English: The idea that Qigong's benevolence is like issuing a debt in the hope that it will be repaid is unworkable.

古文：君无惧矣，其有勤也！ 
现代文：你不必害怕齐侯，将来有你出力气的时候。 
English: You don't have to be afraid of waiting in line. There will be a time in the future when you will be able to exert yourself.

古文：公乃还。
现代文：献公就回国了。
English: It's time to return home.

