古文：凡与敌战，士卒宁进死，而不肯退生者，皆将恩惠使然也。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，士兵之所以宁肯前进而死，却不愿后退而生的，这都是由于将帅平时对他们实行恩惠、爱护的结果。
English: In any war against the enemy, the reason why soldiers prefer to advance and die, but do not want to retreat and live, is the result of generals' benevolence and love for them in peacetime.

古文：三军知在上之人爱我如子之至，则我之爱上也如父之极。
现代文：三军将士深知将帅爱护他们如同爱护自己的孩子那样无微不至，那么，他们爱戴将帅也会像爱自己的父亲那样至敬至诚。
English: The officers and men of the three armies are well aware that General Shuai loves them as much as he loves his own children, so they will love General Shuai as much as they love their father.

古文：故陷危亡之地，而无不愿死以报上之德。
现代文：所以，就算作战中陷入危亡境地，也没有不愿意拼死奋战来报答将帅恩德的。
English: Therefore, even if they were in a critical situation during the battle, they were not unwilling to fight to the death to reward General Shuai Ende.

古文：法曰： 视卒如爱子，故可与之俱死。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 将帅对待士兵如同对待自己的孩子，士兵就可以同将帅在危难中生死与共。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War, a general should treat his soldiers as if they were his own children, so that the soldiers can live and die together with the general in a crisis.

古文：战国，魏将吴起为西河守，与士卒最下者同衣食。坐不设席，行不乘骑，亲裹赢粮，与士卒分劳苦。
现代文：战国时期，魏国将领吴起出任西河太守时，能和最下层的士兵同食同睡；睡觉时不铺垫软席，行军时不乘车骑马；亲自捆扎携带军粮，同士兵共同分担劳苦。
English: During the Warring States period, when the Wei general Wu Qi served as the governor of the West River, he was able to eat and sleep with the lowest-ranking soldiers; when sleeping, he did not lay soft cushions, and when marching, he did not ride a horse; he personally bundled and carried military grain, and shared the labor with the soldiers.

古文：卒有病疽者，起为吮之。
现代文：有个士兵长了脓疮，吴起就用嘴为他吮吸脓汁。
English: One soldier had a malignant poisonous sore, and Wu Qi sucked the thick liquid for him.

古文：卒母闻而哭之。
现代文：这个士兵的母亲听到这个消息后便哭了起来。
English: The soldier's mother burst into tears when she heard the news.

古文：或曰： 子，卒也，而将军自吮其疽，何哭也？ 
现代文：有人问她说： 你儿子不过是个士兵，而将军亲口为他吮吸脓疮，你为什么还哭呢？ 
English: Someone asked her: "Your son is just a soldier, and the general himself is sucking sores for him. Why are you still crying?"

古文：母曰： 非然也。
现代文：她回答说： 不是这样的。
English: She replied: "That's not true.

古文：往年吴公吮其父，其父战不旋踵，遂死于敌。
现代文：只因过去吴公为我儿的父亲吮伤，他父亲作战不后退，结果就战死在沙场。
English: It was only because Wu Gong had wounded my son's father in the past that his father did not retreat in battle and died on the battlefield as a result.

古文：吴公今又吮其子，妾不知其死所矣。
现代文：如今吴公又为其子吮吸脓疮，我不知道他又会战死在什么地方。
English: Now that Wu Gong is sucking his son's boils again, I don't know where he will die.

古文：是以哭之。 
现代文：所以，我是在为他哭泣。 
English: So I'm crying for him.

古文：文侯以吴起用兵廉平，得士卒心，使守西河，与诸侯大战七十六，全胜六十四。
现代文：魏文侯鉴于吴起善于用兵，廉洁公正，深得士兵拥护，就委派他为将镇守西河地区。在此期间，他先后同诸侯大战七十六次，而获全胜的作战有六十四次之多。
English: In view of the fact that Wu Qi was good at using soldiers, was honest and fair, and was deeply supported by soldiers, Wei Wenhou appointed him to guard the West River region. During this period, he fought seventy-six times with the princes, and won a total of sixty-four battles.

