古文：六年春，王三月壬午，杞伯姑容卒。
现代文：六年春季，周历三月壬午日，杞桓公去世。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, on the third day of the third month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Jiankang passed away.

古文：夏，宋华弱来奔。
现代文：夏季，宋国的华弱逃到鲁国。
English: In the summer, Hua Wei fled to Lu Province.

古文：秋，葬杞桓公。
现代文：秋季，安葬杞桓公。
English: In autumn, Shokan was buried.

古文：滕子来朝。
现代文：滕成公来鲁国朝见。
English: Teng Guo Guo Jun met with the Emperor of Lilu.

古文：莒人灭鄫。
现代文：莒国人灭亡了鄫国。
English: The people of Yunnan ruined Yunnan.

古文：冬，叔孙豹如邾。
现代文：冬季，叔孙豹去到邾国。
English: In winter, uncle and grandson leopards go to Shandong Province.

古文：季孙宿如晋。
现代文：季孙宿去到晋国。
English: Ji Sunjuku went to Jin Province.

古文：十有二月，齐侯灭莱。
现代文：十二月，齐侯灭掉莱国。
English: In December, Qi Hou wiped out Lai Guo.

古文：六年春，杞桓公卒，始赴以名，同盟故也。
现代文：六年春季，杞桓公死了。讣告首次记载他的名字，这是由于两国同盟的缘故。
English: In the spring of the 6th year of the Heian period, Shokan died, and his name was recorded for the first time in an obituary, which was due to the alliance between the two countries.

古文：宋华弱与乐辔少相狎，长相优，又相谤也。
现代文：宋国的华弱和乐辔小时候彼此很亲昵，长大了就彼此戏谑，又互相诽谤。
English: Hua Weak and Le Yao of the Song Dynasty were very close to each other when they were children. When they grew up, they teased each other and slandered each other.

古文：子荡怒，以弓梏华弱于朝。
现代文：乐辔有一次发怒，在朝廷上用弓套住华弱的脖子如同带枷一样。
English: Le Yao once flew into a rage and put a bow around Hua Hua's weak neck at court, as if he were wearing a yoke.

古文：平公见之，曰： 司武而梏于朝，难以胜矣！ 
现代文：宋平公见到了，说： 司武而在朝廷上带弓枷，打仗就难于取胜了。 
English: When Song Ping Gong saw this, he said, "If a warrior takes a bow and arrows to the imperial court, it will be difficult to win the battle.

古文：遂逐之。
现代文：于是就把他赶走。
English: So he took father-in-law Wenbo away from home.

古文：夏，宋华弱来奔。
现代文：夏季，华弱逃亡到鲁国。
English: In the summer, Hua Wei fled to Lu Province.

古文：司城子罕曰： 同罪异罚，非刑也。
现代文：司城子罕说： 罪过相同而惩罚不同，这是不合于刑法的。
English: Sijong Zihan said: It is not in accordance with the Criminal Law to have the same crime but different punishments.

古文：专戮于朝，罪孰大焉！ 
现代文：在朝廷上专横和侮辱别人，还有比这大的罪过吗？ 
English: Is there a greater crime than to be imperious and insulting in court?

古文：亦逐子荡。子荡射子罕之门，曰： 几日而不我从？ 
现代文：于是也赶走乐辔，乐辔把箭射在子罕的大门上，说： 看你还有几天会不跟着我一样被赶走？ 
English: So he chased Le Yao away as well. Le Yao shot an arrow at Zi Han's gate and said, "Look, how many more days will you be chased away like me?

古文：子罕善之如初。
现代文：子罕害怕，优待乐辔像过去一样。
English: The children are afraid, and preferential treatment continues as in the past.

古文：秋，滕成公来朝，始朝公也。
现代文：秋季，滕成公起来鲁国朝见，这是第一次朝见鲁襄公。
English: In autumn, Teng Chenggong stood up to see the morning of Lu, which was the first time to see the morning of Lu Xianggong.

古文：莒人灭鄫，鄫恃赂也。
现代文：莒国人灭亡了鄫国，这是由于鄫国仗着送过财礼而疏于防备的缘故。
English: The Han people lost their country because the Han were careless in their preparations due to the gifts they had received.

古文：冬，穆叔如邾聘，且修平。
现代文：冬季，穆叔去到邾国聘问，同时重修友好关系。
English: In the winter, Mu Xiu went to Shandong Province to make an inquiry, and at the same time to re-establish friendly relations.

古文：晋人以鄫故来讨，曰： 何故亡鄫？ 
现代文：晋国人由于鄫国的缘故前来讨伐，说： 为什么把鄫国灭亡？ 
English: The people of Jin came to fight for the sake of Yunnan, saying, "Why should Yunnan be destroyed?

古文：季武子如晋见，且听命。
现代文：季武子去到晋国，听候晋国处置。
English: Jiwuko went to Jin Province to wait for Jin's decision.

古文：十一月，齐侯灭莱，莱恃谋也。
现代文：十一月，齐灵公灭亡莱国，这是由于莱国只是仗着谋略而不务实际的缘故。
English: In November, Emperor Qilin overthrew the State of Lai, which was due to the fact that the State of Lai only relied on strategy and was not pragmatic.

古文：于郑子国之来聘也，四月，晏弱城东阳，而遂围莱。甲寅，堙之，环城傅于堞。
现代文：当郑国子国来鲁国聘问的时候，即去年四月，晏弱在东阳筑城，因而就包围莱国，四月的一天，环城堆起土山，紧挨着女墙。
English: When Zheng Guo Zi Guo came to Lu to ask questions, that is, in April last year, Yan Yan weakly built a city in Dongyang, thus encircling Lai Guo. One day in April, a mound of earth was piled up around the city, right next to the female wall.

古文：及杞桓公卒之月，乙未，王湫帅师及正舆子、棠人军齐师，齐师大败之。
现代文：到杞桓公死去的那一个月的十五日，王湫领兵和正舆子、棠邑人迎战齐军，齐军把他们打得大败。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month of the death of King Zhihuan, Wang Xi, the leader of the army, and Zheng Yizi and Tangyur people fought against the Qi army, and the Qi army defeated them.

古文：丁未，入莱。
现代文：二十七日，进入莱国。
English: On the 27th, it entered Laos.

古文：莱共公浮柔奔棠。正舆子、王湫奔莒，莒人杀之。
现代文：莱共公浮柔逃亡到棠地，正舆子、王湫逃亡到莒国，莒国人杀了他们。
English: The Lao Communist Party's leader, Furuyu, fled to Tangdian, while Zheng Yushi and Wang Yao fled to Shan State, where they were killed by Shan people.

古文：四月，陈无宇献莱宗器于襄宫。
现代文：四月，陈无宇把莱国宗庙里的宝器献于襄宫。
English: In April, Chen Wuyu presented the treasures from the ancestral temple of the Lai Dynasty to the Xiang Palace.

古文：晏弱围棠，十一月丙辰，而灭之。迁莱于郳。
现代文：晏弱包围棠邑，十二月初十灭了它，把莱国的百姓迁到郳地。
English: At the beginning of December, the Xiongnu encircled Tangyue, destroyed it, and moved the people of Lai to the Xiongdi.

古文：高厚、崔杼定其田。
现代文：高厚、崔杼主持划定分配莱国的土地疆界。
English: Gao Hou and Cui Gan presided over the delimitation of the land boundaries of the country.

