古文：凡战，若敌强我弱，敌初来气锐，我之势弱，难以相持，且当避之，伺其疲敝而击之，则胜。
现代文：凡是作战，如果敌人强大、我军弱小，加之敌人初到士气锐盛，我军应当暂且避而不与其正面交战，等敌人疲惫困顿时再进攻，就能取得胜利。
English: In any battle, if the enemy is strong and our army is weak, and if the enemy's morale is at an all-time high, our army should temporarily avoid engaging the enemy head-on, wait until the enemy is exhausted and distressed, and then attack, so that we can achieve victory.

古文：法曰： 避其锐气，击其惰归。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 要避开敌人初来时的锐气，等到敌人松懈气势衰减退归之时再攻打它。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War, "Avoid the enemy's initial surge, and wait until the enemy's slack momentum fades and then attack it."

古文：汉灵帝中平六年，凉州贼王国围陈仓，以皇甫嵩讨之。
现代文：东汉灵帝中平五年，凉州叛乱者王国率军围攻陈仓，朝廷命以皇甫嵩为左将军率兵前往讨伐他。
English: In the 5th year of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Emperor Lingdi Zhongping, the Liangzhou rebel kingdom led an army to besiege Chen Cang. The court ordered the left general, Emperor Fusong, to lead an army to fight him.

古文：董卓请速进，嵩曰： 百战百胜，不如不战而屈之。
现代文：前将军董卓建议尽快发动进攻，但皇甫嵩说： 百战百胜，也不如不战而使敌人屈服为好。
English: Former general Dong Zhuo suggested launching an attack as soon as possible, but Emperor Fusong said: A hundred battles and a hundred victories are better than making the enemy surrender without a fight.

古文：是以善用兵者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。
现代文：善于用兵打仗的人，总是先创造条件以使自己不被敌人所战胜，而等待敌人可以被我所战胜的时机。
English: Those who are good at using soldiers to fight always first create conditions so that they are not defeated by the enemy, but wait for the enemy to be defeated by me.

古文：陈仓虽小，城固备，未易拔。
现代文：陈仓虽然是一座小城，但城防坚固且防守严密，是不容易被攻克的。
English: Although Chencang is a small city, it is well-fortified and well-defended, so it is not easy to be conquered.

古文：王国虽强，攻陈仓不下，其众必疲，疲而击之，全胜之道也。 
现代文：王国兵力虽强，但因攻城不下，其部队必然疲惫松懈，乘其疲惫松懈之时再进击之，这才是取得全胜之策。 
English: Although the kingdom's military strength is strong, but because of the siege of the city, its troops will inevitably be tired and slack. When they are tired and slack, they will attack again. This is the best way to achieve total victory.

古文：国攻之，终不拔，其众疲敝解去。
现代文：王国久攻坚城不下，部众已经疲惫不堪，便撤围而退。
English: The kingdom has not been able to attack the fortified city for a long time, and the subordinates are already exhausted, so they withdraw and retreat.

古文：嵩进兵追击之。卓曰： 穷寇勿迫，归众勿遏。 
现代文：我们以严整有序之军所追击的是溃乱之敌，并不是陷入绝境而拚死挣扎的 穷寇 。 
English: What we are pursuing with a strict and orderly army is the enemy of chaos, not the poor robbers who are in a desperate struggle.

古文：嵩曰： 不然。 遂独追击而破之。
现代文：于是，皇甫嵩独自率军实施猛烈追击，结果大败敌军。
English: As a result, Emperor Fusong led the army alone to carry out a fierce pursuit, resulting in a crushing defeat of the enemy.

古文：卓由是有惭色。
现代文：董卓因此而有惭愧之色。
English: As a result, Dong Zhuo feels ashamed.

