古文：谢枋得，字君直，信州弋阳人也。
现代文：谢枋得，字君直，信州弋阳县人。
English: Xie Rongde, also known as Jun Zhi, is from Shinshu's Poyang County.

古文：为人豪爽。
现代文：为人豪爽。
English: It's great to be a hero.

古文：每观书，五行俱下，一览终身不忘。
现代文：每次看书，五行一齐看下来，过目一看，终身不忘。
English: Every time I read a book, I look at all five lines at once, and when I look over them, I will never forget them.

古文：性好直言，一与人论古今治乱国家事，必掀髯抵几，跳跃自奋，以忠义自任。
现代文：性格好说直话，一与别人论述古今治乱的国家大事，一定是掀起胡子，抵着几案，跳跃自奋，显得很激动的样子。以 忠义 作为己任。
English: He is a straight-talker, and when discussing with others the national events of the past and present, he must have raised his mustache, resisted several cases, jumped up and down, and appeared very excited.

古文：徐霖称其 如惊鹤摩霄，不事笼絷。 
现代文：徐霖称他为 ：如受惊的白鹤伴云霄而飞，不可能用笼子来束缚他。 
English: Xu Lin called him: like a frightened white crane flying with the clouds, it is impossible to restrain him with a cage.

古文：宝祐中，举进士，对策极攻丞相董槐与宦官董宋臣，意擢高第矣，及奏名，中乙科。
现代文：宝祐年间，中举为进士，谢枋得对策时严厉地攻击丞相董槐与宦官董宋臣，本意希望擢升中进士甲科，到公布考生名单，考中乙科。
English: During the Baoyu era, when the junior high school students were promoted to the junior high school students, Xie Yu had harshly attacked the chancellor Dong Yu and the eunuch Dong Song Chen when the countermeasures were taken. He originally hoped to be promoted to the junior high school students in the first grade, and then announced the list of candidates for the junior high school students in the second grade.

古文：除抚州司户参军，即弃去。
现代文：任命担任抚州司户参军，随即弃职而去。
English: He was appointed as Fuzhou governor, joined the army, and then resigned.

古文：明年复出，试教官，中兼经科，除教授建宁府。
现代文：第二年又出来任职，试任教官，中兼经科，担任建宁府教授。
English: The following year, he was appointed to a probationary position as an instructor in middle school and economics, serving as a professor at Jianning Prefecture.

古文：未上，吴潜宣抚江东、西，辟差干办公事。
现代文：未上，吴潜宣抚江南东、西两路，命他担任干办公事。
English: Before he ascended to the throne, Wu Qianxun promoted Jiangnan to the east and west, and ordered him to be in charge of administrative affairs.

古文：团结民兵，以扞饶、信、抚，科降钱米以给之。
现代文：团结民兵，以保护饶州、信州、抚州，用科降钱米以作为地方民兵的食粮。
English: Unite the militia to protect Raozhou, Xinshou and Fuzhou, and use rice to feed the local militia.

古文：枋得说邓、传二社诸大家，得民兵万余人，守信州，暨兵退，朝廷核诸军费，几至不免。
现代文：谢枋得说服邓、傅二姓所属二社各大家，得到民兵一万多人，驻守信州，到兵退后，朝廷核实各项军费，差一点没有免除科降钱。
English: Xie Bing had to convince the leaders of the two companies belonging to the surnames of Deng and Fu Er, and obtained more than 10,000 militiamen stationed in Shinshu. After the soldiers withdrew, the imperial court verified the various military expenses, and almost did not exempt the department from reducing the money.

古文：五年，彗星出东方，枋得考试建康，擿似道政事为问目，言： 兵必至，国必亡。 漕使陆景思衔之，上其稿于似道，坐居乡不法，起兵时冒破科降钱，且讪谤，追两官，谪居兴国军。
现代文：宝祐五年，彗星出现于东方，谢枋得在建府主持考试，以指责贾似道的政事为试卷题目，说： 兵一定至，国家一定亡。 漕使陆景思抓住了这件事，送上这种文稿给贾似道，贾似道则以谢枋得居乡不守法纪、起兵时冒领使用科降钱，又诽谤他，追夺两官，贬谪到兴国军居住。
English: In the fifth year of the Baoyu era, when the comet appeared in the east, Xie Rongde presided over the examination in the government building, and used the political affairs of Jia Lijiao as the examination paper topic, saying: "The soldiers must come, the country must die." Lu Jingsi, the overseer, caught the matter and sent this kind of manuscript to Jia Lijiao, and Jia Lijiao accused Xie Rongde of not abiding by the law, of using the military to reduce money, and also slandered him, pursued two officials, and degraded him to live in the national army.

古文：咸淳三年，赦，放归。
现代文：咸淳三年，赦免，允准回居乡里。
English: Ham Jun was pardoned after three years and allowed to return to his hometown.

古文：德祐元年，吕文焕导大元兵东下鄂、黄、蕲、安庆、九江，凡其亲友部曲皆诱下之，遂屯建康。
现代文：德元年，吕文焕引导大元兵沿长江东下攻占鄂州、黄州、蕲州、安庆、九江，凡是他的亲友、部下都被诱降而献出城邑，于是屯驻建康。
English: In the first year of the German era, Lü Wenhuan led the Taiyuan soldiers eastward along the Yangtze River to conquer Ezhou, Huangzhou, Zhangzhou, Anqing, and Jiujiang. All his relatives, friends, and subordinates were lured into surrendering their towns and were stationed in Jiankang.

古文：枋得与吕师夔善，乃应诏上书，以一族保师夔可信，乞分沿江诸屯兵，以之为镇抚使，使之行成，且愿身至江州见文焕与议。
现代文：谢枋得与吕师夔友善，于是应诏上书，以一族人举保吕师夔可以信任，希望分给沿长江诸屯兵让他统帅，以他为镇抚使，使之行程成功，又愿亲自到江州会见吕文焕与他议论。
English: Xie Rong was friendly with Lü Shizhen, so he sent a letter to the emperor, saying that he could trust Lü Shizhen with the support of the whole nation, and hoped to make him the commander of the troops along the Yangtze River, and make his trip successful with him as the governor, and would like to meet Lü Wenhuan in Jiangzhou to discuss with him.

古文：从之，使以沿江察访使行，会文焕北归，不及而反。
现代文：朝廷同意了，令他沿长江以察访使的职务成行，正当吕文焕北归而去，没有见到他就返回了。
English: The imperial court agreed and ordered him to travel along the Yangtze River as an envoy. Just as Lu Wenhuan was returning north, he returned without seeing him.

古文：以江东提刑、江西招谕使知信州。
现代文：谢枋得以江东提刑、江西招谕使的身份担任信州知州。
English: Xie Jun was able to serve as the leader of Shinshu Zhizhou in the capacity of the leader of Jiangdong and the leader of Jiangxi.

古文：明年正月，师夔与武万户分定江东地，枋得以兵逆之，使前锋呼曰： 谢提刑来。 吕军驰至，射之，矢及马前。枋得走入安仁，调淮士张孝忠逆战团湖坪，矢尽，孝忠挥双刀击杀百余人。
现代文：第二年正月，吕师夔与武万户分别平定江东一带，谢枋得以兵挡之，派前锋呼喊说： 谢提刑来了。 吕师夔的军队驰到军前，用箭射谢枋得，箭头一直射到马前，谢枋得逃入安仁，调淮士张孝忠迎战团湖坪，箭射完了，张孝忠挥动双刀杀死了一百多人。
English: In the first month of the second year, Lv Shih-tao and Wu Wan-hu separately pacified the eastern part of the Yangtze River. Xie Shih-tao was able to fend off the troops and sent a vanguard to shout: "The punishment of Xie Ti-tao is coming." Lv Shih-tao's army rushed to the front of the army, shot Xie Shih-tao with arrows, the arrows shot all the way to the front of the horse, Xie Shih-tao escaped to Anren, and dispatched Huai Shi Zhang Xiaozhong to meet the troops at Huping. After the

古文：前军稍却，后军绕出孝忠后，众惊溃，孝忠中流矢死。
现代文：前军稍有退却，后军从张孝忠尾后绕出，众兵惊惧溃败，张孝忠中流矢而死。
English: The front army retreated slightly, the rear army went around Zhang Xiaodong's tail, the soldiers were terrified and routed, and Zhang Xiaodong died in the crossfire.

古文：马奔归，枋得坐敌楼见之，曰： 马归，孝忠败矣。 遂奔信州。
现代文：他的马奔跑而回，谢枋得坐在城墙敌楼上看见了马，说： 马回来了，张孝忠败了。 于是奔回信州。
English: His horse ran back, and Xie Rong, who was sitting on the enemy tower of the city wall, saw the horse and said, "The horse has returned, Zhang Xiaodong has been defeated." So he ran back to Shinshu.

古文：师夔下安仁，进攻信州，不守。
现代文：吕师夔攻下安仁，进攻信州，信州没守住。
English: Lv Shijun captured Anren and attacked Shinshu, but failed to hold Shinshu.

古文：枋得乃变姓名，入建宁唐石山，转茶坂，寓逆旅中，日麻衣蹑履，东乡而哭，人不识之，以为被病也。
现代文：谢枋得于是改变姓名，到建宁唐石山，转走茶坂，寓居于回流的旅客中，白天穿着麻衣、麻鞋，向东而哭，没有人认识他，以为他患病了，不久就离开了。
English: Xie Rong was forced to change his name. He moved to Jianning Tangshi Mountain, away from Tea Slope, and lived among the returning travelers. During the day, he wore linen clothes and linen shoes, and wept to the east. No one knew him, thought he was ill, and soon left.

古文：已而去，卖卜建阳市中，有来卜者，惟取米屡而已，委以钱，率谢不取。
现代文：他在建阳街市上靠为人占卜为生，有来占卜的人，只拿来米、鞋就可以了。用钱酬送给他，他只谢谢而不要。
English: At the Jianyang Street Market, he earns a living by divining for people. If someone comes to do so, all they have to do is bring rice and shoes. If they give him money as a reward, he only thanks them but does not take it.

古文：其后人稍稍识之，多延至其家，使为弟子论学。
现代文：后来，有人慢慢认出了他，多延请他到家里，请他教弟子读书、论学。
English: Later, someone slowly recognized him and invited him to his home, asking him to teach his disciples how to read and write.

古文：天下既定，遂居闽中。
现代文：国家安定以后，他居住在闽中地区。
English: After the country was stabilized, he lived in the central Luzhong region.

古文：至元二十三年，集贤学士程文海荐宋臣二十二人，以枋得为首，辞不起。
现代文：至元二十三年，集贤殿学士程文海向元朝举荐南宋旧臣二十二人，以谢枋得为首，他推辞不愿就职。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Cheng Wenhai, a scholar of the Jixian Palace, recommended 22 former Southern Song vassals to the Yuan Dynasty, headed by Xie Bingde, who declined to take office.

古文：又明年，行省丞相忙兀台将旨诏之，执手相勉劳。
现代文：第二年，行省丞相忙兀台拿圣旨召他，并拉住他的手勉励他。
English: In the second year, the provincial chancellor, Gao Taita, summoned him with a sacred edict and took him by the hand to encourage him.

古文：枋得曰： 上有尧、舜，下有巢、由，枋得名姓不祥，不敢赴诏。 丞相义之，不强也。
现代文：谢枋得说： 上有唐尧、虞舜，下有巢父、许由，谢枋得名姓不吉祥，不敢赴任接受诏命。 丞相因他仁义，不强求于他。
English: Xie Rongde said: On the top, there are Tang Yao and Gu Yao, and on the bottom, there are Nest Father and Xu Yu. Xie Rongde's surname is not auspicious, and he did not dare to accept the imperial command. Because of his benevolence, the prime minister did not forcefully ask him.

古文：二十五年，福建行省参政管如德将旨如江南求人材，尚书留梦炎以枋得荐，枋得遗书梦炎曰： 江南无人材，求一瑕吕饴甥、程婴、杵臼厮养卒，不可得也。
现代文：至元二十五年，福建行省参政管如德带着圣旨到江南寻求人才，尚书留梦炎推荐谢枋得，谢枋得写信给留梦炎说： 江南没有人材，即使是求一个瑕吕饴甥、程婴、杵臼厮养的役卒，也不可能得到。
English: In the 25th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Rude, the Fujian Provincial Political Advisor, went to the south of the Yangtze River to seek talents with a sacred intention. He was recommended by Shangshu Liu Mengyan. Xie Mengyan wrote to Liu Mengyan saying: There is no talent in the south of the Yangtze River. Even if you ask for a nephew, a child or a servant, it is impossible to get it.

古文：纣之亡也，以八百国之精兵，而不敢抗二子之正论，武王、太公凛凛无所容，急以兴灭继绝谢天下。殷之后遂与周并立。
现代文：商纣之亡，以八百国的精兵，而不能与周文王的二个儿子周武王、周公的正论相抗衡。周武王、姜太公凛凛威风，无所能容，急于以兴灭国、继绝世来答谢天下，殷商之后于是与周代并立。
English: With the death of Shang Xuan, the elite soldiers of eight hundred countries could not compete with the righteous arguments of the two sons of King Zhou Wen, King Zhou Wu and King Zhou Gong. King Zhou Wu and King Jiang Taigong were so powerful that they could not be tolerated. They were eager to thank the world with the rise and fall of the country and the succession of generations. After Yin Shang, they stood side by side with the Zhou dynasty.

古文：使三监、淮夷不叛，武庚必不死，殷命必不黜。
现代文：使三监、淮夷不叛乱，武庚一定不会死，殷命一定不会废黜。
English: The three supervisors and Huaiyi will not rebel, Wu Geng will not die, and Yin Rong will not be deposed.

古文：夫女真之待二帝亦惨矣。
现代文：金国对待宋徽宗、钦宗二帝也够悲惨了。
English: China's treatment of Emperor Song Huizong and Emperor Qinzong II was also quite tragic.

古文：而我宋今年遣使祈请，明年遣使问安。
现代文：而我宋朝今年遣使祈求请和，明年遣使问安。
English: But this year, I sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty to ask for peace, and next year I will send an envoy to ask for peace.

古文：王伦一市井无赖、狎邪小人，谓梓宫可还，太后可归。
现代文：王伦一市井无赖、狎邪刁钻小人，称北宋二帝死后的梓宫可放还，太后可回归。
English: Wang Lun, a scoundrel and villain, said that after the death of the Second Emperor of the Northern Song Dynasty, Zi Gong could be released and the Empress Dowager could return.

古文：终则二事皆符其言。
现代文：最后这两件事都与他说的话相符合。
English: The last two are consistent with what he said.

古文：今一王伦且无之，则江南无人材可见也。
现代文：现在连一个王伦都没有了，那么，江南就没有人材可找到了。
English: Now there is not even a Wang Lun, so there is no talent to be found in Jiangnan.

古文：今吾年六十余矣，所欠一死耳，岂复有它志哉！ 终不行。
现代文：现在我的年龄已六十多岁了，所欠的就是一死了，难道还有其他的志向吗？ 
English: Now that I am in my sixties, all I have to do is die. Do I have any other aspirations?

古文：郭少师从瀛国公入朝，既而南归，与枋得道时事，曰： 大元本无意江南，屡遣使使顿兵，令毋深入，待还岁币即议和，无枉害生灵也。
现代文：最后还是未从诏受任。郭少师跟随瀛国公入朝，而后不久南归，与谢枋得论道时事，说： 大元本来无意统一江南，多次派遣使者停止兵事，命令不要深入，等待归还岁币即双方议和，不要枉害生灵百姓。
English: In the end, Guo Shao Shi did not accept the appointment. Guo Shao Shi followed Shigong into the imperial court and returned to the south soon after. He discussed the current affairs with Xie Qi, saying: Da Yuan originally had no intention of unifying the south of the Yangtze River. He repeatedly sent emissaries to stop the military operations, ordering them not to go deeper, and to wait for the return of the old money, that is, to negotiate peace between the two sides, and not to harm the living people.

古文：张宴然上书乞敛兵从和，上即可之。
现代文：张宴然上书请求敛兵从和，皇上即答应同意。
English: Zhang Yingran sent a letter requesting that the soldiers be restrained, and the emperor immediately agreed.

古文：兵交二年，无一介行李之事，乃挈数百年宗社而降。 因相与痛哭。
现代文：交兵相战二年，却无一介使者往返勾通，于是以建立了数百年的宗社国家而投降。 因此，相互伤心痛哭。
English: After two years of fighting, not a single emissary was able to travel back and forth, so they surrendered by establishing a centuries-old Sosha country. Therefore, they cried bitterly.

古文：福建行省参政魏天祐见时方以求材为急，欲荐枋得为功，使其友赵孟〈辶卸〉来言，枋得骂曰： 天祐仕闽，无毫发推广德意，反起银冶病民，顾以我辈饰好邪？ 及见天祐，又傲岸不为礼，与之言，坐而不对。
现代文：福建行省参政魏天佑见当时多以求人材为急务，想举荐谢枋得以邀功，派他的朋友赵孟来做说客，谢枋得骂道： 魏天佑担任闽地官职，没有一丁点推广仁义道德的意思，相反，还兴起冶银来残害百姓，相反却来抬举我，这不是想以我辈来为他做好的装饰吗？ 到见了魏天佑时，又傲慢而不以礼相待，魏天佑同他说话，他坐下后又不回答他。
English: At that time, Wei Tianyou, who was a member of the Fujian Provincial Political Committee, saw that it was urgent to find more human resources. He wanted to recommend Xie Jun to be invited to contribute, and sent his friend Zhao Meng to be a lobbyist. Xie Jun scolded: Wei Tianyou held a provincial official position, and did not have the slightest intention of promoting benevolence and morality. On the contrary, he also raised money to destroy the people, but on the contrary, he came to elevate me. Isn't this trying to decorate him with my generation? When he met Wei Tianyou, he was arrogant and did not treat him with courtesy. Wei Tianyou

古文：天祐怒，强之而北。枋得即日食菜果。
现代文：魏天佑因此发怒，强行要他北去，谢枋得即每天仅食蔬菜、水果。
English: As a result, Wei Tianyou became angry and forced him to go north, forcing him to eat only vegetables and fruits every day.

古文：二十六年四月，至京师，问谢太后欑所及瀛国所在，再拜恸哭。
现代文：至元二十六年四月，到京师后，谢枋得寻问谢太后的停葬之处及宋恭帝所在的地方的地址，再次朝拜，恸哭不已。
English: In April 1861, after arriving in Beijing, Xie Jun had to ask the Empress Dowager Xie's burial place and the address of the place where Emperor Song Gong was located. He once again bowed before the emperor and cried endlessly.

古文：已而病，迁悯忠寺，见壁间《曹娥碑》，泣曰： 小女子犹尔，吾岂不汝若哉！ 留梦炎使医持药杂米饮进之，枋得怒曰： 吾欲死，汝乃欲生我邪？ 弃之于地，终不食而死。
现代文：不久患病，迁居悯忠寺，见壁间曹娥碑，哭着说： 小女子尚且如此，我难道不如她吗？ 留梦炎派医生拿来药杂拌入米饭中让他饮食，谢枋得发怒说： 我想死，你还想要我活吗？ 把药饭抛洒在地上，最终不食而死。
English: Soon after, she fell ill and moved to Mitizhong Temple. She saw the Cao E monument between the walls and cried, saying, "A little girl is still like this, am I not as good as her?" Remembrance sent a doctor to mix some medicine into the rice for him to eat. Xie Yu was so angry that he said, "I want to die, do you still want me to live?" He threw the medicinal rice on the ground and eventually died without eating.

古文：伯父徽明以特奏恩为当阳尉，摄县事，时天基节上寿，大元兵奄至，徽明出兵战死，二子趋进抱父尸，亦死。
现代文：他的伯父谢徽明曾因特奏恩担任当阳县尉，摄行管理县事，时值天基节上寿，大元兵忽然而至，谢徽明率兵出战而死，两个儿子急忙去抱他们父亲的尸体，也死了。
English: His uncle, Xie Huiming, had served as a Dangyang County lieutenant due to special enlistment, and was in charge of the management of county affairs. At the time of his birthday on the Tianji Festival, the Taiyuan soldiers suddenly arrived. Xie Huiming led the soldiers to fight and died. His two sons hurried to embrace their father's body and also died.

