古文：李邦宁，字叔固，钱唐人，初名保宁，宋故小黄门也。
现代文：李邦宁字叔固，钱塘人。初名保宁，宋时一小太监。
English: Li Bangning, also known as Uncle Gu, is from Qiantang. His first name is Boryeong, and he was a minor eunuch during the Song Dynasty.

古文：宋亡，从瀛国公入见世祖，命给事内庭，警敏称上意。
现代文：及宋朝灭亡，便随瀛国公见世祖，留在内廷供职。为人机敏，很合帝意。
English: After the Song Dynasty's demise, he followed the Emperor Shun to see his ancestor and stayed in the Inner Court to serve. He was an astute person, very much in line with the Emperor's wishes.

古文：令学国书及诸蕃语，即通解，遂见亲任。授御带库提点，升章佩少监，迁礼部尚书，提点太医院事。
现代文：帝令他学蒙古语及诸蕃语，能较快通解，于是更得到信任，授御学库提点，升章佩少监，迁礼部尚书，提点太医生事。
English: The emperor ordered him to learn Mongolian and other Mongolian languages, and he was able to solve problems more quickly. As a result, he gained more trust. He was awarded the title of imperial scholar, promoted to the rank of junior superintendent, transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and became a doctor.

古文：成宗即位，进昭文馆大学士、太医院使。
现代文：成宗即位，进升为昭文馆大学士，太医院使。
English: Chengzong ascended to the throne, and was promoted to Shouwen Academy, and Tai Hospital.

古文：帝尝寝疾，邦宁不离左右者十余月。
现代文：帝曾害病，邦宁不离左右者十余月。
English: Emperor Zeng fell ill, and Bunning did not leave his side for more than ten months.

古文：武宗立，命为江浙行省平章政事，邦宁辞曰： 臣以阉腐余命，无望更生，先朝幸赦而用之，使得承乏中涓，高爵厚禄，荣宠过甚。
现代文：武宗立，命邦宁为江浙行省平章政事，邦宁极力推辞说： 我是个宦官，没有想到自己还有什么作用。世祖赦免我又起用我，使我得为亲近之臣，爵高而禄厚，荣宠过甚。
English: Wu Zongli ordered Banning to carry out the political affairs of Pingzhang in Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province. Banning strongly declined, saying, "I am a eunuch, and I did not think of any other role for myself. The ancestor pardoned me and appointed me again, so that I could be a close vassal, high-ranking and well-paid, and highly favored.

古文：陛下复欲置臣宰辅，臣何敢当。
现代文：现在，皇帝又欲安排我为辅政大臣，我何敢当。
English: Now the emperor wants to make me an assistant minister, how dare I?

古文：宰辅者，佐天子共治天下者也，奈何辱以寺人。
现代文：所谓宰辅，就是辅佐天子而共治天下的人，为何找一个已被阉割的人充当？
English: The so-called vice-regent, that is, the person who assists the heavenly son and co-rules the world, why find a person who has been castrated to act as such?

古文：陛下纵不臣惜，如天下后世何，诚不敢奉诏。 
现代文：即使皇帝让我干，将来如何向天下、后世交代？所以，我实在不敢应诏。 
English: Even if the emperor asked me to do it, how would I explain it to the world and future generations? Therefore, I really don't dare to do it.

古文：帝大悦，使大臣白其言于太后及皇太子，以彰其善。
现代文：帝听了很高兴，使大臣把他的话说给太后及皇太子听，以表彰他一片善意。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear this, and made the minister listen to his words to the empress dowager and the crown prince, in recognition of his good intentions.

古文：帝尝奉皇太后燕大安阁，阁中有故箧，问邦宁曰： 此何箧也？ 
现代文：帝曾侍奉皇太后于燕之大安阁，阁中有旧箱，帝对邦宁说： 这是什么箱子？ 
English: The emperor once served the empress dowager at Yan's Great Peace Pavilion. There was an old box in the pavilion. The emperor said to Bunning, "What is this box?"

古文：对曰： 此世祖贮裘带者。
现代文：回答道： 此是世祖放皮袄带的箱子。
English: He replied, "This is the box in which the ancestors placed the leather belt."

古文：臣闻有圣训曰： 藏此以遗子孙，使见吾朴俭，可为华侈之戒。  
现代文：听世祖曾讲过，把此箱收藏起来，以使子孙看到我的俭朴，使追求奢侈的人引以为戒。 
English: I heard the patriarch say, "Keep this box, so that my children and grandchildren will see my frugality, and so that those who pursue luxury will be warned."

古文：帝命发箧视之，叹曰： 非卿言，朕安知之。 
现代文：帝命打开箱子，看后叹口气说 ：不是你说，我怎知道！ 
English: The emperor opened the box, looked at it, sighed and said, "It wasn't you who said that, how was I to know!"

古文：时有宗王在侧，遽曰： 世祖虽神圣，然啬于财。 
现代文：当时有宗王在身旁，突然说： 世祖虽然伟大，但在钱财方面过于小气。 
English: At that time, there was a Zongwang nearby, who suddenly said, "Although the ancestor is great, he is too stingy in terms of money and wealth.

古文：邦宁曰： 不然。
现代文：邦宁说： 不对，世祖每一句话，无不应为后世所遵循。
English: Bunning said: No, every word of the patriarch, nothing should be followed by future generations.

古文：世祖一言，无不为后世法；一予夺，无不当功罪。且天下所入虽富，苟用不节，必致匮乏。
现代文：每一与、一夺，无不正好相当其人的功或罪。而且，向天下征收的钱财虽然很多，但如不节用，必然匮乏。
English: For every battle won and lost, there is a corresponding human merit or sin. Moreover, although there is a lot of money and wealth collected from all over the world, if it is not used sparingly, there will inevitably be a shortage.

古文：自先朝以来，岁赋已不足用，又数会宗藩，资费无算，旦暮不给，必将横敛掊怨，岂美事耶。 
现代文：自先朝以来，每年的赋税已不足用，又多次召集宗藩集会，费钱无数，早晚不能支给，必将横征暴敛，招致人民怨怒，这难道算是好事吗？ 
English: Since the last dynasty, the annual tax has been insufficient, and the Zonghan Assembly has been convened many times, costing countless money. Sooner or later, it cannot be spent, and it will inevitably be levied arbitrarily, incurring the wrath of the people. Is this a good thing?

古文：太后及帝深然其言。俄加大司徒、尚服院使，遥授丞相，行大司农，领太医院事，阶金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：太后及帝非常同意他所说的这些话，不久便加封他为大司徒、尚服院使，授左丞相，行大司农，领太医院事，官阶金紫光禄大夫。
English: The empress dowager and the emperor were very much in agreement with what he said, and soon he was given the titles of grand steward, courtier, minister of the left, minister of agriculture, director of the imperial hospital, and the official rank of doctor of the golden purple light.

古文：太庙旧尝遣官行事，至是复欲如之，邦宁谏曰： 先朝非不欲亲致飨祀，诚以疾废礼耳。今陛下继成之初，正宜开彰孝道，以率先天下，躬祀太室，以成一代之典。
现代文：过去祭祀太庙，皇帝不是亲自主持，而是遣大臣代为进行。现在，皇帝又想援例照办。邦宁便规劝皇帝说 ：先朝皇帝不是不想亲自祭祀祖先，实在是因疾病而废礼，如今皇帝在即位之初，正应大规模地表彰孝道，以为天下表率，亲自到太庙去祭祀，以成一代的典范。
English: In the past, the emperor did not personally lead the sacrifices at the Imperial Temple, but sent ministers to do so on his behalf. Now, the emperor wants to follow the example. Bonin advised the emperor, saying, "In the past, the emperor did not want to personally sacrifice his ancestors, but actually cancelled the rite due to illness. Now, at the beginning of his reign, the emperor should commend the filial piety on a large scale, and as a role model for the world, he should personally go to the Imperial Temple to make the sacrifice, as a model for the next generation."

古文：循习故弊，非臣所知也。 
现代文：如果循习过去的皇帝不亲临祭典的弊病，为臣的不敢苟同。 
English: If the emperors of the past did not attend the festival, the vassals would not agree.

古文：帝称善。即日备法驾，宿斋宫，且命邦宁为大礼使。
现代文：帝认为他说得好，即日便备车，住宿斋宫，并命邦宁为大礼使。
English: The emperor thought he spoke well, prepared a car the same day, stayed at the palace, and appointed Bunning as the envoy.

古文：初，仁宗为皇太子，丞相三宝奴等用事，畏仁宗英明，邦宁揣知其意，言于武宗曰： 陛下富于春秋，皇子渐长，父作子述，古之道也。未闻有子而立弟者。 
现代文：礼毕，加恩于邦宁的三代：对其曾祖颐，赠银青光禄大夫、司徒，谥敬懿；祖父德懋、父扌为也各有所封赠。仁宗即位，以邦宁为旧臣，赐钞千锭，辞谢不受。以前，当仁宗还在当皇太子时，丞相三宝奴等当权，他们骇怕仁宗的英明，心里想去掉仁宗。邦宁揣度三宝奴的意图，便出面对武宗说： 你年事已高，皇子已渐长大，应立为太子，这是自古以来天经地义的道理，从没听说皇帝自己有儿子还立弟弟的。 
English: After all, the three generations of Bunning were indebted to him: for his great-great-grandfather, he gave silver to Qingguanglu Dafu, Sitou, and Zou Jingzhu; for his grandfather, Dezhu, and father, Zou Jingzhu. When Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he used Bunning as an old vassal and gave him thousands of banknotes, but he did not receive any thanks. Previously, when Emperor Nanzong was still the crown prince, there were three ministers in power, including Sanbao, who were afraid of Emperor Nanzong's wisdom and wanted to get rid of Emperor Nanzong. Bunning

古文：武宗不悦曰： 朕志已定，汝自往东宫言之。 
现代文：武宗很不高兴地说 ：我的主意已定，你要说，就自己向东宫说去。 
English: Wu Zong was very unhappy and said, "My mind is made up. If you want to say something, go and say it to the Eastern Palace yourself."

古文：邦宁惭惧而退。
现代文：邦宁愧惧而退。
English: Bunning retreated in shame.

古文：仁宗即位，左右咸请诛之，仁宗曰： 帝王历数，自有天命，其言何足介怀。 
现代文：及仁宗即位，近臣都建议诛杀邦宁。仁宗说： 帝王的命运，是上天决定的，何必把邦宁的话放在心上。 
English: When Emperor Ninsong ascended the throne, his close vassals all suggested that Banning should be killed. Emperor Ninsong said, "The fate of the emperor is decided by heaven, so why take Banning's words to heart?"

古文：加邦宁开府仪同三司，为集贤院大学士。
现代文：后来，加封邦宁为开府仪同三司、集贤院大学士。
English: Later, Gafon Bunning was a member of the Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies Committee and the Third Division, and a member of the Jixian Academy.

古文：以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: He later died of illness.

古文：朴不花，高丽人，亦曰王不花。
现代文：朴不花，高丽人，亦名王不花。
English: Park does not spend, Goryeo people, also known as Wang does not spend.

古文：皇后奇氏微时，与不花同乡里，相为依倚。
现代文：皇后奇氏在入宫前与不花同乡里，且相互依靠。
English: Before entering the palace, Empress Qi and Fu Hua lived in the same village and relied on each other.

古文：及选为宫人，有宠，遂为第二皇后，居兴圣宫，生皇太子爱猷识理达腊。
现代文：奇氏选入宫后，得宠，遂为第二皇后，居兴圣宫，生太子爱猷识理达腊。
English: Ms. Qi was chosen to be the queen of the palace, she was favored, and she became the second queen, lived in the holy palace, and gave birth to the prince Aizhong Zheli Darla.

古文：于是不花以阉人入事皇后者有年，皇后爱幸之，情意甚胶固，累迁官至荣禄大夫、资正院使。
现代文：于是不花以太监的身份入宫，长期服侍皇后。皇后很喜欢不花，两人情意甚笃，不花因而得以不断升官，直至荣禄大夫、资政院使。
English: Therefore, he entered the palace as an ethereal overseer and served the empress for a long time. The empress liked him very much, and the two of them were very fond of each other. As a result, he was able to continue to rise through the ranks until he became a doctor of honor and an envoy to the Senate.

古文：资正院者，皇后之财赋悉隶焉。至正十八年，京师大饥疫，时河南北、山东郡县皆被兵，民之老幼男女，避居聚京师，以故死者相枕藉。
现代文：至正十八年，京城大饥荒。当时河南、河北、山东兵荒马乱，百姓不分男女老幼，避聚京师，因而死的人很多。不花为了树立自己的声誉，便奏请顺帝由政府购买土地收葬这些饥民的尸体。
English: In the 18th year of the Heian period, there was a great famine in Beijing. At that time, Henan, Hebei and Shandong were ravaged by war, and the people, both men and women, old and young, avoided gathering in Beijing. As a result, many people died. In order to establish his reputation, he asked Shunde to purchase land from the government to bury the bodies of these starving people.

古文：不花欲要誉一时，请于帝，市地收瘗之，帝赐钞七千锭，中宫及兴圣、隆福两宫，皇太子、皇太子妃，赐金银及他物有差，省院施者无算；不花出玉带一、金带一、银二锭、米三十四斛、麦六斛、青貂银鼠裘各一袭以为费。
现代文：帝赞同所请，赐钞七千锭。中宫及兴圣、隆福二宫，皇太子、皇太子妃等也赐了金银及其他物资助。省、院等政府部门也送了很多东西。不花自己也捐出玉带、金带各一条、银二锭、米三十四斛、麦六斛、青貂、银鼠皮袍各一件，作为买地收葬之费。
English: The Emperor agreed to the request and gave 7,000 baht in banknotes. The Middle Court and the Xing Sheng, Long Fu Second Court, the Crown Prince and Crown Princess also gave gold and silver and other material support. Provincial, Imperial Court and other government departments also sent a lot of things. They also donated a jade belt, a gold belt, two baht of silver, thirty-four baht of rice, six baht of wheat, one baht of barley and a silver mouse skin robe at no cost to themselves, as the cost of buying land for burial.

古文：择地自南北两城抵卢沟桥，掘深及泉，男女异圹，人以一尸至者，随给以钞，舁负相踵。
现代文：于是，选择自南北两城到卢沟桥的地段，掘深沟为葬坑，男女分坑而葬。百姓凡抬一尸入坑者，立即给钞票以资鼓励。
English: As a result, they chose the section from the two cities in the north and south to Lugou Bridge, digging a deep trench for the burial pit, and burying men and women separately. People who carried a corpse into the pit were immediately encouraged with banknotes.

古文：既覆土，就万安寿庆寺建无遮大会。
现代文：故背尸抬尸者络绎不绝。收尸完毕，便在坑上覆土，还在万安寿庆寺设不分贵贱僧俗一律布施的无遮大会。
English: After the dead bodies were collected, they covered the pit with soil, and also set up an open-air meeting at Wan'an Shouqing Temple, where all monks and lay people, both noble and lowly, could give alms.

古文：至二十年四月，前后瘗者二十万，用钞二万七千九十余锭、米五百六十余石。
现代文：到至正二十年四月，先后埋葬尸体二十万具，用钞二万七千零九十余锭，米五百六十余石。
English: By April of the 20th year of the Joseon Dynasty, 200,000 bodies had been buried successively, and more than 27,090 baht in banknotes and more than 560 koku of rice had been used.

古文：又于大悲寺修水陆大会三昼夜，凡居民病者予之药，不能丧者给之棺。
现代文：还在大悲寺举行盛大的三昼夜水陆大会，凡百姓有病的发药物，有丧事不能安葬的给棺材。
English: In addition, a grand three-day and night water and land conference was held at the Great Compassion Temple, where people were given medicine for illnesses and coffins for those who could not be buried.

古文：翰林学士承旨张翥为文颂其事，曰《善惠之碑》。
现代文：翰林学士承旨张翥曾撰文歌颂此事，称为《善惠之碑》。
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Zongzhi Zhang, once wrote a poem in praise of this event, called "The Monument of Benevolence."

古文：于是帝在位久，而皇太子春秋日盛，军国之事，皆其所临决。
现代文：顺帝在位日久，太子年岁日长，军国大事皆太子决断。
English: Emperor Shun has been on the throne for a long time, the prince is getting older and older, and the military affairs are decided by the prince.

古文：皇后乃谋内禅皇太子，而使不花喻意于丞相太平，太平不答。
现代文：奇氏皇后谋求顺帝禅位，使不花向丞相太平示意，太平不置可否。
English: The empress of the Qi clan sought to be enthroned as Emperor Shun, so it did not take long for her to indicate to the prime minister, Taiping, whether or not Taiping could do so.

古文：二十年，太平乃罢去，而独搠思监为丞相。
现代文：至正二十年太平被罢免，搠思监继为丞相。
English: Twenty years later, Taiping was ousted from power, and Zou Siyuan succeeded him as chancellor.

古文：时帝益厌政，不花乘间用事，与搠思监相为表里，四方警报、将臣功状，皆抑而不闻，内外解体。
现代文：当时顺帝更不理朝政，不花便乘机过问军国大事，与搠思监相互勾结。将四方警报和将臣功状，都压下来不上奏。
English: At that time, Emperor Shun even ignored the politics of the imperial court, took the opportunity to inquire into the military affairs of the country without spending money, and colluded with Gong Siyuan. The four-way alarm and the merits of the generals and ministers were suppressed and could not be played.

古文：然根株盘固，气焰薰灼，内外百官趋附之者十九。
现代文：于是以皇帝为中心的政治体制趋于解体，而以不花为中心的势力，根株磐固，气焰嚣张。内外百官趋附者十有其九。
English: As a result, the political system centered on the emperor tended to disintegrate, while the forces centered on the emperor were firmly rooted and arrogant. Nine out of ten officials at home and abroad were adherents.

古文：又宣政院使脱欢，与之同恶相济，为国大蠹。
现代文：又宣政院使脱欢和不花狼狈为奸，为国之大蠹。
English: In addition, the Xuan Zheng Yuan made the debauchery and carelessness a crime, and it was a great scandal for the country.

古文：二十三年，监察御史也先帖木儿、孟也先不花、傅公让等乃劾奏朴不花、脱欢奸邪，当屏黜。
现代文：至正二十三年，监察御史也先帖木儿、孟也先不花、傅公让等联名上奏顺帝，揭发朴不花和脱欢的奸邪勾当，认为应把他们罢黜。
English: In the 23rd year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the inspectors of the Imperial History Bureau, including Timur, Meng Yizhuang and Fu Gongzhang, jointly reported to Emperor Shun, exposing the treacherous activities of Pak Wuxia and the debauchery, and believed that they should be dismissed.

古文：御史大夫老的沙以其事闻，皇太子执不下，而皇后庇之尤固，御史乃皆坐左迁。
现代文：御史大夫老的沙，也向皇太子报告不花的情况。但皇太子下不了决心，奇氏皇后又极力包庇，御史们反而皆受降职处分。
English: The Imperial Historian, the old man Sa, also reported to the Crown Prince about the situation. However, the Crown Prince could not make up his mind, and the Empress Ki tried her best to cover it up. Instead, the Imperial Historians were all demoted.

古文：治书侍御史陈祖仁，连上皇太子书切谏之，而台臣大小皆辞职，皇太子乃为言于帝，令二人皆辞退。
现代文：后来，治书侍御史陈祖仁多次上书皇太子，恳切陈词；其他弹劾官员也以辞职的行动上谏。这时，皇太子才向顺帝报告，顺帝以让二人自动辞官的形式罢免了不花和脱欢。
English: Later, Chen Zu-Ren, the chief secretary of history, repeatedly wrote to the crown prince and made earnest speeches; other impeachment officials also resigned. At this time, the crown prince reported to Shun Di. Shun Di dismissed Nie Hua and De Guan in the form of letting the two automatically resign.

古文：而祖仁言犹不已，又上皇帝书言： 二人乱阶祸本，今不芟除，后必不利。
现代文：在二人辞官后，祖仁仍向皇帝上书说： 二人是祸乱之根本，今日不除，后必不利。
English: After the resignation of the two officials, ZuRen still wrote to the emperor saying: "The two are the root of the evil. If they are not removed today, they will be unfavorable in the future."

古文：汉、唐季世，其祸皆起此辈，而权臣、藩镇乘之。
现代文：汉唐之末，因先有此辈为祸，权臣、藩镇才能乘机滋事。
English: At the end of the Han and Tang Dynasties, it was because of this generation's misfortune that powerful vassals and towns could not take advantage of the opportunity to cause trouble.

古文：故千寻之木，吞舟之鱼，其腐败必由于内，陛下诚思之，可为寒心。
现代文：千寻之木，吞舟之鱼，其腐败无不首先起自内部。皇上实事求是地想一想，这是很使人寒心的。
English: As the proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial proverbial

古文：臣愿俯从台谏之言，将二人特加摈斥，不令以辞退为名，成其奸计。
现代文：希望皇上听从台谏之言，撤销他们的职务，不要使他们假 辞退 之名，以售其奸。
English: It is hoped that the Emperor will listen to the words of the Taiwanese and revoke their posts, and not allow them to sell their treachery under the name of resignation.

古文：海内皆知陛下信赏必罚，自此二人始，将士孰不效力，寇贼亦皆丧胆，天下可全，而有以还祖宗之旧。
现代文：果如此，国人皆知皇上信赏必罚，将士谁不效力，寇贼谁不丧胆。天下因而可全，祖宗之业可守。
English: If this is the case, the people of the country all know that the emperor's reward and reward must be punished, soldiers who do not work, and robbers who do not lose heart. Therefore, the world can be perfect, and the cause of the ancestors can be protected.

古文：若优柔不断，彼恶日盈，将不可制。
现代文：若优柔不断，不花、脱欢之势日盛，将不可制。
English: If the indecision continues, it will be impossible to control the growing trend of not spending and not partying.

古文：臣宁饿死于家，誓不与同朝，牵联及祸。 语具《陈祖仁传》。
现代文：我宁可在家饿死，也不愿与不花之辈同朝。 详见《陈祖仁传》。
English: I would rather starve to death at home than live with those who do not care for flowers.

古文：会侍御史李国凤亦上书皇太子，言： 不花骄恣无上，招权纳赂，奔竞之徒，皆出其门，骎骎有赵高、张让、田令孜之风，渐不可长，众人所共知之，独主上与殿下未之知耳。
现代文：时侍御史李国凤亦上书皇太子说： 不花骄傲专横，揽权纳贿。趋炎附势之徒，无不出其门下，颇有点像赵高、张让、田令孜的样子，实不能任其继续发展。不花的罪恶，众人共知，唯皇上与殿下还不了解。
English: At that time, Li Guofeng, the imperial secretary, also wrote a letter to the crown prince, saying: "Do not be proud and arrogant, grab power and take bribes. There are no followers of those who are inflamed with power, quite a bit like Zhao Gao, Zhang Zhan, and Tian Lingzi. In fact, it cannot be allowed to continue to develop. The sin of not spending is well known to everyone, but the emperor and his highness still do not understand it.

古文：纪纲振，则天下之公论为可畏，法度为不可犯，政治修而百废举矣。 
现代文：古来的宦官，因近君亲上，稍有得志，没有不为祸国家的。望殿下及早警惕，行于霜上而知严寒之将至，早日上奏皇上，处以流刑，以快众心。如能这样，法度森严，政治修明，百废可举了。 
English: The eunuchs of ancient times, because they were close to the prince, had a little ambition, and there was no country that would not be a disaster. It is hoped that His Royal Highness will be vigilant as early as possible, walk on the frost and know that the cold will come, and report to the emperor as soon as possible, and punish with exile, to make everyone happy. If this can be done, the laws will be strict, the politics will be clear, and there will be no waste.

古文：由是帝大怒，国凤、祖仁等亦皆左迁。
现代文：但太子上奏后，顺帝大怒，国凤、祖仁等皆被降职。
English: However, after the crown prince's speech, Emperor Shun was furious, and Guofeng, Zu Ren, and others were all demoted.

古文：时老的沙执其事颇力，皇太子因恶之，而皇后又谮之于内，帝以老的沙母舅故，封为雍王，遣归国。
现代文：当时老的沙对自己的御史大夫之职颇为尽力，皇太子因而讨厌他。奇氏皇后也在顺帝面前诽谤他。但皇上因念老的沙是母舅，没有公开处分他，而是封为雍王后遣其返国。
English: At that time, the old Sha was doing his best to fulfill his duties as imperial historian, and the crown prince hated him for it. The Queen of Qi also slandered him in front of Emperor Shun. However, the emperor did not publicly punish him because he considered the old Sha to be his maternal uncle, but sent him back to the country after he was crowned King of Yong.

古文：已而复以不花为集贤大学士、崇正院使，皇后之力也。
现代文：接着提拔不花为集贤大学士、崇正院使，这当然都是奇氏皇后之力。
English: Next, she was promoted to Jixian University Scholar and the envoy of Chongzheng Academy, which, of course, were all due to the strength of the Qixi Empress.

古文：老的沙至大同，遂留孛罗帖木儿军中。
现代文：老的沙至大同时，留孛罗帖木儿军中。
English: When old Sha became an adult, he remained in the Timur's army.

古文：是时，搠思监、朴不花方倚扩廓帖木儿为外援，怨孛罗帖木儿匿老的沙不遣，遂诬孛罗帖木儿与老的沙谋不轨。
现代文：这时，搠思监、朴不花正以扩廓帖木儿为外援，怨孛罗帖木儿收留老的沙，便在顺帝面前诬谄孛罗帖木儿与老的沙图谋不轨。
English: At this time, Gong Siyuan and Park Fuwa were taking the expansionist Timur as foreign aid, and resented Luo Timur for taking in the old Sa, so they falsely accused Luo Timur of scheming with the old Sa in front of Shunde.

古文：二十四年，诏削其官，使解兵柄归四川。
现代文：至正二十四年，顺帝下诏削去孛罗帖木儿官职，令其交出兵权，回四川去。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of the Heian period, Emperor Shun issued an edict stripping Jiro Timur of his official position and ordered him to surrender his military powers and return to Sichuan.

古文：孛罗帖木儿知不出帝意，皆搠思监、朴不花所为，怒不奉诏。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿知是朴不花等诬陷，乃拒不奉诏。宗王不颜贴木儿等也力陈孛罗帖木儿受到冤枉。
English: Knowing that he was the victim of a frame-up, he refused to comply with the edict. The king also accused him of wrongdoing.

古文：宗王不颜帖木儿等为表言其诬枉，而朝廷亦畏其强不可制，复下诏数搠思监、朴不花互相壅蔽簧惑主听之罪，屏搠思监于岭北，窜朴不花于甘肃，以快众愤，而复孛罗帖木儿官爵。
现代文：朝廷当时也有点怕孛罗帖木儿的势力太大，不可强制。故又再次下诏，说处分孛罗帖木儿是因为搠思监、朴不花封锁消息，蒙蔽圣上所致，为了惩治彼等之罪以平众愤，朝廷决心放逐搠思监于岭北，放逐朴不花于甘肃，并恢复孛罗帖木儿的官爵。
English: At that time, the imperial court was also a little afraid that the power of Gong Luo Timur was too great and could not be forced. Therefore, it once again issued an edict, saying that the punishment of Gong Luo Timur was due to the fact that Gong Sijun and Pak Fuxa blocked the news and blinded the saint. In order to punish their crime and calm the public anger, the imperial court decided to banish Gong Sijun to Lingbei, banish Pak Fuxa to Gansu, and restore Gong Luo Timur's official title.

古文：然搠思监、朴不花皆留京城，实未尝行。
现代文：不过，这次的诏书，并未实行。朴不花和搠思监都未离开京城。
English: However, this time the edict was not carried out. Neither Park Bo-hwa nor Kim Si-jong left the capital.

古文：未几，孛罗帖木儿遣秃坚帖木儿以兵向阙，声言清君侧之恶。
现代文：不久，孛罗帖木儿遣秃坚帖木儿兴师上都，声言要 清君侧 。
English: Not long after, Luo Timur sent Bald Jian Timur to the capital, claiming to be on the side of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：四月十二日，驻于清河，帝遣达达国师问故，往复者数四，言必得搠思监、朴不花乃退兵。
现代文：四月十二日，兵抵清河，顺帝遣国师往返问明 清君侧 是指谁，得知必交出搠、朴二人才退兵。
English: On April 12th, the soldiers arrived in Qinghe. Emperor Shun sent a statesman to ask who the side of the Qing Dynasty was, and it was learned that they had to surrender their swords, and only then could they leave the army.

古文：帝度其势不可解，不得已，执两人畀之，其兵乃退。朴不花遂为孛罗帖木儿所杀。事具搠思监、孛罗帖木儿传。
现代文：不得已，乃执二人交送孛罗帖木儿，其兵乃退。朴不花后为孛罗帖木儿所杀。详见《搠思监传》、《孛罗帖木儿传》。
English: As a last resort, Naochu and his two men handed over Mirochimaru, and his soldiers retreated. After the battle, Park Fuwa was killed by Mirochimaru. For more details, see "Biographies of Mirochimaru" and "Biographies of Mirochimaru."

