古文：帝尧周武王越王临洮长人汉高祖陆贾汉元后后汉章帝吴大帝魏明帝晋司马氏白燕晋武帝晋惠帝晋元帝蜀李雄宋高祖宋孝武帝宋明帝齐太祖北齐神武后周太祖陈高祖隋文帝隋炀帝唐高祖唐太宗唐齐王元吉唐中宗唐相王潞州别驾金蜗牛
现代文：帝尧周武王越王临洮长人汉高祖陆贾汉元后后汉章帝吴大帝魏明帝晋司马氏白燕晋武帝晋惠帝晋元帝蜀李雄宋高祖宋孝武帝宋明帝齐太祖北齐神武后周太祖陈高祖隋文帝隋炀帝唐高祖唐太宗唐齐王元吉唐中宗唐相王潞州别驾金蜗牛
English: Emperor Qianlong Emperor Zhouwu Emperor Yue Emperor Lincheng Emperor Han Emperor Gao Emperor Lu Emperor Jia Emperor Yuan Emperor Zhang Emperor Wu Emperor Wei Emperor Ming Emperor Jin Emperor Ma Emperor Bai Yan Emperor Wu Emperor Jin Emperor Hui Emperor Shu Emperor Li Emperor Song Emperor Gao Emperor Song Emperor Xiaowu Emperor Song Emperor Ming Emperor Qi Emperor Northern Qi Emperor Shen Emperor Zhou Emperor Qianlong Emperor Chen Emperor Gao Emperor Sui Emperor Sui Emperor Yan Emperor Tang Emperor Tang Emperor Taizong Emperor Tang Emperor Qi Emperor Yuanji Emperor Tang Emperor of the Middle Kingdom Emperor Tang Emperor of the Southern Han Dynasty Emperor Xian Emperor Xian of the Southern Han Dynasty Xian of the Southern Han Dynasty Xian of the

古文：帝尧
现代文：帝尧
English: The Imperial Palace

古文：秦始皇时，宛渠国之民，乘螺舟而至，云： 臣国去轩辕之丘十万里，臣国先圣，见冀州有黑风，应出圣人，果庆都生尧。 
现代文：秦始皇的时候，宛渠国的一个老百姓，乘坐着一只能在水底潜行的螺旋形的船来了。他说： 我国距离轩辕黄帝的墓地有十万多里，我国很早以前的圣人就看见冀州有黑风，他就断定冀州应当出现圣人，果然在庆都出现了尧。 
English: When Qin Shihuang was the first emperor, a commoner from Wanqu Province came on a spiral-shaped boat that could only sneak underwater. He said: Our country is more than a hundred thousand miles away from the cemetery of the Yellow Emperor Xuan Zang. A very long time ago, a saint in our country saw a black wind in Jizhou, and he concluded that a saint should appear in Jizhou. And indeed, a dragonfly appeared in Qingdu.

古文：周武王
现代文：周武王
English: Zhou Wu Wang

古文：纣之昏乱，欲杀诸侯，使飞廉、恶来诛戮贤良，取其宝器，埋于琼台之下。
现代文：殷纣王昏庸无道，想要杀掉各国的诸侯，于是就派飞廉、恶来去诛杀了许多贤臣忠良。夺取了他们的宝器，把它埋藏在琼台下面。
English: King Yin Xuan was so foolish that he wanted to kill the princes of all countries, so he sent Fei Liang and Qi to fight and kill many wise men and loyalists. He seized their treasure and buried it under the Qiong Tai.

古文：使飞廉等于所近之国，侯服之内，使烽燧相续。
现代文：又派飞廉等人到附近的各国下令，让各诸侯国之间的烽火台接连相望。
English: He also sent Fei Liang and others to nearby countries and ordered that the bonfires between the various states be lit one after another.

古文：纣登台以望火之所在，乃与师往伐其国，杀其君，囚其民，收其女乐，肆其淫虐。
现代文：纣王登上烽火台来观望烽火所在的地方，发现哪个诸侯国有情况，就和他的军队前去攻打那个国家。杀掉他的国君、囚禁他的百姓，收留他的歌妓美女，并且任意地奸淫虐待。
English: The Dragon King climbed onto the bonfire platform to see where the bonfire was located, and when he found out which country had the situation, he and his army went to attack that country, kill his prince, imprison his people, take in his beautiful singer, and arbitrarily rape and abuse.

古文：神人愤怨，时有朱鸟衔火，如星之照耀，以乱烽燧之光，纣木德将灭，水祚方盛。 
现代文：等到武王讨伐的时候，有个樵夫和放牧的儿童在树上找鸟窝，发现了一个红色的玉玺。玉玺上面写道： 殷朝将要灭亡，而周朝将要昌盛。 
English: At the time of King Wu's crusade, a woodcutter and a herding child were looking for a bird's nest in a tree and found a red jade tablet. The jade tablet read: The Yin Dynasty will perish, but the Zhou Dynasty will prosper.

古文：文皆大篆，记殷之世历已尽，而姬之圣德方隆，是以三分天下，而二分归周。
现代文：文字全是用大篆写成的。记载着： 殷朝的历史已经完了，而姬姓圣明贤德，正兴隆，因此三份天下，而二份应归于周。 
English: The text, written entirely in large characters, records: "The history of the Yin Dynasty is over, and her maiden name, Shengmingxiande, is flourishing. Therefore, three copies belong to the world, and two copies belong to Zhou."

古文：乃元元之类，嗟殷亡之晚，恨周来之迟。
现代文：于是老百姓们都叹息殷朝灭亡的晚了，遗憾周朝来的太迟了。
English: As a result, the common people all lamented the late demise of the Yin Dynasty, and regretted that the Zhou Dynasty came too late.

古文：越王
现代文：越王
English: Yue Wang

古文：越王入吴国，有丹鸟夹王飞，故句践之霸也。起望鸟台，言丹鸟之瑞也。
现代文：越王进入吴国时，有个红色的鸟跟随着他来回地飞，所以越王勾践就灭了吴国而称了霸，于是越王就建起了一个望鸟台，说这红鸟是吉祥之物。
English: When King Yue entered the State of Wu, there was a red bird flying back and forth with him. Therefore, King Yue and his cohorts destroyed the State of Wu and gained hegemony. Therefore, King Yue built a bird-watching platform and said that the red bird was auspicious.

古文：临洮长人
现代文：临洮长人
English: Linyi elders sing

古文：秦始皇时，长人十二见于临洮，皆夷服。
现代文：秦始皇的时候，在临洮发现了十二个长人，他们都穿着少数民族的服装。
English: At the time of Qin Shihuang, twelve elders were found in Linyi, all of whom were wearing ethnic minority clothing.

古文：于是铸铜为十二枚，以写之。
现代文：秦始皇于是就铸了十二尊铜像，都是模仿者十二个长人的样子制成的。
English: Qin Shi Huang then cast twelve bronze statues, all of which were made in the likeness of the twelve elders.

古文：盖汉十二帝之瑞也。
现代文：大概这就是汉朝十二个皇帝的吉祥之兆吧。
English: Perhaps this is the auspicious sign of the twelve emperors of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉高祖
现代文：汉高祖
English: Henkel's ancestor

古文：荥阳南原上有厄井，父老云： 汉高祖曾避项羽于此井，为双鸠所救。 
现代文：荥阳南面的原野上有一口破旧的井，当地的老人说： 汉高祖曾经在这个井里躲避过项羽，被两只鸠鸟救了。 
English: There is a dilapidated well in a field in the south of Shenyang. A local old man said: Henkel's great-grandfather once hid in this well and was saved by two ostriches.

古文：故俗语云：汉祖避时难，隐身厄井间，双鸠集其上，谁知下有人。
现代文：所以世上都流传着这样的说法：汉高祖当时避战乱，躲藏在破井里，有两只鸠鸟落在井上面，谁知道井下面还有人呢。
English: That's why there's a saying around the world: Henkel's great-great-grandfather was hiding from the war, hiding in a broken well. Two ostriches landed on top of the well, and who knows if there were still people underneath.

古文：汉朝每正旦，辄放双鸠，起于此。
现代文：以后汉朝每年正月的第一天，就要放两只鸠鸟就是从这开始的。
English: From then on, on the first day of the first month of each year in the Han Dynasty, it was necessary to release two ostriches.

古文：陆贾
现代文：陆贾
English: Lu Jia

古文：樊将军哙问于陆贾曰： 自古人君，皆云受命于天，云有瑞应，岂有是乎？ 陆贾应之曰： 有。
现代文：将军樊哙问陆贾说： 从古到今，人们都说做皇帝的人是上天授给他们以重任，还说事先都有吉祥的征兆，难道真有这样的事吗？ 陆贾回答说： 确实有 。
English: General Zou asked Lu Jia: From ancient times to the present, people have said that those who become emperors are given a heavy responsibility by heaven, and also said that there are auspicious signs in advance. Is there really such a thing? Lu Jia replied: Indeed there is.

古文：夫目瞤得酒食，灯火花得钱财，午鹊噪而行人至，蜘蛛集而百事喜，小既有征，大亦宜然。
现代文：接着又说： 眼睛如果跳，就要有美酒佳肴；灯如果冒火花，就能得到钱财；中午喜鹊如果叫，就要有人来；蜘蛛如果聚集，就会有高兴的事。小事都有这样的征兆，大事也应当是这样。
English: Then he said: "If the eyes jump, there will be fine food and wine; if the lamp sparks, you can get money; if the magpie calls at noon, someone will come; if the spiders gather, there will be joy. Small things have such signs, big things should be the same.

古文：故曰： 目瞤则咒之，灯火花则拜之，午鹊噪则喂之，蜘蛛集则放之。
现代文：所以说，眼睛跳，就要祷告；灯冒火花，就要拜谢；中午喜鹊叫，就要喂它；蜘蛛聚集，就要放了它。
English: Therefore, if the eyes jump, it is necessary to pray; if the lamp emits sparks, it is necessary to give thanks; if the magpie howls at noon, it is necessary to feed it; if the spiders gather, it is necessary to release it.

古文：况天下之大宝，人君重位，非天命何以得之哉！
现代文：如此说来，更何况是天降下的珍宝，皇帝的重位，不是上天授给，怎么能够得到呢？
English: That being said, what is more, how can one obtain the treasure of the heavens, the high rank of the emperor, if it is not bestowed by heaven?

古文：瑞宝信也，天以宝为信，应人之德，故曰瑞应。
现代文：吉祥的宝物就是一种信号，上天用宝物做为信号，反映到有德之人的身上，所以说是吉祥的征兆。
English: The auspicious treasure is a kind of signal. Heaven uses the treasure as a signal and reflects it on the virtuous person, so it is said to be an auspicious sign.

古文：天命无信，不可以力取也。 
现代文：上天如果没有启示，就是凭着武力也不能得到。 
English: If there is no revelation from heaven, it cannot be obtained by force.

古文：汉元后
现代文：汉元后
English: After the Han Dynasty

古文：元后在家，尝有白燕衔石，大如指，堕后绩筐中。
现代文：元后在家时，曾经有个白色的燕子嘴里面含着块石头，像手指甲那样大。掉下来后落在筐里。
English: When Yuan Hou was at home, there was once a white swallow's beak with a stone inside, as big as a fingernail. It fell down and landed in the basket.

古文：后取之，石自剖其二。其中有文曰： 母天后地。 
现代文：元后捡起石头，那石头就自然地分成了两块，其中上面写有文字说： 母天后地。 
English: After picking up the stone, the stone naturally split into two pieces, one of which was inscribed with the words: "Heavenly Mother."

古文：乃合之，遂复还合，乃宝录焉。
现代文：于是就又合在一起恢复了原来的样子，这就是天书啊。
English: So it was put back together again and restored to its original appearance. This is a heavenly book.

古文：乃为皇后，常置之玺笥中，谓为天玺也。
现代文：元后后来做了皇后。她经常将这块石头放在装玉玺的盒子里，称它是 天玺 。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty, she became the empress. She often put this stone in a box with jade ornaments, calling it the Heavenly Dragonfly.

古文：后汉章帝
现代文：后汉章帝
English: Emperor Zhang of the Later Han Dynasty

古文：后汉章帝永宁五年，条支国献异鸟，名鳷鹊。
现代文：后汉章帝永宁五年的时候，条支国来献上了一只奇异的鸟，鸟的名字叫鳷鹊。
English: When Emperor Zhang of the Later Han Dynasty was in the fifth year of Yongning, the State of Jiaozhi presented a strange bird. The bird's name was Rooster.

古文：其高七尺，解人言语，国太平则群翔鸣焉。
现代文：它高有七尺，能听懂人语。这真是国家如果太平，那么群鸟也会鸣叫啊。
English: It is seven feet tall and can understand human speech. This is truly a country where, if it were peaceful, the birds would also sing.

古文：吴大帝
现代文：吴大帝
English: Emperor Wu

古文：吴孙权猎于武昌樊山下，见一老母，问权何获，曰： 只获一豹。 
现代文：吴国孙权在武昌樊山下打猎，遇见一个老太太，她问孙权有什么收获，孙权说： 只获得了一只豹。 
English: Sun Quan of the State of Wu was out hunting in the foothills of the Lushan Mountains in Wuchang when he met an old lady. When she asked him what he had gained, Sun Quan said, "I only got a leopard."

古文：曰： 何不竖其尾？ 
现代文：老太太说： 为什么不把它的尾巴树起？ 
English: The old lady said, "Why don't you trim its tail?"

古文：忽然不见。
现代文：说完老太太就不见了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：权称尊号，立庙于山下。
现代文：孙权称帝于江东时，在山下为它立了庙。
English: When Sun Quan proclaimed himself emperor in the east of the Yangtze River, he built a temple for it at the foot of the mountain.

古文：魏明帝
现代文：魏明帝
English: Emperor Ming of Wei

古文：魏明帝时，泰山下出连理文石。
现代文：魏明帝时，泰山下出产一种有连理一样花纹的石头。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ming, Mount Tai produced a kind of stone with the same pattern as that of Lianli.

古文：高十二丈，状如柏树，其文色彪发，如人雕镂，自上及下皆合而中开，广五尺。父老云：当秦末，二石相去百余步，芜没无有蹊径。
现代文：上面和下面都连在一起，中间是离开的，有五尺多宽。当地的人们说，在秦朝末年，两块石头相距有一百多步，满地都是荒芜的杂草，连落脚的地方都没有。
English: The upper and lower parts are connected, but the middle part is detached, and is more than five feet wide. Local people said that at the end of the Qin Dynasty, the two stones were more than a hundred paces apart, and the ground was covered with weeds, and there was no place to set one's foot.

古文：及明帝之始，稍觉相近，如双阙形。
现代文：等魏明帝之初，发现两块石头渐渐的靠近了，就像皇宫门前两边的望楼那样的形状。
English: At the beginning of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, it was found that the two stones gradually approached each other, just like the shape of the watchtowers on both sides in front of the palace gate.

古文：土王阴类，魏为土德，斯为灵征。
现代文：属土王阴之类，魏时把它叫土德。这是神灵显现的征兆。
English: It belongs to the category of Tuo Wangyin (土王阴) and was called Tu De (土德) in the Wei Dynasty. This is a sign of the appearance of gods.

古文：又沛国有戊己之地，土德之嘉祥也。
现代文：另外沛国有个叫戊己的地方，是土德的吉祥美好的地方。
English: In addition, there is a place called Wuji in Pei Province, which is a beautiful and auspicious place.

古文：乃修戊己坛，黄星炳夜，又起毕昂台祭之，言魏之分野。
现代文：就在那里修建了一个戊己坛，坛像黄色星星一样照亮了夜空。又在那里建起了昂台，在那上面写上祭文说：这是魏的分界。
English: There they built an altar to the god Wuji, which lit up the night sky like a yellow star, and a pedestal, on which they wrote an inscription: "This is the dividing line of Wei."

古文：岁时皆修祀焉。晋司马氏
现代文：从此每年都要修整并在这里祭祀。晋司马氏
English: Since then, it has been repaired every year and a ritual is held here.

古文：水星之精，坠于张掖郡柳谷中，化为黑石，广一丈余，高三尺。
现代文：水星的精华落到了张掖郡柳谷里，变成了黑色的大石头，宽一丈多，高三尺。
English: The essence of Mercury fell into Liu Valley, Zhangye County, and turned into a large black stone, more than a foot wide and three feet high.

古文：后汉之末，渐有文彩，未甚分明。
现代文：到了后汉末年，石头渐渐有了文彩，只是不是很分明。
English: By the end of the Later Han Dynasty, the stone gradually took on a cultural color, but it was not very distinct.

古文：魏青龙年，忽如雷震，闻声百余里。其石自立，白色，有牛马仙人及镮玉玦文字之像。
现代文：到魏青龙年间，忽然像打雷似的震天动地，在百里之外都能听见，那石头自己竖立起来，变成了白色，上面有牛马仙人以及玉镮玉玦、文字的图像。
English: In the Qinglong period of the Wei Dynasty, suddenly the earth shook like thunder, which could be heard a hundred miles away. The stone stood up by itself and turned white, with images of cattle and horses, immortals, and jade and jade, and words on it.

古文：后司马氏受命，以符金德焉。白燕
现代文：后来司马氏做了皇帝，认为是符合了金德。白燕
English: Later, Sima became emperor, which was considered to be in line with the Golden Rule. Baiyan

古文：魏禅晋之岁，北阙下有一白燕，以为神物，以金笼盛，置于宫中，旬日不知所在，论者以晋金德之瑞。
现代文：魏禅晋之年，在北面的皇宫门前有个白色的燕子，人们认为是神物，就用金笼把它装起来放在了宫里，过了十天白燕不知所踪。议论的人们都认为晋是金德吉祥。
English: In the year of Wei, Zen and Jin dynasties, there was a white swallow in front of the north gate of the imperial palace. People thought it was a god, so they put it in a golden cage and placed it in the palace. After ten days, the white swallow was nowhere to be found. People who talked about it all thought that Jin was kind and auspicious.

古文：昔师旷时，有白燕来巢，以为瑞应，师旷事晋。
现代文：师旷时期，有白燕飞来筑巢，认为是吉祥的征兆。
English: During the Spring Festival, there are white swallows flying to build nests, which is considered to be an auspicious sign.

古文：古今之议相符矣。
现代文：古今的议论是相符合的。
English: Ancient and modern arguments are consistent.

古文：晋武帝
现代文：晋武帝
English: Emperor Jinwu

古文：晋武帝为抚军时，府内后堂，忽生草三株，茎黄叶绿，若总金抽翠，花条冉弱似金簦。
现代文：晋武帝做抚军时，在府内后堂忽然长出了三棵草。那草的茎是黄色的，叶子是绿色的，那黄色的茎就好像金子，抽出的绿叶就好像是翡翠一样。枝条柔弱好似金簦。
English: When Emperor Jinwu was raising an army, three grasses suddenly sprouted up in the back hall of the palace. The stems of the grass were yellow and the leaves were green. The yellow stems looked like gold, and the green leaves were like emeralds. The branches were as soft as gold leaf.

古文：有羌人姚覆，字世分，在厩中养马，解阴阳之术，云： 此草应金德之瑞。 
现代文：有个羌族人姚覆，他的字叫世分，是个养马的。
English: There is a Yi man, Yao Zhi, whose Chinese name is Shibun, and he is a horse breeder.

古文：帝以草赐张华，华作金簦赋云： 玩九茎于汉庭，美三珠于兹馆，贵表祥乎金德，比名类而相乱。 
现代文：他有卜算阴阳的本领。说： 这草是金德的吉祥物。 武帝就把这草给了张华，张华就做了一首金簦赋说： 玩九茎于汉庭，美三珠于兹馆，贵表祥乎金德，比名类而相乱。 
English: He had the ability to calculate yin and yang. He said: This grass is the mascot of Kind. Emperor Wu gave this grass to Zhang Hua, and Zhang Hua made a golden endowment saying: Play nine stems in the Han Court, the beautiful three beads in the Zi Pavilion, the precious watch shines with Kind, and it is more chaotic than the famous class.

古文：晋惠帝
现代文：晋惠帝
English: Emperor Jin Hui

古文：高堂隆尝刻邺宫柱云： 后若干年，当有天子居此。 
现代文：高堂隆曾经在邺的宫殿的柱子上刻字说： 以后的若干年，应当有天子住在这里。 
English: Gaodang Long once inscribed on the pillar of the palace in Handan: "In the next few years, there should be a heavenly son living here."

古文：及晋惠帝幸邺，年历当矣。
现代文：等晋惠帝到邺的时候，正好和柱子上所刻年代相同。
English: When Emperor Jinhui arrived in Handan, the date was exactly the same as the one engraved on the pillar.

古文：晋元帝
现代文：晋元帝
English: Emperor Jin Yuan dies

古文：晋中宗为丞相时，有鸡雏者而雀飞集其背，驱而复来，如此再三。
现代文：晋中宗做丞相时，有一只麻雀飞落在了小鸡的背上，将它赶走又回来了，像这样赶走又来有两三次。
English: When Jin Zhongzong was prime minister, a sparrow flew onto the back of a chicken, chased it away and came back, and chased it away like this two or three times.

古文：占者云： 鸡者酉，酉者金，夫雀变而来赴之，即王践祚之象也。 
现代文：有个会占卜的人说： 鸡属酉，酉属金，所以麻雀前来，这就是做皇帝的象征。 
English: A fortune-teller said: "Chicken belongs to cormorant, and cormorant belongs to gold, so the sparrow came, which is the symbol of being an emperor.

古文：又云： 元帝时，三雀共登一雄鸡背，三入安东厅。 
现代文：接着又说： 元帝时，有三只麻雀一齐登在了一只雄鸡的背上，所以元帝三进安东厅。 
English: Then he said, "In the time of the Yuan Emperor, three sparrows landed on the back of a rooster, so the Yuan Emperor entered the Anton Hall three times.

古文：占者以为当进三爵为天子。
现代文：占卜的人认为中宗应当三进爵位才能做天子。
English: Diviners believe that Zhongzong should be promoted three times to the peerage in order to become the son of heaven.

古文：蜀李雄
现代文：蜀李雄
English: Shu Lixiong

古文：蜀长老言： 宕渠故赛国，今有赛城、卢城。 
现代文：蜀国有个长老说： 宕渠从前是赛国，所以现在有赛城、卢城。 
English: An elder of Shu said: "Tago Canal was once Sai Province, so now there are Sai City and Lu City.

古文：秦始皇时，有人长二十五丈，见宕渠。
现代文：秦始皇的时候，有个人高二十五丈，发现了宕渠。
English: At the time of the First Emperor of Qin, there was a man who was twenty-five meters tall and discovered the canal.

古文：秦史胡毋敬曰： 是后五百年外，必有异人为大人者。 
现代文：秦史胡毋敬说： 五百年以后，一定有非同一般的人物称王。 
English: Qin Shihu respectfully said: After five hundred years, there must be an extraordinary person called the king.

古文：及李雄之王，其祖出自宕渠，有识者皆以为应焉。
现代文：等到李雄称王，他的祖先就是宕渠人。有见识的人都认为这是应验了秦史胡毋敬的说法。
English: By the time Li Xiong became king, his ancestors were the people of the canal. People with insight believe that this is a fulfillment of Qin Shihu's irreverent statement.

古文：宋高祖
现代文：宋高祖
English: Song Gaozu

古文：晋安帝时，冀州桑门释法珍告其弟子普严曰： 嵩山神告我，江东有刘将军，汉家苗裔，当受天命，吾以璧三十二枚，并镇金一饼与之，刘氏卜代之数也。 
现代文：晋安帝的时候，冀州桑门有个法珍和尚告诉他的弟子普严说： 嵩山的神告诉我，江东有个刘将军，是汉家的后代，他应当做皇帝。我把三十二枚璧玉和一块金子给了他，是刘氏几代次数的卜算。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin'an, a Fa Zhen monk in Sanmen, Jizhou, told his disciple Pu Yan: "The god of Songshan told me that there was a General Liu in Jiangdong, who was a descendant of the Han family, and that he should become emperor. I gave him thirty-two gems and a piece of gold, which was a divination of the number of generations of the Liu family.

古文：严告同学法义。
现代文：普严把这事告诉了同学法义。
English: Pu Yan told this to his classmate Ho Yi.

古文：以安帝义熙十三年，于嵩庙石坛下，得宝璧三十二枚。
现代文：在安帝义熙十三年的时候，法义在嵩山的庙里的一个石坛下面，果然找到了璧玉三十二枚。
English: When An Di Yixi was thirteen years old, he found thirty-two gems under a stone altar in a temple in Songshan.

古文：三十二者世，宋有天下，相承八帝，享祚六十年。
现代文：后来有天下三十二世，相继共有八个皇帝，共享帝位六十年。
English: Later, there were thirty-two generations of emperors, with a total of eight emperors in succession, sharing the imperial throne for sixty years.

古文：宋孝武帝
现代文：宋孝武帝
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu

古文：宋元嘉七年五月，武陵洪水，善德山崩。两石高丈余，如人，雕刻精奇，形备古制式。
现代文：南朝刘宋元嘉七年的五月，武陵发大水，善德有大山崩裂，剩下了两块一丈多高的大石头，像人的模样。雕刻的十分精细奇巧，形体非常完备是古代刻制的式样。
English: In May of the seventh year of the Southern Dynasty of Liu Song and Yuan Jia, Wuling was flooded, and Shande had a large mountain collapse, leaving two large stones as tall as a person. The carving is very fine and wonderful, and the shape is very complete. It is an ancient carved style.

古文：占者云： 武陵出天子。 
现代文：有个会卜算的人说： 武陵这个地方出天子。 
English: A person who knows divination said: "This place in Wuling is a child of heaven.

古文：其时八月，孝武始诞后宫。
现代文：那年的八月，孝武帝在后宫出生了。
English: In August of that year, Emperor Xiaowu was born in the harem.

古文：十五年，封武陵王，三十年即帝位。
现代文：十五岁被封为武陵王，到三十岁就做了皇帝。
English: He was crowned King of Wuling at the age of fifteen, and became emperor at the age of thirty.

古文：宋明帝
现代文：宋明帝
English: Song Mingdi

古文：南朝宋明帝自序云： 予初封湘东王，居侍中卫尉府。
现代文：南朝宋明帝自述说： 我当初被封为湘东王，住在侍中卫尉府。
English: The Southern Dynasty's Emperor Song Ming said of himself: I was originally named the King of Eastern Hunan, and I lived in the palace of the Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：孝武皇帝为予置萧惠开宅邸，经营方始，凿池，获赤玉一枚，色如练朱，半圆半方，重五斤，光润如莹。
现代文：孝武皇帝给我在萧惠建了个住宅，刚开始建造，挖池，获得了一枚红色的宝石。颜色就像红色的布帛，半圆半方，有五斤重，光华润泽闪闪发光。
English: Emperor Xiaowu built a house for me in Xiao Hui. I just started to build it, dug a pond, and obtained a red gemstone. The color is like a red cloth, half-round, half-square, five pounds in weight, and the luster is sparkling.

古文：世祖崩，少帝继位，予自姑熟入朝，居西邸。
现代文：世祖死了，少帝继承了王位，我从姑熟进入朝廷。
English: The ancestor died, the young emperor inherited the throne, and I entered the imperial court from my aunt.

古文：少帝狂暴，恶闻直言，醉为非法。予骤谏之，大怒，乃使仗士防守。
现代文：住在西面的宅院里。少帝性情狂暴，讨厌听到直言的话，喝醉了酒做了非法的事，我急忙劝谏他，他却非常气愤，就让人拿着木杖严加防守。
English: He lived in a courtyard on the west side. The young emperor had a violent temper, hated to hear straight talk, got drunk and did illegal things. I hurried to dissuade him, but he was very angry, so I had someone hold a wooden cane to defend him.

古文：左右文武，悉惊怖奔走，西邸遂空。
现代文：左右文武都惊慌恐怖逃走了。西面的住所就空荡无人了。
English: Both left and right fled in panic and fear. The residence on the west side was empty.

古文：于是百姓悉入邸，适意取物，纤毫毕尽。
现代文：于是老百姓全都进入了西宅，随意的抢夺财物，一丝一毫也没有剩下。
English: As a result, all the common people entered the West House, looted the property at will, and there was nothing left.

古文：至夜，少帝醉醒，意颇解释。
现代文：到了晚上，少帝酒醒，再三解说劝慰，左右文武才返回来。
English: In the evening, Shao Di sobered up, repeatedly explained and consoled, and only returned to the left and right.

古文：明日，左右文武方还，予于是不喜居于西邸。历阳太守建平王景素，私起宅于建阳门外，始成，予别觅一宅换之，少帝许焉。
现代文：我从此不喜欢住在西宅。历阳太守建平王景素，在建阳门外自己建起了一个住宅，刚建成，我就另外找了一个住宅跟他换，少帝允许了。
English: From then on, I didn't like living in the West House. Jianping Wang Jingsu, the governor of Liyang, built a house for himself outside the Jianyang Gate. As soon as it was completed, I found another house to exchange with him, and the young emperor allowed it.

古文：予自西邸移新宅，新宅在清溪西，旧邸今湘宫寺。
现代文：我就从西宅搬进了新的住宅。新宅在清溪的西面，旧宅是现在的湘宫寺。
English: I moved from the West House into a new house. The new house is on the west side of the Clear Creek, and the old house is now the Shogu-ji Temple.

古文：河洛谶日： 灵曜豫见东南隅。 
现代文：河洛预言说： 神灵七曜都出现在东南角。 
English: Helo prophesied: The spirits will appear in the southeast corner on Thursday.

古文：予二邸皆处宫城之东南，且在巽地，盖天应也。 
现代文：我的两处住宅都处在宫城的东南面，并且在吴地，这大概是上天的安排吧？ 
English: Both of my residences are located in the southeast of Miyagi, and in Wu Di, which is probably God's arrangement, right?

古文：齐太祖
现代文：齐太祖
English: Qi Da Zu

古文：齐太祖在淮阴，理城堑，掘得古锡九枚，下有篆书，荀伯玉诸人皆不能识。
现代文：南朝齐太祖在淮阴时，疏理护城壕沟，挖到了九枚古锡器，下面还刻有篆字，荀伯玉等人都不能认识写的是什么字。
English: When the Southern Dynasty's Qidai Zu was in Huaiyin, he was clearing the moat to protect the city. He dug up nine pieces of ancient pewter, with the characters "" engraved on the bottom. However, Zibo Yu and others could not recognize what the characters were.

古文：时纪僧贞独言曰： 何须辨此久远之物。锡而有九，九锡之征也。 
现代文：当时纪僧贞独自说： 不须罢辨认这久远的东西，古锡器有九枚，这是帝位稳固的征兆。 
English: At that time, Ji Sangzhen said alone: There is no need to discard this long-standing thing, there are nine ancient tinware, which is a sign of the stability of the imperial throne.

古文：帝喜而赏之。
现代文：皇帝听后十分高兴而赏识他。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear this and recognized him.

古文：北齐神武
现代文：北齐神武
English: North Qi Shenwu District

古文：北齐神武，少曾与刘贵、贾智为奔走之友。
现代文：北齐神武帝，少年时曾和刘贵、贾智为打猎时相识的朋友。
English: Northern Qi Emperor Shenwu, when he was a boy, was friends with Liu Gui and Jia Zhi, whom he met while hunting.

古文：贵曾得一白鹰，猎于沃野，见一赤兔，每搏辄逸，遂至迥泽。
现代文：刘贵带着一只白鹰在沃野上打猎，看见了一只红色的兔子。
English: Liu Gui was hunting with a white eagle in the fertile fields when he saw a red rabbit.

古文：有一茅屋，兔将奔入，犬噬之，鹰兔俱死。
现代文：每次捕捉，兔子总是跑掉，于是白鹰就直追兔子到了大泽里。这时有一座茅屋，兔子将要跑进去，却被一条狗咬了，鹰兔一齐都死了。
English: Every time they caught it, the rabbit always ran away, so the white eagle chased the rabbit straight to Osawa. At this time, there was a hut that the rabbit was about to run into, but it was bitten by a dog, and both the hawk and the rabbit died.

古文：神武怒，以鸣镝射犬，犬毙。
现代文：神武大怒，就用带响的弓箭把狗给射死了。
English: Shenwu was so angry that he shot the dog to death with a loud bow and arrow.

古文：屋中有二大人出，持神武衣甚急，其母目盲。
现代文：这时屋里走出了两个巨人。拽着神武的衣服非常气恼。
English: At this time, two giants came out of the room. They were very angry as they tugged at Shenwu's clothes.

古文：曳杖呵二子： 何故触大家？ 
现代文：他们的母亲是个瞎子，拖着拐杖呵叱他的两个儿子说： 为什么要触犯贵人？ 
English: Their mother, who was blind, dragged a cane and scolded her two sons, saying, "Why do you offend the nobles?

古文：因出瓮中酒，烹羊以饭客。
现代文：接着就搬出了装酒的坛子，并烧煮羊肉给客人们吃。
English: Then they brought out the wine jars and cooked mutton for the guests to eat.

古文：自云有知，遍扪诸人，言并 当贵 ，至神武，曰： 皆由此人。 
现代文：她说自己有卜算的本领，于是就用手抚摸着来的人，说他们都应当富贵。等抚摸到神武时说： 都是因为这个人。 
English: She said that she had the power of divination, so she stroked the people who came with her hands, saying that they should all be rich. When she stroked Shenwu, she said: It's all because of this person.

古文：还更访问之，则本无人居，乃知向者非人境也。由是诸人益加敬异。
现代文：等喝完酒出来，再回去探访询问时，那屋子却没有人住。才知道刚才那小屋并不是凡人居住的地方。从这以后，大家对神武更加敬重了。
English: When they came out after drinking the wine and went back to investigate, no one was living in the house. Only then did they know that the hut was not a place for ordinary people to live. From then on, everyone respected Shenwu even more.

古文：后周太祖
现代文：后周太祖
English: Later Zhou Taizu

古文：后周太祖时，有李顺兴者，世传汉筑长安城之日，已为北面军王或隐或见，愚圣莫测。
现代文：后周太祖的时候，有个叫李顺兴的人，世上人传说，在修建长安城的时候，他已做了北面的军帅。有时隐蔽有时出现，他是愚蠢还是圣明，人们都无法猜测。
English: In the time of Emperor Zhou, there was a man named Li Shunxing. Legend has it that when Chang'an City was being built, he had already become the commander of the northern army. Sometimes he was hidden, sometimes he appeared. Whether he was stupid or holy, people couldn't guess.

古文：魏自永熙之后，权雄分据。
现代文：魏从水熙以后，争权夺势的斗争非常激烈。
English: After the Wei and Sui dynasties, the struggle for power was very fierce.

古文：齐神武兴军数十万，次沙苑，太祖地狭兵少，惧不当敌，计尽力穷。
现代文：北齐神武兴起了数十万大军，停留在沙苑。当时太祖所占的地盘非常小，兵力也非常少，害怕抵挡不了，已经用尽了计策，竭尽了全力。
English: Beiqi Shenwu raised hundreds of thousands of troops and stayed in Shayuan. At that time, the land occupied by Taizu was very small and the troops were very few. They were afraid that they could not resist, and they had exhausted their strategies and made every effort.

古文：须臾兴来，太祖请其策谋。
现代文：不久李顺兴来了，太祖请他出主意想办法。
English: Soon after, Li Shunxing arrived, and the great-grandfather asked him to come up with an idea.

古文：更无余语，直云： 黄狗逐黑狗，急走出筋斗。
现代文：他没有多余的话，直截了当地说： 黄狗逐黑狗，急走出筋斗。
English: He didn't waste any words and said bluntly: "The yellow dog chased the black dog and got out of the fight."

古文：一过出筋斗，黄狗夹尾走。 
现代文：一过出筋斗，黄狗夹尾走。 
English: Once out of the loop, the yellow dog will follow.

古文：语讫便去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：于时东军旗帜服色尚黄，西兵用黑，太祖悟其言，遂力战，大破武于沙苑。
现代文：在这时，东军的旗帜和穿的服装的颜色是黄色，而西军则是黑色。太祖明白了李顺兴话的意思，于是就竭尽全力作战，结果在沙苑打败了神武的军队。
English: At this time, the flag of the Eastern Army and the color of the clothing worn were yellow, while the Western Army was black. Taizu understood the meaning of Li Shunxing's words, so he did his best to fight, and as a result, he defeated Shenwu's army in Sha Yuan.

古文：陈高祖
现代文：陈高祖
English: Chen Gaozu

古文：陈高祖武帝受禅之日，其夜，有会稽人史溥，梦朱衣人，戴武冠，自天而下，手持金板，上有文字。
现代文：陈高祖武帝登上帝位的时候，那天晚上，有个会稽人叫史溥，他梦见了一个穿着红色衣服的人，戴着武士的帽子，从天而降，手里拿着金板，上面有文字。
English: When Emperor Chen Gaozhuwu ascended to the throne, that night, there was an auditor named Shi Yan. He dreamed of a man dressed in red, wearing a samurai hat, descending from the sky, holding a gold plate with words on it.

古文：溥视之，其文曰： 陈氏五主，三十四年。 
现代文：史溥看着，那上面的文字是： 陈氏有五代君主，共计三十四年。 
English: Shi Yan looked at it, and the above text read: The Chen clan has had five generations of monarchs, a total of thirty-four years.

古文：遂凌空而上。
现代文：于是就升入空中而去了。
English: So it went up into the air and disappeared.

古文：隋文帝
现代文：隋文帝
English: Sui Emperor Wen Zong

古文：长安朝堂，即旧杨兴村，村门大树今见在。
现代文：长安的朝堂，就是过去的杨兴村。村门前的大树现在还在那里。
English: The morning hall of Chang'an is the former Yangxing village. The big tree in front of the village gate is still there.

古文：初周代有异僧，号为枨公，言词恍惚，后多有验。
现代文：当初南朝周代有个非同一般的和尚，号叫枨公。说话不清楚，不真切，但大多数话都得到了验证。
English: At the beginning of the Southern Dynasty, there was a very unusual monk in the Zhou Dynasty, called Gong Gong. His speech was unclear and imprecise, but most of his words were verified.

古文：时村人于此树下集言议，枨公忽来逐之曰： 此天子坐处，汝等何故居此？ 
现代文：当时村人在这棵大树下集会议事，枨公忽然来驱赶他们说： 这是天子坐的地方，你们为什么要在这里停留 。
English: At that time, the villagers were holding a meeting under this big tree, and the lord suddenly came to drive them away, saying, "This is the place where the Son of Heaven sits, why do you want to stay here."

古文：及隋文帝即位，便有迁都意。
现代文：等到隋文帝即位，就有了迁都的想法。
English: When Emperor Sui Wen ascended the throne, the idea of moving the capital arose.

古文：隋炀帝
现代文：隋炀帝
English: Sui and Qian Dynasties

古文：隋末望气者云： 乾门有天子气，连太原甚盛。 
现代文：隋朝末年有个会看云气的人说： 乾门有天子气，一直连到太原非常旺盛。 
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, there was a person who knew how to read the clouds and said: Qianmen has the spirit of the son of heaven, and it is very vigorous all the way to Taiyuan.

古文：故炀帝置离宫，数游汾阳以厌之。
现代文：所以炀帝就在此建造了离宫，并多次出游汾阳来压这股气。
English: Therefore, Emperor Puyi built a detached palace here, and traveled to Puyang many times to suppress this spirit.

古文：后唐高祖起义兵汾阳，遂有天下。
现代文：后来唐高祖在汾阳兴起义兵。于是就得到了天下。
English: Later, Tang Gaozu raised a volunteer army in Shenyang. Then he gained the world.

古文：唐高祖
现代文：唐高祖
English: Tang Gaozu

古文：唐高祖武德三年，老君见于羊角山。秦王令吉善行入奏，善行告老君云： 入京甚难，无物为验。 
现代文：唐高祖武帝三年，老君现身于羊角山下，秦王叫吉善行进宫启奏，善行告诉老君说： 进京很难，没有用来做凭证的东西。 
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Gaozhuwu of the Tang Dynasty, Laojun appeared at the foot of Yangjiao Mountain. The King of Qin summoned Ji Shan Xing to perform the prelude to his entry into the palace. Shan Xing told Laojun, "It is difficult to enter Beijing. There is nothing to use as a certificate."

古文：老君曰： 汝到京日，有献石似龟者，可为验。 
现代文：老君说： 你到京的那天，有一个奉献像龟一样的石头的人，可以做为证据。 
English: The old man said, "The day you arrived in Kyoto, there was a person who dedicated a stone like a turtle, which can be used as evidence.

古文：既至朝门，果有邵州献石似龟，下有六字，曰： 天下安，千万日。 
现代文：等善行到了朝廷门前时，果然有个邵州人献上一块像龟一样的石头，石下面有六个字是 天下安，千万日 。
English: When the good deed arrived at the front door of the imperial court, a person from Shaoshou presented a stone like a turtle. Under the stone, there were six characters: 天下安,千万日.

古文：唐太宗
现代文：唐太宗
English: Tang Taizong

古文：太宗诞之三日也，有书生皆高祖曰： 公是贵人，有贵子。 
现代文：唐太宗生下三天的时候，有个读书人去对高祖说： 你是贵人，所以才有贵子。 
English: When Emperor Taizong was three days old, a reader went to Gaozhu and said, "You are a noble person, that's why you have a noble son.

古文：因目太宗曰： 龙凤之姿，天日之表也，公贵因此儿，二十必能安民矣。 
现代文：接着又看着太宗说： 这个孩子有有龙凤之姿，说明将来可以做皇帝。你因为有这个儿子，方才能富贵，二十岁就能安定人民生活。 
English: Then he looked at Taizong and said, "This child has the appearance of a dragon and phoenix, indicating that he can become an emperor in the future. Because you have this son, you can only be rich, and you can stabilize people's lives at the age of twenty.

古文：唐齐王元吉
现代文：唐齐王元吉
English: Tang Zi Wang Yuanji

古文：唐齐王元吉于晋阳宫获青石，若龟形，文有丹书四字，曰： 李渊万吉。 
现代文：唐朝齐王李元吉在晋阳宫得到了一块青色的石头，形状很像龟，上面有用红色笔写的四个字： 李渊万吉 。
English: Li Yuanji, the king of Qi in the Tang Dynasty, received a blue stone in the Jinyang Palace. It was shaped like a turtle and had four words written on it with a red pen: Li Yuanwanji.

古文：元吉遣使献之，文字暎澈，宛若龟形，见者咸异焉。
现代文：元吉派使者献石，文字非常清楚好像龟的形状，看见的人都感到十分奇怪。
English: An emissary of the Yuanji faction offered a stone, the writing was very clear, like the shape of a turtle, and everyone who saw it felt very strange.

古文：高祖曰： 不足信也。 
现代文：高祖说： 不足以相信。 
English: Gaozu said, "It's not enough to believe.

古文：乃令水渍磨以验之，数日浸而经宿磨之，其字愈明。
现代文：就叫人用水浸泡摩擦来验证。浸泡了好几天，整夜的摩擦，而石上的文字却更加清楚了。
English: They soaked it in water for several days and rubbed it all night, and the writing on the stone became clearer.

古文：于是内外毕贺。
现代文：于是宫内外全都庆贺。
English: As a result, everyone inside and outside the palace celebrated.

古文：高祖曰： 上天明命，贶以万吉，孤陋寡薄，宁堪预此。
现代文：高祖说： 上天有命，祝赐万吉，我学识浅薄，宁肯受这种安排。
English: Gao Zu said, "God willing, I wish you all the best. I am not well-educated and would rather accept this arrangement."

古文：宜以少牢祀石龟而酹送之。 
现代文：应当用猪羊祭祀龟石，洒酒祭典后再送给他。 。
English: You should use a pig or sheep to sacrifice a turtle stone, and then give it to him after the wine-spilling ceremony.

古文：唐中宗
现代文：唐中宗
English: Tang Zhongzong

古文：唐中宗为天后所废于房陵，仰天而叹，心祝之。因抛一石于空中曰： 我后帝，此石不落。 其石遂为树枝冨挂，至今犹存。
现代文：唐中宗被武后废弃在房陵。他望着苍天而叹息，心里默默的祈祷着，便向空中投去了一个石子说： 我以后还能做皇帝，这块石头就不落地。 这块石头扔上去真就没有落下来，被一个树枝缠挂住，到现在还保存着。
English: Tang Zhongzong was abandoned in the mausoleum by Empress Wu. He looked at the sky and sighed, silently praying in his heart, then threw a stone into the air and said: I can still be an emperor in the future, this stone will not fall to the ground. This stone really did not fall down when it was thrown up, it was caught by a branch and is still preserved.

古文：又有人渡水，拾得古镜，进之。帝照面，其镜中影人语曰： 即作天子。 
现代文：另外还有一个人过河，拾到了一面古镜，把它献给了皇帝，皇帝照着镜子，那镜子里的影子说： 就要做天子。 
English: There was also a man who crossed the river, found an old mirror, and presented it to the emperor. The emperor looked in the mirror, and the shadow in the mirror said, "I want to be the son of heaven."

古文：未浃旬，复居帝位。
现代文：没过十天，中宗又重新登上了皇帝的宝座。
English: Less than ten days later, Zhongzong ascended the throne of the emperor again.

古文：唐相王
现代文：唐相王
English: Tang Xiangwang

古文：唐安州都督杜鹏举，父子皆知名。
现代文：唐朝安州都督杜鹏举，父子都很有名望。
English: Du Peng, the governor of Anzhou in the Tang Dynasty, and his father and son were both famous.

古文：中宗在位，韦后方盛，而鹏举暴卒。
现代文：中宗在位时，韦皇后势力正盛。一天鹏举突然死了。
English: When Emperor Zhongzong was on the throne, Empress Wei was at the height of her power. One day, Penghu suddenly died.

古文：在冥司，鞫讯未毕，至王殿前，忽闻官曰： 王今当立相王为皇帝。 
现代文：在阴司审讯还没有完毕，就被带到了阎王殿的前面。这时忽然听见有当官的说： 大王现在应立相王为皇帝。 
English: Before the trial was over, he was taken to the front of the Hall of Hell. Suddenly, an official was heard to say, "The great king should now make King So-and-so emperor."

古文：王起至阶下，见人身皆长二丈，共扶辇者百人。
现代文：大王起来走到台阶下，看见那些人身高全都有二丈，有一百多人一同推着辇车。
English: The great king got up and went to the bottom of the steps, where he saw all those people who were twice as tall, and more than a hundred people pushing a cart together.

古文：相王被兖冕，在辇中，鬼王见之迎拜，相王下辇答拜，如是礼成而出。
现代文：相王穿着皇帝的礼服，坐在车里。阎王看见了迎上前去礼拜。相王也走下辇车来回拜。像这样的礼拜完了就走了。
English: King Soo, dressed in the emperor's ceremonial robes, sat in the car. The king of hell saw Soo coming forward to worship. King Soo also stepped out of the carriage to worship back and forth. After such a worship, he left.

古文：鹏举既苏言之，时相王作相矣。
现代文：鹏举苏醒以后说了这件事。这时相王已经做相了。
English: Peng Jiu said this after he had regained consciousness. By this time, the king had already made the sign.

古文：后岁余，书皇后将危李氏，相王子临淄王，兴兵灭之，而尊相王为皇帝。
现代文：以后一年多，韦皇后将要害李氏，相王的儿子临淄王起兵消灭了韦皇后而推相王做了皇帝。
English: More than a year later, the Queen of Wei was about to destroy the Li clan. King Linyi, the son of King Si, raised an army to destroy the Queen of Wei and made King Si the emperor.

古文：乃召鹏举，迁其官。
现代文：于是就召见了鹏举，提升了他的官职。
English: So he summoned Peng Jue and promoted him to a higher position.

古文：潞州别驾
现代文：潞州别驾
English: Zhangzhou Beidou

古文：唐玄宗为潞州别驾，将入朝，有军州韩凝礼，自谓知五兆，因以食箸试之。
现代文：唐玄宗做潞州别驾时，将要入朝。有个军州叫韩凝礼的人，自己说懂得五兆。
English: When Emperor Tang Xuan Zong was on his second trip to Zhangzhou, he was about to enter the imperial court. There was a man from Zhangzhou named Han Rongli, who said that he knew five trillion yuan.

古文：既而布卦，一箸无故自起，凡三偃三起，观者以为大吉。
现代文：于是拿着吃饭用的筷子做试验。不久摆开了筷子来占卜吉凶。一根筷子自己就站立起来了，共倒了三次又三次站立起来。观看的人认为是吉祥的象征。
English: So he took the chopsticks used for eating to do an experiment. Soon, he opened the chopsticks to tell fortunes. One chopstick stood up on its own, fell down three times and stood up three times. The people watching thought it was an auspicious symbol.

古文：既而诛韦氏，定天位，因此行也。凝礼起官至五品。
现代文：不久唐玄宗就灭了韦氏，确定了天位。因为这件事，韩凝礼做官到了五品。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty eliminated the Wei clan and established the heavenly throne. Because of this event, Han Rongli became the fifth official.

古文：金蜗牛
现代文：金蜗牛
English: The Golden Snail

古文：唐玄宗在藩邸，有蜗牛成天子字，在寝室之壁。
现代文：唐玄宗在藩邸时，在他寝室的墙壁上有蜗牛形成了 天子 的字样。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong was in the residence, there was a snail on the wall of his bedroom, forming the word "Tian Zi."

古文：上心惧之，以泥涂去。
现代文：皇上心里很害怕，用泥把它涂掉了。
English: The emperor was so scared that he smeared it with mud.

古文：数日复如旧，如是者三。
现代文：过了几天又像原来那样。像这样的三四次。
English: A few days later, it's back to normal. Three or four times like this.

古文：及即位，铸金银蜗牛数百枚，于功德前供养之。又有琢玉为之，后人时有得之者。
现代文：等到玄宗即位，就用金银铸造了一百个蜗牛在供桌前供养着，还有用玉石雕刻成的，后来的人有得到的。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he had a hundred yakitori made of gold and silver, which were served at the table. There were also yakitori carved from jade, which later generations were able to obtain.

