古文：十五日，昧爽起，无梳具，乃亟趋入城寓，而静闻犹卧庙中。
现代文：十五日黎明起床，没有梳洗的用具，于是急忙赶入城中的寓所，而静闻仍躺在庙中。
English: On the fifteenth day, he got up at dawn and did not have the means to wash, so he hurried into his apartment in the city, while Shizun was still lying in the temple.

古文：初拟令顾仆出候，并携囊同入，而顾仆亦卧不能起，余竟日坐楼头俟之，顾仆复卧竟日，不及出游焉。
现代文：起初打算让顾仆出城去侍候，并带着行李一同进城，可顾仆也躺着不能起床，我终日坐在楼上守候他，顾仆又躺了一整天，顾不上出游了。
English: At first, it was planned to let the servant go out of the city to wait for him, and take the luggage with him into the city. However, the servant also lay down and could not get up. I sat upstairs all day waiting for him. The servant lay down again for the whole day, and was unable to travel.

古文：是日暑甚，余因两病人僵卧两处，忧心忡忡，进退未知所适从，聊追忆两三日桂西程纪，迨晚而卧。
现代文：这一天热得厉害，我因为两个病人僵卧茬两个地方，忧心忡忡，不知该进还是该退，无所适从，姑且追忆近两三天桂林以西的游程，作了日记，到晚上才躺下。
English: It was a very hot day. Because of two patients, I was lying in two places, worried, not knowing whether to go in or to go back. I was at a loss. I made a diary, recalling the journey of nearly two or three days to the west of Guilin, and only went to bed in the evening.

古文：十六日，顾仆未起，余欲自往迎静闻。
现代文：十六日顾仆未起床，我想自己前去接静闻。
English: On the sixteenth day, before Gu Min got up, I wanted to go and pick up Jing Han myself.

古文：顾仆强起行，余并付钱赎静闻囊被。
现代文：顾仆勉强起床出行，我一并付了锋去赎静闻的包袱被盖。
English: Gu Min barely got up to travel, I also paid the front to redeem the burden of being covered.

古文：迨上午归，静闻不至而庙僧至焉。
现代文：直到上午归来时，静闻没来而庙里的僧人却来了。
English: When he returned in the morning, Jing Wen had not come, but the monks from the temple had.

古文：言昨日静闻病少瘥病愈，至夜愈甚，今奄奄垂毙，亟须以舆迎之。
现代文：说是昨天静闻的病稍稍痊愈，到夜间病得更严重了，现在已奄奄待毙，须要赶快用车去接他。
English: He said that yesterday Jing He's illness had slightly recovered, but by night it had become more serious, and now he was on the verge of death, and he needed to be picked up quickly by car.

古文：余谓病既甚，益不可移，劝僧少留，余当出视，并携医就治也。
现代文：我认为既然病得厉害，益加不可搬动，劝和尚稍留些时候，我将出城去探视，并带医生去医治。
English: I thought that since my illness was so severe that I could not be moved, I would persuade the monk to stay for a while, and I would go out of the city to visit him and bring a doctor to treat him.

古文：僧怏怏去。
现代文：和尚快快不乐地走了。
English: The monk walked away, unhappy.

古文：余不待午餐，出东门，过唐二贤祠，由其内西转，为柳侯庙，《柳侯碑》在其前，乃苏子瞻书，韩文公诗。
现代文：我不等吃午餐，出了东门，经过唐二贤祠，由祠堂内往西转，是柳侯庙，庙后就是柳宗元的墓了。急忙赶到天妃庙探视静闻，就见他容貌改变，说着胡话，完全失去常态。
English: I did not wait for lunch. I went out of the east gate, passed the Tang Erxian Ancestral Hall, and turned west from the ancestral hall. It was the Liu Hou Temple, and the back of the temple was the tomb of Liu Zongyuan. I hurried to Tianfei Temple to visit Jingwen, and saw him change his appearance, speak nonsense, and completely lose his normal state.

古文：而静闻病中服此，其不即毙亦天幸也。余欲以益元散解之，恐其不信。
现代文：起初问他话，不能回答，继而详细询问，才知道昨天果然病痊愈了些，晚上找来营蒲、雄黄服下去，便感到极度疲困，大概是体内郁积着极度的燥热却又服了这种温热之药，药性悍烈，难怪他到此地步。我想用益元散解药性，担心他不相信。
English: At first, I asked him questions, but he couldn't answer, and then I asked him about it in detail, only to find out that he had indeed recovered from his illness yesterday. In the evening, I went to get some Yingpu and Xionghuang, and after taking them, I felt extremely tired. It was probably because of the extreme heat in my body, but I took this warm medicine. The medicinal properties are powerful, so it's no wonder he got to this point. I wanted to dissolve the medicinal properties with beneficial elements, and I was worried that he wouldn't believe me.

古文：乃二里入北门，觅医董姓者出诊之。
现代文：于是行二里进了北门，找到姓董的医生出城为他诊治。
English: So they walked two miles into the north gate and found a doctor surnamed Dong to go out of the city to treat him.

古文：医言无伤，服药即愈。
现代文：医生说没有妨碍，服药后就会痊愈。
English: The doctor said that there was nothing to worry about and that she would recover after taking the medicine.

古文：乃复随之抵医寓，见所治剂俱旁杂无要。
现代文：于是又随医生来到他的寓所，见他治病的药剂全都旁杂不切要害。
English: So he followed the doctor to his apartment, where he saw that all the medicines to treat his illness were just a distraction.

古文：余携至城寓，另觅益元散，并药剂令顾仆传致之，谕以医意，先服益元，随煎剂以服。
现代文：我把药带到城中的寓所，另外找来益元散，连同药剂命令顾仆转交给静闻，把医生的意思告诉他，先服益元散，随后煎药给他服下。
English: I brought the medicine to my apartment in the city, and I also found Yigensan, and together with the medicine, I ordered my servant to give it to Jingwen, to tell him what the doctor meant, to take Yigensan first, and then to give him the decoction.

古文：迨暮，顾仆返，知服益元后病势少杀矣。
现代文：到天黑时，顾仆返回来，知道服益元散后病势稍微减轻了。
English: By nightfall, Gu Min returned, knowing that the illness had eased slightly after Zhi Yuan's passing.

古文：十七日，中夜雷声殷殷，迨晓而雨。
现代文：十七日半夜雷声隆隆，至拂晓时才下雨。
English: At midnight on the 17th there was a rumble of thunder, and it didn't rain until dawn.

古文：晨餐后，令顾仆出探静闻病，已渐解。
现代文：早餐后，命令顾仆出城去探望静闻的病，已渐渐缓解。
English: After breakfast, he ordered his servant to go out of the city to visit Jing He, whose illness had gradually eased.

古文：既午雨止，湿蒸未己。
现代文：中午雨停之后，天气湿热如蒸。
English: After the rain stopped at noon, the weather was hot and humid.

古文：匡坐寓中，倦于出焉。
现代文：端坐在寓所中，倦于出游了。
English: Sitting in my apartment, tired of traveling.

古文：柳郡三面距江，故曰壶城。
现代文：柳州府城三面环江，所以称为壶城。
English: Liuzhou Fucheng is surrounded by the Yangtze River on three sides, so it is called Jug City.

古文：江自北来，复折而北去，南环而宽，北夹而束，有壶之形焉，子厚所谓 江流曲似九回肠 也。
现代文：柳江自北面流来，又折向北流去，南面环城之处宽阔，北面两道江流相夹并紧束在一起，有着茶壶一样的形态，正是柳子厚所说的 江流曲似九回肠 。
English: The Liujiang River flows from the north and flows to the north, and the south side of the city is wide. The two rivers on the north side are sandwiched and tightly bundled together, with a teapot-like shape. It is exactly what Liu Zi Hou said about the river flowing like a nine-chambered intestine.

古文：其城颇峻，而东郭之聚庐反密于城中，黄翰简、龙天卿之第俱在焉。
现代文：它的城墙十分高峻，而东边外城聚居的房屋反而比城中密集，黄翰简、龙天卿的府第都在那里。
English: Its city walls are very high, but the houses clustered outside the city on the east side are denser than those in the city. The residences of Huang Han Jian and Long Tianqing are all there.

古文：黄翰简名启元。壬戌进士，父名化。由乡科任广东平远令，平盗有功，进佥宪明代都察院。
现代文：黄翰简是壬戌年的进士，父亲由于中乡试出任广东平远县县令，平定盗贼有功，提升为金宪。
English: Huang Hanjian was a member of the Jin Dynasty in the Year of the Rooster. His father was promoted to Jin Xian after he was promoted to the post of county magistrate of Pingyuan County in Guangdong Province. He was credited with suppressing thieves.

古文：母夫人许氏，以贞烈死平远，有颛祠。
现代文：母亲许夫人，因为贞烈死在平远县，有专门的祠堂。
English: Mrs. Xu's mother, because she died a virtuous death in Pingyuan County, has a special ancestral hall.

古文：余昔闻之文相公湛持，言其夫人死于平远城围之上，而近阅《西事珥》，则言其死于会昌，其地既异，则事亦有分。
现代文：我从前从文湛持相公那里听说过这事，说他的夫人死在平远县被围的城墙上，可是近来读《西事饵》，却是说她死在会昌县，她死的地点既然不同，那么事迹也应有所区别。
English: I had heard about this from Wen Zhan and his brother-in-law, who said that his wife died on the walled city of Pingyuan County, but recently I read the "Western Affairs Review," which said that she died in Huichang County. Since the place of her death is different, the deeds should also be different.

古文：此其所居，有祠在罗池东。
现代文：此地是她的居住地，有祠堂在罗池东面。
English: This is her place of residence, with an ancestral hall to the east of the Luo Pond.

古文：当俟考文。
现代文：这事有待考证。
English: This has yet to be verified.

古文：翰简二子俱乡科。十八日，因顾仆病不能炊，余就粥肆中，即出东门观静闻。
现代文：十八日因顾仆生病不能烧饭，我到店铺中吃了稀粥，立即出东门去看望静闻。
English: On the 18th, I couldn't cook dinner because my maid was sick. I ate gruel in the store and immediately went to the east gate to visit Jingwen.

古文：一里，北过二贤祠，东过开元寺，又共一里，抵天妃庙，则静闻病虽少痊，而形神犹非故吾也。
现代文：一里路，往北路过二贤祠，往东路过开元寺，又共走一里，来到天妃庙，就见静闻的病虽然少许痊愈了些，但容貌精神仍不是原来的样子。
English: A one-mile walk north past the Ancestral Hall of the Two Sages, a one-mile walk east past Kaiyuan Temple, and a one-mile walk to the Temple of Heaven's Fairies revealed that although Jingwen's illness had somewhat healed, her appearance and spirit were still not what they had been.

古文：此方病者不信药而信鬼，僧不斋食而肉食，故僧以大餔惑静闻，而静闻信之。僧谓彼所恃不在药而在食。
现代文：我起初打算把钱给庙里的和尚，要他买些绿豆杂米来作粥，用豆芽菜和鲜姜作菜给静闻吃。追问先前给的钱，竟然不买米，都买成面饼来吃。
English: At first, I planned to give the money to the monk in the temple, asking him to buy some green beans and miscellaneous rice to make porridge, and bean sprouts and fresh ginger to make a dish for Jingwen to eat. When I inquired about the money I had previously given, I found out that they did not buy rice, but they all bought noodles to eat.

古文：静闻谓予不惜其命而惜钱，盖犹然病狂之言也。余乃还，过开元寺入瞻焉。
现代文：我害怕重蹈覆辙，便没有给钱，准备自己买来给他，可静闻与庙里的和尚交相用难听话来伤害我。我只得回来，路过开元寺进去瞻仰。
English: I was afraid of repeating the same mistake, so I didn't give him the money and prepared to buy it for him myself. However, I overheard that the monks in the temple were communicating with each other and using unpleasant words to hurt me. I had to come back and go through Kaiyuan Temple to pay my respects.

古文：寺为唐古刹，虽大而无他胜。
现代文：寺院是唐代的古刹，规模虽大却无其他胜迹。
English: The temple is an ancient temple of the Tang Dynasty. Although it is large, it has no other attractions.

古文：又西过唐二贤祠觅拓碑者家，市所拓苏子瞻书韩辞二纸。
现代文：又向西路过唐二贤祠找到拓碑人的家，买了两张他拓的苏东坡写的韩愈的辞。
English: He also walked westward past the Tang Erxian Ancestral Hall to find the home of the person who erected the monument, and bought two copies of Han Yu's speech written by Su Dongpo.

古文：更觅他拓，见有柳书《罗池题石》一方，笔劲而刻古，虽后已剥落，而先型宛然。
现代文：再找其他拓片，见有一张柳宗元书写的《罗池题石》，笔锋遒劲而刻工古朴，虽然后边已经剥落，可原先的形制宛然在目。
English: Looking for other rubbings, there is a copy of "The Stone of Luo Lake" written by Liu Zongyuan. The pen is sharp and the engraving is quaint. Although the back has peeled off, the original shape is still visible.

古文：余嘱再索几纸，其人欣然曰： 此易耳。
现代文：我嘱托再找出几张来，那人欣然说： 这容易。
English: When I asked him to find a few more, the man said happily, "That's easy.

古文：即为公发硎磨刀石出一石拓，乃新摹而才镌之者。 
现代文：马上为尊公用磨刀石打磨出一块石碑来拓，是新近摹拓并才雕刻好的碑。 
English: Immediately, a stone monument was polished with a sharpening stone for the honor of the public. It is a newly excavated and carved monument.

古文：问： 旧碑何在？ 曰： 已碎裂。
现代文：我问： 旧碑在哪里？  答： 已经碎裂。
English: I asked: Where is the old monument? Answer: It is broken.

古文：今番不似前之剥而不全矣。 
现代文：今天这次不像以前的剥落不全了。 
English: Today, unlike in the past, the peeling is not complete.

古文：余甚惋惜，谢其新拓，只携旧者一纸并韩辞二大纸去。
现代文：我十分惋惜，辞谢了他的新拓片，只带着一张旧的和两大张韩愈的辞离开了。
English: To my great regret, I thanked him for his new rubbings and left with only an old rubbing and two large sheets of Han Yu's resignation.

古文：询罗池所在，曰： 从祠右大街北行，从委巷东入即是。
现代文：打听罗池所在的地方，说： 从祠堂右边的大街往北走，从曲折的小巷中向东进去就是。
English: Ask where Luo Chi is located, and say: Go north from the main street on the right of the ancestral hall, and go east from the winding alley.

古文：然已在人家环堵中，未易觅也。 
现代文：但是已在人家的围墙中了，不容易找到。 
English: But it's in someone's fence, so it's not easy to find.

古文：余从之。
现代文：我听从他的话。
English: I listened to him.

古文：北向大街行半里，不得；东入巷再询之，土人初俱云不知。
现代文：向北经大街行半里，找不熟；向东走进小巷再问人，当地人起初都说不知道。
English: After walking half a mile to Beijing Street, I couldn't find anyone familiar with it. When I walked into the alley to the east and asked people, the locals initially said they didn't know.

古文：最后有悟者，曰： 岂谓 罗池夜月 耶？
现代文：最后有人醒悟过来，说： 莫非是说 罗池夜月夕吗？
English: Finally, someone came to their senses and said, "Didn't you just say that Luo Chi means the evening of the moon?

古文：此景已久湮灭，不可见矣。 
现代文：此景已湮没了很久，不能见到了。 
English: This scene has been lost for a long time and can no longer be seen.

古文：余问何故，曰： 大江东南有灯台山，魄悬台上而影浸池中，为此中绝景。
现代文：我问是什么缘故，说： 大江东南方有个灯台山，月光高悬台上而月影浸在池中，是这里绝妙的美景。
English: I asked why, and he said: There is a lighthouse mountain in the southeast of the Dajiang River. The moonlight is high on the platform while the moon's shadow is immersed in the pool, which is a wonderful beauty here.

古文：土人苦官府游宴之烦，抛石聚垢，池为半塞，影遂不耀，觅之无可观也。 
现代文：本地人苦于官府游玩宴饮的烦扰，抛石块堆垃圾，水池被填塞了一半，月影便不再闪耀，找到它也没有什么可看的了。 
English: The local people suffer from the annoyance of the government's tour of banquets, throwing stones and piles of garbage, the pool is half filled, the moon's shadow no longer shines, and there is nothing to see when it is found.

古文：余求一见，其人引余穿屋角垣隙，进一侧门，则有池一湾，水甚污浊，其南有废址两重，尚余峻垣半角，想即昔时亭馆所托也。
现代文：我请他带我去那里，那人领我穿过屋角的墙缝，进了一道侧门，就见有一池水，非常污浊，水池南边有两层废弃的房址，还剩下高墙的半个角落，想来便是旧时亭台楼馆所在之处了。
English: I asked him to take me there. The man led me through a gap in the corner of the roof, into a side door, and there was a pool of water, very dirty. On the south side of the pool, there were two floors of abandoned houses, and there was still half a corner of the high wall left. I think that's where the old pavilion was located.

古文：东岸龙眼二株，极高大，郁倩茂盛的树枝垂实，正累累焉。
现代文：东岸有两棵龙眼树，极高大，葱郁秀美，垂挂着果实，正累累结果。
English: There are two longan trees on the east bank, very tall, lush and beautiful, hanging with fruit, and are bearing fruit.

古文：度其地当即柳祠之后，祠即昔之罗池庙，柳侯之所神栖焉者。
现代文：估计此地应当就是柳侯祠的后方，祠堂就是从前的罗池庙，柳侯的神位居住在那里的地方。
English: It is estimated that this place should be the back of Liu Hou's ancestral hall, the ancestral hall is the former Luo Chi Temple, where Liu Hou's deity lives.

古文：今池已不能为神有，况欲其以景存耶？
现代文：今天水池已不能为神灵拥有，何况想要它靠景色保存下来吗？
English: Today, the pool can no longer be owned by the gods, and besides, do you want it to be preserved by the scenery?

古文：凭吊久之，还饭于寓。
现代文：凭吊了很久，回到寓所吃了饭。
English: After hanging for a long time, I went back to my apartment and ate dinner.

古文：乃出小南门，问融县舟，欲为明日行计。
现代文：于是出了小南门，打听去融县的船，打算为明天上路做准备。
English: So I left Xiaonanmen, inquired about the boat to Rong County, and planned to prepare for the trip tomorrow.

古文：始知府城北门明日为墟期，墟散舟归，沙弓便舟鳞次而待焉。
现代文：这才知道府城北门明天是赶集夭，集市散后船返回时，到沙弓的便船鳞次栉比地等待着。
English: It was only then that I knew that Fucheng North Gate would be busy with the fair the next day. When the boat returned after the fair was over, there were so many boats waiting to get to Shayou.

古文：乃循江东向大南门渡江。
现代文：于是顺江向东到大南门渡江。
English: As a result, the Shun River flows eastward to the Great South Gate.

古文：江之南，稍西为马鞍山，最高而两端并耸，为府之案山；稍东为屏风山，形伏而端方，其东北为灯台山，则又高而扼江北转者也。
现代文：江的南岸，稍西一些是马鞍山，最高处而且两端并排耸立的，是府城的案山；稍东一些是屏风山，形状低伏而端端正正；它的东北面是灯台山，就是又高并扼住江流往北转去的山了。
English: On the south bank of the river, a little to the west is Ma'anshan, the highest point and the two ends of which stand side by side, is the capital's case mountain; a little to the east is the screen mountain, the shape is low and the end is straight; its northeast is the lighthouse mountain, that is, the mountain that is high and holds the river flow to the north.

古文：马鞍之西，尖峰峭耸，为立鱼山。
现代文：马鞍山的西边，尖峰陡峭耸立，是立鱼山。
English: On the west side of Ma'anshan Mountain, a steep peak rises, it is the Standing Fish Mountain.

古文：其山特起如鱼之立，然南复有山映之，非近出其下不能辨。
现代文：那山独自耸起如鱼一样竖立着，然而南面又有山映衬着它，不走近它下边是不能分辨出的。
English: The mountain stands alone like a fish, but there is another mountain to the south that stands in contrast to it, and it is impossible to distinguish it without getting close to the bottom of it.

古文：既渡，余即询仙奕岩，居人无知者。
现代文：渡江后，我立即打听仙奕岩，居民没有知道的。
English: After crossing the river, I immediately inquired about Xianyi Rock. The residents did not know about it.

古文：西南一里至立鱼山，而后知其东之相对者，即仙奕岩也。
现代文：向西南一里走到立鱼山，然后知道了它东面与之相对的山，就是仙奕岩了。
English: I walked one mile southwest to Tateyushan, and then I knew that the mountain opposite it to the east was Xianyi Rock.

古文：岩在马鞍之西麓，居人止知为马鞍，不知为仙奕，实无二山也。
现代文：仙奕岩在马鞍山的西麓，居民只知是马鞍山，不知是仙奕岩，实际上不是两座山。
English: Xianyi Rock is at the western foot of Ma'anshan Mountain. Residents only know it as Ma'anshan Mountain, but do not know that it is Xianyi Rock. In fact, it is not two mountains.

古文：立鱼当宾州大道，在城之西南隅。
现代文：立鱼山正当去宾州的大道上，在城的西南隅。
English: Standing Fish Hill is just off Pennsylvania Avenue, in the southwest corner of the city.

古文：由东北蹑级盘崖而登，岩门东向，踞山之半。
现代文：从东北麓踏着石阶绕着山崖上登，洞口向东，盘踞在半山腰。
English: From the northeastern foot, climb the stone steps around the cliff. The cave entrance faces east and is located in the middle of the mountainside.

古文：门外右上复旁裂一龛，若悬窝缀阁，内置山神；门外左下拾级数层，又另裂一窍，若双崖夹壁，高穹直入，内供大士。
现代文：洞口外右上方又在旁边裂开一个石完，好像高悬的鸟窝缀空的楼阁，里面放着山神；洞口外左侧下去几层石阶，又另外裂开一个石窍，好像双层的山崖夹层的绝壁，高高隆起一直进去，里面供着观音大士。
English: Outside the mouth of the cave, on the upper right side, another stone is broken next to it, like a high-hanging bird's nest adorned with an empty pavilion, with a mountain god inside; on the left side outside the mouth of the cave, several layers of stone steps go down, and another stone nook is broken, like a double-layer cliff wall, high rise all the way in, with the Goddess of Mercy inside.

古文：入岩之门，如张巨吻，其中宽平整朗，顶石倒书 南来兹穴 四大字，西蜀杨芳笔也。
现代文：进入岩洞口，如张开的巨口，其中宽敞平坦，整洁明亮，洞顶的岩石上倒写着 南来兹穴 四个大字，是四川杨芳的手笔。
English: Entering the mouth of the cave is like opening a huge mouth, which is spacious, flat, neat and bright. On the rock at the top of the cave, Nanlaizi Cave is written upside down. The four large characters are the handwriting of Yang Fang from Sichuan.

古文：门外又有诗碑。内列神位甚多，后通两窍，一南一北，穿腹西入，皆小若剜窦。
现代文：洞内排列着的神位很多，后边通有两个石窍，一南一北，穿过山腹向西进去，都是小得像刀挖出的孔洞。
English: There are many shrines lined up inside the cave, and there are two stone nooks at the back, one south and one north, going through the mountainside to the west. They are all small holes dug out like a knife.

古文：先由南窍进。内忽穹然，高盘竖裂。
现代文：先由南边的石窍进去，里边忽然弯然隆起，高高弯曲着竖直裂开。
English: First, go in through the crag on the south side, and the inside suddenly swells up, bends high, and splits vertically.

古文：西复有门透山之西，其中崇彻窈窕，内列三清巨像。
现代文：西边又有个洞口穿透到山的西面，其中高深幽远，里面陈列着三清的巨像。
English: On the west side, there is another cave entrance penetrating to the west side of the mountain, which is high and deep and remote, with Sanqing's colossus on display inside.

古文：后门逾阈而出，西临绝壑，遥瞻西南群峰开绕，延揽甚扩。
现代文：从后洞口越过石门槛出来，西边面临绝谷，遥望西南方群峰回绕开去，延伸得很广。
English: From the back entrance of the cave, the stone threshold is crossed, the west side faces the valley, and the southwest peaks are seen in the distance, extending very widely.

古文：由门侧右穿峡窍以下，复有洞，门西向。
现代文：由洞口侧边往右穿过峡谷中的石窍下来，又有个洞，洞口向西。
English: From the side of the mouth of the cave to the right, go down through the rocky outcrop in the canyon, and there is another hole, the mouth of which is to the west.

古文：其内不高而宽，有一石柱中悬，杂置神像环倚之，柱后有穴，即前洞所通之北窍也。
现代文：洞内不高却宽，有一根石柱悬在中央，神像杂乱地放着 呈环形背靠石柱，柱后有个洞穴，就是前洞通着的靠北的石窍了。
English: The cave is not high, but wide. A stone pillar hangs in the center. Statues of deities are scattered in a ring shape behind the pillar. There is a cave behind the pillar, which is the northern stone nook through which the front hole passes.

古文：乃知是山透腹环转，中空外达，八面玲珑，即桂林诸洞所不多见也。
现代文：这才知道了这座山弯弯转转穿透山腹，中间是空心的，外边四通八达，八面玲珑，就是在桂林诸洞中也不多见了。
English: It was only then that I realized that this mountain curved and twisted and penetrated the mountainside. The center was hollow, and the outside was all-pervading and exquisite. Even among the caves in Guilin, there were not many of them.

古文：由门内左循岩壁而上，洞横南北，势愈高盘。
现代文：由洞口内左侧沿着岩壁往上走，洞横成南北向，洞势愈加高高隆起。
English: From the left side of the cave entrance, walk up along the rock wall. The cave runs horizontally in a north-south direction, and the cave rises higher and higher.

古文：洞顶五穴剜空，仰而望之，恍若明星共曜。
现代文：洞顶有五个挖空的洞穴，抬头去望它们，仿佛明星在一同闪耀。
English: There are five hollowed-out caves at the top of the cave. Looking up at them, it's as if the stars are shining together.

古文：其下东开一峡，前达僧栖，置门下键门上的横插，不通行焉。
现代文：它下方东面张开一条峡谷，往前直达僧人的住处，安了门下了门门，不能通行。
English: Below and to the east of it, a canyon opens up, stretching all the way to the monks' residence. Once the gate is closed, it is impassable.

古文：稍南，西转下峡，复西透一门，前亦下临西壑。
现代文：稍向南走，往西转下峡谷，又向西钻出一个洞口，前边也是下临西面的壑谷。
English: Walk a little to the south, turn west down the canyon, and drill a hole to the west, in front of which is also Shizuku Valley on the western side.

古文：由门左转而入，其内下坠成峡，直迸东底，深峻不可下。
现代文：由洞口向左转进去，那里边下坠成峡，一直迸裂到东面的洞底，深峻不能下去。
English: From the mouth of the cave, turn to the left, where the edge falls into a gorge and continues to split to the east of the bottom of the cave. It is too deep to go down.

古文：由其上扪崖透腋，又南出一门。
现代文：由峡上抓着石崖钻到侧边，又向南出了一个洞口。
English: By the gorge clutching the cliff drilled to the side, and to the south out of a hole.

古文：其门南向，前有一小峰枝起，与大峰骈六成坳。
现代文：这个洞口向南，前方有座小峰分支耸起，与主峰并立形成山坳。
English: The mouth of the cave faces south, with a small peak branching out in front, forming a ridge alongside the main peak.

古文：由其间攀崖梯石，直蹑立鱼之颠焉。
现代文：由它们之间攀着山崖踩着岩石，径直登上立鱼山的峰顶。
English: From between them, climb the cliff, step on the rocks, and go straight to the top of the Standing Fish Mountain.

古文：盖是洞透漏山腹，东开二门，西开三门，南开一门，其顶悬而侧裂者，复十有余穴，开夹而趣括无穷，曲折而境深莫閟，真异界矣。
现代文：原来这个洞穿透了山腹，东面开有两个洞口，西面开了三个洞口，南面开有一个洞口，山顶高悬并斜向裂开之处，又有十多个洞穴，有宽有窄而包含了无穷的趣味，曲曲折折而境界幽深却不闭塞，真正是奇异的地方啊！
English: Originally, this hole penetrated the mountainside. There were two openings on the east side, three openings on the west side, and one opening on the south side. The top of the mountain was high and slanted, and there were more than ten caves. They were wide and narrow, but contained infinite fun. They had twists and turns, but the boundary was deep but not blocked. It was truly a strange place!

古文：复由诸洞宛转出前洞，从门右历级南上，少憩僧庐。
现代文：又经由诸洞辗转出了前洞，从洞口右侧沿石阶向南上走，在僧房中少许休息一下。
English: After passing through Zhu Dongyu, walk out of the front cave, walk south along the stone steps from the right side of the cave entrance, and take a short break in the monk's house.

古文：东瞰山下，有塘汇水一方，中洼而内沁，不知何出；其东北所对者，即马鞍山之西北麓，仙奕岩在焉；其东南所对者，乃马鞍山西南枝峰，又有寿星岩焉。
现代文：往东俯瞰山下，有水塘积了一片水，中间下洼而浸入地里，不知从哪里流出去；它东北相对的山，就是马鞍山的西北麓，仙奕岩在那里；它东南相对的山，是马鞍山西南的支峰，又有个寿星岩在那里。
English: Looking down the mountain to the east, there is a pond that has accumulated a piece of water, which has sunk into the ground in the middle and flowed out from I don't know where; the mountain opposite it to the northeast is the northwest foot of Ma'an Mountain, where Xianyi Rock is; the mountain opposite it to the southeast is the southwest peak of Ma'an Mountain, and there is a Shouxing Rock there.

古文：遥望其后重岩回复，当马鞍之奥境，非一览可尽。
现代文：遥望它的后面，重重岩石回绕环复在马鞍山腹地，不是一眼可以观尽的。
English: Looking at the back of it from a distance, it is surrounded by heavy rocks in the Ma'anshan hinterland. It is not possible to see everything at a glance.

古文：时日已下舂，雨复连绵，余欲再候静闻，并仙奕岩俱留为后游。
现代文：此时已是太阳西下之时，雨又连绵不绝地下起来，我想再去问候静闻，连同仙奕岩全都留着日后来游。
English: At this time, when the sun was setting, the rain began to fall incessantly. I wanted to say hello to Jinghan again, and together with Xianyi Rock, we all kept swimming back to the sun.

古文：下山一里，复渡南门，又东北三里，携豆蔬抵天妃殿，而静闻与僧相侵弥甚；欲以钱赎被。而主僧复避不即至。
现代文：下山走一里，再渡江到南门，又往东北行三里，带上豆子蔬菜来到天妃殿，可静闻与和尚交相伤害我更加厉害；想用钱赎回被盖，而主事的和尚又躲避起来不马上来。
English: I walked one mile down the mountain, then crossed the river to the South Gate, and then walked three miles to the northeast, bringing beans and vegetables to the Heavenly Princess Hall. But quietly listening to the intercourse with the monk hurt me even more; I wanted to redeem the quilt cover with money, but the monk in charge hid and did not come right away.

古文：余乃不顾而返，亟入城，已门将下键矣。
现代文：我只好不理会返回来，急忙进城，城门已将要下门门了。
English: I had to ignore my return and hurried into the city. The city gate was about to fall down.

古文：昏黑抵寓，不得晚餐而卧。
现代文：在昏黑中来到寓所，没吃到晚餐便躺下了。
English: He arrived at the apartment in the dark and went to bed before dinner.

古文：十九日，凌晨而起，雨势甚沛，早出北门观墟市，而街衢雨溢成渠，墟不全集。
现代文：十九日凌晨便起床，雨势非常大，早早出了北门观看集市，可街道中雨水溢成了沟渠，集市没有全部聚集起来。
English: I got up early in the morning of the 19th, it was raining very hard, and I went out of the north gate early to watch the fair, but the rainwater overflowed into the ditch in the street, and the fair did not all gather.

古文：上午还饭于寓。
现代文：上午回到寓所吃饭。
English: Returned to the apartment in the morning for dinner.

古文：计留钱米绿豆，令顾仆往送静闻，而静闻已至。
现代文：计划留下些钱、米、绿豆，命令顾仆前去送给静闻，可静闻已经来到了。
English: He planned to leave some money, rice, and mung beans, and ordered his servants to go ahead and give them to Jing He, but Jing He had already arrived.

古文：其病犹未全脱，而被襆之属俱弃之天妃庙，只身而来。余阴嘱寓主人，同顾仆留栖焉。
现代文：他的病仍未痊愈，但被盖包袱之类都丢弃在天妃庙，只身前来，我暗中嘱托寓所的主人，同顾仆留下住在这里。
English: His illness still hasn't healed, but all his luggage and other belongings have been thrown away in the Temple of Heaven's Fairies. He came alone, and I secretly begged the owner of the apartment to stay here with his servant.

古文：余乃挈囊出西南门，得沙弓小舟一舱，遂附之。而同舟者俱明晨行，竟宿沙际。
现代文：我于是带上行李出了西南门，找到一艘去沙弓的小船，便搭乘此船，但同船的人都要明天早晨才动身，竟然住宿在沙滩边。
English: I then took my luggage out of the southwest gate, found a small boat to get to Sandbows, and took this boat, but the people in the boat would only leave tomorrow morning, and even stayed on the beach.

古文：二十日，候诸行者，上午始发舟。
现代文：二十日等候诸位上路的人，上午才开船。
English: For those of you who have been waiting on the road for the 20th, the boat will not set sail until the morning.

古文：循城西而北溯柳江，过西门，城稍逊而内，遂不滨江云。
现代文：沿城西往北溯柳江而行，经过西门，城墙稍向内退进去，竟然不濒临江流。
English: Walking along the west of the city to the north along the Liujiang River, passing through the west gate, the city wall retreated slightly inward, and it was not even close to the river.

古文：江之西，鹅山亭亨，独立旷野中，若为标焉。
现代文：江的西岸上，鹅山亭亭玉立，独立在旷野中，好像是标杆一样。
English: On the west bank of the river, the Geese Mountain Pavilion stands tall, independent in the wilderness, as if it were a benchmark.

古文：再北，江东岸犹多编茅瞰水之家，其下水涯，稻舟鳞次，俱带梗而束者，诸妇就水次称而市焉，俱从柳城、融县顺流而下者也。
现代文：再往北，江东岸仍有很多茅草编成俯瞰江水的人家，茅屋下方的水边，载稻谷的船鳞次栉比，全是带着稻梗捆成束的，许多妇女就在水边称了卖，都是从柳城、融县顺流而下的船。
English: Further north, on the east bank of the river, there are still many thatched houses overlooking the river. On the water's edge below the huts, the boats carrying rice are all bundled with rice stalks, and many women weigh and sell them on the water's edge. They are all boats coming down the river from Liucheng and Rongxian.

古文：又北二十里，晚泊古陵堡，在江西岸。
现代文：又向北行船二十里，晚上停泊在古陵堡，在江西岸。
English: The ship sailed another twenty miles north and anchored in the evening at the ancient mausoleum, on the west bank of the river.

古文：自柳州府西北，两岸山土石间出，土山迤逦间，忽石峰数十，挺立成队，峭削森罗，或隐或现。
现代文：自柳州府往西北行，两岸的山土山石山间隔着出现，土山透巡之间，忽然有石峰数十座，挺立成队，陡峭峻削，森然罗列，或隐或现。
English: From Liuzhou to the northwest, the mountains and hills on both sides of the river appear at intervals. Between the mountains and hills, there are suddenly dozens of stone peaks, standing in a line, steeply cut, and clearly lined up, either hidden or present.

古文：所异于阳朔、桂林者，彼则四顾皆石峰，无一土山相杂；此则如锥处囊中，犹觉有脱颖之异耳。
现代文：所不同于阳朔、桂林的地方是那里四面环顾都是石峰，无一处土山相杂；此地即如同锥子装在囊中，仍然觉得有脱颖而出的奇异之处罢了。
English: What is different from Yangshuo and Guilin is that there are stone peaks in all directions, and there is no mixture of soil and mountains; this place is like a cone in a bag, and I still feel that there is something strange that stands out.

古文：柳江西北上，两涯多森削之石，虽石不当关，滩不倒壑，而芙蓉倩水之态，不若阳朔江中俱回崖突壑壁，亦不若洛容江中俱悬滩荒碛也。
现代文：沿柳江往西北上行，两岸有许多森然削立的岩石，虽然岩石不挡在关口上，河滩没有倒立成壑谷，却有芙蓉出秀水的姿态，不像阳朔的江中全是回亘的山崖突起的壑谷绝壁，也不像洛容的江中全是高悬的河滩荒凉的沙石滩。
English: Going up the Liujiang River to the northwest, there are many well-hewn rocks on both sides. Although the rocks do not block the pass, the beach does not stand upside down into a reed valley, but has the appearance of beautiful water. Unlike Yangshuo's river, which is full of towering cliffs, and unlike Luoyang's river, which is full of high-hanging beaches and desolate sandy beaches.

古文：此处余所历者，其江有三，俱不若建溪之险。
现代文：此处我所经历过的地方，江流有三条，都不如建溪险要。
English: Here, where I have experienced, there are three rivers, all of which are more dangerous than the creek.

古文：阳朔之漓水，虽流有多滩，而中无一石，两旁时时轰崖缀壁，扼掣江流，而群峰逶迤夹之，此江行之最胜者；洛容之洛青，滩悬波涌，岸无凌波之石，山皆连茅之坡，此江行之最下者，柳城之柳江，滩既平流，涯多森石，危峦倒岫，时与土山相为出没，此界于阳朔、洛容之间，而为江行之中者也。
现代文：阳朔的漓江，虽然江流中有许多河滩，可其中没有一处是石滩，两旁时时有崩裂的山崖连缀着的石壁，扼住江流，而群峰透巡夹住江流，这是江中行船风景最优美的地方；洛容县的洛青江，河滩高悬波涛汹涌，岸上无凌波之石，山全是茅草连接的山坡，这是江中行船景色最差的地方；柳城县的柳江，河滩既与水流平齐，岸上有许多森立的岩石，险峻的山峦倒悬的山峰，不时与土山交替出没，这是介于阳朔、洛容之间，是江中行船景色中等的地方了。
English: Yangshuo's Lijiang River, although there are many beaches in the river flow, but none of them are rocky beaches. On both sides, there are always cracked mountain cliffs with stone walls, holding back the river flow, while the peaks intertwine the river flow. This is the most beautiful place for sailing in the river. Luoqing River in Luoyang County, the beach is high and rough, there is no rock on the shore, and the mountains are all slopes connected by thatch. This is the worst place for sailing in the river. Liucheng River in Liucheng County, the beach is flat with the water flow, there are many standing rocks on the shore,

古文：二十一日昧爽行。
现代文：二十一日黎明开船。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 21st.

古文：二十里，上午过杉岭，江右尖峰叠出。
现代文：行二十里，上午经过杉岭，江右尖峰层层叠叠出现。
English: Twenty miles later, in the morning, after passing through the Cedar Ridge, the peaks on the right side of the river appeared in layers.

古文：又三十里，下午抵柳城县。
现代文：又行船三十里，下午抵达柳城县。
English: The boat traveled another thirty miles and arrived in Liucheng County in the afternoon.

古文：自城北溯怀远江而入，又十里，治于古旧县。
现代文：从城北溯怀远江进去，又行十里，停泊在古旧县。
English: From the north of the city to the Huaiyuan Yangtze River, another ten miles, anchored in the ancient county.

古文：此古县治也，在江北岸。
现代文：这一天非常炎热，在船中如被火烤。
English: It was a very hot day and we were roasting in the boat.

古文：是日暑甚，舟中如炙。柳城县在江东岸，孤城寥寂，有石崖在城南，西突瞰江，此地濒流峭壁，所见惟此。
现代文：柳城县在江东岸，一座孤城寥落寂静，有石崖在城南，向西突出俯瞰江流，此地濒临江流的峭壁，所见过的仅有此处。
English: Liucheng County is on the east bank of the river. It is a lonely and quiet city. There is a stone cliff in the south of the city, protruding to the west overlooking the river. This is the only place where I have seen the cliff on the edge of the river.

古文：城西江道分而为二。
现代文：城西河道分为两条。
English: The Seongseo River is divided into two streams.

古文：自西来者，庆远江也，自北来者，怀远江也，二江合而为柳江，所谓黔江也。下流经柳州府，历象州，而与郁江合于浔。
现代文：自西边流来的，是庆远江，它的源头一是出自天河县称为龙江，一是出自贵州都匀长官司称为乌泥江，流经忻城县北境流入龙江，合流后流到此地；自北面流来的，是怀远江，它的源头一条出自贵州平越府，一条出自黎平府，流经怀远县、融县到此地。
English: Flowing from the west is the Qingyuan River. One of its headwaters comes from Tianhe County, known as the Longjiang River, and the other comes from Duyun, Guizhou, known as the Wuling River. It flows through the northern border of Lucheng County into the Longjiang River, and flows to this place after merging. Flowing from the north is the Huaiyuan River. One of its headwaters comes from Pingyue Prefecture, Guizhou, and one comes from Liping Prefecture, flowing through Huaiyuan County and Rong County to this place.

古文：今分浔州、南宁、太平三府为左江道，以郁江为左也；分柳州、庆远、思恩为右江道，以黔江为右也。
现代文：二江合流后称为柳江，就是所谓的黔江了。往下流经柳州府，经过象州，而后与郁江合流汇入得江。今天划分出得州、南宁、太平三府设为左江道，是把郁江视为左了；分出柳州府、庆远府、思恩府设为右江道，是把黔江视为右了。
English: After the confluence of the two rivers, it is called the Liujiang River, which is the so-called Minjiang River. It flows down through Liuzhou Prefecture, passes through Xiangzhou, and then merges with the Yujiang River into the Dejiang River. Today, the three prefectures of Dezhou, Nanning and Taiping are divided into the left river, and the Yujiang River is considered to be on the left; the three prefectures of Liuzhou, Qingyuan and Shine are divided into the right river, and the Minjiang River is considered to be on the right.

古文：然郁江上流又有左、右二江，则以富州之南盘为右，广源之丽江为左也，二江合于南宁西之合江镇，古之左右二江指此，而今则以黔、郁分耳。
现代文：然而郁江的上游又有左、右二江，那么是把富州的南盘江视为右，广源的丽江视为左了，二江合流于南宁西面的合江镇，古代的左、右二江是指这两条，而今天却是根据黔江、郁江来划分了。
English: However, in the upper reaches of the Yujiang River, there are two rivers on the left and right, so the Nanpan River in Fuzhou is considered to be on the right, and the Lijiang River in Guangyuan is considered to be on the left. The two rivers meet at Hejiang Town in the west of Nanning. In ancient times, the left and right rivers referred to these two rivers, but today they are divided according to the Minjiang River and the Yujiang River.

古文：南盘自富州径田州，至南宁合江镇合丽江，是为右江。
现代文：南盘江自富州取道田州，流至南宁合江镇会合丽江，这是右江。
English: The Nanpan River flows from Fuzhou to Tianzhou, flowing to the Nanning Hejiang Town and Lijiang, which is the right river.

古文：北盘自普安经忻城，至庆远合龙江，是为乌泥江。
现代文：北盘江自普安流经忻城，流至庆远会合龙江，这是乌泥江。
English: The Beipan River flows from the Pu'an River through Lucheng to the Qingyuan Junction Longjiang River, which is the source of the Wudi River.

古文：下为黔江，经柳、象至浔州合郁，亦为右江。
现代文：往下流是黔江，经过柳州、象州至得州会合郁江，也是右江。
English: Downstream is the Li River, passing through Liuzhou and Xiangzhou to the confluence of the Iu River in Dezhou, and also the U River.

古文：是南、北二盘在广右俱为右江，但合非一处耳。
现代文：这样南、北两条盘江在广西都是右江，不过是合流不在一个地方罢了。
English: In this way, the South and North Pan Rivers are both right rivers in Guangxi, but the confluence is not in one place.

古文：《云南志》以为二盘分流千里，至合江镇合焉，则误以南宁之左、右二江俱为盘江，而不知南盘之无关于丽江水，北盘之不出于合江镇也。
现代文：《云南志》认为两条盘江分流在千里之外，到合江镇合流，那是错把南宁府的左、右二江都当作盘江，却不知南盘江与丽江无关，北盘江不流到合江镇。
English: "Yunnan History" believes that the two Panjiang rivers are separated by thousands of miles and join at Hejiang Town. It is a mistake to regard both the left and right rivers of Nanning Prefecture as Panjiang, but it does not know that the South Panjiang has nothing to do with Lijiang, and the North Panjiang does not flow to Hejiang Town.

古文：二十二日平明发舟。
现代文：二十二日天亮开船。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 22nd.

古文：西北二十里，午过大堡，在江东岸。
现代文：往西北行船二十里，中午经过大堡，在江东岸。
English: Twenty miles to the northwest, the boat passed the castle at noon and arrived at the east bank of the river.

古文：是日暑雨时作，蒸燠殊甚，舟人鼓掉，时行时止，故竟日之力，所行无几。
现代文：这一天热雨不时发作，热气蒸腾闷热得十分厉害，船夫摇桨，时走时停，所以终日的力量，所走的路不多。
English: On this day, the hot rain occurred from time to time, the hot steam steamed and sweltered very badly, the boatman rocked the oars, walking and stopping, so the power of the whole day, the distance traveled was not much.

古文：下午又十五里，大雨倾盆，舟中水可掬，依野岸泊。
现代文：下午又行十五里，大雨倾盆而下，船中的雨水可用手捧起来，靠在野外的江岸边停泊下来。
English: In the afternoon, another fifteen miles, heavy rain poured down. The rainwater in the boat could be scooped up by hand and anchored on the riverbank outside.

古文：既暮雨止，复行五里而歇。
现代文：傍晚雨停以后，又行船五里才停歇下来。
English: In the evening, after the rain had stopped, the boat travelled another five miles before coming to a halt.

古文：二十三日昧爽，西北行十五里，过草墟，有山突立江右，上盘危岩，下亘峭壁。
现代文：二十三日黎明，往西北行十五里，经过草墟，有座山突立在江右，上面盘结着危岩，下边横亘着峭壁。
English: At dawn on the 23rd, fifteen miles to the northwest, past the meadows, there is a mountain jutting out on the right side of the river, with dangerous rocks above and cliffs below.

古文：其地鱼甚贱。
现代文：此地的鱼非常便宜。
English: Fish here is very cheap.

古文：十里，马头码头，江左山崖危亘，其内遥峰森列，攒簇天半。
现代文：十里路，到马头，江左岸山崖高高横亘着，山内远处山峰森然罗列，攒聚簇拥到半天高。
English: Ten-mile road, to Ma Tau, the cliffs on the left bank of the river are high and wide, and the distant peaks in the mountains are lined up, clustered up to half a day high.

古文：于是舟转东行，十里复北，五里，下午抵沙弓，融县南界也，江之西南即为罗城县东界。
现代文：从这里船转向东行，十里后又往北行，五里，下午到达沙弓，是融县南境了，江的西南面就是罗城县的东境。
English: From here, the boat turned to the east, and after ten miles, it turned to the north, and after five miles, in the afternoon, it reached Shayuan, which is the southern border of Rong County. The southwest side of the river is the eastern border of Luocheng County.

古文：沙弓，水滨聚落，北至融五十里，西至罗城亦然，西望隔江群峰攒处，皆罗城道中所由也。
现代文：沙弓，是个江边的村落，往北到融县有五十里，向西到罗城也是这么远，往西望去隔着江流群峰攒聚之处，都是去罗城的途中所经过的地方。
English: Shanyuan is a riverside village. It is 50 miles north to Rong County and the same distance west to Luocheng. If you look west across the river, you can see the cluster of peaks. These are all places you pass through on your way to Luocheng.

古文：是晚即宿舟中。
现代文：这天晚上就住宿在船中。
English: That night we stayed on the boat.

古文：二十四日昧爽，仍附原舟向和睦墟。
现代文：二十四日黎明，仍旧搭乘原来的船去和睦墟。
English: At dawn on the 24th, I still took the original boat to the Harmony Ruins.

古文：先是沙弓人言： 明日为和睦墟期，墟散有融县归舟，附之甚便。 
现代文：这之前沙弓人说： 明日是和睦墟的赶集日，集市散后有融县来返回去的船，搭这种船十分方便。 
English: Prior to this, Sand Archer said, "Tomorrow is the market day in Harmony Market. After the market is over, there is a boat from Rong County to go back and forth. It is very convenient to take this boat.

古文：而原舟亦欲往墟买米，故仍附之行。
现代文：而且原来乘的船也要去集市上买米，所以仍搭乘这艘船去。
English: Moreover, the boat I was originally on also had to go to the market to buy rice, so I still took this boat.

古文：和睦去沙弓十里。水陆所共由也。
现代文：和睦墟距沙弓有十里，是水路陆路都共同经过的地方。
English: Hamukuji is ten miles away from Sayumi, and it is a place where waterways and land routes pass through together.

古文：舟自沙弓西即转而东北行，一里，有江自西北来，舞阳江也，又直东四里，始转而北，又五里为和睦墟。
现代文：船从沙弓西边马上转向东北行，一里，有条江自西北流来，是舞阳江，江中石滩极险。又一直往东行四里，开始转向北，又行五里是和睦墟。
English: The boat immediately turned to the northeast from the west side of the sand bow. For one mile, there was a river flowing from the northwest, which was the Maiyang River, and the rocky beach in the middle of the river was extremely dangerous. It continued eastward for four miles and began to turn to the north, and for five miles it was the Harmony Ruins.

古文：荒墟无茅舍，就高蓷草，日初而聚，未午而散，问舟不得。
现代文：荒野中的集市没有茅屋，就着高处的芦苇茅草，太阳初升时便聚在一起，不到中午就散了，找不到船。
English: The market in the wilderness has no huts, but only reeds and thatch on the heights. When the sun first rises, they gather together, but disperse before noon, and no boats can be found.

古文：久之，得一荷盐归者，乃附行囊与之偕行。
现代文：很久之后，遇到一个挑盐回去的人，就把行李让他附带挑着与他一同走。
English: After a long time, he met a man who was going back to pick up salt, so he asked him to take his luggage and go with him.

古文：始东北行一里，有小溪自西而东。
现代文：开初往东北行一里，有条小溪自西流向东。
English: At the beginning of the drive, one mile to the northeast, there is a stream flowing from west to east.

古文：越溪而北，上下陂陀，皆荒草靡靡，远山四绕。
现代文：越过溪流往北走，上下都是斜坡，荒草低伏，远山四面环绕。
English: Crossing the stream to the north, there are slopes up and down, low-lying wild grasses, and distant mountains all around.

古文：又四里过黄花岭，始有随坞之田。
现代文：又走四里越过黄花岭，开始有沿着山坞的田。
English: I walked another four miles over the Huanghualing and began to have fields along the dock.

古文：直北行五里，过古营，其田皆营中所屯也。
现代文：一直往北行五里，路过古营，那些田都是兵营中屯垦的。
English: All the way to the north for five miles, passing the old camp, those fields are barracks in the barracks.

古文：又北五里，越一小溪为高桥，有秦姓者之居在冈中。
现代文：又向北走五里，越过一条小溪是高桥，有姓秦的人家住在山洞中。
English: Another five miles to the north, across a stream is a high bridge. A family with the surname Qin lives in a cave.

古文：北下一里为大溪，有水自西而东，有堰堰之，其深及膝，此中水之大者，第不通舟耳。
现代文：向北下走一里是大溪，有溪水自西流向东，有堤坝拦住溪流，水深及膝，是这一带水流大的了，只是不通船罢了。
English: One mile to the north is a large stream, with water flowing from west to east. There is a dike blocking the stream, and the water is knee-deep. The water flow in this area is large, but there are no boats.

古文：又北五里，大道直北向县，而荷行李者陆姓，家于东梁西北，遂由此岐而西北行。
现代文：又向北行五里，大道一直往北通向县城，可挑行李的人姓陆，家在东梁的西北，于是由此岔路往西北走。
English: Another five miles northbound, the avenue continues northward to the county seat. The person who can pick up luggage is surnamed Lu, and his home is in the northwest of Dongliang. Therefore, take this side road to the northwest.

古文：二里，上鸡笼岭，其坳甚峻，西有大山突兀，曰古东山。
现代文：二里，登上鸡笼岭，这里的山坳十分陡峻，西边有突兀的大山，叫古东山。
English: After about two miles, you will reach the Jiuye Ridge. The mountains here are very steep, and there is a jagged mountain to the west, called Gu Dongshan.

古文：山北东隅为东梁，县中大道所径也。
现代文：山北面的东隅是东梁，是去县里的大道经过之处。
English: The eastern corner of the north face of the mountain is Dongliang, where the highway to the county passes.

古文：西北隅为东阳，亦山中聚落也，而陆姓者聚居于其北坞对山之下，越鸡笼共西北三里，而抵其家。
现代文：西北隅是东阳，也是山中的村落，而姓陆的人家聚居在东阳北面山坞相对的山下，越过鸡笼岭共向西北走三里，便到了他家。
English: The northwest corner is Dongyang, which is also a village in the mountains, and people with the surname Lu live together at the foot of the mountain opposite Dongyang's north dock. They walked a total of three miles to the northwest across Chicken's Cage Ridge and arrived at his home.

古文：时甫逾午，而溽盛夏又湿又热的气候暑疲极，遂止其处。
现代文：距真仙岩还有十里，离县城十五里。此时刚过了中午，但又潮湿又闷热，疲倦极了，便停在了他那里。
English: We were still ten miles from Zhenxianyan, and fifteen miles from the county seat. It was just after noon, but it was humid and muggy, and I was very tired, so I stopped at his place.

