古文：冯子曰：语有之： 男子有德便是才，妇人无才便是德。 
现代文：原文冯梦龙说：俗语说： 男人有德便是才，妇人无才便是德。 
English: Feng Menglong said: As the saying goes: A man with virtue is a talent, a woman without talent is a virtue.

古文：其然，岂其然乎？
现代文：这话当然是不对的。
English: This is, of course, untrue.

古文：夫祥麟虽祥，不能搏鼠；文凤虽文，不能攫兔。
现代文：就像麒麟虽然是吉祥之物，但不能捕鼠；凤凰虽然是美丽的象征，但不能猎兔。
English: Just as the unicorn, although an auspicious animal, cannot catch mice, and the phoenix, although a symbol of beauty, cannot hunt rabbits.

古文：世有申生，孝己之行，才竟何居焉？
现代文：而像春秋时期申生这样的仁孝，也不能代表他有治国定乱的才能。
English: But the benevolence and filial piety of Shensheng during the Spring and Autumn Period does not mean that he has the ability to rule the country.

古文：成周圣善，首推邑姜，孔子称其才与九臣埒，不闻以才贬德也!
现代文：周朝最被称誉的女子，首推邑姜，孔子赞赏她的才能不下于当时的所有功臣豪杰，圣人没有因为邑姜的才能而贬损她的德行。
English: The most praised woman of the Zhou Dynasty, Yujiang was the first to be promoted. Confucius appreciated her talent as much as all the heroes and heroines at that time. The sage did not disparage her virtue because of Yujiang's talent.

古文：夫才者，智而已矣，不智则懵，无才而可以为德，则天下之懵妇人毋乃皆德类也乎？譬之日月：男，日也；女，月也。
现代文：所谓的才能，也就是智慧，没有智慧就是无知，如果没有才干等于有德，那是否等于说天下那些无知的村姑村妇，都是德行高洁之人呢？就如同日月，男子如日，女子如月。
English: The so-called talent, that is, wisdom, without wisdom is ignorance, if there is no talent is equal to virtue, is it equal to saying that those ignorant village women in the world are virtuous people? Just like the sun and the moon, men are like the sun, women are like the moon.

古文：日光而月借，妻所以齐也；日殁而月代，妇所以辅也。此亦日月之智，日月之才也!
现代文：月亮要借助日光才能明亮，所以妻子向丈夫行芹，日落之后月光照明，因此女子是男子的辅助，这就是日、月的智慧和才能。
English: The moon can only shine brightly with the help of the sun, so a wife should be kind to her husband. After sunset, the moonlight illuminates, so a woman is a man's assistant. This is the wisdom and talent of the sun and the moon.

古文：今日必赫赫，月必噎噎，曜一而已，何必二？
现代文：当太阳照耀的时候，月亮肯定是隐晦的。那么只要有一个照耀天空就可以了，何必有两个呢？
English: When the sun shines, the moon must be eclipsed, so why have two when only one can light up the sky?

古文：余是以有取于闺智也。
现代文：这就是我编集 闺智 部的原因。
English: That's why I'm compiling a collection of wisdom.

古文：贤哲者，以别于愚也；雄略者，以别于雌也。
现代文：编集 贤哲 卷，是为了与愚蠢者相区别；编集 雄略 卷，是为了与其他妇女相区别。
English: To compile the volume of sages is to be distinguished from the foolish; to compile the volume of men is to be distinguished from other women.

古文：吕、武之智，横而不可训也。
现代文：至于吕后与武则天的智慧，那是专横而不足为训。
English: As for the wisdom of Lü Guo and Wu Zetian, it is imperious and not enough.

古文：灵芸之属智于技，上官之属智于文，纤而不足，术也。
现代文：而灵芸一类人的智慧在于技巧，上官一类人的智慧在于文采，都是细枝末叶，不足称为智慧，只是一种术业。
English: But the wisdom of a person like Ling Yun lies in skills, and the wisdom of a person like Shang Guan lies in literature. They are all small branches and leaves, not enough to be called wisdom, just a kind of skill.

古文：非横也，非纤也，谓之才可也，谓之德亦可也。
现代文：至于这些不是专横、不是心计的，称为才能也可以，称为德行也可以。
English: As far as these are not arbitrary, not premeditated, they can also be called talent, and can also be called virtue.

古文：若夫孝义节烈，彤管传馨，则亦闺闼中之麟祥凤文，而品智者未之及也。
现代文：至于孝妇烈女一类，已载于史册，如同妇女中的麒麟和凤凰，而研究智慧的人一般都不把他们置于此类人之中。
English: As for the filial piety martyrs, they have been recorded in the annals of history as the unicorns and phoenixes of women, and those who study wisdom generally do not place them among such people.

