古文：桑道茂韦夏卿骆山人李生王锷窦易直李潼贾餗娄千宝丁重夏侯生薛少尹周玄豹程逊
现代文：桑道茂韦夏卿骆山人李生王锷窦易直李潼贾餗娄千宝丁重夏侯生薛少尹周玄豹程逊
English: Sando Mao Wei Xiaqing Luoshan people Li Sheng Wang Qi Dou Yi Zhi Li Sheng Jiaqi Qianbao Ding Chongxia Hou Sheng Xue Shao Yin Zhou Xuan Bao Chengxun

古文：桑道茂
现代文：桑道茂
English: Sando Shigeru

古文：李西平晟之为将军也，尝谒桑道茂。
现代文：李西平，字晟之，是位将军。他曾拜访过桑道茂。
English: Li Xiping, also known as Xizhi, was a general. He once visited Sando Mao.

古文：茂云：将军异日为京兆尹，慎少杀人。
现代文：桑道茂说：将军以后能任京兆尹，但你要谨慎少杀人。
English: Sando Shigeru said, "You can be appointed as General Jing Zhaoyun in the future, but you should be careful not to kill people."

古文：西平曰：武夫岂有京兆尹之望。
现代文：李西平说：我一介武夫怎么能有任京兆尹的可能呢？
English: Li Xiping said: "How can I, a martial artist, have the possibility of being appointed as the Jing Zhaoyun?

古文：后兴元收复，西平兼京尹。
现代文：后来，李西平领兵收复了兴元，并兼任京兆尹。
English: Later, Li Xiping led the troops to recover Xingyuan, and also served as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：时桑公在浮囚之中，当断之际，告西平公：忘少杀人之言耶。
现代文：这时，桑道茂是被俘人员之一，正要处死他的时候，桑道茂提醒李西平道：你忘了当年我劝你少杀人的话了吗？
English: At this time, Sando Mao was one of the prisoners, and just as he was about to be executed, Sando Mao reminded Li Xiping: Did you forget that time I advised you to kill fewer people?

古文：西平释之。
现代文：李西平听了桑道茂的话后，释放了他。
English: Li Xiping released him after listening to Sang Dao Mao's words.

古文：韦夏卿
现代文：韦夏卿
English: Wei Xiaqing

古文：韦献公夏卿有知人之鉴，人不知也。
现代文：韦献，字夏卿，有预知人未来的能力，别人不知道他有这种能力。
English: Wei Xian, also known as Xia Qing, has the ability to predict people's future, and others do not know that he has this ability.

古文：因退朝，于街中逢再从弟执谊，从弟渠牟、舟。
现代文：一次，退朝后，在回家走的路上遇见了再堂弟韦执谊、堂弟韦渠牟、韦舟。
English: Once, after retiring, on the way home, he met his second cousins Wei Xiyi, Wei Qimu and Wei Zhou.

古文：三人皆第二十四，并为郎官。
现代文：这三个人全都考中第二十四，并同时被选任为郎官。
English: All three of them got the 24th place in the final examination and were simultaneously appointed to the post of vassal.

古文：簇马良久，献公曰：今日逢三二十四郎，辄欲题目之。
现代文：几个人骑马聚集在一块儿，过了好一会，韦献说：今天遇见三位二十四郎，我可要对我们妄加品评了。
English: Several people gathered together on horseback. After a while, Wei Xian said, "Today I met three twenty-four-year-olds. I really want to make a comment about us."

古文：语执谊曰：汝必为宰相，善保其末耳。
现代文：他对韦执谊说：你一定能成为宰相，可要好好地保持晚节呵！
English: He said to Wei Zhengyi: You can certainly become the prime minister, but you must keep the evening festival well!

古文：语渠牟曰：弟当别承主上恩，而速贵为公卿。
现代文：对渠牟说：你应该另选新主，承蒙新主的恩赐很快就能贵为高官。
English: He said to Qu: "You should choose a new master. With the new master's blessing, you will soon be a high-ranking official."

古文：语舟曰：三人之中，弟最长远。而位极旄钺。
现代文：对韦舟说：你们三个人中，无论是年寿还是禄位，老弟你最长远，而且能掌握最高的军权。
English: He said to Wei Zhou, "Among the three of you, whether it is your age or your military rank, you are the one with the longest life expectancy, and you can hold the highest military power.

古文：由是竟如言。
现代文：结果，这三个人的情况，竟然与韦献说的一样。
English: As a result, the situation of these three people turned out to be the same as Wei Xian said.

古文：骆山人
现代文：骆山人
English: Luo Shan Ren

古文：王庭凑始生于恒山西南三十里石邑别墅。
现代文：王庭凑生在恒山西南三十里的石邑别墅。
English: Wang Ting lived in Shishi Villa, 30 miles southwest of Hengshan.

古文：当生之后，常有鸠数十，朝集庭树，暮宿檐户之下。
现代文：他出生以后，经常有几十只鸠鸟早晨集聚在他家庭院中的树上，晚上住在他家的屋檐下。
English: After he was born, dozens of starlings often gathered in the morning on a tree in his family yard and stayed under his roof at night.

古文：有里人路德播异之。
现代文：同乡里有个叫路德播的人，看见了感到很奇怪。
English: A fellow countryman called Ludvig was surprised to see it.

古文：及长骈胁，善阴符鬼谷之书。历居戎职，颇得士心。
现代文：待到长大成人，王庭凑身体健壮，喜欢读《阴符》和《鬼谷子》这类的书，多年担任军职，很得士兵的拥戴。
English: When he became an adult, Wang Tingpin was physically robust, liked to read books such as "Yin Fu" and "Ghost Valley," and served in the military for many years. He was very popular with soldiers.

古文：以长庆元年春二月曾使河阳，回及沇水。酒困，寝于道。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆元年二月，王庭凑被派到河阳，在返回来的途中经过沇水时，喝醉酒睡在路边。
English: In February of the first year of Tang Mu Zong's reign, Wang Tingpai was sent to Kheyang. On his way back, he passed by Surabaya and was drunk and sleeping on the side of the road.

古文：忽有一人荷策而过，熟视之曰：贵当列士，非常人。
现代文：忽然有一个人肩扛着计算用的筹子从这里经过，这个人仔细地端详王庭凑说：这个人特别贵相，将来能得到侯位和领地，不是一般的人啊！
English: All of a sudden, a man carrying a calculating chip on his shoulder passed by. This man carefully examined the royal court and said, "This man is particularly distinguished, he will be able to obtain a court and territory in the future, he is not an ordinary person!"

古文：有从者窦载英寤，以告庭凑。
现代文：这时，王庭凑的随从窦载英醒来，听见了这些话，把这话告诉了王庭凑。
English: At this time, Wang Tianzhi's attendant Dou Zaoying woke up, heard these words, and told Wang Tianzhi this.

古文：庭凑驰数里及之，致敬而问。
现代文：王庭凑听了后，骑马疾驰了好几里地追上了这个人。
English: After listening attentively, Wang Ting rode several miles to catch up with the man.

古文：自云：济源骆山人。
现代文：上前施礼后。问他方才的事情。
English: After bowing, ask him about what happened.

古文：向见君鼻中之气，左如龙而右如虎，龙虎气交，当王于今年秋。子孙相继，满一百年。
现代文：这个人自我介绍说：我是济源骆山人，刚才看见你鼻中呼出的气左边象龙，右边象虎。龙虎两气相交，你必定在今年秋天成为王，子孙相递继承你的王位，整一百年。
English: This man introduced himself and said, "I am a Jiyuan Luoshan person. Just now, I saw the breath exhaled from your nose. The left side is like a dragon, and the right side is like a tiger. Dragon and tiger intersect. You will surely become king this autumn, and your descendants will inherit your throne for a full hundred years."

古文：吾相人多矣，未见有如此者。
现代文：我给看过相的人很多，从未见过象你这样的人。
English: I've looked at a lot of faces, and I've never seen anyone like you.

古文：复云：家之庭合有大树，树及于堂，是兆也。
现代文：又说：你家院中有棵大树，长到了与房屋相接，就是征兆啊！
English: He also said, "If you have a large tree in your yard that grows so close to your house, it's a sign!

古文：庭凑既归。遇田弘正之难。
现代文：王庭凑返回去不久，就遇到了主帅田弘正被反叛的乱军杀死。
English: Shortly after Wang Tingpiao returned, he met the head coach, Tian Hongzheng, who was killed by the rebel rebels.

古文：中夜，有军士叩门，伪呼官称。庭凑股況欲逃，载英曰：骆山人之言时至矣。
现代文：当天半夜，有士兵叫门，假称是官府的，王庭凑听见叫门声后，吓得两腿颤抖，想要逃走，窦载英说：骆山人说的那个时刻到了。
English: In the middle of the night of the same day, a soldier knocked at the door, pretending to be from the government. After Wang Tingpai heard the knock at the door, he was so scared that his legs trembled and he wanted to run away. Dou Zaiying said, "The time that Luoshan people said has come.

古文：是夜七月二十七日也，庭凑意乃安。
现代文：这件事发生在七月二十七日夜里。王庭凑听了窦载英的话才放下心来。
English: The incident took place on the night of July 27. Wang Ting listened to Dou Ka Ying's words before putting his mind at rest.

古文：及为留后，他日归其别墅，视家庭之树，婆娑然暗北舍矣。
现代文：待到王庭凑任代理主帅主持军政的留后不久后，回到了当年的出生地石邑别墅，看见庭院中的大树枝叶繁茂，婆娑摇曳，把北面的房屋掩映在树影之下。
English: Not long after Wang Ting took up the post of acting head coach to preside over the military government, he returned to his birthplace of that year, Shiyu Villa, and saw the large trees in the courtyard with lush branches and leaves, swaying, and hiding the houses in the north under the shadows of the trees.

古文：墅西有飞龙山神，庭凑往祭之。将及其门百步，见一人被衣冠，折腰于庭凑。
现代文：别墅西面有飞龙山神，王庭凑前往祭祀，走到离飞龙神庙门约有一百步时，王庭凑看见一个披衣戴冠的人，正俯身向他捐拜。
English: On the west side of the villa, there is the flying dragon mountain god. Wang Tingpai went to the sacrifice. When he walked about a hundred steps from the door of the flying dragon temple, Wang Tingpai saw a man wearing a robe and a crown, who was bowing down to him.

古文：庭凑问左右，皆不见。
现代文：王庭凑问跟随在身边的人。
English: Wang Ting asked the people around him.

古文：及入庙，神乃侧坐，众皆异之。
现代文：都说没有看见。待到进入庙里，看见飞龙山神竟然侧身坐着，大家都很奇怪。
English: They all said they didn't see it. When they entered the temple, everyone was surprised to see the Flying Dragon God sitting sideways.

古文：因令面东起宇，今尚存焉。
现代文：于是，王庭凑命令，面向东方建造了一所房屋，现在那所房子还在。
English: So the court ordered a house to be built facing east, which still stands.

古文：寻以德播为上宾，载英列为首校。访骆山人，久而方获。
现代文：紧接着，王庭凑把同乡路德播待为上宾，把窦载英升任军校头领，又派人四处寻访那位预言他能成为王的骆山人。找了很久，才找到他。
English: Immediately afterwards, Wang Ting made a concerted effort to treat his fellow countryman, Luther Biao, as the chief guest, promoted Dou Ka Ying to the position of the head of the military school, and sent people all over to search for the man from Luoshan who had predicted that he could become the king. It took a long time to find him.

古文：待以函丈之礼，乃别构一亭。
现代文：王庭凑象敬待老师那样敬待骆山人，特为这位骆山人修建了一座亭子，叫《骆氏亭》。
English: Wang Tingpi treated Luo Shan people with the same respect as he treated his teachers. He built a pavilion especially for this Luo Shan person, called "Luo's Pavilion."

古文：去则悬榻，号骆氏亭，报畴昔也。
现代文：王庭凑仿效汉人陈蕃，在亭子里专为骆山人放置一张床，他离去时，就将床悬挂起来，用来报答他从前的恩德。
English: Wang Ting tried to follow the example of the Han Chinese Chen Qi by placing a bed in the pavilion especially for the Luoshan people. When he left, he hung the bed up to repay his former kindness.

古文：李生
现代文：李生
English: Li Sheng

古文：杜悰通贵日久。
现代文：杜悰成为显贵已经很长时间了。
English: Cuckoos have been prominent for a long time.

古文：门下有术士李生，悰待之厚。
现代文：他的门下有位术士叫李生。杜悰待他很好。
English: He had a sorcerer named Li Sheng under his tutelage. Du Juan treated him well.

古文：悰任西川节度使，马埴罢黔南赴阙，取路至西川。
现代文：杜悰任西川节度使时，正值马埴辞去黔南中丞的官职返回京城，路径西川。
English: When Du Xuan was appointed as the envoy of the Xichuan Festival, he was returning to Beijing at the same time as Ma Xuan resigned from the official post of the Xichuan Junior Middle Officer. Du Xuan's path was the Xichuan.

古文：李术士一见埴，谓悰曰：受相公恩久，思有以效答，今有所报矣。
现代文：李生一见马埴就对杜悰说：我受你厚待的恩德已经很长时间了，总想报答你，今天有报答你的机会了。
English: As soon as Li Sheng saw Ma Xuan, he said to Du Xuan: "I have been favored by you for a long time, and I always want to repay you. Today, I have the opportunity to repay you."

古文：黔中马中丞非常人也，相公当厚遇之。
现代文：从贵州来的这位马中丞。不是一般的人，你应该很好地招待他。
English: This Ma Zhongzheng from Guizhou is not an ordinary person, you should treat him well.

古文：悰未之信也。
现代文：杜悰并未信李生的话。
English: Du Juan did not believe Li Sheng's words.

古文：李生一日密言于悰曰：相公将有甚祸，非马中丞不能救，乞厚结之。
现代文：一日，李生偷偷地对杜悰说：相公，你要有大祸，非马中丞不能救你。
English: One day, Li Sheng secretly said to Du Juan: "Brother-in-law, if there is a big disaster, Ma Zhongzheng can't save you.

古文：悰始惊信。发日，厚币赠之。
现代文：这样，马埴生活上的一切费用都不缺了。
English: In this way, all the expenses of the horse's life are not lacking.

古文：仍令邸吏为埴于阙下买宅，生生之费无阙焉。埴至阙方知，感悰不知其旨。
现代文：马埴是到了京城以后才知道买房的事情。他很感激杜悰但不知道杜悰的用意是什么。不久，马植授任光禄卿。
English: Ma Zhe did not know about the purchase of the house until after he arrived in Beijing. He was very grateful to Du Zhe, but did not know what Du Zhe's intention was. Soon, Ma Zhe was awarded the title of Guangluqing.

古文：寻除光禄卿，报状至蜀。悰谓李生曰：贵人至阙也，作光禄勋矣。
现代文：马埴任光禄卿的消息传到蜀中，杜悰对李生说：马埴到了京城，做了光禄大夫。
English: The news of Ma Yu's appointment as Guanglu doctor spread to Shuzhong. Du Yu said to Li Sheng: Ma Yu arrived in Beijing and became Guanglu doctor.

古文：术士曰：姑待之。
现代文：李生说：暂时等一等。
English: Li Sheng said: "Wait for a moment.

古文：稍进大理卿，又迁刑部侍郎，充盐铁使。
现代文：稍后，马埴升任大理卿，继而又升刑部侍郎。提任盐铁使。
English: Later, Ma Jun was promoted to the position of Daliqing, and then he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the Penal Department. He was also promoted to the position of the Salt and Iron Minister.

古文：悰始惊忧。
现代文：杜悰开始担心害怕。
English: The cuckoo started to get worried and scared.

古文：俄而作相。
现代文：不久，马埴升任宰相。
English: Soon after, Ma Jun was promoted to prime minister.

古文：懿安皇后宣宗幽崩，悰懿安子婿也。
现代文：这时，慈安皇后因跟唐宣宗不合突然死去。杜悰是慈安皇后女儿的丈夫。
English: At this time, Empress Cian died suddenly because she did not get along with Emperor Tang Xuanzong. Du Xi was the husband of Empress Cian's daughter.

古文：忽一日，内牓子索检责宰臣元载故事，埴谕旨。
现代文：忽然有一天，皇上下一道命令，要仿效当年重臣元载的先例，处罚杜悰抄家灭门。
English: Suddenly, one day, the emperor issued an order to follow the example of the senior vassal, Yuan Zai, and punish Du Xuan for snooping on his family.

古文：翌日，延英上前，万端营救。
现代文：马埴知道了这事，第二天，上朝面见皇上，千方百计地设法营救杜悰。
English: Ma Yu knew about this, and the next day, he went to see the emperor face to face, and tried his best to rescue Du Yu.

古文：素辩博，能回上意，事遂寝。
现代文：马埴凭着他能言善辩的才能，终于使皇上回心转意，使这件事情平息下来。
English: With his ability to speak eloquently, Ma Yu finally convinced the emperor to change his mind and calm down the situation.

古文：王锷
现代文：王锷
English: Wang Yao

古文：王锷为辛杲下偏裨，杲时帅长沙。
现代文：王锷在辛杲手下做一名偏将。这时，辛杲率军驻在长沙。
English: Wang Yao was a part-time general under Xin Yao. At this time, Xin Yao and his army were stationed in Changsha.

古文：一旦击球，驰骋既酣。
现代文：一天早晨骑马击球。
English: One morning he hit a ball on horseback.

古文：锷向天呵气，气高数丈，若匹练上冲。果谓其妻曰：此极贵相。
现代文：玩到最激烈的时候，王锷向天空呵了一口气，高达几丈，好象白色的绢练直向上冲去，辛杲看见这种情景，回家后，对妻子说：王锷的这种表相，是富贵至极的征兆。
English: When the game was at its most intense, Wang Yao took a breath to the sky, several feet high, as if the white dragonfly was rushing straight up. Xin Yao saw this scene and, after returning home, said to his wife: This appearance of Wang Yao is a sign of extreme wealth.

古文：遂以女妻之。
现代文：于是把女儿嫁给了王锷做妻子。
English: So he married his daughter to Wang Yao as his wife.

古文：锷终为将相。
现代文：后来，王锷真做了将相。
English: Later, Wang Xizhen became a general.

古文：窦易直
现代文：窦易直
English: Dou Yizhi

古文：窦相易直，幼时名秘。
现代文：宰相窦易直，小时候叫窦秘。
English: Prime Minister Dou Yizhong was called Dou Shih when he was a child.

古文：家贫，就业村学。其教授叟有道术，而人不知。
现代文：他家境贫寒，在村里小学读书，教他的老师是位老头，有道术。但别人不知道。
English: He came from a poor family and studied at the village primary school. His teacher was an old man who knew Taoism, but others didn't.

古文：一日近暮，风雪暴至。学童悉归家不得，而宿于漏屋之中。
现代文：一天傍晚，突然天气大变，风雪交加，学童们都回不去家，就住在了漏屋子里。
English: One evening, when the weather suddenly took a turn for the worse and the wind and snow intensified, the schoolchildren were unable to return home and had to live in a leaky house.

古文：寒争附火，唯窦公寝于榻，夜深方觉。
现代文：因为天冷，大家都争着烤火，只有窦易直在床上睡觉，夜深时才睡醒。
English: Because it was cold, everyone was fighting for the fire. Only Dou Yi slept straight in bed and woke up in the middle of the night.

古文：叟抚公令起曰：窦秘，君后为人臣，贵寿至极，勉励自爱也。
现代文：老人抚摸着他，让他起来，对他说：窦秘，你以后能做官。你的官位和寿数都极高。你要勤奋学习，自珍自爱啊！
English: The old man stroked him, made him get up, and said to him: Dou Shi, you can be an official in the future. Your official rank and longevity are extremely high. You must study diligently and cherish yourself!

古文：及德宗幸奉天日，公方举进士，亦随驾而西。
现代文：到了唐德宗登极继承皇位时，窦易直刚考中进士，也跟随圣驾西行。
English: When Emperor Dezong of Tang ascended to the throne, Dou Yi, who had passed the junior high school entrance examination, also followed him westward.

古文：乘一蹇驴至开远门，人稠路隘，其扉将阖。
现代文：窦易直骑一条瘸驴走到开远门，这里人多路窄，又到了快关城门的时候。
English: Dou Yi rode a donkey straight to the far gate, where there were many people and the road was narrow, and it was time to close the gate.

古文：公惧势不可进。
现代文：窦易直看见这情形不敢往前走。
English: Dou Yizhi didn't dare to move forward when he saw this.

古文：闻一人叱驴，兼捶其后，得疾驰而出。
现代文：这时，听见一个人吆喝驴，又在驴屁股上捶了一下，驴就疾驰奔出城门。
English: At this time, a man was heard shouting at the donkey, and he gave it a kick on the ass, and the donkey galloped out of the city gate.

古文：顾见一黑衣卒，呼公曰：秀才，已后莫忘闾情。
现代文：窦易直回头看见一个穿黑衣服的兵士，对他喊道：秀才，以后不要忘了今日城门这件事！
English: Dou Yi looked straight back and saw a soldier dressed in black, and shouted to him: "Clever man, don't forget about today's gate incident in the future!"

古文：及升朝，访得其子，提挈累至吏中荣达。
现代文：到了窦易直做了朝中宰相时，他不忘前情，访察到了黑衣兵士的儿子，不断地提携他，使他在官场中连续升迁，荣耀腾达。
English: When Dou Yizhong became the prime minister of the DPRK and the PRC, he did not forget the previous situation, visited the son of the black-clad soldier, and constantly cooperated with him, so that he was continuously promoted in the officialdom, and his glory soared.

古文：李潼
现代文：李潼
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：韦处厚在开州也，尝有李潼、崔冲二进士来谒，留连月余日。
现代文：韦处厚镇守开州。一次，李潼、崔冲两位进士来拜访他，在他那里住了一个多月。
English: Once, two Jin soldiers, Li Yu and Cui Chong, came to visit him and stayed with him for more than a month.

古文：会有过客西川军将某者能相术，于席上言：李潼三日内有虎厄。
现代文：这期间正遇一位西川军的将领路过开州。到韦处厚这里做客。这位将领会相术，在宴席上他说：李潼在三日内有被老虎伤害的灾难。
English: During this period, he was meeting a general of the Saikawa army who was passing through Kaizhou. He was a guest here in Wei. The general knew the art of physiognomy, and at the banquet he said: Li Xi was injured by a tiger within three days.

古文：后三日，处厚与诸客游山寺，自上方抵下方，日已暮矣。
现代文：第三天，韦处厚与各位客人到山寺中游玩，从山上住山下走，这时太阳已经落山。
English: On the third day, Wei Shucheng and all the guests went to the mountain temple to play, and walked from the mountain to the mountain, when the sun had already set.

古文：李先下，崔冲后来。冲大呼李云：待冲来，待冲来。
现代文：李潼先从山上下来，崔冲落在后面，他大声召呼李潼，喊道：待冲来！待冲来！
English: Li Yao came down from the mountain first, and Cui Rong fell behind. He called Li Yao loudly and shouted: "Wait to rush! Wait to rush!"

古文：李闻待冲来声，谓虎至。
现代文：李潼错把待冲来听成大虫来。
English: Li Yao misheard the rushing sound as a large insect.

古文：颠蹶，坠下出趾。
现代文：吓得他一跤跌倒坠落到山脚下。
English: He was so scared that he fell to the bottom of the mountain.

古文：绝而复苏，数日方愈。
现代文：当时昏死过去，后来又苏醒过来，好几天才完全康复。
English: He passed out at the time, but later woke up and took several days to fully recover.

古文：及军将回，谓李曰：君厄过矣。
现代文：待到这位将领回来时，见到李潼说：你的灾难已经过去了。
English: When the general returned, he saw Li Yao and said: "Your disaster has passed.

古文：贾餗
现代文：贾餗
English: Jia Wei

古文：贾餗布衣时，谒滑台节度使贾耽。
现代文：贾餗未做官时，去拜访滑台节度使贾耽。
English: When Jia Wei was not an official, he went to visit the slide festival to make Jia Tan.

古文：从餗宗党分，更喜其人文甚宏赡，由是益所延纳。
现代文：因为贾餗与贾耽有同一宗族的情分，贾耽又喜欢贾餗这个人特别有文才，所以越发愿意招待他。
English: Because Jia Wei and Jia Tan share the same clan, and Jia Tan likes Jia Wei, who is particularly talented in literature, so he is more and more willing to invite him.

古文：忽一日，宾客大会。
现代文：有一天，贾耽大宴宾客。
English: One day, Jia Tan was a guest at a grand banquet.

古文：有善相者在耽座下，又餗退而相者曰：向来贾公子神气俊逸，当位极人臣。
现代文：宾客中有位擅长相术的人坐在贾耽下边，在贾餗退下去后他说：贾公子一向是英俊萧洒，超凡脱俗，应当贵至人臣最高一级。
English: One of the guests, who was good at the art of physiognomy, was sitting below Jia Tan. After Jia Ye stepped down, he said: "Jia Gongzi has always been handsome, ethereal, and transcendent. He should be held in the highest esteem.

古文：然惜哉，是执政之时，朝庭微变。
现代文：然而可惜呵，此人执掌朝政的时候，朝廷里暗中要发生变化。
English: However, unfortunately, when this person took over the government, there was a change in the imperial court.

古文：若当此际，诸公宜早避焉。
现代文：在这个时候，诸位先生应该及早躲避一下。
English: At this time, gentlemen should take shelter as soon as possible.

古文：耽颔之，以至动容。
现代文：听了相人的话，贾耽点点头，继而很是动情。
English: After listening to the words of his partner, Jia Tan nodded, and then he was very emotional.

古文：及太和末，餗秉钧衡。有知者潜匿于山谷间，十有三四矣。
现代文：到了唐文宗太和末年，贾餗掌管选拔人才的大权时，有知道相人说这话的人，十分之三四都隐居在山野间，不出来应选。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, when Emperor Jia Rong was in charge of selecting talents, three-fourths of those who knew that their partner had said this lived in seclusion in the mountains and fields, unable to come out to vote.

古文：娄千宝
现代文：娄千宝
English: 千宝

古文：浙东李褒闻婺女娄千宝、吕元芳二人有异术，发使召之。
现代文：浙东道巡察使李褒听说婺州有两个叫娄千宝、吕元芳的女人，身怀异术，能预知人的生死未来。
English: The host of the inspection in Zhejiang told Li Bo that there were two women in Luzhou named Zou Qianbao and Lv Yuanfang, who were skilled in divination and could predict a person's future life and death.

古文：既到，李公便令止从事厅。
现代文：于是，李褒派人去请这两个女人。二位女术士来到后，安排在从事厅休息。
English: As a result, Li Biao sent someone to invite the two women. After the two female sorcerers arrived, they arranged to take a rest in the study hall.

古文：从事问曰：府主八座，更作何官？
现代文：从事问她们：我们长官已经位列朝中八大重臣之一，还能升任什么更高的官职啊？
English: Engaged in asking them: our chief has been ranked as one of the eight chief ministers of the DPRK, what higher official position can he be promoted to?

古文：元芳对曰：适见尚书，但前浙东观察使，恐无别拜。
现代文：吕元芳回答说：方才见到了李尚书，他还是任先前的浙东道观察使，恐怕没有别的官职授予他。
English: Lu Yuanfang replied: I have just met Li Shangshu. He is still the former Zhejiang Host Observation Envoy, and I am afraid there is no other official post to be conferred on him.

古文：千宝所述亦尔。
现代文：另一位女术士娄千宝，也是这样说的。
English: Another female sorceress, Zou Qianbao, also said this.

古文：从事默然罢问。
现代文：这位从事不再问了。
English: The man stopped asking.

古文：及再见李公，公曰：仆他日何如？
现代文：待到二位女术士再次见到李褒时，李褒问：我以后的命运将会怎样？
English: When the two sorceresses saw Li Bong again, Li Bong asked: What will be my future fate?

古文：二术士曰：稽山竦翠，湖柳垂阴。
现代文：二位女术士说：会稽山高耸叠翠，湖边绿柳垂阴。
English: The two sorceresses said, "The mountains of Hechi are tall and verdant, and the lakeside is shaded by green willows.

古文：尚书画鷁百艘，正堪游观。
现代文：李尚书您有画船上百艘，可供您游览观赏这大好的山光水色。
English: Li Shangshu, you have a hundred ships on the painting ship, which can be used for your tour to enjoy this great landscape.

古文：昔人所谓人生一世，若轻尘之著草，何论异日之荣悴。
现代文：古人说，人生一世仿佛象尘土和依附在土地上的小草一样微不足道，谈什么荣华与衰败？
English: The ancients said that a lifetime of life is as insignificant as dust and grass clinging to the ground. What is there to say about glory and decline?

古文：荣悴定分，莫敢面陈。
现代文：荣华与衰败都有定数的，我们不敢当面说给你。
English: We dare not tell you face-to-face that there is a fixed number for both prosperity and decline.

古文：因问幕下诸公。
现代文：于是，李褒又问他下属幕僚们的未来归宿。
English: As a result, Li Bop also asked his subordinate staff members about their future destinations.

古文：元芳曰：崔副使刍言，李推官正范，器度相似。
现代文：吕元芳说：副使崔刍言、正推官李范，这两个人的才能风度差不多。
English: Lv Yuanfang said: Deputy envoy Cui Xuanyan and chief judge Li Fan, the talents and demeanor of these two people are almost the same.

古文：但作省郎，止于郡守。
现代文：只能做到皇上的侍从官，最后终止在郡守的职位上。
English: He was only able to become the emperor's equerry, and eventually ended up in the position of county governor.

古文：团练李判官服古，自此大醉不过数场，何论官矣。
现代文：团练判官李服古，从现在起，也只能再醉几次酒罢了，还谈什么官职呢？
English: Group training judge Li Fugu, from now on, can only get drunk a few more times, what is the official position?

古文：观察判官任毂，止于小谏，不换朱衣。
现代文：观察判官任毂，只能做个小谏官就再也升不上去了，是穿不上朱服的。
English: Observing the judge Ren Qi, he can only be a minor eunuch and can no longer be promoted, and he can't wear a red suit.

古文：杨损支使评事，虽骨体清瘦，幕中诸宾，福寿皆不如。
现代文：支使评事杨损，虽然骨架身体清瘦，但是你这些在坐的幕宾们，论福禄、论寿数，都赶不上他。
English: The supporting commentator Yang Zai, although his skeleton is thin, but you, the guests of the curtain, can't keep up with him in terms of fortune and longevity.

古文：卢判官纁，虽即状貌光泽，若比团练李判官，在世日月稍久，寿亦不如。
现代文：判官卢纁，虽然现在看来神采奕奕，容光焕发，跟团练判官李服古比较，他还能多担任一段时间官职。
English: Judge Lu Wei, although he now looks energetic and radiant, compared with the group training judge Li Fugu, he can still serve as an official for a longer period of time.

古文：副使与杨李三人，禄秩区分矣。
现代文：但是，他的寿数却没有李判官长。观察副使崔刍言，和杨损、李范三个人，所任官职的品位等级还是有区别的。
English: However, he did not have the same longevity as Chief Judge Li. Observing Deputy Envoy Cui Xuanyan, there is still a difference in the grade level of the official positions held by the three people, Yang Zai and Li Fan.

古文：二术士所言，咸未之信，默以证焉。
现代文：二位女术士上述预测，在坐的人都不相信。
English: No one in the audience believed the two witches' predictions.

古文：是后李服古不过五日而逝。
现代文：他们沉默不语，只有等待以后事实来验证。这以后不过五天，团练判官李服古果然死了。
English: They remained silent, waiting for the facts to be verified. Just five days later, the group's training judge, Li Fugu, died.

古文：诚大醉不过数场也。
现代文：真是大醉不过几场啊！
English: I've only been really drunk a few times!

古文：李尚书及诸从事，验其所说，敬之如神。
现代文：李褒和他的那些幕僚们，看到二位女术士的预测果然开始应验了，象敬重神灵一样地敬重她们。
English: Seeing that the predictions of the two sorceresses were beginning to come true, Li Bohong and his aides respected them as if they were gods.

古文：时罗郎中绍权赴任明州，窦弘余少卿赴台州。
现代文：这时，郎中罗绍权到明州赴任，少卿窦弘余到台州赴任，途经浙东。
English: At this time, his son-in-law, Luo Shaoquan, went to Mingzhou to take office, and his younger brother-in-law, Dou Hongyu, went to Taizhou to take office, passing through eastern Zhejiang.

古文：李公于席上，问台明二使君如何。
现代文：李褒在招待他们的宴席上，问二位女术士这两个人的未来如何？
English: At the banquet where they were invited, Li Bo asked the two female sorcerers, "What is the future of these two people?"

古文：娄千宝曰：窦使君必当再醉望海亭；罗使君此去，便应求道四明山，不游尘世矣。
现代文：娄千宝说：窦大人一定会再来浙东，重新在望海亭上喝醉酒的。罗大人此行一去。恐怕要到四明山上求仙访道，不再漫游尘世了。
English: Zou Qianbao said: Dou adults will definitely come back to East Zhejiang and get drunk again at the Wanghai Pavilion. Luo adults will go on this trip. I am afraid that I will have to go to the Shiming Mountain to visit the dead, and will no longer roam the world.

古文：后窦少卿罢郡，再之府庭，是重醉也。
现代文：后来，窦少卿辞去台州郡守的官职，在返回京城的途中，重到浙东李褒这儿作客，真的应了重醉一说。
English: Later, Dou Shaoqing resigned from the official post of Taizhou County Governor, and on his way back to Beijing, he came back to Li Bao in eastern Zhejiang as a guest. He said that he was really drunk.

古文：罗郎中没于海岛，故以学道为名，知其不还也。
现代文：罗郎中死在海岛上，因此，当时娄千宝说他到四明山求道，是知道他不会活着回来的呀！
English: Luo Langzhong died on the island. Therefore, when Zou Qianbao said that he went to Shiming Mountain to pray, he knew that he would not come back alive!

古文：李尚书归义兴，未几物故，是无他拜。
现代文：李褒不长时间就回到义兴，一切都和原来一样。
English: Before long, Li Bo returned to Yixing. Everything was the same as before.

古文：卢纁巡官校理，明年逝于宛陵使幕，比李服古官稍久矣，为少年也。
现代文：以后再也没有被授任其它官职。判官卢纁改任巡官校理，第二年死在宛陵节度使的幕僚任上。他比团练判官李服古多做了一年官，但是他死的时候还很年轻，没有李服古的寿数长。
English: After that, he was never assigned to any other official position. The adjudicator, Lu Wei, was changed to the inspector and schoolmaster, and died the next year while serving as a staff member of the Wanling Festival envoy. He had been an official for a year longer than the regimental training adjudicator, Li Fugu, but he was still very young when he died, and did not live as long as Li Fugu.

古文：任毂判官才为补缺，休官归圃田，是不至朱紫也。
现代文：判官任毂刚刚升任为皇帝身边的补缺谏官，便辞官不做，回归故里，过着陶渊明式的隐居生活。
English: The judge, Ren Ren, had just been promoted to fill a vacancy in the eunuchs around the emperor, so he resigned from the position and returned to his hometown, living a secluded life in the style of Tao Yuanming.

古文：崔刍言郎中止于吴兴郡。
现代文：这是没有换上象征显贵的朱衣、紫服啊！
English: This is without changing into the vermilion and purple robes that symbolize nobility!

古文：李范郎中止于九江。
现代文：郎中崔刍言，在吴兴郡守的位职上离任；郎中李范在九江郡守的位职上离任。
English: His son-in-law, Cui Xuanyan, left his post as governor of Wuxing County; his son-in-law, Li Fan, left his post as governor of Jiujiang County.

古文：二公皆自南宫出为名郡，是乃禄秩相参。
现代文：二位都是进士出身，都任过名郡的郡守。这是为官的品位等级差不多啊！
English: Both of you are from the Jin Dynasty, and both of you have served as county governors of famous counties. This is almost the same grade as an official!

古文：独杨损尚书三十来年，两为给事，再任京尹，防御三峰，青州节度使，年逾耳顺，官历藩垣。
现代文：只有尚书杨损，三十年来，两次任门下省的给事中，两次任京兆尹，防守华州，任青州节度使，年过六十了，还多次担任守国卫疆的重要官职。
English: Only Shangshu Yangzai, over the past thirty years, has twice been appointed to the subordinate provinces, twice appointed to Jing Zhaoyun, to defend Huazhou, and appointed to the Qingzhou Festival envoy. He is over sixty years old, and has also served as an important official for the defense of the country.

古文：浙东同院诸公，福寿悉不如也。
现代文：当年浙江道同为幕僚的其他人，不论是福禄，还是寿数，果然都赶不上杨损！
English: At that time, Zhejiang Dao and other people who were staff members, whether it was fortune or longevity, could not catch up with Yang Zhao!

古文：皆依娄吕二生所说焉。
现代文：上述这一切，真的都应验了娄千宝、吕元芳二位女术士当年的预测。
English: All of the above really fulfilled the prediction of the two female magicians of that year, Zou Qianbao and Lü Yuanfang.

古文：杜胜给事在杭州之日，问千宝：己为宰相之事何如？
现代文：给事中杜胜在杭州，问娄千宝：我升任宰相的事怎么样？
English: During the interview, Du Sheng was in Hangzhou and asked Zou Qianbao: How about my promotion to the post of prime minister?

古文：曰：如筮得震卦，有声而无形也。
现代文：娄千宝回答说：如果占卜到的是震卦，卦象是有声而无形，意思是只听到传言而未成为现实。
English: Zou Qianbao replied: If the divination is a shock, the shock seems to be audible but invisible, meaning that it only hears rumors and does not become a reality.

古文：当此之时，或阴人所谮也，若领大镇，必忧悒成疾，可以修禳之。
现代文：这时，也许是阴险的小人在背后诬陷你。如果让你去镇守险要的州郡，你一定会郁闷成疾的，你可以用祭祷的办法来消除灾祸。
English: At this time, perhaps an insidious villain is framing you behind your back. If you let him go to the town to guard the critical state, you will certainly be depressed and become ill. You can use the method of prayer to eliminate the disaster.

古文：后杜工为度支侍郎，有直上之望，草麻待宣。
现代文：后来，杜胜升任度支侍郎，确实有青云直上的希望，就等着皇帝颁发任命他为宰相的诏书了。
English: Later, Du Sheng was promoted to the position of Du Zhi Zhi Rong, and he really had the hope of rising to the top, so he waited for the emperor to issue an edict appointing him as the prime minister.

古文：府吏已上于杜公门构板屋，将布沙堤。忽有东门骠骑，奏以小疵，而承旨以蒋伸侍郎拜相。杜出镇天平，忧悒不乐去，其失望也。
现代文：负责修建的官吏已经派人来到杜府按宰相的规格建造房屋，正准备铺设宰相车马通行的黄沙大道时，忽然有位东门骠骑将军，抓住他的一点小过失上告到皇帝那里。于是，皇上颁下诏书任命侍郎蒋伸为宰相，改任杜胜为天平刺史，将他调离京城。
English: The officials in charge of the construction had already sent people to Du Fu to build houses according to the prime minister's specifications. When they were preparing to pave the Huangsha Road, which was used by the prime minister's carriage, suddenly a general of the East Gate cavalry caught him in a small fault and reported to the emperor. Therefore, the emperor issued a decree to appoint Jiang Sheng as the prime minister and Du Sheng as the chief historian, and transferred him from Beijing.

古文：乃叹曰：金华娄山人之言果应矣。
现代文：杜胜大失所望抑郁不乐地去天平上任，慨叹地说：金华的娄术士预测的话果然应验了啊！
English: Du Sheng, greatly disappointed and depressed, went to the balance to take office and said with a sigh: Jinhua's words of prediction have come true!

古文：欲令招千宝、元芳。又曰：娄吕二生，孤云野鹤，不知栖宿何处。
现代文：杜胜想召请娄千宝、吕元芳二位女术士，又自言自语地说：这二位女术士，行如孤云野鹤一样没有一定的去处，不知道此时她们游方到哪里去了？
English: Du Sheng wanted to summon two female sorceresses, Zou Qianbao and Lü Yuanfang, and said to himself, "These two female sorceresses, like lonely cranes, do not have a certain place to go. I do not know where they have gone at this time."

古文：杜尚书寻亦终于郓州。
现代文：过了不多久，杜胜抑郁成疾，病死在郓州。
English: Not long after, Du Sheng became depressed and died in Zhangzhou.

古文：钟离侑少詹，昔岁闲居东越，覩斯异术。
现代文：太子少詹事钟离侑，从前闲居东越时，亲眼目睹过娄千宝、吕元芳二位女术士的异术。
English: When the young prince Zhan Zhizhong was away from the capital, he used to live in East Vietnam, where he witnessed the strange magic of two female magicians, Zou Qianbao and Lv Yuanfang.

古文：每求之二生，不可得也。
现代文：他每次有请这二位女术士给自己预测一下未来的吉凶福祸，都没有请得到。
English: Every time he asked the two sorceresses to predict his future fortune, they failed to do so.

古文：丁重
现代文：丁重
English: Ding Zhe

古文：处士丁重善相人。
现代文：隐士丁重擅长给人相面。
English: The recluse Ding Chong is good at giving people facial expressions.

古文：驸马于悰方判盐铁，频有宰弼之耗。
现代文：驸马于悰刚刚署理盐铁使，就不断有消息传出，说他可能做宰辅。
English: As soon as Xingma Yuxuan became the acting salt and iron envoy, news kept coming out that he might become the deputy assistant minister.

古文：时路岩秉钧持权，与之不协。
现代文：当时，路岩把持着朝廷的重要大权，他与驸马不和。
English: At that time, Lu Yan held important power in the imperial court, and he was at odds with Xi Ma.

古文：一旦重至新昌私第，值于公适至。
现代文：一天，丁重来到路岩在新昌自己置买的府第上，正巧遇到了驸马于悰也来这儿。
English: One day, Ding Chong came to Luyan on the farm that he had bought in Xinchang, and just happened to meet Xingma Yuxuan, who also came here.

古文：路曰：某与之宾朋，处士垂箔细看，此人终作宰相否。
现代文：路岩对丁重说：于驸马我们是朋友。你在门帘里面仔细看看他的面相，最终能不能做宰相？
English: Lu Yan said to Ding Chong: "We are friends with Yuma. Take a close look at his face behind the door curtain. Could you eventually become prime minister?"

古文：备陈饮馔，留连数刻。
现代文：于是，路岩让家人摆下酒饭，留于悰在这儿饮酒吃饭，盘桓了一段时间。
English: As a result, Lu Yan asked his family to set out some food and drink, and they stayed here drinking and eating for a while.

古文：既去，问之曰：所见何如？
现代文：于悰走后，路岩问丁重：你给他看了面相后，觉得怎么样？
English: After Yu Yao left, Lu Yan asked Ding Chong: After you showed him your face, how did you feel?

古文：重曰：入相必矣，兼在旬月之内。
现代文：丁重说：肯定会做宰相的。而且，就在一个月之内。
English: Ding Chong said, "I will definitely become the prime minister. Moreover, it will be within a month."

古文：岩笑曰：见是贵戚，复做盐铁使耳。
现代文：路岩笑着说：听说是皇上的贵戚，还是任他的盐铁使吧！
English: Lu Yan said with a smile, "I heard that you are a noble relative of the emperor. Let him use his salt and iron!

古文：重曰：不然，请问于之恩泽，何如宣宗朝郑都尉？
现代文：丁重说：不是这样的。我问您，于驸马承受当今皇上的恩惠，照比宣宗皇帝在位时的驸马都尉郑颢如何？
English: Ding Chong said, "That's not true. I ask you, how is Zheng Yao, the captain of the imperial horse during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, compared to Yu Yoma, who received the grace of the current emperor?

古文：岩曰：又安可比乎。
现代文：路岩说：又怎么可以相比呢？
English: Lu Yan said: How can it be compared?

古文：重曰：郑为宣宗注意者久，而竟不为相。
现代文：丁重说：郑都尉被宣宗皇帝注意很长时间了，但是最后竟然没有做成宰相。
English: Ding Chong said: Lieutenant Zheng was noticed by Emperor Xuanzong for a long time, but in the end he did not become prime minister.

古文：岂将人事可以斟酌？
现代文：难道世上的事情是可以任人随意摆布的吗？
English: Are things in this world to be manipulated at will?

古文：某比不熟识于侍郎，今日见之，观其骨状，真为贵人。
现代文：我本来不熟悉于侍郎，今天看见他，细观他的骨相，果真是贵人啊。
English: I wasn't familiar with the waiter, but when I saw him today and took a closer look at his bones, he really was a noble person.

古文：其次风仪秀整，礼貌谦抑。
现代文：再看他仪容端正，风度秀逸，举止恭谨、谦和、温文尔雅。
English: Then look at his neat appearance, elegant demeanor, respectful, modest, and gentle manners.

古文：如百斛重器，所贮尚空其半，安使不益于禄位哉。
现代文：就象能盛一百斛的巨大容器，现在还空着一半，怎么能让他不再升迁呢？
English: Just like a huge container that can hold a hundred urns, it is still half empty, how can he not be promoted?

古文：苟逾月不居廊庙，某无复更至门下。
现代文：如果超过一个月他还进入不了朝中执掌重任，我再也不登您的门槛了。
English: If he is unable to assume the important responsibilities of leading the DPRK for more than one month, I will never set foot on your doorstep again.

古文：岩曰：处士之言，可谓远矣。
现代文：路岩说：丁先生的这些话，可谓是说远了。
English: Lu Yan said, "These words of Mr. Ding are far-fetched.

古文：其后浃旬，于果登台铉。
现代文：过了十天，于悰果然登上宰相的重位。
English: Ten days later, Yu Yao finally ascended to the important position of prime minister.

古文：岩每见朝贤，大为称赏。由兹声动京邑，车马造门甚众。凡有所说，其言皆验。
现代文：这以后，路岩每看到朝中的贤士，都大加称赏丁重，从此丁重的声名惊动了京城，许多乘车的、骑马的人都纷纷来求见他，凡是丁重所说的话，全都应验。
English: After that, whenever Lu Yan saw the wise men of the court, he praised Ding Chong greatly. Since then, Ding Chong's fame has alarmed the capital. Many people in cars and on horseback have come to see him. Everything Ding Chong said has come true.

古文：后居终南山中，好事者亦至其所。
现代文：后来，丁重在终南山定居下来，但一些好事的还到他那里去。
English: Later, Ding Chong settled down in Zhunan Mountain, but some good things still went to him.

古文：夏侯生
现代文：夏侯生
English: Xia Housheng

古文：广南刘仆射崇龟常有台辅之望，必谓罢镇，便期直上。
现代文：广南仆射刘崇龟，常常希望有朝一日能升任宰相，他以为如果辞去镇守的职务，就有希望扶摇直上了。
English: Liu Chongmei, the deputy mayor of Guangnan, often hoped to be promoted to the post of prime minister one day. He thought that if he resigned from the post of town guard, there would be hope for him to be promoted.

古文：罗浮处士夏侯生有道，崇龟重之，因问将来之事。
现代文：罗浮有位隐士夏侯生有道术，刘崇龟很看重他。因此问他，自己将来的命运如何。
English: Luo Bu there is a hermit Xia Hou Sheng who has Taoism, Liu Chongke thinks highly of him. Therefore, he asked him what his future fate would be.

古文：夏生言其不入相，发后三千里，有不测之事。
现代文：夏侯生说刘崇龟不能登上宰相重位，出发后走出三千里，将会遇到危险的事情。
English: Xia Housheng said that Liu Chongmei could not ascend to the important position of prime minister, and he would encounter dangerous things after walking three thousand miles.

古文：洎归阙，至中路，得疾而终。
现代文：刘崇龟辞官回京，走到半路，得病死去。
English: Liu Chongkui resigned his post and returned to Beijing. Halfway there, he fell ill and died.

古文：刘山甫亦蒙夏生言，示五年行止。
现代文：刘山甫也承蒙夏侯生告诉他五年之中如何行动和止息。
English: Liu Shanfu also told Meng Xiaosheng how to act and stop in five years.

古文：事无不验，盖饮啄之有分也。
现代文：夏侯生说的事情没有不灵验的。啊，一个人能得到什么，得到多少，那是有定数的！
English: There is no such thing as failure in what Xia Housheng said. Ah, what a person can get, and how much he can get, that is fixed!

古文：薛少尹
现代文：薛少尹
English: Xue Shaoyin

古文：荆南节度判司空董，与京兆杜无隐，即滑台杜慆常侍之子，洎蜀人梁震俱称进士。
现代文：荆南节度使兼任司空的董某，与京兆尹杜无隐，就是滑台杜慆儿子，和蜀人梁震都是进士出身。
English: Dong Mou, who also served as the secretary of Jingnan Festival, and Jing Zhao Yin Du Wu Rong, who was the son of Du Di, and Liang Zhen, who was from Shu, were all from Jin Shi.

古文：谒成中令，欲希荐送。
现代文：他们三人去拜见成中令，希望能被荐上去。
English: The three of them went to see Cheng Zhongling, hoping to be recommended to him.

古文：有薛少尹者，自蜀沿流至渚宫。
现代文：有位姓薛的少尹，从蜀顺流而下到了江陵。
English: A certain Shao Yin, surnamed Xue, went down the river from Shu to Gangneung.

古文：三贤常访之。
现代文：董、杜、梁三位贤士常去拜访薛少尹。
English: The three sages, Dong, Du and Liang, often visited Xue Shaoyin.

古文：一日，薛亚谓董曰：阁下与京兆，勿议求名，必无所遂，杜亦不寿。
现代文：一天，薛少尹对董某说：阁下与杜无隐，不要再谈论求取功名的事了。你们一定不能如愿的，杜无隐还不能长寿。
English: One day, Xue Shaoyin said to Dong Mou: Your Excellency and Du Wuyin, don't talk about the matter of seeking fame. You must not get your wish, Du Wuyin can't live long.

古文：唯大贤忽为人絷维，官至朱紫。
现代文：只有有大才能的人，偶然被人重用，才能做到三、四品的官职。
English: Only a person with great talent, who happens to be reused, can achieve a third or fourth grade official position.

古文：如梁秀才者此举必捷，然登第后，一命不沾也。
现代文：如果梁秀才这次去参加科举考试，定能一举成功。
English: If Liang Xiucai takes the entrance examination this time, he will surely succeed.

古文：后皆如其言。梁公却思归蜀，重到渚宫。
现代文：因为江路阻塞，未等梁震逆水西行归蜀，淮军大举进犯江陵。
English: Because of the blockage of the river road, before Liang Zhen returned to Shu from the west against the water, the Huai army invaded Jiangling in a big way.

古文：江路梗纷，未及西泝。
现代文：梁震被阻，无法归蜀。
English: Liang Zhen was blocked and unable to return to Shu.

古文：淮师寇江陵，渤海王邀致府衙。俾草檄书，欲辟于府幕。
现代文：渤海王邀请梁震到府衙中，让他起草讨伐淮军的檄文，并想征召他在府中任幕僚。
English: The king of Bohai invited Liang Zhen to the prefectural government, asked him to draft a proclamation to fight the Huai army, and wanted to recruit him to serve as a staff member in the prefectural government.

古文：坚以不仕为志，渤海敬诺之。
现代文：梁震坚决表示不愿步入仕途。渤海王非常敬重梁震的志节，答应了他不任幕僚的要求。
English: Liang Zhen resolutely expressed his unwillingness to step into the career path. The King of Bohai respected Liang Zhen's ambition very much and agreed to his request not to be a staff member.

古文：二纪依栖，竟麻衣也。
现代文：梁震第二次到渤海王府时，竟是一名普通的老百姓。
English: When Liang Zhen came to the Bohai Royal Palace for the second time, he was actually an ordinary citizen.

古文：薛尹之言果验。
现代文：薛少尹的话果然应验了。
English: Xue Shaoyin's words have come true.

古文：周玄豹
现代文：周玄豹
English: Zhou Xuanbao

古文：后唐周玄豹，燕人。
现代文：后唐周玄豹，燕地人，年轻时做过和尚。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Zhou Xuanbao, a native of Yan, became a monk when he was young.

古文：少为僧，其师有知人之鉴。从游十年，不惮辛苦，遂传其秘，还乡归俗。
现代文：他的老师有预知人未来的能力，他跟随师父云游四方十年，不畏辛苦，于是师父把识别人的秘诀传授给他。
English: His teacher had the ability to predict people's future, and he followed the master for ten years, not afraid of hard work, so the master taught him the secret of identifying people.

古文：卢程为道士，与同志三人谒之。
现代文：后来周玄豹还俗回到家乡。道士卢程，与志同道合的二位朋友一同去拜访周玄豹。
English: Later, Zhou Xuanbao also returned to his hometown. Lu Cheng, a Taoist monk, went to visit Zhou Xuanbao with two like-minded friends.

古文：玄豹退谓人曰：适二君子，明年花发，俱为故人。唯彼道士，他年甚贵。
现代文：周玄豹离开三人，对别人说：方才那两位，明年花开时节，全都死去做了鬼了，只有那位道士，以后能显贵。
English: Zhou Xuanbao left the three of them and said to the others: "Just now, those two will all die and become ghosts when the flower season opens next year. Only that Taoist can be distinguished in the future."

古文：来岁，二人果卒。
现代文：第二年，周玄豹说的那二位，果然都死去了。
English: The following year, the two people mentioned by Zhou Xuanbao did indeed die.

古文：卢果登庸，后归晋阳。
现代文：卢道士也真的被选拔担任了官职，后来回到晋阳。
English: Lu Daoshi was indeed selected to hold an official position, and later returned to Jinyang.

古文：张承业俾明宗易服，列于诸校之下。以他人请之，曰：此非也。
现代文：后唐明宗未继位时，张承业让明宗换上普通的军服，站在各位小校队列的最后，以别人的身份让周玄豹来看视。
English: When Mingzong did not succeed to the throne after the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Chengye had Mingzong change into an ordinary military uniform, stand at the end of the queue of elementary schools, and let Zhou Xuanbao look at it as someone else.

古文：玄豹指明宗于末缀曰：骨法非常，此为内衙太保乎。
现代文：这位不是一般的人。周玄豹拽着站在队列最后的明宗说：他的骨相非凡，这个人是内衙的太保吗？
English: This is not an ordinary person. Zhou Xuanba dragged Mingzong, who was standing at the end of the queue, and said, "His bone structure is extraordinary. Is this person a meddlesome eunuch?"

古文：或问前程，唯云末后为镇帅。
现代文：有人问这些人的前程如何，周玄豹说：只有站在最末的一位，以后能做镇守使。
English: When asked about the future of these people, Zhou Xuanbao said: "Only the last one standing will be able to be the town guard in the future."

古文：明宗夏皇后方事中栉，有时忤旨，大犯槚楚。
现代文：明宗的夏皇后，刚刚侍奉明宗时，有时候做事违背明宗的意愿，触怒明宗，而遭到责罚。
English: The Empress Xia of the Ming Dynasty, when she had just served the Ming Dynasty, sometimes did things against the wishes of the Ming Dynasty, angered the Ming Dynasty, and was punished.

古文：玄豹曰：此人有藩侯夫人之位，当生贵子。
现代文：周玄豹见了后说：这个人有做藩王夫人的福份，能生贵子。
English: After seeing her, Zhou Xuanbao said, "This person has the good fortune of being the wife of the lord of the domain and can give birth to a precious child."

古文：其言果验。
现代文：他说的话果然应验了。
English: What he said came true.

古文：凡言吉凶，莫不神中，事多不载。
现代文：周玄豹所预测的吉凶祸福，没有不被他说中的，如神仙一般灵验。有关他的事情很多，不一一记述了。
English: Zhou Xuanbao's predictions of good luck, evil, calamity, and good fortune were as accurate as a genie's. There are many things about him, not all of which are described.

古文：明宗自镇帅入，谓侍臣曰：周玄豹昔曾言联事。
现代文：明宗皇帝从镇守使进宫继承皇位，他对周围的大臣们说：周玄豹过去曾说过我的事，很准，可以下诏让周玄豹从北京太原经水、陆来京。
English: Emperor Mingzong sent an envoy from the town guard to the palace to succeed the imperial throne. He said to the surrounding ministers: Zhou Xuanpao had said something about me in the past, and it was very accurate. You can issue an edict to let Zhou Xuanpao come to Beijing from Beijing Taiyuan via water and land.

古文：颇有征。可诏北京津置赴阙。赵凤曰：袁许之事，玄豹所长。
现代文：赵凤劝谏说：袁天纲、许藏秘这二位高明相士所做的事，也是周玄豹所擅长的。
English: Zhao Feng advised Zou: What Yuan Tiangang and Xu Zanghi, these two high-caliber couples, have done, is also what Zhou Xuanbao is good at.

古文：若诏至辇下，即争问吉凶，恐近妖惑。
现代文：如果把他诏到圣上的身边，朝中的大臣们就该都争着来向他问吉凶，恐怕会近于妖言一样地扰乱人心。
English: If he were to be placed next to the saint, the ministers of the imperial court would all rush to ask him about his fortunes. I'm afraid it would disturb people's hearts in the same way as a fairy tale.

古文：乃合就赐金帛，官至光禄卿，年至八十而终。
现代文：我看赏赐给他黄金、布帛就可以了。周玄豹步入仁途一直升任到光禄大夫，八十岁才去世。
English: As far as I'm concerned, gold or cloth can be given as a reward. Zhou Xuanpao followed the path of benevolence and was promoted to the post of Guanglu doctor before he died at the age of eighty.

古文：程逊
现代文：程逊
English: Cheng Sun

古文：晋太常卿程逊足下有龟文，尝招相者视之。
现代文：晋朝太常卿程逊脚下有龟文形的痣，曾经招相士看视。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a turtle-shaped cocoon at the foot of Grand Duke Chengxun, which was once visited by connoisseurs.

古文：相者告曰：君终有沈溺之厄。
现代文：相士告诉他说：你最后将有溺水之灾。
English: "You'll end up drowning," the mate told him.

古文：其后使于浙右，竟葬于海鱼之腹。
现代文：后来，程逊被派往浙西，终于葬身大海，被鱼吞食。
English: Later, Cheng Xun was sent to western Zhejiang, and finally died at sea, swallowed by a fish.

古文：常谓《李固传》云，固足履龟纹，而位至三公，卒无水害。
现代文：一次，谈论起程逊溺水时，有人说《李固传》上记载，李固脚下也有龟纹，然而李固却位列三位执掌朝政的重臣之一，到死也没有遇到水害。
English: On one occasion, when discussing the drowning of Li Jiaxun, someone said that "Biography of Li Gu" recorded that Li Gu also had tortoise marks under his feet. However, Li Gu was ranked as one of the three chief ministers in charge of the government, and he did not encounter water damage until his death.

古文：同事而异应也。
现代文：同样的事，而应验却不同啊！
English: It's the same thing, but the fulfillment is different!

