古文：庞尚鹏，字少南，南海人。嘉靖三十二年进士。
现代文：庞尚鹏，字少南，广东南海人，嘉靖三十二年进士。
English: Pang Shangpeng, surnamed Shaonan, a native of Nanhai, Guangdong Province, entered the Jiajing University in 1932.

古文：除江西乐平知县。擢御史。
现代文：授职江西乐平知县，后升御史。
English: He was appointed to the post in Leping County, Jiangxi Province, and later promoted to the position of imperial historian.

古文：偕给事中罗嘉宾出核南京、浙江军饷，请罪参将戚继光、张四维，而尽发胡宗宪失律、贪淫及军兴督抚侵军需状。
现代文：与给事中罗嘉宾出去核查南京、浙江军饷，请治参将戚继光、张四维的罪，而全面揭发胡宗宪失律、贪淫及战事兴起以来督抚侵占军需之事。
English: He went out with Luo Jiabin, the person in charge of the case, to check the military budgets of Nanjing and Zhejiang, and asked him to deal with the crimes of the generals Qi Jiguang and Zhang Siwei, and comprehensively expose Hu Zong's constitutional irregularities, corruption, and supervision of the embezzlement of military supplies since the outbreak of the war.

古文：还朝，出按河南。
现代文：回到朝廷，出任河南巡按。
English: He returned to the imperial court and served as Henan inspector general.

古文：巡抚蔡汝楠欲会疏进白鹿，尚鹏不可。
现代文：巡按蔡汝楠想一同上疏进献白鹿，庞尚鹏认为不可以。
English: According to the patrol, Cai Runan wanted to go to the ditch together to offer the white deer, but Pang Shangpeng thought it was not possible.

古文：改按浙江。
现代文：改为浙江巡按。
English: It was changed to Zhejiang Inspection.

古文：民苦徭役，为举行一条鞭法。
现代文：老百姓苦于徭役，为他们实行一条鞭法。
English: The common people are suffering from the yakitori, for them to carry out a whip.

古文：按治乡官吕希周、严杰、茅坤、潘仲骖子弟僮奴，请夺希周等冠带。
现代文：整治乡官吕希周、严杰、茅坤、潘仲马参子弟奴仆，请求夺去吕希周的冠带。
English: He ordered the township officials Lü Xi Zhou, Yan Jie, Mao Kun, and Pan Zhongma Sangzhi to seize Lü Xi Zhou's crown and sash.

古文：诏尽黜为民。
现代文：皇上下诏将他们都贬为平民。
English: The Emperor's edict reduced them all to commoners.

古文：尚鹏介直无所倚。
现代文：庞尚鹏耿直不依附任何权贵。
English: Pang Shangpeng is not attached to any authority.

古文：所至搏击豪强，吏民震慑。
现代文：到一个地方就惩治豪强，官吏、百姓受到震慑。
English: When they arrive at a certain place, they punish the brave and the strong, and the officials and the people are shocked.

古文：已，督畿辅学政。
现代文：不久，督察畿辅学政。
English: Soon, the inspector of Kisho Gakusei came to power.

古文：隆庆元年，请帝时御便殿，延见大臣，恤建言得罪者马从谦等。
现代文：隆庆元年请求皇上不时到便殿召见大臣，抚恤因进言皇上而被治罪的马从龙等人。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he asked the emperor to summon ministers to the throne room from time to time, and to grant a pension to Ma Conglong and others who were punished for speaking against the emperor.

古文：已，又申救给事中胡应嘉，论大学士郭朴无相臣体。
现代文：不久，又申救给事中胡应嘉，弹劾大学士郭朴没有相臣体统。
English: Not long after, Hu Yingjia came to the rescue, and impeached the university scholar Guo Pak for not having the dignity of a vassal.

古文：擢大理右寺丞。
现代文：被提为大理右寺丞。
English: He was elevated to the post of Dairi Uji no jo.

古文：明年春，朝议兴九边屯、盐。
现代文：第二年春天，朝廷议论大兴九边的屯政、盐政。
English: In the spring of the following year, the Imperial Court discussed the Daxing and Jiuyuan Dynasties and the Salt Regime.

古文：擢尚鹏右佥都御史，与副都御史邹应龙、唐继禄分理。
现代文：提升尚鹏为右佥都御史，与副都御史邹应龙、唐继禄分区管理。
English: Shang Peng was promoted to the Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian, and the Deputy Metropolitan Historian was promoted to the Yinglong and Tang Jilu sub-district management.

古文：尚鹏辖两淮、长芦、山东三运司，兼理畿辅、河南、山东、江北、辽东屯务。
现代文：尚鹏管辖两淮、长庐、山东三运司，兼代管理畿辅、河南、山东、江北、辽东屯田事务。
English: Shangpeng is in charge of the two Huaihe, Changchun and Shandong three transportation departments, and also manages the affairs of the military cantonments in Kifu, Henan, Shandong, Jiangbei and Liaodong.

古文：抵昌平，劾内侍张恩擅杀人，两淮巡盐孙以仁赃罪，皆获谴。
现代文：抵达昌平后，他弹劾内侍张恩乱杀人，两淮巡抚盐政的孙以仁贪污罪，张恩、孙以仁皆被贬官。
English: After arriving in Changping, he impeached Zhang Enlai's manservant for murder, and Sun Yiren, the governor of Yancheng, for corruption. Zhang Enlai and Sun Yiren were both demoted.

古文：其秋，应龙等召还，命尚鹏兼领九边屯务。
现代文：秋天，邹应龙等被召回京城，命令尚鹏兼领九边屯政。
English: In the autumn, Zou Yinglong and others were recalled to Beijing and ordered Shang Peng to take over the administration of the Nine-sided Walled City.

古文：疏列盐政二十事，鹾利大兴。
现代文：上疏列出盐政二十事，盐利大兴。
English: The following is a list of twenty things about the salt policy, including the great success of salt production.

古文：乃自江北躬历九边，先后列上屯政便宜，江北者四，蓟镇者九，辽东、宣、大者各十一，宁夏者四，甘肃者七。
现代文：于是，他又从江北巡历九边，先后陈上屯政事务，江北有四，蓟镇有九，辽东、宣府、大同各十一件，宁夏四件，甘肃有七件。
English: As a result, he went on a nine-side inspection tour from the northern part of the Yangtze River, and successively went to Chen Shangtong affairs. There were four cases from the northern part of the Yangtze River, nine cases from Handan Town, eleven cases each from Liaodong, Xuanfu and Datong, four cases from Ningxia and seven cases from Gansu.

古文：奏辄报可。
现代文：奏疏一上，皇上就同意了。
English: As soon as the report was made, the Emperor agreed.

古文：尚鹏权既重，自负经济才，慷慨任事。
现代文：庞尚鹏权力很大，又很为自己经世济民之才自负，慷慨任事。
English: Pang Shangpeng has great power, and he is very proud of his ability to help the world and the people, and is generous in his duties.

古文：诸御史督盐政者以事权见夺，欲攻去之。
现代文：诸督盐政的御史见权力被夺去，想把他轰走。
English: The governors of salt politics saw their power taken away and wanted to drive him away.

古文：河东巡盐郜永春劾尚鹏行事乖违，吏部尚书杨博议留之。
现代文：河东巡盐郜永春弹劾庞尚鹏处事乖违，吏部尚书杨博建议让他留任。
English: Hedong inspection tour of salt mine Yongchun impeachment of Pang Shangpeng for handling things improperly, the personnel department's Shangshu Yangbo suggested that he remain in office.

古文：会中官恶博，激帝怒，谯让，罢博而落尚鹏职，汰屯盐都御史官。时三年十二月也。
现代文：恰好中官很讨厌杨博，故意让皇帝发怒，皇上责备了杨博，将杨博罢官，庞尚鹏去职，将屯盐都御史官淘汰，时间为隆庆三年十二月。
English: It just so happened that the middle-ranking official hated Yang Bo very much, and deliberately made the emperor angry. The emperor rebuked Yang Bo, dismissed Yang Bo from his post, dismissed Pang Shangpeng from his post, and eliminated the chief historian of Tuen Shan. The time was December of the third year of Longqing.

古文：明年，复坐按浙时验进宫币不中程，斥为民。
现代文：第二年又因为巡按浙江时检验进宫的钱币不合规格，被贬为平民。
English: The following year, because the money entering the palace did not meet the specifications during the inspection in Zhejiang Province, it was relegated to civilians.

古文：神宗立，御史计坤亨等交荐，保定巡抚宋纁亦白其无罪。
现代文：神宗登基，御史计坤亨等交相推荐他，保定巡抚宋纟熏也认为他没有罪。
English: Emperor Shenzong ascended to the throne, and he was recommended by his friends such as the Grand Historian Jie Kunheng. The governor of Baoding, Song Jianxuan, also believed that he was not guilty.

古文：万历四年冬，始以故官抚福建。
现代文：万历四年冬天，才以原职巡抚福建。
English: It was only after four years of winter that he returned to his original post as the governor of Fujian.

古文：奏蠲逋饷银，推行一条鞭法。
现代文：上奏请减免拖欠的饷银，推行一条鞭法。
English: It is requested to reduce and waive the arrears of tax and implement a one-strike law.

古文：劾罢总兵官胡守仁，属吏咸奉职。
现代文：弹劾罢免总兵官胡守仁，尚鹏手下的官吏都恪守职责。
English: The impeachment and dismissal of the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, Hu Shouren, has begun, and the officials under Shangpeng are all abiding by their duties.

古文：张居正夺情，重谴言者。
现代文：张居正不为父亲服丧，极力贬退言官。
English: Zhang Juzheng did not attend his father's funeral and tried his best to disparage the speaker.

古文：尚鹏移书救，居正深衔之。
现代文：尚鹏送信救援，张居正大为恼火。
English: Shangpeng sent a rescue team, but Zhang Jizheng was very angry.

古文：会拜左副都御史，居正令吏科陈三谟以给由岁月有误劾之，遂罢去。
现代文：恰好征拜为左副都御史，张居正命令吏科陈三谟以他任职的年月有误弹劾他，庞尚鹏于是被免职。
English: Zhang Juzheng ordered the official, Ke Chen Sanmu, to impeach Pang Shangpeng, who happened to be the Left Vice-Governor of the Capital, on the grounds that he had been in office for the wrong number of years. Pang Shangpeng was then removed from office.

古文：家居四年卒。
现代文：在家居住了四年后死去。
English: He died after four years in the home.

古文：浙江、福建暨其乡广东皆以徭轻故德尚鹏，立祠祀。
现代文：浙江、福建及其家乡广东因为徭役轻的缘故很崇敬尚鹏，修建祠堂祭祀他。
English: Zhejiang, Fujian, and his hometown of Guangdong all revered Shangpeng because of his light military service, and built ancestral halls to worship him.

古文：天启中，赐谥惠敏。
现代文：天启中，赐谥号惠敏。
English: In the apocalypse, the dragonfly Huimin was bestowed.

古文：宋仪望，字望之，吉安永丰人。嘉靖二十六年进士。
现代文：宋仪望，字望之，江西吉安永丰人，嘉靖二十六年中进士。
English: Song Yibang, Zi Wangzhi, Jiangxi Jian Yongfeng people, Jiajing 26 years of junior cadres.

古文：授吴县知县。
现代文：任命为吴县知县。
English: He was appointed to Wuxian Zhixian.

古文：民输白粮京师，辄破家。
现代文：老百姓运送白粮到京师，几乎倾家荡产。
English: The common people transported white grain to the capital and almost lost their homes.

古文：仪望令诸区各出公田，计役授田赡之。
现代文：宋仪望命令县内各区拨出公田，计算赋役拨给田地赡养他们。
English: Song Yiwang ordered all districts in the county to allocate public land and calculate the amount to be allocated to the fields to support them.

古文：禁火葬，创子游祠，建书院，惠绩甚著。
现代文：严禁火葬，创立子游祠，修建书院，惠民政绩非常突出。
English: Cremation is strictly prohibited, a children's shrine was established, a college was built, and the achievements in benefiting the people were outstanding.

古文：征授御史。劾大将军仇鸾挟寇自重，疏留中。
现代文：起用为御史，弹劾大将军仇鸾以边寇为要挟，拥兵自重，奏章被留在禁中，没有批示。
English: Appointed as the imperial historian, impeached the great general Qiu Jun for using the border raiders as a threat, supported the soldiers with self-respect, and the record was left in the ban, without instructions.

古文：已，陈时务十二策。
现代文：不久，他上陈关于时政的十二点对策。
English: Soon, he put forward a twelve-point countermeasure on the current political situation.

古文：巡盐河东，请开桑乾河通宣、大饷道，言： 河发源金龙池下瓮城驿古定桥，会众水，东流千余里，入卢沟桥。
现代文：在河东一带视察盐务，请求开通桑干河直达宣府、大同的运饷之道，说： 河流发源于金龙池下瓮桥驿古定桥，会合众水，东流一千余里，进入卢沟桥。
English: He inspected the salt business in the area east of the river and requested the opening of the Sangan River to the Xuanfu and Datong transportation routes, saying: The river originates from the Jinlongchi Lower Bridge and the Guding Bridge, joins the United States, flows eastward for more than a thousand miles, and enters the Lugou Bridge.

古文：其间惟大同卜村有丛石，宣府黑龙湾石崖稍险，然不逾五十里，水浅者犹二三尺，疏凿甚易。
现代文：其间只有大同卜村有聚集的石头，宣府黑龙湾石崖稍险，然而没有超过五十里，水浅的地方仅二、三尺，上疏认为开凿非常容易。
English: Among them, only Datongbu village has aggregated stones, Xuanfu Heilongwan rock cliff is slightly dangerous, but it does not exceed fifty miles, the water is only two or three feet shallow, and it is considered to be very easy to excavate.

古文：曩大同巡抚侯钺尝乘小艇赴怀来，历卜村、黑龙湾，安行无虞。又自怀来溯流，载米三十石达之古定河，足利漕可徵。 
现代文：往日大同巡抚侯钺曾经乘着小船到怀来，经过卜村、黑龙湾，安全行驶没有什么担心的，又从怀来逆行，运载大米三十石到达古定河，足见便利漕运可以启用。 
English: In the past, the Datong patrolman Hou Yi used to take a small boat to Huailai, passing through Bu village and Heilong Bay. There was nothing to worry about in terms of safe driving. He also traveled backwards from Huailai, carrying 30 kilos of rice to the Guiding River. This shows that convenient rowing transport can be used.

古文：时方行穵运，率三十石致一石。
现代文：当时正在风行开挖运河，大概三十石可致一石。
English: At that time, it was popular to dig canals, and about thirty kilos could be reduced to one stone.

古文：仪望疏至，下廷议。
现代文：宋仪望奏章到，皇上叫廷臣议论。
English: When Song Yi wanted to play a piece, the emperor called the courtiers to discuss.

古文：兵部尚书聂豹言： 河成便漕，兼制敌骑。 
现代文：兵部尚书聂豹说： 河成后可便利漕运，同时可以制服敌人的骑兵。 
English: Shang Shuxuan of the Ministry of Military Affairs said: After the river is formed, it will be convenient to row, and at the same time, it will be possible to subdue the enemy's cavalry.

古文：工部尚书欧阳必进言： 道远役重。 
现代文：工部尚书欧阳必进说： 道路太偏远徭役太繁重了。 
English: Shangshu Ouyang Bijin of the Ministry of Works said: The road is too remote and the work is too heavy.

古文：遂报罢。
现代文：于是下令不实行。
English: It was therefore ordered not to be implemented.

古文：仪望寻省母归。
现代文：宋仪望不久问候母亲回了家乡。
English: Song Yibang soon greeted his mother back home.

古文：还朝，发胡宗宪、阮鹗奸贪状，鹗被逮。
现代文：回到京城，揭发胡宗宪、阮鹗狼狈为奸，阮鹗被逮捕。
English: Returning to Beijing, he exposed Hu Zongxian and Nguyn Lng as traitors, and Nguyn Lng was arrested.

古文：二人皆严嵩私人，嵩由是不悦。
现代文：这两个人都是严嵩的私党，严嵩由是大为不满。
English: Both of these men were personal friends of Yan Song, and Yan Song was very dissatisfied with them.

古文：及受命督三殿门工，嵩子世蕃私贾人金，属必进俾与工事，仪望执不可。
现代文：等到受命督察三殿门工程，严嵩的儿子世蕃私下收纳商人贿金，嘱托欧阳必进将工程一事交给他。宋仪望坚决不允许。
English: When he was appointed to supervise the Third Courtyard Gate Project, Yan Song's son, Shijun, secretly accepted bribe money from a businessman and asked Ouyang Bijin to hand over the project to him. Song Yibang resolutely refused.

古文：工竣，叙劳，擢大理右寺丞。
现代文：竣工后，论功行赏，提拔为大理寺右丞。
English: After completion, he was awarded for his meritorious service and promoted to Daliji Ujo.

古文：世蕃以为德，仪望请急归，无所谢，世蕃益怒。
现代文：严世蕃认为是自己的功德，宋仪望请求辞去官职，没有表示谢意，严世蕃更加愤怒。
English: Yan Shisheng thought it was his own merit. Song Yimang asked him to resign from his post, but Yan Shisheng did not express his gratitude. Yan Shisheng was even more angry.

古文：会灾异考察京官，必进迁吏部，遂坐以浮躁，贬夷陵判官。
现代文：正好灾异考察京官，欧阳必进迁官吏部，宋仪望于是以轻浮急躁之罪名，贬为夷陵判官。
English: Just as the Beijing officials were inspecting the disaster, Ouyang had to relocate the officials department, so Song Yibang was accused of being frivolous and impatient, and was demoted to the judge of the tomb.

古文：嵩败，擢霸州兵备佥事。
现代文：严嵩倒台后，他被提拔为霸州兵备佥事。
English: After the fall of Yan Song, he was promoted to be the commander of the provincial army.

古文：请城涿州，除马户逋税。
现代文：请求修筑涿州城墙，免除马户所欠税收。
English: Requesting the construction of the Zhangzhou city wall and the exemption of tax arrears owed by Madu.

古文：进大名兵备副使，改福建。
现代文：升为大名兵备副使，改派福建。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of Daimyo Heibi and reassigned to Fujian.

古文：与总兵官戚继光合兵破倭，因列海防善后事。
现代文：与总兵官戚继光合兵击败倭寇，列出完善海防的事宜。
English: Together with the general officers, the soldiers defeated the Japanese pirates, and listed the matters for improving the coastal defense.

古文：诏从其请。
现代文：皇上下诏同意他的请求。
English: The Emperor's edict granted his request.

古文：隆庆二年，吏部尚书杨博欲黜仪望，考功郎刘一儒持之，乃镌二秩，补四川佥事。四迁大理少卿。
现代文：隆庆二年，吏部尚书杨博想贬退宋仪望，考功郎刘一儒不同意。于是降了二级，补为四川佥事，四度调职后升为大理少卿。
English: In the second year of Longqing, Yang Bo, the secretary of the cadre department, wanted to demote Song Yibang, but Liu Yirong, the exam winner, disagreed. Therefore, he was reduced to the second level, supplemented by Sichuan Anecdote, and promoted to Dali Shaoqing after being transferred four times.

古文：万历二年，张居正当国，雅知仪望才，擢右佥都御史，巡抚应天诸府。
现代文：万历二年，张居正主持朝政，平素了解宋仪望的才干，提拔他为右佥都御史，巡抚应天等府。
English: In the second year of Wanli, when Zhang Ju was presiding over the imperial court, he was aware of Song Yibang's talent and promoted him to the position of the right-hand governor of the capital and the governor of Yingtian and other prefectures.

古文：奏减属郡灾赋。
现代文：宋仪望上奏建议减免所属郡县受灾之地的赋税。
English: Song Yibang proposed to reduce and exempt the taxes of the affected areas in his county.

古文：海警稍定，将吏讳言兵，仪望与副使王叔果修战备。
现代文：海防稍稍安定，将领官吏忌讳谈论兵事，宋仪望与副使王叔果大修战备。
English: The coastal defense was somewhat stable, generals and officials avoided talking about military affairs, and Song Yibang and deputy envoy Wang Shuguo overhauled combat readiness.

古文：倭果至，御之黑水洋，斩获多，进右副都御史。
现代文：倭寇果然来了，在黑水洋抵御，多有斩获，升为右副都御史。
English: The Japanese invaders did come, and he resisted them in the Black Sea and won many victories, and was promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：先有诏雪建文诸臣，仪望创表忠祠祀之南京。
现代文：先前皇上有诏为建文帝诸臣诏雪，宋仪望建表忠祠在南京祭奠他们。
English: Previously, the emperor had issued an edict to build a shrine for the emperors and emperors of the Song Dynasty, and the Song Dynasty wanted to build a shrine to honor them in Nanjing.

古文：宋忠臣杨邦晙，仪望乡人也，葬江宁，岁久渐湮，仪望为封其墓，载其祠祀典。
现代文：宋代忠臣杨邦翨，是宋仪望的同乡，葬于江宁，因年代久远，墓地渐渐湮废，宋仪望为其整修墓地，装饰其祠庙以祀典他。
English: Yang Bangtao, a loyal retainer of the Song Dynasty, was a fellow villager of Song Yibang. He was buried in Jiangning. Due to the passage of time, the cemetery gradually decayed. Song Yibang renovated the cemetery for him and decorated his ancestral temple to enshrine him.

古文：故太常卿袁洪愈、祭酒姜宝皆不为居正所喜，仪望荐之朝，渐失居正意。
现代文：前太常卿袁洪愈、祭酒姜宝都不为张居正所喜欢，宋仪望大力推荐他们，逐渐失去了张居正的信任。
English: Zhang Jizheng did not like the former First Secretary Yuan Hongyu or the sacrificial wine Jiang Bao. Song Yibang strongly recommended them, and gradually lost Zhang Jizheng's trust.

古文：四年，稍迁南京大理卿。
现代文：四年升为南京大理卿。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to Nanjing Daliqing.

古文：逾年改北，被劾罢归。
现代文：过了一年，改在北京任此职，被弹劾，免去官职，回到家乡。
English: A year later, he was transferred to Beijing, impeached, removed from office, and returned to his hometown.

古文：仪望少师聂豹，私淑王守仁，又从邹守益、欧阳德、罗洪先游。
现代文：宋仪望少年时代师从聂豹，是王守仁的私淑弟子，又跟随邹守益、欧阳德、罗洪先交游。
English: As a boy, Song Yibang was a pupil of Gong Biao, a disciple of Wang Shuren. He also traveled with Gong Shuren, Ouyang De and Luo Hongxian.

古文：守仁从祀，仪望有力焉。
现代文：王守仁能被从祀于孔庙，宋仪望出了大力。
English: Wang Shuren Neng was enshrined in the Confucius Temple, and Song Yi was greatly admired.

古文：家居数年卒。
现代文：他在家乡生活了数年后死去。
English: He died after living in his hometown for several years.

古文：张岳，字汝宗，余姚人。嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：张岳，字汝宗，浙江余姚人，嘉靖三十八年中进士。
English: Zhang Yue, Zi Ruzong, Zhejiang Yuyao people, Jiajing thirty-eight years of young scholars.

古文：授行人。
现代文：授予行人之官。
English: Awarded to pedestrians.

古文：擢礼科给事中。巡视内府库藏，奏行厘弊八事。
现代文：提拔为礼科给事中，巡视内府库藏，上奏建议实行革除弊端的八条措施。
English: In the promotion to the etiquette department, he inspected the inner-prefectural treasury and proposed eight measures to eliminate the drawbacks.

古文：已，又陈时政，极言讲学者以富贵功名鼓动士大夫，谈虚论寂，靡然成风。
现代文：不久，又议论时政，极力指出讲学的人用富贵功名鼓励士大夫，空谈时事，蔚然成风。
English: Soon, they also discussed current affairs, and strongly pointed out that the lecturers encouraged the scholars and doctors with their wealth and achievements, and talked about current affairs, which has become a fashion.

古文：又今吏治方清，独兵部无振刷，推用总兵黄印、韩承庆等，非庸即狡。
现代文：又认为现在吏治清明，唯有兵部没有整顿，任用的黄印、韩承庆等，不是平庸就是狡诈。
English: It is also believed that the personnel management is clear now, only the military department has not been rectified, and the appointments of Huang Ying and Han Chengqing are either mediocre or cunning.

古文：曹司条例淆乱无章，胥吏朋奸，搏噬将校，其咎必有所归。
现代文：曹司的条例混乱没有章法，部属结为朋党，狼狈为奸，打击将领小校，其罪过应该得到惩处。
English: Cao Cao's regulations are chaotic, there are no rules and regulations. His subordinates have formed cronies, ganged up and acted as traitors, and attacked the generals. Their crimes should be punished.

古文：时徐阶当国，为讲学会，而杨博在兵部，意盖指二人也。
现代文：当时，徐阶主持国政，建立讲学会，而杨博在兵部，张岳暗指这两个人。
English: At that time, Xu Ju presided over state affairs and established a lecture society, while Yang Bo was in the military department. Zhang Yue was alluding to these two people.

古文：博奏辨乞罢，帝慰留之。
现代文：杨博上奏为自己辩白，恳求罢官，皇帝劝慰他，留任了他。
English: Yang Bo pleaded his case and begged to be dismissed, but the emperor consoled him and kept him on.

古文：博自是恶岳。
现代文：杨博自此憎恨张岳。
English: Yang Bo has hated Zhang Yue ever since.

古文：及掌吏部，岳已迁工科左给事中，遂出为云南参议。再迁河南参政。
现代文：等到他掌管吏部，张岳已升迁为工科左给事中，于是，杨博将他逐出京城，任命为云南参议，后升为河南参政。
English: By the time he was in charge of the cadre department, Zhang Yue had been promoted to the middle of the engineering department. Therefore, Yang Bo expelled him from Beijing, appointed him as a Yunnan senator, and later promoted him to participate in politics in Henan.

古文：万历初，张居正雅知岳，用为太仆少卿。
现代文：万历初年，向来了解张岳的张居正起用他为太仆少卿。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Zhang Juzheng, who had always known Zhang Yue, used him as his servant.

古文：再迁南京右佥都御史，督操江。
现代文：后任命为南京右佥都御史，督察江防。
English: Later, he was appointed as the official historian of Nanjing and the inspector of Jiangbei.

古文：甫到官，会居正父丧谋夺情，南京尚书潘晟及诸给事、御史，咸上疏请留居正。
现代文：刚一上任，正好张居正父亲死了，商量不循守丧之礼，继续留职执掌政事，南京尚书潘晟及各位给事、御史，都上奏请求留下张居正。
English: As soon as he took office, just as Zhang Jizheng's father died, the discussion did not follow the funeral ceremony, but continued to stay in office to take charge of government affairs. Nanjing Shangshu Panjun and all the officials and historians appealed to Zhang Jizheng to stay.

古文：岳独驰疏请令驰驿奔丧，居正大怒。
现代文：张岳一个人立即飞章上奏请求命令张居正兼程回乡奔丧，张居正大为恼怒。
English: Zhang Yue, a person, immediately requested the order to fly the banner and ordered Zhang Juzheng to return to his hometown to mourn. Zhang Juzheng was very angry.

古文：会大计京官，给事中傅作舟等承风劾岳，贬一秩调外，岳遂归。
现代文：正赶上考核京官，给事中傅作舟等乘机弹劾张岳，张岳被降一级调离京城，张岳于是回到家乡。
English: He was just in time for the evaluation of Beijing officials, and he was given the opportunity to impeach Zhang Yue by Fu Zuoxuan and others. Zhang Yue was demoted one level and transferred out of Beijing. Zhang Yue then returned to his hometown.

古文：久之，操江佥都御史吕藿、给事中吴绾知居正憾未释，摭劾岳落职闲住。
现代文：过了很久，操江佥都御史吕藿、给事中吴绾知道张居正余怒未消，再次弹劾张岳。他被罢免官职，在家闲住。
English: After a long time had passed, Lv Yue, the governor of the Yangtze River and the capital, knew that Zhang Ju Zheng was still angry, and he once again impeached Zhang Yue. He was dismissed from his post and stayed idle at home.

古文：甫两月，居正死，南京御史方万山荐岳，劾作舟。
现代文：过了两个月，张居正死，南京御史方万山推荐张岳，弹劾傅作舟。
English: Two months later, when Zhang Ju was dying, the Nanjing governor Fang Wanshan recommended Zhang Yue and impeached Fu Zuoxu.

古文：作舟坐斥，起岳四川参议。
现代文：傅作舟因罪被罢免，起用张岳为四川参议。
English: Fu Zuoshu was removed from office for a crime, and Zhang Yue was appointed as a senator of Sichuan.

古文：旋擢右佥都御史，巡抚南、赣。
现代文：不久提升为右佥都御史，巡抚南、赣。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of the Right Deputy Governor of the Capital, the Governor of the South, and the Governor of the North.

古文：入为左佥都御史，献时政四议。
现代文：入京师为左佥都御史，上奏关于时局的四项建议。
English: The author of the entry into Beijing is Zuoying Miyoshi, and the four suggestions on the current situation are presented.

古文：其一言宗藩宜以世次递杀，亲尽则停，俾习四民之业。
现代文：其一说宗藩应当以世次顺序递减，直系亲属完了就停止，让他们从事士农工商四民之业。
English: On the one hand, it is said that the number of clans should be reduced in descending order of succession, and the number of direct relatives should be stopped when they are complete, so that they can engage in the business of the four people.

古文：其一言治河之策，夏镇固当开，沽头亦不可废。
现代文：其二说治理黄河的对策，夏镇原本应当开凿，沽头也不可以废弃。
English: Secondly, the countermeasures for the management of the Yellow River, Xia Town should have been excavated, and Shantou should not be abandoned.

古文：并报寝。进左副都御史，上疏评议廷臣贤否，为给事中袁国臣等所论。
现代文：二条建议都被皇上搁置，升为左副都御史，上奏评定议论朝廷大臣贤明与否，被给事中袁国臣等疏论。
English: Both proposals were shelved by the emperor, promoted to the left vice-governor of the capital, submitted to the evaluation of the discussion on whether the imperial minister was wise or not, and were given to Yuan Guoxin and others in the matter.

古文：时已迁刑部右侍郎，坐罢归。
现代文：当时，他已提为刑部右侍郎，因此被罢官回乡。
English: At that time, he had been promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, so he was dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：李材，字孟诚，丰城人，尚书遂子也。
现代文：李材，字孟诚，丰城人，尚书李遂的儿子。
English: Li Zai, alias Meng Cheng, from Fengcheng, the son of Shangshu Li Suo.

古文：举嘉靖四十一年进士，授刑部主事。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年中进士，任命为刑部主事。
English: In the 41st year of Jiajing, he was promoted to junior high school student and appointed as the head of the criminal department.

古文：素从邹守益讲学。自以学未成，乞假归。访唐枢、王畿、钱德洪，与问难。
现代文：平素跟随邹守益讲学，自以为学业未成，恳求告假回乡，访学于唐枢、王畿、钱德洪，相互解答疑难。
English: He always followed Yu Shouyi's lectures, thinking that his studies were not successful, pleaded for leave to return to his hometown, visited Tangzu, Wangji, and Qian Dehong, and answered each other's questions.

古文：隆庆中还朝。
现代文：隆庆中回到朝廷。
English: He returned to the imperial court at the height of the Qing dynasty.

古文：由兵部郎中稍迁广东佥事。
现代文：由兵部郎中逐渐升为广东佥事。
English: From Hyobusho, he gradually rose to Guangdong Anecdote.

古文：罗旁贼猖獗，材袭破之周高山，设屯以守。
现代文：罗旁盗贼猖獗，李材大破其据点周高山，设兵防守。
English: Robberies are rampant in Luobang, and Li Zhai has broken through his stronghold Zhou Gaoshan and set up troops for defense.

古文：贼有三巢在新会境，调副总兵梁守愚由恩平，游击王瑞由德庆入，身出肇庆中道，夜半斩贼五百级，毁庐舍千余，空其地，募人田之。
现代文：盗贼有三个据点在新会境内，调遣副总兵梁守遇由恩平、游击王瑞由德庆进入，自己走肇庆中路，半夜杀死盗贼五百人，烧毁庐舍千余，让其地空出，雇人开垦为田。
English: The thieves had three strongholds in the territory of the New Society. They dispatched the vice-chief soldier Liang Shouyu from Enping and the guerrilla Wang Rui from Deqing to enter. They went to Zhaoqing Middle Road, killed five hundred thieves in the middle of the night, burned more than a thousand outhouses, vacated the land, and hired people to reclaim it as farmland.

古文：亡何，倭五千攻陷电白，大掠而去。
现代文：没有多久，倭寇五千人攻陷电白，大肆抢掠而去。
English: It didn't take long for five thousand wako to invade Denshaku and plunder the city.

古文：材声言大军数道至以疑贼，而返故道迎击，尽杀之。
现代文：李材率军追赶，在海口设下埋伏，等到倭寇逃跑时一举歼灭，夺回妇女三千多人。
English: Li Zai led the army in pursuit, set up an ambush in Haikou, and when the wokou escaped, they were annihilated in one fell swoop, recapturing more than three thousand women.

古文：又追袭雷州倭至英利，皆遁去，降贼渠许恩于阳江。
现代文：正好有内奸引导倭寇从黄山小道向东溃逃。李材大张声势扬言大军几路将至，以此疑惑倭寇，却返回故道迎击，将倭寇全部歼灭，又追赶袭击雷州的倭寇，倭寇都逃跑了。
English: There just happened to be a mole guiding the wokou from the Huangshan Trail to the east to escape. Li Zai made a big noise and threatened that the army would come several ways, thus suspecting the wokou, but returned to the old road to meet the attack, annihilated all the wokou, and chased the wokou that attacked Leizhou. The wokou all fled.

古文：录功，进副使。
现代文：在阳江降服盗贼之首许恩。评论功绩，晋升为副使。
English: Xu En, the head of the thieves who surrendered in the Yangjiang River, commented on his achievements and was promoted to vice-envoy.

古文：万历初，张居正柄国，不悦材，遂引疾去。
现代文：万历初，张居正执掌国政，不欣赏李材，李材于是告病还乡。
English: At the beginning of the Wanli era, Zhang Ju was in charge of state affairs and did not appreciate Li Zai. Li Zai then returned home due to illness.

古文：居正卒，起官山东。
现代文：张居正死后，在山东做官。
English: After Zhang Jizheng's death, he continued to work as an official in Shandong.

古文：以才调辽东开原。
现代文：以才干调任辽东开原。
English: He was transferred to Liaodong Kaiyuan for his talent.

古文：寻迁云南洱海参政，进按察使，备兵金腾。
现代文：不久，调任云南洱海做参政，升为按察使，在金胜备兵。
English: Soon, he was transferred to Bohai, Yunnan Province, to participate in politics, and was promoted to inspector. He was stationed in Jinsheng.

古文：金腾地接缅甸，而孟养、蛮莫两土司介其间，叛服不常。
现代文：金胜地接缅甸，孟养、蛮莫两土司居在其中的交接地带，时而降服，时而反叛。
English: Jinxing is adjacent to Myanmar, and Meng Yang and Meng Mo, the two local governors, live in the transition zone between them, sometimes surrendering, sometimes rebelling.

古文：缅部目曰大曩长、曰散夺者，率数千人据其地。
现代文：缅甸部落大曩长、散夺率数千人占据其地。
English: The Burmese tribe is the largest, with several thousand people occupying its territory.

古文：材谓不收两土司无以制缅，遣人招两土司来归，而间讨抗命夷阿坡。
现代文：李材认为不收复两土司就无法制服缅甸，派人招抚两土司归附。后发兵讨伐抗命的阿坡。
English: Li Zhai believed that Burma could not be subdued without the recovery of the two territories, so he sent someone to persuade the two territories to be annexed. Later, he sent troops to fight against the rebellious Apo.

古文：居顷之，缅遣兵争蛮莫，材合两土司兵败缅众，杀大曩长，逐散夺去。
现代文：没有多久，缅甸遣兵争夺蛮莫，李材集合两土司兵力击败缅甸人，斩杀大曩长，将散夺赶走。
English: Not long after, the Burmese dispatched troops to fight for Monmo, and Li Zai gathered two Tusi troops to defeat the Burmese, killed Dazhong, and drove away the scattered troops.

古文：缅帅莽应里益兵至孟养，复击沈其舟，斩其将一人，乃退。
现代文：缅甸将领莽应裹增派兵力到孟养，李材再一次击沉他们的船只，杀死将领一人，缅甸军于是撤退。
English: The Burmese generals brazenly sent more troops to Mengyang, Li Zhai once again sank their ships, killing one general, and the Burmese army retreated.

古文：有猛密者，地在缅境，数为缅侵夺，举族内徙，有司居之户碗。
现代文：有一个叫猛密的部落，住在缅甸境内，数次被缅甸人侵扰，举族内迁，地方官员让他们居住在户碗。
English: There is a tribe called Mengmi that lives in Myanmar and has been invaded several times by the Burmese. The tribe was forced to relocate and local officials allowed them to live in Houbowl.

古文：至是，缅势稍屈，材资遣还故土。
现代文：到这时，缅甸势力稍为屈服，李材给予猛密一定资金让他们回到故土。
English: By this time, the Burmese forces had slightly succumbed, and Li Zhai gave Mengmi a certain amount of money to let them return to their homeland.

古文：亡何，缅人驱象阵大举复仇，两土司告急。
现代文：没有多久，缅甸人驱赶象阵再次大举入侵，两土司告急。
English: It did not take long before the Burmese drove the elephants back to make another large-scale invasion, and the two local chiefs were in a hurry.

古文：材遣游击刘天俸率把总寇崇德等出威缅，渡金沙江，与孟养兵会遮浪，迎击之。
现代文：李材派遣游击刘天俸率把总寇崇德等出威缅，渡过金沙江，与孟养兵汇合遮浪共同迎战缅人。
English: Li Zhai dispatched the guerrilla Liu Tianbao to lead the general Qiao Zongde out of Vietnam and Burma, crossed the Jinsha River, and joined with the Mengyang soldiers to block the waves and fight against the Burmese.

古文：贼大败，生擒绣衣贼将三人。
现代文：缅甸人大败，三个将领被活捉。
English: The Burmese were soundly defeated and three generals were captured alive.

古文：巡抚刘世曾、总兵官沐昌祚以大捷闻，诏令覆勘。
现代文：巡抚刘世曾、总兵官沐昌祚向朝廷奏报大捷，皇上下诏复核功劳。
English: The governor Liu Shizeng and the commander-in-chief Mu Changyu reported the great victory to the imperial court, and the imperial edict reviewed the merits.

古文：未上，而材擢右佥都御史，抚治郧阳。
现代文：还未上报，李材就被提升为右佥都御史，抚治郧阳。
English: Before the report was made, Li Zhai was promoted to the right-hand capital of the imperial history, Fuzhi Poyang.

古文：材好讲学，遣部卒供生徒役，卒多怨。
现代文：李材喜爱讲学，派遣部下供学生役使，部下多有怨言。
English: Li Zai likes to give lectures and send his subordinates to serve the students, but his subordinates often complain.

古文：又徇诸生请，改参将公署为学宫。
现代文：李材又依照学生的请求，将参将公署改为学宫。
English: At the request of the students, Li Zai also changed the public office into a school palace.

古文：参将米万春讽门卒梅林等大噪，驰入城，纵囚毁诸生庐，直趋军门，挟赏银四千，汹汹不解。
现代文：参将米万春暗示部下梅林等大声喧哗，骑马入城，纵容囚犯毁掉学生屋室，直接跑到军门，要挟赏银四千，吵吵嚷嚷不肯退下。
English: Senior General Mi Wanchun hinted that his subordinates, such as Meilin, were making a lot of noise, rode into the city, connived at the prisoners to destroy the student house, ran directly to the military gate, demanded a reward of four thousand silver, and noisily refused to back down.

古文：居二日，万春胁材更军中不便十二事，令上疏归罪副使丁惟宁、知府沈鈇等，材隐忍从之。
现代文：过了两天，米万春威胁李材更改军中不便十二事，命令他上疏将罪行归于副使丁惟宁、知府沈钅夫等，李材隐忍听从了他。
English: Two days later, Mi Wanchun threatened Li Zai to change the twelve inconvenient things in the army, and ordered him to attribute the crimes to the vice-envoy Ding Wei Ning, the prefect Shen Yefu, etc. Li Zai did not listen to him.

古文：惟宁责数万春，万春欲杀惟宁，跳而免，材遂复劾惟宁激变。
现代文：丁惟宁责骂数落米万春，米万春想杀丁惟宁，丁惟宁逃走。李材于是再一次弹劾丁惟宁激起事变。
English: Ding Wei Ning scolded and beat Mi Wan Chun, Mi Wan Chun wanted to kill Ding Wei Ning, Ding Wei Ning ran away. Li Zai then impeached Ding Wei Ning again to stir up trouble.

古文：诏下鈇等吏，贬惟宁三官，材还籍候勘。时十五年十一月也。
现代文：皇上下诏问沈钅夫等人的罪，将丁惟宁降职三等，李材回到原籍等候调查，时间是万历十五年十一月。
English: The imperial edict inquired into the crimes of Shen Xiongfu and others, demoted Ding Wei Ning to the third grade, and Li Zai returned to his hometown to wait for the investigation. The time was November of the 15th year of the Wanli Era.

古文：御史杨绍程勘万春首乱，宜罪。
现代文：御史杨绍程调查认为米万春是罪魁祸首，应该治罪。
English: Investigator Shi Yang Shaocheng believes that Mi Wanchun is the main culprit and should be punished.

古文：大学士申时行庇之，置不问，旋调天津善地去。
现代文：大学士申时行暗中庇护他，以致朝廷没有问罪，顷刻调任到天津去了。
English: University scholar Shen Shigong secretly sheltered him, so that the imperial court did not find him guilty, and he was transferred to Tianjin at a stroke.

古文：而材又以云南事被讦，遂获重谴。
现代文：而李材又因云南的事被攻击，于是被加重谪贬。
English: Li Zhai was attacked because of the Yunnan incident, and was subjected to aggravated reprimand.

古文：初，有诏勘征缅功，巡按御史苏赞阝言斩馘不及千，破城拓地皆无验，猛密地尚为缅据，材、天俸等虚张功伐，副使陈严之与相附和，宜并罪。
现代文：起初，皇上有旨勘验征讨缅甸的功绩，巡按御史苏赞阝说斩首没有超过一千，攻破城池，开拓疆土都没有证实，猛密这块地方还被缅甸占据，李材、刘天俸等夸大功绩，副使陈严之和他相附和，应该一同治罪。
English: At first, the emperor ordered an inquiry to discuss the exploits of Myanmar. The inspector-general Su Zanjun said that the number of beheadings did not exceed a thousand, and the breaking of the city and the expansion of the territory were not confirmed. This area of Mengmi was still occupied by Myanmar. Li Zai and Liu Tianbao exaggerated their exploits. The deputy envoy Chen Yanzhi agreed with him, and they should be punished together.

古文：帝怒，削世曾籍，夺昌祚禄一年，材、严之、天俸俱逮下诏狱。
现代文：皇帝大怒，剥夺刘世曾官职，停发沐昌祚俸禄一年，李材、陈严之、刘天俸都逮捕下狱。
English: The emperor was enraged, stripped Liu Shizeng of his official position, suspended Mu Chang's salary for one year, and arrested and imprisoned Li Zai, Chen Yanzhi, and Liu Tianyuan.

古文：刑部尚书李世达、左都御史吴时来、大理少卿李栋等，当材、天俸徒，严之镌秩。
现代文：刑部尚书李世达、左都御史吴时来、大理少卿李栋等，认为李材、刘天俸当罚流放，陈严之当降级。
English: Li Shida, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Wu Shilai, the governor of Zuo, and Li Dong, the junior secretary of Dali, believed that Li Zai and Liu Tianfeng should be punished and exiled, and Chen Yanzhi should be demoted.

古文：帝不怿，夺郎中、御史、寺正诸臣俸，典诏狱李登云等亦解官。
现代文：皇帝不高兴，停发郎中、御史、寺正诸臣的俸禄，典诏狱李登云等也被解去官职。
English: The emperor was displeased, and he suspended the salaries of his vassals, such as Chiharu, Goshi, and Terasada, and ordered the imprisonment of Li Dengyun, who was also dismissed.

古文：于是改拟遣戍。
现代文：于是准备将他们改为戍边。
English: So they were going to change them to ruffles.

古文：特旨引红牌说谎例，坐材、天俸斩，严之除名。
现代文：后特下旨援引红牌说谎的例子，定罪李材、刘天俸斩首，陈严之除掉官籍。
English: After that, citing the example of lying with a red card, Li Zai and Liu Tianfeng were convicted and beheaded, and Chen Yan was stripped of his official status.

古文：大学士时行等数为解，给事中唐尧钦等亦言： 材以夷攻夷，功不可泯。
现代文：大学士申时行等数次为他们说情，给事中唐尧钦等也说： 李材以夷攻夷，功绩不可埋没。
English: University scholar Shen Shihong and others interceded for them several times, to which Tang Yuqin and others also said: Li Zai used the barbarians to attack the barbarians, and his achievements must not be buried.

古文：奏报偶虚，坐以死，假令尽虚无实，掩罪为功，何以罪之？
现代文：奏报偶尔有虚夸，就定为死罪，假使全是假的没有实在的东西，掩饰罪过，夸为功绩，又定什么罪呢？
English: If a report is occasionally false and boastful, it is a capital crime. If it is all false and nothing real, if it conceals sins and boasts of achievements, what crime is it?

古文：设不幸失城池，全军不返，又何以罪之？ 
现代文：假设不幸丢失城池，全军没有返回，又定什么罪呢？ 
English: Suppose the castle is lost, and the whole army does not return, what will the punishment be?

古文：帝皆不听。
现代文：皇帝均不听。
English: Emperor Wei did not listen to them.

古文：幽系五年，论救者五十余疏。
现代文：被关押五年，救援他们的奏疏有五十多封。
English: They have been detained for five years, and there are more than 50 appeals for their rescue.

古文：已，天俸以善用火器，释令立功，时行等复为材申理，皆不省。
现代文：不久，刘天俸因为善于使用火器，皇上下令令他立功赎罪，申时行等再一次为李材申辩，皇帝置之不理。
English: Soon after, because Liu Tianfeng was good at using firearms, the emperor ordered him to make meritorious deeds to atone for his sins, and once again pleaded for Li Zhai, but the emperor ignored him.

古文：亡何，孟养使入贡，具言缅人侵轶，天朝救援，破敌有状，闻典兵者在狱，众皆流涕。而楚雄士民阎世祥等亦相率诣阙讼冤。
现代文：没有多久，孟养使者进贡，一一说起缅甸人侵略，明朝救援，击破敌人的情状。听说带兵的人在狱中，使者都痛哭流涕，楚雄的士民阎世祥等也相继到官府为李材等伸冤。
English: It didn't take long for Meng Yao's envoys to pay tribute, and they all talked about the Burmese invasion, the Ming Dynasty's rescue, and the situation of defeating the enemy. I heard that the person who led the soldiers was in prison, and the envoys were all crying bitterly. Chu Xiong's citizen Yan Shixiang and others also went to the government office one after another to seek justice for Li Zhai and others.

古文：帝意乃稍解，命再勘。
现代文：皇帝这才稍稍改变了一下态度，命令再做调查。
English: Only then did the emperor slightly change his attitude and order another investigation.

古文：勘至，材罪不掩功。
现代文：调查的结果报了上来，李材的罪过掩埋不了他的功绩。
English: The results of the investigation were reported, and Li Zhai's crimes could not cover up his achievements.

古文：大学士王锡爵等再疏为言，帝故迟之，至二十一年四月，始命戍镇海卫。
现代文：大学士王锡爵等又上疏替他讲话。皇上故意推迟放人，到万历二十一年四月，才命令他戍守镇海卫。
English: Wang Xizhe, a university scholar, and others went up to speak for him. The emperor deliberately delayed the release of the man, and only ordered him to guard Zhenhaiwei in April of the 21st year of Wanli.

古文：材所至，辄聚徒讲学，学者称见罗先生。
现代文：李材所到之处，就聚众讲学，学者们称他为见罗先生。
English: Everywhere Li Zai went, he gathered crowds to give lectures, and scholars called him Mr. Shiloh.

古文：系狱时，就问者不绝。
现代文：他在狱中时，向他求学的人络绎不绝。
English: While he was in prison, there was a steady stream of people who wanted to learn from him.

古文：至戍所，学徒益众。
现代文：到了戍所，学生更多。
English: When I got to the detention center, there were more students.

古文：许孚远方巡抚福建，日相过从，材以此忘羁旅。
现代文：许孚远正巡抚福建，每天与其交往，李材因此忘了羁旅之苦。
English: Xu Fuyuan is the governor of Fujian, and he interacts with him every day, so Li Zai has forgotten the hardships of the journey.

古文：久之赦还。卒年七十九。
现代文：很久之后，他遇赦还乡，死时年七十九岁。
English: Much later, he was pardoned and returned to his hometown, where he died at the age of 79.

古文：陆树德，字与成，尚书树声弟也。
现代文：陆树德，字与成，尚书陆树声的弟弟。
English: Lu Shude, the younger brother of Shangshu Lu Shuxing.

古文：嘉靖末进士。除严州推官。
现代文：嘉靖末年中进士，授职严州推官。
English: At the end of the Jiajing period, he was promoted to the rank of middle-aged scholar, and was appointed to the post of Yanzhou magistrate.

古文：行取当授给事、御史，会树声拜侍郎，乃授刑部主事。
现代文：按正常考核选官他当授给事中、御史职，正好树声做了侍郎，于是授职他刑部主事。
English: According to the normal assessment and selection of officials, he should be assigned to the middle and historical positions, and he just happened to be a waiter, so he was assigned to be the head of the criminal department.

古文：隆庆四年，改礼科给事中。
现代文：隆庆四年陆树德改任礼科给事中。
English: In the fourth year of the Longqing era, Lu Shude was transferred to the Department of Etiquette.

古文：穆宗御朝讲，不发一语。
现代文：穆宗皇帝亲临朝廷商讨大事，却不发一语。
English: Emperor Mu Zong came to the imperial court to discuss important matters, but did not say a word.

古文：树德言： 上下交为泰，今暌隔若此，何以劘君德，训万几？ 
现代文：陆树德说： 上下应相互沟通，今天却隔阂如此，怎么能磨砺君德规划政事呢？ 
English: Lu Shude said, "Upper and lower levels should communicate with each other, but today they are so far apart. How can we cultivate the virtue of planning government affairs?

古文：不报。
现代文：皇上不予回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：屡迁都给事中。
现代文：多次迁官后任都给事中。
English: He has been in the process of being appointed after being transferred several times.

古文：六年四月，诏辍东宫讲读，树德言： 自四月迄八月，为时甚遥，请非盛暑，仍御讲筵。 
现代文：六年四月皇上下诏停东宫讲读，陆树德说： 从四月到八月，为时尚远，请求如不是盛暑，皇上还是亲临讲座。 
English: In April of the sixth year, the emperor stopped by the East Palace to give a lecture, and Lu Shude said: From April to August, it is far from being fashionable. If it is not a hot summer, the emperor should attend the lecture in person.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：穆宗颇倦勤，树德言： 日月交蚀，旱魃为灾，当及时修省。 
现代文：穆宗颇厌倦辛劳，陆树德说： 日月交蚀，鬼怪为灾，应当及时修行反省。 
English: Mu Zong was quite tired of the hard work, Lu Shude said: The sun and moon intersect, the ghosts are a disaster, and it is necessary to reflect on the practice in time.

古文：及帝不豫，又请谨药饵，善保护，仲夏亢阳月，宜益慎起居。
现代文：皇帝患病了，又请皇上谨慎使用药饵，妥善保养圣体。仲夏炎热的日子，应该更加注意起居生活。
English: When the emperor fell ill, he also asked the emperor to be careful in the use of medicinal herbs and the proper care of the Blessed Sacrament. In the hot days of midsummer, more attention should be paid to daily life.

古文：帝不悦，疏皆留中。
现代文：皇帝不大高兴，所奏上疏皆被留于禁中。
English: The emperor was not happy, and all the players were kept in confinement.

古文：内臣请祈福戒坛，已得旨，树德言： 戒坛度僧，男女扰杂，导淫伤化。
现代文：宦官请求祈福戒坛，并已得到圣旨，陆树德说： 戒坛度僧，男女扰杂，有伤风化。
English: The eunuch asked to pray for good fortune at the altar of vows, and having received the sacred will, Lu Shude said: The vows of the altar of vows, men and women are mixed, which is against the custom.

古文：陛下欲保圣躬，宜法大禹之恶旨酒，成汤之不迩声色，何必奉佛。 
现代文：陛下想保重圣体，应当效法大禹讨厌美酒，成汤不近声色，为什么一定要信佛呢？ 
English: If His Majesty wants to protect the sacred body, he should follow the example of King David, who detested wine and did not like the taste of wine. Why must he believe in Buddha?

古文：未几，穆宗崩，神宗嗣位，中官冯保挤司礼孟冲而代之。
现代文：没有多久，穆宗驾崩，神宗继位，中官冯保挤掉司礼孟冲取而代之。
English: Before long, Mu Zong passed away, Shen Zong succeeded, and Lieutenant-General Feng Bao ousted the priest Meng Chong to take his place.

古文：树德言： 先帝甫崩，忽传冯保掌司礼监。
现代文：陆树德称： 先帝刚刚死去，忽然听说冯保执掌司礼监。
English: Lu Shude said: "The former emperor had just died, and I suddenly heard that Feng Bao was in charge of the ceremonial supervisor.

古文：果先帝意，何不传示数日前，乃在弥留后？
现代文：如果是先帝的意思，为什么数日之前不下命令，而在驾崩之后呢？
English: If this was the Emperor's intention, why didn't he give the order a few days earlier, but only after his death?

古文：果陛下意，则哀痛方深，万几未御，何暇念中官？ 
现代文：果真是陛下的意思，则哀痛正深，政事未理，哪有空闲顾念到中官呢？ 
English: If it is really His Majesty's will, then the grief is deep, the political affairs are not reasonable, and there is no time to think about the lieutenant general.

古文：疏入，保大恨。
现代文：奏疏交上，冯保大为恼恨。
English: Feng Bao Da was angry at the poor performance.

古文：比议祧庙，树德请毋祧宣宗，仍祀睿宗世室，格不行。
现代文：等到议论宗庙时，陆树德请求不要祧祭宣宗，应当祭祀睿宗于世室，其意见被阻止不得实行。
English: When it came to discussing the ancestral temple, Lu Shude asked not to make a sacrificial offering to proclaim the religion, but to sacrifice Ruizong to the world, and his opinion was prevented from being implemented.

古文：已，极陈民运白粮之患，请领之漕臣，从之。
现代文：不久，上书陈述老百姓运输白粮的苦恼，请求交给漕臣负责，皇上同意了。
English: Not long after, a petition was submitted to the emperor, stating the distress of the common people in transporting white grain, and requesting that the responsibility be given to Cao Zhen. The emperor agreed.

古文：树德居言职三年，疏数十上，率侃直。
现代文：陆树德任监察言官三年，上疏十数次，耿直无私。
English: Lu Shude has served as an inspector for three years and has been promoted more than a dozen times. He is honest and selfless.

古文：会树声掌礼部，乃量迁尚宝卿。
现代文：等到树声执掌礼部，于是他改任尚宝卿。
English: He waited until the sound of the tree to take charge of the ceremonial department, and then he was reassigned to Shang Baoqing.

古文：历太常少卿，南京太仆卿，以右佥都御史巡抚山东。
现代文：历任太常少卿、南京太仆卿，以右佥都御史巡抚山东。
English: He was successively appointed as Taizhang Shaoqing and Nanjing Taipuqing, and served as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：树德素清严，约束僚吏，屏绝声伎。
现代文：陆树德一向清正、严明，约束部下甚严，摒弃声色。
English: Lu Shude's ethics have always been clear and strict, and he strictly restrains his subordinates and abandons the tone of voice.

古文：山东民壮改民兵，戍蓟门，隆庆末令岁输银二万四千，罢其戍役。
现代文：山东民壮改为民兵，戍守蓟门，隆庆末年朝廷命令每岁交银二万四千两，免去他们戍守的劳役。
English: Shandong Minzhuang were changed to militia and guarded the imperial gate. At the end of the Longqing Dynasty, the imperial court ordered them to pay 24,000 taels of silver per year and exempted them from labor service.

古文：寻命增输三万，树德请如河南例罢之。
现代文：不久，又命令增加到三万两，陆树德请求像河南一样，不交银两。
English: Soon, the order was increased to thirty thousand taels. Lu Shude requested that, like Henan, no silver taels be paid.

古文：帝不从，而为免增输之数。
现代文：皇上不听从，只是免去增加的银两。
English: The emperor did not obey, but only waived the increase in silver.

古文：德府白云湖故民田，为王所夺，后已还民，王复结中官谋复之。
现代文：德府白云湖过去是老百姓的私田，为藩王侵占。后来已经还给了百姓，但藩王又勾结宦官谋议侵夺。
English: In the past, Defu Baiyun Lake was the private land of the common people, occupied by the king of the domain. Later, it was returned to the people, but the king of the domain conspired with eunuchs to invade it.

古文：树德争不得，乞休归。
现代文：陆树德力争不成，乞求回乡。
English: Lu Shu couldn't succeed in his efforts and begged to return to his hometown.

古文：久之卒。
现代文：很久之后死去。
English: He died a long time later.

古文：萧廪，字可发，万安人。
现代文：萧廪，字可废，江西万安人。
English: Xiao Wei, the character can be scrapped, Jiangxi Wan'an people.

古文：祖乾元，以御史劾刘瑾，廷杖下狱，终云南副使。
现代文：祖父乾元在御史任上弹劾刘瑾，被廷杖下狱，死在云南副使任上。
English: His grandfather, Qian Yuan, was impeached by Liu Bei when he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, was sent to prison by the imperial scepter, and died when he was appointed to the post of Yunnan Vice-Envoy.

古文：廪举嘉靖末进士，授行人。
现代文：萧廪嘉靖末年中进士，授职行人。
English: At the end of Xiao Yu Jiajing's middle years, he was promoted to the rank of scholar.

古文：隆庆三年擢御史。
现代文：隆庆三年提拔为御史。
English: Longqing was promoted to goshi three years later.

古文：因地震，请加礼中宫。
现代文：因为地震，请求待朝内的官厚于常礼。
English: Because of the earthquake, officials in the imperial court were asked to be more courteous than usual.

古文：已，出核陕西四镇兵食。
现代文：不久，出去考察陕西四镇军队的食粮。
English: Soon, he went out to inspect the food of the army in four towns in Shaanxi.

古文：斥将吏隐占卒数万人归伍。
现代文：斥责将吏偷偷地隐占兵士数万人回归队伍。
English: He reprimanded the generals for secretly seizing tens of thousands of soldiers to return to the ranks.

古文：固原州海剌都之地，密迩松山，为楚府牧地。
现代文：固原州海剌都地方，紧靠松山，是楚王府的牧地。
English: Gouyuan County, the capital of Hainan Province, close to Matsuyama, is the pastureland of Chuwangfu.

古文：廪言楚府封武昌，牧地在塞下，与寇接，王所收四五百金，而奸宄窟穴，弊甚大，宜谕使献之朝廷。
现代文：萧廪以为楚王府在武昌，牧地却在边塞，与邻境相接，楚王所收的四五百金，被为非作歹的小人所藏，弊病很大，应当下诏使他献给朝廷。
English: Xiao Yao thought that King Chu's palace was in Wuchang, but the pastures were in the frontier fortress, adjoining the neighboring territory. The four or five hundred gold coins King Chu received were hidden by a villain. He was very ill and should be ordered to donate them to the imperial court.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇上下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：已，改巡茶马。
现代文：不久，改为巡视茶马交易。
English: Soon, it was changed to the inspection of tea and horse trading.

古文：七苑牧地，养马八千七百余匹，而占地五万五千三百顷有奇。
现代文：七苑的牧地，养马八千七百多匹，占地五万五千三百多顷。
English: The pastures in Qiyuan are home to more than 8,700 horses and cover an area of more than 55,300 hectares.

古文：廪但给万二千二百余顷，岁益课二万。
现代文：萧廪只给予一万二千二百余顷，每岁增加收入二万。
English: Xiao Wei only gave a total of more than 12,200 hectares, with an annual increase in income of 20,000.

古文：万历元年，巡按浙江。
现代文：万历元年萧廪巡视浙江。
English: In the first year of Wanli, Xiao Wei inspected Zhejiang.

古文：请祀建文朝忠臣十二人，从祀王守仁于文庙。
现代文：请求祭祀建文帝朝忠臣十二人，从祀王守仁在文庙。
English: Twelve loyal subjects of the Emperor Jianwen are requested to be sacrificed, starting with Wang Shuren in the Temple of Literature.

古文：寻擢太仆少卿，再迁南京太仆卿。
现代文：不久，提为太仆少卿，再提升为南京太仆卿。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Taigu Shaoqing and then to Nanjing Taiguqing.

古文：九年，由光禄卿改右佥都御史，巡抚陕西。
现代文：九年，由光禄卿改任右佥都御史，巡抚陕西。
English: In the ninth year, he was transferred from the position of Guangluqing to the position of the Right Hand of the Emperor and the Governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：时方核天下隐田，大吏争希张居正指增赋，廪令如额而止。
现代文：当时正普查天下隐漏的田地，大部分官吏争着讨好张居正增加赋税，萧廪命令只按额定的数量征收。
English: At that time, they were surveying the world's hidden fields, and most government officials were trying to please Zhang Ju by increasing taxes. Xiao Gan ordered that only a certain amount of taxes should be levied.

古文：境内回回部常群行拾麦穗，间或草窃，耀州以变告。
现代文：陕西境内回部常常成群结队拾麦穗，偶尔就偷窃，耀州官吏以变乱上告。
English: In Shaanxi Province, the Huibe often gather in groups to pick up ears of wheat, and occasionally steal them. The officials of Yaozhou appealed to the Supreme People's Court for mutiny.

古文：廪抚谕之，戮数人，变遂定；令拾麦毋带兵器，侪偶不得至十人。
现代文：萧廪下文抚恤，杀掉几个人，变乱遂定；下令拾麦的人不带兵器，一起不得超过十人。
English: Xiao Qianhong made concessions, killed several people, and the mutiny was complete; the person who ordered the wheat to be picked up did not carry weapons, and there must not be more than ten people at a time.

古文：进右副都御史，移抚浙江。
现代文：他晋升为右副都御史，巡抚浙江。
English: He was promoted to Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Governor of Zhejiang Province.

古文：先以赏贡使，岁增造彩币二千。
现代文：先前因赏赐进贡的使者，每岁增加造彩色织品钱二千。
English: In the past, due to the reward of the envoys who paid tribute, the money for the production of colored fabrics increased by two thousand every year.

古文：廪请均之福建及徽、宁诸府，从之。
现代文：萧廪请求均摊到福建、徽州和宁波等府，朝廷同意了他的意见。
English: Xiao Wei's request was equally distributed to Fujian, Huizhou and Ningbo prefectures, and the imperial court agreed with his opinion.

古文：已，请减上供织造，不许。
现代文：不久，请求减免上供的纺织物，皇上不允许。
English: Soon, the Emperor did not allow requests to reduce or exempt the textiles offered.

古文：迁工部右侍郎，召改刑部。进兵部左侍郎，以官卒。赠尚书。
现代文：后升任工部右侍郎，下诏改任刑部官，又升为兵部左侍郎，死于任上，赠为尚书。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Works, and then to the Officer of the Ministry of Justice, and then to the Left Attendant of the Ministry of War. He died in office and was given the posthumous title of Shosho.

古文：廪初从欧阳德、邹守益游。
现代文：萧廪起初随同欧阳德、邹守益游学。
English: At first, Xiao Yao accompanied Ouyang De and Zou Shouyi on a study tour.

古文：制行醇谨，故所至有立。
现代文：行为淳正、谨慎，所以他所做官的地方都有好的政绩。
English: He is honest and prudent, so he has a good political record wherever he has been in office.

古文：贾三近，字德修，峄县人。
现代文：贾三近，字德修，山东峄县人。
English: Jia Sanchong, also known as De Xiu, was born in Shandong's Handan County.

古文：隆庆二年进士。选庶吉士，授吏科给事中。
现代文：隆庆二年进士，选为庶吉士，授职吏科给事中。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he was promoted to the rank of academician, and was elected to the rank of associate academician.

古文：四年六月，疏言： 善治者守法以宜民，去其太甚而已。
现代文：四年六月上疏说： 善于治理的人遵守法律以让百姓得到好处，不要让他们太离谱了。
English: In June last year, Shang Zuo said: "Good governors should abide by the law to benefit the people, and not let them go too far."

古文：今庙堂之令不信于郡县，郡县之令不信于小民。
现代文：现在郡县不相信朝廷的法令，百姓不相信郡县的命令。
English: At present, counties do not believe in the decrees of the imperial court, and people do not believe in county orders.

古文：蠲租矣而催科愈急，振济矣而追逋自如，恤刑矣而冤死相望。
现代文：已减免了的租税却催交甚急，已经赈济了的却仍然追讨如常，已经宽免了刑罚而冤死的人不断。
English: Those whose taxes have been reduced or exempted are urged to pay in a hurry, those whose taxes have been reduced or exempted are still pursued as usual, and those who have been pardoned and died unjustly continue.

古文：正额之输，上供之需，边疆之费，虽欲损毫厘不可得。
现代文：正额赋税，进贡的物品，边疆的费用，想减免一毫一厘都不可能。
English: It is impossible to reduce or exempt even a millisecond from the amount of tax, the items subject to tribute, and the expenses of the frontier.

古文：形格势制，莫可如何。
现代文：受到形势的限制，毫无办法。
English: Constrained by the situation, there was no way out.

古文：且监司考课，多取振作集事之人，而轻宽平和易之士，守令虽贤，安养之心渐移于苛察，抚字之念日夺于征输，民安得不困！
现代文：况且监司考察官员的成绩，多录用苛刻好事之人，而轻视宽大、平和的官员，守令虽然贤明，安抚养护百姓的心逐渐转移为苛刻，抚恤百姓的念头日日为征税的想法代替，百姓怎能不贫困呢？
English: Moreover, the Supervision Department examined the performance of officials, and more people were hired who were harsh and good, while officials who were lenient and peaceful were despised. Although the order-keeping was wise, the heart of pacifying and protecting the people gradually shifted to harsh, and the idea of subsidizing the people was replaced by the idea of taxing every day. How could the people not be impoverished?

古文：乞戒有司务守法。而监司殿最毋但取旦夕功，失惇大之体。 
现代文：乞求告诫有关官吏务必要守成法，监司考核名次不可只看一朝一夕，失去了诚实、淳厚的大体。 
English: It is necessary to admonish the relevant officials to abide by the law, and the supervisors should not only look at the rankings overnight, but lose the honesty and integrity.

古文：已，复疏言： 抚按诸臣遇州县长吏，率重甲科而轻乡举。
现代文：不久，又上疏说： 抚按诸臣与州县长吏相遇，都重甲科而轻视乡举。
English: Not long after, Shang Zuo said again: Fuzhang's subordinates met with the prefectural and county officials, and all of them placed great importance on A-levels, but despised the township examination.

古文：同一宽也，在进士则为抚字，在举人则为姑息。
现代文：同是宽大，在进士则认为是抚恤，在举人则是姑息。
English: It is also lenient, in the case of a promotion, it is considered to be a pension, and in the case of a promotion, it is a concession.

古文：同一严也，在进士则为精明，在举人则为苛戾。
现代文：同样严明，认为进士是精明，举人则是苛刻。
English: He is equally strict, believing that it is shrewd to recruit people, but it is harsh to promote people.

古文：是以为举人者，非华颠豁齿不就选；人或裹足毁裳，息心仕进。
现代文：要是举人，不到头发白了、牙齿掉了就不被征送。有的举人裹足不前，断了进仕途的念头。
English: If they are drafted, they won't be conscripted until their hair turns white and their teeth fall out. Some draftees are so discouraged that they have given up the idea of pursuing a career.

古文：夫乡举岂乏才良，宜令勉就是途，因行激劝。 
现代文：乡举难道缺乏人才吗？应该采取鼓励办法，让他们尽力于仕途。 皇上下诏同意。
English: Don't township officials lack talent? Encouragement measures should be taken to encourage them to do their best. The Emperor agreed.

古文：诏皆俞允。
现代文：再升为左给事中，去贵州考察。
English: He was promoted to the left again, and went to Guizhou for inspection.

古文：再迁左给事中，勘事贵州。中道罢遣，遂请急归。
现代文：途中接到不去贵州的命令，于是，他请求立刻归家。
English: On the way, he received an order not to go to Guizhou, so he asked to return home immediately.

古文：神宗嗣位，起户科给事中。
现代文：神宗继位，贾三近起用为户科给事中。
English: Shenzong succeeded to the throne, and Jia Sanxing was appointed as the head of the household.

古文：万历元年，平江伯陈王谟以太后家姻，夤缘得镇湖广。
现代文：万历元年，平江伯陈王谟因与太后家联姻，攀附得以镇守湖广。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, King Mu of Pingjiang Province married into the empress dowager's family, and was able to retain control of the lake.

古文：三近劾其垢秽，乃不遣。
现代文：贾三近弹劾他污秽，于是没有派遣。
English: Jia San nearly impeached him for filth, so he was not dispatched.

古文：给事中雒遵、御史景嵩、韩必显劾谭纶被谪，三近率同列救之，诏增供用库黄蜡岁二万五千，三近等又谏，皆不从。
现代文：给事中雒遵，御史景嵩、韩必显弹劾谭纶被贬斥，贾三近率领同官援救他们。皇上下诏增加供用库黄蜡每年二万五千，贾三近等又劝谏，皇上都没有听从。
English: During the incident, Emperor Jianzhong and Han Bixian denounced the impeachment of Tan Zheng, and Jia Sanxin led his colleagues to rescue them. The emperor issued an edict to increase the supply of warehouse yellow wax by 25,000 per year, and Jia Sanxin and others also advised the emperor, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：时方行海运，多覆舟，以三近言罢其役。
现代文：当时正好实行海运，舟船多覆没，因为贾三近的劝说罢掉了海运。
English: At that time, the sea transport was just implemented, and many boats were overturned, because Jia Sanqian's persuasion eliminated the sea transport.

古文：肃王缙贵，隆庆间用贿以辅国将军袭封，至是又请复庄田，三近再疏争，遂弗予。
现代文：肃王缙火贵，隆庆年间因为贿赂以辅国将军袭封肃王，这时他又请求恢复庄田，贾三近再次上疏争论，皇上于是没有给他。
English: Su Wang was very valuable. During the Longqing Dynasty, because of bribery, Su Wang was besieged by the general of the auxiliary country. At this time, he also requested the restoration of Shoda. Jia Sanxuan once again raised the dispute, and the emperor did not give it to him.

古文：初，有令征赋以八分为率，不及者议罚。
现代文：起初，有命令征收赋税以八分为率，不及格的将被罚。
English: Initially, there was an order to levy the tax at an eight-percent rate, with failure to pass being punished.

古文：三近请地凋敝者减一分，诏从之。
现代文：贾三近请求贫瘠地方的官吏减去一分，皇上下诏听从。
English: Jia San nearly asked the officials of the barren places to subtract one point, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：中官温泰请尽输关税、盐课于内库，三近言课税本饷边，今屯田半芜，开中法坏，塞下所资惟此，苟归内帑，必误边计。议乃寝。
现代文：中官温泰请求将关税、盐课全部输入内库，贾三近说课税本来是给边疆的，现在屯田荒芜了一半，开中法被破坏，边疆能依靠的就是这了，如果归入内库，必定误了边防大计，此项建议于是被搁置。
English: Lieutenant General Wen Tai requested that all tariffs and salt duties be transferred to the internal treasury. Jia Sanxiang said that taxation was originally given to the frontier. Now half of the tundra is deserted, the opening and closing method has been destroyed, and this is what the frontier can rely on. If it is included in the internal treasury, it must have missed the border defense plan. This proposal was therefore shelved.

古文：顷之，擢太常少卿。
现代文：很快，贾三近提为太常少卿。
English: Soon, Jia Sanxin was promoted to the position of Taizang Shaoqing.

古文：再迁南京光禄卿，请假归。
现代文：再升南京光禄卿，请假归家。
English: Re-promoted to Nanjing Guangluqing, he took a leave of absence and returned home.

古文：十二年，召掌光禄，其秋，拜右佥都御史，巡抚保定。
现代文：万历十二年征召他执掌光禄寺，这年秋天拜为右佥都御史，巡抚保定。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, he was summoned to take charge of the Guanglu Temple, and in the autumn of that year, he was appointed as the Right Hand of the Emperor and the Governor of Baoding.

古文：畿辅大饥，振贷有方。召拜大理卿。
现代文：畿辅发生大饥荒，贾三近赈贷有方，征召为大理寺卿。
English: A great famine occurred in Kii-Fu, and Jia San, who was close to lending money, was conscripted as the Lord of Dali Temple.

古文：未上，以亲老归养。
现代文：没有上任，以亲人年老归家抚养。
English: He did not take office, and was brought up by relatives in their old age.

古文：起兵部右侍郎，复以亲老辞，不许。
现代文：后起用为兵部右侍郎，又以亲人年老推辞，皇上不答应。
English: Later, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the military department, but the emperor did not agree to this, citing the old age of his relatives as an excuse.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：不久之后死去。
English: He died soon after.

古文：李颐，字惟贞，余干人。
现代文：李颐，字惟贞，江西余干人。
English: Li Qian, Zha Weizhen, Jiangxi Yu Gangren.

古文：隆庆二年进士。授中书舍人。
现代文：隆庆二年中进士，授职中书舍人。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he was promoted to a scholar.

古文：博习典故，负才名。
现代文：博览、熟悉典故，盛负才气。
English: Broad-minded, familiar with allusions, and full of talent.

古文：万历初，擢御史。
现代文：万历初年，升为御史。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to goshi.

古文：同官胡涍、景嵩、韩必显，给事中雒遵相继获谴，抗疏申救，不听。
现代文：同官胡氵孝、景嵩、韩必显，给事中雒遵相继遭到皇上指责，他上疏相救，可惜皇帝不听。
English: His fellow officials Hu Yingxiao, Jing Song, and Han Bixian were accused by the emperor one after another, and he tried to save them, but unfortunately the emperor did not listen.

古文：清军湖广、广西，请免士民远戍，只充傍近卫所军，制可。
现代文：清理湖广、广西军队，请求免除士民远戍之苦，只充军邻近的卫所，皇上予以批准。
English: The emperor approved the request to clean up the troops in Hukang and Guangxi, to relieve the suffering of the soldiers and the people, and to fill only the garrison near the troops.

古文：忤张居正，出为湖州知府。
现代文：因违背张居正意愿，他出任湖州知府。
English: Because he violated Zhang Juzheng's will, he became the governor of Huzhou.

古文：迁苏松兵备副使、湖广按察使。
现代文：改任苏松兵备副使、湖广按察使。
English: He was reappointed as the deputy envoy of Su Song Bei and the inspector of Hunan Province.

古文：郧阳兵变，知府沈鈇且得罪，颐为白其冤，而密歼首乱者。
现代文：郧阳发生兵变，知府沈钅夫被治罪，李颐为他申辩冤情，秘密杀死带头叛乱的人。
English: There was a mutiny in Shenyang, and the prefect, Shen Yefu, was punished. Li Yao pleaded his case and secretly killed the leader of the mutiny.

古文：以母丧归。
现代文：后来因为母亲去世回到故乡。
English: He later returned to his hometown after his mother died.

古文：起故官，莅陕西，进河南右布政使。
现代文：服丧期满，官复原职，到陕西上任，升为河南右布政使。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was reinstated as an official, took office in Shaanxi, and was promoted to Henan Ubu Political Envoy.

古文：擢右佥都御史，巡抚顺天。
现代文：提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚顺天府。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian, and became the governor of Shuntianfu.

古文：进右副都御史。
现代文：再升为右副都御史。
English: He was promoted again to the post of Right Vice-Governor.

古文：以定乱兵进兵部右侍郎。
现代文：因勘定兵变，提为兵部右侍郎。
English: As a result of the mutiny, he was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the military department.

古文：长昂桀骜，颐与总兵王保擒其心腹小郎儿等七人，贼遂軿。
现代文：长昂骄横，李颐与总兵王保将其心腹小郎儿等七人抓住，叛贼于是害怕。
English: Chang was haughty and arrogant. Li Gan and the general soldier Wang Bao caught seven of his henchmen, so the traitor was afraid.

古文：已，别部伯牙入寇，督将士败之罗文峪，进左侍郎。
现代文：不久，其别部伯牙入寇，李颐率领将士将其击败于罗文峪，升左侍郎。
English: Soon after, another of his subordinates, Baoga, invaded, and Li Jun, leading his generals, defeated him at Luowen, and he was promoted to the position of Left Attendant.

古文：久之，进右都御史。
现代文：过了很久，升右都御史。
English: After a long time, he became the governor of Shidozu.

古文：时矿税使四出。
现代文：其时，征收矿税的使者四出。
English: At that time, envoys to collect the mineral tax were everywhere.

古文：马堂驻天津，王忠驻昌平，王虎驻保定，张晔驻通州。
现代文：马堂驻于天津，王忠驻守昌平，王虎驻保定，张晔驻通州。
English: Mado was stationed in Tianjin, Wang Zhong was stationed in Changping, Wang Hu was stationed in Baoding, and Zhang Ye was stationed in Tongzhou.

古文：颐疏言： 燕京王气所钟，去陵寝近，开凿必损灵气。 
现代文：李颐上疏道： 燕京是王气所钟之地，离陵寝也近，一开凿必定损伤灵气。 
English: Li Xuan Shang Diao: Yanjing is the place where the king's qi is stored. It is also close to the mausoleum. If you open a hole, you will definitely damage the qi.

古文：又言： 畿辅地荒岁俭，而敕使诛求，不遗纤屑，恐临清激变之惨，复见辇毂下。 
现代文：又说： 畿辅土地荒芜，收成不高，而敕令使者索求不遗余力，恐怕临清变乱的惨剧，将会重新上演。 
English: He also said: "Kifu's land is barren, the harvest is not high, and the emperor has ordered the emissaries to spare no effort in their demands. I am afraid that the tragedy of the Qing Dynasty will be repeated."

古文：已，辽东税使高淮诬劾山海同知罗大器，颐复言： 内监外僚，初无统摄，且辽阳矿税，何预蓟门？
现代文：不久，辽东税使高淮诬蔑弹劾山海同知罗大器，李颐再一次上疏： 朝廷监官，外省的僚属，起初并没有统摄，况且辽阳的矿税与蓟门有何关系？
English: Soon, the Liaodong tax made Gao Huai slander the impeachment of the mountain and sea with the knowledge of Luo Daqi, and Li Wei once again went upstream: the imperial inspector, the provincial subordinate, did not have a unified photo at first, and moreover, what is the relationship between Liaoyang's mineral tax and the gate?

古文：若皆效淮所为，有司将无遗类。
现代文：假若都效法高淮的所作所为，有关官吏将无法归类处理。
English: If everyone followed Gao Huai's example, the relevant officials would not be able to classify and deal with him.

古文：陛下奉天之权，制驭宇内，今尽落宦竖手，朝奏夕报，如响应声。
现代文：皇上执掌天下的权力，统治海内外，现在却尽落入宦官之手，早上上奏，下午回报，如同声音的回响。
English: The emperor wields the power of the world, ruling at home and abroad, but now it has all fallen into the hands of eunuchs, playing in the morning and returning in the afternoon, like the echo of sound.

古文：纵所劾当罪，尚非所以为名，何况无辜，暴加摧折。 
现代文：纵使所弹劾的人应当治罪，以什么名义呢？更何况无辜之人，被暴虐的摧残。 
English: For if they that are accused be judged guilty, wherefore? much more shall the innocent be vexed with violence.

古文：皆不报。
现代文：所上奏疏皆无下文。
English: None of this has been approved.

古文：颐在镇十年，威望大著。
现代文：李颐在镇任职十年，威望大增。
English: Li Wei has served in the town for ten years, and his prestige has increased greatly.

古文：中使惮颐廉正，畿民少安。
现代文：宦官害怕李颐的廉正，故而畿辅的老百姓稍稍能过安宁的日子。
English: The eunuchs were afraid of Li Gan's integrity, so the people of Kiyev were able to live a bit of a peaceful life.

古文：二十九年，以工部右侍郎代刘东星管理河道。
现代文：万历二十九年，以工部右侍郎之职代刘东星管理河道。
English: In the 29th year of Wanli, Liu Dongxing took over the management of the river as the right hand man of the engineering department.

古文：议上筑决口，下疏故道，为经久计。
现代文：建议上筑决口，下疏故道，为长远打算。
English: It is recommended to build a breakthrough at the top, and to narrow the old road at the bottom. This is a long-term plan.

古文：甫两月，以劳卒。
现代文：两个月后，以积劳成疾而死。
English: Two months later, he died of a disease caused by overwork.

古文：赠兵部尚书。
现代文：赠为兵部尚书。
English: It was given as a gift to the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：颐仕宦三十余年，敝车羸马，布衣蔬食。
现代文：李颐任职三十多年，破车瘦马，布衣蔬食。
English: Li Wei has been in office for more than thirty years. He has a broken car, a thin horse, cloth clothes, vegetables and food.

古文：初为御史，首请祀胡居仁于文庙，寝未行。
现代文：初为御史时，第一个请求在文庙祭祀胡居仁，未获批准。
English: At the beginning of his reign, his first request to hold a memorial service for Hu Jia at the Temple of Literature was not approved.

古文：见居仁裔孙希祖幼且贫，字以女，养之于家。
现代文：看见胡居仁的孙子希祖幼小且贫穷，就将女儿许配给他，并收留在家中抚养。
English: Seeing that Hu's grandson Xizu was young and poor, she promised her daughter to him and took him into her home to raise him.

古文：弟谦早卒，以己荫畀其子。
现代文：弟弟谦早亡，把自己的荫庇特权给了他的儿子。
English: His younger brother, Chien, died early and gave his shadowing privileges to his son.

古文：朱鸿谟，字文甫，益都人。
现代文：朱鸿谟，字文甫，山东益都人。
English: Zhu Hongmu, also known as Wenfu, was from Yidu, Shandong Province.

古文：隆庆五年进士。授吉安推官。
现代文：隆庆五年中进士，授官吉安推官。
English: In the fifth year of Longqing, he was promoted to the rank of junior high school student, and was awarded the post of Ji'an magistrate.

古文：识邹元标于诸生，厚礼之。擢南京御史。
现代文：在诸生中赏识邹元标，待他很优厚，提为南京御史。
English: He was the most appreciated among all living people, and was treated very generously. He was referred to as the "Nanjing Imperial Historian."

古文：元标及吴中行等得罪，鸿谟疏救，语侵居正，斥为民。
现代文：邹元标和吴中行被治罪，朱鸿谟上疏救援，言语触怒张居正，被贬为平民。
English: Yu Yuanbiao and Wu Zhongxing were punished, Zhu Hongmu came to the rescue, his words angered Zhang Jizheng, and he was reduced to a commoner.

古文：鸿谟归，杜门讲学，不入城市。
现代文：朱鸿谟回到家乡，闭门讲学，不入城市。
English: Zhu Hongmu returned to his hometown, lectured behind closed doors, and did not enter the city.

古文：居正卒，起故官，出按江西。
现代文：张居正死后，以原官起用，出使江西。
English: After Zhang Juzheng's death, he was appointed to his former post and sent to Jiangxi.

古文：奏蠲水灾赋，请减饶州磁器，不报。
现代文：上奏减免因水灾造成减产的赋税，请求减去饶州磁器，奏章没有被上报给皇帝。
English: He petitioned for tax relief for the reduction in production caused by the flood, and requested that the Raozhou porcelain be deducted. The petition was not reported to the emperor.

古文：又疏荐建言削籍者，忤旨，夺俸。
现代文：又上疏推荐因谏议被削去官职的人，违背了圣旨，被停发俸禄。
English: In addition, a person who was removed from an official position due to dissenting opinions was recommended to be suspended from salary, which violated the holy will.

古文：擢光禄少卿。
现代文：提拔为光禄少卿。
English: He was promoted to Koroku Shokei.

古文：由大理少卿擢右佥都御史，提督操江。
现代文：由大理寺少卿升为右佥都御史、操江提督。
English: He was promoted from Dairi-ji Shokei (Junior Secretary of the Dairi-ji Temple) to Utsunomiya Miyoshi (Minister of the Right) and Fukue no Admiral.

古文：改抚应天、苏州十府。
现代文：后又改为巡抚应天、苏州十府。
English: Later, it was changed to the governor of the 10 prefectures of Suzhou.

古文：引二祖节俭之德，请裁上供织造，报闻。
现代文：征引二位先皇帝节俭的美德，请求裁减上供的纺织品，报告给皇帝。
English: He invoked the virtue of thrift of the first two emperors, requested a reduction in the supply of textiles, and reported to the emperor.

古文：吴中徭役不均，令一以田为准，不及百亩者无役，县为立籍，定等差。
现代文：苏州一带徭役不均，命令以占有的田地为标准，不足百亩的不服徭役，县里予以登记，定出差别、等级。
English: The ploughing service is uneven in the Suzhou area. The order takes the occupied fields as the standard. If less than 100 mu are not subject to ploughing service, the county will register them and determine the difference and level.

古文：贵游子弟恣里中，无赖者与共为非，远近讹言谓有不轨谋。鸿谟尽捕之，上疏告变。
现代文：纨绔子弟横行乡里，无赖之徒与他们为非作歹，远近谣传他们将图谋不轨，朱鸿谟将他们一网打尽，上疏报告皇帝有叛乱。
English: The henchmen were running rampant in the countryside. Scoundrels conspired with them to commit crimes. Rumors spread far and wide that they were plotting to commit crimes. Zhu Hongmu wiped them all out. Shangsu reported to the emperor that there was a rebellion.

古文：朝议将用兵，兵部主事伍袁萃亟言于尚书石星，令覆勘，乃解。
现代文：朝廷议论要出动部队，兵部主事伍袁萃极力劝说尚书石星，命令再做勘察，于是调解。
English: The imperial court discussed dispatching troops, and the head of the military department, Wu Yuanqiu, tried his best to persuade Shang Shuxi Shixing to order another survey, and then mediated.

古文：鸿谟寻入为刑部右侍郎，卒官。
现代文：朱鸿谟不久提为刑部右侍郎，死于任上。
English: Zhu Hongmu was soon appointed as the right hand man of the criminal department, and died in office.

古文：不能敛，僚属醵金以办。
现代文：不能下葬，同僚凑钱才办理丧事。
English: Unable to be buried, his colleagues pooled their money to pay for the funeral.

古文：赠刑部尚书，谥恭介。
现代文：赠为刑部尚书，谥号恭介。
English: He was given the pen name Shangshu and the posthumous name Kyosuke.

古文：萧彦，字思学，泾县人。
现代文：萧彦，字思学，陕西泾县人。
English: Xiao Yan, also known as Si Xue, is a native of Min County, Shaanxi Province.

古文：隆庆五年进士。除杭州推官。
现代文：隆庆五年中进士，任命为杭州推官。
English: In the fifth year of the Longqing Middle School, he was promoted to the post of deputy of Hangzhou.

古文：万历三年，擢兵科给事中。
现代文：万历三年升为兵科给事中。
English: He has been promoted to the military academy for the past three years.

古文：自塞上多警，边吏辄假招降幸赏。
现代文：边塞上多有警报，守边的官吏就假传圣旨招降以邀赏。
English: There are many alarms on the border posts, and the officials guarding the border are offering rewards for surrendering to the false gospel.

古文：彦言： 议招逆党，为中国逋亡设耳，乃欲以此招漠北敌人。
现代文：萧彦道： 议定招降叛逆的党徒，是为逮捕境内亡命之徒而设立的，想以此招降漠北的敌人。
English: Xiao Yan said: The agreed-upon recruitment of traitorous party members was established for the purpose of arresting outlaws in the country, and they wanted to recruit the enemy in the north of the desert.

古文：夫李俊、满四等休养百年，称乱一旦，降人不可处内地明矣。
现代文：李俊、满四等休养生息百余年，一旦叛乱，后患无穷。招降之人不能让他们居于内地是很明白的。
English: It is clear that Li Jun and others who have reached the fourth rank can live for more than a hundred years, and if they rebel, they will have endless troubles. It is clear that those who invite surrender cannot let them live in the mainland.

古文：宜一切报罢。 
现代文：应该一切废止。 
English: It should all be abolished.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：以工科左给事中阅视陕西四镇边务。
现代文：以工科左给事中巡视陕西四镇的边务。
English: He toured the border affairs of the four towns in Shaanxi Province.

古文：还奏训兵、储饷十事，并允行。
现代文：回来后，向皇上奏报训练部队、储藏粮饷等十件事，皇上全部予以赞同。
English: After returning, he reported ten things to the emperor, including the training of troops and the storage of grain, and the emperor agreed to all of them.

古文：寻进户科都给事中。
现代文：不久，升为户科都给事中。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to head of the household science department.

古文：初，行丈量法，延、宁二镇益田万八千余顷。
现代文：起初，实行丈量土地法，延、宁二镇增加田地一万八千余顷。
English: At first, the land measurement law was implemented, and the two towns of Yan and Ning increased their fields by more than 18,000 hectares.

古文：总督高文荐请三年征赋，彦言： 西北垦荒永免科税，祖制也。
现代文：总督高文荐请求三年后征收赋税。萧彦说： 西北垦荒永远免除科差税收，是祖宗的制度。
English: Governor Gao Wenshu recommended that the tax should be levied after three years. Xiao Yan said: The Northwest Rift Valley is forever exempt from the tax. It is an ancestral system.

古文：况二镇多沙碛，奈何定永额，使初集流庸怀去志。 
现代文：何况二镇多沙碛，为什么要定永远的额赋，使刚刚集中起来的流民有远走他乡的想法呢？ 
English: What's more, there are many sandbars in the two towns. Why should a permanent quota be set so that the newly concentrated displaced people have the idea of going far away from their hometowns?

古文：遂除前令。
现代文：朝廷于是解去了从前的命令。
English: As a result, the Imperial Court rescinded the previous order.

古文：诏购金珠，已，停市，而命以其直输内库。
现代文：皇帝下诏购买黄金和珠宝，不久，下令停止购买。命令直接输送到内库。
English: The emperor issued an edict to buy gold and jewels, and soon after, he ordered to stop the purchase. The order was sent directly to the treasury.

古文：彦言不当虚外府以实内藏，不听。
现代文：萧彦认为不应当让外府空虚而充实内库的收藏，皇上不听。
English: Emperor Xiao did not listen to Xiao Yan's opinion that the collection of the inner treasury should not be enriched by leaving the outer palace empty.

古文：寻上言： 察吏之道，不宜视催科为殿最。
现代文：不久萧彦说： 考察官吏的政绩，不应该看他催科的多少为标准。
English: Soon after, Xiao Yan said: When examining the political achievements of officials, one should not look at how much he pushed science as a standard.

古文：昨隆庆五年诏征赋不及八分者，停有司俸。
现代文：从前隆庆五年下诏说征收赋税不到十分之八的，停发有关官吏的俸禄。
English: According to the edict issued under the previous Longqing Five-Year Plan, the salaries of relevant officials would be suspended if the tax collection rate was less than eight-tenths of a percent.

古文：至万历四年则又以九分为及格，仍令带征宿负二分，是民岁输十分以上也。
现代文：到万历四年又以十分之九为及格线，仍然下令附带征收所欠的二分，则老百姓每岁输税十分以上。
English: In the fourth year of Wanli, it was raised to nine-tenths as the passing line, and still ordered the collateral collection of two-tenths of the debt, and the people's annual tax payment was more than ten-tenths.

古文：有司惮考成，必重以敲扑。
现代文：官吏害怕考核，必定敲诈勒索。
English: If officials are afraid of assessment, they are bound to resort to extortion.

古文：民力不胜，则流亡随之。
现代文：老百姓不能负担，便到处流亡。
English: Ordinary people can't afford it, so they emigrate everywhere.

古文：臣以为九分与带征二议，不宜并行。
现代文：我认为九分与附带征收二条制度不应该同时实行。
English: I think that the nine-point and incidental levy two-tier system should not be implemented at the same time.

古文：所谓宽一分，民受一分之赐也。 
现代文：所谓放宽一分，老百姓受皇上一分的恩赐。 
English: The so-called relaxation of one point, the common people by the emperor's gift of one point.

古文：部议允行。未几，浙江巡抚张佳胤复以旧例请，部又从之。
现代文：吏部讨论后同意他的意见，不久，浙江巡抚张佳胤又请实行旧的方法，吏部又同意了。
English: After discussion, the administrative department agreed with his opinion. Soon, Zhang Jiayin, the governor of Zhejiang Province, also asked to implement the old method, and the administrative department agreed again.

古文：彦疏争，乃诏如新令。
现代文：萧彦上疏力争，于是下诏还是实行新的办法。
English: Xiao Yan tried his best to be conciliatory, so the next edict was to implement a new method.

古文：诏取黄金三千二百两，彦请纳户部言减其半，不从。
现代文：皇帝下令调取黄金三千二百两，萧彦请求接纳户部意见，减免一半，皇上不听从。
English: The emperor ordered the transfer of 3,200 taels of gold. Xiao Yan requested to accept the opinion of the household department and reduce the amount by half, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：擢太常少卿，以右佥都御史巡抚贵州。
现代文：萧彦升职为太常少卿，以右佥都御史巡抚贵州。
English: Xiao Yan was promoted to Taizhong Shaoqing (太常少卿) and became the governor of Guizhou.

古文：都匀答千岩苗叛，土官蒙诏不能制，彦檄副使杨寅秋破擒之。
现代文：都匀答千岩苗族叛乱，土官蒙诏不能制服，萧彦命令副使杨寅秋平定叛乱。
English: Xiao Yan ordered the vice-envoy Yang Yinqiu to quell the rebellion.

古文：宣慰安国亨诡言献大木，被赉。
现代文：宣慰安国亨诡称要献上大木，被赏赐。
English: As a consolation, Guoheng said that he would present a large tree, which was rewarded.

古文：及征木无有，为彦所劾。
现代文：等到征求大木时却没有，被萧彦所弹劾。
English: However, he did not do so when he asked for the large tree, and was impeached by Xiao Yan.

古文：国亨惧，诬商夺其木，讦彦于朝。帝怒，欲罪彦。
现代文：安国亨非常害怕，诬赖商人掠夺了他的大木，在朝廷上攻击萧彦。皇上大怒，准备治罪萧彦。
English: An Guoheng was very afraid. The villainous merchant plundered his timber and attacked Xiao Yan in the court. The emperor was furious and prepared to punish Xiao Yan.

古文：大学士申时行等言国亨反噬，轻朝廷，帝乃止。
现代文：大学士申时行等说是安国亨反咬一口，轻视朝廷，皇上才作罢。
English: University scholar Shin Shih-hong and others said that Anguko Heng bit back, despised the imperial court, and the emperor had to give up.

古文：改抚云南。时用师陇川，副将邓子龙不善御军，兵大噪，守备姜忻抚定之。而其兵素骄，给饷少缓，遂作乱。
现代文：改为巡抚云南，当时用兵陇川，副将邓子龙不善统御部队，士兵群起喧哗，守备姜忻安抚他们，但是，士兵平素就骄纵，兵饷给得稍慢，就犯上作乱。
English: He was changed to the governor of Yunnan. At that time, the troops were poorly led by the soldiers of Fenchuan, with the vice-general Deng Zilong leading the troops. The soldiers made a lot of noise, and the guard Jiang Chen tried to calm them down. However, the soldiers were always arrogant, and when the soldiers were a little slow, they started a riot.

古文：鼓行至永昌，趋大理，抵澜沧，过会城。
现代文：部队很快走到永昌，直趋大理，抵澜沧，过会城。
English: The troops soon marched to Yongchang, headed straight for Dali, arrived at Lancang, and passed through Huicheng.

古文：彦调土、汉兵夹攻之，斩首八十，胁从皆抚散。
现代文：萧彦调动少数民族士兵和汉兵两路夹攻，杀死八十余人，其余的或降或逃。
English: Xiaohan mobilized ethnic soldiers and Han soldiers to attack in two directions, killing more than eighty people, and the rest either surrendered or fled.

古文：事闻，赉银币。
现代文：事情传到京城，朝廷赏赐大量的银子。
English: The matter spread to the capital, and the imperial court rewarded him with a large amount of silver.

古文：自缅甸叛，孟养、车里二宣慰久不贡。
现代文：自从缅甸叛乱，孟养、车里二宣慰已很久不上贡了。
English: Since the Burmese rebellion, Meng Yang and Che Liwei Xuan You have not paid tribute for a long time.

古文：至是修贡，彦抚纳之。
现代文：从这时起，才重新修好关系上贡，萧彦抚慰并接纳他们的贡品。
English: It was only from this time that relations were restored and tribute was paid, and Xiao Yan consoled and accepted their tribute.

古文：寻以副都御史抚治郧阳。
现代文：不久，以副都御史治理郧阳。
English: Soon, he governed Shenyang as vice-governor.

古文：进兵部右侍郎，总制两广军务。
现代文：又提拔为兵部右侍郎，全权掌管两广的军务。
English: He was also promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, with full control over the military affairs of the two provinces.

古文：日本躏朝鲜。
现代文：日本蹂躏朝鲜。
English: Japan ravaged Korea.

古文：会暹罗入贡，其使请勤王，尚书石星因令发兵捣日本。
现代文：恰好暹罗入贡，其使者请求帮助他们的国王，尚书石星因而命令发兵进攻日本。
English: Just as Siam paid tribute, its envoys requested help from their king, and Shang Shuxi Shixing therefore ordered the dispatch of troops to attack Japan.

古文：彦言暹罗处极西，去日本万里，安能飞越大海，请罢其议。
现代文：萧彦说暹罗处于西面，离日本有万里之遥，怎能飞越大海？
English: Xiao Yan said that Siam is in the west, thousands of miles away from Japan, how can you fly over the sea?

古文：星执不从。
现代文：请求停止石星的命令，石星执意不从。
English: Requesting to stop Shi Xing's order, Shi Xing stubbornly refused.

古文：万历初，官广西副使，移疾归。
现代文：结果暹罗并未发一兵一卒。皇上召见萧彦，任命为户部右侍郎，不久，萧彦就死了。
English: As a result, Siam did not send a single soldier. The emperor summoned Shōhiko and appointed him as the right hand man of the household, but Shōhiko died soon after.

古文：缮水西书院，讲王畿、钱德洪之学，后进多归之。
现代文：萧彦跟从同县的查铎学习，有大志。当官后，关心天下的大事，凡他工作过的地方的老百姓都称赞他。
English: Xiao Yan studied under the same county's Cha Yu and has big ambitions. After taking office, he is concerned about the world's major events, and the people everywhere he has worked have praised him.

古文：孙维城，字宗甫，丘县人。
现代文：死后赠为右都御史，谥号为定肃。孙维城，字宗甫，丘县人。
English: After his death, he was given the posthumous name of Uto Mishi, and his posthumous name was Jingsu. Sun Weicheng, also known as Zongfu, was from Qiu County.

古文：隆庆五年进士。历知浚、太康、任丘三县。
现代文：隆庆五年中进士，相继担任浚县、太康、任丘三县知县。
English: In the fifth year of Longqing, he was promoted to junior high school, and successively served as the chief of three counties of Jian County, Taikang County, and Renqiu County.

古文：万历十年，擢南京御史。
现代文：万历十年升为南京御史。
English: In the tenth year of Wanli, it was promoted to Nanjing Imperial History.

古文：初，张居正不奔丧，宁国诸生吴仕期欲上书谏。
现代文：当初，张居正不奔丧，宁国的儒生吴仕期想上书劝谏。
English: At first, Zhang Juzheng did not rush to the funeral, and Wu Shigu, a Confucian student from Ningguo, wanted to write a letter to persuade him.

古文：未发，太平同知龙宗武告之操江胡槚，以闻于居正。
现代文：未发，太平同知龙宗武报告给操江提督胡木贾，让他告诉张居正。
English: Before it was issued, Taiping Tongzhi Long Zongwu reported to Fujiang Admiral Humijia, asking him to tell Zhang Jizheng.

古文：会有伪为海瑞劾居正疏者，播之邸抄。
现代文：正好有伪称海瑞弹劾张居正的人，将他的上书印在邸报上。
English: It just so happened that someone falsely claiming to be Hai Rui, who was going to impeach Zhang Juzheng, printed his petition in the residence newspaper.

古文：宗武意仕期，遂置狱，榜掠七日而卒。
现代文：龙宗武指为吴仕期所干，于是将他逮捕下狱。
English: Long Zongwu accused Wu Shigu of the crime, and he was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：居正死，仕期妻讼冤，维城疏言状。
现代文：严刑拷打七天，致使吴仕期死亡。张居正死后，吴仕期的妻子为他伸冤，孙维城将事情原原本本地上奏。
English: He was severely tortured for seven days, resulting in the death of Wu Shiguang. After the death of Zhang Juzheng, Wu Shiguang's wife avenged him, and Sun Weicheng played down the matter.

古文：槚已擢刑部侍郎，宗武湖广参议，皆落职戍边，天下快之。
现代文：时胡木贾已提升为刑部侍郎，龙宗武已是湖广参议，都被撤职流放边地，天下人称为大快人心事。
English: At that time, Hu Mujia had been promoted to the position of the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Long Zongwu had been the councillor of the Hubei Provincial People's Congress. Both of them were dismissed from their posts and exiled to outlying areas. People all over the world called it a matter of great happiness.

古文：中官田玉提督太和山，请兼行分守事，帝许之，维城援祖制力陈不可。
现代文：宦官田玉提督太和山并请求兼任地方防守事宜，皇帝答应了他。孙维城援引祖制极力认为不可以这样做。
English: The eunuch, Admiral Tamada Taiwasan, also requested to take on the role of local defense, and the emperor agreed. Sun Weicheng, citing the ancestral system, strongly believed that this should not be done.

古文：俄以救言官范俊，夺俸一年。
现代文：不久因为申救御史官员范亻焦，孙维城被停发俸禄一年。
English: Soon after, Sun Weicheng was suspended from receiving his salary for one year because of Fan Bingjiao, the official in charge of the rescue.

古文：忤座主大学士许国，出为永平知府。
现代文：又因违背恩师大学士许国的意旨，被贬为永平知府。
English: It was also downgraded to Yongping Prefecture for violating the will of its benefactor, the scholar Xu Guo.

古文：迁赤城兵备副使。缮亭障二百六十所，招史、车二部千余人。
现代文：后改任赤城兵备副使，修理亭障二百六十所，招降史、车二部一千余人。
English: Later, he was appointed as Akagi Deputy Military Preparedness Envoy, repairing 260 pavilions and barriers, recruiting and demobilizing more than 1,000 people in two divisions.

古文：以功屡进按察使，兵备如故。
现代文：以功绩升为按察使，兵备副使仍旧。
English: On the basis of merit, he was promoted to the post of inspector general, while the post of deputy military attaché remained the same.

古文：部长安兔挟五千骑邀赏，维城请于督、抚，革其市赏而责之，戢不敢肆。
现代文：部落首领安兔挟持五千骑兵邀功请赏，孙维城请求督、抚，免除赏赐而且责备他，于是安兔不敢放肆。
English: The leader of the tribe, Anqiu, took five thousand cavalrymen hostage to ask for a reward, and Sun Wicheng asked for a reward, exempted him from a reward and scolded him, so Anqiu did not dare to be reckless.

古文：寻以右布政使移守宣府，改广东左布政使。
现代文：不久以右布政使移守宣府，后改为广东左布政使。
English: Soon, he was transferred to Xuanfu as the right cloth political envoy, and later changed to the Guangdong left cloth political envoy.

古文：二十九年，拜右佥都御史，巡抚延绥。
现代文：万历二十九年拜官右佥都御史，巡视抚察延绥。
English: In the 29th year of the Manchurian calendar, he was appointed to the post of the right-hand magistrate of the capital, inspecting Yancheng.

古文：河套常犯顺，罢贡市十余年。
现代文：河套地区诸部落常常反叛，孙维城停止他们进贡、互市十余年。
English: Tribes in the Hetao region often rebelled, and Sun City stopped them from paying tribute and trading with each other for more than ten years.

古文：后复松山，筑边城，诸部长恐，益侵轶。
现代文：后来，他又收复松山，修筑边境城市，各部落首领异常恐慌，便加紧袭击。
English: Later, when he recaptured Matsuyama and built a border city, the tribal leaders panicked and intensified their attacks.

古文：至是，吉囊、卜庄等乞款。
现代文：这时，吉囊、卜庄等乞求和议。
English: At this time, Ji Zuc, Bu Zhuang and others begged for peace.

古文：闻巡抚王见宾当去，请益切。
现代文：听说巡抚王见宾当离职，请求更为迫切。
English: Hearing that the governor Wang Jibintang had resigned, the request was even more urgent.

古文：在宁夏者曰著宰，亦请之巡抚杨时宁。
现代文：在宁夏的著宰，也向巡抚杨时宁请求。
English: The governor of Ningxia also appealed to Yang Shining.

古文：两镇交奏，给事中桂有根请听边臣自主。
现代文：两镇都上了奏，给事中桂有根请让边臣自做主张。
English: Both towns are on the record, please let the frontiersman make his own proposal.

古文：维城方代见宾，时宁亦迁去，以黄嘉善代，二人并申约束。
现代文：孙维城刚代替王见宾，杨时宁也升任走了，由黄嘉善代替，二人一起相互约束。
English: Sun Weicheng has just replaced Wang Jibin, Yang Shining has also been promoted and gone, replaced by Huang Jiasan, and the two are working together to restrain each other.

古文：维城又条善后六事，款事复坚。
现代文：孙维城又陈上有关善后事宜六件，修好之事重新巩固下来。
English: Sun Weicheng also raised six issues related to the aftermath, and the repairs were re-consolidated.

古文：初，维城在宣府，与总兵官麻承恩不相能。
现代文：起初，孙维城在宣府，与总兵官麻承恩关系处理不好。
English: At first, Sun Weicheng was in Xuanfu, and the relationship with the commander-in-chief Ma Cheng'en was not handled well.

古文：会承恩亦移镇延绥。
现代文：恰好麻承恩也移镇在延绥。
English: It just so happens that Ma Cheng'en also moved to Yancheng.

古文：一日，维城见城外积沙及城，命余丁除之。
现代文：一天，孙维城看见城外的积沙几与城高，命令兵丁除掉它。
English: One day, Sun Weicheng saw the pile of sand outside the city and the city high, and ordered the soldiers to remove it.

古文：承恩绐其众曰： 食不宿饱，且塞沙可尽乎？ 
现代文：麻承恩哄骗众人说： 连饭都吃不饱，还能除尽塞上的沙吗？ 
English: Ma Cheng'en cajoled the crowd saying, "I can't even eat enough rice, can I remove all the sand from the plug?"

古文：卒遂噪。
现代文：士兵于是喧哗。
English: The soldiers made a ruckus.

古文：维城晓之曰： 除城沙，以防寇耳，非谓塞上沙也。 
现代文：孙维城明白地告诉他们说： 除掉城墙下的沙，是为了防止敌人，并不是说塞上的沙。 
English: Sun Wicheng clearly told them: The sand under the city wall was removed to prevent the enemy, not the sand on the wall.

古文：卒悟而散。
现代文：士兵醒悟散去了。
English: The soldiers woke up and dispersed.

古文：维城因自劾，帝慰留维城，治哗者。
现代文：孙维城因此弹劾自己，皇帝安慰、留任他，整治哗变的人。
English: Sun Wicheng therefore impeached himself, and the emperor consoled him and kept him in office to rectify the mutineers.

古文：然维城竟坐是得疾，不数月卒。
现代文：然而孙维城竟然因此而得病，不到几个月就死了。
English: However, Sun Wicheng became ill as a result and died within a few months.

古文：将吏入视其橐，仅俸数金，赙而归其丧。
现代文：将吏进入他的家看了他的口袋，里面仅有俸禄数金，大家捐献金钱将他的尸体送回到家乡。
English: The officers entered his home and looked at his pockets, which contained only his salary and a few coins. Everyone donated money to send his body back to his hometown.

古文：谢杰，字汉甫，长乐人。
现代文：谢杰，字汉甫，长乐县人。
English: Xie Jie, alias Han Fu, from Changle County.

古文：万历初进士。除行人。册封琉球，却其馈。
现代文：万历初年进士，授职行人，册封琉球，谢杰推却他们的馈送。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to a scholar, given a post, and was awarded the title of Ryukyuan, but Xie Jie rejected their gifts.

古文：其使入谢，仍以金馈，卒言于朝而返之。
现代文：琉球的使者入宫中辞谢，仍用黄金馈送，终于在朝廷说了让他们返回。
English: The Ryukyuan envoy declined to enter the palace, and was still fed with gold. Finally, the imperial court told them to return.

古文：历两京太常少卿。
现代文：任两京太常少卿。
English: He was appointed to the position of Ryakyo Taicho Shokei.

古文：南京岁祀懿文太子，以祠祭司官代，杰言： 祝版署御名，而遣贱者将事，于礼为亵。请如哀冲、庄敬二太子例，遣列侯。 
现代文：南京每年祭祀懿文太子，以祠祭司官代替，谢杰说： 祝版上署上皇帝的名字，结果派卑贱的人行事，亵渎了礼节，请如哀冲、敬庄二位太子的事例一样，派遣列侯祠祭。 
English: Nanjing annually holds a memorial service for Prince Gongwen, replacing him with an ancestral hall priest. Xie Jie said: "The emperor's name was signed on the congratulatory plate, and as a result, low-ranking people were sent to act, desecrating the etiquette. Please, as in the case of the two princes, Lechong and Jingzhuang, send a memorial service to the ancestral hall.

古文：帝是之，乃用南京五府佥书。
现代文：皇上肯定了他的意见，于是任用南京五府佥书负责。
English: The emperor affirmed his opinion, so he appointed the five prefectures of Nanjing to be in charge of the imperial edict.

古文：累迁顺天府尹。
现代文：谢杰逐渐升到顺天府尹。
English: Xie Jie gradually rose to Shuntianfu Yin.

古文：以右副都御史巡抚南、赣。
现代文：以右副都御史巡抚南、赣。
English: On the right, the deputy governor of the capital, Minami, and the shogun.

古文：属吏被荐者以贿谢，杰曰： 贿而后荐，干戈之盗；荐而后贿，衣冠之盗。 
现代文：属吏被推荐的人以钱来谢他，谢杰说： 贿赂而后推荐，像是拿着戈矛的强盗。推荐而后接受贿赂，是披着衣冠的强盗。 
English: When a subordinate officer is recommended by someone who thanks him with money, Xie Jie said: "Bribing and then recommending is like a robber with a spear; recommending and then accepting a bribe is a robber wearing a crown."

古文：人以为名言。
现代文：人们把它当作名言。
English: People think it's a famous quote.

古文：进南京刑部右侍郎。
现代文：后晋升为南京刑部右侍郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：二十五年春，杰以帝荒于政事，疏陈十规。
现代文：万历二十五年春天，谢杰因为皇帝荒废政事，上疏陈述十条告诫意见。
English: In the spring of the 25th year of the Wanli era, Xie Jie, because of the emperor's wasteful government affairs, went to Shang Zhou to state ten admonitions.

古文：言： 前此两宫色养维一，今则定省久旷，庆贺亦疏。
现代文：说： 此前侍奉两宫太后亲热恭敬出自一心，现在却长久地未如期进宫请安，节日庆贺也少了。
English: He said, "Previously, I served the empress dowager of the two palaces out of my heart, but now I have not been able to enter the palace as scheduled for a long time, and there are fewer festival celebrations.

古文：孝安太后发引，并不亲送。
现代文：孝安太后出丧，皇上也不亲自护送。
English: Empress Dowager Xiao An was in mourning, and the emperor did not personally escort her.

古文：前此太庙时飨皆躬亲，今则皆遣代。
现代文：以前太庙的岁时祭祀，陛下皆亲自前往，现在都是派人代替。
English: In the past, when it was Taimyo's turn to perform the ritual, His Majesty would go in person, but now he sends someone in his place.

古文：前此经筵临御，圣学日勤，今则讲官徒设，讲席久虚。
现代文：以前开讲经筵，陛下亲临，日日勤于圣学，现在讲官形同虚设。
English: In the past, sermons were delivered in the presence of His Majesty, who devoted himself daily to the study of sacred scripture.

古文：前此披星视朝，今则高拱深居，累年不出。
现代文：以前披星戴月上朝，现在却深居宫中，常年累月不出来。
English: In the past, he wore a star on his lapel in the morning, but now he lives deep in the palace and can't come out for months on end.

古文：前此岁旱步祷郊坛，今则圜丘大报，久缺斋居；宸宫告灾，亦忘修省。
现代文：以前如有旱灾，陛下必步行到郊外祭坛祈祷，现在祭天的大礼，很久不见陛下素食斋戒；宫殿报告灾情，陛下也忘记了反省。
English: In the past, if there was a drought, His Majesty would walk to the altar in the suburbs to pray. Now, when there is a drought, His Majesty does not go to the altar. It has been a long time since His Majesty went on a vegetarian fast. When the palace reported the disaster, His Majesty also forgot to reflect.

古文：前此四方旱涝，多发帑金，今则采矿榷税。
现代文：以前倘若四方发生旱涝，陛下大量发放币金，现在则开采矿产征收利税。
English: In the past, if there were droughts and floods in the four directions, His Majesty issued a large amount of coins and gold. Now, mining profits and taxes are levied.

古文：前此用财有节，今则岁进月输；而江右之磁，江南之纻，西蜀之扇，关中之绒，率取之逾额。
现代文：以前财用节省，现在每岁进贡每月输入；而江西的磁，江南的，四川的扇，关中的绒，都大大超过了定额。
English: In the past, financial savings were made, but now the annual tribute is imported every month; and the magnetism of Jiangxi, the south of the Yangtze River, the fan of Sichuan, and the velvet of Guanzhong all greatly exceed the quota.

古文：前此乐闻谠言，今则封事甫陈，严纶随降，但经废弃，永不赐环。
现代文：前段时间乐于接受直言劝谏，现在则刚上疏，严厉斥责的圣旨就随之而降，一经免官，便永不再任用。
English: Some time ago, he was willing to accept straightforward advice, but now, as soon as he is promoted, he will be severely reprimanded, and once he is dismissed, he will never be reappointed.

古文：前此抚恤宗室，恩义有加，今则楚藩见诬，中榼旋出，以市井奸宄，间骨肉懿亲。
现代文：以前抚恤宗室，恩义有加，现在藩王被诬赖，宦官四出，用市井奸诈之人离散骨肉亲情。
English: In the past, the head of the family received a pension and was treated with gratitude. Now, the king of the domain is being blamed, eunuchs are everywhere, and people who are deceitful are used to separate flesh and blood.

古文：前此官盛任使，下无旷鳏，今则大僚屡虚，庶官不补。
现代文：以前官吏人才济济任以使用，下面没有空缺的职位，现在则大官屡屡虚设，众官也不予补足。
English: In the past, talented officials were used sparingly, and there were no vacant positions below. Now, high-ranking officials are often set up, and officials are not replenished.

古文：是陛下孝亲、尊祖，好学、勤政、敬天、爱民、节用、听言、亲亲、贤贤，皆不克如初矣。 
现代文：陛下在孝养尊亲、尊敬祖先、致力于圣学、勤于政事、敬戴上天、爱恤民众、节省财用、接受谏言、亲近宗亲、任用贤人等方面，皆不如以前。 
English: His Majesty is not as good as he used to be in the following aspects: filial piety, respect for relatives, respect for ancestors, dedication to sacred learning, diligence in government affairs, reverence for God, love for the people, saving money, accepting criticism, closeness to relatives, and appointment of wise men.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇上不予回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：召为刑部左侍郎，擢户部尚书督仓场。
现代文：征召为刑部左侍郎，升为户部尚书督管仓场。
English: He was conscripted as the left attendant of the criminal department, and was promoted to the post of the head of the household, inspector of books and warehouse.

古文：时四方遇灾，率请改折，杰请岁运必三百万以上方许议折，从之。
现代文：当时四方发生灾乱，都请改折为银，谢杰请求每岁运粮到三百万以上的才许议论改折，皇上听从了他。
English: At that time, disasters and turmoil occurred in all four directions, all of which were changed to silver. Xie Jie requested that the annual grain transportation should be more than three million before discussing changes, and the emperor listened to him.

古文：三十二年，卒官。
现代文：万历三十二年死于任上。
English: He died in office in 32 B.C.

古文：初，杰父教谕廷衮家居老矣，族人假其名逋赋。
现代文：起初，谢杰的父亲教谕谢廷衮在家居住死了，族人顶替他的名字逃避赋税。
English: At first, Xie Jie's father instructed Xie Tingyao to live at home and died, and the tribesmen replaced his name to evade taxes.

古文：县令刘禹龙言于御史逮之。
现代文：县令刘禹龙告诉了御史，将他逮捕。
English: Liu Yulong, the county magistrate, told the governor and arrested him.

古文：杰代讯，几毙。
现代文：谢杰代替他被审问，几乎死去。
English: Xie Jie was interrogated in his place and almost died.

古文：后抚赣，禹龙家居，未尝修隙，时服其量。
现代文：后来谢杰巡抚赣州，刘禹龙在家居住，谢杰没找他一点麻烦，时人都折服他的雅量。
English: Later, Xie Jie was the governor of Bozhou, Liu Yulong lived at home, Xie Jie did not find him a bit of trouble, and people were always impressed by his elegance.

古文：郭惟贤，字哲卿，晋江人。
现代文：郭惟贤，字哲卿，晋江人。
English: Guo Weixian, surnamed Zheqing, from Jinjiang.

古文：万历二年进士。自清江知县拜南京御史。
现代文：万历二年进士，从清江知县征拜为南京御史。
English: He entered the priesthood in the second year of Wanli, and was recruited from Qingjiang County to be the official historian of Nanjing.

古文：张居正既死，吴中行、赵用贤等犹未录。
现代文：张居正已经死了，吴中行、赵用贤等还未被启用。
English: Zhang Jizheng has already died, Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian and others have not yet been used.

古文：会皇长子生，诏赦天下，惟贤因请召诸臣。
现代文：恰好皇长子出生，皇上下诏赦免天下，郭惟贤因此请求召回被贬的大臣。
English: Just as the eldest son of the emperor was born, the emperor issued a decree to pardon the world, and Guo Weixian therefore requested the recall of the demoted minister.

古文：冯保恶其言，谪江山丞。
现代文：冯保很讨厌这话，因此将他贬为江山县丞。
English: Feng Bao disliked this remark very much, so he demoted him to jiangshan county magistrate.

古文：保败，还故官。
现代文：冯保因罪被处置后，郭惟贤官复原职。
English: After Feng Bao was punished for his crime, Guo Weixian was reinstated.

古文：劾左都御史陈炌希权臣指，论罢御史赵耀、赵应元，不可总宪纪。
现代文：弹劾左都御史陈看权贵眼色行事，将御史赵耀、赵应元弹劾罢职，因此不能再掌管监察事宜。
English: Impeachment of Zhao Yao and Zhao Yingyuan, the left-wing prefectural governors Chen impeached and removed from office, so he could no longer be in charge of supervision.

古文：炌罢去。
现代文：陈被免去职务。
English: Chen was removed from his post.

古文：又荐王锡爵、贾三近、孙鑨、何源、孙丕扬、耿定向、曾同亨、詹仰庇，皆获召。
现代文：他又推荐王锡爵、贾三近、孙钅龙、何源、孙丕扬、耿定向、曾同亨、詹仰庇，这些人都被征召。
English: He also recommended Wang Xizhe, Jia Sancheng, Sun Yulong, He Yuan, Sun Xiangyang, Geng Dingling, Zeng Tongheng, Zhan Yangpi, all of whom were conscripted.

古文：主事董基谏内操被谪，惟贤救之，忤旨，调南京大理评事。
现代文：主事董基劝谏皇宫内操练之事被贬，郭惟贤援救他，违背圣旨，调任南京大理评事。
English: Guo Weixian was transferred to the post of Nanjing University's political commentator, in violation of the imperial edict, after Guo Weixian rescued him from being demoted for advising the imperial palace on military drills.

古文：给事中阮子孝、御史潘惟岳等交章救。帝怒，夺俸有差。
现代文：给事中阮子孝、御史潘惟岳等相继上疏救助，皇上发怒，不同程度地扣发了这些人的俸禄。
English: During the incident, Ruan Zi Xiao, Gu Shi Pan Wei Yue and others were successively rescued by Shang So. The emperor was angry and withheld the salaries of these people to varying degrees.

古文：惟贤寻迁户部主事，历顺天府丞。
现代文：郭惟贤不久升户部主事，后担任过顺天府丞。
English: Guo Weixian was soon promoted to the head of the household department, and later served as Shuntianfujing.

古文：二十年，以右佥都御史巡抚湖广。
现代文：万历二十年以右佥都御史身份巡抚湖广。
English: He served as the governor of Hukang for twenty years.

古文：景王封德安，土田倍诸藩，国绝赋额犹存。
现代文：景王分封在德安府，田土比别的藩王多一倍多，藩国绝灭后景王的赋额还在征收。
English: King Gyeongbokgol's fief was in De'an-fu, and he had more than twice as much farmland as other lords of the domain. After the demise of the domain, King Gyeongbokgol's tribute was still being collected.

古文：及帝弟潞王之国卫辉，悉以景赋予王。
现代文：等到皇上弟弟潞王分封在卫辉，将景王的赋税都给了他。
English: When the emperor's younger brother, Shao Wang, was assigned to Weihui, he was given all of King Jing's taxes.

古文：王奏赋不及额，帝为夺监司以下俸，责抚按急奏报。
现代文：潞王上奏说赋税不到规定的数目，皇上停发监司以下官职的俸禄，下令巡按赶紧奏报。
English: Emperor Shun reported to the emperor that the amount of tax paid was less than the prescribed amount. The emperor suspended the payment of salaries for officials below the rank of inspector and ordered the inspection report to be promptly reported.

古文：惟贤言： 景府赋额皆奸民投献，妄张其数。臣为王履亩，增赋二万五千，非复如往者虚数，王反称不足，何也？
现代文：郭惟贤说： 景府的赋额都是奸民投献的，乱说数目，我为潞王勘察田亩，增加赋税二万五千，不是像以前奏报的那个假数目，潞王反而说不足，为什么？
English: Guo Weixian said, "The amount of Jingfu's endowment was all contributed by the villainous people. The number is a lie. I surveyed the fields and increased the tax by 25,000 mu for the king of Sheba. It is not a fake number like the one previously reported. Instead, the king of Sheba said it was insufficient. Why?

古文：且潞去楚远，莫若征之有司，转输潞府。
现代文：况且潞王府离湖北很远，不如让有关官吏征收，转送给潞王府。
English: Moreover, the Shao Wangfu is very far from Hubei, it is better to let the relevant officials collect and transfer to the Shao Wangfu.

古文：《会典》皇庄及勋戚官庄，遇灾蠲减视民田。
现代文：《会典》上说皇庄以及勋贵、外戚的官庄，遇到灾荒与民田一样蠲减。
English: According to the "Charter," the imperial estates, as well as the estates of nobles and relatives, were reduced to the same extent as the people's fields in the event of a natural disaster.

古文：今襄、汉水溢，王佃民流亡过半，请蠲如例。 
现代文：现在襄水汉江涨水，潞王府的佃民逃亡过半，请求按原例蠲减。 
English: Now that the Han River in Xiangshui has risen, more than half of the people in Wangfu have fled, and they are asking for a reduction in the original amount.

古文：又言： 长沙、宝庆、衡州三卫军戍武冈，而永州、宁远诸卫远戍广西，瘴疠死无数。
现代文：又说： 长沙、宝庆、衡州三卫军戍守武冈，而永州、宁远诸卫远戍广西，因太潮湿而死去的人无数。
English: He also said: The Changsha, Baoqing, and Hengzhou Three Guards Armies guarded Wugang, while the Yongzhou, Ningyuan, and Guangxi Three Guards Armies guarded Guangxi. Countless people died because it was too humid.

古文：请分番迭戍武冈，罢其戍广西者。 
现代文：请求分别轮流戍守武冈，停止戍守广西。 
English: The request is to take turns guarding Wuyuan and stop guarding Guangxi.

古文：帝悉报许。
现代文：皇上都予以同意。
English: Both emperors agreed.

古文：承天守备中官以征兴邸旧赋，请罪潜江知县及诸佃民，旨下抚按勾捕。
现代文：承天府守备中官因为征收兴邸的旧赋，请求将潜江知县及佃民治罪，皇上下诏让抚按官逮捕。
English: Because of the expropriation of the old fief of Xingyi, the vice-governor of the Chengtianfu garrison requested that Qianjiang County and Zoumin County be punished, and the emperor issued an edict to arrest the officials.

古文：惟贤言： 臣抚楚，事无不当问。
现代文：郭惟贤说： 我巡抚楚地，没有不过问的事。
English: Guo Weixian said: I am the governor of Chu, there is nothing I cannot ask.

古文：今中官问，而臣等为勾捕，臣实不能。 
现代文：现在中官责问，而我等去追捕，我实在不能干。 
English: I really can't do it now that the lieutenant-commander is reprimanding me and I'm waiting to go after him.

古文：帝直其言而止。
现代文：皇上认为他的话直爽，于是停止实行命令。
English: The emperor thought his words were straightforward, so he stopped carrying out the order.

古文：寻请以太和山香税充王府逋禄，免加派小民，又请以周敦颐父辅成从祀启圣。
现代文：不久，他请求用太和山的香税充潞王所欠下的俸禄，不要加派于百姓，又请求以周敦颐的父亲辅成从祀启圣。
English: Before long, he requested that the incense tax from Mt. Taihe be used to cover the salary owed by King Gong, and that it not be distributed to the people. He also requested that Zhou Dunyao's father assist him in the consecration of the saint.

古文：诏皆从焉。
现代文：皇帝均下诏听从他的意见。
English: All the emperors obeyed him.

古文：入为左佥都御史。
现代文：入京师为左佥都御史。
English: His entry into the capital was accompanied by the left arm of the imperial family.

古文：言行取不宜久停，言官不宜久系，台员不宜久缺。
现代文：他说考核选用官员不应当长久停止，言官不应当长久被拘囚，御史官员不应久缺。
English: He said that the assessment and selection of officials should not be suspended for a long time, that officials should not be detained for a long time, and that government officials should not be absent for a long time.

古文：已，复言天下多故，乃自大僚至监司率有缺不补，政日废弛，且建言获谴者不下百余人，效忠者皆永弃。帝不纳。
现代文：尔后又说天下多有变故，是从大官至监司都有缺漏而没有补上，政事日益废弛，而且因劝谏被贬的人不下百余人，效忠的人都被永远贬斥而不任用。
English: Later, he said that many things had changed in the world. From high officials to supervisors, there were omissions that had not been made up, and government affairs had become increasingly wasteful. Moreover, there were more than a hundred people who were demoted because of persuasion, and those who were loyal were forever demoted and not appointed.

古文：寻迁左副都御史。
现代文：皇上不接受他的意见。
English: The emperor did not accept his opinion.

古文：请早建皇储，慎简辅弼，亟行考选，尽下推举诸疏。俱不报。
现代文：不久升左副都御史，他请求尽早设立皇储，谨慎地对待辅臣，赶紧实行考选，尽快将推荐人才的奏疏发下，皇上都不予回答。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to deputy governor of the capital. He asked the emperor to establish a crown prince as soon as possible, to treat aides-de-camp with caution, to carry out the examination and selection as soon as possible, and to send out the report of recommended talents as soon as possible. The emperor did not answer.

古文：久之，以忧归。
现代文：过了很久，因家人去世回乡。
English: After a long time, due to the death of a family member, he returned to his hometown.

古文：起户部左侍郎，未上卒。
现代文：后起用为户部左侍郎，没有上任就死了。
English: Later, he was appointed as the left hand man of the head of the household, but he died without taking office.

古文：赠右都御史。
现代文：赠为右都御史。
English: It was donated to the Utsunomiya Imperial Palace.

古文：天启初，谥恭定。
现代文：天启初年，追谥号为恭定。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the pursuit of the dragonfly was determined.

古文：万象春，字仁甫，无锡人。
现代文：万象春，字仁甫，无锡人。
English: Vanzhongchun, Zha Renfu, Wuxi people.

古文：万历五年进士。选庶吉士，授工科给事中。
现代文：万历五年进士，选为庶吉士，授职工科给事中。
English: In the fifth year of Wanli's reign, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, and was elected to the rank of associate scholar. He is now in the process of being awarded a degree in engineering.

古文：皇女生，诏户部、光禄寺各进银十万两。
现代文：皇上生了女儿，下诏让户部、光禄寺各进献银子十万两。
English: When the Emperor had a daughter, he decreed that the household and Koroku-ji Temple should each donate 100,000 taels of silver.

古文：象春力谏，不听。
现代文：万象春极力劝谏，皇上不接受。
English: Vanzhongchun tried his best to persuade him, but the emperor did not accept.

古文：屡迁礼科都给事中。
现代文：万象春几次调职后任礼科都给事中。
English: After several transfers in the spring, the newly appointed etiquette department is in the middle of things.

古文：郑贵妃有盛宠，而帝耽于酒。
现代文：郑贵妃极得宠幸，而皇上沉湎于饮酒。
English: Zheng Guifei was extremely favored, and the emperor indulged in drinking.

古文：象春因慈宁宫灾疏谏，报闻。
现代文：万象春因慈宁宫发生灾变上奏劝谏，皇帝答复知道了。
English: In the spring of Vientiane, due to the disaster that occurred in the Cining Palace, the emperor's reply was known.

古文：时宗室繁衍，岁禄不继，象春议变通。
现代文：当时宗室繁衍，每发禄米不够用，万象春建议予以变通。
English: At that time, the family line was expanding, and there was not enough rice to go around, so Vanzhongchun suggested a workaround.

古文：会河南巡抚褚鈇亦奏其事，帝即命象春遍诣河南、山西、陕西诸王府，计画以闻。
现代文：恰好河南巡抚褚钅夫也奏明此事，皇上于是命令万象春出使河南、山西、陕西，遍访各王府，计划周全以后奏上。
English: It just so happened that the Henan governor Yan Fu also reported the matter, and the emperor then ordered the Vientiane spring envoys to Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi to visit all the royal palaces and report after the plan was well-planned.

古文：象春抵河南，方集议，而周府诸宗人疑鈇疏出宗正睦〈木挈〉意，群殴睦〈木挈〉几死。
现代文：万象春抵达河南正准备集思广议，而周府各位宗人怀疑褚钅夫的奏疏是出自宗正睦木挈的意思，群起殴打睦木挈，几乎将他打死。
English: When Vanzhong Chun arrived in Henan, he was preparing for a brainstorming session, but the Zhou people suspected that the woodcutter's call was from the meaning of Zong Zheng Mucu Yao, and they beat Mucu Yao in groups, almost killing him.

古文：象春以状闻，帝为夺诸人岁禄。
现代文：万象春将此事奏明皇上，皇上停发各宗人的每岁俸禄。
English: Vanzhongchun reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor suspended the annual salary of each patriarch.

古文：象春复以次诣秦、晋诸藩，奏上便宜十五事，多著为令。
现代文：万象春又依次到达秦、晋诸藩王府，奏上方便施行的十五件事。皇上将他所奏大多颁发为命令。
English: Banshangchun also arrived at the royal palaces of Qin and Jin in succession, and reported fifteen matters that were convenient to implement. The emperor issued most of his reports as orders.

古文：真人张国祥乞三年一觐，象春言左道无民社寄，不当在述职之列。
现代文：真人张国祥乞求三年一觐见，万象春认为道教无国家社稷可寄托，不应当在述职的行列。
English: The real person, Zhang Guoxiang, begged to meet him once every three years, and Vanzhong Chun believed that Taoism had no national society to rely on, and should not be in the line of duty.

古文：时诏许后父永年伯王伟乘肩舆，象春言： 勋戚不乘舆，祖制也。
现代文：当时皇上下诏允许皇后的父亲永年伯王伟乘坐轿子，万象春认为： 权贵、外戚不许乘轿子，是祖宗的制度。
English: At that time, the imperial edict allowed the queen's father Yongnian Bo Wang Wei to ride in a palanquin, and Banshangchun believed that it was the ancestral system that the nobility and relatives were not allowed to ride in a palanquin.

古文：固安伯陈景行、武清伯李伟，太后父，衰白封，始赐肩舆。
现代文：固安伯陈景行、武清伯李伟是皇太后的父亲，鬓发疏落花白被封，才赏赐坐轿。
English: Guanbo Chen Jingxing and Wuqingbo Li Wei were the fathers of the empress dowager. Only after they were sealed did they receive a sedan chair.

古文：定国公徐文璧班首重臣，嗣爵久，故亦蒙殊典。
现代文：定国公徐文璧为重臣之首，继承爵位良久，所以也获得格外的恩典。
English: Ding Guogong Xu Wenbi was the head of the senior vassals, and inherited the title for a long time, so he also received special grace.

古文：今伟非三人比，乞寝前命。 
现代文：现在王伟无法与三人相比，乞求停止前项的命令。 
English: Now Wang Wei is no match for the three, begging for an order to stop the former.

古文：皆不许。
现代文：皇上都没有同意。
English: The emperor did not agree.

古文：孟秋将享庙，帝斋宿宫中，象春言当在便殿，不当于内寝。
现代文：初秋时将祭祀祖庙，皇帝斋戒住宿在宫中。万象春说应当住在便殿，不应当在内宫就寝。
English: At the beginning of autumn, the ancestral temple will be sacrificed, and the emperor will fast and stay in the palace. Vanzhongchun said that he should live in the hall, and should not sleep in the inner palace.

古文：帝怒，停俸三月。
现代文：皇上发了脾气，停发他三个月的俸禄。
English: The emperor lost his temper and suspended his salary for three months.

古文：已，因灾异，言： 外吏贪残不当遣缇骑逮问，宫禁邃密不当宿重兵，廷臣建言贬黜当叙迁，内臣有犯当付外廷按治。 
现代文：不久，因为发生灾害，万象春说： 京城之外官吏贪污、残暴，不应当派遣缇骑逮捕审问，宫中禁地幽密不应当驻守重兵，朝廷大臣因建议被贬退的应当考虑依次调迁，内臣有犯王法者，应当送交外廷处理。 
English: Soon, because of the disaster, Vanzhongchun said: Officials outside the capital are corrupt and cruel, and should not be sent to arrest and interrogate, the palace should not be guarded by heavy soldiers, the imperial minister who was demoted due to the proposal should consider transferring in turn, and the vassal who violated the royal law should be sent to the Foreign Court for handling.

古文：帝报闻。
现代文：皇帝说知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：象春在谏垣久，前后七十十余疏，多关军国计。
现代文：万象春在御史台很久，前后上了七十余疏，多是关于军事、国家的大计。
English: Vanzhongchun has been on the historical stage for a long time, with more than 70 dynasties before and after, mostly related to military and national plans.

古文：请复建文年号，加景帝庙谥，尤为时所称。
现代文：他请求恢复建文年号，追加景帝庙的谥号，尤其为时人所称道。
English: He requested the restoration of the Jianwen year name and the addition of the nickname of the Jingdi Temple, which was especially praised by the people at that time.

古文：出为山东参政。
现代文：万象春出使为山东参政。
English: Vanzhong Chun envoy to Shandong to participate in politics.

古文：妖贼郭大通为乱，计擒之。
现代文：妖贼郭大通叛乱，万象春设计抓住了他。
English: The monster thief Guo Datong rebelled, and Vientiane Spring Design seized him.

古文：历山西左布政使。
现代文：他历任山西左布政使。
English: He is the most senior political envoy of Shanxi Province.

古文：二十五年，以右副都御史巡抚山东。
现代文：万历二十五年以右副都御史巡抚山东。
English: He served as the right-hand vice-governor of Shandong Province for 25 years.

古文：倭躏朝鲜，滨海郡邑悉戒严。
现代文：倭寇蹂躏朝鲜，滨海郡邑全部戒严。
English: The Japanese invaders ravaged Korea, and all the coastal counties were placed under martial law.

古文：象春拊军民，供馈运，应机立办。
现代文：万象春安抚军民，供应粮米，看准时机立即办理。
English: In all likelihood, the military and civilians will be pacified in the spring, grain and rice will be supplied, and it will be handled immediately when the time is right.

古文：中使陈增以矿税至，象春疏论其害。
现代文：中使陈增以矿税使身份来到山东，万象春上奏评论矿税使的害处。
English: Chen Zeng, the Chinese envoy, came to Shandong as a mineral tax collector, and commented on the harm of the mineral tax collector.

古文：福山知县韦国贤忤增被侵辱，象春力保持之，增遂劾国贤沮挠，象春党庇。
现代文：福山知县韦国贤违背陈增旨意被侮辱，万象春极力保护他，陈增于是弹劾韦国贤攻击阻挠征税之事，万象春庇护他。
English: Wei Guoxian of Zhixian County, Fukuyama was insulted for violating Chen Zeng's will, and Vanzhong Chun tried to protect him. Chen Zeng then impeached Wei Guoxian for attacking and obstructing taxation, and Vanzhong Chun protected him.

古文：诏逮国贤，夺象春俸，遂引疾归。
现代文：皇上下诏逮捕韦国贤，停发万象春的俸禄，万象春于是称病回家。
English: The imperial edict ordered the arrest of Wei Guoxian and the suspension of Vanzhongchun's salary. Vanzhongchun then called in sick.

古文：起南京工部右侍郎，未上卒。
现代文：后起用为南京工部右侍郎，没有上任就去世了。
English: Later, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the Nanjing Engineering Department, but died before taking office.

古文：赠右都御史。
现代文：赠为右都御史。
English: It was donated to the Utsunomiya Imperial Palace.

古文：钟化民，字维新，仁和人。
现代文：钟化民，字维新，浙江仁和人。
English: Zhong Huamin, Zi Wei Xin, Zhe Jiang Ren He Ren.

古文：万历八年进士。授惠安知县，多异政。
现代文：万历八年进士，授职惠安知县，多有与众不同的政绩。
English: In the eight years of Wanli, he was promoted to Hui'an County, and many of his political achievements were unique.

古文：御史安九域荐于朝，以俸未及期，移知乐平，治复最。
现代文：御史安九域把他推荐给朝廷，以俸禄没有到期限，转到乐平任知县，治绩又为最好。
English: Goshian Jiuquan recommended him to the imperial court, but his salary did not meet the deadline, so he was transferred to Leping Renzhixian, and his performance was the best.

古文：征授御史。与同官何卓、王慎德交章请建储，不报。
现代文：钟化民被征召至朝廷授职御史，与同官何卓、王慎德接二连三上奏请求建立储君，皇上不予回答。
English: Zhong Huamin was summoned to the imperial court to confer the post of imperial historian, and he and his colleagues, He Zhuo and Wang Xinde, successively petitioned for the establishment of a crown prince, but the emperor did not respond.

古文：出视陕西茶马，言： 边塞土寒，独畜马为业。
现代文：他离京巡视陕西茶马，说： 边塞地方寒冷，仅以畜马为业。
English: He left Beijing to inspect tea and horses in Shaanxi. He said, "It's cold in the border region, and only horses are used for livestock.

古文：今虑其阑出为厉禁，于是民间孳息与境内贸易俱废，公私缓急亦无所资。
现代文：现在考虑到擅自出入事，因而严厉禁止，于是民间的生息与境内贸易都废除了，公私费用也无所依赖。
English: It is now strictly forbidden to enter or leave the country without permission. Therefore, people's livelihoods and domestic trade have been abolished, and there is no need to rely on public and private expenses.

古文：请听逾境贩鬻，特不得入番中。又曩宁夏乏饷，岁发万金易米二万七千石，后所司干没，滥征之民。
现代文：请求听任过境贩卖，只是不得进入番中，又以前宁夏缺乏粮饷，每岁发银万两换米二万七千石，后被主管部门吞没，向百姓滥征。
English: The request was granted to allow transit sales, but they were not allowed to enter the middle class. In addition, Ningxia was previously short of grain, issuing 10,000 taels of silver per year in exchange for 27,000 koku of rice. After that, it was swallowed up by the competent department, and the people were indiscriminately levied.

古文：请以垦田粟补之，永停征派。 
现代文：请求以垦田的粮食补充，永远停止征派。 
English: The request was to supplement the food with grain from the sugar cane fields and to permanently stop conscription.

古文：俱报可。
现代文：皇上都予以同意。
English: Both emperors agreed.

古文：巡按山东，岁旱，请蠲振先发后闻。
现代文：巡按山东，请求每年旱灾时，地方官可以先蠲恤然后上报。
English: patrols Shandong, requesting that in the event of an annual drought, local officials can first make a complaint and then report it.

古文：坐宁夏时取官银交际，为尚宝丞周弘禴所劾，调行人司正。
现代文：在宁夏时取官银做交往费用，被尚书丞周弘礻仑所弹劾，调为行人司正。
English: When he was in Ningxia, he took official money for socializing expenses. He was impeached by Shang Shujo Zhou Hongyulun and transferred to the position of pedestrian secretary.

古文：累迁仪制郎中。
现代文：多次迁官后任仪制郎中。
English: After being transferred several times, he was appointed to the position of gisei roju.

古文：沈王珵尧由支庶嗣，请封其庶子为郡王，化民持不可。
现代文：沈王王呈尧由旁支长子嗣位，请求分封他的庶子为郡王，钟化民坚持认为不可以。
English: Shen Wang Wang submitted a request for his illegitimate son to be given the title of county king, but Zhong Huamin insisted that this was not possible.

古文：帝传谕曰： 第予虚名，令藉是婚娶耳。 
现代文：皇上传下命令说： 只管给予虚名，命令藉此成婚。 
English: The emperor issued an order saying, "Even if you give her a false name, the order is to marry her."

古文：化民奏曰： 沈王子与元子孰亲？
现代文：钟化民上奏说： 沈王之子与嫡长子哪一个更亲？
English: Zhonghua made a report to the people, saying: Which one is closer to the son of King Shen and the eldest son?

古文：王子不即封，虑妨婚娶，元子不即立，不虑妨豫教乎？ 
现代文：王子不立即分封，担心妨碍婚娶。嫡长子不立即立，不害怕妨碍礼教吗？ 
English: If a prince does not immediately receive a title of nobility, is he afraid that it will interfere with his marriage? If he does not immediately have a legitimate eldest son, is he not afraid that it will interfere with the teaching of etiquette?

古文：帝怒，以化民辞直，无以难。
现代文：皇上震怒，以钟化民言辞率直没有追究。
English: The emperor was outraged, and did not pursue the matter openly, using the rhetoric of appeasing the people.

古文：帝命并封三王，化民与顾允成等面诘王锡爵于朝房。
现代文：皇上命令同时分封三王，钟化民与顾允成等在朝房中当面责问王锡爵。不久，升光禄寺。
English: The emperor ordered the three kings to be appointed at the same time, and Zhong Huamin and Gu Yuncheng personally interrogated Wang Xizhe in the imperial court. Soon, he was promoted to Guanglu Temple.

古文：寻进光禄丞。二十二年，河南大饥，人相食，命化民兼河南道御史往振。
现代文：万历二十二年，河南发生大饥荒，人们相互吞食，皇上命令钟化民兼河南道御史前往赈恤。
English: In the 22nd year of Wanli, a great famine occurred in Henan, people were devouring each other, and the emperor ordered Zhong Huamin and the governor of Henan Province to go to Yingye.

古文：荒政具举，民大悦。
现代文：救荒之政均有振兴，老百姓大为高兴。
English: The policy of drought relief has been revitalized, and the people are very happy.

古文：既竣，绘图以进。
现代文：钟化民既已完成任务，便把有关情况绘上图画进献给皇上。
English: After completing his task, Zhong Huamin drew a picture of the situation and presented it to the emperor.

古文：帝嘉之，褒谕者再。
现代文：皇上予以嘉奖，一再下谕旨赞扬他。
English: The Emperor gave him a commendation and repeatedly issued orders to praise him.

古文：擢太常少卿。
现代文：钟化民提升为太常少卿。
English: Zhong Huamin was promoted to Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：二十四年，以右佥都御史巡抚河南，讨平南阳矿盗。
现代文：二十四年钟化民以右佥都御史身份巡抚河南，讨平南阳的矿盗。
English: In 24 years, Zhong Huamin became the governor of Henan Province as the right-hand governor of the capital, and fought against the miners in Nanyang.

古文：夹河贼啸聚数千人，复督兵破之。
现代文：夹河的强盗聚集在一起有数千人，钟化民又率兵大破他们。
English: There were thousands of bandits gathered in the river, and the soldiers led by Zhong Huamin defeated them.

古文：时方采矿，抗疏力谏。
现代文：当时正值皇上派宦官开采矿产，钟化民上疏极力劝谏。
English: At that time, the emperor was sending eunuchs to mine minerals, and the people of Zhonghua tried their best to persuade him.

古文：化民短小精悍，多智计。
现代文：钟化民矮小精悍，多有智谋。
English: The people of Zhonghua are small and nimble, and many of them are resourceful.

古文：居官勤厉，所至有声。
现代文：居于官位勤勉政事，所到之处留有声名。
English: He is diligent in his official position and government affairs, and has a reputation everywhere he goes.

古文：遍历八府，延父老问疾苦。
现代文：走遍了八府，延请父老，询问疾苦。
English: He went to eight prefectures, invited his parents, and inquired about his illness.

古文：劳瘁卒官，士民相率颂于朝。
现代文：辛苦劳累死于任上。绅士、百姓相继到朝廷颂扬他。
English: He died of exhaustion in office. Gentlemen and commoners alike came to the court to eulogize him.

古文：诏赠右副都御史，赐祠曰忠惠。
现代文：皇上下诏赠为右副都御史，赐给祠名为忠惠。
English: The imperial edict granted him the title of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and gave the shrine the name of Zhonghui.

