古文：万章问曰： 敢问友。 
现代文：万章问： 请问如何交友？ 
English: Question: How do you make friends?

古文：孟子曰： 不挟长，不挟贵，不挟兄弟而友。
现代文：孟子说： 不倚仗年岁大，不倚仗地位高，不倚仗有钱势的兄弟。
English: Mencius said, "No matter how old you are, no matter how high your position is, no matter how rich and powerful your brother is.

古文：友也者，友其德也，不可以有挟也。
现代文：交友，是以品德相交，决不可有所倚仗。
English: To make friends, one should do so on the basis of one's moral character, and one should never rely on others.

古文：孟献子，百乘之家也，有友五人焉：乐正裘、牧仲，其三人，则予忘之矣。献子之与此五人者友也，无献子之家者也。
现代文：孟献子，是拥有兵车百乘的世家，有五个朋友，乐正裘、牧仲、其他三个人的姓名我忘记了，孟献子和这五个人互助合作，是不提献子家的地位的。
English: Meng Xianzi is a family with a hundred chariots and chariots. They have five friends, including Le Zhengqiu, Mu Zhong and three other people whose names I have forgotten. Meng Xianzi and these five people help and cooperate with each other without mentioning the status of the Xianzi family.

古文：此五人者，亦有献子之家，则不与之友矣。
现代文：这五个人如果也看重献子家的地位，就不会与他互助合作了。
English: If these five people also value the status of the donor, they will not cooperate with him.

古文：非惟百乘之家为然也。虽小国之君亦有之。
现代文：不仅是拥有兵车百乘的世家如此，即使小国的国君也有这个问题。
English: This is not only the case for families with hundreds of chariots, but even the sovereigns of small countries have this problem.

古文：费惠公曰： 吾于子思，则师之矣；吾于颜般，则友之矣；王顺、长息则事我者也。 
现代文：费惠公说： 我对于子思，看成是老师；我对于颜般，则是互助合作关系；王顺、长息则是侍奉我的臣子。 
English: Fei Huigong said: I regard Zisi as a teacher; I regard Yan as a mutual assistance and cooperation relationship; Wang Shun and Changshi are my servants.

古文：非惟小国之君为然也，虽大国之君亦有之。
现代文：不仅是小国的君主如此，即使是大国的君主也有这个问题。
English: This is not only true of the monarchs of small countries, even the monarchs of large countries have this problem.

古文：晋平公之于亥唐也，入云则入，坐云则坐，食云则食。虽疏食菜羹，未尝不饱，盖不敢不饱也。
现代文：晋平公对于亥唐这个人，叫他进去就进去，叫他坐下就坐下，叫他吃饭就吃饭，哪怕是粗茶淡饭，从不会不吃饱，因为不敢不吃饱。
English: For Hei Tang, Jin Ping Gong told him to go in and go in, to sit down and sit down, to eat and eat, even if it was a light meal, he would never not eat enough, because he did not dare not to eat enough.

古文：然终于此而已矣。
现代文：然而也只能做到这一步了。
English: However, this is the only step that can be taken.

古文：弗与共天位也，弗与治天职也，弗与食天禄也，士之尊贤者也，非王公之尊贤也。
现代文：并不与他共居官位，不与他共理政事，不与他共享俸禄。这只是读书人对贤者的尊敬，不是王公对贤者的尊敬。
English: They do not share the official position with him, they do not share the government affairs with him, and they do not share the salary with him. This is only the respect of the readers for the sages, not the respect of the princes for the sages.

古文：舜尚见帝，帝馆甥于贰室，亦飨舜，迭为宾主，是天子而友匹夫也。
现代文：舜去进见帝尧，帝尧让女婿住在备用的房间里，也宴请舜，互为宾主，这是天子跟普通人互助合作的行为方式。
English: He went to see the emperor, and the emperor let his son-in-law live in a spare room, and also invited him to a banquet, and they were each other's guests. This is the behavior mode of mutual assistance and cooperation between the Son of Heaven and ordinary people.

古文：用下敬上，谓之贵贵；用上敬下，谓之尊贤。
现代文：以职位低的人尊敬职位高的人，就称为尊重贵人。以职位高的人尊敬职位低的人，就称为尊敬贤人。
English: If a person with a low position respects a person with a high position, it is called respect for nobles. If a person with a high position respects a person with a low position, it is called respect for sages.

古文：贵贵、尊贤，其义一也。 
现代文：尊重贵人，尊敬贤人，其行为方式都是一样的。 
English: Respect for the noble, respect for the wise, their behavior is the same.

