古文：元皇帝下景元三年
现代文：起，止，一共三年。魏元帝景元三年
English: A total of three years. Emperor Wei of the Yuan Dynasty and Emperor Jing of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：秋，八月，乙酉，吴主立皇后硃氏，硃公主之女也。
现代文：秋季，八月，乙酉，吴王立皇后朱氏，她是朱公主的女儿。
English: Autumn, August, Acetylene, Wu Wangli Empress Zhu, she is the daughter of Princess Zhu.

古文：戊子，立子л为太子。
现代文：戊子，立孙为太子。
English: Boshi, the grandson of the crown prince.

古文：汉大将军姜维将出军，右车骑将军廖化曰： 兵不戢，必自焚，伯约之谓也。
现代文：蜀汉大将军姜维将要出兵征战，右车骑将军廖化说： 兵不止，必自焚，说的就是姜维。
English: General Jiang Wei of Shu Han is about to go to war. General Liao Hua, riding on the right, says: "If you don't have enough soldiers, you must set yourself on fire. This is what Jiang Wei is talking about."

古文：智不出敌而力少于寇，用之无厌，将何以存！ 
现代文：智谋超不出敌人，力量也小于敌人，而用兵没有满足的时候，将何以自存？ 
English: When the enemy cannot be outmaneuvered, when the enemy's strength is less than that of the enemy, and when the use of force is not enough, how can we survive?

古文：冬，十月，维入寇洮阳，邓艾与战于侯和，破之，维退住沓中。
现代文：冬季，十月，姜维入侵洮阳，邓艾与他在侯和交战，打败了他。
English: In the winter, in October, Jiang Wei invaded Fenyang. Deng Ai fought with him at Houhe and defeated him.

古文：初，维以羁旅依汉，身受重任，兴兵累年，功绩不立。
现代文：姜维撤兵驻扎在沓中。当初，姜维因寄居在外而投奔蜀汉，身受重任，连年兴兵，但没有建立什么功绩。
English: Jiang Wei's retreating troops were stationed in Shuzhong. At the beginning, Jiang Wei went to Shuhan because he was a sojourner, and he was given the heavy responsibility of raising troops for several years, but he did not achieve any achievements.

古文：黄皓用事于中，与右大将军阎宇亲善，阴欲废维树宇。
现代文：黄皓在朝内当政，与右大将军阎宇关系交好，暗地里想废掉姜维而树立阎宇。
English: Huang Qi was in power in the imperial court and had a good relationship with the right general Yan Yu. He secretly wanted to abolish Jiang Wei and establish Yan Yu.

古文：维知之，言于汉主曰： 皓奸巧专恣，将败国家，请杀之！ 
现代文：姜维知道后，就对汉后主说： 黄皓奸诈巧伪专权任意，将会败坏国家，请杀了他！ 
English: When Jiang Wei learned of this, he said to the Han empress: "The tyrant's arbitrary power will corrupt the country. Please kill him!"

古文：汉主曰： 皓趋走小臣耳，往董允每切齿，吾常恨之，君何足介意！ 
现代文：汉后主说： 黄皓不过是在前面往来奔走的小臣，以前董允也常对他切齿痛恨，我常常为此遗憾，你何必介意他！ 
English: The Queen of Han said: Huang Yao is just a junior minister who is running around in front of him. In the past, Dong Yun used to hate him with all his teeth. I often regret this. Why should you mind him!

古文：维见皓枝附叶连，惧于失言，逊辞而出，汉主敕皓诣维陈谢。
现代文：姜维见黄皓的党羽象树木的枝叶那样相互依附勾结，害怕自己失言，说了几句谦恭的话就出来了。汉后主让黄皓到姜维那里解释、谢罪。
English: Jiang Wei saw that Huang Qi's party members clung to each other like the branches and leaves of trees. He was afraid of making a mistake, so he said a few words of humility and came out. The Queen of Han let Huang Qi go to Jiang Wei to explain and apologize.

古文：维由是自疑惧，返自洮阳，因求种麦沓中，不敢归成都。
现代文：姜维从此就更加疑虑恐惧，从洮阳返回后，就要求到沓中去种麦，不敢返回成都。
English: Since then, Jiang Wei has become more doubtful and fearful. After returning from Shenyang, he asked to go to Juzhong to grow wheat, and did not dare to return to Chengdu.

古文：吴主以濮阳兴为丞相，廷尉丁密、光禄勋孟宗为左右御史大夫。
现代文：吴王任命濮阳兴为丞相，廷尉丁密、光禄勋孟宗为左右御史大夫。
English: King Wu appointed Puyang Xing as chancellor, and courtier Ding Mi and Guanglu Xun Meng Zong as left and right imperial historians.

古文：初，兴为会稽太守，吴主在会稽，兴遇之厚；左将军张布尝为会稽王左右督将，故吴主即位，二人皆贵宠用事；布典宫省，兴关军国，以佞巧更相表里，吴人失望。
现代文：当初，濮阳兴任会稽太守，吴王居住在会稽，濮阳兴对他很好，左将军张布曾任会稽王的左右督将，因此吴王即位之后，濮阳兴和张布二人受到尊崇而执掌朝政；张布主管朝内官署，濮阳兴主管军国之事，二人在里里外外阿谀欺蒙，吴国人很失望。
English: At the beginning, Puyang Xing was appointed as the auditor of the imperial court, Wu Wang lived in the auditor's residence, Puyang Xing was very kind to him, and Zhang Bu, the left general, was appointed as the left and right governor of the auditor of the imperial court. Therefore, after Wu Wang ascended the throne, Puyang Xing and Zhang Bu were respected and took charge of the imperial government; Zhang Bu was in charge of the Imperial Household Agency, and Puyang Xing was in charge of the military affairs. The two were deceived inside and outside, and the people of Wu were very disappointed.

古文：吴主喜读书，欲与博士祭酒韦昭、博士盛冲讲论，张布以昭、冲切直，恐其入侍，言己阴过，固谏止之。
现代文：吴王喜爱读书，想要与博士祭酒韦昭、博士盛冲一起讲论学术，张布因为韦昭、盛冲二人性情耿直，恐怕他们入侍之后，对吴王说自己暗地里做的错事，因此坚持劝谏，不让他们入宫。
English: King Wu loved to read and wanted to give a lecture on academic subjects together with Wei Zhao and Sheng Chong, both of whom were doctoral candidates. Zhang Bu did not allow them to enter the palace because Wei Zhao and Sheng Chong were honest. He was afraid that after they entered the palace, they would tell King Wu that they had secretly done something wrong, so he insisted on persuading them.

古文：吴主曰： 孤之涉学，群书略遍，但欲与昭等讲习旧闻，亦何所损！
现代文：吴王说： 我涉猎学术，群书大致都读完了，现在只想与韦昭等人讲论学习以前所学的内容，这又有什么损害？
English: Wu Wang said: I dabble in academics, I have read most of the books, and now I just want to talk with Wei Zhao and others about what I have learned before. What is the harm in this?

古文：君特当恐昭等道臣下奸慝，故不欲令入耳。
现代文：你不过害怕韦昭等人谈论臣下的奸诈邪慝之行，所以不想让他们入宫。
English: You are just afraid that Wei Zhao and others will talk about the treacherous and evil deeds of your subjects, so you don't want them to enter the palace.

古文：如此之事，孤已自备之，不须昭等然后乃解也。 
现代文：象这类事情，我自己已经有所了解，不须韦昭等人说了然后才知道。 
English: I already know about things like this, I don't need Wei Zhao and others to tell me.

古文：布惶恐陈谢，且言惧妨政事。吴主曰： 王务、学业，其流各异，不相妨也。此无所为非，而君以为不宜，是以孤有所及耳。
现代文：张布十分惶恐地谢罪，又说这是恐怕妨碍政事，吴王说： 政事和学术，其源流各不相同，不会相互妨碍，让他们入宫没有什么不对的，而你却认为不宜让他们来，因此我才说起这些事。
English: Zhang Bu was very alarmed and said, "I'm afraid this will interfere with political affairs." Wu Wang said, "Political affairs and academic affairs have different origins and will not interfere with each other. There's nothing wrong with letting them enter the palace, but you don't think it's appropriate to let them come. That's why I'm talking about these things."

古文：不图君今日在事更行此于孤也，良甚不取！ 
现代文：没想到你今日在官任事又对我做这种不让接近儒生的事，这实在让我不能同意！ 
English: I didn't expect that you would do such a thing to me today in your official duties, not allowing me to get close to Confucianism. This really makes me disagree!

古文：布拜表叩头。
现代文：张布跪下叩头。
English: Zhang Bu knelt down and bowed.

古文：吴主曰： 聊相开悟耳，何至叩头乎！
现代文：吴王说： 我不过是开导开导你，何必叩头谢罪呢！
English: The king of Wu said, "I only enlightened you, why do you have to bow down and apologize?"

古文：如君之忠诚，远近所知，吾今日之巍巍，皆君之功也。《诗》云： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 
现代文：象你这样的忠诚，远近之人都很了解，我能有今日南面为君的尊严，全都是你的功劳。《诗》云： 事皆有始，却少能终。 
English: With loyalty like yours, people near and far understand very well that it is all thanks to you that I am able to have the dignity of being a prince in the south today. "Poem" cloud: Everything has a beginning, but few can end.

古文：终之实难，君其终之！ 
现代文：坚持到最后是很难的，希望你能坚持到最后。 
English: It is difficult to persevere to the end. I hope you can persevere to the end.

古文：然吴主恐布疑惧，卒如布意，废其讲业，不复使昭等入。
现代文：但吴王恐怕张布会怀疑害怕，终究还是顺了张布之意，废止讲论学业，不再让韦昭等人入宫。
English: However, King Wu was afraid that Zhang Bu would be suspicious and afraid of him. In the end, he followed Zhang Bu's wishes and abolished the lectures and studies, and no longer allowed Wei Zhao and others to enter the palace.

古文：谯郡嵇康，文辞壮丽，好言老、庄而尚奇任侠，与陈留阮籍、籍兄子咸、河内山涛、河南向秀、琅邪王戎、沛人刘伶特相友善，号竹林七贤。
现代文：谯郡人嵇康，文章写得雄壮清丽，喜好谈论《老子》、《庄子》，高节奇行，行侠仗义。他与陈留人阮籍、阮籍的侄子阮咸、河内人山涛、河南人向秀、琅邪人王戎、沛国人刘伶是至交好友，号称竹林七贤。
English: He was a member of the Quan County, and his articles were written in a majestic and beautiful style. He liked to talk about "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi," the high festivals, and the heroic deeds. He was best friends with Chen Rui, Nguyen Quan, Nguyen Quan's nephew Nguyen Hanh, Hanoi's Shan Tao, Henan's Xiang Xiu, Quan Xiang's Wang Rong, and Pei Guo's Liu Wei. They were known as the "Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest."

古文：皆崇尚虚无，轻蔑礼法，纵酒昏酣，遗落世事。
现代文：他们都崇尚虚无之论，轻蔑礼仪法度，每日以纵情饮酒为乐，不问世事。
English: They all advocate the theory of nothingness, despise etiquette and laws, enjoy drinking every day, and do not care about worldly affairs.

古文：阮籍为步兵校尉，其母卒，籍方与人围棋，对者求止，籍留与决赌。
现代文：阮籍任步兵校尉，他母亲去世时，他正在与别人下围棋，对方要求停止，但阮籍却要他留下一块胜负。
English: Nguyn Quc, an infantry captain, was playing a game of Go with a friend when his mother died. The friend asked him to stop, but Nguyn Quc told him to keep a piece of the game.

古文：既而饮酒二斗，举声一号，吐血数升，毁瘠骨立。
现代文：下完棋喝了两斗酒，高声一喊，吐血数升，极度哀痛而消瘦得只剩皮包骨了。
English: After playing chess, he drank two buckets of wine, shouted loudly, vomited several liters of blood, and was so sad and emaciated that he was only skin and bones.

古文：居丧，饮酒无异平日。
现代文：居丧期间，和平日一样饮酒无度。
English: During the period of mourning, he drank as much as on a normal day.

古文：司隶校尉何曾恶之，面质籍于司马昭座曰： 卿纵情、背礼、败俗之人，今忠贤执政、综核名实，若卿之曹，不可长也！ 
现代文：司隶校尉何曾很讨厌他，就在司马昭座位前当面指责阮籍说： 你是个纵情无度、违背礼仪、败坏风俗的人，如今忠贤之人执掌朝政，要综合考察人事的名与实，象你这类人，不可助长你的恶习！ 
English: Sili captain He once hated him very much, and in front of Sima Zhao's seat, he accused Ruan Ji, saying: You are a person who indulges excessively, violates etiquette, and corrupts customs. Nowadays, a loyal and virtuous person is in charge of the government. It is necessary to comprehensively examine the names and facts of personnel. People like you should not encourage your bad habits!

古文：因谓昭曰： 公方以孝治天下，而听阮籍以重哀饮酒食肉于公座，何以训人！
现代文：于是就对司马昭说： 您正在以孝道治理天下，却听任阮籍居丧期间在您的座前饮酒吃肉，以后还怎么教训别人？
English: So he said to Sima Zhao: You are governing the world with filial piety, but you let Nguyen Quan drink alcohol and eat meat in front of you during the funeral. How can you teach others in the future?

古文：宜摈之四裔，无令污染华夏。 
现代文：应该把他流放到四方荒远之地，不让他污染我们华夏的风气。 
English: He should be exiled to a remote place in the four directions to prevent him from polluting our Chinese culture.

古文：昭爱籍才，常拥护之。
现代文：司马昭喜爱阮籍之才，常常扶助保护他。
English: Sima Zhao loved Nguyen Quan Cai and often helped and protected him.

古文：曾，夔之子也。
现代文：何曾是何夔之子。
English: He was the son of He Yao.

古文：阮咸素幸姑婢；姑将婢去，咸方对客，遽借客马而追之，累骑而还。
现代文：阮咸喜欢姑姑的婢女，姑姑把婢女领走时，阮咸正在陪客，赶快借了客人的马去追，然后两人骑一匹马回来了。
English: Nguyn Ánh liked his aunt's maid. When his aunt took the maid away, Nguyn Ánh was accompanying the guest. He quickly borrowed the guest's horse to chase, and then the two returned on a horse.

古文：刘伶嗜酒，常乘鹿车，携一壶酒，使人荷锸随之，曰： 死便埋我。 
现代文：刘伶喜好饮酒，常常乘一辆小车，带着一壶酒出游，又让人扛着锹跟着，说： 死了就把我埋掉。 
English: Liu Yao liked to drink, and often took a small car to travel with a jug of wine. He also had people follow him carrying a crossbow, saying, "If I die, bury me."

古文：当时士大夫皆以为贤，争慕效之，谓之放达。
现代文：当时士大夫都认为他贤明，争相仿效他的做法，称作放达。
English: At that time, all the magistrates thought that he was wise and tried to emulate his practice, known as Fanda.

古文：钟会方有宠于司马昭，闻嵇康名而造之，康箕踞而锻，不为之礼。
现代文：钟会正受到司马昭的宠爱，听到嵇康的名声就去拜访他，嵇康伸腿坐在那里毫不在乎地打铁，很不礼貌地对待钟会。
English: Sima Zhao was fond of the bell association, and when he heard the reputation of Jikang, he went to visit him. Jikang sat there with his legs outstretched, hammering iron without a care in the world, and treated the bell association very rudely.

古文：会将去，康曰： 何所闻而来，何所见而去？ 
现代文：钟会将要离去，嵇康问他说： 你听到了什么而来，见到了什么而去？ 
English: When the bell ringers were about to leave, Yu Kang asked him: What did you hear when you arrived, and what did you see when you left?

古文：会曰： 闻所闻而来，见所见而去！ 
现代文：钟会说： 听我所听到的而来，见我所见到的而去！ 
English: The bell will say: Listen to what I hear, see what I see and go!

古文：遂深衔之。
现代文：从此他对嵇康怀恨在心。
English: From then on, he harbored a grudge against Yan Kang.

古文：山涛为吏部郎，举康自代。康与涛书，自说不堪流俗，而非薄汤、武。
现代文：涛任吏部郎，推荐嵇康代替自己；嵇康给山涛写信，说自己不堪忍受流俗，又菲薄商汤、周武王。
English: Tao, who was in charge of the administrative department, recommended Zhi Kang to replace him; Zhi Kang wrote a letter to Shantao, saying that he could not bear the vulgarity, and that he was a poor merchant and Zhou Wu Wang.

古文：昭闻而怒之。
现代文：司马昭听到后十分生气。
English: Sima Zhao was very angry after hearing this.

古文：康与东平吕安亲善，安兄巽诬安不孝，康为证其不然。
现代文：嵇康与东平的吕安是好朋友，吕安之兄吕巽诬陷吕安不孝，嵇康为他作证说并非不孝。
English: Lu Kang and Dongping's Lyu An were good friends. Lyu An's brother, Lyu Hao, accused Lyu An of being unfilial, and Lyu Kang testified for him that he was not unfilial.

古文：会因谮 康尝欲助毌丘俭，且安、康有盛名于世，而言论放荡，害时乱教，宜因此除之。 
现代文：钟会借此事诬告说： 嵇康曾经想帮助丘俭，而且吕安、嵇康在世上享有盛名，但他们的言论放荡不羁，为害时俗，扰乱政教，应该乘此机会把他们除掉。 
English: The Bell Society used this incident to make a false accusation, saying: "Hui Kangran once wanted to help Qiu Jian, and Lu An and Hui Kang enjoyed a high reputation in the world, but their words were unrestrained, harmful to the times and customs, and disruptive to politics and religion. They should take this opportunity to get rid of them."

古文：昭遂杀安及康。
现代文：于是司马昭就杀了吕安和嵇康。
English: As a result, Sima Zhao killed Lu'an and Yan Kang.

古文：康尝诣隐者汲郡孙登，登曰： 子才多识寡，难乎免于今之世矣！ 
现代文：嵇康曾去拜访隐士汲郡人孙登，孙登说： 你才气多见识少，在当今之世难免被杀！ 
English: Zekang once went to visit the hermit Sun Deng, a native of Ku County. Sun Deng said, "You are more talented than you know. In today's world, you will inevitably be killed!"

古文：司马昭患姜维数为寇，官骑路遗求为刺客入蜀，从事中郎荀勖曰： 明公为天下宰，宜杖正义以伐违贰，而以刺客除贼，非所以刑于四海也。 
现代文：司马昭忧虑姜维屡次进犯，官骑路遗要求当刺客入蜀去杀姜维，从事中郎荀勖对司马昭说： 明公是天下的主宰，应该依仗正义去讨伐不归服者，而用刺客去除掉敌人，这不是被四海之人作为表率的做法。 
English: Sima Zhao was worried about Jiang Wei's repeated attacks. The official asked the assassin to go to Shu to kill Jiang Wei. The middle-ranking official said to Sima Zhao, "Ming Gong is the ruler of the world. He should rely on justice to fight against those who refuse to submit, and use the assassin to eliminate the enemy. This is not a practice that is taken as a model by people from all over the world.

古文：昭善之。
现代文：司马昭很赞成他的话。
English: Sima Zhao agrees with his words.

古文：勖，爽之曾孙也。
现代文：荀勖是荀爽的曾孙。
English: Gong is Gong Shuang's great-grandson.

古文：昭欲大举伐汉，朝臣多以为不可，独司隶校尉钟会劝之。
现代文：司马昭想要大举讨伐蜀汉，朝臣们大都认为不可，只有司隶校尉钟会赞成。
English: Sima Zhao wanted to fight against Shu Han in a big way, and most of the courtiers thought it was impossible, only Sisli Lieutenant Zhong would agree.

古文：昭谕众曰： 自定寿春已来，息役六年，治兵缮甲，以拟二虏。
现代文：司马昭告谕众人说： 自从平定寿春以来，已经六年没有战事了，我们要整治军队去攻打两个敌国。
English: Sima Zhao announced to the crowd: "Since the pacification of Shuchun, there has been no war for six years. We must reorganize the army to attack the two enemy countries."

古文：今吴地广大而下湿，攻之用功差难，不如先定巴蜀，三年之后，因顺流之势，水陆并进，此灭虢取虞之势也。
现代文：如今吴国土地广大而地势低湿，攻打他旋展兵力较为困难，不如先平定巴蜀，三年之后，就顺流而下，水陆并进，这就是春秋时晋献公先灭虢国再乘势攻取虞国的那种形势。
English: Nowadays, the land of Wu is vast and the terrain is low and wet. It is more difficult to attack other countries and expand their forces. It is better to first pacify Bashu. After three years, it will go down the river and advance along the land and water. This is the situation in spring and autumn when the Jin Dynasty first destroyed the Han Dynasty and then took advantage of the situation to attack the State of Yu.

古文：计蜀战士九万，居守成都及备他境不下四万，然则馀众不过五万。
现代文：蜀国的战士共计有九万，居守成都以及防卫其他边境的不下四万人，这样剩余的战士不过五万人。
English: There were a total of ninety thousand warriors in Shu, and no less than forty thousand lived in Chengdu and defended other borders. The remaining soldiers were only fifty thousand.

古文：今绊姜维于沓中，使不得东顾，直指骆谷，出其空虚之地以袭汉中，以刘禅之暗，而边城外破，士女内震，其亡可知也。 
现代文：如今把姜维牵制在沓中，让他不能向东出兵。我们发兵直向骆谷，通过他们的空虚地带去袭击汉中，以刘禅的暗弱无能，又加上边境城市在外面被攻破，蜀国的男女老少就会在内地震恐不安，这样敌人的灭亡就是意料之中的事。 
English: Now we are holding Jiang Wei in shackles so that he cannot send troops to the east. We sent troops straight to Luogu and attacked Hanzhong through their empty areas. With Liu Zhen's weakness and incompetence, coupled with the border city being breached outside, the men and women of Shu will be trembling with fear inside, so the enemy's demise is to be expected.

古文：乃以钟会为镇西将军，都督关中。
现代文：于是任命钟会为镇西将军，都督关中。
English: Therefore, he appointed Zhonghui as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Guanzhong.

古文：征西将军邓艾以为蜀未有衅，屡陈异议；昭使主簿师纂为艾司马以谕之，艾乃奉命。
现代文：征西将军邓艾认为蜀国没有可乘之机，屡次陈述不同意见；司马昭让主簿师纂担任邓艾的司马去给他讲明道理，于是邓艾也就奉命行事了。
English: Deng Ai, the general of the Western Expedition, thought that Shu had no chance to take advantage of it, and repeatedly stated different opinions; Sima Zhao asked the master book editor to act as Deng Ai's Sima to explain the truth to him, so Deng Ai also acted under orders.

古文：姜维表汉主： 闻钟会治兵关中，欲规进取，宜并遣左右车骑张翼、廖化，督诸军分护阳安关口及阴平之桥头，以防未然。 
现代文：姜维向汉后主上表说： 听说钟会在关中整治军队，想图谋进攻，应该派遣左右车骑将军张翼、廖化率领诸军分别守护阳安关口和阴平的桥头，以防患于未然。 
English: Jiang Wei said to the Han empress: I heard that the bell would rectify the army in the pass, and if you want to plan an attack, you should send the left and right cavalry generals Zhang Ying and Liao Hua to lead the troops to guard the Yang'an pass and the bridgehead of Yinping respectively, in order to prevent problems in advance.

古文：黄皓信巫鬼，谓敌终不自致，启汉主寝其事，群臣莫知。
现代文：黄皓相信鬼神巫术，认为敌人终究不会自己找上门来，于是就奏明汉后主让他不提这件事，因而群臣没人知道。
English: Huang Qi believed in ghosts, gods and magic, and thought that the enemy would not come to the door on their own, so he sent a message to the Han empress asking him not to mention this matter, so no one knew.

古文：元皇帝下景元四年
现代文：景元四年
English: In the 4th year of King Gyeongwon

古文：春，二月，复命司马昭进爵位如前，又辞不受。
现代文：春季，二月，再次晋升司马昭的爵位如前所命，但司马昭又推辞不受。
English: In the spring, in February, Sima Zhao was again promoted to the peerage as previously ordered, but Sima Zhao did not accept the rejection.

古文：吴交趾太守孙谞贪暴，为百姓所患；会吴主遣察战邓荀至交趾，荀擅调孔爵三十头送建业，民惮远役，因谋作乱。
现代文：吴国交趾太守孙贪婪残暴，被百姓所厌恨；恰好此时吴王又派遣察战邓荀到交趾去，而邓荀又擅自调用三十个大爵送往建业，百姓害怕遥远的劳役，于是就图谋作乱。
English: It was at this time that the king of Wu dispatched the inspector of war, Deng Xuan, to Jiaozuo, and Deng Xuan also summoned thirty grand nobles to Jianye without authorization. The people were afraid of the distant labor service, so they tried to make trouble.

古文：夏，五月，郡吏吕兴等杀讠胥及荀，遣使来请太守及兵，九真、日南皆应之。
现代文：夏季，五月，郡吏吕兴等人杀掉了孙和邓荀，派使者来请求给他派太守和兵力，九真、日南二郡也都响应他。
English: In the summer, in May, the county official Lv Xing and others killed Sun and Deng Xuan, and sent an envoy to request that he be given the position of grand marshal and troops. Jiu Zhen and the two counties in the south of the country also responded to him.

古文：诏诸军大举伐汉，遣征西将军邓艾督三万馀人自狄道趣甘松、沓中，以连缀姜维；雍州刺史诸葛绪督三万馀人自祁山趣武街桥头，绝维归路；钟会统十馀万众分从斜谷、骆谷、子午谷趣汉中。
现代文：诏令诸军大举进攻蜀汉，派征西将军邓艾率领三万人从狄道奔赴甘松、沓中，以牵制姜维；派雍州刺史诸葛绪率领三万多人从祁山奔赴武街、桥头，断绝姜维的退路。钟会统兵十万余人分别从斜谷、骆谷、子午谷奔赴汉中。
English: The emperor ordered the army to attack Shu Han in a big way, and sent the general of the Western Expedition, Deng Ai, who led 30,000 people from Dido to Gansong and Shizhong to contain Jiang Wei; sent the statesman of Yongzhou, Zhu Gexu, who led more than 30,000 people from Shaoshan to Wuxi and Qiaotou to cut off Jiang Wei's retreat. More than 100,000 soldiers of the Bell Association rushed to Hanzhong from Shizhong, Luohu and Zihuang respectively.

古文：以廷尉卫瓘持节监艾、会军事，行镇西军司。
现代文：让廷尉卫持符节监督邓艾、钟会的军事，兼镇西军司。
English: Let the courtier Wei hold the festival to supervise the military of Deng Ai and the Bell Association, and also the West Military Department of the town.

古文：瓘，觊之子也。
现代文：卫是卫之子。
English: Wei is the son of Wei.

古文：会过幽州刺史王雄之孙戎，问 计将安出？ 
现代文：钟会去拜访幽州刺史王雄之孙王戎，问他： 我将怎样去干？ 
English: The bell will visit Wang Rong, the grandson of Yuzhou ruler Wang Xiong, and ask him: "What will I do?"

古文：戎曰： 道家有言， 为而不恃。 非成功难，保之难也。 
现代文：王戎说： 道家有句话说 为而不恃 ，也就是说成功并不难，而保持它则很难。 
English: Wang Rong said, "There is a saying in Taoism, "To succeed is not difficult, but to maintain it is difficult."

古文：或以问参相国军事平原刘寔曰： 钟、邓其平蜀乎？ 
现代文：有人问参相国军事、平原人刘说： 钟会、邓艾能平定蜀国吗？ 
English: Someone asked Liu, a military man from the plains of Shanxi Province, and he said: Can Zhonghui and Deng Ai conquer Shu Province?

古文：寔曰： 破蜀必矣，而皆不还。 
现代文：刘说： 破蜀是必然的，但他们都回不来。 
English: Liu Gong said, "I can definitely defeat Shu, but I can't come back."

古文：客问其故，寔笑而不答。
现代文：对方问是什么原因，刘笑而不答。
English: When the other party asked what the reason was, Liu laughed and did not answer.

古文：秋，八月，军发洛阳，大赉将士，陈师誓众。
现代文：秋季，八月，从洛阳发兵，大赏全军将士，列队誓师。
English: In autumn, in August, troops were sent from Luoyang, the soldiers of the whole army were greatly rewarded, and they lined up to swear an oath.

古文：将军邓敦谓蜀未可讨，司马昭斩以徇。
现代文：将军邓敦说不能去讨伐蜀国，司马昭就把他杀了示众。
English: When General Dandong said that he could not go to Shu, Sima Zhao killed him in public.

古文：汉人闻魏兵且至，乃遣廖化将兵诣沓中，为姜维继援，张翼、董厥等诣阳安关口，为诸围外助。
现代文：蜀汉听到魏兵将至，就派遣廖化率兵到沓中作姜维的后援，派张翼、董厥等人到阳安关口帮助各个外围据点。
English: When Shu and Han heard that Wei soldiers were coming, they sent soldiers led by Liao Hua to Shizhong to support Jiang Wei, and sent Zhang Ying, Dong Jue and others to Yang'an Pass to help various outposts.

古文：大赦，改元炎兴。
现代文：实行大赦，改年号为炎兴。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and the name of the year was changed to Yanxing.

古文：敕诸围皆不得战，退保汉、乐二城，城中各有兵五千人。
现代文：命令各外围据点不得与敌人交战，退守汉、乐二城，城中各有兵力五千人。
English: He ordered the outlying strongholds not to engage the enemy, and to retreat to Han and Le two cities, each with a force of five thousand soldiers.

古文：翼、厥北至阴平，闻诸葛绪将向建威，留住月馀待之。
现代文：张翼、董厥向北到达阴平，听到诸葛绪将向建威发兵，就留住一个多月等待敌兵。
English: Zhang Ying and Dong Jue went north to Yinping. When they heard that Zhugexu would send troops to Jianwei, they stayed there for more than a month waiting for the enemy soldiers.

古文：钟会率诸军平行至汉中。
现代文：钟会率诸军齐头并进，到达汉中。
English: The army led by Zhong Hui marched side by side and reached Hanzhong.

古文：九月，钟会使前将军李辅统万人围王含于乐城，护军荀恺围蒋斌于汉城。
现代文：九月，钟会让前将军李辅统兵万人把王含包围在乐城，让护军荀恺把蒋斌包围在汉城。
English: In September, the bell would let the former general Li Shuo surround Wang Han in Lecheng with a total of ten thousand soldiers, and let the military escort encircle Jiang Bin in Seoul.

古文：会径过西趣阳安口，遣人祭诸葛亮墓。
现代文：钟会直接从西路奔向阳安口，派人祭奠了诸葛亮墓。
English: The bell association ran directly from the West Road to Yang'an Exit and sent people to pay tribute to Zhuge Liang's tomb.

古文：初，汉武兴督蒋舒在事无称，汉朝令人代之，使助将军傅佥守关口，舒由是恨。
现代文：当初，蜀汉的武兴督蒋舒在位庸碌无为，蜀汉朝廷让人代替了他，派助将军傅佥把守关口，蒋舒因此怀恨在心。
English: At first, the Wuxing governor of Shu Han, Jiang Shu, did not do much during his reign. The Shu Han court had someone replace him and sent the assistant general Fu Yao to guard the pass, so Jiang Shu held a grudge.

古文：钟会使护军胡烈为前锋，攻关口。
现代文：钟会派护军胡烈为前锋，进攻关口。
English: The Bell Association sent the escort Hu Lie as a striker to attack the pass.

古文：舒诡谓佥曰： 今贼至不击而闭城自守，非良图也。 
现代文：蒋舒诡诈地向傅佥说： 如今敌兵到了，不去进击而闭城自守，不是好的计策。 
English: Jiang Shuxu slyly said to Fu Jun: Now that the enemy soldiers have arrived, it is not a good strategy not to attack but to close the city and defend oneself.

古文：佥曰： 受命保城，惟全为功；今违命出战，若丧师负国，死无益矣。 
现代文：傅佥说： 你以保全此城为功劳，我以出战打败敌人为功劳，希望我们各行其志。 
English: Fu Yao said, "You are credited with preserving this city, and I am credited with going to war and defeating the enemy. I hope we can both fulfill our dreams."

古文：舒曰： 子以保城获全为功，我以出战克敌为功，请各行其志。 
现代文：于是率领他的兵士出城；傅佥认为他是去交战，因此没有防备。
English: So he led his soldiers out of the city. Fu Xun thought he was going to war, so he was unprepared.

古文：遂率其众出。佥谓其战也，不设备。舒率其众迎降胡烈，烈乘虚袭城，佥格斗而死，佥，肜之子也。
现代文：蒋舒率领他的士兵迎接投降了胡烈，胡烈乘虚袭击城池，傅佥格斗拼杀而死。傅佥是傅肜之子。
English: Jiang Shu led his soldiers to meet Hu Lie, who surrendered. Hu Lie attacked the city on a false pretext, and Fu Xun fought and killed him. Fu Xun was the son of Fu Xun.

古文：钟会闻关口已下，长驱而前，大得库藏积谷。
现代文：钟会听到关口已被攻克，就长驱直入，获得大量库藏的粮食。
English: When the bell association heard that the pass had been conquered, they drove straight in and obtained a large amount of stored grain.

古文：邓艾遣天水太守王颀直攻姜维营，陇西太守牵弘邀其前，金城太守杨欣趣甘松。
现代文：邓艾派遣天水太守王颀直攻姜维营垒，陇西太守牵弘在前面阻截，金城太守杨欣奔赴甘松。
English: Deng Ai dispatched Tianshui's grand marshal Wang Xi to directly attack Jiang Wei's camp, Shaanxi's grand marshal Yan Hong to intercept in front, and Jincheng's grand marshal Yang Xin to rush to Gan Song.

古文：维闻钟会诸军已入汉中，引兵还。欣等追蹑于强川口，大战，维败走。
现代文：姜维听说钟会诸军已经进入汉中，就领兵返回，杨欣等人在后面紧追至强川口，激烈交战，姜维败走。
English: When Jiang Wei heard that the armies of the Bell Association had entered Hanzhong, he led the troops back, Yang Xin and others followed closely behind to Qiangchuangkou, fought fiercely, and Jiang Wei was defeated and left.

古文：闻诸葛绪已塞道屯桥头，乃从孔函谷入北道，欲出绪后；绪闻之，却还三十里。
现代文：姜维又听到诸葛绪已经阻塞道路占据了桥头，于是就从孔函谷进入北部道路，想绕到诸葛绪的身后，诸葛绪知道后往回退却三十里。
English: Jiang Wei also heard that Zhugexu had blocked the road and occupied the bridgehead, so he entered the northern road from Konghang Valley and wanted to go around behind Zhugexu. Zhugexu knew and retreated back thirty miles.

古文：维入北道三十馀里，闻绪军却，寻还，从桥头还，绪趣截维，较一日不及。
现代文：姜维进入北道三十多里后，听到诸葛绪退兵，赶紧往回走，从桥头过去，诸葛绪赶上去阻截姜维，但晚了一天没有赶上。
English: After Jiang Wei entered more than 30 miles of Beidou, he heard Zhugexu retreating, and hurriedly walked back. After passing the bridgehead, Zhugexu caught up and blocked Jiang Wei, but he did not catch up a day later.

古文：维遂还至阴平，合集士众，欲赴关城；未到，闻其已破，退趣白水，遇廖化、张翼、董厥等，合兵守剑阁以拒会。
现代文：姜维于是退至阴平，聚集军队，想要奔赴关城；还没到达，听说关城已破，于是退兵奔向白水，遇到了廖化、张翼、董厥等人，兵合一处据守剑阁以抵御钟会。
English: Jiang Wei then retreated to Yinping, gathered troops, and wanted to rush to Guancheng; before arriving, he heard that Guancheng had been breached, so he ran back to Baishui, and encountered Liao Hua, Zhang Ying, Dong Jue and others. The soldiers jointly guarded Jiange to resist the Bell Association.

古文：安国元侯高柔卒。
现代文：安国元侯高柔去世。
English: Prince An Guo Gao Rong passed away.

古文：冬，十月，汉人告急于吴。
现代文：冬季，十月，汉人向吴国告急求援。
English: In the winter, in October, the Han people appealed to Wu Guo for urgent help.

古文：甲申，吴主使大将军丁奉督诸军向寿春；将军留平就施绩于南郡，议兵所向；将军丁封、孙异如沔中，以救汉。
现代文：甲申，吴王派大将军丁奉率领诛军进兵寿春；让将军留平到南郡的施绩那里，商议向何处进兵之事；让将军丁封、孙异到沔中去救援蜀汉。
English: In Jiaxing, the king of Wu sent the general Ding Bong to lead the Shun army to march into Shuchun; let the general Ping stay in the performance of duties in Nan County to discuss where to march; let the general Ding Feng and Sun Yi go to Shuzhong to rescue Shu Han.

古文：诏以征蜀诸将献捷交至，复命大将军昭进位，爵赐一如前诏，昭乃受命。
现代文：诏令因征蜀的各位将领捷报频传，再次命大将军司马昭晋位，所赐爵位一切都与前面的诏令相同，司马昭终于接受了任命。
English: The edict was widely reported as a victory for the generals who had conquered Shu. Once again, the general Sima Zhao was ordered to ascend to the throne. The rank he was given was the same as in the previous edict, and Sima Zhao finally accepted the appointment.

古文：昭辟任城魏舒为相国参军。
现代文：司马昭提升任城人魏舒为相国参军。
English: Sima Zhao promoted Wei Shu, a resident of Rencheng, to join the army of the neighboring country.

古文：初，舒少时迟钝质朴，不为乡亲所重，从叔父事部郎衡，有名当世，亦不知之，使守水碓，每叹曰； 舒堪数百户长，我愿毕矣！ 
现代文：最初，魏舒少年时反映迟钝，较为质朴，不受乡里亲戚的重视，他的堂叔吏部郎魏衡，在当时很有名望，也不了解魏舒，就让他去看守水碓，而且常常叹气说： 魏舒如果能担当数百户的官长，我也就心满意足了。 
English: At first, when Wei Shu was a young boy, his reflexes were slow, he was more rustic, and he was not valued by his relatives in the countryside. His uncle, the official of the Ministry, Lang Wei Heng, who was very famous at that time, did not know Wei Shu, so he let him watch the water rafts, and often sighed and said: If Wei Shu can be in charge of hundreds of officials, I will be satisfied.

古文：舒亦不以介意，不为皎厉之事。
现代文：魏舒毫不介意，也不干那些能显示抬高自己的事。
English: Wei Shu doesn't mind at all, and doesn't do things that show he's trying to elevate himself.

古文：唯太原王乂谓舒曰： 卿终当为台辅。 
现代文：只有太原的王对魏舒说： 你终究会达到三公宰相的地位。 
English: Only the king of Taiyuan said to Wei Shu: You will eventually reach the position of the three prime ministers.

古文：常振其匮乏，舒受而不辞。
现代文：又常常拿出钱财周济魏舒，魏舒也毫不推辞地接受。
English: He often makes allowances for Wei Shu's shortcomings, and Wei Shu accepts and does not refuse.

古文：年四十馀，郡举上计掾，察孝廉。
现代文：四十余岁时郡里举拔上计掾、掌簿记孝廉。
English: At the age of more than 40 years old, he was promoted to the top of the county and became a bookkeeper.

古文：宗党以舒无学业，劝令不就，可以为高。
现代文：亲戚朋友认为魏舒没有什么学业，劝他不要去应考，还可以显示清高。
English: Relatives and friends thought that Wei Shu did not have much study, and advised him not to take the exam, and he could still show a high score.

古文：舒曰： 若试而不中，其负在我，安可虚窃不就之高以为己荣乎！ 
现代文：魏舒说： 如果考试不中，是我本事不够，怎能虚假地盗窃清高的名声以为自己的荣耀呢？ 
English: Wei Shu said: If I go to the test and fail the test, then the responsibility is mine. How can I take it as my glory not to go to the test and steal the noble false name?

古文：于是自课，百日习一经，因而对策升第，累迁后将军钟毓长史。
现代文：于是刻苦自学，每百日学一部经书，因而对策得到提升，累次提升到担任后将军钟毓的长史。
English: As a result, he studied hard and studied a scripture every 100 days. As a result, his countermeasures were promoted, and he was repeatedly promoted to the long history of serving as post-general Zhong Xi.

古文：毓每与参佐射，舒常为画筹而已；后遇朋人不足，以舒满数，舒容范闲雅，发无不中，举坐愕然，莫有敌者。
现代文：钟毓每次与参军、佐吏一起举行射箭比赛，魏舒只是常常为他们计算成绩而已；后来遇到比赛人数不足，就让魏舒来凑数，魏舒仪范闲雅，发无不中，所有的人都十分愕然，没有人能敌得过他。
English: Every time Zhong Qi held an archery competition with the soldiers and staff officers, Wei Shu would often calculate the results for them. Later, when the number of competitors was insufficient, he asked Wei Shu to make up the number. Wei Shu's etiquette was casual and elegant, and he was always successful. Everyone was very shocked, and no one could beat him.

古文：毓叹而谢曰： 吾之不足以尽卿才，有如此射矣，岂一事哉！ 
现代文：钟毓感叹地道歉说： 我不能够充分发挥你的才能，就象这次射箭一样，其实何止这一件事呢！ 
English: "I cannot give full play to your talent, just like this archery, in fact, how much more than this one thing!

古文：及为相国参军，府朝碎务，未尝见是非；至于废兴大事，众人莫能断者，舒徐为筹之，多出众议之表。
现代文：魏舒担任相国参军之后，处理相国府中琐碎的事务，未曾出现什么纠纷；至于该废该兴的大事，众人不能决断的，魏舒都能从容地为之筹划，而且大多比众人的议论高明。
English: After Wei Shu joined the army, he dealt with trivial matters in the government of the neighboring country, and there was no dispute; as for the big things that should be abolished and revived, if people can't decide, Wei Shu can calmly plan for it, and most of them are better than people's discussions.

古文：昭深器重之。
现代文：因此，司马昭非常器重魏舒。
English: Therefore, Sima Zhao attached great importance to Wei Shu.

古文：癸卯，立皇后卞氏，昭烈将军秉之孙也。
现代文：癸卯，魏国立皇后卞氏。卞氏是昭烈将军卞秉的孙女。
English: Zou Wu, the Empress of the Wei Dynasty, was the granddaughter of the illustrious general Zou Bing.

古文：邓艾进至阴平，简选精锐，欲与诸葛绪自江油趣成都。绪以本受节度邀姜维，西行非本诏，遂引军向白水，与钟会合。
现代文：邓艾进兵到达阴平，挑选了精锐部队，想要与诸葛绪一起经江油直奔成都，诸葛绪因为本来接受的命令是阻截姜维，而向西行进不是给他的诏令，所以率军奔向白水，与钟会会合。
English: Deng Ai Jin soldiers arrived in Yinping, selected the elite troops, and wanted to go straight to Chengdu via the Yangtze River oil together with Zhu Gexu. Zhu Gexu, because the order he originally received was to intercept Jiang Wei, and the westward march was not given to him, so he led the army to run to Baishui and meet with the bell club.

古文：会欲专军势，密白绪畏懦不进，槛车征还，军悉属会。
现代文：钟会想要专擅军权，就秘密报告说诸葛绪畏惧敌兵不敢前进，于是用囚车把诸葛绪押送回京，而军权全部归钟会掌握了。
English: The bell society wanted to monopolize military power, and secretly reported that Zhugexu was afraid of the enemy soldiers and did not dare to advance, so Zhugexu was escorted back to Beijing in a prison van, and military power was all in the hands of the bell society.

古文：姜维列营守险，会攻之，不能克；粮道险远，军食乏，欲引还。
现代文：姜维排列营垒据守险要之地，钟会进攻不能取胜，而且运粮道路既危险又遥远，想要领兵撤回。
English: Jiang Wei wanted to withdraw his troops, because he had to defend a very important place, the attack of the Bell Association could not win, and the grain transportation route was dangerous and far away.

古文：邓艾上言： 贼已摧折，宜遂乘之。若从阴平由邪径经汉德阳亭趣涪，出剑阁西百里，去成都三百馀里，奇兵冲其腹心，出其不意，剑阁之守必还赴涪，则会方轨而进，剑阁之军不还，则应涪之兵寡矣。 
现代文：邓艾上书说： 敌兵已经受到摧折，应乘胜进军，如果从阴平出发由小路经过汉朝的德阳亭奔赴涪县，从剑阁之西一百里处进军，离成都三百余里，在这里出奇兵冲击其腹心之地，那么剑阁的守军必然往回奔赴涪县，而钟会就可以两车并行着向前推进。如果剑阁的守军不往回撤，那么接应涪县的兵力就会很少了。 
English: Deng Ai said in the letter: The enemy soldiers have been devastated and broken, and they should march into the army with the victory. If they set out from Yinping and rushed to Jixian County from Deyangting, a small road that passed through the Han Dynasty, and marched from a hundred miles west of Jiange, more than three hundred miles from Chengdu, where they made a surprise attack on their henchmen, then the defenders of Jiange will inevitably rush back to Jixian County, and the bell club can advance two cars in parallel. If the defenders of Jiange do not retreat, then there will be little force to receive Jixian County.

古文：遂自阴平行无人之地七百馀里，凿山通道，造作桥阁。山高谷深，至为艰险，又粮运将匮，濒于危殆。艾以氈自裹，推转而下。将士皆攀木缘崖，鱼贯而进。
现代文：于是从阴平出发走了七百余里的无人之地，凿山开路，架桥梁建阁道，山高谷深，非常艰险，运来的粮食也将吃尽，濒临危险的绝境，邓艾用毡毯裹住自己，翻转着滚下山去，将士们也都攀缘着树木崖壁，鱼贯而进。
English: So he set out from Yinping and walked more than seven hundred miles of no man's land, chiseled a path through the mountains, built a bridge and built a road. The mountains were high and the valleys were deep. It was very difficult, and the grain that had been transported would also be eaten up. On the verge of danger, Deng Ai wrapped himself in a felt blanket and rolled down the mountain. The soldiers also climbed the trees and cliffs, and the fish came in.

古文：先登至江油，蜀守将马邈降。
现代文：邓艾首先到达江油，蜀国守将马邈投降。
English: Deng Ai was the first to arrive at Jiangyou, and the Shu governor surrendered to Ma Jun.

古文：诸葛瞻督诸军拒艾，至涪，停住不进。
现代文：诸葛瞻率诸军抵御邓艾，到达涪县后，停住不进。
English: Zhuge Zhan led the troops to resist Deng Ai, and after arriving in Lixian County, they could not advance.

古文：尚书郎黄崇，权之子也，屡劝瞻宜速行据险，无令敌得入平地，瞻犹豫未纳；崇再三言之，至于流涕，瞻不能从。
现代文：尚书郎黄崇是黄权之子，他屡次劝说诸葛瞻应迅速前进占据险要，不让敌人进入平地，诸葛瞻犹豫不决没有采纳；黄崇再三劝说，甚至流着眼泪说，但诸葛瞻仍然不听。
English: Shang Shulang Huang Chong was the son of Huang Quan. He repeatedly persuaded Zhuge Zhan that Zhuge Zhan should quickly advance to occupy the critical point and not let the enemy enter the plain. Zhuge Zhan hesitantly did not accept; Huang Chong repeatedly persuaded, even said with tears, but Zhuge Zhan still did not listen.

古文：艾遂长驱而前，击破瞻前锋，瞻退往绵竹。
现代文：于是邓艾长驱直入，击败诸葛瞻的前锋，诸葛瞻退兵驻扎在绵竹。
English: As a result, Deng Ai Chang drove straight in, defeated Zhuge Zhan's vanguard, and Zhuge Zhan retreated and was stationed in Mianzhu.

古文：艾以书诱瞻曰： 若降者，必表为琅邪王。 
现代文：邓艾写信劝诱诸葛瞻说： 如果投降，必定表奏你为琅邪王。 
English: Deng Ai wrote a letter to persuade Zhugezhan saying, "If you surrender, you will surely be exposed as the king of evil."

古文：瞻怒，斩艾使，列阵以待艾。
现代文：诸葛瞻大怒，杀掉邓艾的使者，排列阵势以等待邓艾进攻。
English: Zhugezhan flew into a rage, killed Deng Ai's messenger, and lined up to wait for Deng Ai to attack.

古文：艾遣子惠唐亭候忠等出其右，司马师纂等出其左。
现代文：邓艾派他儿子惠唐亭侯邓忠攻其右翼，派司马师纂等人攻其左翼。
English: Deng Ai sent his son Hui Tang Ting Hou Deng Zhong to attack his right flank, and sent Sima Shizang and others to attack his left flank.

古文：忠、纂战不利，并引还，曰： 贼未可击！ 
现代文：邓忠与师纂战斗不利，都撤兵而还，说： 敌兵还不能攻破！ 
English: Deng Zhong and Shizuo were not good at fighting, so they both withdrew and returned, saying, "The enemy soldiers cannot break through yet!

古文：艾怒曰： 存亡之分，在此一举，何不可之有！ 
现代文：邓艾大怒，说： 存亡之别就在此一举，有什么不能的。 
English: Deng Ai was furious and said, "This is the difference between survival and death. There is nothing I can do.

古文：叱忠、纂等，将斩之。
现代文：怒叱邓忠、师纂等人，说再攻不破就要杀了他们。
English: He angrily scolded Deng Zhong, Shizao and others, saying that if they could not break through, they would kill them.

古文：忠、纂驰还更战，大破，斩瞻及黄崇。
现代文：邓忠、师纂跑回来再战，大败敌兵，杀了诸葛瞻和黄崇。
English: Deng Zhong and Shizang ran back to fight again, defeated the enemy soldiers, and killed Zhuge Zhan and Huang Chong.

古文：瞻子尚叹曰： 父子荷国重恩，不早斩黄皓，使败国殄民，用生何为！ 
现代文：诸葛瞻之子诸葛尚叹息说： 我们父子蒙受国家重恩，没有早点杀了黄皓，致使国败民亡，活着还有什么用！ 
English: Zhuge Zhan's son Zhuge still sighed and said, "Our father and son have received a great favor from the state, and did not kill Huang Qi earlier, resulting in the defeat of the country and the death of the people. What is the use of being alive!

古文：策马冒阵而死。
现代文：于是骑马冲入敌阵而死。
English: So he rode into the enemy lines and died.

古文：汉人不意魏兵卒至，不为城守调度；闻艾已入平土，百姓扰扰，皆迸山野，不可禁制。
现代文：蜀汉人没想到魏兵突然而至，没做守城的准备；听说邓艾已经进入平在，百姓们惊恐万状，都逃往山林大泽，不可禁止。
English: The people of Shu Han did not expect the sudden arrival of the Wei soldiers and did not prepare to defend the city; they heard that Deng Ai had entered Pingzhe, the people were terrified and fled to the mountains and forests of Dashe, which could not be prohibited.

古文：汉主使群臣会议，或以为蜀之与吴，本为与国，宜可奔吴；或以为南中七郡，阻险斗绝，易以自守，宜可奔南。
现代文：汉后主召集群臣讨论，有人认为蜀与吴本来是友好邻邦，应该投奔到吴国；有人认为南中七郡，山势陡峭险峻，容易防守，应该奔向南面。
English: The empress dowager of the Han Dynasty convened a group of courtiers to discuss. Some people thought that Shu and Wu were originally friendly neighbors and should rush to Wu; some people thought that the seven counties in the south, with steep and precipitous mountains, were easy to defend and should rush to the south.

古文：光禄大夫谯周以为： 自古以来，无寄他国为天子者，今若入吴国，亦当臣服。
现代文：光禄大夫谯周却认为： 自古以来，没有寄居别国仍为天子的，如果到吴国去，也当臣服于吴。
English: However, the Guanglu doctor Zhou Zhou believed that: Since ancient times, there has never been a son of heaven who lived in another country. If you go to Wuxi, you should also submit to Wuxi.

古文：且治政不殊，则大能吞小，此数之自然也。
现代文：而且治国之道从来就没有什么不同，大国吞并小国，这是形势发展的自然趋势。
English: Moreover, the way of governing the country has never been any different. Big countries annex small countries, which is a natural trend in the development of the situation.

古文：由此言之，则魏能并吴，吴不能并魏明矣。
现代文：从这点上说，魏国能吞并吴国，而吴国不能吞并魏国，这是很明显的事。
English: From this, it is clear that Wei could annex Wu, but Wu could not annex Wu.

古文：等为称臣，为小孰与为大！再辱之耻何与一辱！
现代文：同样是称臣，对小国称臣就不如对大国称臣，与其忍受两次受辱之耻不如一次受辱！
English: It is the same with flattery. It is better to flatter a small country than a great one. It is better to be humiliated once than to suffer the shame of being humiliated twice.

古文：且若欲奔南，则当早为之计，然后可果。今大敌已近，祸败将及，群小之心，无一可保，恐发足之日，其变不测，何至南之有乎！ 
现代文：而且如果想要奔赴南方，就应当及早计划好，才能成功；如今大敌已经临近，灾祸失败也将要降临，而且众小人之心，没有一个可保其不变，恐怕我们出发的时候，其变化不可预料，怎么能到达南中呢？ 
English: Moreover, if you want to go to the south, you should plan well in advance in order to succeed; now the great enemy has approached, disaster and failure will also come, and the hearts of the little people, none of which can be kept unchanged, I am afraid that when we set out, its changes are unpredictable, how can we reach the south?

古文：或曰： 今艾已不远，恐不受降，如之何？ 
现代文：有人说： 如今邓艾已经不远，恐怕他不接受我们投降，怎么办呢？ 
English: Some people said: Deng Ai is not far away now, I'm afraid he won't accept our surrender, what should we do?

古文：周曰： 方今东吴未宾，事势不得不受，受之不得不礼。
现代文：谯周说： 现在吴国还没有臣服于魏，事情的形势使他不得不接受，接受了也不得不待之以礼。
English: Zou Zhou said: Now that Wu has not yet submitted to Wei, the state of affairs has forced him to accept, and he had to be polite when he accepted.

古文：若陛下降魏，魏不裂土以封陛下者，周请身诣京都，以古义争之。 
现代文：如果陛下投降魏国，而魏国不划分土地封给陛下的话，我请求只身到洛阳，用古代的大义与他们争辩。 
English: If Your Majesty surrenders to the Wei Dynasty, and the Wei Dynasty rewards Your Majesty with land without dividing it, Yan Zhou will ask you to go to Beijing in person and use the ancient and modern morality to argue for you.

古文：众人皆从周议。
现代文：众人都听从了谯周的建议。
English: Everyone listened to Gong Zhou's suggestion.

古文：汉主犹欲入南，狐疑未决。
现代文：汉后主仍然想入南中，犹豫不决。
English: The Han empress still wanted to enter the Southern Middle School, but hesitated.

古文：周上疏曰： 南方远夷之地，平常无所供为，犹数反叛，自丞相亮以兵威逼之，穷乃率从。
现代文：谯周上疏说： 南方偏远蛮夷之地，平常就不交纳供奉租税，还多次反叛，自丞相诸葛亮用武力威逼他们，走投无路才顺服。
English: Zou Zhou Shangsuo said: In the remote and barbaric land of the south, they usually do not pay taxes, and they have rebelled many times. Since the prime minister Zhuge Liang used force to force them, they have no choice but to obey.

古文：今若至南，外当拒敌，内供服御，费用张广，他无所取，耗损诸夷，其叛必矣！ 
现代文：如今如果去南中，外要抗拒敌兵，内要供奉日常粮食物品，费用浩大，没有其他地方可以收取，只能耗损各个夷人部族，那他们必然会反叛。 
English: Nowadays, if you go to Nanzhong, you have to resist the enemy soldiers on the outside and offer daily food and supplies on the inside. The cost is huge, there is no other place to collect, and you can only wear out the various tribes of the barbarians, then they will inevitably rebel.

古文：汉主乃遣侍中张绍等奉玺绶以降于艾。
现代文：于是汉后主就派侍中张绍等人奉着御玺向邓艾投降。
English: As a result, the Han empress sent Zhang Shao and other attendants to surrender to Deng Ai.

古文：北地王谌怒曰： 若理穷力屈，祸败将及，便当父子君臣背城一战，同死社稷，以见先帝可也，奈何降乎！ 
现代文：北地王刘谌愤怒地说： 如果我们理穷力屈，灾祸败亡将至，就应当父子君臣一起背城一战，共同为社稷而死，这样才能见先帝于地下，为什么要投降？ 
English: The king of the Northland, Liu Bei, said angrily: "If we are forced to give in, and disaster and defeat are imminent, we should, together with our father and son, betray the city and die together for the society, so that we can see the former emperor underground. Why should we surrender?"

古文：汉主不听。
现代文：汉后主不听。
English: Han Wang ignored him.

古文：是日，谌哭于昭烈之庙，先杀妻子，而后自杀。
现代文：这一天，刘谌哭诉于昭烈帝刘备之庙，先杀了妻子儿女，然后自杀而死。
English: On this day, Liu Wei cried to the temple of Liu Bei, the Emperor Zhao, and first killed his wife and children, and then committed suicide and died.

古文：张绍等见邓艾于雒，艾大喜，报书褒纳。
现代文：张绍等人在雒县见到邓艾，邓艾大喜，写信褒扬接纳投降。
English: Zhang Shao and others saw Deng Ai in Handan County. Deng Ai was overjoyed and wrote a letter praising the acceptance of the surrender.

古文：汉主遣太仆蒋显别敕姜维使降钟会，又遣尚书郎李虎送士民簿于艾，户二十八万，口九十四万，甲士十万二千，吏四万人。
现代文：汉后主又派遣太仆蒋显去命令姜维向钟会投降，又派尚书郎李虎把士民户口簿交给邓艾，共计有二十八万户，九十四万人，兵士十万二千人，官吏四万人。
English: The Han empress also dispatched her eunuch Jiang Xian to order Jiang Wei to surrender to the bell association, and sent Shang Shulang Li Hu to hand over the household registration book to Deng Ai, with a total of 280,000 households, 940,000 people, 102,000 soldiers, and 40,000 officials.

古文：艾至成都城北，汉主率太子诸王及群臣六十馀人，面缚舆榇诣军门。
现代文：邓艾到达成都城北，汉后主率太子、诸王以及群臣六十余人，缚手于后，拉着棺木走到军营门前。
English: When Deng Ai reached the north of the capital, the Han empress led the prince, the kings and more than 60 courtiers, tied her hands behind her, and walked to the front of the military camp with the coffin.

古文：艾持节解缚焚榇，延请相见；检御将士，无得虏略，绥纳降附，使复旧业；辄依邓禹故事，承制拜汉主禅行骠骑将军，太子奉车、诸王驸马都尉，汉群司各随高下拜为王官，或领艾官属；以师纂领益州刺史，陇西太守牵弘等领蜀中诸郡。
现代文：邓艾持节解开缚绳，焚烧了棺木，请进军营相见；约束控制将士，不许掠夺百姓，安抚接纳投降依附之人，让他们恢复旧业；然后就依照东汉初年邓禹的旧事，秉承皇帝旨意授予汉后主刘禅行骠骑将军、太子为奉车都尉、诸王为驸马都尉之职，蜀汉的群官各随其职位的高低授予王官，或担任邓艾属下官吏；让师纂任益州刺史，陇西太守牵弘等人担任蜀中各郡的官职。
English: On the first day of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Deng Ai held a festival, loosened the ropes, burned the coffin, and invited everyone to enter the military camp to meet each other; restrained and controlled the soldiers, did not allow the people to be plundered, appeased and accepted those who surrendered and depended, and allowed them to resume their old business; then, in accordance with the old affairs of Deng Yu in the first year of the Eastern Han Dynasty, adhering to the emperor's will, he awarded the Han empress Liu Zengxing the post of cavalry general, the prince to be the lieutenant of the carriage, and the kings to be the lieutenant of the horse.

古文：艾闻黄皓奸险，收闭，将杀之，皓赂艾左右，卒以得免。
现代文：邓艾听说黄皓为人奸诈阴险，把他收押起来，准备杀掉，后来黄皓贿赂邓艾的左右亲近之人，终于免于一死。
English: Deng Ai heard that Huang Qi was a treacherous and insidious person. He detained him and prepared to kill him. Later, Huang Qi bribed Deng Ai's close friends and relatives, and was finally spared from death.

古文：姜维等闻诸葛瞻败，未知汉主所向，乃引军东入于巴。
现代文：姜维等人听说诸葛瞻失败，但不知汉后主的意向，于是率军向东进入巴中。
English: Jiang Wei and others heard that Zhuge Zhan had failed, but they did not know the intention of the Han empress, so they led the army eastward into Bazhong.

古文：钟会进军至涪，遣胡烈等追维。
现代文：钟会进军到涪县，派遣胡烈等人追击姜维。
English: The Bell Association marched into Handan County and sent Hu Lie and others to pursue Jiang Wei.

古文：维至郪，得汉主敕命，乃令兵悉放仗，送节传于胡烈，自从东道与廖化、张翼、董厥等同诣会降。
现代文：姜维到达县，得到汉后主的命令，于是命令士兵都放下武器，把符节传送交给胡烈，自己从东道与廖化、张翼、董厥等一起到钟会那里投降。
English: When Jiang Wei arrived at the county, he received an order from the empress dowager of the Han Dynasty, so he ordered the soldiers to lay down their weapons, conveyed the symbols to Hu Lie, and went to the bell association to surrender from the host together with Liao Hua, Zhang Ying, and Dong Jue.

古文：将士咸怒，拔刀斫石。
现代文：将士们都十分震怒，气得挥刀砍石。
English: The soldiers were so furious that they were swinging their swords and chopping stones.

古文：于是诸郡县围守皆被汉主敕罢兵降。
现代文：至此各郡县和驻点的部队都接到汉后主的命令而罢兵投降。
English: At this point, the troops of all counties and garrisons received the order of the Han empress and surrendered.

古文：锺会厚待姜维等，皆权还其印绶节盖。
现代文：钟会给了姜维等人优厚的待遇，把印绶、符节、车盖等都暂时还给了他们。
English: The bell association gave Jiang Wei and others generous treatment, and temporarily returned the seal, rune, and car cover to them.

古文：吴人闻蜀已亡，乃罢丁奉等兵。
现代文：吴国人听说蜀国已经灭亡，于是就停止了丁奉等人的军事行动。
English: When the people of Wu heard that Shu had been destroyed, they stopped the military operations of Ding Feng and others.

古文：吴中书丞吴郡华覈诣宫门上表曰： 伏闻成都不守，臣主播越，社稷倾覆，失委附之土，弃贡献之国，臣以草芥，窃怀不宁。
现代文：吴国中书丞吴郡的华走到宫门上表说： 我听说成都已经失守，君臣都已散亡，国家遭到覆灭，失去了委身依附的土地，抛弃了进献纳贡的小国。
English: Hua of Wu County, the chief scribe of the State of Wu, went to the palace gate and said: I have heard that Chengdu has been lost, that the princes and ministers have all perished, that the country has been destroyed, that it has lost the land to which it was committed, and that it has abandoned the small countries that paid tribute.

古文：陛下圣仁，恩泽远抚，卒闻如此，必垂哀悼。
现代文：我这个草芥之人，心里暗自感到很不安宁，陛下圣明仁厚，恩泽抚慰远方，突然听到此事，必然会产生哀悼之情。
English: I, a man of straw and mustard, secretly feel very uneasy in my heart. Your Majesty is holy and benevolent, and grace soothes the distant, and suddenly hearing this matter will inevitably produce feelings of mourning.

古文：臣不胜忡怅之情，谨拜表以闻！ 
现代文：我克制不住自己的忧虑惆怅之情，恭敬地上表讲给您听。 
English: I can't hold back my worries and feelings, and I respectfully come forward to tell you.

古文：魏之伐蜀也，吴人或谓襄阳张悌曰： 司马氏得政以来，大难屡作，百姓未服，今又劳力远征，败于不暇，何以能克！ 
现代文：魏国攻打蜀国的时候，吴国有人对襄阳人张悌说： 司马氏得到朝政大权以来，国内的大乱屡次出现，百姓还没有归服，如今又费尽辛劳去远征，他会败于没有时间休整，怎能取胜？ 
English: When the State of Wei attacked the State of Shu, someone from the State of Wu said to Zhang Xuan from the State of Xiangyang: Since the Sima clan gained the supreme political power, domestic turmoil has repeatedly occurred. The people have not yet submitted, and now they are struggling to go on an expedition. He will be defeated because he does not have time to recuperate. How can he win?

古文：悌曰： 不然。
现代文：张悌说： 不是这样。
English: Zhang Ye said, "It's not like that.

古文：曹操虽功盖中夏，民畏其威而不怀其德也。
现代文：曹操虽然功盖中原，百姓们畏惧他的威严却不感念他的恩德。
English: Although Cao Cao's achievements covered the Central Plains, the people were afraid of his majesty but did not appreciate his kindness.

古文：丕、睿承之，刑繁役重，东西驱驰，无有宁岁。
现代文：曹丕、曹睿继承他，刑罚苛繁劳役沉重，驱使人民东西往来奔走，没有一年安宁过。
English: Cao Pi and Cao Rui succeeded him. They imposed harsh punishments and heavy labor, forcing the people to travel back and forth between east and west. Not a single year passed peacefully.

古文：司马懿父子累有大功，除其烦苛而布其平惠，为之谋主而救其疾苦，民心归之亦已久矣。
现代文：司马懿父子累世立有大功，废除对百姓烦琐苛刻而实行对百姓较为平和有利的政策，为百姓谋划着想而解救他们的疾苦，民心归顺他已经很久了。
English: Sima Yu and his son have made great achievements over the years, abolishing the burdensome and harsh policies for the people and implementing a more peaceful and beneficial policy for the people, planning for the people and relieving their suffering. It has been a long time since the people's hearts have been submissive.

古文：故淮南三叛，而腹心不扰；曹髦之死，四方不动。
现代文：因此淮南出现三个叛逆，而腹心之地不受惊扰；曹髦被杀而死，四方也没有引起叛乱。
English: As a result, three rebellions occurred in Huainan, but the place of the confidant was not disturbed; Cao Xiang was killed and died, and the four sides did not cause a rebellion.

古文：任贤使能，各尽其心，其本根固矣，奸计立矣。
现代文：而且能够任用贤能，使他们各尽其心，所以他的根基是很牢固的，奸计也得以实现了。
English: Moreover, he is able to appoint capable people and let them do their best, so his foundation is very solid, and the treachery has been realized.

古文：今蜀阉宦专朝，国无政令，而玩戎黩武，民劳卒敝，竞于外利，不修守备。
现代文：而如今蜀国却是宦官专擅朝政，国家没有政策法令，而且穷兵黩武，人民劳顿兵士疲惫，竞争于外利，不加强防务。
English: Today, however, it is the eunuchs in Shu who are exclusively in charge of the government, the country has no policies or laws, and the army is exhausted, the people are exhausted, the soldiers are tired, the competition is for foreign interests, and the defense is not strengthened.

古文：彼强弱不同，智算亦胜，因危而伐，殆无不克。
现代文：他们强弱不同，魏国人的智谋又胜过蜀国人，魏国乘其危难而攻伐，大概战无不胜。唉！
English: They are different in strength and weakness, the wisdom of the Wei people is better than that of the Shu people, and the Wei state takes advantage of its peril to attack, and is probably invincible. Alas!

古文：噫！彼之得志，我之忧也。 
现代文：魏国得志，是我们的忧患。 
English: Wei Guo Dezhi is our sorrow.

古文：吴人笑其言，至是乃服。
现代文：起初吴国人都取笑他的话，到魏国取胜后才信服。
English: At first, the people of Wu made fun of his words, but they were convinced after the victory in Wei.

古文：吴人以武陵五溪夷与蜀接界，蜀亡，惧其叛乱，乃以越骑校尉钟离牧领武陵太守。
现代文：吴国人因武陵五溪夷人与蜀国接壤，蜀国灭亡后，害怕五溪夷人叛乱，于是就让越骑校尉钟离牧暂代武陵太守。
English: The people of Wu were afraid of the Wuxi barbarians' rebellion after the fall of Shu, because Wuling was bordered by the Wuxi barbarians and Shu. Therefore, they let the Yue cavalry captain Zhong Liwei become the temporary governor of Wuling.

古文：魏已遣汉葭县长郭纯试守武陵太守，率涪陵民入迁陵界，屯于赤沙，诱动诸夷进攻酉阳，郡中震惧。
现代文：魏国已经派遣汉葭县长郭纯暂代武陵太守，率领涪陵百姓进入迁陵界内，驻扎在赤沙，引诱各夷族部落进攻酉阳，郡中一片震恐。
English: Wei had already sent Guo Jun, the governor of Hanzhong County, as the temporary governor of Wuling. He led the people of Hanzhong into the territory of relocation, stationed in Chisha, and lured the tribes of the Yi people to attack Fenyang. The county was in shock.

古文：牧问朝吏曰： 西蜀倾覆，边境见侵，何以御之？ 
现代文：钟离牧问郡吏说： 西蜀灭亡，边境受到侵犯，我们如何抵御？ 
English: Zhong Li Mu asked the middle-ranking official: "Western Shu has perished, our border has been invaded, how can we defend ourselves now?"

古文：皆对曰： 今二县山险，诸夷阻兵，不可以军惊扰，惊扰则诸夷盘结；宜以渐安，可遣恩信吏宣教慰劳。 
现代文：众人回答说： 这两个县山势险要，各夷族部落都拥兵自守，我们不能用军队去惊扰他们，一旦被惊扰，他们就会联合起来抵抗；应该慢慢地安抚他们，可以派恩信吏去宣教慰劳他们。 
English: The people replied, "The situation in these two counties and mountains is very dangerous, and all the tribes of the barbarians are defending themselves with troops. We can't use troops to scare them. Once they are scared, they will unite to resist. We should slowly pacify them, and we can send trustworthy officials to preach and comfort them.

古文：牧曰： 不然。
现代文：钟离牧说： 不能这样。
English: Zhong Li Mu said, "No."

古文：外境内侵，诳诱人民，当及其根柢未深而扑取之，此救火贵速之势也。 
现代文：境外之敌入侵，诳骗引诱人民闹事，我们应乘其根柢未深之时就迅速地扑灭他们，这是救火贵在快速的形势。 
English: A foreign enemy invades our territory and deceives the people. We should seize the opportunity of their unstable foundation to extinguish and capture them. This is a situation where it is important to quickly put out the fire.

古文：敕外趣严。
现代文：于是命令外边加紧准装待发。
English: The order was then given to the outside world to step up their preparations.

古文：抚夷将军高尚谓牧曰： 昔渊太常督兵五万，然后讨五溪夷。
现代文：抚夷将军高尚对钟离牧说： 以前潘太常领兵五万人，然后才去讨伐五溪夷。
English: Fuxi General Gao Shang said to Zhong Yimou: In the past, Pan Taizang often led fifty thousand soldiers, and then went to fight against Wuxi Yi.

古文：是时刘氏连和，诸夷率化。
现代文：当时还与刘氏联合，所以诸夷族部落都顺服。
English: At that time, it was still allied with the Liu clan, so all the barbarian tribes obeyed.

古文：今既无往日之援，而郭纯已据迁陵，而明府欲以三千兵深入，尚未见其利也。 
现代文：如今既没有往日的援助，而且郭纯已经占据了迁陵，而您却想用三千兵力深入作战，我看很难取得胜利。 
English: Now that there is no help from the past, and Guo Chun has occupied Qianling, but you want to use three thousand troops to fight deeper, I think it is difficult to achieve victory.

古文：牧曰： 非常之事，何得循旧！ 
现代文：钟离牧说： 非常之事，怎能依循旧例！ 
English: Zhong Li Mu said: "This is an extraordinary thing, how can we follow the old practice!

古文：即率所领晨夜进道，缘山险行垂二千里，斩恶民怀异心者魁帅百馀人，及其支党凡千馀级。
现代文：随即率领他的兵士夜间就上了路，沿着危险的山路行走了近二千里，杀了作恶之民中怀有异心的首领一百余人以及同党一千余人。
English: He then led his soldiers on the road at night, traveled nearly two thousand miles along the dangerous mountain road, and killed more than one hundred leaders and more than one thousand members of the same party among the evil-doers.

古文：纯等散走，五溪皆平。
现代文：郭纯等人四散逃走，终于平定了五等地。
English: Guo Chun and the others scattered and fled, and finally the five villages were pacified.

古文：十二月，庚戌，以司徒郑冲为太保。
现代文：十二月，庚戌，任命司徒郑冲为太保。
English: In December, Geng Zheng, appointed Szu Zheng Chong as Tai Bao.

古文：壬子，分益州为梁州。
现代文：壬子，从益州中分出部分土地设置梁州。
English: On the 21st, a part of Yizhou was set aside as Liangzhou.

古文：癸丑，特赦益州士民，复除租税之半五年。
现代文：癸丑，特赦益州士人百姓，又下令在五年之内免除一半租税。
English: At the same time, he granted amnesty to the people of Yizhou and ordered to exempt half of the tax within five years.

古文：乙卯，以邓艾为太尉，增邑二万户；锺会为司徒，增邑万户。
现代文：乙卯，任命邓艾为太尉，增加食邑两万户；任命钟会为司徒，增加食邑一万户。
English: Second, he appointed Deng Ai as the first lieutenant, increasing the number of food villages by 20,000; he appointed Zhong Hui as the assistant, increasing the number of food villages by 10,000.

古文：皇太后郭氏殂。
现代文：皇太后郭氏去世。
English: Empress Dowager Guo passed away.

古文：邓艾在成都，颇自矜伐，谓蜀士大夫曰： 诸君赖遭艾，故得有今日耳。如遇吴汉之徒，已殄灭矣。 
现代文：邓艾在成都，颇为居功自傲，他对蜀国的士大夫们说： 诸君多亏是遇到了我，所以才能有今日，如果遇到东汉初年吴汉那样的人，恐怕已经灭亡了。 
English: In Chengdu, Deng Ai was quite proud of his achievements. He said to the officials of Shu: "It is thanks to you that you have met me that you are able to be here today. If you had met someone like Wu Han in the early years of the Eastern Han Dynasty, I am afraid you would have perished.

古文：艾以书言于晋公昭曰： 兵有先声而后实者，今因平蜀之势以乘吴，吴人震恐，席卷之时也。
现代文：邓艾写信对晋公司马昭说： 用兵有先造声势然后发兵的情形，如今乘平定蜀国的威势去攻打吴国，吴人必将受到震恐，这是一举攻灭吴国的大好时机。
English: Deng Ai wrote a letter to Ma Zhao of the Jin Company, saying: The situation of using soldiers to first make a noise and then send troops, and now taking advantage of the power of Shu to attack Wu, Wu people will certainly be shocked and terrified. This is a great opportunity to attack and destroy Wu.

古文：然大举之后，将士疲劳，不可使用，且徐缓之。
现代文：但是我们在大规模用兵之后，将士们都十分疲劳，不能立即用兵，应暂缓一些时日。
English: However, after the large-scale use of troops, our soldiers are very tired, we cannot use troops immediately, we should postpone it for some time.

古文：留陇右兵二万人、蜀兵二万人，煮盐兴冶，为军农要用，并作舟船，豫为顺流之事。
现代文：我想留下陇右兵二万人、蜀兵二万人，在这里煮盐炼铁，以备军事农事之用。同时制作舟船，预先为顺流攻吴作准备。
English: I would like to leave 20,000 soldiers from the right bank of the Yangtze River and 20,000 soldiers from the left bank of the Shu River to boil salt and make iron here for military and agricultural purposes, as well as to make boats to prepare for the attack on Wu.

古文：然后发使告以利害，吴必归化，可不征而定也。
现代文：然后派出使者告以利害，吴国必定归顺，可以不用征战就平定吴国。
English: Then he sent an envoy to announce that Wu would definitely surrender and could be pacified without war.

古文：今宜厚刘禅以致孙休，封禅为扶风王，锡其资财，供其左右，郡有董卓坞，为之宫舍，爵其子为公侯，食郡内县，以显归命之宠；开广陵、城阳以待吴人，则畏威怀德，望风而从矣！ 
现代文：如今应厚待刘禅以招致孙休，封刘禅为扶风王，赐给他资财，供给他左右侍奉之人。扶风郡有董卓坞，可当做他的宫舍，赐给他儿子以公侯的爵位，以郡内的县为食邑，以此来显示归顺所受到的恩宠。再开放广陵、城阳二郡作为封国以等待吴人归顺，这样他们畏惧我们的威严，感念我们的恩德，就会望风而顺从了。 
English: Now, Liu Zhen should be treated generously by inviting Sun Xiu, naming Liu Zhen as the king of Fu Feng, giving him wealth and resources, and providing him with servants around him. Fu Feng County has Dong Zhuo dock, which can be used as his palace, giving his son the title of prince, and using the county within the county as a food town, in order to show the grace received by the surrender. Then open Guangling and Chengyang two counties as a fief to wait for the Wu people to surrender, so that they will fear our majesty, feel our grace, and obey the wind.

古文：昭使监军卫瓘谕艾： 事当须报，不宜辄行。 
现代文：司马昭让监军卫去晓喻邓艾说： 做事当须上报，不宜立即按己意实行。 
English: Sima Zhao let the supervisor of the military guard go to know Deng Ai and said: Work should be reported, it is not appropriate to implement it immediately according to one's own will.

古文：艾重言曰： 衔命征行，奉指授之策，元恶既服，至于承制拜假，以安初附，谓合权宜。
现代文：邓艾严厉地说： 我受命出征，奉行指示给我的计策，现在首恶已经归服，至于秉承旨意授予他们官爵，以安抚刚刚依附之人，我认为也是合乎权宜的计策。
English: Deng Ai said sternly: I was ordered to go to war, and I followed the strategy that was instructed to me. Now that the chief evil has been subdued, as for granting them peerages in accordance with the will to appease those who have just attached themselves, I think it is also a convenient strategy.

古文：今蜀举众归命，地尽南海，东接吴、会，宜早镇定。
现代文：如今蜀举国上下都已归顺，国土南至南海，东接吴国，应该尽早使其镇定下来。
English: Today, all of Shuqiu has surrendered, from the southern part of the country to the South China Sea, and from the east to the State of Wu. It should be calmed down as soon as possible.

古文：若待国命，往复道途，延引日月。
现代文：如果等待朝廷命令，来往于道路，就会拖延时日。
English: If you wait for an order from the court to come and go on the road, it will delay the time.

古文：《春秋》之义， 大夫出疆，有可以安社稷、利国家，专之可也。 
现代文：《春秋》之义说： 大夫出国在外，如果有可以安社稷、利国家之事，自行决断是可以的。 
English: The meaning of "Spring and Autumn" says: Doctors go abroad, and if there is a matter that can stabilize society and benefit the country, it is possible to make their own decisions.

古文：今吴未宾，势与蜀连，不可拘常，以失事机。
现代文：如今吴国尚未归服，势必与蜀国联合，所以不可拘于常理，而失去事情的机会。
English: Now that the State of Wu has not been subjugated, it is bound to unite with the State of Shu. Therefore, we must not be bound by common sense and lose the opportunity of things.

古文：《兵法》： 进不求名，退不避罪。 
现代文：《兵法》上说 进不求名，退不避罪。 
English: It is said in the "Law of War" that one should not go into a battle seeking fame, nor should one retreat to avoid sin.

古文：艾虽无古人之节，终不自嫌以损国家计也！ 
现代文：我虽然没有古人的节操，也终究不会自我疑惑而损害国家利益！ 
English: Although I do not have the discipline of the ancients, I will not doubt myself and damage the national interest!

古文：钟会内有异志，姜维知之，欲构成扰乱，乃说会曰： 闻君自淮南已来，算无遗策，晋道克昌，皆君之力。
现代文：钟会内心怀有叛离之志，姜维已有所察觉，就想促成他的作乱，于是就劝说钟会： 听说您自淮南之战以来，计策从未有过失误，司马氏能够昌盛，全依赖您的力量。
English: Zhong Hui harbored a spirit of defection in his heart. Jiang Wei had already noticed this and wanted to facilitate his rebellion, so he persuaded Zhong Hui: I heard that since the Huainan War, you have never made a mistake in your strategy. Sima's ability to prosper depends entirely on your strength.

古文：今复定蜀，威德振世，民高其功，主畏其谋，欲以此安归乎！
现代文：如今又平定了蜀国，威德振世，百姓颂扬您的功劳，主上畏惧您的谋略，您还想因此安然而归吗？
English: Now that Shu has been pacified, virtue has revived the world, the people praise your merits, and the Lord is afraid of your strategy, do you still want to return safely?

古文：何不法陶硃公泛舟绝迹，全功保身邪！ 
现代文：何不效法陶朱公范蠡泛舟湖上远避是非，以保全自己的功名性命呢！ 
English: Why not follow the example of Tao Zhu Gong Fan Qi and avoid the wrongdoing on the rafting lake to preserve one's reputation and life!

古文：会曰： 君言远矣，我不能行。
现代文：钟会说： 您说的太远了，我不能离开。
English: The bell will say: You've gone too far, I can't leave.

古文：且为今之道，或未尽于此也。 
现代文：而且从现在的形势看，还没有到这种地步。 
English: And from the current situation, it has not yet reached this point.

古文：维曰： 其他则君智力之所能，无烦于老夫矣。 
现代文：姜维说： 其他的事情凭您的智慧、力量就能做到，用不着我多说了。 
English: Jiang Wei said: Other things can be done with your wisdom and strength, I don't need to say more.

古文：由是情好欢甚，出则同舆，坐则同席，会因邓艾承制专事，乃与卫瓘密白艾有反状。
现代文：从此他们俩感情融洽关系密切，出则同车，坐则同席。钟会因邓艾承旨专权行事，就与卫一起密报邓艾有谋反的表现。
English: From then on, the two of them had a close emotional rapport. They rode in the same car and sat at the same table. Because Deng Ai acted with absolute power, Zhong Hui, together with Wei, secretly reported Deng Ai's rebellious behavior.

古文：会善效人书，于剑阁要艾章表、白事，皆易其言，令辞指悖傲，多自矜伐；又毁晋公昭报书，手作以疑之。
现代文：钟会善于摹仿别人的字体，就在剑阁拦截了邓艾的奏章和上报事情的书信，改写了其中的话，让言辞狂悖傲慢，有很多居功自夸之处，同时又毁掉晋公司马昭的回信，亲手重新再写以使邓艾生疑。
English: The bell association is good at imitating other people's fonts. In Jiange, it intercepted Deng Ai's letter and the letter reporting the matter, and rewrote the words in it, so that the rhetoric was wild and arrogant, with a lot of credit and boasting. At the same time, it destroyed Jin company Ma Zhao's reply letter and rewrote it by hand to make Deng Ai suspicious.

古文：元皇帝下咸熙元年
现代文：咸熙元年
English: in the first year of Ham Hee

古文：春，正月，壬辰，诏以槛车征邓艾。
现代文：春季，正月，壬辰，诏令用囚车押回邓艾。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, in Imjin, Deng Ai was ordered to be taken back in a prison van.

古文：晋公昭恐艾不从命，敕钟会进军成都，又遣贾充将兵入斜谷。
现代文：晋公司马昭怕邓艾不从命，就命令钟会进军成都，又派遣贾充率兵入斜谷。
English: Jin Company's Ma Zhao, fearing that Deng Ai would not follow orders, ordered Zhonghui to march into Chengdu, and sent Jia Chong and his soldiers into the valley.

古文：昭自将大军从帝幸长安，以诸王公皆在鄴，乃以山涛为行军司马，镇鄴。
现代文：司马昭则亲自率领大军跟着魏帝到达长安，因诸王公都在邺城，就任命山涛为行军司马镇守邺城。
English: Sima Zhao personally led a large army to arrive in Chang'an with Emperor Wei. Since all the princes were in Lucheng, he appointed Shantao as the marching Sima Town to guard Lucheng.

古文：初，钟会以才能见任，昭夫人王氏言于昭曰： 会见利忘义，好为事端，宠过必乱，不可大任。 
现代文：当初，钟会因有才能受到重用，司马昭的夫人王氏对司马昭说： 钟会见利忘义，好生事端，恩宠太过必然作乱，不可让他担当大任。 
English: At the beginning, the bell association was used because of its talent. Wang, Sima Zhao's wife, said to Sima Zhao: The bell association sees profit and forgets righteousness, it is good to cause trouble, the grace is too inevitable to cause chaos, and he should not be allowed to take on a major role.

古文：及会将伐汉，西曹属邵悌言于晋公曰： 今遣钟会率十万馀众伐蜀，愚谓令单身无任，不若使馀人行也。 
现代文：钟会将伐蜀汉时，西曹属邵悌对晋公说： 如今派钟会率领十几万人去伐蜀，我认为钟会单身一人没有家人做人质，不如派别人去。 
English: When the Bell Association was about to attack Shushan, Shao Qi, a senior Cao, said to Jin Gong: Now, send the Bell Association to lead a hundred thousand people to attack Shushan. I think that if a single person of the Bell Association has no family to be a hostage, it is better to send someone else.

古文：晋公笑曰： 我宁不知此邪！
现代文：晋公笑着说： 我怎能不知道此事呢？
English: Jin Gong said with a smile: How could I not know about this?

古文：蜀数为边寇，师老民疲，我今伐之，如指掌耳，而众方蜀不可伐。
现代文：蜀国多次进犯，军队倦怠百姓疲劳，我们去讨伐，易如反掌，但众人都说蜀不可伐。
English: Shu attacked many times, the army was tired and the people were tired. It would have been easy for us to fight, but everyone said that Shu could not be defeated.

古文：夫人心豫怯则智勇并竭，智勇并竭而强使之，适所以为敌禽耳。
现代文：如果人先心存畏惧，那么智勇都会衰竭，智勇衰竭而强使他出兵，就会被敌人所擒获。
English: If a man's heart is filled with fear, his wisdom and courage will be exhausted. If his wisdom and courage are exhausted and he is forced to send troops, he will be captured by the enemy.

古文：惟钟会与人意同，今遣会伐蜀，蜀必可灭。
现代文：只有钟会与我意见相同，如今派钟会去伐蜀，蜀必定可以灭亡。
English: Only the Bell Association shares my opinion. If they send the Bell Association to attack Shu now, Shu will surely perish.

古文：灭蜀之后，就如卿虑，何忧其不能办邪？
现代文：灭蜀之后，即使如你所顾虑的那样，何愁不能处理他？
English: After the destruction of Shu, even if you are as worried as you are, why can't you deal with him?

古文：夫蜀已破亡，遗民震恐，不足与共图事；中国将士各自思归，不肯与同也。
现代文：蜀已灭亡，遗留的人受到震恐，不足与钟会共同谋乱，而中原的将士都想急于回家，也不肯与他在一起。
English: Shu had perished, and those who remained were shocked and frightened, not enough to conspire with the bell society, and the soldiers in the Central Plains all wanted to rush home and did not want to be with him.

古文：会若作恶，只自灭族耳。
现代文：钟会如果作乱，只会自我招致灭族之祸。
English: If the bell ringers make trouble, they will only bring about the disaster of ethnic extermination.

古文：卿不须忧此，慎勿使人闻也！ 
现代文：你不必担忧此事，但要谨慎，不要让人知道。 
English: You don't have to worry about it, but be careful not to let people know.

古文：及晋公将之长安，悌复曰： 钟会所统兵五六倍于邓艾，但可敕会取艾，不须自行。 
现代文：等晋公将去长安时，邵悌又说： 钟会所统领的兵力是邓艾的五、六倍，只让钟会去攻取邓艾就行了，不必亲自去。 
English: When Emperor Jin was about to leave for Chang'an, Shao Jun also said: The army led by the Bell Club is five or six times that of Deng Ai. Just let the Bell Club go to capture Deng Ai, you don't have to go in person.

古文：晋公曰： 卿忘前言邪，而云不须行乎？
现代文：晋公说： 你忘记以前说的话了，怎能说不用去呢？
English: Shinkong said, "You have forgotten what you said before. How can you say that you don't need to go?"

古文：虽然，所言不可宣也。
现代文：尽管如此，我们所说的也不可宣扬出去。
English: Still, what we say must not be broadcast.

古文：我要自当以信意待人，但人不当负我耳，我岂可先人生心哉！
现代文：我自当会以信义待人，但别人不当辜负我，我岂可先于别人而生疑心呢？
English: I know that I can be loyal to others, but if others do not live up to my expectations, should I be suspicious before others?

古文：近日贾护军问我： 颇疑钟会不？ 
现代文：最近护军贾充问我： 是否很怀疑钟会？ 
English: Recently, Jia Fuzhou, the escort, asked me: Are you very suspicious of the bell association?

古文：还答言： 如今遣卿行，宁可复疑卿邪？ 
现代文：我回答说： 如果现在派你去，难道可以再怀疑你吗？ 
English: I replied: If I send you now, can I doubt you again?

古文：贾亦无以易我语也。
现代文：贾充也不能不同意我的话。
English: Jia Chong also had nothing to say. When I arrived in Chang'an, the matter was resolved naturally.

古文：我到长安，则自了矣。 
现代文：我到长安，就自会了断此事。 
English: When I got to Chang'an, I was able to end the affair on my own.

古文：钟会遣卫瓘先至成都收邓艾，会以瓘兵少，欲令艾杀瓘，因以为艾罪。
现代文：钟会派卫先到成都拘捕邓艾，钟会因卫兵力少，想让邓艾杀掉卫，再借此事定邓艾的罪。
English: The bell association sent guards to Chengdu to arrest Deng Ai first. Due to the small number of guards, the bell association wanted Deng Ai to kill Wei, and then use this incident to convict Deng Ai.

古文：瓘知其意，然不可得距，乃夜至成都，檄艾所统诸将，称： 奉诏收艾，其馀一无所问；若来赴官军，爵赏如先；敢有不出，诛及三族！ 
现代文：卫知道他的意图，但又不能抗拒命令，于是在深夜到达成都，传檄文给邓艾所统领的将领，声称： 我奉诏来拘捕邓艾，其余的人一概不予追究；你们投向官军这一边，则如先前平蜀时一样再加爵赏，如胆敢不出，则要诛及三族！ 
English: Wei knew his intention, but could not resist the order, so he went to Chengdu in the middle of the night to deliver a message to the generals led by Deng Ai, saying: I have issued an order to arrest Deng Ai, and the rest of the people will not be prosecuted; if you join the official army, you will be rewarded with a knighthood, as in the previous time of Ping Shu, and if you do not dare, you will be punished by the three tribes!

古文：比至鸡鸣，悉来赴瓘，唯艾帐内在焉。
现代文：等到鸡鸣时分，诸将都跑到卫这里，只有邓艾帐内之人未来。
English: By the time of the bugle call, everyone had rushed to the gate, except for Deng Ai's entourage.

古文：平旦，开门，瓘乘使者车，径入至艾所居；艾尚卧未起，遂执艾父子，置艾于槛车。
现代文：到早晨，打开营门，卫乘坐使者车，直接进入邓艾帐内；邓艾还躺着未起，于是把邓艾父子抓起来，把邓艾置于囚车中。
English: In the morning, the gate of the camp was opened, Wei took the messenger car and went directly into Deng Ai's tent; Deng Ai was still lying down, so he arrested Deng Ai and his son and put Deng Ai in the prison car.

古文：诸将图欲劫艾，整仗趣瓘营；瓘轻出迎之，伪作表草，将申明艾事，诸将信之而止。
现代文：诸将想要劫持邓艾，就整兵奔向卫的营帐；卫不带卫兵只身出来迎接，又假装书写表章，说将要申明邓艾没有反心。诸将相信了他而未劫持。
English: The generals wanted to kidnap Deng Ai, so they rushed to Wei's camp; Wei came out to meet them without a guard and pretended to write a seal, saying that he would declare that Deng Ai had no ill will. The generals believed him and did not kidnap him.

古文：丙子，会至成都，送艾赴京师。
现代文：丙子，钟会到了成都，派人把邓艾押送京师。
English: Bongzi, when the bell arrived in Chengdu, sent someone to escort Deng Ai to the Beijing Division.

古文：会所惮惟艾，艾父子既禽，会独统大众，威震西土，遂决意谋反。
现代文：钟会所忌惮者只有邓艾，邓艾父子既已被擒，钟会则独自统领大众，威震西部地区，于是下定决心阴谋反叛。
English: Only Deng Ai was afraid of the Bell Club. Since Deng Ai and his son had already been arrested, the Bell Club alone ruled the public, dominating the western region, so they made up their minds to plot a rebellion.

古文：会欲使姜维将五万人出斜谷为前驱，会自将大众随其后，既至长安，令骑士从陆道，步兵从水道，顺流浮渭入河，以为五日可到孟津，与骑兵会洛阳，一旦天下可定也。
现代文：钟会想让姜维率五万人出斜谷为前锋，自己率领大众跟随其后。到长安之后，命令骑兵从陆路走，步兵从水路走，顺流从渭水进入黄河，认为五日即可到达孟津，再与骑兵会合于洛阳，一时之间就能平定天下。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, he ordered the cavalry to take the land route, the infantry to take the water route, and the tributary to enter the Yellow River from Surabaya, believing that he could reach Mengjin in five days, and then meet with the cavalry in Luoyang, and he would be able to pacify the world in an instant.

古文：会得晋公书云： 恐邓艾或不就征，今遣中护军贾充将步骑万人径入斜谷，屯乐城，吾自将十万屯长安，相见在近。 
现代文：恰在此时，钟会收到了晋公的信，信中说： 恐怕邓艾不甘心接受惩处，现已派遣中护军贾充率领步骑兵一万人直接进斜谷，驻扎在乐城，我亲自率十万人驻扎在长安，近日即可相见。 
English: Just at this time, the Bell Association received a letter from Jin Gong, which said: I am afraid that Deng Ai is not willing to accept punishment, and has now dispatched the middle protection force Jia Chong, led by 10,000 infantry cavalry, directly into the valley, stationed in Lecheng, and I personally led 100,000 people stationed in Chang'an. I will see you soon.

古文：会得书惊，呼所亲语之曰： 但取邓艾，相国知我独办之；今来大重，必觉我异矣，便当速发。
现代文：钟会接到书信大惊失色，叫来亲信之人对他们说： 如果只取邓艾，相国知道我能独自办理；如今带来重兵，必定觉察到我有变异，我们应当迅速发难。
English: When the bell society received the letter, they were shocked and disgraced. They called in their close confidants and said to them: If we only take Deng Ai, our country knows that I can handle it alone; if we bring in heavy troops now, they will certainly notice that I have a mutation, and we should quickly get into trouble.

古文：事成，可得天下；不成，退保蜀、汉，不失作刘备也！ 
现代文：事情成功了，就可得天下；不成功，就可以退保蜀汉，仍可作个刘备一样的人。 
English: If things work out, he can conquer the world; if things don't work out, he can retire from Shu Han and still be a person like Liu Bei.

古文：丁丑，会番请护军、郡守、牙门骑督以上及蜀之故官，为太后发哀于蜀朝堂，矫太后遗诏，使会起兵废司马昭，皆班示坐上人，使下议讫，书版署置，更使所亲信代领诸军；所请群官，番闭著益州诸曹屋中，城门宫门皆闭，严兵围守。
现代文：丁丑，钟会把护军、郡守、牙门骑督以上以及过去的蜀国官吏都请了来，在成都的朝堂为郭太后致哀，并假造了太后的遗诏，说让钟会起兵废掉司马昭，把遗诏向座上众人宣布，让大家议论之后，开始授官任职，又让所亲信之人代领诸军；把所请来的群官，都关在益州各官署的屋中，关闭了城门宫门，派重兵把守。
English: Ding Yuxi, the bell association invited the escort, the county governor, the Zhamen cavalry commander and above, as well as the past Shu officials, to pay tribute to the Empress Guo in the Chengdu court, and forged the empress's last will and testament, saying that the bell association should raise an army to abolish Sima Zhao, announce the last will and testament to the audience, let everyone discuss it, begin to assign officials, and let the trusted people lead the army on behalf of the army; the invited officials were all locked in the houses of the Yizhou government offices, closed the city gate and palace gate, and sent heavy troops to guard.

古文：卫瓘诈称疾笃，出就外廨。
现代文：卫诈称病重，出来住在外面的官舍。
English: Weizhu said he was seriously ill and went to live in a government house outside.

古文：会信之，无所复惮。
现代文：钟会相信他，对他也无所忌惮。
English: The bell would believe him and have no fear of him.

古文：姜维欲使会尽杀北来诸将，己因杀会，尽坑魏兵，复立汉主，密书与刘禅曰： 愿陛下忍数日之辱，臣欲使社稷危而复安，日月幽而复明。 
现代文：姜维想让钟会杀尽从北方来的诸将，自己再借机杀掉钟会，全部坑杀魏国兵士，重立汉王。他给刘禅写密信说： 希望陛下再忍受数日之辱，我要让国家危而复安，日月幽而复明。 
English: Jiang Wei wanted the Bell Association to kill all the generals coming from the north, and he wanted to take the opportunity to kill the Bell Association, kill all the Wei soldiers, and re-establish the Han king. He wrote a secret letter to Liu Zen saying: I hope your majesty can endure the humiliation of a few more days, I want the country to be safe and secure, and the sun and moon to be dim and dim.

古文：会欲从维言诛诸将，犹豫未决。
现代文：钟会想听从姜维的意见诛杀诸将，但仍犹豫不决。
English: Zhong Hui wanted to follow Jiang Wei's advice and kill the generals, but still hesitated.

古文：会帐下督丘建本属胡烈，会爱信之。
现代文：钟会的帐下督丘建，本属于胡烈手下，钟会喜爱并信任他。
English: Duqiu Jian, a subordinate of the Bell Association, originally belonged to Hu Lie's subordinates. The Bell Association loved and trusted him.

古文：建愍烈独坐，启会，使听内一亲兵出取饮食，诸牙门随例各内一人。
现代文：丘建怜悯胡烈一人独自被囚，就请求钟会，让他允许一名亲兵进出取饮食，各牙门将也都随此例让一人进来侍奉。
English: Yau Jian sympathized with Hu Rong being held in solitary confinement, and told Zhong Rong that he hoped to send a trusted person to deliver food to Hu Rong, and that other generals and officials should also have a servant.

古文：烈绐语亲兵及疏与其子渊曰： 丘建密说消息，会已作大坑，白棓数千，欲悉呼外兵入，人赐白臽，拜散将，以次棓杀，内坑中。 
现代文：胡烈欺骗亲兵并让他传递消息给儿子胡渊说： 丘建秘密地透露消息，说钟会已经挖了大坑，作了数千根白色大棒，想叫外面的兵士全部进来，每人赐一白帽，授散将之职，依次击杀诸将，埋入坑中。 
English: Hu Lie deceived his own soldiers and asked him to pass on the news to his son Hu Yuan said: Qiu Jian secretly revealed the news that the Bell Association had dug a large pit and made thousands of white sticks, and wanted to call all the soldiers outside to come in, give each one a white hat, confer the post of general, kill the generals in turn, and bury them in the pit.

古文：诸牙门亲兵亦咸说此语，一夜，转相告，皆遍。
现代文：诸牙门将的亲兵也都说同样的话，一夜之间，辗转相告，大家都知道了。
English: The relatives and soldiers of Zhuya's keeper all said the same thing. Overnight, word spread, and everyone knew.

古文：己卯，日中，胡渊率其父兵雷鼓出门，诸军不期皆鼓噪而出，曾无督促之者，而争先赴城。
现代文：己卯，中午时分，胡渊率领其父的兵士擂鼓而出，各军也都不约而同地呐喊着跑出来，竟然连督促之人都没有，就争先恐后地跑向城里。
English: At noon, Hu Yuan led his father's soldiers to march out to the sound of drums. All the soldiers ran out shouting at the same time, and there was no one to urge them, so they all ran to the city.

古文：时会方给姜维铠仗，白外有匈匈声，似失火者，有顷，白兵走向城。
现代文：当时钟会正在给姜维铠甲兵器，报告说外面有汹汹嘈杂之声，好象是失火似的，一会儿，又报告说有兵跑往城里。
English: At that time, the clock association was arming Jiang Wei, reporting that there was a violent noise outside, as if it was a misfire, and for a while, it reported that soldiers were running into the city.

古文：会惊，谓维曰： 兵来似欲作恶，当云何？ 
现代文：钟会大惊，问姜维说： 兵来似乎是想作乱，应当怎么办？ 
English: Alarmed, Zhonghui asked Jiang Wei: "The soldiers seem to want to make trouble. What should I do?

古文：维曰： 但当击之耳！ 
现代文：姜维说： 只能攻击他们！ 
English: Jiang Wei said: We can only attack them!

古文：会遣兵悉杀所闭诸牙门郡守，内人共举机以拄门，兵斫门，不能破。
现代文：钟会派兵去杀那些被关起来的牙门将、郡守，而里面的人都拿起几案顶住门，兵士砍门却砍不破。
English: The bell society sent soldiers to kill the keepers of the castle and the county, who were locked up, and the people inside took up several cases to hold the door, but the soldiers couldn't break the door.

古文：斯须，城外倚梯登城，或烧城屋，蚁附乱进，矢下如雨，牙门郡守各缘屋出，与其军士相得。
现代文：过了一会儿，城外的人爬着梯子登上城墙，有的人焚烧城内的屋子，兵士们像蚂蚁那样乱哄哄地涌进来，箭如雨下，那些牙门将、郡守都从屋子上爬出来，与他们手下的军士汇合在一处。
English: After a while, people from outside the city climbed ladders to climb the city wall, some people burned houses inside the city, soldiers poured in like ants, and arrows rained down. Those gatekeepers and county governors climbed out of the houses and gathered with their sergeants.

古文：姜维率会左右战，手杀五六人，众格斩维，争前杀会。
现代文：姜维带着钟会左右拼杀，亲手杀死五六人，众人格杀了姜维，又争相向前杀死了钟会。
English: Jiang Wei fought with the bell group left and right, killing five or six people with his own hands. Many people killed Jiang Wei, and scrambled forward to kill the bell group.

古文：会将士死者数百人，杀汉太子璿及姜维妻子，军众钞略，死丧狼藉。
现代文：钟会的将士死了数百人，兵士们又杀了蜀汉太子刘和姜维的妻子儿女，并到处抢掠，死伤满地一片狼藉。
English: Hundreds of soldiers of the Bell Association died, the soldiers also killed the wives and children of the Prince of Shu Han Liu and Jiang Wei, and looted everywhere, leaving the country in ruins.

古文：卫瓘部分诸将，数日乃定。
现代文：卫部署诸将去平息，过了几天才平定下来。
English: Security forces deployed to quell the unrest, which took several days to subside.

古文：邓艾本营将士追出艾于槛车，迎还。
现代文：邓艾本营的将士追上囚车把邓艾救出并迎接回来。
English: The soldiers of Deng Ai's own battalion caught up with the cart to rescue Deng Ai and welcome her back.

古文：卫瓘自以与会共陷艾，恐其为变，乃遣护军田续等将兵袭艾，遇于绵竹西，斩艾父子。
现代文：卫认为自己与钟会共同陷害邓艾，恐怕他回来会有变乱，就派遣护军田续等人领兵去袭击邓艾，在绵竹西边遇上，于是杀了邓艾父子。
English: Wei thought that he and the Bell Association had set up Deng Ai together, fearing that there would be turmoil when he returned, so he sent the escort force led by Tian Zhuo and others to attack Deng Ai. They met on the west side of Mianzhu and killed Deng Ai and his son.

古文：艾之入江油也，田续不进，艾欲斩续，既而舍之。
现代文：当初邓艾进入江油时，田续不往前进，邓艾想杀了他，后来又放了他。
English: At first, when Deng Ai entered Jiangyou, Tian Cui did not move forward. Deng Ai wanted to kill him, but later released him.

古文：及瓘遣续，谓曰： 可以报江油之辱矣。 
现代文：卫派遣田续时，对他说： 你可以为江油受的耻辱报仇了。 
English: When Wei dispatched Tian Cui, he said to him: You can take revenge for the humiliation that Jiang You suffered.

古文：镇西长史杜预言于众曰： 伯玉其不免乎？
现代文：镇西长史杜预对众人说： 卫是免不了一死了！
English: The mayor of the western part of the town, Stiu Yuan, said to the crowd, "Wei is bound to die!

古文：身为名士，位望已高，既无德音，又不御下以正，将何以堪其责乎！ 
现代文：他身为名士，地位声望很高，但是既没有足以表示美德的言语，又不能用正道驾御下属，他怎能承担自己的责任呢？ 
English: As a famous person with a high reputation, how can he assume his responsibilities if he does not have enough words to express his virtue and cannot lead his subordinates in the right way?

古文：瓘闻之，不候驾而谢预。
现代文：卫听到后，不等驾车就跑去感谢杜预。
English: After Wei heard this, he didn't wait for the car to drive and ran to thank Du Yuan.

古文：预，恕之子也。
现代文：杜预是杜恕之子。
English: Du Yueh is the son of Du Shum.

古文：邓艾馀子在洛阳者悉伏诛。徙其妻及孙于西城。
现代文：邓艾其余的儿子在洛阳者被诛杀，又把他的妻子及孙子迁到西城县。
English: Deng Ai's remaining son was beaten to death in Luoyang, and he moved his wife and grandson to Xicheng County.

古文：钟会兄毓尝密言于晋公曰： 会挟术难保，不可专任。 
现代文：钟会之兄钟毓曾秘密地对晋公说： 钟会爱玩弄权术，不可过于信任。 
English: Zhong Xuan, the brother of Zhong Hui, once said to Jin Gong in secret: "Zhong Hui likes to play with power. You can't trust him too much."

古文：及会反，毓已卒，晋公思钟繇之勋与毓之贤，特原毓子峻、迪，官爵如故。
现代文：及钟会反叛，钟毓已经去世，晋公思念钟毓的功勋与钟毓的仁贤，特别宽宥了钟毓之子钟峻、钟，官爵如故。
English: and the bell society rebelled, Zhong Xuan had passed away, and the Jin Gong thought about the merits of Zhong Xuan and the benevolence of Zhong Xuan, and especially pardoned Zhong Xuan's sons Zhong Jun, Zhong, and Guanzhe.

古文：会功曹向雄收葬会尸，晋公召而责之曰： 往者王经之死，卿哭于东市而我不问；钟会躬为叛逆，又辄收葬，若复相容，当如王法何！ 
现代文：钟会的功曹向雄收葬钟会之尸，晋公召他来责备说： 从前王经死时，你哭于东市而我没有责问。钟会身为叛逆，你又特地去收葬，如果再容忍你，还有没有王法？ 
English: The benefactor of the bell association, Xiang Xiong, collected and buried the body of the bell association, and the prince of Jin summoned him to rebuke him, saying: Once upon a time, when the king passed away, you cried in the eastern city and I did not rebuke you. The bell association was a rebel, and you specifically went to collect and bury it. If you are tolerated again, is there no king's law?

古文：雄曰： 昔先王掩骼埋胔，仁流朽骨，当时岂先卜其功罪而后收葬哉！
现代文：向雄说： 以前先王掩埋枯骨腐尸，仁德施于朽骨，当时难道是先计算其功罪而后再收葬吗？
English: Xiang Xiong said, "In the past, the former king buried the dead bones and the rotting corpses, and gave benevolence to the rotting bones. At that time, did he first calculate their merits and demerits before burying them?

古文：今王诛既加，于法已备；雄感义收葬，教亦无阙。
现代文：现在王者的诛罚已经加于其身，从法度上说已经很完备，我有感于大义而收葬他，教化也就没有了缺憾。
English: Now that the king's chastisement has been imposed on him, it is complete from the legal point of view. I have buried him with a feeling of great righteousness, and there is no lack of enlightenment.

古文：法立于上，教弘于下，以此训物，不亦可乎？
现代文：法度立于上，教化弘扬于下，以此来作为万物的法则不是很好吗？
English: Isn't it good that the law is established at the top and the education is promoted at the bottom, so that it can be used as the law of all things?

古文：何必使雄背死违生，以立于世！
现代文：何必要让我背弃死者违背生者而立于当世？
English: Why should I turn my back on the dead, on the living, on the present?

古文：明公雠怼枯骨，捐之中野，岂仁贤之度哉！ 
现代文：您以仇怨对待枯骨，把他弃之野外，这难道是仁贤之人的气度吗？ 
English: You treat dead bones with malice and abandon them in the open. Is this the attitude of a man of virtue?

古文：晋公悦，与宴谈而遣之。
现代文：晋公很高兴，与他一起宴饮交谈之后才送他走。
English: Shingong was very happy, and only sent him away after feasting and talking with him.

古文：二月，丙辰，车驾还洛阳。
现代文：二月，丙辰，魏帝车驾返回洛阳。
English: In February, Xing Chen and Wei Di drove back to Luoyang.

古文：庚申，葬明元皇后。
现代文：庚申，安葬明元皇后。
English: Emperor Go-shin and Empress Mingyuan are buried together.

古文：初，刘禅使巴东太守襄阳罗宪将兵二千人守永安，闻成都败，吏民惊扰，宪斩称成都乱者一人，百姓乃定。
现代文：当初，刘禅让巴东太守、襄阳人罗宪领兵二千人驻守永安，罗宪听到成都兵败，吏民一片惊恐，便杀了一个述说成都变乱的人，百姓们才安定下来。
English: At first, Liu Zen had the Padong governor and the Yangyang man Luo Jian, the leader of 2,000 soldiers, stationed in Yong'an. Luo Jian heard about the military defeat in Chengdu, and the officials and people were terrified. He killed a person who described the chaos in Chengdu, so that the people could settle down.

古文：及得禅手敕，乃帅所统临于都亭三日。
现代文：等到得到刘禅的手令，罗宪就率领他手下的兵士到永安的都亭哭吊了三天。
English: After receiving Liu Zhen's order, Luo Xian led his soldiers to Du Ting in Yongan and wept for three days.

古文：吴闻蜀败，起兵西上，外托救援，内欲袭宪。
现代文：吴国听说蜀国失败，就起兵西上，表面上扬言来救援，实际上是想袭击罗宪。
English: When the State of Wu heard that the State of Shu had failed, it raised an army and marched westward, ostensibly threatening to come to the rescue, but actually intending to attack Luo Xian.

古文：宪曰： 本朝倾覆，吴为脣齿，不恤我难而背盟徼利，不义甚矣。
现代文：罗宪说： 我国已经覆亡，吴国是我们的唇齿领邦，却不怜悯我们的危难而背弃盟约谋取利益，实在是太不讲信义。
English: Luo Xian said, "Our country has been overthrown and destroyed. Wu is our closest ally, but it is very disloyal of him not to have compassion on our plight, but to renege on the treaty to seek profits.

古文：且汉已亡，吴何得久？我宁能为吴降虏乎！ 
现代文：而且汉已灭亡，吴国怎能长久，我岂能成为吴国的降将俘虏！ 
English: Moreover, Han has perished, how can the State of Wu last, how can I become a captive of the State of Wu!

古文：保城缮甲，告誓将士，厉以节义，莫不愤激。
现代文：于是坚守城池整治装备，告诫全军将士，用节义激励他们，全军上下莫不激愤。
English: As a result, he insisted on keeping the castle and equipment in good repair, admonished the soldiers of the whole army, and encouraged them with religious rites. The whole army was outraged.

古文：吴人闻钟、邓败，百城无主，有兼蜀之志，而巴东固守，兵不得过，乃使抚军步协率众而西。
现代文：吴人听说钟会、邓艾失败，百城无主，于是有兼并蜀国之心，但巴东防守坚固，兵士不能通过，于是让抚军步协率兵向西挺进。
English: The Wu people heard that Zhonghui and Deng Ai had failed and that the hundred cities had no master, so they annexed the heart of Shu, but the defense of Badong was strong and the soldiers could not pass, so they allowed the Foot Guards to advance westward.

古文：宪力弱不能御，遣参军杨宗突围北出，告急于安东将军陈骞，又送文武印绶、任子诣晋公。
现代文：罗宪实力薄弱不能抵抗，就派参军杨宗突围奔向北方，向安东将军陈骞告急，又给晋公送去文武官员的印绶和人质。
English: Luo Xian was too weak to resist, so he sent Yang Zong, who had joined the army, to break out of the encirclement and run to the north. He sent an urgent message to the Anton general Chen Qi, and also sent the seal of the civil and military officials and hostages to Jin Gong.

古文：协攻永安，宪与战，大破之。
现代文：步协攻打永安，罗宪与他交战，大败步协。
English: The CPPCC attacked Yongan, Luo Xian fought with him, and the CPPCC was defeated.

古文：吴主怒，复遣镇军陆抗等帅众三万人增宪之围。
现代文：吴王大怒，又派遣镇军陆抗等人率三万兵士增缓对罗宪的包围。
English: Wu Wang was furious, and dispatched the town army, the land resistance, and others to increase the encirclement of Luo Xian with 30,000 soldiers.

古文：三月，丁丑，以司空王祥为太尉，征北将军何曾为司徒，左仆射荀顗为司空。
现代文：三月，丁丑，任命司空王祥为太尉，征北将军何曾为司徒，左仆射荀为司空。
English: In March, Dingwuxi, appointed Sifu Wang Xiang as the first lieutenant, Northern Expeditionary General He Zeng as Sifu, and Left Servant Shao Zeng as Sifu.

古文：己卯，进晋公爵为王，增封十郡。
现代文：己卯，进封晋公的爵位为王，增加封邑十个郡。
English: In addition, the title of Prince of Jinfu was made king, and ten counties were added to the fief.

古文：王祥、何曾、荀顗共诣晋王，顗谓祥曰： 相王尊重，何侯与一朝之臣皆已尽敬，今日便当相率而拜，无所疑也。 
现代文：王祥、何曾、荀共同去见晋王，荀对王祥说： 相王地位尊贵，何曾及满朝的文武大臣都对他极为恭敬，今日我们就应当相继跪拜，不要迟疑。 
English: Wang Xiang, He Zeng and Zou jointly went to see the King of Jin. Zou said to Wang Xiang: He Wang's status is honorable. He Zeng and the ministers of literature and armed forces of the Manchu Dynasty are extremely respectful to him. Today, we should kneel one after another, do not hesitate.

古文：祥曰： 相国虽尊，要是魏之宰相，吾等魏之三公，王、公相去一阶而已，安有天子三公可辄拜人者！
现代文：王祥说： 相国虽然地位尊重，但他还是魏国的宰相，而我们是魏国的三公；王、公相差只一级而已，哪有天子的三公可以随便拜人的？
English: Wang Xiang said: Although the status of the partner country is respected, he is still the prime minister of Wei, and we are the three princes of Wei; the difference between the king and the prince is only one level. Which three princes of the son of heaven can worship people casually?

古文：损魏朝之望，亏晋王之德，君子爱人以礼，我不为也。 
现代文：这不仅有损魏朝的威望，也有亏晋王之德，君子要以礼仪敬爱别人，我不能跪拜。 
English: This is not only detrimental to the prestige of the Wei Dynasty, but also detrimental to the morality of the Jin Dynasty. A gentleman should respect others with etiquette. I cannot kneel.

古文：及入，顗遂拜，而祥独长揖。
现代文：进去后，荀就跪拜于地，只有王祥长揖不拜。
English: After entering, Zou knelt down and bowed, while Wang Xiang was the only one to bow.

古文：王谓祥曰： 今日然后知君见顾之重也！ 
现代文：晋王对王祥说： 今日之后才知你对我的关心之情是多么深厚。 
English: Jin Wang said to Wang Xiang: After today, I know how deeply you care about me.

古文：刘禅举家东迁洛阳，时扰攘仓卒，禅之大臣无从行者，惟秘书令郤正及殿中督汝南张通舍妻子单身随禅，禅赖正相导宜适，举动无阙，乃慨然叹息，恨知正之晚。
现代文：刘禅的全家迁居洛阳，临行时十分纷乱仓猝，刘禅的大臣没有随行的人，只有秘书令正和殿中督汝南人张通舍弃妻儿老小单身随刘禅而行，刘禅仰仗正的导引帮助，才使自己的言谈举止合乎礼仪而无所缺误，于是他慨然长叹，恨自己了解正之晚。
English: Liu Zhen's whole family moved to Luoyang, and when they were about to leave, they were in a very chaotic rush. Liu Zhen's ministers did not have anyone to accompany them. Only the secretary, Ling Zheng, and the vice-governor of the palace, Runan Zhang Tong, abandoned his wife and children to follow Liu Zhen. Liu Zheng relied on Ling Zheng's guidance to help him keep his speech and behavior in line with etiquette and without any mistakes. So he sighed with regret, hating himself for being too late to understand Ling Zheng.

古文：初，汉建棕太守霍弋都督南中，闻魏兵至，欲赴成都，刘禅以备敌既定，不听。
现代文：当初，蜀汉建宁太守霍弋都督南中，听说魏兵来攻，就想赴成都协助防御，刘禅认为抵抗敌人的准备已经完成就没让他来。
English: At the beginning, Shu Han Jianning, the governor of the Southern Middle School, heard that the Wei soldiers were attacking and wanted to go to Chengdu to assist in the defense. Liu Zen did not let him come because he thought that the preparation for resisting the enemy had already been completed.

古文：成都不守，弋素服大临三日。
现代文：成都失守后，霍弋穿着白色衣服哭吊三日。
English: After the loss of Chengdu, Hou Rong wore white clothes and cried for three days.

古文：诸将咸劝弋宜速降，弋曰： 今道路隔塞，未详主之安危，去就大故，不可苟也。
现代文：诸将都劝霍弋应快点投降，霍弋说： 如今道路隔绝阻塞，不知道主上的安危，降魏是件大事，不可随随便便。
English: The generals all advised Ho Th to hurry up and surrender. Ho Th said, "Nowadays, the roads are blocked, and we don't know if our lord is safe. The fall of Wei is a big deal, and we can't just do whatever we want."

古文：若魏以礼遇主上，则保境而降不晚也。
现代文：如果魏国以礼对待主上，那我们再全境而降也不晚。
English: If the State of Wei treats the Lord with courtesy, then it is not too late for us to surrender the entire territory.

古文：若万一危辱，吾将以死拒之，何论迟速邪！ 
现代文：如果万一主上遭受危难侮辱，我将要以死抵抗，还论什么快慢！ 
English: If, by any chance, the Lord were to suffer the indignity of a calamity, I would resist to the death, no matter how quickly!

古文：得禅东迁之问，始率六郡将守上表曰： 臣闻人生在三，事之如一，惟难所在，则致其命。
现代文：得到刘禅东迁洛阳的消息后，才开始率六郡的将军郡守上表说： 我听说人生在世所赖者有三，即父、母、君上，要用同样的心意来事奉，发生危难，都要舍命相随。
English: It was only after receiving the news that Liu Zendong had moved to Luoyang that he began to lead the general of the six counties, Gu Shou Shangbai, to say: I heard that there are three people on whom one's life depends in this world, namely, father, mother, and the sovereign. They should serve with the same spirit, and in the event of a crisis, they should follow each other with all their hearts.

古文：今臣国败主附，守死无所，是以委质，不敢有贰。 
现代文：如今我们国家败亡，主上降附，想要坚持至死而不变也没有了处所，因此决定归顺，不敢有贰心。 
English: Now that our country has been defeated and we have surrendered to the Lord, there is no place for us to remain unchanged until we die. Therefore, we have decided to surrender and dare not have a bad heart.

古文：晋王善之，拜南中都尉，委以本任。
现代文：晋王很称赞他，授予他南中都督之职，仍在原来的地方任职。
English: The king of Jin praised him very much and gave him the post of the governor of Nanzhong, and he is still serving in the same place.

古文：丁亥，封刘禅为安乐公，子孙及群臣封侯者五十馀人。
现代文：丁亥，封刘禅为安乐公，刘禅的子孙及群臣封侯者五十余人。
English: Dinghai, Liu Zen was named the Prince of Peace and Happiness, and Liu Zen's descendants and retainers numbered more than fifty.

古文：晋王与禅宴，为之作故蜀伎，旁人皆为之感怆，而禅喜笑自若。
现代文：晋王与刘禅一起宴饮，为他表演蜀国的歌舞，旁人都为之伤感不已，而刘禅却高高兴兴同平时一样。
English: Jin Wang and Liu Zhen feasted together and performed the songs and dances of Shu for him. The others were saddened by this, but Liu Zhen was as happy as usual.

古文：王谓贾充曰： 人之无情，乃至于是！虽使诸葛亮在，不能辅之久全，况姜维邪！ 
现代文：晋王对贾充说： 人之无情，竟然到这种程度；即使诸葛亮还在，也不能辅佐他长久平安，何况姜维呢！ 
English: Jin Wang said to Jia Chong: People's mercilessness has reached such a level; even if Zhuge Liang is still alive, he can't be supported for a long time, let alone Jiang Wei!

古文：他日，王问禅曰： 颇思蜀否？ 
现代文：过了几天，晋王问刘禅说： 你还思念蜀国吗？ 
English: A few days later, Jin Wang asked Liu Zhen: Do you still miss Shu?

古文：禅曰： 此间乐，不思蜀也。 
现代文：刘禅说： 在这里很快乐，不思念蜀国。 
English: Liu Zhen said: I am very happy here, and I don't miss Shu.

古文：郤正闻之，谓禅曰： 若正后问，宜泣而答： 先人坟墓，远在岷、蜀，乃心西悲，无日不思。 
现代文：正听到后，就对刘禅说： 如果晋王以后再问，你应当哭着回答说： 祖先的坟墓，都远在岷、蜀，我心常常西望而悲，没一天不思念。 
English: After hearing this, he said to Liu Zhen: If Jin Wang asks you again later, you should answer with tears: The graves of our ancestors are far away in Shu and Shou. My heart often looks to the west in sorrow, and not a day goes by that I don't think about them.

古文：因闭其目。 
现代文：然后闭上眼睛。 
English: Then close your eyes.

古文：会王复问，祥对如前，王曰： 何乃似郤正语邪！ 
现代文：后来晋王又问他，刘禅就象正说的那样回答，晋王说： 你说得怎么像正的话。 
English: Later, Jin Wang asked him again, and Liu Zen answered as he had just said. Jin Wang said, "How can you say it like it is?"

古文：禅惊视曰： 诚如尊命。 
现代文：刘禅惊讶地睁开眼说： 确实像您所说的那样。 
English: Liu Zen opened his eyes in surprise and said, "It really is as you said.

古文：左右皆笑。
现代文：左右之人都哈哈大笑。
English: People on both sides burst out laughing.

古文：夏，四月，新附督王稚浮海入吴句章，略其长吏及男女二百馀口而还。
现代文：夏季，四月，新附督王稚从海路进入吴国的句章，抢掠了那里的官吏及男女百姓二百余人而还。
English: In the summer, in April, the new vice-governor Wang Wuchang entered the state of Wu by sea, plundered the officials and more than 200 men and women there, and returned.

古文：五月，庚申，晋王奏复五等爵，封骑督以上六百馀人。
现代文：五月，庚申，晋王上奏恢复五等爵位，封了骑督以上六百余人的爵位。
English: In May, Goshun, Jin Wang Shangso restored the fifth-class knighthood and sealed the knighthoods of more than six hundred people above the cavalry commander.

古文：甲戌，改元。
现代文：甲戌，改年号为咸熙。
English: Armor, changed his era name to Ham Hee.

古文：癸未，追命舞阳主理侯懿为晋宣王，忠武侯师为景王。
现代文：癸未，追封舞阳文宣侯司马懿为晋宣王，忠武侯司马师为景王。
English: At that time, Muyangwen Xuan Hou Sima Yu was appointed as the king of Jin Xuan, and Zhongwu Hou Sima Shi was appointed as the king of Jing.

古文：罗宪被攻凡六月，救援不到，城中疾病太半。
现代文：罗宪被攻近六个月，救援仍然未到，城中之人病了大半。
English: Luo Xian has been under attack for nearly six months, and help has yet to arrive. Most people in the city are ill.

古文：或说宪弃城走，宪曰： 吾为城主，百姓所仰。危不能安，急而弃之，君子不为也，毕命于此矣！ 
现代文：有人劝罗宪弃城而走，罗宪说： 我是此城之主，为百姓们所仰仗，他们有了危难而不能让他们安定，情况紧急就丢下他们逃跑，这不是君子所为，我要战死在这里！ 
English: Some people urged Luo Xian to abandon the city. Luo Xian said, "I am the lord of this city, whom the people rely on. When they are in danger, I cannot keep them stable. When the situation is urgent, I abandon them and flee. This is not the act of a gentleman. I will die fighting here!"

古文：陈骞言于晋王，遣荆州刺史胡烈将步骑二万攻西陵以救宪。秋，七月，吴师退。
现代文：陈骞把这些告诉了晋王，于是派遣荆州刺史胡烈率步骑兵二万人攻打西陵以救援罗宪，秋季，七月，吴国军队撤退。
English: Chen Xi told this to the King of Jin, so he sent Jing Zhou Zhishi Hu Lie and his 20,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Xiling in order to rescue Luo Xian. In the autumn, in July, the Wu army retreated.

古文：晋王使宪因仍旧任，加陵江将军，封万年亭侯。
现代文：晋王让罗宪仍旧在原地任职，又加陵江将军之职，封为万年亭侯。
English: The Jin king let Luo Xian still serve in the same place, and also added the post of General of the Lingjiang River, and appointed him as the Prince of Ten Thousand Years.

古文：晋王奏使司空荀顗定礼仪，中护军贾充正法律，尚书仆射裴秀议官制，太保郑冲总而裁焉。
现代文：晋王上奏让司空荀制定礼仪，中护军贾充订正法律，尚书付射裴秀议论官制，太保郑冲总揽其事加以裁定。
English: The Jin king ascended to the throne and asked Jia Kun to formulate the etiquette, Jia Chong, the middle guard, to revise the law, Shang Shou and Pei Xiu to discuss the official system, and Taibao Zheng Chong to make a decision on the matter.

古文：吴分交州置广州。
现代文：吴国从交州中分出一部分设置广州。
English: Wu separated a part of Jiaozhou to set up Guangzhou.

古文：吴主寝疾，口不能言，乃手书呼丞相濮阳兴入，令子л出拜之。
现代文：吴王孙休卧病不起，口不能言，就用手书叫丞相濮阳兴入内，又让其子孙出来拜见濮阳兴。
English: When Wu Wangsun fell ill and was unable to speak, he used his handwriting to ask the chancellor, Fenyang Xing, to come to the palace, and also asked his children and grandchildren to come out to see Fenyang Xing.

古文：休把兴臂，把л以托之。
现代文：孙休拉着濮阳兴的手臂，手指着孙托付给他。
English: Sun Xiu took Puyang Xing's arm and entrusted him with his finger.

古文：癸未，吴主殂，谥曰景帝。
现代文：癸未，吴王孙休去世，谥为景帝。
English: Soon after, King Sun Xiu of Wu died and was succeeded by Emperor Jing.

古文：群臣尊硃皇后为皇太后。
现代文：群臣尊朱皇后为皇太后。
English: The courtiers respected Empress Zhu as the empress dowager.

古文：吴人以蜀初亡，交趾携叛，国内恐惧，欲得长君。
现代文：吴人因蜀国刚刚灭亡，交趾的吕兴又反叛，国内十分恐惧，想要有一位年长的君主统治。
English: The people of Wu were very afraid because the State of Shu had just perished and their ally, Luxing, had rebelled. They wanted an older monarch to rule.

古文：左典军万尝为乌程令，与乌程侯皓相善，称 皓才识明断，长沙桓王之俦也；又加之好学，奉遵法度。 
现代文：左典军万曾担任乌程令，与乌程侯孙相友善，就声称： 孙的才识和明断能力，可以和长沙桓王孙策相比拟；同时他又十分好学，遵奉法度。 
English: Zuo Dianjun Wan, who once served as the governor of Wucheng and was friendly with Wucheng Hou Sun, claimed that: Sun's talent and ability to make decisions can be compared to that of Changsha King Sun Ce; at the same time, he is very eager to learn and abide by the law.

古文：屡言之于丞相兴、左将军布，兴、布说硃太后，欲以皓为嗣。
现代文：他屡次对丞相濮阳兴和左将军张布说这些话，濮阳兴和张布又劝说朱太后，想要立孙为君。
English: He repeatedly said these words to the chancellor Shenyang Xing and the left general Zhang Bu. Shenyang Xing and Zhang Bu also persuaded Empress Dowager Zhu that they wanted to have a grandchild.

古文：硃后曰： 我寡妇人，安知社稷之虑，苟吴国无陨，宗庙有赖，可矣。 
现代文：朱后说： 我是个寡妇，怎能考虑国家的大事，只要吴国不遭陨灭，宗庙有所依赖，就可以了。 
English: Zhu Hou said: I am a widow, how can I think about the important affairs of the country, as long as the State of Wu is not destroyed and the ancestral temple is dependent, it is fine.

古文：于是遂迎立皓，改元元兴，大赦。
现代文：于是就迎立孙，改年号为元兴，实行大赦。
English: So he welcomed his grandson, changed his name to Genxing, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：八月，庚寅，命中抚军司马炎副贰相国事。
现代文：八月，庚寅，任命中扶军司马炎辅佐相国事宜。
English: In August, Goyang appointed Ma Yanfu, the secretary of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, to assist him in the affairs of the country.

古文：初，钟会之伐汉也，辛宪英谓其夫之从子羊祜曰： 会在事纵恣，非持久处下之道，吾畏其有他志也。 
现代文：当初，钟会伐汉之时，辛宪英对他丈夫的侄子羊祜说： 钟会做事恣意放纵，这不是长久地处于臣下地位的做法，我恐怕他有其他的想法。 
English: At the beginning, when the bell society was hunting down Han, Xin Xianying said to his husband's nephew, Yang Xuan: The bell society does things arbitrarily and indulgently. This is not a practice of being a subject for a long time. I'm afraid he has other ideas.

古文：会请其子郎中琇为参军，宪英忧曰： 他日吾为国忧，今日难至吾家矣。 
现代文：钟会请求让她儿子郎中羊为参军，辛宪英忧虑地说： 以前我为国家担忧，今日大难降临我家了。 
English: At the request of the bell association for her son, Langzhongyang, to join the army, Xin Xianying said anxiously: In the past, I was worried about the country. Today, a great calamity has befallen my family.

古文：琇固请于晋王，王不听。
现代文：羊坚决向晋王请求不担任参军，但晋王不答应。
English: Yang resolutely asked Jin Wang not to join the army, but Jin Wang did not agree.

古文：宪英谓琇曰： 行矣，戒之，军旅之间，可以济者，其惟仁恕乎！ 
现代文：辛宪英对羊说： 你去吧，但要警惕小心，在军队之中可以行得通的，只有仁恕二字。 
English: Xin Xianying said to the sheep, "Go ahead, but be careful. In the army, the only acceptable word is "forgiveness."

古文：琇竟以全归。
现代文：结果羊竟然安全地返回。
English: As it turned out, the sheep returned safely.

古文：癸巳，诏以琇尝谏会反，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：癸巳，诏命因羊曾劝谏钟会不要反叛，而赐爵关内侯。
English: Later, the imperial edict conferred a peerage on the Lord of Kansai because he had persuaded the bell ringers not to rebel.

古文：九月，戊午，以司马炎为抚军大将军。
现代文：九月，戊午，任命司马炎为抚军大将军。
English: In September, at noon, Sima Yan was appointed as the general of the Fuzhou army.

古文：辛未，诏以吕兴为安南将军，都督交州诸军事，以南中监军霍弋遥领交州刺史，得以便宜选用长吏。
现代文：辛未，诏令任命吕兴为安南将军，都督交州诸军事，任命南中监军霍弋兼任交州刺史，可以按照便利条件选用官吏。
English: Xinwei, the imperial edict appointed Lv Xing as Annan general, the military governor of Jiaozhou, and appointed the Southern Middle Supervision Army of Huo Jia as Jiaozhou scribe, and officials could be selected according to convenient conditions.

古文：弋表遣建宁爨谷为交趾太守，率牙门董元、毛炅、孟幹、孟通、爨能、李松、王素等将兵助兴。未至，兴为其功曹李统所杀。
现代文：霍弋上表推荐建宁人爨谷为交趾太守，派他率领牙门将董元、毛炅、孟干、孟通、爨能、李松、王素等人领兵去帮助吕兴，还未到达，吕兴就被他的功曹李统所杀。
English: On the table above, Huo Gan recommended the Jianning man Shibuya as the imperial governor of Jiaozuo, and sent him to lead the archers Dong Yuan, Mao Jun, Meng Gan, Meng Tong, Xun Neng, Li Song, Wang Su and others to lead the troops to help Lv Xing. Before they arrived, Lv Xing was killed by his gong cao Li Tong.

古文：吴主贬硃太后为景皇后，追谥父和曰文皇帝，尊母何氏为太后。
现代文：吴王贬朱太后为景皇后，追谥父亲孙和为文皇帝，又尊母亲何氏为皇太后。
English: King Wu dethroned Empress Dowager Zhu as Empress Jing, pursued her father, Sun He, as Emperor Wen, and revered her mother, He, as Empress Dowager.

古文：冬，十月，丁亥，诏以寿春所获吴相国参军事徐绍为散骑常侍，水曹掾孙彧为给事黄门侍郎，以使于吴，其家人在此者悉听自随，不必使还，以开广大信。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁亥，诏令任命寿春之战所俘获的吴国相国参军事徐绍为散骑常侍，水曹掾孙为给事黄门侍郎，让他们出使吴国，他们的家人在魏国的，完全可听任他们相随而去，也不必让他们回来，以此来扩大魏国讲求信义的影响。
English: In the winter, October, Dinghai, the imperial edict appointed Xu Shao, the minister of the State Council of the State of Wu and the military general captured in the Battle of Shuchun, as the strolling attendant, and Su Cao Xinsun as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, so that they could be sent to the State of Wu, and their families in the State of Wei could be completely allowed to follow them, and they did not have to let them come back, so as to expand the influence of the State of Wei to seek truth.

古文：晋王因政书吴主，谕以祸福。
现代文：晋王还因此给吴王写信，晓谕祸福的道理。
English: Therefore, Jin Wang also wrote a letter to Wu Wang, explaining the principles of good and evil.

古文：初，晋王娶王肃之女，生炎及攸，以攸继景王后。
现代文：当初，晋王娶王肃的女儿为妻，生了司马炎和司马攸，把司马攸过继给景王司马师为后。
English: At the beginning, Jin Wang married Wang Su's daughter and had Sima Yan and Sima You, and passed Sima You on to King Jing Wang Sima Shi.

古文：攸性孝友，多材艺，清和平允，名闻过于炎。晋王爱之，常曰： 天下者，景王之天下也，吾摄居相位，百年之后，大业宜归攸。 
现代文：司马攸对父母孝顺，对兄弟友爱，多才多艺，清静平和，为人公正，名望超过司马炎，晋王很喜爱他，常常说： 天下本是景王的天下，我不过是代理宰相之位，我死之后，大业应该归于司马攸。 
English: Sima You was dutiful to his parents, kind to his brothers, multi-talented, calm and peaceful, and fair. His reputation surpassed Sima Yan. Jin Wang loved him very much and often said, "The world is King Jing's world. I am only the acting prime minister. After my death, the great cause should belong to Sima You."

古文：炎立发委地，手垂过膝，尝从容问裴秀曰： 人有相否？ 
现代文：司马炎垂直了长发可以拖到地面，双手下垂超过膝盖，他曾经从容地问裴秀说： 人能不能看相？ 
English: Sima Yan's long hair is perpendicular and can be dragged to the ground, and his hands hang down over his knees. He once calmly asked Pei Xiu: Can one see the face?

古文：因以异相示之。
现代文：于是就把自己奇异的相貌展示给裴秀。
English: So he showed his strange appearance to Pei Xiu.

古文：秀由是归心。
现代文：裴秀从此就归顺了他。
English: Pei Xiu submitted to him from then on.

古文：羊琇与炎善，为炎画策，察时政所宜损益，皆令炎豫记之，以备晋王访问。
现代文：羊与司马炎相友善，就为司马炎出谋划策，观察时政所应减损和补益之处，让司马炎都预先记住，以备晋王询问时回答。
English: Sheep is friendly with Sima Yan, so he made a suggestion for Sima Yan, observed the derogation and benefit of the current government, and let Sima Yan remember in advance to prepare for the king's inquiry.

古文：晋王欲以攸为世子，山涛曰： 废长立少，违礼不祥。 
现代文：晋王想立司马攸为世子，山涛说： 废弃长子而立幼子，违背礼义不吉祥。 
English: Jin Wang wanted to make Sima You as his heir, Shantao said, "It is not auspicious to abandon the eldest son and raise a younger son. It is against etiquette."

古文：贾充曰： 中抚军有君人之德，不可易也。 
现代文：贾充说： 中抚军有君主的德行，不可让别人代替。 
English: Jia Chong said: The Central Military Commission has the virtues of a monarch, and cannot be replaced by others.

古文：何曾、裴秀曰： 中抚军聪明神武，有超世之才，人望既茂，天表如此，固非人臣之相也。 
现代文：何曾、裴秀也说： 中抚军聪慧过人，神明而威武，有超越世人的奇才，已经享有极高的声望，帝王的仪容就是如此，这本不是人臣的相貌。 
English: He Zeng, Pei Xiu also said: The Central Military Commission is extremely intelligent, divine and powerful, with extraordinary talent, and has already enjoyed a very high reputation. The emperor's appearance is like this. This is not the appearance of a vassal.

古文：晋王由是意定，丙午，立炎为世子。
现代文：晋王因此拿定了主意，丙午，立司马炎为世子。
English: As a result, Jin Wang made up his mind to make Sima Yan his heir.

古文：吴主封太子及其三弟皆为王，立妃滕氏为皇后。
现代文：吴王封太子孙和他的三个弟弟为王，立妃子滕氏为皇后。
English: The descendants of Wu Wang Feng, the crown prince, and his three younger brothers became the king, and his daughter-in-law Teng became the empress.

古文：初，吴主之立，发优诏，恤士民，开仓廪，振贫乏，科出宫女以配无妻者，禽兽养于苑中者皆放之。
现代文：当初，吴王即位时，发优抚诏书，体恤士民百姓，打开仓库，赈济贫困之人，按条例放出宫女做那些无妻者的配偶，养在御苑中的禽兽也都放归山林。
English: At the beginning, when King Wu ascended the throne, he issued an imperial edict, sympathized with the people, opened a warehouse, helped the poor, released the concubines to be the spouses of those without wives according to the regulations, and the animals raised in the imperial garden were also released into the mountains and forests.

古文：当时翕然称为明主。
现代文：当时人们交口赞誉称之为明主。
English: At that time, people called it a clear winner.

古文：及既得志，粗暴矣盈，多忌讳，好酒色，大小失望，濮阳兴、张布窃悔之。
现代文：而他得志之后，开始变得粗暴骄横，既有很多忌讳，又沉湎于酒色，全国上下大失所望，濮阳兴、张布也暗自后悔不迭。
English: But after he achieved his goal, he began to become rude and arrogant. He had a lot of taboos and indulged in alcohol. The whole country was greatly disappointed, and Shenyang Xing and Zhang Bu also secretly regretted it.

古文：或谮诸吴主，十一月，朔，兴、布入朝，吴主执之，徙于广州，道杀之，夷三族。
现代文：有人向吴王诬陷濮阳兴和张布，十一月朔，濮阳兴和张布入朝，吴王把他们抓起来，迁徙到广州，结果在半路上就把他们杀了，又诛灭了他们的三族。
English: Some people falsely accused Puyang Xing and Zhang Bu to the king of Wu. In November, Puyang Xing and Zhang Bu entered the imperial court. The king of Wu arrested them and moved them to Guangzhou. As a result, he killed them in the middle of the road and destroyed their three tribes.

古文：以后父滕牧为卫将军，录尚书事。
现代文：任命皇后的父亲滕牧为卫将军、录尚书事。
English: The appointment of the Empress's father, Teng Mu, as Wei general is recorded in the records.

古文：牧，胤之族人也。
现代文：滕物是滕胤家族的人。
English: Tengmeng is a member of the Tengyin family.

古文：是岁，罢屯田官。
现代文：这一年，废置了屯田官。
English: In the same year, Tondenkan was abolished.

