古文：武士彟字信，世殖赀，喜交结。
现代文：武士彟，字信，世代经商，喜欢结交朋友。
English: Samurai, letters, generations of business, like to make friends.

古文：高祖尝领屯汾、晋，休其家，因被顾接。
现代文：高祖李渊在隋朝时领兵屯守汾、晋，曾在他家休息，就此成为朋友。
English: Li Yuan, the great ancestor of the Sui Dynasty, led troops in the defense of Sui and Jin dynasties. He used to rest at his home and became a friend.

古文：后留守太原，引为行军司铠参军。
现代文：后来李渊留守太原，就任武士彟为行军司铠参军。
English: Later, Li Yuan stayed in Taiyuan and joined the army as a samurai.

古文：募兵既集，以刘弘基、长孙顺德统之。
现代文：招募的兵集中后，交给刘弘基、长孙顺德统领。
English: After the recruited soldiers were concentrated, they were handed over to Liu Hongji and the eldest son Shunde.

古文：王威、高君雅私谓士訄曰： 弘基等皆背征三卫，罪当死，奈何授之兵？
现代文：王威、高君雅私下对武士彟说 ：弘基等人都违背诏令不随皇上征辽，该当死罪，怎把兵权交给他们？
English: Wang Wei and Gao Junya privately said to the samurai Yu Yu: Hongji and others have violated the imperial edict not to follow the emperor to recruit Liao, which should be a capital offense, how can military power be handed over to them?

古文：吾且劾系之。 
现代文：我们应揭发并送他有司治罪。 
English: We should expose him and bring him to justice.

古文：士卬皞曰： 此皆唐公客，若尔，必大有嫌。 
现代文：武士彟说 ：两人都是唐公的门下客，若把他们治罪，岂不叫唐公对我们生嫌？ 
English: The samurai said, "Both of them are guests of Tang Gong. If we punish them, won't they make Tang Gong dislike us?"

古文：故威等疑不发。
现代文：王威等人才心有疑不敢告发。
English: Wang Wei and other talented people are suspicious and dare not report.

古文：会司兵参军田德平欲劝威劾募人状，士訄胁谓曰： 讨捕兵悉隶唐公，威、君雅无与，徒寄坐耳，何能为？ 
现代文：那时，司兵参军田德平想劝王威检举募兵的事，武士彟威胁说： 讨捕兵全都隶属唐公。王威、高君雅没有兵权，只不过寄身于留守之位罢了，能有什么作为？ 
English: At that time, the officer Tian Deping wanted to persuade Wang Wei to investigate the matter of recruiting soldiers, and the samurai Zou threatened: "The recruitment of soldiers is all subordinated to Tang Gong. Wang Wei and Gao Junya have no military power, but just stay in the position of staying behind. What can they do?

古文：德平亦止。
现代文：田德平也就不再提此事。
English: Tian Deping also no longer mentioned the matter.

古文：兵起，士卬皞不与谋也。
现代文：李渊兵起，武士彟没有参与商议。
English: After Li Yuan's departure, the samurai clan did not participate in the discussion.

古文：以大将军府铠曹参军从平京师，为光禄大夫、义原郡公。
现代文：后来以大将军府铠曹参军随从平定京师，受官光禄大夫、义原郡公。
English: Later, he joined the army with the rank of major general and served as a subordinate of Hepingding Beijing Division, and was promoted to the posts of Guanglu Doctor and Yihara County Commissioner.

古文：自言尝梦帝骑而上天，帝笑曰： 尔故王威党也，以能罢系刘弘基等，其意可录，且尝礼我，故酬汝以官。今胡迂妄媚我邪？ 
现代文：自称曾梦见皇帝骑着龙上天，皇帝笑着对他说 ：你原是王威一党的人，因为能阻止治刘弘基等人的罪，心意可嘉，而且曾礼待我，所以封你官作为答谢，现在为什么来讨好巴结我呀？ 
English: He claimed to have dreamed of the emperor riding a dragon into the sky. The emperor smiled and said to him, "You used to be a member of Wang Wei's party. Since you were able to prevent the crimes of Liu Hongji and others, your intentions are commendable. Moreover, you treated me with courtesy, so I appointed you as an official in return. Now, why are you trying to curry favor with me?

古文：累迁工部尚书，进封应国公，历利、荆二州都督。
现代文：后来升官至工部尚书，进封应国公，曾任利州、荆州都督。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, and was assigned to Yingguo. He served as the governor of Lizhou and Jingzhou.

古文：卒，赠礼部尚书，谥曰定。
现代文：死后追赠礼部尚书，加谥为 定 。
English: After his death, he will be posthumously presented with a copy of the Book of Etiquette.

古文：高宗永徽中，以士↓仲女为皇后，故崇赠并州都督、司徒、周国公。
现代文：高宗永徽年间，以武士彟的二女儿为皇后，所以又追赠并州都督、司徒、周国公。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Yonghui, the second daughter of the samurai Yao became the empress, so he also posthumously gave her the title of provincial governor, the title of Sidu, and the title of Zhou Guogong.

古文：咸亨中，加赠太尉兼太子太师、太原郡王，配享高祖庙廷，列功臣上。
现代文：咸亨年间，再次加赠为太尉兼太子太师、太原郡王，附祭于高祖的庙廷，位列功臣之上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianheng, he was once again awarded the title of Taijun and Prince Daishi, the King of Taiyuan County, and was enshrined in the temple court of Gao Zu, ranking above meritorious vassals.

古文：后监朝，尊为忠孝太皇，建崇先府，置官属，追王五世。
现代文：武后监朝，又被尊为忠孝太皇，建崇先府，置官属，追赠为五世王。
English: He supervised the reign of Empress Wu, and was also revered as a loyal and filial great emperor, built a noble ancestral palace, appointed officials, and posthumously became the fifth king.

古文：后革命，更于东都立武氏七庙，追册为帝，诸妣皆随帝号曰皇后。
现代文：武后革命，在东都立武氏七庙，追册封为皇帝，他们的妻子们也随皇帝而称为皇后。
English: After the Wu revolution, seven temples of the Wu clan were established in the eastern capital, and they were posthumously crowned as emperors. Their wives were also called empresses after the emperor.

古文：先天中，有诏削士卬皞伪号，仍为太原王，庙遂废。
现代文：先天年间，玄宗有诏削去武士彟的伪帝号，恢复太原王名位，其庙也随之而废。
English: During the year before yesterday, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to remove the pseudo-emperor title of samurai and reinstate the throne of King Taiyuan, and his temple was also abolished.

古文：始，士訄娶相里氏，生子元庆、元爽。
现代文：当初，武士彟娶妻相里氏，生了两个儿子：武元庆、武元爽。
English: At first, samurai Shun married his wife, Sori, and had two sons: Takegen Ching and Takegen Shuang.

古文：又娶杨氏，生三女。
现代文：后来又娶杨氏，生了三个女儿。
English: Later, she married Mr. Yang and gave birth to three daughters.

古文：元女妻贺兰氏，早寡。
现代文：长女嫁给贺兰越石，很早就守寡了。
English: The eldest daughter married Horan Yueishi and became a widow very early.

古文：季女妻郭氏，不显。
现代文：小女儿嫁给郭素慎，是个小官。
English: The youngest daughter married Guo Sushen, a minor official.

古文：士卬皞卒后，诸子事杨不尽礼，衔之。
现代文：武士彟死后，两个儿子对于杨氏继母不尽人子之礼，杨氏心中怀恨。
English: After the death of the samurai, the two sons did not pay enough homage to Ms. Yang's stepmother, and Ms. Yang harbored hatred in her heart.

古文：后立，封杨代国夫人，进为荣国，后姊韩国夫人。
现代文：武后立为帝，封母亲杨氏为代国夫人，后来进封为荣国夫人，封姊姊为韩国夫人。
English: Emperor Wu was enthroned, Emperor Fong's mother, Empress Yang, became the acting Empress, Empress Rong was later enthroned, and Empress Fong's sister became the Empress of Korea.

古文：于时元庆已官宗正少卿，元爽少府少监，兄子惟良卫尉少卿。
现代文：那时，武元庆已任宗正少卿，武元爽任少府少监，还有堂兄弟武惟良任卫尉少卿。
English: At that time, Wu Yuanqing had already been appointed as Zong Zheng Shaoqing, Wu Yuan Shuang as Shao Fu Shao Guan, and his cousin Wu Weiliang as Wei Liang Shaoqing.

古文：杨讽后上疏出元庆等于外，以示退让。
现代文：杨氏劝武后上疏请将元庆等调为外官以表示谦让。
English: Mr. Yang advised the Empress Dowager Wu to ask the Shang for the transfer of Yuan Qing and others to the position of foreign minister to show her modesty.

古文：由是元庆斥龙州，元爽濠州，惟良始州。
现代文：因此，武元庆出京到龙州，武元爽到濠州，武惟良到始州。
English: Therefore, Wu Yuanqing went from Beijing to Longzhou, Wu Yuan Shuang went to Zhangzhou, and Wu Weiliang went to Shizhou.

古文：元庆死，元爽流振州。
现代文：武元庆忧愤而死，武元爽后因犯罪被流放到振州。
English: Wu Yuanqing died of grief and anger. Wu Yuanqing was later exiled to Zhenzhou for his crimes.

古文：乾封时，惟良及弟淄州刺史怀运与岳牧集泰山下，于是韩国有女在宫中，帝尤爱幸。
现代文：乾封年间武惟良及弟弟淄州刺史武怀运与各州刺史到泰山朝觐。那时，韩国夫人的女儿在宫中，皇帝非常喜爱她。
English: During the Qianfeng era, Wu Weiliang and his younger brother, Quzhou Zishi Wu Huaiyun, went to Mount Taishan for a pilgrimage with other provincial Zishi. At that time, the daughter of the Korean lady was in the palace, and the emperor was very fond of her.

古文：后欲并杀之，即导帝幸其母所，惟良等上食，后寘堇焉，贺兰食之，暴死。
现代文：武后想一并杀死她，于是引导皇帝到她母亲家里。惟良等送上食物，武后在食物中放了毒药，韩国夫人的女儿贺兰氏吃了，猝死。
English: Wu Wu wanted to kill her as well, so she led the emperor to her mother's house. Wei Liang and others brought food, Wu Wu put poison in the food, the Korean lady's daughter, Helan, ate it and died suddenly.

古文：后归罪惟良等，诛之，讽有司改姓 蝮氏 ，绝属籍。
现代文：武后说是惟良等人意图害主，皇帝立将他们处死。武后还指使有司改他们的姓为 蝮氏 ，逐出武氏籍。
English: Empress Wu said that Koreyoshi and others intended to harm the lord, and the emperor had them put to death. Empress Wu also ordered some officials to change their surnames to the Yi clan, expelling them from the Wu clan.

古文：元爽缘坐死，家属投岭外。
现代文：武元爽也受株连而死，其家属流放岭外。
English: Wuyuan Shuang was also killed by Zhu Lian, and his family members were exiled outside the ridge.

古文：后取贺兰敏之为士訄后，赐氏武，袭封，擢累左侍极、兰台太史令，与名儒李嗣真等参与刊撰。
现代文：武后将贺兰敏之继为武士彟之后人，赐姓武，承袭封号，提拔为左侍极、兰台太史令，与名儒李嗣真等人同在弘文馆。
English: Empress Wu made Heranmin the successor to the title of samurai, gave him the family name of Wu, inherited his seal number, promoted him to the left hand of the Emperor, and promoted him to the rank of Landai Taishi, together with the famous Confucian scholar Li Shizhen and others at the Hongwu Museum.

古文：敏之韶秀自喜，烝于荣国，挟所爱，佻横多过失；荣国卒，后出珍币建佛庐徼福，敏之乾匿自用；司卫少卿杨思俭女选为太子妃，告婚期矣，敏之闻其美，强私焉；杨丧未毕，褫衰粗，奏音乐；太平公主往来外家，宫人从者，敏之悉逼乱之。
现代文：敏之风采翩翩，颇为自恃，得到杨氏的溺爱。敏之倚仗外祖母之宠，轻佻放浪，颇多过失。荣国夫人死后，武后拿出许多珍宝钱币要敏之建佛堂为外祖母祈福，敏之侵吞了自己用；司卫少卿杨思俭的女儿被选为太子妃，婚期都已经定下了，敏之听说姑娘很美，强与之私通；荣国夫人的丧期未毕，敏之就脱掉孝服，奏乐作乐；太平公主到外婆家，连同跟随而去的宫人，敏之都逼迫与之通奸。
English: After the death of Lady Rongguo, Empress Wu took out many precious coins to ask Minzhi to build a Buddhist temple to pray for her grandmother's well-being, but Minzhi squandered them; the daughter of Swei Shaoqing Yang Sijian was chosen as the crown princess, and the wedding date had already been set, and Minzhi heard that the girl was very beautiful, so he had an affair with her; before the death of Lady Rongguo, Minzhi took off his filial piety and played music; Princess Taiping went to her grandmother's house, together with the palace people who followed her, and Minzhi went to the

古文：后叠数怒，至此暴其恶，流雷州，表复故姓，道中自经死。
现代文：武后累积了这些事，到出了与太子妃私通之事，就揭发了他的各种坏事，流放雷州，上表让他恢复原姓贺兰。敏之在流放途中自缢而死。
English: Empress Wu accumulated these things, and when it came to the adultery with the crown princess, she exposed his various bad deeds, exiled him to Leizhou, and ordered him to restore his original surname, Horan. During his exile, Minzhi hanged himself and died.

古文：乃还元爽之子承嗣奉士皞后，宗属悉原。
现代文：于是仍由武元爽的儿子武承嗣承祀武士彟，宗属均回来。
English: As a result, the son of Takemoto Sasaru, Takeshige, succeeded to the samurai title, and all the clan members returned.

古文：士訄兄士梭、士逸。
现代文：武士彟的哥哥一个叫武士眣，一个叫武士逸。
English: One of the brothers of the samurai is called samurai, and the other is called samurai 逸.

古文：士棱，字彦威，少柔愿，力于田。
现代文：士眣字彦威，忠厚老实，在家种田。
English: Yanwei, a loyal and honest samurai, was a farmer at home.

古文：官司农少卿，宣城县公，常主苑囿农稼事。
现代文：后来任司农少卿、宣城县公，曾经主管苑囿的栽培种植的事。
English: Later, he served as the Junior Secretary of Agriculture and the Governor of Xuancheng County. He was in charge of the cultivation and planting of garden lettuce.

古文：卒，赠潭州都督，陪葬献陵。
现代文：死后，追赠潭州都督，陪葬献陵。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of the governor of Tanzhou and accompanied the funeral and offered the mausoleum.

古文：士逸，字逖，有战功，为齐王府户曹参军，六安县公。
现代文：士逸字逖，有战功，任齐王府户曹参军、六安县公。
English: Shi Yizhe, with war achievements, was appointed as a member of the army of Qi Wangfudou Cao and the governor of Lu'an County.

古文：从王守太原，为刘武周所执，尝遣间人陈破贼计。
现代文：随从齐王守太原，被刘武周抓去，曾经派一个人来说破贼的计策。
English: A follower of Qi Wang Shou Taiyuan, who was arrested by Liu Wu Zhou, once sent a person to break the thief's strategy.

古文：筑大库百馀舍聚所得财，一昔火，不遗一钱。
现代文：贼乱平后，提拔为益州行台左丞，多次议论当世的得失，高祖很赞许，接受了他的一些建议。
English: After the Thieves' Revolt, he was promoted to Yizhou Xingtai Zu Rong, and repeatedly discussed the gains and losses of the current world. Gaozu was very approving and accepted some of his suggestions.

古文：以冬官尚书罢。
现代文：死时是韶州刺史。
English: At the time of his death, he was the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：神龙初，终岐州刺史，赠尚书右仆射。三思当太后时，累进夏官、春官尚书，监脩国史，爵为王。
现代文：武三思，是武元庆的儿子。在武则天当太后时，接连升官为夏官、春官尚书，监修国史，封爵为王。
English: Wu Sansi was the son of Wu Yuanqing. When Wu Zetian became empress dowager, he was successively promoted to summer official, spring official, supervisor of national history, and knighted as king.

古文：契丹陷营州，以榆关道安抚大使屯边。
现代文：契丹攻陷营州，武三思任榆关道安抚大使屯守边陲。
English: When Yingzhou fell to the Khitan, Wu Sanshi was appointed as the pacification ambassador of Yingguan Road, and he stayed in Bianchi.

古文：还，同凤阁鸾台三品，逾月去位。
现代文：回京师后，授官同凤阁鸾台三品，一个月后免官。
English: After returning to Beijing as a teacher, he was awarded the title of Tongfengge Xingtai Sanpin, and was dismissed a month later.

古文：又检校内史，罢为太子少保，迁宾客，仍监国史。
现代文：又检校内史，罢为太子少保，后改任太子宾客，仍监修国史。
English: He also supervised the school's internal history, serving as the prince's junior bodyguard, and was later appointed as the prince's guest, still supervising the national history.

古文：三思性倾谀，善迎谐主意，钩探隐微，故后颇信任，数幸其第，赏予尤渥。
现代文：武三思生性乖巧，会说好听的话，善于迎合主上的心意，所以武后颇为信任，多次到他的家里去，赏赐甚厚。
English: Wu San thought he was good-natured, could say nice things, and was good at catering to the Lord's will. Therefore, Empress Wu was quite trusting, and went to his home many times, and the reward was very rich.

古文：薛、二张方烝蛊，三思痛屈节，为怀义御马，倡言昌宗为王子晋后身，引公卿歌咏淫污，靦然媚人而不耻也。
现代文：当时薛怀义、张易之、张昌宗正迷惑武后受到特别宠幸，武三思能屈节侍奉他们，为薛怀义牵马，盛赞张昌宗，说他是仙人王子晋的后身，还引导公卿朝士歌咏淫污，面见然人面，实为禽兽，竟不以为耻。
English: At that time, Xue Huaiyi, Zhang Yizhi, and Zhang Changzong were particularly favored by Empress Wu, and Wu Sanxi was able to serve them, leading a horse for Xue Huaiyi, praising Zhang Changzong, saying that he was the descendant of the immortal prince Jin, and also guiding the noblemen to sing and defile themselves. Although they looked human, they were actually beasts, and they were not ashamed.

古文：后春秋高，厌居宫中，三思欲因此市权，诱胁群不肖，即建营三阳宫于嵩山、兴泰宫于万寿山，请太后岁临幸，己与二张扈侍驰骋，窃威福自私云。
现代文：武后年纪大了，不喜欢住在深宫。武三思想借机揽权，就诱骗胁迫一批小人在嵩山上营建三阳宫、在万寿山上营建兴泰宫，请太后每年临幸消遣，他自己则与张易之、张昌宗扈从驰骋，作威作福。
English: When Empress Wu was old, she did not like to live in the Deep Palace. Wusan thought of taking advantage of the opportunity to grab power, so he tricked and coerced a group of villains to build Sanyang Palace on Songshan Mountain and Xingtai Palace on Wanshou Mountain. He invited Empress Wu to spend time with him every year, while he and Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong were galloping to make a fortune.

古文：工役钜万万，百姓愁叹。
现代文：两处宫殿役使的工人及所费资财都达万万，百姓怨叹。
English: The workers and money spent on the two palaces have reached tens of thousands of yuan, and the people are complaining.

古文：崇训之尚主也，三思方辅政，中宗居东宫，欲宠耀其下，乃令具亲迎礼。
现代文：三思之子武崇训娶安乐公主为妻，武三思辅政，中宗居于东宫。为表示恩宠，便令崇训行亲迎礼。
English: Sansei's son, Wu Chongxun, married Princess Anle. Wu Sansei assisted the government, and Chuzong lived in the East Palace. In order to show his favor, he ordered Chongxun to greet his relatives.

古文：宰相李峤、苏味道等及沈佺期、宋之问诸有名士，造作文辞，慢泄相矜，无复礼法。
现代文：宰相李峤、苏味道等人及沈亻全期、宋之问等一批名士都撰文写诗献入，满纸称颂，全无礼法。
English: Prime Minister Li Qian, Su Yiguang and others, as well as a group of celebrities such as Shen Zhenguan and Song Zhiwen, all wrote poems and dedicated them, full of paper praise, all disrespectful.

古文：中宗复位，擢崇训驸马都尉、太常卿，兼左卫将军。
现代文：中宗复位后，提拔武崇训为驸马都尉、太常卿、兼左卫将军。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Zhongzong, Wu Chongxun was promoted to lieutenant of the imperial cavalry, grand secretary of the imperial court, and general of the Left Division.

古文：三思进位司空、同中书门下三品，加实户五百。
现代文：武三思则晋位司空、同中书门下三品，加实封五百户。
English: Wu Sanxi was promoted to the rank of Siku, and the three products under the same middle school were promoted, and five hundred households were added.

古文：固辞，进开府仪同三司。
现代文：武三思再三推辞，便进为开府仪同三司。
English: Wu Sansi repeatedly declined, and then he was promoted to the third division of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：会降封，裁减实户。
现代文：正遇随例降封，便裁减实封户。
English: In the event of a case-by-case reduction in sealing, the number of sealed households will be reduced.

古文：俄以太后遗诏还所减，而封崇训镐国公。
现代文：不久，以太后的遗诏还归所减的实封户，封武崇训为镐国公。
English: Soon, after the death of the emperor, the imperial edict was also returned to the reduced real-sealed households, and Fongwu Chongxun became the Duke of Shandong.

古文：初，桓彦范等已诛二张，薛季昶、刘幽求劝并诛三思等，不从。
现代文：当初，桓彦范等诛杀二张，薛季昶、刘幽求劝他一并诛杀武三思等人，桓彦范不听劝告。
English: At first, Kuan Yan Fan and others wanted to kill the two Zhangs, but Xue Jizhe and Liu You urged him to also kill Wu Sanshi and others, but Kuan Yan Fan did not listen to the advice.

古文：翌日，三思因韦后潜入宫中，反易国政，数日而彦范等皆失柄，所斥去者悉还。
现代文：第二天，武三思因韦后的关系潜入宫中，挑唆离间，不几天工夫，桓彦范等人都失了权柄，原被他们斥官的人全都回来了。
English: The next day, Wu Sanxi sneaked into the palace because of the relationship after Wei, instigating discord. Within a few days, Kanehiko Fan and others lost their power, and all those who had been rejected by them returned.

古文：诏群臣复循太后法。
现代文：皇帝还诏令群臣再次遵循太后时的法规。
English: The emperor also ordered the courtiers to once again follow the regulations of the empress dowager.

古文：三思建言： 大帝封泰山，则天皇后建明堂，封嵩山，二圣之美不可废。 
现代文：武三思建议： 帝封泰山，则天皇后建明堂，封嵩山，二圣之美德不可废置。 
English: Wu Sansi suggested: If Mount Tai is given to the emperor, then the empress should build a Ming Hall, and if Mount Song is given to the emperor, then the virtue of the two saints should not be discarded.

古文：帝韪其言，遂更名五县曰乾封、合宫、永昌、登封、告成云。
现代文：皇帝认为他的话对，将五个县改名为乾封、合宫、永昌、登封、告成。
English: The emperor thought his words were right, and renamed the five counties as Qianfeng, Hegu, Yongchang, Dengfeng and Xicheng.

古文：明年春，大旱，帝遣三思、攸暨祷乾陵而雨，帝悦。
现代文：第二年春，天大旱，皇帝派武三思、武攸暨去乾陵祈祷求雨，正好天降雨了，皇帝很高兴。
English: In the spring of the second year, when the weather was very dry, the emperor sent Wu San Si, Wu You Ji to the Qianling Mausoleum to pray for rain. It happened to rain, and the emperor was very happy.

古文：三思因主请复崇恩庙，昊、顺二陵，皆置令丞。
现代文：武三思又领头请求恢复崇恩庙及昊、顺二陵，并均置令丞。
English: Wu Sansi also took the lead in requesting the restoration of Chong'en Temple and Hao and Shun's two mausoleums, and they were both placed in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：其党郑愔上《圣感颂》，帝为刻石。
现代文：其党羽郑忄音还献《圣感颂》，皇帝并为之刻石。
English: Zheng Yuyin, a member of his party, also presented the "Hymn to the Sacred Heart," and the emperor carved a stone for it.

古文：补阙张景源建言： 母子承业，不可言中兴，所下制书皆除之。 
现代文：补阙张景源建议： 母子承继，不可说是中兴，所下的制书中应将中兴二字除去。 
English: Zhang Jingyuan suggested: the mother and son's succession cannot be said to be ZTE, and the word ZTE should be removed from the book.

古文：于是天下名祠改唐兴、龙兴云。
现代文：于是天下各祠改为应兴、龙兴。
English: As a result, all the shrines in the world were changed to Yingxing and Longxing.

古文：补阙权若讷又言： 制诏如贞观故事。且太后遗训，母仪也；太宗旧章，祖德也。
现代文：补阙权若讷又说 ：制诏应按照贞观时的旧例，太后的遗训是为人母的仪则；太宗的旧则，是祖上的德制。
English: If it were not for the right to make up the imperial edict, he also said that the imperial edict should be made according to the old example at the time of Zhengu, the last instruction of the empress dowager was the mother's ritual; the old rule of the emperor was the ancestral German system.

古文：沿袭当自近者始。 
现代文：沿袭旧制应从近者开始。 
English: Continuation of the old system should start with the most recent.

古文：帝褒答。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖同意。
English: The emperor agreed to the award.

古文：是时，起球场苑中，诏文武三品分朋为都，帝与皇后临观。
现代文：这时，在帝苑里筑了场，诏令文武三品官自愿分边赛，皇帝与皇后来观赛。
English: At this time, a court was built in the imperial garden, and the emperor ordered the civil and military tribunes to voluntarily divide the game, and the emperor and the empress came to watch the game.

古文：崇训与驸马都尉杨慎交注膏筑场，以利其泽，用功不訾，人苦之。
现代文：武崇训与驸马都尉杨慎交用脂膏筑场，使其光泽，用工用钱耗费甚多，百姓不胜其苦。
English: Wu Chongxun and Yang Shen, the commander of the Horse Guards, used grease to build the construction site to make it shiny. It cost a lot of labor and money, and the people suffered a lot.

古文：三思既私韦后，又与上官昭容乱，内忌节愍太子，即与主谋废之。
现代文：武三思既与韦后通奸，又与上官昭容淫乱，内心忌恨节愍太子重俊，即与韦后等商议废掉他。
English: Wu Sanxi not only committed adultery with Wei Hou, but also committed adultery with the superior officer Zhaorong. He was filled with loathing for the crown prince Shigetoshi, so he discussed with Wei Hou and others to abolish him.

古文：太子惧，故发羽林兵围三思第，并崇训斩之，杀其党十馀人。
现代文：太子知道后很害怕，于是调动羽林兵包围了武三思的家，将武三思与武崇训杀了，他们的党羽十多人也一并杀死。
English: The prince was very afraid after he knew, so he mobilized the Ulin soldiers to surround Wu Sansi's home, killed Wu Sansi and Wu Chongxun, and killed more than ten of their party members.

古文：时疾三思奸乱窃国，比司马懿。
现代文：当时，人们忌恨武三思的奸乱宫廷、阴谋窃国，将他比为司马懿。
English: At that time, people abhorred Wu Sansi's treachery, disruption of the court, and conspiracy to steal the country, comparing him to Sima Yu.

古文：其忌阻正人特甚，尝曰： 我不知何等名善人，唯与我者殆是哉。 
现代文：武三思特别仇视正义之人，千方百计阻止他们说话。他曾说 ：我不知道什么样的人能叫作好人，凡是顺从我的人大概就是好人。 
English: Wu Sansi had a particular hatred for righteous people and did everything he could to prevent them from speaking. He once said, "I don't know what kind of person can be called a good person. Anyone who obeys me is probably a good person."

古文：与宗楚客兄弟、纪处讷、崔湜、甘元柬相驱煽，王同皎、周憬、张仲之等不胜愤，谋杀之，为冉祖雍、宋之愻、李悛所白，皆坐死。
现代文：武三思与宗楚客兄弟、纪处讷、崔、甘元柬等人狼狈为奸，王同皎、周憬、张仲之等人不胜愤恨，打算杀掉武三思，被冉祖雍、宋之孙心、李悛告发，都惨遭杀害。
English: Wu Sanshi and the brothers Zong Chuk, Ji Chuanna, Cui, Gan Yuan Kam and others conspired to commit treason. Wang Tongyao, Zhou Jing and Zhang Zhongzhi were so angry that they planned to kill Wu Sanshi. They were denounced by Ran Zu Yong, Song Zi Sunxin and Li Xuan, and were all killed.

古文：因逮染五王，而崔湜遣周利贞就杀之，故祖雍与御史姚绍之等五人，号 三思五狗 。
现代文：并牵连到敬晖、桓彦范、张柬之、袁恕己、崔玄日韦等五人，崔派周利贞将他们杀害。
English: He also implicated five people, including Jing Jun, Kuan Yan Fan, Zhang Kammzhi, Yuan Shouji, and Cui Xuan Rihwei, and Cui sent Zhou Lizhen to kill them.

古文：司农少卿赵履温、中书舍人郑愔、长安令马构、司勋郎中崔日用、监察御史李忄曳托其权，熏炙内外，其尤干政事者，天下语曰： 崔、冉、郑，乱时政。 
现代文：所以冉祖雍、李悛、宋之孙心、周利贞及御史姚绍之等五人，时人称之为 三思五狗 ，司农少卿赵履温、中书舍人郑忄音、长安令马构、司勋郎中崔日用、监察御史李忄曳，倚仗武三思，在朝廷内外均炙手可热，甚至干预朝政。当时天下人都说： 崔、冉、郑，乱时政。 
English: Therefore, the five people including Ran Zuyong, Li Qianlong, Song Zi Sunxin, Zhou Lizhen, and Mi Shi Yao Shao, were known as the "three thoughts and five dogs" at that time, the "Minor Secretary of Agriculture" Zhao Ruiwen, the "Secretary of Chinese Literature" Zheng Yuyin, the "Chang'an Secretary" Ma Jie, the "Senior Secretary of Honor" Zhong Cui Rinyi, the "Supervisor" of the "Minor Secretary of History" Li Qianhui, and the "Supervisor" of the "Warrior" Wu Sanxi, and they were very popular both

古文：以爵赏自相崇树，凡构大狱，污点善良，破坏其宗，天下为荡然。
现代文：他们都以赏官封爵自相树威，凡诬造大案，定要诬陷善良的人，直至迫害其宗族，天下为之震惊。
English: They all follow the same pattern of rewarding officials with knighthoods. Anyone who fabricates a major case is sure to frame a good person, and even persecute his family. The whole world is shocked.

古文：始韦月将、高轸上疏，极言三思过恶，有司杀月将，逐轸恶地。
现代文：以前，韦月将、高轸上疏，痛陈武三思的罪恶，有司将韦月将杀死，贬高轸到荒远之地。
English: In the past, Wei Yue Zhao, Gao Yao Shang Zuo, suffered from Chen Wu's sin of thinking twice, and there was a division that killed Wei Yue Zhao and degraded him to a desolate land.

古文：黄门侍郎宋璟执奏，俄见斥。
现代文：黄门侍郎宋瞡执掌奏书，不久就将他斥为外职。
English: The Yellow Gate's chamberlain, Song Xi, was in charge of the music, and he was soon dismissed from his post.

古文：其权大抵如此。
现代文：武三思的权柄之大可见一斑。
English: The great power of Wu Sansi is evident.

古文：既死，帝为举哀，废朝五日，赠太尉，复封梁王，谥曰宣。
现代文：武三思死后，皇帝还为之举哀，废朝五天。追赠为太尉，再封梁王，封谥为宣。
English: After the death of Wu Sansi, the emperor also mourned for him and abolished the imperial court for five days. He was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain, then given the title of Liang Wang and the title of Xuan.

古文：景龙中卒，赠太尉、并州大都督，还定王，谥曰忠简。坐公主大逆，夷其墓。
现代文：追封武崇训为鲁王，赐谥为忠。安乐公主将节愍太子的头来祭奠武三思的灵柩。睿宗即位，认为武三思父子都是奸逆之臣，斫开棺材，暴尸于众，夷平坟墓。
English: Emperor Wu enthroned Wuzongxun as the King of Lu, and bestowed the title of Gong to him for his loyalty. Princess Anle brought the head of the crown prince to pay tribute to the coffin of Wuzanxi. Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, believing that both Wuzanxi and his son were traitorous vassals. He opened the coffin, exposed the bodies to the public, and razed the grave.

古文：韦温者，中宗废后庶人从父兄也。
现代文：韦温，是中宗被废韦皇后的叔伯哥哥。
English: Wei Wen was the uncle of the deposed Empress Wei.

古文：后父玄贞，历普州参军事，以女为皇太子妃，故擢累豫州刺史。
现代文：韦皇后的父亲韦玄贞，曾任普州参军事，因女儿做了皇太子妃，提拔为豫州刺史。
English: Queen Wei's father, Wei Xuanzhen, once served as a military officer in Puzhou. Because his daughter became the crown princess, he was promoted to be the crown prince of Yuzhou.

古文：帝幽庐陵，玄贞流死钦州，妻崔为蛮首宁承所杀，四子洵、浩、洞、泚同死容州，后二女弟逃还京师。
现代文：皇帝被幽禁庐陵时，韦玄贞被流放钦州，并死于该处，玄贞之妻崔氏被蛮人首领宁承所杀，四个儿子韦洵、韦浩、韦洞、韦氵此同死于容州。韦后的两个妹妹逃回京师。
English: When the emperor was confined to Baoling, Wei Xuanzheng was exiled to Qinzhou and died there. The wife of Xuanzhen, the Cui clan, was killed by the barbarian leader Ning Cheng. The four sons of Wei Xuan, Wei Hao, Wei Dong and Wei Yan also died in Yongzhou. Wei's two younger sisters fled back to Beijing.

古文：帝复政，是日诏赠玄贞上洛郡王、太师、雍州牧、益州大都督，温父玄俨鲁国公、特进、并州大都督。
现代文：皇帝复政，诏令追赠韦玄贞上洛郡王、太师、雍州牧、益州大都督。追赠韦温的父亲韦玄俨为鲁国公、特进、并州大都督。
English: After the emperor's return to power, the imperial edict posthumously awarded Wei Xuanzhen as the King of Shangluo County, Grand Master, Yongzhou Patriarch, and Grand Governor of Yizhou. Wei Wen's father, Wei Xuanzhen, was the Prince of Lu, the Special Envoy, and the Grand Governor of Yizhou.

古文：遣使者迎玄贞丧，诏广州都督周仁轨讨宁承，斩其首祭崔柩，官仁轨左羽林大将军，汝南郡公。
现代文：又派使者迎回韦玄贞的灵柩，诏令广州都督周仁轨讨伐宁承，将他的头祭奠崔氏的灵柩。委任周仁轨为左羽林大将军、汝南郡公。
English: He also sent an envoy to welcome back the coffin of Wei Xuan Zhen, and ordered the governor of Guangzhou, Zhou Ronglu, to fight against Ning Cheng and offer his head as a tribute to the coffin of the Cui clan. Zhou Ronglu was appointed the General of the Left Feather Forest and the Governor of Yunnan County.

古文：柩至，帝与后登长乐宫望而哭，赠酆王，谥文献，号庙曰褒德，陵曰荣先，置令丞，给百户扫除。
现代文：待韦玄贞夫妇的灵柩运到，皇帝与韦后登长乐宫望着运丧队而哭。加赠韦玄贞为酆王，谥为文献，号称其庙为褒德，称其陵为荣先，各置官员，给一百户做守卫洒扫。
English: When the caskets of Wei Xuan Zhen and her husband arrived, the emperor and Wei's wife went to the Changle Palace to look at the funeral procession and wept. In addition, Wei Xuan Zhen was given the title of "King of Gong" and "King of Literature," his temple was known as "Bo De," and his mausoleum was known as "Rong Xian." Officials were assigned to each, and they guarded and swept a hundred households.

古文：赠洵吏部尚书、汝南郡王，浩太常卿、武陵郡，洞卫尉卿、淮阳郡，泚太仆卿、上蔡郡，并葬京师。
现代文：又追赠玄贞之子韦洵为吏部尚书、汝南郡王，韦浩为太常卿、武陵郡王，韦洞为卫尉卿、淮阳郡王，韦氵此为太仆卿、上蔡郡王，全部葬于京师。
English: In addition, Xuanzhen's son Wei Wei was posthumously awarded the titles of Shangshu and Runan County King, Wei Hao was Tai Changqing and Wuling County King, Wei Dong was Wei Weiqing and Huaiyang County King, and Wei Wei was Taihokuqing and Shang Cai County King, all of which were buried in Beijing.

古文：温初试吏，坐赃斥。
现代文：韦温开始为官就因受贿而遭斥。
English: Since taking office, Wei Wen has been criticized for accepting bribes.

古文：神龙初，擢宗正卿，迁礼部尚书，封鲁国公。
现代文：神龙初年，提拔为宗正卿，升为礼部尚书，封鲁国公。
English: In the first year of Shenlong, he was promoted to Zongzhengqing (宗正卿), he was promoted to Shangshu (礼部尚書) of the Ministry of Rites, and he was crowned the Prince of Lu.

古文：弟湑，自洛州户曹参军事连拜左羽林大将军，曹国公。
现代文：其弟韦氵胥，从洛州户曹参军事接连升任左羽林大将军，封曹国公。
English: His brother, Wei Wei, was promoted successively from the Lozhou household Cao San military to the left feather Lin general, named Cao Guogong.

古文：后大妹嫁陆颂，进国子祭酒。
现代文：韦后的大妹嫁给陆颂，升任国子祭酒。
English: The eldest sister of Emperor Wei married Lu Song and was promoted to be the chief sake brewer of the National Children's Festival.

古文：仲妹嫁嗣虢王邕。
现代文：韦后的二妹嫁给嗣虢王李邕。
English: The second sister of Queen Wei married the heir to the throne, King Li Yao.

古文：湑子捷尚成安公主，温从弟濯尚定安公主，并拜驸马都尉，捷为右羽林将军。
现代文：韦氵胥的儿子韦捷娶成安公主为妻，韦温的堂弟韦濯娶定安公主为妻，都授官为驸马都尉，韦捷还任右羽林将军。
English: Wei Wei's son Wei Jie married Princess Cheng'an as his wife, Wei Wen's cousin Wei Maozong married Princess Ding'an as his wife, and both were awarded the rank of Lieutenant of the Horse. Wei Jie was also appointed General of the Right Feather Forest.

古文：景龙三年，温以太子少保同中书门下三品，遥领扬州大都督。
现代文：景龙三年，韦温以太子少保职同中书门下三品，遥领扬州大都督。
English: In the third year of Jinglong, Wei Wen and Ether Zi were given lesser job security, and Wei Wen and Ether Zi were promoted to the third grade of middle school students. He was promoted to Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：温既见天下事在手，欲自殖以牢其权，引用友党不相一，公卿虽畏伏，然温无能，不如诸武凶而炽也。
现代文：韦温见自己已居显要，天下事均在己手，想要培植力量以巩固权柄，引用党羽但心不齐，公卿虽然怕他，不敢说什么，然而韦温本人无能，所以不如武氏族人那样凶狠嚣张。
English: Wei Wen saw that he was already prominent and that everything in the world was in his own hands. He wanted to cultivate power to consolidate power. He tried to use the party's feathers, but his heart was not in it. Although the nobles were afraid of him, they did not dare to say anything. However, Wei Wen himself was incompetent, so he was not as fierce as the Wu clan.

古文：湑初兼脩文馆大学士，时荧惑久留羽林，后恶之，方湑从至温泉，后毒杀之以塞变，厚赠司徒、并州大都督。
现代文：韦氵胥开始时兼修文馆大学士，但他却迷恋能久留在羽林，韦后不喜欢他。那时，韦氵胥随从皇帝皇后到温泉，韦后将他毒死以防止变乱，然后追赠高官：司徒、并州大都督。
English: At the beginning, Wei Xuan was also a scholar at the College of Literature and Culture, but he was infatuated with staying in Yulin for a long time, and Wei Hou did not like him. At that time, Wei Xuan followed the emperor and empress to the hot spring, and Wei Hou poisoned him to prevent chaos, and then posthumously presented him with high-ranking officials: Szeto, and the provincial governor.

古文：湑兄弟颇以文词进，帝方盛选文章侍从，与赋诗相娱乐，湑虽为学士，常在北军，无所造作。
现代文：韦氵胥兄弟多次写诗文呈送皇帝，其时皇帝正广为征选文学侍从，以便与之赋诗娱乐。韦氵胥虽是学士，但常在北军，没有机会有所创作。
English: The Wei brothers repeatedly wrote poems and sent them to the emperor. At that time, the emperor was widely recruiting literary attendants in order to entertain them with poetry. Although Wei Wei was a bachelor, he was often in the Northern Army and did not have the opportunity to create.

古文：有富商抵罪，万年令李令质按之。濯驰救，令质不从，毁于帝。
现代文：有个富商犯了罪，万年县的县令李令质审询此案，韦濯跑去救富商，李令质不听，韦濯在皇帝面前控告李令质。
English: A rich merchant committed a crime. Li Ling, the county magistrate of Wannen County, questioned and investigated the case. Wei Maozhen ran to save the rich merchant. Li Lingguo did not listen. Wei Maozhen sued Li Lingguo in front of the emperor.

古文：帝召令质至，左右为恐，令质从容曰： 濯于贼非亲，但以货为请，濯虽势重，不如守陛下法，死无恨。 
现代文：皇帝将李令质召来询问。左右的人都为李令质性命担心。李令质从容地说 ：韦濯与那贼人并非亲戚，只因收了那贼的钱；韦濯的权势虽大，也不如坚守陛下所制的法令，我虽死亦无憾。 
English: The emperor summoned Li Rongguo to inquire. People on both sides feared for Li Rongguo's life. Li Rongguo calmly said, "Weixiu is not a relative of the thief, but only because he received the thief's money; although Weixiu's power is great, it is not as good as adhering to the decrees made by His Majesty, and I have no regrets even if I die."

古文：帝释不责。
现代文：皇帝放了县令，不再追究。
English: The emperor released the county magistrate and no longer pursued the case.

古文：帝崩，后专政，畏有变，敕温尽总内外兵，守省中；又以从子播、捷从弟璿、高嵩分领左右羽林军。
现代文：中宗崩，韦后专政，害怕有变故，命韦温将宫内外的兵权全掌在手中，守卫省中。又派侄子韦播、族弟韦王睿、韦高、韦嵩分别控制左右羽林军。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhongzong and the dictatorship of Empress Wei, fearing a change of fortune, Emperor Wen decreed that Empress Wei would hold all military power inside and outside the palace, guarding the middle of the province. He also sent his nephew Wei Bo, and his brothers Wei Wang Rui, Wei Gao, and Wei Song to separately control the left and right Ulin armies.

古文：温与宗楚客、武延秀等说后托图谶，韦氏当受命，谋杀少帝，内惮相王、太平公主属尊，欲先除之，然后发其谋。
现代文：韦温与宗楚客、武延秀等人劝韦后利用图谶以惑众，说韦后应顺天命称帝。于是设计谋杀少帝重茂，但还害怕相王李旦和太平公主的阻挠，打算先除掉他们两人，然后自己再宣布政变。
English: Wei Wen, Zong Chuk, Wu Yanxiu, and others persuaded Wei Hou to use the picture to deceive the public, saying that Wei Hou should follow the order of heaven to become emperor. So he planned to murder the young emperor Shigemo, but he was also afraid of the obstruction of King Li Dan and Princess Taiping, and planned to get rid of them both first, and then announce the coup himself.

古文：而玄宗兵夜起，将军葛福顺攻玄武门，入羽林，斩播、璿、高、嵩，枭首以徇，军中相率而应，无敢后。
现代文：但相王之子李隆基夜里发兵起事，将军葛福顺攻进玄武门，斩杀韦播、韦王睿、韦高、韦嵩，并割头示众，军中接连响应，不敢后人。
English: However, Li Longji, the son of King Si, launched a military uprising in the night. General Ge Fushun stormed into the Xuanwu Gate, killed Wei Bo, Wei Wang Rui, Wei Gao, Wei Song, and cut his head to show the public. The army responded one after another, and no one dared to follow.

古文：后死，迟旦斩温，分捕诸韦子弟，无少长皆斩。
现代文：韦后当晚被杀，天明斩杀韦温，分头逮捕各韦姓子弟，不论老少，一律斩杀不赦。
English: Wei Hou was killed that night, Tianming killed Wei Wen, and arrested each of Wei's children separately, regardless of age, they were all killed.

