古文：昔司马迁、班固书，并为《司马相如传》，相如不预汉廷大事，盖取其文章尤著也。
现代文：从前司马迁、班固的史书，都编撰了《司马相如传》，司马相如并没有参预汉朝朝廷大事，为他列传实在是取他的文章特别著名。
English: The history books of the former Sima Qian and Ban Gu both compiled "Sima Xiangru Biography." Sima Xiangru did not participate in the pre-Han dynasty and imperial court events, and the articles that listed his biography were particularly famous.

古文：固又为《贾邹枚路传》，亦取其能文传焉。
现代文：班固又撰写了《贾邹枚路传》，也是因为他们能写文章传布于世。
English: Ban Gu also wrote "Jia Xuan Hui Road Biography," also because they can write articles and spread them to the world.

古文：范氏《后汉书》有《文苑传》，所载之人，其详已甚。
现代文：范晔《后漠书》中有《文苑传，载入传中之人，事迹记载得已经非常详细。
English: In Fan Yu's "Book of the Desert," there is a "Biography of Wen Yuan," and the deeds of the people recorded in the biography have been recorded in great detail.

古文：然经礼乐而纬国家，通古今而述美恶，非文莫可也。
现代文：制定礼乐，治理国家，通晓古今，记述美行和恶行，离开了文章都是不行的。
English: It is not possible to formulate liturgical music, govern the country, know the past and the present, and record good and evil deeds without articles.

古文：是以君临天下者，莫不敦悦其义，缙绅之学，咸贵尚其道，古往今来，未之能易。
现代文：因此做君王治理天下的人，没有一个不尊崇看重文章的功用；缙绅当中的学者，也都重视崇尚文章的功用。从古到今，这种情况都没有改变。
English: Therefore, there is no king or ruler in the world who does not respect and value the function of writing; scholars among the gentry also respect and value the function of writing. This situation has not changed from ancient times to the present.

古文：高祖聪明文思，光宅区宇，旁求儒雅，诏采异人，文章之盛，焕乎俱集。
现代文：高祖既有才智又有美德，明察事理，广有天下，他下韶广泛地寻求博雅的儒生，接纳各种有特殊学问的人才，因此礼乐制度兴盛，各种人才都聚集京城，焕发出耀眼的光彩。
English: Gao Zu was both talented and virtuous. He was a shrewd observer of the world. He extensively sought out liberal Confucianism and accepted all kinds of talented people with special knowledge. As a result, the ritual music system flourished, and all kinds of talented people gathered in Beijing and shone with dazzling brilliance.

古文：每所御幸，辄命群臣赋诗，其文善者，赐以金帛，诣阙庭而献赋颂者，或引见焉。
现代文：高祖每驾临一处，往往命群臣赋诗撰文，诗文写得好的人，赏赐金帛给他，自己到宫廷献赋献颂的人，有时会得到被接见的恩宠。
English: Whenever Gao Zu visited a place, he often ordered his subjects to write poems. Those who wrote good poems were rewarded with gold ingots, and those who went to the court to offer their praise were sometimes given the grace of being received.

古文：其在位者，则沈约、江淹、任昉，并以文采妙绝当时。
现代文：那些有官职爵位的文人，有沈约、江淹、任防等人，都因为他们的文采，在当时被称作绝妙。
English: Those literati with official titles, such as Shen Yotong, Jiang Dun and Ren Fang, were called brilliant at that time because of their literary skills.

古文：至若彭城到沆、吴兴丘迟、东海王僧孺、吴郡张率等，或入直文德，通宴寿光，皆后来之选也。
现代文：至于像彭城到沆、吴兴丘迟、束海王僧孺、吴郡张率等人，有的得入直待韶文德殿的荣耀，有的享受君臣宴饮寿光殿的恩宠，这些都是后起的优秀出众的人才。
English: As for the likes of Pengcheng Zuo, Wu Xingqiu Chi, Sokhai Wang Sanguo, and Wu County Zhang Rui, some of them were admitted to the glory of the Zhiwende Hall, and some enjoyed the grace of the Shuguang Hall for monarchs' banquets. These were outstanding talents who came later.

古文：约、淹、昉、僧孺，率别以功迹论。
现代文：沈约、江淹、任防、王僧孺、张率另外按他的功劳业绩叙述。
English: Shen You, Jiang Tun, Ren Guo, Wang Xiangtao and Zhang Quan are also described according to his achievements.

古文：今缀到沆等文兼学者，至太清中人，为《文学传》云。
现代文：遣裹以到太清年间为限，缀集到沆等有文采有学识人物的事迹，组成《文学传》。
English: The "Biography of Literature" is limited to the years of the Taiqing Dynasty, and is made up of the stories of literate and learned people from the Ming Dynasty to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：到沆，字茂瀣，彭城武原人也。
现代文：到沆字茂瀣，彭城武原人。
English: To Shanzha Maozhuang, Pengcheng Wuyuan people.

古文：曾祖彦之，宋将军。
现代文：他的曾祖父到彦之，宋时任将军。
English: His great-grandfather Zu Yanzhi was a general in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父捴，齐五兵尚书。
现代文：父亲到揭，齐时任五兵尚书。
English: When his father arrived, he was accompanied by five soldiers.

古文：沆幼聪敏，五岁时，捴于屏风抄古诗，沆请教读一遍，便能讽诵，无所遗失。
现代文：到沆从小聪慧机敏，他五岁的时候，父亲到揭在屏风上抄写古诗，到沆请父亲教自己读一遍，他随即就能背诵，不曾遣忘字句。
English: When he was five years old, his father showed him a copy of an ancient poem on the screen. He asked his father to teach him to read it. He could recite it immediately and never forgot a word.

古文：既长勤学，善属文，工篆隶。
现代文：长大之后，到沆勤奋好学，善于写文章，并且精于写篆书隶书。
English: After growing up, he was diligent and eager to learn, good at writing articles, and good at writing essays.

古文：美风神，容止可悦。
现代文：到沆容貌风度都很美，举止形态都受到人们喜爱。
English: All of them are beautiful in appearance and demeanor, and are loved by people.

古文：齐建武中，起家后军法曹参军。
现代文：齐建武年间，到沆出仕任后军法曹参军。
English: During Qi Jianwu's time, after he was appointed to the post of the military legal officer, he joined the army.

古文：天监初，迁征虏主簿。
现代文：天监初年，迁任征虏主簿。
English: In the first year of the overseer of heaven, the main book of the conscript was transferred.

古文：高祖初临天下，收拔贤俊，甚爱其才。
现代文：高祖初登帝位，注重收罗擢拔杰出的人才，高祖很欣赏到沆的才学。
English: Gaozu ascended to the throne for the first time, and paid attention to recruiting and promoting outstanding talents. Gaozu appreciated Gaozu's talent.

古文：东宫建，以为太子洗马。
现代文：高祖册立太子之后，命到沆为太子洗马。
English: After Gaozhuan was crowned crown prince, it was his duty to wash the prince's horse.

古文：时文德殿置学士省，召高才硕学者待诏其中，使校定坟史，诏沆通籍焉。
现代文：当时朝廷在文德殿设置学士省，召集高才博学的人在学士省中待韶，命他们校定典籍，高祖还下韶让到沆享受通籍的待遇，记名在门籍，可以进出宫门。
English: At that time, the imperial court set up a bachelor's department in the Palace of Letters and Decrees, called up highly talented and learned people to wait for the emperor in the bachelor's department, and ordered them to check the classics. Gao Zu also asked the emperor to allow the emperor to enjoy the treatment of universal citizenship, record his name in the family register, and be able to enter and leave the palace gate.

古文：时高祖宴华光殿，命群臣赋诗，独诏沆为二百字，二刻使成。
现代文：当时高祖在华光殿宴享群臣，命群臣赋诗，衹下韶命到沆一人作二百字的长诗，限时三刻内完成。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was feasting with a group of courtiers at the Hua Guang Palace. He ordered the courtiers to perform a poem, and one of his subordinates was ordered to write a long poem of two hundred words, which was completed within three minutes.

古文：沆于坐立奏，其文甚美。
现代文：到沆在座席上站着进献自己的即兴之作，文辞很美。
English: Zu Yao stood on the seat and sang his improvised song. The lyrics were beautiful.

古文：俄以洗马管东宫书记、散骑省优策文。
现代文：不久，到沆以洗马之职管东宫书记、散骑省优策文。
English: Not long after, the secretary of the Eastern Palace and the provincial cavalry commander, Yuzhe Wen, arrived in Zhaoying.

古文：三年，诏尚书郎在职清能或人才高妙者为侍郎，以沆为殿中曹侍郎。
现代文：天监三年，高祖下韶命选拔在任职期间清正能干或是才学佳美的尚书郎提拔为侍郎，到沆被授任为殿中曹侍郎。
English: In the third year of the Tenko era, Emperor Gaozong decreed that Shang Shulang, who had been highly capable and academically excellent during his term of office, should be promoted to Jiro, and he was appointed to Jiro.

古文：沆从父兄溉、洽，并有才名，时皆相代为殿中，当世荣之。
现代文：到沆与堂兄到溉、到洽，都有才子之名，当时又都轮流任殿中之职，当代人都认为这是种荣耀。
English: He and his cousins, Zuigan, Zuigan, and Zuigan, were all famous for their talents. At that time, they all took turns to hold positions in the palace. People of the present day consider this to be an honor.

古文：四年，迁太子中舍人。
现代文：天监四年，到沆迁任太子中舍人。
English: In the fourth year of the celestial overseer, he was transferred to the position of crown prince.

古文：沆为人不自伐，不论人长短，乐安任昉、南乡范云皆与友善。
现代文：到沆为人不夸耀自己的功劳，不谈论别人的长短，乐安任防、南乡范云都和他有很好的友情。
English: He does not boast of his own merits, does not talk about the strengths and weaknesses of others, is happy to play defense, and Nanxiang Fanyun has a good friendship with him.

古文：其年，迁丹阳尹丞，以疾不能处职事，迁北中郎谘议参军。
现代文：这一年，到沆迁任丹阳尹丞，因为有病不能就职，又迁任北中郎谘议参军。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the post of Danyang Yinzheng, because he was unable to take office due to illness, and he was also transferred to the post of Beizhongro to consult on joining the army.

古文：五年，卒官，年三十。
现代文：天监五年，到沆在任职期间去世，死时三十岁。
English: Tianjun was five years old when he died. He was 30 years old when he died.

古文：高祖甚伤惜焉，诏赐钱二万，布三十匹。
现代文：直担为他的去世伤心痛惜，下诏赐钱二万，布三十匹给他家。
English: Directly responsible for his death, sad and regretful, the next edict gave him twenty thousand money and thirty pieces of cloth to his family.

古文：所著诗赋百余篇。
现代文：到沆所著的诗赋有百余篇。
English: There are more than a hundred poems attributed to him.

古文：丘迟，字希范，吴兴乌程人也。
现代文：丘迟字希范，吴兴乌程人。
English: Qiu Chi Zi Xi Fan, Wu Xing Wucheng Ren.

古文：父灵鞠，有才名，仕齐官至太中大夫。
现代文：他父亲丘灵鞠，因才气而出名，齐时出仕，官升至太中大夫。
English: His father, Chuling Qi, was famous for his talent, and he served at the same time, and was promoted to the post of the First Vice-Minister of Health.

古文：迟八岁便属文，灵鞠常谓 气骨似我 。
现代文：丘迟八岁就能写文章，丘灵鞠常说 造孩子文章的气势和骨力和我相似 。
English: Yau was able to write articles when he was eight years old. Yau often said that the power and strength to write children's articles was similar to mine.

古文：黄门郎谢超宗、征士何点并见而异之。
现代文：黄门郎谢塑毖、征士何点都接见了丘迟，认为他的才能优异。
English: Huangmen Lang, Xie Shuxuan, and Zhe Shi all met with Qiu Chi, and thought that his talent was excellent.

古文：及长，州辟从事，举秀才，除太学博士。
现代文：到丘迟长大成人之后，州中辟他为从事，举为秀才，被除授太学博士。
English: After he grew up and became an adult, he was appointed as a scholar by the state and was stripped of his doctorate.

古文：迁大司马行参军，遭父忧去职。
现代文：丘迟迁大司马行参军，因为父亲去世而离职守丧。
English: He was late to join the army because of his father's death.

古文：服阕，除西中郎参军。
现代文：守丧期满，丘迟被除授为西中郎参军。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was removed from his post as Nishinakuro to join the army.

古文：累迁殿中郎，以母忧去职。
现代文：积功迁为殿中郎，又因母亲去世而离职守丧。
English: He was promoted to the post of palace middle steward, but had to leave due to the death of his mother.

古文：服除，复为殿中郎，迁车骑录事参军。
现代文：服丧期满之后，丘迟又任殿中郎，迁任车骑录事参军。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was appointed to the post of palace chief steward and transferred to the post of chariot and cavalry officer.

古文：高祖平京邑，霸府开，引为骠骑主簿，甚被礼遇。时劝进梁王及殊礼，皆迟文也。
现代文：高祖平定京城，建立霸府，丘迟被选拔为骠骑主簿，受到非常隆厚的礼遇，当时劝进梁王以及给梁王特殊礼遇的文字，都是丘迟的手笔。
English: Gaozhu conquered the capital and established a domineering government, while Qiu Chi was selected as the main rider and received very generous courtesy. At that time, the words of persuading Liang Wang to enter the capital and giving special courtesy to Liang Wang were all written by Qiu Chi.

古文：高祖践阼，拜散骑侍郎，俄迁中书侍郎，领吴兴邑中正，待诏文德殿。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，丘迟被拜为散骑侍郎，不久迁任中书侍郎、领吴兴邑中正、待诏文德殿。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God, and he was worshipped as a horseback riding attendant, and soon he was transferred to the position of the middle secretary, the leader of Wu Xingyur, and the secretary of the palace.

古文：时高祖著《连珠》，诏群臣继作者数十人，迟文最美。
现代文：当时高祖自着《连珠》，命臣下敷十人继作，其中丘迟继作的文字最美。
English: At that time, Gaozu wrote "Renju" by himself, and his vassal had ten subordinates write it in succession, of which the most beautiful writing was written by Yau Chi.

古文：天监三年，出为永嘉太守，在郡不称职，为有司所纠，高祖爱其才，寝其奏。
现代文：天监三年，丘迟出京任永嘉太守，丘迟在永嘉郡时不称职，被有司纠弹，高祖爱惜他的才能，压住了纠弹丘迟的奏章。
English: In the third year of Tianjun, Qiu was late to leave Beijing for the position of Yongjia governor-general. Qiu was incompetent when he was in Yongjia County, and was reprimanded by the magistrate. Gao Zu cherished his talent and suppressed the reprimanded Qiu.

古文：四年，中军将军临川王宏北伐，迟为谘议参军，领记室。
现代文：天监四年，中军将军临川王萧宏北伐，丘迟任谘议参军，领记室。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjing, the Chinese army general Linchuan Wang Xiaohong went to the Northern Expedition, and Yau was appointed to consult and join the army.

古文：时陈伯之在北，与魏军来距，迟以书喻之，伯之遂降。
现代文：当时陈伯之投靠魏，与魏军一起来抵御北伐军，丘迟去信开导陈伯之，陈伯之于是投降了。
English: At that time, Chen Bozhi sided with Wei and joined the Wei army to resist the Northern Expeditionary Force. Qiu delayed to write to Chen Bozhi and guide him. Chen Bozhi then surrendered.

古文：还拜中书郎，迁司徒从事中郎。
现代文：回师后丘迟被拜为中书郎，迁司徒从事中郎。
English: After returning to his teacher, he was later worshipped as a junior high school teacher, and a transfer student became a junior high school teacher.

古文：七年，卒官，时年四十五。
现代文：天监七年，丘迟在任职期间去世，死时四十五岁。
English: After seven years as overseer of heaven, Yau died while in office, at the age of forty-five.

古文：所著诗赋行于世。
现代文：丘迟所著的诗赋流传于世。
English: Poems written by Yau Chi have been handed down to the world.

古文：刘苞，字孝尝，彭城人也。
现代文：刘苞字孝尝，彭城人。
English: Liu Yanzi is a filial son of Pengcheng.

古文：祖勔，宋司空。
现代文：他祖父刘劻，宋时任司空。
English: His grandfather, Liu Ye, was the first secretary of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父愃，齐太子中庶子。
现代文：父亲刘值，齐时任太子中庶子。
English: His father, Liu Zhen, was an illegitimate son of the then crown prince.

古文：苞四岁而父终，及年六七岁，见诸父常泣。
现代文：刘苞四岁时，他父亲就去世了，到六七岁的时候，刘苞见到叔父伯父就常常哭泣。
English: When Liu Wei was four years old, his father passed away. By the time he was six or seven years old, Liu Wei often cried when he saw his uncle.

古文：时伯、叔父悛、绘等并显贵，苞母谓其畏惮，怒之。
现代文：当时刘苞的伯父刘悛、叔父刘绘等都已经地位显贵，刘苞的母亲认为刘苞是因为畏惧而哭，为此事很生气。
English: At that time, Liu Hui's uncle Liu Hui and uncle Liu Bing were already in a prominent position. Liu Hui's mother thought that Liu Hui was crying because of fear, and was very angry about this.

古文：苞对曰： 早孤不及有识，闻诸父多相似，故心中欲悲，无有佗意。 
现代文：刘苞回答说： 我很早失去父亲，没有记住父亲的面容，听说伯父、叔父与父亲面容很相似，所以见到他们心中悲痛，没有别的意思。 
English: Liu Yao replied, "I lost my father at an early age, and I didn't remember my father's face. I heard that my uncle and my uncle's faces were very similar to my father's, so seeing the sadness in their hearts had no other meaning.

古文：因而歔欷，母亦恸甚。
现代文：说着又献欷抽噎，他母亲也就更加悲痛。
English: As he spoke, convulsions set in and his mother's grief deepened.

古文：初，苞父母及两兄相继亡没，悉假瘗焉。苞年十六，始移墓所，经营改葬，不资诸父，未几皆毕，绘常叹服之。
现代文：当初，刘苞父母以及两个兄长相继亡故，全都是暂且瘗葬，刘苞十六岁的时候，才把他们的丧柩移葬在墓地裹，筹划安排改葬的事，全是刘苞一人的力量，不藉助伯父叔父的帮助，不多久事情就都办好了，刘绘常常赞叹他，佩服他的能力。
English: At first, Liu Wei's parents and two brothers died one after another, and all of them were temporarily buried. When Liu Wei was 16 years old, he moved their funerals to the cemetery. The planning and arrangement of the reburial was all the power of Liu Wei. Without the help of his uncle, things were done in a short time. Liu Wei often admired him and admired his ability.

古文：少好学，能属文。
现代文：刘苞从小好学，能写文章。
English: Liu Wei has been eager to learn since childhood and can write articles.

古文：起家为司徒法曹行参军，不就。
现代文：初出仕任司徒法曹行参军，他不就职。
English: He did not take up his post after joining the army for the first time as a magistrate.

古文：天监初，以临川王妃弟故，自征虏主簿仍迁王中军功曹，累迁尚书库部侍郎、丹阳尹丞、太子太傅丞、尚书殿中侍郎、南徐州治中，以公事免。
现代文：天监初年，因为是临川王妃的弟弟，因此从征虏主簿频频升迁为临川王中军功曹，又积功迁任尚书库部侍郎，丹阳尹丞，太子太傅丞，尚书殿中侍郎，南徐州治中，因为公事而免职。
English: In the first year of Tian Guan, because he was the younger brother of Linchuan Wangfei, he was frequently promoted from the main recruiting book to Linchuan Wangzhongjun Gong Cao, and was transferred to Shangshu Library Department Attendant, Danyang Yin Rong, Prince Taifu Rong, Shangshu Hall Attendant, and South Xuzhou Jizhong, but he was dismissed for official business.

古文：久之，为太子洗马，掌书记，侍讲寿光殿。
现代文：遇了很久，刘苞又任太子洗马，掌书记，侍讲寿光殿。
English: After a long time, Liu Ye was appointed as the prince's horse washer, secretary, and attendant of the Shuguang Palace.

古文：自高祖即位，引后进文学之士，苞及从兄孝绰、从弟孺、同郡到溉、溉弟洽、从弟沆、吴郡陆倕、张率并以文藻见知，多预宴坐，虽仕进有前后，其赏赐不殊。
现代文：高祖即位之后，选拔年轻的有文才的士人，刘苞以及他的堂兄刘孝绰、堂弟刘孺、同郡的到溉、到溉的弟弟到洽、到溉的堂弟到沆、吴郡陆捶、张率都以文采受到赏识，常常参预君臣的宴饮，虽然他们所任官职有所不同，但得到的赏赐却没有区别。
English: After Gaozu's accession to the throne, the young literati, Liu Jun, his cousin Liu Xiaochu, his cousin Liu Yao, his cousin Zuorigui, his cousin Zuorigui's brother Zuochao, his cousin Zuorigui's brother Zuochao, Wu County's Luo Yao, and Zhang Quan were all appreciated for their literary skills, and often attended the banquets of pre-eminent officials. Although their official positions were different, there was no difference in the rewards they received.

古文：天监十年，卒，时年三十。
现代文：天监十年，刘苞去世，死时三十岁。
English: Ten years into his term as overseer of heaven, Liu Ye passed away at the age of thirty.

古文：临终，呼友人南阳刘之遴托以丧事，务从俭率。
现代文：刘苞临终，把友人南阳、刘之遭叫来把丧事托付他办，要求丧事务必力求俭薄。
English: On his deathbed, Liu Yao called his friends Nanyang and Liu Zhisheng to entrust him with the funeral affairs, and asked them to be frugal in the funeral affairs.

古文：苞居官有能名，性和而直，与人交，面折其非，退称其美，情无所隐，士友咸以此叹惜之。
现代文：刘苞任官有办事能干的名声，他生性温和。但处事刚直，舆人交往，当面批评友人的缺点错误，背后称赞友人的长处美德，感情直率，不藏隐私，他的朋友都因此而赞叹他。
English: Liu Xuan has a reputation for being able to do things, and he is gentle by nature. However, his friends all admire him for his straightforwardness, social interaction, criticizing his friend's shortcomings and mistakes in person, praising his friend's strengths and virtues behind his back, emotional straightforwardness, and not hiding his privacy.

古文：袁峻，字孝高，陈郡阳夏人，魏郎中令涣之八世孙也。
现代文：袁峻字孝高，陈郡阳夏人，他是魏郎中令袁涣之的第八代子孙。
English: Yuan Junzhi Xiaogang, Chen County Yang Xia people, he is the eighth generation of the descendants of Wei Lang Zhongling Yuan Xizhi.

古文：峻早孤，笃志好学，家贫无书，每从人假借，必皆抄写，自课日五十纸，纸数不登，则不休息。
现代文：袁峻早年失去父亲，但他专心一意爱好学习。他家中贫穷，没有书，常常向人借书读，借来的书一定都要抄写。他给自己规定进度，每天要抄写五十页，页数没有达到规定，就不休息。
English: Yuan Jun lost his father at an early age, but he devoted himself to his love of learning. His family was poor and had no books. He often borrowed books to read, and borrowed books had to be copied. He set a schedule for himself, copying fifty pages a day. If the number of pages did not meet the requirements, he would not rest.

古文：讷言语，工文辞。
现代文：袁峻言语木讷，但是工于文辞。
English: Yuan Jun's speech is wooden, but he is good at words.

古文：义师克京邑，鄱阳王恢东镇破冈，峻随王知管记事。
现代文：高祖义军攻克京城的时候，嫠阳王萧恢在东边镇守苏迩，袁峻跟随整驻主管记事。
English: When the Gaozu Uyghur army conquered the capital city, Shanyang Wang Xiao Hui was in the east guarding Suye, and Yuan Jun followed the commander.

古文：天监初，鄱阳国建，以峻为侍郎，从镇京口。
现代文：天监初年，藩国建立，他命袁峻为侍郎，跟随自己镇守京口。
English: In the first year of Tensho, when the domain was established, he ordered Yuan Jun to be his attendant and to follow him as the town guard of Kyoguchi.

古文：王迁郢州，兼都曹参军。
现代文：王迁任郢州刺史，兼都曹参军。
English: Wang Qian was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and also joined the army of Du Cao.

古文：高祖雅好辞赋，时献文于南阙者相望焉，其藻丽可观，或见赏擢。
现代文：高祖十分爱好辞赋，当时在南阙向高祖进献诗文的人络绎不绝，其中文辞华丽、可供欣赏的诗文，作者有时受到赏赐或提拔。
English: Gao Zu was very fond of poetry. At that time, there was an endless stream of people in Nanzhu who presented poems to Gao Zu. Some of the poems were gorgeous and could be appreciated, and the authors were sometimes rewarded or promoted.

古文：六年，峻乃拟扬雄《官箴》奏之。
现代文：天监六年，袁蝗就仿照荡壁撰写《官箴》进献给台祖。
English: In the sixth year of Tianjun, Yuan Locust copied the wall and wrote "Guan Zhen" and dedicated it to the founder of Taiwan.

古文：高祖嘉焉，赐束帛。
现代文：高祖表彰他，赐给他五匹帛。
English: Gaozu commended him and gave him five horses.

古文：除员外散骑侍郎，直文德学士省，抄《史记》、《汉书》各为二十卷。
现代文：袁峻被除授为员外散骑侍郎，袁峻坛屘学士省，抄写《史记》、《漠书》各二十卷。
English: Yuan Jun was awarded the title of non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned cavalryman, and Yuan Jundan was awarded the title of bachelor of the province, and copied 20 volumes of "History" and "Book of the Desert."

古文：又奉敕与陆倕各制《新阙铭》，辞多不载。
现代文：又奉高祖的命令与陆倕各自撰写《新阙铭》，因为文辞太长，逭裹不载。
English: Also, by order of Gao Zu, he and Lu Yao wrote the "New Epitaph" separately, because the words were too long and could not be read.

古文：庾於陵，字子介，散骑常侍黔娄之弟也。
现代文：庾於陵字子介，他是散骑常侍黔娄的弟弟。
English: He is the younger brother of the horseback-riding imperial concubine Zosuke.

古文：七岁能言玄理。
现代文：庾於陵七岁时就能和人谈论精微的义理。
English: When he was seven years old, he was able to talk to people about the subtleties of logic.

古文：既长，清警博学有才思。
现代文：成年之后，他机智敏锐，博学而有才气。
English: As an adult, he was quick-witted, erudite and talented.

古文：齐随王子隆为荆州，召为主簿，使与谢朓、宗夬抄撰群书。
现代文：齐随王萧子隆任荆州刺史，召庾于陵为主簿，命他和谢跳、宗央等一起抄集编撰书籍。
English: Qi followed Wang Xiaozilong as the chief historian of Jingzhou, and summoned Zou to the mausoleum as the main book, and ordered him to collect and compile books together with Xie Jian and Zong Yang.

古文：子隆代还，又以为送故主簿。
现代文：萧子隆职务被替代，自己回京城，又命庾于陵为送故主簿。
English: Xiao Zilong's duties were replaced, he returned to Beijing, and he was buried in the mausoleum as a memorial.

古文：子隆寻为明帝所害，僚吏畏避，莫有至者，唯於陵与夬独留，经理丧事。
现代文：萧子隆不久就被明帝杀害，萧子隆旧有的僚属故吏都因为害怕而避开，没有一个敢来处理后事，衹有庾于陵和宗央留下来，为萧子隆经办丧事。
English: Xiao Zilong was soon killed by the Ming Emperor. All of Xiao Zilong's former colleagues and officials shied away from him out of fear. None of them dared to deal with the aftermath. Only Zou Yu Ling and Zongyang stayed behind to handle the funeral for Xiao Zilong.

古文：始安王遥光为抚军，引为行参军，兼记室。
现代文：始安王萧遥光任抚军，他选拔庾于陵为行参军，兼记室。
English: Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, appointed him to lead the army. He selected Gong Yu Ling to join the army, and he also served as a secretary.

古文：永元末，除东阳遂安令，为民吏所称。
现代文：永元末年，庾于陵被除授为东阳遂安令，因为治县有方而被百姓和属吏称道。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, Zou Yuling was stripped of the title of Dongyang Sui Anling, and was praised by the people and subordinate officials because he ruled the county well.

古文：天监初，为建康狱平，迁尚书工部郎，待诏文德殿。
现代文：天监初年，庾于陵为建康狱平，迁任尚书功论郎，待诏文德殿。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, he was imprisoned in the mausoleum for Jiankang, transferred to Shangshu Gongren, and waited for the edict of the Emperor.

古文：出为湘州别驾，迁骠骑录事参军，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：又出京任湘州别驾，迁任骠骑录事参军，兼中书通事舍人。
English: He also went to Beijing to serve as the deputy governor of Hunan Province, transferred to the post of cavalry officer to join the army, and concurrently served as the secretary of the General Office of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：俄领南郡邑中正，拜太子洗马，舍人如故。
现代文：不久又领南郡邑中正，拜为太子洗马，舍人之职不变。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the position of Zhongzheng of Liannan County, and was given the position of Prince's horse-washing attendant.

古文：旧事，东宫官属，通为清选，洗马掌文翰，尤其清者。
现代文：按照以前的旧例，东宫的官员，全是以清纯高雅著称的人士充任，太子洗马掌管文书，更是其中最为突出的。
English: According to the previous precedent, the officials of the East Palace were all persons who were known for their purity and elegance, and the most prominent of them was Prince Saima, who was in charge of documents.

古文：近世用人，皆取甲族有才望，时於陵与周舍并擢充职，高祖曰： 官以人而清，岂限以甲族。 
现代文：近代挑选束宫的官员，都取用世家大族中有才气、有名望的士人，当时庾于陵舆周舍都被提拔到东宫任职，高祖说： 任官需要人品清纯高雅，哪能局限在世家大族中。 
English: In modern times, officials of Sokgong Palace were selected from the most talented and renowned scholars of the family. At that time, all the officials of the imperial family were promoted to the East Palace. Gaozhu said, "To be appointed as an official requires a pure and elegant personality, which cannot be confined to the family."

古文：时论以为美。
现代文：当时人们认为这是很为确切的见解。
English: At the time, people thought this was a very accurate view.

古文：俄迁散骑侍郎，改领荆州大中正。
现代文：庾于陵不久迁任散骑侍郎，改领荆州大中正。
English: Gong Yuling was soon transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, and became the head of the Jingzhou University Middle School.

古文：累迁中书黄门侍郎，舍人、中正并如故。
现代文：又积功而迁升为中书黄门侍郎，舍人、中正之职都不变。
English: He also accumulated merits and was promoted to the position of the attendant of the Yellow Gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：出为宣毅晋安王长史、广陵太守，行府州事，以公事免。
现代文：庾于陵后来出京任宣毅晋安王长史、广陵太守，行府州事，因为公事而免职。
English: After being buried in the mausoleum, he went to Beijing to serve as the king of Xuan Yi, Jinan, Changshi and the governor of Guangling, where he was in charge of state affairs. However, he was relieved of his duties because of his official duties.

古文：复起为通直郎，寻除鸿胪卿，复领荆州大中正。
现代文：又被起用为通直郎，不久除授为鸿胪卿，又领荆州大中正。
English: He was also appointed as Tong Naorong, and was soon awarded the title of Hongyuqing, and also became the leader of Jingzhou University Junior High School.

古文：卒官，时年四十八。
现代文：庾于陵在任职期间去世，死时四十八岁。
English: Gong Yuling died during his term of office, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：文集十卷。
现代文：庾于陵有文集十卷。
English: Yan Yan died during his term of office. He had a collection of ten volumes.

古文：弟肩吾。
现代文：庾于陵之弟庾肩吾。
English: My younger brother, who is buried in the mausoleum, is standing next to me.

古文：肩吾，字子慎。
现代文：庾肩吾字子慎。
English: Don't look over your shoulder.

古文：八岁能赋诗，特为兄於陵所友爱。
现代文：他八岁时就能赋诗，兄长庾于陵对他特别友爱。
English: He was able to compose poems at the age of eight, and his elder brother, Zou Yuling, was particularly fond of him.

古文：初为晋安王国常侍，仍迁王宣惠府行参军。自是每王徙镇，肩吾常随府。
现代文：庾肩吾最初任晋安王国常侍，接着迁任晋安王宣惠府行参军，从这以后，晋安王每次调动镇所，庾肩吾也随着王府行动。
English: I was first appointed as the Jinan Kingdom's attendant, then transferred to the Jinan King's Xuanhui Palace to join the army. Since then, every time the King of Jinan moved the town hall, I also followed the royal action.

古文：历王府中郎、云麾参军，并兼记室参军。
现代文：他历任王府中郎，云麾参军，并兼记室参军。
English: He successively served as the palace's middle-ranking official, and he joined the army at the same time as the secretary.

古文：中大通三年，王为皇太子，兼东宫通事舍人，除安西湘东王录事参军，俄以本官领荆州大中正。
现代文：中大通三年，晋安王为皇太子，庾肩吾兼东宫通事舍人，又除授为安西湘束王录事参军，不久以本官职领荆州大中正。
English: In the third year of his junior high school education, Jin'an Wang was crown prince, and he served as his colleague and the secretary of the East Palace. In addition, he was awarded the record of Anxi Xiangzhu Wang to join the army, and soon became the official leader of Jingzhou University Junior High School.

古文：累迁中录事谘议参军、太子率更令、中庶子。
现代文：积功迁任中录事谘议参军，太子率更令，太子中庶子。
English: Accomplishments in the transfer of posts recorded in the consultation on joining the army, the prince's rate was increased, and the prince's illegitimate son was removed.

古文：初，太宗在籓，雅好文章士，时肩吾与东海徐摛、吴郡陆杲、彭城刘遵、刘孝仪、仪弟孝威，同被赏接。
现代文：当初，太宗在藩国的时候，十分喜欢文学士人，当时庾肩吾舆束海徐搞，吴郡陆呆，彭城刘遵、刘孝仪，刘孝仪之弟刘孝威，同被赏识延请。
English: At the beginning, when Taizong was in the domain, he was very fond of literary scholars. At that time, Shigeharu Shouwaku, Hai Xu, Wu Guan Lu, Pengcheng Liu Zun, Liu Xiaoyi, Liu Xiaoyi's brother Liu Xiaowei, were all appreciated and invited.

古文：及居东宫，又开文德省，置学士，肩吾子信、摛子陵、吴郡张长公、北地傅弘、东海鲍至等充其选。
现代文：到太宗成为太子的时候，又开设文德省，设置学士，庾肩吾之子庾信、徐搞之子徐陵、吴郡张长公、北地傅弘、东海鲍至等人都是充任学士的优秀人才。
English: When Emperor Taizong became the crown prince, he also opened the Bende Province and set up a bachelor's degree. Along with my son Xuan Xin, Xu Jing's son Xu Ling, Wu County Zhang Changgong, Hebei Fu Hong, and Donghai Bao Zhi, they are all outstanding talents who are full-time bachelor's degree holders.

古文：齐永明中，文士王融、谢朓、沈约文章始用四声，以为新变，至是转拘声韵，弥尚丽靡，复逾于往时。
现代文：齐永明年问，文士王融、谢跳、沈约等人在文章中开始运用四声变化，在着文时出现了新的变化，到逭时候更加讲究声韵的整齐，更加崇尚靡丽，对文章中四声的要求又超过以前。
English: Qiyong asked next year, the scribes Wang Rong, Xie Jie, Shen Yorong and others began to use four-voice changes in the article, and new changes appeared when writing the article. By the time of writing, they paid more attention to the neatness of the rhyme, more advocated the beauty, and the requirements for the four voices in the article were more than before.

古文：时太子与湘东王书论之曰：
现代文：当时太子给湘东王写信论及这种风气时说：
English: At that time, the prince wrote a letter to the King of Eastern Hunan about this culture, saying:

古文：吾辈亦无所游赏，止事披阅，性既好文，时复短咏。
现代文：我们这些人没有游山玩水的爱好，衹会披板书籍，生性喜好写文章，时时吟咏短诗。
English: We don't have a penchant for hiking in the mountains or playing in the water. We don't have a penchant for reading books, writing articles, or reciting short poems.

古文：虽是庸音，不能阁笔，有惭伎痒，更同故态。
现代文：虽是平庸之音，但不能搁笔不写，伎痒时虽感羞惭，但免不了故态复萌。
English: Although it is a mediocre sound, it is impossible to put down the pen and not write. Although it feels shameful when it itches, it inevitably returns to its former state.

古文：比见京师文体，懦钝殊常，竞学浮疏，急为阐缓。
现代文：近来见到京城流传的文章，特别庸弱而无骨力，文人竞相学习浮华不实之风，争着仿效柔弱无力之作。
English: Recently, I have seen articles circulating in Beijing that are particularly mediocre and spineless. Writers are competing to learn the style of pomposity and insincerity, vying to imitate weak and feeble works.

古文：玄冬修夜，思所不得，既殊比兴，正背《风》、《骚》。
现代文：面对这种风气，冬季长夜，苦苦思索也弄不明白，这种风气和赋、比、兴手法不相符，又和《诗经》、《楚辞》的风格相背离。
English: In the face of this culture, the long winter nights and painstaking contemplation cannot make it clear that this culture does not match the Fu, Bi and Xing methods, and also deviates from the style of "Shijing" and "Chuji."

古文：若夫六典三礼，所施则有地；吉凶嘉宾，用之则有所。
现代文：至于治理国家的六典、祭祀天地宗庙的三礼，施行有一定的范围；吉凶嘉宾军五种礼仪，使用有一定的场合。
English: As for the six rites of governing the country and the three rites of worshiping heaven, earth and the ancestral temple, they have a certain scope; the five etiquettes of the auspicious and inauspicious guests have a certain occasion.

古文：未闻吟咏情性，反拟《内则》之篇；操笔写志，更摹《酒诰》之作；迟迟春日，翻学《归藏》；湛湛江水，遂同《大传》。
现代文：假如吟咏自己的感情，却去仿照《内则》的篇章；提笔抒写自己的志向，却去模仿《酒诰》的体制；抒写春游之景，却去学习《归藏》的写法；描摹江山壮丽，却要和《周易大传》相同，这都是我从未听说过的。
English: If you chant your feelings, but try to imitate the chapters of "The Inner Precepts"; if you take up a pen to express your aspirations, but try to imitate the system of "The Winepress"; if you describe the scenery of Spring Tour, but try to learn how to write "The Repository"; if you describe the magnificence of the mountains and rivers, but try to be the same as "Zhou Yi Biography," these are all things I have never heard of.

古文：吾既拙于为文，不敢轻有掎摭。
现代文：我既然在写诗作文方面比较笨拙，自然不敢随意指摘别人的文章。
English: Since I am rather clumsy in writing poetry, I naturally do not dare to point out other people's articles.

古文：但以当世之作，历方古之才人，远则扬、马、曹、王，近则潘、陆、颜、谢，而观其遣辞用心，了不相似。
现代文：衹是拿当代的诗文作品，一一和古代才人的作品相比较，远的有扬雄、司马相如、曹植、王粲，近的有陆攒、颜至蛙、谢灵运，看看今人和古人的用语和立意，全不相似。
English: Comparing contemporary poetic works with the works of ancient geniuses, Yang Xiong, Sima Xiangru, Cao Zhi, and Wang Yao are far away, while Lu Zuo, Yan Zhi Frogs, and Xie Lingyun are nearby. If you look at the words and intentions of modern people and ancient people, they are completely different.

古文：若以今文为是，则古文为非；若昔贤可称，则今体宜弃。
现代文：假如认为现在的诗文是对的，那么古代的诗文就不符合要求；假如以前的贤人值得称道，那么现在的文体就应当废弃。
English: If the poetry of today is considered correct, then the poetry of antiquity does not meet the requirements; if the sages of the past are praiseworthy, then the current style should be abandoned.

古文：俱为盍各，则未之敢许。
现代文：认为各有志趣，应当并存，那是我不能同意的。
English: I cannot agree with the view that everyone has their own interests and that they should coexist.

古文：又时有效谢康乐、裴鸿胪文者，亦颇有惑焉。
现代文：又时而出现仿效谢尘乐、苤边躔的诗文进行写作，也很叫人糊涂。
English: From time to time, there are also poems that imitate Xie Ducheng's music and ruffles, which are also very confusing.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：谢客吐言天拔，出于自然，时有不拘，是其糟粕；裴氏乃是良史之才，了无篇什之美。
现代文：谢康乐写出文句卓然超绝，全是出于自然，但时时出现不拘形式的现象，这是他的糟粕；裴鸿膻是个写史的良才，全无篇章文句之美。
English: Xie Kangle's writing is superb, it is all natural, but there is always a phenomenon of informal form, which is his waste; Pei Hongyao is a talented writer of history, there is no chapter of beauty.

古文：是为学谢则不届其精华，但得其冗长；师裴则蔑绝其所长，惟得其所短。
现代文：因此学谢学不到他的精华，衹学到了他的冗长的弊病；学裴却弃绝了他的长处，衹学到他的短处。
English: Therefore, Xie Xie did not learn his essence, and Zou learned his lengthy maladies; but Xubei abandoned his strengths, and Zou learned his weaknesses.

古文：谢故巧不可阶，裴亦质不宜慕。
现代文：谢文的神妙不能达到，裴文的质朴也不应当仰慕。
English: The magic of Xiewen cannot be achieved, and the simplicity of Peiwen should not be admired.

古文：故胸驰臆断之侣，好名忘实之类，方分肉于仁兽，逞郤克于邯郸，入鲍忘臭，效尤致祸。
现代文：所以凭空臆想之流，好名忘实之辈，想要分肉给麒麟仁兽食用，想要晋国的却克在赵国的邯郸恣意妄为，遣祇是空想。
English: Therefore, the stream of imagining things out of thin air, the generation that forgets reality for the sake of a good name, the generation that wants to give a portion of meat to the unicorns and beasts for food, the generation that wants to make the shoguns of Jin do whatever they want in Zhao, and the sending of deities are fantasies.

古文：决羽谢生，岂三千之可及；伏膺裴氏，惧两唐之不传。
现代文：久入鲍鱼之肆而不闻其臭，一味盲目效尤往往会导致祸患。
English: If you have been around abalone for a long time without smelling it, blindly following their example will often lead to disaster.

古文：故玉徽金铣，反为拙目所嗤；《巴人下里》，更合郢中之听。《阳春》高而不和，妙声绝而不寻。
现代文：奋力追赶谢康乐，哪裹祇是模仿 三千广于赤县 之类的语句就可追上；一味倾慕裴鸿胪，那就担心像汉代唐林、唐尊之类的人物却不被列传。所以精美的琴、放光的金，反被目光短浅的人唾弃；《巴人》《下里》之类的通俗乐曲，反而更能迎合郢中听众的喜好。
English: Efforts to catch up with Xie Kangle, which is nothing more than an imitation of statements such as "three thousand wide in Chixian," can be caught up; if one admires Pei Hongtao, then one worries that figures such as Tanglin and Tang Zun in the Han Dynasty will not be listed. Therefore, exquisite pianos and shining gold are rejected by short-sighted people; popular music such as "Bajin" and "Shideli" are more able to cater to the preferences of the audience.

古文：竟不精讨锱铢，核量文质，有异《巧心》，终愧妍手。
现代文：《阳春》之曲高雅却没有人相和，美妙的歌声结束之后却没有人接续，竟然不去仔细研究作品的详细内容，全面衡量作品的文华舆质朴，和《巧心》相异趣，面对高手终感惭愧。
English: The song of "Yangchun" is elegant, but no one is in harmony with it. After the end of the wonderful singing, no one follows up. How dare they not carefully study the detailed content of the work, comprehensively measure the simplicity of the work. It is different from "Clever Heart," and they feel ashamed in the face of the master.

古文：是以握瑜怀玉之士，瞻郑邦而知退；章甫翠履之人，望闽乡而叹息。
现代文：因此，具有高尚品德注意操守的士人，远远望见郑国就畏避郑卫之音抽身而退；戴章甫冠用珍珠翠履的人，见到闽乡断发文身跣行的越人祇有长长叹息。
English: Therefore, a scholar with high moral character and attention to conduct will retreat from the distant sight of Zheng Guo when he is afraid of Zheng Wei's voice; a person who wears a Zhangfu crown and wears pearls will only have a long sigh when he sees a Yue person with a broken hair and a tattoo walking in the countryside.

古文：诗既若此，笔又如之。
现代文：诗已经像这种情况，文又和诗的情况一样。
English: The poem is already like this, and the text is like the poem.

古文：徒以烟墨不言，受其驱染；纸札无情，任其摇襞。
现代文：衹是因为松烟墨不会说话，衹会受人驱使胡加涂染；纸张没有感情，可以任由文人摇笔书写。
English: Because the pine-smoke ink cannot speak, the ink will be forced to be dyed; the paper has no emotion, and can be written by the writer.

古文：甚矣哉，文之横流，一至于此！
现代文：太厉害了啊，诗文的灾祸，竟到了这样的程度!
English: It is terrible, the scourge of poetry, that it has come to this!

古文：至如近世谢朓、沈约之诗，任昉、陆倕之笔，斯实文章之冠冕，述作之楷模。
现代文：至于近代谢跳、沈约的诗作，任防、陆棰的文章，遣实在是诗文中的冠冕，著述的楷模。
English: As for the poems of modern poets Xie Zi and Shen Yao, the articles of Ren Zi and Lu Yao, they are indeed the crown of poetry and the model of writing.

古文：张士简之赋，周升逸之辩，亦成佳手，难可复遇。
现代文：张士简作的赋，周升逸写的辩，也使这两人成为写文章的佳手，很难再遇上这样的能人。
English: Zhang Shijian's "Fu" and Zhou Shengyi's "Dispute" have also made these two people good at writing articles. It is difficult to meet such talented people again.

古文：文章未坠，必有英绝；领袖之者，非弟而谁。
现代文：礼乐制度、文物典章没有崩溃，一定会有英俊卓异的人才应运而生，作为这些人才的领袖，除了弟弟你还有谁呢!
English: The ceremonial music system and the cultural relics ordinance have not collapsed, and there will definitely be handsome and extraordinary talents. As the leader of these talents, who else do you have besides your brother?

古文：每欲论之，无可与语，思言子建，一共商榷。
现代文：常常想议论这些事，但是没有人可以一同谈说，你是我们家的曹子建，所以想和你一同商摧。
English: I often want to talk about these things, but no one can talk together. You are the Cao Zijian of our family, so I want to talk with you.

古文：辩兹清浊，使如泾、渭；论兹月旦，类彼汝南。
现代文：分辨逭当中的清浊，使它们像泾水、渭水那样分得清清楚楚；评议这当中的是非优劣，就如同许劭、许靖汝南月旦评论那样。
English: Distinguish the clear and muddy among the muddy, so that they can be clearly distinguished as muddy water and muddy water; discuss the merits and demerits among them, just as Xu Yao and Xu Jing Runan commented on the moon.

古文：硃丹既定，雌黄有别，使夫怀鼠知惭，滥竽自耻。
现代文：朱笔已经写定，评议却会有不同，让那些以鼠作玉璞的人知道羞惭，让滥竽充数的人自己知道羞耻。
English: The pen has already been written, but the review will be different, so that those who use the rat as a talisman know shame, and those who use the rat as a talisman know shame.

古文：譬斯袁绍，畏见子将；同彼盗牛，遥羞王烈。
现代文：造就好比袁绍，害怕豪华的车骑被许子将见到；也如同盗牛者，羞于自己的罪行被王烈知道。
English: He was like Yuan Shao, who was afraid that his luxurious carriage ride would be seen by his betrothed; he was also like the cow thief, who was ashamed that his crime would be known by Wang Lai.

古文：相思不见，我劳如何。
现代文：久久思念却见不到你，我的忧愁如何打发啊!
English: I've been missing you for a long time, but I can't see you. How can I get rid of my sadness?

古文：太清中，侯景寇陷京都；及太宗即位，以肩吾为度支尚书。
现代文：太清年间，侯景进犯并攻陷京城，到太宗登上帝位的时候，命庾肩吾为度支尚书。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Houjing attacked and captured the capital, and when Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, it was a matter of life and death.

古文：时上流诸蕃，并据州拒景，景矫诏遣肩吾使江州，喻当阳公大心，大心寻举州降贼。肩吾因逃入建昌界，久之，方得赴江陵，未几卒。
现代文：当时在江上流的众藩王，都固守自己所在的州郡抵御侯景。侯景假藉皇上诏命派庾肩吾为朝廷使臣到江州，劝谕当阳公萧大心投降，萧大心不久率州投降侯景，庾肩吾就逃入建昌地界，很久，他才得以赶赴江陵，不久就去世了。
English: At that time, all the kings of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River were holding fast to their own prefectures and counties to resist Hou Jing. Hou Jing sent his emissary to Jiangzhou as an imperial envoy by imperial edict, exhorting Dangyanggong Xiao Daxin to surrender. Xiao Daxin soon led the state to surrender to Hou Jing, and his emissary fled to Jianchang. It took him a long time to get to Gangneung, and he died soon after.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：庾肩吾有文集流传在世上。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：刘昭，字宣卿，平原高唐人，晋太尉实九世孙也。
现代文：刘昭字宣卿，平原高唐人，他是晋太尉刘定第九代子孙。
English: Liu Zhaozhe, surnamed Xuanqing, was a native of the Plains of Gaotang. He was the ninth generation descendant of the Jin officer Liu Ding.

古文：祖伯龙，居父忧以孝闻，宋武帝敕皇太子诸王并往吊慰，官至少府卿。
现代文：他的祖父刘伯龙，在为父亲守丧时因孝行而出名，宋武帝命皇太子及诸王一起前往他家吊唁慰问。刘伯龙官职升至少府卿。
English: His grandfather, Liu Bolong, was famous for his filial piety when he attended his father's funeral. Emperor Songwu ordered the crown prince and other kings to go to his home to offer condolences. Liu Bolong was promoted to at least the post of prefectural governor.

古文：父彪，齐征虏晋安王记室。
现代文：刘昭的父亲刘彪，齐时任征虏晋安王记室。
English: Liu Zhao's father, Liu Biao, was conscripted into the Jinan Wang Ji Office.

古文：昭幼清警，七岁通《老》、《庄》义。
现代文：刘昭从小聪慧机敏，七岁时就能理解《老邗《庄子》的文义。
English: Liu Zhao has been clever and astute since he was a child. At the age of seven, he was able to understand the meaning of "Lao Zhi" and "Zhuang Zi."

古文：既长，勤学善属文，外兄江淹早相称赏。
现代文：长大成人之后，他更为勤奋学习，善于写文章，他的表兄江淹很早就赏识他，称颂他。
English: When he became an adult, he was more diligent in studying and good at writing articles. His cousin Jiang Nong recognized him very early and praised him.

古文：天监初，起家奉朝请，累迁征北行参军、尚书仓部郎，寻除无锡令。
现代文：天监初年，刘昭初出仕任奉朝请，积功迁升征北行参军，尚书仓部郎，不久又除授无锡令。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervisor, Liu Zhaohu was appointed to serve the imperial court, and he was promoted to the north to join the army, and soon he was awarded the Order of Wuxi.

古文：历为宣惠豫章王、中军临川王记室。
现代文：先后任宣惠豫章王、中军临川王记室。
English: He successively served as the secretary of King Xuan Huiyu Zhang and the secretary of King Linchuan of the Chinese army.

古文：初，昭伯父肜集众家《晋书》注干宝《晋纪》为四十卷，至昭又集《后汉》同异以注范晔书，世称博悉。
现代文：起初，刘昭伯父刘肜集众家《晋书》为干实《晋纪》作注，共四十卷，到逭时刘昭又集各家《后漠书》不同之处为范晔《后漠书》作注，当时人都称逭注本广博周全。
English: At first, Liu Zhao's uncle Liu Zhe collected the "Jin Shu" of all the families to annotate the "Jin Ji" of Gan Shi, a total of forty volumes. When Liu Zhao died, Liu Zhao also collected the differences between the "Houmo Shu" of each family to annotate the "Houmo Shu" of Fan Zhe. At that time, everyone said that the annotated book was extensive and comprehensive.

古文：迁通直郎，出为剡令，卒官。
现代文：刘昭迁任通直郎，出京任刘令，在任职期间去世。
English: Liu Zhao was transferred to the post of Tong Naorong, and went to Beijing to serve as Liu Ling. He died during his term of office.

古文：《集注后汉》一百八十卷，《幼童传》十卷，文集十卷。
现代文：刘昭著有《集注后漠》一百八十卷，《幼童传》十卷，文集十卷。
English: Liu Zhao is the author of 180 volumes of "Collection of Notes on the Back Desert," 10 volumes of "Children's Biography," and 10 volumes of anthologies.

古文：子縚，字言明。亦好学，通《三礼》。
现代文：刘昭之子刘縚，字言明，也爱好学习，精通《三礼》。
English: Liu Zhao's son, Liu Wei, has a clear vocabulary, is also fond of learning, and is proficient in the "Three Rites."

古文：大同中，为尚书祠部郎，寻去职，不复仕。
现代文：大同年间，刘绢任尚书祠部郎，不久离职，不再出仕。
English: In the same year, Liu Wei was appointed as the minister of Shangshu Shrine, but soon left the post and no longer served.

古文：縚弟缓，字含度，少知名。
现代文：刘縚之弟刘縚，字含度，他从小就很出名。
English: Liu Xuan's younger brother, Liu Xuan, has been famous since he was a child.

古文：历官安西湘东王记室，时西府盛集文学，缓居其首。
现代文：曾任安西湘东王记室，当时西府中聚集了很多文学之士，刘縚在其中居于首位。
English: He once served as the Anxi Xiangdong Wang Ji's office. At that time, many literary figures gathered in West Fuchu, and Liu Ye was at the top of them.

古文：除通直郎，俄迁镇南湘东王中录事，复随府江州，卒。
现代文：刘縚被除授通直郎，不久迁任镇南湘东王中录事，又随府到，在江州去世。
English: Liu Ye was stripped of the title of Tong Nairo, soon moved to the town of South Hunan Dongwang Middle School, and then went to the capital, where he died in Jiangzhou.

古文：何逊，字仲言，东海郯人也。
现代文：何逊字仲言，东海郯县人。
English: He is also a mediator, and a native of Min County in the East China Sea.

古文：曾祖承天，宋御史中丞。
现代文：他的曾祖父何承天，宋时任御史中丞。
English: His great-grandfather, He Chengtian, was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History in the Song Dynasty.

古文：祖翼，员外郎。
现代文：祖父何翼，任员外郎。
English: His grandfather, Ho Tsubasa, was a postmaster.

古文：父询，齐太尉中兵参军。
现代文：父亲何询，齐时任太尉中兵参军。
English: At his father's request, Qi joined the army as a lieutenant.

古文：逊八岁能赋诗，弱冠，州举秀才。南乡范云见其对策，大相称赏，因结忘年交好。
现代文：何逊八岁就能赋诗，二十岁被州中举为秀才，南乡范云见到何逊写的对策，大加赞赏，因此和何逊结成忘年之交。
English: When he was eight years old, he was able to compose poems. At the age of 20, he was selected as an outstanding talent by the middle school of the state. When Fan Yun from Nanzhong saw the countermeasures written by him, he greatly appreciated them. Therefore, he formed an unforgettable friendship with him.

古文：自是一文一咏，云辄嗟赏，谓所亲曰： 顷观文人，质则过儒，丽则伤俗；其能含清浊，中今古，见之何生矣。 
现代文：从此之后，何逊的每一篇文章，每一首诗歌，范云见到之后就都加以赞赏。范云对自己亲近的人说： 近来看这些文人的诗文，质朴的就如同儒生讲经书，靡丽的就有些伤风败俗；能够容纳天地的灵气，包含今古的道理，衹是在何生的诗文中见到。 
English: From then on, Fan Yun appreciated every article and every poem of Ho Son after seeing them. Fan Yun said to his close people: Recently, the poems of these literati are as simple as Confucian sermons, and the beautiful ones are a bit vulgar; they can accommodate the spirit of heaven and earth, including the ancient truth, and they are seen in Ho Son's poems.

古文：沈约亦爱其文，尝谓逊曰： 吾每读卿诗，一日三复，犹不能已。 
现代文：沈约也喜欢何逊的诗文，他曾经对何逊说： 我每次读到你的诗，一天反复多次，还不能尽兴而止。 
English: Shen You also likes Ho Sun's poems. He once said to Ho Sun: Every time I read your poem, I can't stop enjoying it. I read it several times a day.

古文：其为名流所称如此。
现代文：何逊被名流称赞竟到了这样的程度。
English: No one has ever been praised by celebrities to such an extent.

古文：天监中，起家奉朝请，迁中卫建安王水曹行参军，兼记室。
现代文：天监年间，何逊从家中出仕任奉朝请，迁任中卫建安王水曹行参军，兼记室。
English: During the time of the Heaven's Inspector, he was sent from home to serve at the request of the imperial court, transferred to the position of the middle guard of the Jianan Wang Shui Cao line to join the army, and also served as a secretary.

古文：王爱文学之士，日与游宴，及迁江州，逊犹掌书记。
现代文：建安王喜爱文学之士，每天与他们一起游乐宴饮，建安王迁任江州，何逊还是掌书记。
English: King Jian'an loved literary people and enjoyed banquets with them every day. King Jian'an was transferred to Jiangzhou, and he was still the secretary.

古文：还为安西安成王参军事，兼尚书水部郎，母忧去职。
现代文：何逊回京城任安西安成王参军事，兼尚书水部郎，因为母亲守丧而离职。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he was appointed as the Anxi Ancheng Wang Sheng military, concurrently serving as the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. However, he left the post due to his mother's funeral.

古文：服阕，除仁威庐陵王记室，复随府江州，未几卒。
现代文：服丧期满，何逊被除授仁威庐陵王记室，又随王府到江州，没多久就去世了。
English: At the end of the period of mourning, he was removed from the Office of the King's Record of the Tomb of Emperor Jinwei, and went to Jiangzhou with the royal court. He died not long after.

古文：东海王僧孺集其文为八卷。
现代文：东海王僧孺收集何逊的诗文汇成文集八卷。
English: The East Sea King Monk Zou collected a number of poems into an eight-volume anthology.

古文：初，逊文章与刘孝绰并见重于世，世谓之 何刘 。
现代文：当初，何逊的诗文舆刘孝绰的诗文都被世人看重，世人称他们为 何刘 。
English: At the beginning, the poems of He Xun and Liu Xiaoqiao were valued by the world, and the world called them He Liu.

古文：世祖著论论之云： 诗多而能者沈约，少而能者谢朓、何逊。 
现代文：世祖写文章评论何逊说： 诗多而显示才能的是沈约，诗少而显示才能的是谢跳、何逊。 
English: The Ancestor wrote an article commenting on this, saying, "A poet with many poems but little talent is a mediocrity; a poet with few poems but great talent is a failure."

古文：时有会稽虞骞，工为五言诗，名与逊相埒，官至王国侍郎。
现代文：当时有会稽虞骞，精于写五言诗，名声与何逊相等，官职当到王国侍郎。
English: At that time, there was a scholar who was good at writing five-character poems, and his reputation was equal to that of a villain. His official position was a royal chamberlain.

古文：其后又有会稽孔翁归、济阳江避，并为南平王大司马府记室。
现代文：以后又有会稽孔翁归、济阳江避，两人都任南平王大司马府记室。
English: Later, there were also Kong Wenggui and Jiyang Jiangyu, both of whom served as the secretary of Nanping Wang.

古文：翁归亦工为诗，避博学有思理，更注《论语》、《孝经》。
现代文：孔翁归也精于做诗。江避博学，并且有思辩之才，他另外又给《论语》、《孝经》作注。
English: Kong Wengui was also good at writing poetry. He avoided erudition and had the ability to reason. He also wrote notes for "Analects" and "The Book of Filial Piety."

古文：二人并有文集。
现代文：这两人都有文集。
English: Both of them have collections.

古文：钟嵘，字仲伟，颍川长社人，晋侍中雅七世孙也。
现代文：钟嵘字仲伟，颍川长社人，他是晋侍中钟壁的第七代子孙。
English: Zhong Wei, also known as Zhong Wei, was a member of the Jianchuan Presbyterian Church. He was the seventh generation descendant of Zhong Zhongbi, a member of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父蹈，齐中军参军。
现代文：他的父亲钟蹈，齐时任中军参军。
English: His father, Zhong Tie, was serving in the Chinese army at the time.

古文：嵘与兄岏、弟屿并好学，有思理。
现代文：钟嵘和兄长钟岘、弟弟钟屿都十分好学，善于思考，明辨事理。
English: Jonghyun, his elder brother Jonghyun and younger brother Jongyu are all very eager to learn, good at thinking and able to reason.

古文：嵘，齐永明中为国子生，明《周易》，卫军王俭领祭酒，颇赏接之。
现代文：钟嵘在齐永明年间为国子生，通晓《周易》，卫军将军王俭领国子祭酒，他对钟嵘颇为赏识，并极力举荐。
English: Zhong Qi was the son of the state in the middle of the Qiyong dynasty. He was familiar with "Zhou Yi," and the general of the Guards, Wang Jian, led the son of the state in the sacrifice of wine. He was quite appreciative of Zhong Qi and strongly recommended him.

古文：举本州秀才。
现代文：钟嵘被举为本州秀才。
English: Jonghyun was named the top talent in Honshu.

古文：起家王国侍郎，迁抚军行参军，出为安国令。
现代文：初出仕任王国侍郎，迁任抚军行参军，出京任安国令。
English: At the beginning of his service, he was appointed as the attendant of the kingdom, transferred to the army to join the army, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of An.

古文：永元末，除司徒行参军。
现代文：永元末年，钟嵘被除授司徒行参军。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, Zhong Yao was expelled from the priesthood and joined the army.

古文：天监初，制度虽革，而日不暇给，嵘乃言曰： 永元肇乱，坐弄天爵，勋非即戎，官以贿就。
现代文：天监初年，礼制法规虽有改变，但事务繁忙，日不暇给，钟嵘于是上书进言说： 永元年间的祸乱，起因在于随意对待朝廷的爵位，勋不是参加战争获取，官依靠贿赂取得。
English: In the first year of the Celestial Inspector, although there were changes in the rules and regulations of the etiquette system, the affairs were busy and there was no time to spare, so Zhong Wei wrote a letter saying: The disaster in the Yongyuan period was caused by the arbitrary treatment of the imperial court's titles. Honors were not obtained by participating in wars, but officials relied on bribery to obtain them.

古文：挥一金而取九列，寄片札以招六校；骑都塞市，郎将填街。
现代文：挥洒金银就能取得九卿职位，凭藉请托信件就能跻身军官行列，骑都尉充塞街市，中郎将满街满巷。
English: Gold and silver can be used to obtain the position of nine lords, and letters of request can be used to join the ranks of officers. Cavalry captains will fill the streets, and middlemen will fill the streets.

古文：服既缨组，尚为臧获之事；职唯黄散，犹躬胥徒之役。
现代文：身穿官员的服饰，还干着奴仆的事情；职务虽说是黄门、散骑之类，还亲自承担衙吏的差事。
English: Dressed in official attire, he also did the work of a servant; although his duties were to guard the Yellow Gate, horseback riding and the like, he also personally undertook the duties of a bailiff.

古文：名实淆紊，兹焉莫甚。
现代文：名实混淆，没有比遣更厉害的了。
English: There's nothing worse than being confused.

古文：臣愚谓军官是素族士人，自有清贯，而因斯受爵，一宜削除，以惩侥竞。
现代文：我认为军官假如是累代士族，他家自有名望，如果祇是依靠这点得到爵位，那就全都应当削除，以使那些贪求利禄之徒引为鉴戒。
English: I think that if an officer is a descendant of a noble family, if his family is famous, if he only relies on this to get a knighthood, then all of them should be removed, so that those who are greedy for lucre can be cautioned.

古文：若吏姓寒人，听极其门品，不当因军，遂滥清级。
现代文：假如是仕宦之家，寒素出身，就应当准许他们根据自己的门第在仕途尽力，不应当空授军中职务，致使清贵之职泛滥。
English: If they are from a poor family, they should be allowed to do their best according to their lineage. They should not be given positions in the military, leading to a proliferation of high-ranking positions.

古文：若侨杂伧楚，应在绥附，正宜严断禄力，绝其妨正，直乞虚号而已。
现代文：假如是侨居的北方人任职，应加存问安抚，但应严格控制他们的俸禄，禁止他们妨碍政务，衹是授予虚职而已。
English: If a northerner living abroad is appointed to a post, he or she should be given additional consideration, but their salary should be strictly controlled and they should be prohibited from interfering with government affairs. Otherwise, it is nothing more than the granting of a fake post.

古文：谨竭愚忠，不恤众口。 
现代文：我衹是尽心竭力，进献自己的愚忠，不考虑众人的议论。 
English: I am trying my best to promote my own foolish loyalty, regardless of the opinions of others.

古文：敕付尚书行之。
现代文：高祖命令把遣份上书交给尚书省施行。
English: Gaozhu ordered that the letter be sent to Shangshuo for implementation.

古文：迁中军临川王行参军。
现代文：钟蝼迁任中军堕丛王行参军。
English: Zhong Xi Qian was transferred to join the army of the fallen Cong Wang Xing.

古文：衡阳王元简出守会稽，引为宁朔记室，专掌文翰。
现代文：复旧眶芦五盐出京到盒擅任职，把钟蠖提拔为宁朔记室，专门掌管文书。
English: Revival of the old Gourd Five Salts went to Beijing to serve as a box expert, and promoted Zhong Qi to the Ningshuo Records Office, specializing in the management of documents.

古文：时居士何胤筑室若邪山，山发洪水，漂拔树石，此室独存。元简命嵘作《瑞室颂》以旌表之，辞甚典丽，选西中郎晋安王记室。
现代文：当时居士何胤在若邪山中筑造石室，山洪暴发，冲走石头和树木，衹有何胤逭石室没被冲毁，萧元简命钟嵘作《瑞室颂》表彰宣扬遣件事，文辞十分典雅华丽。钟嵘又被选授西中郎晋安王记室。
English: At that time, the householder He Yan built a stone room in the middle of the Waka Mountain. A flash flood occurred and washed away the stones and trees. However, the stone room was not washed away. Xiao Yuan Jianmei Zhongyi wrote the "Song of Ruishu" to commend and promote the sending of the matter, and the words were very elegant and gorgeous. Zhongyi was also selected to be awarded the West Middle Lord Jinan Wang Ji's room.

古文：嵘尝品古今五言诗，论其优劣，名为《诗评》。
现代文：钟嵘曾经品评古今五言诗，评论它们的优劣，取名为《诗评》。
English: Zhong Qi once commented on ancient and modern five-character poems, commenting on their merits and demerits, and named it "Poetry Review."

古文：其序曰：气之动物，物之感人，故摇荡性情，形诸舞咏。
现代文：《诗评》的序文说：节气更替使万物萌动，万物的变化兴衰，又使人受到感触。
English: The preface of the "Poetry Review" says: The change of the solar terms makes all things bud, the changes of all things rise and fall, and people are touched.

古文：欲以照烛三才，辉丽万有，灵祇待之以致飨，幽微藉之以昭告。动天地，感鬼神，莫近于诗。
现代文：所以情感激荡，这种情感在歌咏舞蹈中表现出来。想要用来照亮天地人三才，辉映天地间万物，召唤神灵享用祭品，把世间幽微昭告上天，惊动天地，感化鬼神，再没有什么比诗歌更为有效的了。
English: Therefore, emotions are stirred, and this emotion is expressed in song and dance. If you want to use it to illuminate the three talents of heaven and earth, reflect all things in heaven and earth, call the gods to enjoy the offerings, announce the world to heaven, alarm heaven and earth, and influence ghosts and gods, there is nothing more effective than poetry.

古文：昔《南风》之辞，《卿云》之颂，厥义夐矣。
现代文：从前虞舜时《南风》歌辞，《卿云》颂歌，它们的含意十分深远。
English: The lyrics of "Southern Wind" and "Ode to Qingyun" from the time of Yu Xuan, their meanings are very far-reaching.

古文：《夏歌》曰 郁陶乎予心 ，楚谣云 名余曰正则 ，虽诗体未全，然略是五言之滥觞也。
现代文：《夏歌》说 郁陶乎予心 ，楚地歌谄说 名余为正则 ，虽然诗的整体还不够完备，但它们大体上可以算是五言诗的滥觞吧。
English: "Summer Song" says that Yu Tao is full of foreboding, and "Chu Di Song" says that the rest of the name is the rule, although the whole of the poem is not complete, but they can generally be regarded as five-character poems.

古文：逮汉李陵，始著五言之目。
现代文：到漠代李陵，才创立五言诗的名目。
English: It was not until the Li Ling Dynasty in the desert that the name of the five-character poem was created.

古文：古诗眇邈，人代难详，推其文体，固是炎汉之制，非衰周之倡也。
现代文：古诗的时代离现在已很久远，它们的作者和写作年代，都很难考察清楚，但从它的内容和风格来推断，应当是漠代的作品，并不是周末衰败时期之作。
English: The era of ancient poetry is far away from now. It is difficult to investigate the author and the year of writing, but from its content and style, it should be a work of the desert era, not a work of the weekend decay period.

古文：自王、扬、枚、马之徒，辞赋竞爽，而吟咏靡闻。从李都尉讫班婕妤，将百年间，有妇人焉，一人而已。
现代文：从王褒、扬雄、枚乘、司马相如等人以来，都在辞赋创作上争强斗胜，各显神通，而诗歌吟咏却从未听说，从李陵李都尉到班婕妤，将近一百年间，虽有妇人在其中，但也衹有一人而已。
English: Since Wang Bao, Yang Xiong, Mihajen, Sima Xiangru and others, they have been competing and winning in the creation of diction, each showing supernatural powers, but they have never heard of poetic chanting. From Li Ling Li Du Fu to Banzhu, in nearly a hundred years, although there are women among them, there is only one.

古文：诗人之风，顿已缺丧。
现代文：作诗的风气，骤然中断了。
English: The poetic tradition came to an abrupt halt.

古文：东京二百载中，唯有班固《咏史》，质木无文致。
现代文：后汉二百年中，衹有班固的《咏史》诗，质朴而没有文采。
English: In the last two hundred years of the Han Dynasty, many of Ban Gu's "History" poems were simple and lacked literary flair.

古文：降及建安，曹公父子，笃好斯文；平原兄弟，郁为文栋；刘桢、王粲，为其羽冀。
现代文：到了建安时期，曹操父子，酷爱文学；曹植兄弟，作品繁茂，实为文坛栋梁；刘桢、王粲，在他们左右壮大声势。
English: By the Jianan period, Cao Cao and his son were passionate about literature; the Cao Zhi brothers, whose works were prolific, were the pillars of the literary world; Liu Bei and Wang Bei were strong and influential around them.

古文：次有攀龙托凤，自致于属车者，盖将百计。
现代文：还有攀龙附凤，自愿追随他们的，大概将近一百人。
English: There were also about a hundred people who volunteered to follow them.

古文：彬彬之盛，大备于时矣！
现代文：人才济济的盛况，算是在这个时代出现了。
English: It was in this era that the flourishing of talent appeared.

古文：尔后陵迟衰微，讫于有晋。
现代文：逭以后，文坛逐渐衰落，直到晋代。
English: After the Qing Dynasty, the literary world gradually declined until the Jin Dynasty.

古文：太康中，三张二陆，两潘一左，勃尔复兴，踵武前王，风流未沫，亦文章之中兴也。
现代文：太康年间，张载、张协、张华三张，陆机、陆云二陆，潘岳、潘尼二潘，还有左思，他们勃然兴起，复兴文坛，追踪曹氏父子，继承建安时期的流风余韵，遣也正是五言诗的中兴时期。
English: During the Taikang years, Zhang Zai, Zhang Xie, Zhang Hua, Lu Jiao, Lu Yun Er Lu, Pan Yue, Pan Ni Er Pan, as well as Zuo Si, they suddenly arose, revived the literary world, traced Cao's father and son, inherited the afterglow of the Jianan period, and it was also the rising period of five-character poetry.

古文：永嘉时，贵黄、老，尚虚谈，于时篇什，理过其辞，淡乎寡味。
现代文：永嘉时代，看重黄、老之说，崇尚玄言之风，这个时期的诗歌作品，重在谈玄说理，压倒内容文采，读起来淡然无味。
English: In the Yongjia era, the emphasis was on Huang, Lao Zhi, and the style of advocating metaphysics. The poetic works of this period focused on the discussion of metaphysics, overwhelming the content of literature, and it was boring to read.

古文：爰及江表，微波尚传，孙绰、许询、桓、庾诸公，皆平典似《道德论》，建安之风尽矣。
现代文：至于到了晋朝南迁，这种风气的余波依然流传，孙绰、许询、桓伟、庾友等人的作品，都质朴平板，好似《道德论》，建安风骨丢失殆尽。
English: As for the southern migration of the Jin Dynasty, the aftershocks of this culture are still circulating. The works of Sun Cao, Xu En, Huan Wei, Xing You and others are simple and flat, just like "Theory of Morals," and the spirit of Jian'an has been lost.

古文：先是郭景纯用俊上之才，创变其体；刘越石仗清刚之气，赞成厥美。
现代文：这以前，郭景纯凭藉他俊逸出众的才华，革新诗体；刘越石依仗清正刚健的作风，推波助澜。
English: Prior to this, Guo Jingshun used his extraordinary talent to innovate the style of poetry; Liu Yueishi relied on his clean, upright and robust style to make waves.

古文：然彼众我寡，未能动俗。
现代文：但守旧派多，革新者少，他们没有能够影响文坛风气。
English: However, there are many conservatives and few innovators, and they have not been able to influence the literary world.

古文：逮义熙中，谢益寿斐然继作；元嘉初，有谢灵运，才高辞盛，富艳难踪，固已含跨刘、郭，陵轹潘、左。
现代文：到了义熙年间，谢益寿以他文采斐然的作品继之而起；元嘉初年，出现了谢灵运，他诗才高妙，创作丰盛，文辞富丽华赡，无人能舆他相提并论，他实在已经超过了刘越石、郭景纯，压倒了潘岳、左思。
English: During the Yixi era, Xie Yishou followed suit with his brilliant literary works; in the first year of the Yuan Jia era, Xie Lingyun appeared. He was a brilliant poet, his works were abundant, his words were rich and brilliant, and no one could compare with him. He really surpassed Liu Yue Shi and Guo Jingshun, and overwhelmed Pan Yue and Zuo Si.

古文：故知陈思为建安之杰，公干、仲宣为辅；陆机为太康之英，安仁、景阳为辅；谢客为元嘉之雄，颜延年为辅：此皆五言之冠冕，文辞之命世。
现代文：由此可知，陈思王曹植是建安时期的杰出人才，刘公干、王仲宣为他壮大声势；陆机是太康时期的精英，潘安仁、张景阳是他的左右臂膀；谢灵运是元嘉时期的雄才，颜延年是他的辅佐。这些人都是五言诗的领先人物，是以他们的作品名著一时的杰出人才。
English: From this, it can be seen that Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi was an outstanding talent in the Jianan period, Liu Gongkang and Wang Zhongxuan were his strong leaders; Lu Ji was an elite in the Taikang period, Pan Anren and Zhang Jingyang were his right and left arms; Xie Lingyun was a great talent in the Yuan Jia period, and Yan Yan Nian was his assistant. These people are all leading figures in five-character poetry, and are outstanding talents with their famous works.

古文：夫四言文约意广，取效《风》、《骚》，便可多得，每苦文烦而意少，故世罕习焉。
现代文：说到四言诗，文字简约而含义深远，假如能够仿效《诗经》、楚辞》，就能有很大的收获，但是常常苦于文字烦琐，表达的内容却很单薄，所以世上很少有入学写四言诗。
English: When it comes to four-character poems, the words are simple but the meaning is profound. If you can imitate the "Book of Songs" and "Elegy," you can get a lot of harvest. However, you often suffer from the cumbersome words, but the content of expression is very thin, so there are very few schools in the world to write four-character poems.

古文：五言居文辞之要，是众作之有滋味者也，故云会于流俗。岂不以指事遣形，穷情写物，最为详切者邪！
现代文：五言诗处在诗歌中的关键地位，是各种体裁中最有趣味的一种，说它符合一般人的要求，不正是因为它在述写情景、抒发感情、描绘事物等方面，是一种最为详尽、最为贴切的体裁吗?
English: The five-syllable poem occupies a key position in poetry, is one of the most interesting genres, and is said to meet the requirements of ordinary people. Is it because it is the most detailed and most appropriate genre in terms of describing situations, expressing emotions, and depicting things?

古文：故《诗》有六义焉，一曰兴，二曰比，三曰赋。
现代文：所以诗》有六义，其中第一叫兴，第二叫赋，第三叫比。
English: Therefore, "poetry" has six meanings, of which the first is "xing," the second is "fu" and the third is "bi."

古文：文已尽而意有余，兴也；因物喻志，比也；直书其事，寓言写物，赋也。
现代文：文辞已尽而含义未尽，就是兴；藉其他事物来表明自己的思想，就是比；直接描绘事物，用言辞来描摹事物情状，就是赋。
English: If the words are exhausted but the meaning is not exhausted, it is xing; if you use other things to express your thoughts, it is li; if you describe things directly and use words to describe the state of things, it is fu.

古文：弘斯三义，酌而用之，干之以风力，润之以丹采，使味之者无极，闻之者动心，是诗之至也。
现代文：弘扬《诗》的逭三种表现手法，斟酌情况使用它们，用风骨去增强诗的内容，用文采去润饰诗的文辞，能使品味诗的人觉得其味无穷，听到诗的人感情萌动，这是诗中的上乘作品。
English: To carry forward the three modes of expression of "Poetry" and use them as appropriate, to enhance the content of the poem with the spirit, and to embellish the words of the poem with the text, can make people who taste the poem feel that its taste is infinite, and people who hear the poem are emotional. This is the best work in the poem.

古文：若专用比、兴，则患在意深，意深则辞踬。
现代文：假如衹用比、兴手法，其毛病在于含义过于深奥，含义深奥就会使人感觉文辞艰涩。
English: If you use the comparison and interest method, the problem is that the meaning is too profound, and the profound meaning will make people feel that the words are difficult.

古文：若但用赋体，则患在意浮，意浮则文散。嬉成流移，文无止泊，有芜漫之累矣。
现代文：假如又衹用赋这种手法，那么毛病就在于意义浅显，意义浅显就显得文辞松散，因而油滑浮泛，失去控制，显示出芜杂混乱的毛病。
English: If this method is also used, then the problem is that the meaning is not clear, and the meaning is not clear, the wording is loose, so it is slippery, floating, out of control, and shows the problem of mixed confusion.

古文：若乃春风春鸟，秋月秋蝉，夏云暑雨，冬月祁寒，斯四候之感诸诗者也。
现代文：至于春风春鸟，秋月秋蝉，夏云暑雨，隆冬严寒，这都是四季的变化使人产生感触而写入诗中。
English: As for the spring wind, spring birds, autumn cicadas, summer clouds, summer rain, midwinter cold, these are all changes in the four seasons that make people feel and write them into the poem.

古文：嘉会寄诗以亲，离群托诗以怨。
现代文：嘉节盛会藉诗以表达情谊，离别友朋藉诗以表达愁怨。
English: Poetry is used to express friendship at the Jiading Festival, and poems are used to express sorrow at the parting of friends.

古文：至于楚臣去境，汉妾辞宫；或骨横朔野，或魂逐飞蓬；或负戈外戍，或杀气雄边；塞客衣单，霜闺泪尽。
现代文：至于楚臣屈原被放逐，汉姬昭君离宫庭，有的人尸横塞外，有的人魂逐飞蓬，有的人负戈戍边，有的人威震边塞，边塞游子天寒衣单，深闺妇人思亲泪尽。
English: As for the banishment of Chu Qian Qu Yuan, when Han Ji Zhaojun left the palace, some people's corpses were left behind, some people's souls were chased away, some people were defeated, some people's authority was shaken, some wanderers were stranded in cold clothes, and many young women were in tears.

古文：又士有解佩出朝，一去忘反；女有扬蛾入宠，再盼倾国。
现代文：又有士人辞官出朝，去而不返；美女入宫受宠，倾城倾国。
English: There were also officials who resigned and went to the imperial court, but never returned; beautiful women were favored when they entered the palace, and they loved the city and loved the country.

古文：凡斯种种，感荡心灵，非陈诗何以展其义，非长歌何以释其情？故曰： 《诗》可以群，可以怨。 
现代文：这种种情况，都激荡人们的心灵，不用诗歌吟颂怎么体现自己的思想，不高声吟咏怎么畅抒自己的情怀?所以说 《诗》可以交流大家的情感，可以表达悲愁哀怨 。
English: All of these situations stir people's hearts. How can one express one's thoughts without chanting poetry, and how can one express one's feelings without chanting aloud? Therefore, "Poetry" can communicate everyone's emotions, and can express sadness and sorrow.

古文：使穷贱易安，幽居靡闷，莫尚于诗矣。
现代文：要使处在窘迫贫贱之中的人安定，要使孤寂幽居的人没有烦闷，没有什么东西比诗更能起到这种作用了。
English: Nothing is more effective than poetry in stabilizing the distressed and impoverished, and in relieving the boredom of the lonely and reclusive.

古文：故辞人作者，罔不爱好。
现代文：所以文人雅士，没有谁不爱好诗歌。
English: Therefore, there is no literati aristocrat who does not like poetry.

古文：今之士俗，斯风炽矣。
现代文：现在在士人百姓之中，这种爱好诗歌的风气更为炽盛。
English: Now, among the common people, this love of poetry has become even more ardent.

古文：裁能胜衣，甫就小学，必甘心而驰骛焉。
现代文：刚刚学会穿衣走路的小孩，刚刚进入学校的儿童，就一定会津津乐道，在诗的领域驰骛。
English: Children who have just learned to dress and walk, children who have just entered school, will certainly appreciate the music and gallop in the field of poetry.

古文：于是庸音杂体，各为家法。
现代文：于是平庸之作，杂乱之句，都俨然以诗的流派的身份出现。
English: As a result, mediocre works and disjointed sentences have suddenly emerged as a genre of poetry.

古文：至于膏腴子弟，耻文不逮，终朝点缀，分夜呻吟，独观谓为警策，众视终沦平钝。
现代文：至于富家子弟，更以诗文不及别人为耻辱，整天修改，日夜吟咏，自己看来，认为是精炼贴切的警策之句，在大家看来，不过是浅陋笨拙的平庸之作。
English: As for the children of the rich, they are even more ashamed that their poetry is not as good as that of others. They revise all day and chant day and night. In their own opinion, they think it is a refined and appropriate policing sentence, but in everyone's opinion, it is just a shallow and clumsy mediocre work.

古文：次有轻荡之徒，笑曹、刘为古拙，谓鲍昭羲皇上人，谢朓今古独步；而师鲍昭终不及 日中市朝满 ，学谢朓劣得 黄鸟度青枝 。
现代文：更有一些轻薄狂妄之徒，嗤笑茎植、刘桢的诗作古板拙劣。他们认为鲍昭是恬静闲逸的羲皇上人，谢跳古今独步，无与伦比；但他们仿效鲍昭始终赶不上 日中市朝满 之句，学习谢跳也仅仅学到 黄鸟度青枝 之类的句子。
English: Moreover, there are some light-hearted and arrogant people who scoff at the stem planting and the old-fashioned and clumsy poetry of Liu Xuan. They think that Bao Zhao is a quiet and leisurely emperor, and Xie Zhan is unique in the past and present, unparalleled; but they have never been able to catch up with Bao Zhao's "Chihzhongshi Chaoman," and learning Xie Zhan only learned sentences such as "yellow bird degree green branches."

古文：徒自弃于高听，无涉于文流矣。
现代文：这些人衹是自己弃绝高明的见解，无法进入文学的领域了。
English: These people are unable to enter the field of literature because they have abandoned their lofty views.

古文：嵘观王公搢绅之士，每博论之余，何尝不以诗为口实，随其嗜欲，商榷不同。淄渑并泛，硃紫相夺，喧哗竞起，准的无依。
现代文：我看那些王公贵族、士大夫之流，每每高谈阀论之余，何尝不把诗歌作为口实，任随自己的愿望，提出不同的见解，把性质完全不同的事物混为一谈，邪和正位置颠倒，争论不休，没有准确的标准。
English: I look at those princes, aristocrats, and scholars, who are always talking about the valve theory, but never use poetry as a pretext, let their own wishes, put forward different opinions, confuse things of completely different natures, reverse the position of evil and positive, argue endlessly, and have no accurate standard.

古文：近彭城刘士章，俊赏之士，疾其淆乱，欲为当世诗品，口陈标榜，其文未遂，嵘感而作焉。
现代文：近来，彭城型童是位精于鉴赏的士人，他不满遣种混乱的局面，想撰写一部当代的诗品，他衹在口头上加以品评，但未能写成文字，我受到他的影响而撰写《诗评》。
English: Recently, Pengcheng Katong was a scholar who was good at appreciation. He was dissatisfied with the chaotic situation and wanted to write a contemporary poem. He tried to evaluate it verbally, but could not write it. I was influenced by him to write "Poetry Review."

古文：昔九品论人，《七略》裁士，校以宾实，诚多未值；至若诗之为技，较尔可知，以类推之，殆同博弈。
现代文：从前有分成九品评论人的方法，《七略》也曾裁定士人的品位高下，但拿他们排列的品第和实际情况相对照，实在有很多不恰当的地方。至于诗歌创作技巧，一比较便能清楚地知道高低优劣，以同类的事情来说明，大概跟下棋差不多。
English: In the past, there was a method of dividing critics into nine grades, and the "Seven Abbreviations" also judged the high and low grades of scholars, but there are a lot of inappropriate places by comparing the grades they arranged with the actual situation. As for poetry creation skills, a comparison can clearly know the high and low merits and demerits, and illustrate with similar things, probably similar to playing chess.

古文：方今皇帝资生知之上才，体沈郁之幽思，文丽日月，学究天人，昔在贵游，已为称首；况八枿既掩，风靡云蒸，抱玉者连肩，握珠者踵武。固以睨汉、魏而弗顾，吞晋、宋于胸中。
现代文：当今皇上，凭藉他生而知之的出色才气，体察深奥幽微的情思，文章可与日月同光，学问可通人道天理，从前，尚未登上皇位的时候，已被人们称做文界之首，何况现在天下已经统一，人才奋起，纷纷聚集，抱玉握珠的俊逸之士比肩接踵地涌现，本来就已经睥睨汉、魏，不再放在眼中；气吞晋、宋，自觉高出一筹。
English: Today's emperor, by virtue of his outstanding talent that he knows by nature, perceives the profound and subtle feelings, the article can be the same as the sun and the moon, and the knowledge can pass through human nature. In the past, when he had not yet ascended the throne, he has been called the head of the literary world. Moreover, now that the world has been unified, talents have risen and gathered, and handsome people who hold jade and pearl have emerged one after another. Originally, Han and Wei were no longer in the eye; Qi Tong Jin and Song were consciously higher.

古文：谅非农歌辕议，敢致流别。
现代文：这样的盛况，确实不是凭藉山歌野老、街谈巷议，就敢于分别品第。
English: Such a grand occasion, indeed, does not rely on old folk songs, street talk, and dares to separate the goods.

古文：嵘之今录，庶周游于闾里，均之于谈笑耳。
现代文：我现在收录的文字，大概衹能流传于乡里街巷，等同于谈资笑料而已。
English: The text I am collecting now, which is unlikely to be able to circulate in the streets of the countryside, is tantamount to gossip.

古文：顷之，卒官。
现代文：不久，钟嵘在任职期间去世。
English: Soon after, Jonghyun died while in office.

古文：岏，字长岳，官至府参军、建康平。
现代文：钟吭字长岳，官职升到府参军、建康平。
English: Zhongyao Zi Changyue was promoted to prefectural military officer, and Jian Kangping was promoted to general.

古文：著《良吏传》十卷。
现代文：他着有《良吏传》十卷。
English: He is the author of the ten-volume "Biography of a Good Official."

古文：屿，字季望，永嘉郡丞。
现代文：钟屿字季望，任永嘉郡丞。
English: Zhongyu Ziwang, appointed Yongjia County magistrate.

古文：天监十五年，敕学士撰《遍略》，屿亦预焉。
现代文：天监十五年，高祖命学士编撰《褊略》，钟屿也参加了编写。
English: In the 15th year of Tianjun, Gao Zu Mingsheng compiled the "Outline," and Zhongyu also participated in the compilation.

古文：兄弟并有文集。
现代文：他们兄弟都有文集。
English: Both of their brothers have literary collections.

古文：周兴嗣，字思纂，陈郡项人，汉太子太傅堪后也。
现代文：周兴嗣字思纂，陈郡项县人，他是漠太子太傅周堪的后人。
English: Zhou Xing Zi Zi, a word thinker from Xiang County, Chen County, was a descendant of Zhou Kan, the Prince of the Desert.

古文：高祖凝，晋征西府参军、宜都太守。
现代文：他的高祖父周凝，晋时任征西府参军、宜都太守。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zhou Jian, was appointed as the governor of Yidu and was conscripted to join the army in the western province at the time of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：兴嗣世居姑孰。
现代文：周兴嗣世代居住在姑孰。
English: Zhou Xingzi has lived in Gulu for generations.

古文：年十三，游学京师，积十余载，遂博通记传，善属文。
现代文：他十三岁的时候，前往京城求学，一共度过十余年，最终广泛阅读通晓历史书籍，善于写文章。
English: When he was 13 years old, he went to study in Beijing. He spent a total of more than 10 years, eventually reading widely, knowing history books, and being good at writing articles.

古文：尝步自姑孰，投宿逆旅，夜有人谓之曰： 子才学迈世，初当见识贵臣，卒被知英主。 
现代文：周兴嗣曾经从姑孰出行，在旅店投宿，夜间有人对他说： 你的才学超越当代人，最初被贵臣赏识，最终又被英主赏识。 
English: Zhou Xingzi once traveled from Guzheng and stayed at a hotel. At night, someone said to him, "Your ability to learn surpasses that of contemporaries. At first, it was appreciated by dignitaries, and eventually it was appreciated by British masters.

古文：言终，不测所之。
现代文：话说完之后，说话人就不知到哪儿去了。
English: After he finished speaking, the speaker did not know where to go.

古文：齐隆昌中，侍中谢朏为吴兴太守，唯与兴嗣谈文史而已。
现代文：齐隆昌年间，侍中谢肋任吴兴太守，衹是与周兴嗣谈谈文史而已。
English: During the Qilongchang period, the chamberlain Xie Li served as Wu Xing's eunuch, and it was only to talk about literary history with Zhou Xingzi.

古文：及罢郡还，因大相称荐。
现代文：到谢肋免去太守职务回到京城，就大力称颂极力荐举周兴嗣。
English: When Xie Li was relieved of his duties as the eunuch and returned to Beijing, he praised and highly recommended Zhou Xingzi.

古文：本州举秀才，除桂阳郡丞，太守王嵘素相赏好，礼之甚厚。
现代文：本州把周兴嗣举为秀才，周兴嗣又被除授为桂阳郡丞，太守王嵘一向赏识他，用隆厚的礼遇对待他。
English: Honshu has honored Zhou Xingzi as an outstanding talent, and Zhou Xingzi has been awarded the title of Guiyang county magistrate. Governor Wang Hui has always appreciated him and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：高祖革命，兴嗣奏《休平赋》，其文甚美，高祖嘉之。
现代文：高祖更换天命，建立梁朝，周兴嗣进献《休平赋》，文字很美，高祖十分赞赏。
English: Gao Zu replaced the Mandate of Heaven and established the Liang Dynasty, and Zhou Xingzi presented "Xiu Ping Fu." The writing is very beautiful, and Gao Zu is very appreciative.

古文：拜安成王国侍郎，直华林省。
现代文：周兴嗣被拜为安成王国侍郎，直华林省。
English: Zhou Xingzi was worshipped as the attendant of the Ancheng Kingdom, Jiuhua Lin Province.

古文：其年，河南献儛马，诏兴嗣与待诏到沆、张率为赋，高祖以兴嗣为工。
现代文：那一年，河南进献舞马，高祖下韶周兴嗣与待诏到沆、张率写赋赞颂这事，三人完稿后高祖认为周兴嗣的赋最为精巧。
English: That year, when Henan Province presented dancing horses, Gaozu sent Zhou Xingzi to dance with the horses and Zhang Du to write a eulogy. After the three finished the manuscript, Gaozu thought that Zhou Xingzi's dance was the most exquisite.

古文：擢员外散骑侍郎，进直文德、寿光省。
现代文：周兴嗣被擢拔为员外散骑侍郎，进直文德、寿光省。
English: Zhou Xingzi was promoted to non-commissioned officer of horseback riding, and was sent to Zhuang Mende and Shuguang Provinces.

古文：是时，高祖以三桥旧宅为光宅寺，敕兴嗣与陆倕各制寺碑。及成俱奏，高祖用兴嗣所制者。
现代文：当时，高祖把位于三桥的旧宅改建为光宅寺，命周兴图舆陆任各自撰写寺庙的碑文，写完之后两人一同进呈高祖，高祖选用了周兴嗣所写的碑文。
English: At that time, Gao Zu converted the old house in Sanqiao into the Guangzhai Temple. He ordered Zhou Xingtu and Liu Ren to each write the temple's inscription. After writing it, the two went to present it to Gao Zu. Gao Zu chose the inscription written by Zhou Xingzi.

古文：自是《铜表铭》、《栅塘碣》、《北伐檄》、《次韵王羲之书千字》，并使兴嗣为文；每奏，高祖辄称善，加赐金帛。
现代文：从此以后，《铜表铭》、《栅塘碣》、《北伐檄》、《次韵王羲之书千字》，都命周兴嗣撰写，每次写完进呈，高祖都称赞文辞之美，并且加赐金帛。
English: From then on, "Copper Inscription," "Lattan Inscription," "Northern Expedition Inscription" and "Thousand Characters of the Book of the Second Rhyme of Wang Xizhi" were all ordered to be written by Zhou Xingzi. Every time he finished writing, Gao Zu praised the beauty of the words and gave him a gold medal.

古文：九年，除新安郡丞，秩满，复为员外散骑侍郎，佐撰国史。
现代文：天监九年，周兴嗣被除授为新安郡丞，任职期满，又任员外散骑侍郎，佐撰国史。
English: In the ninth year of Tianjun, Zhou Xingzi was removed from the post of Xin'an county magistrate, and after the expiration of his term of office, he was also appointed as a non-commissioned officer, and was assigned to compile the national history.

古文：十二年，迁给事中，撰文如故。
现代文：天监十二年，周兴嗣迁任给事中，佐撰国史之职不变。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianjing, Zhou Xingzi was transferred to a new post, and the post of scribe of national history remained unchanged.

古文：兴嗣两手先患风疽，是年又染疠疾，左目盲，高祖抚其手，嗟曰： 斯人也而有斯疾也！ 
现代文：周兴嗣两只手原先患了风疽病，这年又染上了疫病，左眼失明，高祖拍着他的手，嗟叹说： 遣么好的人竟然患上这样的病! 
English: Zhou Xingzi's two hands had previously suffered from gangrene, and this year they were infected with the plague, and his left eye was blinded. Gaozu patted his hand and sighed: What a good person to have such a disease!

古文：手疏治疽方以赐之。
现代文：亲手一条条抄写治疗疽病的药赐给周兴嗣。
English: He gave Zhou Xingzi the medicine to treat gangrene by hand.

古文：其见惜如此。
现代文：他被高祖看重竟到了这种程度。
English: He was valued by Gaozu to such an extent.

古文：任昉又爱其才，常言曰： 周兴嗣若无疾，旬日当至御史中丞。 
现代文：任防又十分喜爱周兴嗣的才能，常常说： 周兴嗣假如没有病，十天之内将要升为御史中丞。 
English: He was very fond of Zhou Xingzi's talent, and often said: "If Zhou Xingzi is not ill, he will be promoted to Vice-Minister of History within ten days."

古文：十四年，除临川郡丞。
现代文：天监十四年，周兴嗣被除授为临川郡丞。
English: In the 14th year of Tianjing, Zhou Xingzi was stripped of his title of Linchuan County magistrate.

古文：十七年，复为给事中，直西省。
现代文：天监十七年，他又任给事中，直西省。
English: In the seventeenth year of Tianjing, he was again appointed to Zhizhong, Zhansi Province.

古文：左卫率周舍奉敕注高祖所制历代赋，启兴嗣助焉。
现代文：左卫率周舍奉高祖命为高祖撰写的历代赋作注，周舍启奏请周兴嗣帮助自己。
English: Zuo Wei's leader Zhou Jie asked Zhou Xingzi to help him, and Zhou Jie asked Zhou Xingzi to help Zhou Xingzi, and Zhou Jie asked Zhou Xingzi to help himself.

古文：普通二年，卒。
现代文：普通二年，周兴嗣去世。
English: Two years later, Zhou Xingzi passed away.

古文：所撰《皇帝实录》、《皇德记》、《起居注》、《职仪》等百余卷，文集十卷。
现代文：他撰写的《皇帝实录》、《皇德记》、《起居注》、《职仪》等共有百余卷，有文集十卷。
English: He wrote more than 100 volumes of "Imperial Record," "Record of Imperial Virtues," "Note on Life," "Rituals of Office" and other works, as well as 10 volumes of anthologies.

古文：吴均，字叔庠，吴兴故鄣人也。
现代文：吴均字叔庠，吴兴故鄣人。
English: Wu Junzhi was the uncle of Wu Xing, and Wu Xing was the son of Wu Xing.

古文：家世寒贱，至均好学有俊才。沈约尝见均文，颇相称赏。
现代文：家中世代贫贱，吴均却好学，有卓异的才能，沈约曾经见到吴均的文章，十分赏识，大加称赞。
English: The family was poor for generations, but Wu Jun was eager to learn and had extraordinary talent. Shen Yu once saw Wu Jun's article, which was highly appreciated and praised.

古文：天监初，柳恽为吴兴，召补主簿，日引与赋诗。
现代文：天监初年，柳惮任吴兴太守，召吴均补任主簿，每天请吴均和自己一道赋诗。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, Liu Shuo appointed Wu Xing as the governor, called Wu Jun to fill in as the main book, and asked Wu Jun to compose poems with him every day.

古文：均文体清拔有古气，好事者或斅之，谓为 吴均体 。
现代文：吴均文章风格清秀脱俗，有古人的气质，有的人喜欢他这种风格就仿效他，称为 吴均体 。
English: Wu Jun's writing style is refined and refined, with the temperament of the ancients. Some people like him and imitate his style, which is called Wu Jun's style.

古文：建安王伟为扬州，引兼记室，掌文翰。
现代文：建安王萧伟为扬州刺史，提拔吴均兼记室，掌管文书之事。
English: Jian'an Wang Xiao Wei is Yangzhou's chief historian, and Wu Jun is also promoted to the office of record and is in charge of the paperwork.

古文：王迁江州，补国侍郎，兼府城局。
现代文：建安王迁任江州刺史，吴均补任国侍郎，兼府城局。
English: Jian'an Wang was transferred to the post of Jiangzhou magistrate, and Wu Junbai was appointed as the state attendant and the prefectural government.

古文：还除奉朝请。
现代文：吴均回京城后被除授为奉朝请。
English: After Wu Jun returned to Beijing, he was stripped of his title of "Messenger to the Emperor."

古文：先是，均表求撰《齐春秋》。书成奏之，高祖以其书不实，使中书舍人刘之遴诘问数条，竟支离无对，敕付省焚之，坐免职。
现代文：在这以前，吴均上表请求编撰《齐春秋》，书写成后进呈给高祖，高祖认为他写的书不符实际，就派中书舍人刘之遴提出书中的几条记载诘问吴均，吴均竟然含混不清，无法答对，高祖下命令把书交尚书省焚毁，吴均也因此而被免职。
English: Prior to this, Wu Jun requested the compilation of "Qi Chunqiu" and submitted it to Gao Zu. Gao Zu believed that the book he wrote did not correspond to reality. He sent Liu Zhixuan, a Chinese scholar, to ask Wu Jun about several records in the book. Wu Jun was confused and could not answer correctly. Gao Zu ordered the book to be burned. Wu Jun was dismissed for this reason.

古文：寻有敕召见，使撰《通史》，起三皇，讫齐代，均草本纪、世家功已毕，唯列传未就。
现代文：不久高祖又下命令召见吴均，派吴均撰写《通史》，起自三皇，讫于齐代，吴均起草本纪、世家已经完毕，祇有列传还未完成。
English: Not long after, Gao Zu issued another order to summon Wu Jun, and sent Wu Jun to write "General History." Since the Third Emperor, who reigned in the Qi Dynasty, Wu Jun has drafted this history, the family has been completed, and only the enumeration has not been completed.

古文：普通元年，卒，时年五十二。
现代文：普通元年，县均去世，死时五十二岁。
English: In the first year of the common era, all the prefectures died, and he was fifty-two years old when he died.

古文：均注范晔《后汉书》九十卷，著《齐春秋》三十卷、《庙记》十卷、《十二州记》十六卷、《钱唐先贤传》五卷、《续文释》五卷，文集二十卷。
现代文：范晔《后漠书》九十卷，着《齐春秋》三十卷，《庙记》十卷，《十二州记》十六卷，《钱唐先贤传》五卷，《续文释》五卷，文集二十卷。
English: Fan Yu's "Book of the Desert" is ninety volumes, with "Qi Chunqiu" thirty volumes, "Record of the Temple" ten volumes, "Record of the Twelve Provinces" sixteen volumes, "Biographies of the Qiantang Sages" five volumes, "Continuation Commentary" five volumes, and twenty volumes of anthologies.

古文：先是，有广陵高爽、济阳江洪、会稽虞骞，并工属文。
现代文：这以前，有广陵高爽、济阳江洪、会稽虞骞，都精于写文章。
English: In the past, Guangling Gaoshuang, Jiyang Jianghong and He Jingyu were all good at writing articles.

古文：爽，齐永明中赠卫军王俭诗，为俭所赏，及领丹阳尹，举爽郡孝廉。
现代文：高爽在齐永明年间赠诗给卫军将军王俭，受王俭赏识，到王俭领丹阳尹时，荐举高爽为郡孝廉。
English: Gao Shuang gave a poem to the guard general Wang Jian in the middle of the second year of Qiyong, which was appreciated by Wang Jian. When Wang Jian led Danyang Yin, Gao Shuang was recommended as the county filial piety.

古文：天监初，历官中军临川王参军。
现代文：天监初年，高爽历任中军临川王参军。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervision, Gao Shuang, the highest-ranking Chinese military official, and Linchuan Wang joined the army.

古文：出为晋陵令，坐事系冶，作《镬鱼赋》以自况，其文甚工。后遇赦获免，顷之，卒。
现代文：出京任晋陵令，因为有罪被关押在冶中，他作《镬鱼赋》以自况，赋的文字十分精巧后来遇赦高爽被释放，不久他就去世了。
English: He was imprisoned in Yezhong because he was found guilty, and he wrote "Codfish Fu" on his own. The Fu was written very skillfully, and Gaoshuang was later pardoned and released. He died soon after.

古文：洪为建阳令，坐事死。
现代文：江洪任建阳令，因为有罪而死。
English: Jiang Hong Ren Jianyang died because he was guilty.

古文：骞官至王国侍郎。
现代文：虞骞官职升至王国侍郎。
English: He was promoted to the position of imperial equerry.

古文：并有文集。
现代文：他们都有文集。
English: They all have collections.

