古文：李回李珏李固言郑覃，故相珣瑜之子。以父廕补弘文校理，历拾遗、补阙、考功员外郎、刑部郎中。
现代文：郑覃，是原宰相郑王旬瑜的儿子，因其父勋劳的恩荣所及，补弘文校理，历任拾遗、补阙、考功员外郎、刑部郎中等职。
English: Zheng Rong, the son of the former prime minister Zheng Wang Rong Yu, because of his father's distinguished service, has served as compiler and proofreader, and has served as scavenger, compiler, examiner, and criminal investigator.

古文：元和十四年二月，迁谏议大夫。
现代文：宪宗元和十四年二月，升为谏议大夫。
English: In February of the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, he was promoted to the position of doctor of the imperial court.

古文：宪宗用内官五人为京西北和籴使，覃上疏论罢。
现代文：宪宗任用五名宦官为京西北和籴使，郑覃上奏疏论析应予取消。
English: Gensong appointed five eunuchs to be Beijing's northwest peace envoys, and Zheng Jun's ascension to the throne should be canceled.

古文：穆宗不恤政事，喜游宴；即位之始，吐蕃寇边，覃与同职崔玄亮等廷奏曰： 陛下即位已来，宴乐过多，畋游无度。
现代文：穆宗不忧虑政事，喜好游乐饮宴。即位之始，吐蕃侵犯边境。郑覃与同职官员崔玄亮等在朝堂上面奏说： 陛下登基以来，饮宴娱乐太多，打猎游乐无度。
English: Mu Zong is not worried about politics, he likes to have fun at banquets. At the beginning of his reign, Tubo invaded the border. Zheng Yi and his fellow official Cui Xuanliang gave a speech at the top of the morning hall, saying: Since His Majesty ascended to the throne, there have been too many banquets and entertainment, and there has been no end to hunting and pleasure.

古文：今蕃寇在境，缓急奏报，不知乘舆所在。
现代文：现今吐蕃入侵军队已在边境，任何缓、急的奏报，都不知陛下在哪里。
English: Now that the invading troops from Tibet have arrived at the border, no matter how urgent or slow the report is, His Majesty does not know where it is coming from.

古文：臣等忝备谏官，不胜忧惕，伏愿稍减游纵，留心政道。
现代文：臣等愧为谏官，不胜忧伤戒惧，敬望陛下稍稍减少游乐放纵，多加注意为政之道。
English: Vassals are ashamed to be eunuchs, and are overcome with sorrow and fear. We respectfully hope that His Majesty will slightly reduce his pleasure and indulgence, and pay more attention to politics.

古文：伏闻陛下晨夜昵狎倡优；近习之徒，赏赐太厚。
现代文：臣下听说陛下早早晚晚亲近歌舞杂技艺人，对亲近宠爱的人，赏赐过于优厚。
English: His subjects have heard that His Majesty is close to acrobats morning and night, and rewards those who are near and dear to him too generously.

古文：凡金银货币，皆出自生灵膏血，不可使无功之人，滥沾赐与。
现代文：所有金银财物，全都出自民脂民膏，不能让无功的人，滥受恩惠得到赐予。
English: All the gold, silver, and goods come from the people's fat and the people's ointment, and it is not right to allow those who have no merit to receive favors.

古文：纵内藏有余，亦乞用之有节，如边上警急，即支用无阙。
现代文：即使皇宫内库财物有余，也望使用有法度，如果边疆报警告急，就能支用不会短缺。
English: Even if there is a surplus of property in the palace storehouse, it is expected to be used legally. If there is an urgent warning on the frontier, it can be used without shortage.

古文：免令有司重敛百姓，实天下幸甚。 
现代文：免得让官府对百姓加重赋税的征收，如能这样，实在是天下百姓的大幸。 
English: It would be a great blessing for the people of the world if this could be done, so that the government would not be able to increase the tax levied on the people.

古文：帝初不悦其言，顾宰相萧俛曰： 此辈何人？ 
现代文：穆宗开始很不喜欢这些话，对宰相萧亻免说： 这是些什么人？ 
English: At first, Mu Zong didn't like these words very much, and said to Prime Minister Xiao Yiming: "Who are these people?

古文：俛对曰： 谏官也。 
现代文：萧亻免回答说： 是谏官。 
English: Xiao Yimeng replied, "He is a eunuch."

古文：帝意稍解，乃曰： 朕之过失，臣下尽规，忠也。 
现代文：穆宗的怒意稍有缓解，便说： 朕的过失，臣下尽力规劝，这是尽忠。 
English: Mu Zong's anger eased slightly, and he said: My fault, my vassals tried their best to persuade me, this is loyalty.

古文：乃谓覃曰： 阁中奏事，殊不从容。今后有事面陈，朕与卿延英相见。 
现代文：并对郑覃说： 在内阁官署奏事，时间太不充裕，今后有事面陈，朕与你在延英殿相见。 
English: He also said to Zheng Qi: I have to report to the Cabinet Office, and I don't have enough time. In the future, if something comes up, I'll meet you at Yan Ying Dian.

古文：时久无阁中奏事，覃等抗论，人皆相贺。
现代文：当时已很久没有在朝堂中禀奏事情，郑覃等直言奏论，人们都表示赞许。
English: At that time, it had been a long time since matters had been discussed in the imperial court, and people expressed their approval of Zheng Yao's forthright approach.

古文：镇冀节度使王承宗死，其弟承元听朝旨，移授郑滑节度。
现代文：镇冀节度使王承宗死后，他的弟弟王承元愿意听从朝廷命令，将他改任郑滑节度使。
English: After the death of Wang Chengzong, the chief of the Zhenji Festival, his younger brother Wang Chengyuan was willing to obey the order of the imperial court and was appointed as the chief of the Zhenji Festival.

古文：镇之三军留承元，以难不能赴镇；承元乞重臣宣谕，乃以覃为宣谕使，起居舍人王璠副之。
现代文：冀镇的三军将士挽留王承元，因为感到为难不能到郑滑赴任，王承元请求朝廷委派重要大臣前来宣布、解说朝廷旨意。于是朝廷派郑覃任宣谕使，起居舍人王播为副使。
English: The three generals in Jizhen detained Wang Chengyuan, who was unable to go to Zhenglu to take office because he felt embarrassed. Wang Chengyuan asked the imperial court to appoint an important minister to come and announce and explain the will of the imperial court. Therefore, the imperial court appointed Zheng Rong as the envoy, and Wang Bo, a layman, as the deputy envoy.

古文：初，镇卒辞语不逊，覃至宣诏，谕以大义，军人释然听命。
现代文：开始，镇冀的将士言语很不恭顺，郑覃到来宣布诏令，从大道理上给予阐说，镇冀将士高兴地听从朝廷命令。
English: At the beginning, the words of the soldiers of Zhenji were very disrespectful. When Zheng Yi arrived, he announced the edict and gave an explanation from the principle. The soldiers of Zhenji gladly obeyed the order of the imperial court.

古文：长庆元年十一月，转给事中。
现代文：长庆元年十一月，郑覃转任给事中。
English: In November of the first year of the Changqing era, Zheng Qi was transferred to the middle of the case.

古文：四年，迁御史中丞，十一月，权知工部侍郎。
现代文：长庆四年，升任御史中丞。十一月，兼任工部侍郎。
English: In the fourth year of Nagakatsu, he was promoted to goshi chujo. In November, he also served as a chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：宝历元年，拜京兆尹。
现代文：宝历元年，郑覃担任京兆尹。
English: In the first year of the Baoli era, Zheng Zhen served as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：文宗即位，改左散骑常侍。
现代文：文宗即位，郑覃改任左散骑常侍。
English: When Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, Zheng Yi was appointed as the left rider.

古文：三年，以本官充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：太和三年，以本官职位充任翰林侍讲学士。
English: For the past three years, she has served as an adjunct lecturer at Hanlin University.

古文：四年四月，拜工部侍郎。
现代文：四年四月，被授职工部侍郎。
English: In April of the fourth year, he was awarded the post of chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：覃长于经学，稽古守正，帝尤重之。
现代文：郑覃擅长经学，研习古事，笃守正道，文宗特别器重他。
English: Zheng Yao was good at studying scriptures, studying ancient things, adhering to the right path, and he was particularly interested in literature.

古文：覃从容奏曰： 经籍讹谬，博士相沿，难为改正。
现代文：郑覃和缓地进言说： 经书典籍讹误谬传，经学博士因循沿袭，难以改正。
English: Zheng Qi slowly said: The sutras and classics are all erroneous and fallacious, and it is difficult for the doctor of theology to correct them.

古文：请召宿儒奥学，校定六籍；准后汉故事，勒石于太学，永代作则，以正其阙。 
现代文：请陛下召集老成博学、学问精深之士，校正刊定《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》、《易》、《春秋》六种典籍，效法东汉的先例，在太学内刻文于石，作为永久的准则，以补正残缺讹误。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to convene a group of experienced, learned and knowledgeable people to proofread and publish the six classics of "Poetry," "Book," "Rite," "Music," "Ease" and "Spring and Autumn," and to follow the example of the Eastern Han Dynasty and engrave them in stone within the University as a permanent standard to make up for the shortcomings and mistakes.

古文：从之。
现代文：文宗听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五年，李宗闵、牛僧孺辅政。
现代文：太和五年，李宗闵、牛僧孺辅佐朝政。
English: In the 5th year of the Taihe era, Li Zongyao and Niu Xiangyao became assistants to the imperial court.

古文：宗闵以覃与李德裕相善，薄之。
现代文：李宗闵因为郑覃与李德裕友善，对待郑覃很刻薄。
English: Because Zheng Yi was friendly with Li Deyu, Li Zongyao treated Zheng Yi very harshly.

古文：时德裕自浙西入朝，复为闵、孺所排，出镇蜀川。
现代文：当时，李德裕刚由浙西入朝，又遭到李宗闵、牛僧孺排斥，被调出朝廷镇守蜀川。
English: At that time, Li Deyu had just entered the imperial court from western Zhejiang. He was rejected by Li Zongyao and Niu Zangyao, and was transferred out of the imperial court to guard the Shu River.

古文：宗闵恶覃禁中言事，奏为工部尚书，罢侍讲学士。
现代文：李宗闵害怕郑覃在宫内议事，奏请让他担任工部尚书，免去他担任的侍讲学士。
English: Li Zongyao was afraid of Zheng Yao's meddling in the palace affairs, so he asked Zheng Yao to serve as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and to be relieved of his post as an assistant lecturer.

古文：文宗好经义，心颇思之。
现代文：文宗爱好经学义理，心中很想念他。
English: His love of literature is justified by his studies, and I miss him very much.

古文：六年二月，复召为侍讲学士。
现代文：太和六年二月，又召回郑覃任侍讲学士。
English: In February of the sixth year of the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Zheng Yao was recalled to serve as an assistant lecturer.

古文：七年春，德裕作相。
现代文：七年春，李德裕做宰相。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Li Deyu became prime minister.

古文：五月，以覃为御史大夫。
现代文：五月，委任郑覃为御史大夫。
English: In May, Zheng Qi was appointed as the imperial historian.

古文：文宗尝于延英谓宰相曰： 殷侑通经学，为人颇似郑覃。 
现代文：文宗曾在延英殿对宰相们说： 殷侑精通经学。为人很像郑覃。 
English: Wenzong once said to the prime ministers at the Yan Ying Palace: Yin Xi is proficient in the study of the classics. He is very much like Zheng Xi.

古文：宗闵曰： 覃、侑诚有经学，于议论不足听览。 
现代文：李宗闵说： 郑覃、殷侑的确通经学，但在评议论说方面没有值得听的东西。 
English: Li Zongyao said: Zheng Yao and Yin Yao are indeed well-versed in the study of scripture, but there is nothing worth listening to in terms of commentary and discussion.

古文：李德裕对曰： 殷、郑之言，他人不欲闻，唯陛下切欲闻之。 
现代文：李德裕针锋相对地说： 殷侑、郑覃的言论，别人不想听，不过陛下极想听。 
English: Li Deyu said pointedly: "Other people don't want to listen to the remarks of Yin Qi and Zheng Qi, but His Majesty really wants to listen.

古文：覃尝嫉人朋党，为宗闵所薄故也。
现代文：郑覃曾经憎恶别人结为朋党，这正是李宗闵待他刻薄的原因所在。
English: Zheng Rong used to hate it when others made friends with him, which is why Li Zong Rong treated him so harshly.

古文：八年，迁户部尚书。
现代文：太和八年，郑覃迁升为户部尚书。
English: In the eighth year of the Taihe era, Zheng Qi was promoted to the position of household secretary.

古文：其年，德裕罢相，宗闵复知政，与李训、郑注同排斥李德裕、李绅。
现代文：同年，李德裕罢相，李宗闵又主持朝政，与李训、郑注一道排斥李德裕和李绅。
English: In the same year, Li Deyu resigned from the post of prime minister, and Li Zongyao presided over the government of the dynasty. Together with Li Xun and Zheng Zhu, he ousted Li Deyu and Li Sheng.

古文：二人贬黜，覃亦左授秘书监。
现代文：李德裕、李绅遭贬黜后，郑覃也被降职任秘书监。
English: After Li Deyu and Li Sheng were demoted, Zheng Yao was also demoted to the post of secretary supervisor.

古文：九年六月，杨虞卿、李宗闵得罪长流，复以覃为刑部尚书。
现代文：太和九年六月，杨虞卿、李宗闵获罪被流放，又委任郑覃为刑部尚书。
English: In June of the ninth year of the Taihei era, Yang Yuqing and Li Zongyao were convicted and exiled, and Zheng Yao was appointed as the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：十月，迁尚书右仆射，兼判国子祭酒。
现代文：十月，郑覃迁升为尚书右仆射，兼任国子祭酒。
English: In October, Zheng Rong was promoted to Shang Shuxu Rongfei, and also served as the head of the Guozi Festival.

古文：训、注伏诛，召覃入禁中草制敕，明日以本官同平章事，封荥阳郡公，食邑二千户。
现代文：李训、郑注伏法处死，文宗召郑覃入宫拟制皇帝的诏书敕令；次日，郑覃以本官任同平章事，受封为荥阳公，食邑二千户。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhubo were put to death, and Wenzong summoned Zheng Yao to the palace to fabricate the emperor's edict; the next day, Zheng Yao was appointed to the position of Tongping, and was given the title of Shenyang, feeding two thousand households.

古文：覃虽精经义，不能为文。
现代文：郑覃虽然精通经义，但不善于写文章。
English: Although Zheng Qi was well versed in the classics, he was not good at writing articles.

古文：嫉进士浮华。开成初，奏礼部贡院宜罢进士科。
现代文：他讨厌进士们的虚浮不实，开成初年，他上奏提出：礼部贡院应当取消进士科。
English: He hated the pretentiousness of those entering the priesthood. In the first year of its establishment, he proposed that the Ministry of Ceremonies should abolish the entrance examination.

古文：初，紫宸对，上语及选士，覃曰： 南北朝多用文华，所以不治。
现代文：起初，在紫宸殿应答策问时，文宗谈到选拔才士的问题，郑覃说： 南北朝时多取用文采华丽的人，所以国家治理不好。
English: At first, when answering questions at the Palace of the Grand Empress Dowager Cixi, Wenzong talked about the issue of selecting talented people. Zheng Wei said, "During the Northern and Southern Dynasties, people with magnificent literary skills were often selected, so the governance of the country was not good.

古文：士以才堪即用，何必文辞？ 
现代文：士人以才干能胜任职务就取用，有什么必要讲究文章辞藻？ 
English: What need is there to be particular about the wording of articles, when officials are appointed on the basis of their ability to perform their duties?

古文：帝曰： 进士及第人已曾为州县官者，方镇奏署即可之，余即否。 
现代文：文宗说： 考中进士的人已经担任过州县官员的，方镇上报朝廷各署即可任用，其他的不能任用。 
English: Wenzong said: Those who passed the junior high school entrance examination and have served as prefectural and county officials can be appointed if they report to the Imperial Household Agency. Others cannot be appointed.

古文：覃曰： 此科率多轻薄，不必尽用。 
现代文：郑覃说： 进士科考中的人大多轻浮刻薄，不一定都任用。 
English: Zheng Wei said: Most of the people in the entrance examination are frivolous and mean, and they are not necessarily appointed.

古文：帝曰： 轻薄敦厚，色色有之，未必独在进士。
现代文：文宗说： 轻浮刻薄与诚朴敦厚，各类职务中都有这两种人，未必只在进士中有。
English: Wen Zong said: There are two kinds of people in all kinds of positions, including the frivolous and the mean and the sincere and the thoughtful, and they are not necessarily only found among the advanced students.

古文：此科置已二百年，亦不可遽改。 
现代文：进士科已设置二百年，也不能骤然改掉。 
English: The promotion system has been in place for 200 years and cannot be changed suddenly.

古文：覃曰： 亦不可过有崇树。 
现代文：郑覃说： 也不可过分推崇培植。 
English: Zheng Yao said: It is also impossible to over-emphasize cultivation.

古文：帝尝谓宰臣曰： 百司弛慢，要重条举。 
现代文：文宗曾对宰辅大臣说： 现在百官松懈怠惰，需要逐条重列法纪。 
English: Wenzong once said to the Vice-Minister of Justice, "Nowadays, hundreds of officials are slack and lazy, and it is necessary to rearrange the legal disciplines one by one."

古文：因指香炉曰： 此炉始亦华好，用之既久，乃无光彩。
现代文：就势指着此前的香炉说： 这个香炉开初也很华美，使用久了以后，就失去了光彩。
English: Pointing to the previous incense burner, he said: This incense burner was also very beautiful at the beginning, but it lost its luster after being used for a long time.

古文：若不加饰，何由复初？ 
现代文：如不加以修饰，怎能复原如初？ 
English: If it is not modified, how can it be restored to its original state?

古文：覃对曰： 丕变风俗，当考实效。
现代文：郑覃回答说： 大力变革风气，应当考察实效。
English: Zheng Wei replied: vigorously reforming the culture, we should examine the actual results.

古文：自三十年已来，多不务实，取于颜情。
现代文：近三十年以来，人们多不务实，都凭情面办事。
English: Over the past 30 years, people have been more pragmatic and have acted according to their own interests.

古文：如嵇、阮之流，不摄职事。 
现代文：像嵇康、阮籍这样的人，不可能办理本职分内事务。 
English: It is impossible for people like Yu Kang and Nguyen Quoc to handle affairs within their duties.

古文：李石云： 此本因治平，人人无事，安逸所致。
现代文：李石说： 这种风气源于世道太平，人人相安无事，系由安逸所致。
English: Li Shi said, "This kind of culture stems from the world's peacefulness, everyone is safe and sound, and it is caused by comfort.

古文：今之人俗亦慕王夷甫，耻不能及之。 
现代文：现在一般民众也都仰慕晋代王衍的求自全、尚玄谈的作风，以赶不上王衍为羞耻。 
English: Nowadays, the general public also admires Wang Yan's self-sufficiency in the Jin Dynasty and his style of insider talk, and is ashamed of not being able to catch up with Wang Yan.

古文：上曰： 卿等辅朕，在振举法度而已。 
现代文：文宗说： 诸位辅佐朕治国，职责仅在振起复兴法度而已。 
English: Wenzong said: "You are assisting me in governing the country, and your duty is only to revive the revival law.

古文：时太学勒石经，覃奏起居郎周墀、水部员外郎崔球、监察御史张次宗、礼部员外郎温业等，校定《九经》文字，旋令上石。
现代文：当太学将儒家经典刻在石碑上时，郑覃奏请由起居郎周土犀、水部员外郎崔球、监察御史张次宗、礼部员外郎温业等人，校定《诗》、《书》、《易》等儒家九经的文字，并旋即将刊定的文本刻在石上。
English: When the Confucian classics were engraved on the stone monument by Taigaku, Zheng Bingso asked Kijiro Zhou Dursa, Water Department member Wai Lang Cui Ku, Inspector of Imperial History Zhang Jizong, and Ceremonial Department member Wai Lang Wen Ye to calibrate the words of the Confucian Nine Classics, such as "Poetry," "Book," and "Easy," and to engrave the text to be published on the stone.

古文：加门下侍郎、弘文馆大学士、监修国史。
现代文：郑覃被加授门下侍郎、弘文馆大学士、监修国史等职务。
English: Zheng Yao was awarded additional positions such as his disciple's attendant, scholar of the Hongwen Museum, and supervisor of national history.

古文：上尝于延英论古今诗句工拙，覃曰： 孔子所删，三百篇是也。
现代文：文宗曾在延英殿评论古今诗句的优劣，郑覃说： 孔子所删定的，只是《诗》三百篇。
English: Wenzong once commented on the merits and demerits of ancient and modern poems at the Yan Ying Dian. Zheng Yao said: What Confucius deleted was only the 300 poems of "Poetry."

古文：降此五言七言，辞非雅正，不足帝王赏咏。
现代文：后世泛滥至今的这些五言诗、七言诗之类，都不是雅正之辞，不值得帝王欣赏吟咏。
English: These five-character poems, seven-character poems and the like, which have proliferated in later generations, are not words of elegance, and are not worthy of the emperor's appreciation.

古文：夫《诗》之《雅》、《颂》，皆下刺上所为，非上化下而作。
现代文：《诗》中的《雅》、《颂》之作，都是在下位者批评在上位者而写的，而不是在上位者教化在下位者所做的。
English: The works of "Ya" and "Ode" in "Poetry" were all written by the inferior criticizing the superior, rather than by the superior educating the inferior.

古文：王者采诗，以考风俗得失。
现代文：王者采集民间诗歌，是借以考察民情风俗、施政得失。
English: The king's collection of folk poetry is used to examine folk customs and the pros and cons of governance.

古文：仲尼删定，以为世规。
现代文：孔子删定它们，拿它们作为世代承袭的典范。
English: Confucius eliminated them and took them as a model for generations to follow.

古文：近代陈后主、隋炀帝皆能章句，不知王者大端，终有季年之失。
现代文：近代的陈后主、隋炀帝都长于诗歌章句，却不懂王者治国的主要方面的事，终于发生末年的失国。
English: The modern empress Chen and Emperor Sui and Qian are both good at poetry, but they do not understand the main aspects of the king's governance. Finally, the country was lost at the end of the year.

古文：章句小道，愿陛下不取也。 
现代文：诗歌章句是小技，希望陛下不要去追求它。 
English: Poetry is a minor skill, and I hope Your Majesty will not pursue it.

古文：覃以宰相兼判国子祭酒，奏太学置五经博士各一人，缘无职田，请依王府官例，赐禄粟。从之。
现代文：郑覃以宰相身份兼任国子祭酒，奏请在太学设置五经博士各一人，由于他们没有禄米田，请求按王府官例，赐给他们俸禄粮，文宗依从这一建议。
English: In his capacity as prime minister, Zheng He also served as the national son's sacrificial wine. He requested that one person from each of the Five Classics be set up at Taigaku. Since they did not have a rice field, he requested that they be given a stipend according to the official regulations of the royal court. Wenzong followed this suggestion.

古文：又进《石壁九经》一百六十卷。
现代文：郑覃又进献《石壁九经》一百六十卷。
English: Zheng Qi also presented 160 volumes of "The Nine Classics of the Stone Wall."

古文：其年，李固言复为宰相。
现代文：同年，李固言再度任宰相。
English: In the same year, Li Gugen was reappointed as prime minister.

古文：固言与李宗闵、杨嗣复善，覃憎之。
现代文：李固言与李宗闵、杨嗣复相亲善，郑覃憎恶他。
English: Li Guogan was friendly with Li Zongyao and Yang Shifu, but Zheng He detested him.

古文：因起居郎阙，固言奏曰： 周敬复、崔球、张次宗等三人，皆堪此任。 
现代文：由于起居郎一职无人担任，李固言进奏说： 周敬复、崔球、张次宗等三人，都能胜任这一职务。 
English: Since there is no one to hold the position of kijiro, Li Guyan said: Zhou Jingfu, Cui Qiu, Zhang Jizong and other three people are all qualified for this position.

古文：覃曰： 崔球游宗闵之门，且赤墀下秉笔，为千古法，不可朋党。
现代文：郑覃说： 崔球奔走于李宗闵门下；况且史官在宫殿内执笔所记之事，将成为千古准则，不允许朋党的人担任。
English: Zheng Yao said: Cui Qiu ran under the tutelage of Li Zongyao; moreover, what the historian wrote in the palace will become the standard of thousands of years, and people who are friends of the party are not allowed to serve.

古文：如裴中孺、李让夷，臣不敢有纤芥异论。 
现代文：如果让裴中孺、李讠襄夷任此职，微臣不敢有丝毫异议。 
English: If Pei Zhongyao and Li Shuxiangyi were appointed to this post, Weixin would not dare to have the slightest objection.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：三年，杨嗣复自西川入拜平章事，与覃尤相矛盾；加之以固言、李珏，入对之际，是非蜂起。
现代文：开成三年，杨嗣复由西川入朝任平章事，与郑覃矛盾更深，加上倚恃李固言、李珏，进殿对答策问的时候，是非蜂起。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, Yang Shih-fu entered the imperial court from Saikawa to assume the title of Taira no Shomei, and the contradiction with Zheng He was even deeper. In addition, when he leaned on Li Guan and Li Yao to answer questions when he entered the imperial court, it was an uprising.

古文：二月，覃进位太子太师。
现代文：二月，郑覃晋位为太子太师。
English: In February, Zheng Jun ascended the throne as crown prince.

古文：文宗以旱放系囚，出宫人刘好奴等五百余人，送两街寺观，任归亲戚。
现代文：文宗因旱灾不止释放在押囚犯，放出宫女刘好奴等五百余人，将她们送到两街的寺院道观中，听凭她们各自返回亲属家中。
English: Due to the drought, Emperor Wenzong not only released the prisoners in custody, but also released more than five hundred people, including Liu Haonong's concubine, and sent them to the Taoist temples in the two streets. They were allowed to return to their relatives' homes.

古文：紫宸对，李珏曰： 陛下放宫女数多，德迈千古。
现代文：在紫宸殿对答策问时，李珏说： 陛下放还宫女的人数多，德超千古。
English: When answering questions at the Privy Council, Li Lan said, "His Majesty has released a large number of maids of honor, which is unprecedented in the history of the world.

古文：汉制，八月选人，晋武平吴，亦多采择。
现代文：汉代制度，八月挑选宫人；晋武帝平定吴国，也多采选宫女。
English: According to the Han Dynasty system, the palace attendants were selected in August; Emperor Jinwu conquered the State of Wu, and the palace maids were mostly selected.

古文：仲尼所谓 未见好德如好色 。
现代文：孔子曰： 没有见过好德有如这样好色的人。 
English: Confucius said, "I have never seen such a lecherous person with such good morals."

古文：今陛下以为无益放之，微臣敢贺。 
现代文：如今陛下认为宫女过多无益而放还她们，微臣庆贺。 
English: Now that His Majesty has decided that too many maids-of-honour are not beneficial and has released them, Weizhong congratulates.

古文：覃曰： 晋武帝以采择之失，中原化为左衽；陛下以为殷鉴，放去攸宜。 
现代文：郑覃说： 晋武帝由于采选宫人的失当，致使中原变成为异族统治地区，陛下以此作为鉴戒，将宫女放还非常适宜。 
English: Zheng Yao said: Due to the improper selection of courtiers, Emperor Jinwu caused the Central Plains to become a foreign-ruled region. His Majesty used this as a warning, and it is very appropriate to return the palace maids.

古文：其年十二月，三上章求罢，诏落太子太师，余如故。
现代文：同年十二月，郑覃三次上呈奏章请求免职，文宗下诏免去他太子太师职务，其他职位不变。
English: In December of the same year, Zheng Rong submitted a petition for dismissal three times, and he was dismissed from the post of prince and daishi. Other positions remained unchanged.

古文：仍三五日一入中书，商量政事。
现代文：他仍然三、五天去一次中书省，商量政事。
English: He still goes to the Ministry of Education and Culture every three to five days to discuss government affairs.

古文：四年五月，罢相，守左仆射。
现代文：开成四年五月，郑覃被免去宰相职务，仍兼左仆射。
English: In May of the same year, Zheng Rong was removed from the post of prime minister, but he continued to serve as his right-hand man.

古文：武宗即位，李德裕用事，欲援为宰相。固以足疾不任朝谒。
现代文：武宗即位，李德裕当政，打算选拔郑覃任宰相，郑覃以脚有毛病为由坚决推辞，不到任入朝参谒。
English: Wu Zong was enthroned, Li Deyu was in power, and he planned to select Zheng Yao as prime minister. Zheng Yao firmly declined on the grounds that he had a foot problem and would not be appointed to the imperial court.

古文：会昌二年，守司徒致仕，卒。
现代文：会昌二年，郑覃以代理司徒的职位辞官归居，后去世。
English: In the second year of Huichang, Zheng Qi resigned from the post of acting scholar and returned to his residence. He later died.

古文：子裔绰，以廕授渭南尉，直弘文馆。
现代文：其子裔绰，因郑覃的勋劳而受恩荣，被授予渭南尉官职，代理弘文馆职务。
English: His descendant, Kao, was honored for his distinguished service to Zheng Qi, and was awarded the official post of the Lieutenant of the Southern Song Dynasty, and the post of the Acting Director of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：阅奏兴悼，临轩载怀。
现代文：郑覃年轻时生活清苦，为人正直谦让，不轻易与别人亲密相交。
English: When Zheng Rong was young, he lived a simple life, was honest and humble, and did not easily get intimate with others.

古文：将辍视朝之仪，兼列上公之秩。
现代文：官位高至宰相，所住的房屋从未增建装饰，刚够遮蔽风雨。
English: The official rank is as high as prime minister, and the houses they live in have never been decorated, just enough to shelter them from the wind and rain.

古文：慰兹幽怀，期尔有知，可赠司空。
现代文：家中没有妾婢，人们都仰慕他纯朴洁净的作风。
English: There were no concubines in his family, and people admired his simple and clean style.

古文：潜，字无闷，亦登进士第。
现代文：但他嫉恶得过分，许多事情他都不能容忍，因而大家对他感到畏惧而不喜欢他。
English: But he was too jealous, he could not tolerate many things, so people were afraid of him and did not like him.

古文：陈夷行，字周道，颍川人。
现代文：陈夷行字周道，颍川人。
English: Chen Yi Xing Zi Zhou Dao, a native of Hechuan.

古文：祖忠，父邑。
现代文：祖父陈忠，父亲陈邑。
English: His grandfather was Chen Zhong and his father was Chen Yu.

古文：夷行，元和七年登进士第，累辟使府。
现代文：陈夷行在宪宗元和七年考中进士，多次被朝廷派往地方负责特殊事务的使臣府署召用。
English: Chen Yigang was promoted to the rank of a scholar in the first year of the reign of Emperor Xizong and in the seven-year examination, and was repeatedly sent by the imperial court to the local envoy office responsible for special affairs.

古文：宝历末，由侍御史改虞部员外郎，皆分务东都。
现代文：敬宗宝历末年，陈夷行由侍御史改任虞部员外郎，都是在朝廷的东都分设机构任职。
English: In the last year of Emperor Keizong's reign, Chen Yixing was transferred from the position of the Grand Historian to the position of the Foreigner, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, both of which were positions in the Imperial Palace's Dongdu branch.

古文：太和三年，入为起居郎、史馆修撰，预修《宪宗实录》。
现代文：文宗太和三年，入朝担任起居郎、史馆修撰，参预修撰《宪宗实录》。
English: In the third year of Emperor Wenzong's reign, he entered the imperial court as a courtier and historian, and participated in the preparatory work for the compilation of the "Constitutional History."

古文：四年献上，转司封员外郎。
现代文：四年进献《宪宗实录》，转任司封员外郎。
English: Four years later, he presented the "Constitutional Law Record" and was transferred to the post of Shifu member, Gairo.

古文：五年，迁吏部郎中。
现代文：太和五年，陈夷行迁升吏部郎中。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Chen Yixing was promoted to the middle-ranking official.

古文：四月，召充翰林学士。
现代文：四月，被召任翰林学士。
English: In April, he was appointed as a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：八年，兼充皇太子侍读，诏五日一度入长生院侍太子讲经。
现代文：太和八年，兼任皇太子侍读，奉诏：每五天进长生院一次，侍奉太子讲经。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, she also served as an attendant to the Crown Prince, and according to the imperial edict, she was to enter Choshoin once every five days to serve the Crown Prince in his sermon.

古文：上召对，面赐绯衣牙笏，迁谏议大夫、知制诰，余职如故。
现代文：文宗召见他应对策问，当面赏赐给他绯衣、牙笏，迁升谏议大夫、知制诰，其他职务不变。
English: Wenzong summoned him to answer the questions, and rewarded him in person with a robe, a set of dentures, a promotion to the position of doctor of consultation, a promotion to the position of intellectual, and other positions unchanged.

古文：九年八月，改太常少卿，知制诰、学士侍讲如故。
现代文：太和九年八月，改任太常少卿，知制诰、学士侍讲等职务不变。
English: In August of the ninth year of the Taiwa era, he was reassigned to the position of Taijo Shokei, and his positions such as Chisei Shosei and Bachelor's Lecturer remained unchanged.

古文：开成二年四月，以本官同平章事。
现代文：文宗开成二年四月，陈夷行以本官职位任同平章事。
English: In April of the second year of Wenzong's founding, Chen Yixing was appointed to the same position as his father.

古文：三年，杨嗣复、李珏继入辅政。
现代文：三年，杨嗣复、李珏相继入朝辅政。
English: Three years later, Yang Shifu and Li Xi successively entered the government as aides to the emperor.

古文：夷行介特，素恶其所为，每上前议政，语侵嗣复，遂至往复。
现代文：陈夷行性情孤高，不随流俗，历来憎恶杨、李诸人的所作所为，每次在皇帝面前议政，他都在言语上冒犯杨嗣复，以至于来言去语相互冲突。
English: Chen Yixing was of a solitary nature and did not follow the fashion. He had always detested the actions of Yang and Li. Every time he discussed politics in front of the emperor, he would verbally offend Yang Shifu, so much so that their words clashed with each other.

古文：性不能堪，上表称足疾辞位；不许，诏中使就第宣劳。
现代文：陈夷行不能忍受，上表皇帝，称说因脚有病，请求辞位；文宗不准许，下诏宫中使者前去他家慰劳。
English: Chen Yixing could not bear it, so he asked the emperor to resign, saying that he had a foot ailment. However, Emperor Wenzong did not allow it, and sent an emissary from the imperial court to his house to console him.

古文：七月，以王彦威为忠武节度使，史孝章为邠宁节度使，皆嗣复拟议。
现代文：七月，朝廷委任王彦威为忠武节度使，史孝章为宁节度使，都是由杨嗣复一手筹划的。
English: In July, the imperial court appointed Wang Yanwei as the envoy of the Zhongwu Festival and Shi Xiaozhang as the envoy of the Ning Festival, both of which were planned by Yang Shifu.

古文：夷行对曰： 但出自圣心即当。 
现代文：在延英殿应答策问时，文宗趁便问陈夷行说： 日前委任的两个方镇，恰当吗？ 
English: When answering questions from Yan Ying Dian, Wenzong took the opportunity to ask Chen Yixing: "Are the two Fangzhen that were recently appointed appropriate?

古文：杨嗣复曰： 若出自圣心当，即人情皆惬。
现代文：杨嗣复说： 如果说出自皇上的心意就恰当，当然人心都满意。
English: Yang Shifu said, "If you say the emperor's will, it is appropriate, of course, everyone is satisfied.

古文：如事或过当，臣下安得无言？ 
现代文：如果说这件事有办得失当的地方，臣下们怎么会没有意见？ 
English: If there is something improper about this matter, how can the subordinates have no objection?

古文：帝曰： 诚如此，朕固无私也。 
现代文：文宗说： 确实是这样，我本来没有偏私之心。 
English: Wenzong said, "It's true, I don't have a selfish heart.

古文：夷行曰： 自三数年来，奸臣窃权，陛下不可倒持太阿，授人钅尊柄。 
现代文：陈夷行说： 近三年来，奸臣窃取权柄；陛下不可倒持太阿宝剑，授人以柄。 
English: Chen Yixing said: In the past three years, treacherous vassals have stolen power; Your Majesty must not hold the sword upside down and give the handle to others.

古文：嗣复曰： 齐桓用管仲于雠虏，岂有太阿之虑乎？ 
现代文：杨嗣复说： 齐桓公从仇虏中起用管仲，难道有倒持太阿、授人以柄的忧虑吗？ 
English: Yang Shifu said, "Qi Kuan has been using mediation since he was captured by the enemy. Does he have any worries about being a tyrant and giving people a hard time?

古文：上不悦。
现代文：文宗对陈夷行的话感到不高兴。
English: Wenzong was not happy with Chen Yigang's words.

古文：仙韶院乐官尉迟璋授王府率，右拾遗窦洵直当衙论曰： 伶人自有本色官，不合授之清秩。 
现代文：仙韶院乐官尉迟璋被授予王府率这一主领门卫士卒、役夫的职务，右拾遗窦洵直在官署内评论说： 艺人自有他本业的官职，不应当授予清贵的官职。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong's court music officer, Xizang, was given the position of the king's chief gatekeeper, guard and attendant at the head of the royal court. The Right Reverend Dou Yanzhi commented in the government office: An artist has his own official position, and should not be given a noble official position.

古文：郑覃曰： 此小事，何足当衙论列！
现代文：郑覃说： 这样的小事，哪里值得拿到朝廷官署来论列一番！
English: Zheng Yao said: Such a small thing, where is it worth getting the Imperial Household Agency to discuss it!

古文：王府率是六品杂官，谓之清秩，与洵直得否？
现代文：王府率是六品杂官，说这是清贵官职，给你窦洵直你满足吗？
English: Wangfuzi is a six-grade miscellaneous official, saying that this is a noble official position, are you satisfied with giving you a straight answer?

古文：此近名也。 
现代文：这是追求名誉。 
English: It's the pursuit of glory.

古文：嗣复曰： 尝闻洵直幽，今当衙论一乐官，幽则有之，亦不足怪。 
现代文：杨嗣复说： 曾经听人说窦洵直有点昏昧古怪，今天在衙署评论一个乐官，昏昧则有之，倒也不足为怪。 
English: Yang Shifu said, "I once heard that Dou Yanzhong was a bit dim and eccentric. Today, a music official commented on Dou Yanzhong at the music department. It is not surprising that Dou Yanzhong is dim and eccentric.

古文：夷行曰： 谏官当衙，只合论宰相得失，不合论乐官。
现代文：陈夷行说： 谏官在衙署，只该评论宰相得失，不该论乐官。
English: Chen Yixing said: The eunuch is in the eunuch office, he should only comment on the gains and losses of the prime minister, and should not talk about the music officer.

古文：然业已陈论，须与处置。
现代文：但是已经评论，须给予处置。
English: But it has been commented on and needs to be dealt with.

古文：今后乐人每七八年与转一官，不然，则加手力课三数人。 
现代文：今后乐工每七、八年给他转一个官职，如果不这样的话，就加上役作小吏每次考核数个人。 
English: From now on, every seven or eight years, music workers will transfer an official post to him. If this is not the case, a number of people will be assessed as minor officials each time.

古文：帝曰： 别与一官。 
现代文：文宗说： 另外给他一个官职。 
English: Wenzong said: Give him another official post.

古文：乃授光州长史，赐洵直绢百疋。
现代文：于是委派尉迟璋任光州长史，赐给窦洵直绢一百匹。
English: Therefore, he appointed Lieutenant Zhiqian Renguang as the governor and gave him one hundred horses.

古文：夷行寻转门下侍郎。
现代文：不久，陈夷行转为担任门下侍郎。
English: Soon after, Chen Yixing was transferred to serve as a servant.

古文：上紫宸议政，因曰： 天宝中政事，实不甚佳。
现代文：文宗在紫宸殿召集宰辅大臣议论政事，趁便说道： 天宝年间的施政状况，确实不很好。
English: In Shishinden, Emperor Wenzong convened the Vice-Minister to discuss political affairs, and took the opportunity to say: The state of governance during the Tenpo era was indeed not good.

古文：当时姚、宋在否？ 
现代文：这时候姚崇、宋王景还在吗？ 
English: At this time, were Yao Chong and Song Wangjing still there?

古文：李珏曰： 姚亡而宋罢。 
现代文：李珏说： 姚崇已经去世而宋王景被免了职。 
English: Li Wei said: Yao Chong has passed away and Song Wangjing has been dismissed.

古文：珏因言： 人君明哲，终始尤难。
现代文：接着，李珏又说： 人君英明圣哲，始终如一极难。
English: Then, Li Wei also said: It is extremely difficult to be a wise sage.

古文：玄宗尝云： 自即位已来，未尝杀一不辜。 
现代文：玄宗曾说： 自从即位以来，我从未错杀一个无罪的人。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong once said, "Since I ascended the throne, I have never killed an innocent person by mistake."

古文：而任林甫陷害破人家族，不亦惑乎？ 
现代文：可是任用的李林甫陷害毁灭别人的全家、诛除一族，不也昏惑迷乱了吗？ 
English: But Li Linfu, who was appointed to frame up and destroy someone else's entire family and uproot an entire clan, wasn't he also dazed and confused?

古文：夷行曰： 陛下不可移权与人。 
现代文：陈夷行说： 陛下不可将自己的权柄移交他人。 
English: Chen Yixing said: His Majesty must not transfer his power to others.

古文：嗣复曰： 夷行之言容易，且太宗用房玄龄十六年、魏徵十五年，何尝失道？
现代文：杨嗣复说： 陈夷行的话说起来简单，实行却很难；况且太宗重用房玄龄十六年、魏征十五年，又何曾违背道义呢？
English: Yang Shifu said: Chen Yixing's words are simple to say, but it is difficult to implement; moreover, Taizong reused the house for 16 years, Wei Zheng for 15 years, and what was against morality?

古文：臣以为用房、魏多时不为不理，用邪佞一日便足。 
现代文：臣认为信用房玄龄、魏征多年不能叫不合道理，但是滥用邪辟奸佞之人一天，就足以说是违背道义了。 
English: The vassal believed that the credit house Xuanling and Wei Zheng could not be called unreasonable for many years, but it was enough to say that it was against morality to abuse the evil and treacherous person for one day.

古文：夷行之言，皆指嗣复专权。
现代文：陈夷行所说的话，全都是说杨嗣复擅自专断独揽大权。
English: Chen Yixing's words were all about Yang Shifu arbitrarily seizing power.

古文：文宗用郭薳为坊州刺史，右拾遗，宋邧论列，以为不可。
现代文：文宗任用郭鑅为坊州刺史，右拾遗宋元阝上奏论评，认为不合适。
English: It was considered inappropriate for Wenzong to appoint Guo Jian as the chief historian of Fangzhou, and for the right to collect the remains of Song Yuanzhang to make a comment on it.

古文：既而薳坐赃。帝谓宰相曰： 宋邧论事可嘉，邧授官来几时？ 嗣复曰： 去年。 
现代文：不久之后，郭鑅因贪赃获罪，文帝对宰相们说： 宋元阝奏论政事值得嘉奖，他被授予现任官职是什么时间？ 杨嗣复说： 去年。 
English: Soon after, Guo Gan was found guilty of corruption, and Emperor Wen said to the prime ministers: Song Yuanxuan's speech on politics is worthy of commendation, when was he awarded his current post? Yang Shifu said: Last year.

古文：因曰： 谏官论事，陛下但记其姓名，稍加优奖。
现代文：接着又说： 谏官议事，陛下只须记下他的姓名，随即给予优待奖励。
English: Then he said, "When a eunuch comes to the meeting, His Majesty only needs to write down his name, and then give him preferential treatment and reward.

古文：如不当，亦须令知。 
现代文：如果他论事不恰当，也应该让他明白。 
English: If he makes inappropriate comments, he should be made aware of this.

古文：夷行曰： 谏官论事，是其本职。
现代文：陈夷行说： 谏官奏论政事，是他本身的职责。
English: Chen Yixing said: It is the duty of a eunuch to report on political affairs.

古文：若论一事即加一官，则官何由得，不免有情。 
现代文：如若每奏论一件事就加授一个官职，那么官位究竟该从哪里获得？其中不免有私情。 
English: If an official post is awarded to every person who plays an important role, then where should they get the post from? There will inevitably be personal feelings involved.

古文：帝曰： 情固不免，理平之时，亦不可免。 
现代文：文宗说： 私情实在难以避免，太平盛世时期，也不可避免。 
English: Wen Zong said: It is really difficult to avoid personal affairs, and it is also inevitable during the period of peace and prosperity.

古文：上竟以夷行议论太过，恩礼渐薄。
现代文：文宗终于认为陈夷行发表议论太过分，对待他的礼遇渐渐淡薄。
English: Wen Zong finally thought that Chen Yixing's speech was too excessive, and his courtesy was gradually diluted.

古文：寻罢知政事，守吏部尚书。
现代文：不久免除他掌管朝政的职权，让他代理吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was relieved of his duties in charge of the imperial government, leaving him in charge of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：四年九月，检校礼部尚书，出为华州刺史。
现代文：开成四年四月，陈夷行任检校礼部尚书，调出朝廷担任华州刺史。
English: In April of the following year, Chen Yixing was appointed as the inspector of the school's etiquette department, and transferred from the imperial court to serve as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：五年，武宗即位，李德裕秉政。
现代文：次年，武宗即位，李德裕执掌朝政。
English: The following year, Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, and Li Deyu took charge of the imperial government.

古文：德裕既贬，绅亦追削三任官告。
现代文：七月，陈夷行由华州被召入朝，再任中书侍郎、平章事。
English: In July, Chen Yixing was summoned to the imperial court from Huazhou, and was reappointed as the secretary of the Central Committee and the secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：吴汝纳者，澧州人，故韶州刺史武陵兄之子。
现代文：会昌三年十一月，任检校司空、平章事、河中尹、河中晋绛节度使。去世后，封赠为司徒。吴汝纳，澧州人，原韶州刺史吴武陵的侄儿。
English: In November of the third year of Huichang, Wu Runa, a native of Zhangzhou and the nephew of Wu Wuling, the former governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the inspector of schools.

古文：武陵进士登第，有史学，与刘轲并以史才直史馆。
现代文：吴武陵考中进士，攻史学，与刘轲一并因有史家才识在史馆任职。
English: Wu Wuling passed the junior high school entrance examination and majored in history. Together with Liu Wei, he worked in the history museum because of his ability as a historian.

古文：武陵撰《十三代史驳议》二十卷。
现代文：吴武陵撰有《十三代史驳议》二十卷。
English: Wu Wuling is the author of the twenty-volume "Rejection of the Thirteenth Dynasty History."

古文：自尚书员外郎出为忠州刺史，改韶州。
现代文：由尚书员外郎调出朝廷任忠州刺史，改任韶州刺史。
English: Gairo, a court scribe, was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as Chungju scribe, and Ryo was transferred to serve as Chungju scribe.

古文：坐赃贬潘州司户卒。
现代文：因贪赃，被贬为潘州司户时死去。
English: He died when he was relegated to the post of Pan State Secretary due to corruption.

古文：汝纳亦进士擢第，以季父赃罪，久之不调。
现代文：吴汝纳也考中进士，因叔父吴武陵犯贪赃罪，长时间没有授予官职。
English: Wu Runa also passed the junior high school entrance examination, but because his uncle Wu Wuling was guilty of corruption, he was not awarded an official post for a long time.

古文：会昌中，为河南府永宁县尉。
现代文：武宗会昌年间，任河南府永宁县尉。
English: During the Wuzong Huichang era, he served as a lieutenant of Yongning County, Henan Province.

古文：初，武陵坐赃时，李德裕作相，贬之。故汝纳以不调挟怨，而附宗闵、嗣复之党，同作谤言。
现代文：先前，吴武陵因贪赃获罪时，是李德裕做宰相，贬了吴武陵的官，因此吴汝纳由于久不被授职而对李德裕心怀怨恨，从而依附李宗闵、杨嗣复一党，与他们一道制造诽谤言论。
English: Previously, when Wu Wuling was convicted of corruption, it was Li Deyu who was the prime minister and demoted Wu Wuling's official. Therefore, Wu Runa harbored resentment against Li Deyu because he had not been appointed for a long time, thus adhering to Li Zongyao and Yang Shifu's party and working with them to make slanderous remarks.

古文：会汝纳弟湘为江都尉，为部人所讼赃罪，兼娶百姓颜悦女为妻，有逾格律。
现代文：适逢吴汝纳的弟弟吴湘任江都尉时，被部属告发有贪赃罪，加之娶平民颜悦的女儿为妻，违背条律。
English: When Wu Runa's younger brother, Wu Xiang, was appointed captain of the Yangtze River, he was accused by his subordinates of embezzlement, in addition to marrying the daughter of a commoner, Yan Yue, in violation of regulations.

古文：李绅令观察判官魏铏鞫之，赃状明白，伏法。
现代文：李绅责成观察判官魏钅刑审讯此案，吴湘所犯贪赃罪罪状很清楚，依法处死。
English: Li Sheng ordered to observe the judge Wei Xuan's criminal trial of the case. The crime of corruption committed by Wu Xiang was very clear, and he was executed according to law.

古文：湘妻颜，颜继母焦，皆笞而释之。仍令江都令张弘思以船监送湘妻颜及兒女送澧州。
现代文：吴湘的妻子颜氏、颜氏的继母焦氏，受笞刑后都释放了；并责成江都县令张弘思用船监送吴湘的妻子颜氏及其子女回到澧州。
English: Wu Xiang's wife, Yan, and Yan's stepmother, Jiao, were both released after being tortured; and Jiangdu County ordered Zhang Hongsi to use a boat to escort Wu Xiang's wife, Yan, and his children back to Zhangzhou.

古文：及扬州上具狱，物议以德裕素憎吴氏，疑李绅织成其罪。
现代文：待到扬州上报据以定案的全部罪状案卷，舆论认为李德裕一向憎恶吴氏，怀疑李绅罗织罪名制造了吴湘罪案。
English: By the time Yangzhou reported the entire criminal case file on which the conviction was based, public opinion believed that Li Deyu had always hated the Wu clan, and suspected that Li Shenglao fabricated the charges to create the Wu Xiang crime case.

古文：谏官论之，乃差御史崔元藻为制使，覆吴湘狱，据款伏妄破程粮钱，计赃准法。
现代文：谏官呈奏评论此事，于是朝廷派御史崔元藻为皇帝使臣，重审吴湘一案。根据吴湘服罪的自供：非法消耗粮钱，计算赃款有法律依据。
English: The eunuch made a report and commented on the matter, so the imperial court sent the imperial envoy Cui Yuanmao to retry Wu Xiang's case. According to Wu Xiang's confession: illegal consumption of grain money, there is a legal basis for calculating the stolen money.

古文：其恃官娶百姓颜悦女为妻，则称悦是前青州衙推。悦先娶王氏，是衣冠女，非继室焦所生，与扬州案小有不同。
现代文：说他倚仗官势娶平民颜悦的女儿为妻，他却称颜悦是前青州衙推，而颜悦先娶的妻子王氏是官绅之女，吴妻不是继室焦氏所生；与扬州呈报的罪案略有不同。
English: He said that he relied on his official position to marry the daughter of Yan Yue, a commoner, as his wife, but he said that Yan Yue was a former Qingzhou official, while Yan Yue's first wife, Wang, was the daughter of a government official, and Wu's wife was not born from the stepmother, Jiao; the crime reported by Yangzhou is slightly different.

古文：德裕以元藻无定夺，奏贬崖州司户。
现代文：李德裕因为崔元藻不作可否的裁决，奏请贬他为崔州司户。
English: Li Deyu, because Cui Yuanmao did not make a ruling on whether or not to do so, requested that he be demoted to the position of Cui State Secretary.

古文：及汝纳进状，追元藻覆问。
现代文：待到吴汝纳向朝廷告状，追究崔元藻的复审情况。
English: Wait until Wu Runa sues the imperial court and investigates the review of Cui Yuanmao.

古文：元藻既恨德裕，阴为崔铉、白敏中、令狐綯所利诱，即言湘虽坐赃，罪不至死。
现代文：崔元藻既恨李德裕，又暗中受崔铉、白敏中、令狐腍的利诱，因而说：吴湘虽然因贪赃犯法，罪不至死。
English: Cui Yuanmao not only hated Li Deyu, but was also secretly enticed by Cui Yao, Bai Minzhong, and Ling Fuxi, and therefore said: Although Wu Xiang broke the law due to corruption, the crime did not lead to death.

古文：又云，颜悦实非百姓，此狱是郑亚首唱，元寿协李恪锻成，李回便奏。
现代文：还说：颜悦实在不是平民百姓，这起案子系由郑亚首倡，元寿协助李恪罗织罪名而制造的，李回偏私呈奏。
English: He also said: Yan Yue is really not a commoner. This case was initiated by Zheng Ya and fabricated by Yuan Shou with the assistance of Li Ke Luo. Li Hui acted out of self-interest.

古文：遂下三司详鞫。
现代文：于是将此案下交御史大夫、中书、门下三司详密审讯。
English: As a result, the case was handed over to Dr. Mishi, Chusho, and his three subordinates for detailed interrogation.

古文：故德裕再贬，李回、郑亚等皆窜逐。
现代文：因而李德裕再次被贬黜，李回、郑亚等都遭到流放。
English: As a result, Li Deyu was once again demoted, and Li Hui, Zheng Ya and others were all exiled.

古文：吴汝纳、崔元藻为崔、白、令狐所奖，数年并至显官。
现代文：吴汝纳、崔元藻受到崔铉、白敏中、令狐腍的奖励，数年间一并成为权势显赫的要官。
English: Wu Runa and Cui Yuanmao were rewarded by Cui Yao, Bai Minzhong and Ling Xuchang, and all of them became powerful and prominent officials in a few years.

