古文：谢晦尼智通王袭之周宗沈僧复僧道志唐文伯崔平业王镇恶郭祖深卫元宗姜胜生傅奕并州人薛孤训巂州县令丁零唐武宗王义逸赘肉西明寺明相寺僧义孚开照寺盗僧绍明潼江军
现代文：谢晦尼智通王袭之周宗沈僧复僧道志唐文伯崔平业王镇恶郭祖深卫元宗姜胜生傅奕并州人薛孤训巂州县令丁零唐武宗王义逸赘肉西明寺明相寺僧义孚开照寺盗僧绍明潼江军
English: Zhou Zong Shen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Z

古文：谢晦
现代文：谢晦
English: Thank you.

古文：宋尚书谢晦为荆州刺史，谓塔寺不宜在人间，当移之郭外，乃自率部下至新寺门，遣队士八十，持刀斧，毁坏浮图，尊像纵横，瓦木倾坠。
现代文：宋朝尚书谢晦任荆州刺史。他声言塔寺不应该建在城里，应该移到城外去。于是就亲自率领部下来到新寺门，派了八十个士兵，拿着刀斧，砍的砍，刨的刨，毁坏了佛象，佛神的塑像也都横躺竖卧，房倒屋塌瓦掉木倒。
English: He said that the pagoda and temple should not be built in the city, but should be moved outside the city. So he personally led the department down to the new temple gate and sent eighty soldiers with knives and axes, chopping and sawing, and destroyed the Buddha image. The statues of the Buddha are also lying horizontally and vertically, and the houses have collapsed.

古文：俄而云雾暗天，风尘勃起，晦冥即怖走，队人惊散，莫知所以。
现代文：不一会儿，云雾遮天蔽日，大风吹起烟尘。谢晦一看这样昏暗吓得跑了，士兵也都惊惧四散逃跑，不知道是什么原因。
English: In a short time, clouds covered the sky and a strong wind blew smoke and dust. Xie Xiao was so scared when he saw the darkness, and the soldiers were all scared and ran away. I don't know why.

古文：晦等夜梦，咸见沙门，飞腾空中，光明显赫。
现代文：谢晦等人在夜晚都作了梦，都看见和尚在空中飞腾。发出耀眼的光亮。
English: Xie Yao and the others all had dreams at night, and they all saw the monk flying in the air, emitting dazzling light.

古文：又见二人，形悉丈余，容姿甚伟，厉声嗔曰： 所行反道，寻当自知。
现代文：又看见两个一丈多高的人，容颜姿态都很奇伟，瞪着眼睛大声斥责说： 你们的所作所为背叛了仁道。不久自己就会明白。 
English: He also saw two people who were as tall as he was, both of whom had marvelous looks and gestures. They stared into his eyes and loudly rebuked him, saying, "What you have done betrays the path of benevolence. You will soon see for yourself."

古文：其后，队人满身著癞疾，经时而死。
现代文：这以后那些士兵满身生癞，不几天就死了。
English: After that, the soldiers were covered with rust and died within a few days.

古文：余人并犯法就终，谢晦连年患瘠病，后因谋叛，合家被诛，皆非命而卒。
现代文：这些人都不是正常死亡的。
English: These are not normal deaths.

古文：尼智通
现代文：尼智通
English: Ni Zhitong

古文：宋尼智通，京师简静尼也，年貌殊少，信道不笃。
现代文：南北朝时，南宋有个尼姑叫智通，是京城简静庵的尼姑，年少貌美，但信道不忠。
English: At the time of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, there was a nun named Zhitong in the Southern Song Dynasty. She was a nun at the Jianjing Monastery in Beijing. She was young and beautiful, but she was unfaithful.

古文：元嘉九年，师死罢道，嫁为魏郡梁甫妾，生一男，年七岁，家甚贫穷，无以为衣。
现代文：元嘉九年，因为她师傅死了她也就不信道了，还俗嫁给魏郡的梁甫作妾。生了一个男孩，已经七岁了。她们家一贫如洗，连衣服都穿不上。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Jia, because her master died, she did not believe, and married Liang Fu of Wei County as a concubine. She gave birth to a boy, who is already seven years old. Their family was so poor that they could not even wear clothes.

古文：智通为尼时，有数卷素无量寿法华等经，悉练捣之，以衣其儿。
现代文：智通当尼姑时有几卷用白绢写的《无量寿》《法华》等经书，她就拿来拆散漂洗，然后给孩子做了衣服。
English: When Zhitong was a nun, she had several volumes of scriptures such as "Immeasurable Life" and "Fa Hua" written in Chinese characters. She took them apart and washed them, and then made clothes for her children.

古文：居一年而得病，恍惚惊悸，肌体坏烂，状若火疮，有细白虫，日去升余，惨痛烦毒，昼夜号叫。常闻空中语云： 坏经为衣，得此报也。 
现代文：一年以后得了病，神志不清，害怕心跳，肌肤坏烂，好象生了火疮，长了很多细白虫，每天都能拨除一升多，疼痛难忍烦躁不安，昼夜号叫，经常听到空中有人说： 毁了经书做衣服，应该得到这样的报应啊。 
English: A year later, I got sick. I was delirious, afraid of my heartbeat, my skin was rotten, it looked like I had fire sores, I had a lot of fine white worms, I was able to remove more than a liter every day, the pain was unbearable, I was restless, I cried day and night, and I often heard someone in the air say: I ruined the scriptures to make clothes, I deserve such retribution.

古文：旬余而死。
现代文：十多天就死了。
English: He died more than ten days later.

古文：王袭之
现代文：王袭之
English: Wang Haizhi

古文：宋吴兴太守琅琊王袭之，有学问，爱老庄而不信佛，唯事宰杀。
现代文：宋朝的吴兴太守王袭之是琅琊人，博学多闻，信奉道教而不信佛教，专能宰杀家禽牲畜。
English: The Song Dynasty's Wu Xing Taishu Wang Xi Rong was a scholarly and erudite man. He believed in Taoism but not Buddhism, and was skilled at slaughtering poultry and livestock.

古文：初为晋西省郎中，性好宾客，于内省前养一双鹅，甚爱玩之。
现代文：当初任晋西省郎中，性好客，在府内养了一对鹅，特别喜欢这对鹅。
English: At the beginning, he was the son-in-law of the governor of Jinxi Province. He was hospitable and raised a pair of geese in the prefecture. He especially liked this pair of geese.

古文：夜忽梦鹅口衔一卷经，可十纸许，取看皆说罪福之事，明旦果见，乃是佛经。
现代文：有一天忽然梦到鹅口中衔着一卷经书，约有十多页，拿来看那里面都说的是罪和福一类的事。第二天早晨果然发现了经书，原来是佛经。
English: One day, I suddenly dreamed that a goose was holding a scroll of scripture in its beak, about ten pages long, and when I took it out, I saw that it was all about things like sin and happiness. The next morning, I found the scripture, which turned out to be a Buddhist scripture.

古文：因是不敢宰杀，笃信过人。
现代文：从此以后再也不敢宰杀了，一心一意信佛超过了别的人。
English: From then on, he never dared to kill again, and his single-minded belief in Buddhism surpassed that of other people.

古文：周宗
现代文：周宗
English: Zhou Zong

古文：周宗者，广陵郡人也。
现代文：周宗是广陵郡人。
English: Zhou Zong is from Guangling County.

古文：宋元嘉七年，随到彦之北伐。
现代文：宋朝元嘉七年，随从到彦之北伐，结果官军大败。
English: In the seventh year of the Song Dynasty, Yuan Jia followed the Northern Expedition led by Duan Yan. As a result, the government army was soundly defeated.

古文：王师失利，与同邑六人逃窜。
现代文：周宗就和六个同乡逃跑了，从小路跑到彭城以北，碰到一个空寺院，连一个僧徒也没有。
English: Zhou Zong ran away with six of his fellow villagers. He ran along a path to the north of Pengcheng and came across an empty monastery, without even a single monk.

古文：间行于彭城北，遇一空寺，无有僧徒，中有形像，以水晶为相，因共窃取之，乃出村贷食。
现代文：但寺里有个佛像，是用水晶雕刻成的。他们几个人就一块儿把水晶塑像偷走了，出村后换了食物。
English: However, there was a Buddha statue in the temple, which was carved from crystal. Several of them together stole the crystal statue and exchanged it for food after leaving the village.

古文：其一人羸病，等辈皆轻之，独不得分与。
现代文：结果其中一个人瘦弱有病，其他人都轻视他，没有分给食物。
English: As a result, one of them was thin and sickly, and the others despised him and did not give him any food.

古文：既而各还家，三四年中，宗等五人，相继病癞而死。不得分者独获免。
现代文：后来就各自回家了。三四年的时间内，周宗等五个人都相继生了癞疮死去，只有那个没分到食物的没死。
English: Later, they went home separately. Within three or four years, Zhou Zong and five others all died of scabies one after another, only the one who did not get food did not die.

古文：沈僧复
现代文：沈僧复
English: Shen Zangfu

古文：宋吴兴沈僧复，大明末，本土饥荒，逐食至山阳。
现代文：宋朝吴兴的沈僧复，在大明末年，因为当地闹饥荒，一路讨饭来到山阳。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, Shen Zengfu of the Song Dynasty and Wu Xing came to Shanyang to beg for food because there was a famine in the area.

古文：昼入村野乞食，夜还寄寓寺舍左右。
现代文：白天他就到村子里去讨饭，天黑就回来寄住在寺院左右。
English: During the day, he would go to the village to beg for food, and come back at night to stay around the temple.

古文：时山阳诸小形铜像甚众，僧复与其乡里数人，积渐窃取，遂囊箧数四悉满，复因将还家，共铸为钱。事既发觉，执送出都，入舡便云： 见人以火烧之。 
现代文：沈僧复就和同乡的几个人一天天偷来很多。于是把几个箱子口袋都装满了。
English: Shen Sangfu and a few of his fellow villagers stole a lot every day, so they filled several boxes and bags.

古文：昼夜叫呼，自称楚毒不可忍，未及刑坐而死，举体皆拆裂，状如火烧。
现代文：僧复就把这些铜像带回家，与同乡一起铸造铜钱。事情立即就被发觉了，被抓获解往京都，上了船就说 有人用火烧我。 他便白天晚上大呼大叫，自己就痛苦得不能忍受，还没有受到刑罚就死了，死的时候全身都破裂，好象火烧的一样。
English: The matter was immediately discovered, he was arrested and sent to Kyoto, and when he got on the ship, he said, "Someone is burning me with fire," and he screamed day and night, he was in unbearable pain, and he died before he was punished, and when he died, his whole body was ruptured, as if it were on fire.

古文：吴郡朱亨，亲识僧复。
现代文：吴郡的朱亨认识僧复，这些事他都亲眼看见了。
English: Zhu Heng from Wuxi County knows Monk Fu, he has seen all these things with his own eyes.

古文：僧道志
现代文：僧道志
English: Buddhist precepts

古文：宋沙门僧道志者，北多宝僧也。
现代文：宋朝有个和尚叫道志，是北多宝的和尚。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there was a monk named Tao Zhi, who was a monk from Beidobao.

古文：尝为众僧令知殿塔，自窃幡盖等宝饰。所取甚众，后遂偷像眉间珠相，既而开穿垣壁，若外盗者，故僧众不能觉也。
现代文：他在当僧人时奉命看守佛殿佛塔，当看守时独自盗了幡帘帏盖等宝饰，偷了很多，后来就偷佛像眼眉中间的珠子，接着又把墙壁扒开，造成象外人偷出似的现场，所以众僧人也没有发觉。
English: When he was a monk, he was ordered to guard the pagoda of the Buddhist temple. When he was guarding, he stole a lot of jewelry such as curtains and lids. Later, he stole the beads in the middle of the eyebrows of the Buddha statue, and then he scratched the walls, creating a scene where it looked like a stranger had stolen them, so the monks did not notice.

古文：积旬余而得病，便见异人，以戈矛刺之，时来时去，辄惊叫，应声流血。
现代文：过了十多天道志就得了病，看见一个不平常的人用枪矛刺他，有时来有时走，他惊骇大叫，随着叫声而流血。
English: After more than ten days, Doushi fell ill. When he saw an unusual person stabbing him with a spear, sometimes coming and sometimes going, he screamed in horror and bled as he screamed.

古文：初犹日中一两如此，其后病甚，刺者稍数，疮痍变遍体，呻呼不能声。
现代文：最初还是一天里有一两次这种情况，到后来病就加重了，刺他的人来的次数也稍有增加，他的满身都变成了疮伤，直到连呻吟的力气也没有了。
English: At first it was only once or twice a day, but then it got worse, and the number of people stabbing him increased slightly, until his whole body was covered in sores and he didn't even have the strength to moan.

古文：同寺僧众，颇疑其有罪，欲为忏谢。
现代文：同寺的僧人们都怀疑他犯了罪，想要让他忏悔。
English: The monks at the temple suspected he had committed a crime and wanted him to confess.

古文：始问，犹讳而不言。将尽二三日，乃具自陈列，泣涕请救曰： 吾愚悖不通，谓无幽途，失意作罪，招此殃酷，生受楚拷，死婴刀镬，已糜之身，唯垂哀恕，今无复余物，唯衣被毡履，或足充一会。 
现代文：开始问他的时候，他还隐讳不说，又过了二三天，才把他作的事全都说出来，哭着请求救命说： 我愚蠢糊涂不通事理，以为没有冥间幽途，一念之差犯了罪，招来这样惨酷的殃祸。活着受严厉地拷打，死了要受刀割或在大锅里煮。现在全身都烂了，只求可怜我饶恕我。
English: When they began to question him, he remained silent. It took another two or three days before he told them everything he had done, crying and begging for help, saying: "I was stupid, confused and unreasonable, thinking that there was no other way. I committed a crime because of a difference of opinion, which led to such a terrible disaster. I was severely tortured while alive, and when I died, I was cut with a knife or boiled in a cauldron. Now my whole body is rotten, I only ask for mercy and forgiveness."

古文：并频请愿，具为忏悔者。
现代文：现在我也没有别的东西。
English: Now I have nothing else.

古文：偷像相珠有二枚，一枚已属妪人，不可复得；一以质钱，在陈昭家，令赎取。
现代文：只有衣服，被褥、帽子和鞋了，这些东西变卖了也许能够一次佛会的费用。 道志一再请愿，这些东西都拿出来作忏悔。又说：偷佛像上的珠子有二枚，一枚已经换给了一个妇人，不可能再找回来了，另一枚换了钱，在陈昭家。让他们赎回。
English: Only the clothes, bedding, hat and shoes were left, and these things were sold to cover the expenses of the Buddhist Association. Doshi repeatedly petitioned, and these things were taken out for repentance. He also said: There are two beads on the stolen Buddha statue, one has been exchanged for a woman, and it is impossible to get it back, and the other has been exchanged for money, at Chen Zhao's house. Let them redeem it.

古文：道志既死，诸僧合集，赎得相珠，并设斋忏。
现代文：道志死后，僧人们集资。赎回那一枚塑像上的珠子，并摆了斋为道志忏悔。
English: After Doshi's death, the monks collected money, redeemed the beads on the statue, and fasted in penitence for Doshi.

古文：初工人复相珠时，展转回趣，终不安合，众僧复为礼拜烧香，乃得著焉。
现代文：刚开始工匠往佛像上装珠子时，翻来覆去怎样也安不上。僧人们又给佛像作礼拜烧香，才算安上了。
English: When the craftsmen began to place beads on the Buddha statue, they couldn't get it to settle. The monks had to burn incense to the Buddha statue before it was settled.

古文：年余，而同学等于昏夜间，闻空中有语，详听即道志声也。自说云： 自死已来，备婴痛毒，方累年劫，未有出期。
现代文：仔细听才听出是道志的声音。道志自己说： 自从死了以来，各种苦都受遍了，将要有很长时间，没有摆脱的日期，全靠众僧可怜救助。赎回佛珠。
English: It is only when you listen carefully that you can hear the voice of Dao Zhi. Dao Zhi himself said, "Since I died, I have suffered all kinds of hardships. It will take a long time, and there is no date to get rid of them. It all depends on the poor help of the monks. To redeem the Buddhist beads."

古文：赖蒙众僧哀怜救护，赎像相珠，故苦酷之中，时有间息，感恩无已，故暂来称谢。 
现代文：所以，在特别痛苦之中，也稍有停息的时候，感恩不尽，才特意来致谢。 说到这儿就不说了。
English: Therefore, in the midst of great pain, when there is a slight pause, gratitude is inexhaustible, and only then do I specifically come to give thanks.

古文：言此而已，闻其语时，腥腐臭气，苦痛难过。
现代文：当听他说话的时候。闻到一种腥臭腐烂的气味，让人难以忍受。
English: When listening to him, one can smell a foul, putrid odor that is unbearable.

古文：言终久之，乃稍歇。
现代文：说完过很长时间稍稍好一些了。
English: After talking for a long time, it got a little better.

古文：唐文伯
现代文：唐文伯
English: Tang Wenbo

古文：宋唐文伯，东海赣榆人也。弟好蒲博，家资都尽。
现代文：宋朝的唐文伯是东海赣榆人，他的弟弟好以子、马、五木等博具而赌，把家产都输光了。
English: Tang Wenbo of the Song Dynasty was a native of the East China Sea. His younger brother liked to gamble with his son, horse, five trees and other bogeys, and lost all the family property.

古文：村中有寺，经过人或以钱上佛，弟屡窃取。
现代文：他住的村子里有座寺院、经过这里的人有的就拿钱敬献给佛像。他的弟弟多次窃取这些钱。
English: There is a temple in the village where he lives, and some people who pass by take money to pay homage to the Buddha statue. His younger brother has stolen the money many times.

古文：后病癞，卜者云： 祟由盗佛钱。 
现代文：后来得了病生癞疮。给他算命的人说： 这个灾祸是由于他偷了佛的钱。 
English: Later, he got scabies. His fortune-teller said, "This misfortune is because he stole the Buddha's money."

古文：父怒曰： 佛是何神，乃令我儿致此！
现代文：他父亲气愤地说： 这个佛是什么神？
English: His father angrily said, "What kind of god is this Buddha?

古文：吾当试更虏夺，若复能病，可也。 
现代文：就让我的儿子得了这样的病，我再拿些别的东西试试，如果也能得病，我就信。 
English: Just let my son get sick like this, and I'll try something else, and if I get sick, I'll believe.

古文：前县令何欣之妇，上织成宝盖带四枚，乃盗取为腰带。
现代文：前任县令何欣的媳妇织成四条佛的宝盖带子敬献给佛。他就偷来作腰带。
English: The daughter-in-law of the previous county magistrate, He Xin, knitted four Buddha's treasure-covered ribbons as a tribute to the Buddha. He stole them to make a belt.

古文：不百日，复得恶病。发疮之始，起腰带处。
现代文：还不到一百天，他又得了恶病，开始生疮，是从腰带那个地方生的。
English: When he was less than a hundred days old, he fell ill again and began to have sores, which came from the girdle.

古文：崔平业
现代文：崔平业
English: Choi Pyong-ye

古文：梁人崔平业者，善弓马，为武士监军。
现代文：南北朝梁人崔平业。善于骑马射箭，当了武士监军。
English: Cui Pingye, the leader of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, was good at horseback archery and served as a samurai overseer.

古文：一生以偷佛熔铜为业，卖铜以供酒肉，心无惭惧。
现代文：他一辈子以偷佛像熔化成铜为职业，卖了铜买酒肉，心里不觉得惭愧也不害怕。
English: He has been stealing and melting Buddha statues into copper all his life. He sold the copper to buy wine and meat. He does not feel ashamed or afraid.

古文：年五十，妻子兄弟并死，业一身忽病目障，饥寒并至，饿死。
现代文：五十岁那年，妻和孩子兄弟们一起死了。他孤身一人忽然又得了病眼睛瞎了，这样饥寒一同来到，饿死了。
English: In the fiftieth year of his age, his wife died together with his children and brothers, and he was left alone, and suddenly he fell ill again and lost his sight, and so cold and hunger came together, and he died of starvation.

古文：王镇恶
现代文：王镇恶
English: Wang Zhenxiong

古文：梁人进士王镇恶，有学问而无善心，出言多所非毁，亦为时人所嫌。
现代文：梁人王镇恶是进士，有学问却没有善良的心，经常恶语伤人，当时人们都嫌弃他。
English: Liang Zhen Wang Zhenlu was a bad scholar. He was learned but not kind-hearted. He often used bad language to hurt people. At that time, people all disliked him.

古文：轻慢佛法，见僧必侮诮。
现代文：他还轻慢佛法，看见僧人就一定要侮辱耍笑一番。
English: He also despised Buddhism. Whenever he saw a monk, he had to insult him and make fun of him.

古文：后以教学为业，时有鹿溪寺僧法满寄铜钟一口于其学内，未取之间，镇恶盗以铸钱。
现代文：后来他以教学为职业，当时鹿溪寺有个法满和尚在他的学校里寄存了一口铜钟，还没取走的时候，镇恶就偷着熔化铸成铜钱。
English: Later, he took teaching as his profession. At that time, a Dharma Man Monk from Luxi Temple deposited a copper bell in his school. Before taking it away, Zhen Huan secretly melted it down and cast it into copper coins.

古文：后与僧法满对誓，经年重病，而舌弯缩，口不得言。
现代文：后来他和法满和尚发誓说根本没动那口钟。过了一年就得了重病，舌头弯曲萎缩，不能说话。
English: Later, he and the Dharma Man monk swore that they had not touched the bell at all. A year later, he fell seriously ill, his tongue bent and atrophied, and he could not speak.

古文：既知负誓，乃舍资铸钟赎罪。至死，口不得言。
现代文：他自己知道是违了誓，于是拿出钱财铸钟赎罪，到死的时候还是不能说话。
English: He himself knew that he had broken his oath, so he took out money and money to make a bell to atone for his sin, and he still couldn't speak when he died.

古文：郭祖深
现代文：郭祖深
English: Guo Zu Sheng

古文：梁人郭祖深，上梁武一十八条事，请废郭内小寺及无业僧尼，梁武不纳。
现代文：梁人郭祖深，曾上奏梁武帝十八件事，其中有一条要废掉城郭内的一个小寺院和那些无业的僧尼。梁武帝没有采纳他的意见。
English: Liang's man, Guo Zu Sheng, once reported eighteen matters to Emperor Liang Wudi, one of which was to abolish a small temple in the city and those unemployed monks and nuns. Emperor Liang Wudi did not adopt his opinion.

古文：后梦见神唾之，遂病癞，虽悔不差。
现代文：后来他梦见神唾斥他，于是得了癞疮病，虽然后悔但也没有好。
English: Later, he dreamt that God had spit on him, and he got scabies. Although he regretted it, it wasn't good.

古文：卫元宗
现代文：卫元宗
English: Wei Yuan Zong

古文：卫元宗毁法之后，身著热风，委顿而死。
现代文：卫元宗毁掉佛法以后，得了一种热风发烧的病，最后枯瘦困顿而死。
English: After the Wei Yuan sect destroyed Buddhism, he contracted a disease of wind fever, and finally died of exhaustion.

古文：姜胜生
现代文：姜胜生
English: Jiang Sheng Sheng

古文：冀州故观城人姜胜生，唐武德末年，忽遇恶疾，遂入蒙山医疗，积年不损。
现代文：冀州故观城人姜胜生，在唐朝武德末年忽然得了很重的病，于是就去蒙山找人治疗。
English: Jiang Sheng Sheng, a former resident of Guancheng in Jizhou, suddenly fell seriously ill in the last years of the Tang Dynasty, so he went to Mengshan to seek treatment.

古文：后始还家，身体疮烂，手足指落。
现代文：治了几年也不见效，后来才回家，身体生疮溃烂，手指和脚指都掉了。
English: After several years of treatment, it did not work, and only later did he return home, his body ulcerated, and his fingers and toes had fallen off.

古文：夜眠，忽梦见一白石像，可长三尺许，谓之曰： 但为我续手，令尔即差。 
现代文：晚上睡觉，忽然梦见一个白色石像，估计能有三尺多高，那石像对他说： 只要给我续上手，我就让你的病好。 
English: When he went to bed at night, he suddenly dreamed of a white stone statue, estimated to be more than three feet tall. The stone statue said to him: "Just let me get started, and I'll make your illness better."

古文：至旦，忽忆于武德初年，在黍地里打雀，于故村佛室中，取维摩经裂破，用系杖头吓雀。
现代文：到天亮叶，忽然回忆起来在武德初年，有一次他在苞米地里打麻雀，直追到原来村子里的佛室里，他拿起维摩经撕破用来系在棍子头上吓唬麻雀。
English: At dawn, he suddenly recalled that in the first year of martial arts, he once hit a sparrow in the glutinous rice field, and chased it straight to the Buddhist temple in the original village. He picked up the Vimalakirti Sutra and tore it to tie it to the head of the stick to scare the sparrow.

古文：有人见者云： 盗裂经大罪。 
现代文：有看见他这样做的人说： 偷撕经书是很大的罪。 
English: Someone who saw him do this said: "Secretly tearing up a scripture is a great sin.

古文：胜生反更恶骂，遂入堂中，打白石像右手落，梦中所见，宛然旧像。
现代文：胜生不但不听反而恶语骂人，又进到佛堂里把白色石佛像的右手打掉了。胜生梦中见到的佛像，很象当年那座旧佛像。
English: Not only did he not listen, but he cursed and went into the Buddhist hall and knocked off the right hand of the white stone Buddha statue. The Buddha statue that he saw in his dream was very similar to the old Buddha statue.

古文：遂往佛前，头面作礼，尽心悔过。
现代文：于是就到佛像前，面对佛像磕头作礼，一心一意悔过。
English: So he went to the Buddha statue, bowed to the statue's head, and wholeheartedly repented.

古文：顾匠续其像手，造经四十卷，营一精舍。一年之内，病得痊，乡人号为圣像。
现代文：又雇了工匠给佛像续上右手，造了经书四十卷，还另建了一座做佛寺的房子，一年之内病就全好了。乡里的人都称佛像为圣像。
English: He also hired a craftsman to add the right hand to the Buddha statue, made forty volumes of scriptures, and built another house to make a Buddhist temple. Within a year, his illness was completely cured. The people in the village called the Buddha statue a holy image.

古文：傅奕
现代文：傅奕
English: Fu Yi

古文：唐太史令傅奕，本太原人，隋末，徙至扶风。
现代文：唐朝的太史令傅奕。本来是太原人。隋朝末年。搬到扶风。
English: Tang Dynasty's Taishi Ling Fu Yi, originally from Taiyuan, moved to Fufeng at the end of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：少好博学，善天文历数，聪辩，能剧谈。
现代文：他少年时就爱好广泛，学识渊博善于天文历法和算数。聪慧有辩才，还能谈很难的问题。
English: As a young boy, he had a wide range of interests, was well-versed in the astronomical calendar and mathematics, and was an intelligent debater, able to discuss difficult issues.

古文：自武德贞观中，尝为太史令，性不信佛法，每轻僧尼，至以后像为砖瓦之用。
现代文：从武德贞观年，曾任太史令。他生性不信佛法。经常轻视僧尼，以致用石佛象当砖瓦用。
English: He was appointed Taishi Ryo from the year of Wu De Zhen Guan. He did not believe in Buddhism by nature. He often despised monks and nuns, so much so that he used stone Buddha statues as bricks.

古文：贞观十四年秋，暴病卒。
现代文：贞观十四年秋天，突然得急病死了。
English: In the autumn of the fourteenth year of Zhenguan, she suddenly fell ill and died.

古文：初奕与同伴傅仁均、薛颐，并为太史令，颐先负仁均钱五千，未偿而仁均死，后颐梦见仁均，言语如平常。颐因问曰： 先所负钱，当付谁人？ 
现代文：当初他和同伴傅仁均、薛颐，同作太史令。薛颐以前欠傅仁均五千钱，还没偿还仁均就死了。后来薛颐作梦梦见了仁均，说话就象平时说话那样，薛颐就趁机问仁均： 以前我欠你的钱应该还给谁呢？ 
English: At the beginning, he and his companions Fu Renjun and Xue Yao were both Tai Shi Ling. Xue Yao had previously owed Fu Renjun five thousand money, but died before he could repay it. Later, Xue Yao had a dream of Renjun, and spoke as he usually did. Xue Yao took the opportunity to ask Renjun: Who should I pay back the money I owed you before?

古文：仁均曰： 可以付泥犁人。 
现代文：仁均回答说： 可以给地狱里的人。 
English: Renjun replied, "It can be given to people in hell."

古文：问是谁，答曰： 太史令傅奕是也。 
现代文：薛颐追问是谁。仁均答： 就是太史令傅奕。 
English: Xue Yao asked who it was. Ren Jun replied: It was Taishi Ling Fu Yi.

古文：既而寤。
现代文：然后就醒了。
English: And then I woke up.

古文：是日夜，少府监冯长命又梦己在一处，多见先亡人，长命问经文说罪福之报，未知审定有否，答曰： 皆悉有之。 
现代文：也就在那天晚上，少府监冯长命梦到自己在一个地方，见到了很多先死了的人，长命就问经文里论的罪福等报应，不知审定没有。回答说： 全都有。
English: That same night, the Young Prefect Feng Changmei dreamed that he was in a place where he saw many people who had died before him. He asked Changmei about the retribution of sin and blessing in the scriptures. He didn't know if they had been verified. He answered: They all exist.

古文：又问如傅奕者，生平不信，死受何报，答曰： 罪福定有，然傅奕已配越州为泥犁矣。 并州人
现代文：又问： 象傅奕那样，一生也不信佛法，死了受什么报应？ 回答说： 罪和福一定有报应，然而傅奕已经发配到越州成了地狱里的人了。 并州人
English: He also asked, "If, like Fu Yi, you do not believe in Buddhism all your life, what retribution will you receive when you die?" He answered, "There must be retribution for sin and blessing, but Fu Yi has already been sent to Yuezhou to become a person in hell.

古文：并州有人解画，曾陷北虏，突厥可汗遣画佛像。
现代文：并州有个人会画画，曾经被突厥人抓去作了俘虏。突厥的可汗派他画佛像。
English: And there was a man in Ganzhou who knew how to paint. He had been captured by the Turks and taken prisoner. The Turkish khan sent him to paint a Buddha statue.

古文：此人时偷彩色，恐被搜获，纸裹塞鼻中，鼻中血出数升。
现代文：这个人有时偷颜料。怕被搜查出来，就用纸裹着塞到鼻子里，鼻子里淌血能有几升那么多。
English: This man sometimes steals paint. Afraid of being searched, he wraps it in paper and sticks it in his nose. There can be several litres of blood in his nose.

古文：此人后为僧，唐贞观中，于山东住寺，渐渐患鼻。二三年，后鼻中生肉，甚大如桃，脓血狼藉，酸痛不已。
现代文：这个人后来当了和尚。唐朝贞观年间，在山东住于寺院里，慢慢得了鼻病，二三年以后鼻中生出肉，像桃一样大，流脓淌水，不停地痛疼。
English: This man later became a monk. During the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, he lived in a temple in Shandong. He gradually developed a nasal disease. Twenty-three years later, flesh sprouted from his nose, as big as a peach, oozing water, and he was in constant pain.

古文：后请僧灵顗忏悔，病亦不愈，十年始亡。
现代文：后来他请灵顗和尚为他作忏悔，但病也不见好。十年以后才死。
English: Later, he asked a Buddhist monk to do penance for him, but his illness did not improve, and he died ten years later.

古文：灵顗尝住慈恩寺，说其事。
现代文：灵顗曾在慈恩寺住过，说了他的事。
English: Lingya had once lived in the Jian Temple, and she told him about it.

古文：薛孤训
现代文：薛孤训
English: by Xue Guoxun

古文：唐贞观二十年，征龟兹。
现代文：唐朝贞观二十年，征讨龟兹。
English: Twenty years after the Tang Dynasty abolished the concept of chastity.

古文：有薛孤训者，为行军仓曹。
现代文：有个叫薛孤训的人，是军营里管仓库的官。
English: There was a man named Xue Guoxun, who was the officer in charge of the warehouse in the military camp.

古文：军及屠龟兹后，乃于精舍剥佛面金，旬日之间，眉毛尽落。
现代文：军队占领了龟兹以后，他在一所佛堂里剥掉了佛面上的金子。十多天的时间，他的眉毛全掉了。
English: After the army occupied Kuez, he peeled off the gold from the Buddha's face in a Buddhist temple. It took more than ten days for his eyebrows to completely fall off.

古文：还至伊州，乃于佛前悔过，以所得金皆为造功德。
现代文：回到伊州，他就在佛前悔过。把所剥下来的金子全都拿出来作了功德。
English: Back in Izhou, he repented in front of the Buddha. He took all the gold he had stripped off and made merit.

古文：未几，眉毛复生。
现代文：不久，他的眉毛又长出来了。
English: Before long, his eyebrows had grown back.

古文：巂州县令
现代文：巂州县令
English: Zhangzhou County Government

古文：唐贞观中，有人任巂州一县令，往高昌，于寺得一真珠像。
现代文：唐贞观年间，有一个人任巂州县令。有一次，他去高昌的时候，在寺庙里得到一个纯珍珠的佛像。
English: Once, when he went to Gaochang, he found a pure pearl Buddha statue in a temple.

古文：至京师，诸大寺欲与千贯钱买之，不肯，遂毁破，卖得一千三百贯。
现代文：到了京城，各大寺院要给他一千贯钱买去。他不肯。于是毁坏了它，卖了一千三百贯。
English: When he arrived in the capital, the major temples wanted to buy it from him for 1,000 kroner. He refused, so they destroyed it and sold it for 1,300 kroner.

古文：后月余患肿，寤寐之间，见一僧云： 何因毁坏尊像？ 
现代文：一个多月后全身发肿。睡觉的时候看见一个和尚说： 为什么毁坏尊像？ 
English: More than a month later, my whole body was swollen. While I was sleeping, I saw a monk who said, "Why destroy the statue?

古文：遂遣人拔其舌，长尺余，苦痛呻吟，数日而死。
现代文：于是就派人拔他的舌头，拔出一尺多长，他苦痛地呻吟。只几天就死了。
English: So they sent someone to pull out his tongue, which was more than a foot long, and he moaned in pain. He only died a few days later.

古文：德安县令薛逵备知此事。
现代文：德安县令薛逵全都知道这件事。
English: Everyone in De'an County knew about this.

古文：丁零
现代文：丁零
English: Ding Zi

古文：相州邺城中，有丈六铜立像一躯。
现代文：那铜像发出很大的声音，声音象炸雷一样。
English: The bronze statue made a loud noise, like a thunderclap.

古文：贼丁零者，志性凶悖，无有信心，乃弯弓射像，箭中像面，血下交流，虽加莹饰，血痕犹在。又选五百力士，令挽仆地，消铸为铜，拟充器用。
现代文：力士们丧魂落魄。
English: The wrestlers were heartbroken.

古文：乃口发大声，响烈雷震，力士亡魂丧胆，人皆仆地，迷闷宛转，怖不能起。由是贼侣惭惶，归信者众。
现代文：胆子也没了，都倒在地上，迷迷糊糊天旋地转。吓得不能起来。于是贼人们惭愧惶恐，信佛的人很多了。
English: They lost their courage and fell to the ground, spinning around in a daze. They were too scared to get up. As a result, the thieves were ashamed and frightened, and many people believed in Buddha.

古文：丁零后时著疾，被诛乃死。
现代文：丁零后来得了病。被杀而死。
English: Ding Zero later fell ill. He was killed and died.

古文：唐武宗
现代文：唐武宗
English: Tang Wuzong

古文：长安城北有古冢，高十数丈，传云周穆王陵也。
现代文：长安城北有座古坟，高有十几丈。传说是周穆王的陵墓。
English: In the north of Chang'an City, there is an ancient tomb, more than ten stories high. According to legend, it is the mausoleum of King Zhou Mu.

古文：唐会昌六年，正月十五日，有人夜行至陵下，闻人语于林间，意其盗也，因匿于草莽中伺焉。
现代文：唐朝会昌六年，正月十五那天，有一个人晚上走到陵墓下边，听到树林里有人说话，他心里想一定是盗贼，就在草丛里藏起来等着看。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the sixth year of the Tang Dynasty, a man went to the bottom of the mausoleum in the evening. When he heard someone talking in the woods, he thought it must be a thief and hid in the grass to wait.

古文：俄有人自空而来，朱衣执版，宣曰： 冢尉何在？ 
现代文：不一会儿发现有人从天空中下来。穿着红衣服拿着笏板。大声说： 坟官在哪里？ 
English: Soon they saw a man coming down from the sky, dressed in red and carrying a chopping board. He shouted, "Where is the gravedigger?

古文：二吏出曰： 在位。 
现代文：有两个官吏出来说： 在这里！ 
English: Two officers came out and said, "Here!"

古文：因曰： 录西海君使者，何时当至？ 
现代文：红衣人就说： 去逮西海君王的使者。什么时候应该到？ 
English: The man in red said, "To catch the messenger of the king of the West Sea. When should he arrive?"

古文：吏曰： 计程十八日方来。 
现代文：官吏说： 算一下路程十八日那天才能来。 
English: The official said, "Let's calculate the distance. You can't come until the 18th."

古文：朱衣曰： 何稽？ 
现代文：朱衣人说： 因为什么事？ 
English: The man in red said, "Why?

古文：对曰： 李某坐毁圣教，减一纪算，当与西海君同日录其魂。 
现代文：回答说： 武宗在位毁骂圣教，按减十二年算，应该和西海君王同一天收他的魂魄。 
English: He replied, "According to the calculation of the twelve years since the reign of Emperor Wu Zong, who abused the holy religion, his soul should be collected on the same day as that of the king of the West Sea.

古文：忽有贾客铃声自东来，朱衣与二吏俱不复见。
现代文：这时忽然听到有商客的马铃声从东边传来，朱衣人和二官吏都不见了。
English: At this time, the sound of a merchant's horse-bell was suddenly heard from the east, and Zhu Yiren and the two officials disappeared.

古文：后数月，帝果晏驾。
现代文：几个月后，武宗皇帝果然死了。
English: A few months later, Emperor Wuzong died.

古文：帝英毅有断，勤于庶政，至如迎贵主以破羌族，复内地而歼狡穴，武功震耀，肃宪之次也。
现代文：武宗英明决断，勤勉治国。能迎接友好邻国的君主打败了羌族，又在内地歼灭了山贼强盗的巢穴，武功赫赫。仅次于肃宗宪宗了。
English: Wuzong made a wise decision and diligently governed the country. The monarch who could welcome a friendly neighboring country defeated the Yi people, and also destroyed the nest of bandits and robbers in the inland. His military exploits are second only to Su Zong Xianzong.

古文：然金人之教，不可厚诬，则秦时焚书坑儒，后华山中有告祖龙之死者，事不谬矣。
现代文：然而佛的教义是不能诋毁诬蔑的。那样就好象秦朝时的焚书坑儒了，后来华山中有人报告说祖龙死了，看来这事一点儿也不假呀。
English: However, the Buddha's teachings cannot be slandered and defamed. That would be like the Qin Dynasty's book-burning. Later, someone in Huashan reported that the ancestor of the dragon had died. It seems that this is not at all false.

古文：王义逸
现代文：王义逸
English: Wang Yiyi

古文：唐会昌中，有王义逸者，护凤翔军，值武宗斥毁佛刹。
现代文：唐朝会昌年间，有个王义逸，作凤翔将军。
English: During the Heichang period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a King Yiyi, who was General Fengxiang.

古文：义逸以家财易诸瓦木，取其精者，遂大营市邸，并治其第，为岐下之甲焉。
现代文：正赶上武宗拆毁佛堂宝刹，义逸用家里的财物换回寺院的砖瓦木料，选用其中精美的，于是大量建造房屋，并修建了他的宅第，可以说是岐山下数第一了。
English: Just in time for Emperor Wuzong to demolish the Buddhist temple, Yiyi used his family's wealth to buy back the temple's bricks and timber, selecting the finest ones, and then built a large number of houses and built his mansion, which can be said to be the first in Qishan.

古文：居三年，一日有小吏入告，有不便事，且泣曰： 某适方就室假寐，有紫衣人招入一朱户，则类将军之第也。
现代文：住了三年。一天，有个小官吏进来报告，说有不便直说的事，然后小声哭着说， 我刚才在床上闭着眼躺着，看到有一个紫衣人招我进入一个大红门里，那院落也很象将军你的府第。
English: One day, a minor official came in to report that it was inconvenient to speak openly, and then said, crying softly, "I was just lying in bed with my eyes closed when I saw a man in purple invite me to enter a large red gate. That courtyard is also very much like a general's mansion."

古文：见丝竹绮罗，宾客列坐满堂，独无将军。紫衣人指阶下一径曰： 此路可见公主人。 
现代文：走到一个低矮的房屋前。
English: He walked to a low-slung building.

古文：因北趋，见荆棘满地，其路才可容人，步至低屋，排户而入，见将军卧于床上，系其手足，有人持火至，方爇其发，因出涕而言曰： 吾不幸，生好贾贩僧寺材础，以贪其利，今系于此，后三日当死。君归为我告其家，速毁邸第，以归佛寺，不可辄留。
现代文：过了一排门进去。见将军躺在床上，捆绑着手脚，有人拿着火来了。正要烧头发，你就大哭说： 我太不幸了，活着时候好贩卖僧寺的建筑材料，贪图钱财，现在被绑在这里，三天后就该死了，你回去替我告诉家里的人，赶快毁掉那些房屋宅第，把那些材料都还给佛寺，一点儿也不要留。 
English: You enter through a row of doors. You see the general lying on a bed, his hands and feet bound. Someone comes with a fire. Just as your hair is about to burn, you burst into tears and say, "I am so unfortunate. When I was alive, I used to sell building materials for Buddhist temples. I was greedy for money. Now I am tied up here. In three days I should be dead. Go back and tell my family for me. Quickly destroy those houses and houses. Return all those materials to the Buddhist temple. Don't keep any of it."

古文：既而焰炽，不能尽言， 义逸怒而叱之。
现代文：接着火烧得更旺了，不能说完全。 义逸听后气愤地呵斥他。
English: Then the fire became more intense, I can't say it was complete. Hearing this, Yiyi angrily rebuked him.

古文：明日，果脑发痈，三日而卒。
现代文：第二天，果然脑后生了毒疮。三天就死了。
English: The next day, he did indeed develop a poisonous sore on the back of his head. He died three days later.

古文：赘肉
现代文：赘肉
English: Beef stew

古文：释氏因果，时有报应。
现代文：佛家讲因果，总有报应的时候。
English: Buddhists talk about cause and effect, and there is always a time of retribution.

古文：近岁有一男子，既贫且贱，于上吻忽生一片赘肉，如展两手许大，下覆其口，形状丑异，殆不可言。
现代文：近年有一个男子，贫穷而且下贱。在上唇上边突然间长出一片多余的肉，好象展开的两支手那么大，下面可以盖住他的嘴，形状丑怪的样子实在说不出来。
English: In recent years, there was a man, poor and lowly, who suddenly developed a piece of excess flesh on the upper lip, as big as two outstretched hands, which could cover his mouth, and the shape of the ugly appearance is really indescribable.

古文：其人每饥渴，则揭赘肉以就饮啜，颇甚苦楚。
现代文：这个人每次饿了或者渴了，就须揭开那片多余的肉才能吃喝。简直太痛苦了。
English: Every time this man was hungry or thirsty, he had to open the extra piece of meat to eat and drink. It was so painful.

古文：或问其所因。
现代文：有人问他这是什么原因。
English: Someone asked him what the reason was.

古文：则曰： 少年无赖，曾在军伍，常于佛寺安下，同火共刲一羊，分得少肉，旁有一佛像，上吻间可置之，不数日婴疾，遂生此赘肉焉。 
现代文：分到一些肉，旁边有一尊佛像，上唇那个空间可以放些肉，我就放在那上面了。不过几天就得了病，于是就生长了这片多余的肉。
English: I was given some meat, there was a Buddha statue next to it, and the space on my upper lip could hold some meat, so I put it there. However, I got sick a few days later, and this extra piece of meat grew.

古文：西明寺
现代文：西明寺
English: Saimyo-ji Temple

古文：长安城西明寺钟，寇乱之后，缁徒流离，阒其寺者数年。
现代文：长安城西明寺有口大钟，贼寇作乱之后。僧徒流离四散，西明寺空无一人，断香火有几年时间了。
English: Ximing Temple in Chang'an City has a large bell. After the bandit rebellion, monks and nuns were scattered, Ximing Temple was empty, and the incense fire had been broken for several years.

古文：有贫民利其铜，袖锤錾往窃凿之，日获一二斤，鬻于阛阓。
现代文：有个贫民看那口钟的铜有利，就在衣袖里藏着锤和錾到西明寺偷偷地凿铜，一天可凿下一二斤，然后就到集市上去卖。
English: A poor man saw the advantage of the copper in the bell, so he hid a hammer and sickle in his sleeve and secretly chiseled copper at Ximing Temple. He could chisel one or two kilos a day, and then went to the bazaar to sell it.

古文：如是经年，人皆知之，官吏不禁。
现代文：象这样也有一年多了，人们都知道，官吏也不管。
English: It's been like this for more than a year. People know about it, and officials don't care.

古文：后其家忽失所在，市铜者亦讶其不来。
现代文：后来他们家忽然就不知哪里去了，买铜的人也怪他怎么不来卖铜了呢？
English: Later, their family suddenly disappeared, and the copper buyer blamed him for not coming to sell the copper.

古文：后官欲徙其钟于别寺，见寺钟平堕在阁上，及仆之，见盗钟者抱锤錾，俨然坐于其间，既已干枯矣。
现代文：以后官府想把那口钟搬到别的寺院里，看那钟平堕在楼上，等把它放倒，只见盗铜的人抱着锤和錾，分明地坐在里面，已经干枯了。
English: Later, when the government wanted to move the bell to another temple, they saw that the bell had fallen flat on the upper floor, and when they put it down, they saw the copper thief holding a hammer and sickle, clearly sitting inside, already withered.

古文：明相寺
现代文：明相寺
English: Myosho-ji Temple

古文：凤州城南有明相寺，佛数尊，皆饰以金焉。
现代文：凤州城南边有座明相寺，寺里有几尊佛像，都用金子装饰着。
English: On the south side of the city of Fengzhou, there is a Mingxiang Temple. There are several Buddha statues in the temple, all decorated with gold.

古文：乱罹之后，有贫民刮金，鬻而自给，迨至时宁，金彩已尽。
现代文：遭乱以后，有个贫民去刮金子，卖了来供给自己的生活。
English: After the turmoil, a poor man went to scrape gold and sold it to support himself.

古文：于是遍身生癣，痒不可忍，常须以物自刮，皮尽至肉，肉尽至骨而死焉。
现代文：等到社会安定了，佛像的金彩也都刮光了。于是这个人遍身生皮癣，痒得不能忍受，常常须用东西自己往下刮，皮都刮光了还是痒，直到把肉也刮掉到了骨头而死了。
English: By the time society stabilized, the gold of the Buddha statues had all been scraped off. So this man was covered with raw skin, itching unbearably, and he often had to scrape it off himself with something. When the skin was scraped off, it was still itchy, until he scraped the flesh off to the bone and died.

古文：毁佛之咎，昭报如此。
现代文：毁佛的罪过，遭到如此的报应。
English: The crime of destroying the Buddha was punished in this way.

古文：僧义孚
现代文：僧义孚
English: Monk Yifu

古文：僧义孚，青社人，解琴。
现代文：和尚义孚，青社人，会弹琴。
English: Monk Yifu, a member of the Young Society, can play the piano.

古文：寓于江陵龙兴寺，行止诡谲。府主优容之，俾赍钱帛，诣西川写藏经。
现代文：居住在江陵龙兴寺，这个人行动诡异多变，寺主优待他而收容了他，让他带着钱财到西川抄写藏经。
English: Living in the Longxing Temple in Gangneung, this man behaved strangely and erratically. The head of the temple treated him well and took him in, letting him take money with him to the West River to copy the Tibetan sutras.

古文：或有人偷窃社户所造藏经出货，义孚以廉价赎之，其羡财遂为所有。
现代文：有的人偷窃庙堂所造的藏经出卖，义孚就用廉价收买来，剩余的钱就自己留下了。
English: Some people steal the Tibetan scriptures made by temples and sell them. Yifu buys them at a low price and keeps the rest of the money for himself.

古文：一旦发觉，卖经者毙于枯木下。
现代文：终于被发觉了，卖经的人死在枯树下。
English: He was eventually discovered, dead under a dead tree.

古文：此僧虽免罪，未久得疾，两唇反引，有以驴口，其热痛不可忍也，人皆畏见，苦楚备极而死。
现代文：义孚虽然被免罪，不久就得了病，两个嘴唇翻长，好象驴的嘴。并且发热疼痛不能忍受，人们都怕看他，最后受尽痛苦而死了。
English: Although Yifu was exonerated, he soon fell ill, his two lips turned up like a donkey's mouth, and the heat and pain were unbearable, people were afraid to look at him, and he finally died in agony.

古文：同寺有数辈，贩鬻经像，惧而舍财，修功德，以孚为鉴戒。
现代文：同寺的和尚中有些人曾贩卖过经书和佛像，也害怕了，立刻拿出钱物，建立功德，拿义孚作诫鉴。
English: Some of the monks in the same temple had sold scriptures and Buddha statues, and they were also afraid. They immediately took out money and goods, established merits, and took Yifu as a precept.

古文：开照寺盗
现代文：开照寺盗
English: Kaishoji Temple robbery

古文：伪蜀金堂县三学山开照寺，夜群寇入寺，劫掠缁徒罄尽。
现代文：前蜀金堂县三学山有个开照寺。夜间一群贼寇进入寺里抢光了僧徒的财物。
English: At night, a group of thieves entered the temple and robbed the monks of their belongings.

古文：寺元有释迦藕丝袈裟，为千载之异物也，贼曹分取，与其妻拆而易之。
现代文：寺里原来有一件释迦的藕丝袈裟，是千年珍奇宝物，贼官分取到手后，与他的妻子拆开卖了。
English: In the temple, there used to be a silk robe worn by Shakyamuni, a treasure of a thousand years. After the thieving official got hold of it, he and his wife took it apart and sold it.

古文：夫妻当时，手指节节堕落，须鬓俱坠，寻事败。
现代文：立刻夫妻的手指一节一节地掉了，头发和胡须也全掉了。
English: Immediately, the couple's fingers fell off one by one, and all their hair and beards were gone.

古文：戮于市。
现代文：不久事情被破获，在市井中被杀死。
English: The matter was soon discovered and he was killed in the city.

古文：僧绍明
现代文：僧绍明
English: The monk Shao Ming

古文：伪蜀大慈寺赐紫慈昭大师绍明，主持文殊阁，常教化钱物，称供养菩萨圣像。
现代文：前蜀大慈寺御赐紫慈昭大师绍明，作文殊阁主持。他常常叫僧徒化斋收取钱物。
English: Shao Ming, the former master of Shudai Ci Zhao Temple, presided over the composition. He often asked the monks to collect money.

古文：积有星岁，所获太半入己。
现代文：说是供养菩萨圣像用，过了些年，所获得的钱物多半都装入了私囊。
English: He said it was for the purpose of maintaining the holy image of the Bodhisattva, but after a few years, most of the money and goods he obtained went into his own pocket.

古文：后染病，恒见火烧顶至足，周而复始，不胜其苦。
现代文：后来生了病，总看见大火从头顶烧到脚底，烧完又烧，一再重复。
English: Later, when I got sick, I always saw the fire burning from the top of my head to the soles of my feet, burning and burning, repeating over and over again.

古文：悔过忏谢，唱施衣，竟不获免。
现代文：绍明忍受不了这样的痛苦，在菩萨像前拜谢忏悔，大量施舍衣物，但还是不能免除痛苦。
English: Shaoming could not bear such pain. He repented in front of a bodhisattva and gave a large amount of clothes, but he still could not get rid of the pain.

古文：潼江军
现代文：潼江军
English: The Minjiang Army is formed.

古文：伪蜀潼江，起军攻取阆州，兵火烧劫，闾里荡尽。
现代文：前蜀的潼江，发兵攻打阆州，兵士们烧杀抢掠，街巷里都被扫荡一空。
English: Former Shu's Lijiang River, sent troops to attack Luzhou, the soldiers burned, killed and looted, and the streets were swept away.

古文：佛寺有大钟在地，有一卒运大石击钟，令碎而鬻之。钟破裂流迸，正中卒胫，双折而死。
现代文：佛寺地上有一口大钟。有一个兵士搬来一块大石头砸钟，砸碎后要卖掉，钟被砸碎四散迸裂，其中的一块碎片正打在兵的小腿上，两条腿都折断然后死了。
English: There was a big bell on the ground of a Buddhist temple. A soldier brought a big rock to smash the bell. After smashing it, he wanted to sell it. The bell was smashed and scattered. One of the fragments was hitting the soldier's calf. Both legs were broken and he died.

