古文：老聃之役有庚桑楚者，偏得老聃之道，以北居畏垒之山。其臣之画然知者去之，其妾之挈然仁者远之。拥肿之与居，鞅掌之为使。
现代文：老聃的弟子中有一个叫庚桑楚的，独得老聃真传，居住在北边的畏垒山，他的奴仆中喜欢炫耀才智的都被辞去，侍婢中标榜仁义的就被他疏远；只有敦厚朴实的人跟他住在一起，勤劳的为他所用。
English: One of Lao Zi's disciples, named Geng San Chu, who was the only one to have received Lao Zi's true teachings, lived on the northern side of Mount Diao. Among his servants, those who liked to show off their talents were dismissed, and those who advertised their benevolence and righteousness were alienated by him; only strong-willed and simple people lived with him, and the industrious were used by him.

古文：居三年，畏垒大壤。
现代文：居住三年，畏垒山一带大丰收。
English: After living here for three years, the area around Mount Diao has enjoyed a bumper harvest.

古文：畏垒之民相与言曰： 庚桑子之始来，吾洒然异之。
现代文：畏垒山一带的老百姓互相议论说： 庚桑楚刚来畏垒山的时候，我们都没有见过这样的，感觉很惊讶。
English: The people in the vicinity of Mount Biya said to each other, "When Gensang Chu first came to Mount Biya, we had never seen anything like this, and we were very surprised.

古文：今吾日计之而不足，岁计之而有余。
现代文：如今我们一天天地计算收入虽然还嫌不足，但一年总的计算收益也还富足有余。
English: Today, although our day-to-day computing income is still insufficient, the total annual computing income is also more than enough.

古文：庶几其圣人乎！
现代文：庚桑楚恐怕就是圣人了吧！
English: I'm afraid that Gengsangchu is a saint!

古文：子胡不相与尸而祝之，社而稷之乎？ 
现代文：大家何不共同像供奉神灵一样供奉他，像对待国君一样地敬重他？ 
English: Why don't we all together worship him as if he were a god, and respect him as if he were a sovereign?

古文：庚桑子闻之，南面而不释然。
现代文：庚桑楚听到了大家的谈论，坐朝南方心里很不愉快。
English: Gyeongsang Choo heard what everyone was talking about. Sitting in the south, he felt very unhappy.

古文：弟子异之。
现代文：弟子们感到奇怪。
English: The disciples were puzzled.

古文：庚桑子曰： 弟子何异于予？
现代文：庚桑楚说： 你们对我有什么感到奇怪呢？
English: Geng Sanchu said, "What do you find so strange about me?

古文：夫春气发而百草生，正得秋而万宝成。
现代文：春天阳气蒸腾勃发百草生长，正当秋天时节庄稼成熟果实累累。
English: In spring, the transpiration of the yang gas causes the growth of grasses, just as in autumn, the crops are ripe and full of fruits.

古文：夫春与秋，岂无得而然哉？
现代文：春天与秋天，难道无所遵循就能够这样吗？
English: Can spring and autumn be like this without any rules?

古文：天道已行矣。
现代文：这是自然规律的运行与变化。
English: This is the operation and change of the natural law.

古文：吾闻至人，尸居环堵之室，而百姓猖狂，不知所如往。
现代文：我听说道德修养极高的人，像没有生命的人一样虚淡宁静地生活在斗室小屋内，而百姓纵任不羁全不知道应该做些什么。
English: I have heard of people of the highest moral character living like dead men in the quiet solitude of a cubbyhole hut, while the common people run wild and don't know what to do.

古文：今以畏垒之细民，而窃窃焉欲俎豆予于贤人之间，我其杓之人邪？
现代文：如今畏垒山一带的庶民百姓私下里谈论想把我列入贤人的行列而加以供奉，我难道乐意成为众人所注目的人吗？
English: Now the common people around Mount Biya are talking in private about wanting to add me to the ranks of the sages and worship me. Am I happy to be the focus of everyone's attention?

古文：吾是以不释于老聃之言。 弟子曰： 不然。
现代文：我正因为遵从老聃的教诲而对此大不愉快。 弟子说： 不是这样的。
English: Just because I follow the teachings of Lao Zi, I am very unhappy about this.The disciple said, "It is not like that.

古文：夫寻常之沟，巨鱼无所还其体，而鲵鳅为之制；步仞之丘陵，巨兽无所隐其躯，而孽狐为之祥。
现代文：小水沟里，大鱼没有办法回转它的身体，可是小小的泥鳅却能转身自如；矮小的山丘，大的野兽没有办法隐匿它的躯体，可是妖狐却正好得以栖身。
English: In the small ditch, the big fish can't turn its body, but the small mud can turn itself freely; the small hill, the big beast can't hide its body, but the fox can just hide.

古文：且夫尊贤授能，先善与利，自古尧、舜以然，而况畏垒之民乎！
现代文：况且尊重贤才授权能人，以善为先给人利禄，从尧舜时代起就是这样，何况畏垒山一带的百姓呢！
English: Moreover, it has been this way since ancient times, with respect for the wise empowering the capable, and the good taking precedence over the bad. Not to mention the people in the vicinity of Mount Biwa!

古文：夫子亦听矣！ 庚桑子曰： 小子来！
现代文：先生你还是顺从大家的心意吧！ 庚桑楚说： 小子你过来！
English: Sir, you should still follow everyone's wishes! Geng San Chu said: Kid, come here!

古文：夫函车之兽，介而离山，则不免于网罟之患；吞舟之鱼，荡而失水，则蚁能苦之。
现代文：口能含车的巨兽，孤零零地离开山野，那就不能免于罗网的灾祸；口能吞舟的大鱼，一旦被水波荡出水流，小小的蚂蚁也会使它困苦不堪。
English: If a huge beast with a mouth that can hold a cart leaves the mountains and fields alone, it will not be exempt from the scourge of trawling; if a big fish with a mouth that can swallow a boat is swung out of the current by the waves, small ants will also make it suffer.

古文：故鸟兽不厌高，鱼鳖不厌深。
现代文：所以鸟兽不厌山高，鱼鳖不厌水深。
English: That's why birds and beasts don't mind high mountains, and fish don't mind deep waters.

古文：夫全其形生之人，藏其身也，不厌深眇而已矣！
现代文：保全身形本性的人，隐匿自己的身形，不厌深幽高远罢了。
English: People who keep their natural body shape, hide their body shape, and are not tired of being deep and lofty.

古文：且夫二子者，又何足以称扬哉！
现代文：至于尧与舜两个人，又哪里值得加以称赞和褒扬呢！
English: As for the two of them, what is there worth praising and commending?

古文：是其于辩也，将妄凿垣墙而殖蓬蒿也，简发而栉，数米而炊，窃窃乎又何足以济世哉！
现代文：尧与舜那样分辨世上的善恶贤愚，就像是在胡乱地毁坏好端端的垣墙而去种上没有什么用处的蓬蒿。选择头发来梳理，点数米粒来烹煮，计较于区区小事又怎么能够有益于世啊！
English: To discriminate between the good, the bad, the wise and the foolish in the world, as the ploughman and the plough, is like wantonly destroying a perfectly good wall in order to plant a useless hedge. How can combing one's hair and cooking with a few grains of rice be beneficial to the world?

古文：举贤则民相轧，任知则民相盗。
现代文：举荐贤才人民就会相互出现伤害，任用智能百姓就会相互出现伪诈。
English: There will be mutual harm in recommending talented people, and there will be mutual fraud in appointing intelligent people.

古文：之数物者，不足以厚民。
现代文：这数种作法，不足以给人民带来好处。
English: These practices are not enough to bring benefits to the people.

古文：民之于利甚勤，子有杀父，臣有杀君；正昼为盗，日中穴阫。
现代文：人们对于追求私利向来十分迫切，为了私利有的儿子杀了父亲，有的臣子杀了国君，大白天抢人，光天化日之下在别人墙上打洞。
English: People have always been very eager to pursue self-interest. For the sake of self-interest, some sons killed their fathers, some courtiers killed the sovereign, robbed people in broad daylight, and punched holes in other people's walls in broad daylight.

古文：吾语女：大乱之本，必生于尧、舜之间，其末存乎千世之后。
现代文：我告诉你，天下大乱的根源，必定是产生于尧舜的时代，而它的流毒和遗害又一定会留存于千年之后。
English: I tell you, the root cause of the world's turmoil must have originated in the Age of the Rooster, and its poison and damage will certainly remain after a thousand years.

古文：千世之后，其必有人与人相食者也。 
现代文：千年之后，还将会出现人与人相食的情况哩！ 
English: A thousand years from now, there will still be cannibalism!

古文：南荣趎蹴然正坐曰： 若趎之年者已长矣，将恶乎托业以及此言邪？ 
现代文：南荣趎虔敬地端正而坐，说： 像我这般年纪的人，将怎样学习才能达到你所说的那种境界呢？ 
English: Nan Rongjun sat upright reverently and said, "How will a person of my age learn to reach the level you mentioned?"

古文：庚桑子曰： 全汝形，抱汝生，无使汝思虑营营。
现代文：庚桑楚说： 保全你的身形，护养你的生命，不要使你的思虑为求取私利而奔波劳苦。
English: Geng San Chu said: Take care of your body, take care of your life, and don't let your thoughts run wild in pursuit of personal gain.

古文：若此三年，则可以及此言矣！ 
现代文：像这样三年时间，那就可以达到我所说的那种境界了。 
English: In three years like this, you can reach the kind of state I'm talking about.

古文：南荣趎曰： 目之与形，吾不知其异也，而盲者不能自见；耳之与形，吾不知其异也，而聋者不能自闻；心之与形，吾不知其异也，而狂者不能自得。
现代文：南荣趎说： 盲人的眼睛和普通人的眼睛，彼此的外形我看不出有什么不同，而盲人的眼睛却看不见东西；聋子的耳朵和普通人的耳朵，彼此的外形我看不出有什么不同，而聋子的耳朵却听不见声音；疯狂人的样子与普遍人的样子，彼此之间我看不出有什么不同，而疯狂人却不能把持自己。
English: Nan Rongyao said: I don't see any difference between the appearance of a blind person's eyes and an ordinary person's eyes, but the blind person's eyes can't see anything; I don't see any difference between the appearance of a deaf person's ears and an ordinary person's ears, but the deaf person's ears can't hear anything; I don't see any difference between the appearance of a crazy person and that of an ordinary person, but a crazy person can't control himself.

古文：形之与形亦辟矣，而物或间之邪？
现代文：形体与形体之间本是相通的，但出现不同的感知是外物有什么使之区别吗？
English: Form and form are inherently connected, but does the appearance of different perceptions make any difference to the appearance of foreign objects?

古文：欲相求而不能相得。
现代文：还是希望获得却始终未能获得呢？
English: Or do you hope for it but never get it?

古文：今谓趎曰： 全汝形，抱汝生，无使汝思虑营营。 
现代文：如今先生对我说： 保全你的身形，护养你的生命，不要使你的思虑为求取私利而奔波劳苦。 
English: Now my husband said to me: Take care of your body, take care of your life, and don't let your thoughts run wild for personal gain.

古文：趎勉闻道达耳矣！ 
现代文：我只不过勉强听到耳里罢了庚桑楚说： 我的话说尽了。
English: I could just barely hear Geng Sang-Chu say, "I've said all I have to say."

古文：庚桑子曰： 辞尽矣，奔蜂不能化藿蠋，越鸡不能伏鹄卵，鲁鸡固能矣！
现代文：小土蜂不能孵化出豆叶虫，越鸡不能孵化天鹅蛋，而鲁鸡却能够做到。
English: The small soil wasp cannot hatch the bean leaf beetle, the guinea fowl cannot hatch the swan egg, but the rooster can do it.

古文：鸡之与鸡，其德非不同也。有能与不能者，其才固有巨小也。
现代文：鸡与鸡，它们的禀赋并没有什么不同，有的能做到有的不能做到，是因为它们的本领原本就有大有小。
English: Chicken and chicken, their endowment is no different, some can do it and some can't do it, because their ability originally has big and small.

古文：今吾才小，小足以化子。子胡不南见老子！ 
现代文：拿现在说我的才干就很小，不足以使你受到感化，你何不到南方去拜见老子？ 
English: For now, my talent is small, not enough to inspire you, why don't you go to the south to meet Lao Zi?

古文：南荣囗赢粮，七日七夜至老子之所。
现代文：南荣趎带足干粮，走了七天七夜来到老子的住所。
English: Nan Rongjun took dry food and walked for seven days and seven nights to get to Lao Zi's residence.

古文：老子曰： 子自楚之所来乎？ 
现代文：老子说： 你是从庚桑楚那儿来的吧？ 
English: Lao Tzu said, "You came from Gensang Chu, didn't you?"

古文：南荣囗曰： 唯。 
现代文：南荣趎说： 是的。 
English: Nan Rongyao said: Yes.

古文：老子曰： 子何与人偕来之众也？ 
现代文：老子说： 怎么跟你一块儿来的人如此多呢？ 
English: Lao Tzu said, "How come so many people came with you?"

古文：南荣囗惧然顾其后。
现代文：南荣趎恐惧地回过头来看看自己的身后。
English: Nan Rongyao looked back fearfully to see what was behind her.

古文：老子曰： 子不知吾所谓乎？ 
现代文：老子说： 你不知道我所说的意思吗？ 
English: Laozi said, "Don't you know what I mean?

古文：南荣囗俯而惭，仰而叹，曰： 今者吾忘吾答，因失吾问。 
现代文：南荣趎低下头来羞惭满面，而后仰面叹息： 现在我已忘记了我应该怎样回答，因为我忘掉了我的提问。 
English: Nan Ronglu bowed her head to hide her embarrassment, then looked up and sighed: Now I have forgotten how I should answer, because I have forgotten my question.

古文：老子曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：老子说： 什么意思呢？ 
English: Lao Tzu said: What do you mean?

古文：南荣囗曰： 不知乎人谓我朱愚，知乎反愁我躯；不仁则害人，仁则反愁我身；不义则伤彼，义则反愁我己。
现代文：南荣趎说： 不聪明吗？人们说我愚昧无知。
English: Nan Ronglu said, "Isn't it clever? People say I'm stupid and ignorant.

古文：我安逃此而可？
现代文：聪明吗？反而给身体带来愁苦和危难。
English: Is it wise? On the contrary, it brings sorrow and danger to the body.

古文：此三言者，趎之所患也。
现代文：不具仁爱之心便会伤害他人，推广仁爱之心反而给自身带来愁苦和危难。
English: If one does not have a benevolent heart, he will harm others. If one promotes a benevolent heart, he will bring sorrow and danger to himself.

古文：愿因楚而问之。 
现代文：不讲信义便会伤害他人，推广信义反而给自己带来愁苦和危难。
English: If you don't speak truthfully, you will hurt others, but if you promote truthfulness, you will bring sorrow and danger to yourself.

古文：老子曰： 向吾见若眉睫之间，吾因以得汝矣。
现代文：这三句话所说的情况，正是我忧患的事，希望因为庚桑楚的引介而获得赐教。 老子说： 刚来时我察看你眉宇之间，也就借此了解了你的心思。
English: The situation described in these three sentences is exactly what I am worried about, and I hope to be taught by the introduction of Geng Sanchu.Lao Tzu said: When I first came, I looked between your eyebrows, and through this I understood your thoughts.

古文：今汝又言而信之。
现代文：如今你的谈话更证明了我的观察。
English: Now your conversation confirms my observation even more.

古文：若规规然若丧父母，揭竿而求诸海也。
现代文：你失神的样子真像是失去了父母，又好像在举着竹竿探测深深的大海。
English: You look as if you have lost your parents, and as if you are holding a bamboo pole to explore the deep sea.

古文：女亡人哉！惘惘乎，汝欲反汝情性而无由入，可怜哉！ 
现代文：你确实是一个丧失了真性的人啊，是那么迷惘而又昏昧！你一心想返归你的真情与本性却不知道从哪里做起，实在是值得同情啊！ 
English: You are indeed a man who has lost his true nature, and is so confused and dim-witted! It is really pitiful that you want to return to your true feelings and nature but don't know where to start!

古文：南荣囗请入就舍，召其所好，去其所恶。十日自愁，复见老子。
现代文：南荣趎回到寓所，求取自己所喜好的东西，舍弃自己所讨厌的东西，整整十天愁思苦想，再去拜见老子。
English: Nan Rongyao returned to his apartment, asked for the things he liked, gave up the things he disliked, and thought about them for ten whole days. Then he went to see Lao Zi.

古文：老子曰： 汝自洒濯，孰哉郁郁乎！
现代文：老子说： 你作了自我反省，郁郁不安的心情实在是沉重啊！
English: Laozi said, "You have done self-reflection, and your depressed and uneasy mood is really heavy!

古文：然而其中津津乎犹有恶也。
现代文：然而你心中那充满外溢的情况说明还是存有邪念。
English: However, the overflowing situation in your heart indicates that there are still evil thoughts.

古文：夫外韄者不可繁而捉，将内揵；内韄者不可缪而捉，将外揵；外内韄者，道德不能持，而况放道而行者乎！ 
现代文：受到外物的束缚便不可避免繁杂与急促，于是内心世界必将堵塞不通；内心世界受到束缚便不可避除杂乱无绪和急促，于是外部感官必定会闭塞不通。外部感官和内心世界都被束缚缠绕，即使道德高尚也不能持守，何况是初初学道仿行的人呢！ 
English: When constrained by external things, complexity and haste are inevitable, so the inner world will inevitably be blocked and impassable; when the inner world is constrained, it is impossible to avoid disorder and haste, so the external senses will inevitably be blocked and impassable. The external senses and the inner world are all entangled in bondage, and even high morals cannot be maintained, let alone those who imitate the Way at an early age!

古文：南荣囗曰： 里人有病，里人问之，病者能言其病，然其病病者犹未病也。
现代文：南荣趎说： 邻里的人生了病，周围的乡邻询问他，生病的人能够说明自己的病情，而能够把自己的病情说个清楚的人，那就算不上是生了重病。
English: Nan Rongyao said: If a person in the neighborhood is sick, the surrounding villagers will ask him about it. A sick person can explain his illness, but a person who can explain his illness clearly is not seriously ill.

古文：若趎之闻大道，譬犹饮药以加病也。趎愿闻卫生之经而已矣。 
现代文：像我这样的听闻大道，好比服用了药物反而加重了病情，因而我只希望能听到养护生命的常规罢了。 
English: Hearing stories like mine is like taking medicine that makes you sicker, so I just want to hear about life-preserving routines.

古文：老子曰： 卫生之经，能抱一乎！
现代文：老子说： 养护生命的常规，能够使身形与精神浑一谐合吗？
English: Lao Tzu said: Can the routine of preserving life harmonize the body and spirit?

古文：能勿失乎！
现代文：能够不失却真性吗？
English: Can it be done without losing its authenticity?

古文：能无卜筮而知吉凶乎！
现代文：能够不求助于卜筮而知道吉凶吗？
English: Is it possible to know good and evil without resorting to divination?

古文：能止乎！
现代文：能够满足于自己的本分吗？
English: Will you be able to be satisfied with your duty?

古文：能已乎！
现代文：能够对消逝了的东西不作追求吗？
English: Is it possible not to yearn for what is gone?

古文：能舍诸人而求诸己乎！
现代文：能够舍弃仿效他人的心思而寻求自身的完善吗？
English: Can you give up the idea of imitating others and seek your own perfection?

古文：能翛然乎！
现代文：能够无拘无束、自由自在吗？
English: Are you able to dance freely and without restraint?

古文：能侗然乎！
现代文：能够心神宁寂无所执著吗？
English: Is it possible for the mind to be free from attachment?

古文：能儿子乎！
现代文：能够像初生的婴儿那样纯真、朴质吗？
English: Can it be as pure and simple as a newborn baby?

古文：儿子终日嗥而嗌不嗄，和之至也；终日握而手不掜，共其德也；终日视而目不瞬，偏不在外也。
现代文：婴儿整天啼哭咽喉却不会嘶哑，这是因为声音谐和自然达到了顶点；婴儿整天握着小手而不松开，这是因为听任小手自然地握着乃是婴儿的天性与常态；婴儿整天瞪着小眼睛一点也不眨眼，这是因为内心世界不会滞留于外界事物。
English: Babies cry all day long, but their throats do not get hoarse, because the harmony of sound has naturally reached its peak; babies hold their little hands all day long and do not let go, because it is the nature and normalcy of babies to let their little hands hold them naturally; babies stare at their little eyes all day long and do not blink at all, because the inner world does not linger on external things.

古文：行不知所之，居不知所为，与物委蛇而同其波。是卫生之经已。 
现代文：行走起来不知道去哪里，平日居处不知道做什么，接触外物随顺应合，如同随波逐流、听其自然：这就是养护生命的常规了。 
English: When you walk, you don't know where to go, when you live, you don't know what to do, and when you come into contact with foreign objects, you go with the flow, as if you were going with the flow, listening to nature: this is the routine of preserving life.

古文：南荣囗曰： 然则是至人之德已乎？ 曰： 非也。
现代文：南荣趎： 那么这就是至人的最高思想境界吗？ 
English: Nan Ronglu: So, is this the highest realm of human thought?

古文：是乃所谓冰解冻释者。
现代文：老子回答： 不是的。这仅只是所谓冰冻消解那样自然消除心中积滞的本能吧？
English: Lao Zi replied, "No, it's just the so-called 'freeze-dissolve' instinct to naturally eliminate the stagnation in the mind, right?"

古文：夫至人者，相与交食乎地而交乐乎天，不以人物利害相撄，不相与为怪，不相与为谋，不相与为事，翛然而往，侗然而来。
现代文：道德修养最高尚的人，跟人们一块儿向大地寻食而又跟人们一块儿向天寻乐，不因外在的人物或利害而扰乱自己，不参与怪异，不参与图谋，不参与尘俗的事务，无拘无束、自由自在地走了。
English: People with the highest moral cultivation, together with people, go to the earth for food, and together with people, go to the sky for fun. They do not disturb themselves because of external people or interests, do not participate in weirdness, do not participate in schemes, do not participate in mundane affairs, and walk freely and freely.

古文：是谓卫生之经已。 
现代文：又心神宁寂无所执著地到来。这就是所说的养护生命的常规。 
English: This is the so-called life-preserving routine.

古文：曰： 然则是至乎？ 
现代文：南荣趎说： 这样说来，这就是至人的最高思想境界，是吗？ 
English: Nan Rongyao said, "In this way, this is the highest realm of human thought, isn't it?

古文：曰： 未也。
现代文：老子回答： 不是这样的。
English: The old man said, "That's not enough!

古文：吾固告汝曰： 能儿子乎！ 
现代文：我对你说过： 能够洗净污染的人像初生的婴儿那样纯真、朴质吗？ 
English: I said to you: Is the person who can wash away pollution as pure and simple as a newborn baby?

古文：儿子动不知所为，行不知所之，身若槁木之枝而心若死灰。
现代文：婴儿伸手伸脚不知道干什么，爬来爬去不知道去哪里，身形像秋树无叶不招风，心境像熄尽了死灰。
English: Babies stretch out their arms and legs and don't know what to do, crawl around and don't know where to go, their bodies are like autumn trees with no leaves and no wind, and their moods are like exhausted ashes.

古文：若是者，祸亦不至，福亦不来。祸福无有，恶有人灾也！ 宇泰定者，发乎天光。
现代文：像这样的人，祸福都不会降临，祸福都不存在，人间灾害怎么能加寄于他呢？ 
English: For a person like this, neither misfortune nor good fortune will befall him, neither misfortune nor good fortune exist. How can human disasters befall him?

古文：发乎天光者，人见其人，物见其物。
现代文：胸襟坦然、心境安泰镇定的人，就会有自然的灵光。发出自然灵光的人，看人观物，清楚明白。
English: A person with a calm mind and a tranquil state of mind will have a natural aura. A person who emits a natural aura will see people and things clearly.

古文：人有修者，乃今有恒。有恒者，人舍之，天助之。
现代文：注重道德修养的人，才能长久保持灵光的存在；持有长期稳定灵光的人，人们就会自然地依归他，上天也会帮助他。
English: A person who pays attention to moral cultivation can maintain the existence of spiritual light for a long time; a person who holds a long-term stable spiritual light, people will naturally follow him, and heaven will help him.

古文：人之所舍，谓之天民；天之所助，谓之天子。
现代文：人们所依归的，称他为天民；上天所辅佐的，称他为天之子。
English: He whom men rely on is called the man of heaven; he whom heaven supports is called the son of heaven.

古文：学者，学其所不能学也？行者，行其所不能行也？辩者，辩其所不能辩也？
现代文：学习，是为了学习那些自己不曾掌握的知识；行走，是为了到达那些不能去到的地方；分辩，是为了辨别那些不易辨清的事物。
English: To study is to acquire knowledge one does not possess; to walk is to go where one cannot go; to discriminate is to discern what is difficult to discern.

古文：知止乎其所不能知，至矣！
现代文：知道自己停留在不知道的境域，便达到了知道的最高境界。
English: When you know that you are in the realm of the unknown, you have reached the highest realm of knowing.

古文：若有不即是者，天钧败之。备物将以形，藏不虞以生心，敬中以达彼。
现代文：如果有人不是这样，大踏步冲出去，那么自然本性必然会遭受亏损。
English: If someone is not like that, striding out, then nature is bound to suffer a loss.

古文：若是而万恶至者，皆天也，而非人也，不足以滑成，不可内于灵台。灵台者有持，而不知其所持而不可持者也。
现代文：备足造化的事物而顺应成形，深敛外在情感不作任何思虑而使心境快活并富有生气，谨慎地持守心中的一点灵气用以通达外在事物，像这样做而各种灾祸仍然纷至沓来，那就是自然安排的结果，而不是人为所造成，因而不足以扰乱成性，也不可以纳入灵府。灵府，就是有所持守却不知道持守什么，并且不可以着意去持守的地方。
English: If one prepares for the things of creation and conforms to them, if one restrains one's external emotions without any thought and makes one's mind happy and lively, if one carefully holds on to a bit of spiritual energy in one's heart and uses it to access external things, and if one does so and all kinds of calamities still come, then it is the result of natural arrangements, not man-made, and thus it is not enough to disturb one's nature, nor can it be included in the spirit world. The spirit world is a place where one holds on to something, but one does not know what to hold on to, and one should not intentionally hold on to it.

古文：不见其诚己而发，每发而不当；业入而不舍，每更为失。
现代文：不能表现真诚的自我而任随情感外驰，虽然有所表露却总是不合适宜，外事一旦侵扰心中就不会轻易离去，即使有所改变也会留下创伤。
English: You can't show your sincere self and let your emotions run away with you. Although it is revealed, it is always inappropriate. Once foreign affairs invade your heart, they won't go away easily. Even if there is a change, it will leave a trauma.

古文：为不善乎显明之中者，人得而诛之；为不善乎幽间之中者，鬼得而诛之。
现代文：在光天化日下做了坏事，人人都会谴责他、处罚他；在昏暗处隐蔽地做下坏事，鬼神也会谴责他、处罚他。
English: If you do bad things in broad daylight, everyone will condemn you and punish you; if you do bad things in the dark, ghosts and gods will also condemn you and punish you.

古文：明乎人、明乎鬼者，然后能独行。
现代文：对于人群清白光明，对于鬼神也清白光明，这之后便能独行于世。
English: For the crowd, they are pure and bright, and for the ghosts and gods, they are also pure and bright, and then they can walk alone in the world.

古文：券内者，行乎无名；券外者，志乎期费。
现代文：各分合乎自身，行事就不显于名声；名分超出自身，就是心思也总在于穷尽财用。
English: When a man's affairs are in his own hand, he is not concerned about his reputation; when they are in someone else's hand, his thoughts are always on getting as much money as possible.

古文：行乎无名者，唯庸有光；志乎期费者，唯贾人也。人见其跂，犹之魁然。
现代文：行事不显名声的人，即使平庸也有光辉；心思在于穷尽财用的人，只不过是商人而已，人人都能看清他们在奋力追求分外的东西，还自以为泰然无危。
English: Those whose actions are not famous, even if they are mediocre, have brilliance; those who are intent on running out of money are just businessmen. Everyone can see that they are struggling to pursue something extraordinary, and they think they are safe.

古文：与物穷者，物入焉；与物且者，其身之不能容，焉能容人！
现代文：跟外物顺应相通的人，外物必将归依于他；跟外物相互阻遏的人，他们自身都不能相容，又怎么能容纳他人！
English: Those who are compatible with the external things, the external things will surely come to him; those who are mutually incompatible with the external things, they are not compatible with themselves, and how can they accommodate others!

古文：不能容人者无亲，无亲者尽人。
现代文：不能容人的人没有亲近，没有亲近的人也就为人们所弃绝。
English: Those who cannot tolerate others will not be approached, and those who are not approached will be rejected by others.

古文：兵莫惨于志，镆铘为下；寇莫大于阴阳，无所逃于天地之间。
现代文：兵器没有什么能对人的心神作出伤害，从这一意义说良剑莫邪也只能算是下等；寇敌没有什么比阴阳的变异更为巨大，因为任何人也没有办法逃脱出天地之间。
English: There is no weapon that can do harm to a person's mind and spirit. In this sense, a good sword without evil can only be considered inferior; there is nothing more powerful than the variation of yin and yang, because no one can escape between heaven and earth.

古文：非阴阳贼之，心则使之也。
现代文：其实并非阴阳的变异伤害他人，而是人们心神自扰不能顺应阴阳的变化而使自身受到伤害。
English: In fact, it is not the variation of yin and yang that harms others, but that people's mind and spirit cannot conform to the changes of yin and yang and cause themselves to be harmed.

古文：道通其分也，其成也毁也。
现代文：大道通达于万物。一种事物分离了，一种事物就会形成；另一种事物就会毁灭。
English: The road leads to all things. When one thing is separated, one thing will be formed; another thing will be destroyed.

古文：所恶乎分者，其分也以备。所以恶乎备者？其有以备。
现代文：有人不喜欢从分离的角度来看待世界，就在于对分离求取完备；也有些人不喜欢从完备的角度看待世界，就在于对完备进一步求取完备。
English: Some people do not like to see the world from the perspective of separation, which is to seek perfection in separation; others do not like to see the world from the perspective of perfection, which is to further seek perfection in perfection.

古文：故出而不反，见其鬼。出而得，是谓得死。
现代文：心神离散而不能返归的人，就会像鬼一样只有形骸；心神离散而有所得，可以说他在精神上已经死了。
English: A person who is separated from the spirit and cannot return to it will be like a ghost with only a skeleton; a person who is separated from the spirit and gains something can be said to be spiritually dead.

古文：灭而有实，鬼之一也。
现代文：迷失本性而只有外形，也是一个鬼。
English: He is also a ghost who has lost his true nature and only has an appearance.

古文：以有形者象无形者而定矣！
现代文：把有形的东西效法载形的道，那么内心就会得到安宁。
English: If you imitate the path of the embodied by imitating the tangible, then you will have peace of mind.

古文：出无本，入无窍，有实而无乎处，有长而无乎本剽，有所出而无窍者有实。有实而无乎处者，宇也；有长而无本剽者，宙也。
现代文：大道具有实在的形体却不占有空间；大道在成长却看不到成长的过程。世界从大道中产生，却找不到产生的孔窍。具有实在的形体而不占有空间，是因为大道处在上下左右没有边际的空间中；有成长却看不到成长的始末，是因为大道处在极限的时间里。
English: The boulevard has a real shape but does not occupy space; the boulevard is growing but does not see the process of growth. The world arises from the boulevard, but the orifice of creation cannot be found. The boulevard has a real shape but does not occupy space, because the boulevard is in a space without boundaries; the boulevard has growth but does not see the beginning and end of growth, because the boulevard is in the limit of time.

古文：有乎生，有乎死；有乎出，有乎入。
现代文：大道既存在着生也存在着死，既存在着出也存在着入。
English: The boulevard is both life and death, both out and in.

古文：入出而无见其形，是谓天门。
现代文：入和出都没有实实在在的形迹，这就是 自然之门 。
English: There are no real signs of entering or leaving, this is the gate of nature.

古文：天门者，无有也。万物出乎无有。
现代文：自然之门不假人为，但是万事万物都来自于这个门。
English: The door of nature is not artificial, but everything comes from this door.

古文：有不能以有为有，必出乎无有，而无有一无有。
现代文：不可能用 有 来着生 有 ， 有 一定来自于 无有 ，而 无有 是无和有的统一。
English: It is impossible for something to come from something, something must come from nothing, and nothing is the unity of nothing and something.

古文：圣人藏乎是。
现代文：圣人游心于这种境界。
English: The sages dwell in this realm.

古文：古之人，其知有所至矣。
现代文：古代的人，他们的才智已经达到很高的境界。
English: People in ancient times, their wisdom reached the highest level.

古文：恶乎至？
现代文：达到什么样的境界呢？
English: How can you reach the highest level of singing?

古文：有以为未始有物者，至矣，尽矣，弗可以加矣！
现代文：有人认为宇宙开始是不存在事物的，这是最高明、最完善的观点，不能够再添加什么了。
English: Some people think that the universe began without anything existing. This is the clearest and most complete view, and nothing more can be added.

古文：其次以为有物矣，将以生为丧也，以死为反也，是以分已。
现代文：差一点儿的观点就是他们认为宇宙开始已经存在事物，只不过反一种事物的产生看作是另一种事物的分离，把消逝看作是回归，而这个观点对事物已经有了区分。
English: The near view is that they believe that the universe began with the existence of things, but they regard the creation of one thing as the separation of another thing, and the disappearance as the return, and this view has already distinguished things.

古文：其次曰始无有，既而有生，生俄而死。以无有为首，以生为体，以死为尻。孰知有无死生之一守者，吾与之为友。
现代文：比这个观点再差一点儿的就是他们认为宇宙开始的确不曾有过什么，不久之后就产出了事物，有生命的东西又很快地消失了，他们把虚空当作头，把生命当作躯体，把死亡当作尾脊。哪个人能把有、无、死、生归结为一体，我就把他当朋友。
English: Closer to this view is the view that the universe began with nothing, soon after which it produced things, and the living things quickly disappeared. They regard emptiness as the head, life as the body, and death as the tail. Anyone who can combine being, nothingness, death, and life into one, I consider him a friend.

古文：是三者虽异，公族也。
现代文：上面三种观点虽然名有不同，却同源于道。
English: Although the above three views have different names, they all originate from Tao.

古文：昭景也，著戴也；甲氏也，著封也：非一也。
现代文：就像楚国王族中昭、景两姓，因为世代为官而显赫，屈姓，又因为世代封赏而显赫，姓氏不同。
English: Just like the two surnames of the Chu royal family, Zhaozhao and Jing, which are distinguished because they have been officials for generations, the surname of Qu, which is distinguished because it has been awarded for generations, is different.

古文：有生黬也，披然曰 移是 。尝言 移是 ，非所言也。
现代文：世上存在生命，乃是从昏暗中产生出来，生命一旦产生彼与此、是与非就在不停地转移而不易分辨。
English: There is life in the world, but it is born from the darkness. Once life is born, it is constantly shifting and not easy to distinguish.

古文：虽然，不可知者也。
现代文：让我来谈谈转移和分辨，其实这本不足以谈论。
English: Let me talk about transference and discrimination, which is actually not enough to talk about.

古文：腊者之有膍胲，可散而不可散也；观室者周于寝庙，又适其偃焉！
现代文：虽然如此，即使谈论了也是不可以明瞭的。譬如说，年终时大祭备有牛牲的内脏和四肢，可以分别陈列却又不可以离散整体牛牲；又譬如说，游观王室的人周旋于整个宗庙，但同时又必须上厕所。
English: Nevertheless, even if it is discussed, it is not clear. For example, at the end of the year, the festival is equipped with the entrails and limbs of cattle, which can be displayed separately, but the whole cattle cannot be discrete; or, for example, the royal visitors circulate throughout the ancestral temple, but at the same time they must go to the toilet.

古文：为是举 移是 。
现代文：像这些例子全都说明彼与此、是与非在不停地转移。
English: Examples like these all show that he is constantly shifting between right and wrong.

古文：请尝言 移是 ：是以生为本，以知为师，因以乘是非。
现代文：请让我再进一步谈谈是非的转移和不定。这全是因为把生存看作根本，把才智看作老师。
English: Let me go a step further and talk about the transference and uncertainty of right and wrong, all because of looking at survival as the root and intelligence as the teacher.

古文：果有名实，因以己为质，使人以为己节，因以死偿节。
现代文：于是以这样的观点来驾驭是与非，便果真分辨出次要、主要的区别；于是把自我看作是主体，并且让人把这一点当作神圣的节操，于是又用死来殉偿这一节操。
English: And so, by controlling right and wrong from this point of view, one really discerns the difference between the secondary and the primary; one then sees oneself as the subject, and one makes this a sacred principle, and then one sacrifices one's life for this principle.

古文：若然者，以用为知，以不用为愚；以彻为名，以穷为辱。 移是 ，今之人也，是蜩与学鸠同于同也。
现代文：像这样的人，以举用为才智，以晦迹为愚昧，以通达为荣耀，以困厄为羞耻。是非、彼此的不定，是现今人们的认识，这就跟蜩与学鸠共同讥笑大鹏那样，乃是同样的无知。
English: People like this take emulation for wisdom, obscurity for ignorance, attainment for glory, and adversity for shame. The present-day people's understanding of right and wrong, and their uncertainty about each other, is the same ignorance as the common ridicule of Tai Peng by the scholar and the scholar.

古文：蹍市人之足，则辞以放骜，兄则以妪，大亲则已矣。
现代文：在路上踩了行人的脚，就要道歉说自己放肆，兄长踩弟弟的脚就怜惜抚慰，父母至亲踩了就无须谢过。
English: If you step on a pedestrian's foot on the road, you must apologize and say that you are presumptuous. If an elder brother steps on a younger brother's foot, you should pity and comfort him. If a parent steps on a relative, there is no need to thank them.

古文：故曰：至礼有不人，至义不物，至知不谋，至仁无亲，至信辟金。
现代文：因此，至礼是没有人我之分的，至义是没有物我之分的，至知是不用谋略的，至仁是不表露爱迹的，至信就是不用金钱作凭证的。
English: Therefore, the highest etiquette is no one's business, the highest righteousness is no one's business, the highest knowledge is without strategy, the highest kindness is without love, and the highest faith is without money as proof.

古文：彻志之勃，解心之谬，去德之累，达道之塞。
现代文：毁除意志的干扰，解脱心灵的束缚，遗弃道德的牵累，打通大道的阻碍。
English: Destroy the interference of the will, liberate the bondage of the soul, abandon the moral entanglement, and break through the obstacle of the avenue.

古文：贵富显严名利六者，勃志也；容动色理气意六者，谬心也；恶欲喜怒哀乐六者，累德也；去就取与知能六者，塞道也。
现代文：高贵、富有、尊显、威严、声名、利禄六种情况，全是扰乱意志的因素。容貌、举止、美色、辞理、气调、情意六种情况，全是束缚心灵的因素。憎恶、欲念、欣喜、愤怒、悲哀、欢乐六种情况，全部牵累道德的因素。离去、靠拢、贪取、施与、智虑、技能六种情况，全是堵塞大道的因素。
English: The six conditions of nobility, wealth, dignity, majesty, fame, and fortune are all factors that disturb the will. The six conditions of appearance, manners, beauty, speech, temperament, and affections are all factors that bind the mind. The six conditions of hatred, desire, joy, anger, sorrow, and happiness are all factors that affect morality. The six conditions of leaving, approaching, coveting, giving, wisdom, and skill are all factors that block the avenue.

古文：此四六者不荡胸中则正，正则静，静则明，明则虚，虚则无为而无不为也。
现代文：这四个方面各六种情况不至于震荡胸中，内心就会平正，内心平正就会宁静，宁静就会明澈，明澈就会虚空，虚空就能恬适顺应无所作为而又无所不为。
English: If these six conditions in each of the four aspects are not shaken in the chest, the mind will be calm, the mind will be calm, the calm will be clear, the clear will be empty, and the empty will be able to adapt to inaction and omnipotence.

古文：道者，德之钦也；生者，德之光也；性者，生之质也。
现代文：大道，是自然的敬仰；生命，是盛德的光华；禀性，是生命的本根。
English: The road is the admiration of nature; life is the splendor of virtue; toughness is the root of life.

古文：性之动谓之为，为之伪谓之失。
现代文：合乎本性的行动，称之为率真的作为；受伪情驱使而行动，称之为失却本性。
English: To act in accordance with one's nature is called true action; to act under the influence of false emotions is called loss of nature.

古文：动以不得已之谓德，动无非我之谓治，名相反而实相顺也。
现代文：知识，出自与外物的应接；智慧，出自内心的谋划；具有智慧的人也会有不了解的知识，就像斜着眼睛看，所见必定有限。
English: Knowledge comes from contact with external objects; wisdom comes from inner planning; people with wisdom will also have knowledge that they do not understand, just like looking with slanted eyes, what you see must be limited.

古文：羿工乎中微而拙乎使人无己誉；圣人工乎天而拙乎人；夫工乎天而俍乎人者，唯全人能之。
现代文：有所举动却出于不得已叫做德，有所举动却不是为了自我叫做治，追求名声必定适得其反，而讲求实际就会事事顺应。羿精于射中微细之物而拙于人们不称誉自己。圣人精于顺应自然而拙于人为。精于顺应自然而又善于周旋人世，只有 全人 能够这样。
English: To act out of necessity is called virtue, but to act out of self-interest is not called virtue. To seek fame is counterproductive, but to be practical is to conform to everything. People do not praise themselves for being good at shooting small things, but for being bad at them. A saint is good at conforming to nature, but not to people. Only the whole person can be good at conforming to nature and good at turning the world around.

古文：虽虫能虫，虽虫能天。全人恶天，恶人之天，而况吾天乎人乎！
现代文：唯独只有虫豸能够像虫豸一样地生活，唯独只有虫豸能够禀赋于自然。 全人 厌恶自然，是厌恶人为的自然，更何况用自我的尺度来看待自然和人为呢！
English: Only worms can live like worms, and only worms can be endowed with nature. All human beings loathe nature and man-made nature, let alone view nature and man-made nature from the perspective of self!

古文：一雀适羿，羿必得之，威也。以天下为之笼，则雀无所逃。
现代文：一只小雀向羿飞来，羿肯定会把它射中，这是羿的能力；把天下当作雀笼，那么没有一只鸟雀能逃脱这个雀笼。
English: A small sparrow flies towards a cormorant, and the cormorant is sure to hit it. This is the power of the cormorant. Treat the world as a cage, and no bird can escape from the cage.

古文：是故汤以庖人笼伊尹，秦穆公以五羊之皮笼百里奚。
现代文：因此，商汤用庖厨来亲近伊尹，秦穆公用五张羊皮来亲近百里奚。
English: Therefore, Shang Tang used five sheepskins to get close to Yi Yin, and Qin Mu Gong used five sheepskins to get close to Bai Liguo.

古文：是故非以其所好笼之而可得者，无有也。
现代文：从古至今，最好的笼络人心的方法就是投其所好。
English: From ancient times to the present, the best way to win the hearts and minds of the people is to appeal to their preferences.

古文：介者拸画，外非誉也。胥靡登高而不惧，遗死生也。
现代文：砍断了脚的人之所以不加修饰，因为他已经把毁誉置之身外；服役的囚徒登上高处之所以不存恐惧，因为他已经把生死忘掉了。
English: The man who has cut off his foot does not embellish it, because he has put the shame behind him; the prisoner of war does not fear to go up high, because he has forgotten life and death.

古文：夫复谐不馈而忘人，忘人，因以为天人矣！
现代文：能够受到威吓却不报复的，是忘掉了他人；能够忘掉他人的人，就可以称为合于自然之理、忘却人道之情的 天人 。
English: He who can be threatened without retaliation is a man who has forgotten others; he who can forget others may be called a man of nature who has forgotten his humanity.

古文：故敬之而不喜，侮之而不怒者，唯同乎天和者为然。
现代文：所以，人们敬重他，他却不感到欣喜，人们侮辱他，他却不会愤怒，只有融入了自然顺和之气的人才能这样。
English: Therefore, people respect him, but he does not feel happy, people insult him, but he does not get angry, only those who have integrated the natural harmony can do so.

古文：出怒不怒，则怒出于不怒矣；出为无为，则为出于无为矣！
现代文：发出了不是有心发怒的怒气，那么这样的怒气也就出于不怒；有作为但不是有心，那么这样的作为也就出于无心。
English: If there is anger without a mind to be angry, then such anger comes from not being angry; if there is an action without a mind, then such an action comes from not having a mind.

古文：欲静则平气，欲神则顺心。有为也欲当，则缘于不得已。
现代文：想宁静就要心平气和，想全神就要顺应心志，即便是有所作为也要处置适宜，每件事都要顺应于不得已。
English: If you want to be peaceful, you must have a peaceful mind. If you want to be perfect, you must follow your heart's desire. Even if you have to do something, you must do it properly. Everything must be done out of necessity.

古文：不得已之类，圣人之道。
现代文：每件事不得已的做法，也就是圣人之道。
English: To do everything as a last resort is the way of the sage.

