古文：胡世宁，字永清，仁和人。
现代文：胡世宁，字永清，浙江仁和人。
English: Hu Shining, surnamed Yongqing, Zhejiang Renhe people.

古文：弘治六年进士。
现代文：弘治六年榜进士。
English: Koji became a priest six years later.

古文：性刚直，不畏强御，且知兵。
现代文：他性情刚直，不怕威胁，并且懂得军事。
English: He has an upright temperament, is not afraid of threats, and understands military affairs.

古文：除德安推官。
现代文：开始他做德州推官。
English: He started out as a Texas adjudicator.

古文：岐王初就藩，从官骄，世宁裁之。
现代文：歧王初登王位，下属官吏骄横，世宁制裁了他们。
English: When King Bi first ascended the throne, his subordinate officials became arrogant, and the world sanctioned them.

古文：他日复请湖田，持不可。
现代文：后来歧王又请求给他湖泊周围的良田，世宁坚决不允准。
English: Later, King Bi asked for the good fields around the lake, but Shining refused.

古文：迁南京刑部主事。
现代文：后来，他升官做了南京刑部主事。
English: Later, he was promoted to head the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：应诏陈边备十策，复上书极言时政阙失。
现代文：曾应诏写了十篇有关边备问题的策论，又上书极论当时政事的不足和过失。
English: In response to the edict, he wrote ten pieces of policy theory on border issues, and also published a book on the shortcomings and mistakes of the political affairs at that time.

古文：时孝宗已不豫，犹颔之。
现代文：当时孝宗皇帝已重病在身，对他的奏章还点头称赞。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaozong was seriously ill, and his performance was also praised.

古文：再迁郎中。
现代文：后来他又升任郎中。
English: Then he moved to a junior high school.

古文：与李承勋、魏校、余祐善，时称 南都四君子 。
现代文：他和李承勋、魏校、余三人相友好，当时人们称他们四个为 南都四君子 。
English: He was friendly with Li Chengxun, Wei Jia and Yu San, and people called them the "Four Gentlemen of Nantou" at that time.

古文：迁广西太平知府。
现代文：以后他又升任广西太平知府。
English: Later, he was promoted to the top post of Guangxi Taiping Prefecture.

古文：太平知州李濬数杀掠吏民，世宁密檄龙英知州赵元瑶擒之。
现代文：太平知州李几次三番杀害吏民，掠夺财产，世宁密令龙英知州赵元瑶捕捉了他。
English: In Taiping Chizhou, Li repeatedly killed officials and citizens and plundered property. Shining secretly ordered Long Ying Chizhou's Zhao Yuanjun to capture him.

古文：思明叛族黄文昌四世杀知府，占三州二十七村。
现代文：思明地方黄文昌一族人四代反叛，杀害知府，占据三州二十七村土地。
English: In Siming, Huang Wenchang and his clan rebelled for four generations, killed the prefect and occupied 27 villages in three prefectures.

古文：副总兵康泰偕世宁入思明，执其兄弟三人。
现代文：副总兵康泰和世宁一齐进入思明，拘捕了黄文昌的三个弟兄。
English: The vice-commander-in-chief soldiers, Kangtai and Shining, entered Siming together and arrested Huang Wenchang's three brothers.

古文：而泰畏文昌夜遁，委世宁空城中，危甚。诸土酋德世宁，发兵援，乃得还。文昌惧，归所侵地，降。
现代文：可是康泰害怕文昌夜间逃跑生事，把世宁丢在空城中自己走了，情况很危急，幸亏当地的民族首领们感激世宁发兵援救，世宁才免得一死，文昌害怕了，归还他所侵占的地方向朝廷投降了。
English: However, Kangtai was afraid that Wenchang would escape at night and cause trouble, so he left Shining in the empty city and went away on his own. The situation was very critical. Fortunately, the local ethnic leaders were grateful to Shining for sending troops to rescue them, and Shining was spared from death. Wenchang was afraid and returned the place he had occupied and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：土官承袭，长吏率要贿不时奏，以故诸酋怨叛。
现代文：当地土官接班时，上级官员常向他们索取贿赂，不肯按时替他们向朝廷上报，因此民族首领们时常怨恨并发动叛乱。
English: When local land officials took over, higher-ranking officials often demanded bribes from them and refused to report to the imperial court on their behalf on time, so the ethnic leaders often resented and launched rebellions.

古文：世宁令： 生子即闻府。
现代文：世宁下令 ：民族首领一生下儿子就在本府报上姓名。
English: Shining decreed that the names of the sons born to ethnic leaders would be published in the local newspaper.

古文：应世及者，年十岁以上，朔望谒府。
现代文：应世袭为首领的，十岁以上，每月初一、十五到府里拜会知府。
English: Those who should be hereditary chiefs and are over ten years old should go to the prefectural capital on the first day and the fifteenth day of every month.

古文：父兄有故，按籍请官于朝。 土官大悦。
现代文：父兄亡故以后，知府根据文书替他们向朝廷申请补官。 这下，土官很高兴。
English: After the death of his father and brother, the prefectural government applied to the Imperial Court for a replacement post for them, according to the document.

古文：母丧归。
现代文：母亲死后他回家守孝。
English: After his mother's death, he returned home to be a filial son.

古文：服阕赴京。
现代文：三年守孝完后又赴京候补去。
English: After three years of filial piety, he went to Beijing to make up for it.

古文：道沧州，流寇攻城急。
现代文：经过沧州时，流寇正猛烈攻打州城。
English: While passing through Cangzhou, the bandits were fiercely attacking the state capital.

古文：世宁即驰入城，画防守计。
现代文：世宁于是走马入城，帮着策划守城的办法。
English: Shining then rode into the city, helping to plan the defense of the city.

古文：贼攻七日夜，不能拔，引去。
现代文：流寇攻打了七天七夜，打不下来，才撤退走了。
English: The bandits fought for seven days and seven nights, but they could not beat them down, so they retreated.

古文：再知宝庆府。
现代文：世宁这次补官，做了宝庆知府。
English: This time, Shining became the governor of Baoqing.

古文：岷王及镇守中官王润皆严惮之。
现代文：期间，岷王和镇守的宦官王润都很怕他。
English: During this time, both the king and the eunuch guarding the town, Wang Run, were afraid of him.

古文：迁江西副使。与都御史俞谏画策擒盗，讨平王浩八。
现代文：以后他升任江西副使，与都御史俞谏一齐定下计策捉拿强盗，讨平了王浩八。
English: Later, he was promoted to the vice-envoy of Jiangxi Province, and together with the governor of the capital Shi Yan, they decided on a strategy to capture the robbers, and brought Wang Hao to justice.

古文：以暇城广昌、南丰、新城。
现代文：又利用闲暇修筑广昌、南丰、新城的城防。
English: He also used his leisure time to build the city defenses of Guangchang, Nanfeng and Xincheng.

古文：当是时，宁王宸濠骄横有异志，莫敢言，世宁愤甚。
现代文：这个时候，宁王宸濠骄横不法有造反的意图，但是没人敢说起此事。
English: At this time, Ning Wangtao arrogantly and illegally had a rebellious intention, but no one dared to talk about it.

古文：正德九年三月上疏曰： 江西之盗，剿抚二说相持，臣愚以为无难决也。
现代文：世宁恼火极了，正德九年三月就上书说 ：江西的盗贼，剿灭它还是招安它，两种主张相持不下，我个人以为这没什么难以决定的。
English: Shining was extremely angry, and Zhengde wrote to him in March of the ninth year, saying, "The thief in Jiangxi, whether to exterminate it or to pacify it, the two propositions cannot be reconciled. Personally, I think there is nothing difficult to decide.

古文：已抚者不诛，再叛者毋赦，初起者亟剿，如是而已。
现代文：已接受招安的不杀他，再敢反叛的有杀无赦，刚刚起事的立刻剿除，大体如此而已。
English: Do not kill him who has accepted the recruitment, do not kill him if he dares to rebel again, and eliminate him immediately if he has just started a riot, that's about it.

古文：顾江西患非盗贼。
现代文：但是江西的祸患还不在于盗贼。
English: But thieves are not yet the scourge of Jiangxi.

古文：宁府威日张，不逞之徒群聚而导以非法，上下诸司承奉太过。
现代文：宁王府的势力一天天扩大，无赖之徒聚集那里，用非法的事情诱导宁王，上下各级官府对宁王的奉迎太过分了。
English: The influence of Ningwang's government is expanding day by day. Rogue elements have gathered there, using illegal means to entice Ningwang. The officialdoms at all levels have gone too far in their obeisance to Ningwang.

古文：数假火灾夺民廛地，采办扰旁郡，蹂籍遍穷乡。
现代文：致使他频频假借火灾之名鲸吞百姓宅舍地，王府采办骚扰到旁边的郡县，爪牙所及侵害到贫穷的乡村。
English: As a result, he frequently took advantage of the fire to swallow up people's houses and land, and the royal procurement office harassed neighboring counties and encroached on poor villages.

古文：臣恐良民不安，皆起为盗。
现代文：我真怕好百姓为此不能平安度日，都起来做强盗。
English: I am really afraid that the good people will not be able to live in peace because of this, and will all rise up and become robbers.

古文：臣下畏祸，多怀二心，礼乐刑政渐不自朝廷出矣。
现代文：一般大臣们害怕祸及自己，多怀着观望的态度，礼乐刑政渐渐不是出自朝廷了。
English: The general ministers were afraid of bringing misfortune upon themselves, and they mostly took a wait-and-see attitude. Gradually, the politics of etiquette and punishment did not come from the imperial court.

古文：请于都御史俞谏、任汉中专委一人，或别选公忠大臣镇抚。
现代文：我请求从都御史俞谏、任汉二人中专门委派一人，或者另外选择公正、忠诚的大臣镇压、招安盗贼。
English: I request that one person be specially appointed from the two of them, or that another fair and loyal minister be selected to suppress and recruit thieves.

古文：敕王止治其国，毋挠有司，以靖乱源，销意外变。 
现代文：皇上命令宁王只治理自己的封国，不要干扰地方官府，以期铲除作乱的根源，灭绝无法设想的祸变。 
English: The emperor ordered King Ning to only govern his own fiefdom and not to interfere with the local government, with a view to eradicating the root cause of the unrest and exterminating the unimaginable calamity.

古文：章下兵部。尚书陆完议，令谏往计贼情抚剿之宜，至所言违制扰民，疑出伪托，宜令王约束之。
现代文：他的奏章下发到兵部后，尚书陆完建议，派俞谏前去根据盗贼的实际情况商定招安或剿灭事宜，至于世宁说到的宁王违法乱民的事，恐怕出于坏人托名伪装，应当传令宁王管制他们。
English: After his report was sent to the military department, Shang Shujuan suggested that they should send a messenger to agree on the recruitment or extermination of thieves according to the actual situation. As for Ning Wang's illegal and disorderly people mentioned by Shining, I am afraid that because of the bad people's name and disguise, Ning Wang should be ordered to control them.

古文：得旨报可。
现代文：圣旨同意了陆完的建议。
English: Shen Zi agreed to Lu Gan's suggestion.

古文：宸濠闻，大怒。列世宁罪，遍赂权幸，必杀世宁。
现代文：宸濠知道这件事后大为恼火，就罗列了世宁的罪过，贿赂当权的宠臣们，非杀掉世宁不可。
English: After learning of this, Zou was very angry, and he listed Shining's sins, bribing the favorites in power, he had to kill Shining.

古文：章下都察院。右都御史李士实，宸濠党也，与左都御史石玠等上言，世宁狂率当治。
现代文：他的奏章下发都察院后，右都御史李士实是宸濠的党羽，他与左都御史石等上书说世宁狂妄、粗率，应予治罪。
English: After his report was issued by the Duka-in, the Right Metropolitan Historian, Li Shishi, who was a member of Shun's faction, and the Left Metropolitan Historian, Shi, wrote that Shining was arrogant and rude and should be punished.

古文：命未下，宸濠奏复至，指世宁为妖言。
现代文：命令还没下达，宸濠的奏章又递了上来，指责世宁制造妖言。
English: The order had not yet been issued, and the crippled musician handed it up again, accusing Shining of fabricating rumors.

古文：乃命锦衣官校逮捕世宁。
现代文：于是朝廷传令锦衣官逮捕世宁。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered the brocade officer to arrest Shining.

古文：世宁已迁福建按察使，取道还里。
现代文：世宁当时已升为福建按察使，赴任途中取道还乡。
English: At that time, Shining had been promoted to Fujian A-level inspector, and on his way to the post, he took the road back to his hometown.

古文：宸濠遂诬世宁逃，驰使令浙江巡按潘鹏执送江西。
现代文：宸濠就诬蔑说他逃跑了，派人传令浙江巡按潘鹏将他抓住送江西来。
English: Zhai slandered that he had run away, and sent a messenger to order the Zhejiang patrol to press Pan Peng to catch him and send him to Jiangxi.

古文：鹏尽系世宁家人，索之急。
现代文：潘鹏把世宁全家人关了起来，紧急追捕世宁。
English: Pan Peng locked up Shining's entire family and urgently hunted down Shining.

古文：李承勋为按察使，保护之。
现代文：李承勋当时是浙江按察使，暗中保护了他。
English: At that time, Li Chengxun was the inspector general of Zhejiang Province and secretly protected him.

古文：世宁乃亡命抵京师，自投锦衣狱。
现代文：世宁于是逃出，去到北京，自己投案住进了锦衣卫的监狱。
English: Shining then escaped and went to Beijing, where he turned himself in to Jin Rongwei's prison.

古文：狱中三上书言宸濠逆状，卒不省。
现代文：在监狱中他三次上书陈述宸濠大逆不道的罪状，最后无人理会。
English: In prison, he wrote three times to report the crime of high treason, but no one listened to him.

古文：系岁余，言官程启充、徐文华、萧鸣凤、邢寰等交章救，杨一清复以危言动钱宁，乃谪戍沈阳。
现代文：关押了一年多，谏官程启充、徐文华、萧鸣凤、刑寰等人递上奏章搭救他，杨一清又用危言说动钱宁，才把他放出，贬往沈阳戍守。
English: After being detained for more than a year, the eunuchs Cheng Qicheng, Xu Wenhua, Xiao Mingfeng, and Xing Yao submitted a petition to rescue him, and Yang Yixing used the threat of moving Channing to release him and send him to Shenyang.

古文：居四年，宸濠果反。
现代文：过了四年，宸濠果然造起反来。
English: After four years, he finally rebelled.

古文：世宁起戍中为湖广按察使。
现代文：世宁从贬戍地被重新启用，做了湖广按察使。
English: Shining was re-launched from a demeaning position and made the inspector of Hukangan.

古文：寻擢右佥都御史，巡抚四川。
现代文：不久升任右佥都御史前往巡抚四川。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Ukyo Miyoshi and went to Sichuan as an inspector.

古文：道闻世宗即位，疏以司马光仁、明、武三言进，因荐魏校、何瑭、邵锐可讲官；林俊、杨一清、刘忠、林廷玉可辅弼；知府刘莅、徐钰先为谏官有直声，宜擢用。
现代文：路上得知世宗即位，贺表中拿司马光仁、明、武三字向世宗进言，借此举荐说魏校、何塘、邵锐可以担任讲官，林俊、杨一清、刘忠、林廷玉可以辅佐政事，知府刘莅、徐钰以前任谏官时声名正直应加提拔使用。
English: On the way, he learned of the enthronement of King Sejong. In his congratulatory letter, he used the three characters of Sima Guangren, Ming, and Wu to advise King Sejong. He used this to recommend that Wei Xie, He Tang, and Shao Rui could serve as lecturers, Lin Jun, Yang Iqing, Liu Zhong, and Lin Tingyu could assist in political affairs, and the reputation and honesty of governors Liu Ye and Xu Ye when they were eunuchs should be promoted and used.

古文：时韪其言。
现代文：当时人们都同意他的话。
English: At the time, people agreed with him.

古文：松潘所部熟番，将吏久不能制，率输货以假道。
现代文：松潘所辖的内属的少数族人，将领、官吏都管他们不住，经常得向他们交纳财货借路通行。
English: The generals and officials under the jurisdiction of Songpan do not hesitate to control the ethnic minorities under their jurisdiction, and they often have to pay them money and goods to use the road.

古文：番杀官军，惮不敢诘。
现代文：番人杀害军人，官方怕他们不敢追究。
English: Guards kill soldiers, officials fear they won't dare prosecute.

古文：官军杀番，辄抵罪。
现代文：官军杀死番人，就必须抵命。
English: If the government troops kill the guards, they will have to fight for their lives.

古文：世宁陈方略，请选将益兵，立赏罚格，严隐匿禁，修烽堠，时巡徼，以振军威，通道路。
现代文：世宁上书陈说方略，请求选将增兵，规定赏罚的标准，严办隐匿罪犯的罪行，修建烽火台，经常派人巡逻，以振兴官兵的军威，疏通四川的道路。
English: Shining put forward a strategy in a letter, requesting the election of more soldiers, stipulating the standard of reward and punishment, strictly handling the crime of concealing criminals, building a campfire, and frequently sending patrols to revitalize the military prestige of officers and soldiers and clear the roads in Sichuan.

古文：诏悉行之。
现代文：朝廷下诏准予实行。
English: The Imperial Court issued an imperial edict approving its implementation.

古文：又劾罢副总兵张杰、中官赵钦。
现代文：他又上书弹劾并罢免了副总兵张杰、宦官赵钦。
English: He also wrote to impeach and dismiss the vice-commander Zhang Jie and eunuch Zhao Qin.

古文：甫两月，召为吏部右侍郎。
现代文：上任才两个月，朝廷召他回京任吏部右侍郎。
English: He had only been in office for two months when the Imperial Court called him back to Beijing to take up the post of the Right Hand Man of the Cadre Department.

古文：未上，以父忧归。
现代文：还没到任，因为父亲去世回乡去了。
English: He hasn't taken up his post yet, because his father passed away and he went back to his hometown.

古文：既免丧家居，朝廷方议 大礼 ，异议者多得罪。
现代文：服丧完后在家闲住，朝廷里正在议论 大礼 ，持不同意见者很多人被问了罪。
English: After the funeral, they stayed at home, the imperial court was discussing the grand ceremony, and many people who disagreed were asked about the crime.

古文：世宁意是张璁等，疏乞早定追崇 大礼 。
现代文：世宁心里肯定张璁等，写奏章请求及早确定追崇献王的 大礼 。
English: In his heart, Shenning was sure that Zhang Xuan and others would write a musical composition to request that the great gift of the king be determined as early as possible.

古文：未上，语闻京师。
现代文：奏章还没递出，其中的话传布到京城去了。
English: The score had not yet been handed in, but word of it had spread to the capital.

古文：既有议迁显陵祔天寿山者，世宁极言不可，乃并前疏上之。
现代文：以后有人建议把显陵迁到天寿山去，世宁极力说不行，于是连同以前撰写的奏章一同递了上去。
English: Later, someone suggested moving the Hsien Mausoleum to Tianshou Mountain, but Shining said no, so he handed it over together with the previously written music.

古文：帝深嘉叹。
现代文：世宗读后深为赞叹。
English: After reading it, Sejong was deeply impressed.

古文：无何，闻廷臣伏阙争，有杖死者，驰疏言： 臣向以仁、明、武三言进，然尤以仁为本。
现代文：没过多久，他听说朝中大臣们赴宫门前哭争，有人被用棍子打死了，就飞章上书说： 我过去把仁、明、武三字之理进呈给陛下，然而三字之中尤其是以仁为根本。
English: Not long after, he heard that the ministers of the DPRK and China went to the front of the palace gate to cry and fight, and someone was beaten to death with a stick. He wrote on the flyer: I used to present to Your Majesty the truth of the three characters of Ren, Ming and Wu, but among the three characters, it is especially Ren that is fundamental.

古文：仁，生成之德；明，日月之临，皆不可一日无。
现代文：仁，是生养万物的德性；明，应像日月照临人间。这二者都是不可一日或缺的。
English: Benevolence is the virtue that gives birth to and nurtures all things; clearness should shine upon the human world like the sun and moon. Both of these are indispensable.

古文：武则雷霆之威，但可一震而已。
现代文：武，就像雷霆的威力，只可以偶尔震响一下而已。
English: Wu, like the power of thunder, can only be shaken once in a while.

古文：今廷臣忤旨，陛下赫然示威，辱以箠楚，体羸弱者辄毙。
现代文：现在朝中大臣对抗圣旨，陛下赫然示威，用棍棒捶打他们，身体衰弱的就被打死了。
English: Now that the ministers of the DPRK and China are opposing the sacred will, His Majesty made a strong demonstration, beat them with sticks, and they were beaten to death when they were weak.

古文：传之天下，书之史册，谓鞭扑行殿陛，刑辱及士夫，非所以光圣德。
现代文：消息遍传天下，写在史书中，说陛下您的殿前有鞭打的刑法，推行应用在士大夫身上，这不是您光大德行的办法。
English: The news spread all over the world, and it was written in the history books that Your Majesty had the criminal law of whipping in front of your palace, and it was not your way to be virtuous.

古文：新进一言偶合，后难保必当；旧德老成，一事偶忤，后未必皆非。
现代文：新任大臣一句话偶然说中，难保以后事事得当。老成的大臣一句话偶然违忤，以后未必都不对。
English: If a new minister says something by accident, it's safe to assume that it's the right thing to do. If an established minister accidentally breaks a promise, it's not necessarily the wrong thing to do.

古文：望陛下以三无私之心，照临于上，无先存适莫于中。 
现代文：希望陛下存此仁、明、武三无私的信念，像日月一样在高处照临天下，不要先存可否的成见在心！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will keep this unselfish belief of benevolence, wisdom and martial arts, and shine down on the world from on high like the sun and moon. Don't keep the prejudices in your heart!

古文：帝虽不能从，亦不忤。
现代文：世宗虽然不肯听从，总算没有当作违忤。
English: Although Sejong did not want to obey, he did not consider it a violation.

古文：寻召为兵部左侍郎。
现代文：不久被召入朝，做了兵部左侍郎。
English: He was soon called to the imperial court and became the left-hand man of the military.

古文：条戍边时所见险塞利害二十五事以上。
现代文：把他戍边时所看到的山川形势、军民利害列为二十五条意见递交世宗。
English: He listed the mountain and river situation and the interests of the military and the people that he saw when he was on the border as 25 opinions and submitted them to Sejong.

古文：又请善保圣躬，毋轻饵药物。
现代文：又请求世宗好好保养自己的身体，不要轻易吃任何药物。
English: He also asked Sejong to take good care of his body and not to take any drugs.

古文：献《大学·秦誓》章、《洪范》 惟辟威福 、《系辞·节》 初爻 讲义，并乞留中。
现代文：又献上自己撰写的《大学》、《秦誓》章句、《洪范》 惟辟威福 解义和《系辞？节初爻》讲义，请一并保存在皇宫中，勿传。
English: He also presented his own handouts of "College," "Qin's Oath," "Hong Fan" and "History of the Early Qing Dynasty." Please keep them together in the imperial palace and do not pass them on.

古文：给事中余经遂劾世宁启告密之渐。
现代文：给事中余经于是上书批评他开了告密的坏头。
English: Yu Jing, who was involved in the case, then wrote a letter criticizing him for starting the bad habit of whistleblowing.

古文：世宁乞罢，不许。 大礼 成，进秩一等。
现代文：世宁请求罢官，没得到允许。 大礼 确定以后，又官升一级。
English: Shining requested to be dismissed, but was not allowed to do so. After the promotion was confirmed, he was promoted to the next level.

古文：复陈用人二十事。
现代文：他又上书对用人问题陈述了二十条意见。
English: He also submitted a letter stating twenty opinions on the employment issue.

古文：工匠赵奎等五十四人以中官请，悉授职。
现代文：工匠赵奎等五十四个人因为宦官的请托都被封了官职。
English: Fifty-four people, including the craftsman Zhao Kui, were appointed to official posts at the request of the eunuch.

古文：世宁言赏过滥，不纳。
现代文：世宁上书说封赏过于随意了，世宗不听。
English: Shining wrote a letter saying that the award was too arbitrary, and Shizong did not listen.

古文：屡疏引疾。
现代文：他屡次上书称病。
English: He repeatedly wrote in to say he was ill.

古文：改南京吏部，就迁工部尚书。
现代文：于是被改派到南京吏部，马上又改为工部尚书。
English: As a result, he was reassigned to the Nanjing Librarian's Department, which was immediately changed to the Industrial Department.

古文：已，复召为左都御史，加太子少保。辞宫衔，许之。
现代文：后来，他又被召入京城做左都御史，加太子太保衔，他辞谢这个品衔，世宗同意了。
English: Later, he was called to the capital to serve as the governor of the Left Capital, and was granted the title of crown prince. He declined the title, and Shizong agreed.

古文：世宁故方严。及掌宪，务持大体。
现代文：世宁为人本来就端直、严厉，等到他掌管朝廷法纪时，便竭力坚持原则。
English: Shining was originally a straightforward and strict person, and when he was in charge of the imperial court's legal discipline, he tried his best to adhere to the principle.

古文：条上宪纲十余条，末言： 近士习忌刻，一遭谗毁，则终身废弃。
现代文：他曾条列纪纲十多条进呈，末尾说道： 近年来士人习惯于刻薄、忌恨，有的大臣一旦受到批评，就终生被废弃了。
English: He had submitted more than ten articles of the disciplinary code, and said at the end: In recent years, scholars have become accustomed to vitriol and hatred. Once some ministers are criticized, they are discarded for life.

古文：佥事彭祺发豪强罪，受谤夺官。
现代文：佥事彭祺揭发豪强的罪行，被人诽谤丢了官。
English: Anecdote: Peng Yao exposed the crimes of Gaoqiang, was slandered and lost his position.

古文：诸如此者，宜许大臣申理。 
现代文：许多像这样的事，应当允许大臣们申诉、处理。 
English: There are many things like this that ministers should be allowed to complain about and deal with.

古文：帝采其言，惟祺报寝。
现代文：世宗采纳了他的建议，只是彭祺被批示不加启用。
English: The Sejong accepted his suggestion, but Peng Yao was ordered not to implement it.

古文：执政请禁私谒，世宁曰： 臣官以察为名。人非接其貌，听其言，无由悉其才行。 
现代文：执政大臣请禁止私人之间的相互谒见，世宁说： 我所担任的官职本来以分别人才为名，对于人才，不见到他的容貌，听他说话，就无法了解他的才干和品行。 
English: The ruling minister asked for a ban on mutual meetings between private individuals. Shining said: "The official position I hold is originally in the name of distinguishing talent. For talent, without seeing his face and listening to him, it is impossible to understand his talent and character.

古文：帝以为然，遂弗禁。
现代文：世宗认为是这样，就没有禁止。
English: According to Sejong, there is no ban.

古文：俄改刑部尚书。
现代文：不久，世宁改任刑部尚书。
English: Soon after, Shining was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：每重狱，别白为帝言之，帝辄感悟。
现代文：每遇到重大案件，他都分辨曲直，为世宗讲解，世宗一听就能明白。
English: Whenever he came across a major case, he would distinguish between right and wrong and explain it to Sejong, who could understand it immediately.

古文：中官刚聪诬漕卒掠御服，坐二千人，世宁劾其妄。
现代文：宦官刚聪诬陷漕运士兵抢劫御服，连累达二千人，世宁揭发了此事的作假。
English: The eunuch Gangchong framed rowing soldiers for robbing the imperial clothes, with a total of two thousand people, and Shining exposed the fraud.

古文：已，聪情得抵罪，帝乃益信世宁。
现代文：后来，刚聪的隐情为人所知，他被问了罪，世宗于是越发信任世宁。
English: Later, when Gangchong's secret became known and he was accused of a crime, Shizong trusted Shining more and more.

古文：王琼修郤陈九畴，将致之死。以世宁救，得戍。
现代文：王琼与陈九畴计较仇怨，打算搞死陈九畴，因为世宁挽救，九畴才被发配戍边。
English: Wang Qiong and Chen Jiuyong had a grudge against each other and planned to kill Chen Jiuyong. Chen Jiuyong was only given a bridle because he saved the world.

古文：兵部尚书王时中罢，以世宁代，加太子太保。
现代文：兵部尚书王时中罢官后，用世宁替换了他，并得以加封太子太保。
English: After the dismissal of Hyobusho Shoshuo Shizhong, he was replaced by Shining, and was able to add the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：再辞不得命，乃陈兵政十事，曰定武略、崇宪职、重将权、增武备、更赏罚、驭土夷、足边备、绝弊源、正谬误、惜人才。
现代文：他两次辞谢没辞掉，于是陈述了有关军政方面的十件事，包括制定战略、加强监察、扩大将权、增置武备、改革赏罚、控制士人、充实边防、杜绝祸根、修正错误、爱护人才等。
English: He twice resigned, but did not resign, and then stated ten things related to military and political affairs, including formulating strategies, strengthening supervision, expanding generals' powers, increasing armaments, reforming rewards and punishments, controlling cadres, enriching border defense, eliminating the root cause, correcting mistakes, and caring for talents.

古文：所言多破常格，帝优旨答之。
现代文：他的论述有不少打破常规的地方，世宗还是用称赞的语气作了批示。
English: There were quite a few places in his discourse that broke with the norm, but Sejong still gave instructions in a praising tone.

古文：土鲁番贡使乞归哈密城，易降人牙木兰。
现代文：吐鲁番前来进贡的使臣请求归还哈密城给朝廷，换投降过来的牙木兰。
English: The envoys who came to pay tribute to Turuban requested the return of Hami City to the imperial court in exchange for the surrender of Toa Mulan.

古文：王琼上其事。世宁言： 先朝不惜弃大宁、交阯，何有于哈密。
现代文：王琼把这件事汇报上来，世宁说： 武宗在位时不惜放弃大宁、交趾，哪里在乎哈密？
English: Wang Qiong reported the matter to Shining, who said, "When Emperor Wu was on the throne, he did not hesitate to give up Danying and Jiaozuo, so what does Hami care?

古文：况初封忠顺为我外藩，而自罕慎以来三为土鲁番所执，遂狎与戎比，以疲我中国，耗财老师，戎得挟以邀索。
现代文：况且当初我们封忠顺王作为外边的屏障，可是自从罕慎以来忠顺王三次被吐鲁番抓去，于是他便和戎人联合，以至于使我中国疲惫不堪，花了钱财，军队吃亏，西戎还拿他来要挟我们，索取财物。
English: Moreover, at the beginning, we had appointed King Zhongshun as a barrier to the outside world, but since Han Zhen, King Zhongshun had been captured three times by Turfan, so he allied himself with the Xiongnu, so that I had exhausted China, spent money, the army suffered losses, and Xiongnu also used him to blackmail us and demand money.

古文：臣以为此与国初所封元孽和顺、宁顺、安定三王等耳。
现代文：我以为这和开国初分封元朝后裔为和顺、宁顺、安定三王一样。
English: I thought that this was the same as the descendants of the first division of the founding of the country, the descendants of the Yuan Dynasty, who were the three kings of harmony, tranquility and stability.

古文：安定在哈密内，近甘肃，今存亡不可知。我一切不问，独重哈密何也？
现代文：安定王就在哈密境内，邻近甘肃，现在他的封国存亡不可知，我们也一切不加过问，又何必偏偏看重哈密？
English: The Prince of Stability is in the territory of Hami, close to Gansu, and now the survival of his fiefdom is unknown. We do not question anything, and why should we pay attention to Hami?

古文：宜专守河西，谢绝哈密。
现代文：我们应该专心防守河西，谢绝接受哈密。
English: We should concentrate on defending Hexi and refuse to accept Hami.

古文：牙木兰本曲先卫人，反正归顺，非纳降比，彼安得索之？
现代文：牙木兰本来是曲先卫的人，反正后来归顺朝廷，不能与收纳过来的投降者相提并论，吐鲁番怎么可以向我们讨要他呢？
English: Tooth Mulan was originally a Qu Xianwei's man, anyway, he later surrendered to the imperial court, and cannot be compared with the surrendered surrendered, how can Turpan ask us for him?

古文：唐悉怛谋事可鉴也。 
现代文：唐朝时悉怛谋的事情可以作为我们今日的借鉴。 
English: The Tang Dynasty's well-planned events can serve as a reference for us today.

古文：张璁等皆主琼议，格不用，独留牙木兰不遣。
现代文：张璁等人都赞同王琼的主张，世宁的建议受到阻挠，未予采用，只是留下牙木兰没有把他遣送出境。
English: Zhang Qian and others all agreed with Wang Qiong's proposition. Shining's suggestion was blocked and not adopted, but Mulan was not deported.

古文：居兵部三月求去，帝不许，免朝参。
现代文：世宁在兵部呆了三个月后请求退休，世宗不同意，免了他进朝参拜一事。
English: After Shining had spent three months in the military, he asked to retire. Shizong did not agree, and he was excused from going to the North to worship.

古文：世宁又上备边三事。固称疾笃，乃听乘传归，给廪隶如制。
现代文：世宁又上书陈述三件边防事务，并坚持称自己病重，于是世宗准许他乘车还乡，按照规定发给他粮食和仆从。
English: Shining also submitted a letter stating three border defense affairs, and insisted that he was seriously ill, so Shizong allowed him to return to his hometown by car, and gave him grain and servants in accordance with regulations.

古文：归数月，复起南京兵部尚书，固辞不拜。
现代文：回家才数月，又起用他做南京兵部尚书，他坚决辞让，不肯接受任命。
English: He had only been back home for a few months when he was appointed to the post of secretary of the Nanjing Military Department. He resolutely refused to accept the appointment.

古文：九年秋卒。赠少保，谥端敏。
现代文：九年秋天去世后，被追赠为少保，谥端敏。
English: After his death in the autumn of the ninth year, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shōhō, 端敏.

古文：世宁风格峻整，居官廉。疾恶若仇，而荐达贤士如不及。
现代文：世宁为人风格端庄、峻严，居官廉洁，疾恶如仇，而推荐贤人，却惟恐他们仕路不通。
English: Shenning's personal style is dignified and austere, his officials are incorruptible, and evil is his enemy. He recommends wise men, but fears that they will not succeed.

古文：都御史马昊、陈九畴坐累废；副使施儒、杨必进考察被黜；御史李润、副使范辂为时所抑，连章荐之。
现代文：都御史马昊、陈九畴因罪被罢官，副使施儒、杨必进在考评中被黜斥，御史李润、副使范辂被当时大臣压制，他都连章推荐。
English: The metropolitan magistrates Ma Hao and Chen Jiuzhuang were dismissed for crimes, the vice-envoys Shiru and Yang Bijin were rebuked in the evaluation, and the magistrate Li Run and the vice-envoy Fan Ye were suppressed by the minister at that time. He recommended them all.

古文：与人语，呐不出口。及具疏，援据古今，洞中窾会。
现代文：与人说话，好像嘴笨说不出什么，等撰写奏章时，却援引古今，洞察深微。
English: When talking to people, it seems that his mouth can't say anything, but when writing music, he cites the past and the present, with little insight.

古文：与李承勋善，而持议不苟合。
现代文：他和李承勋关系很好，但议论政事从不苟且迎合。
English: He and Lee Seung-Hun have a good relationship, but when it comes to politics, he's a panderer.

古文：承勋欲授陇胜官，复芒部故地，世宁言胜非陇氏子，芒氏不当复立。
现代文：承勋想给陇胜封官，恢复芒部的故土，世宁说陇胜不是陇氏子孙，芒氏不应当重新设官。
English: Cheng Xun wanted to appoint Gong Sheng as an official and restore the ancestral land of the Mang clan. Shining said that Gong Sheng was not a descendant of the Gong clan, and the Mang clan should not be reappointed.

古文：始以议礼与张璁、桂萼合，璁、萼德之，欲援以自助。
现代文：起初议论 大礼 时他和张璁、桂萼意见一致，张璁、桂萼感激他，想拉他一把，让他帮自己的忙。
English: At first, he and Zhang Jun and Gui Calyx were in agreement when they discussed the gift. Zhang Jun and Gui Calyx were grateful to him and wanted to give him a hand and let him help himself.

古文：世宁不肯附会，论事多牴牾。
现代文：世宁却不肯附合他们，议论政事常常和他们意见抵触。
English: However, Shining refused to go along with them, and often disagreed with them when discussing politics.

古文：萼议欲销兵，世宁力折之。
现代文：桂萼主张销毁民间的兵器，世宁却竭力反驳。
English: Gui Calyx advocated the destruction of civilian weapons, but Shining strenuously refuted this.

古文：昌化伯以他姓子冒封，下廷议。
现代文：昌化伯以他姓子弟冒封，事下朝臣议论。
English: Chang Hwa-pyo usurped the throne using his younger brother's surname, and the court discussed the matter.

古文：世宁言： 吾辈不得以厚赂故，诬朝廷 ，萼为色变。
现代文：世宁说我们不能因为接受了丰厚的贿赂，就欺骗朝廷，桂萼听了，脸色大变。
English: Shining said that we could not deceive the imperial court because we had accepted a rich bribe. Gui Cale listened and his face changed dramatically.

古文：萼方为吏部，而世宁引疾，言： 天变人穷，盗贼滋起，咎在吏、户、兵三部不得人。
现代文：桂萼正当吏部尚书，而世宁称病告退时，说： 老天发生灾变，人民贫穷，盗贼遍地生，根源在于吏、户、兵三部所用非人。
English: Gui Caly wrote a book justifying the officials, while Shining claimed to be ill and retired, saying: A natural disaster occurred, the people were poor, and thieves were everywhere. The root cause was that the officials, households, and soldiers were all non-humans.

古文：兵部尤重，请避贤路。 
现代文：兵部问题尤为严重，请让我给贤人让开路吧！ 
English: The problem of the military is particularly serious, please let me give way to the wise men!

古文：又以哈密议，语侵璁，诸大臣皆忌之。
现代文：又因为讨论哈密一事，言词之中伤着了张璁，朝中大臣都忌恨他。
English: Also, because of the discussion of Hami, Zhang Ye was hurt by the words, and the ministers of the DPRK and China hated him.

古文：帝始终优礼不替。
现代文：好在世宗皇帝对他始终恩礼不衰。
English: Fortunately, Emperor Sejong was always gracious to him.

古文：子纯、继。
现代文：他有二子叫胡纯、胡继。
English: He has two sons named Hu Chun and Hu Ji.

古文：纯以父任知肇庆府，有才行。
现代文：胡纯因为父亲做了肇庆知府，才能、品行都不错。
English: Hu Chun because his father did Zhaoqing prefecture, talent, conduct are good.

古文：继幼不慧，不为世宁知。
现代文：胡继小时不聪明，得不到世宁的了解。
English: Hu Jizhong was not clever enough to gain the understanding of the world.

古文：世宁在江西出讨贼，部将入见继。
现代文：世宁在江西外出讨贼，他的部将到府中见到胡继。
English: Shining went out to solicit thieves in Jiangxi, and his subordinates went to the capital to see Hu Ji.

古文：继为指阵法，进退离合甚详，凡三日。
现代文：胡继为他们指点阵法，对部队的进退、离合，考虑得很周密，给他们讲解了三天。
English: Hu Jie showed them the method of pointing the formation, and carefully considered the advance and retreat of the troops and the clutch, and explained it to them for three days.

古文：世宁归阅，大异之。
现代文：世宁回来后检阅部队，大吃一惊。
English: When Shining returned, he inspected the troops and was taken aback.

古文：知其故，叹曰： 吾有子不自识，何也？ 
现代文：问知原因后，感慨地说： 我有这么个儿子，我自己却不能识别他，是什么道理呢？ 
English: After inquiring about the reason, he said with emotion: I have such a son, but I can't recognize him myself. What is the reason?

古文：自是击贼，辄令继从，与策方略。
现代文：从此以后外出攻打敌人，就让胡继跟在身边，和他一同决定用兵方略。
English: From then on, when he went out to attack the enemy, he let Hu Jie follow him around, and together they decided on the strategy of using soldiers.

古文：世宁十不失三，继十不失一。
现代文：世宁定计，十不失三，胡继却十不失一。
English: According to Shining's calculation, he would not lose three out of ten, but Hu Jie would lose one out of ten.

古文：世宁方草疏论宸濠，继请曰： 是且重得祸。 
现代文：世宁正起草奏章揭发宸濠时，胡继请求说 ：这样可是要闯大祸的呀！ 
English: When Shining was drafting a report exposing the scandal, Hu Jie pleaded with him, saying, "This is going to lead to a big disaster!"

古文：世宁曰： 吾已许国，遑恤其他。 
现代文：世宁说 ：我已经以身许国，哪还管得了其他？ 
English: Shining said, "I've already ruled a country by myself, how can I rule others?"

古文：及世宁下狱，继念其父，病死。
现代文：等世宁被投进监狱后，胡继想念他的父亲，忧病而死。
English: After Shining was sent to prison, Hu Jie missed his father and died of grief.

古文：李承勋，字立卿，嘉鱼人。
现代文：李承勋，字立卿，湖北嘉鱼人。
English: Li Chengxun, Zhi Liqing, Hubei Jiayu Ren.

古文：父田，进士，官右副都御史，巡抚顺天。
现代文：他的父亲李田是进士出身，官至右副都御史，巡抚顺天。
English: His father, Li Tian, was from the Jin Dynasty. He served as the second-in-command to the right of the prefectural governor, and the procurator Shuntian.

古文：有操执，为政不苛。
现代文：为人有操行，理政不苛刻扰人。
English: If you act for the people, your governance will not be harsh and disturbing.

古文：承勋举弘治六年进士。由太湖知县迁南京刑部主事。历工部郎中，迁南昌知府。
现代文：承勋考中弘治六年进士，由太湖知县升任南京刑部主事，经工部郎中，转任南昌知府。
English: He was promoted from Taihu County to be the head of the Nanjing Criminal Justice Department, and was transferred to Nanchang Prefecture after serving as a junior member of the Engineering Department.

古文：正德六年，赣州贼犯新淦，执参政赵士贤。
现代文：正德六年，赣州的盗贼进犯新淦，拘押了参政赵士实。
English: In the sixth year of Zhengde, thieves from Zhangzhou invaded Xinlu and detained Zhao Shishi, a politician.

古文：靖安贼据越王岭玛瑙岸，华林贼又陷瑞州。
现代文：靖安的盗贼盘踞在越王岭玛瑙岸，华林的盗贼又打下了瑞州。
English: Jing'an's thieves are entrenched on the onyx coast of Yuewangling, and Waring's thieves have laid siege to Ruizhou.

古文：诸道兵不敢前。
现代文：各路官兵不敢向前近敌。
English: Officers and soldiers of all ranks dared not advance close to the enemy.

古文：承勋督民兵剿，数有功。
现代文：承勋督率民兵围剿盗贼，几次立了战功。
English: He led the militia to encircle the thieves and made several war feats.

古文：华林贼杀副使周宪，宪军大溃。承勋单骑入宪营，众乃复集。
现代文：华林的盗贼杀死副使周宪，周宪的队伍乱作一团，承勋单枪匹马去到周宪的军营里，他的队伍才又集合起来。
English: Waring's thieves killed Zhou Xian, Zhou Xian's second-in-command. Zhou Xian's team was in disarray. He went to Zhou Xian's camp single-handed, and his team was assembled again.

古文：都御史陈金即檄承勋讨之。
现代文：都御史陈金就此传令承勋讨伐盗贼。
English: As a result, the Metropolitan Historian, Chen Jin, issued a command to the heir to the throne to fight against the thieves.

古文：贼党王奇听抚，搜得其衷刃，纵使还。
现代文：贼将王奇接受招安时，从他怀中搜出短刀来，承勋却放他回去。
English: When the thief recruited Wang Qi, he found a knife in his arms, but Cheng Xun let him go back.

古文：奇感泣，誓以死报。
现代文：王奇感动得掉下泪来，发誓以死相报答。
English: Wang Qi was moved to tears and vowed to repay the favor with his death.

古文：承勋令奇密入寨，说降其党为内应，而亲率所部登山。
现代文：承勋让他秘密回到驻地，劝说他的同伙做内应，自己则亲自率队登山。
English: Chengxun let him secretly return to the station, persuaded his accomplices to do internal affairs, and personally led the mountaineering team.

古文：奇夜拔栅，官军奋而前，降者自内出，贼遂溃。
现代文：王奇在夜间打开栅门，官军奋勇向前，降兵又从内部杀出，盗贼于是溃不成军。
English: Wang Qi opened the gate at night, the official army advanced bravely, and the retreating soldiers were killed from within, so the thieves were routed and could not join the army.

古文：已，从金斩贼渠罗光权、胡雪二，华林贼平。
现代文：不久跟随陈金斩杀了贼首罗光权、胡雪二，华林的盗贼被平定了。
English: Soon after, Chen Jin killed the heads of the thieves, Luo Guangquan and Hu Xueyi, and the thieves in Hualin were pacified.

古文：镇守中贵黎安诬承勋擅易贼首王浩八狱词，坐下吏。
现代文：镇守宦官黎安诬陷承勋擅自改动贼首王浩八的供词，因此他被投入监狱。
English: The eunuch of the town guard, Li An, framed Zhe Xun for altering the confession of the thief Wang Hao Bao without authorization, so he was thrown into prison.

古文：大理卿燕忠即讯，得白。
现代文：大理卿燕忠主持审讯，承勋得以昭雪。
English: Daliqing Yanzhong presided over the trial, and he was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：举治行卓异，超迁浙工按察使。
现代文：因为被举为治行优异，他得以越级升任浙江按察使。
English: Because he was praised for his excellent governance, he was able to be promoted to the rank of Zhejiang inspector.

古文：历陕西、河南左、右布政使。以右副都御史巡抚辽东。
现代文：经陕西、河南左、右布政使，然后以右副都御史的名义巡抚辽东。
English: He went to Shaanxi and Henan to dispatch political envoys left and right, and then became the governor of Liaodong in the name of the right vice-governor.

古文：边备久弛，开原尤甚。
现代文：当时，边备松弛很久了，开原尤其如此。
English: At that time, the border reserve had been slack for a long time, and this was especially true for Kaiyuan.

古文：士马才十二，墙堡墩台圮殆尽。
现代文：兵马才有名额的十分之二多，墙堡、望台坍塌几尽。
English: The number of soldiers and horses is only two-tenths of the quota, and the wall fort and watchtower have collapsed.

古文：将士依城堑自守，城外数百里悉为诸部射猎地，承勋疏请修筑。
现代文：将士凭借堑河防守，城外几百里土地全都是各部队射箭、打猎的场所，承勋上书请求修城筑防。
English: The soldiers defended themselves with the help of the Li River, and the hundreds of miles of land outside the city were all used by the troops for archery and hunting. Cheng Xun wrote a letter requesting that the city be built and fortified.

古文：会世宗立，发帑银四十余万两。
现代文：正好世宗刚即位，就发给他国库银四十余万两。
English: As soon as Sejong ascended the throne, he was given more than 400,000 taels of silver from the national treasury.

古文：承勋命步将四人各一军守要害，身负畚锸先士卒。
现代文：他命令四位部将各领一队人马驻守要害地带，自己身先士卒荷锸挑担，参加劳动。
English: He ordered the four departments to each lead a team of men and horses to guard the key areas, and to take the lead in picking up the burden and participating in the labor.

古文：凡为城堑各九万一千四百余丈，墩堡百八十有一。招逋逃三千二百人，开屯田千五百顷。
现代文：前后分别修城墙，挖护城河各九万一千四百多丈，望敌台、土城堡一百八十一个，招集逃亡军民三千二百人，开垦屯田一千五百亩。
English: The city walls were built separately before and after, the moat was dug to a height of more than 91,400 meters, the watchtower and the earthen castle were built to a height of 181 meters, 3,200 fugitive soldiers and civilians were called up, and 1,500 mu of farmland were reclaimed.

古文：又城中固、铁岭；断阴山、辽河之交；城蒲河、抚顺，扼要冲。
现代文：又在中固、铁岭筑起城墙，切断阴山、辽河的交通，加强蒲河、抚顺的城防，扼守交通要冲。
English: In addition, city walls were built in Zhonggu and Tieling, cutting off the traffic of Yinshan and Liaohe, strengthening the city defenses of Puhe and Fushun, and protecting the traffic.

古文：边防甚固。
现代文：这样边防很坚固了。
English: This makes the border defense very strong.

古文：录功，进秩一等。
现代文：评定功绩，他官升一级。
English: Record achievements, promoted to the first-class official level.

古文：又数陈军民利病，咸报可。
现代文：此后他几次上书主张革除对军民不利的弊政，都得到朝廷批准。
English: After that, he submitted several letters advocating the elimination of the bad government that was unfavorable to the military and the people, all of which were approved by the Imperial Court.

古文：以疾归。起故官，莅南院。三迁刑部尚书，加太子少保。
现代文：后来因病还乡疗养，重出后起任原官，到南院值勤，三次升迁，做到了刑部尚书，加封太子少保衔。
English: Later, due to illness, he returned to his hometown to recuperate. After his return, he was appointed to the original officer, went to the Southern Hospital for duty, and was promoted three times. He achieved the promotion of the criminal department, and was awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：帝以京营多弊，欲振饬之。遂加承勋太子太保，改兵部尚书兼左都御史，专督团营。
现代文：世宗因京营存在很多弊端，想加以整顿，于是加封承勋为太子太保，改当兵部尚书兼左都御史，专门督办团营。
English: Sejong wanted to rectify the many drawbacks that existed in the Beijing camp, so he added the title of Prince to the title of Crown Prince, and became the military secretary and the governor of the Left Capital, specifically supervising the regimental camp.

古文：寻兼掌都察院。
现代文：不久兼职主持都察院。
English: He soon became the part-time president of the Duza Academy.

古文：以疾，三疏乞休，且言： 山西潞城贼以四道兵讨之，不统于一人，故无功。
现代文：因为又生了病，三次上书请求退休，书中说： 山西潞城的盗贼，朝廷动用四道兵讨伐它，权力不统一在一个人手中，所以没有效果。
English: Because he got sick again, he wrote three times to request retirement. In the letter, he said, "There are thieves in Lucheng, Shanxi Province. The imperial court has mobilized four armies to fight them. The power is not unified in the hands of one person, so there is no effect."

古文：川、贵芒部之役措置乖方，再胜再叛，宜命伍文定深计，毋专用兵。
现代文：川、贵芒部的战事规划不当，屡胜屡叛，应派伍文定深心谋划，不要一味用兵。
English: The war plans of the Kuomintang and the Kuomintang were improper, and they repeatedly won and repeatedly rebelled. Wu Wenzhen should be sent to plan deeply, and not to use soldiers blindly.

古文：丰、沛河工，二年三易大臣，工不就，宜令知水利者各陈所见，而俾侍郎潘希曾度可否。
现代文：丰、沛地方的修河工程，二年之中换了三个大臣，工程尚未竣工，应让懂得水利的大臣各陈己见，然后由侍郎潘希会考虑可否。
English: Three ministers have been replaced in two years for the river repair project in Feng and Pei regions, and the project has not yet been completed. It is necessary to let the ministers who understand water conservancy express their views, and then Pan Xi will consider whether it is possible or not.

古文：其尤要者，在决壅蔽患。
现代文：诸事之中尤其紧要的，在于疏通君臣之间消息不通。
English: Among other things, it is particularly important to clear up the lack of information between monarchs and ministers.

古文：仿唐、宋转对、次对故事，不时召见大臣。 
现代文：请陛下仿效唐、宋时转对、次对故事，不时召见大臣。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to follow the example of Tang and Song dynasties and invite ministers from time to time.

古文：帝不允辞，下其议于所司。
现代文：世宗不允许他辞职，他的建议则下发给主管部门讨论。
English: Sejong did not allow him to resign, and his proposal was sent to the competent department for discussion.

古文：时秦、晋、楚、蜀岁祲，诏免田赋。
现代文：当时陕西、山西、湖北、四川年成不好，皇上颁布诏书减免田租。
English: At that time, the harvest in Shaanxi, Shanxi, Hubei and Sichuan was not good, and the emperor issued an edict to reduce and exempt farm rents.

古文：承勋言： 有司例十月始征赋。
现代文：承勋建议说 ：主管部门按惯例十月份就开始征收田赋。
English: Chojun Sugimoto said, "The competent department will begin to collect rice fields in October according to the usual practice.

古文：今九月矣，恐官吏督趣，阴图乾没。
现代文：现在已九月份，恐怕地方上官吏催促百姓完租，暗里图谋侵吞减免田赋。
English: Now that it is September, I am afraid that local officials are urging the people to complete the rent and secretly plotting to encroach on the reduction and exemption of rice fields.

古文：宜及其未征，遣官驰告以所蠲数。山陬僻壤，俾悉户晓。
现代文：应在他们还没征收时派遣官吏速到彼处，把减免数额予以公布，即使偏僻的山村，也让百姓家喻户晓。
English: Officials should be dispatched to other places as soon as they have not collected the tax, and the amount of relief should be made public, so that even remote mountain villages are well known to the people.

古文：有司不能奉宣德意者，罪之。抚按失举奏，并坐。 
现代文：主管部门不能奉诏宣扬朝廷关心百姓的精神，就加以问罪；抚按不加举报的，同罪。 
English: If the competent department cannot issue an edict to promote the spirit of the imperial court's concern for the people, it will be charged with a crime; if it is not reported, it will be the same crime.

古文：帝褒纳之。
现代文：世宗赞同并采纳了这个意见。
English: The Sejong endorsed and adopted this opinion.

古文：奏夺京营把总汤清职。郭勋为求复，语侵承勋。
现代文：后来他又上书把京营把总汤清削了官，郭勋上书替汤清请求，言语之间攻击了承勋，承勋于是请求退休。
English: Later, he also wrote a letter to the Beijing camp to remove the general Tang Qing from the official, Guo Xun wrote a letter to request for Tang Qing, and attacked and acknowledged Xun between words, so Xun Xun requested retirement.

古文：承勋因求退，给事中王准等劾勋恣。乃敕责勋，而下清法司。
现代文：给事中王准等弹劾郭勋专横，世宗于是颁发敕文批评了郭勋，并把汤清交给法司处理。
English: Given the fact that Wang Jun and others arbitrarily impeached Guo Xun, Shizong then issued a letter of reprimand criticizing Guo Xun and handed Tang Qing over to the Legal Department.

古文：兵部尚书胡世宁致仕，诏承勋还部代之。
现代文：兵部尚书胡世宁退休后，世宗诏令承勋回兵部担任尚书。
English: After Hu Shining retired from the post of military secretary, King Sejong ordered him to return to the post of military secretary.

古文：疏言： 朝廷有大政及推举文武大臣，必下廷议。
现代文：他上书说 ：朝廷有大事或者是推选文武大臣，肯定要下达朝中议论。
English: He sent a letter saying, "If the Imperial Court has a major event or elects a minister of literature and armed forces, it must definitely issue a discussion between the DPRK and China."

古文：议者率相顾不发，拱手听。
现代文：但参加议论的人大多睁着眼睛，一语不发，拱着手听别人说话。
English: But most of the people who took part in the discussion kept their eyes open, did not utter a word, and listened to others with their hands folded.

古文：宜及未议前，备条所议，布告与议者，俾先谂其故，然后平心商质，各尽所怀。
现代文：建议在议论之前，由被荐人详述自己的主张，并公布给参加议论的大臣，让大家先熟悉个中缘由，然后在讨论时平心静气，商量辩论，都说出自己的想法。
English: It is suggested that before the discussion, the recommended person should detail his or her own ideas and announce them to the ministers participating in the discussion, so that everyone can first familiarize themselves with the reasons, and then calm down during the discussion, discuss and debate, and express their own ideas.

古文：议苟不合，听其别奏。
现代文：被荐人的主张如不称人意，允许他再作奏议。
English: If the proposer's proposal is unsatisfactory, he shall be allowed to make a further appeal.

古文：庶足尽诸臣之见，而所议者公。 
现代文：如此或许足能听到大臣们的各种意见，而推荐出来的人也出于公正了。 
English: This may be enough to hear the various opinions of ministers, and the person recommended is also out of fairness.

古文：帝然其言，下诏申饬。
现代文：世宗认为他说得对，下诏对此加以强调。
English: Sejong thought he was right, and the following edict emphasized this.

古文：寻命兼督团营。
现代文：不久又让他兼职督办团营。
English: Soon he was asked to supervise the camp on a part-time basis.

古文：言官攻张璁、桂萼党，并及承勋。承勋连章求退，帝复温旨答之。
现代文：谏官在攻击张璁、桂萼一伙人时连及承勋，承勋连章请求退休，世宗又以温和的口气下诏挽留。
English: The eunuchs attacked a group of people, including Zhang Xuan and Gui Cai, including Shilian and Cheng Xun. Cheng Xun requested retirement, but Shizong, in a gentle tone, asked him to stay.

古文：中官出镇者，率暴横。
现代文：当时宦官外出镇守的大多残暴、专横。
English: At that time, most eunuchs who went out to guard the town were cruel and tyrannical.

古文：承勋因谏官李凤毛等言，先后裁二十七人，又革锦衣官五百人，监局冒役数千人。
现代文：承勋根据谏官李凤毛等人的主张，先后裁汰了二十七个镇守宦官，又把五百名锦衣官予以革职，削减了几千名混在监局中的滥冒宦官。
English: According to the proposal of eunuch Li Fengmao and others, Cheng Xun successively dismissed 27 town guard eunuchs, dismissed 500 brocade eunuchs, and reduced several thousand profane eunuchs mixed in the supervisory bureau.

古文：独御马监未汰，复因给事中田秋奏，多所裁减。
现代文：只御马监没有撤除，又按着给事中田秋的奏议，多加裁减。
English: However, the superintendent was not removed, and more cuts were made in accordance with Nakata Aki's report.

古文：而请以腾骧四卫属部，核诡冒，制可。
现代文：然后又请把腾骧四卫改为部属，核查其中的假冒人员，世宗同意了。
English: Then, he asked Sejong to change Tsang Teng-soo to a subordinate to check for impostors. Sejong agreed.

古文：中官言曩彰义门破也先，东市剿曹贼，皆四卫功，以直内故易集，隶兵部不便。
现代文：有宦官说过去在彰义门打败也先，在东市消灭曹贼，都是四卫的功劳；四卫兵在内值勤容易集合，隶属兵部就多有不便了。
English: Some eunuchs said that in the past, it was the merit of the four guards to defeat Zhangyimen first, and to eliminate Cao Kuai in Dongshi; the four guards were easy to assemble on duty inside, and it was more inconvenient to belong to the military department.

古文：承勋言： 彰义门之战，祸由王振。东市作贼，即曹吉祥也。 
现代文：承勋说 ：彰义门战事的发生，祸害是由刘瑾引起的；在东市做盗贼的不是别人，而是曹吉祥。 
English: Cheng Xun said: the battle of Changyi Gate occurred, the disaster was caused by Liu Ye; the thief in Dongshi was none other than Cao Jixiang.

古文：帝卒从承勋议，归兵部。
现代文：世宗最终听了承勋的意见，把四卫改归兵部管辖。
English: In the end, Shizong listened to and accepted Xun's opinion, and transferred the four guards to the jurisdiction of the military department.

古文：寇犯大同，议遣大臣督兵。
现代文：盗贼侵犯大同时，朝廷决定派大臣外出督领军队。
English: At the same time that the thieves invaded the palace, the imperial court decided to send a minister out to lead the army.

古文：众推都御史王宪，宪不肯行。
现代文：大家推举都御史王宪，王宪不肯去。
English: Everyone nominated the Metropolitan Wang Xian, but Wang Xian refused to go.

古文：给事中夏言谓承勋曰： 事急，公当请行。 
现代文：给事中夏言对承勋说： 情况紧急，先生您该走一趟了。 
English: In the middle of the matter, Xia Yan said to Cheng Xun: The situation is urgent, sir, it's time for you to go.

古文：承勋竟不请。
现代文：承勋最终还是没有提出来。
English: In the end, however, Cheng Xun did not bring it up.

古文：给事中赵廷瑞并劾之。
现代文：给事中赵廷瑞上书批评王宪并说到承勋，正好敌人被打退了，此事不了了之。
English: During the incident, Zhao Tingrui wrote a letter criticizing Wang Xian and said about Cheng Xun, just as the enemy was repulsed, the matter could not be resolved.

古文：会寇退，罢。十年春，大风昼晦，帝忧边事。
现代文：嘉靖十年春天，刮起大风来，白天的天色也灰暗不明，世宗因此忧念边疆的事情。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of Jiajing, a strong wind blew, and the sky was gray and unclear during the day. As a result, Shizong was worried about the border.

古文：承勋言： 去岁冰合，敌骑尽入河套。
现代文：承勋建议说 ：去年黄河一结冰，敌人的骑兵就都到河套来骚扰。
English: Cheng Xun suggested, "Last year, as soon as the Yellow River froze over, the enemy's cavalry came to the river to harass us.

古文：延、宁、固原皆当警备。
现代文：我以为延、宁、固原都应当戒备。
English: I thought that Yan, Ning, and Gu Yuan should all be on the alert.

古文：甘肃军饷专仰河东，宜于兰州籴贮，以备缓急。
现代文：甘肃的军饷全靠河东供应，应在兰州设仓储粮，以备急用。
English: Gansu's army rations are entirely supplied by Hedong, and grain storage warehouses should be set up in Lanzhou for emergency use.

古文：曩河西患土鲁番，今亦卜喇又深入。
现代文：过去河西担心吐鲁番入侵，现在亦卜喇的人也敢深入进来。
English: In the past, the west of Hebei was worried about the invasion of Turpan, but now the Yibla people also dare to come in.

古文：两寇云扰，孤危益甚。
现代文：两股敌兵纷扰边疆，河西驻兵更显得势单力薄。
English: Two groups of enemy soldiers are disturbing the border, and the soldiers stationed in Hexi are even weaker.

古文：套寇出入，并经庄浪。急宜缮塞设险，断臂截踵，使不得相合。
现代文：我看敌人出入河套，都要经过庄浪，应在那里紧急设防，修缮城堡，以期切断战线，使两敌不得聚合一处。
English: I see that the enemy has to pass through Zhuanglang to enter and leave Hetao. It is necessary to urgently fortify and repair the castle there in order to cut off the front line and prevent the two enemies from gathering in one place.

古文：兀良哈最近京师，不善抚，即门庭寇。
现代文：兀良哈部离北京最近，不好自安抚，就将成为门庭之内的盗贼。
English: Haileybury is the closest to Beijing. If you can't placate yourself, you will become a thief in the courtyard.

古文：云南安凤之叛，军民困敝，临安、蒙自盗贼复兴，旷日淹时，恐酿大患。
现代文：另外云南安凤的叛乱已经弄得军民贫困了，临安、蒙自又出现了盗贼，假如旷日持久不能平定，恐怕将成为天下的大患啊。
English: In addition, the rebellion in Anfeng, Yunnan Province, has already made the military and civilians poor, and thieves have appeared in Lin'an and Mengzi. If it cannot be quelled for a long time, I am afraid it will become a big problem for the world.

古文：交阯世子流寓老挝，异日归命请援，或据地求封，皆未可测。
现代文：听说交趾的王太子亡命于老挝，以后如归顺我国，请求援助，或者占据领土求取封赏，这都还是不可预测的事。
English: I've heard that a close friend, the crown prince, died in Laos, and it's still unpredictable if he will surrender to our country, ask for assistance, or occupy territory to get a reward.

古文：惟急用人理财，俾边鄙无虞。 
现代文：现在只有选人理财，富我国家，才可指望边疆无事可忧。 
English: Now, only if we choose people to manage our finances and enrich our country, can we expect that there will be nothing to worry about at the border.

古文：帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：世宗高兴地听取了他的建议。
English: Emperor Wen approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：承勋沉毅有大略。
现代文：承勋为人沉着、坚强，胸有韬略。
English: Zheng Xun is a calm, strong person, with a clear mind.

古文：帝所信任，自辅臣外，独承勋与胡世宁，大事辄咨访。
现代文：世宗皇帝所信任的人中，除辅臣而外，只有承勋与胡世宁两个，每遇大事就向他们询问意见。
English: Among the people trusted by Emperor Sejong, except for his aides, there were only two people, Choe Son and Ho Sonin, whom he asked for advice in every major event.

古文：二人亦孜孜奉国，知无不言。
现代文：他们两个也孜孜不倦，辛劳国事，腹中所知，知无不言。
English: The two of them also work tirelessly, toil in state affairs, know what they know, and say what they know.

古文：世宁卒半岁，承勋亦卒，帝深嗟悼。赠少保，谥康惠。
现代文：世宁死后半年，承勋也去世了，世宗对他们的死深感惋惜、悼念，追赠少保，谥他为 康惠 。
English: Six months after Shining's death, Cheng Hun also passed away. Shizong deeply regretted and mourned their deaths, posthumously awarded him the title of Shao Bao, and named him Kang Hui.

古文：历官四十年，以廉节著。
现代文：生前赐给他的东西除规定外，还特别给他白金、彩币、稻米、菜蔬等物。
English: In addition to the provisions of what was given to him during his lifetime, he was also specially given platinum, colored coins, rice, vegetables and other items.

古文：子正国，南京刑部侍郎。
现代文：承勋做官四十年，家中却没有多余的钱财。他关于 大礼 的主张，也是和胡世宁相一致的。
English: Cheng Xun has been an official for forty years, but there is no extra money in his family. His idea of a grand gift is also consistent with that of Hu Shining.

古文：郑晓，字窒甫，海盐人。
现代文：郑晓，字窒甫，浙江海盐人。
English: Zheng Xiao, also known as Niu Fu, is a Zhejiang salt miner.

古文：嘉靖元年举乡试第一。明年成进士，授职方主事。
现代文：嘉靖元年考中乡试第一名，第二年中进士，做了职方主事。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, he won the first place in the junior high school examination, and in the second year, he was promoted to junior high school.

古文：日披故牍，尽知天下厄塞、士马虚实、强弱之数。
现代文：期间，他坚持天天披阅过去的文牍，得以通晓天下远塞近山及各地兵马的虚实、强弱。
English: During this period, he insisted on reading the past documents every day, so that he could be familiar with the reality and strength of the soldiers and horses in the mountains and around the world.

古文：尚书金献民属撰《九边图志》，人争传写之。
现代文：尚书金献民嘱托他编写《九边图志》，书成以后，人们争着抄写、传阅。
English: Shang Shujin Xianmin commissioned him to compile the "Nine-Sided Atlas," and after the book was completed, people competed to copy and distribute it.

古文：以争 大礼 廷杖。
现代文：因为 大礼 之争受到廷杖的刑罚。
English: He was punished by the imperial scepter because of the dispute over the grand salute.

古文：大同兵变，上疏极言不可赦。
现代文：大同兵变后，他上书极力论说不可赦免主犯。
English: After the Datong mutiny, he wrote a letter arguing that the main criminal should not be pardoned.

古文：张孚敬柄政，器之，欲改置翰林及言路，晓皆不应。
现代文：张孚敬掌权后器重他，想把他安排在翰林院和谏官的位置上，他都不予理睬。
English: After Zhang Fujing took power, he treated him with great respect and tried to place him in the position of Hanlin Academy and eunuch, but he ignored him.

古文：父忧，归，久之不起。
现代文：父亲死后他回家守丧，过后很长时间得不到起用。
English: After his father's death, he went home to mourn, and for a long time after that he couldn't get a job.

古文：许讃为吏部尚书，调之吏部。历考功郎中。
现代文：许瓒当时是礼部尚书，把他调入吏部，做考功郎中。
English: At that time, Xu Yao was a member of the etiquette department, and he was transferred to the personnel department to be a member of the examination committee.

古文：夏言罢相，帝恶言官不纠劾，诏考察去留。
现代文：夏言被罢相后，世宗恨谏官们没有纠举他，就命令吏部对他们加以考察，分别去留。
English: After Xia Yan was dismissed from his post, Shizong hated that the eunuchs did not pester him, so he ordered the officials to investigate them and stay separately.

古文：大学士严嵩因欲去所不悦者，而晓去乔佑等十三人，多嵩所厚。
现代文：大学士严嵩想借此排挤自己不喜欢的人，可是郑晓却拿掉了乔佑等十三个人，这些人大多和严嵩关系很好。
English: College student Yan Song wanted to use this to push out people he didn't like, but Zheng Xia took out Qiao You and thirteen other people, most of whom had a good relationship with Yan Song.

古文：嵩大憾晓，调文选。
现代文：严嵩这下很是恨他，就把他调入文选司。
English: Yan Song now hated him very much, so he transferred him to the Literature Selection Division.

古文：嵩欲用赵文华为考功，晓言于讃曰： 昔黄祯为文选，调李开先考功，皆山东人，诏不许。
现代文：严嵩想用赵文华来负责考功司，郑晓对许瓒说： 过去黄祯做文选，调李开先做考功，他们都是山东人，所以皇上不同意。
English: Yan Song wanted to use Zhao Wenhua to be in charge of the examination of gong. Zheng Xiao said to Xu Yao: In the past, Huang Yao did the selection of texts, and Li Qiankai did the examination of gong first. They were both from Shandong, so the emperor did not agree.

古文：今调文华，晓避位而已。 
现代文：现在调文华来，我就只好避开了。 
English: Now, with the change in tone, I had no choice but to avoid it.

古文：讃以谢嵩。
现代文：许瓒用这个理由谢绝了严嵩。
English: Xu Yao used this reason to refuse Yan Shuang.

古文：嵩欲以子世蕃为尚宝丞，晓曰： 治中迁知府，例也。迁尚宝丞，无故事。 
现代文：严嵩又想让他的儿子世蕃做尚宝丞，郑晓说： 治中升做知府，符合常例；升做尚宝丞，过去没这个先例。 
English: Yan Song also wanted his son Shijun to be Shang Baorong, Zheng Xiao said: to be promoted to prefectural governor in the middle of the reign is consistent with the usual practice; to be promoted to Shang Baorong, there was no such precedent in the past.

古文：嵩益怒。以推谪降官周鈇等，贬晓和州同知。
现代文：严嵩更加恼恨了，后来用郑晓举荐在贬官员周铁等人的名义，把他贬出去做和州同知。
English: Yan Song became even more angry. Later, he used Zheng Xiao's recommendation in the name of the demoted official Zhou Tie and others to demote him to be a state confidant.

古文：稍迁太仆丞，历南京太常卿。召拜刑部右侍郎。俄改兵部，兼副都御史总督漕运。
现代文：稍后郑晓升为太仆丞，经南京太常卿，又召入朝，做了刑部右侍郎，不久改调兵部，兼副都御史，负责总督漕运。
English: A little later, Zheng Xiaosheng was promoted to Daju Rong, and through the Nanjing Taizhongqing, he was also summoned to the imperial court, and became the right-hand man of the criminal department. He was soon transferred to the military department, and also the vice-governor of the capital, and was responsible for the governor of rowing.

古文：大江南北皆中倭，漕艘几阻。
现代文：当时大江南北都可以看到倭寇，漕运的船只几乎无法航行。
English: At that time, wako could be seen from the north to the south of the Yangtze River, and rowing boats could hardly sail.

古文：晓请发帑金数十万，造战舸，筑城堡，练兵将，积刍糗。
现代文：郑晓请拨发国库银数十万两，用以建造战舰，修筑城堡，操练兵将，收集粮草。
English: Zheng Xiao requested that several hundred thousand taels of treasury silver be allocated to build warships, construct castles, train soldiers, and collect grain and grass.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：世宗颁诏同意。
English: He complied.

古文：中国奸民利倭贿，多与通。通州人顾表者尤桀黠，为倭导。
现代文：中国的奸民得到倭寇的贿赂，很多人和倭寇相勾结，通州人顾表尤其残忍、狡黠，替倭寇充当指导。
English: The traitors in China were bribed by the wokou, and many people colluded with the wokou. The Tongzhou people were particularly cruel and cunning, and acted as guides for the wokou.

古文：以故营寨皆据要害，尽知官兵虚实。
现代文：因此倭寇的营地都位于要害地带，官兵的虚实也知之无余。
English: As a result, the wako's camps are all located in the critical zone, and the officers and soldiers are well aware of the truth.

古文：晓悬重赏捕戮之。
现代文：郑晓悬重赏抓住顾表并斩了他。
English: Zheng Xiao, with a heavy reward hanging over him, grabbed Gu Yaobang and beheaded him.

古文：募盐徒骁悍者为兵，增设泰州海防副使，筑瓜洲城，庙湾、麻洋、云梯诸海口皆增兵设堠。
现代文：招募勇猛强悍的盐客当兵，增设泰州海防副使，修筑了瓜洲城，并在庙湾、麻洋、云梯等出海口都增派驻兵，设立望台。
English: Recruited brave and powerful salt merchants as soldiers, added the deputy envoy of Taizhou Coastal Defense, built Guazhou City, and stationed more soldiers at the sea entrance such as Miao Bay, Ma Yang and Yuntai, and set up a lookout.

古文：遂破倭于通州，连败之如皋、海门，袭其军吕泗，围之狼山，前后斩首九百余。贼溃去。
现代文：就这样先在通州打败倭寇，又在如皋、海门连着获胜，在吕泗袭击他们之后，把倭寇围困在狼山，前后斩敌九百多，倭寇败逃而去。
English: In this way, he first defeated the wokou in Tongzhou, and then won consecutive victories in Rugao and Haimen. After Lv Ying attacked them, he besieged the wokou in Wolf Mountain, defeated more than nine hundred enemies, and the wokou fled in defeat.

古文：录功，再增秩，三赉银币。
现代文：论功后，郑晓又得到晋级，三次受到世宗赏赐的银币。
English: After the meritorious service, Zheng Xiao was promoted again, and received the silver coin awarded by the Sejong three times.

古文：时贼多中国人。
现代文：当时倭乱中有很多中国人参加。
English: At that time, many Chinese participated in the Japanese Rebellion.

古文：晓言： 武健才谞之徒。困无所逞，甘心作贼。
现代文：郑晓为此上书说： 勇武有谋的中国人，因为无所施展，所以才甘心作贼。
English: Zheng Xiao wrote a letter to this effect, saying: The brave and resourceful Chinese are only willing to be thieves because they have nothing to show for it.

古文：非国家广行网罗，使有出身之阶，恐有如孙恩、卢循辈出乎其间，祸滋大矣。
现代文：国家如果不对这些人广行网罗，让他们有出人头地的台阶，恐怕会有像孙恩、卢循那样的人从中冒出，那样祸就大了。
English: If the state does not widely pursue these people and let them have the steps to get ahead, I am afraid that people like Sun En and Lu Xun will emerge from them, and that would be a great disaster.

古文：洪武时倭寇近海州县。以高皇帝威灵，兼谋臣宿将，筑城练兵，经略数年，犹未乂安。
现代文：洪武时倭寇侵略到海州县，凭着高皇帝的声名，加上谋臣老将，修筑城墙，训练士兵，经营了几年，还没能平定下来。
English: At the time of Hongwu, the Japanese invaders invaded Haizhou County. With the high reputation of the emperor, plus the veteran advisers, they built city walls, trained soldiers, and operated for several years. They have not been able to settle down.

古文：乃招渔丁、岛人、盐徒、蜑户籍为水军至数万人，又遣使出海宣布威德。久之，倭始不为患。
现代文：后来招募渔户、岛民、盐客、户编成一支水军达几万人，又派使节过海到倭国宣示刑赏，很久以后，倭人才不敢来侵扰。
English: Later, fishermen, islanders, salt traders, and households were recruited to form a navy of tens of thousands of people, and envoys were sent across the sea to Japan to announce the punishment reward. After a long time, the Japanese people did not dare to intrude.

古文：今江北虽平，而风帆出没，倏忽千里。
现代文：现在长江以北虽然太平无事了，但是海面上船只往来，倏忽千里。
English: Although there is peace and tranquility north of the Yangtze River now, ships travel thousands of miles on the sea.

古文：倭恃华人为耳目，华人借倭为爪牙，非详为区画，后患未易弭也。 
现代文：倭寇依仗华人做他们的耳目，华人又仗着倭寇做自己的爪牙，不详加区分处理，后患可不容易消除啊。 
English: The wokou rely on the Chinese to be their eyes and ears, and the Chinese rely on the wokou to be their minions. Without a detailed distinction, it is not easy to eliminate the aftermath.

古文：帝颇采纳之。
现代文：世宗很是采纳了他一些意见。
English: Sejong was very receptive to some of his suggestions.

古文：寻召为吏部左侍郎，迁南京吏部尚书。
现代文：不久他被召还朝做了吏部左侍郎，又升为南京吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was called back to the imperial court to serve as the left-hand man of the cadre, and was promoted to the highest rank of the Nanjing cadre.

古文：帝以晓知兵，改右都御史协理戎政。寻拜刑部尚书。
现代文：世宗因为郑晓懂得军事，改用他做右都御史，协助办理军事，不久任命他为刑部尚书。
English: Because Zheng Xiao knew military affairs, Shizong used him as the imperial historian of the Right Capital to assist in military affairs, and soon appointed him as the secretary of the Department of Justice.

古文：俺答围大同右卫急，帝命兵部尚书杨博往督大师，乃以晓摄兵部。
现代文：俺答把大同右卫围困得很紧，世宗让兵部尚书杨博前去指挥大军作战，于是用郑晓代理兵部事务。
English: I replied that the siege of Datong U-guards was very tight, and Shizong asked Yang Bo Shangshu of the military department to go and command the large army to fight, so he used Zheng Xiao to represent the military affairs.

古文：晓言： 今兵事方棘，而所简听征京军三万五千人，乃令执役赴工，何以备战守？
现代文：郑晓上书说 ：现今军事问题正难办，可是挑选出来听候调遣的三五千京军士兵，竟然还命令他们出去服役打工，怎么进行战务呢？
English: Zheng Xiao wrote: Today's military problems are difficult to handle, but how can the 35,000 soldiers of the Beijing Army, who have been selected and are waiting for deployment, be ordered to go out to serve and work?

古文：乞归之营伍。 
现代文：请调他们归队！ 
English: Please bring them back to the team!

古文：帝立从之。
现代文：世宗即刻听用了他的意见。
English: The emperor immediately obeyed.

古文：寻还视刑部事。
现代文：不久他又回去办理刑部的事务。
English: Soon he went back to deal with the affairs of the criminal department.

古文：严嵩势益炽。
现代文：那时严嵩的权势更加炙手可热。
English: At that time, Yan Song's power was even hotter.

古文：晓素不善嵩。
现代文：郑晓一向不喜欢严嵩这个人。
English: Zheng Xiao has always disliked Yan Song.

古文：而其时大狱如总督王忬以失律，中允郭希颜以言事，晓并予轻比，嵩则置重典。
现代文：那时候的一些大案如总督王忄予因办案不当，中允郭希颜因论事谬误，郑晓一并从轻判案，严嵩却援用重典。
English: Some major cases at that time, such as Governor Wang Shiyu because of improper handling of the case, Zhong Yun Guo Xiyan because of the fallacy of the argument, Zheng Xiao Yi and the light sentence, Yan Song but invoked the heavy text.

古文：南都叛卒周山等杀侍郎黄懋官，海寇汪直通倭为乱，晓置重典，嵩故宽假之。
现代文：南京造反士卒周山等人杀死侍郎黄懋官，海盗汪直勾结倭寇作乱，郑晓援用重典，严嵩却有意对他们宽大处理。
English: The Nanjing rebel Zhou Shan and others killed the steward Huang Xuanlu, the pirate Wang Zhi colluded with the wokou to create chaos, Zheng Xiao invoked the heavy text, but Yan Song intentionally dealt with them leniently.

古文：惟巡抚阮鹗、总督杨顺、御史路楷，以嵩曲庇，晓不能尽法，议者讥其失出云。
现代文：只有巡抚阮鹗、总督杨顺、御史路楷数案，因为严嵩曲意庇护，郑晓不能完全绳之以法，所以议论者说他断案时罪重罚轻，不合律令。
English: Only in the cases of Governor Nguyen Xuan, Governor Yang Shun, and Minister of History Lu Kai, because Zheng Xiao could not be fully brought to justice due to the protection of strictness, so the commentator said that when he decided the case, the crime was light and the punishment was not in accordance with the law.

古文：故事，在京军民讼，俱投牒通政司送法司问断。
现代文：按照先前的事例，在北京的军民诉讼，都呈递状纸给通政司然后送法司审讯、判决。
English: According to previous cases, military and civilian lawsuits in Beijing are all submitted on paper to the Ministry of Communications and then sent to the Ministry of Justice for trial and judgment.

古文：诸司有应鞫者，亦参送法司，无自决遣者。
现代文：各个部门有应加审讯的犯人，也要向上送交法司办理，没有自行判决、发落的。
English: If there are prisoners in various departments who should be tried, they should also be sent up to the Legal Department for handling, and they should not be sentenced or sent down on their own.

古文：后诸司不复遵守，狱讼纷拿。
现代文：后来各个部门不再遵守成规，办起案来纷纷攘攘。
English: Later, various departments no longer complied with the established rules, and cases were filed one after another.

古文：晓奏循故事，帝报许，于是刑部间捕囚畿府。
现代文：郑晓上书请照先前成规进行，世宗同意了，于是刑部有时也在京郊的府县逮捕犯人。
English: Zheng Xiao asked that the letter be submitted according to the previously established rules. Shizong agreed, so the criminal department sometimes arrested prisoners in prefectures outside Beijing.

古文：而巡按御史郑存仁谓讼当自下而上，檄州县，法司有追取，毋辄发。
现代文：而巡按御史郑存仁认为诉讼应当从下向上，所以传令州县官吏，法司要追拿的犯人，不要轻易交出。
English: Zheng Cunren, the inspecting magistrate, believed that the lawsuit should start from the bottom up, so he ordered the state and county officials and the legal department not to hand over the criminals they wanted to catch.

古文：晓闻，率侍郎赵大祐、傅颐守故事争，存仁亦据律执奏。
现代文：郑晓听说后，领着侍郎赵大、傅颐按着先前的成规向皇帝争取，存仁也根据律令递了奏章。
English: After hearing this, Zheng Xiao and his attendants, Zhao Da and Fu Jun, followed the previous rules to win the emperor's favor. Cunren also submitted a report according to the rules.

古文：章俱下都察院会刑科平议。
现代文：他们的奏章都被发放给都察院会同刑科评议。
English: All of their reports were sent to the Duza Academy for review by the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：议未上，晓疏辨。
现代文：都察院的决议还没有报上去，郑晓又上书为自己辩护。
English: The resolution of the Municipal People's Procuratorate has not yet been reported, and Zheng Xiao has sent a letter to defend himself.

古文：嵩激帝怒切让，遂落晓职，两侍郎亦贬二秩。
现代文：严嵩借此鼓动世宗的火气，使世宗严厉批评了郑晓，然后罢了他的官，两个侍郎也被贬了两级。
English: Yan Song took advantage of this to stir up the fire of Shizong, so that Shizong severely criticized Zheng Xiao, and then dismissed his official, and two attendants were also demoted two levels.

古文：晓通经术，习国家典故，时望蔚然。
现代文：郑晓通达经术，熟悉国家的典章制度，当时声望很高。
English: Zheng Xiao was well-versed in Chinese classics, familiar with the country's legal system, and had a high reputation at the time.

古文：为权贵所扼，志不尽行。
现代文：但是被权贵压制，他无法完全实现自己的抱负。
English: But, stifled by the powerful, he was unable to fully realise his ambitions.

古文：既归，角巾布衣与乡里父老游处，见者不知其贵人也。
现代文：回乡以后，他戴着棱形头巾，穿上平民百姓的服装，和家乡的父老交游，碰上他的人并不知道他原本是达官贵人。
English: After returning to his hometown, he wore a rectangular headscarf, put on the clothes of ordinary people, and traveled with his parents in his hometown. People who met him did not know that he was originally a dignitary.

古文：既卒，子履淳等讼晓御倭功于朝，诏复职。
现代文：他死后，他的儿子郑履淳等向朝廷申诉他抗击倭寇的功绩，皇上下诏恢复了他的官职。
English: After his death, his son Zheng Lushun and others complained to the imperial court about his achievements in fighting against the Japanese invaders, and the emperor restored his official position by imperial edict.

古文：隆庆初，赠太子少保，谥端简。
现代文：隆庆初，追赠太子少保，谥端简。
English: At the beginning of the Long Qing Dynasty, the young prince was posthumously awarded the title of Junior Protector, 端简.

