古文：郭嘉孙策既尽有江东，转斗千里，闻曹公与袁绍相持官渡，将议袭许。
现代文：原文三国时，孙策占领整个江东地区之后，遂有争霸天下的雄心，听说曹操和袁绍在官渡相持不下，就打算攻打许都。
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, after Sun Tse occupied the entire eastern Jiangsu region, he had the ambition to dominate the world. Hearing that Cao Cao and Yuan Shao could not hold on to each other in Guandu, he planned to attack Xu Du.

古文：众闻之，皆惧。郭嘉独曰： 策新并江东，所诛皆英杰，能得人死力者也。
现代文：曹操部属听了都很害怕，只有郭嘉说： 孙策刚刚并合了整个江东，诛杀了许多原本割据当地的英雄豪杰，而这些人其实都是能让人为他拚命的人物，这些人的手下对他一定恨之入骨。
English: Cao Cao's subordinates were all afraid when they heard this, only Guo Jia said: Sun Ce has just merged the entire East River and killed many local heroes who were originally isolated. These people are actually people who can make people fight for him. These people's subordinates must hate him to the bone.

古文：然策轻而无备，虽有百万众，无异于独行中原。
现代文：孙策本身的性格又轻率，对自己的安全一向不怎么戒备。虽有百万大军在手，和孤身一人处身野外其实没什么两样。
English: Sun Ce's own personality is reckless, and he has never been very wary of his own safety. Although he has a million-strong army at hand, it's actually no different from being alone in the field.

古文：若刺客伏起，一人之敌耳。
现代文：若有埋伏的刺客突然而出，一个人就可以对付他。
English: If an ambushed assassin suddenly comes out, one man can deal with him.

古文：以吾观之，必死于匹夫之手。 
现代文：依我看，他一定死在刺客手中。 
English: In my opinion, he must have died at the hands of assassins.

古文：虞翻亦以策好驰骋游猎，谏曰： 明府用乌集之众，驱散附之士，皆能得其死力，此汉高之略也。
现代文：虞翻也因为孙策爱好驰骋打猎，劝孙策说： 即使是一些残兵败将、乌合之众，在您指挥之下，都能立刻成为拼死作战的雄兵，这方面的能力您并不下于汉高祖刘邦。
English: Because of Sun Ce's love of galloping and hunting, Gu Fu also advised Sun Ce: "Even some of the defeated soldiers and the rabble, under your command, can immediately become soldiers who fight to the death. In this regard, your ability is not inferior to Liu Bang, the founder of the Han Dynasty."

古文：至于轻出微行，吏卒尝忧之。
现代文：但是您常私下外出，大家都非常担忧。
English: But you often go out privately, and everyone is very worried.

古文：夫白龙鱼服，困于豫且；白蛇自放，刘季害之。
现代文：尊贵的白龙做大鱼游于海中，渔夫豫且就能捉住它，白蛇挡路，刘邦一剑就把它杀了。
English: The noble white dragon swam in the sea as a big fish, and the fisherman could catch it without hesitation. The white snake blocked the way, and Liu Bang killed it with a single sword.

古文：愿少留意。 
现代文：希望您稍微留意一些。 
English: I hope you'll pay a little more attention.

古文：策曰： 君言是也! 
现代文：孙策说： 你的话很对。 
English: Sun Ce said: Your words are right.

古文：然终不能悛，至是临江未济，果为许贡家客所杀。
现代文：然而毛病还是改不掉，所以军队还没有渡江，就被许贡的家客所杀。
English: However, the problem could not be fixed, so the troops had not yet crossed the river when they were killed by Xu Gong's guests.

古文：孙伯符不死，曹瞒不安枕矣。天意三分，何预人事？
现代文：孙策不死，曹操就不能安枕，这或许是天意要三分天下吧？
English: If Sun Ce doesn't die, Cao Cao won't be able to rest. Maybe it's God's will to divide the world into three parts?

