古文：周纪一
现代文：周纪一
English: Zhou Jiyi

古文：威烈王
现代文：周威烈王
English: King Zhou Weili

古文：二十三年初命晋大夫魏斯、赵籍、韩虔为诸侯。
现代文：二十三年戊寅，周威烈王姬午初次分封晋国大夫魏斯、赵籍、韩虔为诸侯国君。
English: In the 23rd year of Wu Yin, Zhou Weili Wang Qigong for the first time appointed the governor of Jin Province, Wei Si, Zhao Qi, and Han Qian as princes.

古文：臣光曰：臣闻天子之职莫大于礼，礼莫大于分，分莫大于名。
现代文：臣司马光说：我认为，天子的职责中最重要的是守护礼制，守护礼制中最重要的是区分地位，区分地位中最重要的是匡正名分。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: I believe that the most important of the duties of the heavenly son is to guard the ritual system, the most important of the guarding ritual system is to distinguish the status, and the most important of the distinguishing status is to correct the name.

古文：何谓礼？
现代文：什么是礼呢？
English: What is a salutation?

古文：纪纲是也；何谓分？
现代文：就是朝廷的纲纪。什么是区分地位？
English: It is the discipline of the imperial court. What is the distinguishing status?

古文：君臣是也；何谓名？
现代文：就是君臣有别。什么是名分？
English: That is, there is a difference between a prince and a minister. What is a title?

古文：公、侯、卿、大夫是也。
现代文：就是公、侯、卿、大夫等官爵。
English: That is, dukes, lords, lords, doctors and other officials.

古文：夫以四海之广，兆民之众，受制于一人，虽有绝伦之力，高世之智，莫敢不奔走而服役者，岂非以礼为之纲纪哉！
现代文：以四海之内这样广大的疆土，以天下亿兆这样众多的人民，大家情愿受制于天子一人，虽然其中有才能超群、智慧绝伦的人，也没有不在天子足下为他奔走服务的，这难道不是以礼作为礼纪朝纲的作用吗？
English: With such a vast territory within the four seas, with such a large number of people in the billions and trillions of the world, everyone is willing to be subject to the Son of Heaven alone. Although there are people with extraordinary talent and wisdom, there is no one who does not run to serve the Son of Heaven. Isn't this the role of etiquette as the etiquette?

古文：是故天子统三公，三公率诸侯，诸侯制卿大夫，卿大夫治士庶人。
现代文：所以，天子统率三公，三公督率诸侯国君，诸侯国君节制卿、大夫官员，卿、大夫官员又治理百姓。
English: Therefore, the heavenly son leads the three princes, the three princes lead the princes of the provinces, the princes of the provinces control the lords and doctors, and the lords and doctors govern the people.

古文：贵以临贱，贱以承贵。
现代文：权贵指挥在下位的百姓，百姓服从权贵。
English: The dignitaries command the people below, and the people obey the dignitaries.

古文：上之使下，犹心腹之运手足，根本之制支叶；下之事上，犹手足之卫心腹，支叶之庇本根。然后能上下相保而国家治安。
现代文：上层指挥下层就好像人的心腹控制四肢行动，又如树木的根干控制枝叶；下层服侍上层就好像人的四肢保护心腹，树木的枝和叶遮护根和干，这样才能上下层互相保护，从而使国家长治久安。
English: The upper level directs the lower level as if the human heart and abdomen control the movements of the limbs, and as if the root of the tree controls the branches and leaves; the lower level serves the upper level as if the human limbs protect the heart and abdomen, and the branches and leaves of the tree protect the roots and trunk. In this way, the upper and lower levels can protect each other, so that the country can enjoy long-term stability.

古文：故曰：天子之职莫大于礼也。
现代文：所以说，天子的职责没有比维护礼制更重要的了。
English: Therefore, there is no more important duty of a heavenly son than the maintenance of etiquette.

古文：文王序《易》，以乾坤为首。
现代文：周文王演绎排列《易经》，以乾、坤为首位。
English: Zhou Wenwang interpreted and arranged the "I Ching," with Qian and Kun at the top.

古文：孔子系之曰： 天尊地卑，乾坤定矣，卑高以陈，贵贱位矣。 
现代文：孔子在《系辞传》中解释说： 天尊贵，地卑微，于是乾坤的次序排列得到了确定。
English: Confucius explained in the Analects of Confucius: Heaven is noble and earth is humble, so the order of things was determined.

古文：言君臣之位，犹天地之不可易也。
现代文：由低至高排列有序，于是万物贵贱的地位便大明于世了。 这是说君主和臣子之间的上下关系就像天和地一样不能互易。
English: From the lowest to the highest, they are arranged in an orderly manner, so that the nobility and lowliness of all things are very clear to the world.This means that the relationship between the monarch and the courtiers is like heaven and earth, and cannot be reciprocated.

古文：《春秋》抑诸侯，尊周室，王人虽微，序于诸侯之上，以是见圣人于君臣之际，未尝不惓惓也。
现代文：《春秋》一书的主旨是贬低诸侯，保持周王室的地位，尽管周王室的官吏地位不高，孔子在《春秋》中还把他们排在各国诸侯之上，由此可见孔圣人对于君臣关系的关注。
English: The main purpose of the book "Spring and Autumn" is to disparage the princes and maintain the status of the Zhou royal family. Although the officials of the Zhou royal family do not have a high status, Confucius also ranked them above the princes of various countries in "Spring and Autumn." This shows the concern of Kong sage for the relationship between monarchs and subjects.

古文：非有桀、纣之暴，汤、武之仁，人归之，天命之，君臣之分，当守节伏死而已矣。
现代文：如果不是夏桀、商纣那样的暴虐昏君，对手又遇上商汤、周武王这样的仁德明主，使人民归心、上天赐命的话，君臣之间的名分只能是作臣子的恪守臣节，矢死不渝。
English: If it were not for the tyrannical dim-witted princes such as Xia Yao and Shang Yao, and the benevolent and enlightened rulers such as Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu, who made the people come to their senses and gave their lives to God, then the only distinction between the princes and the subjects would be that the princes and the subjects would abide by the festival of the vassals, and they would stick to it to the death.

古文：是故以微子而代纣，则成汤配天矣；以季札而君吴，则太伯血食矣。
现代文：所以如果商朝立贤明的微子为国君来取代纣王，成汤创立的商朝就可以永配上天；而吴国如果以仁德的季札做君主，开国之君太伯也可以永享祭祀。
English: Therefore, if the Shang Dynasty set up a wise minor son as the sovereign to replace King Gong, the Shang Dynasty founded by Cheng Tang could go to heaven forever; and if the State of Wu made the benevolent Ji Zi as the monarch, the founding prince could also enjoy the sacrifice forever.

古文：然二子宁亡国而不为者，诚以礼之大节不可乱也。
现代文：然而微子、季札二人宁肯国家灭亡也不愿做君主，实在是因为礼教的大节绝不可因此破坏。
English: However, the two of them would rather see the country perish than become monarchs, because the great festival of etiquette must not be destroyed.

古文：故曰：礼莫大于分也。
现代文：所以说，礼教中最重要的就是地位高下的区分。
English: Therefore, the most important thing in etiquette is the distinction between high and low status.

古文：夫礼，辨贵贱，序亲疏，裁群物，制庶事。
现代文：礼的作用，在于分辨贵贱，排比亲疏，裁制万物，处理日常事物。
English: The function of etiquette is to distinguish between the high and the low, to classify relatives and strangers, to regulate all things, and to deal with everyday matters.

古文：非名不著，非器不形。
现代文：没有名分，礼就得不到彰显；没有器物，礼就得不到体现。
English: If there is no title, the courtesy will not be highlighted; if there is no object, the courtesy will not be reflected.

古文：名以命之，器以别之，然后上下粲然有伦，此礼之大经也。
现代文：只有用名位来分别称呼，用器物来分别标志，这样以后上下才能井然有序。这就是礼教的根本所在。
English: Only by using proper names to call each other, and using utensils to mark each other, can the top and bottom be in order. This is the essence of etiquette.

古文：名器既亡，则礼安得独在哉？
现代文：如果名位、器物都没有了，那么礼教又怎么能单独存在呢！
English: If the name, rank, and possessions are gone, then how can etiquette exist on its own?

古文：昔仲叔于奚有功于卫，辞邑而请繁缨，孔子以为不如多与之邑。
现代文：当年仲叔于奚为卫国家立了大功，他谢绝了赏赐的封地，却请求允许他享用贵族才应有的马饰。
English: At that time, Uncle Zhong made a great contribution to the defense of the country. He declined the reward of the fief, but requested that he be allowed to enjoy the horse ornaments that only aristocrats should have.

古文：惟名与器，不可以假人，君之所司也。政亡，则国家从之。
现代文：孔子认为不如多赏赐他一些封地，惟独名位和器物，绝不能假与他人，这是君王的职权象征；处理政事不坚持原则，国家也就会随着走向危亡。
English: Confucius thought that it would be better to reward him with more fiefs, but only titles and utensils, and must not be false to others, which is a symbol of the authority of the monarch; if he does not adhere to the principle of dealing with political affairs, the country will also be in danger.

古文：卫君待孔子而为政，孔子欲先正名，以为名不正则民无所措手足。
现代文：卫国国君期待孔子为他处理政事，孔子却先要确立名位，认为名位不正则百姓无所是从。
English: Emperor Heiguo expected Confucius to handle political affairs for him, but Confucius wanted to establish a position first, believing that if the position was not right, the people would not follow.

古文：夫繁缨，小物也，而孔子惜之；正名，细务也，而孔子先之。诚以名器既乱，则上下无以相保故也。
现代文：马饰，是一种小器物，而孔子却珍惜它的价值；正名位，是一件小事情，而孔子却要先从它做起，就是因为名位、器物一紊乱，国家上下就无法相安互保。
English: Horse ornaments are a kind of small utensils, but Confucius cherished their value; the rightful place is a small thing, but Confucius had to start with it first. It is because the rightful place and the utensils are disordered that the country is unable to keep each other safe.

古文：夫事未有不生于微而成于著。圣人之虑远，故能谨其微而治之；众人之识近，故必待其著而后救之。
现代文：没有一件事情不是从微小之处产生而逐渐发展显著的，圣贤考虑久远，所以能够谨慎对待微小的变故及时予以处理；常人见识短浅，所以必等弊端闹大才来设法挽救。
English: There is not a single thing that does not arise from a small place and gradually develop into a significant one. The sages have thought about it for a long time, so they can treat the small changes with caution and deal with them in a timely manner. Ordinary people are short-sighted, so they must wait for the drawbacks to make a big fuss before trying to save them.

古文：治其微，则用力寡而功多；救其著，则竭力而不能及也。
现代文：矫正初起的小错，用力小而收效大；挽救已明显的大害，往往是竭尽了全力也不能成功。
English: To correct a small mistake at the beginning, the effort is small but the result is great; to save a great harm that has already become obvious, it is often not possible to succeed with all one's might.

古文：《易》曰： 履霜，坚冰至 ，《书》曰： 一日二日万几 ，谓此类也。故曰：分莫大于名也。
现代文：所以说，区分地位高下最重要的是匡正各个等级的名分。
English: Therefore, the most important thing in distinguishing between high and low status is to correct the rank of each level.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：幽、厉失德，周道日衰，纲纪散坏，下陵上替，诸侯专征，大夫擅政。礼之大体，什丧七八矣。
现代文：周幽王、周厉王丧失君德，周朝的气数每况愈下。礼纪朝纲土崩瓦解；下欺凌、上衰败；诸侯国君恣意征讨他人；士大夫擅自干预朝政；礼教从总体上已经有十之七八沦丧了。
English: Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang lost their propriety, and the morale of the Zhou Dynasty became worse and worse. The etiquette and discipline system collapsed; the lower echelon bullied and the upper echelon decayed; princes and sovereigns arbitrarily solicited others; magistrates interfered in court politics without authorization; and, overall, the etiquette and discipline system had lost seven-eighths of its power.

古文：然文、武之祀犹绵绵相属者，盖以周之子孙尚能守其名分故也。
现代文：然而周文王、周武王开创的政权还能绵绵不断地延续下来，就是因为周王朝的子孙后裔尚能守定名位。为什么这样说呢？
English: However, the political power created by King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu can continue to exist, because the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants.

古文：何以言之？昔晋文公有大功于王室，请隧于襄王，襄王不许，曰： 王章也。
现代文：当年晋文公为周朝建立了大功，于是向周襄王请求允许他死后享用王室的隧葬礼制，周襄王没有准许，说： 周王制度明显。
English: At that time, Prince Jinwen established great achievements for the Zhou Dynasty, so he asked King Zhou Xiang to allow him to enjoy the royal tunnel funeral system after his death. King Zhou Xiang did not give permission, saying: The Zhou system is obvious.

古文：未有代德而有二王，亦叔父之所恶也。
现代文：没有改朝换代而有两个天子，这也是作为叔父辈的晋文公您所反对的。
English: He has not yet replaced the behavior of Zhou Miao with two heavenly sons, which is also detested by his uncle.

古文：不然，叔父有地而隧，又何请焉！ 
现代文：不然的话，叔父您有地，愿意隧葬，又何必请示我呢？ 
English: Otherwise, your uncle has land and is willing to be buried in a tunnel, so why do you need to ask me?

古文：文公于是乎惧而不敢违。
现代文：晋文公于是感到畏惧而没有敢违反礼制。
English: Jinwen thus felt intimidated and did not dare to violate the etiquette.

古文：是故以周之地则不大于曹、滕，以周之民则不众于邾、莒，然历数百年，宗主天下，虽以晋、楚、齐、秦之强，不敢加者，何哉？
现代文：因此，周王室的地盘并不比曹国、滕国大，管辖的臣民也不比邾国、莒国多，然而经过几百年，仍然是天下的宗主，即使是晋、楚、齐、秦那样的强国也还不敢凌驾于其上，这是为什么呢？
English: Therefore, the territory of the Zhou royal family is not larger than that of Cao and Teng, and the subjects under its jurisdiction are not more than that of Yao and Yao. However, after hundreds of years, it is still the sovereign of the world. Even the powerful countries such as Jin, Chu, Qi and Qin do not dare to surpass it. Why is this?

古文：徒以名分尚存故也。
现代文：只是由于周王还保有天子的名分。
English: It is only because King Zhou still retains the title of the son of Heaven.

古文：至于季氏之于鲁，田常之于齐，白公之于楚，智伯之于晋，其势皆足以逐君而自为，然而卒不敢者，岂其力不足而心不忍哉？
现代文：再看看鲁国的大夫季氏、齐国的田常、楚国的白公胜、晋国的智伯，他们的势力都大得足以驱逐国君而自立，然而他们到底不敢这样做，难道是他们力量不足或是于心不忍吗？
English: Let's look again at Lu's Dr. Ji, Qi's Tian Chang, Chu's Bai Gongsheng, and Jin's Zhibo. Their power is great enough to expel the sovereign and become independent. However, they do not dare to do so. Is it because of their lack of strength or impatience?

古文：乃畏奸名犯分而天下共诛之也。
现代文：只不过是害怕奸夺名位僭犯身分而招致天下的讨伐罢了。
English: It's just that they are afraid of becoming famous criminals, which has led to a worldwide crusade.

古文：今晋大夫暴蔑其君，剖分晋国，天子既不能讨，又宠秩之，使列于诸侯，是区区之名分复不能守而并弃之也。
现代文：现在晋国的三家大夫欺凌蔑视国君，瓜分了晋国，作为天子的周王不能派兵征讨，反而对他们加封赐爵，让他们列位于诸侯国君之中，这样做就使周王朝仅有的一点名分不能再守定而全部放弃了。
English: Now, the three doctors of Jin have bullied and despised the sovereigns, and divided Jin. As the son of heaven, King Zhou could not send troops to collect, but instead gave them titles and knighthoods, allowing them to be listed among the princes and sovereigns. In doing so, the only point of the Zhou dynasty could no longer be kept and was completely abandoned.

古文：先王之礼于斯尽矣。
现代文：周朝先王的礼教到此丧失干净！
English: The etiquette of the last king of the Zhou Dynasty has lost its purity!

古文：或者以为当是之时，周室微弱，三晋强盛，虽欲勿许，其可得乎？
现代文：有人认为当时周王室已经衰微，而晋国三家力量强盛，就算周王不想承认他们，又怎么能做得到呢！
English: Some people think that the Zhou royal family had already declined at that time, while the three powerful families of Jin were strong. Even if King Zhou did not want to recognize them, how could he do it?

古文：是大不然。
现代文：这种说法是完全错误的。
English: This is completely untrue.

古文：夫三晋虽强，苟不顾天下之诛而犯义侵礼，则不请于天子而自立矣。
现代文：晋国三家虽然强悍，但他们如果打算不顾天下的指责而公然侵犯礼义的话，就不会来请求周天子的批准，而是去自立为君了。
English: Although the three dynasties of Jin were powerful, if they intended to openly violate etiquette in spite of the world's criticism, they would not come to ask for Zhou Tianzi's approval, but to stand up for themselves.

古文：不请于天子而自立，则为悖逆之臣。天下苟有桓、文之君，必奉礼义而征之。
现代文：不向天子请封而自立为国君，那就是叛逆之臣，天下如果有像齐桓公、晋文公那样的贤德诸侯，一定会尊奉礼义对他们进行征讨。
English: It is a traitorous vassal to become the sovereign without asking the heavenly son for a seal. If there are virtuous lords like Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen in the world, they will certainly be investigated with respect and courtesy.

古文：今请于天子而天子许之，是受天子之命而为诸侯也，谁得而讨之！
现代文：现在晋国三家向天子请封，天子又批准了。他们就是奉天子命令而成为诸侯的，谁又能对他们加以讨伐呢！
English: Now, the three families of the Jin Dynasty have petitioned the heavenly son for a seal, and the heavenly son has approved it. They became lords by the order of the heavenly son. Who can fight against them?

古文：故三晋之列于诸侯，非三晋之坏礼，乃天子自坏之也。呜呼！
现代文：所以晋国三家大夫成为诸侯，并不是晋国三家破坏了礼教，正是周天子自已破坏了周朝的礼教啊！呜呼！
English: Therefore, when the three doctors of Jin became princes, it was not the three doctors of Jin who destroyed etiquette. It was Zhou Tianzi himself who destroyed the etiquette of the Zhou Dynasty! Alas!

古文：君臣之礼既坏矣，则天下以智力相雄长，遂使圣贤之后为诸侯者，社稷无不泯绝，生民之类糜灭几尽，岂不哀哉！
现代文：君臣之间的礼纪既然崩坏，于是天下便开始以智慧、武力互相争雄，使当年受周先王分封而成为诸侯国君的圣贤后裔，江山相继沦亡，周朝先民的子孙灭亡殆尽，岂不哀伤！
English: Since the etiquette between princes and ministers has broken down, the world has begun to compete with each other in wisdom and force, so that the descendants of the sages who became princes and sovereigns when they were divided by King Zhou, the country has fallen one after another, and the descendants of the ancestors of the Zhou Dynasty have all perished. Isn't it sad!

古文：初，智宣子将以瑶为后。智果曰： 不如宵也。
现代文：当初，晋国的智宣子想以智瑶为继承人，族人智果说： 他不如智宵。
English: At first, Zhisheng's son in Jin Province wanted to make Zhisheng the heir, and the tribesman Zhigao said: He is not as good as Zhiyou.

古文：瑶之贤于人者五，其不逮者一也。
现代文：智瑶有超越他人的五项长处，只有一项短处。
English: There are five areas where Zhisheng is better than others, but it is not as good as others.

古文：美鬓长大则贤，射御足力则贤，伎艺毕给则贤，巧文辩慧则贤，强毅果敢则贤，如是而甚不仁。
现代文：美发高大是长处，精于骑射是长处，才艺双全是长处，能写善辩是长处，坚毅果敢是长处。虽然如此却很不仁厚。
English: Having beautiful hair and being tall is an advantage, being good at riding and shooting is an advantage, being talented at both is an advantage, being able to write and argue well is an advantage, and being strong and courageous is an advantage. Despite this, they are very unkind.

古文：夫以其五贤陵人，而以不仁行之，其谁能待之？
现代文：如果他以五项长处来制服别人而做不仁不义的恶事，谁能和他和睦相处？
English: If he subdues others with his five strengths and does the most cruel and unjust evil, who can get along with him?

古文：若果立瑶也，智宗必灭。 
现代文：要是真的立智瑶为继承人，那么智氏宗族一定灭亡。 
English: If they really make Zhisheng the heir, the Zhi family will inevitably perish.

古文：弗听，智果别族于太史为辅氏。
现代文：智宣子置之不理。智果便向太史请求脱离智族姓氏，另立为辅氏。
English: Chigo ignored this, and Chigo then asked Taishi to abandon the Chizoku family name and establish a subsidiary family name.

古文：赵简子之子，长曰伯鲁，幼曰无恤。
现代文：赵国的大夫赵简子的儿子，长子叫伯鲁，幼子叫无恤。
English: He is the son of Zhao Jianzi, a doctor in Zhao Guo. His eldest son is called Bulu, and his youngest son is called Wuhong.

古文：将置后，不知所立。乃书训戒之辞于二简，以授二子曰： 谨识之。 
现代文：赵简子想确定继承人，不知立哪位好，于是把他的日常训诫言词写在两块竹简上，分别交给两个儿子，嘱咐说： 好好记住！ 
English: Zhao Jianzi wanted to determine the successor, and did not know who to appoint, so he wrote his daily exhortation on two pieces of bamboo and handed it to his two sons, saying: Remember!

古文：三年而问之，伯鲁不能举其辞，求其简，已失之矣。
现代文：过了三年，赵简子问起两个儿子，大儿子伯鲁说不出竹简上的话；再问他的竹简，已丢失了。
English: Three years later, Zhao Jianzi asked about his two sons. The eldest son, Bulu, could not say the words on the bamboo cutter. When he asked again, his bamboo cutter was lost.

古文：问无恤，诵其辞甚习，求其简，出诸袖中而奏之。
现代文：又问小儿子无恤，竟然背诵竹简训词很熟习；追问竹简，他便从袖子中取出献上。
English: He also asked his youngest son, who was so inexperienced that he was able to recite the precepts of the Bamboo Sutra very well. When asked about the Bamboo Sutra, he took it out of his sleeve and presented it.

古文：于是简子以无恤为贤，立以为后。
现代文：于是，赵简子认为无恤十分贤德，便立他为继承人。
English: As a result, Zhao Jianzi considered Wu Bei to be very virtuous and appointed him as his successor.

古文：简子使尹铎为晋阳。请曰： 以为茧丝乎？抑为保障乎？ 
现代文：赵简子派尹铎去晋阳，临行前尹铎请示说： 您是打算让我去抽丝剥茧般地搜刮财富呢，还是作为保障之地？ 
English: Zhao Jianzi sent Yin Qi to Jinyang. Before leaving, Yin Qi asked: "Are you going to let me go and search for wealth like a pickpocket, or as a place of protection?"

古文：简子曰： 保障哉！ 
现代文：赵简子说： 作为保障。 
English: Zhao Jianzi said: As a guarantee.

古文：尹铎损其户数。
现代文：尹铎便少算居民户数，减轻赋税。
English: Yin Qi then reduced the number of household taxes.

古文：简子谓无恤曰： 晋国有难，而无以尹铎为少，无以晋阳为远，必以为归。 及智宣子卒，智襄子为政，与韩康子、魏桓子宴于蓝台。
现代文：赵简子又对儿子赵无恤说： 一旦晋国发生危难，你不要嫌尹铎地位不高，不要怕晋阳路途遥远，一定要以那里作为归宿。 等到智宣子去世，智襄子智瑶当政，他与韩康子、魏桓子在蓝台饮宴，席间智瑶戏弄韩康子，又侮辱他的家相段规。
English: Zhao Jianzi also said to his son Zhao Wuxi: "In the event of a crisis in Jin Province, don't think that Yin Ye's status is not high, don't be afraid of the long journey to Jinyang, and be sure to use it as a destination.When Zhixuan Zi died and Zhixiang Zi Zhixuan took office, he had a banquet with Han Kangzi and Wei Huanzi on the balcony.During the meal, Zhixuan teased Han Kangzi and insulted his family.

古文：智伯戏康子而侮段规，智国闻之，谏曰： 主不备难，难必至矣！ 智伯曰： 难将由我。
现代文：智瑶的家臣智国听说此事，就告诫说： 主公您不提防招来灾祸，灾祸就一定会来了！ 
English: When Chiharu's vassal, Chikoku, heard of this, he admonished him, "Lord, if you do not guard against disaster, disaster will surely come!

古文：我不为难，谁敢兴之？ 
现代文：智瑶说： 人的生死灾祸都取决于我。我不给他们降临灾祸，谁还敢兴风作浪！ 
English: Zhisheng said, "People's life and death, disasters and calamities all depend on me. I will not bring disaster to them. Who would dare to stir up trouble?

古文：对曰： 不然。
现代文：智国又说： 这话可不妥。
English: Chikoku also said, "That's not right."

古文：《夏书》有之曰： 一人三失，怨岂在明，不见是图。 
现代文：《夏书》中说： 一个人屡次三番犯错误，结下的仇怨岂能在明处，应该在它没有表现时就提防。 
English: "Summer Book" said: A person repeatedly makes mistakes three times. Can the grudge be revealed? It should be guarded when it does not show.

古文：夫君子能勤小物，故无大患。
现代文：贤德的人能够谨慎地处理小事，所以不会招致大祸。
English: A gentleman can pay attention to small things, so there is no big trouble.

古文：今主一宴而耻人之君相，又弗备，曰不敢兴难，无乃不可乎！
现代文：现在主公一次宴会就开罪了人家的主君和臣相，又不戒备，说： 不敢兴风作浪。 这种态度恐怕不行吧。
English: Now the lord of the manor has offended the lord of the manor and his minister at a banquet, and he is not on his guard, saying: Don't dare to make waves. I'm afraid this attitude is not acceptable.

古文：蜹、蚁、蜂、虿，皆能害人，况君相乎！ 
现代文：蚊子、蚂蚁、蜜蜂、蝎子，都能害人，何况是国君、国相呢！ 
English: Mosquitoes, ants, bees and scorpions can all harm people, let alone the head of state and the minister of state!

古文：弗听。
现代文：智瑶不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：智伯请地于韩康子，康子欲弗与。
现代文：智瑶向韩康子要地，韩康子不想给。
English: Zhisheng wanted land from Han Kangzi, but Han Kangzi did not want to give it to him.

古文：段规曰： 智伯好利而愎，不与，将伐我；不如与之。
现代文：段规说： 智瑶贪财好利，又刚愎自用，如果不给，一定讨伐我们，不如姑且给他。
English: Duan Gui said: Zhisheng is greedy for money and profit, and he is stubborn and self-serving. If he doesn't give it to us, he will certainly fight against us. It's better to give it to him.

古文：彼狃于得地，必请于他人；他人不与，必向之以兵。然则我得免于患而待事之变矣。 康子曰： 善。 
现代文：他拿到地更加狂妄，一定又会向别人索要；别人不给，他必定向人动武用兵，这样我们就可以免于祸患而伺机行动了。 韩康子说： 好主意。 
English: The more arrogant he is, the more he will ask others for land; if others don't give it to him, he will certainly use armed soldiers against them, so that we can avoid disaster and act in time.Han Yasuko said: Good idea.

古文：使使者致万家之邑于智伯，智伯悦。又求地于魏桓子，桓子欲弗与。
现代文：便派了使臣去送上有万户居民的领地。智瑶大喜，果然又向魏桓子提出索地要求，魏桓子想不给。
English: He then sent an envoy to deliver the territory with more than ten thousand residents. Zhisheng was overjoyed, and he asked Wei Huan Zi for the land. Wei Huan Zi refused to give it.

古文：任章曰： 何故弗与？ 
现代文：家相任章问： 为什么不给呢？ 
English: Interviewer: Why not give it to them?

古文：桓子曰： 无故索地，故弗与。 
现代文：魏桓子说： 无缘无故来要地，所以不给。 
English: Wei Huan Zi said, "I came to the right place for no reason, so I won't give it to you."

古文：任章曰： 无故索地，诸大夫必惧；吾与之地，智伯必骄。
现代文：任章说： 智瑶无缘无故强索他人领地，一定会引起其他大夫官员的警惧；我们给智瑶地，他一定会骄傲。
English: Ren Zhang said: Zhisheng's forcible seizure of other people's territory without any reason will certainly arouse the alarm of other doctors and officials; if we give Zhisheng land, he will certainly be proud.

古文：彼骄而轻敌，此惧而相亲。以相亲之兵待轻敌之人，智氏之命必不长矣。
现代文：他骄傲而轻敌，我们警惧而互相亲善；用精诚团结之兵来对付狂妄轻敌的智瑶，智家的命运一定不会长久了。
English: He is proud and contemptuous of the enemy, we are wary and friendly to each other; with the soldiers of sincerity and unity to deal with the arrogant and contemptuous enemy, the fate of the wise men will not last long.

古文：《周书》曰： 将欲败之，必姑辅之；将欲取之，必姑与之。 
现代文：《周书》说： 要打败敌人，必须暂时听从他；要夺取敌人利益，必须先给他一些好处。 
English: "If you want to defeat him, you must first help him; if you want to capture him, you must first give him," the Weekly said.

古文：主不如与之以骄智伯，然后可以择交而图智氏矣。奈何独以吾为智氏质乎！ 桓子曰： 善。 
现代文：主公不如先答应智瑶的要求，让他骄傲自大，然后我们可以选择盟友共同图谋，又何必单独以我们作智瑶的靶子呢！ 魏桓子说： 对。 
English: It would be better for the lord to first agree to Zhisheng's request and make him proud, and then we can choose allies to plot together, and why should we alone be Zhisheng's target! Wei Huan Zi said: Right.

古文：复与之万家之邑一。
现代文：也交给智瑶一个有万户的封地。
English: He also gave Zhisheng a fief with ten thousand households.

古文：智伯又求蔡、皋狼之地于赵襄子，襄子弗与。
现代文：智瑶又向赵襄子要蔡和皋狼的地方。赵襄子拒绝不给。
English: Zhisheng also asked Zhao Xiangzi for the location of Cai and the wolf. Zhao Xiangzi refused to give it.

古文：智伯怒，帅韩、魏之甲以攻赵氏。
现代文：智瑶勃然大怒，率领韩、魏两家甲兵前去攻打赵家。
English: Zhisheng flew into a rage and led the Han and Wei armies to attack the Zhao family.

古文：襄子将出，曰： 吾何走乎？ 
现代文：赵襄子准备出逃。问： 我到哪里去呢？ 
English: Zhao Xiangzi prepares to flee. Q: Where will I go next?

古文：从者曰： 长子近，且城厚完。 
现代文：随从说： 长子城最近，而且城墙坚厚又完整。 
English: The attendant said, "The eldest son is close by, and the city wall is thick and complete.

古文：襄子曰： 民罢力以完之，又毙死以守之，其谁与我！ 
现代文：赵襄子说： 百姓精疲力尽地修完城墙，又要他们舍生入死地为我守城，谁能和我同心？ 
English: Zhao Xiangzi said, "The people have worked tirelessly to complete the construction of the city wall, and I want them to give their lives to defend the city for me. Who can agree with me?

古文：从者曰： 邯郸之仓库实。 
现代文：随从又说： 邯郸城里仓库充实。 
English: The waiter said, "Ma's storehouse is very full.

古文：襄子曰： 浚民之膏泽以实之，又因而杀之，其谁与我！
现代文：赵襄子说： 搜刮民脂民膏才使仓库充实，现在又因战争让他们送命，谁会和我同心。
English: Zhao Xiangzi said: "It was only by scraping the people's fat and grease that the warehouse was enriched, and now they are being killed because of the war. Who will be with me?

古文：其晋阳乎，先主之所属也，尹铎之所宽也，民必和矣。 
现代文：还是投奔晋阳吧，那是先主的地盘，尹铎又待百姓宽厚，人民一定能同我们和衷共济。 
English: It is better to go to Jinyang, which is the Lord's territory. Yin Xi is also generous to the people, and the people will surely be able to work with us in harmony.

古文：乃走晋阳。
现代文：于是前往晋阳。
English: So he went to Jinyang.

古文：三家以国人围而灌之，城不浸者三版。沉灶产蛙，民无叛意。
现代文：智瑶、韩康子、魏桓子三家围住晋阳，引水灌城。城墙头只差三版的地方没有被淹没，锅灶都被泡塌，青蛙孳生，人民仍是没有背叛之意。
English: The three families of Zhisheng, Han Kangzi, and Wei Huanzi surrounded Jinyang and diverted water to flood the city. The place at the top of the city wall that was only three blocks away was not flooded, the pots and pans were all washed away, the frogs were born, and the people still had no intention of betraying.

古文：智伯行水，魏桓子御，韩康子骖乘。
现代文：智瑶巡视水势，魏桓子为他驾车，韩康子站在右边护卫。
English: Zhisheng inspected the water potential, Wei Huan Zi drove for him, and Han Kang Zi stood on the right to escort him.

古文：智伯曰： 吾乃今知水可以亡人国也。 
现代文：智瑶说： 我今天才知道水可以让人亡国。 
English: Zhisheng said, "I only learned today that water can make a man lose his country."

古文：桓子肘康子，康子履桓子之跗，以汾水可以灌安邑，绛水可以灌平阳也。
现代文：魏桓子用胳膊肘碰了一下韩康子，韩康子也踩了一下魏桓子脚。因为汾水可以灌魏国都城安邑，绛水也可以灌韩国都城平阳。
English: Wei Huan Zi touched Han Kang Zi with his elbow, and Han Kang Zi also stepped on Wei Huan Zi's foot. Because salty water can be used to irrigate the capital city of Wei, Anyi, and salty water can also be used to irrigate the capital city of Korea, Pingyang.

古文：絺疵谓智伯曰： 韩、魏必反矣。 
现代文：智家的谋士疵对智瑶说： 韩、魏两家肯定会反叛。 
English: The strategist of the intellectuals said to Zhisheng: Han and Wei will definitely rebel.

古文：智伯曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：智瑶问： 你何以知道？ 
English: Surprised, Zhisheng asked: How did you know?

古文：絺疵曰： 以人事知之。
现代文：疵说： 以人之常情而论。
English: Kikka said, "Let's go with human nature."

古文：夫从韩、魏之兵以攻赵，赵亡，难必及韩、魏矣。
现代文：我们调集韩、魏两家的军队来围攻赵家，赵家覆亡，下次灾难一定是连及韩、魏两家了。
English: We mobilized the armies of Han and Wei to besiege the Zhao family, the Zhao family was overthrown, and the next disaster must be the even of Han and Wei.

古文：今约胜赵而三分其地，城不没者三版，人马相食，城降有日，而二子无喜志，有忧色，是非反而何？ 
现代文：现在我们约定灭掉赵家后三家分割其地，晋阳城仅差三版就被水淹没，城内宰马为食，破城已是指日可待。然而韩康子、魏桓子两人没有高兴的心情，反倒面有忧色，这不是必反又是什么？ 
English: Now that we have agreed to eliminate the Zhao family, the three families will divide their land. Jinyang City is only three blocks away from being flooded. The horses in the city will feed on it. The destruction of the city is just around the corner. However, Han Kangzi and Wei Huanzi are not happy. On the contrary, they are sad. This is not inevitable, but what is?

古文：明日，智伯以絺疵之言告二子，二子曰： 此夫谗臣欲为赵氏游说，使主疑于二家而懈于攻赵氏也。
现代文：第二天，智瑶把疵的话告诉了韩、魏二人，二人说： 这一定是离间小人想为赵家游说，让主公您怀疑我们韩、魏两家而放松对赵家的进攻。
English: The next day, Zhisheng told Han and Wei about the fault, and the two said: This must be a ruffian who wants to lobby for the Zhao family, so that the master will suspect us, Han and Wei, and relax the attack on the Zhao family.

古文：不然，夫二家岂不利朝夕分赵氏之田，而欲为危难不可成之事乎？ 
现代文：不然的话，我们两家岂不是放着早晚就分到手的赵家田土不要，而要去干那危险必不可成的事吗？ 
English: Otherwise, wouldn't our two families just let go of the Zhao family's farmland, which would be divided up sooner or later, and go do that dangerous, impossible thing?

古文：二子出，絺疵入曰： 主何以臣之言告二子也？ 
现代文：两人出去，疵进来说： 主公为什么把臣下我的话告诉他们两人呢？ 
English: The two of them went out and asked, "Why did the lord tell my servants what I said to them?"

古文：智伯曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：智瑶惊奇地反问： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: Surprised, Zhisheng asked: How did you know?

古文：对曰： 臣见其视臣端而趋疾，知臣得其情故也。 
现代文：回答说： 我见他们认真看我而匆忙离去，因为他们知道我看穿了他们的心思。 
English: He replied: I saw them look at me seriously and hurried away, because they knew I had read their minds.

古文：智伯不悛。
现代文：智瑶不改。
English: Wisdom does not change.

古文：絺疵请使于齐。
现代文：于是疵请求让他出使齐国。
English: As a result, Kikuchi requested that he be sent to Qi.

古文：赵襄子使张孟谈潜出见二子，曰： 臣闻唇亡则齿寒。
现代文：赵襄子派张孟谈秘密出城来见韩、魏二人，说： 我听说唇亡齿寒。
English: Zhao Xiangzi sent Zhang Meng to talk about secretly going out of the city to meet Han and Wei, saying: I heard that Han and Wei's lips are cold.

古文：今智伯帅韩、魏而攻赵，赵亡则韩、魏为之次矣。 
现代文：现在智瑶率领韩、魏两家来围攻赵家，赵家灭亡就该轮到韩、魏了。 
English: Now Zhisheng led the Han and Wei families to besiege the Zhao family, and it was the turn of the Han and Wei families to destroy the Zhao family.

古文：二子曰： 我心知其然也，恐事未遂而谋泄，则祸立至矣 。
现代文：韩康子、魏崐桓子也说： 我们心里也知道会这样，只怕事情还未办好而计谋先泄露出去，就会马上大祸临头。 
English: Han Kangzi and Wei Zhenhuanzi also said: We also know in our hearts that this will happen. If things are not done well and the plan is leaked first, a big disaster will be imminent.

古文：张孟谈曰： 谋出二主之口，入臣之耳，何伤也？ 
现代文：张孟谈又说： 计谋出自二位主公之口，进入我一人耳朵，有何伤害呢？ 
English: Zhang Mengyan also said, "A stratagem comes from the mouth of two lords and enters my one ear, what harm can it do?

古文：二子乃潜与张孟谈约，为之期日而遣之。
现代文：于是两人秘密地与张孟谈商议，约好起事日期后送他回城了。
English: As a result, the two secretly discussed with Zhang Meng and agreed on the date of the incident and sent him back to the city.

古文：襄子夜使人杀守堤之吏，而决水灌智伯军。
现代文：夜里，赵襄子派人杀掉智军守堤官吏，使大水决口反灌智瑶军营。
English: In the night, Zhao Xiangzi sent people to kill the officials of the Chichi army guarding the dike, causing the flood to break through and flood the Chichi army camp.

古文：智伯军救水而乱，韩、魏翼而击之，襄子将卒犯其前，大败智伯之众。遂杀智伯，尽灭智氏之族。
现代文：智瑶军队为救水淹而大乱，韩、魏两家军队乘机从两翼夹击，赵襄子率士兵从正面迎头痛击，大败智家军，于是杀死智瑶，又将智家族人尽行诛灭。
English: Zhisheng's army was in a big mess to save the flood. The Han and Wei armies took the opportunity to attack from both wings. Zhao Xiangzi and his soldiers attacked head-on, defeating Zhisheng's army, killing Zhisheng, and annihilating the Zhisheng family.

古文：唯辅果在。
现代文：只有辅果得以幸免。
English: Only the side effects were spared.

古文：臣光曰：智伯之亡也，才胜德也。
现代文：臣司马光认为：智瑶的灭亡，在于才胜过德。
English: Sima Guang, a vassal, believed that Zhisheng's downfall lay in the fact that he only excelled in virtue.

古文：夫才与德异，而世俗莫之能辨，通谓之贤，此其所以失人也。
现代文：才与德是不同的两回事，而世俗之人往往分不清，一概而论之曰贤明，于是就看错了人。
English: Talent and virtue are two different things, and worldly people often do not know the difference. Generally speaking, they are wise, so they look at the wrong person.

古文：夫聪察强毅之谓才，正直中和之谓德。才者，德之资也；德者，才之帅也。
现代文：所谓才，是指聪明、明察、坚强、果毅；所谓德，是指正直、公道、平和待人。才，是德的辅助；德，是才的统帅。
English: The so-called talent refers to cleverness, clear-sightedness, strength and determination; the so-called virtue refers to honesty, fairness and peaceful treatment of others. Talent is a supplement to virtue; virtue is the commander of talent.

古文：云梦之竹，天下之劲也，然而不矫揉，不羽括，则不能以入坚；棠溪之金，天下之利也，然而不熔范，不砥砺，则不能以击强。
现代文：云梦地方的竹子，天下都称为刚劲，然而如果不矫正其曲，不配上羽毛，就不能作为利箭穿透坚物。棠地方出产的铜材，天下都称为精利，然而如果不经熔烧铸造，不锻打出锋，就不能作为兵器击穿硬甲。
English: The bamboo produced in Yunmeng region is known throughout the world as sturdy. However, if its curve is not corrected and it is not fitted with feathers, it cannot be used as a sharp arrow to penetrate hard objects. The copper produced in Tang region is known throughout the world as sturdy. However, if it is not melt-cast and forged, it cannot be used as a weapon to break through hard armor.

古文：是故才德全尽谓之圣人，才德兼亡谓之愚人，德胜才谓之君子，才胜德谓之小人。
现代文：所以，德才兼备称之为圣人；无德无才称之为愚人；德胜过才称之为君子；才胜过德称之为小人。
English: Therefore, a person who has both virtue and talent is called a saint; a person who has neither virtue nor talent is called a fool; a person who has more virtue than talent is called a gentleman; and a person who has more talent than virtue is called a villain.

古文：凡取人之术，苟不得圣人、君子而与之，与其得小人，不若得愚人。
现代文：挑选人才的方法，如果找不到圣人、君子而委任，与其得到小人，不如得到愚人。
English: If you can't find a saint or a gentleman to appoint, it's better to get a fool than a villain.

古文：何则？
现代文：原因何在？
English: Why is that?

古文：君子挟才以为善，小人挟才以为恶。
现代文：因为君子持有才干把它用到善事上；而小人持有才干用来作恶。
English: For the superior man has the ability to do good, but the inferior man has the ability to do evil.

古文：挟才以为善者，善无不至矣；挟才以为恶者，恶亦无不至矣。
现代文：持有才干作善事，能处处行善；而凭借才干作恶，就无恶不作了。
English: If anyone has the ability to do good, he will do good; if anyone has the ability to do evil, he will do evil.

古文：愚者虽欲为不善，智不能周，力不能胜，譬之乳狗搏人，人得而制之。
现代文：愚人尽管想作恶，因为智慧不济，气力不胜任，好像小狗扑人，人还能制服它。
English: Even though a stupid person wants to do evil, because his wisdom is poor and his strength is incompetent, he is like a small dog that bites people. People can still subdue him.

古文：小人智足以遂其奸，勇足以决其暴，是虎而翼者也，其为害岂不多哉！
现代文：而小人既有足够的阴谋诡计来发挥邪恶，又有足够的力量来逞凶施暴，就如恶虎生翼，他的危害难道不大吗！
English: And the villain has enough intrigue to exert evil, and enough power to commit violence, just like the evil tiger has wings, isn't his harm great!

古文：夫德者人之所严，而才者人之所爱。爱者易亲，严者易疏，是以察者多蔽于才而遗于德。
现代文：有德的人令人尊敬，有才的人使人喜爱；对喜爱的人容易宠信专任，对尊敬的人容易疏远，所以察选人才者经常被人的才干所蒙蔽而忘记了考察他的品德。
English: A man of virtue is respected, and a man of talent is liked; a man of liking is easily trusted, and a man of respect is easily alienated; so that the judge of talent is often blinded by the man's talent, and forgets to examine his character.

古文：自古昔以来，国之乱臣，家之败子，才有馀而德不足，以至于颠覆者多矣，岂特智伯哉！
现代文：自古至今，国家的乱臣奸佞，家族的败家浪子，因为才有余而德不足，导致家国覆亡的多了，又何止智瑶呢！
English: From ancient times to the present, the country's unruly vassals and traitors, the family's losers and prodigals, because they have more than enough but not enough virtue, have led to the downfall of the country, and what is more than wisdom!

古文：故为国为家者，苟能审于才德之分而知所先后，又何失人之足患哉！
现代文：所以治国治家者如果能审察才与德两种不同的标准，知道选择的先后，又何必担心失去人才呢！
English: Therefore, if those who govern the country and families can examine the two different standards of talent and virtue, and know the order of selection, why worry about losing talent!

古文：三家分智氏之田。赵襄子漆智伯之头，以为饮器。
现代文：赵、韩、魏三家瓜分智家的田土，赵襄子把智瑶的头骨涂上漆，作为饮具。
English: The three families of Zhao, Han, and Wei divided the land of the wise men, and Zhao Xiangzi painted the skull of the wise men as drinking utensils.

古文：智伯之臣豫让欲为之报仇，乃诈为刑人，挟匕首，入襄子宫中涂厕。
现代文：智瑶的家臣豫让想为主公报仇，就化装为罪人，怀揣匕首，混到赵襄子的宫室中打扫厕所。
English: When Zhisheng's vassal Yu Zhen wanted to take revenge on the lord, he disguised himself as a sinner, carrying a dagger, and sneaked into Zhao Xiangzi's palace to clean the toilets.

古文：襄子如厕心动，索之，获豫让。
现代文：赵襄子上厕所时，忽然心动不安，令人搜索，抓获了豫让。
English: When Zhao Xiang went to the toilet, he suddenly felt uneasy, which made people search for him, and caught him.

古文：左右欲杀之，襄子曰： 智伯死无后，而此人欲为报仇，真义士也！吾谨避之耳。 
现代文：左右随从要将他杀死，赵襄子说： 智瑶已死无后人，而此人还要为他报仇，真是一个义士，我小心躲避他好了。 
English: His followers on both sides wanted to kill him, but Zhao Xiangzi said: Zhisheng is dead and there is no one to succeed him, and this man still wants to avenge him. He is truly a righteous man. I'd better avoid him carefully.

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：于是释放豫让。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：豫让又漆身为癞，吞炭为哑，行乞于市，其妻不识也。
现代文：豫让用漆涂身，弄成一个癞疮病人，又吞下火炭，弄哑嗓音。在街市上乞讨，连结发妻子见面也认不出来。
English: Yu Zhan painted his body with lacquer to make him look like an acne sufferer, swallowed charcoal to muffle his voice, begged on the street, and couldn't recognize his wife when they met.

古文：行见其友，其友识之，为之泣曰： 以子之才，臣事赵孟，必得近幸。子乃为所欲为，顾不易邪？
现代文：路上遇到朋友，朋友认出他，为他垂泪道： 以你的才干，如果投靠赵家，一定会成为亲信，那时你就为所欲为，不是易如反掌吗？
English: On the way, he met a friend. The friend recognized him and shed tears for him and said, "With your talent, if you rely on the Zhao family, you will surely become a close friend. Then you can do whatever you want. Isn't it so easy?"

古文：何乃自苦如此！
现代文：何苦自残形体崐以至于此？
English: How did it come to this?

古文：求以报仇，不亦难乎？ 
现代文：这样来图谋报仇，不是太困难了吗！ 
English: Isn't it too difficult to seek revenge in this way!

古文：豫让曰： 既已委质为臣，而又求杀之，是二心也。
现代文：豫让说： 我要是委身于赵家为臣，再去刺杀他，就是怀有二心。
English: Yu Zhan said: If I commit myself to Zhao Jia as a vassal, and then assassinate him, I have two hearts.

古文：凡吾所为者，极难耳。
现代文：我现在这种做法，是极困难的。
English: What I am doing now is very difficult.

古文：然所以为此者，将以愧天下后世之为人臣怀二心者也。 
现代文：然而之所以还要这样做，就是为了让天下与后世做人臣子而怀有二心的人感到羞愧。 
English: However, the reason for doing so is to make the world and future generations feel ashamed of those who are double-minded and want to be a vassal.

古文：襄子出，豫让伏于桥下。
现代文：赵襄子乘车出行，豫让潜伏在桥下。
English: Zhao Xiangzi travels by car, while Yu Zhen lurks under the bridge.

古文：襄子至桥，马惊，索之，得豫让，遂杀之。
现代文：赵襄子到了桥前，马突然受惊，进行搜索，捕获豫让，于是杀死他。
English: When Zhao Xiangzi arrived at the bridge, the horse suddenly panicked, searched for, captured and killed him.

古文：襄子为伯鲁之不立也，有子五人，不肯置后。
现代文：赵襄子因为赵简子没有立哥哥伯鲁为继承人，自己虽然有五个儿子，也不肯立为继承人。
English: Zhao Xiangzi because Zhao Jianzi did not appoint his brother Baolu as the heir, although he had five sons, he did not want to be appointed as the heir.

古文：封伯鲁之子于代，曰代成君，早卒，立其子浣为赵氏后。
现代文：他封赵伯鲁的儿子于代国，称代成君，早逝；又立其子赵浣为赵家的继承人。
English: He named Zhao Boru's son Yu Dai Guo, known as Dai Cheng Jun, who died early; and appointed his son Zhao Yao as the heir of the Zhao family.

古文：襄子卒，弟桓子逐浣而自立，一年卒。
现代文：赵襄子死后，弟弟赵桓子就驱逐赵浣，自立为国君，继位一年也死了。
English: After the death of Zhao Xiangzi, his brother Zhao Huanzi expelled Zhao Yao and became the sovereign himself. He also died a year after taking the throne.

古文：赵氏之人曰： 桓子立，非襄主意。 
现代文：赵家的族人说： 赵桓子做国君本来就不是赵襄子的主意。 
English: A member of the Zhao family said, "It was not Zhao Xiangzi's original idea for Zhao Huanzi to become the country's ruler.

古文：乃共杀其子，复迎浣而立之，是为献子。
现代文：大家一起杀死了赵桓子的儿子，再迎回赵浣，拥立为国君，这就是赵献子。
English: Everyone together killed the son of Zhao Huan Zi, and then welcomed back Zhao Yao and supported him as the sovereign. This is Zhao Xianzi.

古文：献子生籍，是为烈侯。
现代文：赵献子生子名赵籍，就是赵烈侯。
English: Zhao Xianzi's son's name is Zhao Zeki, which is Zhao Rehu.

古文：魏斯者，魏桓子之孙也，是为文侯。
现代文：魏斯，是魏桓子的孙子，就是魏文侯。
English: Weiss is the grandson of Wei Han Zi, that is, Wei Wen Hou.

古文：韩康子生武子，武子生虔，是为景侯。
现代文：韩康子生子名韩武子，武子又生韩虔，被封为韩景侯。
English: Han Kang Zi's son was named Han Wuzi, and Wuzi was born Han Qian, who was given the title of Han Jing Hou.

古文：魏文侯以卜子夏、田子方为师，每过段干木之庐必式。
现代文：魏文侯魏斯以卜子夏、田子方为国师，他每次经过名士段干木的住宅，都要在车上俯首行礼。
English: Wei Wen Hou Weiss took Bu Zixia and Tian Zi Fang as his national teachers. Every time he passed the dry wood houses of famous people, he had to bow his head and salute in the car.

古文：四方贤士多归之。
现代文：四方贤才德士很多前来归附他。
English: Many talented and virtuous people from all over the country came to join him.

古文：文侯与群臣饮酒，乐，而天雨，命驾将适野。
现代文：魏文侯与群臣饮酒，奏乐间，下起了大雨，魏文侯却下令备车前往山野之中。
English: Wei Wenhou and his courtiers were drinking and playing music when a heavy rain fell. Wei Wenhou, however, ordered to prepare a car to go to the mountains.

古文：左右曰： 今日饮酒乐，天又雨，君将安之？ 
现代文：左右侍臣问： 今天饮酒正乐，外面又下着大雨，国君打算到哪里去呢？ 
English: The courtiers around him asked, "It's a lovely day for drinking, and it's raining heavily outside. Where does the sovereign plan to go?"

古文：文侯曰： 吾与虞人期猎，虽乐，岂可无一会期哉！ 
现代文：魏文侯说： 我与山野村长约好了去打猎，虽然这里很快乐，也不能不遵守约定！ 
English: Wei Wenhou said: I made an appointment with the mayor of Yamano village to go hunting. Although I am very happy here, I cannot but keep the appointment!

古文：乃往，身自罢之。
现代文：于是前去，亲自告诉停猎。
English: So they stopped the banquet and went back to the pre-Qing era.

古文：韩借师于魏以伐赵。
现代文：韩国邀请魏国出兵攻打赵国。
English: South Korea invited Wei to attack Zhao.

古文：文侯曰： 寡人与赵，兄弟也，不敢闻命。 赵借师于魏以伐韩，文侯应之亦然。
现代文：魏文侯说： 我与赵国，是兄弟之邦，不敢从命。 赵国也来向魏国借兵讨伐韩国，魏文侯仍然用同样的理由拒绝了。
English: Wei Wenhou said: I and Zhao Guo are brotherly countries, and I dare not take my own life. Zhao Guo also came to borrow soldiers from Wei Guo to fight in Korea, Wei Wenhou still refused for the same reason.

古文：二国皆怒而去。
现代文：两国使者都怒气冲冲地离去。
English: The envoys of both countries left angrily.

古文：已而知文侯以讲于己也，皆朝于魏。
现代文：后来两国得知魏文侯对自己的和睦态度，都前来朝拜魏国。
English: Later, when the two countries learned of Wei Wenhou's conciliatory attitude towards them, they both came to pay homage to Wei.

古文：魏由是始大于三晋，诸侯莫能与之争。
现代文：魏国于是开始成为魏、赵、韩三国之首，各诸侯国都不能和它争雄。
English: As a result, the State of Wei became the head of the three states of Wei, Zhao, and Han, and all the states could not compete with it.

古文：使乐羊伐中山，克之，以封其子击。
现代文：魏文侯派乐羊攻打中山国，予以攻克，封给自己的儿子魏击。
English: Wei Wen Hou sent Le Yang to attack Zhongshan, conquered it, and gave it to his son Wei Fu.

古文：文侯问于群臣曰： 我何如主？ 
现代文：魏文侯问群臣： 我是什么样的君主？ 
English: Wei Wenhou asked his courtiers: What kind of monarch am I?

古文：皆曰： 仁君。 
现代文：大家都说： 您是仁德的君主！ 
English: Everyone said: You are a benevolent monarch!

古文：任座曰： 君得中山，不以封君之弟而以封君之子，何谓仁君？ 
现代文：只有任座说： 国君您得了中山国，不用来封您的弟弟，却封给自己的儿子，这算什么仁德君主！ 
English: Only Ren Zi said, "Your Majesty, you won Zhongshan Province, and you did not use it to seal your brother, but to seal your own son. What a benevolent monarch!

古文：文侯怒，任座趋出。
现代文：魏文侯勃然大怒，任座快步离开。
English: Wei Wenhou flew into a rage and left quickly.

古文：次问翟璜，对曰： 仁君也。 
现代文：魏文侯又问翟璜，翟璜回答说： 您是仁德君主。 
English: Wei Wenhou asked him again, and he replied, "You are a benevolent monarch.

古文：文侯曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：魏文侯问： 你何以知道？ 
English: Wei Wenhou asked: How do you know?

古文：对曰： 臣闻君仁则臣直。
现代文：回答说： 臣下我听说国君仁德，他的臣子就敢直言。
English: He answered, "My lord, I have heard that the sovereign is benevolent, and that his subjects dare to speak their minds.

古文：向者任座之言直，臣是以知之。 
现代文：刚才任座的话很耿直，于是我知道您是仁德君主。 
English: What you just said was very sincere, so I know that you are a benevolent monarch.

古文：文侯悦，使翟璜召任座而反之，亲下堂迎之，以为上客。
现代文：魏文侯大喜，派翟璜去追任座回来，还亲自下殿堂去迎接，奉为上客。
English: Wei Wen Hou was overjoyed. He sent his eunuch to chase after the throne and come back. He also went down to the hall of fame in person to greet the guests. He was honored as the guest of honor.

古文：文侯与田子方饮，文侯曰： 钟声不比乎？
现代文：魏文侯与田子方饮酒，文侯说： 编钟的乐声不协调吗？
English: Wei Wenhou and Tian Zi Fang drank alcohol. Wenhou said: Is the music of the chimes not coordinated?

古文：左高。 
现代文：左边高。 
English: High on the left.

古文：田子方笑。文侯曰： 何笑？ 
现代文：田子方笑了，魏文侯问： 你笑什么？ 
English: Tian Zi Fang laughed, Wei Wen Hou asked: What are you laughing at?

古文：子方曰： 臣闻之，君明乐官，不明乐音。
现代文：田子方说： 臣下我听说，国君懂得任用乐官，不必懂得乐音。
English: Tashikata said, "I have heard, my lord, that the sovereign knows how to appoint music officials, not necessarily how to play music.

古文：今君审于音，臣恐其聋于官也。 文侯曰： 善。 
现代文：现在国君您精通音乐，我担心您会疏忽了任用官员的职责。 魏文侯说： 对。 
English: Now that you are so proficient in music, I am worried that you will neglect your duties as an appointed official. Wei Wenhou said: That's right.

古文：子击出，遭田子方于道，下车伏谒。
现代文：魏文侯的公子魏击出行，途中遇见国师田子方，下车伏拜行礼。
English: Wei Wenhou's son Wei Wei hit the road, on the way he met the national teacher Tian Zikang, got off and bowed.

古文：子方不为礼。
现代文：田子方却不作回礼。
English: However, Tago did not return the salute.

古文：子击怒，谓子方曰： 富贵者骄人乎？贫贱者骄人乎？ 
现代文：魏击怒气冲冲地对田子方说： 富贵的人能对人骄傲呢，还是贫贱的人能对人骄傲？ 
English: Wei Hui angrily said to Tian Zifang: Can a rich person be proud of someone, or can a poor person be proud of someone?

古文：子方曰： 亦贫贱者骄人耳，富贵者安敢骄人？
现代文：田子方说： 当然是贫贱的人能对人骄傲啦，富贵的人哪里敢对人骄傲呢！
English: Tashigata said, "Of course, poor people can be proud of others, but how dare rich people be proud of others!

古文：国君而骄人则失其国，大夫而骄人则失其家。
现代文：国君对人骄傲就将亡国，大夫对人骄傲就将失去采地。
English: If a ruler is proud of his people, his country will be ruined; if a doctor is proud of his people, he will lose his land.

古文：失其国者未闻有以国待之者也，失其家者未闻有以家待之者也。
现代文：失去国家的人，没有听说有以国主对待他的；失去采地的人，也没有听说有以家主对待他的。
English: The man who has lost his country has not heard that he is treated as the master of his country; the man who has lost his mining land has not heard that he is treated as the master of his house.

古文：夫士贫贱者，言不用，行不合，则纳履而去耳，安往而不得贫贱哉！ 
现代文：贫贱的游士呢，话不听，行为不合意，就穿上鞋子告辞了，到哪里得不到贫贱呢！ 
English: As for the poor wanderer, he does not listen to words and does not agree with actions, so he puts on his shoes and bids farewell. How can he not be poor?

古文：子击乃谢之。
现代文：魏击于是谢罪。
English: Wei Wei then pleaded guilty.

古文：文侯谓李克曰： 先生尝有言曰： 家贫思良妻，国乱思良相。
现代文：魏文侯问李克： 先生曾经说过： 家贫思良妻，国乱思良相。 
English: Wei Wenhou asked Li Ke: Teacher once said: A poor family thinks of a good wife, a country in turmoil thinks of a good person.

古文：今所置非成则璜，二子何如？ 
现代文：现在我选相不是魏成就是翟璜，这两人怎么样？ 
English: Now we have to arrange for a prime minister, either a son or a daughter. What do you think of these two people?

古文：对曰： 卑不谋尊，疏不谋戚。
现代文：李克回答说： 下属不参与尊长的事，外人不过问亲戚的事。
English: Li Ke replied: Subordinates do not participate in the affairs of their superiors, and outsiders only ask about relatives.

古文：臣在阙门之外，不敢当命。 
现代文：臣子我在朝外任职，不敢接受命令。 
English: My duties lie outside the palace gates, and I dare not undertake this mission.

古文：文侯曰： 先生临事勿让。 
现代文：魏文侯说： 先生不要临事推让！ 
English: Wen Hou said, "If you are confronted with this, don't deny it.

古文：克曰： 君弗察故也。
现代文：李克说道： 国君您没有仔细观察呀！
English: Li Ke said, "Your Majesty, you didn't observe carefully!"

古文：居视其所亲，富视其所与，达视其所举，穷视其所不为，贫视其所不取，五者足以定之矣，何待克哉！ 
现代文：看人，平时看他所亲近的，富贵时看他所交往的，显赫时看他所推荐的，穷困时看他所不做的，贫贱时看他所不取的。仅此五条，就足以去断定人，又何必要等我指明呢！ 
English: In ordinary times, see which people he is close to, when he is distinguished, see which people he recommends, when he is discouraged, see what things he does not do, and when he is poor, see what things he does not want. These five are enough to decide, why do I need Li Ke?

古文：文侯曰： 先生就舍，吾之相定矣。 
现代文：魏文侯说： 先生请回府吧，我的国相已经选定了。 
English: Wei Wenhou said: Sir, please go back to the capital, my minister of state has already been selected.

古文：李克出，见翟璜。
现代文：李克离去，遇到翟璜。
English: Li Ke left and was met with thunderous applause.

古文：翟璜曰： 今者闻君召先生而卜相，果谁为之？ 克曰： 魏成。 
现代文：翟璜问： 听说今天国君召您去征求宰相人选，到底定了谁呢？ 李克说： 魏成。 
English: Q: I heard that the Emperor has called you today to solicit candidates for the post of prime minister. Who has been chosen? Li Ke said: Wei Cheng.

古文：翟璜忿然作色曰： 西河守吴起，臣所进也；君内以邺为忧，臣进西门豹；君欲伐中山，臣进乐羊；中山已拔，无使守之，臣进先生；君之子无傅，臣进屈侯鲋。
现代文：国君担心内地的邺县，我推荐西门豹。国君想征伐中山国，我推荐乐羊。中山国攻克之后，没有人去镇守，我推荐了先生您。国君的公子没有老师，我推荐了屈侯鲋。
English: The king is worried about the inland county of Jixian, I recommend the West Gate Leopard. The king wants to invade Zhongshan, I recommend the Goat. After the conquest of Zhongshan, no one went to the town guard, I recommended Mr. You. The king's son has no teacher, I recommended Qu Houyi.

古文：以耳目之所睹记，臣何负于魏成？ 
现代文：凭耳闻目睹的这些事实，我哪点儿比魏成差！ 
English: Based on these facts that I have heard and witnessed, I am no worse than Wei Chengwu!

古文：李克曰： 子之言克于子之君者，岂将比周以求大官哉？
现代文：李克说： 你把我介绍给你的国君，难道是为了结党以谋求高官吗？
English: Li Ke said: Did you introduce me to your sovereign for the purpose of forming a party to seek high office?

古文：君问相于克，克之对如是。
现代文：国君问我宰相的人选，我说了刚才那一番话。
English: The sovereign asked me about the prime minister's candidate, and I said what I just said.

古文：所以知君之必相魏成者，魏成食禄千钟，什九在外，什一在内，是以东得卜子夏、田子方、段干木。
现代文：我所以推断国君肯定会选中魏成为相，是因为魏成享有千钟的俸禄，十分之九都用在外面，只有十分之一留作家用，所以向东得到了卜子夏、田子方、段干木。
English: I therefore deduced that the sovereign would definitely choose Wei to become the prime minister, because Wei Cheng enjoyed a thousand-bell salary, nine-tenths of which were used outside, and only one-tenth was reserved for writers, so he got Buzixia, Tianzihang and Duan dry wood to the east.

古文：此三人者，君皆师之；子所进五人者，君皆臣之。
现代文：这三个人，国君都奉他们为老师；而你所举荐的五人，国君都任用为臣属。
English: Of these three, the sovereign regards them as his teachers, and of the five whom you have recommended, the sovereign has appointed them as his subjects.

古文：子恶得与魏成比也！ 
现代文：你怎么能和魏成比呢！ 
English: How can you compare yourself to Wei!

古文：翟璜逡巡再拜曰： 璜，鄙人也，失对，愿卒为弟子。 
现代文：翟璜听罢徘徊不敢进前，一再行礼说： 我翟璜，真是个粗人，失礼了，愿终身为您的弟子！ 
English: He listened and lingered, not daring to step forward, repeatedly bowing and saying, "I am really a rude person, excuse me, I wish to be your disciple forever!"

古文：吴起者，卫人，仕于鲁。
现代文：吴起，卫国人，在鲁国任官。
English: Wu Qi, a defender of the country, became an official in the State of Lu.

古文：齐人伐鲁，鲁人欲以为将，起取齐女为妻，鲁人疑之，起杀妻以求将，大破齐师。
现代文：齐国攻打鲁国，鲁国想任用吴起为将，但吴起娶的妻子是齐国人，鲁国猜疑吴起。于是，吴起杀死了自己的妻子，求得大将，大破齐国军队。
English: Qi attacked Lu, and Lu wanted to appoint Wu Qi as general, but Wu Qi married a wife from Qi, and Lu suspected Wu Qi. Therefore, Wu Qi killed his wife, asked for a general, and defeated the Qi army.

古文：或谮之鲁侯曰： 起始事曾参，母死不奔丧，曾参绝之。
现代文：有人在鲁国国君面前攻击他说： 吴起当初曾师事曾参，母亲死了也不回去治丧，曾参与他断绝关系。
English: Someone attacked him in front of the Prince of the State of Lu, saying: Wu Qi had once been a teacher and a participant, and when his mother died, he did not go back to mourn, and he had participated in breaking off the relationship.

古文：今又杀妻以求为君将。
现代文：现在他又杀死妻子来求得您的大将职位。
English: Now he's killed his wife to get your promotion to general.

古文：起，残忍薄行人也。
现代文：吴起，真是一个残忍缺德的人！
English: Wu Qi, what a cruel and immoral person!

古文：且以鲁国区区而有胜敌之名，则诸侯图鲁矣。 
现代文：况且，以我们小小的鲁国能有战胜齐国的名气，各个国家都要来算计鲁国了。 
English: Moreover, with the reputation of our small Lu country being able to defeat Qi country, all countries will come to calculate Lu country.

古文：起恐得罪。闻魏文侯贤，乃往归之。
现代文：吴起恐怕鲁国治他的罪，又听说魏文侯贤明，于是就前去投奔。
English: Wu Qi was afraid that Lu Guo would punish him for his crime. He also heard that Wei Wen Hou was a wise man, so he went ahead and fled.

古文：文侯问诸李克，李克曰： 起贪而好色，然用兵，司马穰苴弗能过也。 
现代文：魏文侯征求李克的意见，李克说： 吴起为人贪婪而好色，然而他的用兵之道，连齐国的名将司马穰苴也超不过他。 
English: Wei Wenhou asked Li Ke for his opinion. Li Ke said: Wu Qi is a greedy and lascivious person. However, his way of using soldiers is even better than that of Sima Qian, the famous general of Qi.

古文：于是文侯以为将，击秦，拔五城。
现代文：于是魏文侯崐任命吴起为大将，攻击秦国，攻占五座城。
English: As a result, Weiwen Houjun appointed Wu Qi as a general to attack Qin and capture five cities.

古文：起之为将，与士卒最下者同衣食，卧不设席，行不骑乘，亲裹赢粮，与士卒分劳苦。
现代文：吴起做大将，与最下等的士兵同样穿衣吃饭，睡觉不铺席子，行军也不骑马，亲自挑上士兵的粮食，与士兵们分担疾苦。
English: As a general, Wu Qi dressed and ate the same as the lowest-ranking soldiers, slept without a mat, marched without a horse, personally picked up the soldiers' grain, and shared the hardships with the soldiers.

古文：卒有病疽者，起为吮之。
现代文：有个士兵患了毒疮，吴起为他吸吮毒汁。
English: One soldier had a malignant poisonous sore, and Wu Qi sucked the thick liquid for him.

古文：卒母闻而哭之。
现代文：士兵的母亲听说后却痛哭。
English: The soldier's mother burst into tears when she heard the news.

古文：人曰： 子，卒也，而将军自吮其疽，何哭为？ 
现代文：有人奇怪地问： 你的儿子是个士兵，而吴起将军亲自为他吸吮毒疮，你为什么哭？ 
English: Someone strangely asked: Your son is a soldier, and General Wu Qi personally sucked the poisonous sores for him. Why are you crying?

古文：母曰： 非然也。
现代文：士兵母亲答道： 不是这样啊！
English: She replied: "That's not true.

古文：往年吴公吮其父，其父战不还踵，遂死于敌。
现代文：当年吴将军为孩子的父亲吸过毒疮，他父亲作战从不后退，就战死在敌阵中了。
English: At that time, General Wu sucked poisonous sores for the child's father. His father never retreated in battle and died in the enemy's camp.

古文：吴公今又吮其子，妾不知其死所矣，是以哭之。 
现代文：吴将军现在又为我儿子吸毒疮，我不知道他该死在哪里了，所以哭他。 
English: General Wu is now giving my son drug sores again. I don't know where the hell he is, so I'm crying for him.

古文：燕湣公薨，子僖公立。
现代文：燕公薨，子僖公立。
English: Yan Gong Zang, Zi Zang Zang public.

古文：二十四年己卯，公元前四零二年
现代文：二十四年
English: Twenty-four years

古文：王崩，子安王骄立。
现代文：王崩，子安王骄立。
English: Wang collapses, Zi An Wang proudly stands up.

古文：盗杀楚声王，国人立其子悼王。
现代文：盗杀楚声王，国人立其子悼王。
English: He stole and killed King Chuseong, and the people of his country raised their son to mourn the king.

古文：安王
现代文：安王
English: An Wang

古文：△元年庚辰，公元前四零一年
现代文：元年秦国讨伐魏国，军队一直到达阳孤。二年
English: In the first year of the Qin Dynasty, the state of Qin fought against the state of Wei, and the army reached Yang Guo.

古文：秦伐魏，至阳狐。二年辛巳，公元前四零零年
现代文：魏、韩、赵三国联军攻打楚国，攻进桑丘。
English: The Wei, Han, and Zhao allied forces of the three countries attacked Chu and invaded Sanqiu.

古文：魏、韩、赵伐楚，至桑丘。郑围韩阳翟。韩景侯薨，子烈侯取立。
现代文：郑国军队围攻韩国的阳翟围城。韩国国君韩景侯去世，他的儿子韩取即位，就是韩烈侯。
English: The Zheng army besieged the South Korean city of Yangpyeong. The South Korean sovereign Han Jinghong died, and his son Han Tori ascended the throne, that is, Han Ryonghong.

古文：秦简公薨，子惠公立。
现代文：赵国国君赵烈侯去世，赵国人拥立他的弟弟即位，是为赵武侯。
English: After the death of Zhao Lihou, the sovereign of Zhao, the people of Zhao supported his younger brother's accession to the throne, which was Zhao Wuhou.

古文：三年壬午，公元前三九九年
现代文：秦国国君秦简公去世，他的儿子即位，就是秦惠公。三年
English: Qin's sovereign, Qin Jian Gong, died, and his son, Qin Hui Gong, ascended the throne.

古文：王子定奔晋。
现代文：周王室王子姬投奔晋国。
English: Prince Ji of the Zhou royal family fled to Jin.

古文：虢山崩，壅河。
现代文：虢山崩塌，沙石堵住了黄河。
English: Mount Lushan collapsed, and sand and rock blocked the Yellow River.

古文：四年癸未，公元前三九八年
现代文：四年
English: Four years

古文：楚围郑。
现代文：楚国军队围攻郑国。
English: The Chu army besieged Zheng.

古文：郑人杀其相驷子阳。
现代文：郑国人杀死了国相驷子阳。
English: Zheng Guo killed the Minister of State Zou Ziyang.

古文：五年甲申，公元前三九七年
现代文：五年
English: Five years

古文：日有食之。
现代文：出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs.

古文：三月，盗杀韩相侠累。
现代文：三月，盗匪杀死了韩国国相侠累。
English: In March, robbers killed South Korea's vice-premier.

古文：侠累与濮阳严仲子有恶。仲子闻轵人聂政之勇，以黄金百镒为政母寿，欲因以报仇。
现代文：侠累与濮阳人严仲子有仇，严仲子听说轵地人聂政很勇敢，便拿出一百镒黄金为聂政母亲祝寿，想让聂政为他报仇。
English: He had a grudge against Yan Zhongzi, a native of Shiyang. Yan Zhongzi heard that the native of Shiyang, Yan Zheng, was very brave, so he took out a hundred pieces of gold to celebrate the birthday of Yan Zheng's mother. He wanted Yan Zheng to take revenge for him.

古文：政不受，曰： 老母在，政身未敢以许人也！ 
现代文：聂政却不接受，说： 我的老母亲还健在，我不敢为别人去献身！ 
English: He did not accept it, saying, "My old mother is still alive, I dare not sacrifice myself for others!"

古文：及母卒，仲子乃使政刺侠累。
现代文：等到他的母亲去世，严仲子便派聂政去行刺侠累。
English: When his mother died, Yan Zhongzi sent Yu Zheng to assassinate her.

古文：侠累方坐府上，兵卫甚众，聂政直入上阶，刺杀侠累，因自皮面抉眼，自屠出肠。
现代文：侠累正端坐府中，有许多护卫兵丁，聂政一直冲上厅阶，把侠累刺死。然后划破自己的面皮，挖出双眼，割出肚肠而死。
English: Xie Lei was sitting in the middle of the government building, surrounded by many bodyguards. Yan Zheng rushed up the stairs and stabbed Xie Lei to death. He then slashed his face, gouged out his eyes, and cut out his stomach, and died.

古文：韩人暴其尸于市，购问，莫能识。
现代文：韩国人把聂政的尸体放在集市中暴尸。
English: The South Koreans put his body on display in the market.

古文：其姊嫈闻而往哭之，曰： 是轵深井里聂政也。
现代文：并悬赏查找，但无人知晓。聂政的姐姐聂听说此事前往，哭着说： 这是轵地深井里的聂政啊！
English: And a reward was offered for finding it, but no one knew about it. On hearing of this, Ye Zheng's sister Yao went there, crying and saying, "This is Ye Zheng in a deep well in a barren land!"

古文：以妾尚在之故，重自刑以绝从。
现代文：他因为我还在，就自毁面容不使连累。
English: Because I'm still here, he doesn't have to be self-destructive.

古文：妾奈何畏殁身之诛，终灭贤弟之名！ 
现代文：我怎么能怕杀身之祸，最终埋没我弟弟的英名呢！ 
English: How can I be afraid of killing myself and finally burying my brother's famous name!

古文：遂死于政尸之旁。
现代文：于是自尽死在聂政的尸体旁边。
English: So he committed suicide and died next to the corpse of Ying Zheng.

古文：六年乙酉，公元前三九六年郑驷子阳之党弑繻公，而立其弟乙，是为康公。
现代文：六年郑国宰相驷子阳的余党杀死国君郑公，改立他的弟弟姬乙为国君，是为郑康公。
English: In the sixth year of Zheng Ziyang, the prime minister of Zheng, the rest of the party killed the sovereign Zheng Gong, and replaced his brother Ji Yi as the sovereign, which was Zheng Kang Gong.

古文：宋悼公薨，子休公田立。
现代文：宋国宋悼公去世，他的儿子宋田即位，是为宋休公。八年
English: Song Eulogist Song of Song died, and his son Song Tian ascended the throne as Song Xiu Gong. Eight years later,

古文：齐伐鲁，取最。
现代文：齐国发兵攻打鲁国，攻占最地。
English: Qi sent troops to attack Lu and occupied most of the land.

古文：韩救鲁。
现代文：韩国救援鲁国。
English: South Korea comes to North Korea's rescue.

古文：郑负黍叛，复归韩。
现代文：郑国负黍这个地方反叛郑国，后来归附韩国。
English: This place rebelled against Zheng and was later annexed by South Korea.

古文：九年戊子，公元前三九三年
现代文：九年
English: Nine years

古文：魏伐郑。
现代文：魏国攻打郑国。
English: Wei attacked Zheng.

古文：晋烈公薨，子孝公倾立。
现代文：晋国晋烈公去世，他的儿子姬倾即位，是为晋孝公。十一年
English: After the death of Prince Jin of Jin, his son Jiqian ascended to the throne as Prince Jinxiao.

古文：十一年庚寅，公元前三九一年
现代文：秦国发兵攻打韩国宜阳郡，攻占了六个城池。
English: Qin sent troops to attack South Korea's Yiyang County and captured six cities.

古文：秦伐韩宜阳，取六邑。初，田常生襄子盘，盘生庄子白，白生太公和。
现代文：起初，齐国田常生襄子田盘，田盘生庄子田白，田白再生太公田和。
English: At first, Tsuneo Tsuchida of Qi Province gave birth to his son, Tanban, who gave birth to his son, Shoko, who gave birth to his son, Tanpaku, who gave birth to his son, Taiko, who gave birth to his son, and so on.

古文：是岁，齐田和迁齐康公于海上，使食一城，以奉其先祀。
现代文：这年，田和把国君齐康公流放到海边，让他保有一个城的赋税收入，以承继祖先祭祀。
English: This year, Tianhe exiled the sovereign Qikangong to the seaside, allowing him to keep one city's tax revenue to continue the ancestor worship.

古文：十二年辛卯，公元前三九零年
现代文：十二年秦国与晋国在武城开战。
English: In the twelfth year, Qin and Jin started a war in Wucheng.

古文：十三年壬辰，公元前三八九年
现代文：齐国攻打魏国，夺取襄阳。鲁国在平陆击败齐国军队。十三年
English: Qi attacked Wei and captured Xiangyang. Lu defeated the Qi army on flat land. Thirteen years passed.

古文：秦侵晋。
现代文：秦国入侵晋国。
English: Qin invaded Jin.

古文：齐田和会魏文侯、楚人、卫人于浊泽，求为诸侯。
现代文：齐国田和在浊泽约会魏文侯及楚国、卫国贵族，要求作诸侯。
English: Qi Guotian and He Zuo dated Wei Wenhou and Chu State, the nobles of the defense of the country, and demanded to be princes.

古文：魏文侯为之请于王及诸侯，王许之。
现代文：魏文侯替他向周安王及各国诸侯申请，周安王准许。
English: Wei Wenhou applied for him to King Zhou An and the princes of various countries, and King Zhou An gave him permission.

古文：秦伐蜀，取南郑。
现代文：十五年秦国攻打蜀地，夺取南郑。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Qin Dynasty, they attacked Shu and conquered Nan Zheng.

古文：魏文侯薨，太子击立，是为武侯。
现代文：魏国魏文侯去世，太子魏击即位，是为魏武侯。
English: Wei Wenhou of Wei died, and Prince Wei Wei ascended to the throne as Wei Wuhou.

古文：武侯浮西河而下，中流顾谓吴起曰： 美哉山河之固，此魏国之宝也！ 
现代文：魏武侯在西河泛舟顺流而下，船行到河中心对吴起说： 好美啊！高山大河如此险要，这是魏国的珍宝啊！ 
English: Wei Wuhou rafted down the West River, and when the boat reached the center of the river, he said to Wu Qi: How beautiful! The Gaoshan River is so dangerous, this is the treasure of Wei!

古文：对曰： 在德不在险。
现代文：吴起回答说： 国宝在于国君施行德政而不在于地势险要。
English: Wu Qi replied: The national treasure lies in the virtuous governance of the sovereign and not in the critical situation of the land.

古文：昔三苗氏，左洞庭，右彭蠡，德义不修，禹灭之；夏桀之居，左河济，右泰华，伊阙在其南，羊肠在其北，修政不仁，汤放之；商纣之国，左孟门，右太行，常山在其北，大河经其南，修政不德，武王杀之。
现代文：当初三苗氏部落，左面有洞庭湖，右面有彭蠡湖，但他们不修德义，被禹消灭了。夏朝君王桀的居住之地，左边是黄河、济水，右边是泰华山，伊阙山在其南面，羊肠阪在其北面，但因朝政不仁，也被商朝汤王驱逐了。商朝纣王的都城，左边是孟门，右边是太行山，常山在其北面，黄河经过其南面，因他施政不德，被周武王杀了。
English: Originally, the three Miao tribes had Dongting Lake on the left and Penghu Lake on the right, but they did not practice virtue and were eliminated by Yu. The summer dynasty king Zou lived in the Yellow River and Jishui on the left, Mount Taihua on the right, Mount Ili on the south, and Yanshihan on the north, but he was also expelled by Tang Wang of the Shang Dynasty due to the lack of benevolence in court politics. The capital city of the Shang Dynasty Zou King was Mengmen on the left, Taihang Mountain on the right, Changshan on the north, and the Yellow River passing through it on the south, but he was killed by

古文：由此观之，在德不在险。
现代文：由此可见，国宝在于德政而不在于地势险要。
English: From this point of view, the stability of the regime lies in extending grace to the people, not in the perilousness of the geographical situation.

古文：若君不修德，舟中之人皆敌国也。 武侯曰： 善。 魏置相，相田文。
现代文：如果君主您不修德政，恐怕就是这条船上的人，也要成为您的敌人。 魏武侯听罢说道： 对。 魏国设置国相，任命田文为相。
English: If you, the sovereign, do not practice virtue, I am afraid that the people on this ship will also become your enemies. Wei Wuhou listened and said: Yes. Wei set up a minister of state and appointed Tianwen as a minister.

古文：吴起不悦，谓田文曰： 请与子论功，可乎？ 田文曰： 可。 
现代文：吴起不高兴，对田文说： 我和你比较功劳如何？ 田文说： 可以。 
English: Wu Qi was not happy and said to Tian Wen: How about comparing my merits with yours? Tian Wen said: Yes.

古文：起曰： 将三军，使士卒乐死，敌国不敢谋，子孰与起？ 
现代文：吴起便说： 统率三军，使士兵乐于战死，敌国不敢谋算，你比我吴起如何？ 
English: Wu Qi said, "Take command of the three armies, let the soldiers be willing to fight to the death for the country, the enemy country will not dare to plot against Wei. Who is better than you and me?

古文：文曰： 不如子。 
现代文：田文说： 我不如你。 
English: Tian Wen said: Not as good as you.

古文：起曰： 治百官，亲万民，实府库，子孰与起？ 
现代文：吴起又问： 整治百官，亲善百姓，使仓库充实，你比我吴起如何？ 
English: Wu Qi said, "Managing hundreds of civil and military officials, letting the people be close to them, and enriching the reserves of the prefectural treasury. Compared to you and me, who can do it?

古文：文曰： 不如子。 
现代文：田文说： 我不如你。 
English: Tian Wen said: Not as good as you.

古文：起曰： 守西河而秦兵不敢东乡，韩、赵宾从，子孰与起？ 
现代文：吴起再问： 镇守西河，使秦兵不敢向东侵犯，韩国、赵国依附听命，你比我吴起如何？ 
English: Wu Qi asked again: The town guards the West River, so that Qin soldiers do not dare to encroach to the east, South Korea and Zhao are attached to their orders, how are you better than me, Wu Qi?

古文：文曰： 不如子。 
现代文：田文还是说： 我不如你。 
English: Tian Wen said: Not as good as you.

古文：起曰： 此三者子皆出吾下，而位加吾上，何也？ 
现代文：吴起质问道： 这三条你都在我之下，而职位却在我之上，是什么道理？ 
English: Wu Qi questioned, "You are below me in these three aspects, but your position is above me. What is the reason for this?"

古文：文曰： 主少国疑，大臣未附，百姓不信，方是之时，属之子乎，属之我乎？ 
现代文：田文说： 如今国君年幼，国多疑难，大臣们不能齐心归附，老百姓不能信服，在这个时候，是嘱托给你呢，还是嘱托给我呢？ 
English: Tianwen said, "Nowadays, the sovereign is young, the country is full of doubts and difficulties, the ministers cannot be united, and the people cannot be convinced. At this time, is it entrusted to you or to me?

古文：起默然良久，曰： 属之子矣。 
现代文：吴起默默不语想了一会儿，说： 嘱托给你啊！ 
English: Wu Qi silently thought for a moment and said, "I entrust it to you!

古文：久之，魏相公叔尚魏公主而害吴起。
现代文：过了很久，魏国国相公叔娶了公主为妻而以吴起为忌。
English: After a long time, the uncle of the Wei Minister of State married the princess as his wife, and Wu Qi became a scourge.

古文：公叔之仆曰： 起易去也。
现代文：他的仆人献计说： 吴起容易去掉，吴起为人刚劲而沾沾自喜。
English: My uncle's servant said, "It is not difficult to drive Wu Qi away.

古文：起为人刚劲自喜，子先言于君曰： 吴起，贤人也，而君之国小，臣恐起之无留心也，君盍试延以女？起无留心，则必辞矣。
现代文：您可以先对国君说： 吴起是个杰出人才，但君主您的国家小，我担心他没有长留的心思。国君您何不试着要把女儿嫁给他，如果吴起没有久留之心，一定会辞谢的。 
English: You can first say to the sovereign: Wu Qi is an outstanding talent, but the monarch of your country is small, I'm afraid he doesn't have the heart to stay long. Sovereign, why don't you try to marry your daughter to him, if Wu Qi doesn't have the heart to stay long, he will surely resign.

古文：子因与起归而使公主辱子，起见公主之贱子也，必辞，则子之计中矣。 
现代文：主人您再与吴起一起回去，让公主羞辱您，吴起看到公主如此轻视您，一定会辞谢国君的婚事，这样您的计谋就实现了。 
English: Master, you will go back with Wu Qiming and let the princess humiliate you. When Wu Qiming sees that the princess despises you so much, he will surely decline the marriage of the sovereign, so your plan will be realized.

古文：公叔从之，吴起果辞公主。
现代文：公叔照此去做，吴起果然辞谢了与公主的婚事。
English: The uncle-in-law did as he was told, and Wu Qi indeed declined to marry the princess.

古文：魏武侯疑之而未信，起惧诛，遂奔楚。
现代文：魏武侯疑忌他，不敢信任，吴起害怕被诛杀，于是投奔了楚国。
English: Wei Wuhou was suspicious of him and did not dare to trust him. Wu Qi was afraid of being killed, so he fled to Chu.

古文：楚悼王素闻其贤，至则任之为相。
现代文：楚悼王平素听说吴起是个人才，到了便任命他为国相。
English: Chu Wei Wang Ping Su heard that Wu Qi was a talented person, and then appointed him as the Minister of State.

古文：起明法审令，捐不急之官，废公族疏远者，以抚养战斗之士，要在强兵，破游说之言从横者。
现代文：吴起严明法纪号令，裁减一些不重要的闲官，废除了王族中远亲疏戚，用来安抚奖励征战之士，大力增强军队、破除合纵连横游说言论。
English: Wu issued orders to strictly enforce laws and regulations, reduce the number of unimportant officials, and abolish the royal family's distant relatives, which was used to appease the soldiers who were encouraged to enlist, strengthen the army, and eliminate the lobbying speech.

古文：于是南平百越，北却三晋，西伐秦，诸侯皆患楚之强，而楚之贵戚大臣多怨吴起者。
现代文：于是楚国向南平定百越，向北抵挡住韩、魏、赵三国的扩张，向西征讨秦国，各诸侯国都害怕楚国的强大，而楚国的王亲贵戚、权臣显要中却有很多人怨恨吴起。
English: As a result, Chu went to the south to pacify Baekje, to the north to resist the expansion of Han, Wei, and Zhao, and to the west to conquer Qin. All the vassal states were afraid of Chu's power, but many of the king's relatives and dignitaries in Chu resented Wu Qi.

古文：秦惠公薨，子出公立。
现代文：秦惠公去世，他的儿子出公继位。
English: Qin Huigong died, and his son ascended to the throne.

古文：赵武侯薨，国人复立烈侯之太子章，是为敬侯。
现代文：赵国赵武侯去世，赵国人重新拥立赵烈侯的太子赵章继位，这就是赵敬侯。
English: After the death of Zhao Wuhou of the State of Zhao, the people of Zhao re-established the succession of Zhao Zhang, the prince of the State of Zhao. This is the origin of Zhao Jinghou.

古文：韩烈侯薨，子文侯立。
现代文：韩国韩烈侯去世，他的儿子文侯继位。
English: South Korea's Prince Han died and was succeeded by his son Prince Wen.

古文：十六年乙未，公元前三八六年初命齐大夫田和为诸侯。赵公子朝作乱，出奔魏，与魏袭邯郸，不克。
现代文：十六年周王朝开始任命齐国大夫田和为诸侯国君。赵国公子赵朝作乱，出奔魏国，与魏国军队一起进袭赵国邯郸，未能攻克。
English: Sixteen years later, the Zhou Dynasty began to appoint Tian He, the doctor of Qi, as the prince of the state. Zhao, the prince of Zhao, made a riot, went to Wei, and attacked Zhao Guojun with the Wei army, but failed to conquer.

古文：十七年丙申，公元前三八五年秦庶长改逆献公于河西而立之；杀出子及其母，沉之渊旁。
现代文：十七年秦国名叫改的庶长在河西迎接秦献公，立为国君；把秦出公和他的母亲杀死，沉在河里。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Qin dynasty, the second-in-command of the Qin dynasty, whose name was Qiao, met Qin Xianguo in the west of the river and made him the ruler of the country. He killed Qin Xianguo and his mother and drowned them in the river.

古文：齐伐鲁。
现代文：齐国攻打鲁国。
English: Qi attacked Lu.

古文：韩伐郑，取阳城；伐宋，执宋公。
现代文：韩国攻打郑国，夺取阳城。又攻打宋国，捉住宋国国君。
English: South Korea attacked Zheng and captured Yangcheng. It also attacked Song and captured Song Guo Jun.

古文：齐太公薨，子桓公午立。
现代文：齐国太公田和去世，其子田午即位，是为齐桓公。十九年
English: The Tai Gong of Qi, Tian He, died, and his son, Tian Wu, ascended to the throne as the Prince of Qi.

古文：日有食之，既。二十一年庚子，公元前三八一年
现代文：魏国在兔台击败赵国军队。二十年出现日全食。二十一年
English: Wei defeated Zhao's army at Tiantai. A total solar eclipse occurred for twenty years.

古文：楚悼王薨，贵戚大臣作乱，攻吴起，起走之王尸而伏之。
现代文：楚悼王去世。贵族国戚和大臣作乱，攻打吴起，吴起逃到悼王尸体边，伏在上面。
English: After the death of the king of Chu, the nobles, relatives of the state, and ministers rioted and attacked Wuqi. Wuqi fled to the side of the king's corpse and lay down on it.

古文：击起之徒因射刺起，并中王尸。
现代文：攻击吴起的暴徒用箭射吴起，并射中了悼王的尸体。
English: The rioters who attacked Wu Zhi shot Wu Zhi with arrows and hit the body of the mourning king.

古文：既葬，肃王即位。使令尹尽诛为乱者，坐起夷宗者七十馀家。
现代文：办完葬事，楚肃王即位，命令楚相全数翦灭作乱者，因射吴起之事而被灭族的多达七十余家。
English: After the funeral, the king of Chu Su ascended to the throne and ordered all the princes of Chu to exterminate the troublemakers. As many as seventy families were exterminated because of the shooting of Wuqi.

古文：二十二年辛丑，公元前三八零年
现代文：二十二年齐国攻打燕国，夺取桑丘。
English: Twenty-two years ago, Qi attacked Yan and captured Sanqiu.

古文：齐伐燕，取桑丘。
现代文：魏、韩、赵三国攻打齐国，兵至桑丘。
English: Wei, Han, and Zhao three countries attacked Qi, and the soldiers reached Sanqiu.

古文：魏、韩、赵伐齐，至桑丘。
现代文：二十三年赵国袭击卫国，未能攻克。
English: In 233, Zhao attacked Wei and failed to conquer it.

古文：齐康公薨，无子，田氏遂并齐而有之。
现代文：流放的齐康公去世，没有儿子。田氏家族于是把姜氏的齐国全部兼并了。
English: The exiled Qikang died without a son. The Tian family then annexed all of Jiang's Qi.

古文：是岁，齐桓公亦薨，子威王因齐立。
现代文：当年，齐桓公也去世，其子田因齐即位，是为齐威王。
English: In the same year, Prince Qi Huan also died, and his son Tian Yingqi ascended the throne as King Qi Wei.

古文：二十四年癸卯，公元前三七八年
现代文：二十四年狄族军队在浍击败了魏军。
English: In 1924, the Di army defeated the Wei army in Handan.

古文：狄败魏师于澮。魏、韩、赵伐齐，至灵丘。
现代文：魏、韩、赵伐齐，至灵丘。
English: Wei, Han, Zhao, to Lingqiu.

古文：晋孝公薨，子靖公俱酒立。
现代文：晋国晋孝公去世，其子姬俱酒即位，是为晋靖公。
English: After the death of Jin Xiaogong of Jin, his son Ji Jigu ascended to the throne as Jin Jinggong.

古文：蜀伐楚，取兹方。
现代文：二十五年蜀人攻打楚国，夺取兹方。
English: Twenty-five years ago, the Shu people attacked the state of Chu and conquered the Zi side.

古文：子思言苟变于卫侯曰： 其材可将五百乘。 公曰： 吾知其可将。
现代文：孔，字子思，向卫国国君提起苟变说： 他的才能可统领五百辆车。 
English: Kong, the character Zi Si, brought up the subject of change to Wei Guo Guojun and said: His talent can command five hundred cars.

古文：然变也尝为吏，赋于民而食人二鸡子，故弗用也。 子思曰： 夫圣人之官人，犹匠之用木也，取其所长，弃其所短。故杞梓连抱而有数尺之朽，良工不弃。
现代文：卫侯说： 我知道他是个将才，然而苟变做官吏的时候，有次征税吃了老百姓两个鸡蛋，所以我不用他。 孔说： 圣人选人任官，就好比木匠使用木料，取其所长，弃其所短；因此一根合抱的良木，只有几尺朽烂处，高明的工匠是不会扔掉它的。
English: Wei Hou said, "I know that he is a great general, but when he tried to become a government official, there was a time when he collected taxes and ate two eggs from the common people, so I don't need him." Kong said, "Selecting a saint to be an official is like a carpenter using wood, taking its strengths and discarding its weaknesses; therefore, a good tree that is well-maintained has only a few feet of rot, and a skilled craftsman will not throw it away."

古文：今君处战国之世，选爪牙之士，而以二卵弃干城之将，此不可使闻于邻国也。 公再拜曰： 谨受教矣。 卫侯言计非是，而群臣和者如出一口。
现代文：现在国君您处在战国纷争之世，正要收罗锋爪利牙的人才，却因为两个鸡蛋而舍弃了一员可守一城的大将，这事可不能让邻国知道啊！ 卫侯一再拜谢说： 我接受你的指教。 卫侯提出了一项不正确的计划，而大臣们却附和如出一口。
English: Now, sovereign, you are in a world of warring nations, and you are trying to recruit talented people with sharp claws and sharp teeth, but because of two eggs, you have abandoned a general who can defend a city. You can't let your neighbors know about this! Wei Hou repeatedly said, "I accept your advice." Wei Hou proposed an incorrect plan, but the ministers agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：子思曰： 以吾观卫，所谓 君不君，臣不臣 者也。 公丘懿子曰： 何乃若是？ 子思曰： 人主自臧，则众谋不进。
现代文：孔说： 我看卫国，真是 君不像君，臣不像臣 呀！ 公丘懿子问道： 为什么竟会这样？ 孔说： 君主自以为是，大家便不提出自己的意见。
English: Kong said, "In my opinion, as the defender of the country, it is true that you are not like you, and the vassal is not like the vassal!" Gongqiu Zizi asked, "Why did this happen?" Kong said, "The monarch is self-righteous, and everyone does not put forward their own opinions.

古文：事是而臧之，犹却众谋，况和非以长恶乎！
现代文：即使事情处理对了没有听取众议，也是排斥了众人的意见，更何况现在众人都附和错误见解而助长邪恶之风呢！
English: Even if things are handled correctly without listening to the public, it is the exclusion of the opinions of the masses, and even more so now that the masses have joined the wrong opinions and promoted the evil wind!

古文：夫不察事之是非而悦人赞己，闇莫甚焉；不度理之所在而阿谀求容，谄莫甚焉。
现代文：不考察事情的是非而乐于让别人赞扬，是无比的昏暗；不判断事情是否有道理而一味阿谀奉承，是无比的谄媚。
English: It is exceedingly dim not to examine the rights and wrongs of things, but to be happy to let others praise them; it is exceedingly flattering not to judge whether things are justified.

古文：君闇臣谄，以居百姓之上，民不与也。
现代文：君主昏暗而臣下谄媚，这样居于百姓之上，老百姓是不会同意的。
English: The people will not agree to a dim monarch who lives above the people while his subjects fawn over him.

古文：若此不已，国无类矣！ 子思言于卫侯曰： 君之国事将日非矣！ 公曰： 何故？ 对曰： 有由然焉。
现代文：长期这样不改，国家就不象国家了。 孔对卫侯说： 你的国家将要一天不如一天了。 卫侯问： 为什么？ 
English: If it doesn't change like this for a long time, the country will no longer resemble a country.Kong said to Wei Hou, "Your country will become worse day by day."Wei Hou asked, "Why?

古文：君出言自以为是，而卿大夫莫敢矫其非；卿大夫出言亦自以为是，而士庶人莫敢矫其非。
现代文：回答说： 事出有因。国君你说话自以为是，卿大夫等官员没有人敢改正你的错误；于是他们也说话自以为是，士人百姓也不敢改正其误。
English: He replied, "Things happen for a reason. Your majesty, you speak with self-righteousness, and no officials, such as lords and doctors, dare to correct your mistakes. Therefore, they also speak with self-righteousness, and the people, including the politicians, dare not correct their mistakes.

古文：君臣既自贤矣，而群下同声贤之，贤之则顺而有福，矫之则逆而有祸，如此则善安从生！
现代文：君臣都自以为贤能，下属又同声称贤，称赞贤能则和顺而有福，指出错误则忤逆而有祸，这样，怎么会有好的结果！
English: Princes and courtiers all believe themselves to be virtuous, their subordinates all claim to be virtuous, praising virtuousness is a blessing, pointing out mistakes is a curse, so how can there be a good result!

古文：《诗》曰： 具曰予圣，谁知乌之雌雄？ 
现代文：《诗经》说： 都称道自己是圣贤，乌鸦雌雄谁能辨？ 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Everyone claims to be a sage. Who can tell the difference between a crow and a male crow?

古文：抑亦似君之君臣乎？ 
现代文：不也像你们这些君臣吗？ 
English: Aren't they just like you, lords and gentlemen?

古文：鲁穆公薨，子共公奋立。
现代文：鲁国鲁穆公去世，其子姬奋即位，是为鲁共公。
English: After the death of Prince Rumu of the State of Lu, his son Ji Fen ascended to the throne as the Prince of the Communist Party of Lu.

古文：韩文侯薨，子哀侯立。
现代文：韩国韩文侯去世，其子即位，是为韩哀侯。
English: South Korea's Prince Han died and his son ascended to the throne. It was a time of mourning for Han.

古文：二十六年乙巳，公元前三七六年
现代文：二十六年周安王去世，其子姬喜即位，是为周烈王。
English: Twenty-six years after the death of King Zhou An, his son Ji Xi ascended the throne as King Zhou Lei.

古文：王崩，子烈王喜立。魏、韩、赵共废晋靖公为家人而分其地。
现代文：魏、韩、赵三国一同把晋靖公废黜为平民，瓜分了他的残余领地。
English: Wei, Han, and Zhao together deposed Jin Jing Gong as a commoner and divided up his remaining territory.

古文：烈王
现代文：烈王
English: The King of Martyrs

古文：△元年丙午，公元前三七五年
现代文：周烈王元年韩国灭掉郑国，于是把国都迁到新郑。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Zhou, Korea destroyed Zheng and moved the capital to Xinzheng.

古文：三年戊申，公元前三七三年
现代文：赵国赵敬侯去世，其子赵种即位，是为赵成侯。三年
English: Zhao Jinghou of the State of Zhao died, and his son Zhao Zong ascended the throne as Zhao Chenghou.

古文：燕败齐师于林狐。
现代文：燕国在林狐击败齐国军队。
English: Yan's army defeated Qi's army at Linfu.

古文：鲁伐齐，入阳关。
现代文：鲁国攻打齐国，进入阳关。
English: Lu attacked Qi and entered Yangguan.

古文：魏伐齐，至博陵。
现代文：魏国攻打齐国，抵达博陵。
English: Wei attacked Qi and reached Boling.

古文：燕僖公薨，子桓公立。
现代文：燕国燕僖公去世，其子即位，是为燕桓公。
English: Prince Yan Xun of the State of Yan died, and his son ascended the throne as Prince Yan Huan.

古文：宋休公薨，子辟公立。
现代文：宋国宋休公去世，其子即位，是为宋辟公。
English: When Song Xiu Gong of the Song Dynasty died, his son ascended to the throne as Song Pi Gong.

古文：卫慎公薨，子声公训立。
现代文：卫国卫慎公去世，其子卫训即位，是为卫声公。四年
English: After the death of Emperor Weizhen, his son Wei Xun ascended to the throne as Emperor Wei Sheng. Four years passed.

古文：赵伐卫，取都鄙七十三。
现代文：赵国攻打卫国，夺取七十三个村镇。
English: Zhao attacked and defended the country, capturing 73 villages and towns.

古文：魏败赵师于北蔺。
现代文：魏国在北蔺击败赵国军队。五年
English: Wei defeated Zhao's army in Beilun, five years later.

古文：五年庚戌，公元前三七一年
现代文：魏国攻打楚国，夺取鲁阳。
English: Wei attacked Chu and captured Luyang.

古文：魏伐楚，取鲁阳。韩严遂弑哀侯，国人立其子懿侯。
现代文：韩国严遂杀死韩哀侯，国中贵族立哀侯之子，是为韩懿侯。
English: South Korea finally killed Han Yehou, the son of the country's aristocrats, Han Yehou.

古文：初，哀侯以韩廆为相而爱严遂，二人甚相害也。
现代文：当初，韩哀侯曾任命韩为国相却宠爱严遂，两人互相仇恨至深。
English: At first, Han Yehou had appointed Han as his minister of state, but he loved Yan Sui, and the two of them hated each other deeply.

古文：严遂令人刺韩廆于朝，廆走哀侯，哀侯抱之。人刺韩廆，兼及哀侯。
现代文：严遂派人在朝廷行刺韩，韩逃到韩哀侯身边，韩哀侯抱住他，刺客刺韩，连带韩哀侯也被刺死。
English: Yan Sui sent people to assassinate Han in the imperial court, Han fled to Han Mo Hou's side, Han Mo Hou hugged him, the assassin stabbed Han, and he and Han Mo Hou were also stabbed to death.

古文：魏武侯薨，不立太子，子罃与公中缓争立，国内乱。
现代文：魏国魏武侯去世，没有立太子，他的儿子魏与公中缓争位，国内大乱。
English: Wei Wuhou of the State of Wei died without establishing a crown prince, and his son Wei and the prince delayed the dispute, leading to domestic turmoil.

古文：六年辛亥，公元前三七零年
现代文：六年
English: Six years

古文：齐威王来朝。
现代文：齐威王朝拜周烈王。
English: The Qiwei Dynasty worships King Zhou.

古文：是时周室微弱，诸侯莫朝，而齐独朝之，天下以此益贤威王。
现代文：当时周王室已十分衰弱，各诸侯国都不来朝拜，唯独齐王仍来朝拜，因此天下人愈发称赞齐威王贤德。
English: At that time, the Zhou royal family was already very weak, and all the principalities did not come to worship, except for King Qi, who still came to worship. As a result, people around the world increasingly praised the virtue of King Qiwei.

古文：赵伐齐，至鄄。
现代文：赵国攻打齐国，直至鄄地。
English: Zhao attacked Qi until the battle was over.

古文：魏败赵师于怀。
现代文：魏国在怀地击败赵国军队。
English: Wei defeated Zhao's army at Huaiji.

古文：齐威王召即墨大夫，语之曰： 自子之居即墨也，毁言日至。
现代文：齐威王召见即墨大夫，对他说： 自从你到即墨任官，每天都有指责你的话传来。
English: King Qi Wei summoned Dr. Jimo and said to him, "Since you came to Jimo and became an official, there have been accusations against you every day.

古文：然吾使人视即墨，田野辟，人民给，官无事，东方以宁。
现代文：然而我派人去即墨察看，却是田土开辟整治，百姓丰足，官府无事，东方因而十分安定。
English: However, when I sent someone to investigate, it turned out that the land had been developed and improved, the people were prosperous, the government was not involved, and the East was therefore very stable.

古文：是子不事吾左右以求助也。 封之万家。
现代文：于是我知道这是你不巴结我的左右内臣谋求内援的缘故。 
English: So I knew it was because you didn't pander to my right and left vassals to seek internal support.

古文：召阿大夫，语之曰： 自子守阿，誉言日至。
现代文：便封赐即墨大夫享用一万户的俸禄。齐威王又召见阿地大夫，对他说： 自从你到阿地镇守，每天都有称赞你的好话传来。
English: King Ziwei also summoned Dr. Adi and said to him: "Since you came to Adi, there have been good words of praise for you every day.

古文：吾使人视阿，田野不辟，人民贫馁。
现代文：但我派人前去察看阿地，只见田地荒芜，百姓贫困饥饿。
English: But I sent men to explore the land, and behold, the land was desolate, and the people were destitute and hungry.

古文：昔日赵攻鄄，子不救；卫取薛陵，子不知。是子厚币事吾左右以求誉也。 是日，烹阿大夫及左右尝誉者。
现代文：当初赵国攻打鄄地，你不救；卫国夺取薛陵，你不知道；于是我知道你用重金来买通我的左右近臣以求替你说好话！ 当天，齐威王下令烹死阿地大夫及替他说好话的左右近臣。
English: At that time, Zhao attacked Xingdi, and you did not save him; you did not know when the defending country seized Xueling; so I know that you used a lot of money to bribe my right and left vassals to say good words for you! On the same day, King Qi Wei ordered the death of Dr. Adi and his right and left vassals who said good words for him.

古文：于是群臣耸惧，莫敢饰诈，务尽其情，齐国大治，强于天下。
现代文：于是臣僚们毛骨耸然，不敢再弄虚假，都尽力做实事，齐国因此大治，成为天下最强盛的国家。
English: As a result, the ministers were furious, dared not make any more lies, and did their best to do real things. As a result, Qi ruled the country and became the most powerful country in the world.

古文：楚肃王薨，无子，立其弟良夫，是为宣王。
现代文：楚国楚肃王去世，他没有儿子，弟弟良夫即位，是为楚宣王。
English: The King of Chu Su died, he had no son, his brother Ryof ascended the throne, he was the King of Chu Xuan.

古文：七年壬子，公元前三六九年
现代文：宋国宋辟公去世，其子宋剔成即位。七年
English: Song Pi Gong of the Song Dynasty died, and his son Song Qi Cheng ascended to the throne.

古文：王崩，弟扁立，是为显王。
现代文：周烈王去世，弟弟姬扁即位，是为周显王。
English: After the death of King Zhou Rong, his younger brother Qibian ascended to the throne as King Zhou Xian.

古文：魏大夫王错出奔韩。
现代文：魏国大夫王错逃奔韩国。
English: Dr. Wang, a doctor in the German Democratic Republic, fled to South Korea by mistake.

古文：公孙颀谓韩懿侯曰： 魏乱，可取也。 懿侯乃与赵成侯合兵伐魏，战于浊泽，大破之，遂围魏。
现代文：公孙颀对韩懿侯说： 魏国内乱，可以乘机攻取。 韩懿侯于是与赵成侯联合出兵攻打魏国，在浊泽地方交战，大败魏军，包围了魏国都城。
English: Gongsun Qian said to Han Qian Hou: The civil war in Wei can be taken advantage of. Han Qian Hou then jointly sent troops with Zhao Cheng Hou to attack Wei, fought in Heze, defeated the Wei army, and surrounded the capital city of Wei.

古文：成侯曰： 杀罃，立公中缓，割地而退，我二国之利也。 懿侯曰： 不可。
现代文：赵成侯说： 杀掉魏，立公中缓为魏国国君，然后割地退兵，这对我们两国是有利的作法。 韩懿侯说： 不妥。
English: Zhao Chenghou said, "Killing Wei, establishing himself as the sovereign of Wei, and then withdrawing from the battlefield is a good practice for our two countries," Han Zhenghou said, "This is not right."

古文：杀魏君，暴也；割地而退，贪也。
现代文：杀死魏国国君，是强暴；割地后才退兵，是贪婪。
English: It is violence to kill the sovereign of Wei; it is greed to leave the army after cutting the land.

古文：不如两分之。魏分为两，不强于宋、卫，则我终无魏患矣。 赵人不听。
现代文：不如让两人分别治理魏国，魏国分为两半，比宋国、卫国还不如，我们就再也不用担心魏国的威胁了。 赵成侯不同意。
English: It would be better to let the two govern Wei separately. Wei is divided into two halves, worse than Song and Wei, and we would no longer have to worry about the threat of Wei. Zhao Chenghou disagreed.

古文：懿侯不悦，以其兵夜去。
现代文：韩懿侯不高兴，率领他的军队乘夜离去。
English: Han Biao was not happy and led his army away in the night.

古文：赵成侯亦去。
现代文：赵成侯也只好退兵归国。
English: Zhao Chenghou also had to leave the army and return to China.

古文：罃遂杀公中缓而立，是为惠王。
现代文：魏于是杀死公中缓即位，是为魏惠王。
English: Wei then killed Gongzhong and abdicated the throne to Wei Hui Wang.

古文：太史公曰：魏惠王之所以身不死，国不分者，二国之谋不和也。
现代文：太史公司马迁曰：魏惠王之所以能自身不死，国家不被瓜分，是由于韩、赵两国意见不和。
English: Ma Qian of the Taishi Company said: The reason why Wei Hui Wang could not die and the country could not be divided was due to the discord between South Korea and Zhao.

古文：若从一家之谋，魏必分矣。
现代文：如果按照其中一家的办法去做，魏国一定会被瓜分。
English: If one of them is followed, the state of Wei will definitely be divided.

古文：故曰： 君终，无適子，其国可破也。 
现代文：所以说： 国君死时，无继承人，国家就会被击破。 
English: Therefore, it is said: When the sovereign dies, there is no successor, and the country will be destroyed.

