古文：大司寇之职，掌建邦之三典，以佐王刑邦国，诘四方。一曰，刑新国用轻典；二曰，刑平国用中典；三曰，刑乱国用重典。
现代文：大司寇的职责，负责建立和颁行治理天下的三法，以辅佐王惩罚违法的诸侯国，禁止四方各国的叛逆：一是惩罚新建立之国用轻法，二是惩罚违法的旧国用中法，三是惩罚乱国用重法。
English: The duties of the grand secretary of the Kuo, responsible for establishing and issuing the three laws governing the world, to assist the king in punishing the illegal vassal states, and prohibiting the rebellion of the four countries: one is to punish the newly established country with light law, the second is to punish the illegal old country with medium law, and the third is to punish the chaotic country with heavy law.

古文：以五刑纠万民：一曰野刑，上功纠力；二曰军刑，上命纠守；三曰乡刑，上德纠孝；四曰官刑，上能纠职；五曰国刑；上愿纠暴。
现代文：用五种刑法纠察民众：一是针对野地之民的刑法，以鼓励务农而纠察是否勤劳；二是针对军队的刑法，以鼓励服从军令而纠察是否有离队的；三是针对六乡之民的刑法，以鼓励德行而纠察是否有不孝的；四是针对官府的刑法，以鼓励贤能而纠察是否失职；五是针对国都之民的刑法，以鼓励谨慎而纠察是否恭敬。
English: Five kinds of criminal laws are used to picket the people: First, the criminal law for the people in the field, to encourage farming and picket whether they are hardworking; Second, the criminal law for the army, to encourage obedience to military orders and picket whether they have left the army; Third, the criminal law for the people in the six townships, to encourage virtue and picket whether they are not filial; Fourth, the criminal law for the government, to encourage virtue and picket whether they are derelict in their duties; Fifth, the criminal law for the people in the capital, to encourage caution and picket whether they are respectful.

古文：以圆土聚教罢民，凡害人者，寘之圆土而施职事焉，以明刑耻之，其能改者，反于中国，不齿三年。
现代文：用狱城聚教那些游手好闲的不良之民。凡危害人畜，把他关入狱城而罚做工，写明他的罪行让他背在背上以羞辱他。那些能改过的，就释放回故里，但三年不得按年龄大小与一般乡民排列尊卑位次。
English: Use the prison city to gather and teach the bad people who are idle. Anyone who endangers people and animals, put him in the prison city and punish him to work, let him carry his crime on his back to humiliate him. Those who can change will be released back to their hometowns, but for three years they will not be ranked according to their age with the general villagers.

古文：其不能改而出圆土者杀。
现代文：那些不能改过而逃出狱城的，处死。
English: Those who can't be reformed and escape from prison will be put to death.

古文：以两造禁民讼，入束矢于朝，然后听之，以两剂禁民狱，入钧金。三日，乃致于朝，然后听之。
现代文：用使诉讼双方都到场的办法来防禁诉讼不实之辞，先交一束矢给朝廷，然后受理诉讼。通过诉讼双方都携带有关文拿证明材料的办法来防禁人们对于大案的诉讼有不实之辞，先交三十斤铜，过三天才让诉讼双方来朝，然后受理诉讼。
English: In order to prevent people from saying untrue things about the litigation of a big case, both parties to the litigation should bring relevant documents to prevent people from saying untrue things about the litigation of a big case. First, 30 kilos of copper should be paid, and after three days, both parties to the litigation should come to the DPRK, and then the litigation should be accepted.

古文：以嘉石平罢民，凡万民之有罪过而未丽于法而害于州里者，桎梏而坐诸嘉石，役诸司空。
现代文：用嘉石来使不良之民改过向善。凡民众有罪过而尚未犯法，却危害乡里的，就给他们戴上手镣脚铐罚坐嘉石，然后交给司空。
English: People who have committed a crime but have not yet broken the law, but have harmed the countryside, will be punished with handcuffs, shackles and shackles, and then handed over to the magistrate.

古文：重罪，旬有三日坐，期役；其次，九日坐，九月役；其次，七日坐，七月役；其次；五日坐，五月役；其下罪，三日坐，三月役，使州里任之，则宥而舍之。
现代文：罪重的罚坐嘉石十三天，服役一年；其次罚坐九天，服役九个月；又其次罚坐七天，服役七个月；又其次罚坐五天，服役五个月；又轻一等的罪罚坐三天，服役三个月。由同州里的人担保，就宽宥而释放他。
English: For the most serious crime, Jia Shi was sentenced to 13 days in prison and one year of service; for the next crime, he was sentenced to nine days in prison and nine months of service; for the next crime, he was sentenced to seven days in prison and seven months of service; for the next crime, he was sentenced to five days in prison and five months of service; and for the least serious crime, he was sentenced to three days in prison and three months of service.

古文：以肺石达穷民，凡远近茕独、老幼之欲有复于上，而其长弗达者，立于肺石三日，士听其辞，以告于上，而罪其长。
现代文：用肺石使穷苦无告之民的冤辞能够上达。凡远近孤独无靠或年老、幼弱之民想要向上申诉冤屈，而他们的长官不予转达的，就来到肺石上站三天，然后由朝士听他诉说冤屈，以报告朝廷，而惩罚他们的长官。
English: The Lung Stone was used to make it possible for the grievances of the poor and destitute to be heard. When the poor, the lonely, the old, and the weak wanted to appeal to the emperor for their grievances, but their officers would not allow them to do so, they would stand on the Lung Stone for three days, and then the court officials would listen to their grievances, report them to the imperial court, and punish their officers.

古文：正月之吉，始和，布刑于邦国、都鄙乃县刑象之法于象魏，使万民观刑象。挟日，而敛之。
现代文：正月初一，开始向各诸侯国和王畿内的采邑宣布刑法，把形成文字的刑法悬挂在象魏上，让万民观看刑法，过十天而后收藏起来。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, they began to announce the criminal law to the various states and counties in the kingdom, and hung the written criminal law on the elephant Wei, so that all the people could watch the criminal law, and then collect it after ten days.

古文：凡邦之大盟约，莅其盟书，而登之于天府，大史、内史、司会、及六官，皆受其贰而藏之。
现代文：凡王与诸侯因会同而订立盟约，就亲临监视盟约的书写，然后上交天府，大史、内史、司会及六卿，都接受盟约的副本加以收藏。
English: All kings and princes signed the covenant because of their association, and they personally monitored the writing of the covenant, and then submitted it to the Heavenly Palace, the Grand Historian, the Inner Historian, the Secretary and the Six Lords, all of whom accepted copies of the covenant for collection.

古文：凡诸侯之狱讼，以邦典定之。
现代文：凡诸侯之间的诉讼，用王国的六典来审定。
English: All lawsuits between lords were to be decided according to the six canons of the kingdom.

古文：凡卿大夫之狱讼，以邦法断之。
现代文：凡卿大夫之间的诉讼，用王国的八法来评断。
English: Lawsuits between ordinary doctors should be judged according to the eight laws of the kingdom.

古文：凡庶民之狱讼，以邦成弊之。
现代文：凡庶民之间的诉讼，用王国的八成来判断。
English: In lawsuits between commoners, let 80% of the kingdom be the judge.

古文：大祭祀，奉犬牲；若祀五帝，则戒之日，莅誓百官，戒于百族。
现代文：举行大祭祀，负责奉进犬牲。用裎祀来祭祀五帝，就宣告祭祀的日期，临视对百官的告诫，又对服务于官府的府史胥徒们进行告诫。
English: He held a great sacrifice, and was in charge of bringing in the dogs and animals. When the five emperors were sacrificed with the yakitori, he announced the date of the sacrifice, admonished the officials, and also admonished the prefectural historians who served in the government.

古文：及纳亨，前王祭之日，亦如之。
现代文：到行纳亨礼的时候，为王做前导。
English: When it's time to perform the Nakhon Rite, act as an usher for the king.

古文：奉其明水火。
现代文：到天大亮以后也这样做。负责奉进明水和明火。
English: They do the same after dawn. They are responsible for fetching water and lighting fires.

古文：凡朝觐、会同，前王，大丧亦如之。
现代文：凡举行朝觐、会同，为王前导。有大丧也这样做。
English: Whenever there is a pilgrimage, everyone should come together as a vanguard for the king. If there is a great mourning, they should do the same.

古文：大军旅，莅戮于社。
现代文：有重大军事行动，亲临监视在军社前行刑。
English: There was a major military operation, and he personally monitored the execution in front of the military society.

古文：凡邦之大事，使其属跸。
现代文：凡王国有大事，就派属吏禁止闲人通行。
English: Whenever there is a major event in the kingdom, officials are dispatched to prohibit the passage of idlers.

