古文：清水出河内修武县之北黑山，黑山在县北白鹿山东，清水所出也，上承诸陂散泉，积以成川。
现代文：清水发源于河内郡情武县的北黑山，黑山在了者武县北方白鹿山的东头，是清水的发源地。
English: The clear water originates from the northern Black Mountain in Rongwu County, Hanoi County. The Black Mountain is located at the eastern end of the northern White Deer Mountain in Rongwu County. It is the birthplace of the clear water.

古文：南流西南屈，瀑布乘岩，悬河注壑二十余丈，雷赴之声，震动山谷。
现代文：清水上流承接破塘散流的水，汇集成为河流南流，转向西南；水流成为瀑布，乘岩而下，从二十余丈的高处直泻入深壑中，轰雷般的响声震动了整个山谷。
English: The clear water flowing upstream received the scattered water from the broken pond, and gathered into the south stream of the river, turning to the southwest; the water flow became a waterfall, down the rock, from a height of more than twenty feet straight into the depths, and the thunderous sound shook the entire valley.

古文：左右石壁层深，兽迹不交，隍中散水雾合，视不见底。
现代文：两边的石壁层层叠叠极其幽深，连野兽的足迹也到不了那里，深涧中水流冲激飞溅，升腾起一层雾气，俯视深不见底。
English: The layers of stone walls on both sides are extremely deep, even the footprints of wild beasts cannot reach there, the water rushes and splashes in the depths, a layer of fog rises, and there is no bottom to the view.

古文：南峰北岭，多结禅栖之士，东岩西谷，又是刹灵之图，竹柏之怀，与神心妙远，仁智之性，共山水效深，更为胜处也。
现代文：这一带远近各处的峰岭上，居住着不少修道幽居的人，岩谷间也散布着些寺院佛塔。清高绝俗的情怀，与神灵之心一样幽远，仁人志士们的至性，得山水之美而愈益深厚，这真是极其佳胜的地方。
English: In this area, on the peaks far and near, there are many monks and hermits living, and there are also some temples and stupas scattered among the valleys. The feelings of purity and sublimity are as distant as the hearts of the gods, and the supremacy of the benevolent people is more and more profound due to the beauty of the landscape. This is really an extremely beautiful place.

古文：其水历涧飞流，清冷洞观，谓之清水矣。
现代文：山水穿过幽涧飞流，澄澈见底，因而称为清水。
English: The mountain water flows through the secluded stream and is crystal clear, so it is called clear water.

古文：溪曰瑶溪，又曰瑶涧。
现代文：溪叫瑶溪，又叫瑶涧。
English: A stream is called a reed stream, also called a reed pond.

古文：清水又南，与小瑶水合，水近出西北穷溪，东南流注清水。
现代文：清水又南流，与小瑶水汇合。小瑶水发源于西北近处深山里的溪涧。往东南流，注入清水。
English: Clear water also flows south, merging with Xiaobang water. Xiaobang water originates from a creek in the deep mountains near the northwest. It flows southeast, injecting clear water.

古文：清水又东南流，吴泽陂水注之，水上承吴陂于修武县故城西北。
现代文：清水又往东南流，有吴泽破水注入。破水上流在惰武县老城西北承接吴破。
English: The clear water also flows to the southeast, and is injected by the Wuzhe watershed. The upstream watershed joins the Wuzhe watershed in the northwest of the old city of Neiwu County.

古文：修武，故宁也，亦曰南阳矣。
现代文：惰武县就是旧时的宁，又叫南阳。
English: Neowu County is the old Ning, also known as Nanyang.

古文：马季长曰：晋地自朝歌以北至中山为东阳，朝歌以南至轵为南阳。
现代文：马季长说：晋国地域从朝歌以北到中山是东阳，朝歌到软是南阳。
English: Ma Jichang said: The area of Jin Province from the north of the morning song to Zhongshan is Dongyang, and from the morning song to the soft is Nanyang.

古文：故应劭《地理风俗记》云：河内殷国也，周名之为南阳。
现代文：所以应动《地理风俗记》说：河内是殷国，周人称为南阳。
English: Therefore, in response to the "Geography and Customs," it was said that Hanoi is Yin country, and Zhou people are called Nanyang.

古文：又曰：晋始启南阳。
现代文：又说：晋国开始开发南阳。
English: He also said that Jin Province has begun to develop Nanyang.

古文：今南阳城是也。
现代文：指的就是现在的南阳城。秦始皇改名为惰武。
English: It refers to the current Nanyang City. Qin Shihuang changed its name to Neowu.

古文：秦始皇改曰修武，徐广、王隐并言始皇改。
现代文：徐广、王隐也都说是秦始皇改的。
English: Xu Guang and Wang Yin are also said to have been reformed by Qin Shi Huang.

古文：瓒注《汉书》云：案《韩非书》，秦昭王越赵长平，西代修武，时秦未兼天下，修武之名久矣。
现代文：薛攒注《汉书》说：按韩非的书，秦昭王越过赵国的长平，从西面进攻惰武，当时秦国还没有统一天下，情武这地名早就有了。
English: According to the book of Han Fei, Qin Zhaowang crossed Changping of Zhao and attacked Neowu from the west. At that time, Qin had not yet unified the country, and the name of this place, Zhiwu, already existed.

古文：余案《韩诗外传》言，武王伐纣，勒兵于宁，更名宁曰修武矣，魏献子田大陆还，卒于宁是也。
现代文：我按《韩诗外传》说：武王讨伐封王，在宁练兵，把宁改名为惰武。魏献子在大陆打猎回来，死于宁。
English: According to the "History of Korean Poetry," I said: King Wu fought against King Ho, trained soldiers in Ning, and changed the name of Ning to Neowu. Wei Xianzi came back from hunting on the mainland and died in Ning.

古文：汉高帝八年，封都尉魏遬为侯国，亦曰大修武。
现代文：汉高帝八年前，把这里封给都尉魏遨，立为侯国，也叫大惰武。
English: Eight years ago, Emperor Han Gao assigned this place to Lieutenant Wei Wei and established it as a vassal state, also known as the Great Lazy Wu.

古文：有小，故称大。
现代文：因为有个小惰武，所以这里叫大情武。
English: Because there is a small lazy martial arts, so here is called big emotion martial arts.

古文：小修武在东，汉祖与滕公济自玉门津，而宿小修武者也。
现代文：小惰武在东，汉高祖与滕公从玉门津渡水，夜宿小惰武，就是这地方。
English: Xiao Neiwu is in the east, Henkel's ancestor and Tenggong crossed the water from Yumenjin, and Xiao Neiwu's night shelter is here.

古文：大陆即吴泽矣。
现代文：大陆就是吴泽。
English: The mainland is Wuzhe.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：修武城西北二十里有吴泽水。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：惰武城西北二十里有吴泽水。
English: "Wei Shiji Ji" said: There is Wu Ze Shui in the northwest twenty of Neowu City.

古文：东径雍城南，寒泉水注之，水出雍城西北，泉流南注，径雍城西。
现代文：肢塘南北约二十里，东西三十里，西边有长明沟流入。此水有两个源头，北边一条上游承接河内野王县东北的界沟，分出支流就是长明沟，往东流经雍城南面，有寒泉水注入。寒泉水发源于雍城西北面，泉水往南流经雍城西面。
English: This water has two sources. In the north, there is an upstream ditch that follows the northeast boundary of Hanoi's Nio County. The branching tributary is the Changming ditch. It flows eastward through the south of Yongcheng and is fed by cold spring water. The cold spring water originates in the northwest of Yongcheng, and the spring water flows southward through the west of Yongcheng.

古文：《春秋》僖公二十四年，王将以狄伐郑，富辰谏曰：雍，文之昭也。
现代文：《春秋》：禧公二十四年前，周王打算调狄人去攻郑国。富辰劝、阻道：雍是文王子孙的封国。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-four years ago, King Zhou planned to incite the Di people to attack Zheng. Fuchen advised and discouraged: Yong is the fief of Prince Wen's grandson.

古文：京相璠曰：今河内山阳西有故雍城。
现代文：京相播说：现在河内山阳西面有旧雍城。
English: The Beijing Foreign Minister said, "Nowadays, there is the old Yongcheng in the west of Hanoi's Sanyang.

古文：又东南注长明沟，沟水又东径射犬城北。
现代文：又往东南注入长明沟，沟水又往东流经射犬城北面。
English: It also flows into the Changminggou to the southeast, and the ditch water flows eastward to the north of Shainongcheng.

古文：汉大司马张扬为将杨丑所害，眭固杀丑屯此，欲北合袁绍。
现代文：汉朝大司马张扬被将军杨丑所害，睦固杀了驻在这里的杨丑，心想北进与袁绍会合。
English: Han Dynasty Grand Master Ma Zhangyang was victimized by General Yang Jiu. Mugu killed Yang Jiu, who was stationed here, and wanted to go north to join Yuan Shao.

古文：《典略》曰：眭固字白菟。
现代文：《典略》说：睦固字白冤。
English: "The Abridged Text" says: "Mukoguji's words are nothing but lies."

古文：或戒固曰：将军字菟，而此邑名犬，菟见大，其势必惊，宜急去，固不从。
现代文：有人提醒睦固说：将军字冤，而这座城名叫犬，兔子见了狗势必惊吓，你还是赶快离开为好。但睦固不听。
English: Someone reminded Mutsugu that the word "general" means "misfortune" and that the city is called "dog." When a rabbit sees a dog, it is bound to be frightened. You had better leave quickly. But Mutsugu did not listen.

古文：汉建安四年，魏太祖斩之干此。以魏种为河内太守，守之。
现代文：汉建安四年，魏太祖就在这里杀了他，派魏种去当河内太守，驻守在这里。
English: In the fourth year of Han Jianan, Wei Taizu killed him here and sent Wei Zong to be the governor of Hanoi, stationed here.

古文：沇州叛，太祖曰：惟种不弃孤。
现代文：充州反叛时，太祖说：只有魏种不会背弃我。
English: At the time of the rebellion in Chenzhou, the great ancestor said, "Only the Wei race will not betray me."

古文：及走，太祖怒曰：种不南走越，北走胡，不汝置也。
现代文：但他却逃走了，太祖生气地说：魏种不往南逃到南越，往北逃向胡人，我不会饶了你的！
English: However, he ran away. The great-grandfather angrily said, "Wei Zong did not flee south to South Vietnam, he fled north to the Huns. I will not spare you!"

古文：射犬平，禽之。公曰：惟其才也。释而用之。
现代文：平定射犬后，就把他抓住了，曹操说：我只是看中他的才能，才免了他的罪加以使用的。
English: Cao Cao said, "I was only taking advantage of his talent, I did not commit the crime of using him."

古文：长明沟水东入石涧，东流，蔡沟水入焉，水上承州县北，白马沟东分，谓之蔡沟。东会长明沟水，又东径修武县之吴亭北，东入吴陂。
现代文：长明沟水东流注入石涧，东流，有蔡沟水注入。蔡沟水上流承接州县北面的白马沟，向东分支流出，称为蔡沟，往东与长明沟水汇合，又往东流经情武县吴亭北面，往东注入吴破。
English: The eastern stream of the Changming ditch water is injected into Shizhu, and the eastern stream is injected by the Cai ditch water. The upper stream of the Cai ditch water is derived from the Baima ditch in the north of Yezhou County, and branches out to the east, known as the Cai ditch. It merges with the water of the Changming ditch to the east, and flows eastward through the north of Wuting, Rongwu County, and is injected into Wubao to the east.

古文：次北有苟泉水入焉，水出山阳县故修武城西南，同源分派，裂为二水。南为苟泉，北则吴渎，二渎双导，俱东入陂。
现代文：稍北有苟泉水注入。苟泉水出自山阳县惰武城西南，同一个源头分成两条水；南边是苟泉，北边是吴读，两条水都往东流入破塘中。
English: Slightly to the north, the Gou Spring water is injected. The Gou Spring water comes from the southwest of Neowu City, Sanyang County. The same source is divided into two streams; the south side is the Gou Spring, and the north side is Wuyao. Both streams flow eastward into the broken pond.

古文：山阳县东北二十五里有陆真阜，南有皇母、马鸣二泉，东南合注于吴陂也。
现代文：山阳县东北二十五里有陆真阜，南面有皇母、马鸣两条水泉，往东南合流注入吴破。
English: In the northeast 25th of Sanyang County, there is Lu Zhenfu, and in the south, there are two water springs, the Empress Mother and Ma Ming, which merge in the southeast and flow into the Wubao River.

古文：次陆真阜之东北，复覆釜堆，堆南有三泉，相去四五里，参差次合，南注于陂。
现代文：靠近陆真阜的东北面，有覆釜堆，覆釜堆南有三支泉水，相距各有四五里，参差地汇合，往南注入破泉。
English: On the northeastern side of the island, close to the mainland, there is a caldron mound. To the south of the caldron mound, there are three springs, each separated by four or five miles. They converge irregularly, and a broken spring is injected to the south.

古文：泉在浊鹿城西，建安二十五年，魏封汉献帝为山阳公。浊鹿城，即是公所居也。
现代文：破泉在浊鹿城西边，建安二十五年，魏封汉献帝为山阳公，浊鹿城就是他所居的地方。
English: The Broken Spring is on the west side of Elk City. In the 25th year of Jian'an, Wei, Feng and Han offered the emperor as the Sun King, and Elk City was the place where he lived.

古文：陂水之北际泽，侧有隤城。
现代文：破水北面，靠近沼泽，旁边有馈城。
English: North of the water break, near the swamp, next to the feeding city.

古文：《春秋》隐公十一年，王以司寇苏忿生之田，攒茅、隤十二邑与郑者也。
现代文：《春秋》隐公十一年前，周王把司寇苏忿生的田地―攒茅、馈等十二个城邑给与郑人。
English: Eleven years before "Spring and Autumn" was published, King Zhou gave twelve townships to the Zheng people, including the fields that were the birthplace of Scor So Ren.

古文：京相瑶曰：河内修武县北有故隤城，实中。
现代文：京相潘说：河内惰武县北面有老馈城，很坚固。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: There is an old feeder city in the north of Hanoi's Neowu County, which is very strong.

古文：今世俗谓之皮垣，方四百步，实中，高八丈。
现代文：现在俗称皮垣，很坚固，四百步见方，高八丈。
English: Now commonly known as the leather fence, it is very strong, four hundred paces square, eight meters high.

古文：际陂，北隔水十五里，俗所谓兰丘也，方二百步。
现代文：靠近破塘北岸，隔水十五里，就是民间所说的兰丘，方圆二百步。
English: Close to the north shore of the broken pond, fifteen miles across the water, is what the people call Lanqiu, with a radius of two hundred paces.

古文：西十里又有一丘际山，世谓之敕丘，方五百步，形状相类，疑即古攒茅也。
现代文：往西十里又有一座小丘，靠近山边，人们称为救丘，方圆五百步，形状相似，想来可能就是古时的攒茅。
English: Ten miles to the west, there is another small hill, close to the edge of the mountain, which people call Salvation Hill. It is five hundred paces in circumference and has a similar shape. It may be thought of as the ancient Scarecrow.

古文：杜预曰：二邑在修武县北，所未详也。
现代文：杜预说：两座城都在惰武县北边，不知是否如此。
English: Du Yu said: Both cities are in the north of Neowu County, I don't know if that's true.

古文：又东，长泉水注之，源出白鹿山东南，伏流径十三里，重源浚发于邓城西北，世亦谓之重泉水也。
现代文：又东流，有长泉水注入。长泉源出白鹿山东南，潜流地下十三里，又在邓城西北重新流出地面，世人也叫重泉水。
English: It also flows to the east and is fed by the Long Spring. The Long Spring originates in the southeast of Mount Shirakawa, flows underground for thirteen miles, and flows out of the ground again in the northwest of Dengcheng. People also call it heavy spring water.

古文：又径七贤祠东。
现代文：又流经七贤祠东面，祠庙左右两边遍植翠竹，无论冬夏都是秀色葱笼。
English: It also flows through the eastern side of the Ancestral Hall of the Seven Sages, and both sides of the ancestral hall and temple are covered with green bamboo. Regardless of winter and summer, it is a beautiful green onion cage.

古文：左右筠篁列植，冬夏不变贞萎，魏步兵校尉陈留阮籍，中散大夫谯国嵇康，晋司徒河内山涛，司徒琅邪王戎，黄门郎河内向秀，建威参军沛国刘伶，始平太守阮咸等，同居山阳，结自得之游，时人号之为竹林七贤。
现代文：魏步兵校尉陈留阮籍、中散大夫谁国秘康、晋司徒河内山涛、司徒榔邪王戎、黄门郎河内向秀、建威参军沛国刘伶、始平太守阮咸等，都一同住在山阳，常结伴同游，逍遥自得，当时人称他们为竹林七贤。
English: Wei Infantry Captain Chen Liu Ruan, Zhongshan Doctor Quang Guo Hikang, Jin Sittu Hanoi Shan Tao, Sittu Quan Ying Wang Rong, Huang Men Lang Hanoi Xiu Xiu, Jian Wei Joined the Army Pei Guo Liu Hui, Shi Ping Empress Dowager Ruan Han, etc. all lived together in the mountains, often traveling together and enjoying themselves. At that time, they were known as the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest.

古文：向子期所谓山阳旧居也，后人立庙于其处。庙南又有一泉，东南流注于长泉水。
现代文：这就是向子期所渭的山阳旧居。后人在那地方立庙，庙南有一条泉水，往东南流，注入长泉水。
English: This is the former residence of Sanyang, which was built in the Xiangzi period. Later generations built a temple in the area. There is a spring to the south of the temple, which flows to the southeast and injects long spring water.

古文：郭缘生《述征记》所云，白鹿山东南二十五里有嵇公故居，以居时有遗竹焉，盖谓此也。
现代文：郭缘生《述征记》说，白鹿山东南二十五里有稽公故居，因为当时还留有竹林才知道的。
English: Guo Yansheng's "Record of the Conquest" said that there was a former residence of Jigong in the 25th southeast of Bailu Mountain, which was only known because there was still a bamboo forest at that time.

古文：其水又南径邓城东，名之为邓渎，又谓之为白屋水也。
现代文：他指的就是这地方。水又往南流经邓城东边，名为邓读，又称白屋水。
English: He was referring to this place. The water flows south through the eastern part of Dengcheng, and is called Deng Yue, also known as Baiya Water.

古文：昔司马懿征公孙渊还达白屋，即于此也。
现代文：从前司马爵攻打公孙渊，归来时到达白屋，就指这地方。
English: It refers to the place where Sima Jie attacked Gongsun Yuan in the past and reached Baiya when he returned.

古文：其水又东南流径隤城北，又东南历泽注于陂。
现代文：水又往东南流经馈城北面，又往东南流过沼泽，注入破塘中。
English: The water flows to the southeast, feeding the north side of the city, and flows to the southeast through the swamp and into the broken pond.

古文：陂水东流，谓之八光沟，而东流注于清水，谓之长清河，而东周永丰坞，有丁公泉发于焦泉之右。
现代文：破水东流，称为八光沟；东流注入清水，又叫长清河。东周的永丰坞有丁公泉，从焦泉右边流出。
English: The east-flowing stream is called the Hakko-gou; the east-flowing stream injects clear water and is also called the Changqing River. The Yongfeng dock on the eastern periphery has the Dinggong Spring, which flows out of the right side of the hot spring.

古文：次东得焦泉，泉发于天门之左、天井固右。天门山石自空，状若门焉，广三丈，高两匹，深丈余，更无所出，世谓之天门也。
现代文：稍东又有焦泉，此泉是从天门左边、天并固右边流出的，天门山的岩石天然形成空缺，形状像是门户，宽三丈，高八丈，深约一丈余，此外没有别的出日，因此世人称为天门。
English: Slightly to the east, there is also a hot spring. This spring flows from the left side of Tianmen and the right side of Tianbin. The rocks of Tianmen Mountain naturally form a gap, shaped like a portal, three meters wide, eight meters high, and about one meter deep. In addition, there is no other sunrise, so the world is called Tianmen.

古文：东五百余步，中有石穴西向，裁得客人，东南入，径至天井，直上三匹有余，扳蹑而升，至上平，东西二百步，南北七百步，四面险绝，无由升陟矣。
现代文：往东五百余步，内有石洞，洞日朝西，只容得下一个人，从东南方进入，可直达天井；从这里一直往上爬了大约十二丈，手扳脚踏，直爬到上面，却是一片坦平的山顶，东西二百步，南北七百步，四面险峻陡峭极了，根本没有可攀登的地方。
English: More than five hundred steps to the east, there is a stone cave inside, the cave faces west, it can only accommodate the next person, entering from the southeast, it can reach the ceiling; from here, I climbed up about twelve feet, hand and foot, and climbed straight to the top, but it is a flat mountain top, two hundred steps to the east and west, seven hundred steps to the north and south, very steep and steep on all sides, there is no place to climb.

古文：上有比丘释僧训精舍，寺有十余僧，给养难周，多出下平，有志者居之。
现代文：顶上有持戒僧人训修行的地方，寺内有僧徒十余人，衣食等生活必需品都要从下面的平原搬运上来，很难供应周全，所以只有修炼意志十分坚定的人才会来这里居住。
English: At the top, there is a place for monks to practice, and there are more than ten monks in the temple. The necessities of life, such as food and clothing, have to be carried up from the plains below. It is difficult to provide a comprehensive supply, so only those who are very determined to cultivate will come to live here.

古文：寺左右杂树疏颁，有一石泉，方丈余，清水湛然，常无增减，山居者资以给饮。
现代文：寺院旁边杂树疏疏落落，有一洼石井泉，约莫丈余见方，一涨清泉平静不波，住在山上的人都靠这泉水饮用。
English: Next to the temple, there is a grove of sparse trees. There is a shallow stone well spring, which is about as long as it is wide. The clear spring is calm when it rises. People who live in the mountains rely on this spring water for drinking.

古文：北有石室二口，旧是隐者念一之所，今无人矣。
现代文：北边有两个石室，从前是隐居的人静心修炼的地方，现在已经无人居住了。
English: There are two stone chambers on the north side, which used to be a place for secluded people to meditate and cultivate, but are now uninhabited.

古文：泉发于北阜，南流成溪，世谓之焦泉也。
现代文：泉水从北阜涌出，南流成为溪涧，人们称为焦泉。
English: The spring water gushes out from Beifu, and the south stream becomes a stream, and people call it a scorched spring.

古文：次东得鱼鲍泉，次东得张波泉，次东得三渊泉，梗河参连，女宿相属，是四川在重门城西并单川南注也。
现代文：稍东有鱼鲍泉，稍东有张波泉，稍东有三渊泉，这四条泉水正像梗河三星结合在一起，并与女宿遥相联系一样，在重门城一西面汇合成为一条，往南流注。
English: A little to the east is Fubao Spring, a little to the east is Zhangbo Spring, and a little to the east is Sanyuan Spring. These four springs are just like the three stars of the Yangtze River combined together, and are connected with the women's hostel far away, merging into one on the west side of Chongmen City, flowing southward.

古文：重门城，昔齐王芳为司马师废之，宫于此，即《魏志》所谓送齐王于河内重门者也。
现代文：重门城是从前齐王芳被司马师废黝后，在这里居住之处。《魏志》说的遣送齐王到河内重门，就是这地方。
English: Chongmengcheng is the place where Qi Wangfang lived after he was deposed by Sima Shi. It is the place where "Weizhi" said that Qi Wangfang was sent to Chongmen, Hanoi.

古文：城在共县故城西北二十里。
现代文：城在共县老城西北二十里，城南有安阳破，稍东又有卓水破，稍东又有百门破。
English: The city is located 20 miles northwest of the old city of Gongxian County. To the south of the city is Anyang, to the east is Zhuoshui, and to the east is Baimen.

古文：城南有安阳陂，次东又得卓水陂，次东有百门陂，陂方五百步，在共县故城西。汉高帝八年，封卢罢师为共侯，即共和之故国也。
现代文：百门肢方圆五百步，在共县老城西面。汉高帝八年前，封卢罢师为共侯，就是共和的故都。
English: It is 500 paces from the 100 gates to the west of the county's old town. Eight years before the Han Dynasty, it was the former capital of the Republic.

古文：共伯既归帝政，逍遥于共山之上。
现代文：共伯还政于宣王，在共山上逍遥自在地过着隐居生活。
English: Comrade Bo returned to the throne of Xuanwang and lived a secluded life in the mountains.

古文：山在国北，所谓共北山也，仙者孙登之所处，袁彦伯《竹林七贤传》，嵇叔夜尝采药山泽，遇之于山，冬以被发自覆，夏则编草为裳，弹一弦琴，而五声和。
现代文：山在都城北面，就是所谓共北山，仙人孙登就住在那里。袁彦伯仗竹林七贤传》载，秘叔夜曾在山林泽地采药，在山上遇到他，冬天散着头发来遮蔽自己的身体，夏天编草做衣裳，他用独弦琴弹奏，却能奏出和谐的五音。
English: The mountain is in the north of the capital city, that is, the so-called North Mountain, where the hermit Sun Deng lived. According to "The Legend of the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest" written by Yuan Yan Boqi, his uncle used to collect medicine in the mountains and forests, and met him on the mountain. In winter, he wore his hair loose to cover his body, and in summer, he made clothes from weeds. He played the solo violin, but he could play five harmonious notes.

古文：其水三川南合，谓之清川。
现代文：山上有三条水南流汇合成一条，称为清川。
English: On the mountain, three streams converge to form one stream, known as the Kiyokawa.

古文：又南径凡城东。
现代文：又往南流经凡城东。
English: It then flows south through the eastern part of the city.

古文：司马彪、袁山松《郡国志》曰：共县有凡亭，周凡伯国。
现代文：司马彪、袁山松《郡国志》说：共县有凡亭，是周时凡伯的封国。
English: Sima Biao and Yuan Shansong in "County History" said: "All counties have Fantei, which is the fiefdom of Zhou Shi Fanbo."

古文：《春秋》隐公七年，《经》书，王使凡伯来聘是也。
现代文：《春秋》：隐公七年前，《经》文记载，周王派遣凡伯前来访问。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Seven years ago, according to the "Ching" text, King Zhou sent Fan Bo to visit.

古文：杜预曰：汲郡共县东南有凡城。
现代文：杜预说：汲郡共县东南有凡城。
English: Du Yu said: There is a city in the southeast of Kyu County.

古文：今在西南。
现代文：现在却在西南面。
English: Now it's in the southwest.

古文：其水又西南与前四水总为一渎，又谓之陶水，南流注于清水。
现代文：水又往西南流，与前面那四条水汇为一条，又叫陶水，南流注入清水。
English: The water flows to the southwest, merging with the four streams in front of it to form one stream, also known as pottery water. The southern stream injects fresh water.

古文：清水又东周新丰坞，又东注也。
现代文：清水又东流，绕过新丰坞，然后又往东奔去。
English: The clear water also flows east, bypassing the new Feng dock, and then rushes east again.

古文：东北过获嘉县北，《汉书》称越相吕嘉反，武帝元鼎六年，巡行于汲郡中乡，得吕嘉首，因以为获嘉县。
现代文：往东北流过获嘉县北边，《汉书》说越国承相吕嘉谋反，武帝元鼎六年前，巡察汲县中乡，获得吕嘉的头颅，因此叫获嘉县。
English: To the northeast, it flows through the northern part of Guojia County. According to the "Chinese Book," Yue Guo's successor, Lujia, plotted a rebellion. Six years before the reign of Emperor Wu, he inspected the middle of the county and obtained Lujia's head. Therefore, it is called Guojia County.

古文：后汉封侍中冯石为侯国。
现代文：后汉时把这里封给侍中冯石，立为侯国。
English: Later, during the Han Dynasty, it was given to the chamberlain Feng Shi and established as a principality.

古文：县故城西有汉桂阳太守赵越墓，冢北有碑。
现代文：获嘉县老城西有汉时桂阳太守赵越墓，坟墓北面有石碑。
English: In the west of the old town of Hujia County, there is the tomb of Zhao Yue, the governor of Guiyang during the Han Dynasty. There is a stone monument on the north side of the tomb.

古文：越字彦善，县人也。累迁桂阳郡、五官将、尚书仆射，遭忧服阕，守河南尹，建宁中卒。
现代文：赵越字彦善，本县人，历任桂阳郡太守，五官将，尚书仆射，因为父母丧亡，守孝三年期满后，任命为河南尹，建宁年间亡故。
English: Zhao Yue Zi Yan Shan, a native of this county, successively served as the governor of Guiyang County, five officials, Shang Shufu, because his parents died, after the expiration of the three-year period of filial piety, he was appointed as Henan Yin, and died during Jianning.

古文：碑东又有一碑，碑北有石柱、石牛、羊、虎俱碎，沦毁莫记。
现代文：石碑东面又有一块碑，碑北有石柱、石牛、石羊、石虎，都破碎毁坏了，无可记述。
English: On the east side of the stone monument, there is another monument. On the north side of the monument, there is a stone pillar, a stone ox, a stone sheep, and a stone tiger, all of which have been broken and destroyed beyond description.

古文：清水又东周新乐城，城在获嘉县故城东北，即汲之新中乡也。
现代文：清水又往东绕过新乐城，城在获嘉县老城东北，就是汲县的新中乡。
English: Qingshui also bypassed Xinle Town to the east. The town is in the northeast of the old town of Zhuojia County, that is, Xinzhong Township of Qi County.

古文：又东过汲县北，县，故汲郡治，晋太康中立。
现代文：又往东流过汲县北边，汲县是旧时汲郡的治所，晋太康年间设置。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Kyu County. Kyu County was the administrative center of the old Kyu County and was established during the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：城西北有石夹水，飞湍浚急，人亦谓之磻溪，言太公尝钓于此也。
现代文：城西北有石夹水，水深流急，人们也称为播溪，说太公曾在这里垂钓过。
English: In the northwest of the city, there is a rocky creek with deep rapids. People also call it "Boasting Creek" and say that Emperor Taigong once fished here.

古文：城东门北侧有太公庙，庙前有碑，碑云：太公望者，河内汲人也。
现代文：城中东门北侧，有太公庙，庙前有碑，碑文上说：太公望是河内汲县人。
English: On the north side of the east-central gate of the city, there is a temple of Taigong, and there is a monument in front of the temple. The inscription says: Taigongwang was a native of Nhuang County, Hanoi.

古文：县民故会稽太守杜宣白令崔瑗曰：太公本生于汲，旧居犹存。
现代文：县人前会稽太守杜宣告诉县令崔缓说：太公本来生于汲，故居现在还保留着。
English: Du Xuan, the former auditor of the county people's association, told the county magistrate Cui Yan that: the grand duke was originally born in Kumi, and the former residence is still preserved.

古文：君与高、国同宗，太公载在《经》《传》，今临此国，宜正其位，以明尊祖之义。
现代文：您和高氏、国氏都是太公的后代，经传中都有记载，现在您来到这里，应当摆正太公位置，以宏扬尊祖的传统。
English: You and the Gao and Guo clans are all descendants of the Grand Duke. It is recorded in the scriptures. Now that you have come here, you should take up the position of the Grand Duke and carry forward the tradition of revering the ancestors.

古文：于是国老王喜，廷掾郑笃，功曹邠勤等，咸曰：宜之。
现代文：于是国老王喜、廷椽郑笃、功曹那勤等都说：确实理当如此。
English: Therefore, Wang Xi, the elder statesman, Zheng Tu, and Gong Cao Naqin all said, "This is indeed the right thing to do."

古文：遂立坛祀，为之位主。
现代文：就立坛建祠，安置神位。
English: A shrine was built on the site of the altar, and a shrine was built.

古文：城北三十里，有太公泉。泉上又有太公庙，庙侧高林秀木，翘楚竞茂，相传云：太公之故居也。
现代文：城北三十里有太公泉，泉上又有太公庙，庙旁高耸的丛林，秀丽的树木，郁郁葱葱非常茂盛，据当地相传，这里就是太公的故居。
English: To the north of the city, there are 30 Taiko Springs, and on top of the springs is the Taiko Temple. Next to the temple is a towering jungle, beautiful trees, lush and very lush. According to local legend, this is the Taiko's former residence.

古文：晋太康中，范阳卢无忌为汲令，立碑于其上。
现代文：晋太康年间，范阳卢无忌在汲县当县令，曾在那里立碑。
English: During the Jin and Taikang dynasties, Fan Yanglu became the county magistrate of Ku County and erected a monument there.

古文：太公避纣之乱，屠隐市朝，遁钓鱼水，何必渭滨，然后磻溪？
现代文：太公为避封王乱国，隐于市上从事屠宰，躲到水边去钓鱼，何必非要渭水之滨，一然后又是播溪呢？
English: In order to avoid the chaos of the country, the grand duke secretly engaged in slaughtering in the market and went to the water's edge to go fishing. Why did he have to flood the waterfront and then flood the creek?

古文：苟惬神心，曲渚则可，磻溪之名，斯无嫌矣。
现代文：只要能舒畅高远的情怀，一弯曲水也就够了。播溪是指这里，那是无可置疑的了。
English: As long as the lofty feelings can be relaxed, it is enough to bend the water. Bo's Creek is here, there is no doubt about it.

古文：清水又东径故石梁下，梁跨水上，桥石崩褫，余基尚存。
现代文：清水又往东从一座老石桥下流过。石桥原来横跨于水面上，后来桥石崩塌，只留下一个遗址了。
English: Clear water also flows eastward under an old stone bridge, which originally spanned the water, but later the stones of the bridge collapsed, leaving only a ruin.

古文：清水又东与仓水合。
现代文：清水又东流，与仓水汇合。
English: The clear water also flows eastward, merging with the Cangshui.

古文：水出西北方山，山西有仓谷，谷有仓玉、珉石，故名焉。
现代文：仓水发源于西北的方山，山的西边有仓谷，山谷里有仓玉、氓石，因而得名。
English: Cangshui originated in the northwest of Fangshan. On the west side of the mountain there is Canggu, and in the valley there are Cangyul and Houguangshi, hence the name.

古文：其水东南流，潜行地下，又东南复出，俗谓之雹水。
现代文：水往东南流，潜入地下，又往东南重新冒出，俗称雹水，往东南流过姆野。
English: The water flows to the southeast, sinks into the ground, and rises again to the southeast, commonly known as Surabaya water, flowing southeast through Muno.

古文：东南历坶野，自朝歌以南，南暨清水，土地平衍，据皋跨泽，悉坶野矣。
现代文：从朝歌以南，南到清水，地势平坦，包括大片的水田和沼泽，全都是姆野地区。
English: From the south of Choga, south to Shimizu, the terrain is flat, including large areas of paddy fields and swamps, all of which are in the Muno region.

古文：《郡国志》曰：朝歌县南有牧野。
现代文：《郡国志》说：朝歌以南有牧野。
English: "County History" said: south of the morning song, there is a pasture.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：周武王率西夷诸侯伐殷，败之于坶野。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：周武王率领西方夷族诸侯讨伐殷封，在姆野打败了他。
English: The "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter" says: King Zhou Wu led the western barbarian princes to fight against Yinfu and defeated him in Mnao.

古文：《诗》所谓坶野洋洋，檀车煌煌者也。
现代文：《诗经》里说：姆野宽广坦荡，檀木车呀多堂皇！
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The country is wide and spacious, and the sandalwood car is magnificent!

古文：有殷大夫比于冢，前有石铭，题隶云：殷大夫比于之墓。
现代文：那里有殷朝大夫比干墓，坟前刻石用隶书题着：殷大夫比干之墓。
English: There is the tomb of Yin Dynasty doctor Bi Gan, and the tombstone is inscribed with the inscription: "The tomb of Yin doctor Bi Gan."

古文：所记惟此。今已中折，不知谁所志也。
现代文：所载就只有这么几个字，也不知是谁立的，现在碑也断了。
English: There are only a few words on it, and I don't know who put it there, and now it's broken.

古文：太和中，高祖孝文皇帝南巡，亲幸其坟，而加吊焉，刊石树碑，列于墓隧矣。
现代文：太和年间一，高祖孝文皇帝到南方巡察，亲临比干墓，举行祭扫，并刻石立碑，放置在墓道上。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, Emperor Gaozu Xiaowen went to the south to inspect, personally visited the Bi Gan Tomb, held a sweeping ceremony, and carved a stone monument and placed it on the cemetery road.

古文：雹水又东南入于清水。
现代文：雹水又往东南注入清水。
English: Surabaya's water is then injected with clean water to the southeast.

古文：清水又东南径合城南，故三会亭也，似淇、清合河，放受名焉。
现代文：清水又往东南流经合城南面，这就是旧时的三会亭，因为淇水、清水在这里与河水汇合，所以得名。
English: The clear water then flows south-east through the southern part of Hachijo. This is the old Sankaitei, which got its name because the clear water meets the river here.

古文：清水又屈而南径凤皇台东北南注也。
现代文：清水又转弯往南流过凤皇台东北，往南流去。
English: The clear water turned south again and flowed through the northeast of Fenghuangdai, flowing south.

古文：又东入于河。
现代文：又往东流注人河水。
English: The waters of the Jinren River flowed eastward again.

古文：谓之清口，即淇河口也，盖互受其名耳。
现代文：清水入河处叫清口，也就是淇河口，这是因为两水互相通称的缘故。
English: The place where the clear water enters the river is called the clear mouth, that is, the mouth of the Qi River. This is because the two waters are commonly known as each other.

古文：《地理志》曰：清河水出内黄县南，无清水可来，所有者惟钟是水耳。
现代文：《地理志》说：清河水发源于内黄县南边，清河并没有水流到内黄来，流过来的实际上只有这条淇水。
English: "Geography" said: The water of the Qinghe originates from the south of Neihuang County. The water of the Qinghe does not flow to Neihuang. In fact, only this water flows here.

古文：盖河徒南注，清水渎移，汇流径绝，余目尚存。
现代文：因为河水改道南流，清水的河道也移徙了，汇流的水路断了，但地名却留了下来，所以东川有清河的名称，相承不绝。
English: Because of the diversion of the river to the south, the clear-water river channel has also migrated, the waterway of the confluence has been broken, but the place name has remained, so the East River has the name of the Clear River, which is inherited.

古文：故东川有清河之称，相嗣不断，曹公开白沟，遏水北注，方复故渎矣。
现代文：曹操开凿白沟，阻挡水道使向北流。
English: Cao Cao dug a white ditch to block the waterway and make it flow north.

古文：沁水出上党涅县谒戾山，沁水即涅水也。
现代文：方才恢复了旧水道。沁水发源于上党涅县渴庚山，沁水就是涅水。
English: It was only recently that the old waterway was restored. Surabaya's water originates from Jiegang Mountain in Shangdangne County, and Surabaya's water is called Nie Shui.

古文：或言出谷远县羊头山靡谷，三源奇注，径泻一隍。
现代文：也有人说是发源于谷远县羊头山世靡谷，有三个源头一同泻入深涧中。
English: Some people also say that it originated in Yangtou Mountain Shimei Valley, Guiyuan County. There are three sources that flow into the abyss together.

古文：又南会三水，历落出左右近溪，参差翼注之也。
现代文：又南流，汇合了三条水，这些泉水涂涂地从左右近旁的山溪中流出，参差错落地从两边注入沁水。
English: It also flows south, bringing together three streams of water. These springs flow out of the nearby mountain streams from both sides, injecting brackish water from both sides.

古文：南过谷远县东，又南过陭氏县东，谷远县，王莽之谷近也。
现代文：往南流过谷远县东边，又往南流过隋氏县东边，谷远县就是王莽的谷近。
English: It flows southward through the east of Guiyuan County and southward through the east of Sui County. Guiyuan County is close to Wang Mang's valley.

古文：沁水又南径陭氏县故城东，刘聪以詹事鲁繇为冀州，治此也。
现代文：沁水又往南流经崎氏县老城东边。刘聪任命詹事鲁蒜为冀州太守，治所就在这里。
English: Surabaya also flows south to the east of the old city of Qi County. Liu Cong appointed Zhan Shiru Garlic as the governor of Jizhou, and the administrative center is here.

古文：沁水又南历陭氏关，又南与水合，水出东北巨骏山，乘高泻浪，触石流响，世人因声以纳称。
现代文：沁水又往南流过陆氏关，又往南与最晶水汇合。这条水发源于东北的巨骏山，从高处滚滚地奔泻而下，冲着岩石发出轰响，人们就是以水声取名的。
English: Surabaya water flows south through Lu's pass, and then south to meet the most crystal water. This water originates from the northeast of the Giant Surabaya Mountain, and rushes down from a high place, making a roar against the rocks. People are named after the sound of the water.

古文：西南流注于沁。
现代文：水往西南流，注入沁水。
English: The water flows to the southwest, injecting brackish water.

古文：沁水又南与秦川水合，水出巨骏山东，带引众溪，积以成川，又西南径端氏县故城东。
现代文：沁水又南流，与秦川水汇合，秦川水发源于巨骏山东麓，带引了许多山溪，积聚成一条川流。又往西南流经端氏县旧城东边。
English: The Qin River originates from the eastern foothills of the Giant Mountains, bringing many mountain streams and accumulating into a single river. It flows southwest through the eastern side of the old city of Danshi County.

古文：昔韩、赵、魏分晋，迁晋君于端氏县，即此是也。
现代文：从前韩、赵、魏分割了晋国，把晋国的国君贬迁到端氏县就是此县。
English: Former Han, Zhao, and Wei divided Jin Province, and this is the county where the sovereigns of Jin Province were relocated to.

古文：其水南流，入于沁水。
现代文：水往南流，注入沁水。
English: The water flows south, injecting brackish water.

古文：又南过阳阿县东，沁水南径阳阿县故城西。
现代文：又往南流过阳阿县东边，沁水往南流经阳阿县老城西边。
English: It also flows southward through the east of Yang'a County, and flows southward through the west of the old city of Yang'a County.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：建兴郡治阳阿县。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：建兴郡的脚所在阳阿县。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: the foot of Jianxing County is located in Yang'a County.

古文：郡西四十里有沁水南流。
现代文：郡治西边四十里有沁水往南流。
English: In the west of the county, there are forty rivers flowing southward.

古文：沁水又南与濩泽水合，水出濩泽城西白涧岭下，东径濩泽。
现代文：沁水又南流，与菠泽水汇合。菠泽水发源于菠泽城西的白涧岭下，往东流经覆泽。
English: Surabaya water also flows south and merges with Spinazawa water. Spinazawa water originates in the west of Spinazawa city, under the Shiranuka ridge, and flows east through Hozuze.

古文：《墨子》曰：舜渔濩泽。
现代文：《墨子》说：舜在镬泽捕鱼。
English: "Mozi" said: "The cormorant fishes in Heze."

古文：山上有水，渊而不流，其水东径阳陵城南，即阳阿县之故城也。
现代文：应肋说：菠泽在县城西北。又东流经菠泽县老城南面，县名就是因菠泽而来的。
English: Ying Li said: Spinazhe is in the northwest of the county seat. It also flows east through the south of the old city of Spinazhe County, and the county name comes from Spinazhe.

古文：汉高帝六年，封卞訢为侯国。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：梁惠成王十九年，把这地方封给卞诉，立为侯国。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": In the 19th year of Liang Huicheng's reign, this place was given to the court and established as a vassal state.

古文：水历嶕峣山东，下与黑岭水合，水出西北黑岭下，即开瞪也。
现代文：水流过礁晓山东边，在山下与黑岭水汇合。黑岭水发源于西北的黑岭脚下，就是开瞪。
English: The water flows through the eastern side of Jiaoxiao Mountain and merges with the Heiling Water at the foot of the mountain. The Heiling Water originates from the foot of the Heiling Mountain in the northwest.

古文：其水东南流径北乡亭下，又东南径阳陵城东，南注阳泉水。
现代文：水往东南流经北乡亭下，又往东南流经阳陵城东面，往南注入阳泉水。
English: The water flows to the southeast under the Beixiang Pavilion, flows to the southeast east of Yangling City, and flows southward into the Yangquan Water Spring.

古文：阳泉水又南注濩泽水。
现代文：阳泉水又南流，注入菠泽水。
English: Yangquan water also flows south and is infused with spinach water.

古文：泽水又东南，有上涧水注之，水导源西北辅山，东径铜于崖南，历析城山北，山在濩泽南，《禹贡》所谓砥柱、析城，至于王屋也。
现代文：泽水又经东南流，有上涧水注入。上涧水发源于西北的辅山，东经铜于崖南边，流过析城山北边。析城山在蓬泽南边，《禹贡》所谓砒柱、析城，直到王屋，就是指这座山。
English: Ze water also flows through the southeast, and is infused with Shanglu water. Shanglu water originates from Fu Shan in the northwest, and flows eastward along the south side of the cliff, passing through the north side of Seulcheng Mountain. Seulcheng Mountain is on the south side of Ponze, and the so-called pillar, Seulcheng, up to Wangya in "Ugong" refers to this mountain.

古文：山甚高峻，上平坦。下有二泉，东浊西清，左右不生草木，数十步外多细竹。
现代文：山极高峻，地面平坦，山下有两道泉水，东边那条浑浊，西边那条澄清，两岸草木不长，只在数十步外面才有许多细竹。
English: The mountain is very high, the ground is flat, there are two springs at the bottom of the mountain, the eastern one is cloudy, the western one is clear, the vegetation on both sides is not long, and only a few dozen steps away there are many fine bamboo.

古文：其水自山阴东入濩泽水。濩泽水又东南注于沁水。
现代文：水从山北往东注入攫泽水，镬泽水又往东南注入沁水。
English: Water from the northern part of the mountain is injected into the eastern part of the Heze River, and the Heze River is then injected into the southeastern part of the Heze River.

古文：沁水又东南，阳阿水左入焉，水北出阳阿川，南流径建兴郡西，又东南流径午壁亭东，而南入山。
现代文：沁水又往东南流，阳阿水从东边注入。阳阿水发源于北方的阳阿川，往南流经建兴郡西边，又往东南流经午壁亭东面，然后往南流入山中。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, and Yang Ah water is injected from the east. Yang Ah water originates from the Yang Ah River in the north, flows south through the west of Jianxing County, and flows to the southeast through the east of Wu Keping Pavilion, and then flows south into the mountains.

古文：其水沿波漱石，漰涧八丈，环涛毂转，西南流入于沁水。
现代文：滚滚的水波冲着山石，沿着高达八丈的深涧发出轰隆隆的巨响，掀起卷着漩涡的怒涛，往西南流奔，注入沁水。
English: The rolling waves of water rush against the mountains and rocks, making a roaring sound along the up to eight-meter-high cliff, setting off a swirling storm, rushing to the southwest and injecting rushing water.

古文：沁水又南五十余里，沿流上下，步径裁通，小竹细笋，被于山渚，蒙茏茂密，奇为翳荟也。
现代文：沁水又往南流了五十余里，沿着水流上下一带，只有一条小径相通；山间水滨，翁翁郁郁的全是一行小竹细笋，长得非常茂密，绿荫沉沉，景色清奇。
English: Surabaya water flowed southward for more than fifty miles. Only one path runs along the upper and lower bands of the water flow. The waterfront between the mountains is a line of small bamboo shoots, which grow very densely, with a deep green shade and a wonderful view.

古文：又南出山，过沁水县北，沁水甫径石门，谓之沁口。《魏土地记》曰：河内郡野王县西七十里有沁水，左径沁水城西，附城东南流也。
现代文：又往南流出山间，流过沁水县北边，沁水往南流经石门，人们也叫沁口，《魏土地记》说：河内郡野王县以西七十里有沁水，左边流经沁水城西面，傍着城边往东南流。
English: It also flows south out of the mountains, flowing through the north of Surabaya County. Surabaya water flows south through Shimen, and people also call it Hukou. "Wei Shiji Ji" said: There is Surabaya water in the west of Noowang County, Hanoi County, and it flows west of Surabaya City on the left, and it flows southeast next to the city.

古文：石门是晋安平献王司马孚之为魏野王典农中郎将之所造也。
现代文：这道石门是晋朝安平献王司马孚在魏当野王县的典农中郎将时主持修建的。
English: This stone gate was built under the auspices of King Sima Fu of the Anping Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty during the reign of Emperor Dunong of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：按其表云：臣孚言，臣被明诏，兴河内水利。
现代文：沁水源出铜鞍山，萦回曲折，水道长达九百里。
English: The source of the water is Tong'an Mountain, and the water course is nine hundred miles long.

古文：臣既到，检行沁水，源出铜鞮山，屈曲周回，水道九百里，自太行以西，王屋以东，层岩高峻，天时霖雨，众谷走水，小石漂迸，木门朽败，稻田泛滥，岁功不成。
现代文：太行、王屋二山岩峰层沓，极其高峻，从太行以西，王屋以东，每逢久雨季节，条条山谷就都山水横流，小石块纷纷被卷走，木制的水门年久朽坏，稻田泛滥淹水，一年的辛劳就得不到收成。
English: Mt. Taihang and Mt. Wangya are two extremely high rocky peaks. Every rainy season, the valleys to the west of Mt. Taihang and the east of Mt. Wangya are swept away by cross-currents. Small stones are swept away one after another. Wooden sluice gates decay over the years, rice paddies are flooded, and a year's hard work yields no harvest.

古文：臣辄按行，去堰五里以外，方石可得数万余枚。
现代文：我立即去巡察，发现离堰五里外，可以取得好几万块方石。
English: I immediately went to inspect and found that five miles away from the weir, I could get tens of thousands of blocks of stone.

古文：臣以为累方石为门，若天旸旱，增堰进水，若天霖雨。
现代文：我以为用方石砌成水门，如逢天时晴旱，可以增堰引水灌溉；如逢天时久雨，破塘湖泽都已水满，就关闸断水。
English: I thought that the water gate was built with square stones. If the weather was fine and dry, the weir could be increased to divert water for irrigation. If the weather was rainy for a long time, and the lakes and ponds were full of water, the gates would be closed and the water cut off.

古文：陂泽充溢，则闭防断水，空渠衍涝，足以成河。
现代文：那时切断上源的空渠，单凭排涝也足以成河了。
English: At that time, the upstream canals were cut off, and it was enough to create a river by dredging alone.

古文：云雨由人，经国之谋，暂劳永逸，圣王所许，愿陛下特出臣表，敕大司农府给人工，勿使稽延，以赞时要。
现代文：这样云雨都可以由人力加以控制，实在是治国大计，一劳永逸，圣明君主应会赞许的。请陛下把我的奏表特别颁发下去，下令大司农府派给人工，不要拖延，以助成目前这件要事。
English: In this way, both clouds and rain can be controlled by manpower. This is truly a great plan for governing the country. Once and for all, the Holy Emperor should approve it. I would like to ask His Majesty to specially issue my report form, and order the director of the Ministry of Agriculture to assign laborers, without delay, to help with this important matter.

古文：臣孚言。诏书听许。于是夹岸累石，结以为门，用代木门枋，故石门旧有枋口之称矣。
现代文：朝廷下诏批准，于是在两岸砌筑成石门，以代替过去的木门杭，因有木杭，所以石门以前又有仿口之称。
English: The imperial court gave its approval, and the stone gate was built on both sides of the river to replace the wooden gate piles of the past. Because of the wooden piles, the stone gate used to be known as an imitation mouth.

古文：溉田顷亩之数，间二岁月之功，事见门侧石铭矣。
现代文：水门建成后灌溉田亩多少，在漫长的年月中历次重修的曲折经过，石门旁的碑刻上都有记载。
English: How many mu of irrigated fields after the water gate was built, the twists and turns of successive renovations over the long years, are recorded on the inscriptions next to the stone gate.

古文：水西有孔山，山上石穴洞开，穴内石上，有车辙、牛迹。
现代文：水西有孔山，山上有石洞，洞口大开，洞内岩石上，有车辙印迹和牛的蹄痕。
English: To the west of the water, there is Kongshan Mountain. There is a stone cave on the mountain. The mouth of the cave is wide open. On the rocks inside the cave, there are ruts and cow hoofprints.

古文：《耆旧传》云：自然成著，非人功所就也。
现代文：《眷旧传》说：这些都是天然形成，不是人工凿出的。
English: "The Ancestor's Tale" says: These are all natural formations, not artificially excavated.

古文：其水南分为二水，一水南出，为朱沟水。
现代文：水往南流，分成两条，一条往南分出，就是朱沟水。
English: The water flows south and divides into two streams, with one branching off to the south. This is the Zhugou water.

古文：沁水又径沁本县故城北，盖藉水以名县矣。
现代文：沁水又流经沁水县老城北面，该县就是以水来命名的。
English: Surabaya also flows through the north of the old city of Surabaya County, which is named after water.

古文：《春秋》之少水也。
现代文：沁水就是《春秋》的少水。
English: Surabaya is the "Spring and Autumn" of less water.

古文：京相璠曰：晋地矣。
现代文：京相潘说：这里是晋国地方。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said, "This is the best place in Jin Province.

古文：又云：少水，今沁水也。
现代文：又说：少水就是今天的沁水。
English: He also said that a shortage of water is today's water shortage.

古文：沁水又东径沁水亭北，世谓之小沁城。
现代文：沁水又东流，经沁水亭北，世人称之为小沁城。
English: Surabaya also flows to the east, passing north of Surabaya Pavilion, and the world calls it Little Surabaya.

古文：沁水又东，右合小沁水，水出北山台淳渊，南流为台淳水，东南入沁水。
现代文：沁水又东流，在右边汇合了小沁水。小沁水发源于北山台停渊，南流就是台停水，往东南注入沁水。
English: Surabaya also flows to the east and is joined on the right by Xiao Surabaya. Xiao Surabaya originates from the North Mountain Plateau, while the south stream is the Plateau, and flows into Surabaya to the southeast.

古文：沁水又东，倍涧水注之，水北出五行之山，南流注于沁水。
现代文：沁水又东流，倍涧水注入。倍涧水发源于北方的五行之山，南流注入沁水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the east, and Beilun water is injected. Beilun water originates from the Wuling Mountain in the north, and the south stream is injected into Surabaya water.

古文：又东过野王县北，沁水又东，邗水注之，水出太行之阜山，即五行之异名也。
现代文：又往东流过野王县北边，沁水又东流，邢水注入。邪水发源于太行的阜山―太行山是五行山的异名。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northern part of Yeo County, and the salty water also flowed eastward, and the salty water was injected. The evil water originated from Fushan in Taihang - Taihang Mountain is a different name for Wugang Mountain.

古文：《淮南子》曰：武王欲筑宫于五行之山，周公曰：五行险固，德能覆也，内贡回矣，使吾暴乱，则伐我难矣。
现代文：《淮南子》说：武王想在五行之山建造宫室，周公说：五行形势险要而闭塞，如果我们修德可以保住它，那末天下来纳贡的道路却很曲折难行；如果我们有暴虐悖乱的行为，那末天下人要来讨伐我们又很困难了。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said: King Wu wanted to build a palace in the mountains of the Five Elements. Zhou Gong said: The situation of the Five Elements is imminent and blocked. If we can maintain morality, then the road to pay tribute will be very tortuous and difficult; if we have violent and disorderly behavior, then it will be very difficult for the world to come and fight us.

古文：君子以为能持满。
现代文：有识之士认为周公很能保持成业。
English: People with insight believe that Zhou Gong is very capable of maintaining a successful career.

古文：高诱云：今太行山也，在河内野王县西北上党关。
现代文：高诱说：五行之山就是今天的太行山，在河内野王县西北的下党关。
English: Gao Yu said: Wuhang Mountain is today's Taihang Mountain, in the northwest of Hanoi's Nio County.

古文：庙有碑焉，是河内郡功曹山阳荀灵龟以和平四年造，天安元年立。
现代文：有诗说：在野王路上走得困倦不堪，到上党关喜逢知友畅叙衷肠。
English: There is a poem that says: "Walking on the Wild King Road, one is sleepy and exhausted. When one reaches the upper gate of the party, he is happy to meet his friends and express his heartfelt feelings."

古文：沁水又东，朱沟枝津入焉。
现代文：说的就是这座山。沁水往南流经邢城西面，就是旧时的邢国。
English: It is this mountain. The Surabaya River flows south through the western side of Surabaya, which was the old Surabaya.

古文：又东与丹水合，水出上党高都具故城东北阜下，俗谓之源源水。
现代文：城南有邪台，《春秋》：僖公二十四年河内郡功曹山阳荀灵龟所造，天安元年所立。沁水又东流，朱沟支流注入；又东流与丹水汇合。丹水发源于上党高都县老城东北的山冈下，俗称源源水。
English: In the south of the city, there is a subterranean platform, "Spring and Autumn": It was built by Gong Cao Shan Yang Xingling Kame of Hanoi County in the 24th year of King Gong, and erected in the first year of Tian'an. The Xing water also flows to the east, and the Zhugou tributary flows into it; the east flow also merges with the Danshui. The Danshui originates from the foot of the mountain northeast of the old city of Shangdanggodu County, and is commonly known as the source water.

古文：《山海经》曰：沁水之东有林焉，名曰丹林，丹水出焉。
现代文：《山海经》说：沁水东边有一片树林，名叫丹林，丹水发源在这里。
English: The "Song of Mountains and Seas" says: On the east side of Surabaya, there is a forest called Danlin. The source of the Dan River is here.

古文：即斯水矣。
现代文：说的就是这条水。
English: It is this water that is being talked about.

古文：丹水自源东北流，又屈而东注，左会绝水。
现代文：丹水从源头往东北流，又转弯东流，左边与绝水汇合。
English: The Danshui flows from the source to the northeast, then turns to the east, and merges with the Heishui on the left.

古文：《地理志》曰：高都县有莞谷，丹水所出，东南入绝水是也。
现代文：《地理志》说：高都县有莞谷，是丹水的发源地，往东南流入绝水。
English: "Geography" said: There is Guan Valley in Gaodu County, which is the birthplace of Danshui and flows into Deshui to the southeast.

古文：绝水出泫氏县西北杨谷，故《地理志》曰：杨谷，绝水所出。
现代文：绝水发源于法氏县西北的杨谷，所以《地理志》说：杨谷，绝水发源在那里，往东南流，左边汇合了长平水。
English: The permafrost originated in the Yanggu Valley in the northwest of Faji County, so "Geography" said: Yanggu, the source of the permafrost is there, flowing southeast, and the left side is the confluence of the Changping Water.

古文：东南流，左会长平水，水出长平县西北小山，东南流径其县故城。
现代文：长平水发源于长平县西北的小山，往东南流经老县城，就是法氏的长平亭。
English: The Changping Water originates from a hill in the northwest of Changping County and flows southeast through the old county seat, that is, Fashi's Changping Pavilion.

古文：泫氏之长平亭也。《史记》曰：秦使左庶长王齕攻韩，取上党，上党民走赵，赵军长平，使廉颇为将，后遣马服君之子赵括代之。
现代文：《史记》说：秦国派左庶长王屹去攻打韩国，夺取了上党，上党的百姓逃到赵国去。赵国驻军于长平，任廉颇为大将，后来又派马服君的儿子赵括去替换他。
English: "Histories" said: Qin State sent Wang Yi, the second-in-command of the Left Division, to attack Korea, and captured Shang Party, and the people of Shang Party fled to Zhao State. Zhao State garrisoned troops in Changping, and Ren Liang was quite a general. Later, he sent Ma Fuqun's son Zhao Kuo to replace him.

古文：秦密使武安君白起攻之，括四十万众降起，起坑之于此。
现代文：秦国暗里派了武安君白起去进攻赵括，赵括的四十万军队都降了白起，白起就在这里把他们统统活埋了。
English: Qin secretly sent Wu'anjun Baiqi to attack Zhao Kuo. Zhao Kuo's 400,000 troops all descended on Baiqi and buried them all alive here.

古文：《上党记》曰：长平城在郡之南，秦垒在城西，二军共食流水，涧相去五里。
现代文：《上党记》说：长平城在郡的南边，秦的营地在西边，两国军队都一起喝这条溪涧里的水，相距不过五里。
English: "Upper Party Chronicle" said: Changping City is in the south of the county, Qin's camp is in the west, and the two armies drink water from this stream together. The distance is only five miles.

古文：秦坑赵众，收头颅筑台于垒中，因山为台，崔嵬桀起，今仍号之曰白起台。
现代文：秦军活埋了赵国兵众以后，又把他们的头颅收集起来在营地中筑起高台，高台利用山势而建，高高拔地而起，现在还叫它白起台。
English: After the Qin army buried the Zhao soldiers alive, they collected their heads and built a high platform in the camp. The high platform was built by taking advantage of the mountainous terrain and rising high above the ground. It is still called the Baiji platform.

古文：城之左右沿山亘隰，南北五十许里，东西二十余里，悉秦、赵故垒，遗壁旧存焉。
现代文：城的左右两边，沿着山边，横过低地，南北五十来里，东西二十余里的一带地方，全是秦赵的旧营垒，壁垒的遗址还在。
English: On the left and right sides of the city, along the mountains, across the lowlands, fifty miles north and south, and more than twenty miles east and west, are all the old camps of Qin Zhao, and the ruins of the barriers are still there.

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，以封将军卫青为侯国。
现代文：汉武帝元朔二年前，把这里封给将军卫青，立为侯国。
English: Hanwu Emperor Yuan Shuo two years ago, this place was given to General Wei Qing and established as a principality.

古文：其水东南流，注绝水。
现代文：水往东南流，注入绝水。
English: The water flows to the southeast, injecting fresh water.

古文：绝水又东南流径泫氏县故城北。
现代文：绝水又往东南流经法氏县老城北面。
English: The permafrost water also flows southeast through the northern part of the old city of Faji County.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：晋烈公元年，赵献子城泫氏。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：晋烈公元年前，赵献子在法氏筑城。
English: "The Bamboo Annals" says: Before the year of the Jin Dynasty, Zhao Xianzi was building a city in the Haji.

古文：绝水东南与泫水会，水导源县西北该谷，东流径一故城南，俗谓之都乡城。
现代文：绝水往东南流，与法水汇合。法水发源于法氏县西北的法谷，往东流经一座老城南面，俗称都乡城。
English: The fresh water flows to the southeast and merges with the legal water. The legal water originates from the legal valley in the northwest of Faji County and flows eastward through the south of an old city, commonly known as the capital city.

古文：又东南径泫氏县故城南，世祖建武六年，封万普为侯国。
现代文：又往东南流经法氏县老城南面。世祖建武六年，把这里封给万普，立为侯国。
English: It also flows to the southeast, passing south of the old city of Faji County. The ancestor Jianwu, in the sixth year of his reign, gave this place to Wanpu and established it as a vassal state.

古文：而东会绝水，乱流东南入高都县，右入丹水。
现代文：法水又东流汇合于绝水，往东南乱流进入高都县、在右边注入丹水。
English: The eastward flow of the Fa-shui also converges with the She-shui, and the southeastward turbulent flow enters Gaodu County and injects the Dan-shui on the right.

古文：《上党记》曰：长平城在郡南山中，丹水出长平北山，南流。
现代文：《上党记》说：长平城在郡治南边山中。丹水发源于长平的北山，往南流。
English: "Upper Party Chronicle" said: Changping City is in the mountains on the southern edge of the county. Danshui originates from the North Mountain of Changping and flows southward.

古文：秦坑赵众，流血丹川，由是俗名为丹水，斯为不经矣。
现代文：秦军活埋了赵国兵士，流的血把水都染红了，因而俗名为丹水，这真是胡说八道。
English: The Qin army buried the Zhao soldiers alive, and the blood dyed the water red, so it was commonly known as Danshui. This is really nonsense.

古文：丹水又东南流注于丹谷，即刘越石《扶风歌》所谓丹水者也。
现代文：丹水又往东南流注入丹谷，这就是刘越石《扶风歌》中所说的丹水。《晋书。
English: The Dan River flows to the southeast and flows into the Dan Valley. This is the Dan River mentioned in Liu Yueishi's "Fu Feng Ge" (Fu Feng Song).

古文：《晋书地道记》曰：县有太行关，丹溪为关之东谷，途自此去，不复由关矣。
现代文：地道记》说：县里有太行关，丹溪就是太行关的东谷，道路由这里通出去，就不再从关那边走了。
English: Local History said: There is Taihangguan in the county, and Danxi is the east valley of Taihangguan. The road goes out from here, and it is no longer possible to walk from the other side of the pass.

古文：丹水又径二石人北，而各在一山，角倚相望，南为河内，北曰上党。
现代文：丹水又流经两个石人北边，石人各在一山，前后相望，南面是河内，北面是上党。
English: The Dan River also flows through the northern side of the two stone figures. Each stone figure is on a mountain, facing each other, with Hanoi to the south and Shangdang to the north.

古文：二郡以之分境。
现代文：二郡就以两山为分界。
English: The two counties are separated by two mountains.

古文：丹水又东南历西岩下，岩下有大泉涌发，洪流巨输，渊深不测，濒藻茭芹，竟川含绿，虽严辰肃月，无变暄萋。
现代文：丹水又往东南流过西岩下面，岩下有一股强劲的泉流，大如巨轮，汹涌而出，深不可测，整条河中，萍藻菱芹之类水草绿油油的一片，即虽是严寒的冬天，也还是生意欣欣，毫无改变。
English: The Dan River also flows to the southeast under the West Rock. Under the rock, there is a strong spring flow, as big as a giant wheel, surging out, unfathomable. In the whole river, there is a piece of aquatic plants such as watercress, even though it is a cold winter, business is still good, no change.

古文：丹水又南，白水注之，水出高都县故城西，所谓长平白水也，东南流历天井关。
现代文：丹水又南流，白水注入。白水发源于高都县老城西面，就是所谓长平白水，经东南流过天并关。
English: The white water originates from the western side of the old town of Gotu County, that is, the so-called Changping white water, flowing through the southeast and passing through the sky.

古文：《地理志》曰：高都县有天井关。蔡邕曰：太行山上有天井关，在井北，遂因名焉。
现代文：《地理志》说：高都县有天井关，蔡琶说：太行山上有个天井，关口就在天井北面，于是就以天井为名了。
English: "Geography" said: There is a ceiling pass in Gaodu County, Caiwa said: There is a ceiling on Taihang Mountain, the pass is on the north side of the ceiling, so it is named after the ceiling.

古文：故刘歆《遂初赋》曰：驰太行之险峻，入天井之高关，太元十五年，晋征虏将军朱序破慕容永于太行，遣军至白水，去长子百六十里。
现代文：所以刘散《遂初赋》说：奔驰在险峻的太行山，进入那高高的天井关。太元十五年，晋朝征虏将军朱序在太行山大败慕容永，派兵到白水，离长子一百六十里。
English: That's why Liu San said in "Sui Shih Fu": "Mercedes is on the precipitous Taihang Mountain, entering that high ceiling pass." In the 15th year of Taiyuan, the Jin Dynasty conscript general Zhu Xiu defeated Murong Yong on Taihang Mountain and sent troops to Baishui, one hundred and sixty miles away from the eldest son.

古文：白水又东，天井溪水会焉。
现代文：白水又东流与天井溪水相汇合。
English: The east stream of the White Water also merges with the water of the Ceiling Stream.

古文：水出天井关，北流注白水，世谓之北流泉。
现代文：溪水发源于天井关，北流注入白水，人们称为北流泉。
English: The water of the stream originates from the ceiling, and the north stream injects white water. People call it the north stream spring.

古文：白水又东南流入丹水，谓之白水交。
现代文：白水又往东南流，注入丹水，汇流处称为白水交。
English: The whitewater flows to the southeast, where it flows into the Dan River. The confluence is known as the whitewater junction.

古文：丹水又东南出山，径鄈城西。
现代文：丹水又往东南流出山间，流过郑城西面。
English: The Dan River flows out of the mountains to the southeast and flows through the western side of Zhengcheng.

古文：城在山际，俗谓之期城，非也。
现代文：癸肠城在山边，俗称期城，其实不对。
English: In fact, it is not correct to say that Jangchulseong is on the mountainside, commonly known as Jangchulseong.

古文：司马彪《郡国志》曰：山阳有鄈城。
现代文：司马彪《郡国志》说：山阳有鄂城。
English: Sima Biao's "County History" said: Sanyang has E City.

古文：京相璠曰：河内山阳西北六十里有鄈城。
现代文：京相潘说：河内山阳西北六十里有鄂城。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: "Sixty kilometers northwest of Hanoi and Sanyang, there is H City.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：梁惠成王元年，赵成侯偃、韩懿侯若伐我葵。即此城也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：梁惠成王元年前，赵成侯僵、韩露侯若，进攻我国的葵，说的就是此城。
English: "The Bamboo Chronicle" says: Before the first year of Liang Huicheng's reign, Zhao Chenghou and Han Rouhou attacked our country's Aoi, referring to this city.

古文：丹水又南屈而西转，光沟水出焉。
现代文：丹水又向南弯，向西转，分出一条光沟水。
English: The Dan River bends to the south and turns to the west, creating a clear channel of water.

古文：丹水又西径苑乡城北，南屈东转，径其城南，东南流注子沁，谓之丹口。
现代文：丹水又往西流经苑乡城北面，向南弯又转回东边，流经城南，往东南注入沁水，汇流处称为丹口。
English: The Dan River flows westward through the northern part of Yuanxiang City, turns southward and returns to the east, flows through the south of the city, and flows southeast into the Ershui River. The confluence is called the mouth of the Dan River.

古文：即此水也。沁水又东，光沟水注之，水首受丹水，东南流，界沟水出焉，又南人沁水。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：晋出公五年前，丹水断流三日，幽公九年前，丹水涌出，互相冲激，说的就是这条水。沁水又东流，光沟水注入。光沟水上口承接丹水，往东南流，界沟水分支流出；又南流汇入沁水。
English: The "Chronicle of Bamboo" says: Five years before the Jin Dynasty, the Dan River was cut off for three days, and nine years before the Yu Dynasty, the Dan River gushed out and impinged on each other, and it was this water that was spoken of. The Er water also flowed to the east, and the light ditch water was injected. The light ditch water was connected to the Dan water at the upper mouth, and flowed to the southeast, and the branch of the ditch water flowed out; and the south flow flowed into the Er water.

古文：沁水又东南流径成乡城北，又东径中都亭南，左合界沟水，水上承光沟，东南流，长明沟水出焉。又南径中都亭西，而南流注于沁水也。
现代文：沁水又往东南流经成乡城北面，又往东流往中都亭南面，在左边汇合了界沟水。界沟水上口承接光沟，往东南流，长明沟水分支流出，又往南流经中都亭西面，然后南流注入沁水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast through the northern side of Chengxiang Town, flows to the east to the southern side of Zhongdouting, and merges with the water of Jiegou on the left. The water of Jiegou meets the water of Guanggou, flows to the southeast, branches off the water of Changminggou, and flows to the south through the western side of Zhongdouting, and then the southern flow injects Surabaya water.

古文：又东过州县北，县，故州也。
现代文：又往东流过州县北边，州县就是旧时的州。
English: It also flows eastward past the northern edge of Zhoushan County, which was the old Zhoushan.

古文：《春秋左传》隐公十有一年，周以赐郑公孙段。
现代文：《春秋左传》：隐公十一年前，周王把州赐给郑国。 昭公三年，晋以州田赐公孙段。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Eleven years before King Yin, King Zhou gave the state to King Zheng; three years after King Zhaogong, Emperor Jin gave the state to his grandson Duan.

古文：韩宣子徙居之。
现代文：后来韩宣子迁居到这里。
English: Later, Han Xuan Zi moved here.

古文：有白马沟水注之，水首受白马湖，湖一名朱管陂，陂上承长明沟。湖水东南流，径金亭西，分为二水，一水东出为蔡沟，一水南注于沁也。
现代文：有白马沟水注入。白马沟上口承接白马湖，白马湖又名朱管破，破湖仁口承接长明沟，湖水往东南流经金亭西边，分成二条：一条往东分出，叫蔡沟；一条往南注入沁水。
English: There is a white horse ditch water injection. The upper mouth of the white horse ditch connects to the white horse lake, the white horse lake is also known as the Zhu pipe break, the broken lake's mouth connects to the Changming ditch, the lake water flows southeast through the west side of Jinting, and is divided into two: one branching off to the east, called Cai ditch; one injecting into the south of the water.

古文：又东过怀县之北，《韩诗外传》曰：武王伐纣到邢丘，更名邢丘曰怀。
现代文：又往东流过怀县北边，《韩诗外传》说：武王讨伐封王，到了邢丘，把邢丘改名为怀。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northern part of Huai County. "Han Shi Gao Zhen" said: King Wu fought against the King of Fong, and when he arrived at Mengqiu, he renamed Mengqiu to Huai.

古文：春秋时，赤翟伐晋围怀是也。
现代文：春秋时，赤翟攻晋包围了怀。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the Red Kites attacked Jin and surrounded Huai.

古文：王莽以为河内，故河内郡治也。
现代文：王莽改为河内，是旧河内郡的治所。
English: Wang Mang was changed to Hanoi, which is the seat of the former Hanoi County.

古文：旧三河之地矣。
现代文：从前属三河地方。
English: Formerly part of the Sanhe region.

古文：韦昭曰：河南、河东、河内为三河也。
现代文：韦昭说：河南、河东、河内合称三河。
English: Wei Zhao said: Henan, Hedong and Hanoi are collectively known as the three rivers.

古文：县北有沁阳城，沁水径其甫而东注也。
现代文：县北有沁阳城，沁水流经城南往东流去。
English: In the north of the county there is the city of Fenyang, and the Fenyang River flows through the south of the city to the east.

古文：又东过武德县甫，又东南至荣阳县北，东入于河。
现代文：又往东流过武德县南边，又往东南流到荣阳县北边，东流注人河水。
English: It also flows eastward through the south of Wude County, and southeastward to the north of Rongyang County, and the eastward flow is the water of Renren River.

古文：沁水于县南，水积为陂，通结数湖，有朱沟水注之，其水上承沁水于沁水县西北，自枋口东南流，奉沟水右出焉。又东南流，右泄为沙沟水也。
现代文：沁水在县南积聚成为破塘，把好几个湖泊都连结在一起，有朱沟水注入。朱沟水上流在沁水县西北承接沁水，从仿口往东南流，从右岸分支流出的是奉沟水；又往东南流，从右岸分支流出的是沙沟水。
English: Surabaya water accumulates in the south of the county to become a broken pond, linking several lakes together, and is injected with vermilion ditch water. The upstream flow of vermilion ditch water receives Surabaya water in the northwest of Surabaya County. It flows from the mouth to the southeast, and the outflow from the right bank branch is Fenggou water; it also flows to the southeast, and the outflow from the right bank branch is sand ditch water.

古文：其水又东南，于野工城西，枝渠左出焉，以周城溉，东径野工城南，又屈径其城东而北注沁水。
现代文：水又往东南流，在野王城西面，有支渠从左岸分出，以灌溉城边一带土地 支渠东流经野王城南面，又转弯流经城东，然后北流注入沁水。
English: The water also flows to the southeast. On the west side of Wild King City, a branch canal branches off from the left bank to irrigate the land around the edge of the city. The east side of the branch canal flows through the south side of Wild King City, and turns to flow through the east of the city, and then the north stream injects salty water.

古文：朱沟自枝渠东南，径州城南，又东径怀城南，又东径殷城北郭缘生《述征记》曰：河之北岸，河内怀县有殷城。
现代文：朱沟水从支渠往东南流经州城南面，又往东流经怀城南面，又往东流经殷城北面。郭缘生《述征记》说：河水北岸，河内怀县有殷城。
English: Zhugou water flows from the branch canal to the southeast through the south of Zhucheng, then flows eastward through the south of Huaicheng, and then flows eastward through the north of Yincheng. Guo Yansheng's "Records" said: On the north bank of the river, there is Yincheng in Huai County, Hanoi.

古文：或谓楚、汉之际，殷王印治之，非也。
现代文：有人说楚汉对峙的时候，殷王司马印的治所就设在这里，其实不是。
English: Some people say that at the time of the confrontation between Chu and Han, Yin Wang Sima Ying's office was located here, but in fact it was not.

古文：余案《竹书纪年》云：秦师伐郑，次于怀，城殷。
现代文：我按《竹书纪年》说：秦军攻打郑国，驻扎于怀，在殷筑城，指的就是此城。
English: According to the "Chronicle of Bamboo," I said: the Qin army attacked Zheng, stationed in Huai, in Yinzhu City, referring to this city.

古文：即是城也，然则殷之为名久矣，知非从印始。
现代文：那末殷这地名由来已久，可知不是司马印开始的。
English: The place name "Nan Yin" has a long history, and it is known that it did not originate with Sima Yin.

古文：昔刘曜以郭默为殷州刺史，督缘河诸军事，治此。
现代文：从前刘耀指派郭默为殷州刺史，负责督察沿河各部队的事务，治所就设在这里。
English: In the past, Liu Yao assigned Guo Mo to be the historian of Yinzhou, responsible for inspecting the affairs of the troops along the river, and the office is located here.

古文：朱沟水又东南注于湖。
现代文：朱沟水又往东南流，注入湖中。
English: The water of Zhugou also flows to the southeast and is injected into the lake.

古文：湖水右纳沙沟水，水分朱沟南派，东南径安昌城西。
现代文：湖水在西边接纳了沙沟水。沙沟水分出朱沟南支，往东南流经安昌城西边。
English: The lake water receives the sand ditch water on the west side. The sand ditch water comes from the south branch of Zhugou and flows southeast through the west side of Anchang City.

古文：汉成帝河平四年，封丞相张禹为侯国。
现代文：汉成帝河平四年把安昌封给承相张禹，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Heping of Han Dynasty made Anchang a vassal state in the fourth year of his reign and established it as a vassal state.

古文：今城之东南有古冢，时人谓之张禹墓。
现代文：现在城的东南有一座古墓，人们称为张禹墓。
English: Now there is an ancient tomb in the southeast of the city, known as Zhang Yu Tomb.

古文：余按《汉书》，禹，河内轵人，徒家莲勺，鸿嘉元年，禹以老乞骸骨，自治冢奎，起祠堂于平陵之肥牛亭，近延陵，奏请之，诏为徒亭，哀帝建平二年薨，遂葬于彼，此则非也。
现代文：我按《汉书》，张禹是河内积县人，一家人迁移到莲勺。鸿嘉元年前，张禹年老，申请退休回家养老。他亲自营建坟墓，在平陵的肥牛亭修建祠堂，那地方与延陵相邻近。他向朝廷提出申请，皇帝下诏为他把亭移走。哀帝建平二年前，张禹亡故，于是就葬在那里。
English: According to the "Hanshu," Zhang Yu was a native of Jixian County, Hanoi, and his family moved to Lianchao. Before the first year of Hongjia, Zhang Yu was old and applied for retirement to go home for old age. He personally built a tomb and built an ancestral hall in the Fatty Cow Pavilion in Pingling, which is adjacent to Yanling. He applied to the imperial court, and the emperor ordered the pavilion to be removed for him. Zhang Yu died two years ago, so he was buried there.

古文：沙沟水又东径隰城北《春秋》值公二十五年，取太叔于温，杀之于隰城是也。
现代文：那末这里就不是他的坟墓了。沙沟水又往东流经瞩城北面。《春秋》；僖公二十五年前，在温逮捕了大叔，就在瞩城杀了他。
English: Then this is not his grave. The sand ditch water also flows eastward through the north of the city of Zhencheng. "Spring and Autumn"; twenty-five years ago, Zheng Gong arrested his uncle in Wen and killed him in Zhencheng.

古文：京相璠曰：在怀县西南。
现代文：京相潘说：限城在怀县西南。
English: Beijing's Minister Pan said: "The city limits are in the southwest of Huai County.

古文：又径殷城西，东南流入于陂，陂水又值武德县，南至荥阳县北，东南流入于河。
现代文：沙沟水又流经殷城西面，往东南流入破塘，破水又一直流过武德县，往南流到荣阳县北边，往东南流，注入河水。
English: The sand ditch water also flows through the west of Yincheng, flowing southeast into the broken pond, and the broken water flows all the way through Wude County, flowing south to the north of Rongyang County, flowing southeast and injecting river water.

古文：先儒亦咸谓是沟为济渠。故班固及阚駰并言济水至武德入河。
现代文：从前学者也都说这条沟就是济渠，所以班固和阐姻也都说济水到武德注入河水。
English: In the past, scholars also said that this ditch was a water channel. Therefore, both Ban Gu and Ying Rong also said that water was injected into Wude.

古文：盖济水枝渎条分，所在布称，亦兼丹水之目矣。
现代文：因为济水分出一条条的支流所到之处各有名称，也就兼有丹水的名目了。
English: Because the tributaries of the Jishui have their own names, they also have the names of the Danshui.

古文：淇水出河内隆虑县西大号山，《山海经》曰：淇水出沮枷山。
现代文：淇水发源于河内隆虑县西边的大号山，《山海经》说：淇水发源于沮枷山。
English: Qi Shui originated from the Dazhong Mountain in the west of Longxian County, Hanoi. The "Song of Mountains and Seas" says: Qi Shui originated from Deyu Mountain.

古文：水出山侧，颓波漰注，冲激横山。
现代文：水从山边流出，轰隆隆地奔泻直下，冲激着横山。
English: The water flows out from the mountainside and rushes down with a roar, shaking the mountainside.

古文：山上合下开，可减六七十步，巨石磥砢，交积隍涧，倾澜涝荡，势同雷转，激水散氛，暖若雾合。
现代文：这座山峰顶合拢，山下却分开，大约不到六七十步，深涧里错杂地堆满巨石，洪涛骇浪，猛冲过来，犹如雷电似的迅猛，激得水花飞迸，飘散成一片檬潦的水雾。
English: The top of this mountain is closed, but the bottom of the mountain is separated, less than sixty or seventy paces, the depths are jumbled with boulders, the waves are raging, rushing over, as fast as lightning, causing the water to fly, and drifting into a lemon-scented water mist.

古文：又东北，沾水注之。
现代文：又往东北流，沾水注入。
English: Another northeasterly flow, drenched with water.

古文：水出壶关县东沾台下，石壁崇高，昂藏隐天，泉流发于西北隅，与金谷水合，金谷即沾台之西溪也。东北会沾水，又东流注淇水。
现代文：沾水发源于壶关县东边的沾台下，高耸的石壁，遮蔽了天空，泉流就发源于西北角，汇合了金谷水―就是沾台的西溪，往东北流，汇合于沾水，又东流注入淇水。
English: Tsukimizu originates from Tsukimidai on the east side of Kuguan County. The towering stone wall obscures the sky. The spring flow originates from the northwest corner and merges with Jingu water - that is, the west stream of Tsukimidai flows to the northeast, merges with Tsukimizu, and the east stream injects water.

古文：淇水又径南罗川，又历三罗城北，东北与女台水合，水发西北三女台下，东北流注于淇。
现代文：淇水又流经南罗!，又流过三罗城北面，往东北与女台水汇合。女台水发源于西北方的三女台下，往东北流，注入淇水。
English: The water also flows through South Luo! and flows through the northern side of Sanluo City, merging with the water of Meitai to the northeast. The water of Meitai originates from the northwest of Sanmen Taishu, flows to the northeast, and is infused with water.

古文：淇水又东北历淇阳川，径石城西北，城在原上，带涧枕淇。
现代文：淇水又往东北流过淇阳川，流经石城西北。城在平原上，旁边有涧水流过，同时也靠近淇水。
English: Qishui also flows to the northeast through Qiyang River and flows through the northwest of Shicheng. The city is on the plain, and there is a stream running next to it, which is also close to Qishui.

古文：淇水又东北，西流水注之，水出东大岭下，西流径石楼南，在北陵石上，练垂禁立，亭亭极峻。
现代文：淇水又往东北流，西流水注入，西流水发源于东大岭脚下，往西流经石楼南面，在北陵的岩石上直垂下来，有如从极高处挂下的白练。
English: The west-flowing water originates at the foot of Dongdaling Mountain, flows westward to the south of the stone tower, and hangs straight down on the rock of Beiling Mountain, like a white drill hanging from a very high place.

古文：其水，西流水也。
现代文：这条水就是西流水。
English: This water is the West Stream.

古文：又东径冯都垒南，世谓之淇阳城，在西北三十里。
现代文：又往东流经冯都垒南边，人们称为淇阳城，在西北三十里。
English: It also flows eastward to the south of Fengduye, known as Qiyang City, 30 miles to the northwest.

古文：魏熙平中复通之，故渠历仿城北，东出今读，破故竭。
现代文：淇水又东流出山，分为两条―在两水相会处建了一道石堰，拦水引入白沟―左边是苑水，右边是淇水。淇水从元甫城往东南流经朝歌县北面。《竹书纪年》：晋定公十八年才重新使它通水。
English: The water flowed out of the mountain to the east and was divided into two streams - a stone weir was built at the junction of the two streams, and the water was blocked and led into a white ditch - on the left was the garden water, and on the right was the water. The water flowed from Yuanfu City to the southeast through the north of Chaoga County.

古文：其堰，悉铁柱木石参用，其故渎南径仿城西，又南分为二水，一水南注清水，水流上下更相通注，河清水盛，北入故渠自此始矣。
现代文：旧渠道通过仿城北面，往东流出；今天渠道中已拆去旧坝，改筑新堰全用铁柱打下，也夹着使用木石。旧渠往南流经杭城西面，又南流分为两条水：一条南流注入清水，水流向下向上都可流通，河清水大时，就从这里开始往北倒灌入旧渠。
English: The old channel flowed through the north of the imitation city and flowed out to the east; today, the old dam has been removed from the channel, and a new weir has been built. All the iron columns have been used, and wood and stone have also been used. The old canal flows southward through the west of Hangzhou, and the south stream is divided into two streams: a south stream injects clean water, and the water flow can circulate downward and upward. When the river is clear, it begins to pour into the old canal from here to the north.

古文：一水东流，径妨城南，东与菀口合。
现代文：一条往东流经仿城南边，往东汇合于莞口。
English: One flows eastward through the southern side of the imitation city, and merges eastward at the mouth of the river.

古文：菀水上承淇水于元甫城西北，自石堰东、菀城西，屈径其城南，又东南流历土军东北，得旧石逗。
现代文：苑水上流在元甫城西北承接淇水，从石堰东边，苑城西边，转弯流过城南，又往东南流过土军东北，有石头砌的旧水沟。
English: The upper stream of the Yuan Shui flows northwest of the Yuanfu city, and flows from the east side of the stone weir and the west side of the Yuanfu city, turning south of the city, and flowing southeast through the northeast of the Turkish army. There is an old stone ditch.

古文：故五水分流，世号五穴口，今惟通并为二水，一水西注淇水，谓之夭井沟，一水径土军东分为蓼沟，东入白祀陂。
现代文：从前有五条水分流，世人称为五穴口，现已合并，只有两条了：一条往西注入淇水，叫天井沟，一条流经土军以东，分出萝沟，东流注入白祀破。
English: In the past, there were five streams of water, known to the world as the five-hole mouth, which have now been merged, and there are only two: one flows westward into the water, called the ceiling ditch, one flows east of the Turkish army, separating the radish ditch, and the eastward flow injects the white water.

古文：又南分东入同山陂，溉田七十余顷。
现代文：又向南分支，东流注入同山破，灌溉着七十余顷的田亩。
English: It also branches to the south and flows east into the same mountain, irrigating more than 70 hectares of farmland.

古文：二陂所结，即台阴野矣。
现代文：这两片破塘相接处，就是台阴野。
English: The place where these two pieces of broken pond meet is called Taiyin Field.

古文：菀水东南入淇水。
现代文：莞水往东南流入淇水。
English: The Guan River flows southeast into the Jinshui River.

古文：淇水右合宿胥故渎，渎受河于顿丘县遮害亭东、黎山西，北会淇水处立石堰，遏水令更东北注。
现代文：淇水右岸汇合了宿青旧渠，旧渠在黎山西北顿丘县遮害亭东边，接纳了河水。在与淇水的汇合处，筑了一道石堰拦截渠水，使渠水转向东北流。
English: The right bank of the Qishui River joins the Suqiao Old Canal, which receives water from the river on the east side of the sheltering pavilion in Dongqiu County, northwest of Lishan. At the confluence with the Qishui River, a stone weir was built to intercept the canal water and divert the canal water to the northeast stream.

古文：魏武开白沟，因宿胥故渎而加其功也。
现代文：魏武帝开凿白沟，就是循着宿青旧渠加工开成的。
English: Emperor Weiwu dug a white ditch, which was made by following the old canal of Suqiao.

古文：故苏代曰：决宿胥之口，魏无虚顿丘。
现代文：所以苏代说：在宿青决个口，魏的虚和顿丘就完蛋了。
English: Therefore, Su Dai said, "In the Suqiao showdown, Wei's Huo and Dongqiu will be finished."

古文：即指是渎也。
现代文：指的就是此渠。
English: It is this canal that is being referred to.

古文：淇水又东北流，谓之白沟，径雍榆城南。
现代文：淇水又往东北流，称为白沟，流经雍榆城南面。
English: The water also flows to the northeast, known as the White Ditch, and flows through the southern side of Yongle City.

古文：《春秋》襄公二十三年，叔孙豹救晋，次于雍榆者也。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公二十三年前，叔孙豹去援救晋国，屯兵在雍榆，就指这地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-three years before Prince Xiang, Uncle Sun Leopard went to the rescue of Jin, and the garrison was in Yongle, referring to this place.

古文：淇水又北径其城东，东北径同山东，又东北径帝喾冢西。世谓之顿丘台，非也。
现代文：淇水又往北流经城东，往东北流经同山东边，又往东北流经帝誉墓西边，世人称为顿丘台，其实不是。
English: The water flows northward through the east of the city, northeastward through the east side of the same mountain, and northeastward through the west side of the Emperor's Tomb. The world calls it Dongqudai, but it is not.

古文：《皇览》曰：帝喾冢在东郡濮阳顿丘城南，台阴野中者也。
现代文：《皇览》说：帝誉墓在东郡淮阳顿丘城南的台阴野。
English: The "Imperial Review" said: the Imperial Honor Tomb is located in Taiyin County, Dong County, south of Huaiyang Dongqiu City.

古文：又北径白祀山东，历广阳里，径颛顼冢西。俗谓之殷王陵，非也。
现代文：又往北流经白祀山东边，流过广阳里，流经撷项墓西边，俗称殷王陵，也不是。
English: It also flows to the north through the eastern side of Baishi Mountain, flows through Guangyangli, and flows through the western side of the Tomb of King Yin, commonly known as the Tomb of King Yin.

古文：《帝王世纪》曰：颛顼葬东郡顿丘城南，广阳里大冢者是也。
现代文：《帝王世纪》说：撷项葬于东郡顿丘城南面，广阳里的大墓就是。
English: "The Century of Emperors" said: Xiang Xiang was buried in the south of Dong County Dongqiu City, and the tomb in Guangyangli was the start.

古文：淇水又北屈而西转，径顿丘北，故阚駰云：顿丘在淇水南。
现代文：淇水又向北弯，向西转，流经顿丘北边。所以阐驯说：顿丘在淇水以南。
English: And the stream bent northward and turned westward, and flowed by the north side of Dongqiu. Therefore, he said, "Dongqiu is south of the stream."

古文：《尔雅》曰：山一成谓之顿丘，《释名》谓一顿而成丘，无高下小大之杀也。
现代文：《尔雅》说：山只有一层的叫顿丘。《释名》说：一重就成为丘，上下没有大小的差别。
English: "Erya" said: a mountain with only one layer is called a dongqiu. "Shomyo" said: a layer becomes a hill, there is no difference in size between the top and bottom.

古文：《诗》所谓送子涉淇，至于顿丘者也。
现代文：《诗经》里说的：送你涉河过淇水，送到那顿丘的水边。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "I will send you wading through the reeds, to the water's edge of that hill.

古文：魏徙九原、西河、土军诸胡，置土军于丘侧，故其名亦曰土军也。
现代文：魏把九原、西河、土军各地的胡人迁移出去，把土军胡人安置在顿丘旁边，所以地名也叫土军。
English: Wei moved the Hu people out of the nine plains, the West River, and the Turkish army, and placed the Turkish army Hu people next to the Dongqiu, so the place name is also called the Turkish army.

古文：又屈径顿丘县故城西。《古文尚书》以为观地矣。盖太康弟五君之号曰五观者也。
现代文：又转弯流经顿丘县旧城西边，《古文尚书》以为这就是观的地方，因为太康的弟弟名为五观。
English: It also flows through the west side of the old city of Dongqiu County. "Ancient Texts" thought that this was the place to watch, because Taikang's younger brother was named Wu Guan.

古文：《竹书纪年》，晋走公三十一年城顿丘。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋定公三十一年前，在顿丘筑城。
English: The Bamboo Annals: Thirty-one years before the accession of Emperor Jinding, a city was built in Dongqiu.

古文：《皇览》曰：顿丘者，城门名，顿丘道，世谓之殷。
现代文：《皇览》说：叫顿丘的来由，是因为城门名为顿丘道，世人又把它称为殷，这都不对。
English: "Imperial Review" said: The reason for calling it Dongqiu is because the city gate is called Dongqiu Road, and the world calls it Yin, which is not right.

古文：皆非也。盖因丘而为名，故曰顿丘矣。
现代文：顿丘是因小丘而取名的，所以叫顿丘。
English: Dongqiu is named after a small hill, so it is called Dongqiu.

古文：淇水东北径在人山东、牵城西。
现代文：淇水往东北流经枉人山以东，牵城以西。
English: The water flows to the northeast, passing to the east of Wu Ren Shan and to the west of Tongcheng.

古文：《春秋左传》定公十四年，公会齐侯、卫侯于牵者也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：定公十四年前，定公在牵会见齐侯、卫侯。牵就指牵城。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Fourteen years ago, Ding Gong met Qi Hou and Wei Hou in Tsui. Tsui refers to the city of Tsui.

古文：杜预曰：黎阳东北有牵城。即此城矣。
现代文：杜预说：黎阳东北有牵城，就是此城。
English: Du Yu said, "In the northeast of Liyang, there is a city called Tongcheng, which is this city.

古文：淇水又东北径石柱冈，东北注矣。
现代文：淇水又往东北流经石柱冈，往东北流去。
English: The water then flows to the northeast, passing through the stone pillar hill, and continues to flow to the northeast.

古文：东过内黄县南，为白沟。
现代文：往东流过内黄县南边称为白沟。
English: It flows eastward through the southern part of Inner Huang County and is known as Bai Gou.

古文：淇水又东北径并阳城西。
现代文：淇水又往东北流经并阳城西面，世人称为辟阳城是不对的。
English: The water then flows to the northeast and passes to the west of Nianyang City. It is not right for the world to call it Nianyang City.

古文：世谓之辟阳城，非也，即《郡国志》所谓内黄县有并阳聚者也。白沟又北，左合荡水。
现代文：其实这地方就是《郡国志》所说的内黄县的并阳聚。白沟又北流，左边汇合了荡水。
English: In fact, this place is the "County History" of Inner Huang County. Bai Gou is also the north stream, and the left side is the confluence of the waves.

古文：又东北流径内黄县故城南，县右对黄泽。
现代文：又往东北流经内黄县老城南面，县城右边朝向黄泽。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the southern part of the old town of Neihuang County, and from the right side of the county seat towards Huangze.

古文：《郡国志》曰：县有黄泽者也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：县里有黄泽。
English: "County History" said: There is Huangze in the county.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：陈留有外黄，故加内，《史记》曰赵廉颇伐魏取黄，即此县。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：陈留有个外黄，所以这里叫内黄。《史记》说：赵将廉颇攻魏，夺取了黄，指的就是此县。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: Chenliu has an outer Huang, so it is called Inner Huang. "History" says: Zhao Zhaolian attacked Wei and captured Huang, referring to this county.

古文：屈从县东北，与洹水合。
现代文：转弯从县城往东北流与洹水汇合。
English: Turning from the county seat to the northeast, the stream meets the Surabaya River.

古文：白沟自县北径戏阳城东，世谓之羛阳聚。
现代文：白沟从县城往北流经戏阳城东面，那地方世人称为养阳聚。
English: The Baigou River flows north from the county seat through the eastern side of Yangcheng. This place is known to the world as Yangcheng.

古文：《春秋》昭公十年，晋荀盈如齐逆女，还，卒戏阳是也。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公十年前，晋国荀盈到齐国去迎接一个女子，回来时死于戏阳。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Ten years before Zhaogong, Jin Guoying went to Qi Guo to meet a woman, but died when he returned.

古文：白沟又北径高城亭东，洹水从西南来注之。
现代文：白沟又往北流经高城亭东面，垣水从西南流来注入。
English: The Bai Gou also flows northward through the east side of Gaochenting, and the backwater is injected from the southwest.

古文：又北径问亭东，即魏界也，魏县故城。
现代文：又往北流经间亭东面，就是魏县地界了。
English: It flows north again to the east of the pavilion, which is the boundary of Wei County.

古文：应劭曰：魏武侯之别都也。
现代文：魏县老城，据应劭说，是魏武侯的陪都。
English: The old town of Wei County, according to Ying Zang, was the capital of Wei Wuhou.

古文：城内有武侯台，王莽之魏城亭也。左与新河合，洹水枝流也。
现代文：就是王莽的魏城亭，城内有武侯台。左边与新河汇合，新河是垣水的支流。
English: It is Wang Mang's Wei Cheng Ting, with Wuhotai within the city. On the left is the confluence with the Xinhe River, which is a tributary of the Wuchuan River.

古文：白沟又东北径铜马城西，盖光武征铜马所筑也，故城得其名矣。
现代文：白沟又往东北流经铜马城西面，光武帝征讨铜马军时筑了此城，城也因而得名了。
English: Baigou also flows to the northeast through the west of Bronze Horse City. Emperor Guangwu built this city when he conquered the Bronze Horse Army, which is how the city got its name.

古文：白沟又东北径罗勒城东，又东北，漳水注之，谓之利漕口。
现代文：白沟又往东北流经罗勒城东面，又往东北流，漳水注入，汇流处称为利嘈口。
English: The Baigou also flows to the northeast through the eastern side of the city of Basil, and flows to the northeast, injecting brackish water, and the confluence is called the noisy mouth.

古文：自下清漳、白沟、淇河，咸得通称也。
现代文：从这里起，下流都可用清漳、白沟或淇河作为通称了。
English: From here on, all downstream rivers can be referred to by the common names of Qingyu, Baigou or Qihe.

古文：又东北过馆陶县北，又东北过清渊县西，白沟水又东北径赵城西，又北，阿难河出焉。
现代文：又往东北流过馆陶县北边，又往东北流过清渊县西边，白沟水又往东北流经赵城西面，又往北流，分出了阿难河。
English: It also flowed to the northeast through the north of Guantao County, and to the northeast through the west of Qingyuan County. Baigou Water also flowed to the northeast through the west of Zhaocheng, and to the north, separating the Anan River.

古文：盖魏将阿难所导，以利衡渎，遂有阿难之称矣。
现代文：魏将阿难疏导此河，以便利衡读的通航，于是有了阿难河的名称。
English: Wei diverted the river to facilitate the navigation of Hengduan, hence the name Anan River.

古文：白沟又东北径空陵城西，又北径乔亭城西，东去馆陶县故城十五里。
现代文：白沟又往东北流经空陵城西面；又往北流经乔亭城西面，乔亭城东距馆陶县老城十五里。
English: Baigou also flows to the northeast through the west of Ku Ling City; it also flows to the north through the west of Qiaoting City, and Qiaoting City is fifteen miles east of the old city of Guantao County.

古文：县，即《春秋》所谓冠氏也，魏阳平郡治也。
现代文：馆陶县就是《春秋》所说的冠氏，是魏阳平郡的治所。
English: Guantao County is the Guan family mentioned in "Spring and Autumn," and is the capital of Weiyangping County.

古文：其水又屈径其县北，又东北径平恩县故城东。
现代文：水又转弯流过县北，又往东北流经平恩县老城东面。
English: The water turned and flowed through the north of the county, and then flowed northeast through the east of the old city of Ping'an County.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：县，故馆陶之别乡也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：平恩县就是从前馆陶的一个分乡。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: Ping'en County is a sub-township of the former Guantao.

古文：汉宣帝地节三年置，以封后父许伯为侯国。
现代文：汉宣帝地节三年设县，把它封给皇后的父亲许伯，立为侯国。
English: On the Han Emperor's Birthday, a county was set up for the third year, and it was given to the queen's father, Xu Bo, who established it as a principality.

古文：《地理志》，王莽之延平县矣。
现代文：按《地理志》，这就是王莽的延平县。
English: According to "Geography," this is Wang Mang's Yanping County.

古文：其水又东过清渊县故城西，又历县之西北为清渊，故县有清渊之名矣。
现代文：水又往东流过清渊县老城西面，又流过县城西北，就是清渊，所以县名也就叫清渊县。
English: The water also flows eastward through the west side of the old town of Qiyuan County, and also flows through the northwest of the county seat, that is, Qiyuan, so the county name is also called Qiyuan County.

古文：世谓之鱼池城，非也。
现代文：世人称为鱼池城，这是不对的。
English: It is not right that the world calls it a fishpond city.

古文：其水又东北径榆阳城北，汉武帝封太常江德为侯国。
现代文：水又往东北流，经过榆阳城北面。汉武帝把这里封给太常江德，立为侯国。
English: The water flowed to the northeast, passing north of the city of Shenyang. Emperor Han Wu gave this place to the Tai Chang Jiangde and established it as a vassal state.

古文：文颖曰：邑在魏郡清渊。世谓之清渊城，非也。
现代文：文颖说：城在魏郡清渊，世人称为清渊城，是不对的。
English: Wen Ying said: The city is in Qingyuan, Wei County, and it is not right for the world to call it Qingyuan City.

古文：又东北过广宗县东，为清河。
现代文：又往东北流过广宗县东边，叫清河。
English: It flows northeast through the eastern part of Guangzong County and is called the Qinghe.

古文：清河东北径广宗县故城南。
现代文：清河往东北流经广宗县老城南面。
English: The Qinghe River flows northeast through the southern part of the old city of Guangzong County.

古文：和帝永元五年，封皇太子万年为王国。
现代文：和帝永元五年把这里封给皇太子万年，立为王国。
English: In the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, this place was given to the crown prince for a thousand years and established as a kingdom.

古文：田融言，赵立建兴郡于城内，置临清县于水东，自赵石始也。
现代文：据田融说，赵在城内设置了建兴郡郡治，在水东设立临清县，这都是从石氏的赵国开始的。
English: According to Tian Rong, Zhao set up Jianxing County in the city and Linqing County in the east of the water, which all started from Shi's Zhao Province.

古文：猜河之右有李云墓，云字行祖，甘陵人，好学，善阴阳，举孝廉，迁白马令。
现代文：清河右岸有李云墓。李云，字行祖，甘陵人，喜欢读书，长于阴阳五行之学；他被举为孝廉，派去当白马县县令。
English: There is Li Yun's tomb on the right bank of the Qing River. Li Yun, the founder of the lineage, a native of Ganling, liked to read and excelled in the study of yin and yang and the five elements. He was honored as a filial son and sent to serve as the county magistrate of Baima County.

古文：中常侍单超等，立掖庭民女毫氏为后，后家封者四人，赏赐巨万。
现代文：中常侍单超等人，把后宫偏室的普通民间女子毫氏立为皇后，她家里受封的多达四人，赏赐的财物数以万计。
English: The middle-ranking attendant Shanchao and others made the ordinary folk woman, who was a part-time member of the imperial court, the empress. As many as four members of her family received the title of empress, and they were rewarded with tens of thousands of goods.

古文：云上书移副三府曰：孔子云，帝者，谛也，今尺一拜用，不经御省，是帝欲不谛乎？
现代文：李云向朝廷上书，并把复本交到三府，书中说：孔子道，帝就是谛，即审慎的意思。现在发个诏书就封官用人，不经过御省的同意，这么做您这位皇帝是否就不想谛一下―不愿慎重行事了呢？
English: Li Yun wrote a letter to the imperial court, and handed a copy to the three prefectures. In the book, he said: Confucianism, the emperor is the essence, that is, the meaning of prudence. Now, if you issue an edict to appoint officials without the consent of the imperial province, does this emperor not want to think about it - unwilling to act prudently?

古文：帝怒，下狱杀之。
现代文：皇帝大怒，把他关进牢狱，并杀了他。
English: The emperor was furious, put him in prison and killed him.

古文：后冀州刺史贾琼使行部过柯云墓，刻石表之，今石柱尚存，俗犹谓之李氏石柱。
现代文：后来冀州刺史贾琼出来巡视下属，途中经过时祭扫了李云墓，并刻石表彰他，现在石柱还在，民间还称它为李氏石柱。
English: Later, Jizhou chief secretary Jia Qiong came out to inspect his subordinates. On the way, he swept Li Yun's tomb through the time festival, and engraved a stone to commend him. Now the stone pillar is still there, and the people also call it Li's stone pillar.

古文：清河又东北径界城亭东。
现代文：清河又往东北流经界城亭东面。
English: The Qinghe River flows to the northeast and passes east of Jiecheng Pavilion.

古文：水上有大梁，谓之界城桥。
现代文：水上有座大桥叫界城桥。
English: There is a big bridge over the water called Jiecheng Bridge.

古文：《英雄记》曰：公孙瓒击青州黄中贼，大破之，还屯广宗。
现代文：《英雄记》说：公孙攒攻打青州的黄巾贼，把贼兵打垮了，回来时屯在广宗。
English: "Heroes" said: Gongsun fought against the yellow bandits in Qingzhou, defeated the bandits, and settled in Guangzong when he returned.

古文：袁本初自往征瓒，合战于界桥南二十里，绍将麴义破瓒于界城桥，斩瓒。
现代文：袁本初亲自去打公孙攒，会战于界桥以南二十里。袁绍的大将鞠义在界城桥打垮公孙攒，杀了他。
English: Yuan Benchu personally went to fight Gongsun Bao, and the battle took place twenty miles south of the Boundary Bridge. Yuan Shao's general Qi Yi defeated Gongsun Bao at the Boundary Bridge and killed him.

古文：冀州刺史严纲又破瓒殿兵于桥上，即此梁也。
现代文：冀州刺史严纲又在桥上打垮了公孙攒的殿后部队，就是这座桥。
English: It was on this bridge that Jizhou's assassin Yan Gang defeated Gongsun's rearguard troops.

古文：世谓之鬲城桥，盖传呼失实矣。
现代文：世人称为扁城桥，那是口传失实的结果。
English: The world calls it the Hiencheng Bridge, which is the result of misinformation.

古文：清河又东北径信乡西。
现代文：清河又往东北流经信乡西面。
English: The Qinghe River also flows to the northeast through the west of Xinxiang.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：甘陵西北十七里有信乡，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：甘陵西北十七里有信乡，原是个县。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: There are seventeen townships in the northwest of Ganling, and it was originally a county.

古文：清河又北径信成县故城西。
现代文：清河又往北流经信成县旧城西面。
English: The Qinghe River also flows north through the west of the old city of Xincheng County.

古文：汉桓帝建和三年，改清河为甘陵王国，以王妖言，徙，其年立甘陵郡，治此焉。
现代文：应动说。甘陵西北五十里有信成亭，原是个县。赵在城中设立水东县，所以也叫水东城。清河又往东北流过清阳县旧城西面，汉高帝设清河郡，治所就在这里。景帝中元三年把清河改为甘陵王国，后来清河王因为妖言被贬滴，当年立甘陵郡，而把治所设在这里。
English: It was originally a county. Zhao set up Suidong County in the city, so it is also called Suidong City. Qinghe River also flowed to the northeast through the west of the old city of Qingyang County. Emperor Gao of Han Dynasty set up Qinghe County, and the government office was located here. Emperor Jing changed Qinghe County to Ganling Kingdom in the third year of the Middle Ages. Later, King Qinghe established Ganling County, and the government office was located here, because he was dethroned.

古文：又东北过东武城县西，清河又东北径陵乡西。
现代文：又往东北流过东武城县西边，清河又往东北流经陵乡西面。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west of Dongwucheng County, and the Qinghe River flows to the northeast through the west of Lingxiang.

古文：应劭曰：东武城西南七十里有陵乡，故县也。
现代文：应肋说：东武城西南七十里有陵乡，原是个县。
English: Ying Li said: There is a mausoleum township in the southwest of Dongwu City, which used to be a county.

古文：后汉封太仆梁松为侯国，故世谓之梁侯城，遂立侯城县治也。
现代文：后汉时把陵乡封给太仆梁松，立为侯国，所以世人称为梁侯城，于是就设立了侯城县治所。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, Lingxiang was given to Liang Song, the great vassal, and made into a vassal state. Therefore, the world called it Liang Hucheng, and the Hucheng County Government was established.

古文：清河又东北径东武城县故城西。
现代文：清河又往东北流经东武城县老城西面。
English: The Qinghe River also flows to the northeast through the west side of the old city of Dongwucheng County.

古文：《史记》，赵公子胜，号平原君，以解邯郸之功，受封于此。
现代文：据《史记》，赵国公子胜，号为平原君，因为解除了邯郸之围有功，被封在这里。
English: According to "Historical Records," Zhao Guo Gongzi Sheng, known as Plains Jun, was sealed here because he was instrumental in lifting the siege of Yunnan.

古文：定襄有武城，故加东矣。
现代文：因为定襄郡有个武城，所以这里加上东字，叫东武城。
English: Because there is a Wucheng in Dingxiang County, the word "Dongwucheng" is added here.

古文：清河又东北径复阳县故城西。
现代文：清河又往北流经复阳县旧城西面。
English: The Qinghe River also flows north through the west side of the old city of Foyang County.

古文：汉高祖七年，封右司马陈胥为侯国，王莽更名之曰乐岁。
现代文：汉高祖七年前，把复阳封给右司马陈青，立为侯国。王莽改名为乐岁。
English: Seven years ago, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong, gave Fuyang to the right-hand man, Chen Qing, and established it as a vassal state. Wang Mang changed his name to Le Lian.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：东武城西北三十里有复阳亭，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：东武城西北三十里有复阳亭，原是个县。
English: "Geography and Customs" said: There is a Fuyang Pavilion in the northwest of Dongwu City, which was originally a county.

古文：世名之曰槛城，非也。
现代文：人们叫他槛城，这不对。
English: People call it Threshold City. That's not right.

古文：清河又东北流，径枣强县故城西。
现代文：清河又往东北流经枣强县老城西面。
English: The Qinghe River also flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Zaoqiang County.

古文：《史记。建元以来王子侯者年表》云：汉武帝元朔二年，封广川惠王子晏为侯国也。
现代文：《史记•建元以来王子侯者年表》说：汉武帝元朔立年前把枣强封给广川惠王的儿子刘晏，立为侯国。
English: "Chronicle of Princes and Princes since the Founding of the Yuan Dynasty" says: Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo forced the jujube to Liu Wei, the son of Guangchuan Hui Wang, and established it as a princely state.

古文：应劭《地理风俗记》曰：东武城县西北五十里，有枣强城，故县也。
现代文：应韵《地理风俗记》说：东武城县西北五十里，有枣强城，是个旧县城。
English: According to the rhyme "Geography and Customs" says: 50 miles northwest of Dongwucheng County, there is Zaoqiang City, which is an old county seat.

古文：又北过广川县东，清河北径广川县故城南。
现代文：又往北流过广川县东面，清河往北流经广川县老城南面。
English: It also flows northward through the east of Guangchuan County, and the Qinghe River flows northward through the south of the old city of Guangchuan County.

古文：阚駰曰：县中有长河为流，故曰广川也。
现代文：阐胭说：县中有长河流水，所以叫广川。
English: Elucidated: There are long rivers in the county, so it is called Guangchuan.

古文：水侧有羌垒，姚氏之故居也。今广川县治。
现代文：水边有羌垒，是姚氏的故居，现在是广川县的治所。
English: On the water's edge there is a fortification, which was the former residence of the Yao clan and is now the administrative center of Guangchuan County.

古文：清河又东北径历县故城南。
现代文：清河又往东北流经历县老城南面。
English: The Qinghe River also flows to the northeast, passing through the southern part of the county's old city.

古文：《地理志》，信都之属县也，王莽更名曰历宁也。
现代文：按《地理志》这是信都的属县，王莽改名为历宁。
English: According to "Geography," this was a county belonging to Xindu, and Wang Mang changed his name to Lining.

古文：应劭曰：广川县西北三十里有历城亭，故县也。
现代文：应肋说：广川县西北三十里有历城亭。
English: Ying Li said: There are 30 Licheng pavilions in the northwest of Guangchuan County.

古文：今亭在县东如北。水济尚谓之为历口渡也。
现代文：是个旧县址，现在亭在县东偏北，渡口到今天还叫历口渡。
English: It is an old county site, now the pavilion is in the north-east of the county, and the ferry crossing is still called Liguodu today.

古文：又东过脩县南，又东北过东光县西，清河又东北，左与张甲屯绛故渎合，阻深堤高鄣，无复有水矣。
现代文：又往东流过脩县南边，又往东北流过东光县西边，清河又往东北流，左边与张甲屯绛旧河道汇合，因被高堤所阻，不再有水了。
English: It also flows eastward through the south of Min County, and northeastward through the west of Dongguang County. The Qing River also flows northeastward. On the left, it merges with the old river channel of Zhangjiajie. Because it is blocked by the high embankment, there is no more water.

古文：又径脩县故城南，屈径其城东。
现代文：又流经惰县老城南边，转弯流经城东。
English: It also flows through the south side of the old town of Lazy County, and turns to flow through the east of the city.

古文：脩音条，王莽更名之曰脩治，《郡国志》曰：故属信都。
现代文：惰字读作条，王莽改名为惰治。《郡国志》说：惰县旧时属信都郡。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Neoji. "County History" said: Neoji County used to belong to Xindu County.

古文：清河又东北，左与横漳枝津故渎合，又东北径脩国故城东。汉文帝封周亚夫为侯国，故世谓之北脩城也。
现代文：清河又往东北流，左边与横漳支流旧水道汇合。又往东北流经惰国旧城东面，汉文帝把这地方封给周亚夫，立为侯国，所以世人称为北情城。
English: The Qing River flowed to the northeast, and on the left it merged with the old waterway of the Hengye tributary. It also flowed to the northeast through the eastern side of the old city of Lazy Country. Emperor Hanwen gave this place to Zhou Yafu and established it as a principality, so the world called it North Love City.

古文：清河又东北径邸阁城东，城临侧清河。
现代文：清河又往东北流经邸阁城东面，城濒清河边，晋时是惰县的治所。
English: The Qinghe River also flows to the northeast through the eastern side of the Mansion, and the city is on the edge of the Qinghe River. At the time of Jin, it was the seat of Lazy County.

古文：晋脩县治，城内有县长鲁国孔明碑。
现代文：城内有县长鲁国孔明碑。
English: In the city, there is a monument to the county governor Lu Guo Kongming.

古文：清河又东至东光县西，南径胡苏亭。
现代文：清河又东流，到了东光县西面，往南流胡苏亭。
English: The Qinghe also flows eastward, to the west of Dongguang County, and flows southward to Husuting.

古文：《地理志》，东光有胡苏亭者也。
现代文：按《地理志》，东光县有胡苏亭。
English: According to "Geography," Dongguan County has Husuting.

古文：世谓之羌城，非也。
现代文：世人称为羌城，不对。
English: The world calls it Shicheng, but that's not right.

古文：又东北，右会大河故渎，又径东光县故城西。后汉封耿纯为侯国。
现代文：又往东北流，右边与大河旧河道汇合，又流经东光县旧城西边，后汉时把这地方封给耿纯，立为侯国。
English: It also flows to the northeast, merging with the old Dahe River on the right, and flowing through the west of the old city of Dongguang County. In the late Han Dynasty, this place was given to Geng Chun and established as a vassal state.

古文：初平二年，黄巾三十万人入渤海，公孙瓒破之于东光界，追奔是水，斩首三万，流血丹水。即是水也。
现代文：初平二年,黄巾三十万人侵入渤海，公孙攒在东光边界打败了他们，追到这条水上，杀了三万人，流血把水都染红了，说的就是这条水。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, 300,000 Yellow Turbans invaded the Bohai Sea. Gongsun Nanba defeated them at the Dongguan border, chased them to this water, killed 30,000 people, and the bloodshed turned the water red. This is the water.

古文：又东北过南皮县西，清河又东北，无棣沟出焉。
现代文：又往东北流过南皮县西边，清河又往东北流，无棣沟在这里分出。
English: It also flows northeast through the west side of Nanpi County, and the Qinghe River flows northeast again, and the Muxinggou is separated here.

古文：东径南皮县故城南，又东径乐亭北。《地理志》之临乐县故城也，王莽更名乐亭。
现代文：往东流经南皮县旧城南面，又往东流经乐亭北面，就是《地理志》的临乐旧城，王莽改名为乐亭。
English: It flows eastward to the south of the old city of Nanpi County, and eastward to the north of Leting, which is the old city of Linle in "Geography." Wang Mang changed its name to Leting.

古文：《晋书地道志》、《太康地记》：乐陵国有新乐县。
现代文：《晋书•地道志》、《太康地记》都说乐陵国有新乐县，就是这座城。
English: "Jinshu•Jidoshi" and "Taikangji" both say that Leling is state-owned Xinle County, which is the origin of this city.

古文：即此城矣。又东径新乡城北。即《地理志》高乐故城也，王莽更之曰为乡矣。
现代文：又往东流经新乡城北面，就是《地理志》的高乐旧城，王莽改名叫为乡。无棣沟又东流，分为两条渠道。
English: It also flows eastward through the north of Xinxiang City, which is the Gaole Old Town of "Geography," and Wang Mang changed his name to Township. There is no ditch and eastward flow, divided into two channels.

古文：无棣沟又东分为二渎，无棣沟又东径乐陵郡北，又东屈而北出，又东转径苑乡县故城南，又东南径高成县故城南，与枝渎合。
现代文：无棣沟又往东流经乐陵郡北面，又折向东边，往北流，又转而往东流经苑乡老城南面；又往东南流经高城县老城南面，与支渠相汇合。
English: Muxinggou also flows eastward through the north of Leling County, turns eastward, flows northward, and turns eastward through the south of the old city of Yuanxiang; it also flows southeastward through the south of the old city of Gaocheng County, and merges with the branch canal.

古文：枝渎上承无棣沟，南径乐陵郡西，又东南径千童县故城东。
现代文：支渠上口承接无棣沟，往南流经乐陵郡西边，又往东南流经千童县旧城东边。
English: At the upper mouth of the branch canal, there is no ditch, and it flows southward through the west side of Leling County, and flows southeastward through the east side of the old city of Chidong County.

古文：《史记。建元以来王子侯者年表》曰：故重也，一作千钟。
现代文：《史记•建元以来王子侯者年表》说：千童就是旧时的重，又写作千钟。
English: "Chronicle of Princes since the Founding of the Yuan Dynasty" said: "Thousand children is the weight of the old time, and it is also written as a thousand bells."

古文：汉武帝元朔四年，封河间献王子刘阴力侯国。
现代文：汉武帝元朔四年前，把千童封给河间献王的儿子刘阴，立为侯国。
English: Four years ago, Emperor Hanwu bestowed the title of Chidofu to Liu Yin, the son of the king of Hebei, and made him a vassal state.

古文：应劭曰：汉灵帝改曰饶安也，沧州治。
现代文：应劫说：汉灵帝改名为饶安，是沧州的治所。
English: It is said that Hanling changed its name to Raoan, which is the capital of Cangzhou.

古文：枝渎又南东屈，东北注无棣沟。
现代文：支渠又往南流，转向东边，往东北注入无棣沟。
English: The branch canal flows to the south, turns to the east, and pours into the northeast without a ditch.

古文：无棣沟又东北径一故城北，世谓之功城也。又东北径盐山东北入海。
现代文：无棣沟又往东北流经一座老城北面，人们称为功城；又往东北流经盐山，往东北注入大海。
English: Muxinggou also flows to the northeast through an old city to the north, known as Gongcheng; it also flows to the northeast through Yanshan and flows into the sea to the northeast.

古文：《春秋》僖公四年，齐、楚之盟于召陵也，管仲曰：昔召康公赐命先君太公履，北至于无棣，益四履之所也。
现代文：《春秋》：僖公四年前，齐、楚二国在召陵会盟，管仲说：从前召康公给我们的先君太公划定征伐的范围，北边到无棣，是四方疆界所至的地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Four years ago, when the two countries of Qi and Chu were calling for a tomb alliance, Guanzhong said: "Our forefather Taigong, who once called for Kangong, delineated the scope of the conquest, from the north to Muxian, which is the place where the four-sided border reaches.

古文：京相璠曰：旧说无棣在辽西孤竹县。
现代文：京相瑶说：旧的说法以为无棣在辽西孤竹县。
English: Beijing's Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs said, "The old saying is that there are no mountains in Xizhu County, West Liaoning Province.

古文：二说参差，未知所定，然管仲以责楚无棣在此，方之为近，既世传已久，且以闻见书之。
现代文：两种说法互有出入，不知哪一个对。但管仲以周所定疆界责难楚国，无棣在这里，照位置看来，较为切近。但世上相传已久，姑且把所见所闻都记录下来。
English: There are discrepancies between the two statements, and I don't know which one is correct. However, Guanzhong blamed Chu for the boundary set by Zhou, and here, according to the location, it is closer. However, it has been passed down in the world for a long time, so let's record what we saw and heard.

古文：清河又东北径南皮县故城西。
现代文：清河又往东北流经南皮县老城西面。
English: The Qinghe River also flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Nanpi County.

古文：《十三州志》曰：章武有北皮亭，故此曰南皮也，王莽之迎河亭。
现代文：《十三州志》说：章武有北皮亭，所以这里叫南皮亭，也就是王莽的迎河亭。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: Zhangwu has the North Pavilion, so it is called the South Pavilion, that is, Wang Mang's Yinghe Pavilion.

古文：《史记。惠景侯者年表》云：汉景帝后七年，封孝文后兄子彭祖为侯国，建安中，魏武擒袁谭于此城也。
现代文：《史记•惠景侯者年表》说：汉文帝后元七年前，把这里封给孝文帝皇后哥哥的儿子彭祖，立为侯国。建安年间一，魏武帝就在这城中俘获袁谭。
English: "Historical Records • Huijing Hou People's Chronology" says: Seven years ago, Emperor Hanwen gave this place to Peng Zu, the son of Emperor Xiaowen's elder brother, and established it as a vassal state. In the first year of Jianan, Emperor Wei captured Yuan Tan in this city.

古文：清河又北径北皮城东，左会滹沱别河故渎，谓之合口。
现代文：清河又往北流经北皮城东面，在左边汇合淖沱别河旧道，汇流处叫合口。
English: The Qinghe River flows northward through the east of Beipicheng, and merges with the old road of the Fenweihe River on the left. The confluence is called the confluence.

古文：城谓之合城也。《地理风俗记》曰：南皮城北五十里有北皮城，即是城矣。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：南皮城北五十里有北皮城，就是此城。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: Beipicheng is located 50 kilometers north of Nanpi. This is the city.

古文：又东北过浮阳县西，清河东北流，浮水故渎出焉。
现代文：又往东北流过浮阳县西边，清河往东北流，浮水旧河道在这里分出。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west side of Fuyang County, and the Qinghe River flows to the northeast, and the old river channel is separated here.

古文：首受清河于县界，东北径高成县之苑乡城北，又东径章武县之故城北。
现代文：按《史记》这是赵国的南部边界，有浮水流出。浮水在南，但这里却叫浮阳，大概是因为浮水出入的水流，同流与逆流的水互相混并，清河和漳河这两条水，又循河水的旧道而流，浮水的遗迹又是从这里分出的，所以该县也就有了浮阳之名了。
English: According to "Histories," this is the southern border of Zhao, with the outflow of floating water. The floating water is in the south, but here it is called the floating sun, probably because of the water flow in and out of the floating water, the water of the same stream and the countercurrent mixed with each other, the two waters of the Qing River and the Fen River flowed along the old path of the river, and the remains of the floating water were separated from here, so the county also had the name of the floating sun.

古文：汉景帝后七年，封孝文后弟窦广国为侯国，王莽更名桓章。晋太始中立章武郡，治此。
现代文：浮水上口在浮阳县境内引入清河水。往东北流经高城县苑乡城北面，又往东流经章武县老城北面，汉文帝后元七年始年间设立章武郡，治所就在这里。
English: The upper outlet of the floating water introduced clear river water into the territory of Fuyang County. It flows to the northeast through the north of Yuanxiang City, Gaocheng County, and flows to the east through the north of the old city of Zhangwu County. Zhangwu County was established in the first seven years of the Yuan Dynasty, and the provincial capital is here.

古文：浮水故渎又东径箧山北。
现代文：浮水旧河又往东流经筐山北面。
English: The old river flows eastward through the northern part of Mount Kyeso.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：高成东北五十里有筐山，长七里。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：高成东北五十里有筐山，长七里。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: "In the northeast of Gaocheng, there are 50 basket mountains with a length of seven miles.

古文：建武十五年，更封骁骑将军平乡侯刘歆为侯国，浮阳郡治。
现代文：浮水又往东北流经柳县老城南面。汉武帝元朔四年把这里改封给晓骑将军平乡侯刘欲，立为侯国，是浮阳郡的治所。
English: Buoyant water flowed to the northeast and passed south of the old town of Liuxian County. In the fourth year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wu changed the name of this place to Xiaojing General Pingxiang Hou Liu Zhi and established it as a county. It is the seat of Buoyant County.

古文：又东北，滹沱别渎注焉，谓之合口也。
现代文：又往东北流，淖沱别读注入，汇流处称为合口。
English: It also flows to the northeast, where it is injected, and the confluence is called the confluence.

古文：又东北过邑北，水出焉。
现代文：又往东北流过渗邑北边，秽水由此流出。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the northern edge of Xuanwu, and the polluted water flows out from there.

古文：又东北过乡邑南，清河又东，分为二水，枝津右出焉。东径汉武帝故台北。
现代文：又往东北流过乡邑南边，清河又东流，分为两条。支流从右岸分出，往东流经汉武帝故台北面。
English: Further to the northeast, it flows through the southern part of the township, and the Qinghe River flows to the east and divides into two. The tributary flows from the right bank and flows eastward through the Han Emperor Wudi's former Taipei.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：章武县东百里有武帝台，南北有二台，相去六十里，基高六十丈，俗云，汉武帝东巡海上所筑。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：章武县东边一百里有武帝台，台有南北两座，相距六十里。台基高六十丈，民间相传，这是汉武帝在东方巡察海上时所筑。
English: "Wei Shiji Ji" said: In the eastern part of Zhangwu County, there are 100 Wudi terraces, and there are two terraces in the north and south, which are 60 miles apart. The foundation is 60 meters high, which is passed down from generation to generation. This was built by Emperor Hanwu when he was surveying the sea in the East.

古文：又东注于海。
现代文：又东流注入大海。
English: The eastern current also flows into the sea.

古文：清河又东北径纻姑邑南。俗谓之新城，非也。
现代文：清河又往东北流经纷姑邑南边，俗称新城，不对。
English: The Qinghe River flows to the northeast, passing through the southern side of Langu, commonly known as Xincheng, is not right.

古文：又东北过穷河邑南，清河又东北径穷河邑南。俗谓之三女城，非也。东北至泉州县，北入滹沱。
现代文：又往东北流过穷河邑南边，清河又往东北流过穷河邑南边，俗称三女城，不对；往东北到了泉州县，北流注入淖沱水。
English: The Qinghe also flows to the northeast through the southern edge of Poor River Town, and the Qinghe also flows to the northeast through the southern edge of Poor River Town, commonly known as Three Women's Town, is not correct; it flows to the northeast to Quanzhou County, and the north stream is injected into Surabaya.

古文：《水经》曰：笥沟东南至泉州县与清河合，自下为派河尾也，又东，泉州渠出焉。
现代文：《水经》说：筒沟往东南流到泉州县，与清河汇合，从这里起的下流是派河的尾端。又东流，泉州渠在这里分出。
English: "Water Sutra" said: the tube ditch flows southeast to Quanzhou County, merges with the Qing River, and the downstream from here is the tail end of the Pai River. It also flows east, and the Quanzhou Canal is separated here.

古文：又东北过漂榆邑，入于海。
现代文：又往东北流过漂榆邑，注人大海。
English: It also flowed to the northeast, passing through the town of Driftwood, and spilling into the sea.

古文：清河又东径漂榆邑故城南，俗谓之角飞城。
现代文：清河又往东流经漂愉邑老城南面，俗称角飞城。
English: The Qinghe River also flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Fuyou, commonly known as Jiaofei City.

古文：《赵记》云：石勒使王述煮盐于角飞，即城异名矣。
现代文：《赵记》说：石勒派王述在角飞煮盐，就是漂榆城的别名。
English: "Zhao Ji" said: Shi Le sent Wang Shu to boil salt in Jiao Fei, which is another name for the drifting city.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：高城县东北百里，北尽漂榆，东临巨海，民咸煮海水，藉盐为业。即此城也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：高城县东北一百里，北边到漂榆县为止，东边靠着大海，老百姓都用海水煮盐，以制盐为业，说的就是此城。
English: "Wei Zhi Ji" said: "It is a hundred miles northeast of Gaocheng County, north to Huludao County, and east to the sea. The common people use seawater to boil salt, and salt production is their business. This is the city.

古文：清河自是入于海。
现代文：清河就在这里流入大海。
English: The Qinghe River flows into the sea here.

古文：荡水出河内荡阴县西山东，荡水出县西石尚山，泉流径其县故城南，县因水以取名也。
现代文：荡水发源于河内荡阴县西山东边，荡水发源于县西的石尚山，泉水流经老县城南面，该县就是按水来取名的。
English: The swinging water originates from the east side of the West Mountain of Hanoi's Hangin County, and the swinging water originates from Shishang Mountain in the west of the county. The spring water flows through the southern part of the old county. The county is named after the water.

古文：晋伐成都王颖，败帝于是水之南。
现代文：晋朝讨伐成都王颖，惠帝就在此水南岸打了败仗。
English: Wang Ying of the Jin Dynasty besieged Chengdu, and Emperor Hui fought a losing battle on the south bank of this river.

古文：卢谌《四王起事》曰：惠帝征成都王颖，战败时，举辇司马八人，辇犹在肩上，军人竟就杀举辇者，乘舆顿地，帝伤三矢，百僚奔散，唯侍中秘绍扶帝，士将兵之，帝曰：吾吏也，勿害之。
现代文：卢琳《四王起事》说：惠帝征讨成都王颖，打了败仗，当时抬轿子的司马有八人，轿子还抬在肩上，兵士就一拥而上，把抬轿的人杀了。轿子落地，惠帝也中了三箭，受了伤，百官都纷纷逃散了，只有侍中稽绍扶着惠帝。士兵向他举起刀枪。惠帝说：这是我的官员，不要伤害他。
English: Lu Lin's "The Rise of the Four Kings" said: Hui Di recruited Chengdu Wang Ying and lost the battle. At that time, there were eight horses to carry the palanquin. The palanquin was still carried on the shoulders, and the soldiers rushed up and killed the person carrying the palanquin. The palanquin fell to the ground, Hui Di was also hit by three arrows and injured, and all the officials fled. Only the attendant inspector supported Hui Di. The soldiers raised their swords and guns to him. Hui Di said: This is my official, don't hurt him.

古文：众曰：受太弟命，惟不犯陛下一人耳。
现代文：士兵们说：我们接受了皇太弟的命令，只是不能冒犯陛下一人罢了。
English: The soldiers said, "We have accepted the order of the crown prince's younger brother, but we cannot offend His Majesty alone."

古文：遂斩之，血污帝袂。
现代文：于是就把他杀了，他的血溅污了惠帝的衣袖。
English: So he killed him, and his blood splattered on Hui Di's sleeve.

古文：将洗之，帝曰：嵇侍中血，勿洗也。
现代文：后来人们要给他洗衣，惠帝说：这是稽侍中的血，不要洗。
English: Later, when people wanted to give him laundry, Hui Di said: "This is the blood of the attendant, don't wash it."

古文：此则嵇延祖殒命之所。
现代文：这地方就是秸延祖丧命的地方。
English: This is the place where Jian Yanzu died.

古文：又东北至内黄县，入于黄泽。
现代文：又往东北流到内黄县，注人黄泽。
English: It also flows to the northeast to Neihuang County and flows into Huangze.

古文：羑水出荡阴西北韩大牛泉。
现代文：羑水发源于荡阴西北的韩大牛泉。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the Hangdahu Spring in the northwest.

古文：《地理志》曰：县之西山，羑水所出也。
现代文：《地理志》说：内黄县的西山，是美水的发源地。
English: "Geography" said: the West Mountain of Neihuang County is the birthplace of the beauty of water.

古文：羑水又东径韩附壁北，又东流径羑城北，故羑里也。
现代文：美水又往东流经韩附壁北面，又往东流经姜城北面，这就是旧时的美里。
English: The beautiful water flowed eastward through the north side of Han attached wall, and eastward through the north side of Jiangcheng, which was the old Miri.

古文：《史记音义》曰：牖里在荡阴县。
现代文：《史记音义》说：墉里在荡阴县。
English: "Historical Notes" says: "Bali is in Wangyin County.

古文：《广雅》：牖，狱犴也。
现代文：《广雅卜墉，就是牢狱。
English: "Guangya Buyeo is a prison.

古文：夏曰夏台，殷曰羑里，周曰囹圄，皆圜土。
现代文：夏叫夏台，殷叫羡里，周叫图圈，都是监狱。
English: Xia is called Xatai, Yin is called Zhenli, Zhou is called Tuhuan, and they are all prisons.

古文：昔殷纣纳崇侯虎之言，囚西伯于此。
现代文：从前殷封听了崇侯虎的话，把西伯拘禁在这里。
English: Once upon a time, Yinfeng listened to the words of Chong Houhu and detained Xi Bo here.

古文：散宜生、南宫括见文工，乃演《易》用明否泰始终之义焉。
现代文：散宜生、南宫括去见文王，文王于是发展了《易经》，借以卜知吉凶始终的道理。
English: After the death of Sangi, Nan Gong went to see King Wen, who then developed the "I Ching" and used it as a way to know good and evil.

古文：羑城北，水积成渊，方十余步，深一丈余。
现代文：羡城北面，水流积聚成潭，方圆十余步，深一丈，东流到内黄，与防水汇合。
English: On the north side of Encheng, the water flow accumulates into a pool, with a circumference of more than ten paces and a depth of one meter, and flows east to Neihuang, and merges with the waterproof.

古文：东至内黄与防水会，水出西山马头涧，东径防城北，卢湛《征艰赋》所谓越防者也。
现代文：防水发源于西山的马头涧，往东流经防城北面，卢湛《征艰赋》所说的越过了防，就是防城。
English: The waterproof originated in the West Mountain's Madouyu, and flowed eastward through the north side of the fortified city. As Lu Zhan said in "Seeking Hardship," it crossed the fortified city and became the fortified city.

古文：其水东南流注于羑水，又东历黄泽入荡水。
现代文：水往东南流，注入赘水，又往东流过黄泽，注入荡水。
English: The water flows to the southeast, injecting brackish water, and flows eastward through Huangze, injecting swirling water.

古文：《地理志》曰：羑水至内黄入荡者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：羡水到内黄注入荡水。
English: "Geography" said: Envy water to the inner yellow injection of water.

古文：荡水又东与长沙沟水合，其水导源黑山北谷，东流径晋鄙故垒北。
现代文：荡水又东流，与长沙沟水汇合。长沙沟水发源于黑山的北谷，往东流经晋鄙老城堡北面，称为晋鄙城，又叫魏将城。
English: The Changsha ditch water originates from the north valley of the Black Mountain, and flows eastward through the north side of Jinnan Old Castle, known as Jinnan City, also known as Weizhao City.

古文：谓之晋鄙城，名之为魏将城，昔魏公子无忌矫夺晋鄙军于是处。故班叔皮《游居赋》曰：过荡阴而吊晋鄙，责公子之不臣者也。
现代文：从前魏公子无忌，就在这里虚托王命夺取了晋鄙的军权，所以班叔皮《游居赋》说：途经荡阴而凭吊晋鄙，责难公子有失臣节。
English: Once upon a time, Wei nobles had no fear. It was here that they took the military power of Jinshan by vainly relying on the king's life. Therefore, Ban Shupi, "Yu Jiu Fu," said: "By passing through Yin and hanging Jinshan, it is the day of losing a vassal to blame."

古文：其水又东，谓之宜师沟，又东径荡阴县南，又东径枉人山，东北至内黄县，右入荡水，亦谓之黄雀沟。
现代文：水又往东流，称为宜师沟。又往东流过荡阴县南面；又往东流过枉人山，往东北流到内黄县，向右边注入荡水，又叫黄雀沟。
English: The water also flows eastward, known as Yishi ditch. It also flows eastward through the south of Wangyin County; it also flows eastward through Wusongren Mountain, flows northeast to Inner Huangshan County, and injects the water to the right, also known as Huangjia ditch.

古文：是水，秋夏则泛，春冬则耗。
现代文：这条水到了夏秋二季就会泛滥，冬春时又干涸。
English: This water floods in the summer and autumn, and dries up in the winter and spring.

古文：荡水又径内黄城南。
现代文：荡水又往东流经内黄城南面，往东注入白沟。
English: The swirling water then flows eastward through the southern part of Inner Hwangcheng and flows eastward into Baigou.

古文：陈留有外黄，故称内也。
现代文：陈留有外黄，所以这里称内黄。
English: Chen Liu has outer yellow, so here it is called inner yellow.

古文：东注白沟。洹水出上党泫氏县，水出洹山，山在长子县也。
现代文：洹水发源于上党法氏县，洹水发源于洹山，洹山在长子县。
English: Ershui originated in Shangdang Faji County, Ershui originated in Lushan, and Lushan originated in Changzi County.

古文：东过隆虑县北，县北有隆虑山，昔帛仲理之所游神也。
现代文：往东流过隆虑县北，隆虑县北边有隆虑山，是从前帛仲理仙游的地方。
English: It flows eastward through the north of Longxian County, and there is Longxian Mountain on the north side of Longxian County. It is the place where the Ancients went on a fairy tale tour.

古文：县因山以取名。
现代文：该县因山而取名。
English: The county was named after the mountain.

古文：汉高帝六年，封周灶为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把它封给周灶，立为侯国。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave it to Zhou Zhao and established it as a principality.

古文：应助曰：殇帝曰隆，故改从林也。
现代文：应肋说：荡帝名隆，因避讳改隆字为林字。
English: Ying Li said: "The emperor is called Long, so I changed the Long character to the Lin character because I avoided using it."

古文：县有黄华水，出于神园之山黄华谷北崖上。
现代文：县里有黄华水，发源于神困之山，黄华谷的北崖上。
English: There is Huanghua Water in the county. It originates from the north cliff of Huanghua Valley, Shenshu Mountain.

古文：山高十七里，水出木门带，带即山之第三级也，去地七里，悬水东南注壑，直泻岩下，状若鸡翘，故谓之鸡翘洪。盖亦天台，赤城之流也。
现代文：山高十七里，水从木门带流出―这是山的第三级，离地七里，悬崖上的水，往东南注入深壑，直泻到岩下，形状像鸡的长尾巴，所以叫鸡翘洪，这也正像天台、赤城之类的命名一样。
English: The mountain is seventeen miles high, and the water flows out from the wooden gate belt - this is the third level of the mountain, seven miles from the ground, the water on the cliff, southeast into the deep, straight down to the rock, shaped like a chicken's long tail, so it is called the chicken flood, which is just like the names of the rooftop and Akagi.

古文：其水东流至谷口，潜入地下，东北十里复出，名柳渚，渚周四五里，是黄华水重源再发也。
现代文：水往东流到了谷口，潜入地下，在东北十里处重又冒出，名叫柳诸。柳诸周围四五里，是黄华水再次发源形成的。
English: The water flowed eastward to Taniguchi, where it went underground, and re-emerged ten miles to the northeast, where it was named Yuzhu. The four or five miles around Yuzhu were formed by the renewed source of Huanghua Water.

古文：东流，苇泉水注之，水出林虑山北泽中，东南流，与双泉合，水出鲁般门，东下流入苇泉水。
现代文：水往东流，苇泉水注入。苇泉水发源于林虑山北边的沼泽中，往东南流，与双泉汇合。双泉发源于鲁般门东，往下注，流入苇泉水。
English: The water flows to the east, and the water from the spring is injected. The spring water originates from the swamp on the north side of Linxi Mountain, flows to the southeast, and merges with the double spring. The double spring originates from the east of Luhangmen, and flows into the water from the spring water.

古文：苇泉水又东南，流注黄华水，谓之陵阳水。
现代文：苇泉水又往东南流，注入黄华水，称为陵阳水。
English: The water from the Liyang Spring flows to the southeast and is infused with Huanghua Water, known as Lingyang Water.

古文：又东，入于洹水也。
现代文：又东流，注入洹水。
English: It also flows to the east, injecting brackish water.

古文：又东北出山，过邺县南，洹水出山，东径殷墟北。《竹书纪年》曰：盘庚即位，自奄迁于北蒙，曰殷。
现代文：又往东北出山，流过邺县南边，洹水出山后，往东流经殷墟北面，《竹书纪年》说：盘庚即位，从奄迁都到北蒙，国号叫殷。
English: It also flowed to the northeast out of the mountains, passing through the south of Lushan County, and after flowing out of the mountains of Lushan, it flowed eastward through the north of Yinhu. "The Bamboo Annals" said: Pan Geng ascended the throne, from the capital to North Mongolia, and the country was called Yin.

古文：昔者项羽与章邯盟于此地矣。
现代文：从前项羽与章邯就是在这里会盟的。
English: It was here that Xiang Yu and Zhang Ye first formed an alliance.

古文：洹水又东，枝津出焉，东北流径邺城南，谓之新河。
现代文：沮水又东流，分出一条支流，往东北流经邺城南面，称为新河。
English: Despondent water also flows east, branching out into a tributary, which flows northeast through the south of Lucheng, known as the Xinhe.

古文：又东，分为二水，一水北径东明观下。
现代文：又东流，分成两条。一条往北流过东明观下。
English: It also flows east, splitting into two streams. One flows north past Dongmingguan.

古文：昔慕容隽梦石虎啮其臂，寤而恶之，购求其尸，而莫之知。
现代文：从前慕容隽梦见石虎咬他的臂膊，醒后很恼恨，出赏榜征求石虎的尸体，但人们都不知道。
English: Once upon a time, Murong Yao dreamed of a stone tiger biting his arm. When he woke up, he was very angry. He offered a reward to solicit the body of the stone tiger, but no one knew about it.

古文：后宫劈妾言，虎葬东明观下，于是掘焉，下度三泉，得其棺，剖棺出尸，尸僵不腐，隽骂之曰：死胡，安敢梦生天子也！
现代文：后宫有个宠妾说：石虎葬于东明观下。于是掘地直到深处，找到了他的棺材。开棺拖出尸体，已经成为僵尸，没有腐烂。慕容隽骂道：这死胡，你怎么敢托梦给在生的天子！
English: A favorite concubine in the harem said, "The stone tiger was buried under the East Ming Court." So they dug down to the depths and found his coffin. They opened the coffin and dragged out the corpse, which had become a zombie and had not rotted. Murong scolded, "This dead goose, how dare you dream about the living heavenly son!"

古文：使御史中尉阳约数其罪而鞭之。
现代文：他叫御史中尉阳约列举他的罪状，举鞭痛打。
English: He asked Lt. Mishi Yangyo to list his charges and whip him severely.

古文：此盖虎始葬处也。
现代文：这里就是石虎初葬的地方。
English: This is the place where the stone tiger was first buried.

古文：又北径建春门，石梁不高大，治石工密，旧桥首夹建两石柱，螭矩趺勒甚佳。
现代文：又往北流经建春门石桥下。桥并不高大，但石工却十分细致，老桥头两边竖了两根石柱，柱上的盘龙和柱座都雕得很精美。
English: It flows north again under the Jianchunmen Stone Bridge. The bridge is not very tall, but the masonry is very meticulous. Two stone pillars stand on both sides of the old bridge, and the dragon on the pillar and the pedestal are exquisitely carved.

古文：乘舆南幸，以其作制华妙，致之平城东侧西阙，北对射堂，绿水平潭，碧林侧浦，可游憩矣。
现代文：皇帝南巡时，看到石柱制作华丽精妙，就把它移到平城。石桥东边，就是西城楼，朝北面对射堂，这里有绿水平潭，水滨长着一片青葱的林木，是个游憩的好地方。
English: During the emperor's southern tour, when he saw the magnificent and exquisite stone pillar, he moved it to Pingcheng. On the east side of the stone bridge is the West City Tower, facing north to the shooting hall. There is a green horizontal pool here, and the waterfront has a lush forest. It is a good place for recreation.

古文：其水西径魏武玄武故苑。苑旧有玄武池，以肄舟楫，有鱼梁、钓台、竹木、灌丛，今池林绝灭，略无遗迹矣。
现代文：新河水往西流过旧时魏武帝的玄武苑，苑内从前有玄武池，可以学习划船，有鱼梁、钓台、竹木、灌丛，现在水池和丛林都已埋灭，不留一点痕迹了。
English: The water of the Xinhe River flows westward through the old Emperor Wu of Wei's Xuanwu Garden. In the garden, there used to be a Xuanwu Pool, where you could learn to row a boat, and there were fish beams, fishing platforms, bamboo trees, and bushes. Now the pool and the jungle have been buried, leaving no trace.

古文：其水西流注于漳。
现代文：水往西流，注入漳水。
English: The water flows westward, injecting brackish water.

古文：南水东北径女亭城北，又东北径高陵城南，东合坰沟，又东径鸬鹚陂，北与台陂水合。
现代文：南边那一条水往东北流过女亭城北面，又往东北流过高陵城南面，往东与炯沟汇合，又往东流经鸿鹅破，往北与台殴水汇合。
English: The water on the south side flows to the northeast through the north side of the city of Meiting, and then flows to the northeast through the south side of the city of Gaoling, eastward to the confluence with the Shugu, and eastward through the Hongge Gap, and northward to the confluence with the Taiwu Water.

古文：陂东西三十里，南北注白沟河，沟上承洹水，北绝新河，北径高陵城东，又北径斥丘县故城西。
现代文：破塘东西三十里注入白沟。炯沟上流承接垣水，往北横穿过新河，往北流经高陵城东面，又往北流经斥丘县老城西面。
English: The broken pond flows into the white ditch for thirty miles from east to west. The upper part of the ditch flows under the water of the adjacent wall, crosses the Xinhe River to the north, flows to the north through the east of Gaoling City, and flows to the north through the west of the old city of Kuyu County.

古文：汉高帝六年，封唐厉为侯国，王莽之利丘矣。
现代文：斥丘县南角有斥丘，是以丘名来取县名的，就是旧时的乾侯。《春秋经》载：昭公二十八年把这里封给唐厉，立为侯国，这就是王莽的利丘。
English: There is a hill in the southern corner of Yatai County, and the name of the county is derived from the name of the hill, which is the old Qianhou. "Spring and Autumn Annals" recorded: In the 28th year of Zhaogong, he gave this place to Tang Li and established it as a princely state. This is Wang Mang's Rikyu.

古文：又屈径其城北，东北流注于白沟。
现代文：又转弯流过城北，往东北流，注入白沟。
English: It then turned and flowed through the northern part of the city, heading northeast and flowing into the White Ditch.

古文：洹水自邺东径安阳县故城北。
现代文：垣水从邺往东流经安阳县老城北面。
English: The backwater flows eastward from Handan to the north of the old city of Anyang County.

古文：徐广《晋纪》曰：石遵自李城北入，斩张豺于安阳是也。
现代文：徐广《晋纪》说：石遵从李城向北方进军，在安阳杀了张豺。
English: Xu Guang's "Jin Ji" said: Shi Zun marched to the north from Licheng and killed Zhang Ye in Anyang.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：邺城南四十里有安阳城，城北有洹水东流者也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：邺城以南四十里，有安阳城，城北有但水东流。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: "Forty miles south of Handan City, there is Anyang City, and to the north of the city, there is Danzhui East Stream.

古文：洹水又东至长乐县，左则枝沟出焉。
现代文：垣水又往东流到长乐县，左边分出一条支沟。
English: The backwaters flow eastward to Changle County, with a branching ditch on the left.

古文：洹水又东径长乐县故城南。按《晋书。地理志》曰：魏郡有长乐县也。
现代文：垣水又往东流过长乐县老城南面，按《晋书•地理志》说：魏郡有长乐县。
English: The backwaters flowed eastward to the south of the old city of Changle County. According to the "Jinshu•Geography," Wei County has more than Changle County.

古文：又东过内黄县北，东入于白沟。
现代文：又往东流过内黄县北边，往东注人白沟。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Inner Huang County and eastward into the Renren Bai Gully.

古文：洹水径内黄县北东流，注于白沟，世谓之洹口也。
现代文：垣水经过内黄县北面往东流，注入白沟，世人称汇流处为垣口。
English: The backwaters flow eastward through the north of Inner Huang County and flow into the White Ditch. The world calls the confluence of the streams the backwaters.

古文：许慎《说文》、吕忱《字林》，并云洹水出晋、鲁之间。
现代文：许慎《说文》、吕忱《字林》都说垣水发源于晋、鲁之间。
English: Xu Shen's "Shuowen" and Lucheng's "Zhilin" both say that Kakimizu originated between Jin and Lu.

古文：昔声伯梦涉洹水，或与己琼瑰而食之，泣而又为琼瑰，盈其怀矣。
现代文：从前声伯梦见涉过垣水，有人送给他玉石，他把玉石吃了，流下的眼泪又变成了玉石，装了满怀。
English: Once upon a time, Shoubo dreamt of wading through a hedge. Someone gave him a piece of jade. He ate it, and the tears he shed turned into jade, filling his heart.

古文：从而歌曰：济洹之水，赠我以琼瑰，归乎，归乎，琼瑰盈吾怀乎！
现代文：于是唱道，涉过道水，送给我玉石。回家吧，回家吧，玉石装满我的怀抱了！
English: So he sang, waded through the water, and gave me the jade. Go home, go home, the jade has filled my arms!

古文：后言之，之暮而卒。
现代文：后来把梦中的事说了又说，到傍晚才死去。
English: Later, he went on and on about the dream, and died in the evening.

古文：即是水也。
现代文：说的就是这条水。
English: It is this water that is being talked about.

