古文：起柔兆阉茂九月，尽著雍困敦七月，凡二年。
现代文：起柔兆阉茂九月，尽著雍困敦七月，一共两年。
English: It took two years from the beginning of September to the end of July.

古文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝下之下
现代文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝下之下
English: Gao Zu Sheng, Grand Sage under Emperor Guangxiao

古文：武德九年丙戌，公元六二六年
现代文：唐高祖武德九年
English: The ninth year of Tang Gao Zuwude

古文：九月，突厥颉利献马三千匹，羊万口；上不受，但诏归所掠中国户口，征温彦博还朝。
现代文：九月，突厥颉利可汗进献三千匹马、一万头羊，唐太宗推辞不受，只是下诏令其归还所掠夺的中原人口，并征召上一年被突厥俘虏的温彦博回到朝中。
English: In September, the Turko-Bactrian Khan offered three thousand horses and ten thousand sheep. Tang Taizong did not accept the refusal, but issued a decree ordering him to return the plundered Central Plains population, and conscripted Wen Yanbo, who had been captured by the Turks the previous year, to return to the court.

古文：丁未，上引诸卫将卒习射于显德殿庭，谕之曰： 戎狄侵盗，自古有之，患在边境少安，则人主逸游忘战，是以寇来莫之能御。
现代文：丁未，太宗带领各卫将士在显德殿庭院练习箭术，并当面训话道： 自古以来就有周边的戎狄等族的侵扰，值得忧虑的是边境稍微安宁，君主就放逸游荡，而忘记战争的威胁，因而一俟敌人来犯则难以抵御。
English: Ding Wei, Taizong led the guards to practice archery in the courtyard of the Xiande Hall, and said in person: Since ancient times, there have been invasions by the surrounding troops and other ethnic groups. It is worrisome that the border is somewhat peaceful, and the monarch roams freely, forgetting the threat of war. Therefore, it is difficult to resist an enemy attack.

古文：今朕不使汝曹穿池筑苑，专习弓矢，居闲无事，则为汝师，突厥入寇，则为汝将，庶几中国之民可以少安乎！ 
现代文：现在朕不让你们修池榭筑宫苑，而是专门熟习射箭技术。闲居无事时，朕就当你们的老师，一旦突厥入侵，则做你们的将领，这样，中原的百姓也许能过上安宁的日子！ 
English: Now I don't want you to build ponds and gardens, but to become familiar with archery techniques. When you are idle, I will be your teacher, and if the Turks invade, I will be your general. In this way, the people of the Central Plains may be able to live a peaceful life!

古文：于是日引数百人教射于殿庭，上亲临试，中多者赏以弓、刀、帛，其将帅亦加上考。
现代文：从此，太宗皇帝每日带领数百人在宫殿庭院里，教他们射箭，并亲自测试，射中箭靶多的士兵赏赐给弓、刀、布帛，他们的将领考核成绩时列为上等。
English: From then on, Emperor Taizong led hundreds of people in the palace courtyard every day, taught them archery, and personally tested them. Soldiers who hit more targets were awarded bows, swords, and cloths. Their generals ranked them as superior when assessing their performance.

古文：群臣多谏曰： 于律，以兵刃至御在所者绞。
现代文：许多大臣劝谏道： 依照大唐律令，在皇帝住处手持兵刃的要处以绞刑。
English: Many ministers advised him: In accordance with the Great Tang Ruling, anyone who carries a sword in the emperor's residence should be hanged.

古文：今使卑碎之人张弓挟矢于轩陛之侧，陛下亲在其间，万一有狂夫窃发，出于不意，非所以重社稷也。 
现代文：现在陛下您让这些卑微之人张弓挟箭在殿宇之旁，陛下身处其中，万一有一个狂徒恣肆妄为，就会出现意外事故，这不是重视社稷江山的办法。 
English: Now, Your Majesty, you are letting these lowly people carry their bows and arrows next to the palace. Your Majesty is among them. In the unlikely event that a madman acts recklessly, there will be an accident. This is not the way to value society.

古文：韩州刺史封同人诈乘驿马入朝切谏。
现代文：韩州刺史封同人假称有事，骑驿马来到朝廷直言苦谏。
English: Han Zhou's son-in-law, Zhi Feng, pretended to have an affair and rode a donkey to the imperial court to speak frankly and bitterly.

古文：上皆不听，曰： 王者视四海如一家，封域之内，皆朕赤子，朕一一推心置其腹中，奈何宿卫之士亦加猜忌乎！ 
现代文：大宗均听不进去，他说： 真正的君主视四海如同一家，大唐辖境之内，都是朕的忠实臣民。我对每个人都能推心置腹，以诚相待，却为何要对保卫朕的将士横加猜忌呢？ 
English: Most of them did not listen, he said: A true monarch regards the four seas as one family, and within the jurisdiction of the Great Tang Dynasty, they are all my loyal subjects. I can put my heart and soul into everyone and treat them with sincerity, but why should I be suspicious of the soldiers who defend me?

古文：由是人思自励，数年之间，悉为精锐。
现代文：从此人人想着自强自励，几年之间，都成为精锐之士。
English: Since then, everyone has been thinking about self-improvement, and in a few years, everyone has become an elite.

古文：上尝言： 吾自少经略四方，颇知用兵之要，每观敌陈，则知其强弱，常以吾弱当其强，强当其弱。
现代文：太宗曾说过： 我从小南征北战，东略西讨，颇知用兵之道。每次观察敌军阵势，即知道它的强弱，并常以我军弱旅抵挡其强兵，而以强师击其弱旅。
English: Emperor Taizong once said: I have been marching from the south to the north and from the east to the west, and I am quite familiar with the way of using troops. Every time I observe the enemy's position, I know its strength and weakness, and I often use our army's weak brigade to resist its strong soldiers, and use a strong division to defeat its weak brigade.

古文：彼乘吾弱，逐奔不过数十百步，吾乘其弱，必出其陈后反击之，无不溃败，所以取胜，多在此也。 
现代文：敌军追逐我方弱旅不过走数百步，我军攻其弱旅，一定要突至其阵后乘势反击，敌军无不溃败奔逃，这就是我的取胜之道！ 
English: The enemy army chasing our weak brigade can only walk a few hundred paces. Our army attacking its weak brigade must rush to its rear and counterattack. The enemy army will be routed and flee. This is my way to win!

古文：己酉，上面定勋臣长孙无忌等爵邑，命陈叔达于殿下唱名示之，且曰： 朕叙卿等勋赏或未当，宜各自言。 
现代文：己酉，太宗与群臣当面议定开国元勋长孙无忌等人的爵位田邑，命陈叔达在宫殿下唱名公布，太宗说： 朕分等级排列你们的功劳赏赐，如有不当之处，可以各自申明。 
English: Ji Xuan, Taizong and the courtiers agreed in person on the titles of the founding father, the patriarch, the grandson of Mu Mu, and other noblemen. Chen Shuda was ordered to sing and announce the names under the palace. Taizong said: I rank your merits and rewards, and if there is anything improper, you can declare it individually.

古文：于是诸将争功，纷纭不已。淮安王神通曰： 臣举兵关西，首应义旗，今房玄龄，杜如晦等专弄刀笔，功居臣上，臣窃不服。 
现代文：于是各位将领纷纷争功，议论不休，淮安王李神通说： 我在关西起兵，首先响应义旗，而房玄龄、杜如晦等人只是捉刀弄笔，功劳却在我之上，我感到难以心服。 
English: As a result, the generals argued and discussed endlessly. Huai'an King Li Shentong said: I raised an army in Kansai and was the first to respond to the flag of righteousness, while Fang Xuanling, Du Rugao and others were just playing with swords and pens, but the credit was on me. I felt unconvinced.

古文：上曰： 义旗初起，叔父虽首唱举兵，盖亦自营脱祸。
现代文：太宗说： 叔父虽然首先响应义旗举兵，这也是自谋摆脱灾祸。
English: Taizong said: Although my uncle was the first to raise an army in response to the flag of righteousness, this was also his own way to get rid of the disaster.

古文：及窦建德吞噬山东，叔父全军覆没；刘黑闼再合馀烬，叔父望风奔北。
现代文：等到窦建德侵吞山东，叔父全军覆没；刘黑闼再次纠集余部，叔父丢兵弃甲，望风脱逃。
English: When Dou Jiande invaded and annexed Shandong, his uncle's entire army was wiped out; Liu Hefei gathered the rest again, his uncle abandoned his army and fled.

古文：玄龄等运筹帷幄，坐安社稷，论功行赏，固宜居叔父之先。
现代文：房玄龄等人运筹帷幄、决胜千里，使大唐江山得以安定，论功行赏，功劳自然在叔父之上。
English: Fang Xuanling and others have made thousands of kilometers of operations and decisive victories, so that the Datang mountains and rivers can be stabilized. In terms of merit and reward, the merit is naturally above the uncle.

古文：叔父，国之至亲，朕诚无所爱，但不可以私恩滥与勋臣同赏耳！ 
现代文：叔父您是皇族至亲，朕对您确实毫不吝惜，但不可循私情滥与有功之臣同等封赏。 
English: Uncle, you are a close relative of the imperial family. I do not begrudge you anything, but you should not be awarded the same rewards as meritorious vassals.

古文：诸将乃相谓曰： 陛下至公，虽淮安王尚无所私，吾侪何敢不安其分。 
现代文：众位将领于是相互议论道： 陛下如此公正，即使对皇叔淮安王也不循私情，我们这些人怎么敢不安本分呢。 
English: The generals then discussed among themselves, saying, "Your Majesty is so fair-minded, even when dealing with the Emperor's uncle, King Huai'an, you don't follow your personal feelings. How dare we not do our duty?"

古文：遂皆悦服。
现代文：大家都心悦诚服。
English: Everyone is very happy and satisfied.

古文：房玄龄尝言： 秦府旧人未迁官者，皆嗟怨曰： 吾属奉事左右，几何年矣！今除官，返出前宫、齐府人之后。  
现代文：房玄龄曾说： 秦王府的旧僚属未能升官的，皆满腹怨言道： 我等跟随侍奉陛下身边，也有许多年了，现今拜官，反而都在前太子东宫、齐王府僚属的后面。  
English: Fang Xuanling once said: The former colleagues of the Qin royal court who failed to be promoted are all full of complaints, saying: We have been following and serving His Majesty for many years, but now we are worshiping officials, but we are all behind the former East Palace of the Crown Prince and the colleagues of the Qi royal court.

古文：上曰： 王者至公无私，故能服天下之心。
现代文：太宗说： 君主大公无私，因此能使天下人心服。
English: Emperor Taizong said: The monarch is selfless, so he can win the hearts and minds of the world.

古文：朕与卿辈日所衣食，皆取诸民者也。
现代文：朕与你们平日的衣食，都取自百姓。
English: You and I get our daily food and clothing from the people.

古文：故设官分职，以为民也，当择贤才而用之，岂以新旧为先后哉！
现代文：因此设官吏定职守都是为了百姓，理应选择贤才加以任用，怎么能以新人旧人来做为选拔人才的先后顺序呢？
English: Therefore, the establishment of officials and the appointment of duties are all for the people. It is reasonable to select talents to be appointed. How can new people and old people be used as the order of selection of talents?

古文：必也新而贤，旧而不肖，安可舍新而取旧乎！
现代文：如果新人贤能，故旧不才，怎么可以放弃新人而只取故旧呢！
English: If the new man is capable, but the old man is not, how can we give up the new man and take only the old man?

古文：今不论其贤不肖而直言嗟怨，岂为政之体乎！ 
现代文：现在你们不论其是否贤能而只是怨声不断，这岂是为政之道？ 
English: Now, whether you are capable or not, you are just complaining. Isn't that the way of politics?

古文：诏： 民间不得妄立妖祠。
现代文：太宗下诏； 民间百姓不得私自设立妖祠。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict; the common people were not allowed to set up demon shrines on their own.

古文：自非卜筮正术，其馀杂占，悉从禁绝。 
现代文：除了正当的卜筮术，其余杂滥占卜，一律禁绝。 
English: In addition to legitimate divination, all other kinds of abusive divination are forbidden.

古文：上于弘文殿聚四部书二十馀万卷，置弘文馆于殿侧，精选天下文学之士虞世南、褚亮、姚思廉、欧阳询、蔡允恭、萧德言等，以本官兼学士，令更日宿直，听朝之隙，引入内殿，讲论前言往行，商榷政事，或至夜分乃罢。
现代文：太宗聚集经史子集四部书二十余万卷藏于弘文殿，并于殿旁设置弘文馆。遴选虞世南、褚亮、姚思廉、欧阳询、蔡允恭、萧德言等国内精通学术之人，以原职兼任弘文馆学士，让他们轮流值宿，皇上在听政之暇，领他们进入内殿，讲论先哲言行，商榷当朝大政，有时要到午夜时分才结束。
English: Emperor Taizong collected more than 200,000 volumes of the four-volume collection of history books, which are stored in the Hongwen Hall, and set up the Hongwen Hall next to the hall. Yu Shennan, Zhi Liang, Yao Siliang, Ouyang Zhen, Cai Yungong, Xiao Deyan and other domestic academically proficient people were selected to concurrently serve as scholars of the Hongwen Hall with their original duties, so that they could take turns staying there. The emperor led them into the inner hall in his spare time to listen to politics, to talk about the previous philosophy and practice, and to discuss the great policy of the government, sometimes until midnight.

古文：又取三品已上子孙充弘文馆学生。
现代文：又选取三品以上官员的子孙充任弘文馆学生。
English: In addition, the children and grandchildren of officials with three or more pins were selected to be appointed as students of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：冬，十月，丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，丙辰朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：诏追封故太子建成为息王，谥曰隐；齐王元吉为剌王，以礼改葬。
现代文：太宗下诏追封已故太子皇兄李建成为息王，谥号为隐；皇弟齐王李元吉谥号为剌，以皇家丧礼重新安葬。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict to enthrone the late prince's elder brother, Li Jian, as the son-in-law of the king, with the posthumous name of Yin; his younger brother, King Qi, with the posthumous name of Li Yuanji, was reburied with a royal funeral.

古文：葬日，上哭之于宜秋门，甚哀。
现代文：安葬那一天，太宗皇帝在宜秋门大哭一场，显得十分哀痛。
English: On the day of the funeral, Emperor Taizong burst into tears at the Yixiu Gate, appearing very sad.

古文：魏征、王珪表请陪送至墓所，上许之，命宫府旧僚皆送葬。
现代文：魏徵、王上表请求陪送灵车到安葬地，太宗答应了他们的请求，并命令原东宫和齐王府的旧僚属都去送葬。
English: Wei Zheng and Wang Shangbai requested that the hearse accompany them to the burial site. Emperor Taizong agreed to their request and ordered the former Donggong Palace and the former colleagues of the Qi royal palace to attend the funeral.

古文：癸亥，立皇子中山王承乾为太子，生八年矣。
现代文：癸亥，朝廷立中山王李承乾为皇太子，时年仅八岁。
English: At the age of eight, the imperial court appointed the king of Zhongshan, Li Chengqian, as crown prince.

古文：庚辰，初定功臣实封有差。
现代文：庚辰，唐朝初步规定功臣实得食邑封户的等级差别。
English: Geng Chen, the Tang Dynasty initially stipulated the difference in rank between meritorious vassals who actually received food and households.

古文：初，萧瑀荐封德彝于上皇，上皇以为中书令。
现代文：起初，萧向高祖荐举封德彝，高祖任命他为中书令。
English: At first, Xiao recommended Gao Zu to be awarded the title of Dejun, and Gao Zu appointed him to be the Clerk of the Central Government.

古文：及上即位，瑀为左仆射，德彝为右仆射。议事已定，德彝数反之于上前，由是有隙。
现代文：到了太宗即位，改任萧为尚书左仆射。封德彝为右仆射，二人商定将要上奏的事，到了太宗面前封德彝屡次变易，由此二人之间产生隔阂。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Xiao was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and Fong Deyu as his left-hand man. The two agreed on what would be played, but when it came to Emperor Taizong, Fong Deyu was repeatedly changed, resulting in a rift between the two.

古文：时房玄龄、杜如晦新用事，皆疏瑀而亲德彝，瑀不能平，遂上封事论之，辞指寥落，由是忤旨。
现代文：当时房玄龄、杜如晦刚当权，均疏远萧而亲近封德彝，萧愤愤不平，于是上密封的奏章理论，辞意凄凉，由此触犯圣意。
English: At that time, Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao, who were in power at the time, both distanced themselves from Xiao and were close to Feng Dejun. Xiao was indignant, so the theory of the sealed musical composition was bleak, thus violating the sacred intention.

古文：猁瑀与陈叔达忿争于上前，庚辰，瑀、叔达皆坐不敬，免官。
现代文：适逢萧与陈叔达又在太宗面前含怒争辩，庚辰，萧、陈叔达皆以对皇上不恭敬的罪名，被罢官免职。
English: At the same time, Xiao and Chen Shuda had an angry argument in front of Emperor Taizong. Geng Chen, Xiao, and Chen Shuda were all dismissed from their posts on the charge of disrespecting the emperor.

古文：甲申，民部尚书裴矩奏 民遭突厥暴践者，请户给绢一匹。 
现代文：甲申，民部尚书裴矩进言： 对遭受突厥暴虐践踏的百姓，请求每户赐给绢帛一匹。 
English: Gao Shin, Minister of the People's Republic of China, said: To the people who suffered from the Turkish tyranny, I request that each household be given a donkey.

古文：上曰： 朕以诚信御下，不欲虚有存恤之名而无其实，户有大小，岂得雷同给赐乎！ 
现代文：太宗说： 朕以诚、信二字统治下属，不想徒有抚恤百姓的名声而没有实在的东西，每户中人数多少不等，怎么能整齐划一，赏赐都一样呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I govern my subordinates with sincerity and faith. I don't want to have the reputation of caring for the people without anything real. The number of people in each household varies. How can it be uniform and the rewards be the same?

古文：于是计口为率。
现代文：于是计算人口以它为赏赐的标准。
English: The population was then counted using this as the criterion for awarding it.

古文：初，上皇欲强宗室以镇天下，故皇再从、三从弟及兄弟之下，虽童孺皆为王，王者数十人。
现代文：起初，高祖想以加强皇室宗族的力量来威镇天下，所以与皇帝同曾祖、同高祖的远房堂兄弟以及他们的儿子，即使童孺幼子均封为王，达数十人。
English: At first, Gao Zu wanted to strengthen the power of the royal family to dominate the world, so he and the emperor together with his great-grandfather, distant cousins of Gao Zu, and their sons, even if they were all crowned as kings, reaching dozens of people.

古文：上从容问群臣： 遍封宗子，于天下利乎？ 
现代文：为此，太宗语气和缓地征求群臣的意见： 遍封皇族子弟为王，对天下有利吗？ 
English: To this end, Emperor Taizong gently solicited the opinions of his courtiers: Is it beneficial to the world to have a son of the imperial family as king?

古文：封德彝对曰： 前世唯皇子及兄弟乃为王，自馀非有大功，无为王者。
现代文：封德彝回答道： 前世只有皇帝的儿子及兄弟才封为王，其他宗亲如果不是有大功勋，便没有封王的。
English: Feng Dejun replied, "In the previous life, only the emperor's son and brother were made kings. If the other relatives did not have great merits, they were not made kings.

古文：上皇敦睦九族，大封宗室，自两汉以来未有如今之多者。
现代文：太上皇亲善厚待皇亲国戚，大肆分封宗室，自东西汉以来都没有如此之多。
English: Since the Eastern and Western Han dynasties, there have not been so many emperors and empresses who treated the relatives of the emperor and the relatives of the country with kindness and generosity.

古文：爵命既崇，多给力役，恐非示天下以至公也。 
现代文：封给的爵位既高，又多赐给劳力仆役，这恐怕不能向天下人显示自己的大公无私吧！ 
English: The high number of knighthoods bestowed, and the fact that many of them are given to labourers and servants, is probably not a sign of selflessness to the rest of the world!

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：太宗说： 有道理。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：朕为天子，所以养百姓也，岂可劳百姓以养己之宗族乎！ 
现代文：朕做天子，就是为了养护百姓，怎么可以劳顿百姓来养护自己的宗族呢！ 
English: As the Son of Heaven, I am here to protect the people. How can I make the people work so hard to protect their own clan?

古文：十一月，庚寅，降宗室郡王皆为县公，惟有功者数人不降。
现代文：十一月，庚寅，将宗室郡王降格为县公，只有功勋卓著的几位不降。
English: In November, Geng Yin downgraded the county king of the family to the county magistrate. Only a few people with outstanding merits did not downgrade.

古文：丙午，上与群臣论止盗。
现代文：丙午，太宗与群臣讨论防盗问题。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Taizong discussed the anti-theft issue with his retainers.

古文：或请重法以禁之，上哂之曰： 民之所以为盗者，由赋繁役重，官吏贪求，饥寒切身，故不暇顾廉耻耳。
现代文：有人请求设严刑重法以禁盗，太宗微笑着答道： 老百姓之所以做盗贼，是因为赋役繁重，官吏贪财求贿，百姓饥寒交集，所以便顾不得廉耻了。
English: Some people asked for the establishment of a severe criminal law to prohibit theft, and Taizong replied with a smile: The reason why ordinary people are thieves is because they are overworked, officials are greedy for money and bribes, and people are hungry and cold, so they cannot afford to be shameless.

古文：朕当去奢省费，轻徭薄赋，选用廉吏，使民主食有馀，则自不为盗，安用重法邪！ 
现代文：朕主张应当杜绝奢移浪费，轻徭薄赋，选用廉吏，使老百姓吃穿有余，自然不去做盗贼，何必用严刑重法呢！ 
English: I advocate that we should put an end to extravagance and waste, frivolity and extravagance, the use of corrupt officials, so that the people have more than enough to eat and wear, naturally not to be a thief, why use severe punishment?

古文：自是数年之后，海内升平，路不拾遗，外户不闭，商旅野宿焉。
现代文：从此经过数年之后，天下太平，路不拾遗，夜不闭户，商人旅客可在野外露宿。
English: Since then, several years have passed, the world is peaceful, the road is not littered, the house is not closed at night, and businessmen and tourists can camp out in the open.

古文：上又尝谓侍臣曰： 君依于国，国依于民。
现代文：太宗曾对身边的大臣说： 君主依靠国家，国家仰仗百姓。
English: Emperor Taizong once said to the ministers around him: The monarch relies on the country, and the country relies on the people.

古文：刻民以奉君，犹割肉以充腹，腹饱而身毙，君富而国亡。
现代文：剥削百姓来奉养君主，如同割下身上的肉来充腹，腹饱而身死，君主富了而国家灭亡。
English: Exploiting the people to feed the monarch is like cutting off the flesh of the body to fill the stomach, the stomach is full and the body dies, the monarch is rich and the country perishes.

古文：故人君之患，不自外来，常由身出。
现代文：所以君主的忧虑，不来自于外面，而常在于自身。
English: So the monarch's worries do not come from the outside, but often lie within himself.

古文：夫欲盛则费广，费广则赋重，赋重则民愁，民愁则国危，国危则君丧矣。
现代文：凡欲望多则花费大，花费大则赋役繁重，赋役繁重则百姓愁苦，百姓愁苦则国家危急，国家危急则君主地位不保。
English: Where there is much desire, there is great expense; where there is great expense, there is heavy taxation; where there is heavy taxation, the people are in distress; where the people are in distress, the state is in danger; and where the state is in danger, the position of the monarch is insecure.

古文：朕常以此思之，故不敢纵欲也。 
现代文：朕常常思考这些，所以不敢放纵自己的欲望。 
English: I often think about these things, so I don't dare to indulge my desires.

古文：十二月，己巳，益州大都督窦轨奏称獠反，请发兵讨之。
现代文：十二月，己巳，益州大都督窦轨上奏，声称当地的獠民造反，请求朝廷派兵讨伐。
English: In December, the grand-duke of Yizhou, Dou Ke, announced that the local people had rebelled and asked the imperial court to send troops to put down the rebellion.

古文：上曰： 獠依阻山林，时出鼠窃，乃其常俗；牧守苟能抚以恩信，自然帅服，安可轻动干戈，渔猎其民，比之禽兽，岂为民父母之意邪！ 竟不许。
现代文：这难道是当百姓父母官的本意吗！ 
English: Is this really the intention of the people's parents and officials?

古文：上谓裴寂曰： 比多上书言事者，朕皆粘之屋壁，得出入省览，每思治道，或深夜方寝。
现代文：最后没有准许出兵。太宗对大臣裴寂说： 近来很多上书言事的奏章，朕都将它们贴在寝宫的墙壁上，以便进出时观看，朕时常思考为政之道，有时要到深夜才能入睡。
English: In the end, the dispatch of troops was not permitted. Emperor Taizong said to Minister Pei Zhigu: "Recently, there have been a lot of speeches and speeches. I have posted them on the walls of my bedroom so that I can see them when I go in and out. I often think about the way to do politics, and sometimes I can't fall asleep until late at night.

古文：公辈亦当恪勤职业，副朕此意。 
现代文：希望你们也要恪尽职守，与朕的这一心意相称。 
English: I hope that you will also fulfill your duties, commensurate with this intention of mine.

古文：上厉精求治，数引魏征入卧内，访以得失；征知无不言，上皆欣然嘉纳。
现代文：太宗励精求治，多次让魏徵进入卧室内，询问政治得失。魏徵知无不言，太宗均高兴地采纳。
English: Taizong diligently sought a solution, and repeatedly asked Wei Zheng to enter the bedroom to inquire about political gains and losses. Wei Zheng knew everything, and Taizong was happy to accept.

古文：上遣使点兵，封德彝奏： 中男虽未十八，其躯干壮大者，亦可并点。 
现代文：太宗派人征兵，封德彝上奏道： 中男虽不到十八岁，其中身体魁梧壮实的，也可一并征发。 
English: Tai Sect sent people to recruit soldiers, and Fong De Xuan said: Although the middle-aged man is less than eighteen years old, he can also be conscripted if he is physically strong.

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：敕出，魏征固执以为不可，不肯署敕，至于数四。
现代文：敕令传出，魏徵固执己见加以反对，不肯签署，如是往返四次。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, Wei Zheng stubbornly opposed his own opinion and refused to sign. In this case, he went back and forth four times.

古文：上怒，召而让之曰： 中男壮大者，乃奸民诈妄以避征役，取之何害，而卿固执至此！ 
现代文：太宗大怒，将他召进宫中责备道： 中男中魁梧壮实的，都是那些奸民虚报年龄以逃避徭役的人，征召他们有什么害处，而你却如此固执！ 
English: He was so angry that he summoned him to the palace and scolded him, saying, "Among the middle-aged men, the big and strong ones are all those who have deceived the people by falsely reporting their age to avoid military service. What is the harm in conscripting them, but you are so stubborn!

古文：对曰： 夫兵在御之得其道，不在众多。
现代文：魏徵答道： 军队在于治理得法，而不在于人数众多。
English: Wei Qian replied: The army is good at governance, not at having a large number of people.

古文：陛下取其壮健，以道御之，足以无敌于天下，何必多取细弱以增虚数乎！
现代文：陛下征召身体壮健的成丁，用正确的方法加以管理，便足以无敌于天下，又何必多征年幼之人以增加虚数呢！
English: If His Majesty conscripted able-bodied men and managed them in the right way, they would be invincible in the world. Why should He conscript more young people to increase the imaginary number?

古文：且陛下每云： 吾以诚信御天下，欲使臣民皆无欺诈。 
现代文：而且陛下总说： 朕以诚、信治理天下，欲使臣下百姓均没有欺诈行为。 
English: Moreover, His Majesty always said: I govern the world with sincerity and faith, and I want to make sure that none of my subjects commit fraud.

古文：今即位未几，失信者数矣！ 上愕然曰： 朕何为失信？ 
现代文：现在陛下即位没多久，却已经多次失信了！ 太宗惊愕地问道： 朕怎么失信了？ 
English: Now that His Majesty has been on the throne for a short time, he has already been unfaithful several times! Taizong asked in surprise, "How have I been unfaithful?"

古文：对曰： 陛下初即位，下诏云： 逋负官物，悉令蠲免。 
现代文：魏徵答道： 陛下刚即位时，就下诏说： 百姓拖欠官家的财物，一律免除。 
English: Wei Qian replied, "When His Majesty ascended the throne, he issued an edict saying, 'All the people who are in arrears with the officials' property will be exempted.

古文：有司以为负秦府国司者，非官物，征督如故。
现代文：有关部门认为拖欠秦王府国司的财物，不属于官家财物，仍旧征求索取。
English: The relevant departments believe that the property of the State Secretary of Qinwangfu that is in arrears does not belong to the official property, and they are still soliciting it.

古文：陛下以秦王升为天子，国司之物，非官物而何！
现代文：陛下由秦王升为天子，秦王府国司的财物不是官家之物又是什么呢？
English: Your Majesty ascended from the Qin King to the Son of Heaven. What are the properties of the Qin King's General Secretary that are not those of the official family?

古文：又曰： 关中免二年租调，关外给复一年。 
现代文：又说： 关中地区免收二年的租调，关外地区免除徭役一年。 
English: He also said, "In Guanzhong area, there will be a two-year exemption of rent transfer, and in Guanzhong area, there will be a one-year exemption of labor service.

古文：既而继有敕云： 已役已输者，以来年为始。 
现代文：不久又有敕令说： 已纳税和已服徭役的，从下一年开始免除。 
English: Soon after, another imperial edict said: Those who have paid taxes and performed national service will be exempted from the following year.

古文：散还之后，方复更征，百姓固已不能无怪。
现代文：如果退还已纳税物之后，又重新征回，这样百姓不能没有责怪之意。
English: If, after the tax has been refunded, it is collected again, the people cannot but feel guilty.

古文：今既征得物，复点为兵，何谓来年为始乎！
现代文：现在是既征收租调，又指派为兵员，还谈什么从下一年开始免除呢！
English: Now it is both the levy of rent transfer and the assignment of soldiers, and what to speak of exemption from the next year!

古文：又，陛下所与共治天下者在于守宰，居常简阅，咸以委之；至于点兵，独疑其诈，岂所谓以诚信为治乎！ 
现代文：另外与陛下共同治理天下的都是地方官，日常公务都委托他们办理；至于征点兵员，却怀疑他们使诈，这难道是以诚信为治国之道吗？ 
English: In addition, together with His Majesty, the world is governed by local officials, who are entrusted with the day-to-day management of public affairs; as for the conscription of soldiers, but they are suspected of fraud, is this the way to govern the country with integrity?

古文：上悦曰： 向者朕以卿固执，疑卿不达政事，今卿论国家大体，诚尽其精要。
现代文：太宗高兴地说： 以前朕认为你比较固执，怀疑你不通达政务，现在看到你议论国家大政方针，确实都切中要害。
English: Taizong said happily, "In the past, I thought you were rather stubborn and suspected that you were not well versed in government affairs. Now that I see you discussing the country's major policies, they are indeed all to the point.

古文：夫号令不信，则民不知所从，天下何由而治乎？
现代文：朝廷政令不讲信用，则百姓不知所从，国家如何能得到治理呢？
English: If the imperial edicts are not trustworthy, the people will not know what to do. How can the country be governed?

古文：朕过深矣！ 
现代文：朕的过失很深呐！ 
English: My fault is very deep!

古文：乃不点中男，赐征金甕一。
现代文：于是不征点中男做兵员，并且赐给魏徵一只金瓮。
English: Therefore, he did not draft the middle-aged man as a soldier, and gave Wei Zheng a gold ingot.

古文：上闻景州录事参军张玄素名，召见，问以政道，对曰： 隋主好自专庶务，不任群臣；群臣恐惧，唯知禀受奉行而已，莫之敢违。
现代文：太宗素闻景州录事参军张玄素的大名，便召他进宫，问他为政之道，张玄素答道： 隋朝皇帝好独揽各种政务，而不委任给群臣；群臣内心恐惧，只知道禀承旨意加以执行，没有人敢违命不遵。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard of Zhang Xuansu's record of military service in Jingzhou, he summoned him to the palace and asked him how to run the government. Zhang Xuansu replied: The Emperor of the Sui Dynasty liked to handle all kinds of government affairs without delegating them to the courtiers. The courtiers were afraid and only knew how to carry out the emperor's will. No one dared to disobey his orders.

古文：以一人之智决天下之务，借使得失相半，乖谬已多，下谀上蔽，不亡何待！
现代文：然而以一个人的智力决断天下事务，即使得失参半，乖谬失误之处已属不少，加上臣下谄谀皇上受蒙蔽，国家不灭亡更待何时！
English: However, deciding the world's affairs with one's intellect, even if the gains and losses are mixed, there are already quite a few perverse mistakes, and with the emperor being deceived by his vassals, when will the country not perish!

古文：陛下诚能谨择群臣而分任以事，高拱穆清而考其成败以施刑赏，何忧不治！
现代文：陛下如能慎择群臣而让他们各司其事，自己高拱安坐、清和静穆，考察臣下的成败得失据以实施刑罚赏赐，国家还能治理不好！
English: If his majesty can carefully choose a group of ministers and let them do their own thing, sit high and calmly, examine the success or failure of his subordinates and reward them with punishment, the country can still be governed badly!

古文：又，臣观隋末乱离，其欲争天下者不过十馀人而已，其馀皆保乡党、全妻子，以待有道而归之耳。
现代文：而且，我观察隋末大动乱，其中想要争夺天下的不过十几人而已，其余大部分都想保全乡里和妻子儿女，等待有道之君而归附。
English: Moreover, I observed the great turmoil at the end of the Sui Dynasty, of which only a dozen or so people wanted to fight for the world, and most of the rest wanted to preserve the countryside and their wives and children, waiting for the virtuous prince to join them.

古文：乃知百姓好乱者亦鲜，但人主不能安之耳。 
现代文：由此可知百姓很少有好作乱的，只是君主不能使他们安定罢了。 
English: From this it can be seen that the people are rarely inclined to make trouble, but the monarch cannot make them stable.

古文：上善其言，擢为侍御史。
现代文：太宗欣赏他的言论，提拔他为侍御史。
English: Emperor Taizong appreciated his words and promoted him to the position of attendant to the emperor.

古文：前幽州记室直中书省张蕴古上《大宝箴》，其略曰： 圣人受命，拯溺亨屯，故以一人治天下，不以天下奉一人。 
现代文：前幽州记室参军、直中书省张蕴古，呈给太宗一篇《大宝箴》。大略写道： 圣人上承天命，拯黎民于水火，救时世之危难。所以以一个人来治理天下，而不以天下专奉一人。 
English: Zhang Yungu, a former member of the Yuzhou Recorder's Office who joined the army, and Zhang Yungu, a former member of the Ministry of Education, presented Taizong with a copy of the "Great Treasure Proverb." It roughly reads: The sage inherits the fate of heaven, rescues the people from fire and water, and saves the peril of the times. Therefore, one person should govern the world, rather than serving one person exclusively.

古文：又曰： 壮九重于内，所居不过容膝；彼昏不知，瑶其台而琼其室。
现代文：又写道： 内廷重屋叠室、宽大无比，而帝王所居住的不过一片狭小之地；他们却昏庸无知，大肆修筑瑶台琼室。
English: He also wrote: The multi-storied chambers of the Inner Court are incomparably large, but the emperor lives in only a small space. However, they are stupid and ignorant, and they have built the Xingtai Qiong's chamber.

古文：罗八珍于前，所食不过适口；惟狂罔念，丘其糟而池其酒。 
现代文：席前堆着山珍海味，而帝王所吃的不过合口味的几样；他们却忽发狂想，堆糟成丘、以酒为池。 
English: The delicacies of the mountains and the sea can be enjoyed at will. In fact, the food is already good as long as it goes well with the mouth. But the indulgent tyrants have stored wine as a pool, and the dregs have piled up into mountains.

古文：又曰： 勿没没而暗，勿察察而明，虽冕旒蔽目而视于未形，虽黈纩塞耳而听于无声。 
现代文：又写道： 不要无声无息、糊里糊涂，也不要苛察小事，自以为精明，应该虽有冕前的垂旒遮住双眼却能看清事物的未成形状态，虽有纩挡住耳朵却能听到尚未发出的声音。 
English: He also wrote: Don't be silent and confused, don't scrutinize trifles, don't think you're clever, you should be able to see the unformed state of things even though the drool in front of the crown covers your eyes, and you should be able to hear sounds that have not yet been emitted even though your ears are blocked by your eyelids.

古文：上嘉之，赐以束帛，除大理丞。
现代文：太宗深为嘉许，赏赐给束帛，任命他为大理丞。
English: Emperor Taizong was deeply appreciative and rewarded Sokjong by appointing him as a grand secretary.

古文：上召傅奕，赐之食，谓曰： 汝前所奏，几为吾祸。然凡有天变，卿宜尽言皆如此，勿以前事为惩也。 
现代文：太宗召见傅奕，赐给他食物，对他说： 你六月所奏金星出现在秦的分野，秦王当有天下，差一点害我遭殃，不过今后凡有天象变化，你应一如既往，言无不尽，不要心有余悸，总记着过去的事。 
English: Taizong summoned Fu Yi, gave him some food, and said to him: "The Venus you played in June appeared in the field of Qin. When the King of Qin ruled the world, it almost brought disaster to me. However, in the future, whenever there is a change in the celestial bodies, you should, as always, talk endlessly, do not worry, and always remember the past.

古文：上尝谓奕曰： 佛之为教，玄妙可师，卿何独不悟其理？ 
现代文：太宗曾对傅奕说： 佛作为宗教，道理玄妙可以师法，为何惟独你不明悟其道理？ 
English: Emperor Taizong once said to Fu Yi: As a religion, the Buddha's teachings are profound and profound, so why can't you understand them?

古文：对曰： 佛乃胡中桀黠，诳耀彼土。
现代文：傅奕答道： 佛是胡族中的狡诈之人，欺言诳世炫耀于西域。
English: Fu Yi replied, "Buddha is a cunning person among the Hu people. He deceives the world and shows off in the western region.

古文：中国邪僻之人，取庄、老玄谈，饰以妖幻之语，用欺愚俗。无益于民，有害于国，臣非不悟，鄙不学也。 
现代文：中国的一些邪避之人，择取庄子、老子玄谈理论，用妖幻之语加以修饰，用来欺蒙愚昧的民众，这既不利于百姓，更有害于国家，我不是不能明悟，而是鄙视它不愿意接触它。 
English: Some evildoers in China have chosen Zhuangzi and Laozi's occult theories, embellished them with magical language, and used them to deceive the ignorant people. This is not only detrimental to the people, but also harmful to the country. I am not unable to understand, but despise it and do not want to touch it.

古文：上颇然之。
现代文：太宗颇以为然。
English: Taizong was quite impressed.

古文：上患吏多受赇，密使左右试赂之。
现代文：太宗担心官吏中多有接受贿赂的，便秘密安排身边的人去试探他们。
English: Taizong was worried that many officials accepted bribes, so he secretly arranged for people around him to test them.

古文：有司门令史受绢一匹，上欲杀之，民部尚书裴矩谏曰： 为吏受赂，罪诚当死；但陛下使人遗之而受，乃陷人于法也，恐非所谓 道之以德，齐之以礼。  
现代文：有一个刑部的司门令史收受绢帛一匹，太宗得悉后想要杀掉他。民部尚书裴矩劝谏道： 当官的接受贿赂，罪的确应当处死；但是陛下派人送上门去让其接受，这是有意引人触犯法律，恐怕不符合孔子所谓 用道德加以诱导，以礼教来整齐民心 的古训。 
English: There is a story of a doorkeeper of the criminal investigation department who received a donkey, and the emperor learned of it and wanted to kill him. The Ministry of People's Affairs wrote a letter to the donkey and advised the donkey: The crime of accepting bribes by officials should indeed be punished by death; however, His Majesty sent someone to the donkey's door to make it accept the bribe. This was intentionally causing it to break the law, and I'm afraid it does not conform to Confucius's ancient teaching of using morality to induce people and etiquette to rectify the people's hearts.

古文：上悦，召文武五品已上告之曰： 裴矩能当官力争，不为面从，倘每事皆然，何忧不治！ 
现代文：太宗听了很高兴，召集文武五品以上的官员，对他们说： 裴矩能够做到在位敢于力争，并不一味地顺从我，假如每件事情都能这样做，国家怎么能治理不好呢！ 
English: Taizong was very pleased to hear this, and called together the officials above the rank of Wenwu Wupin, and said to them: If Pei Momeng can achieve the position of daring to struggle, and does not blindly obey me, if everything can be done this way, how can the country not be well governed!

古文：臣光曰：古人有言：君明臣直。
现代文：臣司马光曰：古人说过：君主贤明则臣下敢于直言。
English: Vassal Sima Guang said: The ancients said: When the monarch is wise, his vassals dare to speak out.

古文：裴矩佞于隋而忠于唐，非其性之有变也；君恶闻其过，则忠化为佞，君乐闻直言，则佞化为忠。
现代文：裴矩在隋朝是位佞臣而在唐则是忠臣，不是他的品性有变化。君主讨厌听人揭短，则大臣的忠诚便转化为谄谀；君主乐意听到直言劝谏，则谄谀又会转化成忠诚。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, Pei Rong was a vassal, but in the Tang Dynasty, he was a loyal vassal. It is not his character that has changed. If the monarch hates to hear insults, then the minister's loyalty will turn into disloyalty; if the monarch is willing to hear straightforward advice, then disloyalty will turn into loyalty.

古文：是知君者表也，臣者景也，表动则景随矣。
现代文：由此可知君主如同测影的表，大臣便似影子，表一动则影子随之而动。
English: From this it can be seen that the monarch is like a measuring table, the minister is like a shadow, and when the table moves, the shadow moves with it.

古文：是岁，进皇子长沙郡王恪为汉王，宜阳郡王祐为楚王。
现代文：这一年，将皇子长沙郡王李恪升为汉王，宜阳郡王李升为楚王。
English: In this year, the prince of Changsha County, Wang Li Ke, was promoted to Han King, and the prince of Yiyang County, Wang Li, was promoted to Chu King.

古文：新罗、百济、高丽三国有宿仇，迭相攻击；上遣国子助教硃子奢往谕指，三国皆上表谢罪。
现代文：新罗、百济、高丽三国之间世代结怨，相互攻伐，战事连绵，太宗派遣国子监助教朱子奢前去传达圣意，劝他们讲和，三国都上表谢罪。
English: The three countries of Silla, Baekje, and Goryeo had been feuding for generations, attacking each other, and warring continuously. Emperor Taizong sent the state son overseer, assistant professor Zhu Zizhao, to convey the sacred will and persuade them to make peace. All three countries expressed their thanks for the sin.

古文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝上之上
现代文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Taizong, Emperor Wenwu, Emperor Sheng, Emperor Guangxiao,

古文：贞观元年丁亥，公元六二七年
现代文：唐太宗贞观元年春季正月，乙酉，改年号。
English: Tang Taizong Zhenguan, the first month of the spring of the first year of the year, the acetylene, the new year.

古文：春，正月，乙酉，改元。丁亥，上宴群臣，奏《秦王破陈乐》。
现代文：丁亥，太宗大宴群臣，席间演奏《秦王破陈乐》。
English: Ding Hai, Taizong's grand banquet group of courtiers, between the tables playing "Qin Wang Break Chen Le."

古文：上曰： 朕昔受委专征，民间遂有此曲，虽非文德之雍容，然功业由兹而成，不敢忘本。 
现代文：太宗说： 朕从前曾受命专行率兵征伐，民间于是流传着这个曲子。虽然不具备文德之乐的温文而雅，但功业却由此而成就，所以始终不敢忘本。 
English: Taizong said, "I was once ordered to lead an army on a special campaign, and the folk then spread this piece. Although it does not have the gentleness and elegance of the classical music, the work has been accomplished through this, so I always dare not forget this.

古文：封德彝曰： 陛下以神武平海内，岂文德之足比！ 
现代文：封德彝说： 陛下以神武之才平定天下，岂是文德所堪比拟。 
English: Feng Deyao said, "Your majesty is able to pacify the world with the power of martial arts. Is it comparable to the Wende School?"

古文：上曰： 戡乱以武，守成以文，文武之用，各随其时。
现代文：太宗说： 平乱建国凭借武力，治理国家保持已取得的成就却仰赖文才，文武的妙用，各随时势的变化而有不同。
English: Taizong said: the pacification of chaos and the founding of the country by force, the governance of the country and the maintenance of the achievements have been achieved, but they rely on literary talent, the ingenious use of literature and martial arts, and each time the situation changes and is different.

古文：卿谓文不及武，斯言过矣。 
现代文：你说文不如武，此言差矣！ 
English: If you say that writing is not as good as martial arts, you are wrong!

古文：德彝顿首谢。
现代文：封德彝磕头道歉。
English: Fongde Shantou apologized.

古文：己亥，制： 自今中书、门下及三品以上入阁议事，皆命谏官随之，有失辄谏。 
现代文：己亥，唐朝廷下制文： 从今以后，中书省、门下省以及三品以上官员入朝堂议事，都应让谏官随行，有失误立即进谏。 
English: Ji Hai, the Tang court issued a document: From now on, officials from the Central Literature Department, subordinate departments, and those with three or more court ranks should be accompanied by eunuchs when they enter the court for deliberation. If there is a mistake, they should be punished immediately.

古文：上命吏部尚书长孙无忌等与学士、法官更议定律令，宽绞刑五十条为断右趾，上犹嫌其惨，曰： 肉刑废已久，宜有以易之。 
现代文：太宗让吏部尚书长孙无忌等人与学士、法官重新议定律令，宽减绞刑五十条，改为断右趾，太宗仍嫌其苛刻，说道： 肉刑废除已经很长时间，应当用其他刑罚代替。 
English: Emperor Taizong asked the cadres, Shangshu, his eldest grandson Mujing and others to renegotiate the ritsuryo with the scholars and judges, to reduce the hanging sentence by fifty articles and change it to cutting off the right toe. Emperor Taizong still disliked its harshness, saying: It has been a long time since corporal punishment was abolished, and it should be replaced with other punishments.

古文：蜀王法曹参军裴弘献请改为加役流，流三千里，居作三年；诏从之。
现代文：蜀王府法曹参军裴弘献请求改断趾为加服劳役的流放，流放到三千里外，刑期三年。
English: At the request of Shuangfu's legal officer and military officer Pei Hongxian, his broken toe was changed to an additional labor service banishment, and he was banished to three thousand miles away, with a three-year prison term.

古文：上以兵部郎中戴胄忠清公直，擢为大理少卿。
现代文：太宗下诏依此办理。太宗认为兵部郎中戴胄忠诚清正耿直，提升他为大理寺少卿。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict according to this. Emperor Taizong believed that Hyobusho's vassal, Daisuke, was loyal, pure and upright, and promoted him to the position of Junior Secretary of Dali Temple.

古文：上以选人多诈冒资廕，敕令自首，不首者死。
现代文：当时许多候选官员都假冒资历和门荫，太宗令他们自首，否则即处死。
English: At that time, many candidate officials were faking their qualifications and connections. Emperor Taizong ordered them to surrender or be executed.

古文：未几，有诈冒事觉者，上欲杀之。
现代文：没过几天，有假冒被发觉的，太宗要杀掉他。
English: A few days later, a fake was discovered, and Taizong wanted to kill him.

古文：胄奏： 据法应流。 
现代文：戴胄上奏道： 根据法律应当流放。 
English: Dai Yao said, "According to the law, you should be exiled."

古文：上怒曰： 卿欲守法而使朕失信乎？ 
现代文：太宗大怒道： 你想遵守法律而让我失信于天下吗？ 
English: Taizong said angrily, "Do you want to abide by the law and let me lose my credibility with the world?

古文：对曰： 敕者出于一时之喜怒，法者国家所以布大信于天下也。
现代文：戴胄回答道： 敕令出于君主一时的喜怒，法律则是国家用来向天下人昭示最大信用的。
English: Dai Ye replied: The edict is out of the monarch's momentary joy and anger, and the law is used by the state to show the world the greatest credit.

古文：陛下忿选人之多诈，故欲杀之，而既知其不可，复断之以法，此乃忍小忿而存大信也。 
现代文：陛下气愤于候选官员的假冒，所以想要杀他们，但是现在已知道这样做不合适，再按照法律来裁断，这就是忍住一时的小愤而保全大的信用啊！ 
English: His Majesty was angry with the candidate officials for impersonation, so he wanted to kill them, but now he knows that it is not appropriate to do so, and then judge according to the law. This is to hold back a small moment of anger and maintain great credibility!

古文：上曰： 卿能执法，朕复何忧！ 
现代文：太宗说： 你如此执法，朕还有何忧虑！ 
English: Taizong said, "If you enforce the law like this, I have nothing to worry about!"

古文：胄前后犯颜执法，言如涌泉，上皆从之，天下无冤狱。
现代文：戴胄前后多次冒犯皇上而执行法律，奏答时滔滔不绝，太宗都听从他的意见，国内没有冤案。
English: Dai Zong repeatedly offended the emperor while enforcing the law, and was voluble when answering questions. Emperor Taizong always listened to his opinion, and there were no unjust cases in the country.

古文：上令封德彝举贤，久无所举。
现代文：太宗令封德彝荐举贤才，很长时间没有选荐一个人。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the Fongdezhen to recommend talents, but for a long time there was no one to recommend.

古文：上诘之，对曰： 非不尽心，但于今未有奇才耳。 
现代文：太宗质问其原因，答道： 不是我不尽心竭力，而是现在没有奇才！ 
English: Taizong questioned the reason and replied, "It's not that I'm not trying hard enough, it's that there are no prodigies now!"

古文：上曰： 君子用人如器，各取所长，古之致治者，岂借才于异代乎？
现代文：太宗说： 君子用人如用器物，各取其长处。古时候使国家达到大治的君主，难道是从别的时代去借人才的吗？
English: Emperor Taizong said: Nobles use people as if they were utensils, and each takes advantage of their strengths. Did the monarchs who brought the country to great power in ancient times borrow talents from other eras?

古文：正患己不能知，安可诬一世之人！ 
现代文：正应当怪自己不能识别人才，怎么能诬蔑整个时代的人呢？ 
English: Just as we should blame ourselves for not being able to recognize talent, how can we slander the people of an entire era?

古文：德彝惭而退。
现代文：封德彝羞惭地退下。
English: Fong Deyu shamefully retreated.

古文：御史大夫杜淹奏 诸司文案恐有稽失，请令御史就司检校。 
现代文：御史大夫杜淹上奏道： 各部门的公文案卷恐有稽延错漏，请求让御史到各部门检查核对。 
English: Chief Historian Du Duan made the following report: The official document files of each department may have errors and omissions, and requested that the chief historian go to each department to check and check.

古文：上以问封德彝，对曰： 设官分职，各有所司。
现代文：太宗征求封德彝的意见，封德彝回答说： 设官定职，各有分工，如果真有错失，御史自当纠察举报。
English: Emperor Taizong asked Feng Dejun's opinion, and Feng Dejun replied: There are fixed positions for officials, and each has a division of labor. If there is a mistake, the historian should picket and report it.

古文：果有愆违，御史自应纠举；若遍历诸司，搜括疵颣，太为烦碎。 淹默然。
现代文：假如让御史到各部门巡视，吹毛求疵，实在是太繁琐。 杜淹默不作声。
English: It would be too cumbersome to have the inspector general visit every department and nitpick. Du Du was silent.

古文：上问淹： 何故不复论执？ 
现代文：太宗问杜淹： 你为什么不加争辩呢？ 
English: Taizong asked Du Juan: Why don't you argue?

古文：对曰： 天下之务，当尽至公，善则从之。
现代文：杜淹回答说： 国家的事务，应当务求公正，从善而行。
English: Du Juan replied, "In matters of state, we should seek justice and do what is good.

古文：德彝所言，真得大体，臣诚心服，不敢遂非。 
现代文：封德彝讲的话深得大体，我心悦诚服，不敢有所非议。 
English: The words spoken by Feng Dejun are generally profound, I am sincerely convinced, and I dare not criticize.

古文：上悦曰： 公等各能如是，朕复何忧！ 
现代文：太宗高兴地说： 你们如果都能做到这样，朕还有什么忧虑呢？ 
English: Taizong said happily, "If all of you can do this, what do I have to worry about?

古文：右骁卫大将军长孙顺德受人馈绢，事觉，上曰： 顺德果能有益国家，朕与之共有府库耳，何至贪冒如是乎！ 
现代文：右骁卫大将军长孙顺德接受别人送的绢帛，事情暴露，太宗说： 长孙顺德如果能有益于国家，朕与他共享府库的资财，他何至于如此贪婪呢！ 
English: When it was revealed that Sun Shunde, General of the Right Division of the National Guard, had accepted money sent by others, Taizong said, "If Sun Shunde can benefit the country, I will share the treasury's wealth with him. Why is he so greedy?"

古文：犹惜其有功，不之罪，但于殿庭赐绢数十匹。
现代文：太宗仍爱惜他有功于大唐，不予惩罚，反而在宫殿上赐给他数十匹绢帛。
English: Taizong still pities him for his contribution to Datang and does not punish him, but instead gives him dozens of donkeys at the palace.

古文：大理少卿胡演曰： 顺德枉法受财，罪不可赦，奈何复赐之绢？ 
现代文：大理寺少卿胡演说： 长孙顺德贪脏枉法，犯下的罪不可饶恕，为什么又要赐他绢帛呢？ 
English: Hu Ren, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, said: Shunde's eldest grandson is greedy and lawless, and the crime he committed is unforgivable. Why should he be given a gong?

古文：上曰： 彼有人性，得绢之辱，甚于受刑；如不知愧，一禽兽耳，杀之何益！ 
现代文：太宗说： 如果他有人性的话，得到朕赐给绢帛的羞辱，远甚于受到刑罚；如果不知道羞耻，不过是禽兽而已，杀他又有何用呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "If he is humane, the humiliation I give him is far greater than the punishment; if he knows no shame and is just an animal, what is the use of killing him?

古文：辛丑，天节将军燕郡王李艺据泾州反。
现代文：辛丑，天节将军、燕郡王李艺占据泾洲反叛朝廷。
English: Xinxiu, General Tianjie, and Yan County King Li Yi occupied Luzhou and rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：艺之初入朝也，恃功骄倨，秦王左右至其营，艺无故殴之。
现代文：李艺当初进入朝廷时，居功自傲，秦王李世民身边的人到他的营地，李艺无缘无故地殴打他。
English: When Li Yiyi first entered the imperial court, he was proud of his achievements. People around the Qin King Li Shimin came to his camp, and Li Yiyi beat him for no reason.

古文：上皇怒，收艺系狱，既而释之。
现代文：高祖皇帝大怒，将李艺关进牢里，不久又释放他。
English: Emperor Gaozhu was furious and put Li Yiyi in prison, but soon released him.

古文：上即位，艺内不自安。
现代文：太宗即位后，李艺内心不安。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Li Yiyi felt uneasy.

古文：曹州妖巫李五戒谓艺曰： 王贵色已发！ 
现代文：曹州邪恶的巫师李五戒对李艺说： 郡王您已然面呈贵相！ 
English: Li Wujing, the evil sorcerer of Caozhou, said to Li Yiyi, "Count King, you have already shown your noble face!

古文：劝之反。
现代文：劝他反叛。
English: Tell him to rebel.

古文：艺乃诈称奉密敕，勒兵入朝。
现代文：李艺于是假称奉皇帝密诏，带兵前来朝廷。
English: Li Yi then brought soldiers to the imperial court under the pretense of carrying a secret imperial edict.

古文：遂引兵至幽州，幽州治中赵慈皓驰出谒之，艺入据幽州。
现代文：李艺带领兵马到豳州城下，豳州治中赵慈皓出城迎接，李艺入城占据了豳州。
English: Li Yiyi led the soldiers and horses to the city of Ganzhou. Zhao Cixi came out of the city to meet Li Yiyi during the reign of Ganzhou. Li Yiyi entered the city and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：诏吏部尚书长孙无忌等为行军总管以讨之。
现代文：太宗命吏部尚书长孙无忌等人为行军总管，率兵讨伐。
English: Emperor Taizong's personal secretary, Shangshu, his eldest grandson, Wu Bo, and others acted as the general managers of the march and led the soldiers in the crusade.

古文：赵慈皓闻官军将至，密与统军杨岌图之，事泄，艺囚慈皓。
现代文：赵慈皓听说官兵即将到来，便秘密与统军杨岌商议谋取李艺，事情败露，李艺囚禁了赵慈皓。
English: When Zhao Cixi heard that the officers and soldiers were about to arrive, he secretly negotiated with Yang Bi of the United Army to obtain Li Yiyi. The matter was revealed, and Li Yiyi imprisoned Zhao Cixi.

古文：岌在城外觉变，勒兵攻之，艺众溃，弃妻子，将奔突厥。至乌氏，左右斩之，传首长安。
现代文：杨笈在城外觉察到变化，便率兵攻城，李艺手下兵将溃逃，李艺抛下妻子儿女，准备投奔突厥，到了乌氏城，身边的人将他杀掉，送首级回长安。
English: Yang Jie sensed a change outside the city and led an army to attack the city. Li Yiyi's soldiers fled in a rout. Li Yiyi left his wife and children behind and prepared to flee to Turkey. When he arrived at Wuji City, the people around him killed him and sent him back to Chang'an.

古文：弟寿，为利州都督，亦坐诛。
现代文：李艺弟李寿，官做利州都督，也受牵连被处斩。
English: Li Yi's younger brother Li Shou, an official and the governor of Lishu, was also implicated and executed.

古文：初，隋末丧乱，豪杰并起，拥众据地，自相雄长；唐兴，相帅来归，上皇为之割置州县以宠禄之，由是州县之数，倍于开皇、大业之间。
现代文：起初，隋朝末年天下大乱，英雄豪杰蜂拥而起，据地拥兵，各自称雄一方。唐兴起后相继归附，高祖为他们分置州县，施以荣禄，由此州县的数目，大大超过隋朝开皇、大业年间。
English: At first, at the end of the Sui Dynasty, there was a great turmoil in the world, heroes and heroes flocked to support the troops, and each side claimed to be the champion. After the rise of the Tang Dynasty, they were successively attached, and Gao Zu separated them into prefectures and counties, and gave them honor money. As a result, the number of prefectures and counties greatly exceeded that of the Sui Dynasty during the reign of Emperor Gao and the reign of Emperor Daye.

古文：上以民少吏多，思革其弊；二月，命大加并省，因山川形便，分为十道：一曰关内，二曰河南，三曰河东，四曰河北，五曰山南，六曰陇右，七曰淮南，八曰江南，九曰剑南，十曰岭南。
现代文：太宗认为官多民少，想革除弊端。二月，下令州县大加合并，依山川地势条件，将全国分为十道： 一关内，二河南，三河东，四河北，五山南，六陇右，七淮南，八江南，九剑南，十岭南。
English: In February, he ordered the unification of prefectures and counties, and divided the country into ten provinces according to the topography of mountains and rivers: First Guanzhong, Second Henan, Third Henan East, Fourth Henan North, Fifth Shan'an South, Sixth Guanzhong Right, Seventh Huai'an South, Eighth Jiang'an South, Ninth Jian'an, Tenth Ling'an South.

古文：三月，癸巳，皇后帅内外命妇亲蚕。
现代文：三月，癸巳，皇后带领着后宫妃嫔及宫外有爵号的妇女举行躬亲蚕事的典礼。
English: In March, the empress led the concubines of the harem and the women with titles outside the palace to hold a ceremony.

古文：闰月，癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰三月，癸丑朔，出现日食。
English: In leap March, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：壬申，上谓太子少师萧瑀曰： 朕少好弓矢，得良弓十数，自谓无以加，近以示弓工，乃曰 皆非良材 。
现代文：壬申，太宗对太子少师萧说： 朕年轻时喜好弓箭，曾得到十几张好弓，自认为没有能超过它们的，最近拿给做弓箭的弓匠看，他说： 都不是好材料。 
English: In other words, Emperor Taizong said to the prince's apprentice, Xiao Ramu, "When I was young, I liked bows and arrows. I got more than a dozen good bows, and I thought nothing could surpass them. Recently, I showed them to an archer who makes bows and arrows, and he said, 'These are not good materials.

古文：朕问其故，工曰： 木心不直，则脉理皆邪，弓虽劲而发矢不直。 
现代文：朕问他原因，弓匠说： 弓子木料的中心部分不直，所以脉纹也都是斜的，弓力虽强劲但箭发出去不走直线。 
English: When I asked him why, the archer said: The center of the wood of the bow is not straight, so the veins are also oblique. Although the bow is strong, the arrow does not go straight.

古文：朕始寤向者辨之未精也。
现代文：朕这才醒悟到以前对弓箭的性能分辨不清。
English: Only then did I wake up to the fact that I couldn't tell the difference between the performance of a bow and arrow.

古文：朕以弓矢定四方，识之犹未能尽，况天下之务，其能遍知乎！ 
现代文：朕以弓箭平定天下，而对弓箭的性能还没有能完全认识清楚，何况对于天下的事务，又怎么能遍知其理呢！ 
English: I use the bow and arrow to pacify the world, but I have yet to fully understand the performance of the bow and arrow. Moreover, how can I know everything about the affairs of the world?

古文：乃命京官五品以上更宿中书内省，数延见，问以民间疾苦，政事得失。
现代文：于是下令在京五品以上官员，轮流在中书内省值夜班，太宗多次接见他们，询问民间百姓疾苦和政治得失。
English: Taizong then ordered officials of the Fifth Rank and above in Beijing to take turns on the night shift in Zhongshuni Province. Taizong met with them many times to inquire about the hardships and political gains and losses of the common people.

古文：凉州都督长乐王幼良，性粗暴，左右百馀人，皆无赖子弟，侵暴百姓；又与羌、胡互市。
现代文：凉州都督、长乐王李幼良，性情暴躁，身边一百多人，都是无赖之徒，侵扰残虐百姓，又和羌、胡等族人开展互市贸易。
English: Li Yu-liang, the governor of Liangzhou and the king of Changle, had a violent temper and was surrounded by more than a hundred people, all of whom were ruffians who harassed and brutalized the common people, and also carried out trade with the Min and Hu ethnic groups.

古文：或告幼良有异志，上遣中书令宇文士及驰驿代之，并按其事。
现代文：有人上告太宗说李幼良存有二心，太宗特派中书令宇文士及急速前往，暂代理职权，并按察其事。
English: Someone appealed to Taizong that Li Youliang had two minds, and Taizong sent a special messenger to the scribe and quickly went to temporarily act as agent and investigate the matter.

古文：左右惧，谋劫幼良入北虏，又欲杀士及据有河西。
现代文：李幼良身边的人恐惧，密谋劫持李幼良到北方胡虏之地，又想要杀掉宇文士及，占据河西地区。
English: The people around Li Yuliang were afraid, plotted to kidnap Li Yuliang to the northern land of Hulun, and wanted to kill U Wenshi and occupy the Hexi region.

古文：复有告其谋者，夏，四月，癸巳，赐幼良死。
现代文：不久又有人将其密谋上告朝廷，夏季，四月，癸巳，太宗赐李幼良自杀。
English: Soon after, someone else reported his conspiracy to the imperial court, and in the summer, in April, Emperor Taizong ordered Li Youliang to commit suicide.

古文：五月，苑君璋帅众来降。
现代文：五月，苑君璋率领手下兵马投降。
English: In May, Yuan Junyao led his men to surrender.

古文：初，君璋引突厥陷马邑，杀高满政，退保恒安。
现代文：起初，苑君璋勾引突厥兵攻陷马邑，杀掉了高满政，退兵据守恒安。
English: At first, Yuan Junyao lured Turkish soldiers to invade Ma'ei, killed Gaomansheng, and retreated to defend Heng'an.

古文：其众皆中国人，多弃君璋来降。
现代文：他的士兵都是中原人，大多脱离他投奔唐朝。
English: His soldiers were all from the Central Plains, and most of them defected to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：君璋惧，亦降，请捍北边以赎罪，上皇许之。
现代文：君璋十分害怕，便也主动投诚，请求让他防守北部边疆以赎罪，高祖允诺。
English: Junyao was very afraid, so he also took the initiative to surrender, asking him to defend the northern border to atone for his sins. Gaozu agreed.

古文：君璋请约契，上皇雁门人元普赐之金券。
现代文：君璋请求订契约，高祖派雁门人元普送给他金券。
English: Junyao asked Gao Zu to sign a contract, and Gao Zu sent the man from the Wild Goose Gate, Yuan Pu, to give him a gold certificate.

古文：颉利可汗复遣人招之，君璋犹豫未决，恒安人郭子威说君璋以 恒安地险城坚，突厥方强，且当倚之以观变，未可束手于人。 
现代文：颉利可汗又派人来招降，君璋犹豫不决，恒安人郭子威劝他说： 恒安地势险要城墙坚固，突厥正强盛，正应该依靠它再观察形势的变化，不宜束手受制于人。 
English: The Khan of Meli also sent someone to invite him to surrender, but the ruler hesitated, and Guo Ziwei, a native of Heng'an, advised him: The situation in Heng'an is precarious, the city walls must be strong, the Turks are strong, we should rely on them to observe changes in the situation, and it is not appropriate to be constrained by others.

古文：君璋乃执元普送突厥，复与之合，数与突厥入寇。
现代文：苑君璋于是拘捕元普送到突厥，又一次与突厥联合，并数次入侵唐帝国。
English: Yuan Junyao then arrested and sent Yuan Pu to the Turks, once again allied with the Turks, and invaded the Tang Empire several times.

古文：至是，见颉利政乱，知其不足恃，遂帅众来降。
现代文：到了五月，看到颉利可汗政事混乱，知道突厥不足以依靠，于是率兵马投降。
English: In May, seeing the political turmoil of Meli Khan and knowing that the Turks were not enough to rely on, he led his soldiers to surrender.

古文：上以君璋为隰州都督、芮国公。
现代文：太宗封苑君璋为隰州都督、芮国公。
English: Taizong Fuenjun was the governor of Bozhou and the prince of Bozhou.

古文：有上书请去佞臣者，上问： 佞臣为谁？ 
现代文：有人上书请求除去奸佞之人，太宗问： 谁是奸佞之人？ 
English: When someone wrote to request the removal of a traitor, Taizong asked: Who is the traitor?

古文：对曰： 臣居草泽，不能的知其人，愿陛下与群臣言，或阳怒以试之，彼执理不屈者，直臣也，畏威顺旨者，佞臣也。 
现代文：回答道： 臣我身居草野，不能确知谁是奸佞之人，希望陛下对群臣明言，或者假装恼怒加以试探，那些坚持己见、不屈服于压力的，便是耿直的忠臣；畏惧皇威顺从旨意的，便是奸佞之人。 
English: He replied, "My lord, I live in the meadow, so I cannot know for sure who the traitors are. I hope that Your Majesty will test the courtiers by expressing or feigning anger. Those who stick to their opinions and do not give in to pressure are loyal courtiers; those who fear the majesty of the emperor and obey his will are traitors.

古文：上曰： 君，源也；臣，流也；浊其源而求其流之清，不可得矣。
现代文：太宗说： 君主，是水的源头；群臣，是水的支流。混浊了源头而去希冀支流的清澈，是不可能的事。
English: Emperor Taizong said: "The sovereign is the source of water; the courtiers are the tributaries of water. It is impossible to muddy the source and expect the tributaries to be clear.

古文：君自为诈，何以责臣下之直乎！
现代文：君主自己做假使诈，又如何能要求臣下耿直呢！
English: How can a monarch ask his vassals to be honest when he himself is deceitful?

古文：朕方以至诚治天下，见前世帝王好以权谲小数接其臣下者，常窃耻之。
现代文：朕正以至诚之心治理天下，看见前代帝王喜好用权谋小计来对待臣下，常常觉得可鄙。
English: I am governing the world with a sincere heart, and I often find it despicable to see the previous emperors prefer to use power to treat their subjects.

古文：卿策虽善，朕不取也。 
现代文：你的建议虽好，朕不采用。 
English: Although your suggestion is good, I will not adopt it.

古文：六月，辛巳，右仆射密明公封德彝薨。
现代文：六月，辛巳，右仆射密明公封德彝去世。
English: In June, Xin Si's right-hand man, Sho Mi Ming, died.

古文：壬辰，复以太子少师萧瑀为左仆射。
现代文：壬辰，又任命太子少师萧为尚书左仆射。
English: Imjin, also appointed the prince's apprentice, Xiao, as his right-hand man.

古文：戊申，上与侍臣论周、秦修短，萧瑀对曰： 纣为不道，武王征之。
现代文：戊申，太宗与大臣议论周朝、秦朝的政治得失，萧说： 殷纣王无道，周武王讨伐他。
English: Wushin, Taizong and the minister discussed the political gains and losses of the Zhou and Qin Dynasties, and Xiao said: King Yin had no way, and King Zhou had to fight him.

古文：周及六国无罪，始皇灭之。
现代文：周朝及六国均无罪，秦始皇分别灭掉他们。
English: The Zhou Dynasty and the Six Kingdoms were not guilty, and Emperor Qin eliminated them separately.

古文：得天下虽同，人心则异。 
现代文：取得天下的方式虽然相同，人心所向却不一样。 
English: Although the method of obtaining the world is the same, the people's hearts are different.

古文：上曰： 公知其一，未知其二。
现代文：太宗说： 你只知其一，不知其二。
English: Gao Zu said: The public only knows one thing, the unknown another.

古文：周得天下，增修仁义；秦得天下，益尚诈力；此修短之所以殊也。
现代文：周朝取得天下，更加修行仁义；秦朝取得天下，一味崇尚欺诈、暴力，这就是长短得失的不同。
English: The Zhou Dynasty gained the world and practiced benevolence and righteousness more; the Qin Dynasty gained the world and advocated fraud and violence. This is the difference between the long and short gains and losses.

古文：盖取之或可以逆得，守之不可以不顺故也。 
现代文：所以说夺取天下也许可以凭借武力，治天下则不可以不顺应民心。 
English: Therefore, it may be possible to conquer the world by force, but it is impossible to rule the world without conforming to the people's will.

古文：瑀谢不及。
现代文：萧钦服不已。
English: Xiao Qin did not give up.

古文：山东大旱，诏所在赈恤，无出今年租赋。
现代文：山东大旱，诏令各地赈济抚恤，今年的租赋不必交纳。
English: Due to the severe drought in Shandong, the government has ordered all regions to provide subsidies. This year's rent will not have to be paid.

古文：秋，七月，壬子，以吏部尚书长孙无忌为右仆射。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬子，任命吏部尚书长孙无忌为尚书右仆射。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Renzi, Shangshu's eldest grandson, who was appointed to the cadre department, was undoubtedly Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：无忌与上为布衣交，加以外戚，有佐命功，上委以腹心，其礼遇群臣莫及，欲用为宰相者数矣。
现代文：无忌与太宗早年为布衣之交，加上皇后兄长的外戚身份，又有辅佐太宗即位的大功，太宗视为心腹，对他的礼遇无人堪比，几次想重用他为宰相。
English: He was a close friend of Emperor Taizong in the early years. He was a relative of the empress's elder brother and assisted Emperor Taizong's ascension to the throne. Emperor Taizong regarded him as a confidant and treated him with unparalleled courtesy. He wanted to use him as prime minister several times.

古文：文德皇后固请曰： 妾备位椒房，家之贵宠极矣，诚不愿兄弟复执国政。
现代文：文德皇后固执地请求： 我身为皇后，家族的尊贵荣耀已达到顶点，实在不愿意我的兄、弟再去执掌国政。
English: Empress Wende stubbornly pleaded: I, as the empress, the noble glory of the family has reached its peak, and I really don't want my brother to take charge of national politics again.

古文：吕、霍、上官，可为切骨之戒，幸陛下矜察！ 
现代文：汉代的吕、霍、上官三家外戚都是痛彻骨髓的前车之鉴，望陛下体恤明察！ 
English: The three maternal relatives of Lü, Huo, and Shangguan in the Han Dynasty are a good example of the forerunner of the bone marrow. I hope His Majesty will consider them carefully!

古文：上不听，卒用之。
现代文：太宗不听，最后还是予以重用。
English: Taizong did not listen, and in the end it was reused.

古文：初，突厥性淳厚，政令质略。
现代文：起初，突厥族风俗淳厚，政令简质疏略。
English: At first, the Turkic customs were simple, and the government decrees were simple and sketchy.

古文：颉利可汗得华人赵德言，委用之。德言专其威福，多变更旧俗，政令烦苛，国人始不悦。
现代文：颉利可汗得到汉人赵德言，加以重用，德言恃势专权，大量地改变旧有风俗习惯，政令也变得繁琐苛刻，百姓们大为不满。
English: Zhao Deyan, a Han Chinese, was given to the Qili Khan, and he made heavy use of him. Deyan usurped the power and changed a lot of old customs and habits. The government decrees also became cumbersome and harsh, and the people were very dissatisfied.

古文：颉利又好信任诸胡而疏突厥，胡人贪冒，多反覆，兵革岁动；会大雪，深数尺，杂畜多死，连年饥馑，民皆冻馁。
现代文：颉利又信任各胡族人，而疏远突厥本族人，这些胡族人贪得无厌，反复无常，干戈连年不息。又赶上大雪天，雪深达数尺，牲畜多冻死，加以连年饥荒，百姓都饥寒交迫。
English: These Hu people are insatiably greedy, capricious, and never stop fighting year after year. They also catch up with heavy snow, the snow is several feet deep, livestock often freeze to death, and there is a famine year after year, and the people are hungry and cold.

古文：颉利用度不给，重敛诸部，由是内外离怨，诸部多叛，兵浸弱。
现代文：颉利费用不足，便向各部落征收重税，由此上下离心，怨声载道，各部落多反叛，兵力渐弱。
English: When the profit was insufficient, heavy taxes were levied on the tribes. As a result, there was a lot of discontent, and many tribes rebelled, leading to a gradual weakening of the military.

古文：言事者多请击之，上以问萧瑀、长孙无忌曰： 颉利君臣昏虐，危亡可必。
现代文：唐朝大臣们议事时多请求乘机出兵，太宗问萧和长孙无忌： 颉利君臣昏庸残暴，必然面临危亡。
English: When the ministers of the Tang Dynasty were in deliberation, they often asked for the opportunity to send troops. Emperor Taizong asked Xiao and his eldest grandson without any hesitation: "The princes and ministers of the Tang Dynasty are stupid and cruel, and they will inevitably face death.

古文：今击之，则新与之盟；不击，恐失机会；如何而可？ 
现代文：现在出兵讨伐，则刚刚与突厥订立盟约，师出无名；不出兵，恐怕又要失去机会，怎么办呢？ 
English: If we send troops to fight now, we will have just signed a treaty with the Turks and will have no reputation; if we do not send troops, we will probably lose the opportunity again. What should we do?

古文：瑀请击之。
现代文：萧请求出兵。
English: Xiao requested to send troops.

古文：无忌对曰： 虏不犯塞而弃信劳民，非王者之师也。 
现代文：长孙无忌说： 突厥并没有侵我边塞，却要背信弃义、劳民伤财，这不是正义之师的所为。 
English: The eldest grandson said, "The Turks did not invade our border, but they betrayed our trust and harmed our people and wealth. This is not the act of a righteous person."

古文：上乃止。
现代文：太宗于是没有出兵。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：上问公卿以享国久长之策，萧瑀言： 三代封建而久长，秦孤立而速亡。 
现代文：太宗向公卿大臣询问使国运长久的办法，萧说： 夏、商、周分封诸侯而统治时间长久，秦国不分封诸侯而迅速灭亡。 
English: Taizong asked the court noble and minister about the way to make the national movement long-lasting, Xia said: Xia, Shang and Zhou were divided into feudal lords and ruled for a long time, while Qin was divided into feudal lords and quickly perished.

古文：上以为然，于是始有封建之议。
现代文：太宗认为有道理，于是有分封诸侯王的动议。
English: Emperor Taizong thought it was reasonable, so he supported the motion to divide the territory among the princes.

古文：黄门侍郎王珪有密奏，附侍中高士廉，寝而不言。
现代文：黄门侍郎王有密奏要上报，交给侍中高士廉转呈，士廉搁置起来没有转达。
English: Huangmen waiter Wang had a secret recital to report, and handed it over to the attendant Gao Shillian for transmission. Shillian was put on hold and did not transmit it.

古文：上闻之，八月，戊戌，出士廉为安州大都督。
现代文：太宗得知后，八月，戊戌这一天，调走高士廉，任命为安州大都督。
English: When Emperor Taizong learned of this, Gao Shiliang was transferred to Anzhou on this day in August. He was appointed as the grand governor of Anzhou.

古文：九月，庚戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，庚戌朔，出现日食。
English: In September, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛酉，中书令宇文士及罢为殿中监，御史大夫杜淹参豫朝政。
现代文：辛酉，中书令宇文士及降职为殿中监，御史大夫杜淹参预朝政。
English: Xin Zhen, the Chinese calligrapher Yu Wenshi and demoted to the position of the palace middle supervisor, and the historian Du Yun participated in the pre-imperial government.

古文：他官参豫政事自此始。
现代文：宰相以外官员参预朝政是从这时候开始的。
English: It was at this time that officials other than the prime minister began to participate in pre-imperial politics.

古文：淹荐刑部员外郎邸怀道，上问其行能，对曰： 炀帝将幸江都，召百官问行留之计，怀道为吏部主事，独言不可。
现代文：杜淹推荐刑部员外郎邸怀道，太宗问他有何才能，杜淹答道： 隋炀帝将要驾临江都，召集百官询问去留之计，怀道当时官居吏部主事，只有他一人坚持认为不可去江都。
English: Du Huan recommended a member of the Department of Justice, Wei Lang residence, Huai Dao. Taizong asked him what talent he had. Du Huan replied: Emperor Sui will drive to Jiangdu and gather hundreds of officials to inquire about how to stay. At that time, Huai Dao was the head of the official residence department. He was the only one who insisted that he could not go to Jiangdu.

古文：臣亲见之。 
现代文：这是我亲眼所见。 
English: I saw it with my own eyes.

古文：上曰： 卿称怀道为是，何为自不正谏？ 
现代文：太宗说： 你称赞邸怀道做得对，你自己为什么不正言劝谏？ 
English: Taizong said, "You praised Huai Dao for doing the right thing, why didn't you do the right thing yourself?

古文：对曰： 臣尔日不居重任，又知谏不从，徒死无益。 
现代文：杜淹答道： 我当时地位卑微，不任要职，又知道劝谏也不会听从，徒然一死毫无益处。 
English: Du Wan replied, "I was in a lowly position at that time, I did not hold any important position, and I knew that I would not listen to his advice. It would be useless to die in vain.

古文：上曰： 卿知炀帝不可谏，何为立其朝？既立其朝，何得不谏？
现代文：太宗说： 你知道炀帝不可进谏，为什么要在朝为官，即然在朝为官，又怎么能不进谏？
English: Emperor Taizong said, "You know that the emperor cannot enter the imperial palace, so why do you want to be an official in the imperial court? Even if you are an official in the imperial court, how can you not enter the imperial palace?"

古文：卿仕隋，容可云位卑；后仕王世充，尊显矣，何得亦不谏？ 
现代文：你供职于隋朝，姑且可以说位卑言轻，后来供职于王世充，地位尊显，为什么也不进谏？ 
English: You served in the Sui Dynasty, even if it can be said that you were a lowly person. Later, you served in Wang Shichong, and your status was respected. Why didn't you get promoted?

古文：对曰： 臣于世充非不谏，但不从耳。 
现代文：杜淹答道： 我对王世充不是不进谏，只是他听不进去。 
English: Du Yu replied: I am not against Wang Shichong, but he cannot listen.

古文：上曰： 世充若贤而纳谏，不应亡国；若暴而拒谏，卿何得免祸？ 
现代文：太宗说： 王世充如果贤明又能讷谏，便不应亡国；假若残暴而又拒谏，你怎么能够免于灾祸呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "If Wang Shichong is wise and can be patient, the country should not be destroyed; if he is cruel and refuses to be patient, how can you avoid disaster?"

古文：淹不能对。
现代文：杜淹答不上来。
English: Du Yun couldn't answer.

古文：上曰： 今日可谓尊任矣，可以谏未？ 
现代文：太宗说： 现在你的地位称得上尊贵了，可以进谏吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "Now that your position is so prestigious, can you enter the imperial palace?"

古文：对曰： 愿尽死。 
现代文：杜淹回答： 甘愿冒死强谏。 
English: Du Yu replied: I am willing to risk my life.

古文：上笑。
现代文：太宗笑了。
English: Taizong smiled.

古文：辛未，幽州都督王君廓谋叛，道死。
现代文：辛未，幽州都督王君廓密谋叛乱，中途被杀。
English: Soon after, the governor of Yuzhou, Wang Junku, plotted a rebellion and was killed in the process.

古文：君廓在州，骄纵多不法，征入朝。
现代文：王君廓在幽州时，骄横自恣，无法无天，后被征召入朝。
English: When Wang Junku was in Yuzhou, he was arrogant, self-willed and lawless. Later, he was conscripted into the imperial court.

古文：长史李玄道，房玄龄从甥也，凭君廓附书，君廓私发之，不识草书，疑其告己罪，行至渭南，杀驿吏而逃；将奔突厥，为野人所杀。
现代文：幽州长史李玄道是房玄龄的外甥，托王君廓捎信给房玄龄。君廓私下拆信，不认识草书字体，怀疑他告发自己的罪过，走到渭南，杀死驿站吏卒逃跑，将要奔往突厥，途中被野人杀死。
English: Li Xuan Dao, the governor of Yu County, was the nephew of Fang Xuanling. He sent a letter to Fang Xuanling from Wang Juncao. The prince privately opened the letter, did not know the cursive font, suspected that he was denouncing his own sins, went to South Hunan, killed the stationmaster and fled, and was going to rush to Turku, where he was killed by savages on the way.

古文：岭南酋长冯盎、谈殿等迭相攻击，久未入朝，诸州奏称盎反，前后以十数；上命将军蔺謩等发江、岭数十州兵讨之。
现代文：岭南部落首领冯盎、谈殿等人互相争斗，很久没有入朝。各地方州府前后十几次奏称冯盎谋反，太宗命令将军蔺等人征发江、岭数十州兵马大举讨伐。
English: The leaders of the villages in the southern part of the Ling, such as Feng Ang and Dan Dian, fought against each other and did not enter the imperial court for a long time. The local prefectures reported that Feng Ang was plotting a rebellion more than a dozen times, and Emperor Taizong ordered General Zhai and others to conscript soldiers and horses from dozens of prefectures in the Fadu River and the Ling.

古文：魏征谏曰： 中国初定，岭南瘴疠险远，不可以宿大兵。
现代文：魏徵劝谏说： 中原刚刚平定，岭南路途遥远、地势险恶，有瘴气瘟疫，不可以驻扎大部队。
English: Wei Zhengxuan said: Zhongyuan has just been pacified, the southern part of Lingnan is far away, the terrain is dangerous, there is plague, and it is not allowed to station large forces.

古文：且盎反状未成，未宜动众。 
现代文：而且冯盎反叛的情状还没有形成，不宜兴师动众。 
English: Moreover, the situation of Feng's rebellion has not yet formed, and it is not appropriate to incite the masses.

古文：上曰： 告者道路不绝，何云反状未成？ 
现代文：太宗说： 上告冯盎谋反者络绎不绝，怎么能说反叛的情状还没有形成呢？ 
English: Taizong said, "There is an endless stream of people appealing to Feng Huan's conspiracy. How can it be said that the situation of rebellion has not yet formed?

古文：对曰： 盎若反，必分兵据险，攻掠州县。
现代文：魏徵答道： 冯盎如果反叛，必然分兵几路占据险要之地，攻掠邻近州县。
English: Wei Qian replied: If Feng Un rebels, it is inevitable that several detachments of soldiers will occupy critical areas and attack and plunder the neighboring counties.

古文：今告者已数年，而兵不出境，此不反明矣。
现代文：现在告发他谋反已有几年了，而冯氏兵马还没出境，这明显没有反叛的迹象。
English: Now that it has been several years since he was accused of plotting a rebellion, and Feng's soldiers and horses have not yet left the country, there is obviously no sign of rebellion.

古文：诸州既疑其反，陛下又不遣使镇抚，彼畏死，故不敢入朝。
现代文：各州府既然怀疑冯氏谋反，陛下又不派使臣前去安抚，冯氏怕死，所以不敢来朝廷。
English: Since the various prefectures suspected that the Fengs were plotting a rebellion, and His Majesty did not send envoys to appease them, the Fengs were afraid of death, so they did not dare to come to the imperial court.

古文：若遣信臣示以至诚，彼喜于免祸，可不烦兵而服。 
现代文：如果陛下派使臣向他示以诚意，冯氏欣喜能免于祸患，这样可以不必劳动军队而使他顺从。 
English: If His Majesty sends envoys to show sincerity to him, Mr. Feng will be spared the calamity, and it will be possible to make him obey without laboring the army.

古文：上乃罢兵。
现代文：太宗于是下令收兵。
English: Emperor Taizong then ordered the withdrawal of troops.

古文：冬，十月，乙酉，遣员外散骑侍郎李公掩持节慰谕之，盎遣其子智戴随使者入朝。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙酉，派员外散骑侍郎李公掩持旌节往岭南慰问冯盎，冯盎则让他的儿子冯智戴随着使臣返回朝廷。
English: In the winter, in October, in the middle of the year, Li Gong sent an envoy to Lingnan to offer condolences to Feng Weng, and Feng Weng sent his son Feng Zhidai to return to the imperial court with the envoy.

古文：上曰： 魏征令我发一介之使，而岭表遂安，胜十万之师，不可不赏。 
现代文：太宗说： 魏徵让我派遣一个使者，岭南就得以安定，胜过十万大军的作用，不能不加赏。 
English: Taizong said: Wei Zheng asked me to send an envoy, so that Lingnan could be stabilized, which is better than the role of a hundred thousand troops, and must be rewarded.

古文：赐征绢五百匹。
现代文：赐给魏徵绢帛五百匹。
English: He gave Wei Zheng five hundred horses.

古文：十二月，壬午，左仆射萧瑀坐事免。
现代文：十二月，壬午，尚书左仆射萧因事犯罪被免职。
English: In December, at noon, Shangshu's left-hand man, Jie Xiao, was removed from his post for committing a crime.

古文：戊申，利州都督义安王李孝常等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：戊申，利州都督李孝常等图谋反叛，被处死。
English: Wushin, Lizhou governor Li Xiaochang and others plotted to rebel and were executed.

古文：孝常因入朝，留京师，与右武卫将军刘德裕及其甥统军元弘善、监门将军长孙安业互说符命，谋以宿卫兵作乱。
现代文：李孝常因上朝办公务，留在京城，与右武卫将军刘德裕及其外甥统军元弘善、监门将军长孙安业相互议论受命于天的征兆，密谋借助皇宫警卫部队叛乱。
English: Li Xiaozhong often stayed in Beijing due to the office work of the last dynasty, and discussed with the right guard general Liu Deyu, his nephew, the general of the united army, Yuan Hongzen, and the warden general, Sun Anye, the signs of being ordered by heaven, and plotted to rebel with the help of the palace guard troops.

古文：安业，皇后之异母兄也，嗜酒无赖；父晟卒，弟无忌及后并幼，安业斥还舅氏。
现代文：长孙安业是长孙皇后的同父异母哥哥，嗜酒如命，不务正业。其父长孙晟死后，弟弟长孙无忌与长孙皇后均年幼，安业把二人赶回他们的舅舅高士廉家。
English: The eldest grandchild, Anye, was the half-brother of the eldest grandchild of the Empress Dowager. He was a drunkard who did not do his duty. After the death of his father, the eldest grandchild, his younger brother, the eldest grandchild, and the eldest grandchild of the Empress were both young. Anye drove the two of them back to their uncle, Gao Shiliang.

古文：及上即位，后不以旧怨为意，恩礼甚厚。
现代文：等到太宗即位，皇后不念旧怨、不记前嫌，对安业的礼遇仍十分优厚。
English: By the time Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, the empress did not remember old grudges, did not remember previous grudges, and was still very generous to Ankian.

古文：及反事觉，后涕泣为之固请曰： 安业罪诚当万死。
现代文：等到谋反的事被查觉，皇后哭着向太宗请求说： 安业所犯罪行，实在是罪该万死。
English: When the conspiracy was discovered, the empress cried and pleaded with Emperor Taizong, saying, "The crime committed by Anye is truly a crime worthy of death.

古文：然不慈于妾，天下知之；今置以极刑，人必谓妾所为，恐亦为圣朝之累。 
现代文：但他以前对我不好，国人都知道，现在处他以极刑，大家必然认为是我存心报复，这恐怕也会使圣朝受牵累。 
English: But he was not nice to me before, and everyone in the country knows it. Now that he has been sentenced to the death penalty, everyone is bound to think that it was my intention to take revenge, and I'm afraid that this will also affect the holy pilgrimage.

古文：由是得减死，流巂州。
现代文：安业由此得以免死，流配到州。
English: As a result, Anye escaped death and was exiled to the state.

古文：或告右丞魏征私其亲戚，上使御史大夫温彦博按之，无状。
现代文：有人告发右丞魏徵偏袒他的亲属，太宗派御吏大夫温彦博查问，没有实据。
English: Some people accused Yu Zheng Wei Zheng of favoring his relatives, and the Tai sect official doctor Wen Yanbo investigated, but there was no evidence.

古文：彦博言于上曰： 征不存形迹，远避嫌疑，心虽无私，亦有可责。 
现代文：彦博对太宗说： 魏徵不留下办事的表态，远远地避开嫌疑，内心虽然无私，但也有应责备的地方。 
English: Yanbo said to Taizong: Wei Zheng does not leave behind the statement of affairs, avoids suspicion far away, and although he is selfless, there is also a place to blame.

古文：上令彦博让征，且曰： 自今宜存形迹。 
现代文：太宗让温彦博去责问魏徵，而且说道： 从今以后，应留下办事的表态。 
English: Taizong asked Wen Yanbo to interrogate Wei Zheng, and said: From now on, you should leave a statement of affairs.

古文：它日，征入见，言于上曰： 臣闻君臣同体，宜相与尽诚；若上下但存形迹，则国之兴丧尚未可知，臣不敢奉诏。 
现代文：有一天，魏徵上朝，对太宗说： 我听说君主与臣下一体，应彼此竭诚相待。如果上下都追求留下办事的表态，那么国家的兴亡就难以预料了，我不敢接受这个诏令。 
English: One day, Wei Zheng said to Emperor Taizong: I have heard that the sovereign and the vassal are one and should treat each other with sincerity. If everyone pursues the position of leaving things to be done, then the rise and fall of the country will be unpredictable. I dare not accept this edict.

古文：上瞿然曰： 吾已悔之。 
现代文：太宗吃惊地说： 我已经后悔了。 
English: Surprised, Taizong said, "I already regret it."

古文：征再拜曰： 臣幸得奉事陛下，愿使臣为良臣，勿为忠臣。 
现代文：魏徵拜了两拜道： 我很荣幸能为陛下做事，愿陛下让臣做良臣，不要让臣做忠臣。 
English: Wei Zhaobai bowed twice and said, "I am honored to do things for Your Majesty. May Your Majesty let your vassal be a good vassal, not a loyal vassal."

古文：上曰： 忠、良有以异乎？ 
现代文：太宗问： 忠、良有什么区别吗？ 
English: Taizong asked: What is the difference between loyalty and goodwill?

古文：对曰： 稷、契、皋陶，君臣协心，俱享尊荣，所谓良臣。
现代文：回答道： 后稷、契、皋陶，君臣齐心合力，共享荣耀，这就是所说的良臣。
English: He replied: Houyi, Qi, Jintao, princes and ministers work together and share the glory. This is the so-called virtuous minister.

古文：龙逄、比干，面折廷争，身诛国亡，所谓忠臣。 
现代文：龙逄、比干犯颜直谏，身死国亡，这就是所说的忠臣。 
English: Long Xuan, Bi Gan, Yan Zhaojun, die for the country, this is the so-called loyal subject.

古文：上悦，赐绢五百匹。
现代文：太宗听后十分高兴，赐给绢五百匹。
English: Emperor Taizong was very pleased to hear this and gave him five hundred horses.

古文：上神采英毅，群臣进见者，皆失举措；上知之，每见人奏事，必假以辞色，冀闻规谏。
现代文：太宗的神情、风采英武刚毅，众位大臣进见他时，皆手足失措。太宗知道后，每次见人上朝奏事，都要对他们和颜悦色，希望听到规谏之言。
English: Taizong's appearance and demeanor were so strong and courageous that when the ministers came to see him, they were all at a loss. After Taizong knew this, every time he saw someone reporting to the emperor, he had to be pleasant to them, hoping to hear words of discipline.

古文：尝谓公卿曰： 人欲自见其形，必资明镜；君欲自知其过，必待忠臣。
现代文：曾对公卿说： 人想要看见自己的形体，一定要借助于镜子；君主想自己知道过错，必然要善待忠正耿直的大臣。
English: He once said to a nobleman: If you want to see your own form, you must use a mirror; if you want to know your own faults, you must be kind to a loyal minister.

古文：苟其君愎谏自贤，其臣阿谀顺旨，君既失国，臣岂能独全！
现代文：如果君主刚愎自用，自以为是，大臣阿谀逢迎，君主就会失去国家，大臣又岂能独自保全！
English: If the monarch is self-indulgent and self-righteous, and the minister is sycophantic, the monarch will lose the country, and the minister will not be able to preserve it on his own!

古文：如虞世基等谄事炀帝以保富贵，炀帝既弑，世基等亦诛。
现代文：像虞世基等人对隋炀帝阿谀奉承以求保全富贵，炀帝被杀后，世基等也难免一死。
English: Like Yu Shiji and others, they flattered the Sui and Qian Emperors in order to preserve their wealth. After the Qian Emperors were killed, Shiji and others also inevitably died.

古文：公辈宜用此为戒，事有得失，无毋尽言！ 
现代文：望你们以此为戒，每件事都有得失，希望不惜畅所欲言！ 
English: I hope you will take this as a warning. Everything has its pros and cons. I hope you will feel free to say whatever you want!

古文：或上言秦府旧兵，宜尽除武职，追入宿卫。
现代文：有人上书主张秦王府旧兵，应全部任命为武官，加入皇宫警卫部队。
English: Some people submitted a petition advocating that all former soldiers of the Qin royal court should be appointed as military attachés and join the palace guard force.

古文：上谓之曰： 朕以天下为家，惟贤是与，岂旧兵之外皆无可信者乎！
现代文：太宗对他说： 朕视天下为一家，只选用贤才，难道旧属士兵之外就别无可信用的人了吗？
English: Emperor Taizong said to him, "I regard the whole world as one family, and only choose the wise. Are there any untrustworthy people other than former soldiers?

古文：汝之此意，非所以广朕德于天下也。 
现代文：你这个想法，并不是让朕的恩德广被于天下。 
English: Your idea is not to make my benevolence known to the world.

古文：上谓公卿曰： 昔禹凿山治水而民无谤讟者，与人同利故也。
现代文：太宗对公卿说： 从前大禹凿山治水而百姓没有怨谤之言，是因为与民利益攸关的缘故。
English: Taizong said to the courtier: In the past, Dayu chiseled mountains to control water and the people did not speak ill of him, because he had a vested interest in the people.

古文：秦始皇营宫室而民怨叛者，病人以利己故也。
现代文：秦始皇营造宫室而百姓怨声载道、图谋反叛，是因为秦始皇损民以利己的缘故。
English: The reason why Qin Shi Huang built a palace and the people complained and plotted to rebel was because Qin Shi Huang took advantage of the people.

古文：夫靡丽珍奇，固人之所欲，若纵之不已，则危亡立至。
现代文：奇珍异宝，本是每个人都想得到的，假如放纵自己不止，那么国家就会立刻面临危亡。
English: Rare treasures are what everyone wants. If you indulge yourself too much, then the country will immediately face peril.

古文：朕欲营一殿，材用已具，鉴秦而止。
现代文：朕想要营造一个宫殿，材料已经齐备，有鉴于秦的灭亡，便停止了这项工程。
English: I wanted to build a palace, the materials were ready, but in light of Qin's demise, the project was halted.

古文：王公已下，宜体朕此意。 
现代文：亲王公卿以下，应当体会朕的这个想法。 
English: Princes, dukes and dukes should understand this idea of mine.

古文：由是二十年间，风俗素朴，衣无锦绣，公私富给。
现代文：从此二十年间，风俗质朴淳厚，穿着不用锦绣，官府与百姓均很富足。
English: In the twenty years since then, the customs have been simple and honest, no brocade is used for clothing, and both the government and the people are very wealthy.

古文：上谓黄门侍郎王珪曰： 国家本置中书、门下以相检察，中书诏敕或有差失，则门下当行驳正。
现代文：太宗对黄门侍郎王说： 朝中本来设置中书省、门下省，以相互监督检查，中书省起草诏令制敕如有差误，则门下省当予纠驳指正。
English: Taizong said to Huangmen's attendant Wang: Originally, the central government set up the Chinese Literature Department and the subordinate department to supervise and inspect each other. If there is a mistake in the Chinese Literature Department's drafting of the edict, the subordinate department should correct it.

古文：人心所见，互有不同，苟论难往来，务求至当，舍己从人，亦复何伤！
现代文：人的见解各有不同，如果往来辩论，务求准确恰当，放弃个人见解从善如流，又有什么不好呢？
English: People's opinions are all different, so what's wrong with exchanging and debating, striving for accuracy and appropriateness, and abandoning personal opinions for the greater good?

古文：比来或护己之短，遂成怨隙，或苟避私怨，知非不正，顺一人颜情，为兆民之深患，此乃亡国之政也。
现代文：近来有人护己之短，于是产生仇怨隔阂，有的为了避开私人恩怨，明知其错误也不加驳正。顺从顾及某个人的脸面，造成万民的灾患，这是亡国的政治。
English: In recent times, some people have been too short-sighted to protect themselves, thus creating hatred and estrangement, and some have avoided personal grudges, knowing that their mistakes will not be corrected. Obedience to a person's face, causing a disaster for all people, is the politics of a ruined country.

古文：炀帝之世，内外庶官，务相顺从，当是之时，皆自谓有智，祸不及身。
现代文：隋炀帝在位时，内外官吏一团和气，在那时，均自认为有智慧，祸患殃及不到自身。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, officials at home and abroad were a harmonious group. At that time, they all thought that they were wise and that the disaster would not affect them.

古文：及天下大乱，家国两亡，虽其间万一有得免者，亦为时论所贬，终古不磨。
现代文：等到天下大乱，家庭与国家俱亡，虽然这中间偶有某个人得以幸免，也要被舆论所针砭，永远难以磨灭。
English: Wait until the world is in turmoil, the family and the country will both die, and although someone in the middle may be spared, they will also be pinpointed by public opinion and will never be erased.

古文：卿曹各当徇公忘私，勿雷同也！ 
现代文：你们每个人都应徇公忘私，不要犯同样的错误。 
English: Each of you should be selfless and not make the same mistakes.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 吾闻西域贾胡得美珠，剖身以藏之，有诸？ 侍臣曰： 有之。 
现代文：太宗对亲近的大臣说： 我听说西域有一个胡族的商人得到一粒宝珠，用刀割开身上的肉，将宝珠藏在里面，有这么回事吗？ 大臣答道： 有这回事。 
English: Emperor Taizong said to a close minister, "I heard that in the western region, a merchant of the Hu ethnic group obtained a pearl, cut his flesh with a knife, and hid the pearl inside. Is this true?" The minister replied, "It is true."

古文：上曰： 人皆知彼之爱珠而不爱其身也；吏受赇抵法，与帝王徇奢欲而亡国者，何以异于彼胡之可笑邪！ 
现代文：太宗说： 人们都知道这个人爱珍珠而不爱惜自己的身体。官吏受贿贪赃依法受刑，和帝王追求奢华而遭致国家灭亡，这与胡族商人的可笑有什么区别呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "People all know that this man loves pearls but does not care about his own body. What is the difference between officials who are punished according to the law for bribery and corruption, and emperors who pursue luxury and cause the country to perish, and the ridiculous Hu merchants?

古文：魏征曰： 昔鲁哀公谓孔子曰： 人有好忘者，徙宅而忘其妻。 
现代文：魏徵说： 从前鲁哀公对孔子说： 有的人非常健忘，搬家而忘记自己的妻子。 
English: Wei Zheng said: Once upon a time, Lu Aigong said to Confucius: Some people are very forgetful, moving house and forgetting their wives.

古文：孔子曰： 又有甚者，桀、纣乃忘其身。 
现代文：孔子说： 还有比这严重的，夏桀、商纣均贪恋身外之物而忘记自己的身体。 
English: Confucius said, "There is something more serious than this. Both Xia Yao and Shang Yao are greedy for external things and forget their own bodies.

古文：亦犹是也。 
现代文：也是这样。 
English: It's the same with the crows.

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：太宗说： 对。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：朕与公辈宜戮力相辅，庶免为人所笑也！ 
现代文：朕与你们应当同心合力，相互辅助，以免被后人耻笑。 
English: I and you should work together and support each other, so as not to be ridiculed by posterity.

古文：青州有谋反者，州县逮捕支党，收系满狱，诏殿中侍御史安喜崔仁师覆按之。
现代文：青州有人谋反，州县官员逮捕其同伙，致使牢狱中人满为患。诏令殿中侍御史、安喜人崔仁师前去覆查。
English: Someone in Qingzhou plotted a rebellion, and the state and county officials arrested his accomplices, resulting in overcrowding in the prison. The imperial edict ordered the palace attendant, the Anxi person, Cui Ren, to go and investigate.

古文：仁师至，悉脱去杻械，与饮食汤沐，宽慰之，止坐其魁首十馀人，馀皆释之。
现代文：崔仁师到了青州，命令卸去囚犯的枷具，给他们饮食、让他们沐浴，加以宽慰，只将其首犯十余人定罪，其他人都释放。
English: When Cui Renshih arrived in Qingzhou, he ordered the shackles to be removed from the prisoners, gave them food, let them bathe, and comforted them. Only the first ten or so prisoners were convicted, and everyone else was released.

古文：还报，敕使将往决之。
现代文：崔仁师回朝禀报，太宗又派人前往叛决。
English: Cui Renshi reported back to the imperial court, and Emperor Taizong sent another group of people to rebel.

古文：大理少卿孙伏伽谓仁师曰： 足下平反者多，人情谁不贪生，恐见徒侣得免，未肯甘心，深为足下忧之。 
现代文：大理寺少卿孙伏伽对崔仁师说： 您平反了很多人，依人之常情谁不贪生，只恐怕这些首犯见同伙免罪释放，不肯甘心，我深为您忧虑。 
English: Sun Fu Jia, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, said to Cui Ren, "You have rehabilitated many people. According to human nature, who is not greedy for life? However, I am afraid that these criminals will not be satisfied with seeing their accomplices released without charge. I am deeply worried about you."

古文：仁师曰： 凡治狱当以平恕为本，岂可自规免罪，知其冤而不为伸邪！
现代文：崔仁师说： 凡定罪断案应当以公正宽恕为根本，怎么可以自己为了逃避责任，明知其冤枉而不为他们申诉呢！
English: Teacher Cui Ren said: All convictions and verdicts should be based on justice and forgiveness. How can you evade responsibility by not appealing for them when you know they are wronged?

古文：万一暗短，误有所纵，以一身易十囚之死，亦所愿也。 伏伽惭而退。
现代文：万一判断不准，放错了人，我宁愿以自己一人换取十个囚犯的生命。 孙伏伽羞惭地退下。
English: In the unlikely event that my judgment is incorrect and the wrong person is released, I would rather exchange myself for the lives of ten prisoners.

古文：及敕使至，更讯诸囚，皆曰： 崔公平恕，事无枉滥，请速就死。 
现代文：等到太宗派的人到了当地，重新审讯犯人，他们都说： 崔公公正宽仁，断案没有冤枉，请求立刻处死我们。 
English: When the people from the Tai Sect arrived and re-interrogated the prisoners, they all said: Cui Gong is fair and lenient, there was no injustice in the verdict, and they requested that we be put to death immediately.

古文：无一人异辞者。
现代文：没有一人有二话的。
English: No one said a word.

古文：上好骑射，孙伏伽谏，以为： 天子居则九门，行则警跸，非欲苟自尊严，乃为社稷生民之计也。
现代文：太宗喜好骑马射箭，孙伏伽苦谏道： 天子居住则要有九重门，出行则要警戒开道，这不是为了表示自己的尊严，而是为国家百姓考虑。
English: Emperor Taizong liked to ride a horse and shoot arrows, and Sun Fu Jia said bitterly to Emperor Taizong: If you want to live in heaven, you must have a nine-storey gate, and if you want to travel, you must be careful to open the road. This is not to show your dignity, but to consider the people of the country.

古文：陛下好自走马射的以娱悦近臣，此乃少年为诸王时所为，非今日天子事业也。
现代文：陛下喜好亲自骑马射箭以便让亲近的侍臣们高兴，这是年轻做亲王时的所做所为，而不是今日贵为天子应做的事。
English: His Majesty likes to go horseback archery himself to make his close courtiers happy, which is what he did when he was a young prince, not what he should do today.

古文：既非所以安养圣躬，又非所以仪刑后世，臣窃为陛下不取。 
现代文：既不能靠此来保养圣体，又不能用它来为后代做典范，我认为陛下不应如此。 
English: You can't use it to preserve the Blessed Sacrament, and you can't use it to set an example for future generations, and I don't think Your Majesty should do that.

古文：上悦。
现代文：太宗十分高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：未几，以伏伽为谏议大夫。
现代文：没几天，任命孙伏伽为谏议大夫。
English: A few days later, he appointed Sun Fuga as the chief adviser.

古文：隋世选人，十一月集，至春而罢，人患其期促。
现代文：隋朝选拔官员，每年十一月候选者聚集京城，到次年春天结束，人们苦于期限过短。
English: Sui Dynasty officials were selected, candidates gathered in Beijing every November, and the process ended in the spring of the following year. People suffered from the fact that the period was too short.

古文：至是，吏部侍郎观城刘林甫奏四时听选，随阙注拟，人以为便。
现代文：到此时，吏部侍郎观城人刘林甫上奏请求四季都可选官，根据空阙随时补充，人们颇以为便。
English: At this time, Liu Linfu, the attendant of the personnel department and a citizen of Guancheng, made a request that the four seasons could elect officials, and people thought it was quite convenient to add them at any time according to vacancies.

古文：唐初，士大夫以乱离之后，不乐仕进，官员不充。
现代文：唐朝初年，士大夫经过动乱之后，都不愿意做官，政府官员人数不够。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, after the upheaval, the scholar-bureaucrats did not want to be officials, and the number of government officials was insufficient.

古文：省符下诸州差人赴选，州府及诏使多以赤牒补官。
现代文：尚书省下文让各州派人赴选，州府及皇帝特使常用赤色文牒直接委任官吏。
English: Shang Shuxuan decreed that each state should send people to the election, and the state government and the emperor's special envoy often directly appointed officials with a red letter.

古文：至是尽省之，勒赴省选，集者七千馀人，林甫随才铨叙，各得其所，时人称之。
现代文：到此时全都废止。勒令他们都到尚书省候选，聚集有七千余人，刘林甫量才录用，各得其所，当时人十分称赞。
English: At this time, they were all abolished. They were all ordered to go to Shangshu Province to be candidates, and more than seven thousand people gathered. Liu Linfu was only hired on a case-by-case basis, and everyone got their place, which was highly praised at the time.

古文：诏以关中米贵，始分人于洛州选。
现代文：太宗以为关中地区米价贵，开始分一部分人在洛州参加铨选。
English: Taizong thought that rice in the Guanzhong area was expensive, and began to divide a part of the people to participate in the election in Lozhou.

古文：上谓房玄龄曰： 官在得人，不在员多。 
现代文：太宗对房玄龄说： 官吏在于得到合适的人选，而不在于人多。 
English: Taizong said to Fang Xuanling, "Officials depend on getting the right person, not on the number of people.

古文：命玄龄并省，留文武总六百四十三员。
现代文：命令房玄龄裁并削减，只留下文武官员总计六百四十三人。
English: He also ordered the number of officials in charge of military and civilian affairs to be reduced, leaving only a total of 643 officials.

古文：隋秘书监晋陵刘子翼，有学行，性刚直，朋友有过，常面责之。
现代文：隋朝秘书监晋陵人刘子翼，学问人品俱佳，性格刚正直爽，朋友有过失，常常当面指责。
English: Liu Zi Ying, the secretary of the Sui Dynasty and the supervisor of the Jin Mausoleum, was a scholar with a good moral character, an upright and upright personality, a friend who made mistakes, and was often criticized in person.

古文：李百药常称： 刘四虽复骂人，人终不恨。 
现代文：李百药常说： 刘四虽然总是骂人，人们却不恨他。 
English: Li Baiyao often said: Although Liu Si is always cursing, people do not hate him.

古文：是岁，有诏征之，辞以母老，不至。
现代文：这一年，有诏令征召他入朝，以母亲年迈为由，辞谢不去。
English: That year, he was summoned to the imperial court by imperial decree, but he declined to go on the grounds that his mother was too old.

古文：鄃令裴仁轨私役门夫，上怒，欲斩之。
现代文：县县令裴仁轨，私下役使看门人，太宗大怒，要处斩他。
English: County magistrate Pei Renglu, who secretly served as the gatekeeper, was so furious that he wanted to behead him.

古文：殿中侍御史长安李乾祐谏曰： 法者，陛下所与天下共也，非陛下所独有也。
现代文：殿中侍御史长安人李乾劝谏道： 法律，是陛下与天下百姓共有的，并非陛下独有之物。
English: Li Qian, the attendant of the court historian Chang'an, advised him: The law is common to His Majesty and the people of the world, and is not unique to His Majesty.

古文：今仁轨坐轻罪而抵极刑，臣恐人无所措手足。 
现代文：现在裴仁轨犯罪较轻却处以极刑，我担心人们将无所适从。 
English: Now that Pei Renlu is facing the death penalty for a minor crime, I'm worried that people will be at a loss.

古文：上悦，免仁轨死，以乾祐为侍御史。
现代文：太宗高兴，免除裴仁轨死罪，任命李乾为侍御史。
English: Taizong was pleased, exempted Pei Renlu from the death penalty, and appointed Li Qian as the imperial secretary.

古文：上尝语及关中、山东人，意有同异。
现代文：太宗曾说及关中与关东人，认为有所不同。
English: Taizong once said that the people of Guanzhong and Guandong are different.

古文：殿中侍御史义丰张行成跪奏曰： 天子以四海为家，不当有东西之异；恐示人以隘。 
现代文：殿中侍御史义丰人张行成跪下奏道： 天子以四海为一家，不应当有东、西的差别，恐怕会让人觉得您狭隘。 
English: Zhang Xingcheng, the attendant in the hall, kneeled down and sang: The Son of Heaven belongs to the four seas, and there should be no difference between the East and the West. I am afraid it will make people think you are narrow-minded.

古文：上善其言，厚赐之。
现代文：太宗欣赏他的话，给他丰厚的赏赐。
English: Emperor Taizong appreciated his words and rewarded him handsomely.

古文：自是每有大政，常使预议。
现代文：从此每当朝廷有大事，都让他参与谋议。
English: From then on, whenever there was a major event in the imperial court, he was involved in the deliberation.

古文：初，突厥既强，敕勒诸部分散，有薛延陀、回纥、都播、骨利干、多滥葛、同罗、仆固、拔野古、思结、浑、斛薛、结、阿跌、契苾、白等十五部，皆居碛北，风俗大抵与突厥同；薛延陀于诸部为最强。
现代文：起初，突厥族已经强大，敕勒各部落分散，有薛延陀、回纥、都播、骨利、多滥葛、同罗、仆固、拔野古、思结、浑、斛薛、结、阿跌、契、白等十五部，均居住在漠北地区，风欲习惯大致与突厥相同。薛延陀在各部落中实力最强。
English: At the beginning, the Turkic people were already powerful, and the various tribes of Mule were dispersed. There were fifteen tribes, including Xueyantao, Huiqi, Tuban, Bonli, Dacangge, Tongluo, Dugu, Bafanggu, Sijie, Hun, Zhexue, Jie, Adul, Qie, and Bai, all of which lived in the north desert area, and their customs and habits were roughly the same as those of the Turks. Xueyantao was the strongest of all the tribes.

古文：西突厥曷萨那可汗方强，敕勒诸部皆臣之。
现代文：西突厥曷萨那可汗正强大的时候，敕勒各部都向他称臣。
English: When West Turkistan's Sanaa Khan was at the height of his power, all the provinces of the Mughal Empire claimed him as a vassal.

古文：曷萨那征税无度，诸部皆怨。
现代文：曷萨那横征暴敛，敕勒各部均有怨言。
English: There are complaints from all departments in Mengle about the excessive taxation in Buxana.

古文：曷萨那诛其渠帅百馀人，敕勒相帅叛之，共推契苾哥楞为易勿真莫贺可汗，居贪于山北。
现代文：曷萨那诛杀他们的首领一百多人，导致敕勒各部相继叛离，一致推举契部的哥楞做易勿真莫贺可汗，居住在贪于山北。
English: He killed more than a hundred of their leaders, which led to the successive defection of the various departments of Mule, and the unanimous election of the brother of the department to be Yibujin Moga Khan, who lived in the north of the mountain.

古文：又以薛延陀乙失钵为也咥小可汗，居燕末山北。
现代文：又推薛延陀部的乙失钵为也小可汗，居住在燕末山北。
English: He was also a minor khan, living in the northern part of Mt. Yanmai.

古文：及射匮可汗兵复振，薛延陀、契苾二部并去可汗之号以臣之。
现代文：等到西突厥射匮可汗的部队重新兴盛起来，薛延陀、契二部便去掉可汗称号再次称臣。
English: When the troops of the Western Turkic Shaka Khan flourished again, Xue Yanta and Qi Erbu removed the khan title and again praised the minister.

古文：回纥等六部在郁督军山者，东属始毕可汗。
现代文：回纥等六部聚居在郁督军山的，东隶属于突厥始毕可汗。
English: Ekui and other six clans lived together in Ikutoku Junzansan, and the east was under the control of the Turku Shibikhan.

古文：统叶护可汗势衰，乙失钵之孙夷男帅其部落七万馀家，附于颉利可汗。
现代文：西突厥统叶护可汗势力衰微，乙失钵的孙子夷男率本部落七万多户，依附于突厥颉利可汗。
English: The power of the Western Turkic Yehuo Khan waned, and the grandson of the lost son, Yi Man, led more than seventy thousand families of the tribe, adhering to the Turkic Yili Khan.

古文：颉利政乱，薛延陀与回纥、拔野古等相帅叛之。
现代文：颉利政治混乱，薛延陀与回纥、拔野古等相继反叛。
English: Goryeo was in political turmoil, and Xue Yanta rebelled successively with Hui Yao and Bapyeonggu.

古文：颉利遣其兄子欲谷设将十万骑讨之，回纥酋长菩萨将五千骑，与战于马鬣山，大破之。
现代文：颉利可汗派他的侄子欲谷设统领十万骑兵讨伐，回纥酋长菩萨率五千骑兵迎战于马鬣山，大败欲谷设。
English: The Qili Khan sent his nephew Qigu Shi to lead a hundred thousand cavalry in the crusade, and the Hui chief Bodhisattva led five thousand cavalry in the battle on Mount Malang, and defeated Qigu Shi.

古文：欲谷设走，菩萨追至天山，部众多为所虏，回纥由是大振。
现代文：欲谷设仓遑奔逃，菩萨追到天山，俘虏其大部，回纥从此兴盛。
English: He wanted to set up a granary and fled, but the Buddha chased him to Tianshan Mountain and captured most of him. Since then, Huizhou has flourished.

古文：薛延陀又破其四设，颉利不能制。
现代文：薛延陀又乘机击败突厥四个设的军队，颉利可汗无法控制。
English: Xueyantuo also took the opportunity to defeat the Turks' four-man army, which the Qili Khan could not control.

古文：颉利益衰，国人离散。
现代文：颉利可汗日益衰败，百姓纷纷离散。
English: The Qili Khan fell into decline, and the people scattered.

古文：会大雪，平地数尺，羊马多死，民大饥，颉利恐唐乘其弊，引兵入朔州境上，扬言会猎，实设备焉。
现代文：正赶上天下大雪，雪深达数尺，羊、马多冻死，百姓饥寒交迫，颉利可汗担心大唐帝国乘突厥衰败进兵，于是带领兵马到朔州边境，扬言要会猎，实际上是防备唐朝。
English: It was just in time for the world's heavy snow, snow several feet deep, sheep and horses froze to death, the people were starving and cold, and the Qili Khan was worried that the Great Tang Empire would be defeated by the Turks and enter the army, so he led the soldiers to the border of Shuozhou, threatening to hunt, but actually to guard against the Tang Dynasty.

古文：鸿胪卿郑元璹使突厥还。言于上曰： 戎狄兴衰，专以羊马为侯。
现代文：鸿胪寺卿郑元出使突厥还朝，对太宗说： 戎狄族的兴衰隆替，专以羊马的情状作为征候。
English: Zheng Yuan, the chief priest of Hongye Temple, sent an envoy to the Turkic Empire and said to Emperor Taizong: The rise and fall of the Yongdi people is very rapid, with the condition of the sheep and horses as a symptom.

古文：今突厥民饥畜瘦，此将亡之兆也，不过三年。 
现代文：现在突厥百姓饥饿、牲畜瘦弱，这是将要灭亡的先兆，不会超过三年。 
English: Now the Turkish people are starving and their livestock is emaciated. This is a harbinger of their impending demise, which will not last more than three years.

古文：上然之。
现代文：太宗颇以为然。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：群臣多劝上乘间击突厥，上曰： 新与人盟而背之，不信；利人之灾，不仁；乘人之危以取胜，不武。
现代文：众大臣都劝说太宗乘此机会袭击突厥，太宗说： 刚刚与人家订盟却要背约，这是不守信用；利用人的灾祸，这是不仁义；乘人之危来取胜，这不是勇武的行为。
English: All the ministers persuaded Taizong to take this opportunity to attack the Turks. Taizong said, "If you have just made an alliance with someone, but you want to renege on the agreement, this is not keeping a promise; if you take advantage of someone's misfortune, this is not benevolence; if you take advantage of someone's danger to win, this is not a courageous act.

古文：纵使其种落尽叛，六畜无馀，朕终不击，必待有罪，然后讨之。 
现代文：即使突厥的各部落都叛离，牲畜所剩无几，朕还是不出击，一定要等到他们有罪过，然后讨伐他们。 
English: Even if all the tribes of the Turks were to defect and there were few cattle left, I would not attack them. I would wait until they had committed a crime and then fight them.

古文：西突厥统叶护可汗遣真珠统俟斤与高平王道立来，献万钉宝钿金带，马五千匹，以迎公主。
现代文：西突厥统叶护可汗，派真珠统俟斤与高平王李道立来到长安，献上一万钉宝钿金带、五千匹马，以迎娶唐公主。
English: The Western Turkic ruler, Yegu Khan, sent the pearl-headed warlock and the king of Gapyeong, Li Daoli, to Chang'an to offer ten thousand nails, a gold belt, and five thousand horses to marry the Tang princess.

古文：颉利不欲中国与之和亲，数遣兵入寇，又遣人谓统叶护曰： 汝迎唐公主，要须经我国中过。 
现代文：颉利可汗不希望大唐与统叶护和亲，几次派兵侵扰，又派人对统叶护说： 你要是迎娶大唐公主，必须从我们的领土经过。 
English: The Qili Khan did not want Datang and Tongye to be reconciled. He sent troops several times to harass Tongye and told him: "If you marry the princess of Datang, you must pass through our territory."

古文：统叶护患之，未成昏。
现代文：统叶护深为忧虑，最后没有成婚。
English: Tongye Bao was deeply worried and did not marry in the end.

古文：贞观二年戊子，公元六二八年
现代文：贞观二年春季，正月，辛亥，尚书右仆射长孙无忌离职。
English: In the spring of the second year of Zhenguan, the first month of the year, Xinhai, Shangshu's right-hand servant and eldest grandson left the post.

古文：春，正月，辛亥，右仆射长孙无忌罢。时有密表称无忌权宠过盛者，上以表示之，曰： 朕于卿洞然无疑，若各怀所闻而不言，则君臣之意有不通。 
现代文：当时有人上密表称长孙无忌权力过大，荣宠太盛，太宗将密表拿给长孙无忌看，并说： 朕对你丝毫不怀疑，假如各有所闻而不说，则君臣的想法便不能沟通。 
English: At that time, someone on the secret table said that the eldest grandson had too much power and too much honor. Taizong showed the secret table to the eldest grandson and said: I have no doubt about you at all. If everyone hears something and does not say it, then the thoughts of the monarchs and ministers cannot be communicated.

古文：又召百官谓之曰： 朕诸子皆幼，视无忌如子，非他人所能间也。 
现代文：又召集百官对他们说： 朕的儿子均年幼，所以视无忌如亲子一般，不是其他人所能离间的。 
English: And he called together the centurions and said to them, "My sons are very young, and they cannot be separated from me, but they are like my own children.

古文：无忌自惧满盈，固求逊位，皇后又力为之请，上乃许之，以为开府仪同三司。
现代文：长孙无忌自己担心富贵至极会带来灾祸，一再请求让位，长孙皇后也尽力为他请求，太宗于是准许离职，改封为开府仪同三司。
English: The eldest grandson, fearing that his extreme wealth would bring disaster, repeatedly asked to abdicate, and the eldest grandson's empress also did her best to plead for him. Taizong then allowed him to leave his post and changed his title to Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji.

古文：置六司侍郎，副六尚书；并置左右司郎中各一人。
现代文：设置六司侍郎，为六司尚书的副职，同时设置左右司郎中各一人。
English: A six-ranked attendant was set up as a vice-position of the six-ranked secretary, and one of each of the left and right attendants was set up at the same time.

古文：癸丑，吐谷浑寇岷州，都督李道彦击走之。
现代文：癸丑，吐谷浑入侵岷州，都督李道彦将其击退。
English: 丑,吐谷浑 invaded Bozhou, the governor Li Daohan repulsed them.

古文：丁巳，徙汉王恪为蜀王，卫王泰为越王，楚王祐为燕王。
现代文：丁巳，改封汉王李恪为蜀王，卫王李泰为越王，楚王李为燕王。
English: Ding Si changed the titles of Han King Li Ke to Shu King, Wei King Li Tai to Yue King, and Chu King Li to Yan King.

古文：上问魏征曰： 人主何为而明，何为而暗？ 
现代文：太宗问魏徵： 君主如何做称为明，如何做称为暗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong asked Wei Zheng: How does the monarch call the light, how does he call the dark?

古文：对曰： 兼听则明，偏信则暗。
现代文：魏徵答道： 能听取各方面的意见，就是明，偏听偏信，就是暗。
English: Wei Qian replied: Being able to listen to opinions from all sides is bright, and partial listening and partial belief are dark.

古文：昔尧清问下民，故有苗之恶得以上闻；舜明四目，达四聪，故共、鲧、欢兜不能蔽也。
现代文：从前尧帝体恤下情，详细询问民间疾苦，所以能够知道有苗的恶行；舜帝目明能远视四方，耳聪能远听四方，所以共工、鲧、兜不能掩匿罪过。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Qian sympathized with and inquired in detail about the sufferings of the people, so he could know the evil deeds of the seedlings; Emperor Qian's eyes could clearly see the four directions, and his ears could hear the four directions, so he could not cover up the sins.

古文：秦二世偏信赵高，以成望夷之祸；梁武帝偏信硃异，以取台城之辱；隋炀帝偏信虞世基，以致彭城阁之变。
现代文：秦二世偏信赵高，造成望夷宫的灾祸；梁武帝偏信朱异，招来台城的羞辱；隋炀帝偏信虞世基，导致彭城阁的变故。
English: Qin II's partial belief in Zhao Gao caused the disaster of Wangyi Palace; Emperor Liangwu's partial belief in Zhu Yi caused the humiliation of Taicheng; Emperor Sui Jian's partial belief in Yu Shiji caused the misfortune of Pengcheng.

古文：是故人君兼听广纳，则贵臣不得拥蔽，而下情得以上通也。 
现代文：所以君主善于听取各方面意见，则亲贵大臣就无法阻塞言路，下情也就得以上达。 太宗说： 非常对！ 
English: Therefore, the monarch is good at listening to opinions from all sides, and if the minister is close to him, he will not be able to block the speech path, and the situation will have to be reached. Taizong said: Very right!

古文：上曰： 善！ 上谓黄门侍郎王珪曰： 开皇十四年大旱，隋文帝不许赈给，而令百姓就食山东，比至末年，天下储积可供五十年。
现代文：太宗对黄门侍郎王说： 隋朝开皇十四年天下大旱，隋文帝不准许赈济百姓，而让百姓自己到关东地区寻找食物，等到了文帝末年，全国储备的粮食可供五十年食用。
English: Emperor Taizong said to Huangmen's attendant Wang: In the 14th year of the Sui Dynasty, there was a drought in the country. Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty did not allow the people to receive aid, but let the people go to the Kanto region to find food. By the end of Emperor Wen's reign, the grain reserves of the whole country could be used for 50 years.

古文：炀帝恃其富饶，侈心无厌，卒亡天下。
现代文：隋炀帝依仗着富足的粮食，奢侈无度，终于导致国家的灭亡。
English: The Sui and Qin emperors relied on plentiful grain and indulged in extravagance, which eventually led to the country's demise.

古文：但使仓廪之积足以备凶年，其馀何用哉！ 
现代文：只要使仓库中的粮食足以应付灾年就可以了，其他多余的又有何用呢！ 
English: As long as the grain in the warehouse is sufficient to cope with the disaster year, it is enough, what is the use of other superfluous things!

古文：二月，上谓侍臣曰： 人言天子至尊，无所畏惮。
现代文：二月，太宗对亲近的大臣说： 人们都说君主至为尊贵，无所畏惧。
English: In February, Emperor Taizong said to a close minister: People say that the monarch is the most honorable and fearless.

古文：朕则不然，上畏皇天之监临，下惮群臣之瞻仰，兢兢业业，犹恐不合天意，未副人望。 
现代文：朕则并非如此，上怕皇天的监督，下惧群臣的注视，兢兢业业，还怕不符合上天的旨意和百姓的期望。 
English: I, on the other hand, am not like that. I am afraid of the emperor's supervision, I am afraid of the attention of the courtiers, I am afraid of not conforming to the will of heaven and the expectations of the people.

古文：魏征曰： 此诚致治之要，愿陛下慎终如始，则善矣。 
现代文：魏徵说： 这的确是达到治世的要旨，希望陛下能慎始慎终，那就好了。 
English: Wei Zheng said: This is indeed the essence of achieving the reign. I hope that His Majesty can be prudent in the beginning and prudent in the end. That would be fine.

古文：上谓房玄龄等曰： 为政莫若至公。
现代文：太宗对房玄龄等人说： 处理政务没有比大公无私更重要的了。
English: Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and others: There is nothing more important in handling government affairs than being selfless.

古文：昔诸葛亮窜廖立、李严于南夷，亮卒而立、严皆悲泣，有死者，非至公能如是乎！
现代文：以前诸葛亮流放廖立、李严到南夷之地，诸葛亮死的时候，廖立悲痛万分，李严哀伤而死，如果不是大公无私能这样吗？
English: In the past, Zhuge Liang exiled Liao Li and Li Yan to the land of Nanyi. When Zhuge Liang died, Liao Li was extremely sad, and Li Yan died in sorrow. If it were not for the selflessness of the grand duke, could this have happened?

古文：又高颎为隋相，公平识治体，隋之兴亡，系颎之存没。
现代文：再如高为隋朝丞相，公正无私，颇识治国之本，隋朝的兴亡，与高休戚相关。
English: For example, Gao was the prime minister of the Sui Dynasty, he was fair and selfless, and he knew a lot about how to govern the country. The rise and fall of the Sui Dynasty is closely related to Gao Jiu.

古文：朕既慕前世之明君，卿等不可不法前世之贤相也。 
现代文：朕既然仰慕前代的明君，你们也不可不效法前代的贤相啊！ 
English: Since I admire the previous generation of wise men, you must also follow the example of the previous generation of sages!

古文：三月，戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，戊寅朔，出现日食。
English: In March, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：壬子，大理少卿胡演进每月囚帐；上命自今大辟皆令中书、门下四品已上及尚书议之，庶无冤滥。
现代文：壬子，大理寺少卿胡演进呈每月囚禁的罪犯名簿。太宗下令从今往后大辟死罪都让中书、门下省四品以上官员及尚书省讨论，以尽量减除冤案。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered that from now on, all death penalty cases should be discussed by officials of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MOST) in order to reduce the number of unjust cases as much as possible.

古文：既而引囚，至岐州刺史郑善果，上谓胡演曰： 善果虽复有罪，官品不卑，岂可使与诸囚为伍。
现代文：随即带囚犯走过，见有岐州刺史郑善果，太宗对胡演说： 郑善果虽然有罪，毕竟官衔不低，怎能让他与其他囚犯同列。
English: Then he led the prisoners to pass by and saw Zheng Zengguo, the Qizhou assassin. Taizong said to Hu: Although Zheng Zengguo is guilty, after all, his rank is not low, how can he be put in the same category as other prisoners.

古文：自今三品以上犯罪，不须引过，听于朝堂俟进止。 
现代文：从现在起三品以上官员犯法，不必带来殿前过目，只让他们在太极宫承天门外东西朝堂听候处分。 
English: From now on, officials with three or more court ranks who violate the law do not need to bring a court appearance, only let them wait for punishment in the East and West Court outside the Taiji Palace.

古文：关内旱饥，民多卖子以接衣食；己巳，诏出御府金帛为赎之，归其父母。
现代文：关内地区大旱饥荒，百姓多卖儿卖女换取食物。己巳，命令拿出皇宫府库中的金银财物赎回被变卖的子女们，送还给他们的父母。
English: Due to the drought and famine in the Kwanai region, many people sold their sons and daughters in exchange for food. Therefore, an order was issued to redeem the children who had been sold by taking out the gold, silver and other valuables from the treasury of the Imperial Palace and return them to their parents.

古文：庚午，诏以去岁霖雨，今兹旱、蝗，赦天下。
现代文：庚午，诏令说因为上一年连绵大雨，今年又遇旱、蝗灾害，因此大赦天下。
English: At noon, the imperial edict said that because of the continuous heavy rain last year and the droughts and locust plagues this year, there would be a general amnesty.

古文：诏书略曰： 若使年谷丰稔，天下又安，移灾朕身，以存万国，是所愿也，甘心无吝。 
现代文：诏令大略说道： 假如让五谷丰登、天下安宁，即使将灾害移到朕身上来保全百姓也心甘情愿，毫不吝惜。 
English: The edict said in summary: If the grain is plentiful and the country is peaceful, even if the disaster is transferred to me to protect the people, I am willing to spare no effort.

古文：会所在有雨，民大悦。
现代文：不久旱区天降喜雨，百姓大为高兴。
English: Soon, the sky in the arid region fell with rain, and the people were very happy.

古文：夏，四月，己卯，诏以 隋末乱离，因之饥馑，暴骸满野，伤人心目，宜令所在官司收瘗。 
现代文：夏季四月，己卯，下诏说： 隋朝末年天下大乱，造成饥荒，尸骨遍野，使人触目伤悲，命令各地官府掩埋尸骨。 
English: In the summer of April, Ji Yu issued the following edict: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, the world was in turmoil, causing famine, and corpses and bones were everywhere, making people sad and sad. He ordered the local government offices to bury the corpses.

古文：初，突厥突利可汗建牙直幽州之北，主东偏，奚、等数十部多叛突厥来降，颉利可汗以其失众责之。
现代文：起初，突厥突利可汗建牙帐于幽州北面，主持东部事务，奚、等数十部大多反叛突厥投降唐朝，颉利可汗责备他失去了这些部落。
English: At first, the Turko-Turkic Khan set up a tent in the north of Yuzhou and presided over the eastern affairs. Dozens of mostly rebel Turks surrendered to the Tang Dynasty, and the Turko-Turkic Khan reproached him for losing these tribes.

古文：及薛延陀、回纥等败欲谷设，颉利遣突利讨之，突利兵又败，轻骑奔还。
现代文：等到薛延陀、回纥等打败欲谷设，颉利派突利讨伐，突利的军队又吃败仗，单枪匹马逃回。
English: Wait until Xue Yanta, Hui Xuan, etc. defeat Zhi Gu Shimo, and the Haili send the Turli to fight, and the Turli army is defeated and flees back single-handedly.

古文：颉利怒，拘之十馀日而挞之，突利由是怨，阴欲叛颉利。
现代文：颉利大怒，将突利拘禁了十几天，并鞭笞他，突利从此怨恨颉利，暗中想背叛颉利。
English: In a rage, Keli detained Turi for ten days and whipped him. From then on, Turi resented Keli and secretly wanted to betray Keli.

古文：颉利数征兵于突利，突利不与，表请入朝。
现代文：颉利几次向他征兵，他都不给，向唐朝上表请求归附。
English: He refused to accept several conscription offers from Goryeo and petitioned the Tang Dynasty for annexation.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 向者突厥之强，控弦百万，凭陵中夏，用是骄恣，以失其民。
现代文：太宗对大臣们说： 以前突厥强盛，拥有百万兵马，侵凌中原，却因如此骄横放纵而失去百姓的支持。
English: Taizong said to the ministers: Previously, the Turks were powerful, had a million soldiers and horses, and invaded the Central Plains, but they lost the support of the people because they were so arrogant and indulgent.

古文：今自请入朝，非困穷，肯如是乎！
现代文：现在请求归附，如果不是深陷困境，能这么做吗？
English: Is it possible to ask for annexation now, if we are not in deep trouble?

古文：朕闻之，且喜且惧。
现代文：朕听到这个消息是又高兴又担心。为什么呢？
English: I was both happy and worried when I heard the news. Why?

古文：何则？突厥衰则边境安矣，故喜。
现代文：突厥衰败则大唐边境即得安宁，所以高兴。
English: With the decline of the Turks, the border of the Great Tang Dynasty became peaceful, so I am happy.

古文：然朕或失道，它日亦将如突厥，能无惧乎！
现代文：然而朕若有过失，日后也会象突厥一样，能不担心忧虑吗？
English: However, if I make a mistake, will I be like the Turks in the future, can I not worry?

古文：卿曹宜不惜苦谏，以辅朕之不逮也。 
现代文：望你们直言苦谏，来帮助朕弥补不足。 
English: I hope that you will speak frankly and bitterly to help me make up for the shortcomings.

古文：颉利发兵攻突利，丁亥，突利遣使来求救。上谋于大臣曰： 朕与突利为兄弟，有急不可不救。
现代文：颉利可汗发兵攻打突利，丁亥，突利派人向大唐求援，太宗与大臣们谋划道： 朕与突利结为兄弟，他有急难我不能不救。
English: Meli khan sent troops to attack Turi, Ding Hai, Turi sent people to Datang for help, Taizong and the ministers plotted: I am a brother of Turi, I can't help him if he is in trouble.

古文：然颉利亦与之有盟，奈何？ 
现代文：然而颉利可汗也与我们订有盟约，怎么办呢？ 
English: However, the Hari Khan also has a treaty with us, so what should we do?

古文：兵部尚书杜如晦曰： 戎狄无信，终当负约，今不因其乱而取之，后悔无及。
现代文：兵部尚书杜如晦说： 戎狄族不守信用，以后肯定要背约，现今如不乘其混乱而进攻，以后将后悔莫及。
English: Shang Shudu Rugao of the Military Department said: If the Yong Di people do not keep their word, they will definitely break the agreement in the future. If they do not take advantage of the confusion and attack now, they will regret it later.

古文：夫取乱侮亡，古之道也。 
现代文：谋取混乱者，侵凌将亡之师，这是自古以来就有的道理。 
English: It has been a truism since ancient times that those who seek to sow confusion are the masters of chaos.

古文：丙申，契丹酋长帅其部落来降。
现代文：丙申，契丹族首领率领所辖部落投降唐朝。
English: Bishen, the leader of the Khitan tribe, led his tribe to surrender to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：颉利遣使请以梁师都易契丹，上谓使者曰： 契丹与突厥异类，今来归附，何故索之！
现代文：颉利可汗派使臣来到大唐，请求用梁师都来换回契丹部族，太宗对突厥使臣说： 契丹族与你们突厥是不同的种族，现在来归顺我大唐，你们有什么理由讨还！
English: The Khari Khan sent envoys to Datang, requesting the use of Liang Shidu to return to the Khitan tribe. The Emperor said to the Turkish envoys: The Khitan people are a different race from you Turks, now come to submit to my Datang, what reason do you have to return!

古文：师都中国之人，盗我土地，暴我百姓，突厥受而庇之，我兴兵致讨，辄来救之，彼如鱼游釜中，何患不为我有！
现代文：梁师都本是中原汉人，侵占我大唐土地，欺压我大唐百姓，突厥接受他并加以庇护，大唐兴兵讨伐梁师都，你们总出兵救援，梁氏已如鱼游釜中，早晚要被我们消灭。
English: Liang Shidu was originally a Han Chinese from the Central Plains. He occupied my Great Tang land and oppressed my Great Tang people. The Turks accepted him and sheltered him. Great Tang soldiers fought against Liang Shidu. You always sent troops to rescue him. The Liang clan is like a fish swimming in a pot. Sooner or later, they will be eliminated by us.

古文：借使不得，亦终不以降附之民易之也。 
现代文：即使一时消灭不掉，也不会用归降的契丹百姓去换他。 
English: Even if he cannot be eliminated for the time being, he will not be replaced by the Qidan people who have surrendered.

古文：先是，上知突厥政乱，不能庇梁师都，以书谕之，师都不从。
现代文：在此之前，太宗得悉突厥内部争斗，政局混乱，不能够庇护梁师都，曾寄书信晓谕，劝他归降，梁师都执意不从。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Taizong learned of the turmoil within the Turks and the political turmoil, and was unable to protect Liang Shidu. He sent a letter to Liang Shidu, urging him to surrender, but Liang Shidu refused to do so.

古文：上遣夏州都督长史刘旻、司马刘兰成图之，旻等数遣轻骑践其禾稼，多纵反间，离其君臣，其国渐虚，降者相属。
现代文：太宗派夏州都督府长史刘、司马刘兰成设法对付他，刘等人多次派遣轻骑兵践踏梁氏占据区的土地禾苗，又常使反间计，离间其君臣，其国势渐衰，投降唐朝的人接踵而至。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Xia Prefecture Governor Shi Liu and Sima Liu Lancheng to try to deal with him. Liu and others repeatedly sent light cavalry to trample on the land and seedlings in the area occupied by the Liang clan, and often used countermeasures to alienate their princes and ministers, their national situation gradually declined, and the people who surrendered to the Tang Dynasty followed.

古文：其名将李正宝等谋执师都，事泄，来奔，由是上下益相疑。
现代文：梁氏手下名将李正宝等密谋将梁氏抓起来，事情败露，投奔唐朝，从此梁氏内部上下更加互相猜忌。
English: Li Zhengbao, one of Liang's subordinates, and others conspired to arrest Liang, but the plot was uncovered and he defected to the Tang Dynasty. From then on, there was more mutual suspicion within the Liang clan.

古文：旻等知可取，上表请兵。
现代文：刘等知道时机已到，上表请求派兵出击。
English: Liu et al. knew that the time had come, and sent out the troops as requested in the above table.

古文：上遣右卫大将军柴绍、殿中少监薛万均击之，又遣旻等据朔方东城以逼之。
现代文：太宗派右卫大将军柴绍、殿中少监薛万均率兵进攻，又让刘等据守朔方东城进逼梁氏。
English: Tai Sect faction Right Guard General Chai Shao and palace junior superintendent Xue Wanjun led the troops to attack, and let Liu and others enter the eastern city of Shuo Fang to force the Liang clan.

古文：师都引突厥兵至城下，刘兰成偃旗卧鼓不出。
现代文：梁师都带突厥兵到了朔方东城下，刘兰成偃旗息鼓按兵不动。
English: Liang Shidu took the Turkish soldiers to the eastern city of Shuofang, Liu Lancheng waved the flag, and the soldiers did not move.

古文：师都宵遁，兰成追击，破之。
现代文：梁氏半夜逃跑，刘兰成追击，大败梁氏。
English: Mr. Liang ran away in the middle of the night, Liu Lancheng chased him, and Mr. Liang was defeated.

古文：突厥大发兵救师都，柴绍等未至朔方数十里，与突厥遇，奋击，大破之，遂围朔方。
现代文：突厥征调大批兵力救援梁氏，柴绍等率兵马走到离朔方数十里的地方，与突厥兵相遇，奋力拼杀，大败突厥兵，于是包围朔方城。
English: The Turks mobilized a large number of troops to rescue the Liang family, Chai Shao and other soldiers and horses went to a place dozens of miles away from Shuo Fang, met with the Turkish soldiers, fought hard, defeated the Turkish soldiers, and then surrounded Shuo Fang City.

古文：突厥不敢救，城中食尽。
现代文：突厥兵不敢前去救援，城中粮绝。
English: The Turkish soldiers did not dare to go to the rescue. There was no food in the city.

古文：壬寅，师都从父弟洛仁杀师都，以城降，以其地为夏州。
现代文：壬寅，梁师都的堂弟梁洛仁杀死师都，献城投降，唐朝以该地建夏州。
English: Ren Yin, the cousin of Liang Shidu, Liang Luo Ren, killed Shidu, surrendered the city, and the Tang Dynasty used the place to build Xiazhou.

古文：太常少卿祖孝孙以为梁、陈之音多吴、楚，周、齐之音多胡、夷，于是斟酌南北，考以古声，作《唐雅乐》，凡八十四调、三十一曲、十二和。
现代文：太常寺少卿祖孝孙，认为南朝梁、陈的音乐杂入很多吴、楚的音调；而北朝周、齐的音乐杂入很多北方胡、夷的音调，于是斟酌南、北方的音乐，又考察古代的音乐，修成了《唐雅乐》，总共八十四调、三十一曲、十二和。
English: Zu Xiaosun, Shaoqing of Taizhong Temple, thought that the music of the Southern Dynasties Liang and Chen was mixed with a lot of Wu and Chu tones, while the music of the Northern Dynasties Zhou and Qi was mixed with a lot of Northern Hu and Yi tones. Therefore, he considered the music of the South and North, and also examined the ancient music, and composed "Tang Ya Le," a total of eighty-four tones, thirty-one pieces, and twelve harmonies.

古文：诏协律郎张文收与孝孙同修定。
现代文：太宗又下诏令协律郎张文收与祖孝孙共同修定唐乐。
English: Emperor Taizong also issued an imperial edict ordering Zhang Wenrui, the conciliator, to jointly revise Tang music with his ancestors.

古文：六月，乙酉，孝孙等奏新乐。
现代文：六月，乙酉，孝孙等人演奏新乐。
English: In June, Atsuko, Takamatsu, and others performed new music.

古文：上曰： 礼乐者，盖圣人缘情以设教耳，治之隆替，岂由于此？ 
现代文：太宗说： 礼乐不过是古代圣人根据实际情况的不同而设施教化罢了，国家政治的兴衰隆替，难道也由此而生？ 
English: Taizong said: "Ritual music is nothing more than the edification of ancient saints according to different actual situations. Is it also the reason for the rise and fall of national politics?

古文：御史大夫杜淹曰： 齐之将亡，作《伴侣曲》，陈之将亡，作《玉树后庭花》，其声哀思，行路闻之皆悲泣，何得言治之隆替不在乐也！ 
现代文：御史大夫杜淹说： 北齐将要灭亡时，产生《伴侣曲》；陈国将亡时，又出现《玉树后庭花》，其声调悲哀，过路人听到了都悲伤落泪，怎么能说政治的兴衰隆替不在于音乐呢？ 
English: Historian Du Yun said: When Beiqi was about to perish, "Companion Song" was produced; when Chen Guo was about to die, "Tamshu Houyuanhua" appeared again. Its tone was sad, and passers-by were sad and tearful when they heard it. How can it be said that the rise and fall of politics is not due to music?

古文：上曰： 不然。夫乐能感人，故乐者闻之则喜，忧者闻之则悲，悲喜在人心，非由乐也。
现代文：太宗说： 不对，音乐能够触动人的感情，所以高兴的人听到音乐则喜悦，忧伤的人听到它则感到悲痛，悲痛与喜悦全在于人的内心，不是由音乐引起的。
English: Taizong said: No, music can touch people's emotions, so happy people feel happy when they hear music, and sad people feel sad when they hear it. Sadness and joy are all in people's hearts, not caused by music.

古文：将亡之政，民必愁苦，故闻乐而悲耳。
现代文：将要衰亡的政治，百姓必然感到愁苦，所以听到音乐更加悲切。
English: The people must be saddened by the decaying politics, so it is even sadder to hear the music.

古文：今二曲具存，朕为公奏之，公岂悲乎？ 
现代文：现在这二个曲子都还存在，朕为你弹奏出来，你难道会悲伤吗？ 
English: Now these two pieces still exist, I play them for you, will you be sad?

古文：右丞魏征曰： 古人称 礼云礼云，玉帛云乎哉！
现代文：右丞魏徵说： 古人说： 礼难道仅指玉帛之类礼器吗？ 
English: Yu Zhen Wei Zheng said: The ancients said: Does the etiquette only refer to the etiquette such as the jade bracelet?

古文：乐云乐云，钟鼓云乎哉！ 
现代文：乐难道仅指钟鼓之类乐器吗？
English: Does "music" only refer to musical instruments such as gongs and drums?

古文：乐诚在人和，不在声音也。 
现代文：乐的意义确实在于使人心和睦，而不在于声音本身。 
English: Indeed, the meaning of music is to harmonize the heart, not the sound itself.

古文：臣光曰： 臣闻垂能目制方圆，心度曲直，然不能以教人，其所以教人者，必规矩而已矣。
现代文：司马光曰：我听说古代巧匠垂能够用眼睛测方圆，用内心量曲直，但是不能将自己的技术传给别人，他能够传授给别人的，必定是圆规曲尺罢了。
English: Sima Guang said: I heard that the ancient craftsmen could use their eyes to measure the square and the circle, and use their hearts to measure the curvature, but they could not pass on their technology to others. If they could pass it on to others, it must be a compass.

古文：圣人不勉而中，不思而得，然不能以授人，其所以授人者，必礼乐而已矣。
现代文：古代圣人不费力而能切中事物的道理，不深思而能获得治国之道，但却不能传授给别人，所能传授的，一定是礼、乐罢了。
English: The ancient sages were able to grasp the truth of things without effort, and they were able to obtain the way of governing the country without deep thinking, but they could not teach it to others. What they could teach must be etiquette and music.

古文：礼者，圣人之所履也；乐者，圣人之所乐也。
现代文：礼，是圣人所躬亲实践的；乐，是圣人所喜爱的。
English: Rites are practised by the saint; music is loved by the saint.

古文：圣人履中正而乐和平，又思与四海共之，百世传之，于是乎作礼乐焉。
现代文：圣人遵行正道而喜爱谐和，又想与天下人共同遵行，使之传留百世，于是便制作礼乐。
English: The saint followed the right path and loved harmony, and wanted to follow it together with the people of the world, so that it would be passed down for centuries, so he made liturgical music.

古文：故工人执垂之规矩而施之器，是亦垂之功已；王者执五帝、三王之礼乐而施之世，是亦五帝、三王之治已。
现代文：所以工匠手拿垂所传授的圆规曲尺去制作器物，这也就是垂的功劳了；君主用五帝三王的礼乐来治理国家，这也就是五帝三王的政治了。
English: That is why craftsmen use the round compass taught by Dangdang to make utensils, which is the merit of Dangdang; monarchs use the ritual music of the Five Emperors to govern the country, which is the politics of the Five Emperors.

古文：五帝、三王，其违世已久，后之人见其礼知其所履，闻其乐知其所乐，炳然若犹存于世焉。此非礼乐之功邪？
现代文：五帝三王离今世已很久远，后代人们看见他们的礼而知道他们的行止，听到他们的乐而知道他们的喜好，昭昭然如同仍存在于当世，这不是礼乐的功劳吗？
English: The five emperors and three kings are long gone from this world. Future generations will see their rites and know their actions, hear their music and know their preferences, as if they still existed in the present. Isn't this the merit of ceremonial music?

古文：夫礼乐有本、有文：中和者，本也；容声者，末也；二者不可偏废。
现代文：礼乐有内在的本质，有外表的形式：中正平和为礼乐之本，仪节声音为礼乐之末，二者不可偏废。
English: Ceremonial music has an inner essence and an outer form: Zhongzheng Heping is the basis of ceremonial music, and ceremonial sounds are the end of ceremonial music. Both should not be wasted.

古文：先王守礼乐之本，未尝须臾去于心，行礼乐之文，未尝须臾远于身。
现代文：先代贤明的君王谨守礼乐之本，一刻也没有离心远去，笃行礼乐的外在形式，躯体一刻也没有远离它。
English: The wise monarchs of the past faithfully kept to the principles of ritual music, never deviating from the heart for a moment, adhering to the external form of ritual music, and never deviating from it physically for a moment.

古文：兴于闺门，著于朝廷，被于乡遂比邻，达于诸侯，流于四海，自祭祀军旅至于饮食起居，未尝不在礼乐之中；如此数十百年，然后治化周浃，凤凰来仪也。
现代文：兴起于闺阁家门，显达于朝廷，广被于乡野近邻，通达于诸侯，流播于四海，从祭祀战争到饮食起居，都离不开礼乐。长此以往数十百年，然后教化普遍深入，天下太平。
English: It arose in the boudoir family, reached the imperial court, was widely spread in the countryside and near neighbors, reached the princes, and spread to the four seas. From sacrificial war to eating and living, it is inseparable from ritual music. This went on for tens of hundreds of years, and then enlightenment was generally deepened, and the world was peaceful.

古文：苟无其本而徒有其末，一日行之而百日舍之，求以移风易俗，诚亦难矣。
现代文：如果没有礼乐之本而只有礼乐之末，一日行礼乐而百日舍弃礼乐，想用礼乐来移风易俗，实在是难。
English: If there is no book of eulogy but only the end of eulogy, one day of eulogy and one hundred days of abandoning eulogy, it is really difficult to use eulogy to change customs.

古文：是以汉武帝置协律，歌天瑞，非不美也，不能免哀痛之诏。
现代文：所以汉武帝设置协律都尉，歌唱天降祥瑞，不能说不美，但仍不能不下伤感的罪己诏。
English: Therefore, Emperor Hanwu set up a chorus captain, singing Tianxiao Xiangrui, can not be said to be unattractive, but still can not help but feel sad.

古文：王莽建羲和，考律吕，非不精也，不能救渐台之祸。
现代文：王莽设立执掌天地四时的官吏羲和，考定律吕之音，不能说不精确，但仍不能挽救渐台之祸。
English: Wang Mang set up the officials who presided over heaven and earth at four o'clock to make peace, and the sound of the law was not inaccurate, but it still could not save the calamity of Zhentai.

古文：晋武制笛尺，调金石，非不详也，不能弭平阳之灾。
现代文：晋武帝制笛尺，调金石之声，不能说不详尽，但仍不得消弭平阳的灾难。
English: Emperor Jinwu's making of the flute and the tuning of the cymbals cannot be said to be exhaustive, but they still cannot erase the disaster of Pingyang.

古文：梁武帝立四器、调八音，非不察也，不能免台城之辱。
现代文：梁武帝设立四器，调理八音，不能说不分明，但仍不能免除台城的耻辱。
English: Emperor Liangwu set up four instruments and adjusted eight tones, which cannot be said to be unclear, but still cannot absolve the shame of Taicheng.

古文：然则韶、夏、濩、武之音，具存于世，苟其馀不足以称之，曾不能化一夫，况四海乎！
现代文：这样看来，舜、禹？周武王时的韶、夏？武四乐，即使都保存于当世，如果德行不足以与它们相称并不能感化一个人，更何况普天之下的民众呢！
English: From this perspective, even if the Four Joys of Heaven and Earth and the Four Joys of Summer are preserved in this world, if their virtues are not commensurate with them, they will not be able to influence a single person, let alone the people of the whole world!

古文：是犹执垂之规矩而无工与材，坐而待器之成，终不可得也。
现代文：这如同拿着垂的圆规曲尺而没有其他工具、材料，徒然等待器具的制成，最后一无所得一样。
English: It's like holding a dangling compass without any other tools or materials, waiting in vain for the instrument to be made, and getting nothing in the end.

古文：况齐、陈淫昏之主，亡国之音，暂奏于庭，乌能变一世之哀乐乎！
现代文：况且齐、陈的淫荡昏庸之主，亡国之音，暂奏于朝庭，又怎么能改变一个时代的哀乐呢！
English: What's more, Chen's lascivious and banal master, the sound of a ruined country, is temporarily played at the imperial court. How can one change the sad music of an era?

古文：而太宗遽云治之隆替不由于乐，何发言之易而果于非圣人也如此？
现代文：太宗说政治的兴衰隆替不在于乐，为什么讲话轻率，非难圣人又如此果断呢？
English: Taizong said that the rise and fall of politics is not due to music. Why is the speech rash and the criticism of the sage so decisive?

古文：夫礼非威仪之谓也，然无威仪则礼不可得而行矣。
现代文：礼并不是指威仪而言，然而没有威仪则礼难以施行。
English: Etiquette is not about authority, but without authority, etiquette is difficult to enforce.

古文：乐非声音之谓也，然无声音则乐不可得而见矣。
现代文：乐并非指声音而言，然而没有声音则乐难以表现。
English: Music does not refer to sound, but without sound, music is difficult to express.

古文：譬诸山，取其一土一石而谓之山则不可，然土石皆去，山于何在哉！
现代文：譬如一座山，取其一土一石则不能称为山，但是如果去掉土石，山又何在！
English: For example, a mountain cannot be called a mountain if its soil and rock are removed, but if the soil and rock are removed, what is a mountain?

古文：故曰： 无本不立，无文不行。 
现代文：所以说： 礼没有内在的本质不能成立，没有外表的形式无法施行。 
English: Therefore it is said, "Rites cannot be established without an inner essence, and cannot be practiced without an outward form."

古文：奈何以齐、陈之音不验于今世，而谓乐无益于治乱，何异睹拳石而轻泰山乎！
现代文：怎么能因为齐、陈之音对当世无效而说乐无益于治乱呢，这与看见拳头大的石头而轻视泰山有什么不同！
English: How can it be said that music is of no use in controlling chaos because ch'i and ch'en are ineffective in the present world? This is no different from seeing a stone with a big fist and despising Mount Tai!

古文：必若所言，则是五帝、三五之作乐皆妄也。 君子于其所不知，盖阙如也。 惜哉！
现代文：如果象上述这种议论所说的，则五帝、三王的作乐均为虚妄。 君子对于他所不知道的，暂付之阙如。 可惜呀！
English: If, as the above-mentioned argument says, the music of the five emperors and three kings is all false, then a gentleman should not pay attention to what he does not know. What a pity!

古文：戊子，上谓侍臣曰： 朕观《隋炀帝集》，文辞奥博，亦知是尧、舜而非桀、纣，然行事何其反也！ 
现代文：戊子，太宗对亲近的大臣说： 朕翻阅《隋炀帝集》，见其文辞深奥博雅，也知道推崇尧、舜而非议桀、纣，然而其行事为何与其文章相反呢？ 
English: In response, Emperor Taizong said to a close minister: "I have read the Sui Dynasty Anthology, and I have seen that its words are profound and elegant, and I also know that it is to promote and not to discuss, but why does it act contrary to its articles?

古文：魏征对曰： 人君虽圣哲，犹当虚己以受人，故智者献其谋，勇者竭其力。
现代文：魏徵回答道： 君主虽然是圣哲之人，也应当虚心地接受别人的谏议，所以智慧的人奉献他的谋略，勇武之人竭尽其勇力。
English: Wei Zheng replied: Although the monarch is a sage, he should also humbly accept the advice of others, so the wise man should offer his strategy, and the brave man should do his best.

古文：炀帝恃其俊才，骄矜自用，故口诵尧、舜之言而身为桀、纣之行，曾不自知，以至覆亡也。 
现代文：炀帝恃才自傲，骄矜自大，所以口诵尧、舜的言语而身行桀、纣的作为，竟然自己不知道怎么回事而至于覆灭。 
English: It is only the arrogant emperor who is conceited and arrogant, so he recites arrogant words and acts arrogant, and he does not know what is going on and is about to be overthrown.

古文：上曰： 前事不远，吾属之师也！ 
现代文：太宗说： 前事不远，当成为我们的借鉴。 
English: Taizong said: The past is not far away, it should serve as a reference for us.

古文：畿内有蝗。
现代文：长安地区出现了蝗虫。
English: Locusts have appeared in the Chang'an area.

古文：辛卯，上入苑中，见蝗，掇数枚，祝之曰： 民以谷为命，而汝食之，宁食吾之肺肠。 
现代文：辛卯，太宗到玄武门北面的禁苑，看见了蝗虫，拾取几只蝗虫，祷祝说： 百姓视谷子如生命，而你们却吃它们，宁肯让你们吃我的肺肠。 
English: Xinwu, Emperor Taizong went to the Forbidden City north of the Xuanwu Gate, saw the locusts, picked up a few locusts, and prayed: "The people regard the grain as life, but you eat them. I would rather let you eat my lungs."

古文：举手欲吞之，左右谏曰： 恶物或成疾。 
现代文：举手想吞掉蝗虫，身边的人劝谏道： 吃脏东西容易得病。 
English: He raised his hand to swallow the locusts, and people around him advised him: "It's easy to get sick from eating dirty things."

古文：上曰： 朕为民受灾，何疾之避！ 
现代文：太宗说： 朕为百姓承受灾难，为什么要躲避疾病！ 
English: Emperor Taizong said: I bear the disaster for the people, why should I avoid the disease!

古文：遂吞之。
现代文：于是吞食掉蝗虫。
English: After saying this, he swallowed the locusts whole.

古文：是岁，蝗不为灾。
现代文：这一年，蝗虫没有成为灾害。
English: This year, locusts did not become a disaster.

古文：上曰： 朕每临朝，欲发一言，未尝不三思。恐为民害，是以不多言。 
现代文：太宗说： 朕每次临朝听政，想要说一句话，都要再三思忖，担心给百姓造成伤害，所以不多说话。 
English: Taizong said, "Every time I come to the imperial court to listen to politics, if I want to say a word, I have to think twice. I'm worried about causing harm to the people, so I don't say much.

古文：给事中知起居事杜正伦曰： 臣职在记言，陛下之言失，臣必书之，岂徒有害于今，亦恐贻讥于后。 
现代文：给事中知起居事杜正伦说： 我的职责在于记言，陛下的每一个过失，我一定要记上，陛下有过岂止有害于当今，恐怕还会让后人讥笑。 
English: Du Zhenglun, who became aware of the situation, said: My duty is to remember words. I must remember every fault of His Majesty. His Majesty's past is not only harmful to the present, but I am afraid it will make future generations laugh.

古文：上悦，赐帛二百段。
现代文：太宗高兴，赐给帛二百段。
English: Taizong was pleased and gave him two hundred dan.

古文：上曰： 梁武帝君臣惟谈苦空，侯景之乱，百官不能乘马。
现代文：太宗说： 梁武帝君臣只是会谈论佛教的苦行与空寂，侯景之乱，百官不能够骑马。
English: Emperor Taizong said: Emperor Liangwu's princes and courtiers would only talk about the asceticism and emptiness of Buddhism, the Houjing Rebellion, and the inability of officials to ride horses.

古文：元帝为周师所围，犹讲《老子》，百官戎服以听。
现代文：梁元帝被北周的军队包围，还在讲论《老子》，百官穿着戎装听讲。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan surrounded by the Northern Zhou army, still lecturing on "Lao Zi," hundreds of officials wearing military uniforms listening to the lecture.

古文：此深足为戒。
现代文：这些深足为戒。
English: These are profound warnings.

古文：朕所好者，唯尧、舜、周、孔之道，以为如鸟有翼，如鱼有水，失之则死，不可暂无耳。 
现代文：朕所喜好的，只有尧、舜、周公、孔子之道，认为这如同鸟长翅膀、鱼得活水，失去它们将要死去，不可片刻没有它们。 
English: I like only the Tao, Confucianism, Zhou Gong and Confucianism. I think that it is like a bird with long wings and a fish with living water. If you lose them, you will die. You should not be without them for a moment.

古文：以辰州刺史裴虔通，隋炀帝故人，特蒙宠任，而身为弑逆，虽时移事变，屡更赦令，幸免族夷，不可犹使牧民，乃下诏除名，流欢州。
现代文：太宗认为辰刺史裴虔通是隋炀帝的旧臣，特别受到宠爱，最后却杀了炀帝。虽然星转斗移、时世变迁，几次经历颁布赦令，裴虔通也幸免于诛灭全族，但不可以让他再做官，于是下诏将其除名，流放到州。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that Pei Qiantong, a former vassal of the Sui and Qian Dynasties, was particularly beloved, but he eventually killed Emperor Qian. Although the stars have changed, the times have changed, and the pardon order has been issued several times, Pei Qiantong also survived the annihilation of the whole family, but he could not be allowed to work as an official again, so he was expelled and exiled to the state.

古文：虔通常言 身除隋室以启大唐 ，自以为功，颇有觖望之色。
现代文：裴虔通常说： 亲自除掉隋朝皇室，开启大唐江山 ，自以为有功，颇有怨恨失望的意思。
English: Pei Qian usually said: I personally eliminated the Sui Dynasty royal family and opened the Great Tang Dynasty. I thought it was a great achievement, but I felt resentment and disappointment.

古文：及得罪，怨愤而死。
现代文：等到开罪于朝廷，怨愤而死。
English: He waited until he had offended the imperial court and died in a rage.

古文：秋，七月，诏宇文化及之党莱州刺史牛方裕、绛州刺史薛世良、广州都督长史唐奉义、隋武牙郎将元礼并除名徙边。
现代文：秋季七月，下诏将宇文化及的同党莱州刺吏牛方裕、绛州刺史薛世良、广州都督府长史唐奉义、隋虎牙郎将元礼一并除名流边。
English: In the autumn of July, the following edict was issued to expel Yuan Li and his fellow party members, Laizhou assassin Niu Fangyu, Zhangzhou assassin Xue Shiliang, Guangzhou governor Shi Tang Bongyi, and Sui Hougang Lang, from the party.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 古语有之： 赦者小人之幸，君子之不幸。 
现代文：太宗对大臣说： 古语说道： 宽赦是小人的幸事，是君子的不幸。 
English: Taizong said to the minister, "In ancient times, there was a saying: Forgiveness is a blessing for the villain and a misfortune for the gentleman.

古文： 一岁再赦，善人暗哑。 
现代文： 一年中两次大赦，使善良的人哑口不言。 
English: Two amnesties in one year have silenced the good people.

古文：夫养稂莠者害嘉谷，赦有罪者贼良民，故朕即位以来，不欲数赦，恐小人恃之轻犯宪章故也！ 
现代文：养恶草则对好谷子有害，宽赦罪犯则使善良的百姓遭殃，所以自从朕即位以来，不想屡次发布赦令，惟恐小人有恃无恐，动辄触犯法令。 
English: Raising evil weeds is harmful to good corns, and pardoning criminals causes good people to suffer. Therefore, since I ascended the throne, I do not want to repeatedly issue pardon orders, but I am afraid that villains will have no fear and will easily violate the law.

