古文：起重光协洽，尽昭阳作噩，凡三年。孝献皇帝乙初平二年
现代文：起，止，一共三年。汉纪五十二汉献帝初平二年春季，正月，辛丑，大赦天下。
English: It lasted for a total of three years. In the Han Dynasty, the fifty-two emperors were offered to the emperor in the spring of the second year of the Heian period, in the first month of the year, and were pardoned by the emperor.

古文：春，正月，辛丑，赦天下。关东诸将议：以朝廷幼冲，逼于董卓，远隔关塞，不知存否，幽州牧刘虞，宗室贤俊，欲共立为主。
现代文：关东各州、郡起兵讨伐董卓的将领们商议，认为献帝年龄幼小，被董卓所控制，又远在长安，关塞相隔，不知生死，幽州牧刘虞是宗室中最贤明的，准备拥立他为皇帝。
English: The generals of the Kanto states and counties who raised troops to fight against Dong Zhuo deliberated and believed that Emperor Xian was young, controlled by Dong Zhuo, and far away in Chang'an, separated by barriers, and did not know life and death. Yuzhou Patriarch Liu Yu was the wisest in the family, and was ready to support him as emperor.

古文：曹操曰： 吾等所以举兵而远近莫不响应者，以义故也。
现代文：曹操说： 我们这些人所以起兵，而且远近之人无不响应的原因，正由于我们的行动是正义的。
English: Cao Cao said, "This is why we have raised an army, and there is no reason why people near and far will not respond, precisely because our actions are just.

古文：今幼主微弱，制于奸臣，非有昌邑亡国之衅，而一旦改易，天下其孰安之！
现代文：如今皇帝幼弱，虽为奸臣所控制，但没有昌邑王刘贺那样的可以导致亡国的过失，一旦你们改立别人，天下谁能接受！
English: Today, the emperor is young and weak, and although he is controlled by treacherous vassals, he has not made any mistakes that could lead to the downfall of the country like Liu He, the king of Changyi. If you change the emperor, who in the world will accept it?

古文：诸君北面，我自西向。 
现代文：你们向北边迎立刘虞，我自尊奉西边的皇帝。 
English: You welcome Liu Yu to the north, I proudly serve the emperor in the west.

古文：韩馥、袁绍以书与袁术曰： 帝非孝灵子，欲依绛、灌诛废少主、迎立代王故事，奉大司马虞为帝。 
现代文：韩、袁绍写信给袁术说： 皇帝不是灵帝的儿子，我们准备依周勃和灌婴废黜少主，迎立代王的先例，尊奉大司马刘虞为皇帝。 
English: Han and Yuan Shao wrote to Yuan Shuxu saying, "The emperor is not the son of Lingdi. We are ready to follow Zhou Bo and Guan Ying to depose the young lord, to set up the precedent of the king, and to honor the great chief Ma Liu Yu as the emperor.

古文：术阴有不臣之心，不利国家有长君，乃外托公义以拒之。
现代文：袁术暗中怀有当皇帝的野心，认为国家有一个年长的皇帝对自己不利，于是表面假托君臣大义，拒绝了韩和袁绍的建议。
English: Yuan Shuxu secretly harbored the ambition of becoming emperor, believing that the country had an elderly emperor to its detriment, so he rejected Han and Yuan Shao's suggestion, pretending to be a monarch and a statesman on the surface.

古文：绍复与术书曰： 今西名有幼君，无血脉之属，公卿以下皆媚事卓，安可复信！
现代文：袁绍再次给袁术写信，说： 如今西边名义上有一个年幼的皇帝，而并没有皇家的血统。公卿等朝臣都谄媚董卓，怎能再相信他们！
English: Yuan Shao again wrote to Yuan Shou, saying, "Nowadays, there is a young emperor in the West, but he has no royal blood. Court nobles and other courtiers are all in love with Dong Zhuo, how can we believe them again!

古文：但当使兵往屯关要，皆自蹙死。
现代文：只要派兵去守住关口要塞，自会把他们全都困死。
English: As long as they send soldiers to guard the pass fortress, they will all be trapped.

古文：东立圣君，太平可冀，如何有疑？
现代文：我们在东边拥立一个圣明的皇帝，就可期望过上太平日子，为什么迟疑不决？
English: If we establish a holy emperor in the East, we can expect to live a peaceful life. Why are we hesitating?

古文：又室家见戮，不念子胥可复北面乎？ 
现代文：再说，咱们全家被杀，你不想想伍子胥是怎样为父兄报仇的，难道可以再向这样的皇帝称臣吗？ 
English: Besides, our whole family was killed. Don't you want to think about how Wu Zixuan avenged his father and brother? Can you really be a vassal to such an emperor?

古文：术答曰： 圣主聪睿，有周成之质。
现代文：袁术回信说： 皇帝职明睿智，有周成王姬诵那样的资质。
English: Yuan Shuxu replied in a letter, "The emperor's position is bright and wise, and he has the same qualifications as Zhou Chengwang.

古文：贼卓因危乱之际，威服百寮，此乃汉家小厄之会，乃云今上 无血脉之属 ，岂不诬乎！
现代文：贼臣董卓乘国家危乱之时，用暴力压服群臣，这是汉朝的一个小小厄运，你意说皇帝 没有皇家血统 ，这岂不是诬蔑吗！
English: When the treacherous minister Dong Zhuo took advantage of the national crisis, he used violence to subdue the ministers. This was a small misfortune of the Han Dynasty. You meant to say that the emperor did not have royal blood. Isn't this slander?

古文：又曰 室家见戮，可复北面 ，此卓所为，岂国家哉！
现代文：你还说 全家被杀，难道可以再向这样的皇帝称臣 ，这事是董卓做的，岂是皇帝吗！
English: You also said that the whole family was killed, how can you still claim to be a vassal to such an emperor, this was done by Dong Zhuo, is it the emperor!

古文：慺慺赤心，志在灭卓，不识其他！ 
现代文：我满腔赤诚，志在消灭董卓，不知其他的事情！ 
English: I am full of sincerity, aiming to eliminate Dong Zhuo, I don't know anything else!

古文：馥、绍竟遣故乐浪太守张岐等赍议上虞尊号。
现代文：韩与袁绍竟然派遣前任乐浪郡太守张岐等带着他们的提议到幽州，向刘虞奉上皇帝的尊号。
English: Han and Yuan Shao even sent Zhang Qi, the former governor of Lelang County, to Yuzhou with their proposal and offered Liu Yu the honorary title of emperor.

古文：虞见岐等，厉色叱之曰： 今天下崩乱，主上蒙尘，吾被重恩，未能清雪国耻。
现代文：刘虞见到张岐等人，厉声呵斥他们说： 如今天下四分五裂，皇帝在外蒙难，我受到国家重恩，未能为国雪耻。
English: When Liu Yu saw Zhang Qi and others, he shouted at them: "If the country falls apart today, and the emperor is in trouble abroad, I have received great favor from the state, and I have failed to be a disgrace to the country.

古文：诸君各据州郡，宜共戮力尽心王室，而反造逆谋以相垢污邪！ 
现代文：你们各自据守州、郡，本应尽心尽力为王室效劳，却反而策划这种逆谋来沾污我吗！ 
English: You, each of you, according to your state and county, should have devoted your best efforts to serve the royal family, but instead you have plotted this treachery to tarnish me!

古文：固拒之。
现代文：他坚决拒绝。
English: He flatly refused them.

古文：馥等又请虞领尚书事，承制封拜，复不听，欲奔匈奴以自绝，绍等乃止。
现代文：韩等人又请求刘虞主持尚书事务，代表皇帝封爵任官，刘虞仍不接受，打算逃入匈奴将自己隔绝起来，袁绍等人这才作罢。
English: Han and others also asked Liu Yu to preside over the affairs of Shangshu and appoint officials on behalf of the emperor. Liu Yu still did not accept and planned to escape to the Xiongnu to isolate himself. Yuan Shao and others had to give up.

古文：二月，丁丑，以董卓为太师，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：二月，丁丑，任命董卓为太师，地位在诸侯王之上。
English: In February, Dingwu appointed Dong Zhuo as Grand Master, a position higher than that of a prince.

古文：孙坚移屯梁东，为卓将徐荣所败，复收散卒进屯阳人。
现代文：孙坚率军移驻梁县以东，被董卓部将徐荣打败，他又收集残部进驻阳人。
English: Sun Jian and his army moved to the east of Liang County. They were defeated by Dong Zhuo's army and Xu Rong's army. He gathered the remaining army and moved to Yangren.

古文：卓遣东郡太守胡轸督步骑五千击之，以吕布为骑督。
现代文：董卓派遣东郡太守胡轸统率步、骑兵五千人，攻打孙坚，任命吕布为骑督。
English: Dong Zhuo dispatched the East County Governor Hu Rongtong and 5,000 cavalry to attack Sun Jian, and appointed Lv Bu as the cavalry commander.

古文：轸与布不相得，坚出击，大破之，枭其都督华雄。
现代文：胡轸与吕布不和，孙坚出来迎战，大破胡轸，斩杀他部下的都督华雄。
English: Hu Yao and Lü Bu did not get along, and Sun Jian came out to meet the battle, defeated Hu Yao, and killed his subordinate, the governor Huaxiong.

古文：或谓袁术曰： 坚若得雒，不可复制，此为除狼而得虎也。 
现代文：有人对袁术说： 假如孙坚攻占洛阳，就不能再控制他，这是除掉了狼而得到了虎。 
English: Someone said to Yuan Shuxu: If Sun Jian attacks and occupies Luoyang, it will no longer be possible to control him. This is getting rid of the wolf and gaining the tiger.

古文：术疑之，不运军粮。
现代文：袁术感到疑虑，便不再给孙坚运送军粮。
English: Yuan Shuxu felt doubtful, so he no longer delivered military rations to Sun Jian.

古文：坚夜驰见术，画地计校曰： 所以出身不顾者，上为国家讨贼，下慰将军家门之私雠。
现代文：孙坚连夜奔驰，去见袁术，在地上画图为他分析形势，说： 我所以奋不顾身，上为国家讨伐逆贼，下为将军报家门私仇。
English: Sun Jian drove all night to see Yuan Shu, and drew a map on the ground for him to analyze the situation. He said, "That's why I worked so hard, first for the country to fight the traitors, and then for the general to avenge my family."

古文：坚与卓非有骨肉之怨也，而将军受浸润之言，还相嫌疑，何也？ 
现代文：我与董卓并没有个人怨恨，而将军却听信外人的挑拨之言来猜忌我，这是为什么？ 
English: I have no personal grudge against Dong Zhuo, but the general listens to the provocative words of outsiders to suspect me. Why is that?

古文：术踧踖，即调发军粮。
现代文：袁术惭愧不安，立即调发军粮。
English: Embarrassed and uneasy, Yuan Shuxu immediately dispatched the army rations.

古文：坚还屯，卓遣将军李傕说坚，欲与和亲，令坚疏子弟任刺史、郡守者，许表用之。
现代文：孙坚回到驻地，董卓派将军李劝说孙坚，表示愿与孙坚结成儿女亲家，并要孙坚把他子弟中想做刺史、太守的，开列一个名单，由他推荐任用。
English: When Sun Jian returned to the garrison, Dong Zhuo sent General Li to persuade Sun Jian, expressed his willingness to become a family with Sun Jian, and asked Sun Jian to make a list of his sons and daughters who wanted to be the crown prince and grand prince, and let him recommend the appointment.

古文：坚曰： 卓逆天无道，今不夷汝三族，县示四海，则吾死不瞑目，岂将与乃和亲邪！ 
现代文：孙坚说： 董卓逆天无道，我今天要是不能灭你三族，昭示天下，则我死不瞑目，怎会与你结亲！ 
English: Sun Jian said: "Dong Zhuo, there is no way to go against heaven. If I cannot destroy your three tribes today and show the world, then I will not rest until I die. How can I marry you!"

古文：复进军大谷，距雒九十里。
现代文：孙坚继续进军，抵达距洛阳九十里的大谷。
English: Sun Jian continued his march and arrived at the valley 90 miles away from Luoyang.

古文：卓自出，与坚战于诸陵间。卓败走，却屯渑池，聚兵于陕。
现代文：董卓亲自出击，与孙坚在诸陵园之间交战，董卓败逃，退守渑池，在陕县集结兵力。
English: Dong Zhuo personally attacked and fought with Sun Jian between the cemeteries. Dong Zhuo was defeated and fled, retreated to Dianchi and gathered forces in Shaanxi.

古文：坚进至雒阳，击吕布，复破走。
现代文：孙坚进入洛阳，进攻吕布，吕布也被打败，退走。
English: Sun Jian entered Luoyang and attacked Lvbu. Lvbu was also defeated and retreated.

古文：坚乃扫除宗庙，祠以太牢，得传国玺于城南甄宫井中；分兵出新安、渑池间以邀卓。
现代文：于是孙坚打扫皇帝宗庙，用猪、牛、羊进行祭祀。在城南甄官署的水井中，找到了传国御玺。他又分兵到新安、渑池，以逼迫董卓。
English: As a result, Sun Jian cleaned the emperor's ancestral temple and used pigs, cattle, and sheep for sacrifices. In the well of the Seongnam Inspection Office, he found the imperial scepter. He also sent troops to Xin'an and Dianchi to persecute Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓谓长史刘艾曰： 关东军败数矣，皆畏孤，无能为也。
现代文：董卓对长史刘艾说： 关东的叛军屡败，都畏惧我，不会有什么作为。
English: Dong Zhuo said to Changshi Liu Ai: The rebels in Guandong have been defeated many times. They are afraid of me and will not do anything.

古文：惟孙坚小戆，颇能用人，当语诸将，使知忌之。
现代文：只有孙坚有点不知死活，挺会用人，应该告诉诸将，让他们知道提防。
English: Only Sun Jian is a bit reckless, very good at employing people, and should tell the generals to beware.

古文：孤昔与周慎西征边、韩于金城，孤语张温，求引所将兵为慎作后驻，温不听。
现代文：我从前与周慎到金城郡西征边章、韩遂，我向张温请求率领部下做周慎的后援，张温不同意。
English: I once went with Zhou Sheng to the west of Jincheng County to recruit Bianzhang and Han Sui. I asked Zhang Wen to lead his subordinates to support Zhou Sheng. Zhang Wen did not agree.

古文：温又使孤讨先零叛羌，孤知其不克而不得止，遂行，留别部司马刘靖将步骑四千屯安定以为声势。
现代文：张温又派我去讨伐先零的叛乱羌人，我知道不能取胜，但又不能不去，于是出发，留下别部司马刘靖率领四千步、骑兵驻在安定，作为呼应。
English: Zhang Wen also sent me to fight against the first zero of the rebels. I knew I couldn't win, but I couldn't not go. So I set off, leaving Liu Jing, the head of another department, to lead the four thousand paces, and the cavalry stationed in the stable, as a response.

古文：叛羌欲截归道，孤小击辄开，畏安定有兵故也。
现代文：羌军想切断我的归路，我只作轻微攻击就冲开了阻截，这是因为他们害怕安定的驻军。
English: The Shan army wanted to cut off my way back, and I only made a slight attack to break the blockade, because they were afraid of a stable garrison.

古文：虏谓安定当数万人，不知但靖也。
现代文：羌军以为安定会有数万大军，不知只有刘靖一支部队。
English: The Shan army thought that there would be tens of thousands of troops for stability, but there was only one army for Liu Jing.

古文：而孙坚随周慎行，谓慎求先将万兵造金城，使慎以二万作后驻。
现代文：孙坚随周慎作战，向周慎请求先率一万人前往金城，让周慎率二万人为后援。
English: Sun Jian fought with Zhou Sheng, and asked Zhou Sheng to lead ten thousand people to Jincheng, and let Zhou Sheng lead twenty thousand people as backup.

古文：边、韩畏慎大兵，不敢轻与坚战，而坚兵足以断其运道。
现代文：边章、韩遂害怕周慎的大军，不敢轻易与孙坚开战，而孙坚的军队足以切断他们的粮道。
English: Bianzhang and Han Sui were afraid of Zhou Sheng's large army and did not dare to fight Sun Jian easily, and Sun Jian's army was enough to cut off their food supply.

古文：儿曹用其言，凉州或能定也。
现代文：假如周慎那帮小子能用孙坚的计谋，凉州或许能够平安。
English: If Zhou Sheng's gang of boys can use Sun Jian's strategy, Liangzhou may be safe.

古文：温既不能用孤，慎又不能用坚，卒用败走。
现代文：而张温既不能听从我，周慎又不能听从孙坚，最后只能战败而退走。
English: But Zhang Wen could not listen to me, Zhou Sheng could not listen to Sun Jian, and in the end they could only retreat in defeat.

古文：坚以佐军司马，所见略与人同，固自为可；但无故从诸袁儿，终亦死耳！ 
现代文：孙坚是个佐军司马，见解却与我大致相同，确实是可用之才。只是他无缘无故地跟随袁家的那些公子，最终还是会送命的！ 
English: Sun Jian is a military commander, but his views are roughly the same as mine, and he is indeed a useful talent. However, those nobles who follow Yuan for no reason will eventually be killed!

古文：乃使东中郎将董越屯渑池，中郎将段煨屯华阴，中郎将牛辅屯安邑，其馀诸将布在诸县，以御山东。
现代文：于是，董卓派东中郎将董越驻守渑池，中郎将段煨驻守华阴，中郎将牛辅驻守安邑，其余的将领分布各县，以抵御山东联军的进攻。
English: As a result, Dong Zhuo sent Dong Zhong Lang to garrison Dong Yue in Dianchi, Zhong Lang to garrison Duan Rong in Huayin, Zhong Lang to garrison Niu Fu in Anyu, and the rest of the generals were distributed throughout the counties to resist the attack of the Shandong Allied Forces.

古文：辅，卓之婿也。
现代文：牛辅是董卓的女婿。
English: Niu Fu is the son-in-law of Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓引还长安。
现代文：董卓回到长安。
English: Dong Zhuo returned to Chang'an.

古文：孙坚修塞诸陵，引军还鲁阳。
现代文：孙坚在修复历代皇帝的陵墓后，率军回到鲁阳。
English: After restoring the mausoleums of successive emperors, Sun Jian led his army back to Luyang.

古文：夏，四月，董卓至长安，公卿皆迎拜车下。
现代文：夏季，四月，董卓抵达长安。公卿都来迎接，在他车前参拜。
English: In the summer, in April, Dong Zhuo arrived in Chang'an. Noblemen came to meet him and paid homage in front of his car.

古文：卓抵手谓御史中丞皇甫嵩曰： 义真，怖未乎？ 
现代文：董卓击掌对御史中丞皇甫嵩说： 皇甫义真，你害怕不害怕？ 
English: Dong Zhuo clapped his hands and said to Wang Fusong, the Imperial Historian: Wang Fusong, are you afraid or not?

古文：嵩曰： 明公以德辅朝廷，大庆方至，何怖之有！
现代文：皇甫嵩回答说： 您以德辅佐朝廷，巨大的喜庆方才到来，我有什么害怕的！
English: Empress Fusong replied: You are a German assistant to the imperial court, a huge celebration has just arrived, what should I be afraid of!

古文：若淫刑以逞，将天下皆惧，岂独嵩乎！ 
现代文：如果随意杀戮，滥施刑罚，则天下人人畏惧，岂只是我一个人呢！ 
English: If I kill at will and inflict punishment indiscriminately, then everyone in the world will be afraid of me. Am I the only one?

古文：卓党欲尊卓比太公，称尚父。
现代文：董卓的党羽想依照周朝开国功臣羌子牙的先例，尊称董卓为 尚父 。
English: Dong Zhuo's followers wanted to follow the precedent of Zhou Dynasty's founding hero, Xizigu, and honorably call Dong Zhuo "Father Shang."

古文：卓以问蔡邕，邕曰： 明公威德，诚为巍巍，然比之太公，愚意以为未可。
现代文：董卓征求蔡邕的意见，蔡邕说： 您的威德，确实很高，但我觉得不可以与羌子牙相比。
English: Dong Zhuo asked Cai Qi for his opinion. Cai Qi said, "Your wisdom teeth are really high, but I don't think they can be compared to the braces.

古文：宜须关东平定，车驾还反旧京，然后议之。 
现代文：应该等到平定函谷关以东的叛乱，皇帝返回旧京洛阳，然后再商议此事。 
English: They should wait until the rebellion east of Hankow Pass is quelled and the emperor returns to the old Beijing and Luoyang before discussing the matter.

古文：卓乃止。
现代文：于是董卓作罢。
English: So let Dong Zhuo do it.

古文：卓使司隶校尉刘器籍吏民有为子不孝、为臣不忠、为吏不清、为弟不顺者，皆身诛，财物没官。
现代文：董卓命令司隶校尉刘嚣，将官员与百姓中儿女不孝顺父母、臣属不忠于长官，官吏不清廉以及弟弟不尊敬兄长的人进行登记，一律处死，财物由官府没收。
English: Dong Zhuo ordered his subordinate, Lieutenant Liu Han, to register officials and common people whose sons and daughters were not filial to their parents, subordinates were not loyal to their superiors, officials were not honest, and younger brothers did not respect their older brothers. All of them were to be put to death and their property confiscated by the government.

古文：于是更相诬引，冤死者以千数。
现代文：于是有许多人互相诬告，含冤而死的人数以千计。
English: As a result, many people falsely accused each other, and thousands died unjustly.

古文：百姓嚣嚣，道路以目。
现代文：百姓惶恐不安，在路上相遇时，只敢用眼睛相互示意。
English: Panicked and anxious, people only dare to make eye contact with each other when they meet on the road.

古文：六月，丙戌，地震。
现代文：六月，丙戌，发生地震。
English: In June, an earthquake occurred in Zhouzhuang.

古文：秋，七月，司空种拂免；以光禄大夫济南淳于嘉为司空，太尉赵谦罢；以太常马日磾为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，司空种拂被免职，任命光禄大夫、济南人淳于嘉为司空。太尉赵谦被免职，任命太常马日为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, Tsukuda Tsukuda was relieved of his duties, and Dr. Guanglu and Jinan native Junyujia were appointed as Tsukuda. Second Lieutenant Zhao Qian was relieved of his duties, and First Lieutenant Ma Ri was appointed as Second Lieutenant.

古文：初，何进遣云中张杨还并州募兵，会进败，杨留上党，有众数千人。
现代文：起初，何进派遣云中人张杨回并州去召募兵马。恰赶上何进被杀，张杨就留在上党，有部众数千人。
English: At first, He Jin sent Zhang Yang, a man from Yunzhong, back to Bianzhou to recruit soldiers and horses. Just in time for He Jin to be killed, Zhang Yang remained in the upper party, with thousands of followers.

古文：袁绍在河内，杨往归之，与南单于于扶罗屯漳水。
现代文：袁绍在河内，张杨前往归附，与南匈奴单于於扶罗共同在漳水岸边扎营。
English: Yuan Shao was in Hanoi, Zhang Yang was on his way to annexation, and together with the Southern Xiongnu, they set up camp on the banks of the Surabaya River in Guro.

古文：韩馥以豪杰多归心袁绍，忌之；阴贬节其军粮，欲使其众离散。
现代文：冀州刺史韩因为各地豪杰多拥戴袁绍，心中嫉妒，暗地里减少对袁绍的军粮供应，想使他的军队离散。
English: Jealous of Yuan Shao, who was favored by heroes and heroines from all over the country, Jizhou Jishi Han secretly reduced the supply of military grain to Yuan Shao and wanted to disperse his army.

古文：会馥将麹义叛，馥与战而败，绍因与义相结。
现代文：正在这时，韩部将麴义叛变，韩进行讨伐，反被麴义战败。
English: Just at this time, the South Korean side rebelled against the Kuomintang, and the South Korean side went on a crusade, but was defeated by the Kuomintang.

古文：绍客逢纪谓绍曰： 将军举大事而仰人资结，不据一州，无以自全。 
现代文：袁绍就乘此机会与麴义相互联合。袁绍的门客逢纪对袁绍说： 将军倡导大事，却要依靠别人供应粮草，如果不能占据一个州作为根据地，就不能保全自己。 
English: Yuan Shao took this opportunity to unite with Zhai Yi. Yuan Shao's protégé Feng Ji said to Yuan Shao: The general advocates great things, but he has to rely on others to supply grain and grass. If he cannot occupy a state as a base, he cannot protect himself.

古文：绍曰： 冀州兵强，吾士饥乏，设不能办，无所容立。 
现代文：袁绍说： 冀州兵强，而我的部下又饥又乏，假如不能成功，就没有立足之处了。 
English: Yuan Shao said: Jizhou's soldiers are strong, but my subordinates are hungry and weary. If they cannot succeed, they will have no foothold.

古文：纪曰： 韩馥庸才，可密要公孙瓚使取冀州，馥必骇惧，因遣辩士为陈祸福，馥迫于仓卒，必肯逊让。 
现代文：逢纪说： 韩是一个庸才，您可秘密联络公孙瓒，让他攻打冀州。韩必然惊慌恐惧，我们便乘机派遣有口才的使节去为他分析祸福，韩迫于突然发生的危机，必然肯把冀州出让给您。 
English: Feng Ji said: Han is a mediocrity, you can secretly contact Gongsun Yao, let him attack Jizhou. Han will inevitably panic and fear, we will take the opportunity to send eloquent envoys to analyze the misfortune and fortune for him, Han is forced by the sudden crisis, will inevitably be willing to cede Jizhou to you.

古文：绍然之，即以书与瓚。
现代文：袁绍觉得有理，就写信给公孙瓒。
English: Yuan Shao felt justified and wrote to Gongsun Yao.

古文：瓚遂引兵而至，外托讨董卓而阴谋袭馥，馥与战不利。
现代文：公孙瓒率军到冀州，表面上声称去讨伐董卓，而密谋袭击韩。韩与公孙瓒交战，失败。
English: Gongsun Rong led an army to Jizhou, ostensibly claiming to fight Dong Zhuo, but plotting to attack Han. Han fought Gongsun Rong and lost.

古文：会董卓入关，绍还军延津，使外甥陈留高幹及馥所亲颍川辛评、荀谌、郭图等说馥曰： 公孙瓚将燕、代之卒乘胜来南，而诸郡应之，其锋不可当。
现代文：正好董卓进入函谷关，袁绍便率军返回延津，派外甥、陈留人高干与韩所亲信的颖川人辛评、荀谌、郭图等人去游说韩： 公孙瓒统率燕、代两地的军队乘胜南下，各郡纷纷响应，军锋锐不可当。
English: Just as Dong Zhuo entered Hanyu Pass, Yuan Shao led the army back to Yanjin, and sent his nephew, Chen Liu Ren Gao Gan, and Han's trusted Yingchuan people Sin Cao, Zou, Guo Tu, and others to lobby Han: Gongsun Zhaotong led Yan, and the army of the two places took advantage of the victory to go south. All counties responded in succession, and the military front could not be stopped.

古文：袁车骑引军东向，其意未可量也。窃为将军危之！ 
现代文：袁绍又率军向东移动，意图不可估量，我们为将军担心。 
English: Yuan Shao has once again led his army eastward, and his intentions are incalculable. We are worried about the general.

古文：馥惧，曰： 然则为之奈何？ 谌曰： 君自料宽仁容众为天下所附，孰与袁氏？ 
现代文：韩心中恐慌，问他们说： 既然这样，那么该怎么办呢？ 荀谌说： 您自己判断一下，宽厚仁义，能为天下豪杰所归附，比得上袁绍吗？ 韩说： 比不上。 
English: Han panicked in his heart and asked them, "Since it's like this, what should we do?" Zou said, "Judge for yourself, if you can attribute to the world's great heroes, generosity, kindness and justice, is it comparable to Yuan Shao?" Han said, "It's not comparable."

古文：馥曰： 不如也。  监危吐决，智勇过人，又孰与袁氏？ 
现代文：荀谌又问： 那么，临危不乱，遇事果断，智勇过人，比得上袁绍吗？ 
English: Zou also asked: So, do you have the ability to stand firm in the face of danger, be decisive in the face of adversity, and have superior wisdom and courage compared to Yuan Shao?

古文：馥曰： 不如也。 
现代文：韩说： 比不上。 
English: Han Yan replied: I am not as good as him.

古文：谌曰： 袁氏一时之杰，将军资三不如之势，久处其上，彼必不为将军下也。
现代文：荀谌再问： 数世以来，广布恩德，使天下家家受惠，比得上袁绍吗？ 韩说： 比不上。 荀谌说： 袁绍是这一时代的人中豪杰，将军以三方面都不如他的条件，却又长期在他之上，他必然不会屈居将军之下。
English: Zou asked again: Since several generations ago, Guang Bunde has made the whole world benefit, is it comparable to Yuan Shao? Han said: It is incomparable. Zou said: Yuan Shao is a hero in this era. The general is not as good as him in three aspects, but he has been above him for a long time. He will certainly not bow to the general.

古文：夫冀州，天下之重资也，彼若与公孙瓚并力取之，危亡可立而待也。
现代文：冀州是天下物产丰富的重要地区，他要是与公孙瓒合力夺取冀州，将军立刻就会陷入危亡的困境。
English: Jizhou is an important region rich in natural resources. If he and Gongsun Rong worked together to seize Jizhou, the general would immediately be in a dangerous predicament.

古文：夫袁氏，将军之旧，且为同盟，当今之计，若举冀州以让袁氏，彼必厚德将军，瓚亦不能与之争矣。
现代文：袁绍是将军的旧交，又曾结盟共讨董卓，现在办法是，如果把冀州让给袁绍，他必然感谢您的厚德，而公孙瓒也无力与他来争。
English: Yuan Shao is an old friend of the general, and has allied with Dong Zhuo to discuss the issue. Now the solution is that if you give Jizhou to Yuan Shao, he will certainly thank you for your virtues, and Gongsun Yao will not be able to compete with him.

古文：是将军有让贤之名，而身安于泰山也。 
现代文：这样，将军便有让贤的美名，而自身则比泰山还要安稳。 
English: In this way, the general will have the reputation of being virtuous, while he himself will be more stable than Mount Tai.

古文：馥性恇怯，因然其计。
现代文：韩性情怯懦，于是同意了他们的计策。
English: South Korea, being cowardly, agreed to their scheme.

古文：馥长史耿武、别驾闵纯、治中李历闻而谏曰： 冀州带甲百万，谷支十年。
现代文：韩的长史耿武、别驾闵纯、治中李历得到消息，劝阻韩说： 冀州地区可以集结起百万大军，所存粮食够吃十年。
English: Han's long history of Gengwu, Don't drive away the pure, and rule the middle Li Li got the news to dissuade Han, saying: Jizhou region can assemble a million-strong army, and the stored grain is enough to eat for ten years.

古文：袁绍孤客穷军，仰我鼻息，譬如婴儿在股掌之上，绝其哺乳，立可饿杀，奈何欲以州与之！ 
现代文：袁绍只是一支孤单而缺乏给养的客军，仰仗我们的鼻息，好像怀抱中的婴儿，不能他奶吃，立刻就会饿死，为什么要把冀州交给他呢！ 
English: Yuan Shao is just a lonely and poorly fed guest army, relying on our snuff, like a baby in his arms. If he can't eat his milk, he will immediately starve to death. Why should we hand over Jizhou to him?

古文：馥曰： 吾袁氏故吏，且才不如本初，度德而让，古人所贵，诸君独何病焉！ 
现代文：韩说： 我本来是袁家的老部下，才干也不如袁绍，自知能力不足而让贤，是古人所称赞的行为，你们为什么偏要反对呢？ 
English: Han said, "I used to be an old subordinate of the Yuan family, and my ability is not as good as that of Yuan Shao. Knowing one's own inadequacy and giving way to a superior is an act praised by the ancients. Why do you want to oppose it?

古文：先是，馥从事赵浮、程涣将强弩万张屯孟津，闻之，率兵驰还。
现代文：先前，韩派从事赵浮、程涣率领一万名弓弩手驻守孟泽，他们听到这个消息，率军火速赶回冀州。
English: Previously, 10,000 archers of the Han faction, led by Zhao Fu and Cheng Yu, had been stationed in Mengze. Hearing this news, they hurried back to Jizhou with their troops.

古文：时绍在朝歌清水，浮等从后来，船数百艘，众万馀人，整兵鼓，夜过绍营，绍甚恶之。
现代文：当时袁绍在朝歌清水口，赵浮等从后赶来，有战船数百艘，兵众一万余人，军容鼓声整齐，在夜里经过袁绍的军营，袁绍十分厌恶。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao was in Chaoga Chingshuikou, and Zhao Fu and others arrived later. There were hundreds of warships, more than 10,000 soldiers, and the military drums were neat. They passed Yuan Shao's military camp at night, and Yuan Shao was very disgusted.

古文：浮等到，谓馥曰： 袁本初军无头粮，各已离散，虽有张杨、于扶罗新附，未肯为用，不足敌也。
现代文：赵浮等赶到冀州，对韩说： 袁绍军中没有一斗粮食，已经各自离散，虽然有张杨、於扶罗等新近归附，但不会为他效力，不足以为敌。
English: Zhao Fu and others rushed to Jizhou and said to Han: Yuan Shao's army did not have a single barrel of grain and had already dispersed. Although Zhang Yang and Fu Luo had recently been annexed, they would not work for him and were not enough for the enemy.

古文：小从事等请以见兵拒之，旬日之间，必土崩瓦解。
现代文：我们这几个小从事，愿领现有部队抵御他，不过十天，袁军必然土崩瓦解。
English: These few of us are willing to lead the existing troops to resist him, but in ten days, Yuan's army will inevitably collapse.

古文：明将军但当开阁高枕，何忧何惧！ 
现代文：将军您只管打开房门，放心睡觉，既不用忧虑，也不必害怕！ 
English: General, all you have to do is open the door and go to sleep without any worries or fear!

古文：馥又不听，乃避位，出居中常侍赵忠故舍，遣子送印绶以让绍。
现代文：韩仍不采纳，于是离开冀州牧官位，从官府中迁出，在中常侍赵忠的旧宪居住，派儿子把印绶送给袁绍，让出冀州。
English: Han still did not accept, so he left the pastoral post of Jizhou, moved out of the government office, lived in the old constitutional residence of Zhao Zhong, and sent his son to give the seal to Yuan Shao and leave Jizhou.

古文：绍将至，从事十人争弃馥去，独耿武、闵纯杖刀拒之，不能禁，乃止；绍皆杀之。
现代文：袁绍将要到达邺城，韩部下的十名从事争先恐后地离开韩，唯独耿武、闵纯挥刀阻拦，但禁止不了，只好作罢。
English: Yuan Shao was about to arrive in Lucheng, and the ten men under Han's command were scrambling to leave Korea. Only Geng Wu and Xuchun waved their swords to stop him, but they couldn't stop him, so they had to give up.

古文：绍遂领冀州牧，承制以馥为奋威将军，而无所将御，亦无官属。
现代文：袁绍来到后，将耿武、闵纯二人处死。袁绍于是兼任冀州牧，以皇帝的名义任命韩为奋威将军，但既没有兵，也没有官属。
English: When Yuan Shao arrived, he had Geng Wu and Xizhun executed. Yuan Shao then also served as the governor of Jizhou, and in the name of the emperor appointed Han as the general of Fenwei, but he had neither soldiers nor officials.

古文：绍以广平沮授为奋武将军，使监护诸将，宠遇甚厚。
现代文：袁绍任命广平人沮授为奋武将军，派他临护所有将领，对他十分宠信。
English: Yuan Shao appointed Guangping to be the General of Fenwu, and sent him to protect all generals. He was very fond of him.

古文：魏郡审配、巨鹿田丰并以正直不得志于韩馥，绍以丰为别驾，配为治中，及南阳许攸、逢纪、颍川荀谌皆为谋主。
现代文：魏郡人审配、巨鹿人田丰都因为人正直，不为韩欣赏，袁绍任命田丰为别驾，审配为治中，与南阳人许攸、逢纪、颖川人荀谌都成为袁绍的主要谋士。
English: The Wei County people's selection committee and the Koga people's Tian Feng were not appreciated by South Korea because of their honesty. Yuan Shao appointed Tian Feng as a special driver and the selection committee as a middle-ranking official, and the Nanyang people Xu You, Feng Ji, and Yingchuan people all became the main advisers of Yuan Shao.

古文：绍以河内硃汉为都官从事。
现代文：袁绍任命河内人朱汉为都官从事。
English: Yuan Shao appointed Zhu Han, a native of Hanoi, as the official of the capital.

古文：汉先为韩馥所不礼，且欲徼迎绍意，擅发兵围守馥第，拔刃登屋，馥走上楼，收得馥大儿，槌折两脚。
现代文：朱汉原先曾被韩轻慢，这时又想迎合袁绍的心意，便擅自发兵包围韩的住宅，拔刀登屋。韩逃上楼去，朱汉捉到韩的大儿子，将他的两只脚打断。
English: Zhu Han, who had previously been slighted by Han, now wanted to pander to Yuan Shao's wishes, so he sent troops to surround Han's house without authorization and entered the house with a sword drawn. Han fled upstairs, and Zhu Han caught Han's eldest son and broke both of his legs.

古文：绍立收汉，杀之。
现代文：袁绍立即逮捕朱汉，将他处死。
English: Yuan Shao immediately arrested Zhu Han and put him to death.

古文：馥犹忧怖，从绍索去，往依张邈。
现代文：但是韩仍然优虑惊恐，请求袁绍让他离去，袁绍同意，于是韩就去投奔陈留郡太守张邈。
English: However, Han was still worried and asked Yuan Shao to let him leave. Yuan Shao agreed, so Han went to Chenliu County to join Zhang Ye, the governor of Chenliu County.

古文：后绍遣使诣邈，有所计议，与邈耳语；馥在坐上，谓为见图，无何，起至溷，以书刀自杀。
现代文：后来，袁绍派使者去见张邈，商议机密时，使者在张邈耳边悄声细语。韩当时在座，以为是在算计自己。过了一会儿，他起身走进厕所，用刮削简牍的书刀自杀。
English: Later, Yuan Shao sent an envoy to see Zhang Ye. When discussing confidential matters, the envoy whispered in Zhang Ye's ear. Han was present at the time and thought he was calculating. After a while, he got up and went into the toilet and killed himself with a book cutter.

古文：鲍信谓曹操曰： 袁绍为盟主，因权夺利，将自生乱，是复有一卓也。
现代文：鲍信对曹操说： 袁绍身为盟主，却利用职权，专谋私利，将自行生乱，成为第二个董卓。
English: Bao Xin said to Cao Cao: Yuan Shao, as the leader of the alliance, has used his authority to seek personal gain, and will create turmoil on his own to become the second chairman of the board.

古文：若抑之，则力不能制，只以遘难。
现代文：如果抑制他，我们没有力量，只会树敌。
English: If we restrain him, we have no power and will only make enemies.

古文：且可规大河之南以待其变。 
现代文：我们可暂且先去黄河以南发展势力，等待形势变化。 
English: We can temporarily go to the south of the Yellow River to develop our power and wait for the situation to change.

古文：搡善之。
现代文：曹操十分同意。
English: Cao Cao fully agreed.

古文：会黑山、于毒、白绕、眭固等十馀万众人略东郡，王肱不能御。
现代文：正好黑山、于毒、白绕、眭固等下余万人进攻东郡，太守王肱不能抵御。
English: At the same time, more than ten thousand people attacked Dong County under the command of Black Mountain, Yu Zu, Bai Wuan, and Tong Gu, and the governor Wang Xi could not resist.

古文：曹操引兵入东郡，击白绕于濮阳，破之。
现代文：曹操就率军进入东郡，在濮阳进攻白绕，将白绕打败。
English: Cao Cao then led his army into Dong County and attacked Baiyuan in Shenyang, defeating Baiyuan.

古文：袁绍因表操为东郡太守，治东武阳。
现代文：于是，袁绍便向朝廷举荐曹操为东郡太守，曹操将郡府设在东武阳。
English: As a result, Yuan Shao recommended to the imperial court that Cao Cao be made the governor of Dong County, and Cao Cao set up the county seat in Dongwuyang.

古文：南单于劫张杨以叛袁绍，屯于黎阳。
现代文：南匈奴单于於抚罗动持张杨，背叛了袁绍，驻军黎阳。
English: The Southern Xiongnu alone moved Zhang Yang in Fula, betrayed Yuan Shao, and garrisoned Liyang.

古文：董卓以杨为建义将军、河内太守。
现代文：董卓任命张杨为建义将军，河内郡太守。
English: Dong Zhuo appointed Zhang Yang as General Jianyi, the governor of Hanoi County.

古文：太史望气，言当有大臣戮死者。
现代文：太史观察天象后声称，朝中大臣中将有人被杀死。
English: The Grand Historian, in charge of astronomy and calendars, observed the celestial phenomenon and reported that there should be a minister to be killed by Dong Zhuo.

古文：董卓使人诬卫尉张温与袁术交通，冬，十月，壬戌，笞杀温于市以应之。
现代文：董卓借机派人诬告卫尉张温与袁术秘密联络。冬季，十月，壬戌，将张温在闹市中笞打而死，以应天象。
English: Dong Zhuo took the opportunity to send someone to falsely accuse the guard Zhang Wen of secretly communicating with Yuan Shu. In the winter, in October, he beat Zhang Wen to death in the middle of the city, in response to the celestial elephant.

古文：青州黄巾寇勃海，众三十万，欲与黑山合。
现代文：青州黄巾军进攻勃海，部众达三十万人，准备与黑山军会合。
English: The Qingzhou Yellow Turban Army attacked the Bohai Sea with 300,000 soldiers, preparing to join the Montenegrin Army.

古文：公孙瓚率步骑二万人逆击于东光南，大破之，斩首三万馀级。
现代文：公孙瓒率领步、骑兵二万人在东光县以南迎击，大破黄巾军，斩杀三万余人。
English: Led by Gongsun Qian, 20,000 cavalrymen attacked south of Dongguang County, defeating the Yellow Turban Army and killing more than 30,000 people.

古文：贼弃其辎重，奔走渡河。
现代文：黄巾军丢弃辎重，奔逃渡过黄河。
English: The Yellow Turban Army abandoned their baggage and fled across the Yellow River.

古文：瓚因其半济薄之，贼复大破，死者数万，流血丹水，收得生口七万馀人，车甲财物不可胜算，威名大震。
现代文：公孙瓒在黄巾军流过一半时逼近，黄巾军再次大败，死了数万人，河水被血染成了红色。被浮虏的有七万余人，车辆、甲胄和财物不计其数。公孙瓒威名大震。
English: Gongsun Xuan approached the Yellow Turban Army when it was halfway through its flow. The Yellow Turban Army was once again defeated, tens of thousands of people died, and the river was dyed red with blood. More than seventy thousand people were captured, and vehicles, armor, and property were countless. Gongsun Xuanwei suffered a great shock.

古文：刘虞子和为侍中，帝思东归，使和伪逃董卓，潜出武关诣虞，令将兵来迎。
现代文：刘虞的儿子刘和在宫廷担任侍中，献帝想要东归洛阳，便命刘和假装逃避董卓，秘密地经武关去见刘虞，要刘虞出兵去接献帝。
English: Liu Yu's son Liu He served as an attendant at the court. When Emperor Xianlong wanted to return to Luoyang, he ordered Liu He to pretend to escape from Dong Zhuo, secretly pass through Wuguan to meet Liu Yu, and ask Liu Yu to send troops to meet Emperor Xianlong.

古文：和至南阳，袁术利虞为援，留和不遣，许兵至俱西，令和为书与虞。
现代文：刘和走到南阳时，袁术企图利用刘虞为外援，便扣住刘和，应许在刘虞兵到之后一起西行，命刘和给刘虞写信。
English: When Liu He went to Nanyang, Yuan Shou tried to use Liu Yu as foreign aid, so he detained Liu He, promised to go west together after Liu Yu's soldiers arrived, and ordered Liu He to write to Liu Yu.

古文：虞得书，遣数千骑诣和。
现代文：刘虞接到信后，便派数千名骑兵去见刘和。
English: After Liu Yu received the letter, he sent thousands of cavalry to meet Liu He.

古文：公孙瓚知术有异志，止之，虞不听。
现代文：公孙瓒知道袁术素有称帝的野心，就劝阻刘虞，但是刘虞不听。
English: Knowing that Yuan Shuxu had the ambition to be emperor, Gongsun Yao tried to dissuade Liu Yu, but Liu Yu would not listen.

古文：瓚恐术闻而怨之，亦遣其从弟越将千骑诣术。而阴教术执和，夺其兵，由是虞、瓚有隙。
现代文：公孙瓒害怕袁术知道此事后会怨恨自己，也派堂弟分孙越率领一千名骑兵去见袁术，并暗中挑唆袁术扣留刘和，吞并刘虞派去的队伍。
English: Gongsun Yao was afraid that Yuan Shuxu would resent him if he knew about this. He also sent his cousin, Duansun Yue, to meet Yuan Shuxu with a thousand cavalry, and secretly instigated Yuan Shuxu to detain Liu He and absorb the team sent by Liu Yu.

古文：和逃术来北，复为袁绍所留。
现代文：从此刘虞与公孙瓒有了仇怨。刘和从袁术处逃走北上，又被袁绍留住不放。
English: From then on, Liu Yu and Gongsun Yao had a grudge against each other. Liu He fled north from Yuan Shuxi's office, but was detained by Yuan Shao.

古文：是时关东州、郡务相兼并以自强大，袁绍、袁术亦自相离贰。
现代文：这时，函谷关以东的各州、郡长官只顾相互吞并，扩充自己的势力，袁绍、袁术兄弟自身也离心离德。
English: At this time, the governors of the states and counties to the east of the Hakodate Pass were only interested in annexing each other and expanding their power. Yuan Shao and Yuan Shou themselves also left Germany.

古文：术遣孙坚击董卓未返，绍以会稽周昂为豫州刺史，袭夺坚阳城。
现代文：袁术派孙坚前去攻打董卓，孙坚尚未返回，袁绍就任命会稽人周昂为豫州刺史，偷袭并攻占孙坚的根据地阳城。
English: Yuan Shuxu sent Sun Jian to attack Dong Zhuo. Before Sun Jian could return, Yuan Shao appointed Zhou Ang, the inspector of the commission, as the historian of Yuzhou, and attacked and captured Sun Jian's base, Yangcheng.

古文：坚叹曰： 同举义兵，将救社稷，逆贼垂破而各若此，吾当谁与戮力乎！ 
现代文：孙坚叹息道： 大家共同为大义而起兵，想要拯救国家，现在逆贼董卓就要被打败了，但我们却各自如此相待，我能与谁一起合力奋战呢！ 
English: Sun Jian sighed, "We all raised an army for the greater good and wanted to save the country. Now the traitor Dong Zhuo is about to be defeated, but we are treating each other like this. Who can I fight with?

古文：引兵击昂，走之。
现代文：孙坚率军还击周昂，周昂败退。
English: Sun Jian led the army to fight back against Zhou Ang, and Zhou Ang was defeated.

古文：袁术遣公孙越助坚攻昂，越为流矢所中死。
现代文：袁术派公孙越帮助孙紧进攻周昂，公孙越被流箭射死。
English: Yuan sent Gongsun Yue to help Sun Ting attack Zhou An. Gongsun Yue was killed by a stray arrow.

古文：公孙瓚怒曰： 余弟死，祸起于绍。 
现代文：公孙瓒知道后大怒，说： 我弟弟的死，祸首就是袁绍。 
English: After learning this, Gongsun Yao became very angry and said, "My brother's death was caused by Yuan Shao.

古文：遂出军屯磐河，上疏数绍罪恶，进兵攻绍。
现代文：于是他率军驻扎磬河，上书朝廷，历数袁绍所犯的罪恶，然后进军攻击袁绍。
English: So he stationed his army in Luohe, sent a letter to the imperial court, enumerated the crimes committed by Yuan Shao, and then marched to attack Yuan Shao.

古文：冀州诸城多畔绍从瓚。
现代文：冀州下属各城多数背叛袁绍而响应公孙瓒。
English: Most of the cities under Jizhou betrayed Yuan Shao and responded to Gongsun Yao.

古文：绍惧，以所佩勃海太守印绶授瓚从弟范，遣之郡，而范遂背绍，领勃海兵以助瓚。
现代文：袁绍感到恐慌，便把自己所佩带的勃海太守印绶授予公孙瓒的堂弟公孙范，派他前往勃海郡出任太守，以求和解。
English: Yuan Shao felt panicked, so he gave Gongsun Fan, Gongsun Yao's cousin, the imperial seal of the Bohai Empress Dowager, which he was wearing, and sent him to Bohai County to serve as Empress Dowager in order to seek reconciliation.

古文：瓚乃自署其将帅严纲为冀州刺史，田楷为青州刺史，单经为兗州刺史。又悉改置郡、县守、令。
现代文：然而，公孙范随即便背叛了袁绍，率领勃海郡的军队，前去协助公孙瓒。于是公孙瓒自行任命部将严纲为冀州刺史，田楷为青州刺史，单经为兖州刺史，并全部更换了各郡、县的长官。
English: However, Gongsun Fan then betrayed Yuan Shao and led the troops of Bohai County to assist Gongsun Yao. Therefore, Gongsun Yao himself appointed General Yan Gang as the governor of Jizhou, Tian Kai as the governor of Qingzhou, and Shan Jing as the governor of Zhangzhou, and replaced all the governors of counties and counties.

古文：初，涿郡刘备，中山靖王之后也。
现代文：当初西汉中山靖王刘胜的后裔、涿郡人刘备，幼年丧父，家境贫苦，与母亲一起靠贩卖草鞋为生。
English: Originally, Liu Bei, a descendant of Liu Sheng, the King of the Western Han Dynasty, lost his father at a young age, and his family was poor. Together with his mother, he made a living by selling straw sandals.

古文：少孤贫，与母以贩履为业，长七尺五寸，垂手下膝，顾自见其耳；有大志，少语言，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：刘备身高七尺五寸，双手下垂时能够超过膝盖，耳朵很大，连自己的眼睛都能看得到。他胸怀大志，不多说话，喜怒不形于色。
English: Liu Bei is seven feet and five inches tall. When his hands hang down, they can exceed his knees. His ears are so big that he can even see his own eyes. He is ambitious, doesn't talk much, and his emotions are all over the place.

古文：尝与公孙瓚同师事卢植，由是往依瓚。
现代文：他因曾经与公孙瓒一起在卢植门下学习儒家经义，所以便投靠公孙瓒。
English: Because he had studied Confucianism under Lu Zhi together with Gongsun Rong, he became a disciple of Gongsun Rong.

古文：瓚使备与田楷徇青州有功，因以为平原相。
现代文：公孙瓒派他与田楷夺取青州，建立了战功，因此被任命为平原国相。
English: Gongsun Qian sent him and Tian Kai to seize Qingzhou, establishing a war record, so he was appointed Minister of the Plains.

古文：备少与河东关羽、涿郡张飞相友善；以羽、飞为别部司马，分统部曲。
现代文：刘备年轻时与河东人关羽、涿郡人张飞交情深厚，于是委派他们两人为别部司马，分别统领部队。
English: When Liu Bei was young, he had a deep friendship with Guan Yu from the east of the river and Zhang Fei Rong from Min County. Therefore, he appointed the two of them to be the second-in-command and to lead the troops separately.

古文：备与二人寝则同床，恩若兄弟，而稠人广坐，侍立终日，随备周旋，不避艰险。
现代文：他与这两人同榻而眠，情同手足，但是在大庭广众之中，关羽和张飞整日站在刘备身边侍卫。他们跟随刘备应付周旋，不避艰险。
English: He sleeps in the same bed with the two of them, and they are like brothers and sisters, but in the middle of the large crowd, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei stand guard around Liu Bei all day. They follow Liu Bei to deal with the situation, and do not avoid difficulties.

古文：常山赵云为本郡将吏兵诣公孙瓚，瓚曰： 闻贵州人皆愿袁氏，君何独迷而能反乎？ 
现代文：常山人赵云率领本郡的队伍前去投奔公孙瓒，公孙瓒问他说： 听说你们冀州人都愿归顺袁绍，怎么唯独你能迷途知返呢？ 
English: Zhao Yun, a resident of Changshan, led the county's team to go to Gongsunye. Gongsunye asked him, "I heard that all of you in Jizhou are willing to submit to Yuan Shao. How is it that you are the only one who can find your way back?

古文：云曰： 天下讻讠凶，未知孰是，民有倒县之厄，鄙州论议，从仁政所在，不为忽袁公，私明将军也。 
现代文：赵云答道： 天下大乱，不知道谁是能够拯救大难的人。百姓遭受的痛苦，就像是被倒吊起来一样。我们冀州的百姓，只是向往仁政，并不是轻视袁绍而亲附将军。 
English: Zhao Yun replied: The world is in great turmoil, and we don't know who can save the people in great difficulties. The suffering of the people is like being hung upside down. We, the people of Jizhou, only yearn for benevolent government, and do not despise Yuan Shao but are close to the general.

古文：刘备见而奇之，深加接纳，云遂从备至平原，为备主骑兵。
现代文：刘备见到赵云后，认为他胆识出众，便用心交结。于是赵云就随刘备到平原国，为他统领骑兵。
English: After Liu Bei saw Zhao Yun, he thought that he was courageous and outstanding, so he had a heart-to-heart talk with him. So Zhao Yun followed Liu Bei to the plain country to lead the cavalry for him.

古文：初，袁术之得南阳，户口数百万，而术奢淫肆欲，征敛无度，百姓苦之，稍稍离散。
现代文：当初，袁术占领南阳时，有户口数百万，但他骄奢淫逸，征收赋税没有限度，百姓困苦，逐渐外逃。
English: At first, when Yuan Shuxu occupied Nanyang, he had millions of hukou, but he was arrogant and extravagant, tax collection was unlimited, the people were poor and gradually fled.

古文：既与袁绍有隙，各立党援以相图谋。
现代文：他与袁绍结下怨仇后，两人自树立党羽，寻求外援，互相算计。
English: After he and Yuan Shao settled their grudge, the two of them set up their own party, sought foreign aid, and calculated with each other.

古文：术结公孙瓚而绍连刘表，豪桀多附于绍。
现代文：袁术勾结公孙瓒，袁绍则联合刘表。当时，豪杰多数都归附袁绍。
English: Yuan Shuxu colluded with Gongsun Yao, and Yuan Shao allied with Liu Bei. At that time, most of the heroes were affiliated with Yuan Shao.

古文：术怒曰： 群竖不吾从而从吾家奴乎！ 
现代文：袁术愤怒地说： 这些小子不跟随我，反而跟随我们家的家奴吗！ 
English: Yuan Shuxu said angrily, "These boys don't follow me, but instead follow our family's slave!

古文：又与公孙瓚书曰： 绍非袁氏子。 
现代文：他还给公孙瓒写信说： 袁绍不是袁家的儿子。 
English: He also wrote a letter to Gongsun Yao, saying: Yuan Shao is not the son of the Yuan family.

古文：绍闻大怒。
现代文：袁绍听到后大怒。
English: Yuan Shao was furious when he heard this.

古文：术使孙坚击刘表，表遣其将黄祖逆战于樊、邓之间，坚击破之，遂围襄阳。
现代文：袁术派孙坚去攻击荆州刺史刘表，刘表派部将黄祖在樊城和邓县一带迎战。孙坚打败黄祖，于是围困襄阳。
English: Yuan Shuxu sent Sun Jian to attack Liu Bei, the governor of Jing Province. Liu Bei sent Huang Zu to fight against Huang Zu in the areas of Lucheng and Deng County. Sun Jian defeated Huang Zu and besieged Xiangyang.

古文：表夜遣黄祖潜出发兵，祖将兵欲还，坚逆与战，祖败走，窜岘山中。
现代文：刘表派黄祖乘夜偷偷出城，前去调集各郡的授军，黄祖率军想要返回襄阳时，孙坚迎击，黄祖败退，逃入岘山。
English: Liu He sent Huang Zu to sneak out of the city at night and go to gather the troops from all counties. When Huang Zu and his army wanted to return to Xiangyang, Sun Jian counterattacked. Huang Zu was defeated and fled to Lushan.

古文：坚乘胜夜追祖，祖部兵从竹木间暗射坚，杀之。
现代文：孙坚乘胜连夜追赶，黄祖的部曲潜伏在竹林树丛之中，用暗箭将孙坚射死。
English: Sun Jian chased after Sheng overnight. Huang Zu's subordinates lurked among the bamboo groves and shot Sun Jian to death with hidden arrows.

古文：坚所举孝廉长沙桓阶诣表坚丧，表义而许之。
现代文：孙坚生前推荐的孝廉长沙人桓阶晋见刘表，请求他归还孙坚的尸体安葬。
English: Huanfa Jin, a filial son of Changsha who was recommended by Sun Jian before his death, saw Liu Biao and asked him to return Sun Jian's body for burial.

古文：坚兄子贲率其士众就袁术，术复表贲为豫州刺史。
现代文：刘表为他的义举所感动，表示同意发还。孙坚哥哥的儿子孙贲率领孙坚的部队投靠袁术。袁术又上表推荐孙贲担任豫州刺史。
English: Liu Biao was moved by his act of charity and agreed to send him back. Sun Jian's elder brother's son, Sun Qian, led Sun Qian's troops to support Yuan Shou. Yuan Shou also recommended Sun Qian to serve as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：术由是不能胜表。
现代文：从此以后，袁术不再能战胜刘表。
English: From then on, Yuan Shuxu was no longer able to defeat Liu Biao.

古文：初，董卓入关，留硃俊守雒阳，而俊潜与山东诸将通谋，惧为卓所袭，出奔荆州。
现代文：当初，董卓入函谷关时，留朱俊镇守洛阳。而朱俊暗中与山东地区的将领们联络，他怕董卓发觉后会出兵袭击，就逃到荆州。
English: At first, when Dong Zhuo entered Hanzhong Pass, he left Zhu Jun to guard Luoyang. Zhu Jun secretly contacted the generals in Shandong. He was afraid that if Dong Zhuo found out, he would send troops to attack, so he fled to Jingzhou.

古文：卓以弘农杨懿为河南尹；俊复引兵还雒，击懿，走之。
现代文：董卓任命弘农人杨懿为河南尹，朱俊又率军返回洛阳，进攻杨懿，杨懿败逃。
English: Dong Zhuo appointed the Hong farmer Yang Kun as the Henan Yin, and Zhu Jun led the army back to Luoyang to attack Yang Kun, but Yang Kun was defeated and fled.

古文：俊以河南残破无所资，乃东屯中牟，移书州郡，请师讨卓。
现代文：朱俊见洛阳已残破不堪，便向东移驻中牟县。同时向各州、郡发出公文，号召各地派军讨伐董卓。
English: Zhu Jun thought that there was nothing to rely on from the Henan remnants, so he went to the garrison in Zhongmou and notified the prefecture and county to send a division to fight against Dong Zhuo.

古文：徐州刺史陶谦上俊行车骑将军，遣精兵三千助之，馀州郡亦有所给。
现代文：徐州刺史陶谦上表推荐朱俊代理车骑将军，并派三千名精兵援助朱俊，其他州、郡也纷纷响应。
English: Zhu Jun was recommended to be the deputy chariot and cavalry general by the Xuzhou governor, Tao Qian, and 3,000 elite soldiers were sent to help Zhu Jun. Other states and counties also responded.

古文：谦，丹杨人。朝廷以黄巾寇乱徐州，用谦为刺史。
现代文：陶谦是丹阳人，朝廷因黄巾军侵扰徐州，便任命他为刺史。
English: Tao Qian was from Danyang. Because the Yellow Turban Army invaded Xuzhou, the imperial court appointed him as the chief historian.

古文：谦至，击黄巾，大破走之，州境晏然。
现代文：陶谦到职之后，大破黄巾军，将其逐出，恢复了徐州境内的秩序。
English: After Tao Qian took office, he defeated the Yellow Turban Army, drove them out, and restored order in Xuzhou.

古文：刘焉在益州阴图异计。
现代文：刘焉在益州暗中策划独立。
English: Liu Yan is secretly plotting independence in Yizhou.

古文：沛人张鲁，自祖父陵以来世为五斗米道，客居于蜀。
现代文：沛国人张鲁从他祖父张陵创立五斗米道以来，世代信奉，迁到蜀地居住。
English: Zhang Lu, a native of Pei Province, has been a believer for generations since his grandfather Zhang Ling founded the Wudu Bead Tao, and moved to Shu to live.

古文：鲁母以鬼道常往来焉家，焉乃以鲁为督义司马，以张脩为别部司马，与合兵掩杀汉中太守苏固，断绝斜谷阁，杀害汉使。
现代文：张鲁的母亲因会神秘的道术，经常出入刘焉家中，于是刘焉任命张鲁为督义司马，张为别部司马，派两人联合率兵攻杀汉中郡太守苏固，并封锁了益州到长安的通道斜谷阁，截杀朝廷派来的使臣。
English: Zhang Lu's mother often visited Liu Yan's home due to her knowledge of mysterious Taoism, so Liu Yan appointed Zhang Lu as the inspector of Yixi Sima and Zhang as the other Sima, sent the two men to jointly lead the troops to attack and kill Sugu, the governor of Hanzhong County, and blocked the passage from Yizhou to Chang'an, and intercepted the envoys sent by the imperial court.

古文：焉上书言： 米贼断道，不得复通。 
现代文：刘焉上书朝廷，说： 米贼将道路阻断，不能再与朝廷联系。 
English: Liu Yan wrote to the imperial court, saying: "The American thieves have blocked the road, and we can no longer contact the imperial court.

古文：又托他事杀州中豪强王咸、李权等十馀人，以立威刑。
现代文：又找借口杀死州中豪强王咸、李权等十余人，以建立型威。
English: He also found an excuse to kill more than ten people, such as Wang Xian and Li Quan, in order to establish his authority.

古文：犍为太守任岐及校尉贾龙由此起兵攻焉，焉击杀岐、龙。
现代文：犍为郡太守任岐与校尉贾龙因此起兵攻打刘焉，刘焉迎击，杀死任岐、机龙。
English: As a result, Renqi, the county's deputy governor, and Jialong, the school's captain, raised an army to attack Liu Yan. Liu Yan counterattacked and killed Renqi and Qiaolong.

古文：焉意渐盛，作乘舆车具千馀乘，刘表上 焉有似子夏在西河疑圣人 之论。
现代文：刘焉渐渐得意忘形，制作了唯有皇帝才能使用的御车及其他车具一千多辆。荆州刺史刘表为此上书说： 刘焉在益州处处仿效皇帝，就像子夏在西河模仿孔圣人一样。 
English: Liu Yan gradually lost his self-confidence and made more than a thousand cars and other vehicles that only the emperor could use. Jingzhou engraving history Liu table wrote a letter to this effect: Liu Yan imitated the emperor everywhere in Yizhou, just as Zixia imitated the sage Kong in the West River.

古文：时焉子范为左中郎将，诞为治书御史，璋为奉车都尉，皆从帝在长安，惟小子别部车马瑁素随焉；帝使璋晓喻焉，焉留璋不遣。
现代文：当时，刘焉的儿子刘范为左中郎将，刘诞为治书御史，刘璋为奉车都尉，都跟随献帝住在长安，只有小儿子别部司马刘瑁一直跟随在刘焉身边。
English: At that time, Liu Yan's son Liu Fan was the left-hand middle-ranking general, Liu Xing was the chief historian, and Liu Jun was the lieutenant of the imperial carriage. They all followed Emperor Xian to live in Chang'an. Only Liu Yan's youngest son, Liu Jun, the second secretary of the imperial household, always followed Liu Yan's side.

古文：公孙度威行海外，中国人士避乱者多归之，北海管宁、邴原、王烈皆往依焉。
现代文：献帝派刘璋到益州，向刘焉讲清道理，刘焉则将刘璋留下，不让他再回长安。公孙度的声威远传海外，中原地区人士为了躲避战乱纷纷归附他。北海人管宁、邴原和王烈都前往投奔。
English: Emperor Xian sent Liu Bei to Yizhou to clarify the truth to Liu Yan, but Liu Yan left Liu Bei behind and did not allow him to return to Chang'an. Gongsundu's fame spread far and wide overseas, and people in the Central Plains region flocked to him in order to escape the turmoil of war. The North Sea people, Guanning, Yuyuan and Wang Lie, all fled.

古文：宁少时与华歆为友，尝与歆共锄菜，见地有金，宁挥锄不顾，与瓦石无异，歆捉而掷之，人以是知其优劣。
现代文：管宁少年时与华歆是朋友，曾一起锄菜，看到地上有一块黄金，管宁继续挥锄不止，视黄金如同瓦砾，华歆却将黄金拾起后又扔掉。
English: When Guan Ning was a teenager, he was friends with Hua Wei. They used to pick vegetables together. When he saw a piece of gold on the ground, Guan Ning continued to wave it around, treating the gold like rubble. However, Hua Wei picked up the gold and then threw it away.

古文：邴原远行游学，八九年而归，师友以原不饮酒，会米肉送之，原曰： 本能饮酒，但以荒思废业，故断之耳。
现代文：人们从这件事上判断出他们二人的优劣。邴原曾到远方去游学，八九年后才返回家乡，老师和朋友们以为他不会喝酒，所以只拿来米和肉为他送行。邴原说： 我本来有酒量，只是因为怕荒废学业，才将酒戒掉。
English: People judge the merits and demerits of the two of them from this incident. Kajiwara once traveled to a faraway place to study, and only returned to his hometown eight or nine years later. His teachers and friends thought he couldn't drink, so they only brought him rice and meat to see him off. Kajiwara said, "I used to be able to drink, but I quit drinking because I was afraid of wasting my studies.

古文：今当远别，可一饮燕。 
现代文：如今就要与你们远别，可以喝一次。 
English: Now it's time to say goodbye. You can have a drink.

古文：于是共坐饮酒，终日不醉。
现代文：于是与众人坐在一起饮酒，喝了一天也没醉。
English: So I sat with the others and drank, and I didn't get drunk for a whole day.

古文：宁、原俱以操尚称，度虚馆以候之。
现代文：管宁、邴原都以节操高尚而闻名于世，公孙度听说他们来到辽东，便准备宾馆，迎候二人。
English: Both Guanning and Qianyuan are famous in the world for their high moral standards. When Gongsundu heard that they were coming to Liaodong, he prepared a hotel to welcome the two.

古文：宁既见度，乃庐于山谷。
现代文：管宁见过公孙度之后，就在山谷中修建小屋。
English: After Guan Ning met Gong Sundu, he built a hut in the valley.

古文：时避难者多居郡南，而宁独居北，示无还志，后渐来从之，旬月而成邑。
现代文：当时前来避难的人大多居住在郡城南郊，而唯独管宁住在北郊，表示他不想返回家乡。后来人们渐渐地在他的周围落户。
English: At that time, most of the people who came to seek refuge lived in the southern suburbs of the county seat, but Kanenaka, who lived in the northern suburbs, said he did not want to return to his hometown. Later, people gradually settled around him.

古文：宁每见度，语唯经典，不及世事；还山，专讲《诗》、《书》，习俎豆，非学者无见也。
现代文：不过一个月，就形成了村庄。管宁每次见到公孙度，只谈儒学经典，不涉及世事；回到山中，则专门讲授《诗经》、《尚书》，研习古代祭祀的礼仪，只会见学者，不见其他的人。
English: However, within a month, a village was formed. Every time Guan Ning saw Gong Sundu, he only talked about Confucian classics and did not involve himself in worldly affairs. When he returned to the mountains, he specifically taught the "Book of Songs" and "Song of Songs" and studied the etiquette of ancient rituals. He only met with scholars and no one else.

古文：由是度安其贤，民化其德。
现代文：因此，公孙度因管宁为人贤明而不再提防他，民间则受到他品德的感化。
English: Therefore, Gongsun Du was no longer wary of him because he was a wise man, and the people were influenced by his character.

古文：邴原性刚直，清议以格物，度已下心不安之。
现代文：邴原为人性情刚直，喜欢评价人物，抨击不合理的现象，从公孙度以下的各级官吏，都对他表示不满。
English: Gongyuan was a man with a straightforward nature, who liked to evaluate people and criticize unreasonable phenomena. Officials at all levels, from public servants to grandchildren, expressed their dissatisfaction with him.

古文：宁谓原曰： 潜龙以不见成德。
现代文：管宁对邴原说： 隐藏的龙，以不为人所见而成其德。
English: Guan Ning said to Yuyuan: "The hidden dragon's virtue lies in not being seen by people.

古文：言非其时，皆招祸之道也。 
现代文：不合时机而发表意见，都会招来灾祸。 他秘密教邴原逃回中原。
English: If he voiced his opinion at the wrong time, it would bring disaster. He secretly told Shihara to flee back to the Central Plains.

古文：密遣原逃归，度闻之，亦不复追也。王烈器业过人，少时名闻在原、宁之右。
现代文：公孙度听说后，也没有派人追赶。王烈器度宽宏，学业精深，年轻时名望在管宁、邴原之上。
English: After hearing about Gongsundu, he did not send anyone to chase him. Wang Laiyi was a magnanimous person with a deep knowledge of learning. When he was young, his reputation was higher than that of Guanning and Suyuan.

古文：善于教诱，乡里有盗牛者，主得之，盗请罪，曰： 刑戮是甘，乞不使王彦方知也！ 
现代文：他善于教诲，乡里有人偷牛，被牛的主人捉住，偷牛贼请求说： 甘愿受型被杀，只求不让王烈知道。 
English: He was good at teaching. In the countryside, someone stole a cow and was caught by the owner of the cow. The thief pleaded, "I'm willing to be killed, I just hope that Wang Lie doesn't find out."

古文：烈闻而使人谢之，遗布一端。
现代文：王烈听说后让人前去看他，并送给他一匹布。
English: When Wang Lie heard about this, people thanked him and sent him six-layered cloth.

古文：或问其故，烈曰： 盗惧吾闻其过，是有耻恶之心，既知耻恶，则善心将生，故与布以劝为善也。 
现代文：有人询问送布的原因，王烈说： 偷牛贼害怕我听到他的过失，表示他还有羞耻心。既然知道羞耻，就能够生出善心。我送给他布，就是鼓励他从善。 
English: When asked why he gave the cloth, Wang Lie said, "The cattle thief was afraid that I would hear about his wrongdoings, indicating that he still had a sense of shame. Since he knew shame, he was able to develop a good heart. I gave him the cloth to encourage him to be good."

古文：后有老父遗剑于路，行道一人见而守之。至暮，老父还，寻得剑，怪之，以事告烈，烈使推求，乃先盗牛者也。
现代文：后来，有一位老人将佩剑丢失在路上，一位行人看到后，便守在旁边，到了傍晚，老人回来，找到了丢失的剑，大为惊奇，便把这件事告诉王烈。王烈派人调查，原来守剑的人就是从前那个偷牛贼。
English: Later, an old man lost his sword on the road. When a passerby saw it, he stayed by. In the evening, the old man came back, found the lost sword, was very surprised, and told Wang Lei about it. Wang Lei sent someone to investigate. The original person who kept the sword was the former cattle thief.

古文：诸有争讼曲直将质之于烈，或至涂而反，或望庐而还，皆相推以直，不敢使烈闻之。
现代文：民间发生争执后，去请王烈裁决，有的才走到半路，有的只看到他的住宅，便纷纷退回去，向对方表示让步，而不愿让王烈知道他们有过纠纷。
English: After a civil dispute occurred, they went to ask Wang Liao to adjudicate. Some only got halfway, some only saw his house, and then they retreated one after another, making concessions to the other side, rather than letting Wang Liao know that they had a dispute.

古文：度欲以为长史，烈辞之，为商贾以自秽，乃免。
现代文：公孙度想任命王烈为长史，王烈推辞不受，而去经营商业来贬低自己，表示无意为官。
English: Wang Sundu wanted to appoint Wang Liao as his successor. Wang Liao did not accept the refusal, but went to run a business to belittle himself, saying that he had no intention of becoming an official.

古文：孝献皇帝乙初平三年
现代文：公孙度这才作罢。初平三年
English: It was not until the time of King Gongsundu that this practice was abandoned.

古文：春，正月，丁丑，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，丁丑，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Ding Chuxi, all is forgiven.

古文：董卓遣牛辅将兵屯陕，辅分遣校尉北地李傕、张掖郭汜、武威张济将步骑数万击破硃俊于中牟，因掠陈留、颍川诸县，所过杀虏无遗。
现代文：董卓派牛辅率军驻在陕县，牛辅分别派遣校尉北地人李、张掖人郭汜、武威人张济率领步、骑兵数万人袭击中牟，大败朱俊，并沿抢掠陈留、颖川两郡所属各县，所过之处，烧杀掳掠，人民几乎死尽。
English: Dong Zhuo sent Niu Fu and his army to be stationed in Shaanxi County. Niu Fu separately dispatched Lieutenants Li from the North, Guo Jun from Zhangye, and Zhang Ji from Wuwei to lead the way. Tens of thousands of cavalry attacked Zhongmou, defeated Zhu Jun, and plundered Chenliu and Yingchuan counties. Wherever they passed, they burned, killed, and plundered, and the people almost died.

古文：初，荀淑有孙曰彧，少有才名，何颙见而异之，曰： 王佐才也！ 
现代文：当初，荀淑的孙子荀，从小就有才华名望。何见到他大为惊异，说： 真是一个辅佐君王的人才！ 
English: At first, Myosuk's grandson Min, who had been talented and famous since childhood, was surprised to see him and said, "What a talent to be an aide to the king!"

古文：及天下乱，彧谓父老曰： 颍川四战之地，宜亟避之。 
现代文：及至天下大乱，荀对乡里父老说： 颖川地势平阔，四面受敌，应该尽早躲避。 
English: When the world was in turmoil, Zou said to the village elders: Yingchuan is a flat land, surrounded by enemies on all sides, you should avoid it as soon as possible.

古文：乡人多怀土不能去，彧独率宗族去依韩馥。
现代文：乡里人多依恋故土，舍不得离去。只有荀率领他的家族前去投奔韩。
English: Most of the villagers are attached to their homeland and are reluctant to leave. Only Hao led his family to go to South Korea.

古文：会袁绍已夺馥位，待彧以上宾之礼。
现代文：这时袁绍已经夺取了韩的地位，他用上宾之礼接待荀。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao had already seized the status of Han, and he received Zou with the honor of a guest.

古文：彧度绍终不能定大业，闻曹操有雄略，乃去绍从操。
现代文：荀认为袁绍最终不能成就大业，听说曹操有雄才大略，于是离开袁绍，前去投奔曹操。
English: Yao thought that Yuan Shao would not be able to achieve a great career in the end. He heard that Cao Cao had great talent, so he left Yuan Shao and went to Cao Cao.

古文：操与语，大悦，曰： 吾子房也！ 
现代文：曹操与他面谈之后，大为高兴，说： 这就是我的张良！ 
English: After the interview, Cao Cao was very pleased and said, "This is my Zhang Liang!"

古文：以为奋武司马。
现代文：于是任命他为奋武司马。
English: So he appointed him as his successor.

古文：其乡人留者，多为傕、汜等所杀。
现代文：那些留在颖川未走的乡人，多在这次劫难中被李、郭汜等杀害。
English: Those villagers who stayed in Yingchuan and did not leave were mostly killed by Li, Guo Wei and others in this disaster.

古文：袁绍自出拒公孙瓚，与瓚战于界桥南二十里。
现代文：袁绍亲自率军迎战公孙瓒，两军会战于界桥以南二十里处。
English: Yuan Shao personally led the army to meet Gongsun Yao, and the two armies fought twenty miles south of the bridge.

古文：瓚兵三万，其锋甚锐。
现代文：公孙瓒部下有三万人马，锐不可当。
English: Gongsun Yao's subordinates are 30,000 strong, which is a formidable force.

古文：绍令麹义领精兵八百先登，强弩千张夹承之。
现代文：袁绍命令义率领精兵八百人为先锋，并在左右两侧布置了一千张强弩。
English: Yuan Shao ordered Yi to lead eight hundred elite soldiers as the vanguard, and arranged a thousand strong shields on both sides.

古文：瓚轻其兵少，纵骑腾之。
现代文：公孙瓒轻视义兵少，命令骑兵冲阵。
English: Gongsun Yao despised the small number of volunteers and ordered the cavalry to charge.

古文：义兵伏楯下不动，未至十数步，一时同发，欢呼动地，瓚军大败。斩其所置冀州刺史严纲，获甲首千馀级。
现代文：义的士兵则用盾牌掩护身体，一动不动。等双方相距不到十几步时，两侧弓弩齐发，喊杀之声动地。公孙瓒军大败，他所任命的冀州刺史严纲被杀，死亡一千余人。
English: The soldiers of righteousness covered their bodies with shields and did not move. When the two sides were less than a dozen paces apart, the two sides fired their bows and arrows in unison, and the shouts of death were loud. Gongsun's army was defeated, and the Jizhou assassin Yan Gang, whom he had appointed, was killed, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：追至界桥，瓚敛兵还战，义复破之，遂到瓚营，拔其牙门，馀众皆走。
现代文：及至公孙瓒初次击败袁绍的军队后，告诉刘岱，让交出袁绍的家眷。
English: After Gongsun Yi defeated Yuan Shao's army for the first time, he told Liu Bei to hand over Yuan Shao's family members.

古文：初，兗州刺史刘岱与绍、瓚连和，绍令妻子居岱所，瓚亦遣从事范方将骑助岱。
现代文：同时另下命令给范方： 如果刘岱不交出袁绍的家眷，就率领骑兵返回。等我平定袁绍之后，再对刘岱用兵。 
English: At the same time, he issued another order to Fanfang: If Liu Bei does not hand over Yuan Shao's family members, he will lead the cavalry back. After I subdue Yuan Shao, I will use troops against Liu Bei.

古文：及瓚击破绍军，语岱令遣绍妻子，别敕范方： 若岱不遣绍家，将骑还！吾定绍，将加兵于岱。 
现代文：刘岱与部属商议对策，一连几天不能决定。后听说东郡人程昱足智多谋，便召他来征询意见。
English: Liu Yao and his subordinates discussed countermeasures and could not decide for several days in a row. Later, when he heard that Cheng Yao, a man from Dong County, was resourceful, he called him to solicit opinions.

古文：岱与官属议，连日不决，闻东郡程昱有智谋，召而问之，昱曰： 若弃绍近援而求瓚远助，此假人于越以救溺子之说也。夫公孙瓚非袁绍之敌也，今虽坏绍军，然终为绍所禽。 
现代文：程昱说： 舍弃冀州袁绍这个近援，而想得到幽州公孙瓒的远助，就好像到遥远的越地去请游泳能手来解救这里已快淹死的人一样，是毫无用处的。而且公孙瓒不是袁绍的对手，如今公孙瓒打败袁绍的军队，然而他紧终将被袁绍擒获。 
English: Cheng Yao said: To abandon the close support of Jizhou Yuan Shao and seek the distant help of Yuzhou Gongsun Yao is as useless as going to the distant Yue to ask a swimmer to rescue a drowning man. Moreover, Gongsun Yao is not Yuan Shao's rival. Now Gongsun Yao has defeated Yuan Shao's army, but he will eventually be captured by Yuan Shao.

古文：岱从之。
现代文：刘岱听从了他的意见。
English: Liu Ye obeyed his words.

古文：范方将其骑归，未至而瓚败。
现代文：范方率骑兵离开兖州，返回公孙瓒的大营，还未到达，公孙瓒便已经溃败。
English: Fan Fang's cavalry left Zhangzhou and returned to Gongsun Yao's camp, but before they arrived, Gongsun Yao was already defeated.

古文：曹操军顿丘，于毒等攻东武阳。
现代文：曹操驻军顿丘，于毒等进攻东武阳。
English: Cao Cao stationed troops in Dongqiu and attacked Dongbuyang with poison.

古文：操引兵西入山，攻毒等本屯。
现代文：曹操命令军队西行入山，前去攻击于毒等的营寨。
English: Cao Cao ordered the army to march west into the mountains to attack the encampment of Yu Yuxuan.

古文：诸将皆请救武阳。
现代文：部下将领全都请求援救东武阳。
English: His subordinate generals all requested the rescue of Dongwuyang.

古文：操曰： 使贼闻我西而还，武阳自解也，不过，我能败其本屯；虏不能拔武阳必矣。 
现代文：曹操说： 让叛匪听说我们西行，如果他们回来救援，那么东武阳的包围不救自解；如果他们不回来，那么我们能够攻下他们的营寨，而他们肯定不能攻下武阳。 于是率军出发。
English: Cao Cao said: Let the rebels hear that we are going west, if they come back to help, then the siege of East Wuyang will not be relieved; if they do not come back, then we can attack their camp, and they certainly cannot attack Wuyang.

古文：遂行。毒闻之，弃武阳还。
现代文：于毒听说曹军西行，便放弃东武阳，赶回来援救营寨。
English: When Yu Gan heard that Cao's army was heading west, he abandoned Dongwuyang and rushed back to rescue Yingzhu.

古文：操遂击眭固及匈奴于夫罗于内黄，皆大破之。
现代文：曹操乘势进军内黄，向眭固及南匈奴单于於扶罗发动进攻，大败这两支队伍。
English: Cao Cao took advantage of the situation and marched into Inner Huang, and launched an attack on Tonggu and Southern Xiongnu in Furuo, defeating the two teams.

古文：董卓以其弟旻为左将军，兄子璜为中军校尉，皆典兵事，宗族内外并列朝廷。卓侍妾怀抱中子皆封侯，弄以金紫。
现代文：董卓任命他的弟董为左将军，倒子董璜为中军校尉，都执掌兵权。他的宗族及亲戚都在朝中担任大官，就连董卓侍妾刚生下的儿子也都被封为侯爵，把侯爵用的金印和紫色绶带当作玩具。
English: Dong Zhuo appointed his younger brother, Dong, as the left general, and his son-in-law, Dong Jun, as the lieutenant of the Chinese army, both of whom wielded military power. His family and relatives all held high-ranking positions in the imperial court, and even the newborn son of Dong Zhuo's concubine was made a marquis, using the gold seal and purple ribbon used by the marquis as toys.

古文：卓车服僭拟天子，召呼三台，尚书以下皆自诣卓府启事。
现代文：董卓所乘坐的车辆和穿着的各种衣饰，都与皇帝的一样。他对尚书台、御史台、符节台发号施令，尚书以下的官员都要到他的太师府去汇报和请示。
English: Dong Zhuo rode in the same car and wore the same clothes as the emperor. He gave orders to Shang Shudai, Gu Shudai, and Fusetai. All officials below Shang Shudai had to report to his Taishifu for instructions.

古文：又筑坞于郿，高厚皆七丈，积谷为三十年储，自云： 事成，雄据天下；不成，守此足以毕老。 
现代文：他又在地修建了一个巨大的堡坞，墙高七丈，厚也有七丈，里面存了足够吃三十年的粮食。他对自己说： 大事告成，可以雄据天下；如果不成，守住这里也足以终老。 
English: He also built a huge dockyard on the land, the walls of which were seven stories high and seven stories thick, and in which he stored enough grain to eat for thirty years. He said to himself: If I succeed, I will be able to rule the world; if I fail, I will be able to hold on here forever.

古文：卓忍于诛杀，诸将言语有蹉跌者，便戮于前，人不聊生。
现代文：董卓性情残暴，随意杀人，部下将领言语稍有差错，就被当场处死，致使人人自危。
English: Dong Zhuo had a cruel disposition and killed people at will. If his subordinate generals made a slight mistake in their speech, they were executed on the spot, causing everyone to be in danger.

古文：司徒王允与司隶校尉黄琬、仆射士孙瑞、尚书杨瓚密谋诛卓。
现代文：司徒王允与司隶校尉黄琬、仆射士孙瑞、尚书杨瓒等密谋除掉董卓。
English: Wang Yun, the tutor, conspired with Huang Qi, the captain of the school, Sun Rui, the foot soldier, and Yang Qi, the secretary, to get rid of Dong Zhuo.

古文：中郎将吕布，便弓马，膂力过人，卓自以遇人无礼，行止常以布自卫，甚爱信之，誓为父子。
现代文：中郎将吕布精于骑射，力气超过常人。董卓知道自己待人寡恩无礼，害怕遭到暗害，无论去什么地方，都常常让吕布做自己的随从侍卫，对他十分宠信，发誓说情同父子。
English: Dong Zhuo knew that he was ungracious and rude to others, and was afraid of being assassinated. No matter where he went, he often had Lü Bu as his attendant and bodyguard. He was very fond of Lü Bu and swore that he felt the same way as his father and son.

古文：然卓性刚褊，尝小失卓意，卓拔手戟掷布，布拳捷避之，而改容顾谢，卓意亦解。
现代文：但是董卓性情刚愎，曾经为了一件不合自己心意的小事，拔出手戟掷向吕布。吕布身手矫健，避开手戟，又和言悦色地向董卓道歉，董卓才息怒作罢。
English: However, Dong Zhuo's stubborn nature, once for a small matter that was not to his liking, pulled out his hand and threw it at Lv Bu. Lv Bu was able-bodied, avoided the handcuffs, and apologized to Dong Zhuo in a friendly manner, and Dong Zhuo was able to stop his anger.

古文：布由是阴怨于卓。
现代文：吕布从此暗中怨恨董卓。
English: However, Lü Bu secretly hated Dong Zhuo in his heart from then on.

古文：卓又使布守中阁，而私于傅婢，益不自安。
现代文：董卓又命吕布守卫中，吕布乘机与董卓的一位侍女私通，越发心中不安。
English: Dong Zhuo also ordered Lü Bu to be among the guards. Lü Bu took the opportunity to have an affair with one of Dong Zhuo's maids and became increasingly uneasy.

古文：王允素善待布，布见允，自陈卓几见杀之状，允因以诛卓之谋告布，使为内应。
现代文：王允一向待吕布很好。吕布见王允时，主动说出几乎被董卓所杀的事情，于是王允将诛杀董卓的计划告诉吕布，并让他做内应。
English: Wang Yun has always treated Lv Bu well. When Lv Bu saw Wang Yun, he volunteered to say that he was almost killed by Dong Zhuo, so Wang Yun told Lv Bu the plan to kill Dong Zhuo, and let him do the inner response.

古文：布曰： 如父子何？ 
现代文：吕布说： 但我们有父子之情，怎么办？ 
English: Lüb said: How should the father-son relationship be handled?

古文：曰： 君自姓吕，本非骨肉。今忧死不暇，何谓父子？
现代文：王允说： 你自姓吕，与他本没有骨肉关系，如今顾虑自己的生死都来不及，还谈什么父子！
English: Wang Yun said, "You are surnamed Lu, you have no flesh-and-blood relationship with him, and now you are too late to worry about your own life and death. What kind of father and son are you talking about!

古文：掷戟之时，岂有父子情邪！ 
现代文：他在掷戟之时，难道有父子之情吗！ 
English: When he throws the dice, does he have a father-son relationship?

古文：布遂许之。
现代文：吕布于是应允。
English: Lü Bu then agreed.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，帝有疾新愈，大会未央殿。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁巳，献帝患病初愈，在未央殿大会朝中百官。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Si, Emperor Xian's illness was just beginning to heal, and there were hundreds of officials in attendance at the general assembly of the imperial court at the Weiyang Palace.

古文：卓朝服乘车而入，陈兵夹道，自营至宫，左步右骑，屯卫周匝，令吕布等扞卫前后。
现代文：董卓身穿朝服，乘车入朝。从军营到皇宫的道路两侧警卫密布，左侧是步兵，右侧是骑兵，戒备森严，由吕布等在前后侍卫。
English: Dong Zhuo, wearing a court uniform, enters the court by car. The road from the military camp to the imperial palace is heavily guarded on both sides, with infantry on the left and cavalry on the right. It is heavily guarded, with Lü Bu and other guards in front and behind.

古文：王允使士孙瑞自书诏以授布，布令同郡骑都尉李肃与勇士秦谊、陈卫等十馀人伪著卫士服，守北掖门内以待卓。
现代文：王允命士孙瑞自己书写诏书交给吕布。吕布让同郡人、骑都尉李肃与勇士秦谊、陈卫等十余人冒充卫士，身穿卫士的服装，埋伏在北掖门等待董卓。
English: Wang Yun ordered Sun Rui himself to write an imperial edict and hand it over to Lü Bu. Lü Bu had more than ten people from the same county, including cavalry captain Li Su and warriors Qin Rui and Chen Wei, pose as guards, wear guards' clothing, and lie in wait for Dong Zhuo at Beilun Gate.

古文：卓入门，肃以戟刺之；卓衷甲，不入，伤臂，堕车，顾大呼曰： 吕布何在？ 
现代文：董卓一进门，李肃举戟刺去，董卓内穿铁甲，未能刺入，只伤了他的手臂，跌到车下。董卓回头大喊： 吕布在哪里？ 
English: As soon as Dong Zhuo entered the door, Li Su held up a shovel and stabbed him. Dong Zhuo pierced the iron armor inside, failed to pierce it, only injured his arm, and fell under the car. Dong Zhuo turned around and shouted: Where is Lü Bu?

古文：布曰： 有诏讨贼臣！ 
现代文：吕布说： 奉皇帝诏令，讨伐贼臣！ 
English: Lü Bu said, "By the Emperor's edict, let's fight against the vassals!

古文：卓大骂曰： 庸狗，敢如是邪！ 
现代文：董卓大骂说： 狗崽子，你胆敢如此！ 
English: Dong Zhuo scolded loudly, "You son of a bitch, how dare you!

古文：布应声持矛刺卓，趣兵斩之。
现代文：吕布没等董卓骂完，就手持铁矛将他刺死，并催促士兵砍下他的头颅。
English: Lü Bu responded by stabbing Dong Zhuo with a spear, prompting the soldiers to kill him.

古文：主簿田仪及卓仓头前赴其尸，布又杀之，凡所杀三人。
现代文：主簿田仪及董卓的奴仆扑到董卓的尸前，又被吕布杀死，共杀了三个人。
English: The chief bookkeeper Tian Yi and Dong Zhuo's servant threw themselves in front of Dong Zhuo's corpse and were killed by Lü Bu, killing a total of three people.

古文：布即出怀中诏版以令吏士曰： 诏讨卓耳，馀皆不问。 
现代文：吕布随即从怀中取出诏书，命令官兵们说： 皇帝下诏，只讨董卓，其他人一概不问。 
English: Lv Bu then immediately took out the imperial decree from his bosom and ordered the officers and soldiers to say: The emperor issues an imperial decree, only about Dong Zhuo, and does not ask about anyone else.

古文：吏士皆正立不动，大称万岁。
现代文：官兵们听后都立正不动，高呼万岁。
English: After hearing this, the officers and soldiers all stood still and shouted "long live."

古文：百姓歌舞于道，长安中士女卖其珠玉衣装市酒肉相庆者，填满街肆。
现代文：百姓大街道上唱歌跳舞，以示庆祝。长安城中的士人、妇女卖掉珠宝首饰及衣服，用来买酒买肉，互相庆贺，街市拥挤得水泄不通。
English: People sang and danced in the streets to celebrate. The men and women of Chang'an sold their jewelry and clothes to buy wine and meat to celebrate with each other. The markets were so crowded that no one could get through.

古文：弟旻、璜等及宗族老弱在郿，皆为其群下所斫射死。
现代文：董卓的弟弟董、董璜以及留在坞的董氏家族老幼，都被他们的部下用刀砍死，或用箭射死。
English: Dong Zhuo's younger brothers, Dong and Dong Yao, as well as all the members of the Dong family, old and young, who remained in the dock, were all killed by their subordinates with knives or shot with arrows.

古文：暴卓尸于市。
现代文：董卓的尸体被拖到市中示众。
English: Dong Zhuo's body was dragged into the city for public viewing.

古文：天时始热，卓素充肥，脂流于地，守尸吏为大炷，置卓脐中然之，光明达曙，如是积日。
现代文：当时天气渐热，董卓一向身体肥胖，油脂流到地上，看守尸体的官吏便作了一个大灯捻，放在董卓的肚脐上点燃，从晚上烧到天亮，就这样一连烧了几天。
English: At that time, the weather was getting hot, Dong Zhuo had always been fat, and the grease flowed to the ground. The officials guarding the corpse made a headlamp, placed it on Dong Zhuo's navel and lit it. It burned from evening to dawn, and burned for several days in a row.

古文：诸袁门生聚董氏之尸，焚灰扬之于路。
现代文：受过董卓迫害的袁氏家族的门生们，把已被斩碎的董卓尸体收拢起来，焚烧成灰，所撤在大路上。
English: The disciples of the Yuan family, who had been persecuted by Dong Zhuo, gathered up the already chopped-up body of Dong Zhuo, burned it to ashes, and took it to the highway.

古文：坞中有金二三万斤，银八九万斤，锦绮奇玩积如丘山。
现代文：坞中藏有黄金二三万斤，白银八九万斤，绫罗绸缎、奇珍异宝堆积如山。
English: In the dock, there are 230,000 jin of gold, 890,000 jin of silver, thousands of pieces of silk and brocade, and a mountain of rare treasures.

古文：以王允录尚书事，吕布为奋威将军、假节、仪比三司，封温侯，共秉朝政。
现代文：献帝任命王允主持尚书事务；吕布为奋威将军，假节，礼仪等待遇均与三公相等，封温侯，与王允一起主持朝政。
English: Emperor Xian appointed Wang Yun to preside over the affairs of Shangshu; Lü Bu became General Fenwei, and was treated equally with the three princes in terms of festivals and etiquette. He was also given the title of Wen Hou, and presided over the government together with Wang Yun.

古文：卓之死也，左中郎将高阳侯蔡邕在王允坐，闻之惊叹。
现代文：董卓被杀时，左中郎将、高阳侯蔡邕正在王允家中作客，听到这一消息后，为之惊叹。
English: When Dong Zhuo was killed, Zuo Zhongrong, Gaoyang Hou Cai Wei was a guest at Wang Yun's home. After hearing this news, he was amazed.

古文：允勃然叱之曰： 董卓，国之大贼！几亡汉室。
现代文：王允勃然大怒，斥责说： 董卓是国家的大贼，几乎灭亡了汉朝王室的统治。
English: Wang Yun flew into a rage and rebuked him, saying: "Dong Zhuo is a great thief of the country and has almost destroyed the royal rule of the Han Dynasty.

古文：君为王臣，所宜同疾，而怀其私遇，反相伤痛，岂不共为逆哉！ 
现代文：你是汉朝的大臣，应当同仇敌忾，而你怀念他的私人恩惠，反为他悲痛，这岂不是与他共同为逆吗！ 
English: You are a minister of the Han Dynasty, you should fight with the enemy, but you miss his personal favor, but grieve for him. Isn't this the opposite of him?

古文：即收付廷尉。
现代文：当时就将蔡邕逮捕，送交廷尉。
English: At that time, Cai Qi was arrested and sent to the court lieutenant.

古文：邕谢曰： 身虽不忠，古今大义，耳所厌闻，口所常玩，岂当背国而向卓也！
现代文：蔡邕承认自己有罪，说： 虽然我身处这样一个不忠的地位，但对古今的君臣大义，耳中常听，口中常说，怎么会背叛国家而袒护董卓呢！
English: Cai Qi admitted his guilt, saying: Although I am in such a disloyal position, I often hear and say to the ancient and modern monarchs and ministers, how can you betray the country and protect Dong Zhuo!

古文：愿黥首刖足，继成汉史。 
现代文：我情愿在脸上刺字，砍去脚，让我继续写完《汉史》。 
English: I'd rather have my face tattooed and my feet chopped off so that I can continue to finish "Chinese History."

古文：士大夫多矜救之，不能得。
现代文：许多士大夫同情蔡邕，设法营救他，但没有成功。
English: Many doctors and nurses took pity on him and tried to save him, but to no avail.

古文：太尉马日磾谓允曰： 伯喈旷世逸才，多识汉事，当续成后史，为一代大典；而所坐至微。诛之，无乃失人望乎！ 
现代文：太尉马日对王允说： 蔡伯喈是旷世奇才，对汉朝的史事典章了解很多，应当让他完成史书，这将是一代大典。而且他所犯的罪是微不足道的，杀了他，岂不使天下士人失望！ 
English: First Lieutenant Ma Rih said to Wang Yun: Cai Boqin is a wonder of the ancient world, he knows a lot about the historical records of the Han Dynasty, he should be allowed to complete the history book, which will be a great book. Moreover, the crime he committed is insignificant, killing him would not disappoint the world's scholars!

古文：允曰： 昔武帝不杀司马迁，使作谤书流于后世。
现代文：王允说： 从前武帝不杀司马迁，结果使得他所作的谤书《史记》流传后世。
English: Wang Yun said: Once upon a time, Emperor Wu did not kill Sima Qian, and as a result, his slanderous book "History" was passed down to future generations.

古文：方今国祚中衰，戎马在郊，不可令佞臣执笔在幼主左右，既无益圣德，复使吾党蒙其讪议。 
现代文：如今国运中衰，兵马就在郊外，不能让奸佞之臣在幼主身边撰写史书，这既无益于皇帝的圣德，还会使我们这些人受到讥讽。 
English: Now that the national fortune is in decline, and the soldiers and horses are in the suburbs, we cannot let the treacherous vassals write history books around the young master. This is neither beneficial to the emperor's sanctity, nor will it make us people subject to ridicule.

古文：日磾退而告人曰： 王公其无后乎！
现代文：马日退出后，对别人说： 王允的后代大概要灭绝！
English: After Ma's withdrawal, he said to others: Wang Yun's descendants will probably be extinct!

古文：善人，国之纪也；制作，国之典也；灭纪废典，其能久乎！ 
现代文：善人是国家的楷模，史著是国家的经典。毁灭楷模，废除经典，国家如何能够长久？ 
English: The good man is the model of the country, the history book is the classic of the country. Destroy the model, abolish the classic, how can the country last long?

古文：邕遂死狱中。
现代文：于是，蔡邕就死在狱中。
English: As a result, Cai Wei died in prison.

古文：初，黄门侍郎荀攸与尚书郑泰、侍中种辑等谋曰： 董卓骄忍无亲，虽资强兵，实一匹夫耳，可直刺杀也。 
现代文：起初，黄门侍郎荀攸与尚书郑秦、侍中种辑等秘密商议： 董卓骄横残忍，没有真正的亲信，虽然手握强兵，实际上不过是一个孤立的独夫民贼，可以径直把他刺死！ 
English: At first, Huangmen's chamberlain Zou You secretly discussed with Shangshu Zheng Qin, and chamberlain Zeng Lian: Dong Zhuo was arrogant and cruel, and had no real confidants. Although he had a strong army, he was actually just an isolated one-man bandit who could stab him to death!

古文：事垂就而觉，收攸系狱，泰逃奔袁术。
现代文：事情将成，而消息泄露，荀攸被捕入狱，郑泰逃走，投奔袁术。
English: The matter will come to an end, and the news will be leaked, Zou You will be arrested and imprisoned, Zheng Tai will escape and join Yuan Shu.

古文：攸言语饮食自若，会卓死。
现代文：荀攸在狱中沉着镇定，言谈和饮食都与平时一样。
English: Gong You remained calm and composed in prison, and his speech and diet were the same as usual.

古文：得免。
现代文：恰好董卓被杀，荀攸得以幸免。
English: It just so happened that Dong Zhuo was killed, and Zou You was spared.

古文：青州黄巾寇兗州，刘岱欲击之，济北相鲍信谏曰： 今贼众百万，百姓皆震恐，士卒无斗志，不可敌也。
现代文：青州的黄巾军攻掠兖州，兖州刺史刘岱准备出兵迎击。济北国相鲍信劝阻他说： 如今黄巾军有百万之众，百姓全都十分恐慌，士兵也没有斗志，不能对付敌人。
English: The Yellow Turban Army of Qingzhou attacked and plundered Zhangzhou, and Liu Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, prepared to send troops to meet the attack. Baoxin, the minister of North Jilin Province, dissuaded him: Today, the Yellow Turban Army has a million people, the people are all very panicked, and the soldiers have no fighting spirit and cannot deal with the enemy.

古文：然贼军无辎重，唯以钞略为资。
现代文：然而黄巾军没有辎重，只靠抢劫来供应军需。
English: However, the Yellow Turban Army did not have a heavy burden, relying only on robbery to supply military supplies.

古文：今不若畜士众之力，先为固守。
现代文：我们不如保存实力，首先固守城池。
English: We might as well preserve our strength and hold on to the castle first.

古文：彼欲战不得，攻又不能，其势必离散。
现代文：敌军求战不得，攻城不下，势必离散。
English: The enemy army cannot go to war, cannot attack the city, and is bound to disperse.

古文：然后选精锐，据要害，击之可破也。 
现代文：到那时再挑选精兵，分据各关口要塞，一定可以将敌军打败。 
English: At that time, they will select the best soldiers and divide them according to the checkpoints and fortresses, and they will surely defeat the enemy.

古文：岱不从，遂与战，果为所杀。
现代文：刘岱不听，率军出战，果然被黄巾军杀死。
English: Liu Bei did not listen, and led soldiers to fight against the Yellow Turban Army, and was eventually killed.

古文：曹操部将东郡陈宫谓操曰： 州今无主，而王命断绝，宫请说州中纲纪，明府寻往牧之，资之以收天下，此霸王之业也。 
现代文：曹操的部将东郡人陈宫对曹操说： 现在刺史已死，州中无主，与朝廷的联系也已断绝，无法再委任新的刺史。我想去说服州中的主要官员，同意由您来主持州中事务。以此作为资本，进而夺取天下，这是霸王大业。 
English: Cao Cao's general, Chen Gong, from Dong County, said to Cao Cao: "Now that Zhishi is dead, there is no ruler in the state, and the connection with the imperial court has been severed, it is no longer possible to appoint a new Zhishi. I want to convince the main officials in the state to agree that you will preside over the affairs of the state. Using this as capital, and then seizing the world, this is the great cause of the overlord.

古文：宫因往说别驾、治中曰： 今天下分裂而州无主；曹东郡，命世之才也，若迎以牧州，必宁生民。 
现代文：于是，陈宫前去劝说别驾、治中等主要官员。 如今天下分裂，而无人主持州政。曹操是一代英才，假如迎接他做刺史，必然能够使百姓安宁。 
English: As a result, Chen Gong went to persuade key officials such as governors, governors, etc. If there is a split today, and no one presides over state affairs, Cao Cao is an outstanding talent, and if he is welcomed to make history, he will certainly be able to bring peace to the people.

古文：鲍信等亦以为然，乃与州吏万潜等至东郡，迎操领兗州刺史。
现代文：鲍信等也有同样的看法，便与州中官吏万潜等人来到东郡，迎接曹操兼任兖州刺史。
English: Bao Xin and others also had the same opinion, so they came to Dong County with the state official Wan Qian and others to meet Cao Cao, who also served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：操遂进兵击黄巾于寿张东。
现代文：曹操随后率军到寿张县东攻击黄巾军，未能取胜。
English: Cao Cao then led his army to the east of Shou Zhang County to attack the Yellow Turban Army, but failed to win.

古文：不利。贼众精悍，操兵寡弱，操抚循激励，明设赏罚，承间设奇，昼夜会战，战辄禽获，贼遂退走。
现代文：黄巾军骁勇精悍，而曹军则兵力单薄。曹操稳定军心，鼓舞士气，严明赏罚制度，并且连设奇计，昼夜不停地会战，每次都杀伤不少敌军。
English: The Yellow Turban Army was brave and skillful, while Cao's army was thinly armed. Cao Cao stabilized the military spirit, encouraged morale, strictly enforced the reward and punishment system, and even devised a plan to fight non-stop day and night, killing and wounding many enemy troops each time.

古文：鲍信战死，操购求其丧不得，乃刻木如信状，祭而哭焉。
现代文：于是黄巾军退出兖州。鲍信战死，曹操悬赏寻找他的尸体，但终究没有找到，于是就雕刻了一个鲍信的木像。下葬时，曹操亲去祭奠，放声大哭。
English: As a result, the Yellow Turbans withdrew from Zhangzhou. Bao Xin died in battle, Cao Cao offered a reward to search for his body, but in the end it was not found, so he carved a wooden statue of Bao Xin. When he was buried, Cao Cao went to pay his respects and cried loudly.

古文：诏以京兆金尚为兗州刺史，将之部，操逆击之，尚奔袁术。
现代文：朝廷任命京兆人金尚为兖州刺史。金尚将要赴任，遭到曹操迎击，金尚逃走，投奔了袁术。
English: The imperial court appointed Jin Shang, a man from Beijing and Shanghai, as the governor of Zhangzhou. When he was about to take office, he was attacked by Cao Cao. Jin Shang fled and joined Yuan Shu.

古文：五月，以征西将军皇甫嵩为车骑将军。
现代文：五月，任命征西将军皇甫嵩为车骑将军。
English: In May, Emperor Fusong, the general of the Western Expedition, was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：初，吕布劝王允尽杀董卓部曲，允曰： 此辈无罪，不可。 
现代文：当初，吕布劝王允把董卓的部曲全部杀死，王允说： 这些人没有罪，不能处死。 
English: At first, Lü Bu advised Wang Yun to kill all of Dong Zhuo's followers. Wang Yun said, "These people are not guilty and cannot be executed.

古文：布欲以卓财物班赐公卿、将校，允又不从。
现代文：吕布想把董卓的财物赏赐给朝中大臣及统兵将领，王允又没有答应。
English: Lv Bu wanted to reward the wealth of Dong Zhuo to the ministers and generals of the Central Military Commission, but Wang Yun did not agree.

古文：允素以剑客遇布，布负其功劳，多自夸伐，既失意望，渐不相平。
现代文：王允一向把吕布视为一员武将，不愿他干预朝政。而吕布认为自己诛杀董卓有功，到处夸耀。既然屡次失望，心中逐渐不高兴。
English: Wang Yun had always regarded Lv Bu as a military commander and did not want him to interfere in imperial politics. Lv Bu, on the other hand, thought he had done a great job in killing Dong Zhuo and boasted about it everywhere. Since he had been disappointed so many times, his heart gradually became unhappy.

古文：允性刚稜疾恶，初惧董卓，故折节下之。
现代文：王允性情刚直方正，嫉恶如仇，当初因为畏惧董卓，不得不委曲低头。
English: Wang Yun's temperament was upright and upright, and his jealousy was like a vendetta. At first, because he was afraid of Dong Zhuo, he had to bow his head.

古文：卓既歼灭，自谓无复患难，颇自骄傲，以是群下不甚附之。
现代文：董卓被诛之后，他自认为不会再有什么祸难，颇为骄傲，因此部属们对他并不十分拥戴。
English: After the arrest of Dong Zhuo, he thought that there would be no more calamity, he was quite proud, so his subordinates did not fully support him.

古文：允始与士孙瑞议，特下诏赦卓部曲，既而疑曰： 部曲从其主耳。
现代文：王允起初曾与士孙瑞商议，特别下诏赦免董卓部曲。接着又感到迟疑，说道： 部曲只是遵从主人的命令，本无罪可言。
English: At first, Wang Yun had discussed with the judge Sun Rui, and specifically issued a decree to pardon Dong Zhuo Buqu. Then he felt hesitant, saying: Buqu was just following the master's orders, and he was not guilty.

古文：今若名之恶逆而赦之，恐适使深自疑，非所以安之也。 
现代文：如今要把他们作为恶逆之人予以赦免，恐怕反会招致他们的猜疑，并不是令他们安心的办法。 
English: Pardoning them now, as ruffians, is not the way to reassure them, for fear of arousing their suspicions.

古文：乃止。
现代文：因而没有颁布赦书。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：又议悉罢其军，或说允曰： 凉州人素惮袁氏而畏关东，今若一旦解兵开关，必人人自危。
现代文：后又商议全部解散董卓所统率的军队。有人对王允说： 凉州人一直害怕袁绍，畏惧关东的大军。如今若是一旦解散军队，打开函谷关，董卓的部下一定会人人自危。
English: Later, they discussed disbanding the entire army under the command of Dong Zhuo. Someone said to Wang Yun: "The people of Liangzhou have always been afraid of Yuan Shao, afraid of the large army in Kanto. If they disband the army and open Hanyu Pass now, Dong Zhuo's subordinates will all be in danger."

古文：可以皇甫义真为将军，就领其众，因使留陕以安抚之。 
现代文：可任命皇甫嵩为将军，率领董卓的旧部，并留驻陕县以进行安抚。 
English: He could appoint Wang Fusong as a general to lead the old department of Dong Zhuo and stay in Shaanxi to pacify the situation.

古文：允曰： 不然。关东举义兵者，皆吾徒也。今若距险屯陕，虽安凉州，而疑关东之心，不可也。 
现代文：王允说： 不然，关东的义兵将领与我们是一致的，现在如果再将大军留驻陕县，扼守险要，虽然安抚了凉州人，却会使关东将领起疑，这是不行的。 
English: Wang Yun said, "Otherwise, the volunteer generals in Guandong are the same as us. Now, if we keep a large army stationed in Shaanxi and guard the key points, although it will appease the people of Liangzhou, it will make the generals in Guandong suspicious. This is not acceptable."

古文：时百姓讹言当悉诛凉州人，卓故将校遂转相恐动，皆拥兵自守，更相谓曰： 蔡伯喈但以董公亲厚，尚从坐，今既不赦我曹而欲使解兵，今日解兵，明日当复为鱼肉矣！ 
现代文：当时，百姓中盛传要杀死所有的凉州人，于是那些原为董卓部下的将领惊恐不安，全都控制军队，以求自保。他们还相互传言： 蔡邕只因受过董卓的信任和厚待，尚且被牵连处死。现在既没有赦免我们，又要解散我们的军队。如果今天解散军队，明天我们就会成为任凭宰杀的鱼肉了。 
English: At that time, there was a widespread rumor among the people that they wanted to kill all the people of Liangzhou. As a result, the generals who were originally subordinates of Dong Zhuo were terrified and insecure, and they all controlled the army in order to protect themselves. They also told each other: Cai Wei was only implicated and executed because he had received Dong Zhuo's trust and kind treatment. Now they have neither pardoned us nor disbanded our army. If the army is disbanded today, tomorrow we will become fish meat that can be slaughtered at will.

古文：吕布使李肃至陕，以诏命诛牛辅，辅等逆与肃战，肃败，走弘农，布诛杀之。
现代文：吕布派李肃前往陕县，宣布皇帝诏命，诛杀牛辅。
English: Lvbu sent Li Su to Shaanxi to announce the emperor's edict to kill Niu Fu.

古文：辅恇怯失守，会营中无故自惊，辅欲走，为左右所杀。
现代文：牛辅等率军迎击李肃。李肃战败，逃回弘农，被吕布处死。牛辅心中惶恐不安，恰巧遇上军营中无故发生夜惊，牛辅想弃军逃走，被左右亲信杀死。
English: Niu Fu led the army to meet Li Su. Li Su was defeated, fled back to Hongnong, and was executed by Lv Bu. Niu Fu was terrified and uneasy, and happened to encounter a night terror in the military camp for no reason. Niu Fu wanted to abandon the army and escape, and was killed by his right and left cronies.

古文：李傕等还，辅已死，傕等无所依，遣使诣长安求赦。
现代文：李等回到大营时，牛辅已死，李等无以依靠，便派使者前往长安请求赦免。
English: When Li et al. returned to the camp, Niu Fu was dead, and Li et al. had nothing to rely on, so they sent an envoy to Chang'an to request a pardon.

古文：王允曰： 一岁不可再赦。 
现代文：王允回答说： 一年之内，不能发布两次赦免令。 
English: Wang Yun replied: Within one year, it is not possible to issue two amnesty orders.

古文：不许。
现代文：拒绝了他们的请求。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：傕等益惧，不知所为，欲各解散，间行归乡里，讨虏校尉武威贾诩曰： 诸君若弃军单行，则一亭长能束君矣。不如相率而西，以攻长安，为董公报仇。
现代文：李等更加害怕，不知如何是好，打算解散军队，各人分别走小路逃回家乡。讨虏校尉、武威人贾诩说： 如果你们放弃军队，孤身逃命，只需一个亭长就能把你们捉起来，不如大家齐心合力，西进攻打长安，去为董卓报仇。
English: Li et al. were even more afraid, and did not know what to do. They planned to disband the army, and each of them took a separate path to escape back to their hometown. Jia Wei, the captain of the army, said: If you abandon the army and run away alone, just one captain can catch you. It would be better for everyone to work together and attack Chang'an in the west to avenge Dong Zhuo.

古文：事济，奉国家以正天下；若其不合，走未后也。 
现代文：如果事情成功，可以拥戴皇帝以号令天下，如若不成，再逃走也不迟。 
English: If the matter is successful, it will serve the country to rectify the world; if not, it is not too late to escape.

古文：傕等然之，乃相与结盟，率军数千，晨夜西行。
现代文：李等同意。于是一起宣誓结盟，率领着数千人马，昼夜兼程向长安进发。
English: Li and others agreed. So they swore an oath of alliance together and led thousands of people to travel to Chang'an day and night.

古文：王允以胡文才、杨整修皆凉州大人，召使东，解释之，不假以温颜，谓曰： 关东鼠子，欲何为邪？卿往呼之！ 
现代文：王允知道胡文才、杨整修都是凉州有威望的人物，便召见胡、杨二人，想让他们去东方会见李等人，解释误会。
English: Wang Yun knew that Hu Wencai and Yang Shixu were both prestigious figures in Liangzhou, so he summoned Hu and Yang and wanted them to go to the East to meet with Li and others to explain the misunderstanding.

古文：于是二人往，实召兵而还。
现代文：可是王允在面见他们时，并没有和颜悦色，而是说： 这些潼关东面的鼠辈，想要干什么？
English: However, when Wang Yun met them face to face, he was not friendly, but said: What do these rats in the east of Shaoguan want?

古文：傕随道收兵，比至长安，已十馀万，与卓故部曲樊稠、李蒙等合围长安城，城峻不可攻，守之八日。
现代文：你们去把他们叫来！ 因此，胡文才和杨整修去见李等人，实际上是把大军召回长安。李沿途招集人马，等到达长安时，已有十余万之众。他们与董卓旧部樊稠、李蒙等会合，一起包围了长安。长安城墙高大，无法进攻。守到第八天，吕布属下的蜀郡士兵叛变。
English: Therefore, Hu Wencai and Yang Shixiu went to see Li and others, and in fact, they called back a large army to Chang'an. Li called up men and horses along the way, and by the time they reached Chang'an, there were more than 100,000 people. They met with Dong Zhuo's old unit, Zeng Cong, Li Meng and others, and surrounded Chang'an together. Chang'an's city wall is high and cannot be attacked. It was defended until the eighth day, when the soldiers of Shu County, which belonged to Lvbu, mutinied.

古文：吕布军有叟兵内反，六月，戊午，引傕众入城，放兵虏掠。
现代文：六月，戊午，叛军引李部队入城，李等放纵士兵大肆抢掠。
English: In June, at noon, the rebels led Li's troops into the city, and Li and other soldiers indulged in large-scale looting.

古文：布与战城中，不胜，将数百骑以卓头系马鞍出走，驻马青琐门外，招王允同去。允曰： 若蒙社稷之灵，上安国家，吾之愿也；如其不获，则奉身以死之。
现代文：吕布与李等在城中交战不胜，便率领数百名骑兵，把董卓的头颅挂在马鞍上，突围出走。他在青琐门外停马，招呼王允一起逃走，王允回答说： 如果得到社稷之灵保佑，国家平安，这是我最大的愿望，如果此愿不能实现，那么我将为之献出生命。
English: Lv Bu and Li and others were unable to win the battle in the city, so they led hundreds of cavalrymen, hung the head of Dong Zhuo on the saddle, and broke out. He stopped his horse outside the Qingzo Gate and called Wang Yun to flee together. Wang Yun replied: If I am blessed by the spirit of the community and the country is safe, this is my greatest wish. If this wish cannot be realized, then I will give my life for it.

古文：朝廷幼少，恃我而已，临难苟免，吾不忍也。
现代文：如今皇帝年龄幼小，只能倚仗着我，遇到危险而自己逃命，我不忍心这样做。
English: Now that the emperor is so young, he can only rely on me. If there is danger and he has to run for his life, I can't bear to do it.

古文：努力谢关东诸公，勤以国家为念！ 
现代文：请勉励关东的各位将领，常将皇帝和国家大局放在心上。 
English: Please encourage the generals in Kanto to always keep the emperor and the overall situation of the country in mind.

古文：太常种拂曰： 为国大臣，不能禁暴御侮，使白刃向宫，去将安之！ 
现代文：太常种拂说： 身为国家大臣，不能禁止暴力，抵御凌辱，致使刀枪指向皇宫，还想逃到哪里！ 
English: "As a minister of state, I can't prohibit violence, resist insults, cause knives and guns to be pointed at the imperial palace, and where do I want to escape to!

古文：遂战而死。
现代文：于是奋战而死。
English: So he fought and died.

古文：傕、汜屯南宫掖门，杀太仆鲁馗、大鸿胪周奂、城门校尉崔烈、越骑校尉王颀。吏民死者万馀人，狼藉满道。
现代文：李、郭汜等驻扎在南宫掖门，杀死太仆鲁馗、大鸿胪周奂、城门校尉崔烈、赵骑校尉王颀等人，官吏和百姓被杀一万余人，尸体散乱地堆满街道。
English: Li, Guo Jie and others stationed at the South Palace Gate killed the eunuch Lu Jie, the great general Zhou Jie, the gate captain Cui Rong and the cavalry captain Zhao Jie and others. More than 10,000 officials and people were killed, and the bodies were scattered all over the streets.

古文：王允扶帝上宣平门避兵，傕等于城门下伏地叩头，帝谓傕等曰： 卿等放兵纵横，欲何为乎？ 
现代文：王允扶着献帝逃上宣平门，躲避乱兵。李等人在城下伏地叩头，献帝对李等人说： 你们放纵士兵，想要做什么？ 
English: Wang Yun supported Emperor Xian to escape to the Xuanping Gate and evade the rampaging soldiers. Li and others prostrated themselves at the foot of the castle. Emperor Xian told Li and others, "You are indulging the soldiers, what do you want to do?

古文：傕等曰： 董卓忠于陛下，而无故为吕布所杀，臣等为卓报仇，非敢为逆也。
现代文：李等说： 董卓忠于陛下，却无故被吕布杀害，我们为董卓报仇，并不敢作叛逆之事。
English: Li et al. said: Dong Zhuo was loyal to His Majesty, but was killed by Lü Bu without reason. We took revenge for Dong Zhuo and did not dare to rebel.

古文：请事毕诣廷尉受罪。 
现代文：待到此事了结之后，我们情愿上廷尉去领受罪责。 
English: Pending the outcome of this matter, we would like to see the captain face criminal charges.

古文：傕等围门楼，共表请司徒王允出，问： 太师何罪？ 
现代文：李派兵围住宣平门楼，联名上表，要求司徒王允出面，问道： 太师董卓有什么罪！ 
English: Li sent soldiers to surround the gatehouse of Xuanping, and jointly went up to the table, asking the disciple Wang Yun to come forward, and asked: What is the sin of the great teacher Dong Zhuo!

古文：允穷蹙，乃下见之。
现代文：王允被逼无奈，只好走下楼来面见李等人。
English: Wang Yun had no choice but to go downstairs to meet Li and the others.

古文：己未，赦天下，以李傕为扬武将军，郭汜为扬烈将军，樊稠等皆为中郎将。
现代文：己未，大赦天下。任命李为扬武将军，郭汜为扬烈将军，樊稠等人都为中郎将。
English: Li was appointed as Yangwu General, Guo Jie as Yang Rong General, and Gong Chou and others were appointed as Zhonglang General.

古文：傕等收司隶校尉黄琬，下狱。
现代文：李等逮捕司隶校尉黄琬，将他处死。
English: Li waited for the arresting officer, Lieutenant Huang Qi, to execute him.

古文：杀之。初，王允以同郡宋翼为左冯翊，王宏为右扶风，傕等欲杀允，恐二郡为患，乃先征翼、宏。
现代文：起初，王允任命同郡人宋翼为左冯翊，王宏为右扶风。李等想要杀死王允，又恐怕他们起兵反抗，于是先要献帝下诏征召宋翼、王宏。
English: At first, Wang Yun appointed Song Ying, who was from the same county, as the left Feng Ye, and Wang Hong as the right Fu Feng. Li and others wanted to kill Wang Yun, and they were afraid that they would rebel, so they first had to present the emperor with a decree to conscript Song Ying and Wang Hong.

古文：宏遣使谓翼曰： 郭汜、李傕以我二人在外，故未危王公。
现代文：王宏派人对宋翼说： 郭汜、李因为我们两人在外，所以不敢杀害王允。
English: Wang Hong sent someone to say to Song Ying: Guo Gan, Li, because the two of us are outside, we dare not kill Wang Yun.

古文：今日就征，明日俱族，计将安出？ 
现代文：如果今日应召，明日就会全族被害，你有什么办法吗？ 
English: If you answer the call today, tomorrow your whole family will be killed. Is there anything you can do?

古文：翼曰： 虽祸福难量，然王命，所不得避也！ 
现代文：宋翼回答说： 虽然祸福无法预料，然而皇帝的诏命是不能违抗的。 
English: Song Ying replied: Although misfortune and fortune cannot be predicted, the emperor's edict cannot be defied.

古文：宏曰： 关东义兵鼎沸，欲诛董卓，今卓已死，其党与易制耳。
现代文：王宏的使人说： 关东诸州、郡义兵好象滚水沸腾，想要诛杀董卓，如今董卓已死，他的党容易制服。
English: Wang Hong's emissary said: "The Guandong states and counties are like boiling water, and they want to kill Dong Zhuo. Now that Dong Zhuo is dead, his party is easy to subdue.

古文：若举兵共讨傕等，与山东相应，此转祸为福之计也。 
现代文：如果起兵一同讨伐李等人，与关东诸军相互呼应，正是转祸为福的上策。 
English: If soldiers are raised to fight Li and others together, and the armies of the Kwantung Army respond to each other, it is the best way to turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：翼不从，宏不能独立，遂俱就征。
现代文：宋翼不同意，王宏孤立不能成事，于是双双接受征召。
English: Song Ying disagreed. Wang Hong could not accomplish anything alone, so they both accepted the call-up.

古文：甲子，傕收允及翼、宏，并杀之；允妻子皆死。
现代文：甲子，李逮捕王允、宋翼、王宏，一齐处死。
English: Ka Zi, Li arrested Wang Yun, Song Ying, and Wang Hong, and they were all executed.

古文：宏临命诟曰： 宋翼竖儒，不足议大计！ 
现代文：王允的家小也都被杀死。王宏临死之前辱骂道： 宋翼，你这个没用的腐儒，真不足以与你商议国家大事！ 
English: Wang Yun's family and children were also killed. Wang Hong insulted Song Ying before his death: "Song Ying, you useless rotter, it's really not enough to discuss national affairs with you!

古文：傕尸王允于市，莫敢收者，故吏平陵令京兆赵戬弃官收而葬之。
现代文：李把王允的尸体放置在闹市之中，没人胆敢前去收尸。王允从前的部属、平陵县县令京兆人赵戬，放弃官位，将王允的尸体收葬。
English: Li placed Wang Yun's body in the middle of the busy city, and no one dared to go to collect the body. Wang Yun's former subordinate, Pingling County Governor Zhao Zhao, gave up his official position and buried Wang Yun's body.

古文：始，允自专讨卓之劳，士孙瑞归功不侯，故得免于难。
现代文：当初，王允将讨伐董卓的功劳全都归于自己。由于士孙瑞的功劳归给了王允，没有封侯，因而这次能够幸免于难。
English: At first, Wang Yun took all the credit for fighting against Dong Zhuo. Since the credit for Shisun Rui was given to Wang Yun, he was not made a vassal, so he was able to survive this time.

古文：臣光曰：《易》称 劳谦君子有终吉 ，士孙瑞有功不伐，以保其身，可不谓之智乎！
现代文：臣司马光曰：《易经》说： 辛劳而又谦让的君子，有善终吉祥。 士孙瑞立下大功而不夸耀，以保护自己的身家性命，岂不应称他是智慧过人！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: "The I Ching says: A hard-working and humble gentleman has a good and auspicious ending. Shouldn't Sisun Rui, who did great deeds without boasting in order to protect his family and life, be called a wise man!

古文：傕等以贾诩为左冯翊，欲侯之。
现代文：李傕等任命贾诩为左冯翊，想封他为侯爵。
English: Li Yu and others appointed Jia Yu as Zuo Feng Yu and wanted to make him a marquis.

古文：诩曰： 此救命之计，何功之有！ 
现代文：贾诩说： 我提出的只是救命之计，有什么功劳！ 
English: Jia Ying said: My idea is just a life-saving measure, what is the merit!

古文：固辞不受。
现代文：坚决辞让不受。
English: Sun Qian resolutely refused to accept soldiers.

古文：又以为尚书仆射，诩曰： 尚书仆射，官之师长，天下所望，诩名不素重，非所以服人也。 
现代文：李又任命他为尚书仆射，贾诩说： 尚书仆射是宫廷的主要官员，为天下所瞩目，我平素名望不重，不能使人心服。 
English: He also appointed him as Shang Shuxu's assistant, Jia Wei said: Shang Shuxu's assistant is an official's teacher, the world is watching, my reputation has never been high, I can't convince people.

古文：乃以为尚书。
现代文：于是任命贾诩为尚书。
English: So he appointed Jia Jia as his successor.

古文：吕布自武关奔南阳，袁术待之甚厚。
现代文：吕布途经武关到南阳投奔袁术，袁术待他十分优厚。
English: Lv Bu passed through Wuguan to Nanyang to join Yuan Shu, who treated him very well.

古文：布自恃有功于袁氏，恣兵钞掠。
现代文：吕布认为自己杀死了董卓，对袁家有功，因此放纵部下士兵抢掠，袁术对此不满。
English: Lü Bu thought that he had killed Dong Zhuo and had done a great service to the Yuan family, so he allowed his soldiers to loot and plunder. Yuan Shuxin was not happy about this.

古文：术患之，布不自安，去从张杨于河内。
现代文：吕布察觉后，心不自安，便离开袁术，去河内投奔张杨。
English: After Lv Bu noticed this, his heart was not at ease, so he left Yuan Shu and went to Hanoi to join Zhang Yang.

古文：李傕等购求布急，布又逃归袁绍。
现代文：李等人悬赏捉拿吕布，形势很紧，吕布又从张杨处逃走，改投袁绍。
English: Li et al. offered a reward for the capture of Lü Bu. The situation was very tight, and Lü Bu fled from Zhang Yang and joined Yuan Shao.

古文：丙子，以前将军赵谦为司徒。
现代文：丙子，任命前将军赵谦为司徒。
English: He appointed former general Zhao Qian as his disciple.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，以太尉马日磾为太傅，录尚书事；八月，以车骑将军皇甫嵩为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚子，任命太尉马日为太傅，主持尚书事务。八月，任命车骑将军皇甫嵩为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, Geng Zi appointed Taifu Ma Rong as Taifu to preside over the affairs of Shangshu. In August, he appointed Cavalry General Huang Fusong as Taifu.

古文：诏太傅马日磾、太仆赵岐杖节镇抚关东。
现代文：献帝下诏，命令太傅马日、太仆赵岐持符节去安抚关东诸州、郡。
English: Emperor Xian made an imperial edict, ordering Taifu Ma Rih and Taifu Zhao Qiming to appease the Guandong states and counties.

古文：九月，以李傕为车骑将军、领司隶校尉、假节；郭汜为后将军，樊稠为右将军，张济为骠骑将军，皆封侯。
现代文：九月，任命李为车骑将军，兼任司隶桃尉，假节；任命郭汜为后将军，樊稠为右将军，张济为骠骑将军，都封为侯爵。
English: In September, he appointed Li as the general of chariot and cavalry, and concurrently served as the lieutenant of Sili and Taoyuan, and the false festival; he appointed Guo Jun as the rear general, Gong Cong as the right general, Zhang Jie as the cavalry general, and they were all made marquesses.

古文：傕、汜、稠筦朝政，济出屯弘农。
现代文：李、郭汜、樊稠掌管朝政，张济出京，率军驻在弘农郡。
English: Li, Guo Jie, and Gong Cong were in charge of the imperial government, while Zhang Jie went to Beijing and stationed his army in Hongnong County.

古文：司徒赵谦罢。
现代文：司徒赵谦被免职。
English: Sidu Zhao Qian is gone.

古文：甲申，以司空淳于嘉为司徒，光禄大夫杨彪为司空，录尚书事。
现代文：甲申，任命司空淳于喜为司徒，光禄大夫杨彪为司空，主持尚书事务。
English: Jia Shen appointed the Secretary of the Air Force, Jun Yuxi, as the instructor, and the Doctor of the Air Force, Yang Biao, as the Secretary of the Air Force, to preside over the affairs of the Air Force.

古文：初，董卓入关，说韩遂、马腾与共图山东，遂、腾率众诣长安，会卓死，李傕等以遂为镇西将军，遣还金城；腾为征西将军，遣屯郿。
现代文：起初，董卓入关后，劝说韩遂、马腾等人一起对抗关东讨伐董卓的联军，韩遂、马腾率军前往长安。他们到达长安时，正赶上董卓被杀。李等便任命韩遂为镇西将军，派他返回金城；马腾为征西将军，率军前去驻守地。
English: At first, after Dong Zhuo entered Guanzhong, he persuaded Han Sui, Ma Teng and others to fight together against the allied forces of Guandong to fight against Dong Zhuo. Han Sui and Ma Teng led the army to Chang'an. When they arrived in Chang'an, they were just in time for Dong Zhuo to be killed. Li and others then appointed Han Sui as the Zhenxi general and sent him back to Jincheng; Ma Teng was the Zhengxi general and led the army to the garrison.

古文：冬，十月，荆州刺史刘表遣使贡献。
现代文：冬季，十月，荆州刺史刘表派遗使者到长安进献贡品。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Bei, the statesman of Jingzhou, sent his emissaries to Chang'an to offer tribute.

古文：以表为镇南将军、荆州牧，封成武侯。
现代文：任命刘表为镇南将军、荆州牧，封成武侯。
English: Liu Biao was appointed as Zhenan General, Jingzhou herdsman, and Fucheng Wuhou.

古文：十二月，太尉皇甫嵩免，以光禄大夫周忠为太尉，参录尚书事。
现代文：十二月，太尉皇甫嵩被免职，任命光禄大夫周忠为太尉，参与主持尚书事务。
English: In December, First Lieutenant Wang Fusong was relieved of his duties, and Guanglu Doctor Zhou Zhong was appointed First Lieutenant to participate in the management of official documents.

古文：曹操追黄巾至济北，悉降之，得戎卒三十馀万，男女百馀万口，收其精锐者，号青州兵。
现代文：曹操追击黄巾军到济北，黄巾军全体投降。曹操得到兵士三十余万，男女一百余万口。曹操从中挑选精锐，称为 青州兵 。
English: Cao Cao chased the Yellow Turban Army to Jiubei, and the entire Yellow Turban Army surrendered. Cao Cao received more than 300,000 soldiers, and more than one million men and women. Cao Cao selected the elite from them, called the Qingzhou soldiers.

古文：操辟陈留毛玠为治中从事，玠言于操曰： 今天下分崩，乘舆播荡，生民废业，饥馑流亡，公家无经岁之储，百姓无安固之志，难以持久。
现代文：曹操延聘陈留人毛为治中从事，毛向曹操进言： 如今天下四分五裂，皇帝流亡在外，百姓无法生产，因饥荒而弃家流亡。官府没胡一年的存粮，百姓不能安心，这种局面难以持久。
English: Cao Cao retained Chen to retain Mao as a mediator, and Mao advised Cao Cao: If today the country is torn apart, the emperor is in exile, the people are unable to produce, and have abandoned their homes due to famine. The government does not have a year's supply of grain, the people cannot rest assured, and this situation is difficult to last.

古文：夫兵义者胜，守位以财，宜奉天子以令不臣，修耕植以畜军资，如此，则霸王之业可成也。 
现代文：奉行仁义的军队，才以取得胜利；拥有丰富的财源，才能贡固自己的地位。应该尊奉天子，用朝廷的名义向那些叛逆之臣发号施令；发展农业和桑蚕业，以积蓄军用物资。这样，就能够成就霸王之业。 
English: An army that pursues benevolence and righteousness can achieve victory; an army that has abundant financial resources can consolidate its position; it should respect the Son of Heaven and use the name of the court to give orders to those rebellious subjects; it should develop agriculture and mulberry silkworm industry to accumulate military materials. In this way, it can achieve the cause of overpowering the king.

古文：操纳其言，遣使诣河内太守张杨，欲假涂西至长安，杨不听。
现代文：曹操采纳了他的建议，派人晋见河内郡太守张杨，想借道西上长安与朝廷联系，被张杨拒绝。
English: Cao Cao accepted his suggestion and sent Jin to see Zhang Yang, the governor of Hanoi County. He wanted to contact the imperial court through West Upper Chang'an, but Zhang Yang refused.

古文：定陶董昭说杨曰： 袁、曹虽为一家，势不久群。
现代文：定陶人董昭劝说张杨： 虽然袁绍与曹操联盟，但势必不会长久合作。
English: Dong Zhao, a ceramist, persuaded Zhang Yang: Although Yuan Shao and Cao Cao are allied, they will not cooperate for a long time.

古文：曹今虽弱，然实天下之英雄也，当故结之。
现代文：曹操如今势力虽弱，然而他实际上是天下真正的英雄。应当寻找机会与他结交，何况现有借路这个机缘。
English: Although Cao Cao's strength is a little weak now, he is truly a hero of the world, and we should make friends with him.

古文：况今有缘，宜通其上事，并表荐之，若事有成，永为深分。 
现代文：最好允许他的使者通过，将他的奏章上呈朝廷，并上表推荐他。如果事情成功，就可以成为长久的深交。 
English: It is best to allow his emissary to pass through, present his report to the court, and recommend him to the table. If the matter is successful, it can become a long-term deep friendship.

古文：杨是通操上事，仍表荐操。
现代文：于是张杨允许曹操的使者通过河内郡前往长安，同时自己上表推荐曹操。
English: So Zhang Yang allowed Cao Cao's emissary to travel to Chang'an through Hanoi County, and recommended Cao Cao himself.

古文：昭为操作书与李傕、郭汜等，各随轻重致殷勤。
现代文：董昭还以曹操的名义定信给李、郭汜等人，依照他们的权势轻重，分别致以问候。
English: Dong Zhao also sent a letter in the name of Cao Cao to Li, Guo Wei and others, according to their power, respectively, to send greetings.

古文：傕、汜见操使，以为关东欲自立天子，今曹操虽有使命，非其诚实，议留操使。
现代文：李、郭汜见到曹操的使者，认为关东诸将领想自己拥立皇帝，如今曹操虽然派使前来表示效忠，但并不是真心诚意。
English: When Li and Guo Wei saw Cao Cao's envoy, they thought that the generals in Guandong wanted to support the emperor. Although Cao Cao sent an envoy to show his loyalty, it was not sincere.

古文：黄门侍郎钟繇说傕、汜曰： 方今英雄并起，各矫命专制，唯曹兗州乃心王室，而逆其忠款，非所以副将来之望也？ 
现代文：李、郭二人商议，准备把使者扣留在长安。黄门侍郎钟繇向李、郭汜建议说： 如今天下英雄一同崛起，各自冒用朝廷的名义独断专行。唯有曹操心向王室。假如朝廷拒不接受他的忠诚，会使将来打算效法他的人失望。 
English: Li and Guo deliberated and prepared to detain the envoy in Chang'an. The Yellow Gate's chamberlain Zhong Xi suggested to Li and Guo Xi: If today's heroes rise together, each of them will use the name of the imperial court to arbitrarily rule. Only Cao Cao is loyal to the royal family. If the imperial court refuses to accept his loyalty, it will disappoint those who plan to emulate him in the future.

古文：傕、汜乃厚加报答。
现代文：李、郭汜于是款待曹操的来使，并给以很丰厚的回报。
English: Li and Guo Gan then entertained Cao Cao's envoy, and gave him a very rich reward.

古文：繇，皓之曾孙也。
现代文：钟繇是钟皓的曾孙。
English: Jonghyun is Jonghyun's great-grandson.

古文：徐州刺史陶谦与诸守相共奏记，推硃俊为太师，因移檄牧伯，欲以同讨李亻隺等，奉迎天子。
现代文：徐州刺史陶谦与各郡、国的太守、国相联合签署文书，推举车骑将军朱俊为太师。并用公文通知各州长官，号召共同讨伐李等人，奉迎天子返回洛阳。
English: Tao Qian, the governor of Xuzhou, jointly signed a document with the counties, the governor of the country, and the minister of state to nominate the cavalry general Zhu Jun as the grandmaster. He also used official documents to inform the governors, calling for a joint crusade against Li and others, and returning to Luoyang.

古文：会李傕用太尉周忠、尚书贾诩策，征俊入朝，俊乃辞谦议而就征，复为太仆。
现代文：正在这时，李采用太尉周忠、尚书贾诩的计谋，用皇帝名义征召朱俊入朝。于是朱俊辞谢陶谦的提议，应召入朝，又被任命为太仆。
English: It was at this time that Li used the stratagem of Taijun Zhouzhong and Shangshu Jiaxuan to recruit Zhu Jun into the imperial court in the name of the emperor. Therefore, Zhu Jun declined the proposal of Xie Taoqian, accepted the call to the imperial court, and was appointed as the servant of the emperor.

古文：公孙瓚复遣兵击袁绍，至龙氵奏，绍击破之。
现代文：公孙瓒又派遣军队进攻袁绍，到达龙凑，被袁绍军队击败。
English: Gongsun Kun also sent an army to attack Yuan Shao, reaching Longqin, and was defeated by Yuan Shao's army.

古文：瓚遂幽州，不敢复出。
现代文：公孙瓒于是退回幽州，不敢再出来。
English: Gongsun Yao then returned to Yuzhou, not daring to come out again.

古文：扬州刺史汝南陈温卒，袁绍使袁遗领扬州；袁术击破之。
现代文：扬州刺史、汝南人陈温去世。袁绍委派袁遗兼任扬州刺史。
English: Chen Wen, Yangzhou's chief historian and a native of southern Yunnan, passed away. Yuan Shao sent Yuan Yuan to serve as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：遗走至沛，为兵所杀。
现代文：袁术派军队击败袁遗，袁遗逃到沛，被乱兵杀死。
English: Yuan Shuxi sent troops to defeat Yuan Yue. Yuan Yue fled to Pei and was killed by the rioters.

古文：术以下邳陈瑀为扬州刺史。
现代文：袁术任命下邳人陈为扬州刺史。
English: Yuan Shou appointed his subordinate, Chen, as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：孝献皇帝乙初平四年
现代文：初平四年
English: Hatsuhira 4 years old

古文：春，正月，甲寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月，甲寅朔，出现日食。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the first day of the new year, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁卯，赦天下。
现代文：丁卯，大赦天下。
English: Dingwu, amnesty to the world.

古文：曹操军鄄城。
现代文：曹操驻军甄城。
English: Cao Cao stationed troops in Zhencheng.

古文：袁术为刘表所逼，引军屯封丘，黑山别部及匈奴于扶罗皆附之。
现代文：袁术受荆州刺史刘表军队的逼迫，率军移驻封兵，黑山军的一个分支部队与南匈奴单于於扶罗都归附袁术。
English: Yuan Shuxi was forced by the Jingzhou army led by Liu Biao to move his army to Fenghe. A branch of the Montenegrin army and the Southern Xiongnu army were both attached to Yuan Shuxi in Furao.

古文：曹操击破术军，遂围封丘。
现代文：曹操击败袁术军队，于是包围封丘。
English: Cao Cao defeated Yuan Shuxu's army, and then encircled Fengqiu.

古文：术走襄邑，又走宁陵。操追击。连破之。
现代文：袁术退到襄邑，又退到宁陵，曹操在后面追击，接连打败袁术。
English: Yuan Shu retreated to Xiangyun and then to Ningling. Cao Cao chased after him and defeated Yuan Shu one after another.

古文：术走九江，扬州剌史陈瑀拒术不纳。
现代文：袁术逃到九江，扬州刺史陈率军抵御，不许袁术入境。
English: Yuan Shuxu fled to Jiujiang, Yangzhou stabbed Chen and led the army to resist, and Yuan Shuxu was not allowed to enter.

古文：术退保阴陵，集兵于淮北，复进向寿春。
现代文：袁术退守阴陵，在淮河以北集结部队，又向寿春进军。
English: Yuan Shou retreated to Yinling, gathered troops north of the Huai River, and marched to Shouchun.

古文：瑀惧，走归下邳，术遂领其州，兼称徐州伯。
现代文：陈大为恐惧，逃回下邳。于是袁术占领寿春，自称扬州刺史，兼称徐州伯。
English: Chen Da was afraid and fled back to the Lower Yunnan. Therefore, Yuan Shu occupied Shouchun and called himself Yangzhou Zhishi, also known as Xuzhou Bo.

古文：李傕欲结术为援，以术为左将军，封阳翟侯，假节。
现代文：李想拉拢袁术作外援，便任命袁术为左将军，封阳翟侯，假节。
English: Li wanted to win over Yuan Shuxu as a foreign aid, so he appointed Yuan Shuxu as the left general, fenced Yang Zhou, and staged a false festival.

古文：袁绍与公孙瓚所置青州刺史田楷连战二年，士卒疲困，粮食并尽，互掠百姓，野无青草。
现代文：袁绍与公孙瓒所委任的青州刺史田楷连续作战两年，军队疲惫不堪，粮食全都吃尽，因抢掠百姓致使田地间连青草都难得见到。
English: Yuan Shao and Tian Kai, the Qingzhou warlord appointed by Gongsun Qian, fought for two consecutive years. The army was exhausted, the grain was all eaten up, and even the grass was hard to see between the fields due to the looting of the people.

古文：绍以其子谭为青州刺史，楷与战，不胜。
现代文：袁绍任命自己的儿子袁谭为青州刺史，田楷进攻袁谭，未能取胜。
English: Yuan Shao appointed his own son Yuan Tan as the governor of Qingzhou. Tian Kai attacked Yuan Tan and failed to win.

古文：会赵岐来和解关东，瓚乃与绍和亲，各引兵去。
现代文：正好朝廷派赵岐前来调解关东各州、郡的矛盾，公孙瓒于是与袁绍结为儿女亲家，各自率兵退回。
English: Just as the imperial court sent Zhao Qi to mediate the conflicts between the states and counties in the Kanto region, Gongsun Qian and Yuan Shao married and returned with their respective armies.

古文：三月，袁绍在薄落津。
现代文：三月，袁绍驻军薄落津。
English: In March, Yuan Shao's garrison left Tianjin.

古文：魏郡兵反，与黑山贼于毒等数万人共覆鄴城，杀其太守。
现代文：这时，他属下魏郡的士兵叛变，与黑山军于毒等数万人联合，攻占邺城，杀死魏郡太守。
English: At this time, the soldiers of Wei County under his command mutinied, united with tens of thousands of Montenegrins such as Yu Dang, captured the city of Handan, and killed the governor of Wei County.

古文：绍还屯斥丘。
现代文：袁绍率军回到斥丘。
English: Yuan Shao led the army back to the hill.

古文：夏，曹操还军定陶。
现代文：夏季，曹操大军回到定陶。
English: In the summer, Cao Cao's army returned to Dingtao.

古文：徐州治中东海王朗及别驾琅邪赵昱说刺史陶谦曰： 求诸侯莫如勤王，今天子越在西京，宜遣使奉贡。 
现代文：徐州治中、东海人王朗和别驾、琅邪人赵昱向刺史陶谦建议说： 要想求得诸侯的信任与拥护，最好的办法莫过于尊奉君王。如今天子流亡在长安，应该派遣使者前去进贡。 
English: Xuzhou Zhizhong, Wang Lang from the East China Sea, and Zhao Xi, a ruffian and scoundrel, suggested to Tao Qian: To gain the trust and support of the princes, the best way is to honor the king. If today's son is in exile in Chang'an, he should send an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：谦乃遣昱奉章至长安。
现代文：陶谦于是派赵昱作为使节，携带呈给皇帝的奏章到长安。
English: Therefore, Tao Qian sent Zhao Jun to Chang'an as an envoy to carry the musical score presented to the emperor.

古文：诏拜谦徐州牧，加安东将军，封溧阳侯。
现代文：献帝下诏任命陶谦为徐州牧，加授安东将军，封为溧阳侯。
English: Under the imperial edict, Tao Qian was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, promoted to the rank of general of Andong, and appointed as the marquis of Fenyang.

古文：以昱为广陵太守，朗为会稽太守。
现代文：任命赵昱为广陵太守，王朗为会稽太守。
English: He appointed Zhao Jun as the governor of Guangling and Wang Lang as the auditor of the association.

古文：是时，徐方百姓殷盛，谷实差丰，流民多归之。
现代文：当时，徐州地区百姓富裕，粮食丰足，各地流民多来投奔。
English: At that time, the people in Xuzhou region were rich and had plenty of grain, and many migrants from all over the country came to the region.

古文：而谦信用谗邪，疏远忠直，刑政不治，由是徐州渐乱。
现代文：但是陶谦信任奸佞小人，疏远忠直之士，司法及政务都管理不善，使得徐州政局也逐渐混乱。
English: However, Tao Qian trusted crooks, alienated honest people, and mismanaged the judiciary and government affairs, causing the political situation in Xuzhou to gradually become chaotic.

古文：许劭避地广陵，谦礼之甚厚，劭告其徒曰： 陶恭祖外慕声名，内非真正，待吾虽厚，其势必薄。 
现代文：许劭避难来到广陵，陶谦对他的礼节和待遇都很厚。许劭对他的门徒们说： 陶谦外表上追求尊重贤才的名声，但实际上他并不是正人君子。现在待我虽厚，将来必然会改变。 
English: Xu Rong took refuge in Guangling, and Tao Qian treated him with great courtesy. Xu Rong said to his disciples: "On the outside, Tao Qian pursues the reputation of respecting the wise, but in reality, he is not an upright gentleman. Although he treats me well now, he will surely change in the future."

古文：遂去之。
现代文：于是，他离开徐州。
English: So he left.

古文：后谦果捕诸寓士，人乃服其先识。
现代文：后来，陶谦果然大肆逮捕流亡到徐州的士大夫，人们才佩服许劭的先见之明。
English: Later, Tao Qian did indeed arrest the scholar-officials who had exiled to Xuzhou, and people could only admire Xu Xi's foresight.

古文：六月，扶风大雨雹。
现代文：六月，扶风郡下了大冰雹。
English: In June, large hailstones fell in Fufeng County.

古文：华山崩裂。
现代文：华山发生山崩。
English: Huashan has collapsed.

古文：太尉周忠免，以太仆硃俊为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：太尉周忠被免职，任命太仆朱俊为太尉，主持尚书事务。
English: Captain Zhou Zhong was removed from his post, and his manservant Zhu Jun was appointed captain to preside over the affairs of Shangshu.

古文：下邳阙宣聚众数千人，自称天子；陶谦击杀之。
现代文：下邳人阙宣聚集百姓数千人，自称天子。陶谦击斩阙宣。
English: Xiao Xuan gathered thousands of people and proclaimed himself to be the son of heaven. Tao Qian defeated him.

古文：大雨，昼夜二十馀日，漂没民居。
现代文：大雨昼夜不停地持续二十余日，淹没了许多百姓的住宅。
English: Heavy rain continued day and night for more than 20 days, flooding many people's homes.

古文：袁绍出军入朝歌鹿肠山，讨于毒，围攻五日，破之，斩毒及其众万馀级。
现代文：袁绍率军深入朝歌境内的鹿肠山，讨伐于毒。围攻五日，攻破于毒，斩杀于毒及其部下万余人。
English: Yuan Shao led the army deep into the Deer Sausage Mountain in the territory of the morning song, and fought with the poison. The siege lasted for five days, broke through the poison, and killed more than 10,000 people of the poison and its subordinates.

古文：绍遂寻山北行，进击诸贼左髭丈八等，皆斩之。
现代文：袁绍于是顺山北行，进攻左髭丈八等乱匪，将乱匪全部斩死。
English: Yuan Shao then went north along the mountain, attacked the gangsters such as Zuo Jiao Ba, and killed all the gangsters.

古文：又击刘石、青牛角、黄龙左校、郭大贤、李大目、于氐根等，复斩数万级，皆屠其屯壁。
现代文：又进击刘石、青牛角、黄龙左校、郭大贤、李大目、于氐根等，又斩杀数万人，乱匪的营寨全部遭到屠戮。
English: They also attacked Liu Shi, Qing Niu Jiao, Huang Long Zuo, Guo Da Xian, Li Dame, Yu Xieng, etc., and killed tens of thousands of people. All the bandits' camps were slaughtered.

古文：遂与黑山贼张燕及四营屠各、雁门乌桓战于常山。
现代文：最后，袁绍与黑山军张燕以及四营的匈奴屠名部落和雁门的乌桓部落在常山交战。
English: Next, he fought against the Montenegrin bandit Zhang Yan, as well as the four battalions of the Xiongnu army and the wild boars in Changshan.

古文：燕精兵数万，骑数千匹。
现代文：张燕有精兵数万人，战马数千匹。
English: Zhang Yan had tens of thousands of elite soldiers and thousands of horses.

古文：绍与吕布共击燕，连战十馀日，燕兵死伤虽多，绍军亦疲，遂俱退。
现代文：袁绍与吕布联合进攻张燕，一连战斗了十余天，张燕军死伤虽多，袁绍军也感到疲惫，于是双方自撤退。
English: Yuan Shao and Lv Bu jointly attacked Zhang Yan. They fought for more than ten days in a row. Although Zhang Yan's army suffered many deaths and injuries, Yuan Shao's army also felt tired, so both sides withdrew.

古文：吕布将士多暴横，绍患之，布因求还雒阳。
现代文：吕布部下的将士多凶横强暴，袁绍颇为厌恨。吕布于是请求返回洛阳。
English: The soldiers under Lü Bu were often cruel and violent, and Yuan Shao was quite disgusted. Lü Bu then requested to return to Luoyang.

古文：绍承制以布领司隶校尉，遣壮士送布，而阴图之。
现代文：袁绍用皇帝的名义任命吕布兼任隶校尉，派遣精壮武士护送吕布，命令他们暗中将他害死。
English: Yuan Shao, in the name of the emperor, appointed Lv Bu to serve concurrently as a sub-lieutenant, dispatched elite warriors to escort Lv Bu, and ordered them to secretly kill him.

古文：布使人鼓筝于帐中，密亡去，送者夜起，斫帐被皆坏。
现代文：吕布命人在他的帐内弹筝，自己悄悄地溜走了。武士们乘夜袭击吕布，帐篷和床被全部砍坏。
English: Lü Bu ordered someone to play the kite in his tent, and quietly slipped away. The warriors attacked Lü Bu at night, and the tent and bed were completely destroyed.

古文：明旦，绍闻布尚在，惧，闭城自守。
现代文：第二天早晨，袁绍得知吕布仍然活着，大为恐惧，下令关闭城门，严加防守。
English: The next morning, Yuan Shao was horrified to learn that Lü Bu was still alive, and ordered the city gates to be closed and the defenses to be strengthened.

古文：布引军复归张杨。
现代文：吕布率军再度依附张杨。
English: The army led by Lü Bu once again followed Zhang Yang.

古文：前太尉曹嵩避难在琅邪，其子操令泰山太守应邵迎之。
现代文：前任太尉曹嵩在琅邪躲避战乱，他的儿子曹操命令泰山郡太守应劭迎接曹嵩到兖州。
English: His son Cao Cao ordered the governor of Taishan County to welcome Cao Song to Zhangzhou.

古文：嵩辎重百馀两，陶谦别将守阴平，士卒利嵩财宝，掩袭嵩于华、费间，杀之，并少子德。
现代文：曹嵩携带辎重一百余车，陶谦的一个部将驻守在阴平县，其士兵贪图曹嵩的财产，于是在华县与费县的交界处发动袭击，杀死曹嵩和他的小儿子曹德。
English: Cao Song was carrying more than a hundred carts. A detachment of Tao Qian would be stationed in Yinping County. Its soldiers coveted Cao Song's property, so they launched an attack at the junction of Hua County and Fei County, killing Cao Song and his young son Cao De.

古文：秋，操引兵击谦，攻拔十馀城，至彭城，大战，谦兵败，走保郯。
现代文：秋天，曹操率军进攻陶谦，攻克十余城。到达彭城时，与陶谦的军队展开大战，陶谦战财，逃到郯县固守。
English: In autumn, Cao Cao led his army to attack Tao Qian and conquered more than ten cities. When he reached Pengcheng, he started a big war with Tao Qian's army. Tao Qian fought and fled to Shixian to hold on.

古文：初，京、雒遭董卓之乱，民流移东出，多依徐土，遇操至，坑杀男女数十万口于泗水，水为不流。
现代文：先前，洛阳一带遭受董卓之乱，百姓向东迁徒，大多投奔徐州。这次遇到曹操到来，男女老幼数十万人被驱赶到泗水河中淹死，尸体阻塞了河道，致使水不能流。
English: Previously, the Luoyang area suffered from the Dong Zhuo Rebellion, and the people migrated eastward, mostly to Xuzhou. This time, when Cao Cao arrived, hundreds of thousands of men, women and children were driven into the Surabaya River to drown, and the bodies blocked the river, causing the water not to flow.

古文：操攻郯不能克，乃去，攻取应、睢陵、夏丘，皆屠之，鸡犬亦尽，墟邑无复行人。
现代文：曹操围攻郯县，未能攻下，于是离开，攻取虑、睢陵、夏丘三县，所过之处全都遭到屠戮，鸡犬不留，旧城废址不再有行人。
English: Cao Cao besieged and attacked Ying County, but failed to capture it, so he left and attacked the three counties of Xian, Fuling and Xiaqiu. All the places he passed were slaughtered, the chickens and dogs did not stay, and there were no more pedestrians in the old city waste site.

古文：冬，十月，辛丑，京师地震。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛丑，京城长安发生地震。
English: In winter, October, Xinwu, the earthquake occurred in Beijing Chang'an.

古文：有星孛于天市。
现代文：有异星出现在天市星旁。
English: The comet appeared in the constellation Draco.

古文：司空杨彪免。
现代文：司空杨彪被免职。
English: Sikyong Yang Biao was removed from office.

古文：丙午，以太常赵温为司空，录尚书事。
现代文：丙午，任命太常赵温为司空，主持尚书事务。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, Zhao Wen, the First Secretary of the State Council, was appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force to preside over the affairs of the Air Force.

古文：刘虞与公孙瓚积不相能，瓚数与袁绍相攻，虞禁之，不可，而稍节其禀假。
现代文：幽州牧刘虞与公孙瓒之间的矛盾日益加深，公孙瓒数次与袁绍相互攻击，刘虞禁止无效，因而逐渐减少对公孙瓒的粮草供应。
English: The contradiction between the Yuzhou herdsmen Liu Yu and Gongsun Yao deepened day by day. Gongsun Yao and Yuan Shao attacked each other several times, and Liu Yu's ban was invalid, thus gradually reducing the supply of grain and grass to Gongsun Yao.

古文：瓚怒，屡违节度，又复侵犯百姓。
现代文：公孙瓒大怒，不断违背刘虞的命令，又经常侵掠百姓。
English: In anger, Gongsun Yao repeatedly disobeyed his orders and attacked the people.

古文：虞不能制，乃遣驿使奉章陈其暴掠之罪，瓚亦上虞禀粮不周。二奏交驰，互相非毁，朝廷依违而已。
现代文：刘虞无力制约，于是派遗上书陈述公孙瓒横暴掠夺百姓的罪状，公孙瓒也上书指责刘虞扣军粮。两人不断上奏，相互攻击，朝廷只能敷衍而已。
English: Liu Yu was powerless to restrain him, so he sent a posthumous petition to state Gongsun Yao's crime of violently plundering the people. Gongsun Yao also sent a petition to accuse Liu Yu of withholding military supplies. The two continued to play up and attack each other, and the imperial court could only perfunctory.

古文：瓚乃筑小城于蓟城东南以居之。
现代文：于是公孙瓒在蓟城的东南修筑一座小城，率军在内居住。
English: As a result, Gongsun Rong built a small city in the southeast of Licheng and led his army to live there.

古文：虞数请会，瓚辄称病不应；虞恐其终为乱，乃率所部兵合十万人以讨之。
现代文：刘虞几次请他会商，他都称病不肯前往。刘虞担心他终将叛乱，于是率领部下合计十万大军，计伐公孙瓒。
English: Liu Yu asked him to negotiate several times, but he claimed to be ill and refused to go. Liu Yu was worried that he would eventually rebel, so he led his subordinates with a total of 100,000 troops to attack Sun Quan.

古文：时瓚部曲放散在外，仓卒掘东城欲走，虞兵无部伍，不习战，又爱民庐舍，敕不听焚烧，戒军士曰： 无伤馀人，杀一伯珪而已。 
现代文：当时公孙瓒的部下都分散在外，仓卒之间掘开东城打算逃走，刘虞的部队没有纪律，缺乏训练，刘虞又爱惜百姓的房屋，下令不许纵火，他告诫士兵说： 不要伤害其他人，只杀公孙瓒一人。 
English: At that time, Gongsun Yao's subordinates were scattered outside, digging up Dongcheng in a hurry to escape. Liu Yu's troops were undisciplined and lacked training. Liu Yu also cherished the houses of the people and ordered that they should not be set on fire. He warned the soldiers: "Don't hurt others, only kill Gongsun Yao."

古文：攻围不下。
现代文：因此围兵战斗力不强，未能攻克。
English: As a result, the besieging forces did not have a strong combat capability and were unable to conquer the city.

古文：瓚乃简募锐士数百人，因风纵火，直冲突之，虞众大溃。
现代文：公孙瓒于是挑选了几百名勇士，乘风纵火，直冲突围，刘虞军队一下子溃散，刘虞与部下官属向北逃到居庸关。
English: Gongsun Yao then selected several hundred warriors, took advantage of the wind to set fire, and directly clashed with the siege, Liu Yu's army suddenly broke up, and Liu Yu and his subordinates fled north to Juyongguan.

古文：虞与官属北奔居庸，瓚追攻之，三日，城陷，执虞并妻子还蓟，犹使领州文书。
现代文：公孙瓒赶来，围攻居庸关，三日后攻下，把刘虞及其妻子儿女捉回蓟城，仍让刘虞签署州府的文书。
English: Gongsun Yao arrived, besieged Juyongguan, and three days later captured Liu Yu, his wife and children back to Handan, and still let Liu Yu sign the document of the state capital.

古文：会诏遣使者段训增虞封邑，督六州事；拜瓚前将军，封易侯。
现代文：正在此时，朝廷派使者段训宣布献帝诏书，增加刘虞的封邑，让他总官六州的事务；任命公孙瓒为前将军、封为易侯。
English: Just at this time, the imperial court sent an envoy, Duan Xun, to announce the imperial edict of dedication to the emperor, increasing Liu Yu's fiefs and making him the general of the six states; appointing Gongsun Ya as a former general and giving him the title of Yi Hou.

古文：瓚乃诬虞前与袁绍等谋称尊号，胁训斩虞及妻子于蓟市。
现代文：公孙瓒便乘机诬告刘虞先前曾与袁绍等人通谋要当皇帝，胁迫段训在蓟城的闹市处死刘虞及其妻子儿女。
English: Gongsun Qian then took the opportunity to falsely accuse Liu Yu of having previously conspired with Yuan Shao and others to become emperor, and coerced Duan Xun to execute Liu Yu, his wife and children in downtown Handan.

古文：故常山相孙瑾、掾张逸、张瓚等相与就虞，骂瓚极口，然后同死，瓚传虞首于京师，故吏尾敦于路劫虞首，归葬之。
现代文：前任常山国相孙瑾，掾张逸、张瓒等一同自动聚到刘虞周围，对公孙瓒破口大骂，然后与刘虞一起被杀。公孙瓒把刘虞的头颅送往京城长安，刘虞的旧部尾敦在半路上截下头颅，送回安葬。
English: Sun Yat-sen, Sun Yat-sen's son-in-law, Zhang Yat-sen, and Zhang Yat-sen, the former governors of Changshan, gathered around Liu Yu and cursed him, and then they were killed together with Liu Yu. Sun Yat-sen sent Liu Yu's head to the capital Chang'an, and Liu Yu's former subordinate, Oton, cut off his head halfway and sent it back for burial.

古文：虞以恩厚得众心，北州百姓流旧莫不痛惜。
现代文：刘虞为人宽厚，广施仁义，因此深得民心。幽州的百姓，无论是当地上著，还是流亡来的外乡人，无不痛惜他的惨死。
English: Liu Yu was a benevolent and generous man who won the hearts of the people. The people of Yuzhou, whether they were local residents or expatriates, all deplored his tragic death.

古文：初，虞欲遣使奉章诣长安，而难其人，众咸曰： 右北平田畴，年二十二，年虽少，然有奇材。 
现代文：当初，刘虞想派遗使者到长安去呈送奏章，但难以找到合迁的人选。众人都说： 右北平人田畴，今年二十二岁，年纪虽轻，然而却有奇才。 
English: At first, Liu Yu wanted to send a posthumous envoy to Chang'an to present the music chapter, but it was difficult to find a candidate for the relocation. Everyone said: Right North Pingren Tianzheng, 22 years old, although young, but he is a prodigy.

古文：虞乃备礼，请以为掾。
现代文：于是刘虞送上礼物，请他做自己的僚属。
English: So Liu Yu sent him a gift and asked him to be his colleague.

古文：具车骑将行，畴曰： 今道路阻绝，寇虏纵横，称官奉使，为众所指。
现代文：车马备好，将要出发的时候，田畴说： 如今道路阻断，盗寇横行，如果公开官方使者的身份，必会成为他们劫掠的目标。
English: When the chariots and horses were ready and about to set out, Tian Zang said: "Nowadays, the roads are blocked and thieves and robbers are rampant. If the identity of the official messenger is disclosed, it will surely become the target of their plunder.

古文：愿以私行，期于得达而已。 
现代文：我愿以平民百姓的身份私自前往，只要能到达长安就行。 
English: I am willing to go as a commoner, as long as I can get to Chang'an.

古文：虞从之。
现代文：刘虞同意了他的建议。
English: Liu Yu agreed to his suggestion.

古文：畴乃自选家客二十骑，俱上西关，出塞，傍北山，直趣朔方，循间道至长安致命。
现代文：田畴便在自己的门客中挑选二十名骑士，一道从居庸关出塞，沿阴山直抵朔方郡，再走小路到达长安，向朝廷呈上刘虞的奏章。
English: Tian Zhen then selected twenty knights from among his guests, and together they went from Juyongguan out of the city, along the Yinshan straight to Shuofang County, and then took a small road to Chang'an to present Liu Yu's record to the court.

古文：诏拜畴为骑都尉。
现代文：献帝下诏任命田畴为骑都尉。
English: Under the imperial edict of dedicating the emperor, Tian Zeng was appointed as a cavalry captain.

古文：畴以天子方蒙尘未安，不可以荷佩荣宠，固辞不受。
现代文：田畴认为皇帝流亡，蒙受垢辱，尚未安定，自己不能任官享受荣耀，因而坚决辞让不受。
English: Tian Zhen believed that the emperor had been exiled, humiliated, and unstable, and that he could not enjoy the glory of being an official, so he resolutely refused to resign.

古文：得报，驰还，比至，虞已死，畴谒祭虞墓，陈发章表，哭泣而去。
现代文：他得到朝廷回复的章报后，就急速赶回幽州。但等他回来时，刘虞已被杀害。田畴到刘虞墓前祭拜，陈放朝廷章报，并汇报其中内容，然后痛哭离去。
English: After he received the reply from the imperial court, he hurried back to Yuzhou. However, by the time he returned, Liu Yu had already been killed. Tian Zang went to Liu Yu's tomb to worship, display the imperial court's reply and report on its contents, and then left in tears.

古文：公孙瓚怒，购求获畴，谓曰： 汝不送章报我，何也？ 
现代文：公孙瓒知道后，大怒，悬赏捉拿田畴。捉到后，公孙瓒问田畴说： 你为什么不把朝廷的章报送给我？ 
English: After Sun Quan learned of this, he flew into a rage and offered a reward for the capture of Tian Zhen. After the capture, Sun Quan asked Tian Zhen, "Why didn't you give me the official newspaper of the imperial court?"

古文：畴曰： 汉室衰颓，人怀异心，唯刘公不失忠节。
现代文：田畴说： 汉朝王室势力衰微，人人都怀有异心，只有刘虞没有失去忠贞的节操。
English: Tian Zhengyi said: The power of the royal family in the Han Dynasty was waning. Everyone harbored heresy. Only Liu Yu did not lose the discipline of loyalty.

古文：章报所言，于将军未美，恐非所乐闻，故不进也。
现代文：章报中的内容，对将军并没有赞美之词，恐怕也不是将军所愿意看到的，因此我没有送来。
English: There was no praise for the general in the article, and I'm afraid it wasn't what the general wanted to see, so I didn't send it.

古文：且将军既灭无罪之君，又雠守义之臣，畴恐燕、赵之士皆将蹈东海而死，莫有从将军者也。 
现代文：而且，将军既然杀害无罪的上级，又分视固守节义的臣僚，我恐怕燕、赵地区的豪杰之士都将跳到东海里淹死，而没有人肯追随将军。 
English: Moreover, since the general killed his innocent superiors and discriminated against his loyal ministers, I am afraid that the heroes of Yan and Zhao regions will all jump into the East Sea and drown, and no one will follow the general.

古文：瓚乃释之。
现代文：公孙瓒只好将他释放。
English: Gongsun Yao had no choice but to release him.

古文：畴北归无终，率宗族及他附从者数百人，扫地而盟曰： 君仇不报，吾不可立于世！ 
现代文：田畴回到无终县，率领宗族以及归附他的数百人，扫地而盟誓说： 刘虞之仇不报，我不能再活在世上！ 
English: Tian Zong returned to Wufeng County, leading his clan and hundreds of people who had joined him, sweeping the ground and swearing: I will not avenge Liu Yu, I can no longer live in this world!

古文：遂入徐无山中，营深险平敞地而居，躬耕以养父母，百姓归之，数年间至五千馀家。
现代文：于是进入徐无山中，在深险之处找到一块平地，建立营寨居住。他亲自进行耕作，以奉养父母。百姓前来投奔，数年间增加到五千余家。
English: So he went into the middle of nowhere, found a flat piece of land in a dangerous place, and built a camp to live in. He cultivated it himself to support his parents. People came to join him, and in a few years it increased to more than five thousand.

古文：畴谓其父老曰： 今众成都邑，而莫相统一，又无法制以治之，恐非久安之道。
现代文：田畴对乡里父老说： 如今大家聚集到一起，已形成村镇，但不相统一，又没有法律来约束，这恐怕不是维持长久安定的方式。
English: Tian Zhen said to the village elders: Nowadays, everyone has gathered together to form villages and towns, but they are not unified, and there is no law to restrict them. This is probably not a way to maintain long-term stability.

古文：畴有愚计，愿与诸君共施之，可乎？ 
现代文：我有一个计划，愿意与诸位父老一起实施，可以吗？ 大家都说： 可以！ 
English: Tianzheng has a rough plan and hopes to implement it together with you, is it possible? Everyone said: Yes.

古文：皆曰： 可！ 畴乃为约束，相杀伤、犯盗、诤讼者，随轻重抵罪，重者至死，凡一十馀条。
现代文：于是，田畴制订法令，凡是相互杀伤、偷盗以及因争吵而告状的人，按照情节轻重予以处罚，最重的判处死刑，共十余条。
English: As a result, Tianzheng issued a decree, according to which anyone who killed or injured each other, stole, or sued because of a quarrel would be punished according to the severity of the circumstances, with the heaviest sentence being the death penalty, a total of more than ten articles.

古文：又制为婚姻嫁娶之礼，与学校讲授之业，班行于众，众皆便之，至道不拾遗。
现代文：他又制定婚姻嫁聚的礼仪和学堂讲授的课程。法令制订后，向众人公布实行，大家都乐于遵循，甚至路不拾遗。
English: He also formulated the etiquette of marriage and the curriculum to be taught in schools. After the decree was formulated, it was announced to everyone and implemented. Everyone was happy to follow it, and there was even no trace of it.

古文：北边翕然服其威信，乌桓、鲜卑各遣使致馈，畴悉抚纳，令不为寇。
现代文：北方边塞地区的人都很敬服田畴的威信，乌桓、鲜插部落分别派来向田畴致意，并送上礼物。
English: The people in the North Frontier Area respect the prestige of Tianzheng. The Wuhuan and the Xianjian tribes were sent separately to pay their respects to Tianzheng and send gifts.

古文：十二月，辛丑，地震。
现代文：十二月，辛丑，发生地震。
English: In December, Xinwu, an earthquake occurred.

古文：司空赵温免。
现代文：司空赵温被免职。
English: Secretary Zhao Wen was removed from his post.

古文：乙巳，以卫尉张喜为司空。
现代文：乙巳，任命卫尉张喜为司空。
English: At this time, Lieutenant Zhang Xi was appointed as Siku.

