古文：靖郭君善齐貌辨。
现代文：靖郭君对待门客齐貌辨非常友好。
English: Jing Guo treated his guests very friendly.

古文：齐貌辨之为人也多疵，门人弗说。
现代文：可是齐貌辨为人不拘小节，因此门客们都讨厌他。
English: However, Qiming is known to be a bit of a loose cannon, which is why his clients hate him.

古文：士尉以证靖郭君，靖郭君不听，士尉辞而去。
现代文：有个叫士尉的人曾为此劝说靖郭君赶走齐貌辨，靖郭君没有接受他的意见，士尉辞别离去。
English: A man called a sergeant had persuaded Jing Guo-kun to drive out Qi Maoban for this reason. Jing Guo-kun did not accept his opinion, and the sergeant resigned and left.

古文：孟尝君又窃以谏，靖郭君大怒曰： 刬而类，破吾家。苟可慊齐貌辨者，吾无辞为之。 
现代文：后来孟尝君田文也在暗中劝说驱逐齐貌君，没想到田婴却大发脾气说： 即使将来有人铲除我的家族，捣毁我的家业，只要能对齐貌辨有好处，我也宁可让他去做！ 
English: Later, Meng Yijun and Tian Wen also secretly persuaded the expulsion of Qi Maojun. Unexpectedly, Tian Yu lost his temper and said: Even if someone eradicates my family and destroys my family business in the future, as long as it can be beneficial to Qi Maojun, I would rather let him do it!

古文：于是舍之上舍，令长子御，旦暮进食。
现代文：从那以后田婴就给齐貌辨上等的客舍住，并且派长子为他驾车，朝夕侍候。
English: Since then, Tian Ying has given Qi Yan the best guest house to live, and sent his eldest son to drive for him and wait for him in the morning and evening.

古文：数年，威王薨，宣王立。
现代文：几年以后，齐威王驾崩，由田婴的异母兄宣王即位。
English: A few years later, King Qiwei passed away, and Tianying's half-brother, King Xuan, ascended the throne.

古文：靖郭君之交，大不善于宣王，辞而之薛，与齐貌辨俱留。
现代文：田婴跟宣王合不来，于是就离开首都到自己的封士薛地来住，齐貌辨也跟他一同到了薛城。
English: Tian Yu could not get along with Xuan Wang, so he left the capital to live with his cousin Xue Di. Qi Maoban also went to Xue Cheng with him.

古文：无几何，齐貌辨辞而行，请见宣王。靖郭君曰： 王之不说婴甚，公往必得死焉。 
现代文：没多久，齐貌辨决定辞别田婴，请求回到齐国去见宣王，这时田婴就说： 君王既然很讨厌我田婴，你去见他，必定会被其所杀！ 
English: Before long, Qimangban decided to bid farewell to Tianying and asked him to return to Qi to see King Xuan. At this time, Tianying said, "Since the king hates my Tianying, if you go to see him, you will surely be killed by him!"

古文：齐貌辨曰： 固不求生也，请必行。 
现代文：齐貌辨说： 臣根本就不想活，所以臣一定要去。 
English: Qimangdan said, "The minister doesn't want to live at all, so the minister must go."

古文：靖郭君不能止。
现代文：田婴也无法阻止，于是齐貌辨就去见宣王。
English: Tian Yu couldn't stop him, so he went to see Xuan Wang.

古文：齐貌辨行至齐，宣王闻之，藏怒以待之。
现代文：齐貌辨到了齐国首都临淄，宣王很早就知道他来，他满心怒气地等着齐貌辨。
English: Qi Gao had arrived in Linyi, the capital of Qi, and Xuan Wang had known for a long time that he was coming. He was waiting for Qi Gao to arrive, full of anger.

古文：齐貌辨见宣王，王曰： 子，靖郭君之所听爱夫。 
现代文：齐貌辨拜见宣王后，宣王首先问他说： 你是靖郭君手下的宠臣，靖郭君是不是一切都听你的呢？
English: After bowing to Queen Xuan, Xuan Wang first asked him: "You are the favorite of Yasuko's men. Does Yasuko listen to you in everything?"

古文：齐貌辨曰： 爱则有之，听则无有。
现代文：齐貌辨回答说： 臣是靖郭君的宠臣并不错，但要说靖郭君什么都听臣的那倒未必。
English: Qimangban replied, "It's not a bad thing if a vassal is a favorite vassal of Yasuko-kun, but it's not necessary to say that Yasuko-kun obeyed his vassal in everything.

古文：王之方为太子之时，辨谓靖郭君曰： 太子相不仁，过颐豕视，若是者信反。
现代文：大王还是太子时，臣曾对靖郭君说： 太子长相不仁，下巴太大，看起来好像一头猪。
English: When the great king was still a prince, a vassal once said to Jing Guojun: The prince is not kind, his chin is too big, he looks like a pig.

古文：不若废太子，更立卫姬婴儿郊师。 
现代文：让这种人当国王，施政必然违背正道，所以不如把太子废掉，改立卫姬之子效师为太子。 
English: If such a person were to become king, his administration would inevitably go against the right path. Therefore, it would be better to abolish the position of crown prince and install the son of Wei Ji, Koji, as crown prince.

古文：靖郭君泣而曰： 不可，吾不忍也。 
现代文：可是靖郭君竟然哭着对臣说： 不可以这样做，我不忍心这样做。 
English: However, Jing Guo Jun actually cried and said to his vassal: "You can't do this, I can't bear to do this."

古文：若听辨而为之，必无今日之患也。此为一。
现代文：假如靖郭君什么都听我的，那么靖郭君也不会遭受今天这样的迫害，此其一。
English: If Yasuko-kun had listened to me in everything, then Yasuko-kun would not have suffered such persecution today.

古文：至于薛，昭阳请以数倍之地易薛，辨又曰： 必听之。 
现代文：当靖君到了薛城，楚相昭阳要用几倍的土地来换薛地，我又向靖郭君说： 一定要接受这个请求。 
English: When Jing Jun arrived at Xuecheng, Chu Xiang Shoyang wanted to use several times more land to exchange for Xuecheng, and I said to Jing Guo Jun: You must accept this request.

古文：靖郭君曰： 受薛于先王，虽恶于后王，吾独谓先王何乎!
现代文：靖郭君说： 从先王那里接受薛地，现在即使与后王关系不好，如果把薛地交换出去，将来死后我向先王如何交待呢？
English: Jing Guo Jun said: If I accept Xue Di from the former king, even if the relationship with the former king is not good now, if I exchange Xue Di, how will I tell the former king after my death?

古文：且先王之庙在薛，吾岂可以先王之庙与楚乎! 
现代文：况且先王的宗庙就在薛地，我难道能把先王的宗庙交给楚国吗！ 
English: Moreover, the ancestral temple of the former king is in Xue Di. Can I give the ancestral temple of the former king to the state of Chu?

古文：又不肯听辨。
现代文：他又不肯听从我的建议。
English: He wouldn't listen to my advice.

古文：此为二。 
现代文：这是第二件事。 
English: That's the second thing.

古文：宣王大息，动于颜色，曰： 靖郭君之于寡人，一至此乎！
现代文：齐宣王听了不禁长声叹息，脸色也变了，说： 靖郭君对寡人的感情竟然深到这种程度啊！
English: After listening to this, Qi Xuanwang couldn't help but let out a long sigh, and his face also changed, saying, "Jing Guo's feelings for so few people are so deep!

古文：寡人少，殊不知此。
现代文：我太年轻了，很不了解这些事情。
English: I was too young and didn't know much about it.

古文：客肯为寡人来靖郭君乎? 
现代文：您愿意替我把靖郭君请回来吗？ 
English: Would you like to bring back Yasuko-kun for me?

古文：齐貌辨对曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：齐貌辨回答说： 谨遵王命。 
English: And he answered, I will do according to the king's commandment.

古文：靖郭君衣威王之衣，冠舞其剑，宣王自迎靖郭君于郊，望之而泣。
现代文：靖郭君穿戴上齐威王赐给的衣服帽子，佩带赐给的宝剑，齐宣王亲自到郊外迎接靖郭君，望着他就开始哭泣。
English: Jing Guo Jun put on the clothes and hat given to him by King Qi Wei, and wore the sword given to him. King Qi Xuan himself went to the suburbs to meet Jing Guo Jun, and began to cry when he looked at him.

古文：靖郭君至，因请相之。
现代文：靖郭君到了朝廷，齐宣王就请他做国相。
English: When Jing Guo Jun arrived at the imperial court, King Qi Xuan asked him to become the minister of state.

古文：靖郭君辞，不得已而受。
现代文：靖郭君表示辞谢，后来推辞不掉才接受了。
English: Yasuko expressed her thanks for his resignation, which was later accepted.

古文：七日，谢病强辞。靖郭君辞不得，三日而听。
现代文：七天以后，又以有病为名坚决要求辞职，一开始还是不被批准，三天之后齐宣王才批准他辞职。
English: Seven days later, he again insisted on resigning in the name of illness. At first, he was still not approved. Three days later, Qi Xuanwang approved his resignation.

古文：当是时，靖郭君可谓能自知人矣!
现代文：此时此刻，应该明白靖郭君有知人之明啊！
English: At this moment, it should be clear that Yasuko has acquaintances!

古文：能自知人，故人非之不为沮。
现代文：自己能够了解别人，所以即使有人非议那个人，他也不怀疑自己的判断力。
English: He is able to understand others, so even if someone criticizes that person, he does not doubt his judgment.

古文：此齐貌辨之所以外生乐患趣难者也。
现代文：这也就是齐貌辨之所以置生死于度外、乐于解忧患、急于救人危难的原因。
English: This is the reason why Qimangdian puts life and death in excess, is willing to solve problems, and is eager to save people in danger.

