古文：二刘殷许程柴任丘刘弘基，雍州池阳人。
现代文：刘弘基是雍州池阳县人。
English: Liu Hongji is from Yongzhou Chiyang County.

古文：少以廕补隋右勋侍。
现代文：少时因父荫补任隋右勋侍。
English: Due to his father's influence, he served as an attendant to the Sui Dynasty's right-hand man for a short time.

古文：大业末，从征辽，赀乏，行及汾阴，度后期且诛，遂与其属椎牛犯法，讽吏捕系。
现代文：大业末年，从征辽东，因家资贫乏，行至汾阴县时，自料误期依法当斩，便与其部属屠牛犯法，暗示县吏逮己入狱。
English: At the end of his career, when he went from the conquest of Liaodong to Shiyin County due to a lack of family resources, he broke the law of cow slaughter with his subordinates, suggesting that the county officials arrest him and put him in prison.

古文：岁余，以赎论，因亡命，盗马自给。
现代文：一年之后，按赎刑论处。随后亡命在外，盗马以自供给。
English: A year later, he was sentenced to atonement. Subsequently, he went into exile, stealing horses to feed himself.

古文：至太原，阴事高祖。
现代文：后来到达太原，暗自依附高祖。
English: Later, he arrived in Taiyuan and secretly clung to Gao Zu.

古文：又察太宗资度非常，益自托。
现代文：又见太宗才干度量非同寻常，更加委心自托。
English: I also see that Taizong's talent measurement is extraordinary, and he is more self-reliant.

古文：由是蒙亲礼，出入连骑，间至卧内。
现代文：由此大受礼遇信任，出入连骑，有时同入卧内。
English: As a result, they were treated with great courtesy and trust. They rode in and out together, and sometimes slept in the same bed.

古文：兵将举，弘基募士，得二千人。
现代文：将起兵时，弘基招募士卒，得到二千人。
English: When it was time to raise an army, Hiroki recruited soldiers and got 2,000 men.

古文：王威等鲠大事，弘基与长孙顺德伏閤后，麾左右执之。
现代文：王威等人梗阻大事，弘基与长孙顺德埋伏阁后，指挥左右卫士逮执王威等人。
English: Wang Wei and others obstructed the event. After Hongji and his eldest grandson Shunde ambushed the pavilion, he commanded the left and right guards to arrest Wang Wei and others.

古文：从攻下西河，宋老生败，弃马投堑，弘基斩其首，拜右光禄大夫。
现代文：随同攻下西河，宋老生战败，抛弃战马投入堑中，弘基斩其首级，晋爵为右光禄大夫。
English: Accompanying the capture of the West River, Song Laosheng was defeated, abandoned the warhorse and threw himself into the middle of the plough, Hongji cut off his head, and Jinjue became the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：师至蒲，引兵先济河，下冯翊。
现代文：义兵到达蒲州后，弘基引兵率先渡过黄河，攻下冯翊。
English: After the volunteers arrived in Puzhou, Hongji took the lead in crossing the Yellow River and captured Fenghuang.

古文：为渭北道大使，命殷开山副之。
现代文：授职为渭北道大使，以殷开山为副手。
English: He was appointed as the ambassador of North Gyeongsang Province, with Yin Kaishan as his deputy.

古文：西徇扶风，众至六万，南度渭，次长安故城，振队金光门。
现代文：西进略地于扶风，拥众达到六万，南渡渭河，屯驻于长安故城，振军示威于金光门。
English: The westward march took place in Fufeng, with the number of supporters reaching 60,000. The southward march took place in Shuhe, stationed in Chang'an Old Town, and the Zhenjun demonstration took place in Jinguangmen.

古文：隋将卫文升来拒，弘基逆击，擒甲士千余，马数百。
现代文：隋将卫文升前来迎战，弘基迎头痛击，擒获甲士千余人，战马数百匹。
English: Wei Wensheng, the Sui general, came to meet the battle, and Hongji hit him head-on, capturing more than a thousand warriors and hundreds of horses.

古文：时诸军尚未至，弘基最先胜。
现代文：当时诸军尚未到达，弘基先到，而且一战即胜。
English: At that time, the armies had not yet arrived, but Hongji arrived first and won the battle.

古文：高祖悦，赐马二十匹。
现代文：高祖大喜，赏赐良马二千匹。
English: Gao Zu was overjoyed and rewarded two thousand good horses.

古文：京师平，功第一，授右骁卫大将军。
现代文：京师平定后，论功为第一，授职右骁卫大将军。
English: After the subjugation of the Beijing division, the merit was the first, and he was awarded the post of right guard general.

古文：讨薛举，战浅水原，八总管军皆没，唯弘基一军战力，矢尽，为贼拘。
现代文：讨伐薛举时，大战于浅水原，八总管军全都陷没，惟独弘基一军尽力苦战，矢尽援绝，被贼抓获。
English: At the time of the campaign against Xueju, the great battle was in the shallow water plain, and the eight general management troops were all trapped. However, Hongji's army fought hard and did its best to help, and was captured by the thieves.

古文：帝以临难不屈，优护其家。
现代文：高祖认为他临难不屈，厚赐其家。
English: Gao Zu believed that he was unyielding in the face of difficulties and gave generously to his family.

古文：仁杲平，乃克归，官之如初。
现代文：薛仁杲平定后，方才返归京师，恢复其官爵如初。
English: It was only after the defeat of Xue Renzhen that he returned to Beijing and resumed his official title as before.

古文：刘武周犯太原，弘基屯平阳，复陷贼。
现代文：刘武周进犯太原，弘基屯驻于平阳，再次陷没于贼。
English: Liu Wuzhou invaded Taiyuan, Hongjitun was stationed in Pingyang, and once again fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：俄自拔归，授左一总管。
现代文：不久，自拔归来，授职为左一总管。
English: Soon after, he came back from retirement and was appointed as the first general manager.

古文：从秦王屯柏壁，以劲卒二千繇隰州趋西河，蹑贼归路。
现代文：随同秦王屯驻于柏壁，率精兵二千人从隰州直趋西河，截断贼寇退路。
English: Accompanied by Qin Wang Tun stationed in Baibi, he led 2,000 elite soldiers from Zhangzhou straight to the West River to cut off the retreat of the bandits.

古文：贼锐甚，弘基坚壁储勇。
现代文：当时贼寇兵锋甚锐，弘基坚守营垒以蓄其勇。
English: At that time, the bandit soldiers were very strong, and Hongji held the camp to gather his courage.

古文：及宋金刚遁走，率骑尾之介休，与王合击，大破之。
现代文：到宋金刚逃跑时，率领骑兵追至介休，与秦王合兵进击，大破其众。
English: When Song King Kong ran away, he led the cavalry to chase him to Jiehu, and joined forces with Qin Wang to attack, greatly beating the crowd.

古文：累封任国公。
现代文：累功封为任国公。
English: He was awarded the title of kokugo.

古文：从击刘黑闼，还，除井钺将军。
现代文：不久随同进击刘黑闼，返回后，授职为井钺将军。
English: Soon after, he accompanied Liu Heibei to attack, and after returning, he was awarded the post of General Jingye.

古文：会突厥患边，督步骑万人备塞，自豳北东拒子午岭，西抵临泾，筑障遮虏。
现代文：后遇突厥进犯边郡，弘基督率步骑兵一万人守备边塞，从州北界东至子午岭，西达临泾，修筑障塞，拦截虏寇。
English: Later, when the Turks invaded Fuxian County, Hong Christ led 10,000 infantry and cavalry to defend the border fortress, from the northern border of the state east to Ziwu Ling, west of Linyi, to build a barrier and intercept the invaders.

古文：贞观初，李孝常等谋反，坐与交，除名为民。
现代文：贞观初年，李孝常等人谋反，弘基坐与他们交游之罪，被除职为民。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Li Xiaozhang and others plotted a rebellion, and Hongji was removed from office for the crime of associating with them.

古文：岁余，起为易州刺史，复封爵。
现代文：一年后，起用为易州刺史，恢复原有的封爵。
English: A year later, he was appointed as the governor of Yizhou and restored his original knighthood.

古文：召授卫尉卿，改封夔国。
现代文：后招授为卫尉卿，改封为夔国公。
English: Later, he was promoted to Captain of the Imperial Guards, and his title was changed to Lord of Shikoku.

古文：以老乞骸，为辅国大将军，朝朔望，禄赐同职事。
现代文：随后因年老请求离休，朝廷授予他辅国大将军之衔，命他每月逢朔望入朝，俸禄赏赐与职事官相同。
English: Subsequently, he asked to retire due to old age, and the Imperial Court awarded him the rank of Assistant Grand Admiral, ordered him to visit the Imperial Court every month, and awarded him the same salary as a staff officer.

古文：太宗征辽，召为前军大总管，战驻跸山，有功，累加封户至千一百。
现代文：太宗征讨辽东，征召弘基为前军大总管，力战于驻跸山，立有战功，累增封邑至一千一百户。
English: Taizong led a campaign to conquer Liaodong, and recruited Hongji as the commander-in-chief of the former army. He fought bravely in Shaoshan, where he distinguished himself in battle, and increased the number of fiefs to 1,100.

古文：时贼营四面阻水，惟一路得入。
现代文：去世之后，赠予开府仪同三司、并州都督，陪葬于昭陵，谥为襄。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Kaifu Yi and the three offices, as well as the title of prefectural governor, and was buried in the Zhaolin Mausoleum with his wife.

古文：钦明欲选将简兵，乘夜袭贼也，而城中无寤其瘦者，遂见害。
现代文：当初，弘基生病时，就分给诸子奴婢，每人各为十五人，田地各为五顷，并对所亲近之人说： 如子孙有贤才，本来就不需凭借财富之多；如无贤才，守此产业就可免于饥寒了。 
English: At first, when Hongji fell ill, he distributed slaves and maidservants to his sons, each with fifteen people, and five hectares of fields each, and said to those close to him: If the descendants are talented, they do not need to rely on wealth; if they are not talented, they can keep this property free from hunger and cold.

古文：兄弟死王事，世名其忠。
现代文：其余财产全都分给亲戚乡邻。其子仁实，承袭了他的封爵。
English: The rest of the property was all divided among relatives and neighbors. His son, Rensho, inherited his title.

古文：程知节本名咬金，济州东阿人。
现代文：程知节原名程咬金，济州东阿县人。
English: Chengzhi Festival's original name was Cheng Niu Jin. He was from Donga County, Jeju.

古文：善马槊。
现代文：善使马槊。
English: He is good at riding a horse.

古文：隋末，所在盗起，知节聚众数百保乡里。
现代文：隋朝末年，所居地区盗贼蜂起，程咬金聚众数百人共保乡里。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, thieves in the area where he lived rose up, and Cheng Bi Jin gathered hundreds of people to jointly protect the township.

古文：后事李密，而密料士八千隶四骠骑，分左右以自卫，号 内军 ，常曰： 此可当百万。 
现代文：后来归附李密，当时李密挑选勇士八千人隶属于四骠骑，分为左右两班以自卫，号称 内军 。李密常对人说 ：这八千人抵得上百万大军。 
English: Later, it was attached to Li Mi. At that time, Li Mi selected eight thousand warriors to be subordinated to the four horsemen, divided into two groups for self-defense, known as the Inner Army. Li Mi often said to people: These eight thousand people are equal to a million-strong army.

古文：知节领骠骑之一，恩遇隆特。
现代文：程知节管领四骠骑之一，所受恩遇特别隆厚。
English: Cheng Zhi Jie was in charge of one of the four horsemen during the festival. He was treated to a particularly grand occasion.

古文：王世充与密战，知节以内骑营北邙，单雄信以外骑营偃师。
现代文：王世充与李密决战，程知节率领内骑扎营于北邙山上，单雄信率领外骑扎营于偃师。
English: Wang Shichong and Li Mi fought a decisive battle. Cheng Zhiset led the Inner Cavalry and encamped on Beilun Mountain, and Shan Xiongxin led the Outer Cavalry and encamped in Long Division.

古文：世充袭雄信，密遣知节及裴行俨助之。
现代文：王世充袭击单雄信营垒，李密派遣程知节与裴行俨前去救援，裴行俨被流箭中，坠落马下。
English: Wang Shichong attacked the camp of Shan Xiongxin, Li Mi sent Cheng Zhijie and Pei Xingyao to the rescue. Pei Xingyao was hit by a stray arrow and fell under the horse.

古文：行俨中流矢坠马，知节驰救之，杀数人，军辟易，乃抱行俨重骑驰。
现代文：程知节驰马救援，连杀数人，趁敌军后退之机，抱起裴行俨驰马回奔。
English: Cheng Zhi Jie galloped to the rescue, killed several people in quick succession, took advantage of the enemy's retreat, picked up Pei Xing and galloped back.

古文：追兵以槊撞之，知节折其槊，斩追者，乃免。
现代文：追兵用槊刺击，程知节折断其槊，斩杀追兵，方才免于此难。
English: The pursuer stabbed him with a crossbow, but Cheng Zhijie broke his crossbow and killed the pursuer. Only then was he saved from this difficulty.

古文：后密败，为世充所获。
现代文：后来李密失败，为王世充所得。
English: Later, Li Mi failed, and Wang Shichong won.

古文：恶其为人，与秦叔宝来奔，授秦王府左三统军。
现代文：程知节厌恶王世充的为人，与秦叔宝一道前来奔投。授职为秦王府左三统军。
English: Cheng Zhi Jie detested Wang Shichong as a person, and came to invest with Qin Shubao. He was awarded the post of Qin King's Left Third United Army.

古文：从破宋金刚、窦建德、王世充，并领左一马军总管，搴旗先登者不一，以功封宿国公。
现代文：随从秦王攻破宋金刚、窦建德、王世充，并领左一马军总管，每逢出征，常常举旗先登，因屡建战功被封为宿国公。
English: He followed the Qin King to defeat Song King Kong, Dou Jiande, Wang Shichong, and led the left one horse army commander-in-chief. Whenever he went to war, he often raised the flag first. Because of his repeated war achievements, he was named the host country's prince.

古文：七年，隐太子谮之，出为康州刺史，白秦王曰： 大王去左右手矣，身欲久全，得乎？
现代文：武德七年，隐太子建成上谗言于高祖，派他出任康州刺史。程知节告知秦王说： 大王被去掉左膀右臂，要想使自己得到长久的保全，能做得到吗？
English: In the seventh year of King Wu De, Prince Yin Jiancheng spoke to Gao Zu and sent him to serve as the Kangzhou chief historian. Cheng Zhisai told King Qin that: The great king was deprived of his left arm and right arm. If you want to keep yourself safe for a long time, can you do it?

古文：知节有死，不敢去！ 
现代文：知节有死而已，不敢离开大王身边！ 
English: Zhi Jie only knows death, he dares not leave the great king's side!

古文：事平，拜太子右卫率。
现代文：乱事平定之后，授职为太子右卫率。
English: After the turmoil was quelled, he was given the post of crown prince.

古文：寻迁右武卫大将军，实封七百户。
现代文：不久迁任右武卫大将军，享受实封七百户。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and enjoyed a stipend of 700 households.

古文：贞观中，历泸州都督、左领军大将军，改封卢国。
现代文：贞观年间，历任泸州都督、左领军大将军。改封为卢国公。
English: During Zhenguan's reign, the successive governors of Zhangzhou and the general leading the left-wing army were renamed Lu Guogong.

古文：显庆二年，授葱山道行军大总管，以讨贺鲁。
现代文：显庆二年，授职为葱山道行军大总管以征讨贺鲁。
English: In the second year of Xianqing, he was appointed as the general manager of the march to conquer Helu.

古文：师次怛笃城，胡人数千出降，知节屠其城去，贺鲁因远遁。
现代文：军队进驻怛笃城时，有胡人数千家开门出降，程知节屠杀其城军民后离去，贺鲁因此而远逃他方。
English: When the army entered the city of Fengtu, thousands of Hu people opened their doors and surrendered. Cheng Zhijie massacred his city's soldiers and people and left. As a result, Horu fled far away.

古文：有如朕子弟不幸死，当此奏邪！ 
现代文：军队返回后，坐罪免官。不久，又被起用为岐州刺史，随后离休。
English: After the return of the army, he was exonerated. Soon, he was appointed as a historian of Kishu, and then retired.

古文：自是大臣丧，遂不对仗奏云。
现代文：去世后，赠予骠骑大将军、益州大都督、陪葬于昭陵。
English: After his death, he was given the title of General of Cavalry and the title of Grand Governor of Yizhou, and was buried in the Zhaoling Mausoleum.

古文：丘和，河南洛阳人，后徙家郿。
现代文：其子程处亮，娶清河公主为妻。丘和是河南府洛阳县人，后来徙家于郿县。
English: His son, Cheng Chueliang, married Princess Qinghe. Yuhe was born in Luoyang County, Henan Province, and later moved to Minxian County.

古文：少重气侠，闲弓马，长乃折节自将。
现代文：少时重义任侠，娴熟弓马，年长后才折节自修。
English: When he was young, he was a chivalrous knight, skilled in archery and horsemanship. When he was older, he became a self-taught swordsman.

古文：仕周开府仪同三司。
现代文：出仕北周为开府仪同三司。
English: North Zhou is responsible for the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：入隋为右武卫将军，封平城郡公，历资、梁、蒲三州刺史，以宽惠著名。
现代文：入隋后任职右武卫将军，封为平城郡公，历任资、梁、蒲三州刺史，治政以宽大慈惠闻名。
English: After entering the Sui Dynasty, he served as General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, was appointed as the first governor of Pingcheng County, and served as the governor of Zhu, Liang, and Pu three provinces. He was known for his lenient and benevolent governance.

古文：汉王谅反，使卒衣妇人衣，袭取蒲州，和挺身免，坐废为民。
现代文：汉王杨谅造反，派其兵士穿妇人之衣，袭取蒲州，丘和脱身免难，坐此过失被罢职为民。
English: The Han king Yang Peng rebelled and sent his soldiers dressed in women's clothing to attack Puzhou, the hill and escape was inevitable. He was dismissed from his post for this mistake.

古文：宇文述有宠，和倾心附纳。
现代文：当时宇文述正受宠信，丘和倾心结纳依附于他。
English: At that time, Yu Wenshu was being favored by the letter, and the hill and the heart attached to him.

古文：俄以发武陵公元胄罪，复拜代州刺史。
现代文：不久因告发武陵公元胄之罪，复职就任为代州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated as daishu shishi due to the crime of denouncing Wuling A.D. Sheng.

古文：炀帝北巡，和馈献精腆，至朔州，而刺史杨廓无所进，帝不悦。
现代文：炀帝北巡经过代州，丘和献食很是精细丰盛。到达朔州时，刺史杨廓无所进献，炀帝很不高兴。
English: Emperor Gao's northern tour passed through Daizhou, and the hills and offerings were very fine and plentiful. When he arrived in Shuozhou, Emperor Gao was very unhappy because there was nothing to offer.

古文：述盛称和美，帝用为博陵太守，诏廓就视和为式。
现代文：宇文述又盛赞丘和的好处，炀帝便派丘和任职为博陵太守，下诏杨廓前往博陵向丘和学习。
English: Yu Wen also praised the benefits of Qiu He. Emperor Qian sent Qiu He to serve as the governor of Boling, and Yang Kuo went to Boling to study Qiu He.

古文：后帝过博陵，和上食加丰，愈喜。
现代文：后来炀帝经过博陵，丘和献食更为丰盛，炀帝更加高兴。
English: Later, Emperor Gong passed through Boling, the hills and offerings were more plentiful, and Emperor Gong was even happier.

古文：由是所过竞为珍侈献，自和发也。
现代文：由此所过之处尽献奇珍异品，大肆奢侈，此风自丘和而起。
English: From this, all the places I passed were full of strange and rare items, extravagant luxury, and this wind started from the hill.

古文：然和善抚吏士，得其心。
现代文：但丘和善于抚慰吏士，得其欢心。
English: But Danyuoka was good at soothing officials and won their favor.

古文：迁天水郡守，入为左御卫将军。
现代文：不久迁任天水郡太守，入朝为左御卫将军。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of the governor of Tianshui County and entered the imperial court as General Zuo Wei.

古文：大业末，海南苦吏侵，数怨畔。
现代文：大业末年，海南地区苦于官吏侵渔贪婪，百姓多次叛乱。
English: In the last years of the Taiei era, the Hainan region suffered from the greed of officials encroaching on fishing, and the people rebelled many times.

古文：帝以和所莅称淳良，而黄门侍郎裴矩亦荐之，遂拜交址太过，抚接尽情，荒憬安之。
现代文：炀帝认为丘和治政淳良宽厚，而黄门侍郎裴矩也推荐他出任其职，便派丘和任职为交趾太守，他抚慰吏民，尽通其情，由此荒地之区得以安定。
English: Emperor Yao thought that Qiu and Zhi Zheng were kind and generous, and the Yellow Gate Chamberlain Pei Ru recommended him for the post. He then sent Qiu and Zhi Zheng to serve as Koji Taishu. He comforted the officials and the people and did his best, and thus the wasteland area was stabilized.

古文：炀帝崩，而和未知。
现代文：炀帝去世，而丘和不知。
English: Emperor Xuan died, and the hills and the unknown.

古文：于是鸿胪卿宁长真举郁林附萧铣，冯盎举珠崖、番禺附林士弘，各遣使招和，不从。
现代文：当时鸿胪卿宁长真举郁林郡依附萧铣，冯盎举珠崖、番禺之地依附林士弘，各自遣使招抚丘和，丘和概不依从。
English: At that time, Hongtao Lord Ning Changzheng made Yu Lin County subordinate to Xiao Qi, and Feng Ang made Zhuyao and Panyu County subordinate to Lin Shihong. They both sent envoys to summon Qiu He, but Qiu He did not obey.

古文：林邑西诸国，数遗和明珠、文犀、金宝，故和富埒王者。
现代文：林邑之西各国，多次赠送丘和明珠、文犀、金宝，以故丘和富比王者。
English: The western countries of Lin-yi have repeatedly given gifts of hills and pearls, rhinoceroses, and gold, with the former hills and King Fubi.

古文：铣闻，利之，命长真以南粤蛮、俚攻交址，和遣长史高士廉率兵击走之，郡为树石勒其功。
现代文：萧铣闻之，欲图其利，便命宁长真率领南粤蛮俚进攻交趾。丘和派遣长史高士廉率兵将其击退，该郡为此树碑纪功。
English: Xiao Yu heard of this and wanted to take advantage of it, so he ordered Ning Changzheng to lead the Southern Guangdong Barbarians to attack. Yau and dispatched Long Shi Gao Shiliang to lead the troops to repel them, and the county made a great contribution to this monument.

古文：会隋骁果自江都来，乃审隋亡，和即陈款归国，而岭峤闭岨，乃权附铣。
现代文：后遇旧时骁勇士卒从江都返回，才知道隋朝已亡，丘和随即奉表归国，但由于岭表闭阻，便暂且依附萧铣。
English: Later, when the old time warriors returned from the Yangtze River, they knew that the Sui Dynasty had died. Yau He immediately returned to the table, but because the ridge table was blocked, he temporarily adhered to Xiao Yu.

古文：铣平，遂得归。
现代文：萧铣平定后，方才得以归朝。
English: It was only after Xiao Yu was subdued that Fang was able to return to the imperial court.

古文：诏李道裕即授和交州大总管，爵谭国公。
现代文：下诏李道裕随即授予丘和交州大总管之职，封为谭国公。
English: In the following edict, Li Daoyu immediately awarded Yau and Jiaozhou the post of general manager of the university, and he was named Tan Guogong.

古文：和遣士廉奉表请入朝，诏其子师利迎之。
现代文：丘和派高士廉奉表奏请入朝，下诏由其子师利前往迎接。
English: Yau and Gao Shi-Lian, a member of the faction, were invited to the Imperial Court with a formal invitation, and their son, Li Shili, went to meet them.

古文：及谒见，高祖为兴，引入卧内，语平生，欢甚，奏九部乐飨之，除左武候大将军。
现代文：到朝见之时，高祖为他起身，引入卧内，话说平生，极为高兴，演奏九部乐曲以佐宴飨，授职左武侯大将军。
English: When it was time to see him in the morning, Gaozu got up for him, led him into the bedchamber, and said that he had never been so happy in his life. He played nine pieces of music to serve as a banquet, and was awarded the post of General of the Left Wu.

古文：和时已老，以稷州其故乡也，令为刺史以自养。
现代文：丘和时已年老，因稷州是其故乡，命他就任刺史以自怡养。
English: As Yao He was already old, he was appointed to the post of chief historian to support himself since Zhangzhou was his hometown.

古文：寻除特进。
现代文：不久，加衔为特进。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of special advance.

古文：贞观十一年卒，年八十六，赠荆州总管，谥曰襄，陪葬献陵。
现代文：贞观十一年去世，时年八十六岁。赠予荆州总管，谥为襄，陪葬于献陵。
English: Zhenguan died in the eleventh year, at the age of eighty-six. He was given to the Jingzhou chief administrator, and was buried with him in the mausoleum.

古文：有子十五人，多至大官，而行恭为知名。
现代文：丘和有十五个儿子，多数任职为大官，其中丘行恭最为知名。
English: Yau had fifteen sons, most of whom served as senior officials, of whom Yau Yukong was the best known.

古文：行恭有勇，善骑射。
现代文：丘和之子丘行恭，富有勇力，善于骑射。
English: Oka and his son, Oka Gyokong, were brave and good at horseback archery.

古文：大业末，与兄师利聚兵万人保郿城，人多依之，群盗不敢窥境。
现代文：大业末年，与丘师利集聚兵马万人守卫城，人们多来依附，群盗不敢窥视其境。
English: At the end of the Taiei era, thousands of soldiers and horses were gathered with Qiu Shili to guard the city. Many people came to attach themselves, and the bandits did not dare to peek into their territory.

古文：后原州奴贼围扶风，太守窦璡坚守。
现代文：其后原州奴贼包围扶风，太守窦坚守其城。
English: After that, the slave-thieves of Wonju surrounded Fufeng, and the grand marshal Dou held fast to his city.

古文：贼食尽无所掠，众稍散归行恭。
现代文：贼寇食尽，野无所掠，其众渐渐散归于行恭。
English: The bandits were exhausted and had nothing left to steal, so they gradually dispersed and returned to Xingxiong.

古文：行恭遣其酋说贼共迎高祖，乃自率五百人负粮持牛酒诣贼营。
现代文：行恭派遣其小头目细说贼首共同迎附高祖，随后亲率五百人背粮携带牛酒前往贼营。
English: Xing Qiong sent his minor leader, Xiao Zhaodong, to jointly welcome Gao Zu, and then he and his relatives led five hundred people to carry grain and wine to the thieves' camp.

古文：奴帅长揖，行恭手斩之，谓众曰： 若皆豪桀也，何为事奴乎？
现代文：奴帅长揖不拜，行恭挥手斩杀其人，对众人说 ：你们都是英雄豪杰，为何侍奉奴才呢？
English: The commander-in-chief did not bow, but killed his men with a wave of his hand, saying to everyone: You are all heroes, why do you serve slaves?

古文：使天下号曰奴贼。 
现代文：使得天下之人称你们为奴贼。 
English: That's why people all over the world call you bastards.

古文：众皆伏，曰： 愿改事公。 
现代文：众人全都俯伏，说： 情愿改奉您为首领。 
English: And all the people fell on their faces, and said, We will be thy servants.

古文：行恭乃率其众，与师利迎谒秦王于渭北，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：行恭便率领其众，与师利一道迎见秦王于渭北，授职为光禄大夫。
English: Xing Qiong then led his people and, together with his teacher Li, met the Qin King in the north of Anhui Province, and was awarded the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：累从战伐，功多，迁左一府骠骑，锡劳甚厚。
现代文：多次随同征战，因功多，迁任左一府骠骑，所受赏赐甚厚。
English: He went to war with them many times, and because of his great service, he was transferred to the left wing of the army and received a great reward.

古文：隐太子诛，以功擢左卫将军。
现代文：隐太子被诛后，因功升任左卫将军。
English: After Prince Inzai was imprisoned, he was promoted to General of the Left Division for his service.

古文：贞观中，坐与兄争葬所生母，废为民。
现代文：贞观年间，坐与其兄争葬所生之母，被法司劾奏，免职为民。
English: During the Zhenguan years, he and his brother quarreled over the burial of their mother. He was impeached by the legal department and removed from office.

古文：从侯君集平高昌，封天水郡公，进右武候将军。
现代文：后随侯君集平定高昌，被封为天水郡公，升任右武侯将军。
English: Later, he became the lord of Tianshui County, and was promoted to the position of General of the Right Military Region, after he subdued Gaochang.

古文：高宗立，迁大将军、冀陕二州刺史，致仕。
现代文：高宗即位后，迁任大将军，冀、陕二州刺史，不久离休。
English: After Gao Zong ascended the throne, he was transferred to the post of general and made history in Hebei and Shaanxi provinces. He retired soon after.

古文：卒，年八十，赠荆州刺史，谥曰襄，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：去世时年龄为八十岁，赠予荆州刺史，谥为襄，陪葬于昭陵。
English: At the time of his death, he was eighty years old. He was given the Jingzhou Sashih, and was buried in the Zhao Mausoleum.

古文：行恭所守严烈，僚吏畏之。
现代文：行恭性情严酷，僚属都很害怕，但多次坐事免职。
English: Xing Qiong's temperament was harsh, and his colleagues and subordinates were afraid of him, but he was removed from office many times.

古文：数坐事免，太宗思其功，不逾时辄复官。
现代文：太宗思念其功，往往不超过一季就恢复官职。
English: Taizong thought about his merits and often resumed his official duties in no more than one season.

古文：初，从讨王世充，战邙山。
现代文：起初，随从征讨王世充，会战于邙山之上。
English: At first, Wang Shichong, a follower of the conquest, would fight on Lushan.

古文：太宗欲尝贼虚实，与数十骑冲出阵后，多所杀伤，而限长堤，与诸骑相失，唯行恭从。
现代文：太宗想要试探贼军虚实，亲率数十名骑兵冲出阵后，多所杀伤。但随即因长堤限阻，与诸骑相失，惟有行恭跟随其后。
English: Taizong wanted to test the truth and falsity of the bandits. After his relatives and dozens of cavalrymen rushed out of the battle, many were killed. But then, due to the long embankment, they lost to the horsemen, only Xing Gong followed.

古文：贼骑追及，流矢著太宗马，行恭回射之，发无虚镞，贼不敢前。
现代文：贼骑追至，流矢射中太宗所乘之马，行恭回射敌骑，箭无虚发，贼骑不敢近前。
English: The thief on horseback chased after him, shooting arrows in the direction of the horse that Taizong was riding, and then shooting back at the enemy on horseback. The arrows were effective, and the thief on horseback did not dare to approach.

古文：遂下拔箭，以己马进太宗，步执长刀，大呼导之，斩数人，突阵而还。
现代文：然后下马拔箭，将自己所乘之马进奉太宗，手执长刀步行，大呼引导，连斩数人，方才冲出敌阵返回大军。
English: Then he dismounted, drew his arrows, rode his horse to Feng Taizong, walked with a long sword in his hand, shouted for guidance, and killed several people in quick succession. Only then did he rush out of the enemy lines and return to the main army.

古文：贞观中，诏斫石为人马，象拔箭状，立昭陵阙前，以旌武功云。
现代文：贞观年间，下诏凿石为人马，以模仿行恭拔箭之状，立于昭陵阙前，以旌表其武功。
English: During the reign of Zhenguan, the Lower Zhao chiseled the stone into a horse and stood in front of the Zhao Mausoleum in the shape of an arrow, imitating the act of saluting and drawing the arrow, to show his martial prowess.

古文：子神勣，见《酷吏传》。
现代文：其子神责力，事迹见《酷吏传》。
English: His son, Shinnyo Riki, is described in "Kuru Rikiden."

