古文：乔宇，字希大，山西乐平人。
现代文：乔宇，字希大，山西乐平人。
English: Qiao Yu, character Xida, Shanxi Leping people.

古文：祖毅，工部左侍郎。
现代文：祖父乔毅曾当过工部左侍郎。
English: Grandfather Qiao Yi was once the left-hand man of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：父凤，职方郎中。
现代文：父亲乔凤当过职方郎中。
English: His father, Qiao Feng, was once a middle school teacher's assistant.

古文：皆以清节显。
现代文：他们都以廉洁著名。
English: They are all known for their integrity.

古文：宇登成化二十年进士，授礼部主事。
现代文：乔宇自己考中成化二十年进士，初任礼部主事。
English: Qiao Yu himself became a member of the middle school entrance examination for twenty years, and was the first head of the ceremonial department.

古文：弘治初，王恕为吏部，调之文选，三迁至郎中。
现代文：弘治初年，王恕当吏部尚书时调他到文选司，三次升迁做到郎中。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, when Wang Shou was in charge of the personnel department of Shangshu, he was transferred to the anthology department, and he was promoted three times to become a henchman.

古文：门无私谒。
现代文：他在自己家中从不接受私人拜访。
English: He never receives private visits in his own home.

古文：擢太常少卿。
现代文：后来他升任太常少卿。
English: Zhong Huamin was promoted to Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：武宗嗣位，遣祀中镇、西海。
现代文：武宗即位后，派乔宇到中镇、西海祭神。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, he sent Qiao Yu to Zhongzheng and the West Sea to offer sacrifices to the gods.

古文：还朝，条上道中所见军民困苦六事。
现代文：回朝后，乔宇上书列举了六点路上所看到的军民百姓困苦不堪的情况。
English: After returning to the DPRK, Qiao Yu listed in his letter the hardships of the soldiers and civilians he saw on the six o'clock road.

古文：已，迁光禄卿，历户部左、右侍郎。
现代文：过后，他升任光禄卿，又先后做过户部左、右侍郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to Kōroku-kyō, and successively served as the left and right chamberlain of the household.

古文：刘瑾败，大臣多以党附见劾，宇独无所染。拜南京礼部尚书。
现代文：刘瑾败亡后，很多大臣因为追随他拉帮结派受到弹劾，乔宇却一无所染，因此武宗用他做了南京礼部尚书。
English: After Liu Bei's defeat and death, many ministers were impeached for following him to form a faction, but Qiao Yu remained unscathed. Therefore, Emperor Wuzong used him to write a book on Nanjing etiquette.

古文：乾清宫灾，率同列言视朝不勤，经筵久辍，国本未建，义子猥多，番僧处禁寺，优伶侍起居，立皇店，留边兵，习战斗，土木繁兴，织造不息，凡十事。
现代文：乾清宫发生灾祸以后，乔宇率领同事上书说武宗不经常上朝，经筵长时间关闭，皇储还没有确定，干儿子倒有一大堆，西番的和尚呆在禁宫里边，唱戏的优伶侍候皇上起卧，开设皇家店铺，边防部队留驻京师，不自爱惜练习战斗，各种土木工程频频兴建，供应皇宫的织造工作没完没了，一共讲了十件需加改正的事情。
English: After the disaster occurred in the Qianqing Palace, Qiao Yu led his colleagues to write a letter saying that Emperor Wu Zong did not often go to the court, the palace was closed for a long time, the crown prince had not yet been determined, but there were a lot of dead sons, the monk of the west side stayed in the forbidden palace, the opera singer waited for the emperor to get up, opened a royal shop, the border troops stayed in Beijing, and did not spare themselves to practice fighting, various civil engineering projects were frequently built, and the weaving work to supply the palace was endless. A total of ten things that needed to be corrected were mentioned.

古文：帝不省。
现代文：武宗并不予理睬。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：久之，改兵部，参赞机务。
现代文：过了很长时间，乔宇改任南京兵部尚书，开始参与机要的军政大事。
English: After a long time, Qiao Yu was transferred to the Nanjing Military Department and began to participate in important military and political events.

古文：以帝远游塞上，而监国无人，请早建储贰。
现代文：因为武宗远游边塞，没有人监国，乔宇上书请尽快确定皇储。
English: Because Emperor Wuzong has traveled far and there is no one to supervise the country, Qiao Yu's letter asks that the crown prince be determined as soon as possible.

古文：帝将自击寇，宇复率同列谏。
现代文：武宗打算亲自统兵进攻北方敌寇，乔宇又率领同事一起上书谏阻。
English: Wu Zong planned to personally lead the army to attack the northern enemy, Qiao Yu, and led his colleagues to write a letter to oppose it.

古文：皆不报。
现代文：武宗都没有作什么答复。
English: None of this has been approved.

古文：未几，宁王宸濠反，扬言旦夕下南京。
现代文：不多久，宁王宸濠谋反，扬言马上要攻打南京。
English: Soon after, Ning Wang plotted a rebellion and threatened to attack Nanjing immediately.

古文：宇严为警备，而谈笑自如。时携客燕城外，密察地险易，置戍守。
现代文：乔宁严加警备，但表面上谈笑自如，经常陪伴客人在南京城外设宴嬉游，暗中考察地势险易，安排士兵驻防。
English: Qioning was on high alert, but on the surface he was a happy-go-lucky person. He would often accompany his guests to dinner parties outside Nanjing, surreptitiously inspecting the dangerous terrain and arranging for soldiers to be stationed there.

古文：综理周密，内外宴然。
现代文：由于他周密地进行了布置，南京城内、外都很平静。
English: Due to his careful arrangement, Nanjing was calm both inside and outside the city.

古文：指挥杨锐有才略，署为安庆守备。
现代文：指挥杨锐很有谋略和才干，乔宇安排他做安庆守备。
English: Conductor Yang Rui is very resourceful and talented. Qiao Yu arranged for him to be the guard of Anqing.

古文：镇守中官刘瑯与濠通，为预伏死士。
现代文：镇守中官刘琅与宸濠暗中勾结，替他埋伏了敢死队。
English: The town guard lieutenant-colonel Liu Wei secretly colluded with Yao and ambushed the death squads for him.

古文：宇刺得其情，诘瑯用事者，瑯惧不敢动。
现代文：乔宇侦察到这个情况，质问刘琅是谁在管事，刘琅怕了，不敢轻举妄动。
English: Qiao Yu detected this situation and asked Liu Ye who was in charge. Liu Ye was afraid and did not dare to act rashly.

古文：宇乃大索城中，斩所伏壮士三百人，悬首江上。
现代文：于是乔宇派人在城中大加搜捕，斩了三百名刘琅埋伏下的壮士，把他们的脑袋悬挂于江面上。
English: As a result, Qiao Yu sent people to search the city, beheaded three hundred of Liu Ye's ambushed warriors, and hung their heads over the river.

古文：宸濠失内应，且知有备，不敢东。
现代文：宸濠失去了内应，并且知道南京做了准备，不敢东下。
English: He lost his inner support, and knowing that Nanjing had made preparations, he did not dare to go to the east.

古文：攻安庆，锐固守不得下。
现代文：他猛攻安庆，杨锐在那里固守着，打不下来。
English: He stormed Anqing, where Yang Rui held firm and was unable to beat him.

古文：未几败。
现代文：没几天宸濠的叛乱也就失败了。
English: Within a few days, the mutiny had failed.

古文：帝至南京，诏百官戎服朝明年正旦。
现代文：武宗到达南京后，诏令百官穿军装上朝欢庆明年元旦。
English: After Emperor Wuzong arrived in Nanjing, he ordered hundreds of officials to wear military uniforms to celebrate the upcoming New Year's Day.

古文：宇不可，率诸臣朝服贺。
现代文：乔宇不同意，率领群臣都穿着朝服上朝庆贺。
English: Qiao Yu disagreed, leading the group of courtiers all dressed in morning dress to celebrate the morning.

古文：江彬索城门诸钥，都督府问宇。宇曰： 守备者，所以谨非常。
现代文：江彬想要各个城门的钥匙，都督府过来问乔宇，乔宇说 ：守备官是用来防范非常事变的。
English: Jiang Bin wanted the keys to each gate of the city, and the governor's office came to ask Qiao Yu. Qiao Yu said: The guards are used to prevent emergencies.

古文：禁门锁钥，孰敢索？亦孰敢予？虽天子诏不可得。 
现代文：禁城城门的钥匙谁敢来要，又有谁敢给他，就是天子下诏来要也不能拿到。 
English: Whoever dares to come and ask for the key to the gate of the Forbidden City, and whoever dares to give it to him, will not be able to get it even if the Son of Heaven decrees it.

古文：都督府以宇言复，乃已。
现代文：都督府用乔宇的话答复了来人，事方算完。
English: The prefectural government replied to the caller with Qiao Yu's words, and the matter was settled.

古文：彬矫旨有所求，日数十至，宇必廷白之，彬亦稍稍止。
现代文：江彬假称圣旨来讨什么东西，一天能跑几十趟，乔宇总是在朝中向武宗禀报，江彬也只好稍稍收敛一些。
English: Jiang Bin could make dozens of trips a day to ask for something, pretending to have a holy will. Qiao Yu always reported to Emperor Wu in the morning, and Jiang Bin had to restrain himself a little.

古文：彬欲谮去宇。守备太监王伟者，初为帝伴读，帝信之，每从中调护，故彬谋不行。
现代文：江彬想进谗言把乔宇赶走，守备太监王伟常从中周旋，维护乔宇，所以江彬的奸计没能得逞。
English: Jiang Bin wanted to drive Qiao Yu away, and the guard eunuch Wang Wei often intervened to protect Qiao Yu, so Jiang Bin's treachery did not succeed.

古文：帝驻南京九月，宇倡诸臣三请回銮，又自伏阙请。
现代文：武宗在南京停留了九个月，乔宇三次号召大臣们恳求武宗回程，又亲自到宫门外跪地请愿。
English: Emperor Wuzong stayed in Nanjing for nine months. Qiao Yu called on the ministers three times to implore Emperor Wuzong to return, and personally went outside the palace gate to kneel and petition.

古文：驾旋，扈至扬州。
现代文：武宗起程后，他陪同走到扬州。
English: After the departure of Wu Zong, he accompanied him to Yangzhou.

古文：明年加太子太保。
现代文：第二年，乔宇加官为太子太保。
English: The following year, Qiao Yu was promoted to the post of crown prince.

古文：论保障功，复加少保。
现代文：评议保护南京城的功劳，又被加官为少保。
English: He was commended for his contribution to the protection of Nanjing City, and was promoted to the rank of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：世宗即位，召为吏部尚书。
现代文：世宗即位后，召乔宇回朝当了吏部尚书。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Qiao Yu was summoned back to the imperial court to serve as the secretary.

古文：宇自为选郎，有人伦鉴，及是铨政一清。
现代文：乔宇自早年当文选郎，就能辨别人才，到这时更使人才选拔问题得到妥善解决。
English: Qiao Yu, who has been a talent scout since his early years, is able to identify talent. At this time, the talent selection problem has been properly solved.

古文：帝求治锐甚。
现代文：世宗追求太平的决心很坚定。
English: Sejong's determination to pursue peace is firm.

古文：宇与林俊、鼓泽、孙交，皆海内重望，帝亦委任之。
现代文：乔宇与林俊、彭泽、孙交当时都是国内很有名望的重臣，世宗也都任用了他们。
English: Qiao Yu, Lin Jun, Peng Ze, and Sun Jiao were all well-known senior ministers in China at that time, and Shizong also appointed them.

古文：凡为权幸所黜者，皆起列庶位，天下欣欣望治。
现代文：凡是过去被权贵们罢贬的人臣，乔宇都把他起复，安排在各种职务上，一时间天下欣欣向治。
English: All the ministers who were ousted by dignitaries in the past have been reinstated by Qiao Yu and placed in various positions. For a while, the whole world was excited to rule.

古文：帝性刚，好自用，宇所执渐不见听。
现代文：但是世宗性格刚勇，喜欢自以为是，乔宇的意见渐渐也不被采纳了。
English: However, Shizong is courageous and likes to be self-righteous, and Qiao Yu's opinion is gradually not accepted.

古文：兴府需次官六十三人，乞迁叙。宇言此辈虚隶名籍，与见供事者不同。黜罚之有差，皆怨宇。
现代文：兴王府候补的官吏六十三个人请求升用，乔宇说这些人本来就是虚挂一个名籍，与事实上担任职务的不同，所以程度不等地给他们以贬免、处分，他们都记恨乔宇。
English: Sixty-three alternate officials of the Xingwang Palace requested to be promoted. Qiao Yu said that these people originally had a false name, different from the positions they actually held, so they were disparaged and punished to varying degrees. They all hated Qiao Yu.

古文：帝欲封驸马都尉崔元为侯，外戚蒋轮、邵喜为伯，宇不可。
现代文：世宗想封驸马都尉崔元为侯，外戚蒋轮、邵喜为伯，乔宇不同意。
English: Shizong wanted to make Ma Duifeng Cui Yuan the lord of the manor, and his maternal relatives Jiang Rong and Shao Xi as his brothers-in-law, but Qiao Yu disagreed.

古文：无何，诏进寿宁侯张鹤龄为公，封后父陈万言为伯，授万言子绍祖尚宝丞。
现代文：不久，世宗还是下诏把寿宁侯张鹤龄加封为公，封皇后的父亲陈万言为伯，让万言的儿子绍祖当了尚宝丞。
English: Soon after, King Sejong issued an edict to make Shuning's vassal, Zhang Hailing, a prince, and the queen's father, Chen Wanjian, a great-grandfather, and to make Wanjian's son, Shaosu, a great-great-grandfather.

古文：宇言： 累朝太后戚属无生封公者，张峦亦殁后赠，今奈何以父赠为子封。
现代文：乔宇说 ：历朝太后的亲属没有活着就封为公爵的，张峦也是死后才追赠的，现在怎么能把父亲死后追赠的封爵加在活着的儿子身上？
English: Qiao Yu said: Throughout the ages, the relatives of the empress dowager were made dukes when they were not alive, and Zhang Ye was also posthumously awarded. Now, how can the posthumous knighthood of the father be added to the living son?

古文：万言封伯视峦更骤，而子授尚宝非制。
现代文：万言封伯比张峦还来得快些，他的儿子授官为尚宝丞不合乎规定。
English: Wanyan Fengbo is even faster than Zhang Ye, and his son's appointment of Shang Baorong is not in accordance with regulations.

古文：愿陛下守典章，以垂万世。 
现代文：希望陛下遵照典章制度办事，以便流传万代。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will act in accordance with the code system so that it can be passed down for generations to come.

古文：帝并不从。
现代文：世宗都没有听从。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：史道讦杨廷和，宇言道挟私，遂下之诏狱。
现代文：史道攻击杨廷和，乔宇说史道挟私报复，于是把他打入了皇家监狱。
English: Shi Dao attacked Yang Tinghe, Qiao Yu said that Shi Dao was taking revenge, so he put him in the royal prison.

古文：曹嘉助道劾宇，宇求罢，帝命鸿胪趋视事。
现代文：曹嘉帮史道弹劾乔宇，乔宇请求罢官，世宗让鸿胪寺派人到乔宇家中催他出来上班。
English: Cao Jia helped Shi Dao to impeach Qiao Yu, Qiao Yu requested to be dismissed, and Shizong asked Hongyu Temple to send someone to Qiao Yu's home to urge him to come out to work.

古文：宇遇事不可，无不力争，而争 大礼 尤切。
现代文：乔宇遇到讲不通的事无不据理力争，其中争论 大礼 争得最厉害。
English: When Qiao Yu encounters things that are incomprehensible, there is no reason not to argue. Among them, the argument over the gift is the most fierce.

古文：帝欲加兴献帝皇号，宇言加皇于本生之亲，则干正统，非所以重宗庙，正名分。
现代文：世宗想给兴献帝追加皇号，乔宇说给亲生父王追加皇号，就会妨害皇位的正宗谱系，不是用来重视宗庙，正定名分应有的办法。
English: If the Sejong wanted to add the imperial title to Emperor Heungchen, and Qiao Yu said to add the imperial title to his biological father, it would interfere with the authentic genealogy of the imperial throne. It is not a method to attach importance to the ancestral temple and correctly determine the title.

古文：及礼官请称献帝为本生考，帝改称本生皇考，又诏建献帝庙于大内，宇等复连章谏。
现代文：后来等礼官奏请称献帝为本生考时，世宗改为本生皇考，又传令在宫中修建献帝庙，乔宇等人又接连几次上书谏阻。
English: Later, when the etiquette officials requested that Emperor Xian be called Emperor Bonsheng, Shizong changed it to Emperor Bonsheng, and ordered to build a temple for Emperor Xian in the palace. Qiao Yu and others resisted several times.

古文：特旨用席书为礼部尚书，宇又偕九卿言： 陛下罢汪俊，用席书；谪马明衡、季本、陈逅，召张璁、桂萼、霍韬。举措乖违，人心骇愕。
现代文：宫廷中传出世宗的特别圣旨任命席书为礼部尚书，乔宇又和九卿一块上书说 ：陛下罢免汪俊，任用席书，贬走马明衡、季本、陈逅，征召张璁、桂萼、霍韬，举动异常，人心惊惧。
English: It was reported in the court that Sejong's special edict appointed Wang Jun to be the ceremonial secretary, and Qiao Yu and Jiujing jointly wrote a letter saying: His Majesty dismissed Wang Jun, appointed the secretary, dismissed Ma Mingheng, Ji Ben, and Chen Xuan, and conscripted Zhang Xuan, Gui Caly, and Huo Xuan. His behavior was abnormal, and the people were alarmed.

古文：且书不繇廷推，特出内降，此祖宗来所未有。
现代文：况且席书不经过朝臣推举，就直接从宫廷中传出特别圣旨，这还是祖宗开国以来未曾有过的事呢。
English: Moreover, the special imperial edict was issued directly from the imperial court, without being recommended by courtiers. This is something that has never happened since the founding of the country.

古文：乞令俊与书各仍旧职，宥明衡等，止璁、萼毋召。 
现代文：请陛下传令让汪俊和席书各安原职，饶恕明衡等人，停止对张璁、桂萼的征召。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to order Wang Jun and Xi Shu to return to their original positions, to pardon Ming Heng and others, and to stop the conscription of Zhang Xuan and Gui Caly.

古文：寻复请罢璁、萼、书，而出争 大礼 者吕柟、邹守益于狱。
现代文：不久又请求罢免张璁、桂萼、席书，从监狱中放出争议 大礼 的吕木冉和邹守益。
English: Soon, he also requested the removal of Zhang Ye, Gui Caly, and Xishu, and the release of Lv Mujan and Zou Shouyi, who were involved in the controversy, from prison.

古文：会璁、萼至京，诏皆用为学士。
现代文：等到张璁、桂萼到京城后，世宗传下诏书把他们都用为学士。
English: After Zhang Ye and Gui Calyl arrived in Beijing, the edict handed down by King Sejong made them all bachelors.

古文：宇等又言： 内降恩泽，先朝率施于佞幸小人。
现代文：乔宇等人又上书说 ：宫廷中施行的恩泽，以前历朝大都是加给宦官之流的。
English: Qiao Yu and others also wrote: In the past, most of the court's favors were given to eunuchs.

古文：若士大夫一预其间，即不为清议所齿。
现代文：士大夫一沾这边，就被正直的舆论所蔑视。
English: As soon as a magistrate touches this side, he is scorned by honest public opinion.

古文：况学士最清华，而俾萼等居之，谁复肯与同列哉？ 
现代文：何况学士是最清高、华美的职位，让桂萼等人来充任，谁还肯跟他们同事呢？ 
English: Besides, a bachelor's degree is the most high-ranking and glamorous position. If you let people like Gui Caly and others fill the position, who would want to work with their colleagues?

古文：帝怒，切责。
现代文：世宗恼了，把他们严厉批评了一番。
English: Sejong was annoyed and criticized them severely.

古文：宇遂乞休，许之。驰传给夫廪，犹如故事。
现代文：乔宇于是请求离休，世宗同意了，不过仍按惯例让他乘坐驿站车马回乡，颁发禄米。
English: Qiao Yu then asked for a leave of absence, and Shizong agreed, but still, according to the usual practice, he was allowed to return to his hometown by stagecoach and was awarded a lump sum.

古文：御史许中、刘隅等请留宇，帝曰： 朕非不用宇，宇自以疾求去耳。 
现代文：御史许中、刘隅等奏请留用乔宇，世宗说： 我又不是不用乔宇，是他自己因病要求离休的嘛。 
English: Shizhong Xu, Liu Sumi and other players asked to keep Qiao Yu, and Shizong said: I don't need Qiao Yu, he himself asked to leave due to illness.

古文：后《明伦大典》成，追论前议，夺官。
现代文：后来《明伦大典》成书，追论乔宇以前关于 大礼 的主张，他被剥夺了官职。
English: Later, "Ming Lun Da Dian" was compiled into a book, tracing Qiao Yu's previous claims about the grand gift, and he was deprived of his official position.

古文：杨一清卒，宇渡江吊之。南都父老皆出迎，举手加额曰： 活我者，公也。 
现代文：杨一清死后，乔宇渡江去祭奠他，南京的父老乡亲都出城来迎接他，把手举在额头上说 ：使我们得以活下来的，就是乔公您啊！ 
English: After the death of Yang Iqing, Qiao Yu went across the river to pay tribute to him. The fathers and fellow countrymen of Nanjing came out of the city to greet him, holding their hands up to their foreheads and saying, "It was you, Qiao Gong, who made it possible for us to survive!"

古文：宇幼从父京师，学于杨一清。成进士后，复从李东阳游。
现代文：乔宇从小跟着父亲住在北京，向杨一清问学，考中进士后又跟着李东阳游学。
English: Qiao Yu has lived in Beijing with his father since he was a child. He asked Yang Iqing about studying, and after he passed the middle school entrance examination, he followed Li Dongyang to study.

古文：诗文雄隽，兼通篆籀。
现代文：他的诗文风格雄健，并兼通篆文、籀文。
English: His poetic style is vigorous, and he is also fluent in  and.

古文：性好山水，尝陟太华绝顶。遇虎，仆夫皆惊仆，宇端坐不动，虎徐帖尾去。
现代文：他天生爱好山水风景，一次他登上太华山顶峰，撞上一只老虎，仆人们都吓得跌倒在地，乔宇却端坐不动，一会儿老虎就夹着尾巴离开了。
English: He was born with an affinity for landscapes. Once he climbed to the top of Mount Taihua and bumped into a tiger. His servants fell to the ground in fright, but Qiao Yu remained motionless. After a while, the tiger left with its tail between its legs.

古文：家居澹泊，服御若寒士。
现代文：他居家清贫，穿的像个穷书生。
English: He lives in poverty and dresses like a poor student.

古文：身殁，二妾刘、许皆从死。
现代文：他死后，两个妾刘氏、许氏都主动跟着殉身而死了。
English: After his death, his two concubines, Ms. Liu and Ms. Xu, both died of their own accord.

古文：穆宗即位，复官，赠少傅，谥庄简。
现代文：穆宗即位后，为乔宇恢复了官籍，并追赠他为少傅，谥庄简。
English: After the enthronement of Mu Zong, Qiao Yu's official registration was restored, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Shao Fu (少傅) and Zhaozhuang Jane (庄简).

古文：孙交，字志同，陆安人。
现代文：孙交，字志同，湖北安陆人。
English: Sun Jia, Zhidong, Hubei Anlu people.

古文：成化十七年进士。
现代文：成化十七年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the seventeenth year of Chenghua.

古文：授南京兵部主事，为尚书王恕所知。
现代文：初任南京兵部主事，受到尚书王恕的赏识。
English: He was the first head of the Nanjing Military Department and was highly appreciated by Emperor Shang.

古文：弘治初，怒入吏部，荐授稽勋员外郎，历文选郎中。
现代文：弘治初年，王恕进了吏部，推荐他当了稽勋员外郎，又做过文选郎中。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, Wang Shou was promoted to the cadre department. He was recommended to be an inspector, and he also worked as a literary editor.

古文：居吏部十四年，于善类多所推引。
现代文：他前后在吏部干了十四年，推荐、引进过不少好人。
English: He has worked in the personnel department for fourteen years, and has recommended and introduced many good people.

古文：迁太常少卿，提督四夷馆。
现代文：然后升任太常少卿，提督四夷馆事务。
English: Then he was promoted to the post of Vice-Minister of the Navy, Admiral of the Siyi Pavilion Affairs.

古文：大同有警，命经略黄花镇诸边。
现代文：大同发生战事，孝宗命令他前往经略黄花镇等边塞。
English: When war broke out in Datong, Xiaozong ordered him to go to the border fortress of Huanghua Town.

古文：增垣堑，广树艺，制敌骑驰突。
现代文：他增修城墙、战壕，到处栽种树木，牵制敌人骑兵的冲击。
English: He built additional city walls and trenches, planted trees everywhere, and held back the onslaught of enemy cavalry.

古文：永乐时，岁遣隆庆诸卫军采薪炭。其后罢之，令岁输银二万两，军重困。
现代文：永乐年间，每年派隆庆卫所的军队伐木烧炭，后来废除了这种指令，让他们每年支出两万两白银做抵押，这些部队经济上发生严重困难。
English: During the Yongle years, the army of Longqing Sanitary Station was sent to cut wood and burn coal every year. Later, this order was abolished, and they were required to spend 22,000 silver as collateral every year. These troops encountered serious economic difficulties.

古文：交奏免之。
现代文：孙交向朝廷申请得以豁免。
English: Sun Jiao applied to the imperial court to be exempted.

古文：正德初，擢光禄卿。
现代文：正德初年，孙交被提升为光禄卿。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, Sun Jiao was promoted to Guangluqing.

古文：三年进户部右侍郎，提督仓场，改吏部。
现代文：三年，升为户部右侍郎，提督粮仓草场事务，后来改任吏部右侍郎。
English: In the third year, he was promoted to the right hand man of the household department, the admiral of the granary and pasture affairs, and later he was appointed the right hand man of the personnel department.

古文：尚书张彩附刘瑾，交数规切。彩怒，调之南京。
现代文：当时吏部尚书张练追随刘瑾，孙交几次规劝他，张练恼了，就把他调往南京去了。
English: At that time, Zhang Rong, the secretary of the cadre department, followed Liu Bei. Sun Jia advised him several times. When Zhang Rong was annoyed, he transferred him to Nanjing.

古文：瑾败，召拜户部尚书。
现代文：刘瑾倒台后，武宗召他回朝当了户部尚书。
English: After the fall of Liu Bei, Emperor Wuzong called him back to the imperial court to become the head of the household.

古文：时征讨流寇，调度烦急，仍岁凶，正赋不足，交区画适宜。
现代文：当时朝廷正在讨论平定流寇，当时钱粮的征调繁琐而且紧急，灾荒也还在继续，正赋收入不足，孙交还是恰当地作了谋划和处理。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing how to quell the flow of robbers. At that time, the collection and transfer of money and grain was cumbersome and urgent, the famine was still continuing, and the official revenue was insufficient. However, Sun Jia planned and dealt with it appropriately.

古文：四方告饥，辄请蠲租遣振，以故民不至甚敝，而小人用事者皆不便之。
现代文：各地报上灾情，他都奏请减免当地的赋税，派官前往赈灾，因此百姓不至于太困窘，但是那些当权的小人们却因此感到对他们不利。
English: When the disaster was reported in various regions, he asked for the reduction and exemption of local taxes and sent officials to the disaster relief, so that the people would not be too embarrassed, but those in power felt disadvantageous to them.

古文：帝欲以太平仓赐幸臣裴德，云南镇守中官张伦请采银矿，南京织造中官吴经奏费乏，交皆力争。
现代文：武宗想把太平仓交由宠臣裴德掌管，云南镇守的宦官张伦奏请开采银矿，南京织造的宦官吴经奏称经费缺乏，孙交都据理力争，不肯同意。
English: Wu Zong wanted to put the Taiping Cang under the control of his favorite, Pei De. Zhang Lunso, the eunuch of the Yunnan town guard, asked to mine silver. Wu Jingso, the eunuch of the Nanjing weaving, said that there was a lack of funds. Sun Jiaodu argued and refused to agree.

古文：八年六月，中旨与礼部尚书傅珪并致仕。
现代文：八年六月，从宫廷中直接传下来一道圣旨，要孙交和礼部尚书傅王圭一道离休。
English: In June of the eighth year, a sacred decree was passed down directly from the court, asking Sun Jiao to retire together with Wang Gui, the ceremonial secretary.

古文：言官多请留，不报。
现代文：很多谏官上书请留用他们，武宗却没有作答复。
English: Many eunuchs wrote begging him to keep them, but the Emperor did not reply.

古文：世宗在潜邸知交名，甫即位，召复故官。
现代文：世宗未即位时在兴王府就听说过孙交，所以刚一即位，就召他回朝恢复了原任。
English: When Sejong had not yet ascended the throne, he had heard about Sun Jiao in the Heungwang Palace, so as soon as he ascended the throne, he called him back to the court and resumed his original position.

古文：首请帝日读《祖训》，言动悉取准则，经筵日讲寒暑勿辍。
现代文：孙交刚上任就上书请世宗每天读一读《祖训》，说话、办事都拿它作为准则，经筵前每天的讲习无论寒暑都不要停止。
English: As soon as Sun Jia took office, he wrote to Sejong asking him to read the "Ancestor's Teaching" every day, and to use it as a guideline in all his words and deeds. The daily pre-funeral lectures should not be stopped no matter what the weather is like.

古文：帝褒纳焉。
现代文：世宗对此表示赞许。
English: Sejong expressed his approval of this.

古文：或议迁显陵天寿山，交言： 山陵事重，太祖欲迁仁祖于钟山，虑泄灵气而止，具载《皇陵碑》。 
现代文：当时有人主张把显陵迁到天寿山去，孙交上书说： 王陵事关重大，过去太祖想把仁祖的陵墓迁到钟山，担心迁移过程中泄漏了灵气，就停止了，这事都在《皇陵碑》中记着呢。 
English: At that time, some people advocated moving the Hsien Mausoleum to Tianshou Mountain, and Sun Jiao wrote: The royal tomb is very important. In the past, the great-grandfather wanted to move the mausoleum of the benevolent ancestor to Zhongshan. Fearing that the aura would be leaked during the relocation process, he stopped. This is all recorded in the "Imperial Mausoleum Monument."

古文：事乃止。
现代文：迁移显陵的事就此停下了。
English: As a result, the attack did not take place.

古文：武宗侈汰之后，库藏殚虚。交裁冗食，定经制，宿弊为清。
现代文：继武宗奢侈浮华之后，国库几乎空虚到头了，孙交裁减吃闲饭的官吏，确定了经济制度，扫除了过去的弊病。
English: Following the extravagance of Emperor Wuzong, the national treasury was almost empty. Sun Jiaxuan reduced the number of idle officials, established an economic system, and eliminated the ills of the past.

古文：然事涉中官者，帝亦不能尽从也。
现代文：但是事情牵涉到宦官时，世宗也没能全听从他。
English: But when it came to the eunuchs, Shizong could not fully obey him.

古文：尝会廷臣议发内帑给军廪官俸，已报可，为中官梁谏等所沮。
现代文：一次孙交召集廷臣讨论取内府的库藏来发放军粮、官俸，世宗已答复同意，却被宦官梁谏等人给搅了。
English: On one occasion, Sun Jiao called together courtiers to discuss taking the treasury of the Inner Court to distribute military rations and government salaries. Shizong had already agreed, but was disturbed by eunuch Liang Jun and others.

古文：交言： 宫府异同，令出复反，非新政所宜。 
现代文：孙交上书说 ：宫廷和朝廷不一致同调，命令已下达又收回去，这不是推行新政时应有的事。 
English: Sun Jiao said in his letter: The court and the imperial court are not in unison, the order has been issued and withdrawn, this is not what should be done when implementing the New Deal.

古文：不听。
现代文：世宗没吸取他的意见。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：中官监督仓场者，初止数人，正德中增至五十五人。
现代文：宦官被派出去监督粮仓、草场的，最初只有几个人，正德年间增加到五十五个人。
English: Eunuchs were sent out to supervise granaries and pastures. Initially, there were only a few people, but during the Zhengde era, the number increased to fifty-five.

古文：以交言罢撤过半，其后复渐增。
现代文：因为孙交的提议裁撤了一大半，后来又逐渐地多起来。
English: Because of Sun Jia's proposal, more than half of them were abolished, and later they gradually increased.

古文：帝已罢三十七人，交欲尽去之，并临清、徐、淮诸仓，一切勿遣。
现代文：世宗当时已裁减了三十七人，孙交想全部裁掉，并且连临清、徐州、淮州等粮仓都请求莫派宦官。
English: At that time, Shizong had already reduced thirty-seven people, and Sun Jiao wanted to cut them all, and even Linqing, Xuzhou, Huaizhou and other granaries asked not to send eunuchs.

古文：帝令自今毋更加而已。
现代文：世宗只是传令以后不要再增派而已。
English: Sejong only ordered not to send any more troops.

古文：守珠池中官，诏毋得预守土事，而安川夤缘复故。
现代文：监护珠池的宦官，朝廷已诏令他们不得干预当地政事，但是安川依然结交官府。
English: The eunuchs who are the guardians of Zhuqi have been ordered by the imperial court not to interfere in local politics, but Yasukawa still has ties with the government.

古文：交劾川，命如前诏。
现代文：孙交弹劾了他，世宗传令安川遵守诏令。
English: Sun Jiao impeached him, and Shizong ordered Yaskawa to comply with the edict.

古文：正德中，上林苑内臣至九十九人，侵夺公私地无算。
现代文：正德年间，上林苑的宦官多达九十九个人，所侵占的公、私地皮多得没法计算。
English: During the Zhengde era, there were as many as ninety-nine eunuchs in Shanglin Court, and the amount of public and private land they occupied was beyond calculation.

古文：帝即位，命留十八人，如弘治时。已复传奉至六十二人，交乞汰如初，且尽归侵夺地。
现代文：世宗即位后，命令像弘治年间一样只留下十八个人，过后又传令增加到六十二个人，孙交请按当初的诏令裁下来，并且把他们侵占的土地都予以没收。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, the order left only eighteen people behind, as was the case during the reign of King Hongzhi. Later, the order was increased to sixty-two people. Sun Jiao was asked to make a ruling according to the original edict, and confiscate all the land they had occupied.

古文：报许。
现代文：世宗指示说可以。
English: Sejong instructed him to do so.

古文：又论御马监内臣宜如祖制，毋监收刍豆，并令户部通知马数，杜其侵耗。
现代文：孙交又建议御马监的太监应按照祖宗定下的制度，不要让他们管收草料，并且要让户部知道马匹的数目，以便杜绝他们贪污、浪费。
English: Sun Jia also suggested that the eunuchs of the Horse Inspector should follow the system set by the ancestors, not let them manage the collection of grass, and let the household know the number of horses in order to prevent them from corruption and waste.

古文：不从。
现代文：世宗没有采纳这个意见。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：锦衣百户张瑾率校尉支俸通仓，横取狼藉，主事罗洪载欲按之。瑾绐请受杖，奏洪载擅笞禁卫官。
现代文：锦衣百户张瑾率领校尉从通州仓库中领取禄米，横七竖八只管强要，主事罗洪载想按察此事，张瑾就骗他，自请挨了一顿打，然后奏称洪载擅自打了禁卫官。
English: Zhang Rong, who was in charge of a hundred households of brocade, led the school captain to collect the rice from the warehouse in Tongzhou. The principal, Luo Hongzhao, wanted to investigate the matter, but Zhang Rong lied to him. He received a beating at his own request, and then said that Hongzhao had beaten the guard without permission.

古文：帝怒，逮下诏狱谪外。
现代文：世宗恼了，把洪载关进锦衣卫的监狱，然后贬到地方上去。
English: Annoyed, Shizong put Hongzhao in the brocade guard's prison and then banished him to the countryside.

古文：交与林俊、乔宇先后论救，不纳。
现代文：孙交与林俊、乔宇先后上书解救洪载，世宗也不肯听。
English: Sun Jiao, Lin Jun and Qiao Yu successively sent letters to relieve the flood, but Shizong refused to listen.

古文：御马监阎洪乞外豹房地，交言： 先帝以豹房故，贻祸无穷。
现代文：御马监阎洪申请豹房外的土地，孙交上书说： 以前武宗因为豹房的缘故，造成了无穷的祸害。
English: The overseer of horses, Yan Hong, applied for the land outside the leopard house, and Sun Jiao submitted a letter saying: In the past, Emperor Wu Zong caused infinite harm because of the leopard house.

古文：洪等欲修复以开游猎之端，非臣等所敢闻。 
现代文：阎洪等想修复它，给陛下开个游猎的头，这不是我们所愿意听到的好消息。 
English: If Yan Hong et al. want to repair it and give His Majesty a head start, this is not the good news we want to hear.

古文：诏以地十顷给豹房，余令百户赵恺等佃如故。
现代文：世宗诏令给豹房十顷地，其他的地面让锦衣百户赵恺等照旧佃种。
English: King Sejong's edict gave the Leopard Room ten hectares of land, and the other land was left to the 100 households of brocade and silk, such as Zhao Yao, to cultivate as before.

古文：奉诏上各宫庄田数，视旧籍不同，帝诘其故。
现代文：一次孙交奉令递呈各宫庄田的数目，世宗看到和原先的簿册上的记载不一样，问起原因来。
English: Once, when the grandson was ordered to submit the number of manors in each palace, the sejong saw that it was different from the records in the original book and asked why.

古文：交言： 旧籍多以奏请投献，数多妄报也。
现代文：孙交说 ：原先簿册上记载的有很多是臣民们奏请捐献的，数目有很多虚报。
English: Sun Jiao said: Many of the items originally recorded in the ledger were donated by subjects, and the numbers were greatly exaggerated.

古文：新籍少，以奉命清核，田多除豁也。 
现代文：现在簿册上的庄田少，是因为户部曾奉令核实，虚报的庄田被减了下来。 
English: The reason why there are fewer shodates in the register now is because the head office was ordered to verify the false shodates and they were reduced.

古文：帝意稍解，令考成、弘间籍以闻。
现代文：世宗的疑惑略有消除，诏令他查考成化、弘治年间的档案报上来。
English: Sejong's suspicions were slightly dispelled, and he was ordered by the emperor to check the archives and reports from the Chenghua and Hongzhi years.

古文：交年已七十，连章乞罢。
现代文：孙交当时已七十多岁，一次次上书请求卸任。
English: At that time, Sun Jia was already more than seventy years old, and he repeatedly petitioned to resign.

古文：帝辄慰留，遣医视疗。
现代文：世宗总是挽留，派太医为他治病。
English: Shizong always stayed behind and sent the great doctor to treat him.

古文：请益力，乃许之。
现代文：后来他更坚决请求退休，世宗才批准了。
English: He later made a more emphatic request to retire, which was only approved by the Sejong.

古文：手诏加太子太保，驰驿。令子编修元侍行，有司时存问，给食米舆隶，复赐道里费。
现代文：手诏加他为太子太保，让他乘驿站车马还乡，让他的儿子编修孙元为他护行，要求有关部门经常加以问候，发给他粮食、车马和仆人，又赏了他路上的花销钱。
English: He signed his name as the prince's bodyguard, let him return to his hometown by stagecoach and horse, let his son, the editor Sun Yuan, escort him, asked the relevant departments to greet him often, gave him grain, horses and servants, and rewarded him with spending money on the road.

古文：卒年八十，谥荣僖。
现代文：孙交死的那年八十岁，朝廷谥他为 荣僖 。
English: In the year of Sun Quan's death, when he was 80 years old, the imperial court gave him an honorary title.

古文：交言论恂恂，不以势位骄人。清慎恬悫，终始一致。
现代文：孙交说话和蔼，不因为有权势瞧不起人，清静自守，忠实严谨，自始至终，操行一致。
English: Sun Jiao speaks kindly, does not look down on others because he is powerful, is quiet and self-controlled, loyal and rigorous, and consistent in his behavior from beginning to end.

古文：后中官言孙尚书侵地，世宗曰： 此先皇所赐，吾敢夺耶？ 
现代文：当初在南京做官时，僚友们因为事少多闲暇，大家常在一起谈笑、饮酒、下棋，孙交一个人独处一室，不停地读书。有人劝说他玩一玩，他说： 面对圣贤的话语，不是比陪着宾客、妻妾更好吗？ 
English: When he was working as an official in Nanjing, his colleagues and friends had more leisure time than he did. They often talked, drank, and played chess together. Sun Jiao was alone in a room, reading non-stop. Someone persuaded him to play. He said, "Isn't it better to face the words of sages than to accompany guests, wives, and concubines?"

古文：元，进士，终四川副使。
现代文：兴献王一向看重孙交，曾经割了阳春台东边一块地为他扩大住宅。
English: King Xingxian has always valued Sun Jiao. He once cut a piece of land on the east side of Yangchun Terrace for him to expand his residence.

古文：谨厚有父风。林俊，字待用，莆田人。
现代文：后来有宦官说孙尚书侵占土地，世宗说： 这是父皇赏赐他的，我怎么敢要回来呢？ 林俊，字待用，福建莆田人。
English: Later, a eunuch said that Sun Shangshu had occupied the land, and Shizong said: This was given to him by his father, the emperor. How dare I want to return?

古文：成化十四年进士。
现代文：成化十四年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 14th year of Chenghua, and was conferred the new title of Hechi County.

古文：除刑部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：初任刑部主事，升任员外郎。
English: He was first appointed as the head of the criminal justice department, and then promoted to the position of deputy chief.

古文：性侃直，不随俗浮湛。事涉权贵，尚书林聪辄属俊治之。
现代文：他为人耿直，不随俗浮沉，凡是牵涉到权贵人物，尚书林聪就交给林俊办理。
English: He is a straightforward person, does not follow the ups and downs of the world. Whenever he is involved with a powerful person, Shangshu Lincong will hand it over to Lin Jun.

古文：上疏请斩妖僧继晓并罪中贵梁芳，帝大怒，下诏狱考讯。
现代文：一次他上书请把妖僧继晓斩首，并把权宦梁芳问罪，宪宗大为恼火，把他打入诏狱中拷讯。
English: Once he wrote a letter requesting that the demon priest Cixiao be beheaded, and that Quan Xuan Liang Fang be interrogated. Enraged, Emperor Xianzong sent him to the imperial prison to be tortured.

古文：后府经历张黻救之，并下狱。
现代文：后府经历张黹攵搭救他，也被关了进去。
English: After the prefecture experienced Zhang Ye rescuing him, he was also locked up.

古文：太监怀恩力救，俊得谪姚州判官，黻师宗知州。
现代文：太监怀恩极力营救他们，林俊才被贬为姚州判官了事，张黹攵贬为师宗知州。
English: Eunuch Wai En tried his best to rescue them, but Lin Juncai was demoted to judge of Yaozhou, and Zhang Ye was demoted to teacher of Zhizhou.

古文：时言路久塞，两人直声震都下，为之语曰： 御史在刑曹，黄门出后府。 
现代文：当时朝廷中言路久已隔绝，他们两个这下可说是名震京城，人们为他们编了一句话，说是 御史在刑曹，黄门出后府 。
English: At that time, the way to the imperial court had been cut off for a long time, and the two of them could now be said to be famous in the capital. People made up a sentence for them, saying that the history was in the torture room, and the yellow door was in the back of the house.

古文：寻以正月朔星变，帝感悟，复俊官，改南京。
现代文：不久因为正月初一发生星变，宪宗省悟过来，就恢复了林俊的官职，改派他到南京去了。
English: Soon after, due to the star change that occurred on the first day of the first month of the year, when Gensong came to his senses, he restored Lin Jun's official position and reassigned him to Nanjing.

古文：弘治元年用荐擢云南副使。
现代文：弘治元年，林俊因人推荐升任云南副使。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Lin Jun was promoted to deputy envoy of Yunnan on the recommendation of others.

古文：鹤庆玄化寺称有活佛，岁时集士女万人，争以金涂其面。
现代文：鹤庆玄化寺据说是有活佛，逢年过节这里聚集了上万名男女，争着用钱往佛面上涂贴。
English: It is said that there is a living Buddha in Zheqing Xuanhua Temple. Every year, tens of thousands of men and women gather here to compete in using money to paint the Buddha's face.

古文：俊命焚之，得金悉以偿民逋。
现代文：林俊下令烧了这尊佛像，所得的捐款用来帮助穷苦百姓偿还拖欠的款项。
English: Lin Jun gave the order to burn the Buddha statue, and the donations received were used to help poor people repay the arrears.

古文：又毁淫祠三百六十区，皆撤其材修学宫。
现代文：后来他又拆毁了三百六十处滥建的祠堂庙宇，木料都撤下来修筑学宫。
English: Later, he demolished 360 temples and shrines that had been built without due consideration, and removed all the timber to build a school palace.

古文：干崖土舍刀怕愈欲夺从子宣抚官，劫其印数年。
现代文：千崖地方的土著人刀怕愈想夺走侄儿的宣抚官，把他的大印劫去几年不还。
English: The more the aborigines in the Qianyao region are afraid of the sword, the more they want to take away the nephew's pacifier and rob his great seal for several years.

古文：俊檄谕之，遂归印。
现代文：林俊传令过去警告他，刀怕愈这才归还了侄儿的大印。
English: Lin Jun sent a messenger to warn him that the sword would not be returned until his nephew's great seal was returned.

古文：进按察使。五年调湖广。
现代文：后来，林俊又升任按察使，五年调到湖广去了。
English: Later, Lin Jun was promoted to the post of inspector and transferred to Hunan Province for five years.

古文：以雨雪灾异上疏陈时政得失。又言德安、安陆建王府及增修吉府，工役浩繁，财费巨万，民不堪命。
现代文：在这期间他因为雨雪灾异上书评议时政的得失、利弊，又说德安、安陆修建王府以及增修吉王府都工程浩大，耗费亿万钱财，百姓受不了这样的征派。
English: During this period, because of the rain, snow and disasters, he wrote a book to review the gains and losses, advantages and disadvantages of the current government. He also said that the construction of the royal palace in De'an and Anlu and the additional construction of the Jiewang capital were huge projects, costing hundreds of millions of money, and the people could not bear such conscription.

古文：乞循宁、襄、德府故事，一切省俭，勿用琉璃及白石雕阑，请著为例。
现代文：所以他奏请按照宁王、襄王、德王府的旧例来办，一切都务必减省，不必使用琉璃砖瓦和白玉雕栏，并请将此订为律例。
English: Therefore, he requested to follow the old practice of Ningwang, Xiangwang and Dewangfu. Everything must be reduced, there is no need to use glazed tiles and white jade carvings, and please set this as a rule.

古文：不从。
现代文：孝宗没有听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：九年引疾，不待报径归。
现代文：九年，他上书称病引退，没等批复就径自回去了。
English: Nine years later, he submitted a letter saying that he was retiring due to illness, and left without waiting for approval.

古文：久之，荐起广东右布政使，不拜。起南京右佥都御史，督操江。
现代文：很久之后，因人推荐朝廷起用他为广东右布政使，他不接受任命；又起用他为南京佥都御史，总管操江事宜。
English: After a long time, he did not accept the appointment because he was recommended by someone to the imperial court to be appointed as the Guangdong Ubu political envoy; he was also appointed as the governor of Nanjing, in charge of river management.

古文：十四年正月朔，陕西、山西地震水涌。疏述古宫闱、外戚、内侍、柄臣之祸；乞罢斋醮，减织造，清役占，汰冗员，止工作，省供应，应赏赐，戒逸欲，远佞幸，亲贤人。
现代文：十四年正月初一，陕西、山西地震水涌，林俊借此上书讲述自古以来宫闱、外戚、太监、权臣的祸患，并且请求孝宗停止设坛求福，减少织造供应，清理役满官员，停止工程建设，削减内府供应，节制各种赏赐，戒除游佚享乐，疏远邪佞小人，亲近贤良之人。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 14th year, the Shaanxi and Shanxi earthquakes and floods, Lin Jun used this opportunity to publish a book to tell the evils of the imperial concubine, maternal relative, eunuch, and vassal since ancient times, and to request Xiaozong to stop setting up the altar to seek blessings, reduce the supply of weaving, clean up the officials, stop the construction of projects, reduce the supply of the inner government, control all kinds of rewards, abstain from pleasure, alienate evil villains, and be close to virtuous people.

古文：又请豫教皇储，恩荐侍郎谢铎，少卿储瓘、杨廉，致仕副使曹时中，处士刘闵堪辅导。
现代文：又请求预先教育太子，进而荐举侍郎谢铎，少卿储馞、杨廉，已退休的副使曹时中，处士刘闵，说他们可以做太子的辅导官。
English: He also requested that the prince be educated in advance, and then recommended that the attendant Rong Xie Jun, the junior secretary Rong Yu, Yang Lian, the retired deputy envoy Cao Shizhong, and the clerk Liu Jun, saying that they could be the prince's tutor.

古文：报闻。
现代文：孝宗回答说知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：已，屡疏乞休，荐时中自代。不许。
现代文：过后，林俊又屡次上书请求退休，推荐时中来接替自己，孝宗不答应。
English: After that, Lin Junlong repeatedly wrote to request retirement, recommending that Zhong come to replace himself, but Xiaozong did not agree.

古文：江西新昌民王武为盗，巡抚韩邦问不能靖，命俊巡视。
现代文：江西新昌的一个百姓王武率领一帮人做了贼盗，巡抚韩邦问不能扫除他，朝廷传令林俊前往巡视。
English: Wang Wu, a citizen of Xinchang in Jiangxi Province, led a group of people to commit theft. The inspector Han Bang asked if he could not sweep him away, and the court ordered Lin Jun to go on a tour.

古文：身入武巢，武请自效，悉擒贼党。
现代文：林俊亲自走入王武的巢穴之中，王武便请为他效命，林俊把所有的贼党都给擒拿了。
English: Lin Jun personally walked into Wang Wu's lair, and Wang Wu asked him to serve him. Lin Jun captured all the thieves.

古文：诏即以俊代邦问，俊引朱熹代唐仲友、包拯代宋祁事，力辞。
现代文：孝宗发布诏书就让林俊取代邦问，林俊援引朱熹代唐仲友、包拯代宋祁的往事竭力推辞。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong issued the edict, he asked Lin Jun to replace the state to ask, and Lin Jun tried his best to refuse, citing the past of Zhu Xi in the Tang Dynasty and Bao Zheng in the Song Dynasty.

古文：不允。
现代文：孝宗不答应他的推辞。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：乃更定要约，庶务一新。
现代文：于是林俊改定政纲，使各种政务从此焕然一新。
English: As a result, Lin Jun revised the political program, so that all kinds of government affairs have been renewed from now on.

古文：王府征岁禄，率倍取于民，以俊言大减省。
现代文：王府征收岁禄，大都向百姓多增收一倍，因为林俊说了话才大大削减了数额。
English: When the royal court levied the land tax, most of them doubled the amount they collected from the people, because Lin Jun greatly reduced the amount only after he had spoken.

古文：宁王宸濠贪暴，俊屡裁抑之。
现代文：宁王宸濠贪婪、横暴，林俊却屡次抑制他。
English: Ning Wangtao was greedy and domineering, but Lin Jun repeatedly restrained him.

古文：王请易琉璃瓦，费二万。
现代文：宁王请把王府改为琉璃瓦，约费银两万两。
English: Ning Wang, please change the royal palace to glazed tiles, about 20,000 taels of silver.

古文：俊言宜如旧，毋涉叔段京鄙之求，吴王几杖之赐。
现代文：林俊说应该保持原样，不要犯上像叔段请求京边肥地、吴王所得几杖的赏赐那样的不吉利。
English: Lin Jun said that it should be kept as it is, and do not commit the unlucky like Uncle Duan's request for the fertile land on the outskirts of Beijing and the reward of several staffs received by King Wu.

古文：王怒，伺其过，无所得。
现代文：宁王恼了，一心想找他的茬子，却没抓到他什么把柄。
English: Ning Wang was annoyed and tried to find his mule, but he couldn't catch him.

古文：会俊以圣节按部，遂劾奏之，停俸三月。
现代文：后来碰到皇上生日，林俊却巡查自己的部属，就上书弹劾他，林俊因此被扣发了三个月的俸禄。
English: Later, on the emperor's birthday, Lin Jun inspected his subordinates and impeached him in writing. As a result, Lin Jun was deprived of his salary for three months.

古文：寻以母忧归。
现代文：不久他母亲去世，他就归乡守丧去了。
English: Soon after, his mother died, and he returned to his hometown to mourn.

古文：武宗即位，言官交荐，江西人在朝者合疏乞还俊。
现代文：武宗继位后，言官纷纷荐举林俊，江西人在朝中做官的也联名上书请让林俊恢复原职。
English: After the succession of Emperor Wuzong, officials recommended the promotion of Lin Jun one after another. Jiangxi officials in the imperial court also jointly submitted a letter asking Lin Jun to resume his original position.

古文：乃进右副都御史，再抚江西，遭父忧不果。
现代文：于是武宗提升他为右副都御史，再次让他去巡抚江西，但碰上他父亲去世，他在家守丧，没能上任。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wuzong promoted him to the position of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, and again asked him to be the governor of Jiangxi Province, but when his father died, he was at home in mourning and was unable to take up the post.

古文：正德四年起抚四川。
现代文：正德四年，武宗起用他巡抚四川。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengde, Wu Zong appointed him as the governor of Sichuan.

古文：眉州人刘烈倡乱，败而逃，诸不逞假其名剽掠。
现代文：眉州人刘烈发起叛乱，失败后逃走了，一帮不得志的人们假托他的名字四出剽掠。
English: Liu Lie, a resident of Meizhou, launched a rebellion, failed, and fled. A group of disaffected people went on a rampage under the guise of his name.

古文：俊绘形捕，莫能得。
现代文：林俊张榜绘像缉捕，没能抓到。
English: Lin Jun Zhangpang painted a picture of arrest, but failed to catch him.

古文：会保宁贼蓝廷瑞、鄢本恕、廖惠等继起，势益张，转寇巴州。
现代文：恰好这时保宁的反贼蓝廷瑞、鄢本恕、廖惠等跟着闹起来，气势更加猖狂，从保宁转攻巴州。
English: Just at this time, the anti-thieves of Boryeong, such as Lan Tingrui, Eponmonshu, and Liao Hui, followed suit, and the momentum was even more rampant. They switched from Boryeong to attack Baju.

古文：猝遇之华垄，单舆抵其营，譬晓利害，贼罗拜约降。
现代文：林俊在华垄突然撞上了他们，就乘坐一顶轿子独自到他们营前，给他们讲解利害关系，反贼听后就围着他下拜，愿意约定时间投降。
English: Lin Jun suddenly bumped into them in Huarong, so he took a palanquin and went to their camp alone to explain to them the stakes. After listening, the anti-thieves surrounded him and bowed down, willing to agree on a time to surrender.

古文：淫雨失期，复叛去，攻陷通江。
现代文：后因为大雨连绵误了约定日期，他们就又叛走，打下了通江。
English: Later, because of the continuous heavy rain, they missed the agreed date, so they rebelled again and laid siege to Tongjiang.

古文：俊击败之龙滩河，遣知府张敏等追败之门镇子，遂擒廖惠。
现代文：林俊在龙滩河打败了他们，又派遣知府张敏等人追击，在门镇子打败他们，捉住了廖惠。
English: Lin Jun defeated them at Longtan River, and sent the governor Zhang Min and others to chase them, defeated them at the gate town, and captured Liao Hui.

古文：而廷瑞奔陕西西乡，越汉中三十六盘，至大巴山。
现代文：蓝廷瑞逃奔到陕西西乡，越过汉中三十六盘，到达大巴山。
English: Lan Tingrui fled to Xixiang, Shaanxi Province, and crossed the 36th Pan of the Middle Han Dynasty to reach Dabashan.

古文：官军追及，复大破之。
现代文：官军追上去，又把他打得大败。
English: The government army chased after him and beat him badly.

古文：遂移师击泸州贼曹甫，且遣人招谕。
现代文：然后林俊移兵攻击泸州反贼曹甫，同时派人前往招安。
English: Lin Jun then moved his troops to attack Cao Fu, the anti-thief of Zhangzhou, and at the same time sent people to Zhaotong.

古文：甫佯听令，使弟琯劫如故。
现代文：曹甫佯装着听他们的命令，却让他的弟弟曹一如既往地抢劫。
English: Cao Fuchen pretended to listen to their orders, but let his brother Cao continue to rob as usual.

古文：指挥李荫斩琯首，贼遂移江津。分七营，将攻重庆。
现代文：指挥李荫斩下了曹的人头，反贼就转移到江津，分兵七营，打算攻打重庆。
English: Commander Li Yin cut off Cao's head, and the anti-thieves moved to Jiangjin, divided into seven battalions, and planned to attack Chongqing.

古文：俊发酉阳、播州土兵助荫，以元日掩破其四营。贼遁入民家，焚之尽毙。
现代文：林俊征调酉阳、播州的士兵增援李荫，在五年元旦那天发起围攻，打下了敌人四个兵营，活着的贼人逃入百姓家里，官军把他们全给烧死了。
English: Lin Junzheng sent soldiers from Shenyang and Banzhou to reinforce Li Yin. On the fifth New Year's Day, he launched a siege and defeated four enemy barracks. The thieves escaped alive into people's homes, and the government army burned them all to death.

古文：乘胜捣老营，指挥汪洋等中伏死。
现代文：然后官军乘胜攻打反贼的老营，指挥汪洋等中埋伏死掉了。
English: Then the government army took advantage of the victory to attack the old anti-thief battalion, and the commander Wang Yang died in the ambush.

古文：荫复进，去贼十五里。甫以数十骑出，遇荫兵，败走。
现代文：李荫继续进兵，在离贼营十五里的地方，曹甫带着几十个骑兵出来，碰上李荫的部队，就败逃回去。
English: Li Yin continued to advance, and at a place fifteen miles from the thief camp, Cao Fu came out with dozens of cavalry, met Li Yin's troops, and fled back.

古文：官军乘胜进围之，俘及焚死者二千有奇。
现代文：官军乘胜进兵围困敌营，俘虏及烧死的盗贼有两千多人。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, the government army marched in and besieged the enemy camp. More than two thousand thieves were captured and burned to death.

古文：已，本恕、廷瑞为永顺土舍彭世麟所擒。
现代文：后来，本恕、廷瑞被永顺的土著百姓彭世麟捉住。
English: Later, Honjo and Tingrui were captured by the indigenous people of Yongshun, Peng Shilin.

古文：俊论功进右都御史。
现代文：林俊论功升任右都御史。
English: Lin Jun was promoted to the post of Utsu Imperial Historian.

古文：甫党方四亡命思南，复攻南川、綦江，以窥泸州。
现代文：曹甫的余党方四逃到思南后又攻占南川、綦江，窥视泸州。
English: After Cao Fu's remaining four parties fled to Sinan, they captured Nanchuan and Minjiang, and peered into Ganzhou.

古文：俊益发士兵，令副使何珊、李钺等败之去。
现代文：林俊又多调了一些士兵，派副使何珊、李钺等把他们打得败逃而去。
English: Lin Jun also transferred more soldiers, and sent deputy envoys such as He Shan and Li Jun to defeat them and escape.

古文：捷闻，玺书奖励。
现代文：捷报传给朝廷后，武宗用加盖玉玺的诏书奖励了林俊。
English: The news of the victory was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor issued a reward.

古文：俊在军，与总督洪钟议多左。
现代文：林俊在部队里，与总督洪钟议事往往意见不一。
English: In the army, Lin Jun often disagreed with Governor Hong Zhong.

古文：中贵子弟欲冒从军功，辄禁止。
现代文：一些太监的子弟要跟着冒认军功，林俊总是不许这样。
English: Some of the eunuchs' sons want to follow suit and claim military merit, but Lin Jun always forbids this.

古文：御史俞缁走避贼，而佥事吴景战殁。
现代文：御史俞缁临阵脱逃躲避敌人，致使佥事吴景阵亡。
English: Gu Shih, who was in the front line, escaped to avoid the enemy, resulting in the death of Wu Jing.

古文：缁惭，欲委罪俊，遂劾俊累报首功，贼终不灭；加凿井毁寺，逐僧徒，迫为贼。
现代文：俞缁感到惭愧不安，想嫁罪于林俊，就弹劾林俊一次次报上斩敌之功，反贼到底还没消灭掉，加上他开凿水井，拆毁寺庙，赶出僧人，迫使他们都做了贼。
English: Shun felt ashamed and uneasy, and wanted to blame Lin Jun for the crime, so he impeached Lin Jun for his success in defeating the enemy, which the anti-thieves had not eliminated after all, plus he dug wells, demolished temples, and drove out monks, forcing them all to become thieves.

古文：于是俊前后被切责。
现代文：于是林俊前后几次受到严厉批评。
English: As a result, Lin Jun was severely criticized several times.

古文：比方四败，贼且尽，俊辞加秩及赏，乞以旧职归田。
现代文：等到方四败灭以后，江西反贼差不多消灭干净了，林俊上书辞谢给自己的晋级和奖赏，请求让自己以原来的职务告老还乡。
English: After the defeat of Fang Si, the Jiangxi anti-thieves were almost wiped out. Lin Jun wrote a letter to thank his promotion and reward, and asked to return to his hometown with his original position.

古文：诏不许辞秩，听其致仕。言官交请留，不报。
现代文：诏书传下来，不允许他辞谢晋级，但准予退休，言官纷纷上书请对林俊加以留用，武宗没做任何批示。
English: After the imperial edict was passed down, he was not allowed to resign from the promotion, but he was allowed to retire. Government officials wrote to Lin Jun and asked him to stay on. However, Emperor Wu did not give any orders.

古文：俊归，士民号哭追送。
现代文：林俊起程回家的时候，江西的士绅、百姓号哭追送，恋恋不舍。
English: When Lin Jun started to go home, the gentry and common people in Jiangxi cried and chased him away, unable to give up their love.

古文：时正德六年十一月也。
现代文：当时是正德六年十一月。
English: It was November of Zhengde's sixth year.

古文：世宗即位，起工部尚书，改刑部。
现代文：世宗即位以后，起用他做工部尚书，又改为刑部尚书。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was appointed as the official secretary of the Ministry of Works, and then changed to the official secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：在道数引疾，不许。
现代文：他在赴京的路上就几番称病求罢，世宗不同意。
English: On his way to Beijing, he repeatedly said that he was ill, but Sejong disagreed.

古文：因请帝亲近儒臣，正其心以出号令，用浑朴为天下先。初诏所革，无迁就以废公议。
现代文：他在奏章中还进而请求世宗亲近儒臣，平心静气地发号施令，以朴实、厚重的美德做天下人的榜样；即位诏书中所要革除的弊端，实行过程中不要迁就，以免使公众的舆论落空。
English: In the transcript, he further requested Shizong to be close to Confucius, calmly issue orders, and set an example for the people of the world with simple and profound virtues; the evils to be eliminated in the enthronement edict should not be accommodated in the implementation process, so as not to fail the public opinion.

古文：既抵京师，会暑月经筵辍讲，举祖宗勤学故事以谏。
现代文：抵达京师后，正碰上暑天，经筵停止进行日讲，林俊就拿祖宗勤学的故事来劝谏世宗。
English: After arriving in Beijing, Lin Jun took the story of his ancestor's diligent study as a means of persuading Xing Shizong.

古文：俊时年已七十，寓止朝房，示无久居意。
现代文：他那时已经有七十岁了，却只在朝房中居住，以示没有长期住下来的意思。
English: He was already seventy years old at that time, but he only lived in the palace to show that he did not intend to live there for a long time.

古文：数为帝言亲大臣，勤圣学，辨异端，节财用。
现代文：他几次给世宗讲要亲近大臣，勤于研究儒学，明辨佛、道是异端，治国要节约财用等道理。
English: He told Sejong several times that he should be close to the minister, diligently study Confucianism, clearly distinguish Buddhism and Taoism as heresy, and govern the country to save money and other reasons.

古文：朝有大政，必侃侃陈论，中外想望其风采。
现代文：朝廷中间每有大事，他一定侃侃陈论，当时朝堂内外的人们都想一睹他的风采呢。
English: Whenever there was a big event in the middle of the Imperial Court, he was sure to rant and rave about it. At that time, people inside and outside the Imperial Court wanted to see his style.

古文：中官葛景等奸利事觉，为言官所纠，诏下司礼监察讯。俊言内臣犯法，法司不得讯，是宫府异体也。
现代文：宦官葛景等人非法谋利的事暴露后，被言官举报上去，世宗传令让司礼太监审讯，林俊说内臣犯法，法司不能审问，这样宫廷和朝廷不就一分为二了吗？
English: After the illegal profiteering of eunuch Ge Jing and others was exposed, the eunuch was reported by the spokesman, Shizong ordered the eunuch to be interrogated, Lin Jun said that the vassal had violated the law, and the legal department could not interrogate, so the court and the court would not be divided into two?

古文：乞下法司公讯，以诏平明之治。
现代文：请交给法司公审，以显示政治的公平、光明。
English: Please submit it to the legal department for public trial to show political fairness and brightness.

古文：都督刘晖下狱，俊当以交结朋党律，言与许泰同罪，请斩以谢天下。
现代文：都督刘晖关入监狱后，林俊认为应按结成朋党的律令来断，说刘晖与许泰罪恶相等，请将他斩首以告慰天下人。
English: After the governor Liu Wei was put in prison, Lin Jun thought that it should be broken according to the law of forming a fraternal party, saying that Liu Wei and Xu Tai's crimes are equal, please behead him to console the world.

古文：廖鹏、廖铠、齐佐、王瓛论死，屡诏缓刑，俊乞亟行诛。
现代文：廖鹏、廖铠、齐佐、王王献被判死刑后，世宗屡次诏令缓期执行，林俊上书请立即执行。
English: After Liao Peng, Liao Wei, Qi Zuo and Wang Wang Xian were sentenced to death, Shizong repeatedly issued an edict to suspend the execution, and Lin Jun sent a letter requesting immediate execution.

古文：又劾谷大用占民田万余顷。
现代文：后来他又弹劾谷大用侵占民田一万多顷。
English: Later, he also used the impeachment of Gu Dai to occupy more than 10,000 hectares of people's fields.

古文：皆不听。
现代文：世宗都没有听从他的意见。
English: These kings of the sea don't listen.

古文：中官崔文家人李阳凤索匠师宋钰贿不获，嗾文杖之几死，下刑部治未决，而中旨移镇抚司。
现代文：宦官崔文的仆人李阳凤向匠师宋钰索取贿赂不成，怂恿崔文把宋钰差点一棒打死了，崔文被关在刑部狱中尚未定案，已从宫廷内直接传来圣旨要刑部把他移交镇抚司。
English: The eunuch Cui Wen's servant, Li Yangfeng, was unable to obtain a bribe from the craftsman Song Xuan. Cui Cui Wen nearly beat Song Xuan to death with a stick. Cui Wen was locked up in the prison of the Ministry of Justice. The case had not yet been decided, but a direct order had come from the court to the Ministry of Justice to hand him over to the magistrate.

古文：俊留不遣，力争不纳。
现代文：林俊押下不肯移交，极力向世宗谏诤，世宗不听。
English: Lin Jun refused to hand it over and tried his best to persuade Shizong, but Shizong would not listen.

古文：明日又奏，帝怒责陈状。
现代文：第二天林俊再次上书，世宗恼火地责成他作出书面解释。
English: The next day, Lin Jun wrote again, and Shizong angrily ordered him to make a written explanation.

古文：俊言： 祖宗以刑狱付法司，以缉获奸盗付镇抚。讯鞫既得，犹必付法司拟罪。
现代文：林俊说 ：祖宗把量刑交给法司办理，把缉捕奸盗交镇抚司办理，镇抚司审讯以后，犯人还必须交给法司来判刑。
English: Lin Jun said: Ancestors handed over the sentencing to the Legal Department to handle, and handed over the arrest of rape and theft to the Public Security Department to handle. After the Public Security Department's trial, the prisoner must also be handed over to the Legal Department to be sentenced.

古文：未有夺取未定之囚，反付推问者。
现代文：从来没有从法司夺走尚未量刑的犯人，倒回头交给审讯者定罪的。
English: No unsentenced prisoner has ever been taken from the courtroom and returned to the interrogators to be convicted.

古文：文先朝漏奸，罪不容诛，兹复干内降。臣不忍朝廷百五十年纪纲，为此辈坏乱。 
现代文：崔文是武宗朝留下的坏蛋，他的罪恶已经不容不杀，现在又暗地里求取内宫发出诏书，我不忍心看到朝廷一百五十年来传下的法度给这些人破坏了。 
English: Cui Wen is a villain left over from the Wuzong Dynasty. His crimes have become so egregious that he cannot be allowed to live. Now he is secretly asking the Inner Court to issue an edict. I can't bear to see the 150-year-old laws handed down by the imperial court destroyed by these people.

古文：帝惮其言直，乃不问。
现代文：世宗敬畏他说话爽直，就不再追究他了。
English: The world feared him because he spoke boldly, and they did not persecute him.

古文：俊以耆德起田间，持正不避嫌，既屡见格，遂乞致仕。
现代文：林俊因为年长而有德行，被世宗从乡下起用上来，他坚持正道，不避嫌疑，在屡次受到阻挠后，就上书请求退休。
English: Because of his age and virtue, Lin Jun was recruited by Shizong from the countryside. He adhered to the right path and did not avoid suspicion. After being repeatedly obstructed, he submitted a letter requesting retirement.

古文：诏加太子太保，给驿赐隶廪如制。
现代文：世宗传令加封他为太子太保，按规定配给他驿道车马、仆人和粮食。
English: Shizong ordered that he be given the title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm, and he was provided with a carriage, horses, servants, and food according to regulations.

古文：俊数争 大礼 ，与杨廷和合。
现代文：林俊也曾屡次和世宗争议 大礼 ，意见和杨廷和一致。
English: Lin Jun has also repeatedly been in dispute with Shizong, and his opinions are in line with Yang Ting's.

古文：尝上言推尊所生有不容已之情，有不可易之礼，因辑尧、舜至宋理宗事凡十条，以上。
现代文：他曾上书说皇上推尊自己的亲生父母有不容罢休的心情，也有不可改变的礼制，于是抄辑了尧、舜以来到宋理宗为止共十条往事，递了上去。
English: He once wrote a letter saying that Emperor Taizong's own parents had an unquenchable passion and an unchangeable etiquette, so he copied a total of ten past events from Emperor Taizong to Emperor Song and handed it to Emperor Taizong.

古文：及 大礼 议定，得罪者或杖死。
现代文：等 大礼 议定后，被世宗治罪的人有的竟被杖打至死。
English: After the grand ceremony was agreed upon, some people who had been condemned by the world were actually beaten to death with a cane.

古文：四年秋，俊从病中上书言： 古者鞭扑之刑，辱之而已，非欲糜烂其体肤而致之死也，又非所以加于士大夫也。
现代文：嘉靖四年秋天，林俊在病中上书说： 古时候鞭打的刑罚，也只是羞辱罪人而已，不是非要打伤罪人的肌肤，让他去死不可，也不是用来对待士大夫的。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Jiajing, Lin Jun wrote in his illness: The punishment of whipping in ancient times was only to humiliate the sinner. It was not necessary to hurt the skin of the sinner and let him die, nor was it used to treat the scholar.

古文：成化时，臣及见廷杖二三臣，率容厚棉底衣，重毡叠裹，然且沉卧，久乃得痊。
现代文：成化时，我见到过廷杖三个大臣，都允许他们穿着厚棉衣，裹着几层毯子，就这样也要打得大半死，很长时间才能痊愈。
English: When I was growing up, I saw three ministers of the imperial scepter, and they all allowed themselves to be dressed in thick cotton clothes and wrapped in several layers of blankets. In this way, they had to be beaten half to death, and it took a long time for them to recover.

古文：正德朝，逆瑾窃权，始令去衣，致末年多杖死。
现代文：正德年间，邪恶的刘瑾窃取权柄后，廷杖才让人脱下衣服，致使后来受廷杖的人大多被打死。
English: During the Zhengde era, after the evil Liu Bei stole power, the imperial scepter only made people take off their clothes, resulting in most of those who later received the imperial scepter being beaten to death.

古文：臣又见成化、弘治时，惟叛逆、妖言、劫盗下诏狱，始命打问。他犯但言送问而已。
现代文：我又见到成化、弘治年间，只有叛逆、妖言、强盗关进诏狱后，才传令拷问，其他类型的犯人只是说送审而已。
English: I also saw that during the Chenghua and Hongzhi dynasties, only traitors, soothsayers and robbers were summoned for interrogation after being sent to the imperial prison, while other types of prisoners were merely referred for trial.

古文：今一概打问，亦非故事。
现代文：现在对不管什么犯人都一概拷问，也不是过去有过的事。
English: It is not a thing of the past that all prisoners, no matter who they are, are now subjected to torture.

古文：自去岁旧臣斥逐殆尽，朝署为空。
现代文：从去年至今，原先的大臣差不多给赶尽了，朝堂为之一空。
English: From last year to the present, the former ministers have almost all been ousted, and the chancellery is empty.

古文：乞圣明留念，既去者礼致，未去者慰留。
现代文：我请求圣明的陛下留心，把已经离开的大臣以礼召回，对没有离去的加以安慰和留用。
English: I ask Your Holiness to take heed, to recall with honor the ministers who have left, and to comfort and retain those who have not left.

古文：硕德重望如罗钦顺、王守仁、吕柟、鲁铎辈，宜列置左右。
现代文：有着很高的德行、名望的人如罗钦顺、王守仁、吕木冉、鲁铎等人，应该安排在陛下的身边。
English: People with high virtue and reputation, such as Luo Qinshun, Wang Shouren, Lv Mullan, Lu Wei and others, should be placed at His Majesty's side.

古文：臣衰病待尽，无复他望，敢效古人遗表之意，敬布犬马之心。 
现代文：我衰老有病，只在等死，没有别的希望，所以敢仿效古人临死上表的意思，恭敬地表达我犬马一样的忠心。 
English: I'm old and sick, just waiting to die, with no other hope, so I dare to imitate the meaning of the ancient people's death watch and respectfully express my loyalty like a dog.

古文：帝但下所司而已。
现代文：世宗收到后只是交给有关部门收存而已。
English: After receiving it, Sejong only handed it over to the relevant department for storage.

古文：又明年，疾革，复上书请懋学隆孝，任贤纳谏，保躬导和，且预辞身后恤典，遂卒。
现代文：过了一年，林俊病危，又上书请世宗勤于学问，光大孝行，任用贤人，虚心纳谏，善保玉体，并且预先辞谢身后的丧葬善后仪式。
English: A year later, Lin Jun was critically ill, and he wrote again to ask Shizong to be diligent in learning, to show great filial piety, to appoint wise men, to be open-minded in accepting gifts, to be good at preserving the jade body, and to thank him in advance for the funeral and aftercare ceremony.

古文：年七十六。
现代文：然后就死掉了，终年七十六岁。
English: And then he died, aged seventy-six.

古文：瑶端亮清介。既归，僻处陋巷。
现代文：第二年，《明伦大典》成书，朝廷追论林俊附和杨廷和的罪过，削了他生前的官，他的儿子就用士丧礼埋葬了他。
English: The following year, "Ming Lun Da Dian" was written, and the imperial court pursued Lin Junfu and Yang Tinghe for their crimes, stripped them of their official positions, and his son buried him with a military funeral.

古文：与尚书刘麟、顾应祥辈结文酒社，徜徉岘山间。卒年八十九。赠太子太保，谥恭靖。王廷相，字子衡，仪封人。
现代文：林俊先后经历四朝，抗言敢谏，以礼入仕，也以礼退休，一生中始终保持着同样的节操。隆庆初年，朝廷恢复了他的官，又追赠他为少保，谥贞肃。王廷相，字子衡，河南仪封人。
English: Lin Jun went through four dynasties successively, resisting and daring, entering the service with courtesy and retiring with courtesy, and always maintained the same discipline throughout his life. In the first year of the Longqing, the imperial court restored his official position, and posthumously awarded him the title of Shao Bao, Shao Zhen Su, Wang Ting Xiang, Zi Heng, Henan Yi Feng Ren.

古文：幼有文名。
现代文：从小就有文名。
English: He has had a pen name since he was a child.

古文：登弘治十五年进士，选庶吉士，授兵科给事中。
现代文：考上弘治十五年榜进士后，选为庶吉士，授官兵科给事中。
English: After he was admitted to the Hongzhi 15th Year Honor Roll, he was selected as an associate member, and he is in the process of being awarded an officer in the military science.

古文：以忧去。
现代文：因回家守丧去职。
English: He resigned due to his father's death.

古文：正德初，服阕至京。
现代文：正德初年，丧礼完结除丧服去到北京。
English: In Zhengde's first year, after the funeral, he took off his mourning clothes and went to Beijing.

古文：刘瑾中以罪谪亳州判官，量移高淳知县。
现代文：刘瑾诬他有罪，贬为亳州判官，经考察转任高淳知县。
English: Liu Wei found him guilty and demoted him to judge of Zhangzhou. After investigation, he was transferred to Gao Junchi County.

古文：召为御史，疏言： 大盗四起，将帅未能平。
现代文：后来征召回京为御史，给皇帝上书说 ：造反的百姓四处都是，领兵的将帅不能镇压。
English: Later, he was called back to Beijing to serve as imperial historian, and he wrote to the emperor, "The rebellious people are everywhere, and the generals leading the troops cannot suppress them."

古文：由将权轻，不能御敌；兵机疏，不能扼险也。
现代文：原因在于将领直接握有的权力轻微，不能很好地防御敌人；军队的部署疏散，不能有效地扼守险要地带。
English: The reason is that the power directly held by generals is weak and cannot defend the enemy well; the deployment and evacuation of troops cannot effectively defend the critical areas.

古文：盗贼所至，乡民奉牛酒，甚者为效力。
现代文：造反的队伍所到之处，地方百姓用牛肉、酒食犒劳，甚至帮叛军做事。
English: Wherever the rebel troops went, the local people provided them with beef, wine and food, and even helped the rebels with their work.

古文：盗有生杀权，而将帅反无之，故兵不用命。
现代文：盗贼有杀人的权力，可是朝廷的将帅却没有，所以士兵不肯听从调令。
English: Thieves have the power to kill, but the court marshal does not, so the soldiers refuse to obey the order.

古文：宜假便宜，退却者必斩。
现代文：陛下应授权给将帅，允许他们见机行事，士卒临阵后退者杀头。
English: His Majesty should authorize the generals to act as they see fit, and the soldiers to kill the retreating troops.

古文：河南地平旷，贼易奔，山西地险阻，亦纵深入，将帅罪也。
现代文：河南土地平整广阔，叛军容易奔逃，山西地理艰险阻塞，也还是让叛军打进去了，这是将帅的失职。
English: Henan's land is flat and vast, making it easy for the rebels to flee, and Shanxi's geography is difficult and dangerous, but the rebels were allowed to enter. This was a dereliction of duty on the part of the commander.

古文：若陈兵黄河之津，使不得西，分扼井陉、天井，使不得东，而主将以大军蹙之，则贼进退皆穷，可不战擒矣。 
现代文：假令在黄河的渡口布下军队，使叛兵不能向西去，再分兵把守井陉、天井，使叛兵不能向东跑，然后主将集中兵力向敌军推进，那么叛军进退无路，就可以不战而拿获了。 
English: Suppose an army is deployed at the ferry of the Yellow River so that the rebels cannot go westward, and then the army is divided to guard the shaft, the ceiling, so that the rebels cannot run eastward, and then the master will concentrate the forces to advance against the enemy, then the rebels have no way to retreat and can be captured without a fight.

古文：帝切责总督诸臣，悉从其议。
现代文：武宗为此严厉批评了总管军务的大臣们，全部听从了他的意见。
English: Wu Zong severely criticized the ministers in charge of military affairs for this, and they all obeyed his opinion.

古文：已，出按陕西，裁抑镇守中官廖堂，被诬。
现代文：过后，他外放按察陕西，惩办了镇守陕西的宦官廖堂，又被人诬陷。
English: Later, he was sent to investigate Shaanxi Province, and punished the eunuch Liaodang, the town guard of Shaanxi Province. He was also framed.

古文：时已改督京畿学校，逮系诏狱，谪赣榆丞。
现代文：当时他已经改任，正督办京畿学校事务，被逮捕关在朝廷的监狱中，出狱后贬为赣榆丞。
English: At that time, he had already been reassigned to the post of official inspector in charge of Gyeonggi school affairs. He was arrested and held in a prison at the imperial court, and after his release, he was demoted to the position of secretary.

古文：屡迁四川佥事，山东副使，皆提督学校。
现代文：后几次转官，先后为四川签事、山东副使，都是管理学校的官员。
English: The last few transfers, first to Sichuan and then to Shandong, were all school management officials.

古文：嘉靖二年举治行卓异，再迁山东右布政使。
现代文：嘉靖二年被推荐为政绩品行优等，又升为山东右布政使。
English: In the second year, Jiajing was recommended for his outstanding political performance, and he was promoted to the position of Shandong Right Branch Political Envoy.

古文：以右副都御史巡抚四川，讨平芒部贼沙保。
现代文：以右副都御吏的名义巡视四川，征服平定了芒部的造反将领沙保。
English: In the name of the right vice-governor of the capital, he toured Sichuan and conquered and quelled the rebellious general Sa Bao.

古文：寻召理院事。
现代文：不久召入京城办理都察院的事务。
English: He was soon called to the capital to deal with the affairs of the capital's court of inquiry.

古文：历兵部左、右侍郎，迁南京兵部尚书，参赞机务。
现代文：经兵部左、右侍郎，升到南京兵部尚书，参加筹议朝廷的机密大事。
English: He rose through the ranks of the left and right attendants of the military department, and was promoted to the Nanjing military department, where he participated in the planning of the confidential events of the imperial court.

古文：初有诏，省进贡快船。
现代文：最初朝廷有诏书，减少运送贡品的快船。
English: At first, the imperial court issued an edict to reduce the number of fast ships transporting tributes.

古文：守备太监赖义复求增，廷相请酌物轻重以定船数，而大减宣德以后传旨非祖制者。
现代文：守备太监赖义又要求增加，廷相请考虑贡品的重量来确定需用的船数，并且大大减弃宣德以后不合祖宗旧制的诏令。
English: Guarding eunuch Lai Yi also asked for an increase, and the court official asked to consider the weight of the tribute to determine the number of ships needed, and greatly reduced the edict that did not conform to the old system of the ancestors after Xuan De.

古文：龙江、大胜、新江、浦子、江淮五关守臣借稽察榷利，安庆、九江借春秋阅视索赂，廷相皆请革之。
现代文：龙江、大胜、新江、浦子、九江的守臣借口春秋视察向人索取贿赂，廷相都请皇帝把他们革了职。
English: The courtiers of Longjiang, Dasheng, Xinjiang, Puzi and Jiujiang used the spring and autumn inspection as an excuse to solicit bribes from people. The court ministers all asked the emperor to dismiss them.

古文：草场、芦课银率为中官杨奇、卜春及魏国公徐鹏举所侵蚀。
现代文：草场、芦课的银钱大多被宦官杨奇、卜春和魏国公徐鹏举占为私有。
English: The eunuchs Yang Qi, Bu Chun and Wei Guogong Xu Penghu appropriated most of the money from the pastures and reed beds as private property.

古文：以廷相请，逮问奇、春，夺鹏举禄。
现代文：朝廷听从廷相的请求，逮捕、审问杨奇、卜春，扣发了徐鹏举的俸禄。
English: The imperial court complied with the request of the court officials, arrested and interrogated Yang Qi and Bu Chun, and withheld Xu Penghu's salary.

古文：三月入为左都御史，疏言南京守备权太重，不宜令魏国世官。
现代文：三月入北京为左都御史，上疏说南京守备的兵权太大，也不应该让魏国公世袭为官。
English: In March, he entered Beijing as the Left Capital Imperial Historian. Shang Zuo said that the military power of the Nanjing garrison was too great, and the Wei Guogong should not be allowed to succeed to the post.

古文：给事中曾忭亦言之，遂解鹏举兵柄。
现代文：给事中曾忭也说起这事，朝廷就此削夺了徐鹏举的兵权。
English: Zeng Yao also mentioned this in his report, and the imperial court thus curtailed Xu Penghu's military power.

古文：居二年，加兵部尚书兼前官，提督团营，仍理院事。
现代文：过了两年，加官晋级做了兵部尚书，兼任左都御史。负责提督团营，仍然办理都察院事。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of vice admiral, and became the secretary of the military department, concurrently serving as the governor of the Left Capital. He was in charge of the admiral's regimental camp, and still handled the affairs of the capital.

古文：两考满，加太子少保。
现代文：经过两个考察期后，加升太子少保。
English: After two observation periods, the promotion of the crown prince to the minor protector was carried out.

古文：畿民盗天寿山陵树，巡按杨绍芳引盗大祀神御物，律斩。
现代文：京城郊区的百姓偷了天寿山皇陵的树，巡抚按察使杨绍芳援引盗取大祀神御物的条款判处斩首。
English: Peasants in the suburbs of Beijing stole a tree from the imperial mausoleum on Tianshou Mountain, and Yang Shaofang, the inspector-general, invoked the clause on stealing sacred objects and sentenced them to beheading.

古文：廷相言： 大祀神御物者，指神御在内祭器帷帐之物而言。
现代文：廷相进言道 ：大祀神御物，是指神御在内使用的祭器帷帐之类的物品而言。
English: The Imperial Household Agency's comment: "Greatly venerated sacred objects" refers to items such as sacred vessels and curtains used by gods.

古文：律文，盗陵木者，止杖一百，徒三年。
现代文：按照刑律条文规定，盗窃陵墓树木者，最多判他一百大棒，三年徒刑。
English: According to the provisions of the Criminal Law, a person who steals mausoleum trees will be sentenced to a maximum of one hundred large sticks and three years in prison.

古文：今舍本律，非刑之平。 
现代文：现在不按律令判处，不能说是公正的刑罚。 
English: Now, if the sentence is not in accordance with the law, it cannot be said to be a just punishment.

古文：忤旨，罚俸一月。
现代文：这话违背了世宗的旨意，他被扣除一个月的官俸。
English: This went against Sejong's wishes, and he was docked one month's salary.

古文：帝将幸承天，廷相与诸大臣谏，不纳。
现代文：世宗将去承天巡视，廷相和其他大臣们一起规劝，世宗不听。
English: Sejong will go on a tour of Succession to Heaven, and the prime minister and other ministers will try to persuade him, but Sejong will not listen.

古文：扈从还，以九年满，加太子太保。
现代文：他担任侍从，回来后因为任职满九年，加太子太保。
English: He served as an attendant, and after his return, because he had been in office for nine years, he was promoted to crown prince.

古文：雷震奉先殿，廷相言： 人事修而后天道顺，大臣法而后小臣廉。
现代文：雷电震坏了奉先殿，廷相上书说： 人间事务办好了，自然会天道和顺，大臣守法，然后下级官僚就会洁廉。
English: After the thunder and lightning shook the Imperial Palace, the courtier wrote: When human affairs are done, it will naturally be peaceful, the ministers will abide by the law, and then the lower-level bureaucrats will be clean and honest.

古文：今廉隅不立，贿赂盛行，先朝犹暮夜之私，而今则白日之攫。
现代文：现在官员们品行不端，贿赂的风气盛行，先帝一朝贿赂还是黄昏夜晚偷偷摸摸地进行，而今天就如白天掠夺一样。
English: Now, officials are behaving improperly, and the culture of bribery is prevalent. In the past, bribery was done secretly in the twilight of the night, but today it is like plundering in the daytime.

古文：大臣污则小臣悉效，京官贪则外臣无畏。
现代文：大臣贪污那么下面的小官就会全来仿效。京城的官僚贪婪那么地方的官吏就无所畏惧了。
English: If a minister is corrupt, then all the lower-ranking officials will follow suit. If the bureaucrats in the capital are greedy, then local officials have nothing to fear.

古文：臣职宪纪，不能绝其弊，乞先罢斥。 
现代文：我的职务是负责维持纪纲的，而我不能消除这些弊端，请先罢免、斥逐我吧。 
English: My duty is to maintain discipline, and I cannot eliminate these defects. Please dismiss and expel me first.

古文：用以刺尚书严嵩、张瓒辈。
现代文：意在用这些话影射尚书严嵩、张瓒等人。
English: The intention is to use these words to allude to Shangshu Yansong, Zhang Jun and others.

古文：帝但谕留而已。
现代文：世宗只是指示挽留他罢了。
English: The Sejong merely gave instructions to retain him.

古文：初，廷相请以六条考察差还御史。
现代文：原先，廷相请用六条办法考察奉使还朝的御史。
English: Originally, the Minister of the Imperial Court requested that six methods be used to investigate the history of the envoys returning to the imperial court.

古文：帝令疏其所未尽，编之宪纲。
现代文：世宗命令他上书陈说他没说完的意见，把它们编成法令。
English: King Sejong ordered him to submit his unfinished opinions in writing and compile them into a law.

古文：乃取张孚敬、汪鋐所奏列，及新所定凡十五事以进，悉允行之。
现代文：于是他采纳张孚敬、汪钅宏所上奏的意见和他重新制定的法令共十五条进呈，世宗完全批准予以执行。
English: As a result, he adopted the opinions of Zhang Fu Jing and Wang Binghong and submitted a total of fifteen newly formulated laws and decrees, which were fully approved by Shizong.

古文：及九庙灾，下诏修省，因敕廷相曰： 御史巡方职甚重。
现代文：等到祖庙发生灾祸，世宗颁下诏书自我反省，又下诏书对廷相说 ：御史出巡外方职责很重要。
English: When the calamity occurred in the ancestral temple, Shizong issued an edict of self-reflection, and the next edict said to the imperial secretary: "It is important for you to go on a foreign tour.

古文：卿总宪有年，自定六条后，不考黜一人，今宜痛修省。 
现代文：你掌管法令很有些年岁了，可是自从制定六条法令以来，不曾考核、罢免过一个人，现在应该痛加反省了。 
English: You have been in charge of laws and regulations for quite a few years, but since the enactment of the six laws and regulations, you have not examined or dismissed a single person. Now you should seriously reflect.

古文：廷相惶恐谢。
现代文：廷相惶然畏惧，赶紧赔罪。
English: The courtier, panicked and afraid, hurried to make amends.

古文：廷相掌内台最久，有威重。
现代文：廷相掌管内台时间最长，很有威望。
English: The chancellor of the court has been in charge of the Inner Court for the longest time, which is very prestigious.

古文：督团营，与郭勋共事，逡巡其间，不能有所振饬。
现代文：督办团营，与郭勋一起共事，犹豫不决，不能有所整顿。
English: Supervising the regimental camp, working with Guo Xun, hesitating, unable to rectify.

古文：给事中李凤来等论权贵夺民利，章下都察院，廷相檄五城御史核实，迟四十余日。
现代文：给事中李凤来等批评权贵侵夺百姓利益，奏章下达都察院，廷相传命五城御史加以核实，因此迟办了四十多天。
English: Li Fenglai and others criticized the interests of the people being encroached upon by the rich and powerful, and a report was sent to the Duka Academy. The imperial court ordered the Five Cities Imperial Historian to verify the report. As a result, the report was delayed for more than forty days.

古文：给事中章允贤遂劾廷相徇私慢上。
现代文：给事中章允贤于是就上书指责廷相徇私情欺骗皇上。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhang Yunxian wrote a letter accusing the imperial couple of infidelity and deceiving the emperor.

古文：帝方诘责，而廷相以御史所核闻，惟郭勋侵最多。
现代文：世宗正要怪罪，廷相用御史们核对的结果递上了报告，其中只有郭勋侵占最多。
English: Sejong was about to blame, the courtier used the results of the historians' verification to submit a report, of which only Guo Xun occupied the most.

古文：帝令勋自奏，于是劾勋者群起。
现代文：世宗命令郭勋自己写报告上来，于是弹劾郭勋的人群起而攻之。
English: Sejong ordered Guo Xun to write up a report himself, so the crowd that impeached Guo Xun rose up and attacked him.

古文：勋复以领敕稽留触帝怒，下狱。
现代文：郭勋又因为接到世宗的诏令拖延时间惹得世宗恼怒，被打入监牢。
English: Guo Xun was also sent to prison for delaying the time of receiving the edict from Shizong, which angered Shizong.

古文：责廷相朋比阿党，斥为民。
现代文：廷相被指责为无原则地结朋树党，罢官为民。
English: The court chancellor was accused of unprincipledly forming a party with cronies and dismissing officials for the sake of the people.

古文：越三年卒。
现代文：过三年死去了。
English: He died three years later.

古文：廷相博学好议论，以经术称。
现代文：廷相博学，爱好议论，以通经术闻名。
English: He was a learned scholar, fond of discussion, and was famous for his ability to read and write.

古文：于星历、舆图、乐律、河图、洛书及周、邵、程、张之书，皆有所论驳，然其说颇乖僻。
现代文：对于星历、地图、乐律、河图、洛书及周敦颐、邵雍、程颢、程颐的著作，都有所议论和批驳，但是他的学说很怪僻，不合道理。
English: There have been discussions and refutations about the ephemeris, maps, musical rhythms, river maps, the Book of Lu, and the works of Zhou Dunyao, Shao Yong, Cheng Yao, and Cheng Yao, but his theories are very eccentric and unreasonable.

古文：隆庆初，复官，赠少保，谥肃敏。
现代文：隆庆初恢复官位，追赠太子少保，谥肃敏。
English: At the beginning of the Longqing era, he was restored to his official position, posthumously awarded the title of Junior Prince, and promoted to the rank of Senior Prince.

