古文：杜重威，其先朔州人，近世徙家于太原。
现代文：杜重威，他的祖先是朔州人，近世搬家到太原。
English: Du Chongwei, whose ancestors were from Shuozhou, moved to Taiyuan in modern times.

古文：祖兴，振武牙将。
现代文：祖父杜兴，是振武军牙将。
English: His grandfather, Du Xing, was a Zhenwu military commander.

古文：父堆金，事唐武皇为先锋使。
现代文：父亲杜堆金，服事后唐武皇李克用，担任先锋使。
English: His father, Du Duijin, served Tang Emperor Li Kezong as a vanguard envoy.

古文：重威少事明宗，自护圣军校领防州刺史。
现代文：杜重威年少服事后唐明宗李嗣源，从护圣军校升任防州刺史。
English: As a young man, Du Chongwei later served Li Siyuan of the Tang and Ming Dynasties, and was promoted from the Military School of Protection of Saints to the post of prefect of Bozhou.

古文：其妻即晋高祖妹也，累封宋国大长公主。
现代文：他的妻子就是后晋高祖石敬瑭的妹妹，被封为宋国大长公主。
English: His wife was the younger sister of the late Jin Gao's progenitor, Shi Jingyao, who was named the Grand Princess of Song.

古文：天福初，命重威典禁军，遥授舒州刺史。
现代文：天福初年，晋高祖命令杜重威在京城掌管禁军，又兼任朝外的舒州刺史。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, Emperor Gaozhu ordered Du Chongwei to take charge of the imperial army in Beijing, and also served as the governor of Shuzhou outside the court.

古文：二年，张从宾构乱，据汜水，晋高祖遣重威与候益率众破之，以功授潞州节度使。
现代文：天福二年，张从宾挑起祸乱，占据汜水，晋高祖派遣杜重威与侯益领军攻破他，因功被授潞州节度使。
English: In the second year of Tianfu, Zhang Congbin instigated a calamity and occupied Surabaya. Jinguo Zu dispatched Du Chongwei and Hou Yi to lead an army to defeat him. For his service, he was awarded the Bozhou Festival.

古文：与杨光远降范延光于鄴城，改许州节度使，兼侍卫亲军马步军副指挥使，寻加同平章事。
现代文：杜重威与杨光远迫使范延光在邺城投降，杜重威改任许州节度使，兼任侍卫亲军马步军副指挥使，不久加封同平章事。
English: Du Chongwei and Yang Guangyuan forced Fan Yanguang to surrender in Handan. Du Chongwei was appointed as the envoy of the Huizhou Festival, and also served as the deputy commander of the guards of the pro-army horse-marching army, and was soon awarded the same rank.

古文：未几，移镇郓州，迁侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
现代文：又不久，调任镇守郓州，迁升为侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
English: Not long after, he was transferred to the post of the town guard of Bozhou and was promoted to the post of the commander of the guards of the pro-army horse and foot troops.

古文：至镇，复重敛于民，税外加赋，境内苦之《通鉴》：重威所至黩货，民多逃亡，尝出过市，谓左右曰： 人言我驱尽百姓，何市人之多也！ 少帝嗣位，与契丹绝好，契丹主连年伐晋，重威但闭壁自守。部内城邑相继破陷，一境生灵受屠戮，重威任居方面，未尝以一土一骑救之。
现代文：晋高祖明知此事但不过问。到镇州后，又加紧搜刮人民，在税收外增加赋贡，境内的人民都深受其苦。晋少帝即位，与契丹断绝了友好关系，契丹国主连年攻打晋国，杜重威仅仅闭城自守。辖区内的城邑一个接一个被攻陷，一境生灵遭受杀戮，杜重威身为一方大员，不曾派出一兵一卒营救他们。
English: Jin Gaozu knew about this but did not ask. After arriving in Zhenzhou, he intensified the search for people and increased the tribute in addition to the tax, and the people in the territory were deeply suffering from it. When Emperor Jin ascended the throne, he broke off friendly relations with Khitan. The Khitan ruler attacked Jin Province for years, and Du Chongwei only closed the city to defend himself. The towns in the jurisdiction area were attacked one by one, and the lives of the people were killed. Du Chongwei was a member of one side and did not send a single soldier to rescue them.

古文：每敌骑数十驱汉人千万过城下，如入无人之境，重威但登陴注目，略无邀取之意。
现代文：常有敌人骑兵几十人驱赶汉人千万人经过他的城下，如入无人之境，杜重威仅登上城上的矮墙眼睁睁地望着，毫无拦截抢救的意思。
English: There were often dozens of enemy cavalrymen driving tens of millions of Han Chinese past his castle, as if into no man's land. Du Chongwei only climbed onto the low wall of the castle and stared open-eyed, with no intention of intercepting and rescuing.

古文：开运元年秋，加北面行营招讨使。
现代文：开运元年秋天，加封为北面行营招讨使。
English: In the autumn of the first year of operation, Jiafeng invited envoys to the camp in the north.

古文：二年，领大军下新州、满城、遂城。
现代文：二年，率领大军攻下泰州、满城、遂城。
English: In the second year, he led a large army to conquer Taizhou, Mancheng and Suicheng.

古文：契丹主自古北口回军，追蹑王师，重威等狼狈而旋，至阳城，为契丹所困。
现代文：契丹国主从古北口调回军队，追击晋朝部队，杜重威等人被打得狼狈而回，到阳城，被契丹军队围困。
English: The Khitan ruler sent his army back from Gubeikou to pursue the Jin forces, and Du Chongwei and others were beaten back to Yangcheng, where they were besieged by the Khitan army.

古文：会大风狂猛，军情愤激，府彦卿、张彦泽等引军四出，敌众大溃，诸将欲追之，重威曰： 逢贼得命，更望复子乎！ 
现代文：恰逢遇上猛烈的大风，士兵们情绪激愤，符彦卿、张彦泽等带领士兵四面出击，敌军被打得四处逃散，各位将领要追击败敌，杜重威却说： 遇上强敌而能保全性命就是万幸了，还能指望更大的福佑吗！ 
English: Just as a violent gale was encountered, the soldiers were furious. Fu Yanqing, Zhang Yanze and others led the soldiers to attack in all directions. The enemy army was beaten and scattered everywhere. The generals wanted to chase and defeat the enemy, but Du Chongwei said: If you meet a strong enemy and can save your life, it is a great fortune. Can you expect a greater blessing?

古文：遂收军驰归常山。
现代文：于是集合部队赶回常山。
English: As a result, the assembled troops rushed back to Changshan.

古文：先是，重威于州内括借钱帛，吏民大被其苦，人情咸怨，重以境内凋弊，十室九空，重威遂无留意，连上表乞归朝，不俟报即时上路。朝廷以边上重镇，主帅擅离，苟有奔冲，虑失御备，然亦无如之何，即以马全节代之，重威寻授鄴都留守。
现代文：在这之前，杜重威在州内搜刮钱财，官吏百姓大受其害，人心都怨恨他，再加上境内衰败困乏，十户家庭就有九户空无一人，杜重威因而不想呆在这里，接连向皇上进表请求调回朝廷，不等皇上答应就急忙上路回京，朝廷认为边境重镇，主帅擅自离开，如果有长奔突袭将会失去抵抗防守，但又不能把杜重威怎么样，只是立即让马全节接替他，而将他任命为邺都留守。
English: Prior to this, Du Chongwei was scrounging for money in the state, officials and people suffered greatly, and people resented him. Coupled with the decline and poverty in the territory, nine out of ten families were empty. Du Chongwei did not want to stay here, and successively asked the emperor to transfer the watch back to the court. Without waiting for the emperor's consent, he hurried on his way back to Beijing. The court believed that the border was important, the coach left without permission, and if there was a long-distance raid, it would lose resistance and defense. However, it could not do Du Chongwei any good, but immediately let Ma Quanzhi succeed him, and

古文：会镇州军食不继，遣殿中监王钦祚就本州和市，重威私第有粟十余万斛，遂录之以闻。朝廷给绢数万匹，价其粟直。
现代文：这时镇州军粮供应不上，派遣殿中监王钦祚到邺州协议购买，杜重威家里有十万多斛粟谷，王钦祚于是登录下来报告朝廷，朝廷用数万匹绢布给杜重威，以抵偿征用粟谷的价值。
English: At this time, the supply of military food in Zhenzhou was not available, and the palace overseer Wang Qinqian was sent to Zhangzhou to negotiate the purchase. Du Chongwei had more than 100,000 poppy seeds at home. Wang Qinqian then logged in to report to the court. The court used tens of thousands of poppy seeds to Du Chongwei to offset the value of the expropriated poppy seeds.

古文：重威大忿曰： 我非反逆，安得籍没耶！ 
现代文：杜重威大为生气说 ：我又不是反叛逆贼，怎么能没收我的粮食呢！ 
English: Du Chongwei was very angry and said, "I am not a rebel, how can they confiscate my grain!"

古文：三年冬，晋少帝诏重威与李守贞等率师经略瀛、鄚。
现代文：开运三年冬天，晋少帝诏令杜重威和李守贞等人率领部队攻取瀛州、莫阝州。
English: In the winter of the third year after the start of the campaign, Emperor Jinzhao ordered Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen and others to lead the troops to conquer Zhangzhou and Mopu.

古文：师至瀛州城下，晋骑将梁汉璋与契丹接战，汉璋死焉。
现代文：军队来到瀛州城下，晋军骑兵将领梁汉璋上前与契丹人交战，梁汉璋战死阵前。
English: When the army came to the city of Zhangzhou, Liang Hanju, the cavalry general of the Jin army, went forward to fight with the Khitan people, and Liang Hanju was killed in the battle.

古文：重威即时回军，次武强，闻契丹主南下，乃西趋镇州，至中渡桥，与契丹夹滹水而营。
现代文：杜重威立时下令撤回军队，驻扎武强，听说契丹国主南下，于是向西奔赴镇州，到中渡桥时，与契丹部队夹着滹水相对扎营。
English: Du Chongwei immediately ordered the withdrawal of the army and stationed Wu Qiang. He heard that the Khitan ruler was heading south, so he rushed west to Zhenzhou. When he reached Zhongdu Bridge, he camped with the Khitan troops opposite Surabaya.

古文：十二月八日，宋彦筠、王清等率数千人渡滹沲，阵于北岸，为敌所破。
现代文：这时契丹渡河部队已到了栾城，截断了杜重威的后路，军心惶恐不安，杜重威偷偷派人到敌军帅营，暗自表述投降的心意。
English: At this time, the Khitan river-crossing troops had arrived in Handan City, cutting off Du Chongwei's back route. The army was panicked and uneasy. Du Chongwei secretly sent someone to the enemy camp to express his intention to surrender.

古文：时契丹游军已至栾城，道路隔绝，人情危蹙，重威密遣人诣敌帐，潜布腹心。
现代文：契丹国主非常高兴，答应让他在中原称帝，杜重威昏庸愚昧，完全相信了契丹国主的话。
English: The Khitan sovereign was very pleased and promised to make him emperor in the Central Plains. Du Chongwei was so ignorant that he fully believed the words of the Khitan sovereign.

古文：契丹主大悦，许以中原帝之，重威庸暗，深以为信。一日，伏甲于内，召诸将会，告以降敌之意，诸将愕然。以上将既变，乃俯首听命，遂连署降表，令中门使高勋赍送敌帐，军士解甲，举声恸哭。
现代文：一天，暗地里埋伏下甲士，召集诸位将领相聚，将投降敌人的主意告诉他们，众将们都感到惊愕，但因为上将既然已经叛变，他们也就俯首听命，于是当即写下投降书，派中门使高勋送往敌人帅营，士兵们卸下战甲放下武器投降，都同声痛哭。
English: One day, he secretly ambushed the under-armour soldiers, called all the generals together, and told them of his plan to surrender to the enemy. The generals were all surprised, but since the general had already mutinied, they also bowed down and obeyed his orders. So he immediately wrote a letter of surrender, and sent the middle gate to send Gao Xun to the enemy camp. The soldiers unloaded their armour, laid down their weapons, and surrendered. They all cried together.

古文：是日，有大雾起于降军之上。
现代文：这一天，在投降晋军的阵地上出现了大雾。
English: On this day, a heavy fog appeared in the surrendered Jin army's position.

古文：契丹主使重威衣赭袍以示诸军，寻伪加守太傅，鄴都留守如故。
现代文：契丹国主让杜重威穿上罪人囚徒所穿的赤色的衣袍到各部队示众，旋即任以守太傅的伪职，仍像以前一样担任邺都留守。
English: The Khitan ruler asked Du Chongwei to put on the red robe worn by the criminal prisoners and go to the troops to demonstrate to the public. He was immediately appointed to the pseudo-position of guarding the Taifu, and still remained at the capital as before.

古文：契丹主南行，命重威部辖晋军以从，既至东京，驻晋军于陈桥，士伍饥冻，不胜其苦。
现代文：契丹国主到南方去，命令杜重威带领投降的晋军部下一起跟随，已经到了汴京，把投降的晋军驻扎在陈桥，士兵们饥饿寒冷，苦不堪言。
English: The Khitan ruler went to the south and ordered Du Chongwei to lead the surrendered Jin army subordinates to follow him. Du Chongwei had already arrived in Beijing and stationed the surrendered Jin army in Chenqiao. The soldiers were starving, cold and miserable.

古文：重威每出入衢路，为市民所诟，俯首而已。
现代文：杜重威每当从大路上经过，都被市民们辱骂，只得低着头而已。
English: Whenever Du Chongwei passed by on the highway, he was verbally abused by citizens and had to keep his head down.

古文：契丹下令括率京城钱帛，将相公私，雷同率配，重威与李守贞各万缗，乃告契丹主曰： 臣等以十万汉军降于皇帝，不免配借，臣所不甘。 
现代文：契丹国主下令搜刮京城钱财，无论将相公私，全都配额缴纳，杜重威与李守贞各缴纳一万缗钱。于是求告契丹国主说 ：臣下率领十万汉军投降皇帝，仍不能免除缴纳钱财，我们内心有所不甘。 
English: The Khitan sovereign ordered that the capital's money and property be collected, and that all officials, both public and private, pay the quota. Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen each paid ten thousand baht. So they appealed to the Khitan sovereign and said, "Our vassals, who led a hundred thousand Han troops to surrender to the emperor, are still not exempt from paying money and property, and we are not happy about it.

古文：契丹主笑而免之。
现代文：契丹国主笑着免除了他们的配额。
English: With a smile, the Khitan ruler exempted them from the quota.

古文：寻群盗断澶州浮梁，契丹乃遣重威归籓。
现代文：接着有成群的盗寇截断了澶州的浮桥，契丹国主才派杜重威回归邺都。
English: Then, hordes of thieves cut off the pontoon bridge in Ganzhou, and the governor of Qidan sent Du Chongwei back to Ganzhou.

古文：明年三月，契丹主北去，至相州城下，重威与妻石氏诣牙帐贡献而回。
现代文：第二年三月，契丹国主回北方去，到相州城下，杜重威与他妻子石氏到契丹国主的牙帐去贡献财宝后回来。
English: In March of the following year, the ruler of Khitan went back to the north, to the city of Sangju. Du Chongwei and his wife Shi Shi went to the ruler of Khitan's dental office to contribute treasure, and then returned.

古文：高祖车驾至阙，以重威为宋州节度使，加守太尉。
现代文：汉高祖御驾赴京，任命杜重威为宋州节度使，加封守太尉，杜重威害怕，关闭城门拒绝受命。
English: Emperor Gaozu went to Beijing and appointed Du Chongwei as the Song State Festival Envoy, and he was also given the title of captain of the garrison. Du Chongwei was afraid and closed the city gate and refused to accept the order.

古文：重威惧，闭城拒命，诏高行周率兵攻讨，重威遣其子宏遂等告急于镇州满达勒，乞师救援，以宏遂为质，满达勒遣蕃将杨兗赴之。
现代文：高祖诏令高行周领兵攻讨，杜重威派他的儿子杜弘遂等人到镇州向麻答告急，请求派军救援，而且以杜弘遂作为人质，麻答派蕃将杨兖奔赴救援。
English: Gao Zu'er ordered Gao Xing Zhou to lead the troops to attack, Du Chongwei sent his son Du Hong Sui and others to Zhenzhou to report to Ma Du in an urgent manner, requesting to send troops for rescue, and with Du Hong Sui as a hostage, Ma Du sent his son Yang Xing to rescue.

古文：未几，镇州军逐满达勒，杨兗至洺州而回。
现代文：不久，镇州部队驱逐麻答，杨兖只到氵名州就返回了。
English: Not long after, the Zhenzhou troops drove out the Ma-tao, and Yang Hui only went as far as Shenyang and then returned.

古文：十月，高祖亲征，车驾至鄴城之下，遣给事中陈观等赍诏入城，许其归命，重威不纳。
现代文：十月，高祖御驾亲征，兵临邺都城下，派给事中陈观等人带着诏书进城，答应允许他投降，杜重威不接受诏令。
English: In October, Gao Zu personally led the enlistment of soldiers to the city of Linyi, and sent Chen Guan and others to the city with an edict, promising to allow him to surrender. Du Chongwei did not accept the edict.

古文：高祖驻军数旬，城中粮尽，屑麹饼以给军士，吏民逾垒而出者甚众，皆无人色。
现代文：几天后，高祖亲自率领各路军队进攻城墙堡垒，不能攻下，汉军战伤一万多人。高祖屯驻军队数十天，邺城中粮食吃完，磨碎麦粒做成饼以供应士兵，官吏平民翻越城墙而逃出来的有很多，都饿得没有了人色。
English: A few days later, Gaozu personally led the various armies to attack the city wall fortress, which could not be captured, and the Chinese army injured more than 10,000 people. Gaozu stationed the army for dozens of days, ate the grain in the city, grinded wheat into bread to supply the soldiers, and there were many officials and civilians who climbed over the city wall and escaped, all starving to death.

古文：至是，重威牙将诣行宫请降，复遣节度判官王敏奉表请罪，赐优诏敦勉，许其如初。
现代文：这时，杜重威才派牙将到高祖行宫请求投降，又派节度使判官王敏捧上降表请罪，高祖赐给宽大他的诏书敦促他，答应像以前一样对待他。
English: At this time, Du Chongwei sent Fang Zheng to Gao Zu's palace to ask for surrender, and also sent Jiedu to make the judge Wang Min hold up a petition to plead guilty. Gao Zu gave him a decree to urge him to be lenient and promised to treat him as before.

古文：重威即遣其子宏遂、妻石氏出候高祖，重威继踵出降，素服俟罪，复其衣冠，赐见，即日制授检校太师、守太傅、兼中书令。
现代文：杜重威就派他的儿子杜弘遂、妻子石氏先出城迎候高祖，杜重威接着出城投降，穿着白衣等待处罚，高祖让他穿上原来衣帽，接见他，当日下令授予他检校太师、守太傅、兼中书令等官爵。
English: Du Chongwei sent his son Du Hongsui and his wife Shi Shi first out of the city to meet Gao Zu. Du Chongwei then went out of the city to surrender, wearing a white robe to await punishment. Gao Zu let him put on the original cap and gown to meet him, and on the same day he ordered that he be awarded the title of inspector of schools, the title of guardian of schools, and the title of Chinese scholar.

古文：鄴城士庶，殍殕者十之六七。
现代文：邺城的士兵百姓，饿死倒毙的有十分之六七。
English: Sixty-seven out of every ten soldiers and civilians in Lucheng died of starvation.

古文：先是，契丹遣幽州指挥使张琏，以部下军二千余人屯鄴，时亦有燕军一千五百人在京师，会高祖至阙，有上变者，言燕军谋乱，尽诛于繁台之下，咸称其冤。
现代文：在这以前，契丹派幽州指挥使张琏，带领部下军士二十多人屯驻邺城，同时还有幽燕的军士一千五百人在京师。当高祖到京师时，有人报告将发生变乱，说燕军计划叛乱，因而将燕军全杀死在繁台下面，人们都说燕军死得冤枉。
English: Prior to this, the Khitans had sent the Yuzhou commander Zhang Qian and more than twenty of his subordinate sergeants to settle in Handan. At the same time, there were 1,500 Yanyan sergeants in the Beijing Division. When Gaozu arrived in the Beijing Division, someone reported that there would be a mutiny, saying that Yan's army was planning a rebellion, and thus killed all of Yan's army under the busy stage. People all said that Yan's army died unjustly.

古文：有逃奔于鄴者，备言其事，故张琏等惧死，与重威胶固守城，略无叛志。
现代文：有逃脱跑到邺城的人，详细讲述这件事，所以张琏等人怕死，与杜重威等固守城池，毫无投降之意。
English: Some people who escaped and ran to Lucheng recounted the incident in detail, so Zhang Xuan and others were afraid of death, and Du Chongwei and others held fast to the castle, with no intention of surrendering.

古文：高祖亦悔其前失，累令宣谕，许以不死。
现代文：高祖也后悔错杀燕军的过失，多次晓谕守城将帅，答应不杀害他们。
English: Gaozu also regretted the mistake of mistakenly killing Yan's army. He repeatedly told the garrison commander to promise not to kill them.

古文：琏等于城上扬言曰： 繁台之诛，燕军何罪？
现代文：张琏等人在城墙上高叫说 ：繁台的诛杀，燕军有什么罪？
English: Zhang Qian and others shouted on the city wall: "What is the crime of Yan's army, killing so many people?

古文：既无生理，以死为期。 
现代文：既然没有生的希望，就只有以死相拼。 
English: Since there is no hope of life, there is only a fight to the death.

古文：琏一军在围中，重威推食解衣，尽力姑息。
现代文：张琏的士兵在围城之内，杜重威解衣给他们穿，送饭给他们吃，尽量姑息迁就他们。
English: Zhang Ye's soldiers were besieged inside the city. Du Chong gave them clothes to wear, sent them food to eat, and tried his best to appease and accommodate them.

古文：燕军骄悍，凭陵吏民，子女金帛，公行豪夺。
现代文：因而幽燕的兵士骄横凶悍，欺凌官吏平民，对于女子金钱布帛，公然强取豪夺。
English: As a result, the soldiers of Yuyan were arrogant and fierce, bullied officials and civilians, and openly extorted money from women.

古文：及重威请命，琏等邀朝廷信誓，诏许琏等却归本土。
现代文：当杜重威请命投降时，张琏等人请朝廷信守誓言，高祖答应让张琏等人回到契丹国去。
English: When Du Chongwei asked for his life to surrender, Zhang Xuan and others asked the imperial court to keep their oaths. Gaozu promised to let Zhang Xuan and others return to Khitan.

古文：及出降，尽诛琏等将数十人，其什长已下放归幽州，将出汉境，剽略而去。
现代文：等他们出城投降后，又全部杀死张琏等几十位将领，什长以下的士官才放回幽州，在即将走出汉朝边界时，这帮人抢劫一番而去。
English: After they surrendered outside the city, they killed all of the dozens of generals such as Zhang Xuan, and the non-commissioned officers below Shichang were only released back to Yuzhou. When they were about to leave the Han Dynasty border, this group of people robbed and left.

古文：高祖遣三司使王章、枢密副使郭威，录重威部下将吏尽诛之，籍其财产与重威私帑，分给将士。
现代文：高祖派三司使王章、枢密副使郭威，登录杜重威部下将官名字，全部杀掉他们，没收他们的财产和杜重威的私财，分给自己的将士。
English: Gao Zu sent the three divisional envoy Wang Zhang and the confidential deputy envoy Guo Wei to record the names of Du Chongwei's subordinate generals, kill them all, confiscate their property and Du Chongwei's personal wealth, and distribute them to his own soldiers.

古文：车驾还宫，高祖不豫，既而大渐。顾命之际，谓近臣将佐曰： 善防重威。 
现代文：车驾回到京师皇宫，高祖生病，不久病重，在遗言托命之际，对亲信臣子将佐说 ：要小心提防杜重威。 
English: Driving back to the Imperial Palace in Beijing, Gaozu fell ill and soon became seriously ill. On the occasion of leaving his last words, he said to his trusted vassal Shosa: "Be careful of Du Chongwei."

古文：帝崩，遂收重威，重威子宏璋、宏琏、宏杰诛之。
现代文：高祖驾崩，就拘禁了杜重威，连同杜重威的儿子杜弘璋、杜弘琏、杜弘王桀等一起诛杀。
English: After Gao Zu passed away, Du Chongwei was detained and killed together with Du Chongwei's sons Du Hongyao, Du Hongyao and Du Hongwangyao.

古文：诏曰： 杜重威犹贮祸心，未悛逆节，枭音不改，虺性难驯。
现代文：诏令说 ：杜重威仍然包藏祸心，不改叛逆的旧习，像恶枭一样的言论未变，像毒蛇一样的本性难以驯服。
English: The edict said: Du Chongwei still harbors evil intentions, does not change the old habits of rebellion, his speech like a viper has not changed, and his nature like a viper is difficult to tame.

古文：昨朕小有不安，罢朝数日，而重威父子潜肆凶言，怨谤大朝，扇惑小辈；今则显有陈告，备验奸期。
现代文：往日朕身体稍有不适，停止视朝几天，而杜重威父子就暗地散布恶毒的言论，怨恨诽谤朝廷，煽动蛊惑一些小人。
English: In the past, I had a slight discomfort in my body and stopped watching the DPRK for a few days, while Du Chongwei and his son secretly disseminated vicious remarks, slandered the imperial court with resentment, and incited and bewitched some villains.

古文：《隆平集》：党进，幼为天雄军节度使杜重威奴，重威爱其淳谨，虽长，犹令与婢妾杂侍。
现代文：现在已有明显的罪行彰现，已经全部洞悉他们谋乱的日期，他既然辜负本朝深厚的恩德，就必须处以极刑。杜重威父子一并处斩，杜重威的妻子晋朝公主石氏以及其他亲戚族人，一切都像往常一样，仍然予以供养。 
English: Now that the obvious crimes have emerged, and the date of their plotting has been fully understood, since he has betrayed the profound benevolence of this dynasty, he must be sentenced to capital punishment. Du Chongwei and his son were executed together, and Du Chongwei's wife, Jin Dynasty Princess Shi and other relatives and relatives, everything was still provided for as usual.

古文：重威败，周祖得之，以为铁骑都虞候。重威之后寒饿，进常分俸以给，士大夫或愧焉。李守贞，河阳人也。
现代文：杜重威父子被诛杀后，尸体抛弃在大街上，市民们围观着谩骂，用脚踢用棍子打石头砸，军吏们不能阻止，尸首一片狼藉，一下子就碎烂而不见了。李守贞，河阳人。
English: After Du Chongwei and his son were beaten to death, their bodies were dumped on the street. The townspeople watched and cursed, kicked and beat them with sticks and stones. The military officials could not stop them. The bodies were in a mess. They suddenly fell apart and disappeared. Li Shouzhen, a native of Heyang.

古文：少桀黠落魄，事本部为牙将。
现代文：年少时凶暴奸猾，飘泊无依，在本郡做牙将。
English: When he was young, he was violent and treacherous, wandering aimlessly, and working as a dentist in this county.

古文：晋高祖镇河阳，用为典客，后移数镇，皆从之。
现代文：晋高祖镇守河阳时，任他为典客，后来晋高祖多次调动，李守贞都跟随着他。
English: When Jin Gao Zu was the warden of Heyang, he was appointed as a guest. Later, Jin Gao Zu was transferred many times, and Li Shouzhen followed him.

古文：及即位，累迁至客省使。
现代文：晋高祖即位后，李守贞接连升到客省使。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, Li Shouzhen was successively promoted to the guest provincial envoy.

古文：天福中，李金全以安州叛，淮夷入寇，晋高祖命马全节讨之，守贞监护其军，贼平，以守贞为宣徽使。
现代文：天福年间，李金全凭据安州反叛，南唐贼人入寇，晋高祖命马全节讨伐他们，李守贞监护军队，贼寇平定后，任李守贞为宣徽使。
English: During the Tenpu era, Li Jinquan led the Anzhou rebellion, the Southern Tang bandits invaded, and Jinguo Zu Mima fought them all the way. Li Shouzhen was the guardian of the army, and after the bandits were defeated, Li Shouzhen was appointed as the herald.

古文：少帝即位，授滑州节度兼侍卫马军都指挥使，未几，改侍卫都虞候。
现代文：晋少帝即位，授李守贞为滑州节度使兼侍卫马军都指挥使，不久，改任侍卫都虞候。
English: When Emperor Jin came to the throne, he appointed Li Shuzhen as the secretary of the festival and the commanding officer of the guards of the capital city of Gansu. Soon, she was appointed the secretary of the guards of the capital city of Guizhou.

古文：开运元年春，敌众犯澶、魏，少帝幸澶州，契丹主遣满达勒以奇兵由郓州马家口济河，立栅于东岸，守贞率师自澶州驰赴之。
现代文：开运元年春，契丹人进犯澶州、魏州，少帝驾往澶州，契丹派麻答领骑兵由郓州马家口渡过黄河，在东岸树立营栅，李守贞领兵从澶州奔赴前线。
English: In the spring of the first year of the movement, the Khitans invaded Bozhou and Weizhou. The young emperor rode to Bozhou. The Khitans sent Madu to lead the cavalry across the Yellow River from Bozhou's Majiakou and set up a camp gate on the east bank. Li Shouzhen led the soldiers from Bozhou to the front line.

古文：契丹大败，溺死者数千人，获马数百匹，偏裨七十余人。
现代文：契丹大败，淹死数千人，李守贞俘获战马数百匹、偏将七十多人。
English: Khitan suffered a crushing defeat, drowning thousands of people, while Li Shouzhen captured hundreds of horses and more than seventy captains.

古文：有顷，敌退。
现代文：不久，敌人退走。
English: Soon, the enemy retreated.

古文：晋少帝还京，以守贞为兗州节度使，依前侍卫都虞候。
现代文：晋少帝回京，任李守贞为兖州节度使，仍兼侍卫都虞候一职。
English: When Emperor Jin the Younger returned to Beijing, he appointed Li Shuzhen as the envoy of the Bozhou Festival, and he also held the position of the bodyguard of the capital.

古文：五月，以守贞为青州行营都部署，率兵二万东讨杨光远，命符彦卿为副。
现代文：五月，以李守贞任青州行营都部署，率领二万士兵向东讨伐杨光远，以符彦卿为副。
English: In May, with Li Shouzhen in charge of the Qingzhou encampment, he led twenty thousand soldiers to fight Yang Guangyuan in the east, with Fu Yanqing as his deputy.

古文：十一月，光远子承勋等乞降，守贞入城，害光远于别第。
现代文：十一月，杨光远的儿子杨承勋等人请求投降，李守贞进城，在别宅杀害杨光远。
English: In November, Yang Guangyuan's son Yang Chengxun and others requested to surrender. Li Shouzhen entered the city and killed Yang Guangyuan in another house.

古文：光远有孔目官吏宋颜者，尽以光远财宝、名姬、善马告于守贞，得之置于帐下。
现代文：杨光远有位叫宋颜的孔目官，将杨光远的财宝、名姬、善马全部告知李守贞，因而得以藏在李守贞帐下。
English: Yang Guangyuan had an official named Song Yan, who told Li Shouzhen all of Yang Guangyuan's treasures, famous witches, and good horses, and thus was able to hide them under Li Shouzhen's account.

古文：近例，官军克复城隍，必降德音，洗涤瑕秽，时枢密使桑维翰以光远同恶数十辈潜窜未出，搜索甚急，故制书久不下。
现代文：按近来惯例，官军攻下城池，皇上必降诏广施恩惠，清除弊端。这时，枢密使桑维翰因为杨光远的数十位同党尚潜藏逃匿未抓获，搜索很急，所以降恩诏书久久未下。
English: According to recent practice, when the government army captured a city, the emperor would issue an imperial edict to grant a wide range of favors and eliminate the drawbacks. At this time, the Privy Councilor San Weihan was in a hurry to search because dozens of Yang Guangyuan's party members were still hiding and had not been caught, so the imperial edict had not been issued for a long time.

古文：或有告宋颜匿于守贞处者，朝廷取而杀之，守贞由是怨维翰。
现代文：有人告发宋颜就藏在李守贞那里，朝廷便抓获宋颜而杀了他，李守贞因此怨恨桑维翰。
English: Someone denounced that Song Yan was hiding with Li Shouzhen, and the imperial court arrested Song Yan and killed him. As a result, Li Shouzhen held a grudge against San Weihan.

古文：时行营将士所给赏赐，守贞尽以黦茶、染木、姜药之类分给之，军中大怨，乃以帛包所得物，如人首级，目之为守贞头，悬于树以诅之。
现代文：这时给予行营将士的赏赐，李守贞全用发霉变质的茶叶和染木、姜药之类充数，军士大怒，于是用布包着得到的赏赐，像人头形状，当作李守贞的头，悬挂在树上以诅咒他。
English: At this time, a reward was given to the camp commander. Li Shouzhen was completely filled with moldy and spoiled tea leaves and dyed wood, ginger medicine and the like. The sergeant was furious, so he wrapped the reward he received in cloth, shaped like a human head, as the head of Li Shouzhen, and hung it on a tree to curse him.

古文：守贞班师，加同平章事，以杨光远东京第赐之。
现代文：李守贞回师后，加封他为同平章事，将杨光远在东京的住宅赐给他。
English: After Li Shouzhen returned to his teacher, he was awarded the title of Tongping, and Yang Guangyuan's house in Tokyo was given to him.

古文：守贞因取连宅军营，以广其第，大兴土木，治之岁余，为京师之甲。行幸赐宴，恩礼无比。
现代文：李守贞于是占取邻近住宅的军营，用来扩大自己的住宅，大兴土木，建造一年多，为京城之冠，少帝前往赐宴，施恩礼待无人能比。
English: Li Shouzhen then occupied the military camp next to the residence, used it to expand his own residence, built a large building, and built it for more than a year. As the crown of the capital, the young emperor went to the banquet, and the gracious treatment was incomparable.

古文：开运二年春，契丹以全军南下，前锋至相州汤阴县，诏守贞屯滑州。
现代文：开运二年春，契丹出动全部兵力南下，前锋到达相州汤阴县。少帝令李守贞驻防滑州。
English: In the spring of the second year, Khitan dispatched all his troops to the south, and the vanguard reached Tongyin County, Xiangzhou. The young emperor ordered Li Shuzhen to stay in Nanzhizhou.

古文：少帝再幸澶州，以守贞为北面行营都监，与招讨使杜重威北伐，洎获阳城之捷，遂收军而还。
现代文：少帝再次驾临澶州，李守贞为北面行营都监，与招讨使杜重威一同北伐，到取得阳城之战的胜利后，就收兵而回。
English: The young emperor once again traveled to Bozhou, and Li Shouzhen became the northern camp inspector, and together with Du Chongwei, he led the Northern Expedition. After the victory in the Battle of Yangcheng, he withdrew his troops and returned.

古文：四月，车驾还京，以守贞为侍卫副都指挥使，移镇宋州，加检校太师。
现代文：四月，御驾回京，以李守贞为侍卫副都指挥使，调往宋州镇守，加封检校太师。
English: In April, he returned to Beijing, with Li Shouzhen as deputy commander of the palace guards, and was transferred to Songzhou Town Guard, and was also assigned to the post of inspector of schools.

古文：三年春，诏守贞率师巡边。至衡水，获鄚州刺史赵思英而还。
现代文：三年春，诏令李守贞领兵巡视边界，到衡水，抓获莫州刺史赵思英而回。
English: In the spring of the third year, Li Shuzhen was ordered to lead the troops to patrol the border, go to Hengshui, capture the Mochou assassin Zhao Siying, and return.

古文：居无何，代高行周为侍卫亲军都指挥使，移镇郓州，意颇觖望。
现代文：不久，代替高行周为侍卫亲军都指挥使，调往郓州镇守，李守贞非常失望怨恨。
English: Soon, instead of Gao Xingzhou as the commander of the guards, he was transferred to the town guard of Zhangzhou. Li Shouzhen was very disappointed and resentful.

古文：会宰臣李崧加侍中，守贞谓枢密使直学士殷鹏曰： 枢密何功，便加正相！ 
现代文：正逢宰臣李崧加封侍中，李守贞对枢密使直学士殷鹏说： 枢密有什么功，就加封他为正相！ 
English: It was at the time when the Vice-Minister of the State Council, Li Shuzhen, was adding an attendant to the imperial seal, that Li Shuzhen said to the imperial envoy, the direct scholar, Yin Peng: "If there is any merit in the imperial seal, then add him as the official seal!"

古文：先是，桑维翰以元勋旧德为枢密使，守贞位望素处其下，每惮之，与李彦韬、冯玉辈协力排斥，维翰竟罢枢务。
现代文：此前，桑维翰因功高德劭而任枢密使，李守贞的名望地位一直居于他下面，常畏惧他，便与李彦韬、冯玉一帮人协力排斥桑维翰，桑维翰终被罢免枢密使职务。
English: Previously, Sang Wai Han had been appointed as a privy councillor due to his great merits and virtues. Li Shouzhen, who had been in a lower position than him, was often afraid of him, so he worked with Li Yanqi, Feng Yu and others to oust Sang Wai Han. Sang Wai Han was eventually removed from the post of privy councillor.

古文：李崧事分疏远，守贞得以凌蔑。
现代文：李崧资历不够，李守贞得以欺凌蔑视他。
English: Li Yao did not have enough qualifications, so Li Shouzhen was able to bully and despise him.

古文：其年夏，契丹寇边，以守贞为北面行营都部署。
现代文：那年夏天，契丹人侵犯边境，朝廷任李守贞为北面行营都部署。
English: In the summer of that year, the Khitan invaded the border, and the imperial court sent Li Shouzhen to camp in the north.

古文：少帝开曲宴于内殿，以宠其行，教坊令人献语云： 天子不须忧北寇，守贞面上管幽州。 
现代文：少帝在内殿设私宴，以恩宠李守贞的出征，教坊伶人献上话语说： 天子不须忧北寇，守贞面上管幽州。 
English: The young emperor held a private banquet in the inner hall, with the grace of Li Shouzhen's departure, and the teaching staff presented a speech saying: "The Son of Heaven does not need to worry about the North Korean invaders, in terms of keeping chastity, he should be in charge of Yuzhou."

古文：既罢，守贞有自负之色，以其言夸诧于外。
现代文：宴罢，李守贞有得意自傲的神态，在外面传扬伶人的献语。
English: After the banquet, Li Shouzhen had a proud attitude, and spread the eulogy outside.

古文：既而率兵至定州北，与契丹偏师遇，斩蕃将嘉哩而还。
现代文：接着领兵到定州以北，与契丹的非正规军相遇，便杀了契丹将领解里就回师。
English: He then led his troops to the north of Dingzhou, where they encountered the irregular army of the Khitan, killed the Khitan general, and then returned to his division.

古文：九月，加兼侍中。
现代文：九月，加封为兼侍中。
English: In September, he was given the additional post of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：会契丹遣瀛州刺史伪降于少帝，请发大军应接，朝廷信之。
现代文：这时契丹派瀛州刺史假装向少帝投降，请求发大军接应，朝廷信以为真。
English: At this time, the Khitan sent Bozhou Zishi to pretend to surrender to the young emperor, requesting a large army to respond, and the imperial court believed it to be true.

古文：十月，诏杜重威为北面行营招讨使，以守贞为兵马都监，知幽州行府事。
现代文：十月，诏令杜重威为北面行营招讨使，以李守贞为兵马都监，主管幽州行府事务。
English: In October, the emperor ordered Du Chongwei to recruit envoys for the northern campaign, with Li Shouzhen as the commander of the army and horses, in charge of Yuzhou government affairs.

古文：先是，守贞领兵再由鄴都，杜重威厚加赠遗，曲意承迎，守贞悦之，每于帝前称举，请委征讨之柄。
现代文：此先，李守贞领兵第二次经过邺都时，杜重威厚加赠馈，曲意奉承逢迎，李守贞很高兴，常在少帝面前夸耀杜重威，请交给他征讨的权力。
English: At this point, when Li Shouzhen led the soldiers through the capital of Shandong for the second time, Du Chongwei lavished him with gifts and flattery. Li Shouzhen was very happy and often boasted about Du Chongwei in front of the young emperor. Please give him the power to collect.

古文：至是，守贞、重威等会兵于鄴，遂趋瀛州，瀛州不应。
现代文：现在，李守贞、杜重威等在邺都会合兵力，便奔赴瀛州，瀛州却不响应。
English: Now, Li Shouzhen, Du Chongwei and others have joined forces in Handan and rushed to Handan, but Handan did not respond.

古文：贝州节度使梁汉璋为蕃将高牟翰所败，死之，王师遂还。
现代文：贝州节度使梁汉璋被蕃将高牟翰打败，战死，晋军便退回。
English: The Beizhou Festival made Liang Hanju defeated by Gao Mouhan, the war dead, and the Jin army retreated.

古文：师至深州，闻契丹大至，乃西趋镇州，至滹沲之中渡，与敌相遇，官军营于滹水之南。
现代文：退到深州，听到契丹大军来到，于是向西奔往镇州，到滹沱河的中渡时，与敌人遭遇。
English: He retreated to Shenzhou and heard that the Khitan army was coming, so he rushed west to Zhenzhou. When he was in the middle of the Minhe River, he encountered the enemy.

古文：未几，敌骑潜渡至栾城，断我粮路，寻则王清战死，杜重威遂与守贞归命契丹，授守贞司徒，依前郓州节度使，从契丹至汴。
现代文：晋军在滹沱河南边，不久，敌人骑兵偷偷渡河来到栾城，断了晋军的粮道，旋即王清又战死，杜重威便与李守贞投降契丹，李守贞被授予司徒，依旧任郓州节度使，跟随契丹军队进军汴京。
English: The Jin army was on the south side of the Min River. Soon, the enemy cavalry sneaked across the river and came to Min City, cutting off the Jin army's food supply. Wang Qing was killed in the battle. Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen surrendered to the Khitan. Li Shouzhen was awarded the title of scholar, still serving as the festival envoy of Min Province, and followed the Khitan army into Min Beijing.

古文：时京辇之下，契丹充斥，都人士庶，若在涂炭。
现代文：这时京城中，契丹人充斥，京城的百姓，就如在泥水炭火之中。
English: At this time, the capital was full of Khitan people, and the people of the capital were like in the middle of a muddy charcoal fire.

古文：二帅出入扬扬，市人诟之，略无惭色。
现代文：杜重威、李守贞却来去高视阔步，市民们唾骂他们，他们全无愧色。
English: Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen, however, came and went with a high-handed look, and the citizens reviled them. They were completely unworthy.

古文：有顷，河北及京东草寇大起，澶州浮桥为群贼所断，契丹主甚恐，乃命诸帅各归本镇，守贞遂赴汶阳。
现代文：不久，黄河以北及京城以东草寇蜂起，澶州浮桥被贼寇切断，契丹国主极为惊恐，便命众帅各回本州镇守，李守贞就到了汶阳。
English: Soon after, the hawks to the north of the Yellow River and to the east of the capital rose up, and the Qizhou floating bridge was cut off by the bandits. The Qidan sovereign was extremely alarmed, and ordered all the generals to return to their home states to guard the towns. Li Shouzhen went to Wenyang.

古文：高祖入汴，守贞惧而来朝，授守贞太保，移镇河中。
现代文：汉高祖进入汴京后，李守贞害怕而来朝奉，高祖授他太保爵位，调往河中府镇守。
English: After Han Gaozu entered Beijing, Li Shouzhen was afraid to come and serve the imperial court. Gaozu gave him the title of Tai Bao Jie and transferred him to the post of the town guard of Hezhongfu.

古文：居无何，高祖晏驾，杜重威被诛，守贞愈不自安，乃潜畜异计。
现代文：不久，汉高祖去世，杜重威被诛，李守贞更感不安，于是暗中筹划奸计。
English: Soon after, Han Gaozu died, Du Chongwei was arrested, and Li Shouzhen felt even more uneasy, so she secretly planned a treachery.

古文：乾祐元年三月，先致书于权臣，布求保证，而完城郭，缮甲兵，昼夜不息。
现代文：乾佑元年三月，李守贞首先写信给权贵重臣，遍求荫庇支持，而自己巩固城墙，修造兵甲，日夜不停。
English: In March of the first year of the Qianyu era, Li Shouzhen first wrote a letter to the powerful and dignified senior ministers, seeking support from them, while consolidating the city walls and repairing the armor himself, day and night.

古文：守贞贪而无谋，性多忌刻，全义累为画策，皆不能用。俄而王景崇据岐下，与赵思绾遣使推奉，守贞乃自号秦王，思绾、景崇皆受守贞署置。
现代文：李守贞认为后汉皇室新创，新君才立，自以为自己举事安排周密无遗，又加上有位叫总伦的僧人，以占卜方术依附李守贞，说李守贞能获取帝位。不久，赵思绾据京兆反叛，派使者奉表送皇帝穿的衣服给李守贞，李守贞便以为天时和人事与自己相合，于是暗中支援草寇，令他们在所在地偷偷举事，自己派兵占据潼关。
English: Li Shouzhen thought that the imperial family of the later Han Dynasty was newly created and a new prince was established. He thought that he had made a thorough arrangement for his own affairs. In addition, there was a monk named Chonglun who depended on Li Shouzhen with divination techniques and said that Li Shouzhen could obtain the imperial throne. Soon, Zhao Shizhen rebelled according to the Beijing Zodiac and sent an envoy to send clothes worn by the emperor to Li Shouzhen. Li Shouzhen thought that the weather and the personnel were compatible with himself, so he secretly supported the Thracians and made them secretly carry out affairs in the location and sent troops to occupy Shaoguan

古文：又遣人赍蜡弹于吴、蜀、契丹，以求应援。
现代文：朝廷派白文珂、常思等人领兵问罪，又派枢密使郭威西征。
English: The imperial court sent Bai Wenke, Chang Si and others to interrogate the soldiers, and also sent the envoy Guo Wei Xi.

古文：马令《南唐书·硃元传》：守贞以河中反，汉命周太祖讨之，元与李平奉守贞表来乞师，未复而守贞败。
现代文：汉军刚到，李守贞因为汉朝各军大多曾是自己的部下，自以为一向深得军心拥护，所以坐待他们前来敲门迎接自己，当军士们鼓噪辱骂他时，李守贞才大失所望。接着王景崇占据岐下，与赵思绾一起派使者推举尊奉李守贞，李守贞于是自称为秦王，赵思绾、王景崇都受李守贞的任命安置。
English: The Han army had just arrived, and Li Shouzhen thought that she had always been deeply supported by the military because most of the armies of the Han dynasty had been her subordinates. So she waited for them to knock on the door to greet her. When the sergeants shouted and insulted him, Li Shouzhen was greatly disappointed. Then Wang Jingsong occupied Qishan, and together with Zhao Siyi sent an envoy to nominate Li Shouzhen for the honor. Li Shouzhen then called himself the King of Qin. Zhao Siyi and Wang Jingsong were both appointed and placed by Li Shouzhen.

古文：既而城中粮尽，杀人为食。
现代文：李守贞又派人用蜡丸裹着书信送给吴、蜀、契丹诸国，以求接应支援。
English: Li Shouzhen also sent people to send letters wrapped in wax balls to the states of Wu, Shu and Khitan in order to receive support.

古文：召总伦诘其休咎，总伦至曰： 王自有天分，人不能夺。
现代文：不久城中粮尽，杀人为食，李守贞叫来总伦询问凶吉，总伦竟说 ：大王自有天分，别人不能夺去。
English: Soon the food ran out in the city and people were being killed and eaten. Li Shouzhen called Sholun to inquire about the bad luck. Sholun actually said, "The great king has his own talent, and others cannot take it away."

古文：然分野灾变，俟磨灭将尽，存留一人一骑，即王鹊起之际也。 
现代文：然而与此地相应的天上星宿有灾变，等城中磨难杀灭将尽，只留下一人一骑，那就是大王时来运转的时候。 
English: However, the stars and planets in the sky corresponding to this place will have a cataclysmic change, and the tribulations in the city will be exhausted, leaving only one person and one horse. That is when the great king comes to work.

古文：守贞深以为信。
现代文：李守贞深信不疑。
English: Li Shouzhen is convinced.

古文：李守贞出兵五千余，设梯桥，分五路于长连城西北以御周祖。
现代文：当汉军攻城时，李守贞将发炮石以抵拒城外军队，而发炮石的竿子找不到，不久，上游漂来一架木筏，那木头全可用作炮竿，李守贞更以为有神相助。
English: When the Han army besieged the city, Li Shouzhen took the flint to resist the troops outside the city, but the rod of the flint could not be found. Soon, a raft floated upstream. The wood could all be used as a cannon rod. Li Shouzhen even thought that there was divine help.

古文：周祖令虔裕率大军横击之，蒲人败走，夺其梯桥，杀伤大半。
现代文：又曾经宴请将佐，李守贞手持弓箭，遥指一副老虎舐虎掌的图画说 ：我如能成就非常的大业，就当射中老虎舌头。 
English: Once, at a banquet for generals, Li Shouzhen, holding a bow and arrow, pointed to a picture of a tiger licking a tiger's paw and said: "If I can achieve a great cause, I should shoot the tiger's tongue."

古文：及周光逊以西寨降，其势益窘，人情离散。
现代文：发弓一箭射中，将佐们都拜贺他，李守贞也更加自负。到周光逊献西寨投降汉军时，李守贞势力更加窘迫，人心离散。
English: When Zhou Guangxun surrendered Xizhai to the Han army, Li Shouzhen's forces were even more embarrassed, and the hearts of the people were scattered.

古文：官军攻城愈急，守贞乃潜于衙署多积薪刍，为自焚之计。
现代文：汉军攻城更急，李守贞于是暗中在府衙积蓄许多柴草，做自焚的打算。
English: The Chinese army's siege of the city was more urgent, so Li Shouzhen secretly hoarded a lot of firewood and grass in the government building, intending to self-immolate.

古文：二年七月，城陷，举家蹈火而死。
现代文：二年七月，城池陷落，李守贞全家投火而死。
English: In July of the following year, the city fell, and Li Shouzhen's entire family was burned to death.

古文：及城陷，后独免，周祖为世宗娶之，显德中，册为后。
现代文：汉军进城，从烟火中找到李守贞的尸休，割下他脑袋用木匣子装着，又抓获他几个儿子和两个女儿，与其他党徒一起献给朝廷。隐帝登上明德楼接受俘虏，宣读庆功的捷报，百官称贺。
English: The Han army entered the city, found the corpse of Li Shouzhen from the fireworks, cut off his head and put it in a wooden box, and captured several of his sons and two daughters, together with other party members, and presented them to the imperial court. The Hidden Emperor ascended to the Mingde Building to accept the captives, read out the victory report of the celebration, and hundreds of officials congratulated him.

古文：赵思绾，魏府人也。唐同光末，赵在礼之据魏城也，思绾隶于帐下，累从之。在礼卒，赵延寿籍其部曲，尽付于其子赞，思绾即其首领也。
现代文：受俘礼毕，将俘虏在都城示众，李守贞的首级挂在南街上，他的各个子女以及贼党孙愿、刘芮、张延嗣、刘仁裕、僧人总伦、靖王余、张球、王廷秀、焦文杰、安在钦等一并在西街碎尸，其余都被斩首。赵思绾，魏府人。后唐同光末年赵在礼占据魏城时，赵思绾在他帐下做事，长期跟随他。赵在礼死后，赵延寿收编了赵在礼的部下，全交给自己的大儿赵赞，赵思绾即赵赞手下首领。
English: After Li Li was captured, his captives were displayed to the public in the capital city. The head of Li Shuzhen was hung on South Street, and his children, as well as the Kleptocrats Sun Zhen, Liu Bei, Zhang Yan Zi, Liu Ren Yu, the Chief Monk, Jing Wang Yu, Zhang Qiu, Wang Ting Xiu, Jiao Wen Jie, and An Zai Qin, were all found on West Street, and the rest were beheaded. Zhao Sijian, Wei Fu. In the last years of the late Tang Dynasty, when Zhao occupied Wei City, Zhao Sijian worked under him and followed him for a long time

古文：高祖定河、洛，赞自河中移京兆尹。
现代文：汉高祖安定河、洛，赵赞从河中调任京兆尹。
English: Han Gao's ancestors settled in He and Luo, and Zhao Zan was transferred from He to Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：赞以久事契丹，常虑国家终不能容，乃与凤翔侯益谋，引蜀兵为援，又令判官李恕入朝请觐，赞不待报赴阙，留思绾等数百人在京兆。
现代文：赵赞因为自己长期事奉契丹，总担心不为汉朝所容，于是与凤翔侯益阴谋策划，引蜀兵为支援，又令判官李恕入朝请求让他觐见，赵赞不等朝廷回报，就前往京城，留下赵思绾等数百人在京兆。
English: Because of his long-term service to the Khitan, Zhao Zan was always worried that he would not be tolerated by the Han Dynasty, so he plotted with Feng Xiang Houyi, brought in Shu soldiers for support, and ordered the judge Li Shorong to request an audience with him. Zhao Zan did not wait for the return of the court, he went to Beijing, leaving hundreds of people such as Zhao Siyu in Beijing.

古文：会高祖遣王景崇等西赴凤翔，行次京兆，时思绾等数百人在焉。思绾等比是赵在礼御士，本不刺面，景崇、齐藏珍既至京兆，欲令文面，以防逋逸。
现代文：遇上高祖派王景崇等人西赴凤翔，走到京兆府时，只有赵思绾等几百人在那里，赵思绾等人前不久还是赵在礼的部下，本来没有刺面，王景崇、齐藏珍在到达京兆后，想要他们在脸上刺上记号，以防他们逃跑。
English: When Gao Zu sent Wang Jingsong and others west to Fengxiang and walked to Jingzhao Prefecture, only Zhao Sijun and a few hundred others were there. Zhao Sijun and others were Zhao Zili's subordinates not long ago, and they did not have a tattoo. After arriving at Jingzhao, Wang Jingsong and Qi Zangzhen wanted to tattoo their faces to prevent them from escaping.

古文：景崇微露风旨，思绾厉声先请自刺，以率其下，景崇壮之。
现代文：王景崇仅略微表达这个意思，赵思绾就厉声请先刺自己，为部下带个头，王景崇称赞他勇壮。
English: Wang Jingsong only slightly expressed this meaning, and Zhao Siyuan asked him to stab himself first and take the lead for his subordinates. Wang Jingsong praised him for his bravery.

古文：藏珍窃言曰： 思绾粗暴难制，不如杀之。 
现代文：齐藏珍私下说 ：赵思绾粗暴难制，不如杀了他。 
English: Qi Zangzhen said in private: Zhao Siyuan is rough and difficult to control, it is better to kill him.

古文：景崇不听，但率之同赴凤翔。
现代文：王景崇不听，但带着他一同奔赴凤翔。
English: Wang Jingsong did not listen, but took him with him to Fengxiang.

古文：朝廷闻之，遣供奉官王益部署思绾等赴阙。
现代文：朝廷知悉后，派供奉官王益带赵思绾等人赴京。
English: After the Imperial Court learned of this, they sent the official in charge of offerings, Wang Yi, to take Zhao Siyu and others to Beijing.

古文：思绾既发，行至途中，谓其党常彦卿曰： 小太尉已入他手，吾辈至，则并死矣。 
现代文：赵思绾已经出发，走到半路，对同伙常彦卿说： 小太尉已落入朝廷手中，我们再去，就要一起死了。 
English: Zhao Sijian had already set off, and when he was halfway there, he said to his comrade Chang Yanqing: "The little captain has fallen into the hands of the imperial court, if we go there again, we will die together."

古文：小太尉盖谓赵赞也。
现代文：小太尉就是指赵赞。
English: Xiao Dafu refers to Zhao Zan.

古文：彦卿曰： 临机制变，子勿复言！ 
现代文：常彦卿说： 临机应变，您不用再说了！ 
English: Lord Tsunehiko said: You don't need to say any more!

古文：王益至永兴，副使安友规、巡检使乔守温出迎，于郊外离亭置酒。
现代文：走到永兴，永兴副使安友规、巡检使乔守温出城迎接，在郊外离亭置酒设宴。
English: When they came to Yongxing, Yongxing Deputy Envoy An Youjie and Inspection Envoy Qiao Shouwen went out of the city to welcome them, and they had a banquet in a pavilion outside the city.

古文：思绾前曰： 部下军士已在城东安下，缘家属在城，欲各将家今夜便宿城东。 
现代文：赵思绾上前说 ：部下军士已在城东安置停当，因为有的军士家属在永兴城内，都想各自将家属接出来今夜住到城东。 
English: Zhao Sijun stepped forward and said: The junior sergeants have been stationed in the east of the city, because some of the sergeants' families are in Yongxing city, and they all want to take their families out to live in the east of the city tonight.

古文：守温等然之。
现代文：守温等人答应了。
English: Shouwen and the others agreed.

古文：思绾等辞去，与部下并无兵仗，才入西门，有州校坐门侧，思绾遽夺其佩剑，即斩之。
现代文：赵思绾等告辞离开，与部下不带武器，才进永兴城西门，有州校坐在西门边，赵思绾迅速夺过他的佩剑，立即杀死他。
English: Zhao Siyu waited for his farewell to leave, and he and his subordinates did not take weapons before entering the west gate of Yongxing City. There was a state school sitting by the west gate. Zhao Siyu quickly grabbed his sword and immediately killed him.

古文：其众持白挺杀守门军士十余人，分众守捉诸门。
现代文：他部下抄起木棍杀死守门军士十多人，分兵守卫各门。
English: His subordinates picked up sticks and killed more than a dozen gatekeepers, and soldiers guarded each gate.

古文：思绾劫库兵以授之，遂据其城，时乾祐元年三月二十四日也。
现代文：赵思绾抢出兵库中的武器发给部下，于是占领了永兴城，这是乾佑元年三月二十四日。
English: Zhao Sijun snatched the weapons from the arsenal and gave them to his subordinates, and then occupied Yongxing City. This was on March 24th in the year of Emperor Qianyu.

古文：翌日，集城中丁壮得四千余人，浚池隍，修楼橹，旬浃之间，战守皆备。
现代文：第二天，集中城中丁壮得到四千多人，疏浚城池，修理城楼，十天半月之内进攻防守都做好了准备。
English: On the second day, more than four thousand people were concentrated in the city of Ding Zhuang, dredging the city pond, repairing the city tower, and preparing for the attack and defense within ten days and a half months.

古文：寻遣人送款于河中，李守贞遣使赍伪诏授思绾晋昌军节度使、检校太尉。
现代文：立即派人到河中府讲和，河中李守贞派使者携带伪诏任赵思绾为晋昌军节度使、检校太尉。
English: He immediately sent someone to talk peace to the central government of Hechuan, and the central government of Li Shouzhen sent an envoy with a fake edict to appoint Zhao Siyu as the envoy of the Jinchang Army and the captain of the school inspection.

古文：朝廷闻之，命郭从义、王峻帅师伐之。
现代文：朝廷听到后，命郭从义、王峻领兵攻打他。
English: After the imperial court heard about this, Guo Zongyi and Wang Jun led an army to attack him.

古文：及攻其城，王师伤者甚众，乃以长堑围之。经年粮尽，遂杀人充食。
现代文：当进攻永兴城时，朝廷军队伤亡很重，于是挖掘长长的战壕将永兴城包围起来，一年后城中粮尽，便杀人为食。
English: When attacking Yongxing City, the imperial army suffered heavy casualties, so they dug long trenches to encircle Yongxing City. A year later, when there was no more food in the city, they killed people for food.

古文：自后夫人密遣人令思绾之妻来参，夫人厚以衣物赐之，前后与钱物甚多。
现代文：赵思绾曾当众剖取人胆用酒吞下，并对众人说： 吞下一千个人的胆，就胆量无敌了。 
English: Zhao Sijian once publicly dissected a human gallbladder and swallowed it with wine, and said to the crowd: "If you swallow the gallbladder of a thousand people, your courage will be invincible."

古文：及汉朝，公以上将军告老归雍。未久，思绾过雍，遂闭门据雍城叛，衣冠之族，遭涂炭者众，公全家免祸。
现代文：乾佑二年夏天，城中粮食完全吃光，赵思绾没有办法，当时退休的原左骁卫上将军李肃寓居在城中，于是与判官程让能一同向赵思绾说 ：太尉本与朝廷无仇，只是负罪害怕被害，才做了这种事。现在朝廷在三处用兵，我们一城未攻下，太尉如能归顺朝廷，首先投降，以功补过，也许可免祸患。如果坐守穷城，安然等死，那又有何益呢？ 
English: In the summer of the second year of Qianyu, the food in the city was completely consumed, and Zhao Siyu had no choice. At that time, the retired former Zuoying Guard General Li Su lived in the city, so he and the judge Cheng Zhaneng said to Zhao Siyu: The captain did not have any enmity with the court, but he was guilty and afraid of being harmed. Now the court is using soldiers in three places, and we have not captured a city. If the captain can submit to the court, surrender first, and make up for it with merit, he may be able to avoid the disaster. If you guard a poor city and die peacefully,

古文：终以计劝思绾纳款，遂拔雍城。思绾然之，即令让能为章表，遣牙将刘成琦入朝。制授思绾华州留后、检校太保，以常彦卿为虢州刺史，遣内臣赍官告国信赐之。
现代文：赵思绾以为然，便令程让能写好章表，派牙将刘成琦进京朝拜归降，皇上诏令授赵思绾为华州留后、检校太保，以常彦卿为虢州刺史，派内廷臣子携带任职文告与印信赐给他们。
English: Zhao Siyi thought so, so he ordered Cheng Jian to write a good chapter list, sent a tooth to send Liu Chengyi to Beijing to pay homage and surrender, and the Emperor's edict awarded Zhao Siyi to be a school inspector after staying in Huazhou, and Lord Changyan to be a historian of Zhangzhou, and sent courtiers from the Inner Court to carry the official announcement and seal letter to them.

古文：既受命，迟留未发。
现代文：赵思绾等在接受任命后，迟迟不动身赴任。
English: After accepting the appointment, Zhao Siyu and others were slow to take office.

古文：郭从义、王峻等筹之曰： 狼子野心，终不可用，留之必贻后悔耳！ 
现代文：郭从义、王峻等筹划说： 赵思绾狼子野心，终不可能为朝廷所用，留下他必贻害无穷！ 
English: Guo Congyi, Wang Jun and other planners said: Zhao Shizhen's wolf ambition is ultimately impossible for the imperial court to use, leaving him will cause endless harm!

古文：思绾信之，遂开门送款，从义入城，思绾谒见，即遣武士执之。
现代文：不久郭从义、王峻等骑马缓步进城，排列步兵骑兵直到衙府，派人去叫赵思绾说： 太保要上路赴任了，我们没功夫到路上送行，对饮一杯，就此送别。 赵思绾一到，就被抓起来了，于是处死在街上，并杀了他的家族。
English: Soon after, Guo Zongyi, Wang Jun and others rode slowly into the city, lined up infantry and cavalry until they reached Shifu, and sent someone to call Zhao Siyu to say: "Tai Bao is on his way to his post, we don't have time to see him off on the road, let's have a drink to say goodbye.

古文：思绾临刑，市人争投瓦石以击之，军吏不能禁。
现代文：赵思绾临刑时，市民们争着用瓦片石块打他，军士们都制止不住。
English: When Zhao Sijian was about to be executed, the citizens fought to hit him with tiles and stones, and the soldiers couldn't stop them.

古文：是日，并部下叛党新授虢州刺史常彦卿等五百余人并诛之。
现代文：同日，连同部下叛党新任虢州刺史常彦卿等五百余人全部杀掉。
English: On the same day, he and his subordinates, including the newly appointed member of the rebel party, Zhangzhou Jishi Tsunehiko-kyo, killed more than five hundred people.

古文：籍思绾家财，得二十余万贯，入于官。
现代文：没收赵思绾的家财，共得二十多万贯，归入国库。
English: Zhao Siyuan's family wealth was confiscated, totaling more than 200,000 yuan, and was transferred to the state treasury.

古文：始思绾入城，丁口仅十余万，及开城，惟余万人而已，其饿殍之数可知矣。
现代文：赵思绾刚进永兴城时，城中有人口近十多万，到开城投降时，仅剩下一万人而已，那被饿死的有多少人就可得而知了。
English: When Zhao Siyi first entered Yongxing City, the population of the city was nearly more than one hundred thousand. By the time of the surrender of Kaesong, only ten thousand people were left, so how many people died of starvation can be known.

