古文：褚渊王俭褚渊，字彦回，河南阳翟人也。
现代文：褚渊，字彦回，是河南阳翟人。
English: Gongyuan, also known as Yanhui, is a native of Yangshuo, Henan Province.

古文：祖秀之，宋太常。
现代文：他的祖父叫褚秀之，在刘宋时代做过太常之官。
English: His grandfather's name was Gong Xiuzhi, and he served as an official of the imperial court during the era of Liu Song.

古文：父湛之，骠骑将军，尚宋武帝女始安哀公主。
现代文：他的父亲是褚湛之，曾任骠骑将军，和宋武帝女儿始安哀公主结婚。
English: His father was Gong Zhanzhi, who had been a general in the imperial cavalry and married Song Emperor Wu's daughter, Princess Shi'an'ai.

古文：渊少有世誉，复尚文帝女南郡献公主，姑侄二世相继。
现代文：褚渊少年时就很受世人称誉，后来又娶了文帝女儿南郡献公主为妻，姑侄二世相继。
English: When he was a young boy, Shanyuan was highly praised by the world. Later, he married Emperor Wen's daughter, Princess Nanxunxian, and his second cousin followed.

古文：拜驸马都尉，除著作佐郎，太子舍人，太宰参军，太子洗马，秘书丞。
现代文：褚渊官拜驸马都尉，被任命为著作郎，太子舍人，太宰参军，太子洗马，秘书丞。
English: Gongyuan official, Captain Baizhima, was appointed as a writer, the prince was a layman, the Dazai joined the army, the prince was a horse-breaker, and the secretary was a joiner.

古文：湛之卒，渊推财与弟，唯取书数千卷。
现代文：褚湛之死后，褚渊把家财都让给弟弟了，自己只留下数千卷书。
English: After the death of Gong Zhan, Gong Yuan left all the family wealth to his brother, leaving only thousands of volumes of books.

古文：袭爵都乡侯。
现代文：袭爵被封为都乡侯。
English: The heir to the title of nobility was made the lord of the capital.

古文：历中书郎，司徒右长史，吏部郎。
现代文：历官中书郎，司徒右长史，吏部郎。
English: He was a clerk, a secretary, a secretary, a clerk, a clerk.

古文：宋明帝即位，加领太子屯骑校尉，不受。
现代文：宋明帝即位后，加褚渊官太子屯骑校尉，褚渊没接受。
English: After Emperor Song Ming ascended to the throne, Gongyuan was made an official, a prince, and a cavalry captain. Gongyuan did not accept this.

古文：迁侍中，知东宫事。
现代文：迁任侍中，知东宫事。
English: He was transferred to the position of a chamberlain, and worked at the Chito Palace.

古文：转吏部尚书，寻领太子右卫率，固辞。
现代文：转任吏部尚书，不久领太子右卫率，坚决辞让。
English: He was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu, and soon led the prince to the right guard, and resolutely resigned.

古文：司徒建安王休仁南讨义嘉贼，屯鹊尾，遣渊诣军，选将帅以下勋阶得自专决。
现代文：司徒建安王刘休仁南讨义嘉之贼时，兵驻鹊尾，朝廷派褚渊至军中，选拔将帅以下军官可以自行决定他们的勋阶。
English: When Liu XiuRenNan, the King of Jian'an, was fighting against the thieves of Yijia, the soldiers were stationed in Shanwei. The imperial court sent Gongyuan to the army, and the officers below the rank of general could decide their rank at their own discretion.

古文：事平，加骁骑将军。
现代文：事件平定后，褚渊被升为骁骑将军。
English: After the incident was settled, Gongyuan was promoted to general of cavalry.

古文：薛安都以徐州叛虏，频寇淮、泗，遣渊慰劳北讨众军。
现代文：薛安都投敌叛变并献出了徐州城，敌虏频频寇掠淮、泗，朝廷派褚渊慰劳北讨的众军。
English: Xue Andu defected to the enemy and surrendered Xuzhou City. The enemy frequently pillaged, plundered, and plundered, and the imperial court sent Gongyuan to comfort the troops of the Northern Expedition.

古文：渊还启帝言： 盱眙以西，戎备单寡，宜更配衣。
现代文：褚渊回来启禀皇上说： 盱眙以西一带，军备单薄，应进一步充实。
English: When Gongyuan returned, Emperor Qizong said, "In the area west of Gongyuan, the armament is thin and should be further enriched.

古文：汝阴、荆亭并已围逼，安丰又已不守，寿春众力，止足自保。若使游骑扰寿阳，则江外危迫。历阳、瓜步、钟离、义阳皆须实力重戍，选有干用者处之。 
现代文：汝阴、荆亭都已被围逼，安丰又已不保，寿春的兵力，只能自保，如果敌人派骑兵游击，那么江外形势就很危迫了，故而历阳、瓜步、钟离、义阳都必须以实力重点防卫，选择有才能干练的军官负责那里。 
English: Ruyin and Jingting have been besieged, Anfeng has not been secured, Shuchun's military strength can only be self-insured. If the enemy sends cavalry guerrillas, then the situation outside the river will be very dangerous. Therefore, Liyang, Guabou, Zhongli and Yiyang must be defended with a focus on strength, and talented and capable officers should be selected to take charge there.

古文：帝在藩，与渊以风素相善。及即位，深相委寄，事皆见从。
现代文：皇帝在藩国为王时，就对褚渊的风标雅素很欣赏，关系很友善，后来即位做了皇帝，对褚渊格外寄以重望，他所建议的事皇上都采纳。
English: When the emperor was the king of the domain, he was very appreciative of Shanyuan's elegant style, and the relationship was very friendly. Later, when he became the emperor, he placed great hopes on Shanyuan, and the emperor accepted everything he suggested.

古文：改封雩都县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：改封他为雩都县伯，食邑五百户。
English: He was given the title of Bodu County Mayor, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：转侍中，领右卫将军，寻迁散骑常侍，丹阳尹。
现代文：转任侍中，领右卫将军，不久又迁散骑常侍，丹阳尹。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, leading the right guard, and was soon followed by the equestrian, Danyang Yin.

古文：出为吴兴太守，常侍如故。增秩千石，固辞增秩。
现代文：出任吴兴太守，常侍仍旧，增加俸禄至一千石，褚渊坚决辞让增加的俸禄。
English: Wu Xing was appointed as the de facto ruler, but his regular attendants remained the same, and his salary was increased to one thousand koku. Gongyuan resolutely refused to accept the increased salary.

古文：明帝疾甚，驰使召渊，付以后事。
现代文：宋明帝病重的时候，派使者疾驰召褚渊前来，委托后事。
English: When Emperor Song Ming was gravely ill, he sent an envoy to hastily summon Gongyuan to come and entrust him with the aftermath.

古文：帝谋诛建安王休仁，渊固谏，不纳。
现代文：明帝打算诛杀建安王刘休仁，褚渊坚决谏止，明帝不听。
English: Emperor Ming planned to assassinate Liu Xuren, the king of Jianan, but Gongyuan stood firm and did not listen to Emperor Ming.

古文：复为吏部尚书，领常侍、卫尉如故，不受，乃授右仆射，卫尉如故。
现代文：任命褚渊为吏部尚书，领常侍、卫尉仍旧，褚渊不受，于是任他为右仆射，卫尉仍旧。
English: He appointed Shanyuan to be the secretary of the cadre, but he still led the regular attendants and guards. Shanyuan did not accept this, so he appointed him as his right-hand man, and the guards remained.

古文：渊以母年高羸疾，晨昏须养，固辞卫尉，不许。
现代文：褚渊借口母亲年纪大了而且有病，需要早晚奉养，坚决辞让卫尉，皇帝不答应。
English: On the pretext that his mother was old and ill and needed to be taken care of sooner or later, Gongyuan resolutely resigned from the post of guard lieutenant, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：明帝崩，遗诏以为中书令、护军将军，加散骑常侍，与尚书令袁粲受顾命，辅幼主。
现代文：明帝驾崩，遗诏任褚渊为中书令、护军将军，加散骑常侍，和尚书令袁粲一起接受顾命，辅佐幼主。
English: After the death of the Ming Emperor, the emperor appointed Yu Yuan as the middle secretary, the general of the escort, and the attendant of the cavalry, and the monk secretary Yuan Qi accepted the mission and assisted the young master.

古文：渊同心共理庶事，当奢移之后，务弘俭约，百姓赖之。
现代文：褚渊同心共理政务，当时正处在奢侈之后，褚渊特别强调俭约，老百姓都很仰赖他。
English: At that time, Gongyuan was in the luxury, Gongyuan especially emphasized frugality, and the people were very dependent on him.

古文：接引宾客，未尝骄倦。
现代文：对待宾客，从来不流露骄傲和厌倦。
English: Treat guests, never show pride and boredom.

古文：王道隆、阮佃夫用事，奸赂公行，渊不能禁也。
现代文：王道隆、阮细夫把持朝政时，公然进行奸赃贿赂等活动，褚渊也不能禁止他们。
English: Wang Daolong and Nguyn Xuân Phúc openly carried out activities such as treachery and bribery when they were in charge of the government, and Quyn Phúc could not ban them.

古文：遭庶母郭氏丧，有至性，数日中，毁顿不可复识。
现代文：庶母郭氏去世，褚渊丧事期间特动感情，数日之中毁顿得没个人样儿。
English: Guo's mother-in-law passed away, and she was very emotional during Gongyuan's funeral. She was inconsolable for several days.

古文：期年不盥栉，惟哭泣处乃见其本质焉。
现代文：将近一年不梳头不洗脸，只有眼泪流过的地方才能显露本来的面貌。
English: After nearly a year of not combing her hair or washing her face, only where tears have flowed can her original face be revealed.

古文：诏断哭，禁吊客。
现代文：皇上下诏要他断哭，禁止前往凭吊。
English: The Emperor decreed that weeping should be stopped, and guests were forbidden to mourn.

古文：葬毕，起为中军将军，本官如故。
现代文：安葬完毕，起用为中军将军，本来的官职仍旧。
English: After the burial, he was appointed as a general of the Chinese army, but his original official position remained.

古文：元徽二年，桂阳王休范反，渊与卫将军袁粲入卫宫省，镇集众心。
现代文：元徽二年，桂阳王刘休范造反，褚渊与卫将军袁粲进来保卫皇宫及中央机关，并稳定集中众人的心理。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Guiyang King Liu Xiufan rebelled, and Gongyuan and Wei General Yuan Qi came to defend the imperial palace and central organs, and stabilized and concentrated the psychology of the masses.

古文：渊初为丹阳，与从弟炤同载出，道逢太祖，渊举手指太祖车谓炤曰： 此非常人也。 
现代文：褚渊当初在丹阳尹任上时，曾和从弟褚火召一起外出，路上碰到太祖，褚渊举手指着太祖对褚火召说： 此人可不是寻常之辈啊！ 
English: When Gongyuan was first appointed to Danyang Yin, he went out with his younger brother Gonghu Zhao. On the way, they met Grandfather. Gongyuan held up his hand to Grandfather and said to Gonghu Zhao, "This man is not an ordinary person!"

古文：出为吴兴，太祖饷物别，渊又谓之曰： 此人材貌非常，将来不可测也。 
现代文：后出任吴兴太守，太祖送东西来作告别，褚渊又对褚火召南齐书说： 此人才貌非常，将来不可估量啊！ 
English: After that, Wu Xing became the de facto ruler, and the great-grandfather sent something as a farewell gift. Gongyuan also said to Nan Qishu, who had been summoned to the bonfire: "This man is very handsome, and his future is immeasurable!"

古文：及顾命之际，引太祖豫焉。
现代文：明帝临终召大臣顾命的时候，褚渊便把太祖也拉来参与了。
English: When Emperor Ming on his deathbed summoned the minister to attend to his duty, Gongyuan also brought his great-grandfather to participate.

古文：太祖即平桂阳，迁中领军，领南兖州，增户邑。
现代文：太祖平定桂阳王以后，被升任中领军，领南兖州刺史，增食邑户数。
English: After the great-grandfather subdued King Guiyang, he was promoted to the leader of the middle army, led the south of Luzhou to make history, and increased the number of households in the county.

古文：太祖固让，与渊及卫军袁粲书曰： 下官常人，志不及远。
现代文：太祖坚决辞让，并给褚渊和卫军袁粲上书说： 下官只是个很平常的人，也没什么远大抱负。
English: The great-grandfather resolutely refused to give in, and sent a letter to Zouyuan and the guard Yuan Qi saying: The lower-ranking officer is just a very ordinary person, and has no lofty ambitions.

古文：随运推斥，妄践非涯，才轻任重，夙宵冰惕。
现代文：跟着时运随波逐流，现在的官职已很不应该，才轻任重，日夜不安。
English: Following the trend of the times, the current official position is very inappropriate, with heavy responsibilities and uneasiness day and night.

古文：近值国危，含气同奋，况在下官，宁吝身命！
现代文：近来正值国家危急，大家都在努力奋战，何况下官我，理应舍生忘死。
English: Recently, the country is in a critical situation, everyone is working hard to fight, not to mention my subordinate, I should give up life and forget death.

古文：履冒锋炭，报效恒理，而褒嘉之典，偏见甄沐，贵登端戎，秩加爵土，瞻言霄衢，魂神震坠。
现代文：冲锋陷阵，对于报效国家说来那是极平常的事，而给的这么大的荣誉、这么高的职务和地位，实在让我神魂震坠。
English: It's very common for countries that reward service to charge into the fray, but to be given such a great honor, such a high position and status, it really blew my mind.

古文：下官奉上以诚，率性无矫，前后忝荷，未尝固让。
现代文：下官我对待主上一片诚心，坦率自然，以前给我的荣誉和利益，我都没推辞。
English: Subordinate officer, I treated the Lord with sincerity, frankly and naturally, and I did not refuse the honor and benefits I had previously given.

古文：至若今授，特深恇迫。
现代文：至于现在的提拔，我的确特别不安。
English: As far as the current promotion is concerned, I am indeed particularly worried.

古文：实以衔恩先旨，义兼陵阙，识蔽防萌，宗戚构祸，引诮归咎，既已腼颜，乃复乘灾求幸，藉乱取贵，斯实国家之耻，非臣子所忍也。
现代文：实在说我是在报答先帝的恩典执行他的指示，这关系到死去的帝王和在位的皇上，而且是为了防患于未然。况且这是宗亲构祸，我这做臣下的也有责任，现在不仅不受到批评反而乘灾求幸、借乱取贵，这实在是国家的耻辱，非人臣所能容忍的！
English: It is true that I am repaying the grace of the former emperor by carrying out his instructions. This is related to the deceased emperor and the reigning emperor, and it is also to prevent problems in advance. Moreover, this is a patriarchal calamity, and I, as a subject, also have a responsibility. Now, not only am I not criticized, but I take advantage of misfortune to seek happiness, and take advantage of chaos to get rich. This is really a national disgrace, which is intolerable for a subject!

古文：且荣不可滥，宠不可昧，乞蠲中候，请亭增邑，庶保止足，输效淮湄。
现代文：而且荣誉不能滥用，宠幸不能白张，我请求免除我的封赏和提拔，以让我再鼓勇力。效力于淮河前线。
English: Moreover, honor should not be abused, favors should not be flaunted, I request to be exempted from my award and promotion, so that I can regain my courage.

古文：如使伐匈奴，凯归反旆，以此受爵，不复固辞矣。 
现代文：如果让我去讨伐匈奴，等我凯旋归来的时候，再封我这样的爵赏，我就不会推辞了。 
English: If you ask me to go and fight the Huns, and when I return in triumph, award me such a knighthood, I will not refuse.

古文：渊、粲答曰： 来告颖亮，敬挹无已。
现代文：褚渊、袁粲答复说： 你的上书聪颖明亮，很让人敬佩。
English: Gongyuan and Yuan Rong replied: Your letter is clever and bright, very admirable.

古文：谦贬居心，深承非饰，此诚此旨，久著言外；况复造席舒衿，迂翰绪意，推情顾己，信足书绅。但今之所宜商榷，必以轻重相推。
现代文：你的谦让是发自内心的，并没什么虚饰，这一番心意，长期以来已有显著表现，更何况现在又一字一句地写下来了呢。不过现在应该商量的，乃是什么是轻什么是重。
English: Your condescension is heartfelt and unadorned, and has long been conspicuous, not to mention now written down verbatim, but what should be discussed now is what is light and what is heavy.

古文：世惟多难，事属雕弊，四维恇扰，边氓未安，国家费广，府藏须备，北狄侵边，忧虞交切。
现代文：目前世道艰难，正逢凋敝，天下担忧，边民不安，国家到处都要用钱，但国库还很空虚。北方的敌人在侵扰边境，真是忧危交加。
English: At present, the world is difficult, the times are waning, the world is worried, the border people are uneasy, the country has to spend money everywhere, but the treasury is still very empty. The enemy in the north is invading the border, it is really worrying.

古文：宇内含识，尚为天下危心，相与共荷任寄若此，当可稍修廉退不？
现代文：天下之人，都在为国家担心，更何况我们共负重要责任的人呢，你能否稍微不谦让一点呢？
English: People all over the world are worried about the country, not to mention the people with whom we share important responsibilities. Can you be a little less humble?

古文：求之怀抱，实谓不可。了其不可，理无固执。
现代文：从你的怀抱说来，这样要求你是不合适的，已经知道不合适，按说就不应该固执下去。
English: Judging from your embrace, it is not appropriate to ask you in this way. You already know that it is not appropriate, so you should not be stubborn.

古文：且勍寇穷凶，势过原燎，衅逆仓卒，终古未闻。
现代文：可是强寇穷凶，势过燎原，内地的叛逆，发展迅速，这都是前所未闻的情势严峻。
English: However, the situation is unprecedentedly grim, with powerful banditry rampaging across the plains, and rebellions in the interior developing rapidly.

古文：常时惧惑，当虑先定，结垒新亭，枕戈待敌：断决之策，实有由然。
现代文：因而时常恐惧应该考虑先定之计，你在新亭结构堡垒，枕戈待敌，这个决策，是有道理的。
English: Therefore, fear should always be considered a preemptive measure, and the decision that you should build a fortress in Xinting and wait for the enemy is justified.

古文：锋镝初交，元恶送首，总律制奇，判于此举。
现代文：初战告捷，就砍了敌主的首级，此举出奇制胜。具有决定性意义。
English: If the first battle is successful, the enemy's head will be cut off, which is a surprising victory. It is of decisive significance.

古文：裂邑万户，登爵槐鼎，亦何足少酬勋劳，粗塞物听！
现代文：就是封你一万户，最高爵位，也不足报酬你的功劳，满足群众的呼声。
English: Even if you are awarded ten thousand households and the highest peerage, it is not enough to reward your merits and satisfy the voice of the masses.

古文：今以近侍禁旅，进升中候，乘平随牒，取此非叨。
现代文：现在只给你晋升中侯，你接受下来本是极平常的。
English: Now you've just been promoted to middle steward, and it's quite normal for you to accept it.

古文：济、河昔所履牧，镇军秩不逾本，详校阶序，愧在未优，就加冲损，特亏朝制。
现代文：当初收复济、河，你的待遇并未提高，实际如果检查一下你的级别，就知道这样的待遇并不优厚，如果再打折扣，那就要影响朝廷的制度了。
English: At the beginning of the economic recovery, your treatment did not improve. In fact, if you check your level, you will know that such treatment is not generous. If you discount it again, it will affect the imperial system.

古文：奉职数载，同舟无几，刘领军峻节霜明，临危不顾，音迹未晞，奄成今古。迷途失偶，恸不及悲。
现代文：奉职数年来，我们一直同舟共济亲密无间，刘领军峻节霜明，临危不顾，音容形象如在昨日，转眼之间已成古人，在这样迷乱的时代失去这样的同伴，真是连哭都来不及。
English: Over the past few years of service, we have been in the same boat and have been very close. Liu led the army in the harsh season, regardless of the danger, and the image of the voice and figure was like yesterday. In a blink of an eye, it has become an old man. In such a confused era, losing such a companion is really too late to cry.

古文：戎谟内寄，恒务倍急，秉操辞荣，将复谁委？
现代文：现在军情严重，常务倍急，你如果只顾成全自己的节操而推辞荣誉，那么如此重任又交给谁呢？
English: Now the military situation is serious, and the general affairs are urgent. If you only care about fulfilling your own discipline and decline the honor, then who will you give such an important task to?

古文：诚惟军柄所期。自增茂圭社，誓贯朝廷，匹夫里语，尚欲信厚，君令必行，逡巡何路！
现代文：而且我们觉得由于对你有更重要的军事交待，所以才应该为你增加封地，而我们也应为朝廷效力，即使是普通人的平时说话，也希望它确定可靠，更何况君王的命令，我们必须执行，容不得你犹豫徘徊。
English: Moreover, we feel that we should increase the fief for you because of the more important military service to you, and we should also serve the court, even if ordinary people speak in peacetime, we also hope that it will be reliable, let alone the king's order, we must carry out, do not allow you to hesitate.

古文：凡位居物首，功在众先，进退之宜，当与众共。
现代文：所有位居首要而功在众先的人，他是该进还是该退，应该和大家一样。
English: If anyone is to be first, he must be last of all and servant of all. If anyone is to enter or leave, he must be like everyone else.

古文：苟殉独善，何以处物！
现代文：如果你只想着牺牲荣利而求独善，那么我们又怎样对待别人呢？
English: If you only think about sacrificing glory and profit for the sake of self-righteousness, then how should we treat others?

古文：受不自私，弥见至公，表里详究，无而后可。想体殊常，深思然纳。 
现代文：只要你自问大公无私表里如一就行了。非常希望你能理解目前的非常状况，同意并接受我们的意见。 
English: All you have to do is ask yourself what is in it for you. I very much hope that you will understand the current extraordinary situation and agree and accept our opinion.

古文：太祖乃受命。
现代文：太祖于是接受了。
English: The great-grandfather accepted.

古文：其年，渊加尚书令、侍中，给班剑二十人，固让令。
现代文：这一年，皇上给褚渊加官尚书令、侍中，配给班剑仪仗二十人，褚渊坚决辞让了尚书令。
English: In that year, the emperor gave Shanyuan the posts of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and Waizhong (侍中) and assigned him a squadron of 20 swordsmen. Shanyuan resolutely declined the post of Shang Shuling.

古文：三年，进爵为侯，增邑千户。
现代文：元徽三年，晋爵为侯，增加食邑至千户。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the peerage and increased the number of food villages to 1,000 households.

古文：服阕，改授中书监，侍中、护军如故，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：服丧结束后，改授中书监，侍中、护军等职仍旧，又配给鼓吹一部。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was reclassified as a middle school librarian, and his duties as an attendant and escort remained the same. He was assigned to a band.

古文：明年，渊后嫡母吴郡公主薨，毁瘠如初，葬毕，诏摄职，固辞。
现代文：次年，褚渊后嫡母吴郡公主去世，他又像上次那样哀伤毁瘠。
English: The following year, when Gongyuan's legitimate mother, Princess Wu County, passed away, he grieved as he had the previous time.

古文：又以期祭礼及，表解职，并不许。
现代文：安葬后，皇上下诏要他着手职务，他坚决辞让，又以年祭在即为由，请求解职，皇上都没允许。
English: After his burial, the Emperor issued an edict ordering him to resume his duties, but he refused to do so. On the grounds that the New Year's festival was about to begin, he asked to be relieved of his duties, but the Emperor did not allow it.

古文：苍梧酷暴稍甚，太祖与渊及袁粲言世事。粲曰： 主上幼年微过易改，伊、霍之事，非季代所行，纵使功成，亦终无全地。 
现代文：苍梧王酷暴稍甚，太祖与褚渊和袁粲谈论天下大事，袁粲说： 主上正处少年，有些小错误改起来也容易，伊尹霍光那样的事情，不是我们这个时代所适于做的，即使干成了，我们最终也不会有好下场。 
English: Cangwu Wang was a bit more brutal. Grandfather talked about the world's major events with Gongyuan and Yuan Rong. Yuan Rong said: The Lord is in his adolescence. Some small mistakes are easy to correct. Things like Yin Houguang are not suitable for our time. Even if they are done, we will not have a good ending.

古文：渊默然，归心太祖。
现代文：褚渊不说话，但心里倾向太祖做皇帝。
English: Gongyuan did not speak, but in his heart he was inclined to make his grandfather the emperor.

古文：及废苍梧，群公集议，袁粲、刘秉既不受任，渊曰： 非萧公无以了此。 
现代文：后来要废苍梧王，群公集议，袁粲、刘秉不接受安排，褚渊说： 除了萧公没有人能收拾局面。 
English: Later, King Cangwu had to be dethroned, and the public gathered to discuss the matter. Yuan Qi and Liu Bing did not accept the arrangement. Gongyuan said, "Apart from Xiao Gong, no one can clean up the situation."

古文：手取书授太祖。太祖曰： 相与不肯，我安得辞！ 
现代文：手取诏书授予太祖，太祖说： 送给他他不要，我就不好推辞了！ 
English: He took the imperial rescript and gave it to his great-grandfather. His great-grandfather said, "If he doesn't want to give it to me, I can't refuse!"

古文：事乃定。
现代文：事情于是定下来。
English: Things are just settling down.

古文：顺帝立，改号卫将军、开府仪同三司，侍中如故。
现代文：顺帝立位后，褚渊改号卫将军、开府仪同三司，侍中之职仍旧。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Shun, Gongyuan changed his title to General of the Imperial Guards, and was given the title of Kaifu Yi and San Si, but his position as an attendant remained the same.

古文：甲仗五十人入殿。
现代文：配给甲仗五十人上殿。
English: Fifty people came up to the hall from the first round of rations.

古文：沈攸之事起，袁粲怀贰，太祖召渊谋议。渊曰： 西夏衅难，事必无成。公当先备其内耳。 
现代文：沈攸之事件暴发，袁粲有二心，太祖召褚渊来商量，褚渊说： 西夏那边闹事，必然不成气候，公应该先防备内部出事。 
English: Shen Yu's incident broke out, Yuan Shao was in two minds, and the great ancestor called Zou Yuan to discuss. Zou Yuan said: The troubles in the west of the country will inevitably fail to materialize, and the public should first prevent internal accidents.

古文：太祖密为其备。
现代文：太祖便秘密作了防备。
English: The great-grandfather secretly made preparations.

古文：事平，进中书监、司空，本官如故。
现代文：事件平定后，褚渊进位中书监、司空，本官仍旧。
English: After the incident was settled, Gongyuan was promoted to the position of middle school librarian and secretary, but his position remained the same.

古文：齐台建，渊白太祖引何曾自魏司徒为晋丞相，求为齐官，太祖谦而不许。
现代文：齐王府建制开始时，褚渊援引何曾自魏司徒为晋丞相的先例，请求太祖让他到齐王府任职，太祖谦虚而不答应。
English: At the beginning of the establishment of the Qi royal palace, Gong Yuan cited the precedent of He Zeng from Wei Sittu as the prime minister of the Jin dynasty, and asked the great-grandfather to let him serve in the Qi royal palace. The great-grandfather was modest and did not agree.

古文：建元元年，进位司徒，侍中、中书监如故。
现代文：建元元年，褚渊进位司徒，侍中、中书监等职务仍旧。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, Gongyuan was promoted to the position of scribe, and the positions of chamberlain and librarian remained unchanged.

古文：封南康郡公，邑三千户。
现代文：被封为南康郡公，食邑三千户。
English: It was made the county seat of Nankang County, with a population of 3,000 households.

古文：渊固让司徒。
现代文：褚渊坚决辞让司徒。
English: Gongyuan resolutely gave up the lead to Szeto.

古文：与仆射王俭书，欲依蔡谟事例。
现代文：他给仆射王俭写信，想依照蔡谟的事例。
English: He wrote to his servant, Wang Jian, that he wanted to follow Zhaimu's example.

古文：俭以非所宜言，劝渊受命，渊终不就。
现代文：王俭认为不宜说，劝褚渊接受下来，褚渊终究不就职。
English: Wang Jian did not think it was appropriate to say that Gongyuan should be persuaded to accept, and Gongyuan would not take office after all.

古文：渊美仪貌，善容止，俯仰进退，咸有风则。
现代文：褚渊仪表优美，举止和善，一举一动都很有风度。
English: Gongyuan's appearance is beautiful, his manners are kind, and his every move is very graceful.

古文：每朝会，百僚远国使莫不延首目送之。
现代文：每到朝会的时候，文武百官和外国使者无不伸长了脖子观看褚渊的举动。
English: Whenever he came to the imperial court, hundreds of civil and military officials and foreign envoys all craned their necks to watch Shanyuan's actions.

古文：宋明帝尝叹曰： 褚渊能迟行缓步，便持此得宰相矣。 
现代文：宋明南齐书帝曾经感叹说： 褚渊能迟行缓步，就凭这就该做宰相了。 
English: Emperor Songming of the Southern Qi Dynasty once lamented: "If Gongyuan can walk slowly, then he should be prime minister."

古文：寻加尚书令，本官如故。
现代文：不久加褚渊官尚书令，其他本官仍旧。
English: Soon after, Gao Yuan was made an official, and other officials remained the same.

古文：二年，重申前命为司徒，又固让。
现代文：建元二年，重申上次任命，褚渊任司徒，他又坚决辞让了。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, he reiterated his previous appointment and appointed Gongyuan as a disciple, and he resolutely resigned.

古文：是年虏动，上欲发王公已下无官者为军，渊谏以为无益实用，空致扰动，上乃止。
现代文：这一年敌虏又有所活动，皇上想发动所有王公以下没有官职的人员到军队去，褚渊谏止说这无益于实用，而且徒然造成扰动，皇上便作罢了。
English: This year, the enemy was active again, and the emperor wanted to mobilize all the people below the prince who did not have official positions to go to the army. However, the emperor said that this was not useful and practical, and that it was in vain to cause disturbance.

古文：朝廷机事，多与谘谋，每见从纳，礼遇甚重。上大宴集，酒后谓群臣曰： 卿等并宋时公卿，亦当不言我应得天子。 
现代文：朝廷里的机密大事，皇上常常要听取褚渊的意见，而且经常采纳他的建议，对他的礼遇甚为厚重，有一回皇上大宴群臣，酒后对群臣说： 你们大家都是宋时的公卿，也没有人认为我应该做皇帝吧？ 
English: In confidential matters at the imperial court, the emperor often had to listen to Shanyuan's opinions, and often adopted his suggestions. He was treated with great courtesy. At one of the emperor's grand banquets, he said to the courtiers after drinking: You are all court nobles in the Song Dynasty, and no one thinks I should be emperor, right?

古文：王俭等未及答，渊敛板曰： 陛下不得言臣不早识龙颜。 
现代文：王俭等人还来不及回答，褚渊手持笏板说： 陛下不能说我们没有早识龙颜。 
English: Wang Jian and others were too late to answer, and Yu Yuan, holding a cutting board, said: "Your Majesty can't say that we didn't know about Longyan in advance.

古文：上笑曰： 吾有愧文叔，知公为朱祜久矣。 
现代文：皇上大笑道： 我有愧于文叔，早就知道你是朱祜了。 
English: The emperor laughed loudly, "I am ashamed of Uncle Wen. I already knew you were Zhu Xi.

古文：渊涉猎谈议，善弹琵琶。
现代文：褚渊渊博健谈，又善弹琵琶。
English: Gongyuan is a great conversationalist and is also good at playing the lute.

古文：世祖在东宫，赐渊金镂柄银柱琵琶。
现代文：世祖做太子时，曾赐给他金镂柄银柱琵琶。
English: When the patriarch was crown prince, he was given a gold-handled, silver-columned lute.

古文：性和雅有器度，不妄举动。宅尝失火，烟焰甚逼，左右惊扰，渊神色怡然，索舆来徐去。
现代文：他的性情和雅而有气度，不妄举妄动，家宅曾有一次失火，烟火都逼近了，周围的人一片惊慌骚动，褚渊却神色怡然，叫人把舆找来徐徐离去。
English: His disposition and elegant and dignified, do not act rashly, there was once a fire in the house, the fireworks were approaching, the people around him were panicked and agitated, but Gongyuan looked happy, and asked people to find him and slowly leave.

古文：轻薄子颇以名节讥之，以渊眼多白精，谓之 白虹贯日 ，言为宋氏亡征也。
现代文：轻薄之辈很是讥诮他的名节，由于褚渊眼珠白的部分多些，他们便说他是 白虹贯日 ，意思是说这便是宋朝亡国的征兆。
English: The frivolous generation mocked his name day. Since the pearly whites of his eyes were more, they said that he was a white rainbow, meaning that this was a sign of the fall of the Song Dynasty.

古文：太祖崩，遗诏以渊为录尚书事。
现代文：太祖驾崩，在遗诏中任命褚渊录尚书事。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, he appointed Shanyuan Luo Shang Shuji in his will.

古文：江左以来，无单拜录者，有司疑立优策。
现代文：东晋以来，尚书没有单独拜录的先例，有关部门怀疑考虑要立优策。
English: Since the construction of the capital of Jiangdong, there has not been a separate appointment to record books, and the relevant departments doubt whether it is necessary to establish a good book or a book.

古文：尚书王俭议，以为： 见居本官，别拜录，推理应有策书，而旧事不载。
现代文：尚书王俭讨论时说； 现居本官，另外拜录，按理应该有策书才是，但这样的情况又不见记载。
English: Shang Shuxuan Wang Jian said during the discussion; He is currently living in his own office, and in addition to the application, it is reasonable that there should be a proposal, but such a situation is not recorded.

古文：中朝以来，三公王侯，则优策并设，官品第二，策而不优。
现代文：中朝以来，三公王侯的封任，都是优文与策书并设的，官品第二，则只策不优。
English: Since the Middle Kingdom, the investiture of the three princes and princes has been both excellent writing and strategy, and the second official product is only poor strategy.

古文：优者褒美，策者兼明委寄。
现代文：优文只是褒美，而策书还兼有表彰委任寄托的意思。
English: "优" means "praise"; "策" means "strategy" and is also used to describe the committee's letter.

古文：尚书职居天官，政化之本，尚书令品虽第三，拜必有策。
现代文：尚书之职居于大官，是政治教化的根本，所以尚书令虽然只是三品，但拜官必有策书。
English: Shangshu's duty resides in the high-ranking officials and is the foundation of political education. Therefore, although Shangshu's order is only three products, the high-ranking officials must have Shangshu.

古文：录尚书品秩不见，而总任弥重，前代多与本官同拜，故不别有策。
现代文：录尚书虽不明确品位待遇的级别，但总理之任尤其重大，前代大多是与本官同拜，所以不另立策书。
English: There is no record of the rank of the record keeper, but the duties of the head keeper are more important. Most of the previous generations were appointed at the same time as this official, so there are no other records.

古文：即事缘情，不容均之凡僚，宜有策书，用申隆寄。
现代文：根据即事缘情适时变革的原则，此事有能和一般官僚的任命同样对待，应该有策书，以表明寄托和隆重。
English: Based on facts and reasoning, they cannot be equated with ordinary officials, and there should be a policy book to show solemnity.

古文：既异王侯，不假优文。 
现代文：既然和王侯不同，也就不必要优文了。 
English: Since it is different from the prince, it is not necessary to write a good essay.

古文：从之。寻增渊班剑为三十人，五日一朝。
现代文：不久褚渊生病了，皇上观察星象认为将连续发生变故，褚渊很担忧，便上表要求退下来。
English: Soon after, Gongyuan fell ill. The emperor observed the stars and thought that there would be continuous changes. Gongyuan was very worried and asked the table to step down.

古文：顷之寝疾。上相星连有变，渊忧之，表逊位。又因王俭及侍中王晏口陈于世祖，世祖不许。
现代文：又通过王俭和侍中王晏口头请求世祖，世祖不批准。
English: He also verbally requested the ancestor through Wang Jian and the attendant Wang Yao, but the ancestor did not approve.

古文：又启曰： 臣顾惟凡薄，福过灾生，未能以正情自安，远惭彦辅。
现代文：褚渊又上启道： 臣下我资质凡薄，福过灾生，没能保持正情以获安宁，很是惭愧。
English: Gongyuan went on to say, "I am ashamed that I, a vassal, have poor qualifications, have been blessed with misfortune, and have not been able to maintain a righteous attitude in order to obtain peace.

古文：既内怀耿介，便觉晷刻难推。
现代文：而我是忠心耿耿的，就更觉得不能拖延时间了。
English: And I'm loyal, so I don't think I can delay any longer.

古文：叨职未久，首岁便婴疾笃，尔来沈痼，频经危殆，弥深忧震。
现代文：我受职不久，头一年就患了重病，近来更是多次出现危险，更加忧虑震惊。
English: Not long after I was appointed, I became seriously ill in the first year, and recently I have been in danger many times, more worried and shocked.

古文：陛下曲存迟回，或谓佥议同异，此出于留慈每过，爱欲其荣。
现代文：陛下总是格外地挽留爱护我，有人说是有关人员议论未定，这都是因为您对我过分的慈爱并想让我更加荣耀。
English: Your Majesty has always been exceptionally reserved and affectionate towards me, and some say that the people concerned are undecided, all because of your excessive love for me and want to make me more glorious.

古文：臣年四十有八，叨忝若此，以疾陈逊，岂骇听察！
现代文：我已经四十八岁了，蒙受如此待遇，因为生病而要求退休，这有什么可惊奇的呢？
English: I'm forty-eight years old, and to be treated like this, to ask to retire because I'm sick, is it any wonder?

古文：总录之任，江左罕授，上邻亚台，升降盖微。
现代文：况且总录尚书这个职位，东晋以来就很少任命，是国家重要的高层中枢。
English: Moreover, the position of general record keeper, which has rarely been appointed since the Eastern Jin Dynasty, is an important national high-level center.

古文：今受禄弗辞，退绌斯愿，于臣名器，非曰贬少。万物耳目，皎然共见，宁足仰延圣虑，稍垂矜惜。
现代文：如今我接受的时候不曾推辞，而退休下来也是自愿，这对于我的名誉地位也没什么影响，这也是人所共知的事情，陛下何足为这点事情劳神费心呢？
English: Now that I have accepted without demur, and retired voluntarily, without any prejudice to my honourable position, it is a matter of common knowledge how much your majesty has laboured over this matter.

古文：臣若内饰廉誉，外循谦后，此则宪书行劾，刑网是肃。臣赤诚不能行，亦幽明所不宥。
现代文：我如果是为了故意谦虚掩饰而赚取廉洁退让的名声，那么就应该受到监察部门的揭露和法律部门的制裁。我的一片赤诚之心不能落实，这也是神鬼不来宽宥我的原因吧。
English: If I am trying to earn a reputation of integrity and concession by deliberately concealing modesty, then I should be exposed by the supervisory department and sanctioned by the legal department. My sincere heart cannot be put into practice, which is also the reason why the gods and demons do not come to forgive me.

古文：区区寸心，归启以实。
现代文：区区寸心，现在都照实禀告了。
English: It's all coming out in the obits now.

古文：自吝寸阴，实愿万倍尧世。
现代文：我知道光阴宝贵，更希望天下大治远过于尧舜时代。
English: I know that time is precious, and I hope that the world will be governed far better than it was in the days of Mao.

古文：昔王弘固请，乃于司徒为卫将军，宋氏行之不疑，当时物无异议。
现代文：当年王弘坚决请求，才从司徒降为卫将军，刘宋王朝行之为疑，当时也没什么好的反映，拿我与他比较，就更不持齿了。
English: At that time, Wang Hong resolutely requested that he be demoted from Stuto to Wei general, and the Liu Song Dynasty doubted it. At that time, there was no good response, and I was even more reluctant to compare myself with him.

古文：以臣方之，曾何足说。
现代文：我只盼望陛下宏图大展，王业发达，这样虽死在九泉，也如同活在人间了。 
English: I only hope that His Majesty's ambitious plans will be carried out to the full, and that his royal career will be developed. In this way, even though he has passed away, it will be as if he were still alive.

古文：伏愿恢阐宏猷，赐开亭造，则臣死之日，犹生之年。 乃改授司空，领骠骑将军，侍中、录尚书如故。
现代文：于是改任褚渊为司空，领骠骑将军，侍中、录尚书仍旧。
English: As a result, he was reassigned to the position of Shibuya as the second-in-command, the leader of the cavalry, and the chamberlains, and the record of honors remained the same.

古文：上遣侍中王晏、黄门郎王秀之问疾。
现代文：皇上派侍中王晏、黄门郎王秀之来问候褚渊的病情。
English: The emperor sent his attendants, Wang Yao and Huangmen Lang Wang Xiu Rong, to pay their respects to Shanyuan's illness.

古文：薨，家无余财，负债至数十万。
现代文：褚渊死后，家中没有多余的钱财，负债至数十万。
English: After Gongyuan's death, the family had no extra money and was hundreds of thousands in debt.

古文：诏曰： 司徒奄至薨逝，痛怛恸怀，比虽尪瘵，便力出临哭。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 司徒一旦去世，令我悲痛不已，近来虽然瘦弱多病，但我仍然坚持出来临哭。
English: The Emperor's edict said: "Once Stutts passed away, I was overwhelmed with grief. Although I have been weak and sick recently, I still insisted on crying.

古文：给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱二十万，布二百匹，蜡二百斤。 
现代文：赐给他东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱二十万，布二百匹，蜡二百斤。 
English: He was given the East Garden's secret utensils, a morning suit, a suit of clothes, two hundred thousand yuan in money, two hundred horses of cloth, and two hundred pounds of wax.

古文：时司空掾属以渊未拜，疑应为吏敬不？
现代文：当时司空的下属们考虑到褚渊并没上任司空，提出是否应该以其下属的礼节行礼敬？
English: At that time, the subordinates of Sifu, considering that Gongyuan did not take up the post of Sifu, asked whether they should salute with the courtesy of their subordinates.

古文：王俭议： 依《礼》，妇在涂，闻夫家丧，改服而入。
现代文：王俭在议论中说： 按照《礼》的要求，新媳妇虽在路上还没过门，只要听到丈夫家有丧事，也应改换服装来到家中。
English: Wang Jian said in the discussion: According to the requirements of "Rite," although the new daughter-in-law has not passed the door on the road, as long as she hears that her husband's family has a funeral, she should change her clothes and come home.

古文：今掾属虽未服勤，而吏节禀于天朝，宜申礼敬。 
现代文：如今下属们虽然还没接受他的领导，而为吏的礼节是服从朝廷的要求的，应该表示礼敬。 
English: Now, although the adjutants do not work with them, the etiquette of subordinate officers is stipulated by the Heavenly Court, and should be expressed with courtesy.

古文：司徒府史又以渊既解职，而未恭后授，府犹应上服以不？
现代文：司徒府吏又考虑到褚渊已经解职，但继任的司徒还没上任，那么司徒府人员是否应该制服致哀呢？
English: Taking into account that Gongyuan has been relieved of his duties, but the succeeding magistrate has not yet taken office, should the magistrate's staff wear uniforms to mourn?

古文：俭又议： 依中朝士孙德祖从乐陵迁为陈留，未入境，卒，乐陵郡吏依见君之服，陈留迎吏依娶女有吉日齐衰吊，司徒府宜依居官制服。 
现代文：王俭又议论说： 中朝士孙德明从乐陵迁任陈留，还没入境就死了，乐陵郡的属吏是把他作为现君的资格来穿着丧服的，而陈留的迎吏则依女有吉日之礼行齐丧之吊的，所以司徒府应当依照褚渊还在任的礼仪要求制作哀服。 
English: Wang Jian also commented: Sun Deming, a member of the Central Military Commission, was transferred from Le Ling to Chen Liu, but died before he entered the country. The officials of Le Ling County wore mourning clothes to honor him as the reigning monarch, while the officials of Chen Liu were wearing mourning clothes according to the ritual of auspicious days. Therefore, the Government of St. Petersburg should make mourning clothes according to the etiquette requirements of Gong Yuan, who was still in office.

古文：又诏曰： 夫褒德所以纪民，慎终所以归厚。
现代文：皇上又下诏说： 褒扬美德是为了引导民众，慎重终丧是为了体现恩情。
English: The emperor issued another edict, saying, "To praise virtue is to guide the people, and to die a prudent death is to show one's gratitude."

古文：前王盛典，咸必由之。
现代文：以前帝王们的有关盛典，都是从这种精神出发的。
English: The grand ceremonies of emperors in the past were all based on this spirit.

古文：故侍中、司徒、录尚书事、新除司空、领骠骑将军、南康公渊，履道秉哲，鉴识弘旷。
现代文：已故侍中、司徒、录尚书事、新授司空、领骠骑将军、南康公褚渊，履道秉哲，鉴识弘旷。
English: The late chamberlains, tutors, scribes, newly-awarded magistrates, generals, and Nankang Gongyuan, followed the path of virtue, and their knowledge was extensive.

古文：爰初弱龄，清风夙举；登庸应务，具瞻允集。
现代文：当初青少年时代，就清誉远扬了。后来参加朝廷工作，又深受人们的敬仰。
English: At first, when he was a teenager, his reputation spread far and wide. Later, he participated in the work of the imperial court and was deeply admired by the people.

古文：孝友著于家邦，忠贞彰于亮采。佐命先朝，经纶王化，契阔屯夷，绸缪终始。
现代文：他的孝友忠贞天下共知。他曾辅佐先朝，经伦王化，聚散坎坷，终前始后，他都参与了大政方针的制定。
English: His filial piety and loyalty are known all over the world. He had assisted the previous government, and through the ups and downs, he participated in the formulation of major policies.

古文：总录机衡，四门惟穆，谅以同规往古，式范来今。
现代文：他领导中枢机构之后，作风严谨，完全可以和古人比美，并且可作后人的楷模。
English: After leading the central organization, he has a rigorous style, which can be compared with the ancients, and can serve as a model for future generations.

古文：谦光弥远，屡陈降挹，权从高旨，用亏大猷。
现代文：而且为人谦逊，多次请求降职，勉强服从了安排，因此劳损了身体。
English: Moreover, he was a humble person, repeatedly asked to be demoted, and reluctantly obeyed the arrangement, thus straining his body.

古文：将登上列，永翼声教。天不慭遗，奄焉薨逝。朕用震恸于厥心。
现代文：南齐书正要登上高位、长期翼赞君主的政治教化，岂料天命不延，忽焉世逝，朕为此心情震恸。
English: Nanqishi was about to ascend to a high position, and he had long praised the political enlightenment of the monarch. However, his destiny was not prolonged, and he passed away suddenly. My heart trembled for this.

古文：其赠公太宰，侍中、录尚书、公如故。
现代文：特赠褚渊太宰，侍中、录尚书、公等仍旧。
English: He was given the title of Shanyuan Dazaifu as a special gift. He still holds the ranks of chamberlain, recorder, and courtier.

古文：给节，加羽葆鼓吹，增班剑为六十人。
现代文：配给符节，加羽葆鼓吹，增班剑仪仗为六十人。
English: The distribution of symbols, the promotion of feathers and feathers, and the increase in the number of ceremonial swords for sixty people.

古文：葬送之礼，悉依宋太保王弘故事。谥曰文简。 
现代文：葬送之礼全都比照宋太保王弘的先例来办理。谥号为 文简  。
English: Funeral gifts were all handled according to the precedent of Song Taibao Wanghong. His nickname was Wenjian.

古文：王俭，字仲宝，琅琊临沂人也。祖昙首，宋右光禄。
现代文：王俭字仲宝，是琅琊临沂人，祖父昙首，曾任宋的右光禄。
English: Wang Jian Zi Zhong Bao, is the founder of the Jin Dynasty, the grandfather of the Jin Dynasty, and was once the right light of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父僧绰，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲王僧绰，官至金紫光禄大夫。
English: His father, Wang Soqiao, was a high-ranking official and the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：俭生而僧绰遇害，为叔父僧虔所养。
现代文：王俭出生时，其父遇害，叔父僧虔收养了他。
English: When Wang Jian was born, his father was killed, and his uncle, a monk, adopted him.

古文：数岁，袭爵豫宁侯，拜受茅土，流涕呜咽。
现代文：过了几年，他便袭封爵位为豫宁侯，受封的时候，王俭流涕呜咽。
English: A few years later, he was knighted as Yu Ning Hou. When he was knighted, Wang Jianlu sobbed.

古文：幼有神彩，专心笃学，手不释卷。
现代文：王俭幼时便很有神采，专心笃学，手不释卷。
English: When Wang Jian was very young, he was very bright, concentrated on his studies, and never let go of the scroll.

古文：丹阳尹袁粲闻其名，言之于明帝，尚阳羡公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：丹阳尹袁粲知道了他的名声，便说给宋明帝，明帝便把阳羡公主许配给王俭，拜官驸马都尉。
English: When Danyang Yin Yuanlu learned of his reputation, he told Song Mingdi, and Emperor Mingdi married Princess Yang Qian to Wang Jianlu, a military officer.

古文：帝以俭嫡母武康公主同太初巫蛊事，不可以为妇姑，欲开冢离葬，俭因人自陈，密以死请，故事不行。
现代文：皇上因为王俭的嫡母武康公主参与了太初年间的巫蛊事件，不能享受公主的婆婆的名义，要开墓分葬，王俭便通过有关人士向皇上自陈，并暗中以死请求皇上，这事才算过去。
English: Since the emperor could not enjoy the name of the princess's mother-in-law because Wang Jian's legitimate mother, Princess Wu Kang, was involved in the Wuxia Incident in the first year of the reign of the emperor, and wanted to open a separate grave, Wang Jian confessed to the emperor through the relevant people, and secretly asked the emperor to die. This was the end of the matter.

古文：解褐秘书郎，太子舍人，超迁秘书丞。
现代文：起初王俭任秘书郎，太子舍人，破格提拔为秘书丞。
English: At first, Wang Jian served as the secretary's younger brother, the prince's son, and was promoted to the secretary's younger brother.

古文：上表求校坟籍，依《七略》撰《七志》四十卷，上表献之，表辞甚典。
现代文：他上表请求校阅古代典籍，仿照《七略》撰写《七志》四十卷，上表献给皇上，此表的辞采非常典雅。
English: He asked the table above to proofread ancient classics, and based on the "Seven Sketches" to write the "Seven Stories" forty volumes, the table above is dedicated to the emperor, the words of this table are very elegant.

古文：又撰定《元徽四部书目》。
现代文：又撰定《元徽四部书目》。
English: He also compiled the "Four-volume Bibliography of the Yuan Hui Dynasty."

古文：母忧，服阕为司徒右长史。
现代文：母亲去世，王俭服丧结束后被任命为司徒右长史。
English: After the death of his mother, Wang Jian was appointed to the post of Stou Yu Changshi.

古文：《晋令》，公府长史著朝服，宋大明以来著朱衣。
现代文：依照《晋令》，公府长史要穿朝服，宋大明以来穿红衣服。
English: According to the "Jinling," the head of the public office should wear a court dress, and since Song Daming, they should wear red clothes.

古文：俭上言宜复旧，时议不许。
现代文：王俭上书说应该恢复旧规矩，当时讨论没被通过。
English: Wang Jian wrote a letter saying that the old rules should be restored. At that time, the discussion was not approved.

古文：苍梧暴虐，俭忧惧，告袁粲求出，引晋新安主婿王献之为吴兴例，补义兴太守。
现代文：苍梧王暴虐，王俭很忧惧，便向袁粲要求出京做地方官，援引晋新安公主婿王献之为吴兴太守的先例，王俭被补为义兴太守。
English: Cangwu Wang was tyrannical, and Wang Jian was very worried, so he asked Yuan Shao to go to Beijing to be a local official, citing the precedent that Wang, the son-in-law of Princess Jin Xin'an, offered to be Wu Xing's eunuch, and Wang Jian was supplemented as Yixing's eunuch.

古文：还为黄门郎，转吏部郎。
现代文：后还朝任黄门郎，转任带吏部郎。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Huangmen Lang, and then to the post of Zhu Li Bu Lang.

古文：升明二年，迁长兼侍中，以父终此职，固让。
现代文：升明二年，迁任长兼侍中，他考虑到父亲最后一任也是这个职务，坚决辞让了。
English: Two years after his promotion, he was transferred to the post of chancellor and chamberlain. Considering that his father was also the last to hold this position, he firmly resigned.

古文：俭察太祖雄异，先于领府衣裾，太祖为太尉，引为右长史，恩礼隆密，专见任用。
现代文：王俭察知太祖为人雄异，便先做了太祖领军府的衣裾，太祖任太尉后，便援引王俭为右长史，恩礼隆重而且亲密，受到专门任用。
English: Wang Jian sensed that the great-grandfather was a great man, so he first made the great-grandfather the leader of the military headquarters, and after the great-grandfather was appointed as a captain, he cited Wang Jian as the right long history, the ceremony was grand and intimate, and he was specially appointed.

古文：转左长史。
现代文：转任左长史。
English: He was transferred to Sadanaga-shi.

古文：及太傅之授，俭所唱也。
现代文：后来皇上授太祖太傅之职，也是王俭活动的结果。
English: Later, the Emperor conferred the position of Grandfather to Grandfather, which was also the result of Wang Jian's activities.

古文：少有宰相之志，物议咸相推许。
现代文：王俭少年时便有做宰相的抱负，人们在谈论时也都很推许他。
English: Wang Jian had the ambition to become the prime minister when he was a young boy, and people highly recommended him when they talked about him.

古文：时大典将行，俭为佐命，礼仪诏策，皆出于俭，褚渊唯为禅诏文，使俭参治之。
现代文：当时即将举行禅位大典，王俭佐命，所有礼仪诏策，都出王俭之手，褚渊只写了禅诏文，还让王俭参与修改。
English: At that time, the Great Zen Ceremony was about to be held. According to Wang Jiansa's will, all the etiquette and etiquette were done by Wang Jiansa. Gongyuan only wrote the Zen etiquette, and also allowed Wang Jiansa to participate in the revision.

古文：齐台建，迁右仆射，领吏部，时年二十八。
现代文：齐王府开始设置建制时，王俭迁任右仆射，领吏部，当时才二十八岁。
English: Wang Jianqian was only twenty-eight years old when he was appointed as the right-hand man and the leader of the cadre department when the Qi royal court began to set up the system.

古文：太祖从容谓俭曰： 我今日以青溪为鸿沟。 
现代文：太祖曾从容对王俭说： 我现在要以青溪为鸿沟。 
English: The great-grandfather once calmly said to Wang Jian: I now want to take Qingxi as the gap.

古文：对曰： 天应民顺，庶无楚、汉之事。 
现代文：王俭回答说： 天应民从，但愿不要有楚、汉争斗之事。 
English: Wang Jian replied, "Heaven responds to the demands of the people. I hope there will be no conflict between Chu and Han."

古文：建元元年，改封南昌县公，食邑二千户。
现代文：建元元年，改封王俭为南昌县公，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, Wang Jian was given the title of Nanchang County official, with 2,000 households in the food village.

古文：明年，转左仆射，领选如故。
现代文：次年，转任左仆射，领吏部之职仍旧。
English: The following year, he was transferred to Zuo Fuxia, but retained his position as head of the personnel department.

古文：上坏宋明帝紫极殿，以材柱起宣阳门。
现代文：皇上拆掉了宋明帝的紫极殿，用它的材料建宣扬门。
English: The emperor tore down Emperor Song Ming's Hall of the Purple Diadem and used its materials to build the Great Hall of Propaganda.

古文：俭与诸渊及叔父僧虔连名上表谏曰： 臣闻德者身之基，俭者德之舆。
现代文：王俭与褚渊及叔父王僧虔连名上表谏止说： 我们认为德是立身的基础，俭是行走的车船。
English: Wang Jian, together with Zou Yuan and his uncle Wang Xiangqian, said: We believe that virtue is the foundation of one's life, and frugality is a moving vehicle.

古文：春台将立，晋卿秉议；北宫肇构，汉臣尽规。
现代文：晋代将建春台时，公卿们都发议论，汉代要造北宫时，大臣们都来规劝。
English: When the Spring Palace was to be built in the Jin Dynasty, the nobles all discussed it, and when the North Palace was to be built in the Han Dynasty, the ministers all came to persuade.

古文：彼二君者，或列国常侯，或守文中主，尚使谏诤在义即悦，况陛下圣哲应期，臣等职司隆重，敢藉前诰，窃乃有心！
现代文：这二个君主，一个是列国常侯，一个是守文中主，尚且能够乐于接受谏诤，何况陛下是圣哲天子呢。我们这些人的责任重大，愿意就以前的诏令，发表点意见。
English: These two sovereigns, one a prince of the nations and the other a prince of the people, can still accept the imperial edict, not to mention the fact that His Majesty is the Son of Heaven and Earth. We have a great responsibility and would like to make some comments on the previous imperial edict.

古文：陛下登庸宰物，节省之教既诏；龙衮璇极，简约之训弥远。
现代文：陛下自从登基御宇以来，简约节省的品德已经照耀天下了。
English: Your Majesty, since your accession to the throne, the virtue of simplicity and economy has shone throughout the world.

古文：乾华外构，采椽不斫，紫极故材，为宣阳门，臣等未譬也。
现代文：外面建造的乾华殿，朴素简洁，而现在要用紫极殿的旧材料来建宣阳门，我们便有些弄不明白了。
English: The Qianhua Hall built outside is plain and simple, but now we have to use the old materials from the Purple Hall to build the Xuanyang Gate, so we are a bit puzzled.

古文：夫移心疾于股肱，非良医之美；畏影迹而驰鹜，岂静处之方？
现代文：我们觉得把心病转到胳膊腿上来，这不是良医的高明；害怕影子脚印便发足奔跑，也不是获得安静的方法。
English: We feel that it is not a good doctor's skill to transfer heart disease to the arms and legs; it is not a way to get peace of mind to run in fear of shadow footprints.

古文：且又三农在日，千轸咸事，辍望岁之勤，兴土木之役，非所以宣昭大猷，光示遐迩。
现代文：况且农活正忙，田园事多，现在反而停下争取丰收的劳动，来大兴土木之役，这不是宣扬您的伟大品德所该做的。
English: Moreover, you are busy with farm work, and there are many things to do in the countryside. Now, instead of stopping the work of striving for a good harvest, you are busy with the construction of civil engineering projects. This is not what you should do to promote your great character.

古文：若以门居宫南，重阳所属，年月稍久，渐就沦胥，自可随宜修理而合度。
现代文：如果说门在宫南，属于重阳之处，年月稍久，渐渐破旧的话，这只要适当修理调整一下就行了，不必大事改作。
English: If it is said that the gate in the south of the Imperial Palace, which belongs to Chongyang, has been deteriorating for a long time, it only needs to be properly repaired and adjusted. There is no need to make major changes.

古文：改作之烦，于是乎息。所启谬合，请付外施行。 
现代文：如果我们的建议有道理的话，就请付诸施行。 
English: If our proposal makes sense, then please implement it.

古文：上手诏酬纳。
现代文：皇上手诏表示采纳并予以奖赏。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to accept and reward them.

古文：宋世外六门设竹篱，是年初，有发白虎樽者，言 白门三重关，竹篱穿不完 。
现代文：宋朝时京城的外六门设有竹篱，这年初，有人挖到了白虎樽，传说 白门三重门，竹篱穿不完 。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the outer six gates of the capital had bamboo fences. At the beginning of this year, someone dug up a white tiger barrel. Legend has it that the triple gates of the White Gate could not be penetrated by the bamboo fences.

古文：上感其言，改立都墙。
现代文：皇上鉴于这话，要改建都墙。
English: In view of this, the emperor decided to rebuild the capital wall.

古文：俭又谏，上答曰： 吾欲令后世无以加也。 
现代文：王俭又谏止，皇上答复说： 我要让后世无以复加！ 
English: Wang Jian paused again, and the emperor replied, "I want to leave nothing for the future generations to add!

古文：朝廷初基，制度草创，俭识旧事，问无不答。
现代文：当时朝廷初奠基，一切制度都在草创之中，王俭懂得旧事，问无不答。
English: At that time, the foundation of the imperial court had just been laid, and all systems were in the process of being created. Wang Jian understood the old things and answered all questions.

古文：上叹曰： 《诗》云 维岳降神，生甫及申。 
现代文：皇上曾感叹说： 《诗》中说： 维岳降神，生甫及申。 
English: The emperor once lamented, "In the poem, it says, 'Wu Yue prostrated himself before the gods, giving birth to Fu and Shen.'

古文：今亦天为我生俭也。 
现代文：现在上天也为我生了一个王俭呀！ 
English: Now God has also given birth to a Wang Jian for me!

古文：其年，俭固请解选，表曰： 臣远寻终古，近察身事，邀恩幸藉，未见其伦。
现代文：就在这一年，王俭上表请求解除他的吏部职务，表中说： 臣下我考察了古代的身边的君臣关系，发现没有谁能像我这样得到陛下如此的恩幸。为什么这样说呢？
English: That very year, Wang Jian made a petition to be relieved of his position as an official, saying: "Vassal, I have examined the relationships between kings and vassals in ancient times, and I have found that no one could have received such a blessing from Your Majesty as I did. Why do you say this?

古文：何者？子房之遇汉后，公达之逢魏君，史籍以为美谈，君子称其高义。
现代文：子房碰到汉后，公达逢着魏君，史书上都当作美谈，君子们都称颂他们的高义。
English: When Zifo met the Queen of Han, and Gongda met Wei Jun, the history books regarded it as a beautiful story, and the gentlemen praised their high-mindedness.

古文：二臣才堪王佐，理非曲私，两主专仗威武，有伤宽裕，岂与庸流之人，凭含弘之泽者同年而语哉？
现代文：二臣都怀有王佐之才，受到这样的待遇也不是什么偏爱，而两位君主专权威武，未免不够宽裕，怎么能够和平常之人，到宽弘大量的对待，同日而语呢？
English: Both ministers have the talent of a king's son, and it is not a matter of preference to be treated like this, but the two monarchs, the absolute authority of the military, are not rich enough, how can they be treated like ordinary people, to a large extent, on the same day?

古文：预在有心，胡宁无感！如使倾宗殒元，有益尘露，犹当毕志驱驰，仰酬万一，岂容稍在形饰，以徇常事！
现代文：这些我都铭记在心，感戴莫名，即使让我倾家丧命，只要能对陛下有一丁点儿益处，我也应该尽力驱驰，报答万一，岂能允许有一丝儿形饰，碌碌无为？
English: I have kept all this in mind, and I feel inexplicably that even if I were to lose my life, as long as I can be of the slightest benefit to His Majesty, I should do my best to drive away. In case of retribution, would it be possible to allow a trace of ornamentation, idleness?

古文：九流任要，风猷所先，玉石朱素，由斯而定。
现代文：至于选拔各类人才合理任用，这乃是风教的首要工作，玉石朱素，都要同此判定。
English: As for the selection and reasonable appointment of all kinds of talents, this is the primary work of the etiquette, and the jade and vermilion should be judged accordingly.

古文：臣亦不谓文案之间都无微解，至于品裁臧否，特所未闲。
现代文：我不是说我的工作没有一点毛病，但我品裁评定，的确是不曾懈怠。
English: I'm not saying that there isn't something wrong with my work, but I've never been lax in my assessment of quality.

古文：虽存自勖，识不副意，兼窃而任，彼此俱壅，专情本官，庶几仿佛。
现代文：虽然我自南齐书己很努力，但由于识力有限不能称意，如果再让我这样不合适地干下去，彼此都会被壅塞；如果让我专心于本职工作，那还差不多能够胜任。
English: Although I have worked very hard since I came to Nanqi, I cannot be satisfied due to my limited knowledge. If I continue to work in such an inappropriate manner, both of us will be blocked; if I concentrate on my job, I can still be almost competent.

古文：且前代掌选，未必具在代来，何为于今，非臣不可？
现代文：况且前代掌管选官工作，未必其在代来，为什么现在，非我不可呢？
English: Moreover, the previous generation in charge of the work of electing officials did not necessarily do it in their place, so why should I do it now?

古文：倾心奉国，匪复退让之与；预同休戚，宁俟位任为亲。
现代文：我这倾心为国，并不是什么退让，既然我们关系休戚相联，难道需要用地位和职务才能表明亲密么？
English: My devotion to my country is not a concession. Since we have a close relationship, is it necessary to use status and position to show closeness?

古文：陛下若不以此理赐期，岂仰望于殊眷。
现代文：陛下如果不能根据这个道理满足我的愿望，那么我以后就不敢再希望得到您的特别爱护了。
English: If Your Majesty does not grant my wish on this basis, I will not dare to hope for your special care in the future.

古文：频冒严威，分甘尤戾。 
现代文：频频冒犯您的威严，甘愿受到您的惩处。 
English: I have often offended your majesty, and I am willing to be punished by you.

古文：见许。
现代文：皇上答应了。
English: Permission was granted.

古文：加侍中，固让，复散骑常侍。
现代文：加王俭侍中，他坚决辞让，又恢复了他的散骑常侍之职。
English: In addition to Wang Qian, he resolutely resigned and resumed his position as a straggler.

古文：上曲宴群臣数人，各使效伎艺。
现代文：皇上举行私宴招待几个大臣，让大家各献技艺。
English: The emperor held a private banquet to invite several ministers, and let everyone present their skills.

古文：褚渊弹琵琶，王僧虔弹琴，沈文季歌《子夜》，张敬儿舞，王敬则拍张。
现代文：褚渊弹琵琶，王僧虔弹琴，沈文季唱《子夜》歌，张敬儿跳舞，王敬则表演了空中接刀的杂技。
English: Gongyuan played the lute, Wang Zengqian played the piano, Shen Wenzhong sang the "Ziyang" song, Zhang Jing'er danced, and Wang Jing performed the acrobatics of picking up a sword in the air.

古文：俭曰： 臣无所解，唯知诵书。 
现代文：王俭说： 臣下我什么也不通，只知道背诵书本。 
English: Wang Jian said, "I don't know anything about my subjects, I only know how to recite books."

古文：因跪上前诵相如《封禅书》。
现代文：于是跪在皇上跟前背诵司马相如的《封禅书》。
English: So he knelt in front of the emperor and recited Sima Xiangru's "Zen Book."

古文：上笑曰： 此盛德之事，吾何以堪之！ 
现代文：皇上笑道： 这是盛德君主的事情，我哪里担当得起。 
English: The Emperor laughed and said, "This is a matter for the Emperor Shengde. How can I be responsible for it?"

古文：后上使陆澄诵《孝经》，自 仲尼居 而起。
现代文：后来皇上让陆澄背诵《孝经》，从 仲尼语 诵起。
English: Later, the emperor asked Lu Cheng to recite the "Book of Filial Piety," starting with the Zhongnian language.

古文：俭曰： 澄所谓博而寡要，臣请诵之。 
现代文：王俭说： 陆澄真是所谓博而寡要，我请求背诵。 
English: Wang Jian said: Lu Chengmao is really a so-called scholar, I ask you to recite it.

古文：乃诵《君子之事上》章。
现代文：于是背诵了《君子之事上》章。
English: He then recited the chapter "On the Affairs of a Gentleman."

古文：上曰： 善！
现代文：皇上说： 很好！
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：张子布更觉非奇也。 
现代文：现在更觉得张子布没什么稀奇的了。 
English: Now I think there's nothing unusual about the chiffon.

古文：寻以本官领太子詹事，加兵二百人。
现代文：不久王俭便以本官领太子詹事，加兵二百人。
English: Not long after, Wang Jian took the position of leading the crown prince, Zhan Zhi, and added 200 soldiers.

古文：上崩，遗诏以俭为侍中、尚书令、镇军将军。
现代文：皇上驾崩，在遗诏中任命王俭为侍中、尚书令、镇军将军。
English: After the emperor's death, he appointed Wang Jian as a chamberlain, official secretary, and general of the town army in his will.

古文：世祖即位，给班剑二十人。
现代文：世祖即位，配给王俭班剑仪仗二十人。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, Wang Jianban was given a ceremonial sword and twenty soldiers.

古文：永明元年，进号卫军将军。参掌选事。
现代文：永明元年，王俭进号卫军将军，参掌选事。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Wang Jianjin was promoted to the rank of General of the Guards and participated in the election.

古文：二年，领国子祭酒、丹阳尹，本官如故。
现代文：永明二年，领国子祭酒、丹阳尹，本官仍旧。
English: In the second year of Yongming, Danyang Yin, the leader of the National Children's Festival, was still in office.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：配给鼓吹一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：三年，领国子祭酒。
现代文：永明三年，领国子祭酒。
English: The third year of Yongming, the leader of the National Children's Festival.

古文：叔父僧虔亡，俭表解职，不许。
现代文：叔父王僧虔去世，王俭上表请求解职，皇上不批准。
English: When his uncle Wang Zengqian died, Wang Jian petitioned for his dismissal, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：又领太子少傅，本州中正，解丹阳尹。
现代文：又领太子少傅，本州中正，解除丹阳尹。
English: In addition, the crown prince Shao Fu and the head of the central government of Honshu were dismissed, and Danyang Yin was dismissed.

古文：旧太子敬二傅同，至是朝议接少傅以宾友之礼。
现代文：按照旧规定太子敬待二傅是一样的，到这时朝廷中讨论对待少傅用宾友之礼。
English: According to the old regulations, the prince should treat the second Fu in the same way. At this time, there was a discussion in the imperial court about treating the second Fu with the courtesy of a good friend.

古文：是岁，省总明观，于俭宅开学士馆，悉以四部书充俭家，又诏俭以家为府。
现代文：这一年，精简了总明观，在王俭的宅第里开学士馆，把四部书全都充实到王俭家来，又诏王俭以家为府。
English: In this year, he streamlined the General Theory and opened an academy in Wang Jian's residence, and sent all four books to Wang Jian's home. He also decreed that Wang Jian's home should be his residence.

古文：四年，以本官领吏部。
现代文：永明四年，以本官领吏部。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, he became the head of the cadre department.

古文：俭长礼学，谙究朝仪，每博议，证引先儒，罕有其例。
现代文：王俭长于礼学，精通朝仪，每次大讨论，引证先儒言论，没有人能比过他。
English: Wang Jian is good at etiquette, proficient in court etiquette, every big discussion, citing the first Confucian speech, no one can beat him.

古文：八座丞郎，无能异者。
现代文：入坐丞郎，没有谁能说别的。
English: Get in the chair, nobody can say anything else.

古文：令史谘事，宾客满席，俭应接铨序，傍无留滞。
现代文：令史来谘事，宾客满席，而王俭应接评判，毫无留滞。
English: Let Shi come to consult, the guests are full, and Wang Jian should receive the judgment, without delay.

古文：十日一还学，监试诸生，巾卷在庭，剑卫令史仪容甚盛。
现代文：十天到学馆一次，监试学生，满院子的读书人，剑卫令史，仪伏排列，场面十分盛大。
English: Once every ten days, we went to the school hall. There were students taking exams, a yard full of readers, a history of the Sword and Shield, and a row of ceremonial guards. It was a very grand scene.

古文：作解散髻，斜插帻簪，朝野慕之，相与放效。
现代文：王俭还设计了解散髻，斜插帻簪，朝野羡慕，互相效仿。
English: Wang Jian also designed to understand the scatter dowel, oblique insert dowel, morning field envy, mutual imitation.

古文：俭常谓人曰： 江左风流宰相，唯有谢安。 
现代文：王俭经常对人讲： 江左风流宰相，惟有谢安。 
English: Wang Jian often said to people: There is only one prime minister, Xie An, who is not popular with Jiang Zuo.

古文：盖自比也。
现代文：言下之意自己就像是谢安那样的风流宰相。
English: The implication is that he is like a philandering prime minister like Xie An.

古文：世祖深委仗之，土流选用，奏无不可。
现代文：世祖对王俭非常信赖，选拔官员，王俭只要奏请没有不批准的。
English: The founder of the dynasty trusted Wang Jian very much. When selecting officials, Wang Jian only had to ask for their approval.

古文：五年，即本号开府仪同三司，固让。
现代文：永明五年，世祖让王俭即本号开府仪同三司，王俭坚决辞让。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, the founder of the dynasty asked Wang Jian, the founder of this issue, to open the ceremony and the three departments. Wang Jian resolutely refused.

古文：六年，重申前命。
现代文：永明六年，又重申前命。
English: Six years later, Sun Life reiterated its previous promise.

古文：先是诏俭三日一还朝，尚书令史出外谘事；上以往来烦数，复诏俭还尚书下省，月听十日出外。
现代文：此前，皇上诏王俭三日一还朝，尚书令史出外咨询事情，皇上考虑到这样太麻烦，又诏王俭回到尚书下省，每月只有十日出外接受谘询。
English: Previously, the emperor had ordered Wang Jian to return to Shangshu on the morning of the third day to consult with Shangshu. The emperor considered this to be too troublesome, and ordered Wang Jian to return to Shangshu and only go out for consultation on the tenth day of each month.

古文：俭启求解选，不许。
现代文：王俭请求解除自己在吏部的职务，皇上不批准。
English: Wang Jian requested to be relieved of his duties in the personnel department, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：七年，乃上表曰： 臣比年辞选，具简天明，款言彰于侍接，丹诚布于朝野，物议不以为非，圣心未垂矜纳。
现代文：永明七年，又上表说： 臣下我近年来要求辞去在吏部职务，要说的陛下也都知道了，有关原因也在您身边多次陈述，我的赤诚朝野都晓得，人们在谈论时也没说什么不好，可是陛下您就是不答应。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of King Yongming, the table again said: My vassal, in recent years, I have asked to resign from my post in the cadre department. Your majesty knows what I want to say. The relevant reasons have also been stated many times around you. My sincerity is known to all. People did not say anything bad when talking about it, but your majesty did not agree.

古文：臣闻知慧不如明时，求之微躬，实允斯义。
现代文：我听人说过智慧还不如明时，这话正像是针对我说的一样。
English: I've heard it said that wisdom is not as good as timing, and that's exactly what it sounds like to me.

古文：妄庸之人，沈浮无取，命偶休泰，遂践康衢。
现代文：像我这样愚妄平庸之人，无足取用，只是赶上了好机会，遂登上了高位。
English: A stupid and mediocre person like me, who had nothing to do, just seized a good opportunity and ascended to a high position.

古文：秋叶辞条，不假风飙之力；太阳跻景，无俟萤爝之辉。
现代文：然而树叶该落了，不必借助风力；太阳该昏暗了，不必等待萤烛的光亮。
English: However, the leaves should fall, without the help of the wind; the sun should dim, without waiting for the glow of the candle.

古文：晦往明来，五德递运，圣不独治，八元亮采。
现代文：暗的去明的来，五德交替运行，圣人不是孤立地治理天下，八元一齐放射光辉。
English: The dark comes to the light, the five virtues run alternately, the sage does not govern the world in isolation, and the eight elements radiate radiance together.

古文：臣逢其时，而叨其位，常总端右，亟管铨衡，事涉两朝，岁绵一纪。
现代文：我适逢其时，叨得其位，经常总管重要部门，并且负责吏部工作。
English: I was in the right place at the right time, often in charge of important departments, and responsible for the work of the personnel department.

古文：盛年已老，孙孺巾冠。
现代文：已经经历了两朝十年。如今人也老了，后辈们也长大了。
English: It has been ten years since the two dynasties. Nowadays, people are getting older, and the younger generation has also grown up.

古文：人物徂迁，逝者将半。
现代文：人物迁移，逝者将半。
English: The characters move, the dead are half dead.

古文：三考无闻，九流寂寞。
现代文：也没能选择到优秀人才和突出官员。
English: They also failed to select outstanding talents and prominent officials.

古文：能官之咏，辍响于当时；《大车》之刺，方兴于来日。
现代文：我活着时算不了能官，死后还会招来《大车》之讥。
English: When I am alive, I cannot be considered a high-ranking official, and when I die, I will still attract the ridicule of "Big Wheel."

古文：若夫珥貂衣兖之贵，四辅六教之华，诚知匪服，职务差简，端揆虽重，犹可勉励。
现代文：至于珥貂衣衮等礼仪方面的问题，四辅六教等文教方面的工作，虽然自知不很胜任，但只要精简了我的职务，即使责任重大，我还是可以勉力而为的。
English: As for the ceremonial issues such as clothing and shoes, and the cultural and educational work such as the Four Auxiliary Departments, although I know that I am not very competent, as long as I streamline my duties, even if the responsibilities are heavy, I can still do my best.

古文：至于品藻之任，尤惧其阻。
现代文：至于品评人物选择人才，我最害怕堵塞了人才的道路。
English: As for the evaluation of the selection of talents, I am most afraid of blocking the road of talents.

古文：夙宵罄竭，屡试无庸。
现代文：虽然我夜以继日殚精竭虑，多次尝试，都不成功。
English: Although I have tried day and night, I have not been successful.

古文：岁月之久，近世罕比。
现代文：我占据这个职位岁月之久，近世很少有人能比。
English: I've held this position for more years than almost anyone else in recent memory.

古文：非唯悔吝在身，故乃惟尘及国。
现代文：不仅自己满怀愧悔，而且还要影响到国家。
English: Not only is he full of remorse, but he will also have an impact on the country.

古文：方今多士盈朝，群才竞爽，选众而授，古亦何人。
现代文：如今满朝人物，群才争妍，可以经过广泛选拔授以此职，自古以来便是如此。
English: Nowadays, people of the Manchurian dynasty, a group of talented people, can be awarded this position after extensive selection, which has been the case since ancient times.

古文：冒陈微翰，必希天照。
现代文：我冒犯威严陈述这些，希望皇上一定要给予体谅。
English: I have offended majesty by stating these things, and I hope that the Emperor will grant me his understanding.

古文：至敬无文，不敢烦黩。 
现代文：至敬无文，我就不敢多写了。 
English: Being penniless, I dared not write more.

古文：见许。
现代文：皇上批准了。
English: Permission was granted.

古文：改领中书监，参掌选事。
现代文：改领中书监，还参与吏部的一些工作。
English: He was reassigned to the post of middle school librarian, and also participated in some work of the personnel department.

古文：其年疾，上亲临视。薨，年三十八。
现代文：就在这一年，王俭生病了，皇上亲临探视，去世时才三十八岁。
English: In the same year, Wang Jian fell ill and was visited by the emperor in person. He was only 38 years old when he died.

古文：吏部尚书王晏启及俭丧，上答曰： 俭年德富盛，志用方隆；岂意暴疾，不展救护，便为异世。奄忽如此，痛酷弥深！
现代文：吏部尚书王晏在启文中说到了王俭的丧礼问题，皇上答复说： 王俭年富德盛，志用正隆，岂料暴疾，未有及时救护，便忽然去世，让我痛酷弥深。
English: In the opening paragraph, the head clerk, Shangshu Wang Xi, mentioned the issue of Wang Jian's funeral. The emperor replied, "Wang Jian was a man of wealth and virtue in his younger years, and he died suddenly of a sudden illness without timely treatment. I am deeply pained.

古文：其契阔艰运，义重常怀，言寻悲切，不能自胜。
现代文：艰难的时期，他离开了我们，但他的情义我们永远不忘。想来悲切，不能自胜。
English: He left us at a difficult time, but we will never forget what he meant to us. We are heartbroken and can't get over it.

古文：痛矣奈何！
现代文：痛苦又有什么办法呀？
English: What can be done about the pain?

古文：往矣奈何！ 
现代文：他去了又能有什么办法呀！ 
English: What can he do when he's gone?

古文：诏卫军文武及台所兵仗可悉停待葬。
现代文：下诏命卫军文武官员及中央机关各部门军队仪仗一律停止活动等待举行葬礼。
English: The following edict ordered the civil and military officials of the Guards and the military honor guards of all departments of the central organs to suspend activities until the funeral was held.

古文：又诏曰： 慎终追远，列代通规，褒德纪勋，弥峻恒策。
现代文：又下诏说： 慎终追远，是历朝历代的通规，褒德纪勋，更是严格的常策。
English: The next edict said, "Cautious pursuit is the general rule of all dynasties throughout the ages, and rewarding virtue and discipline is a strict policy.

古文：故侍中、中书令、太子少傅、领国子祭酒、卫军将军、开府仪同三司南昌公俭，体道秉哲，风宇渊旷。
现代文：已故侍中、中书令、太子少傅、领国子祭酒、卫军将、开府仪同三司、南昌公王俭，体道秉哲，风宇渊旷。
English: The late middle-ranked attendant, middle-ranked scribe, young tutor to the crown prince, son-in-law of the ruler of the country, commander of the imperial guard, keeper of the imperial residences and the three offices, and prince of Nanchang, Wang Jian, had a virtuous character and a wide range of talents.

古文：肇自弱龄，清猷自远；登朝应务，民望斯属。
现代文：从少年时代起，便清誉远扬。登朝任职以后，更是万民瞩望。
English: Since he was a boy, he has had a high reputation. After his appointment to the imperial court, he has been even more admired by the people.

古文：草昧皇基，协隆鼎祚。宏谟盛烈，载铭彝篆。
现代文：皇业初创时期，他就参与奠基，又协助君主发展和巩固政权；南齐书宏伟的谋略盛大的功德，都将载入史册刻铭勒石。
English: At the beginning of the imperial era, he participated in the laying of the foundation, and assisted the monarch in developing and consolidating the regime; Nanqishu's grand strategy and great merits will be recorded in the history books.

古文：及赞朕躬，徽绩光茂。
现代文：后来协助我统治天下，功绩卓著。
English: Later, he helped me rule the world, and his achievements are outstanding.

古文：忠图令范，造次必彰。
现代文：他的忠诚和美德，都是光辉的榜样。
English: He is a shining example of loyalty and virtue.

古文：四门允穆，百揆时序。
现代文：文化教育庄严肃穆，百官政务有条不紊。
English: Culture and education are solemn and serious, and the government affairs of hundreds of officials are orderly.

古文：宗臣之重，情寄兼常。
现代文：他是令人景仰的大臣，我们对他一直怀有深厚的感情和重大的期望。
English: He is an admirable minister and we have always had great affection and high hopes for him.

古文：方正位论道，永厘衮职，弼兹景化，以赞隆平；天不慭遗，奄焉薨逝，朕用震恸于厥心。
现代文：正当他正位论道，不断纠正帝王的职责，辅弼大化，襄赞隆平之时。可惜天命不延，忽焉逝世，这让我心灵震恸。
English: It was at the time when he was preaching the doctrine of enthronement, constantly correcting the duties of the emperor, expanding the role of the emperor, and extolling the magnificence of the emperor. Unfortunately, his destiny was not prolonged, and he passed away suddenly, which made my heart tremble.

古文：可追赠太尉，侍中、中书监、公如故。给节，加羽葆鼓吹，增班剑为六十人。
现代文：特追赠王俭太尉，侍中、中书监、公等职爵仍旧，赐给符节，加羽葆鼓吹，增加班剑仪仗为六十人。
English: Wang Jian was posthumously awarded the rank of captain, while the ranks of chamberlain, chief librarian, and official title of nobility remained the same. He was also given the insignia, the feathered cape for preaching, and the number of ceremonial swordsmen was increased to 60.

古文：葬礼依故太宰文简公褚渊故事。
现代文：葬礼比照已故太宰文简公褚渊的先例办理。
English: The funeral was conducted in accordance with the precedent of the late Dazaifu Jangong Shanyuan.

古文：冢墓材官营办。
现代文：冢墓棺奢由官家营办。
English: The tombs and coffins are all run by government officials.

古文：谥文宪公。 
现代文：谥号为 文宪公 。 
English: His nickname was Wen Xingguo.

古文：俭寡嗜欲，唯以经国为务，车服尘素，家无遗财。
现代文：王俭没什么嗜欲，一心扑在国务上，车马服装都很朴素，家中没有留下什么钱财。
English: Wang Jian did not have much of an appetite. He was devoted to the state, his car and horse costumes were very simple, and there was no money left at home.

古文：手笔典裁，为当时所重。
现代文：他的著作手迹，很受当时人看重。
English: His handwriting was highly valued by the people of his time.

古文：史臣曰：褚渊、袁粲，俱受宋明帝顾托，粲既死节于宋氏，而渊逢兴运，世之非责渊者众矣。
现代文：少年时撰写《古今丧服集记》并文集，都在世间传播。当今皇上受禅，下诏为王俭立碑，降爵为侯，食邑千户。史臣曰：褚渊、袁粲都接受了宋明帝顾命之托，袁粲既已为刘宋死节，而褚渊便经常受到世人的指责。
English: When he was a boy, he wrote "A Collection of Ancient and Modern Funerary Costumes" and a collection of essays, both of which have been disseminated to the world. Today, the emperor has received Zen, issued the edict to erect a monument to Wang Jian, was demoted to marquis, and has been eaten by thousands of households. The historian said: Yuanyuan and Yuan Qi both accepted the entrustment of Song Ming Emperor to take care of their lives. Since Yuanyuan has been the day of Liu Song's death, Yuanyuan has often been criticized by the world.

古文：臣请论之：夫汤、武之迹，异乎尧、舜，伊、吕之心，亦非稷、契。
现代文：请让我来讨论一下这个问题：汤、武的行为，是和尧、舜、伊、吕的心思很不一样的，也不同于稷、契。
English: Please allow me to discuss this issue: the behavior of Tang and Wu is very different from the thoughts of Yao, Shao, Yi and Lu, and also different from Yao and Qi.

古文：降此风规，未足为证也。
现代文：除了这些人，其他人的风范就不足为证了。
English: Except for these people, the example of others is not enough proof.

古文：自金、张世族，袁、杨鼎贵，委质服义，皆由汉氏，膏腴见重，事起于斯。
现代文：自从金、张世族，袁、杨鼎贵，于是尽忠服义，都由汉氏来决定，华美的文词受到重视，便起于这个时代。
English: Since Kim, Zhang Shizong, Yuan, Yang Dinggui, and so on, have been loyal and obedient, all decided by the Han clan, the gorgeous words and phrases have been valued, and it originated in this era.

古文：魏氏君临，年祚短促，服褐前代，宦成后朝。
现代文：魏氏君临天下时间短促，沿用前代。也养成了后朝。
English: The reign of the Wei Dynasty was short, and the previous generation was used. It also developed into the Later Dynasty.

古文：晋氏登庸，与之从事，名虽魏臣，实为晋有，故主位虽改，臣任如初。
现代文：晋氏登上皇位，跟着干的那帮人，名义上虽说是魏臣，实际上已属于晋氏，所以主位虽改，臣任如初。
English: When the Jin clan ascended the throne, the group of people who followed them, although nominally Wei vassals, actually belonged to the Jin clan, so although the head position was changed, the vassals remained the same.

古文：自是世禄之盛，习为旧准，羽仪所隆，人怀羡慕，君臣之节，徒致虚名。
现代文：从此世禄之盛，已习惯为老标准，而羽仪之隆，也受到人们的羡慕，君臣之节，徒有虚名。
English: Since then, the prosperity of the world has been accustomed to be the old standard, and the height of the feather ceremony has also been envied by people. The Emperor and Empress Festival has only a false name.

古文：贵仕素资，皆由门庆，平流进取，坐至公卿，则知殉国之感无因，保家之念宜切。
现代文：贵仕素资，皆由门庆，平流进取，坐至公卿，于是便知殉国的感情是有根据的，而保家的念头最应关切。
English: The qualities of the noblemen are all from the gate of the Qing Dynasty, the level of advancement, and sitting to the nobility, so they know that the feelings of martyrdom are well-founded, and the idea of protecting the family should be the most concerned.

古文：市朝亟革，宠贵方来，陵阙虽殊，顾眄如一。
现代文：于是天下迅速变革，宠贵才能到手，陵阙虽然不同，看上去如同一样。
English: As a result, the world is rapidly changing, and only the rich can get their hands on it. Although the mausoleums are different, they look the same.

古文：中行、智伯，未有异遇。
现代文：中行、智伯，未有异遇。
English: Zhongxing and Zhibo did not have any disagreements.

古文：褚渊当泰始初运，清涂已显，数年之间，不患无位，既以民望而见引，亦随民望而去之。
现代文：褚渊在泰初时期王业初运时，清正的前途已经显现，数年之间，不愁没有地位。既然是由于民望所归而被引用，当然也可以因民望所归而离开他。
English: In the early days of Thailand, when Wangye was at the beginning of his career, the future of Qingzheng was already apparent. Within a few years, there was no fear of losing his position. Since he was cited because of his popularity, of course, he could also leave him because of his popularity.

古文：夫爵禄既轻，有国常选，恩非己独，责人以死，斯故人主之所同谬，世情之过差也。
现代文：给人的爵禄很轻，而要人长期为自己效力，用恩不专，却要人为自己拼命，这便是做君主的共同误会，也是一般人的不足。
English: It is a common misunderstanding to be a monarch, and it is also a shortcoming of the average person, to give people a very light peerage, but to require people to work for themselves for a long time, to be generous with favors, but to require people to work hard for themselves.

古文：赞曰：猗欤褚公，德素内充。
现代文：赞曰：褚公呀褚公，你的道德早已内充。
English: Zang said: "My lord, my lord, your morality has already been filled in.

古文：民誉不爽，家称克隆。
现代文：人们的评价虽然不一致，但你的家道照样兴隆。
English: People's opinions may differ, but your family business is still thriving.

古文：从容佐世，贻议匪躬。
现代文：辅世主从容不迫，留下的话柄你可以不听。
English: The Lord of the Universe is not pushy, and you can choose not to listen to what he says.

古文：文宪济济，辅相之体。
现代文：文宪呀文宪，你有美好的风仪和辅相的资质。
English: Wen Xian, Wen Xian, you have a beautiful demeanor and complementary qualities.

古文：称述霸王，纲维典礼。
现代文：你称述霸业王道，理顺了各种典礼。
English: You have proclaimed the supremacy of industry and rationalized all kinds of ceremonies.

古文：期寄两朝，绸缪宫陛。
现代文：两朝君主都对你寄以厚望，你赢得了宫廷上下的深情厚意。
English: The monarchs of both dynasties have high hopes for you, and you have won the affection of the court.

