古文：余玠，字义夫，蕲州人。
现代文：余玠，字义夫，蕲州人。
English: Yu Yu, the character Yifu, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：家贫落魄无行，喜功名，好大言。
现代文：家境贫穷，潦倒失意，行为没有拘束，喜欢功名，好说大话。
English: His family background is poor, he is frustrated, his behavior is unrestrained, he likes fame, and he likes to talk big.

古文：少为白鹿洞诸生，尝携客入茶肆，殴卖茶翁死，脱身走襄淮。
现代文：小时候在白鹿洞书院当过学生，曾经带客人到卖茶的小店，殴打卖茶的老头致死，故逃走到襄阳、淮南等地。
English: When he was a child, he was a student at the Bai Lu Dong College. He once took a guest to a small shop selling tea and beat the old man selling tea to death, so he fled to Yangyang, Huainan and other places.

古文：时赵葵为淮东制置使，玠作长短句上谒，葵壮之，留之幕中。
现代文：当时，赵葵担任淮南东路制置使，余玠带着所做的词作去拜见他，赵葵为词气的豪壮拍案叫绝，于是留他在幕府中。
English: At that time, Zhao Kwai served as an envoy for the construction of Huainan East Road. Yu Zhen went to visit him with the lyrics he had written. Zhao Kwai was very impressed by the magnificent beat of the lyrics, so he left him in the shogunate.

古文：未几，以功补进义副尉，擢将作监主簿、权发遣招进军，充制置司参议官，进工部郎官。
现代文：不多时，因为有功升补为进义副尉，擢升为将作监主簿、权发遣招进军中，充任制置司参议官，进任工部郎官。
English: Not infrequently, because of meritorious service, he was promoted to the rank of Vice-Lieutenant of Jinyi, promoted to the position of Supervisor of the Master Book, delegated the power to recruit into the army, served as a member of the Standing Committee of the CPC Central Committee, and was appointed to the post of the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：嘉熙三年，与大元兵战于汴城、河阴有功，授直华文阁、淮东提点刑狱兼知淮安州兼淮东制置司参谋官。
现代文：嘉熙三年，与大元的士兵在汴城、河阴作战立有军功，授任直华文阁、淮东提点刑狱，兼任淮安知州，兼任淮南东路制置司参谋官。
English: In the three years of Jia Xi, he fought with the soldiers of Dayuan in Lucheng and Heyin and achieved military merit. He was awarded the post of Zhihua Wenge, Huai Dong Ti Ti Punishing Prison, concurrently served as the staff officer of Huai'an Zhizhou, and also served as the staff officer of Huai'an East Road Construction Division.

古文：淳祐元年，玠提兵应援安丰，拜大理少卿，升制置副使。
现代文：淳元年，余玠率兵接应、援助安丰，授拜大理少卿，升制置副使。
English: In the first year of the June era, Yu Xi led the soldiers to receive and assist Anfeng, and conferred the title of Dali Shaoqing, and promoted and appointed him as vice-envoy.

古文：进对： 必使国人上下事无不确实，然后华夏率孚，天人感格。 又言： 今世胄之彦，场屋之士，田里之豪，一或即戎，即指之为粗人，斥之为哙伍。
现代文：上奏进对说： 一定要使宋朝各色人等，自上至下，办事确实可靠，那么，华夏就可使人信服，天人之间就会格于成例。 又说 ：现在世代传承有才德的人、乡村隐逸的儒士、乡里村野的豪强，他们一旦接触戎事、练习武艺，就指斥他为粗人，斥责为像樊哙之类的武夫。
English: Shang Sojin said to him, "We must make sure that people of all colors in the Song and Tang Dynasties, from the top to the bottom, do things truly and reliably, so that Huaxia can be convincing, and it will set an example among the heavenly beings." He also said, "Nowadays, once they come into contact with military affairs and practice martial arts, they will accuse him of being a vulgarian and rebuke him as a warrior like a baboon.

古文：愿陛下视文武之士为一，勿令偏有所重，偏必至于激，文武交激，非国之福。 帝曰： 卿人物议论皆不常，可独当一面，卿宜少留，当有擢用。 乃授权兵部侍郎、四川宣谕使，帝从容慰遣之。
现代文：希望理宗皇帝陛下对文武官员一视同仁，不要使他们有所偏重，偏重一定会导致过激的行为，文武之才，交相过激，并不是国家的福兆。 理宗说： 你对人物的议论都不同寻常，可以独挡一面，你应该稍为等待一时，当有擢升、进用你的时候。 于是，授权他代理兵部侍郎、四川宣谕使，理宗和颜悦色地慰劳、派遣他去上任。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty the Emperor Rizong will treat civil and military officials equally, and not give them any preferential treatment. Preferential treatment will certainly lead to excessive behavior. The talent of literature and military, and the excessive interaction with each other, are not a good sign for the country. Rizong said: Your comments on people are unusual, you can stand alone, you should wait for a while, when there is a promotion and use you. Therefore, he was authorized to act as the attendant of the military department and the envoy to Sichuan, and Rizong consoled him pleasantly and sent him to take office.

古文：玠亦自许当手挈全蜀还本朝，其功日月可冀。
现代文：余玠也自许当全面控制所有蜀地，为本朝守土，达到这个目的指日可待。
English: Yu Xi also vowed to comprehensively control all of Shu, to protect the land for this dynasty, and this goal is just around the corner.

古文：寻授兵部侍郎、四川安抚制置使兼知重庆府兼四川总领兼夔路转运使。
现代文：不久，授任余玠兵部侍郎、四川安抚制置使，兼任重庆府知府、四川总领、夔州路转运使职。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yuzhen Military Department and the Sichuan Pacification Envoy, and concurrently served as the governor of Chongqing Prefecture, the head of Sichuan Province, and the head of transportation on the Zhangzhou Road.

古文：自宝庆三年至淳祐二年，十六年间，凡授宣抚三人，制置使九人，副四人，或老或暂，或庸或贪，或惨或缪，或遥领而不至，或开隙而各谋，终无成绩。
现代文：从宝庆三年到淳二年，十六年当中，一共授予宣抚使三人，制置使九人，制置副使四人，有的年老，有的暂时代理，有的不是平庸就是贪赃枉法，有的不是残酷掠取就是过错百出，有的任官不到任而行遥控指挥，有的制造矛盾而各谋私利，以致没有一人最终取得应有功绩。
English: During the 16 years from Baoqing 3rd year to Jun 2nd year, a total of three envoys were awarded, nine envoys were appointed, and four deputy envoys were appointed. Some were old, some were temporary agents, some were mediocre or corrupt, some were cruel and predatory or full of mistakes, some were appointed without being appointed and carried out remote control command, and some created conflicts and pursued their own interests, so that no one finally achieved their due merits.

古文：于是东、西川无复统律，遗民咸不聊生，监司、戎帅各专号令，擅辟守宰，荡无纪纲，蜀日益坏。
现代文：于是，造成了四川东、西部没有统一的律令，当地的老百姓都不能维持其生存，监司官吏、将帅各自发号施令，擅自任命郡守知县，没一丁点儿纪纲的约束，蜀地日益穷困败坏。
English: As a result, the east and west of Sichuan did not have a unified legal code, and the local people could not maintain their existence. The supervisors, officials and generals each issued their own orders, arbitrarily appointed county governors, did not have any discipline constraints, and Shu was increasingly impoverished and corrupt.

古文：及闻玠入蜀，人心粗定，始有安土之志。
现代文：待听到余玠入川蜀任官，人心才稍微安定，人们才开始有安居乡土的打算。
English: It wasn't until they heard that Yu Qian had been appointed to Sichuan Shu that people's minds became a little more stable and they began to have plans to live in the countryside.

古文：玠大更敝政，遴选守宰，筑招贤之馆于府之左，供张一如帅所居，下令曰： 集众思，广忠益，诸葛孔明所以用蜀也。
现代文：余玠大张旗鼓地更革弊政，挑选州郡官守与县邑宰令，在府衙的左边修建招贤馆，设施就像帅府居处。还下令说： 收集众人的智慧，广泛吸收有益的、忠诚的意见，这就是诸葛亮治理蜀地的做法。
English: With great fanfare, Yu Qi also reformed the corrupt politics, selected the top officials of the prefectures and counties, and built a recruitment hall on the left side of the prefectural government, with facilities like the residence of the governor. He also ordered: "Collect the wisdom of many people, and widely absorb useful and loyal opinions. This is the way Zhuge Liang governs Shu."

古文：欲有谋以告我者，近则径诣公府，远则自言于郡，所在以礼遣之，高爵重赏，朝廷不吝以报功，豪杰之士趋期立事，今其时矣。 士之至者，玠不厌礼接，咸得其欢心，言有可用，随其才而任之；苟不可用，亦厚遗谢之。
现代文：希望献计献策者，近的可以直接到公署衙府，远的可以自己到州府陈述，所在各地州县官吏必须以礼相待，有真才实学者给予高官厚禄，朝廷也不吝啬予以按功奖赏。豪杰有识之士希望建功立业的人，现在是时候了。 对于到来的士大夫们，余玠不厌其烦地以礼相待，都得到了他的欢心，有言论可以采用者，按照他的才能而予以任用；假如不能被任用的，也丰厚地赠与答谢他。
English: Those who hope to contribute ideas and suggestions can go directly to the public office of the government in the near future, and those who are far away can go to the state government to present themselves. State and county officials in various regions must treat each other with courtesy. Scholars with real talent give high-ranking officials generous rewards, and the imperial court is not stingy in rewarding them according to their merits. It is now time for heroes and insightful people who hope to make contributions. For the arriving scholars and doctors, Yu Xuan is not tired of treating them with courtesy, and they have all gained his favor. Those who have speech can be used, and they will be appointed according to his talent; if they cannot be appointed,

古文：播州冉氏兄弟琎、璞，有文武才，隐居蛮中，前后阃帅辟召，坚不肯起，闻玠贤，相谓曰： 是可与语矣。 遂诣府上谒，玠素闻冉氏兄弟，刺入即出见之，与分廷抗礼，宾馆之奉，冉安之若素有，居数月，无所言。
现代文：播州冉氏兄弟冉王进、冉璞，有文治武功的才能，隐居在蛮中地区，前后数任驻此的将帅征辟召用他们，坚持不肯从召，听说余玠贤能，他们兄弟认为道： 是可以同他谈一谈的时候了。 于是，就到府上拜谒余玠，余玠平素早就听说冉氏兄弟的文武才能，待他们一到府上便出来与他们相见，与他们以平等的身份行礼，同时待之以贵宾的馆舍，敬奉他们，冉氏兄弟安居于此显得如平常在家一样，居住了几个月，没有说什么。
English: Banzhou Ran brothers, Ran Wangjin and Ran Min, who had talent in literature and martial arts, lived in seclusion in the middle of the countryside. Several generals stationed here conscripted them and called them, but they insisted on not accepting the call. When they heard of Yu Yu's ability, their brothers thought, "It's time to talk to him." So they went to the palace to pay homage to Yu Yu. Yu Yu had long heard of the Ran brothers' ability in literature and martial arts. As soon as they arrived at the palace, he came out to meet them, and paid homage to them as equals. At the same time, he stayed in the guest house and paid

古文：玠将谢之，乃为设宴，玠亲主之。
现代文：余玠打算酬谢他们，于是为他们设置宴席，余玠亲自主持。
English: Yu Yu planned to reward them, so he set up a banquet for them, which Yu Yu personally presided over.

古文：酒酣，坐客方纷纷竞言所长，琎兄弟饮食而已。
现代文：饮酒至尽兴的时候，坐席上的客人们竞相说出自己所擅长的，冉王进兄弟仅仅只顾饮酒吃食罢了。
English: When drinking to their heart's content, the guests at the table competed to say what they were good at. Brother Ran Wangjin only cared about drinking and eating.

古文：玠以微言挑之，卒默然。
现代文：余玠以含蓄的话挑起话头，最终仍默然无语。
English: Yu Yu provoked the conversation with subtle words, and finally remained speechless.

古文：玠曰： 是观我待士之礼何如耳。 明日更辟别馆以处之，且日使人窥其所为。
现代文：余玠说： 按照你们的观察，是看我对待有识之士们的礼节怎么样吧？ 第二天，更换了一个僻静的馆舍来安顿他们，又每天派人暗中观察他们的行为。
English: Yu Yao said: According to your observation, is it to see how I treat the etiquette of people with insight? The next day, I changed a secluded house to settle them, and sent people to secretly observe their behavior every day.

古文：兄弟终日不言，惟对踞，以垩画地为山川城池之形，起则漫去，如是又旬日，请见玠，屏人曰： 某兄弟辱明公礼遇，思有以少裨益，非敢同众人也。
现代文：冉氏兄弟二人成天不说话，仅仅相对而坐，用白垩在地上画成山丘、河流、城邑、护城河之类的形状，站起来时就把画的图形擦去。这样又过了上十天，要求进见余玠，屏退了左右的人，于是说： 我们兄弟有辱贤明之公您的礼遇之恩，思量只有不多的裨益好处，不敢同其他众人一样。
English: The two Ran brothers did not speak all day long, but merely sat opposite each other, and with a chalk they drew on the ground the shapes of hills, rivers, towns, moats, and the like. When they stood up, they erased the drawings. Thus, after another ten days, they asked to see Yu Xi, screened the people around, and then said: Our brothers have insulted the wisdom of your courtesy, thinking of only a few benefits, and dare not be like everyone else.

古文：为今日西蜀之计，其在徙合州城乎？ 玠不觉跃起，执其手曰： 此玠志也，但未得其所耳。 曰： 蜀口形胜之地莫若钓鱼山，请徙诸此，若任得其人，积粟以守之，贤于十万师远矣，巴蜀不足守也。 玠大喜曰： 玠固疑先生非浅士，先生之谋，玠不敢掠以归己。 遂不谋于众，密以其谋闻于朝，请不次官之。
现代文：为今天治理西蜀的计策，不是在于迁徙合州城吗？ 余玠不觉跳起身来，拉住他们的手说 ：这正是余玠的志向所希望的，但不知道怎么具体进行好。 冉氏兄弟回答说 ：川蜀关口形胜之地没有什么地方比得上钓鱼山，请迁合州城到这里，如果守任得到了合适的人选，积储谷粟在这里驻守，远胜如十多万军队，巴蜀地就会守住了。 余玠很高兴地说道 ：余玠本来就相信您们二位不是一般的浅薄之士。先生的谋略，余玠不敢掠其美以归功于自己。 于是不与众人商量，秘密地把冉氏兄弟的计谋报告给朝廷，请求不要按常规授予官职。
English: Wasn't the relocation of Hezhou City part of the strategy for today's governance of West Shuxi? Yu Yu jumped up unconsciously, grasped their hands and said, "This is exactly what Yu Yu's ambition hopes for, but I don't know how to carry it out concretely." Ran's brother replied, "There is no place in Sichuan Shuguangkou that is more successful than Diaoyu Mountain. Please move Hezhou City here. If the governor gets the right person, and the grain storage is stationed here, far better than more than a hundred thousand troops, Bashu will be preserved." Yu Yu said happily, "I always believed that you two are not

古文：诏以琎为承事郎、权发遣合州，璞为承务郎、权通判州事。
现代文：理宗诏令冉王进为承事郎，暂时发遣到合州任知州，冉璞担任承务郎，代理合州通判，管理州事。
English: Rizong Zhao ordered Ran Wangjin to be the secretary, and temporarily sent Ran to Hezhou to serve as the secretary of Hezhou, and Ran Yu to serve as the secretary, acting as the secretary of Hezhou, and managing state affairs.

古文：徙城之事，悉以任之。
现代文：迁徙合州城治的事情，全部委任给他们来办。
English: They were entrusted with all the affairs of the relocation and administration of Hezhou City.

古文：命下，一府皆喧然同辞以为不可。
现代文：诏令一下，合州一府都喧嚷哗然，认为这样不可行。
English: As soon as the edict was issued, all of Hezhou was in an uproar, believing that this was not feasible.

古文：玠怒曰： 城成则蜀赖以安，不成，玠独坐之，诸君无预也。 卒筑青居、大获、钓鱼、云顶、天生凡十余城，皆因山为垒，棋布星分，为诸郡治所，屯兵聚粮为必守计。
现代文：余玠发怒说 ：合州城修成则蜀地就会依赖它保证安全，不能修成，余玠将独自承担罪责，与大家没有什么关系。 最后修筑成青居、大获、钓鱼、云顶、天生等十几座城池，都依山筑成城堡，形成坚固堡垒，如星罗棋布，成为各州府的治所，屯驻军队，聚集粮食，做长期坚守的准备。
English: Yu Xuan said angrily: If Hezhou City is built, then Shu will rely on it to ensure safety. If it cannot be built, Yu Xuan will bear the guilt alone and have nothing to do with everyone. Finally, he built more than a dozen cities such as Qingju, Dahuo, Diaoyu, Genting, and Tennen, all of which were built on mountains to form castles and form strong fortresses, such as Xingluo, and became the administrative center of various state capitals, stationed troops, gathered grain, and prepared to hold out for a long time.

古文：且诛溃将以肃军令。
现代文：又杀掉溃败将帅以严肃军令。
English: He also killed the defeated general with a stern military order.

古文：又移金戎于大获，以护蜀口。
现代文：又迁移金地的戍卒于大获一带，以守护巴地的关口。
English: In addition, the gold miners were relocated to the Dafu area to guard the gate of Badi.

古文：移沔戎于青居，兴戎先驻合州旧城，移守钓鱼，共备内水。
现代文：迁移沔水一带的戍卒于青居一带，先前驻守合州旧城邑的兴地戍卒，迁移驻守钓鱼，共同守备内水。
English: The cadets stationed in the Surabaya area were relocated to the Qingju area, and the cadets stationed in the Xingdi area, who were previously stationed in the old city of Hezhou, were relocated to the fishing area to jointly guard the inland water.

古文：移利戎于云顶，以备外水。
现代文：迁移利州戍卒到云顶，守备外水。
English: Relocate the Lishu soldiers to Genting to guard the outer waters.

古文：于是如臂使指，气势联络。
现代文：如此设防，有如以臂使指，联络一体，气势磅礴。
English: Thus fortified, it is as if the arm is used to point the finger, the connection is one, and the momentum is tremendous.

古文：又属嘉定俞兴开屯田于成都，蜀以富实。
现代文：又嘱令嘉定人俞兴在成都府路一带开垦屯田，蜀地因此富足殷实。
English: He also ordered the people of Jiading to reclaim the abandoned fields around Chengdu Prefectural Road. As a result, Shu became rich and prosperous.

古文：十年冬，玠率诸将巡边，直捣兴元，大元兵与之大战。
现代文：淳十年冬天，余玠率各位将领巡视边防，直捣兴元，大元的士兵与之发生大战。
English: In the winter of the 10th year of the Jun era, Yu Yu led the generals to inspect the border defense, and directly attacked the soldiers of Xingyuan and Dayuan, leading to a large-scale war.

古文：十二年，又大战于嘉定。
现代文：十二年，又在嘉定与元兵打了一次大仗。
English: Twelve years later, he again fought a big battle with Yuan soldiers in Jiading.

古文：初，利司都统王夔素残悍，号 王夜叉 ，恃功骄恣，桀骜裯受节度，所至劫掠，每得富家，穴箕加颈，四面然箕，谓之 蟆蚀月 ，以弓弦系鼻下，高悬于格，谓之 错系喉 ，缚人两股，以木交压，谓之 干榨油 ，以至用醋灌鼻、恶水灌耳口等，毒虐非一，以胁取金帛，稍不遂意，即死其手，蜀人患苦之。
现代文：开始的时候，利州路司都统王夔平素残暴骄悍，号称 王夜叉 ，他恃功骄横，恣意妄为，桀骜不驯，不受节制，所至抢劫掠夺，每次遇到富豪之家，把中间有洞的竹箕加于富人的颈上，弄成四面像箕的样子，称之为 蛤蟆蚀月 ；用弓弦系于鼻子下，高悬于格上，称之为 错系喉 ；缚住人的两条腿，用木头交相压在上面，称之为 干榨油 ，以至于用酸醋灌人的鼻孔，恶臭的脏水灌人的耳朵、嘴巴等，采用多种办法狠毒地虐待别人，以此勒索别人的金银财帛，稍不如自己的意思，就弄断别人的手。
English: At the beginning, the ruler of Lizhou Road, Wang Shou, was cruel and arrogant. He was known as Wang Yasha. He was arrogant, arbitrary, unruly, and unrestrained, so he robbed and plundered. Every time he encountered a rich man's house, he put a bamboo pole with a hole in the middle on the rich man's neck, making it look like a beak on all sides. It was called "eroding the moon"; he tied a bowstring under his nose and hung it high on the lattice, calling it "incorrectly tying the throat"; he tied the man's two legs and pressed it on top with wood

古文：且悉敛部将倅马以自入，将战，乃高其估卖与之。
现代文：巴蜀的人以此为患，感到很痛苦。又把部将、副官的马全部占为己有，将要打仗的时候，就把马的价格弄得高高的卖给他们。
English: The people of Bashu suffered from this and felt great pain. They also took possession of all the horses of their commanders and aides-de-camp, and when war was imminent, they sold the horses to them at exorbitant prices.

古文：朝廷虽知其不法，在远不能诘也。
现代文：朝廷虽然知道他不守法律，但因远隔朝廷，朝廷也不能诘问、处罚他。
English: Although the court knew that he did not abide by the law, because he was far away from the court, the court could not interrogate or punish him.

古文：大帅处分，少不嗛其意，则百计挠之，使不得有所为。
现代文：大将帅处理他，稍微不合乎他的意思，就千方百计地阻挠将帅的行动，使他不能有所作为。
English: If the general manager does not agree with him, he will do everything possible to obstruct the general manager's actions, so that he can not make a difference.

古文：玠至嘉定，夔帅所部兵迎谒，才赢弱二百人。
现代文：余玠到嘉定的时候，王夔率领他的部下、士兵去迎接、拜谒余玠，总共才二百多名老弱残瘦士兵。
English: When Yu Han arrived in Jiading, Wang Xi led his subordinates and soldiers to meet and pay homage to Yu Han, a total of only more than two hundred old and weak soldiers.

古文：玠曰： 久闻都统兵精，今疲敝若此，殊不称所望。 夔对曰： 夔兵非不精，所以不敢即见者，恐惊从人耳。 顷之，班声如雷，江水如沸，声止，圆阵即合，旗帜精明，器械森然，沙上之人弥望若林立，无一人敢乱行者。
现代文：余玠说 ：早就听说王都统的士兵精干，现在疲敝、残弱成这个样子，与别人所传说的极不相称，不合乎人们对你的厚望。 王夔回答说： 王夔的士兵不是不精干，之所以不敢来见您，是担心惊吓了您的随从人员。 不一会儿，集合的声音如响雷，就像沸腾的江水，声音一停止，队伍就全部摆好了阵势，集合完毕，旗帜猎猎，士卒精明强干，武器森然严整，站在沙土上的人看起来也像林立的大树一样稳固，没有一个人敢有不合乎规范的行为。
English: Yu Yao said: I have long heard that Wang Du Tong's soldiers were capable, but now they are tired and weak in this way, which is extremely incongruous with what others have said, and does not meet people's high expectations of you. Wang Yao replied: Wang Yao's soldiers are not incompetent, and the reason why they dare not come to see you is that they are afraid of scaring your entourage. Soon, the sound of the gathering was like thunder, like boiling river water, and as soon as the sound stopped, the team was all set up and assembled, the flag was hunting, the soldiers were clever and strong, the weapons were well-trained,

古文：舟中皆战掉失色，而玠自若也。
现代文：船上的人都颤抖失色，表现出害怕的样子，而余玠则神态自若。
English: The people on the boat were trembling and scared, but Yu Yao looked confident.

古文：徐命吏班赏有差。夔退谓人曰： 儒者中乃有此人！ 
现代文：接着，按次序命令将吏分别授予赏赐，王夔在退散后对别人说 ：儒学之士中还有这样有胆有识的人。 
English: Next, he ordered the officials to be awarded separately in order. After they dispersed, Wang Yao said to others, "There are still such courageous and insightful people among Confucian scholars."

古文：玠久欲诛夔，独患其握重兵居外，恐轻动危蜀，谋于亲将杨成，成曰： 夔在蜀久，所部兵精，前时大帅，夔皆势出其右，意不止此也。
现代文：余玠很想杀掉王夔，唯独担忧他握有重兵在外，恐怕轻举妄动会危及到蜀地的安全，就与他的亲信将领杨成商量，杨成说 ：王夔在蜀地很久，他所属的部下兵卒精练强干，从前蜀地的大帅，王夔的势力都比他们强大，其意思还不只如此。
English: Yu Qian really wanted to kill Wang Qian. However, he was worried that Wang Qian had a large number of soldiers at his disposal. He was afraid that any rash move would endanger the security of Shu. So he consulted with his trusted general Yang Cheng. Yang Cheng said: Wang Qian has been in Shu for a long time, his subordinates are strong and capable, and he was once the general of Shu. Wang Qian's power is stronger than theirs, and that's not all he meant.

古文：视侍郎为文臣，必不肯甘心从令，今纵弗诛，养成其势。
现代文：他还看您余侍郎是文臣，一定不肯心甘情愿地听从命令，现在放纵他不杀，待养成更大的势力，然后去处罚他，一行动，西蜀之地就危险了。 
English: He also sees that you, Yu Jiulang, are a scholar and must be unwilling to willingly obey orders. If you indulge him now, he will not kill you. If you wait for him to become more powerful, then you should punish him. If you act, the land of Xishuo will be in danger.

古文：后一举足，西蜀危矣。 玠曰： 我欲诛之久矣，独患其党与众，未发耳。 成曰： 侍郎以夔在蜀久，有威名，孰与吴氏？
现代文：余玠说： 我想杀他已经很久了，唯独担心他的党羽很多，所以没有采取行动。 杨成说： 余侍郎因为王夔在蜀地很久，有威赫的名声，怎能与蜀地有威势的吴氏相比？
English: "I've wanted to kill him for a long time, but I didn't take action because I was worried about his many followers," said Yu Qi. Yang Cheng said, "Because Wang Hui has been in Shu for a long time and has a reputation as a great man, how can Yu Ji Rong compare with the powerful Wu clan in Shu?"

古文：夔固弗若也。
现代文：王夔根本就不如吴氏。
English: Wang Yao is not as good as the Wu clan.

古文：夫吴氏当中兴危难之时，能百战以保蜀，传之四世，恩威益张，根本益固，蜀人知有吴氏而不知有朝廷。
现代文：吴氏兄弟当中兴危难的时候，能身经百战，保卫蜀地的安全，一共传了四代，恩德威势扩展至很广，在蜀地的根基也更加巩固，蜀地人知道有吴氏而不清楚有朝廷。
English: When the Wu brothers were in the midst of a crisis, they were able to go through a hundred wars and defend the security of Shu. In total, they have been passed down for four generations. Ndebele's influence has expanded to a very wide range, and the foundation in Shu has become more solid. Shu people know the Wu clan, but they are not clear about the imperial court.

古文：一旦曦为叛逆，诸将诛之如取孤豚。
现代文：一旦当吴曦叛变为逆贼，各位将领杀他就像捉拿、宰杀一只猪一样。
English: Once Wu Xi turns traitor, you will hunt him down and kill him just like you would hunt down and slaughter a pig.

古文：况夔无吴氏之功，而有曦之逆心，恃豨突之勇，敢慢法度，纵兵残民，奴视同列，非有吴氏得人之固也。
现代文：况且，王夔还没有吴氏兄弟那样的功劳，而却有吴曦那样的叛逆之心，依仗像猪那种唐突的莽撞行为，敢于违犯、亵渎国家的法律，纵容士兵残害民众，待同事官吏如奴婢，没有吴氏那样得人心以固根本。
English: Moreover, Wang Hui did not have the merit of the Wu brothers, but he had the rebellious heart of Wu Xi, relying on the abrupt and reckless behavior like a pig, daring to violate and blaspheme the laws of the country, conniving soldiers to brutalize the people, and treating fellow officials like slaves. He did not win the hearts and minds of the people with a firm foundation like the Wu clan.

古文：今诛之，一夫力耳，待其发而取之，难矣。 玠意遂决，夜召夔计事，潜以成代领其众，夔才离营，而新将已单骑入矣，将士皆愕眙相顾，不知所为。
现代文：现在杀了他，只要一个人的力量就可以了；如果等到他发动叛乱时再来杀他，那就难了。 余玠于是下定了决心要杀掉他，晚上，召集王夔来商量事情，暗中以杨成来代替他统领部众，王夔刚刚离开军营，而新任的将领已一个人乘马进入了王的军帐，将士们都惊愕相顾，不知道做什么好。
English: To kill him now would only require the strength of one person; to wait until he started a rebellion to kill him again would be difficult. Therefore, Yu Yu made up his mind to kill him. In the evening, he called Wang Hui to discuss the matter and secretly replaced him with Yang Cheng to lead the troops. Wang Hui had just left the military camp, and the newly appointed general had already entered the king's military account on horseback. The soldiers were stunned and did not know what to do.

古文：成以帅指譬晓之，遂相率拜贺，夔至，斩之。
现代文：杨成以主帅的身份指挥将士并说明原委，于是互相拜谒祝贺。王夔刚到，就被杀了。
English: Yang Cheng, as the head coach, commanded the players and explained the original committee, so they bowed to each other and congratulated each other. Wang Yao had just arrived and was killed.

古文：成因察其所与为恶者数人，稍稍以法诛之。
现代文：杨成根据询察，把几个与王夔勾结一起作恶多端的人，根据法律一个个地杀了。
English: According to Yang Cheng's investigation, he killed several people who colluded with Wang Yao to commit various crimes one by one in accordance with the law.

古文：乃荐成为文州刺史。
现代文：于是，余玠推荐杨成担任文州刺史。
English: As a result, Yu Qian recommended Yang Cheng to serve as the chief historian of Wenzhou.

古文：戎帅欲举统制姚世安为代，玠素欲革军中举代之敝，以三千骑至云顶山下，遣都统金某往代世安，世安闭关不纳。且有危言，然常疑玠图己。
现代文：戍地将帅想推举统制姚世安来接替，余玠平素就想革除军中举代的弊端，令三千骑兵到云顶山下，遣都统金某去代替姚世安，姚世安守住关隘不接受，又有怨言，然而又常怀疑余玠图谋吞并自己。
English: The commander-in-chief wanted to promote the commander-in-chief Yao Shian to succeed him, and Yu Yu wanted to get rid of the drawbacks of generalship in the army, so he ordered three thousand cavalry to the foot of Mount Genting and sent the commander-in-chief Jin Mou to replace Yao Shian. Yao Shian did not accept to stay in Guanxiao, and there were complaints, but he often suspected Yu Yu of plotting to annex himself.

古文：属丞相谢方叔家子侄自永康避地云顶，世安厚结之，求方叔为援。
现代文：有丞相谢方叔家的子侄从永康避居到云顶，姚世安与他有着深厚的交往，请求谢方叔援助他。
English: There was a nephew of the Minister of War, Uncle Xie Fang, who had fled from Yongkang to Genting. Yao Shian had a deep relationship with him and asked Uncle Xie Fang to help him.

古文：方叔因倡言玠失利戎之心，非我调停，且旦夕有变，又阴嗾世安密求玠之短，陈于帝前。
现代文：谢方叔因此诉陈余玠大失利州戍人之心，如果不是他调停，就会很快发生变乱，又暗地里嗾使姚世安秘密地寻求余玠的短处，在皇帝理宗面前陈说。
English: As a result, Uncle Xie Fang sued Chen Yuxuan and lost the hearts of the people of Zhoushan. If it were not for his mediation, there would soon be turmoil. He also secretly ordered Yao Shian to secretly seek out the shortcomings of Yu Yuxuan and tell Chen in front of Emperor Lizong.

古文：于是世安与玠抗，玠郁郁不乐。
现代文：于是姚世安与余玠相抗衡，余玠因此郁郁不乐。
English: As a result, Yao Shian competed with Yu Xi, leaving Yu Xi unhappy.

古文：宝祐元年，闻有召命，愈不自安，一夕暴下卒，或谓仰药死。
现代文：宝元年，听说有召他回朝的命令，自觉特别不安心，一天晚上得暴病而死，有的说他因为吃药而逝。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, when he heard that there was an order to call him back to the imperial court, he felt very uneasy. One night, he died of a violent illness. Some said that he died because of taking medicine.

古文：蜀之人莫不悲慕如失父母。
现代文：蜀地的人众没有谁不悲哀、仰慕，有如失去了自己的父母。
English: There is no one in Shu who does not mourn and admire him, as if he had lost his parents.

古文：玠自入蜀，进华文阁待制，赐金带，权兵部尚书，进徽猷阁学士，升大使，又进龙图阁学士、端明殿学士，及召，拜资政殿学士，恩例视执政。
现代文：余玠自从入蜀开始，进升华文阁待制，赏赐金带，代理兵部尚书，进升徽猷阁学士，升任大使，又进升为龙图阁学士、端明殿学士，又召他拜任为资政殿学士，恩准例视执政。
English: From the time he entered Shu, Yu Han was promoted to the Chinese Academy of Letters, was awarded a gold belt, became the acting military commander, was promoted to the Hui Academy of Letters, was promoted to the rank of ambassador, was promoted to the Longtu Academy of Letters, was promoted to the Duanming Academy of Letters, and was appointed to the Academy of Finance and Administration. He was considered to be in power.

古文：其卒也，帝辍朝，特赠五官。
现代文：到他死时，理宗皇帝为他辍朝悼念，特别赠与五官。
English: At the time of his death, Emperor Rizong mourned for him leaving the imperial court and specially presented him with five officials.

古文：以监察御史陈大方言夺职。
现代文：因监察御史陈大方的言论而削夺职务。
English: He lost his position because of the remarks of the inspector general, Chen Dafang.

古文：六年，复之。
现代文：宝六年，被恢复职务。
English: After six years, he was reinstated.

古文：玠之治蜀也，任都统张实治军旅，安抚王惟忠治财赋，监簿朱文炳接宾客，皆有常度。
现代文：余玠治理蜀地的时候，任都统张实治理军队事务，安抚王惟忠治理财赋税收，监簿朱文炳负责接待宾客，都有一定的规章制度。
English: When Yu Qian was in charge of Shu, there were certain rules and regulations in place to govern the military affairs, to pacify Wang Weizhong, to govern the taxation of wealth, and to receive guests.

古文：至于修学养士，轻徭以宽民力，薄征以通商贾。
现代文：至于修习学业，抚养寒士，轻徭薄赋，以宽民力，对于商贾关税采取薄敛之策以鼓励通商。
English: As for pursuing studies, raising the cold-blooded, light-hearted and thin-skinned, with broad people's strength, for merchants and tariffs to adopt a policy of restraint to encourage trade.

古文：蜀既富实，乃罢京湖之饷；边关无警，又撤东南之戍。
现代文：蜀地已经富实的时候，于是罢免京湖的粮饷；边关没有战事紧急的警报，又撤除了东南的戍卒。
English: When Shu was already rich, he removed the granary from Jinghu; there was no warning of an imminent war at the border, and he removed the pawns in the southeast.

古文：自宝庆以来，蜀阃未有能及之者。
现代文：从宝庆年间以来，蜀地的官吏没有谁能达到他治蜀的程度。
English: Since the Baoqing era, no official in Shou has been able to govern Shou to the same extent.

古文：惜其遽以太平自诧，进蜀锦蜀笺，过于文饰。
现代文：可惜他匆忙以太平之世来自夸，向朝廷进献蜀锦蜀笺，过于文饰。
English: Unfortunately, he was in a hurry to boast of a peaceful world and presented the imperial court with a lot of ornaments, which were too decorative.

古文：久假便宜之权，不顾嫌疑，昧于勇退，遂来谗贼之口；而又置机捕官，虽足以廉得事情，然寄耳目于群小，虚实相半，故人多怀疑惧。
现代文：长期凭借手中拥有的权力，不顾及嫌疑，不知激流勇退，于是招致贼人谗言；而又设置自己掌握的秘密捕官，虽然足以使政事清廉，然而又依靠许多小人的耳目监视，以致虚实参半，故人们多存疑问、恐惧。
English: For a long time, relying on the power in his hands, regardless of suspicion, he did not know how to retreat bravely, so he invited criticism from thieves; and he set up a secret arresting officer under his own control, although it was enough to make politics clean, but he relied on the eyes and ears of many villains to monitor, so that the truth was mixed, so people had more doubts and fears.

古文：至于世安拒命，玠威名顿挫，赍志以没。
现代文：至于姚世安拒不受命，余玠的威势名声顿受挫折，以致志向泯灭遂而死去。
English: As for Yao Shi'an's refusal to accept the order, Yu Xi's prestige suffered a setback, so that his ambition was crushed and he died.

古文：有子曰如孙，取 当如孙仲谋 之义，遭论改师忠，历大理寺丞，为贾似道所杀。
现代文：余玠有儿子叫如孙，取 当如孙仲谋 的含义，遭议论改名师忠，历任大理寺丞，被贾似道所杀。
English: Yu Yao had a son named Rouson, which was interpreted to mean the son of Rouson Chungmoo. He was rumored to have changed his name to Shizhong, and he was killed by Jia Li Dao.

