古文：苏秦谓齐王曰： 齐、秦立为两帝，王以天下为尊秦乎？且尊齐乎？ 
现代文：苏秦对齐闵王说： 齐国、秦国分别称帝后，大王认为天下是尊重秦国还是齐国？ 
English: Su Qin said to King Qizong, "Qi and Qin are called empresses, respectively. Does the king think that the world respects Qin or Qi?

古文：王曰： 尊秦。 
现代文：齐王说： 尊重秦国。 
English: Shao Wang said: It is best to respect Qin.

古文： 释帝则天下爱齐乎？
现代文：苏秦说： 如果放弃帝号，那天下人是爱戴秦国还是齐国呢？ 
English: Su Qin said: If you give up the title of emperor, will the people of the world love Qin or Qi?

古文：且爱秦乎？ 
现代文：齐王说： 爱戴齐国而憎恨秦国。 
English: King Qi said: It is best to love Qi and hate Qin.

古文：王曰： 爱齐而憎秦。  两帝立，约伐赵，孰与伐宋之利也？ 
现代文：苏秦说： 齐、秦两国称帝，相约讨伐赵国，和讨伐宋国相比哪个更有利？ 
English: Su Qin said, "Qi and Qin both became emperors, and they agreed to fight against Zhao. Compared to fighting against Song, which is more advantageous?"

古文：对曰： 夫约然与秦为帝，而天下独尊秦而轻齐；齐释帝，则天下爱齐而憎秦；伐赵不如伐宋之利。
现代文：齐王说： 不如讨伐宋国。 苏秦说： 所谓条约是这样，可是如果我们与秦国并立帝号，天下各国只会尊重秦国而轻视齐国；如果齐国放弃帝号，那么天下各国就会爱戴齐国而憎恨秦国；讨伐赵国不如讨饯宋国有利。
English: Su Qin said: The so-called treaty is like this, but if we establish the title of emperor with Qin, all countries in the world will only respect Qin and despise Qin; if Qin abandons the title of emperor, then all countries in the world will love Qin and hate Qin; it is better to fight Zhao than to fight Song.

古文：故臣愿王明释帝，以就天下；倍约傧秦，勿使争重；而王以其间举宋。
现代文：所以臣下希望大王表面放弃帝号，来靠近天下诸侯；违背盟约排斥秦国，不让他们和我们争夺重权；然而大王可以趁此机会攻占宋国。
English: Therefore, the vassals hoped that the great king would give up the imperial title and come closer to the princes of the world; violate the covenant to exclude Qin and not let them compete with us for power; however, the great king could take advantage of this opportunity to conquer Song.

古文：夫有宋则卫之阳城危；有淮北则楚之东国危；有济西则赵之河东危；有阴、平陆则梁门不启。
现代文：占据了宋国，那么卫国的濮阳就危险了；占据了淮水之尊匕，那么楚国的东部地区就危险了。占有了济水以西的土地，那么赵国的边邑就危险了；占有了阴地、平陆，那么魏国都城太梁的门就不能打开了。
English: If you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger in Fenyang, the defense of the country; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in danger; if you occupy the Song Dynasty, then you will be in

古文：故释帝而贰之以伐宋之事，则国重而名尊，燕、楚以形服，天下不敢不听，此汤、武之举也。
现代文：因此我们放弃帝号以进攻宋国表明与秦国怀有二心，那么齐国就会被重视而名声也会尊贵。燕国、楚国因为形势归服，天下诸侯不敢不听从我们，这是商汤、周武王的举动。
English: Therefore, if we give up the title of emperor and attack Song to show that we have a double heart with Qin, then Qi will be valued and its reputation will be noble. Because of the situation, Yan and Chu surrendered, and the princes of the world did not dare to disobey us. This was the action of Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu.

古文：敬秦以为名，而后使天下憎之，此所谓以卑易尊者也!
现代文：名义上尊重秦国，然后使天下各国憎恨他们，这就是所说的用卑贱换取尊贵的办法呀！
English: Nominally respecting Qin, and then making all the countries in the world hate them, this is the so-called method of exchanging lowliness for nobility!

古文：愿王之熟虑之也！ 
现代文：希望大王仔细考虑这件事！ 
English: I hope the king will consider this matter carefully!

