古文：公孙弘，菑川薛人也。
现代文：公孙弘，菑川国薛县人。
English: Gongsun Hong, a native of Xue County, Sichuan Province.

古文：少时为狱吏，有罪，免。
现代文：年轻时作过狱吏。因犯了罪而被免职。
English: As a young man, he was a prison officer. He was dismissed for committing a crime.

古文：家贫，牧豕海上。
现代文：由于家中贫寒，在海边放猪为生。
English: His family is poor, and the only thing they can afford is to go to the seaside to herd pigs.

古文：年四十余，乃学《春秋》杂说。
现代文：四十多岁时才开始研习《春秋》及各家的杂论。
English: It was only when he was in his forties that he began to study "Spring and Autumn" and the miscellaneous theories of various families.

古文：武帝初即位，招贤良文学士，是时，弘年六十，以贤良征为博士。
现代文：汉武帝刚刚即位时，招选贤良文学之士，此时公孙弘六十岁，以贤良文学的身份作了博士。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu's accession to the throne, scholars of fine literature were recruited. At this time, Gongsun Hong, sixty years old, became a doctor of fine literature.

古文：使匈奴，还报，不合意，上怒，以为不能，弘乃移病免归。
现代文：他出使匈奴，返朝汇报，不合皇上的心意，武帝很生气，认为他无能，于是公孙弘上书称病，免官回到故里。
English: He dispatched the Xiongnu to report back to the emperor, which did not meet the emperor's wishes. Emperor Wu was very angry and thought he was incompetent, so Gongsun Hong wrote a letter saying that he was ill and was dismissed to return to his hometown.

古文：元光五年，复征贤良文学，菑川国复推上弘。
现代文：元光五年，汉武帝再次征选贤良文学之士，董卫回又一次推荐公逐丛。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Guang, Emperor Hanwu once again selected virtuous literary men, and Dong Wei once again recommended the public to follow the bunch.

古文：弘谢曰： 前已尝西，用不能罢，愿更选。 
现代文：公垂丛推辞说： 过去我曾西去入京，因为无能被免职，希望另选他人。 
English: "In the past, I went to the West to enter Beijing because I was dismissed for incompetence, and I hoped that someone else would be elected," he said.

古文：国人固推弘，弘至太常。
现代文：但国人坚持荐举他，于是公孙弘来到太常处。
English: However, the Chinese people resolutely voted for Gongsunhiro, and Gongsunhiro ended up in Taizhong.

古文：上策诏诸儒：
现代文：皇上下韶书策问众儒生：
English: The imperial edict asked all the Confucian scholars:

古文：制曰：盖闻上古至治，画衣冠，异章服，而民不犯；阴阳和，五谷登，六畜蕃，甘露降，风雨时，嘉禾兴，朱草生，山不童，泽不涸；麟凤在郊薮，龟龙游于沼，河洛出图书；父不丧子，兄不哭弟；北发渠搜，南抚交阯，舟车所至，人迹所及，跂行喙息，咸得其宜。
现代文：制书策写道：听说远古时代政治完善，对罪犯的惩罚衹是在其衣帽上作出标志，让他们穿特殊的衣服，而百姓竟不犯法。那时阴阳和协，五谷丰登，六畜繁衍，天降甘露，风调雨顺，长出谷粒丰满的稻子，出现了红色的瑞草，山上覆盖着密林茂草，湖泽也不干涸。城郊湖泽中出没着麒麟、凤凰。池沼中游弋着龟龙，河出图，洛出书。儿子不会先父亲而亡，弟弟也不会死于兄长之前。那时北至渠搜，南到交肚，衹要是车船能够到达、人能够走到的地方，一切生灵都各得其所。
English: "I heard that in ancient times, politics was perfect, and the punishment for criminals was to make a mark on their caps, so that they could wear special clothes, but the people did not break the law," wrote the book maker. At that time, the yin and yang were harmonious, the five grains were abundant, the six animals were proliferating, the dew was falling from the sky, the wind and rain were favorable, rice with plump grains was growing, red fresh grass appeared, the mountains were covered with dense forests of grasses, and the lakes did not dry up. There were unicorns and phoenixes in the lakes on the outskirts of the city. There were turtle dragons

古文：朕甚嘉之，今何道而臻乎此？
现代文：我很钦慕那个时代，现在如何治国才能达到这种境界呢？
English: I admire that era very much. How can we achieve this level of governance now?

古文：子大夫修先圣之术，明君臣之义，讲论洽闻，有声乎当世，敢问子大夫：天人之道，何所本始？
现代文：诸位研习先圣的法度，通晓君臣尊卑大义，议论起来很有见识，在当今都是很有名声的，敢问诸位：天人之道，最根本的是什么？
English: You have studied the laws of the ancient sages, you are familiar with the principle of the superiority and inferiority of kings and subjects, you are very insightful in your discussions, and you are very famous today. I dare to ask you: What is the most fundamental way of heaven and earth?

古文：吉凶之效，安所期焉？
现代文：吉凶征验，如何去预料呢？
English: How can you predict the outcome of a recruitment test?

古文：禹、汤水旱，厥咎何由？
现代文：大禹、商汤时发生了水旱灾害，他们的过失是什么呢？
English: What was the fault of Dayu and Shangtang when the floods and droughts occurred?

古文：仁、义、礼、知四者之宜，当安设施？
现代文：应该用什么方法来完善和协调仁、义、礼、智这四个方面？
English: What method should be used to perfect and coordinate the four aspects of benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, and wisdom?

古文：属统垂业，物鬼变化，天命之符，废兴何如？
现代文：帝统的继承延续、生死的变化无常、上天授命的征兆，这一切的兴与衰是如何发生的？
English: How did the rise and fall of imperial succession, the fickleness of life and death, and the signs of divine appointment come about?

古文：天文、地理、人事之纪，子大夫习焉。
现代文：天文、地理、人事的法则，花是诸位所研究的。
English: Astronomy, geography, the laws of human affairs, flowers are all studied by you.

古文：其悉意正议，详具其对，著之于篇，朕将亲览焉，靡有所隐。
现代文：请把你们认为是论述全面，合乎正道的，详细写成文章，我将亲自阅览，不要有所隐瞒。
English: Please write a detailed article on what you think is a comprehensive and correct exposition. I will read it myself, so please don't hide anything.

古文：弘对曰：
现代文：公孙弘回答说：
English: Gongsun Hong replied:

古文：臣闻上古尧、舜之时，不贵爵常而民劝善，不重刑罚而民不犯，躬率以正而遇民信也；末世贵爵厚赏而民不劝，深刑重罚而奸不止，其上不正，遇民不信也。
现代文：我听说远古尧、舜的时代，不重视爵位的封赏，百姓却努力向善；不崇尚施用严刑重罚，百姓却不轻易犯法，这是因为尧舜自身行正，对待百姓有信义。衰亡的时代。重视封爵，厚加赏赐，百姓却并不因此受到勉励而向善；施以严刑重罚，却不能制止邪恶的事情发生，这是因为君王自身不正，对待百姓没有信义。
English: I have heard that in the times of the ancient emperors and empresses, they did not attach importance to the award of peerage, but the people tried to do good; they did not advocate the use of severe punishment and heavy punishment, but the people did not easily break the law. This is because the emperors themselves were upright and treated the people with loyalty. The era of decline and fall. They attached importance to the knighthood and rewarded the people, but the people were not encouraged to do good; they imposed severe punishment and heavy punishment, but they could not stop the evil things from happening. This is because the king himself was unjust and treated the people without loyalty.

古文：夫厚赏重刑未足以劝善而禁非，必信而已矣。
现代文：必须对待百姓有信义，否则，丰厚的奖赏、酷烈的刑罚，也不足以鼓励良善而禁止犯罪。
English: People must be treated fairly, otherwise, rich rewards and harsh punishments will not be enough to encourage goodness and prohibit crime.

古文：是故因能任官，则分职治；去无用之言，则事情得；不作无用之器，即赋敛省；不夺民时，不妨民力，则百姓富；有德者进，无德者退，则朝廷尊；有功者上，无功者下，则群臣逡；罚当罪，则奸邪止；赏当贤，则臣下劝：凡此八者，治民之本也。
现代文：因此，按才干高低授予宫职，官吏就能各掌其职而达到政治清明；不听无用的议论，那么事情就可以办成；不做无用的器物，就可以减少赋敛；不耽误农作之时，不损害民力，那么百姓就能富裕起来；提拔有德行的人，贬斥无德的人，那么朝廷就能够树立起威信；提升有功的人，贬退无功劳的人，那么群臣就不会竞相争夺权位；犯罪的得到恰如其分的惩罚，那么奸诈邪恶的事情就会被制止；贤良之人得到适当的奖赏，那么官吏们就会受到勉励。总括追八条，是治理百姓的根本方略。
English: Therefore, by assigning palace posts according to ability, officials can each assume their duties and achieve political clarity; if they do not listen to useless discussions, then things can be done; if they do not make useless utensils, they can reduce austerity; if they do not delay agricultural work and do not harm the people's strength, then the people can become rich; if they promote virtuous people and disparage those who are not virtuous, then the imperial court can establish prestige; if they promote meritorious people and disparage those who are not meritorious, then the courtiers will not compete for power; if criminals are properly punished, then treacherous and evil things will be stopped; if

古文：故民者，业之即不争，理得则不怨，有礼则不暴，爱之则亲上，此有天下之急者也。
现代文：百姓各得其业就不会相争，使他们能各申其理就不会产生抱怨，待之以礼，百姓就不会有暴慢，爱民如子，百姓就会对皇上信任而亲近，这些是作为天子的当务之急。
English: The common people will not quarrel if they each get their own inheritance, they will not complain if they each get their own way, they will be polite, they will not be arrogant, they will love the people like children, and they will trust and be close to the emperor. These are the urgent tasks of the emperor as the son of heaven.

古文：故法不远义，则民服而不离；和不远礼，则民亲而不暴。
现代文：所以法度不违背义，百姓才会信服而不叛离；所倡导的礼仪而不违于礼，百姓才会亲附而不暴慢。
English: Therefore, if the laws and regulations do not violate righteousness, the people will be convinced and not rebel; if the etiquette advocated does not violate etiquette, the people will be attached and not arrogant.

古文：故法之所罚，义之所去也；和之所赏，礼之所取也。
现代文：所以，法制所惩罚的，也是义所不容的；提倡奖励的，一定是礼所崇尚的。
English: Therefore, what is punished by the legal system is also unacceptable by righteousness; what is advocated as a reward must be advocated by propriety.

古文：礼义者，民之所服也，而赏罚顺之，则民不犯禁矣。故画衣冠，异章服，而民不犯者，此道素行也。
现代文：百姓信服的是礼义，如果赏罚都顺应礼义，那么百姓就不会犯法：远古时代仅仅用 画衣冠，异章服 这种象征性的惩罚，便使得百姓不犯法，就是因为那时一贯遵行礼义。
English: The people believe in propriety, and if rewards and punishments are in accordance with propriety, then the people will not violate the law: in ancient times, only the symbolic punishment of "painting clothes and wearing different clothes" made the people not violate the law, because they always followed propriety at that time.

古文：臣闻之，气同则从，声比则应。
现代文：我听说，志趣相投才能相随，声音相近才能相应和。
English: I have heard that like-minded people can only follow each other, and similar voices can only be matched.

古文：今人主和德于上，百姓和合于下，故心和则气和，气和则形和，形和则声和，声和则天地之和应矣。
现代文：现在皇上实行德政于上，百姓同心同德于下，因此同心同德便会志向一致，志向一致便会行动统一，行动统一便会有协调的言论。言论协调那么天地之间的和合便会与之相应和。
English: Now that the Emperor is carrying out the policy of virtue at the top, and the people are acting with the same spirit and the same virtue at the bottom, therefore, the same spirit and the same virtue will result in the same aspiration, the same aspiration will result in the same action, and the same action will result in a coordinated speech.

古文：故阴阳和，风雨时，甘露降，五谷登，六畜蕃，嘉禾兴，朱草生，山不童，泽不涸，此和之至也。
现代文：阴阳和协，风调雨顺，天降甘露，五谷丰登，六畜繁衍，长出谷粒丰满的嘉稻，生出红色的瑞草，山林茂密，湖泽水满，这些都是和协之至所产生的景象。
English: Yin and yang harmonize, wind and rain harmonize, the sky drops nectar, five grains are abundant, six animals reproduce, rich grains of rice grow, red grasses grow, mountains and forests are dense, lakes and lakes are full of water, these are the scenes produced by the harmony.

古文：故形和则无疾，无疾则不夭，故父不丧子，兄不哭弟。
现代文：身体协调不会生病，没有疾病便不会夭折，父亲不会失去儿子，哥哥也不会因为弟弟早亡而哭泣。
English: Physical coordination will not get sick, without disease will not die prematurely, the father will not lose his son, and the brother will not cry because of the early death of his brother.

古文：德配天地，明并日月，则麟凤至，龟龙在郊，河出图，洛出书，远方之君莫不说义，奉币而来朝，此和之极也。
现代文：圣王的恩德天高地广，与日月同辉，于是吉祥的麒麟、凤凰便出现了，郊外湖泽也会出现吉祥的龟、龙，河出图，洛出书，远方的国家无不钦慕，派遣使者，携带着礼品前来臣服觐见，这是和协的顶点了。
English: The benevolence of the holy king is as wide as the sky and as bright as the sun and the moon, so the auspicious unicorn and the phoenix appeared, and the auspicious turtle, dragon, river map, and book of Luo would appear in the suburban lakes. The distant countries all admired and sent envoys, bringing gifts to come to submit and meet. This was the culmination of the reconciliation.

古文：臣闻之，仁者爱也，义者宜也，礼者所履也，智者术之原也。
现代文：进退有分寸，尊卑有所区别，称为礼。独揽生杀之权，开通堵塞之路，权衡轻重缓急，探讨得失之道，使周围及远方的真实、伪诈之事都暴露出来，称为术。
English: Advancing and retreating are measured, and there is a difference between superiority and inferiority, which is called etiquette. Solely seizing the power of life and death, opening the blocked road, weighing the priorities, exploring the ways of gain and loss, and exposing the true and false things around and far away, is called art.

古文：致利除害，兼爱无私，谓之仁；明是非，立可否，谓之义；进退有度，尊卑有分，谓之礼；擅杀生之柄，通壅塞之涂，权轻重之数，论得失之道，使远近情伪必见于上，谓之术：凡此四者，治之本，道之用也，皆当设施，不可废也。
现代文：以上四条是治理天下的根本原则和方法，全都应制定实施，不可荒废。
English: The above four are the fundamental principles and methods of governing the world. All of them should be formulated and implemented, and should not be wasted.

古文：得其要，则天下安乐，法设而不用；不得其术，则主蔽于上，官乱于下。
现代文：掌握其要领，就会天下安乐太平，刑法虽设立，却因无人犯法而不使用；不能掌握这些方法，那么皇帝就将受到蒙蔽，官吏就会作乱。
English: If these methods are not mastered, then the emperor will be deceived and the officials will make trouble.

古文：此事之情，属统垂业之本也。
现代文：这些事情的得失利害，是继承、延续祖先业绩的根本。
English: The gains and losses of these things are the basis for inheriting and continuing the achievements of our ancestors.

古文：臣闻尧遭鸿水，使禹治之，未闻禹之有水也。
现代文：我听说，尧那个时代有洪水之灾，派去禹去治理，没有听说大禹治理天下时有水灾。
English: I heard that there was a flood disaster in that era and sent Yu to govern, but I did not hear that there was a flood disaster when Yu governed the world.

古文：若汤之旱，则桀之余烈也。
现代文：至于商汤时代的旱灾，那是夏桀的余孽造成的。
English: As for the droughts of the Shang and Tang dynasties, they were caused by the excesses of Xia Yao.

古文：桀、纣行恶，受天之罚；禹、汤积德，以王天下。
现代文：夏桀、商纣实行恶政，受到天的惩罚；大禹、商汤行善积德，因此而称王天下。
English: Xia Yao and Shang Yao carried out evil policies and were punished by heaven; Dayu and Shang Tang did good deeds and accumulated virtues, so they were called kings of the world.

古文：因此观之，天德无私亲，顺之和起，逆之害生。
现代文：由此看来，上天并无个人的亲疏好恶，顺应天德，便和协兴旺，倒行逆施，灾害就会降临。
English: From this point of view, God does not have any personal personal likes and dislikes. If you conform to God's morality, you will prosper. If you do the opposite, disasters will come.

古文：此天文、地理、人事之纪。
现代文：造就是天文、地理、人事的法则。
English: Creation is the law of astronomy, geography and human affairs.

古文：臣弘愚戆，不足以奉大对。
现代文：我愚昧鲁莽，回答皇上的策问实不胜任。
English: I'm stupid and reckless, and I'm not competent to answer the emperor's questions.

古文：时对者百余人，太常奏弘第居下。
现代文：当时对敕策的有一百多人，太常上奏对策成绩时，公孙弘位居下等。
English: At that time, there were more than a hundred people working on countermeasures. When the results of countermeasures were announced, Gongsun Hong was at the bottom.

古文：策奏，天子擢弘对为第一。
现代文：策简呈给皇帝后，天子将公孙弘的对策选拔为第一。
English: All the countermeasure articles were sent to the emperor, and Emperor Wu promoted Gongsunhong's countermeasure article to the first.

古文：召见，容貌甚丽，拜为博士，待诏金马门。
现代文：公孙弘被召入见，天子见他一表人才，于是任命为博士，待韶金马盟。
English: Gongsun Hong was summoned to the court, and the emperor saw him as a great talent, so he was appointed as a doctor, waiting for the Golden Horse League.

古文：弘复上疏曰： 陛下有先圣之位而无先圣之名，有先圣之民而无先圣之吏，是以势同而治异。
现代文：公孙弘再次上疏说： 陛下有先圣的位置而没有先圣的名声，有先圣的名声而又没有先圣的官吏，所以陛下现在所处的情势与先圣相同，但治理的结果却不一样。
English: Gongsunhong said again, "Your Majesty has the position of the first saint without the reputation of the first saint, and the reputation of the first saint without the officials of the first saint. Therefore, the situation that Your Majesty is in now is the same as that of the first saint, but the results of governance are different.

古文：先世之吏正，故其民笃；今世之吏邪，故其民薄。
现代文：过去那个时代的官吏清正，所以百姓忠实；现在的官吏贪邪，所以百姓粗鄙。
English: In the past, the officials of that era were honest, so the people were loyal; the current officials are greedy, so the people are rude.

古文：政弊而不行，令倦而不听。
现代文：有弊端的政治得不到推行，令人憎恶的法令不会被听从。
English: Bad policies will not be pursued, odious decrees will not be obeyed.

古文：夫使邪吏行弊政，用倦令治薄民，民不可得而化，此治之所以异也。
现代文：任用贪邪的官吏去推行弊政，用令人憎恶的法令去治理粗鄙的百姓，百姓不可能被教化，造就是为什么会出现不同的治理结果。
English: The appointment of greedy officials to carry out bad policies, and the use of abhorrent laws to govern the vulgar people, the people can not be educated, which is why there are different governance results.

古文：臣闻周公旦治天下，期年而变，三年而化，五年而定。
现代文：我听说周公治理天下，一年就发生了变化，三年百姓受到教化，五年便天下太平。
English: I heard that Zhou Gong governed the world. In one year, there was a change. In three years, the people were enlightened, and in five years, the world was peaceful.

古文：唯陛下之所志。 
现代文：这是陛下向往追求的。 
English: This is what His Majesty aspires to.

古文：书奏，天子以册书答曰： 问：弘称周公之治，弘之材能自视孰与周公贤？ 
现代文：奏疏呈上后，天子用册书答覆： 问：公孙弘盛赞周公之治，那么你认为自己与周公相比，谁的才能更高呢？ 
English: After the report was submitted, Tianzi replied in a handwritten letter: Q: Gongsun Hong Sheng praised Zhou Gong's rule, so who do you think is more talented than Zhou Gong?

古文：弘对曰： 愚臣浅薄，安敢比材于周公！
现代文：公孙弘回答说： 我的见识浅薄，怎么敢与周公相比！
English: Gongsun Hong replied: My knowledge is shallow, how dare I compare with Zhou Gong!

古文：虽然，愚心晓然见治道之可以然也。
现代文：虽然如此，我还是明白现在实行治道就可以达到先圣的治理境界。
English: Nevertheless, I still understand that the implementation of governance now can reach the governance level of the first saint.

古文：去虎豹马牛，禽兽之不可制者也，及其教驯服习之，至可牵持驾服，唯人之从。
现代文：虎豹马牛，这些都是难以号令的野兽，等到它们被教练驯服后，便可驾驭使用，让它听从人的命令。
English: The tiger, the leopard, the horse and the cow, these are all beasts that are difficult to command. When they are tamed by the trainer, they can be harnessed and used to make it obey human commands.

古文：臣闻揉曲术者不累日，销金石者不累月，夫人之于利害好恶，岂比禽兽木石之类哉？
现代文：我听说，数日之内燥工就可以将直木烘曲，数月之内金石便可被销熔，人对于利害的好恶认识，岂是禽兽木石所能相比的？
English: I've heard that within a few days, dryers can bake straight wood, and within a few months, gold and stone can be sold and melted. Is a person's knowledge of the likes and dislikes of interests comparable to that of animals and stones?

古文：期年而变，臣弘尚窃迟之。 
现代文：我认为，用一年时间才使国家发生变化，太慢了。 
English: I think it's too slow to change a country in a year.

古文：上异其言。
现代文：皇上对他的话很诧异。
English: The Emperor was very surprised by his words.

古文：时方通西南夷，巴、蜀苦之，诏使弘视焉。
现代文：当时刚刚与西南夷交往，巴蜀两郡苦于供奉劳作，皇上下诏派公孙弘去视察。
English: At that time, he had just made contact with the Southwest Yi, and the two counties of Bashu were struggling to provide labor, so the emperor sent Gongsun Honglu to inspect.

古文：还奏事，盛毁西南夷无所用，上不听。
现代文：回朝汇报时，他极力反对交通西南夷，认为没有用处，皇上没有听从他的意见。
English: When Gongsun Hong returned from his inspection, he reported to the emperor that it was useless to denigrate the Xuanxi Yi, and the emperor did not accept his opinion.

古文：每朝会议，开陈其端，使人主自择，不肯面折庭争。
现代文：每当朝会议政的时候，公孙弘都将自己的意见陈述出来，让皇帝自己选择，而不肯在朝堂上当面反驳、争论。
English: Whenever it was time for the Imperial Diet to make a decision, Gongsun Hong would state his own opinion and let the emperor make his own choice, rather than contradicting and arguing in front of the emperor in the Imperial Court.

古文：于是上察其行慎厚，辩论有余，习文法吏事，缘饰以儒术，上说之，一岁中至左内史。
现代文：由此皇帝看出他行为谨慎忠厚，辩论时留有余地，熟悉文书法令及官吏公务，又以儒术加以文饰，所以非常喜欢他，一年之内就将其提拔为左内史。
English: From this, the emperor saw that he was prudent and loyal in his behavior, left room for debate, was familiar with documents, laws and official duties, and decorated with Confucianism, so he liked him very much. Within a year, he was promoted to Zuo Naishi.

古文：弘奏事，有所不可，不肯庭辩。
现代文：公孙弘上朝奏事，有认为不对的事，也不当庭争辩。
English: His great-grandson, Hiroshi, reported the matter to the Imperial Court. There were things that he thought were not right, and they were not worth arguing in court.

古文：常与主爵都尉汲黯请间，黯先发之，弘推其后，上常说，所言皆听，以此日益亲贵。
现代文：他常与主爵都尉汲黯先后去见皇上，汲黯先提出问题，公孙弘随后进行推究阐述，皇上常常很高兴，听从他所说的一切，公孙弘因此而越来越受到宠信。
English: He often went to see the emperor successively with the lord and captain Kuchika. Kuchika asked questions first, and then Gongsunhiro investigated and explained. The emperor was often pleased and listened to everything he said. Gongsunhiro was therefore more and more favored.

古文：尝与公卿约议，至上前，皆背其约以顺上指。
现代文：他曾与公卿相约提出某些建议，可是到了皇帝面前，又完全背弃约定，顺着皇帝的意图说。
English: He had agreed with the nobles to make certain proposals, but when he came before the emperor, he completely reneged on the agreement and said in accordance with the emperor's intention.

古文：汲黯庭诘弘曰： 齐人多诈而无情，始为与臣等建此议，今皆背之，不忠。 
现代文：汲黯当庭责问公孙弘： 齐人多伪诈而不老实，先与臣等提出以上建议，现在又完全背弃前约，这是对君不忠。 
English: Ku Ying asked Gongsun Hong in court: "You are deceitful and dishonest. You first proposed the above suggestions to your vassals, and now you have completely reneged on the previous agreement. This is disloyalty to you."

古文：上问弘，弘谢曰： 夫知臣者以臣为忠，不知臣者以臣为不忠。 
现代文：皇上询问公孙弘，公孙弘谢罪说： 了解臣的人认为臣是忠君的，不了解臣的人认为臣是不忠的。 
English: The emperor inquired about Gongsunhiro, and Gongsunhiro said, "Those who know me think that I am loyal to you, and those who do not know me think that I am disloyal."

古文：上然弘言。
现代文：皇上认为他的话有道理。
English: The Emperor agreed with Gongsunhiro's statement.

古文：左右幸臣每毁弘，上益厚遇之。
现代文：皇帝左右的宠臣诋毁公孙弘，但皇上却越来越厚待他。
English: The favored vassals around the emperor constantly slandered Sun Hong, but the emperor treated Sun Hong more and more generously.

古文：弘为人谈笑多闻，常称以为人主病不广大，人臣病不俭节。
现代文：公孙弘善于言谈，见多识广，常说君主怕的是不能宽弘大度，为臣子怕的是不能节俭。
English: Gongsun Hong is good at talking and is well-informed. It is often said that what a monarch fears is not being able to be generous, and what a vassal fears is not being able to be frugal.

古文：养后母孝谨，后母卒，服丧三年。
现代文：他奉养后母恭谨孝顺，后母去世，他服了三年丧。
English: He raised his stepmother with respect and filial piety. When his stepmother passed away, he mourned for three years.

古文：为内史数年，迁御史大夫。
现代文：作了几年内史后，公孙弘升为御史大夫。
English: After working for several years in internal history, Gongsun Hongsheng became a goshi taifu.

古文：时又东置苍海，北筑朔方之郡。
现代文：当时又在东方新设置了苍海郡，在北面筑起朔方郡城。
English: At that time, Canghai County was newly established in Dongfang New Area, and Shuofang County Town was built in the north.

古文：弘数谏，以为罢弊中国以奉无用之地，愿罢之。
现代文：公孙弘几次劝谏，认为这是劳民伤财去经营无用之地，不值得使中原地区为此疲敝不堪，希望停止。
English: Gongsun Hong advised him several times that this was a useless place for labor and people to operate, and it was not worth making the Central Plains region exhausted for this, and he hoped to stop.

古文：于是上乃使朱买臣等难弘置朔方之便。
现代文：皇上于是命朱买臣等驳斥公孙弘，论证设置朔方郡的必要性。
English: The emperor then ordered Zhu Baichen and others to refute Gongsunhong and demonstrate the necessity of setting up Shuofang County.

古文：发十策，弘不得一。
现代文：朱买臣等提出十个问题，公孙弘一条也驳不倒。
English: Zhu Baichen and others raised ten questions, and Gongsun Hong couldn't answer a single one.

古文：弘乃谢曰： 山东鄙人，不知其便若是，愿罢西南夷、苍海，专奉朔方。 
现代文：于是他向皇上谢罪说： 我是山东粗鄙之人，不了解设朔方郡如此有利，希望罢去西南夷、苍海郡，而专一经营朔方郡。 
English: So he confessed his sins to the emperor and said, "I am a rude person in Shandong. I don't understand why it is so advantageous to set up Shuofang County. I hope to oust Xuanxiyi County and Canghai County, and concentrate on running Shuofang County."

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：皇上这才应允了他的请求。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：汲黯曰： 弘位在三公，奉禄甚多，然为布被，此诈也。 
现代文：汲黯说： 公孙弘位列三公，俸禄很多，但却用布做被子，这是伪诈。 
English: Kuching said: Gongsun Hong is ranked as the third highest official, with a lot of salary, but he uses cloth to make quilts. This is a fraud.

古文：上问弘，弘谢曰： 有之。
现代文：皇上询问公孙弘，他谢罪说： 有这样的事。
English: The emperor asked Gongsunhiro about it, and he apologized and said, "There is such a thing.

古文：夫九卿与臣善者无过黯，然今日庭诘弘，诚中弘之病。
现代文：九卿中与我交情好的没有比得过汲黯的，可是今天他当庭责问我，实在是说中了我的弱点。
English: Among the nine nobles, there is no one who is more friendly to me than Kyubei, but he did pick a fight with me at court today, and he really hit the nail on the head.

古文：夫以三公为布被，诚饰诈欲以钓名。
现代文：身为三公之一而用布被子，的确是伪饰欺诈，想要沽名钓誉。
English: I have the noble status of the Three Kingdoms, but I am covered with a cloth. It is indeed a skillful deception, in a vain attempt to gain a good name.

古文：且臣闻管仲相齐，有三归，侈拟于君，桓公以霸，亦上僣于君。
现代文：我听说管仲作齐国的相，娶了三位不同姓的女子为妻，其奢侈程度可与君主相比，齐桓公依靠他的辅佐而称霸，不过他是对上僭越国君。
English: I've heard that Guan Zhong, the ruler of Qi, married three women with different surnames. His extravagance can be compared to that of a monarch. Qi Huan relied on his aides to rule, but he was the ruler of Shangyue.

古文：晏婴相景公，食不重肉，妾不衣丝，齐国亦治，亦下比于民。
现代文：晏婴作齐景公的相，一餐不吃两份肉菜，他的小妾不穿丝织的衣服，齐国也治理得很好，他是向下比照着平民。
English: The baby is the image of Qi Jinggong, he does not eat two servings of meat and vegetables at a meal, his concubine does not wear silk clothes, Qi is also well governed, he is compared to the commoners.

古文：今臣弘位为御史大夫，为布被，自九卿以下至于小吏无差，诚如黯言。
现代文：现在我公孙弘作御史大夫，用布被子，是使九卿以下至小吏都没有了贵贱的差别。确如汲黯所言。
English: Now my great-grandson, Hiroshi, is a goshi taifu, and he uses a cloth quilt, so that there is no difference between the nobles and the commoners below the nine nobles. It's true what Kyubei said.

古文：且无黯，陛下安闻此言？ 
现代文：再说没有汲黯，陛下如何能听到我这番话？ 
English: Besides, how could His Majesty hear me without a microphone?

古文：上以为有让，愈益贤之。
现代文：皇上认为他能礼让，越发尊敬他。
English: The Emperor thought he could be more courteous and respected him all the more.

古文：元朔中，代薛泽为丞相。
现代文：元朔年间，公孙弘取代薛泽成为丞相。
English: During the Yuan Shuo era, Gongsun Hong replaced Xue Ze as chancellor.

古文：先是，汉常以列侯为丞相，唯弘无爵，上于是下诏曰： 朕嘉先圣之道，开广门路，宣招四方之士，盖古者任贤而序位，量能以授官，劳大者厥禄厚，德盛者获爵尊，故武功以显重，而文德以行褒。
现代文：原先汉王朝一般以列侯为丞相，祇有公孙弘没有爵位，皇上于足下诏说： 我钦慕先圣治国之道，广开门路，宣招四方的贤士。古代按其贤能安排职位高低，衡量其才干授予不同的宫职，功劳大的人俸禄丰厚，德行高的人爵位尊显，所以立有武功的得到升迁，有文德的得到褒奖。
English: In the early Han Dynasty, princes were usually appointed as chancellors. Only Sun Hong, the eldest son of the emperor, did not have a title. The emperor said at the foot of the throne: I admire the way of ruling the country, opening the door wide, and recruiting the sages of the four directions. In ancient times, positions were arranged according to their ability, and different palace posts were awarded according to their ability. Those with great merits were richly rewarded, and those with high virtues were honored with peerages. Therefore, those with military merits were promoted, and those with virtues were rewarded.

古文：其以高成之平津乡户六百五十封丞相弘为平津侯。 
现代文：兹令将高成县平津乡的六百五十户封给丞相公孙弘，封其为平津侯。 
English: I hereby order that 650 households in Pingjin Township, Gaocheng County, be assigned to the Minister of War, Gongsun Hong, and that he be appointed as the Mayor of Pingjin.

古文：其后以为故事，至丞相封，自弘始也。
现代文：其后便以此为制度。官至丞相而封侯，是从公孙弘开始的。
English: After that, this became the system. From the official to the chancellor to the feudal lord, it started with Gongsunhiro.

古文：时，上方兴功业，娄举贤良。
现代文：当时皇上正在兴功立业之际，一再选拔贤良。
English: At that time, the emperor was in the process of establishing his career, and he repeatedly selected virtuous people.

古文：弘自见为举首，起徒步，数年至宰相封侯，于是起客馆，开东阁以延贤人，与参谋议。
现代文：公孙弘就因对策第一而出人头地的，他起白布衣，几年后就官至宰相并封侯。止因为此，他营建客馆，打开束门招请贤士，并与他们共同研讨议事。
English: As a result of his countermeasures, Gongsun Hong was the first to rise to prominence. He donned a white robe, and a few years later he was appointed prime minister and given the title of feudal lord. To this end, he built a guest house, opened the gate to invite the sages, and discussed matters with them.

古文：弘身食一肉，脱粟饭，故人宾客仰衣食，奉禄皆以给之，家无所余。
现代文：公孙弘本人每餐衹吃一个肉菜和糙米，其亲朋及宾客都依靠他供给衣食，他的俸禄因此而全部拿了出来，家中无所剩余。
English: Gongsun Hong himself only eats one meat dish and brown rice at each meal. His relatives, friends and guests all rely on him to provide food and clothing. As a result, his entire salary was taken out and there is nothing left in the house.

古文：然其性意忌，外宽内深。
现代文：但他性情好猜忌，表面宽和而内心深藏。
English: But he is suspicious by nature, with a gentle exterior and a deep heart.

古文：诸常与弘有隙，无近远，虽阳与善，后竟报其过。
现代文：那些与公孙弘有过嫌隙的，无论近远，虽然表面上他都与其友善，最终总要报复。
English: Those who had a grudge with Gongsun Hong, whether close or far away, although he was friendly with them on the surface, would eventually want to take revenge.

古文：杀主父偃，徙董仲舒胶西，皆弘力也。
现代文：杀主父偃，贬董仲舒到胶西，都是公孙弘的主意。
English: It was Gongsun Hong's idea to kill his master and father, and to banish Dong Zhongshu to Jiaoxi.

古文：后淮南、衡山谋反，治党与方急，弘病甚，自以为无功而封侯，居宰相位，宜佐明主填抚国家，使人由臣子之道。
现代文：后来淮南王、衡山王谋反，朝廷正在严厉追查其党羽的时候，公孙弘得了重病，他感到自己无功而封侯，官居宰相之位，应该辅佐圣明的皇帝平定安抚国家，使得人们都遵循作臣子的道义。
English: Later, when King Huainan and King Hengshan plotted a rebellion, and the imperial court was severely investigating their followers, Gongsun Hong fell seriously ill. He felt that he had been made a vassal without merit, and that he, who held the position of prime minister, should help Emperor Shengming to pacify and pacify the country, so that people would follow the morality of being a vassal.

古文：今诸侯有畔逆之计，此大臣奉职不称也。
现代文：现在诸侯王中出现了叛逆，这是作大臣的不称职所致。
English: Now there is a rebellion among the princes, caused by the incompetence of the ministers.

古文：恐病死无以塞责，乃上书曰： 臣闻天下通道五，所以行之者三。
现代文：他怕病死无法交待，于是上书说： 我听说天下的常道有五个方面，用以实行的又有三条。
English: He was afraid that he would not be able to tell anyone for fear of dying, so he wrote: I have heard that there are five aspects to the ordinary way of life in the world, and three ways to practice it.

古文：君臣、父子、夫妇、长幼、朋友之交，五者天下之通道也；仁、知、勇三者，所以行之也。
现代文：君臣、父子、夫妇、长幼、朋友之交，这五个方面是天下的常道；仁、智、勇是实行常道的三德。
English: The five aspects of ruler and subject, father and son, husband and wife, father and child, and friendship are the common ways of the world; benevolence, wisdom, and courage are the three virtues that implement the common ways.

古文：故曰 好问近乎知，力行近乎仁，知耻近乎勇，知此三者，知所以自治；知所以自治，然后知所以治人。 
现代文：所以说 有疑则问近于智，身体力行近于仁，知道廉耻近于勇。懂得这三条，便知道如何修身自律；才会知道如何治理百姓。 
English: Therefore, when in doubt, to ask is closer to wisdom, to exert oneself is closer to benevolence, and to be shameless is closer to courage. If you understand these three, you will know how to cultivate self-discipline; only then will you know how to govern the people.

古文：未有不能自治而能治人者也。
现代文：没有不能自律而能治理百姓的。
English: There is no one who can govern the people without self-discipline.

古文：陛下躬孝弟，监三王，建周道，兼文武，招徕四方之士，任贤序位，量能授官，将以厉百姓劝贤材也。
现代文：陛下亲行孝悌，借鉴三王，建立周朝那样的政令，兼有文王之德武王之才，招揽四方之士，选贤任职，量能授官，这是能够激励百姓劝勉贤才的做法。
English: His Majesty personally practised filial piety, learned from the Three Kings, established government decrees similar to those of the Zhou Dynasty, and also had the talent of King Wen and King Dewu. He invited people from all over the country, elected wise men to positions, and promoted them as much as possible. This was a practice that could inspire the people to encourage wise men.

古文：今臣愚驽，无汗马之劳，陛下过意擢臣弘卒伍之中，封为列侯，致位三公。
现代文：而今臣下我愚鲁无才，又无汗马之劳，陛下过分看重从卒伍之中将我提拔起来，封为列侯，位至三公。
English: But now, I am a foolish and incompetent subordinate, and I do not have to work hard. His Majesty overvalued me and promoted me from the ranks, made me a vassal, and elevated me to the rank of Third Prince.

古文：臣弘行能不足以称，加有负薪之疾，恐先狗马填沟壑，终无以报德塞责。
现代文：我的德行才能不足与这样高的官爵相称，加上有病在身，恐怕要先于狗马葬身沟壑，最终都无法报答皇上的恩德，也无法尽忠职守。
English: My virtues and talents are not enough to be worthy of such a high official title, and with my illness, I am afraid I will be buried in a ditch before the dogs and horses. In the end, I will not be able to repay the emperor's kindness, nor will I be able to perform my duties faithfully.

古文：愿归侯，乞骸骨，避贤者路。 
现代文：我想归还列侯爵位，辞职退休，给贤才让路。 
English: I want to give back the marquisate, resign and retire, and make way for a genius.

古文：上报曰： 古者赏有功，褒有德，守成上文，遭遇右武，未有易此者也。
现代文：皇上答覆说： 自古奖赏有功劳的，表彰有德行的，守成时崇尚文治，逢乱世崇尚武功，这个原则从未改变过。
English: The emperor replied, "Since ancient times, the principle of rewarding those who have meritorious deeds and commending those who are virtuous, advocating the rule of law in times of prosperity and martial arts in times of adversity, has never changed.

古文：朕夙夜庶几，获承至尊，惧不能宁，惟所与共为治者，君宜知之。
现代文：我朝夕努力以求成才，获承皇位，心怀忧惧，不能安宁，衹想与诸位大臣共同努力治理天下，而您是通晓治国之道的。
English: I have worked hard day and night to acquire the ability to succeed to the throne, and I am anxious and restless. I want to work with you ministers to govern the world, and you are well versed in the way of governing the country.

古文：盖君子善善及后世，若兹行，常在朕躬。
现代文：君子赞美良善，他的善举福及后代，你若照此行事，我心裹是会常常想到的。
English: A gentleman praises the good, and his good deed is a blessing to posterity. If you act in this way, my heart will often think of you.

古文：君不幸罹霜露之疾，何恙不已，乃上书归侯，乞骸骨，是章朕之不德也。
现代文：您不幸身染小病，何愁不愈？竟上书辞归侯爵并要退休辞官，这是显露我无德啊。
English: You have the misfortune to be suffering from a minor illness, why do you not get over it? The fact that you have written a resignation to the Marquis and want to retire from the dicastery, this is a revelation of my lack of virtue.

古文：今事少闲，君其存精神，止念虑，辅助医药以自恃。 
现代文：现在朝中事情不多，您可保养精神，不要挂念思虑，请医吃药以恢复身体。 
English: Now there are not many things in the morning, you can maintain your spirit, don't worry, ask the doctor to take medicine to recover.

古文：因赐告牛、酒、杂帛。
现代文：于是，赐予休假，又赏赐牛酒及各类丝帛。
English: As a result, he was granted a leave of absence, and was also rewarded with beef wine and various types of silk cocoons.

古文：居数月，有瘳，视事。
现代文：过了几个月，公孙弘病愈，上朝理事。
English: After a few months, Gongsunhiro's illness was cured, and he went to work in the morning.

古文：凡为丞相御史六岁，年八十，终丞相位。
现代文：公孙弘共作了六年丞相、御史大夫，八十岁时死在丞相任上。
English: Kinsunhiro served as chancellor and chief historian for six years, and died at the age of 80 while serving as chancellor.

古文：其后李蔡、严青翟、赵周、石庆、公孙贺、刘屈氂继踵为丞相。
现代文：在他后面，李蔡、严青翟、趟周、石庆、公孙贺、刘屈牦相继作了丞相。
English: After him, Li Cai, Yan Qingyao, Wu Zhou, Shi Qing, Gongsun He, and Liu Quqian successively served as prime ministers.

古文：自蔡至庆，丞相府客馆丘虚而已，至贺、屈氂时坏以为马厩车库奴婢室矣。
现代文：从李蔡开始到石庆时止，丞相府的客馆已荒凉残破，到了公孙贺、刘屈牦时，客馆破败，改为马厩、车库和奴婢的住房。
English: From the time of Li Cai to the time of Shi Qing, the guest house of the Prime Minister's Office was desolate and broken. By the time of Gongsun He and Liu Quan, the guest house was dilapidated and changed to stables, garages and slave housing.

古文：唯庆以惇谨，复终相位，其余尽伏诛云。
现代文：这些人中衹有石庆敦厚严谨，继公孙弘之后寿终于丞相任上，其余的全都获罪被斩。
English: Among these people, Shi Qing Dunhuang was strict, and after Gongsun Hong, Shou finally became the prime minister, and the rest were all convicted and beheaded.

古文：弘子度嗣侯，为山阳太守十余岁，诏征巨野令史成诣公车，度留不遣，坐论为城旦。
现代文：公孙弘的儿子公孙度继承了侯爵，作了十余年的山阳郡太守，皇帝征召钜野县令史成，让他到公车待命，公孙度却挽留他不让上路，于是被论罪，被判服四年劳役。
English: Gongsunhong's son Gongsundu succeeded the marquis and served as the governor of Sanyang County for more than ten years. The emperor conscripted Gongye County's commander Shicheng and put him on standby in a bus, but Gongsundu refused to let him on the road, so he was convicted and sentenced to four years of hard labor.

古文：元始中，修功臣后，下诏曰： 汉兴以来，股肱在位，身行俭约，轻财重义，未有若公孙弘者也。
现代文：元始年间，褒奖功臣的后代，皇帝下诏说： 汉朝兴邦立国以来，股肱大臣中，没有一个能比得上公孙弘，能够在任职期间力行节俭，轻财重义。
English: At the beginning of the year, the emperor issued an edict praising the descendants of meritorious vassals, saying: Since the founding of the Han Dynasty and the rise of the nation, none of the ministers of the stock market can match Gongsun Hong, who can practice frugality during his term of office.

古文：位在宰相封侯，而为布被脱粟之饭，奉禄以给故人宾客，无有所余，可谓减于制度，而率下笃俗者也，与内厚富而外为诡服以钓虚誉者殊科。
现代文：他官居宰相且封侯，但却盖布被子，吃糙米饭，将俸禄拿出来供给故旧宾客，以致无所剩余。他享受的衣食都在制度所规定的标准以下。可称得上是以自身为表率来促使民风朴实，与那些内藏财富而表面衣着俭朴以钓取虚名的人完全不一样。
English: He lived in the official residence of the prime minister and was a feudal lord, but he covered his bed with a quilt, ate brown rice, and offered his salary to the old guests, so that there was nothing left over. He enjoyed food and clothing below the standards stipulated by the system. It can be said that he took the lead in promoting the simple folk style, and was completely different from those who hid their wealth and dressed frugally on the surface to catch a false reputation.

古文：夫表德章义，所以率世厉俗，圣王之也。
现代文：用表彰德行义举来引导，勉励世俗民风的转变，这是圣王的法度。
English: It is the law of the holy king to guide and encourage the transformation of the secular folk style by commending virtue and doing righteous deeds.

古文：其赐弘后子孙之次见为適者，爵关内侯，食邑三百户。 
现代文：赐公孙弘后代子孙中的嫡系为关内侯，食邑三百户。 
English: Among the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of Guanai, there are three hundred households in the food village.

古文：卜式，河南人也。
现代文：卜式，河南人。
English: Pu style, from Henan Province.

古文：以田畜为事。
现代文：以耕种畜牧为业。
English: They are engaged in farming and animal husbandry.

古文：有少弟，弟壮，式脱身出，独取畜羊百余，田宅财物尽与弟。
现代文：有小弟，弟长大后，卜式从家中分出居住，衹取羊百余只，田宅财物尽给弟弟。
English: There was a younger brother. When the younger brother grew up, Bu Shi lived separately from the family, took more than a hundred sheep, and gave all the farmhouse and property to the younger brother.

古文：式入山牧，十余年，羊致千余头，买田宅。
现代文：卜式入山牧羊十余年，羊多到千余头，于是便买下田宅。
English: After more than ten years of shepherding goats, with more than a thousand head of sheep, he bought a farmhouse.

古文：而弟尽破其产，式辄复分与弟者数矣。
现代文：而其弟则倾家荡产，卜式立即又分给弟弟财产，如此有多次。
English: His younger brother, on the other hand, went bankrupt, and Bu Shi immediately gave his property to his younger brother. This happened many times.

古文：时汉方事匈奴，式上书，愿输家财半助边。
现代文：当时汉正在抵抗匈奴入侵，卜式上书，愿捐家财的一半助边事。
English: At that time, Han was resisting the invasion of the Xiongnu, and he wrote a letter saying that he was willing to donate half of his family's wealth to help with foreign affairs.

古文：上使使问式： 欲为官乎？ 
现代文：皇上派人间卜式： 想当官吗？ 
English: The emperor sent someone to ask: Do you want to be an official?

古文：式曰： 自小牧羊，不习仕宦，不愿也。 
现代文：式说： 从小牧羊，不熟悉怎样当官，不愿意作官。 
English: He said: I have been a shepherd since I was a child, I am not familiar with how to be an official, and I do not want to be an official.

古文：使者曰： 家岂有冤，欲言事乎？ 
现代文：使者说： 家里难道没有冤家仇人，想讲出来吗？ 
English: The messenger said, "Isn't there an enemy in the house you want to tell me about?

古文：式曰： 臣生与人亡所争，邑人贫者贷之，不善者教之，所居，人皆从式，式何故见冤！ 
现代文：卜式说： 臣生来与人无争，邑人贫者借钱给他，不善的人教他干好事，在住处与人友好相处，卜式有何冤事呀！ 
English: Pu Shih said, "A subject is born without quarrels with others, the poor people in the town lend him money, the bad people teach him to do good deeds, and the people in the neighborhood are friendly with each other. What is Pu Shih's grievance?

古文：使者曰： 苟，子何欲？ 
现代文：使者说： 你这样，想干什么？ 
English: The messenger said, "What are you trying to do?

古文：式曰： 天子诛匈奴，愚以为贤者宜死节，有财者宜输之，如此而匈奴可灭也。 
现代文：卜式说： 天子抗击匈奴，我以为贤者理应为大节而死，有钱的应出钱，这样匈奴可灭。 
English: Bu Shi said: The Son of Heaven fought against the Xiongnu, I thought that the wise should die for the festival, and the rich should pay money, so that the Xiongnu could be destroyed.

古文：使者以闻。
现代文：使者报告朝廷。
English: Envoys reported to the imperial court.

古文：上以语丞相弘。
现代文：皇上又告诉了丞相公孙弘。
English: The emperor also told the prime minister, Sunhiro.

古文：弘曰： 此非人情。
现代文：公孙弘说道： 这不是入之常情的表现。
English: Kinsun Hiroshi said, "This is not humanly possible.

古文：不轨之臣不可以为化而乱法，愿陛下勿许。 
现代文：不轨之臣，不可能作为效法的榜样，愿陛下不要答应。 
English: An unscrupulous vassal cannot serve as a role model. Your Majesty should not agree to this.

古文：上不报，数岁乃置式。
现代文：皇上没有接受卜式的请求，过了几年便退回卜式。
English: The emperor did not accept Bu's request, and after a few years he returned to Bu.

古文：式归，复田牧。
现代文：卜式回乡后，又重操他的牧羊业。
English: After Bu Shi returned home, he still farmed and grazed.

古文：岁余，会浑邪等降，县官费众，仓府空，贫民大徙，皆卬给县官，无以尽赡。
现代文：一年后，遇上浑邪王等降汉，国家费用过大，仓府空虚，贫民多迁徙，都靠国家补给，也无法完全供给。
English: A year later, faced with the fall of the Han Dynasty, the national expenses were too large, the warehouses were empty, and the poor were more migratory, all of which depended on state supplies and could not be fully supplied.

古文：式复持钱二十万与河南太守，以给徙民。
现代文：卜式又拿钱二十万给河南太守，以救流民。
English: Bu Shih also gave 200,000 yuan to the governor of Henan Province to save the displaced people.

古文：河南上富人助贫民者，上识式姓名，曰： 是固前欲输其家半财助边。 
现代文：河南上报富人助贫名单，皇上认出了卜式，说： 是那一位坚持要给一半家产助边的人。 
English: Henan reported the list of rich people to help the poor. The emperor recognized Bo Shi and said, "He is the one who insisted on giving half of his family's wealth to help the poor."

古文：乃赐式外繇四百人，式又尽复与官。
现代文：于是赐卜式差役四百人，卜式又全部还给官府。
English: As a result, four hundred officials were given the blessing, and all the blessings were returned to the government.

古文：是时，富豪皆争匿财，唯式尤欲助费。
现代文：当时，富豪皆争相隐匿财产，衹有卜式特别想帮助国家费用。
English: At the time, the rich were all scrambling to hide their assets, with the well-heeled in particular wanting to help the state pay.

古文：上于是以式终长者，乃召拜式为中郎，赐爵左庶长，田十顷，布告天下，尊显以风百姓。
现代文：皇上于是把卜式尊为长者，召拜卜式为中郎，赐爵左庶长，田十顷，布告天下，以示尊崇，鼓励百姓效法。
English: The emperor then announced to the world that Bu Shih-tzu would be revered as an elder, that he would call Bu Shih-tzu as a middle-ranking official, that he would bestow a title of nobility on him, and that he would give him ten hectares of land, as a sign of respect and to encourage the people to follow his example.

古文：初，式不愿为郎，上曰： 吾有羊在上林中，欲令子牧之。 
现代文：开始时卜式不愿为郎，皇上说： 我有羊在上林苑中，想让先生去放牧。 
English: At first, Bu Shih did not want to be a son, the emperor said: I have sheep in Shanglin Yuan, I want my master to graze them.

古文：式既为郎，布衣草蹻而牧羊。
现代文：卜式当了郎官后，依然穿着布衣草鞋去牧羊。
English: After Bu Shi became the steward, he still wore cloth clothes and straw shoes to herd sheep.

古文：岁余，羊肥息。
现代文：一年多，羊肥壮又繁殖得很多。
English: More than a year later, the flock is fat and has multiplied a lot.

古文：上过其羊所，善之。
现代文：皇上经过牧羊场地，很称赞。
English: The Emperor passed by the shepherd's field and praised it.

古文：式曰： 非独羊也，治民亦犹是矣。
现代文：卜式说： 不衹是牧羊，治民也是一样。
English: Bu Shi said, "If you are a shepherd, it is the same as governing the people.

古文：以时起居，恶者辄去，毋令败群。 
现代文：按时起居，坏的立即除去，不让其害群。 
English: Get up on time, remove the bad immediately, and do not let it harm the herd.

古文：上奇其言，欲试使治民。
现代文：皇上惊奇其言，想让他试一试治民。
English: The emperor was surprised by his words and wanted him to try his hand at governing the people.

古文：拜式缑氏令，缑氏便之；迁成皋令，将漕最。
现代文：任卜式为缑氏令，缑氏大治；迁成皋令，管领漕运，考核最优。
English: Ren Pu style is the order of the Xiong family, the great rule of the Xiong family; moved to the order of the Xiong family, the leader of the rowing, the best assessment.

古文：上以式朴忠，拜为齐王太傅，转为相。
现代文：皇上以卜式朴实忠厚，拜为齐王太傅，又转任为相。
English: The emperor followed the style of Pu and was simple, loyal, and revered as the king of Qi and Tai Fu, and was also transferred to the position of minister.

古文：会吕嘉反，式上书曰： 臣闻主愧臣死。
现代文：遇到吕嘉反叛，卜式上书说： 臣听说主愧臣死。
English: When he encountered Lujia's rebellion, he wrote a letter to the emperor saying, "I heard that my master died.

古文：群臣宜尽死节，其驽下者宜出财以佐军，如是则强国不犯之道也。
现代文：群臣应该死节，最蠢笨的也应出财助军，这样才是强国不敢侵犯的保证。
English: The courtiers should die, and even the most stupid should contribute financially to the army. This is the guarantee that the powerful countries dare not infringe upon.

古文：臣愿与子男及临菑习弩博昌习船者请行死之，以尽臣节。 
现代文：臣愿与儿子及临苗习弩与博昌习船之士请战，战死以尽臣节。 
English: The vassal was willing to go to war with his son, Linmiao Xiqi and Bochang Xiqi, and died in battle to make the most of the Vassal Day.

古文：上贤之，下诏曰： 朕闻报德以德，报怨以直。
现代文：皇上认为他贤德，下韶说： 朕闻以德报德，以直报怨。
English: The emperor thought he was a virtuous man, and said, "I have heard that one should repay virtue with virtue, and grievances with directness.

古文：今天下不幸有事，郡县诸侯未有奋繇直道者也。
现代文：今天下不幸多事，郡县诸侯没有奋激而起、以直报怨的直道之人。
English: Today's world is full of misfortune. Counties and counties do not have the courage to stand up and take direct action to redress grievances.

古文：齐相雅行躬耕，随牧畜悉，辄分昆弟，更造，不为利惑。
现代文：齐相行为雅正而亲耕，随畜放牧，以资产帮助亲弟，又从头开始经营，不为利惑。
English: Qi Xiang behaved with elegance and proactively cultivated, grazed with livestock, helped his brothers with assets, and started business from scratch, not for profit.

古文：日者北边有兴，上书助官。
现代文：不久前北部边境调军出击匈奴，卜式上书出钱助官。
English: Not long ago, the northern border troops were dispatched to attack the Huns, and the assistant officers were paid in writing.

古文：往年西河岁恶，率齐人入粟。
现代文：往年西河灾荒，卜式又率齐人送粮到西河。
English: In previous years, when the West River was in a state of disaster and famine, Bu Shi also led a group of people to send grain to the West River.

古文：今又首奋，虽未战，可谓义形于内矣。
现代文：今又首先奋起报名从军，虽然没有交战，可谓义见于内心了。
English: Now, they are the first to rise up and sign up to join the army, although there is no war, it can be said that they see the righteousness in their hearts.

古文：其赐式爵关内侯，黄金四十斤，田十顷，布告天下，使明知之。 
现代文：应赐卜式关内侯，黄金四十斤，田十顷，布告天下，使明知朕意。 
English: It is necessary to proclaim to the world the boon of Guanai, forty catties of gold, and ten hectares of farmland, so that everyone will know what I mean.

古文：元鼎中，征式代石庆为御史大夫。
现代文：元鼎年间，征召卜式代亘庆为御史大夫。
English: During the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, Wu Qing, a descendant of Bu Shi, was conscripted as a goshi taifu.

古文：式既在位，言郡国不便盐铁而船有算，可罢。
现代文：卜式上任后，说郡国不便盐铁而船有算赋，可以废除。
English: After Bu Shih took office, he said that the county was inconvenient to salt and iron, and the ship had a reckoning, and it could be abolished.

古文：上由是不说式。
现代文：皇上由此不喜欢卜式。
English: As a result, the emperor did not like the Bo style.

古文：明年当封禅，式又不习文章，贬秩为太子太傅，以兒宽代之。
现代文：第二年应当封掸，卜式又不习文章礼仪，贬为太子太傅，以皑代卜式之职。
English: In the second year, he should be given the title of crown prince, but he did not learn the etiquette of the post, and was relegated to the position of crown prince.

古文：式以寿终。
现代文：上述以寿终。
English: The above ends with the end of life.

古文：儿宽，千乘人也。
现代文：儿宽，千乘人。
English: A child is wide, but a thousand people ride on it.

古文：治《尚书》，事欧阳生。
现代文：研习《尚书》，师从于趑屋生。
English: Studied "Shang Shu" under the tutelage of Yu Yuya.

古文：以郡国选诣博士，受业孔安国。
现代文：以郡国选诣博士身份，受业于孔室厘。
English: He studied under Kong Shuling as a county-appointed doctor.

古文：贫无资用，尝为弟子都养。
现代文：因贫困无资用，曾由弟子供养。
English: Due to poverty and lack of resources, he was once raised by his younger brother.

古文：时行赁作，带经而锄，休息辄读诵，其精如此。
现代文：时常租田而耕，带经书而劳作，休息时便诵读，读书精深到如此地步。
English: He often rented land and cultivated it, worked with scriptures, and read when he rested. He was so proficient in reading.

古文：以射策为掌故，功次，补廷尉文学卒史。
现代文：以策问为掌故，以功补廷尉文学卒史。
English: Asking questions is the way to learn, and the history of literature graduates is the way to make up for one's shortcomings.

古文：宽为人温良，有廉知自将，善属文，然懦于武，口弗能发明也。
现代文：宽为人温良，有清廉智慧，能自卫，善于文章，柔弱于武，口不能开发陈述。
English: A broad person is mild-mannered, has clean wisdom, can defend himself, is good at writing, is weak in martial arts, and can't develop a presentation.

古文：时张汤为廷尉，廷尉府尽用文史法律之吏，而宽以儒生在其间，见谓不习事，不署曹，除为从史，之北地视畜数年。
现代文：当时退荡任廷尉，廷尉府尽用文史法律之吏，而遮以儒生的身份处于其间，表现出不谙事理，不能做下等官吏，被任为从史，前往韭地看守牲畜数年。
English: At that time, he was a retired imperial lieutenant, and the imperial lieutenant's office made full use of literary, historical and legal officials, but he was in the middle as a Confucian. He showed irrationality and could not be a lower-ranking official. He was appointed as a historian and went to Shunde to guard livestock for several years.

古文：还至府，上畜簿，会廷尉时有疑奏，已再见却矣，掾史莫知所为。
现代文：还至府，上报牲畜簿册，正遇廷尉碰到疑难奏章，已经多次退回，属吏不知如何是好。
English: He also went to the capital to report on the livestock register, but just as he was about to do so, he encountered a problem with the record, which had already been returned several times, and the officials did not know what to do.

古文：宽为言其意，掾史因使宽为奏。
现代文：倪宽对他讲明写法，属吏便让倪宽写奏书。
English: Ni Kuan clearly explained to him how to write, and the official let Ni Kuan write the musical score.

古文：奏成，读之皆服，以白廷尉汤。
现代文：奏成，读之皆服，告诉廷尉张汤。
English: It was a success, everyone was satisfied with the reading, and told Lieutenant Zhang Tang.

古文：汤大惊，召宽与语，乃奇其材，以为掾。
现代文：张汤大惊，召倪宽交谈，便赏识其才，任为掾。
English: Zhang Tang was shocked and called Ni Guang for a conversation. He appreciated his talent and hired him.

古文：上宽所作奏，即时得可。
现代文：上报倪宽所作奏书，即时许可。
English: Permission is hereby granted to publish the transcript of Ni Kuan's speech.

古文：异日，汤见上。
现代文：次日，张汤见皇上。
English: The next day, Zhang Tang met with the emperor.

古文：问曰： 前奏非俗吏所及，谁为之者？ 
现代文：问道： 上次奏书非俗吏所能及，是谁作的？ 
English: Question: Who was the last person to write a book that was beyond the reach of ordinary people?

古文：汤言儿宽。
现代文：张汤说是倪宽。
English: Zhang Tang said it was Ni Kuan.

古文：上曰： 吾固闻之久矣。 
现代文：皇上说： 我本来早就听说他了。 
English: The Emperor said: I had heard of him long before.

古文：汤由是乡学，以宽为奏谳掾，以古法义决疑狱，甚重之。
现代文：张汤从此向往学问，让倪宽任上奏案件的属官，用古法律之义判决疑难案件，很受重用。
English: From then on, Zhang Tang yearned for learning, and appointed Ni Guang as a subordinate officer to report cases. He used the ancient law to judge difficult cases, which was highly valued.

古文：及汤为御史大夫，以宽为掾，举侍御史。
现代文：到张汤任御史大夫，任倪宽为属官，提拔任侍御史。
English: Zhang Tang was appointed as the imperial historian, Ni Kuan was appointed as a subordinate official, and Zang was promoted to the post of imperial historian.

古文：见上，语经学，上说之，从问《尚书》一篇。
现代文：见皇上，谈经学。皇上喜悦，又问《尚书》一篇。
English: Seeing the Emperor, they talked about the study of the scriptures. The Emperor was delighted and asked for another copy of the Shang Shu.

古文：擢为中大夫，迁左内史。
现代文：提升为中大夫，迁左内史。
English: Promoted to junior doctor, moved to internal medicine.

古文：宽既治民，劝农业，缓刑罚，理狱讼，卑体下士，务在于得人心；择用仁厚士，推情与下，不求名声，吏民大信爱之。
现代文：宽任治民职务之后，劝导农耕，减缓刑罚，治理狱讼，谦恭下士，致力于取得人心；择用仁厚之士，推求人情对待下属，不求名声，吏民极为信爱。
English: After being appointed to the position of civil servant, he advised people on farming, mitigated punishments, managed prison litigation, treated corporals with courtesy, and strived to win the hearts of the people; he chose benevolent people, treated subordinates with human feelings, and did not seek fame, and the officials and the people were extremely faithful.

古文：宽表奏开六辅渠，定水令以广溉田。
现代文：倪宽表奏开六辅渠，订治水条令以扩大溉田。
English: Ni Kuan-pyo opened six auxiliary canals and issued a water control order to expand irrigated fields.

古文：收租税，时裁阔狭，与民相假贷，以故租多不入。
现代文：收租税，根据季节收成裁定，不急征收，借贷与民，因此租多不入库。
English: Tax collection, according to the seasonal harvest ruling, do not rush to collect, borrow and lend to the people, so rent more do not enter the warehouse.

古文：后有军发，左内史以负租课殿，当免。
现代文：后有军役征发，左内史以欠租课名列最后，当免官。
English: Later, there was conscription for military service, and Zuonaishi ranked last in the rent arrears class and was dismissed.

古文：民闻当免，皆恐失之，大家牛车，小家担负，输租繦属不绝，课更以最。
现代文：百姓听说他将被免官，都怕失去倪宽，大家出牛车，小家担挑，输租接连不断，交租税居首。
English: When the people heard that he would be removed from office, they were all afraid of losing Ni Guang. Everyone drove cattle cars, small families were picked up, rents were transferred one after another, and the highest taxes were paid.

古文：上由此愈奇宽。
现代文：皇上由此更加惊奇倪宽的才干。
English: As a result, the emperor was even more surprised by Niikai's talent.

古文：及议欲放古巡狩封禅之事，诸儒对者五十余人，未能有所定。
现代文：当议论仿古巡狩封惮之事时，诸儒对者五十余人，未能有所定。
English: When discussing the matter of the imitation of ancient times, more than 50 Confucianists were unable to reach a consensus.

古文：先是，司马相如病死，有遗书，颂功德，言符瑞，足以封泰山。
现代文：当初，司马相如病死，有遗书大颂功德，讲符瑞，提出应该封泰山。
English: At the beginning, Sima Xiang died of illness. He left a last will and testament in which he extolled his merits and spoke highly of Fu Rui, suggesting that Mount Tai should be sealed off.

古文：上奇其书，以问宽，宽对曰： 陛下躬发圣德，统楫群元，宗祀天地，荐礼百神，精神所乡，征兆必报，天地并应，符瑞昭明。
现代文：皇上看重其书，问倪宽，倪宽说： 陛下亲行圣德，统集万民，祭祀天地，献礼百神，神灵所指，征兆必定显示，天地同时感应，符瑞已经显明。
English: The emperor valued his book and asked Ni Kuan about it. Ni Kuan said, "Your Majesty has personally practiced holiness, gathered all the people, sacrificed heaven and earth, and offered sacrifices to hundreds of gods. According to the gods, the signs must show that heaven and earth are simultaneously affected, and the auspiciousness has been revealed.

古文：其封泰山，禅梁父，昭姓考瑞，帝王之盛节也。
现代文：应封泰山，祭梁父山，昭明宗姓考求祥瑞，是帝王之盛大节日。
English: The enthronement of Mount Tai, the celebration of Liangzhi Mountain, and the examination of Shomei Zong's family name for auspiciousness, are the grand festivals of the emperor.

古文：然享荐之义，不著于经，以为封禅告成，合祛于天地神祗，祗戒精专以接神明。总百官之职，各称事宜而为之节文。
现代文：然而享献之义，不着于经书，封禅告成，开闭于天地神祇，恭敬地迎接神明的降临，总揽百官之职，各尽职守并且确定其制度礼节。
English: However, to enjoy the righteousness of dedication, it is not written in the scriptures, the seal of Zen is completed, it is opened and closed in the gods of heaven and earth, respectfully welcome the advent of the gods, and the duties of the hundred officials are collected, and each performs its duties and determines its system etiquette.

古文：唯圣主所由，制定其当，非君臣之所能列。
现代文：衹有圣主制定得当，非群臣所能相比。
English: It is not comparable to what the ministers can do unless it is properly formulated by the Lord.

古文：令将举大事，优游数年，使群臣得人自尽，终莫能成。
现代文：今天将举办大事，可是数年间议而不决，群臣所言不同，终无所成。
English: A great event is to be held today, but after several years of discussion and indecision, nothing has been accomplished, contrary to what the ministers have said.

古文：唯天子建中和之极，兼总条贯，金声而玉振之，以顺成天庆，垂万世之基。 
现代文：衹有天子确立中和之正位，总揽万事，协调治理，振荡德音如金玉之声，以便服从上天庆赏，建立万世流传的基业。 
English: There is no heavenly son to establish the positive position of neutralization, comprehensively grasp everything, coordinate governance, and oscillate virtuous tones like the voice of the golden ball, so as to obey the praise of heaven and establish the foundation that has been passed down for generations.

古文：上然之，乃自制仪，采儒术以文焉。
现代文：皇上赞同这一见解，便自己制订礼仪，采用儒家学术加以修饰。
English: The emperor agreed with this opinion, so he developed his own etiquette and embellished it with Confucian scholarship.

古文：既成，将用事，拜宽为御史大夫，从东封泰山，还登明堂。
现代文：礼仪已成，将要举行封禅，拜倪宽为御史大夫，随从束封泰山，还登明堂。
English: The etiquette has been completed, and the enthronement ceremony will be held, with Ni Kuan as the Grand Historian, followed by the enthronement of Mount Tai, and then the enthronement ceremony.

古文：宽上寿曰： 臣闻三代改制，属象相因。
现代文：倪宽上寿说： 臣闻三代改制，政教法象相因属。
English: Ni Kuan Shangshou said: Three generations of reform have been carried out, and the political and religious laws are related to each other.

古文：间者圣统废绝，陛下发愤，合指天地，祖立明堂辟雍，宗祀泰一，六律五声，幽赞圣意，神乐四合，各有方象，以丞嘉祀，为万世则，天下幸甚。
现代文：不入圣统废绝，陛下发愤，合指天地，始立明堂辟雍，尊祭泰一神庙，用六律五声来深赞圣意，神乐和四方色彩各有仪象，以承接最隆重的祭祀盛典，为后世万代留下祭祀天地的法则，天下为此而深感幸运。
English: His majesty was outraged that he was not included in the sacred lineage and abolished it, and he pointed to heaven and earth, and set up the Ming and Tang dynasties, and the sacred temple of Taiyi, and used the six laws and five voices to deeply praise the sacred meaning, and the sacred music and the four-square colors each had their own rituals. In order to undertake the grandest sacrificial ceremony, he left the rules of sacrificing heaven and earth for future generations. The world is deeply fortunate for this.

古文：将建大元本瑞，登告岱宗，发祉闿门，以候景至。
现代文：通过这次祭礼将要确定太初年的白麟、宝鼎祥瑞，登上泰山向天神报告吉祥，发福开门，以等待冬至祥瑞景象的到来。
English: Through this festival, the Bai Lin and Baoding Xiang Rui of the first year of the year will be determined, and the auspiciousness will be reported to the gods on Mount Tai, and the door will be opened to wait for the arrival of the winter solstice Xiang Rui scene.

古文：癸亥宗祀，日宣重光；上元甲子，肃邕永享。
现代文：癸亥尊祭，太阳显示出曰中有曰之光；太初元年甲子冬至之曰，天地永享敬肃祥和。
English: On the day of the festival, the sun shows the light of the day; on the day of the winter solstice in the first year of the year, the heavens and the earth enjoy eternal peace and tranquility.

古文：光辉充塞，天文粲然，见象日昭，报降符应。
现代文：光辉普照，上天文彩粲然夺目，现出曰曰昭明的景象，为报答德政施行而降下吉祥兆应。
English: The sun shines brightly, the celestial light is dazzling, and the scene is clear and bright. In order to reward the implementation of the moral government, the auspicious signs are lowered.

古文：臣宽奉觞再拜，上千万岁寿。 
现代文：臣倪宽举杯再拜，敬上千万大寿。 
English: Minister Ni Kuan raises a glass to bid farewell and celebrate his 10 millionth birthday.

古文：制曰： 敬举君之觞。 
现代文：皇上写下制书说： 敬举君之杯。 
English: The emperor wrote down the inscription and said: "I raise my cup to you."

古文：后太史令司马迁等言： 历纪坏废，汉兴未改正朔，宜可正。 
现代文：后来太史令司马迁等言： 历法坏废，汉兴未改正朔，现在应该改正。 
English: Later, the Taishi ordered Sima Qian to make the following remarks: The calendar is bad and useless, Han Xing has not been corrected, and it should be corrected now.

古文：上乃诏宽与迁等共定汉《太初历》。
现代文：皇上于是诏令倪宽与司马迁等共定汉《太初历》。
English: The emperor then issued an edict ordering Ni Kuan and Sima Qian to jointly establish the Han "Great Lunar Calendar."

古文：语在《律历志》。
现代文：详见《律历志》。
English: For details, see "Ritsuryo chronicle."

古文：初，梁相褚大通《五经》，为博士，时宽为弟子。
现代文：当初梁国相褚大通晓《五经》，为博士，当时倪宽为其弟子。
English: At that time, Liang Guoxiang was a scholar of the "Five Classics" and was a doctor, while Ni Guang was his disciple.

古文：及御史大夫缺，征褚大，大自以为得御史大夫。
现代文：到御史大夫缺额，征褚大来就任，褚大自以为得任御史大夫。
English: When there was a vacancy for the post of Imperial Historian, he was recruited by the University of Gyeonggi to take up the post. The University of Gyeonggi thought that he should be appointed Imperial Historian.

古文：至洛阳，闻儿宽为之，褚大笑。
现代文：到洛阳，听说倪宽已就任，褚大笑。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he heard that Ni Kuan had taken office, and burst out laughing.

古文：及至，与宽议封禅于上前，大不能及，退而服曰： 上诚知人。 
现代文：到达朝廷与倪宽在皇帝面前议封禅，褚大不及倪宽，退而佩服说： 皇上真是知人。 
English: When he arrived at the imperial court, he and Ni Kuan had a discussion about the seal of Zen in front of the emperor. Zou Da, who was not as tall as Ni Kuan, stood back in admiration and said, "The emperor is really an acquaintance."

古文：宽为御史大夫，以称意任职，故久无有所匡谏于上，官属易之。
现代文：倪宽为御史大夫，由于称意任职，因此很久没有对皇上有所匡谏，官属轻视他。
English: Ni Kuan was the Imperial Historian, and because of his willingness to serve, he had not been loyal to the Emperor for a long time, and the officials despised him.

古文：居位九岁，以官卒。
现代文：居位九年，死于官任。
English: He held the post for nine years and died in office.

古文：赞曰：公孙弘、卜式、儿宽皆以鸿渐之翼困于燕爵，远迹羊豕之间，非遇其时，焉能致此位乎？
现代文：赞曰：公孙弘、卜式、倪宽都以鸿渐之翼受困燕雀，远涉羊猪之间，不遇时运，怎能到这个地步？
English: Zang said: Gongsunhong, Bu Shi, Ni Guang all used the wings of Hongqian to be trapped by birds, and wandered far and wide between sheep and pigs. If they did not meet with good luck, how could they get to this point?

古文：是时，汉兴六十余载，海内艾安，府库充实，而四夷未宾，制度多阙。
现代文：当时，汉兴六十余年，海内安定，府库充实，然而四边未服，制度多缺。
English: At that time, Han Xing had been in power for more than 60 years, the country was stable at home and the treasury was well-stocked. However, it was not accepted by all sides, and many systems were lacking.

古文：上方欲用文武，求之如弗及，始以蒲轮迎枚生，见主父而叹息。
现代文：皇上刚刚兴办文武大业，求之而不得人才，开始用蒲轮车迎枚乘，见到主父偃而叹息。
English: The emperor had just launched the great cause of literature and martial arts, but he was unable to find the talent he was looking for, so he started to use a wheelbarrow to transport people, and he sighed when he saw his father looking sad.

古文：群士慕向，异人并出。
现代文：群士羡慕向往，异人奇才同时出现。
English: A group of people admire and yearn for each other, and a strange genius appears at the same time.

古文：卜式拔于刍牧，弘羊擢于栗竖，卫青奋于奴仆，日磾出于降虏，斯亦曩时版筑饭牛之朋已。
现代文：卜式拔于放牧，弘羊从贾人中提拔，卫青从奴仆中奋起，金曰蝉出于降虏，这些都是古代版筑贩牛一类人。
English: Bu Shih was promoted to herding, Hong Yang was promoted from the Jia people, Wei Qing was promoted from the slaves, and Jin Shia was promoted from the slaves. These are all ancient versions of cattle traders.

古文：汉之得人，于兹为盛，儒雅则公孙弘、董仲舒、儿宽，笃行则石建、石庆，质直则汲黯、卜式，推贤则韩安国、郑当时，定令则赵禹、张汤，文章则司马迁、相如，滑稽则东方朔、枚皋，应对则严助、朱买臣，历数则唐都、洛下闳，协律则李延年，运筹则桑弘羊，奉使则张骞、苏武，将率则卫青、霍去病，受遗则霍光、金日磾，其余不可胜纪。
现代文：漠之得人才，于此为盛，儒学文雅有公孙弘、董仲舒、倪宽，忠厚有石建、石庆，质朴有汲黯、卜式，推举贤士有韩安国、郑当时，制定法律条令有赵禹、张汤，文章有司马迁、司马相如，滑稽有东方朔、枚皋，应对皇上提问有严助、朱买臣，历数有唐都、洛下闳，协调音律有李延年，运筹财政有桑弘羊，奉命出使有张骞、苏武，领兵有卫青、霍去病，受遣诏保幼主有霍光、金曰殚，其余不可胜记。
English: Talents from all walks of life flourished here. Confucianism was refined by Gongsunhong, Dongzhongshu and Ni Guang; loyalty by Shi Jian and Shi Qing; simplicity by Cu Ying and Pu Shih; wise men were selected by Han An Guo and Zheng Dang; laws were enacted by Zhao Yu and Zhang Tang; articles by Sima Qian and Sima Xiangru; comedy by Dongfangshuo and Hanyu; responses to questions from the emperor by Yan Su and Zhu Mai Chen; chronicles by Tangdu and Luo Jiajing; musical rhythms by Li Yan Nian; financial operations by Sang Hongyang; dispatched

古文：是以兴造功业，制度遗文，后世莫及。
现代文：因此兴造功业，制度遣文，后世不及。
English: Therefore, it is too late for future generations to create merits and send money.

古文：孝宣承统，纂修洪业，亦讲论六艺，招选茂异，而萧望之、梁丘贺、夏侯胜、韦玄成、严彭祖，尹更始以儒术进，刘向，王褒以文章显，将相则张安世、赵充国、魏相、丙吉、于定国、杜延年，治民则黄霸、王成、龚遂、郑弘、召信臣、韩延寿、尹翁归、赵广汉、严延年、张敞之属，皆有功迹见述于世。
现代文：孝宣承大统，继修宏伟帝业，讲论六艺，招选优秀人才，而萧望之、梁丘贺、夏侯胜、韦玄成、严彭祖、尹更始以儒术进升，刘向、王褒以文章显名，将相有张安世、赵充国、魏相、丙吉、于定国、杜延年，治民有黄霸、王成、龚遂、郑弘、召信臣、韩延寿、尹翁归、赵广漠、严延年、张敞之辈，皆有功迹见述于世。
English: Xiao Xuan inherited the great tradition, followed the great imperial cause, lectured on the six arts, and recruited outstanding talents, while Xiaowanzhi, Liang Qiuhe, Xia Hou Sheng, Wei Xuancheng, Yan Pengzu, and Yin Gangshi advanced with Confucianism, Liu Xiang and Wang Bao became famous for their articles, and Zhang Anshi, Zhao Chongguo, Wei Xiang, Bingji, Yu Dingguo, Du Yanneng, Huangba, Wang Cheng, Shuxui, Zheng Hong, Zhaoxin, Han Yanshou, Yin Wengui, Zhao Guangmai, Yan Yanneng, and

古文：参其名臣，亦其次也。
现代文：考其名臣，次于武帝时代的人才。
English: As a famous retainer, his talent is second only to that of Emperor Wu.

