古文：◎礼二
现代文：礼二
English: 2nd chorus

古文：郊祀郊祀配位郊祀仪注祈谷大雩大飨令节拜天
现代文：郊祀郊祀配位郊祀仪注祈谷大雩大飨令节拜天
English: Suburban rites Suburban rites coordination Suburban rites ceremony Chuchu prayer valley Daxing Daxing Festival worship

古文：郊祀之制
现代文：郊祀之制
English: Suburban worship system

古文：洪武元年，中书省臣李善长等奉敕撰进《郊祀议》，略言：
现代文：洪武元年，中书省大臣李善长等人奉敕命撰写进献《郊祀议》，大概说：
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Li Zhengrong, the Minister of the Ministry of Chinese Literature, and others were ordered to write the "Suburban Worship Proposal," which roughly said:

古文：王者事天明，事地察，故冬至报天，夏至报地，所以顺阴阳之义也。
现代文：做帝王的侍奉上天明鉴，侍奉大地明察，因而冬至日祭天，夏至日祭地，就是顺应阴阳的意思。
English: To serve the emperor is to serve the heavens, and to serve the earth is to serve the heavens. Therefore, to celebrate the winter solstice and the summer solstice is to follow the yin and yang.

古文：祭天于南郊之圜丘，祭地于北郊之方泽，所以顺阴阳之位也。
现代文：在南郊的圜丘祭天，在北郊的方泽祭地，就是顺应阴阳的方位。
English: In the southern suburb of Mengqiu Festival, in the northern suburb of Fangze Festival, it is the orientation that conforms to yin and yang.

古文：《周礼·大司乐》： 冬日至，礼天神，夏日至，礼地祇。 
现代文：《周礼，大司乐》中说： 冬至日，礼祭天神，夏至日，祭祀地祇。 
English: In "Weekly Rituals, Grand Celebration Music," it says: Winter solstice day, ritual deities, summer solstice day, ritual deities.

古文：《礼》曰： 享帝于郊，祀社于国。 
现代文：《礼》说： 茌郊外祭祀上天，在都城祭祀社神。 
English: "Ri" says: "It is better to offer sacrifices to the heavens in the suburbs than to offer sacrifices to the shrine gods in the capital."

古文：又曰： 郊所以明天道，社所以明地道。 
现代文：又说： 郊祀是用来明示天道，社祀是用来明示地道。 
English: He also said: Suburban worship is used to manifest the heavenly way, and social worship is used to manifest the earthly way.

古文：《书》曰： 敢昭告于皇天后土。 
现代文：《书》说： 敢请明白告示皇天后土。 
English: "The book" said: "Dare to clearly announce the empress dowager.

古文：按古者或曰地祇，或曰后土，或曰社，皆祭地，则皆对天而言也。
现代文：考察古代有时称为地只，有时称为后土，有时称为社，都是祭祀地，则都是相对于天而言。
English: In ancient times, the earth was sometimes called the terra firma, sometimes the hinterland, and sometimes the shrine. All of these were places of worship, but they were all relative to the heavens.

古文：此三代之正礼，而释经之正说。
现代文：这是三代的正礼，是解释经典的正确说法。
English: This is the formal etiquette of the three generations, and it is the correct way to explain the classics.

古文：自秦立四时，以祀白、青、黄、赤四帝。
现代文：从秦开始建立四时，用来祭祀白、青、黄、赤四帝。
English: Since the Qin Dynasty, the four o'clock position has been used to worship the white, blue, yellow and red emperors.

古文：汉高祖复增北畤，兼祀黑帝。
现代文：汉高祖又增加北时，同时祭祀黑帝。
English: The ancestors of the Han Dynasty also added the Northern Dynasty and worshipped the Black Emperor at the same time.

古文：至武帝有雍五畤，及渭阳五帝、甘泉太乙之祠，而昊天上帝之祭则未尝举行，魏、晋以后，宗郑玄者，以为天有六名，岁凡九祭。
现代文：到武帝有雍地的五时，以及渭水北岸的五帝、甘泉太乙的祠庙，但对昊天上帝的祭祀还不曾举行。魏、晋以后，推崇郑玄的人，主张上天有六个名称，每年有九次祭祀。
English: By the time of Emperor Wu, there were temples dedicated to the Five Emperors of the Yangtze and the Five Emperors of the Northern Bank of Surabaya, as well as the ancestral temple of Ganquan Taiyi, but sacrifices to Haotian God had not yet been held. After Wei and Jin Dynasties, people who revered Zheng Xuan advocated that there were six names for Heaven and that there should be nine sacrifices every year.

古文：宗王肃者，以为天体惟一，安得有六？
现代文：推崇王肃的人，认为天体是一个整体，怎么会分为六个？
English: Wang Su's admirers believe that the celestial body is a whole, so how can it be divided into six?

古文：一岁二祭，安得有九？
现代文：每年两次祭祀，怎么会有九次？
English: Two times a year, how can there be nine?

古文：虽因革不同，大抵多参二家之说。
现代文：虽然承继变革各有不同，但大多数都是参照了这两家的说法。
English: Although the succession of changes are different, most of them are based on the statements of these two companies.

古文：自汉武用祠官宽舒议，立后土祠于汾阴脽上，礼如祀天。
现代文：从汉武帝开始采纳祠官宽舒的建议，在汾阴雎上建立后土祠庙，如同祭天一样举行祭礼。
English: Emperor Hanwu began to adopt the suggestion of the ancestral hall official, Kanshu, to establish a Hotsuchi ancestral hall and temple on Jinyin Mountain, and held a festival like a festival.

古文：而后世因于北郊之外，仍祠后土。
现代文：后代就在北郊之外。仍祭祀后土。
English: Subsequent generations, just outside the northern suburbs, still worshipped Houchi.

古文：又郑玄惑于纬书，谓夏至于方丘之上祭昆仑之祇，七月于泰折之坛祭神州之祇，析而为二。
现代文：又因为郑玄被《纬书》迷惑，说夏至日在方丘之上祭祀昆仑之只，七月在祭祀地祇的泰折祭坛祭祀神州的地只，分为两次。
English: In addition, because Zheng Xuan was confused by the "Book of Latitude," he said that on the summer solstice, only the Kunlun was sacrificed on the square mound, and in July, only the Jinshou was sacrificed at the Tai-Fold Altar, which was the place of worship. It was divided into two times.

古文：后世又因之一岁二祭。
现代文：后代又沿袭为每年祭祀两次。
English: Subsequent generations have continued the tradition of holding the ritual twice a year.

古文：元始间，王莽奏罢甘泉泰畤，复长安南北郊。
现代文：元始年间，王莽奏请废除甘泉泰时，恢复长安南北郊的祭坛。
English: In the early years, Wang Mangso requested the abolition of Ganquan Taishi and the restoration of the altars in the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an.

古文：以正月上辛若丁，天子亲合祀天地于南郊。
现代文：在正月上辛日或丁日，天子亲自在南郊合祭天地。
English: On the first day of the first month, Shinnichi or Dingichi, the Son of Heaven will personally lead a festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：由汉历唐，千余年间，皆因之合祭。
现代文：从汉到唐，千余年间，都沿袭共同祭祀。
English: For more than a thousand years, from the Han Dynasty to the Tang Dynasty, common sacrificial rituals have been followed.

古文：其亲祀北郊者，惟魏文帝、周武帝、隋高祖、唐玄宗四帝而已。
现代文：亲祀北郊的，只有魏文帝、周武帝、隋高祖、唐玄宗四个皇帝而已。
English: Only four emperors, Wei Wen Di, Zhou Wu Di, Sui Gao Zu and Tang Xuan Zong, were worshipped in the northern suburbs.

古文：宋元丰中，议罢合祭。
现代文：宋朝元丰年间，议定罢除合祭的仪式。
English: During the Song Dynasty and Yuanfeng Dynasty, it was agreed to abolish the closing ceremony.

古文：绍圣、政和间，或分或合。
现代文：绍圣、政和年间，有时分祭、有时合祭。
English: During the years of Shoshen, Zhenghe, sometimes the sub-festival, sometimes the joint festival.

古文：高宗南渡以后，惟用合祭之礼。
现代文：高宗南渡以后，只举行合祭的礼仪。
English: After Gaozong went to the south, only the closing ceremony was held.

古文：元成宗始合祭天地五方帝，已而立南郊，专祀天。
现代文：元成宗开始共同祭祀天地五方之帝，不久建立南郊，专门祭祀上天。
English: The Yuancheng sect began to jointly offer sacrifices to the Emperor of Heaven, Earth, and the Five Directions, and soon established the southern suburb to specifically offer sacrifices to Heaven.

古文：泰定中，又合祭。
现代文：泰定年间，又合祭。
English: During the year of Taidai, the festival was held again.

古文：文宗至顺以后，惟祀昊天上帝。
现代文：文宗至顺以后，只祭祀昊天上帝。
English: After Wenzong and Shun, only Haotian God was worshipped.

古文：今当遵古制，分祭天地于南北郊。
现代文：而今应当遵从古代礼制，在南北郊分祭天地。
English: Now, however, it is necessary to follow the ancient ritual system and divide the festival into the northern and southern suburbs.

古文：冬至则祀昊天上帝于圜丘，以大明、夜明、星辰、太岁从祀。
现代文：冬至日则在圜丘祭祀昊天上帝，以大明、夜明、星辰、太岁陪从祭祀。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the god Haotian is worshipped in the Mengqiu, accompanied by Daming, Yaming, Xingchen and Tai Lian.

古文：夏至则祀皇地祇于方丘，以五岳、五镇、四海、四渎从祀。
现代文：夏至日在方丘祭祀皇地只，以五岳、五镇、四海、四渍陪从祭祀。
English: On the day of the summer solstice, only the imperial land is worshipped at Fangqiu, with the Five Mountains, Five Towns, Four Seas, and Four Lakes accompanying the worship.

古文：太祖如其议行之。
现代文：太祖按照他们的提议实行。
English: The great-grandfather acted on their suggestion.

古文：建圜丘于钟山之阳，方丘于钟山之阴。三年，增祀风云雷雨于圜丘，天下山川之神于方丘。
现代文：在钟山的南面建立圜丘，在钟山的北面建立方丘。三年，在圜丘增加祭祀风云雷雨，在方丘增加祭祀天下山川的神祗。
English: On the south side of the bell mountain, build a mound, and on the north side of the bell mountain, build a square mound. In three years, increase the worship of wind and thunderstorms in the mound, and increase the worship of the gods of the world's mountains and rivers in the square mound.

古文：七年，增设天下神祇坛于南北郊。
现代文：七年，在南北郊增设天下神祗坛。
English: In the seventh year, the world god altar was added in the northern and southern suburbs.

古文：九年，定郊社之礼，虽有三年丧，不废。
现代文：九年，规定郊社祭祀的礼仪，即使有三年的丧期，也不废弃。
English: Nine years ago, it was stipulated that the etiquette of the suburb's sacrificial rites would not be abandoned, even if there was a three-year mourning period.

古文：十年秋，太祖感斋居阴雨，览京房灾异之说，谓分祭天地，情有未安，命作大祀殿于南郊。
现代文：十年秋，太祖斋居时因阴雨天气而有所触动，阅读京房灾异的学说，说分别祭祀天地心中不安，命在南郊建造大祀殿。
English: In the autumn of the tenth year, when the great-grandfather was fasting, he was moved by the rainy weather, read the doctrine of the disaster of the Beijing House, said that he was uneasy in the heart of the world and the world, and ordered to build a large shrine in the southern suburb.

古文：是岁冬至，以殿工未成，乃合祀于奉天殿，而亲制祝文，意谓人君事天地犹父母，不宜异处。
现代文：这年冬至日，因为大殿尚未建成，就在奉天殿共同祭祀，皇帝亲自撰写祝祷文，大意说君王侍奉天地犹如侍奉自己的父母，不应当分作两处。
English: On the winter solstice of that year, because the main hall had not yet been built, they offered sacrifices together in the Bongten Hall. The emperor himself wrote a prayer, to the effect that kings should serve heaven and earth as if they were serving their own parents, and should not be divided into two places.

古文：遂定每岁合祀于孟春，为永制。
现代文：于是规定每年正月共同祭祀，作为固定制度。
English: As a result, it was stipulated that there would be a joint ritual every New Year's Day as a fixed system.

古文：十二年正月，始合祀于大祀殿，太祖亲作《大祀文》并歌九章。永乐十八年，京都大祀殿成，规制如南京。
现代文：十二年正月，开始在大祀殿合祭，太祖亲自撰写《大祀文》和歌九章永乐十八年，京都大祀殿建成，规模样式如同南塞。
English: In the first month of the twelfth year, the festival began at the Great Worship Hall. Taizu personally wrote "Great Worship Text" and nine chapters of waka poems. In the eighteenth year of Yongle, the Kyoto Great Worship Hall was built, with a scale and style similar to Nansai.

古文：南京旧郊坛，国有大事，则遣官告祭。
现代文：童京的旧郊祀坛，国家如果有大事，就派遣官员前往祭祀。
English: If there is an important event in the country, officials will be dispatched to the shrine.

古文：嘉靖九年，世宗既定《明伦大典》，益覃思制作之事，郊庙百神，咸欲斟酌古法，厘正旧章。
现代文：嘉靖九年，世宗制定《明伦大典》以后，更深思建立礼制的事，对郊庙供奉的众多神只，都想要斟酌古代的礼法，清理订正从前的礼制。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, after the establishment of the "Ming Lun Grand Code," the Sejong Dynasty thought more deeply about establishing a ritual system. For the many gods and goddesses worshiped in the suburban temples, they all wanted to consider the ancient etiquette, clean up and revise the former ritual system.

古文：乃问大学士张璁： 《书》称燔柴祭天，又曰 类于上帝 ，《孝经》曰： 郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝 ，以形体主宰之异言也。
现代文：于是问大学士张璁： 《尚书》中说焚烧木柴祭天，又说 类于上帝 ，《孝经》说， 郊祀后稷以配天，在明堂宗祀文王以配上帝 ，因形体主宰的不同而言。
English: He then asked Zhang Ye, a university scholar: "Shangshu" said that burning firewood was the best way to celebrate heaven, and also said that it was similar to God, "Chiao Jing" said that the suburbs worshiped Houyi to match the sky, and the Ming Hall worshiped King Wen to match God, due to the difference in form.

古文：朱子谓，祭之于坛谓之天，祭之屋下谓之帝。
现代文：朱子说，在祭坛祭祀称为天，在房屋下祭祀称为帝。
English: Zhu Zi said that at the altar, the sacrifice is called "Tian" and under the house, the sacrifice is called "Tei."

古文：今大祀有殿，是屋下之祭帝耳，未见有祭天之礼也。
现代文：而今大祀有宫殿，是在房屋下面祭祀帝而已，没有看见有祭天的礼仪。
English: Now, however, there is a palace for the emperor, but the emperor is only worshipped beneath the building, and there is no ritual for the celebration of heaven.

古文：况上帝皇地祇合祭一处，亦非专祭上帝。 
现代文：况且上帝和皇地只在一起共同祭祀，也不是专门祭祀上帝。 
English: Moreover, God and the imperial land were only sacrificed together, and not specifically to God.

古文：璁言： 国初遵古礼，分祭天地，后又合祀。
现代文：张璁说： 开国初期遵从古礼，分祭天地，后来又共同祭祀。
English: Zhang Ye said: In the early days of the founding of the country, the ancient rites were followed, the heaven and earth were divided, and later there were common sacrifices.

古文：说者谓大祀殿下坛上屋，屋即明堂，坛即圜丘，列圣相承，亦孔子从周之意。 
现代文：说礼的人认为，大祀殿下面是祭坛，上面是房屋，房屋就是明堂，祭坛就是圜丘，众多圣贤相传继承，也是孔子遵从《周礼》的意思。 
English: Preachers believe that beneath the Great Hall of Worship is the altar, above it is the house, the house is the Ming Hall, and the altar is the Mengqiu. Many saints and sages have been passed down from generation to generation, which is also the meaning of Confucius following the "Weekly Ritual."

古文：帝复谕璁： 二至分祀，万代不易之礼。
现代文：皇帝又训谕张璁说： 夏至、冬至两个至日分开祭祀，是万代不变的礼仪。
English: The emperor also ordered Zhang Ye to say: It is the invariable etiquette for all generations that the summer solstice and the winter solstice should be celebrated separately.

古文：今大祀殿拟周明堂或近矣，以为即圜丘，实无谓也。 
现代文：而今大祀殿模拟周代的明堂或者还接近，认焉造就是圜丘，其实毫无道理。 
English: Now, the Great Hall of Worship simulates the Myeongdong of the Zhou Dynasty, or is even close to it, and it is actually unreasonable to think that the Myeongdong is a mound.

古文：璁乃备述《周礼》及宋陈襄、苏轼、刘安世、程颐所议分合异同以对。
现代文：张璁就详细述说《周礼》以及宋代陈襄、苏轼、刘安世、程颐议论的分合异同的话来回答。
English: Zhang Ye replied by elaborating on the similarities and differences between "Weekly Ritual" and the discourses of Chen Xiang, Su Ye, Liu Anshi, and Cheng Ye in the Song Dynasty.

古文：且言祖制已定，无敢轻议。
现代文：并且说祖宗制度已经制定，不敢轻易议论。
English: He also said that the ancestor system had already been established and that he did not dare to discuss it lightly.

古文：帝锐欲定郊制，卜之奉先殿太祖前，不吉。
现代文：皇帝执意想要复位郊祀制度，在奉先殿太祖神位前占卜，不吉利。
English: The emperor was adamant that he wanted to restore the suburban worship system, and divined before the enthronement of the great-grandfather, which was unlucky.

古文：乃问大学士翟銮，銮具述因革以对。
现代文：于是询问大学士翟銮，翟銮详备陈述了所有礼制的沿革来回答。
English: So he asked a university scholar, who gave a detailed account of the history of all forms of etiquette.

古文：复问礼部尚书李时，时请少需日月，博选儒臣，议复古制。
现代文：又问礼部尚书李时，李时请求稍稍等待，广泛征选儒臣，商议恢复古代礼制。
English: He also asked the ceremonial department of Shangshu Li Si, Li Si asked to wait a little, extensively recruited Confucianism, and discussed the restoration of the ancient ceremonial system.

古文：帝复卜之太祖，不吉，议且寝。
现代文：皇帝又在太祖神位前占卜，不吉利，议论将停息。
English: The emperor also divined in front of the throne of the great ancestor, which was unlucky, and the discussion would stop.

古文：会给事中夏言请举亲蚕礼。
现代文：适逢给事中夏言请求举行皇后躬亲蚕事的典礼。
English: This coincided with a request from Natsugen to hold a ceremony in which the empress would personally officiate.

古文：帝以古者天子亲耕南郊，皇后亲蚕北郊，适与所议郊祀相表里，因令璁谕言陈郊议。
现代文：皇帝因为古代天子在南郊举行躬亲耕种的典礼，皇后在北郊举行躬亲蚕事的典礼，刚好与先前所讨论的郊祀礼密切相关，因此令张璁告诉夏言上奏郊祀的意见。
English: Because the emperor held a ceremony of cultivating in the southern suburb and the empress held a ceremony of sericulture in the northern suburb in ancient times, which was closely related to the previously discussed suburb worship ceremony, Zhang Ye told Xia Yan about the opinion of suburb worship.

古文：言乃上疏言： 国家合祀天地，及太祖、太宗之并配，诸坛之从祀，举行不于长至而于孟春，俱不应古典。
现代文：于是夏言上疏说： 国家共同祭祀天地，以及太祖、太宗的共同配祀，各坛的从祀，举行典礼不是在夏至日而是在初春，都不符合古代典章。
English: As a result, Natsugen Shozo said: The country's common sacrifice of heaven and earth, as well as the common worship of Taizu and Taizong, the worship of each altar, and the holding of the ceremony not on the summer solstice but in early spring, are not in line with ancient ceremonies.

古文：宜令群臣博考《诗》、《书》、《礼经》所载郊祀之文，及汉、宋诸儒匡衡、刘安世、朱熹等之定论，以及太祖国初分祀之旧制，陛下称制而裁定之。
现代文：应当令群臣广泛考察《诗》、《书》、《礼经》所记载的有关郊祀的文字，以及汉、宋诸儒士匡衡、刘安世、朱熹等人的定论，以及太祖开国初期分别祭祀的旧制，由皇上下旨裁定。
English: The group of ministers should be ordered to extensively examine the texts related to suburban worship recorded in "Poems," "Books" and "Rituals," as well as the conclusions of Han, Song and other Confucianists Kuangheng, Liu Anshi, Zhu Xi and others, as well as the old system of separate sacrifices in the early days of the founding of the country, to be decided by the emperor.

古文：此中兴大业也。 
现代文：这是中兴的大功业。 
English: This is ZTE's great achievement.

古文：礼科给事中王汝梅等诋言说非是，帝切责之。
现代文：礼科给事中王汝梅等人谴责夏言的说法不对，皇帝狠狠地责备了他们。
English: In the matter of etiquette, Wang Rumei and others condemned Xia Yan's statement as wrong, and the emperor severely rebuked them.

古文：乃敕礼部令群臣各陈所见。
现代文：于是敕命礼部令群臣各抒己见。
English: As a result, the Imperial Household Agency ordered the retainers to express their opinions.

古文：且言： 汝梅等举《召诰》中郊用二牛，谓明言合祭天地。
现代文：并且说： 王汝梅等人举出《召诰》当中说郊祀用两头牛，认为已经明白显示是共同祭祀天地。
English: And he said, "Wang Rumei and others pointed out that in the "Call to Prayer" it was said that two cows were used for suburban worship, and they thought that it had been clearly shown that it was a common sacrifice of heaven and earth.

古文：夫用二牛者，一帝一配位，非天地各一牛也。
现代文：用两头牛，是一个上帝，一个配位，不是天地各享一头牛。
English: With two cows, there is one God, one coordination, not one cow shared by heaven and earth.

古文：又或谓天地合祀，乃人子事父母之道，拟之夫妇同牢。
现代文：又有人认为天地共同祭祀是因为人子事奉父母的道理，比拟为夫妇共同享用祭牲。
English: Some people also think that the reason why heaven and earth offer sacrifices together is that human beings should serve their parents, and it is more appropriate for a husband and wife to enjoy the sacrifices together.

古文：此等言论，亵慢已甚。
现代文：这些言论，亵渎轻慢太严重。
English: These comments, the profanity, the pettiness, are too serious.

古文：又或谓郊为祀天，社稷为祭地。
现代文：又有人说郊祀就是祭天，祭祀社稷就是祭地。
English: Some people also say that the suburb is the festival heaven, and the festival shrine is the festival ground.

古文：古无北郊，夫社乃祭五土之祇，犹言五方帝耳，非皇地祇也。
现代文：古代没有北郊祭祀，社祭是祭祀五方土地的地只，如同说五方帝而已，不是皇地祇。
English: In ancient times, there were no festivals in the northern suburbs, and the shrine festival was a celebration of the land of the Five Directions, as if it were the Emperor of the Five Directions, not the Emperor of the Empire.

古文：社之名不同，自天子以下，皆得随所在而祭之。
现代文：社祭的名称不同，从天子以下，都可以在所在之地祭祀。
English: The name of the social festival is different, from the emperor down, all can be sacrificed in the place where they are located.

古文：故《礼》有 亲地 之说，非谓祭社即方泽祭地也。 
现代文：因此《礼》有 亲地 的说法，不是说祭社就是方泽的祭祀地祇。 
English: Therefore, "Ri" is said to be close to the land, not to say that the shrine is the place of worship of Fangze.

古文：璁因录上《郊祀考议》一册。
现代文：张璁因此记录呈上《郊祀考议》一册。
English: As a result, Zhang Ye submitted a copy of "Suburban Worship Consideration" for record.

古文：时詹事霍韬深非郊议，且言分祀之说，惟见《周礼》，莽贼伪书，不足引据，于是言复上疏言：《周礼》一书，于祭祀为详。
现代文：当时詹事霍韬十分反对郊祀的议论，并且说分别祭祀的说法，只见于《周礼》，王莽贼子伪造经典，不足以引为根据。于是夏言又上疏说：《周礼》一书，对祭祀记载得尤为详细。
English: At that time, Zhan Zhihuo was very opposed to the discussion of suburban rites, and said that the argument of separate sacrifices was only found in the "Weekly Ritual," and Wang Mangzi forged the classics, which was not enough to cite as a basis. Therefore, Xia Yan also said: "Weekly Ritual" is a book that records the sacrifices in particular detail.

古文：《大宗伯》以祀天神，则有禋祀、实柴、槱燎之礼，以祀地祇，则有血祭、沈、趯辜之礼。
现代文：《大宗伯》记载祭祀天神，就有里祀、实柴、杠燎的礼仪，祭祀地只，就有血祭、藐沈、诟辜的礼仪。
English: "Daizongbo" records that the rituals for worshipping the Tenjin included the rituals for worshipping the mountain, the solid wood, and the wooden pole, while the rituals for worshipping the land included the rituals for blood sacrifice, defilement, and defilement.

古文：《大司乐》冬至日，地上圜丘之制，则曰礼天神，夏至日，泽中方丘之制，则曰礼地祇。
现代文：《大司乐》记载冬至日，陆地上圜丘的制度，称为礼祀天神；夏至日，水泽中方丘的制度，称为礼祭地只。
English: "Daisiraku" records that on the day of the winter solstice, the system of earthen mounds on the land is called the ritual of Tenjin; on the day of the summer solstice, the system of Mizusawa Chinese mounds is called the ritual site.

古文：天地分祀，从来久矣。
现代文：对天地分开祭祀，已经有久远的来历了。
English: Separate sacrifices for heaven and earth have a long history.

古文：故宋儒叶时之言曰： 郊丘分合之说，当以《周礼》为定。 
现代文：因此宋儒叶时说： 郊祀丘祀分合的说法，应当以《周礼》为准则。 
English: Therefore, Song Confucius said: The saying of suburb worship, hill worship, and branch worship should be based on the "Weekly Rituals."

古文：今议者既以大社为祭地，则南郊自不当祭皇地祇，何又以分祭为不可也？
现代文：而今众人议论以大社为祭地，那么南郊自然不应当祭皇地祇，为什么又说分祭不行呢？
English: But now everyone is talking about using the grand shrine as a place of worship, so of course the southern suburbs should not be used to worship the imperial deity, so why is it not OK to have a sub-festival?

古文：合祭之说，实自莽始，汉之前皆主分祭，而汉之后亦间有之。
现代文：共同祭祀的说法其实是从王莽开始的，漠以前都主张分祭，并且汉以后也间或有分祭。
English: The idea of a common sacrifice actually began with Wang Mang. Prior to the Han Dynasty, they all advocated a separate sacrifice, and after the Han Dynasty, there was also a separate sacrifice.

古文：宋元丰一议，元祐再议，绍圣三议，皆主合祭，而卒不可移者，以郊赉之费，每倾府藏，故省约安简便耳，亦未尝以分祭为礼也。
现代文：宋代元丰年间第一次议论，元佑年间第二次议论，绍圣年问第三次议论，都主张共同祭祀，而最终不能再改变，是因为郊祀的开销，每每用尽国库的储备，因此就节约减省一些而已，并不曾因为分祭不合乎礼仪。
English: The first discussion during the Song Dynasty, the first discussion during the Yuan Dynasty, the second discussion during the Yuan Dynasty, and the third discussion during the Shao Dynasty, all advocated common sacrifice, but ultimately could not be changed, because the cost of suburban worship, every time exhausted the reserves of the national treasury, so it was only a matter of saving and saving, and it was not because the offering was not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：今之议者，往往以太祖之制为嫌为惧。
现代文：而今议论的人，往往因为是太祖的制度而避嫌、惧怕。
English: However, those who speak out now are often shunned and feared because of the patriarchal system.

古文：然知合祭乃太祖之定制，为不可改，而不知分祭固太祖之初制，为可复。
现代文：然而他们只知道共同祭祀是太祖的定制，是不能更改的，却不知道分祭本来就是太祖的最初礼制，是可以恢复的。
English: However, they only know that the common sacrifice is the custom of the great ancestor and cannot be changed, but they do not know that the offering is the original ritual of the great ancestor and can be restored.

古文：知《大祀文》乃太祖之明训，为不可背，而不知《存心录》固太祖之著典，为可遵。
现代文：只知道《大祀文》是太祖的明训，不能够违背，却不知道《存心录》本来就是太祖的著作，是应当遵守的。
English: They only know that "Daishibun" is a clear teaching of the great-grandfather and cannot be violated, but they do not know that "Zenshinroku" was originally a work of the great-grandfather and should be observed.

古文：且皆太祖之制也，从其礼之是者而已。
现代文：况且都是太祖定下的制度，按照礼仪中正确的遵守就是了。
English: What's more, they are all systems set down by the great-grandfather, and it's just a matter of following the correct etiquette.

古文：敬天法祖，无二道也。
现代文：敬畏上天遵从祖训，并没有别的道路。
English: There is no other way but to fear God and follow the teachings of our ancestors.

古文：《周礼》一书，朱子以为周公辅导成王，垂法后世，用意最深切，何可诬以莽之伪为耶？
现代文：《周礼》一书，朱子认为是周公辅佐盛王而作，为后代作榜样，用意最为深刻切实，怎么可以诬枉为是王莽的伪作呢？
English: How can the book "Zhou Li," which Zhu Zi believed to have been written by Zhou Gongfu as an example for future generations, be falsified as Wang Mang's forgery?

古文：且合祭以后配地，实自莽始。
现代文：况且共同祭祀以后配祀地，事实是从王莽开始的。
English: Moreover, the fact that the common sacrifice was followed by the matching of places of worship began with Wang Mang.

古文：莽既伪为是书，何不削去圜丘、方丘之制，天神地祇之祭，而自为一说耶？
现代文：王莽既然伪造了这部书，为何不删去圜丘、方丘的制度，天神地祇的祭祀，而自成一说呢？
English: Since Wang Mang forged this book, why didn't he delete the system of mounds and square mounds, the sacrifices of gods and goddesses, and say it himself?

古文：于是礼部集上群臣所议郊礼，奏曰： 主分祭者，都御史汪鋐等八十二人，主分祭而以慎重成宪及时未可为言者，大学士张璁等八十四人，主分祭而以山川坛为方丘者，尚书李瓒等二十六人，主合祭而不以分祭为非者，尚书方献夫等二百六人，无可否者，英国公张仑等一百九十八人。
现代文：于是礼部总结了群臣对郊礼的议论，上奏说： 主张分祭的，是都御史汪铉等八十二人；主张分祭而以慎重对待既成制度及时不可为言的，是大学士张璁等八十四人；主张分祭而以山川坛焉方丘的，是尚书李瓒等二十六人；主张共同祭祀而不认为分祭是错误的，是尚书方献夫等二百零六人；不置可否的，是英国公张仑等一百九十八人。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Ceremonies summed up the discussion of the courtiers on the suburban rite, and said in the report: Those who advocated the division of the sacrifice were eighty-two people such as the governor Wang Xi; those who advocated the division of the sacrifice and carefully treated the established system in a timely manner were eighty-four people such as the university scholar Zhang Xi; those who advocated the division of the sacrifice and used the mountain and river altar as the hill were twenty-six people such as Shangshu Li Xi; those who advocated the common sacrifice without thinking that the division of the sacrifice was wrong were two hundred and six people such as Shangshu's offering; and those who

古文：臣等祗奉敕谕，折衷众论。
现代文：臣等敬奉御旨，折衷众人的议论。
English: The vassals and others respectfully obeyed the Emperor's will, and everyone's discussion was a compromise.

古文：分祀之义，合于古礼，但坛壝一建，工役浩繁。
现代文：分别祭祀约道理，合乎古代的礼仪，但祭坛的建造，工程浩大。
English: The principle of separate sacrificial rites is consistent with ancient etiquette, but the construction of the altar is a huge project.

古文：《礼》，屋祭曰帝，夫既称昊天上帝，则当屋祭。
现代文：《礼》中说，在房屋中祭祀称帝，既然称为昊天上帝，就应当在屋宇中受祭。
English: "Rite" says that since it is called Haotian God, it should be sacrificed in the house.

古文：宜仍于大祀殿专祀上帝，改山川坛为地坛，以专祀皇地祇。
现代文：应该仍旧在大丰堑璧专门祭祀上帝，改山川坛为地坛，用来专门祭祀皇地祇。
English: It should still be dedicated to the worship of God in Dafeng Temple, and the altar of mountains and rivers should be changed to the altar of earth, which should be dedicated to the worship of the imperial deity.

古文：既无创建之劳，行礼亦便。 
现代文：既没有开工建造祭坛的劳役耗费，行礼也方便。 
English: There is no need to start building the altar, and it is convenient to perform the ritual.

古文：帝复谕当遵皇祖旧制，露祭于坛，分南北郊，以二至日行事。
现代文：皇帝又谕令应当遵从皇祖的旧制，在祭坛上露天祭祀，分为南北郊，在两个至日举行祭祀礼。
English: The emperor also decreed that the old system of the emperor's ancestors should be followed, with open-air sacrifices on the altar, divided into the northern and southern suburbs, and the sacrificial rites held on the two solstices.

古文：言乃奏曰： 南郊合祀，循袭已久，朱子所谓千五六百年无人整理。
现代文：夏言就上奏说： 南郊共同祭祀，沿袭已久，朱子所说的一千五六百年来无人整理。
English: Natsugen made the following comment: The common sacrificial rites in the southern suburbs have been handed down for a long time, and as Zhu Zi said, no one has sorted them out for the last fifteen hundred years.

古文：而陛下独破千古之谬，一理举行，诚可谓建诸天地而不悖者也。 
现代文：而陛下独自打破千古的谬误，一旦举行，真可以说得上建立了经天纬地的功业而不会违背了。 
English: And His Majesty alone has broken the fallacy of thousands of years. Once it is held, it can truly be said that it has established the cause of heaven and earth and will not be violated.

古文：已而命户、礼、工三部偕言等诣南郊相择。
现代文：不久命户、礼、工三部，偕同夏言等人到南郊相看风水选择地址。
English: Soon, the three departments of household, etiquette, and work were appointed, and Yu Tong and Xia Yan and others went to the southern suburbs to look at the feng shui to choose the address.

古文：南天门外有自然之丘，咸谓旧丘地位偏东，不宜袭用。
现代文：南天门外有自然的丘陵，都说旧有的丘陵位置偏束，不宜袭用。
English: There are natural hills outside the Nantian Gate, and it is said that the old hills are too far apart and should not be used.

古文：礼臣欲于具服殿少南为圜丘。
现代文：礼部大臣想在具服殿稍微偏南的地方建造圜丘。
English: The minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies wants to build a mound in a place slightly south of Gufutsu-den.

古文：言复奏曰： 圜丘祀天，宜即高敞，以展对越之敬。
现代文：夏言又上奏说： 圜丘是祭祀上天的地方，应当在地势高而宽敞的地方，以便展示对天地神灵的敬意。
English: Natsugen also made a report, saying, "Mount Mugu is a place to offer sacrifices to the heavens, and it should be in a high and spacious place in order to show respect for the gods of heaven and earth.

古文：大祀殿享帝，宜即清閟，以尽昭事之诚。
现代文：大祀殿祭享上帝，应当清净隐蔽，以便尽到祭祀的诚意。
English: A great hall of worship dedicated to God should be kept clean and hidden, so that the sincerity of the sacrifice can be fulfilled.

古文：二祭时义不同，则坛殿相去，亦宜有所区别。
现代文：两次祭祀时间意义不同，那么殿坛之间的距离，也应当有所区别。
English: If the significance of the time of the two sacrifices is different, then the distance between the altars should also be different.

古文：乞于具服殿稍南为大祀殿，而圜丘更移于前，体势峻极，可与大祀殿等。 
现代文：请求在具服殿稍微偏南的地方建造大祀殿，而圜丘更移到前方，形势高峻，可以和大祀殿等高。 
English: The request is to build the Great Shrine in a place slightly south of the Gufutsu-den, and the Shizuku-dake is moved further forward, the situation is steep, and it can be as high as the Great Shrine.

古文：制曰 可 。
现代文：制命说 可以 。
English: Emperor Jing agreed.

古文：于是作圜丘，是年十月工成。
现代文：于是修筑圜丘，这年十月竣工。
English: As a result, the construction of Shizukuoka was completed in October of that year.

古文：明年夏，北郊及东、西郊，亦以次告成，而分祀之制遂定。
现代文：第二年夏天，北郊以及束、西郊，也依次完工，而分祀的制度也就确定下来了。
English: In the summer of the following year, the northern suburb, as well as the western suburb and the western suburb of Sokcho, were also completed in turn, and the system of sub-shrines was established.

古文：万历三年，大学士张居正等辑《郊祀新旧图考》进呈。
现代文：万历三年，大学士张居正等人纂集《郊祀新旧图考》进献。
English: After three years, Zhang Juzheng, a university scholar, and others compiled a collection of "New and Old Pictures of Suburban Rituals" and submitted it.

古文：旧礼者，太祖所定。
现代文：旧礼，是太祖制定的。
English: The old rituals were established by the great ancestors.

古文：新礼者，世宗所定也。
现代文：新礼，是世宗制定的。
English: The new rite was established by King Sejong.

古文：郊祀配位
现代文：郊祀配位
English: Suburban worship coordination

古文：洪武元年，始有事于南郊。
现代文：洪武元年，开始在南郊举行祭祀仪式。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, they began to hold sacrificial ceremonies in the southern suburbs.

古文：有司议配祀。
现代文：有关部门商量配祀的事情。
English: The relevant departments will discuss the matter of matching.

古文：太祖谦让不许，亲为文告太庙曰： 历代有天下者，皆以祖配天。
现代文：太祖谦让不允许，亲自写下祭文告祭太庙说： 历代据有天下的帝王，都以祖先配祀上天。
English: Emperor Taizu did not allow it, and personally wrote down a ritual to announce it to the Imperial Temple, saying: All the emperors throughout the ages have been enshrined in heaven with their ancestors.

古文：臣独不敢者，以臣功业有未就，政治有阙失。
现代文：惟独臣不敢，是因为功业尚未完成，朝政国事尚有阙失。
English: However, the vassal did not dare to do so, because the work was not yet completed, and there were still shortcomings in the affairs of state of the dynasty.

古文：去年上天垂戒，有声东南，雷火焚舟击殿吻，早暮兢惕，恐无以承上帝好生之德，故不敢辄奉以配。
现代文：去年上天降下警戒，东南部有声响，雷火焚烧了船只击毁了殿吻，我时时刻刻谨慎警惕，惟恐没有什么来接续上帝好生之德，因而不敢轻易供奉配祀。
English: Last year, the heavens dropped a warning, there was a rumble in the southeast, thunder and lightning burned the ships and destroyed the palace kiss. I am always cautious and vigilant, fearing that there is nothing to continue God's virtuous life, so I dare not easily worship.

古文：惟祖神与天通，上帝有问，愿以臣所行奏帝前，善恶无隐。
现代文：只是祖先出神灵与上天相通，上帝如果问起，祈望把臣的所作所马上奏上帝面前，善恶都不要隐瞒。
English: It is just that the spirits of our ancestors are in communication with the heavens. If God asks, we should pray that the deeds of our vassals are immediately reported to God, and we should not hide either good or evil.

古文：候南郊竣事，臣率百司恭诣庙廷，告成大礼，以共享上帝之锡福。 明年夏至，将祀方丘，群臣复请。
现代文：八月，庆阳平定。十一月冬至日，群臣又坚决请求。
English: In August, Qingyang was pacified. On the day of the winter solstice in November, the ministers again made a firm request.

古文：乃奉皇考仁祖淳皇帝配天于圜丘。
现代文：于是在圜丘奉皇考仁祖淳皇帝配祀上天。
English: Therefore, Emperor Jianzuchun was enshrined in the imperial examination hall at Mengqiu.

古文：明年祀方丘，亦如之。
现代文：第二年，祭祀方丘，同样照此办理。
English: In the second year, the ritual on the square mound was carried out in the same way.

古文：建文元年，改奉太祖配。
现代文：建文元年改为奉太祖配祀。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, it was changed to honoring the great-grandfather.

古文：洪熙改元，敕曰： 太祖受命上天，肇兴皇业。
现代文：洪熙元年，救命说： 太祖受命于上天，兴起创建帝业。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the lifeguard said: Grandfather was ordered by heaven to rise up and create an empire.

古文：太宗中兴宗社，再奠寰区。
现代文：太宗中兴宗庙社稷，再次奠定天下。
English: Taizong Zhongxing Zongmiao Shrine, once again laid the foundation of the world.

古文：圣德神功，咸配天地。
现代文：圣德神功，都可以配祀天地。
English: Both heaven and earth can be worshipped together with the sacred virtue, Shengong.

古文：《易》曰， 殷荐上帝，以配祖考 。
现代文：《易》说： 殷奉享上帝，以配祀祖考 。
English: "Yi" said, "Worship God and be worthy of worshiping the ancestors."

古文：朕崇敬祖考，永惟一心。
现代文：朕崇敬祖考，永远一心一意。
English: I revere my ancestors, and I will always be single-minded.

古文：正月十五日，大祀天地神祇，奉皇祖、皇考以配。 
现代文：正月十五日大祀天神地只，奉皇祖、皇考配祀。 
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the year, the main shrine was dedicated to Tenjin, with offerings to the emperor's ancestors and the imperial examinations.

古文：遂于郊祀前告太庙及几筵，请太祖、太宗并配。
现代文：于是在郊祀前告祭太庙及灵座，请太祖、太宗共同配祀。
English: Therefore, before the suburban worship, the temple and the shrine were announced, and the great ancestor and the great patriarch were invited to worship together.

古文：嘉靖九年，给事中夏言上疏言： 太祖、太宗并配，父子同列，稽之经旨，未能无疑。
现代文：嘉靖九年，给事中夏言上疏说： 太祖、太宗一并配祀，父子同列，察考经书旨意，不能说没有疑问。
English: In the 9th year of the Jiajing era, Xia Yanzhong said: "The great-grandfather and the great-grandfather are enshrined together, and the father and son are in the same row. Looking at the will of the scriptures, it cannot be said that there is no doubt.

古文：臣谓周人郊祀后稷以配天，太祖足当之。
现代文：臣认为周人郊祀后稷以配祀上天，太祖足以当之。
English: The vassal thought that after Zhou was enshrined in the suburbs, he would be enshrined in heaven as a match, and that the great-grandfather would be enough.

古文：宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝，太宗足当之。 
现代文：在明堂宗祀文王以配祀上帝，太宗足以当之。 
English: In Myeongdong, the king of literature is worshipped as a god, and Taejong is worthy of it.

古文：礼臣集议，以为二祖配享，百有余年，不宜一旦轻改。
现代文：礼部大臣会集商议，认为二祖配享，已有一百多年，不宜轻易改动。
English: The Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies will hold a meeting to discuss the matter, and it is believed that the two ancestors have shared it for more than a hundred years, and it is not appropriate to change it easily.

古文：帝降敕谕，欲于二至日奉太祖配南、北郊，岁首奉太宗配上帝于大祀殿。
现代文：皇帝降下敕谕，希望在两个至日奉太祖配祀南、北郊，正月初一在大祀殿奉太宗配祀上帝。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, hoping to enshrine the great-grandfather in the southern and northern suburbs on the two solstices, and to enshrine the great-grandfather in the Great Hall of Worship on the first day of the first month.

古文：于是大学士张璁、翟銮等言，二祖分配，于义未协，且录仁宗年撰敕谕并告庙文以进。
现代文：于是大学士张璁、翟銮等人说，二祖分别配祀，在礼法上不妥当，并且抄录了仁宗撰写的敕谕和告庙文进献。
English: As a result, university scholars Zhang Jun, Zou and others said that it was inappropriate in terms of etiquette and law for the two ancestors to be enshrined separately, and copied the imperial edict and proclamation to the temple written by Rinzong.

古文：帝复命集议于东阁，皆以为： 太庙之祀，列圣昭穆相向，无嫌并列。
现代文：皇帝又命在东阁会集商议，都认为： 太庙的祭祀，众先圣按昭穆次序相向排列，没有并列的嫌疑。
English: The emperor also ordered them to gather in the East Pavilion for discussion, and they all agreed that: The sacrificial rites of the Great Temple, the first saints are arranged in the order of Shomu, and there is no suspicion of juxtaposition.

古文：况太祖、太宗，功德并隆，圜丘、大祀殿所祀，均之为天，则配天之祖，不宜阙一。
现代文：何况太祖、太宗，功德同等盛大，圜丘、大祀殿所祭祀的，总之都是上天，那么配享上天的祖先，不宜阙失一个。
English: What's more, great ancestors and great sects have equally great merits, and those who are enshrined at the Great Memorial Hall and the Great Memorial Hall are all from heaven, so it is not appropriate to lose one ancestor who is entitled to enjoy heaven.

古文：臣等窃议南、北郊及大祀殿，每祭皆宜二祖并配。 
现代文：臣等私下认为南、北郊及大祀殿，每次祭祀都应当二祖共同配祀。 
English: Privately, the vassals believed that the south, the northern suburbs, and the main hall of worship should be jointly dedicated to the two ancestors for each worship.

古文：帝终以并配非礼，谕阁臣讲求。
现代文：皇帝最终因为并配不符合礼法，谕令内阁大臣商讨。
English: In the end, the emperor ordered the cabinet ministers to discuss the matter because the match was not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：璁等言： 《礼》曰： 有其举之，莫敢废也。 
现代文：张璁等人说： 《礼》说： 有就要进行，没有人敢废除。 
English: Zhang Ye and others said: "The Ritual says: If it exists, it must be carried out, and no one dares to abolish it.

古文：凡祭尽然，况祖宗配享大典？
现代文：所有祭祀都是这样，何况祖宗配祀的大典呢？
English: All sacrificial rites are like this, not to mention the great ceremony of ancestor worship.

古文：且古者郊与明堂异地，故可分配。
现代文：而且古代郊祀与明堂不在同一个地方，因而可以分别配祀。
English: Moreover, the ancient suburb shrine and Myeongdong are not in the same place, so they can be enshrined separately.

古文：今圜丘、大祀殿同兆南郊，冬至礼行于报而太宗不与，孟春礼行于祈而太祖不与，心实有所不安。 
现代文：而今圜丘、大祀殿同在南郊，冬至日行报礼而太宗不参与，孟春行祈礼而太祖不参与，心中确实有所不安。 
English: Now, Mengqiu and the Great Hall of Worship are both in the southern suburbs. On the day of the winter solstice, Taizong does not participate in the ceremony, and Mengchun does not participate in the ceremony. I am really uneasy in my heart.

古文：帝复报曰： 万物本乎天，人本乎祖。
现代文：皇帝又回复说： 万物本于天，人本于祖。
English: The emperor replied, "All things originate from heaven, and man originates from the ancestors.

古文：天惟一天，祖亦惟一祖。
现代文：天只有一个天，祖先也祇有一个祖先。
English: There is only one heaven, and there is only one ancestor.

古文：故大报天之祀，止当以高皇帝配。
现代文：因而大报上天的祭祀，只应当以高皇帝配祀。
English: As a result, only the emperor Gao should be worshipped in the sacrificial rites that are publicly announced.

古文：文皇帝功德，岂不可配天？
现代文：文皇帝的功德，难道不可以配祀上天吗？
English: Isn't it possible that Emperor Wen's merits are worthy of being enshrined in heaven?

古文：但开天立极，本高皇帝肇之耳。
现代文：然而开辟天下基业，本来是从高皇帝开始的。
English: However, it was originally Emperor Gao who started the foundation of the world.

古文：如周之王业，武王实成之，而配天止以后稷，配上帝止以文王，当时未闻争辨功德也。 
现代文：如同周的王业，实际是由武王完成的，但配祀上天只以后稷，配祀上帝只以文王，当时并未听说争辩功德。 
English: Just like Zhou's royal career, it was actually accomplished by King Wu, but only Emperor Wu was considered worthy of worship, and only King Wen was considered worthy of worship. At that time, it was unheard of to dispute one's merits.

古文：因命寝其议。
现代文：因而下令停止议论。
English: He therefore ordered a halt to the discussion.

古文：已而夏言复疏言： 虞、夏、殷、周之郊，惟配一祖。
现代文：不久夏言又上疏说： 虞、夏、商、周的郊祀，只配祀一个祖先。
English: Not long after, Natsugen went on to say: Suburban worship of Yu, Xia, Shang and Zhou is only suitable for worshipping one ancestor.

古文：后儒穿凿，分郊丘为二，及误解《大易》配考、《孝经》严父之义。
现代文：后儒穿凿附会，把郊、丘一分为二，又误解《大易》配考、《孝经》严父的义理。
English: Later, the Confucianists divided the suburb and the hill into two, and misunderstood the meaning of the strict father in "Dai Yi" and "Xiao Jing."

古文：以致唐、宋变古，乃有二祖并侑，三帝并配之事。
现代文：以致唐、宋变乱古法，纔有二祖并享，三帝并配的事情。
English: As a result, the Tang and Song dynasties changed the ancient law, and there were two ancestors and three emperors.

古文：望断自宸衷，依前敕旨。 
现代文：祈望按皇上心意判定，依从此前的敕旨。 
English: Prayers will be conducted in accordance with the Emperor's wishes, in accordance with the Emperor's previous edict.

古文：帝报曰： 礼臣前引太庙不嫌一堂。
现代文：皇帝回复说： 礼部大臣此前引证太庙中没有同堂共列的嫌疑。
English: The emperor replied, "The Minister of Ceremonies previously cited the fact that there was no suspicion of cohabitation in the Great Temple.

古文：夫祀帝与享先不同，此说无当。 
现代文：其实祭祀上帝和祭享祖先不同，这说法不妥当。 
English: In fact, it is not correct to say that worshiping God is different from worshiping ancestors.

古文：仍命申议。
现代文：仍旧命进一步商议。
English: There is still time for further discussion.

古文：于是礼臣复上议： 南北郊虽曰祖制，实今日新创。
现代文：于是礼部大臣又上奏： 南北郊虽然是祖制，寅际是今天的新创举。
English: As a result, the Minister of Ceremonies played up again: Although the southern and northern suburbs are the ancestral system, Taninji is today's new initiative.

古文：请如圣谕，俱奉太祖独配。
现代文：请求依照圣上谕令，都供奉太祖单独配祀。
English: Requests are made in accordance with the holy edict, and both are offered to the great-grandfather separately.

古文：至大祀殿则太祖所创，今乃不得侑享于中，恐太宗未安，宜仍奉二祖并配。 
现代文：至于大祀殿则是太祖创建的，而今反而不能在那里得到配享，恐怕太宗不安，应当仍旧奉二祖共同配祀。 
English: As for the Great Hall of Worship, it was founded by Taizu, but now it cannot be shared there. I am afraid that Taizong is uneasy and should still worship the two ancestors together.

古文：遂依拟行之。郊祀仪注
现代文：于是按照拟定的建议实行。郊祀仪注
English: Therefore, it was implemented in accordance with the proposed recommendations.

古文：洪武元年冬至，祀昊天上帝于圜丘。
现代文：洪武元年冬至，在圜丘祭祀昊天上帝。
English: On the winter solstice of the first year of Hongwu, the god Haotian was worshipped in the mountains.

古文：先期，皇帝散斋四日，致斋三日。
现代文：在这之前，皇帝实行散斋四日，致斋三日。
English: Prior to this, the emperor practiced fasting for four days and fasting for three days.

古文：前祀二日，皇帝服通天冠、绛纱袍省牲器。
现代文：祭祀前两天，皇帝戴通天冠、穿绛纱袍视察祭牲祭器。
English: Two days before the sacrifice, the emperor, wearing a crown and a gauze robe, inspected the sacrificial vessels.

古文：次日，有司陈设。
现代文：第二天，官吏陈列摆放好。
English: The next day, the officials were displayed.

古文：祭之日，清晨车驾至大次，太常卿奏中严，皇帝服衮冕。
现代文：祭祀当天，清晨车驾到达祭祀时休息的大帐篷，太常卿奏请中庭戒严，皇帝穿戴衮服冠冕。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, in the early morning, when the carriage arrived at the large tent for resting during the sacrifice, Emperor Taizong declared martial law in the atrium, and the emperor wore the imperial crown.

古文：奏外办，皇帝入就位，赞礼唱迎神。协律郎举麾奏《中和之曲》。
现代文：奏请警卫宫禁，皇帝进入就位。赞礼唱迎神，协律郎举麾奏《中和之曲》。
English: The guards were asked to play the imperial banquet, and the emperor took his seat. A hymn was sung to welcome the god, and the handmaidens raised the cymbals to play the "Song of Neutrality."

古文：赞礼唱燔柴，郊社令升烟，燔全犊于燎坛。
现代文：赞礼宣唱燔柴，郊社下令点火升烟，在燎坛燔烤整头牛犊。
English: Bonfires were sung in praise, and the suburb ordered the smoke to rise from the flames, roasting a whole head of beef in the fire.

古文：赞礼唱请行礼，太常卿奏有司谨具，请行事。
现代文：赞礼宣唱请行礼，太常卿奏谙主管官吏妥善准备，奏请进行祭祀。
English: Pray for the chanting of praises, and the officials in charge of the chanting of praises should properly prepare and perform the ritual.

古文：皇帝再拜，皇太子及在位官皆再拜。
现代文：皇帝行再拜礼，皇太子及在位官员行再拜礼。
English: The emperor will perform the second prostration, and the crown prince and the officials in office will perform the second prostration.

古文：赞礼唱奠玉帛，皇帝诣盥洗位。
现代文：赞礼宣唱进献玉帛，皇帝到盥洗位。
English: A hymn of praise was sung for the presentation of the jade bowl, and the emperor went to the lavatory.

古文：太常卿赞曰： 前期斋戒，今辰奉祭，加其清洁，以对神明。 
现代文：太常卿赞唱道： 在此之前斋戒，此时奉祭，加倍清洁，以对神明。 
English: "Before this, you fasted. At this time, you offer a sacrifice, which is twice as pure, to appease the gods.

古文：皇帝搢圭，盥手，帨手。
现代文：皇帝插上玉圭，洗手，擦手。
English: The emperor inserted the ginger root, washed his hands, and wiped his hands.

古文：出圭，升坛。
现代文：拿出玉圭，登坛。
English: Take out Tamagui and ascend the altar.

古文：太常卿赞曰： 神明在上，整肃威仪。 
现代文：太常卿赞唱道： 神明在上，仪容庄严肃穆。 
English: Tai Changqing sang praises, saying: The gods are above, the appearance is solemn and serious.

古文：升自午陛。协律郎举麾奏《凝和之曲》。
现代文：从正南边登坛，协律郎举麾奏《肃和之曲》。
English: From the south side of the altar, the chorus master played "Shuwa no Kyoku."

古文：皇帝诣昊天上帝神位前跪，搢圭，三上香，奠玉帛，出圭，再拜复位。
现代文：皇帝到昊天上帝神位前跪下，插上玉圭，三次上香，祭奠玉帛，拿出玉圭，行再拜礼回到原位。
English: The emperor knelt in front of God's throne on the eighth day, inserted the jade arrow, burned incense three times, dedicated the jade arrow, took out the jade arrow, and then returned to the original position.

古文：赞礼唱进俎，协律郎举麾奏《凝和之曲》。
现代文：赞礼宣唱进俎，协律郎举麾奏《凝和之曲》。
English: The hymn was sung into the cymbals, and the accompanist raised the cymbals to play the "Song of Harmony."

古文：皇帝诣神位前，搢圭奠俎，出圭，复位。
现代文：皇帝到神位前，插上玉圭，备置祭牲，拿出玉圭，回到原位。
English: Before the emperor ascended to the throne of God, he inserted the yakitori, prepared the sacrificial offering, took out the yakitori, and returned to his original position.

古文：赞礼唱行初献礼。
现代文：赞礼宣唱举行初献礼。
English: A hymn of praise was sung as the first offering was made.

古文：皇帝诣爵洗位，搢圭，涤爵，拭爵，以爵授执事者，出圭。
现代文：皇帝到爵洗位，插上玉圭，洗涤酒爵，擦干，把酒爵交给执事官员，拿出玉圭。
English: The emperor went to the baron to wash the place, plugged in the yakitori, washed the yakitori, wiped it dry, handed the yakitori to the deacon official, and took out the yakitori.

古文：诣酒尊年，搢圭，执爵，受泛齐，以爵授执事者，出圭。
现代文：到酒尊放置的地方，插上玉圭，拿起酒爵，接受泛齐，把酒爵交给执事人员，拿出玉圭。
English: Go to the place where the priest has placed the wine, insert the corkscrew, pick up the corkscrew, accept Pan Qi, give the corkscrew to the deacon and take out the corkscrew.

古文：协律郎举麾奏《寿和之曲》、《武功之舞》。
现代文：协律郎举麾奏《寿和之曲》、《武功之舞》。
English: Concierges hold up cymbals to play "Song of Peace" and "Dance of Valor."

古文：皇帝诣神位前跪，搢圭，上香，祭酒，奠爵，出圭。
现代文：皇帝到神位前下跪，插上玉圭，上香，祭酒，奠爵，拿出玉圭。
English: The emperor knelt down before the throne of God, put in the yakitori, the incense, the sacrificial wine, the yakitori, and took out the yakitori.

古文：读祝官捧祝跪读讫，皇帝俯伏，兴，再拜，复位。
现代文：读祝官捧祝祷文跪着朗读完毕，皇帝伏跪在地，站起来，行再拜礼，回到原位。
English: After reading the congratulatory prayer on his knees, the emperor knelt on the ground, stood up, repeated the prayer, and returned to his original position.

古文：亚献，酌醴齐，乐奏《豫和之曲》、《文德之舞》。
现代文：亚献，酌醴齐，音乐演奏《豫和之曲》、《文德之舞》。
English: "Yuwa no Kyoku" and "Wende no Danse" were presented and performed with music.

古文：终献，酌盎齐，乐奏《熙和之曲》、《文德之舞》。
现代文：终献，酌盎齐，音乐演奏《熙和之曲》、《文德之舞》。
English: The final offering, a glass of wine, music performance of "Heiwa no Kyoku," "Wende no Dan."

古文：仪并同初献，但不用祝。
现代文：仪程与初献相同，但不用读祝文。
English: The ceremony is the same as the first offering, but there is no need to read a congratulatory message.

古文：赞礼唱饮福受胙，皇帝升坛，至饮福位，再拜，跪，搢圭。
现代文：赞礼宣唱饮福酒受胙肉，皇帝登坛，至饮福酒位置，行再拜礼，跪下，插上玉圭。
English: The blessing was sung, the blessed wine was drunk, and the emperor ascended the altar to the place where the blessed wine was drunk. After the prayer, he knelt down and inserted the yakitori.

古文：奉爵官酌福酒跪进，太常卿赞曰： 惟此酒肴，神之所与，赐以福庆，亿兆同沾。 
现代文：奉爵官斟上祭神后的福酒跪着进献，太常卿赞唱道： 只有这酒肉，是神的恩赐，赐给你福禄吉祥，天下同沾恩泽。 
English: After the vassal had poured the offering to the deity, he kneeled down and offered the blessing wine. Lord Taizeng chanted: "Only this wine and meat is God's gift, bestowing upon you the blessing of fortune and good luck, and the whole world shares the same blessing."

古文：皇帝受爵，祭酒，饮福酒，以爵置于坫。
现代文：皇帝接受酒爵，祭酒，饮福酒，把酒爵放在土台上。
English: The emperor accepted the liquor, the sacrificial wine, and the blessed wine, and put the liquor on the foundation.

古文：奉胙官奉胙跪进，皇帝受胙，以授执事者，出圭，俯伏，兴，再拜，复位。
现代文：奉胙官捧祭肉跪着进献，皇帝接受祭肉，交给执事人员，拿出玉圭，伏跪在地，站起来，行再拜礼，回到原位。
English: The officiating eunuch kneels to offer the sacrificial meat, the emperor kneels to receive the sacrificial meat, hands it over to the deacon, takes out the orb, kneels on the ground, stands up, recites the prayer, and returns to his original position.

古文：皇太子以下在位官皆再拜。
现代文：皇太子以下在位官，都行再拜礼。
English: Reigning officials from the crown prince on down are allowed to make a second prostration.

古文：赞礼唱彻豆，协律郎举麾奏《雍和之曲》，掌祭官彻豆。
现代文：赞礼宣唱撤除俎豆，协律郎举麾奏《雍和之曲》，执掌祭祀的官员撤除俎豆。
English: The pea-removal ceremony was held, with praise and chanting, the gurus holding up the cymbals and playing "Yonghe no Koto," and the officials in charge of the ceremony removing the peas.

古文：赞礼唱送神，协律郎举麾奏《安和之曲》。
现代文：赞礼宣唱送神，协律郎举麾奏《安和之曲》。
English: A hymn was sung in praise of the departed deity, and the accompanist played "Anwa no Kyoku" in unison.

古文：皇帝再拜，皇太子以下在位官皆再拜。
现代文：皇帝又行再拜礼，皇太子以下在位官都行再拜礼。
English: The emperor also performs the second prostration, and the crown prince and other officials also perform the second prostration.

古文：赞礼唱读祝官奉祝，奉币官奉币，掌祭官取馔及爵酒，各诣燎所。
现代文：赞礼宣唱祝官捧祝，奉币官捧币，执掌祭祀官取仆食及爵酒，各自前往燎祭之所。
English: The praising and chanting officials offered their congratulations, the money-offering officials offered their money, the sacrificial officials took the food and wine, and each went to the place of the burnt offering.

古文：唱望燎，皇帝至望燎位。
现代文：宣唱望祭与燎祭，皇帝到达望燎位。
English: The votive and burnt offerings were chanted, and the emperor arrived at the votive altar.

古文：半燎，太常卿奏礼毕，皇帝还大次，解严。
现代文：燎至一半，太常卿奏请礼毕，皇帝回到休息的大篷，解除戒严。
English: At the half-way point, the emperor returned to the pavilion to rest, and the martial law was lifted.

古文：二年夏至，祀皇地祇于方丘，其仪并同。
现代文：洪武二年夏至日，在方丘祭祀皇地只，仪程相同。
English: On the summer solstice of the second year of Hongwu, only the imperial family was sacrificed at Fangqiu, and the ceremony was the same.

古文：惟迎神后瘗毛血，祭毕，奉牲帛祝馔而埋之，与郊天异。
现代文：只是在迎神后痉埋毛血，祭祀完毕，奉祭牲祭帛祝文仆食掩埋，与祭天有所不同。
English: However, it is different from the days of the festival, in that after welcoming the deity, the hair and blood are buried, the sacrifice is completed, and the offerings and sacrifices are buried.

古文：其冬，奉仁祖配天于南郊，仪同元年。
现代文：那年冬天，在南郊供奉仁祖配祀上天，仪程如同洪武元年。
English: That winter, in the southern suburbs, there was an offering to the benevolent ancestor and worship of heaven, with the same ceremony as in the first year of Hongwu.

古文：其奠玉帛、进俎、三献，皆先诣上帝前，次诣仁祖神位前，行礼亦如之，惟不用玉。
现代文：奠玉帛、进奉祭牲、三献，都是先到上帝神位前，再到仁祖神位前，衍礼也是这样，只是不用玉。
English: The ceremonial offering of gems, the offering of sacrificial animals, and the offering of three gifts, all go first to the throne of God, and then to the throne of the benevolent ancestor. This is also the case with the ritual offering, except that no gems are used.

古文：四年定，先祭六日，百官沐浴宿官署。
现代文：洪武四年规定，祭祀前六天，百官沐浴后留宿官署。
English: According to Hongwu's four-year regulation, six days before the ritual, all officials must stay at the government office after bathing.

古文：翼日，朝服诣奉天殿丹墀，受誓戒。
现代文：第二天，穿上朝服前往奉天殿丹墀下，接受誓戒。
English: The next day, he put on the imperial robes and went to the Bongten Hall to receive the vows.

古文：丞相以祀期遍告百神，后诣各祠庙行香三日。
现代文：丞相把祭祀日期遍告百神，又前往各祠庙进香三天。
English: The chancellor announced the date of the sacrifice to the hundred gods, and went to the ancestral temples for incense for three days.

古文：次日，驾诣仁祖庙，告请配享。
现代文：再过一天，御驾前往仁祖庙，告请配享。
English: One day later, you will drive to the Temple of the benevolent ancestors to ask for your share.

古文：礼毕，还斋宫。
现代文：行礼完毕，回到斋宫。
English: After the ceremony, return to the temple.

古文：七年，去中严、外办及赞唱上香之缛节，定十二拜礼。
现代文：洪武七年，废除中庭戒严、警卫宫禁及赞唱上香的繁琐礼节，定为十二拜礼。
English: In the seventh year of Hongwu, the atrium martial law, the palace ban on guards and the tedious ritual of singing incense were abolished, and it was designated as the twelfth worship.

古文：十年，改合祀之制，奠玉帛、进俎、三献，俱先诣上帝神位前，次皇地祇，次仁祖，馀悉仍旧仪。
现代文：十年，改变为共同祭祀的制度，祭奠玉帛，进献祭牲、三献，都先到上帝神位前，其次到皇地只神位，再次到仁祖神位，其余都遵照旧仪程。
English: Ten years later, it was changed to a system of common sacrifice. The offering of the Jade Urn, the offering of the sacrificial animal, and the three offerings all went first to the throne of God, then to the throne of the emperor, and then to the throne of the benevolent ancestor. The rest followed the old ritual.

古文：嘉靖八年，罢各庙焚香礼。
现代文：嘉靖八年，废除各庙焚香礼。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, incense-burning ceremonies were abolished in all temples.

古文：九年，复分祀之制，礼部上大祀圆丘仪注：前期十日，太常寺题请视牲。
现代文：九年，恢复分别祭祀的制度，礼部进献大祀圜丘仪程。祭祀的前十天，太常寺奏请视察祭牲。
English: In the ninth year, the system of separate sacrificial rites was restored, and the ceremonial department presented the grand ritual of Hakuoka. Ten days before the ritual, the Taijo-ji Temple asked to inspect the sacrificial animal.

古文：次请命大臣三员看牲，四员分献。
现代文：然后奏请命大臣三位看守祭牲，大臣四位分献祭品。
English: Then, the minister-designate was asked to send three guards to offer sacrifices, and four ministers to share the sacrificial offerings.

古文：前期五日，锦衣卫备随朝驾，帝诣牺牲所视牲。
现代文：祭期前五天，锦衣卫准备跟随朝驾，皇帝前往看养牺牲的地方视察祭牲。
English: Five days before the festival, Jin Rongwei was preparing to follow the morning procession, and the emperor went to the place of sacrifice to inspect the sacrificial animals.

古文：其前一日，常服告于庙。
现代文：此前一天，穿日常衣冠在太庙告祭。
English: On the previous day, he wore his daily robe to the temple.

古文：前期四日，御奉天殿，太常寺进铜人如常仪。
现代文：祭期前四天，驾临奉天殿，太常寺按常规进献铜人。
English: Four days before the festival, after arriving at the Bongten Hall, Taejō-ji Temple presents the bronze man as usual.

古文：太常博士请太祖祝版于文华殿，候帝亲填御名捧出。
现代文：太常博士到文华殿请太祖祝版，等候皇帝亲自填写御名捧出。
English: Dr. Taejong went to the Palace of Literature to ask the great-grandfather for a congratulatory copy, and waited for the emperor to fill in his name and hand it out.

古文：前期三日，帝具祭服，以脯醢酒果诣太庙，请太祖配。
现代文：祭期前三天，皇帝身穿祭服，送脯醢酒果前往太庙，恭请太祖配祀。
English: Three days before the festival, the emperor, dressed in ceremonial robes, went to the Imperial Temple to bring wine and fruit, and respectfully invited the great-grandfather to be enshrined.

古文：帝还易服，御奉天殿，百官朝服受誓戒。
现代文：皇帝回来换去衣冠，驾临奉天殿，百官穿朝服接受誓戒。
English: The emperor came back to change his clothes and crown, and arrived at the Temple of Heaven. Hundreds of officials wore imperial robes to receive the oath.

古文：前期二日，太常光禄卿奏省牲，帝至奉天殿亲填祝版。
现代文：祭期前两天，太常光禄卿奏请视察祭牲，皇帝到奉天殿亲自填写祝版。
English: Two days before the festival, Emperor Taizong asked Emperor Guanglu to inspect the sacrificial animals, and the emperor went to the Temple of Heaven to personally fill out the congratulatory plate.

古文：前期一日免朝，锦衣卫备法驾，设版舆于奉天门。
现代文：祭期前一天罢朝，锦衣卫预备法驾，在奉天门设版舆。
English: On the day before the festival, Jin Yi Wei went to the palace to prepare for the ceremony, and set up an altar at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：常服告庙，乘舆诣南郊，由西天门入，至昭亨门外降舆。
现代文：皇帝穿日常衣冠告祭太庙，乘车舆前往南郊，从西天门进入，到昭亨门外下车。
English: The emperor wore his daily ceremonial crown to the Imperial Temple, and rode a horse-drawn carriage to the southern suburbs. He entered from the West Heaven Gate and got off outside the Zhaoheng Gate.

古文：礼部太常官导由左门入，至内壝。
现代文：礼部太常官引导从左门进入，到称作内堰的内矮墙。
English: The etiquette officer led the way through the left door to the inner low wall, known as the inner weir.

古文：太常卿导至圜丘，恭视坛位，次至神库视笾豆，至神厨视牲毕，仍由左门出，升舆，至斋宫。
现代文：太常卿引导到圜丘，恭视祭坛神位，再到神库视察篷豆祭器，到神厨视察祭牲完毕，仍从左门出，上车到斋宫。
English: He led Mr. Tai Chang Kei to Mengqiu to pay his respects to the altar god, then to the sacred treasure to inspect the tabernacle, to the sacred kitchen to inspect the sacrificial animal, and still left from the left door to get on the bus to the temple.

古文：分献陪祀官叩首，礼部太常官诣皇穹宇，请皇天上帝神版、太祖神主、从祀神牌，奉安坛座。
现代文：分献陪祀官叩头觐见。礼部太常官前往皇穹宇，请求皇天上帝神版、太祖神主、从祀神牌，供奉安放在坛座上。
English: The ceremonial officials went to the imperial vault to ask for the divine tablet of the emperor, the divine tablet of the great-grandfather, and the divine tablet of the great-grandfather to be placed on the altar.

古文：祭之日，三鼓，帝自斋宫乘舆至外壝神路之西，降舆至神路东大次。
现代文：祭祀当天，三鼓时分，皇帝从斋宫乘车到称作外蜡的外矮墙神路的西面，下车到神路东面临时休息的大帐篷。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, at the time of the three drums, the emperor rode from the temple to the west side of the outer dwarfing wall called the outer wax, and got off at the large tent facing the east side of the divine road.

古文：礼部、太常寺捧神位官复命讫，退。
现代文：礼部、太常寺捧神位官复命完毕，退下。
English: He resigned from the Ministry of Ceremonies and from his position as a Shinto priest at Taijo-ji Temple after his reinstatement was completed.

古文：百官分列神路东西以候。
现代文：百官分列神路东西两侧等候。
English: Hundreds of officials lined up on both sides of the road to wait.

古文：帝具祭服出，导引官导由左灵星门入内。
现代文：皇帝穿祭服出来，导引官引导从左灵星门入内。
English: The emperor came out in his ceremonial robes, and the usher led him in through the left spirit star gate.

古文：赞对引官导行至内壝，典仪唱乐舞生就位，执事官各司其事。
现代文：赞对引官引导前衍到内堪，典仪唱乐舞生就位，执事官各自办自己职责内的事。
English: The ushers lead the procession to the inner sanctum, the ceremonial singers and dancers take their places, and the deacons each do their own duties.

古文：帝至御拜位，自燔柴、迎神至礼毕，其仪悉如旧。
现代文：皇帝到御拜位，从燔柴、迎神到礼毕，仪程完全照旧。
English: When the emperor goes to the place of worship, from the chopping of wood and the welcoming of the gods to the completion of the ritual, the ritual is completely the same as before.

古文：至大次易服，礼部太常官奉神位安于皇穹宇。
现代文：到休息的大帐篷换下衣冠，礼部太常官捧神位安放在皇穹宇。
English: After changing into their capes, they went to a large tent for rest. The ceremonial head of the Imperial Household Agency held the divine throne and placed it in the imperial dome.

古文：还斋宫，少憩。
现代文：回到斋宫，稍作休息。
English: Back to the temple for a short break.

古文：驾还，诣庙参拜毕。回宫。
现代文：起驾回宫，前往太庙参拜完毕，回宫。
English: Start driving back to the palace, go to the Great Temple, complete the worship, and return to the palace.

古文：诏如拟。
现代文：下诏如同拟定的仪程进行。
English: The eulogy proceeded as planned.

古文：明年，定方泽仪：先期一日，太常卿请太祖配位，奉安皇祇室。
现代文：第二年，规定方泽祭祀仪程。祭期前一天，太常卿恭请太祖配位，供奉安放在皇祇室。
English: The next year, the procedure for the Fonze ritual was established. The day before the festival, the Grand Duke Tsuneyoshi respectfully asked the great-grandfather to be seated, and the offering was placed in the Imperial Family Room.

古文：至期，礼部太常官同请皇地祇神版、太祖神主、从祀神牌，奉安坛座。
现代文：到日期，礼部太常官一同请求皇地祇神版、太祖神位牌、从祀神牌，供奉安放在坛座上。
English: On the day of the event, the chief priests and officials of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies together requested that the Imperial Shrine Board, the Imperial Ancestor Plaque, and the Consecration Plaque be removed and placed on the altar.

古文：祀毕，太常奉神版、神牌安皇祇室，奉神主还庙寝。
现代文：祭祀完毕，太常捧神版、神牌安放在皇只室，捧神位牌回到太庙。
English: After the ritual is over, it is customary to place the shinpan and shinpai in the Imperial Household, and then return to the Imperial Temple with the shinpai.

古文：馀皆如圜丘仪。
现代文：其余都如同圜丘仪程。
English: All the rest is like a procession through the hills.

古文：是年十月，帝将郊祀，谕礼部尚书夏言欲亲行奉安礼。
现代文：这年十月，皇帝将要举行郊祀礼，谕令礼部尚书夏言想要亲自举行奉安礼。
English: In October of that year, the emperor was going to hold a suburb ritual, and he ordered the ceremonial department Shangshu Xiayan to personally hold a blessing ceremony.

古文：言乃拟仪注以闻：先期择捧主执事官十一员，分献配殿大臣二员，撰祝文，备脯醢、酒果、制帛、香烛。
现代文：夏言就草拟了仪程上奏。祭期之前挑选捧神位牌的执事官十一员，分献陪殿大臣两员，撰写祝文，预备脯醢、酒果、制帛、香烛。
English: Before the festival, eleven deacons were selected to hold the divine tablet, and two ministers were assigned to accompany the offering, to write the congratulatory message, and to prepare the candy, fruits, candies, and incense.

古文：前一日行告庙礼，设神舆香案于奉天殿，神案二于泰神殿，神案二于东西配殿，香案一于丹墀正中，设大次于圜丘左门外。
现代文：前一天举行告祭太庙礼，在奉天殿设神舆香案，在泰神殿设神案两张，在东西配殿设神案两张，在丹墀正中设香案一张，在圜丘左门外设临时休息的大帐篷。
English: The day before, a ceremony was held to announce the temple's dedication. Two incense burners were set up in the Bongten Hall, two incense burners in the Thai Temple, two incense burners in the East-West Allocation Hall, one incense burner in the Danzhong Middle School, and a large tent for temporary rest was set up outside the left door of the Mengqiu Hill.

古文：是日质明，帝常服诣奉天殿，行一拜三叩头礼。
现代文：当天拂晓，皇帝穿日常衣冠前往奉天殿，行一拜三叩头礼。
English: At dawn on the same day, the emperor, wearing his daily robe, went to the Temple of Heaven to perform a prostration.

古文：执事官先后捧昊天上帝、太祖高皇帝及从祀神主，各奉安舆中，至圜丘泰神殿门外。
现代文：执事官先后捧昊天上帝、太祖高皇帝以及从祀神主，各供奉安放在车中，到圜丘泰神殿门外。
English: The deacon successively picked up the offerings of the God of Heaven, the Emperor Taizugo, and the God of Worship, and placed them in the car to the outside of the gate of the temple.

古文：帝乘辂至昭亨门，礼官导至泰神殿丹墀。
现代文：皇帝乘车到昭亨门，礼官引导至泰神殿台阶下。
English: The Emperor was driven to the Zhaoheng Gate, and the etiquette officer led him to the foot of the steps of the Thai Temple.

古文：执事官就神舆捧神主升石座，奉安于龛中。
现代文：执事官到神舆前捧神位牌登上石座，安放在龟中。
English: The deacon went to the shrine, held up the divine tablet, climbed onto the stone pedestal, and placed it in the turtle.

古文：帝乃诣香案前，行三献礼如仪。
现代文：皇帝纔到香案前，按照仪程举行三献礼。
English: Before the emperor arrived at the incense case, three offerings were held according to the ritual.

古文：礼毕，出至大次升座，百官行一拜三叩头礼毕，还宫。
现代文：礼毕，退出来到临时休息的大帐升座，百官行一拜三叩头礼毕，回宫。
English: After bowing, retiring to a temporary resting place, the dignitaries and courtiers bowed their heads and returned to the palace.

古文：帝从之，而命行礼用祭服，导引用太常寺官一员，合礼部堂上官四员。
现代文：皇帝听从了，但命令行礼时穿祭服，导引用太常寺官一员，加上礼部堂上官四员。
English: The emperor obeyed, but ordered to wear ceremonial robes during the ceremony, and the guide was a member of the Taijo-ji Temple official, plus four members of the upper echelon of the ceremonial department.

古文：十一年冬至，尚书言，前此有事南郊，风寒莫备。
现代文：十一年冬至日，尚书说，在此之前南郊举行祭祀仪式，对风寒没有准备。
English: On the winter solstice of the eleventh year, Shang Shu said that before this, the southern suburbs held a sacrificial ceremony, and there was no preparation for the wind and cold.

古文：乃采《礼书》天子祀天张大次、小次之说，请 作黄毡御幄为小次。
现代文：于是采用《礼书》天子祭祀天张设大帐篷、小帐篷的说法，请求 建造黄毡御帐驯、帐篷。
English: Therefore, they used the "Book of Rites" to set up a large tent and a small tent to worship the Son of Heaven, and requested the construction of a tent and a tent.

古文：每大祭，所司以随。
现代文：每次大祭，有关人员跟随。
English: Every time there is a big festival, the relevant people follow.

古文：值风雪，则设于圜丘下，帝就幄中对越，而陟降奠献以太常执事官代之 。
现代文：遇上风雪，就张设在圜丘下，皇帝到帷幕中行祭祀礼，而上下祭奠进献的事就由太常执事官代替 。
English: In the event of wind and snow, Zhang was stationed at the foot of the molehill, the emperor went to the middle of the curtain to perform the sacrificial rite, and the upper and lower sacrificial offerings were replaced by the permanent deacon.

古文：命著为令。
现代文：下令写为定制。
English: Orders are written as custom orders.

古文：祈谷
现代文：祈谷
English: Kiritani

古文：明初末尝行。
现代文：明朝初年不曾举行祈谷礼。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the valley prayer was not held.

古文：世宗时，更定二祖分配礼。
现代文：世宗时，重新确走二祖分别配祀的礼仪。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, the ritual of worshipping the two ancestors separately was reintroduced.

古文：因诸臣固请，乃许于大祀殿祈谷，奉二祖配。
现代文：因为众臣坚决请求，纔允许在大祀殿行祈谷礼，供奉二祖配祀。
English: Because of the resolute request of all the ministers, the Emperor allowed them to perform the valley prayer in the Great Hall of Worship, and to worship the two ancestors together.

古文：嘉靖十年，始以孟春上辛日行祈谷礼于大祀殿。
现代文：嘉靖十年，开始在正月上辛日，在大祀殿举行祈谷礼。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing era, the Valley Prayer Service was held in the Great Hall of Worship on the first day of the lunar new year.

古文：礼毕，帝心终以为未当，谕张璁曰： 自古惟以祖配天，今二祖并配，决不可法后世。
现代文：行礼完毕，皇帝内心终究认为不妥当，谕令张璁说： 自古只以祖宗配祀上天，而今二祖共同配祀，决不能垂法后世。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor's heart finally felt that it was not appropriate, and ordered Zhang Ye to say: Since ancient times, only ancestors have been enshrined in heaven, but now the two ancestors are jointly enshrined, and must not be passed down to future generations.

古文：嗣后大报与祈谷，但奉太祖配。 
现代文：以后大报与祈谷礼，只供奉太祖配祀。 
English: In the future, the broadsheet and the prayer rite will only be offered to worship the great ancestor.

古文：寻亲制祝文，更定仪注，改用惊蛰节，礼视大祀少杀。帛减十一，不设从坛，不燔柴，著为定式。
现代文：不久亲自撰写祝文，重新订立仪程，改在惊垫节，礼仪比大祀礼稍微降低，供献的帛减少十分之一，不设从坛，不燔柴，写为定制。
English: Soon after, I personally wrote a congratulatory message, re-established the ritual, and changed it to the Spring Festival. The etiquette was slightly lower than that of the grand ritual, the offering was reduced by one-tenth, there was no altar, no firewood, and it was written as a custom.

古文：十一年惊蛰节，帝疾，不能亲，乃命武定侯郭勋代。
现代文：十一年惊垫节，皇帝生病，不能亲自行礼，就命武定侯郭勋代替。
English: In the eleventh year of the Spring Festival, the emperor fell ill and was unable to perform the ritual himself, so he ordered Wuding Hou Guoxun to take his place.

古文：给事中叶洪言： 祈谷、大报，祀名不同，郊天一也。
现代文：给事中叶洪说： 祈谷、大报，祭祀的名称不同，但同样都是祭祀上天。
English: In the middle of the event, Hong Yeh said, "The names of the sacrifices are different, such as the prayer valley and the broadsheet newspaper, but they are all sacrifices to heaven.

古文：祖宗无不亲郊。
现代文：祖宗没有不亲自行礼的。
English: There is no ancestor who did not personally pay homage.

古文：成化、弘治间，或有故，宁展至三月。
现代文：成化、弘治年间，有别的缘故，宁可推迟到三月。
English: During the Chenghua and Hongzhi years, for other reasons, it was better to postpone it to March.

古文：盖以郊祀礼重，不宜摄以人臣，请俟圣躬痊，改卜吉日行礼。 
现代文：因为郊祀礼重大，不宜由臣子代行，请求等到圣上身体康复，改换占卜吉日行礼。 
English: Because the suburb ritual is important, it is not appropriate for a courtier to perform it on behalf of the saint, and it is requested to wait until the saint's body recovers before performing the ritual on the day of divination.

古文：不从。
现代文：没有听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：十八年，改行于大内之玄极宝殿，不奉配，遂为定制。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，改在大内的玄极宝殿行礼，不供奉配祀，于是成为定制。
English: In the 18th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, it was changed to the Xuanji Treasure Hall in Daini, and it was not offered for worship, so it became a custom.

古文：隆庆元年，礼臣言： 先农亲祭，遂耕耤田，即祈谷遗意。
现代文：隆庆元年，礼部大臣说： 先农坛亲自行祭，接着耕藉田，就是祈谷礼的遣意。
English: In the first year of the Longqing Festival, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: First, the farmer's self-sacrifice, followed by the cultivation of the land, is the meaning of the prayer.

古文：今二祀并行于春，未免烦数。
现代文：而今两次祭祀都在春季举行，未免繁琐。
English: Now, both ceremonies are held in the spring, which is somewhat cumbersome.

古文：且玄极宝殿在禁地，百官陪祀，出入非便。
现代文：并且玄极实殿在禁宫内，百官陪祀，出入不便。
English: Moreover, the Genji Realm Hall is inside the Forbidden City, and hundreds of officials accompany the shrine, making it inconvenient to enter.

古文：宜罢祈谷，止先农坛行事。 
现代文：应当罢除祈壳礼，只在先农坛举行祭祀礼。 
English: The shell-praying ceremony should be abolished, and only the sacrificial ceremony should be held at the altar first.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从其请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：大雩
现代文：大雩
English: Daxing

古文：明初，凡水旱灾伤及非常变异，或躬祷，或露告于宫中，或于奉天殿陛，或遣官祭告郊庙、陵寝及社稷、山川，无常仪。
现代文：明代初年，凡是有水旱灾害以及非常变异，有时亲自祷告，有时在宫中露天之地祭告，有时在奉天殿的台阶上祭告，有时派遣官员祭告郊庙、陵寝以及社稷、山川，没有固定的礼仪。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, whenever there were floods, droughts, and great changes, sometimes prayers were offered in person, sometimes offerings were made in the open air in the palace, sometimes offerings were made on the steps of the Hall of Heaven, and sometimes officials were sent to offer sacrifices at suburban temples, tombs, shrines, and mountains and rivers. There was no fixed etiquette.

古文：嘉靖八年，春祈雨，冬祈雪，皆御制祝文，躬祀南郊及山川坛。
现代文：嘉靖八年春季祈雨，冬季祈雪，都是皇上撰写的祝文，亲自在南郊及山川坛祭祀。
English: Praying for rain in the spring and praying for snow in the winter in the eighth year of Jiajing were both written by the emperor, who personally led the sacrifices in the southern suburbs and at the mountain and river altars.

古文：次日，祀社稷坛。
现代文：第二天，祭祀社稷坛。
English: The next day, the sacrificial altar was set up.

古文：冠服浅色，卤簿不陈，驰道不除，皆不设配，不奏乐。
现代文：穿戴浅色衣冠，不陈设仪仗，不肃清御道，都不设配祀，不奏乐。
English: They wear light-colored crowns, do not display ceremonial battles, do not cleanse the imperial road, do not set up matching shrines, and do not play music.

古文：九年，帝欲于奉天殿丹陛上行大雩礼。
现代文：嘉靖九年，皇帝想在奉天殿的台阶上举行大雩礼。
English: In the ninth year of Jiajing, the emperor wanted to hold a grand coronation ceremony on the steps of the Bongtian Hall.

古文：夏言言： 按《左传》 龙见而雩 。
现代文：夏言说： 按照《左传》记载 苍龙出现就举行雩祭 。
English: Xia Yan said: According to the "Zhuan" record, the dragon festival was held as soon as the dragon appeared.

古文：盖巳月万物始盛，待雨而大，故祭天为百谷祈膏雨也。
现代文：大概四月万物开始茂盛，等到下雨而大，因而祭天为百谷祈求雨露滋润。
English: Around April, all things begin to flourish, until it rains and grows, so they pray to the heavens for rain and dew to moisten the hundred grains.

古文：《月令》： 雩帝用盛乐，乃命百县雩祀，祀百辟卿士有益于民者，以祈谷实。 
现代文：《月令》上说： 雩祭上帝用盛大的礼乐，于是命百县举行雩祭，祭祀对百姓有益的百王卿士，以祈祷庄稼丰收。 
English: The "Monthly Regulation" said: "The god of the burnt offering played a grand ritual, so he ordered hundreds of counties to hold a burnt offering, sacrifice hundreds of kings and queens who are beneficial to the people, and pray for a good harvest.

古文：《通典》曰： 巳月雩五方上帝，其坛名雩，禜于南郊之傍。 
现代文：《通典》上说： 四月雩祭五方上帝，祭坛称为雩，在南郊之旁举行荣祭。 
English: According to the "Compendium": In April, the Yule Festival is held in the five directions, the altar is called Yule, and the Rong Festival is held in the southern suburbs.

古文：先臣丘浚亦谓： 天子于郊天之外，别为坛以祈雨者也。
现代文：先臣丘浚也说： 天子除了郊祀上天之外，另外建筑祭坛祈雨。
English: The senior vassal Kujun also said: In addition to worshipping the heavens in the suburbs, the Son of Heaven also built an altar to pray for rain.

古文：后世此礼不传，遇有旱，辄假异端之人为祈祷之事，不务以诚意感格，而以法术劫制，诬亦甚矣。 
现代文：后世这一礼仪没有流传，遇上旱灾，就请异端邪说的人举行祈祷祭祀，不求用诚意去感动上天，而以法术相要挟，诬枉太厉害了。 
English: This etiquette was not passed on to later generations. In the event of a drought, the heretics were invited to hold a prayer and sacrifice. They did not seek to use sincerity to move heaven, but to use magic to blackmail. The injustice was too great.

古文：浚意欲于郊傍择地为雩坛，孟夏后行礼。
现代文：丘浚希望能在郊社旁择地建造雩坛，孟夏后行礼。
English: Yau Jun hopes to be able to build a gong altar next to the suburb, and Meng Xia will salute.

古文：臣以为孟春既祈谷矣，苟自二月至四月，雨昜时若，则大雩之祭，可遣官摄行。
现代文：臣认为孟春已行祈谷礼，如果从二月至四月，晴雨时节和顺，那么大雩的祭祀，可派遣官吏代为举行。
English: The minister thought that Mengchun had already performed the Valley Prayer, and if the weather was fine from February to April, then officials could be dispatched to hold the sacrificial rites.

古文：如雨泽愆期，则陛下躬行祷祝。 
现代文：如果雨期推迟，陛下就亲自祷告。 
English: If the rainy season is delayed, His Majesty will personally pray.

古文：乃建崇雩坛于圜丘坛外泰元门之东，为制一成，岁旱则祷，奉太祖配。
现代文：于是在圜丘坛外泰元门的东方建造崇雩坛，形成制度，年成干旱就举行祷告，供奉太祖配祀。
English: Therefore, the Chongwu Altar was built in the east of the Taiyuan Gate outside the Gongwu Altar to form a system, and prayers were held at the end of the year to worship the great ancestor.

古文：十二年，夏言等言： 古者大雩之祀，命乐正习盛乐、舞皇舞。
现代文：嘉靖十二年，夏言等人说： 古代大雩之祭，命乐正演习盛乐、舞皇舞。
English: In the twelfth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Xia Yan and others said: The ancient Daxi Festival, the life music is practicing the grand music, and the dance is the royal dance.

古文：盖假声容之和，以宣阴阳之气。
现代文：借音乐舞蹈的和谐，激发天地阴阳之气。
English: Using the harmony of music and dance to inspire the yin and yang of heaven and earth.

古文：请于三献礼成之后，九奏乐止之时，乐奏《云门之舞》。
现代文：请求在三献礼完成之后，九奏乐停止之时，演奏《云门之舞》。
English: Please play "Dance of the Cloud Gate" when the nine pieces stop after the three offerings.

古文：仍命儒臣括《云汉》诗词，制《云门》一曲，使文武舞士并舞而歌之。
现代文：仍旧命儒臣总括《云汉》诗词，谱写《云门》一曲，派文武舞士一同舞蹈一同高歌。
English: He still ordered Ju Chen to summarize the poetry of "Yunhan" and compose a song "Yunmen," and sent the martial arts dancers to dance together and sing a high song.

古文：盖《云门》者，帝尧之乐，《周官》以祀天神，取云出天气，雨出地气也。
现代文：《云门》，是帝尧的乐曲，《周官》记载用来祭祀天神，取云出天气，雨出地气的意思。
English: "Yunmen" is the music of Emperor Qian. "Zhou Guan" records that it was used to worship the gods, meaning to take the clouds out of the weather and the rain out of the earth.

古文：且请增鼓吹数番，教舞童百人，青衣执羽，绕坛歌《云门之曲》而舞，曲凡九成。 
现代文：并且请求增添数阙鼓吹曲，教一百名舞童，穿青衣执羽毛，绕坛歌《云门之曲》而舞蹈，乐曲共有九章。 
English: He also requested the addition of several gongs to play the music, to teach a hundred dancers, to wear blue clothes and feathers, and to dance around the altar song "Song of the Cloud Gate." The music has nine chapters.

古文：因上其仪，视祈谷礼。
现代文：因而奏上仪程，比照祈谷礼。
English: As a result, the ritual is played, for example, the valley prayer.

古文：又言： 大雩乃祀天祷雨之祭。凡遇亢旱，则礼部于春末请行之。 
现代文：又说： 大雩是祀天祷雨的祭祀，凡是遇上干旱，礼部在春季末期奏请举行。 
English: He also said, "Daxuan is a ritual to worship the rain. Whenever there is a drought, the ritual should be held at the end of spring.

古文：帝从其议。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：十七年，躬祷于坛，青服。用一牛，熟荐。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，亲自在祭坛祷告，穿青衣，用一头牛，熟食祭献。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jiajing, he personally prayed at the altar, wore a blue robe, sacrificed a cow and cooked food.

古文：大飨礼
现代文：大飨礼
English: The grand salute

古文：明初无明堂之制。
现代文：明朝初年没有明堂制度。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there was no Myeongdong system.

古文：嘉靖十七年六月，致仕扬州府同知丰坊上疏言： 孝莫大于严父，严父莫大于配天。
现代文：嘉靖十七年六月，辞官归居的扬州府同知丰坊上疏说： 孝敬没有什么比尊父更大的，尊敬父亲没有什么比配天更大的。
English: In June of the seventeenth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Shang Zuo, a retired official from Yangzhou Prefecture, said: "There is nothing greater than honoring one's father, and there is nothing greater than honoring one's father.

古文：请复古礼，建明堂。
现代文：恳请恢复古礼，建造明堂。
English: I implore you to restore the ancient rite and build the Ming Hall.

古文：加尊皇考献皇帝庙号称宗，以配上帝。 
现代文：加尊皇考献皇帝庙号为宗，以配祀上帝。 
English: The temple's name is derived from the emperor's name, and it is dedicated to the god.

古文：下礼部会议。
现代文：下发礼部集体商议。
English: The lower hairdressing department held a collective discussion.

古文：尚书严嵩等言：昔羲、农肇祀上帝，或为明堂。
现代文：尚书严嵩等人说：从前伏羲、神农开始祭祀上帝，有时建造明堂。
English: Shangshu Yanlong and others said: In the past, Fuxi and Shennong began to worship God, and sometimes built Myeongdong.

古文：嗣是夏后氏世室，殷人重屋，周人作明堂之制，视夏、殷加详焉。
现代文：继后夏后氏在世室，殷人在重屋，周人作明堂之制，比夏、殷更加详备。
English: Subsequently, Xia Guo's family in the world, Yin people in the heavy house, and Zhou people made the Ming Hall system, which is more detailed than Xia and Yin.

古文：盖圣王事天，如子事父，体尊而情亲。
现代文：圣王奉事上天，如同儿子事奉父亲，血统尊重而感情亲切。
English: The holy king serves heaven, just as a son serves his father, with respect for lineage and affection.

古文：故制为一岁享祀之礼，冬至圜丘，孟春祈谷，孟夏雩坛，季秋明堂，皆所以尊之也。
现代文：因而规定为一年享祀的礼仪，冬至圜丘祭，孟春祈谷祭，孟夏雩坛祭，季秋明堂祭，都以此来表示尊显。
English: Therefore, the winter solstice festival, the Mengchun Valley Festival, the Mengxia Altar Festival, and the Mid-Autumn Festival Festival are all held to show respect.

古文：明堂帝而享之，又以亲之也。
现代文：明堂祭享上帝，又以此亲近亲人。
English: Ming-tang is dedicated to enjoying God, and this is also a way to get close to relatives.

古文：今日创制，古法难寻，要在师先王之意。
现代文：今天创建新制度，难以借鉴古法，关键在于效法先王之意。
English: To create a new system today, it is difficult to learn from the ancient law. The key is to follow the meaning of the previous king.

古文：明堂圜丘，皆所以事天，今大祀殿在圜丘之北，禁城东西，正应古之方位。
现代文：明堂圜正，都是祀天的地方，而今大祀殿在圜丘的北方，禁城的东南方，正好对应古法的方位。
English: The Ming and Qing dynasties were both places to worship the heavens, while today the Great Hall of Worship is located in the north of Fuxiu Hill, in the southeast of the Forbidden City, exactly corresponding to the direction of the ancient law.

古文：明堂秋享，即以大祀殿行之为当。
现代文：明堂秋季祭享，就以在大祀殿举行更为妥当。
English: It is more appropriate to hold the autumn festival of Myeongdong in the main hall.

古文：至配侑之礼，昔周公宗祀文王于明堂，诗传以为物成形于帝，犹人成形于父。
现代文：至于配祀的礼仪，从前周公在明堂宗祀文王，《诗》传认为万物成形于上帝，如同人成形于父亲。
English: As for the ritual of matching the deities, Zhou Gong started worshipping King Wen in the Ming Hall last week. "Poetry" says that all things are shaped by God, just as people are shaped by their fathers.

古文：故季秋祀帝明堂，而以父配之，取其物之时也。
现代文：因而季秋在明堂祭享上帝，而以父亲配祀，取万物成熟季节之意。
English: Therefore, the seasons of autumn and winter are celebrated in Myeongdong to enjoy God, and the father is enshrined, taking the meaning of the season of maturity of all things.

古文：汉孝武明堂之享，以景帝配，孝章以光武配，唐中宗以高宗配，明皇以睿宗配，代宗以肃宗配，宋真宗以太宗配，仁宗以真宗配，英宗以仁宗配，皆世以递配，此主于亲亲也。
现代文：汉孝武明堂的祭享，以景帝配祀，孝章帝以光武帝配祀，唐中宗以高宗配祀，明皇以睿宗配祀，代宗以肃宗配祀，宋真宗以太宗配祀，仁宗以真宗配祀，英宗以仁宗配祀，都是世代依次配祀，这是主要依据亲缘关系。
English: Han Xiaowu Ming-tang's festival, with Emperor Jing as the deity, Emperor Xiaozhang's with Emperor Guangwu as the deity, Tang Zhong-zong's with Emperor Gao as the deity, Emperor Ming's with Emperor Rui as the deity, Emperor Sui's with Emperor Sui as the deity, Emperor Song's with Emperor Zhen as the deity, Emperor Ren's with Emperor Zhen as the deity, Emperor Ying's with Emperor Ren's as the deity, are all deities of successive generations, which is mainly based on kinship.

古文：宋钱公辅曰： 郊之祭，以始封之祖，有圣人之功者配焉。
现代文：宋钱公辅说： 郊祀之祭，由开拓封疆的祖先，有圣人功德的人配祀。
English: Song Qian Gongyu said: The festival of suburb worship, the ancestors who explored and sealed the country, and those who have the merits of saints are worthy of worship.

古文：明堂之祭，以继体之君，有圣人之德者配焉。 
现代文：明堂之祭，由继嗣的君王，有圣人功德的人配祀。 
English: At the Myodo Festival, the successor of the monarch, a person with the merits of a saint, is enshrined.

古文：当时司马光、孙抃诸臣执辨于朝，程、朱大贤倡议于下，此主于祖宗之功德也。
现代文：当时司马光、孙忭等大臣在朝堂上辩论，程、朱大贤在下倡议，这是主要依据祖宗的功德。
English: At that time, Sima Guang, Sun Yat-sen and other ministers debated in the imperial court, and Cheng and Zhu Daxian took the initiative, which was mainly based on the merits of the ancestors.

古文：今复古明堂大享之制，其所当配之帝，亦惟二说而已。
现代文：而今恢复古代明堂大享的制度，那应当配祀的帝王，也就只有这两种说法而已。
English: Now that the ancient Myeongdong system has been restored, there are only two ways to describe the emperor who should be enshrined.

古文：若以功德论，则太宗再造家邦，功符太祖，当配以太宗。
现代文：如若按功德论，则太宗重新建设国家，功德与太祖相符，应当由太宗配祀。
English: If according to the theory of merit, then Emperor Taizong rebuilt the country, and the merits are consistent with Emperor Taizong, then Emperor Taizong should be enshrined.

古文：若以亲亲论，则献皇帝陛下之所自出，陛下之功德，即皇考之功德，当配以献皇帝。
现代文：如果按亲绿论，献皇帝，是陛下的亲生父亲，陛下的功德，就是皇考的功德，应当由献皇帝配祀。
English: If, according to the pro-green theory, the emperor is the real father of His Majesty, and His Majesty's merits are the merits of the imperial examination, the emperor should be sacrificed.

古文：至称宗之说，则臣等不敢妄议。
现代文：至于称宗的说法，臣等不敢妄加议论。
English: As for the allegation that he was a monk, the vassals did not dare to discuss it.

古文：帝降旨： 明堂秋报大礼，于奉天殿行，其配帝务求画一之说。
现代文：皇帝降旨： 明堂秋报大礼，在奉天殿举行，配祀的帝王务必要有个统一的说法。
English: Emperor's decree: Ming hall autumn report grand ceremony, held in the hall of worship, the emperor must have a unified statement.

古文：皇考称宗，何为不可？
现代文：皇考称宗，有什么不可？
English: The imperial examination said Zong, what can't we do?

古文：再会议以闻。 
现代文：再商议上奏。 
English: Let's discuss the first movement again.

古文：于是户部左侍郎唐胄抗疏言：
现代文：于是户部左侍郎唐冑直言上疏说：
English: As a result, the left attendant of the household, Tang Yao, bluntly said:

古文：三代之礼，莫备于周。
现代文：三代的礼制，没有比周更周详的。
English: The etiquette of the three generations is nowhere more detailed than in the Zhou dynasty.

古文：《孝经》曰： 郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝。 
现代文：《孝经》上说： 郊祀后稷以配上天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝。 
English: "The Book of Filial Piety" says: The countryside worships Hou Yi as a match made in heaven, and the clergy worships King Wen in the Ming Hall as a match made in heaven.

古文：又曰： 严父莫大于配天，则周公其人也。 
现代文：又说： 尊敬父亲莫大于配天，周公就是这样做的。 
English: He also said, "There is no greater way to respect one's father than to be a match for the heavens. Zhou Gong did just that.

古文：说者谓周公有圣人之德，制作礼乐，而文王适其父，故引以证圣人之孝，答曾子问而已。
现代文：论者认为周公有圣人的功德，制礼作乐，而文王恰巧是他的父亲，因而引用来证明圣人的孝敬，回答曾子的提问罢了。
English: The commentators believed that Zhou Gong had the merits of a saint, and was the master of ceremonies and music, while King Wen happened to be his father. Therefore, the quotation was used to prove the saint's filial piety and to answer the question of his great-grandson.

古文：非谓有天下者皆必以父配天，然后为孝。
现代文：不是说有天下的人，都必定以父亲配天，然后纔称为孝。
English: This is not to say that all those who have a heavenly father are bound to match their father with heaven, and then claim to be filial.

古文：不然，周公辅成王践阼，其礼盖为成王而制，于周公为严父，于成王则为严祖矣。
现代文：否则，周公辅佐成王治理夭下，其礼是为成王而设的，对于周公来说是尊父，对于成王来说就是尊祖了。
English: Otherwise, Zhou Gongfu assisted the young King Cheng in governing the country. This courtesy was set up for King Cheng. For Zhou Gong, it was respect for his father, and for King Cheng, it was respect for his grandfather.

古文：然周公归政之后，未闻成王以严父之故，废文王配天之祭，而移于武王也。
现代文：然而周公把政权归还之后，没听说成三因为尊父的原因，废去文王配天的祭祀，而换作武王。
English: However, after Zhou Gong returned the political power, it was not heard that Cheng San, because of his respect for his father, abolished the sacrifice of King Wen to match the sky, and replaced it with King Wu.

古文：后世祀明堂者，皆配以父，此乃误《孝经》之义，而违先王之礼。
现代文：后世祀明堂的，都以父亲配祀，这是误解了《孝经》的意义，违背了先王的礼法。
English: In later generations, those who worshiped Myeongdong had their father as a partner, which misunderstood the meaning of the "Book of Filial Piety" and violated the etiquette of the former king.

古文：昔有问于朱熹曰： 周公之后，当以文王配耶，当以时王之父配耶？ 
现代文：从前有人向朱熹请教： 周公之后，应当以文王配祀呢，还是以当时帝王的父亲配祀？ 
English: Once upon a time, someone asked Zhu Xi for advice: After Zhou Gong, should King Wen be enshrined, or the father of the emperor at that time?

古文：熹曰： 只当以文王为配。 
现代文：朱熹说： 只当以文王配祀。 
English: Zhu Xi said: Only King Wen should be worshipped.

古文：又曰： 继周者如何？ 
现代文：又问： 继承周的天下的又怎么样？ 
English: He also asked: What about inheriting Zhou's empire?

古文：熹曰： 只以有功之祖配，后来第为严父说所惑乱耳。 
现代文：朱熹说： 只以有功德的祖宗配祀，后来祇是被尊父的说法迷惑错乱罢了。 
English: Zhu Xi said: Only the ancestors with merits were worshipped, and later they were only confused and confused by the words of the venerable father.

古文：由此观之，明堂之配，不专于父明矣。
现代文：由此看来，明堂的配祀，不专门由父亲是明白的。
English: From this point of view, it is clear that the deity of Myeongdong is not exclusively the father.

古文：今礼臣不能辨严父之非，不举文、武、成、康之盛，而乃滥引汉、唐、宋不足法之事为言，谓之何哉！
现代文：而今礼部大臣不能辨明尊父的错误，不举证文、武、成、康的盛事，而滥引漠、唐、宋不足效法的事例为论据，说的都是什么啊！
English: Now, the minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies can't identify the mistakes of his father. He doesn't cite the grand events of the Yuan, Wu, Cheng and Kang dynasties, but the examples of indiscriminately following the example of the Miao, Tang and Song dynasties as an argument. What is he talking about!

古文：虽然，丰坊明堂之议，虽未可从，而明堂之礼，则不可废。
现代文：即使这样，丰坊明堂的提议，虽然不可听从，但明堂的礼仪，则不应当废除。
English: Even so, although Fengfang Mingtang's proposal cannot be obeyed, the Mingtang's etiquette should not be abolished.

古文：今南、北两郊皆主尊尊，必季秋一大享帝，而亲亲之义始备。
现代文：而今南、北两郊都主张尊敬亲尊，必定在季秋大享上帝，而亲近亲人的意义纔具备。
English: However, both the southern and northern suburbs now advocate respect for one's relatives, and it is necessary to enjoy God in the spring and autumn, and to be close to one's relatives.

古文：自三代以来，郊与明堂各立所配之帝。
现代文：自三岱以来，郊天与明堂各立所陪祀之帝。
English: Since the time of Samye, Suburban Heaven and Myeongdong have been enshrined with the emperor.

古文：太祖、大宗功德并盛，比之于周，太祖则后稷也，太宗则文王也。
现代文：太祖、太宗功德同等盛大，与周相比，太祖就配后稷，太宗就配文王。
English: Taizu and Taizong had equally great merits. Compared with Zhou, Taizu was awarded the title of Houyi, and Taizong was awarded the title of Wenwang.

古文：今两郊及祈谷，皆奉配太祖，而太宗独未有配。甚为缺典。
现代文：而今两次郊祀及祈谷，都供奉太祖配祀，而太宗独独没有配祀，遭是仪制典礼的欠缺。
English: Now, the two suburban shrines and the prayer valley are both dedicated to the great ancestor, but the Taizong is the only one without a matching shrine, which is due to the lack of ceremony.

古文：故今奉天殿大享之祭，必奉配太宗，而后我朝之典礼始备。
现代文：因此今日奉天殿大享之祭，一定要供奉太宗配祀，然后我朝的典礼纔完备。
English: Therefore, today's festival of enjoying the heavenly palace must be dedicated to the worship of Taizong, and then the ceremony of my morning will be complete.

古文：帝怒，下胄诏狱。
现代文：皇帝发怒，逮捕唐胄关进钦犯狱。
English: The emperor was so angry that he arrested Tang Yiguan and put him in the Qin prison.

古文：嵩乃再会廷臣，先议配帝之礼，言： 考季秋成物之指，严父配天之文，宜奉献皇帝配帝侑食。 
现代文：严嵩这纔又召集朝臣，先商议配帝的礼法，说： 考证季秋万物成熟的意义，尊父配天的论说，应当供奉献皇帝配享上帝。 
English: Yan Song then called together the courtiers and first discussed the etiquette of serving the emperor, saying: "If we examine the meaning of the season of autumn and the maturity of all things, the argument of honoring the father and serving God should be used to dedicate the emperor to serve God.

古文：因请奉文皇帝配祀于孟春祈谷。
现代文：因而请求供奉文皇帝在孟春祈谷时配祀。
English: Therefore, it was requested that Emperor Fengwen be worshipped when Mengchun went to pray in the valley.

古文：帝从献皇配帝之请，而却文皇议不行。
现代文：皇帝听从了献皇配祀上帝的请求，但拒绝了文皇配享的提议而不施行。
English: The emperor complied with the request to dedicate the emperor to the god, but rejected the emperor's proposal and did not implement it.

古文：已复以称宗之礼，集文武大臣于东阁议，言： 《礼》称： 祖有功，宗有德。 
现代文：不久又因为称宗的礼仪，召集文武大臣在东合商议，说： 《礼》称： 祖有功，宗有德。 
English: Not long after that, because of the etiquette of claiming to be the founder of a sect, the ministers of culture and armed forces were called together for consultation in the East, saying: "The Ritual" says: "The founder has merit, the sect has virtue."

古文：释者曰： 祖，始也。
现代文：解释的人说： 祖，是始祖。
English: The interpreter said, "The patriarchs."

古文：宗，尊也。 《汉书注》曰： 祖之称始，始受命也。
现代文：宗，是尊，《汉书》注焉： 祖被称为始，开始接受天命。
English: Zong, is honor, "Hanshu" note: the ancestor is called the beginning, began to accept the destiny.

古文：宗之称尊，有德可尊也。 
现代文：宗被称为尊，是有德可尊。 
English: Zong is known as honorable, and it is virtuous to be honorable.

古文：《孝经》曰： 宗祀文王于明堂，以配上帝。 
现代文：《孝经》上说： 在明堂宗祀文王，以配上帝。 
English: "The Filial Piety Sutra" says: In Myeongdong, the King of Literature is worshipped as a match for God.

古文：王肃注曰： 周公于文王，尊而祀之也。 
现代文：王肃注为： 周公对于文王，尊亲而祭祀他。 
English: Wang Su's annotation reads: Zhou Gong did not respect King Wen, but worshipped him.

古文：此宗尊之说也。
现代文：这是宗尊的说法。
English: This is what Munetaka said.

古文：古者天子七庙。
现代文：古代，天子有七庙。
English: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven had seven temples.

古文：刘歆曰： 七者正法，苟有功德则宗之，不可预为设数。
现代文：刘歆说： 七，是常规法则，如果有功德就宗奉，不可预先定下数目。
English: Liu Wei said, "Seven is a general rule. If you have merits, you should practice them. You should not predetermine the number.

古文：宗不在数中，宗变也。 
现代文：宗不在七数之中，是有变化。 
English: Zong is not among the seven numbers, there is a change.

古文：朱熹亦以歆之说为然。
现代文：朱熹也认为刘歆的说法对。
English: Zhu Rong also believes that Liu Rong's statement is right.

古文：陈氏《礼书》曰： 父昭子穆，而有常数者，礼也。
现代文：陈氏《礼书》说： 父焉昭，子为穆，而有一定的数目，是礼法。
English: Mr. Chen's "Book of Etiquette" says: The father is Yanzhao, the son is Mu, and there is a certain number, which is etiquette.

古文：祖功宗德，而无定法者，义也。 此宗无数之说，礼以义起者。
现代文：祖有功宗有德，而没有一定的成法，是道义，这是宗没有定数的说法，礼法是因道义纔兴起的。
English: Ancestors have merits and virtues, but do not have a certain law, which is morality. This is a way of saying that there is no fixed number of ancestors, and the etiquette is due to the rise of morality.

古文：今援据古义，推缘人情，皇考至德昭闻，密佑穹旻，宗以其德可。
现代文：而今援引古义，推及人情，皇考有至高的德行和昭显的名声，在天上秘密佑护，按其德行宗奉是可以的。
English: But now, by invoking the ancient teachings and appealing to people's sentiments, it is possible for the imperial examination to have the highest virtue and clear reputation, secretly protected in heaven, and worshipped according to its virtue.

古文：圣子神孙，传授无疆，皆皇考一人所衍布，宗以其世亦可。
现代文：圣子神孙，传授不绝，都是皇考一人繁衍广布，按其世次宗奉也可以。
English: The holy sons and grandsons of the gods, teaching endlessly, are all propagated and spread by one person, and can also be worshipped according to their lineage.

古文：宜加宗皇考，配帝明堂，永为有德不迁之庙。 
现代文：应当加宗皇考，在明堂配帝，建造有德而永世不迁的宗庙。 
English: It is necessary to add the imperial examination, match the emperor in the Ming Hall, and build a virtuous ancestral temple that will never move.

古文：帝以疏不言祔庙，留中不下，乃设为臣下奏对之词，作《明堂或问》，以示辅臣。
现代文：皇帝因为奏疏中不言及拊太庙，留在宫内不下发。于是假设臣下奏对的口气，作《明堂或问》，拿给宰辅大臣看。
English: Since the Emperor did not mention the Ancestral Temple in his report, he remained in the Imperial Palace and did not issue it. Therefore, he assumed that his vassal had played the right tone, and wrote "Mingtang or Qian" and showed it to the Vice-Minister.

古文：大略言： 文皇远祖，不应严父之义，宜以父配。
现代文：大概说： 文皇是远祖，不符合尊父的意思，应当由父亲配祀。
English: They probably said: Emperor Wen is a distant ancestor, he does not conform to the will of his father, he should be worshipped by his father.

古文：称宗虽无定说，尊亲崇上，义所当行。
现代文：称宗虽然没有定说，尊敬亲人崇奉上天，按道义应当进行。
English: He said that although there is no set doctrine, respect for relatives and worship of heaven should be carried out in accordance with morality.

古文：既称宗，则当祔庙，岂有太庙中四亲不具之礼？ 
现代文：既然称宗，就应当柑太庙，难道有太庙中没有四亲的道理？ 
English: Since it is called a sect, it should be called a temple. Is there a reason why there are not four relatives in the temple?

古文：帝既排正议，崇私亲，心念太宗永无配享，无以谢廷臣，乃定献皇配帝称宗，而改称太宗号曰成祖。
现代文：皇帝既已排斥正当的言论，尊崇私亲，心中想到太宗永远没有配享，不能杜绝朝廷大臣，于是定献皇配帝称宗，而改称太宗的庙号为成祖。
English: Since the emperor had already rejected legitimate speech and revered his relatives, he thought in his heart that Emperor Taizong would never be worthy and could not stop the court ministers, so he decided to present the emperor with the emperor's name, and changed the temple name of Emperor Taizong to Chengzu.

古文：时未建明堂，迫季秋。遂大享上帝于玄极宝殿，奉睿宗献皇帝配。
现代文：当时没有建造明堂，迫近季秋，于是在玄极宝殿大享上帝，供奉睿宗献皇帝配祀。
English: At that time, Myeongdong was not built, and it was close to the autumn, so God was greatly enjoyed in the Genji Treasure Hall, and it was dedicated to Emperor Rui Zongxian.

古文：殿在宫右乾隅，旧名钦安殿。
现代文：殿在宫中右面西北方位一角，旧名钦安殿。
English: The hall is located in the northwest corner on the right side of the palace. It was formerly known as the Qin'an Hall.

古文：礼成，礼部请帝升殿，百官表贺，如郊祀庆成仪。
现代文：行礼完毕，礼部请皇帝升殿，百官上表朝贺，如同郊祀庆贺礼成的仪式。
English: After the ceremony, the ritual department invited the emperor to ascend to the palace, and hundreds of officials came up to offer morning greetings, just like the ceremony of celebrating the rite of suburban worship.

古文：帝以大享初举，命赐宴群臣于谨身殿。
现代文：皇帝因为大享初次举行，命令在谨身殿赐宴群臣。
English: Because it was the first time that the imperial banquet was held, the emperor ordered that the banquet be given to the courtiers in the hall of honor.

古文：已而以足疾不御殿，命群臣勿行贺礼。
现代文：随后因为脚病没有驾临，命群臣不要贺礼。
English: Subsequently, he did not arrive due to a foot ailment, and ordered his ministers not to make a congratulatory call.

古文：礼官以表闻，并罢宴，令光禄寺分给。
现代文：礼官上表奏闻，撤销宴请，令光禄寺分别发给宴品。
English: The etiquette officer made a report, revoked the banquet, and ordered the Guanglu Temple to distribute the banquet items separately.

古文：二十一年，敕谕礼部： 季秋大享明堂，成周礼典，与郊祀并行。
现代文：嘉靖二十一年，敕谕礼部： 季秋大享明堂，是成周出礼仪典章，与郊祀同时进行。
English: In the 21st year of the Jiajing era, the Zoku ritual department was established: the Jiqiu Grand Festival was held in the Ming Hall. It was a ceremonial of the Cheng Zhou ritual, and was held at the same time as the suburb ritual.

古文：曩以享地未定，特祭于玄极宝殿，朕诚未尽。
现代文：以前因为享地没有确定，特地在玄极宾殿行祭，朕诚意未尽。
English: Previously, because the place of worship was not determined, we held a special ceremony at the Xuan Ji Bin Hall. My sincerity is still not exhausted.

古文：南郊旧殿，原为大祀所，昨岁已令有司撤之。
现代文：南郊旧殿，原为大祀的处所，去年已令有关官员撤除。
English: Last year, the officials concerned ordered the removal of the old hall in the southern suburbs, which was originally the location of the main shrine.

古文：朕自作制象，立为殿，恭荐名曰泰享，用昭寅奉上帝之意。 
现代文：朕自己制作了图样，建造为殿，恭奉进名称泰享，用以昭示敬奉上帝的意思。 
English: I made the pattern myself, built it as a temple, and gave it the name of Taixing, which is used to show the meaning of honoring God.

古文：乃定岁以秋季大享上帝，奉皇考睿宗配享。
现代文：于是规定每年在秋季大享上帝，供奉皇考睿宗配享。
English: As a result, it was stipulated that the god should be celebrated every year in the autumn, and the temple should be dedicated to the Emperor Koga and the Emperor Ruizong.

古文：行礼如南郊，陈设如祈谷。
现代文：行礼如同南郊，陈设如同祈谷。
English: The etiquette is like that of a southern suburb, and the furnishings are like that of a prayer valley.

古文：明年，礼部尚书费寀以大享殿工将竣，请帝定殿门名，门曰大享，殿曰皇乾。
现代文：第二年，礼部尚书费案因为大享殿将要竣工，奏请皇帝定殿门名称，门为大享，殿为皇干。
English: In the second year, the Ministry of Ceremonies still had to pay for the books because the Great Hall was about to be completed, and the Emperor was asked to decide on the name of the hall's door. The door was called the Great Hall, and the hall was called the Imperial Staircase.

古文：及殿成，而大享仍于玄极宝殿，遣官行礼以为常。
现代文：等到大殿落成，而大享礼仪仍在玄极宝殿举行，派遣官吏行礼成为常规。
English: By the time the main hall was completed, and the grand ceremony was still being held in the Genji Treasure Hall, it had become customary to send officials to perform the ceremony.

古文：隆庆元年，礼臣言： 我朝大享之礼，自皇考举行，追崇睿宗，以昭严父配天之孝。
现代文：隆庆元年，礼部大臣说： 我朝大享之礼，从皇考举行，追尊睿宗，以昭示尊父配天之孝。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: I am the first to enjoy the ceremony, held from the imperial examination, to honor Ruizong, to show my father's filial piety.

古文：自皇上视之，则睿宗为皇祖，非周人宗祀文王于明堂之义。 
现代文：从皇上看来，则睿宗为皇祖，不合于周人宗祀文王于明堂之义。 
English: From the emperor's point of view, Ruizong was the emperor's ancestor, which was not in line with the Zhou people's worship of King Wen in the Ming Hall.

古文：于是帝从其请，罢大享礼，命玄极宝殿仍为钦安殿。
现代文：于是皇帝听从他们的请求，罢除大享礼，命玄极宝殿仍改为钦安殿。
English: As a result, the emperor listened to their request, cancelled the grand reception, and ordered the Xuanji Treasure Hall to be changed to the Qin'an Hall.

古文：令节拜天
现代文：令节拜天
English: Day of the Dead

古文：嘉靖初，沿先朝旧仪，每日宫中行拜天礼。
现代文：嘉靖初年，沿袭先朝旧仪，每天宫中举行拜天礼。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the ancient rituals of the previous dynasty were followed, and a Sunday service was held in the palace every day.

古文：后以为渎，罢之。
现代文：后来认为太泛滥，罢除了。
English: Later, it was considered to be too widespread and was abolished.

古文：遇正旦、冬至、圣诞节，于奉天殿丹陛上行礼。
现代文：遇上元旦、冬至、圣上生日，在奉天殿丹陛上行礼。
English: On New Year's Day, the winter solstice, and the saint's birthday, a salute is made to His Majesty the Emperor Dan in the Bokuten-den.

古文：既定郊祀，遂罢冬至之礼。
现代文：既已确定了郊天祭祀，就罢除了冬至的祭礼。
English: The winter solstice festival has been cancelled as soon as the suburban festivals have been determined.

古文：惟正旦、圣诞节行礼于玄极宝殿。
现代文：只有元旦、圣上生日在玄捶童扬行礼。
English: It is only on New Year's Day, the saint's birthday, that the rite is performed at Xuanzang Tongyang.

古文：隆庆元年正旦，命宫中拜天，不用在外执事，祭品亦不取供于太常。
现代文：隆庆元年元旦，命令宫中拜天，不用在外举行祭祀，祭品也不从太常寺取用。
English: On New Year's Day of the first year of the Longqing era, the palace was ordered to worship heaven, and there was no need to hold sacrifices outside, and the sacrificial offerings were not taken from the Taiji Temple.

