古文：韩显符，不知何许人。
现代文：韩显符，不知何许人。
English: Han Xianpu, I don't know how many people.

古文：少习三式，善察视辰象，补司天监生，迁灵台郎，累加司天冬官正。
现代文：从小学习雷公、太乙、六壬三式，善于观察天象，被补为司天监生，升为灵台郎，连续升官为司天冬官正。
English: He learned the three styles of Lei Gong, Tai Yi, and Liujin from a young age, and was good at observing celestial objects. He was appointed as the overseer of heaven, was promoted to the post of spiritual director, and was successively promoted to the post of the overseer of heaven and winter.

古文：显符专浑天之学，淳化初，表请造铜浑仪、候仪。
现代文：韩显符专门研究浑天之学，淳化初，上表请求造铜浑仪、候仪。
English: Han Xianfu specialized in the study of the heavens, and at the beginning of Junhua, the above table requested the creation of a copper horoscope and a weather vane.

古文：诏给用度，俾显符规度，择匠铸之。
现代文：皇上下诏拨给钱、物，让韩显符设计，选工匠铸造。
English: The emperors allocated money and goods, let Han Xianpu design, and selected craftsmen to cast.

古文：至道元年浑仪成，于司天监筑台置之，赐显符杂彩五十匹。
现代文：至道元年浑仪造成，在司天监建台安放它，皇上赐给韩显符杂彩五十匹。
English: In the first year of the Dogo era, the emperor gave Han Xianfu and 50 horses to the emperor.

古文：显符上其《法要》十卷，序之云：
现代文：韩显符又上浑仪《法要》十卷，《法要》序云：
English: Han Xianfu went on to read the ten volumes of the "Legal Essentials," the preface of which reads:

古文：伏羲氏立浑仪，测北极高下，量日影短长，定南北东西，观星间广狭。
现代文：伏羲氏设立浑仪，用它测北极的高下，量日影的短长，确定南北东西的方向，观察星宿间的远近。
English: He set up a compass and used it to measure the height of the North Pole, measure the length of the sun's shadow, determine the north-south and east-west direction, and observe the distance between the stars.

古文：帝尧即位，羲氏、和氏立浑仪，定历象日月星辰，钦授民时，使知缓急。
现代文：尧帝即位，羲氏、和氏设立浑仪，测定历象日月星辰的变化，钦授民时，使百姓知道农时的缓急。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, and the Qian and He clans set up the Hun instrument to measure the changes of the calendar, the sun, the moon and the stars, to guide the people, and to let the people know the priorities of the agricultural time.

古文：降及虞舜，测璇玑玉衡以齐七政。
现代文：到虞舜时，则用璇玑玉衡来测量日月和金木水火土五星。
English: When arriving at the yu, the sun, moon, wood, water, fire and earth are measured with the yu yu.

古文：《通占》又云： 抚浑仪，观天道，万象不足以为多。 是知浑仪者，实天地造化之准，阴阳历数之元，自古圣帝明王莫不用是精详天象，预知差忒。
现代文：《通占》又说 ：用浑仪，观天道，万象都不能认为是多。 由此可知，浑仪，实是天地造化的准则，阴阳历数的本原，自古圣帝明王没有不用浑仪来深入了解天象，预知差错的。
English: "Tong Zhan" also said: "Using the Hun Yi to observe the heavenly path cannot be considered to be too much. From this, it can be seen that the Hun Yi is actually the criterion for the creation of heaven and earth, the origin of the yin and yang calendar, since ancient times, the Holy Emperor Ming Wang did not use the Hun Yi to deeply understand the heavenly path, and the prediction was wrong.

古文：或铸以铜，或饰以玉，置之内庭，遣日官近臣同窥测焉。
现代文：或用铜铸成，或用玉装饰，安放在宫中，派日官近臣一起观测。
English: Or cast in copper, or decorated with jade, placed in the palace, and sent to the Japanese officials and courtiers to observe together.

古文：自伏羲甲寅年至皇朝大中祥符三年庚戌岁，积三千八百九十七年。
现代文：从伏羲甲寅年到皇朝大中祥符三年，共三千八百九十七年。
English: It took three years, a total of three thousand eight hundred and ninety-seven years, from Fuxin Jia Yin to the Emperor's great middle school Xiang Fu.

古文：五帝之后讫今，明历象之玄，知浑天之奥者，近十余朝，考而论之，臻至妙者不过四五。自余徒夸重于一日，不深图于久要，致使天象无准，历算渐差，占候不同，盈虚难定。
现代文：五帝之后至今，明白历象的本原，了解浑天的奥妙的，将近有十多朝了，经过考察比较认为，达到最好的不过四五朝；其余只不过是炫耀于一时，不图长久，致使天象无准确的观测，历算也渐渐有误差，占候出现不同，日月星辰的变化难以确定。
English: From the time of the Five Emperors to the present, there have been nearly a dozen dynasties that have understood the origin of the astrological phenomena and the mysteries of the heavens. After examination and comparison, it is believed that only four or five dynasties have achieved the best; the rest are just showing off for a while, not for a long time. As a result, there is no accurate observation of the celestial phenomena, and the calendar calculation gradually has errors. The horoscope appears different, and the changes of the sun, moon and stars are difficult to determine.

古文：陛下讲求废坠，爰造浑仪，漏刻星躔，晓然易辨。
现代文：陛下讲求得失，于是造浑仪，计时和观看星宿的位置和序次，晓然易辨。
English: His Majesty talked about the pros and cons, so he built a compass, kept time and watched the position and order of the stars, which were easy to distinguish.

古文：若人目窥于下，则铜管运于上，七曜之进退盈缩，众星之次舍远近，占逆顺，明吉凶，然后修福俾顺其度，省事以退其灾，悉由斯器验之。
现代文：如果用眼睛在下面看浑仪，则铜窥管在上面运行，日、月、金、木、水、火、土星的进退盈亏，各星的位置和距离的远近，占卜逆顺，明白吉凶，然后修福顺应它们的法度，减少劳作消灭灾害，全由浑仪来验证。
English: If you look at the Hun below with your eyes, then the copper spy tube will run on the top. The sun, moon, gold, wood, water, fire, Saturn's progress and retreat, the distance and proximity of the stars, divination, understanding good and bad luck, and then cultivating good luck according to their laws, reducing labor and eliminating disasters are all verified by the Hun.

古文：昔汉洛下闳修浑仪，测《太初历》云： 后五百年必当重制。 至唐李淳风，果合前契。
现代文：从前汉代洛下闳修浑仪，测定《太初历》，说 ：五百年后必会重造浑仪。 到唐代时的李淳风，果然重修浑仪。
English: Once upon a time, Li Chunfeng, who went to Luo in the Han Dynasty to repair the armillary sphere and determine the "Great First Calendar," said that the armillary sphere would be rebuilt after five hundred years.

古文：贞观初。淳风又言前代浑仪得失之差，因令铜铸。
现代文：贞观初，李淳风言及前代浑仪得失，于是诏命用铜铸造。
English: At the beginning of Zhenguan, Li Chunfeng mentioned the gains and losses of the previous generation of Hunyi, so he ordered to cast it in copper.

古文：七年，太宗起凝晖阁于禁中，俾侍臣占验。
现代文：七年，唐太宗在宫中修凝晖阁放浑仪，让侍臣观天象，卜吉凶。
English: In the seventh year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Taizong repaired the cocoon in the palace and set the eaves of the eaves on fire to let the courtiers watch the celestial bodies and tell fortunes.

古文：既在宫掖，人莫得见，后失其处所。
现代文：因在宫中，外人看不见，后来不知去向。
English: Because in the palace, outsiders can not see, and then do not know where to go.

古文：玄宗命沙门一行修《大衍历》，盖以浑仪为证。
现代文：唐玄宗命僧一行修《大衍历》，大概是用浑仪验证的。
English: Tang Xuan Zong's ordained monk and his entourage practiced the "Great Yan Calendar," which was probably verified using the Hun instrument.

古文：又有梁令瓒造浑仪木式，一行谓其精密，思出古人，遂以铜铸。
现代文：还有梁令瓒用木造成浑仪模型，僧一行认为它很精密，巧思超出古人，于是用铜铸造。
English: Also, Liang Lingyao used wood to make a model of the Hunyi. The monks thought that it was very precise and more ingenious than the ancients, so they cast it in copper.

古文：今文德殿鼓楼下有古本铜浑仪一，制极疏略，不可施用。
现代文：现在文德殿鼓楼下有一仿古铜浑仪，造的很粗陋，不能使用。
English: Now there is an imitation bronze Hun instrument under the stairs of the Wende Hall. It is very crudely made and cannot be used.

古文：且历象之作，非浑仪无以考真伪；算造之士，非占验不能究得失。
现代文：再说做历象，不用浑仪无法考察真伪；计算和制作的人，不验证不能究明得失。
English: In addition, as a historian, you can't investigate the authenticity without a compass; those who calculate and produce can't investigate the gains and losses without verification.

古文：浑仪之成，则司天岁上细行历。益可致其详密。
现代文：浑仪成后，则司天监每年可上细行历，更可使历法详尽周密。
English: After the formation of the Hun Dynasty, the Celestial Supervisor could carry out the calendar in detail every year, and even make the calendar more detailed and thorough.

古文：其制有九，事具《天文志》。
现代文：浑天仪的规制有九，见《天文志》。
English: There are nine regulations for the armillary sphere, see "Astronomical History."

古文：自是显符专测验浑仪，累加春官正，又转太子洗马。
现代文：从此韩显符专门测验浑仪，连续升为春官正，又调为太子洗马。
English: Since then, Han Xianfu has been specially testing the mud instrument, and has been continuously promoted to the spring official, and has been transferred to the prince to wash the horse.

古文：大中祥符三年，诏显符择监官或子孙可以授浑仪法者。
现代文：大中祥符三年，诏命韩显符选司天监官员或子孙中可传授浑仪法的人。
English: In the third year of Daizhong Xiangfu, Han Xianfu was ordered by the emperor to choose an official of the Celestial Guardianship or a person who could teach the Hunyi Law to his children and grandchildren.

古文：显符言长子监生承矩善察躔度，次子保章正承规见知算造，又主簿杜贻范、保章正杨惟德皆可传其学。
现代文：韩显符说长子司天监生韩承矩善察日月星辰运行的度次，次子保章正韩承规懂算造，还有主簿杜贻范、保章正杨惟德都可传授。
English: Han Xianfu said that the eldest son of the Heavenly Guardians, Han Cheng Ru, was good at observing the movement of the sun, moon and stars, and the second son, Bao Zhang Zheng, knew calculation and construction, as well as the master book, Du Xuan Fan, and Bao Zhang Zheng Yang Wei De could be taught.

古文：惟胡宾王、胡元兴二家纂述，皆不之备。克明访耆旧，采碑志，孳孳著撰，裁十数卷，书未成而卒。
现代文：诏命韩显符和杜贻范等参验浑仪。后来韩显符升为殿中丞兼翰林天文。六年去世，终年七十四岁。
English: The imperial edict ordered Han Xianfu and Du Qianfan to take part in the examination of Hunyi. Later, Han Xianfu was promoted to the post of palace junior secretary and Hanlin astronomer. He died six years later at the age of seventy-four.

古文：刘翰，沧州临津人。
现代文：又下诏司天监丞丁文泰接替他的职事。刘翰，沧州临津人。
English: He was also succeeded in his post by the Imperial Commissioner of Heaven, Ding Wentei. Liu Han, a native of Linjin, Cangzhou.

古文：世习医业，初摄护国军节度巡官。
现代文：世代为医，开始为护国军节度巡官。
English: He has been a doctor for generations, and he started out as a festival inspector for the National Guard.

古文：周显德初，诣阙献《经用方书》三十卷、《论候》十卷、《今体治世集》二十卷。
现代文：周显德初，到朝中献上《经用方书》三十卷、《论候》十卷、《今体治世集》二十卷。
English: At the beginning of Zhou Xiande's reign, he presented 30 volumes of "The Book of Economic Usage," 10 volumes of "The Study of the Seasons" and 20 volumes of "The Collection of the Governance of the Modern World" to the imperial court.

古文：世宗嘉之，命为翰林医官，其书付史馆，再加卫尉寺主簿。
现代文：周世宗嘉奖他，命他为翰林医官，他献的书交到史馆，又加官为卫尉寺主簿。
English: Zhou Shizong praised him, appointed him as Hanlin's medical officer, submitted the book he donated to the history museum, and appointed him as the master of Weiyi Temple.

古文：太祖北征，命翰从行。
现代文：宋太祖北征，命他随行。
English: Song Taizu's Northern Expedition, ordered him to accompany.

古文：建隆初，加朝散大夫、鸿胪寺丞。
现代文：建隆初，被加封为朝散大夫、鸿胪寺丞。
English: At the beginning of Jianlong's reign, he was given the additional titles of Chosan Daifu and Hongyu Temple Cho.

古文：时太祖求治，事皆核实，故方技之士必精练。
现代文：此时太祖讲求治道，事事都要核实，所以方技之士定要精通本职。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather preached the way of seeking justice, and everything must be verified, so the party technicians must be proficient in their duties.

古文：乾德初，令太常寺考较翰林医官艺术，以翰为优，绌其业不精者二十六人。
现代文：乾德初，太祖命太常寺考核翰林医官的技艺，以刘翰为优秀，贬退医术不精的二十六人。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qiande, Emperor Taizu ordered the Taiji Temple to evaluate the skills of the medical officers of Hanlin, with Liu Han as the outstanding one, and to reject the 26 people who were not good at medicine.

古文：自后，又诏诸州访医术优长者籍其名，仍量赐装钱，所在厨传给食，遣诣阙。
现代文：此后，太祖又诏命各州查访到有医术优秀者登记他们的姓名，并衡量距离远近赐给他们路费，在他们所过之处命官府供给食物，送他们到朝廷。
English: After that, the great-grandfather also ordered the states to visit those who had outstanding medical skills to register their names, and to measure the distance to give them travel expenses, to order the government to provide food wherever they passed, and to send them to the imperial court.

古文：开宝五年，太宗在藩邸有疾，命翰与马志视之。
现代文：开宝五年，太宗在王府患病，太祖命刘翰和马志诊视。
English: In the fifth year of the Kaibao era, Emperor Taizong fell ill at Wangfu, and Liu Han and Ma Zhi were sent to see him.

古文：及愈，转尚药奉御，赐银器、缗钱、鞍勒马。
现代文：太宗病愈后，刘翰升调为尚药奉御，并得到银器、缗钱、马及鞍勒的赏赐。
English: After Taizong recovered from his illness, Liu Han was promoted to Shangye Bongyo, and was rewarded with silverware, money bags, horses and saddles.

古文：尝被诏详定《唐本草》，翰与道士马志、医官翟煦、张素、吴复珪圭、王光祐、陈昭遇同议，凡《神农本经》三百六十种，《名医录》一百八十二种，唐本先附一百一十四种，有名无用一百九十四种，翰等又参定新附一百三十三种。
现代文：刘翰曾受命详定《唐本草》，刘翰与道士马志，医官翟煦、张素、吴复王圭、王光佑、陈昭遇共同议定，详定后的《唐本草》包括的药物有：《神农本经》三百六十种，《名医录》一百八十二种，唐本先附的一百一十四种，有名无用的一百九十四种。
English: Liu Han had been ordered to detail the "Tang Ben Cao." Liu Han and the Taoist Ma Zhi, the medical officers Tong Tong, Zhang Su, Wu Fu Wang Gui, Wang Guang You and Chen Zhaoyuan jointly agreed that the detailed "Tang Ben Cao" included the following medicines: 360 kinds of "Shennong Hon Jing," 182 kinds of "Ming Yi Luo," 114 kinds of "Tang Ben Anzhuan," and 194 kinds of famous and useless drugs.

古文：既成，诏翰林学士中书舍人李昉、户部员外郎知制诰王祐、左司员外郎知制诰扈蒙详覆毕上之。
现代文：新书编成后，皇上命翰林学士中书舍人李日方、户部员外郎知制诰王佑、左司员外郎知制诰扈蒙详细审察后把它献上。
English: After the new book was compiled, the emperor ordered Li Yifang, the book keeper of Hanlin Middle School, Wai Lang Chisei Hao Wang You, a member of the Household Department, and Wai Lang Chisei Hao Meng, a member of the Left Division, to examine it in detail and present it.

古文：昉等序之曰：
现代文：李日方等人为新定本草一书做序说：
English: Li Yifang and others made a preface to the newly set text, saying:

古文：《三坟》之书，神农预其一。
现代文：《三坟》一书，神农写了一部分。
English: Shennong wrote part of the book "Three Graves."

古文：百药即辨，《本草》序其录。
现代文：各种药物得到辨别，《本草》在序中记录下来。
English: Various drugs have been identified, and "this herb" has been recorded in the sequence.

古文：旧经三卷，世所流传。
现代文：《本草》旧经三卷，在世上流传。
English: "The Primordial Herbs" is a three-volume ancient scripture that has been passed down around the world.

古文：《名医别录》，互为编纂。
现代文：《名医别录》，是总结各医家之说编纂成的。
English: "Record of Famous Physicians" is compiled by summarizing the sayings of various doctors.

古文：至梁陶弘景乃以《别录》参其《本经》，朱墨杂书，时谓明白。
现代文：到梁时的陶弘景才以《名医别录》参验《本经》，用红字和黑字交替写成一书，当时人认为很明白。
English: It was not until the time of Liang that Tao Hongjing examined the "Book of Famous Physicians" and wrote a book with alternating red and black characters. At that time, people thought it was very clear.

古文：而又考彼功用，为之注释，列为七卷，南国行焉。
现代文：他又考核各种药的功用，进行注释，排列为七卷，在南方流行。
English: He also examined the functions of various medicines, annotated them, and arranged them into seven volumes, which were popular in the south.

古文：逮乎有唐，别加参校，增药余八百味，添注为二十卷。
现代文：到唐代，又另外加以比较考核，增加八百多种药，增加注释，成为二十卷。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, it was compared and evaluated separately, and more than 800 kinds of medicines were added, and annotations were added, resulting in 20 volumes.

古文：《本经》漏缺则补之，陶氏误说则证之。
现代文：《本经》漏缺的就补上，陶氏误说的就改正。
English: Any omissions in this sutra will be made up, and any mistakes made by Mr. Dow will be corrected.

古文：然而载历年祀，又逾四百，朱字墨字，无本得同；旧注新注，其文互阙。
现代文：然而年复一年，又过了四百年，红字黑字，没一本相同；旧注新注，文字也互相缺漏。
English: However, year after year, and after four hundred years, the red and black characters, none of them are the same; old notes and new notes, the characters are also missing from each other.

古文：非圣主抚大同之运，永无疆之休，其何以改而正之哉！
现代文：若不是圣主继承统一大业，使天下太平，怎么能改正它呢！
English: If the Lord does not inherit the great cause of unification and make the world peaceful, how can it be corrected?

古文：乃命尽考传误，刊为定本。
现代文：于是皇上诏命详细考察流传过程中的失误，刊为定本。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered a detailed examination of the errors in the circulation process and published it as a final version.

古文：类例非允，从而革焉。
现代文：分类不当的，由此得以纠正。
English: The misclassification was corrected.

古文：至如笔头灰，兔毫也，而在草部，今移附兔头骨之下；半天河、地浆，皆水也，亦在草部，今移附土石类之间；败鼓皮，移附于兽名；胡桐泪，改从于木类；紫鑛，亦木也，自玉石品而改焉；伏翼，实禽也，由虫鱼部而移焉；橘柚，附于果实；食盐，附于光盐；生姜、乾姜，同归一类；至于鸡肠、蘩蒌，陆英、蒴藋，以类相似，从而附之。
现代文：如笔头灰，是兔毫，而在草部，今移附在兔头骨之下；半天河、地浆，都是水，也在草部，今移附在土石类之间；败鼓皮，移附于兽名；胡桐泪，改在木类；紫矿，也是木，从玉石品下改在木类；伏翼实为禽，由虫鱼部而改移到禽部；橘柚，改附于果实部；食盐，改附于光盐部；生姜、干姜，同归一类；至于鸡肠、蘩蒌、陆英、蒴鑋，因类别相似，也附在一起。
English: For example, the gray at the beginning of the text is rabbit hair, but in the grass section, it is now attached under the rabbit's skull; half of the Tianhe River and the earth's pulp are water, also in the grass section, it is now attached between the earth and stone; the broken drum skin is attached to the animal name; the ho-tong teardrop is changed to the wood category; the purple ore is also wood, from the jade product to the wood category; the feathered wing solid is poultry, from the worm fish section to the poultry section; the tangerine yakitori is attached to the fruit section; the table salt is attached to the

古文：仍采陈藏器《拾遗》、李含光《音义》，或穷源于别本，或传效于医家，参而较之，辨其臧否。
现代文：新书还选用陈藏器的《拾遗》、李含光的《音义》，或者寻求别的版本的来源，或者向医家请教，互相参考比较，辨明正误。
English: The new book also selects the "Collected Works" of the museum and Li Gangguang's "Meaning of Sound," or seeks the source of other versions, or consults with doctors, and compares and contrasts with each other to identify right and wrong.

古文：至如突屈白，旧说灰类，今是木根；天麻根，解似赤箭，今又全异。
现代文：如突屈白，旧说是灰类，今为木根；天麻根，解释为似赤箭，今又完全不同。
English: For example, the white-breasted night heron, which used to be classified as a grey heron, is now classified as a tree root, while the red-throated night heron, which used to be classified as a red-throated night heron, is now a completely different animal.

古文：去非取是，特立新条。
现代文：去掉错的，保留对的，单独设立新条目。
English: Delete the wrong one, keep the right one, and create a new entry separately.

古文：自余刊正，不可悉数。
现代文：刊正的其他条目，不可尽数。
English: There are an infinite number of other articles that have been published.

古文：下采众议，定为印板。
现代文：采纳众人意见，确定印刷版本。
English: The printed version will be determined by taking into account the opinions of everyone.

古文：乃以白字为神农所说，墨字为名医所传，唐附今附，各加显注，详其解释，审其形性。
现代文：于是以白字为神农所说，黑字为名医所传，唐代增加的药种和宋代增加的药种，都分别加上明显的标志，详细解释，弄清它们的形态和药性。
English: Therefore, the white characters are said to be Shennong, the black characters are said to be transmitted by famous doctors, and the drugs added in the Tang Dynasty and the drugs added in the Song Dynasty are clearly marked, explained in detail, and their forms and medicinal properties are clarified.

古文：证谬误而辨之者，署为今注；考文意而述之者，又为今按。
现代文：辨证谬误的，作为今注；考察文意而记述的，作为今按。
English: The dialectical fallacy is now a footnote; the examination of the meaning of the text is now a footnote.

古文：义既判定，理亦详明。
现代文：药的功效确定了，道理也就详明。
English: The efficacy of the drug has been confirmed, and the reason is clear.

古文：今以新旧药合九百八十三种，并目录二十一卷，广颁天下，传而行焉。
现代文：今以新旧药共九百八十三种，加上目录二十一卷，颁行天下，广泛流传。
English: At present, a total of 983 kinds of new and old drugs, plus 21 volumes of catalogues, are issued and distributed throughout the world, and are widely circulated.

古文：翰后加检校工部员外郎。
现代文：刘翰后来加官为检校工部员外郎。
English: Liu Han was later promoted to the position of inspector of the school construction department.

古文：太平兴国四年，命为翰林医官使，再加检校户部郎中。
现代文：太平兴国四年，被任命为翰林医官使，再加官为检校户部郎中。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, he was appointed as the medical envoy of Hanlin, and then he was appointed as the junior official of the school inspection department.

古文：雍熙二年，滑州刘遇疾，诏翰驰往视之。
现代文：雍熙二年，滑州刘遇患病，皇上命刘翰去诊治。
English: In the second year of the Yongxi Dynasty, the Emperor ordered Liu Han to go to Slanting County for treatment after Liu fell ill.

古文：翰还，言遇必瘳，既而即死，坐责授和州团练副使。
现代文：刘翰从滑州回来，说刘遇必会病愈，不久，刘遇就死了，刘翰因此获罪，被贬责为和州团练副使。
English: Liu Han came back from Slushu and said that Liu Rong would surely recover from his illness. Soon, Liu Rong died. Liu Han was found guilty and was demeaned as the vice-envoy of the Hezhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：端拱初，起为尚药奉御。
现代文：端拱初，又被起用为尚药奉御。
English: At the beginning of the end of the arch, it was also used as a medicine.

古文：淳化元年，复为医官使。
现代文：淳化元年，再为医官使。
English: In the first year of the Chunhua era, he became a medical officer again.

古文：卒，年七十二。
现代文：逝世时七十二岁。
English: He was 72 when he died.

