古文：桓温病笃，讽朝廷加己九锡。
现代文：原文晋朝时桓温虽病危卧床，仍请求朝廷加自己九锡。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, although Kan'en was critically ill in bed, he still asked the imperial court to give him nine pennies.

古文：谢安使袁宏具草，安见之，辄使宏改，由是历旬不就，温薨，锡命遂寝。
现代文：谢安要袁宏起草加锡诏书，文稿完成后，谢安却频频要袁宏修改，于是延误了十多天才定稿。一直到桓温病逝以后，加锡的诏命才送达。
English: Xie An asked Yuan Hong to draft the imperial edict of Jiaxi, but after the document was completed, Xie An frequently asked Yuan Hong to revise it, so the final draft was delayed for more than ten days. The imperial edict of Jiaxi was not delivered until after Huan Wen died of illness.

古文：大将军窦宪内妻，郡国俱往贺。
现代文：东汉时大将军窦宪纳妾时，许多官员都前去道贺。
English: When Eastern Han Dynasty General Dou Xian took a concubine, many officials came forward to congratulate him.

古文：汉中太守亦欲遣使，户曹李郃谏曰： 窦氏恣横，危亡可立俟矣。
现代文：当时的汉中太守也想派使前往，户曹李郃劝谏说： 窦氏专权骄横，遭受国法制裁是指日可待的事，希望大人跟他保持距离，免得惹祸上身。 
English: At that time, Hanzhong Daju also wanted to send an envoy, and Huzo Cao Liqi advised him: Dou's autocratic arrogance and being subjected to national law sanctions are things that can wait. I hope that adults will keep their distance from him, so as not to get into trouble.

古文：愿明府勿与通。 
现代文：然而太守仍坚持要派使申贺。
English: However, the Empress Dowager still insisted on sending an envoy to offer congratulations.

古文：太守固遣，郃乃请自行，故所在迟留，以观其变。
现代文：于是李郃自请为使者，一路上故意拖延停留，静观其变。
English: As a result, Li Yao invited himself to be an envoy, deliberately delaying his stay along the way, and watching his change.

古文：行至扶风，而宪已诛，诸交通者皆连坐，唯太守以不预得免。
现代文：等他到达扶风的时候，就已传来窦宪被诛的消息，当时与窦宪交往的官员多半受到牵连获罪，唯有汉中太守得以幸免。
English: By the time he reached Fufeng, news of Dou Xian's arrest had already reached him. Most of the officials who had been in contact with Dou Xian at that time were implicated and convicted, but only Han Zhong Taishou was spared.

古文：按袁宏草成，以示王彪之。彪之曰： 卿文甚美，然此文何可示人？
现代文：当初袁宏草拟诏命时，曾将文稿拿给王彪之看，王彪之说： 你的文笔很好，但这篇文章怎能给外人看？
English: At the beginning, when Yuan Hong drafted the edict, he showed the manuscript to Wang Biao, who said: Your writing is very good, but how can this article be shown to outsiders?

古文：安之频改，有以也。 
现代文：谢大人多次要求你修改，不是文章不好，一定还有其他原因。 
English: Mr. Xie has asked you to revise it several times. It's not that the article is bad, there must be other reasons.

古文：李郃，字孟节，即知二使星来益部者。
现代文：李郃，字孟节，他在汉中做官时，朝廷派遣两个使者微服去益州查访，在汉中遇到李郃。
English: Li Xi, byte Meng Jie, when he was an official in Hanzhong, the imperial court sent two envoys to Yizhou to visit, and met Li Xi in Hanzhong.

古文：其决窦氏之败，或亦天文有征，然至理亦不过是。
现代文：李郃问： 二君离京师时，知朝廷遣二使否？ 使者惊愕，问李郃如何得知，李郃指着天上的星星说： 有二使星向益州分野，故知之耳。 
English: Li Rong asked: When the two princes left Beijing, did they know that the imperial court had sent the two princes? The envoy was surprised and asked Li Rong how he knew. Li Rong pointed to the stars in the sky and said: There are two guiding stars to the Yizhou area, so I know the ears.

