古文：十六日平明行，二十里，为麻潭驿，其地犹属零陵，而南即道州界矣。
现代文：十六日天亮时出发，行二十里为麻潭骚，这里仍然属于零陵县，但它的南面就是道升界了。
English: We set out at dawn on the 16th and drove 20 miles to Ma Tan Sau. This area still belongs to Luling County, but its southern side is now in the province of Dousheng.

古文：自入泷来，山势逼束，石滩悬亘，而北风利甚，卷翠激玉，宛转凌波，不觉其难，咏旧句 舡梭织峰翠，山轴卷溪绡 ，《下宁洋溪中诗》。
现代文：自从进入此泥以来，两边山势逼束，石滩高悬横亘，然而北风很便于航行，奔腾的江水卷翠激玉，船曲折地行进在浪尖上，不觉得航行的艰难，我曼声吟出旧时写的两句诗： 船行如梭织出峰岭上翠秀的图景，山转似轴卷起澳中薄绸般的彩画 。
English: Since entering this mud, the mountains on both sides are imposing, the rocky beaches are high and wide, but the north wind is very easy to sail, the rushing river waters are jade-like, and the ship is zigzagging on the top of the waves. I do not feel the difficulty of sailing. I hummed out two poems written in the old days: The boat is like a shuttle weaving a beautiful picture on the peak, and the mountain turns like a spool rolling up a silk-like painting in Macao.

古文：若为此地设也。
现代文：这仿佛是为此地而作的。
English: It feels like it was made for this place.

古文：其处山鹃盛开，皆在水涯岸侧，不作蔓山布谷之观，而映碧流丹，老觉有异。
现代文：这地方杜鹃花盛开，点缀了水边岸侧，虽没有呈现出漫山遍野的景象，但映碧流丹，给人的感觉非同一般。
English: In this place, rhododendrons are in full bloom, embellishing the water's edge and the shore side. Although it does not present a scene of endless mountains and fields, it gives people an extraordinary feeling.

古文：二十里，吴垒铺，其西南山稍逊，舟反转而东。
现代文：行二十里，到吴垒铺，铺的西南面山稍向里退缩，而船反而转往东。
English: After a twenty-mile journey to Wuye Pu, the mountain to the southwest of the pu retreated slightly, and the ship turned east instead.

古文：又五里，复南转，其东北岸有石，方形叠砌，围亘山腰，东下西起，若甃而成者，岂垒之遗者耶？
现代文：又行五里，重新转往南，江的东北岸上有些石头，呈方形堆叠着，环绕横直在山腰上，东边下倾西边耸起，像是人工砌成的，难道是堡垒的残留部分吗？
English: After another five miles, we turned south again. On the northeast bank of the river, there were some stones, stacked in a square shape, surrounding the mountainside, rising from the east to the west, as if they were artificially built. Was it the remnants of a fortress?

古文：又十里，山势愈逼束，是为泷口。
现代文：又行十里，山势更加逼束，这里便是拢口。
English: After another ten miles, with the mountain conditions becoming more severe, we came to a junction.

古文：又五里，泊于将军滩。
现代文：又行五里，停泊在将军滩。
English: Another five miles, anchored at Shogun Beach.

古文：滩有峰立泷之口，若当关者然。溯流出泷，划然若另辟区宇。
现代文：滩边有座山峰屹立在拢的出口处，如守关的将士一样•溯流出了此拢，景象迥异，如另一番天地。
English: On the beach, there is a mountain standing at the exit of the enclosure, like a watchman. The scenery is very different, like another world.

古文：是夜月明达旦，入春来所未有。
现代文：整个夜晚月光明亮，直到天明，是入春以来从未有过的。
English: Throughout the night, the moon was bright and bright until dawn, which has never happened since the beginning of spring.

古文：十七日平明行，水径迂曲，五里至青口。
现代文：十七日天亮时开船，水路迂回曲折，行五里到青口。
English: On the seventeenth day, at dawn, the boat set out. The water route was circuitous and tortuous, and it took five miles to reach Aokuchi.

古文：一水东自山峡中出者，宁远道也，此水最大，即潇水也；一水南自平旷中来者，道州道也，此水次之，即沲水也，乃舍潇而南溯沲。
现代文：一条水从东边的山峡中流泻出来，这是去宁远县的水路，此水最大，它就是潇水；一水从南面平坦的旷野中流来，这是去道州的水路，此水没有潇水大，它就是拖水，水势弱小。
English: A stream of water flows out of the eastern mountain gorge, which is the waterway to Ningyuan County. This water is the largest, and it is Xiaoshui. A stream of water flows from the flat wilderness in the south, and this is the waterway to Daozhou. This water is not as large as Xiaoshui, but it is dragging water, and the water potential is weak.

古文：又五里为泥江口。
现代文：于是我们不走潇水而往南溯拖水行。又行五里为泥江口。
English: So we didn't go to Xiaoshui, but towed the water line to the south. Another five miles to the mouth of the muddy river.

古文：按《志》有三江口，为潇、沲、营合处，问之舟人，皆不能知，岂即青口耶？
现代文：按志书记载，有个兰江口，为潇水、拖水、营水三条水流汇合处，我向船上的人打听，却都不知道，难道就是青口吗？
English: According to the will, there is a Lanjiang estuary, which is the confluence of three water streams, Xiaoshui, tow water and ying water. I asked the people on the boat, but they did not know. Is it the Qingkou?

古文：但营水之合在上流耳。
现代文：但是营水汇入拖水处是在潇水、拖水汇合处的上游。
English: However, the place where the Yingshui flows into the Huashui is upstream of the confluence of the Xiaoshui and Huashui.

古文：又三十里，抵道州东门，绕城南，泊于南门。
现代文：泥江口的水西通营阳，乘船溯此水上罗坪为三天的路程，它应当就是营水了。又行三十里，抵达道州城东门，然后绕到城南，停泊在南门边。
English: The water west of the mouth of the muddy river flows to Yingyang, and it is a three-day journey by boat to this watery Luoping, which should be Yingshui. Another thirty miles, arriving at the east gate of Doushu City, and then around to the south of the city, moored at the south gate.

古文：下午入城，自南门入，过大寺，名报恩寺。由州前抵西门。
现代文：下午我到城中去，从南门入城，经过一个大寺庙，由州衙署前抵达西门。
English: In the afternoon, I went to the city center. I entered the city from the south gate, passed a large temple, and arrived at the west gate from the state gate.

古文：登南城回眺，乃知道州城南临江水，东南西三门俱南濒于江，惟北门在内。
现代文：登上南城墙往回眺望，才知道道州城南临江水，东、南、西三个门都向南濒临江流，只有北门在里面。
English: When you climb the southern city wall and look back, you will know that the southern part of the city borders the river, and the east, south, and west gates are all south of the river, and only the north gate is inside.

古文：盖沲水自江华，掩、遨二水自永明，俱合于城西南十五里外，东北来，抵城西南隅，绕南门至东门，复东南去，若弯弓然，而城临其背。
现代文：拖水从江华县流来，掩、遨两条水自永明县流来，它们都汇合在城西南十五里以外。水从东北流来，抵达城西南隅，绕过南门到东门边，又往东南流去，像一张弯弓一样，而城正好位于弓背上。
English: The water flows from the northeast, reaches the southwest corner of the city, goes around the south gate to the east gate, and then flows to the southeast, like a curved bow, and the city is just on the back of the bow.

古文：西门有濂溪水，西自月岩，翼云桥跨其上。
现代文：城西门外有条赚溪水，从西面的月岩流来，翼云桥横架在溪流上。
English: There is a stream outside the west gate of the city. It flows from the west side of the moon rock, and the wing cloud bridge is cross-supported on the stream.

古文：东门亦水自北来注，流更微矣。
现代文：城东门外也有条水从北面流来汇入江水中，但那条水流就更加涓细了。
English: Outside the east gate of the city, there is also a stream of water flowing from the north into the river, but that stream is thinner.

古文：迨暮，仍出南门，宿舟中。
现代文：到傍晚，我们仍然出了南门，宿在船中。
English: In the late afternoon, we still went out of the south gate and stayed in the boat.

古文：夜复雨。
现代文：夜里又下起了雨。
English: It rained again in the evening.

古文：道州附郭有四景：东有响石，即五如石。西有濂溪，北有九井，南有一木。
现代文：道州城城外附近有四景：东边有响石，西边有镰溪，北边有九井，南边有一根很特别的木头。
English: There are four views near the outskirts of the city of Doushu: the east side has a bell, the west side has a brook, the north side has nine wells, and the south side has a very special tree.

古文：南门外一大木卧江底。
现代文：十八日天空明亮清朗，我早早地吃了饭登上岸。
English: On the 18th, the sky was bright and clear. I had an early meal and went ashore.

古文：十八日天光莹彻，早饭登涯。由南门外循城半里，过东门，又东半里有小桥，即涍泉入江处也。
现代文：从南门外顺城下走半里，过了东门，又往东走半里有座小桥，这里就是津泉入江处。
English: From outside the south gate, walk half a mile downhill, past the east gate, and then walk half a mile east. There is a small bridge. This is where the Tsuzumi River enters the river.

古文：桥侧江滨有石突立，分岐空腹，其隙可分瓣而入，其窦可穿瓠而透，所谓五如石也。
现代文：桥侧面江滨有石头耸突插立，形态如同永州城外愚溪桥边那些，但比愚溪桥边的更透漏高耸陡峭，那些石头如枝干分向四处，中间是空的，可以分开花瓣似的石片走进石隙中，也可以穿过壶形的孔道进到小洞中，这就是所说的五如石。
English: On the side of the bridge, there are jutting stones on the riverbank. The shape is like those on the edge of the Yuxi Bridge outside the city of Yongzhou, but they are steeper and higher than those on the edge of the Yuxi Bridge. The stones are divided into four parts like branches, and the middle is empty. You can separate the petal-like stone pieces into the stone gap, and you can also pass through the pot-shaped hole into the small hole. This is the so-called five-like stone.

古文：中有一石，南之声韵幽亮，是为响石。
现代文：其中有块石头，一敲击就会发出和谐深远响亮的声音，这是响石。
English: Among them, there is a stone that, when struck, emits a harmonious, far-reaching and loud sound. This is a rattlesnake.

古文：按元次山《道州诗题》，石则有五如、窊ā即凹樽，泉则有潓、漫等七名，皆在州东，而泉经一涍而可概其余，石得五如而窊樽莫觅。
现代文：据考，元次山咏道州景物诗中所写到的，石头有五如石、帘槽石，泉有穗、漫等七处，都在州城东。泉我游览了一个哮泉便可以大概推知其余各泉的情形，至于石我见到了五如石但帘蹲石没能寻到。
English: According to the research, the stones written in the poem of the scenery of the original Shanxi Province, there are five stones such as stone, curtain trough stone, spring with spike, man and seven other places, all in the east of the state. Spring I visited a roaring spring and could roughly infer the situation of the remaining springs. As for the stone, I saw five stones but could not find the curtain squatting stone.

古文：屡询，一儒生云： 在报恩大寺。 
现代文：屡向旁人询问，一读书人告诉说： 在报恩大寺内。 
English: Repeatedly inquiring from others, a reader told him: "In the Baon Grand Temple."

古文：然无序云，在州东左湖中石山巅。
现代文：然而元次山诗序中说在州城东左湖中的石山顶上。
English: However, it is said in the preface to the poem that it is on the top of a stone mountain in the middle of the left lake in the east of Suzhou.

古文：石窊可樽，其上可亭，岂可移置寺中者，抑寺即昔之左湖耶？
现代文：既然那石帘可以当酒蹲，上面可以建亭子，那么难道可以移置到寺中？抑或寺址就是先前的左湖所在地？
English: Since the stone curtain can be used as a wine cellar, and a pavilion can be built on top of it, can it be moved to a temple? Or is the temple site the previous location of the left lake?

古文：质之其人，曰： 入寺自知。 
现代文：我质询那人，他说： 到了寺中自然知道。 
English: I questioned the man, and he said: "When you get to the temple, you'll know.

古文：乃入东门，经南门内，西过报恩寺，欲入问窊樽石，见日色丽甚，姑留为归途探质。
现代文：于是到城东门，经过南门内，往西到报恩寺，想入寺打听空蹲石，见到日色很美丽，就姑且留着等到归来的途中再探问。
English: So I went to the east gate of the city, passed through the south gate, and went west to Baoen Temple. I wanted to enter the temple to inquire about the empty squatting stone, and when I saw that the sun was very beautiful, I kept it until I was on my way back.

古文：亟出西门，南折过翼云桥，有二岐。从西二十五里为濂溪祠，又十里为月岩；又南为十里铺，又六十里为永明县；十里铺侧有华岩，由岩下间道可出濂溪祠。
现代文：赶忙出了西门，往南折过翼云桥，路分成两条：从西面的那条走二十五里为赚溪祠，又走十里为月岩；从南面的那条走是十里铺，然后又走六十里为永明县。十里铺侧面有座华岩，由岩下的小路可以到镰溪祠。
English: He hurried out of the West Gate and turned southward across the Yingyun Bridge. The road was divided into two: from the west side, he walked twenty-five miles to Zhanxi Ancestral Hall, and another ten miles to the Moon Rock; from the south side, he walked ten miles to Pu, and then another sixty miles to Yongming County. On the side of the ten-mile pavement, there was a rock, and from the path under the rock, he could get to the Ancestral Hall.

古文：余欲兼收之，遂从南行。
现代文：我想两处都游览，便往南面的那条走。
English: I wanted to visit both places, so I went to the one to the south.

古文：大道两傍俱分植乔松，如南岳道中，而此更绵密。
现代文：大道两旁都分别栽种着高大的松树，如同上南岳衡山的路一样，而此处的更加丛密。
English: Tall pine trees are planted separately on both sides of the avenue, just like the road up to South Yue Heng Mountain, but here it is more crowded.

古文：有松自下分柯五六枝，丛挺竞秀，此中特见之，他所无也。
现代文：有的松树从下面分出五六根枝权，枝干密集挺拔，争翠竞秀，这是此地独见而其他地方所没有的。
English: Some pines have five or six branches branching out from below, with the trunks of the branches densely erect and competing for the limelight, which is unique to this place and not found elsewhere.

古文：自州至永明，松之夹道者七十里，栽者之功，亦不啻甘棠矣。
现代文：从道州到永明县，松树夹道的路程有七十里，栽种者的功劳，也不比古时种植甘棠树的地方官吏的小。
English: From Daozhou to Yongming County, the distance between the pines is seventy miles. The effort of the planters is no less than that of the local officials who planted neem trees in ancient times.

古文：州西南冈陀高下，置道因之。
现代文：州城西南，山冈山坡起伏不平，修筑道路时便顺着地势。
English: Southwest of the state capital, the mountains and hillsides are undulating. When building roads, they follow the terrain.

古文：而四顾崇山开远，惟西北一山最高而较近，则月岩后所倚之大山也。
现代文：四下望去，崇山远离，只西北面的一座山最高而且离得较近，它是月岩后面背靠的大山。
English: Looking around, the lofty mountains are far away, only one mountain in the northwest is the highest and closer, it is the mountain behind the moon rock.

古文：至十里铺东，从小径北向半里，为华岩。
现代文：到十里铺东，从小路向北走半里，便为华岩。
English: To the east of the ten-mile shop, walk half a mile north from the path and you will reach Hua Yan.

古文：洞门向北，有小水自洞下出。
现代文：岩洞门向着北，有条小水从洞下面流出来。
English: The door of the cave faces north, and a small stream of water flows out from under the cave.

古文：由洞入，止闻水声，而不见水。
现代文：由洞口进去，只听到水声而不见水。
English: Entering through the mouth of the cave, I only heard the sound of water but didn't see it.

古文：转东三丈余，复南下，则穹然深暗，不复辨光矣。
现代文：折往东三丈多，又折往南朝下走，洞便变得高弯幽深黑暗，不再见到光亮了。
English: Turning to the east by more than three feet, and then turning to the south and going down, the cave became high and dark, and the light was no longer visible.

古文：时洞北有僧寮，行急不及入觅火炬，闻其内止一炬可尽，亦不必觅也。
现代文：洞北边有间僧人住的小屋，因为要急着走，来不及到那小屋中寻觅火把，听说洞内只需一支火把便可以游完，因而也不必再找火把来游。
English: On the north side of the cave, there is a hut where a monk lives. Since we had to hurry to leave, we didn't have time to look for torches in the hut. I heard that you only need one torch to swim through the cave, so you don't have to look for torches to swim.

古文：遂从寮右北向小径行。
现代文：于是我从那小屋右面向北朝小路走。
English: So I walked from the hut to the right towards the Northern Morning Path.

古文：此处山小而峭，或孤峙，或两或三，连珠骈笋，皆石骨嶙峋，草木摇飏á飘舞，升降宛转，如在乱云叠浪中，令人茫然，方向辨。
现代文：此处的山小而峻峭，或孤峰耸立，或两三座山相连相接，如同串起来的珠子和并立生长的竹笋，座座山上岩石尖峭嶙峋，草木摇曳飘舞，在山间曲折地朝上走或往下行，如同置身在纷乱的云层和重叠的波浪中，令人茫然，辨不出方向。
English: Here, the mountains are small and steep, or stand alone, or two or three mountains are connected to each other, like beads strung together and bamboo shoots growing side by side. The rocks on the mountain are sharp and steep, the plants sway and dance, and they zigzag up and down between the mountains, as if they were in the midst of chaotic clouds and overlapping waves. It is bewildering and impossible to discern the direction.

古文：然无大山表识，惟西北崇峰，时从山隙瞻其一面，以为依归焉。
现代文：然而没有大山作为标志，只有西北面有个高峰，我不时地从山间缝隙中窥望它的一面，把它作为辨别里距、方位的座标。
English: However, there is no big mountain as a sign, only a peak in the northwest. From time to time, I peep at its side from the gap between the mountains and use it as a coordinate to distinguish the distance and direction.

古文：五里，横过山蹊，四五里，渡一小石桥，又逾岭，得大道西去。
现代文：走五里，横过四条山间小路，又五里，越过一座小石桥，又翻过一座山岭，见到大路向西而去。
English: After walking five miles and crossing four mountain paths, another five miles, crossing a small stone bridge, and turning over a mountain ridge, I saw the highway heading west.

古文：随之二里，又北入小径，沿石山之嘴，共四里而转出平畴，则道州西来大道也，又一里而濂溪祠在焉。
现代文：顺大路走两里，又往北进入小路中，沿着石山山嘴，共走四里而转到平坦的田畴间，便是道州往西来的大路经过的地方。又走一里，镰溪祠就到了。
English: Walk along the main road for two miles, then walk north into a small path, walk along the Ishiyama Sanzui for a total of four miles and turn to a flat field, which is where the main road from Dōshū to the west passes. Walk another mile and you will arrive at the Hibiya Shrine.

古文：祠北向，左为龙山，右为象山，皆后山，象形，从祠后小山分支而环突于前者也。
现代文：祠朝向北，左边为龙山，右边为象山，都在祠后面，形态如龙似象，从祠后的小山分支出来而环拱突兀在祠前方。
English: The ancestral hall faces north, with Longshan on the left and Xiangshan on the right, both behind the ancestral hall. They are shaped like dragons, branching out from the hill behind the ancestral hall, while the ring arch protrudes in front of the ancestral hall.

古文：其龙山即前转嘴而出者，象山则月岩之道所由渡濂溪者也。
现代文：龙山就是前面我从它的山嘴转出到田畴间的那山，象山则是到月岩经过赚溪的那座山。
English: Longshan is the mountain in front of me that I turned from its peak to the fields, and Xiangshan is the mountain that passes through Zhucheng Creek to the moon rock.

古文：祠环于山间而不临水，其前扩然，可容万马，乃元公所生之地，今止一二后人守其间，而旁无人焉。
现代文：祠被山峦环抱但不临水，前方宽展，可以容纳万马奔腾。祠是周元公出生的地方，如今只有他的一两个后人守护在其中，而没有其他任何人。
English: The ancestral hall is surrounded by mountains but not by water, with a wide front that can accommodate thousands of galloping horses. The ancestral hall is the place where Zhou Yuan Gong was born, and now only one or two of his descendants guard it, and no one else.

古文：无从索炊，乃西行。
现代文：因为没有地方找饭吃，便往西走。
English: Since there was no place to find food, they headed west.

古文：一里，过象山，沿其北，又一里，渡濂溪。
现代文：一里，经过象山，沿着它的北面又走一里，渡过镰溪。
English: One mile, past the Elephant Mountain, along the north side of it, another mile, across the Lushan Creek.

古文：从溪北溯流西行，五里而抵达村，为洪氏聚族。
现代文：镰溪从月岩流来，到此处因为被象山在东边挡住，便往北流，然后又折向东流到州城西面汇入拖水。从镰溪北岸溯流往西行，五里到达村，它是洪姓人家聚居的一个村子。
English: The Lushan Creek flows from the Yueyan stream, and because it is blocked by the Elephant Mountain in the east, it flows to the north here, and then flows eastward to the west of the state capital to merge into the tow water. It flows westward from the north bank of the Lushan Creek and reaches the village five miles away. It is a village where people with the surname Hong live together.

古文：乃卧而候饭，肆中无酒，转沽久之，下午始行。
现代文：于是到一家店铺中躺下来等着吃饭，店中没有酒，到别处去买花了很长时间，下午才出发。
English: So I lay down in a shop and waited for dinner, there was no wine in the shop, it took a long time to buy elsewhere, and I didn't leave until the afternoon.

古文：遂西南入山。
现代文：出村后便往西南进入山中。
English: After leaving the village, they headed southwest into the mountains.

古文：路傍先有一峰圆锐若标，从此而乱峰渐多，若卓锥，若骈指，若列屏，俱环映于大山之东，分行逐队，牵引如蔓，皆石骨也。
现代文：路旁边先是有一座山峰圆而尖峭若如一支标枪，从这座山峰处起，乱峰渐多，有的若直立的锥子，有的像并列的手指，有的似横列的屏风，都绕环掩映在一座大山的东面，它们分成一行行排成一队队，如藤蔓一样互相牵引，都尖峭如骨。
English: At the side of the road, there is a mountain peak, round and sharp like a javelin. From this peak, there are more and more peaks, some are upright cones, some are like parallel fingers, and some are like horizontal screens. They are all reflected around the ring on the east side of a large mountain. They are divided into lines and lined up in a queue, pulling each other like vines. They are all sharp as bones.

古文：又五里，南转入乱山之腋。
现代文：又走五里，往南转入乱山的内侧。
English: I walked another five miles and turned south into the inner side of the mountain.

古文：又三里，西越一岭，望见正西一山，若有白烟一脉抹横其腰者，即月岩上层所透之空明也。
现代文：又走三里，往西翻越一座山岭，望见正西边的一座山，宛若有一缕白烟横浮在山腰上，它就是月岩上层的山间穿洞露出来的天空。
English: I walked another three miles, climbed over a mountain range to the west, and saw a mountain directly to the west. It looked like a wisp of white smoke floating sideways on the mountainside. It was the sky emerging through a hole between the mountains in the upper layer of the moon rock.

古文：盖正西高山屏立，若齐天之不可阶，东下第三层而得此山，中空上蛩，下辟重门，翠微中剜，光映前山，故遥睇若白云不动。
现代文：正西面高山若屏风般直立，仿佛和天一样高而难以攀登，往东延伸下来，第三层便是若有白烟横浮在山腰的这座山，山中间空而上面成弧形，下面形成几层石门，青翠的山冈如从中间被剑了一块，光色映照到前面的山上，所以远远看去如静止不动的白云。
English: If the high mountain in the west stands upright like a screen, as if it is as high as the sky and difficult to climb, and extends to the east, the third layer is if there is white smoke floating on the mountainside of this mountain, the middle of the mountain is empty and the top is curved, and several layers of stone doors are formed below. The green mountain is like a sword from the middle, and the light color is reflected to the front of the mountain, so it looks like a stationary white cloud from far away.

古文：又二里，直抵山下，从其东麓拾级而上，先入下岩。
现代文：又走两里，直抵月岩山下，我从山东麓拾级而上，先进入下岩中。
English: I walked another two miles, straight to the bottom of Moon Rock Mountain. I climbed up from the eastern foot of the mountain and first entered the lower rock.

古文：其岩东向，中空上连，高蛩若桥，从下望之，若虎之张吻，目光牙状，俨然可畏。
现代文：那岩洞朝向东边，中间空而上面相连，高高环拱起如桥梁，从下面望上去，如同老虎张着大口，目光以及牙齿的形状，威严可畏。
English: The cave faces east, empty in the middle but connected at the top. The high ring arches like a bridge. From below, it looks like a tiger with a wide mouth. The eyes and the shape of the teeth are formidable.

古文：复从岩上遍历诸异境，是晚宿于月岩。
现代文：我又从岩上遍游了景观奇异的地方。这晚住宿在月岩中。
English: From the rock I again travelled through places with strange landscapes. This night I stayed in the moon rock.

古文：十九日自月岩行二里，仍过望岩如白烟处。
现代文：十九日从月岩出发走两里，仍然从前一天所望见的如有白烟横浮的那座岩石处经过。
English: On the 19th, after walking two miles from the moon rock, I still passed by the rock I had seen floating like white smoke the day before.

古文：分岐东南行，穿小石山之腋，宛转群队中。
现代文：到岔路处便往东南行，穿过小石山的内侧，曲折地从乱石中间穿行。
English: At the fork in the road, we headed southeast, crossing the inner side of the small stone mountain and zigzagging through the middle of the jumble of rocks.

古文：八里出山，渡大溪而东，是为洪家宅，亦洪氏之聚族也。
现代文：八里出了山，渡过大溪往东走，这地方为洪家宅，也是洪姓人家聚居的村庄。
English: Eight miles out of the mountains, across the Daxi River to the east, this place is the home of the Hong family, and is also a village where people with the surname of Hong live together.

古文：又东南入小土山，南向山脊行，三里而下，一里出山，有巨平岩横宕而东。一里，复南向行山坡，又二里，南上一岭。
现代文：又往东南进入小土山中，向南从山脊上走，三里后朝山下走，一里出了山，那地方有座巨大而平滑的岩石横贯着，往东走一里，又向南朝山坡上行，又走两里，往南登上一座岭。
English: Another mile to the southeast into the middle of a small hill, walk south from the ridge, after three miles walk down the hill, one mile out of the mountain, there is a huge and smooth rock across the place, walk one mile to the east, walk south up the hillside, walk two miles, walk south up a ridge.

古文：名银鸡岭。越岭而下，有村两三家。
现代文：越岭往下，有个两三户人家的村子。
English: Further down the ridge, there is a village of two or three families.

古文：从其东又三里为武田，自月岩至武田二十里。
现代文：从岭东又走三里为武田，那地方村落很大。
English: From the east of the ridge, it is another three miles to Takeda, where there is a large village.

古文：其中聚落颇盛。
现代文：再往东半里，就是通往永明县的大道。
English: Half a mile further east is the main road to Yongming County.

古文：再东半里，即永明之大道也。横大道而过，南沿一小平溪行一里，渡桥而东又半里，则大溪汤汤介于前矣。
现代文：横过大道，往南沿一条小而水流平缓的溪流行一里，越过桥向东又走半里，便见一条急流奔涌的大溪横隔在前面。
English: Cross the boulevard and walk south along a small, gently flowing stream for one mile. Cross the bridge and walk east for another half mile, and you will see a fast-flowing stream in front of you.

古文：是为永明掩、遨二水，是为六渡。
现代文：这两条溪是永明县流来的掩、遨两水，路与溪交合的地方为六渡。
English: These two streams come from Yongming County. The place where the road meets the stream is called Liudu.

古文：渡江复东南行，陂陀高下，三里为小暑洞。
现代文：渡过江又往东南行，山坡高低起伏倾斜不平，走三里为小暑洞。
English: After crossing the river and traveling southeast, the mountain slope is uneven and uneven, and it takes three miles to reach Xiaosha Cave.

古文：又东逾山冈，三里得板路甚大，乃南随板路，又十里而止于板寮，盖在上都之东北矣，问所谓杨子宅、南龙，俱过矣。
现代文：又往东翻越山冈，走三里见到一条很大的石板路，沿石板路南行，又走十里停在板寮，这里大略在上都的东北面。向旁人打听所谓的杨子宅、南龙，回答说都已经走过了。
English: He also went east to climb over the mountains and hills, walked three miles to see a large stone road, followed the stone road south, and walked another ten miles to stop at Panliao, which is roughly in the northeast of Shangdu. He asked others about the so-called Yangzi House and Nanlong, and answered that they had all passed.

古文：二十日从寮中东南小径，一里，出江华大道，遂南遵大道行，已为火烧铺矣。
现代文：二十日从板寮东南的小路上走，一里，到达通往江华县的大道，往南顺大道行，这里已经是火烧铺了。
English: On the 20th, walk one mile from the small road southeast of Panliao to reach the highway leading to Jianghua County, and then go to Nanshun Avenue. There is already a fire shop here.

古文：铺在道州南三十里而遥，江华北四十里而近。
现代文：此铺在道州南面三十里开外、江华县北面不足四十里的地方。
English: This shop is located 30 miles away in the south of the province and less than 40 miles away in the north of Jianghua County.

古文：又行五里为营上，则江华、道州之中，而设营兵以守者也。
现代文：又行五里为营上，它是江华县至道州的中点，设置了营房驻兵把守着。
English: Another five miles to the camp, it is the midpoint of Jianghua County to Doushou, set up a barracks garrison to guard.

古文：其后有小尖峰倚之。
现代文：营后面有座小尖峰紧靠着。
English: At the back of the camp there is a small peak close by.

古文：东数里外有峰突屼，为杨柳塘，由此遂屏亘而南，九疑当在其东矣。
现代文：东面数里外有座山峰高峻而上面光秃秃的，这是杨柳塘，从此峰起山脉便如屏风一样向南绵亘，九疑山应当就是在它的东面了。
English: A few miles to the east, there is a high mountain with a bare top. This is Yangliutang. From this peak, the mountains stretch southward like a screen. Jiuzhishan should be just to the east of it.

古文：西南数里外，有高峰圆耸，为斜溜。
现代文：西南面数里外，有座圆状的高峰耸起，这是斜溜。
English: A few miles to the southwest, a round peak rises, which is oblique.

古文：其南又起一峰，为大佛岭，则石浪以后云山也。
现代文：斜溜南边又耸起一座山峰，这是大佛岭，它便是石浪后面那座云雾缭绕的高山。
English: On the south side of the slope, another mountain rises, this is the Great Buddha Ridge, which is the misty mountain behind the stone wave.

古文：自营上而南，两旁多小峰巑岏。
现代文：从营上往南走，两旁有许多高峻尖峭的小山峰。
English: Walking south from the camp, there are many high and sharp small peaks on both sides.

古文：又五里，为高桥铺。
现代文：又走五里，为高桥铺。
English: I walked another five miles to reach Takahashi's shop.

古文：又三里，有溪自西而东，石骨嶙峋，横卧涧中，济流漱之，宛然包园石壑也。
现代文：又走三里，有条溪自西向东流，尖峭嶙峋的石块石棱横卧在涧流中，大而急的水流从石上冲刷而过，宛若包园的石谷。
English: After walking for another three miles, there was a stream flowing from west to east. Steep and jagged stone blocks lay on their sides in the turbulent stream. A large and rapid stream of water washed over the stones, resembling the stone valley of Baoyuan.

古文：溪上有石梁跨之，当即所谓高桥矣。
现代文：溪上有座石桥横架着，它应当就是所说的高桥了。
English: There is a stone bridge across the stream, it should be the so-called high bridge.

古文：又南七里，为水塘铺。
现代文：又往南七里，为水塘铺。
English: Another seven miles to the south, for the reservoir.

古文：自高桥来，途中村妇多觅笋箐中，余以一钱买一束，携至水塘村家煮之，与顾奴各啜二碗，鲜味殊胜，以筒藏其半而去。
现代文：从高桥来，途中有许多乡村妇女在竹林中采摘笋子，我花一钱银子买了一束，带到水塘铺村民家煮熟了，和顾仆各吃掉两碗，味道鲜美异常，然后用筒子装了剩下的一半带上离开那里。
English: On the way from Takahashi, there were many village women picking hazelnuts in the bamboo forest. I bought a bunch of hazelnuts for one silver coin, took them to the villagers' home of the pond shop, cooked them, and ate two bowls each with my servants. The taste was delicious and extraordinary. Then I put the remaining half in a tube and took it with me to leave there.

古文：水塘之西，直逼斜溜，又南，斜溜、大佛岭之间，有小峰东起，若纱帽然。
现代文：水塘铺的西面，直逼斜溜，再往南，斜溜和大佛岭之间，有座小山峰耸起在东面，若一顶纱帽一样。
English: On the west side of the pond, straight up to the slope, and further south, between the slope and the Great Buddha Ridge, there is a small peak rising in the east, like a gauze cap.

古文：又五里为加佑铺，则去江华十里矣。
现代文：又走五里为加佑铺，它离江华县城有十里远。
English: He walked another five miles to get to the shop, which is ten miles away from the county seat of Jianghua.

古文：由铺南直下，从径可通浪石寺。
现代文：由铺南直往下走，从小路可通浪石寺。
English: If you walk straight down from the south of the pavilion, you can pass through the small road to the Lanshi Temple.

古文：转而东南从岭上行，共六七里而抵江华城西。
现代文：我们折往东南从岭上走，共六七里就抵达江华城西面。
English: We turned to the southeast and walked from the ridge, a total of six or seven miles to reach the west of Jianghua City.

古文：盖自高桥铺南，名三十里，而实二十五里也。
现代文：从高桥铺南到县城，名义上说是三十里，而实际上仅二十五里。
English: From the south of Takahashi-pu to the county seat, it is nominally thirty miles, but actually only twenty-five miles.

古文：循城下抵南门，饭于肆。
现代文：顺城墙下绕到南门边，在店中吃了饭。
English: We walked under the city wall to the south gate and had lunch in a restaurant.

古文：又东南一里，为麻拐岩。
现代文：又往东南走一里，为麻拐岩。
English: Walk another mile to the southeast, and you'll come to the Hemlock Rocks.

古文：一名回龙庵。由回龙庵沿江岸南行半里，水分二道来：一自山谷中出者，其水较大，乃沲水也；一自南来者，亦通小舟，发源自上武堡。
现代文：由回龙庵沿江岸向南行半里，水分成两条流来：一条从山谷中流出来，水流较大，它便是拖水；一条从南面流来，也可通小船，它发源于上武堡。
English: From Huilong'an, half a mile south along the riverbank, the water flows in two streams: one flows out of the valley, the water flow is large, it is towing water; one flows from the south, it can also pass small boats, it originates from Shangwu Fort.

古文：盖西界则大佛岭、班田、嚣云诸山迤逦而南去，东界则东岭、苦马云诸峰环转而南接，独西南一坞遥开，即所谓上武堡也，其西南即为广西富川、贺县界。沿南小江岸又西行三里，是为浪石寺。
现代文：白马营东面的大山叫吴望山，山上有个秦洞，很是奇异，可惜未能前往；从白马营又往南走，才到上武堡，堡东的大山叫冬冷山。吴望、冬冷两山的水汇合而流出白马营，为小江的上游。于是我们沿南面的小江江岸又往西行三里，到浪石寺。
English: The large mountain to the east of the White Horse Camp is called Wuwang Mountain. There is a Qin cave on the mountain, which is very strange, but unfortunately we could not go there. From the White Horse Camp, we went south to Shangwu Fort, and the large mountain to the east of the fort is called Dongling Mountain. The water from the two mountains of Wuwang and Dongling merged and flowed out of the White Horse Camp, which is the upper reaches of the creek. So we went three miles west along the south bank of the creek, to the Longshan Temple.

古文：其身已髹，而面尚肉，头戴香巾，身袭红褶，为儒者服，以子孙有青其衿者耳。
现代文：小江中石头密密麻麻，如起伏奔涌的波浪，寺就是由此而得名。此寺中先前有个姓蒋的人修炼成佛，如今肉身还在，他就是所称的 一刀屠 。
English: The stones in the creek are so dense that they look like undulating waves, which is how the temple got its name. In this temple, there was once a man named Chiang, who became a Buddha through cultivation. He is still alive today, and he is known as Icchu Tu.

古文：是日止于浪石寺，但其山僧甚粗野。
现代文：这一天停留在浪石寺中，但寺中的山僧很是粗野。
English: On this day, we stayed at the Long Stone Temple, but the monks there were very rude.

古文：二十一日饭于浪石寺。
现代文：二十一日在浪石寺吃饭。
English: On the twenty-first day, they had dinner at Nagase-ji Temple.

古文：先是，路左有一岩，若云楞嵌垂，余疑以为即是矣，而莲花岩尚在路右大岭之麓。
现代文：想前往莲花洞，但寺中僧人正好集合众徒弟耕田，无人带路，我们就等候过路的人，许久后才等到一人，于是由寺西顺大路前行。走了七里，直抵大佛岭下。这之前，路左边有座岩，若如镶嵌垂挂在那里的云楞，我怀疑它就是莲花岩了，然而莲花岩还在路右面大山岭的岭脚。
English: I wanted to go to Lotus Cave, but the monks in the temple just happened to gather all the apprentices to cultivate the fields. There was no one to lead the way, so we waited for the passers-by. After a long time, we waited for one person, so we walked from the west side of the temple to the main road. We walked seven miles and reached the foot of the Great Buddha Ridge. Before that, there was a rock on the left side of the road. If it was like a mosaic hanging there, I doubt it was Lotus Rock. However, Lotus Rock is still at the foot of the mountain ridge on the right side of the road.

古文：乃从北岐小径入，不半里，至洞下。
现代文：于是从岔往北边的小路进去，不足半里，到达洞下。
English: So I took the path from the north side of the moat, less than half a mile, and reached the bottom of the cave.

古文：导者取枯竹一大捆，缚为六大炬分肩以出，由路左洞披转以入。
现代文：导游在竹丛中拾了一大捆枯竹，扎成六大支火把，我们分别扛在肩上走出竹林，由路左边的洞口劈开障碍物曲折地进入洞中。
English: The guide picked up a large bundle of dead bamboo in the bamboo thicket and tied it into six large torches. We carried them out of the bamboo forest on our shoulders and entered the cave through the hole on the left side of the road by cutting through the obstacles.

古文：还饭于浪石，已过午矣。
现代文：回到浪石寺吃饭时，已过了中午。
English: By the time I returned to the temple for lunch, it was past noon.

古文：乃循旧路，抵麻拐岩之西合江口，有板架江坝外为桥，乃渡而南。
现代文：这才顺着原路，返抵麻拐崖西面的合江口，有木板架在江坝外成为桥，于是跨过桥到了江南边。
English: Only then did I follow the original route and return to the mouth of the He River on the western side of the steep cliff. A wooden plank became a bridge outside the dam, so I crossed the bridge to the south side of the river.

古文：东南二里，至重元观，寺南一里，入狮子岩洞。
现代文：往东南走两里，到重元观寺，从寺往南走一里，进入狮子岩洞。
English: Walk two miles southeast to Chongyuan Temple, and walk one mile south from the temple to enter Lion Rock Cave.

古文：出洞四里，渡小江桥，经麻拐岩，北登岭，直北行，已过东门外矣。
现代文：出了洞走四里，越过小江上的桥，经过麻拐岩，向北登上山岭，直往北行，到这里已经过了江华县城东门外了。
English: I walked four miles out of the cave, crossed the bridge over the creek, passed the limestone rock, climbed the mountain to the north, and drove north. I had already passed the east gate of Jianghua County.

古文：又北逾一岭，六里，渡沲水而北，宿于江渡。
现代文：又往北翻越一座山岭，走六里，渡过拖水到了北岸，投宿在江渡。
English: Further north, we climbed over a mountain, walked six miles, crossed the tow water to the north shore, and stayed in Jiangdu.

古文：二十二日昧爽，由江渡循东山东北行。
现代文：二十二日黎明，由江渡沿东面的山往东北行。
English: At dawn on the 22nd, we drove from Jiangdu along the eastern mountains to the northeast.

古文：十里为蜡树营。
现代文：十里为蜡树营。
English: Wax Tree Camp is ten miles away.

古文：由此渐循山东转，五里，过鳌头源北麓。
现代文：由此处起渐渐顺山势转往东，五里后，经过鳌头源北麓。
English: From here, it gradually turns east along the mountain, and after five miles, it passes through the northern foot of Shantouyuan.

古文：二里，至界牌，又三里，过石源，又五里，过马冈源。
现代文：又走两里，到界牌，又走三里，经过石源，又走五里，经过马冈源。
English: Walk another two miles to the boundary sign, walk another three miles past Shiyuan, walk another five miles past Magangyuan.

古文：自鳌头源突于西北，至东北马冈源，皆循山北东向行，其山南皆瑶人所居也。
现代文：从突起在西北面的鳌头源到东北面的马冈源，都是顺着山的北面向东行，山的南面全是瑶族人居住的地方。
English: From the Shantou source that protrudes in the northwest to the Magang source in the northeast, they all follow the north of the mountain to the east, and the south of the mountain is entirely inhabited by the Yi people.

古文：马冈之北，犹见沲水东曲而来，马冈之北，始见溪流自南而北。
现代文：在马冈源的北面，仍看到拖水从东面曲折地流来，到了马冈源的南面，才见到溪流自南而北流淌。
English: On the north side of the Magangan headwaters, we can still see the trailing water flowing from the east in a zigzag pattern. On the south side of the Magangan headwaters, we can only see the stream flowing from south to north.

古文：又东七里，逾虎版石。
现代文：又往东走七里，翻越虎版石岭。
English: I walked another seven miles to the east and climbed over the Tiger's Stone Ridge.

古文：谓之 分 者，岂瑶与民分界耶？东三里，渡大溪，南自九彩源来者。
现代文：从界牌走来，接连越过众多小山岭，只有虎版石岭最高。越过岭又走三里，为分村，于是在村中吃饭。从分村往东走三里，渡过一条大溪，它是从南面的九彩源流来的。
English: Walking from the boundary sign, I crossed many small mountains one after another, with the only one being the highest, the Tiguan Shiling. After crossing the ridge, I walked another three miles to the village, where I had dinner. From the village, I walked three miles to the east and crossed a large stream, which flowed from the Jiucaiyuan in the south.

古文：溪东又有山横列于南，与西来之山似。
现代文：溪东边又有山横列在南面，与西面延伸过来的山相似。
English: On the east side of the stream, there are mountains in a row to the south, similar to the mountains extending to the west.

古文：复循其北麓行七里，至四眼桥，有溪更大，自顾村来者，与分村之水，皆发于瑶境也。
现代文：又顺着此山北麓走七里，到四眼桥，桥下有条溪流更大，它是从顾村流来的，与分村的水一样都是发源于瑶族人居住的区域。
English: Then, walk seven miles along the northern foot of the mountain to the Four Eyes Bridge. Under the bridge, there is a larger stream, which flows from Gu village. Like the water in the sub-village, it all originates from the area where the Qiang people live.

古文：渡木桥，颇长，于是东登岭。
现代文：越过溪上很长的木桥，从溪岸往东登上山岭。
English: Cross the long wooden bridge over the stream and climb up the mountain from the stream bank to the east.

古文：其先只南面崇山，北皆支冈条下；至是北亦有山横列，路遂东行两山之间。
现代文：原先只是南面有高大的山，北面都是从高山分出来的一条条山冈向下绵延；到此处北面也有大山横列着，因而路便向东从两山之间通过。
English: Originally, there were only high mountains in the south, while in the north, there were only ridges extending down from the high mountains. At this point, there were also mountains in a row in the north, so the road passed between the two mountains to the east.

古文：升踄冈坳十里，抵孟桥西之彭家村，乃宿。
现代文：在山冈山坳间翻爬攀越了十里，抵达孟桥西面的彭家村，这才住宿下来。
English: After climbing more than ten miles through the mountains and ridges, they arrived at Pengjia village on the west side of Mengqiao, where they stayed for the night.

古文：是日共行五十里，而山路荒僻，或云六十里云。
现代文：这天共走了五十里，然而山路荒僻，或许有六十里。
English: We walked a total of fifty miles that day, but the mountain road was deserted, perhaps sixty miles.

古文：二十三日五鼓，雨大作。
现代文：二十三日五更时，下起了大雨。
English: At 5:00 a.m. on the 23rd, it started to rain heavily.

古文：自永州来，山田苦旱，适当播种之时，至此嗷嗷已甚，乃得甘霖，达旦不休。
现代文：从永州府过来，山田苦于干旱，而又正当播种时节，到此地已经听得到百姓的哀怨声。
English: Coming from Yongzhou Prefecture, Yamada is suffering from drought, but the sowing season is right, and the people's complaints have been heard here.

古文：余僵卧待之，晨餐后始行，持盖草履，不以为苦也。
现代文：终于盼到甘霖，雨到天亮仍未停。我静静地躺着等候雨停，早餐后才出发，虽然撑着伞穿着草鞋，但不以为苦。
English: Finally, I hoped for rain, but the rain did not stop until dawn. I lay quietly waiting for the rain to stop, and only set out after breakfast. Although I was holding an umbrella and wearing straw sandals, I did not think it was hard.

古文：东一里，望见孟桥，即由岐路南行。
现代文：往东走一里，望见孟桥，于是从岔路往南走。
English: Walk one mile to the east, you can see Mengqiao Bridge, so walk south from Kushiro Road.

古文：盖至是南列之山已尽，遂循之南转。
现代文：大概到这里南面耸列的山已经到尽头，于是顺山转往南。
English: By now, the line of mountains to the south had probably come to an end, so I turned south along the mountain.

古文：五里，抵唐村坳。
现代文：走五里，抵达唐村坳。
English: Walk five miles and arrive at Tangcun Road.

古文：坳北有小洞东向，外石辚峋，俯而入，下有水潺潺，由南窦出，北流而去。
现代文：坳北面有个小洞朝向东面，洞外岩石嶙峋，俯身进入里面，洞下面有水潺潺流淌，从南面的小孔流出洞来，向北流去。
English: There was a small cave to the east on the north side of the grotto. There was a rock outside the cave, so he stooped down and went inside. Water trickled under the cave, and flowed out of the hole from the small hole on the south side, and went north.

古文：乃停盖，坐久之。
现代文：我们这才收起雨具，在洞外坐了好久。
English: It was only then that we put away our rain gear and sat outside the cave for a long time.

古文：逾岭而南，有土横两山，中剖为门以适行，想为道州、宁远之分隘耶。
现代文：越过山岭往南走，有个土堆横在两山间，中间剖开成门，以便于通行，我猜想它是道州和宁远县的分界。
English: Walking south across the mountains, there is a mound of earth lying between two mountains, with a gate cut in the middle to facilitate passage. I guess it is the border between Daozhou and Ningyuan County.

古文：于是连涉两三岭，俱不甚高，盖至是前南列之山转而西列，此皆其东行之支垅，而其东又有卓锥列戟之峰，攒列成队，亦自南而北，与西面之山若排闼门者。
现代文：从这里起连续翻过两三座岭，都不很高，这大概是因为前面耸列在南边的山都折往西边排列的原故，这些小山岭都是山往东延伸而分出的支脉。山的东边，又有些如直立的锥、排列的戟一样的山峰，聚集而列置成队，也是自南而北纵贯，与西面的山相夹峙，像长排的门屏。
English: From here, I climbed two or three ridges in succession, none of them very high, probably because the mountains in the south that were in the foreground were folded and arranged to the west. These small ridges were all branches of the mountains extending to the east. On the east side of the mountain, there were also some peaks like upright cones and arranged stalks, gathered and arranged in a line, also from south to north, sandwiched against the mountains to the west, like a long row of doors.

古文：然第西界则崇山屏列，而东界则乱阜森罗，截级不紊耳，直南遥望两界尽处，中竖一峰，如当门之标，望之神动，惟恐路之不出其下也。
现代文：然而只是西边的高山如屏风般列置，而东边的却是杂乱的土山密集地重叠着，两边截然分明而不乱。直向南远远望去，两边山峦尽头处的中间，直立着一峰，如同正对着门树起的一支标枪，望见它便使人动心，惟恐路不从它下面经过。
English: However, only the high mountains on the west side are arranged like a screen, while on the east side there is a dense overlap of chaotic earthen mounds, both sides are very clear and not chaotic. Looking far to the south, in the middle of the end of the mountains on both sides, there is a peak standing upright, like a javelin standing up against the gate tree. Seeing it makes people emotional, but they are afraid that the road will not pass under it.

古文：北望小溪入江之口，有众舟舣停泊其侧。小舟上至鲁观，去九疑四五里，潇江与母江合处。渡大溪，是为车头。
现代文：过了唐村坳又走五里到大洋，这里山势忽然变得开阔，中间分布着许多村落。又往南走两里，向东跨过一座桥，桥下的小溪流得很急。过了桥便有一条水流很大的大溪，它从南面的九疑山流来，往北流出青口，它就是潇水的上游了。向北望去，小溪汇入潇江的江口处，有好多船停靠在侧边。渡过大溪，为车头。
English: After passing the Tang village, we walked another five miles to the ocean, where the mountain suddenly became open, with many villages distributed in the middle. We walked another two miles to the south, crossed a bridge to the east, and the stream under the bridge flowed very rapidly. After crossing the bridge, there was a large stream with a large flow of water. It flowed from Jiuzhaishan in the south to Qingkou in the north, and it was the upper reaches of the Xiao River. Looking north, the creek merged into the estuary of the Xiao River, and there were many boats docked on the side. Crossing the creek was the head of the car.

古文：又东南逾岭，共六里，为红洞。
现代文：又往东南翻越山岭，共走六里，为红洞。
English: We also went to the southeast and climbed over the mountains, walking a total of six miles to reach the Red Cave.

古文：市米而饭，零雨犹未止。
现代文：在红洞买米做饭吃，零星的小雨还未停止。
English: In Hongdong to buy rice to cook and eat, sporadic light rain has not stopped.

古文：又东南行六里，直逼东界乱峰下，始过一小峰，巉石岩岩，东裂一窍，若云气氤氲。
现代文：又往东南行六里，直逼东边乱峰下面，开初经过的一座小山峰，岩石高峻，东边裂开一个小洞，像是有云气在那里涌动。
English: Another six miles to the southeast, straight to the bottom of the jumbled peaks on the east side, passing a small peak at the beginning, the rock is high and steep, and a small hole is cracked on the east side, as if there is cloud gas surging there.

古文：攀坐其间，久之雨止，遂南从小路行。
现代文：攀上去坐在其间，过了许久雨停下来，于是往南从小路上走。
English: Climbed up and sat in it, stopped after a long rain, and then walked south from the path.

古文：四里，过一村。曰大盖。
现代文：四里，经过一村，叫大盖。
English: Four miles, passing through a village called Dagai.

古文：又南二里至掩口营，始与宁远南来之路合，掩口之南，东之排岫，西之横嶂，至此凑合成门，向所望当门之标，已列为东轴之首，而西嶂东垂，亦竖一峰，北望如插屏，逼近如攒指，南转如亘垣，若与东岫分建旗鼓而出奇斗胜者。
现代文：又往南走两里到掩口营，这才与从宁远县向南来的路相合。掩口营往北到宁远县有三十里。掩口营的南面，东边排列的峰峦和西边横障的高山，合拢而形成门，前面所望见的当门而立的标枪状的山峰，已列为东边的第一峰峦，而西边横障的高山东睡，也直立着一峰，从北面望去如插立的屏风，走近峰下看去如并拢的手指，转到南面又如横贯的墙垣，像是与东边的峰峦分别建竖旗鼓而各自出奇斗胜。
English: Another two miles south to the refuge camp, which coincides with the road from Ningyuan County to the south. The refuge camp is thirty miles north to Ningyuan County. To the south of the refuge camp, the peaks on the east and the mountains on the west side of the barricade are closed to form a gate. The javelin-shaped peak seen in front of the gate has been listed as the first peak on the east side, and the mountain on the west side of the barricade sleeps to the east, also standing upright. From the north, it looks like a screen. When approaching the peak, it looks like a closed finger. When turning to the south, it looks like a wall

古文：二里，出凑门之下，水亦从其中南出，其下平畴旷然，东西成壑。
现代文：两里后走出东西山合成的山门下，水也从其中往南流出，那下面平坦的田野空旷广阔，呈东西向展开形成深谷。
English: Two miles later, under the mountain gate formed by the East and West Mountains, water also flows south from there. The flat fields below are vast and open, spreading east to west to form a deep valley.

古文：于是路从西峰之南，转西向行。又三里而至路亭。
现代文：从这里起路从西边山峰的南面折向西行，又走三里到达路亭。
English: From here, take the road from the south side of the western peak, turn west, and walk three miles to reach the road pavilion.

古文：路亭者，王氏所建，名应丰亭，其处旧名周家峒ó王氏之居在焉。
现代文：路亭是个姓王的人建的，名叫应丰亭，这地方原先叫周家炯，姓王那家的住处就在此地。
English: The road pavilion was built by a man surnamed Wang, named Yingfeng Pavilion. This place was originally called Zhou Jiaxuan, and the residence of the Wang family was here.

古文：王氏，世家也，因建亭憩行者，会发乡科中乡试，故遂以 路亭 为名。
现代文：王家是世代为官的高门大户，因为建了这亭供行人歇脚休息，他家的人乡试中举，因而便以 路亭 为名。
English: The Wang family has been a high-ranking official family for generations. Because this pavilion was built for pedestrians to take a break, his family's hometown was put to the test, and thus the road pavilion was named.

古文：是日止行三十五里，计时尚早，因雨湿衣透，遂止而向薪焉。
现代文：这天只行了三十五里，我估算时辰还早，但因为雨水浸湿了衣服，便停下来烧柴火烘烤。
English: It was only a thirty-five-mile trip that day, and I estimated that it was still early, but because the rain had soaked my clothes, I stopped to burn firewood and bake.

