古文：泗水出鲁卞县北山，《地理志》曰，出济阴乘氏县。又云：出卞县北。《经》言北山，皆为非矣。
现代文：泗水发源于奋郡卞县的北山，《地理志》说：泗水发源于济阴乘氏县，又说：发源于卞县北面，《水经》则说发源于北山，这些说法都不对。
English: Surabaya Water originated in Beishan, Fen County, Min County. "Geography" said: Surabaya Water originated in Jiyin County, and also said: Originated in the north of Min County. "Shui Jing" said that it originated in Beishan. These statements are not correct.

古文：《山海经》曰：泗水出鲁东北。
现代文：《山海经》说：泗水发源于鲁东北。
English: "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: Surabaya's water originates from the northeastern part of Shandong.

古文：余昔因公事，沿历徐沇，路径洙、泗，因令寻其源流。
现代文：我过去因公事，曾沿徐水、沈水走过，又曾路经沫水、泗水，当时我派人去探寻过泗水的源头。
English: In the past, due to business, I have walked along slow water and sinking water, and I have passed through foam water and salty water. At that time, I sent someone to explore the source of salty water.

古文：水出卞县故城东南，桃墟西北。
现代文：查明泗水发源于卞县老城东南，桃墟的西北。
English: It was ascertained that the source of the water originated in the southeast of the old town of Handan County and the northwest of the Peach Market.

古文：《春秋》昭公七年，谢息纳季孙之言，以孟氏成邑与晋而迁于桃。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公七年，谢息采纳了季孙的建议，把孟氏的成邑给晋，把居民迁移到桃。
English: "Spring and Autumn": In the seventh year of Zhaogong, Xie Xixi adopted the suggestion of Ji Sun, gave the Chengyi of the Mengs to Jin, and moved the residents to Peach.

古文：杜预曰：鲁国卞县东南有桃墟。世谓之曰陶墟，舜所陶处也，井曰舜井，皆为非也。
现代文：杜预说：鲁国卞县东南有个桃墟，世人称为陶墟，说是舜制陶的地方；那里有个井叫舜井，其实都不是。
English: Du Yu said: There is a peach market in the southeast of Lu Guojun County. The world calls it a pottery market, and it is said to be a place where pottery is made; there is a well there called a well, but it is not.

古文：墟有漏泽，方十五里，渌水澂渟，三丈如减。泽西际阜，俗谓之妫亭山，盖有陶墟、舜井之言，因复有妫亭之名矣。
现代文：桃墟有个漏泽，方圆十五里，泽水清澈澄碧，平静如镜，水深近三丈，泽西紧靠一座小土山，俗称妨亭山，大概是因为有了陶墟、舜井，因而又有了妨亭的名称的。
English: There is a leak in the peach market, fifteen miles in circumference, the lake water is clear, clear and blue, calm as a mirror, the water depth is nearly three meters, Jersey is close to a small hill, commonly known as Jiaoting Mountain, probably because of the pottery market, the well, and thus the name of Jiaoting.

古文：阜侧有三石穴，广圆三四尺。穴有通否，水有盈漏，漏则数夕之中，倾陂竭泽矣。
现代文：小山旁有三个石洞，洞口大小约三四尺，石洞有通有塞，泽水有时积得满满的，有时又漏掉，一漏水几天之间就会泽底朝天。
English: There are three stone caves next to the hill, the size of the cave mouth is about three or four feet, the stone cave has a passage and a plug, the lake water is sometimes full, sometimes it leaks, and the lake water will rise to the sky in a few days.

古文：左右民居，识其将漏，预以木为曲洑，约障穴口，鱼鳖暴鳞，不可胜载矣。
现代文：附近民众看出将要漏水了，就预先用木料做成鱼鼠，挡在洞口，水涸之 后，泽底鱼鳖全都暴露出来，运也运不完了。
English: When people nearby saw that the water was about to leak, they made wooden fish-mice in advance and blocked them at the mouth of the cave. After the water dried up, all the fish hooks on the bottom of the lake were exposed and the transport could not be completed.

古文：自此连冈通阜，西北四十许里，冈之西际，使得泗水之源也。
现代文：从此处的小丘向西北方走，山冈绵延四十余里，山冈的西边便是泗水的源头。
English: From this small hill to the northwest, the mountain range stretches for more than forty miles, and the west side of the mountain range is the source of Surabaya.

古文：《博物志》曰：泗出陪尾。
现代文：《博物志》说：泗水发源于陪尾，就指这座小丘。
English: "Natural History" said: "The source of Surabaya's water comes from Baotou, which refers to this hill.

古文：盖斯阜者矣。石穴吐水，五泉俱导，泉穴各径尺余。
现代文：这里有五个石洞向外涌水，各洞口直径大约都有一尺余，五股泉水涌出后就汇合同流。
English: There are five stone caves here with water gushing out, each hole is about a foot in diameter, and after the five springs gush out, they merge into the same stream.

古文：水源南侧有一庙，栝柏成林，时人谓之原泉祠，非所究也。
现代文：水源南侧有一座庙，那里有成片的桧树和柏树林，当时人们称它为原泉祠，但我没有考证过。
English: There is a temple on the south side of the water source, where there are patches of eucalyptus and cypress forests. At that time, people called it the original spring shrine, but I have not verified it.

古文：泗水西径其县故城南。《春秋》襄公二十九年，季武子取卞曰：闻守卞者将叛，臣率徒以讨之是也。
现代文：泗水往西流经卞县旧城南面，《春秋》：襄公二十九年前，季武子攻取了卞，说：听说据守卞的军队要反叛，我率兵前去讨伐。
English: Surabaya water flows westward through the south of the old city of Surabaya County. "Spring and Autumn": Xianggong Twenty-nine years ago, Ji Wuzi captured Surabaya, saying: I heard that the army guarding Surabaya was going to rebel, so I led my soldiers to fight.

古文：南有姑蔑城。《春秋》隐公元年，公及邾仪父盟于蔑者也。
现代文：卞县南有姑蔑城，《春秋》：隐公元年前，隐公和邻仪父在蔑会盟。
English: There is a disdainful city in the south of Min County, "Spring and Autumn": before the year of Yin, the disdainful father and the disdainful father were in the disdainful league.

古文：水出二邑之间，西径郚城北。
现代文：泗水发源于卞县旧城和姑蔑城之间，往西流经邵城北面。
English: Surabaya's water originates from between the old city of Surabaya and the city of Guzhu, and flows westward through the northern part of Shao.

古文：《春秋》文公七年，《经》书：公伐邾，三月甲戌，取须句，遂城郚。
现代文：《春秋》：文公七年前《经》记载，文公讨伐邦，三月甲戌日攻取须句，于是就在部筑城。
English: "Spring and Autumn": It was recorded in the "Book" that seven years ago, Wen Gong started to fight against the state, and in March, on the day of Armor Day, he captured Su Kuan, so he built a city in the province.

古文：杜预曰：鲁邑也，卞县南有郚城备邾难也。
现代文：杜预说：这是鲁国的城邑。卞县南有邵城，这是为防备邻有外患时而修筑的。
English: Du Yu said, "This is a city in the country of Lu. There is Shaocheng in the south of Handan County. It was built to guard against external disasters.

古文：泗水自卞而会于洙水也。
现代文：泗水在卞县与邻水汇合。
English: Surabaya water merges with the neighboring water in Surabaya County.

古文：宅大一顷，所居之堂，后世以为庙。
现代文：往西南流过鲁县北面，泗水又往西南流，经过鲁县分为两条，水旁有一座城，是两水分流之处。北面的一条就是沫读。
English: It flows south-west through the north of Lu County, and then flows south-west through Lu County. It is divided into two rivers, and there is a city next to the water, which is the place where the two rivers flow. The one in the north is Modyo.

古文：汉高祖十三年，过鲁，以太牢祀孔子。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公九年经过鲁，用三牲祭祀孔子。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Zhuang Gong passed through Lu nine years ago, and used three animals to worship Confucius.

古文：自秦烧《诗》、《书》，经典沦缺。汉武帝时，鲁恭王坏孔子旧宅，得《尚书》、《春秋》、《论语》、《孝经》，时人已不复知有古文，谓之科斗书，汉世秘之，希有见者。
现代文：自从秦始皇焚烧《诗经》、《尚书》后，经典散失残缺，汉武帝时，鲁恭王拆毁孔子旧宅，获得《尚书》、《春秋》、《论语》、《孝经》等书。当时人们已不知道还有古文，称为蟒鲜书。汉时把它秘藏起来，很少有人见过这种文字。
English: Since Qin Shihuang burned the "Song of Songs" and the "Book of Songs," the classics have been lost. During the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, King Lu Qiong demolished the old house of Confucius and obtained the "Song of Songs," "Spring and Autumn," "Analects," "Book of Filial Piety" and other books. At that time, people did not know that there were still ancient texts, known as the "Book of Songs." During the Han Dynasty, it was kept secret, and few people had ever seen this kind of writing.

古文：于时闻堂上有金石丝竹之音，乃不坏。
现代文：当时从堂上传来钟磐管弦之音，于是就停止拆屋。
English: At that time, the sound of the bell orchestra came from the hall, so they stopped demolishing the house.

古文：庙屋三间，夫子在西间东向，颜母在中间南向，夫人隔东一间东向。
现代文：庙屋有三间：孔夫子住在西间，朝东；颜母在中间，朝南；夫人在东面隔一间，朝东。
English: There are three temples: Confucius lives in the west, facing east; his mother lives in the middle, facing south; his wife lives in the east, facing east.

古文：夫子床前，有石砚一枚，作甚朴，云平生时物也。
现代文：孔夫子床前有石砚一枚，制作很简朴 据说是他生时常用之物。
English: In front of the bed of Confucius, there is a stone urn, made very simply. It is said to be something he used frequently during his lifetime.

古文：鲁人藏孔子所乘车于庙中，是颜路所请者也。
现代文：鲁人把孔子乘过的车藏在庙中，就是颜路请求给颜回做棺材的车。
English: Lu person hid the car that Confucius rode in the temple, which is the car that Yan Lu asked Yan to make a coffin.

古文：献帝时，庙遇火，烧之。
现代文：汉献帝时，庙遭火灾烧毁了。
English: The temple was destroyed by fire during the Han Emperor Consecration.

古文：水平中，钟高意为鲁相，到官，出私钱万三千文，付户曹孔治夫子车，身入庙，拭几席剑履。
现代文：永平年间，钟离意当鲁国宰相，上任时，拿出自己的钱一万三千文，付给户曹孔诉，要他整修孔子的车，他亲自入庙，擦拭孔夫子的旧物：几、席、佩剑和鞋子。
English: During the Yongping era, Zhong Liang wanted to be the prime minister of Lu. When he took office, he took out 13,000 yuan of his own money and paid the household of Cao Kong to ask him to renovate Confucius's car. He personally went to the temple and wiped Confucius's old things: the table, the seat, the sword and the shoes.

古文：男子张伯除堂下草，土中得玉壁七枚。伯怀其一，以六枚白意。
现代文：有个汉子叫张伯在堂下割草时，在土中发现玉璧七枚，把一枚藏在怀里，拿了六枚去察告钟离意。
English: A man named Zhang Bo was mowing the grass under the hall when he found seven jade beads in the soil. He hid one in his arms and took six of them to announce the bell's departure.

古文：意令主簿安置几前。
现代文：钟离意叫主簿把玉璧放在几前。
English: Zhong Liang told the bookkeeper to put the gems in front of him.

古文：孔子寝堂床首，有悬瓮。
现代文：孔子卧室床头挂着一只瓮。
English: In Confucius' bedroom, a dragonfly hangs over the headboard.

古文：意召孔，问：何等瓮也？
现代文：钟离意叫来孔诉问：这瓮是干么的？
English: Zhong Liang called Lai Kong and asked, "What's up with this cocoon?"

古文：对曰：夫子瓮也，背有丹书，人勿敢发也。
现代文：孔诉回答：这是夫子的瓮，背后有朱砂写的红字，人们都不敢打开。
English: Kong replied, "This is my husband's scepter. There is a scarlet letter written in cinnabar on the back. People are afraid to open it."

古文：意曰：夫子圣人，所以遗瓮，欲以悬示后贤耳。
现代文：钟离意说：夫子是圣人，他之所以留下这个瓮，是想启示后世的贤人。
English: Zhong Liang said: "The master is a saint. The reason why he left this coffin is that he wanted to inspire future generations of sages.

古文：发之，中得素书，文曰：后世修吾书，董仲舒。护吾车，拭吾履，发吾笥，会稽钟离意。璧有七，张伯藏其一。
现代文：开瓮后，里面有一块白绢，上面写着：后世编纂我的书的，是董仲舒；保护我的车，擦我的鞋、开我的箱的，是会稽钟离意；玉璧有七枚，张伯藏了一枚。
English: After the coffin was opened, there was an egret inside, on which was written: "Dong Zhongshu is the one who will compile my book in the future; the one who protects my car, shines my shoes, and opens my box is the watchmaker; there are seven pieces of jade, and Zhang Bo has hidden one."

古文：意即召问伯，果服焉。
现代文：钟离意立即叫来张伯询问，张伯果然供认了。
English: Zhong Liang immediately called Zhang Bo to inquire, and Zhang Bo confessed.

古文：魏黄初元年，文帝令郡国修起孔子旧庙，置百石吏卒。
现代文：魏黄初元年，文帝令郡国修建孔子旧庙，设置年傣百石的吏卒，专门负责管理。
English: In the first year of the Wei and Huang dynasties, Emperor Wen ordered the county to build an old temple of Confucius and set up a cadre of officials with an annual income of 300 million yuan, who were specifically responsible for the management of the temple.

古文：庙有夫子像，列二弟子执卷立侍，穆穆有询仰之容。
现代文：庙里有孔夫子像，旁边有两个弟子，手执书卷，站着侍侯他，神色肃穆恭敬，似乎在向他请教的样子。
English: There is a statue of Confucius in the temple. Next to it are two disciples, holding scrolls in their hands, standing to wait on him, looking solemn and respectful, as if they were asking him for advice.

古文：汉、魏以来，庙列七碑，二碑无字。栝柏犹茂。
现代文：汉、魏以来，庙里立有七块碑，两块碑无字，庙旁桧树柏树至今还很茂盛。
English: Since the Han and Wei dynasties, there have been seven monuments in the temple, two of which are wordless. The eucalyptus and cypress trees next to the temple are still very lush.

古文：庙之西北二里，有颜母庙，庙像犹严，有修栝五株。
现代文：庙的西北二里处，有颜母庙，庙像还很严整，庙里有五株长长的桧树。
English: Two miles northwest of the temple, there is a temple with a face, the temple image is still very neat, and there are five long eucalyptus trees in the temple.

古文：孔庙东南五百步，有双石阙，即灵光之南闭。北百余步，即灵光殿基，东西二十四丈，南北十二丈，高丈余。东西廊庑别舍，中间方七百余步。阙之东北有浴池，方四十许步。池中有钓台，方十步，台之基岸悉石也。
现代文：孔子庙东南面五百步，有一对石阀，就是灵光殿的南阀，北面百余步就是灵光殿旧址，东西二十四丈，南北十二丈，高一丈余；东西两边是廊屋，中间方七百余步；石网东北面有一个浴池，方约四十步；池中有个钓台，方十步，台基和岸边都是用石头砌成，遗基还较完整。
English: Five hundred paces to the southeast of the Confucius Temple, there is a pair of stone valves, that is, the south valve of the Hall of Light, and more than a hundred paces to the north is the old site of the Hall of Light, 24 meters high from east to west, 12 meters high from north to south, and more than one meter high; there are corridors on both sides of the east and west, and more than seven hundred paces in the middle; there is a bath on the northeast side of the stone net, about forty paces; there is a fishing platform in the pool, ten paces square, the base and the shore are made of stone, and the remains are relatively

古文：遗基尚整，故王延寿赋曰：周行数里，仰不见日者也。是汉景帝程姬子鲁恭王之所造也。
现代文：所以王延寿作赋说：绕行数里，仰头不见天日。这是汉景帝程姬的儿子鲁恭王修筑的。
English: Therefore, Wang Yanshou wrote a fable: "If you walk around for several miles, you will not see the sun." This was built by the son of the Han Emperor Cheng Ji, King Lu Gong.

古文：殿之东南，即泮宫也，在高门直北道西。
现代文：殿的东南面，就是伴宫，在高门正北的大路西边。
English: The southeast side of the hall is the companion palace, on the west side of the main road just north of the high gate.

古文：宫中有台，高八十尺，台南水东西百步，南北六十步，台西水南北四百步，东西六十步，台池咸结石为之，《诗》所谓思乐泮水也。
现代文：宫中有台，高八十尺，台南水池东西一百步，南北五十步，台西水池南北四百步，东西六十步，台池都用石块结砌，这就是《诗经》所谓的：在洋水之畔多么快乐！
English: There is a platform in the palace that is eighty feet high, the south pool of Tainan is one hundred paces east to west, fifty paces north to south, the west pool of Tainan is four hundred paces north to south, and sixty paces east to west, and the pools are all made of stone. This is what the "Song of Songs" calls: How happy you are on the shore of the ocean!

古文：沂水又西径圜丘北，丘高四丈余。
现代文：沂水又往西流经圆丘北面，丘高四丈余。
English: Surabaya water also flows westward through the north side of the round hill, which is more than four stories high.

古文：沂水又西流，昔韩雉射龙于斯水之上。
现代文：沂水又往西流，从前韩难在这条水上射过龙。
English: Surabaya's water flows westward. In the past, it was difficult for Koreans to shoot a dragon on this water.

古文：《尸子》曰；韩雉见申羊于鲁，有龙饮于沂。
现代文：《尸子》说：韩难在鲁与申羊见面，有一条龙在沂水上饮水。
English: "The Corpse" said: Han Nan met Shen Yang in Lu, and there was a dragon drinking water on the river.

古文：韩雉曰：吾闻之，出见虎，搏之，见龙，射之，今弗射，是不得行吾闻也。
现代文：韩堆说：我听人们说过，出外见到虎，就打死它；见到龙，就用箭射，今天如果不射，就是没有照我听到的做了。
English: Han Dui said, "I have heard people say that if you go out and see a tiger, you should kill it; if you see a dragon, you should shoot it with an arrow. If you don't shoot it today, you didn't do what I heard.

古文：遂射之。
现代文：说着就用箭射龙。
English: While talking, he shot a dragon with an arrow.

古文：沂水又西，右注泗水也。
现代文：沂水又往西流，从右面注入泗水。
English: Surabaya water also flows westward, injecting Surabaya water from the right side.

古文：又西过瑕丘县东，屈从县东南流，漷水从东来注之。
现代文：又往西流过瑕丘县东边，转弯从县城往东南流，都水从东方流来注人。
English: It also flows westward through the eastern part of Koecheok County, turns from the county seat to the southeast, and the capital water flows from the east.

古文：瑕丘，鲁邑，《春秋》之负瑕矣。
现代文：瑕丘是鲁国的城邑，也就是《春秋》的负瑕。
English: Kogaoka is a city in the country of Lu, which is the negative flaw of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：晋永嘉中，太尉郗鉴将乡曲保此山，胡贼攻守不能得。
现代文：哀公七年太尉都鉴率领乡民保卫这座山，胡贼进攻未能得手。
English: In the seventh year of Aigong's reign, Lieutenant Du Jian led the villagers to defend this mountain. The bandits' attack was unsuccessful.

古文：今山南有大峄，名曰郗公峄。
现代文：今天山南有大峰，称为都公峰，山北有绝壁。
English: Today, there is a large peak in the south of the mountain, known as the Du Gongfeng, and a cliff in the north of the mountain.

古文：其后当周，爵称侯，后见侵削，霸者所继为伯，任姓也。
现代文：秦始皇到鲁国观礼，登上峰山，命垂相李斯用大篆字体在山岭上刻写铭文，名叫昼门。《诗经》所说的保有亮峰，就指这里。
English: The first emperor of Qin went to the State of Lu to pay homage, and climbed the peak of the mountain, and after his death, Li Si inscribed an inscription on the mountain ridge with a large font, called the Day Gate. The "Shijing" said that the bright peak should be preserved, which refers to here.

古文：应欲曰：邳在薛。
现代文：榔水又往西南流经蕃县旧城南面，又往西流经薛县旧城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows southwestward through the southern side of the old city of Surabaya County, and westward through the northern side of the old city of Xue County.

古文：徐广《史记音义》曰：楚元王子郢客，以吕后二年，封上邳侯也。
现代文：《地理志》说：这是夏朝车正奚仲约封国《竹书纪年》载，梁惠成王三十一年时被封为上邱侯。
English: "Geography" said: This is the "Bamboo Chronicle Year" recorded in the summer when the chariot was in the middle of the country, and Liang Huicheng was crowned as Shangqiu Hou in the 31st year of his reign.

古文：有下故此为上矣。
现代文：因为有下那，所以这里称上郑。
English: Because there is a lower one, this place is called Shangzheng.

古文：《晋书地道记》曰：仲虺城在薛城西三十里。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》说：仲迪城在薛城西三十里，榔水又往西流到湖陆县注入泗水。
English: "Jinshu•Jinduo Ji" said: Zhongdi City is 30 miles west of Xue City, and Surabaya's water flows westward into Hulun County to inject Surabaya's water.

古文：漷水又西至湖陆县，入于泗，故京相璠曰：薛县漷水，首受蕃县，西注山阳湖陆是也。《经》言瑕丘东，误耳。
现代文：所以京相播说：薛县的榔水，上口在蕃县接纳了水流，向西流注于山阳湖陆。《水经》说流经瑕丘东，是弄错了。
English: Therefore, the Beijing phase broadcast said: Xue County's Surabaya water, the upper mouth received the water flow in Surabaya County, and the westward flow poured into the land of Sanyang Lake. "Water Sutra" said that the flow was east of Keqiu, but it was a mistake.

古文：又南过平阳县西，县，即山阳郡之南平阳县也。
现代文：又往南流过平阳县西面，平阳县就是山阳郡的南平阳县。
English: It also flows south through the west of Pingyang County, which is the southern Pingyang County of Sanyang County.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：梁惠成王二十九年，齐田肸及宋人伐我东鄙，围平阳者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：梁惠成王二十九年前，齐国田肝和宋国军队进攻我国东部边境，包围平阳。
English: "The Bamboo Annals" says: Twenty-nine years before the reign of King Liang Huicheng, the armies of the State of Qi and the State of Song attacked the eastern border of China and surrounded Pingyang.

古文：王莽改之曰黾平矣。
现代文：王莽时改称龟平。泗水又往南流经旧城西，世人称为漆乡。
English: Wang Mangshi changed his name to Guiping. Surabaya then flowed south through the old west of the city, known to the world as Urushi Town.

古文：泗水又南径故城西，世谓之漆乡；应劭《十三州记》曰：漆乡，邾邑也。
现代文：应肋《十三州记》说：漆乡是邻的城邑。
English: According to the "Tale of the Thirteen Provinces," Chuxiang is a neighboring city.

古文：杜预曰：平阳东北有漆乡。
现代文：杜预说：平阳东北有漆乡。
English: Du Yu said: There is a lacquer town in the northeast of Pingyang.

古文：今见有故城，西南方二里，所未详也。
现代文：今天在平阳西南，也有旧城，方圆二里。
English: Today, in the southwest of Pingyang, there is also an old town, two miles in circumference.

古文：又南过高平县西，洸水从西北来流注之。
现代文：到底是否漆乡故城，不很清楚。又往南流过高平县西面，洸水从西北流过来注人。
English: It is not very clear whether it is the old town of Shuxiang. It flows southward across the west of Gaoping County, and the water flows from the northwest to the people.

古文：泗水南径高平山，山东西十里，南北五里，高四里，与众山相连，其山最高，顶上方平，故谓之高平山，县亦取名焉。
现代文：泗水往南流经高平山，此山东西十里，南北五里，高四里，与众山相连，而以这座山为最高，山顶呈方形而平坦，所以称为高平山。县也取名为高平县。
English: Surabaya water flows southward through Mount Gaoping. This mountain is ten miles from east to west, five miles from north to south, and four miles high. It is connected to many mountains, and this mountain is the highest. The top of the mountain is square and flat, so it is called Mount Gaoping. The county is also called Gaoping County.

古文：泗水又南径高平县故城西。
现代文：泗水又往南流经高平县旧城西面。
English: Surabaya water also flows southwards through the western side of the old town of Gaoping County.

古文：汉宣帝地节三年，封丞相魏相为侯国。
现代文：汉宣帝地节三年。把这地方封给垂相魏相，立为侯国。
English: In the third year of the Han Xuan Emperor's Land Festival, this place was given to Hui Xuan and Wei Xuan and established as a vassal state.

古文：高帝七年，封将军陈锴为橐侯。
现代文：高帝七年封将军陈错为真侯。
English: Emperor Gao's seven-year-long general Chen mistakenly became the real lord.

古文：《地理志》：山阳之属县也。
现代文：据《地理志》，高平县是山阳郡的属县。
English: According to "Geography," Gaoping County is a subordinate county of Sanyang County.

古文：王莽改曰高平。
现代文：王莽时改称高平郡。
English: Wang Mangshi changed the name to Gaoping County.

古文：应劭曰：章帝改。
现代文：应劭说：是章帝改的。
English: Ying Jun said: It was Emperor Zhang who reformed it.

古文：按本《志》曰王莽改名，章帝因之矣。
现代文：据《地理志》：王莽先改名，章帝予以沿用。
English: According to "Geography": Wang Mang first changed his name, and Zhang Di followed suit.

古文：所谓洸水者，洙水也，盖洸、洙相入，互受通称矣。
现代文：所谓洗水，其实就是侏水，因为洗水、沫水互相汇合，也就互可通称了。
English: The so-called washing water is actually pyroclastic water, because washing water and foam water converge with each other, so they can be called each other.

古文：又南过方与县东，汉哀帝建平四年，县女子田无啬生子。先未生二月，儿啼腹中，及生不举，葬之陌上。
现代文：又往南流过方与县东面，汉哀帝建平四年前，县里有个女子名叫田无音要临产，儿子出生前两个月，就已在腹中啼哭了，等到生下来后却不中用了。
English: Four years ago, there was a woman in the county named Tian Mute who was about to give birth. Two months before her son was born, she was already crying in her stomach, but after she was born, she couldn't use it.

古文：三日，人过闻啼声，母掘养之。
现代文：她把孩子葬在陌上，过了三天，有人经过，听见哭声，母亲又把他掘出来抚养。
English: She buried the child on the meadow, and three days later, someone passed by, heard the cries, and the mother dug him out again to raise him.

古文：菏水从西来往之。
现代文：菏水从西方流过来注入。
English: Surabaya's water comes from the west and is pumped in.

古文：菏水，即济水之所苞注以成湖泽也。
现代文：菏水就是由济水流注、积聚成的湖泽。
English: Surabaya is a lake formed by the inflow and accumulation of water from the Jishui River.

古文：而东与泗水合于湖陵县西六十里谷庭城下，俗谓之黄水口。
现代文：往东流，在湖陵县西六十里的毁庭城下与泗水汇合，俗称黄水口。
English: Flowing eastward, it merges with the Surabaya River at the foot of Ruinting Castle, sixty miles west of Huling County, and is commonly known as the Huangshuikou River.

古文：黄水西北通巨野泽，盖以黄水沿注于菏，故因以名焉。
现代文：黄水西北通巨野泽，因为黄水注入菏水，可相通称。
English: Northwest of Huangshui, there is Konozawa. Because Huangshui is infused with brackish water, it is commonly known as the Huangshui River.

古文：又屈东南过湖陆县南，涓涓水从东北来流注之。
现代文：所以水口也叫黄水口。又转弯往东南流过湖陆县南面，涓涓水从东北方流过来注人。
English: Therefore, the water outlet is also called the yellow water outlet. It turns to the southeast and flows through the south of Hulud County, and the salty water flows from the northeast and pours into people.

古文：《地理志》：故湖陵县也，菏水在南，王莽改曰湖陆。
现代文：按《地理志》，湖陆县就是从前的湖陵县。菏水在南面，王莽改名为湖陆。
English: According to the "Geography," Hululun County is the former Huling County. Surabaya is in the south, and Wangmang changed its name to Hulun.

古文：应劭曰：一名湖陵，章帝封东平王苍子为湖陆侯，更名湖陆也。
现代文：应肋说：又名湖陵，章帝封东平王苍的儿子为湖陆侯，改名叫湖陆。
English: Ying Li said: also known as Huling, the son of Emperor Zhang Feng Dongping Wang Cang was Hulong, and changed his name to Hulong.

古文：泗水又东，径郗鉴所筑城北，又东，径湖陵城东南。
现代文：泗水又往东流，经过都鉴所筑城的北面，又往东流经湖陵城东南。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward, passing the north side of the city built by the Duken Institute, and flows eastward through the southeast of Huling City.

古文：昔桓温之北入也，范懽擒慕容忠于此，城东有《度尚碑》。
现代文：从前桓温北上，范灌在这里俘获了慕容忠。城东有度尚碑。
English: When Fan Guan went to the north from the former Kuanwen, he captured Murongzhong here. There is a monument to him in the east of the city.

古文：泗水又左会南梁水。
现代文：泗水又在左边汇合了南梁水。
English: Surabaya's water joins Nanliang's water on the left.

古文：《地理志》曰：水出著县。
现代文：《地理志》说：南梁水发源于蕃县。
English: "Geography" said: Nanliang Water originates from Handan County.

古文：今县之东北，平泽出泉若轮焉，发源成川，西南流，分为二水。北水枝出西径蕃县北，西径膝城北。
现代文：今天该县的东北面平泽冒出泉水，有车轮那么大小，发源后成为川流，向西南流分为二条，北支往西流经蕃县北、面；又往西流经滕城北面。
English: Today, in the northeast of the county, there is a spring in Pyeongtaek, which is as big as a wheel. After the source, it becomes a stream. The southwest stream is divided into two, the north branch flows westward through the north and west of the county; and it flows westward through the north of Tengcheng.

古文：《春秋左传》隐公十一年，滕侯、薛侯来朝，争长。
现代文：《春秋左传》，隐公十一年前，滕侯、薛侯来朝见，两人互争尊长。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn Legend," eleven years ago, Teng Hou and Xue Hou came to the Imperial Court to meet, and the two fought with each other.

古文：薛侯曰：我先封。
现代文：薛侯说：我先受封应当为长。
English: Xue Hou said: I should be the first to receive the title.

古文：滕侯曰：我周之卜正也。薛，庶姓也，我不可以后之。
现代文：滕侯说：我是周天子的卜正官，薛与周天子异姓，我的位置不能居他之后。
English: Teng Hou said: I am Zhou Tianzi's Bu Zhengguan, Xue and Zhou Tianzi are different surnames, my position cannot be after him.

古文：公使羽父请薛侯曰：君辱在寡人，周谚有之曰：山有木，工则度之：宾有礼，主则择之。
现代文：隐公命羽父把薛侯请来，对他说：承你前来问侯我，周有一句谚语说，山上有树木，须工匠去量；客人有礼物，让主人去挑。
English: Hinkong's father, Feather, invited Xue Hou and said to him, "I dare you to come and ask me. There is a proverb around saying, "There are trees on the mountain, craftsmen must measure them; guests have gifts, let the host choose."

古文：周之宗盟，异姓为后。
现代文：周天子与诸侯会盟时异姓居后。
English: When Zhou Tianzi allied with the princes, he took a different surname.

古文：寡人若朝于薛，不敢与诸任齿。
现代文：如果我到薛来朝见您，是不敢与任姓诸侯争排行的。
English: If I were to come to Xue to see you in the morning, I would not dare to stand in line with the feudal lords.

古文：君若辱贶寡人，则愿以滕君为请。
现代文：如果承蒙您照顾，那么我想为滕君请求您这次让他一下。
English: If you will take care of me, then I would like to ask you for Teng Jun to let him swim this time.

古文：薛侯许之，乃长滕侯者也。
现代文：薛侯伺意了，于是滕侯居长。
English: Xue Hou agreed, so Teng Hou became ruler.

古文：汉高祖封夏侯婴为侯国，号曰滕公。
现代文：汉高祖把此地封给夏侯婴，立为侯国，夏侯婴就称滕公。
English: Emperor Gaozong gave this land to Xia Houyi and established it as a princely state. Xia Houyi became known as Tenggong.

古文：邓展曰：今沛郡公丘也。
现代文：邓晨说：滕城就是今天沛郡的公丘。
English: Deng Chen said: Tengcheng is today's Gongqiu in Pei County.

古文：其水又溉于丘焉。
现代文：此水灌溉这一带的土地。
English: This water irrigates the land in this area.

古文：县故城在滕西北，城周二十里，内有子城。按《地理志》即滕也。周懿王子错叔绣文公所封也。
现代文：该县旧城在滕的西北，城周围二十里，城内有子城，据《地理志》，这座旧城就是滕，是周巍王儿子错叔绣文公的封邑。
English: The county's old city is in the northwest of Teng, twenty miles around the city, and there is a sub-city in the city. According to "Geography," this old city is Teng, a fief of the son of King Zhou Qi.

古文：齐灭之，秦以为县。汉武帝元朔三年，封鲁恭王子刘顺为侯国。
现代文：后来被齐灭掉，秦时立为县，汉武帝元朔三年前，把这地方封给鲁恭王儿子刘顺，立为侯国。
English: Later, Qi was eliminated, Qin was established as a county, and Han Emperor Wudi Yuanshuo three years ago, gave this place to Liu Shun, the son of King Lukong, and established it as a principality.

古文：世以此水溉我良田，遂及百秭，故有两沟之名焉。
现代文：世人因为此水灌溉良田，到达百株，所以有两沟的名称。
English: Because people irrigate good fields with this water, reaching hundreds of plants, so there are two ditch names.

古文：南梁水自枝渠西南，径鲁国蕃县故城东，俗以南邻于漷，亦谓之西漷水。
现代文：南梁水从支渠向西南流，经过鲁国蕃县旧城东，因为它南面与廓水相邻，民间也称为西榔水。
English: Nanliang water flows from the branch canal to the southwest, passing through the old east of the city of Lu County, because it is adjacent to the southern water, it is also known as the West Liang water.

古文：南梁水又屈径城南，应劭曰：县，古小邾邑也。
现代文：南梁水又拐弯流经城南，应劭说：蕃县就是古时的小邻邑。
English: Nanliangshui flows through the south of the city, and Ying Zang said: Zang County is a small neighborhood in ancient times.

古文：《地理志》曰，其水西流，注于济渠，济在湖陆西，而左注泗，泗、济合流，故《地记》或言济入泗，泗亦言入济，互受通称，故有人济之文。
现代文：《地理志》说：这条水往西流注入济渠。济水在湖陆西面，在左边注入泗水，泗水和济水合流，所以记述地理一类书中，有的地方说济水注入泗水，也有说泗水注入济水，因为相互可以通称，所以有入济的说法。
English: "Geography" said: This water flows westward into the reed canal. The reed water is in the west of the lake and the land, and the reed water is injected on the left, and the reed water and the reed water merge. Therefore, in a book of geography, some places say that the reed water is injected into the reed water, and some say that the reed water is injected into the reed water. Because they can be called each other, there is a saying of entering the reed.

古文：阚駰《十三州志》曰：西至湖陆入泗是也。
现代文：阐胭《十三州志》说：西流到湖陆注入泗水。
English: According to the "History of the Thirteen States," the West River flows into the lake and injects water from the Yangtze River.

古文：《经》无南梁之名，而有涓涓之称，疑即是水也。
现代文：《水经》里没有南梁水，却有涓涓水，大概就是这条水。
English: There is no Nan Liang Shui in the "Water Sutra," but there is Sui Shui, which is probably this water.

古文：戴延之《西征记》亦言湖陆县之东南，有涓涓水，亦无记子南梁，谓是吴王所道之渎也。
现代文：戴延之《西征记》也说，湖陆县的东南有涓涓水，也没有记载南梁水，说涓涓水是吴王所开的渠道。
English: Dai Yan's "Record of the Western Conquest" also said that the southeast of Huludao County had Surabaya water, but there was no record of Nanliang water, saying that Surabaya water was a channel opened by King Wu.

古文：余按湖陆西南，止有是水。延之盖以《国语》云，吴王夫差起师，将北会黄池，掘沟于商、鲁之间，北属之沂，西属于济。
现代文：我查考过，湖陆西南只有这条水，戴延之大概是根据《国语》所说，吴王夫差起兵，将北上黄池，在商鲁之间开掘渠道，北面与沂水连接，西面通济水。
English: I have checked, there is only this water in the southwest of the lake and the land. Dai Yan is probably based on the "National Language" saying that Wu Wangfu sent troops to the north of Huangchi and excavated channels between Shanglu, connecting the north with Surabaya and the west with Jishui.

古文：以是言之，故谓是水为吴王所掘，非也。
现代文：凭这点记载，所以说这条水是吴王开掘的，其实不是如此。
English: Based on this record, it is said that this water was excavated by King Wu, but this is not true.

古文：余以水路求之。止有泗川耳。
现代文：我根据水路探察，此处只有泗水。
English: According to the waterway I explored, there is only salty water here.

古文：盖北达沂西，北径于商鲁而接于济矣，吴所浚广耳。
现代文：北通沂水，西北流经商、鲁，而与济水相接的就是泗水。
English: The north stream is Surabaya, the northwest stream is Commerce and Lu, and Surabaya is connected to Jishui.

古文：非谓起自东北受沂西南注济也。
现代文：吴王只是疏浚过，并拓宽了原水道，不是说从东北起开掘，引入沂水，往西南注入济水。
English: Wu Wang only dredged and widened the original waterway, not that he excavated from the northeast, introduced salty water, and injected fresh water to the southwest.

古文：假之有通，非吴所趣，年载诚眇，人情则近，以今忖古，益知延之之不通情理矣。
现代文：涓涓水只是利用原有水道开成，并不是吴一气凿通的。此事年代确实已很久远了，但人情物理却还是相近的。以今天来推想古代，就可以更清楚地看出戴延之实在不通情理了。
English: Surabaya's water supply was only developed by using the original waterway, and was not chiseled out by Wu. The time of this event is indeed a long time ago, but the human physiology is still similar. If we think about ancient times today, we can see more clearly that Dayan's situation is really unreasonable.

古文：泗水又南，漷水注之，又径薛之上邳城西，而南注者也。
现代文：泗水又往南流，榔水注入，又流经薛的上邱城西，然后向南流去。
English: Surabaya water flows to the south, Surabaya water is injected, and flows through the west of Xue's Shangqiu City, and then flows to the south.

古文：又东过沛县东，昔许由隐于沛泽，即是县也。县盖取泽为名，宋灭属楚，在泗水之滨，于秦为泗水郡治。黄水注之。
现代文：又往东流过沛县东边，从前许由隐居在沛泽，那就在沛县，沛县是按沛泽命名的，宋国被灭后属楚，秦时是泗水郡的治所。沛县在泗水之滨，黄水注入。
English: It also flows eastward past the east side of Peizhou County. Formerly, Xu Rong lived in seclusion in Peizhou, which is in Peizhou. Peizhou County is named after Peizhou. After the Song Dynasty was destroyed, it belonged to Chu. In the Qin Dynasty, it was the seat of administration of Surabaya County. Surabaya County is on the coast of Surabaya, with yellow water flowing into it.

古文：黄水出小黄县黄乡黄沟。
现代文：黄水出自小黄县黄乡的黄沟。
English: The yellow water comes from the yellow ditch in Huangxiang, Xiaohang County.

古文：《国语》曰：吴子会诸侯于黄池者也。
现代文：《国语》说：吴子与诸侯在黄池会盟，就是这地方。
English: "National Language" said: Wu Zi and the princes in Huangchi alliance, this is the place.

古文：黄水东流，径外黄县故城南。
现代文：黄水往东流经外黄县旧城南。
English: The Yellow River flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Waigaoqian.

古文：张晏曰：魏郡有内黄县，故加外也。
现代文：张晏说：魏郡有内黄县，所以这里加上外字。
English: Zhang Jun said: Wei County has Neihuang County, so foreign characters are added here.

古文：薛瓒曰：县有黄沟，故县氏焉。
现代文：薛攒说：县有黄沟，所以县称黄县。
English: Xue Nan said: There is a yellow ditch in the county, so the county is called Huangxian.

古文：秦末兵起，萧何、曹参迎汉祖于此城。高帝十一年，封合阳侯刘仲子为侯国。
现代文：圈称《陈留风俗传》说：县南有渠水，春秋时，这里是宋国的曲棘里，是从前宋国的别都。《春秋》：昭公二十五年把这地方封给合阳侯刘仲子，立为侯国。
English: "Chenliu Customs and Traditions" said: There is a canal in the south of the county. In the Spring and Autumn Period, this was the Song Dynasty's Quxianli, and it was the former Song Dynasty's capital. "Spring and Autumn Period": In the 25th year of King Zhaogong, this place was given to Heyang marquis Liu Zhongzi and established as a marquisate.

古文：城内有汉高祖庙，庙前有三碑，后汉立庙基，以青石为之，阶陛尚存。
现代文：城内有汉高祖庙，庙前有三座碑，后汉时立。庙基用青石垒砌，台阶还在。
English: There is a temple of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty in the city. There are three monuments in front of the temple, which were erected in the late Han Dynasty. The foundation of the temple is made of bluestone, and the steps are still there.

古文：刘备之为徐州也，治此，袁术遣纪灵攻备，备求救吕布，布救之。
现代文：刘备占据徐州时，此城是治所。袁术派遣纪灵进攻刘备，刘备向吕布求救，吕布赶来援助，驻扎在小沛，邀了纪灵，又请刘备一起饮酒。
English: When Liu Bei occupied Xuzhou, this city was the seat of government. Yuan Shu sent Ji Ling to attack Liu Bei, Liu Bei asked Lv Bu for help, Lv Bu came to help, stationed in Xiaopei, invited Ji Ling, and asked Liu Bei to drink together.

古文：屯小沛，招灵请备共饮，布谓灵曰：玄德，布弟也，布性不喜合斗，但喜解斗。
现代文：吕布对纪灵说：玄德是我的义弟，我生性不喜欢相斗，只喜欢解斗。说完就把戟插在门口，然后拉弓搭箭，说道：看我射戟的小枝。
English: Lü Bu said to Ji Ling: Xuan De is my brother-in-law, I don't like to fight by nature, I only like to resolve conflicts. After saying this, he stuck the crossbow in the doorway, then drew the bow and arrows and said: "Look at the twig of the crossbow I shot."

古文：乃植戟于门，布弯弓曰：观布射戟，小枝中者，当各解兵，不中可留决斗。
现代文：射中，你们就收兵；射不中，你们可留下来决斗。说完一箭射中，于是双方收兵。
English: If you hit, you must withdraw; if you miss, you may stay and fight a duel. If one arrow hits, both sides must withdraw.

古文：一发中之，遂解。
现代文：这里就是吕布当年射戟的地方。
English: This is the place where Lübbe shot his harpoon.

古文：此即布射朝枝处也。《述征记》曰：城极大，四周堑通丰水。丰水于城南东注泗，即泡水也。
现代文：《述征记》说：城很大，四周城壕通丰水，丰水从城南往东流，注入泗水，也就是泡水。
English: "Description" said: the city is very large, the city ditch is surrounded by abundant water, the abundant water flows from the south of the city to the east, and is injected with brackish water, that is, soaking water.

古文：《地理志》曰：泡水自平乐县东北至沛入泗者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：泡水从平乐县往东北流，到沛县注入泗水。
English: "Geography" said: the soaking water flows from Pingle County to the northeast, and the salty water is injected into Pei County.

古文：泗水南径小沛县东。
现代文：泗水往南流经小沛县东，县治旧城在南丘上。
English: Surabaya water flows south through the east of Xiaopei County, and the old county seat rises on the south hill.

古文：县治故城南垞上，东岸有泗水亭，汉祖为泗水亭长，即此亭也。
现代文：东岸有泗水亭，汉高祖当泗水亭长时，就是这个亭。所以今天这里有高祖庙。
English: On the east bank, there is the Yuanshui Pavilion. It was this pavilion when the founder of the Han Dynasty Gao Zu was the head of the Yuanshui Pavilion. That is why there is the Gao Zu Temple here today.

古文：故亭今有高祖庙，庙前有碑，延熹十年立。
现代文：庙前有碑，延熹十年立。
English: There is a monument in front of the temple, which has been standing for ten years.

古文：庙阙崩褫，略无全者。
现代文：庙宇门阀现在都已崩塌，没有完整的东西了。
English: The temple's gate valves have now all collapsed, leaving nothing intact.

古文：水中有故石梁处，遗石尚存。
现代文：水中有旧石桥的遗迹，只留下些石块还在。
English: The remains of the old stone bridge are visible in the water, with only a few stones remaining.

古文：高租之破黥布也，过之，置酒沛宫，酒酣歌舞，慷慨伤怀曰：游子思故乡也。
现代文：高祖打败默布后，经过这里，在沛宫摆酒设宴，歌舞畅饮，慷慨伤怀，叹道：游子思念故乡呵！
English: After Gaozu defeated Mibu, he passed by here, held a banquet at Pei Palace, sang and danced, drank freely, was generous and sad, and sighed: "The wanderer misses his hometown!"

古文：泗水又东南流，径广戚县故城南。
现代文：泗水又往东南流经广戚县旧城南。
English: Surabaya's water also flows southeast through the old southern part of the city in Guangqi County.

古文：汉武帝元朔元年，封刘择为侯国，王莽更之曰力聚也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔元年把这地方封给刘择，立为侯国。王莽时改名为力聚。
English: In the first year of Hanwu Emperor Yuan Shuo, this place was given to Liu Zi and established as a principality. Wang Mangshi changed his name to Lijun.

古文：泗水又径留县，而南径垞城东。
现代文：泗水又流经留县，而后往南流经咤城东面，城西南有崇侯虎庙。
English: Surabaya water also flows through Ryu County, and then flows south through the east of Surabaya City, and there is the Chong Hou Tiger Temple in the southwest of the city.

古文：城西南有崇侯虎庙，道沦遗爱，不知何因而远有此图。泗水又南径床大夫桓冢西。山枕泗水、西上尽石，凿而为冢，今人谓之石郭者也。
现代文：不知此人的庙，为何会远远立到这里。泗水又往南流经宋大夫桓魅墓西面。山紧临泗水，西面上去都是岩石，凿成坟墓，今天人们称为石榔。
English: I don't know why this man's temple was built so far away from here. Surabaya also flows south through the west side of the tomb of Dr. Song Huanmei. The mountain is close to Surabaya, and the west side is full of rocks, chiseled into tombs, today known as stone graves.

古文：郭有二重，石作工巧。
现代文：榔有两重，石匠的制作十分细致精巧。
English: The crockery is double-layered, and the workmanship of the stonemasons is very detailed and exquisite.

古文：夫子以为不如死之速朽也。
现代文：孔夫子认为，人死了还是迅速腐朽为好。
English: Confucius believed that it was better to rot quickly after death.

古文：又东南过彭城县东北，泗水西有龙华寺，是沙门释法显远出西域，浮海东还，持龙华图，首创此制。法流中夏，自法显始也。
现代文：又往东南流过彭城县东北，泗水西岸有龙华寺。僧人法显远赴西域，渡海东归，手持《龙华图》，首创了佛寺的形制，以后传遍中国，就是从法显开始的。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the northeast of Pengcheng County, and there is Longhua Temple on the west coast of Surabaya. The monk Fa Hsien went far to the west, crossed the sea to the east, holding the "Longhua Map," and created the form of a Buddhist temple, which was later spread throughout China, starting with Fa Hsien.

古文：其所持天竺二石，仍在南陆东基堪中，其石尚光洁可爱。
现代文：当时他带来的两块天竺石，今天还在南面路东那片高地东边的基砌中，这两块石还十分光洁可爱。
English: At that time, he brought two pieces of geodesic stone, which are still in the foundation of the east side of the highland on the south side of the road. These two stones are still very beautiful.

古文：泗水又南，获水入焉，而南径彭城县故城东。
现代文：泗水又往南流，获水注入，往南流经彭城县旧城东面。
English: Surabaya water also flows southward, receives water injection, and flows southward through the east of the old city of Pengcheng County.

古文：周显王四十二年，九鼎沦没泗渊。秦始皇时，而鼎见于斯水。始皇自以德合三代，大喜，使数千人没水求之，不得，所谓鼎伏也。
现代文：周显王四十二年前，九鼎沉没于泗水的深潭中，秦始皇时鼎在此水出现，他以为自己的贤德已可与三代媲美了，非常高兴，就派了数千人去水下打捞，结果没有捞到，这就是所谓鼎伏―沉没隐藏起来了。
English: Zhou Xianwang Forty-two years ago, Jiuding sank in the deep pool of Surabaya. When Qin Shihuang appeared in this water, he thought that his virtue was comparable to that of the three generations. He was very happy and sent thousands of people to salvage underwater. As a result, they did not find it. This is the so-called ding volt - the sinking was hidden.

古文：亦云系而行之未出，龙齿啮断其系，故语曰：称乐大早绝鼎系。
现代文：也有人说是用绳索系住鼎往上拉，但没有拉上来，绳索就被龙齿咬断了。所以谚语说，高兴得太早，拉鼎断了绳。 
English: It was also said that a rope was used to tie the dowel and pull it up, but when it was not pulled up, the rope was snapped by the dragon's teeth. Therefore, the proverb says, "If you rejoice too early, the dowel will break the rope."

古文：当是孟浪之传耳。
现代文：这是荒唐的传说。
English: This is an absurd legend.

古文：泗水又径龚胜墓南，墓碣尚存。又经亚父冢东。
现代文：泗水又流经龚胜墓南面，墓碑今天还在；又流经亚父墓东面。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the southern side of the tomb, and the tombstone is still there today; it also flows through the eastern side of the tomb.

古文：《皇览》曰：亚父家在庐江县郭东居巢亭中。
现代文：《皇览》说：亚父墓在庐江县城东居巢亭中，那里有亚父井。
English: The "Imperial Review" said: the tomb of Yabu is in the nesting pavilion of the Chengdong residence in Lijiang County, where there is the Yabu well.

古文：有亚父井，吏民亲事，皆祭亚父于居巢厅上。
现代文：官吏任职办公事，都在居巢厅上蔡祀亚父。
English: All official duties are performed in the residence hall by Cai Shiya.

古文：后更造祠于郭东，至今祠之。
现代文：后来又在城东建祠，人们至今还在祭祀他。
English: Later, a shrine was built in the east of the city, and people still worship him.

古文：按《汉书。项羽传》，历阳人范增，未至彭城而发疽死，不言之居巢。
现代文：据《汉书•项羽传》载：历阳人范增，还没有到彭城，就患毒疮而死，没有说他到居巢。
English: According to "Hanshu • Xiang Yu Chuan" contains: Liyang people Fan Zeng, has not yet arrived in Pengcheng, he died of poisonous sores, did not say that he came to the nest.

古文：今彭城南，有项羽凉马台，台之西南山麓上，即其冢也。
现代文：今天彭城南有项羽的凉马台，台西南的山麓上，就是他的墓地。
English: Today, Pengcheng is buried in the foothills of Liangmadai, southwest of Taizhou.

古文：增尔慕范蠡之举，而自绝于斯，可谓褊矣。
现代文：范增不仰慕范彝的行为，却离开项羽来到这里，可说胸怀太偏狭了。
English: Fan Zeng did not admire Fan Kui's behavior, but left Xiang Yu to come here. It can be said that his mind was too narrow.

古文：推考书事，墓近于此也。
现代文：根据记载推想起来，他的墓以在这里较为近情。
English: Judging by the records, his grave is relatively close to here.

古文：又东南过吕县南。
现代文：又往东南流过吕县南面。
English: It also flows southeast through the southern part of Lv County.

古文：吕，宋邑也。
现代文：吕县原是宋国的城邑。
English: Lixian County was originally a town in the Song Dynasty.

古文：《春秋》襄公元年，晋师伐郑及陈，楚子辛救郑，侵宋吕留是也。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公元年前，晋军进攻郑及陈，楚子辛去援救郑，侵入宋国的吕、留。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Before the year 1000, the Jin army attacked Zheng and Chen, Chu Zixin went to rescue Zheng, and invaded Lu and Ru of Song.

古文：县对泗水，汉景帝三年，有白颈乌与黑乌群斗于县，白颈乌不胜，堕泗水中，死者数千。
现代文：吕县正对泗水。汉景帝三年前，有白颈乌鸦及黑乌鸦在该县相斗，白颈乌鸦斗败，坠入泗水而死达数千只。
English: Lv County is facing Surabaya. Three years before the Han Dynasty, there was a fight between white-necked crows and black crows in the county. The white-necked crows lost the fight and fell into Surabaya, killing thousands.

古文：京房《易传》曰：逆亲亲厥妖，白黑鸟斗时，有吴楚之反。
现代文：京房《易传》说：违反了亲属相亲之理，于是出现了黑白相斗的妖异，那时即有吴、楚谋反。
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Biography" said: In violation of the principle of relatives being close to each other, a black-and-white battle monster appeared. At that time, Wu and Chu plotted to rebel.

古文：泗水之上，有石梁焉，故曰吕梁也。昔宋景公以弓工之弓，弯弧东射，矢集彭城之东，饮羽于石梁，即斯梁也。
现代文：泗水上有桥梁，所以称吕梁，从前宋景公拉开弓匠制作的弓，搭箭向东射去，箭都聚集在彭城之东，深深射进石桥里，说的就是这座桥。
English: There is a bridge over the Surabaya River, which is why it is called Luliang. Once upon a time, Song Jing Gong drew a bow made by an archer and shot arrows to the east. The arrows gathered in the east of Pengcheng and shot deep into the stone bridge. This is the bridge.

古文：悬涛崩渀，实为泗险，孔子所谓鱼鳖不能游。
现代文：这里狂涛急流奔腾澎湃，是泗水上的险地，正像孔子所说的，连鱼鳖也不能游。
English: Here, the turbulent rapids are surging, and it is a dangerous place on the turbulent water. As Confucius said, even fish hooks cannot swim.

古文：又云悬水三十仞，流沫九十里、今则不能也。
现代文：又说，飞瀑三十丈，浪花飞进九十里。今天已看不见古时的情景了。
English: He also said that the waterfall is thirty meters high and the waves are ninety miles high. Today, the scenes of ancient times are no longer visible.

古文：盖惟岳之喻，未便极天明矣。
现代文：但这些说法也有点夸张，正像以插天描写山高，并不是真的就高到天上了。
English: But these statements are also a bit exaggerated, just like describing the height of a mountain by inserting the sky, it is not really as high as the sky.

古文：《晋太康地记》曰：水出磬石。《书》所谓泗滨浮磬者也。
现代文：《晋太康地记》说：泗水出产馨石，就是《尚书》所说的泗水岸边有浮磐。
English: "Jin Taikang Ji Ji" said: Surabaya produces gemstones, that is, "Shang Shu" said that there is a floating rock on the shore of Surabaya.

古文：泗水又东南流，丁溪水注之。
现代文：泗水又往东南流，丁溪水注入。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, and Dingxi water is injected.

古文：溪水上承泗水于吕县，东南流，北带广隰，山高而注于泗川。
现代文：溪水上口在吕县承接泗水，水往东南流，从一片辽阔的低地北面绕过，又流经高山脚下而注入泗水。
English: The upper mouth of the stream receives the floodwater in Lv County. The water flows to the southeast, bypassing a vast lowland to the north, and flowing through the foot of the mountain to inject the floodwater.

古文：泗水冬春浅涩，常排沙通道，是以行者多从此溪，即陆机《行思赋》所云：乘丁水之捷岸，排泗川之积沙者也。
现代文：泗水冬春两季经常水浅流滞，常常须排去积沙以保持水道畅通，旅人大多从此溪过往。正如陆机《行思赋》所说的，利用丁水近捷的水岸，来排除泗水的积沙。
English: Surabaya's water is often shallow and stagnant in the winter and spring, and it is often necessary to drain away the accumulated sand to keep the waterway smooth. Most travelers pass through this stream. As the land plane "Going Sifu" said, use the water close to the riverbank to remove the accumulated sand of Surabaya.

古文：晋太元九年，左将军谢玄，于吕梁遣督护闻人奭，用工丸万，拥水立七拖，以利运漕者。
现代文：晋太元九年，左将军谢玄派遣督护闻人爽，在吕梁动用民工九万，在水上筑了七条坝，以利子运粮船只的通航。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Jintai, General Xie Xuan dispatched Wenren Shuang to supervise and protect Luliang. He used 90,000 migrant workers in Luliang and built seven dams on the water to facilitate the navigation of grain ships.

古文：又东南过下邳县西，泗水历县，径葛峄山东，即奚仲所迁邳峄者也。
现代文：又往东南流过下郑县西面，泗水流经卞那县，经过葛峰山东面，就是奚仲迁居的郑峰。
English: It also flows to the southeast down the west side of Zheng County, and flows through Jinnah County, passing through the east side of Gefeng Mountain, which is Zhengfeng where Gongzhong moved.

古文：泗水又东南径下邳县故城西。东南流，沂水流注焉。
现代文：泗水又往东南流经下邱县旧城西面，往东南流，近水流来注入。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the west side of the old city of Qiu County, flows to the southeast, and is injected near the water flow.

古文：故东海属县也。
现代文：下邪是过去东海郡的属县。
English: It used to belong to Donghae County in the past.

古文：应劭曰：奚仲自薛徙居之，故曰下邳也。
现代文：应韵说：奚仲从薛迁居到这里，所以称为下邪。
English: According to the rhyme: Qizhong moved here from Xue, so it is called the lower evil.

古文：汉徙齐王韩信为楚王，都之，后乃县焉，王莽之闰俭矣。东阳郡治。
现代文：汉时把齐王韩信迁到这里为楚王，建都在这里，后来设立为县。王莽时改名为闰俭，是东阳郡的治所。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the King of Qi, Han Xin, was moved here to become the King of Chu, and the capital was built here, and later it was established as a county. Wang Mangshi changed its name to Yue Jian, and it was the capital of Dongyang County.

古文：文颖曰：秦嘉，东阳郡人。
现代文：文颖说：秦嘉，东阳郡人。
English: Wen Ying said, "Qin Jia is from Dongyang County.

古文：今下邳是也。晋灼曰：东阳县本属临淮郡。明帝分属下邳，后分属广陵。
现代文：指的就是今天的下邱，晋灼说：东阳县本属临淮郡，明帝时把它划归下邱，后来又划归广陵。
English: Referring to today's Shimo-Chiu, Jin Jiao said: Dongyang County originally belonged to Linhuai County, but it was transferred to Shimo-Chiu during the Ming Dynasty, and later to Guangling.

古文：故张晏曰：东阳郡，今广陵郡也，汉明帝置下邳郡矣。
现代文：因此张晏说：东阳郡是今天的广陵郡，汉明帝时设置了下那郡。
English: Therefore, Zhang Ye said: Dongyang County is today's Guangling County, which was established by Emperor Han Ming.

古文：城有三重，其大城中，有大司马石苞、镇东将军胡质、司徒王浑、监军石崇四碑。
现代文：城有三重，大城中有大司马石苞、镇东将军胡质、司徒王浑、监军石崇的四座碑。
English: The city is three-storied, and there are four monuments in the large city: Daisima Shikaku, Zhendong Shogun Hu Jian, Shitu Wanghun, and Guanjun Shisong.

古文：南门谓之白门，魏武擒陈宫于此处矣。
现代文：南门称为白门，魏武帝就在这里俘获了陈宫。
English: The south gate is known as the White Gate, and it was here that Emperor Wei Wudi captured Chen Palace.

古文：中城，吕布所守也。
现代文：中城是吕布守卫的。
English: The middle of the city is guarded by Lübbe.

古文：小城，晋中兴北中郎将荀羡郗昙所治也。
现代文：小城是晋中兴时，北中郎将荀羡、都昙驻管的地方。
English: When Jin Zhongxing was in power, Kojo was the place where Kita Chungro was in charge and Tudo was stationed.

古文：昔泰山吴伯武少孤，与弟文章相失二十余年，遇于县市，文章欲欧伯武，心神悲恸，因相寻问，乃兄弟也。
现代文：从前泰山的吴伯武，少年时成了孤儿，与弟弟文章失散二十多年，后来在该县市上相遇。文章想打伯武，但心情悲痛，因此互相询间才知道原是兄弟。
English: Wu Bo Wu, formerly of Mount Tai, became an orphan when he was a boy. He was separated from his younger brother Article for more than 20 years, and later they met in the county town. Article wanted to fight Bo Wu, but he was sad, so they had to ask each other before they knew that they were brothers.

古文：县为沂、泗之会也。
现代文：该县是沂水和泗水的汇流处。
English: This county is the confluence of Surabaya and Surabaya.

古文：又有武原水注之，水出彭城武原县西北会注陂南，径其城西，王莽之和乐亭也，县东有徐庙山，山因徐徙，即以名之也。
现代文：又有武原水注入。武原水发源于彭城武原县西北，注入破南，流经城西，此城就是王莽时的和乐亭。县东有徐庙山，是因为徐人迁徙到这里而得名。
English: There is also the injection of Wuhara water. Wuhara water originates from the northwest of Pengcheng Wuhara County, is injected into the south, and flows through the west of the city. This city is Wang Mangshi's music pavilion. In the east of the county there is Xu Miao Mountain, which got its name because the Xu people migrated here.

古文：山上有石室，徐庙也。
现代文：山上有个石室，就是徐庙。
English: There is a stone room on the mountain, which is the Xu Temple.

古文：武原水又南合武水，谓之泇水。南径刚亭城，又南至下邳入泗，谓之武原水口也。
现代文：武原水又南流与武水汇合，称为伽水，往南流经刚亭城，又往南流到下那注入泗水，汇流处称为武原水口。
English: The southern stream of the Wuhuan Water also merges with the Wuhuan Water, and is called the Wuhuan Water. It flows southward through the city of Gangting, and then flows southward to the Lower Town, where it is infused with the Wuhuan Water. The confluence is called the Wuhuan Water Outlet.

古文：又有桐水，出西北东海容丘县东南，至下邳入泗。
现代文：又有一条水叫桐水，发源于西北方东海容丘县东南，到下邢汇入泗水。
English: There is another water called Tongshui, which originates in the south-east of Yongqiu County in the north-west of the East China Sea, and flows into the lower Yunnan River.

古文：泗水东南径下相县故城东，王莽之从德也。
现代文：泗水往东南流经下相县旧城东面，王莽时改名为从德。
English: The Surabaya River flows southeast through the eastern part of the old city of Shimoaso County. Wang Mangshi changed its name to Congde.

古文：城之西北，有汉太尉陈球墓，墓前有三碑，是弟子管宁、华歆等所造。
现代文：城的西北面有汉朝太尉陈球墓，墓前有三块碑，是他的弟子管宁、华欲等人修造的。
English: In the northwest of the city, there is the tomb of the Han Dynasty Lieutenant Chen Qiu. In front of the tomb, there are three monuments, which were built by his disciples, Guanning and Huayou.

古文：初平四年，曹操攻徐州，破之，拔取虑、睢陵、夏丘等县，以其父避难，被害于此，屠其男女十万，泗水为之不流，自是数县人无行迹，亦为暴矣。
现代文：初平四年，曹操进攻徐州，破城后又连克取虑、唯陵、夏丘等县。因曹操父亲曾在此避难被害，他就屠杀了男女十万余人泄愤，泗水因此堵塞不流，从此以后，这几县行人绝迹，这也太残暴了！
English: At the beginning of the fourth year of the Heian period, Cao Cao attacked Xuzhou, and after destroying the city, he also took over the counties of Kexian, Wei Ling, and Xiaqiu. Because Cao Cao's father had taken refuge here and was killed, he slaughtered more than 100,000 men and women to vent his anger. As a result, the water supply was blocked and did not flow. Since then, pedestrians in these counties have disappeared, which is also too cruel!

古文：泗水又东南，得睢水口。
现代文：泗水又往东南流到睢水口。
English: Surabaya's water flows southeast to Surabaya's mouth.

古文：泗水又径宿预城之西，又径其城南。
现代文：泗水又流经宿预城西面，又流经城南。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the western side of Sukuecho, and also flows through the south of the city.

古文：故下邳之宿留县也，王莽更名之曰康义矣。
现代文：宿预原是下邱的宿留县，王莽时改名为康义。
English: Yakuehara is a sub-prefecture of Shimo-Chou, and Wang Mangshi changed its name to Kangyi.

古文：晋元皇之为安东也，督运军储而为邸阁也。
现代文：晋元帝任安东将军的时候，在此督运军用物资，这里是仓库。
English: When Emperor Jin Yuan was General Anton, he supervised the transportation of military supplies here, and this is the warehouse.

古文：魏太和中，南徐州治，后省为戍。
现代文：魏太和年间，这里是南徐州的治所，后来撤消州治改设边防营垒。
English: During the Wei and Taiping dynasties, it was the administrative center of southern Xuzhou. Later, the administrative center was abolished and replaced with a border fortress.

古文：梁将张惠绍北入，水军所次，凭固斯城，更增修郭堑，其四面引水环之，今城在泗水之中也。
现代文：梁将张惠绍北侵，利用此城的险固，就把水军驻扎在这里，又增修外城，挖掘城壕，引水环绕城的四面，今天城已在泗水之中了。
English: Liang ordered Zhang Huishao to invade the north, and taking advantage of the city's perilous situation, he stationed the navy here. He also expanded the outer city, dug trenches, and diverted water to surround the four sides of the city. Today, the city is already in flood.

古文：又东南入于淮。
现代文：又往东南流，注人淮水。
English: It also flows to the southeast, flooding people.

古文：泗水又东径陵栅南。《西征记》曰：旧陵县之治也。
现代文：泗水又往东流经陵栅南面，《西征记》说：这里是旧陵县的治所。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the southern side of Neungsa. "Westward Conquest" said: This is the old Neungsa county's administrative center.

古文：泗水又东南径淮阳城北。城临泗水，昔訢丘斩饮马斩蛟，眇目于此处也。
现代文：泗水又往东南流经淮阳城北面，城临泗水，昔日苗丘诉在泗水放马饮水，入水斩蛟瞎了眼，就在此处。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the north of Huaiyang City, and the city is adjacent to Surabaya water. In the past, Miaoqiu sued to let horses drink water in Surabaya water, and it was here that he was blinded by the water.

古文：泗水又东南径魏阳城北。城枕泗川，陆机《行思赋》曰：行魏阳之在渚。
现代文：泗水又往东南流经魏阳城北面，城紧靠泗水，陆机《行思赋》说：到了魏阳的水弯边。
English: Surabaya also flows to the southeast through the north of Weiyang City. The city is close to Surabaya, and the land machine "Journey of Thought" said: to the water bend of Weiyang.

古文：故无魏阳，疑即泗阳县故城也，王莽之所谓淮平亭矣。
现代文：过去没有魏阳，可能就是泅阳县的旧城，王莽时叫淮平亭。
English: In the past, there was no Weiyang, it may have been the old city of Fenyang County. Wang Mangxu was called Huai Pingting.

古文：盖魏文帝幸广陵，所由或因变之，未详也。
现代文：也许因为魏文帝临幸广陵时经过这里，因此改变了地名，这就不清楚了。
English: Perhaps because Emperor Weiwen passed by here when he visited the Guangling Mausoleum, he changed the name of the place, which is not clear.

古文：泗水又东径角城北，而东南流注于淮。
现代文：泗水又往东流经角城北面，然后往东南流，注入淮水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastwards through the north of the city, and then flows south-eastwards, injecting Huai Shui.

古文：考诸《他说》，或言泗水于睢陵入淮，亦云于下相入淮，皆非实录也。
现代文：查阅各种地理书，有的说泗水在唯陵注入淮水，也有说在下相注入淮水，都不是确实可靠的说法。
English: Checking various geography books, some say that the Surabaya water is injected into the Huai River in Wuling, and others say that the Huai River is injected into the lower phase, neither of which is a truly reliable statement.

古文：沂水出泰山盖县艾山，郑玄云：出沂山，亦或云临乐山。
现代文：沂水发谏于泰山郡盖县的艾山，郑玄说：沂水发源于沂山，也有说发源于临乐山。
English: Ershui originated from Mount Aishan in Gai County, Taishan County. Zheng Xuan said: Ershui originated from Mount Aishan, and it is also said that Ershui originated from Mount Linle.

古文：水有二源，南源所导，世谓之柞泉；北水所发，俗谓之鱼穷泉。
现代文：沂水有两个源头，南源民间称为柞泉，北源民间称为鱼穷泉。
English: Surabaya water has two sources. The southern source is popularly known as Surabaya spring, and the northern source is popularly known as fish poor spring.

古文：俱东南流，合成一川。
现代文：两条水都往东南流，汇合成一条，在右边与洛预水汇合。
English: Both streams flow to the southeast, merging into one, and merging with the Luo Reservoir on the right.

古文：右会洛预水，水出洛预山，东北流注之。
现代文：洛预水发源于洛预山，往东北流，注入沂水。
English: Luo prefecture water originates from Luo prefecture mountain, flows to the northeast, and is infused with Surabaya water.

古文：沂水东南流，左合桑预水，水北出桑预山，东注于沂水。
现代文：沂水往东南流，左边汇合了桑预水。此水发源于北面的桑预山，东流注入沂水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, and is joined on the left by Sanguishima water. This water originates from the Sanguishima mountain in the north, and the east stream flows into Surabaya water.

古文：沂水又东南，螳蜋水入焉。
现代文：沂水又往东南流，蝗娘水注入。
English: The floodwaters also flowed to the southeast, and the locusts injected fresh water.

古文：水出鲁山，东南流，右注沂水。
现代文：此水发源于鲁山，往东南流，在右边注入沂水。
English: The water originates from the Lushan Mountains and flows south-east, injecting brackish water on the right.

古文：沂水又东径盖县故城南，东会连绵之水。
现代文：沂水又往东流经盖县旧城南面，往东流与连绵之水汇合。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the south of the old city of Gai County, and the eastward flow merges with the continuous water.

古文：水发连绵山，南流，径盖城东而南入沂。
现代文：此水发源于连绵山，往南流经盖城东南，而后南流注入沂水。
English: This water originates from the Lianmian Mountain, flows south through the southeast of Gaicheng, and then the south stream injects the water from the Yangtze River.

古文：沂水又东径浮来之山，《春秋经》书，公及莒人盟于浮来者也，即公来山也。在邳乡西。故号曰邳来之间也。
现代文：沂水又往东流经浮来山。《春秋经》载，公和营人在浮来会盟。浮来山就是公来山，在那乡西，所以称郑来之间。
English: The "Spring and Autumn Annals" recorded that Gongheying people were members of the Fulai Association. Fulai Mountain is Gonglai Mountain, in the west of the township, so it is called Zhenglai.

古文：浮来之水注之。其水左控三川，右会甘水而注于沂。
现代文：浮来水又注入沂水，浮来水左面接纳了三条水，右面与甘水汇合，而后注入沂水。
English: Floating water is then injected with brackish water. The left side of the floating water receives three streams of water, the right side merges with sweet water, and then brackish water is injected.

古文：沂水又南径爆山西，山有二峰，相去一里，双峦齐秀，圆峙若一。
现代文：沂水又往南流经爆山西面，爆山有两座山峰，相距一里，双峰都很秀美，浑圆的山形看来一模一样。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the west side of Mount Haku. Mount Haku has two peaks, one mile apart. Both peaks are beautiful, and the round mountain looks exactly the same.

古文：沂水又东南径东莞县故城西，与小沂水合。
现代文：沂水又往东南流经东莞县日城西面，与小沂水汇合。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the west side of Nicheng, Dongguan County, and merges with Xiaobian water.

古文：孟康曰：县，故郓邑，今郓亭是也。
现代文：孟康说：东莞县是从前的郸邑，就是今天的哪亭。
English: Meng Kang said: Dongguan County is the former Shouyi, which is today's Netei.

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，封城阳共王子吉为东莞侯。
现代文：汉武帝元朔二年前，封城阳共王的儿子吉为东莞侯。
English: Two years before Emperor Hanwu's accession to the throne, Ji, the son of Emperor Chengyang, became the Prince of Dongguan.

古文：魏文帝黄初中，立为东莞郡，《东燕录》谓之团城，刘武帝北伐广固，登之以望王难。魏南青州治。
现代文：魏文帝黄初年间，立为东莞郡。《东燕录》称为团城。刘武帝北伐广固时，登上城关遥望王龙，魏时，这里是南青州的治所。
English: In the early years of Emperor Wenhuang of Wei, it was established as Dongguan County. "Dongyan Lu" is called Tuancheng. When Liu Wudi went to Guanggu in the Northern Expedition, he climbed the city gate to look at Wanglong from afar. In Wei, it was the seat of government of Nanqing Prefecture.

古文：《左氏怜》曰：莒鲁争郓，为日久矣。
现代文：《左氏传》说：营、鲁争夺郸，由来已久。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" says: Ying and Lu have been competing for the throne for a long time.

古文：今城北郓亭是也。
现代文：今天城北的邪亭就是当时的郸。
English: Today's yakitori in the north of the city is the yakitori of that time.

古文：京相璠曰：琅邪姑幕县南四十里员亭，故鲁郓邑，世变其字，非也。
现代文：京相瑶说：琅邪姑幕县南四十里有员亭，就是过去鲁国的郸邑。世人把字改了，是写错的。
English: Beijing's Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs said, "There is a pavilion in the southern forty-fourth of Yagu County, which is the former Lu County. The world has changed the word, but it is a mistake.

古文：《郡国志》：东莞有郓亭，今在团城东北四十里，犹谓之故东莞城矣。
现代文：据《郡国志》东莞有娜亭，今天在团城东北四十里，还把它称为旧东莞城。
English: According to the "County History" of Dongguan, Yu Na Ting, today it is forty miles northeast of Tuancheng, and it is also called the old Dongguan City.

古文：小沂水出黄孤山西，南流径其城北，西南注于沂。
现代文：小沂水发源于黄孤山，往西南流经城北，往西南注入沂水。
English: Xiaobang water originates from Huangloushan Mountain, flows southwest through the north of the city, and injects into the southwest.

古文：沂水又南与间山水合，水出闾山，东南流，右佩二水，总归于沂。
现代文：沂水又往南流与间山水汇合，间山水发源于间山，往东南流，右面引入两条水，一起汇合入沂水。
English: Surabaya's water flows southward and merges with the inter-mountain water. The inter-mountain water originates from the inter-mountain and flows southeastward. Two streams are introduced on the right side and merge into Surabaya's water.

古文：沂水南径东安县故城东，而南合时密水，水出时密山。春秋时莒地。
现代文：沂水往南流经东安县！日城东面，又南流与时密水汇合。时密水发源于时密山，春秋时属营地。
English: Surabaya water flows southward through Dongan County! On the east side of Nichijo, the south stream merges with Shimi water. Shimi water originates from Shimi Mountain and belongs to the camp in spring and autumn.

古文：《左传》，莒人归井仲于鲁，及密而死是也。
现代文：《左传》：营人把共仲送回鲁国，到密时却死了。
English: "Zhuan": The battalion sent Guanzhong back to Lu, but he died when he arrived in Hsinchu.

古文：时密水东流，径东安城南。汉封鲁孝王子强为东安侯。
现代文：时密水往东流经东安城南，汉封鲁孝王的儿子强为东安侯。
English: When the dense water flowed eastward through the south of Dongan City, Qiang, the son of the Han dynasty Lu Xiao Wang, became the lord of Dongan.

古文：时密水又东南流入沂。
现代文：时密水又往东南流入沂水。
English: The dense water then flows southeast into the Surabaya River.

古文：沂水又南，桑泉水北出五女山，东南流，巨围水注之。
现代文：沂水又往南流，桑泉水发源于北方的五女山，往东南流，巨围水注入。
English: Surabaya water flows to the south, and Mulberry Spring water originates from Mount Womei in the north, flows to the southeast, and is infused with water from Jiuwei.

古文：水出巨围之山，东南注于桑泉水。
现代文：巨围水发源于巨围之山，往东南流注入桑泉水。
English: The water originates in the mountains of Jiuwei and flows south-east into the water of the Mulberry Spring.

古文：桑泉水又东南，堂阜水入焉，其水导源堂阜。
现代文：桑泉水又往东南流，堂阜水注入，此水发源于堂阜。
English: The mulberry spring water also flows to the southeast, where it is infused with water from Dongfu. This water originates from Dongfu.

古文：《春秋》庄公九年，管仲请囚，鲍叔受之，及堂阜而税之。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公九年前，管仲请求鲍叔把他关起来，鲍叔就把他囚禁了，但到堂阜就把他释放了。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Zhuang Gong nine years ago, Guanzhong asked Uncle Bao to lock him up. Uncle Bao imprisoned him, but released him when he got to Dongfu.

古文：杜顶曰：东莞蒙阴县西北，有夷吾亭者是也。
现代文：杜预说：东莞蒙阴县西北有夷吾亭。就是这地方。
English: Du Yu said: In the northwest of Mengyin County, Dongguan, there is Yiwu Pavilion. This is the place.

古文：堂阜水又东南注桑泉水。桑泉水又东南径蒙阴县故城北，王莽之蒙恩也。
现代文：堂阜水又往东南流，注入桑泉山，桑泉水又往东南流经蒙阴县旧城北面，王莽时称为蒙恩。
English: The Dongfu water also flows to the southeast, injecting into the Mulberry Spring Mountain, and the Mulberry Spring water also flows to the southeast through the north of the old city of Mengyin County. Wang Mangshi is called Meng En.

古文：又东南与崮水合，水有二源双会，东导一川，俗谓之汶水也。
现代文：桑泉水又往东南流与望尚水汇合，此水有两条源流，东流合为一条，俗称汉水。
English: The southeast stream of the Mulberry Spring Water converges with the Wuchang Water. This water has two headwaters, and the east stream merges into one, commonly known as the Han Water.

古文：东径蒙阴县，注桑泉水。
现代文：往东流经蒙阴后注入桑泉水。
English: It flows eastward through the overcast and is then filled with mulberry spring water.

古文：又东南，卢川水注之。
现代文：桑泉水又往东南流，卢川水注入。
English: The mulberry spring water also flows to the southeast, and the Lu River water is injected.

古文：水出鹿岭山，东南流，左则二川臻凑，右则诸葛泉源，斯奔乱流径城阳之卢县，故盖县之卢上里也。
现代文：卢川水发源于鹿岭山，往东南流，左边有二条水汇入，右边有诸葛泉流来，乱流经过城阳的卢县，这里是从前盖县的卢上里。
English: The Lu River originates in the Luling Mountains and flows southeast. On the left, two rivers flow in, and on the right, the Zhuge Spring flows. The turbulent flow passes through Lu County in Chengyang, and here it is from Lu Shangri in Qiange County.

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，封城阳共王子刘豨为侯国，王莽更名之曰著善矣。
现代文：汉武帝元朔二年前，把这里封给城阳共王的儿子刘稀，立为侯国。王莽时改名为著善。
English: Hanwu Emperor Yuan Shuo two years ago, gave this place to Liu Xie, the son of King Chengyang, and established it as a principality. Wang Mang changed his name to Xie Zhen.

古文：又东南注于桑泉水。桑泉水又东南，右合蒙阴水。
现代文：卢川水又往东南流，注入桑泉水；桑泉水又往东南流，右边与蒙阴水汇合。
English: Lu River water flows to the southeast, injecting mulberry spring water; mulberry spring water flows to the southeast, and merges with cloudy water on the right.

古文：水出蒙山之阴，东北流。
现代文：蒙阴水发源于蒙山北麓，往东北流。
English: The Mengyin Water originates from the northern foot of Mengshan Mountain and flows to the northeast.

古文：昔琅邪承宫避乱此山，立性好仁，不与物竟，人有认其黍者，舍之而去。
现代文：从前琅邪承宫在此避乱，他生性仁厚，不和人争，有人冒认他所种的黍，他也就丢掉离开了。
English: Once upon a time, Zou Yaxingguo took refuge here. He was a benevolent person by nature and did not quarrel with others. When someone pretended to be the grasshopper he had planted, he threw it away and left.

古文：其水东北流，人于沂。
现代文：蒙阴水往东北流，注入沂水。
English: The cloudy water flows to the northeast, injecting turbid water.

古文：沂水又南径阳都县故城东。县，故阳国也。
现代文：沂水又往南流经阳都县旧城东面，阳都县就是从前的阳国。
English: Surabaya also flows southward through the east of the old city of Yangdu County, which was formerly Yangguo.

古文：齐同盟，齐利其地而迁之者也。
现代文：阳国是齐国的盟国，齐国贪图那片土地肥美，就把阳人迁走。
English: Yang Guo was an ally of Qi Guo, and Qi Guo coveted the fertile land and moved the Yang people away.

古文：汉高帝六年，封将军丁复为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这里封给将军丁复，立为侯国。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao assigned this area to the general Ding Fu and established it as a principality.

古文：沂水又南与蒙山水合，水出蒙山之阴，东流，径阳都县南，东注沂水。
现代文：沂水又往南流与蒙山水汇合。蒙山水发源于蒙山的北面，往东流经阳都县南面，又往东注入沂水。
English: The Mengshan Water originates from the northern side of Mengshan Mountain, flows eastward through the southern side of Yangdu County, and then flows eastward into the Ershui River.

古文：沂水又左合温水，水上承温泉陂，而西南入于沂水者也。
现代文：沂水又在左面与温水汇合。温水上口承接温泉破，往西南注入沂水。
English: Surabaya water and warm water meet again on the left side. The hot spring bursts at the mouth of the warm water, and Surabaya water is injected to the southwest.

古文：南过琅邪临沂县东，又南过开阳县东。
现代文：往南流过琅邪郡临沂县东面，又往南流过开阳县东面。
English: It flows southward through the east side of Linyi County, Yuya County, and southward through the east side of Kaiyang County.

古文：沂水南径中丘城西。《春秋》隐公七年。夏，城中丘。
现代文：沂水往南流经中丘城西面，《春秋》：隐公七年夏天，修筑中丘城。
English: Surabaya water flows southward through the west side of Zhongqiu City. "Spring and Autumn": In the summer of the seventh year of Emperor Jingong, the construction of Zhongqiu City began.

古文：《左传》曰：书不时也。
现代文：《左传》说：记录这件事是因为这项工程不合时宜。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: Record this matter because this project is out of time.

古文：沂水又南径临沂县故城东。《郡国志》曰：琅邪有临沂县，故属东海郡。有治水注之。
现代文：沂水又往南流经临沂县旧城东面，《郡国志》说：琅邪有临沂县，从前属于东海郡，有治水在此注入沂水。
English: Surabaya water also flows southward through the eastern side of the old city of Linyi County. "County History" said: Linyi County, formerly belonging to Donghai County, has a flood control to inject Surabaya water here.

古文：水出泰山南武阳县之冠石山。
现代文：治水发源于泰山南武阳县的冠石山。
English: The flood control originated from the Guan Shishan Mountain of Taishan South Wuyang County.

古文：《地理志》曰：冠石山，治水所出。
现代文：《地理志》说：冠石山是治水的发源地。
English: "Geography" said: Guanshishan is the birthplace of flood control.

古文：应劭《地理风俗记》曰，武水出焉，盖水异名也。
现代文：应肋《地理风俗记》说：武水发源于冠石山，那大概是治水的异名吧。
English: According to "Geography and Customs," Wu Shui originated from Guanshi Mountain, which is probably a different name for water control.

古文：东流，径蒙山下，有祠。
现代文：治水往东流经蒙山下，那里有一个祠庙。
English: The flood control water flows eastward through the lower part of Mengshan Mountain, where there is an ancestral temple.

古文：治水又东南径颛臾城北。
现代文：治水又往东南流经撷臾城北面，《郡国志》说：临沂县有撷臾城。
English: The flood control also flows southeast through the north of Linyi City. "County History" said: Linyi County has Linyi City.

古文：《郡国志》曰：县有颛臾城，季氏将伐之，孔子曰：昔者先王以为东蒙主，社稷之臣，何以伐之为？冉有曰：今夫颛臾，固而便近于费者也。
现代文：季氏打算征伐撷臾，孔子说：昔日先王封他为东蒙主，是国家的重臣，为什么要征伐他呢？冉有说：因为撷臾城坚兵利，而且又与费相邻近，不攻下它，恐有后患。
English: Ji's army planned to conquer Fuzhou. Confucius said, "Once upon a time, the king made him the ruler of Eastern Mongolia and the chief minister of the country. Why should he be conquered? Ran once said, "Because Fuzhou is strong and prosperous, and it is close to Fei, if we don't conquer it, we may suffer the consequences."

古文：治水又东南流，径费县故城南。
现代文：治水又往东南流经费县旧城南面。
English: Flood control measures were also taken for the south-eastern flow of water to the south of the old city of Fuxian County.

古文：《地理志》：东海之属县也。
现代文：据《地理志》，费县是东海郡的属县，是鲁国季孙氏的封邑，子路要毁掉它。
English: According to "Geography," Fei County is a subordinate county of Donghai County, a fiefdom of the Jisun clan of the State of Lu. Zi Lu wants to destroy it.

古文：为鲁季孙之邑，子路将堕之，公山弗扰师袭鲁，弗克。后季氏为阳虎所执，弗扰以费畔，即是邑也。
现代文：公山弗扰的军队袭鲁，没有攻克，后来季氏被阳虎拘捕，公山弗扰在费反叛，说的就是这城邑。
English: The army of Gongshan Fuhu attacked Lu, but failed to conquer it. Later, the Ji clan was arrested by the Yanghu, and Gongshan Fuhu rebelled in Fei, which is said to be this town.

古文：汉高帝六年，封陈贺为侯国，王莽更名之曰顺从也。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这里封给陈贺，立为侯国，王莽改为顺从。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Chen He and established it as a principality. Wang Mang changed it to Obedience.

古文：许慎《说文》云，沂水出东海费县东，西入泗，从水，斤声。
现代文：许慎《说文》说：沂水发源于东海费县，往东南流，注入泗水。
English: Xu Shen's "Narrative" said: "The Surabaya water originates from Donghaifei County, flows southeast, and is infused with Surabaya water.

古文：吕忱《字林》，亦言是矣。
现代文：沂字偏旁从水，音斤。吕忱《字林》也这样说。
English: 字偏旁从水,音斤. Lü Zhen "Zhilin" also said so.

古文：斯水东南所注者，沂水在西，不得言东南趣也，皆为谬矣。
现代文：治水往东南注入的是沂水，泗水在西边，不能说向东南流注入泗水，两人都说得不对。
English: Flood control is to inject floodwater to the southeast, floodwater is in the west, it cannot be said to inject floodwater to the southeast, both are wrong.

古文：故世俗谓此水为小沂水。
现代文：所以民间称这条水为小沂水。
English: That's why people call this water Xiaobang water.

古文：治水又东南径访城南。
现代文：治水又往东南流经访城南面。
English: The flood control also flowed to the southeast through the southern part of the city.

古文：《春秋》隐公八年：郑伯请释泰山之把而祀周公，使宛归泰山之祊，而易许田。
现代文：《春秋》：隐公八年前，郑伯要求废弃对泰山的祭祀而祭祀周公，让宛交还泰山的访城，而以近许的田作为交换。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eight years ago, Zheng Bo-Gong asked Zhou Bo-Gong to abandon the worship of Mount Tai and instead worship Zhou Gong. He asked Wan to return Mount Tai's visit to the city in exchange for a nearby field.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：祊，郑祀泰山之邑也。在琅邪费县东南。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：访是郑国祭祀泰山的城邑，在琅邪费县东南。
English: Du Yuan's "Interpretation" said: the visit is to the township of Zheng Guo's worship of Mount Tai, which is located in the southeast of the county.

古文：治水又东南流，注于沂。
现代文：治水又往东南流，注入沂水。
English: The flood control also flows to the southeast, injecting brackish water.

古文：沂水又南径开阳县故城东。县，故鄅国也。
现代文：沂水又往南流经开阳县旧城东面，开阳县是从前的邵国。
English: Surabaya also flows southward through the eastern part of the old city of Kaiyang County, which was formerly Shao's country.

古文：《春秋左传》昭公十八年，邾人袭鄅，尽俘以归，各鄅子曰，余无归矣，从帑于邾是也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：昭公十八年前,郑人袭击部，把部人全都抓起来带回，禹卜子说：我已无处可归了。
English: "The Legend of Spring, Autumn and the Left": Eighteen years ago, Zheng attacked the ministry, arrested all the members and brought them back. Yu Bzi said: I have nowhere to go.

古文：后更名开阳矣。
现代文：于是就随着妻子儿女去邦。后来部改名力开阳。
English: So he went to the country with his wife and children. Later, the club changed its name to Lili Kaiyang.

古文：《春秋》哀公三年，《经》书季孙斯、叔孙州仇帅师城启阳者是矣，县故琅邪郡治也。
现代文：《春秋》：哀公三年前经》载，季孙斯、叔孙州仇率军修筑启阳城，就是这座城。开阳县是过去琅邪郡的治所。
English: "Spring and Autumn: Three Years of Mourning" recorded that Ji Sun Si and his uncle Sun Zhou led a hostile army to build Kaiyang City, which is this city. Kaiyang County used to be the administrative center of Suye County.

古文：又东过襄贲县东，屈从县南，西流，又屈南过郯县西。
现代文：又往东流过襄资县东面，转弯从县南往西流，又转弯向南流过郑县西面，
English: It flows eastward through the east of Xiangzi County, turns from the south of the county to the west, and turns southward through the west of Zheng County.

古文：《鲁连子》称陆子谓齐滑王曰：鲁费之众臣，甲舍于囊贲者也。
现代文：《鲁连子》说：陆子对齐滑王说：鲁国费的家臣们，在襄责建造宅第。
English: "Lu Lian Zi" said: Lu Zi said to Xiao Wang: Lu Guofei's vassals, are in charge of building the mansion.

古文：王莽更名章信也。郯，故国也，少昊之后。
现代文：襄贵，王莽时改名章信，是从前郊的封国，少吴的后代住在这里。
English: Xianggui, which changed its name to Zhangxin at the time of Wang Mang, was a fief from the former suburb, and the descendants of Shao Wu lived here.

古文：《春秋》昭公十七年，郯子朝鲁，公与之宴，昭子叔孙湣问曰：少吴鸟名官，何也？
现代文：《春秋》犷昭公十七年前，炎体子朝拜鲁国，鲁公宴请他。昭公的儿子叔孙蜡问他：少昊以鸟为官名，那是什么缘故？
English: "Spring and Autumn" Seventeen years before the death of King Zhao Zhaohong, Yan Tiao Zi made a pilgrimage to Lu. Lu invited him to a banquet. Zhao Zhaohong's son, Uncle Sun Wax, asked him, "Why did Shao Hao choose a bird as his official name?"

古文：郯子曰：吾祖也，我知之矣。
现代文：郑子答道：少昊是我的祖先，我知道这件事。
English: Zheng Zi replied: Shao Hao is my ancestor, I know this.

古文：黄帝、炎帝以云火纪官，太皞以龙纪，少皞瑞凤鸟，统历鸟官之司，议政斯在，孔子从而学焉。
现代文：黄帝、炎帝以云、火为官名，太睐以龙为官名。少睁立时有凤鸟出现的祥瑞，就以凤鸟掌管历法，并规定了各种鸟官的职司，商议政事都靠他们。孔子也在这里向郊子学习。
English: Emperor Huangdi and Emperor Yan took "cloud" and "fire" as their official names, and Emperor Taizhong took "dragon" as his official name. Emperor Xiangrui, who had a phoenix appear when he was crowned, used the phoenix to control the calendar, and set out the duties of various bird officials, who were responsible for discussing political affairs. Confucius also learned from the countryside here.

古文：既而告人曰，天子失官，学在四夷者也。
现代文：不久他对人说：天子把典章制度都丢了，关于职官的学问现在反而向四夷学习。
English: Before long, he said to someone, "The Emperor has lost the system of awards. Instead, we should learn from the Shi'i people about the knowledge of officials."

古文：《竹书纪年》，晋烈公四年，越子末句灭郯，以郯子鸪归。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋烈公四年前，越子末句灭掉郊国，俘虏了郊子鸽回来。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Four years ago, Prince Jin Rong, the last sentence of Yue Zi wiped out the suburbs and captured the suburban pigeons.

古文：县，故旧鲁也。东海郡治。秦始皇以为郯郡。汉高帝二年，更从今名，即王莽之沂平者也。
现代文：襄责县是从前鲁国地方，是东海郡的治所，秦始皇立为郑郡，汉高帝二年前，改为今名，就是王莽时的沂平。
English: Xiangren County is a former part of the State of Lu. It is the seat of Donghai County. Qin Shihuang established it as Zheng County. Two years ago, Emperor Han Gao changed it to its current name, which is Wang Mangshi's Suiping.

古文：又南过良城县西，又南过下邳县西，南入于泗。
现代文：又往南流过良城县西面，又往南流过下郑县西面，往南注人泗水。
English: It also flows southward through the west side of Liangcheng County, and southward through the west side of Zheng County to the south.

古文：《春秋左传》曰：昭公十三年秋，晋侯会吴子于良，吴子辞水道不可以行，晋乃还。
现代文：《春秋左传》说：昭公十三年秋，晋侯在良与吴子会晤，吴子以水路不通为借口推辞了，晋侯就回去了。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says: In the autumn of the 13th year of Zhaogong, Jin Hou met with Wu Zi in Liang. Wu Zi refused on the pretext that the waterway was impassable, and Jin Hou went back.

古文：是也。《地理志》曰：良城，王莽更名承翰矣。
现代文：《地理志》说：良城，王莽时改名为承翰。
English: "Geography" said: Liangcheng, Wang Mangshi changed his name to Chenghan.

古文：沂水于下邳县北，西流分为二水，一水于城北西南入泗，一水径城东屈从县南，亦注泗，谓之小沂水。
现代文：沂水在下邵县北面向西流，分为两条水，一条在城北向西南注入泗水，另代条流经城东再拐弯流过县南，也注入泗水，称为小沂水。
English: Surabaya water flows westward in the north of Shao County, and is divided into two streams. One stream injects Surabaya water to the southwest in the north of the city, and another stream flows through the east of the city and then flows through the south of the county, also injecting Surabaya water, known as small Surabaya water.

古文：水上有桥，徐、泗间以为妃。昔张子房遇黄石公于圮上，即此处也。
现代文：水上有一座桥，徐、泅一带称桥为坦，从前张子房在纪上遇黄石公，就是这地方。
English: There is a bridge over the water. The area around Xu and Lu is called Tan Bridge. This is the place where Zhang Zifang met Huang Shiguo in the past.

古文：洙水自山西北径盖县。
现代文：建安二年,曹操在这里围困吕布，引沂、洒之水灌城，而擒了他。
English: In the second year of Jian'an, Cao Cao besieged Lvbu here, dragged the anchor, sprinkled water on the city, and killed him.

古文：汉景帝中五年，封后兄王信为侯国。又西径泰山东平阳县。《春秋》宣公八年冬，城平阳。
现代文：洙水发源于泰山郡盖县的临乐山，《地理志》说：临乐山是洙水的发源地，洙水往西北流到盖，注入泗水，有人把洒字写作池字，把字写错了。洙水从山间往西北流经盖县，汉景帝中元五年冬，修筑平阳城。
English: Surabaya originated from Linle Mountain in Gai County, Taishan County. "Geography" said: Linle Mountain is the birthplace of Surabaya. Surabaya water flows northwest to Gai, where it is infused with Surabaya water. Some people wrote the word "pool" and wrote the word incorrectly. Surabaya water flowed from the mountains to the northwest through Gai County. In the winter of the 5th year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Jing built Pingyang City.

古文：杜预曰：今泰山平阳县是也。
现代文：杜预说：平阳就是今天泰山郡的平阳县。
English: Du Yu said: Pingyang is today's Pingyang County in Taishan County.

古文：河东有平阳，故此加东矣。
现代文：河东也有平阳县，所以此处加了东字。
English: There is also Pingyang County to the east of the river, so the word "East" was added here.

古文：晋武帝元康九年，改为新泰县也。
现代文：晋武帝元康九年改名为新泰县。
English: It was renamed Xintai County in the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Jingu.

古文：西南至卞县入于泗。
现代文：往西南流到卞县，注人泗水。
English: It flows to the southwest to Minxian County and pours water on people.

古文：洙水西南流，盗泉水注之。
现代文：洙水往西南流，盗泉水注入。
English: The brackish water flows to the southwest, and the stolen spring water is injected.

古文：泉出卞城东北卞山之阴。
现代文：泉水发源于卞城东北、卞山的北面。
English: The spring water originates in the northeast of Lushan, north of Lushan Mountain.

古文：《尸子》曰：孔子至于暮矣而不宿，于盗泉渴矣而不饮，恶其名也。
现代文：《尸子》说：孔子走到胜母县，天晚了，却不愿住宿；经过盗泉，口渴了，却不肯饮水，那是因为他讨厌这两个名字的缘故。
English: "The Corpse" said: Confucius walked to Shengmao County, it was late in the day, but he did not want to stay; after stealing a spring, he was thirsty, but refused to drink water, it was because he hated these two names.

古文：故《论语比考谶》曰：水名盗泉，仲尼不漱。即斯泉矣。
现代文：所以《论语比考俄》说：水名盗泉，仲尼不漱，指的就是这泉水。
English: Therefore, "The Analects of Confucius" says: "The name of the water is stolen spring, Zhongni does not wash, referring to this spring water."

古文：西北流，注于洙水。
现代文：盗泉水往西北流，注入洙水。
English: The stolen spring water flows to the northwest and is injected with brackish water.

古文：洙水又西南流于卞城西，西南入泗水。乱流西南，至鲁县东北，又分为二水。
现代文：洙水又往西南流到卞城西面，往西南注入泗水，往西南乱流到鲁县东北，又分为两条水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southwest to the west of Surabaya city, injects Surabaya water to the southwest, and flows to the southwest to the northeast of Lu County, and is divided into two waters.

古文：水侧有故城，两水之分会也。
现代文：水旁有旧城，是两条水的分水处。
English: There is an old town next to the water, which is the dividing point of the two rivers.

古文：洙水西北流，径孔里北，是谓洙泗之间矣。
现代文：洙水往西北流经孔里北面，这就是所谓沫、洒之间。
English: Surabaya water flows northwest through the north side of the hole, this is the so-called foam, sprinkling.

古文：春秋之浚洙，非谓始导矣，盖深广之耳。
现代文：《春秋》说的浚沫，不是说那时开始开凿，而是进行了加深拓宽的疏浚工程。
English: The dredging foam mentioned in "Spring and Autumn" does not mean that excavation began at that time, but that a dredging project of deepening and widening was carried out.

古文：洙水又西南，枝津出焉。又南径瑕丘城东，而南入石门，古结石为水门，跨于水上也。
现代文：洙水又往西南流，分出了支流，又往南流经瑕丘城东面，而后南流进入石门，古时候用石块结成水门，横跨在水上。
English: Surabaya's water flows to the southwest, creating a tributary, and then flows south through the eastern side of Keqiu City, and then flows south into Shimen. In ancient times, stones were used to make gates that spanned the water.

古文：赵肃侯二十年，韩将举与齐魏战于乘丘，即此县也。汉武帝元朔五年，封中山靖王子刘将夜为侯国也。
现代文：洙水往西南流，世人称为杜武沟。洙水又往西南流，经过南平阳县的显间亭西面，那就是郑邑。《春秋》：襄公二十一年把这里封给中山靖王的儿子刘将夜，立为侯国。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southwest, known to the world as Duwugou. Surabaya water also flows to the southwest, passing to the west of Xianma Pavilion in Nanpingyang County, that is, Zhengyi. "Spring and Autumn": In the 21st year, Prince Xiang gave this place to Liu Zhaoye, the son of Zhongshan Jingwang, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：洸水又东南流，注于洙。
现代文：洗水又往东南流，注入洙水。
English: The wash water then flows to the southeast, where it is injected with brackish water.

古文：洙水又南至高平县，南入于泗水。
现代文：洙水又往南流到高平县，往南注入泗水。
English: Surabaya water also flows southward to Gaoping County, and Surabaya water is injected to the south.

古文：西有茅乡城，东去高平三十里。
现代文：这里西有茅乡城，东距高平三十里。
English: To the west is Mao Xiangcheng, and to the east is Gaoping, 30 miles away.

古文：京相璠曰：今高平县西三十里，有故茅乡城者也。
现代文：京相播说：今高平县西三十里有旧茅乡城。
English: Beijing's foreign minister said: "There is an old Mao Township Town in the west 30 of Gaoping County.

