古文：赵贵，字元宝，天水南安人也。
现代文：赵贵，字元宝，天水南安人。
English: Zhao Gui, Zi Yuan Bao, Tianshui Nan'an people.

古文：祖仁，以良家子镇武川，因家焉。
现代文：祖父赵仁，以良家子弟的身份从军镇守武川，因而在那里安家。
English: Grandfather Zhao Ren, as the son of a good family, guarded Takekawa from the military town, and thus settled there.

古文：贵少有节概，尔硃荣以为别将，从讨元颢有功，赐爵燕乐县子。
现代文：他从小就有道德气概，尔朱荣任他为别将，随尔朱荣讨伐元颢立有功劳，被赐爵为燕乐县子。
English: He had moral courage since he was a child. Lv Zhu Rong appointed him as his second-in-command. Lv Zhu Rong fought against the Yuan Dynasty and was awarded a knighthood as a son of Yanle County.

古文：从贺拔岳平关中，累迁大都督。
现代文：他跟随贺拔岳平定关中，升任为大都督。
English: He followed He Baduyue in subduing Dingguanzhong and was promoted to the position of grand governor.

古文：岳为侯莫陈悦所害，将吏奔败，莫有守者。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦害死，将领和官吏大多逃散，没有能坚守军营的。
English: He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, most of the generals and officials fled, and no one was able to hold on to the military camp.

古文：谓其党曰： 吾闻仁义岂有常哉，行之则为君子，违之则为小人。
现代文：他对贺拔岳的部下说 ：我听说仁义不管怎么也不可能经常保留在一个人身上，实行仁义你就可以成为君子，违背仁义则成为小人。
English: He said to He Baturake's subordinates: I heard that no matter what, benevolence and righteousness cannot always be kept in one person. If you practice benevolence and righteousness, you can become a gentleman, but if you violate benevolence and righteousness, you will become a villain.

古文：硃伯厚、王修感意气微恩，尚能蹈履名节，况吾等荷贺拔公国士之遇，宁可自同众人乎？ 
现代文：朱伯厚、王修还能被意气和微小的恩德所激发，更何况我们这些人蒙受贺拔公国士一样的待遇，怎么能同一般人一样呢？ 
English: Zhu Bohou and Wang Xiu can still be inspired by the spirit and tiny grace, not to mention that we are treated the same as the princes of Hebei, how can we be the same as ordinary people?

古文：因涕泣嘘唏，从之者五十人。
现代文：因而失声痛哭，跟从他的有五十个人。
English: And he wept aloud, and there followed him fifty men.

古文：乃诣悦诈降，悦信之。因请收葬岳，言辞慷慨，悦壮而许之。
现代文：他们到侯莫陈悦那里诈称投降，侯莫陈悦相信了，因而他请求埋葬贺拔岳，言词慷慨激昂。
English: They went to Hou Mo Chen Yue and pretended to surrender. Hou Mo Chen Yue believed them, so he asked for the burial of He Batur, and his words were impassioned.

古文：贵乃收岳尸还营，与寇洛等奔平凉，共图拒悦。
现代文：侯莫陈悦称赞他的行为并同意他的请求。他便将贺拔岳的尸体运回军营，与寇洛等人逃向平凉，共同谋图对抗侯莫陈悦。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue praised his actions and agreed to his request. He then transported He Batyue's body back to the military camp, fled to Pingliang with Kolo and others, and together plotted against Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：贵乃首议迎周文帝。
现代文：他首次提议迎接周文帝宇文泰。
English: For the first time, he proposed to welcome Zhou Wendi and Yu Wente.

古文：周文至，以贵为大都督，领府司马。
现代文：宇文泰率军来到后，任赵贵为大都督，领府司马。
English: After the arrival of the army led by Uwentai, Zhao Gui was appointed as the grand governor and the leader of the prefectural government.

古文：悦平，行秦州事。
现代文：侯莫陈悦被荡平，他代管秦州的政务。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue was purged, and he took over the administration of Qin State.

古文：后以预立魏文帝勋，进爵为公。
现代文：后来，因参与拥立魏元帝元宝炬的功劳，被晋爵为公。
English: Later, he was given a peerage for his participation in the establishment of the Wei-Yuan Emperor Yuan Baotong.

古文：梁仚定称乱河右，以贵为陇西行台讨破之。
现代文：梁定在黄河以西作乱，朝廷命赵贵为陇西行台，打败乱军。
English: Liang Ding caused a disturbance west of the Yellow River, and the imperial court ordered Zhao Gui to march west to defeat the rebels.

古文：从复弘农，战沙苑，进爵中山郡公。
现代文：他又率军收复弘农，战于沙苑，因立功晋爵为中山郡公。
English: He also led the army to recover Hongnong, fought in Sha Yuan, and was promoted to the peerage of Zhongshan County for his meritorious service.

古文：河桥之战，贵与怡峰为左军，战不利，先还。
现代文：河桥之役，他与怡峰为左军，作战失利，提前退还。
English: In the Battle of Heqiao, he and Yifeng were in the left army. They lost the battle and were sent back ahead of time.

古文：及高仲密以北豫州降，周文迎之，与东魏人战于芒山。
现代文：高仲密率北豫州投降，宇文泰派军接应他，与东魏的军队在邙山作战。
English: Gao Zhongmi led Beiyuzhou to surrender, and Uwentai sent troops to meet him, and fought against the Eastern Wei army in Lushan.

古文：贵为左军，失律，坐免官。
现代文：他为左军，因违犯军律，坐罪被免去官职。
English: He was a member of the Left Army and was removed from his post for violating military regulations.

古文：寻复官爵。
现代文：不久，又恢复了官职爵位。
English: Shortly afterwards, his official title and rank were restored.

古文：建德初，周、齐通好，齐人乃归其柩。
现代文：后来，被封为柱国大将军，赐姓乙佛氏。
English: Later, he was given the title of Zhu Guodao (general of Zhu Guodao) and the surname of Yifo.

古文：其子询表请赠谥。诏赠大将军、大都督、四州诸军事、岐州刺史，谥曰敬。
现代文：孝闵帝即皇帝位，建立北周，他又升任为大冢宰，晋封为楚国公，食邑万户。当初，他与独孤信等与宇文泰都是平辈相称。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun, that is, the emperor, established the Northern Zhou Dynasty. He was also promoted to the position of grand steward, and promoted to the prince of the State of Chu, and served thousands of households. At the beginning, he and Du Guoxin, etc. were on a par with Yu Wentai.

古文：李贤，字贤和，自云陇西成纪人，汉骑都尉陵之后也。
现代文：晋公宇文护掌管朝政，他以元勋自居，常泱泱不快，与独孤信密谋杀死宇文护，被开府宇文盛告发，被处死。李贤，字贤和，自称是陇西成纪人，汉代骑都尉李陵的后代。
English: Jin Gong Uwenshu was in charge of the imperial government. He regarded himself as the founder of the dynasty, and was often unhappy. He conspired with a solitary confidant to murder Uwenshu. He was denounced by the head of the government, Uwensheng, and was executed. Li Xian and Zi Xianhe claimed to be the descendants of the Shaanxi Cheng Ji Ren and the Han Dynasty cavalry captain Li Ling.

古文：陵没匈奴，子孙因居北狄。
现代文：李陵死在匈奴，他的子孙因而居住在北部夷族生活的地方。
English: Li Ling died in the Xiongnu, and his descendants live in the northern part of the country, where the Yi people live.

古文：后随魏南迁，复归氵幵、陇。
现代文：后来，北魏南迁，又归、陇管辖。
English: Later, Northern Wei moved to the south, and it came under the jurisdiction of Shandong.

古文：曾祖富，魏太武时以子都督讨两山屠各，殁于阵，赠宁西将军、陇西郡守。
现代文：他的曾祖李富，在魏太武帝时任子都督讨伐两山屠各，在战场上牺牲，被追赠为宁西将军、陇西郡守。
English: His great-grandfather Li Fu, who was appointed as the governor of the two mountains of Tu and died on the battlefield, was posthumously awarded the title of Ningxi General and Shaanxi County Governor.

古文：大统末，以贤兄弟著勋，追赠司空公。
现代文：大统末年，因为李贤兄弟功勋卓著，朝廷又追赠李富为司空公。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Taizong, because of the outstanding merits of the Li Xian brothers, the imperial court posthumously awarded Li Fu as the crown prince.

古文：贤幼有志节，不妄举动。
现代文：李贤从小就有志气节操，从不轻举妄动。
English: Li Xian has had the spirit of self-restraint since he was a child, and has never acted rashly.

古文：尝出游，逢一老人，鬓眉皓白，谓曰： 我年八十，观士多矣，未有如卿。
现代文：他曾经出游，遇见一位老人，须眉尽白，对他说： 我已八十岁了，相过许多人，没有像你这样的。
English: Once, when he was on a trip, he met an old man with a white brow and said to him: "I am eighty years old, I have met many people, but no one like you.

古文：卿必为台牧，努力勉之。 
现代文：你将来必定为台阁或者牧守，望努力加勉。 
English: In the future, you will surely work hard to improve yourself as a leader or shepherd.

古文：九岁，从师受业，略观大指而已。
现代文：九岁时从师受业读书，他只是粗略地了解书中的主要内容。
English: At the age of nine, he was apprenticed to a teacher, and he only had a rough understanding of the main content of the book.

古文：或讥其不精，答曰： 贤岂能领徒授业？
现代文：有人批评他读书不精，他回答说 ：我将来怎么能领着学生去传授学业？
English: When someone criticised him for not being a good reader, he replied: "How can I lead students to teach in the future?

古文：至如忠孝之道，实铭于心。 
现代文：至于忠君孝友之道，实已铭记在心。 
English: As for the way of loyalty, filial piety and friendship, I have really kept it in my heart.

古文：问者惭服。
现代文：问他的人听了既惭愧又佩服。
English: Those who asked him were both ashamed and impressed.

古文：十四遭父忧，抚训诸弟，友爱甚笃。
现代文：十四岁那年父亲去世，他抚养教育兄弟们，十分真诚友爱。
English: His father died when he was fourteen, and he raised and educated his brothers with sincere love.

古文：魏永安中，万俊丑奴据岐、泾等州反，孝庄遣尔硃天光击破之。
现代文：北魏永安年间，万俟丑奴占据岐州、泾州等地反叛朝廷，孝庄帝派尔朱天光前往讨伐。
English: During the Northern Wei Yong'an period, thousands of ugly slaves occupied Qizhou, Zhangzhou and other places to rebel against the imperial court, and Emperor Xiaozhuang sent Zhu Tianguang to fight.

古文：天光令都督长孙邪利行原州事，以贤为主簿。
现代文：天光命都督长孙邪利代行原州事务，命李贤任主簿。
English: Tian Guang ordered the governor of the capital, Sun Yali, to act on behalf of the original state affairs, and ordered Li Xian to be the main bookkeeper.

古文：累迁高平令。
现代文：他又升任为高平县县令。
English: He was also promoted to be the county magistrate of Gaoping County.

古文：贺拔岳为侯莫陈悦所害，周文帝西征，贤与其弟远、穆等密应侯莫陈崇。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，周文帝宇文泰率军西征，讨伐侯莫陈悦。李贤与他的弟弟李远、李穆等暗中接应侯莫陈崇。
English: He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, and Zhou Wen Diyu Wentai led the army to the west to fight Hou Mo Chen Yue. Li Xian and his brother Li Yuan and Li Mu secretly followed Hou Mo Chen Chong.

古文：以功授都督，仍守原州。
现代文：他因立功被授予都督，仍守卫原州。
English: He was awarded the title of governor due to his meritorious service, and continued to defend Wonju.

古文：及大军至秦州，悦弃城走。
现代文：宇文泰率大军到达秦州，侯莫陈悦弃城逃走。
English: Yu Wentai and his army reached Qinzhou, and Hou Mo Chen Yue abandoned the city and fled.

古文：周文命兄子导追之，以贤为先锋，至牵屯山及之。
现代文：宇文泰派他哥哥的儿子宇文导追赶，宇文导以李贤为先锋，到牵屯山追上了侯莫陈悦。
English: Uwentai sent his brother's son, Uwendou, to chase after him. With Li Xian as his vanguard, Uwendou caught up with Hou Mo and Chen Yue at Tuotun Mountain.

古文：以功授假节、抚军将军、大都督。
现代文：因立功被授予假节、抚军将军、大都督。
English: For his meritorious service, he was awarded the titles of Fuxi, General of the General Staff, and Governor of the Capital.

古文：魏孝武西迁，周文令贤率骑迎卫，封上邽县公。
现代文：魏孝武帝西入关中，宇文泰命李贤率领骑兵迎接并护卫，他被封为上圭阝县公。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu entered the western gate, he was greeted and escorted by cavalry led by Li Xian, who was appointed as the governor of Shangguizhou County.

古文：俄授左大都督，还镇原州。
现代文：不久，又授予左大都督，奉命镇守原州。
English: Soon after, he was also awarded the title of Zuodai-totoku and ordered to defend Wonju.

古文：大统二年，州人豆卢狼害都督大野树兒等，据州城反。
现代文：西魏大统二年，原州人豆卢狼杀死都督大野树儿等，占据州城造反。
English: In the second year of the Great Reunification of the Western Wei Dynasty, the Yuanzhou people, the Doulu wolves, killed the governor Ohno Shuer and others and occupied the state capital to rebel.

古文：贤率敢死士一战败之，狼斩关遁走，贤追斩之。
现代文：李贤率领敢死的勇士一战即把叛军打败，豆卢狼夺关逃走，李贤挥军追赶，将他杀死。
English: Li Xian led the death-defying warriors to defeat the rebels in the first battle, and the Doulu wolves took Guan and fled. Li Xian's army chased and killed him.

古文：八年，授原州刺史。
现代文：大统八年，朝廷命他为原州刺史。
English: In the eighth year of unification, the imperial court ordered him to write the history of Wonju.

古文：周文之奉魏太子西巡，至原州，遂幸贤第，让齿而坐，行乡饮酒礼。
现代文：宇文泰护卫魏太子西巡到达原州，住在李贤的家里，宾主互相谦让，按年纪大小作为排列次序，并按当地的礼节饮酒。
English: When Wu Wentai, the bodyguard of Wei Taishi, arrived in Wonju on his western tour, he stayed at Li Xian's home. The guests were courteous to each other, arranged in order of age, and drank alcohol according to local etiquette.

古文：后帝复至原州，令贤乘路车，备仪服，以诸侯会遇礼相见。
现代文：后来，废帝又到原州，命李贤坐上自己的辂车，为他备下礼服，用会见诸侯的礼仪与他相见。
English: Later, the deposed emperor went to Wonju again and ordered Li Xian to sit in his carriage, prepared a ceremonial dress for him, and met him with the etiquette of meeting princes.

古文：然后幸贤第，欢宴终日，凡是亲族，颁赐有差。
现代文：然后来到李贤家，欢宴终日。对李贤的亲属，都给予不同的赏赐。
English: Then they came to Li Xian's house and feasted all day. Different rewards were given to Li Xian's relatives.

古文：恭帝元年，进爵西河郡公。
现代文：恭帝元年，他晋爵为西河郡公。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Goryeo, he was promoted to the peerage as the Prince of Saihe County.

古文：后以弟子植被诛，贤坐除名。
现代文：后来，他因兄弟的儿子李植犯罪被诛杀，受牵连被免官除名。
English: Later, he was implicated in the murder of his brother's son, Li Zhi, and was removed from his post.

古文：保定二年，诏复贤官爵，仍授瓜州刺史。
现代文：北周保定二年，朝廷下诏恢复他的官爵，任他为瓜州刺史。
English: In the second year of Northern Zhou Baoding, the imperial court issued an edict to restore his official title, and appointed him as the governor of Guazhou.

古文：武帝及齐王宪之在襁褓，不利居宫中，周文令于贤家处之，六载乃还宫。
现代文：王宇文宪幼小的时候，不利于住在宫中，宇文泰让他们住在李贤家，过了六年才回到皇宫。
English: When Wang Yuwenxian was a child, it was not conducive to live in the palace. Wu Wentai let them live in Li Xian's house, and it took six years to return to the palace.

古文：因赐贤妻吴姓宇文氏，养为侄女，赐与甚厚。
现代文：因而，朝廷赐李贤的妻子吴氏姓宇文氏，当作皇后的侄女，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: As a result, the imperial court gave Li Xian's wife, a member of the Wu clan, surnamed Uwen, a very rich reward as the queen's niece.

古文：及武帝西巡原州，幸贤第，诏曰： 朕昔冲幼，爰寓此州。
现代文：武帝西巡来到原州，亲临李贤的府第，颁布诏书说 ：我年幼的时候，曾寄寓在这里。
English: Emperor Wu came to Wonju on a western tour, visited Li Xian's residence in person, and issued an edict saying: When I was young, I used to live here.

古文：使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、瓜州诸军事、瓜州刺史贤，斯土良家，勋德兼著，受委居朕，辅导积年。
现代文：使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、瓜州诸军事、瓜州刺史李贤，是这里的良善人家，功勋和道德都很卓著，受先帝委托留我居住，对我辅导教育好多年。
English: Zhi Jizhi Jie, Zhengyi General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, Grand Governor, Guazhou Military, Guazhou Shishi Li Xian, are good people here, with outstanding merits and morals. They were commissioned by the former emperor to keep me living and to tutor and educate me for many years.

古文：念其规弼，功劳甚茂。
现代文：顾念他对我的规劝帮助，功劳极为突出。
English: Considering his help in persuading me, his contribution is outstanding.

古文：今巡抚届此，不殊代邑，举目依然，益增旧想。
现代文：现在我巡视到这里，无异于到达代邑。举目四望，依然如旧，更增加了我对昔日的怀念。
English: Now that I have visited here, it is no different from arriving at Daimyo. Looking around, it is still the same as before, and it has increased my nostalgia for the past.

古文：贤虽无属籍，朕处之若亲，凡厥昆季，乃至子侄等，可并预宴赐。 
现代文：李贤虽然没有贵族大姓的名籍，但我与他相处就像亲人一样。他所有的兄弟以及子侄等人，都可以一起参加宴会并接受赏赐。 
English: Although Li Xian does not have a noble surname, I get along with him like a relative. All his brothers and nephews can attend the banquet together and receive rewards.

古文：于是令中侍上士尉迟恺往瓜州，降玺书劳贤。
现代文：于是，武帝命中侍上士尉迟恺到瓜州颁布玺书，慰劳李贤。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu ordered the lance corporal to belatedly arrive in Guazhou to issue the imperial edict and comfort Li Xian.

古文：赐衣一袭及被褥，并御所服十三环金带一腰、中厩马一疋、金装鞍勒、杂彩五百段、银钱一万。
现代文：赐给他一套衣服和被褥，以及武帝佩带的十三环金带一根、御厩中的马一匹、用金子装饰的马鞍和笼头、各种丝绸五百段、银钱一万。
English: He was given a set of clothes and bedding, as well as a thirteen-ring gold belt worn by Emperor Wu, a horse in the stable, a saddle and cage head decorated with gold, five hundred pieces of various silks, and ten thousand silver coins.

古文：赐贤弟申国公穆亦如之。
现代文：赏赐他的弟弟申国公李穆的东西也和这一样。
English: The same thing happened to his younger brother, Sheng Guogong Li Mu.

古文：子侄男女中外诸孙三十四人各赐衣一袭。
现代文：他的子侄不分男女以及孙子外孙等三十四人都赐给衣服一套。
English: Thirty-four of his male and female nephews and nieces, as well as his grandchildren and great-grandchildren, were all given a set of clothes.

古文：拜贤甥库狄乐为仪同。
现代文：封他的外甥厍狄乐为仪同。
English: He was accompanied by his nephew, Zou Di Le.

古文：贤门生昔经侍奉者，二人授大都督，四人授帅都督，六人别将。奴已免贱者五人，授军主；未免贱者十二人，酬替放之。
现代文：他的门生过去曾经侍奉过武帝的，有两个人被授予大都督，四个人被授予帅都督，六个人为别将，已经免去奴隶身份的五名仆人被封为军主；还没有免去奴隶身份的十二名仆人，给予报酬，将他们放还。
English: Of his disciples who had served Emperor Wu in the past, two were awarded the title of grand-duke, four were awarded the title of grand-duke, six were awarded the title of second-in-command, five servants who had been freed from slavery were awarded the title of warlord, and twelve servants who had not yet been freed from slavery were rewarded and released.

古文：四年，王师东讨，西道空虚，虑羌、浑侵扰，乃授贤河州总管。
现代文：保定四年，周军东讨，西部边境空虚，朝廷担心羌、浑等夷族侵扰，便命李贤为河州总管。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, Zhou's army was on the march to the east, the western border was empty, and the imperial court was worried about the intrusion of barbarians such as the Yao and Hun, so it appointed Li Xian as the chief administrator of Hezhou.

古文：河州旧非总管，至是创置。
现代文：河州过去没有总管，这时开始设置。
English: There was no head office in Hezhou in the past, but it was set up at this time.

古文：贤乃大营屯田，以省运漕，多设斥候，以备寇戎，于是羌、浑敛迹。
现代文：李贤在这里大量屯田，以节省漕运的开支。又设立许多哨卡，以防备敌人进攻。于是，羌人和浑人都销声匿迹。
English: Li Xian built a large number of military camps here in order to save the cost of transportation. He also set up many sentry posts to prevent the enemy from attacking. As a result, the Xiong people and the Huns all disappeared.

古文：五年，宕昌寇边，乃于洮州置总管府以镇遏之。
现代文：保定五年，宕昌人侵犯边境，朝廷便在洮州设置总管府以遏制他们。
English: In Baoding five years later, when the Tang and Chang people invaded the border, the imperial court set up a general administration office in Zhangzhou to contain them.

古文：遂废河州总管，改授贤洮州总管。
现代文：因此，撤去河州总管，改授李贤为洮州总管。
English: Therefore, the director of Hezhou was removed, and Li Xian was re-assigned as the director of Ganzhou.

古文：属羌寇侵扰，贤频破之，虏遂震慑，不敢犯塞。
现代文：羌人侵扰，李贤多次将他们打败，夷族震骇，不敢再侵犯边塞。
English: Li Xian defeated the intruders many times, and the barbarians were so shocked that they did not dare to invade the border fortress again.

古文：俄废洮州总管，还于河州置总管府，复以贤为之。
现代文：不久，朝廷又废除洮州总管，仍在河州设置总管府，仍命李贤任总管。
English: Soon after, the imperial court abolished the Zhangzhou General Administration and still set up the General Administration Office in Hezhou. Li Xian was still appointed as the General Administration.

古文：武帝思贤旧恩，征拜大将军。
现代文：武帝思念李贤过去的恩德，将他调回京城，封为大将军。
English: Emperor Wu, thinking of Li Xian's past benevolence, transferred him back to Beijing and made him a general.

古文：于京师薨，帝亲入，哀动左右。
现代文：他在京中去世，武帝亲去祭吊，悲哀痛苦的情形感动了周围的人。
English: He died in Kyoto, Emperor Wu personally went to the funeral, and the sad and painful situation moved the people around him.

古文：询弟崇，字永隆，英果有筹算，胆力过人。
现代文：朝廷追赠李贤为使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、十州诸军事、原州刺史，谥号为桓。李崇，字永隆，李贤的第五个儿子。
English: The Imperial Court posthumously presented Li Xian with the titles of Envoy, General of the Column, Grand Governor, Military Commander of the Ten Provinces, and Historian of the Former Provinces, with the posthumous name of Huan. Li Chong, also known as Yonglong, was the fifth son of Li Xian.

古文：周元年，以父勋，封回乐县侯。
现代文：英勇果敢，深有谋算，胆量和力气都超过常人。北周初建，因父亲李贤的功勋，朝廷封他为乐县侯。
English: He was brave and daring, had a deep sense of strategy, and his courage and strength exceeded that of an ordinary person. He was born in the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and because of the merits of his father, Li Xian, the court made him the lord of Le County.

古文：时年尚小，拜爵日，亲族相贺，宗独泣下。
现代文：这时他年纪还小，拜受封爵的那一天，亲友们都来祝贺，他却独自潸然落泪。
English: At that time he was still young. On the day he was knighted, his relatives and friends came to congratulate him, but he burst into tears all alone.

古文：贤问之，对曰： 无勋于国，幼少封侯，当报主恩，不得终于孝养，是以悲耳。 
现代文：李贤问他原因，他答道 ：我对国家没有贡献，从小就封为侯爵，应当报答朝廷的恩德，因而，不能孝敬奉养父母，所以悲哀。 
English: When Li Xian asked him why, he replied, "I have made no contribution to the country. I was given the title of marquis when I was a child. I should repay the kindness of the imperial court. As a result, I cannot honor my parents, so I am sad."

古文：贤由此大奇之。
现代文：李贤听了非常惊异。
English: Li Xian was very surprised.

古文：起家州主簿，非其好也，辞不就职，求为将兵都督。
现代文：他离家做官，任州主簿，这不是他喜欢干的，因而辞职不就，请求任领兵的都督。
English: He left home to work as an official, serving as the state's chief accountant, which was not something he liked doing, so he could not resign and asked to be appointed as the military leader of the capital.

古文：随宇文护伐齐，以功最，授仪同三司。
现代文：他跟随宇文护攻打齐军，因功劳突出，被授予仪同三司。
English: He followed Yuwen Zhou to attack the Qi army, and was awarded the Medal of the Third Division for his outstanding service.

古文：历位少侍伯大夫、少承御大夫，摄太子宫正。
现代文：他又历任少侍伯大夫、少承御大夫，担任太子宫正。
English: He also successively held the positions of Shosui Haku no daibu, Shosho Mi no daibu, and served as the Prince's uterine attendant.

古文：周武平齐，引参谋议，以勋加授开府，封襄阳县公，寻改封广宗县公。
现代文：周武帝平定北齐，请他任参谋议，因立功加授为开府，封爵为襄阳县公。不久，改封为广宗县公。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu conquered Beiqi and asked him to serve as a staff officer, and he was awarded the title of Kaifu for his service, knighted as the governor of Xiangyang County, and soon changed his title to the governor of Guangzong County.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，加授上开府仪同大将军、怀州刺史，进爵郡公。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚任北周丞相时，授予他上开府仪同大将军、怀州刺史，晋封爵位为公。
English: When Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty served as the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu, the title of Tongda General, the title of Waizhou Sashih, and the title of Jianfeng.

古文：尉迟迥反，遣使招之。崇初欲相应，后知叔父穆以并州附文帝，慨然太息曰： 合家富贵数十人，遇国有难，竟不能扶倾继绝，何面目处天地间乎！ 
现代文：尉迟迥谋反，派人招请他，李崇开始想响应，后来听说他的叔父李穆率并州归顺隋文帝，便慨然叹息说： 我们全家数十人享受北周的荣华富贵，遇到国家有难，竟不能扶危困，继绝世，还有什么面目处在天地之间呢！ 
English: After a while, he plotted a rebellion and sent someone to invite him. Li Chong began to think about responding. Later, when he heard that his uncle Li Mu led the state to surrender to the Sui Emperor, he sighed with emotion and said: Dozens of our family members enjoy the glory and wealth of the northern Zhou Dynasty. When the country is in difficulty, they can't help the crisis. After the end of the world, what kind of face is there between heaven and earth?

古文：韦孝宽亦疑之，与俱卧起。
现代文：韦孝宽也怀疑应不应该攻打尉迟，因而，他与李崇态度都很消极。
English: Wei Xiaokuan also doubted whether it was right to attack the lieutenant, so he and Li Chonglu were very negative.

古文：其兄询时为元帅长史，每讽谕之。崇由是亦归心焉。
现代文：李崇的哥哥李询这时任讨伐尉迟军队的元帅长史，常常劝诫催促他们，李崇因此也归心向隋。
English: Li Chong's elder brother, Li Zhen, who was the marshal of the army at that time, often exhorted and urged them, so Li Chong also returned to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：及迥平，授徐州总管，进位上柱国。开皇三年，除幽州总管。
现代文：尉迟被平定，李崇被晋封为柱国。开皇三年，他任幽州总管。
English: After the war was settled, Li Chong was promoted to the pillar state. In the first three years of the emperor's reign, he served as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：突厥犯塞，崇辄破之。
现代文：突厥人进犯边塞，常被他打败。
English: The Turks attacked the frontier post and were often defeated by it.

古文：奚、霄、契丹等詟吓其威略，争来内附。
现代文：奚、霍、契丹等夷族人畏惧他的威风胆略，争相归附。
English: The barbarian tribes such as the Yao, Huo, and Qidan were afraid of his arrogance, and vied with each other to join him.

古文：后突厥大为侵掠，崇率步骑三千拒之。转战十余日，师人多死，遂保于沙城。
现代文：后来，突厥人大举侵犯，他率领三千骑兵抵御，转战十多天，将士大多战死，他便退保沙城。
English: Later, when the Turks invaded en masse, he led three thousand cavalry against them and fought for more than ten days. Most of his soldiers were killed in battle, and he then withdrew to Baosha.

古文：突厥围之，死亡略尽。
现代文：敌兵包围沙城，隋军死亡殆尽。
English: The enemy surrounded Shacheng, and the Sui army was completely wiped out.

古文：突厥欲降之，谓曰： 降者封为特勤。 
现代文：突厥人想让他们投降，说： 投降的人可封为特勤。 
English: The Turks wanted them to surrender, saying: Those who surrender can be appointed to the secret service.

古文：崇知不免，令其士卒曰： 吾丧师徒，罪当万死，今效命以谢国家。
现代文：李崇知道难免一死，便对他的将士说： 我丧失军队，罪该万死，今天献出生命以报效国家。
English: Li Chong knew that death was inevitable, so he said to his soldiers: I lost the army, I deserve to die, I gave my life today to serve the country.

古文：看吾死，且可降贼，方便散走。
现代文：等到我死了之后，你们可以投降，也可以逃走。
English: When I'm dead, you can surrender or run.

古文：还见至尊，道此意也。 
现代文：回去见到天子，请转达我的心意。 
English: Go back and see the Son of God. Please convey my heart's desire.

古文：乃挺刃突贼，复杀二人，没于阵。
现代文：说完挥舞兵器冲入敌群，又杀死两名敌兵，死在战场上。
English: After saying this, he rushed into the enemy group brandishing his weapon, killed two more enemy soldiers, and died on the battlefield.

古文：主州诸军事、豫州刺史，谥曰壮。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为六州诸军事、豫州刺史，谥号为壮。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of Rokkashu Zhu Military and Yuzhou Zhishi, and his nickname was Zhuang.

古文：子敏嗣。
现代文：李敏，字树生，李崇的儿子。
English: His son Xiao Min succeeded to the title.

古文：敏字树生，文帝以其父死王事，养于宫中。
现代文：隋文帝因他的父亲为国战死，将他收养在宫中。
English: Because his father died fighting for his country, Emperor Sui adopted him into the imperial court.

古文：及长，袭爵广宗公，起家左千牛。
现代文：长大后，他继承父爵，被封为广宗公，离家入仕，任左千牛。
English: After growing up, he inherited his father's peerage, was named Guangzong, left home to serve, and served as Zuo Qian Niu.

古文：美姿容，善骑射，工歌舞弦管。
现代文：他姿容俊美，善于骑射、工于歌舞弦管。
English: He is good-looking, good at riding and shooting, and good at singing and dancing.

古文：开皇初，周宣帝后乐平公主有女娥英，妙择婚对，敕贵公子弟集弘圣宫者，日以百数。
现代文：开皇初年，周宣帝的皇后乐平公主有个女儿叫娥英，正选择女婿，朝廷命贵族权门的子弟集中在弘圣宫，每天都有数百人。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, Princess Leping, the empress of Emperor Zhou Xuan, had a daughter named Ee Ying, who was choosing a son-in-law. The imperial court ordered the children of aristocrats to gather at the Hong Sheng Palace, and there were hundreds of people every day.

古文：公主选取敏，礼仪如尚帝女。
现代文：公主选中了李敏，结婚的礼仪和娶皇帝的女儿一样。
English: The princess chose Li Min, and the wedding etiquette was the same as marrying the emperor's daughter.

古文：后将侍宴，公主谓敏曰： 我以天下与至尊，唯一女夫，当为汝求柱国。若授余官，慎无谢。 
现代文：后来将参加隋文帝的宴会，乐平公主对李敏说： 我们把天下交给了隋朝天子，我只有你这一个女婿，应当请求天子封你为柱国，如果授给其他官职，不要谢恩。 
English: Later, she will attend the banquet of Emperor Sui Wen. Princess Leping said to Li Min: "We have handed over the world to the Sui Dynasty and the Son of Heaven. I only have you as a son-in-law. I should ask the Son of Heaven to make you a pillar country. If you are given other official positions, don't thank me.

古文：及进见上，上亲御琵琶，遣敏歌舞，大悦，谓公主曰： 敏何官？ 
现代文：进宫见到文帝，文帝亲自弹奏琵琶，让李敏唱歌跳舞。文帝十分高兴，问公主 ：李敏任什么官职？ 
English: When she entered the palace, she met Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen himself played the lute and let Li Min sing and dance. Emperor Wen was very happy and asked the princess: What official position does Li Min hold?

古文：对曰： 一白丁耳。 
现代文：公主答 ：还是一个没有任何官职的白丁。 
English: The princess replied: "He is still a commoner without any official position."

古文：谓敏曰： 今授仪同。 
现代文：文帝对李敏说 ：现在我授予你仪同。 
English: Wen Di said to Li Min: Now I award you the same.

古文：敏不答。
现代文：李敏不答话。
English: Li Min did not answer.

古文：上曰： 不满尔意耶？
现代文：文帝又说 ：对这个官职不满意吗？
English: Wen Di also said: Are you not satisfied with this post?

古文：今授开府。 
现代文：现在任你为开府。 
English: Now it's up to you to open the government.

古文：又不谢。
现代文：李敏仍不谢恩。
English: Li Min is still not grateful.

古文：上曰： 公主有大功于我，我何得向其女婿惜官，今授卿柱国。 
现代文：文帝说： 公主对我有很大的功劳，我怎能对他的女婿吝啬官职，现在命你为柱国。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "The princess has done a great service to me. How can I begrudge his son-in-law an official post? Now I order you to be a pillar state."

古文：敏乃拜而蹈舞。
现代文：李敏才拜谢，并高兴得跳起舞来。
English: Li Mincai thanked him and danced with joy.

古文：遂于坐发诏授柱国，以本官宿卫。
现代文：文帝在宴席上颁布诏书，授予他柱国的职务，命他以本官守卫皇宫。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict at the banquet, awarding him the post of pillar state and ordering him to guard the imperial palace.

古文：后避炀帝讳，改封经城县公。
现代文：后来，为了避隋炀帝杨广的讳，他的封爵由广宗公改为经城县公。
English: Later, in order to avoid the taboo of Emperor Yang Guang of the Sui Dynasty, his knighthood was changed from Guang Zong Gong to Jingcheng County Gong.

古文：历豳、金、华、岐数州刺史，多不莅职，常留京师。往来宫内，侍从游宴，赏赐超于功臣。
现代文：历任豳、金、华、岐数州的刺史，他大多不到职，经常留居京城，来往在宫廷中，侍从天子的游玩和参加宴会，朝廷给他的赏赐超过功臣。
English: In the history of successive emperors, Jin, Hua, and Guizhou, he mostly did not take office, often stayed in Beijing, went back and forth in the court, and attended the emperor's visits and banquets. The court gave him more rewards than meritorious soldiers.

古文：大业初，转卫尉卿。
现代文：大业初年，他转任宿卫卿。
English: In the first year of his career, he was transferred to the post of Lord of the Palace Guards.

古文：乐平公主将薨，遗言于炀帝 妾唯一女，不自忧死，深怜之。
现代文：乐平公主即将去世，留下遗言给炀帝，说 ：我只有一个女儿，我不忧虑自己死去，却很可怜我的女儿。
English: When Princess Leping was about to die, she left her last words to Emperor Gong, saying, "I only have one daughter. I am not worried about dying, but I feel sorry for my daughter."

古文：汤沐乞回与敏。 
现代文：你沐浴的时候也请让李敏有所沾湿。 
English: When you take a bath, please let Li Min get wet.

古文：帝从之，竟食五千户。摄屯卫将军。
现代文：炀帝答应了，命李敏食五千户，任屯卫将军。
English: Emperor Qian agreed, and ordered Li Min to feed five thousand households, and appointed him as the general of the garrison.

古文：杨玄感反后，城阙大兴，敏之策也。
现代文：杨玄感反叛后，炀帝大兴土木，兴建城池宫殿，就是李敏的主意。
English: After Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, it was Li Min's idea to build a palace.

古文：将作监。
现代文：他又转任将作监。
English: He was also transferred to be a prison warden.

古文：从征高丽，领新城道军，加光禄大夫。
现代文：他跟随炀帝东征高丽，奉命率领新城道的军队，又被加封为光禄大夫。
English: He followed Emperor Gong's eastward expedition to Goryeo, was ordered to lead the army of the new city road, and was also sealed as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：十年，帝复征辽东，遣敏黎阳督运。
现代文：大业十年，炀帝又征讨辽东，派李敏在黎阳负责督运粮食。
English: Ten years after the great undertaking, Emperor Gao once again conscripted Liaodong and sent Li Min to Liyang to supervise the transportation of grain.

古文：时或言敏一名洪兒，帝疑 洪 字当谶，尝面告之，冀其引决。
现代文：这时，有人说李敏还有一个名字叫洪儿，炀帝怀疑 洪 字应当应验，曾当面告诉他，希望他能够自裁。
English: At this time, someone said that Li Min also had another name, Hong Er. Emperor Qian suspected that the Hong character should be fulfilled, and told him in person that he hoped he could judge for himself.

古文：敏由是大惧，数与金才、善衡等屏人私语。
现代文：他因此极为恐惧，多次与金才、善卫等人私下交谈。
English: As a result, he was extremely afraid and had many private conversations with Jin Cai, Shan Wei and others.

古文：宇文述知而奏之，竟与浑同诛。
现代文：宇文述知道后奏报给炀帝，炀帝将他与李浑一同处死。
English: After Yuwen learned of this, he reported it to Emperor Gong, who had him and Li Hun executed together.

古文：其妻宇文氏寻亦赐鸩而终。
现代文：他的妻子宇文氏不久也被炀帝赐给的药酒毒死。
English: His wife, Uwen, was soon poisoned to death by the medicinal liquor given to her by Emperor Gao.

古文：贤弟远。
现代文：李远，是李崇的儿子，李贤的弟弟。
English: Li Yuan is the son of Li Chong, the younger brother of Li Xian.

古文：远字万岁，幼有器局，尝与群兒为战斗戏，指麾便有军阵之法。
现代文：字万岁，从小就有才能度量，他曾经与小孩子们做打仗的游戏，指挥起来颇有军队的阵法。
English: He had a talent for measurement from an early age. He used to play war games with children and commanded quite an army.

古文：郡守见而异之，召使更戏。
现代文：郡守见了很是奇异，让他们再做一次这种游戏。
English: It was very strange to see the county magistrate, let them do this game again.

古文：群兒散走，远持杖叱之，复为向阵，意气雄壮，殆甚于前。
现代文：其他孩子见是郡守，都吓得走开，独有李远拿着木棒大声吆喝，又演习了一遍原来的阵法，意气昂扬，更甚于前次。
English: When the other children saw that it was the county magistrate, they were so scared that they all walked away. Li Yuan was the only one who held a wooden stick and shouted loudly. He practiced the original formation again, with high spirits, even more than the previous time.

古文：郡守曰： 此小兒必为将帅，非常人也。 
现代文：郡守说： 这个孩子将来必定成为将军或统率，不是一般的人啊。 
English: The county governor said, "This child will definitely become a general or a leader in the future, he is not an ordinary person.

古文：及长，涉猎书传。
现代文：他长大后，广泛涉猎书籍。
English: When he grew up, he was an avid reader.

古文：魏正光末，天下鼎沸，敕勒贼胡琮侵逼原州。
现代文：魏正光末年，天下动乱，敕勒部的首领胡琮侵犯原州。
English: In the last years of Wei Zhengguang, the whole country was in turmoil, and the leader of the Zhele Department, Hu Yao, invaded Yuanzhou.

古文：远昆季率励乡人，欲图拒守，而众情颇有异同。
现代文：李远兄弟几人率领乡民准备抗拒敌人，而大家的看法颇不一致。
English: Several Li Yuan brothers led the villagers to prepare to resist the enemy, but everyone's views were quite inconsistent.

古文：远乃按剑喻以节义，因曰： 有异议者，请斩之。 
现代文：他手按剑柄晓以气节道义，并说： 有不同意见的，请把他斩首。 
English: He put his hand on the hilt of his sword and said, "If there is a difference of opinion, please behead him."

古文：众惧，乃听命，相与盟歃，深壁自守。
现代文：大家恐惧，便听从他的指挥。大家歃血结盟，筑垒自守。
English: They were afraid, so they obeyed his command. They made an alliance with each other, and built a wall to protect themselves.

古文：无援，城隐，其徒多被害，唯远兄弟并为人所匿，得免。
现代文：没有救兵，城被攻陷，很多人被杀害，惟有李远兄弟几人被别人掩护，才免于被杀。
English: There were no rescuers, the city was captured, and many people were killed. Only the Li Yuan brothers, who were protected by others, were spared from being killed.

古文：远乃使贤晦迹和光，潜身间行，入朝求援。
现代文：他便派李贤化妆改扮，偷偷出城，入朝求援。
English: He then sent Li Xian to change his makeup and disguise, sneak out of the city, and go to the imperial court for help.

古文：魏朝嘉之，授武骑常侍，俄转别将。
现代文：朝廷极为赞赏他，授予他武骑常侍的职务，不久又转为别将。
English: The imperial court greatly appreciated him and awarded him the post of equestrian equerry, and he was soon promoted to second-in-command.

古文：及尔硃天光西伐，配远精兵为乡导。
现代文：尔朱天光西伐，让他率领精锐部队作为向导。
English: Zhu Tianguang's westward march, let him lead the elite troops as a guide.

古文：天光钦远才望，除为长城郡守。
现代文：天光非常钦佩他的才能，命他为长城郡守。
English: Tianguang admired his talent very much and appointed him as the Great Wall County Governor.

古文：后以应侯莫陈崇功。迁高平郡守。
现代文：后来因接应侯莫陈崇立功，升任为高平郡守。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of the governor of Gaoping County for his outstanding contribution to Hou Mo Chen Chong.

古文：周文见面悦之，令居麾下。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰看见他非常喜欢，命他留在自己的军帐。
English: Seeing that he liked him very much, Zhou Wen Diyu ordered him to stay in his military account.

古文：及魏孝武西迁，封安定县伯。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，封他为安定县伯。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, and he was given the title of Count of Anding County.

古文：魏文帝嗣位之始，思享遐年，以远字可嘉，令扶帝升殿。
现代文：西魏文帝刚开始登基，想长久在位，因李远的远字符合他的心意，便命李远扶着文帝上殿。
English: West Wei Emperor Wen had just ascended to the throne, and wanted to stay on the throne for a long time. Since Li Yuan's words were in line with his intentions, he ordered Li Yuan to help Emperor Wen into the palace.

古文：进爵为公，仍领左右。从征窦泰，复弘农，并有殊勋。
现代文：朝廷晋封他的爵位为公，他跟随大军征讨窦泰，收复弘农，都立下特殊的功勋。
English: The imperial court made his title public, and he followed the great army to recruit Dou Tai and recover Hong Nong, both of which were special feats.

古文：授都督、原州刺史。
现代文：朝廷授予他都督的职衔，命他为原州刺史。
English: The court awarded him the title of governor and ordered him to write the history of Wonju.

古文：周文谓远曰： 孤有卿，若身之有臂。本州之荣，乃私事尔。 
现代文：宇文泰对他说 ：我有了你，就好像身体有了胳膊，你的原州刺史的职务，只是私事啊。 
English: Uwentai said to him, "Having you is like having an arm for my body. Your post as governor of Wonju is just a private matter."

古文：遂令远兄贤代行州事。
现代文：便命他的哥哥李贤代替他行州刺史的职务。
English: He then appointed his brother, Li Xian, to take his place as acting governor.

古文：沙苑之役，远功居最，进爵阳平郡公。
现代文：沙苑一战，他的功劳最大，被晋爵为阳平郡公。
English: In the First Battle of Sha Yuan, he made the greatest contribution and was promoted to the rank of Yangping County.

古文：寻除大丞相府司马，参军国机务。
现代文：不久，又被任命为大丞相府司马，参与国家和军队的重要机密。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the secretary of the Prime Minister's Office, and participated in the important secrets of the country and the army.

古文：时河东初复，人情未安。
现代文：这时，河东刚刚收复，人心还不安稳。
English: At this time, Hedong had just recovered, and people were still uneasy.

古文：周文以河东为国之要领，乃授河东郡守。
现代文：宇文泰认为河东是国家的重要区域，便命他为河东郡守。
English: Uwentai believed that Hedong was an important region of the country, so he appointed him as the governor of Hedong County.

古文：远敦奖风俗，劝课农桑，肃遏奸非，兼修守之备。
现代文：他在河东奖励当地淳朴美好的风尚习俗，劝导百姓耕田种桑，肃清奸盗小人，修建防守敌人的堡垒。
English: In Hedong, he rewarded the local simple and beautiful customs, exhorted the people to cultivate fields and grow mulberry trees, clean up the villains, and build a fortress to defend the enemy.

古文：曾未期月，百姓怀之。
现代文：任职不满一个月，百姓们都很怀念他。
English: Less than a month into the job, the people are missing him.

古文：周文降书劳问。征为侍中，迁太子少师。
现代文：宇文泰写书信对他慰劳，将他调至朝廷任侍中，又迁任太子少卿。
English: Uwentai wrote a letter of consolation to him, transferred him to the imperial court to serve as a chamberlain, and transferred him to the post of prince junior minister.

古文：东魏北豫州刺史高仲密请举州来附，周文以仲密所据辽远，难为应接。
现代文：东魏的北豫州刺史高仲密请率全州投降，宇文泰认为高仲密管辖的地方距西魏比较远，难以接应。
English: Gao Zhongmi, the governor of North Yuzhou in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, invited the entire state to surrender. Wu Wentai believed that the area under Gao Zhongmi's jurisdiction was relatively far from the Western Wei Dynasty, and it was difficult to respond.

古文：诸将皆惮此行。
现代文：将领们也都害怕被派去接应仲密。
English: Generals are also afraid of being sent to meet Zhongmi.

古文：远曰： 北豫远在贼境，高欢又屯兵河阳，常理而论，实难救援。
现代文：李远说 ：北豫州远远地处在东魏境内，高欢又率兵驻扎在河阳。按常理而论，实在是难以救援。
English: Li Yuan said: Beiyuzhou is far away in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and Gao Huan and his soldiers are stationed in Heyang. According to common sense, it is really difficult to rescue.

古文：但不入兽穴，不得兽子，若以奇兵出其不意，事或可济。
现代文：但是，不入虎穴，就得不到虎子。如果派奇兵出其不意，事情或许可以成功。
English: However, if you don't go into the tiger's den, you won't get the tiger's cub. If you send in the surprise troops, things may work out.

古文：脱有利钝，故是兵家之常。
现代文：假如出现意外，也是兵家常有的事情。
English: If there is an accident, it is also a common thing for soldiers.

古文：如其顾望不行，便无克定之日。 
现代文：如果观望犹豫，而不行动，东魏就没有克服的时候。 
English: If you wait and hesitate, but do not act, the Eastern Wei Dynasty will not have time to overcome.

古文：周文喜曰： 李万岁所言，差强人意。 
现代文：宇文泰高兴地说 ：李万岁说的话，还算令人满意。 
English: Yu Wentai said happily, "What Li Wan Rong said is still quite satisfactory."

古文：乃授行台尚书，前驱东出。
现代文：便命他为行台尚书，作为前锋向东魏进发。
English: He then ordered him to go to the Eastern Wei Dynasty as a forward.

古文：周文率大军继进。
现代文：宇文泰率领大军随后出动。
English: Uwentai led a large army and then set out.

古文：远乃潜师而往，拔仲密以归。
现代文：李远派军队潜入北豫州，将高仲密接应回来。
English: Li Yuan sent troops to infiltrate into North Henan Province and brought Gao Zhong back.

古文：仍从周文战于芒山，时大军不利，远独整所部为殿。
现代文：他又跟随宇文泰在邙山与东魏军交战，当时西魏军失利，李远单独率领所部在最后掩护。
English: He also followed Yu Wentai to fight against the East Wei army in Shaoshan. At that time, the West Wei army was defeated, and Li Yuan led the headquarters alone to take cover at the end.

古文：寻授都督义州弘农等二十一郡诸军事。
现代文：不久，朝廷授予他都督义州、弘农等二十一郡诸军事。
English: Soon after, the imperial court awarded him the military posts of twenty-one counties, including the governorships of Yizhou and Hongnong.

古文：远善抚驭，有干略，战守之备，无不精锐。
现代文：他善于抚慰驾驭部队，又有才能和韬略，对于进攻和防守的战略战术，无不精通。
English: He is good at soothing and driving the troops, and has talent and cunning. He is well versed in the strategy and tactics of attack and defense.

古文：每厚抚境外之人，使为间谍，敌中动静，必先知之。
现代文：常常优厚地抚慰境外来的人，让他们当间谍。所以，敌方的动静，他都能提前掌握。
English: He often generously pampers people from abroad and lets them work as spies. Therefore, he is able to grasp the enemy's movements in advance.

古文：至有事泄被诛，亦不以为悔。
现代文：至于有的人因事情败露被杀，也不后悔替他出了力。
English: As for some people who were killed as a result of things going wrong, he does not regret the efforts he made on their behalf.

古文：尝猎于莎栅，见石于丛薄中，以为伏兔，射之，镞入寸余，视之乃石。
现代文：他曾在莎栅打猎，错把树丛中的石头当成了兔子，一箭射去，箭头射入石中一寸多，一看原来是块石头。
English: He once went hunting in Sar-e-Zor, mistook a stone in the bushes for a rabbit, shot an arrow, and the arrow penetrated more than an inch into the stone, which turned out to be a rock.

古文：周文闻面异之，赐书曰： 昔李将军亲有此事，公今复尔，可谓世载其德矣。 
现代文：宇文泰听说非常惊异，赐给他书信说： 过去李将军有过此事，你今天又是这样，真可以说你们李家世代都有这种本领啊。 
English: He was very surprised to hear that, and gave him a letter saying, "General Lee had this happen in the past, and you are doing it again today. I can truly say that you of the Lee family generation have this ability."

古文：东魏将段孝先趣宜阳，以送粮为名，实有窥窬之意。
现代文：东魏将领段孝先进向宜阳，以运送粮食为名，实际上窥探西魏的虚实。
English: Eastern Wei general Duan Xiao advanced to Yiyang, in the name of transporting grain, actually spying on the West Wei.

古文：远密知其计，遣兵袭破之。孝先遁走。
现代文：李远了解了他的预谋，派兵将敌兵打败，段孝先逃走。
English: Li Yuan understood his premeditation, sent troops to defeat the enemy soldiers, and Duan Xiao fled first.

古文：周文赐所乘主金带床帐衣被等，并彩二千匹，拜大将军。
现代文：宇文泰将自己乘坐的马、用的金带、床帐、衣被等物品都赏赐给他，又加上绸缎二千匹，封他为大将军。
English: Uwentai rewarded him with the horse he rode, the gold belt he used, the bedspread, the quilt and other items, plus two thousand silks and satins, and made him a grand general.

古文：顷之，除尚书左仆射，固辞。周文不许，远不得已，方拜职。
现代文：没过几天，又命他为尚书左仆射，他坚决推辞不受，宇文泰不同意，他不得已，才拜受这个职务。
English: A few days later, he ordered him to be the second-in-command of Shangshu. He was adamant that he would not accept the resignation, but Uwentai did not agree. He had no choice but to accept the position.

古文：周文又以第十一子代王达令远子之，其见亲待如此。
现代文：宇文泰还把自己的第十一个儿子代王宇文达送给李远当儿子。对他的亲近厚待就是这样。
English: Uwentai also gave his eleventh son to Li Yuan as a son on behalf of Wang Uwenta. This is how he treated him.

古文：时周文嫡嗣未建，明居长，已有成德；孝闵处嫡，年尚幼冲。
现代文：这时，宇文泰嫡长子继承父业的事情还没有确定，明帝宇文毓年龄最大，已有成年人应有的品德。孝闵帝宇文觉是正出，但年纪尚小。
English: At this time, the succession of his father's business by the eldest son of Uwen Tai was not yet certain. Ming Emperor Uwen Yao was the oldest and already had the character of an adult. Filial Emperor Uwen Jue was just emerging, but still young.

古文：乃谓群公曰： 孤欲立子以嫡，恐大司马有疑。 
现代文：宇文泰便对群臣说： 我想立嫡长子，恐怕大司马有疑虑。 
English: Uwentai then said to his ministers: I want to have a legitimate eldest son, but I'm afraid Daisima has doubts.

古文：大司马即独孤信，明帝敬后父也。
现代文：大司马即独孤信，是明帝皇后的父亲。
English: Daisima was the father of Emperor Ming's empress.

古文：众未有答。
现代文：众人没有答话。
English: There was no response.

古文：远曰： 立子以嫡不以长，略阳公为嗣，公何疑焉？
现代文：李远说 ：立太子的依据应是正出而不是年长，略阳公宇文觉为太子，您还有什么好怀疑的呢？
English: Li Yuan said: The basis for the establishment of the crown prince should be the most senior, not the oldest. Xiaoyang Gongwu Wencu is the crown prince, what else do you have to doubt?

古文：若以人为嫌，请即斩信。 
现代文：如果独孤信不满意，请立即将他杀掉。 
English: If you are not satisfied with just one person, please kill him immediately.

古文：便起拔剑。
现代文：说着便拔出剑站了起来。
English: As he spoke, he drew his sword and stood up.

古文：周文亦起曰： 何事至此！ 
现代文：宇文泰也站起来，说： 什么事值得这样。 
English: Wu Wentai also stood up and said, "What's worth it?

古文：信又自陈产，远乃止。
现代文：独孤信又自己陈说一番，李远才罢休。
English: Li Yuan did not give up until Du Guoxin made his own statement.

古文：于是群公并从远议。
现代文：于是，大家都同意李远的意见。
English: As a result, everyone agreed with Li Yuan's opinion.

古文：远出外，拜谢信曰： 临大事不得不尔。 
现代文：李远到宫外，对独孤信谢罪说 ：遇到大事不得不这样。 
English: Li Yuan went outside the palace and said to Duoluxin Xie Sin: "This is what you have to do when you encounter a big event."

古文：信亦谢远曰： 今日赖公决此大议。 
现代文：独孤信也感谢李远说 ：今天幸赖你才决定了这件大事。 
English: Du Guoxin also thanked Li Yuan and said, "I'm glad you decided to do this big thing today.

古文：六官建，授小司寇。
现代文：六官制度实行，朝廷命李远为小司寇。
English: The six official system was implemented, and the imperial court ordered Li Yuan to become a minor official.

古文：周孝闵帝践祚，进位柱国大将军，复镇弘农。
现代文：周孝闵帝即皇帝位，晋封他为柱国大将军，镇守弘农。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaohui was enthroned as emperor, and he was promoted to the post of general of the pillar country, and became the town guard of Hongnong.

古文：远子植，文帝时已为相府司录，参掌朝政。
现代文：他的儿子李植，西魏文帝时已任相府司录，参与朝政。
English: His son, Li Zhi, was already the secretary of the cabinet of ministers when Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty, and participated in the imperial government.

古文：及晋公护执权，密欲诛护，颇泄，护乃出植为梁州刺史。
现代文：晋公宇文护执掌朝廷大权，李植密谋想除去宇文护。事情泄露，宇文护将李植调出京城任梁州刺史。
English: Jin Gong Uwenguo held the power of the imperial court, and Li Zhi plotted to remove Uwenguo. The matter leaked out, and Uwenguo transferred Li Zhi from Beijing to Liangzhou.

古文：寻而废帝，召远及植还朝。
现代文：不久，宇文护废去孝闵帝，召李远和李植父子还朝。
English: Soon after, Uwen Rong went to the Emperor Xiaozhun and summoned Li Yuan and Li Zhi and their sons to meet him.

古文：远恐有变，沉吟良久，乃曰： 大丈夫宁为忠鬼，安能作叛臣乎！ 
现代文：李远恐怕会有事变发生，沉吟许久才说： 大丈夫宁为忠鬼，怎么能作叛臣呢？ 
English: Li Yuan was afraid that something would happen, and he pondered for a long time before saying, "It's okay, rather than being a loyal ghost, how can I be a traitor?"

古文：遂就征，至京师。
现代文：便接受征召还朝，到达京城。
English: He accepted the call-up in the morning and arrived in the capital.

古文：护以远功名素重，犹欲全宥之，谓曰： 公兒遂有异谋，可早为之所。 
现代文：宇文护考虑到李远平常功高名重，还想宽宥他，便对他说 ：你的儿子有过异谋。你可早一点把他处死。 
English: Taking into account Li Yuan's usual high reputation, and still wanting to forgive him, he said to him: Your son had a conspiracy. You could have put him to death a little earlier.

古文：乃以植付远。
现代文：便把李植交给了他。
English: and handed over Li Zhe to him.

古文：远素爱植，植又有口辩，云初无此谋。
现代文：他平常喜欢李植，李植又善于辩解，说自己当初并没有这种打算。
English: He usually likes Li Zhi, and Li Zhi is good at defending himself, saying that he did not have such an intention at the beginning.

古文：远信之，诘朝将植谒护。
现代文：李远信以为真，第二天带着李植去拜谒宇文护。
English: Li Yuanxin thought it was true, and the next day he took Li Zhi to pay homage to Gong Yuwen.

古文：护谓植已死，乃曰： 阳平公何意自来？ 
现代文：宇文护认为李植已被李远杀死，便问： 阳平公自己来是什么用意？ 
English: Yu Wenguo thought that Li Zhi had been killed by Li Yuan, so he asked: What was the intention of Yang Ping Gong himself?

古文：左右云： 植亦在门外。 
现代文：他身边的人说 ：李植也在门外。 
English: People close to him say: Li Zhi is also outside the door.

古文：护大怒曰： 阳平公不信我矣！ 
现代文：宇文护异常恼怒，说： 阳平公不相信我呀！ 
English: Yu Wengu was extremely angry and said, "Yang Ping Gong doesn't believe me!

古文：召入，命远同坐，令帝与植相质于远前。
现代文：将他们召入，命李远坐下，让孝闵帝与李植在李远面前对质。
English: He called them in, ordered Li Yuan to sit down, and had Emperor Xiaozhun confront Li Zhi in front of Li Yuan.

古文：植辞穷，谓帝曰： 本为此谋，欲安社稷，利至尊耳。
现代文：李植无言应对，对孝闵帝说 ：我有这种打算，本来是为了安定社稷，保护天子。
English: Li Zhi was speechless in response, and said to Emperor Xiaojun: "I have this intention, originally it was to stabilize society and protect the emperor.

古文：今日至此，何事云云。 
现代文：今天事已至此，何必再说什么。 
English: That's all for today, nothing more needs to be said.

古文：远闻之，自投于床，曰： 若尔，诚合万死。 
现代文：李远听后，从座位上跳下来，说 ：像这样，真是罪该万死。 
English: After listening to Li Yuan, he jumped down from his seat and said, "Like this, it's really a crime worthy of death."

古文：于是护乃害植，并逼远自杀。
现代文：于是，宇文护杀害了李植，并逼迫李远自杀。
English: As a result, Yu Wenzhou murdered Li Zhi and forced Li Yuanlong to commit suicide.

古文：威字安人，又改袭远爵阳平郡公，加上开府。
现代文：建德元年，宇文护被武帝诛杀，追赠李远原来的官爵，又加封为太保，谥号为忠。
English: In the first year of the Jiande era, Emperor Wu killed Wu Wenzhou, and Li Yuan was posthumously awarded the original title of nobility, and was also given the title of Taibo, with the posthumous name of Zhong.

古文：大象末，地至柱国，封公。
现代文：隋开皇初年，追赠他为上柱国，改谥号为怀。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo and changed his surname.

古文：贤弟穆，字显庆，少明敏有度量。
现代文：李穆，字显庆，李贤的弟弟。从小聪明敏捷，有度量。
English: Li Mu, also known as Xianqing, is the younger brother of Li Xian. He has been smart and agile since he was a child.

古文：文帝入关，便给事左右，深被亲遇。
现代文：西魏文帝入关，他便侍奉左右，深被文帝亲近和知遇。
English: When Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty entered the imperial palace, he served on the right and left, and was deeply close to and known by Emperor Wen.

古文：穆亦小心谨肃，未尝懈怠。
现代文：他小心谨慎，从不懈怠。
English: He is careful and never slacks off.

古文：及侯莫陈悦害贺拔岳，周文自夏州赴难，而悦党史归据原州，犹为悦守。
现代文：侯莫陈悦害死贺拔岳，周文帝宇文泰从夏州率兵讨伐侯莫陈悦，陈悦的同党史归占据原州，仍替侯莫陈悦死守。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue caused the death of He Baturu, Zhou Wen Diyu Wente led the troops from Xiazhou to fight Hou Mo Chen Yue, Chen Yue's fellow party members returned to occupy Yuanzhou, and still defended Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：周文令侯莫陈崇袭之，穆时先在城中，与兄贤、远应崇，遂禽归。
现代文：宇文泰命侯莫陈崇进攻他。李穆这时先在原州城中，与兄长李贤、李远作为内应，抓住史归。
English: At that time, Li Mu was in the city of Wonju, and he and his elder brothers, Li Xian and Li Yuan, acted as inner deputies to capture Shi Gui.

古文：以功授都督。
现代文：因立功被授予都督。
English: He was awarded the title of "Totoku" for his contribution.

古文：从迎魏孝武，封永平县子。
现代文：他因参与了迎接魏孝武帝的事情，被封为永平县子。
English: Because of his participation in welcoming Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was awarded the title of Yongping County Son.

古文：又领乡兵。禽窦泰，复弘农，并有战功。
现代文：他又带领乡兵，擒获窦泰，收复弘农，都立有战功。
English: He also led the village soldiers to capture Dou Tai and recover Hong Nong, both of which were distinguished war feats.

古文：沙苑之捷，穆言： 欢今日已丧胆矣，请速逐之，则欢可禽也。 
现代文：沙苑大捷，他建议说： 高欢今日已经被打得魂飞胆丧，请赶快追赶，可以将他活捉。 
English: Sha Yuan Dajie, he suggested: Gao Huan has been beaten to the point of despair today, please hurry to catch up, you can catch him alive.

古文：周文不听。
现代文：宇文泰没有采纳。
English: It was not adopted by Uwentai.

古文：论前后功，进爵国公。
现代文：根据前后建立的功劳，他被晋爵为公。
English: He was given a knighthood in recognition of his achievements.

古文：芒山之战，周文马中流矢，惊逸坠地。
现代文：邙山之役，宇文泰骑的马被流矢射中，受惊狂奔，他被摔在地上。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, the horse of Uwen Tai was shot by a stream of arrows, and he was thrown to the ground.

古文：敌人追及，左右皆散。
现代文：敌兵追赶上来，他周围的人也都走散。
English: The enemy soldiers chased after him, and the people around him scattered.

古文：穆下马，以策击周文背，因大骂曰： 笼陈军士，尔曹主何在？
现代文：李穆跳下马，用马鞭抽打宇文泰的脊背，口中大骂说 ：你这个不振作的败兵，你的军曹在哪里？
English: Li Mu jumped down from his horse, whipped Uwentai's back with a horsewhip, and cursed loudly, "You bad-tempered defeated soldier, where is your sergeant?

古文：尔独住此！ 
现代文：一个人在这里干什么？ 
English: What's a guy doing out here?

古文：敌人见其轻侮，不疑是贵人，遂舍而过。
现代文：敌兵见他被轻慢和侮辱，不怀疑他是大官，便放掉他走开。
English: The enemy soldiers saw him being belittled and insulted, and without suspecting that he was a high-ranking officer, they let him go.

古文：穆以马授周文，遂俱逸。
现代文：李穆把马交给宇文泰，和他一起逃跑。
English: Li Mu gave the horse to Yu Wentai and ran away with him.

古文：是日微穆，周文已不济矣。
现代文：这一天如果没有李穆，宇文泰就会被敌人抓住。
English: On this day, without Li Mu, Yu Wentai would have been caught by the enemy.

古文：既而与穆相对而泣，自是恩盼更隆。顾左右曰： 成我事者，其此人乎！ 
现代文：过了一会儿，两个人相对哭泣。从此，宇文泰对他的恩遇更加隆重，曾对左右的人说： 危难中救我的，就是这个人啊！ 
English: After a while, the two of them wept together. From then on, Uwentai's gratitude to him became even greater. He used to say to people around him, "It was this man who saved me from danger!"

古文：擢授武卫将军、仪同三司，进封安武郡公。
现代文：提拔他为武卫将军、仪同三司，晋封爵位为安武郡公。
English: He was promoted to General of the Imperial Guards, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and given the title of Anwu County Governor.

古文：前后赏赐，不可胜计。
现代文：前后给他的赏赐，不可胜计。
English: There is no limit to what he can be given.

古文：周文叹其忠节，曰： 人所贵唯命，穆遂轻命济孤，爵位玉帛，未足为报。 
现代文：宇文泰感叹他的忠诚，说： 人最宝贵的只有生命，李穆却轻视自己的生命救我，爵位玉帛，都不足以报答他。 
English: Yu Wentai lamented his loyalty, saying: "The most precious thing for a man is his life, but Li Mu despised his own life. To save me, a peerage and an emerald are not enough to repay him.

古文：乃特赐铁券，恕以十死。
现代文：便特意赐给他铸在铁券上的诏书，饶恕他犯十种罪可以不死。
English: He then gave him a special edict cast on iron, forgiving him for committing ten sins and granting him immortality.

古文：进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中。
现代文：朝廷晋封他为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中。
English: The Imperial Court promoted him to General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Samurai Junior Officer.

古文：初，芒山之败，穆授周文马，后中厩此色者，悉以赐之。
现代文：邙山失败的那一次，李穆送给宇文泰的是一匹毛色青白间杂的马，以后宫中马厩中凡有这种颜色的马，宇文泰都赠给他。
English: The one time when Lushan failed, Li Mu gave Yu Wentai a horse with a mixed blue and white coat. Later, all the horses with this color in the palace stables were given to him by Yu Wentai.

古文：又赐穆嗣子惇安乐郡公，姊一人为郡君，自余姊妹并为县君，兄弟子侄及缌麻已上亲并舅氏皆沾厚赐。
现代文：又赐给他儿子李淳的爵位为安乐郡公，他的一位姐姐为郡君，其他姐妹都为县君。他的兄弟子侄，以及够得上穿孝衣守丧的亲属和他的舅父，都给予很优厚的赏赐。
English: He also gave his son Li Chun the title of Anle County Governor, one of his sisters the title of county governor, and all his other sisters the title of county governor. His brothers and nephews, as well as relatives who were able to wear filial piety and his uncle, were all given very generous rewards.

古文：其褒崇如此。从解玉壁围，拜安定国中尉。
现代文：后来，他跟从宇文泰解除玉壁的包围，被封为安定国中尉。
English: Later, he followed Yu Wentai in lifting the siege of the Jade Wall and was named a lieutenant of the State of Stability.

古文：历同州刺史、太仆卿。
现代文：又历任同州刺史、太仆卿。
English: He also successively held the posts of Tongzhou Sashishi and Taihokukyo.

古文：从于谨平江陵，以功别封一子长城县侯。
现代文：跟随于谨平定江陵，因立功，朝廷封他的一个儿子为长城县侯。
English: Following Yu Jianding Gangneung, for his meritorious service, the court made one of his sons the marquis of Great Wall County.

古文：寻进位大将军，赐姓拓拔氏。
现代文：不久，又晋位为大将军，赐姓拓跋氏。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of general and given the surname Tuoba.

古文：又击曲沔蛮破之。
现代文：率军攻打曲沔的蛮族，将他们打败。
English: He led the army to attack the barbarians of Quzhou and defeated them.

古文：俄除原州刺史，拜世子惇为仪同三司，以贤子为平高郡守，远子为平高县令，并加鼓吹。
现代文：不久，朝廷命他为原州刺史，封他的长子李淳为仪同三司，封李贤的儿子为平高郡守，李远的儿子为平高县令，并给予鼓吹的仪仗。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed him to write the history of Wonju, appointed his eldest son, Li Chun, as the third secretary of Yi Tong, appointed Li Xian's son as the governor of Pinggao County, and Li Yuan's son as the county magistrate of Pinggao County, and gave him the honorary title of propagandist.

古文：穆自以叔侄一家三人皆牧宰乡里，恩遇过隆，固辞不拜。周文不许。
现代文：他因一家叔侄三人都成为乡里的牧守，朝廷的恩遇过于隆重，坚辞不受，宇文泰不允许。
English: Because three of his uncles and nephews all became village pastors, he was treated too grandly by the imperial court and was not allowed to become a monk.

古文：后人为雍州刺史，兼小冢宰。
现代文：后来他入京城任雍州刺史，兼小冢宰。
English: Later, he entered Beijing and served as Yongzhou's magistrate, as well as a minor magistrate.

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，又封一子为升迁县伯。
现代文：周孝闵帝称帝，又封他的一个儿子为升迁县伯。
English: Zhou Xiaohui was proclaimed emperor and one of his sons was promoted to county magistrate.

古文：穆请回授贤子孝轨，许之。
现代文：他请求将爵位授给兄长李贤的儿子，朝廷同意了。
English: He requested that the title be conferred on the son of his elder brother, Li Xian, and the court agreed.

古文：及兄子植谋害宇文护被诛，穆亦坐除名。
现代文：他兄长李远的儿子李植因谋害宇文护被诛死，他也坐罪被免官除名。
English: His elder brother, Li Yuan's son, Li Zhi, was strangled to death for plotting to kill Yu Wengu. He was also removed from his post and expelled.

古文：先是穆知植非保家主，每劝远除之，远不能用。
现代文：原先他知道李植不忠于皇室，劝李远除掉他，李远没有听取。
English: Originally, he knew that Li Zhi was not loyal to the royal family and advised Li Yuan to get rid of him, but Li Yuan did not listen.

古文：及远临刑，泣谓穆曰： 显庆，吾不用汝言以至此，将奈何！ 
现代文：李远临死前，哭着对他说 ：显庆，我不听你的话，所以有今天。
English: Before his death, Li Yuan cried and said to him, "Xianqing, I didn't listen to you, that's why I'm here today."

古文：穆以此获免，及其子弟亦免官。
现代文：有什么办法呢？ 他也因此免受诛杀，他的子弟也被免官。
English: What could he do? He was spared from being killed, and his son was dismissed from his post.

古文：时植弟基当从坐戮，穆求以子惇、怡等代死，辞理酸切，闻者莫不动容。护矜之，遂特免基死。
现代文：这时，李植的兄弟李基按律当被杀死。他请求用自己的儿子李淳、李怡等人代替李基去死，言词和道理十分酸楚恳切，听的人无不被感动，宇文护可怜他，便特意免去李基的死罪。
English: At this time, Li Zhi's brother, Li Ji, was killed according to the law. He asked his son, Li Jun, Li Yi, and others to die in Li Ji's place. The words and reason were very bitter and sincere, and everyone who listened was moved. Yu Wenkuo felt sorry for him, and he specifically exempted Li Ji from the death penalty.

古文：明帝即位，拜骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督，复爵安武郡公，拜直州刺史。
现代文：明帝即位后，封他为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督，又恢复安武郡公的爵位，命他任直州刺史。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the grand general of cavalry, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rite, and the grand governor, and restored the title of the prince of Anwu County, and ordered him to serve as the governor of Zhoushou.

古文：武成中，子弟免官爵者悉复之。
现代文：武成时，他的子弟被免去官爵的全都恢复。
English: At the time of Wu Cheng, all of his sons who had been removed from the peerage were reinstated.

古文：累迁大司空。
现代文：他又迁任为大司空。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Daishi Kucho.

古文：天和二年，进封申国公，旧爵回授一子。
现代文：天和二年，武帝晋封他为申国公，将旧爵授给他的一个儿子。
English: In the 2nd year of Tianhe, Emperor Wu promoted him to the title of Shen Guoguang and bestowed the old title to one of his sons.

古文：建德元年，迁太保，寻出为原州总管。
现代文：建德元年，迁任太保，不久，出任为原州总管。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was transferred to Taibo, and soon after, he assumed the post of Yuanzhou general manager.

古文：四年，武帝东征，令穆别攻轵关及河北诸县，并破之。
现代文：建德四年，武帝东征，命他攻打轵关以及黄河以北各县，他都一一打破。
English: In the fourth year of Jiande, Emperor Wu's eastern expedition ordered him to attack Shouguan and the counties north of the Yellow River, and he defeated them one by one.

古文：后以帝疾班师，弃而不守。
现代文：后来因武帝有病撤兵，攻占的地方又弃而不守。
English: Later, due to Emperor Wu's illness, the troops were withdrawn, and the conquered areas were abandoned and not defended.

古文：六年，进位上柱国，除并州总管。
现代文：建德六年，晋封为上柱国，任并州总管。
English: Jiande for six years, was promoted to Shangzhuang, and served as the provincial governor.

古文：时东夏初平，人情尚扰，穆靖以镇守，百姓怀之。
现代文：这时，东部的北齐刚被平定，人们的情绪还浮动不安，他安详抚慰，百姓们都很怀念他。
English: At this time, North Qi in the east had just been pacified, and people's emotions were still unstable. He was calm and comforting, and the people missed him very much.

古文：大象元年，加邑至九千户，迁大左辅，总管如旧。
现代文：大象元年，朝廷给他增加食邑至九千户，迁任他为大左辅，总管的职务不变。
English: In the first year of the elephant, the imperial court gave him an increase in food villages to nine thousand households, and he was transferred to the position of the major left assistant. The position of the general manager remained unchanged.

古文：二年，诏加太傅，仍总管。
现代文：大象二年，朝廷下诏加封他为太傅，仍担任总管。
English: In the second year of the elephant, the imperial court issued an edict to appoint him as the grand steward, and he still served as the chief steward.

古文：及隋文作相，尉迟迥举兵，遣使招穆，穆锁其使，上其书。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚任北周的宰相，尉迟迥举兵反叛，派人来劝李穆响应。
English: Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty, who was the prime minister of Northern Zhou, ordered his soldiers to rebel, and sent someone to persuade Li Mu to respond.

古文：穆子士荣以穆所居天下精兵处，阴劝穆应之。
现代文：李穆关押来使，把尉迟迥策反的书信送给杨坚。他的儿子李士荣认为他掌握着天下精兵，暗中劝他响应。
English: Li Mu detained the envoy and sent the letter to Yang Jian. His son, Li Shirong, thought that he had the best soldiers in the world and secretly advised him to respond.

古文：穆弗听，曰： 周德既衰，愚智共悉，天时若此，岂能违天？ 
现代文：他不听从，说 ：北周朝廷德政衰败，愚笨的和聪明的都看得很清楚，天意就是这样，我们怎么能违背天意呢？ 
English: He didn't listen and said, "The Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Tingde government are in decline. Both the foolish and the wise can see this very clearly. This is the will of Heaven. How can we go against the will of Heaven?"

古文：乃遣使谒隋文帝，并上十三环金带，盖天子服也，以微申其意。
现代文：他便派人去拜谒杨坚，并送上天子用的十三环金带，以表达自己的心意。
English: He then sent someone to pay homage to Yang Jian, and sent him a gold belt with thirteen rings to express his thoughts.

古文：时迥子谊为朔州刺史，亦执送京师。
现代文：这时，尉迟迥的儿子尉迟谊任朔州刺史，被抓获送到京城。
English: At this time, Ren Shuzhou's son, Ren Shiyi, was arrested and sent to Beijing.

古文：迥今其署行台韩长业攻陷潞州，执刺史赵威，署城人郭子胜为刺史。
现代文：尉迟迥命自己委任的行台韩长乐攻陷潞州，俘获刺史赵威，命当地人郭子胜为刺史。
English: He ordered the self-appointed governor Han Changle to invade Zhangzhou, captured the assassin Zhao Wei, and ordered the local man Guo Zisheng to be the assassin.

古文：穆遣兵讨获子胜。
现代文：李穆派兵讨伐，抓住了郭子胜。
English: Li Mu sent troops to fight and captured Guo Zisheng.

古文：文帝嘉之，以穆劳同破鄴城第一勋，加三转，听分授其二子荣、才及贤子孝轨。
现代文：杨坚嘉奖他，认为他的功劳如同打破邺城一样，立下了第一大功，三次加封官爵，允许他分授给李荣和李才两个儿子，以及李贤的儿子李孝轨。
English: Yang Jian Jia awarded him, believing that his merit was the same as that of breaking the city of Lushan, and set up the first great merit, three times adding a peerage, allowing him to award Li Rong and Li Cai's two sons, as well as Li Xian's son Li Xiaorou.

古文：荣及才并仪同大将军，孝轨进开府仪同大将军，又别封子雄为密国公。
现代文：李荣和李才都任仪同大将军，李孝轨晋为开府仪同大将军。另外，又封他的儿子李雄为密国公。
English: Both Li Rong and Li Cai were appointed grand marshals, and Li Xiaorou Jin was appointed grand marshal of Kaifu. In addition, his son Li Xiong was appointed grand marshal of Myitkyina.

古文：穆又密表劝进。
现代文：他秘密上表劝杨坚称帝。
English: He secretly went public to persuade Yang to remain emperor.

古文：文帝既受禅，诏曰： 公既旧德，且又父党，敬惠来旨，便以今月十三日恭膺天命。 
现代文：杨坚受北周静帝禅让，即皇帝位，下诏对李穆说： 公旧有大德，且又父子多人同心助我，敬悉您上表的大旨，便于这月十三日膺承天命。 
English: Yang Jian accepted the abdication of the Northern Zhou Emperor, that is, the emperor's throne, and said to Li Mu: I have great public virtue, and many fathers and sons have helped me. I respectfully understand the general intention of your table above, and it will be easier to inherit the heavenly destiny on the 13th day of this month.

古文：俄而穆来朝，文帝降座礼之。
现代文：不久，李穆来朝拜，文帝走下座位迎接他。
English: Soon after, Li Mu came to pay homage, and Emperor Wen stepped down from his seat to greet him.

古文：拜太师，赞拜不名，真食成安县三千户。
现代文：封他为太师，并规定他上朝时不报自己的姓名，封给他真安县食邑三千户。
English: He was given the title of Grand Master, and it was stipulated that he would not announce his name when he ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of the most prosperous of the 3,000 households in the food villages of Zhen'an County.

古文：穆子孙虽在襁褓，悉拜仪同，其一门执象笏者百余人，贵盛当时无比。
现代文：他的子孙虽然还在襁褓中，也都封为仪同。一门之中持朝笏的有一百多人，其尊贵兴旺当时无与伦比。
English: Although his sons and grandsons were still in the imperial court, they were also given the title of gitong. There were more than a hundred people who held the imperial court in one family, and their dignity and prosperity were unparalleled at that time.

古文：穆上表乞骸骨，诏曰： 公年既耆旧，筋力难烦，今勒所司敬蠲朝集。
现代文：他上表请求辞政养老，文帝下诏说： 你年事已高，精力衰减，现在命令有司，免去你每天上朝集会。
English: He asked for retirement from politics, and Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "You are old and your energy is fading. Now, there is an order from the emperor to exempt you from going to the imperial court every day.

古文：如有大事，须共谋谟，别遣侍臣，就第询访。 
现代文：如有重大事务，需要我们共同商议，我另派侍臣，到你的家里征询意见。 
English: If there are important matters that need our joint consultation, I will send another courtier to your home to solicit opinions.

古文：时太史奏当有移都事，帝以初受命，甚难之。
现代文：这时，太史奏请迁都，文帝认为即位不久，很是为难。
English: At this time, Emperor Taishi requested that the capital be moved, and Emperor Wen thought that it would not be long before he ascended the throne, which was very difficult.

古文：穆乃上表极言宜移都之便。
现代文：李穆便上表极力陈说迁都的好处。
English: On the table, Li Mu then tried his best to explain the benefits of moving the capital.

古文：帝素嫌台城制度迮小，又宫内多鬼妖。
现代文：文帝一直嫌旧都地面狭小，宫内常闹鬼怪。
English: Emperor Wen always disliked the small size of the old capital, and the palace was often haunted by ghosts.

古文：苏威尝劝迁，上不纳，遇太史奏状，意乃惑之。
现代文：苏威曾劝他迁移，他没有采纳。看到太史的奏疏，他的心思开始动摇。
English: Su Wei had advised him to move, but he did not accept. Seeing Tai Shi's record, his mind began to waver.

古文：至是省穆表，帝曰： 天道聪明，已有征应，太师人望，复抗此请，则可矣。 
现代文：这时看到李穆的表章，说： 天道英明，已有感应。太师为众人仰望，也持这种意见，可以迁都了。 
English: At this time, he saw the seal of Li Mu and said, "The way of heaven is wise, and I have been inspired. The Grand Master is looked up to by everyone, and he also holds this opinion, and it is possible to move the capital."

古文：遂之。
现代文：便听从了李穆的建议。
English: So he followed Li Mu's suggestion.

古文：岁余，下诏： 穆自今已后，虽有愆罪，但非谋逆，纵有百死，终不推问。 
现代文：过了一年多，文帝又下诏说： 李穆从今以后，如果有了罪过，只要不是谋逆造反，虽然应该死一百次，也不追问。 
English: More than a year later, Emperor Wen issued another edict, saying: From now on, if Li Mu commits a crime, as long as it is not plotting to rebel, although he should die a hundred times, he will not be questioned.

古文：开皇六年薨，时年七十七，遗令以不得陪驾岱宗为恨。
现代文：开皇六年，李穆去世，时年七十七岁，遗言是以不能陪同文帝到泰山封禅为最大的遗憾。
English: Six years after the emperor's enthronement, Li Mu died at the age of seventy-seven. His last words were that it was his greatest regret not to be able to accompany Emperor Wen to Mount Tai for the Fuzan retreat.

古文：赠太尉、尚书令、雍州刺史，谥曰武昭。
现代文：朝廷派黄门侍郎监护他的丧事，追赠他为十州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥号为明。
English: The imperial court sent Huangmen Zhi Rong to supervise his funeral and posthumously awarded him the titles of Shuzhou Zhu Military and Jizhou Zhi Shi. His posthumous name was Yu Ming.

古文：子睿。睿字恃德，少沉敏有行检。
现代文：梁睿，字恃德，从小深沉机敏，很有操行。
English: Liang Rui, who is good at writing, has been deep and astute since childhood, and is very active.

古文：周文帝时，以功臣子养宫中，复命与诸子游。
现代文：他的父亲梁御曾跟随周文帝宇文泰征战，屡立功勋，被封为侍中、仪同三司、雍州刺史等职。
English: His father, Liang Gu, once followed Emperor Zhou Wen, Emperor Yu and Emperor Buntai to fight in the war. He made many meritorious achievements and was appointed as an attendant, the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, and the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：七岁，袭爵广平郡公。累加仪同三司、本州大中正、开府，改封五龙郡公，渭州刺史。
现代文：因为他是功臣的儿子，宇文泰从小就将他养在宫中，命他与自己的儿子们一起游玩。七岁，继承父亲的封爵，为广平郡公。以后，历任仪同三司、本州大中正、开府，改封爵位为五龙郡公，任渭州刺史。
English: Because he was the son of a meritorious vassal, Uwentai raised him in the palace from an early age and ordered him to play with his sons. At the age of seven, he inherited his father's title and became the Guangping County Governor. Later, successive officials, such as the Third Division, the Honshu University Vice-governor, and the Kaifu, changed the title to the Wulong County Governor and served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：周闵帝受禅，征为御伯。
现代文：周闵帝受西魏禅让称帝，封他为御伯。
English: Emperor Zhou Enlai was proclaimed emperor by the Western Wei Emperor, and he was given the title of granduncle.

古文：出为中州刺史，镇新安以备齐。
现代文：出任中州刺史，镇守新安以阻挡北齐。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Zhongzhou and the town guard of Xin'an to block Beiqi.

古文：齐人来寇，睿辄挫之。
现代文：齐军进犯，他常常把他们打退。
English: When the Qi attacked, he often drove them back.

古文：帝甚嘉叹，拜大将军。
现代文：闵帝对他大为赞叹，封他为大将军。
English: Emperor Xuan greatly admired him and made him a great general.

古文：以御佐命功，进爵蒋国公。入为司会。
现代文：因为他父亲的功劳，朝廷又给晋爵为蒋国公，征入朝廷任司会。
English: Because of his father's merits, the imperial court also gave Jinjie to Jiang Guogong and recruited him into the imperial court to serve as secretary.

古文：后从齐王宪拒齐将斛律明月于洛阳，每战有功，迁小冢宰。
现代文：后来，他跟随齐王宇文宪在洛阳抗拒齐将斛律明月，每次战斗都立下战功，迁任小冢宰。
English: Later, he followed Qi Wang Yuwen Xian in Luoyang to resist Qi Zhaolou Mingyue, and made great achievements in every battle, and was transferred to the position of Xiaobuzhai.

古文：历敷州刺史、凉、安二州总管，俱有惠政，进位柱国。
现代文：他又历任敷州刺史、凉州和安州的总管，每到一处，都有突出的政绩，因而，被晋封为柱国。
English: He also successively served as the governor of Shikizhou, Liangzhou and Anzhou, and had outstanding political achievements in each place. Therefore, he was promoted to the pillar state.

古文：隋文帝总百揆，代王谦为益州总管。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚总揽北周的朝政，命梁睿代王谦为益州总管。
English: Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui and Wen dynasties oversaw the Northern Zhou dynasty, and appointed Liang Rui to succeed Wang Qian as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：行至汉川西，谦反，攻始州，睿不得进。
现代文：他行至汉川西部，王谦反叛，领兵攻打始州，使他无法前进。
English: He went to the west of Han River, Wang Qian rebelled and led troops to attack Shizhou, making it impossible for him to advance.

古文：文帝命睿为行军元帅，率行军总管于义、张威、达奚长儒、梁升、石孝义步骑二十万讨之。
现代文：杨坚命他为行军元帅，率领行军总管于义、张威、达奚长儒、梁升、石孝义各部步骑两军共二十万人马讨伐王谦。
English: Yang Jian ordered him to be the marshal of the march, and he led the head marshal of the march, Yu Yi, Zhang Wei, Daguang Changru, Liang Sheng, and Shi Xiaoyi, all of whom rode the two armies with a total of 200,000 horses to fight Wang Qian.

古文：谦遣开府李三王守通谷，睿使张威击破之。
现代文：王谦派开府李三王把守通谷，梁睿派张威将通谷打破。
English: Wang Qian sent Kaifu Li Sanwang to guard Tonggu, Liang Rui sent Zhang Wei to break Tonggu.

古文：进至龙门，谦将赵俨、秦会拥众十万，据险为营，周亘三十里。
现代文：大军进至龙门。王谦的部将赵俨、秦会拥众十万，据险设营，绵延三十里长。
English: The great army marched to Longmen. Wang Qian's generals Zhao Wei and Qin Hui gathered hundreds of thousands of people, set up camp according to the danger, and stretched thirty miles long.

古文：睿令将士衔枚，出自间道，四面奋击，力战破之，遂鼓行而进。
现代文：梁睿命将士们衔枚疾进，从小路突然杀出，四面奋勇攻击，将三十里防线打得七零八落。
English: Liang Rui ordered the soldiers to rush forward in a row, suddenly attack from the side road, attack bravely on all sides, and beat the thirty-mile defense line to pieces.

古文：谦将敬豪守剑阁，梁岩拒平林，并惧而来降。
现代文：周军一鼓作气，继续前进。王谦的部将敬豪率兵把守剑阁，梁岩守卫平林，都因畏惧周军威势前来投降。
English: Wang Qian's troops, led by General Qian Hao, guarded Jiange, and Liang Yan's troops guarded Pinglin. They were both afraid of Zhou's military might and surrendered.

古文：谦又命高阿那瑰、达奚惎等以盛兵攻利州。
现代文：王谦又命高阿那王襄、达奚其心等率重兵进攻利州。
English: Wang Qian also ordered Gao Anah Wang Xiang and Dajun Qixin to lead heavy troops to attack Lishu.

古文：闻睿将至，飐分兵据开远。
现代文：听说梁睿率大军将至，达奚其心分出一部兵力占据开远。
English: Hearing that Liang Rui and his army were coming, Dafu decided to send a force to occupy Kaifeng.

古文：睿遣上开府拓拔宗趣、剑阁大将军宇文琼指巴西，大将军赵达水军入嘉陵。
现代文：梁睿派上开府拓跋宗进向剑阁，派大将军宇文直指巴西，大将军赵达所部水军进入嘉陵江。
English: Liang Rui sent the Gaifu Tuoba sect to advance towards Jiange, sent the general Uwen to point directly at Brazil, and the general Zhao Dashong's navy entered the Jialing River.

古文：遣张威、王伦、贺若震、于义、韩相贵、阿那惠等分道攻惎，自午及申，破之。惎奔归于谦。
现代文：又派张威、王伦、贺若震、于义、韩相贵、阿那惠等人率兵分道进攻达奚其心，从午时至申时，两军鏖战厮杀，叛军终被打败，达奚其心逃奔王谦那里。
English: He also sent Zhang Wei, Wang Lun, He Ruo Zhen, Yu Yi, Han Xiang Gui, Anahui and others to attack Dadu's heart separately. From noon to dusk, the two armies fought and killed each other. The rebels were finally defeated, and Dadu's heart fled to Wang Qian.

古文：睿逼成都，谦令达奚惎、乙弗虔守城，亲帅精兵五万，背城结陈。
现代文：梁睿挥师进逼成都，王谦命达奚其心、乙弗虔把守城池，亲率五万精兵，背城结阵，迎战周军。
English: Liang Rui waved his division into Chengdu, Wang Qian's life reached his heart, Yifu Qian guarded the city, personally led fifty thousand elite soldiers, formed a line behind the city, and faced the Zhou army.

古文：睿击败之。
现代文：梁睿一举将他打败。
English: Liang Rui defeated him at one stroke.

古文：谦将入城，惎、虔以城降。
现代文：王谦正要逃回城中，达奚其心、乙弗虔献城投降。
English: Wang Qian was about to flee back to the city, but he had a change of heart and surrendered the city.

古文：谦将麾下三十骑遁走，新都令王宝执之，睿斩谦于市，剑南悉平。
现代文：王谦领部下三十人骑马逃走，新都县县令王葆将他捉拿。梁睿在街市上将王谦斩首，剑南全被平定。
English: Wang Qian led thirty of his subordinates to flee on horseback, and Xindu County ordered Wang Yao to capture him. Liang Rui beheaded Wang Qian in the market, and Jian'nan was completely subdued.

古文：进位上柱国，总管如故，赐物五千段、奴婢一千口、金二千两、银三千两，邑千户。
现代文：朝廷晋封他为上柱国，总管的职位不变，又赏赐给他丝绸五千段、奴婢一千人、金二千两、银三千两，封给食邑一千户。
English: The imperial court promoted him to the position of the head of the pillar country, and the position of the general manager remained unchanged. He was also awarded 5,000 pieces of silk, 1,000 slaves, 2,000 taels of gold, 3,000 taels of silver, and 1,000 households of food villages.

古文：睿时威振西州，夷獠归附，唯南宁首帅爨震恃远不宾。
现代文：这时，梁睿威名震动西部各州，夷獠纷纷归附，惟有南宁首领爨震倚恃偏远，不肯投降。
English: At this time, Liang Ruiwei's fame shook the western states, and the barbarians flocked to join him. However, the leader of Nanning, who was far away, refused to surrender.

古文：睿上疏曰： 南宁州，汉牂柯之地。
现代文：梁睿上疏陈奏： 南宁州，是汉代管辖的地方。
English: Liang Rui Shangsu Chen: Nanning is a place under the jurisdiction of the Han Dynasty.

古文：近代已来，分置兴古、云南、建宁、硃提四郡，户口殷众，金宝富饶，二河有骏马明珠，益、宁出盐井犀角。
现代文：近代以来，那里分别设置兴古、云南、建宁、朱提四郡，人口繁多，财宝丰饶。二河盛产军马明珠，益州、宁州有盐井和珍奇的犀牛角。
English: Since modern times, the four counties of Xinggu, Yunnan, Jianning and Zhuti have been set up there separately, with a large population and abundant wealth. Erhe is rich in military horse pearls, Yizhou and Ningzhou have salt wells and rare rhinoceros horns.

古文：晋泰始七年以益州旷远，分置宁州。
现代文：晋泰始七年，因益州地处偏远，地面辽阔，又分设了宁州。
English: In the first seven years of Jintai, due to the remoteness of Yizhou and the vastness of the land, Ningzhou was also separated.

古文：至伪梁，南宁州刺史徐文盛被湘东征赴荆州。属东夏尚阻，未遑远略，土人爨瓚遂窃据一方。
现代文：到南梁时，南宁州刺史徐文盛被从湘东征调到荆州，因中原尚被阻隔，无法顾及远方的州郡，土人爨瓒便乘机占据一方。
English: When he arrived in Nanliang, Xu Wensheng, the governor of Nanning, was transferred from Hunan East to Jingzhou. Because the Central Plains was still cut off, it was impossible to take into account the distant counties and prefectures, and the local people took the opportunity to occupy one side.

古文：国家遥授刺史，其子震相承至今。
现代文：国家只得授予他刺史的职位以便遥控，他的儿子爨震继承父职，以至于今。
English: The state had to give him the post of chief historian in order to control it remotely, and his son, Zou Zhen, has inherited his father's post to this day.

古文：而震臣礼多亏，贡赋不入。
现代文：而爨震经常不向朝廷行人臣大礼，贡赋也常不缴纳。
English: However, Yu Zhen often did not pay tribute to the imperial court, and often did not pay tribute.

古文：如闻彼人苦其苛政，思被皇风幸因平蜀士众，不烦重兴师旅，狎獠既讫，即请略定南宁。 
现代文：听说那里的百姓都苦恼于他的苛政，可望沐浴天子的惠风。借着这次平蜀的军队，不需再重派人马，群獠已经降服，请求再去平定南宁。 
English: It was heard that the people there were distressed by his harsh rule and hoped to enjoy the benevolent wind of the son of heaven. With the help of the army of Pingshu, there was no need to reassign men and horses. The Qunlun had already surrendered and asked to go and pacify Nanning again.

古文：文帝深纳之，然以天下初定，恐人心不安，故未之许。
现代文：杨坚很同意他的意见，然而因天下初定，恐怕人心不安，所以没有允许。
English: Yang Jian very much agreed with his opinion, however, because of the world's initial decision, I'm afraid people's hearts are uneasy, so it was not allowed.

古文：后竟遣史万岁讨平之，并因睿之策也。
现代文：后来派史万岁率兵讨平了南宁，但执行的都是梁睿的策略。
English: Later, he sent Shi Wanzhe to lead the troops to level Nanning, but all the strategies were implemented by Liang Rui.

古文：睿威惠兼著，人夷悦服，声望逾重，文帝阴惮之。
现代文：梁睿恩威兼著，边境的人民对他心悦诚服，声望越来越高，杨坚心中暗暗地嫉妒他。
English: Along with Liang Rui Enwei, the people of the border are pleased with him, and his reputation is getting higher and higher. Yang Jian secretly envies him.

古文：薛道衡从军在蜀，说睿劝进，文帝大悦。
现代文：薛道衡随军队在蜀地，劝他上表请杨坚称帝，杨坚看到奏章十分高兴。
English: Xue Daoheng, who was with the army in Shoudi, advised him to ask Yang Jian to proclaim himself emperor. Yang Jian was very happy to see the performance.

古文：及受禅，顾待弥隆。
现代文：杨坚接受禅让即皇帝位，对梁睿礼遇更加优隆。
English: Yang Jian accepted the emperor's throne, and treated Liang Rui more graciously.

古文：睿复上平陈策，帝善之，下诏曰： 昔公孙、隗嚣，汉之贼也，光武与其通和，称为皇帝。
现代文：他又陈奏平定南陈的策略，文帝赞同，颁布诏书说： 过去，公孙、隗嚣，都是东汉的仇人，光武帝还与他们和好，承认他们是皇帝。
English: He also used the strategy of pacifying the Southern Han, which was approved by Emperor Wen, and issued an edict saying: In the past, Gongsun and Yanran were enemies of the Eastern Han, but Emperor Guangwu made peace with them and recognized them as emperors.

古文：佗之于高祖，初犹不臣。
现代文：尉佗对于汉高祖，开始也不愿意臣服。
English: In the beginning, he was not willing to submit to Han Gao Zu.

古文：孙皓之答晋文，书尚云 白 。
现代文：孙皓给晋文帝写信，信中不用 启 而用 白 字。
English: Sun Yat-sen wrote a letter to Emperor Jinwen, in which he used the word "white" instead of "open."

古文：或寻款服，或即灭亡。
现代文：有的通款降服，有的被武力消灭。
English: Some surrendered, some were eliminated by force.

古文：王者体大，义存遵养，虽陈国来朝，示尽蕃节，如公大略，诚须责罪，尚欲且缓其诛，宜如此意。
现代文：王者应胸怀远大，允许败亡之君尊养待时。虽然陈国使者来朝拜，不愿臣服，如您的雄才大略，实在需要责罚他们。我还想着暂时缓一缓对他们的诛灭，你应该了解其中的用意。
English: A king should be broad-minded and allow the prince of defeat to cherish his time. Although the emissaries of the State of Chen came to worship and did not want to submit, as your great talent suggests, it is really necessary to punish them. I also want to temporarily delay their annihilation, you should understand the intention.

古文：淮海未灭，必兴师旅，若命永袭，终当相屈，以身许国，无足致辞也。 
现代文：淮海西岸还未平定，一定要兴动大军，如果用水兵袭击，还需要委屈你去效力。你以身许国，想来是不会推辞的。 
English: The west coast of the Huaihai Sea has not yet been pacified, we must mobilize a large army. If the sailors attack, we still need to force you to work. If you are a small country, you will not refuse.

古文：睿乃止。
现代文：梁睿便不再说攻打南陈的事。
English: Liang Rui then stopped talking about attacking Nan Chen.

古文：睿时见突厥方强，恐为边患，复陈镇守之策十余事。
现代文：他当时见突厥日益强大，又陈奏镇守北部边境的方略十余条。
English: At that time, he saw that the Turks were becoming increasingly powerful, and he devised more than a dozen strategies for guarding the northern border.

古文：帝嘉叹久之，答以厚意。
现代文：文帝深为赞叹，并殷勤答复。
English: Emperor Wen was deeply impressed and responded courteously.

古文：睿时自以周代旧臣，久居重镇，内不自安，屡请入朝，于是征还京师。
现代文：他认为自己是北周的旧臣，长久镇守要害的地方，心内很不安稳，屡次请求入朝任职，于是被征还至京城。
English: He thought of himself as an old vassal of Northern Zhou, who had been guarding the key places for a long time. He was very insecure in his heart. He repeatedly requested to serve in the imperial court, so he was conscripted back to the capital.

古文：及引见，上为之兴，命睿升殿，握手极欢。
现代文：文帝接见他时，很替他高兴，命他进殿，两人握手笑谈，极为高兴。
English: When Emperor Wen received him, he was very happy for him, ordered him to enter the hall, and the two shook hands and chatted, extremely happy.

古文：睿退谓所亲曰： 功遂身退，今其时也。 
现代文：他出宫后对亲近的人说： 功成身退，今天正是时候啊。 
English: After he left the palace, he said to those close to him: "It's time to retire.

古文：遂谢病，阖门自守，不交当时。
现代文：便称病在家，闭门自守，不与当时权贵交往。
English: He claimed to be ill at home, kept to himself behind closed doors, and did not socialize with those in power at the time.

古文：帝赐以板舆，每有朝觐，必令三卫舆上殿。睿初平王谦之始，自以威名太盛，恐为时所忌，遂大受金贿以自秽。由是勋簿多不以实，诣朝堂称屈者，前后百数人。
现代文：文帝赐给他板舆上殿。梁睿平定王谦以后，自认为名声太大，恐怕被人们忌恨，便大肆接受贿赂以自损污，因此，他登记的立功将士的簿册多有不实之处。到朝廷喊冤叫屈的前后有一百来人。
English: Emperor Wen gave him the Panmyou Palace. After Liang Rui subdued Wang Qian, he thought his reputation was too great and feared that he would be hated by the people, so he accepted bribes to damage himself. As a result, the book of meritorious soldiers he registered was mostly untrue. There were about a hundred people before and after he went to the imperial court to complain.

古文：上令有司案验其事，主者多获罪。睿惧，上表陈谢，请归大理。
现代文：文帝命有司调查这些事，主使的人大多获罪，梁睿畏惧，上表陈述并谢罪，请求把自己投入大理监狱。
English: Emperor Wen ordered a department to investigate these matters, and most of the people who were the main instigators were found guilty. Liang Rui was afraid, made the above statement and apologized, and asked to be put into Dali Prison.

古文：上慰喻遣之。
现代文：文帝宽慰并送他回家。
English: Emperor Wen consoled him and sent him home.

古文：十五年，从至洛阳而卒，谥曰襄。
现代文：开皇十五年，他跟随文帝到洛阳，去世，谥号为襄。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Emperor's reign, he followed Emperor Wen to Luoyang, where he died. His nickname was Xiang.

