古文：齐泰，溧水人。
现代文：齐泰，溧水人。
English: Qitai, the sprinkler.

古文：初名德。洪武十七年，举应天乡试第一。
现代文：初名齐德，洪武十七年在应天乡试中名列第一。
English: First name Zide, Hongwu ranked first in the 17th year of Ying Tianxiang test.

古文：明年成进士。
现代文：第二年成为进士。
English: The next year he became a member of the choir.

古文：历礼、兵二部主事。
现代文：历任礼、兵二部主事。
English: Successive ceremonial duties, two divisions of soldiers are in charge.

古文：雷震谨身殿，太祖祷郊庙，择历官九年无过者陪祀，德与焉，赐名泰。
现代文：因雷震谨身殿，太祖前往郊庙祈祷，选择为官九年无过失者陪同祭祀，齐德随行，被赐名齐泰。
English: Due to the lightning shock, the great-grandfather went to the suburban temple to pray. He chose a nine-year-old official without fault to accompany the sacrifice. Zide accompanied him and was given the name Zita.

古文：二十八年，以兵部郎中擢左侍郎。
现代文：二十八年由兵部郎中提升为左侍郎。
English: On the 28th, he was promoted from Hyobushojo to Sasajiro.

古文：太祖尝问边将姓名，泰历数无遗。
现代文：太祖曾经询问边将的姓名，齐泰历数无遗。
English: The great-grandfather once asked the names of the captains, and the list is endless.

古文：又问诸图籍，出袖中手册以进，简要详密，大奇之。
现代文：太祖又问地图户籍，齐泰从袖中拿出手册献上，内容简要详密，太祖十分惊奇。
English: The great-grandfather also asked for the map of the household registration, Qitai took out the handbook from his sleeve and presented it, the content was concise and detailed, the great-grandfather was very surprised.

古文：皇太孙素重泰。
现代文：皇太孙一向看重齐泰。
English: The great-grandson of the emperor has always valued Qitai.

古文：及即位，命与黄子澄同参国政。寻进尚书。
现代文：即位之后，命齐泰与黄子澄同参国政，齐泰随即进升为尚书。
English: After the enthronement, Qitai and Huang Zicheng were ordered to participate in national politics together, and Qitai was immediately promoted to Shangshu.

古文：时遗诏诸王临国中，毋奔丧，王国吏民听朝廷节制。
现代文：当时遗诏命诸王统治封地，不要奔丧，封地官民听朝廷节制。
English: At that time, the imperial edict ordered the kings to rule the fiefdoms and not to grieve, and the officials and people of the fiefs obeyed the restraint of the imperial court.

古文：诸王谓泰矫皇考诏，间骨肉，皆不悦。
现代文：诸王说这是齐泰假传皇父遗诏，离间骨肉，都不高兴。
English: The kings said that this was a fake imperial edict passed down from Emperor Qitai, and they were not happy.

古文：先是，帝为太孙时，诸王多尊属，拥重兵，患之。至是因密议削藩。
现代文：在此之前，皇上还是皇太孙时，诸王位尊辈高，拥有重兵，皇上为此很担心，现在因此密议削藩之事。
English: Prior to this, when the Emperor was still the great-great-grandson of the Emperor, he had high-ranking dignitaries on the throne and had a heavy army. The Emperor was very worried about this, and now they are secretly discussing the matter of cutting the domain.

古文：建文元年，周、代、湘、齐、岷五王相继以罪废。
现代文：建文元年，周、代、湘、齐、岷五王相继因罪被废。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, the five kings of Zhou, Dai, Hunan, Qi and Qi were successively abolished for crimes.

古文：七月，燕王举兵反，师名 靖难 。指泰、子澄为奸臣。
现代文：七月，燕王举兵而反，名为 靖难 ，指责齐泰、黄子澄为奸臣。
English: In July, Yan Wang raised an army and rebelled, named Jing Nan, accusing Qi Tai and Huang Zicheng of being traitors.

古文：事闻，泰请削燕属籍，声罪致讨。
现代文：事情传至朝廷，齐泰请求削除燕王的藩籍，公布其罪，派兵声讨。
English: The matter was reported to the Imperial Court, and Qitai requested that Yan Wang's domain name be removed, his crime made public, and soldiers sent to investigate.

古文：或难之，泰曰： 明其为贼，敌乃可克。 
现代文：有的人反驳他，齐泰却说： 揭露贼行，敌乃可克。 
English: Some people contradicted him, but Zi Tai said, "Exposing the thief's actions is not an enemy.

古文：遂定议伐燕，布告天下。
现代文：于是，朝廷议定伐燕，并布告天下。
English: As a result, the Imperial Court agreed on the felling of the swans and announced it to the world.

古文：时太祖功臣存者甚少，乃拜长兴侯耿炳文为大将军，帅师分道北伐，至真定为燕所败。
现代文：当时太祖的功臣留下来的很少，建文帝便授长兴侯耿炳文为大将军，率军分道北伐，到真定为燕兵所败。
English: At that time, there were very few heroes of the great ancestor left, and Emperor Jianwen awarded Changxinghou Geng Bingwen with the title of general. He led the army to the Northern Expedition, and was defeated by Yan soldiers.

古文：子澄荐曹国公李景隆代将，泰极言不可。
现代文：黄子澄推荐曹国公李景隆代替耿炳文统率军队，齐泰极言不可。
English: Huang Zicheng recommended Cao Guogong Li Jinglong to take the place of Geng Bingwen in leading the army, and Qi Tai was extremely reluctant.

古文：子澄不听，卒命景隆将。
现代文：黄子澄不听，最终还是命李景隆率军。
English: Huang Zizheng did not listen and eventually ordered Li Jinglong to lead the army.

古文：当是时，帝举五十万兵畀景隆，谓燕可旦夕灭。
现代文：那个时候，建文帝将五十万军队全部交给李景隆，并称短时间内便可灭燕。
English: At that time, Emperor Jianwen gave all the 500,000 troops to Li Jinglong, and said that Yan could be eliminated in a short time.

古文：燕王顾大喜曰： 昔汉高止能将十万，景隆何才，其众适足为吾资也！ 
现代文：燕王因此大喜道 ：昔日汉高祖只能统兵十万。李景隆有什么才能，其部众正好可以为我所用。 
English: As a result, Yan Wang was overjoyed: In the past, the founder of the Han Dynasty could only command 100,000 soldiers. Li Jinglong had no talent, and his subordinates were just what I needed.

古文：是冬，景隆果败。
现代文：这年冬天，李景隆果然战败，建文帝脸露惧色。
English: This winter, Li Jinglong was defeated, and Emperor Jianwen's face showed fear.

古文：帝有惧色，会燕王上书极诋泰、子澄。
现代文：正巧当时燕王上书极力诋毁齐泰、黄子澄。
English: Coincidentally, at that time, Yan Wang wrote a letter to denigrate Qitai and Huang Zicheng.

古文：帝乃解二人任以谢燕，而阴留之京师，仍参密议。
现代文：建文帝于是将他们两人解职以向燕王道歉，但暗地里仍将他俩留在京城，参与密议。
English: Emperor Jianwen then dismissed the two of them to apologize to King Yan, but secretly kept them in Beijing to participate in secret discussions.

古文：景隆遗燕王书，言二人已窜，可息兵。燕王不听。
现代文：李景隆给燕王写信，说他俩已逃，可以息兵了，燕王不听。
English: Li Jinglong wrote a letter to Yan Wang, saying that the two of them had escaped and could rest, but Yan Wang did not listen.

古文：明年，盛庸捷东昌，帝告庙，命二人任职如故。
现代文：第二年，盛庸在东昌获胜，建文帝到太庙告祭，并命齐泰、黄子澄二人任职如故。
English: In the second year, Shengyong won in Dongchang, Emperor Jianwen went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices, and ordered Qi Tai and Huang Zicheng to continue to serve as before.

古文：及夹河之败，复解二人官求罢兵，燕王曰： 此缓我也。 
现代文：待到夹河兵败时，又解除他们两人的官职以求罢兵，燕王却说 ：这是缓兵之计。 
English: When the soldiers were defeated at the Jiehe River, he dismissed both of them from their posts in order to call for a general strike, but Yan Wang said, "This is a delaying tactic."

古文：进益急。
现代文：于是进兵更急。
English: As a result, the recruitment of soldiers became more urgent.

古文：始削藩议起，帝入泰、子澄言，谓以天下制一隅甚易。
现代文：在开始商议削藩时，建文帝采纳齐泰、黄子澄之言，说以天下遏制一方十分容易。
English: At the beginning of the negotiations on the reduction of the domain, Emperor Jianwen adopted the words of Qitai and Huang Zicheng, saying that it was very easy to curb one side with the whole world.

古文：及屡败，意中悔，是以进退失据。
现代文：在屡次失败后，便开始后悔，因此进退失措。
English: After repeated failure, he began to regret, so he was at a loss.

古文：迨燕兵日逼，复召泰还。
现代文：当燕兵日益进逼时，又将齐泰召回。
English: When Yan soldiers were increasingly advancing, he recalled Qitai.

古文：未至，京师已不守，泰走外郡谋兴复。
现代文：齐泰未到，京城已不能守，齐泰逃往外郡，企图复兴。
English: Before Qitai arrived, the capital could no longer be defended, and he fled to the outer counties in an attempt to revive it.

古文：时购泰急。
现代文：当时朝廷急于重金悬赏齐泰。
English: At that time, the imperial court was eager to offer a hefty reward to Qi Tai.

古文：泰墨白马走，行稍远，汗出墨脱。
现代文：齐泰骑上用墨涂黑的白马逃走，马跑了一段远路后，汗出墨退。
English: Qitai rode away on a white horse that had been blackened with ink. After the horse had run a long distance, it was drenched in sweat.

古文：或曰： 此齐尚书马也。 
现代文：有的人说 ：这是齐尚书的马。 
English: Some people say: This is the horse of Qishangshu.

古文：遂被执赴京，同子澄、方孝孺不屈死。
现代文：齐泰就这样被捉送京，同黄子澄、方孝孺一起不屈而死。
English: This is how Qitai was caught and sent to Beijing, where he died together with Huang Zicheng and Fang Xiaojuan.

古文：泰从兄弟敬宗等皆坐死，叔时永、阳彦等谪戍。
现代文：齐泰的堂兄弟齐敬宗等都被牵连而死，其叔叔齐时永、齐阳彦等则被贬戍边。
English: Qitai's cousins Qi Jingzong and others were all implicated and died, while his uncles Qi Shiyong and Qi Yangyan and others were sidelined.

古文：子甫六岁，免死给配，仕宗时赦还。
现代文：其子刚刚六岁，被免死发配，仁宗时被赦回京。
English: His son was just six years old when he was pardoned from death and returned to Kyoto.

古文：黄子澄，名氵是，以字行，分宜人。
现代文：黄子澄，名，以字行世，分宜人。
English: Huang Zizheng, a famous poet, was born into the world with a pen name.

古文：洪武十八年，会试第一。
现代文：洪武十八年会试第一。
English: Hongwu won the first place in the 18th annual audition.

古文：由编修进修撰，伴读东宫，累迁太常寺卿。
现代文：由编修进升为修撰，在东宫伴读，屡升至太常寺卿。
English: He was promoted from being an editor to a writer, he was an accompanist at the East Palace, and he was repeatedly promoted to Lord of the Taiji Temple.

古文：惠帝为皇太孙时，尝坐东角门谓子澄曰： 诸王尊属拥重兵，多不法，奈何？ 
现代文：惠帝为皇太孙时，曾坐在东角门对黄子澄说 ：诸王位尊辈高，拥有重兵，且多不法，怎么办呢？ 
English: When Hui Di was the great-grandson of the emperor, he once sat at the East Corner Gate and said to Huang Zicheng: What should we do with the high-ranking dignitaries of the throne, the heavy soldiers, and the lawlessness?

古文：对曰： 诸王护卫兵，才足自守。倘有变，临以六师，其谁能支？
现代文：黄子澄回答说： 诸王的护卫兵，只足以自守，倘若有变，出以六师，他们谁能抵挡得住呢？
English: Huang Zicheng replied, "The guards of the kings are only enough to defend themselves. If there is a change, and six divisions are sent out, who will be able to resist?

古文：汉七国非不强，卒底亡灭。
现代文：汉七国并非不强，而最终却灭亡了。
English: The Han Seven Kingdoms were not weak, but they eventually perished.

古文：大小强弱势不同，而顺逆之理异也。 
现代文：大小强弱视情势各不相同，而顺逆之理也各异。 
English: The size, strength and weakness vary according to the situation, and the converse is also different.

古文：太孙是其言。
现代文：皇太孙觉得他说得在理。
English: The great-grandson thought he was right.

古文：比即位，命子澄兼翰林学士，与齐泰同参国政。谓曰： 先生忆昔东角门之言乎？ 
现代文：即位之后，便命黄子澄兼翰林学士，与齐泰同参国政，并对他说 ：先生还记得昔日东角门之言吗？ 
English: After ascending to the throne, he ordered Huang Zicheng and Han Lin Biao to participate in national politics with Qi Tai, and said to him: "Sir, do you still remember the words of the East Angle Gate in the past?

古文：子澄顿首曰： 不敢忘。 
现代文：黄子澄叩首回答 ：不敢忘记。 
English: Huang Zicheng bowed his head and replied, "I dare not forget."

古文：退而与泰谋，泰欲先图燕。
现代文：退朝之后与齐泰商议，齐泰认为要先谋取燕。
English: After retreating to the North, he discussed with Qitai. Qitai believed that he should first seek Yan.

古文：子澄曰： 不然，周、齐、湘、代、岷诸王，在先帝时，尚多不法，削之有名。
现代文：黄子澄则说： 不能这样，周、齐、湘、代、岷诸王，在先帝时，尚且经常违法，因此削之有名。
English: Huang Zizheng said, "This cannot be done. The kings of Zhou, Qi, Hunan, Dai, and Qian frequently broke the law when they were emperors, which is why they are famous for cutting their hair.

古文：今欲问罪，宜先周。
现代文：而今如欲问罪，应当从周开始。
English: Now, if there is to be an indictment, it should start with Zhou.

古文：周王，燕之母弟，削周是剪燕手足也。 
现代文：周王是燕王的亲弟弟，削除周王便是剪去燕王的手足。 
English: Zhou Wang is the younger brother of Yan Wang. Deleting Zhou Wang means cutting off Yan Wang's limbs.

古文：谋定，明日入白帝。
现代文：两人议定，第二天便去向皇上建议。
English: The two agreed, and the next day they went to propose to the Emperor.

古文：会有言周王橚不法者，遂命李景隆帅兵袭执之，词连湘、代诸府。
现代文：正逢当时有人说周王朱木肃违法。于是便命李景隆率军前去袭击，将其捉拿，周王的供词牵连湘、代诸王府。
English: At that time, some people said that King Zhou of Zhumisu was breaking the law. Therefore, he ordered Li Jinglong to lead an army to attack and capture him. King Zhou's confession implicated Hunan and other royal residences.

古文：于是废橚及岷王楩为庶人；幽代王桂于大同；囚齐王榑于京师。
现代文：于是惠帝便将朱木肃及岷王朱木便废为庶人，将代王朱桂幽禁于大同，将齐王朱囚于京城。
English: As a result, Emperor Hui dethroned Zhu Muxu and Shao Wang Zhu Muxun as commoners, imprisoned the acting king Zhu Gui in Datong, and imprisoned Qi King Zhu in Beijing.

古文：湘王柏自焚死。
现代文：湘王朱柏则自焚而死。
English: Zhu Bai, the king of Hunan Province, set himself on fire and died.

古文：下燕议周王罪。
现代文：又将周王一事下到燕议罪，燕王上书再三援救。
English: He also brought the case of Zhou Wang to Yan to discuss the crime, and Yan Wang repeatedly sent letters for help.

古文：燕王上书申救，帝览书恻然，谓事宜且止。子澄与泰争之，未决，出相语曰： 今事势如此，安可不断？ 
现代文：惠帝览书恻然，说此事应当停止了。黄子澄与齐泰进行规劝，没有结果，出去之后两人互相说道： 而今事势如此，怎么能不做一决断？ 
English: Hui Di looked at the book and said that the matter should be stopped. Huang Zicheng and Qitai had no results in their persuasion. After they went out, the two said to each other: And now that the situation is like this, how can we not make a decision?

古文：明日又入言曰： 今所虑者独燕王耳，宜因其称病袭之。 
现代文：第二天又向皇上进言说： 现在所担心的只有燕王了，应当趁他生病时前去袭击。 
English: The next day, he made another suggestion to the emperor, saying, "The only one we have to worry about now is Yan Wang, and we should take advantage of his illness to attack him."

古文：帝犹豫曰； 朕即位未久，连黜诸王，若又削燕，何以自解于天下？ 
现代文：惠帝犹豫道 ：朕即位不久，连罢诸王，如又削燕王，我怎么去向天下解释呢？ 
English: Hui Di hesitated: I have been on the throne for a short time, even if I remove all the kings, how can I explain to the world if I also remove King Yan?

古文：子澄对曰： 先人者制人，毋为人制。 
现代文：黄子澄回答说 ：要先发制人，不要为人所制。 
English: Huang Zicheng replied, "We should preempt others, not be preempted by others."

古文：帝曰： 燕王智勇，善用兵。虽病，恐猝难图。 
现代文：惠帝又说： 燕王智勇双全，善于用兵，虽然有病，恐怕突然袭击他也难以谋取。 
English: Hui Di also said: Yan Wang's wisdom and courage are both complete, and he is good at using soldiers. Although he is ill, I'm afraid it would be difficult for him to make a sudden attack.

古文：乃止。
现代文：此事乃止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：于是命都督宋忠调缘边官军屯开平，选燕府护卫精壮隶忠麾下，召护卫胡骑指挥关童等入京，以弱燕。
现代文：于是命都督宋忠调遣防边官军驻扎开平，挑选精壮的燕府护卫隶属宋忠麾下，并将护卫胡骑指挥关童等召入京城，以削弱燕。
English: As a result, he ordered the governor Song Zhong to dispatch the border guard troops stationed in Kaiping, select the strong Yanfu guards under the command of Song Zhong, and call the guards Hu Jia and Guan Tong into Beijing to weaken Yan.

古文：复调北平永清左、右卫官军分驻彰德、顺德，都督徐凯练兵临清，耿瓛练兵山海关，以控制北平。
现代文：又调北平永清左、右卫官军分驻彰德、顺德，都督徐凯在临清练兵，耿王献在山海关练兵，以控制北平。
English: In order to control Beiping, Yongqing left and right guards were stationed in Zhangde and Shunde, the governor Xu Kai trained soldiers in Linqing, and Geng Wang Xian trained soldiers in Shanhaiguan.

古文：皆泰、子澄谋也。
现代文：这些全是齐泰、黄子澄的主意。
English: These are all the ideas of Qitai and Huang Zicheng.

古文：时燕王忧惧，以三子皆在京师，称病笃，乞三子归。
现代文：当时燕王担忧不已，因为他的三个儿子都在京城，因此便称自己病重，请求让他们返回。
English: At that time, Yan Wang was worried because his three sons were in Beijing, so he said he was seriously ill and asked them to return.

古文：泰欲遂收之，子澄曰： 不若遣归，示彼不疑，乃可袭而取也。 
现代文：齐泰想将三人逮捕，黄子澄则说： 不如放他们回去，以示对他并未怀疑，这样便可袭而取之。 
English: Qitai wanted to arrest the three, but Huang Zicheng said, "It's better to let them go back to show that they don't suspect him, so they can attack and take him."

古文：竟遣还。
现代文：就这样放回了三人。
English: That's how we got the three of them back.

古文：未几，燕师起，王泣誓将吏曰： 陷害诸王，非由天子意，乃奸臣齐泰、黄子澄所为也。 
现代文：不久，燕军起兵，燕王在将吏面前哭着发誓说： 陷害诸王，并非天子之意，而是奸臣齐泰、黄子澄所为。 
English: Soon after, Yan's army raised an army, and Yan Wang cried and swore in front of the officers, saying, "It was not God's will to frame the kings, but the treacherous vassals Qi Tai and Huang Zicheng did it.

古文：始帝信任子澄与泰，聚事削藩。
现代文：开始皇上信任黄子澄与齐泰，迅速发兵削藩。
English: The emperor began to trust Huang Zicheng and Qi Tai, and quickly dispatched troops to reduce the domain.

古文：两人本书生，兵事非其所长。
现代文：但这两人本是书生，兵事非其所长。
English: However, these two are students, and military affairs are not their forte.

古文：当耿炳文之败也，子澄谓胜败常事，不足虑。因荐曹国公李景隆可大任，帝遂以景隆代炳文。
现代文：当耿炳文兵败时，黄子澄说胜败乃兵家常事，不足以忧虑，因而推荐曹国公李景隆担负大任。
English: When Geng Xianwen was defeated, Huang Zicheng said that victory and defeat were commonplace for soldiers, not enough to worry about, and therefore recommended Cao Guogong Li Jinglong to take on the important task.

古文：而景隆益无能为，连败于郑村坝、白沟河，丧失军辎士马数十万。
现代文：皇上于是便命李景隆代替耿炳文，而李景隆也无所作为，连败于郑村坝、白沟河，丧失军队辎重、士兵马匹数十万。
English: The emperor then ordered Li Jinglong to take the place of Geng Bingwen, but Li Jinglong did nothing and suffered consecutive defeats at Zhengcun Dam and Baigou River, losing hundreds of thousands of troops and soldiers' horses.

古文：已，又败于济南城下。
现代文：不久，又败于济南城下。
English: Soon after, they were defeated by Jinan Chengxiao.

古文：帝急召景隆还，赦不诛。
现代文：皇上急忙将李景隆召回，赦免其死罪。
English: The emperor hastily recalled Li Jinglong and pardoned his death sentence.

古文：子澄恸哭，请正其罪。
现代文：黄子澄痛哭，请治其罪。
English: Huang Zizhen cried bitterly. Please punish his crime.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：子澄拊膺曰： 大事去矣，荐景隆误国，万死不足赎罪！ 
现代文：黄子澄拍着胸脯说： 大势已去，我推荐李景隆而误国，万死不足以赎罪。 
English: Huang Zicheng patted his chest and said, "The tide has turned. I recommended Li Jinglong, but I made a mistake. Death is not enough to atone for my sins.

古文：及燕兵渐南，与齐泰同谪外，密令募兵。
现代文：当燕兵逐渐向南推进时，黄子澄与齐泰一同遇贬在外，被密令募兵。
English: When Yan soldiers gradually pushed southward, Huang Zicheng and Qitai were both ostracized and secretly ordered to recruit soldiers.

古文：子澄微服由太湖至苏州，与知府姚善倡义勤王。
现代文：黄子澄微服由太湖至苏州，与知府姚善倡义勤王。
English: Huang Zizhen served from Taihu Lake to Suzhou, and advocated loyalty to the king with Governor Yao Shan.

古文：善上言： 子澄才足捍难，不宜弃闲远以快敌人。 
现代文：姚善上奏说 ：黄子澄之才足以抵御灾难，不应当将他抛弃在清闲僻远之地，而令敌人高兴。 
English: Yao Shan said: Huang Zizhen's talent is enough to resist disaster, and he should not be abandoned in a quiet and remote place, but make the enemy happy.

古文：帝复召子澄，未至而京城陷。
现代文：皇上又召见黄子澄，他还未到，京城便已失陷了。
English: The emperor also summoned Huang Zicheng, but before he arrived, the capital had already fallen.

古文：欲与善航海乞兵，善不可。乃就嘉兴杨任谋举事，为人告，俱被执。
现代文：黄子澄想与姚善航海求救兵。姚善不同意，于是便与嘉兴杨任图谋举事，被人告发，都被逮捕。
English: Huang Zicheng wanted to sail with Yao Shan to call for help. Yao Shan did not agree, so he and Jia Xing Yang Ren plotted to do something. They were accused and arrested.

古文：子澄至，成祖亲诘之。
现代文：黄子澄至京，成祖亲自责问。
English: Huang Zizheng went to Beijing, and Cheng Zu personally interrogated him.

古文：抗辨不屈，磔死。
现代文：但他抗辩不屈，被施磔刑而死。
English: But he did not give in and was beaten to death.

古文：族人无少长皆斩，姻党悉戍边。
现代文：其族人无论年老年少一律处斩，姻亲党羽全部戍边。
English: All members of his clan, young and old alike, were to be executed, and all in-laws and party members were to be executed.

古文：二子礼、益俱斩。
现代文：他的一子变姓改名田径，后遇赦，在湖广咸宁安家。
English: One of his sons changed his surname and changed his name to Track and Field. He was later pardoned and settled down in Xianning, Guangxi.

古文：亲属戍边。
现代文：正德年中，进士黄表是他的后代。
English: In the middle of the Zhengde era, the Jin Shi Huang watch was his offspring.

古文：方孝孺，字希直，一字希古，宁海人。
现代文：方孝孺，字希直，另有一字叫希古，宁海人。
English: Fang Xiaojun, the character Xizhi, another character called Xigu, Ninghai people.

古文：父克勤，洪武中循吏，自有传。
现代文：他父亲名叫克勤，洪武年间的循吏。《明史》中另有传记。
English: His father's name was Keqin, a cadre during the Hongwu era, according to another biography in Ming History.

古文：孝孺幼警敏，双眸炯炯，读书日盈寸，乡人目为 小韩子。 
现代文：方孝孺年幼时就机警聪明，目光炯炯有神。读书每天都有长进，人们都称他为 小韩子 。
English: When he was young, Fang Xiaojuan was alert and clever, with a keen eye. He improved his reading skills every day, and people called him Little Han Zi.

古文：长从宋濂学，濂门下知名士皆出其下。先辈胡翰、苏伯衡亦自谓弗如。
现代文：长大后，方孝孺拜宋濂为师。但宋濂门下的知名学士都不如他，就连前辈胡翰、苏伯衡都自认不如。
English: After growing up, Fang Xiaojun followed Song Tao as his teacher. However, the famous scholars under Song Tao were not as good as him, and even his predecessors Hu Han and Su Boheng considered themselves inferior.

古文：孝孺顾末视文艺，恒以明王道、致太平为己任。
现代文：方孝孺没有拘泥文学、艺术，常以彰明王道、致太平为己任。
English: Fang Xiaolu did not stick to literature and art, and often took it as his duty to highlight the royal road and promote peace.

古文：尝卧病，绝粮，家人以告，笑曰： 古人三旬九食，贫岂独我哉！ 
现代文：方孝孺曾经患病，家中无粮，家人告诉他，谁知他却笑着说： 古人有三十天只食九天的先例，贫穷难道只我一人吗？ 
English: Fang Xiaohui was once ill and there was no food in the house. His family members told him about it, but who knows what he said with a smile: The ancients had a precedent of eating only nine days in thirty days. Am I the only one who is poor?

古文：父克勤坐 空印 事诛，扶丧归葬，哀动行路。
现代文：他的父亲克勤因 空印 案而被杀，他护丧葬归故里，路人都为之哀痛。
English: His father, Kekin, was killed as a result of the "Empty Seal" case. He escorted the funeral procession back to his hometown, and passers-by mourned for him.

古文：既免丧，复从濂卒业。
现代文：待丧事一完，他又立即从学宋濂，直至毕业。
English: As soon as the funeral was over, he immediately dropped out of Song Tao University and did not return until graduation.

古文：洪武十五年，以吴沉、揭枢荐，召见。
现代文：洪武十五年，由于吴沉、杨枢的推荐，方孝孺得到皇上的召见。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, due to the recommendation of Wu Shen and Yang Zu, Fang Xiaozhu was summoned by the emperor.

古文：太祖喜其举止端整，谓皇太子曰： 此庄士，当老其才。 
现代文：太祖看他举止端整，十分高兴，就对太子说： 这个年青人，今后应该发挥他的才华。 
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased to see his neat demeanor and said to the prince: This young man should use his talent in the future.

古文：礼遣还。
现代文：并礼节性地把他遣送回去。
English: and politely sent him back.

古文：后为仇家所连，逮至京。太祖见其名，释之。
现代文：后来因仇家连累，方孝孺被逮送到京城，太祖看到他的名字后，下令释放他。
English: Later, due to a family feud, Fang Xiaojuan was arrested and sent to Beijing. After the great-grandfather saw his name, he ordered his release.

古文：二十五年，又以荐召至。
现代文：二十五年，又因推荐被召到京城。
English: Twenty-five years later, he was once again called to the capital due to a recommendation.

古文：太祖曰： 今非用孝孺时。 
现代文：太祖说 ：现在还不是使用方孝孺的时候。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Now is not the time to use filial piety."

古文：除汉中教授，日与诸生讲学不倦。
现代文：任命他为汉中教授。方孝孺每天对儒生讲学孜孜不倦。
English: He was appointed as a professor at Hanzhong University. Fang Xiaojuan tirelessly lectured on Confucianism every day.

古文：蜀献王闻其贤，聘为世子师。
现代文：蜀献王得知他的贤良，就聘任他为王子的老师。
English: When King Shu Xian learned of his virtues, he appointed him as the prince's teacher.

古文：每见，陈说道德。王尊以殊礼，名其读书之庐曰 正学。 
现代文：每每见到他，都和他陈说道德伦理，蜀献王对他十分尊重，并把他读书的屋子命名为 正学 。
English: Whenever he saw him, he talked to him about morality and ethics. Shu Xianwang respected him very much, and named the room where he studied as the main school.

古文：及惠帝即位，召为翰林侍讲。
现代文：到了惠帝即位，召方孝孺为翰林侍讲。
English: When Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, he summoned Fang Xiaojun to act as Hanlin's attendant.

古文：明年迁侍讲学士，国家大政事辄咨之。
现代文：第二年升为侍讲学士，国家遇有大事常常向他咨询。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to associate lecturer, and he was often consulted in the event of national events.

古文：帝好读书，每有疑，即召使讲解。
现代文：惠帝喜欢读书，每当遇到疑问时就召他讲解。
English: Hui Di likes to read, and whenever he encounters a problem, he calls for an explanation.

古文：临朝奏事，臣僚面议可否，或命孝孺就扆前批答。
现代文：上朝奏事，君臣在朝廷面议可否，有时就命令方孝孺到屏风前批答。
English: When a matter was brought to the Imperial Court, the Emperor and the courtier would discuss whether or not to meet face-to-face in the Imperial Court, and sometimes they would order Fang Xiaojun to appear in front of the screen to give a reply.

古文：时修《太祖实录》及《类要》诸书，孝孺皆为总裁。
现代文：当时明廷正在编撰《太祖实录》和《类要》等书，方孝孺都担任总裁。
English: At that time, the Ming court was compiling books such as "Grandfather's Record" and "Classification," and Fang Xiaojun served as president.

古文：更定官制，孝孺改文学博士。
现代文：变更官制后，方孝孺为文学博士。
English: After the change of the official system, Fang Xiaojuan became a doctor of literature.

古文：燕兵起，廷议讨之，诏檄皆出其手。
现代文：燕王起兵以后，朝廷商议征讨，诏令、檄文都出自方孝孺之手。
English: After Yan Wang raised an army, the imperial court discussed and discussed, and the imperial edict and the imperial edict were all from the hand of Fang Xiaohui.

古文：建文三年，燕兵掠大名。
现代文：建文三年，燕兵侵占了大名。
English: In the third year of Jianwen, Yan soldiers occupied Daming.

古文：王闻齐、黄已窜，上书请罢盛庸、吴杰、平安兵。
现代文：燕王听说齐泰、黄子澄已逃窜，上奏请求罢免盛庸、吴杰、平安的兵权。
English: Yan Wang heard that Qitai and Huang Zicheng had fled, and made a request to revoke Shengyong, Wu Jie and Ping'an's military powers.

古文：孝孺建议曰： 燕兵久顿大名，天暑雨，当不战自疲。
现代文：方孝孺建议说 ：燕兵久住大名，天气很热又下雨，不打仗他们自己也会疲劳。
English: Fang Xiaohui suggested: Yan soldiers have lived in daimyo for a long time, the weather is very hot and rainy, they will be tired without fighting.

古文：急令辽东诸将入山海关攻永平；真定诸将渡卢沟捣北平，彼必归救。
现代文：应立即命令辽东诸将进入山海关进攻永平、真定，诸将过卢沟桥进攻北平，对方一定会回救。
English: We should immediately order the Liaodong generals to enter the Shanhaiguan to attack Yongping and Zhending, and the generals to cross the Lugou Bridge to attack Beiping. The other side will certainly come to the rescue.

古文：我以大兵蹑其后，可成擒也。
现代文：我方用大兵断其后，这样就可以擒拿贼王。
English: We'll use the soldiers to cut off his tail, so we can capture the thief king.

古文：今其奏事适至，宜且与报书，往返逾月，使其将士心懈。
现代文：现在燕王奏书刚到，应暂且答书，这样，往返需要一个多月，敌方将士心理懈怠。
English: Now that Yan Wang's report has just arrived, he should temporarily answer the report. In this way, it takes more than a month to travel back and forth, and the enemy's soldiers are psychologically slack.

古文：我谋定势合，进而蹴之，不难矣。 
现代文：当我方谋划已定，形势又极为有利，便可一举克敌。这并不是很困难的事。 
English: When our plans are settled and the situation is extremely favorable, we can defeat the enemy at one stroke. This is not very difficult.

古文：帝以为然。命孝孺草诏，遣大理寺少卿薛驰报燕，尽赦燕罪，使罢兵归藩。
现代文：皇上觉得十分有理，于是就命令方孝孺草拟诏书，派大理寺少卿薛岩飞马驰送诏书到燕，完全赦免燕的反叛之罪，要求他们收兵回归藩地。
English: The emperor thought it was very reasonable, so he ordered Fang Xiaojun to draft an edict, and sent Xue Yanfei, the Shaoqing of Dali Temple, to send the edict to Yan, completely pardon Yan's crime of rebellion, and require them to withdraw their troops and return to the domain.

古文：又为宣谕数千言授，持至燕军中，密散诸将士。
现代文：又给薛岩带上皇上数千言的手谕，让他带到燕王的军队中，秘密散发到将士手中。
English: He also gave Xue Yan thousands of words of the emperor's instruction, which he took to Yan Wang's army and secretly distributed to the soldiers.

古文：比至，匿宣谕不敢出，燕王亦不奉诏。
现代文：但事到临头，薛岩隐藏宣谕不敢取出，燕王也不遵奉皇帝的诏令。
English: However, when the time came, Xue Yan did not dare to take out the hidden edict, and Yan Wang did not follow the emperor's edict.

古文：五月，吴杰、平安、盛庸发兵扰燕饷道。
现代文：五月，吴杰、平安、盛庸带兵骚扰燕军的粮道。
English: In May, Wu Jie, Ping'an, and Shengyong led troops to harass the grain route of Yan's army.

古文：燕王复遣指挥武胜上书，伸前请。
现代文：燕王再次派遣指挥武胜上书请求皇上罢前线军队。
English: King Yan once again dispatched commander Busheng to petition the emperor to withdraw the front-line troops.

古文：帝将许之。
现代文：皇帝准备同意撤兵。
English: The emperor was ready to agree to the withdrawal.

古文：孝孺曰： 兵罢，不可复聚，愿毋为所惑。 
现代文：但方孝孺说： 撤兵容易，再次集聚军队就难了，不要被燕王的言语所迷惑。 
English: However, Fang Xiaojuan said: It is easy to withdraw troops, but it is difficult to gather troops again. Don't be fooled by Yan Wang's words.

古文：帝乃诛胜以绝燕。
现代文：皇帝于是下令杀了武胜，以此来断绝和燕国的交往。
English: The emperor then gave the order to kill Wu Sheng, in order to cut off contact with Yan.

古文：未几，燕兵掠沛县，烧粮艘。
现代文：没多久，燕军侵掠沛县，并烧毁粮船。
English: Soon after, Yan's army invaded and plundered Pae County and burned grain ships.

古文：时河北师老无功，而德州又馈饷道绝，孝孺深以为忧。
现代文：当时黄河以北的军队疲累而无战功，而德州的运粮道路又被截断。为此，孝孺深感忧虑。
English: At that time, the troops north of the Yellow River were exhausted and had no combat achievements, and the grain transportation road in Texas was cut off. For this reason, Xiaojuan was deeply worried.

古文：以燕世子仁厚，其弟高煦狡谲，有宠于燕王，尝欲夺嫡，谋以计间之，使内乱。
现代文：燕世子仁厚，他的弟弟高煦狡诈，得宠于燕王，曾想争夺嫡长子之位。方孝孺想用计挑起他们内乱。
English: Yan's descendant, Yan Zi, was benevolent, and his younger brother, Gao Yao, was cunning and was favored by Yan Wang. They once wanted to compete for the position of the eldest son. Fang Xiaoxuan wanted to use trickery to stir up civil strife between them.

古文：乃建议白帝：遣锦衣卫千户张安赍玺书往北平，赐世子。
现代文：于是方孝孺向建文帝禀明计划，并派锦衣卫千户张安带着盖有皇帝印章的书信，赐封燕世子。
English: As a result, Fang Xiaohui sent a plan to Emperor Jianwen, and sent Zhang An, a member of the Jin, Yi and Wei dynasties, with a letter stamped with the emperor's seal to bestow the title on Yan's son.

古文：世子得书不启封，并安送燕军前。
现代文：世子拿到信函并不拆封，并将张安一起送到燕王军帐里。
English: When the emperor got the letter, he did not open it and sent Zhang An to Yan Wang's military account together.

古文：间不得行。
现代文：于是离间之计失败了。
English: As a result, the separation plan failed.

古文：明年五月，燕兵至江北，帝下诏征四方兵。
现代文：第二年五月，燕军打到了长江以北，皇帝下诏书征集全国的军队。
English: In May of the following year, Yan's army reached the north of the Yangtze River, and the emperor issued an edict to recruit troops from all over the country.

古文：孝孺曰： 事急矣。
现代文：方孝孺说 ：事情已经十分紧急。
English: Fang Xiaojuan said, "The situation has become very urgent."

古文：遣人许以割地，稽延数日，东南募兵渐集。北军不长舟楫，决战江上，胜负未可知也。 
现代文：可派人前往说和，许以割地，争取拖延几天时间。东南募兵已逐渐云集，北方的军队不擅长水战，如果两军在长江上决战，胜负就难以预料了。 
English: They can send someone to talk peace, offer to divide the land, and try to stall for a few days. The southeast has gradually gathered troops, and the northern army is not good at water battles. If the two armies fight a decisive battle on the Yangtze River, it will be difficult to predict the outcome.

古文：帝遣庆成郡主往燕军，陈其说。
现代文：建文帝派庆成郡主前往燕军中，陈说了孝孺的意思。
English: Emperor Jianwen sent Princess Qingcheng to the Yan army, and Chen said the meaning of filial piety.

古文：燕王不听。
现代文：但是，燕王不听。
English: However, the king of swallows did not listen.

古文：帝命诸将集舟师江上。而陈瑄以战舰降燕，燕兵遂渡江。
现代文：建文皇帝命令众将率水师汇集在长江上，但明战将陈蠧率领战舰向燕军投降了。
English: Emperor Jianwen ordered the generals and sailors to gather on the Yangtze River, but the warship led by Chen Xi surrendered to the Yan army.

古文：时六月乙卯也。
现代文：燕军于是渡过了长江，当时是六月三日。
English: Yan's army then crossed the Yangtze River on June 3.

古文：帝忧惧，或劝帝他幸，图兴复。
现代文：建文帝忧虑惧怕，有的劝说皇上移宫他处，再图复兴大业。
English: Emperor Jianwen was worried and afraid, and some people tried to persuade the emperor to move the palace to another place and try to revive the great cause.

古文：孝孺力请守京城以待援兵，即事不济，当死社稷。
现代文：方孝孺力请皇上坚守京城等待援兵的到来。即使失败，也是为社稷而亡。
English: Fang Xiaolong tried his best to ask the emperor to hold on to the capital and wait for reinforcements to arrive. Even if he failed, he died for the people.

古文：乙丑，金川门启，燕兵入，帝自焚。
现代文：十三日，京城的金川门被打开了，燕军入城，建文帝自焚而死。
English: On the 13th, the Jinchuan Gate of Beijing was opened, the Yan army entered the city, and Emperor Jianwen set himself on fire and died.

古文：是日，孝孺被执下狱。
现代文：当日，方孝孺被抓进监狱。
English: On the same day, Fang Xiaojuan was arrested and taken to prison.

古文：先是，成祖发北平，姚广孝以孝孺为托，曰： 城下之日，彼必不降，幸勿杀之。
现代文：这以前，成祖发兵北平，姚广孝向成祖请托方孝孺时说： 兵临城下那一天，孝孺一定不会投降，请不要杀他。
English: Before this, when Cheng Zu sent troops to Peking, Yao Guangxiao asked Cheng Zu to entrust Xiao Yao, saying: On the day when the soldiers come to the city, Xiao Yao will definitely not surrender, please do not kill him.

古文：杀孝孺，天下读书种子绝矣。 
现代文：如果杀了方孝孺，就会断绝天下的读书人。 成祖点头答应。
English: If you kill Fang Xiaojuan, you will cut off all the readers in the world. Chengzu nodded and agreed.

古文：成祖颔之。至是欲使草诏。
现代文：攻下南京后，想让方孝孺草拟诏书。
English: After the capture of Nanjing, he wanted Fang Xiaoxiao to draft an edict.

古文：召至，悲恸声彻殿陛。
现代文：方孝孺被召到宫殿后，悲恸之声响彻大殿。
English: After Fang Xiaojuan was summoned to the palace, the sound of grief resounded throughout the hall.

古文：成祖降榻，劳曰： 先生毋自苦，予欲法周公辅成王耳。 
现代文：成祖从殿座走到方孝孺的身边安慰他说 ：先生不要自己苦自己，我不过是效法周公辅佐成王罢了。 
English: Cheng Zu walked from the throne to the side of Fang Xiaozhuang to comfort him and said, "Sir, don't beat yourself up. I'm just following the example of Zhou Gongfu and King Cheng.

古文：孝孺曰： 成王安在？ 
现代文：方孝孺问： 成王在哪里？ 
English: Fang Xiaoxuan asked: Where is Chengwang?

古文：成祖曰： 彼自焚死。 
现代文：成祖回答说： 他已自焚而死。 
English: Chengzu replied, "He died by self-immolation."

古文：孝孺曰： 何不立成王之子？ 
现代文：方孝孺又问： 为什么不立成王的儿子为皇呢？ 
English: Fang Xiaojuan also asked: Why not make the son of King Cheng the emperor?

古文：成祖曰： 国赖长君。 
现代文：成祖回答说： 老百姓信赖年长的君王。 
English: Cheng Zu replied, "The common people trust the elderly monarch.

古文：孝孺曰： 何不立成王之弟？ 
现代文：方孝孺又问： 为什么不立成王的弟弟为皇呢？ 
English: Fang Xiaojuan also asked: Why not make Chengwang's younger brother the emperor?

古文：成祖曰： 此朕家事。 
现代文：成祖回答说 ：这是我们家庭内部的事。 
English: Chengzu replied, "This is a matter within our family.

古文：顾左右授笔札，曰： 诏天下，非先生草不可 孝孺投笔于地，且哭且骂曰： 死即死耳，诏不可草。 
现代文：要左右把笔和纸拿给方孝孺，说： 诏告天下，非先生起草的诏书不可。 方孝孺把笔扔到地上，又哭又骂说： 死就死吧，诏书我是不会起草的。 
English: He had to take a pen and paper to Fang Xiaojuan, saying, "If you want to announce to the world, you must draft an imperial edict."Fang Xiaojuan threw the pen to the ground, weeping and cursing, saying, "Let it die, I won't draft an imperial edict."

古文：成祖怒，命磔诸市。
现代文：成祖大怒，命令斩首示众。
English: Cheng Zu flew into a rage and gave the order to behead everyone.

古文：孝孺慨然就死，作绝命词曰： 天降乱离兮孰知其由，奸臣得计兮谋国用犹。忠臣发愤兮血泪交流，以此殉君兮抑又何求？
现代文：方孝孺从容就义，临死前做绝命词说 ：天降大乱啊又有谁知道其中的缘由，奸臣得计谋夺国家，忠臣发愤啊又血泪交流，以身来殉先君又还有何求。
English: Fang Xiaojuan calmly accepted the justice, and before his death, he said in his dying words: "The heavens have fallen into chaos, and who knows the reason for it. The traitor has to plot to seize the country, the loyal subject is angry, and blood and tears are exchanged. What more could you ask for than to be martyred?"

古文：鸣呼哀哉兮庶不我尤！ 
现代文：唉！如此这般方能死无怨尤。 
English: Alas! one can die in such a way without complaint.

古文：时年四十有六。
现代文：当时方孝孺年仅四十六岁。
English: At that time, Fang Xiaojun was only 46 years old.

古文：其门人德庆侯廖永忠之孙镛与其弟铭，检遗骸瘗聚宝门外山上。
现代文：他的学生德庆侯廖永忠的孙子廖镛和他的弟弟廖铭把方孝孺的尸体殓葬于聚宝门外的山上。
English: The grandson of his student, Deqing Hou Liao Yongzhong, Liao Yan and his brother Liao Ming buried the body of Fang Xiaojuan on the mountain outside the treasure gate.

古文：孝孺有兄孝闻，力学笃行，先孝孺死。
现代文：方孝孺的哥哥叫方孝闻，勤奋好学，为人忠厚，他比方孝孺先死。
English: Fang Xiaohui's brother was named Fang Xiaohui. He was a diligent student and a loyal person. He died before Fang Xiaohui.

古文：弟孝友与孝孺同就戮，亦赋诗一章而死。
现代文：弟弟方孝友与方孝孺同时被杀，临死前也赋诗一首。
English: His younger brother, Fang Xiaoyu, was killed at the same time as Fang Xiaojun, and he also composed a poem before his death.

古文：妻郑及二子中宪、中愈先自经死，二女投秦淮河死。
现代文：方孝孺的妻子郑氏及两个儿子方中宪、方中愈先后上吊身亡，两个女儿也投秦淮河而死。
English: Fang Xiaohui's wife, Zheng, and two sons, Fang Zhongxian and Fang Zhongyu, hanged themselves successively, and two daughters also threw themselves into the Qinhuai River and died.

古文：孝孺工文章，醇深雄迈。
现代文：方孝孺工于文章，其文清纯深邃，雄伟豪迈。
English: Fang Xiaoxiao's work in the article, its text is pure and profound, majestic and heroic.

古文：每一篇出，海内争相传诵。
现代文：他的每一篇文章问世，海内都争相传诵。
English: Every time one of his articles is published, it is eagerly read by people all over the country.

古文：永乐中，藏孝孺文者罪至死。
现代文：永乐年间，凡藏有方孝孺文章的都论以死罪。
English: In Yongle's time, all of Fang Xiaolu's articles were about capital punishment.

古文：门人王稌潜录为《侯城集》，故后得行于世。
现代文：方孝孺的学生王禾余暗中把他的文章收集编写成《侯城集》，方孝孺的文章因此得以流传后世。
English: Wang He Yu, a student of Fang Xiaojun, secretly collected his articles and compiled them into "Houcheng Collection." As a result, Fang Xiaojun's articles were able to be passed down to future generations.

古文：仁宗即位，谕礼部： 建文诸臣，已蒙显戮。家属籍在官者，悉宥为民，还其田土。
现代文：仁宗即位，示谕礼部： 建文时的各位大臣，已经蒙受了杀戮之祸，他们的家属沦为官籍奴仆者，都释放为民，并归还田土。
English: The enthronement of Emperor Nintsong, from the Department of Divination and Rituals: The ministers at the time of the founding of the Republic of China had already suffered the scourge of killing, and their families had been reduced to the status of official slaves. They were all released as citizens and their land was returned to them.

古文：其外亲戍边者，留一人戍所，余放还。 
现代文：其外亲戍边者，除留一人戍所外，其余的都遣放回家。 
English: Those whose foreign relatives were detained at the border, except for one person detained at the detention center, the rest were sent home.

古文：万历十三年三月，释坐孝孺谪戍者后裔，浙江、江西、福建、四川、广东凡千三百余人。
现代文：万历十三年三月，释放了因方孝孺案株连而戍边者的后代，浙江、江西、福建、四川、广东共计一千三百多人。
English: In March of the thirteenth year of the lunar calendar, the descendants of those who were detained in connection with the Fang Xiaohui case were released, a total of more than 1,300 people in Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, Sichuan and Guangdong.

古文：而孝孺绝无后，惟克勤弟克家有子曰孝复。
现代文：方孝孺已经没有后代了，唯独方克勤的弟弟方克家有个儿子叫方孝复。
English: Fang Xiaohui has no descendants, except for Fang Keqin's younger brother, Fang Ke, who has a son named Fang Xiaofu.

古文：洪武二十五年尝上书阙下，请减信国公汤和所加宁海赋，谪戍庆远卫，以军籍获免。
现代文：洪武二十五年，方孝复曾经上书朝廷，请求减免信国公汤和给宁海所增加的赋税，被贬戍庆远卫，株连时因军籍免。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, Fang Xiaofu once wrote to the imperial court, requesting the reduction and exemption of Shinkokukongtang and the increased tax imposed on Ninghai. Qingyuanwei was demoted, and Zhu Lian was exempted from military service.

古文：孝复子琬，后亦得释为民。
现代文：方孝复的儿子名叫方琬，后被释放为民。
English: Fang Xiaofu's son, named Fang Yao, was released and became a commoner.

古文：世宗时，松江人俞斌自称孝孺后，一时士大夫信之，为纂《归宗录》。
现代文：世宗时，松江人俞斌自称是方孝孺的后代，一时士大夫深信不疑，编纂《归宗录》。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zong, the Matsue man, Yu Bin, claimed to be a descendant of Fang Xiaohui. At one time, the doctor was convinced of this and compiled the "Record of Reversion to the Fatherland."

古文：归语妻子曰： 我固甘死，正恐累汝辈耳。 
现代文：后来方氏发觉俞斌不是方孝孺的后代，于是就将实情告诉了官府，这一骗局也就结束。
English: Later, Fang found out that Yu Bin was not a descendant of Fang Xiaohui, so he told the truth to the government, and the scam was over.

古文：其夕，遂自经。或曰草诏乃括苍王景，或曰无锡王达云。练子宁，名安，以字行，新淦人。
现代文：神宗初年，下诏令褒奖建文时的忠臣，在南京建立表忠祠，排位第一的是徐辉祖，排位第二的是方孝孺。练子宁，名安，以字行世，新淦人。
English: In the first year of the Shinshu Sect, the loyal vassals who were at the time of the establishment of the document were awarded by the Imperial Edict, and a memorial shrine was established in Nanjing. The first place was ranked by Xu Huizu, and the second place was ranked by Fang Xiaojun. Reishi Ning, famous for peace, went through the world with a letter, and was a Xinlu person.

古文：父伯尚，工诗。
现代文：父亲练伯尚，工于诗词。
English: His father was a Buddhist monk and a poet.

古文：洪武初，官起居注。以直言谪外任，终镇安通判。
现代文：洪武年初，练子宁负责起居注，因直言相陈而被贬出外任职，最后为镇安通判。
English: At the beginning of the year of Hongwu, Reishi Ning was in charge of the residence notice, and was dismissed from his post because of his outspoken views. Finally, he was sentenced to Zhen'an Tong.

古文：子宁英迈不群，十八年，以贡士廷试对策，力言： 天之生材有限，陛下忍以区区小故，纵无穷之诛，何以为治？ 
现代文：练子宁英才超群，十八年以贡生身份参加廷试对策，极力申言： 天下人才有限，陛下怎么忍心因区区小事，而放任无穷无尽的诛杀，又将靠什么去治国呢？ 
English: Reishi's son, Ning, is an outstanding talent. In 18 years, he participated in the imperial examination as a tribute student. He strongly prophesied: Talent is limited in the world. How can His Majesty tolerate endless fighting due to trivial matters? What will he rely on to govern the country?

古文：太祖善其意，擢一甲第二，授翰林修撰。
现代文：太祖嘉赏其用心，将他提拔为一甲第二名，授为翰林修撰。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated his diligence, promoted him to the second place, and awarded him the title of Hanlin Shuxian.

古文：丁母艰，力行古礼。
现代文：练子宁遭母丧，力行古礼。
English: Practicing son Ning suffered from his mother's death, and vigorously performed the ancient rites.

古文：服阕，复官，历迁工部侍郎。
现代文：服丧完毕，恢复官职，升任工部侍郎。
English: After the funeral, he resumed his official position and was promoted to chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：建文初，与方孝孺并见信用，改吏部左侍郎。以贤否进退为己任，多所建白。
现代文：建文初年，练子宁与方孝孺同为惠帝所信用，改任吏部左侍郎，以考核官吏是否贤能，而决定其升降为己任，对此多有建议。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, Reishi Ning and Fang Xiaojun, who were both trusted by Hui Di, were appointed as the left attendants of the personnel department, and it was decided that their promotion and demotion would be their own responsibility based on the assessment of whether the officials were virtuous. There were many suggestions for this.

古文：愤激叩首大呼曰： 坏陛下事者，此贼也。
现代文：不久，练子宁被授为御史大夫。燕军兵起，李景隆北征屡败，应诏返京。
English: Soon after, Reishi Ning was awarded the title of Imperial Historian. After the Yanshan Rebellion, Li Jinglong repeatedly failed in his Northern Expedition and had to return to Beijing.

古文：臣备员执法，不能为朝廷除卖国奸，死有余罪。
现代文：练子宁在朝中历数其罪，请求处死他，皇上不听，练子宁便叩首愤激大喊道： 坏陛下事者，就是此贼，死有余辜。
English: In the court, Reishi Ning enumerated his crimes and requested that he be put to death. The emperor did not listen, so Reishi Ning shook his head angrily and shouted, "He who did evil to Your Majesty, that thief, deserves to die."

古文：即陛下赦景隆，必无赦臣！ 
现代文：即使陛下赦免了李景隆，一定不要赦免微臣。 
English: Even if His Majesty pardons Li Jinglong, he must not pardon Weixin.

古文：因大哭求死，帝为罢朝。
现代文：然后大哭求死，皇上为此只得罢朝。
English: Then he cried out for his death, and the emperor had to abdicate for this.

古文：宗人府经历宋徵、御史叶希贤皆抗疏言景隆失律丧师，怀二心，宜诛。
现代文：宗人府经历宋征、御史叶希贤都坚决上疏说李景隆出战失利丧师，存有二心，应当处斩。
English: Both Song Zheng and Gu Shi Ye Xixian, who experienced the patriarchal palace, resolutely said that Li Jinglong lost the battle and lost his division, had two minds, and should be executed.

古文：并不纳。
现代文：皇上全不采纳。
English: The Emperor did not accept any of them.

古文：燕师既渡淮，靖江府长史萧用道、衡府纪善周是修上书论大计，指斥用事者。
现代文：燕兵渡淮之后，靖江府长史萧用道、衡府纪善周是修上书谈论大计，斥责当权者。
English: After Yan Bing's arrival in Huai, the governor of Jingjiang, Shi Xiaoying, and the governor of Hengfu, Ji Shan Zhou, wrote a letter to discuss the grand plan and reprimand those in power.

古文：书下廷臣议，用事者盛气以诟二人。
现代文：上书被下到廷臣商议，当权者盛气十足，辱骂萧、周二人。
English: The petition was sent to the courtiers for deliberation, and those in power were in high spirits, abusing Xiao and Zhou.

古文：子宁曰： 国事至此，尚不能容言者耶？ 
现代文：练子宁说道： 国事至此，你们还不能容许上言者吗？ 
English: Reishi said, "With the state of affairs as it is, can't you still tolerate those who preach?

古文：诟者愧而止。
现代文：辱骂者羞愧而止。
English: The reviler stops in shame.

古文：燕王即位，缚子宁至。
现代文：燕王即位，练子宁被绑至京。
English: Yan Wang ascended to the throne, and Reishi Ning was bound to Beijing.

古文：语不逊，磔死。族其家，姻戚俱戍边。子宁从子大亨，官嘉定知县。闻变，同妻沉刘家河死。
现代文：出语不逊，被施磔刑而死，其家被灭族，姻亲全部戍边，练子宁的堂侄练大亨，任嘉定知县，获悉此事，便与其妻投刘家河而死。
English: He was sentenced to death, his family was exterminated, his in-laws were all killed, and his cousin and nephew, the tycoon Ren Jiading, learned of the incident and died with his wife in Liujiahe.

古文：里人徐子权以进士为刑部主事，闻子宁死，恸哭赋诗自经。
现代文：同乡人徐子权以进士身份任刑部主事，听说练子宁的死讯，痛哭赋诗后上吊而死。
English: A fellow villager, Xu Ziguang, who served as the head of the criminal justice department as a probation officer, heard the news of Reishi Ning's death, cried bitterly and hanged himself after composing a poem.

古文：子宁善文章，孝孺称其多学而文。
现代文：练子宁善写文章，方孝孺称其多学而富文采。
English: Reishi is rather good at writing articles, and Fang Xiaojuan said that he is more scholarly and literate.

古文：燕王称帝，与大芳并见收，不屈死。
现代文：弘治年中，王佐刊刻其遗文，称为《金川玉屑集》。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, Wang Sa published and engraved his last will and testament, known as the "Kanagawa Gypsum Scrapbook."

古文：而大芳子顺童、道寿俱论诛，二孙死狱中。卓敬，字惟恭，瑞安人。
现代文：提学副使李梦阳设立金川书院以祭祀练子宁，将其堂命名为 浩然 。卓敬，字惟恭，瑞安人。
English: Li Mengyang, the vice-minister of education, established Jinchuan College with the aim of cultivating sons and daughters, and named its hall "Haoran," "Zhuo Jing," "Zhe Weigong" and "Ruian Ren."

古文：颖悟过人，读书十行俱下。
现代文：他颖悟过人，读书一目十行。
English: He was a brilliant student, able to read ten lines at a time.

古文：举洪武二十一年进士。
现代文：洪武二十一年考中进士。
English: Hongwu was promoted to junior high school in his 21st year.

古文：除户科给事中，鲠直无所避。
现代文：被任命为户科给事中，为人耿直，不避权势。
English: When he was appointed as the head of the Household Science Department, he was straightforward and did not shy away from power.

古文：时制度未备，诸王服乘拟天子。
现代文：当时制度还不完备，诸王的服饰、车马模仿太子。
English: At that time, the system was not yet complete, and the kings' clothing, chariots and horses imitated the prince.

古文：敬乘间言： 京师，天下视效。
现代文：卓敬乘机说道 ：京城为天下效仿。
English: Takechi took the opportunity to say: The capital city should be an example for the rest of the world.

古文：陛下于诸王不早辨等威，而使服饰与太子埒，嫡庶相乱，尊卑无序，何以令天下？ 
现代文：陛下对诸王如不趁早分辨等级、威严，而使他们的服饰与太子相同，从而嫡庶混乱，尊卑无序，何以令天下？ 
English: Your majesty, if you do not distinguish the rank and dignity of kings as soon as possible, and make their clothing the same as that of princes, so that there will be chaos in the line of succession, and there will be no order in the hierarchy, how will you rule the world?

古文：帝曰： 尔言是，朕虑未及此。 
现代文：皇上说： 你说得对，朕还没有考虑到此。 
English: The emperor said: You are right, I have not considered this.

古文：益器重之。
现代文：因而更加器重他。
English: That makes him all the more important.

古文：他日与同官见，适八十一人，命改官为 元士 。
现代文：他日与同僚觐见，恰好八十一人，太祖命他们改称元士。
English: On the day he met with his colleagues, there were exactly eighty-one of them, and the great-grandfather ordered them to change their name to Genji.

古文：寻以六科为政事本源，又改曰 源士 。已，复称给事中。
现代文：随即以六科为政事本源，又改称源士。不久，重又称给事中。
English: He then changed his name to Genshi (Minister of Science and Technology) with the six sciences as the source of politics. Soon, he was also called Genshizuchu (Minister of State).

古文：历官户部侍郎。
现代文：卓敬历任户部侍郎。
English: I would like to pay my respects to all the past retainers of the head office.

古文：建文初，敬密疏言： 燕王智虑绝伦，雄才大略，酷类高帝。
现代文：建文初年，卓敬秘密上疏说： 燕王智谋绝伦，并有雄才大略，酷似高皇帝。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, Zhuo Jian secretly said: Yan Wang is a brilliant strategist, and has great talent, just like Emperor Gao.

古文：北平形胜地，士马精强，金、元年由兴。
现代文：北平地势优越，兵精马壮，金、元即由此兴起。
English: Beiping has a superior geographical position, strong soldiers and horses, and the rise of gold and yuan.

古文：今宜徙封南昌，万一有变，亦易控制。
现代文：现在应当将他改封南昌，万一有变，也容易控制。
English: Now he should be renamed Nanchang, in case of change, it is also easy to control.

古文：夫将萌而未动者，几也；量时而可为者，势也。
现代文：事情即将萌发而未行动，那是由于时机未到，而考虑可以行动的时间则要依据形势。
English: If something is about to happen and you don't act, it's because the time is not right, and the time to act depends on the situation.

古文：势非至刚莫能断，几非至明莫能察。 
现代文：形势还未成熟时便不能做出决断，而时机还未明朗便不能给予明察。 
English: Decisions cannot be made when the situation is not yet ripe, and the time is not yet clear to give a clear view.

古文：奏入，翌日召问。
现代文：上奏到达朝廷，第二天皇上召问卓敬。
English: The prelude arrived at the imperial court, and the second emperor summoned Takakage.

古文：敬叩首曰： 臣所言天下至计，愿陛下察之。 
现代文：卓敬叩首道 ：微臣所言乃天下至计，愿陛下明察。 
English: Zhuo Jing tapped his head and said, "What Weixin said is the best plan in the world. May His Majesty see it clearly."

古文：事竟寝。
现代文：但是此事最终就此而止。
English: But the matter ended there.

古文：燕王即位，被执，责以建议徙燕，离间骨肉。
现代文：燕王即位，卓敬被捕，明成祖指责他曾建议改封一事，离间骨肉之情。
English: Yan Wang ascended to the throne, Zhuo Jing was arrested, and Ming Chengzu accused him of having proposed to change the seal, causing a rift between flesh and blood.

古文：敬厉声曰： 惜先帝不用敬言耳！ 
现代文：卓敬厉声说道： 可惜先帝没有采纳我的建议。 
English: Zhuo Jing said in a sharp voice: Unfortunately, the former emperor did not adopt my suggestion.

古文：帝怒，犹怜其才，命系狱，使人讽以管仲、魏徵事。
现代文：皇上十分生气，但仍怜惜其才，下令将他下狱，派人以管仲、魏征之事相劝。
English: The emperor was very angry, but still pitied his talent, ordered him to be released from prison, and sent someone to advise him on the matter of Guanzhong and Wei Zheng.

古文：敬泣曰： 人臣委贽，有死无二。
现代文：卓敬流着泪说： 身为人臣，只有以死相报。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Zhuo Jing said, "As a vassal, I can only be rewarded with death.

古文：先皇帝曾无过举，一旦横行篡夺，恨不即死见故君地下，乃更欲臣我耶？ 
现代文：先皇帝曾无过失，忽然被横行篡夺，我恨不得立即死去，到地下去见先皇，你还想让我为你效力吗？ 
English: The previous emperor had no faults, but was suddenly usurped by a rampant usurper. I wish I could die immediately and go underground to see the previous emperor. Do you still want me to work for you?

古文：帝犹不忍杀。
现代文：皇上还是不忍杀他。
English: The emperor could not bear to kill him.

古文：姚广孝故与敬有隙，进曰： 敬言诚见用，上宁有今日。 
现代文：姚广孝以前与卓敬有隔阂，便进劝皇上 ：卓敬之言如果真的被采用，皇上难道还会有今日吗？ 
English: Yao Guangxiao had previously been at odds with Zhuo Jian, so he went to persuade the emperor: If Zhuo Jian's words were really adopted, would the emperor still exist today?

古文：乃斩之，诛其三族。
现代文：皇上这才处死卓敬，并灭其三族。
English: It was only then that the emperor executed Zhuo Jian and destroyed his three clans.

古文：敬立朝慷慨，美丰姿，善谈论，凡天官、舆地、律历、兵刑诸家，无不博究。
现代文：卓敬言行慷慨，风流倜傥，善于谈论，凡天官、舆地、律历、兵刑诸家无不广泛研究。
English: Zhuo Jing was generous in words and deeds, good-natured, and good at talking. He was widely studied by all families of heaven, earth, law, calendar, and military punishment.

古文：成祖尝叹曰： 国家养士三十年，惟得一卓敬。 
现代文：成祖曾叹道 ：国家培养人才三十年，唯得一卓敬。 
English: Cheng Zu once lamented: The country has been cultivating talents for thirty years, and it has won great respect.

古文：万历初，用御史屠叔方言，表墓建祠。
现代文：万历年初，朝廷采纳御史屠叔方的建议，为卓敬修墓建祠。
English: At the beginning of the Wanli year, the Imperial Court accepted the suggestion of the uncle of Mishi Tu and built a shrine for the tomb of Zhuo Jing.

