古文：许汉阳刘禹锡周邯资州龙韦思恭卢元裕卢翰李修韦宥尺木史氏子
现代文：许汉阳刘禹锡周邯资州龙韦思恭卢元裕卢翰李修韦宥尺木史氏子
English: Xu Hanyang, Liu Yuxi, Zhou Rongzizhou, Long Wei Si, Gong Lu, Yuan Yu, Lu Han, Li Xiuwei, Yu Shakubi, Shi Shi,

古文：许汉阳
现代文：许汉阳
English: Xu Hanyang

古文：许汉阳，本汝南人也。
现代文：许汉阳本是汝南人。
English: Xu Hanyang is originally from the south of China.

古文：贞元中，舟行于洪饶间。
现代文：贞元年间，他乘舟走到洪饶州间。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, he went by boat to Hongraozhou.

古文：日暮，江波急，寻小浦路入。不觉行三四里，到一湖中，虽广而水才三二尺。
现代文：傍晚，江流很急，顺着水边的一条路线漂入，不知不觉漂出三四里，来到一个湖中。湖面虽然宽广，但是水深只有二三尺。
English: In the evening, the river flowed very fast, following a route along the water's edge, drifting in and out unconsciously for three or four miles, to a lake. Although the lake is wide, the water is only two or three feet deep.

古文：又北行一里许，见湖岸竹树森茂，乃投以泊舟。
现代文：又向北走了一里左右，见湖岸竹树繁茂，就想划过船去停泊。
English: I walked north for another mile or so, and when I saw the bamboo trees growing on the lake shore, I wanted to row across the boat to anchor.

古文：渐近，见亭宇甚盛，有二青衣双鬟方鸦，素面如玉，迎舟而笑。
现代文：这两个婢女头顶双发髻，方形丫，脸白如玉。许汉阳感到惊讶。
English: The two maids had double-bun hairstyles on their heads, were square-shaped, and their faces were as white as snow. Xu Hanyang was surprised.

古文：汉阳讶之，而调以游词，又大笑，复走入宅。
现代文：他油腔滑调挑逗她们，她们大笑着走入宅院。
English: He flirted with them in a flirtatious way and they walked into the house laughing.

古文：汉阳束带，上岸投谒。
现代文：许汉阳整衣束带，上岸去投宿拜谒。
English: Xu Hanyang strapped on his clothes and went ashore to pay homage.

古文：未行三数步，青衣延入宅内厅，揖坐。
现代文：没走上三五步，一位婢女便迎出来，直接领进内厅，让他坐下。
English: Before he had taken three or five steps, a servant girl greeted him, led him directly into the inner hall, and made him sit down.

古文：云： 女郎易服次。 
现代文：然后说： 这是女郎换衣服的地方。 
English: And he said, This is the place where the young women change their clothes.

古文：须臾，青衣命汉阳入中门。
现代文：过了一会儿，婢女让许汉阳走进中门。
English: After a while, the maid let Xu Hanyang walk into the middle door.

古文：见满庭皆大池，池中荷芰芬芳，四岸斐如碧玉。
现代文：院里到处都是大水池，池中的荷花、菱角之类散发着芬芳，四岸像碧玉一般文彩焕然。
English: There are large ponds everywhere in the yard, and the lotus flowers and rhododendrons in the ponds exude fragrance, and the four banks are resplendent like jasper.

古文：作两道虹桥，以通南北。
现代文：有两座虹桥贯通南北。
English: There are two rainbow bridges running north-south.

古文：北有大阁。
现代文：北边有一个大阁。
English: To the north is a large pavilion.

古文：上阶，见白金书曰 夜明宫 。
现代文：拾级而上，见上面有用白金书写的三个大字： 夜明宫 。
English: Climbing up the ladder, see the three large characters written in platinum above: Yaming Palace.

古文：四面奇花果木，森耸连云。
现代文：四面的奇花异草以及各种果树，森然高耸，与云相接。
English: Strange flowers and grasses as well as various fruit trees on all sides, towering high and touching the clouds.

古文：青衣引上阁一层，又有青衣六七人，见者列拜。
现代文：那婢女把他领到阁楼的头一层，那里的六七个婢女一齐向他下拜。
English: The maid led him to the first floor of the attic, where all six or seven maids bowed to him.

古文：又引第二层，方见女郎六七人。
现代文：又领到第二层，才见到六七位女郎。
English: I was led to the second floor, where I saw 67 girls.

古文：目未尝睹，皆拜问所来。
现代文：他还未等看清她们，她们就一齐拜见，并七嘴八舌问他从哪儿来。
English: Before he could get a good look at them, they all turned to him and asked him where he was from.

古文：汉阳具述不意至此。
现代文：许汉阳详细说明自己是无意中来到这里的。
English: Xu Hanyang elaborated that he came here unintentionally.

古文：女郎揖坐讫，青衣具饮食，所用皆非人间见者。
现代文：女郎们请他坐定之后，婢女们送上来饮食。这些饮食都是人间不曾见过的。
English: After the girls had seated him, the maids brought him food and drink such as he had never tasted before.

古文：食讫命酒。
现代文：吃完又喝酒。
English: After eating and drinking.

古文：其中有奇树高数丈，枝干如梧，叶似芭蕉，有红花满树未吐。
现代文：院子里有一棵几丈高的大树，看枝干像梧桐。看叶子像芭蕉。树上挂满了还没有开放的红花，一朵朵大如酒杯。
English: In the courtyard, there is a tall tree with branches like a sycamore and leaves like a plantain. The tree is covered with red flowers that have not yet opened, each one as big as a wine glass.

古文：盎如杯，正对饮所。
现代文：这棵树正对着喝酒的地方。
English: The tree is right in front of the drinking area.

古文：一女郎执酒，命一青衣捧一鸟如鹦鹉，置饮前栏干上。
现代文：一位女郎端着酒，让一名婢女捧来一只很像鹦鹉的鸟，放在面前的栏杆上。
English: A woman carrying wine asked a servant to bring her a bird resembling a parrot, which she placed on the railing in front of her.

古文：叫一声，而树上花一时开，芳香袭人。
现代文：那鸟叫了一声，树上的花便同时开放，香气袭人。
English: The bird gave a cry, and the flowers on the tree opened at the same time, and the fragrance was amazing.

古文：每花中有美人长尺余，婉丽之姿，掣曳之服，各称其质。
现代文：每一朵花中，都有一个一尺多高的美人。这些小美人个个都姿容婉丽，服饰飘摆，各有风韵。
English: In each flower, there is a beauty more than a foot tall. Each of these little beauties has a graceful figure, flowing clothes, and each has its own charm.

古文：诸乐弦管尽备。
现代文：各种弦乐管乐的乐器都有。
English: There are all kinds of string and wind instruments.

古文：其人再拜。女郎举酒，众乐俱作，萧萧冷冷，窨如神仙。
现代文：女郎一举杯，便众乐齐奏，忽而像萧萧马鸣，时而像泠泠的水声，就像仙乐一般。
English: As soon as the girl raised her glass, the music played in unison, suddenly resembling the sound of a horse neighing, sometimes like the sound of rushing water, just like heavenly music.

古文：才一巡，已夕，月色复明。
现代文：刚刚酒过一巡，天就已经黑了，月色明亮起来。
English: After just one round of drinking, the sky was already dark and the moon was bright.

古文：女郎所论，皆非人间事，汉阳所不测。
现代文：女郎们谈论的，都不是人间的事。都是许汉阳所没有想到的。
English: The girls are not talking about mundane things. They are talking about things that Xu Hanyang never thought of.

古文：时因汉阳以人事辩之，则女郎一无所酬答。
现代文：当时许汉阳就用人间的事与她们争辩，女郎们没法儿用常理回答。
English: At that time, Xu Hanyang used human affairs to argue with them, and the girls could not answer with common sense.

古文：欢饮至二更，筵宴已毕，其树花片片落池中，人亦落，便失所在。
现代文：喝到二更天，宴席已经结束，那些树上的红花也一片片地落入池中，那些小美人也随之落下，便不知哪去了。
English: After two days of drinking, the banquet is over, the red flowers on the trees have fallen into the pool, and those little beauties have also fallen, and I don't know where they went.

古文：一女郎取一卷文书以示，汉阳览之，乃《江海赋》。
现代文：一位女郎拿来一卷文书给许汉阳看。许汉阳一看，是《江海赋》。
English: A girl brought a roll of paperwork for Xu Hanyang to look at. When Xu Hanyang looked at it, it was "River Sea Fable."

古文：女郎令汉阳读之，遂为读一遍。
现代文：那女郎让许汉阳读一遍。许流阳就读了一遍。
English: The girl asked Xu Hanyang to read it again. Xu Liyang read it again.

古文：女郎又请自读一遍，命青衣收之。
现代文：女郎又自己读了一遍，然后让婢女收了起来。
English: The girl read it again herself, and then asked her maid to put it away.

古文：一女即谓诸女郎，兼语汉阳曰： 有感怀一章，欲请诵之。 
现代文：一位女郎对众女郎和许汉阳说： 我想好一首感怀诗，想给大家朗诵一下。 
English: A girl said to all the girls and Xu Hanyang: I'd like to write a touching poem and recite it to everyone.

古文：女郎及汉阳曰： 善。 及吟曰： 海门连洞庭，每去三千里。
现代文：女郎们和许汉阳都说好，于是那女郎吟诵道： 海门连洞庭，每去三千里。
English: The girls all agreed with Xu Hanyang, so the girl chanted: Haimen Lian Dongting, every three thousand miles.

古文：十载一归来，辛苦潇湘水。 
现代文：十载一归来，辛苦潇湘水。 
English: After ten years of hard work, Xiao Xiangshui is back.

古文：女郎命青衣取诸卷，兼笔砚，请汉阳与录之。
现代文：那女郎让婢女把卷、笔、砚取来，请许汉阳为她把诗录下来。
English: The girl asked her maid to fetch the scroll, pen, and inkstone, and asked Xu Hanyang to write down the poem for her.

古文：汉阳展卷，皆金花之素，上以银字札之，卷大如拱斗。
现代文：许汉阳把卷打开一看，见卷全是金花底色的白素丝绸，上面用银字写的。卷像拱斗那么大，有半卷已经写过了。
English: Xu Hanyang opened the scroll and saw that the scroll was made entirely of white silk with a gold flower background, with silver writing on it. The scroll was as big as an arch, and half of the scroll had already been written.

古文：已半卷书过矣，观其笔，乃白玉为管，研乃碧玉，以玻璃为匣，研中皆研银水。
现代文：看那笔，是白玉做的笔管。
English: Look at that pen. The barrel is made of white jade.

古文：写毕，令以汉阳之名押之。
现代文：砚台是碧玉做的，用玻璃做的匣子。
English: The ring stand is made of jasper and the box is made of glass.

古文：展向前，见数首，皆有人名押署。
现代文：砚台里研的全是银水。写完之后，女郎让许汉阳写上自己的名字。打开往前看，看到了几首诗，都有人署名。
English: After she finished writing, the girl asked Xu Hanyang to write her name. She opened it and looked forward, and saw several poems, all of which were signed.

古文：有名仲方者，有名巫者，有名朝阳者，而不见姓。
现代文：有叫 仲方 的，有叫 巫 的，有叫 朝阳 的，而不见有写姓氏的。
English: Some are called "Nakafo," some are called "Wu," some are called "Chaoyang," but there are no written surnames.

古文：女郎遂收索卷。
现代文：这时候女郎就往回要那卷。
English: At this time, the girl went back to ask for the scroll.

古文：汉阳曰： 有一篇欲奉和，拟继此可乎？ 
现代文：许汉阳说： 我有一首和诗，打算接着写到后边可以吗？ 
English: Xu Hanyang said, "I have a poem and a poem, do you want to write it next?"

古文：女郎曰： 不可。
现代文：女郎说： 不可以。
English: The girl said: No.

古文：此亦每归呈父母兄弟，不欲杂尔。 
现代文：这书卷每次回家都要交给父母兄弟看，不想把你夹杂在里边。 
English: Every time I go home, I have to show this book to my parents and brothers. I don't want to include you in it.

古文：汉阳曰： 适以弊名押署，复可乎？ 
现代文：许汉阳说： 刚才把我的名字都写上了，那怎么又可以了呢？ 
English: Xu Hanyang said, "I just wrote my name on everything, so how can I do it again?

古文：曰： 事别，非君子所谕。 
现代文：女郎说： 不是一回事，这不是你能明白的。 
English: The girl said: "It's not the same thing, you can't understand it.

古文：四更已来，命悉收拾。
现代文：四更天一到，就让人全都收拾了。
English: As soon as the fourth day arrived, everyone was told to clean up.

古文：挥霍次，一青衣曰： 郎可归舟矣。 
现代文：匆忙中，一位婢女说： 您可以回去了。 
English: In a hurry, one of the maids said, "You can go back."

古文：汉阳乃起。
现代文：许汉阳便起身。
English: Xu Hanyang then got up.

古文：诸女郎曰： 忻此旅泊接奉，不得郑重耳。 恨恨而别。
现代文：众女郎说： 这次相会令人高兴，只是对你怠慢了。 大家恋恋不舍，恨恨而别。
English: The girls said, "This meeting is a pleasure, but we have neglected you. We are all in love, but we must part ways.

古文：归舟忽大风，云色陡暗，寸步黯黑。
现代文：许汉阳回来的时候忽然遇上大风，云色陡然变暗，每走一步都黑暗得看不见路。
English: When Xu Hanyang returned, he suddenly encountered a strong wind. The clouds suddenly turned dark, and every step he took was so dark that he couldn't see the road.

古文：至平明，观夜来饮所，乃空林树而已。
现代文：到了天明，他来看他夜间喝酒的地方，乃是一片空空的树林罢了。
English: At dawn he came to see that the place where he had been drinking the night before was nothing but an empty forest.

古文：汉阳解缆，行至昨晚棂口江岸人家，见十数人，似有非常。
现代文：许汉阳解开缆绳，走到昨晚所见江岸人家处，见有十几个人，好像发生了什么事情，于是就停船打听。
English: Xu Hanyang untied the cable and walked to the place where he saw the riverbank last night. He saw more than a dozen people, as if something had happened, so he stopped the boat to inquire.

古文：因泊舟而讯。人曰： 江口溺杀四人，至二更后，却捞出。三人已卒，其一人，虽似死而未甚。有巫女以杨柳水洒拂禁咒，久之能言曰： 昨夜水龙王诸女及姨姊妹六七人归过洞庭，宵宴于此，取我辈四人作酒。
现代文：有人说： 江口淹死了四个人，到二更天捞上来，三个人已死，另一个虽然像死了却没有完全死过去，有一个巫女为他洒拂杨柳水，念咒，四次才能讲话，他说： 昨天晚上水龙王的几个女儿及她们的姨表姊妹六七个人回过洞庭，在这举行夜宴，用我们四个人做酒。
English: Some people said: Jiangkou drowned four people, and two days later he fished them out. Three people were dead, and the other one, although he seemed to be dead, did not completely die. A witch sprinkled poplar willow water on him and recited a spell four times before he could speak. He said: Yesterday evening, several daughters of the Water Dragon King and their aunts and cousins, six or seven people, returned to the cave garden, held a dinner here, and used the four of us to make wine.

古文：掾客少，不多饮，所以我却得来。  
现代文：因为客人不多，喝酒不多，所以我还能活着回来。  
English: Because there aren't many guests and there isn't much to drink, I can still come back alive.

古文：汉阳异之，乃问曰： 客者谓谁。 
现代文：许汉阳感到惊异，就问那个人说： 那个客人是谁？ 
English: Xu Hanyang was surprised and asked the man, "Who is that guest?"

古文：曰： 一措大耳，不记姓名。 
现代文：那人说： 是一个穷酸的读书人，不记得他的姓名。 
English: The man said: 'He was an avid reader, I can't remember his name.

古文：又云，青衣言，诸小娘子苦爱人间文字，不可得，常欲请一措大文字而无由。
现代文：那人又说： 听婢女说，这些小娘子特别喜爱人间的文字，但总弄不到。她常常想向一个穷酸文人求字而没有法子。 
English: The man also said: According to the maid, these little girls are particularly fond of human letters, but they can never get them. She often wants to ask a literary man for a letter, but there is no way.

古文：又问今在何处，已发舟也。
现代文：许汉阳问那个穷酸文人现在什么地方，对方说已经开船走了。
English: Xu Hanyang asked the poor writer where he was now, and the other said that he had already sailed away.

古文：汉阳乃念昨宵之事，及感怀之什，皆可验也。
现代文：许汉阳想到昨天夜间的事，以及那些复杂的感触，都可以验证了。
English: When Xu Hanyang thinks about the events of last night, and those complex feelings, they can all be verified.

古文：汉阳默然而归舟，觉腹中不安，乃吐出鲜血数升，知悉以人血为酒尔。三日方平。
现代文：他默默地乘船而回，觉得肚子里不大安稳，就吐了几升鲜血，知道这全是用人血做的酒，三天之后才平定。
English: He silently took the boat back, feeling that his stomach was not stable, he vomited several liters of blood, knowing that this was all wine made from human blood, and it took three days to calm down.

古文：刘禹锡
现代文：刘禹锡
English: Liu Yuxi

古文：唐连州刺史刘禹锡，贞元中，寓居荥泽。
现代文：唐朝连州刺史刘禹锡，贞元年中，寓居在荥泽。
English: Liu Yuxi, a member of the Tang Dynasty Lianzhou Nobility, lived in Heze in the middle of the first year of his reign.

古文：首夏独坐林亭，忽然间大雨，天地昏黑，久方开霁。
现代文：四月的一天，他独自坐在林亭中，忽然间下起大雨，天地一片昏黑，很久才开晴。
English: One day in April, he was sitting alone in a pavilion in the forest, when it suddenly started to rain heavily. The sky was dark, and it took a long time for it to clear up.

古文：独亭中杏树，云气不散。
现代文：只有亭中的一棵杏树云气不散。
English: Only one almond tree in the pavilion remains.

古文：禹锡就视树下，有一物形如龟鳖，腥秽颇甚，大五斗釜。
现代文：刘禹锡走近杏树细看，看到一物形状像龟鳖，特别污秽腥臭，有五斗大锅那么大的东西。
English: Liu Yuxi approached the almond tree to take a closer look, and saw an object shaped like a turtle shell, with a particularly foul stench and the size of a five-dipper cauldron.

古文：禹锡因以瓦砾投之，其物即缓缓登阶，止于檐柱。
现代文：他就扔瓦砾打它。那东西就缓缓地登上台阶，在檐柱下停住了。
English: He hit it with rubble and it slowly climbed up the steps and stopped under a pillar.

古文：禹锡乃退立于床下，支策以观之。
现代文：刘禹锡就退到床下，把书箱摞起来垫脚，观察那东西。
English: Liu Yuxi retreated under the bed, propped up the bookcase, and observed the object.

古文：其物仰视柱杪，款以前趾，抉去半柱。
现代文：那东西仰视着柱子的顶端，慢慢用前爪子挖去半根柱子，于是大震一声，屋上的瓦纷飞乱下。
English: The thing looked up at the top of the pillar, slowly using its front paws to dig away half of the pillar, and then there was a loud bang and the roof tiles flew down.

古文：因大震一声，屋瓦飞纷乱下，亭内东壁，上下罅裂丈许。先是亭东紫花苜蓿数亩，禹锡时于裂处，分明遥见。
现代文：亭内东壁上，从上到下裂了一个一丈来长的口子。原先这亭东有几亩紫花苜蓿，刘禹锡这时从裂口可以分明地看到远处这些苜蓿。
English: On the east wall of the pavilion, there is a crack from top to bottom. Originally, there were several acres of alfalfa in the east of the pavilion. At that time, Liu Yuxi could clearly see these alfalfa in the distance from the crack.

古文：雷既收声，其物亦失，而东壁之裂，亦已自吻合矣。
现代文：雷震声过后，那东西也没有了。而东壁上的裂口，也自己吻合了。
English: After the thunderclap, that thing was gone, too, and the crack in the east wall closed on its own.

古文：禹锡亟视之，苜蓿如故，壁曾无动处。
现代文：刘禹锡多次去看，苜蓿如旧，墙壁竟然没有变化之处。
English: Liu Yuxi went to see it several times, but it was just the same as before, and there was no change in the walls.

古文：周邯
现代文：周邯
English: Zhou Ying

古文：贞元中，有处士周邯，文学豪俊之士也。
现代文：贞元年间，有一个叫周邯的处士，是一位文学豪杰之士。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, there was a clerk named Zhou Qi, who was a literary hero.

古文：因彝人卖奴，年十四五。
现代文：一个彝人卖奴隶，那奴隶十四五岁，看样子很聪明伶俐。
English: A man was selling a slave. The slave was fourteen or fifteen years old and looked very intelligent.

古文：视其貌甚慧黠。言善入水，如履平地。
现代文：主人介绍说这奴隶善于入水，在水里如履平地一般。
English: The master said that this slave was good at entering the water, and in the water it was like walking on flat ground.

古文：令其沉潜，虽经日移时。终无所苦。
现代文：让他沉到水底，虽然经日移时不上来，他始终都不觉得苦。
English: Let him sink to the bottom of the water, although he does not come up when the sun moves, he always does not feel pain.

古文：云，蜀之溪壑潭洞，无不届也。
现代文：说蜀地的溪、壑、潭、洞，没有他没到过的。
English: He said that there is no creek, stream, pool or cave in Shu that he has not been to.

古文：邯因买之，易其名曰 水精 。
现代文：周邯于是就买了这个奴隶，认为他的本领不一般，给他改名叫 水精 。
English: Zhou Ye then bought this slave, thinking that his ability was not ordinary, and changed his name to Shui Jing.

古文：异其能也。
现代文：周邯从蜀地坐船，出山峡，到江陵。
English: Zhou Qi took a boat from Shudi, went out of the mountain gorge, and went to Gangneung.

古文：邯自蜀乘舟下峡，抵江陵，经瞿塘滟滪，遂令水精沉而视其邃远。水精入，移时而出，多探金银器物。邯喜甚。
现代文：经过瞿塘峡滟滪堆滩时，他就让水精沉到水底，去看看水底到底有多深。水精入水，过了一会儿出来，捞得许多的银器物，周邯高兴坏了。
English: When passing through the Qutang Gorge, he let the water sprite sink to the bottom of the water to see how deep the water was. The water sprite entered the water, came out after a while, and retrieved a lot of silverware. Zhou Yao was overjoyed.

古文：每舣船于江潭，皆令水精沉之，复有所得。
现代文：每次小船泊于江岸潭边，他都让水精沉下去一次，又有收获。
English: Every time he moored the boat on the bank of the river, he let the water spirit sink down once, and there was a harvest.

古文：沿流抵江都，经牛渚矶，古云最深处，是温峤爇犀照水怪之滨。
现代文：沿江流来到江都，经过牛渚矶。自古说最深的地方，是温峤燃烧犀角照水怪的地方。
English: Along the river flow to the Yangtze River, passing through the Ushi Nagisa Mountains. Since ancient times, the deepest place has been said to be the place of the warm-tempered burning rhinoceros shining water monster.

古文：又使没入。
现代文：他又让水精沉下去。
English: He let the water spirit sink again.

古文：移时复得宝玉。云，甚有水怪，莫能名状，皆怒目戟手，身仅免祸。
现代文：过了一会儿水精捞上来一块宝玉，说水底下有水怪，说不准是什么样子，都怒自狂舞，要抓他，自己仅仅能免祸。
English: After a while, the water sprite fished up a precious stone and said that there was a water monster under the water. He couldn't say for sure what it looked like, but he was furious and danced wildly. He wanted to catch him, but he could only avoid disaster.

古文：因兹邯亦至富赡。
现代文：由此周邯也成为巨富。
English: As a result, Zhou Yu also became very rich.

古文：后数年，邯有友人王泽，牧相州，邯适河北而访之。
现代文：几年后，周邯有一个叫王泽的朋友在相州做太守，周邯到河北去访问他。
English: A few years later, Zhou Yu had a friend named Wang Ze who was the governor of Xiangzhou. Zhou Yu went to Hebei to visit him.

古文：泽甚喜，与之游宴，日不能暇。
现代文：王泽很高兴，与周邯一起游览，欢宴，一天天没有空闲。
English: Wang Ze was very happy. He toured and feasted with Zhou Ye. There was never a day off.

古文：因相与至州北隅八角井。
现代文：二人一起来到州北隅的八角井。
English: The two of them came to the octagonal well in the northern corner of the state.

古文：天然磐石，而甃成八角焉，阔可三丈余。
现代文：所谓八角井，是用天然弯曲的石头，把井壁砌成八角形。井口宽三丈还多。
English: The so-called octagonal well is made of naturally curved stone, and the walls of the well are built into an octagonal shape. The wellhead is more than three stories wide.

古文：且暮烟云蓊郁，漫衍百余步。
现代文：这口井，早晨和晚上烟云蒸腾，弥漫出一百多步外。
English: This well, in the morning and in the evening, steaming clouds of smoke, spread out more than a hundred paces away.

古文：晦夜，有光如火红射出千尺，鉴物若昼。
现代文：黑夜，有火红的光从井里射出来，可照出一千尺，看东西像白天一样清楚。
English: In the dark of night, a fiery red light shoots out of the well, illuminating up to a thousand feet and seeing things as clearly as during the day.

古文：古老相传云，有金龙潜其底，或亢阳祷之，亦甚有应。
现代文：自古人们相传说，有一条金龙潜伏在水底。有时候久旱不雨，人们到井边来祷告，也很灵验。
English: Since ancient times, people have said that there is a golden dragon lurking at the bottom of the water. Sometimes there is no rain for a long time, and people come to the well to pray, which is also very effective.

古文：泽曰： 此井应有至宝，但无计而究其是非耳。 
现代文：王泽说： 这井里理应有至宝，只可惜没有办法探究它的虚实罢了。 
English: Wang Ze said, "There should be a great treasure in this well, but it is a pity that there is no way to investigate its truth and falsity."

古文：邯笑曰： 甚易。 
现代文：周邯笑着说： 非常容易！ 
English: Zhou Qi said with a smile: It's very easy!

古文：遂命水精曰： 汝可与我投此井到底，看有何怪异。泽亦当有所赏也。 
现代文：于是就对水精说： 你要能投到水底，看看井里有什么怪异，连王泽也会重重的赏你。 
English: So he said to the water sprite: If you can throw a crane to the bottom of the water and see what strange things are in the well, even Wang Ze will reward you.

古文：水精已久不入水，忻然脱衣沉之。
现代文：水精已经很长时间没下过水了，很高兴就脱了衣服下去了。
English: The water sprite had not been in the water for a long time, so he was happy to take off his clothes and go in.

古文：良久而出，语邯曰： 有一黄龙极大，鳞如金色，抱数颗明珠熟寐。
现代文：很长时间他才出来，对周邯说： 有一条很大的黄龙，鳞如金色，抱着几颗明珠在那睡觉。
English: It took him a long time to come out, and he said to Zhou Qi: There is a big yellow dragon, with golden scales, sleeping there with several pearls in its arms.

古文：水精欲劫之，但手无刃。惮其龙忽觉，是以不敢触。
现代文：水精想要把明珠抢过来，但是手中没有兵刃，怕那龙忽然发觉，所以没敢动。
English: The water sprite wanted to snatch the pearl, but she didn't have a sword in her hand, so she didn't dare to move for fear that the dragon would suddenly discover it.

古文：若得一利剑，如龙觉，当斩之无惮也。 
现代文：如果能有一把利剑，即使龙发觉了那也可以把它杀死，没有什么可怕了。 
English: If you can have a sharp sword, even if the dragon finds it, you can kill it, there is nothing terrible.

古文：邯与泽大喜。
现代文：周邯和王泽非常惊喜。
English: Zhou Qi and Wang Ze were very surprised.

古文：泽曰： 吾有剑，非常之宝也。
现代文：王泽说： 我有剑，我这把剑还是一把不比寻常的宝剑呢。
English: Wang Ze said, "I have a sword, and this sword of mine is an extraordinary sword.

古文：汝可持往而劫之。 
现代文：你可以拿我的剑下去把明珠抢来！ 
English: You can take my sword and go down and get the pearl!

古文：水精饮酒伏剑而入。
现代文：水精喝了些酒，带着剑就下去了。
English: The water sprite drank some wine and went down with his sword.

古文：移时，四面观者如堵。
现代文：过了一会儿，四面看热闹的人像墙一样。
English: After a while, the people watching the action on all sides were like a wall.

古文：忽见水精自井面跃出数百步。续有金龙亦长数百尺，爪甲锋颖，自空拿攫水精。却入井去。
现代文：忽然看见水精从井面跳出来几百步远，接着有一条几百尺长，爪甲锋利的金龙从空中来抓水精，人和龙都退进入井中。
English: Suddenly, he saw a water sprite jump out of the well surface several hundred paces away, followed by a golden dragon several hundred feet long with sharp claws coming from the air to catch the water sprite. Both the man and the dragon retreated into the well.

古文：左右慑栗，不敢近睹。
现代文：左右的人心惊胆战，不敢近看。
English: People on both sides panicked and did not dare to look closer.

古文：但邯悲其水精，泽恨失其宝剑，逡巡。
现代文：只是周邯心疼他的水精，王泽心疼他的宝剑，二人逡巡不定。
English: It's just that Zhou Qian is distressed by his water spirit, Wang Ze is distressed by his sword, and the two are uncertain.

古文：有一老人，身衣褐裘，貌甚古朴。
现代文：有一位身穿褐裘，相貌古朴的老人来见王泽说： 我是土地神。
English: An old man dressed in brown fur and with a quaint appearance came to see Wang Ze and said: I am the god of the land.

古文：而谒泽曰： 某土地之神，使君何容易而轻其百姓？此穴金龙，是上玄使者。宰其瑰璧，泽润一方。岂有信一微物，欲因睡而劫之？
现代文：先生怎能这么轻视自己的百姓？这口井里的金龙，是上天的使者，主宰那些瑰璧，泽润一方生灵，哪能只相信那一把小小的宝剑，而想要趁龙睡觉去把明珠抢过来呢？
English: How could the teacher despise his own people so much? The golden dragon in this well is the messenger of heaven, controlling those gems. How can the living beings believe only in that small sword, but want to take advantage of the dragon's sleep to snatch the pearl?

古文：龙忽震怒，作用神化，摇天关，摆地轴，搥山岳而碎丘陵，百里为江湖，万人为鱼鳖。
现代文：龙忽然震怒，作用神化，摇得动天关，摆得动地轴，捶得碎山岳，砸得碎丘陵，百里大地变成江湖，万人之众都要喂鱼鳖。
English: The dragon was suddenly enraged, and his actions were deified. He shook the heavens, and the earth's axis was shaken. He smashed the mountains, and the hills were smashed. Hundreds of miles of land were turned into rivers and lakes. Millions of people had to feed the fishes.

古文：君之骨肉焉可保？
现代文：到那时候，你的骨肉怎么能保得住呢？
English: At that time, how can your flesh and blood be preserved?

古文：昔者钟离不爱其宝，孟尝自返其珠，子不之效，乃肆其贪婪之心。
现代文：从前钟离不爱其宝，孟尝君自返其珠。你不学他们，却纵使贪婪狡诈之徒，鼓动狡诈贪婪之心，肆无忌惮地去夺宝。
English: If you do not learn from them, even if you are a greedy and cunning person, you will encourage the cunning and greedy heart to seize the treasure unscrupulously.

古文：纵使猾韧之徒，取宝无惮，今已啖其驱而锻其珠矣。 泽赧恨，无词而对。又曰： 君须火急悔过而祷焉，无使甚怒耳。 
现代文：现在他已经被龙吃掉锻炼那些珠子了！ 王泽羞愧悔恨，无言以对。土地神又说： 你必须马上悔过并且要褥告，不要让金龙太生气了！ 
English: Now he has been eaten by the dragon for training those beads! Wang Ze was ashamed and remorseful, speechless. The land god also said: You must immediately repent and denounce, don't let the golden dragon get too angry!

古文：老人倏去。
现代文：老人倏然离去。
English: The old man left abruptly.

古文：泽遂具牲牢奠之。资州龙
现代文：王泽立即就准备供品祭奠。资州龙
English: Wang Ze immediately prepared for the offering ceremony.

古文：韦皋镇蜀末年，资州献一龙，身长丈余，鳞甲悉具。
现代文：韦皋镇守巴蜀的末年，资州献来一条龙，身长一丈多，鳞和甲什么都有。
English: In the last years of Wei Wei's rule over Bashu, Zizhou offered a dragon, more than a meter long, with scales and claws.

古文：皋以木匣贮之，蟠屈于内。
现代文：韦皋把它用木匣子装着，让它在匣子里蟠屈着。
English: Wei Yan put it in a wooden box and let it squirm in the box.

古文：时属元日，置于大慈寺殿上，百姓皆传，纵观二三日，为香烟薰死。
现代文：当时正是正月初一，把它放在大慈寺的大殿上，百姓们一传十、十传百，随便看了三天，结果龙被香火薰死了。
English: At that time, it was the first day of the first month of the year, it was placed on the main hall of Daci Temple, and the people watched it for three days, one by one, one by one, one by one. As a result, the dragon was killed by incense.

古文：国史阙书。
现代文：《国史》上缺少这件事的记载。
English: There is no record of this event in the "National History."

古文：是何祥也？
现代文：这是什么预兆呢？
English: What kind of omen is this?

古文：韦思恭
现代文：韦思恭
English: Wei Sikyong

古文：元和六年，京兆韦思恭与董生、王生三人结友，于嵩山岳寺肄业。
现代文：元和六年，京兆人韦思恭与董生、王生三人结友，在嵩山岳寺修习学业。
English: Six years ago, Wei Sikyong, a resident of Beijing, made friends with Dong Sheng and Wang Sheng, and they studied at Songshan Mountain Temple.

古文：寺东北百余步，有取水盆在岩下。
现代文：寺东北一百多步的地方，岩石下有一个取水盒。
English: More than a hundred paces northeast of the temple, there is a water tank under a rock.

古文：围丈余，而深可容十斛。
现代文：水盆的围长一丈多一点，而深可装得下十斛。
English: The circumference of the basin is a little more than a meter, and the depth can be as much as ten fathoms.

古文：旋取旋增，终无耗。
现代文：水是随打随增多，打多少增多少，始终不见少。
English: The amount of water increases with the number of strokes, and there is never a shortage.

古文：一寺所汲也。
现代文：全寺的人都来打水。
English: People from all over the temple came to draw water.

古文：三人者自春居此，至七月中，三人乘暇欲取水。
现代文：韦思恭等三人从春天住进来，到了七月中旬，有一天，三个人趁有空就去打水。
English: Wei Sikyong and three others came to live here in the spring, and by mid-July, one day, the three of them took the opportunity to fetch water.

古文：路臻于石盆。
现代文：走到石盆，他们看到一条大蛇。
English: When they got to the stone basin, they saw a big snake.

古文：见一大蛇长数丈，黑若纯漆，而有白花，似锦，蜿蜒盒中。
现代文：这条大蛇有几丈长，黑得像纯漆，有白花，像锦，在石盆里弯弯曲曲地爬动。
English: The snake was several feet long, black as lacquer, with white flowers like brocade, and it slithered in a stone basin.

古文：三子见而骇，视之良久。
现代文：三个人吓了一跳，看了好久。
English: The three of them were startled and stared for a long time.

古文：王与董议曰： 彼可取而食之。 
现代文：王生与董生商议说： 那东西可以打死拿回去吃。 
English: Wang Sheng and Dong Sheng discussed and said: That thing can be beaten to death and taken back to eat.

古文：韦曰： 不可。
现代文：韦思恭说： 不行。
English: Wei Sikyong said: No.

古文：昔葛陂之竹，渔父之梭，雷氏之剑，尚皆为龙，安知此名山大镇，岂非龙潜其身耶。
现代文：以前葛陂的竹，渔父的梭，雷氏的剑，尚且都是龙，怎么知道这名山大镇之中就没有龙呢？
English: In the past, Ge Yao's bamboo, the fisherman's shuttle, and Lei's sword were all dragons. How do you know that there are no dragons in this famous mountain town?

古文：况此蛇鳞甲，尤异于常者。是可戒也。 
现代文：难道不是龙在这石盆里潜身吗？况且这条蛇的鳞和甲，和一般蛇特别不一样。这可要小心！ 
English: Isn't it possible that a dragon is lurking in this stone basin? Moreover, the scales and scales of this snake are very different from those of ordinary snakes. Be careful!

古文：二子不纳所言，乃投石而扣蛇且死，萦而归烹之。
现代文：二人没听他的话，就扔石头把蛇打死，缠绕起来拿回去煮上了。
English: The two did not listen to his words, so they threw stones to kill the snake, wound it up, took it back and cooked it.

古文：二子皆咄韦生之诈洁。
现代文：二人都嘲笑韦思恭是假正经。
English: Both men derided Wei Sicong as a phony.

古文：俄而报盆所又有蛇者。二子之盆所，又欲击。韦生谏而不允。
现代文：不一会儿有人说石盆那里又有大蛇，二人跑去一看，又要下手击蛇，韦思恭急忙劝阻。
English: After a while, someone said that there was another big snake in the stone basin. The two ran to take a look and wanted to hit the snake again. Wei Sikyong hurriedly dissuaded them.

古文：二子方举石欲投，蛇腾空而去。
现代文：二人刚举石要投，那蛇腾空而去。
English: The two of them had just lifted a stone to throw, when the snake ran away.

古文：及三子归院，烹蛇未熟。
现代文：等到三个人回到院子里，蛇肉还没煮熟。
English: By the time the three of them returned to the courtyard, the snake meat was still undercooked.

古文：忽闻山中有声，殷然地动。
现代文：忽然听到山中有一种声音，地也在颤动。
English: Suddenly, a sound was heard in the mountains, and the earth trembled.

古文：觇之，则此山间风云暴起，飞沙走石。
现代文：一看，竟然是这山中风云暴起，飞砂走石。
English: At first glance, it appears that this is a storm in the middle of the mountain.

古文：不瞬息至寺，天地晦暝，对面相失。
现代文：眨眼的工夫，风沙来到寺前，天昏地暗，对面不见人。
English: In the blink of an eye, the wind and sand came to the front of the temple, the sky was dark, and there was no one on the other side.

古文：寺中人闻风云暴起中云： 莫错击。 
现代文：寺中的人们在风云暴起之中有人祷告说： 不要错击了好人！ 
English: In the midst of the storm, people in the temple were praying, "Don't hit a good person by mistake!"

古文：须臾，雨火中半下，书生之宇，并焚荡且尽。
现代文：片刻，天上下火，其中多半下到三位书生的屋上，烧了个净光。
English: For a moment, the sky went up in flames, most of which went down to the rooftop of the three students and burned to a crisp.

古文：王与董，皆不知所在，韦子于寺廊下无事。
现代文：王生和董生都不知在哪。韦思恭在寺廊下没啥事儿。
English: Both Wang Sheng and Dong Sheng don't know where they are. Wei Sikyong is doing just fine in the hallway.

古文：故神化之理，亦甚昭然。
现代文：所以，神化的道理也很明显。
English: Therefore, the reason for deification is also obvious.

古文：不能全为善，但吐少善言，则蛟龙之祸不及矣。而况于常行善道哉！
现代文：不能全做善事，只说了一些好话，那么蛟龙之祸就没有及身，何况那些经常行善道的呢！
English: You can't do all the good deeds, you can only say some good words, then the evil dragon won't get you, let alone those who always do good deeds!

古文：其二子尸，迨两日，于寺门南隅下方索得。斯乃韦自说。
现代文：那王生和董生的尸体，过了两天，才在寺门南边找到。这是韦思恭亲口说的。
English: It took two days for the bodies of Wang Sheng and Dong Sheng to be found on the south side of the temple gate. This was said by Wei Sikyong himself.

古文：至于好杀者，足以为戒矣。
现代文：对于那些好杀生的人，此事足以为戒了。
English: For those who like to kill, this is enough of a warning.

古文：卢元裕
现代文：卢元裕
English: Lu Yuanyu

古文：故唐太守卢元裕未仕时，尝以中元设幡幢像，置盂兰于其间。俄闻盆中有唧唧之音。
现代文：从前唐太守卢元裕还没做官时，曾经在七月二十五这天设置幡幢像，又把盂兰盆放在其间，不一会儿就听到盆中有 唧唧 的声音。
English: When Lu Yuanyu, the former governor-general of the Tang Dynasty, was not yet an official, he once set up a giant statue on July 25th, and placed a pot of ylang-ylang in the middle of it. Soon after, he heard the sound of a gong in the pot.

古文：元裕视，见一小龙才寸许，逸状奇姿，婉然可爱。
现代文：卢元裕过去一看，见盆里有一条才一寸来长的小龙，形状超逸，姿态奇丽，婉然可爱。
English: Lu Yuanyu looked over and saw that there was a small dragon in the basin that was only an inch long. The shape was superb, the posture was beautiful, and it was gentle and lovely.

古文：于是以水沃之，其龙伸足振鬣已长数尺矣。
现代文：于是他就用水浇它。这时候，只见那小东西伸足振鬣，转瞬间长到几尺长了。
English: So he doused it with water. At that moment, the little thing stretched its legs and quivered, growing to several feet in an instant.

古文：元裕大恐。有白云自盆中而起，其龙亦逐云而去。
现代文：卢元裕很害怕，有白云从盆中升起，那龙也追赶着白云而飞去。
English: Lu Yuanyu was very scared. A white cloud rose from the basin, and the dragon also chased the white cloud and flew away.

古文：元裕即翰之父也。
现代文：卢元裕就是卢翰的父亲。
English: Lu Yuanyu is the father of Lu Han.

古文：卢翰
现代文：卢翰
English: Luhan

古文：唐安太守卢元裕子翰言，太守少时，尝结友读书终南山。
现代文：唐安太守卢元裕的儿子卢翰说，卢元裕年轻的时候，曾经结友在终南山读书。
English: Lu Han, the son of Lu Yuanyu, the governor of Tang'an, said that when Lu Yuanyu was young, he used to make friends studying in Zhunan Mountain.

古文：日晚溪行，崖中得一圆石，莹白如鉴。
现代文：有一天傍晚走在溪边，从石崖中拾到一块圆形石头。这石头莹晶光亮如镜子一般。
English: One evening I was walking by the stream and picked up a round stone from the cliff. The stone was crystal clear and shone like a mirror.

古文：方执玩忽次，堕地而折。中有白鱼约长寸余，随石宛转落涧中。
现代文：正拿着玩，忽然掉到地上摔断了，里边有一条一寸多长的白鱼，随着那石头宛宛转转落到涧中。
English: While he was playing with it, it suddenly fell to the ground and broke. Inside, there was a white fish more than an inch long, which turned and fell into the urn with the stone.

古文：渐盈尺，俄长丈余，鼓鬐掉尾。
现代文：只见那条小鱼渐渐长满一尺，不一会儿又长到一丈多。它鼓鬐奋爪，昂首掉尾。
English: I saw the little fish gradually grow to a full foot, and soon it grew to more than a foot. It drummed its claws, raised its head and dropped its tail.

古文：云雷暴兴，风雨大至。
现代文：于是云雷暴起，风雨大作。
English: As a result, clouds and thunderstorms broke out, and there was a lot of wind and rain.

古文：李修
现代文：李修
English: Li Xiu

古文：唐浙西观察使李修，元和七年，为绛郡守。
现代文：唐朝浙西观察使李修，元和七年，是绛郡太守。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Western Zhejiang observation envoy Li Xiu, Yuan and seven years old, was the governor of Jixian County.

古文：是岁，其属县龙门有龙见。时观者千数。
现代文：这年，这个郡所属的龙门县有龙出现，当时看见的有上千人。
English: This year, a dragon appeared in Longmen County, which belongs to this county, and more than a thousand people saw it at the time.

古文：郡以状闻于太府。
现代文：郡守写状子报告太府知道。
English: The county magistrate wrote a letter and reported it to the prefectural government.

古文：时相国河东府张弘靖为河中节度使，相国之子故舒州刺史以宗，尝为文以赞其事。
现代文：当时相国是河东府的张弘靖任河中节度使，相国的儿子前舒州刺史张以宗，曾经写文章赞美这件事。
English: At that time, the sister country was Zhang Hongjing of Hedong Prefecture, who served as the envoy of the Mid-Hebei Provincial Party Committee. The son of the sister country, the former Shuzhou chief Zhang Yizong, once wrote an article praising the event.

古文：韦宥
现代文：韦宥
English: Wei Yu

古文：唐元和，故都尉韦宥出牧温州，忽忽不乐，江波修永，舟船燠热。
现代文：唐元和年间，前都尉韦宥出任温州郡守，心中闷闷不乐，水路又很远，天气灼热，坐在船上也不好受。
English: During the Tang and Yuan Dynasties, the former captain Wei Yu served as the governor of Wenzhou County. He was depressed, the waterway was far away, the weather was scorching, and it was uncomfortable to sit on the boat.

古文：一日晚凉，乃跨马登岸，依舟而行。
现代文：一天晚上比较凉爽，他就下船上岸，骑着马和船并行。
English: One evening, when it was cooler, he disembarked from the boat and rode alongside.

古文：忽浅沙乱流，芦苇青翠，因纵辔饮马。
现代文：忽然间看到一个地方，沙浅流乱，芦苇青青，于是他就撒开缰绳过去饮马。
English: All of a sudden, he saw a place where the sand was muddy and the reeds were green, so he spread out his reins and went to water his horse.

古文：而芦枝有拂鞍者。宥因闲援熟视，忽见新丝筝弦，周缠芦心。
现代文：走在芦苇丛中，有的芦枝拂打马鞍，他随手就抓上来一棵，一看，看到一根新丝制成的筝弦缠在芦苇上。
English: Walking in the reed bushes, some reed branches whipped the saddle, he grabbed one with his hands, and saw a kite string made of new silk wrapped around the reed.

古文：宥即收芦伸弦，其长倍寻。
现代文：他立即就把筝弦拿下来，伸开一看，有两寻来长。
English: He immediately took down the kite string, stretched it out and saw that there were two strings.

古文：试纵之，应乎复结。
现代文：他把弦松开，弦又立即盘结回去。
English: He unwound the strings, which were immediately rewound.

古文：宥奇骇，因置于怀。
现代文：他很惊奇，就把它揣到怀里。
English: He was surprised and took it into his arms.

古文：行次江馆，其家室皆已维舟入亭矣。宥故驸马也，家有妓。
现代文：来到江馆，全家已经早到了。他是从前的驸马，家里有歌妓和乐妓。
English: When we arrived at Jiang Pavilion, the whole family had already arrived early. He was a former broodmare, and there were geishas and geishas in his family.

古文：即付筝妓曰： 我于芦心得之，颇甚新紧。然沙洲江徼，是物何自而来？
现代文：他把那根筝弦交给筝妓说： 这是我从芦苇上拾到的，挺新挺紧的，但是那是沙洲江岸，这东西是从哪来的呢？
English: He gave the string to the kite-girl and said, "I picked this up from the reeds, it's quite new and tight, but that's the sandbank, where did this thing come from?"

古文：吾甚异之。
现代文：我觉得挺奇怪。
English: I find it very strange.

古文：试施于器，以听其音。 
现代文：你把它装到筝上，听听怎么样。 
English: Why don't you put it on a kite and listen to it.

古文：妓将安之，更无少异，唯短三二寸耳。
现代文：筝妓接过弦去，立即就去往筝上安装，发现这弦与其它弦完全一样，只是短了二三寸。
English: The kite prostitute took the string and immediately went to attach it to the kite. She found that the string was exactly the same as the other strings, but it was two or three inches shorter.

古文：方馔，妓即置之，随置复结。
现代文：当时正吃饭，筝妓先把弦放在那里，一放下它就又盘结起来。
English: At the time, they were having dinner, and the kite-girl first put the string there, and as soon as she put it down, it was coiled up again.

古文：食罢视之，则已蜿蜒摇动。
现代文：吃完饭一看，那弦居然蜿蜒摇动起来。
English: When I looked at it after dinner, the string actually began to wiggle.

古文：妓惊告众，竞来观之，而双眸瞭然矣。
现代文：筝妓吃惊地告诉大家，大家争抢着来看，见那东西居然有一双明亮的眼睛。
English: The kite prostitute was surprised to tell everyone that everyone was scrambling to see if the thing had a pair of bright eyes.

古文：宥骇曰： 得非龙乎？ 
现代文：韦宥吃惊地说： 莫非是一条龙？ 
English: Surprised, Wei Yu said: Is it a dragon?

古文：命衣冠，焚香致敬。
现代文：于是他命人帮他穿戴好衣帽，烧香祷告。
English: So he ordered someone to help him put on his coat and hat, burn incense and pray.

古文：盛诸盂水之内，投之于江。
现代文：然后把那东西放到水盆里，投到大江里去。
English: Then put it in a basin and throw it into the river.

古文：才及中流，风浪皆作，蒸云走雷，咫尺昏晦。俄有白龙百尺，拿攫升天。
现代文：刚投到江流中，风流便大作，云雾蒸腾，惊雷滚动，天昏地暗，一条一百多尺长的白龙腾跃升空。
English: As soon as it was cast into the river current, the wind flowed wildly, clouds and fog steamed, thunder rolled, the sky was dark, and a white dragon more than a hundred feet long leapt into the air.

古文：众咸观之，良久乃灭。
现代文：在场的人全都看到了，老半天才渐渐消逝。
English: Everyone present saw that the old man was fading away.

古文：尺木
现代文：尺木
English: shakuhoku

古文：龙头上有一物如博山形，名尺木。
现代文：有一个姓史的人，在唐元和年间，曾经和几位道士游华山。当时天气很热，大家坐在一条小溪旁歇息。
English: A man surnamed Shi once traveled to Huashan with several Taoists during the Tang and Yuan Dynasties. It was very hot at the time, and they sat down to rest by a stream.

古文：龙无尺木，不能升天。
现代文：忽然有一片手掌大的树叶顺流而下。
English: Suddenly, a palm-sized leaf floated down the stream.

