古文：苏味道，赵州栾城人也。
现代文：苏味道，赵州栾城人。
English: Su taste, Zhaozhou Lucheng people.

古文：少与乡人李峤俱以文辞知名，时人谓之苏李。
现代文：少年时代就与同乡李峤同以文辞知名，当时人们称之为苏李。
English: When he was a boy, he and his fellow villager, Li Xuan Tong, were famous for their poetry. At that time, people called them Su Li.

古文：弱冠，本州举进士。
现代文：二十岁，在赵州举进士。
English: He was 20 years old and a high school student in Zhaozhou.

古文：累转咸阳尉。
现代文：调任咸阳县尉。
English: Transferred to Xianyang County Lieutenant.

古文：吏部侍郎裴行俭先知其贵，甚加礼遇，及征突厥阿史那都支，引为管记。
现代文：吏部侍郎裴行俭看出他日后大有发展，甚加礼遇。到征伐突厥阿史那都支时，引荐任管记。
English: Bae Gyojian, the secretary of the cadre department, saw that he would develop greatly in the future and even received him with courtesy. When he went to the conquest of the Turkic Ashinadu branch, he was recommended to serve as a record keeper.

古文：孝敬皇帝妃父裴居道再登左金吾将军，访当时才子为谢表，托于味道，援笔而成，辞理精密，盛传于代。
现代文：孝敬皇帝妃父裴居道第二次任左金吾将军，访当时的才子为他写谢表，就选中苏味道。苏味道提笔成文，辞理精密，盛传于当代。
English: For the second time, the emperor's father Pei Ju Dao was appointed as General Zuo Jingu. When he visited the talented son at that time to write a thank-you letter for him, he chose the Su flavor. The Su flavor was written with a pen, the rhetoric was precise, and it has been passed down to the present day.

古文：延载初，历迁凤阁舍人、检校凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，寻加正授，证圣元年，坐事，出为集州刺史，俄召拜天官侍郎。
现代文：延载初年，历任凤阁舍人、检校凤阁侍郎、代理宰相。延圣元年，犯错外调任集州刺史，不久又授天官侍郎。圣历初年，迁任凤阁侍郎，代理宰相。
English: In the first year of the extension, the successors of Fengge were the housekeeper of Fengge, the attendant of the inspection of the school of Fengge, and the acting prime minister. In the first year of the extension, he made a mistake and was transferred to the position of the scribe of Shishu, and soon he was awarded the position of the attendant of Heaven. In the first year of the calendar, he was transferred to the position of the attendant of Fengge and the acting prime minister.

古文：圣历初，迁凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品。味道善敷奏，多识台阁故事，然而前后居相位数载，竟不能有所发明，但脂韦其间，苟度取容而已。
现代文：苏味道善于上奏铺陈论说，很了解台阁内情和典章制度，但是他前后任宰相数年，竟然不能对内阁问题有所发现，只是谄媚其中，见风转舵而已。
English: Su Ji, who is good at playing the role of a shop steward, said that he knows the cabinet's internal situation and the award system very well, but he has been the prime minister for several years, and he can't even find out about the cabinet's problems. He is just a sycophant, seeing the wind and turning the rudder.

古文：尝谓人曰 处事不欲决断明白，若有错误，必贻咎谴，但模棱以持两端可矣。 
现代文：他曾对人说 ：处事不要决断得太明白，如果有错误，必然要承担责任遭谴责，只要模棱持两端就可以了。 
English: He once told people: do not make decisions too clearly, if there is a mistake, it is inevitable to take responsibility and be condemned, as long as the ambiguity is on both ends.

古文：时人由是号为 苏模棱 。
现代文：当时人们由此称他为 苏模棱 。
English: At that time, people called him Su Mingren because of this.

古文：长安中，请还乡改葬其父，优制令州县供其葬事。
现代文：长安年中，苏味道上表请求还乡改葬他的父亲，武则天特别优待他，下令所在州县供给葬事。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an year, Su Zhiguo requested to return to his hometown to bury his father. Wu Zetian gave him special preferential treatment and ordered the county to provide funeral services.

古文：味道因此侵毁乡人墓田，役使过度，为宪司所劾，左授坊州刺史。
现代文：苏味道因此侵占毁坏乡人墓田，役使过度，被地方官举报，被贬谪到坊州任刺史。
English: As a result, Su Yi occupied and destroyed the villagers' grave fields, and overworked them. He was reported by local officials, and was demoted to Fangzhou Ren Zangshi.

古文：未几，除益州大都督府长史。
现代文：未过多久，任他为益州大都督府长史。
English: Not long after, he was appointed governor of Yishu Prefecture.

古文：神龙初，以亲附张易之，昌宗贬授郿州剌史。
现代文：神龙初年，因为依附张易之、张昌宗，被贬谪任州刺史。
English: In the first year of Shenlong, he was demoted to the post of prefectural governor because of his attachment to Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong.

古文：以侍读之恩，追赠卫州刺史，谥曰文。有集六十卷。二子禹锡、翘，开元中，相次为中书舍人。卢藏用，字子潜，度支尚书承庆之侄孙也。
现代文：不久又任益州大都督府长史，未上任就死了，年五十八岁。赠冀州刺史，苏味道与他的弟弟太子洗马苏味玄甚相友爱，苏味玄托付他所办的事如未办成，经常当面指责他，但苏味道对之怡然，不把这当一回事，论者称扬他这一点。苏味道有文集行于当时。卢藏用，字子潜，是度支尚书卢孙庆的侄孙。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, but died before taking office, at the age of 58. As a gift to the history of Jizhou, Su Yi was very friendly with his younger brother, Prince Shima Su Yi Xuan. If Su Yi Xuan entrusted him with a task that was not completed, he would often criticize him in person. However, Su Yi was pleased with him and did not take it seriously, and commentators praised him for this. Su Yi had a collection of writings at that time. Lu Zangyong, also known as Zhizi Xuan, was the grandnephew of Lu Sunqing.

古文：父璥，有名于时，官至魏州司马。
现代文：他的父亲卢王敬，在当时很有名，官至魏州司马。
English: His father, Lu Wangjing, was very famous at the time, and was the highest-ranking official in the State Council of Wei Province.

古文：藏用少以辞学著称。初举进士选，不调，乃著《芳草赋》以见意。
现代文：卢藏用少年时代就以辞学著称，他在举进士之初，因不被选用，就做《芳草赋》来表达自己的心志。
English: As a boy, Luzang was known as a lexicographer. At the beginning of the promotion of young scholars, because he was not selected, he made "Fang Cao Fu" to express his aspirations.

古文：寻隐居终南山，学辟谷、练气之术。
现代文：不久，隐居终南山，学辟谷练气之术。
English: Soon, he lived in seclusion in Nanshan for the rest of his life, learning the art of practicing qi in the valley.

古文：长安中，征拜左拾遗。
现代文：长安年间，被朝廷征召拜左拾遗。
English: During the Chang'an era, he was conscripted by the imperial court to collect relics.

古文：时则天将营兴泰宫于万安山，藏用上疏谏曰：
现代文：当时，武则天要在万安山营造兴泰宫。卢藏用上疏提意见说：
English: At that time, Wu Zetian wanted to build the Xingtai Palace on Mount Wan'an. Lu Zang used the occasion to make a suggestion, saying:

古文：臣愚虽不达时变，窃尝读书，见自古帝王之迹众矣。
现代文： 臣愚昧，虽然不能通达时变，但还读了一些书，从书中见到古代帝王的业绩很多。
English: Although he was ignorant and unable to grasp the changes of the times, he read some books and learned a lot about the achievements of ancient emperors.

古文：臣闻土阶三尺，茅茨不翦，采椽不斫者，唐尧之德也；卑宫室，菲饮食，尽力于沟洫者，大禹之行也；惜中人十家之产，而罢露台之制者，汉文之明也。
现代文：臣闻土筑的台阶三尺，屋顶的茅草不修剪，栎木的椽子不砍削，是唐尧的好作风；低矮的宫室，微薄的饮食，尽力于水道疏通，是大禹的好行为；爱惜平常百姓十家之产，停止露台的修造，是汉文帝的知民疾苦。
English: It was a good style of Tang Xuan for his vassals to be familiar with the three-foot steps of the earthwork, not to trim the thatch of the roof, and not to cut the hazel of the birch; the low palace, the meager diet, and the efforts to clear the waterway were good behaviors of Dayu; cherishing the products of ten ordinary people and stopping the construction of the terrace were the sufferings of the Han Emperor.

古文：并能垂名无穷，为帝皇之烈。
现代文：他们都能垂名永年，为帝皇的最光辉者。
English: They can all be famous forever, as the emperor's most brilliant.

古文：岂不以克念徇物，博施济众，以臻于仁恕哉！
现代文：这难道不是克制欲念，牺牲财物，博于施舍，救济大众，达到仁爱宽恕的好楷模吗？
English: Is this not a good example of restraining one's desires, sacrificing wealth, giving alms, relieving the public, and achieving benevolence and forgiveness?

古文：今陛下崇台邃宇，离宫别馆，亦已多矣。
现代文：今陛下高台深宇，离宫别馆，也已很多了。
English: Now that His Majesty has left the Imperial Palace, there have been many departures.

古文：更穷人之力以事土木，臣恐议者以陛下为不忧人、务奉已也。
现代文：还要穷尽人力来兴土木，臣担忧人们会议论陛下不知爱民，只知奉己。
English: It is also necessary to exhaust manpower to build civil engineering, and the minister is worried that people will think that his majesty does not know how to love the people, but only knows how to serve himself.

古文：且顷岁已来，虽年谷颇登，而百姓未有储蓄。
现代文： 况且近岁以来，虽年谷丰登，但百姓没有储蓄。
English: Moreover, since recent years, although the harvest has been bountiful, the people have no savings.

古文：陛下西幸东巡，人未休息，土木之役，岁月不空。
现代文：陛下西幸东巡，人未休息，土木之类的劳役，不空岁月。
English: His Majesty is fortunate to be touring the East and West, people are not resting, civil works and other labor are not idle.

古文：臣闻忠臣不避死亡之患，以纳君于仁；明主不恶切直之言，以垂名千载。
现代文：陛下不趁此时施法布化，却还在广造宫苑，臣恐百姓难以承受。今左右近臣，大多以顺从陛下心意为忠；朝廷臣僚，都以不顺从陛下心意为患。这样就使陛下不知百姓为劳役而失农桑生计，也不知左右的人在伤害陛下的仁德；明主不恶忠直意，因此名垂千载。
English: His Majesty does not take advantage of this time to apply the magic cloth, but he is still building palaces and gardens, and it is unbearable for his ministers to be afraid of the people. Now, most of his near and dear ones are loyal to obey His Majesty's will; the courtiers of the court are all suffering from disobedience to His Majesty's will. In this way, His Majesty does not know that the people are laborers and lose their livelihoods, nor does he know that people around him are harming His Majesty's benevolence; the Lord is not evil and is loyal, so he is famous for thousands of years.

古文：陛下诚能发明恕之制，以劳人为辞，则天下必以陛下为惜人力而苦己也。
现代文：陛下如真能开启弘扬宽恕之制，以劳苦人民为念，那么天下人民一定会知道陛下是怜惜百姓人力而克己的圣明君主。
English: If His Majesty can truly open up and promote the system of forgiveness, with the labor of the people in mind, then the people of the world will surely know that His Majesty is a saintly monarch who spares the people's manpower and restrains himself.

古文：小臣固陋，不识忌讳，敢冒死上闻。
现代文：小臣鄙陋，不识忌讳，敢冒死直言。
English: The vassal is contemptible, does not know the taboo, and dares to speak out.

古文：乞下臣此章，与执事者议其可否，则天下幸甚。
现代文：并乞请将下臣此章，交与执事者议其可否，则天下幸矣。 
English: And please ask your vassal to submit this chapter to the deacon to discuss whether it is possible, then all is well.

古文：神龙中，累转起居舍人，兼知制诰，俄迁中书舍人。
现代文：神龙年间，卢藏用调任起居舍人，兼管制诰，不久，又迁任中书舍人。
English: During the reign of the Dragon God, Lu Zangye was transferred to the post of the chief resident and also the governor of Yunnan Province. Soon, he was also transferred to the post of the chief resident of Zhongshan Province.

古文：藏用常以俗多拘忌，有乖至理，乃著《析滞论》以暢其事，辞曰：
现代文：卢藏用认为世俗多拘忌，有违至理，于是著《析滞论》以使事理通畅。
English: Lu Zangyong thought that secularism was too rigid and contrary to reason, so he wrote the "Analysis of Stagnation" to make things clear.

古文：客曰： 天道玄微，神理幽化，圣人所以法象，众庶由其运行。
现代文：其文如下： 客说：天道深奥微妙，神理变化无形，圣人所以效法物象，一切由其运行。
English: Its text is as follows: Guest said: The heavenly way is profound and subtle, the divine changes are invisible, so the sage imitates the object, and everything runs by it.

古文：故大挠造甲子，容成著律历，黄公裁变，玄女启谟，八门御时，六神直事。
现代文：故黄帝之臣大挠造甲子，配天干地支；容成善律历，含四时变化。黄公控制变化，玄女开启谋略，八门配九宫以推知时变凶吉，六神乘一破十以使百事不失。
English: Therefore, the Yellow Emperor's vassal Da Zhizhi created the gongzi, matching the heavenly and earthly branches; Rongcheng created the virtuous rhythms, including the four-hour change; Huang Gong controlled the change, Xuan Niang opened the strategy, eight gates matched the nine palaces to predict the change of time, and the six gods multiplied by one to break ten to make everything go smoothly.

古文：从之者则兵强国富，违之者则将弱朝危，有同影响，若合符契。先生亦尝闻之乎？
现代文：所以顺从天道神理的，就会兵强国富；违背的就会将弱国危。这如同影随形、响随声，若合符契，先生也曾听说过这些吗？
English: Therefore, he who obeys the heavenly way and the divine law will gain a strong army and a rich country; he who disobeys it will endanger a weak country. This is like a shadow following a shape and a sound following a sound. If it matches, it is a contract. Have you ever heard of these things?

古文：主人曰： 何为其然也？
现代文： 主人答道：为什么它是这样呢？
English: The master replied, "Why is it so?

古文：子所谓曲学所习，曘昧所守，徒识偏方之诡说，未究亨衢之通论。盖《易》曰 先天不违 ，《传》称 人神之主 。
现代文：你所说的，曲邪学问却反复学习的、暗昧玄理却始终把守的，只不过是些偏方之诡说，并未弄明顺应规律的通论。因此《易经》说： 先天不远。 《传》称： 人，神之主。 
English: What you have said, that you have repeatedly studied the heresies of the heretics, and have always guarded the obscure esoteric knowledge, is nothing more than a trick of partiality, and has not clarified the general theory of conformity to the law. Therefore, the "I Ching" says, "Heaven is not far away," and the "Zhuan" says, "Man is the master of God."

古文：范围不过，三才所以虚中；进退非邪，百王所以无外。
现代文：范围不超过天、地、人三才，所以中虚，进退不曲邪，百王所以不在外。
English: The scope does not exceed heaven, earth and man, so the middle is empty, the advance and retreat are not perverse, and the hundred kings are not outside.

古文：故曰： 国之将兴听于人，将亡听于神。 
现代文：故此说 国家将兴听于人，将亡听于神 。
English: Therefore, it is said that the country will listen to the people and listen to the gods.

古文：又曰： 祸福无门，唯人所召。
现代文：又说 祸福无门，惟人所召。
English: He also said, "There is no good or evil, but only man's calling."

古文：人无衅焉，妖不自作。 
现代文：人自身无病，妖不自作 。
English: People don't have signs, and demons don't arise on their own.

古文：由是言之，得丧兴亡，并关人事；吉凶悔吝，无涉天时。
现代文：由此言之，得失兴亡，都关人事，吉凶悔咎，与天时无干涉。
English: In other words, success or failure depends on people, fortune or misfortune, and there is no interference with the weather.

古文：且皇天无亲，唯德是辅，为不善者，天降之殃。
现代文：况且皇天无亲，只辅助有德的人；不干善事的人，老天要降灾于他。
English: Moreover, the emperor has no relatives, and only assists those who are virtuous; those who do not do good deeds, God will bring disaster to him.

古文：高宗修德，桑谷以变；宋君引过，法星退舍，此天道所以从人者也。
现代文：所以，高宗修养德行，桑谷也发生变化；宋君自省己过，主阴刑的荧惑星也退舍，这说明天道也从人道的实情。
English: Therefore, Gaozong cultivated virtue, and Sanggu also changed; Song Jun self-examined himself, and the fluorescent planet of Lord Yin's punishment was also abandoned, which shows that the heavenly way is also based on the reality of humanity.

古文：古之为政者，刑狱不滥则人寿，赋敛蠲省则人富，法令有常则国静，赏罚得中则兵强。
现代文：古代的治政者，刑狱不滥则人长寿，赋税轻则民富足，法令有常不变则国家平静，赏罚适中则兵强。
English: In ancient times, those who governed the country said that if the prison was not abusive, the people would live longer, if the tax was light, the people would be rich, if the laws were constant, the country would be calm, and if the rewards and punishments were moderate, the soldiers would be strong.

古文：所以礼者，士之所归，赏者，士之所死，礼赏不倦，则士争先。
现代文：所以礼能使士归向于国家，赏能使士尽死节于朝廷，礼赏始终不衰，那么士争先恐后尽忠效力。
English: For this reason, courtesy enables the envoy to be loyal to the country, and reward enables the envoy to be loyal to the imperial court until his death, and the reward is always unflagging, so the envoys scramble to be loyal and effective.

古文：苟违此途，虽卜时行刑，择日出令，必无成功矣。
现代文：如果违背了这些，即使卜时行刑，择日出令，肯定不会成功。
English: If you violate these, even if you choose the time of execution and choose the day to issue the order, it will certainly not succeed.

古文：自叔世迁讹，俗多徼幸，竞称怪力，争诵诡言，屈政教而就孤虚，弃信赏而从推步。
现代文：现世变迁无常，世俗多有徼亻幸之心，彼此争着夸说怪力，争诵诡言，使政教不伸而俯就时辰不全之孤虚，弃信赏而靠天时推算日月五星之度行事。
English: The present world is changeable and impermanent, and most of the people in the world have a happy-go-lucky attitude. They compete with each other in boasting of their extraordinary strength and reciting witchery. They make politics and religion not expand, but bow down to the emptiness of incomplete time. They abandon faith and appreciation, and rely on the time of the day to calculate the degree of the sun, moon and stars.

古文：附会前史，变易旧经，依托空文，以为征据。
现代文：牵强附会过去的历史，变更旧经，托空话，以为证据。
English: Far-fetched past history, alteration of old scriptures, and empty talk are taken as evidence.

古文：覆军败将者，则隐秘无闻；偶同幸中者，则共相文饰。
现代文：如果覆军败将，就隐秘无使人知；如果偶然相同，侥幸说中，就互相夸饰。
English: If the covering army is about to be defeated, they will be secretive; if they are coincidentally the same, if by chance, they will boast about each other.

古文：岂唯德之增惑，亦乃学人自是。
现代文：这不仅是在道德上使人增惑，也是学者自以为是，唉！
English: This is not only morally puzzling, it is also academic self-righteousness, alas!

古文：呜呼，习俗讹谬，一至此焉！
现代文：习俗讹谬，竟达到这样无以复加的地步！
English: The absurdity of custom has reached such a level of complexity!

古文：昔者，甲子兴师，非成功之日；往亡用事，异制胜之辰。
现代文： 过去，甲子日兴师，并不等于成功之日；往而不能行事，不等于制胜之时。
English: In the past, the day of the rising sun is not equal to the day of success; the inability to act in the past is not equal to the time of victory.

古文：人事苟修，何往不济？
现代文：人事如果处理好了，何往不成功啊？
English: If personnel matters are handled well, what if they are not successful?

古文：至若环城自守，接阵重围，无阙地形，不乖天道。
现代文：至于环城自守，接阵战于重围，地利不决，天道不违。
English: As for the self-defence of Huancheng, the battle will be fought in the heavy siege, the situation will not be resolved, and the heavenly way will not violate.

古文：若兵强将智，粟积城坚，虽复屡转魁刚，频移太岁，坐推白虎，行计贪狼，自符难斗之祥，多贻蚁附之困。
现代文：如果兵强将智，粮积城坚，即使魁刚星在屋上多次出现，太岁木星在天上频繁移动，坐卧行止均推算出不吉利的白虎、贪狼，现实仍会吉祥。
English: If the soldiers are strong and wise, and the grain reserves are strong, even if the star of Qui-Gon appears many times on the roof, the ancient Jupiter moves frequently in the sky, and the sitting and lying movements are all calculated to be unlucky white tigers and greedy wolves, the reality will still be auspicious.

古文：故曰，任贤使能，则不时日而事利；明法审令，则不卜筮而事吉；养劳赏功，则不祷祠而得福。
现代文：所以说只要任贤使能，那么不管吉日良辰，做事也顺利；只要明法审令，那么不卜算行事也吉利；只要养劳赏功，那么不祈祷也会得福。
English: Therefore, it is said that as long as one is virtuous and capable, then regardless of whether it is a good day or a bad day, the work will be smooth; as long as the law is clear, then it is auspicious to act without calculation; as long as labor is rewarded, then it will be blessed without prayer.

古文：此所谓天时不如地利，地利不如人和。
现代文：这就是所说的天时不如地利，地利不如人和。
English: This is what is meant by the saying that time is not as important as place, and place is not as important as people.

古文：太公犯雨，逆天时也，韩信背水，乖地利也，并存人事，俱成大业。
现代文：姜太公犯雨，违逆天时；韩信背水，失去地利，但他们均存心于人事，却成了大业。
English: Jiang Taigong broke the law and went against the times; Han Xin went against the grain and lost his position, but they were both concerned with personnel, but it became a big business.

古文：削树而斩庞涓，举火而屠张郃，未必暗同岁德，冥会日游，俱运三门，并占四杀。
现代文：削树斩庞涓，举火而屠张合阝，未必就暗同了岁中德神，遇到凶兆。
English: Cutting down a tree and chopping down a giant maple tree, setting fire to a tree and butchering it, do not necessarily coincide with the year of the Middle German god and encounter a bad omen.

古文：杜邮齿剑，抑唯计沮，垓下悲歌，实阶剚印。若以并资厌胜，不事良图，则长平尽坑，固须恆济，襄城无噍，亦可常保。
现代文：杜邮是白起伏剑处，还是因策略失败；垓下是楚霸王悲歌之处，造成不好结局，还是因为玩印无赏；若因为满足胜利，不思考良图，那么在长平就都要被坑埋，如坚持把守互相救援，襄城也就不会出现紧急，也可常保平安了。
English: Du Po is the place of the white ups and downs of the sword, or because of the failure of the strategy; under the yoke is the place of the tragic song of Chu Bawang, resulting in a bad ending, or because there is no reward for playing the seal; if you do not think about a good plan because you are satisfied with the victory, then you will all be buried in Changping. If you insist on guarding and rescuing each other, there will be no emergency in Xiangcheng, and you can always be safe.

古文：是知拘而多忌，终丧大功；百姓与能，必遗小数。金鸡玉鹤，方为楚国之殃；《万毕》、《枕中》，适构淮南之祸。
现代文：这都是在智识上被拘束而且多忌讳，终于丧失大功。金鸡玉鹤，才造成了楚国的灾祸；《万华》、《枕中》等方术之书，才构成了淮南大祸。
English: These were all intellectually restrained and tabooed, and finally lost their great achievements. It was the Golden Rooster and the Jade Crane that caused the disaster in Chu; "Wanhua," "In the Pillow" and other books of magic only constituted the great disaster in Huainan.

古文：刻符指盗，反更亡身；被发邀神，翻招夷族。
现代文：刻神符针对盗贼反而亡身；披发邀神，反招来夷族之祸。
English: In response to the thief, the god's seal is engraved, but the thief is killed instead; wearing it invites the god, but invites the evil of the barbarians.

古文：嗟乎，威斗赭鞭，不禳赤伏之运；筑城断罔，何救素灵之哭！
现代文：唉！王莽的威斗，神农的赭便，也禳除不了赤伏之命运；汉高祖筑城断冈，岂能救白帝子母亲的痛哭。
English: Alas! Wang Mang's bravery and Shennong's benevolence can't erase the fate of Chabushi; Han Gao's forefathers couldn't save the tears of Emperor Paik's mother by building a city on a mountain.

古文：火灾不验，裨灶无力以窥天；超乘阶凶，王孙取监于观德。
现代文：火灾不验，赵国之裨灶也无力来窥天；秦军北门超乘、王孙满观德推知必败。
English: The fire is not tested, and the Zhao Kingdom's help stove is also powerless to see the sky; the Qin Army's North Gate is super-journeying, and Wang Sunman Guande deduces that it will be defeated.

古文：九征九变，是曰长途；人谋鬼谋，良归有道。
现代文：这些都是经史中的陈迹，圣贤的普遍规律，这些离仁义远吗，难道应该凝滞死守吗？
English: These are all historical traces in history, the universal laws of saints and sages. Are they far from benevolence and righteousness? Should they be rigidly adhered to?

古文：此并经史陈迹，贤圣通规，仁远乎哉，讵宜滞执？客乃蹙然避席曰： 鄙人困蒙，不阶至道，请事斯语，归于正途。而今而后，焚蓍龟，毁律历，废六合，斥五行，浩然清虑，则将奚若？ 
现代文： 客人听了，恭敬地避席，说： 鄙人糊涂，还没有踏上至道的台阶，请允许我弄清这些道理，归于正途，从今而后，烧掉蓍草和龟甲，毁掉律历，废除六合，斥去五行，浩然澄清思想，则将如何？ 
English: After listening, the guest respectfully left the table and said, "I am a little confused and have not yet stepped on the steps of the path. Please allow me to clarify these truths and return to the right path. From now on, what will happen if I burn the thistle and the tortoise shell, destroy the legal calendar, abolish the six degrees of separation, expel the five elements, and clarify my thoughts?

古文：答曰： 此所谓过犹不及也。
现代文：主人答道 ：这就是所说的过犹不及了。
English: The host replied, "That's what I meant by too late."

古文：夫甲子所以配日月，律历所以通岁时，金木所以备法象，蓍龟所以筮吉凶。
现代文：甲子是用来配日月的，律历是用来通岁时的，金木水火土是用来备天地万物的，蓍龟是用占卜吉凶的。
English: Jiazi is used to match the sun and the moon, the lunar calendar is used for the passage of the year, the gold, wood, water, fire and earth are used to prepare the heavens and the earth, and the tortoise is used for divination.

古文：圣人以此神明德行，辅助谋猷，存之则协赞成功，执之则凝滞于物。
现代文：圣人以此来使德行神圣，辅助计谋，客观对待它就协助事业成功，凝滞死板就使万物凝滞无生气。
English: The sages use it to sanctify virtue and aid strategy. If it is treated objectively, it will help the cause succeed. If it is rigid, it will make all things stagnant and lifeless.

古文：消息之义，其在兹乎 ！
现代文：万物消长之义，大概就在这里吧！ 
English: The law of diminishing returns is probably at work here!

古文：客于是循墙匍匐，帖然无气，口去心醉，不知所以答矣。
现代文：客人于是沿墙根匍伏而行，很服帖地大气不敢出，口内生津，内心陶醉，不知怎么回答。 
English: The guest then crouched along the wall, very submissive, the atmosphere dared not come out, the mouth was full, the heart was intoxicated, I don't know how to answer.

古文：景龙中，为吏部侍郎。
现代文：景龙年间，卢藏用为吏部侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinglong, Luzang served as an attendant of the cadre.

古文：藏用性无挺特，多为权要所逼，颇隳公道。
现代文：他性格无特出的地方，多被权贵所逼，很影响公道。
English: There is nothing special about his character. He is often forced by the powerful and influential, which has a great impact on justice.

古文：又迁黄门侍郎，兼昭文馆学士，转工部侍郎、尚书右丞。
现代文：卢藏用后来迁黄门侍郎，兼义馆学士，转任工部侍郎、尚书右丞。
English: Lu Zangye was later transferred to Huangmen waiter, also a bachelor of Yijian, and transferred to the position of engineering department waiter, Shangshu Rongzheng.

古文：先天中，坐托附太平公主，配流岭表。
现代文：唐玄宗先天年间，卢藏用投靠太平公主而受牵连，流配岭表。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Lu Zang was implicated for his allegiance to the Taiping Princess, and became a disciple of Ling.

古文：开元初，起为黔州都督府长史，兼判都督事，未行而卒，年五十余。有集二十卷。
现代文：开元初，又起用任黔州都督府长史，兼判都督事，未赴任而卒。年五十余岁，有文集二十卷。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the prefectural governor of Zhangzhou, and was also appointed as the governor. He died before taking office. He was more than 50 years old and had a collection of 20 volumes.

古文：藏用工篆隶，好琴棋，当时称为多能之士。
现代文：卢藏用擅于篆书隶书，喜爱琴棋，当时称为多能之士。
English: Lu Zangye was good at calligraphy and liked to play the piano. At that time, he was known as a man of many talents.

古文：少与陈子昂、赵贞固友善，二人并早卒，藏用厚抚其子，为时所称。
现代文：少年时与陈子昂、赵贞固友善，二人都早卒，卢藏用很好地抚养他们的子女，为当时所称扬。
English: When he was a boy, he was friendly with Chen Zi'ang and Zhao Zhenggu. Both of them died early, and Luzang used to raise their children well, which was praised at the time.

古文：然初隐居之时，有贞俭之操，往来于少室、终南二山，时人称为 随驾隐士 ；及登朝，趑趄诡佞，专事权贵，奢靡淫纵，以此获讥于世。
现代文：但是当初隐居的时候，有贞俭的美名，往来于少室、终南二山，时人称为 随驾隐士 ；后来到朝廷做官，小心趋奉，虚假谄媚，专事权贵，奢侈靡乱纵淫，因此被世人所讥讽。
English: However, when he initially lived in seclusion, he had a reputation for chastity and frugality. He went back and forth between the small room and the two mountains in the south. At that time, he was called a traveling hermit. Later, he came to the imperial court to work as an official. He was careful to be devoted, false and charming, devoted to the powerful, and indulged in luxury and debauchery. Therefore, he was ridiculed by the world.

