古文：性慷慨，志立功名。周明帝时，袭爵文城郡公。
现代文：薛胄，字绍玄。少小聪明颖悟，每次读到罕见的书籍，都能通晓其中的内容。
English: Xue Yao, also known as Shao Xuan, was a clever and insightful person. Every time he read a rare book, he was able to understand its contents.

古文：累迁上仪同，寻拜司金大夫，后加开府。
现代文：常常慨叹注释的人不领会圣人著书的深刻含义，往往根据自己的理解进一步阐发书中的大旨。读书人听了没有不称赞的。
English: Commentators often lament that people don't understand the profound meaning of books written by saints, and they often further explain the meaning of the book according to their own understanding. Readers have nothing but praise for this.

古文：隋文帝受禅，三迁为兗州刺史。
现代文：性情慷慨大度，立志建功立业。隋文帝杨坚继位，薛胄三次升迁，任兖州刺史。
English: Sui Emperor Yang Jian succeeded to the throne, and Xue Yao was promoted three times and appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：到官，系囚数百。胄剖断旬日便了，囹圄空虚。
现代文：到任后，看到狱中关押着数百名囚犯，薛胄一一审问，十来天就处理完毕，牢房内竟空无一人。
English: After taking office, he saw that hundreds of prisoners were being held in the prison. Xue Yao interrogated them one by one, and after about ten days, the interrogation was completed, and there was no one in the cell.

古文：有陈州人向道力伪作高平郡守，将之官。
现代文：陈州有一个叫向道力的，冒充高平郡的太守，将要赴官就任。
English: In Chenzhou, there is a person named Xiang Daoli, who is posing as the governor of Gaoping County and is going to take office.

古文：胄遇诸涂，察其有异，将留诘之。
现代文：薛胄在路上遇见了他，觉察出他不正常，准备将他留下盘问。
English: Xue Yao met him on the road, sensed that he was not normal, and prepared to leave him for cross-examination.

古文：司马王君馥固谏，乃听诣郡。
现代文：司马王君馥坚决劝说不要过问这件事，薛胄才放那人到高平去。
English: Sima Wang Junya resolutely persuaded him not to inquire about the matter, and Xue Yao let the man go to Gaoping.

古文：既而悔之，即遣主簿追道力。
现代文：不久又后悔了，便派主簿追赶向道力。
English: He soon regretted it, and sent his chief clerk to chase after Xiang Daoli.

古文：有部人徐俱罗尝任海陵郡守，先是已为道力伪代之。比至秩满，公私不悟。
现代文：薛胄过去的部属徐俱罗曾任海陵郡太守，原先太守的职务已被向道力骗到手，任期将满，官府和百姓都没有发觉。
English: Xu Quro, a former subordinate of Xue Yao, once served as the governor of Hailing County. The original position of governor had been deceived by Xiang Daoli, and the term was about to expire. The government and the people did not find out.

古文：俱罗遂语君馥曰： 向道力经赐代为郡，使君岂容疑之。 
现代文：徐俱罗便对王君馥说 ：向道力经朝廷恩赐被任命为太守，薛刺史怎么能怀疑他？ 
English: Xu Quro then said to Wang Junyao: Xiang Daoli was appointed as governor-general by the grace of the imperial court, how could Xue Zhanshi doubt him?

古文：君馥以俱罗所陈，又固请胄。胄呵，君馥乃止。
现代文：王君馥将徐俱罗的话告诉了薛胄，又态度坚决地劝阻他，薛胄大声呵斥，王君馥才住口。
English: Wang Junyao told Xue Yao about Xu Clubo's words, and resolutely dissuaded him. Xue Yao shouted loudly, and Wang Junyao shut up.

古文：遂收之，道力惧而引伪。
现代文：薛胄果断地将向道力拘留审问，向道力害怕，交代了他冒任太守的罪行。
English: Xue Yao resolutely detained and interrogated Daoli and, afraid of Daoli, confessed to his crime of impersonating the daimyo.

古文：其发奸擿伏，皆此类也。
现代文：薛胄的明察秋毫，发奸摘伏，都和这件事一样。
English: Xue Yao's shrewd observation, treachery and subterfuge are all the same as this matter.

古文：时人谓为神明，先是，兗州城东沂、泗二水合而南流，泛滥大泽中。
现代文：当时人们都称颂他像神一样明断。先前兖州城东面的沂水和泗水两条河流交汇，向南奔流，泛滥聚集，成为一片汪洋大泽。
English: At that time, people praised him for being as decisive as a god. Previously, the two rivers of Surabaya and Surabaya in the east of Zhangzhou City converged and flowed southward, flooding and gathering to become a vast ocean.

古文：胄遂积石堰之，决令西注，陂泽尽为良田。
现代文：薛胄率领百姓积石垒堰，让河水西流，湖泽涸出，都变成良田。
English: Xue Yao led the people to build stone walls and weirs to let the river flow westward and the lake dry up, all of which turned into good fields.

古文：又通转运，利尽淮海，百姓赖之，号为薛公丰兗渠。
现代文：又开通了水上交通，淮海一带受利颇多。百姓信赖薛胄，称这条渠为 薛公丰兖渠 。
English: Water transportation was also opened, and the Huaihai area benefited a lot. The people trusted Xue Yao and called this canal the Xue Gongfeng Canal.

古文：胄以天下太平，遂遣博士登泰山观古迹，撰封禅图及仪上之。
现代文：薛胄看到天下太平无事，便派博学秀雅之士登泰山寻访古代圣迹，撰写出封禅图和有关的礼仪，呈送给朝廷。
English: Seeing that the world was at peace, Xue Ye sent a number of erudite and elegant people to Mount Tai to search for ancient sacred sites, write a seal of Zen and related etiquette, and present it to the imperial court.

古文：帝谦让不许。
现代文：隋文帝虚心谦让，不同意到泰山封禅。
English: The emperor would not allow any concessions.

古文：转郢州刺史，有惠政。
现代文：薛胄又转任郢州刺史，卓有政绩。
English: Xue Jun was also transferred to the post of the governor of Zhangzhou, with outstanding political achievements.

古文：征拜卫尉卿，转大理卿，持法宽平，名为称职。
现代文：他又被授予卫尉卿，转任大理卿。执法宽缓公平，被评价为胜任职守。
English: He was also awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and transferred to the post of Lord Mayor. He was praised for his lenient and fair enforcement of the law.

古文：迁刑部尚书。
现代文：调迁升任刑部尚书。
English: Transferred and promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：时左仆射高颎稍被疏忌，及王世积诛，颎事与相连，上因此欲成颎罪。
现代文：其时，左仆射高赹被朝廷疏远，到王世积被朝廷处死时，又牵连到高赹，隋文帝因此想向高赹问罪。
English: At that time, Gao Wei's left-hand man Gao Wei was alienated by the imperial court, and when Wang Shijie was executed by the imperial court, he was implicated in Gao Wei. Therefore, Emperor Sui wanted to question Gao Wei.

古文：胄明雪之，正议其狱。
现代文：薛胄替他辨明洗雪，想使他的冤案有个正确结论。
English: Xue Yao tried to identify the culprit for him, hoping to bring his unjust case to a correct conclusion.

古文：由是忤旨，械系之，久而得免。
现代文：因此违逆了隋文帝的旨意，被加上刑具，关进监狱，过了很久才被放出。
English: Therefore, he disobeyed the will of Emperor Sui and was put in prison with instruments of torture. It was a long time before he was released.

古文：检校相州事，甚有能名。
现代文：朝廷让他到相州查核政事，博得了能臣的名声。
English: The imperial court sent him to Sangju to investigate government affairs, and he gained a reputation as a capable minister.

古文：汉王谅作乱并州，遣其将綦良东略地，攻逼慈州。
现代文：汉王杨谅在并州叛乱，派他的部将綦良向东进犯，进逼慈州。
English: Han King Yang Peng rebelled against the annexation of Cizhou, and sent his general Qian Liang to the east to invade and force Cizhou.

古文：刺史上官政请援于胄，胄畏谅兵锋，不敢拒。
现代文：刺史上官政向薛胄请求救援，薛胄畏惧杨谅勇锐的兵锋，不敢出兵抗拒。
English: In the darkest period of history, the government asked Xue Jun for help. Xue Jun was afraid of Yang Jun's brave soldiers and did not dare to resist.

古文：良又引兵攻胄，胄欲以计却之，遣亲人鲁世范说良曰： 天下事未可知。
现代文：綦良又领兵攻打薛胄，薛胄想靠计谋使敌兵退却，派亲信鲁世范劝说綦良： 天下的事情，后果很难预料。
English: Hailiang also led an army to attack Xue Er. Xue Er wanted to make the enemy soldiers retreat by means of stratagem, and sent his close confidant Lu Shifan to persuade Hailiang: In the world, the consequences are difficult to predict.

古文：胄为人臣，去就须得其所，何遽相攻也？ 
现代文：薛胄是朝廷的大臣，去留都需要有一个恰当的处所，你何必这样攻打他呢？ 
English: Xue Ye is a minister of the imperial court, and he needs a proper place to stay. Why do you have to attack him like this?

古文：良乃释去，进围黎阳。
现代文：綦良便撤兵离去，包围了黎阳。
English: Hailiang then withdrew his troops and surrounded Liyang.

古文：及良为史祥所攻，弃军归胄。朝廷以胄怀贰心，锁诣大理。
现代文：綦良受到史祥率领的隋军的进攻，丢下军队投奔薛胄，朝廷认为薛胄怀有二心，将他锁拿交大理寺处理。
English: Hailiang was attacked by the Sui army led by Shi Xiang and left the army to join Xue Qi. The imperial court thought that Xue Qi was of two minds and locked him up in Dali Temple.

古文：后罢郡，终于家。
现代文：相州的官绅百姓怀念薛胄的恩德，到朝廷为他申辩的人有一百多个。
English: The officials, gentry and common people of Sangju are nostalgic for Xue Qi's benevolence, and more than a hundred people have come to the imperial court to plead for him.

古文：有八子，长子聪知名。聪字延智。
现代文：薛胄坐罪被除去名籍，发配到岭南，在道路上死去。薛聪，字延智。
English: Xue Qi was removed from the family register for the crime of sedition, sent to Lingnan, and died on the road. Xue Cong, the character Yan Zhi.

古文：方正有理识，善自标致，不妄游处。
现代文：为人端方正直，处世明于事理，颇有见识。善于保持自己美好的品格，不随便与人交游相处。
English: He is honest, sensible and insightful. He is good at maintaining his good character and does not socialize with people casually.

古文：虽在暗室，终日矜庄，见者莫不懔然加敬。
现代文：虽然独处一室，也终日严肃庄重，看见他的人无不肃然起敬。
English: Although he lives alone in a room, he is serious and dignified all day long, and everyone who sees him is awestruck.

古文：博览坟籍，精力过人，至于前言往行，多所究悉。
现代文：薛聪博览群书，精力旺盛，超过常人。至于对古人过去的言行事迹，大多进行研究探求。
English: Xue Cong is well-read, energetic, and more than an ordinary person. As for the words and deeds of the ancients in the past, he mostly conducts research and exploration.

古文：词辩占对，尤是所长。
现代文：论争辩答，随口应对，更是他的长处。
English: His strength lies in his ability to debate and respond to questions.

古文：遭父忧，庐于墓侧，哭泣之声，酸感行路。
现代文：父亲去世，他在墓侧建起茅庐，哭泣哀号之声，使行路人听了都感到酸楚。
English: When his father died, he built a thatched hut on the side of the grave, weeping and wailing, which made passers-by feel sad.

古文：友于笃睦，而家教甚严；诸弟虽昏宦，恆不免杖罚，对之肃如也。
现代文：兄弟间淳厚和睦，而家教却十分严厉，他的弟弟们做错了事情，也常常免不了受他的杖责，兄弟们相处十分肃穆。
English: The brothers are very amicable, but the tutor is very strict. His younger brothers do the wrong thing and are often punished by his cane. The brothers get along very solemnly.

古文：未弱冠，州辟主簿。
现代文：不到二十岁，薛聪已被征辟为州里的主簿。
English: Less than twenty years old, Xue Cong has been enlisted as the main book in the state.

古文：太和十五年，释褐著作佐郎。
现代文：太和十五年，他脱去布衣，任著作佐郎。
English: In the 15th year of the Taiwa era, he took off his clothes and became Shososaro.

古文：于时，孝文留心氏族，正定官品。
现代文：当时，魏孝文帝注意在门阀世族中选用官吏，并根据出身确定官阶。
English: At that time, Emperor Wei Xiaowen paid attention to the selection of officials among the gate valve family, and determined the official rank according to the origin.

古文：士大夫解巾，优者不过奉朝请。聪起家便佐著作，时论美之。
现代文：士大夫们出仕做官，最多只能享受奉朝请的待遇，薛聪一开始就被授予著作佐郎，因而被时论称颂。
English: Senior scholars who serve as officials can only enjoy the treatment of being invited by the emperor at most. Xue Cong was awarded the title of "Writer of the Year" at the beginning, and was thus praised by the theory of the times.

古文：后迁书侍卸史，凡所弹劾，不避强御；孝文或欲宽贷者，聪辄争之。
现代文：以后，又升任书侍御史。他纠参弹劾朝廷中的错误行为，从不回避势族权要。孝文帝想放宽或谅解的人和事，薛聪往往据理争辩。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of imperial historian. He was deeply involved in the impeachment of wrongdoings in the imperial court, and never shied away from influential people. Emperor Xiaowen wanted to relax or understand people and things, and Xue Cong often argued with reason.

古文：帝每云： 朕见薛聪，不能不惮，何况诸人也？ 
现代文：孝文帝常常说： 我见到薛聪，不能不感到畏惧，更何况其他人呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen often said, "When I see Xue Cong, I can't help but feel fear, let alone other people."

古文：自是贵戚敛手。
现代文：从此，豪门贵戚威风收敛。
English: From then on, the power of the aristocrats and their families began to wane.

古文：累迁直阁将军，兼给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍，直阁如故。
现代文：他累次升迁，官至直阁将军。又兼任给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍，直阁的职务照旧。
English: He was successively promoted to the rank of General Naokaku, and also concurrently held the posts of Yellow-Door Attendant and Sanzhishi Attendant. Naokaku's duties remained the same.

古文：聪深为孝文所知，外以德器遇之，内以心膂为寄。
现代文：薛聪深为孝文帝所赏识，不但表面上用很高的礼遇对待他，而且内心里也把他当作心腹看待。
English: Emperor Xiaowen deeply appreciated Xue Cong, and not only treated him with great courtesy on the surface, but also regarded him as a confidant in his heart.

古文：亲卫禁兵，委总管领。
现代文：保卫皇宫的禁军，委托他来统领。
English: He was entrusted with commanding the Imperial Guard that guarded the palace.

古文：故终太和之世，恆带直阁将军。
现代文：所以，孝文帝在世时，他一直兼任直阁将军。
English: Therefore, when Emperor Xiaowen was alive, he always served as General Zhiakou.

古文：群臣罢朝之后，聪恆陪侍帷幄，言兼昼夜。
现代文：群臣们退朝之后，薛聪经常留下来陪着孝文帝，谈论起来不分白天黑夜。
English: After the courtiers withdrew, Xue Cong often stayed to accompany Emperor Xiaowen, and they talked day and night.

古文：时政得失，预以谋谟；动辄匡谏，事多听允。
现代文：时政的得失成败，都参与运筹谋划。他常向孝文帝提出建议和批评，也大多被采纳。
English: He often made suggestions and criticisms to Emperor Xiaowen, most of which were adopted.

古文：而重厚沈密，外莫窥其际。
现代文：他办事深沉细密，外表难测高深。
English: His work is deep and meticulous, and it is difficult to measure the depth from the outside.

古文：帝欲进以名位，辄苦让不受。
现代文：孝文帝想给他加官晋爵，他坚决推辞，不愿接受。
English: Emperor Xiaowen wanted to give him a promotion, but he firmly refused to accept it.

古文：帝亦雅相体悉，谓之曰： 卿天爵自高，固非人爵之所荣也。 
现代文：孝文帝也体谅他的良苦用心，对他说： 你的天赐的爵位很高，根本不是我赐给你的爵位所能使你荣耀的。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also understood his good intentions and said to him: Your heaven-given title is very high, and it is not at all the title I gave you that can bring you glory.

古文：又除羽林监。
现代文：又授予他羽林监。
English: He was also awarded the title of Uebayashi no kami.

古文：帝曾与朝臣论海内姓地人物，戏谓聪曰： 世人谓卿诸薛是蜀人，定是蜀人不？ 
现代文：孝文帝曾与朝臣们议论天下的姓氏、地理和人物，同薛聪开玩笑 ：人们都说你们薛姓是蜀地人，果真是蜀地人吗？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen once discussed the world's surnames, geography and people with his courtiers, and joked with Xue Cong: People say that your surname Xue is from Shoudi, but are you really from Shoudi?

古文：聪对曰： 臣远祖广德，世仕汉朝，时人呼为汉。
现代文：薛聪回答说： 我的远祖薛广德，世代在汉朝做官，当时人们称薛姓是汉人。
English: Xue Cong replied, "My distant ancestor Xue Guangde was an official in the Han Dynasty. At that time, people with the surname Xue were called Han people.

古文：臣九世祖永，随刘备入蜀，时人呼为蜀。
现代文：我的九世祖薛永随刘备入蜀，人们又称薛姓是蜀地人。
English: My ninth-generation ancestor, Xue Yong, followed Liu Bei into Shu. People also say that the surname Xue comes from Shu.

古文：臣今事陛下，是虏非蜀也。 
现代文：我现在侍奉陛下，是胡虏的薛姓而不是蜀地的薛姓。 
English: I am now serving His Majesty, and my surname is Xue of Huru, not Xue of Shu.

古文：帝抚掌笑曰： 卿幸可自明非蜀，何乃遂复苦朕。 
现代文：孝文帝听了并不生气，拍着手说： 你自可以表明不是蜀人，为什么又挖苦我呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen was not angry when he heard this, he clapped his hands and said: You can prove that you are not from Shu, why are you making fun of me?

古文：聪因投戟而出。帝曰： 薛监醉耳。 
现代文：薛聪气得摔掉手中的兵器离去，孝文帝替他辩解说 ：薛羽林监喝醉了啊。 
English: Xue Cong was so angry that he dropped the weapon in his hand and left. Xiaowen Di defended him, saying: "Xue Yulin Gu is drunk."

古文：其见知如此。
现代文：他被孝文帝的知遇如此厚重。
English: This is the level of understanding and appreciation of Jie Jue by Gao Zu.

古文：二十三年，从驾南征，兼御史中尉。
现代文：太和二十三年，薛聪跟随孝文帝南征，兼任御史中尉。
English: In the 23rd year of the Taihe era, Xue Cong followed Emperor Xiaowen in the Southern Expedition, and also served as a lieutenant of the Imperial Historian.

古文：六岁而孤，专精好学。
现代文：宣武帝即位，他被任为都督、齐州刺史。
English: Emperor Xuanwu ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the governor of the capital and the chief historian of Qizhou.

古文：年十岁，讲《左传》，见子产相郑之功，作《国侨赞》，颇有词致，见者奇之。
现代文：为政廉明清静。死在齐州，官吏百姓为了怀念他，留下他坐的椅子以表示对他的爱戴。薛道衡，字玄卿。六岁时父亲去世，却专心致志，发奋好学。十岁时，老师为他讲解《左传》，看到子产做郑国相的功劳，他便写下《国侨赞》，很有才华，读的人都很惊奇。
English: He died in Qizhou. In order to remember him, the officials and the people left the chair he sat on to show their love for him. Xue Daoheng, known as Xuanqing. When his father died at the age of six, he was dedicated and eager to learn. At the age of ten, the teacher explained "Zhuan" to him. When he saw the merit of his son as Zheng Guozhong, he wrote "Overseas Praise." He was very talented, and the readers were surprised.

古文：其后才名益著。
现代文：以后，他的文名越来越大。
English: Since then, his literary name has become more and more famous.

古文：齐司州牧、彭城王浟引为兵曹从事。
现代文：北齐的司州刺史、彭城王高氵攸任他为兵曹从事。
English: Northern Qi's Shizhou Sashishi and Pengcheng Wang Gaoqi also engaged him as a petty officer.

古文：尚书左仆射杨愔见而嗟赏，授奉朝请。
现代文：尚书左仆射杨对他大加赞赏，授予他奉朝请的职衔。
English: Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Jie Yang, praised him greatly and awarded him the title of "Mong" invited by the emperor.

古文：吏部尚书陇西辛术与语，叹曰： 郑公业不亡矣！ 
现代文：吏部尚书、陇西人辛术与他交谈，感叹道： 汉代才华出众的郑太还活着呀。 
English: Shangshu, an official from the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and Xinzhu, a native of Shaanxi Province, talked with him and lamented: Zheng Ta, an outstanding talent in the Han Dynasty, is still alive.

古文：河东裴谳目之曰： 鼎迁河朔，吾谓 关西孔子 ，罕遇其人，今复遇薛君矣！ 
现代文：河东的裴谳和他见面之后，高兴地说： 政权由中原移至河朔，我只说 关西孔子 这样的人才很难遇到了，没想到今天碰上了薛道衡啊！ 
English: After meeting him, Pei Xuan of Hedong said happily: "The political power has moved from Central Plains to Hexuo. I only say that it is difficult to meet such a talent as Kansai Confucius. I didn't expect to meet Xue Daoheng today!"

古文：武成即位，兼散骑常侍，接对周、陈二使。
现代文：北齐武成帝高湛即位，薛道衡兼任散骑常侍，接待了北周与南陈两国的使者。
English: Emperor Gaozhan of the Northern Qi Wucheng Dynasty ascended to the throne, and Xue Daoheng concurrently served as an equestrian, and received the envoys of the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Southern Chen Dynasty.

古文：武平初，诏与诸儒修定五礼，除尚书左外兵郎。
现代文：武平初年，朝廷命他与其他学者们修订五礼，被授予尚书左外兵郎。
English: In the first year of Wu Ping, the imperial court ordered him and other scholars to revise the Five Rites, and he was awarded the title of Shang Shuzo Gaigei Rong.

古文：陈使傅縡聘齐，以道衡兼主客郎接对之。
现代文：南陈使者傅纟宰出使北齐，薛道衡以主客郎的身份接待了他。
English: Southern Chen's emissary Fu Xizai dispatched the emissary Bei Qi, and Xue Doheng received him as the chief guest.

古文：縡赠诗五十韵，道衡和之，南北称美。
现代文：傅纟宰写赠诗五十韵，薛道衡与之唱和，南北两国都交口称颂。
English: Fu Yanzai wrote a poem of fifty rhymes, Xue Daoheng sang along with it, and the two countries exchanged praise.

古文：魏收曰： 傅縡所谓以蚓投鱼耳。 
现代文：魏收夸赞薛道衡说： 傅纟宰的诗，好比用蚯蚓钓出了大鱼啊。 
English: Wei Jie praised Xue Daoheng and said: Fu Rongzai's poem is like using a hook to catch a big fish.

古文：待诏文林馆，与范阳卢思道、安平李德林齐名友善。
现代文：薛道衡在文林馆职，与范阳的卢思道、安平的李德林关系亲密，名声驰誉。
English: Xue Daoheng worked at the Wenlin Museum. He had a close relationship with Lu Si Dao of Fanyang and Li Delin of Anping, and his reputation was well-known.

古文：复以本官直中书省，寻拜中书侍郎，仍参太子侍读。
现代文：他又以原来的官职兼任中书省的职务，不久，任中书侍郎，又兼太子侍读。
English: He also concurrently held the post of Chushisho (Minister of Books) with his original official post, and soon he was appointed Chushisajiro (Clerk of Books) as well as the Prince's Attendant.

古文：齐后主之世，渐见亲用，与侍中斛律孝卿参预政事。
现代文：齐后主时，他逐渐被重用，与侍中斛律孝卿一起参与朝廷大事。
English: When the emperor was enthroned, he was gradually used more and more, taking part in the important events of the imperial court together with the chamberlain, Shun Ritsutaka.

古文：道衡具陈备周之策，孝卿不能用。
现代文：薛道衡详细陈述防备北周进攻的策略，斛律孝卿却没有采用。
English: Xue Daoheng made a detailed statement of the strategy to prevent the attack of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, but it was not adopted by Gong Ruling Xiaoqing.

古文：及齐亡，周武帝引为御史二命士。
现代文：北齐灭亡后，周武帝授予他御史二命士。
English: After the demise of Northern Qi, Emperor Zhou Wu awarded him the title of "Goshi Ermeishi."

古文：后归乡里，自州主簿入为司禄上士，隋文作相，从元帅梁睿击王谦，摄陵州刺史。
现代文：以后回归乡里，从州主簿的职务开始，又进入朝廷任司禄上士。隋文帝杨坚做北周宰相时，薛道衡跟随元帅梁睿进攻王谦，又担任了陵州刺史。
English: After that, he returned to the countryside, starting from the position of the state master book, and then entered the imperial court as the sergeant of Silo. When the Sui Emperor Yang Jian was the prime minister of North Zhou, Xue Daoheng followed the marshal Liang Rui to attack Wang Qian, and also served as the lingzhou chief historian.

古文：大定中，授仪同，守邛州刺史。
现代文：大定年间，朝廷授予他仪同的职衔，实际担任邛州刺史。
English: During the Dading period, the imperial court awarded him the same title, and he actually served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：文帝受禅，坐事除名。
现代文：隋文帝即位，薛道衡却因事获罪，被免去职务。
English: Emperor Sui Wen ascended to the throne, but Xue Daoheng was found guilty and removed from his post.

古文：河间王弘北征突厥，召典军书。
现代文：河间王杨弘向北征讨突厥，召请他负责军中文书。
English: Wang Yanghong of Kawama went to the north to fight the Turks, and he was called to be in charge of the army's Chinese literature.

古文：还，除内史舍人。
现代文：归来，任内史舍人。
English: After his return, he resigned from his post.

古文：其年，兼散骑常侍，聘陈使主。
现代文：这一年，又兼任散骑常侍。出使陈国，他为主要使者，因而向隋文帝建议说 ：陛下您的功勋可与尧舜相比。
English: This year, he also served as a horseback riding attendant. He sent Chen Guo, who was the main messenger, and thus suggested to the Sui Emperor Wen that: Your Majesty, your merits can be compared to the dragonfly.

古文：道衡因奏曰： 陛下比隆三代，平一九州，岂容区区之陈，久在天网之外？臣今奉使，请责以称蕃。 
现代文：平定九州，天下化一，怎么能允许小小的南陈，长久存在于天纲之外？我现在奉命出使该国，请求朝廷下令他们向大隋自称为藩附国。 
English: If Kyushu is to be pacified and the whole country unified, how can the small Nancheng be allowed to exist outside the framework of heaven for a long time? I have now been ordered to dispatch the country and request the imperial court to order them to declare themselves as a tributary state to the Great Sui Dynasty.

古文：帝曰： 朕且含养，致之度外，勿以言辞相折。 
现代文：隋文帝说 ：我尚且有涵养原谅他们，因而置之度外，你不要用不礼貌的言词损辱他们。 
English: Sui Wen Di said: I still have the forbearance to forgive them, so do not use impolite words to insult them.

古文：江东雅好篇什，陈主尤爱雕虫，道衡每有所作，南人无不吟诵焉。
现代文：江南一带喜好诗文篇章，陈国后主陈叔宝尤其喜欢吟诗填词，薛道衡每有诗篇问世，江南人无不吟诵传唱。
English: The south of the Yangtze River region is fond of poetry. Chen Shubao, the empress dowager of the Chen Kingdom, is particularly fond of chanting poetry. Whenever a poem by Xue Daoheng comes out, the people of the south of the Yangtze River chant it and pass it on.

古文：及八年伐陈，拜淮南道行台尚书吏部郎，兼掌文翰。
现代文：到了开皇八年隋军攻打南陈时，薛道衡被任命为淮南道行台尚书吏部郎，兼管军中的文书。
English: When the Sui army attacked South Chen in the eighth year of the Emperor's reign, Xue Daoheng was appointed as the secretary of the South Huaihai Road, and also the clerk in charge of the army.

古文：王师临江，高颎夜幕中，谓曰： 今段定克江东以不？
现代文：大军驻扎在长江岸边，高赹夜晚坐在军帐中，对薛道衡说 ：这次是否一定能攻克江东？请你谈谈看法。 
English: A large army was stationed on the banks of the Yangtze River, and Gao Yao sat in a military account at night and said to Xue Daoheng: Will we be able to conquer the east of the river this time? Please share your opinion.

古文：君试言之。 道衡答曰： 凡论大事成败，先须以至理断之。
现代文：薛道衡说： 凡讨论大事的成败，必须先用牢不可破的道理去判断。
English: Xue Daoheng said: Whenever we discuss the success or failure of a major event, we must first use an unbreakable principle to judge.

古文：《禹贡》所载九州，本是王者封域。
现代文：《禹贡》上所记载的九州，本来是当王的人所应管辖的领域。
English: Kyushu, which is recorded in "Yugon," was originally the area under the jurisdiction of the king.

古文：郭璞有云： 江东偏王三百年，还与中国合。 
现代文：郭璞说过 ：江东分裂称王三百年，还会与中原合在一起。 
English: Guo Wei said: the Jiangdong split is said to be three hundred years old, and it will be merged with the Central Plains.

古文：今数将满矣。以运数而言，其必克一也。
现代文：现在南陈气数将满，以运数判断，江南必被克复，这是原因之一。
English: This is one of the reasons why, judging by the number of operations, the southern part of the Yangtze River is bound to be recovered.

古文：有德者昌，无德者亡，自古兴灭，皆由此道。
现代文：有道德的就昌盛兴隆，失去道德的就衰弱灭亡，自古以来国家的兴亡，都符合这个道理。
English: Those with morals prosper and flourish, those without morals wither and die, and the rise and fall of nations since ancient times has been consistent with this principle.

古文：主上躬履恭俭，忧劳庶政。叔宝峻宇雕墙，酣酒荒色。
现代文：圣上亲躬政事，俭朴谦恭，劬劳勤勉；陈叔宝却住高屋，雕画墙，沉溺酒色。
English: Sheng Shangxin was a statesman, frugal, modest, and diligent; Chen Shubao, on the other hand, lived in a high-rise, carved walls, and indulged in alcohol.

古文：其必克二也。
现代文：这是江南必被克复的原因之二。
English: This is the second reason why the southern part of the Yangtze River must be recovered.

古文：为国之体，在于任寄。
现代文：治理国家的关键，在于任用贤能。
English: The key to governing the country lies in the appointment of talent.

古文：彼之公卿，备员而已。
现代文：南陈的公卿大臣，仅仅是充数而已。
English: Nan Chen's Kugyo-daijin is merely a placeholder.

古文：拔小人施文庆，委以政事；尚书令江总唯事诗酒，本非经略之才；萧摩诃、任蛮奴是其大将，一夫之用耳。
现代文：提拔卑薄无德的施文庆，并委以重任；尚书令江总只会饮酒赋诗，根本不是经邦治国的人才；萧摩诃、任蛮奴是南陈的大将，仅是两个普通人罢了。
English: Shi Wenqing, who was despicable and without virtue, was promoted and entrusted with a heavy task; Shang Shuling Jiang, who could only drink and write poetry, was not a talent for governing the country at all; Xiao Maqin and Ren Brute Slave were the generals of Nan Chen, but they were just two ordinary people.

古文：其必克三也。
现代文：这是它必然被克复的原因之三。
English: This is one of the three reasons why it must be defeated.

古文：我有道而大，彼无德而小。
现代文：我国得道而又强大，南陈失道而又弱小。
English: Our country is strong and powerful, but weak and small when it loses its way.

古文：量其甲士，不过十万，西自巫峡，东极沧海，分之则势悬而力弱；聚之则守此而失彼。
现代文：估计它的军队，不超过十万。西自巫峡，东到海滨，分散驻守则形势悬殊而力量薄弱。集中驻防又会顾此失彼。
English: It is estimated that its army does not exceed one hundred thousand. From Wuxia in the west to the seashore in the east, the dispersed garrisons are in a very different situation and are weak. Concentrated garrisons will lose the battle.

古文：其必克四也。
现代文：这是南陈必然被攻克的原因之四。
English: This is the fourth reason why Nanchen is bound to be conquered.

古文：席卷之势，其在不疑。 
现代文：席卷江南的形势已经形成，成功的关键在于不要犹豫。 
English: The situation sweeping the south of the Yangtze River has taken shape, and the key to success lies in not hesitating.

古文：颎忻然曰： 君言成败，理甚分明。
现代文：高赹听后高兴地说 ：你分析成败的形势，道理了了分明。
English: After listening, Gao Yao said happily, "Your analysis of the situation of success and failure has made the reason clear.

古文：本以才学相期，不意筹略乃尔。 还除吏部侍郎。
现代文：我本来只把你当成有才学的读书人来看待，没想到如此有文韬武略。 伐陈归来，他任吏部侍郎。
English: Originally, I only regarded you as a scholarly reader, but I didn't expect you to be so literate. When Fa Chen returned, he was appointed as the secretary of the administrative department.

古文：后坐抽擢人物，有言其党苏威，任人有意故，除名，配防岭表。
现代文：后来坐罪于选拔人才。有人弹劾他与苏威结党，有意拔举，所以被免官，流放到岭南。
English: Later, he was found guilty of selecting talents. Someone impeached him for forming a party with Su Wei with the intention of promoting him, so he was removed from office and exiled to Lingnan.

古文：晋王广时在扬州，阴令人讽道衡，遣从扬州路，将奏留之。
现代文：晋王杨广当时在扬州，偷偷派人告诉薛道衡，让他请求走扬州这条路去岭南，然后奏请隋文帝把他留下来。
English: At that time, Yang Guang, the king of Jin, was in Yangzhou. He secretly sent a messenger to Xue Daoheng to ask him to take the Yangzhou road to Lingnan, and then to ask the Sui Emperor to keep him.

古文：道衡不乐王府，用汉王谅之计，遂出江陵道而去。
现代文：薛道衡不喜欢杨广，而采纳了汉王杨谅的建议，便走江陵道去岭南。
English: Xue Daoheng did not like Yang Guang, but he took the advice of Han Wang Yang Peng and went to the south of Lingnan along the Gangneung Road.

古文：寻诏征还，直内史省。
现代文：不久，朝廷下诏将他调回内史省任职。
English: Soon after, the Imperial Court ordered him to be transferred back to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：晋王由是衔之。
现代文：晋王杨广从此对他衔恨。
English: King of Jin, Yang Guang, held a grudge against him ever since.

古文：然爱其才，犹颇见礼。
现代文：然而，因为爱惜他的才干，对他十分礼貌。
English: However, because he cherished his talent, he was very polite to him.

古文：后数岁，授内史侍郎，加上仪同三司。
现代文：以后数年，朝廷任命他为内史侍郎，又加上仪同三司的职衔。
English: A few years later, the Imperial Court appointed him as Naishi no Jiro, and he was also given the title of Gidon Sanji.

古文：道衡每构文，必隐坐空斋，蹋壁而卧，闻户外有人便怒，其沈思如此。
现代文：薛道衡每构思文章，一定端坐在空室内，或者靠着墙半躺着，听到外面有人说话便发脾气。他的沉思如此专注。
English: Whenever Xue Daoheng thinks of an article, he always sits in an empty room, or half-lies against the wall, and gets angry when he hears someone talking outside. His contemplation is so focused.

古文：帝每曰： 道衡作文书称我意。 
现代文：文帝称赞说 ：道衡起草的文书很符合我的意思。 
English: Wen Di praised: The document drafted by Daoheng is very much in line with my intention.

古文：然诫之以迂诞。
现代文：然而，对他的迂阔荒诞却提出告诫。
English: However, his meandering absurdity is cautioned against.

古文：后帝谓杨素、牛弘曰：道衡老矣，驱使勤劳，宜使硃门陈戟。 
现代文：后来，文帝对杨素、牛弘说： 道衡年纪大了，我不能再驱使他，使他尝受辛劳，应该派卫士守卫着他家的大门，让他过上安逸稳定的日子。 
English: Later, Emperor Wen said to Yang Su and Niu Hong, "Doheng is old, I can no longer drive him and make him suffer hardships, I should send guards to guard the gate of his house and let him live a comfortable and stable life.

古文：于是进上开府，赐物百段。
现代文：于是，晋封他为上开府，赐给物品一百件。
English: As a result, he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu and given a hundred items.

古文：道衡辞以无功。帝曰： 尔久劳阶陛，国家大事，皆尔宣行，岂非尔功也？ 
现代文：薛道衡以自己没有功劳而推辞，隋文帝说： 你长久在朝廷内辛勤供职，国家的大事，都由你来宣布，难道不是你的功劳吗？ 
English: Xue Daoheng declined, saying that he had no merit. Sui Wen Di said, "You have served diligently in the imperial court for a long time. You are the one to announce the important matters of the country. Isn't it your merit?

古文：道衡久当枢要，才名益显。
现代文：薛道衡长时间处在国家中枢机要的位置上，声望更加显著。
English: Xue Daoheng has been in an important position in the country for a long time, and his reputation is even more prominent.

古文：太子、诸王争与交好，高颎、杨素雅相推重，声名籍甚，无竞一时。
现代文：太子和各地封王争相与他交结，高赹、杨素对他十分推崇，因而使他的名声更大，一时无人可比。
English: Princes and emperors from all over the country vied for his friendship. Gao Zheng and Yang Su highly respected him, which made his reputation even greater. At the time, no one could compare to him.

古文：仁寿中，杨素专掌朝政。
现代文：仁寿年间，杨素专掌朝廷大事。
English: During his life, Yang Su was in charge of all the important affairs of the imperial court.

古文：道衡既与素善，上不欲道衡久知机密，因出检校襄州总管。
现代文：由于薛道衡与杨素关系密切，隋文帝不想让他长久地了解机密大事，因而，让他出任襄州总管。
English: As Xue Daoheng had a close relationship with Yang Su, Emperor Sui did not want him to know confidential matters for a long time, so he made him the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：道衡一旦见出，不胜悲恋，言之哽咽。
现代文：薛道衡一旦被调出京城，十分悲伤和留恋，说话时不禁哽咽抽泣。
English: Once Xue Daoheng was transferred out of Beijing, he was very sad and nostalgic. When he spoke, he could not help but choke and sob.

古文：帝怆然改容曰： 尔光阴晚暮，侍奉诚劳，朕欲令尔将摄。
现代文：文帝也面容忧戚，说： 你已经到了迟暮之年，对朝廷实在是忠诚勤劳。我想让你将养珍摄。
English: Emperor Wen also looked pensive and said, "You have reached your twilight years, and you have been loyal and diligent to the imperial court. I want you to cherish your family."

古文：今尔之去，朕如断一臂。 
现代文：现在你离开朝廷，我好象断了一只臂膀。 
English: Now that you have left the court, I feel as if I have lost an arm.

古文：于是赉物三百段，九环金带并时服一袭，马十匹，慰勉遣之。
现代文：于是，又赏赐他物品三百件，九环金带和衣服一套，马十匹，劝慰勉励一番将他送走。
English: Therefore, he also rewarded him with three hundred items, a nine-ring gold belt and a set of clothes, ten horses, and sent him away with consolation and encouragement.

古文：在任清简，吏人怀其惠。
现代文：他在襄州任上清廉简放，官吏和老百姓都怀念他的惠政。
English: During his tenure in Xiangzhou, he was a man of integrity and simplicity. Both officials and ordinary people miss his benevolent government.

古文：炀帝嗣位，转潘州刺史。
现代文：炀帝继位，薛道衡转任潘州刺史。
English: Emperor Qian succeeded to the throne, and Xue Daoheng was transferred to the post of the governor of Panzhou.

古文：岁余，上表求致仕。
现代文：一年多后，上表请求退职。
English: More than a year later, the above table requests retirement.

古文：帝谓内史侍郎虞世基曰： 道衡将至，当以秘书监待之。 
现代文：炀帝对内史侍郎虞世基说： 薛道衡将要回来，我将把秘书监的位置留给他。 
English: Emperor Qian said to Yu Shiji, the attendant of internal history: Xue Daoheng will come back, I will leave the position of secretary supervisor to him.

古文：道衡既至，上《高祖文皇帝颂》。帝览之不悦。顾谓苏威曰： 道衡致美先朝，此鱼藻之义也。 
现代文：薛道衡回京城后，写了《高祖文皇帝颂》一文送给炀帝，炀帝看了很不高兴，回头对苏威说： 道衡称誉先朝，就像《诗经》中的《鱼藻》篇用来讽刺幽王啊。 
English: After Xue Daoheng returned to Beijing, he wrote the "Song of Emperor Gaozouwen" and sent it to Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao was very unhappy when he read it, and turned to Su Wei and said: "Doheng praised the previous dynasty, just like the "Fish Algae" chapter in the "Song of Songs" was used to satirize Youwang."

古文：于是拜司隶大夫，将置之罪。
现代文：于是，只任他为司隶大夫，将要问他的罪。
English: So let him be the judge, and he will be asked about his sin.

古文：道衡不悟，司隶刺史房彦谦素与相善，知必及祸，劝之杜绝宾客，卑辞下气，而道衡不能用。
现代文：薛道衡还不觉悟，司隶刺史房彦谦平常与他关系亲近，知道他一定遭受祸殃，劝他杜绝来往的客人，说话也要注意措词和语气。而薛道衡却听不进去。
English: Xue Daoheng was not yet aware of this. His subordinate, Sashishi Fusahikken, who was usually close to him, knew that he must suffer misfortune, and advised him to prevent guests from coming and going, and to pay attention to the wording and tone of his speech. But Xue Daoheng did not listen.

古文：会议新令，久不能决，道衡谓朝士曰： 向使高颎不死，令当久行。 
现代文：恰巧朝廷讨论新的法令，久久不能决定，薛道衡对朝臣们说： 假如高赹不死，法令早已经颁布。 
English: Coincidentally, when the imperial court was discussing a new decree and could not decide for a long time, Xue Daoheng said to the courtiers: If Gao Yao did not die, the decree would have been issued long ago.

古文：有人奏之。帝怒曰： 汝忆颎乎？ 
现代文：有人报告给炀帝，炀帝大怒，说 ：你难道还想念高赹吗？ 
English: Someone reported to Emperor Gao, Emperor Gao was furious and said: Do you still miss Gao Gao?

古文：付执法者推之。
现代文：将他交给执法部门判决。
English: Turn him over to law enforcement for adjudication.

古文：道衡自以非大过，促宪司早解。
现代文：薛道衡自以为不是什么大的过错，催促宪司早日判决。
English: Xue Daoheng thought it was not a big mistake and urged the Constitutional Court to make a ruling as soon as possible.

古文：奏日，冀帝赦之，敕家人具馔以备客来侯者。
现代文：案情奏上时，希望炀帝能够赦免他，并让家里人准备酒饭招待来打听消息的客人。
English: When the case came to light, he hoped that Emperor Gong would pardon him, and asked his family to prepare a banquet to invite guests who came to inquire about the news.

古文：及奏，帝令自尽。
现代文：等到奏上案情，炀帝却下令让他自尽。
English: When the case was reported, Emperor Xuan ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：道衡殊不意，未能引诀。
现代文：薛道衡大感意外，没有诀别自裁。
English: Xue Daoheng was very surprised and did not say goodbye.

古文：宪司重奏，缢而杀之。
现代文：宪司重新上奏，炀帝下令将他用绳子勒死。
English: The gendarme played it again, and Emperor Gong ordered that he be strangled with a rope.

古文：妻子徙且末。
现代文：他的妻子被流放到且末。
English: His wife was eventually exiled.

古文：时年七十。天下冤之。
现代文：死时年七十岁，天下人都认为他冤枉。
English: He was seventy years old when he died, and everyone in the world thought he was innocent.

古文：薛憕，字景猷，河东汾阴人也。
现代文：有文集七十卷流行于世。薛憕，字景猷，河东汾阴人。
English: There are seventy volumes of anthologies that are popular in the world. Xue Yao, Zijing Yao, and Hedong Yao Yin Ren are the most popular.

古文：曾祖弘敞，逢赫连之乱，率宗人避地襄阳。
现代文：曾祖薛弘敞遭逢赫连的变乱，率领本宗族的人避居到襄阳。
English: Zengzu Xue Hongzhang suffered from Feng Khelian's rebellion and led the people of this clan to flee to Yangyang.

古文：憕早丧父，家贫。躬耕以养祖母，有暇则览文籍。
现代文：薛憕早年丧父，家境贫穷，靠种田赡养祖父母和母亲，空闲时便读书。
English: Xue Yao lost his father at an early age, and his family was poor. He supported his grandparents and mother by farming, and read books in his spare time.

古文：疏宕不拘，时人未之奇也。
现代文：他性格旷达，不拘小节，世人都不认为他是一位不寻常的人才。
English: His personality is expansive, unconventional, and the world does not consider him to be an unusual talent.

古文：江表取人，多以世族。
现代文：江南用人大多注重世家大族。
English: Most employers in Jiangnan pay attention to the family lineage.

古文：憕世无贵仕，解褐不过侍郎。既羁旅，不被擢用。
现代文：薛憕家世代没有一位贵官显宦。就是有人解褐做官，也只不过是一个侍郎，因而仕途被阻，不被提拔重用。
English: In the Xue Yue family's generation, there was not a single distinguished official. Even if someone was appointed as an official, he was just a waiter, so his career was blocked and he was not promoted and reused.

古文：常叹曰： 岂能五十年戴帻，死一校尉，低头倾首，俯仰而向人也！ 
现代文：他常常叹息说 ：我怎么能一直戴着普通人的头巾到五十岁，困死在一个小小的校尉的职务上，低眉顺眼，俯仰由人呢？ 
English: He often sighed and said: How could I have worn the common man's turban until the age of fifty, stuck in a small captain's post, with a low brow pleasing to the eye and admired by others?

古文：常郁郁不得志，每在人间，辄陵架胜达，负才使气，未尝趋世禄之门。
现代文：由于郁郁不得志，因而在别人面前往往狂妄放达，依恃才能，挥洒意气，从未登过豪族权要的大门。
English: Due to depression and lack of ambition, they are often arrogant in front of others, cling to talent, and show off their spirit. They have never entered the gate of the powerful.

古文：左中郎将京兆韦潜度谓曰： 君门地非下，身材不劣，何不裾数参吏部？ 
现代文：左中郎将京兆韦潜度对他说： 你的门第并非卑下，自身也不低劣，为何不放下身份多去吏部拜谒几次呢？ 
English: Zuo Zhonglang raised the potential of Beijing Zhaowei and said to him: Your disciples are not lowly, and you are not inferior. Why don't you give up your status and visit the cadre department a few more times?

古文：憕曰：  世胄蹑高位，英俊沈下寮 ，古人以为叹息，窃所未能也。 
现代文：薛憕说 ： 世胄蹑高位，英俊沈下僚 ，古人都为这种情况叹息，我不能这样去做啊。 
English: Xue Yao said: The world's high-ranking, handsome and low-ranking colleagues, the ancients are sighing for this situation, I can't do this.

古文：潜度告人曰： 此年少实慷慨，但不遭时耳。 
现代文：韦潜度对别人说 ：这个少年实在慷慨有为，但却没有遇上好的机会啊。 
English: Wei Potent said to others: This boy is really generous and accomplished, but he has not met a good opportunity.

古文：孝昌中，杖策还洛阳。
现代文：北魏肃宗孝昌年间，薛憕驱马来到洛阳。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suizong of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Xue Yu drove his horse to Luoyang.

古文：先是憕从祖真度与族祖安都拥徐、兗归魏，其子怀俊见憕，甚相亲善。
现代文：先是他的从祖父薛真度与同族的一位祖父辈叫薛安都的带着徐州、兖州归顺北魏，他的儿子薛怀俊来见薛憕，两人十分亲密友善。
English: First, his great-grandfather Xue Zhindu and a grandparent of the same family named Xue Andu took Xuzhou and Ganzhou to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and his son Xue Huaijun came to see Xue Yao. The two were very close and friendly.

古文：属尔硃荣废立，怔遂还河东，止怀俊家。
现代文：北魏大权被尔朱荣控制，任意废立。薛憕便到河东，住在薛怀俊家里。
English: The Northern Wei Great Power was controlled by Er Zhu Rong and arbitrarily abolished. Xue Yao then went to Hedong and lived in the home of Xue Huai Jun.

古文：不交人物，终日读书，手自抄略，将二百卷。
现代文：他不与人交往，每天读书不辍，亲手抄写，将近有二百卷。
English: He did not socialize with people, read every day without stopping, and copied nearly two hundred volumes with his own hands.

古文：唯郡守元袭时相要屈，与之抗礼。
现代文：惟有郡守元袭常常屈尊相邀，两人对等行礼。
English: However, the county governor, Yuan Qi, often condescended to be invited, and the two men bowed to each other.

古文：怀俊每谓曰： 汝还乡里，不营产业，不肯取妻，岂复欲南乎？ 
现代文：怀俊时常对他说 ：你回到故里，不经营产业，也不肯娶妻成家，难道不是还想回到江南？ 
English: Huai Jun often said to him: When you return to your hometown, you don't run an industry, nor do you want to marry and start a family. Don't you still want to return to the south of the Yangtze River?

古文：憕亦不介意。
现代文：薛憕听了也不介意。
English: Xue Yao didn't mind.

古文：普泰中，拜给事中，加伏波将军。
现代文：节闵帝普泰年间，他被任命为给事中，加伏波将军衔。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, he was appointed to the rank of general of the middle-ranking cavalry.

古文：及齐神武起兵，憕乃东游陈、梁间，谓族人孝通曰： 高欢阻兵陵上，丧乱方始。
现代文：到了齐神武帝高欢起兵，薛憕便东游梁、陈之间，对族人薛孝通说 ：高欢陈兵陵上，天下便开始了动荡变乱。
English: When Emperor Qishenwu Gao Huan raised an army, Xue Yao went between Dong You Liang and Chen and said to the tribesman Xue Xiaotong: Gao Huan Chen's tomb, the world began to be in turmoil.

古文：关中形胜之地，必有霸王据之。 
现代文：关中形胜地险，一定会有强有力的人物据守。 
English: In Guanzhong Scenic Area, there will definitely be a strong person to defend it.

古文：乃与孝通俱游长安。
现代文：便同孝通一起游历长安。
English: He then traveled to Chang'an with Xiaotong.

古文：侯莫陈悦闻之，召为行台郎，除镇远将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：侯莫陈悦听说后，请他任行台郎，授予镇远将军、步兵校尉。
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue heard about it, he asked him to be the governor of Xingtai, and awarded him the title of Zhenyuan General and Infantry Lieutenant.

古文：及悦害贺拔岳，军人咸相庆慰。憕独谓所亲曰： 悦才略本寡，辄害良将，败亡之事，其则不远。
现代文：等到侯莫陈悦害死贺拔岳，军人们都欢庆欣慰，薛憕却对军司傅长高说 ：陈悦本来缺少才干，动不动就谋害优秀的将领，败亡的命运不会太远。
English: When Hou Mo Chen Yue caused the death of He Batyue, the soldiers all rejoiced with joy, but Xue Yao said to the commander of the army: Chen Yue originally lacked talent, and plotted to kill excellent generals at every turn, and the fate of defeat would not be too far away.

古文：吾属今即为人所虏，何庆之有乎？ 
现代文：我们不久就会被人俘虏，还有什么值得庆贺呢？ 
English: We're about to be taken prisoner, what's there to celebrate?

古文：长高以憕言为然，并有忧色。
现代文：傅长高认为薛憕的话很有道理，并表现出忧惧的神色。
English: Fu Changgao thought that Xue Yao's words were very reasonable, and showed a worried look.

古文：寻而周文平悦，引憕为记室参军。
现代文：没过多久，宇文泰平定侯莫陈悦，任薛憕为记室参军。
English: Not long after, Uven Tai pinned down Hou Mo Chen Yue, and appointed Xue Yao to join the army as a recorder.

古文：武帝西迁，授征虏将军、中散大夫，封夏阳县男。
现代文：孝武帝西迁，授予他征虏将军、中散大夫，封为夏阳县男。
English: Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, and awarded him the title of Conscript General, Zhongshan Doctor, and the title of the man of Xiayang County.

古文：文帝即位，拜中书侍郎，加安东将军，进爵为伯。
现代文：西魏文帝元宝炬即位，命他为中书侍郎，加安东将军衔，晋爵为伯。
English: Western Wei Emperor Yuan Baoqin ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese book, with the rank of General of the East and the promotion to the peerage.

古文：大统四年，宣光、清徽殿初成，憕为之颂。
现代文：西魏文帝大统四年，宣光、清徽两座宫殿建成，薛憕为此撰文歌颂。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty, the two palaces of Xuan Guang and Qing Hui were built, and Xue Yao wrote a poem in praise of this.

古文：文帝又造二欹器：一为二仙人共持一钵，同处一盘，钵盖有山，山有香气，一仙人又持金瓶以临器上，倾水灌山，则出于瓶而注乎器，烟气通发山中，谓之仙人欹器。
现代文：文帝又做了两件倾斜易覆的珍奇器物：一件为两位仙人共同捧着一只钵，同处在一个大盘子里。钵盖上雕有山，山发出香气。一个仙人又拿着金瓶置于器物上，从金瓶倒出水浇注在山上，水从瓶中流出后倾注在器物上，烟气从山中发出，叫做仙人欹器。
English: Emperor Wen also made two rare objects that can be tilted and overturned: one is for two immortals holding a cocoon together, which is placed in a large dish. The cocoon lid is carved with a mountain, and the mountain emits fragrance. Another immortals holds a gold bottle and places it on the object, pours water from the gold bottle and pours it on the mountain, the water flows out of the bottle and pours it on the object, and the smoke emits from the mountain, which is called a immortals cocoon.

古文：一为二荷同处一盘，相去盈尺，中有莲，下垂器上，以水注荷，则出于莲而盈乎器，为凫雁蟾以饰之，谓之水芝欹器。
现代文：一件为两片荷叶同处在一只盘子里，相距一尺，中间有朵莲花，向下垂在器物上。用水注在荷叶上，则从莲花中流出而充溢在器物内。上面雕有水鸟、雁、蟾蜍以作装饰，叫做水芝欹器。
English: One is two pieces of lotus leaves placed together in a dish, one foot apart, with a lotus flower in the middle, hanging down on the utensil. Water is poured onto the lotus leaves, then flows out of the lotus and fills the utensil. Waterfowl, geese, and dragonflies are carved on the top for decoration, called water chrysanthemum bowl.

古文：二盘各处一床，钵圆而床方，中有人，三才之象也。
现代文：二只盘子各处在一个底座上，钵是圆的，而底座是方的，中间又铸有人，是象征天、地、人 三才 啊。
English: The two plates are placed on a pedestal. The gong is round, the pedestal is square, and a man is cast in the middle, symbolizing heaven, earth, and man.

古文：皆置清徽殿前。形似觥而方，满而平，溢则倾。
现代文：两件器物都放在清徽殿前面，器物形状与觥相似而呈方形，注满水则保持平衡，水溢出便倾斜。
English: Both pieces of equipment are placed in front of the Qinghui Hall. The shape of the equipment is similar to that of an urn and is square. When filled with water, it maintains its balance, and when the water overflows, it tilts.

古文：憕各为颂。
现代文：薛憕又写文章予以歌颂。
English: Xue Yao also wrote an article to praise it.

古文：大统初，仪制多阙。周文令憕与卢辩、檀翥等参定之。
现代文：大统初年，礼仪制度大多缺失，宇文泰命薛憕与卢辩、檀翥等重新修订。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, most of the etiquette system was missing, and Wu Wentai ordered Xue Yao, Lu Fen and Dan Yao to revise it.

古文：以流离世故，不听音乐，虽幽室独处，常有戚容。
现代文：他因为生活流离颠沛，所以不愿欣赏音乐。虽然独处幽室。脸上也常带着忧伤的面容。
English: Because of his hectic life, he doesn't like to listen to music. Although he lives alone in a secluded room, he often wears a sad face.

古文：后坐事死。
现代文：后来因事获罪而死。
English: He was later convicted of the crime and died.

