古文：至于玄月，王召范蠡而问焉，曰： 谚有之曰，觥饭不及壶飧。
现代文：到了这年的九月，越王召见范蠡，向他请教说： 俗话说得好，饿着肚子等好吃的，还不如先吃到一碗粗米饭。
English: In September of this year, Yue Wang summoned Fan Zhu to consult him and said, "As the saying goes, if you are hungry and want to eat something delicious, it is better to eat a bowl of coarse rice first."

古文：今岁晚矣，子将奈何？ 
现代文：如今一年快要完了，你看怎么办呢？ 
English: Now that the year is almost over, what do you think will happen?

古文：对曰： 微君王之言，臣故将谒之。
现代文：范蠡说： 君王不说这话，我也要请求君王攻打吴国了。
English: Fan Ye said: If the king does not say this, I will also ask the king to attack Wu.

古文：臣闻从时者，犹救火、追亡人也，蹶而趋之，唯恐弗及。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：我听说，捕捉机遇，就好像扑灭大火和追捕逃犯一样，拼命追赶还怕来不及。 越王说： 好。 
English: I've heard that seizing opportunities is like putting out a fire and chasing a fugitive, and I'm afraid it's too late to chase desperately.Yue Wang said, "Good.

古文：遂兴师伐吴，至于五湖。
现代文：于是马上起兵攻打吴国，进军到五湖。
English: So he immediately raised an army to attack Wu and marched to Wuhu.

古文：吴人闻之，出而挑战，一日五反。
现代文：吴国人听说越军来了，出兵挑战，一天之内来回五次。
English: When the people of Wu heard that the Vietnamese army was coming, they challenged the soldiers to come and go five times in one day.

古文：王弗忍，欲许之，范蠡进谏曰： 夫谋之廊庙，失之中原，其可乎？
现代文：越王按捺不住，准备答应交战。范蠡进谏说： 在朝廷里谋划得好好的，一到战场就失算，这样可以吗？
English: King Yue could not restrain himself and was ready to agree to engage in battle. Fan Junjin said: If you plan well in the imperial court, you will lose count as soon as you get to the battlefield. Is that okay?

古文：王姑勿许也。
现代文：君王暂且不要答应交战。
English: For the time being, the sovereign should not agree to engage in battle.

古文：臣闻之，得时无怠，时不再来，天予不取，反为之灾。
现代文：我听说，时机到来不能怠慢，时机失去就不会再来。上天赐予却不收受，反而会有灾难。
English: I have heard that when the time comes, one must not neglect it, and if the time is lost, it will not come again. God gives but does not receive, but there will be disaster.

古文：赢缩转化，后将悔之。
现代文：进退变化中，如果拿不准主意，之后一定会懊悔。
English: In the process of change, if you are not sure of your decision, you will regret it later.

古文：天节固然，唯谋不迁。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：天道变化本来就是这样，谋划好了的事就不要再更改了。 越王说： 好吧。 
English: That's how it is with changes in the heavens, so don't change what you've planned.Yue Wang said, "Okay."

古文：弗许。
现代文：就没有同意交战。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：范蠡曰： 臣闻古之善用兵者，赢缩以为常，四时以为纪，无过天极，究数而止。
现代文：范蠡说： 臣听说古代善于用兵的人，以星辰出没和四时转换的规律为准则，不越过天道的极限，到了一定的限度就停止。
English: Fan Rong said: I have heard that in ancient times, people who were good at using weapons took the rule of the appearance of stars and the four-hour change as the standard, and did not exceed the limit of heaven, and stopped when they reached a certain limit.

古文：天道皇皇，日月以为常，明者以为法，微者则是行。
现代文：天道非常明显，日月的运行是天道的常规。日月光明时可以作前进的法则，日月晦暗时可以作隐蔽的榜样。
English: The heavenly way is very obvious, and the movement of the sun and the moon is the routine of the heavenly way. When the sun and the moon are bright, they can be used as the law of progress, and when the sun and the moon are dark, they can be used as a hidden example.

古文：阳至而阴，阴至而阳；日困而还，月盈而匡。
现代文：阳达到极点一定会转为阴，阴达到极点一定会转为阳。太阳落了又升，月亮圆了又缺。
English: When the sun reaches its zenith, it will definitely turn into the shade, and when the shade reaches its zenith, it will definitely turn into the sun. The sun sets and rises, and the moon is round and waning.

古文：古之善用兵者，因天地之常，与之俱行。
现代文：古时善于用兵的人，遵循着天地的常规，和它一起行动。
English: In ancient times, those who were good at using soldiers followed the routine of heaven and earth and acted together with it.

古文：后则用阴，先则用阳；近则用柔，远则用刚。
现代文：被动防守时用阴道，主动进攻时用阳道。敌人逼近时用柔道，敌人远离时用刚道。
English: When passively defending, use the vagina, when actively attacking, use the yang. When the enemy is approaching, use judo, when the enemy is far away, use the hard way.

古文：后无阴蔽，先无阳察，用人无艺，往从其所。
现代文：但被动防守时不能过于隐蔽，主动进攻时也不能过于显露。
English: However, when defending passively, it should not be too covert, and when attacking actively, it should not be too overt.

古文：刚强以御，阳节不尽，不死其野。
现代文：用兵没有一定的格式，需要根据具体情况来作决定。如果敌方顽强抵抗，说明他们的阳气还没有耗尽，就不同他们死战。
English: The use of troops does not have a certain format and needs to be decided according to the specific situation. If the enemy stubbornly resists, indicating that their yang energy has not been exhausted, they will not fight to the death.

古文：彼来从我，固守勿与。
现代文：当敌方来寻我交战时，我们就坚守不战。
English: When the enemy came looking for me to fight, we insisted on not fighting.

古文：若将与之，必因天地之灾，又观其民之饥饱劳逸以参之。
现代文：如果准备出战，一定要乘敌方遭遇灾祸的时候，而且还要看他们的民众是饥是饱，是劳是逸，作为决定出战与否的参考。
English: If you are preparing to go to war, you must take advantage of the enemy's misfortune, and also see whether their people are hungry or full, whether they are hardworking or lazy, as a reference for deciding whether to go to war.

古文：尽其阳节，盈吾阴节而夺之。
现代文：直到敌方的阳气耗尽，我方的阴气积蓄饱满，然后才可夺取胜利。
English: Victory can only be achieved when the enemy's yang is exhausted and our yin is fully accumulated.

古文：宜为人客，刚强而力疾；阳节不尽，轻而不可取。
现代文：采取攻势的时候，应该勇猛顽强而行动迅速。敌方阳气没有耗尽前，不要轻易攻取。
English: When taking the offensive, you should be brave, tenacious and act quickly. Do not easily capture the enemy's yang before it is exhausted.

古文：宜为人主，安徐而重固；阴节不尽，柔而不可迫。
现代文：采取守势的时候，应该从容不迫。我方阴气没有耗尽前，虽然柔弱也不可能被困迫。
English: When taking the defensive, we should take our time and not be forced. Before our gloom is exhausted, although we are weak, we cannot be forced.

古文：凡陈之道，设右以为牝，益左以为牡，蚤晏无失，必顺天道，周旋无究。
现代文：布阵的方法也很重要，右翼可以布阵严整，但不是主力所在。左翼应该加强一些，使它成为主力。早晚都不能有疏忽，顺着天道，进退周旋而变化无穷。
English: The method of setting up the formation is also important. The right wing can be set up neatly, but it is not the main force. The left wing should be strengthened so that it becomes the main force. Sooner or later, there can be no negligence, following the heavenly path, advancing and retreating and changing endlessly.

古文：今其来也，刚强而力疾，王姑待之。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：如今敌方的来势凶猛而迅速，君王还是暂且等一等吧。 越王说： 好。 
English: Now that the enemy's attack was fierce and swift, the king decided to wait for a while. Yue Wang said, "Good."

古文：弗与战。
现代文：于是没有和吴军交战。
English: As a result, there was no engagement with the Wu army.

