古文：康王命作册毕，分居里，成周郊，作《毕命》。
现代文：周康王命令作册书，册命毕公治理成周，分别殷民善恶，区别居里疆界，安定周王都的郊区，史官写了《毕命》。
English: King Zhou Kang ordered to write a book, and the book ordered Bi Gong to govern Zhou, to distinguish between the good and evil of the people, to distinguish between the borders of Qi, and to stabilize the suburbs of the Zhou capital. The historian wrote "Bi Life."

古文：惟十有二年，六月庚午，朏。
现代文：康王十二年六月庚午日，新月初明。
English: It was the morning of June in the twelfth year of King Kang, the first day of the new year.

古文：越三日壬申，王朝步自宗周，至于丰。以成周之众，命毕公保厘东郊。
现代文：三天后，壬申日早晨，周康王离开镐京，到达丰邑，把成周的民众交给太史毕公管理，命其安治于东郊。
English: Three days later, on the morning of Jinshin Day, King Zhou Kang left Shijing and arrived in Fengyi. He put the people of Cheng Zhou under the administration of Taishi Bi Gong and ordered him to rule the eastern suburbs peacefully.

古文：王若曰： 呜呼！
现代文：周康王这样说： 啊！
English: Zhou Kangwang said: Ah!

古文：父师，惟文王、武王敷大德于天下，用克受殷命。
现代文：父师。唯有我先祖文王、武王施德于天下，故而能得到殷商的王命。
English: Father. Only my forefathers, King Wen and King Wu, had the virtue to be able to obtain the king's command.

古文：惟周公左右先王，绥定厥家，毖殷顽民，迁于洛邑，密迩王室，式化厥训。
现代文：周公辅助先王安邦定国，管束殷商顽民，将其迁徙到洛邑，靠近王都便于监督管理。
English: Zhou Gong assisted the previous king An Bang to establish the kingdom, controlled the Yin merchants and people, and moved them to Luoyang, which was close to Wangdu for supervision and management.

古文：既历三纪，世变风移，四方无虞，予一人以宁，道有升降，政由俗革，不臧厥臧，民罔攸劝。惟公懋德，克勤小物，弼亮四世，正色率下，罔不祗师言。
现代文：他们被逐渐周公的感化。
English: They were gradually influenced by Zhou Gong.

古文：嘉绩多于先王，予小子垂拱仰成。 
现代文：从那时到现在，已经过了三十六年。移风易俗，世事无常。
English: Thirty-six years have passed from that time to the present. As times change, so does society.

古文：王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：今四方安定无忧，我甚感欣喜。
English: And the king said, Alas!

古文：父师，今予祗命公以周公之事，往哉！
现代文：世道有好有坏，政教也随应时而变。如果不能褒奖善良，树立起以善为美的榜样，百姓将无向善之心。
English: There are good and bad in the world, and politics and religion also change with the times. If we cannot praise goodness and set up a good example, the people will not have a good heart.

古文：旌别淑慝，表厥宅里，彰善瘅恶，树之风声。弗率训典，殊厥井疆，俾克畏慕。
现代文：毕公您德高望重，不但能将大小事务处理的妥妥当当，而且还先后辅助过四代天子，统率群臣下属领导有方，臣下无人不敬重您，都重视您的教导。
English: Bi Gong, you are highly respected, not only can you handle large and small affairs properly, but you have also assisted four generations of heavenly sons. You have led subordinates well, and none of your subordinates do not respect you. They all attach importance to your teachings.

古文：申画郊圻，慎固封守，以康四海。政贵有恒，辞尚体要，不惟好异。
现代文：你的丰功伟绩为先王所倚重，视为左膀右臂。我小子才疏学浅，比不上先王，对您是敬仰万分，仰望您的功绩。 康王说： 啊！父师。
English: Your great achievements and feats were highly valued by the former king, who regarded you as his right arm and left arm. My son, who is not as bright as the former king, admires you immensely and looks up to your achievements. King Kang said: Ah! Father.

古文：商俗靡靡，利口惟贤，余风未殄，公其念哉！
现代文：今日，我把周公治理殷民的重任委托给您，您现在就去上任吧！
English: Today, I entrust you with the important task of governing the people of Zhou. You should take office now!

古文：我闻曰： 世禄之家，鲜克由礼 。以荡陵德，实悖天道。
现代文：您要识别善恶之人，对善民要加以表彰，让他荣耀乡里。
English: You should identify the good and evil people, and commend the good people, and let them bring glory to the village.

古文：敝化奢丽，万世同流。
现代文：奖善罚恶，树立以善为美的良好风气。
English: Rewarding good and punishing evil, and establishing a good culture that regards goodness as beauty.

古文：兹殷庶士，席宠惟旧，怙侈灭义，服美于人。
现代文：对于顽固不化的人，将他们和善民隔离开，让他们住在那里继续教化，使他们懂得善恶，服从管束。
English: For those who are stubborn, separate them from the good people and let them live there to continue their education, so that they know good and evil and obey the rules.

古文：骄淫矜侉，将由恶终。
现代文：你还要明确的划分出郊区与城市的分界，大力加强军事力量，从而安定天下。
English: You also need to clearly delineate the boundaries between the suburbs and the city, and vigorously strengthen the military force, so as to stabilize the world.

古文：虽收放心，闲之惟艰。
现代文：为政者当重视前人定下的常法，发布的政令应当突出重点，不要标新立异。
English: Politicians should pay attention to the common law established by their predecessors. The decrees issued should highlight the key points, and should not be innovative.

古文：资富能训，惟以永年。
现代文：殷商遗民奢侈之风甚胜，以善辩为贤。
English: The extravagant style of the merchants and survivors of the Shang Dynasty prevailed, and good argumentation was considered virtuous.

古文：惟德惟义，时乃大训。
现代文：虽然经多年的整治，收效甚微，时至今日此歪风仍未断绝。
English: Although after many years of rectification, with little effect, to this day this crooked wind has not been cut off.

古文：不由古训，于何其训。 
现代文：您可得想想办法啊！我听说： 世代为官享有禄位的人家多为二世祖，很少有人能循规蹈矩。
English: You'll have to think of something! I've heard that most of the people who have been government officials for generations and have enjoyed lucrative positions are second-generation ancestors, and very few people can follow the rules.

古文：王曰： 呜呼！父师，邦之安危，惟兹殷士。
现代文：他们放荡不羁，仗势欺人，欺辱有德之人，实在是有违天地正道。这种败坏的风气，世代相同。 殷商的士族们，享受先人的福泽太久了，已经堕落了。
English: It is against heaven and earth and the righteous way for them to be debauched, to use their power to deceive others, and to abuse virtuous people. This corrupt culture has been the same for generations. The merchants of the Shang Dynasty have enjoyed the blessings of their ancestors for too long, and have fallen.

古文：不刚不柔，厥德允修。惟周公克慎厥始，惟君陈克和厥中，惟公克成厥终。
现代文：他们凭仗强大的势力，灭绝德义，穿着奢侈无度，而且骄横放荡，目中无人，无人管束则行恶一生。
English: They rely on powerful forces, exterminate virtue and righteousness, dress extravagantly, and are arrogant and debauched. They have no one in their eyes and no one to control them, but they will do evil all their lives.

古文：三后协心，同厎于道，道洽政治，泽润生民，四夷左衽，罔不咸赖，予小子永膺多福。
现代文：这些人已经无药可救，即使加以惩戒也只能他们收敛一时，但是很难让他们改过自新，重新做人。对于有钱有势又能接受我朝管束的人，自当让其福寿绵绵。重视德，重视义，这是天下的大训；如果连这个古训都不听，那么他们还会听什么呢？ 周康王说： 啊！父师。
English: There is no remedy for these people. Even if they are punished, they can only be restrained for a while, but it is difficult to make them reform and become new people. For those who are rich and powerful and can accept my imperial control, they should let their lives be prosperous. To value virtue and righteousness is the world's great teaching; if they do not even listen to this ancient teaching, then what else will they listen to? King Zhou Kang said: Ah! Father.

古文：公其惟时成周，建无穷之基，亦有无穷之闻。
现代文：教化殷民责任重大，关乎国家安危，不可不慎重。施政当刚柔相济，有赏有罚，如此方能政令通达。
English: It is a great responsibility to educate the people, and it is related to the safety of the country, so we must not be careless. Governance should be both tough and soft, with rewards and punishments, so that government orders can be carried out.

古文：子孙训其成式，惟乂。
现代文：当初，周公谨慎的教化殷民；接着，周公之子君陈和谐治理殷民，使其与我朝和睦相处；如今，就要靠您毕公完成这教化的最终使命。
English: At first, Zhou Gong carefully educated the Yin people; then, Zhou Gong's son, Jun Chen, governed the Yin people harmoniously, so that they could live in harmony with the Ming Dynasty; now, it is up to you, Zhou Gong, to complete the final mission of this education.

古文：呜呼！罔曰弗克，惟既厥心；罔曰民寡，惟慎厥事。
现代文：三位齐心协力，先后教导殷民，治理殷民，政治清明，如春风化雨，润泽百姓。
English: The three of them have made concerted efforts to successively teach the people, govern the people, and make politics clear, such as spring weather and rain, and the people are moist.

古文：钦若先王成烈，以休于前政。 
现代文：认真的治理好先王的大业，要超越前人，使它更加美好！ 
English: To seriously manage the great cause of the forefathers, we must surpass our predecessors and make it even better!

