古文：贞观初，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕观前代，谗佞之徒，皆国之蟊贼也。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我考察前代的历史，发现凡是阿谀逢迎，搬弄是非的人，都是危害国家的败类。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: I have examined the history of the previous generation and found that all those who are flattering and flirting with evil are scum who endanger the country.

古文：或巧言令色，朋党比周。
现代文：他们巧言令色，私结朋党。
English: They talk the talk, I walk the walk.

古文：若暗主庸君，莫不以之迷惑，忠臣孝子所以泣血衔冤。
现代文：如果君主昏庸无能，就会被他们蒙蔽，忠义之臣就会受到排挤打击，蒙受不白之冤。
English: If the monarch is incompetent, he will be deceived by them, and the loyal vassal will be ousted and suffer unjustly.

古文：故丛兰欲茂，秋风败之；王者欲明，谗人蔽之。
现代文：所以兰花虽繁茂，却被秋风摧折；国君希望英明，却被献媚的小人迷惑。
English: Therefore, although the orchids are flourishing, they are destroyed by the autumn wind; the sovereign hopes to be wise, but is confused by the flattering villain.

古文：此事著于史籍，不能具道。
现代文：这样的事情在史书中不胜枚举。
English: The history books are full of such incidents.

古文：至如齐、隋间谗谮事，耳目所接者，略与公等言之。
现代文：现在，我把在齐代、隋代年间我所知道的小人的奸邪行径，简略地说给你们听听。
English: Now, I will briefly tell you about the evil deeds of villains that I knew during the Qi and Sui dynasties.

古文：斛律明月，齐朝良将，威震敌国，周家每岁斫汾河冰，虑齐兵之西渡。
现代文：斛律明月，是齐朝的良将，他的声威令敌国闻风丧胆，周朝的人每年都要斫碎汾河上的冰，因为害怕齐朝的兵马西渡过来，把他们灭掉。
English: Bailu Mingyue was a good general of the Qi Dynasty. His prestige made the enemy countries lose heart. The people of the Zhou Dynasty had to break the ice on the Wei River every year, because they were afraid that the soldiers and horses of the Qi Dynasty would cross over and destroy them.

古文：及明月被祖孝征谗构伏诛，周人始有吞齐之意。
现代文：后来斛律明月被孝征用谗言加害致死，周朝的人于是产生了吞齐的想法。
English: Later, Bailu Mingyue was expropriated and tortured to death by Xiao, and the Zhou people came up with the idea of devouring him.

古文：高颎有经国大才，为隋文帝赞成霸业，知国政者二十余载，天下赖以安宁。
现代文：隋代的高颎有治国的雄才大略，辅佐隋文帝成就了帝业，他参与朝政二十多年，天下得以安宁。
English: Gao Wei of the Sui Dynasty was a great talent in governing the country. He assisted the Sui Emperor Wen to achieve imperial success. He participated in imperial politics for more than 20 years, and the world was at peace.

古文：文帝惟妇言是听，特令摈斥。及为炀帝所杀，刑政由是衰坏。
现代文：后来隋文帝听信妇人的谗言，摒弃冷落他，最后，他被隋炀帝杀害，隋朝的国政也就开始衰败了。
English: Later, Emperor Sui Wen listened to the woman's advice and abandoned him. Finally, he was killed by Emperor Sui Pi, and the national politics of the Sui Dynasty began to decline.

古文：又隋太子勇抚军监国，凡二十年间，固亦早有定分。
现代文：另外，隋太子杨勇指挥兵士，治理国家，达二十年之久，他早已是当仁不让的太子。
English: In addition, Prince Yang Yong of the Sui Dynasty commanded soldiers and governed the country for twenty years, and he was already a prince who was not to be tolerated.

古文：杨素欺主罔上，贼害良善，使父子之道一朝灭于天性，逆乱之源，自此开矣。
现代文：可是，杨素欺骗君主，残害忠良，他到处散布谣言，说太子没有才能，于是隋文帝废掉了太子，隋朝灭亡的祸根也由此埋下。
English: However, Yang Su deceived the monarch and harmed Zhong Liang. He spread rumors everywhere that the prince had no talent, so the Sui Emperor abolished the prince, and the bane of the Sui Dynasty's demise was buried.

古文：隋文既混淆嫡庶，竟祸及其身，社稷寻亦覆败。
现代文：隋文帝混淆了嫡出与庶出，结果殃及了自身，江山社稷不久便拱手让人。
English: Emperor Sui Wen confused legitimate birth with illegitimate birth. As a result, he brought misfortune upon himself, and the country's society soon let him off the hook.

古文：古人云 世乱则谗胜 ，诚非妄言。
现代文：古人说： 世道混乱，那么谗言就会大行其道。 
English: The ancients said: When the world is in chaos, gossip will be rampant.

古文：朕每防微杜渐，用绝谗构之端，犹恐心力所不至，或不能觉悟。
现代文：这话的确中肯。我常常想，应该防微杜渐，杜绝谗言的根源，只恐怕心有余而力不足，或者自己不能觉悟。
English: This is indeed a pertinent point. I often think that we should prevent the gradual elimination and eliminate the root cause of slander, but I am afraid that my heart is more than enough but not enough, or I can not be aware of it.

古文：前史云： 猛兽处山林，藜藿为之不采；直臣立朝廷，奸邪为之寝谋。 
现代文：史书说： 猛兽在山林中出没，野草不会被人采摘；忠正的臣子处于朝廷之中，奸邪小人只有偷偷谋划他们的诡计。 
English: The history book says: Wild beasts haunt the mountains and forests, and wild grasses cannot be picked up by people; loyal courtiers are in the imperial court, and evil villains only secretly plot their schemes.

古文：此实朕所望于群公也。 
现代文：这句话其实就是我对你们的期望啊。 
English: This sentence is actually what I expect from you.

古文：魏征曰： 《礼》云： 戒慎乎其所不睹，恐惧乎其所不闻。 
现代文：魏徵说： 《礼记》上写道： 对自己不能亲见的事情要谨慎，对自己不能耳闻的事情要警觉。 
English: Wei Zheng said: "The Book of Etiquette" wrote: Be cautious about things you can't see for yourself, and be alert to things you can't hear.

古文：《诗》云 恺悌君子，无信谗言。谗言罔极，交乱四国。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 要憎恶小人搬弄是非的嘴，那会搅乱四方邻邦。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Abhor the lying lips of a scoundrel, for they will bring trouble on all sides."

古文：又孔子曰： 恶利口之覆邦家 ，盖为此也。
现代文：另外孔子说， 邪恶善辩的口才会使国家覆灭 ，说的就是这个道理啊。
English: In addition, Confucius said that only an evil and eloquent mouth can bring the country to ruin, which is the reason.

古文：臣尝观自古有国有家者，若曲受谗谮，妄害忠良，必宗庙丘墟，市朝霜露矣。愿陛下深慎之！ 
现代文：我发现，自古以来的帝王，如果被谗言蒙蔽，枉杀忠良，就必定国破家亡。因此，希望陛下要谨慎啊。 
English: I found that emperors since ancient times, if they are deceived by slander and kill the faithful, will surely destroy the country. Therefore, I hope that His Majesty will be cautious.

古文：贞观七年，太宗幸蒲州。
现代文：贞观七年，唐太宗巡幸蒲州。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong made a tour to Bushu.

古文：刺史赵元楷课父老服黄纱单衣，迎谒路左，盛饰廨宇，修营楼雉以求媚；又潜饲羊百余口、鱼数千头，将馈贵戚。
现代文：蒲州刺史赵元楷督促当地百姓一律穿上黄纱单衣，在路边迎接拜谒，并大肆装饰官署，营建城楼雉堞用来献媚讨好。又偷偷地饲养了几百头羊、几千条鱼，准备馈送朝廷贵戚。
English: Zhao Yuankai, the governor of Puzhou, urged the local people to all put on yellow gauze singlets and greet the courtesans on the roadside, and lavishly decorated government offices and built towers to flatter them. He also secretly raised hundreds of sheep and thousands of fish, preparing to feed the royal relatives.

古文：太宗知，召而数之曰： 朕巡省河、洛，经历数州，凡有所须，皆资官物。
现代文：唐太宗知道这事后，把他召来训斥道： 我巡察黄河，洛水一带，历经数州，大凡有什么需要，都由官府供给。
English: After Tang Taizong learned of this, he summoned him to reprimand him, saying: I have inspected the Yellow River, the Luoshui area, and traveled through several prefectures. If you need anything, the government will provide it.

古文：卿为饲羊养鱼，雕饰院宇，此乃亡隋弊俗，今不可复行。
现代文：但你却为此养羊养鱼，雕饰院宇，这是过去隋朝的坏习惯，如今不能再这么做了。
English: However, you raised sheep and fish for this purpose, and decorated courtyards. This was a bad habit of the Sui Dynasty in the past, and now you can no longer do this.

古文：当识朕心，改旧态也。 
现代文：你应该体会我的心意，把这套坏的作风改掉。 
English: You should feel my heart and change this bad style.

古文：以元楷在隋邪佞，故太宗发此言以戒之。
现代文：赵元楷过去在隋朝时就是个奸邪谄佞的官吏，所以唐太宗就讲这一番话来警戒他。
English: Zhao Yuankai used to be a treacherous official in the Sui Dynasty, so Emperor Taizong said this to warn him.

古文：元楷惭惧，数日不食而卒。
现代文：赵元楷听后既羞愧又害怕，几天吃不下东西，很快就死了。
English: After hearing this, Zhao Yuankai was ashamed and afraid. He couldn't eat for a few days and soon died.

古文：贞观十年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 太子保傅，古难其选。
现代文：贞观十年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 太子的老师，自古以来就很难选择。
English: In the tenth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: It has been difficult to choose the prince's teacher since ancient times.

古文：成王幼小，以周、召为保傅，左右皆贤，足以长仁，致理太平，称为圣主。
现代文：周成王年幼时，以周公、召公为老师，他们都很贤明，使周成王成为一代仁君，天下获得太平。
English: When King Zhoucheng was young, he took Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong as his teachers. They were all very wise, making King Zhoucheng a generation of benevolent princes and bringing peace to the world.

古文：及秦之胡亥，始皇所爱，赵高作傅，教以刑法。
现代文：秦代的皇子胡亥，秦始皇很爱他，让赵高做他的师父，教授他刑法。
English: Hu Hai, the prince of the Qin Dynasty, Qin Shi Huang loved him very much and asked Zhao Gao to be his master and teach him criminal law.

古文：及其篡也，诛功臣，杀亲戚，酷烈不已，旋踵亦亡。
现代文：胡亥篡位后，诛杀功臣，杀害亲戚，极其残暴，不久就败亡了。
English: After Hu Hai usurped the throne, he brutally killed heroes and relatives, and was soon defeated.

古文：以此而言，人之善恶，诚由近习。
现代文：由此看来，一个人是善是恶，的确与他所处的环境、所受的影响有关。
English: From this perspective, whether a person is good or evil is indeed related to the environment he is in and the influence he receives.

古文：朕弱冠交游，惟柴绍、窦诞等，为人既非三益，及朕居兹宝位，经理天下，虽不及尧、舜之明，庶免乎孙皓、高纬之暴。
现代文：我二十左右就开始结交名士，可是交往深的，只有柴绍、窦诞等人，但是他们不具有孔子所说益友的三个条件：正直、宽厚、见多识广。我继位以来，治理国家虽然不及尧、舜圣明，但也不像三国吴主孙皓，北齐后主高纬那样的暴政。
English: When I was in my twenties, I began to make friends with famous people, but only Chai Shao, Dou Xue and others had deep contacts, but they did not have the three conditions that Confucius said were beneficial to friends: honesty, generosity, and broad knowledge. Since I succeeded to the throne, although I am not as good at governing the country as Xuan Zang and Xuan Shengming, I am not as tyrannical as the ruler of the Three Kingdoms of Wu, Sun Yat-sen, and the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Wei.

古文：以此而言，复不由染，何也？ 
现代文：我没有受到亲近的人的影响，这是为什么呢？ 
English: I'm not influenced by people close to me. Why is that?

古文：魏征曰： 中人可与为善，可与为恶，然上智之人自无所染。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 智慧中等的人可以做善事，也可以做恶事，然而拥有上等智能的人是不会受到外界影响的。
English: Wei Zheng replied, "A person of average intelligence can do both good and evil, but a person with superior intelligence will not be affected by the outside world.

古文：陛下受命自天，平定寇乱，救万民之命，理致升平，岂绍、诞之徒能累圣德？
现代文：陛下顺应天意，平定战乱，救万民于水火之中，使天下太平，柴绍、窦诞这些人怎么能够损害陛下的圣德呢？
English: Your majesty complied with the will of heaven, pacified the war, saved the people in the midst of fire and water, and made the world peaceful. How could these people, Chai Shao and Dou Guo, damage your majesty's sanctity?

古文：但经云： 放郑声，远佞人。 
现代文：但是经书上说得好： 拒绝郑国的靡靡之音，远离挑拨是非的奸邪小人。 
English: But the sutra says it well: Reject Zhengzhou's malaise, stay away from the mischievous villains who stir up trouble.

古文：近习之间，尤宜深慎。 
现代文：这些外在的影响，也不可不谨慎啊。 
English: These external influences should not go unnoticed.

古文：太宗曰： 善。 
现代文：听后，唐太宗点头称是。
English: After listening, Tang Taizong nodded and said yes.

古文：尚书左仆射杜如晦奏言： 监察御史陈师合上《拔士论》，谓人之思虑有限，一人不可总知数职，以论臣等。 
现代文：尚书左仆射杜如晦上奏说： 监察御史陈师合上奏《拔士论》，说一个人的思考能力有限，不可以身兼数职。
English: Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Du, said at the end of the recital: "Supervisor of History, Chen Shi, and the ensemble played "The Theory of Recruiting Scholars," saying that a person's ability to think is limited, and it is not possible to hold several positions.

古文：太宗谓戴胄曰： 朕以至公治天下，今任玄龄、如晦，非为勋旧，以其有才行也。
现代文：我认为，这是在议论我们这些大臣啊。 看过奏书，唐太宗对戴胄说： 我推行公正的治国原则，现在我重用房玄龄、杜如晦，并非考虑到他们是旧时的功臣，而是因为他们德才兼备的缘故。
English: I think he is talking about us, the ministers. After reading the report, Tang Taizong said to Dai Quan: I have implemented the principle of fair governance, and now I am reusing Fang Xuanling and Du Ruwei, not because they are the heroes of the past, but because they are both virtuous.

古文：此人妄事毁谤，止欲离间我君臣。
现代文：陈师合这个人胡乱议论朝政，其目的是想离间我们君臣之间的关系。
English: Chen Shih-ho, this person, talks about the politics of the imperial court in a wild way, with the aim of trying to separate the relationship between our monarchs and ministers.

古文：昔蜀后主昏弱，齐文宣狂悖，然国称治者，以任诸葛亮、杨遵彦不猜之故也。
现代文：过去，蜀国后主刘禅昏庸孱弱，齐文宣王狂妄无理，然而国家却治理得井然有序，就是因为他们毫无疑心地任用了诸葛亮、杨遵彦这些良才的缘故。
English: In the past, the empress dowager of Shu, Liu Zhen, was weak, and Qi Wen Xuan Wang was arrogant and unreasonable, but the country was governed in an orderly manner, because they had no doubt appointed Zhuge Liang and Yang Zunyan.

古文：朕今任如晦等，亦复如法。 
现代文：我现在任用杜如晦等大臣，也基于此。 
English: This is also the reason why I am now appointing ministers such as Du Rugao.

古文：于是，流陈师合于岭外。
现代文：于是，把陈师合流放到边远的地区。
English: As a result, Chen Shiro was exiled to a remote area.

古文：贞观中，太宗谓房玄龄、杜如晦曰： 朕闻自古帝王上合天心，以致太平者，皆股肱之力。
现代文：贞观年间，唐太宗对房玄龄、杜如晦说： 我听说，自古以来的帝王，能够顺从天意，使天下获得太平，都必须依赖于大臣的辅佐。
English: During the years of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao: I have heard that since ancient times, emperors who can obey the will of heaven and bring peace to the world must rely on the assistance of ministers.

古文：朕比开直言之路者，庶知冤屈，欲闻谏诤。
现代文：我希望众大臣广开言路，申明冤情，让我听到诤言。
English: I hope that the ministers will speak out, express their grievances, and let me hear their criticisms.

古文：所有上封事人，多告讦百官，细无可采。
现代文：现在，所有上书提意见的人，大都是告发百官，意见非常繁多，让人无法定夺。
English: Now, all of the people who have submitted comments are mostly whistleblowers, and there are so many opinions that it's impossible to make a decision.

古文：朕历选前王，但有君疑于臣，则下不能上达，欲求尽忠极虑，何可得哉？
现代文：我发现，历朝历代只要君王怀疑臣下，那么下面的意见就不会传达到朝廷上面，想要臣民们尽职尽忠，是不可能的。
English: I have found that throughout the ages, as long as kings doubt their subjects, the following advice will not reach the imperial court. It is impossible for subjects to be loyal.

古文：而无识之人，务行谗毁，交乱君臣，殊非益国。
现代文：而无耻小人，专以诽谤他人为能事，破坏君臣之间的关系，这对国家是非常不利的。
English: But shameless villains, who specialize in slandering others, destroy the relationship between monarchs and ministers, which is very unfavorable to the country.

古文：自今以后，有上书讦人小恶者，当以谗人之罪罪之。 
现代文：从今以后，凡有人上书揭发别人的小过失，应当以诽谤之罪论处。 
English: From now on, anyone who writes to expose the minor faults of others should be punished with the crime of defamation.

古文：魏征为秘书监，有告征谋反者。
现代文：魏徵做秘书监的时候，有人告发他谋反。
English: When Wei Zheng was a secretarial supervisor, someone accused him of plotting a rebellion.

古文：太宗曰： 魏征，昔吾之雠，只以忠于所事，吾遂拔而用之，何乃妄生谗构？ 
现代文：唐太宗非常气愤地说： 魏徵过去是我的敌人，但因为他对自己的职责尽心尽力，于是我就提拔任用他，现在怎么会传出他谋反的谗言呢？ 
English: Tang Taizong was very angry and said: Wei Zheng was my enemy in the past, but because he did his best in his duties, I promoted and appointed him, so how could there be rumors of him plotting a rebellion now?

古文：竟不问征，遽斩所告者。
现代文：结果唐太宗不询问魏徵，反而把告发者处以斩首之刑。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong did not interrogate Wei Zheng, but instead executed the informant by beheading.

古文：贞观十六年，太宗谓谏议大夫褚遂良曰： 卿知起居，比来记我行事善恶？ 
现代文：贞观十六年，唐太宗对谏议大夫褚遂良说： 你负责撰写起居注的工作，近来你们记录我所做的事情是善还是恶呢？ 
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Zhengyi doctor Wang Suiliang: You are responsible for the work of writing the starting and living notes. Have you recently recorded what I have done? Is it good or evil?

古文：遂良曰： 史官之设，君举必书。
现代文：褚遂良说： 朝廷专门设置了史官，君主一举一动都得记录下来。
English: Zou Suiliang said: The imperial court has specially set up historians, and the monarch's every move must be recorded.

古文：善既必书，过亦无隐。 
现代文：善的既然必须记，过失也一定不加隐瞒。 
English: Since the good must be remembered, the faults must not be concealed.

古文：太宗曰： 朕今勤行三事，亦望史官不书吾恶。
现代文：唐太宗说： 我现在正在认真做三件事，也是希望史官没有我的过失可写。
English: Tang Taizong said: I am now seriously doing three things, and I also hope that the historian can write without my fault.

古文：一则鉴前代成败事，以为元龟；二则进用善人，共成政道；三则斥弃群小，不听谗言。
现代文：一是对照前代成功、失败的事实，作为鉴戒；二是任用品德良好的人，共同办好政事；三是斥退小人，不听信谗言。
English: The first is to compare the success and failure of the previous generation as a warning; the second is to appoint people with good morals to jointly run the government; the third is to repel villains and not listen to insults.

古文：吾能守之，终不转也。 
现代文：这三点我会坚持下去，始终不会改变。 
English: I will stick to these three points and they will never change.

