古文：耶律夷腊葛，字苏散，本宫分人检校太师合鲁子之。
现代文：耶律夷腊葛，字苏散，本宫分人检校太师合鲁之子。
English: Yerutiyi Ragat, also known as Susan, was the son of the palace's second-in-command, Taishi Haru.

古文：应历初，以父任入侍。
现代文：应历初年，因为父亲职任的关系入侍皇上。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he became an attendant to the emperor because of his father's position.

古文：数岁，始为殿前都点检。
现代文：几年后，开始担任殿前都点检。
English: A few years later, he began to serve as a prefectural inspector.

古文：时上新即位，疑诸王有异志，引夷腊葛为布衣交，一切机密事必与之谋，迁寄班都知，赐宫户。
现代文：当时，穆宗刚刚即位，怀疑诸王有异心，将夷腊葛视为布衣之交，一切机密大事必定跟他一起谋划，迁任寄班都知，赐给宫户。
English: At that time, Emperor Muzong had just ascended the throne, and suspected that the kings had ulterior motives. He regarded Yilagat as a close friend, and all confidential matters must be planned together with him. He knew all about the transfer of posts, and gave them to Miyako.

古文：时上酗酒，数以细故杀人。
现代文：当时皇上酗酒，多次寻小过杀人。
English: At that time, the emperor was a heavy drinker and was arrested several times for manslaughter.

古文：有监雉者因伤雉而亡，获之欲诛，夷腊葛谏曰： 是罪不应死。 
现代文：有监管野雉者因为伤了雉而逃走，被抓住后皇上想杀他，夷腊葛进谏说： 这个罪不应该处死。 
English: An overseer of savage baboons ran away because he had injured a baboon. When he was caught, the Empress wanted to kill him. Yirasekera Jintao said, "This crime should not be punished by death."

古文：帝竟杀之，以尸付夷腊葛曰： 收汝故人！ 
现代文：皇上还是杀了他，将尸体交给夷腊葛说 ：收殓你的故人吧！ 
English: The emperor killed him anyway, and handed the body over to the Egrets, saying: "Take back your deceased!"

古文：护思辞曰： 臣子孙贤否未知，得一客省使足矣。 
现代文：夷腊葛并没有因此而泄气。又有监鹿详稳失落了一只鹿，下狱当处死，夷腊葛又上谏说 ：人的生命最宝贵，怎么能因为一只野兽就把他杀了呢？ 过了很久，这人得以释免。
English: Erastus was not discouraged by this. Once again, the jailer lost a deer and was sentenced to death. Again, Erastus said, "Human life is the most precious thing. How can you kill a man because of a wild animal?" After a long time, the man was released.

古文：从之。上晚岁酗酒，用刑多滥，护思居要地，龊龊自保，未尝一言匡救，议者以是少之。
现代文：按辽法，颭鹿中长有分叉角的，只有天子才能射。适逢秋猎，善于作鹿鸣者呼唤一只颭到来，皇上命夷腊葛射之，颭鹿应弦倒地。皇上大喜，赐给金银各一百两，名马一百匹，又赐给他黑山以东抹真之土地。
English: According to the Liao Law, only the Son of Heaven can shoot a mule deer with a forked horn. It was the time of autumn hunting, and a skilled muleteer called for a roe deer to come. The emperor ordered him to shoot it, and the mule fell to the ground. The emperor was overjoyed and gave him one hundred taels of gold and silver, one hundred famous horses, and also gave him the land east of Montenegro.

古文：年五十七卒。萧思温，小字寅古，宰相敌鲁之族弟忽没里之子。
现代文：后来穆宗被杀害，夷腊葛因为守卫不严密获罪，被诛杀。萧思温，乳名寅古，宰相萧敌鲁之族弟忽没里之子。
English: Later, Mu Zong was killed, and Yilagat was beaten to death after being found guilty of lax guarding. Xiao Siwen, also known as Tinggu, was the son of Hu Mengli, the younger brother of Prime Minister Xiao Qilu.

古文：通书史。
现代文：通晓经史。
English: He is familiar with the history of the scriptures.

古文：太宗时为奚秃里太尉，尚燕国公主，为群牧都林牙。
现代文：太宗时为奚秃里太尉，娶燕国公主，为群牧都林牙。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, he was the second lieutenant of Zhai Zhaoli, married the princess of Yan Guo, and was the herdsman of Du Lin Ya.

古文：思温在军中，握笄修边幅，僚佐皆言非将帅才。
现代文：思温在军中，器量狭小，过于拘泥小节，又爱修边幅，手下属官都说他不是个将帅之才。
English: In the army, Si Wen was too narrow, too rigid, and liked to trim the edges. His subordinates all said that he was not a great general.

古文：寻为南京留守。
现代文：不久为南京留守。
English: He soon left for Nanjing.

古文：初，周人攻扬州，上遣思温蹑其后，惮暑不敢进，拔缘边数城而还。
现代文：起初，周人进攻扬州，皇上派思温追踪其后，思温怕热不敢前进，攻下沿边数城而回。
English: At first, Zhou attacked Yangzhou, and the emperor sent Sween to follow, but Sween was afraid of the heat and did not dare to advance. He attacked several cities along the border and returned.

古文：后周师来侵，围冯母镇，势甚张。
现代文：后来周军又来进犯，围冯母镇，兵势十分嚣张。
English: Later, the Zhou army attacked again, encircling Fengmu Town, and the troops were very arrogant.

古文：思温请益兵，帝报曰： 敌来，则与统军司并兵拒之；敌去，则务农作，勿劳士马。 
现代文：思温请求增加人马。皇上回复说： 敌人来了，就与统军司合兵同他们拒战；敌人走了，就从事耕作，不要让人马太烦劳了。 
English: Sween asked for more men and horses. The emperor replied, "When the enemy comes, I will join the United Front Division to resist them; when the enemy leaves, I will engage in farming, so don't make the horses too tired."

古文：会敌入束城，我军退渡滹沱而屯。
现代文：适逢敌军进入束城，我军退渡滹沱河驻扎。
English: When the enemy army entered Sokcho, our army retreated across the Li River and stationed there.

古文：思温勒兵徐行，周军数日不动。
现代文：思温统兵缓缓而行，周军数日按兵不动。
English: Si Wen marched slowly, and the Zhou army did not move for several days.

古文：思温与诸将议曰： 敌众而锐，战不利则有后患。
现代文：思温与诸将商议说： 敌人兵多而且精锐，交战不利就会有后患。
English: Si Wen discussed with the generals and said: The enemy soldiers are many and elite, and if the battle is unfavorable, there will be subsequent problems.

古文：不如顿兵以老其师，蹑而击之，可以必胜。 
现代文：不如按兵不动以疲老其师，再从后攻击，可以必胜。 
English: It is better to rely on tired old tactics and attack from behind in order to win.

古文：诸将从之。
现代文：诸将从之。
English: They will all come out of it.

古文：遂与统军司兵会，饰他说请济师。
现代文：于是与统军司之兵马会合，找别的借口请求军队渡河。
English: Therefore, he met with the soldiers and horses of the Generalissimo to find another excuse to ask the army to cross the river.

古文：周人引退，思温亦还。
现代文：周人退兵，思温也撤军回。
English: Zhou retired, and Siwen also withdrew.

古文：已而周主复北侵，与其将傅元卿、李崇进等分道并进，围瀛州，陷益津、瓦桥、淤口三关，垂迫固安。
现代文：不久，周主又北侵，与其将领傅元卿、李崇进等分路并进，包围了瀛州，攻陷益津、瓦桥、淤口三关，将要进逼固安。
English: Soon after, Zhou invaded the north again, and together with his generals Fu Yuanqing and Li Chongjin, they encircled Zhangzhou, captured Yijin, Tile Bridge, and Xikou Three Passes, and were about to enter and force Gu'an.

古文：思温不知计所出，但云车驾旦夕至。麾下士奋跃请战，不从。
现代文：思温一筹莫展，只是说皇上早晚就会到了；手下将士争先请求作战，思温不从。
English: Sween could do nothing, except to say that the emperor would arrive sooner or later; his subordinates and soldiers scrambled to request battle, but Sween would not comply.

古文：已而陷易、瀛、莫等州，京畿人皆震骇，往往遁入西山。
现代文：不久，周军攻陷易、瀛、莫等州，京师百姓都震恐无比，很多人逃到西山去了。
English: Soon, Zhou's army invaded and occupied Yi, Handan, Mo and other prefectures, and the people of Beijing were terrified. Many fled to the West Mountain.

古文：思温以边防失利，恐朝廷罪己，表请亲征。
现代文：思温因边防失利，恐怕朝廷定自己的罪，上表请皇上亲征。
English: I'm afraid that the imperial court will find Shwin guilty for the failure of the border defense, and the emperor himself will be summoned to the table.

古文：会周主荣以病归，思温退至益津，伪言不知所在。
现代文：适逢周主柴荣因病收兵，思温退兵至益津，假称不知周军在何处。
English: Due to illness, Zhou's commander Chai Rong withdrew his troops, while Si Wen withdrew his troops to Yijin, pretending that he did not know where Zhou's troops were.

古文：遇步卒二千余人来拒，败之。
现代文：遇到步兵两千人前来拒战，败之。
English: When confronted with two thousand infantrymen, he refused to fight and was defeated.

古文：是年，闻周丧，燕民始安，乃班师。
现代文：同年，听得周有国丧，燕京百姓这才安心，于是班师。
English: In the same year, he heard that there was a national mourning in Zhou, and the people of Yanjing were relieved, so he became a teacher.

古文：时穆宗湎酒嗜杀，思温以密戚预政，无所匡辅，士论不与。
现代文：当时穆宗沉溺于饮酒又嗜好杀人，思温作为近亲参预朝政，没有起什么匡救、扶助的作用，士论有微辞。
English: At that time, Mu Zong was addicted to drinking and had a penchant for killing, while Si Wen, as a close relative, participated in the pre-dictatorial government, but did not play any role of rescue or support.

古文：十九年，春蒐，上射熊而中，思温与夷离毕牙里斯等进酒上寿，帝醉还宫。
现代文：十九年，春猎，皇上射熊射中了，思温与夷离毕牙里斯等人进酒上寿，皇上醉酒回宫。
English: In the 19th year, during the spring hunt, the emperor shot a bear and hit it. Siwen and Bi Zaris, who had left the palace, went out drinking to celebrate the emperor's birthday. The emperor returned to the palace drunk.

古文：是夜，为庖人斯奴古等所弑。
现代文：当天夜里，为厨子斯奴古等人所杀。
English: In the night of the same day, he was killed by cook Snooko and others.

古文：思温与南院枢密使高勋、飞龙使女里等立景宗。
现代文：思温与南院枢密使高勋、飞龙使女里等人立景宗。
English: Su Wen and Gao Xun, the envoy of the Privy Council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and Li, the envoy of the Flying Dragon Dynasty, established the Jingsong.

古文：保宁初，为北院枢密使，兼北府宰相，仍命世预其选。
现代文：保宁初，为北院枢密使，兼北府宰相，又命其子孙世代可任其职。
English: At the beginning of the Boryeong era, he served as the Privy Councilor of the Northern Court, concurrently serving as the Prime Minister of the Northern Prefecture, and he also ordered that his children and grandchildren could hold the position.

古文：上册思温女为后，加尚书令，封魏王。
现代文：皇上册封思温女为皇后，加思温为尚书令，封魏王。
English: In the imperial record, Siwen's daughter was named empress, and Jia Siwen was given the title of Shang Shuling, and the title of Wei Wang.

古文：从帝猎闾山，为贼所害。
现代文：随皇上田猎于闾山，为贼人所杀。
English: He hunted with Emperor Ueda in Shaoshan and was killed by thieves.

