古文：二年春，王二月，季孙斯、叔孙州仇、仲孙何忌帅师伐邾，取漷东田，及沂西田。
现代文：二年春季，周历二月，鲁国大夫季孙斯、叔孙州仇、仲孙何忌率领军队攻打邾国，占取了漷、沂两地的土田。
English: In the spring of the second year, in February of the lunar calendar, Ji Sun Si, the doctor of the State of Lu, his uncles Sun Zhou Qian and Zhong Sun He Gui led the army to attack the State of Lu and occupied the soil fields in the two places of Lu and Lu.

古文：癸巳，叔孙州仇、仲孙何忌及邾子盟于句绎。
现代文：癸巳日，叔孙州仇、仲孙何忌和邾国国君在句绎结盟。
English: On the same day, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun, Uncle Sun,

古文：夏四月丙子，卫侯元卒。
现代文：夏季四月丙子日，卫灵公去世。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, Wei Ling Gong passed away.

古文：滕子来朝。
现代文：滕国国君和来鲁国朝见。
English: Teng Guo Guo Jun met with the Emperor of Lilu.

古文：晋赵鞅帅师纳卫世子蒯聩于戚。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅率领军队把卫国的太子送回戚地。
English: Zhao Jun of Jin led an army to send the prince of the defending country back to his relatives in Trong.

古文：秋八月甲戌，晋赵鞅帅师及郑罕达帅师战于铁，郑师败绩。
现代文：秋季八月甲戌日，晋国的赵鞅率军和郑国的罕达的部队在铁地对战，郑国军队被打败。
English: In the autumn of August, on Armor Day, the army led by Zhao Jun of Jin and the rare troops of Zheng fought on the iron ground, and the Zheng army was defeated.

古文：冬十月，葬卫灵公。
现代文：冬季十月，安葬卫灵公。
English: In the winter of October, Wei Ling Gong was buried.

古文：十有一月，蔡迁于州来。
现代文：十一月，蔡国将都城迁至州来。
English: In November, Cai Guo-cheng moved the capital to Cangzhou.

古文：蔡杀其大夫公子驷。
现代文：蔡国杀死自己的大夫公子驷。
English: Cai Guo killed his own doctor.

古文：二年春，伐邾，将伐绞。
现代文：二年春季，鲁军攻打邾国，准备先进攻绞地。
English: In the spring of the second year, the Russian army attacked Shandong Province and prepared to advance to attack Hengye.

古文：邾人爱其土，故赂以漷、沂之田而受盟。
现代文：邾国人爱惜绞地的土地，所以用漷、沂两地的土田作为贿赂，接受盟约。
English: The people of Shan cherished the land of Hengdi, so they used the soil fields of Shan and Shan as a bribe to accept the covenant.

古文：初，卫侯游于郊，子南仆。
现代文：当初，卫灵公在郊外游玩，公子子南为他驾车。
English: At first, Wei Linggong went out to play in the suburbs, and his son Nan drove for him.

古文：公曰： 余无子，将立女。 
现代文：卫灵公说： 我没有嫡子，打算立你做继承人。 
English: Wei Ling Gong said, "I don't have a legitimate son, and I plan to make you my heir."

古文：不对。
现代文：子南不回答。
English: Zonan did not answer.

古文：他日，又谓之。对曰： 郢不足以辱社稷，君其改图。 
现代文：过了些时候，卫灵公又对子南那么说，子南回答说： 郢不足以有国家，您还是改变一下主意。
English: After a while, Wei Ling Gong said the same thing to Zinan. Zinan replied, "It's not enough to have a country, you should change your mind.

古文：君夫人在堂，三揖在下。 君命祗辱。 
现代文：君夫人在堂上，卿、大夫、士在下边。您没有和他们商量，我听从了只能是有辱您的命令。 
English: Your ladyship is in the hall, and sir, doctor, and gentleman are downstairs. You did not consult them, and I obeyed your order only to humiliate you.

古文：夏，卫灵公卒。
现代文：夏季，卫灵公死了。
English: In the summer, Wei Linggong died.

古文：夫人曰： 命公子郢为大子，君命也。 
现代文：夫人说： 命令公子郢做太子，这是国君的命令。 
English: His wife said, "It is the sovereign's order to order the prince to become crown prince."

古文：对曰： 郢异于他子。且君没于吾手，若有之，郢必闻之。
现代文：公子郢回答说： 郢和别的儿子不一样，而且我伺候国君到死，如果有这话，郢一定会听到。
English: The prince replied, "I am not like other sons, and I will serve the sovereign until death. If there is such a thing, I will surely hear about it."

古文：且亡人之子辄在。 
现代文：并且还有逃亡者的儿子辄在那里。 
English: And the fugitive's son is still out there.

古文：乃立辄。
现代文：于是就立了辄。
English: So the anchor was set.

古文：六月乙酉，晋赵鞅纳卫大子于戚。
现代文：六月十七日，晋国的赵鞅把卫国的太子送回戚地。
English: On June 17th, Zhao Wei of Jin Province sent the prince of Wei Province back to his relatives.

古文：宵迷，阳虎曰： 右河而南，必至焉。 
现代文：夜里迷了路，阳虎说： 右边到黄河再渡河往南，一定就到了。 
English: When he lost his way at night, Yang Hu said, "Go to the right side of the Yellow River and then cross the river to the south, and you will definitely arrive."

古文：使大子絻，八人衰绖，伪自卫逆者。
现代文：让太子脱帽，八个人穿着丧服，假装是从卫国前来迎接的样子。
English: Let the crown prince take off his hat, eight people dressed in mourning clothes, pretending to come from the motherland to meet.

古文：告于门，哭而入，遂居之。
现代文：他们通报守门人，号哭入城，于是就住在那里。
English: They called to the porter, and cried, and went into the city, and abode there.

古文：秋八月，齐人输范氏粟，郑子姚、子般送之。
现代文：秋季，八月，齐国人运送粮食给范氏，郑国的子姚、子般押送。
English: In the autumn, in August, the people of Qi sent grain to Mr. Fan, and Zheng Guo's sons, Yao and Zi, escorted him.

古文：士吉射逆之，赵鞅御之，遇于戚。
现代文：士吉射迎接他们，赵鞅抵御他们，在戚地相遇。
English: Shijiazhuang welcomed them, Zhao Rong resisted them, and they met at the relatives' place.

古文：阳虎曰： 吾车少，以兵车之旆，与罕、驷兵车先陈。罕、驷自后随而从之，彼见吾貌，必有惧心。
现代文：阳虎说： 我们的车子少，把大将的旗子插在车上，先与子姚、子般的战车对阵，子姚、子般从后面跟上来，他们看到我军的阵容，必定有恐惧之心。
English: Yang Hu said: We have few vehicles, so we put the flag of the general on the vehicle, and first opposed the Ziyao and Zibo-like chariots. Ziyao and Zibo-like chariots followed from behind. When they saw the lineup of our army, they must have a heart of fear.

古文：于是乎会之，必大败之。 从之。
现代文：在那时候会合战斗，一定可以把他们打得大败。 赵鞅听从了。
English: If they meet at that time to fight, they can surely defeat them. Zhao Jun obeyed.

古文：卜战，龟焦。
现代文：占卜战争的吉凶，龟甲烤焦了。
English: Divining the fortunes of war, the tortoise shell is scorched.

古文：乐丁曰： 《诗》曰： 爰始爰谋，爰契我龟。 
现代文：乐丁说： 《诗》说： 先行谋划，于是占卜。 
English: Leting said: "The poem says: Plan ahead, then divination.

古文：谋协以故兆，询可也。 
现代文：谋划一致，相信过去的卜兆就行了。 
English: All you have to do is agree on a plan and believe in the omens of the past.

古文：简子誓曰： 范氏、中行氏，反易天明，斩艾百姓，欲擅晋国而灭其君。寡君恃郑而保焉。今郑为不道，弃君助臣，二三子顺天明，从君命，经德义，除诟耻，在此行也。
现代文：赵鞅起誓说： 范氏、中行氏违背天命，斩杀百姓，想要在晋国专权而灭亡国君，我们国君依仗着郑国保护自己，现在郑国无道，抛弃国君帮助臣下，我们几个人顺从天命，服从君令，推行德义，消除耻辱就在这次行动了。
English: Zhao Wei swore: The Fan and Zhongxing clans violated the Mandate of Heaven, slaughtered the people, and wanted to destroy the sovereign in the autocracy of Jin. Our sovereign relied on Zheng Guo to protect himself. Now Zheng Guo has no choice but to abandon the sovereign to help his vassals. Several of us obeyed the Mandate of Heaven, obeyed the royal order, promoted virtue, and eliminated shame in this action.

古文：克敌者，上大夫受县，下大夫受郡，士田十万，庶人工商遂，人臣隶圉免。
现代文：战胜敌人的，上大夫可得到县，下大夫可得到郡，士可得到十万亩土田，庶人工商可做官，奴隶可获得自由。
English: If you defeat the enemy, the upper doctor can get the county, the lower doctor can get the county, the scholar can get 100,000 mu of land, the common laborer can become an official, and the slave can be free.

古文：志父无罪，君实图之。
现代文：志父如果没有罪过，就请国君加以考虑。
English: If your father-in-law is not guilty, ask the sovereign to consider it.

古文：若其有罪，绞缢以戮，桐棺三寸，不设属辟，素车朴马，无入于兆，下卿之罚也。 
现代文：如果战败有罪，就用绞刑把我诛戮，死后用三寸厚的桐木棺，不要再有衬版和外椁，用没有装饰的马装运棺材，不要葬入本族的墓地中，这是按照下卿的地位所作的处罚。 
English: If I am guilty of defeat, I will be hanged, and when I die, I will be buried in a three-inch thick paulownia coffin, with no lining and no outer coffin, and the coffin will be transported by an undecorated horse, and I will not be buried in the cemetery of my own tribe. This is a punishment according to the status of the lower lord.

古文：甲戌，将战，邮无恤御简子，卫大子为右。
现代文：八月初七日，将要作战，邮无恤为赵鞅驾御战车，卫国的太子做车右。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, there will be a battle, the post without a shirt is Zhao Zhen driving a chariot, the prince of the defender of the country is on the right.

古文：登铁上，望见郑师众，大子惧，自投于车下。
现代文：登上铁丘，远望郑军人数众多，卫太子害怕，自己跳到车下。
English: After climbing up the iron hill and seeing the large number of Zheng soldiers in the distance, Wei Taizi was afraid and jumped under the car.

古文：子良授大子绥而乘之，曰： 妇人也。 
现代文：邮无恤把车上的拉手带子递给太子而让他上车，说： 你像个女人。 
English: "You look like a woman," the shirtless postman said, handing the car's hand strap to the prince to let him on.

古文：简子巡列曰： 毕万，匹夫也。七战皆获，有马百乘，死于牖下。
现代文：赵鞅巡视队伍，说： 毕万是个普通人，七次战斗都俘获了敌人，后来有了四百匹马，在家里善终。
English: Zhao Yao inspected the patrol team and said: Biwan is an ordinary person. He has captured the enemy in seven battles. Later, he had four hundred horses and died peacefully at home.

古文：群子勉之，死不在寇。 
现代文：诸位努力吧！未必就死在敌人手里。 
English: Do your best! You may not die at the hands of the enemy.

古文：繁羽御赵罗，宋勇为右，罗无勇，麇之。
现代文：繁羽为赵罗驾御战车，宋勇做车右。赵罗胆小，别人用绳子把他捆在车上。
English: Zhao Luo is driving the chariot, Song Yong is driving on the right. Zhao Luo is timid, and others are tying him to the chariot with a rope.

古文：吏诘之，御对曰： 痁作而伏。 
现代文：军吏询问原因，车御回答说： 疟疾发作躺下了。 
English: When the officer asked why, the driver replied: "I had a malaria attack and lay down."

古文：卫大子祷曰： 曾孙蒯聩敢昭告皇祖文王，烈祖康叔，文祖襄公：郑胜乱从，晋午在难，不能治乱，使鞅讨之。
现代文：卫国的太子祷告说： 远孙蒯聩谨敢报告皇祖文王，烈祖康叔，文祖襄公：郑胜搅乱常道，晋午处在危难之中，不能平定祸乱，派赵鞅前来讨伐。
English: The prince said in prayer: "I dare to report to the emperor's ancestor, King Wen, the great-grandfather, Uncle Kang, and the great-grandfather, Prince Xiang: Zheng Sheng is disrupting the normal course of events, Jin Bo is in danger, unable to quell the calamity, and has sent Zhao Wei to fight.

古文：蒯聩不敢自佚，备持矛焉。敢告无绝筋，无折骨，无面伤，以集大事，无作三祖羞。
现代文：蒯聩不敢放纵安逸，居于持矛作战的行列里，谨敢祈祷保佑不要断筋，不要折骨，脸上不要受伤，以成就大事，不给三位祖先带来羞辱。
English: He did not dare to indulge in ease and comfort. He lived in the ranks of those who fought with spears. He dared to pray for blessing not to break a muscle, not to break a bone, not to hurt his face, in order to achieve great things and not to bring shame to the three ancestors.

古文：大命不敢请，佩玉不敢爱。 
现代文：死生的命运不敢请求，佩玉不敢爱惜。 
English: The fate of the living and the dead dares not ask, and Pei Yuping dares not spare.

古文：郑人击简子中肩，毙于车中，获其蠭旗。
现代文：郑国人击中赵鞅的肩膀，赵鞅倒在车里，郑国人缴获了他的蜂旗。
English: Zheng Guo hit Zhao Yao's shoulder, Zhao Yao fell down in the car, Zheng Guo captured his bee flag.

古文：大子救之以戈，郑师北，获温大夫赵罗。
现代文：太子用戈救援赵鞅，郑军败逃。俘虏了温大夫赵罗。
English: The prince used Go to rescue Zhao Yao, Zheng's army was defeated and fled. He captured Dr. Wen Zhao Luo.

古文：大子复伐之，郑师大败，获齐粟千车。
现代文：太子再次进攻，郑军大败，获得了齐国的一千车粮食。
English: The prince attacked again, and Zheng's army suffered a crushing defeat, gaining a thousand carts of grain from Qi.

古文：赵孟喜曰： 可矣。 
现代文：赵鞅高兴地说： 行了。 
English: Zhao Yao said happily, "That's enough.

古文：傅傁曰： 虽克郑，犹有知在，忧未艾也。 
现代文：傅傁说： 虽然打败了郑国，还有知氏在那里，忧患还不能消除呢 
English: Fu Hao said, "Although we have defeated Zheng Guo, and there is still Zhizhi there, the sorrow cannot be eliminated

古文：初，周人与范氏田，公孙尨税焉。赵氏得而献之，吏请杀之。
现代文：当初，周朝人给范氏土田，公孙尨为范氏收税，赵氏抓住了他献给赵鞅。军吏请求把他杀了。
English: At first, the Zhou Dynasty people gave the Fan clan the land, and Gongsun Yao collected taxes for the Fan clan. The Zhao clan captured him and gave him to Zhao Yao. The military officers asked to kill him.

古文：赵孟曰： 为其主也，何罪？ 
现代文：赵鞅说： 他是为了主人，有什么罪？ 
English: Zhao Wei said: He did it for his master, what is his crime?

古文：止而与之田。
现代文：阻止了军吏并且给了公孙尨土田。
English: He stopped the military officials and gave the land to Gongsun.

古文：及铁之战，以徒五百人宵攻郑师，取蠭旗于子姚之幕下，献曰： 请报主德。 
现代文：等到铁丘这一战，公孙尨带领部下五百人夜里进攻郑军，在子姚的帐幕下取得了蜂旗，献上，说： 请允许我以此报答主人的恩德。 
English: Waiting for the battle of the Iron Hill, Gongsun Yao led his five hundred men to attack Zheng's army at night, and obtained a bee flag under Ziyao's tent, presented it, and said, "Please allow me to repay my master's kindness with this."

古文：追郑师。姚、般、公孙林殿而射，前列多死。赵孟曰： 国无小。 
现代文：追逐郑军，子姚、子般、公孙林殿后掩护退军并射击追军，前锋部队大多战死，赵鞅说： 对小国也不能轻视。 
English: Chasing Zheng's army, Ziyao, Zihang, Gongsun Lin and others took cover behind the retreating army and fired at the pursuing army. Most of the forward troops were killed in the battle. Zhao Wei said: You can't look down on small countries.

古文：既战，简子曰： 吾伏弢呕血，鼓音不衰，今日我上也。 
现代文：战斗结束，赵鞅说： 我伏在弓袋上吐了血，但鼓声不衰，今天我的功劳最大。 
English: At the end of the battle, Zhao Wei said: "I threw myself on the bow bag and vomited blood, but the drumbeat continued unabated. Today, I deserve the greatest credit.

古文：大子曰： 吾救主于车，退敌于下，我右之上也。 
现代文：太子说： 我在车上救了您，在下边追击敌人，我是车右中功劳最大的。 
English: The prince said, "I saved you in the car, and chased the enemy on the underside. I am the one who deserves the most credit in the middle of the car."

古文：邮良曰： 我两靷将绝，吾能止之，我御之上也。 
现代文：邮无恤说： 我骖马的两根带子快要断了，我还能控制它，我是车御中功劳最大的。 
English: "The two straps of my horse's bridle are about to break, but I can still control it. I am the most meritorious rider in the carriage.

古文：驾而乘材，两靷皆绝。
现代文：他又驾车装上点木材，两根带子就全断了。
English: He drove back to load some wood and the two straps snapped completely.

古文：吴洩庸如蔡纳聘，而稍纳师。
现代文：吴国的泄庸到蔡国去致送聘礼，逐渐把军队混进蔡国。
English: The general of the State of Wu went to the State of Cai to present a bride price, and gradually mixed the army into the State of Cai.

古文：师毕入，众知之。
现代文：等到吴军全部进入，大家才知道这回事。
English: It wasn't until the entire Wu army entered that everyone knew about it.

古文：蔡侯告大夫，杀公子驷以说，哭而迁墓。
现代文：蔡侯告诉大夫，杀了公子驷来取悦吴国，号哭着把先君的坟墓迁走。
English: Cai Hou told the doctor that he had killed his son to please the State of Wu, and moved his father's grave, crying loudly.

