古文：朱胜非，字藏一，蔡州人。
现代文：朱胜非字藏一，蔡州人。
English: Zhu Shengfei is a native of Caizhou.

古文：崇宁二年，上舍登第。
现代文：崇宁二年，考中进士。
English: In the second year of Chongning, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：靖康元年，为东道副总管，权应天府，金人攻城，胜非逃去。
现代文：靖康元年，任东道副总管，代理应天府。金人攻城时，胜非逃走。
English: In the first year of the Yasukuni era, he served as vice-governor of the host, acting for Yingtianfu. When the Jin people attacked the city, Shengfei fled.

古文：会韩世忠部将杨进破敌，胜非复还视事。
现代文：到韩世忠部将杨进打败金兵，胜非又重新处理政事。
English: To Han Shizhong, Yang Jin defeated Jin Bing, and then re-dealt with political affairs.

古文：逾年，诣济州谓康王言，南京为艺祖兴王之地，请幸之以图大计。
现代文：过了一年，到济州对康王说，南京是艺祖中兴王业之地，请求到南京以图大计。
English: After a year, he went to Jeju and told King Kang that Nanjing was the place where the founder of art, Zhong Xing Wangye, requested him to come to Nanjing.

古文：王即位南京。
现代文：康王在南京即皇帝位。
English: King Kang became emperor in Nanjing.

古文：建炎改元，试中书舍人兼权直学士院。
现代文：建炎改元时，胜非试任中书舍人兼代理直学士院。
English: When Jianyan was reformed, Shengfei was appointed as a probationary student and acting director of the Academy.

古文：时方草创，胜非凭败鼓草制，辞气严重如平时。
现代文：当时正草创大业，胜非用败鼓草制，辞气严肃庄重如平时。
English: At that time, he was in the process of creating a great career, and the victory or defeat was determined by the drum, and his demeanor was serious and solemn as usual.

古文：上疏言： 仁义者，天下之大柄，中国持之，则外夷服而诸夏尊；苟失其柄，则不免四夷交侵之患。
现代文：他上疏说 ：仁义是天下的大权柄，中国持有它，则外国宾服而诸夏尊贵；如果失掉它，就免不了四夷交侵之患。
English: He went on to say: benevolence and righteousness are the great power of the world. If China holds it, it will be honored by foreign guests and respected by all countries. If it loses it, it will inevitably be invaded by the barbarians.

古文：国家与契丹结好，百有余年，一旦乘其乱弱，远交金人为夹攻计，是中国失其柄，而外侮所由招也。
现代文：国家与契丹结盟，有一百多年，一旦趁其乱弱，远交金人为夹攻之计，这是中国失去权柄，而外侮之所以招来的原因。
English: The country has been allied with the Khitan for more than a hundred years, and once it took advantage of its chaotic weakness, it sent a faraway gold to attack it. This is the reason why China lost power and foreign attacks were incurred.

古文：陛下即位，宜壹明正始之道，思其合于仁义者行之，不合者置之，则可以攘却四夷，绍复大业矣。 上嘉之。
现代文：陛下即位，应当申明正始之道，选择其中合于仁义的予以施行，不合于仁义的予以放弃，就可以抵却四夷，绍复大业。 皇上赞许他。
English: When His Majesty ascends the throne, he should affirm the original path, choose which of them is suitable for benevolence to implement, and which is not suitable for benevolence to abandon, so that he can resist the four barbarians and restore the great cause. The Emperor commends him.

古文：总制使钱盖进职，胜非言盖为陕西制置使弃师误国，封还贴黄，盖遂罢。
现代文：总制使钱盖升职，胜非认为钱盖任陕西制置使时弃师误国，封还升迁书，钱盖于是被罢免。
English: The general system promoted Qian Gai, but Shengfei thought that Qian Gai had abandoned his division and left the country when he was appointed as the Shaanxi system envoy, and returned the promotion letter. Qian Gai was then dismissed.

古文：谏官卫肤敏坐论元祐太后兄子徙官，胜非言以外戚故去谏臣，非所以示天下。
现代文：谏官卫肤敏因为指责元太后兄弟的儿子改职，胜非认为因为外戚的缘故逐去谏臣，不是示天下以正道。
English: Because the eunuch, Wei Chuxuan, accused the son of the brother of the former empress dowager, Zhuo, of changing his position, it is better to think that expelling the eunuch for the sake of the maternal relative is not to show the world the right way.

古文：二年，除尚书右丞。
现代文：二年，授任尚书右丞。
English: Two years later, he was awarded the title of Shoshu Ujo.

古文：时宰执荫补多滥，胜非奏： 旧制，宰执子弟例不堂除，只就铨注，罢政不以罪，然后推恩。
现代文：当时宰执大臣荫补太滥，胜非说： 旧制，宰执大臣的子弟一律不当堂授现职，只参加铨注，宰执罢政后不治罪，然后推恩。
English: At that time, the shadow of the vice-chancellor was too excessive, and Shengfei said: In the old system, the sons and daughters of the vice-chancellor did not confer their current positions, but only participated in the anointment, and the vice-chancellor did not commit crimes after the strike, and then showed grace.

古文：赵普子弟皆作武臣，普再相，长子授庄宅使；范纯仁再相，子正平有文行，竟死选调；章惇子援及持皆高科，并为州县、幕职、监当。
现代文：赵普子弟都任武将，赵普再度任相时，长子被授任庄宅使；范纯仁再度任相时，其子范正平有文学才能，竟然死于选调；章之子章援及章持都考中高第，并为州县、幕职、监当各官。
English: Zhao Pu's younger sons all served as military commanders. When Zhao Pu served as minister again, his eldest son was awarded the post of manor house officer; when Fan Chunren served as minister again, his son, Fan Zhengping, had literary talent and even died of selection; Zhang's sons, Zhang Yuan and Zhang Jizhi, both passed the middle and high school examinations, and served as officials of the prefecture, county, shogunate, and supervisors.

古文：惟夏竦子安期累作边帅，授待制、直学士，王安石荐子雱为崇政殿说书，除待制。
现代文：只有夏竦的儿子夏安期历任边帅，授任待制、直学士；王安石推荐其子王蚞为崇政殿说书，授任待制。
English: Only Xia Yao's son, Xia An, who served as a frontier marshal, was awarded the title of "waiting system" and "direct bachelor"; Wang Anshi recommended his son, Wang Yao, to write a book for the Sui Dynasty, and was awarded the title of "waiting system."

古文：然安期犹有才干，雱犹有学问。
现代文：但是夏安期还有才干，王蚞还有学问。
English: But Xia'an still had talent, and Wang Yao still had knowledge.

古文：至蔡京子六人、孙四人，郑居中、刘正夫子各二人，余深、王黼、白时中、蔡卞、邓洵仁洵武子各一人，并列从班。
现代文：至于蔡京的六个儿子、四个孙子，郑居中、刘正夫各两个儿子，余深、王黼、白时中，蔡卞、邓洵仁、邓洵武各一个儿子，都位至列班。
English: As for Cai Jing's six sons and four grandsons, two sons each of Zheng Juzhong and Liu Zhengfu, and one son each of Yu Sheng, Wang Qi, Bai Shizhong, Cai Qi, Deng Yiren, and Deng Yiwu, were all promoted to the same class.

古文：宣和末，谏官疏谓： 尚从竹马之游，已造荷囊之列。
现代文：宣和末年，谏官上疏说： 还在玩竹马的游戏时，已经在大臣之列。 
English: At the end of the years of the declaration of peace, the eunuch Shang Zuo said: "While I was still playing the game of bamboos, I was already among the ministers.

古文：今不可以不戒。 迁中书侍郎。
现代文：现在不可以不戒。 升任中书侍郎。
English: Now it's time to be disciplined. Promoted to the position of junior secretary.

古文：三年，上自镇江南幸，留胜非经理。未几，命为控扼使，已而拜宣奉大夫、尚书右仆射兼御营使。
现代文：三年，皇上从镇江到南方，留下胜非经营镇江，不久，任命他为控扼使，后来授任宣奉大夫、尚书右仆射兼御营使。
English: Three years later, the emperor moved from Zhenjiang to the south, leaving Shengfei to manage Zhenjiang. Soon after, he appointed him as the controlling envoy. Later, he was appointed as the propagandist, the right-hand man of Shangshu and the envoy of the emperor.

古文：故事，命相进三官，胜非特迁五官。
现代文：旧制，任命宰相要晋升三个官职，胜非却晋升了五个官职。
English: Under the old system, the appointment of a prime minister required promotion to three official positions, but Shengfei was promoted to five official positions.

古文：会王渊签书枢密院事兼御营司都统制，内侍复用事恣横，诸将不悦。
现代文：正好王渊签书枢密院事兼御营司都统制，内侍又办事专横，诸将不高兴。
English: Just as Wang Yuan signed the document, the Privy Councillor and the Emperor's secretary were in control of the capital, and the chambermaids were acting arbitrarily. The generals were not happy.

古文：于是苗傅、刘正彦与其徒王钧甫、马柔吉、王世修谋，诬渊结宦官谋反。
现代文：于是苗傅、刘正彦与其同党王钧甫、马柔吉、王世修谋划，诬陷王渊勾结宦官谋反。
English: As a result, Miao Fu, Liu Masahiko and their fellow party members Wang Shifu, Ma Rongji and Wang Shixiu plotted to frame Wang Yuan for colluding with the eunuchs and plotting a rebellion.

古文：正彦手斩渊，分捕中官，皆杀之，拥兵至行宫门外。
现代文：刘正彦亲手杀了王渊，分兵捕捉宦官，都杀掉了，拥兵到行宫门外。
English: Liu Zhengyan personally killed Wang Yuan, the detachment of soldiers to capture the eunuch, killed them all, and embraced the soldiers outside the palace gate.

古文：胜非趋楼上，诘专杀之由。
现代文：胜非急忙上楼，斥问他专杀的理由。
English: Shengfei hurried upstairs and berated him about the reason for the targeted killing.

古文：上亲御楼抚谕，傅、正彦语颇不逊，胜非乃从皇太后出谕旨。
现代文：皇上亲自到御楼安抚，苗傅、刘正彦言语非常不恭敬，胜非于是跟着皇太后出宫谕旨。
English: The Emperor himself went to the Imperial Palace to calm things down, but Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan were very disrespectful, so it was best to follow the Empress Dowager's order to leave the palace.

古文：傅等请高宗避位，太后抱皇子听政，太后不可。
现代文：苗傅等人请高宗避位，太后抱着皇子听政，太后不同意。
English: Miao Fu and others asked Gao Zong to abdicate, the empress dowager held the prince and listened to the government, but the empress dowager did not agree.

古文：傅顾胜非曰： 今日正须大臣果决，相公何无一言耶？ 胜非还告上曰： 王钧甫乃傅等腹心，适语臣云： 二将忠有余，而学不足。
现代文：苗傅盯着胜非说 ：今天正需大臣果断决策，丞相为什么不发一言呢？ 胜非回宫告诉皇上说： 王钧甫是苗傅等人的心腹，刚才告诉我说 ：二将忠诚有余，而学力不足。 
English: Miao Fu stared at Sheng Fei and said, "Today, the minister needs to make a decisive decision, so why doesn't the prime minister say something?" Sheng Fei went back to the palace and told the emperor, "Wang Xifu is a confidant of Miao Fu and others. He just told me that the two generals are more than loyal, but lack academic ability."

古文：此语可为后图之绪。 于是太后垂帘，高宗退居显忠寺，号睿圣宫。
现代文：这句话可以作为后来再图谋的征兆。 于是太后垂帘，高宗退居显忠寺，号称睿圣宫。
English: This statement can be taken as a sign of later attempts, so the empress dowager closed the curtains and Gaozong retreated to Hengzhong Temple, known as Rui Sheng Gong.

古文：胜非因请降赦以安傅等。
现代文：胜非于是请求下诏赦免以安抚苗傅等人。
English: As a result, Sheng Bo requested an imperial pardon to appease Miao Fu and others.

古文：又奏： 母后垂帘，须二臣同对，此承平故事。
现代文：又奏请 ：母后垂帘，必须二臣同见，这是和平时期的旧制。
English: Another request: the curtain must be drawn behind the mother, and the two ministers must be present at the same time, which is the old system in peacetime.

古文：今日事机有须密奏者，乞许臣僚独对，而日引傅徒二人上殿，以弭其疑。 太后语上曰： 赖相此人，若汪、黄在位，事已狼籍矣。 
现代文：当今事机需要密奏的，请求允许大臣单独晋见，而每天带领苗傅之党二人上殿，以消除他们的猜疑。 太后对皇上说： 幸亏任此人为相，如果汪、黄二位在位，事情就难以收拾了。 
English: As today's situation required close coordination, she requested that the minister be allowed to see the crown prince alone, and brought two members of Miao Fu's party to the palace every day to dispel their suspicions.The empress dowager said to the emperor, "Fortunately, I appointed this person as the crown prince, but if Wang and Huang are on the throne, it will be difficult to clean up the situation."

古文：王钧甫见胜非，胜非问： 前言二将学不足，如何？ 钧甫曰： 如刘将手杀王渊，军中亦非之。 胜非因以言撼之曰： 上皇待燕士如骨肉，那无一人效力者乎？
现代文：王钧甫见胜非时，胜非问道： 皇上把燕士看作骨肉，怎么没有一个人效力呢？
English: When Wang Xiufu saw Shengfei, Shengfei asked: The emperor regarded the Yan soldiers as his own flesh and blood, so why didn't any of them serve?

古文：人言燕、赵多奇士，徒虚语耳。 钧甫曰： 不可谓燕无人。 胜非曰： 君与马参议皆燕中名人，尝献策灭契丹者。
现代文：人们常说燕、赵多奇士，只不过是虚誉而已。 王钧甫说： 不能说燕地无人才。 胜非说： 你与马参议都是燕中名人，曾经献计攻契丹。
English: People often say that Yan and Zhao Dokishi are nothing more than false reputation. Wang Xiufu said: It can't be said that Yan has no talent. It's better to say: You and Ma Sanliu are both famous in Yan, and you once made a plan to attack Khitan.

古文：今金人所任，多契丹旧人，若渡江，祸首及君矣。
现代文：现在金人所任用的，大多是契丹旧人，如果渡过长江，祸患就要连及到你了。
English: Now, most of the people appointed by the Jin people are Khitan old people. If you cross the Yangtze River, the calamity will reach you.

古文：盍早为朝廷协力乎！ 钧甫唯唯。
现代文：为什么不早为朝廷出力呢？ 钧甫答应了。
English: Why didn't you contribute to the imperial court earlier? Yan Fu agreed.

古文：王世修来见，胜非谕之曰： 国家艰难，若等立功之秋也。
现代文：王世修来求见，胜非告诉他说： 国家艰难，正是你们立功的时机啊。
English: Wang Shixiu came to see him, and Shengfei told him: The country is in a difficult situation, and this is exactly the time for you to make a contribution.

古文：诚能奋身立事，从官岂难得乎。 世修喜，时往来道军中情实。
现代文：如果能够奋身立事，大臣之位怎难到手呢？ 世修高兴，经常来报告军中情况。
English: If you can stand up and do something, how hard is it to get the position of minister? Sheshu is happy and often comes to report on the situation in the army.

古文：擢世修为工部侍郎。
现代文：提升王世修为工部侍郎。
English: Wang Shixiu was promoted to the position of a chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：傅、正彦乞改年号及移跸建康，胜非以白太后，因议恐尽废其请，则仓卒变生，乃改元明受。
现代文：苗傅、刘正彦请求改年号及迁都到建康，胜非告诉太后，于是商议如果全不听他们的请求，恐怕很快有变乱，于是改年号为明受。
English: Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan requested to change the year and move the capital to Jiankang. Shengfei told the empress dowager, so they discussed that if they did not listen to their request at all, there would soon be turmoil, so the change of year was accepted.

古文：以诏示世修曰： 已从若请矣。 傅等欲挟上幸徽、越，胜非谕之以祸福而止。
现代文：把诏书给世修看了，说： 已经听从了你们的请求了。 苗傅等人打算挟持皇帝到徽、越，胜非给他们分析祸福才作罢。
English: He showed the edict to Shixiu and said, "I have already listened to your request. Miao Fu and others are planning to take the emperor to Hebei and Yue, but it is better to give them an analysis of calamity and blessing.

古文：傅闻韩世忠起兵，取其妻子为质。
现代文：苗傅听说韩世忠起兵，抓来他的妻儿作为人质。
English: Miao Fu heard that Han Shizhong had raised an army and taken his wife and child as hostages.

古文：胜非绐傅曰： 今当启太后召二人慰抚，使报知平江，诸君益安。 傅许诺。
现代文：胜非骗他说 ：现在应该奏太后召来二人加以抚慰，派人告诉平江，各位越发安全。 苗傅同意了。
English: Shengfei said, "Now is the time for the Empress Dowager to call two people to comfort her, and send someone to tell Pingjiang that everyone will be safer." Miao Fu agreed.

古文：胜非喜曰： 二凶真无能为也。 诸将将至，傅等惧，胜非因谓之曰： 勤王之师未进者，使是间自反正耳。
现代文：胜非高兴地说 ：两位元凶真是无能啊。 诸将快要来了，苗傅等人害怕，胜非对他们说 ：救驾军队不前进，是留时间让我们自行反正。
English: Shengfei happily said, "The two culprits are really incompetent. The generals are about to arrive, and Miao Fu and the others are afraid. Shengfei said to them, "If we don't advance to save the army, we will have time to do it ourselves anyway."

古文：不然，下诏率百官六军请上还宫，公等置身何地乎？ 即召学士李邴、张守作百官章及太后手诏。
现代文：否则，下诏率领百官六军请皇上还宫，你们将何处安身？ 立即召来学士李邴、张守写下百官奏章及太后手诏。
English: Otherwise, you will have to lead the six armies of a hundred officials to invite the emperor to return to the palace. Where will you stay? Immediately summon the scholars Li Jun and Zhang Shou to write down the hundred officials' report and the empress dowager's edict.

古文：四月朔，胜非率百官诣睿圣宫，亲掖上乘马还宫。
现代文：四月初一，胜非率领百官到睿圣宫，亲自扶皇上上马还宫。
English: On the first day of April, Shengfei led hundreds of officials to Ruisheng Palace and personally escorted the emperor back to the palace.

古文：苗傅请以王世修为参议，胜非曰： 世修已为从官，岂可复从军？ 上既复辟，胜非曰： 臣昔遇变，义当即死，偷生至此，欲图今日之事耳。 乃乞罢政。
现代文：苗傅请求任命王世修为参议，胜非说： 世修已任朝官，怎能又从军？ 皇上复位后，胜非说： 以前遭遇变故，我应当殉义而死，偷生到现在，正是图谋今日之事而已。 于是请求罢相。
English: Miao Fu requested the appointment of Wang Shixiu as a councillor, and Sheng Fei said: Shixiu has been appointed as a court official, how can he join the army again? After the emperor was restored to the throne, Sheng Fei said: In the past, there was a change of fortune, I should have died a martyr's death, and I have been living a clandestine life until now, just plotting today's events. Therefore, he requested to resign from the position.

古文：上问谁可代者，胜非曰： 吕颐浩、张浚。 问孰优，曰： 颐浩练事而暴，浚喜事而疏。 上曰： 浚太年少。 胜非曰： 臣向被召，军旅钱谷悉付浚，此举浚实主之。 御史中丞张守论胜非不能预防，致贼猖獗，宜罢。
现代文：皇上问他谁可替代，胜非说： 吕颐浩、张浚。 皇上问谁最优。胜非说： 颐浩办事干练而残暴，张浚办事完满而清疏。 皇上说： 张浚太年轻。 胜非说： 我以前被召回时，军队钱粮都交给张浚，这件事实际上是张浚主持的。 御史中丞张守指责胜非不能预防变乱，致使贼臣猖獗，应当罢免。
English: The emperor asked him who could replace him, and Shengfei said: Lv Yinghao and Zhang Jun. The emperor asked who was the best. Shengfei said: Hao Hao's work was efficient and brutal, while Zhang Jun's work was complete but sparse. The emperor said: Zhang Jun was too young. Shengfei said: When I was recalled earlier, the army's money and grain were all handed over to Zhang Jun, and this matter was actually presided over by Zhang Jun. The Grand Historian Zhang Shou accused Shengfei of not being able to prevent turmoil, which led to rampant kleptocracy, and should be dismissed.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇上不答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：授观文殿大学士、知洪州，寻除江西安抚大使兼知江州。
现代文：授任胜非为观文殿大学士、知洪州，不久授任江西安抚大使兼知江州。
English: Shenfei was appointed as a scholar of Guanwenden University and Chihongzhou, and was soon appointed as the ambassador of Jiangxi pacification and Chihongzhou.

古文：绍兴元年，马进陷江州，侍御史沈与求论九江之陷，由胜非赴镇太缓。
现代文：绍兴元年，马进攻陷江州，侍御史沈与求指责九江之陷，是由于胜非赴任太慢的缘故。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, Ma attacked Zagangzhou, and his attendants, Shishi, Shen and Ku, blamed the fall of Jiujiang on the fact that Shenfei was too slow to take office.

古文：降授中大夫，分司南京，江州居住。
现代文：贬任他为中大夫，分司南京，住在江州。
English: He was relegated to the position of junior doctor, branch Nanjing, living in Jiangzhou.

古文：二年，吕颐浩荐兼侍读，又荐都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事，给事中胡安国、侍御史江跻交章论罢之。
现代文：二年，吕颐浩推荐他兼任侍读，又推荐他都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事，给事中胡安国、侍御史江跻相继上章指责罢免他。
English: In the second year, Lü Binghao recommended him to serve as an attendant, and also recommended him to the military governors of Jiangsu, Huai, Jing, and Zhejiang Provinces. During the incident, Hu'an Guo and the attendant of Shijiang successively criticized and dismissed him.

古文：颐浩力引其入，再除兼侍读，寻拜尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：颐浩极力引荐他入朝，再次授任侍读，不久任命为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: Hao Hao tried his best to recommend him to the imperial court, and he was once again appointed as an attendant, and soon he was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Dong Zhong Shumen's right-hand man.

古文：丁母忧去，起复右仆射兼知枢密院事，上《吏部七司敕令格式》一百八十卷。
现代文：母丧去职，重新起用为右仆射兼知枢密院事，进献《吏部七司敕令格式》一百八十卷。
English: After the death of his mother, he was reappointed as the right-hand man of Shaken Kanechi Privy Councillor, and presented the 180-volume "Forms of the Seven Secretaries of the Ministry of Personnel."

古文：时员外郎江端友请营宗庙，议者非之，以为国家期于恢复，不常厥居，胜非方主和议，遂白上营宗庙于临安。
现代文：当时员外郎江端友请求营建宗庙，议官们指责为不对，认为国家期待恢复，不常居某地，胜非力主和议，于是奏请皇上在临安营建宗庙。
English: At that time, member Wai Lang Jiang Duan You requested the construction of the ancestral temple, and the councilors accused him of being wrong, believing that the country was looking forward to recovery, that he did not often live in a certain place, and that he could not win the peace, so he asked the emperor to build the ancestral temple in Lin'an.

古文：徐俯罢参政，胜非荐胡松年。
现代文：徐俯被罢去参知政事，胜非推荐胡松年。
English: Xu Qian was ousted from the post of vice-premier, but was recommended by Hu Songnian.

古文：侍御史常同劾松年乃王黼客，胜非徙同左史。
现代文：侍御史常司弹劾胡松年是王黼的门客，胜非改任常同为左史。
English: Hu Songnian, the minister of history, was a protégé of Wang Hui, and he was often appointed as the left historian.

古文：莫俦谪曲江，其家苍头奴为胜非治疽而愈，奴为俦请，得复官。
现代文：莫俦被贬到曲江，他的家奴替胜非治好疽痛，家奴替莫俦请托，得以恢复原官。
English: Mo Yan was demoted to Qujiang, his family slave took his place and cured the gangrene pain. The family slave took the place of Mo Yan and was able to resume his original position.

古文：姻家刘式尝言为兵官获盗，胜非不以付部用，特旨改官。
现代文：亲家刘式曾经声称当兵官时捉到盗贼，胜非不把他交给吏部委用，特旨替他改官。
English: Liu Shih, a relative of the family, once claimed that when he was a military officer, he caught a thief and handed him over to the cadre committee for use, with the express purpose of changing his position.

古文：会久雨，胜非累章乞免，且自论当罢者十一事。
现代文：遇到长期大雨，胜非多次上章请求罢免，并且自己指责应当被罢的十一件事。
English: In the face of long-term heavy rain, Shengfei repeatedly requested the chapter to be dismissed, and blamed himself for the eleven things that should be dismissed.

古文：魏矼亦劾其罪，遂罢。
现代文：魏石工也弹劾他的罪过，于是被罢免。
English: Wei Shiguang also impeached him for his crime, so he was dismissed.

古文：五年，庆诏言战守四事，起知湖州，引疾归。
现代文：五年，应诏上言战守四事，被起用为知湖州，因病归居。
English: In the fifth year, in response to the edict to keep the four things, he was appointed to Zhihuzhou, but returned home due to illness.

古文：胜非与秦桧有隙，桧得政，胜非废居八年，卒，谥忠靖。
现代文：胜非与秦桧有过节，秦桧执政，胜非闲居八年，去世，谥号为 忠靖 。
English: Shengfei had a quarrel with Qin Hui, Qin Hui ruled, Shengfei lived idly for eight years, died, and his nickname was Zhongjing.

古文：胜非，张邦昌友婿也。
现代文：朱胜非是张邦昌朋友的女婿。
English: Zhu Shengfei is the son-in-law of a friend of Zhang Bangchang.

古文：始，邦昌僣位，胜非尝械其使，及金人过江，胜非请尊礼邦昌，录其后以谢敌。
现代文：当初，张邦昌僭位，胜非曾经囚禁过他的使者。金人过江后，胜非请求尊礼邦昌，录用他的后代以谢敌。
English: At first, when Zhang Bangchang ascended to the throne, Shengfei had imprisoned his envoy. After the Jin people crossed the river, Shengfei asked for the respect of Shengfei and hired his descendants to thank the enemy.

古文：苗、刘之变，保护圣躬，功居多。
现代文：苗、刘之乱时，保护皇帝，立功居多。
English: When the Miao and Liu Dynasties were in turmoil, he protected the emperor.

古文：既去，力荐张浚。然李纲罢，胜非受黄潜善风旨草制，极言其狂妄。
现代文：去相后，极力推荐张浚，但李纲被罢时，胜非受黄潜善的讽劝草拟诏令，极言李纲狂妄。
English: After he left the party, he strongly recommended Zhang Jun, but when Li Gang was ousted, he was persuaded to draft the edict by Huang Qianshan's sarcasm, and Li Gang was extremely arrogant.

古文：再相，忌赵鼎，鼎宣抚川、陕，欲重使名以制吴玠，胜非曰： 元枢出使，岂论此耶？ 盖因事出鼎而轻其权。
现代文：再度任相时，忌讳赵鼎，赵鼎宣抚川、陕时，想尊重使者名分以节制吴，胜非说： 元枢出使，怎么能这样呢？ 其实是趁机挤出赵鼎而削减他的权力。
English: When he was appointed as the prime minister again, he shunned Zhao Ding, and when Zhao Ding sent envoys to Fuzhou and Shaanxi, he wanted to respect the name of the envoy and restrain Wu. Sheng Fei said: How can this be? In fact, he took the opportunity to squeeze out Zhao Ding and reduce his power.

古文：人以此少之。
现代文：人们因此看不起他。
English: People look down on him because of that.

古文：及著《闲居录》，亦多其私说云。
现代文：著有《闲居录》，也大多是一己之见。
English: He is the author of "Idle Residence Record," which is mostly his own opinion.

古文：吕颐浩，字元直，其先乐陵人，徙齐州。
现代文：吕颐浩字元直，其祖先是乐陵人，迁居齐州。
English: Lv Yinghao, whose ancestor was from Leling, moved to Qizhou.

古文：中进士第。
现代文：考中进士。
English: Passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：父丧家贫，躬耕以赡老幼。
现代文：父丧后家贫，亲自耕种以赡养老小。
English: After his father's death, the family was impoverished, and he farmed to support his family.

古文：后为密州司户参军，以李清臣荐，为邠州教授。
现代文：后来任密州司户参军，因为李清臣的推荐，任州教授。
English: Later, he joined the army as a steward of Mizhou Province, and was appointed as a professor of Mizhou Province on the recommendation of Li Qingcheng.

古文：除宗子博士，累官入为太府少卿、直龙图阁、河北转运副使，升待制徽猷阁、都转运使。
现代文：授任宗事博士，历官入朝任太府少卿、直龙图阁、河北转运副使，升任徽猷阁待制、都转运使。
English: He was awarded the title of Doctor of Religious Affairs, and after entering the imperial court, he was appointed as the Taifu Shaoqing, the Jialong Tukge, and the Hebei Transit Deputy Envoy, and was promoted to the Huiyangge Pending, and the Duyun Transport Envoy.

古文：伐燕之役，颐浩以转输随种师道至白沟。
现代文：讨伐燕地之役，颐浩以转输官身份随种师道到白沟。
English: In the Battle of Yanchi, Zou Hao went to Baigou as a transfer officer to accompany the seed teacher.

古文：既得燕山，郭药师众二万，契丹军万余，皆仰给县官，诏以颐浩为燕山府路转运使。
现代文：攻取燕山之后，郭药师的二万部队，契丹的一万多部队，都依靠政府供养，诏令任命颐浩为燕山府路转运使。
English: After the capture of Yanshan, Guo Yakushi's 20,000 troops and Qidan's more than 10,000 troops all relied on the government for support. The imperial edict appointed Zou Hao as the Yanshan prefectural road transfer envoy.

古文：颐浩奏： 开边极远，其势难守，虽穷力竭财，无以善后。 又奏燕山、河北危急五事，愿博议久长之策。
现代文：颐浩上言说： 开拓极远的边疆，其势难守，即使穷竭财力，无法善后。 又上奏陈述燕山、河北危急之事五件，希望广泛征求长久之策。
English: Zou Hao said at the beginning of his speech: It is difficult to defend the potential of opening up a very distant frontier, and even if financial resources are exhausted, it will not be possible to improve the aftermath. He also reported five critical issues in Yanshan and Hebei, hoping to widely solicit long-term solutions.

古文：徽宗怒，命褫职贬官，而领职如故；寻复焉。进徽猷阁直学士。
现代文：徽宗大怒，下令夺去他的职务，而兼职如故；不久恢复官职，升任徽猷阁直学士。
English: Huizong was furious and ordered that he be deprived of his post, but he continued to work part-time; he soon resumed his official post and was promoted to the post of Huizhong Academy.

古文：金人入燕，郭药师劫颐浩与蔡靖等以降。
现代文：金人攻入燕地，郭药师劫持颐浩与蔡靖等人降敌。
English: The Jin invaded Yan's territory, and Guo Yajie kidnapped Zou Hao, Cai Jing and others to surrender to the enemy.

古文：敌退得归，复以为河北都转运使，以病辞，提举崇福宫。
现代文：敌人撤退后回归，重新任命为河北都转运使，因病辞职，任提举崇福官。
English: After the enemy retreated, he returned and was reappointed as the Hebei Capital Transfer Envoy, resigned due to illness, and was appointed as the Chongfu official.

古文：高宗即位，除知扬州。
现代文：高宗即帝位，授任他为知扬州。
English: Gaozong was enthroned as emperor, and he was given the title of Zhiyang Prefecture.

古文：车驾南幸，颐浩入见，除户部侍郎兼知扬州，进户部尚书。
现代文：皇帝到南方，颐浩入宫晋见，授任户部侍郎知扬州，升任户部尚书。
English: When the emperor went to the south, Zou Hao entered the palace to meet him, and was awarded the title of Household Attendant of Yangzhou, and was promoted to Household Secretary.

古文：剧贼张遇众数万屯金山，纵兵焚掠。
现代文：大盗张遇聚兵数万驻扎在金山，纵兵烧掠。
English: The great thief Zhang Yu gathered tens of thousands of soldiers and stationed them in Jinshan.

古文：颐浩单骑与韩世忠造其垒，说之以逆顺，遇党释甲降。
现代文：颐浩单身与韩世忠到他们的兵营，劝说他分清顺逆，张遇的部队放下兵器投降。
English: Hao Hao and Han Shizhong went to their barracks to persuade him to make a clear distinction between good and evil, and the troops encountered by Zhang to lay down their weapons and surrender.

古文：进吏部尚书。
现代文：升任吏部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：建炎二年，金人逼扬州，车驾南渡镇江，召从臣问去留。
现代文：建炎二年，金人逼近扬州，皇帝南渡镇江，召随从大臣询问去留之策。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, when the Jin people were approaching Yangzhou, the emperor Nandu Zhenjiang called the attendant minister to inquire about the strategy to stay.

古文：颐浩叩头愿且留此，为江北声援；不然，敌乘势渡江，事愈急矣。
现代文：颐浩叩头希望留在此地，作为江北的声援；否则，敌人乘势渡江，事情越是危急。
English: Yan Hao hoped to stay here as a supporter of the north of the river; otherwise, the enemy would take advantage of the situation to cross the river, and the situation would become more and more critical.

古文：驾幸钱塘，拜同签书枢密院事、江淮两浙制置使，还屯京口。
现代文：皇上到钱塘，授任颐浩为签书枢密院事、江淮两浙制置使，回兵驻扎京口。
English: The emperor went to Qiantang and appointed Zou Hao as the signatory of the Privy Council, and Jianghuai and Zhuge Liang were appointed as envoys, and the returning soldiers were stationed in Jingkou.

古文：金人去扬州，改江东安抚、制置使兼知江宁府。
现代文：金人离开扬州，颐浩改任江东安抚制置使兼知江宁府。
English: Jinren left Yangzhou, and Hao Hao was appointed as the Jiangdong Pacification and Placement Envoy to Jiangning Prefecture.

古文：时苗傅、刘正彦为逆，逼高宗避位。
现代文：当时苗傅、刘正彦作乱，逼高宗避位。
English: At that time, Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan made a disturbance and forced Gao Zong to abdicate.

古文：颐浩至江宁，奉明受改元诏赦，会监司议，皆莫敢对。
现代文：颐浩到江宁，接受改元为明受的诏令，正遇朝廷讨论，都不敢开口。
English: When Hao Hao went to Jiangning to accept the imperial edict to change the yuan to the yuan, he did not dare to open his mouth when the imperial court was discussing it.

古文：颐浩曰： 是必有兵变。 其子抗曰： 主上春秋鼎盛，二帝蒙尘沙漠，日望拯救，其肯遽逊位于幼冲乎？
现代文：颐浩说 ：这一定是有兵变。 其子吕抗说 ：皇上人当中年，二帝蒙尘沙漠，日夜期望拯救，哪里肯仓促逊位给幼儿呢？
English: Hao Hao said, "There must have been a mutiny," and his son Lu Kang said, "The emperor is middle-aged, the Second Emperor is covered with dust in the desert, and he expects to be saved day and night, so why would he hastily abdicate to a child?"

古文：灼知兵变无疑也。 颐浩即遣人寓书张浚曰： 时事如此，吾侪可但已乎？ 浚亦谓颐浩有威望，能断大事，书来报起兵状。
现代文：可知兵变无疑。 颐浩立即派人送信给张浚说： 时事如此，我们只能不得已吗？ 张浚也认为颐浩有威望，能处理大事，写信给颐浩报告起兵情况。
English: Zhang Jun also thought that Gonghao had prestige and could handle important matters, so he wrote to Gonghao to report the situation of raising an army.

古文：颐浩乃与浚及诸将约，会兵讨贼。
现代文：颐浩于是与张浚及诸将相约，合兵讨贼。
English: Therefore, Hao Hao made an appointment with Zhang Jun and other generals to join forces to hunt down the thieves.

古文：时江宁士民汹惧，颐浩乃檄杨惟忠留屯，以安人心。
现代文：当时江宁百姓惊惧，颐浩于是令杨惟忠留驻，安抚人心。
English: At that time, the people of Jiangning were alarmed, so Yan Hao ordered Yang Weizhong to stay and pacify the hearts of the people.

古文：且恐苗傅等计穷挟帝繇广德渡江，戒惟忠先为控扼备。
现代文：而且提防苗傅等人计穷挟持皇帝由广德渡江，戒令惟忠先作控制准备。
English: Moreover, wary of Miao Fu's and others' desperate plans to hold the emperor hostage from Guangde to cross the river, he ordered Wei Zhong to make control preparations first.

古文：俄有旨，召颐浩赴院供职。
现代文：不久有诏令，召颐浩到枢密院任职。
English: Soon after, there was a gazette notice summoning Bonhoeffer to serve on the Privy Council.

古文：上言： 今金人乘战胜之威，群盗有蜂起之势，兴衰拨乱，事属艰难，岂容皇帝退享安逸？
现代文：上书说： 当今金兵乘战胜之威，群盗有蜂起之势，兴衰拨乱，事体艰难，怎能让皇帝退享安逸？
English: The letter said: Today, the gold soldiers are riding the wave of victory, the bandits have the potential to rise up, the ups and downs are chaotic, and things are difficult. How can the emperor enjoy comfort?

古文：请亟复明辟，以图恢复。 遂以兵发江宁，举鞭誓众，士皆感厉＃
现代文：请赶快让皇帝复位，以图谋恢复大计。 于是在江宁起兵，举鞭誓师，士兵们都十分感奋。
English: Please restore the emperor as soon as possible, in order to restore the grand plan. Therefore, in Jiangning, the soldiers were very excited to raise an army and swear an oath.

古文：将至平江，张浚乘轻舟迓之，相持而泣，咨以大计。
现代文：快到平江时，张浚坐小船迎接他，两人相持而泣，互商大计。
English: When he was about to reach the Pingjiang River, Zhang Jun met him on a small boat. The two held each other and cried, and discussed their plans.

古文：颐浩曰： 颐浩曩谏开边，几死宦臣之手；承乏漕挽，几陷腥膻之域。
现代文：颐浩说： 颐浩往年谏阻开边，几乎死于宦官之手；承办漕运，几乎陷没在腥膻之地。
English: Hao Hao said: In the past years, Hao Hao almost died at the hands of eunuchs, and he was almost trapped in a terrible place.

古文：今事不谐，不过赤族，为社稷死，岂不快乎？ 浚壮其言。
现代文：现在事情如果不成功，不过被族灭而已，为国家而死，岂不快哉？ 张浚认为他很豪壮。
English: Now, if things don't work out, but he is wiped out by the clan and dies for the country, won't that be unpleasant? Zhang Jun thinks he is very brave.

古文：即舟中草檄，进韩世忠为前军，张俊翼之，刘光世为游击，颐浩、浚总中军，光世分军殿后。
现代文：就在船中草制檄命，进升韩世忠为前军，张俊辅佐他，刘光世为游击，颐浩、张浚统率中军，刘光世分兵殿后。
English: Right in the middle of the ship, Han Shizhong was promoted to the vanguard, Zhang Jun assisted him, Liu Guangxi was a guerrilla, Zou Hao and Zhang Dun led the central army, and Liu Guangxi was in the rear.

古文：颐浩发平江，傅党托旨请颐浩单骑入朝。
现代文：颐浩从平江出发，苗傅同党假托圣旨请颐浩单骑入朝。
English: Hao Hao set out from the Pingjiang River, and Miao Fu and the party asked Hao Hao to ride into the imperial court alone.

古文：颐浩奏：所统将士，忠义所激，可合不可离。
现代文：颐浩上奏说，所统将士，都是激于忠义，可合不可离。
English: Zou Hao reported that all the generals were passionate about loyalty and could not be separated.

古文：傅等恐惧，乃请高宗复辟。
现代文：苗傅等人惊恐，于是请高宗复位。
English: Miao Fu and others were alarmed, so they asked Gao Zong to reinstate him.

古文：师次秀州，颐浩勉励诸将曰： 今虽反正，而贼犹握兵居内。事若不济，必反以恶名加我，翟义、徐敬业可监也。 次临平，苗傅等拒战。
现代文：军队到达秀州，颐浩勉励诸将说 ：现在虽然已反正，但贼臣仍在宫内握有兵权，事情如果不成功，一定加我以造反之名，翟义、徐敬业之事可为借鉴。 到达临平，苗傅等人抵抗。
English: When the army arrived at Xiuzhou, Zou Hao exhorted and encouraged the generals, saying, "Although the situation is normal now, the usurper still holds military power in the palace. If things don't work out, I will definitely use the name of rebellion. The case of Zou Yi and Xu Jingye can be used as a reference. When they reached Linping, Miao Fu and others resisted.

古文：颐浩被甲立水次，出入行阵，督世忠等破贼，傅、正彦引兵遁。
现代文：颐浩披甲出入战阵，督促世忠等人破贼，苗傅、刘正彦引兵逃走。
English: Hao Hao, wearing armor, entered and left the battle, urged Shizhong and others to break the thieves, and Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan led the soldiers to escape.

古文：颐浩等以勤王兵入城，都人夹道耸观，以手加额。
现代文：颐浩带领勤王护驾部队入城，人民夹道围观，掩面而泣。
English: Hao Hao led the king's escort troops into the city, and the people watched from the sidelines, hiding their faces and crying.

古文：朱胜非罢相，以颐浩守尚书右仆射、中书侍郎兼御营使，改同中书门下平章事。
现代文：朱胜非被罢去相位，皇上任命颐浩为尚书右仆射、中书侍郎兼御营使，改任同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhu Shengfei was removed from his post, and the emperor appointed Zou Hao as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and the attendant and envoy of Zhong Shuxu, and he was reassigned as the subordinate of Zhong Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：车驾幸建康，闻金人复入，召诸将问移跸之地，颐浩曰： 金人谋以陛下所至为边面，今当且战且避，奉陛下于万全之地，臣愿留常、润死守。 上曰： 朕左右不可以无相。 乃以韩世忠守镇江，刘光世守太平。
现代文：皇上到建康，听说金兵又进犯，召问诸将移都之地，颐浩说 ：金人想以陛下所到之地为边界，现在应当边战边避，奉陛下于万全之地，我愿意留在常、润死守。 皇上说： 我身边不能没有宰相。 于是命令韩世忠守镇江，刘光世守太平。
English: When the emperor arrived in Jiankang, he heard that the Jin soldiers had attacked again, and he summoned the generals to inquire about the place where the capital would be moved. Zhao Hao said, "The Jin people want to use the place where His Majesty has arrived as the border, and now they should avoid fighting. I will serve His Majesty in the land of abundance, and I am willing to stay and defend it to the death." The emperor said, "I cannot be without the prime minister at my side." He then ordered Han Shizhong to defend Zhenjiang, and Liu Guang to defend Taiping.

古文：驾至平江，闻杜充败绩，上曰： 事迫矣，若何？ 颐浩遂进航海之策。
现代文：皇帝到平江，听说杜充溃败，皇帝说： 事情很急迫了，怎么办？ 颐浩于是献航海之策。
English: When the emperor arrived at the Pingjiang River, he heard that Du Cheng had been defeated. The emperor said, "The situation is very urgent, what should we do?" So Hao Hao proposed a sailing strategy.

古文：初，建炎御营使本以行幸总齐军政，而宰相兼领之，遂专兵柄，枢府几无所预。
现代文：当初，建炎御营使本来以行幸总令军政，而由宰相兼任，于是专断兵权，枢密府几乎无法干预。
English: At first, Emperor Jianyuan's envoys had the power to make military policy by acting as commander-in-chief, while the chancellor also served as prime minister. As a result, they had arbitrary military power, and the Privy Council was almost unable to intervene.

古文：颐浩在位尤颛恣，赵鼎论其过。
现代文：颐浩任相时尤其专横，赵鼎指责他的过失。
English: Zhao Hao was particularly domineering when he was premier, and Zhao Ding accused him of negligence.

古文：四年，移鼎为翰林学士、吏部尚书。
现代文：四年，改任赵鼎为翰林学士、吏部尚书。
English: In four years, Zhao Ding was reappointed as Hanlin Baccalaureate and Li Bu Shangshu.

古文：鼎辞，且攻颐浩，章十数上，颐浩求去。
现代文：赵鼎谢绝，并且攻诋颐浩，上了十几道奏章，颐浩请求离职。
English: Zhao Ding declined, and attacked and slandered Hao Hao. He wrote more than a dozen songs, and Hao Hao requested to resign.

古文：除镇南军节度、开府仪同三司、醴泉观使，诏以颐浩倡义勤王，故从优礼焉。
现代文：授任他为镇南军节度、开府仪同三司、醴泉观使，诏令因为颐浩倡义救王，所以优礼他。
English: He was appointed as the commander of the Zhennan Army, the keeper of the imperial residences, the third secretary of the imperial residences, and the inspector of the imperial residences. The imperial edict honored him because he advocated saving the king.

古文：奉化贼将琏乘乱为变，劫颐浩置军中，高宗以颐浩故，赦而招之。
现代文：奉化盗贼蒋琏趁乱为变，劫持颐浩到军中，高宗因为颐浩的缘故，赦免而招安他们。
English: The Fenghua thief, Chiang Kai-shek, took advantage of the turmoil and abducted Hao Hao to the army. Gao Zong pardoned them because of Hao Hao.

古文：寻除江东安抚、制置大使兼知池州。
现代文：不久授任颐浩为江东安抚制置大使兼知池州。
English: Soon after, Hao Hao was appointed as the ambassador for the pacification of the East River and Chichizhou.

古文：颐浩请兵五万屯建康等处，又请王〈王燮〉、巨师古兵自隶。
现代文：颐浩请求拨给五万士兵驻扎建康等处，又请求把王王燮、巨师古的军队隶属于自己。
English: Gonghao requested to allocate fifty thousand soldiers to be stationed in Jiankang and other places, and also requested to subordinate the army of Wang Wangqi and Jiu Shigu to himself.

古文：将之镇，而李成遣将马进围江州。
现代文：快到镇江时，而李成派部将马进围攻江州。
English: When they were close to Zhenjiang, Li Cheng sent his troops to besiege Jiangzhou.

古文：乃驻军鄱阳，会杨惟忠兵，请与俱趋南康，遣师古救江州。
现代文：于是把军队驻扎在鄱阳，会合杨惟忠的部队，奏请与他们一起奔赴南康，派师古去救江州。
English: So he stationed his army in Shenyang, gathered Yang Weizhong's troops, and asked them to go to Nankang with him, and sent Shigu to save Jiangzhou.

古文：贼众鏖战，颐浩、惟忠失利，师古败奔洪州。
现代文：与敌人激战，颐浩、惟忠失利，师古败逃到洪州。
English: In a fierce battle with the enemy, Hao Hao and Wei Zhong were defeated, and Shigu fled to Hongzhou in defeat.

古文：颐浩乞济师讨李成，高宗曰： 颐浩奋不顾身，为国讨贼，群臣所不及，但轻进，其失也。 诏王〈王燮〉以万人速往策应。
现代文：颐浩请求增加军队讨伐李成，高宗说 ：颐浩奋不顾身，为国讨贼，群臣不及他，但是轻率进兵，是他的失误。 诏令王王燮带领一万多人迅速前去策应。
English: When Hao Hao requested to increase the number of troops to fight against Li Cheng, Gao Zong said: Hao Hao tried his best to fight for the country, and the ministers were not as good as him, but it was his mistake to enter the army rashly. He ordered Wang Wangqi to lead more than ten thousand people to quickly respond.

古文：颐浩复军左蠡，又得阁门舍人崔增之众万余，军势复振。
现代文：颐浩又在左蠡驻扎下来，又得到门舍人崔增的部队一万多人，军势复振。
English: Gonghao also stationed in Zuoying, and received more than 10,000 troops from his protégé Cui Zeng, and the military strength was reinvigorated.

古文：命〈王燮〉、增击贼，败之，乘胜至江州，则马进已陷城矣。
现代文：命王王燮、崔增攻击敌人，大败敌人，乘胜到江州，而马进已攻陷江州城。
English: Wang Wangyao and Cui Zeng attacked the enemy, defeated the enemy, and took advantage of the victory to Jiangzhou, while Ma Jin had already captured Jiangzhou City.

古文：朝廷命张俊为招讨使，俊既至，遂败马进。
现代文：朝廷任命张俊为招讨使，张俊到后，打败马进。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhang Jun as a recruiting envoy. After Zhang Jun arrived, he defeated Ma Jin.

古文：进遁，成以余众降刘豫。
现代文：马进逃走，李成率领残兵投降刘豫。
English: Ma Jin fled and Li Cheng led the remaining soldiers to surrender to Liu Yu.

古文：诏以淮南民未复业，须威望大臣措置，以颐浩兼宣抚，领寿春府、徐庐和州、无为军。
现代文：诏令因为淮南百姓未恢复生产，必须由威望大臣管理，任命颐浩兼任宣抚，并兼管寿春府、滁庐和州、无为军。
English: Because the people of Huainan did not resume production, the imperial edict ordered that it must be managed by the minister of prestige, and appointed Hao Hao to also serve as the procurator, and to also be in charge of Shuchunfu, Zhuhe Prefecture, and Wuwei Army.

古文：招降赵延寿于分宁，得其精锐五千，分隶诸将。
现代文：在分宁招降赵延寿，得到他的五千精锐部队，分隶诸将。
English: In Buning, Zhao Yanshou was recruited and received his five thousand elite troops, including subordinate generals.

古文：张琪自徽犯饶州，有众五万。
现代文：张琪从徽州进犯饶州，有军队五万人。
English: Zhang Qi invaded Raozhou from Huizhou with an army of fifty thousand.

古文：时颐浩自左蠡班师，帐下兵不满万人，郡人皇骇。
现代文：当时颐浩从左蠡撤军，军营中士兵不满一万人，郡中百姓惊恐。
English: At that time, Hao Hao withdrew from Zuoying. There were less than 10,000 soldiers in the military camp, and the people in the county were terrified.

古文：颐浩命其将阎皋、姚端、崔邦弼列阵以待。
现代文：颐浩命令部将阎皋、姚端、崔邦弼列阵待敌。
English: Zou Hao's command department lined up Yan Qi, Yao Duan, and Cui Bang to wait for the enemy.

古文：琪犯皋军，皋力战，端、邦弼两军夹击，大破之。
现代文：张琪进攻阎皋的部队，姚端、崔邦弼两军夹击敌人，大败敌军。
English: Zhang Qi attacked Yan Qi's troops, Yao Duan and Cui Bangtao's two armies clamped down on the enemy and defeated the enemy army.

古文：拜少保、尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
现代文：皇上授任颐浩为少保、尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
English: The emperor appointed Hao Hao as a minor official, Shang Shuxi as a left-hand servant, Tong Zhong Shumon as a lower-ranking official, and Zhicheng as a Privy Councilor.

古文：二年，上自越州还临安。
现代文：二年，皇上从越州回到临安。
English: Two years later, the emperor returned to Lin'an from Yuezhou.

古文：时桑仲在襄阳，欲进取京城，乞朝廷举兵为声援。
现代文：当时桑仲在襄阳，打算进攻夺取京城，请求朝廷举兵声援。
English: At that time, Sangzhong was in Yangyang, planning to attack and seize the capital, and asked the imperial court to raise troops in solidarity.

古文：颐浩乃大议出师，而身自督军北向。
现代文：颐浩于是大议出师，而亲自督率军队攻向北方。
English: Therefore, Hao Hao proposed a division, and personally supervised and led the army to attack the north.

古文：高宗谕颐浩、秦桧曰： 颐浩治军旋，桧理庶务，如种、蠡分职可也。 二人同秉政，桧知颐浩不为公论所与，多引知名士为助，欲倾之而擅朝权。
现代文：高宗对颐浩、秦桧说 ：颐浩主管军事，秦桧治理政事，就像种、蠡那样分职。 二人共同执政，秦桧知道颐浩不被舆论赞许，多引荐知名人士帮助自己，打算倾轧他而独掌朝政。
English: Gao Zong said to Hao Hao and Qin Hui: Hao Hao is in charge of military affairs, while Qin Hui is in charge of political affairs, just like the division of duties between father and son. The two ruled together. Qin Hui knew that Hao Hao was not approved by the public opinion, so he introduced more famous people to help himself, intending to crush him and take sole control of the government.

古文：高宗乃下诏以戒朋党，除颐浩都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事，开府镇江。
现代文：高宗于是下诏禁戒结党，授任颐浩都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事，在镇江开府办公。
English: Gao Zong then issued an edict forbidding the formation of political parties, and appointed Gao Hao as the military governor of Jiang, Huai, Jing, and Zhejiang Provinces, and he worked in Zhenjiang Kaifu.

古文：颐浩辟文武士七十余人，以神武后军及御前忠锐崔增、赵延寿二军从行，百官班送。
现代文：颐浩征召文武人士七十多人，带领神武后军及御前忠锐崔增、赵延寿两支军队随行，百官列班送行。
English: Zou Hao conscripted more than 70 people of literature and martial arts, and led the Shenwu Rear Army and the two armies of Guzen loyalists Cui Zeng and Zhao Yanshou to accompany the procession. Hundreds of officials lined up to escort the procession.

古文：颐浩次常州，延寿军叛，刘光世歼其众；又闻桑仲已死，遂不进，引疾求罢。
现代文：颐浩到达常州，延寿军叛乱，刘光世歼灭他的军队；又听说桑仲已死，于是不再前进，称病求罢。
English: When Hao Hao arrived in Changzhou, Yan Shou's army rebelled, and Liu Guangshi annihilated his army; he also heard that Sang Zhong had died, so he did not advance any further, saying that he was ill.

古文：诏还朝，以知绍兴府朱胜非同都督诸军事。
现代文：诏令他回朝，任命知绍兴府朱胜非同都督诸军事。
English: The emperor ordered him to return to the imperial court and appointed Zhu Shengfei as the military governor of Zhishao Xingfu.

古文：颐浩既还，欲倾秦桧，乃引胜非为助。
现代文：颐浩回朝后，打算倾轧秦桧，于是引荐胜非帮助自己。
English: After Hao Hao returned to the imperial court, he planned to crush Qin Yu, so he introduced Sheng Fei to help himself.

古文：给事中胡安国论胜非必误大计，胜非复知绍兴府，寻以醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：给事中胡安国指责胜非必误大计，胜非又任绍兴府，不久任醴泉观使兼侍读。
English: During the incident, Juan Guo accused Shengfei of making a big mistake. Shengfei was also appointed to the Shaoxing Prefecture, and soon after, he was appointed as an attendant and an envoy to Quanquan.

古文：安国持录黄不下，颐浩持命检正诸房文字黄龟年书行。
现代文：安国压着诏书不发，颐浩命令检正诸房文字黄龟年书写任命行状。
English: An Guo pressured not to issue the edict, and Zou Hao ordered to correct the appointment letter written in Zhuofang characters in the Year of the Yellow Turtle.

古文：安国以失职求去，罢之。
现代文：安国因为失职请求离任，朝廷罢免他。
English: An Guo requested to leave his post for dereliction of duty, and the imperial court dismissed him.

古文：桧上章乞留安国，不报。
现代文：秦桧上章请求留用安国，皇上不答复。
English: The Emperor did not reply to the request of the last chapter of Qin Hui to retain An Guo.

古文：侍御史江跻、左司谏吴表臣皆以论救安国罢，程瑀、胡世将、刘一止、张焘、林待聘、楼炤亦坐论桧党斥，台省一空，遂罢桧相。
现代文：侍御史江跻、左司谏吴表臣都因为论救安国被罢免，程蠫、胡世将、刘一止、张焘、林待聘、楼癤也因为是秦桧同党遭贬斥，台省一空，于是罢免秦桧的相位。
English: The attendant Shijiang Lin and the left secretary Gao Wu were both dismissed because of their views on saving the country. Cheng Yu, Hu Shijiao, Liu Yizhong, Zhang Xi, Lin Beiyan and Lou Ye were also dismissed because they were Qin Yu's party members. Taiwan Province was emptied, so Qin Yu's position was dismissed.

古文：颐浩独秉政，屡请兴师复中原，谓： 太祖取天下，兵不过十万，今有兵十六七万矣。
现代文：颐浩单独执政，多次请求兴兵恢复中原，说： 太祖取天下，军队不过十万，现在有军队十六七万。
English: Hao Hao, who ruled alone, repeatedly requested the army to restore the Central Plains, saying, "Our great-grandfather conquered the world with an army of only 100,000, but now we have an army of 167,000."

古文：然自金人南牧，莫敢婴其锋。
现代文：但是自从金人南侵，不敢挡其兵锋。
English: However, since the invasion of the south by the Chinese, they did not dare to defend their troops.

古文：比年韩世忠、张俊、陈思恭、张荣屡奏，人有战心，天将悔祸。
现代文：连年韩世忠、张俊、陈思恭、张茶多次奏请，人有战心，天将悔祸。
English: Over the years, Han Shizhong, Zhang Jun, Chen Sicong and Zhang Cha have performed the invocation many times.

古文：又金人以中原付刘豫，三尺童子知其不能立国。
现代文：再者金人把中原交给刘豫，连儿童都知道他不能立国。
English: Moreover, the Jin people gave the Central Plains to Liu Yu, and even children knew that he could not establish a state.

古文：愿睿断早定，决策北向。
现代文：希望圣断早定，决策北伐。
English: It is hoped that the decision will be made early, and the decision will be made to march north.

古文：今之精锐皆中原人，恐久而消磨，他日难以举事。 时盗贼稍息，颐浩请遣使循行郡国，平狱讼，宣德意。
现代文：现在的精锐部队都是中原人，恐怕时间长了志气消磨，今后难以举事。 当时盗贼稍微平息，颐浩请求派遣使者巡行地方，处理讼狱，宣传德意。
English: The current elite troops are all from the Central Plains, and I'm afraid they've had a long time to burn off their morale, and it will be difficult to do anything in the future.At that time, the thieves calmed down a bit, and Hao Hao requested that an envoy be sent to patrol the area, deal with the prison, and promote German ideals.

古文：李纲宣抚湖南，颐浩言纲纵暴无善状，请罢诸路宣抚之名，纲止为安抚使。
现代文：李纲宣抚河南，颐浩上诉李纲纵暴无善的事，请求罢去诸路宣抚的名号，李纲只任安抚使。
English: Li Gang sent messengers to Henan, and Yan Hao appealed against Li Gang's violent and evil deeds, requesting that the name of Zhu Lu's messengers be removed, and Li Gang only be appointed as a messenger of peace.

古文：时李光在江东，与颐浩书，言纲有大节，四夷畏服。
现代文：当时李光在江东，写信给颐浩，说李纲有大节，四夷畏服。
English: At that time, Li Guang was in Jiangdong and wrote to Hao Hao, saying that Li Gang had a big section and was afraid of the four barbarians.

古文：颐浩称光结党，言者因论光，罢之。
现代文：颐浩指责李光结党，谏官因此指责李光罢免了他。
English: Hao Hao accused Li Guang of forming a party, and the eunuch accused Li Guang of dismissing him.

古文：时方审量滥赏，颐浩时有纵舍，右司郎官王冈持不可，曰： 公秉国钧，不平谓何。 
现代文：当时审计滥赏，颐浩常常滥施赏罚，右司郎官王冈认为不行，说： 你秉持国权，不公平怎么行？ 
English: At that time, the audit was indiscriminate in reward, and Hao Hao was often indiscriminate in reward and punishment. Wang Gang, the Right Secretary, thought it was unacceptable, saying: You uphold state power, how can you be unfair?

古文：颐浩再秉政凡二年，高宗以水旱、地震，下诏罪己求言，颐浩连章待罪。
现代文：颐浩再度执政共二年，高宗因为水旱、地震下诏责怪自己征求上言，颐浩连续上章请罪。
English: Hao Hao reigned for a total of two years. Gao Zong reproached himself for seeking advice because of the drought and earthquake, and Hao Hao continuously pleaded guilty.

古文：高宗一日谓大臣曰： 国朝四方水旱，无不上闻。
现代文：高宗一天对大臣们说 ：国家四方水旱，无不报告朝廷。
English: Gao Zong said to the ministers one day: The country is in a state of drought in all four directions, and everyone must report to the imperial court.

古文：近苏、湖地震，泉州大水，辄不以奏，何也？ 侍御史辛炳、殿中常同论其罪，遂罢颐浩为镇南军节度使、开府仪同三司、提举洞霄宫，改特进、观文殿大学士。
现代文：近来苏州、湖州地震，泉州大水，却不上奏，为什么？ 侍御史辛炳、殿中常同议论指责颐浩的过错，于是罢去相位任镇南军节度使、开府仪同三司、提举洞霄宫，为特进、观文殿大学士。
English: Recently, Suzhou, Huzhou earthquake, Quanzhou flood, but did not play, why? Attendant Shi Xinyi and the palace often discussed the same fault of blaming Hao Hao, so he went to the position of the deputy commander of the Southern Army, the ceremony of the opening of the capital and the three departments, and the promotion of the Dongxiao Palace, as a special student, and a scholar of the Temple of Literature.

古文：五年，诏问宰执以战守方略，颐浩条十事以献，除湖南安抚、制置大使兼知潭州。
现代文：五年，皇上下诏询问大臣们战守策略，颐浩条列十件事献给皇上，授任湖南安抚制置大使兼知潭州。
English: In the fifth year, the emperor made an imperial edict to inquire about the war strategy of the ministers, and Zou Hao listed ten things dedicated to the emperor, and was awarded the post of Hunan Pacification Ambassador and Zhitan Prefecture.

古文：时郴、衡、桂阳盗起，颐浩遣人悉平之。
现代文：当时郴、衡、桂阳暴乱，颐浩派人全部讨平。
English: At that time, there were riots in Handan, Heng and Guiyang, and Handan and Haikou sent people to settle them all.

古文：帝在建康，除颐浩少保、浙西安抚制置大使、知临安府、行宫留守。
现代文：皇帝在建康，授任颐浩为少保、浙西安抚制置大使、知临安府、行宫留守。
English: When the emperor was in Jiankang, he appointed Zou Hao as the minor protector, the ambassador of Zhejiang and West China pacification system, the governor of Lin'an, and left the palace.

古文：明堂礼成，进封成国公。
现代文：明堂礼举行后，进封他为成国公。
English: After the Ming Hall ceremony, he was enthroned as Chengguo.

古文：八年，上将还临安，除少傅、镇南定江军节度使、江东安抚制置大使兼知建康府、行宫留守。
现代文：八年，皇上打算回到临安，任命颐浩为少傅、镇南定江军节度使、江东安抚制置大使兼知建康府、行宫留守。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor planned to return to Lin'an, and appointed Hao Hao as the young chief of staff, Jinan and Dingjiang military commander, and the ambassador for the pacification of Jiangdong and the establishment of Jiankang Prefecture, but he stayed away from the palace.

古文：颐浩引疾求去，除醴泉观使。
现代文：颐浩称病求罢。授任醴泉观使。
English: Hao Hao said that he was ill. He was awarded the post of Huanquan Observer.

古文：九年，金人归河南地，高宗欲以颐浩往陕西，命中使召赴行在。
现代文：九年，金人归还河南地，高宗打算让颐浩前往陕西，命令中使召他到行宫。
English: In the ninth year, when the gold was returned to Henan Province, Gaozong planned to let Gonghao go to Shaanxi, and summoned him to the palace in the order.

古文：颐浩以老病辞，且条陕西利害，谓金人无故归地，其必有意。
现代文：颐浩以老病辞谢，并且条奏陕西利害，认为金人无故归还地方，一定有阴谋。
English: Hao Hao used his old illness as an excuse, and played on the interests of Shaanxi, believing that there must be a conspiracy for Jinren to return the place without reason.

古文：召趣赴阙，既至，以疾不能见，乃听归。
现代文：召他赶赴朝廷，到了后，因病不能晋见，于是听任他归家。
English: He was summoned to rush to the imperial court. When he arrived, he was too ill to attend, so he was allowed to return home.

古文：未几，卒，赠太师，封秦国公，谥忠穆。
现代文：不久，去世，追赠太师，追封为秦国公，谥号为 忠穆 。
English: Soon after, he died and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, the posthumous title of Qin Guogong, and the posthumous title of Zhongmu.

古文：颐浩有胆略，善鞍马弓剑，当国步艰难之际，人倚之为重。
现代文：颐浩有胆略，善于骑马射箭，在国家艰难之际，人们十分倚重他。
English: Hao Hao is daring, good at horseback riding and archery, and people rely on him a lot when the country is in a difficult situation.

古文：自江东再相，胡安国以书劝其法韩忠献，以至公无我为先，报复恩仇为戒，颐浩不能用。
现代文：自从江南再度任相，胡安国用书信劝他效法韩忠献，以至公无我为先务，切戒报恩复仇，颐浩不能采用。
English: Since Jiangnan was reappointed as minister, Hu'an Guo used a letter to advise him to follow Han Zhongxian's example, so that the public would not have any self-interest as a priority, and it was imperative to return the favor and take revenge.

古文：时军用不足，颐浩与朱胜非创立江、浙、湖南诸路大军月桩钱，于是郡邑多横赋，大为东南患云。
现代文：当时军中经费不足，颐浩与朱胜非创立江、浙、湖南诸路大军月桩钱，于是地方官吏常常横征暴敛，成为东南的大患。
English: At that time, there was a shortage of funds in the military, and Zou Hao and Zhu Shengfei created a monthly pile of money for the armies of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Hunan provinces. As a result, local officials often arbitrarily collected funds, which became a big problem in Southeast Asia.

古文：范宗尹，字觉民，襄阳邓城人。
现代文：范宗尹，字觉民，襄阳邓城人。
English: Fan Zongyin, Zi Jue Min, Xiangyang Dengcheng people.

古文：少笃学，工文辞。
现代文：从小专心好学，擅长文辞。
English: Since childhood, he has been eager to learn and good at writing.

古文：宣和三年，上舍登第。累迁侍御史、右谏议大夫。
现代文：宣和三年，考中进士，经多次升迁任侍御史、行谏议大夫。
English: In the third year of Xuanhe, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and after several promotions, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain, and then to the position of doctor.

古文：王云使北还，言金人必欲得三镇。
现代文：王云出使金国返回，说金人一定要得到三镇。
English: Wang Yun dispatched Jin Guo to return, saying that Jin people must get three towns.

古文：宗尹请弃之以纾祸，言者非之，宗尹罢归。
现代文：范宗尹建议放弃三镇以避免战祸，谏官反对这样做，范宗尹被罢免官职，返回乡里。
English: Fan Zongyin suggested abandoning the three towns to avoid the scourge of war, the eunuchs opposed this, Fan Zongyin was removed from office and returned to the countryside.

古文：张邦昌僣位，复其职，遣同路允迪诣康王劝进。
现代文：张邦昌越礼建立伪国，恢复了宗尹的官职，派他同路允迪去见康王劝说他称帝。
English: Zhang Bangchang established a pseudo-state, restored the official position of Zong Yin, and sent him along with Yundi to see King Kang to persuade him to become emperor.

古文：建炎元年，李纲拜右仆射，宗尹论其名浮于实，有震主之威。
现代文：建炎元年，李纲被授任右仆射，范宗尹论奏他名声超过实际才能，有震主之威。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, Li Gang was awarded the title of right-hand man, and Fan Zongyin said that his reputation exceeded his actual talent, and he had the power to shake the world.

古文：不报，出知舒州。
现代文：不被答复，出京任舒州知州。
English: Unanswered, he left Beijing for Shuzhou and Chizhou.

古文：言者论宗尹尝污伪命，责置鄂州。
现代文：谏官论奏范宗尹曾接受过伪朝的朝任命，宗尹又被责罚安置到邓州。
English: Fan Zongyin, a eunuch, once accepted an appointment from the pseudo-dynasty. Zongyin was punished and relocated to Dengzhou.

古文：既，召为中书舍人，迁御史中丞，拜参知政事。
现代文：不久，被召为中书舍人，升任御史中丞，任参知政事。
English: Soon, he was called to be a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, and appointed to the post of Councillor of State Affairs.

古文：吕颐浩罢相，宗尹摄其位。
现代文：吕颐浩被罢去相位，范宗尹代理宰相之位。
English: Lv Yinghao was ousted and Fan Zongyin became acting prime minister.

古文：时诸盗据有州县，朝廷力不能制。
现代文：当时盗贼们占据州县，朝廷无力制服他们。
English: At that time, thieves occupied prefectures and counties, and the imperial court was powerless to subdue them.

古文：宗尹言： 太祖收藩镇之权，天下无事百五十年，可谓良法。
现代文：宗尹上言道: 太祖收回各藩镇的权力，天下太平有一百五十年，可谓是良策。
English: Zong Yin said: Grandfather took back the power of the provinces and towns. The country has been at peace for 150 years, which can be described as a good policy.

古文：然国家多难，四方帅守单寡，束手环视，此法之弊。
现代文：然而国家多难，四方守帅势力单薄，垂手环视，是此法的弊端所在。
English: However, the country is difficult, the four-party guarding forces are thin, and the hands are looking around, which is the drawback of this method.

古文：今当稍复藩镇之法，裂河南、江北数十州之地，付以兵权，俾蕃王室。
现代文：现在应到了稍微恢复建立藩镇的方法，分割河南、江北几十个州的土地，委以兵权，使他们来拱卫皇室。
English: Now it is time to slightly restore the method of establishing a township, divide the land of Henan and dozens of states north of the river, and entrust them with military power so that they can defend the royal family.

古文：侍郎季陵希宗尹意，乞诏宰执于罪累中选真材实能，量付以事。沈与求劾陵，因及宗尹，宗尹求去。上为罢与求，宗尹乃复视事。初，宗尹廷对，详定官李邦彦特取旨置宗尹乙科，宗尹德之，赠邦彦观文殿大学士。
现代文：授任范宗尹为通议大夫、守尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼御营使，当时年仅三十岁。近世的宰相，没有比宗尹年纪更小的。当初，范宗尹参加廷试，详定官李邦彦特别奏请皇上把宗尹放到乙科，宗尹很感激他，赠李邦彦观文殿大学士。
English: Fan Zongyin was only 30 years old when he was appointed as the mediator, the right-hand man of the Keeper of the Great Seal of China, and the subordinate of the Keeper of the Great Seal of China, as well as the imperial envoy. In modern times, there is no prime minister who is younger than Zongyin. At the beginning, when Fan Zongyin took part in the court examination, the detailed official Li Bangyan specially asked the emperor to put Zongyin in the Eighth Division. Zongyin was very grateful to him and gave Li Bangyan a scholarship to the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts.

古文：枢密院副都承旨阙，宗尹拟刑焕、蓝公佐、辛道宗三人，焕戚里，公佐管客省，道宗不知兵，人以此咎宗尹。
现代文：枢密院副都承旨一职空缺，宗尹拟定邢焕、蓝公佐、辛道宗三人，邢焕是他的同乡亲戚，公佐主管客省，而道宗又不懂军事，人们因此指责宗尹。
English: There was a vacancy for the post of Vice-Councilor of the Privy Council, and Zong Yin proposed three people: Zou Huan, Lan Guanzao, and Xin Daozong. Zou Huan was a relative from his hometown, Guanzao was in charge of Hakka Province, and Daozong did not understand military affairs. People criticized Zong Yin for this.

古文：密院计议官王佾结公佐，宗尹请除佾为宗正丞，侍御史张延寿劾之，上罢佾。
现代文：枢密院计议官王佾与公佐结交，宗尹请求授王佾为宗正丞，侍御史张延寿弹劾他，皇上罢免了王佾。
English: Wang Yao, the Privy Council's comptroller, befriended the official, Zong Yin requested that Wang Yao be given the title of Zong Zheng Rong, Zhang Yan Shou impeached him, and the emperor dismissed Wang Yao.

古文：绍兴元年二月辛巳，日有黑子，宗尹以辅政无状请免，上不许。
现代文：绍兴元年二月辛巳，太阳上出现黑斑，宗尹以辅政没有成绩请求免职，皇上不答应。
English: In February of the first year of Shaoxing, a dark spot appeared on the sun. Zong Yin requested to be relieved of his duties as a vice-governor, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：魏滂为江东通判，谏官言其贪盗官钱，滂遂罢；李弼孺领营田，谏官言其媚事朱勔，弼孺亦罢：二人皆宗尹所荐。
现代文：魏滂担任江东通判，谏官弹劾他贪污盗窃官钱，魏滂于是被罢职;李弼孺管领营田事务，谏官弹劾他谄媚事奉朱動，弼孺也被罢免：这二人都是宗尹推荐的。
English: Wei Wei served as the judge of the East River, the eunuchs impeached him for corruption and theft of official money, and Wei Wei was removed from office; Li Wei led the camp affairs, the eunuchs impeached him for flattering Zhu Zhu, and Wei Wei was also removed: both of them were recommended by Zong Yin.

古文：台州守臣晁公为储峙丰备，论者以为扰民，宗尹阴佑之。
现代文：台州守臣晁公为日常储备丰富，议论的人认为这是扰民之举，宗尹暗中保护他。
English: Taizhou Governor Zong Yin is rich in daily reserves. Some people think this is a move to disturb the people, and Zong Yin is secretly protecting him.

古文：会公为妻受囚金事觉，上罢公为，宗尹不自安。
现代文：正逢公为的妻子收受囚犯的银子被发觉，皇上罢免了公为，宗尹自己也感到不安。
English: Just as it was discovered that the wife of a courtier had accepted money from a prisoner, the emperor dismissed the courtier, and Zong Yin himself also felt uneasy.

古文：时明堂覃恩，宗尹请举行讨论之事，上手札云： 朕不欲归过君父，敛怨士大夫。 始，宗尹建此议，秦桧力赞之，及见上意坚，反挤宗尹。
现代文：当时明堂典礼完成广施恩泽，宗尹请求举行评论功过之事，皇上亲笔书写札子说: 朕不想把过错归于君父，而遭士大夫怨恨。 开始时，宗尹提此建议，秦桧极力赞成他，等见到皇上态度坚决，就反过来排挤宗尹。
English: At that time, after the completion of the Ming Hall ceremony, Zong Yin asked the emperor to hold a review of the merits and demerits, and the emperor personally wrote a note saying: I do not want to attribute the fault to your father, but I was resented by the scholar. At the beginning, Zong Yin made this suggestion, Qin Yu strongly agreed with him, and when he saw the emperor's resolute attitude, he in turn ousted Zong Yin.

古文：上亦恶其与辛道宗兄弟往来，遂罢。
现代文：皇上也厌恶他与辛道宗兄弟来往，就罢免了他的相位。
English: The emperor also disliked his association with the brothers of Sindo-zong and removed him from his position.

古文：沈与求奏其罪状，落职，未几，命知温州。
现代文：沈与求上奏他的罪状，宗尹被罢官，不久，任命为温州知州。
English: Shen Yuxu pleaded guilty, Zong Yin was removed from office, and soon after, he was appointed to Wenzhou Zhizhou.

古文：退成天台，卒，年三十七。
现代文：后退居天台，去世，终年三十七岁。
English: He retreated to the rooftop and died at the age of 37.

古文：宗尹有才智，当北敌肆行之冲，毅然自任，建议分镇，以是得相位。
现代文：范宗尹有才干智慧，当金军横行的关头，他毅然以抗敌作为自己的职责，建议分割藩镇，由此得到宰相之位。
English: Fan Zongyin had talent and wisdom. At the critical moment when the Chinese army was rampant, he resolutely took resistance to the enemy as his duty, proposed to divide the towns of the domain, and thus obtained the position of prime minister.

古文：然其置帅多授剧盗，又无总率统属，且不遣援，不通饷，故诸镇守鲜能久存者。
现代文：然而他署任镇帅多授予大盗，又各藩镇之间没有统领隶属的关系，并且不派援兵，不通粮饷，所以各镇守很少能够保存下来。
English: However, his appointment as a town marshal was mostly awarded to big thieves, and there was no relationship of command and subordination between the provinces and towns, and he did not send reinforcements or distribute grain, so the town guards were rarely able to be preserved.

