古文：《易》之为书也，原始要终，以为质也。六爻相杂，唯其时物也。
现代文：《易经》这部书，是追原万事万物的始终，以成其根本的一本书，有六十四卦三百八十四爻，以包括万事万物的要素。
English: The "I Ching" is a book that traces the origin of all things and all things, and has become a fundamental book. It has sixty-four chapters and three hundred and eighty-four chapters, and includes the elements of all things and all things.

古文：其初难知，其上易知，本末也。
现代文：一卦分为六爻，虽六爻刚柔相杂不一，但只要观察爻位，处在适当的时位，和象征的事物，便可以决定吉凶了。
English: A poem is divided into six stanzas. Although the six stanzas are mixed, as long as you observe the position of the stanzas, the appropriate time, and the symbolic things, you can determine the fate.

古文：初辞拟之，卒成之终。
现代文：初爻是很难了解它的涵义的，因初爻为根本，卦的形体，尚未形成。
English: It is difficult to understand the meaning of Hatsushika, because it is the root, and the shape of Gua has not yet been formed.

古文：若夫杂物撰德，辩是与非，则非其中爻不备。
现代文：而上爻为卦末，全卦形体已经具备了，涵义自然毕露，容易领会了。
English: And the upper beak is the end of the gua, the whole gua shape is already available, the meaning is naturally revealed, and it is easy to understand.

古文：噫！亦要存亡吉凶，则居可知矣。
现代文：圣人在拟测而系初爻的文辞时较为困难。
English: It is more difficult for a sage to come up with the right words at the first attempt.

古文：知者观其彖辞，则思过半矣。二与四同功而异位，其善不同；二多誉，四多惧，近也。
现代文：等到初爻的文辞已定，则顺此立二三四五及上爻的文辞，顺爻位的次序，由下而上，全卦六爻的文辞就逐渐形成，到了上爻，不过是卦义的终结而已。
English: When the words of the first chapter have been determined, the words of the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters will follow, and the words of the sixth chapter will gradually form from the bottom up, and the words of the sixth chapter will gradually form. When it comes to the last chapter, it is just the end of the meaning of the first chapter.

古文：柔之为道，不利远者；其要无咎。其用柔中也。三与五同功而异位，三多凶，五多功，贵贱之等也。
现代文：六爻中的第三爻与第五爻，同属阳刚的部位，三与五互成一卦，它们的功用是相同的，而位置是不同的。三居下卦之极，在臣下之位，故多凶害。五居上卦之中，位君上之位，象征高明中正，众星拱照，故多功。这是爻位等次有尊卑贵贱之差异的关系。
English: In the Six Trigrams, the Third Trigram and the Fifth Trigram belong to the same masculine part, and the Three Trigrams and the Five Trigrams are mutually intertwined. Their functions are the same, but their positions are different. The Three Trigrams are at the extreme of the lower trigrams, in the position of the vassal, so they are more harmful. Among the five upper trigrams, the position of the ruler is at the top, symbolizing the high-level and the middle-level, and the stars are shining, so they are more meritorious. This is the relationship between the three positions and the difference between the high-level and the low

古文：其柔危，其刚胜耶？
现代文：岂是属于柔爻的，必定是危殆吗？属于阳刚的，一定优胜吗？
English: Shall he that is soft be destroyed, and he that is hard be delivered?

