古文：温子升，字鹏举，自云太原人，晋大将军峤之后也。
现代文：温子升，字鹏举，自称太原人，晋代大将军温峤的后代。
English: Wen Zi, surnamed Peng Jiu, claimed to be from Taiyuan and a descendant of the great general Wen Jiu.

古文：世居江左。
现代文：世代居住江左。
English: They have lived in the east of the Yangtze River for generations.

古文：祖恭之，刘义隆彭城王义康户曹，避难归国，家于济阴冤句，因为其郡县人焉。
现代文：祖恭之，刘义隆政权彭城王刘义康的户曹，避难归国，定居在济阴冤句，因而成为该郡县人。
English: Zu Gongzhi, a household servant of Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng under Liu Yilong's regime, took refuge and settled in Jiyin, thus becoming a citizen of the county.

古文：家世寒素。
现代文：家中世代寒微。
English: Generations of the family have passed away.

古文：父晖，兗州左将军府长史，行济阴郡事。
现代文：父温晖，兖州左将军府长史，行济阴郡事。
English: His father, Wen Xuan, was the governor of Zhangzhou Left General Prefecture, and was in charge of the affairs of Jiyin County.

古文：子升初受学于崔灵恩、刘兰，精勤，以夜继昼，昼夜不倦。
现代文：子升开始在崔灵恩、刘兰处受学，读书精勤，昼夜不倦。
English: Zi Sheng began to study under Cui Ling'en and Liu Lan. He read diligently and was tireless day and night.

古文：长乃博览百家，文章清婉。
现代文：长大后博览百家，为文清婉。
English: When I grew up, I read hundreds of books, and the articles were clear and elegant.

古文：为广阳王渊贱客，在马坊教诸奴子书。
现代文：作为广阳王元渊的下等宾客，在马坊教众奴子书。
English: As a low-class guest of Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan, he taught books to all the boys in Ma Fang.

古文：作《侯山祠堂碑文》，常景见而善之，故诣渊谢之。
现代文：写《侯山祠堂碑文》，常景见到后很赞赏，故到元渊处感谢。
English: When I wrote "Houshan Shrine Inscription," I was very impressed when I saw the scene, so I went to Yuan Yuan to thank him.

古文：景曰： 顷见温生。 
现代文：景说： 刚刚见到温生。 
English: Changjing said, "See Unzi immediately."

古文：渊怪问之，景曰： 温生是大才士。 
现代文：元渊很奇怪地问是怎么回事，景说： 温生是大才士。 
English: Genkyu asked very strangely what was going on, and Jing said: Atsuo is a great talent.

古文：渊由是稍知之。
现代文：元渊从此待温子升渐渐好起来。
English: From then on, Genbu waited for the temperature to rise and gradually got better.

古文：熙平初，中尉、东平王匡博召辞人，以充御史，同时射策者八百余人，子升与卢仲宣、孙搴等二十四人为高第。
现代文：熙平初年，中尉、东平王元匡广召善文辞之人，以充任御史，同时参加射策考试的有八百多人，温子升与卢仲宣、孙搴等二十四人中高第。
English: In the first year of Heiping, the lieutenant, Dongping Wangyuan Kuang, who was good at writing, was called to serve as a historian. At the same time, more than 800 people took part in the shooting test, including Wen Zisheng, Lu Zhongxuan, Sun Qi and other 24 middle and high school students.

古文：于时预选者争相引决，匡使子升当之，皆受屈而云。
现代文：当时参与选拔的人争相引决，元匡让温子升去应付他们，众人都受屈而去。
English: At that time, the people who participated in the selection scrambled to make a decision. Yuan Kuang let Wen Zi rise to deal with them, and everyone else gave in and left.

古文：搴谓人曰： 朝来靡旗乱辙者，皆子升逐北。 
现代文：孙搴对人说： 朝来吵吵嚷嚷的人群，都是子升把他们赶走了。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said to the man, "When those people came in the morning, they made a lot of noise, but they were all defeated by Wenzi Yao.

古文：遂补御史，时年二十二。
现代文：于是补御史职，当时只二十二岁。
English: At that time, Atsuko was twenty-two years old.

古文：台中文笔皆子升为之。
现代文：台中文笔都是温子升所为。
English: All the Taiwanese Chinese pens were made by Wen Zi Sheng.

古文：以忧去任，服阕，还为朝请。
现代文：后以家丧离任，丧期满后，又应朝请任原职。
English: After that, he left his post due to family bereavement, and after the period of bereavement expired, he was reappointed to his original post.

古文：后李神隽行荆州事，引兼录事参军。
现代文：后来李神隽行荆州事，引他兼录事参军。
English: Later, Li Shensheng went to Jingzhou and brought him to join the army.

古文：被征赴省，神隽表留不遗。
现代文：被征赴省，李神隽上表留他，不让他还朝。
English: Conscripted to go to the province, Li Shennong kept him at the table and did not allow him to return to the imperial court.

古文：吏部郎中李奖退表不许，曰： 昔伯瑜之不应留，王郎所以发叹，宜速遣赴，无踵彦云前失。 
现代文：吏部郎中李奖退表不许，说： 过去伯瑜不应留，王朗因此发出感叹，你今应迅速让他赴朝，不要步彦云前番过失。 
English: Wang Lang said, "In the past, Bo Yu should not have stayed. Therefore, Wang Lang lamented, you should quickly let him go to the DPRK now. Don't make the same mistake."

古文：于是还员。
现代文：于是温子升还省。
English: As a result, Wen Zi Sheng was sent back to the province.

古文：正光末，广阳王渊为东北道行台，召为郎中，军国文翰皆出其手。
现代文：正光末年，广阳王元渊任东北道行台，召温子升任郎中，军国文书都出自他的手笔。
English: At the end of Zheng Guang's life, Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan was appointed as the governor of the Northeastern Daoguang and promoted Wanzi to the position of junior vassal. All the military documents were written by him.

古文：于是才名转盛。
现代文：从此才名转盛。
English: Since then, the name has flourished.

古文：黄门郎徐纥受四方表启，答之敏速，于渊独沉思曰： 彼有温郎中，才藻可畏。 
现代文：黄门郎徐纥受四方表启，回答迅速，对于元渊独沉思说： 他有温郎中，才辞可畏。 
English: Huangmen Lang Xu Wei was inspired by the four sides and answered quickly. For Yuan Yuan Du, he said thoughtfully: He is a warm-hearted person, and his talent is formidable.

古文：高车破走，珍实盈满，子升取绢四十匹。
现代文：高车人战败逃散，珍宝到处都是，子升只取绢四十匹。
English: The Gaochuan people were defeated and fled. Treasures were everywhere. Zi Sheng only took forty yakitori.

古文：及渊为葛荣所害，子升亦见羁执。
现代文：等到元渊被葛荣所害，子升也被逮捕了。
English: When Yuan Yuan was victimized by Ge Rong, Zi Sheng was also arrested.

古文：荣下都督和洛兴与子升旧识，以数十骑潜送子升，得达冀州。
现代文：葛荣部下都督和洛兴与温子升是旧相识，送给温子升数十匹马，他到了冀州。
English: Ge Rong's subordinates, the governor and Luo Xing and Wen Zixuan, were old friends. They used dozens of cavalry to secretly send Wen Zixuan to escape and reach Jizhou.

古文：还京，李楷执其手曰： 卿今得免，足使夷甫惭德。 
现代文：还京后，李楷握着他的手说： 卿今免祸，足以使夷甫忏悔惭愧。 
English: After returning to Beijing, Li Kai took his hand and said: You have been spared now, which is enough to make Yi Fu feel ashamed.

古文：自是无复官情，闭门读书，厉精不已。
现代文：从此后，温子升没有了为官的愿望，闭门读书，厉精不已。
English: From then on, Wen Zisheng did not have the desire to become an official, he studied behind closed doors and worked hard.

古文：建义初，为南主客郎中，修起居注。
现代文：建义初年，任南主客郎中，修起居注。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was appointed as a guest tutor of Nanchu, and he began to study and live there.

古文：曾一日不直，上党王天穆时录尚书事，将加捶挞，子升遂逃遁。
现代文：他曾有一天没有值班，上党王元天穆当时任录尚书事，准备鞭打他，温子升便逃走了。
English: Once upon a time, when he was not on duty, the upper party king, Yuan Tianmu, was writing a book and preparing to whip Wen Zixuan with a whip, and Wen Zixuan ran away.

古文：天穆甚怒，奏人代之。
现代文：天穆很恼火，奏请别人代替他的位置。
English: Yuan Tianmu was so angry that he asked someone to write the commentary in place of Wen Zixiu.

古文：庄帝曰： 当世才子不过数人，岂容为此，便相放黜。 
现代文：庄帝说： 当世才子不过数人，哪能为这点小事，便加放逐。 
English: Zhuang Di said: There are only a few talented people in the world, but if they can do this small thing, they will be exiled.

古文：乃寝其奏。
现代文：于是只好作罢。
English: He put down the score of Yuan Tianmu.

古文：及天穆将讨邢杲，召子升同行，子升未敢应。
现代文：等到元天穆准备讨伐邢杲，召温子升同行，子升没敢答应。
English: When it came to the time when Tianmu was going to fight against Yao, he invited Zi Yao to accompany him. Wen Zi Yao did not dare to agree.

古文：天穆谓人曰： 吾欲收其才用，岂怀前忿也。
现代文：天穆对人说： 我想把他当个才来使用，哪里会怀前忿。
English: Tianmu said to people: I want to use him as a talent, where will I harbor resentment.

古文：今复不来，便须南走越，北走胡耳！ 
现代文：今天他又不来，除非他南逃越地，北走胡原就算了！ 
English: If he doesn't come now, he'll have to flee south to Yueguo and north to Hudi!

古文：子升不得已而见之。
现代文：温子升不得已只好去见他。
English: Wen Zi Sheng had no choice but to go to see him.

古文：加伏波将军，为行台郎中，天穆深加赏之。
现代文：加授伏波将军，任行台郎中，元天穆深深地赏识他。
English: In addition to General Fubo, he was deeply appreciated by Yuan Tianmu, who was a disciple of Gongtai.

古文：元颢入洛，天穆召子升问曰： 即欲向京师，为随我北渡？ 
现代文：元颢入洛阳，元天穆召温子升问： 是挥师向京城，还是随我北渡？ 
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, Yuan Tianmu summoned Wen Zi Sheng and asked: "Should I send my master to the capital, or should I follow him to the north?"

古文：对曰： 主上以虎牢失守，致此狼狈。
现代文：回答说： 主上因虎牢关失守，才导致今天的狼狈局面。
English: He replied: It is mainly due to the failure to keep a tight rein that has led to today's disastrous situation.

古文：元颢新入，人情未安，今往讨之，必有征无战。
现代文：元颢新入京城，人情未定，今天就去讨伐，必定是有征无战。
English: The Yuan Dynasty had just entered Luoyang, and the hearts of the people were not stable. Now they are going to fight, they will surely win, and they will succeed.

古文：王若克复京师，奉迎大驾，桓文之举也。
现代文：大王如若先克复京城，奉迎大驾，这就是齐桓、晋文之举了。
English: If the great king regains the capital first, he will receive a great welcome, which is the move of Qi Kuan and Jinwen.

古文：舍此北渡，窃为大王惜之。 
现代文：舍此而北渡，臣窃为大王惋惜。 
English: Now you are not willing to do this, but want to cross the Yellow River to the north. I really feel sorry for you in private.

古文：天穆善之而不能用。
现代文：元天穆觉得他说得好却不能按他说的去做。
English: Yuan Tianmu felt that he spoke well but could not do what he said.

古文：遣子升还洛，颢以为中书舍人。
现代文：派温子升还归洛阳，元颢命他为中书舍人。
English: He also returned to Luoyang, but was forced to give up his position as a scholar.

古文：庄帝还宫，为颢任使者多被废黜，而子升复为舍人。
现代文：庄帝还宫，以前被元颢任职的多被废黜，而温子升仍为舍人。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang returned to the imperial court and was reinstated, and most of the people appointed by Yuan Shao were dismissed, while Wen Zixuan was appointed as a subordinate.

古文：天穆每谓子升曰： 恨不用卿前计。 
现代文：元天穆每每对温子升说： 恨我不能依卿前计办事。 
English: Yuan Tianmu often said to Wen Zixuan: Unfortunately, I did not adopt your previous strategy.

古文：除正员郎，仍舍人。
现代文：温子升被除任正员郎，仍任舍人。
English: He was appointed to the post of vice-chairman, but he remained a layman.

古文：及帝杀尔朱荣也，子升预谋，当时赦诏，子升词也。
现代文：等到庄帝杀了尔朱荣，子升参预了谋划，当时的赦免诏书，就是子升的手笔。
English: When Emperor Zhuang killed Er Zhu Rong, Zi Sheng participated in the pre-planning. The amnesty edict at that time was the handwriting of Zi Sheng.

古文：荣入内，遇子升，把诏书问是何文书，子升颜色不变，曰 敕 。
现代文：尔朱荣入宫内，遇到温子升，拿着诏书问他是何诏书，子升颜色不变，说 敕 。
English: When Zhu Rong entered the palace, he met Wen Zi Rong and asked him what the imperial edict was. Zi Rong said that the color of the imperial edict did not change.

古文：荣不视之。
现代文：尔朱荣不看他。
English: Zhu Rong didn't even look at it.

古文：尔朱兆入洛，子升惧祸逃匿。
现代文：尔朱兆进入洛阳，温子升怕遇祸，逃走了。
English: Le Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang, and Wen Zi Sheng, fearing disaster, fled.

古文：永熙中，为侍读兼舍人、镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫，迁散骑常侍、中军大将军，后领本州大中正。
现代文：永熙年间，任侍读兼舍人、镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫，迁任散骑常侍、中军大将军，后领本州大中正。
English: During the Yongxi era, he served as an attendant and a layman, Zhenan general, Jin Ziguanglu doctor, transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, Chinese army general, and the leader of the Honshu University junior high school.

古文：萧衍使张皋写子升文笔，传于江外。
现代文：萧衍让张皋模仿温子升文笔，传文江外。
English: Xiao Yan asked Zhang Ye to imitate Wen Zi's calligraphy pen, and the calligraphy went beyond the river.

古文：衍称之曰： 曹植、陆机复生于北土。
现代文：萧衍称赞说： 曹植、陆机又生于北土。
English: Xiao Yan praised: Cao Zhi and Lu Ji were both born in the North.

古文：恨我辞人，数穷百六。 
现代文：恨我辞人，白白有一百零六人。 
English: One hundred and six people who hate me quit their jobs for nothing.

古文：阳夏太守傅标使吐谷浑，见其国主床头有书数卷，乃是子升文也。
现代文：阳夏太守傅标出使吐谷浑，看到其国主床头有书数卷，原来是温子升的文字。
English: Yang Xia Taishou Fu marked out the envoy, Tu Guhun, and saw that there were several volumes of books on his master's bedside, which turned out to be the writings of Wen Zi Sheng.

古文：济阴王晖业尝云： 江左文人，宋有颜延之、谢灵运，梁有沈约、任昉，我子升足以陵颜轹谢，含任吐沈。 
现代文：济阴王晖业曾经说： 江左文人，宋有颜延之、谢灵运，梁有沈约、任日方，我子升足以陵颜压谢，含任吐沈。 
English: Wang Yuanjunye of Jilin Province once said: The literati of the East Jiangsu Province, the Song Dynasty has Yan Yan, Xie Lingyun, the Liang Dynasty has Shen Ying, Ren Nipo, and our Dynasty has Wen Zi Ya, which is enough to surpass Yan, Xie, and swallow Ren, Shen.

古文：杨遵彦作《文德论》，以为古今辞人皆负才遗行，浇薄险忌，唯邢子才、王元景、温子升彬彬有德素。
现代文：杨遵彦作《文德论》，认为古今文人都负才遗行，行薄险忌，只有邢子才、王元景、温子升彬彬有德行。
English: Yang Zunyan wrote "On Literary Virtue" and believed that all literati from ancient times to the present were conceited, misbehaved, frivolous and despicable, and treacherous. Only Zizi, Wang Yuanjing, and Wen Ziqi were courteous and virtuous.

古文：齐文襄王引子升为大将军府谘议参军。
现代文：齐文襄王引荐子升为大将军府咨议参军。
English: Qibun Xiangwang recommended that his son be promoted to the rank of general and join the army.

古文：子升前为中书郎，常诣萧衍客馆受国书，自以不修容止。谓人曰： 诗章易作，逋峭难为。 
现代文：子升以前任中书郎，曾到萧衍客馆接受国书，自己不修举止，对人说： 诗章易作，行为不羁难以做到。 
English: Zisheng used to be a middle school teacher, and he once went to Xiao Yan Guest House to receive a national book. He did not behave himself, and said to people: It is easy to write poems, but it is difficult to behave freely.

古文：文襄馆客元仅曰： 诸大当贺。 
现代文：文襄馆客元仅说： 众人当贺。 
English: The proprietor of the Wenxiang Pavilion only said: "Congratulations to everyone.

古文：推子升合陈辞。
现代文：推子升合陈辞。
English: Fu Zi rose and made a speech.

古文：子升久忸怩，乃推陆操焉。
现代文：温子升总是忸忸怩怩，改推陆操。
English: It's been a hot topic for a long time, and many people recommend the floor exercise.

古文：及元仅、刘思逸、荀济等作乱，文襄疑子升知其谋。
现代文：等到元仅、刘思逸、荀济等作乱，文襄怀疑温子升参与了谋划。
English: When Yuan Shao, Liu Siyi, Qian Ji and others launched a rebellion, Emperor Wenxiang suspected that Wen Zixuan was involved in the conspiracy.

古文：方使之作献武王碑文，既成，乃饿诸晋阳狱，食弊襦而死，弃尸路隅，没其家口。
现代文：这时正派他写献武王碑文，写成后，很快就把他投到晋阳狱中，吃破棉絮而死，弃尸路边，抄没了他的家口。
English: At this time, he was assigned to write the inscription dedicated to King Wu. After he finished, he was soon thrown into Jinyang Prison, where he died from eating broken cotton wool, abandoned his body on the side of the road, and his home was ransacked.

古文：太尉长史宋游道收葬之，又为集其文笔为三十五卷。
现代文：太尉长史宋游道把他收葬了，又把他的文字收集结集为三十五卷。
English: Song Youdao, the captain of Shih, collected his body and buried it. He also collected his articles and compiled them into thirty-five volumes.

古文：子升外恬静，与物无竞，言有准的，不妄毁誉，而内深险。
现代文：温子升外貌恬静，与物无争，言而有物，不妄毁誉，而城府极深。
English: Wen Zi Sheng's appearance is calm, there is no dispute with things, words are things, do not destroy reputation, and the city is very deep.

古文：事故之际，好预其间，所以终致祸败。
现代文：每有大事，喜欢参预，所以最终还是祸及自己。
English: Whenever there is a big event, I like to participate in advance, so in the end it is my own fault.

古文：又撰《永安记》三卷。
现代文：又写有《永安记》三卷。
English: He also wrote three volumes of "The Record of Yong'an."

古文：无子。
现代文：无子嗣。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

