古文：六年春，王正月，公至自会。
现代文：流年春季，周历正月，成公回到鲁国。
English: In the spring of the previous year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Cheng Gong returned to Lu.

古文：二月辛巳，立武宫。
现代文：二月辛巳日，建立了武宫。
English: On February 23rd, the Imperial Palace was built.

古文：取鄟。
现代文：占取了鄟地。
English: They have occupied the land of the plough.

古文：卫孙良夫帅师侵宋。
现代文：卫国的孙良夫率领军队攻打宋国。
English: Sun Liangfu, the defender of the country, led the army to attack Song.

古文：夏六月，邾子来朝。
现代文：夏季六月，邾子来鲁国朝拜。
English: In the summer, in June, the sons of the nobility came to worship at the shrine.

古文：公孙婴齐如晋。
现代文：公孙婴齐去晋国。
English: Grandchildren and great-grandchildren all went to Jin.

古文：壬申，郑伯费卒。
现代文：壬申日，郑悼公去世。
English: On Jinshin Day, Zheng Yigong passed away.

古文：秋，仲孙蔑、叔孙侨如帅师侵宋。
现代文：秋季，仲孙蔑、叔孙侨率领军队攻打宋国。
English: In the autumn, Zhong Sun Zi and his uncle Sun Qiao led an army to attack Song.

古文：楚公子婴齐帅师伐郑。
现代文：楚国公子婴齐率领军队攻打郑国。
English: The prince of Chu, the infant Qi, led an army to attack Zheng.

古文：冬，季孙行父如晋。
现代文：冬季，季孙行父到晋国。
English: In winter, Ji Sun Xingfu went to Jin Province.

古文：晋栾书帅师救郑。
现代文：晋国的栾书率领军队援救郑国。
English: Jin's Zishu led an army to rescue Zheng.

古文：六年春，郑伯如晋拜成，子游相，授玉于东楹之东。
现代文：六年春季，郑悼公到晋国去拜谢讲和，子游辅助行礼，在东楹的东边举行授玉的仪式。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Zheng Yigong went to Jin to offer thanks for the peace, Ziyu assisted in the salute, and the ceremony of awarding the jade was held on the east side of Donglu.

古文：士贞伯曰： 郑伯其死乎？
现代文：士贞伯说： 郑悼公恐怕要死了！
English: Shizhenbo said, "I'm afraid Zheng Youjun is about to die!"

古文：自弃也已！
现代文：自己不尊重自己。
English: You don't respect yourself.

古文：视流而行速，不安其位，宜不能久。 
现代文：目光流动东张西望而走路又快，很不安地坐在自己的位子上，大概不能活多久了。 
English: His eyes darting from side to side, he walks fast and sits uneasily in his seat. He probably doesn't have long to live.

古文：二月，季文子以鞌之功立武宫，非礼也。
现代文：二月，鲁大夫季文子由于鞌地战役的武功建立了武宫，这是不合于礼的。
English: In February, because of his military exploits in the Battle of Badi, Dr. Lu Jiwenzi built a military palace, which is not proper.

古文：听于人以救其难，不可以立武。
现代文：听从别人的话来解救鲁国的灾难，不能标榜武功。
English: To listen to the words of others to save the disaster of Lu, can not flaunt martial arts.

古文：立武由己，非由人也。
现代文：建立武功应该在于自己，而不是由于别人的功劳。
English: The establishment of martial arts should be in oneself, not due to the merits of others.

古文：取鄟，言易也。
现代文：占领鄟地，《春秋》记载说事情完成得很容易。
English: Occupying Handan, "Spring and Autumn" records that things were accomplished easily.

古文：三月，晋伯宗、夏阳说，卫孙良夫、甯相、郑人，伊、雒之戎，陆浑，蛮氏侵宋，以其辞会也。
现代文：三月，晋国伯宗、夏阳说、卫国孙良夫、宁相、郑人、伊洛戎人、陆浑、蛮氏入侵宋国，这是由于宋国拒绝参加盟会。
English: In March, Bozong and Xiayang of Jin Province said that the invasion of Song Province by the patriots Sun Liangfu, Ning Xiang, Zheng Ren, Ilo Ren Ren, Lu Hun, and Man Shi was due to the refusal of Song Province to participate in the League.

古文：师于鍼，卫人不保。
现代文：军队驻扎在鍼地。卫国人不加防守。
English: Troops are stationed at the acupuncture points. The defenders are not on the defensive.

古文：说欲袭卫，曰： 虽不可入，多俘而归，有罪不及死。 
现代文：夏阳说要袭击卫国，说： 虽然不能进入，多抓一些俘虏回去，有罪也不至于死。 
English: Xia Yang said that he wanted to attack the defense of the country, saying: Although he could not enter, he would take more prisoners to go back, and the guilty would not die.

古文：伯宗曰： 不可。
现代文：伯宗说： 不行。
English: Hozon said, "No, we can't."

古文：卫唯信晋，故师在其郊而不设备。若袭之，是弃信也。
现代文：卫国因为相信晋国，所以军队驻扎在他们郊外而不加防守，如果袭击他们，这是丢弃信用。
English: Because the defenders believed in Jin, the troops were stationed on their outskirts without defense. If they were attacked, it would be a breach of trust.

古文：虽多卫俘，而晋无信，何以求诸侯？ 
现代文：虽然多抓了卫国俘虏，而晋国没有信义，用什么去获得诸侯的拥戴？ 
English: Although more prisoners were captured in the defense of the country, and Jin had no loyalty, what did he use to gain the support of the princes?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是就停止了行动。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：师还，卫人登陴。
现代文：军队回国，卫国人却登上了城墙。
English: The troops returned home, but the defenders climbed the city walls.

古文：晋人谋去故绛。诸大夫皆曰： 必居郇瑕氏之地，沃饶而近盬，国利君乐，不可失也。 
现代文：晋国人计划离开故都绛城，大夫们都说： 一定要住在郇瑕氏的地方，那里肥沃富饶而靠近盐池，国家有利，国君欢乐，不可以失掉它。 
English: When the people of Jin planned to leave the old city of Tudor, the doctors all said, "We must live in the place of Gongke, where it is fertile and rich and close to the salt pond, the country is beneficial, the sovereign is happy, and we must not lose it."

古文：韩献子将新中军，且为仆大夫。
现代文：韩献子正率领新中军，同时掌管宫中的事。
English: Han Xianzi is leading the new Chinese army, and is also in charge of the affairs of the palace.

古文：公揖而入，献子从公立于寝庭。谓献子曰： 何如？ 
现代文：晋景公朝罢向群臣作揖而后退入路门，韩献子跟着。晋景公站在正寝外边的庭院里，对韩献子说： 怎么样？ 
English: Jinjing stood in the courtyard outside the bed and said to Han Xianzi, "How are you?

古文：对曰： 不可。
现代文：韩献子回答说： 不行。
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：郇瑕氏土薄水浅，其恶易觏。
现代文：郇瑕氏土薄水浅，污秽肮脏的东西容易积聚。
English: The soil is thin and shallow, making it easy for filth and dirt to accumulate.

古文：易觏则民愁，民愁则垫隘，于是乎有沉溺重膇之疾。不如新田，土厚水深，居之不疾，有汾、浍以流其恶。且民从教，十世之利也。
现代文：污秽的东西容易积聚，百姓就发愁，百姓发愁，身体就瘦弱，在这种情况下就会有风湿脚肿的疾病，不如新田，土厚水深，住在那里不生疾病，有汾水、浍水以冲走污秽，而且百姓习惯服从，这是子孙十代的利益。
English: The filth easily accumulates, the people are worried, the people are worried, the body is thin and weak, in this case, there will be rheumatism and swollen feet. It is not as good as the new fields, the soil is thick and the water is deep, living there does not cause disease, there is watering and watering to wash away the filth, and the people are used to obeying, which is the benefit of the descendants for ten generations.

古文：夫山、泽、林、盬，国之宝也。
现代文：深山、大泽、森林、盐池，是国家的宝藏，国家富饶，百姓就骄傲放荡。
English: Deep mountains, Osawa, forests and salt ponds are national treasures, the country is rich, and the people are proud and debauched.

古文：国饶，则民骄佚；近宝，公室乃贫，不可谓乐。 
现代文：靠近宝藏，大家争利，国家财富就少。不能说是欢乐。 
English: Close to the treasure, everyone competes for profit, and the national wealth is less. It cannot be said to be joy.

古文：公说，从之。
现代文：晋景公很高兴，听从了他的话。
English: King Jinjing was very pleased and obeyed his words.

古文：夏四月丁丑，晋迁于新田。
现代文：夏季，四月十三日，晋国迁都到新田。
English: In the summer, on April 13th, the capital of Jin was moved to Nitta.

古文：六月，郑悼公卒。
现代文：六月，郑悼公去世。
English: In June, Zheng Yigong passed away.

古文：子叔声伯如晋。命伐宋。
现代文：子叔声伯去到晋国，晋国命令鲁国进攻宋国。
English: His uncle Shenbo went to Jin, and Jin ordered Lu to attack Song.

古文：秋，孟献子、叔孙宣伯侵宋，晋命也。
现代文：秋季，孟献子、叔孙宣伯率兵入侵宋国，奉了晋国的命令。
English: In the autumn, Meng Xianzi and his uncle Sun Xuanbo led an army to invade Song and received orders from Jin.

古文：楚子重伐郑，郑从晋故也。
现代文：楚国的子重进攻郑国，这是由于郑国跟随晋国的缘故。
English: It was because Zheng Guo followed Jin Guo that Chu Guo attacked Zheng Guo the second time.

古文：冬，季文子如晋，贺迁也。
现代文：冬季，季文子去到晋国，为了祝贺晋国迁都。
English: In the winter, Ji Wenzi went to Jin Province to congratulate it on its move to a new capital.

古文：晋栾书救郑，与楚师遇于绕角。
现代文：晋国栾书救援郑国，和楚军在绕角相遇。
English: Jin's Yishu rescued Zheng, and met the Chu army around the corner.

古文：楚师还，晋师遂侵蔡。
现代文：楚军回国，晋军就侵袭蔡国。
English: The Chu army returned home, and the Jin army invaded Cai.

古文：楚公子申、公子成以申、息之师救蔡，御诸桑隧。
现代文：楚国公子申、公子成带领申地、息地的军队去救援蔡国，在桑隧抵抗晋军。
English: The princes of Chu, Shen and Cheng, led the armies of Shen and their homelands to rescue Cai, and resisted the Jin army at Sangchun.

古文：赵同、赵括欲战，请于武子，武子将许之。
现代文：赵同、赵括想要出战，向栾武子请求，栾武子打算答应。
English: Zhaotong and Zhao Kuo wanted to go to war, and asked Zhai Wuzi for permission. Zhai Wuzi agreed.

古文：知庄子、范文子、韩献子谏曰： 不可。
现代文：知庄子、范文子、韩献子劝谏说： 不行。
English: Zhouzhuang Zi, Fan Wenzi and Han Xianzi all urged him to say no.

古文：吾来救郑，楚师去我，吾遂至于此，是迁戮也。
现代文：我们来救援郑国，楚军离开我们，我们就到了这里，这是把杀戮转移到别人头上。
English: We came to rescue Zheng Guo, the Chu army left us, and we ended up here. This is transferring the killing to others.

古文：戮而不已，又怒楚师，战必不克。
现代文：杀戮而不停止，又激怒楚军，战争一定不能得胜。
English: The killing will not stop, and the Chu army will be enraged. The war must not be won.

古文：虽克，不令。
现代文：即便战胜，也不是好事。
English: Even if you win, it's not a good thing.

古文：成师以出，而败楚之二县，何荣之有焉？
现代文：整顿军队出国，仅仅打败楚国两个县的军队，有什么光荣呢？
English: What glory is there in going abroad to rectify the army and only defeating the army of two counties in Chu?

古文：若不能败，为辱已甚，不如还也。 
现代文：如果不打败他们，受到的耻辱就太过分了。不如回去。 
English: If we don't beat them, the humiliation will be too much. Let's go back.

古文：乃遂还。
现代文：于是晋军就回去了。
English: As a result, the Jin army withdrew.

古文：于是，军帅之欲战者众，或谓栾武子曰： 圣人与众同欲，是以济事。
现代文：当时军官中要作战的很多，有人对栾武子说： 圣人的愿望和大众相同，所以能成功。
English: At that time, there were many officers who had to fight, and someone said to Zou Wu Zi: The wishes of a sage are the same as the general public, so they can succeed.

古文：子盍从众？
现代文：您何不听从大家的意见？
English: Why don't you listen to everyone?

古文：子为大政，将酌于民者也。
现代文：您是执政大臣，应当斟酌百姓的意见。
English: You are the ruling minister, you should consider the opinions of the people.

古文：子之佐十一人，其不欲战者，三人而已。
现代文：您的辅佐者十一个人，不想作战的仅仅三个人。
English: You have eleven helpers, and only three don't want to fight.

古文：欲战者可谓众矣。
现代文：想要作战的人可以说是大多数。
English: Those who want to fight can be said to be the majority.

古文：《商书》曰： 三人占，从二人。 
现代文：《商书》说： 三个人占卜，听从两个人的。 
English: "Commercial book" said: Three people divination, listen to two people.

古文：众故也。 
现代文：因为是多数的缘故。 
English: Because of the number of them.

古文：武子曰： 善钧，从众。夫善，众之主也。
现代文：栾武子说： 同样是好事，才服从多数，好事是大众的主张。
English: Zou Wu Zi said: It is also a good thing to obey the majority, a good thing is the opinion of the public.

古文：三卿为主，可谓众矣。
现代文：现在有三位大臣主张，可以说是大众了。
English: Now that three ministers are advocating it, it can be said to be popular.

古文：从之，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：依从他们，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Isn't it okay to follow them?

