古文：江夏郡王道宗字承范。
现代文：江夏郡王李道宗字承范，是毕王李璋之孙，东平王李韶之子。
English: King Li Daozong of Jiangxia County was a descendant of Emperor Fan. He was the grandson of King Bi and the son of King Dongping.

古文：高祖即位，授左千牛备身、略阳郡公。
现代文：高祖即皇帝位之后，授职任左千牛备身，封为略阳郡公。
English: After Gao Zu, i.e. the emperor's enthronement, he was given the post of Zuo Qian Niu Bei, and was given the title of Liaoyang County.

古文：裴寂与刘武周战度索原，寂败，贼逼河东，道宗年十七，从秦王讨贼。
现代文：裴寂与刘武周大战于度索原，裴寂战败之后，贼寇逼近河东城，道宗时年十七，随同秦王世民讨伐贼寇。
English: Peizhang and Liu Wuzhou fought a great battle at Duxuoyuan. After Peizhang's defeat, the bandits approached Hedong City. At the age of seventeen, Daozong accompanied Qin Wang Shimin to fight the bandits.

古文：王登玉壁城以望，谓道宗曰： 贼怙众欲战，尔计谓何？ 
现代文：秦王登上玉壁城观望贼军，对道宗说： 贼人恃众想邀我决战，你认为该怎么办？ 
English: Qin Wang went up to the Jade Walled City to watch the bandits, and said to Daozong, "The bandits and the public want to invite me to a decisive battle. What do you think I should do?

古文：对曰： 武周席胜，剡然锋未可当，正宜以计摧之。
现代文：他回答说： 武周乘胜，其兵锋势不可挡，正好应当用计加以摧败。
English: He replied, "Wu Zhou is victorious, his troops are unstoppable, and it is just right to use tactics to destroy them.

古文：且乌合之众惮持久，若坚壁以顿其锐，须食尽气老，可不战禽也。 
现代文：况且乌合之众不能持久，如能坚守壁垒以挫折其锐气，待其粮尽力屈，可以不战而擒获其众。 
English: Moreover, the rabble cannot last. If you can stand firm against the barriers to frustrate their spirit, and wait for their grain to yield, you can capture them without a fight.

古文：王曰： 而意与我合。 
现代文：秦王说： 你的意图与我相合。 
English: King Qin said, "Your intentions are in line with mine.

古文：既而贼粮匮，夜引去，追战灭之。
现代文：后来贼人果因粮尽连夜退走，唐军追至介州，一战而胜。
English: Later, the bandits retreated after running out of food overnight, and the Tang army chased them to Jiezhou and won the battle.

古文：出为灵州总管。
现代文：后来出任灵州总管。
English: He later served as the general manager of Lingzhou.

古文：时梁师都弟洛仁连突厥兵数万傅於垒，道宗闭城守，伺隙出战，破之。
现代文：时遇梁师都之弟洛仁引突厥兵马数万逼城下寨，道宗闭城固守，乘隙出战，大破其众。
English: At that time, Liang Shidu's younger brother, Luo Ren, led tens of thousands of Turkish soldiers and horses to force the city to retreat. Tao Zong closed the city and took advantage of the gap to go to war, greatly defeating his people.

古文：高祖谓裴寂曰： 昔魏任城王彰有却敌功，道宗似之。 
现代文：高祖对裴寂说： 从前魏时任城王曹彰有退敌之功，道宗与之相似。 
English: Gao Zu said to Pei Zh: Cao Zhang, the king of the city in the former Wei Dynasty, had the merit of defeating the enemy. Taoism is similar to it.

古文：因封任城王。
现代文：因而封为任城王。
English: As a result, he was given the title of acting king of the city.

古文：始，突厥郁射设入居五原，道宗逐出之，震耀威武，斥地赢千里。
现代文：起初，突厥郁射设入居于五原旧地，道宗将他们赶走，振耀威武，拓地一千余里。
English: At first, the Turkic Yushas settled in the old land of Wuhuan, but Taoism drove them away, displaying its might and conquering more than a thousand miles of land.

古文：贞观元年，召拜鸿胪卿，迁大理。
现代文：贞观元年，召还京师拜为鸿胪卿，接着改任大理卿。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he was called back to Beijing to serve as a disciple of Hongyu, and then he was appointed as a disciple of Dali.

古文：太宗方经略突厥，复授灵州都督。
现代文：那时太宗正在谋攻突厥，再次授任他为灵州都督。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong was plotting to invade Turkey and reappointed him as the governor of Lingzhou.

古文：三年，为大同道行军总管，助李靖破虏，亲执颉利可汗，赐封六百户，还为刑部尚书。
现代文：贞观三年，任大同道行军总管，协助李靖击破虏寇，亲自率兵执获颉利可汗，赐予实封六百户，还京就任为刑部尚书。
English: For three years, Zhenguan served as the general manager of the march of Datong Road, assisted Li Jing in defeating the Krupko, personally led the soldiers to capture the Qili Khan, granted 600 households with real estate, and returned to Beijing as the head of the criminal department.

古文：吐谷浑寇边，靖出昆丘道，诏与侯君集为靖副。
现代文：吐谷浑进犯边疆，李靖出任为昆丘道行军大总管，下诏李道宗与侯君集充任李靖的副手。
English: Tuyuhun invaded the frontier, Li Jing served as the general manager of the march of Kunqiu Road, and Li Daozong and Hou Junji were appointed as Li Jing's deputy.

古文：贼闻兵且至，走嶂山数千里。
现代文：贼寇闻知大军将至，退入嶂山数千里远。
English: The bandit, knowing that a large army was approaching, retreated thousands of miles into Lushan.

古文：诸将欲止，独道宗请穷追，靖曰： 善。 
现代文：诸将打算停止追击。唯有道宗主张穷追，李靖说： 对。 
English: The generals planned to stop the pursuit. Only Daozong advocated a relentless pursuit, and Li Jing said, "That's right."

古文：君集未从。
现代文：而侯君集不同意。
English: But Hou Junxi did not agree.

古文：道宗以单师进，去大军十日，及之。
现代文：道宗率偏师进击，离开大军十天，方才追上。
English: Dao Zong led the division to attack, leaving the army ten days to catch up.

古文：吐谷浑拒险殊死斗，道宗阴引千骑超山乘其后，贼惊，遂大溃。
现代文：吐谷浑据险拼死苦战，道宗暗引千骑翻山袭击其后，贼人惊恐，于是大败而逃。
English: After a desperate and hard-fought battle in Tugu, Taoism secretly led thousands of horsemen to attack the mountain, the thieves were terrified, so they were defeated and fled.

古文：徙封江夏，授鄂州刺史。
现代文：道宗后来徙封为江夏郡王，就任为鄂州刺史。
English: Later, Daozong was given the title of the King of Jiangxia County and was appointed as the Governor of Ezhou.

古文：久之，坐贪赃，帝闻，怒曰： 朕提四海之富，士马若林，如使辙迹环天下，游观不度，采绝域之玩、海表之珍，顾不得邪？
现代文：久后，坐贪赃枉法之罪，太宗闻知，发怒说： 我拥有四海之富，士马如林，如使车辙之迹周遍天下，游观而不止息，采取绝域之奇玩，海外之珍馐，难道不能得到吗？
English: After a long time, taking the sin of corruption, Taizong heard and learned, and said angrily: I have the wealth of the four seas, the horses are like forests, such as making the tracks around the world, touring without stopping, taking the wonders of the wilderness, the treasures of overseas, can't I get it?

古文：特以劳民自乐，不为也。
现代文：只因劳累民众而自我作乐，因而不为。
English: It is only because of the fatigue of the people that they make fun of themselves, so they do not do it.

古文：人心无艺，当以谊制之。
现代文：人心不知满足，应当以义加以节制。
English: The human heart knows no contentment, and should be tempered with righteousness.

古文：今道宗已王，禀赐多而贪不止，顾不鄙哉！ 
现代文：如今道宗已封王爵，禀赐甚多而贪求不止，岂不令人鄙弃！ 
English: Now that Daozong has been given the title of prince, he has been given a lot of gifts and is greedy for more. Isn't he despicable?

古文：乃免官，削封户，以王就第。
现代文：于是罢免官职，削其封户，以郡王身份归家。
English: As a result, he was removed from his official position, his household was sealed, and he returned home as the county king.

古文：明年，召为茂州都督，未行，拜晋州刺史。
现代文：第二年，召为茂州都督，还未出行，就改任为晋州刺史。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the governor of Maozhou, and before he left, he was appointed as the historian of Jinzhou.

古文：迁礼部尚书。
现代文：不久迁任为礼部尚书。
English: He was soon transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：侯君集破高昌还，颇怨望。
现代文：侯君集击破高昌返回后，心中颇为怨恨不满。
English: After Hou Junji defeated Gaochang and returned, he was quite resentful and dissatisfied.

古文：道宗尝从容奏言： 君集智小言大，且为戎首。 
现代文：道宗曾从容上奏说： 君集智小而言大，必为祸首。 
English: The Taoist once calmly said: "If you are small in wisdom, but great in strength, you will be the chief of evils."

古文：帝问所以知必反者，对曰： 见其忌而矜功，耻为房、李下，官尚书，常郁郁不平。 
现代文：太宗问为什么说他必会谋反，道宗回答说： 见其忌嫉而矜其功勋，耻其位在房玄龄与李靖之下，官为尚书，而常怀郁郁不平之气。 
English: Taizong asked why he said he would rebel, and Daozong replied, "I see his jealousy and despise his merits. I am ashamed of his position under Fang Xuanling and Li Jing. He is a scholar, but he is always depressed.

古文：帝曰： 君集诚有功，材无不堪，朕宁惜爵位邪？
现代文：太宗说： 君集确实有功，也有才干，我怎会吝惜爵位呢？
English: Taizong said, "Kunzhu indeed has merits and talents, how can I begrudge him a title?

古文：弟未及耳。
现代文：只是还未轮到他。
English: It's just not his turn yet.

古文：不宜轻亿度，使自猜危。 
现代文：你不应该随意猜测，让人猜疑自危。 
English: You shouldn't hazard a guess and make people suspicious.

古文：既而君集反，帝笑曰： 如公素揣。 
现代文：不久君集谋反事发，太宗笑着说： 正如您所推测的那样。 
English: Not long after, Taizong said with a smile, "It's just as you suspected.

古文：帝将讨高丽，先遣营州都督张俭轻骑度辽规形势，俭畏，不敢深入。
现代文：太宗将要征讨高丽，先派营州都督张俭率轻骑渡过辽河侦察形势，张俭畏敌，不敢深入其境。
English: Emperor Taizong was going to invade Korea. He first sent Zhang Jianru, the governor of Yingzhou, to ride across the Liao River to investigate the situation. Zhang Jianru was afraid of the enemy and did not dare to go deep into the territory.

古文：道宗请以百骑往，帝许之，约其还，曰： 臣请二十日行，留十日览观山川，得还见天子。 
现代文：道宗奏请率百骑前往，太宗表示同意，与他商讨返回的日期，他说： 臣请用二十天奔走于路，留驻十天观览山川形势，然后还见天子。 
English: Emperor Taizong agreed to discuss with him the date of his return, saying: "Your Majesty, please spend twenty days on the road, stay for ten days to observe the situation of the mountains and rivers, and then see the Son of Heaven."

古文：因秣马束兵，旁南山入贼地，相易险，度营阵便处。
现代文：随即喂饱战马备好行装，沿南山深入贼地，观察险易地势，测度扎营布阵便利之处。
English: Then the war horses were fed and prepared for the journey, along the Nanshan deep into the thieves, observing the dangerous terrain, measuring the convenience of setting up camp.

古文：将还，会高丽兵断其路，更走间道，谒帝如期。
现代文：将要返回时，恰遇高丽军队绝断归路，道宗另走小路，按期谒见太宗。
English: When he was about to return, he happened to meet the Koryo army on his way back, and Daozong took a different path and met with Taizong on schedule.

古文：帝曰： 贲、育之勇何以过！ 
现代文：太宗说： 孟贲、夏育之勇何以过此！ 
English: Taizong said, "Meng Xuan and Xia Yuxin, how dare you do this!

古文：赐金五十斤，绢千匹。
现代文：赐予黄金五十斤，绢帛一千匹。
English: He gave fifty catties of gold and a thousand camels.

古文：乃诏与李勣为前锋，济辽，拔盖牟城。
现代文：随后下诏道宗与李责力为前锋，渡过辽水，攻拔盖牟志城。
English: Subsequently, Daozong Daozong and Li Rongli were the forwards, crossing Liao Shui and attacking Gaimushi City.

古文：会贼救至，道宗与总管张君乂领骑裁四千，虏十倍，皆欲浚沟保险须帝至，道宗曰： 贼遽来，其兵必疲，我一鼓摧之，固矣。
现代文：时逢贼寇救兵大至，道宗与总管张君耣从骑仅为四千，虏寇十倍于我，众人都欲深沟守险以待太宗大军到来，道宗说： 贼人赴急远来，其兵必定疲惫，我军定能一鼓而摧。
English: At a time when the number of thieves and robbers rescuing the soldiers was so large, Tao Zong and the general manager Zhang Junya were only four thousand from the cavalry, and the robbers were ten times more than me. Everyone wanted to dig a deep ditch to guard the danger to wait for the arrival of Taizong's army. Tao Zong said: If the thieves go far away, their soldiers must be tired, and our army will surely be destroyed.

古文：昔耿弇不以贼遗君父，吾为前军，当清道迎乘舆，尚何待？ 
现代文：从前耿不把贼寇留待君父扫除，我等既为前军，就应当扫清道路以迎大驾，还等待什么呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, Geng did not leave the bandits for his father to sweep away. Since we are the vanguard, we should clear the road to meet the great driver. What are we waiting for?

古文：勣善之。
现代文：李责力赞同其议。
English: Li Rongli agreed with his suggestion.

古文：选壮骑数十，突进贼营，左右出入，勣合击，大破之。
现代文：便精选壮士数十骑直逼贼营，横冲直撞，李责力挥军合击，终于大破其众。
English: Then, dozens of well-chosen strong men rode straight to chase the thief camp, rampage, Li Li Li waved the army to fight, and finally broke through the crowd.

古文：帝至，咨美，赐奴婢四十口。
现代文：太宗到达后，深为赞赏，赐予他奴婢四十人。
English: When Emperor Taizong arrived, he was so impressed that he gave him forty slaves.

古文：乃筑拒闉，攻安市城，闉毁傅城，道宗失部分，反为贼据。
现代文：后来筑构土山攻击安市城，土山崩毁于城下，道宗指挥部署不当，反为贼寇占据。
English: Later, they built a mound to attack the city of An, but the mound collapsed under the city. Daozong's command was improperly deployed, and it was occupied by bandits.

古文：帝斩其果毅傅伏爱，道宗跣行请罪，帝曰： 汉武帝杀王恢，不如秦穆公赦孟明。 
现代文：太宗为此斩杀果毅傅伏爱，道宗赤足前行请罪，太宗说： 汉武帝杀掉王恢，不如秦穆公赦免孟明视。 
English: Emperor Taizong killed Guo Yi Fu Fu Ai for this, and Emperor Daozong went barefoot to plead guilty. Emperor Taizong said, "If Emperor Han Wu killed Wang Huai, it would be better if Qin Mu Gong pardoned Meng Mingxi."

古文：遂置不问。
现代文：便置之不问。
English: So I left it at that.

古文：在阵伤足，帝亲加砭治，赐御膳。
现代文：道宗在阵伤足，太宗亲自为他扎针疗治，并赐以御膳。
English: Daozong was in the throes of a foot injury, and Taizong personally treated him with needles and gave him a meal.

古文：还，以疾辞剧就闲，改太常卿。
现代文：返京后，因伤病辞去剧职就任闲职，因而改任太常卿。
English: After returning to Beijing, due to injury and illness, he resigned from the post of actor to take up a sinecure, and was thus reappointed as Tai Changqing.

古文：高宗永徽初，房遗爱以反诛，长孙无忌、褚遂良与道宗有宿怨，诬与遗爱善，流象州，道病薨，年五十四。
现代文：高宗永徽初年，房遗爱因谋反罪被诛死，长孙无忌、褚遂良因与道宗有宿怨，诬奏道宗与遗爱友善，因而被流放象州，结果在道上病逝，时年五十四岁。
English: In the first year of Gaozong Yonghui, Fang Youai was strangled to death for plotting treason. The eldest grandson Mujie and Zou Suiliang were exiled to Xiangzhou because they had a long-standing grudge against the Taoist sect and falsely claimed that the Taoist sect was friendly to Youai. As a result, he died of illness on the road, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：无忌等得罪，诏复爵邑。
现代文：无忌等人得罪失势之后，下诏恢复其爵位封邑。
English: After the loss of power due to the sin of Muji and others, the next edict restored his peerage and fiefdom.

古文：道宗晚好学，接士大夫，不倨於贵。
现代文：道宗晚年颇为好学，接近贤士大夫，不以势贵骄人。
English: In his later years, Daozong was quite studious, close to the wise doctors, and not arrogant.

古文：国初宗室，唯道宗、孝恭为最贤。
现代文：建国初期宗室之中，唯有李道宗、李孝恭最为贤明。
English: Among the lineage families in the early days of the founding of the country, only Li Daozong and Li Xiaogong were the wisest.

古文：子景恒，封卢国公，相州刺史。
现代文：其子景恒，受封为卢国公，任官至相州刺史。
English: His son, Jingheng, was given the title of the Prince of Lu, and was appointed to the post of the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：道宗弟道兴，武德初，爵广宁郡王，以属疏降封县公。
现代文：道宗之弟道兴，武德初年被封为广宁郡王，后因疏属降封为县公。
English: The younger brother of Tao Zong, Tao Xing, Wu De was named the king of Guangning County in the first year, and later he was demoted to county magistrate due to negligence.

古文：宋金刚陷浍州，稽胡多叛，诏琛镇隰州，政宽简，为夷夏爱便。薨，子俭袭王，例降为公。
现代文：贞观九年，出任交州都督，认为安南是瘴疠之乡，担心不能长寿，颇为忧心忡忡，结果死在任上，赠为交州都督。
English: Zhenguan served as the governor of Jiaozhou for nine years. He believed that Annan was the hometown of the dragonfly. He was worried that he would not live long. He was quite worried. As a result, he died in office and was presented as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：河间元王孝恭，少沈敏，有识量。
现代文：河间元王李孝恭，小时沉着机敏，有见识气量。
English: The former king of Kawama, Li Xiaogong, was calm, quick-witted and insightful.

古文：高祖已定京师，诏拜山南招尉大使，徇巴蜀，下三十馀州。
现代文：高祖既已平定京师之后，下诏拜他为山南道招慰大使，领兵出巡巴蜀地区，连下三十余州。
English: After Gaozu had already subdued the Beijing Division, he was appointed as the consolation ambassador of Shannan Province and led troops to patrol the Bashu region, which included more than 30 provinces.

古文：进击硃粲，破之，俘其众，诸将曰： 粲徒食人，挚贼也，请坑之。 
现代文：随后进击朱粲。大破其阵，俘获其众，诸将都说： 朱粲之徒杀食活人，是凶恶之贼，请将他们坑杀。 
English: Then they attacked Zhu Xi. They broke through his army and captured his people, and all the generals said: Zhu Xi's people kill and eat living people, they are vicious thieves, please kill them.

古文：孝恭曰： 不然，今列城皆吾寇，若获之则杀，后渠有降者乎？ 
现代文：孝恭说： 不能这样。如今列城尽在寇境，如获敌则杀，以后还有谁归降呢？ 
English: Hyo-kyung said, "That can't be right. Right now, all the cities are in the Koryo region. If they are captured, they will be killed. Who will surrender in the future?"

古文：悉纵之。
现代文：全都赦罪释放。
English: All were pardoned and released.

古文：繇是腾檄所至辄下。
现代文：由此缘故，传檄所至之处，相继归附。
English: For this reason, the places where the sermons were preached were successively annexed.

古文：明年，拜信州总管，承制得拜假。
现代文：第二年，就任信州总管，承受制命可以权益授官。
English: In the second year, he assumed the post of Shinshu governor, and was given the right to receive orders.

古文：当是时，萧铣据江陵，孝恭数进策图铣，帝嘉纳。
现代文：当此之时，萧铣据有江陵，孝恭多次献策图攻萧铣，高祖采纳其议。
English: At this time, Xiao Yao had the control of Jiangling, and Xiaogong repeatedly proposed a plan to attack Xiao Yao, and Gao Zu accepted his proposal.

古文：进王赵郡，以信州为夔州。
现代文：后晋爵为赵郡王，改信州名为夔州。
English: Later, he was crowned King of Zhao County and changed his name to Zhangzhou.

古文：乃大治舟舰，肄水战。
现代文：随即大造船舰，教习水战。
English: Immediately followed by a large shipbuilding ship, teaching naval warfare.

古文：会李靖使江南，孝恭倚其谋，遂图江陵，尽召巴蜀首领子弟收用之，外示引擢而内实质也。
现代文：恰遇李靖出使江南，孝恭依仗其计谋，准备攻取江陵，尽召巴蜀地区首领子弟收录任用，对外表示引荐擢用，而内心本是将他们作为人质。
English: When Li Jing sent an envoy to the south of the Yangtze River, Xiao Qiong followed his strategy and prepared to capture Jiangling. He tried his best to recruit and appoint the sons and daughters of the leaders of the Bashu region, and said to the outside world that he would recommend them for promotion, but in his heart he was holding them as hostages.

古文：俄进荆湘道总管，统水陆十二军发夷陵，破铣二镇，纵战舰放江中。
现代文：不久任职为荆湘道行军总管，统率水陆十二支军队从夷陵出发，击破萧铣二镇之兵，解开战舰放于江中。
English: He was soon appointed as the general manager of the march of the Jinghong Road, and led the twelve land and sea armies from Yiling, defeated the soldiers of Xiaoqi Second Town, and untied the warships and placed them in the river.

古文：诸将曰： 得舟当济吾用，弃之反资贼，奈何？ 
现代文：诸将说： 所获船舰应当为我军所用，弃船就会资助贼寇，这样做是为了什么呢？ 
English: The generals said, "The captured ships should be used by our army. Abandoning the ships will help the bandits. What is the purpose of doing this?"

古文：孝恭曰： 铣之境，南际岭，左薄洞庭，地险士众，若城未拔而援至，我且有内外忧，舟虽多，何所用之？
现代文：孝恭说： 萧铣的辖境，南至岭表，东达洞庭，地势险要战士众多，如今萧铣沿江镇守将士众多，如城未攻下而援兵到来，我军就会内外交困，舟船虽多，又有何用？
English: Xiao Yao's territory, from the south to Lingbiao, and from the east to Dongting, has a large number of soldiers. Nowadays, there are many soldiers guarding Xiao Yao's towns along the river. If the city is not conquered and reinforcements arrive, our army will be in internal and external difficulties. Although there are many boats, what is the use?

古文：今铣濒江镇戍，见舻舠蔽江下，必谓铣已败，不即进兵，觇候往返，以引救期，则吾既拔江陵矣。 
现代文：如今萧铣已败，不会马上进兵，往返打听情况，就可延缓其救兵，那么我军就能顺利地攻下江陵了。 
English: Now that Xiao Yao has been defeated, he will not immediately march into the army. If he goes back and forth to inquire about the situation, he can delay his rescue, then our army will be able to successfully capture Jiangling.

古文：已而救兵到巴陵，见船，疑不进。
现代文：不久萧铣救兵到达巴陵，见空船，果然迟疑不进。
English: Soon after, Xiao Yao's rescuers arrived in Baling. Seeing the empty boat, they hesitated to go in.

古文：铣内外阻绝，遂降。
现代文：萧铣内外阻绝，只好投降。
English: Xiao Yao resisted both inside and outside, and had no choice but to surrender.

古文：帝悦，迁荆州大总管，诏图破铣状以进。
现代文：高祖大喜，任命他为荆州大总管，下诏画工图其击破萧铣之状以呈进朝廷。
English: Gao Zu was overjoyed and appointed him as the general manager of Jingzhou. The following is a painting of Gao Zu breaking Xiao Yao's status and presenting it to the imperial court.

古文：孝恭治荆，为置屯田，立铜冶，百姓利之。
现代文：孝恭治理荆州有方，大力开置屯田，创设铜冶，以便利百姓。
English: Jingzhou has been governed with filial piety, vigorously opening up farmlands and creating copper smelters in order to facilitate the people.

古文：迁襄州道行台左仆射。
现代文：不久迁任襄州道行台左仆射。
English: He was soon transferred to Xiangzhou Daogangdai Zuopu Jie.

古文：时岭表未平，乃分遣使者，绥辑安慰，其款附者四十有九州，朝廷号令畅南海矣。
现代文：那时岭表地区还未平定，他便分别派遣使者抚慰，其投诚归附者有四十九州，使朝廷号令畅通于南海之滨。
English: At that time, the Ling table region had not yet been pacified, so he sent emissaries to comfort them separately. Forty-nine states were loyal to him, so that the imperial order could flow smoothly along the coast of the South China Sea.

古文：未几，辅公祏反，寇寿阳，诏孝恭为行军元帅讨之。
现代文：不久，辅公礻石起兵造反，进犯寿阳，下诏孝恭为行军元帅予以讨伐。
English: Soon after, Fu Gong Zhi Shi rebelled and attacked Shouyang, and Xiao Qiong became the marching marshal to crush the rebellion.

古文：引兵趋九江，李靖、李勣〗、黄君汉、张镇州、卢祖尚皆禀节度。
现代文：孝恭率兵前往九江，李靖、李责力、黄君汉、张镇州、卢祖尚全都受他指挥。
English: Xiao Hong led his troops to Jiujiang, and Li Jing, Li Rongli, Huang Junhan, Zhang Zhenzhou, and Lu Zu Shang were all under his command.

古文：将发，大飨士，杯水变为血，坐皆失色，孝恭自如，徐曰： 祸福无基，唯所召尔！
现代文：出发之前，大飨将士，杯中之水忽变为血，在座者脸色尽变，孝恭举止自如，从容不迫地开导说： 祸福无门，惟人所招！
English: Prior to departure, the water in the cup suddenly turned into blood, and the faces of those present changed completely. They behaved in a filial and respectful manner, and calmly explained, "There is no such thing as misfortune or good fortune, except for those who invite it!"

古文：顾我不负於物，无重诸君忧。
现代文：我没做什么负心事，诸位不必为我如此忧心。
English: I haven't done anything wrong, you don't need to be so worried about me.

古文：公祏祸恶贯盈，今仗威灵以问罪，杯中血，乃贼臣授首之祥乎！ 
现代文：公礻石恶贯满盈，如今依仗朝廷威灵以问罪致讨，杯中之血，乃是贼臣授首的征兆而已！ 
English: Public criticism is full of evil, now relying on the imperial court's will to punish and punish, the blood in the cup is just a sign of the head of the thief!

古文：尽饮罢，众心为安。
现代文：一口饮尽，众心遂安。
English: One sip and all is well.

古文：公祏将冯惠亮等拒嶮邀战，孝恭坚壁不出，遣奇兵绝饷道，贼饥，夜薄营，孝恭卧不动。
现代文：公礻石部将冯惠亮等人守险邀战，孝恭坚守壁垒而不出战，派出奇兵断绝贼寇粮道，贼众渐饥，夜逼其营挑战，孝恭坚卧不动。
English: The Ministry of Public Security sent Feng Huiliang and others to guard the danger and invite the battle, and the filial piety to firmly guard the barrier without going to war, and sent a miracle soldier to cut off the food supply of the thieves, and the thieves were starving, and they forced their camp to challenge at night, and the filial piety remained motionless.

古文：明日，使羸兵扣贼垒挑之，祖尚选精骑阵以待。
现代文：第二天，派出羸弱兵卒前往贼营挑战，令卢祖尚挑选精骑严阵以待。
English: The next day, weak soldiers were sent to challenge the bandit camp, and Lu Zushan was forced to choose a strong cavalry to wait.

古文：俄而兵却，贼追北且嚣，遇祖尚军，薄战，遂大败。
现代文：不一会儿羸兵退却，贼寇追击败卒甚为嚣张，与祖尚之军相遇，交战一场，大败其众。
English: After a while, the soldiers retreated, and the thieves and robbers were very arrogant in their pursuit of the defeated soldiers. They met with the army of the ancestor Shang, engaged in a battle, and defeated the crowd.

古文：惠亮退保梁山，孝恭乘胜破其别镇，贼赴水死者数千计。
现代文：惠亮退守梁山，孝恭乘胜攻破梁山别镇，贼众赴水死者数以千计。
English: Huiliang retreated to defend Liangshan, Xiaogong took advantage of the victory to break through Liangshan Bie Town, and thousands of thieves went to the water to die.

古文：公祏穷，弃丹杨走，骑穷追，生禽之，江南平。
现代文：公礻石穷蹙，放弃丹阳逃走，孝恭派出骑兵穷追，生擒公礻石，江南终被平定。
English: Gongjunshi fled, abandoning Danyang, while Xiaogong sent cavalry to chase after him. Gongjunshi was captured alive, and the southern part of the Yangtze River was finally pacified.

古文：玺书褒美，赐甲第一区、女乐二部、奴婢七百口、宝玩不赀。
现代文：玺书嘉奖其功，赐予他甲第一所、女乐二部、奴婢七百人、珍宝奇玩不计其数。
English: An imperial edict commended his achievements, awarding him the first place in A, the second place in women's music, seven hundred slaves, and countless treasures.

古文：进授东南道行台左仆射。
现代文：进职为东南道行台左仆射。
English: He started his career as a south-eastern road gangway left-hander.

古文：行台废，更为扬州大都督。
现代文：行台撤消后，改称为扬州大都督。
English: After the cancellation of the parade, he was renamed Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：孝恭再破巨贼，北自淮，东包江，度岭而南，尽统之。
现代文：孝恭两次击破大寇，北起淮河，东包长江，越岭而南，尽归他统管。
English: Xiaogong defeated the great robbers twice, from the north to the Huai River, from the east to the Yangtze River, and from the mountains to the south, he was in charge of everything.

古文：欲以威重夸远俗，乃筑第石头城，陈庐徼自卫。
现代文：因而想以威名夸示远俗，便修筑宅第于石头城中，设立哨所往来巡察以护卫自己。
English: Therefore, he wanted to show off his nobility, so he built a house in the middle of the stone city and set up a sentry post to protect himself.

古文：或诬其反，召还，颇为宪司镌诘，既无状，赦为宗正卿。
现代文：有人诬告他谋反，因此被召还京师，颇受有关部门追究盘问，既无证据，便被赦免为宗正卿。
English: Some people falsely accused him of plotting a rebellion, so he was recalled to the Beijing division, and was investigated and interrogated by the relevant departments. Since there was no evidence, he was pardoned as Zong Zhengqing.

古文：赐实封千二百户。
现代文：赐予实封一千二百户。
English: It was given to 1,200 households.

古文：历凉州都督、晋州刺史。
现代文：历任凉州都督、晋州刺史。
English: Successive governors of Liangzhou and Jinzhou.

古文：贞观初，为礼部尚书，改王河间。
现代文：贞观初年，迁任礼部尚书，改封为河间郡王。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he was transferred to the ceremonial department of Shangshu and changed his title to King of Kawama County.

古文：性奢豪，后房歌舞伎百馀，然宽恕退让，无矜伐色，太宗用是亲重之，宗室莫比也。
现代文：孝恭性情奢侈豪爽，后房歌姬舞女达一百余人，然而待人宽恕谦让，无骄矜夸耀之态，太宗因此缘故亲近并尊重他，宗室中无人可与他相比。
English: His filial piety was extravagant and generous. There were more than a hundred geisha dancers in the back room. However, he was forgiving and humble, without arrogance or boasting. Taizong was close to him and respected him for this reason. No one in his family could be compared to him.

古文：尝谓人曰： 吾所居颇壮丽，非吾心也。
现代文：孝恭曾对人说： 我居住的宅舍颇为壮丽，不合我的心意。
English: He once said to someone, "The house I live in is quite magnificent, but it doesn't suit my heart.

古文：当别营一区，令粗足充事而已。
现代文：应当另建一所，使之粗略能住就行。
English: Another one should be built so that they can live there for a while.

古文：吾殁后，子也才，易以守；不才，不为他人所利。 
现代文：我去世之后，儿子有才，守此容易；假如不才，也不会遭他人盘算。 
English: After my death, if my son is talented, it will be easy to keep it; if he is not talented, he will not be plotted by others.

古文：十四年，中饮暴薨，年五十。
现代文：贞观十四年，饮食后突然辞世，时年五十岁。
English: In the fourteenth year of Zhenguan, after eating and drinking, he died suddenly at the age of fifty.

古文：帝哭之恸，赠司空、扬州都督及谥，陪葬献陵。
现代文：太宗哭得很伤心，赠予司空、扬州都督以及谥号，陪葬于献陵。
English: Taizong cried very sad, gave him the title of Siku, Yangzhou governor and the posthumous name, and was buried with him in the mausoleum.

古文：始，隋亡，盗贼遍天下，皆太宗身自讨定，谋臣骁帅并隶麾下，无特将专勋者，惟孝恭独有方面功以自见云。
现代文：起初，隋亡之后，盗贼遍布天下，都是太宗亲自率军讨伐平定，其谋臣猛将全都隶属麾下，没有单独率军建立功勋者，惟独孝恭建有方面之功以表现其雄才。
English: At first, after the death of the Sui Dynasty, thieves were all over the world. They were all subdued by the army led by Emperor Taizong himself. His advisers, the fierce generals, were all subordinate to him. There was no individual who led the army to establish meritorious service, but only the filial piety built some aspects of merit to show his prowess.

古文：子崇义、晦。
现代文：其子有李崇义、李晦。
English: His sons were Li Chongyi and Li Hui.

古文：崇义嗣王，降封谯国公，历蒲、同二州刺史、益州都督府长史，有威名。终宗正卿。晦，乾封中为营州都督，以治状闻，玺书劳赐。
现代文：淮安靖王李神通，年少时轻慢而尚侠义。
English: Li Shengtong, the king of Huai'an and Jing, was a modest and chivalrous man when he was young.

古文：迁右金吾将军，检校雍州长史，摧擿奸伏无留隐，吏下畏之。
现代文：隋朝大业末年居于长安。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, Daye lived in Chang'an.

古文：高宗将幸洛，诏晦居守，谓曰： 关中事一以属公，然法令牵制，不可以成政，法令外苟可以利人者行之，毋须以闻。 
现代文：恰遇高祖起兵于太原，隋官搜捕其族人，神通便逃亡到户县终南山中，与其豪杰英雄史万宝、裴责力、柳崇礼等人举兵响应太原，与司竹贼帅何潘仁相约连结，进与平阳公主所领兵马汇合，攻下户县。自称为关中道行军总管，任史万宝为副手，裴责力为长史，柳崇礼为司马，令狐德为记室。随同平定京师，任职为宗正卿，掌管宿卫兵马。
English: It so happened that Gao Zu raised an army in Taiyuan, the Sui officials were searching for his people, and Shentong fled to the end of the South Mountain in Hucheng. He and his heroic heroes, Shi Wanbao, Pei Rongli, Liu Chongli and others raised an army to respond to Taiyuan, and made an appointment with He Panren, the leader of the Sizhu bandits, to go and join the soldiers and horses led by Princess Pingyang and capture Hucheng. He called himself the general manager of the march on the Guanzhong Road, appointed Shi Wanbao as deputy, Pei Rongli as long history, Liu Chongli as

古文：故晦治有异绩。
现代文：受封为永康郡王，不久即徙封为淮安王。
English: He was given the title of Yongkang County King, and soon after he was given the title of Huai'an King.

古文：武德初，拜山东安抚大使，黄门侍郎崔干副之，进击宇文化及於魏。
现代文：武德初年，任职为山东安抚大使，命黄门侍郎崔干为副手，进击宇文化及于魏州。
English: In the first year of Wu De, he served as the ambassador of Shandong pacification, appointed the Yellow Gate waiter Cui Gan as his deputy, and entered the world of culture and in Weizhou.

古文：化及败走聊城，神通追北，贼粮尽愿降，神通不肯受，干请纳之，神通曰： 师久暴露，今贼食尽，克不旦暮，正当破之，以玉帛酬战力。
现代文：化及败退于聊城时，贼众粮尽愿降，神通不予接受，崔干请求纳降，神通说： 大军长久暴露于外，如今贼寇粮尽，早晚必败，应当力战破敌，夺其玉帛以奖赏战士。
English: When they were defeated and retreated to Liaocheng, the thieves were willing to surrender, but the gods would not accept it. Cui Gan asked for a surrender, and the gods said: The great army has been exposed to the outside world for a long time, and now the thieves have run out of food. Sooner or later, they will be defeated. They should fight hard to defeat the enemy and capture their jade shields to reward the soldiers.

古文：若降，吾何所藉手？ 
现代文：如果受降，我们又能到手什么呢？ 
English: If we surrender, what will we get?

古文：干曰： 窦建德危至，而化及未平，我转侧两贼间，势必危，王又贪其玉帛，败不日。 
现代文：崔干说： 窦建德将至，而宇文化及未平，我军辗转于两贼之间，其势必危，大王又贪图其玉帛财物，必会败亡的啊！ 
English: Cui Gan said: Dou Jiande is coming, and the world culture is not leveled, our army is caught between two thieves, it is bound to be in danger, the great king is greedy for his jade and wealth, it will surely be defeated!

古文：神通怒，囚干军中。
现代文：神通大怒，囚禁崔干于军中。
English: Shentong was furious and imprisoned Cui Gan in the army.

古文：会士及自济北馈军，化及复振。
现代文：不久宇文士及从济北饣鬼送粮草，因此化及军势复振。
English: Soon after, U-Wen-Shi and from Jeonbuk, Hao-Gi sent grain and grass, and as a result, the army was revitalized.

古文：神通进兵薄其垒，贝州刺史赵君德先登扳堞，神通忌其功，止军不进。
现代文：神通进兵逼近其城，贝州刺史赵君德率先扳堞登城，神通妒忌其功，因而止军不进。
English: Shintong's marching troops approached his city, and the besiegers of Baizhou, Zhao Junde, took the lead in storming the city. Shintong was jealous of his achievement, so he stopped the army from advancing.

古文：君德怒，诟而还，城复坚。
现代文：君德发怒，大骂而还，城中再次坚守。
English: Qin De became angry, cursed loudly and retaliated, and the city once again held firm.

古文：神通遣兵走魏州取攻具，为莘人所乘，引却。
现代文：神通分遣兵卒前往魏州搬取攻城器械，又被莘地武装人员打败，便率军撤走。
English: Shentong dispatched soldiers to Weizhou to pick up the siege equipment, but they were defeated by the local armed forces and withdrew with their army.

古文：后二日，建德拔聊城，势遂张，山东州县靡然归之。
现代文：两天以后，建德攻拔聊城，军势愈益强大，山东州县靡然向风，尽归建德。
English: Two days later, Jiande attacked Liaocheng, and the army became more and more powerful. Shandong Prefecture was swept by the wind and returned to Jiande.

古文：神通麾下多亡，乃退保黎阳，依李世勣，俄为建德所虏。
现代文：神通部下亡失甚众，便退至黎阳，依附李世责力，不久都被建德俘虏。
English: Shengtong's subordinates suffered great losses, so they retreated to Liyang and relied on Li Shili, and were soon captured by Jiande.

古文：后与同安公主自贼归。
现代文：后来神通与同安公主一道从贼中归朝。
English: Later, Shintoku and Princess Tongan returned to the imperial court from among the thieves.

古文：及建德灭，复授河北行台左仆射。
现代文：建德败亡以后，再次就任为河北行台左仆射。
English: After the defeat of Jiande, he was once again appointed as the leader of Hebei Xingtai Zuopu.

古文：从平刘黑闼，迁左武卫大将军。
现代文：随从平定刘黑闼，迁任左武卫大将军。
English: He followed the pacification of Liu Heyao and was transferred to the post of General Zuo Wei.

古文：薨，赠司空。
现代文：逝世后，赠予司空之职。
English: After his death, he was given the posthumous title of Sikyong.

古文：神通十一子，得王者七人，道彦、孝詧、孝同、孝慈、孝友、孝节、孝义，后皆降王。
现代文：神通有子十一人，其中七人得到王爵，即道彦、孝察、孝同、孝慈、孝友、孝节、孝义，后来全都随例降其王号。
English: Shintoku had eleven sons, seven of whom were given the title of prince, namely, Michihiko, Takasaka, Takatomo, Takachi, Takatomo, Takaseki, Takayoshi, Takaseki, Takayoshi, and later all of them were given the title of king.

古文：孝逸爵公。
现代文：孝逸得封公爵。
English: Takahide was made a duke.

古文：孝锐不得封，有子齐物显。
现代文：孝锐未得封爵，而有子李齐物位至通显。
English: Xia Rui did not receive a knighthood, while his son Li Qi rose to prominence.

古文：胶东郡王道彦，幼孝谨。
现代文：胶东郡王李道彦，幼时孝顺恭谨。
English: The king of Jiaodong County, Li Daohan, was filial and respectful when he was young.

古文：初，神通避吏於鄠，被疾山谷间，累旬食尽，道彦羸服丐人间，或采野实以进；神通未食，不敢先，即有所分，辞以饱，乃藏弃以待。
现代文：起初，神通逃避隋官搜捕，在户县山谷中生病，数十日后食物罄尽，道彦换上破旧衣服乞食于民间，或是采摘野果进奉其父。神通未食时，不敢先尝；其父分以食物，他常以已饱推辞，而加以收藏以防困乏。
English: At first, Shintō evaded the search and capture of the Sui officials, fell ill in the valley of Huchien, and ran out of food after dozens of days. Michihiko changed into shabby clothes and begged from the people, or picked wild fruits to serve his father. When Shintō did not eat, he did not dare to taste it first; his father gave him food, he often said he was full, and collected it to prevent fatigue.

古文：高祖初，封义兴郡公，例得王。
现代文：高祖初年，受封为义兴郡公，后来随例进封为胶东王。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, he was appointed as the governor of Yixing County. Later, he was also appointed as the King of Jiaodong.

古文：贞观初，为相州都督，徙岷州，以父丧解。
现代文：贞观初年，任职为相州都督，后转任岷州都督。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he served as the governor of Xiangzhou, and later he was transferred to the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：荷土就坟，躬莳松柏，偃庐柴毁，虽亲友不复识。
现代文：父丧解职后，负土筑坟，亲手栽植松柏，偃卧墓庐之侧，容貌哀毁，虽至亲好友不复相识。
English: After his father's death and dismissal, he dug a grave, planted conifers with his own hands, and lay on the side of the grave, his face saddened, although his relatives and friends no longer knew each other.

古文：太宗嗟叹，敕侍中王珪临谕。
现代文：太宗闻知感叹不已，敕令侍中王王圭前往劝谕开导。
English: Emperor Taizong was so impressed by Wang Zhi that he ordered Wang Gui, the chief steward, to go to persuade and enlighten him.

古文：服除，复拜岷州都督。
现代文：服孝期满后，再次任职为岷州都督。
English: After the expiration of the period of filial piety, he served again as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：间遣入党项谕国威灵，区落降。从李靖击吐谷浑，诏道彦为赤水道总管。
现代文：其间派人前往党项诸部，宣谕国家威灵，其部落尽降后随李靖出击吐谷浑，下诏道彦为赤水道总管。
English: In the meantime, he sent people to the various ministries of the party to proclaim the country's glory, and after his tribe abdicated, he followed Li Jing to attack Tuyugun, and Daohan became the chief administrator of the Equator.

古文：帝厚以利啖党项，使为乡导，其酋拓拔赤辞诣靖自言： 隋击吐谷浑，我资其军，而隋无信，反见仇剽。
现代文：太宗厚赐党项，使之担任向导，其酋长拓拔赤辞前来拜见李靖说： 隋人进击吐谷浑，我们资助其军需，而隋人不讲信用，反遭他们仇视劫掠。
English: Emperor Taizong generously gave the party an item to serve as a guide, and its chief, Tuoba Chijie, came to visit Li Jing and said: The Sui people invaded Tuyugun, we funded their military supplies, but the Sui people did not trust, but they were robbed by their hatred.

古文：今将军若无它，我愿资粮，将复如隋乎？ 
现代文：如今将军若无他意，我愿资助粮草，不会再像隋军那样行事吧？ 
English: Now, if the general has no other intention, I am willing to subsidize grain and grass, and will no longer act like the Sui Army, right?

古文：诸将与歃血遣之。
现代文：诸将都与拓拔赤辞一道歃血为盟，而后送他回去。
English: All generals were blood-bought allies with Tuoba Chieh, and sent him back.

古文：道彦至阔水，见无备，因掠其牛羊，诸羌怨，即引兵障野狐峡，道彦不得进，为赤辞所乘，军大败，死者数万，退保松州。
现代文：道彦行至阔水，见拓拔无备，乘机劫掠其牛羊，诸羌怨恨，随即屯兵阻塞野狐峡，道彦不能前进，遭到拓拔赤辞攻击，其军大败，死者数万，只好退守松州。
English: When Daehiko went to the broad water, he saw that Tuoba was unprepared and took the opportunity to plunder his cattle and sheep, which aroused the resentment of the nobles. Then, the troops blocked the Wild Fox Gorge. Daehiko could not advance and was attacked by Tuoba Chijie. His army was defeated and tens of thousands died, so he had to retreat to Songzhou.

古文：诏减死，谪戍边。
现代文：朝廷下诏减其死罪，谪戍边庭。
English: The imperial court commuted his death sentence, and his trial began.

古文：久之，召为妫州都督。
现代文：久后召为妫州都督。
English: After a long time, he was called to be the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：卒，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：去世后，赠予礼部尚书。
English: After that, he passed away, and the bestowal of an official title became a ceremonial post.

古文：初，武德五年同封者，孝詧为高密王，孝同淄川王，孝慈广平王，孝友河间王，孝节清河王，孝义胶西王。
现代文：起初，武德五年与道彦一道受封的兄弟中，孝察为高密王，孝同为淄川王，孝慈为广平王，孝友为河间王，孝节为清河王，孝义为胶西王。
English: At the beginning, among the brothers who received the title together with Wudehiko in the fifth year of Wudehiko's reign, Xiaochao was the king of Gaomi, Xiaodong was the king of Shichuan, Xiaoji was the king of Guangping, Xiaotomo was the king of Kawama, Xiaojie was the king of Qinghe, and Xiaoyi was the king of Jiaoxi.

古文：於是唐始兴，务广支蕃镇天下，故从昆弟子自胜衣以上，皆爵郡王。
现代文：那时唐朝初建，务求广封支族以镇抚天下，因此同族兄弟之子自孩童已上全都封为郡王。
English: At that time, it was built at the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, in order to encourage the Guangfu branch to govern the world, so the sons of brothers from the same tribe were all crowned as county kings from childhood.

古文：太宗即位，举属籍问大臣曰： 盖王宗子於天下，可乎？ 
现代文：太宗即位之后，拿着宗室属籍问大臣说： 尽封同宗子弟为王于天下，行吗？ 
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he asked the minister, "Would it be all right to make your son the king of the world?"

古文：封德彝曰： 汉所封，惟帝子若亲昆弟；其属远，非大功不王。
现代文：封德彝说： 汉代所封，仅为皇帝之子及亲兄弟；其属疏远者，非立大功者不得封王。
English: Feng Dejun said: In the Han Dynasty, only the emperor's sons and brothers were given titles; those who were estranged were not allowed to become kings unless they had made great contributions.

古文：如周郇滕、汉贾泽尚不得茆土，所以别亲疏也。
现代文：以至于周代的郇、滕，汉代的贾、泽尚且不得封王，就是为了分别亲疏的缘故。
English: So much so that the Zhou dynasty's Zou and Teng, and the Han dynasty's Jia and Ze were not allowed to be crowned king, just because they were distantly related.

古文：先朝一切封之，爵命崇而力役多，以天下为私奉，非所以示至公。 
现代文：先朝一律封王，爵命尊崇而力役繁多，以天下财力私自奉养，非所以显示至公之义。 
English: In the previous dynasty, all emperors were crowned without exception. Their titles were highly respected, and they were given a wide variety of positions. They were supported by the world's financial resources, and this is why they demonstrated the righteousness of justice.

古文：帝曰： 朕君天下以安百姓，不容劳百姓以养己之亲。 
现代文：太宗说： 我治理天下是为了安定百姓，怎能劳累民众以供养自己的亲属呢。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: I govern the world in order to stabilize the people. How can I make the people work hard to support their relatives?

古文：於是疏属王者皆降为公，唯尝有功者不降。
现代文：由此疏属封王之人全都降爵为公，惟独曾建大功者不降爵。
English: As a result, all those who are not related to the crowned king are publicly knighted, except for those who have made great contributions.

古文：故道彦等并降封公。
现代文：因此道彦等人全都降封为公。
English: As a result, Michihiko and the others were all demoted from nobility to commoners.

古文：孝逸，少好学，颇属文。始封梁郡公。高宗时，四迁益州大都督府长史。
现代文：崇义承袭王爵，后来随例降封为谯国公，历任蒲州、同州刺史，益州都督府长史，很有威名，去世于宗正卿任上。
English: Chongyi inherited the title of prince, and later was reduced to the title of prince of Shandong Province, successively serving as the governor of Puzhou, the governor of the same province, and the governor of Yizhou. He was very prestigious, and died in the post of Zongzhengqing.

古文：武后擅国，入为左卫将军，亲遇之。
现代文：李晦在乾封年间就任为营州都督，以善治政事著闻，玺书予以慰劳，并给予奖赏。
English: Li Yu was appointed as the governor of Yingzhou during the Qianfeng era. He was known for his good governance and government affairs. He was commended and rewarded for his efforts.

古文：徐敬业称兵，以孝逸为左玉钤卫大将军、扬州行军大总管，帅师南讨。至淮，而敬业已攻润州，遣弟敬猷壁淮阴，伪将韦超据都梁山以拒孝逸，超众凭险完屯。
现代文：后迁任右金吾将军，兼领检校雍州长史，纠发奸恶毫不留情，属吏畏服。高宗将要出巡洛阳，下诏李晦留守京师，对他说： 关中之事，全都委付给你，然而法令牵制手足，不足以成善政，法令之外，如有利于百姓的措施可权益施行，不必奏闻朝廷。 以故李晦治政颇有成绩。
English: Gao Zong was about to go on patrol in Luoyang, when Li Yu stayed behind in Beijing, and said to him: "All the affairs of Guanzhong are entrusted to you. However, laws and regulations are not enough to achieve good governance. In addition to laws and regulations, if measures that are beneficial to the people can be implemented, they do not need to be reported to the imperial court. Therefore, Li Yu has a lot of achievements in governance.

古文：孝逸会诸将议曰： 贼今负山，攻则士无所用力，骑不得骋，寇救死，伤夷必众。
现代文：武后临朝后，迁任秋官尚书。
English: After Empress Wu's accession to the throne, he was transferred to the position of the autumn official, Shangshu.

古文：不如偏旅缀之，全军趋扬州，势不数日可破。 
现代文：去世后，赠予幽州都督。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Yuzhou Governor.

古文：支度使薛克构曰： 超虽据险，然兵少，若置小敌不击，无以示威；披众以守，则战有阙。
现代文：当初，李晦居宅内建起楼台，下临沿街店铺，其店主曾等候李晦，对他说： 平民百姓虽为礼所不及，然而家有男女老少，不愿外人窥见，如今将辞别您而搬走。 
English: At first, Li Yu built a platform inside his house and opened a store along the street. The store owner had been waiting for Li Yu and said to him: Although ordinary people are too polite, however, there are men, women and children at home who do not want to be seen by outsiders. Now they will say goodbye to you and move away.

古文：舍之则后忧，不如击之。
现代文：李晦大惊，赶紧拆毁其楼。
English: Li Ying was shocked and rushed to demolish his building.

古文：若克超，淮阴自震，淮阴破，楚诸县开门候官军矣。由是以趋江都，逆首可取。 
现代文：其子李荣，改奉吴王李恪的祭祀。庐江郡王李瑗字德圭，是济南郡王李哲之子。
English: His son, Li Rong, was converted to the cult of King Li Ke of Wu. Wang Lijun of Minjiang County, also known as De Gui, was the son of King Li Zhe of Jinan County.

古文：孝逸从之，登山急击超，杀数百人，薄暝解，超夜走。
现代文：武德年间，援例封王，累迁至山南东道行台右仆射。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu De, he was crowned the king of supporting cases and moved to Shannan, the host province of Taizhou.

古文：进击敬猷淮阴，破之。
现代文：与河间王李孝恭合讨萧铣，未立功勋。
English: He shared the post of Xiao Wei with Li Xiaogong, the king of Kawama, but did not receive any merit.

古文：敬业回军下阿溪，孝逸引兵直度，敬业大败，遂拔扬州。以功进镇军大将军，徙封吴国公，威名稜然。
现代文：改任为幽州都督。李瑗平素懦弱，朝廷怕他不称其职，便命右领军将军王君廓辅他而行。君廓曾为盗贼，其勇力过人，李瑗倚仗他镇守其地，便答应他结为亲家，以布心腹之托。
English: He was reappointed as the governor of Yuzhou. Li Yuping was cowardly, and the court was afraid that he would not be up to the job, so he ordered the right leader of the army, Wang Juncao, to accompany him. Juncao had been a thief, and his bravery was beyond compare. Li Yuping relied on him to guard his land, and he agreed to marry him as a family member, with the support of cloth and heart.

古文：武承嗣等忌之，以谗下迁施州刺史。
现代文：那时隐太子将有密谋，因而厚结李瑗。
English: At that time, the Hidden Prince will have a conspiracy, and thus thickly tie Li Xuan.

古文：又使人腾恶语闻上，武后信之，以尝有功，贷死，流儋州，薨。景云初，赠金州大都督。
现代文：太子死后，太宗派遣通事舍人崔敦礼召李瑗入京，李瑗害怕事有不测。而君廓内怀险恶用心，想用计陷害李瑗而成己功，便对李瑗说： 京师事变未知结果，大王是国家宗亲，受命守边，拥兵十万，怎能跟从一使召还呢？
English: After the death of the crown prince, Emperor Taizong sent the mediator and meddler, Cui Dun, to summon Li Qiye to Beijing. Li Qiye was afraid of something happening. However, the prince harbored a sinister intention and wanted to use a trick to frame Li Qiye and achieve his goal. So he said to Li Qiye: The outcome of the events in Beijing is unknown. The great king is the father of the country. He has been ordered to guard the border and has 100,000 soldiers. How can he return after being summoned by an envoy?

古文：孝同曾孙国贞。国贞父广业，为剑州长史。
现代文：况且赵郡王前已交付狱吏，如今太子与齐王又遭此难，大王观此形势能自我保全吗？ 随即泪下。李瑗信其言，说： 那就将性命托付与你了。 
English: Moreover, the king of Zhao County had already been handed over to the prison guards, and now the prince and the king of Qi were once again in this predicament. Looking at this situation, could the great king protect himself? He immediately burst into tears. Li Yan believed his words and said: Then I will entrust my life to you.

古文：国贞刚鲠，有吏才。
现代文：便囚禁敦礼，部署兵马，征召北燕州刺史王诜商议机务。
English: He then imprisoned Dunli, deployed soldiers and horses, and conscripted the North Yanzhou Governor Wang Qian to discuss the matter.

古文：乾元中，由长安令迁河南尹。史思明寇东都，李光弼壁河阳，国贞率官吏西走陕，数月，召为京兆尹。
现代文：兵曹参军王利涉对李瑗说： 大王如今无诏而擅自发兵，这是造反啊。应当权益应变，以结众心。
English: Wang Lizhu, a petty officer who joined the army, said to Li Shao: The great king is now sending troops without an edict, which is a rebellion. Rights and interests should be adjusted to unite the people.

古文：上元初，拜剑南节度使，召为殿中监，以户部尚书持节朔方、镇西、北庭、兴平、陈郑节度行营兵马及河中节度都统处置使，治於绛。
现代文：如果诸州刺史召之不来，将如何保全自己？ 
English: If states do not heed the call of history, how will they preserve themselves?

古文：寻加晋、绛、慈、隰、沁等州观察处置使。既至，粮乏，而所储陈腐，民贫不忍遽敛，上书以闻。
现代文：李瑗说： 那该如何是好？ 利涉回答说： 山东豪杰曾为窦建德所用，如今失职而与编户平民一样，这些人惟恐天下不乱，如大旱之时盼望时雨。
English: Li Wei said, "Then what should we do?" Li Zhanzhong replied, "Shandong Gaojie was once used by Dou Jiande, but now he has failed in his duty, and he is just like the common people who set up households. These people are afraid that the world will not be disordered, just like when there is a drought, they hope for rain.

古文：而军中讠雚谤，突将王振乘众怨绐曰： 具畚锸以待役事。 
现代文：大王如能派遣使者，恢复他们的旧职，随其所在招募兵马，诸州如有不从，则立即予以诛讨，那么河北之地就可唾手而得。
English: If the great king can send emissaries to resume their old posts, recruit soldiers and horses according to their location, and if the states do not comply, they will be immediately discussed, then the land of Hebei can be easily obtained.

古文：众皆怒，夜烧牙门。左右奔告，请避之，国贞曰： 吾被命为将，其可弃城乎？ 固请，乃逃狱中。
现代文：然后派遣王诜对外联络突厥，道经太原南下蒲、绛地区，大王整顿车驾西入关中，两军合势，不出旬月天下可定。 
English: Then, he dispatched Wang Qian to contact the Turks, passing through the Taiyuan south to the Pu and Jiu regions. The great king rectified the situation by driving west into the customs, and the two armies joined forces. The country could be determined within a month.

古文：振引众劫取之，置食其前曰： 食是而役其力，可乎？ 国贞曰： 与尔等方讨贼，何事役为？
现代文：李瑗接受这个建议，将内外兵马全都交付君廓指挥。利涉认为君廓性情反复无常，劝李瑗将兵权交付王诜，李瑗犹豫未定，君廓探知此信，驰马斩杀王诜，持其首级告知军士说： 李瑗与王诜谋反，幽禁敕使，擅自发兵，如今王诜已被斩首，独李瑗尚在，已无能为力。各位如随他谋反就会满门抄斩，助我平叛，富贵可得！ 
English: Li Wei accepted this suggestion and put all the soldiers and horses at home and abroad under the command of the prince. Li Zang thought that the prince's temperament was fickle and advised Li Wei to give the military power to Wang Wei. Li Wei hesitated and was undecided. The prince found out about this letter and galloped to kill Wang Wei, holding his head and telling the sergeant: Li Wei and Wang Wei plotted a rebellion, imprisoned the prince and sent soldiers without authorization. Now Wang Wei has been beheaded, but Li Wei is still there and is powerless. If you follow his plot, you will be beheaded everywhere. Help me put down the rebellion, you can be rich and

古文：正缘储食腐俭，已请诸朝，吾何所负？ 
现代文：众人说： 愿讨贼党。 便从狱中放出敦礼。
English: And the people said, Let him be cursed. And he was loosed out of the dungeon.

古文：众服其言，且引去。
现代文：李瑗闻知此信，率其左右数百人披甲而出。
English: When Li Qian heard about this letter, he led hundreds of people to come out in armor.

古文：振曰： 都统不死，吾曹殆矣！ 
现代文：君廓大呼道： 李瑗反叛，各位都被挂误，为何跟从他而自取诛戮？ 
English: The noblemen shouted loudly: Li Qiye rebelled, you are all mistaken, why follow him and take the beating?

古文：遂害之，并杀其二子及三大将。
现代文：众人全都倒戈溃走。李瑗大骂君廓说： 小人卖我求荣，行将自及其祸！ 
English: All the people turned their backs on him and ran away. Li Yao loudly scolded Jun Guo and said, "The villain sold me for glory. He will go to his doom!"

古文：有诏以郭子仪代之。
现代文：君廓随即擒获李瑗加以缢杀，传其首级于京师。
English: The eunuch was immediately captured and killed by Li Xi, and it is said that his head was taken to the capital.

古文：李琢表其政，赐金紫。
现代文：朝廷将李瑗废为庶人，绝其宗室属籍。
English: The imperial court abolished Li Jian as a commoner, and his family lineage became extinct.

