古文：三十年春，王正月。
现代文：三十年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: Thirty years of spring, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing.

古文：夏，狄侵齐。
现代文：夏季，狄人入侵齐国。
English: In the summer, the Di people invaded Qi.

古文：秋，卫杀其大夫元咺及公子瑕。
现代文：秋季，卫国杀了自己的大夫元咺和公子瑕。
English: In the autumn, the Emperor killed his own doctors, Motohiro and Koko.

古文：卫侯郑归于卫。
现代文：卫侯回到了卫国。
English: Weihou returned to Weiguo.

古文：晋人、秦人围郑。
现代文：晋国、秦国包围郑国。
English: Jin and Qin surrounded Zheng.

古文：介人侵萧。
现代文：介国入侵萧国。
English: China invaded Xiao.

古文：冬，天王使周公来聘。
现代文：冬季，周襄王派遣周公阅来鲁国聘问。
English: In the winter, King Zhou Xiang sent Zhou Gong Rong to Russia to ask questions.

古文：公子遂如京师，遂如晋。
现代文：公子遂去到京师，又去到晋国。
English: So he went to the capital, Kyoto, and then to Suma in Jin Province.

古文：三十年春，晋人侵郑，以观其可攻与否。
现代文：三十年春季，晋国人入侵郑国，以此来试探郑国是否可以攻打。
English: In the spring of the 30th year, the Jin people invaded Zheng to test whether Zheng could be attacked.

古文：狄间晋之有郑虞也。
现代文：狄人钻了晋国侵犯郑国这个空子。
English: Di drilled the hole that Jin invaded Zheng.

古文：晋侯使医衍酖卫侯。
现代文：晋文公派了医生衍毒死卫成公。
English: Jinwen sent a doctor to poison Wei Chenggong.

古文：甯俞货医，使薄其酖，不死。
现代文：甯俞贿赂医生，让他少放点毒药，所以卫成公没有被毒死。
English: He bribed the doctor to use less poison, so Wei Chenggong was not poisoned to death.

古文：公为之请，纳玉于王与晋侯，皆十瑴。
现代文：僖公为卫成公请求，把玉献给周襄王和晋文公，都是十对。
English: At the request of Wei Chenggong, Zeng Gong offered the jade to King Zhou Xiang and King Jinwen, all ten pairs.

古文：王许之。
现代文：周襄王允许了。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：秋，乃释卫侯。
现代文：秋季，卫成公被释放了。
English: In the autumn, Wei Chenggong was released.

古文：卫侯使赂周歂、冶廑，曰： 苟能纳我，吾使尔为卿。 
现代文：卫成公派人贿赂周歂、冶廑说： 如果能接纳我当国君，我让你们当卿。 
English: Wei Chenggong sent people to bribe Zhou Qi, and Yao Qi said: If you can accept me as the sovereign, I will make you a lord.

古文：周、冶杀元咺及子適、子仪。
现代文：周、冶两人杀了元咺和子适、子仪。
English: Zhou and Ye both killed Yuan Shao, Zisai and Zi Yi.

古文：公入祀先君。周、冶既服将命，周歂先入，及门，遇疾而死。
现代文：卫成公回国，在太庙祭祀先君，周、冶两人已经穿好卿的礼服，准备接受任命，周歂先进太庙，到门口，发病而死。
English: When Wei Chenggong returned to China, he held a memorial service for his ancestor in the Imperial Temple. Zhou and Yao had already put on the emperor's ceremonial robes and were ready to accept the appointment. Zhou Yao went to the entrance of the Imperial Temple, fell ill and died.

古文：冶廑辞卿。
现代文：冶廑骇怕了，便辞去卿位。
English: He was horrified and resigned his peerage.

古文：九月甲午，晋侯、秦伯围郑，以其无礼于晋，且贰于楚也。
现代文：九月初十日，晋文公、秦穆公包围郑国，因为郑国对晋国无礼，而且心向着楚国。
English: On the 10th day of early September, Jinwen Gong and Qinmu Gong surrounded Zheng Guo, because Zheng Guo was rude to Jin Guo, and his heart was set on Chu Guo.

古文：晋军函陵，秦军氾南。
现代文：晋军驻扎在函陵，秦军驻扎在汜南。
English: The Jin army was stationed in Hanling, and the Qin army was stationed in Minam.

古文：佚之狐言于郑伯曰： 国危矣，若使烛之武见秦君，师必退。 
现代文：佚之狐对郑文公说： 国家危急了。假若派遣烛之武去进见秦君，军队必然退走。 
English: The fox said to Zheng Wengong, "The country is in a critical situation. If you were to send the Candle Warriors to see Qin Jun, the army would inevitably retreat.

古文：公从之。辞曰： 臣之壮也，犹不如人，今老矣，无能为也已。 
现代文：郑文公采纳了这个建议，便请烛之武去进见秦君，烛之武推辞说： 下臣年壮的时候，尚且不如别人；现在老了，无能为力了。 
English: Zheng Wengong accepted this suggestion, and then invited the Candle Warrior to go and see Qin Jun. The Candle Warrior replied, "When my vassal was young, he was not as good as others; now he is old, he is powerless.

古文：公曰： 吾不能早用子，今急而求子，是寡人之过也。
现代文：郑文公说： 我没有能及早任用您，现在形势危急而来求您，这是我的过错。
English: Zheng Wengong said, "It is my fault that I failed to appoint you early, and now the situation is critical, I come to ask you.

古文：然郑亡，子亦有不利焉。 
现代文：然而郑国被灭亡，您也不好啊。 
English: However, Zheng Guo was destroyed, which is not good for you.

古文：许之，夜缒而出，见秦伯曰： 秦、晋围郑，郑既知亡矣。
现代文：烛之武答应了，夜里用绳子把自己从城上吊到城外，进见秦穆公，说： 秦、晋两国包围郑国，郑国已经知道自己要灭亡了。
English: Candlemass agreed, and in the night he hanged himself with a rope from the city to the outside of the city, and went to see Qin Mu Gong, saying: Qin and Jin have surrounded Zheng Guo, and Zheng Guo already knows that he is about to perish.

古文：若亡郑而有益于君，敢以烦执事。
现代文：如果灭亡郑国而对君王有好处，那是值得劳动君王左右随从的。
English: If the destruction of Zheng Guo is good for the king, it is worth the labor of the king to follow around.

古文：越国以鄙远，君知其难也，焉用亡郑以陪邻。
现代文：越过别国而以远方的土地作为边邑，君王知道是不容易的，哪里用得着灭亡郑国来增加邻国的土地？
English: It is not easy for a monarch to surpass other countries and take a distant land as a border town. How can the destruction of Zheng be used to increase the land of a neighboring country?

古文：邻之厚，君之薄也。
现代文：邻国实力加强，就是君王的削弱。
English: The strengthening of a neighboring country is the weakening of a monarch.

古文：若舍郑以为东道主，行李之往来，共其乏困，君亦无所害。
现代文：如果赦免郑国，让他做东路上的主人，使者的往来，供应他所缺少的一切东西，对君王也没有害处。
English: If you pardon Zheng Guo, let him be the master of the East Road, the messenger's traffic, and supply him with everything he lacks, there is no harm to the king.

古文：且君尝为晋君赐矣，许君焦、瑕，朝济而夕设版焉，君之所知也。
现代文：而且君王曾经把好处赐给晋国国君了，他答应给君王焦、瑕两地，早晨过河回国，晚上就设版筑城，这是君王所知道的。
English: Moreover, the king had once bestowed benefits on the king of Jin. He promised the king Jiao and Guye two lands, to cross the river in the morning to return to the country, and to build a city in the evening, which the king knew.

古文：夫晋何厌之有？既东封郑，又欲肆其西封，若不阙秦，将焉取之？
现代文：晋国哪有满足的时候，已经在东边向郑国开拓土地，又要肆意扩大它西边的土地。如果不损害秦国，还能到哪里去取得土地呢？
English: When there is no satisfaction for Jin, it has already opened up land to Zheng in the east, and it wants to expand its land in the west. If it does not harm Qin, where can it go to acquire land?

古文：阙秦以利晋，唯君图之。 
现代文：损害秦国来有利于晋国的事，请君王考虑。 
English: If you want to harm Qin and benefit Jin, please consider it.

古文：秦伯说，与郑人盟，使杞子、逢孙、扬孙戍之。
现代文：秦穆公很高兴，和郑国人结盟，派遣杞子、逢孙、杨孙在郑国戍守，就撤退了。
English: Qin Mu Gong was very pleased, and allied with the Zheng people, sending Zizi, Feng Sun, and Yang Sun to stay in Zheng, and then withdrew.

古文：乃还。子犯请击之。
现代文：子犯请求追击秦军。
English: The child criminal requested to pursue the Qin army.

古文：公曰： 不可。
现代文：晋文公说： 不行。
English: Jin Wenkong said, "No."

古文：微夫人之力不及此。
现代文：如果没有他们的力量，我们不会有今天这个地位。
English: Without their strength, we would not be where we are today.

古文：因人之力而敝之，不仁。失其所与，不知。以乱易整，不武。
现代文：靠了别人的力量，反而损害他，这是不讲仁德；失掉了同盟国家，这是不明智；用动乱代替整齐，这是不勇敢。
English: It is uncharitable to rely on the strength of others and to harm them; it is unwise to lose an ally; it is not courageous to replace order with disorder.

古文：吾其还也。 
现代文：我还是回去吧。 
English: I might as well go back.

古文：亦去之。
现代文：晋文公也就撤军回国。
English: Emperor Jinwen also withdrew his troops and returned to China.

古文：初，郑公子兰出奔晋，从于晋侯。伐郑，请无与围郑。
现代文：当初，郑国的公子兰逃亡到晋国，跟随晋文公攻打郑国，请求不要参加对郑都的包围。
English: At first, Lan, the prince of Zheng, fled to Jin and followed Jin Wenkong to attack Zheng, requesting not to take part in the siege of Zhengdu.

古文：许之，使待命于东。
现代文：晋文公答应了，让他在东部边境等候命令。
English: Lord Jin agreed and told him to wait for orders at the eastern border.

古文：郑石甲父、侯宣多逆以为大子，以求成于晋，晋人许之。
现代文：郑国的石甲父、侯宣多把他接回来做太子，向晋国讲和，晋国允许了。
English: Shi Jia's father, Hou Xuanduo of Zheng, brought him back to be crown prince, and made peace with Jin. Jin agreed to this.

古文：冬，王使周公阅来聘，飨有昌歜、白、黑、形盐。
现代文：冬季，周襄王派遣周公阅来鲁国聘问，宴请他的食物有昌蒲菹、白米糕、黑黍糕和虎形块盐。
English: In the winter, King Zhou Xiang sent Zhou Gong to Lu to ask for advice. The food he was served included cattails, white rice cakes, black bean cakes and tiger-shaped salt cubes.

古文：辞曰： 国君，文足昭也，武可畏也，则有备物之飨，以象其德。荐五味，羞嘉穀，盐虎形，以献其功。
现代文：周公阅推辞说： 国家的君主，文治足以显扬四方，武功可以使人畏惧，就备有各种物品宴请，以像征他的德行；进五味的调和，献美好的粮食，有虎形的盐，以像征他的功业。
English: Zhou Gong said: "As the monarch of the country, the civil administration is enough to show the four directions, and the martial arts can make people afraid. Therefore, he has prepared a variety of items and banquets to symbolize his virtues; the harmony of the five flavors, the presentation of fine grain, and the tiger-shaped salt to symbolize his achievements.

古文：吾何以堪之？ 
现代文：我怎么当得起这个？ 
English: How do I deserve this?

古文：东门襄仲将聘于周，遂初聘于晋。
现代文：东门襄仲将要到成周聘问，就顺路到晋国作初次聘问。
English: Dongmen Xiangzhong is going to Chengzhou for an interview, and will make his first interview in Jin Province on the way.

