古文：郭太符融许劭郭太字林宗，太原界休人也。
现代文：◆郭太传，郭太字林宗，太原介休人。家世贫贱。
English: ◆ Guo Tai Chuan, Guo Tai Zi Lin Zong, and Guo Tai Yuan Jie were born into a poor family.

古文：家世贫贱。早孤，母欲使给事县廷。
现代文：父亲死得早，母亲想要他去县里做事。
English: His father died early, and his mother wanted him to work in the county.

古文：林宗曰： 大丈夫焉能处斗筲之役乎？ 
现代文：林宗说 ：大丈夫哪能从事这种下贱的工作呢？ 
English: Lin Zong said, "It's all right, how can I do such a menial job?"

古文：遂辞。
现代文：就辞掉不去。
English: I can't just quit.

古文：就成皋屈伯彦学，三年业毕，博通坟籍。
现代文：跟成皋屈伯彦学习，三年毕业，博通群书。
English: Studied under Chengyu Qu Biao, graduated in three years, and became a well-read man.

古文：善谈论，美音制。
现代文：擅长说词，口若悬河，声音嘹亮。
English: He is good at saying words, his mouth is like a river, and his voice is bright.

古文：乃游于洛阳。始见河南尹李膺，膺大奇之，遂相友善，于是名震京师。
现代文：游于洛阳，开始见河南尹李膺，李膺大加赞赏，于是结为好朋友，名震京师。
English: Swam in Luoyang, began to see Henan Yin Li Yao, Li Yao greatly appreciated, so he became a good friend, a famous Beijing teacher.

古文：后归乡里，衣冠诸儒送至河上，车数千两。
现代文：后来回到故乡，士大夫诸儒生送到河边，有几千辆车子。
English: Later, when he returned to his hometown, the scholar-bureaucrat sent all the Confucian students to the riverside. There were thousands of cars.

古文：林宗唯与李膺同舟共济，众宾望之，以为神仙焉。
现代文：郭林宗只与李膺同船过河，送行的众宾客望见他俩，如神仙一般。
English: Guo Linzong only crossed the river in the same boat with Li Qian, and the guests who saw them off looked at them as if they were immortal.

古文：司徒黄琼辟，太常赵典举有道。
现代文：司徒黄琼征召，太常赵典举有道。
English: Szu Huang Qiong was conscripted, too often Zhao Dianjiao was virtuous.

古文：或劝林宗仕进者，对曰： 吾夜观乾象，昼察人事，天之所废，不可支也。 
现代文：有人劝郭林宗出为官的，林宗回答说： 我晚上观看天象，白天考察社会人事，天命要废弃的，是不可支持的。 
English: When someone urged Guo Linzong to run for office, Linzong replied, "I watch the celestial bodies at night and investigate social affairs during the day. If it is God's will, I cannot support it.

古文：遂并不应。
现代文：于是，他都没有应。
English: As a result, he did not respond.

古文：性明知人，好奖训士类。
现代文：天赋有知人之明，喜欢奖励教育读书人。
English: He has a talent for getting to know people and likes to reward readers of educational books.

古文：身长八尺，容貌魁伟，褒衣博带，周游郡国。
现代文：身长八尺，容貌魁梧奇伟，宽衣大带，周游郡国。
English: He is eight feet tall, has a burly appearance, wears a wide-brimmed hat, and travels around the county.

古文：尝于陈梁间行遇雨，巾一角垫，时人乃故折巾一角，以为 林宗巾 。其见慕皆如此。
现代文：曾经在陈、梁间行，遇雨，巾一角折垫起来，当时人也学着故意折巾一角，叫做 林宗巾 ，为人所敬慕大都是这样。
English: There was a time when people used to walk between the cane and the beam, and in case of rain, fold one corner of the towel into a cushion. At that time, people also learned to deliberately fold one corner of the towel, called the Lin Zong towel, which was admired by most people.

古文：或问汝南范滂曰： 郭林宗何如人？ 
现代文：有人问汝南范滂说： 郭林宗是怎样一个人呢？ 
English: Someone asked Runan Fanyao: "How is Guo Linzong a person?

古文：滂曰： 隐不违亲，贞不绝俗，天子不得臣，诸侯不得友，吾不知其它。 
现代文：范滂说： 隐居像介子推一样不违反母亲的意旨，出仕像柳下惠一样，贞忠而不矫情绝俗。天子不得以他为臣，诸侯不得以他为友。其他，我就不得而知道了。 
English: Fan Qi said: "To live in seclusion, like Jie Zixu, does not violate the will of the mother; to serve, like Liu Shih-hui, is chaste and loyal, but not vulgar. The heavenly son may not take him as a vassal, and the princes may not take him as a friend. I have no choice but to know the rest."

古文：后遭母忧，有至孝称。
现代文：后来母亲去世，有至孝的名声。
English: Later, after his mother died, he gained a reputation for filial piety.

古文：林宗虽善人伦，而不为危言核论，故宦官擅政而不能伤也。
现代文：郭林宗虽然善于鉴识人物，品评人物，但不作激切而深刻的谈论，所以宦官专政也不能伤害他。
English: Although Guo Linzong is good at identifying and evaluating people, he does not engage in heated and profound discussions, so the rise of the eunuch dictatorship cannot hurt him.

古文：乃党事起，知名之士多被其害，唯林宗及汝南袁闳得免焉。
现代文：党祸兴起，知名之士大多遭其害，只有郭林宗和汝南袁闳得以幸免。
English: With the rise of the Party calamity, most of the well-known people suffered from it. Only Guo Linzong and Runan Yuanxuan were spared.

古文：遂闭门教授，弟子以千数。
现代文：于是闭门教授，学生以千计。
English: As a result, thousands of students were taught behind closed doors.

古文：建宁元年，太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武为阉人所害，林宗哭之于野，恸。
现代文：建宁元年，太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武被宦官害死，郭林宗在野外号哭，极为悲痛。
English: In the first year of Jianning, Grand Master Chen Xi and General Dou Wu were killed by eunuchs. Guo Linzong cried out in the open, extremely sad.

古文：既而叹曰：  人之云亡，邦国殄瘁 。 瞻乌爰止，不知于谁之屋 耳。 
现代文：因叹声说 ： 人死了，国家也危险了。  乌鸦不知落在那个人家的屋上啊 。 
English: He said with a sigh, "A man is dead, the country is in danger, and a crow has somehow landed on the roof of that man's house."

古文：明年春，卒于家，时年四十二。
现代文：第二年春，在家去世，终年四十二。
English: He died at home in the spring of the following year, at the age of 42.

古文：四方之士千余人，皆来会葬。
现代文：四方之士一千多人来送葬。
English: More than a thousand people from all over the country came to pay their respects.

古文：同志者乃共刻石立碑，蔡邕为其文，既而谓涿郡卢植曰： 吾为碑铭多矣，皆有惭德，唯郭有道无愧色耳。 
现代文：同志者于是共刻石立碑，蔡邕作碑文，既成，对涿郡卢植说： 我作的碑铭多啊！都有些感到惭愧，只有郭有道碑无愧色呢。 
English: The comrades then jointly carved a stone monument, Cai Qi made the inscription, and said to Lu Zhi County Lu Zhi: I made a lot of monuments! They all felt a little ashamed, only Guo You Dao monument was worthy of praise.

古文：其奖拔士人，皆如所鉴。
现代文：郭林宗所奖励选拔的士人，都如他所鉴定的。
English: Guo Linzong's reward and selection of scholars are all as he has identified.

古文：后之好事，或附益增张，故多华辞不经，又类卜相之书。
现代文：先言后验，大家都佩服他。后来喜欢品鉴人物的，或附会增加夸张之，所以多了一些华而不实和怪诞不稽之词，又像卜相之书。
English: After the foreword, everyone admired him. Later, people who liked to taste the characters, or added exaggeration, so there were more flashy and grotesque words, and it was like a book of divination.

古文：今录其章章效于事者。著之篇末。
现代文：今录其明明白白见效于事实的，写在篇尾。
English: The part of the transcript that clearly and unambiguously bears on the facts is written at the end.

古文：左原者，陈留人也，为郡学生，犯法见斥。
现代文：左原，陈留人。为郡学生，犯法被驱逐。
English: Sawara, Chen Liu Ren, a county student, was expelled for violating the law.

古文：林宗尝遇诸路，为设酒肴以慰之。
现代文：郭林宗曾经在路上碰到了他，办了酒席安慰他。
English: Guo Linzong once met him on the road and held a banquet to console him.

古文：谓曰： 昔颜涿聚梁甫之巨盗，段干木晋国之大驵，卒为齐之忠臣，魏之名贤。
现代文：对他说 ：从前颜涿聚是梁甫的大盗，段干木是晋国一个大的市场经纪，终究成为齐国的忠臣、魏国有名的贤人。
English: He said to him, "Once upon a time, Yan Xizhu was a great thief of Liang Fu, and Duan Ganmu was a great market broker of Jin. After all, they became loyal subjects of Qi and famous sages of Wei.

古文：蘧瑗、颜回尚不能无过，况其余乎？
现代文：蘧瑗、颜回还不能无过，何况是一个普通人呢？
English: You and Yan Hui can't be without fault, and what's more, you're an ordinary person?

古文：慎勿恚恨，责躬而已。 
现代文：千万不要生气，反躬自问，自己责备自己就好了。 
English: Don't get angry, don't question yourself, don't blame yourself.

古文：原纳其言而去。
现代文：左原接受了他的意见走了。
English: Sawahara accepted his opinion and left.

古文：或有讥林宗不绝恶人者。
现代文：也有人讥刺郭林宗与坏人来往，他答说： 一个人不仁，恶他太狠，是迫使他更加为坏事。 
English: Some people also ridiculed Guo Linzong for associating with bad people. He replied, "A person is not kind. If he is too cruel, it will force him to do more bad things."

古文：对曰： 人而不仁，疾之以甚，乱也。 原后忽更怀忿，结客欲报诸生。
现代文：左原后来忽然更怀忿恨，结集宾客想报复诸生。
English: Later, Sawahara suddenly became even angrier, gathering guests to take revenge on the living.

古文：其日林宗在学，原愧负前言，因遂罢去。
现代文：这一天郭林宗正在学校，左原惭愧辜负了郭林宗以前所说的话，因此就散去了。
English: On this day, Guo Linzong was at school. Zuo Yuan was ashamed to live up to what Guo Linzong had said before, so they dispersed.

古文：后事露，众人咸谢服焉。茅容字季伟，陈留人也。
现代文：后来事情泄漏出来，大家都感谢他。茅容，字季伟，陈留人。
English: Later, the matter leaked out, and everyone thanked him. Mao Rong, Ji Wei, and Chen Liu Ren.

古文：年四十余，耕于野，时与等辈避雨树下，众皆夷踞相对，容独危坐愈恭。
现代文：四十多岁，在野外耕田，当时与同辈在树底下避雨，大家都平蹲相对，茅容一个人独正襟危坐，十分恭谨。
English: In his forties, he was working in the field, sheltering from the rain with his peers under a tree. Everyone squatted flat against each other, and Mao Rong sat alone, very respectful.

古文：林宗行见之而奇其异，遂与共言，因请寓宿。
现代文：郭林宗看见他与大家不同，觉得奇怪，因同他谈话，茅容请林宗到他家住宿。
English: Guo Linzong saw that he was different from everyone else and felt strange. Because of his conversation with him, Mao Rong invited Linzong to stay at his home.

古文：旦日，容杀鸡为馔，林宗谓为己设，既而以供其母，自以草蔬与客同饭。
现代文：第二天早晨，茅容杀鸡作菜，林宗以为是为他作的，后来才知道是弄给他母亲吃的，自己用蔬菜同客人一起吃饭。
English: The next morning, Mao Rong killed a chicken to make a dish. Lin Zong thought it was for him, but later found out that it was for his mother. He used the vegetables to eat with the guests.

古文：林宗起拜之曰： 卿贤乎哉！ 
现代文：郭林宗向他起拜，说： 你真贤啊！ 
English: Guo Linzong bowed to him and said, "You are so wise!

古文：因劝令学，卒以成德。
现代文：因劝他学习，终于成为一个有道德的人。
English: By persuading him to study, he finally became a moral person.

古文：孟敏字叔达，钜鹿杨氏人也。
现代文：孟敏，字叔达，巨鹿郡杨氏县人。
English: Meng Min, alias Shuda, is from Yangshi County, Jugu County.

古文：客居太原。荷甑墯地，不顾而去。
现代文：客居太原，扛着甑，不慎，甑坠地破了，他看也不看一眼就走了。
English: A guest staying in Taiyuan, carrying a shovel, was careless. The shovel broke, and he left without a second glance.

古文：林宗见而问其意。对曰： 甑以破矣，视之何益？ 
现代文：郭林宗见了他问是什么意思，孟敏回答说： 甑已经破了，看它有什么用处呢？ 
English: Guo Linzong saw what he meant. Meng Min replied, "The cocoon is already broken, what use is it?

古文：林宗以此异之，因劝令游学。
现代文：郭林宗以此认为孟敏不是一个平常人，劝他游学。
English: Guo Linzong thought that Meng Min was not an ordinary person, and advised him to travel to study.

古文：十年知名，三公俱辟，并不屈云。
现代文：十年成名，三公都征召他，都没有去。
English: After ten years of fame, all three princes conscripted him, but he did not go.

古文：庾乘字世游，颍川鄢陵人也。
现代文：庾乘，字世游，颍川郡鄢陵县人。
English: He is a native of Fuling County, Luanchuan County.

古文：少给事县廷为门士。林宗见而拔之，劝游学官，遂为诸生佣。
现代文：年轻时在县里做门卒，郭林宗看见了，提拔他，劝他游学官，因为诸生打杂。
English: When he was young, he worked as a porter in the county. Guo Linzong saw him, promoted him, and advised him to become a tour scholar, because all beings are miscellaneous.

古文：后能讲论，自以卑第，每处下坐，诸生博士皆就雠问，由是学中以下坐为贵。
现代文：后来能够讲论学问，自己认为自己出身卑下，常常坐在下座，诸生博士都就他问疑难，由是学校里以下座为贵。
English: Later, he was able to talk about learning. He thought that he was from a lowly background and often sat in the lower seat. All the living doctors asked him questions, so the lower seat was more expensive in school.

古文：后征辟并不起，号曰 征君 。
现代文：后来朝廷征召他，都不应，人们叫他为 征君 。
English: Later, the imperial court conscripted him, but he did not deserve to be conscripted. People called him "Seijun" (征君).

古文：宋果字仲乙，扶风人也。
现代文：宋果，字仲乙，扶风人。
English: Song Guo, Zhaozhong B, Fu Feng Ren.

古文：性轻悍，憙与人殷仇，为郡县所疾。
现代文：性情强悍，喜欢为人报仇，为郡县所苦。
English: He has a strong temperament, likes to take revenge on people, and is suffering for the county.

古文：林宗乃训之义方，惧以祸败。
现代文：郭林宗于是教育他做人的正道，以祸败吓唬他。
English: Guo Linzong then taught him the right way to be a human being, scaring him with calamity.

古文：果感悔，叩头谢负，遂改节自敕。
现代文：宋果被他感动悔悟，叩头承认错误。因此改邪归正，自己约束自己。
English: Song Guo was moved by him to repent and admit his mistake. Therefore, he changed his ways and restrained himself.

古文：后以烈气闻，辟公府，侍御史、并州刺史，所在能化。
现代文：后来以刚正闻名，公府征召，任侍御史、并州刺史，所到之处，教化大行。
English: Later, he was known for his uprightness, and was called up by the government to serve as the imperial historian and the state historian, and he did a great deal of enlightening wherever he went.

古文：贾淑字子厚，林宗乡人也。
现代文：贾淑，字子厚，是郭林宗的同乡。
English: Jia Shu, who has a thick accent, is Guo Linzong's fellow villager.

古文：虽世有冠冕，而性险害，邑里患之。
现代文：虽然是世代做官的家庭，但他的性情险恶，乡里以他为患。
English: Although he comes from a family that has been in government for generations, he has a sinister temper and is considered a menace in the countryside.

古文：林宗遭母忧。淑来修吊，既而钜鹿孙威直亦至。
现代文：郭林宗的母亲逝世了，贾淑去吊唁，后来巨鹿孙威直也到了。
English: Guo Linzong's mother passed away, Jia Shu went to offer condolences, and later the giant deer Sun Weizhong also arrived.

古文：威直以林宗贤而受恶人吊，心怪之，不进而去。
现代文：孙威直认为郭林宗是个贤人，而接受恶人的吊唁，心里觉得奇怪，没有进屋就走了。
English: Sun Weizhong thought that Guo Linzong was a wise man, but accepted the condolences of the wicked. He felt strange in his heart and left without entering the house.

古文：林宗追而谢之曰： 贾子厚诚实凶德，然洗心向善。
现代文：郭林宗追上孙威直说 ：贾子厚确实是个坏人，然而他洗心向善，改过自新。
English: Guo Linzong caught up with Sun Weizhong and said: Jia Zi Hou is indeed a bad person, but he has cleansed his heart and reformed.

古文：仲尼不逆互乡，故吾许其进也。 
现代文：仲尼不拒互乡，所以我允许他进来。 
English: I allowed him to come in because he was friendly.

古文：淑闻之，改过自厉，终成善士。
现代文：贾淑听了，改过，自己勉励自己，终究成为一个好人。
English: Jia Shu listened, made amends, encouraged herself, and eventually became a good person.

古文：乡里有忧患者，淑辄倾身营救，为州闾所称。
现代文：乡里有忧患的人，贾淑常拼命营救，被州闾称道。
English: Jia Shu often desperately rescues people in distress in the countryside, and has been praised by the State Council.

古文：史叔宾者，陈留人也。
现代文：史叔宾，陈留人。
English: Shi Shubin, Chen Liu Ren.

古文：少有盛名。
现代文：年轻时有盛名。
English: He was famous when he was young.

古文：林宗见而告人曰： 墙高基下，虽得必失。 
现代文：郭林宗见了告诉人说： 墙高基下，虽然得了，一定会失去的。 
English: Guo Lin Zong told people when he saw it: Although the foundation of the wall is high, it will surely be lost.

古文：后果以论议阿枉败名云。
现代文：后来真的因论议阿谀败了名声。
English: Later, he really made a name for himself as a controversialist.

古文：黄允字子艾，济阴人也。
现代文：黄允，字子艾，济阳人。
English: Huang Yun, Zizi Ai, Jiyang people.

古文：以俊才知名。
现代文：因才华出众著名。
English: Renowned for outstanding talent.

古文：林宗见而谓曰： 卿有绝人之才，足成伟器。
现代文：郭林宗见了他说 ：你有绝人的才调，可以成为大器。
English: Guo Linzong met him and said, "You have an extraordinary talent and can become a great instrument."

古文：然恐守道不笃，将失之矣。 
现代文：然而，怕你不能坚持守道，获得了可能也会失去呢。 
English: However, if you can't stick to the path, you may lose what you have gained.

古文：后司徒袁隗欲为从女求姻，见允而叹曰： 得婿如是足矣。 
现代文：后来司徒袁隗想为侄女求婚，见了黄允叹息说： 得婿如是满意了。 
English: Later, when Sitou Yuan Rong wanted to propose to his niece, he saw Huang Yun sigh and said, "I am satisfied with my son-in-law."

古文：允闻而黜遣其妻夏侯氏。
现代文：黄允听说就罢遣他的妻子夏侯氏。
English: When Huang Yun heard of this, he dismissed his wife, Xia Hou.

古文：妇谓姑曰： 今当见弃，方与黄氏长辞，乞一会亲属，以展离诀之情。 
现代文：夏侯氏对她的姑姑说： 现在我已遭到遗弃，将与黄允分手，请一会亲属，以申离诀的感情。 
English: Xia Hou told her aunt: Now that I have been abandoned, I will break up with Huang Yun and invite relatives to express my feelings of separation.

古文：于是大集宾客三百余人，妇中坐，攘袂数允隐匿秽恶十五事，言毕，登车而去。
现代文：于是大集宾客三百多人，夏侯氏坐在当中，卷起袖子数黄允见不得人的秽恶十五事，说罢，乘车走了。
English: As a result, there was a large gathering of more than three hundred guests, and Mr. Xia Hou sat in the middle, rolled up his sleeves and counted the number of "fifteen unspeakably filthy and evil things," said, and left by car.

古文：允以此废于时。
现代文：黄允因此为时人所不齿。
English: As a result, Huang Yun was disgraced at the time.

古文：谢甄字子微，汝南召陵人也。
现代文：谢甄，字子微，汝南郡召陵县人。
English: Xie Zhen, also known as Zi Wei, was from Runan County and Zhaoling County.

古文：与陈留边让并善谈论，俱有盛名。
现代文：与陈留边让都擅长谈论，并且都很有名气。
English: Both of them are good at talking with Chen Rubeizhen, and both of them are famous.

古文：每共候林宗，未尝不连日达夜。林宗谓门人曰： 二子英才有余，而并不入道，惜乎！ 
现代文：常同去见郭林宗，总是夜以继日。郭林宗对门人说： 这两个人英才有余，但都不入道，可惜啊！ 
English: They often went to see Guo Linzong together, always night and day. Guo Linzong said to the gatekeeper: These two men have more than enough talent, but neither of them can enter the Tao, what a pity!

古文：甄后不拘细行，为时所毁。
现代文：谢甄后来不注意小节细行，受到舆论的攻击。
English: Later, Xie Zhen did not pay attention to detail and was attacked by public opinion.

古文：让以轻侮曹操，操杀之。
现代文：边让因轻侮曹操，被曹操杀了。
English: Benjen was killed by Cao Cao for insulting him.

古文：王柔字叔优，弟泽，字季道，林宗同郡晋阳县人也。
现代文：王柔，字叔优，弟弟王泽，字季道，与郭林宗是同郡晋阳县人。
English: Wang Rou, also known as Uncle You, his brother Wang Ze, also known as Ji Dao, and Guo Linzong are from the same county, Jinyang County.

古文：兄弟总角共候林宗，以访才行所宜。
现代文：兄弟小时同去见林宗，问各人才行发展的方向。
English: The brothers went to see Lin Zong at the same time and asked each talent about the direction of development.

古文：林宗曰： 叔优当以仕进显，季道当以经术通，然违方改务，亦不能至也。 
现代文：林宗说 ：叔优当以做官发迹，季道当以经术博通知名，然而改变方向，另干别的，也不能达到这个地步。 
English: Lin Zong said: Shu You should make a fortune as a government official, and Ji Dao should make a fortune as a scholar. However, changing the direction and doing something else cannot reach this level.

古文：后果如所言，柔为护匈奴中郎将，泽为代郡太守。
现代文：后来真的如他所说，王柔仕至护匈奴中郎将，王泽做了代郡太守。
English: Later, it was true, as he said, that Wang Rong served as the middle general to protect the Xiongnu, and Wang Ze became the acting county governor.

古文：而林宗雅俗无所失，将其明性特有主乎？
现代文：又识张孝仲于樵夫牧者之中，在驿使里识拔了范特祖。召公子、许伟都是屠夫酒佣，司马子威出于普通兵卒。
English: Zhang Xiaozhong was identified as a woodcutter-pastor, while Fan Tezu was identified as an envoy. Zhao Gongzi and Xu Wei were butchers and wine stewards, while Sima Ziwei was an ordinary soldier.

古文：然而逊言危行，终享时晦，恂恂善导，使士慕成名，虽墨、孟之徒，不能绝也。符融字伟明，陈留浚仪人也。少为都官吏，耻之，委去。
现代文：以及同郡郭长信、王长文、韩文布、李子政、曹子元、定襄周康子、西河王季然、云中丘季智、郝礼真等六十人，都因他成名。◆符融传，符融字伟明，陈留郡浚仪人。年轻时任都官吏，认为可耻，弃之而去。
English: and 60 people in the same county, such as Guo Changxin, Wang Changwen, Han Wenbu, Li Zizheng, Cao Zi Yuan, Ding Xiang Zhou Yasuko, West River Wang Qiran, Yunzhongqiu Qizhi, Zou Lizhen, all became famous because of him. ◆Fu Rong Chuan, Fu Rong Zi Wei Ming, Chen Liu County Jian Yi people. When he was young, he was a government official, thought it was shameful, and abandoned it.

古文：后游太学，师事少府李膺。
现代文：后来游太学，拜少府李膺为老师。
English: Later, Yu Taigaku and Baishofu Li Yong became teachers.

古文：膺风性高简，每见融，辄绝它宾客，听其言论。
现代文：李膺性情高尚纯洁，每次接见符融，常谢绝其他宾客，听符融说话。
English: Li Yan's disposition is noble and pure. Every time he receives Fu Rong, he often thanks other guests and listens to Fu Rong's speech.

古文：融幅巾奋袖，谈辞如云，膺每捧手叹息。
现代文：符融幅巾挥袖，谈吐云涌，李膺常捧手叹息。
English: Waving his sleeves with a wide width, talking about clouds, Li Yao often sighed with his hands.

古文：郭林宗始入京师，时人莫识，融一见嗟服，因以介于李膺，由是知名。
现代文：郭林宗开始去京师，当时人不相识，符融一见面嗟叹佩服，并介绍给李膺，郭林宗由此名振天下。
English: Guo Linzong began to go to Beijing to study. At that time, people did not know each other, and they met and admired each other. They were introduced to Li Yong, and Guo Linzong became famous all over the world.

古文：时汉中晋文经、梁国黄子艾，并恃其才智，炫曜上京，卧托养疾，无所通接。
现代文：当时汉中晋文经、梁国黄子艾，都恃自己的才智，夸耀京师，托病在家，不接见宾客。
English: At that time, Hanzhong Jin Wenjing and Liang Guo Huang Zi Ai, both boasted of their talents, boasted of the Beijing division, feigned illness at home, and did not receive guests.

古文：洛中士大夫好事者，承其声名，坐门问疾，犹不得见。
现代文：洛中士大夫爱管闲事的，仰慕他的声名，坐在他门外问疾，也不接见。
English: Dr. Lo, a meddlesome sergeant, admires his reputation, sits outside his door to ask for a sick note, but does not answer.

古文：三公所辟召者，辄以询访之，随所臧否，以为与夺。
现代文：三公有所征召，常去访问他，以他俩所说好坏，作为取舍的标准。
English: The three princes were summoned, and they often went to visit him, taking what they both said was good or bad as the standard of choice.

古文：融察其非真，乃到太学，并见李膺曰： 二子行业无闻，以豪桀自置，遂使公卿问疾，王臣坐门。
现代文：符融了解到其中有假，于是到太学，会见李膺说 ：没有听说二人有什么德业，而他们以豪杰自居，因此使公卿去问候他们的病，王臣坐在门外要求接见。
English: Fu Rong understood that some of them were fakes, so he went to Taigaku and met with Li Qian. He said, "I have not heard that the two of them have any virtuous deeds, but they consider themselves to be heroes. Therefore, I asked the noblemen to greet their illness. Wang Chen sat outside the door and asked for an interview."

古文：融恐其小道破义，空誉违实，特宜察焉。 
现代文：我恐怕他们是邪门歪道，徒有虚名，没有事实，应当好好地考察他们啊！ 
English: I'm afraid they're crooked, they have false names, no facts, they should be properly investigated!

古文：膺然之。
现代文：李膺认为对。
English: Li Yao thought it was right.

古文：二人自是名论渐衰，宾徒稍省，旬日之间，惭叹逃去。
现代文：二人自此以后，名声慢慢衰落，宾客门徒也少了，十天以内，惭愧叹息逃走了。
English: Since then, the two of them have seen their reputation slowly decline, the number of guest disciples has dwindled, and within ten days, they fled with a sigh of shame.

古文：后果为轻薄子，并以罪废弃。
现代文：后来知道他俩真的是轻薄子弟，都因犯罪遭到废弃。
English: It was later learned that the two of them were in fact light-skinned children, both of whom had been abandoned due to crime.

古文：融益以知名。
现代文：符融因此更加著名。
English: This made Fuyong even more famous.

古文：州郡礼请，举孝廉，公府连辟，皆不应。
现代文：州郡以礼请他，举孝廉，公府多次征召，都不就。
English: He was invited by the state and county with courtesy, honored with filial piety, and repeatedly recruited by the government, but it was not enough.

古文：太守冯岱有名称，到官，请融相见。
现代文：太守冯代有名，到任，请符融与他相见。
English: The grand marshal of the Feng Dynasty is famous. When you arrive, please meet him.

古文：融一往，荐达郡士范冉、韩卓、孔亻由等三人，因辞病自绝。
现代文：符融一去，推荐郡士范冉、韩卓、孔亻由等三人，就托病不与太守来往。
English: As soon as Fu Rong passed away, three county magistrates, Fan Ran, Han Zhuo and Kong Qiyu, were recommended not to have any dealings with the emperor on the pretext of illness.

古文：会有党事，亦遭禁锢。
现代文：遇上党祸，也遭到禁止做官的处理。
English: In the event of a party disaster, he was also banned from being an official.

古文：妻亡，贫无殡敛，乡人欲为具棺服，融不肯受。
现代文：妻子死了，贫困不能埋葬，乡里人想帮助他办棺服，符融不肯接受。
English: His wife is dead, poverty cannot be buried, the villagers want to help him make coffin clothes, but he refuses to accept.

古文：曰： 古之亡者，弃之中野。
现代文：说： 古时候死了人，扔在野外。
English: He said: In ancient times, dead people were thrown into the open.

古文：唯妻子可以行志，但即土埋藏而已。 
现代文：只有妻子可以行我的志，就土埋葬吧。 
English: Only my wife can carry out my wishes. Let her be buried in the ground.

古文：融同郡田盛，字仲向，与郭林宗同好，亦名知人，优游不仕，并以寿终。
现代文：符融同郡人田盛，字仲向，与郭林宗要好，也有知人之明，不做官，逍遥自在，老死家里。
English: He blends in well with the county people Tian Sheng, Zha Zhong Luo Xiang, is better than Guo Lin Zong, also has a clear acquaintance, does not work as an official, is free and easy-going, and is always at home.

古文：许劭字子将，汝南平舆人也。
现代文：◆许劭传，许劭字子将，汝南郡平舆县人。
English: ◆He was born in Pingyou County, Yunnan Province.

古文：少峻名节，好人伦，多所赏识。
现代文：年轻时立名声，讲节操，好论人物，赏识不少人。
English: When he was young, he made a name for himself, was a stickler for discipline, a good judge of character, and was admired by many.

古文：若樊子昭、和阳士者，并显名于世。
现代文：如樊子昭、和阳士，都有名于当时。
English: Such as Zou Zi Zhao, and Yang Shi, were famous at that time.

古文：故天下言拔士者，咸称许、郭。
现代文：开始任郡里的功曹，太守徐趚很敬重他。
English: He began to serve as a meritorious person in the county, and Emperor Xu Xi respected him very much.

古文：初为郡功曹，太守徐甚敬之。
现代文：府里听说子将为吏，没有不改变操守，谨饰言行的。
English: The prefectural government heard that the son would be an official, but he did not change his behavior, and was careful to embellish his words and deeds.

古文：府中闻子将为吏，莫不改操饰行。同郡袁绍，公族豪侠，去濮阳令归，车徒甚盛，将入郡界，乃谢遣宾客，曰： 吾舆服岂可使许子将见。 
现代文：同郡人袁绍是公族豪侠，自濮阳令离职回家，车马徒众，十分豪华，将入郡境，把宾客等打发走了，说 ：我这样的车马装束，难道可以让许子将看见吗？ 
English: Yuan Shao, a fellow county resident, was a public hero. He left his post in Shiyang to return home. The carriage and horse devotees, who were very luxurious, would enter the county and send the guests away, saying, "With my kind of carriage and horse attire, can I let Xu Ziming see it?"

古文：遂以单车归家。
现代文：于是就只乘着一辆车子回了家。
English: So he returned home with only one car.

古文：劭尝到颍川，多长者之游，唯不候陈寔。
现代文：许劭曾经到颍川，与他同游的都是一些有道德学问的长者，他独不去看望陈萛。
English: Xu Yao once went to Luochuan. He was accompanied by some elders with moral and academic knowledge. He alone did not visit Chen Yao.

古文：又陈蕃丧妻还葬，乡人毕至，而邵独不往。
现代文：又陈蕃的妻子死了回乡安葬，乡里人都去参加葬礼，许劭独没有去。
English: In addition, Chen Yao's wife died and was buried back in his hometown. The villagers all went to the funeral, but Xu Yao didn't go.

古文：或问其故，劭曰： 太丘道广，广则难周；仲举性峻，峻则少通。
现代文：有人问他是什么原因，许劭说： 太丘道术太广，广难得周到；仲举性情严峻，峻就不能通达。
English: When someone asked him what the reason was, Xu Yao said: Taiqiu's Taoism is too broad, and it is difficult to be thoughtful; Zhonghe's disposition is severe, and it is impossible to get through.

古文：故不造也。 
现代文：所以我不去。 
English: So I'm not going.

古文：其多所裁量若此。
现代文：他品评人物大都如此。
English: This is how he evaluates most of his characters.

古文：曹操微时，常卑辞厚礼，求为己目。
现代文：曹操没有得志显名时，曾经办了厚礼很谦逊地求许劭为他谈谈相。
English: When Cao Cao did not become famous, he once humbly asked for permission to speak to the emperor for him.

古文：劭鄙其人而不肯对，操乃伺隙胁劭，劭不得已，曰： 君清平之奸贼，乱世之英雄。 
现代文：许劭看不起他，不肯说，曹操找了个空子威胁许劭，许劭不得已，说 ：你是清平之世的奸贼，乱世的英雄。 
English: Xu Rong looked down on him and refused to say anything. Cao Cao found an opportunity to threaten Xu Rong. Xu Rong had no choice but to say: "You are a traitor to the world of Qingping and a hero to the world of chaos."

古文：操大悦而去。
现代文：曹操极为高兴地走了。
English: Cao Cao left extremely happy.

古文：劭从祖敬，敬子训，训子相，并为三公，相以能谄事宦官，故自致台司封侯，数遣请劭。劭恶其薄行，终不候之。
现代文：许劭的叔祖父许敬，许敬的儿子许训，训子许相，都是三公大臣。许相因为谄媚宦官，所以官到台司封侯，多次派人请许劭，许劭以许相没有德行为可恶，始终没有去看他。
English: Xu Rong's great-uncle Xu Jing, Xu Jing's son Xu Xun, and Xu Rong's son Xu Xiang were all three grand ministers. Xu Xun, because he liked eunuchs, so the officials went to the Taiji Fuhong, and repeatedly sent people to invite Xu Rong. Xu Rong was disgusted with Xu Xun's immoral behavior, and never went to see him.

古文：劭邑人李逵，壮直有高气，劭初善之，而后为隙，又与从兄靖不睦，时议以此少之。
现代文：许劭同县人李逵，正直有高尚的志气，许劭开始同他相好，后来两人有了矛盾，又与从兄许靖不和，当时的舆论对他不满。
English: Xu Yao and Li Yao, a native of the county, were honest and had noble aspirations. Xu Yao began to be friendly with him. Later, the two had a conflict, and he was at odds with his brother Xu Jing. At that time, the public opinion was dissatisfied with him.

古文：初，劭与靖俱有高名，好共核论乡党人物，每月辄更其品题，故汝南俗有 月旦评 焉。
现代文：起先，许劭与许靖都有盛名，喜欢评论乡党人物，每月换一个题目，所以汝南有 月旦评 的风俗。
English: At first, both Xu Rong and Xu Jing were well-known. They liked to comment on the rural party figures and changed a topic every month, so there was a custom of monthly commenting in the south of the country.

古文：司空杨彪辟，举方正、敦朴，征，皆不就。
现代文：司空杨彪征召许劭，举方正、敦朴，征，都不应。
English: Sikyong Yang Biao should not conscript Xu Jun, nor should he promote Fang Zheng, Dunpang, or Zheng.

古文：或劝劭仕，对曰： 方今小人道长，王室将乱，吾欲避地淮海，以全老幼。 
现代文：有人劝许劭做官，他回答说 ：现在小人得志，王室将乱，我想去淮海逃难，以保全老幼。 
English: Some people urged him to become an official, but he replied: "Nowadays, the villain has won, the royal family will be in chaos, I want to flee to Huaihai to protect the old and the young."

古文：乃南到广陵。
现代文：于是南到广陵。
English: So I went south to Guangling.

古文：徐州刺史陶谦礼之甚厚。
现代文：徐州刺史陶谦以礼相待，至为周到。
English: Xuzhou chief Tao Qian was very courteous and considerate.

古文：劭不自安，告其徒曰： 陶恭祖外慕声名，内非真正。
现代文：许劭感到不安，告诉他的门徒说： 陶恭祖表面上好名，内心却不是真的。
English: Xu Yao felt uneasy and told his disciple: "Tao Gongzu has a good name on the surface, but he is not genuine at heart.

古文：待吾虽厚，其势必薄。不如去之。 
现代文：对我虽然很厚，这种情况是不能维持长久的，不如走吧。 
English: Although it is very thick for me, this situation cannot be maintained for a long time, it is better to leave.

古文：遂复投扬州刺史刘繇于曲阿。
现代文：于是到曲阿投扬州刺史刘繇。
English: So he went to Qiaotou in Yangzhou to meet Liu Yao.

古文：其后陶谦果捕诸寓士。乃孙策平吴，劭与繇南奔豫章而卒。时年四十六。
现代文：后来陶谦果然收捕了寄居在他那里的宾客，孙策平定吴国以后，许劭与刘繇南逃豫章，死在那里，时年四十六岁。
English: Later, Tao Qian did indeed arrest the guests who were staying with him. After Sun Ce conquered the State of Wu, Xu Yao and Liu Xuanan fled Yuzhang and died there at the age of 46.

古文：兄虔亦知名，汝南人称平舆渊有二龙焉。
现代文：许劭的哥哥许虔，也有名，汝南人称平舆有两条龙呢。
English: Xu Yao's brother Xu Qian is also famous. The people of Yunnan say that there are two dragons in Pingyao.

