古文：楚怀王拘张仪，将欲杀之。
现代文：楚怀王扣押了张仪，准备杀了他。
English: Chu Hui Wang detained Zhang Yi and prepared to kill him.

古文：靳尚为仪谓楚王曰： 拘张仪，秦王必怒。
现代文：这时楚怀王的佞臣靳尚对怀王说： 君王扣留张仪，秦王必定愤怒。
English: At this time, Chu Huai Wang's vassal Yan Shang said to Huai Wang: The king detained Zhang Yi, the Qin king must be furious.

古文：天下见楚之无秦也，楚必轻矣。 
现代文：天下诸侯一看楚国失去了盟邦秦国，楚国的地位就会低落。 
English: When the princes of the world saw that Chu had lost its ally, Qin, the status of Chu would decline.

古文：又谓王之幸夫人郑袖曰： 子亦自知且贱于王乎? 郑袖曰： 何也? 
现代文：接着靳尚又对怀王的宠妃郑袖说： 你可知道你你马上就要在君王面前失宠了！ 郑袖说： 为什么？ 
English: Then Gong Shang said to the king's favorite wife, Zheng Sool, "Do you know that you are about to fall out of favor with the king?" Zheng Sool said, "Why?

古文：尚曰： 张仪者，秦王之忠信有功臣也。今楚拘之，秦王欲出之。
现代文：靳尚说： 张仪是秦王有功的忠臣，现在出国将他扣留，秦国肯定会要求楚国释放张仪。
English: Yu Shang said: Zhang Yi is a meritorious loyal subject of the King of Qin. Now that he is out of the country, he will be detained. The State of Qin will certainly ask the State of Chu to release Zhang Yi.

古文：秦王有爱女而美，又简择宫中佳翫丽好翫习音者，以欢从之；资之金玉宝器。奉以上庸六县为汤沐邑，欲因张仪内之楚王。
现代文：秦王有一个美丽的公主，同时又选择美貌善玩且懂音乐的宫女作陪嫁，为了使她高兴，此外秦王还陪嫁了各种金玉宝器，用上庸县送给她作为享乐的费用，这次正想让张仪献给楚王为妻。
English: King Qin had a beautiful princess, and at the same time, he chose a beautiful, playful and musical princess to accompany him. In order to make her happy, in addition, King Qin also accompanied her with various gold and jade treasures, using Shangyong County to give her as entertainment expenses. This time, he wanted Zhang Yi to be dedicated to King Chu as his wife.

古文：楚王必爱，秦女依强秦以为重，挟宝地以为资，势为王妻以临于楚。王惑于虞乐，必厚尊敬亲爱之而忘子子益贱而日疏矣。 
现代文：君王必定很爱秦国公主，而秦国公主也仰仗强秦来抬高自己身价，同时更以珠宝土地为资本，四处活动，她势必成为君王的妻子，到那时秦国公主就等于君临楚国，而君王每天都沉迷于享乐，必然忘记你，你被忘掉以后，那你被轻视的日子就不远了。 
English: The king must love the Qin princess very much, and the Qin princess also relies on the strong Qin to raise her status. At the same time, she uses jewelry and land as capital to move around. She is bound to become the king's wife. At that time, the Qin princess is equal to the king of Chu. And the king is addicted to pleasure every day and will inevitably forget you. After you are forgotten, the day when you are despised is not far away.

古文：郑袖曰： 愿委之于公，为之奈何? 曰： 子何不急言王，出张子。
现代文：郑袖说： 我愿意把这一切都拜托给您来处理，您将要怎么办呢？ 
English: Zheng Sleeve said: I am willing to entrust all this to you to deal with. What are you going to do?

古文：张子得出，德子无已时，秦女必不来，而秦必重子。
现代文：靳尚说： 您为什么不赶快劝说大王将张仪给放了。如果张仪被释放了，他心里就会对您感激不尽，秦国的公主也就不会来了，秦国也必定会尊重您。
English: Gong Shang said: Why don't you quickly persuade the king to release Zhang Yi. If Zhang Yi is released, he will be grateful to you in his heart, the princess of Qin will not come, and Qin will certainly respect you.

古文：子内擅楚之贵，外结秦之交。
现代文：您在国内能够拥有楚国的高贵地位，在国外和秦国交好。
English: You can have the noble status of the State of Chu at home, and make friends with the State of Qin abroad.

古文：畜张子以为用，子之子孙必为楚太子矣，此非布衣之利也。 
现代文：并且储备张仪来为您所用，您的子孙必然会成为楚国的太子，这可不是寻常老百姓所能得到的！ 
English: And reserve Zhang Yi to use for you, your children and grandchildren will inevitably become princes of Chu, which is not something ordinary people can get!

古文：郑袖遽说楚王出张子。
现代文：郑袖马上就去说服楚怀王释放了张仪。
English: Zheng immediately went to persuade Chu Huai to release Zhang Yi.

