古文：十八日辞自然师下山。
现代文：十八日辞别自然禅师下山。
English: On the 18th day, the Zen master left the mountain.

古文：一里半，抵山麓。
现代文：一里半路，到达山麓。
English: Half a mile and you reach the foot of the mountain.

古文：苗蛮伏莽可虑。不若西北由东基出平坝抵普安，多行四十里，而地僻苗驯，可免意外。 余思由两顺亦须三日行，走平坝路迂而行多，亦三日可达普安，遂不西行而北逾岭，其岭即白云山之西垂也。
现代文：往西行一里半，有几家人在南面山麓，是永丰庄，都是白云寺中的佃户。由庄前向西通往尖峰下的山峡中去，那是去广顺州的路；从庄前向西去往南转，那是到定番州的路；由庄前向北越过山岭，那是通土地关的路。这之前自然替我策划经由的道路时，说： 经由广顺州、安顺州向西到普定卫，那条道近，然而广顺、安顺两地之间苗蛮伏在丛林中挡路抢劫，值得忧虑。还不如往西北经由东基过平坝卫到达普安，多走四十里路，可地方偏僻苗民良善，可避免出意外。 我考虑经由广顺、安顺两州也须走三天徒平坝卫这条路绕道走而且走的地方多，也是三天可以到达普安，便不往西走而向北越岭，这座岭就是白云山西下之峰了。
English: A mile and a half to the west, there are several families at the foot of the mountain to the south. It is Yongfeng Village, and they are all the tenants of Baiyun Temple. From the village, go west to the gorge under the spikes, that is the road to Guangshun Prefecture; from the village, go west to the south, that is the road to Dingbanzhou; from the village, go north over the mountains, that is the road to the land barrier. Before this, when he naturally planned the road for me, he said: Through Guangshun and Anshun to the west to Pudingwei, that road is close, but the seedlings between Guangsh

古文：共一里，越其北，有坞东北向；东南界即白云后龙潭之后，西北界即南岭所环，转北而东，属于龙潭东峰之下者；其中平坞一壑，南北长二里，水亦中洼下坠，两旁多犁为田，是名八垒。
现代文：共行一里，翻越到岭北，有个山坞呈东北向；东南境就是白云山后龙潭的后面，西北境便是南岭环绕之处，转向北再往东延伸，连接到龙潭东峰之下的山峦；群山环绕之中有一个平坦的山坞，南北方向长二里，水流也是向中间的洼地下坠，两旁大多犁为田地，这里名叫八垒。
English: After walking for one mile and crossing over to the north of the ridge, there is a dock facing northeast; the southeast border is behind Longtan behind Baiyun Mountain, and the northwest border is where Nanling is surrounded, turning north and extending eastward, connecting to the mountains under the east peak of Longtan; there is a flat dock in the middle of the mountains, two miles long in the north-south direction, the water flow also falls into the middle depression, and both sides are mostly fields, here called the eighth base.

古文：北竟坞中，乃北逾石岭。
现代文：向北在坞中走到头，于是往北翻越石岭。
English: Walked north in the dock, and then walked north over the stone ridge.

古文：共半里下，北度独木桥，有坞自东北向西南，是为干沟，横渡之。
现代文：共半里下走，向北过了独木桥，有个山坞自东北伸向西南，这便是干沟，横向越过干沟。
English: We walked down a total of half a mile and passed a single-tree bridge to the north. There was a dock stretching from the northeast to the southwest, which was a dry ditch, and we crossed the dry ditch horizontally.

古文：北上半里，是为土地关。
现代文：向北上走半里，这是土地关。
English: Go half a mile north, and you'll find yourself at the border.

古文：下关半里，凿石坎停细流一盂，曰 一碗水 ，行者以口就而啜之。
现代文：下关来走半里，有股细流流入凿成钵孟状的石坑中，叫 一碗水 ，走路的人用嘴就着饮水。
English: Half a mile from Shimonoseki, a trickle of water flows into a stone pit hewn into the shape of a dragonfly. It's called a bowl of water, and walkers drink it with their mouths.

古文：又西向一里半，出峡；由其北循山东北转，为水车坝道。
现代文：又向西行一里半，出了峡谷；由峡口北面顺山势往东北转去，是去水车坝的路。
English: Another mile and a half to the west, out of the canyon; from the north side of the canyon, along the mountain to the northeast, is the road to the hydroelectric dam.

古文：由其西截坞直行，一里半，有村在北山下，是为谷精。
现代文：由峡口西边横穿山坞一直前行，一里半路，有个村庄在北山下，这是谷精。
English: From the west side of the gorge, cross the dock and go straight ahead. Half a mile ahead, there is a village at the foot of the north mountain, this is Gu Jing.

古文：从村西转，又截坞而下，一里，转入山峡，有溪自西南而北，即从北峡转而东去，是水车坝之上流也；其流自广顺州东北老龙南谷来者。
现代文：从村西转向，又横越山坞下走，一里，转入山峡之中，有条溪流自西南流向北面，随即从北面山峡中转向东流去，这是水车坝的上游；这条溪流是从广顺州东北面主峰的南面山谷中流来的。
English: Turning from the west of the village, and walking across the dock, one mile, turning into the canyon, there is a stream flowing from the southwest to the north, and then turning from the north canyon to the east, which is the upstream of the hydroelectric dam; this stream flows from the south valley of the main peak in the northeast of Guangzhou.

古文：渡之，又西越山坡，旋下，溯西来小流入；其流东注南来大溪，即同之直向东去。
现代文：渡过溪水，又向西登越山坡，很快下坡，溯西来的小水流进去；这条水流往东注入南来的大溪中，就同大溪径直向东流去。
English: After crossing the stream, they ascended westward over the slope of the mountain, and soon went downhill, and the small stream flowing westward flowed in; this stream flowed eastward into the stream coming from the south, and it flowed straight to the east along with the stream.

古文：路溯溪南，山峡逼仄，时攀石上下，二里余，乃西渡此水。
现代文：路溯溪流南岸走，山峡十分狭窄，不时攀着岩石上上下下，有二里多，这才向西渡过这条溪水。
English: Tracing the south bank of the stream, the gorge is very narrow, from time to time climbing up and down the rock, there are more than two miles, which is why I crossed the stream to the west.

古文：从其北西向又半里，其北削崖高穹，有洞上缀，其门南向，遂从其下西逾坳。
现代文：在溪北向西又走半里，路北陡削的山崖高高隆起，有个山洞点缀在上面，洞日向南，于是从它下边向西越过山坳。
English: Half a mile further west on the north side of the creek, the steep cliffs to the north of the road rise high and there is a cave dotted on top, the cave faces south, so I crossed the ridge from below it to the west.

古文：坳间石骨棱厉。
现代文：山坳间岩石嶙峋，棱角锋利，紧逼过去连接着南山。
English: A rocky ridge between the mountains, with sharp edges and corners, connects Nanshan with the past.

古文：逼属南山，回视前溪在其下，不知从何而出，当亦透穴之流也。
现代文：回头审视，先前的溪流就在它下边，木知是从什么地方流出来的，应该也是穿过洞穴流出来的水流。
English: Looking back, the previous stream was just below it, and the water that flowed out of somewhere must have been the water that flowed through the cave.

古文：先是自然谓余，此间如马铃堡诸水，多从山穴出，即水车坝水亦流自穴中者，不知即指此水，抑谓南来大溪也。
现代文：这以前自然告诉我，这一带如马铃堡的各条水流，大多是从山洞中流出，即便是水车坝的水也是从洞中流出来的，不知就是指这条溪水，还是指南边流来的大溪。
English: Previously, I was naturally told that most of the streams in this area, such as the Horseshoe Fort, flowed out of the cave, and even the water from the dam flowed out of the cave. I don't know if this refers to this stream, or the large stream that flows alongside the guide.

古文：逾坳西稍下，约一里，有路交为 十 字：其南北皆从山岭上下，有石蹬逶迤悠长而曲折，乃广顺达贵省道也；其东西即逾坳而西下峡中者。
现代文：越过山坳向西略下走，约有一里，有道路相交成 十 字形：那南北两方都从山岭上下来，有石阶透逸而去的，是从广顺州到贵州省城的路；那条呈东西向的就是越过山坳向西一下到峡中去的路。
English: Walking slightly westward across the ridge for about a mile, there are roads that intersect in a zigzag pattern. The north-south road descends from the mountain ridge, with stone steps leading through, and is the road from Guangshun to the provincial capital of Guizhou. The east-west road is the road that goes westward across the ridge to the middle of the gorge.

古文：从峡西下半里，又闻水声潺潺，有水深自坑底东注坳下，信乎即坳东透穴之水矣。
现代文：从峡谷西头走半里，又听见潺潺的流水声，有水流自深深的坑谷底向东流注于山坳之下，确确实实这就是山坳东头穿过洞穴的水流了。
English: After walking half a mile from the west end of the canyon, I heard the sound of rushing water. A stream of water from the bottom of a deep canyon flowed eastward under the hawthorn. This was indeed the water flowing through the cave at the east end of the hawthorn.

古文：溯之，山坞复开，有村在西山下，是为东基下寨。
现代文：逆流而行、山坞重又开阔起来，有个村庄在西山下，这是东基下寨。
English: Going against the current, the dock is heavy and open, there is a village under the West Mountain, which is Dongji Lower Village.

古文：从其前转而东北，则下寨山之北突也。
现代文：从山寨前转向东北，就到了下寨山向北突出之处。
English: Turning from the front of the cottage to the northeast, you come to the place where the lower cottage mountain protrudes to the north.

古文：循之一里，又西北转，则西界山纯削为石，而东界则土脊迤逦ｙíｌì曲折连绵。又北二里，有村当北冈之上，是为东基上寨。
现代文：沿着这里走一里，又转向西北，只见西边的山清一色是陡削的岩石，可东边却是透邀而去的土山脊。又往北行二里，有村庄位于北面山冈之上，这是东基上寨。
English: Walk one mile along here, and turn to the northwest, only to see that the west side of the mountain is a steep rock, but the east side is an inviting earth ridge. Another two miles north, there is a village located on the hill to the north, this is Dongji Shangzhai.

古文：寨中悬小支尽处，皆瓦房鳞次，非他苗寨所及。
现代文：寨子高悬在一座旁出小山尽头的中央，全是瓦房，鳞次栉比，不是其他苗寨所能赶得上的。
English: The stockade hangs high in the middle of the end of a hill next to it. It is made up entirely of tile-roofed buildings, and is out of all proportion to the rest of the village.

古文：由寨西北向半里，有泉飞流注腋间，中寨东而出，寨当其中。
现代文：由上寨向西北行半里，有泉水飞流奔注于山侧，流经寨子东边而去，寨子正当溪流中段。
English: Half a mile northwest of Shangzhai, a spring rushes down the side of the mountain, flowing past the eastern edge of the village, and the village is right in the middle of the stream.

古文：小支左右，皆祟冈峻峡。
现代文：小山的左右两侧，都是高冈和深峡。
English: On the left and right sides of the hill, there are high hills and deep gorges.

古文：寨后复环一坞，良畴层倚焉，皆此泉之所润，而透于东坳之下者也。
现代文：寨子后方又有山坞环绕着，良田层层相依，全是此条山泉滋润之处，并浸透到东面山坳之下去。
English: Behind the stockade there is also a dockyard surrounded by good fields, all of which are moistened by this mountain spring, which seeps down to the hawthorns to the east.

古文：蜿蜒上跻者一里，从岭上复北逾顶者半里，下至坞中。
现代文：弯弯曲曲上登了一里路，从岭上再往北翻越山顶半里路，下到山坞中。
English: I climbed the one-mile road on the bend, and then climbed the half-mile road on the top of the mountain from the ridge to the north, and went down to the dock.

古文：望北峰夹立甚高，其下有坞自西北来者，即上寨后注腋之水，从水车坝而南去者也；其下有坞向东北坠音，即坞中东分之水，从华仡佬桥而北出者也。
现代文：远望北面山峰对峙＋分高峻，峰下有自西北延伸而来的山坞，坞中水流就是上寨后边奔注到山侧的水流，经水车坝向南流去；峰下有向东北方下坠的山坞，坞中就是向东分流的水流，从华忆佬桥往北流出去。
English: Looking far and wide to the north, the mountain peaks are facing each other and are quite high. Below the peak, there is a dock extending from the northwest. The water flow in the dock is the water flow that rushes to the mountain side from the back of the upper village and flows southward through the dam. Below the peak, there is a dock that falls to the northeast. The water flow in the dock is the water flow that branches off to the east and flows northward from Huayingyao Bridge.

古文：其坞甚平，中犁为田。
现代文：两处山坞十分平整，坞中有开垦的田地。
English: The two mountain docks are very flat, and there are cultivated fields in the docks.

古文：从田塍北上，又东北升岭，半里，逾峰头而饭。
现代文：经由田间小道往北上走，又向东北登岭，半里，越过峰头吃饭。
English: Walk north along the field path, and then walk northeast up the ridge, half a mile, and cross the peak to eat.

古文：于是北望遥山，开伏数里外，石峰屏列，俱不能与此山并峻矣。
现代文：从这里北望远山，数里之外，开阔低伏，石峰呈屏风状排列，全都不如此山陡峻。
English: From here, the North Telescopic Mountain, a few miles away, is open and low-lying, and the stone peaks are arranged in a screen shape, all of which are not so steep.

古文：北下甚坦，半里，路分两岐：一从东北行者，从黄泥堡、天生桥而达省；一从西北行者，为野鸭塘出平坝道。
现代文：往北下山非常平坦，半里，路分为两条岔道：一条从东北方经由黄泥堡、天生桥到达省城；一条向西北从野鸭塘到平坝卫。
English: The descent to the north is very flat. For half a mile, the road is divided into two branch roads: one from the northeast via Huangdi Fort and Tiansheng Bridge to the provincial capital; one to the northwest from Wild Duck Pond to Pingbawei.

古文：遂从西北下山，一里，抵山下。
现代文：于是从西北这条路下山，一里路，到达山下。
English: So I took the northwest road down the mountain, a one-mile route, and reached the foot of the mountain.

古文：沿坡陀西行，渐有小水，俱从东北去。
现代文：沿着倾斜的山坡往西行，渐渐有些小股流水，都向东北方流去。
English: Along the sloping hillside to the west, gradually some small streams of water flowed to the northeast.

古文：二里，复溯水入峡，一里，复陟岭而上，又二里，遂西过野鸭塘。
现代文：二里，又溯水入峡，一里，再次登岭上行，又走二里，于是经过野鸭塘西边。
English: Two miles, and then follow the water into the gorge, one mile, climb up the ridge again, walk two miles, and then pass the west side of the wild duck pond.

古文：有堡数十家在南山下，其前有塘潴水，直逼北山，然东西皆高，不知从何而泄。即所谓野鸭塘是也。
现代文：在南山下有数于家住在上堡中，堡前方有个水塘蓄着水，一直逼到北山，可是东西两面的地势都高，不知从哪里流泻出去，这就是所谓的野鸭塘了。
English: At the foot of the South Mountain, there are a number of families living in the upper castle. In front of the castle, there is a reservoir of water that reaches all the way to the North Mountain, but the terrain on both sides is high, and I don't know where the water flows out from. This is the so-called wild duck pond.

古文：绕堡前西南行半里，望西北山崖间有洞高穹，其前陇复有洞伏于下，乃呼担夫少停行李路隅，余独从西岭横陟之。
现代文：绕到土堡前往西南行半里，望见西北方山崖之间有山洞高高隆起，它前边的土垄上还有个洞伏在下方，便呼唤挑夫稍停一下，把行李放在路旁，我独自一人从西岭横向登山洞。
English: After going half a mile southwest around the earthen castle, I saw a cave high up between the cliffs in the northwest, and there was a cave below it on the dirt ridge in front of it. I called the porter to stop for a moment and put the luggage on the side of the road. I was alone from Xiling to the climbing cave.

古文：半里，遂陟下洞之上。
现代文：半里路，便爬到下洞的上方。
English: After half a mile, they climbed to the top of the lower cave.

古文：陇不甚高，然四面皆悬削不可下。
现代文：土垄不怎么高，然而四面都悬空，陡削得不能下去。
English: The ridge of soil is not very high, but it is overhanging on all sides, and it is too steep to go down.

古文：复稍西，下山麓东向行，遂得下洞。
现代文：又稍微向西走，下到山麓向东行，终于找到下洞。
English: I walked a little to the west again, went down to the foot of the mountain to the east, and finally found the lower cave.

古文：洞门南向，门中稍洼；其左透崖东出，另辟一门，门东北向，其后旋壑下陷，四面宽圆，虽洼而不暗。
现代文：洞以向南，洞口下边略略下注；洞左穿透山崖向东出去，另外开有一个洞口，洞口朝向东北方；洞后部旋绕着陷下去成为壑谷，四面宽敞圆滑，虽然低洼却不黑暗。
English: The cave faces south, and the lower edge of the cave mouth is slightly upturned; the left side of the cave penetrates the cliff to the east, and another cave opens, and the cave mouth faces the northeast; the back of the cave swirls and sinks to become a valley, and the four sides are spacious and smooth, although low-lying, it is not dark.

古文：既上，遂透东门而出。
现代文：上来之后，便钻过向东的洞日出来。
English: After coming up, it drilled through the hole to the east and came out.

古文：稍下，从峡中四陟上洞。
现代文：稍微下走一些，从峡中向西登上上洞。
English: Walk a little further down and climb westwards from the gorge to the upper cave.

古文：洞门东向，前有垒石为垣，后亦中洼而下，然不甚深，其上悬崖虽高，中扃之玲珑，乳柱之夭矫，反不若下洞也。
现代文：洞口向东，前边有石块垒砌成的墙，后面也是中央下洼，但不于分深，洞顶的悬崖虽高，可洞中封藏着的玲珑之状，钟乳石柱的夭矫之态，反而不如一下洞了。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east. There is a wall made of stone blocks in front, and a depression in the middle behind, but it is not more than a minute deep. Although the cliff at the top of the cave is high, the exquisite shape hidden in the cave, and the premature state of the stalactite column, are not as good as a hole.

古文：既出，复从峡中下，转前陇之嘴而西，又经下洞前，则前麓皆水草沮洳ｊūｒù低湿之地，东与野塘相连，而此即其上流也。
现代文：出洞之后，又从峡中下行，转过前面那条土垄的山嘴往西走，又经过下洞前，便见洞前的山麓全是水草泥沼，东边与野鸭塘相连，而此处就是野鸭塘水的上游了。
English: After coming out of the cave, I went down from the gorge, turned around the head of the ridge in front of me and went west. After passing through the lower cave, I saw that the foot of the mountain in front of the cave was all waterweed mud, and the east side was connected to the wild duck pond, and here was the upper reaches of the wild duck pond water.

古文：忽闻水声潺潺，自下洞前石根透出，历沮洳之坞，而东潴于野塘者也。
现代文：忽然听到潺潺水声，又见水从下洞前的石山脚下渗出，流经满是泥沼的山坞，而后往东贮于野鸭塘中去了。
English: Suddenly, the sound of rushing water was heard, and water was seen seeping from the foot of the stone mountain in front of the cave, flowing through the muddy dock, and then going east to be stored in the wild duck pond.

古文：又从西岭下半里，仍抵路隅，呼担与顾奴，遂西缘山坳行。
现代文：又从西岭上下山半里，仍抵达路边，招呼挑夫与顾奴，子是往西沿着山坳行。
English: Another half-mile up and down the mountain from Xiling, still arrived at the roadside, greeted the porter and the servant, and the son went west along the ridge.

古文：西望三峰攒列，外又有峰绕之，心以为异。
现代文：西望有三座山峰攒聚排列在一起，外围又有山峰环绕着它们，心里认为很奇异。
English: Looking west, I thought it was very strange that there were three peaks piled up and arranged together, and that there were peaks surrounding them on the outskirts.

古文：又西四里，有寨在南山下，又绕其前，循之左转。
现代文：又向西走四里，有个山寨在南山下，又绕到寨子前，沿着南山往左转。
English: Another four miles to the west, there is a cottage at the bottom of the Nanshan, and then go around to the front of the cottage and turn left along the Nanshan.

古文：西南半里，又逾一坳，于是西行峡中。
现代文：往西南行半里，又越过一个山坳，于是向西行走在峡谷中。
English: Half a mile to the southwest and over a ridge, I walked west into the canyon.

古文：其峡南北两界，排闼冲开门户而前。
现代文：这个峡谷的南北两面，山峰似门扉排列着向前方延去。
English: On the north and south sides of this canyon, mountain peaks line up like doors stretching ahead.

古文：北即所望三峰攒列者，但在其内，下望反不可见；南则有崖高削，上有一石倒垂，石色独白，而状如羊，是为羊吊崖。
现代文：北面就是前边望见的三座山峰攒聚排列之处，但在山峰内，从下边看反而望不见；南面则有高峻陡削的山崖，上面有一块岩石倒垂下来，只有这块岩石的颜色是白的，而形状似羊，这就是羊吊崖。
English: To the north is the place where the three peaks that can be seen in the foreground are gathered and lined up, but within the peaks, they cannot be seen from below; to the south is a high, steep cliff, with a rock hanging down from it, only this rock is white in color and shaped like a sheep, which is the sheep hanging cliff.

古文：逾坳至此，又一里矣。
现代文：穿越山坳来到此地，又有一里路了。
English: After crossing the mountains to get here, there's another mile to go.

古文：其北崖中断，忽露顶上之峰。盘穹矗竖意即回环高峻又挺拔陡峭，是为唐帽山；盖即前望三峰，至是又转形变象耳。
现代文：那北面的山崖从中断开，忽然露出山顶之上的山峰，呈圆盘状隆起矗立着，这是唐帽山；大概这就是先前望见的那三座山峰，到了这里形态又改变了。
English: The cliff to the north breaks away, suddenly revealing the peak above the summit, rising in a disk-like bulge, which is Tanghut Mountain; this is probably the three peaks seen earlier, and here the shape has changed again.

古文：按志，唐帽在省城南八十里，天生桥在金筑司北三十里。
现代文：据志书记载，唐帽山在省城南面八十里处，天生桥在金筑司北面三十里。
English: According to the official records, Tang Hat Mountain is 80 miles south of the provincial capital, and Tian Sheng Qiao is 30 miles north of Jinqiu.

古文：今天生桥在唐帽东北三十里，是天生桥去省反近，而唐帽反远，不知当时何以分界也？
现代文：现在天生桥在唐帽山东北三十里，这样天生桥距省城反而近，而唐帽山反而远，不知当时是根据什么划分界线的呢？
English: Now Tiansheng Bridge is located 30 miles northeast of Tang Cap Mountain, so Tiansheng Bridge is close to the provincial capital, while Tang Cap Mountain is far away. I don't know what the demarcation line was based on at the time.

古文：自然言建文君先驻唐帽，后驻白云；志言其处可以避兵，亦幽閟之区矣。
现代文：自然说起过，建文帝先住在唐帽山，后来才住在白云山；志书谈到此处可以躲避战乱，也真是一处幽寂闭塞的地方呀！
English: Of course, it was mentioned that Emperor Jianwen first lived in Tanghu Mountain, and later in Baiyun Mountain; the history book said that here you can escape the war, and it's really a quiet and secluded place!

古文：又西一里余，有峡南向下，是为猪槽堡。
现代文：又向西行一里多，有个山峡向南下延，这是猪槽堡。
English: Another mile to the west, there is a canyon extending to the south, this is the pig trough.

古文：路直西逾小脊而下，三里，则坞开南北，路交 十 字于中，乃横截之，渡一小水。
现代文：道路一直向西越过小山山脊然后下走，三里路，便有个山坞呈南北向拓展开来，道路在坞中相交成 十 字形，于是横穿山坞过去，渡过一条小溪。
English: The road continued westward over the ridge of a small mountain and then went down. Three miles later, there was a dock extending in a north-south direction. The road intersected in the dock into a zigzag, and then crossed the dock and crossed a creek.

古文：半里，有堡在西山上，曰柳家堡。
现代文：半里，有座土堡在西山上，叫柳家堡。
English: Half a mile away, there is a mud castle on the west hill, called Liujia Castle.

古文：又北半里，又有堡在北陇上。
现代文：又往北走半里，又有个土堡在北边山垄之上。
English: Half a mile further north, there is another earthen fort on top of the northern ridge.

古文：于是循其右，复西上岭。
现代文：于是顺着山垄右侧，再往西上岭。
English: So I followed the right side of the ridge and then headed west to Shangling.

古文：一里，将及岭坳，有泉淙淙自土穴出，其色乳白，浑而不清。
现代文：一里，将要到达岭坳时，有股泉水涂涂地从土穴中流出，水色呈乳白色，浑浊不清。
English: One mile before reaching Lingyao, a stream of spring water trickled out of a hole in the ground. The water was milky white and muddy.

古文：逾岭下，共二里，复坞开南北，仍横截之。
现代文：越过山岭下走，共二里，又有个山坞呈南北状拓展开来，仍然横穿过山坞。
English: Walking down over the mountains, a total of two miles, there is another dock extending in a north-south direction, still cutting across the dock.

古文：有涧在坞中，其水甚小，潴而不流，似亦北去者。
现代文：有山涧在山坞中，涧水很小，积而不流，似乎也是往北流去的水流。
English: There is a hawthorn in the dock, the water is very small, it does not flow, it seems to be a northward flow of water.

古文：又西一里，复上岭。
现代文：又往西行一里，再次上岭。
English: Another mile to the west and up the ridge again.

古文：其岭南北石峰骈夹，中通一坳，甚逼。
现代文：此岭南北两面石峰并列夹立，中间通着一个山坳，非常狭窄。
English: The stone peaks on the north and south sides of this ridge stand side by side, with a very narrow pass in the middle.

古文：一里，越坳而西，见西壑中堰水满坡，始以为东出，而实不流之波也。
现代文：一里路，越过山坳往西走，看见西面壑谷中堤坝积水满池塘，开初以为池水是向东流出去，可实际上是不流动的死水。
English: A mile away, walking west across the mountains, I saw a pond full of water from the dam in the middle of the west valley. At first, I thought that the pond water was flowing out to the east, but it was actually stagnant water.

古文：循之又西一里，则大坞扩然西去，陂堰横障而北。
现代文：沿着池水又向西走一里，就有一个大山坞扩展开来向西延伸而去，水池的堤坝向北横挡在坞中。
English: One mile further west along the pond, there is a large dock extending to the west, with the pond's dike blocking the dock to the north.

古文：又北循之，有村在北山之嘴，曰狗场堡，乃汤吏部之佃苗也。
现代文：又往北顺着堤坝走，有个村庄在北山的山嘴处，叫狗场堡，住着吏部汤尚书的苗民佃户。
English: Further north along the embankment, there is a village at the mouth of the North Mountain, called the Dog Farm Castle, inhabited by the Miao people of Libe Tang Shangshu.

古文：村西平畴一坞，为膏腴之壤。
现代文：村西平整的田地布满山坞，是肥沃的田野。
English: The flat fields to the west of the village are dotted with docks and are fertile fields.

古文：欲投之宿，村人弗纳，曰： 西去二里有村，亦汤氏佃丁，其中可宿。 
现代文：想要在村里投宿，村里人不肯接纳，说： 往西去二里地有个村子，也住着汤家的佃户，村中可以住宿。 
English: If you want to stay in the village, the villagers won't accept you, saying, "There's a village two miles to the west, and there's also a Tanka family living in Seto, so you can stay in the village."

古文：乃复西循平畴北陇行。
现代文：只好再往西沿着平旷田野靠北的土垄走。
English: You just have to walk further west along the flat fields to the north of the ridge.

古文：一里余，有石峰界平坞中，削骨擎空，亦独秀之峭而险者。
现代文：一里多路，有座石峰坐落在平旷的山坞之中，陡削峭立，高擎在空中，也是一座似独秀峰那样峭拔险峻的山峰。
English: More than a mile away, there is a stone peak located in the middle of a flat dock, standing steeply, high in the air, and it is also a steep and precipitous mountain peak similar to the Duxiu Peak.

古文：透北峡而西，又半里，复得一村，入叩之，其人闭户遁去。
现代文：穿过北边的峡谷往西，又是半里路，又遇到一个村子，进村敲门，村里人关上门逃走了。
English: Crossing the canyon on the north side to the west, it is another half-mile, and another village is encountered. Entering the village and knocking on the door, the villagers closed the door and fled.

古文：又西得一堡，强入其中，茅茨茅草盖的屋陋甚，而卧处与猪畜同秽。
现代文：又向西走找到一座土堡，强行进入堡中，茅屋极简陋，而且睡觉的地方同猪畜的污物混在一起。
English: He also went west and found an earthen fort. He forced his way into the fort. The hut was very simple, and the sleeping place was mixed with the filth of pigs.

古文：盖此地皆苗熟者，虽为佃丁，而习甚鄙，令人反忆土蛮竹栏为上乘耳。
现代文：大体此地都是熟苗，虽然身为佃户，可是习俗却十分鄙陋，让人反而怀念那些土著蛮族的竹楼是上等的了。
English: In general, this area is full of young seedlings. Although I am a tenant, the customs are very despicable. On the contrary, it makes me miss the superior bamboo houses of the indigenous barbarians.

古文：十九日昧爽，促苗起作饭。
现代文：十九日黎明，催促苗民起床做饭。
English: At dawn on the 19th, urge Miao people to get up and cook.

古文：忽担人亦呼之，余心以为异，谓从来懒不肯起，今何以人呼亦呼也？
现代文：忽然听到挑夫也在呼叫，我心中非常奇怪，因为此人自来懒惰不肯起床，今天为什么在别人呼叫时他也叫呢？
English: Suddenly I heard the porter calling out, and I was very surprised, because this man had been lazy and refused to get up. Why was he calling out today when others were calling out?

古文：盖此人名王贵，为靖州太阳坪人。
现代文：原来此人名叫王贵，是靖州太阳坪人。
English: Originally, the man's name was Wang Gui, and he was from Sunping, Jingzhou.

古文：先自三里抵蓝涧，彼同数人自后尾至，告曰： 余侪我辈欲往庆远，苦此路不通，迂路又太远，闻参府以兵送行，故特来附带。 
现代文：先前从三里到达蓝涧时，他同几个人从后面尾随而至，告诉我说： 我们这些人想要前往庆远府，苦于此路不太畅通，绕道又太远，听说参将府派兵护送你上路，所以特意前来投靠你带我们结伴同行。 
English: When I arrived in Lanyu from Sanli earlier, he and a few other people followed me from behind and told me: We want to go to Qingyuanfu, but the road is not smooth and the detour is too far. I heard that the General Staff sent soldiers to escort you on your way, so I came to ask you to accompany us.

古文：余纳而怜之，途中即以供应共给之。
现代文：我同情他们便接纳了他们，途中就用释站供应的东西供给他们。
English: I felt sorry for them and took them in, giving them supplies from the aid station along the way.

古文：及抵庆远，彼已去。
现代文：到抵达庆远府时，他们已离开。
English: By the time they arrived in Qingyuan, they had already left.

古文：及游南山，复遇之，遂日日来候余，愿随往滇中。
现代文：到游览南山时，再度遇上他们，于是便天天来守着我，表示愿意随我前往云南。
English: When I visited Nanshan, I met them again, so they came to watch me every day and expressed their willingness to follow me to Yunnan.

古文：余思自庆抵南丹，有夫可送，至贵州界，恐无负担，欲纳其一人。因与之约曰： 余此地尚无所用汝，然既随余，亦每日予工价一分。
现代文：我考虑，从庆远府到南丹州，可以有差夫送行，到了贵州境内时，恐怕就无人挑担子了，只想接纳他们中的一个人，随即与他们约定说： 我在此地还没有用得上你们的地方，可是既然跟了我，也每天给一分银子的工钱。
English: I considered having a porter escort me from Qingyuan to Nantan, but when I arrived in Guizhou, I was afraid there would be no one to carry the load. I only wanted to receive one of them. I immediately made a deal with them: I haven't needed your place here yet, but since you've followed me, I'll pay you one silver coin a day.

古文：若遇负担处，每日与工价三分半。 
现代文：如果遇上挑担子的地方，每天的工钱给三分半银子。 
English: If there is a place to pick up the burden, the daily wage is three and a half silver coins.

古文：彼欲以二人从。
现代文：他们想要让两个人跟随我。
English: They want two people to follow me.

古文：后闻其侪在南山洞中，以絮塞牧牛童子口，余心疑之。而王贵来言，诱童子非伊，乃同行者，彼已另居于庆。
现代文：后来听说他们有人在南山山洞中，用棉絮塞住放牛儿童的嘴，我对他们产生怀疑，可是王贵来说，诱骗儿童的不是他，而是与他同行的那些人，他们已另外住到庆远去了。
English: Later, I heard that someone had stuffed the mouths of the children herding cattle with cotton wool in the Nanshan cave. I was suspicious of them, but for Wang Gui, it wasn't he who had tricked the children, but the people he was traveling with, who had moved to Qingyuan.

古文：已请独从。
现代文：末了，请求独自跟随我。
English: Finally, I ask you to follow me alone.

古文：后至麻哈，遂渐傲慢，以凳伤予足。
现代文：后来到了麻哈州时，态度逐渐傲慢起来，用凳子砸伤了我的脚。
English: Later, when I arrived in Mahahashtra, my attitude gradually became arrogant, and I injured my foot with a stool.

古文：及抵贵州，见余欲另觅夫，复作悔过状，甚堪怜，余复用之。
现代文：及到达贵州省城时，见我想要另找挑夫，他又作出悔过的祥子，十分可怜，我重又用了他。
English: And when I arrived in Guizhou Province, I saw that I wanted to find another driver, and he made a repentant Shoko, very pitiful, I used him again.

古文：至是早起，复不见，观余所藏路费，亦竟窃之去矣。
现代文：到今天早晨起床后，忽然不见了，察看我收藏的路费，也竟然被他偷去了。
English: When I woke up this morning, he was gone, and he had stolen my travel money collection.

古文：自余行蛮洞中，以数金藏盐筒中，不意日久为彼所窥，乃不失于蛮烟虺毒虺音ｈｕǐ原意为毒蛇。此处引申指此地人心之歹毒之区，而失之就坦遵途之日，徒有怅怅而已。
现代文：自从我走入蛮人居住的地区后，把一些钱藏在装盐的竹筒中，想不到天长日久被他窥见了，在蛮人居住的烟瘴蛇毒的地方竟然没有丢失，却在这马上就要走上坦途的地方丢失了，只有怅怅不乐而已。
English: Ever since I walked into the area inhabited by savages and hid some money in a bamboo tube containing salt, I couldn't imagine how long it would take for him to catch a glimpse of it. It turned out that it wasn't lost in the area inhabited by savages and poisoned by poisonous vipers, but it was lost in the area where I was about to walk on a smooth path. I couldn't help but feel sad.

古文：既明，担夫窃资已去，无可奈何。
现代文：天明后，挑夫偷了旅费已经逃走，无可奈何。
English: After daybreak, the pickpocket stole the travel money and ran away, helpless.

古文：求苗子送出平坝，不及三十里，索价甚贵，已而竟遁ｄùｎ逃去不肯出，盖苗习素不送客。
现代文：央求苗族送出平坝卫，不到三十里路，要价太贵，后竟然逃走了不肯出来，大概是苗族的习俗素来不送客人。
English: He begged the Miao people to send Pingbawei, less than thirty miles away, the asking price was too expensive, and then he even ran away and refused to come out. It is probably the custom of the Miao people not to send guests.

古文：予求之他苗，其人曰： 彼好意宿汝，奈何以担累之？
现代文：我央求其他苗族，那些人说： 他好意留你住宿，怎么用担子来劳累他？
English: I pleaded with the other Miao people, and they said, "He's so kind to let you stay with him, how can you burden him?

古文：须自负去。
现代文：必须自己担了去。
English: You have to carry it yourself.

古文：二三里抵九家堡，即有送者。 遍求之，其语皆然。
现代文：走两三里路到了九家堡，就有人送了。 遍求苗族，他们的话都是这样说。
English: After walking two or three miles to Jiu Jia Castle, someone gave him a horse.

古文：余无可奈何，饭而束担，与顾仆共抬而前行。
现代文：我无可奈何，吃饭后把担子捆在一起，与顾仆一同抬着往前走。
English: There was nothing I could do. After eating, I tied the burden together and carried it forward with my servant.

古文：由狗场西苗堡截坞堰南过，一里，逾岭西下，又过一苗堡，益转而南，又逾一岭。
现代文：由狗场堡西面的苗族土堡向南横越过山坞中的堤坝，行一里路，翻过山岭往西下行，又路过一处苗族土堡，益加转向南走，又越过一道岭。
English: From the Miao earthwork fort west of the dog park fort, walk south across the dam in the dock, walk one mile, cross the mountains and go down to the west, pass a Miao earthwork fort, then turn south and cross another ridge.

古文：半里，乃由岭头从岐路北向入坞，路小山寂。
现代文：半里，便经由岭头从岔路向北走入山坞，路小山寂。
English: Half a mile later, I walked north from Kushiro to the dock via Lingtou. The road was deserted.

古文：一里，乃西向下。
现代文：一里后，便向西下走。
English: After a mile, they headed west.

古文：半里，有溪汪然自南而北，始为脊北第一流，乃北合洛阳桥下水，东经威清而下乌江者。
现代文：半里，有条溪流浩浩荡荡自南流向北去，此溪开始是山脊北面的第一条大水流，往北汇合洛阳桥下的水流，向东流经威清卫后往下流入乌江。
English: Half a mile away, there is a huge stream flowing from the south to the north. This stream began as the first large stream on the north side of the ridge, merging with the water flow under Luoyang Bridge to the north, flowing eastward through Weiqingwei and flowing down into the Wujiang River.

古文：溪上旧有石桥，已圮；其东半涉水而渡；其西半是为九家堡，乃苗之熟者也。
现代文：溪上原来有座石桥，已经倒塌，从溪流东畔涉水，渡到西畔，就是九家堡，是汉化程度较高的苗族聚居处。
English: There used to be a stone bridge over the stream, but it has collapsed. The bridge spans the water from the eastern bank of the stream to the western bank. This is Jiujiapu, a highly Sinicized settlement of the Miao ethnic group.

古文：至是已近午矣，始雇得一夫，担而行。
现代文：来到这里已经接近中午了，这才雇到一个挑夫，挑了担子便走。
English: It was close to noon when we got here, so we hired a porter, picked up the load and left.

古文：复西北上陇，六里，有村在西山下，曰二家堡。
现代文：再向西北登上山陇，六里路，有个村庄在西山下，叫做二家堡。
English: Further northwest up the ridge, along Liuli Road, there is a village at the foot of the West Mountain, called Nijia Castle.

古文：从其东盘山嘴而北，北界山远辟旷然，直东遥见高峰在四十里外者，即志所云马鞍山，威清之山也。
现代文：从村东绕过山嘴往北走，北面远山起伏，村子显得于分空旷，远远见到正东方在四卜里开外的高峰，就是志书所说的马鞍山，是威清卫境内的山了。
English: From the east of the village, walk around the mountain to the north. The distant mountains rise and fall to the north. The village appears to be empty. Far away, you can see the high peak in the east, which is four miles away. It is the Ma'anshan mountain mentioned in the history book. It is the mountain in Wei Qingwei territory.

古文：路复循南山之北，西向入峡。
现代文：道路又沿着南山的北麓，向西进峡。
English: The road then follows the northern foot of Nanshan Mountain, heading west into the gorge.

古文：二里出峡，有村在南山下，曰江清。
现代文：二里路走出山峡，有村庄在南山下，叫江清。
English: Two miles out of the gorge, there is a village in the south of the mountain, called Jiangqing.

古文：其处山坞大开，平畴中拓，东有石峰离立，即与南山夹而为所从之峡者出。
现代文：此处山坞十分开阔，中间开垦为平整的田野，东边有石峰并排矗立，就是与南山夹峙而成为来时所过山峡的山峰。
English: Here, the dock is very open, with a flat field in the middle. On the east side, there are stone peaks standing side by side, which are the peaks of the mountain gorge that has been crossed by the Nanshan.

古文：由村东北向抵二石峰下。
现代文：由村东向北走到两座石峰之下。
English: From the east of the village, walk north to the foot of the two stone peaks.

古文：其峰兀突，南面削崖回裂而无深洞；西面有洞在峰半，其门西向。
现代文：这两座石峰高高耸起，南面陡削的山崖上有曲曲弯弯的裂缝却没有深洞；西面有个洞在山峰半腰上，洞口向西。
English: The two stone peaks rise high. On the south side of the steep cliff, there are curved cracks but no deep caves. On the west side, there is a cave halfway up the mountain, with the entrance to the west.

古文：亟令苗子停担峰下。
现代文：急忙命令苗族把担子停放在峰下。
English: He hurriedly ordered the Miao people to park their burden at the foot of the mountain.

古文：余先探其南面，无岩可入，惟西南峰下细流汩汩，向麓下窍中出，遂从其上跻入洞，洞顶甚平，间有乳柱下垂，若帷带飘摇。
现代文：我首先探察山峰的南面，没有岩洞可以进去，唯有西南一面的山峰下有泊泊流动的细流，向山麓下的窟窿中流出，于是从它上方爬入洞中，洞顶十分平滑，间或有钟乳石柱下垂，好似帷鳗衣带随风飘摇。
English: I first explored the southern side of the peak. There was no cave to enter, but on the southwest side of the peak, there was a trickle of water flowing under the peak. It flowed out into a hole under the foot of the mountain, and then climbed into the cave from above it. The top of the cave was very smooth, and occasionally stalactite columns sagged, like drapery bands swaying with the wind.

古文：其内分为三层。
现代文：洞内分为三层。
English: The cave is divided into three levels.

古文：外层即洞门之前，旷若堂皇，中有圆石，如堆旋而成者。
现代文：外层就是洞口以内靠前面的部分，空阔得有如宽敞的殿堂，中央有块圆石，如人工用刀子削圆的一样。
English: The outer layer is the part inside the mouth of the cave that is closer to the front, the space is as wide as a spacious hall, and there is a round stone in the center, as if it had been manually rounded with a knife.

古文：四五丈之内，即陷空而下。
现代文：四五丈以内，马上空陷下去。
English: Within four or five meters, immediately fall into the sky.

古文：其下亦平整圆拓，深约丈五，而大倍之。
现代文：那下边也很平整圆滑开阔，深处约一丈五，可大处有一倍。
English: The underside is also very flat, round, smooth and wide, with a depth of about one and a half meters, but can be doubled in most places.

古文：从其上下瞰，亦颇光明，盖洞门之光，既从上倒下，而其底北裂成隙，亦透明于外，似可挨入而未及也。
现代文：从这上边俯瞰下面，也很明亮，大概是洞口的光线，从上边反射到下面的原故，而洞底北边裂成缝隙，也从外面透进亮光来，想进去可时间来不及了。
English: Looking down from above, it is also very bright, probably because the light from the mouth of the cave is reflected from the top to the bottom, while the northern side of the bottom of the cave is cracked into a crevice, and light also penetrates from the outside. If you want to go in, it's too late.

古文：是为下层。
现代文：这是下层。
English: This is the lower level.

古文：下层之东，其上复深入成洞，与外层对，第为下陷所隔，不能竟达。
现代文：上层的东边，洞壁上又深陷进去形成山洞，与外层相对，但只是被下陷处隔断了，不能走到底。
English: On the east side of the upper layer, the cave wall is deeply sunk into the cave, opposite the outer layer, but it is only cut off by the sinkhole and cannot go to the end.

古文：由外层南壁攀崖而上，东透入腋，列柱如门，颇觉幽暗，而玲珑嵌空，诡态百出。
现代文：由外层南侧洞壁攀崖而上，向东侧方钻进去，石柱排列好像门道，觉得十分幽暗，可玲珑精巧的钟乳石镶嵌在洞中，奇异之状千姿百态。
English: Climbing up the cliff from the outer south side of the cave wall, drilling into the east side, the stone pillars are arranged like a doorway. It feels very dark, but the exquisite stalactites are embedded in the cave, with a thousand strange shapes.

古文：披窍北下，遂达中层，则外层之光，仍中射而入。
现代文：穿过石窍向北下去，便到了中层，就见外层的光线，仍然照射进洞中。
English: After passing through the crag to the north, we reached the middle layer, where we could see the light from the outer layer still shining into the cave.

古文：其内千柱缤纷，万窍灵幻，左入甚深，而窈窕莫穷，前临下层，如在楼阁，亦贵竹中所仅见者。
现代文：中层内千百根石柱缤纷杂乱，万千个石窍灵妙奇幻，向左边进去十分深，但幽深得无法穷尽，前方面临下层，身体如在楼阁之中，这也是在贵州境内绝少见到的地方。
English: In the middle layer, thousands of stone pillars are colorful and chaotic, and thousands of stone nooks are magical. It is very deep to enter to the left, but it is too deep to be exhausted. The front faces the lower floor, and the body is like in a castle, which is also a place rarely seen in Guizhou.

古文：方攀陟不能去，而苗夫在下呼促不己，乃出洞而下。
现代文：正在攀登跋涉舍不得离去之时，苗族挑夫在山下呼唤催促不止，只好出洞下山。
English: When they were climbing and trekking and could not bear to leave, the Miao porter kept calling and urging at the bottom of the mountain, so they had to leave the cave and go down the mountain.

古文：从洞前北行，升陟塍陇二里，有大溪自西而东，溯之西行。
现代文：从洞前往北行，上爬土垄二里，有条大溪自西流往东去，溯溪往西行。
English: From the cave, go north, climb up the dirt ridge for two miles, there is a large stream flowing from the west to the east, and follow the stream to the west.

古文：有桥十余巩横跨其上，是为洛阳桥，乃新构而成者。
现代文：有座十多个桥拱的桥横跨在溪流上，这是洛阳桥，是新建成的桥。
English: There is a bridge with more than ten bridge arches across the stream. This is Luoyang Bridge, a newly built bridge.

古文：桥下流甚大，自安顺州北流至此，曲而东注威清，又北合陆广，志所谓的澄河是矣。
现代文：桥下水流很大，自安顺州向北流到此处，弯曲向东注入威清，又往北会合陆广河，这就是志书所说的的澄河了。
English: The water flow under the bridge is very large. It flows northward from Anshunzhou to here, bends eastward to inject Weiqing, and then northward to meet Lu Guanghe. This is the Chenghe mentioned in the book.

古文：度桥北，又溯流而西，抵水之北来东折处，遂从岐北向溯小溪行。
现代文：过到桥北，又溯流往西走，到达河水往北流来向东转折之处，就从岔道向北溯一条小溪走。
English: After passing to the north of the bridge, we followed the stream to the west, and when we reached the turning point where the river flowed north to east, we followed a small stream from the fork to the north.

古文：始由溪东，已涉堰由溪西，已复西北逾冈，五里，抵铜鼓山。
现代文：开始在溪东走，不久涉过堤坝在溪西走，随即又向西北越过山冈，五里，到达铜鼓山。
English: He started walking in the east of the creek, and soon he waded through the dike and walked in the west of the creek, and then he crossed the mountain to the northwest, five miles, and reached Tonggu Mountain.

古文：其处山坞南辟，北界石峰耸立，皆有洞，或高或下，随峰而出。
现代文：此处南面辟成山坞，北面有石峰耸立，峰上都有洞，有的高有的低，随着山峰的起伏显露出来。
English: Here, in the south, there is a dock, and in the north, there are stone peaks. There are holes on the peaks, some high and some low, which are revealed with the ups and downs of the peaks.

古文：西界则遥山自北而南，蜿蜒如屏，连裂三洞，其门皆东向，而南偏者最高敞。
现代文：西境则是远山自北而南蜿蜒而下，有如屏障，一连裂开三个洞，洞口都朝向东，而偏向南面一点的洞口最高敞。
English: To the west, the distant mountains wind down from north to south, like a barrier, cracking three holes in a row. The openings all face east, while the one facing south is the most spacious.

古文：其前有数十家当其下，即钢鼓寨也，是洞名铜鼓洞。
现代文：洞前面有儿十户人家正位于洞下，就是铜鼓寨了，这个洞名叫铜鼓洞。
English: In front of the cave, there are ten households under the cave, which is the Bronze Drum Village. This cave is called the Bronze Drum Cave.

古文：按志，铜鼓山在威清西四十五里，以方隅道里计之，似即此山；然其地去平坝仅五里，不平坝而威清，何也？
现代文：根据志书，铜鼓山在威清西边四十五里处，按方位里程来计算，似乎就是此山；但是此地离平坝仅有五里路，志书不用平坝来记载它的方位却取威清，是为什么呢？
English: According to the history book, Tonggu Mountain is located forty-five miles west of Weiqing, and it seems to be this mountain according to the azimuth mileage. However, this place is only five miles away from Pingba, and the history book does not use Pingba to record its position but takes Weiqing. Why?

古文：其洞高悬峻裂，内入不甚深，而前多突耸之石，环牖即窗户分门，反觉窈窕。
现代文：此洞高悬险峻深裂进去，进入里面不怎么深，然而洞前有很多突兀耸立的岩石，似环绕着的窗户分列的门洞，反而觉得窈窕。
English: The cave is high, steep and deep, and it is not very deep to enter, but there are many jutting rocks in front of the cave, and the doors and holes that seem to be surrounded by windows are disjointed, but they feel uncomfortable.

古文：其右重壁之上，圆穴一规，北向高穹。
现代文：洞右侧的重重石壁之上，有一个圆圆的洞穴，面向北方呈弧形高高隆起。
English: On top of the heavy stone wall on the right side of the cave, there is a round cave, facing north in an arc-shaped high rise.

古文：攀崖登之，其中上盘空顶，下坠深阱，土人架木铺竹为垫，俨然层阁。
现代文：攀着石崖登上去，洞中上面弯曲着空荡荡的洞顶，下方陷下去形成深深的陷阱，当地人架了木架，上铺竹垫，俨然似层层楼阁。
English: Climbing up the rock cliff, the empty roof of the cave bends above, and the bottom sinks down to form a deep trap. The locals have set up a wooden frame and a bamboo mat on top, resembling a multi-story building.

古文：顶东另透明窗，阱内复有穴自下层出入，土人置扉穴前，晚则驱牛马数十头藏其中。
现代文：洞顶靠东面之处另外透着一个明亮的窗户，深阱内又有洞穴可从下层出入，当地人在洞穴前安装了一扇门，到晚上便把几十头牛马赶进洞中藏起来。
English: At the top of the cave to the east there is another bright window, and inside the deep pit there are caves that can be accessed from the lower level. The locals installed a door in front of the cave, and in the evening they drove dozens of cattle and horses into the cave and hid them.

古文：正岩之后，有裂窍西南人，滴沥垂其内不绝，渐转渐隘而暗，似向无入者，乃出。
现代文：正洞的后部，有处裂开的窟窿向西南方深入进去，那里面水滴不停地落下来，渐渐转进去渐渐变得又窄又暗，似乎是向来无人进来的地方，于是出洞。
English: At the back of the main cave, there is a cracked hole that goes deep into the southwest, where water droplets keep falling, gradually turning into it, gradually becoming narrow and dark, it seems to be a place where no one has ever entered, and then out of the cave.

古文：时有一老者，侯余洞前。
现代文：此时有一位老年人，在洞前等着我。
English: At this time, there was an elderly man waiting for me in front of the cave.

古文：余欲并探北偏中洞，老者曰： 北洞浅，不足观。
现代文：我想要接着去探一探偏向北边的中洞，老人说： 北洞浅，不值得观赏。
English: I wanted to go on and explore the middle cave, which is to the north. The old man said, "The north cave is shallow and not worth seeing.

古文：有南洞在高崖上，且大路所由，可一登之。 乃循洞麓西转，不数十步，则峰南果有洞出崖端，其门南向，其下依崖而居者，犹环之为庐。
现代文：有个南洞在高处的山崖上，而且大路经过那里，可以去登一登。 于是沿着洞下的山麓转向西，不到几十步，就见山峰南面果然有个洞出现在山崖顶端，洞口向南，洞下方依傍着山崖居住的人家，仍然是环绕着山崖建了房屋。
English: There is a south cave on the high cliff, and the highway passes through there, so you can go and climb it. So I turned west along the foot of the cave, and within a few dozen steps, I saw that there was indeed a cave on the south side of the mountain at the top of the cliff. The mouth of the cave was to the south, and the houses of the people who lived along the cliff below the cave were still built around the cliff.

古文：乃从庐后跻级上。
现代文：于是从屋后登石阶上洞。
English: So he climbed the stone steps from behind the house to get to the cave.

古文：洞门悬嵌弥高，前垒石为垣，若难堞形，内深五丈余，而无悬突之石，扩然高朗。
现代文：洞口悬嵌在更高之处，前面用石块垒砌成墙，似城墙的形状，洞内深有五丈多，但没有高悬尖突的岩石，显得空阔高敞明亮。
English: The mouth of the cave is suspended at a higher place. The front is made of stone block walls, similar to the shape of a city wall. The cave is more than five meters deep, but there are no high-hanging sharp rocks. It appears spacious, spacious and bright.

古文：其后洼陷而下者一二丈，然俱面阳而燥，土人置廪米仓盈其间，其左腋裂窍北下，渐下渐狭而卑越下越窄越低，土人曰与东洞通，想即垂沥不绝处也，亦以黑暗不暇入。
现代文：它的后部洼陷下去之处有一两丈，然而都向阳，很于燥，本地人在此设置了粮仓，粮食充盈在其中。洞左侧裂开一个向北下斜的窟窿，渐下走逐渐窄起来，而且地势越低，本地人说是与东洞相通，想来就是水滴不断之处了，但因为太黑暗来不及进去。
English: The place where the back part of the cave sinks down is one or two stories high, but it all faces the sun, it is very dry. The locals set up a granary here, and the grain is filled in it. A hole sloping down to the north opens on the left side of the cave, and it gradually narrows as it goes down. And the lower the terrain, the locals say that it is connected to the east cave. It seems to be a place where water drips constantly, but because it is too dark, it is too late to get in.

古文：时顾仆与苗子担前行已久，余恐其不之待，遂下山。
现代文：此时顾仆与苗子挑着担子已向前走了很久，我担心他们不会等我，便下了山。
English: At this time, Gu Min and Miao Zi have been carrying the burden for a long time. I was worried that they would not wait for me, so I went down the mountain.

古文：循麓西上，半里，逾坳，则顾仆与苗夫犹待于此。
现代文：沿着山麓往西上行，半里，越过山坳，却见顾仆与苗族挑夫仍等候在此。
English: Along the foot of the mountain to the west, half a mile, over the ridge, but saw Gu minion and Miao porter still waiting here.

古文：其坳当西界蜿蜒屏列之中，脊不甚高，而石骨棱棱，两旁骈峙甚逼。
现代文：这个山坳位于西面一列蜿蜒好似屏风排列着的群山之间，山脊不怎么高，可是石骨嶙峋，两旁群山对峙很是狭窄。
English: This ridge is located in the west between a series of mountains that wind like a screen. The ridge is not very high, but it is rocky. The mountains on both sides are very narrow.

古文：过隘，西下坞中洼，其西复有坳环属，盖南北夹起危峰，而东西又两脊如属垣。
现代文：过了山隘，向西下到山坞中的洼地，山坞西边又有个山坳呈环状相连，大体上南北两面有险峰相对耸起，而东西两面又有两条山脊如城墙相连。
English: After passing through the mountain pass and descending to the west to the depression in the dock, there is another mound on the west side of the dock that is ring-shaped and connected. In general, there are dangerous peaks on the north and south sides, and two ridges on the east and west sides are connected like city walls.

古文：洼中有小水，牧者浸牛满其中。
现代文：洼地中有个小水塘，放牧的人把牛放在塘中。
English: There is a small pond in the depression, where the cattle are kept by the herdsmen.

古文：度洼半里，又逾脊西下约一里，有岐直下西坞者，通平坝南上之道；循岭北越岭角者，为往平坝道。
现代文：穿过洼地有半里，又越过山脊往西下走约一里，有条岔道一直下到西边的山坞中，这是通过平坝往南上行的路；沿着山岭向北越过岭角的，是前往平坝的路。
English: Half a mile through the depression, then over the ridge and down to the west for about a mile, there is a fork road all the way down to the dock on the west, this is the way up through the flat dam to the south; along the mountain to the north over the ridge, is the way to the flat dam.

古文：乃西北上岭者一里，逾岭角而北。
现代文：便向西北上岭走了一里路，越过岭角往北走。
English: He then walked a mile to the northwest of Shangling, crossing Lingjiao and heading north.

古文：又北下者一里，又逾岭西北一里，与大道值相逢。
现代文：又向北下山一里，又越岭往西北行一里，与大道相遇。
English: Another mile north down the mountain, and another mile northwest over the ridge to meet the main road.

古文：循大道稍北，遂西度田塍，共半里，逾小桥，入平坝东门。
现代文：沿着大道稍往北走，便往西穿过田间小道，共走半里，越过小桥，进入平坝城东门。
English: Walk a little north along the boulevard, then west through the field path, walk a total of half a mile, cross the small bridge, and enter the east gate of Pingba City.

古文：半里，转而南，乃停担肆中。
现代文：半里路，转向南，于是把担子停放在旅店中。
English: Half a mile away, he turned south and parked his load in an inn.

古文：是晚觅得安庄夫，市小鲫佐酒。
现代文：这天晚上找到一个安庄的挑夫，买了些小螂鱼下酒。
English: On this evening, I found a porter from Anzhuang and bought some small cockroach fish wine.

古文：时方过午，坐肆楼作记。
现代文：此时才过中午，便坐在旅店的楼上记笔记。
English: At this time, just after noon, I sat on the upper floor of the hotel and took notes.

古文：平坝在东西两山夹间，而城倚西山麓。
现代文：平坝在东西两山夹峙之间，而城池靠着西山山麓。
English: Pingba is sandwiched between two mountains, while Chengchi is located at the foot of Xishan Mountain.

古文：城不甚雄峻，而中街市人颇集，鱼肉不乏。
现代文：城墙不怎么雄伟高峻，可城中街市居民很热闹，鱼肉不缺乏。
English: The city walls are not very majestic and high, but the residents of the city streets are very lively, and there is no shortage of fish.

古文：出西门数里有圣泉，亦时涸时溢，以迂道不及往。
现代文：出西门几里外有条圣泉，也是时干时涨，因为要绕道走来不及前去。
English: A few miles outside the West Gate, there is a holy spring, which is also constantly rising, because it is too late to go around.

