古文：高祖，沛丰邑中阳里人也，姓刘氏。
现代文：汉高祖，是沛县丰邑中阳里的人，姓刘。
English: Han Gaozu was from Zhongyangli, Fengyi County, Pei County. His surname was Liu.

古文：母媪尝息大泽之陂，梦与神遇。
现代文：其母有一次在水塘堤坝上闭目小憩，梦中与天神不期而遇。
English: His mother once closed her eyes and took a nap on the embankment of a reservoir. In her dream, she had an unexpected encounter with Tenjin.

古文：是时雷电晦冥，父太公往视，则见交龙于上。
现代文：当时雷电交加，天色阴暗，他的父亲太公到塘坝接应其母，只见一条蛟龙蟠于其母身上。
English: At that time, there were thunder and lightning and the sky was gloomy. His father, Taigong, went to Tangba to meet his mother, only to see a dragon attached to his mother.

古文：已而有娠，遂产高祖。
现代文：不久后就怀孕了，生下了汉高祖。
English: Soon after, she became pregnant and gave birth to Han Gaozu.

古文：高祖为人，隆准而龙颜，美须髯，左股有七十二黑子。
现代文：高祖长得鼻梁高而眉骨隆起，胡须很美，左大腿上有七十二颗黑痣。
English: This man, Gaozhu, had a high nose, a full forehead like a dragon, beautiful whiskers, and seventy-two black moles on his left leg.

古文：宽仁爱人，意豁如也。
现代文：他宽厚仁爱，胸襟开阔。
English: He is generous, kind and open-minded.

古文：常有大度，不事家人生产作业。
现代文：平时不拘小节，但不愿从事一般的生产劳动。
English: They often have lofty ambitions and do not engage in the production work of ordinary people.

古文：及壮，试吏，为泗上亭长，廷中吏无所不狎侮。
现代文：成年后，试补小吏，当上了泗上亭长。但他对官府中的吏员却又十分看不起。
English: After he came of age, he tried out as a minor official and became the chief of the Imperial Household Agency. However, he had a very low opinion of officials in the government.

古文：好酒及色。
现代文：高祖爱好酒色。
English: He likes to drink and he likes women.

古文：常从王媪、武负贳酒，时饮醉卧，武负、王媪见其上常有龙，怪之。
现代文：经常到王婆、武妈酒店赊酒，有时烂醉如泥，王婆、武妈见他醉卧时身上有异象出现。
English: He often went to Wang Bao and Wu Ma Hotel to drink, and sometimes he was drunk as mud. When Wang Bao and Wu Ma saw him lying drunk, a vision appeared in his body.

古文：高祖每酤留饮，酒雠数倍。及见怪，岁竟，此两家常折券弃责。
现代文：高祖每次在此赊酒痛饮，酒店总是成倍抬高酒价，后见他醉后的神秘气氛，在年底结算酒账时，两家就经常撕毁欠条免去他的酒债。
English: Every time Gao Zu drank heavily here, the hotel always doubled the price of alcohol, and later saw the mysterious atmosphere after he got drunk. At the end of the year, when settling the liquor bill, the two families often tore up the IOU to get rid of his liquor debt.

古文：高祖常徭咸阳，纵观秦皇帝，喟然大息，曰： 嗟乎，大丈夫当如此矣！ 
现代文：高祖曾到秦都咸阳服徭役，亲眼看到秦始皇的威仪，他引声长叹地说： 大丈夫就应该像这样啊！ 
English: Gao Zu once went to the Qin capital of Xianyang to serve as an envoy, and saw with his own eyes the majesty of Qin Shi Huangdi. He sighed and said, "A good husband should be like this!"

古文：单父人吕公善沛令，辟仇，从之客，因家焉。
现代文：单父县的吕公，和沛县令是好友，因躲避仇家，寄居县令寓所，后举家迁沛。
English: Lvong, the sole father of the county, and Pei, the county magistrate, were good friends. Because they were hiding from their enemies, they lived in the residence of the county magistrate, and later they moved to Pei.

古文：沛中豪杰吏闻令有重客，皆往贺。
现代文：沛中的一些有头有脸的人物听说县令有位好友迁沛，都前去祝贺。
English: Some prominent figures in Pei heard that a friend of the county magistrate had moved to Pei, and they all went to congratulate him.

古文：萧何为主吏，主进，令诸大夫曰： 进不满千钱，坐之堂下。 
现代文：萧何是县令的僚佐，负责收礼。对诸位头面人物说： 凑份不满一千钱的，都在堂下就坐。 
English: Xiao He, the chief official of the county and the person in charge of receiving gifts, said to the distinguished guests: If the gift is less than one thousand yuan, sit under the hall.

古文：高祖为亭长，素易诸吏，乃绐为谒曰 贺钱万 ，实不持一钱。
现代文：汉高祖此时当亭长，平时本来就看不起这些人，就恶作剧地在红包上自陈姓名 贺钱一万 ，实际一文钱也没送。
English: Gaozu, as the head of the pavilion, has always despised those officials. So he deceitfully said "He Wan Qian" on his business card, but in fact he did not take out a single coin.

古文：谒入，吕公大惊，起，迎之门。
现代文：礼包送入，吕公见厚礼感到大吃一惊，亲自到大门前迎接。
English: After the business card was handed in, Lv Gong was shocked, stood up, and went to the door to greet Gao Zu.

古文：吕公者，好相人，见高祖状貌，因重敬之，引入坐上坐。
现代文：吕公善于看相，见高祖仪表非凡，也是特别敬重，引入客厅请他在上位就坐。
English: Lv Gong was good at seeing faces. He saw Gao Zu's extraordinary appearance and was also very respectful. He invited him to the living room and asked him to sit in the upper row.

古文：萧何曰： 刘季固多大言，少成事。 
现代文：萧何说： 刘季平日只爱说大话，很少办成好事。 
English: Xiao He said: Liu Ji originally said a lot of big words, but rarely accomplished anything.

古文：高祖因狎侮诸客，遂坐上坐，无所诎。
现代文：高祖早就看不起这些郡府中的头面人物，就毫不谦逊地坐了上位，神色自若。
English: Gao Zu then mocked the guests in the hall and sat in the upper seat himself, showing no modesty.

古文：酒阑，吕公因目固留高祖。
现代文：酒到半醉，吕公以目示意请高祖留下，散席时，挽留高祖缓行。
English: The banquet was about to run out of wine, and Lvong signaled Gao Zu not to leave.

古文：竟酒，后。吕公曰： 臣少好相人，相人多矣，无如季相，愿季自爱。臣有息女，愿为箕帚妾。 
现代文：吕公对高祖说： 鄙人年轻时就研究相术，看了许多人，都不及您的相高贵，希望您多多保重。我有一个亲生女儿，愿意嫁给您为妻。 
English: Lu Gong said to Gao Zu, "I studied the art of physiognomy when I was young. I have seen many people who are not as noble as you. I hope you will take good care of yourself. I have a biological daughter who is willing to marry you.

古文：酒罢，吕媪怒吕公曰： 公始常欲奇此女，与贵人。
现代文：客走后，吕氏吵嚷吕公说： 你往日总说我女儿生相有福，将来要嫁与贵人。
English: After the banquet was over, Lv Ying got angry with Lv Gong and said, "In the beginning, you often wanted to make this daughter special and marry her off to a nobleman.

古文：沛令善公，求之不与，何自妄许与刘季？ 
现代文：沛令和你交好，想娶我女你不肯，今日为何随便许配给刘季？ 
English: Pei Ling befriended you and asked for your daughter's hand in marriage, but you did not agree. Why did you make such a pretentious proposal to marry Liu Ji Huang?

古文：吕公曰： 此非兒女子所知。 
现代文：吕公笑道： 这不是你们妇人女子所知。 
English: Lyu Gong laughed and said, "This is not something you women know about.

古文：卒与高祖。
现代文：结果还是把女儿嫁给了高祖。
English: As a result, he still married his daughter to Gaozu.

古文：吕公女即吕后也，生孝惠帝、鲁元公主。
现代文：吕公之女就是后来的吕后，生了汉孝惠帝及鲁元公主。
English: The daughter of King Lu was later Queen Lu, who gave birth to Emperor Han Xiao Hui and Princess Lu Yuan.

古文：高祖尝告归之田。
现代文：汉高祖曾辞去亭长回家务农。
English: Henkel's great-grandfather once resigned as a pavilion manager to return home to work in agriculture.

古文：吕后与两子居田中，有一老父过，请饮，吕后因餔之。
现代文：吕后和两个孩子住在田间小棚里，有一位过路老丈向其讨水喝，吕后还留他吃了饭。
English: Luguo and her two children lived in a small shed in the field. A passer-by asked her for a drink of water, and Luguo let him stay for a meal.

古文：老父相后曰： 夫人天下贵人也。 
现代文：老丈看了吕后的相赞道： 夫人是天下贵人。 
English: When his father-in-law saw Lyu Guo's admiration, he said, "My wife is the most noble person in the world.

古文：令相两子，见孝惠帝，曰： 夫人所以贵者，乃此男也。 
现代文：吕后请他给两个孩子看相，他看了孝惠帝，说： 夫人之所以能成为贵人，是因为有这个儿子。 
English: Queen Lyu asked him to look at the two children. He looked at Xiao Hui and said, "The reason why my wife can become a noblewoman is because of this son.

古文：相鲁元公主，亦皆贵。
现代文：他又看了鲁元公主，也说将来是位贵人。
English: He also looked at Princess Lu Yuan and said that she would be a noblewoman in the future.

古文：老父已去，高祖适从旁舍来，吕后具言： 客有过，相我子母皆大贵。 
现代文：老丈走后，高祖从另一间田舍归来，吕后向他备言前事，说那位老丈相我母子三人都是大贵之相。
English: After his father-in-law left, Gao Zu returned from another farmhouse. Lvou made a remark to him about the past, saying that the father-in-law and my mother and three children were all very noble.

古文：高祖问，曰： 未远。 
现代文：高祖问老丈何在，吕后说： 其走未远。 
English: Gao Zu asked his father-in-law where he was, and Lü Hou said, "He hasn't gone far."

古文：乃追及，问老父。
现代文：高祖追及老丈，求问自己的生相。
English: Gaozu caught up with the old man and questioned him.

古文：老父曰： 乡者夫人兒子皆以君，君相贵不可言。 
现代文：老丈说： 刚才说夫人及令郎等生相大贵，都是由于您的洪福。您的生相是贵不可言。 
English: The old man said, "Just now, you said that your wife and your son were born very precious, and it was all due to your great fortune. Your birth is precious beyond words.

古文：高祖乃谢曰： 诚如父言，不敢忘德。 
现代文：高祖连忙称谢道： 果真如老先生所说，我永远会记住您的指点之恩。 
English: Gaozu then thanked him and said, "If it is as my father said, I will never forget your kindness to me.

古文：及高祖贵，遂不知老父处。
现代文：到高祖登基后，这位老丈的去向却不得而知了。
English: Wait until Gao Zu is eminent, and he doesn't even know where the old man is.

古文：高祖为亭长，乃以竹皮为冠，令求盗之薛治，时时冠之，及贵常冠，所谓 刘氏冠 也。
现代文：汉高祖当亭长，戴着竹皮的斗笠。派捕盗的亭卒到薛地去学制作竹皮斗笠的手艺，他经常戴着这种斗笠，到身居高位时仍戴着它。后来称这种斗笠叫 刘氏冠 。
English: Henkel's great-great-grandfather, when he was a pavilion keeper, wore a bamboo-leather duel hat. He sent a thief-catching pavilion guard to Xuedi to learn the craft of making a bamboo-leather duel hat. He often wore this kind of duel hat, and still wore it when he was in a high position. Later, this kind of duel hat was called Liu's crown.

古文：高祖以亭长为县送徒骊山，徒多道亡。
现代文：汉高祖以亭长的身份为沛县送役夫去骊山，半路上逃跑的役夫很多。
English: Hangao Zu, as a pavilion chief, sent servants from Pei County to Lushan. Many servants ran away halfway.

古文：自度比至皆亡之，到丰西泽中亭，止饮，夜皆解纵所送徒，曰： 公等皆去，吾亦从此逝矣！ 
现代文：他想到骊山时可能全都跑光了，就到丰西泽中亭，让役夫停下休息，并请大家饮酒，到夜晚将所有役夫全部放走。他说： 大家干脆都逃走吧！
English: When he thought that everyone in Shaoshan might have run away, he went to the Fengxizeta Middle Pavilion, asked the waiters to stop and rest, and invited everyone to drink, and let all the waiters go at night. He said: Let's all just run away!

古文：徒中壮士愿从者十余人。
现代文：我从今也要远走高飞了！ 
English: I'm going to go far away from now on!

古文：高祖被酒，夜径泽中，令一人行前。
现代文：役夫中有血气方刚的十多人愿意与高祖一起走。高祖乘着酒兴，带领众人从泽中小道上逃走，派一人到前面探路。
English: Gaozhu, with a desire to drink, went that night to cut a path through the swamp and sent a man ahead to find a way.

古文：行前者还报曰： 前有大蛇当径，愿还。 
现代文：探路人回头来报： 前面有大蛇挡道，我们还是回去吧。 
English: The pathfinder reported back: There's a big snake in front of us, let's go back.

古文：高祖醉，曰： 壮士行，何畏！ 
现代文：高祖带醉地说： 勇士前行，何所畏惧？ 
English: Gao Zu drunkenly said, "When a brave man walks, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：乃前，拔剑斩蛇。蛇分为两，道开。
现代文：于是亲自向前，拔剑斩蛇，蛇被截为两段，道路可以通行了。
English: So he personally went forward, drew his sword and cut the snake. The snake was cut into two sections, and the road was passable.

古文：行数里，醉困卧。
现代文：走了几里路后，高祖又醉又困，就躺卧在路上。
English: After walking a few miles, Gao Zu, drunk and sleepy, lay down on the road.

古文：后人来至蛇所，有一老妪夜哭。
现代文：有人从后面赶上，经过高祖斩蛇之处，见一位老妈妈夜间在路旁哭泣。
English: Someone caught up from behind, passed the place where Gao Zu cut the snake, and saw an old mother crying on the side of the road at night.

古文：人问妪何哭，妪曰： 人杀吾子。 
现代文：此人询问原因，老妈妈说： 别人杀了我的儿子。 
English: When the man asked why, the mother said: "Someone else killed my son."

古文：人曰： 妪子何为见杀？ 
现代文：此人说： 妈妈的儿子被谁杀死了？ 
English: People also said: "Old lady, why was your son killed?

古文：妪曰： 吾子，白帝子也，化为蛇当道，今者赤帝子斩之，故哭。 
现代文：老妈妈说： 我的孩子是白帝之子，变成大蛇，挡着道路，遇上赤帝子被斩了，所以我在此哭泣。 
English: The old mother said, "My child is the son of the White Emperor. He turned into a big snake and blocked the road. When he met the Red Emperor, he was beheaded. That's why I'm crying here."

古文：人乃以妪为不诚，欲苦之，妪因忽不见。
现代文：此人以为这位老妈妈是信口胡言，想盘诘一番，一眨眼却不见了她的踪影。
English: The man thought the old woman was lying and wanted to investigate, but in the blink of an eye, there was no sign of her.

古文：后人至，高祖觉。
现代文：此人追上高祖时，高祖已经醒来。
English: When the man caught up with Gao Zu, Gao Zu had already woken up.

古文：告高祖，高祖乃心独喜，自负。
现代文：此人将此事告诉了高祖，高祖心中暗自高兴，更相信自己要成大气候。
English: This person told Gao Zu about this, and Gao Zu was secretly happy and even more convinced that he wanted to become a great climber.

古文：诸从者日益畏之。
现代文：那些跟随他的人也越来越敬畏他。
English: Those who followed him were increasingly in awe of him.

古文：秦始皇帝尝曰 东南有天子气 ，于是东游以当之。
现代文：秦始皇曾听人说： 东南有天子云气。 于是始皇东巡对这种云气进行镇塞。
English: Qin Shihuang had heard people say, "In the southeast, there is the son of heaven, Yunqi," so the East Inspection of the First Emperor carried out the suppression of this kind of Yunqi.

古文：高祖隐于芒、砀山泽间，吕后与人俱求，常得之。
现代文：高祖有时隐蔽在芒砀山泽之中，吕后与别人去寻找他，总容易找到。
English: Gao Zu sometimes hides in the mountains, and it is always easy to find him when Luguo and others go to look for him.

古文：高祖怪问吕后，后曰： 季所居上常有云气，故从往常得季。 
现代文：高祖颇觉奇怪，问其中的原因。吕后说： 你逗留的地方上面有层云气，按着有云气的地方去寻你就会找到。 
English: Gao Zu felt rather strange and asked the reason for this. Lü Hou said: There is a layer of cloud above the place where you are staying. If you look for a place with cloud, you will find it.

古文：高祖又喜。
现代文：高祖又很高兴。
English: Gaozu was happy again.

古文：沛中子弟或闻之，多欲附者。
现代文：沛中子弟也听到这种传说，很多人都想依附于他。
English: Peizhong's younger brother also heard this legend, and many people wanted to attach themselves to him.

古文：秦二世元年秋七月，陈涉起蕲。
现代文：秦二世元年秋七月，陈涉在蕲县起义，到达陈地，自立为楚王。
English: In the autumn and July of the first year of the reign of Qin II, Chen intervened in the uprising in Jixian County, arrived in Chen, and established himself as the king of Chu.

古文：至陈，自立为楚王，遣武臣、张耳、陈馀略赵地。
现代文：派武臣、张耳、陈余略取赵地。
English: He sent Wushen, Zhang Er and Chen Yu to capture Zhao Di.

古文：八月，武臣自立为赵王。
现代文：八月，武臣自立为赵王。
English: In August, the samurai established himself as King Zhao.

古文：郡县多杀长吏以应涉。
现代文：各郡县相继发生杀死主要官吏以响应陈涉的事。
English: The killing of key officials in response to the petition has occurred in each county in succession.

古文：九月，沛令欲以沛应之。掾、主吏萧何、曹参曰： 君为秦吏，今欲背之，帅沛子弟，恐不听。
现代文：九月，沛县县令想在沛县响应陈涉，幕僚萧何、曹参进言说： 你身为秦朝官吏，现在想背叛秦朝，想率领沛中子弟起义，大家恐怕不会听从。
English: In September, the county magistrate of Peixian County wanted to respond to the petition in Peixian County, and the staff members Xiao He and Cao San Jinyan said: You are an official of the Qin Dynasty, now you want to betray the Qin Dynasty, you want to lead the uprising of the children of Peixian, I am afraid everyone will not listen.

古文：愿君召诸亡在外者，可得数百人，因以劫众，众不敢不听。 
现代文：希望你能招收那些逃亡在外的人，可以得数百人，靠这些人的力量来号召有顾虑的沛中子弟，沛中子弟就不敢不听。 
English: I hope that you can recruit those who have fled abroad, you can get hundreds of people, and rely on the strength of these people to call on the anxious children, and the children will not dare not to listen.

古文：乃令樊哙召高祖。
现代文：于是沛县县令派樊哙去邀请高祖。
English: As a result, the Peixian County Government sent an envoy to invite Gao Zu.

古文：高祖之众已数百人矣。
现代文：此时高祖已经拥有数百之众了。
English: At this time, Gaozu already had hundreds of followers.

古文：于是樊哙从高祖来。沛令后悔，恐其有变，乃闭城城守，欲诛萧、曹。
现代文：当樊哙与高祖率众前来时，沛令却反悔了，害怕高祖夺取他的权力，就闭城固守，还想诛杀萧何、曹参。
English: When Yao and Gao Zu led the crowd to come, Pei Ling repented, fearing that Gao Zu would seize his power, he closed the city and wanted to kill Xiao He and Cao San.

古文：萧、曹恐，逾城保高祖。
现代文：萧何、曹参感到害怕，就偷越城墙去投靠高祖。
English: Xiao He and Cao San were afraid, so they sneaked across the city wall to seek refuge with Gao Zu.

古文：高祖乃书帛射城上，与沛父老曰： 天下同苦秦久矣。
现代文：高祖于是写帛书射到城上。书上告沛县父老说： 普天之下遭受暴秦的欺凌已经很长时间了。
English: Gaozu then wrote a letter and sent it to the city. In the letter, he told the county elders: It has been a long time since the whole country has been bullied by the tyrannical Qin Dynasty.

古文：今父老虽为沛令守，诸侯并起，今屠沛。
现代文：今日各位父老虽为沛令守城，而各地义军一到，就会在沛地大动刀兵。
English: Now my father has ordered me to defend the city, but the lords of all countries have risen up, and it is necessary to slaughter Pei County.

古文：沛今共诛令，择可立立之，以应诸侯，即室家完。不然，父子俱屠，无为也。 
现代文：要是各位能在现在诛杀沛令，推举众望所归的人为首领，响应义军，就可以保证家室安全。否则，全家都要遭殃，这是毫无意义的。 
English: If you are able to obey the order to kill now, to elect the person you want to be the leader, and to respond to the rebels, you can ensure the safety of your home. Otherwise, the whole family will suffer, which is meaningless.

古文：父老乃帅子弟共杀沛令，开城门迎高祖，欲以为沛令。
现代文：于是沛中父老率其子弟杀死沛令，打开城门迎接高祖，并要推举高祖做沛县县令。
English: As a result, the father of Peizhong and his son killed Peirong, opened the city gate to welcome Gaozhu, and wanted to promote Gaozhu to be the county magistrate of Peixian County.

古文：高祖曰： 天下方扰，诸侯并起，今置将不善，一败涂地。
现代文：高祖辞谢道： 当今正值天下大乱，群雄纷纷起义，要是选拔首领不当，就会一败涂地。
English: Gao Zu said with thanks: Today is a time of great turmoil in the world, and heroes are rising up in droves. If the leader is not properly selected, it will be a complete failure.

古文：吾非敢自爱，恐能薄，不能完父兄子弟。
现代文：我并非贪生怕死之人，而是深恐德能浅薄，不能保全各位父老兄弟。
English: I don't begrudge my own life, I'm just afraid that I'm not strong enough to protect my parents and siblings.

古文：此大事，愿更择可者。 
现代文：这是一件大事，请求再选择一位能人。 
English: This is a big deal. Please choose another capable person.

古文：萧、曹皆文吏，自爱，恐事不就，后秦种族其家，尽让高祖。
现代文：萧何、曹参都是文吏，担心其身家性命，深恐举事不成，将来被秦朝诛灭九族，就竭力推举高祖。
English: Xiao He and Cao San were both clerics. They were afraid for their own lives and deeply afraid that they would not be able to accomplish anything, and that the Qin Dynasty would exterminate the nine ethnic groups in the future, so they tried their best to promote Gao Zu.

古文：诸父老皆曰： 平生所闻刘季奇怪，当贵，且卜筮之，莫如刘季最吉。 
现代文：沛县父老都说： 平日常闻刘季一些奇异之事，有可能成为贵人，我们曾问卜于神明，都说没有比刘季更合适的了。 
English: The parents and elders of Peixian County all said, "We have heard some strange things about Liu Ji, and it is possible that he will become a noble person. We have asked the gods, and they all said that there is no one more suitable than Liu Ji."

古文：高祖数让，众莫肯为，高祖乃立为沛公。
现代文：高祖多次辞让，大家都不同意，高祖于是被拥立为沛公。
English: Gaozu repeatedly made concessions, but everyone disagreed, and Gaozu was then elevated to the position of Pei Gong.

古文：祠黄帝，祭蚩尤于沛廷，而衅鼓旗。
现代文：对古天子黄帝、蚩尤在沛廷进行祠祭。
English: An ancestral shrine festival was held in Pei Ting for the ancient heavenly sons Huang Di and Pu You.

古文：帜皆赤，由所杀蛇白帝子，杀者赤帝子故也。
现代文：并用牲血祭旗鼓。旗帜俱为赤红色，这是由于所杀之蛇是 白帝之子 ，而挥剑斩蛇者是 赤帝之子 的原因。
English: The flags are red and red, this is because the killed snake is the son of the White Emperor, and the one who swings the sword to cut the snake is the son of the Red Emperor.

古文：于是少年豪吏如萧、曹、樊哙等皆为收沛子弟，得三千人。
现代文：于是青年豪吏如萧何、曹参、樊哙等都纷纷招募沛县子弟，义军迅速扩充到三千人。
English: As a result, young high-ranking officials such as Xiao He, Cao San, and Zou enlisted the children of Peixian one after another, and the rebel army quickly expanded to 3,000 men.

古文：是月，项梁与兄子羽起吴。
现代文：同月，项梁与兄子项羽起义兵于吴。
English: In the same month, Xiang Liang and his brother and son Xiang Yu rebelled in Wu.

古文：田儋与从弟荣、横起齐，自立为齐王。
现代文：田儋与堂弟田荣、田横起兵于齐，自立为齐王。
English: Tian Qi and his cousins, Tian Rong and Tian You, raised an army together and became independent as the Qi King.

古文：韩广自立为燕王。
现代文：韩广自立为燕王。
English: Han Guang established himself as the king of swallows.

古文：魏咎自立为魏王。
现代文：魏咎自立为魏王。
English: Wei Wei became the king of Wei.

古文：陈涉之将周章西入关，至戏，秦将章邯距破之。
现代文：陈涉的大将周章西入函谷关，兵至戏水，秦将章邯迎敌打败了周章。
English: Chen Tang's general Zhou Zhangxi entered the Hanzhong Pass, and the soldiers were playing in the water. Qin's general Zhou Zhangxi defeated Zhou Zhang.

古文：秦二年十月，沛公攻胡陵、方与，还守丰。
现代文：秦二世二年十月，沛公攻打胡陵、方舆后，回师丰邑。
English: In October of the second year of Qin II, Pei Gong attacked Huling, Fang Miao, and returned to Fengyi.

古文：秦泗川监平将兵围丰。
现代文：秦泗川监平领兵围丰。
English: Qin Shi Chuan Jianping led the troops to surround Feng.

古文：二日，出与战，破之。令雍齿守丰。
现代文：第二天，沛公发兵与战，打败秦军，派雍齿守丰。
English: The next day, Pei Gong sent troops to fight, defeated the Qin army, and sent Yongjia to defend Feng.

古文：十一月，沛公引兵之薛。
现代文：十一月，沛公领兵到薛。
English: In November, Pei Gong led the troops to Xue.

古文：秦泗川守壮兵败于薛，走至戚，沛公左司马得杀之。
现代文：秦泗川守壮的兵被击败，壮逃到戚，被沛公的左司马得杀死。
English: The soldiers guarding Zhuang in Qinluochuan were defeated. Zhuang fled to his relatives and was killed by Paigong's left-hand man, Sima Du.

古文：沛公还军亢父，至方与。
现代文：沛公兵还亢父，到方舆。
English: Pei Gongbing also beat up his father and went to Fangzhou.

古文：赵王武臣为其将所杀。
现代文：赵王武臣被部将所杀。
English: Zhao Wangwu was killed by his subordinate.

古文：十二月，楚王陈涉为其御所杀。
现代文：十二月，楚王陈涉被其御手庄贾所杀。
English: In December, the King of Chu, Chen Zang, was killed by his mistress, Zhuang Jia.

古文：魏人周巿略地丰、沛，使人谓雍齿曰： 丰，故梁徙也。
现代文：魏将周市略取丰沛，派人对雍齿说： 丰曾是魏的临时都城，今日魏地已被收复数十城。
English: Wei slightly took Fengpei from Zhou, and sent a person to Yongjia to say: Feng was once the temporary capital of Wei, and today dozens of cities in Wei have been recovered.

古文：今魏地已定者数十城，齿今下魏，魏以齿为侯守丰；不下，且屠丰。 
现代文：雍将军如能归顺于魏，魏就委你为侯镇守丰地；若不归顺，魏兵就要屠城。 
English: If General Yong can submit to Wei, Wei will entrust you to guard Fengtian for Hou; if you do not submit, Wei soldiers will slaughter the city.

古文：雍齿雅不欲属沛公，及魏招之，即反为魏守丰。
现代文：雍齿平素本不愿居沛公之下，到魏招降时，就归顺于魏而为魏守丰了。
English: Originally, Yong Zi was very reluctant to be subordinate to Pei Gong. When Wei invited him to surrender, he betrayed Pei Gong and defended Fengyi for Wei.

古文：沛公攻丰，不能取。
现代文：沛公攻丰，无法攻下。
English: Pei Gong attacked Feng, but was unable to capture him.

古文：沛公还之沛，怨雍齿与丰子弟畔之。
现代文：沛公引兵回沛，对雍齿与丰子弟的叛变恨恨不已。
English: Pei Gong led the troops back to Pei, and hated the mutiny of Yong Zi and Feng Zi Rong.

古文：正月，张耳等立赵后赵歇为赵王。
现代文：秦二世三年正月，张耳等立赵国之后赵歇做为赵王。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Qin II, Zhang Er et al. established the State of Zhao, and Zhao Xie became the King of Zhao.

古文：东阳甯君、秦嘉立景驹为楚王，在留。沛公往从之，道得张良，遂与俱见景驹，请兵以攻丰。
现代文：东阳宁君、秦嘉立景驹为楚王，驻守在留县，沛公去投奔景驹，路上遇到张良，就一起去见景驹，请景驹派兵攻打丰邑。
English: Dongyang Ningjun and Qin Jiali stationed Jingyao as the king of Chu, stationed in Liushen. Pei Gong went to join Jingyao, and met Zhang Liang on the way. They went to see Jingyao together, and asked Jingyao to send troops to attack Fengyi.

古文：时章邯从陈，别将司马将兵北定楚地，屠相，至砀。
现代文：这时章邯正在追击陈胜的军队，另外的将领司马夷领兵向北平定楚地，屠戮了相县，到了砀县。
English: At this time, Zhang Ye was pursuing Chen Sheng's army, and another general, Sima Yi, led the troops north to Pingding and Chu Di, slaughtered Xiang County, and arrived at Jixian County.

古文：东阳甯君、沛公引兵西，与战萧西，不利，还收兵聚留。
现代文：东阳宁君和沛公领兵向西，与司马夷在肃县的西面交战，不能取胜，就退回来收集兵卒聚集在留县。
English: Dongyang Ningjun and Peigong led the troops westward, and fought with Sima Yi on the west side of Su County. Unable to win, they returned to collect soldiers and gathered in Ruxian County.

古文：二月，攻砀，三日拔之。收砀兵，得六千人，与故合九千人。
现代文：二月，攻打砀县，三日攻破砀城，收编守砀的部队，得六千人。与原来的三千人会合共九千人。
English: In February, they attacked Handan County, and on the third day, they broke through Handan City, and gathered the troops who were guarding Handan, gaining six thousand men. A total of nine thousand men joined the original three thousand.

古文：三月，攻下邑，拔之。
现代文：三月，攻下邑县，得胜。
English: In March, they conquered Yixian County and won.

古文：还击丰，不下。
现代文：回师攻丰，未胜。
English: Returned to attack Feng, but did not win.

古文：四月，项梁击杀景驹、秦嘉，止薛，沛公往见之。项梁益沛公卒五千人，五大夫将十人。
现代文：四月，项梁击杀景驹、秦嘉，驻兵于薛，沛公到薛晋见项梁，项梁为沛公增兵五千、五大夫将十员。
English: In April, Xiang Liang killed Jing Yao and Qin Jia, and stationed troops in Xue. Pei Gong went to Xue Jin to meet Xiang Liang, and Xiang Liang increased the number of soldiers by five thousand and the number of generals by ten.

古文：沛公还，引兵攻丰，拔之。
现代文：沛公回原地后，领兵攻丰，收复了丰县。
English: After Pei Gong returned to the original place, he led the troops to attack Feng and recovered Feng County.

古文：雍齿奔魏。
现代文：雍齿逃到魏地去了。
English: Yong Zi fled to Wei.

古文：五月，项羽拔襄城还。
现代文：五月，项羽攻下襄城后返回。
English: In May, Xiang Yu captured Xiangcheng and then returned.

古文：项梁尽召别将。
现代文：项梁把在别处的小将全部召回。
English: Cao Liang recalled all the young generals from other places.

古文：六月，沛公如薛，与项梁共立楚怀王孙心为楚怀王。
现代文：六月，沛公到达薛地，和项梁共立楚怀王孙芈心为楚怀王。
English: In June, Pei Gong arrived in Xue Di, and he and Xiang Liang jointly established the King of Chu Huai, Sun Yat-sen, as the King of Chu Huai.

古文：章邯破杀魏王咎、齐王田儋于临济。
现代文：秦将章邯破杀魏王咎、齐王田儋于临济。
English: Qin general Zhang Ye defeated and killed Wei Wang Gui, and Qi Wang Tian Qui in Linji.

古文：七月，大霖雨。
现代文：七月，连天阴雨。
English: In July, it rained for days on end.

古文：沛公攻亢父。
现代文：沛公攻打亢父。
English: Pei Gong attacked and beat his father.

古文：章邯围田荣于东阿。沛公与项梁共救田荣，大破章邯东阿。
现代文：章邯围齐将田荣于东阿县，沛公与项梁一同领兵救田荣，在东阿大败秦将章邯。
English: Zhang Ye surrounded and defeated Tian Rong in Donga County. Pei Gong and Xiang Liang led the troops to rescue Tian Rong and defeated Qin general Zhang Ye in Donga.

古文：田荣归，沛公、项羽追北，至城阳，攻屠其城。军濮阳东，复与章邯战，又破之。
现代文：田荣领兵回，沛公、项羽追赶秦兵，到城阳县，血洗城阳，驻军于濮阳东，再次与章邯开战，又一次打败秦兵。
English: Tian Rong led the soldiers back, Pei Gong and Xiang Yu chased the Qin soldiers, went to Chengyang County, blood-washed Chengyang, garrisoned in the east of Shenyang, and once again went to war with Zhang Ye, and once again defeated the Qin soldiers.

古文：章邯复振，守濮阳，环水。
现代文：章邯重振旗鼓，守卫濮阳，掘壕引水自固。
English: Zhangye reinvigorated the drums, guarding Shenyang, digging trenches to draw water and self-strengthening.

古文：沛公、项羽去攻定陶。
现代文：沛公、项羽就移兵另攻定陶。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu moved their troops to attack Jingtang.

古文：八月，田荣立田儋子市为齐王。
现代文：八月，田荣立田儋子田市为齐王。
English: In August, Tian Rong, Tian Zhi, and Tian Tian were crowned champions.

古文：定陶未下，沛公与项羽西略地至雍丘，与秦军战，大败之，斩三川守李由。
现代文：定陶未攻下，沛公与项羽收取土地至雍丘，与秦兵战，大败秦兵，斩杀三川太守李由。
English: Ding Tao was not conquered, Pei Gong and Xiang Yu received land to Yongqiu, fought with the Qin soldiers, defeated the Qin soldiers, and killed the Mikawa Taishu Li Yu.

古文：还攻外黄，外黄未下。
现代文：回师攻外黄，未能攻下。
English: The Hui attacked Waihuang, but failed to take it.

古文：项梁再破秦军，有骄色。
现代文：项梁两次打败秦军，显出骄傲的神色。
English: Cao Liang once again defeated the Qin army, with a proud look.

古文：宋义谏，不听。
现代文：宋义提醒他，项梁不听。
English: Song Yi admonished him, but he did not listen.

古文：秦益章邯兵。
现代文：秦朝给章邯增派了军队。
English: The Qin Dynasty sent more troops to Zhangye.

古文：九月，章邯夜衔枚击项梁定陶，大破之，杀项梁。
现代文：九月，章邯在黑夜中人衔枚偷袭驻兵定陶的项梁，大破项梁军队，杀死了项梁。
English: In September, Zhang Ye attacked Cao Liang, who was stationed in Dingtao, in the middle of the night. He defeated Cao Liang's army and killed Cao Liang.

古文：时连雨自七月至九月。
现代文：当时阴雨连绵从七月到九月。
English: At that time, it rained continuously from July to September.

古文：沛公、项羽方攻陈留，闻梁死，士卒恐，乃与将军吕臣引兵而东，徙怀王自盱台都彭城。
现代文：沛公、项羽正在攻打陈留，听到项梁已死，士卒惊恐，于是和将军吕臣领兵向东，将楚怀王由盱眙迁都到彭城。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu were attacking Chen Liu, and when they heard that Xiang Liang had died, the soldiers panicked, so they and General Lv Chen led the army to the east and moved King Chu Huai from Sui to Pengcheng.

古文：吕臣军彭城东，项羽军彭城西，沛公军砀。
现代文：吕臣驻军在彭城的东面，项羽驻军在彭城的西面，沛公驻军在砀县。
English: Lv Chen was stationed in the east of Pengcheng, Xiang Yu was stationed in the west of Pengcheng, and Pei Gong was stationed in Zhuo.

古文：魏咎弟豹自立为魏王。
现代文：魏咎的弟弟魏豹自立为魏王。
English: Wei Gui's younger brother, Wei Pan, became the king of Wei.

古文：后九月，怀王并吕臣、项羽军自将之。以沛公为砀郡长，封武安侯，将砀郡兵。
现代文：闰九月，怀王合并吕臣、项羽的军队由自己直接指挥，任命沛公为砀郡长，加封武安侯，统领砀郡的部队。
English: In leap September, King Huai combined the armies of Lü Chen and Xiang Yu under his own direct command, appointed Pei Gong as the governor of Handan County, and Gaofen Wu An Hou as the commander of the troops of Handan County.

古文：以羽为鲁公，封长安侯。吕臣为司徒，其父吕青为令尹。
现代文：任命项羽为鲁公，加封长安侯，任命吕臣为司徒、吕臣的父亲吕青为令尹。
English: He appointed Xiang Yu as Lu Gong, Jafeng as Chang'an Hou, appointed Lü Chen as Stu, and Lü Chen's father Lü Qing as Ling Yin.

古文：章邯已破项梁，以为楚地兵不足忧，乃渡河北击赵王歇，大破之。
现代文：秦将章邯在打败项梁之后，认为楚地的叛秦势力已不足为患，就渡河北上攻打赵王歇，大败赵王歇。
English: After defeating Xiang Liang, the Qin general Zhang Ye thought that the Qin rebels in Chu were not strong enough, so he went to the north of Hebei to attack Zhao Wang Xie and defeated him.

古文：歇保巨鹿城，秦将王离围之。
现代文：赵王歇退保钜鹿城，秦将王离兵围钜鹿。
English: Zhao Wang Xie withdrew from the defense of Menglu City, and Qin ordered Wang Li to surround Menglu.

古文：赵数请救，怀王乃以宋义为上将，项羽为次将，范增为末将，北救赵。
现代文：赵王多次向楚怀王求救，怀王就任宋义为上将，项羽为副将，范增为末将。领兵北救赵军。
English: Zhao Wang repeatedly appealed to Chu Huai Wang for help. Huai Wang appointed Song Yi as the general, Xiang Yu as the deputy general, and Fan Zeng as the last general. He led the soldiers north to save Zhao Army.

古文：初，怀王与诸将约，先入定关中者王之。
现代文：原先，怀王曾与诸将相约，谁能先平定关中就封之为王。
English: Originally, King Huai had made an agreement with the generals that whoever could defeat Guanzhong first would be crowned king.

古文：当是时，秦兵强，常乘胜逐北，诸将莫利先入关。
现代文：这时期，秦兵强大，常常乘胜追击义军，诸将都畏其威而不敢入关。
English: During this period, the Qin soldiers were strong and often used their victories to pursue the rebels. The generals were afraid of them and dared not enter the pass.

古文：独羽怨秦破项梁，奋势，愿与沛公西入关。
现代文：独有项羽恨秦军打败并杀死项梁，十分愤激，愿意和沛公西进入关。
English: Xiang Yu alone hated the Qin army for defeating and killing Xiang Liang. He was very angry and was willing to enter the pass with Pei Gongxi.

古文：怀王诸老将皆曰： 项羽为人慓悍祸贼，尝攻襄城，襄城无噍类，所过无不残灭。
现代文：怀王的一些老将都说： 项羽为人？悍好杀，原先攻下襄城，襄城几无遗类，项羽所过之处都遭残灭。
English: Some of the veterans of Huaiwang said: Xiang Yu was a man? He was fierce and eager to kill. He had previously captured Xiangcheng, and there were few remains of Xiangcheng. Everywhere Xiang Yu passed was destroyed.

古文：且楚数进取，前陈王、项梁皆败，不如更遣长者扶义而西，告谕秦父兄。
现代文：且楚军在多次进取中前楚王陈涉、项梁都以失败告终，不如另派一位宽厚长者仗义西进，告谕秦地父老兄弟。
English: Moreover, the Chu army failed many times in its attempts to invade the territory of the former King of Chu, Chen Tang, and Xiang Liang. It would be better to send another generous elder to fight and advance westward to tell the Qin brothers and fathers.

古文：秦父兄苦其主久矣，今诚得长者往，毋侵暴，宜可下。
现代文：秦地人民受秦朝之苦已久，要是果真有一位长者领兵，秋毫不犯，秦都咸阳应当是能够攻下的。
English: The Qin patriarchs and brothers have suffered from their monarch's rule for a long time. Now, if they can really get the generous elders to go to Guanzhong, without bullying and tyranny, they should be able to win Guanzhong.

古文：项羽不可遣，独沛公素宽大长者。 
现代文：项羽不能担此任，只有沛公平日就是一个宽大仁厚的人。 
English: Xiang Yu can't hold this position, only Pei Fair Day is a generous and kind person.

古文：卒不许羽，而遣沛公西收陈王、项梁散卒。
现代文：最后怀王不同意项羽西进，而派沛公西收陈涉与项梁的散兵。
English: In the end, King Huai disagreed with Xiang Yu's westward march, and sent Pei Gong westward to collect the scattered soldiers who had interfered with Xiang Liang.

古文：乃道砀至城阳与杠里，攻秦军壁，破其二军。
现代文：于是沛公从砀地出发，到城阳与杠里，攻打秦军防地，打败了两地守军。
English: As a result, Pei Gong set out from Handan, went to Chengyang and Liuli, attacked the Qin army's defense, and defeated the two defenders.

古文：秦三年十月，齐将田都畔田荣，将兵助项羽救赵。
现代文：秦二世三年十月，齐将田都叛变齐王田荣，田都领兵帮助项羽救赵。
English: In October of the third year of the reign of Qin II, Qi Wang Tian Rong, who led the rebellion of Tian Du, and Tian Du led the troops to help Xiang Yu save Zhao.

古文：沛公攻破东郡尉于成武。
现代文：沛公在成武打败了秦东郡尉的部队。
English: Pei Gong defeated the troops of Qin Dong County Lieutenant in Chengwu.

古文：十一月，项羽杀宋义，并其兵渡河，自立为上将军，诸将黥布等皆属。
现代文：十一月，项羽杀掉了上将宋义，兼并了宋义之军后渡过黄河，自封为上将军。宋义原有将领如英布等都归辖于项羽。
English: In November, Xiang Yu killed General Song Yi, and after annexing Song Yi's army, he crossed the Yellow River and proclaimed himself the supreme general. Song Yi's former generals, such as Ying Bu, all belonged to Xiang Yu.

古文：十二月，沛公引兵至栗，遇刚武侯，夺其军四千余人，并之，与魏将皇欣、武满军合攻秦军，破之。
现代文：十二月，沛公引兵到达栗县，遇见楚怀王将军刚武侯，也夺取了他所率的四千部队，并成一军和魏将皇欣、武满的军队会合，进攻秦军，大败秦军。
English: In December, Pei Gong led an army to reach Li County, met the general of Chu Hui Wang, Gang Wu Hou, and also captured the four thousand troops he led, and joined forces with the armies of Wei general Wang Xin and Wu Man, attacked the Qin Army, and defeated the Qin Army.

古文：故齐王建孙田安下济北，从项羽救赵。
现代文：前齐王田建之孙田安领兵由济北跟随项羽救赵。
English: Former Qi king Tian Jian's grandson Tian An led an army from Jibei to follow Xiang Yu to rescue Zhao.

古文：羽大破秦军巨鹿下，虏王离，走章邯。
现代文：项羽大破秦军于钜鹿，俘虏了秦将王离，秦将章邯逃走。
English: Xiang Yu defeated the Qin army at Menglu, captured the Qin general Wang Li, and the Qin general Zhang Ye fled.

古文：二月，沛公从砀北攻昌邑，遇彭越。
现代文：二月，沛公从砀出发北攻昌邑，遇见彭越。
English: In February, Peigong set out from Handan to attack Chang'e in the north and met Peng Yue.

古文：越助攻昌邑，未下。
现代文：彭越帮助沛公攻打昌邑，没能攻下。
English: Peng Yue helped Pei Gong to attack Changyi, but failed to capture it.

古文：沛公西过高阳，郦食其为里监门，曰： 诸将过此者多，吾视沛公大度。 
现代文：沛公西经高阳，郦食其是高阳里的门卒，他说： 经过高阳的将领甚多，我认为沛公具有大度。 
English: Pei Gong traveled westward through Gaoyang. He said, "Many generals have traveled through Gaoyang. I think Pei Gong is generous.

古文：乃求见沛公。
现代文：于是求见沛公。
English: So he asked to see Peiko.

古文：沛公方踞床，使两女子洗。
现代文：此时沛公坐在床上。令两个女子替他洗脚。
English: At this time, Pei Gong was sitting on the bed. He ordered two women to wash his feet.

古文：郦生不拜，长揖曰： 足下必欲诛无道秦，不宜踞见长者。 
现代文：郦食其未行拜见之礼，拱手长揖说： 足下要是真想推翻无道之秦，就不应坐着来接见长者。 
English: Pecking him for not performing the courtesy of meeting him, Nagase said, "If you really want to overthrow the lawless Qin Dynasty, you should not come to meet the elders sitting down.

古文：于是沛公起，摄衣谢之，延上坐。
现代文：沛公听后而起，整衣表示歉意，请入上座。
English: After listening, Pei Gong stood up and apologized for getting dressed. Please take your seats.

古文：食其说沛公袭陈留。
现代文：食其建议沛公袭击陈留。
English: Following his advice, Pei Gong attacked Chen Zuo.

古文：沛公以为广野君，以其弟商为将，将陈留兵。
现代文：沛公委任他为广野君。封食其的弟弟郦商为将，领陈留之军。
English: Pei Gong appointed him as Hirono-kun. His younger brother, Shosho, who had been under house arrest, became commander and led Chen Rui's army.

古文：三月，攻开封，未拔。
现代文：三月，攻打开封县，未攻下。
English: In March, they attacked Fong County, but failed to take it.

古文：西与秦将杨熊会战白马，又战曲遇东，大破之。
现代文：领兵西向与秦将杨熊在白马县会战，又交战于曲遇之东，大败秦军。
English: The leader Xi Xiang and the Qin general Yang Xiong fought in Baima County, and also fought in the east of the encounter, defeating the Qin Army.

古文：杨熊走之荥阳，二世使使斩之以徇。
现代文：杨熊败走至荥阳，秦二世派人将败军之将杨熊斩首示众。
English: Yang Xiong was defeated and went to Fenyang. Qin II sent someone to decapitate Yang Xiong, the general of the defeated army.

古文：四月，南攻颍川，屠之。
现代文：四月，沛公南攻颍川，大开杀戒。
English: In April, Pei Gong marched south to attack Sui River and killed many people.

古文：因张良遂略韩地。
现代文：接着运用张良的力量攻韩地。
English: He then used Zhang Liang's strength to attack Korea.

古文：时赵别将司马卬方欲渡河入关，沛公乃北攻平阴，绝河津。
现代文：此时任赵别将的司马？正打算渡黄河入函谷关，沛公就北攻平阴，截断黄河渡口。
English: At this time, Sima Zhao, who was in charge of Zhao Bei, was planning to cross the Yellow River into the Hanzhong Pass. Pei Gong attacked Pingyin in the north and cut off the Yellow River crossing.

古文：南，战雒阳东，军不利，从轘辕至阳城，收军中马骑。
现代文：引兵向南，与秦兵战于洛阳之东，受小挫。就从頧辕险道到阳城，收取军中所需马骑。
English: He led the troops to the south and fought against the Qin soldiers in the east of Luoyang, but suffered a small setback. He went from Yinghuan Road to Yangcheng to collect the horses needed by the army.

古文：六月，与南阳守齮战犨东，破之。略南阳郡，南阳守走，保城守宛。
现代文：六月，与秦南阳郡守齿奇战于韜县之东，大败秦军，占领了南阳郡，南阳郡守逃走，保守宛城。
English: In June, he fought against the Qin Nanyang County garrison in the east of Handan County, defeated the Qin army, occupied Nanyang County, and the Nanyang County garrison fled, preserving Wancheng.

古文：沛公引兵过宛西。张良谏曰： 沛公虽欲急入关，秦兵尚众，距险。
现代文：沛公领兵过宛城西出，张良谏阻说： 沛公虽然急欲攻入函谷关，而秦兵还很多，且负隅相拒。
English: When Pei Gong led his soldiers to the west of Wancheng, Zhang Liangzhang said: Although Pei Gong is eager to enter the Huan Valley Pass, there are still many Qin soldiers, and they are reluctant.

古文：今不下宛，宛从后击，强秦在前，此危道也。 
现代文：现在如不攻下宛城，要是强秦据守于我前，宛兵攻击于我后，这是一条危险的道路。 
English: Now, if we do not attack Wancheng, if Qiangqin defends in front of me and Wan soldiers attack behind me, this is a dangerous road.

古文：于是沛公乃夜引军从他道还，偃旗帜，迟明，围宛城三匝。
现代文：沛公就在夜晚引兵绕道还攻宛城，偃旗息鼓，天未明，就将宛城围住了三层。
English: Pei Gong took a detour to attack Wancheng in the evening, but the attack was repulsed. By dawn, Wancheng was surrounded on three levels.

古文：南阳守欲自刭，其舍人陈恢曰： 死未晚也。 
现代文：南阳郡守想自刎，他的亲信陈恢说： 还未到死的时候。 
English: Nanyang County sheriff wants to hang himself, his close confidant Chen Wei said: It's not time to die yet.

古文：乃逾城见沛公，曰： 臣闻足下约先入咸阳者王之，今足下留守宛。
现代文：于是陈恢越城出见沛公。他说： 小臣听说足下曾与人相约：先入秦都咸阳的尊之为王，现在足下在攻打宛城。
English: So Chen Hui crossed the city to meet Pei Gong. He said, "Minister, I heard that you had an agreement with someone: you will first enter the Qin capital of Xianyang as the honored king, and now you are attacking Wancheng.

古文：宛郡县连城数十，其吏民自以为降必死，故皆坚守乘城。
现代文：宛郡有据点数十处，守卫的将士自以为投降必被处死，所以都登城固守。
English: There are dozens of strongholds in Wan County, and the soldiers guarding them thought that they would be executed if they surrendered, so they all went to the city to hold on.

古文：今足下尽日止攻，士死伤者必多；引兵去，宛必随足下。
现代文：足下如果整日强攻，双方伤亡定会很多；要是放弃攻宛而引兵向西，宛地的秦兵完全尾追于后。
English: If the enemy attacks all day long, there will be a lot of casualties on both sides; if the enemy abandons the attack and leads the troops to the west, the Qin soldiers in the destination will completely follow behind.

古文：前则失咸阳之约，后有强宛之患。
现代文：足下攻宛则延误了先入咸阳者为王之约，足下弃宛则留下了后有追兵之患。
English: Attacking at the foot delayed the agreement that the first to enter Xianyang would be the king, abandoning at the foot left behind the danger of chasing after the soldiers.

古文：为足下计，莫若约降，封其守，因使止守，引其甲卒与之西。
现代文：小臣为足下着想，不如允许宛城守军投降，封郡守为侯，仍令他驻守原地。将他的兵力调出一并向西。
English: As an idea for the future, it would be better to invite him to abdicate by mutual agreement, make him the governor of Nanyang County, let him stay, and then lead Wancheng's soldiers to the west.

古文：诸城未下者，闻声争开门而待足下，足下通行无所累。 沛公曰： 善。 
现代文：前方还未攻下的城邑，定会闻风响应而迎接足下。足下就会顺利通行而无后顾之忧了。 沛公说： 很好。 
English: The towns that have not yet been conquered in the foreground will surely respond to the wind and welcome the footfall. The footfall will pass smoothly and there will be no worries. Pei Gong said: Very good.

古文：七月，南阳守齮降，封为殷侯，封陈恢千户。
现代文：七月，南阳太守齿奇投降，沛公封他为殷侯，封陈恢为千户。
English: In July, Nanyang Daju Ziqi capitulated, and Pei publicly appointed him as the prince of Yin, and appointed Chen Wei as the prince of Qian.

古文：引兵西，无不下者。
现代文：引兵向西，势如破竹。
English: There is no way to lead the troops westward without surrendering.

古文：至丹水，高武侯鳃、襄侯王陵降。
现代文：兵到丹水，秦高武侯鳃、襄侯王陵归降。
English: The soldiers went to Danshui, and the tombs of Qin Gaowu Houyi and Xiang Houwang were surrendered.

古文：还攻胡阳，遇番君别将梅鋗，与偕攻析、郦，皆降。
现代文：回师攻胡阳，遇番君别将梅軭，与他合攻折县、郦县，都归降了。
English: He returned to his division to attack Huyang, but when he met Banjun, he did not want to attack Meizhou, and together with him, attacked Fuxian and Jixian, and both of them surrendered.

古文：所过毋得卤掠，秦民喜。遣魏人甯昌使秦。
现代文：沛公命令军队经过之处不得掳掠，秦民十分欢迎，派魏人甯昌去秦地劝降。
English: Pei Gong ordered that the army should not loot and plunder wherever it passed. The Qin people were very welcoming, and sent the Wei man Juchang to Qin to persuade them to surrender.

古文：是月，章邯举军降项羽，羽以为雍王。
现代文：同月，秦大将章邯率领全军投降项羽，项羽封章邯为雍王。
English: In the same month, the Qin general Zhang Ye led the whole army to surrender to Xiang Yu, and Xiang Yu sealed Zhang Ye as the Yong Wang.

古文：瑕丘申阳下河南。
现代文：瑕丘公申阳攻下河南。
English: Koetsuchukong Shinyang invaded Henan.

古文：八月，沛公攻武关，入秦。
现代文：八月，沛公攻下武关。进入秦郊。
English: In August, Pei Gong captured Wuguan and entered the outskirts of Qin.

古文：秦相赵高恐，乃杀二世，使人来，欲约分王关中，沛公不许。
现代文：秦丞相赵高惊恐，就杀掉秦二世，派使来见沛公，想相约平分关中之地，沛公拒绝了。
English: The Qin chancellor Zhao Gao panicked, killed Qin II, and sent an envoy to meet Pei Gong, wanting to make an agreement to equally divide the land of Guanzhong. Pei Gong refused.

古文：九月，赵高立二世兄子子婴为秦王。
现代文：九月，赵高立二世兄之子子婴为王。
English: In September, the infant son of Zhao Gaoli II's brother became king.

古文：子婴诛灭赵高，遣将将兵距峣关。
现代文：子婴诛灭了赵高，派将军领兵据守山尧关。
English: Zhao Gao annihilated the infants and sent a general to lead the troops to guard the mountain pass.

古文：沛公欲击之，张良曰： 秦兵尚强，未可轻。
现代文：沛公想发起攻击，张良阻止说： 秦兵尚强，不可轻视。
English: Pei Gong wanted to launch an attack, but Zhang Liang stopped him, saying, "Qin soldiers are still strong and should not be despised.

古文：愿先遣人益张旗帜于山上为疑兵，使郦食其、陆贾往说秦将，啗以利。 
现代文：建议先派人在近的山上多插旌旗以为疑兵，派郦食其、陆贾到秦营当说客，以利相诱。 
English: It was suggested that they should first send people to plant more flags on the nearby mountains to lure the suspected soldiers, send soldiers to eat them, and Lu Jia to Qinying to act as a lobbyist to lure them.

古文：秦将果欲连和，沛公欲许之。
现代文：秦将果然想与沛公讲和，沛公打算同意。
English: Qin Zheng really wanted to make peace with Pei Gong, and Pei Gong was going to agree.

古文：张良曰： 此独其将欲叛，恐其士卒不从，不如因其怠懈击之。 
现代文：张良说： 这只是秦的将领想叛秦，恐其士卒不从的缓冲之计，不如乘其无备而发起进攻。 
English: Zhang Liang said: This is just a buffering measure for the Qin generals who want to rebel against the Qin Dynasty and are afraid that their soldiers will not obey. It is better to take advantage of their unpreparedness and launch an attack.

古文：沛公引兵绕峣关，逾蒉山，击秦军，大破之蓝田南。遂至蓝田，又战其北，秦兵大败。
现代文：于是沛公领兵绕道山尧关，翻越黄山，进击秦军，接着进军蓝田，从北侧发起进攻，秦兵又大败。
English: As a result, Pei Gong led his soldiers to bypass Shanhaiguan, climb over Huangshan, attack the Qin army, then march into Lantian, launch an attack from the north side, and the Qin soldiers were defeated.

古文：元年冬十月，五星聚于东井。
现代文：汉高祖元年冬十月，沛公领兵到达霸水上。
English: In the winter of October of the first year of Henkel, Pei Gong led the soldiers to the water.

古文：沛公至霸上。秦王子婴素车白马，系颈以组，封皇帝玺、符、节、降枳道旁。诸将或言诛秦王，沛公曰： 始怀王遣我，固以能宽容，且人已服降，杀之不祥。 
现代文：秦王子婴驾着素车白马，颈上系着绶带，把皇帝的玉玺符节封好，在轵道亭旁向沛公投降，众将中有人建议沛公杀掉秦王，沛公说： 原先楚怀王之所以派我入关，是因为我能宽容人，何况秦王已经归顺投降，要杀掉他是不好的。 
English: Prince Qin was driving a horse-drawn carriage, wearing a sash around his neck. He sealed the Emperor's Jade Rooster Festival and surrendered to Pei Gong next to the Imperial Road Pavilion. Among the generals, someone suggested that Pei Gong kill King Qin. Pei Gong said, "The reason why King Chu Huai sent me to the customs was because I can be tolerant. Besides, King Qin has already surrendered. It is not good to kill him."

古文：乃以属吏。
现代文：于是将孺子婴交给小校看管。
English: As a result, the child was handed over to the care of the school.

古文：遂西入咸阳。欲止宫休舍，樊哙、张良谏，乃封秦重宝财物府库，还军霸上。
现代文：接着西进咸阳，到秦都后沛公想进秦宫休息，樊哙、张良进行劝阻。沛公就将秦都的重要财物府库进行封存后，将军队回驻于霸上。
English: Next, he went west to Xianyang. After arriving at the Qin capital, Pei Gong wanted to rest in the Qin Palace, but was dissuaded by Zhai and Zhang Liang. Pei Gong then sealed the important treasury of the Qin capital and stationed the army back in Baxian.

古文：萧何尽收秦丞相府图籍文书。
现代文：萧何把秦丞相府的图籍档案全都收取。
English: Xiao He collected all the archives of the records of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：十一月，召诸县豪桀曰： 父老苦秦苛法久矣，诽谤者族，耦语者弃市。
现代文：十一月，沛公在召集秦地各县豪杰会上说： 各位父老受秦朝的酷刑峻法之苦很久了。当时是对犯诽谤罪者刑及父母妻子，二人相对议论者斩首示众。
English: In November, Pei Gong said at the gathering of heroes and heroines from all counties of Qin: "Our fathers and grandfathers have suffered from the Qin Dynasty's torture and harsh laws for a long time. At that time, the punishment for those who committed the crime of defamation was the same as that of their parents and wives, and those who argued with each other were beheaded.

古文：吾与诸侯约，先入关者王之，吾当王关中。
现代文：我曾与反秦的诸侯有约，先入关者为王。我先入关当称王于关中。
English: I agreed with the lords that whoever entered the gate first would be crowned king, and I should be crowned king of the gate.

古文：与父老约法三章耳：杀人者死，伤人及盗抵罪。
现代文：现在向诸位父老宣布，法令三条：杀人的偿命，伤人及抢劫的按情节治罪。
English: I now announce to you, fathers and grandfathers, that there are three articles in the decree: compensation for the life of a murderer, and the crime of wounding a person and robbery will be punished according to the circumstances.

古文：余悉除去秦法。
现代文：其余的秦朝法令一律废除。
English: All remaining Qin dynasty decrees were abolished.

古文：吏民皆按堵如故。
现代文：秦地吏臣民都要服从纪律各从其业。
English: Qin and local officials and subjects should all be subject to discipline and follow their own business.

古文：凡吾所以来，为父兄除害，非有所侵暴，毋恐！
现代文：我之所以领兵入关，是为帮父兄们除害。绝不会在此地横行霸道，望诸位不要惊恐。
English: The reason why I led soldiers into the customs is to help my parents and brothers eliminate harm. I will never be domineering here, I hope you will not be alarmed.

古文：且吾所以军霸上，待诸侯至而定要束耳。 
现代文：我现在驻军于霸上的原因，是等各路起义诸侯到达以后一齐执行约法三章。 
English: The reason why I am now stationing troops in Hachijo is to wait for the arrival of the uprising lords from all directions to implement the three chapters of the covenant together.

古文：乃使人与秦吏行至县、乡、邑告谕之。
现代文：即时派人与秦朝故吏下行县乡晓喻百姓。
English: Immediately dispatched people and Qin Dynasty officials to go down to the county townships to tell the people.

古文：秦民大喜，争持牛、羊、酒食献享军士。
现代文：秦民大喜，争先牵着牛羊，提着酒食来犒劳沛公的将士。
English: The people of Qin were overjoyed and raced to lead the cattle and sheep and bring wine and food to the soldiers.

古文：沛公让不受，曰： 仓粟多，不欲费民。 
现代文：沛公一再推辞不受，他说： 秦库粮食甚多，实在不敢增加百姓负担。 
English: Pei Gong was repeatedly rebuffed. He said, "There is a lot of grain in the Qin storehouse. I really dare not increase the burden on the people."

古文：民又益喜，唯恐沛公不为秦王。
现代文：秦地人民更是感戴，深怕沛公不做关中之王。
English: The people of Qin were even more impressed, deeply afraid that Pei Gong would not be the king of Guanzhong.

古文：或说沛公曰： 秦富十倍天下，地形强。今闻章邯降项羽，羽号曰雍王，王关中。
现代文：有人向沛公建议说： 秦地财富十倍于天下，地理形势险要，现在听说秦大将章邯投降了项羽，项羽给他以雍王王号，派他到关中为王。
English: Someone suggested to Pei Gong: Qin's wealth is ten times that of the rest of the world, and the geographical situation is precarious. Now it is said that Qin General Zhang Ye surrendered to Xiang Yu. Xiang Yu gave him the title of King of Yong and sent him to Guanzhong as king.

古文：即来，沛公恐不得有此。
现代文：要是他一到，沛公恐怕不能拥有此地。
English: If he arrives, I'm afraid Pei Gong won't be able to own this place.

古文：可急使守函谷关，毋内诸侯军，稍征关中兵以自益，距之。 
现代文：应该迅速派兵扼守函谷关，不要让诸侯的队伍进来，稍从关中征集一些兵丁以加强兵力，拒章邯于关外。 
English: It was necessary to quickly send soldiers to guard the Hakodate pass, not to let the vassal forces come in, to recruit some soldiers from the pass to strengthen the troops, and to refuse to stay outside the pass.

古文：沛公然其计，从之。
现代文：沛公认为其计甚佳，就听从了。
English: Pei Gong agreed with his plan and did as he was told.

古文：十二月，项羽果帅诸侯兵欲西入关，关门闭。
现代文：十二月，项羽果然领诸侯兵准备入关中，函谷关门紧闭。
English: In December, Xiang Yu really led the vassals to prepare to enter the customs, and the gate of Hakodate was closed.

古文：闻沛公已定关中，羽大怒，使黥布等攻破函谷关，遂至戏下。
现代文：项羽得悉沛公已定关中，勃然大怒，派英布等攻破函谷关，直抵戏下。
English: When Xiang Yu learned that Pei Gong was already in the middle of the pass, he flew into a rage and sent Ying Bu and others to break through the Hanzhong Pass and go straight to the end of the play.

古文：沛公左司马曹毋伤闻羽怒，欲攻沛公，使人言羽曰： 沛公欲王关中，令子婴相，珍宝尽有之。 
现代文：沛公的左司马曹无伤听说项羽发怒，想攻打沛公，就派人密报项羽说： 沛公想当关中王，叫秦王孺子婴当他的丞相，现拥有秦都所有珍宝。 
English: After learning that Xiang Yu was angry and wanted to attack Pei Gong, Pei Gong's left-hand man, Ma Cao Woundless, sent a spy to report to Xiang Yu, saying: "Pei Gong wants to be the king of Guanzhong, and has asked Qin King He Zi Baby to be his prime minister. He now has all the precious treasures of Qin."

古文：欲以求封。
现代文：想借密报之功来求得项羽给他的封号。
English: He's trying to get a reward for this.

古文：亚父范增说羽曰： 沛公居山东时，贪财好色。今闻其入关，珍物无所取，妇女无所幸，此其志不小。
现代文：亚父范增建议项羽说： 沛公在山东时，贪财好色，现在听说他入关之后，珍物宝器不取，美色妇女不近。看来他的志气不小。
English: Father Fan Zeng suggested Xiang Yu said: "When Pei Gong started in Shandong, he was greedy and lustful. Now I heard that after he entered the customs, he did not take precious treasures and beautiful women were not close. It seems that his ambition is not small.

古文：吾使人望其气，皆为龙，成五色，此天子气。
现代文：我曾派人望他头上的云气，云气如龙，五色灿烂，这是帝王之气。
English: I once sent someone to look at the clouds above his head. The clouds were like dragons, brilliantly colored. This was the air of an emperor.

古文：急击之，勿失。 
现代文：定要趁早攻击，不要贻患将来。 
English: It is necessary to attack as soon as possible, and not wait for the future.

古文：于是飨士，旦日合战。
现代文：于是项羽犒劳士卒，下令明日交锋。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu's brother-in-law, ordered a showdown tomorrow.

古文：是时，羽兵四十万，号百万。
现代文：此时，项羽拥兵四十万，号称百万。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu's followers numbered 400,000, reputedly one million.

古文：沛公兵十万，号二十万，力不敌。
现代文：沛公有兵十万，号称二十万，兵力悬殊。
English: The number of public soldiers was 100,000, but it was claimed to be 200,000. The enemy's forces were no more than a feather.

古文：会羽季父左尹项伯素善张良，夜驰见张良，具告其实，欲与俱去，毋特俱死。
现代文：适逢项羽叔父左尹项伯是张良的故友，连夜驰见张良，详细告诉了项羽明日进攻沛公的军事实情，想叫张良和他一起脱离险境，不必与沛公同归于尽。
English: At the right time, Xiang Yu's uncle Zuo Yin Xiang Bo, an old friend of Zhang Liang, saw Zhang Liang overnight and told him in detail the military situation of Xiang Yu's attack on Pei Gong tomorrow. He wanted Zhang Liang to get out of the danger zone with him and not have to die with Pei Gong.

古文：良曰： 臣为韩王送沛公，不可不告，亡去不义。 
现代文：张良说：在下是作为韩王使者来投沛公帐下的，不能不辞而别，别而不告是不义。 
English: Zhang Liang said, "I am here as the emissary of the King of Korea to invest in the public account. I cannot leave without notice. It is unfair to leave without notice."

古文：乃与项伯俱见沛公。
现代文：于是和项伯一同去见沛公。
English: So he and Xiang Bo went to see Pei Gong.

古文：沛公与伯约为婚姻，曰： 吾入关，秋毫无所敢取，籍吏民，封府库，待将军。
现代文：沛公与项伯约为婚姻，对项伯说： 我进关之后，秋毫之物都不敢取，保存吏民簿籍，封锁秦朝府库，以等待项羽将军。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Bo were about to get married, and he said to Xiang Bo: "After I entered the pass, I didn't dare to take anything. I kept the register of officials and people, sealed the Qin Dynasty treasury, and waited for General Xiang Yu.

古文：所以守关者，备他盗也。
现代文：我之所以派兵守关，是为了防备其他盗贼。
English: The reason why I sent soldiers to guard the gate was to prevent other thieves.

古文：日夜望将军到，岂敢反邪！
现代文：日夜盼望项将军的来到，怎么敢有背德的心迹。 
English: Day and night hoping for the arrival of General Xiang, how dare you have a traitor's heart.

古文：愿伯明言不敢背德。 
现代文：项伯点头同意，连夜回营去了。
English: Xiang Bo nodded his agreement and went back to the camp overnight.

古文：项伯许诺，即夜复去，戒沛公曰： 旦日不可不早自来谢。 项伯还，具以沛公言告羽，因曰： 沛公不先破关中兵，公巨能入乎？
现代文：临行时告戒沛公说： 明晨一定要尽早拜见项羽。 项伯回营后，将详情转告于项羽，接着说： 沛公如果不先打败关中秦军，您能够如此顺利到达关中吗？
English: When he was about to leave, he told Cao Pei Gong that he must see Xiang Yu as early as possible in the morning. After Xiang Bo returned to the camp, he relayed the details to Xiang Yu and continued: If Pei Gong does not defeat the Qin Army in Guanzhong first, will you be able to reach Guanzhong so smoothly?

古文：且人有大功，击之不祥，不如因善之。 
现代文：何况沛公立有大功，对之进行攻击是不得人心的，不如就此机会对他表示友好。 
English: Besides, he has made great contributions to the public, and it is unpopular to attack him. It is better to take this opportunity to show him friendship.

古文：羽许诺。
现代文：项羽表示同意。
English: Xiang Yu agreed.

古文：沛公旦日从百余骑见羽鸿门，谢曰： 臣与将军戮力攻秦，将军战河北，臣战河南，不自意先入关，能破秦，与将军复相见。
现代文：沛公清晨带随从百余骑见项羽于鸿门，拜见项羽说： 末将和将军同心协力攻秦，将军转战于河北，末将作战于河南，在无意中先进入关中，打败秦朝，得与将军在此会师。
English: Early in the morning, Pei Gong, accompanied by more than a hundred horsemen, met Xiang Yu at Hongmen. He said to Xiang Yu: "In the end, you and the general will work together to attack Qin. The general will fight in Hebei. In the end, you will fight in Henan. Unintentionally, you will enter Guanzhong first, defeat the Qin Dynasty, and have to join the general's division here."

古文：今者有小人言，令将军与臣有隙。 
现代文：今日却有小人进谗，让将军与末将不和。 
English: Today, however, a villain has entered the fray, causing discord between the general and the viceroy.

古文：羽曰： 此沛公左司马曹毋伤言之，不然，籍何以至此？ 
现代文：项羽说： 这是沛公左司马曹无伤通的消息，不然的话，我项羽何至于采取如此行动？ 
English: Xiang Yu said, "This is the news of Peigong Zuo's safe passage, otherwise, why would I Xiang Yu take such an action?"

古文：羽因留沛公饮。
现代文：项羽就留住沛公共饮。
English: So Xiang Yu kept drinking in public.

古文：范增数目羽击沛公，羽不应。
现代文：范增多次以目示意项羽击杀沛公，项羽未予置理。
English: Fan Zeng repeatedly struck and killed Pei Gong with a pointed feather, but the feather was not taken into account.

古文：范增起，出谓项庄曰： 君王为人不忍，汝入以剑舞，因击沛公，杀之。
现代文：范增离席，出去对项庄说： 项羽将军为人狠不下心，你入席舞剑以助酒兴，乘机刺击沛公，将他杀死。
English: Fan Zeng left the table and went out to say to Xiang Zhuang: General Xiang Yu is a ruthless person. You entered the table to dance with a sword to help the wine, and took the opportunity to stab Pei Gong and kill him.

古文：不者，汝属且为所虏。 
现代文：否则，我和你辈都会做他的俘虏。 
English: Otherwise, you and I will be his prisoners.

古文：庄入为寿。
现代文：项庄入席为主客举杯祝寿。
English: The guests in attendance raise their glasses in celebration of the guest of honor.

古文：寿毕，曰： 军中无以为乐，请以剑舞。 
现代文：敬酒毕说： 军中没有什么为乐的，愿舞剑以助酒兴。 
English: After the toast, Bi said, "There is nothing to enjoy in the army. May the sword dance help you enjoy your drink."

古文：因拔剑舞。
现代文：随即拔剑起舞。
English: He then drew his sword and began to dance.

古文：项伯亦起舞，常以身翼蔽沛公。
现代文：项伯也拔剑起舞，常常用自身来保护沛公。
English: Xiang Bo also drew his sword and danced, often using himself to protect Pei Gong.

古文：樊哙闻事急，直入，怒甚。
现代文：樊哙得知情况紧急，就冲到筵前，怒目圆睁。
English: Upon learning that the situation was urgent, Zou rushed to Zou's side, his eyes wide with anger.

古文：羽壮之，赐以酒。
现代文：项羽欣赏他的勇武，就赐酒与他。
English: Xiang Yu appreciated his bravery and gave him wine.

古文：哙因谯让羽。
现代文：樊哙乘机以言责备项羽。
English: He took the opportunity to reprimand Xiang Yu.

古文：有顷，沛公起如厕，招樊哙出，置车官属，独骑，樊哙、靳强、滕公、纪成步，从间道走军，使张良留谢羽。
现代文：一会儿，沛公离席上厕所，带樊哙一同出去，将同来的人员车马留下，跨马挥鞭，和步行的樊哙、靳强、滕公、纪成等，抄僻静径道回到自己营地，叫张良留下向项羽致谢。
English: After a while, Pei Gong left the table to go to the toilet, and went out with Zhang Liang. He left the chariots and horses of the people who came with him, and waved a whip at the straddling horses. He and the pedestrians, including Yao, Xiangqiang, Tenggong, and Jicheng, walked back to their camp along a secluded path, and asked Zhang Liang to stay behind to thank Xiang Yu.

古文：羽问： 沛公安在？ 
现代文：项羽问： 沛公何处去了？ 
English: Xiang Yu asked: Where did Pei Gong go?

古文：曰： 闻将军有意督过之，脱身去，间至军，故使臣献璧。 
现代文：张良答道： 他听说将军有意找他的过失，他脱身走了，此时可能已经回营，他特意叫小臣向将军献上璧玉。 
English: Zhang Liang replied: He heard that the general intended to find fault with him. He got away and may have returned to the camp at this time. He specifically asked his vassal to present gems to the general.

古文：羽受之。
现代文：项羽受璧。
English: The collar and feathers are exquisite.

古文：又献玉斗范增。增怒，撞其斗，起曰： 吾属今为沛公虏矣！ 
现代文：张良又献范增以玉斗，范增怒，将玉斗击碎，他起立说： 我们不久都要当沛公的俘虏了。 
English: Zhang Liang also presented Fan Zeng with a jade dart. Fan Zeng got angry and broke the jade dart. He stood up and said, "We will all soon be the captives of Pei Gong."

古文：沛公归数日，羽引兵西屠咸阳，杀秦降王子婴，烧秦宫室，所过残灭，秦民大失望。
现代文：沛公回营数日，项羽领兵西进践踏咸阳。处决秦降王子婴，烧毁秦朝宫殿，项羽之兵所过之处无不受殃。秦人大失望。
English: Pei Gong returned to the camp for a few days. Xiang Yu led his soldiers westward and trampled on Xianyang. He executed Qin Qian's infant prince and burned down the palace of the Qin Dynasty. Wherever Xiang Yu's soldiers went, disaster followed. The Qin Dynasty was disappointed.

古文：羽使人还报怀王，怀王曰： 如约。 
现代文：项羽派人报告楚怀王，楚怀王说： 按前约一一一令先入关中沛公为关中王。 
English: Cao Yu sent someone to report to King Chu Hui, and King Chu Hui said, "I have ordered you to go to Guanzhong first, and you will be the king of Guanzhong."

古文：羽怨怀王不肯令与沛公俱西入关而北救赵，后天下约。
现代文：项羽怀恨楚怀王原先不允许他沛公一道西进入关，而是派他北进救赵，以致失去了 先入定关中的为王 的机会。
English: Xiang Yu held a grudge against King Chu Huai, who had not allowed him to enter the pass from the west, but had sent him north to rescue Zhao. As a result, he lost the opportunity to enter the middle of the pass first.

古文：乃曰： 怀王者，吾家所立耳，非有功伐，何以得专主约！
现代文：他说： 楚怀王，是我项家所立，并没有什么功德可称，怎能够让他说一不二！
English: He said: King Chu Huai, who was established by my Xiang family, has no merit to speak of, how can I make him say one thing and do another!

古文：本定天下，诸将与籍也。 
现代文：其实推翻秦朝，是各路将领与项羽的功劳。 
English: In fact, the overthrow of the Qin Dynasty was the achievement of generals and officials from all walks of life.

古文：春正月，阳尊怀王为义帝，实不用其命。
现代文：汉高祖二年正月，项羽明尊怀王为义帝，实则不遵从怀王的命令。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, Xiang Yu respected King Huai as a righteous emperor, but did not obey the king's order.

古文：二月，羽自立为西楚霸王，王梁、楚地九郡，都彭城。
现代文：二月，项羽自立为西楚霸王，统辖梁、楚地九郡，都于彭城。
English: In February, Xiang Yu established himself as the ruler of Western Chu, controlling nine counties in Liang and Chu, all in Pengcheng.

古文：背约，更立沛公为汉王，王巴、蜀、汉中四十一县，都南郑。
现代文：推翻楚怀王的 先入定关中的为王 的约定，改立沛公为汉王，统辖巴、蜀、汉中四十一个县，都于南郑。
English: He overturned the agreement that King Chuhuai would be the first to be crowned as the king of Dingguanzhong, and changed it to establish King Pei as the king of Han, ruling over the forty-one counties of Ba, Shu, and Han, all of which were in Nanzheng.

古文：三分关中，立秦三将，章邯为雍王，都废丘；司马欣为塞王，都栎阳；董翳为翟王，都高奴。
现代文：将关中一分为三，分别派三位秦将为王。派章邯为雍王，都于废丘；立司马欣为塞王，都于栎阳；董翳为翟王，都于高奴。
English: Guanzhong was divided into three, and three Qin kings were sent separately. Zhang Ye, the king of Yong, was sent to Wast Hill; Lisi Mahin, the king of Sai, was sent to Shenyang; and Dong Ye, the king of Shao, was sent to Gaozu.

古文：楚将瑕丘申阳为河南王，都洛阳。
现代文：又封楚将瑕丘申阳为河南王，都于洛阳。
English: He made Shenyang the king of Henan Province and built Luoyang as the capital.

古文：赵将司马卬为殷王，都朝歌。
现代文：赵将司马邛为殷王，都于朝歌。
English: Fong Zhao made Sima Ying the king of Yin and built the capital of morning song.

古文：当阳君英布为九江王，都六。
现代文：当阳君英布为九江王，都于六县。
English: Dangyang Junyingbu is the king of Jiujiang, all in six counties.

古文：怀王柱国共敖为临江王，都江陵。
现代文：怀王的柱国共敖为临江王，都于江陵。
English: He made Chuhuai Wangzhu the king of Linjiang and built the capital at Gangneung.

古文：番君吴芮为衡山王，都邾。
现代文：番君吴芮为衡山王，都于邾。
English: Wuzhen, Fangban County, is the king of Hengshan, and the capital of Jianye County.

古文：故齐王建孙田安为济北王。
现代文：前齐王田建之孙田安为济北王。
English: Tian An, the grandson of the former Qi king Tian Jian, became the king of Jibei.

古文：徙魏王豹为西魏王，都平阳。
现代文：迁魏王豹为西魏王，都于平阳。
English: Qian Wei Wangpan is the king of the Western Wei Dynasty, both in Pingyang.

古文：徙燕王韩广为辽东王。
现代文：迁燕王韩广为辽东王。
English: Han Guang, the migratory king of Yan, became the king of Liaodong.

古文：燕将臧荼为燕王，都蓟。
现代文：燕将臧荼为燕王，都于蓟。
English: Fong Yan made Zou the king of Yan and built the capital of Zou County.

古文：徙齐王田市为胶东王。
现代文：迁齐王田市为胶东王。
English: Qiwangtian City is crowned as the King of Jiaodong.

古文：齐将田都为齐王，都临菑。
现代文：齐将田都为齐王，都于临？
English: Will all the fields of Qi become the king of Qi, and will they all be in the presence?

古文：徙赵王歇为代王。
现代文：迁赵王歇为代王。
English: Zhao Wangxie was appointed as the acting king.

古文：赵相张耳为常山王。
现代文：赵相张耳为常山王。
English: Zhao Xiangzhang is the king of Changshan.

古文：汉王怨羽之背约，欲攻之，丞相萧何谏，乃止。
现代文：汉王刘邦怀恨项羽违背 先入定关中的为王 的前约，想发动进攻，萧何进行劝阻，就停止了。
English: Liu Bang, the king of Han, broke the pre-agreement of being the king of the pre-entry checkpoint with a grudge, and wanted to launch an attack, but was dissuaded, and stopped.

古文：夏四月，诸侯罢戏下，各就国。
现代文：夏四月，各路诸侯告别于项羽麾下，分别到自己的封国去。
English: In the summer of April, all the princes bid farewell to Xiang Yu and went to their respective fiefdoms.

古文：羽使卒三万人从汉王，楚子、诸侯人之慕从者数万人，从杜南入蚀中。
现代文：项羽分拨士卒三万人给汉王，楚与各诸侯国仰慕汉王的而愿追随于他的达数万人。
English: Thirty thousand men were assigned to King Han, and tens of thousands of people from Chu and all the principalities admired King Han and wanted to follow him.

古文：张良辞归韩，汉王送至褒中，因说汉王烧绝栈道，以备诸侯盗兵，亦视项羽无东意。
现代文：张良辞别汉王回到韩国去，汉王亲送张良到褒中，张良在告别时建议汉王烧毁栈道，一是防止其他诸侯进窥汉中，二是向项羽表示汉王无再出汉中东进之意。
English: Zhang Liang said goodbye to the Han king and went back to Korea. The Han prince sent Zhang Liang to Baozhong. When Zhang Liang said goodbye, he suggested that the Han king burn the trestle road. The first was to prevent other princes from entering Han, and the second was to show Xiang Yu that the Han king had no intention of entering the Han Middle East again.

古文：汉王既至南郑，诸将及士卒皆歌讴思东归，多道亡还者。
现代文：汉王在到达南郑途中，所属将士都齐声歌唱想归东部故；有不少人逃回去了。
English: When Han Wang was on his way to Nan Zheng, the soldiers under his command all sang in unison that they wanted to return to the east; many of them fled back.

古文：韩信为治粟都尉，亦亡去。
现代文：韩信是治粟都尉，也随着东归的人走了。
English: Han Xin, a lieutenant of the Jiaogu, also left with the returnees.

古文：萧何追还之，因荐于汉王，曰： 必欲争天下，非信无可与计事者。 
现代文：萧何把韩信追赶转来，推荐给汉王。萧何说： 如果您真想取得天下，除韩信以外再没有可与商议的人。 
English: Xiao He chased Han Xin around and recommended him to Han Wang. Xiao He said, "If you really want to take over the world, there is no one to negotiate with except Han Xin."

古文：于是汉王齐戒设坛场，拜信为大将军，问以计策。
现代文：于是汉王斋戒登上拜将台，拜韩信为大将军，并请教取得天下的计策。
English: As a result, Han Wang Lai Rong climbed onto the general's podium to pay tribute to Han Xin as the great general, and asked for advice to obtain the world's strategy.

古文：信对曰： 项羽背约而王君王于南郑，是迁也。
现代文：韩信答道： 项羽背弃原约而改封大王于南郑，这是把大王当作罪人在迁徙。
English: Han Xin replied: Xiang Yu reneged on the original agreement and changed the title of the great king to Nan Zheng. This was a migration of the great king as a sinner.

古文：吏卒毕山东之人，日夜企而望归，及其锋而用之，可以有大功。
现代文：大王所属将士都是山东的人，日夜希望打回老家去，如能及时用其锐气，定可以取得胜利。
English: Da Wang's soldiers are all from Shandong. They hope to go back to their hometown day and night. If they can use their spirit in time, they will surely win.

古文：天下已定，民皆自宁，不可复用。
现代文：要是等到天下已经安定，人民都各安其所就没有士气可用了。
English: If we wait until the world has stabilized and the people have all settled down, there will be no morale to draw on.

古文：不如决策东向。 
现代文：当务之急就是引兵向东。 
English: The most urgent task is to lead the army to the east.

古文：因陈羽可图、三秦易并之计。
现代文：同时还全面陈述了项羽可取与三秦可并的计策。
English: At the same time, it also comprehensively stated the strategies that Xiang Yu can be combined with Sanqin.

古文：汉王大说，遂听信策，部署诸将。留萧何收巴、蜀租，给军粮食。
现代文：汉王十分满意，完全按照韩信的方案分别进行部署，派萧何留守汉中收取巴、蜀钱粮，以供应军需。
English: Han Wang was very satisfied, and in full accordance with Han Xin's plan, they were deployed separately, and sent Xiao He to stay in Hanzhong to collect Ba and Shu money grain to supply military supplies.

古文：五月，汉王引兵从故道出袭雍。
现代文：五月，汉王领兵从故道县袭击雍地，雍王章邯迎战汉兵于陈仓。
English: In May, the Han king led his troops from the former Daoxian to attack the Yongde, and the Yong Wang Zhangye met the Han soldiers at Chencang.

古文：雍王邯迎击汉陈仓，雍兵败，还走；战好畤，又大败，走废丘。
现代文：雍王兵败，向后撤退；又战于好？县，章邯兵又大败，奔向废丘。
English: The Yong Wang soldiers were defeated and retreated backwards; they also fought in Haoxian County, and the Zhangye soldiers were defeated again and rushed to the waste hill.

古文：汉王遂定雍地。
现代文：汉王及时平定了雍地。
English: The Han king then leveled the highlands.

古文：东如咸阳，引兵围雍王废丘，而遣诸将略地。
现代文：东进咸阳，将章邯所拒守的废丘进行包围后，又派各将领去扩充地盘。
English: After marching eastward to Xianyang and encircling the abandoned hill that Zhang Ye refused to defend, he also sent generals to expand the territory.

古文：田荣闻羽徙齐王市于胶东而立田都为齐王，大怒，以齐兵迎击田都。都走降楚。
现代文：齐将田荣听到项羽迁徙齐王田市到胶东而另立田都为齐王，怒不可遏，就率领齐兵迎截田都，田都败走降楚。
English: When Qi general Tian Rong heard that Xiang Yu had moved Qi Wang Tian City to Jiaodong and set up Tiandu as Qi King, he was furious and led Qi soldiers to attack Tiandu. Tiandu was defeated and surrendered.

古文：六月，田荣杀田市，自立为齐王。
现代文：六月，田荣杀田市，自立为齐王。
English: In June, Tian Rong killed Tian Shi and established himself as the king of Qi.

古文：时彭越在巨野，众万余人，无所属。
现代文：此时彭越驻兵钜野，有士卒一万余人尚无所归属。
English: At this time, Peng Yue was stationed in Hunan, and there were more than ten thousand soldiers who had no place to belong.

古文：荣与越将军印，因令反梁地。
现代文：田荣授予彭越将军印，令他从梁地出击。
English: Tian Rong gave Peng Yue the seal of a general and ordered him to attack from Liang Di.

古文：越击杀济北王安，荣遂并三齐之地。
现代文：彭越击杀济北王田安，田荣就据有了齐与济北、胶东的全部地区。
English: Peng Yue killed Tian An, the king of North Jibei, and Tian Rong became the ruler of all the regions of North Jibei and Jiaodong.

古文：燕王韩广亦不肯徙辽东。
现代文：燕王韩广也不肯迁徙辽东。
English: Yan Wang Han Guang also refused to move to Liaodong.

古文：秋八月，臧荼杀韩广，并其地。
现代文：秋八月，新燕王臧荼杀了韩广，占领其地。
English: In autumn and August, the new Yan Wang killed Han Guang and occupied his land.

古文：塞王欣、翟王翳皆降汉。
现代文：塞王司马欣、翟王董翳都投降于汉。
English: King Sima Xin of Tibet and King Dong Xi of Shandong both surrendered to Han.

古文：初，项梁立韩后公子成为韩王，张良为韩司徒。
现代文：当初，项梁立韩国之后的公子成为韩王，张良当韩王的司徒。
English: At first, Xiang Liang's son became King Han after establishing Korea, and Zhang Liang became King Han's disciple.

古文：羽以良从汉王，韩王成又无功，故不遣就国，与俱至彭城，杀之。
现代文：项羽因为张良追随汉王，韩王成又未立战功，所以就不让他回到韩地去，把他带到彭城后，处决了。
English: Because Zhang Liang followed the Han King, and Han Wangcheng did not achieve any military success, Xiang Yu did not allow him to return to Korea. He was taken to Pengcheng and executed.

古文：及闻汉王并关中，而齐、梁畔之，羽大怒，乃以故吴令郑昌为韩王，距汉。
现代文：此时项羽听到汉王兼并关中，而齐、梁又叛变于他，就怒气冲天，于是派原吴令郑昌为韩王，抵御汉兵。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu was furious when he heard that the Han king was in the middle of annexing Korea, and that Qi and Liang had also rebelled against him, so he sent the original Wu to appoint Zheng Chang as the king of Korea to resist the Han soldiers.

古文：令萧公角击彭越，越败角兵。
现代文：令萧公角攻击彭越，被彭越打败。
English: Xiao Gongjiao attacked Peng Yue and was defeated by Peng Yue.

古文：时张良徇韩地，遗羽书曰： 汉欲得关中，如约即止，不敢复东。 
现代文：其间张良在韩地巡略，送信给项羽说： 汉王想得到关中，能实践先入关的为王之约他就会停止进兵，不敢继续东进。 
English: Meanwhile, Zhang Liang was on a tour of South Korea and sent a message to Xiang Yu saying: If the Han king wants to get into the middle of the pass, he will stop marching into the army and dare not continue eastward if he can practice the king's agreement of entering the pass first.

古文：羽以故无西意，而北击齐。
现代文：项羽因此就暂没有西顾之意，而北击齐王田荣。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu had no intention of looking westward for the time being, while Qi Wang Tian Rong moved north.

古文：九月，汉王遣将军薛欧、王吸出武关，因王陵兵，从南阳迎太公、吕后于沛。
现代文：九月，汉王派遣将军薛欧、王吸出武关，会合据守南阳的王陵的兵力，从南阳去沛地迎接太公、吕后。
English: In September, Emperor Han dispatched generals Xue Ou and Wang Su out of Wuguan to gather the troops guarding the royal mausoleum in Nanyang and go to Paidi from Nanyang to meet the Grand Duke and Empress Dowager Lv.

古文：羽闻之，发兵距之阳夏，不得前。
现代文：项羽闻讯，就派兵在阳夏堵截，王陵等无法前进。
English: When Xiang Yu heard the news, he sent soldiers to block Yangxia, and the royal tombs could not move forward.

古文：二年冬十月，项羽使九江王布杀义帝于郴。
现代文：汉高祖二年冬十月，项羽派九江王英布在郴县杀了义帝。
English: In the winter of October of the second year of the founder of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Yu sent the King of the Nine Rivers, Ying Bu, to kill the Righteous Emperor in Handan County.

古文：陈馀亦怨羽独不王己，从田荣借助兵，以击常山王张耳。
现代文：陈余怀怨项羽独不封他为王，就向齐王田荣借兵相助，以攻击常山王张耳。
English: Chen Yu harbored a grudge against Xiang Yu for not making him king, so he borrowed soldiers from Qi Wang Tian Rong to attack Zhang Er, the king of Changshan.

古文：耳败走降汉，汉王厚遇之。
现代文：张耳败走降汉，汉王给以隆重礼遇。
English: Zhang Er defeated and went down to Han, and Han Wang gave him a grand courtesy.

古文：陈馀迎代王歇还赵，歇立馀为代王。
现代文：陈余迎代王歇归还赵地，代王歇立陈余为代王。
English: Chen Yu ushered in the return of Zhao Di on behalf of Wang Xie, and Chen Yu became the acting king on behalf of Wang Xie.

古文：张良自韩间行归汉，汉王以为成信侯。
现代文：张良从韩地秘密地来到汉王身边，汉王封他为成信侯。
English: Zhang Liang secretly came to the Han king from Korea, and the Han king appointed him as Chengxin marquis.

古文：汉王如陕，镇抚关外父老。
现代文：汉王到达陕县，安慰关外父老。
English: Han Wang arrived in Shaanxi to comfort Guan's parents.

古文：河南王申阳降，置河南郡。
现代文：河南王申阳归降于汉，汉在此设立河南郡。
English: Shenyang, the king of Henan, fell to the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty established Henan County here.

古文：使韩太尉韩信击韩，韩王郑昌降。
现代文：派韩太尉韩信攻打韩地，韩王郑昌投降。
English: Han Taifu Han Xin was sent to attack Korea, and King Han Zheng Chang surrendered.

古文：十一月，立韩太尉信为韩王。
现代文：十一月，封韩太尉信为韩王。
English: In November, Han Taifeng was crowned King of Han.

古文：汉王还归，都栎阳，使诸将略地，拔陇西。
现代文：汉王还归汉中，都于栎阳，派遣各将夺取敌方土地，攻克陇西。
English: The Han king also returned to the Han, both in Fenyang, dispatching each general to seize the enemy's land and conquer Shaanxi.

古文：以万人若一郡降者，封万户。
现代文：凡是率领万人或一郡归降的，都封为万户。
English: Anyone who leads ten thousand people or one county to surrender is sealed as ten thousand households.

古文：缮治河上塞。
现代文：修理河上要塞。
English: Repair the river fortress.

古文：故秦菀囿园池，令民得田之。
现代文：秦朝原先的皇家动植物园地及水池，都准许农民进行耕植。
English: The former royal zoological and botanical gardens and ponds of the Qin Dynasty allowed farmers to cultivate.

古文：春正月，羽击田荣城阳，荣败走平原，平原民杀之。
现代文：汉高祖三年春正月，项羽击田荣于城阳，田荣败走到平原，平原人杀掉了田荣。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Henkel, Xiang Han attacked Tian Rong in Chengyang, Tian Rong went to the plain, and the plain people killed Tian Rong.

古文：齐皆降楚，楚焚其城郭，齐人复畔之。
现代文：齐人尽降楚，楚人焚烧齐的城郡，齐人又叛变于楚。
English: The Qi people surrendered to the Chu, the Chu people burned the cities and counties of the Qi, and the Qi people rebelled against the Chu.

古文：诸将拔北地，虏雍王弟章平。
现代文：汉王派诸将攻克北地，俘虏了雍王之弟章平。
English: The Han king sent generals to conquer the north and captured Zhang Ping, the younger brother of the Yong Wang.

古文：赦罪人。
现代文：赦免罪人。
English: Forgive the sinner.

古文：二月癸未，令民除秦社稷，立汉社稷。
现代文：二月五日，命令百姓废除秦朝的政权标志一一一社稷坛，立汉朝的社稷坛。
English: On February 5th, he ordered the people to abolish the political symbols of the Qin Dynasty and establish the Han Dynasty.

古文：施恩德，赐民爵。
现代文：普施恩德，赐民爵禄。
English: Be charitable and give people a knighthood.

古文：蜀、汉民给军事劳苦，复勿租税二岁。
现代文：蜀汉人民因供应军需负担甚重，免其租税二年。
English: The people of Shuhan were exempted from paying taxes for two years due to the heavy burden of supplying military needs.

古文：关中卒从军者，复家一岁。
现代文：关中士卒从军的，免除其家赋税一年。
English: If Sergeant Guan joins the army, his family will be exempt from paying taxes for one year.

古文：举民年五十以上，有修行，能帅众为善，置以为三老，乡一人。
现代文：凡普通百姓年逾五十，德高望重，能领导大家为善的，安排他为三老，每乡一人。
English: If there are any ordinary people over the age of fifty who are highly respected and can lead everyone to do good, they should be appointed as the three elders, one in each township.

古文：择乡三老一人为县三老，与县令、丞、尉以事相教，复勿徭戍。
现代文：选择三老一人为县三老，和县令、县丞、县尉共议政事，免除其役戍。
English: Select one of the three elders to be the three elders of the county, and discuss political affairs with the county magistrate, the county chancellor, and the county lieutenant, and exempt them from service duty.

古文：以十月赐酒肉。
现代文：以十月份为酒肉慰劳人民之月。
English: With October as the month of wine and meat to comfort the people.

古文：三月，汉王自临晋渡河。魏王豹降，将兵从。
现代文：三月，汉王从临晋渡黄河，魏王豹归降，领兵随汉王出征。
English: In March, Han Wang crossed the Yellow River from Linjin, Wei Wang Pao surrendered, and led the soldiers to go to war with Han Wang.

古文：下河内，虏殷王卬，置河内郡。
现代文：攻克河内，俘虏了殷王邛，设置河内郡。
English: He conquered Hanoi, captured Yin Wangtao, and set up Hanoi County.

古文：至脩武，陈平亡楚来降。
现代文：兵至修武，陈平逃出楚军归顺汉王。
English: Chen Ping fled from the Chu army and surrendered to the Han king.

古文：汉王与语，说之，使参乘，监诸将。
现代文：汉王和他谈话，甚为欣赏，派他任参乘之职，监视诸将。
English: The Han king was very appreciative of his conversation and sent him on a mission to monitor the generals.

古文：南渡平阴津，至洛阳，新城三老董公遮说汉王曰： 臣闻 顺德者昌，逆德者亡 ， 兵出无名，事故不成 。
现代文：南渡平阴津，到达洛阳，新城三老董公拦马说汉王道： 臣听说 顺德者昌，逆德者亡 ， 兵出无名，其事不成 。
English: After traveling south to Ping'an and Yinjin, and arriving at Luoyang, the three elders of Xincheng, Dong Gong, stopped Ma and said the way of the Han king: The minister heard that those who follow the German way are prosperous, those who go against the German way are dead, and those who go against the German way are nameless, and they will not succeed.

古文：故曰： 明其为贼，敌乃可服。 
现代文：所以说： 公布敌人的罪状，敌人才能被打败。 
English: Therefore, it is said that the enemy can only be defeated if the enemy's crimes are made public.

古文：项羽为无道，放杀其主，天下之贼也。
现代文：项羽素来无道，弑杀义帝，是天下罪人。
English: Xiang Yu has never been able to find a way out. He is a sinner who killed the Righteous Emperor.

古文：夫仁不以勇，义不以力，三军之众为之素服，以告之诸侯，为此东伐，四海之内莫不仰德。
现代文：己有仁，不必用勇而天下自服，己有义，不必用力而天下自定，让三军都为义帝披上孝衣，并传檄布告诸侯，说明此次用兵是为义帝被弑而东讨逆贼，如此则四海之内都会仰戴大德。
English: If you have benevolence, you don't need to use courage to make the world submit to you. If you have righteousness, you don't need to use force to make the world self-determined. Let the three armies all put on filial piety for Emperor Righteousness, and deliver a proclamation to the princes, explaining that this use of troops is to fight against the traitors for the sake of Emperor Righteousness. In this way, great virtue will be respected within the four seas.

古文：此三王之举也。 
现代文：这是可以追从三王的义举。 
English: This is a righteous deed worthy of the Three Kings.

古文：汉王曰： 善。
现代文：汉王说： 正确之极，不是老人家的教诲我是不懂得的。 
English: Han Wang said: Good.

古文：非夫子无所闻。 于是汉王为义帝发丧，袒而大哭，哀临三日。发使告诸侯曰： 天下共立义帝，北面事之。
现代文：于是汉王为义帝发丧，按丧礼左袒而大哭，公开追悼三天。派使者遍告诸侯： 天下共立义帝，北面而朝。
English: As a result, the Han king held a funeral for the Emperor, wept loudly according to the funeral eulogy, and publicly mourned for three days. He sent emissaries to all the provinces to tell them: the whole world should jointly establish the Emperor of righteousness, and the north should rule the country.

古文：今项羽放杀义帝江南，大逆无道。
现代文：今项羽弑义帝于江南，实为大逆不道。
English: It is indeed an act of high treason that Emperor Uesugi died in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：寡人亲为发丧，兵皆缟素。悉发关中兵，收三河士，南浮江、汉以下，愿从诸侯王击楚之杀义帝者。 
现代文：寡人亲为发丧，全军尽着素衣，尽起关中兵卒，聚会三河将士，顺汉水入长江南下，愿随各位侯王之后，缉拿弑君的元凶。 
English: Many people are mourning, the whole army is dressed in plain clothes, soldiers from Guanzhong and soldiers from Guanzhong are gathering, soldiers from the three rivers are gathering, and the Han River is flowing southward into the Yangtze River. I am willing to follow the princes and kings to find the culprit of Yujun.

古文：夏四月，田荣弟横收得数万人，立荣子广为齐王。
现代文：夏四月，齐王田荣之弟田横收得被项羽所击溃的余众有数万人，立田荣之子田广为齐王。
English: In the summer of April, tens of thousands of people were defeated by Xiang Yu in the siege of Tian Heng, the younger brother of King Qi Tian Rong. Tian Guang, the son of King Qi Tian Rong, became the King of Qi.

古文：羽虽闻汉东，既击齐，欲遂破之而后击汉，汉王以故得劫五诸侯兵东伐楚。
现代文：项羽此时虽已得知汉王东进的消息，而已经兵发齐地，就想消灭了齐以后再迎击汉兵，所以汉王得以乘机兼并魏、殷等五诸侯之兵，东伐楚。
English: At this time, although Xiang Yu had already learned the news of the Han king's eastward march, and had already sent troops to the east, he wanted to annihilate the Han soldiers and then meet the Han soldiers, so the Han king was able to take the opportunity to annex the soldiers of Wei, Yin and other five princes, the eastward march of Chu.

古文：到外黄，彭越将三万人归汉。
现代文：兵到外黄，彭越率领三万之众归附于汉。
English: Peng Yue led 30,000 soldiers to join the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉王拜越为魏相国，令定梁也。
现代文：汉王封彭越为魏相国。令他平定梁地。
English: The Han king made Peng Yue a vassal of the Wei dynasty, and ordered him to subdue Liang Di.

古文：汉王遂入彭城，收羽美人货赂，置酒高会。
现代文：汉王于是进入楚项之都彭城。收取了项羽的美女与宝货，举行庆祝胜利的酒会。
English: Han Wang then entered the capital of Chu Xiang, Pengcheng. He received the beautiful women and treasures of Xiang Yu and held a victory celebration party.

古文：羽闻之，令其将击齐，而自以精兵三万人从鲁出胡陵，至萧、晨击汉军，大战彭城灵壁东睢水上，大破汉军，多杀士卒，睢水为之不流。
现代文：项羽闻讯，另派一大将击齐，自领精兵三万人从鲁经胡陵，到萧县，凌晨攻击汉军，大战于彭城灵壁之东的睢水之滨，大败汉军，对汉军大肆屠戮，尸塞睢水水不流。
English: Upon hearing the news from Xiang Yu, he sent another general to strike a balance, and 30,000 elite soldiers from his own territory attacked the Chinese army in the early morning from Lu via Huling to Xiao County. The battle was fought on the coast of Surabaya, east of Pengcheng's spiritual wall, and the Chinese army was defeated. The Chinese army was massacred, and the corpses were covered up.

古文：围汉王三匝。
现代文：楚兵围汉王三重。
English: The Chu army surrounded the Han king on three levels.

古文：大风从西北起，折木发屋，扬砂石，昼晦，楚军大乱，而汉王得与数十骑遁去。
现代文：狂风从西北卷来，树折房破，飞砂走石，白昼如同黑夜，楚军一时大乱。而汉王乘乱时与数十骑冲破重围逃走。
English: A fierce wind rolled in from the northwest, trees snapped, houses were broken, flying sand and stones were carried away, the day was like night, and the Chu army was momentarily in chaos. While the Han king was taking advantage of the chaos, he broke through the encirclement with dozens of horsemen and fled.

古文：过沛，使人求室家，室家亦已亡，不相得。
现代文：行经沛县，派人寻找眷属，全家已逃亡，不知去向。
English: He went to Jingpei County and sent someone to look for his relatives. His whole family had fled and he didn't know where they had gone.

古文：汉王道逢孝惠、鲁元，载行。
现代文：汉王在奔走途中遇见子孝惠与女鲁元，共登一车仓惶而去。
English: Han Wang met his son, Xiao Hui, and his daughter, Lu Yuan, on the way, and they all boarded a car and left in a hurry.

古文：楚骑追汉王，汉王急，推堕二子。
现代文：楚骑兵追赶汉王，汉王见情势危急，就将子女推下车去。
English: The Chu cavalry chased Han Wang. When Han Wang saw that the situation was critical, he pushed his children out of the car.

古文：滕公下收载，遂得脱。
现代文：滕公又将二人收登于车，总算逃离虎口。
English: Tenggong also put the two people in the car and finally fled the tiger's mouth.

古文：审食其从太公、吕后间行，反遇楚军，羽常置军中以为质。
现代文：审食其与汉王父太公及夫人吕后从小道逃走，反与楚军相遇，项羽将他们安置军中做人质。
English: In the end, he and Emperor Han, his father the Grand Duke, and his wife the Empress Lyu fled from the path, but they were met by the Chu army, and Xiang Yu placed them in the army as hostages.

古文：诸侯见汉败，皆亡去。
现代文：诸侯见汉军已全面溃败，都落荒而逃了。
English: When the princes saw that the Chinese army had been completely defeated, they all fled.

古文：塞王欣、翟王翳降楚，殷王卬死。
现代文：塞王欣、翟王翳降顺于楚，殷王邛死了。
English: Sai Wangxin and Shao Wang Rong submitted to Chu, and Yin Wang Rong died.

古文：吕后兄周吕侯将兵居下邑，汉王从之。
现代文：汉王妻兄周吕侯领兵马驻于下邑县，汉王前往其处安身。
English: Han Wang's brother-in-law, Zhou Luhou, stationed his troops and horses in Shimoi County, and Han Wang went there to settle down.

古文：稍收士卒，军砀。
现代文：逐渐聚集败散的士卒，进驻于砀县。
English: Gradually, the scattered soldiers were gathered and stationed in Min County.

古文：汉王西过梁地，至虞，谓谒者随何曰： 公能说九江王布使举兵畔楚，项王必留击之。
现代文：汉王向西路经梁地，到虞城县，对挟策求见他的随何说： 先生去劝说九江王英布要他举兵叛楚，项羽就会留下兵力进攻英布。
English: Han Wang took the western route via Liangdi to Yucheng County, and said to Su He, who was seeking to meet him as a countermeasure: "If you go to persuade King Yingbu of Jiujiang to raise an army to rebel, Xiang Yu will leave an army to attack Yingbu.

古文：得留数月，吾取天下必矣。 
现代文：只要项羽能留下兵力数月，我就一定能夺取天下。 
English: If I can stay for a few months, I'll definitely be able to conquer the world.

古文：随何往说布，果使畔楚。
现代文：随何奉命去劝说英布，果然使英布叛楚。
English: No matter what I was ordered to do to persuade Ying Bu, I succeeded in making Ying Bu defect.

古文：五月，汉王屯荥阳，萧何发关中老弱未傅者悉诣军。
现代文：五月，汉王之兵在荥阳集结，萧何征集关中老弱及尚未成年的人都到部伍中去。
English: In May, the soldiers of the Han king gathered in Shenyang. Xiao He recruited the old and weak people in Guanzhong and those who were not yet adults to go to the middle of the army.

古文：韩信亦收兵与汉王会，兵复大振。
现代文：韩信也收聚士卒与汉王会师，汉王此时又军威重振。
English: Han Xin also gathered soldiers to join forces with Han Wang, and Han Wang's military power was revived at this time.

古文：与楚战荥阳南京、索间，破之。
现代文：与楚军在荥阳南边京、索之间交锋，打败了楚军。
English: He clashed with the Chu army in the southern border of Shenyang between Beijing and Suo, and defeated the Chu army.

古文：筑甬道属河，以取敖仓粟。
现代文：汉军在道路两侧筑垣墙，通到河边，以运取临河倚山的敖仓粮食。
English: The Chinese army built walls on both sides of the road, leading to the river, in order to transport Kamakura grain from the mountains along the river.

古文：魏王豹谒归视亲疾。
现代文：此时魏王豹以看望母病为名请假回原籍。
English: At this time, Wei Wangbao asked for leave to return to his hometown in the name of visiting his mother's illness.

古文：至则绝河津，反为楚。
现代文：回籍后即封锁渡口，为楚军抵御汉军。
English: After returning home, he immediately blockaded the ferry port to defend the Chu army against the Chinese army.

古文：六月，汉王还栎阳。壬午，立太子，赦罪人。
现代文：六月，汉王返回都城栎阳，初六日，立太子，赦免罪人。
English: In June, Han Wang returned to the capital city of Shenyang. On the sixth day of the first month, he established the crown prince and pardoned sinners.

古文：令诸侯子在关中者皆集栎阳为卫。
现代文：命令诸侯之子在关中的都集中到栎阳为近卫。
English: He ordered the princes' sons in Guanzhong to gather in Fenyang as guards.

古文：引水灌废丘，废丘降，章邯自杀。
现代文：引水攻废丘，废丘归降，雍王章邯自杀。
English: The waste mound was flooded, the waste mound surrendered, and Zhang Ye committed suicide.

古文：雍地定，八十余县，置河上、渭南、中地、陇西、上郡。
现代文：雍州平定，有八十余县，置河上，渭南、中地、陇西、上郡。
English: There are more than 80 counties in Yongzhou, including Hegang, South Hunan, Zhongdi, West Hunan, and Shangguan.

古文：令祠官祀天地、四方、上帝、山川，以时祠之。
现代文：令祠官祭祀天地四方上帝山川，按时进行祠祭。
English: An ancestral hall official was ordered to offer sacrifices to the four-faced god of heaven and earth, mountains and rivers, and the ancestral hall festival was held on time.

古文：兴关中卒乘边塞。
现代文：派关中士卒登守边塞。
English: Sergeant Guan was sent to guard the border fortress.

古文：关中大饥，米斛万钱，人相食。
现代文：此时关中大饥，斛米值万钱，人吃人。
English: At this time, Guanzhong was starving, glutinous rice was worth thousands of dollars, and people were eating each other.

古文：令民就食蜀、汉。
现代文：安排饥民聚集到蜀、汉地区去渡荒。
English: Arrangements were made for starving people to gather in the Shu and Han regions to cross the wasteland.

古文：秋八月，汉王如荥阳，谓郦食其曰： 缓颊往说魏王豹，能下之，以魏地万户封生。 
现代文：秋八月，汉王到达荥阳，对郦食其说： 请以善言劝说魏王豹，要是劝说成功，就封先生为魏地万户侯。 
English: In the autumn and August, Han Wang arrived in Fenyang and said to Yan Zhiguo: Please persuade Wei Wangpiao with kind words. If the persuasion is successful, Mr. Han Wangpiao will be named the prince of all households in Wei.

古文：食其往，豹不听。
现代文：食其衔命前往，魏王豹拒不听从。
English: The Wei King Leopard refused to obey.

古文：汉王以韩信为左丞相，与曹参、灌婴俱击魏。
现代文：汉王派韩信为左丞相，与曹参、灌婴一起讨伐魏王。
English: The Han king sent Han Xin as the left chancellor to fight against the Wei king together with Cao San and Guan Yu.

古文：食其还，汉王问： 魏大将谁也？ 
现代文：食其回报，汉王问道： 魏大将是谁？ 
English: In return, Han Wang asked: Who is General Wei?

古文：对曰： 柏直。 
现代文：食其答： 柏直。 
English: His answer: "Bo Zhi."

古文：王曰： 是口尚乳臭，不能当韩信。骑将谁也？ 曰： 冯敬。 
现代文：汉王说 这是一个缺乏战斗经验的毛头小子，不是韩信的对手。骑将是谁？ 食其答： 冯敬。 
English: Han Wang said, "This is a young boy with a shaved head who lacks combat experience, and is no match for Han Xin. Who will be the rider?" He replied, "Feng Jing."

古文：曰： 是秦将冯无择子也。虽贤，不能当灌婴。
现代文：汉王说： 他是秦将冯无择之子，虽有才能，但不是灌婴对手。
English: Han Wang said: He is the son of Qin general Feng Wuzhizhuang. Although he has talent, he is no match for Guan Yu.

古文：步卒将谁也？ 曰： 项它。 
现代文：步将是谁？ 食其说： 项它。 
English: Who will be next? Eat it, say it. Drop it.

古文：曰： 不能当曹参。
现代文：汉王说： 他也不是曹参对手。
English: Han Wang said, "He is no match for Cao San."

古文：吾无患矣。 
现代文：我不必担忧了。 
English: I don't have to worry anymore.

古文：九月，信等虏豹，传诣荥阳。
现代文：九月，韩信等俘虏了魏王豹，押解到荥阳。
English: In September, Han Xin and others captured Wei Wangbao and escorted him to Fenyang.

古文：定魏地，置河东、太原、上党郡。
现代文：平定魏地，设置河东、太原、上党郡。
English: Weidi was pacified, and the counties of Hedong, Taiyuan and Shangdang were established.

古文：信使人请兵三万人，愿以北举燕、赵，东击齐，南绝楚粮道。
现代文：韩信派使向汉王请兵三万人，愿意北灭燕、赵，东击齐，南绝楚粮道。
English: Han Xin sent an envoy to invite 30,000 soldiers to the Han king, willing to exterminate Yan and Zhao in the north, to strike Qi in the east, and to destroy the Chu grain road in the south.

古文：汉王与之。
现代文：汉王按数拨给韩信士卒。
English: Han Wang assigned a certain number of followers to Han Xinzhu.

古文：三年冬十月，韩信、张耳东下井陉击赵，斩陈馀，获赵王歇。置常山、代郡。
现代文：三年冬十月，韩信、张耳东下井陉攻赵，斩杀陈余，俘获赵王歇，设置常山、代郡。
English: In October of the winter of the third year, Han Xin and Zhang Er Dongshajing attacked Zhao, killed Chen Yu, captured Zhao Wang Xie, and set up Changshan and Daigun.

古文：甲戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：十月三十日，日食。
English: October 30th, solar eclipse.

古文：十一月癸卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月三十日，又日食。
English: Partial solar eclipse on November 30.

古文：随何既说黥布，布起兵攻楚。楚使项声、龙且攻布，布战不胜。
现代文：随何已经说服英布附汉，英布就起兵攻楚，楚派项声、龙且进攻英布，英布接战失利。
English: After persuading Ying Bu to join Han, Ying Bu raised an army to attack Chu. Chu sent troops to attack Ying Bu, but Ying Bu lost the battle.

古文：十二月，布与随何间行归汉。汉王分之兵，与俱收兵至成皋。
现代文：十二月，英布与随何抄小道向汉王求援，汉王分兵为助，一起收兵到成皋。
English: In December, Ying Bu and Sui Ho Ho asked for help from the Han king, and the Han king sent troops to help, and together they collected troops to Chengdu.

古文：项羽数侵夺汉甬道，汉军乏食，与郦食其谋桡楚权。
现代文：项羽多次夺取汉兵取粮甬道，汉军粮食缺乏。汉王与郦食其商量如何削弱楚项势力。
English: Xiang Yu repeatedly captured the Han soldiers to take grain, and the Han army was short of grain. The Han king and Xiang Yu discussed how to weaken the power of Chu Xiang.

古文：食其欲立六国后以树党，汉王刻印，将遣食其立之。
现代文：食其想立六国之后为汉羽翼，汉王刻六国王印，将派食其前往分封。
English: After the emperor wanted to establish the Six Kingdoms, he was given the wings of the Han Dynasty, and the Han King engraved the Seal of the Six Kingdoms, and sent him to Bifeng.

古文：以问张良，良发八难。
现代文：询问张良之见，张良认为分封六国有八大难题。
English: When asked about Zhang Liang's opinion, Zhang Liang believed that there were eight major problems in dividing the country into six.

古文：汉王辍饭吐哺，曰： 竖儒几败乃公事！ 
现代文：汉王立即放下正在进餐的碗箸，他说： 食其这无知小子几乎坏了老子的大事！ 
English: Han Wang immediately put down the bowl and chopsticks he was eating with. He said, "Don't worry, this ignorant kid almost ruined Lao Zi's big thing!

古文：令趋销印。
现代文：传令迅速销毁所刻的六国印。
English: An order was issued to quickly destroy the Six-Nation Seal.

古文：又问陈平，乃从其计，与平黄金四万斤，以间疏楚君臣。
现代文：又请教陈平，并听从了陈平的计策。给陈平黄金四万斤，以挑拨离间楚项的君臣关系。
English: He also asked Chen Ping for advice and followed Chen Ping's strategy. He gave Chen Ping 40,000 catties of gold in order to defuse the uneasy monarch-vassal relationship.

古文：夏四月，项羽围汉荥阳，汉王请和，割荥阳以西者为汉。
现代文：夏四月，项羽围困了汉王的军事重镇荥阳，汉王请求讲和，以荥阳为界，界西为汉。
English: In the summer of April, Xiang Yu besieged the Han King's military stronghold of Poyang. The Han King asked for peace, with Poyang as the boundary, and the west of the realm as Han.

古文：亚父劝项羽急攻荥阳，汉王患之。
现代文：亚父范增劝项羽要猛攻荥阳，汉王深感不安。
English: Han Wang was deeply worried when his father Fan Zeng advised Xiang Yu to storm Poyang.

古文：陈平反间既行，羽果疑亚父。
现代文：陈平此时已通过贿赂收买了楚军部分将领去诋诬范增，项羽果然对范增产生了怀疑。
English: At this time, Chen Ping had bribed some generals of the Chu army to slander Fan Zeng, and Xiang Yu certainly had doubts about Fan Zeng.

古文：亚父大怒而去，发病死。
现代文：范增怒气填膺地离开了楚营，忧愤之中发疽而死。
English: Fan Zeng angrily left the Chu camp and died of gangrene in his grief.

古文：五月，将军纪信曰： 事急矣！
现代文：五月，将军纪信对汉王说： 情况严峻极了！
English: In May, General Jixin said to Han Wang: The situation is extremely grim!

古文：臣请诳楚，可以间出。 
现代文：臣假扮大王以骗楚军，大王可以乘隙而出围。 
English: The vassal pretends to be the great king to deceive the Chu army, and the great king can take advantage of the gap to go out.

古文：于是陈平夜出女子东门二千余人，楚因四面击之。
现代文：于是陈平于夜间在荥阳东门放出女子二千余人，引起楚兵四面追赶。
English: As a result, Chen Ping released more than two thousand women at the eastern gate of Shenyang at night, causing Chu soldiers to chase them in all directions.

古文：纪信乃乘王车，黄屋左纛，曰： 食尽，汉王降楚。 
现代文：纪信扮汉王乘车。黄盖王旗出东门，他说： 粮食已尽，汉王投降于楚。 
English: Ji Xin dressed up as the Han King and rode in a carriage. Huang Gai waved his banner out of the east gate and said: "The grain has run out, the Han King has surrendered to Chu."

古文：楚皆呼万岁，之城东观，以故汉王得与数十骑出西门遁。
现代文：楚军齐呼胜利万岁，都到城东去观看汉王投降，因此汉王得以乘间率领几十名骑兵出西门逃走。
English: The Chu army shouted in unison, "Long live victory!" and all went to the east of the city to watch Han Wang surrender. As a result, Han Wang was able to escape from the west gate with dozens of cavalry.

古文：令御史大夫周苛、魏豹、枞公守荥阳。
现代文：派御史大夫周苛、魏豹、枞公守荥阳。
English: He sent the imperial historian Zhou Cao, Wei Bao, and Zou Gongshu to Fenyang.

古文：羽见纪信，问： 汉王安在？ 
现代文：项羽见是纪信，大声喝道： 汉王何在？ 
English: Xiang Yu saw it was Ji Xin and shouted: "Where is Han Wang?"

古文：曰： 已出去矣。 
现代文：纪信从容答道： 早已远走高飞了。 
English: Ji Xin replied calmly: It has already gone far and high.

古文：羽烧杀信。
现代文：项羽烧死了纪信。
English: The fire killed Kishin.

古文：而周苛、枞公相谓曰： 反国之王，难与守城。 
现代文：城中的周苛、枞公相商说： 魏豹是反国之王，难与守城。 
English: Zhou Cao and Yan Gong in the city said: Wei Pan is the king of anti-state, it is difficult to defend the city.

古文：因杀魏豹。
现代文：就把魏豹杀了。
English: So he killed the leopard.

古文：汉王出荥阳，至成皋。自成皋入关，收兵欲复东。
现代文：汉王走出荥阳重围，行到成皋，从成皋入关，收集军马准备再次东征。
English: Han Wang went out of the heavy siege of Shenyang, traveled to Chengdu, entered the pass from Chengdu, and gathered horses to prepare for another eastward march.

古文：辕生说汉王曰： 汉与楚相距荥阳数岁，汉常困。
现代文：辕生向汉王建议说： 汉与楚相持于荥阳已两年，汉常处于被动。
English: Xinsheng suggested to Han Wang that: Han and Chu have been holding each other in Fenyang for two years, and Han is often passive.

古文：愿君王出武关，项王必引兵南走，王深壁，令荥阳、成皋间且得休息。
现代文：希望大王兵出武关，项王一定会引兵南去，大王深沟高垒，与之相持，令荥阳成皋的汉军有休整之机。
English: It is hoped that the great king's soldiers will come out of Wuguan, the king of Xiang will certainly lead the soldiers to the south, and the great king's deep ditch high fortress will hold together with it, so that the Chinese army that has been defeated will have a chance to rest and recuperate.

古文：使韩信等得辑河北赵地，连燕、齐，君王乃复走荥阳。
现代文：另派韩信等安定河北赵地，连燕齐为一片，然后大王重新兵发荥阳。
English: In addition, Han Xin and others were sent to stabilize Zhao, Hebei Province, and even Yanqi as a whole, and then the great king sent troops to Fenyang again.

古文：如此，则楚所备者多，力分。
现代文：如此，则楚要拉长防线，分散兵力。
English: As such, Chu had to extend the defensive line and disperse the troops.

古文：汉得休息，复与之战，破之必矣。 
现代文：汉兵得到休整后，再与楚军交锋，一定能打败楚军。 
English: After the Han soldiers have rested, they will fight against the Chu army, and they will surely defeat the Chu army.

古文：汉王从其计，出军宛、叶间，与黥布行收兵。
现代文：汉王接纳了这条妙计，出军于宛县与叶县之间，与英布在此地进行游击。
English: The Han king accepted this brilliant plan and marched out between Wan County and Ye County to carry out a guerrilla attack with Yingbu.

古文：羽闻汉王在宛，果引兵南，汉王坚壁不与战。
现代文：项羽听说汉王驻兵于宛，果然领兵向南讨伐，汉王坚守壁垒不和他交锋。
English: Xiang Yu heard that the Han king stationed troops in Wan, and he led the troops to the south to fight. The Han king insisted on defending the barrier and did not fight with him.

古文：是月，彭越渡睢，与项声、薛公战下邳，破杀薛公。羽使终公守成皋，而自东击彭越。
现代文：本月，彭越渡过睢水，和楚将项声、薛公交兵于下邛，打败楚兵并杀死薛公，项羽派终公守成皋，亲自领兵向东报复彭越。
English: This month, Peng Yue crossed the Surabaya River, and together with Chu general Xiang Sheng and Xue public transportation soldiers, defeated Chu soldiers and killed Xue Gong. Xiang Yu sent soldiers to the east to take revenge on Peng Yue.

古文：汉王引兵北，击破终公，复军成皋。
现代文：汉王乘间引兵北上，打败驻于成皋的楚将终公，重新收复了成皋。
English: Han Wang led the troops northward, defeated Chu Zheng, who was stationed in Chengdu, and regained Chengdu.

古文：六月，羽已破走彭越，闻汉复军成皋，乃引兵西拔荥阳城，生得周苛。羽谓苛： 为我将，以公为上将军，封三万户。 
现代文：六月，项羽已经打败并驱逐了彭越，听说汉兵又攻取了成皋，就领兵向西猛攻荥阳城，生擒主将周苛，项羽对周苛说： 投归我，我封将军为上将军，封赏三万户。 
English: In June, Xiang Yu had already defeated and expelled Peng Yue. When he heard that the Han soldiers had also captured Chenglu, he led the troops to the west to storm the city of Shenyang. Zhou Cao was the master of Shenyang. Xiang Yu said to Zhou Cao: "Surrender to me. I will appoint the general as the supreme general and reward 30,000 households."

古文：周苛骂曰： 若不趋降汉，今为虏矣！
现代文：周苛怒叱道： 你不迅速降汉，马上要成为俘虏了！
English: Zhou Cao angrily scolded, "If you do not quickly surrender to Han, you will soon become a prisoner!"

古文：若非汉王敌也。 
现代文：你是敌不过汉王的。 
English: You are no match for the King of Han.

古文：羽亨周苛，并杀枞公，而虏韩王信，遂围成皋。
现代文：项羽烹杀了周苛，同时处决了枞公，俘获了韩王信，接着围困了成皋。
English: Xiang Yu cooked and killed Zhou Cao, at the same time executed Zeng Gong, captured Han Wangxin, and then besieged Chengluo.

古文：汉王跳，独与滕公共车出成皋玉门，北渡河，宿小修武。
现代文：汉王仓猝逃走，只和滕公同车出成皋北门，北渡黄河，夜宿于小修武。
English: Han Wangcang made a sudden escape, and he and Tenggong took the same car to Chengdu North Gate, traveled north to the Yellow River, and stayed in Xiaoshuwu.

古文：自称使者，晨驰入张耳、韩信壁而夺之军。
现代文：清晨，自称为汉王使者，驱驰入张耳、韩信的阵地，亲自掌握这支队伍。
English: In the early morning, he called himself the emissary of the Han king, drove into the positions of Zhang Er and Han Xin, and personally took control of this team.

古文：乃使张耳北收兵赵地。
现代文：就派张耳到北边赵地去调集汉兵。
English: He sent Zhang Er to Zhaodi in the north to recruit Han soldiers.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于大角。
现代文：秋七月，有彗星在大角上空出现。
English: In autumn and July, a comet appeared near the star Arcturus.

古文：汉王得韩信军，复大振。
现代文：汉王取得了韩信的军队后，重新振作起来。
English: Han Wang was reinvigorated after capturing Han Xin's army.

古文：八月，临河南乡，军小修武，欲复战。
现代文：八月，率兵临近黄河向南，驻军在小修武，想再和楚军交战。
English: In August, he led his troops to the south near the Yellow River and garrisoned them in Xiaoshuwu, hoping to fight the Chu army again.

古文：郎中郑忠说止汉王，高垒深堑勿战。
现代文：郎中郑忠劝阻汉王，建议他深沟高垒，不要和楚军交战。
English: His son-in-law, Zheng Zhong, dissuaded the Han king and advised him not to fight against the Chu army.

古文：汉王听其计，使卢绾、刘贾将卒二万人，骑数百，渡白马津入楚地，佐彭越烧楚积聚，复击破楚军燕郭西，攻下睢阳、外黄十七城。
现代文：汉王听从了他的计策，派卢绾、刘贾领步兵二万，几百骑兵，从白马津渡河进入楚地，协助彭越焚烧楚军的粮草积蓄，又在燕县西面打败楚军，攻下了睢阳、外黄十七座城池。
English: The Han king listened to his strategy and sent Lu Wei and Liu Jia to lead 20,000 infantrymen and several hundred cavalrymen to cross the river from Baima to Chu, to assist Peng Yue in burning the grain and grass reserves of the Chu army, to defeat the Chu army in the west of Yan County, and to capture the seventeen cities of Fenyang and Waifang.

古文：九月，羽谓海春侯大司马曹咎曰： 谨守成皋。
现代文：九月，项羽对海春侯大司马曹咎说： 小心守住成皋。
English: In September, Xiang Yu said to Ma Cao Gui, the grand steward of Haichun, "Be careful to stay in Chengdu.

古文：即汉王欲挑战，慎勿与战，勿令得东而已。
现代文：即使汉王要挑战，千万不要和他交战，只要别让汉军东进就可以了。
English: Even if the Han king wants to challenge, do not fight with him, just do not let the Han army go east.

古文：我十五日必定梁地，复从将军。 
现代文：我在十五天以内一定能平定梁地，再与将军会合。 
English: In fifteen days, I will definitely settle the Liang Di and then meet with the general.

古文：羽引兵东击彭越。
现代文：于是项羽率兵向东攻打彭越。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu led his troops eastward to attack Peng Yue.

古文：汉王使郦食其说齐王田广，罢守兵与汉和。
现代文：汉王派郦食其去游说齐王田广，停止军队的守备和汉军联合。
English: The Han king sent him to lobby the Qi king Tian Guang to stop the army's defense and the Han army's unification.

古文：四年冬十月，韩信用蒯通计，袭破齐。
现代文：高祖四年冬十月，韩信采用蒯通的计策偷袭兵攻打齐军。
English: In October of the winter of Gaozu's fourth year, Han Xin used the stratagem of Shantong to attack the Qi army.

古文：齐王亨郦生，东走高密。
现代文：齐王把郦生烹杀了，向东逃到高密。
English: King Qi killed his son-in-law and fled east to Gaomi.

古文：项羽闻韩信破齐，且欲击楚，使龙且救齐。
现代文：项羽听说韩信打败了齐军，还想攻打楚军，就派龙且率军救援齐军。
English: When Xiang Yu heard that Han Xin had defeated the Qi army and still wanted to attack the Chu army, he sent dragons and led the army to rescue the Qi army.

古文：汉果数挑成皋战，楚军不出。使人辱之数日，大司马咎怒，渡兵汜水。士卒半渡，汉击之，大破楚军，尽得楚国金玉货赂。
现代文：汉军果然多次向成皋的楚军挑战，楚军坚守不出，派人辱骂楚军好多天，大司马曹咎大怒，领兵渡过汜水，楚军刚渡过一半，汉军出击，大败楚军，缴获了楚国的全部金玉财物。
English: The Chinese army indeed challenged the Chu army in Chengdu many times. The Chu army could not hold out, and sent people to abuse the Chu army for many days. The commander, Ma Cao, was furious. He led the soldiers across the Surabaya River. The Chu army had just crossed half of it. The Chinese army attacked, defeated the Chu army, and captured all the gold and jewels of the state of Chu.

古文：大司马咎、长史欣皆自刭汜水上。
现代文：大司马曹咎、长史欣都自刎在汜水岸边。
English: The superintendent, Ma Cao-yin, and the head of the history department, Ma Xin, are all self-proclaimed in Surabaya.

古文：汉王引兵渡河，复取成皋，军广武，就敖仓食。
现代文：汉王领兵渡过黄河，重新占领成皋，驻军在广武，从敖仓运粮。
English: Han Wang led the troops across the Yellow River, reoccupied Chengdu, garrisoned troops in Guangwu, and transported grain from Zhangcang.

古文：羽下梁地十余城，闻海春侯破，乃引兵还。
现代文：项羽攻下梁地十余座城池，听说海春侯被汉军打败，就率兵返回。
English: Xiang Yu captured more than ten cities and towns in Liangdi. Hearing that Hai Chun Hou was defeated by the Han army, he led his soldiers back.

古文：汉军方围钟离末于荥阳东，闻羽至，尽走险阻。
现代文：汉军正把钟离昧围困在荥阳东面，听说项羽兵到，都去逃到险阻的地方。
English: The Han army was besieging Zhongli in the east of Fenyang. When they heard that Xiang Yu's soldiers had arrived, they all fled to the dangerous place.

古文：羽亦军广武，与汉相守。
现代文：项羽也驻军在广武，与汉军对峙。
English: Xiang Yu also stationed troops in Guangwu and confronted the Chinese army.

古文：丁壮苦军旅，老弱罢转饷。
现代文：年轻人厌倦了行军打仗，老弱的由于运输粮饷疲惫不堪。
English: The young men were tired of marching and fighting, and the old and weak were exhausted from transporting grain.

古文：汉王、羽相与临广武之间而语。
现代文：汉王、项羽一同到广武涧前对话。
English: Han Wang and Xiang Yu went to Guangwu together to have a dialogue.

古文：羽欲与汉王独身挑战，汉王数羽曰： 吾始与羽俱受命怀王，曰先定关中者王之。
现代文：项羽要和汉王单挑决战，汉王列举项羽的罪行说： 我当初和你项羽都接受楚怀王的命令，说好先平定关中的为关中王。
English: Xiang Yu wanted to fight the Han King single-handedly. The Han King enumerated Xiang Yu's crimes and said, "I and Xiang Yu both accepted King Chu Hui's order and agreed to first settle Guanzhong as the King of Guanzhong.

古文：羽负约，王我于蜀、汉，罪一也。
现代文：你项羽违背了约定，让我在蜀汉为王，这是第一条罪行。
English: Your Xiang Yu violated the agreement and made me the king of Shuhan, which is the first crime.

古文：羽矫杀卿子冠军，自尊，罪二也。
现代文：你项羽假传怀王旨意杀了卿子冠军，自认上将军，这是第二条罪行。
English: The second crime is that you falsely claimed to be carrying out the will of the king, killed the champion, and claimed to be a general.

古文：羽当以救赵还报，而擅劫诸侯兵入关，罪三也。
现代文：你项羽已援救赵国后应当回报怀王，却擅自胁迫诸侯的军队随你入关，这是第三条罪行。
English: You Xiang Yu should have returned the favor to King Huai after rescuing Zhao, but you forced the armies of the princes to enter the pass with you, which is the third crime.

古文：怀王约，入秦无暴掠，羽烧秦宫室，掘始皇帝冢，收私其财，罪四也。
现代文：怀王约定进入秦地不得烧杀抢掠，你项羽烧毁秦朝宫殿，挖开始皇帝陵墓，将秦地财务占为私有，这是第四条罪行。
English: King Huai stipulated that no one should burn, kill or plunder when entering Qin. You burned down the palace of the Qin Dynasty, began to dig the emperor's tomb, and appropriated the financial resources of Qin as private property. This is the fourth crime.

古文：又强杀秦降王子婴，罪五也。
现代文：又硬是杀掉已经投降的秦王子婴，这是第五条罪行。
English: He also killed the already surrendered baby Qin Prince, which is the fifth crime.

古文：诈坑秦子弟新安二十万，王其将，罪六也。
现代文：残忍用欺诈手段在新安活埋了二十万秦兵，却又封他们的将领为王，这是第六条罪行。
English: Using cruel and fraudulent means, they buried 200,000 Qin soldiers alive in Xin'an, but made their general king. This is the sixth crime.

古文：皆王诸将善地，而徙逐故主，令臣下争畔逆。罪七也。
现代文：将将领们都封在好地方，却迁移赶走原来的诸侯王，让臣下为争王位而反叛，这是第七条罪行。
English: It is the seventh crime to seal the generals in a good place, but relocate and drive away the original princes and kings, and let the subjects rebel to fight for the throne.

古文：出逐义帝彭城，自都之，夺韩王地，并王梁、楚，多自与，罪八也。
现代文：将义帝赶出彭城，自己却在那里建都，夺取韩王的土地，兼并梁地楚地，都划给了自己，这是第八条罪行。
English: Driving Emperor Righteous out of Pengcheng, but building the capital there himself, seizing the land of King Han, annexing Liang Di and Chu Di, all of which were assigned to himself, this is the eighth crime.

古文：使人阴杀义帝江南，罪九也。
现代文：派人在江南秘密杀害了义帝，这是第九条罪行。
English: He sent someone south of the Yangtze River to secretly kill Emperor Righteousness, which is a crime under Article 9.

古文：夫为人臣而杀其主，杀其已降，为政不平，主约不信，天下所不容，大逆无道，罪十也。
现代文：你为人臣子却谋杀君主，杀害已经投降的人，你执政不公，你主持盟约却不守信，不被天下所容，大逆不道。这是第十条罪行。
English: If you are a courtier but murder the sovereign, kill those who have already surrendered, if you govern unjustly, if you preside over a treaty but do not keep your word, if you are not tolerated by the world, and if you commit high treason, this is a crime under Article 10.

古文：吾以义兵从诸侯诛残贼，使刑余罪人击公，何苦乃与公挑战！ 
现代文：我率领义兵跟从诸侯们讨伐，派个受过刑的罪犯打你，又何苦我来跟你单挑？ 
English: I lead the volunteers to fight alongside the lords, and I send a convicted criminal to beat you up. How hard is it for me to take on you alone?

古文：羽大怒，伏弩射中汉王。汉王伤胸，乃扪足曰： 虏中吾指！ 
现代文：项羽大怒，埋伏的弓弩射中了汉王，汉王的胸部受伤，却摸着自己的脚说： 这个贼子射中了我的脚趾。 
English: Xiang Yu was furious. The ambushed crossbow hit Han Wang. Han Wang's chest was injured, but he touched his foot and said, "This thief shot my toe."

古文：汉王病创卧，张良强请汉王起行劳军，以安士卒，毋令楚乘胜。
现代文：汉王因箭伤病倒了，张良硬是请汉王起来去慰问将士，以此稳定将士，不让楚军的乘胜进攻。
English: Han Wang fell ill due to an arrow wound. Zhang Lianghe asked Han Wang to get up to console the soldiers, in order to stabilize the soldiers and prevent the Chu army from attacking.

古文：汉王出行军，疾甚，因驰入成皋。
现代文：汉王去巡视军营，病情加重，立即赶回了成皋。
English: Han Wang went to inspect the military camp, his condition worsened, and he was immediately rushed back to Chengdu.

古文：十一月，韩信与灌婴击破楚军，杀楚将龙且，追至城阳，虏齐王广。
现代文：十一月，韩信和灌婴打败楚军，杀了楚军大将龙且，追到城阳，俘虏了齐王田广。
English: In November, Han Xin and Gan Yu defeated the Chu army, killed the Chu army general Long Qi, chased him to Chengyang, and captured Qi Wang Tian Guang.

古文：齐相田横自立为齐王，奔彭越。
现代文：齐相田横自立为齐王，投奔彭越。
English: Qi Aida laterally established himself as the king of Qi and fled to Peng Yue.

古文：汉立张耳为赵王。
现代文：汉王立张耳为赵王。
English: Zhang Er of Han Dynasty is Zhao Wang.

古文：汉王疾愈，西入关，至栎阳，存问父老，置酒。
现代文：汉王病愈后，西行入关，来到栎阳，慰问当地父老，摆设酒宴。
English: After Han Wang recovered from his illness, he entered the westbound passage and came to Shenyang to offer condolences to the local elders and set up a wine banquet.

古文：枭故塞王欣头栎阳市。
现代文：割下原塞王司马欣的头，悬挂在栎阳街市示众。
English: He cut off the head of Wang Simasin, the former mayor of Sayang, and hung it up for the public to see in the city of Sayang.

古文：留四日，复如军，军广武。
现代文：停留了四天，又回到军中，驻军在广武。
English: After stopping for four days, he returned to the army and was stationed in Guangwu.

古文：关中兵益出，而彭越、田横居梁地，往来苦楚兵，绝其粮食。
现代文：关中士兵大批赶到楚汉战场，而彭越、田横盘踞梁地，往来袭击骚扰楚军，断绝他们的粮食通道。
English: A large number of soldiers from Guanzhong rushed to the battlefield in Chuhan, while Peng Yue and Tian Yangtze raided and harassed the Chu army, cutting off their food supply.

古文：韩信已破齐，使人言曰： 齐边楚，权轻，不为假王，恐不能安齐。 
现代文：韩信攻下齐国后，派人对汉王说： 齐国靠近楚国，权力太小，不做个代理王，恐怕不能安定齐地。 
English: Han Xin had already defeated Qi and sent a messenger to the Han king to say: Qi is close to Chu, and if the power is too small and you don't appoint a temporary acting king, I'm afraid it won't be stable.

古文：汉王怒，欲攻之。
现代文：汉王大怒，想攻打他。
English: Han Wang was furious and wanted to attack him.

古文：张良曰： 不如因而立之，使自为守。 
现代文：张良说： 不如趁机封他为齐王，让他守住齐地。 
English: Zhang Liang said: It is better to take the opportunity to make him the king of Qi and let him keep Qi.

古文：春二月，遣张良操印，立韩信为齐王。
现代文：春二月，派张良带着王印，立韩信为齐王。
English: In the spring and February, Zhang Liang was sent with the royal seal, and Han Xin was appointed as the king of Qi.

古文：秋七月，立黥布为淮南王。
现代文：秋七月，立英布为淮南王。
English: In autumn and July, Liyingbu became the king of Huainan.

古文：八月，初为算赋。
现代文：八月，开始推行算赋法。
English: In August, the calculation method began to be implemented.

古文：北貉、燕人来致枭骑助汉。
现代文：北貉、燕人派了一批勇健的骑兵来协助汉军。
English: In Beilun and Yanren, a group of brave cavalrymen were sent to assist the Chinese army.

古文：汉王下令：军士不幸死者，吏为衣衾棺敛，转送其家。
现代文：汉王下令： 军士不幸阵亡的，派专人为他穿好衣服用棺木收敛，送回老家。 
English: Han Wang ordered: If a sergeant is killed in battle, send someone to dress him up, put him in a coffin and send him back to his hometown.

古文：四方归心焉。
现代文：天下百姓都诚心归附。
English: People all over the world have wholeheartedly adhered to it.

古文：项羽自知少助食尽，韩信又进兵击楚，羽患之。
现代文：项羽知道自己身边缺少帮手，粮草也快要用完了，韩信又屡次带兵进攻楚军，心中很是担心。
English: Xiang Yu knew that there was a lack of helpers around him, that the grain and grass were about to run out, and that Han Xin had repeatedly led soldiers to attack the Chu army. He was very worried.

古文：汉遣陆贾说羽，请太公，羽弗听。
现代文：汉王遣派侯公来到楚地规劝项羽释放太公和吕后。
English: The Han king sent the lord of the manor to Chudi to persuade Xiang Yu to release the grand duke and his wife.

古文：汉复使侯公说羽，羽乃与汉约，中分天下，割鸿沟以西为汉，以东为楚。
现代文：于是项羽与汉王约定平分天下，以鸿沟作为分界线，西归汉，东归楚。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu and the Han king agreed to divide the world equally, with a chasm as the dividing line, with the West returning to Han and the East returning to Chu.

古文：九月，归太公、吕后，军皆称万岁。
现代文：九月，项羽放了太公与吕后，带领士兵解了荥阳之困，继而东归。
English: In September, Xiang Yu released the Grand Duke and Empress Lv, led the soldiers to solve the difficulties of Shenyang, and then returned to the east.

古文：乃封侯公为平国君。羽解而东归。汉王欲西归，张良、陈平谏曰： 今汉有天下太半，而诸侯皆附，楚兵罢食尽，此天亡之时，不因其几而遂取之，此养虎自遗患也。 
现代文：汉王也有西归关中的打算，张良、陈平劝阻说： 汉王现在已经拥有大半个天下，各地诸侯也纷纷前来归附，而如今楚军疲惫不堪，弹尽粮绝，这真是上天赐予灭楚的最佳时机啊。若在这个时候放掉楚人，就是养虎为患。 
English: The Han king also had plans to return to the West, but Zhang Liang and Chen Ping dissuaded him, saying, "The Han king now owns half of the world, and princes from all over the country have come to return, but now the Chu army is exhausted and exhausted. This is really the best time given by heaven to destroy Chu. If you let go of the Chu people at this time, you will raise tigers.

古文：汉王从之。
现代文：汉王听从了他们的意见。
English: Han Wang followed their advice.

