古文：胡惟庸，定远人。
现代文：胡惟庸，定远人。
English: Hu Weiyang, Dingyuan people.

古文：归太祖于和州，授元帅府奏差。
现代文：在和州归附太祖，被授予元帅府奏差。
English: He was awarded the post of Marshal's Office in He Prefecture, which was annexed to Taizu.

古文：寻转宣使，除宁国主簿，进知县，迁吉安通判，擢湖广佥事。
现代文：不久转任宣使，又任宁国县主簿，进升知县，又升吉安府通判，再升湖文佥事。
English: Soon he was transferred to the post of propaganda envoy, and then to the post of Ningguo County chief bookkeeper, and then to the post of Shochi County chief bookkeeper, and then to the post of Ji'an County chief bookkeeper, and then to the post of Hunan Anecdote chief bookkeeper.

古文：吴元年，召为太常少卿，进本寺卿。
现代文：吴元年，召任太常寺少卿，再进本寺卿。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, he was appointed as a junior chief priest of Taizho-ji Temple, and then became the chief priest of this temple.

古文：洪武三年拜中书省参知政事。
现代文：洪武三年拜为中书省参知政事。
English: Three years later, Hongwu served as the party secretary of the People's Republic of China.

古文：已，代汪广洋为左丞。
现代文：不久，取代汪广洋任左丞。
English: Soon, he replaced Wang Guangyang as Zuo.

古文：六年正月，右丞相广洋左迁广东行省参政，帝难其人，久不置相，惟庸独专省事。
现代文：六年正月，右丞相汪广洋被贬为广东行省参政。皇上因丞相人选难觅，所以很长一段时间不设丞相。惟庸于是独专中书省事务。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Wang Guangyang, the Minister of the Right, was relegated to participate in the politics of Guangdong Province. The Emperor did not appoint a Minister of the Right for a long time because it was difficult to find a candidate for the Minister of the Right. However, he was in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：七月拜右丞相。久之，进左丞相，复以广洋为右丞相。
现代文：七月他拜任右丞相，不久，升任左丞相，汪广洋又被任为右丞相。
English: In July, he was appointed Minister of the Right, and soon after, he was promoted to Minister of the Left, and Wang Guangyang was also appointed Minister of the Right.

古文：自杨宪诛，帝以惟庸为才，宠任之。
现代文：自从杨宪被诛后，皇上认为惟庸有才干，很宠信他。
English: After Yang Xian was executed, the emperor thought that he was a mediocre talent and trusted him very much.

古文：惟庸亦自励，尝以曲谨当上意，宠遇日盛，独相数岁，生杀黜陟，或不奏径行。
现代文：惟庸也自觉奋进，曾以遇事小心谨慎博得皇上欢心，进一步获得皇上的宠信。他为此当了多年独相，生杀废黜大事，有的不报告皇上便径直执行。
English: However, he was also a conscientious and diligent person. He had won the emperor's favor by being careful and prudent in dealing with situations, and further gained the emperor's favor. For this reason, he was the sole minister for many years, and some of his actions were carried out without reporting to the emperor.

古文：内外诸司上封事，必先取阅，害己者，辄匿不以闻。
现代文：内外各部门的奏章，他都先拿来看，凡是陷害自己的，便扣下不上呈。
English: He took the transcripts of all departments at home and abroad to look at first, and if he framed himself, he would not submit them.

古文：四方躁进之徒及功臣武夫失职者，争走其门，馈遗金帛、名马、玩好，不可胜数。
现代文：各方面热衷功名之徒，以及失去了职位的功臣武夫，竞相奔走于其门，贿送金帛、名马、玩好之物，不可胜计。
English: Enthusiastic meritorious people in all aspects, as well as meritorious warriors who have lost their positions, are competing to run to their doors, bribing them with gold ingots, famous horses, and things to play with.

古文：大将军徐达深疾其奸，从容言于帝。
现代文：大将军徐达极恨他奸恶，从容地告诉了皇上。
English: The great general Xu Dadu hated his treachery, and calmly told the emperor.

古文：惟庸遂诱达阍者福寿以图达，为福寿所发。
现代文：惟庸于是诱惑徐达的守门人福寿，图谋害徐达，但被福寿揭发。
English: Wei Rong then seduced Xu Da's gatekeeper Fu Shou, plotted to kill Xu Da, but was exposed by Fu Shou.

古文：御史中丞刘基亦尝言其短。
现代文：御史中丞也曾说过他的短处。
English: Goshi Nakajo also talked about his weaknesses.

古文：久之基病，帝遣惟庸挟医视，遂以毒中之。
现代文：后来刘基生病，皇上派惟庸带医生探视，惟庸便对刘基下毒。
English: Later, Liu Ji fell ill, and the emperor sent Wei Yong to visit him with a doctor. Wei Yong then poisoned Liu Ji.

古文：基死，益无所忌。
现代文：刘基死后，他更加无所顾忌。
English: After Liu Ji's death, he became even more reckless.

古文：与太师李善长相结，以兄女妻其从子佑。
现代文：他与太师李善长相勾结，将哥哥的女儿嫁善长的侄子李佑为妻。
English: He colluded with Grand Master Li Shanzhong to marry his brother's daughter to Shanzhong's nephew Li You.

古文：学士吴伯宗劾惟庸，几得危祸。
现代文：学士吴伯宗弹劾惟庸，差点大祸临头。
English: The impeachment of Wu Bozong, a bachelor, almost led to a catastrophe.

古文：自是，势益炽。
现代文：此后，他权势更盛。
English: Since then, he has become more powerful.

古文：其定远旧宅井中，忽生石笋，出水数尺，谀者争引符瑞，又言其祖父三世冢上，皆夜有火光烛天。
现代文：在他定远老家的井中，突然生出石笋，出水数尺深，献媚的人争相说这是祥瑞之兆。他们还说惟庸祖父三代的坟墓上，晚上都有火光，照亮夜空。
English: In the well of his hometown of Dingyuan, a stone cocoon suddenly sprouted, the water was several feet deep, and the flatterers argued that this was a sign of auspiciousness. They also said that the tombs of the three generations of his grandfather had firelight at night, illuminating the night sky.

古文：惟庸益喜自负，有异谋矣。
现代文：惟庸更加高兴和自负，从此有了异心。
English: However, he became more happy and conceited, and from then on, he had a different heart.

古文：吉安侯陆仲亨自陕西归，擅乘传。
现代文：吉安侯陆仲亨从陕西回来，擅自乘坐驿车。
English: Jian Hou Lu Zhongheng returned from Shaanxi and took a taxi without permission.

古文：帝怒责之，曰： 中原兵燹之余，民始复业，籍户买马，艰苦殊甚。
现代文：皇上大怒，责骂他说： 中原在战乱之后，人民刚刚复业，驿站户买马非常艰难。
English: The emperor was furious and scolded him, saying, "In Central Plains, after the war, the people had just resumed work, and it was very difficult for stable owners to buy horses.

古文：使皆效尔所为，民虽尽鬻子女，不能给也。 
现代文：如果大家都像你这样，人民就是将子女全部卖掉，也不能供给。 
English: If everyone were like you, the people would sell all their children and not be able to provide for them.

古文：责捕盗于代县。
现代文：责令他到代县捕盗贼。
English: He was ordered to go to Daya County to catch thieves.

古文：平谅侯费聚奉命抚苏州军民，日嗜酒色。
现代文：平凉侯费聚奉命安抚苏州军民，整天沉溺酒色。
English: Ping Liang Hou Feizhu was ordered to pacify the Suzhou military and civilians, and indulged in alcohol all day.

古文：帝怒，责往西北招降蒙古，无功，又切责之。
现代文：皇上大怒，责令他往西北去招降蒙古，他无功而返，皇上又严厉斥责他。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered him to go to the northwest to invite the Mongolians to surrender. He returned without success, and the emperor reprimanded him severely.

古文：二人大惧。
现代文：两人都非常害怕。
English: Both of them were very scared.

古文：惟庸阴以权利胁诱二人，二人素戆勇，见惟庸用事，密相往来。
现代文：惟庸便暗中对两人威逼利诱。两人一向愚勇，见惟庸正专权用事，便与他秘密往来。
English: The two had always been foolhardy, but when they saw that he was using his power to do things, they had secret dealings with him.

古文：尝过惟庸家饮，酒酣，惟庸屏左右言： 吾等所为多不法，一旦事觉，如何？ 
现代文：两人曾到惟庸家饮酒，酒酣时，惟庸屏退左右，对他俩说： 我等所干的事多不合法，一旦被发觉将怎么办？ 
English: The two of them had gone to Wei Yong's house to drink. When the wine was finished, Wei Yongping stepped back and said to the two of them: "Many of the things we have done are illegal. What will we do if we are discovered?

古文：二人益惶惧，惟庸乃告以己意，令在外收集军马。
现代文：两人更加惶恐。惟庸于是将自己的主意告诉了他们，令他们在外面收集兵马。
English: The two were even more frightened. So Wo Yeon told them his idea and told them to gather soldiers and horses outside.

古文：又尝与陈宁坐省中，阅天下军马籍，令都督毛骧取卫士刘遇贤及亡命魏文进等为心膂，曰： 吾有所用尔也。 
现代文：惟庸又曾与陈宁坐在中书省中，阅览天下兵马簿籍，令都督毛骧将卫士刘遇贤和亡命之徒魏文进收为心腹，说： 我会用得着你。 
English: Wo Rong also once sat with Chen Ning in the Chinese Book Ministry, reading the world's military and equestrian books, and made the duke Mao Jun take the guard Liu Yu Xian and the outlaw Wei Wenjin as his confidant, saying: I will use you.

古文：太仆寺丞李存义者，善长之弟，惟庸婿李佑父也，惟庸令阴说善长。
现代文：太仆寺丞李存义，是李善长的弟弟，惟庸的女婿李佑的父亲，惟庸令他暗中游说李善长。
English: Li Cunyi, the deacon of the temple, was the younger brother of Li Shanzhang and the father of Wei Yong's son-in-law Li You. Wei Yong ordered him to secretly lobby for Li Shanzhang.

古文：善长已老，不能强拒，初不许，已而依违其间。
现代文：李善长年纪已老，不能坚决拒绝，开始不同意，后来便依违其间了。
English: Li Shanlang was too old to firmly refuse, and began to disagree, but later he relented.

古文：惟庸益以为事可就，乃遣明州卫指挥林贤下海招倭，与期会。
现代文：惟庸更加以为事情可以成功，于是派明州卫指挥林贤出海招引倭寇，与他们约定日期相会。
English: However, he thought that the matter could be successful, so he sent the commander of the Ming State Guards, Lin Xian, out to sea to lure the wokou and meet them on the agreed date.

古文：又遣元故臣封绩致书称臣于元嗣君，请兵为外应。
现代文：又派元旧臣封绩致书元朝，向元朝嗣君称臣，请求出兵做外应。
English: He also sent a letter to the Yuan Dynasty praising the former vassal's feats, calling him a vassal to the heir of the Yuan Dynasty, and requesting him to send troops to help.

古文：事皆未发。
现代文：这些事都还没有发出。
English: None of this has come out yet.

古文：会惟庸子驰马于市，坠死车下，惟庸杀挽车者。
现代文：正好惟庸的儿子坐马车奔驰过市，坠死于车下，惟庸将驾车的人杀死。
English: It just so happened that Woeyong's son was riding through the city in a horse-drawn carriage, fell to his death under the car, and Woeyong killed the driver.

古文：帝怒，命偿其死。
现代文：皇上大怒，命他偿命。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered him to pay with his life.

古文：惟庸请以金帛给其家，不许。
现代文：惟庸请求用金帛补偿驾车人家，皇上不许。
English: However, the emperor did not allow the request to use gold ingots to compensate drivers.

古文：惟庸惧，乃与御史大夫陈宁、中丞涂节等谋起事，阴告四方及武臣从己者。
现代文：惟庸害怕了，便与御史大夫陈宁、中丞涂节等人图谋起事，密告四方以及依从于自己的武臣。
English: However, he was afraid, so he plotted with the chief secretary Chen Ning, the vice-commander Tu Jie and others to start an incident, inform the four sides and obey his own vassals.

古文：十二年九月，占城来贡，惟庸等不以闻。
现代文：十二年九月，占城国来进贡，惟庸等人不报告皇上。
English: In September of the twelfth year, Zhancheng Province came to pay tribute, but Wei Yong and others did not report to the emperor.

古文：中官出见之，入奏。
现代文：宦官出来见到了，便进宫奏告皇上。
English: When the eunuch came out and saw them, he went into the palace to report to the emperor.

古文：帝怒，敕责省臣。
现代文：皇上大怒，下敕令责备中书省臣。
English: The emperor was furious and issued an imperial edict to reprimand Chusho's ministers.

古文：惟庸及广洋顿首谢罪，而微委其咎于礼部，部臣又委之中书。
现代文：惟庸和汪广洋叩头谢罪，但暗暗地将罪过归咎于礼部，礼部大臣又归咎于中书。
English: Wei Yong and Wang Guangyang kowtowed and apologized for the crime, but secretly blamed the crime on the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Minister of Ceremonies blamed it on Zhongshu.

古文：帝益怒，尽囚诸臣，穷诘主者。
现代文：皇上更加愤怒，将各臣僚全部关押起来，究问为首主持的人。
English: The emperor was even more furious, and had all his ministers arrested and interrogated the person who presided over it.

古文：未几，赐广洋死，广洋妾陈氏从死。
现代文：不久，赐汪广洋死，汪广洋的妾陈氏为他陪死。
English: Soon after, Wang Guangyang died, and Wang Guangyang's concubine, Chen, died with him.

古文：帝询之，乃入官陈知县女也。大怒曰： 没官妇女，止给功臣家。
现代文：皇上问知陈氏乃是被入官的陈知县的女儿，大怒说： 被没入官的妇女，只给功臣家。
English: When the emperor asked whether the Chen clan was the daughter of Chen Zhixian, who had been promoted to an official position, she said angrily, "Women who are not promoted to an official position are only given to meritorious families.

古文：文臣何以得给？ 
现代文：文臣怎么得到？ 
English: How did Wencheng get it?

古文：乃敕法司取勘。
现代文：便颁下敕令命法司调查。
English: A royal order was then issued ordering the Department of Justice to investigate.

古文：于是惟庸及六部堂属咸当坐罪。
现代文：于是惟庸以及六部属官都应当被判罪。
English: Therefore, Woeyong and the six subordinate officials should all be convicted.

古文：明年正月，涂节遂上变，告惟庸。
现代文：第二年正月，涂节便将祸变上报，告发惟庸。
English: In the first month of the second year, Tu Jie reported the calamity and denounced Wei Yong.

古文：御史中丞商暠时谪为中书省吏，亦以惟庸阴事告。
现代文：御史中丞商皓当时被贬为中书省吏，也告发了惟庸的阴谋。
English: Goshi Chujo Shangyu, who was demoted to the position of the official of the Ministry of Literature at that time, also denounced Wei Yong's plot.

古文：帝大怒，下廷臣更讯，词连宁、节。
现代文：皇上大怒，下令廷臣轮番讯问，词语连及陈宁、涂节。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered the courtiers to interrogate them in turn, and the words were connected with Chen Ning and Tu Jie.

古文：廷臣言： 节本预谋，见事不成，始上变告，不可不诛。 
现代文：廷臣说： 涂节本来参预阴谋，见事情不成，这才将变乱上告，不可不杀。 
English: The courtier said: Tu Jie was originally involved in the pre-plot, and when things didn't work out, that's when he reported the mutiny and had to be killed.

古文：乃诛惟庸、宁并及节。
现代文：于是诛杀惟庸、陈宁和涂节。
English: As a result, Wei Yong, Chen Ning and Tu Jie were killed.

古文：惟庸既死，其反状犹未尽露。至十八年，李存义为人首告，免死，安置崇明。
现代文：惟庸死后，他造反的阴谋还没有全部暴露，到十八年，李存义被人自首告发，得以免死，安置在崇明。
English: However, after Yong's death, his conspiracy to rebel had not yet been fully exposed. In 18 years, Li Cunyi was denounced by someone who turned himself in, was spared death, and was placed in Chongming.

古文：十九年十月，林贤狱成，惟庸通倭事始著。
现代文：十九年十月，林贤狱案办成，惟庸通倭的事才显了出来。
English: In October of the 19th year, Lin Xian's prison case was completed, but it was not until then that the Yangtze River issue came to light.

古文：二十一年，蓝玉征沙漠，获封绩，善长不以奏。
现代文：二十一年，蓝玉征讨沙漠，抓获封绩，李善长不奏告皇上。
English: In the twenty-first year, Blue Jade conquered the desert and was awarded a title of merit. Li Shanchang did not report to the emperor.

古文：至二十三年五月，事发，捕绩下吏，讯得其状，逆谋益大著。
现代文：到二十三年五月，事情败露，将封绩逮捕，审出当时情况，惟庸的逆谋进一步大显。
English: By May 23rd, the affair was exposed, the arrest was made, and the situation at that time was found out. The mediocre counter-plot was further revealed.

古文：会善长家奴卢仲谦首善长与惟庸往来状，而陆仲亨家奴封帖木亦首仲亨及唐胜宗、费聚、赵庸三侯与惟庸共谋不轨。
现代文：正好李善长的家奴卢仲谦自首告发李善长和惟庸往来情况，而陆仲亨的家奴封贴木也自首告发陆仲亨与唐胜宗、费聚、赵庸三位侯爷与惟庸共谋不轨。
English: Just at that time, Lu Zhongqian, a family slave of Li Shanzhong, turned himself in to report the dealings between Li Shanzhong and Wei Yong, while Lu Zhongheng's family slave Huiping also turned himself in to report that Lu Zhongheng conspired with Tang Shengzong, Feiyu, and Zhao Yong.

古文：帝发怒，肃清逆党，词所连及坐诛者三万余人。
现代文：皇上大发雷霆之怒，肃清逆党，词语相连，被诛杀者达三万余人。
English: The emperor lashed out in rage, purged the traitorous party, the words are connected, and more than thirty thousand people were killed.

古文：宁闻之惧，遂与惟庸通谋。
现代文：于是做《昭示奸党录》，布告天下。
English: As a result, he wrote the "Record of the Traitor Party" and announced it to the world.

古文：十三年正月，惟庸事发，宁亦伏诛。陈瑛，滁人。
现代文：此案株连蔓引，直到数年之后，还没有清除干净。陈瑛，滁县人。
English: The case dragged on and on, and it wasn't cleared up until years later.Chen Ying, from Handan County.

古文：洪武中，以人才贡入太学。
现代文：洪武年间，他以人才被选为贡生入太学。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was selected as a "tribute student" to enter Taigaku based on his talent.

古文：擢御史，出为山东按察使。
现代文：后来升为御史，出任山东按察使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of imperial historian, and served as the inspector general of Shandong Province.

古文：建文元年调北平佥事。汤宗告瑛受燕王金钱，通密谋，逮谪广西。
现代文：建文元年调任北平按察使，佥事汤宗上告陈瑛接受燕王金钱，与燕王通密谋，结果陈瑛被逮捕，贬到广西。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, Chen Ying was transferred to Beiping as an inspector, and Tang Zong sued Chen Ying for accepting money from Yan Wang and conspiring with Yan Wang Tong. As a result, Chen Ying was arrested and demoted to Guangxi.

古文：燕王称帝，召为都察院左副都御史，署院事。
现代文：燕王称帝后，把他召回任都察院左副都御史，代理本院事务。
English: Yan Wang called her Empress Dowager and recalled him to serve as the Left Vice-Governor of the Duza Academy, acting on behalf of the affairs of the academy.

古文：瑛天性残忍，受帝宠任，益务深刻，专以搏击为能。
现代文：陈瑛天性残忍，得到皇上宠信后，更加严酷，专以惩罚打击为能事。
English: Chen Ying was cruel by nature, and after receiving the emperor's favor, he became even more severe, using punishment as a means.

古文：甫莅事，即言： 陛下应天顺人，万姓率服，而廷臣有不顺命、效死建文者，如侍郎黄观、少卿廖升、修撰王叔英、纪善周是修、按察使王良、知县颜伯玮等，其心与叛逆无异，请追戮之。 
现代文：他刚就职办事，便说： 陛下顺天应人，万姓臣服，而廷臣中还有不顺命、效死建文帝的人，如侍郎黄观、少卿廖升、修撰王叔英、纪善周是修、按察使王良、知县颜伯玮等人，他们之心与叛逆无异，请追究杀戮他们。 
English: As soon as he took up his duties, he said: "Your majesty follows the will of heaven and all people are subject to him, but among the courtiers, there are also those who do not follow orders and die in the service of Emperor Jianwen, such as the chamberlain Huang Guan, the junior minister Liao Sheng, the scribe Wang Shuxing, the scholar Zhou Zexu, the inspector Wang Liang, and the scholar Yan Boqi. Their hearts are no different from rebellion, please investigate and kill them.

古文：帝曰： 朕诛奸臣，不过齐、黄数辈，后二十九人中如张紞王钝、郑赐、黄福、尹昌隆，皆宥而用之。
现代文：皇上说 ：朕诛奸臣，不过是齐泰、黄子澄数人，后面的二十九人中，如张、王纯、郑赐、黄福、尹昌隆，朕都宽宥而任用他们了。
English: The emperor said, "My treacherous vassals are only Qitai and Huang Zizhen, and a few others, but of the remaining twenty-nine, such as Zhang, Wang Chun, Zheng Qi, Huang Fu, and Yin Changlong, I have pardoned and appointed them.

古文：况汝所言，有不与此数者，勿问。 
现代文：何况你所说的，还有不在这些人中的，不要问罪。 
English: How much more then, when ye say, He that is not with us is against us?

古文：后瑛阅方孝孺等狱词，遂簿观、叔英等家，给配其妻女，疏族、外亲莫不连染。
现代文：后来陈瑛查阅方孝孺等人的狱案材料，便将黄观、王叔英等家登记在内，将其妻子女儿配给功臣之家，他们的疏族、外亲无不被株连。
English: Later, Chen Ying checked the prison case materials of Fang Xiaojuan and others, and then registered the families of Huang Guan, Wang Shuying and others, and assigned his wife and daughter to the family of meritorious soldiers. None of their estranged relatives and maternal relatives were allowed to join the family.

古文：胡闰之狱，所籍数百家，号冤声彻天。
现代文：胡闰一案，所抄没的有数百家，号哭喊冤之声彻天。
English: In the case of Hu Yue, there were hundreds of houses that were confiscated, and the cries of injustice were heard all over the world.

古文：两列御史皆掩泣，瑛亦色惨，谓人曰： 不以叛逆处此辈，则吾等为无名。 
现代文：两边排列的御史都掩面而泣，连陈瑛都脸色凄惨，他对别人说： 不以叛逆之罪处治这些人，则我等便无法立名。 
English: The officials on both sides covered their faces and wept. Even Chen Ying looked miserable. He said to others, "If we don't punish these people for the crime of rebellion, then we won't be able to make a name for ourselves."

古文：于是诸忠臣无遗种矣。
现代文：于是那些忠臣便没有一个能逃脱处治了。
English: As a result, none of those loyal retainers were able to escape punishment.

古文：永乐元年擢左都御史，益以讦发为能。
现代文：永乐元年他升为左都御史，更以攻击和揭发他人为能事。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of the Left Metropolitan Historian, and he was even better at attacking and exposing others.

古文：八月劾历城侯盛庸怨诽，当诛，庸自杀。
现代文：八月，他弹劾历城侯盛庸怨恨诽谤，论罪当诛，盛庸自杀。
English: In August, he impeached the feudal lord Shengyong for maligning and slandering, condemned him to death, and Shengyong committed suicide.

古文：二年劾曹国公李景隆谋不轨，又劾景隆弟增枝知景隆不臣不谏，多置庄产，蓄佃仆，意叵测，俱收系。
现代文：二年，他弹劾曹国公李景隆图谋不轨，又弹劾李景隆的弟弟李增枝知道李景隆有不臣之心却不劝谏，还多置庄院田产，蓄养佃仆，其心难测，将他们全部逮捕了。
English: In the second year, he impeached Cao Guogong Li Jinglong for scheming, and also impeached Li Jinglong's younger brother Li Zengzhi for knowing that Li Jinglong had a rebellious heart but not persuading him. He also placed more farmland in the manor and raised servants, whose hearts were difficult to predict, and arrested them all.

古文：又劾长兴侯耿炳文僣，炳文自杀。
现代文：他又弹劾长兴侯耿炳文超越本分，耿炳文自杀。
English: He also impeached Changxing Hou Geng Bingwen for exceeding his duty, and Geng Bingwen committed suicide.

古文：劾驸马都尉梅殷邪谋，殷遇害。
现代文：他弹劾驸马都尉梅殷有邪谋，梅殷遇害。
English: He impeached Captain Mei Yin of the Horse Guards for plotting evil, and Mei Yin was killed.

古文：三年，行部尚书雒佥言事忤帝意，瑛劾佥贪暴，佥坐诛死。
现代文：三年，出巡所部的尚书雒佥提建议触忤了皇上，陈瑛弹劾雒佥贪婪凶暴，雒佥被诛死。
English: In the third year, Shang Shuxuan's suggestion of the inspection department touched the emperor, Chen Ying impeached him for greed and violence, and he was strangled to death.

古文：又劾驸马都尉胡观强取民间女子，娶娼为妾，预景降逆谋，以亲见宥不改。
现代文：他还弹劾驸马都尉胡观强娶民间女子，娶娼妓为妾，参预李景隆的逆谋，皇上因他是外亲宽宥过他，但他仍不改。
English: He also impeached Captain Hu Guanqiang for marrying a common woman, marrying a prostitute as a concubine, and participating in Li Jinglong's counter-plot. The emperor pardoned him because he was a relative, but he still did not change.

古文：帝命勿治，罢观朝请。
现代文：皇上命不要治罪，但停罢了胡观的朝请。
English: The emperor ordered not to punish the crime, but to stop Hu Guan's appeal to the emperor.

古文：已，又劾其怨望，逮下狱。
现代文：后来，陈瑛又弹劾胡观有怨望情绪，胡观被逮入狱。
English: Later, Chen Ying impeached Hu Guan for resentment, and Hu Guan was arrested and jailed.

古文：八年劾降平侯张信占练湖及江阴官田，命三法司杂治之。
现代文：八年，他弹劾隆平侯张信占夺练湖和江阴县的官田，皇上命三法司会同治理。
English: In the eighth year, he impeached the Longping marquis Zhang Xin to occupy and seize the official fields of Lianhu and Jiangyin County, and the emperor ordered the three legal departments to jointly govern.

古文：瑛为都御史数年，所论劾勋戚、大臣十余人，皆阴希帝指。
现代文：陈瑛担任都御史数年，所弹劾的勋臣外戚、大臣十余人，都暗中窥探皇上旨意。
English: Chen Ying served as the imperial historian of the capital for several years, and more than ten honored vassals, maternal relatives, and ministers who were impeached were all secretly spying on the emperor's will.

古文：其他所劾顺昌伯王佐，都督陈俊，指挥王恕，都督曹远，指挥房昭，佥都御史俞士吉，大理少卿袁复，御史车舒，都督王瑞，指挥林泉、牛谅，通政司参议贺银等，先后又数十人，俱得罪。
现代文：他弹劾的其他人，如顺昌伯王佐、都督陈俊、指挥王恕、都督曹远、指挥房昭、佥都御史俞士吉、大理寺少卿袁复、御史车舒、都督王瑞、指挥林泉、牛谅、通政司参议贺银等人，先后有数十人，这些人都得了罪。
English: Other people he impeached, such as Shunchang Bo Wang Zu, the governor Chen Jun, the commander Wang Shou, the governor Cao Yuan, the commander Fang Zhao, the governor of the capital Shishi Shiji, the junior minister of Dali Temple Yuan Fu, the governor of the capital Shishi Shu, the governor Wang Rui, the commander Lin Quan, the governor of the capital Niu Qiao, the senator of the General Affairs Department He Yin, and so on, there are dozens of people, these people have all been convicted.

古文：帝以为能发奸，宠任之，然亦知其残刻，所奏谳不尽从。
现代文：皇上以为他能揭发奸人，很宠信他，但也知道他残酷，所以他所上奏的判决书，并没有完全批准。
English: The emperor thought he could expose the traitor and trusted him, but he also knew he was cruel, so he did not fully approve the verdict.

古文：中书舍人芮善弟夫妇为盗所杀，心疑其所亲，讼于官。
现代文：中书舍人芮善的弟弟夫妇俩被盗贼所杀，他怀疑某个他所亲善的人，便控告于官。
English: When thieves killed the brother and wife of Chinese scholar and hermit Xuan Shan, he suspected someone he was close to and filed a complaint with the authorities.

古文：刑部验非盗，纵之。
现代文：刑部查出那人不是盗，便放了他。
English: The criminal investigation department found out that the man was not a thief and released him.

古文：善白帝刑部故出盗，帝命御史鞫治，果非盗。
现代文：芮善便报告皇上说刑部故意释放盗贼，皇上命御史审治，查明果然不是盗贼。
English: Yu Shan then reported to the emperor that the criminal investigation department had deliberately released the thief. The emperor ordered that the case be tried and found not to be a thief.

古文：瑛因劾善妄奏，当下狱。
现代文：陈瑛因而弹劾芮善妄奏，应当判入狱。
English: Chen Ying should be sentenced to prison for the impeachment of Zou Zhenliao.

古文：帝曰： 兄弟同气，得贼惟恐逸之，善何罪，其勿问。
现代文：皇上说： 兄弟同气，抓住盗贼惟恐他跑了，芮善有什么罪？不要问罪。 
English: The emperor said, "Brothers, with one heart, seize the thief, lest he run away. What is the sin of the thief? Don't ask about the sin.

古文：车里宣慰使刀暹答侵威远州地，执其知州刀算党以归。
现代文：车里宣慰使刁暹答侵占威远州土地，还将其知州刀算党抓回去。
English: In the car, Xuancheng comforted Zou Siamta to invade the land of Weiyang Prefecture, and also took back his Chizhou sword-counting party.

古文：帝遣使谕之，刀暹答惧，归地及所执知州，遣弟刀腊等贡方物谢罪。
现代文：皇上派使者去劝谕，刀暹答害怕了，归还所夺的土地和所抓住的知州，遣弟弟刀腊进贡土产以谢罪。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to advise, the sword Siam was afraid, returned the seized land and seized Chizhou, and sent his brother the sword to pay tribute to local products as a thank you.

古文：瑛请先下刀腊法司，且逮治刀暹答。
现代文：陈瑛请先将刀腊交到法司，还要逮捕刀暹答治罪。
English: Chen Ying, please first submit the knife wax to the law department, and also arrest the knife Siam to punish the crime.

古文：帝曰： 蛮僚之性稍不相得则相仇，改则已。
现代文：皇上说 ：蛮僚的习性，稍有不合就成仇，改过就和好了。
English: The emperor said, "It is the habit of brutal colleagues to make enemies when there is the slightest disagreement, and to make up after making amends."

古文：今服罪而复治之，何以处不服者。 
现代文：现在他们已经服罪，如还处治他们，那怎么处理那些不服的人？ 
English: Now that they have confessed, if they are to be punished, what will happen to those who refuse to confess?

古文：遂赦弗问。
现代文：遂赦免他们而不问。
English: So he pardoned them without question.

古文：知嘉兴县李鉴廷见谢罪，帝问故。
现代文：嘉兴县知县李鉴廷见皇上谢罪，皇上问原因。
English: Li Jianting of Zhixian County, Jiaxing County, met the emperor to express his gratitude, and the emperor asked the reason.

古文：瑛言： 鉴籍奸党姚瑄，瑄弟亨当连坐，而鉴释亨不籍，宜罪。 
现代文：陈瑛说： 李鉴抄没奸党姚蠧时，姚蠧的弟弟姚亨应当连坐，而李鉴却放过姚亨不录，应治罪。 
English: Chen Ying said: When Li Jian copied the non-rape party Yao Yao, Yao Yao's brother Yao Heng should sit together, but Li Jian did not record Yao Heng and should be punished.

古文：鉴言： 都察院文止籍瑄，未有亨名。 
现代文：李鉴说 ：都察院所下的公文中只说要抄没姚蠧，并没有姚亨之名。 
English: Li Jian said: In the official document issued by the Duza Academy, it only said that they wanted to confiscate Yao Wei, and there was no name of Yao Heng.

古文：帝曰： 院文无名而不籍，不失为慎重。 
现代文：皇上说： 院文中不列有名字而不抄，不失为慎重。 
English: The emperor said, "It is prudent not to include names in the Emperor's edict without copying them.

古文：鉴得免。
现代文：李鉴得以免罪。
English: Li Jian was exonerated.

古文：户部人材高文雅言时政，因及建文事，辞意率直，帝命议行之。
现代文：户部的人才高文雅上书论时政，并提到建文帝之事，用词坦率耿直，皇上命讨论实行。
English: The talented people of the household department spoke highly of the current politics with high elegance, and mentioned the matter of Emperor Jianwen. The words were candid, and the emperor's order was discussed and implemented.

古文：瑛劾文雅狂妄，请置之法。
现代文：陈瑛弹劾高文雅狂妄，请绳之以法。
English: Chen Ying impeachment Gao Wenya arrogance, please bring to justice.

古文：帝曰： 草野之人何知忌讳，其言有可采，奈何以直而废之。
现代文：皇上说： 草野之人懂得什么忌讳，他的建议有可采之处，奈何因为他说得太直而废弃呢？
English: The emperor said: Grassland people know what taboos are, his suggestion has something to recommend it, but why should it be discarded because he spoke too frankly?

古文：瑛刻薄，非助朕为善者。 
现代文：陈瑛太刻薄，不是助朕为善的人。 
English: Chen Ying is too mean and is not someone who will help me do good.

古文：以文雅付吏部，量材授官。
现代文：把高文雅交给吏部，量才授官。
English: Give high culture and refinement to the cadre department, and award positions only according to merit.

古文：海运粮漂没，瑛请治官军罪，责之偿。
现代文：海运粮食漂没，陈瑛请将官军治罪，责成他们赔偿。
English: The grain shipped by sea was lost, and Chen Ying asked the general to punish the government troops and order them to pay compensation.

古文：帝曰： 海涛险恶，官军免溺死，幸矣。 
现代文：皇上说 ：海涛险恶，官军免于溺死，已很幸运了。 
English: The emperor said, "The sea is treacherous, and the imperial army is very lucky to have escaped drowning."

古文：悉释不问。
现代文：把他们全部释放不问。
English: Release them all without question.

古文：瑛之奸险附会，一意苛刻，皆此类也。
现代文：陈瑛的奸险附会，一意苛刻，都如此类。
English: Chen Ying's treacherous and dangerous subsidiary association is always harsh, and so on.

古文：帝北巡，皇太子监国。
现代文：皇上北巡，皇太子监国。
English: The emperor patrols the north, the crown prince supervises the country.

古文：瑛言兵部主事李贞受皂隶叶转等四人金，请下贞狱。
现代文：陈瑛说兵部主事李贞接受皂隶叶转等四人的金钱，请求将李贞关进监狱。
English: Chen Ying said that Li Zhen, the head of the military department, accepted the money of four people such as the transfer of soap leaves, and requested that Li Zhen be put in prison.

古文：无何，贞妻击登闻鼓诉冤。
现代文：不久，李贞的妻子击登闻鼓为李贞诉冤。
English: Soon, Li Zhen's wife beat the drum to appeal for Li Zhen.

古文：皇太子命六部大臣廷鞫之，自辰至午，贞等不至，惟叶转至。
现代文：皇太子命六部大臣在朝廷上审问此事，从早上八九点钟到中午时分，李贞等人都没到，只有叶转到了。
English: The crown prince ordered six ministers to interrogate the matter in the imperial court. From eight or nine o'clock in the morning to noon, Li Zhen and others did not arrive, only Ye turned up.

古文：讯之，云贞不承，不胜拷掠死，三皂录皆笞死三日矣，贞实未尝受金。
现代文：大臣们审问他，叶转说李贞不承认，因不胜拷打已死了，其他三名皂隶也已被打死三天了，李贞实际上并没有接受金钱。
English: The ministers interrogated him, and Ye said that Li Zhen did not admit to it, that she had died from the torture, and that the other three soap makers had also been killed for three days. Li Zhen did not actually accept the money.

古文：先是，袁纲、覃珩两御史俱至兵部索皂隶，贞猝无以应，两御史衔之，兴此狱。
现代文：先前，袁纲、覃珩两位御史都到过兵部索要皂隶，李贞仓猝之间无法答应，这两位御史恨他，所以制造了此案。
English: In the past, Yuan Gang and Zou Yu, both imperial historians, went to the military department to ask for soap, but Li Zhencang suddenly couldn't agree. The two imperial historians hated him, so they fabricated this case.

古文：于是刑科给事中耿通等言瑛及纲、珩朋奸蒙蔽，擅杀无辜，请罪瑛。
现代文：于是刑科给事中耿通等人说陈瑛和袁纲、覃珩朋比为奸，蒙蔽皇上，擅杀无辜，请求给陈瑛治罪。
English: As a result, the Criminal Investigation Department charged Gengtong and others in the case with conspiring with Chen Ying, Yuan Gang and Yan Pengbi to deceive the emperor and kill innocent people, and requested that Chen Ying be punished.

古文：皇太子曰： 瑛大臣，盖为下所欺，不能觉察耳。 
现代文：皇太子说： 陈瑛是大臣，大概他是被属下所欺骗，不能觉察而已。 
English: The crown prince said: Chen Ying is a minister, he was probably deceived by his subordinates, he just couldn't see it.

古文：置勿问，械系纲、珩，以其罪状奏行在。
现代文：太子置之不问，只将袁纲、覃珩关起来，将他们的罪状上奏行在所。
English: The crown prince did not question him, but locked up Yuan Gang and Zou, and reported their charges to the authorities.

古文：又有学官坐事谪充太学膳夫者，皇太子令法司与改役，瑛格不行，中允刘子春等复劾瑛方命自恣。
现代文：还有一个学官，因犯罪被贬为太学的膳夫，皇太子令法司给那个学官改个工作，陈瑛驳回不执行，中允刘子厚等人便又弹劾陈瑛恣意违抗命令。
English: There was also a scholar who was relegated to the role of kitchen porter at the university for committing a crime. The crown prince ordered the legal department to give the scholar a new job, but Chen Ying rejected the order and did not carry it out. Liu Zihou and others then impeached Chen Ying for arbitrarily disobeying the order.

古文：皇太子谓瑛曰： 卿用心刻薄，不明政体，殊非大臣之道。 
现代文：皇太子对陈瑛说 ：卿用心刻薄，不明政体，很不符大臣之道。 
English: The crown prince said to Chen Ying: Sir is mean-spirited, does not know the political system, and is very inconsistent with the way of a minister.

古文：芳辄自矜，百司所为，少不如意，即诣帝前奏之，人比之纪纲。
现代文：当时太子很厌恶陈瑛，但因皇上正宠信他，所以奈何他不得。后来，皇上也渐渐疏远了陈瑛。
English: At that time, the prince disliked Chen Ying very much, but since the emperor favored him, he had no choice. Later, the emperor gradually distanced himself from Chen Ying.

古文：久之，帝亦恶其奸，黜为海盐丞，弃官归。严嵩，字惟中，分宜人。
现代文：九年春，陈瑛得罪被关进监狱而死，天下大快。严嵩，字惟中，分宜人。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Chen Ying was put in prison for a crime and died. The world is very fast.

古文：长身戌削，疏眉目，大音声。
现代文：身材修长，眉毛稀疏，嗓音宏大。
English: He is slender, with sparse eyebrows and a booming voice.

古文：举弘治十八年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：孝中弘治十八年进士，改任庶吉士，又授为编修。
English: In 18 years, Takanaka Koji was promoted to Shinshi, changed his title to Shokishi, and was also awarded the title of editor.

古文：移疾归，读书钤山十年，为诗古文辞，颇著清誉。
现代文：因病辞职回乡，在钤山读书十年，赋诗做文，在当地颇有清誉。
English: Due to illness, he resigned and returned to his hometown. He studied in Lushan for ten years and wrote poems. He has a good reputation in the local area.

古文：还朝，久之进侍讲，署南京翰林院事。
现代文：后重返朝廷，不久晋升侍讲，代理南京翰林院事务。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was soon promoted to attendant lecturer, acting as a representative of the affairs of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：召为国子祭酒。
现代文：召任国子监祭酒。
English: He was called to the post of provincial overseer of sake.

古文：嘉靖七年历礼部右侍郎，奉世宗命祭告显陵，还言： 臣恭上宝册及奉安神床，皆应时雨霁。
现代文：嘉靖七年任礼部右侍郎，奉世宗之命祭告显陵，回来后说： 臣恭敬地献上宝册以及奉命安置神床，都合天意，马上雨过天晴。
English: Jiajing, who served as the right attendant of the ritual department for seven years, served as a priest of the world sect and announced the discovery of the tomb. After returning, he said: "The minister respectfully presented the treasure book and was ordered to place the sacred bed. According to God's will, the rain immediately passed.

古文：又石产枣阳，群鹳集绕，碑入汉江，河流骤涨。
现代文：又枣阳产异石，群鹳毕集环绕；有石碑落入汉江，江水骤涨。
English: In addition, Zaoyang produced strange stones, surrounded by groups of boulders; a stone monument fell into the Han River, and the river water surged.

古文：请命辅臣撰文刻石，以纪天眷。 
现代文：请令宰辅大臣撰写文章，刻上石碑，以纪念上天的眷爱。 
English: Please order the Vice-Minister to write an article and engrave a stone monument to commemorate God's love.

古文：帝大悦，从之。
现代文：皇上非常高兴，都听从了。
English: The Emperor was very pleased, and they all obeyed.

古文：迁吏部左侍郎，进南京礼部尚书，改吏部。
现代文：升吏部左侍郎，再升南京礼部尚书，又改任吏部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the left attendant of the cadre department, and then promoted to the Nanjing ceremony department, and was reappointed to the cadre department.

古文：居南京五年，以贺万寿节至京师。
现代文：在南京的第五年，严嵩以庆贺皇上生日来到京师。
English: In his fifth year in Nanjing, Yan Song came to Beijing to celebrate the emperor's birthday.

古文：会廷议更修《宋史》，辅臣请留嵩以礼部尚书兼翰林学士董其事。
现代文：正好廷臣议论要修改《宋史》，宰辅大臣请留下严嵩，让他以礼部尚书兼翰林学士的身份总领其事。
English: Just as courtiers were discussing the need to revise "Song History," the Vice-Minister of State asked Yan Song to stay on, allowing him to take the lead as the head of the Ministry of Rites and Literature and as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：及夏言入内阁，命嵩还掌部事。
现代文：到夏言入内阁后，便命严嵩回去执掌礼部事务。
English: After Xia Yan entered the cabinet, Yan Song was ordered to return to take charge of the ceremonial affairs.

古文：帝将祀献皇帝明堂，以配上帝。
现代文：皇上将要在明堂祭祀献皇帝，让他配祭上天。
English: The emperor will offer a sacrifice to the emperor in the Ming Hall, and let him go to heaven with the sacrifice.

古文：已，又欲称宗入太庙。
现代文：不久，又想给献皇帝上宗号，把他列入太庙。
English: Soon, he also wanted to give Emperor Xian the family name of Wu and include him in the Imperial Temple.

古文：嵩与群臣议沮之，帝不悦，著《明堂或问》示廷臣。
现代文：严嵩和群臣都提议反对，皇上很不高兴，写《明堂或问》一书给廷臣看。
English: Yan Song and his courtiers all proposed to oppose it. The emperor was very displeased and wrote a book, "Mingtang or Qiu," for his courtiers to read.

古文：嵩惶恐，尽改前说，条画礼仪甚备。
现代文：严嵩惶恐不安，尽改先前的主张，还很详备地给皇上规划好礼仪。
English: With great trepidation and anxiety, he completely changed his previous opinion and planned the etiquette for the emperor in great detail.

古文：礼成，赐金币。
现代文：礼成以后，皇上赐给他金币。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor gave him a gold coin.

古文：自是，益务为佞悦。
现代文：从此以后，严嵩更加专务献媚，取悦于皇上。
English: From then on, Yan Song devoted himself more to flattery and pleasing the emperor.

古文：帝上皇天上帝尊号、宝册，寻加上高皇帝尊谥圣号以配，嵩乃奏庆云见，请受群臣朝贺。
现代文：皇上给皇天上帝加尊号和宝册，不久给高皇帝上尊谥和圣号，以配祭皇天上帝。严嵩于是上奏说有庆云显现，请皇上接受群臣朝贺。
English: The emperor gave Emperor Tenjo the honorific title and the treasure book, and soon gave Emperor Gao the honorific title and the sacred title to match the sacrifice to Emperor Tenjo. Yan Song then reported that there were clouds of celebration, and asked the emperor to accept the congratulations of the courtiers.

古文：又为《庆云赋》、《大礼告成颂》奏之，帝悦，命付史馆。
现代文：他又写《庆云赋》、《大礼告成颂》上奏皇上，皇上很高兴，命令交给史馆珍藏。
English: He also wrote "Celebration of the Clouds" and "Celebration of the Great Gift," and played them for the emperor. The emperor was very pleased and ordered the collection to be handed over to the history museum.

古文：寻加太子太保，从幸承天，赏赐与辅臣埒。
现代文：严嵩不久加封为太子太保，侍从皇上幸临承天府，获得的赏赐与宰辅大臣相等。
English: Yan Song was soon given the title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm, and the Emperor's attendant, Emperor Gao Lin, received a reward equal to that of the Vice-Minister.

古文：嵩归日骄。
现代文：回来后严嵩日益骄横。
English: After returning, Yan Song became increasingly arrogant.

古文：诸宗藩请恤乞封，挟取贿赂。
现代文：各宗室藩王请求抚恤和乞求封爵，严嵩都向他们索取贿赂。
English: The lords of the clans asked for alms and begged to be knighted, and Yan Song asked them for bribes.

古文：子世蕃又数关说诸曹。
现代文：他的儿子世蕃又多次与各部通关节。
English: His son, Shifu, has repeatedly been at loggerheads with various ministries.

古文：南北给事、御史交章论贪污大臣，皆首嵩。
现代文：南北两京的给事、御史纷纷弹劾贪污大臣，他们都将严嵩列为第一个。
English: The governors of the South and the North, as well as the Emperor, have impeached corrupt ministers one after another, and all of them have listed Yan Song as the first.

古文：嵩每被论，亟归诚于帝，事辄已。
现代文：严嵩每次被弹劾，便急忙向皇上表示忠诚，事情往往就得以过去了。
English: Every time Yan Song was impeached, he hurriedly expressed his loyalty to the emperor, and things often went smoothly.

古文：帝或以事谘嵩，所条对平无奇，帝必故称赏，欲以讽止言者。
现代文：皇上有时有事向严嵩咨询，严嵩的回答都平淡无奇，但皇上还故意赞扬他，想借此暗示大臣们不要再提意见。
English: The emperor sometimes consulted Yan Song about something, and Yan Song's answers were all bland, but the emperor also deliberately praised him, trying to suggest that the ministers should not make any comments.

古文：嵩科第先夏言，而位下之。
现代文：严嵩中进士比夏言早，但位在夏言之下。
English: Yan Song and Zhong Jin Shi are earlier than Xia Yan, but they are below Xia Yan.

古文：始倚言，事之谨，尝置酒邀言，躬诣其第，言辞不见。
现代文：开始时他依靠夏言，对待他非常恭谨，曾设酒邀请夏言，并亲自到其府上相请，但夏言辞而不见。
English: At the beginning, he relied on Xia Yan and treated him very respectfully. He once invited Xia Yan to have a drink with him and personally went to his house to invite him, but Xia Yan did not show up.

古文：嵩布席，展所具启，跽读。
现代文：但严嵩并不在意，他铺开席子，将要陈述的东西展开，长跪诵读。
English: But Yan Song didn't care. He spread out the mat, unfolded what he was going to say, and knelt down to read.

古文：言谓嵩实下己，不疑也。
现代文：夏言以为严嵩真的是尊崇他，便不再对他怀有疑心。
English: Thinking that Yan Song really respected him, Xia Yan no longer had any suspicions about him.

古文：帝以奉道尝御香叶冠，因刻沈水香冠五，赐言等。
现代文：皇上在奉祭路神时曾戴过香叶冠，便因此刻制了五顶沉水香冠，赐给夏言等人。
English: The emperor once wore a crown of fragrant leaves when he was offering sacrifices to the god of the road, so he carved five sunken water crowns and gave them to Natsugen and others.

古文：言不奉诏，帝怒甚。
现代文：夏言不接受，皇上非常愤怒。
English: Natsugen did not accept, and the Emperor was very angry.

古文：嵩因召对冠之，笼以轻纱。
现代文：严嵩却趁皇上召见之时戴上香冠，并且还罩上一幅轻纱。
English: However, Yan Song took the opportunity to wear a crown of incense when he was summoned by the emperor, and also covered it with a piece of light yarn.

古文：帝见，益内亲嵩。
现代文：皇上看见后，更从心里亲近严嵩。
English: After seeing this, the emperor became even closer to Yan Song.

古文：嵩遂倾言，斥之。
现代文：严嵩于是排挤夏言，斥责他。
English: Yan Song then ousted Xia Yan and reprimanded him.

古文：言去，醮祀青词，非嵩无当帝意者。
现代文：夏言离职后，举行斋醮仪式时献给天神的青词，除了严嵩之外，没有人能做得合皇上的心意。
English: After Natsugen left office, he dedicated a poem to Tenjin at the time of the Eid al-Fitr ceremony. Apart from Yan Song, no one could match the emperor's heart.

古文：二十一年八月拜武英殿大学士，入直文渊阁，仍掌礼部事。
现代文：二十一年八月，严嵩拜为武英殿大学士，入文渊阁值班，仍掌管礼部事务。
English: In August 21st, Yan Songbai became a scholar of the Wuying Palace University, and was put on duty at the Wenyuan Pavilion, still in charge of ceremonial affairs.

古文：时嵩年六十余矣。精爽溢发，不异少壮。
现代文：严嵩当时已六十多岁了，但他精神焕发，与少壮之时无异。
English: Yan Song was more than 60 years old at the time, but he was refreshed, no different from when he was young and strong.

古文：朝夕直西苑板房，未尝一归洗沐，帝益谓嵩勤。
现代文：他早晚在西苑的板房值班，不曾回家洗沐过，皇上更以为他勤政。
English: He was on duty in the morning and evening in the board room of the West Court, and never went home to wash and shower. The emperor thought he was a diligent politician.

古文：久之，请解部事，遂专直西苑。
现代文：不久，严嵩请辞掉礼部职务，此后便专在西苑当值。
English: Soon after, Yan Song was asked to resign from the Ministry of Ceremonies, after which he was exclusively on duty in the West Courtyard.

古文：帝尝赐嵩银记，文曰 忠勤敏达。 
现代文：皇上曾赐给他银记，上刻 忠勤敏达 四字。
English: The emperor had given him a silver certificate, inscribed with the words "loyal and diligent."

古文：寻加太子太傅。
现代文：不久加封为太子太傅。
English: He was soon given the title of Prince Taifu.

古文：翟銮资序在嵩上，帝待之不如嵩。
现代文：翟銮资历比严嵩老，但皇上待他不如严嵩。
English: He was older than Yan Song in seniority, but the emperor did not treat him as well as Yan Song.

古文：嵩讽言官论之，銮得罪去。
现代文：严嵩暗示言官弹劾他，翟銮获罪而去。
English: Yan Song insinuated the speaker to impeach him, was found guilty and left.

古文：吏部尚书许赞、礼部尚书张璧同入阁，皆不预闻票拟事，政事一归嵩。
现代文：吏部尚书许赞、礼部尚书张璧同时进入内阁，但都不能参与起草圣旨，政事全归严嵩一人。
English: Shosho Susan from the Ministry of Civil Service and Shosho Zhang Bi from the Ministry of Ceremonies entered the cabinet at the same time, but neither of them could participate in the drafting of the edict, and all political affairs were left to Yan Song alone.

古文：赞尝叹曰： 何夺我吏部，使我旁睨人。 
现代文：许赞曾经叹道 ：为何夺去我吏部职事，使我成为旁观者？ 
English: Xu Zhan once sighed: Why did you take away my position in the personnel department and make me a bystander?

古文：嵩欲示厚同列，且塞言者意，因以显夏言短，乃请凡有宣召，乞与成国公朱希忠、京山侯崔元及赞、璧偕入，如祖宗朝謇、夏、三杨故事，帝不听，然心益喜嵩，累进吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士、少傅兼太子太师。
现代文：严嵩想向同事表示尊重，并且也想阻止人们的论劾，因此而显现夏言的短处，便请求皇上凡要召见他时，请让成国公朱希忠、京山侯崔元以及许赞、张璧一同进去，就像祖宗接见蹇义、原吉和三杨的故事。皇上没有听从，不过心里更喜欢严嵩，将他累升为吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士、少傅兼太子太师。
English: Yan Song wanted to show respect to his colleagues, and also wanted to prevent people from criticizing him, thus revealing Xia Yan's shortcoming. He asked the emperor to invite Zhu Xizhong, Cui Yuan, Xu Zhan, and Zhang Bi to accompany him whenever he was summoned, just like the story of the ancestor receiving Zhai Yi, Yuan Ji, and Sanyang. The emperor did not listen, but he liked Yan Song better, and promoted him to the post of the secretary, the scholar, the scholar, the young master, and the prince's teacher.

古文：久之，帝微觉嵩横。
现代文：后来，皇上微微觉察到严嵩骄横。
English: Later, the emperor became slightly aware of Yan Song's arrogance.

古文：时赞老病罢，璧死，乃复用夏言，帝为加嵩少师以慰之。
现代文：当时许赞因老病退职，而张璧也死了，便重新起用夏言，皇上为了安慰严嵩，给他加封少师。
English: At that time, Xu Zan retired due to an old illness, and Zhang Bi also died, so he resumed using Xia Yan. In order to comfort Yan Song, the emperor gave him the title of minor teacher.

古文：言至，复盛气陵嵩，颇斥逐其党，嵩不能救。
现代文：夏言上任后，又盛气欺凌严嵩，斥退了他的一些党羽，严嵩无能挽救。
English: After Xia Yan took office, he bullied Yan Song with great enthusiasm and drove away some of his followers. Yan Song could not be saved.

古文：子世蕃方官尚宝少卿，横行公卿间。
现代文：他的儿子严世蕃时任尚宝少卿，正横行于公卿之间。
English: His son Yan Shiyan, who was Shangbao Shaoqing at the time, was running rampant among the nobles.

古文：言欲发其罪，嵩父子大惧，长跪榻下泣谢，乃已。
现代文：夏言想揭发他们的罪过，严嵩父子大为恐惧，长跪于夏言的榻前，哭泣谢罪，夏言这才罢了。
English: Natsugen wanted to expose their sins, and the father and son were terrified. They knelt in front of Natsugen's bed, weeping and apologizing. That was all Natsugen wanted.

古文：知陆炳与言恶，遂与比而倾言。
现代文：严嵩知道陆炳与夏言不和，遂与他勾结而排挤夏言。
English: Yan Song knew that Lu Yao and Xia Yan were at odds, so he colluded with Lu Yao to oust Xia Yan.

古文：世蕃迁太常少卿，嵩犹畏言，疏遣归省墓。
现代文：世蕃升任太常少卿后，严嵩还害怕夏言，上书请准许回乡扫墓。
English: After he was promoted to the position of Taizang Shaoqing, Yan Song was still afraid of Xia Yan, and wrote to him asking for permission to go back to his hometown to sweep the tombs.

古文：嵩寻加特进，再加华盖殿大学士。
现代文：严嵩不久加特进，再加封华盖殿大学士。
English: Yan Song was soon promoted to gater, and he was also awarded the title of Huagiden University Scholar.

古文：窥言失帝眷，用河套事构言及曾铣，俱弃市。
现代文：他窥视到夏言失去皇上的宠爱，便借河套事件陷害夏言和曾铣，结果他俩都被斩首，暴尸街头。
English: When he saw that Xia Yan had lost the emperor's favor, he used the Hetao Incident to frame Xia Yan and Zeng Yao. As a result, both of them were beheaded, and their bodies were found in the streets.

古文：已而南京吏部尚书张治、国子祭酒李本以疏远擢入阁，益不敢预可否。
现代文：随后南京吏部尚书张治、国子监祭酒李本因关系疏远得以升入内阁，更不敢参预决定政事。
English: Subsequently, because of their distant relationship, Nanjing's librarian, Shangshu Zhangzhi, and the governor of the imperial court, Li Ben, were able to be promoted to the cabinet, but they did not dare to participate in the pre-decision of political affairs.

古文：嵩既倾杀言，益伪恭谨。
现代文：严嵩既已排挤害死夏言，更装作恭敬谨慎。
English: Yan Song has already ousted and killed Xia Yan, and is even pretending to be respectful.

古文：言尝加上柱国，帝亦欲加嵩，嵩乃辞曰： 尊无二上，上非人臣所宜称。
现代文：夏言曾被加封为上柱国，皇上也想给严嵩加封，严嵩便推辞说： 尊隆不能有二人，况且 上 字之称也不是人臣所宜。
English: The emperor also wanted to add a seal to Yan Song, but Yan Song declined, saying, "There cannot be two people with the title of "Dignity and Highness." Moreover, the title of "Dignity and Highness" is not appropriate for a courtier."

古文：国初虽设此官，左相国达，功臣第一，亦止为左柱国。乞陛下免臣此官，著为令典，以昭臣节。 
现代文：开国期虽然设有这一官衔，左相国徐达，是头号功臣，也只封为左柱国，请求陛下免除臣的这个官衔，并且立为法令，以昭示做臣属应具备的节操。 
English: Although there was this official title during the founding of the country, Zuo Guo Xueda, the number one meritorious vassal, was only given the title Zuo Zhuo Guo. He asked His Majesty to exempt him from this official title, and made it a law to show the discipline that a vassal should have.

古文：帝大喜，允其辞，而以世蕃为太常卿。
现代文：皇上很高兴，批准了他的请求，而将世蕃升为太常寺卿。
English: The emperor was pleased and approved his request, and he was promoted to the post of Lord of Taiji Temple.

古文：嵩无他才略，惟一意媚上，窃权罔利。
现代文：严嵩没有别的才略，只会一意向皇上献媚，盗窃威权，骗取私利。
English: Yan Song had no other talent but to flatter the emperor, steal authority, and defraud for personal gain.

古文：帝英察自信，果刑戮，颇护己短，嵩以故得因事激帝怒，戕害人以成其私。
现代文：皇上很自信自己英武明察，刑杀果断，并颇为自己护短，严嵩因此得以借事激怒皇上，残害别人以谋取个人私利。
English: The emperor was very confident that he was skillful, decisive, and self-protective, so Yan Song was able to take advantage of the emperor's anger and kill others for personal gain.

古文：张经、李天宠、王忬之死，嵩皆有力焉。
现代文：张经、李天宠、王忄予之死，严嵩都出了力。
English: Zhang Jing, Li Tiancai, Wang Xiyu's death, Yan Song have all made efforts.

古文：前后劾嵩、世蕃者，谢瑜、叶经、童汉臣、赵锦、王宗茂、何维柏、王晔、陈垲、厉汝进、沈练、徐学诗、杨继盛、周鈇、吴时来、张翀、董传策皆被谴。
现代文：前后弹劾严嵩、世蕃的谢瑜、叶经、童汉臣、赵锦、王宗茂、何维柏、王晔、陈垲、厉汝进、沈炼、徐学诗、杨继盛、周铁、吴时来、张羽中、董传策都被贬职。
English: Yan Song, the world-renowned Xie Yu, Ye Jing, Tong Han Chen, Zhao Jin, Wang Zongmao, He Weibai, Wang Qi, Chen Qi, Li Rujin, Shen Zhen, Xu Xueshi, Yang Jisheng, Zhou Tie, Wu Shilai, Zhang Yuzhong, and Dong Cunchao were all impeached and demoted.

古文：经、炼用他过置之死，继盛附张经疏尾杀之。
现代文：叶经、沈炼还被借别的过失处死；杨继盛因在张经的奏疏末尾附上名字而被杀。
English: Ye Jing and Shen Ren were also executed for other offenses; Yang Jisheng was killed for adding his name at the end of the recitation of Zhang Jing.

古文：他所不悦，假迁除考察以斥者甚众，皆未尝有迹也。
现代文：其他严嵩所不喜欢的人，有许多被借升迁考察之机斥退，还不留下痕迹。
English: Many of the others whom Yan Song disliked were dismissed without leaving a trace by taking advantage of the promotion and inspection opportunity.

古文：俺答薄都城，慢书求贡。
现代文：俺达汗逼近都城，傲慢地投书要求朝贡。
English: We Da Khan approached the capital and arrogantly demanded tribute.

古文：帝召嵩与李本及礼部尚书徐阶入对西苑。
现代文：皇上召严嵩与李本和礼部尚书徐阶到西苑商议。
English: The emperor summoned Yan Song and Li Ben and the etiquette department's Shang Shuxu to the West Courtyard for discussion.

古文：嵩无所规画，委之礼部。帝悉用阶言，稍轻嵩。
现代文：严嵩无所规划，交给礼部讨论，皇上全部采纳了徐阶的建议，稍稍轻视严嵩。
English: Yan Song had no plan and left it to the etiquette department to discuss. The emperor accepted all of Xu Ji's suggestions and slightly scorned Yan Song.

古文：嵩复以间激帝怒，杖司业赵贞吉而谪之。
现代文：严嵩又寻找矛盾激怒皇上，杖打司业赵贞吉，并将他贬职。
English: Yan Song also looked for contradictions to provoke the emperor's anger, and he beat Zhao Zhengyi, the imperial secretary, with a cane, and demoted him.

古文：兵部尚书丁汝夔受嵩指，不敢趣诸将战。
现代文：兵部尚书丁汝夔受严嵩指使，不敢催促各将领抗战。
English: The head of the military department, Shangshu Ding Ruxuan, was ordered by Yan Song and did not dare to urge the generals to fight.

古文：寇退，帝欲杀汝夔。
现代文：敌寇退走后，皇上想杀死丁汝夔。
English: After the enemy pirates retreated, the emperor wanted to kill Ding Ruxuan.

古文：嵩惧其引己，谓汝夔曰： 我在，毋虑也。 
现代文：严嵩怕他把自己供出来，便对他说： 有我在，你不用担心。 
English: Yan Song was afraid that he would expose himself, so he said to him, "With me, you don't have to worry.

古文：汝夔临死始知为嵩绐。
现代文：丁汝夔临死时才知道被严嵩骗了。
English: It was only when Ding Ruxuan was about to die that she realized she had been deceived by Yan Song.

古文：大将军仇鸾，始为曾铣所劾，倚嵩倾铣，遂约为父子。
现代文：大将军仇鸾，当初被曾铣弹劾，后倚靠严嵩排挤曾铣，两人遂认作父子。
English: General Qiu Qi, who was initially impeached by Zeng Qi, later relied on Yan Song to oust Zeng Qi, and the two then recognized each other as father and son.

古文：已而鸾挟寇得帝重，嵩犹儿子蓄之，浸相恶。
现代文：后来仇鸾牵制敌寇，获得皇上重用，这时严嵩还把他当儿子看待，但不久便逐渐不和。
English: Later, when Yan Song gained the emperor's favor by keeping the enemy corsairs at bay, Yan Song still regarded him as his son, but they soon became estranged.

古文：嵩密疏毁鸾，帝不听，而颇纳鸾所陈嵩父子过，少疏之。
现代文：严嵩秘密上疏诋毁仇鸾，皇上不听，反而颇相信仇鸾所提出的严嵩父子的过失，渐渐疏远了严嵩。
English: Yan Song secretly slandered Qian Qi, but the emperor did not listen, but rather believed the faults of Yan Song's father and son proposed by Qian Qi, and gradually alienated Yan Song.

古文：嵩当入直，不召者数矣。
现代文：严嵩本当入宫当值，但已有好几次不被召见了。
English: Yan Song is supposed to be on duty when he enters the palace, but he has not been summoned several times.

古文：嵩见徐阶、李本入西内，即与俱入。
现代文：严嵩见徐阶、李本进入西内，便与他们一同进去。
English: Yan Song saw Xu Ji and Li Ben enter Xinai and went in with them.

古文：至西华门，门者以非诏旨格之。嵩还第，父子对泣。
现代文：到西华门时，看门的人因他不是皇上所召而把他挡了回来，严嵩回到家后，父子相对而泣。
English: When he arrived at the West China Gate, the gatekeeper turned him back because he was not summoned by the emperor. After Yan Wei returned home, his father and son cried.

古文：时陆炳掌锦衣，与鸾争宠，嵩乃结炳共图鸾。
现代文：当时陆炳掌管锦衣卫，正与仇鸾争宠，严嵩于是勾结陆炳一同谋害仇鸾。
English: At that time, Lu Yao was in charge of Jin Yi Wei and was competing with Qiu Yao for favor. Yan Song then conspired with Lu Yao to kill Qiu Yao.

古文：会鸾病死，炳讦鸾阴事，帝追戮之。
现代文：正好仇鸾病死，陆炳便揭发仇鸾的阴事，皇上于是追戮仇鸾。
English: Just as the enemy died of illness, Lu Xun exposed the evil deeds of the enemy, and the emperor chased and killed the enemy.

古文：于是益信任嵩，遣所乘龙舟过海子召嵩，载直西内如故。
现代文：此后皇上更信任严嵩，与从前一样派自己所乘坐的龙舟渡海召严嵩，将他载到西内当值。
English: After that, the emperor trusted Yansong even more. As before, he sent his dragon boat to the sea to summon Yansong and take him to the west to be on duty.

古文：世蕃寻迁工部左侍郎。
现代文：世蕃不久升任工部左侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of the left-hand man of the engineering department.

古文：倭寇江南，用赵文华督察军情，大纳贿赂以遣嵩，致寇乱益甚。
现代文：倭寇骚扰江南，皇上用赵文华督察军情，他广收贿赂献给严嵩，致使倭寇作乱更严重。
English: The wokou harassed the south of the Yangtze River, and the emperor used Zhao Wenhua as an inspector of military affairs. He accepted bribes and gave them to Yan Song, which made the wokou unrest even more serious.

古文：及胡宗宪诱降汪直、徐海，文华乃言： 臣与宗宪策，臣师嵩所授也。 
现代文：到胡宗宪诱降汪直、徐海之后，赵文华便对皇上说： 臣授给胡宗宪的计策，是我的老师严嵩教给我的。 
English: After Hu Zongxian had induced Wang Zhi and Xu Hai to abdicate, Zhao Wenhua said to the emperor: "The stratagem I gave to Hu Zongxian was taught to me by my teacher Yan Song.

古文：遂命嵩兼支尚书俸无谢，自是褒赐皆不谢。
现代文：皇上遂命严嵩兼领尚书的俸禄，严嵩不谢恩。此后皇上的褒奖赏赐，他都不谢。
English: The emperor then ordered Yan Song to also receive the stipend for the book, but Yan Song did not thank the emperor. After that, he did not thank the emperor for the reward.

古文：帝尝以嵩直庐隘，撤小殿材为营室，植花木其中，朝夕赐御膳、法酒。
现代文：皇上曾因严嵩当值的房子太狭小，便拆毁一个小殿，取材营建新室，并种花木于其中，早晚赐给他御膳、法酒。
English: The emperor once tore down a small hall because the house in which Yan Song was on duty was too small. He used the materials to build a new room, planted flowers and trees in it, and gave him imperial meals and sacred wine in the morning and evening.

古文：嵩年八十，听以肩舆入禁苑。
现代文：严嵩年已八十，皇上准许他坐肩舆进入宫苑。
English: Yan Song was eighty years old, and the emperor allowed him to enter the palace grounds.

古文：帝自十八年葬章圣太后后，即不视朝，自二十年宫婢之变，即移居西苑万寿宫，不入大内，大臣希得谒见，惟嵩独承顾问，御札一日或数下，虽同列不获闻，以故嵩得逞志。
现代文：皇上从十八年葬章圣太后以后，便不再临朝听政，而从二十年宫婢之变后，即移居西苑万寿宫，不进入大内，大臣极少得以拜见，惟有严嵩一人得承皇上顾问，皇上的手札有时一天投给他几次，而其他同事都不能闻知，因此严嵩得以肆意妄为。
English: In 18 years after the funeral of Empress Dowager Cixi, the emperor no longer came to the imperial court to listen to politics, and from 20 years after the change of palace maids, that is, he moved to Xiyuan Wanshou Palace and did not enter the Imperial Palace. Ministers were rarely able to visit. Only Yan Song was allowed to be the emperor's adviser. The emperor's hand cards were sometimes given to him several times a day, and other colleagues could not hear it, so Yan Song was able to act recklessly.

古文：然帝虽甚亲礼嵩，亦不尽信其言，间一取独断，或故示异同，欲以杀离其势。
现代文：但皇上虽然很礼敬严嵩，也不完全相信他的话，偶尔取一件事来自己处理，或者有时故意表示与他持不同意见，想以此来杀一杀他的气势。
English: However, although the Emperor was very respectful and strict, he did not fully believe his words. Occasionally, he would take a matter into his own hands, or sometimes he would deliberately express his disagreement with him in order to kill his momentum.

古文：嵩父子独得帝窾要，欲有所救解，嵩必顺帝意痛诋之，而婉曲解释以中帝所不忍。
现代文：严嵩父子独得皇上倾心，如果想要解救谁的话，严嵩必先顺着皇上的心意对他痛加诋毁，然后再向皇上委婉解悉，使皇上不忍给他加罪。
English: Yan Song and his son won the emperor's heart. If he wanted to save someone, Yan Song would first follow the emperor's heart and slander him, and then gently explain to the emperor, so that the emperor could not bear to add to his guilt.

古文：即欲排陷者，必先称其媺，而以微言中之，或触帝所耻与讳。
现代文：即使是对想要排挤陷害的人，严嵩也必先称赞他的优点，然后再对他微言中伤，或者让他能犯皇上所耻和忌讳的事情。
English: Even for those who want to oust and frame him, Yan Song must first praise his merits, and then slander him, or allow him to commit things that are shameful and taboo for the emperor.

古文：以是移帝喜怒，往往不失。
现代文：严嵩由此能左右皇上的喜怒，想干的事往往没有失手。
English: As a result, Yan Song was able to influence the emperor's feelings and anger. He often did what he wanted to do without fail.

古文：士大夫辐辏附嵩，时称文选郎中万寀、职方郎中方祥等为嵩文武管家。
现代文：士大夫们纷纷攀附严嵩，时人称文选郎中万采、职方郎中方祥等人为严嵩的文武管家。
English: Scholar-bureaucrats clung to Yan Song one after another. At that time, people called Wen Xuan Ro, Zhong Wanzhe, Shijikata Ro, Zhong Zhong Xiang and others as Yan Song's literary and military stewards.

古文：尚书吴鹏、欧阳必进、高翟、许论辈，皆惴惴事嵩。
现代文：尚书吴鹏、欧阳必进、高耀、许论之辈，都惴惴不安地奉事严嵩。
English: Wu Peng, Ouyang Bijin, Gao Yao, Xu Xuan, all served Yan Song uneasily.

古文：嵩握权久，遍引私人居要地。
现代文：严嵩掌权岁久，遍引私人占据了各要害部门。
English: Yan Song has been in power for a long time, and private individuals have occupied all key departments.

古文：帝亦浸厌之，而渐亲徐阶。
现代文：皇上也渐渐厌恶他了，转而逐渐亲近徐阶。
English: The emperor also gradually detested him, and gradually became closer to Xu Jia.

古文：会阶所厚吴时来、张翀、董传策各疏论嵩，嵩因密请究主使者，下诏狱，穷治无所引。
现代文：正好徐阶的好友吴时来、张明中、董传策都上疏弹劾严嵩，严嵩便密请皇上追究主使的人，将他投入诏狱，穷加惩治，但都问不出什么来。
English: Just at that time, Xu Jia's good friends Wu Shilai, Zhang Mingzhong, and Dong Chuanxue all went to Shangzo to impeach Yan Song. Yan Song then asked the emperor to investigate the person who was the chief envoy, put him in the imperial prison, and punished him severely, but they couldn't find anything to ask.

古文：帝乃不问，而慰留嵩，然心不能无动，阶因得间倾嵩。
现代文：皇上于是不问，而安慰挽留严嵩，但内心却不能平静，徐阶因此得以有机会排挤严嵩。
English: So the emperor did not ask, but consoled and retained Yansong, but his heart could not be calm, so Xu Ji was able to have the opportunity to oust Yansong.

古文：吏部尚书缺，嵩力援欧阳必进为之，甫三月即斥去。
现代文：吏部尚书出缺，严嵩极力推荐欧阳必进提任，但才三个月即被罢斥。
English: There was a vacancy in the personnel department, and Yan Song strongly recommended Ouyang Bijin for the post, but he was dismissed after only three months.

古文：赵文华忤旨获谴，嵩亦不能救。
现代文：赵文华违逆圣旨，受到贬职，严嵩也不能救。
English: Zhao Wenhua violated the imperial edict and was demoted, and Yan Song could not save him.

古文：有诏二王就婚邸第，嵩力请留内。
现代文：有诏书说二位王子要在府邸完婚，严嵩极力请求留在后宫。
English: An imperial edict stated that the two princes were to be married in the palace, and Yan Song begged to stay in the harem.

古文：帝不悦，嵩亦不能力持。
现代文：皇上不高兴，严嵩也不能再坚持。
English: The emperor was not happy, and Yan Song could no longer insist.

古文：嵩虽警敏，能先意揣帝指，然帝所下手诏，语多不可晓，惟世蕃一览了然，答语无不中。
现代文：严嵩虽机警，能预先揣摩到皇上的心意，但皇上所下的手诏，语言多不可理解，只有世蕃一目了然，答语无不正合皇上旨意。
English: Although Yan Song was alert and could figure out the emperor's intentions in advance, the Emperor's edict was in an incomprehensible language. Only the world's opinion was clear at a glance, and the answer was in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：及嵩妻欧阳氏死，世蕃当护丧归，嵩请留侍京邸。
现代文：到严嵩的妻子欧阳氏死后，世蕃应当护丧归葬，严嵩请让他留在京城的府邸中侍从。
English: After the death of Ouyang, Yan Song's wife, the world should mourn and bury her. Yan Song asked him to stay at his residence in Beijing and serve as an attendant.

古文：帝许之，然自是不得入直所代嵩票拟，而日纵淫乐于家。
现代文：皇上批准了，但从此不准他进入办公室代严嵩起草诏书，世蕃只好每天在家中纵情玩乐。
English: The emperor approved, but from then on he was not allowed to enter the office to draft the edict on behalf of Yan Song, and Shizhao had to spend every day at home.

古文：嵩受诏多不能答，遣使持问世蕃。
现代文：严嵩因接到的诏书多不能作答，便派人拿去问世蕃。
English: As Yan Song was unable to answer many of the imperial edicts he received, he sent someone to take the edict to the world.

古文：值其方耽女乐，不以时答。
现代文：而世蕃往往正在恣淫，不能按时作答。
English: And the World Bank is often in a hurry, unable to respond on time.

古文：中使相继促嵩，嵩不得已自为之，往往失旨。
现代文：中宫使者相继捉弄严嵩，严嵩不得已只好自己动手，但往往不合皇上旨意。
English: The emissaries of the middle court successively teased Yan Song. Yan Song had no choice but to take matters into his own hands, but this was often not in accordance with the emperor's wishes.

古文：所进青词，又多假手他人不能工，经此积失帝欢。
现代文：他所进呈的青词，又因多假手于他人而做得不好，由此他逐渐失去皇上的欢心。
English: He did not do a good job of presenting the imperial benediction because he often pretended to be someone else. As a result, he gradually lost the emperor's favor.

古文：会万寿宫火，嵩请暂徙南城离宫，南城，英宗为太上皇时所居也，帝不悦。
现代文：正好万寿宫失火，严嵩请暂时迁到南城离宫。南城原是英宗做太上皇时居住的地方，皇上不高兴。
English: Manju Palace had just caught fire, so Yan Song asked them to temporarily move to Nanjo Imperial Villa. Nanjo was the place where Emperor Yingzong lived when he became the emperor, and the emperor was not happy.

古文：而徐阶营万寿营甚称旨，帝益亲阶，顾问多不及嵩，即及嵩，祠祀而已。
现代文：而徐阶营建万寿宫却很合皇上心意，皇上便更加亲近徐阶，有所询问多不请教严嵩，即使是问到严嵩，也只有祭祀方面的事情而已。
English: However, the construction of the Manshou Palace by Xu Jia was very much in line with the emperor's wishes. The emperor became even closer to Xu Jia and did not ask Yan Song for advice. Even if he did ask Yan Song, it was only about the ritual.

古文：嵩惧，置酒要阶，使家人罗拜，举觞属曰： 嵩旦夕且死，此曹惟公乳哺之。 
现代文：严嵩害怕了，设酒邀请徐阶，让家人向他跪拜，然后举起酒杯嘱托道： 我严嵩是将死的人了，这些人还望您哺育他们。 
English: Yan Song was afraid, so he invited Xu Cha to have a drink, made his family members kneel before him, and then raised his glass and said, "I, Yan Song, am about to die. These people still expect you to nurture them."

古文：阶谢不敢。
现代文：徐阶推辞说不敢。
English: Xu Jia did not dare to refuse.

古文：未几，帝入方士蓝道行言，有意去嵩。
现代文：不久，皇上采用方士蓝道行的话，有意疏远严嵩。
English: Before long, the emperor adopted the words of the philosopher Lan Daoxing, intentionally alienating Yan Song.

古文：御史邹应龙避雨内侍家，知其事，抗疏极论嵩父子不法，曰： 臣言不实，乞斩臣首以谢嵩、世蕃。 
现代文：御史邹应龙到一个宦官家避雨，知道了这事，便上疏全力弹劾严嵩父子违法，他说： 如臣所说不符合事实，请斩下臣的首级来向严嵩、世蕃谢罪。 
English: Gu Shi Yan Yinglong went to a eunuch's house to shelter from the rain. When he learned of this, he went to great lengths to impeach Yan Song and his son for breaking the law. He said: As the minister said, it is not true. Please cut off the minister's head to apologize to Yan Song and the world.

古文：帝降旨慰嵩，而以嵩溺爱世蕃，负眷倚，令致仕，驰驿归，有司岁给米百石，下世蕃于理。
现代文：皇上降圣旨安慰严嵩，都以严嵩溺爱世蕃，有负皇上眷爱和倚重为名，令他退休，用驿车送回家，让有关当局每年给他一百石粮食，而将世蕃依法审判。
English: The emperor's imperial decree consoled Yan Song, and in the name of Yan Song's doting on the world's emperors, he retired him, sent him home in a carriage, and asked the relevant authorities to give him one hundred koku of grain every year, and to judge the world's emperors according to law.

古文：嵩为世蕃请罪，且求解，帝不听。
现代文：严嵩为世蕃向皇上请罪，并且请求释放世蕃，皇上不听。
English: Yan Song pleaded guilty to the emperor for Shiyan and requested the release of Shiyan, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：法司奏论世蕃及其子锦衣鹄、鸿，客罗龙文，戍边远。
现代文：司法部门上奏判世蕃和他的儿子锦衣卫官员鹄、鸿，以及门客罗龙文发配戍边。
English: The judicial department reported to the court that Shiyan and his sons, Jin Rongwei officials Zou and Hong, as well as Mengjia Luo Longwen, were sentenced to death.

古文：诏从之，特宥鸿为民，使侍嵩，而锢其奴严年于狱，擢应龙通政司参议。
现代文：皇上下诏同意，但特别宽宥严鸿为民，让他服侍严嵩，而将他的家奴严年关押在狱中，将邹应龙提升为通政司参议。
English: The imperial edict agreed, but especially pardoned Yan Hong for the people, let him serve Yan Song, but kept his family slave in prison for years, and promoted Yu Yinglong to the position of Vice-Minister of Political Affairs.

古文：时四十一年五月也。
现代文：这是在四十一年五月。
English: This was in May, 1941.

古文：龙文官中书，交关为奸利，而年最黠恶，士大夫竞称萼山先生者也。
现代文：罗龙文官任中书，与严嵩父子狼狈为奸，而严年最为狡猾凶恶，他就是士大夫们所称的萼山先生。
English: Luo Long, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was in cahoots with Yan Song and his son, while Yan Nian was the most cunning and vicious. He was called Mr. Caly Mountain by the scholars.

古文：嵩既去，帝追念其赞玄功，意忽忽不乐，谕阶欲遂传位，退居西内，专祈长生。
现代文：严嵩既已离去，皇上怀念他辅助自己信奉道教的功劳，心中闷闷不乐，便告诉徐阶想传位给太子，自己退居西内。徐阶极力劝谏说不可。
English: Since Yan Song had already left, the emperor missed his contribution to helping him practice Taoism, and was unhappy in his heart. He told Xu Ji that he wanted to pass the throne to the prince and retire to the West. Xu Ji tried his best to dissuade him.

古文：阶极陈河，帝曰： 卿等不欲，必皆奉君命，同辅玄修乃可。
现代文：皇上说 ：如果你们不想让我退，那就都必须奉老君之命，共同辅助我参修玄功才行。
English: The emperor said, "If you don't want me to retire, then you must all follow the old man's order and jointly assist me in cultivating the secret power."

古文：严嵩既退，其子世蕃已伏法，敢更言者，并应龙俱斩。 
现代文：严嵩已经退了，他的儿子世蕃也已伏法，还敢再反动的，把他同邹应龙一起斩首。 
English: Yan Song had already retreated, and his son Shifang had also submitted to the law. If he dared to be reactionary again, he and Zou Yinglong would be beheaded together.

古文：嵩知帝念己，乃赂帝左右，发道行阴事，系刑部，俾引阶。
现代文：严嵩知道皇上想念他，便贿赂皇上左右的人，揭发蓝道行的阴事，将他押往刑部，企图让他供出徐阶。
English: Yan Song knew that the emperor missed him, so he bribed people around the emperor, exposed the sinister activities of Lan Dao, and sent him to the criminal department in an attempt to make him provide Xu Ji.

古文：道行不承，坐论死，得释。
现代文：蓝道行没有承认，便将他判了死罪，不久释放。
English: When Lan Daogang did not confess, he was sentenced to death and soon released.

古文：嵩初归至南昌，值万寿节，使道士蓝田玉建醮铁柱宫。
现代文：严嵩当初回到南昌时，正值皇上生日，便派道士蓝田玉在铁柱宫设斋醮。
English: When Yan Song first returned to Nanchang, it was the emperor's birthday, so he sent the Taoist priest Lantian Yu to set up a palanquin in the Iron Pillar Palace.

古文：田玉善召鹤，嵩因取其符箓，并己祈鹤文上之，帝优诏褒答。
现代文：蓝田玉善于招引鹤鸟，严嵩向他取得符，将它与自己的祈鹤文一起上呈给皇上，皇上下诏褒奖他。
English: Lantian Yuping was good at attracting cranes. Yan Song obtained a charm from him and presented it to the emperor together with his prayer for cranes. The emperor praised him.

古文：嵩因言： 臣年八十有四，惟一子世蕃及孙鹄皆远戍，乞移便地就养，终臣余年。 
现代文：严嵩因此上书说： 臣已八十四岁了，而唯一的儿子世蕃和孙子鹄都在边远地区戍守，乞请将他们移往方便的地区，使他们能赡养老臣，让臣能安度余年。 
English: Yan Song therefore wrote: My father-in-law is already eighty-four years old, and my only son, Shiyan, and grandson, Yao, are staying in a remote area. Please move them to a convenient area so that they can support my father-in-law and let my father-in-law live out his remaining years in peace.

古文：不许。
现代文：皇上不许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：其明年，南京御史林润奏： 江洋巨盗多入逃军罗龙文、严世蕃家。
现代文：第二年，南京御史林润上奏： 江洋巨盗多逃入罗龙文、严世蕃的家。
English: In the second year, Nanjing's magistrate Lin Run recited: Jiang Yang, the great thief, mostly fled into the homes of Luo Longwen and Yan Shijun.

古文：龙文居深山，乘轩衣蟒，有负险不臣之志。
现代文：罗龙文住在深山中，乘坐轩舆，穿蟒衣，有据险不臣之志。
English: Luo Longwen lives deep in the mountains, rides in Xuanwu, wears a long coat, and has the determination to take risks.

古文：世蕃得罪后，与龙文日诽谤时政。
现代文：严世蕃得罪之后，与罗龙文天天诽谤时政。
English: After Yan Shiyan committed a crime, he and Luo Longwen slandered the current government every day.

古文：其治第役众四千，道路皆言两人通倭，变且不测。 
现代文：他们建府第时动用了四千名劳工，人们都说两人交通倭寇，将有不测之变。 
English: They used four thousand laborers to build the first time, and people said that two traffic wako, there will be unforeseen changes.

古文：诏下润逮捕，下法司论斩，皆伏诛，黜嵩及诸孙皆为民。
现代文：皇上下令林润逮捕他们，交给司法部门判了斩刑。两人都被诛杀，严嵩和他的孙子也被废为民。
English: The emperor ordered Lin Run to arrest them and handed them over to the judicial department, which sentenced them to beheading. Both of them were beaten to death, and Yan Song and his grandson were also deposed.

古文：嵩窃政二十年，溺信恶子，流毒天下，人咸指目为奸臣。
现代文：严嵩窃权二十年，他溺爱信任恶子，流毒天下，人们都将他指为奸臣。
English: Yan Song has been stealing power for 20 years. He dotes on and trusts the villain, poisoning the world. People all point to him as a traitor.

古文：其坐世蕃大逆，则徐阶意也。
现代文：至于判严世蕃犯了大逆之罪，则是徐阶的主意。
English: As for sentencing Yan Shih to the crime of high treason, it was Xu Qi's idea.

古文：又二年，嵩老病，寄食墓舍以死。
现代文：又过了两年，严嵩垂老而且有病，在墓舍寄食而死。
English: After another two years, Yan Song, who was old and sick, died of starvation in the tomb.

古文：世蕃，短项肥体，眇一目，由父任入仕。
现代文：严世蕃，脖子粗短，身材肥胖，瞎了一只眼睛，凭父亲在朝廷任职而进入仕途。
English: Yan Shihong, short neck, fat body, blind in one eye, entered the career by virtue of his father's position in the imperial court.

古文：以筑京师外城劳，由太常卿进工部左侍郎，仍掌尚宝司事。
现代文：因为建筑京师外城有功劳，由太常寺卿升任工部左侍郎，仍掌管尚宝司事务。
English: Due to his achievements as the architect of the outer city of Kyoto, he was promoted from the head of the Taijo-ji Temple to the left hand man of the engineering department, and he is still in charge of the affairs of Shohoji.

古文：剽悍阴贼，席父宠，招权利无厌。
现代文：他剽悍阴贼，仗着父亲受皇上宠爱，贪得无厌地谋取个人权力。
English: He was a daring thief, favored by the emperor thanks to his father, and insatiably sought personal power.

古文：然颇通国典，晓畅时务。
现代文：不过他对国家典籍颇为精通，对时务了解得很清楚。
English: However, he is quite familiar with national classics and has a clear understanding of current affairs.

古文：尝谓天下才，惟己与陆炳、杨博为三。
现代文：他曾说天下的才子，只有他自己和陆炳、杨博三人。
English: He once said that he, Lu Wei and Yang Bo were the only three talented people in the world.

古文：炳死，益自负。
现代文：陆炳死后，他更加自负了。
English: After Lu Yao's death, he became even more arrogant.

古文：嵩耄昏，且旦夕直西内，诸司白事，辄曰： 以质东楼。 
现代文：严嵩年老昏乱，并且早晚在西内当值，各部门来汇报事情时，他总是说： 拿去问东楼。 
English: Yan Song is old and confused, and he is on duty in the west in the morning and evening. When various departments come to report things, he always says: Take it to the east building.

古文：东楼，世蕃别号也。
现代文：东楼，是世蕃的别楼。
English: The East Building is the other building of the World Financial Center.

古文：朝事一委世蕃，九卿以下浃日不得见，或停至暮而遣之。
现代文：朝廷政事全委托给世蕃，九卿以下大臣十天都见不上一面，有的从早等到晚，但仍被遣走。
English: All the political affairs of the imperial court were entrusted to the world magistrate, and the ministers below the nine nobles could not see each other for ten days, some from early to late, but were still sent away.

古文：士大夫侧目屏息，不肖者奔走其门，筐篚相望于道。
现代文：士大夫们对他都屏息侧目，而不肖之徒争相走其门，路上抬着筐篚送贿的人络绎不绝。
English: The judges and magistrates all looked at him with bated breath, while the unscrupulous scrambled to his door. On the way, there was a steady stream of people carrying baskets of bribes.

古文：世蕃熟谙中外官饶瘠险易，责贿多寡，毫发不能匿。
现代文：世蕃非常熟悉中外各个职官的肥瘦险易，然后按不同情况责以多寡不等的贿赂，丝毫都不能少。
English: The world is very familiar with the advantages and disadvantages of various officials at home and abroad, and then, according to different circumstances, the amount of bribes should not be less.

古文：其治第京师，连三四坊，堰水为塘数十亩，罗珍禽奇树其中，日拥宾客纵倡乐，虽大僚或父执，虐之酒，不困不已。
现代文：他在京师建府第，占地三四坊，拦水筑坝，围起数十亩的水塘，将珍禽奇树都网罗其中，每天拥簇着宾客纵情声色，即便是大官僚或父辈之人，也要强迫他饮酒，不醉不罢休。
English: He built a government office in Beijing, covering an area of three or four wards, dammed the water, surrounded dozens of acres of ponds, trapped rare birds and trees in them, and every day gathered guests to indulge in sex. Even big bureaucrats or people of his parents' generation had to force him to drink alcohol, not to get drunk and not to stop.

古文：居母丧亦然。
现代文：在母亲去世守孝期间，他也依然如此。
English: He remained so even after his mother's death.

古文：好古尊彝、奇器、书画，赵文华、鄢懋卿、胡宗宪之属，所到辄辇致之，或索之富人，必得然后已。
现代文：他喜好古尊彝、奇器、书画，赵文华、鄢懋卿、胡宗宪之辈，凡有所得便用车给他送来，或者向富人家索要，不达目的不罢休。
English: He is fond of ancient treasures, strange objects, calligraphy and painting, including the generation of Zhao Wenhua, Zou Jing, and Hu Zongxian. If he has something, he will use a car to send it to him, or ask a rich person. If it does not meet the purpose, he will not stop.

古文：被应龙劾戍雷州，未至而返，益大治园亭。
现代文：后来被邹应龙弹劾，遣往雷州戍守，还没到达便返回了。
English: Later, he was impeached by Zou Yinglong and sent to Leizhou, but returned before he arrived.

古文：其监工奴见袁州推官郭谏臣，不为起。
现代文：他便进一步大建亭园，他的监工奴见到袁州推官郭谏臣，竟不行礼。
English: He then went on to build a large pavilion garden. When his overseer slave saw Yuanzhou magistrate Guo Yingchen, he was rude.

古文：御史林润尝劾懋卿，惧相报，因与谏臣谋发其罪，且及冤杀杨继盛、沈练状。
现代文：御史林润曾弹劾鄢懋卿，怕他报复，便与郭谏臣图谋揭发他的罪状，并提到他冤杀杨继盛、沈炼的情况。
English: Goshilinrun had impeached Lord Zou, and fearing his revenge, he plotted with Guo Xiancheng to expose his guilt, and mentioned the circumstances of his unjustified killing of Yang Jisheng and Shen Qing.

古文：世蕃喜，谓其党曰： 无恐，狱且解。 
现代文：世蕃知道后很高兴，对他的党羽说： 不要怕，这案将要解决了。 
English: Shifu was happy to hear this and told his followers, "Don't worry, this case will be solved."

古文：法司黄光升等以谳词白徐阶，阶曰： 诸公欲生之乎？ 
现代文：司法官黄光升等人将判决词报告徐阶，徐阶说： 你们想让他活下去吧？ 
English: Judicial officer Huang Guangsheng and others reported the verdict to Xu Ju, who said: Do you want him to live?

古文：佥曰：必欲死之。 
现代文：大家都说 ：我们都想将他置于死地。 
English: Everyone said: we all want to put him to death.

古文：曰： 若是，适所以生之也。
现代文：徐阶说： 但你们这样做，正好是让他活下来。
English: Xu Ji said, "But by doing this, you are just letting him live."

古文：夫杨、沈之狱，嵩皆巧取上旨。
现代文：杨沈二人的罪案，都是严嵩巧取皇上旨意办成的。
English: The crimes of Yang Shen and his two accomplices were all carried out in strict accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：今显及之，是彰上过也。
现代文：现在揭露此案，是暴露皇上的过失。
English: To reveal this case now is to expose the emperor's fault.

古文：必如是，诸君且不测，严公子骑款段出都门矣。 
现代文：如果是这样，则各位将有不测之祸，而严公子将骑着马悠然地走出都门。 
English: If this is the case, you will have an unforeseen disaster, and Yan will ride out of the capital on horseback.

古文：为手削其草，独按龙文与汪直姻旧，为交通贿世蕃乞官。
现代文：便亲自为他们删改草稿，单提罗龙文与汪直是亲家。说他们通贿世蕃，为汪直求官。
English: He personally edited and revised the draft for them, mentioning only that Luo Longwen and Wang Zhi are relatives. He said that they bribed the world and sought a post for Wang Zhi.

古文：世蕃用彭孔言，以南昌仓地有王气，取以治第，制拟王者。
现代文：世蕃采用彭孔的建议，以为南昌仓库的那块地方有王气，便取过来建府第，建筑规格都仿照王者等级。
English: The World Government adopted the suggestion of Peng Kong, thinking that the place where the Nanchang warehouse was located had a royal atmosphere, so they took it over to build a prefecture, and the building specifications were all modeled after the king's level.

古文：又结宗人典楧阴伺非常，多聚亡命。
现代文：他又勾结同宗人严典木英，暗中侦察非常之事，多招聚亡命之徒。
English: He also colluded with a member of the same clan, Yan Dian Mu Ying, to secretly investigate suspicious cases and recruit more outlaws.

古文：龙文又招直余党五百人，谋为世蕃外投日本，先所发遣世蕃班头牛信，亦自山海卫弃伍北走，诱致外兵，共相响应。
现代文：罗龙文又招集汪直的余党五百人，并策划为世蕃外投日本，而先前派出去的世蕃的班头牛信也从山海卫离开部队北逃，招诱外兵，准备互相呼应。
English: Luo Longwen also called up the remaining 500 members of Wang Zhi's party and planned to invest in Japan for Shiyan. And the leader of Shiyan, Niu Xin, who had been sent out earlier, also left the troops from Shanhaiwei and fled north, inviting foreign soldiers and preparing to echo each other.

古文：而材、汝楫俱出入嵩卧内，关通请属，尤为人所恶云。周延儒，字玉绳，宜兴人。
现代文：周延儒，字玉绳，宜兴人。
English: Zhou Yanru, Zha Yuzhen, Yixingren.

古文：万历四十一年会试、殿试皆第一。授修撰，年甫二十余。
现代文：万历四十一年他会试、殿试都是第一名，被授予修撰，当时他才二十来岁。
English: He was only in his twenties when he was awarded the title of "master of calligraphy" for the 41st year in a row.

古文：美丽自喜，与同年生冯铨友善。
现代文：他美丽自喜，与同年生员冯铨相友善。
English: He is pleased with his beauty and is friendly with his classmate Feng Yao.

古文：天启中，迁右中允，掌司经局事。
现代文：天启年间，他升为左中允，掌司经局事务。
English: In the year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to Zuozhongyong, in charge of the Economic Affairs Bureau.

古文：寻以少詹事掌南京翰林院事。
现代文：不久他以少詹事之衔掌南京翰林院事务。
English: Soon he was in charge of the affairs of Nanjing Hanlin Academy with the title of Shao Zhanji.

古文：庄烈帝即位，召为礼部右侍郎。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，把他召回任礼部右侍郎。
English: After Emperor Zhuangde ascended to the throne, he was recalled to the throne as the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：延儒性警敏，善伺意指。
现代文：延儒性格警敏，善于揣测皇上意旨。
English: The character of Yan Zhu was alert, and he was good at guessing the emperor's will.

古文：崇祯元年冬，锦州兵哗，督师袁崇焕请给饷。
现代文：崇祯元年冬，锦州部队哗变，督师袁崇焕请拨给粮饷。
English: In the winter of the first year of Chongzhen, the Jinzhou troops mutinied, and the superintendent Yuan Chonghuan was assigned to the granary.

古文：帝御文华殿，召问诸大臣，皆请发内帑。
现代文：皇上御临文华殿，诏各位大臣来问计，他们都请求发给内府钱物。
English: The Emperor is in residence at the Palace of Literature, and the ministers have come to inquire about the plan. They have all requested that money and goods be sent to Naifu.

古文：延儒揣帝意，独进曰： 关门昔防敌，今且防兵。
现代文：延儒揣度皇上心意，独自建议道 ：关门原来是防敌的，现在却是用来防自己的军队。
English: Enju guessed the emperor's intention and suggested on his own, "Closing the gate was originally to protect against the enemy, but now it is to protect against your own army."

古文：宁远哗，饷之，锦州哗，复饷之，各边且效尤。 
现代文：宁远哗变，就给他们粮饷，锦州哗变，又要给他们粮饷，这样做各边镇将会纷纷效尤。 
English: If Ningyuan mutinies, they will be given food rations; if Jinzhou mutinies, they will be given food rations. All border towns will follow suit.

古文：帝曰： 卿谓何如？ 
现代文：皇上说 ：卿认为应该怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said, "What do you think should be done?"

古文：延儒曰： 事迫，不得不发。
现代文：延儒说： 事情紧迫，不得不发。
English: Yanru said, "Things are urgent, I have to go.

古文：但当求经久之策。 
现代文：但应当求得长久之策。 
English: However, a long-term solution should be sought.

古文：帝颔之，降旨责群臣。
现代文：皇上点了点头，颁旨责备群臣。
English: The emperor nodded his head and issued an order to reprimand his ministers.

古文：居数日，复召问，延儒曰： 饷莫如粟，山海粟不缺，缺银耳。
现代文：几天后，皇上又召问大臣，延儒说： 军饷莫如粮食重要，山海关不缺粮食，缺银而已。
English: A few days later, the emperor summoned the minister again, and Yan Ru said: Military supplies are as important as grain. Shanhaiguan is not short of grain, but only of silver.

古文：何故哗？
现代文：为什么哗变？
English: Why the mutiny?

古文：哗必有隐情，安知非骄弁构煽以胁崇焕邪？ 
现代文：一定另有隐情。怎么知道这不是因为骄横的武弁煽动士卒胁迫袁崇焕呢？ 
English: There must be something else hidden. How do we know that this is not because the arrogant Wu Ben instigator coerced Yuan Chong Huan?

古文：帝方疑边将要挟，闻延儒言，大说，由此属意延儒。
现代文：皇上正怀疑边防将领要挟，听延儒这一说非常高兴，从此属意延儒。
English: The emperor was suspicious of the border guard general's threat, and was very pleased to hear Yanru's words. From then on, Yanru's name was attached to the emperor.

古文：十一月，大学士刘鸿训罢，命会推，廷臣以延儒望轻置之，列成基命、钱谦益、郑以伟、李腾芳、孙慎行、何如宠、薛三省、盛以弘、罗喻义、王永光、曹于汴十一人名上。
现代文：十一月，大学士刘鸿训被罢免，皇上命廷臣公推继任人选，廷臣因为延儒名望轻而没有选他而将成基命、钱谦益、郑以伟、李腾芳、孙慎行、何如宠、薛三省、盛以弘、罗喻义、王永光、曹于汴十一人的名字列上。
English: In November, Liu Hongxun, a university scholar, was dismissed, and the emperor ordered the courtiers to publicly nominate a successor. The courtiers did not choose him because of the low reputation of Yan Ru, and listed the names of Cheng Ji Min, Qian Qianyun, Zheng Yi Wei, Li Tengfang, Sun Sheng Xing, He Ruzhong, Xue San Zhou, Sheng Yihong, Luo Yuyi, Wang Yongguang, and Cao Yuxuan.

古文：帝以延儒不预，大疑。
现代文：皇上因延儒不在其中，非常怀疑。
English: The Emperor was very suspicious because Yan Ru was not among them.

古文：及温体仁讦谦益，延儒助之。
现代文：后来温体仁攻击钱谦益，延儒帮助他。
English: Later, Wen Tianzhen attacked Qian Qian and Yan Rong helped him.

古文：帝遂发怒，黜谦益，尽罢会推者不用。
现代文：皇上于是更加愤怒，黜退钱谦益，将廷臣公推的那些人全部罢去不用。
English: As a result, the emperor became even angrier. He refused to return the money and dismissed all those who had promoted the courtier.

古文：二年三月召对延儒于文华殿，漏下数十刻乃出，语秘不得闻。
现代文：二年三月，皇上在文华殿召延儒来谈话，漏下几十刻后他才出来。这次谈话很秘密，无法得知。
English: In March of the second year, the emperor summoned Yan Rong to the Palace of Literature to have a conversation, but he did not come out until several tens of minutes later. This conversation was very secret and could not be known.

古文：御史黄宗昌劾其生平秽行，御史李长春论独对之非。
现代文：御史黄宗昌弹劾延儒的生平秽行，御史李长春论奏他独自与皇上谈话之非。
English: Grand Historian Huang Zongchang impeached Yan Ru for his vulgarity, and Grand Historian Li Changchun discussed the reasons why he did not talk to the emperor alone.

古文：延儒乞罢，不允。
现代文：延儒请求罢免，皇上不许。
English: The emperor did not allow Yen Ryu's request to be dismissed.

古文：南京给事中钱允鲸言： 延儒与冯铨密契，延儒柄政，必为逆党翻局。 
现代文：南京给事中钱允鲸说 ：延儒与冯铨关系很深，现在延儒掌权，肯定要为逆党翻案。 
English: Qian Yunwhal, who was present at the trial in Nanjing, said: Yanru and Feng Qi have a deep relationship. Now that Yanru is in power, he will definitely overturn the case for the rebel party.

古文：延儒疏辨，帝优诏褒答。
现代文：延儒上疏辩解，皇上优诏褒扬他。
English: Yan Rong made a feeble excuse, but the emperor praised him.

古文：其年十二月，京师有警，特旨拜延儒礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参机务。
现代文：这一年十二月，京师有警报，皇上特旨任延儒为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参预机务。
English: In December of that year, there was an alert in Beijing, and the emperor specially appointed Yan Ru to be a member of the etiquette department and a scholar of Dongge University, and to participate in the preparatory work.

古文：明年二月加太子太保，改文渊阁。
现代文：第二年二月他加封为太子太保，改任文渊阁大学士。
English: In February of the following year, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo and was appointed as a scholar of Bunyukaku University.

古文：六月，体仁亦入。
现代文：六月，温体仁也入阁。
English: In June, Onda Jinn also joined the cabinet.

古文：九月，成基命致仕，延儒遂为首辅。
现代文：九月，成基命退休，延儒于是成了首辅。
English: In September, Cheng Ji retired, and Yan Rong became the first assistant.

古文：寻加少保，改武英殿。
现代文：不久他被加封为少保，改任武英殿大学士。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Shōhō (Junior Security Officer) and was promoted to the rank of Shōshō (Senior Security Officer) of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：体仁既并相，务为柔佞，帝意渐响之。
现代文：温体仁一同拜相后，专务谄媚，皇上心意逐渐转向了他。
English: After paying homage to the emperor together, the emperor's heart gradually turned to him.

古文：而体仁阳曲谨媚延儒，阴欲夺其位，延儒不知也。
现代文：而温体仁表面上曲意谨慎地取媚延儒，暗地里却想夺他的位置，而延儒还不知道。
English: On the surface, however, Wen Tien-Ren is subtly and cautiously courting Yan Ru, but secretly he wants to seize his position, and Yan Ru doesn't know it yet.

古文：体仁与吏部尚书王永光谋起逆案王之臣、吕纯如等。
现代文：温体仁和吏部尚书王永光图谋起用逆案名单中的王之臣、吕纯如等人。
English: Wen Tizhen and the official Wang Yongguang schemed to use Wang's vassal, Lü Chunru, and others from the list of counterclaims.

古文：或谓延儒曰： 彼将翻逆案，而外归咎于公。 
现代文：有人对延儒说： 他们将要翻逆案了，而人们却归咎于您。 
English: Someone said to Yan Ru: They are about to overturn the case, but people are blaming you.

古文：延儒愕然。
现代文：延儒愕然。
English: Yan Rong was stunned.

古文：会帝以之臣问，延儒曰： 用之臣，亦可雪崔呈秀矣。 
现代文：正好皇上问到王之臣，延儒说： 如用王之臣，那也可以为崔呈秀平反了。 
English: Just as the emperor asked about Wang's vassal, Yan Ru said: If Wang's vassal is used, then Cui Chengxiu can also be rehabilitated.

古文：帝悟而止。
现代文：皇上醒悟了，停止了这一计划。
English: The emperor came to his senses and put a stop to the plan.

古文：体仁益欲倾延儒。
现代文：温体仁更想排挤延儒。
English: Wen Tianzhen even wants to oust Yan Ru.

古文：四年春。延儒姻娅陈于泰廷对第一，及所用大同巡抚张廷拱、登莱巡抚孙元化皆有私，时论籍籍。
现代文：四年春，延儒的姻亲陈于泰获廷对第一名，受到任用的大同巡抚张廷拱、登莱巡抚孙元化也都与他有私交，当时人们议论纷纷。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Yan Ru's in-law Chen Yutai won the first place in the court, and the appointed Datong governor Zhang Tingqong and the Denglai governor Sun Yuanhua also had personal relations with him. At that time, people talked about it.

古文：其子弟家人暴邑中，邑中民热其庐，发其先垄，为言官所纠。
现代文：他的子弟家人都横行于乡邑，其家乡的百姓烧了他的家，挖掘其祖先坟墓，他因此被言官弹劾。
English: He was impeached by the speaker because his children and family were running rampant in the village. The people of his hometown burned his house and dug up the graves of his ancestors.

古文：兄素儒冒锦衣籍，授千户，又用家人周文郁为副总兵，益为言者所诋。
现代文：他的哥哥素儒冒锦衣卫名籍，被授以千户，他还用家人周文郁为副总兵，这更为言官诋毁。
English: His elder brother, Su Ru, assumed Jin Yi Wei's name and was awarded a thousand households, and he also used his family member, Zhou Wenyu, as a vice-commander-in-chief, which was even more denigrating to the officials.

古文：五年正月，叛将李九成等陷登州，囚元化。
现代文：五年正月，叛将李九成等攻陷登州，囚禁孙元化。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the traitor Li Jiucheng and others were captured in Dengzhou, and Sun Yuanhua was imprisoned.

古文：侍郎刘宇烈视师无功，言路咸指延儒庇宇烈。
现代文：侍郎刘宇烈指挥军队无功，言官都指责延儒庇护刘宇烈。
English: Liu Yulei's aide-de-camp Liu Yulei's command of the army was ineffectual, and the officials all accused Yan Rong of sheltering Liu Yulei.

古文：于是给事中孙三杰、冯元飚，御史余应桂、卫景瑗、尹明翼、路振飞、吴执御、王道纯、王象云等，屡劾延儒。
现代文：于是给事中孙三杰、冯元飙，御史余应桂、卫景瑗、尹明翼、路振飞、吴执御、王道纯、王象云等人，屡次弹劾延儒。
English: As a result, Sun Yat-sen, Sun Yat-sen's son, Feng Yuan Rong, Gu Shi Yu Ying Gui, Wei Jing Yi, Yin Ming Ying, Lu Zhenfei, Wu Shigong, Wang Daochun, Wang Xiangyun and others repeatedly impeached Yan Ru.

古文：应桂并谓延儒纳巨盗神一魁贿。
现代文：余应桂还说延儒收巨盗神一魁的贿赂。
English: Yu Ying Gui also said that Yan Ru received a bribe from a giant thief.

古文：而监视中官邓希诏与总督曹文衡相讦奏，语侵延儒。
现代文：而监视宦官邓希诏和总督曹文衡上奏相互攻击，词语连及延儒。
English: However, the eunuch of surveillance, Deng Xizhao, and the governor, Cao Wenheng, attacked each other at the same time, and the words were linked to Yan Ru.

古文：给事中李春旺亦论延儒当去。
现代文：给事中李春旺也论延儒应该解职。
English: In the letter, Li Chunwang also said that Yanru should be dismissed.

古文：延儒数上疏辩，帝虽慰留，心不能无动。
现代文：延儒多次上疏辩解，皇上虽想慰留他，但这些情况也使他不得不心动。
English: Although the emperor wanted to console him, he was also moved by these circumstances.

古文：已而延儒令于泰陈时政四事，宣府太监王坤承体仁指，直劾延儒庇于泰。
现代文：过后延儒令陈于泰上书陈述四项时政，宣府太监王坤承温体仁的旨意，径直弹劾延儒庇护陈于泰。
English: Later, Yan Confucius ordered Chen Yutai to submit a letter stating four current affairs, and Wang Kun, the eunuch of the Xuanwu government, directly impeached Yan Confucius for sheltering Chen Yutai.

古文：给事中傅朝佑言中官不当劾首揆，轻朝廷，疑有邪人交构，副都御史王志道亦言之。
现代文：给事中傅朝佑说宦官不应当弹劾首辅，轻视朝廷，他怀疑有奸邪之人与王坤勾结，副都御史王志道也这么说。
English: In the matter, Fu Chaoyu said that the eunuchs should not impeach the first and second lieutenants and despise the imperial court. He suspected that the treacherous and evil people were in collusion with Wang Kun, and the vice-governor Wang Zhidao also said so.

古文：帝怒，削志道籍，延儒不能救。
现代文：皇上大怒，将王志道除名，延儒都无法救他。
English: Enraged, the emperor removed Wang Zhidao from the imperial list, and even Yan Rong could not save him.

古文：体仁各处嗾给事中陈赞化劾延儒 昵武弁李元功等，招摇罔利。
现代文：温体仁又唆使给事中陈赞化弹劾延儒 亲近武弁李元功等人，招摇撞骗。
English: Wen Tizhen also instigated Chen Zhan to impeach Yan Rhu, who was close to Wu Ben Li Yuan Gong, and others.

古文：陛下特恩停刑，元功以为延儒功，索狱囚赇谢。
现代文：陛下特恩停止用刑，而李元功以为是延儒的作用，向囚犯索要贿赂酬谢。
English: His Majesty Tern stopped the execution, and Li Yuan Gong thought it was the role of Yanju and demanded a bribe from the prisoner.

古文：而延儒至目陛下为羲皇上人，语誖逆。 
现代文：而延儒甚至视陛下为羲皇上人，出语悖逆。 
English: However, Yan Ru even regarded His Majesty as the emperor's son, uttering words of rebellion.

古文：帝怒，下元功诏狱，且穷诘赞化语所自得。
现代文：皇上怒，将李元功投进诏狱，并究问陈赞化这些话是从哪儿得到的。
English: Enraged, the emperor threw Li Yuan Gong into the imperial prison and asked Chen Zanhua where he got these words from.

古文：赞化言得之上林典簿姚孙渠、给事中李世祺，而副使张凤翼亦具述延儒语。
现代文：陈赞化说是从上林苑典簿姚孙渠、给事中李世祺处得到的，而副使张凤翼也道出延儒所说的话。
English: Chen Zhanhua said that he got it from Yao Sun Qu, the book of Shanglinyuan, and Li Shijun, who was in charge of the matter, and the deputy envoy Zhang Fengyi also said what Yan Ru said.

古文：帝益怒。
现代文：皇上更加愤怒。
English: As a result, Emperor Guangwu became increasingly angry.

古文：锦衣卫帅王世盛拷掠元功无所承。
现代文：锦衣卫统帅王世盛拷打李元功，但他什么也没承认。
English: Admiral Wang Shisheng tortured Li Yuangong, but he did not admit anything.

古文：狱上，镌世盛五级，令穷治其事。
现代文：案情上呈后，王世盛被降五级，令他究治这件事。
English: After the case was reported, Wang Shisheng was demoted five levels and ordered to investigate the matter.

古文：延儒觊体仁为援，体仁卒不应，且阴黜与延儒善者，延儒大困。
现代文：延儒希望温体仁帮助他，但温体仁没有答应，反而暗中将与延儒交好的人撤掉，延儒于是处境大困。
English: Yan Ru hoped that Wen Tianzhen would help him, but Wen Tianzhen did not agree, but secretly removed the people who were friendly with Yan Ru, leaving Yan Ru in a difficult situation.

古文：六年六月引疾乞归，赐白金、彩缎，遣行人护行。
现代文：六年六月他称病请求回乡，皇上赐给白金、彩缎，派行人官为他护行。
English: In June of the sixth year, he claimed to be ill and requested to return to his hometown. The emperor gave him platinum and colored enamel, and sent officials to escort him.

古文：体仁遂为首辅矣。
现代文：温体仁便成了首辅了。
English: Wenzhizhen became the chief aide.

古文：始延儒里居，颇从东林游，善姚希孟、罗喻义。
现代文：当初延儒乡居时，颇与东林党人交往，与姚希孟、罗喻义交好。
English: At the beginning, when Yan Ru lived in his hometown, he was quite in contact with Donglin Party members, and was on good terms with Yao Ximeng and Luo Yuyi.

古文：既陷钱谦益，遂仇东林。
现代文：他陷害钱谦益后，遂仇视东林党。
English: After he framed Qian Qianyi, he became hostile to the Donglin Party.

古文：及主会试，所取士张溥、马世奇等，又皆东林也。
现代文：到他主持会试时，所选的张溥、马世奇等人才，又都是东林党了。
English: By the time he presided over the audition, the talents he selected, such as Zhang Xuan and Ma Shiji, were all Donglin Party members.

古文：至是归，失势，心内惭。
现代文：这时他回乡，因为失势，内心很羞愧。
English: At this time, he returned to his hometown, feeling ashamed because of the loss of power.

古文：而体仁益横，越五年始去。
现代文：而温体仁更加骄横，过了五年才离去。
English: On the other hand, Wenzhisen was more arrogant and only left after five years.

古文：去而张至发、薛国观相继当国，与杨嗣昌等并以娼嫉称。
现代文：他去后张至发、薛国观相继当国，他俩与杨嗣昌等人都以嫉妒闻名。
English: After he left, Zhang Zhifa and Xue Guoqun successively became heads of state. Both of them, along with Yang Shichang and others, were famous for their jealousy.

古文：一时正人郑三俊、刘宗周、黄道周等，皆得罪。
现代文：一时间像郑三俊、刘宗周等正人，都得了罪。
English: For a time, righteous people such as Zheng Sanjun and Liu Zongzhou were all convicted of crimes.

古文：溥等忧之，说延儒曰： 公若再相，易前辙，可重得贤声。 
现代文：张溥等人很忧虑，劝延儒说： 您如果再出来做宰相，改易前辙，可重新获得贤名之声望。 
English: Zhang Xuan and others were very worried, and advised Yan Rong: "If you come out as prime minister again and change your ways, you can regain your reputation as a sage.

古文：延儒以为然。
现代文：延儒以为然。
English: Enjūrō thought otherwise.

古文：溥友吴昌时为交关近侍，冯铨复助为谋。
现代文：张溥的朋友吴昌时为此去结交皇上近身宦官，冯铨又助他策划。
English: Zhang Ye's friend Wu Chang went to make friends with the eunuch close to the emperor for this purpose, and Feng Ye helped him plan it.

古文：会帝亦颇思延儒，而国观适败。十四年二月诏起延儒。
现代文：正好皇上也很想念延儒，而薛国观也正好败了，十四年二月皇上遂下诏起用延儒。
English: It was just as well that the emperor also missed Yanru, and Xue Guoqun also happened to lose. In February 1914, the emperor finally issued an edict to use Yanru.

古文：九月至京，复为首辅。
现代文：九月，延儒到达京师，重任首辅。
English: In September, Yan Rong arrived in Beijing and was given the important post of chief aide.

古文：寻加少师兼太子太师，进吏部尚书、中极殿大学士。
现代文：不久他加封为少师兼太子太师，进升为吏部尚书、中极殿大学士。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Junior Teacher and Prince's Teacher, and was promoted to the post of Secretary of the Ministry of Education and the post of Senior Scholar of the Middle Temple.

古文：延儒被召，溥等以数事要之。
现代文：延儒被召回后，张溥等人以几件事要挟他。
English: After Yan Ru was recalled, Zhang Ye and others threatened him with several things.

古文：延儒慨然曰： 吾当锐意行之，以谢诸公。 
现代文：延儒感慨说道： 我当锐意去做，以答谢诸公。 
English: Yan Ru said with emotion: I should do my best to thank everyone.

古文：既入朝，悉反体仁辈弊政。
现代文：入朝后，他全部反温体仁之辈所实行的弊政。
English: After he entered the imperial court, he followed all the bad policies carried out by the generation of anti-global warming zealots.

古文：首请释漕粮白粮欠户，蠲民间积逋，凡兵残岁荒地，减见年两税。苏、松、常、嘉、湖诸府大水，许以明年夏麦代漕粮。宥戍罪以下，皆得还家。复注误举人，广取士额及召还言事迁谪诸臣李清等。
现代文：他首先请释放欠漕粮和白粮的农户，免去民间拖欠的赋税，凡遭战乱破坏和岁荒之地，减免当年应交的两税；苏州、松江、常州、嘉兴、湖州等府发大水，允许以明年的夏麦代替漕粮交纳；宽宥犯戍边罪以下的人，让他们都得回家；恢复被连累的举人的资格，增加取士名额，以及召回因提意见而被贬职的李清等人。
English: First of all, he asked for the release of farmers who were in arrears of grain and white grain, exempted from the tax arrears of the people, and the reduction and exemption of the two taxes that should be paid in the year for those who were damaged by the war and the years of famine; Suzhou, Songjiang, Changzhou, Jiaxing, Huzhou and other prefectures issued heavy water, allowing them to pay next year's summer barley instead of grain; pardoned those who committed minor crimes, so that they all had to go home; restored the qualifications of those who were implicated, increased the number of candidates, and recalled Li Qing and others who were

古文：帝皆忻然从之。
现代文：皇上都欣然听从了。
English: The emperor readily obeyed.

古文：延儒又言： 老成名德，不可轻弃。 
现代文：延儒又说： 老成名德之士，不可轻易弃掉。 
English: Yan Rong also said: An old man who has achieved fame and virtue should not be easily discarded.

古文：于是郑三俊长吏部，刘宗周掌都察院，范景文长工部，倪元璐佐兵部，皆起自废籍。
现代文：于是郑三俊任吏部尚书，刘宗周掌都察院，范景文任工部尚书，倪元璐佐理兵部，这些人都是从废籍中被起用。
English: As a result, Zheng Sanjun was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, Liu Zong Zhou was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department, Fan Jingwen was appointed as the secretary of the engineering department, and Ni Yuanqi was appointed as the secretary of the military department. All of these people were appointed from the waste register.

古文：其他李邦华、张国维、徐石麒、张玮、金光辰等，布满九列。
现代文：其他如李邦华、张国维、徐石麒、张玮、金光辰等人，都布列于九卿。
English: Others, such as Li Banghua, Zhang Guowei, Xu Shijun, Zhang Ye, Jin Guangcheng and others, are listed in the Nine Lords.

古文：释在狱傅宗龙等，赠已故文震孟、姚希孟等官。
现代文：释放关在狱中的傅宗龙等人，给已故的文震孟、姚希孟等人赠官。
English: He released Fu Zonglong and others who were in prison, and gave positions to the late Wen Zhen Meng, Yao Xi Meng and others.

古文：中外翕然称贤。
现代文：中外人士一致向他致贺。
English: People from home and abroad sent their congratulations to him.

古文：尝燕侍，帝语及黄道周，时道周方谪戍辰州。延儒曰： 道周气质少偏，然学与守皆可用。 
现代文：一次闲暇时侍奉皇上，皇上谈到黄道周，当时黄道周正贬戍辰州，延儒说： 道周气质稍有点偏狭，但他的学识和操守都还可用。 
English: Once, when he was serving the emperor in his spare time, the emperor talked about the Zodiac Week. At that time, the Zodiac Week was denigrating Shichenshou. Yan Ru said: The temperament of the Zodiac Week is a little narrow, but his knowledge and ethics are still usable.

古文：蒋德璟请移道周戍近地。
现代文：蒋德瞡请将黄道周移到近地戍守。
English: Jiang Deyao, please move the zodiac week to a place near the earth.

古文：延儒曰： 上欲用即用之耳，何必移戍。 
现代文：延儒说： 皇上想用就马上用他，何必移戍？ 
English: Yan Rong said, "If the emperor wants to use it, he can use it right away. Why does he have to move it?

古文：帝即日复道周官。
现代文：皇上即日就恢复了黄道周的官衔。
English: On the same day, the emperor restored the official title of the Zodiac Week.

古文：其因事开释如此。
现代文：他因事开释的做法，多像这样。
English: Most of his exonerations look like this.

古文：帝尊礼延儒特重，尝于岁首日东向揖之，曰： 朕以天下听先生。 
现代文：皇上给延儒的礼仪特重，他曾在岁首之日面向东对延儒作揖，说： 朕将天下之事托付给先生。 
English: The emperor gave special importance to the etiquette of Yanju. On the first day of the year, he made an oath to Yanju, facing east, saying, "I entrust the affairs of the world to you, sir."

古文：因遍及诸阁臣。
现代文：随后还对其他阁臣作揖。
English: Subsequently, he also insulted other cabinet ministers.

古文：然延儒实庸驽无材略，且性贪。
现代文：但延儒实是匹庸驽，没有才略，而且还贪婪。
English: However, Yan Rongshi is a mediocre person, without talent, and also greedy.

古文：当边境丧师，李自成残掠河南，张献忠破楚、蜀，天下大乱，延儒一无所谋画。
现代文：当边境丧师，李自成残掠河南，张献忠攻破湖北、四川，天下大乱之时，延儒没能做出任何筹划。
English: When the border lost its division, Li Zicheng looted Henan, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Hubei and Sichuan, and the world was in turmoil, Yanru failed to make any plan.

古文：用侯恂、范志完督师，皆偾事，延儒无忧色。
现代文：他用侯恂、范志完督师，但都败事，延儒毫无忧色。
English: He used Hou Yi and Fan Zhi as supervisors, but they all failed, and Yan Ru was not sad at all.

古文：而门下客盛顺、董廷献因缘为奸利。
现代文：而他的门下客盛顺、董廷献借他的权势，因缘为奸。
English: However, his subordinate, Sheng Shun, and Dongting lent him their power and became traitors.

古文：又信用文选郎吴昌时及给事中曹良直、廖国遴、杨枝起、曾应遴辈。
现代文：他还信用文选司郎中吴昌时和给事中曹良直、廖国遴、杨枝起、曾应遴之辈。
English: He also credited Wu Changshi, the chief editor of the anthology, and Cao Liangnao, Liao Guoshuan and Yang Zhiqi, the editors of the anthology.

古文：昌时，嘉兴人。
现代文：吴昌时，嘉兴人。
English: Wu Chang was born in Jiaxing.

古文：有干材，颇为东林效奔走。
现代文：有才干，颇为东林党效力奔走。
English: He is talented and works hard for the Donglin Party.

古文：然为人墨而傲，通厂卫，把持朝官，同朝咸嫉之。
现代文：但他为人沉默而高傲，交通厂卫，把持朝官，同朝的人都恨他。
English: But he was a silent and proud man. He was a guard at the communications plant, he was in charge of the imperial officials, and his fellow imperialists hated him.

古文：行人司副熊开元廷劾延儒纳贿状，触帝怒，与给事中姜埰俱廷杖，下诏狱。
现代文：行人司副熊开元在朝廷上弹劾延儒纳贿的情状，触怒了皇上，他与给事中姜采都被廷杖，投进诏狱。
English: The emperor was angered by the fact that the deputy of the Pedestrian Division, Xiong Kaiyuan, impeached Yan Junna for bribery in the imperial court. Both he and Jiang Ce, who was involved in the matter, were put into the imperial prison with the imperial cane.

古文：左都御史宗周、佥都御史光辰以救开元、埰罢，尚书石麒又以救宗周等罢，延儒皆弗救，朝议皆以咎延儒。
现代文：左都御史刘宗周、佥都御史金光辰因为救熊开元、姜采而被罢免，尚书徐石麒又因救刘宗周等人被罢免。延儒都不救，朝臣的议论都归咎于他。
English: The Left Metropolitan Liu Zongzhou and the Right Metropolitan Jin Guangchen were dismissed for rescuing Xiong Kaiyuan and Jiang Cai, and Shangshu Xu Shijun was dismissed for rescuing Liu Zongzhou and others. Yan Ru did not save them, and the courtier's discussions were blamed on him.

古文：会昌时以年例出言路十人于外，言路大哗。
现代文：正值吴昌时借年例将十余名言路官员出为外官，言路大哗。
English: At the time of Wu Chang, more than ten high-ranking officials were appointed as foreign ministers by taking advantage of the annual practice, and there was a great clamor.

古文：掌科给事中吴麟徵、掌道御史祁彪佳劾昌时挟势弄权，延儒颇不自安。
现代文：掌科给事中吴麟、掌道御史祁彪佳弹劾吴昌时挟势弄权，延儒很不安。
English: When Wu Lin, who was in charge of the discipline, and Wu Chang, who was in charge of the discipline, were impeached, Yan Ru was very uneasy.

古文：初，延儒奏罢厂卫缉事，都人大悦。
现代文：当初，延儒上奏罢去厂卫的缉事人员，京都人民非常高兴。
English: At first, the people of Kyoto were very happy when Yan Ryu announced the dismissal of the police officers who were guarding the factory.

古文：朝士不肖者因通赂遗，而厂卫以失权，胥怨延儒。
现代文：不肖的朝士因为通贿赂，而厂卫因为失权，都怨延儒。
English: The shady morning watchman because of bribery, and the factory guard because of loss of power, all grudge Yanju.

古文：又傲同官陈演，演衔刺骨。
现代文：他又因轻视同官陈演，陈演恨之入骨。
English: He also despised his colleague Chen Rong, and Chen Rong hated him to his bones.

古文：掌锦衣者骆养性，延儒所荐也，养性狡狠背延儒，与中官结，刺延儒阴事。
现代文：执掌锦衣卫的骆养性，本是延儒所推荐，骆养性狡猾阴狠背叛了延儒，与宦官勾结，刺探延儒的阴事。
English: The camel's nurturing nature in charge of Jin Yi Wei was originally recommended by Yan Ru. The camel's nurturing nature cunningly betrayed Yan Ru, colluded with eunuchs, and probed Yan Ru's sinister affairs.

古文：十六年四月，大清兵略山东，还至近畿，帝忧甚。
现代文：十六年四月，大清兵抢掠山东，回军时到达近畿，皇上很忧虑。
English: In April 16th, the Qing soldiers plundered Shandong, and when they returned to Kinki, the emperor was very worried.

古文：大学士吴甡方奉命办流寇，延儒不得已自请视师。
现代文：大学士吴生生正奉命处理流寇，延儒不得已自请督师。
English: Wu Sheng Sheng, a university scholar, was under orders to deal with the fleeing bandits, and Yan Ru had no choice but to call for an inspector.

古文：帝大喜，降手敕，奖以召虎、裴度，赐章服、白金、文绮、上驷，给金帛赏军。
现代文：皇上很高兴，颁下手敕，奖给他召虎、裴度，赐给章服、白金、文绮、上驷，还给他金帛赏给部队。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and awarded him a bracelet, gave him a prize for summoning a tiger and Baidu, gave him a ceremonial uniform, platinum, a medal, and a medal, and gave him a gold medal to award to the troops.

古文：延儒驻通州不敢战，惟与幕下客饮酒娱乐，而日腾章奏捷，帝辄赐玺书褒励。
现代文：延儒驻扎在通州，不敢交战，只与幕帐下的宾客饮酒娱乐，而每天传书奏捷，皇上便赐给玺书褒奖和鼓励他。
English: Yan Ru stationed in Tongzhou, did not dare to fight, only drank and entertained with the guests under the curtain, and every day the letter was successful, and the emperor gave him a reward and encouraged him.

古文：侦大清兵去，乃言敌退，请下兵部议将吏功罪。
现代文：他侦察到大清兵离去，便说敌人退走了，请求让兵部讨论给将吏定功过。
English: When he detected the departure of the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty, he said that the enemy had retreated, and requested that the military discuss assigning credit to the generals.

古文：既归朝，缴敕谕，帝即令藏贮，以识勋劳。
现代文：回朝后，他缴上敕谕，皇上即令他收藏，以记载他的勋劳。
English: After his return to the imperial court, he submitted the imperial edict, and the emperor ordered him to collect it in order to record his distinguished service.

古文：论功，加太师，荫子中书舍人，赐银币、蟒服。
现代文：论功，加封他为太师，庇荫儿子为中书舍人，赐给银币、蟒服。
English: On the basis of merit, he was awarded the title of Grand Master, and his son, Biyin, was awarded the title of Senior Scholar. He was given silver coins and a ceremonial robe.

古文：延儒辞太师，许之。
现代文：延儒辞去太师，皇上答应了。
English: Yan Rong resigned as Grand Master, and the Emperor agreed.

古文：居数日，养性及中官尽发所刺军中事。
现代文：几天之后，骆养性和宦官全部揭发了他们刺探到的军中之事。
English: A few days later, all the camel breeders and eunuchs revealed what they had discovered in the army.

古文：帝乃大怒，谕府部诸臣责延儒蒙蔽推诿，事多不忍言，令从公察议。
现代文：皇上于是大怒，谕告府部诸臣责备延儒蒙蔽圣上，推诿职守。他的事皇上多不忍说，只令公正检查。
English: The emperor was furious, and ordered the courtiers to reprimand Yan Rong for deceiving the emperor and shirking his duty. The emperor could not bear to talk about him, but ordered a fair investigation.

古文：陈演等公揭救之，延儒席藁待罪，自请戍边。
现代文：陈演等人一同上书救他，延儒坐在草席上待罪，自请戍边。
English: Chen Yuan and the others together wrote a letter to save him. Yan Ru sat on a straw mat and waited for the punishment. He asked for a sash.

古文：帝犹降温旨，言 卿报国尽忱，终始勿替， 许驰驿归，赐路费百金，以彰保全优礼之意。
现代文：皇上还颁下温旨，说他 尽心报国，始终不渝 ，让他乘驿车回去，赐给路费一百金，以表彰他保全优礼之意。
English: The emperor also issued a warm message, saying that he had devoted himself to serving the country and remained steadfast, let him go back by carriage, and gave him one hundred gold coins for travel expenses, in recognition of his intention to preserve courtesy.

古文：及廷臣议上，帝复谕延儒功多罪寡，令免议。
现代文：到大臣们的建议上呈后，皇上又传谕说延儒功多罪少，下令免议。
English: After the proposal of the ministers was submitted, the emperor also issued an edict saying that Yan Zhu Gong had more merits than demerits, and ordered that it be exempted from discussion.

古文：延儒遂归。
现代文：延儒遂回了家。
English: Yan Ru finally returned home.

古文：既去，给事中郝絅疏请除奸，以指延儒。
现代文：延儒走后，给事中郝纟同上疏请除奸，这指的是延儒。
English: After Yan Ju left, he was asked to remove the rapist, which refers to Yan Ju.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：山东佥事雷縯祚纠范志完，亦及延儒。
现代文：山东佥事雷演祚弹劾范志完，也牵涉到延儒。
English: Shandong's impeachment of Fan Zhi also involved Yan Ru.

古文：已而御史蒋拱宸劾吴昌时赃私巨万，大抵牵连延儒，而中言昌时通中官李端、王裕民，泄漏机密，重贿入手，辄预揣温旨告人。
现代文：随后御史蒋拱宸弹劾吴昌时有数万赃私，大抵也牵连到延儒，而主要是说吴昌时交通宦官李端、王裕民，泄露机密，以重贿着手，常预先拿着温旨去告人。
English: Subsequently, during the impeachment of Wu Chang by the imperial historian Jiang Gongyi, there were tens of thousands of accusations, mostly involving Yan Rhu, but mainly saying that Li Duan and Wang Yumin, the traffic eunuchs at the time of Wu Chang, had leaked secrets, and had begun with heavy bribes, and often had a warm intention to sue in advance.

古文：给事中曹良直亦劾延儒十大罪。
现代文：给事中曹良直也弹劾延儒十大罪。
English: Cao Liangzhi also impeached Yan Rong for ten major crimes.

古文：帝怒甚，御中左门，亲鞫昌时，折其胫，无所承，怒不解，拱宸面讦其通内，帝察之有迹，乃下狱论死，始有意诛延儒。
现代文：皇上非常愤怒，御临中左门，亲自审问吴昌时，折断了他的胫骨，但吴昌时什么也没承认，皇上更怒不可解。蒋拱宸当面揭发他交通宦官，皇上也察出他的行迹，于是将他下狱，判了死罪。皇上这才有意要诛杀延儒。
English: The emperor was very angry. When he came to Zhongzamen and personally interrogated Wu Chang, he broke his shinbone. However, Wu Chang did not admit anything, and the emperor was even more furious. Jiang Gongyao exposed his traffic eunuch to his face, and the emperor also found out his whereabouts, so he sent him to prison and sentenced him to death. This is why the emperor intended to kill Yan Rong.

古文：初，薛国观赐死，谓昌时致之。其门人魏藻德新入阁有宠，恨昌时甚，因与陈演共排延儒，养性复腾蜚语。
现代文：当时，薛国观被赐死，说是吴昌时害他，他的门人魏藻德刚入阁，受到皇上宠爱，很恨吴昌时，便与陈演共同排挤延儒，而骆养性又散布蜚语。
English: At that time, Xue Guoqun was put to death, saying that Wu Chang had harmed him. His disciple Wei Zande had just entered the cabinet and was favored by the emperor. When he hated Wu Chang very much, he and Chen Yuan jointly ousted Yan Ru. Meanwhile, Luo Yangxing spread slang.

古文：帝遂命尽削延儒职，遣缇骑逮入京师。
现代文：皇上于是命全部削夺延儒的官职，派缇骑逮捕他入京。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered that all official posts of Yanju be taken away, and he sent his cavalry to arrest him and take him to Beijing.

古文：时旧辅王应熊被召，延儒知帝怒甚，宿留道中，俟应熊先入，冀为请。
现代文：当时原辅臣王应熊被召回，延儒知道皇上十分愤怒，便在中途停宿，等王应熊先入京，希望他为自己求情。
English: At that time, the former aide-de-camp Wang Yingxiong was recalled, and Yan Rong knew that the emperor was very angry, so he stopped halfway and waited for Wang Yingxiong to enter Beijing first, hoping that he would intercede for himself.

古文：帝知之，应熊既抵京，命之归。
现代文：皇上知道了，王应熊刚抵京，便命他回去。
English: When the emperor learned that Wang Ying Xiong had just arrived in Beijing, he ordered him to return.

古文：延儒至，安置正阳门外古庙，上疏乞哀，不许。
现代文：延儒到京后，被安置在正阳门外的古庙中，他上疏请求怜悯，皇上不许。
English: After Yan Ru arrived in Beijing, he was placed in an ancient temple outside the Zhengyang Gate. He went to the emperor to ask for mercy, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：法司以戍请，同官申救，皆不许。
现代文：法司请将他遣去戍边，同僚也申救，皇上都不许。
English: The magistrate asked him to be sent to Lijiang. His colleagues also pleaded for help, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：冬十二月，昌时弃市，命勒延儒自尽，籍其家。
现代文：这年冬十二月，吴昌时被押到市场处死，暴尸街头，勒令延儒自尽，并将他抄家。
English: In the winter of December of that year, Wu Changshi was taken to the market to be put to death, and Yan Ru was ordered to commit suicide and his home was ransacked.

古文：温体仁，字长卿，乌程人。
现代文：温体仁，字长卿，乌程人。
English: Wen Tizhen, Zeta Changqing, and Wucheng Ren.

古文：万历二十六年进士。改庶吉士，授编修，累官礼部侍郎。
现代文：万历二十六年中进士，改任庶吉士，授予编修官，累任到礼部侍郎。
English: In the 26th year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to the position of junior priest, changed to the position of junior priest, awarded the position of editor, and successively appointed to the position of attendant of the ritual department.

古文：崇祯初迁尚书，协理詹事府事。
现代文：崇祯初年，升为尚书，协理詹事府事务。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, he was promoted to Shangshu, assistant manager of Zhan affairs.

古文：为人外谨而中猛鸷，机深刺骨。
现代文：他的为人是外表拘谨而内心凶狠，心事藏得极深。
English: His demeanour is outwardly prim but inwardly ferocious, his thoughts are deeply hidden.

古文：崇祯元年冬，诏会推阁臣，体仁望轻，不与也。
现代文：崇祯元年冬，皇上下诏会推阁臣，体仁因为名望轻，没被推上。
English: In the winter of the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the imperial edict would promote cabinet ministers, but because of his low reputation, he was not promoted.

古文：侍郎周延儒方以召对称旨，亦弗及。
现代文：侍郎周延儒当时奉召应对很合皇上旨意，但也没被选上。
English: At that time, chamberlain Zhou Yanru was called upon to respond to the emperor's will, but he was not chosen.

古文：体仁揣帝意必疑，遂上疏讦谦益关节受贿，神奸结党，不当与阁臣选。
现代文：体仁揣测皇上一定怀疑，便上疏揭发钱谦益通关节受贿，奸猾结党，不应当被选为阁臣。
English: Sensibly surmising that the emperor must have had some doubts, he went on to reveal that the money-grubbing, bribe-taking, treacherous party-pooper should not have been chosen as a cabinet minister.

古文：先是，天启二年，谦益主试浙江，所取士钱千秋者，首场文用俚俗诗一句，分置七义结尾，盖奸人绐为之。
现代文：在此之前，天启二年，钱谦益主持浙江乡试，所选取的士人中有个叫钱千秋的，他首场做文时用了一句俚俗诗，把它分置在七义结尾，这大概是奸人骗他这么干的。
English: Prior to this, in the second year of the Apocalypse, Qian Qianyi presided over the Zhejiang Township Examination. One of the scholars selected was Qian Qianqiu. When he wrote his first essay, he used a folk poem and placed it at the end of the seven meanings. This was probably done by deceiving him.

古文：为给事中顾其仁所摘，谦益亦自发其事。
现代文：此文被给事中顾其仁所摘取，钱谦益也自己揭发了此事。
English: This article was extracted by Gu Qiren, who was involved in the case, and Qian Qianyun also exposed the matter himself.

古文：法司戍千秋及奸人，夺谦益俸，案久定矣。
现代文：法司判钱千秋和奸人戍边，扣罚钱谦益的俸禄，此案早已定了。
English: The case has already been decided by the Justice Department, which sentenced Qian Qianqiu and the traitor Zhou Bian, and fined Qian Qianqiu's salary.

古文：至是体仁复理其事，帝心动。
现代文：这时候体仁又提出此事，皇上心动了。
English: At this time, Tetsujin brought up the matter again, and the Emperor was moved.

古文：次日，召对阁部科道诸臣于文华殿，命体仁、谦益皆至。
现代文：第二天，皇上在文华殿召内阁和部科诸臣，命体仁、钱谦益也去。
English: The next day, the emperor summoned the cabinet and the ministers of science at the Palace of Literature and Art. Meitai Tsering and Qian Qianyi also went.

古文：谦益不虞体仁之劾己也，辞颇屈，而体仁盛气诋谦益，言如涌泉，因进曰： 臣职非言官不可言，会推不与，宜避嫌不言，但枚卜大典，宗社安危所系。
现代文：钱谦益不虞体仁会弹劾他，所以他辩白很无力，而体仁盛气诋毁钱谦益，言如泉涌，随即对皇上说 ：臣的职责不是言官不能说，会推没有选上，臣也应当避嫌不说。但选阁臣乃是大典，是国家安危之所系。
English: Qian Qian did not fear that the nobles would impeach him, so he was powerless to defend himself, but the nobles were full of energy to slander Qian Qian, and his words were like a torrent, and he immediately said to the emperor: "The duty of a minister is not to say what the officials cannot say, but to say what the ministers should avoid saying if they are not elected. But the election of cabinet ministers is a big deal, and it is a matter of national security.

古文：谦益结党受贿，举朝无一人敢言者，臣不忍见皇上孤立于上，是以不得不言。 
现代文：谦益结党受贿，举朝没有一人敢说，臣不忍看皇上被孤立，所以不得不说。 
English: No one in the imperial court dared to say that Emperor Qianyi had accepted bribes and formed a party. The vassal could not bear to see the emperor isolated, so he had to say it.

古文：帝久疑廷臣植党，闻体仁言，辄称善。
现代文：皇上早已怀疑廷臣结党，一听体仁的话便称善。
English: The emperor had long suspected that courtiers were forming a party, and he praised them as soon as he heard their kind words.

古文：而执政皆言谦益无罪，吏科都给事中章允儒争尤力，且言： 体仁热中觖望，如谦益当纠，何俟今日。 
现代文：而执政大臣都说钱谦益无罪，吏科都给事中章允儒争得尤其厉害，他并且说： 体仁热中于抱怨，如果谦益应当弹劾，何以等到今天。 
English: But the ruling ministers all said that Qian Qianyi was not guilty, and the officials and experts all argued particularly fiercely against Zhang Yunru in the matter. He also said: In the heat of complaint, if Qian Qianyi should be impeached, why wait until today.

古文：体仁曰： 前此，谦益皆闲曹，今者纠之，正为朝廷慎用人耳。
现代文：体仁说 ：先前谦益都是在闲暇部门，现在弹劾他，正为了朝廷要慎重用人而已。
English: Tetsujin said, "Previously, all the benefits were in the leisure sector. Impeaching him now is just for the sake of the imperial court to employ people carefully."

古文：如允儒言，乃真党也。 
现代文：像允儒这样说话，才真是袒护他。 
English: If you talk like Yun Ju, then you are really protecting him.

古文：帝怒，命礼部进千秋卷，阅意，责谦益，谦益引罪。
现代文：皇上大怒，命礼部呈上钱千秋的试卷，看完后，责备钱谦益，钱谦益引罪。
English: The emperor was furious, and ordered the etiquette department to present Qian Qianqiu's examination paper. After reading it, Qian Qianqiu was reprimanded, and Qian Qianqiu was found guilty.

古文：叹曰： 微体仁，朕几误！ 
现代文：皇上叹道： 没有体仁，朕几乎要误事了。 
English: Empress Dowager sighed: "I almost made a mistake because I didn't have the courage."

古文：遂叱允儒下诏狱，并切责诸大臣。
现代文：遂呵斥章允儒，把他投进诏狱，并严厉责备其他大臣。
English: He then reprimanded Zhang Yunru, threw him into the imperial prison, and severely reprimanded other ministers.

古文：时大臣无助体仁者，独延儒奏曰： 会推名虽公，主持者止一二人，余皆不敢言，即言，徒取祸耳。
现代文：当时大臣中没人帮助体仁，唯独周延儒上奏说： 会推这名字虽然公正，但主持的也只是一两个人，其他人都不敢说，就是说了，也只是徒取祸害而已。
English: At that time, none of the ministers helped Tetsujin, except for Zhou Yanru Shangsoo, who said: Although the name "will push" is fair, only one or two people presided over it. The others did not dare to say it. Even if they did say it, it was just to cause mischief.

古文：且千秋事有成案，不必复问诸臣。 
现代文：而且钱千秋的事已有成案，不必再问大臣。 
English: Moreover, the matter of Qianqiu has already been finalized, so there is no need to ask the minister again.

古文：帝乃即日罢谦益官，命议罪。
现代文：皇上于是即日罢免钱谦益的官职，命给他议罪。
English: The emperor then dismissed Qian Qian from his official post on the same day and ordered him to plead guilty.

古文：允儒及给事中瞿式耜、御史房可壮等，皆坐谦益党，降谪有差。
现代文：章允儒和给事中瞿式耜、御史房可壮等人，都被视为钱谦益的党羽，分别受到降职。
English: Zhang Yunru, Zhaozhong Zou Shiguo and Gu Shifang Ke Zhuang, all of whom were regarded as Qian Qian's followers, were demoted.

古文：亡何，御史毛九华劾体仁居家时，以抑买商人木，为商人所诉，赂崔呈秀以免。又困杭州建逆祠，作诗颂魏忠贤。
现代文：不久，御史毛九华弹劾体仁居家时，因压价买商人的木材，被商人所告状，他贿赂崔呈秀才得以免罪；又因在杭州修建逆祠，体仁做诗歌颂魏忠贤。
English: Not long after, when the governor of Shizuoka Prefecture, Mao Jiuhua, impeached Tetsujin for living at home, he was sued by a businessman for buying the businessman's timber at a reduced price. He was only acquitted after he bribed Cui Chengxiu. Tetsujin also wrote a poem in praise of Wei Zhongxian for building a rebel shrine in Hangzhou.

古文：帝下浙江巡抚核实。
现代文：皇上交浙江巡抚核实。
English: The emperor submitted it to the Zhejiang governor for verification.

古文：明年春，御史任赞化亦劾体仁娶娼、受金，夺人产诸不法事。
现代文：第二年春，御史任赞化也弹劾体仁娶娼妓、接受金钱、夺人财产等不法之事。
English: In the spring of the following year, the Emperor also impeached Tetsuhito for marrying a prostitute, accepting money, stealing property and other illegal acts.

古文：帝怒其语亵，贬一秩调外。
现代文：皇上怒他用语猥亵，将他贬一级调任外官。
English: The emperor was angered by his use of obscene language and demoted him to the rank of foreign minister.

古文：体仁乞罢，因言： 比为谦益故，排击臣者百出。而无一人左袒臣，臣孤立可见。 
现代文：体仁请求免职，顺便说道 ：他们为了谦益，对臣百般攻击排挤，而没有一个人袒护臣，可见臣之孤立。 
English: Tetsujin asked to be relieved of his duties, saying in passing, "For the sake of modesty, they attacked and ousted their vassals in every possible way, but no one protected their vassals, which shows their isolation."

古文：帝再召内阁九卿质之，体仁与九华、赞化诘辩良久，言二人皆谦益死党。
现代文：皇上再召内阁九卿大臣来质问，体仁与毛九华、任赞化争辩良久，说他们两人都是钱谦益死党。
English: The emperor then summoned nine cabinet ministers to question him. Teito argued with Mao Jihua and Ren Zhanhua for a long time, saying that both of them were die-hard supporters of Qian Qian.

古文：帝心以为然，独召大学士韩爌等于内殿，谕诸臣不忧国，惟挟私相攻，当重绳以法。
现代文：皇上心中以为然，把大学士韩火广单独召到内殿，对他说大臣们不忧国，只是挟私怨相互攻击，应当从重绳之以法。
English: The emperor thought so, and summoned Han Huiguang, a university scholar, to the inner hall alone, telling him that the ministers did not care about the country, but only attacked each other out of personal grudges, and should be brought to justice.

古文：体仁复力求去以要帝，帝优诏慰答焉。
现代文：体仁又极力要求离去，以要挟皇上，皇上优诏安慰他。
English: Tetsujin also strongly demanded to leave, and the emperor consoled him by threatening him with an imperial edict.

古文：已，给事中祖重晔、南京给事中钱允鲸、南京御史沈希诏相继论体仁热中会推，劫言者以党，帝皆不听。
现代文：后来，给事中祖重晔、南京给事中钱允鲸、南京御史沈希诏相继弹劾体仁热中于会推，胁迫言者为党羽，皇上都不听。
English: Later, Emperor Jianzhong, Emperor Qian Yunwhal and Emperor Shen Xizhao of Nanjing successively pushed forward the impeachment in the heat of the meeting. The coerced speakers were party members, and the emperor did not listen to them.

古文：法司上千秋狱，言谦益自发在前，不宜坐。
现代文：法司呈上钱千秋的罪案，说钱谦益揭发在前，不宜判罪。
English: The Justice Department presented Qian Qianqiu's criminal case, saying that Qian Qianqiu should not be convicted before being exposed.

古文：诏令再勘。
现代文：诏令再调查。
English: The imperial edict called for further investigation.

古文：体仁复疏言狱词皆出谦益手。
现代文：体仁又上疏说狱词都是出于钱谦益之手。
English: Teitien went on to say that the prison terms were all the result of Qian Qianyi's actions.

古文：于是刑部尚书乔允升，左都御史曹于汴，大理寺卿康新民，太仆寺卿蒋允仪，府丞魏光绪，给事中陶崇道，御史吴甡、樊尚璟、刘廷佐，各疏言： 臣等杂治千秋，观听者数千人，非一手一口所能掩。
现代文：于是刑部尚书乔允升、左都御史曹于汴、大理寺卿康新民、太仆寺卿蒋允仪、府丞魏光绪、给事中陶崇道、御史吴生生、樊尚瞡、刘廷佐都各自上疏说： 臣等杂治钱千秋时，观看的有数千人，不是一手一口所能掩盖的。
English: As a result, the head of the criminal investigation department, Qiao Yunsheng, the left capital official, Cao Yuyao, the head of the Dali Temple, Kang Xinmin, the head of the Daju Temple, Jiang Yunyi, the head of the prefectural government, Wei Guangxu, and the officials in charge of the case, Tao Chongdao, the official Wu Shengsheng, Gao Shangyao, and Liu Ting Zuo, all came forward and said, "When a minister and other officials are handling money, there are thousands of people watching, and it is not something that can be covered up with one hand.

古文：体仁顾欺冈求胜。 
现代文：体仁不过是欺骗求胜。 
English: Chivalry is nothing more than cheating to win.

古文：体仁见于汴等词直，乃不复深论千秋事，惟诋于汴等党护而已。
现代文：体仁见曹于汴等人词语正直，便不再深论钱千秋的事，只是诋毁曹于汴等人袒护而已。
English: When he saw that Cao Yuxuan and others were honest in their words, he no longer discussed the matter of money, but only slandered Cao Yuxuan and others.

古文：谦益坐杖论赎，而九华所论体仁媚珰诗，亦卒无左验。
现代文：钱谦益被判杖刑，输钱赎罪，而毛九华所弹劾体仁取媚魏忠贤大的诗，也终于没有佐证。
English: Qian Qianqian was sentenced to cane punishment, losing money to atone for the crime, and the poem of Mei Wei Zhongxianda, which was impeached by Mao Jiuhua, finally had no corroboration.

古文：当是时，体仁以私憾撑拒诸大臣，展转不肯诎。
现代文：当时，体仁以私愤抗拒诸大臣，展转不肯屈服。
English: At that time, he resisted the ministers with his personal indignation and refused to give in.

古文：帝谓体仁孤立，益响之。
现代文：皇上以为体仁孤立，更加向着他。
English: The emperor thought that he was isolated, and he became more and more attached to him.

古文：未几，延儒入阁。
现代文：不久，周延儒入阁。
English: Soon after, Zhou Yanru joined the cabinet.

古文：其明年六月，遂命体仁以礼部尚书兼东阁大学士。
现代文：第二年六月，遂任命体仁为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士。
English: In June of the following year, Tetsujin was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University.

古文：体仁既藉延儒力得辅政，势益张。
现代文：体仁既已借周延儒之力得以辅政，势力更盛。
English: Since Tetsujin has been able to use the power of Zhou Yanju to assist in politics, his power has increased.

古文：逾年，吏部尚书王永光去，用其乡人闵洪学代之，凡异己者，率以部议论罢，而体仁阴护其事。
现代文：过了一年，吏部尚书王永光离去，用他同乡人闵洪学取代他，凡是异己之人，闵洪学都以部议将其弹劾罢免，而体仁暗中护着他。
English: After a year, the head of the cadres, Shangshu Wang Yongguang, left and was replaced by his fellow villager, Zhai Hongxue. Anyone who was a stranger to him, Zhai Hongxue would impeach and remove him from office, while Zhenren secretly protected him.

古文：又用御史史褷、高捷及侍郎唐世济、副都御史张捷等为腹心，忌延儒居己上，并思倾之。
现代文：体仁还用御史史范土、高捷和侍郎唐世济、副都御史张捷等人为心腹，他嫉妒周延儒位居自己之上，也想排挤他。
English: Tetsujin also used Imperial Historian Fan Tu, Gao Jie, and attendants Tang Shiji and Vice-Imperial Historian Zhang Jie as confidants. He was jealous of Zhou Yan, a Confucian, who was above him, and wanted to oust him.

古文：初，帝杀袁崇焕，事牵钱龙锡，论死。
现代文：当初，皇上杀了袁崇焕，事情牵连到钱龙锡，他也被判了死罪。
English: At first, the emperor killed Yuan Chonghuan, and the matter involved Qian Longxi, who was also sentenced to death.

古文：体仁与延儒、永光主之，将兴大狱，梁廷栋不敢任而止，事详龙锡传。
现代文：体仁和周延儒、王永光主持此案，他们将制造大案，梁廷栋不敢负责而止，详见《钱龙锡传》。
English: Tianzhen and Zhou Yanru and Wang Yongguang presided over this case. They would create a big case, and Liang Tingdong did not dare to be responsible. For details, see "The Story of Qianlong Xi."

古文：比龙锡减死出狱，延儒言帝盛怒解救殊难，体仁则佯曰： 帝固不甚怒也。 
现代文：到钱龙锡被减死罪出狱后，周延儒说皇上盛怒之下，解救极难。体仁则假装说 ：皇上并不怎么发怒。 
English: After Qian Longxi's death sentence was commuted and he was released from prison, Zhou Yanru said that under the emperor's wrath, it was extremely difficult to rescue him. Tetsujin pretended to say: The emperor is not very angry.

古文：善龙锡者，因薄延儒。
现代文：与钱龙锡交好的人因此而看不起周延儒。
English: People who are friends with Qianlongxi therefore look down on Zhou Yanru.

古文：其后太监王坤、给事中陈赞化先后劾延儒，体仁默为助，延儒遂免归。
现代文：后来太监王坤、给事中陈赞化先后弹劾周延儒，体仁暗中相助，周延儒遂被免职回家。
English: Later, the eunuch Wang Kun and Chen Zanhua, who were in charge of the matter, successively impeached Zhou Yanru, and Zhou Yanru secretly helped, and Zhou Yanru was dismissed and went home.

古文：始与延儒同入阁者何如宠，钱象坤逾岁致政去，无何，如宠亦去。
现代文：最初与周延儒一同入阁的有何如宠、钱象坤，过了一年钱象坤便辞官而去，不久，何如宠也离去。
English: At first, He Ruzhen and Qian Xiangkun entered the cabinet together with Zhou Yanru. After a year, Qian Xiangkun resigned and left. Soon, He Ruzhen also left.

古文：延儒既罢，廷臣恶体仁当国，劝帝复召如宠。
现代文：周延儒被罢免后，廷臣厌恶体仁当国，劝皇上召回何如宠。
English: After Zhou Yanju was deposed, courtiers abhorred the idea of a benevolent ruler, and urged the emperor to recall He Ruling.

古文：如宠屡辞，给事中黄绍杰言： 君子小人不并立，如宠瞻顾不前，则体仁宜思自处。 
现代文：何如宠屡次推辞，给事中黄绍杰说： 君子与小人不并立，何如宠瞻顾不前，则体仁也应好好自处。 
English: Huang Shaojie said: "A gentleman and a small person do not stand side by side, and if a pet does not look ahead, then the body should also be at ease.

古文：帝为谪绍杰于外，如宠卒辞不入，体仁遂为首辅。
现代文：皇上为体仁将黄绍杰贬为外官。何如宠最终还是推辞不入阁，体仁遂成了首辅。
English: The emperor demoted Huang Shao Jie to the position of foreign minister for the sake of Tetsujin. However, Tetsujin eventually declined to join the cabinet, and Tetsujin became the First Assistant Minister.

古文：体仁荷帝殊宠，益忮横，而中阻深。
现代文：体仁受到皇上的殊宠，更加狠毒和骄横，而城府又很深。
English: Toshihito was favored by the emperor, more vicious and arrogant, and the castle was very deep.

古文：所欲推荐，阴令人发端，己承其后。
现代文：他想推荐的人，先令别人提出，然后自己随其后推荐。
English: Anyone he wanted to recommend, he would get someone else to suggest, and then he would recommend them himself.

古文：欲排陷，故为宽假，中上所忌，激使自怒。
现代文：要想排挤陷害谁，就先故意宽容，让他中皇上所忌，激他自己发怒。
English: If you want to oust and frame someone, you must first be deliberately tolerant, let him be the emperor's enemy, and provoke him to anger.

古文：帝往往为之移，初未尝有迹。
现代文：皇上往往被他支配，而最初还看不出来。
English: The emperor is often dominated by him, and at first it is not apparent.

古文：姚希孟为讲官，以才望迁詹事。
现代文：姚希孟做讲官，以才望升为詹事。
English: Yao Ximeng worked as a lecturer, hoping to rise to the top.

古文：体仁恶其逼，乃以冒籍武生事，夺希孟一官，使掌南院去。
现代文：体仁讨厌他受到亲近，便借他冒籍武生一事，夺去他一级官衔，让他去掌管南院。
English: Tetsujin hated him being close to him, so he took advantage of him pretending to be a samurai, deprived him of his first-class official rank, and let him take charge of the Southern Academy.

古文：礼部侍郎罗喻义，故尝与基命、谦益同推阁臣，有物望。
现代文：礼部尚书罗喻义，原曾与成基命、钱谦益一同被推为阁臣，有名望。
English: The Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was a prestigious position, and he was once promoted to the position of cabinet minister along with Shigeki no Mikoto and Qian Qianyun.

古文：会进讲章中有 左右未得人 语，体仁欲去之，喻义执不可。
现代文：正好进讲的内容中有 左右任用未得人 一语，体仁想去掉它，罗喻义坚决不同意。
English: In the content of the lecture, there was a phrase about the appointment of unqualified people. I wanted to get rid of it, but Luo Yuyi firmly disagreed.

古文：体仁因自劾： 日讲进规例从简，喻义驳改不从，由臣不能表率。 
现代文：体仁便自己弹劾自己说 ：每天进讲的规例应从简，喻义反驳不听，这都由于臣不能做表率。 
English: Toshihito impeached himself and said, "The rules for the daily lectures should be simplified and metaphors should not be contradicted. This is all due to the minister's inability to set an example."

古文：帝命吏部议，洪学等因谓： 圣聪天亶，何俟喻义多言。 
现代文：皇上命吏部讨论，闵洪学等人说： 圣上聪明绝顶，何待喻义多言！ 
English: During the discussion of the imperial officials, Zou Hongxue and others said, "He is supremely clever, how can he talk so much!

古文：喻义遂罢归。
现代文：罗喻义于是被罢免回家。
English: Luo Yuyi was dismissed and sent home.

古文：时魏忠贤遗党日望体仁翻逆案，攻东林。
现代文：当时魏忠贤的遗党每天盼体仁翻逆案，攻击东林党。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian's surviving party attacked the Donglin Party on a daily basis.

古文：会吏部尚书、左都御史缺，体仁阴使侍郎张捷举逆案吕纯如以尝帝。
现代文：正好吏部尚书、左都御史出缺，体仁叫侍郎张捷推举逆案中人吕纯如，以试试皇上心意。
English: When the posts of the imperial secretary and the governor of the left capital were vacant, the emperor asked the attendant Zhang Jie to nominate the opposite candidate, Lü Chunru, to test the emperor's will.

古文：言者大哗，帝亦甚恶之。
现代文：言者顿时大哗，皇上也很厌恶他。
English: The speaker suddenly made a loud noise, and the emperor was disgusted with him.

古文：捷气沮，体仁不敢言，乃荐谢升、唐世济为之。
现代文：张捷很沮丧，体仁也不敢说了，于是推荐谢升、唐世济分别担任尚书和左都御史。
English: Zhang Jie was very depressed, and he didn't dare to say anything, so he recommended Xie Sheng and Tang Shiji to serve as Shangshu and Zuo Guo Shi respectively.

古文：世济寻以荐逆案霍维华得罪去。
现代文：唐世济不久因推荐逆案人物霍维华得罪去职。
English: Tang Shiji was soon removed from his post for recommending the person behind the case, Hovihua.

古文：维华之荐，亦体仁主之也，体仁自是不敢讼言用逆党，而愈侧目诸不附己者。
现代文：推荐霍维华，也是体仁做主的。体仁从此不敢上言要用逆党，但他更恨那些不依附他的人。
English: It was also Tenen who recommended Hovey-Hovey. Tenen no longer dared to speak out against the party, but he hated those who did not adhere to him even more.

古文：文震孟以讲《春秋》称旨，命入阁。
现代文：文震孟因讲《春秋》合皇上旨意，被命令入阁。
English: Wen Zhen Meng was ordered to join the cabinet for performing "Spring and Autumn" in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：体仁不能沮，荐其党张至发以间之，而日伺震孟短，遂用给事中许誉卿事，逐之去。
现代文：体仁无法阻止，便推荐他的党羽张至发来疏远他与皇上的关系，并每天刺探文震孟的短处，遂借给事中许誉卿一事，将他逐了出去。
English: Unable to stop it, he recommended his henchman Zhang Zhiwei to alienate his relationship with the emperor, and every day probed the shortcomings of Wen Zhenmeng, and then borrowed the matter of Xu Rongqing in the matter and expelled him.

古文：先是，秦、楚盗起，议设五省总督，兵部侍郎彭汝楠、汪庆百当行，惮不敢往，体仁庇二人，罢其议。
现代文：先前，陕西、湖北盗贼起事，朝廷计划设五省总督，兵部侍郎彭汝南、汪庆百应当赴任，但他们害怕而不敢去。体仁包庇此二人，停罢这项计划。
English: Previously, when the bandits in Shaanxi and Hubei revolted, the imperial court planned to set up five provincial governors, and the attendants of the military department, Peng Runan and Wang Qingbai, were supposed to take office, but they were afraid and did not dare to go.

古文：贼犯凤阳，南京兵部尚书吕维祺等议，令淮抚、操江移镇，体仁又却不用。
现代文：贼人侵犯凤阳，南京兵部尚书吕维祺等建议令淮阳巡抚、操江提督移往镇守，体仁又驳下不用。
English: Thieves invaded Fengyang, and the Nanjing Military Department's Shangshu Lü Weiqi and others recommended that Huaiyang's inspector and Guojiang's admiral be transferred to the town guard, and that they be dismissed and not used.

古文：既而贼大至，焚皇陵。
现代文：后来贼人大至，焚烧皇陵。
English: Later, thieves went so far as to burn the imperial mausoleum.

古文：誉卿言： 体仁纳贿庇私，贻忧要地，以皇陵为孤注，使原庙震惊，误国孰大焉。 
现代文：许誉卿说： 体仁纳贿，庇护私人，贻害要地，以皇陵为最后赌注，致使祖庙震惊，误国莫大焉。 
English: Lord Xu Rong said: The emperor accepted bribes, protected private individuals, and harmed important places, with the imperial mausoleum as the last bet, causing the ancestral temple to be shocked and the country to be overwhelmed.

古文：体仁素忌誉卿，见疏益憾。
现代文：体仁一向忌恨许誉卿，见这奏疏更恨。
English: I've always hated Xu Rongqing, but I hate him even more now.

古文：会谢升以营求北缺劾誉卿，体仁拟旨降调，而故重其词。
现代文：正值谢升为营求北京官缺而弹劾许誉卿，体仁起草圣旨要将他降调，但故意加重其词。
English: At the time when Xie Sheng was impeaching Xu Rongqing for seeking an official vacancy in Beijing, Tizhen drafted a decree to demote him, but deliberately aggravated his words.

古文：帝果命削籍，震孟力争之，大学士何吾驺助为言。
现代文：皇上果然命令将许誉卿除名，文震孟极力论争，大学士何吾驺也帮着说话。
English: The emperor did indeed order the removal of Lord Xu Rong, Wen Zhen Meng argued vigorously, and He Wuxuan, a university scholar, also helped to speak.

古文：体仁讦奏震孟语，谓言官罢斥为至荣，盖以朝廷赏罚为不足惩劝，悖理蔑法。
现代文：体仁上奏攻击文震孟所说的话，他说言官被罢斥为至高荣耀，这就是说朝廷的赏罚不足以惩恶劝善，这是悖理和蔑视国法。
English: He attacked the words of Wen Zhen Meng, saying that it was the highest honor for a speaker to be ousted, which meant that the rewards and punishments of the imperial court were not enough to punish the evil and persuade the good, which was an absurdity and contempt for the law of the country.

古文：帝遂逐震孟并罢吾驺。
现代文：皇上于是逐出文震孟，并罢免何吾驺。
English: The emperor then expelled Wenzhen Meng and dismissed He Wuzhong.

古文：震孟既去，体仁憾未释。
现代文：文震孟离去后，体仁恨犹未已。
English: After the departure of Wen Zhen Meng, there is still a lingering resentment.

古文：庶吉士郑鄤与震孟同建言，相友善也，其从母舅大学士吴宗达谢政归。体仁劾鄤假乩仙判词，逼父振先杖母，言出宗达。
现代文：庶吉士郑曼阝与文震孟一同提建议，互相友善，他的从母舅大学士吴宗达已经辞官归家，体仁弹劾郑曼阝借乩仙判词，逼父亲郑振先杖打母亲，这主意是出自吴宗达。
English: Zheng Mengyao and Wen Zhen Meng, the second son-in-law, made suggestions together and were friendly to each other. His maternal uncle, the scholar Wu Zonda, had already resigned from his post and returned home. He tried to impeach Zheng Mengyao by borrowing the judgment of the immortals and forced his father, Zheng Zhenxian, to beat his mother with a stick. This idea came from Wu Zonda.

古文：帝震怒，下鄤狱。
现代文：皇上大怒，把郑曼阝投进狱中。
English: The emperor was furious and threw Zheng Mengyao into prison.

古文：其后体仁已去，而帝怒鄤甚，不俟左证，磔死。
现代文：后来体仁已经离去，而皇上还很恨郑曼阝，不等拿到证据，便将郑曼阝肢解。
English: Later, the body had already left, and the emperor still hated Zheng Mengyao, and did not wait to get the evidence, he dismembered Zheng Mengyao.

古文：滋阳知县成德，震孟门人，以强直忤巡按御史禹好善，被诬劾，震孟为不平。
现代文：滋阳知县成德，是文震孟的门人，以耿直忤逆了巡按御史禹好善，被诬告弹劾，文震孟为他持不平。
English: Chengde, Zhiyang County, is a disciple of Wen Zhen Meng. He was falsely accused and impeached by Geng Zhiyuan, and Wen Zhen Meng held a grudge against him.

古文：体仁劾德，杖戍之。
现代文：体仁弹劾成德，将他杖打遣戍。
English: The corporal impeached Chengde and beat him with a cane.

古文：体仁辅政数年，念朝士多与为怨，不敢恣肆，用廉谨自结于上，苞苴不入门。
现代文：体仁辅政数年，心念朝士多与他结怨，不敢恣意妄为，以廉洁谨慎求得皇上的信任，贿赂不入其门。
English: For several years, he supported the government with his body and soul. He was concerned that the imperial officials would have a grudge against him and would not dare to act arbitrarily. He sought the emperor's trust with integrity and prudence, and bribery did not enter his door.

古文：然当是时，流寇躏畿辅，扰中原，边警杂沓，民生日困，未尝建一策，惟日与善类为仇。
现代文：但那时候，流寇蹂躏畿辅，骚扰中原，边境警报频传，民生日益困敝，他都不曾提出一项对策，只是每天与善类为仇。
English: However, at that time, the bandits ravaged Kieff, harassed the Central Plains, border alarms were frequent, and people's livelihoods were increasingly difficult. He never proposed a countermeasure, but only antagonized the good guys every day.

古文：诚意伯刘孔昭劾倪元璐，给事中陈启新劾黄景昉，皆奉体仁指。
现代文：诚意伯刘孔昭弹劾倪元璐，给事中陈启新弹劾黄景日方，他们都奉了体仁的旨意。
English: Liu Kongzhao's sincere intention to impeach Ni Yuanjun, and Chen Qixin's impeachment of Huang Jing by the Japanese side, were all in accordance with the will of the body.

古文：礼部侍郎陈子壮尝面责体仁，寻以议宗藩事忤帝指，竟下狱削籍。
现代文：礼部侍郎陈子壮曾当面责备体仁，不久因议宗藩之事忤逆皇上，竟被下狱除名。
English: The chamberlain of the ceremonial department, Chen Zizhuang, once rebuked Teitai Jin to his face, and was soon expelled from prison for rebelling against the emperor in the matter of the Sugisho Domain.

古文：其所引与同列者，皆庸材，苟以充位，且藉形己长，固上宠。
现代文：他所引荐的与他同官的人，都是庸才，只是苟且充位，借影子来显示自己身高，巩固皇上对自己的宠爱而已。
English: The people he recommended and his colleagues were mediocre, they were just filling positions, using their shadow to show their height and strengthen the emperor's love for himself.

古文：帝每访兵饷事，辄逊谢曰： 臣夙以文章待罪禁林，上不知其驽下，擢至此位。
现代文：皇上每次询问兵饷之事，他总是退让说 ：臣平素只以文章之才待罪于禁林，皇上不知臣愚下，将臣提拔到这个位置。
English: Every time the emperor asked him about the soldiers, he always conceded and said, "The emperor does not know how stupid he is to have promoted me to this position.

古文：盗贼日益众，诚万死不足塞责。
现代文：盗贼越来越多，臣诚万死不足以塞责。
English: There are more and more thieves, and the death of a vassal is not enough to punish them.

古文：顾臣愚无知，但票拟勿欺耳。
现代文：但臣虽然愚蠢无知，起草圣旨却不敢欺骗。
English: Although the minister was stupid and ignorant, he did not dare to cheat in drafting the imperial edict.

古文：兵食之事，惟圣明裁决。 
现代文：兵马粮饷之事，惟望圣上明断裁决。 
English: Concerning the matter of the soldiers' and horses' rations, let us hope for a clear ruling from the Holy See.

古文：有诋其窥帝意旨者，体仁言： 臣票拟多未中窾要，每经御笔批改，颂服将顺不暇，讵能窥上旨。 
现代文：有人攻击他窥伺皇上旨意，体仁说： 臣起草圣旨多未切中关键，每每要经御笔批改。臣但求写得通顺已是不暇，哪里还能窥伺圣上旨意？ 
English: Some people attacked him for spying on the emperor's will, but Tetsujin said, "A vassal drafting a sacred edict often misses the middle key, and must always be approved by the emperor's pen. A vassal trying to write smoothly is already too busy, where else can he spy on the emperor's will?"

古文：帝以为朴忠，愈亲信之。
现代文：皇上觉得他很朴实忠诚，更加亲信他。
English: The emperor thought he was very simple and loyal, and trusted him even more.

古文：自体仁辅政后，同官非病免物故，即以他事去。
现代文：自从体仁辅政后，同僚不是因病免职或者去世，就是因别的事被逐去。
English: Since then, colleagues have been removed from their posts due to illness, death, or other reasons.

古文：独体仁居位八年，官至少师兼太子太师，进吏部尚书、中极殿大学士，阶左柱国，兼支尚书俸，恩礼优渥无与比。
现代文：只有体仁在职八年，官任到少师兼太子太师，进升为吏部尚书、中极殿大学士，进级左柱国，兼领尚书俸禄，恩礼之优，无人可比。
English: Only Tetsujin was in office for eight years. He was promoted to Junior Teacher and Prince's Grand Master, promoted to Shosho of the Ministry of Personnel and Shosho of the Central Palace, promoted to Shoshu of the Left Column, and received Shosho's salary at the same time. There is no one comparable to him.

古文：而体仁专务刻核，迎合帝意。
现代文：而体仁专务刻核，迎合皇上心意。
English: On the other hand, he devoted himself to the core of physical benevolence, catering to the emperor's heart.

古文：帝以皇陵之变，从子壮言，下诏宽恤在狱诸臣，吏部以百余人名上。体仁靳之，言于帝，仅释十余人。
现代文：皇上因皇陵之变，听从陈子壮的建议下诏宽恤在狱中的诸臣。吏部为此呈上了一百多人的名单，体仁去掉大部分后对皇上说起，结果仅十余人获得释放。
English: As a result of the change of the imperial mausoleum, the emperor, following the advice of Chen Zizhong, granted clemency to the ministers who were in prison. To this end, the officials submitted a list of more than a hundred people. After removing most of the bodies, they began to speak to the emperor. As a result, only more than ten people were released.

古文：秋决论囚，帝再三谘问，体仁略无平反。
现代文：秋后审判囚犯，皇上再三询问，体仁一个都没有平反。
English: After the fall, prisoners were put on trial, and the emperor repeatedly inquired about them. Not a single corpse was rehabilitated.

古文：陕西华亭知县徐兆麟涖任甫七日，以城陷论死，帝颇疑之。
现代文：陕西华亭知县徐兆麟到任刚七天，因城池失陷被判死罪，皇上颇有疑问。
English: Xu Zhaolin of Huating County, Shaanxi Province, had been in office for just seven days when he was sentenced to death for the fall of the city. The emperor was quite doubtful.

古文：体仁不为救，竟弃市。
现代文：体仁不相救，结果徐兆麟竟被处死，暴尸街头。
English: There was no mercy, and as a result, Xu Zhaolin was actually put to death, leaving a trail of corpses in the streets.

古文：帝忧兵饷急，体仁惟倡众捐俸助马修城而已。
现代文：皇上非常担忧军饷，体仁只是建议众人捐俸禄助马匹和修城而已。
English: The emperor was very worried about the military pay, but Teitien only suggested that everyone donate their salaries to help horses and rebuild the city.

古文：所上密揭，帝率报可。
现代文：他所上呈密揭，皇上都批准了。
English: The Emperor approved all of his secret revelations.

古文：体仁自念排挤者众，恐怨归己，倡言密勿之地，不宜宣泄，凡阁揭皆不发，并不存录阁中，冀以灭迹，以故所中伤人，廷臣不能尽知。
现代文：体仁自想受排挤的人很多，恐怕他们都怨恨他，便倡议机密之地，不宜泄露，凡内阁的揭帖都不发出，全部存录阁中，企图这样来灭迹，所以他所中伤的人，廷臣都不能全部知道。
English: There are a lot of people who want to be excluded, I'm afraid they all resent him, so they advocate a secret place, it is not appropriate to divulge, they do not issue any cabinet announcements, they are all stored in the cabinet, trying to disappear in this way, so the people he slandered, the courtiers can not know everything.

古文：当国既久，劾者章不胜计，而刘宗周劾其十二罪、六奸，皆有指实。
现代文：他当国既久，弹劾他的奏章不可胜计，而刘宗周弹劾他十二罪、六奸，都有事实。
English: Since he has been in power for a long time, there are countless ways to impeach him, and Liu Zongzhou impeached him for twelve crimes and six treasons, all of which are facts.

古文：宗藩如唐王聿键，勋臣如抚宁侯朱国弼，布衣如何儒显、杨光先等，亦皆论之，光先至舆榇待命。
现代文：宗藩如唐王朱聿键，勋臣如抚宁侯朱国弼，布衣百姓如何儒显、杨光先等人，也都弹劾他，杨光先甚至带上棺材待命。
English: Zonghan such as Tang King Zhu Rongji, noblemen such as Fuxing Hou Zhu Guozhen, clothed people such as Ju Xian, Yang Guangxian and others also impeached him, Yang Guangxian even brought a coffin on standby.

古文：帝皆不省，愈以为孤立，每斥责言者以慰之，至有杖死者。
现代文：皇上都不省悟，更加以为体仁孤立，常常斥责那些论劾的人来安慰他，甚至还有被杖死的。
English: The emperor did not reflect, and thought that he was isolated. He often rebuked those who tried to comfort him, and was even caned to death.

古文：庶吉士张溥、知县张采等倡为复社，与东林相应和。
现代文：庶吉士张溥、知县张彩等人首倡组织复社，与东林党相应和。
English: Zhang Yao, Zhang Cai and others from Zhixian County, who were the first to advocate the re-establishment of the company, and the Donglin Party accordingly.

古文：体仁因推官周之夔及奸人陆文声讦奏，将兴大狱。
现代文：体仁因推官周之夔和奸人陆文声的上奏揭发，将制造大案。
English: The body will make a big case because the instigator Zhou Zhisheng and the traitor Lu Wenxuan will be exposed.

古文：严旨察治，以提学御史倪元珙、海道副使冯元飏不承风指，皆降谪之。
现代文：皇上严令调查处理，提学御史倪元珙、海道副使冯元因为不执行命令，都被贬职。
English: The emperor gave strict orders to investigate and deal with the matter, and Ni Yuanpi, the imperial secretary of education, and Feng Yuan, the vice-commander of the Northern Sea Route, were both demoted for not carrying out the order.

古文：最后复有张汉儒讦钱谦益、瞿式耜居乡不法事。
现代文：最后还有张汉儒揭发钱谦益、瞿式耜乡居时的不法事。
English: Finally, there is Zhang Hanru's exposure of Qian Qianyi's and Zou Shiqian's illegal activities while living in the countryside.

古文：体仁故仇谦益，拟旨逮二人下诏狱严讯。
现代文：体仁原来就仇恨钱谦益，便起草圣旨将二人逮捕入诏狱，严加审问。
English: Tenen originally hated Qian Qian, so he drafted an edict to arrest the two men and put them in the imperial prison for strict interrogation.

古文：谦益等危甚，求解于司礼太监曹化淳。
现代文：钱谦益等人处境很危险，向司礼监太监曹化淳求解。
English: Qian Qianyun and others were in a very dangerous situation, and they asked the superintendent of the department of etiquette, superintendent Hua Chun, for a solution.

古文：汉儒侦知之，告体仁。
现代文：张汉儒探知了这一消息，便告诉体仁。
English: Zhang Hanru detected the news and told Tetsujin.

古文：体仁密奏帝，请并坐化淳罪。
现代文：体仁秘密上奏皇上，请一并处治曹化淳。
English: Tell the Emperor about the secret of the body, and please punish Cao Huajun together.

古文：帝以示化淳，化淳惧，自请案治，乃尽得汉儒等奸状及体仁密谋。
现代文：皇上将这奏章拿给曹化淳看，曹化淳害怕了，自请处理此事，于是全部获得张汉儒等人的奸状和体仁的密谋。
English: The emperor showed this piece of music to Cao Hua Chun. Cao Hua Chun was afraid and asked to deal with the matter himself. As a result, all the treachery and conspiracy of Zhang Hanru and others were obtained.

古文：狱上，帝始悟体仁有党。
现代文：案情上呈后，皇上才知道体仁也结党。
English: After the case was filed, the emperor learned that Teito had also formed a political party.

古文：会国弼再劾体仁，帝命汉儒等立枷死。
现代文：正好朱国弼再次弹劾体仁，皇上命将张汉儒等人立即枷死。
English: Just as Zhu Guozhen again impeached Tetsujin, the emperor ordered Zhang Hanru and others to be immediately shackled to death.

古文：体仁乃佯引疾，意帝必慰留。
现代文：体仁于是假装称病辞职，料想皇上一定安慰挽留。
English: Tetsujin then pretended to be ill and resigned, thinking that the emperor would be relieved to retain him.

古文：及得旨竟放归，体仁方食，失匕箸，时十年六月也。
现代文：到收到圣旨时，才知他竟被放回，当时体仁正在吃饭，得知这一消息竟惊得失掉餐刀和筷子。这是在十年六月。
English: It was only when he received the imperial edict that he learned that he had actually been released. Tetsujin was eating at the time, and was so shocked by the news that he lost his table knife and chopsticks. This was in June of the tenth year.

古文：逾年卒，帝犹惜之，赠太傅，谥文忠。
现代文：过了一年，体仁去世，皇上还惋惜他，赠给他太傅，谥号文忠。
English: A year later, Tetsuhito passed away, and the Emperor took pity on him and gave him the title of Taifu and the posthumous name of Munetada.

古文：崇祯末，福王立于南京，以尚书顾锡畴议，削其赠谥，天下快焉。
现代文：崇祯末年，福王在南京即位，因尚书顾锡畴的建议，削去体仁的赠官和谥号，天下大快。
English: In the last years of the reign of King Chongzhen, King Fu ascended to the throne in Nanjing. Due to the advice of Shang Shu and Gu Xizhong, the bestowal of officials and honorary titles was eliminated.

古文：寻用给事中戴英言，复如初。
现代文：不久又采纳给事中戴英的意见，给他恢复如初。
English: It soon adopted Dai Ying's opinion on the matter and restored him to his former position.

古文：体仁虽前死，其所推荐张至发、薛国观之徒，皆效法体仁，蔽贤植党，国事日坏，以至于亡。
现代文：体仁虽已先死，他所推荐的张至发、薛国观之徒，都效法他，压制贤才，广结党羽，致使国政日益败坏，直到灭亡。
English: Although Tetsujin died first, the followers of Zhang Zhifa and Xue Guoqin, whom he recommended, all followed his example, suppressing the wise and talented and amassing a large number of party members, leading to the deterioration of national politics until their demise.

古文：马士英，贵阳人。
现代文：马士英，贵阳人。
English: Ma Shying, from Guiyang.

古文：万历四十四年，与怀宁阮大铖同中会试。
现代文：万历四十四年，他与怀宁人阮大铖一同考中会试。
English: Forty-four years later, he took the middle school entrance examination together with Ruan Dajuan, a native of Huaining.

古文：又三年，士英成进士，授南京户部主事。
现代文：又过了三年，士英成为进士，被授予南京户部主事。
English: After another three years, Shi Ying became a Jin Shi and was awarded the post of head of the Nanjing Household Department.

古文：天启时，迁郎中，历知严州、河南、大同三府。
现代文：天启时期，他升为郎中，历任严州、河南、大同三府知府。
English: At the time of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to junior vassal, and successively served as the prefect of three prefectures: Yanzhou, Henan, and Datong.

古文：崇祯三年，迁山西阳和道副使。
现代文：崇祯三年，升任山西阳和道副使。
English: In the third year of Chongzhen, he was promoted to the post of deputy envoy of Shanxi Yanghe Road.

古文：五年，擢右佥都御史，巡抚宣府。
现代文：五年，升为右佥都御史，巡抚宣府。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to the post of Utsunomiyoshi, the governor of the Imperial Palace.

古文：到官甫一月，檄取公帑数千金，馈遗朝贵，为镇守太监王坤所发，坐遣戍。
现代文：他到任才一个月，便传檄调取公家数千两黄金，贿赂朝中显贵，被镇守太监王坤所揭发，被判遣戍。
English: He had only been in office for a month when it was revealed that he had embezzled thousands of taels of gold from the public and bribed prominent members of the imperial family. This was revealed by the town eunuch Wang Kun and he was sentenced to exile.

古文：寻流寓南京。时大铖名挂逆案，失职久废，以避流贼至，与士英相结甚欢。
现代文：不久他流寓南京，当时阮大铖名入逆案中，早被撤职，因避流贼也到了南京，两人相交甚欢。
English: Soon he was living in Nanjing. At that time, Nguyen Dai Quan was involved in a treason case and had already been removed from his post. He also went to Nanjing to avoid the traitors, and the two of them got along very well.

古文：大铖机敏猾贼，有才藻。
现代文：阮大铖机敏狡猾，有才气。
English: Nguyn Đi Quang was quick-witted, cunning and talented.

古文：天启初，由行人擢给事中，以忧归。
现代文：天启初年，他由行人升为给事中，因亲丧回家。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was promoted from a pedestrian to a middle-ranking official, and returned home due to a personal bereavement.

古文：同邑左光斗为御史有声，大铖倚为重。
现代文：同乡的左光斗任御史，有名声，阮大铖很倚重他。
English: His fellow countryman, Zuo Guangdou Ren Youshi, is famous, and Nguyen Dai Quang is very fond of him.

古文：四年春，吏科都给事中缺，大铖次当迁，光斗招之。
现代文：四年春，吏科给事中出缺，阮大铖依次应当升任，左光斗引荐他。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, there was a vacancy in the personnel department, and Ruan Daju was promoted in turn, and Zuo Guangdou recommended him.

古文：而赵南星、高攀龙、杨涟等以察典近，大铖轻躁不可任，欲用魏大中。
现代文：而赵南星、高攀龙、杨涟等人因为吏科监察重要部门，阮大铖轻浮不可用，想用魏大中。
English: However, Zhao Nansing, Gao Panglong, Yang Hui and others wanted to use Wei Dazhong because they wanted to supervise important departments in the human resources department, while Ruan Daju was too frivolous to be used.

古文：大铖至，使补工科。
现代文：阮大铖到后，被补任工科给事中。
English: After the arrival of Ruan Dajuan, he was assigned to the engineering department.

古文：大铖心恨，阴结中珰寝推大中疏。
现代文：阮大铖心中怨恨，暗中勾结宦官压下推举魏大中的奏疏。
English: With resentment in his heart, Ruan Daju secretly colluded with eunuchs to suppress the nomination of Wei Daizhong.

古文：吏部不得已，更上大铖名，即得请。
现代文：吏部不得已，便换上阮大铖的名字，即得到批准。
English: As a last resort, the officials changed the name to Nguyn Đc Th, which was approved.

古文：大铖自是附魏忠贤，与霍维华、杨维垣、倪文焕为死友，造《百官图》，因文焕达诸忠贤。
现代文：阮大铖从此依附于魏忠贤，与霍维华、杨维垣、倪文焕结为死友，制作《百官图》，通过倪文焕送达魏忠贤手中。
English: From then on, Nguyn Đi Quang attached himself to Wei Zhongxian and formed a close friendship with Huo Weihua, Yang Weiqi, and Ni Wenhuan. He produced "The Map of a Hundred Officials" and sent it to Wei Zhongxian through Ni Wenhuan.

古文：然畏东林攻己，未一月遽请急归。
现代文：但他害怕东林党攻击自己，不到一个月就赶紧请求回家。
English: But he was afraid that the Donglin Party would attack him, so he hurriedly asked to go home in less than a month.

古文：而大中掌吏科，大铖愤甚，私谓所亲曰： 我犹善归，未知左氏何如耳。 
现代文：而魏大中掌管吏科，阮大铖非常愤恨，私下对所亲善的人说： 我还得以善归，不知道左氏将怎么样。 
English: However, Nguyn Đi Quang, who was in charge of the clerical science department at Wei University, was very angry and privately said to his close friend: "I was able to return home safely. I don't know what will happen to Mr. Zuo."

古文：已而杨、左诸人狱死，大铖对客诩诩自矜。
现代文：后来杨涟、左光斗等人死于狱中，阮大铖对客人得意地自我夸耀。
English: Later, Yang Hui, Zuo Guangdou and others died in prison, and Nguyn Đc proudly boasted to his guests.

古文：寻召为太常少卿，至都，事忠贤极谨，而阴虑其不足恃，每进谒，辄厚贿忠贤阍人，还其刺。
现代文：不久他被召任太常寺少卿。他到京都后，侍奉魏忠贤极为恭谨，但暗中担心他不足以依靠，每次去拜见，总是厚贿魏忠贤的守门人，交还他的名片。
English: Soon he was called to the post of Shokei (Junior Secretary) of Taijo-ji Temple. After he arrived in Kyoto, he served Wei Zhongxian very respectfully, but secretly worried that he was not reliable enough. Every time he went to visit him, he always bribed Wei Zhongxian's gatekeeper to return his business card.

古文：居数月，复乞归。
现代文：几个月之后，他又请求回家。
English: A few months later, he asked to come home.

古文：忠贤既诛，大铖函两疏驰示维垣。其一专劾崔、魏。其一以七年合算为言，谓天启四年以后，乱政者忠贤，而翼以呈秀，四年以前，乱政者王安，而翼以东林。
现代文：魏忠贤被诛后，阮大铖装上两封奏疏驰送给杨维垣看，其中一篇专门弹劾崔呈秀和魏忠贤；另一篇将前后七年的事合起来算，他说从天启四年以后，乱政的是魏忠贤，而呈秀是助手，四年以前，乱政的是王安，而东林党是羽翼。
English: After the arrest of Wei Zhongxian, Nguyen Dai Quan sent two letters to Yang Weigang, one of which was dedicated to the impeachment of Cui Chuanxiu and Wei Chuanxian. The other one summed up the events of the past seven years. He said that four years after the apocalypse, Wei Chuanxian was in chaos and Chuanxiu was his assistant. Four years ago, Wang An was in chaos, and the Donglin Party was the wing.

古文：传语维垣，若时局大变，上劾崔、魏疏，脱未定，则上算疏。
现代文：他告诉杨维垣，如果时局大变，就将弹劾崔、魏的奏疏上呈，如果局势未定，则将合算疏上呈。
English: He told Yang Weigaki that if the situation changes dramatically, the impeachment of Cui and Wei will be postponed, and if the situation is undecided, it will be postponed.

古文：会维垣方并指东林、崔、魏为邪党，与编修倪元璐相诋，得大铖疏，大喜，为投合算疏以自助。
现代文：正值杨维垣正一并指责东林、崔、魏为邪党，与编修倪元璐相互诋毁，得到阮大铖的奏疏后，非常高兴，为他投上合算疏，以帮助他自己。
English: At the time, Yang Weiqi Zheng jointly accused Donglin, Cui and Wei of being evil parties, and slandered the editor Ni Yuanqi. After receiving the donation from Ruan Daxuan, he was very happy and invested in a profitable donation for him to help himself.

古文：崇祯元年，起光禄卿。
现代文：崇祯元年，起用他为光禄寺卿。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was appointed as the Keeper of the Guanglu Temple.

古文：御史毛羽健劾其党邪，罢去。
现代文：御史毛羽健弹劾他袒护邪党，他被罢免而去。
English: He was impeached by Mofu Jian for supporting the evil party, and he was dismissed.

古文：明年定逆案，论赎徒为民，终庄烈帝世，废斥十七年，郁郁不得志。
现代文：第二年定逆案，阮大铖被判徒刑，准自赎为民。终庄烈帝一世，他被废斥十七年，郁郁不得志。
English: The following year, in a case of treason, Nguyn Đc was sentenced to prison and allowed to redeem himself to the people. Finally, he was deposed and exiled for seventeen years.

古文：流寇逼皖，大铖避居南京，颇招纳游侠为谈兵说剑，觊以边才召。
现代文：流寇逼近安徽，阮大铖避居南京，颇招纳游侠来谈兵说剑，希望以边将之才被召用。
English: The bandits were approaching Anhui, and Nguyn Đc was hiding in Nanking. He recruited a number of knights-errant to talk about swords, hoping to be called up as a general.

古文：无锡顾杲、吴县杨廷枢、芜湖沈士柱、馀姚黄宗羲、鄞县万泰等，皆复社中名士，方聚讲南京，恶大铖甚，作《留都防乱揭》逐之。
现代文：无锡顾杲、吴县杨廷枢、芜湖沈士柱、余姚黄宗羲、鄞县万泰等人，都是复社中的名士，他们正聚集在南京讲学，非常厌恶阮大铖，做《留都防乱揭》来驱逐他。
English: Wuxi Gu Yao, Wu County Yang Ting Zu, Wuhu Shen Shizhu, Yuyao Huang Zong Yao, Wu County Wan Tai and others are all famous people in the resurgent society. They are gathering in Nanjing to lecture. They are very disgusted with Ruan Daxuan and made "Staying in the Capital to Prevent Chaos" to expel him.

古文：大铖惧，乃闭门谢客，独与士英深相结。
现代文：阮大铖害怕了，便闭门谢客，只与士英深相勾结。
English: Terrified, Ruan Daju closed the door to thank the guests and only colluded with Shi Ying Sheng.

古文：周延儒内召，大铖辇金钱要之维扬，求湔濯。
现代文：周延儒被召入阁，阮大铖载上金钱去贿求维扬，企图洗清前罪。
English: Zhou Yanru was summoned to the cabinet, and Ruan Dajuan loaded up with money to bribe Wei Yang in an attempt to clear up his previous sins.

古文：延儒曰： 吾此行，谬为东林所推。
现代文：周延儒说： 我此行，误为东林党所推。
English: Zhou Yanru said: My trip was mistakenly pushed by the Donglin Party.

古文：子名在逆案，可乎？ 
现代文：你的名字在逆案中，能行吗？ 
English: Your name is on the reverse, is that okay?

古文：大铖沉吟久之，曰： 瑶草何如？ 
现代文：阮大铖沉吟良久，说： 瑶草怎么样？ 
English: Nguyn Đi Quang paused for a long time and said, "How is the lettuce?"

古文：瑶草，士英别字也，延儒许之。
现代文：瑶草，是马士英的别字。周延儒答应了。
English: Zhou Yanru said yes.

古文：十五年六月，凤阳总督高斗光以失五城逮治。
现代文：十五年六月，凤阳总督高斗光因失陷五城被逮捕治罪。
English: In June of the fifteenth year, Fengyang Governor Gao Douguang was arrested and punished for losing five cities.

古文：礼部侍郎王锡兖荐士英才，延儒从中主之，遂起兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督庐、凤等处军务。
现代文：礼部侍郎王锡兖推荐士英有才，周延儒从中做主，于是起用士英为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督庐州、凤阳等处军事。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Wang Xizhao, recommended a scholar of great talent, and Zhou Yanru took the lead, so he appointed the scholar Ying as the right attendant of the military department and the right attendant of the capital, the governor of Bozhou, Fengyang and other military departments.

古文：永城人刘超者，天启中以征安邦彦功，积官至四川遵义总兵官，坐罪免，数营复官不得。
现代文：永城人刘超，天启年间以征伐安邦彦之功，累升到四川遵义总兵官，后因犯罪被罢免，多次营求复官而不得。
English: Liu Chao, a native of Yongcheng, rose to the rank of general of Sichuan Zunyi during the years of the Apocalypse, thanks to his success in the conquest of An Bangyan. Later, he was removed from his post for committing a crime, and was unable to return to his post after many attempts.

古文：李自成围开封，超请募士冠协击，乃用为保定总兵官，令率兵赴救。
现代文：李自成包围开封时，刘超请招募土寇协助击贼，于是起用他为保定总兵官，令他率兵援救开封。
English: When Li Zicheng was besieging Kaifeng, Liu Chao asked him to recruit Turkic raiders to help fight the bandits, so he appointed him as the chief military officer of Baoding and ordered him to lead the troops to rescue Kaifeng.

古文：超惮不敢行，宿留家中，以私怨杀御史魏景琦等三家，遂据城反。
现代文：刘超害怕而不敢行，宿留家中，以私怨杀掉御史魏景琦等三家，然后据城反叛。
English: Liu Chao was afraid and did not dare to go, so he stayed at home and killed three families, including Wei Jingyao, with personal grudges, and then rebelled against the city.

古文：巡抚王汉讨之，被杀。
现代文：巡抚王汉讨伐他，被杀。
English: The governor Wang Han fought against him and was killed.

古文：帝乃命士英偕太监卢九德、河南总兵官陈永福进讨。
现代文：皇上于是命士英偕同太监卢九德、河南总兵官陈永福进兵讨伐。
English: The emperor then ordered the officer Ying Qi, together with the eunuch Lu Jiude and the Henan general officer Chen Yongfu, to march into battle.

古文：明年四月，围其城，连战，贼屡挫，筑长围困之。
现代文：第二年四月，包围其城，接连作战，贼人屡次被打败，官军遂筑起长围围困他们。
English: In April of the following year, they besieged the city and fought one battle after another. The thieves were repeatedly defeated, and the government army then built a long siege to surround them.

古文：超官贵州时，与士英相识，缘旧好乞降。
现代文：刘超在贵州为官时，与士英相识，便提起旧好请求投降。
English: When Liu Chao was an official in Guizhou and met with Shi Ying, he brought up the old request to surrender.

古文：士英佯许之，超出见，不肯去佩刀。
现代文：士英假意答应了，刘超出来相见时，不肯解掉佩刀。
English: Shi Ying pretended to agree, but when Liu Chao came out to meet him, he refused to take off his sword.

古文：士英笑曰： 若既归朝，安用此？ 
现代文：士英笑道 ：你既归附朝廷，还用那玩艺儿干什么？ 
English: Shi Ying said with a smile, "Since you have joined the imperial court, what are you still doing with that toy?"

古文：手解其刀。
现代文：他亲手给刘超解下了刀。
English: He personally unsheathed the knife for Liu Chao.

古文：已，潜去其亲信，遂就缚。
现代文：过后，又暗中去掉他的亲信，刘超遂就擒。
English: After that, he secretly removed his close confidant, and Liu Chao was eventually killed.

古文：献俘于朝，磔死。
现代文：士英把他当俘虏献给朝廷，将他肢解。
English: Shi Ying presented him as a prisoner to the imperial court and dismembered him.

古文：时流寇充斥，士英捍御数有功。
现代文：当时流寇充斥，士英率兵捍御，多次立功。
English: At that time, the area was full of bandits, and Shih Ying led the troops to defend the area and made many meritorious deeds.

古文：十七年三月，京师陷，帝崩，南京诸大臣闻变，仓卒议立君。
现代文：十七年三月，京师失陷，皇上驾崩。南京诸大臣得知这一消息，仓猝之间议立新君。
English: In March of the seventeenth year, the capital fell and the emperor died. When the ministers of Nanjing learned this news, they hastily discussed the appointment of a new emperor.

古文：而福王由崧、潞王常淓俱避贼至淮安，伦序当属福王。
现代文：而福王朱由嵩、潞王朱常芳都因避贼到了淮安，依亲疏顺序应当立福王。
English: However, Zhu Yu Song, the King of Good Fortune, and Zhu Changfang, the King of Shadows, both came to Huai'an to avoid thieves, and they should establish the King of Good Fortune according to the order of kinship.

古文：诸大臣虑福王立，或追怨 妖书 及 挺击 、 移宫 等案；潞王立，则无后患，且可邀功。
现代文：各大臣们担心福王一立，可能会追怨 妖书 和 梃击 、 移宫 等案，而如果立潞王，则没有后患，而且还可以邀功。
English: The ministers are worried that if Fu Wang is established, they may pursue the cases of Yanshu Rong (妖書) and Xuanhuang (击) and move the palace. However, if Fu Wang is established, there will be no after-effects, and they can also claim credit.

古文：阴主之者，废籍礼部侍郎钱谦益，力持其议者兵部侍郎吕大器，而右都御史张慎言、詹事姜曰广皆然之。
现代文：暗中做主的，是被废籍礼部侍郎钱谦益，极力支持这一意见的是兵部侍郎吕大器，而右都御史张慎言、詹事姜曰广都同意。
English: The secret decision-maker was Qian Qianyun, the attendant of the abolished ceremonial department, and the opinion was strongly supported by the attendant of the military department, Lv Daqi, while the Right Metropolitan Historian Zhang Shenyan and Zhan Zhi Jiang said that they all agreed.

古文：前山东按察使佥事雷縯祚、礼部员外郎周镳往来游说。
现代文：前山东按察使佥事雷演祚、礼部员外郎周镳往来游说。
English: The former Shandong provincial inspector made a lightning deduction of the matter, and the member of the ritual department, Wairo Zhou, lobbied back and forth.

古文：时士英督师庐、凤，独以为不可，密与操江诚意伯刘孔昭，总兵高杰、刘泽清、黄得功、刘良佐等结，而公致书于参赞机务兵部尚书史可法，言伦序亲贤，无如福王。
现代文：当时士英正在庐州、凤阳督师，独认为不可，秘密与操江诚意伯刘孔昭，总兵高杰、刘泽清、黄得功、刘良佐等人勾结，一同致书给参赞机务兵部尚书史可法，说依伦常之序，论亲论贤，莫如福王。
English: At that time, Shi Ying was in Zhangzhou, Fengyang superintendent, and thought that it was impossible for him to secretly collude with Liu Kong Zhao, the commander of Guojiang, General Gao Jie, Liu Zeching, Huang Dergong, Liu Liang Zuo and others, and together they sent a letter to the Counsellor of the Machinery and Armament Department Shang Shuxi Ke Fa, saying that the order of Yilun is constant, and there is no such thing as the king of fortune.

古文：可法意未决。
现代文：史可法主意未定。
English: Scofield is undecided.

古文：及廷臣集议，吏科给事中李沾探士英指，面折大器。
现代文：后来廷臣集中商议，吏科给事中李沾探到马士英的旨意，当面驳斥吕大器。
English: Later, the courtiers discussed intensively, and Li Zang discovered Ma Shih-ying's intention and refuted Lü Daqi face to face.

古文：士英亦自庐、凤拥兵迎福王至江上，诸大臣乃不敢言。
现代文：士英也从庐州、凤阳拥兵迎福王到江上，大臣们才不敢说话。
English: Shih Ying also went from Zhangzhou and Fengyang to welcome Fu Wang to the river, and the ministers did not dare to speak.

古文：王之立，士英力也。
现代文：福王之得以登基，全仗了士英的支持。
English: Emperor Fukuda was able to ascend to the throne with the full support of Shiei.

古文：当王监国时，廷推阁臣，刘孔昭攘臂欲得之，可法折以勋臣无入阁例。
现代文：当福王监国时，朝廷公推阁臣，刘孔昭振臂想争得其位，史可法以勋臣没有入阁的先例进行反对。
English: When King Fook was in charge of the country, the imperial court publicly promoted cabinet ministers. Liu Kong Zhaobing wanted to fight for his position, but Shifa opposed it, citing the precedent of honorable ministers not entering the cabinet.

古文：孔昭乃讼言： 我不可，士英何不可？ 
现代文：刘孔昭于是争道 ：我不行，士英为什么不行？ 
English: Liu Kongzhao then argued: I can't do it, why can't Shi Ying?

古文：于是进士英东阁大学士兼兵部尚书、都察院右副都御史，与可法及户部尚书高弘图并命，士英仍督师凤阳。
现代文：于是进升士英为东阁大学士兼兵部尚书、都察院右副都御史，与史可法和户部尚书高弘图一同受命，士英仍到凤阳督师。
English: As a result, Jin Sheng Shih Ying was appointed as a Donggak University scholar, as well as a member of the Military Department, and as the right-hand vice-president of the Military History Research Institute. He received the same orders as Shi Ke Fa and the head of the Military History Research Institute, Gao Hongtu. Shih Ying still went to Fengyang to be an inspector.

古文：士英大愠，令高杰、刘泽清等疏趣可法督师淮、扬，而士英留辅政，仍掌兵部，权震中外。
现代文：士英非常恼怒，令高杰、刘泽清等人上疏催促史可法到淮安、扬州督师，而士英留下辅政，仍掌兵部，权震内外。
English: Shi Ying was very angry, and Gao Jie, Liu Zeqing and others urged Shi Kefa to go to Huai'an and Yangzhou to supervise, while Shi Ying remained a vice-president, still in charge of the military department, weighing in and out of the earthquake.

古文：寻论定策功，加太子太师，荫锦衣卫指挥佥事。
现代文：不久，论定策之功，加封士英为太子太师，庇荫锦衣卫指挥佥事。
English: Not long after, as a result of the deliberation on the strategy, Jafeng Shiying was appointed as the prince's grandmaster, and the patronage of Jin Rongwei as the commanding officer was anecdotal.

古文：九月，叙江北历年战功，加少傅兼太子太师、建极殿大学士，荫子如前。
现代文：九月，评江北历年战绩，加封他为少傅兼太子太师、建极殿大学士，仍如前庇荫儿子一职。
English: In September, he was awarded the title of "Junior Grandmaster, Crown Prince and Grand Master" and "Junior Scholar of Jianji Temple" for his achievements in the north of the Yangtze River. He still holds the position of the son of the former Empress Dowager.

古文：十二月，进少师。
现代文：十二月，进封他为少师。
English: In December, he was promoted to junior teacher.

古文：明年，进太保。
现代文：第二年，进封为太保。
English: In the second year, Jinfeng was promoted to Taibo.

古文：当是时，中原郡县尽失，高杰死睢州，诸镇权侔无统。
现代文：当时，中原郡县全部失陷，高杰死于睢州，各镇权都没有统属。
English: At that time, all the counties in the Central Plains had fallen, Gao Jie died in Zhangzhou, and all the townships were not subordinate.

古文：左良玉拥兵上流，跋扈有异志。
现代文：左良玉在长江上游拥兵，骄横跋扈有异志。
English: Zuo Liangyu supported the soldiers in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. He was arrogant and ambitious.

古文：而士英为人贪鄙无远略，复引用大铖，日事报复，招权罔利，以迄于亡。
现代文：而士英为人贪婪粗鄙没有远略，又引用阮大铖，每天专事报复，揽权逐利，直到灭亡。
English: On the other hand, Shi Ying was a greedy and vulgar person who did not hesitate, and quoted Nguyn Đi Quang as saying that he would take revenge on a daily basis and seek power and profit until his death.

古文：初，可法、弘图及姜曰广、张慎言等皆宿德在位，将以次引海内人望，而士英必欲起大铖。
现代文：当初，史可法、高弘图和姜曰广、张慎言等人都是宿德在位掌权，并将逐渐引用海内有名望之人，而士英却一定要起用阮大铖。
English: At the beginning, Shi Kefa, Gao Hongtu, Jiang Zhiguang, Zhang Shengyan and others were all in power during the reign of Su Dongde, and would gradually cite famous people at home, but Shi Ying must use Ruan Dajuan.

古文：有诏广搜人材，独立逆案不可轻议。
现代文：有诏书说要广罗人才，但说逆案中人不可轻易讨论。
English: There is an imperial edict saying that a wide range of talent is needed, but that people should not be easily discussed in the opposite case.

古文：士英令孔昭及侯汤国祚、伯赵之龙等攻慎言去之，而荐大铖知兵。
现代文：士英令刘孔昭和侯爵汤国祚、伯爵赵之龙等人攻击张慎言而逐走他，推荐阮大铖懂得军事。
English: Liu Kong Showa, Marquis Tang Guozhen, Count Zhao Zhilong and others attacked Zhang Shengyan and drove him away, recommending Nguyen Dai Quan to understand military affairs.

古文：初，大铖在南京，与守备太监韩赞周暱。
现代文：当初，阮大铖在南京时，与守备太监韩赞周关系亲密。
English: At first, when he was in Nanjing, Ruan Dajuan had a close relationship with the eunuch Han Zanzhou.

古文：京师陷，中贵人悉南奔，大铖因赞周遍结之，为群奄言东林当日所以危贵妃、福王者，俾备言于王，以潜倾可法等。
现代文：京师失陷后，显贵的宦官都南奔，阮大铖通过韩赞周都与他们结交上了，他对群阉谈东林党当年之所以倾危贵妃、福王的原因，希望他们对福王提起，借以排挤史可法等人。
English: After the fall of Beijing, the prominent eunuchs all fled south, and Nguyn Đc made friends with them all through Han Zng. He talked to the group of eunuchs about the reasons why the Donglin Party had endangered Guifei and Fu Wang that year, and hoped that they would mention Fu Wang, so as to crowd out Shi Kefa and others.

古文：群奄更极口称大铖才，士英亦言大铖从山中致书与定策谋，为白其附珰赞导无实迹。
现代文：群阉更极口称赞阮大铖有才华，士英也说阮大铖从山中投书与他，制定谋策，还为他辩白，说他实没有依附大魏忠贤，为其策划。
English: The scholars also said that Nguyn Đài Quc wrote to him from the mountains and made plans with him. They also defended Nguyn Đài Quc, saying that he did not rely on the Wei chieftains and planned for them.

古文：遂命大铖冠带陛见。
现代文：于是福王命阮大铖冠带朝见。
English: As a result, King Fu ordered Nguyn Đc to bring the crown to the imperial court.

古文：大铖乃上守江策，陈三要、两合、十四隙疏，并自白孤忠被陷，痛诋孙慎行、魏大中、左光斗，且指大中为大逆。
现代文：阮大铖于是献上守江之策，上陈三要、二合、十四隙奏疏，并自述自己孤忠被陷害，痛诋孙慎行、魏大中、左光斗，而且指责魏大中为大逆。
English: Nguyn Đi Quang then proposed a strategy for protecting the river, and proposed the three points, two points, and fourteen points. He also said that he had been framed for his loyalty, and denounced Sun Shengxing, Wei Daizhong, and Zuo Guangdou, and accused Wei Daizhong of high treason.

古文：于是大学士姜曰广、侍郎吕大器、怀远侯常延龄等并言大铖逆案巨魁，不可召。
现代文：于是大学士姜曰广、侍郎吕大器、怀远侯常延龄等人都说阮大铖是逆案巨魁，不可召用。
English: As a result, the university scholar Jiang Zhiguang, the chamberlain Lu Daiqi, Huaiyuan Hou Chang Yanling and others all said that Ruan Daxuan was the leader of the reverse case and could not be summoned.

古文：士英为大铖奏辨，力攻曰广、大器，益募宗室统钅类、建安王统镂辈，连疏交攻。
现代文：士英为阮大铖上奏辩解，极力攻击姜曰广、吕大器，还拉上宗室朱统翷、建安珠统镂之辈，接连上疏攻击。
English: Judge Ying defended Nguyn Đc's speech, vigorously attacked Jiang Đc Quang and Lü Đc Quang, and also brought up Zhu Đc's and Jian An Zhu Đc's family members to attack Đc Đc.

古文：而以大学士高弘图为御史时尝诋东林，必当右己，乃言 弘图素知臣者。 
现代文：士英还认为大学士高弘图为御史时曾诋毁东林党，一定会支持他，便说 弘图一定知道臣的为人 。
English: Shi Ying also thought that the university scholar Hongtu had slandered the Donglin Party when he was a historian, and he would definitely support him. He said that Hongtu must have known what kind of person he was.

古文：弘图则言先帝钦定逆案一书，不可擅改。
现代文：高弘图却说先帝钦定逆案一书，不可擅改。
English: Gao Hongtu, however, said that the former emperor Khin Ting had made a counter-proposal and that it could not be changed without authorization.

古文：士英与争，弘图因乞罢。
现代文：士英与他争辩，高弘图遂请罢免。
English: Shi Ying argued with him, and Gao Hongtu was finally dismissed.

古文：士英意稍折，迟回月余，用安远侯柳祚昌荐，中旨起大铖兵部添注右侍郎。
现代文：士英心意稍稍受挫，迟疑了一个多月，用安远侯柳祚昌的推荐，发中旨起用阮大铖为兵部添注右侍郎。
English: Slightly frustrated, Shi Ying hesitated for more than a month, and with the recommendation of Anyuan Hou Liu Yuchang, he issued the order to appoint Ruan Daxuan as the right hand man of the military department.

古文：左都御史刘宗周言： 杀大中者魏珰，大铖其主使也。
现代文：左都御史刘宗周说 ：杀魏大中的是魏阉，阮大铖是其主使。
English: Liu Zongzhou, the governor of the Left Capital, said: "It was Wei Wei who killed Wei Daizhong, and Ruan Daizhong was his chief envoy.

古文：即才果足用，臣虑党邪害正之才，终病世道。
现代文：即使他才能果然足以使用，臣担心这种党邪害正之才，终会贻害世道。
English: Even if his talent is indeed enough to use, the minister is worried that this kind of party evil harms the right talent, and will eventually harm the world.

古文：大铖进退，实系江左兴亡，乞寝成命。 
现代文：阮大铖此番进退，实关系江左的兴亡，乞请停罢这一成命。 
English: Ruan Dajuan's advance and retreat this time is actually related to the rise and fall of Jiang Zuo, please stop this success.

古文：有旨切责。
现代文：有圣旨严厉斥责他。
English: There was a decree to rebuke him severely.

古文：未几，大铖兼右佥都御史，巡阅江防。
现代文：不久，阮大铖兼任右佥都御史，巡阅长江防线。
English: Soon, Nguyn Đi Quang concurrently served as the right-hand magistrate of the capital, patrolling the Yangtze River defense line.

古文：寻转左侍郎。
现代文：不久转为左侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Sasajiro.

古文：明年二月进本部尚书兼右副都御史，仍阅江防。
现代文：第二年二月进升为本部尚书兼右副都御史，仍巡阅长江防线。
English: In February of the following year, he was promoted to the head of the Shoshu and Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, and still patrolled the Yangtze River defense line.

古文：吕大器、姜曰广、刘宗周、高弘图、徐石麒皆与士英龃龉，先后罢归。
现代文：吕大器、姜曰广、刘宗周、高弘图、徐石麒都与士英有矛盾，先后被罢免回家。
English: Lv Dati, Jiang Zhaigang, Liu Zongzhou, Gao Hongtu, and Xu Shijuan all had conflicts with Shi Ying, and were successively dismissed to go home.

古文：士英独握大柄，内倚中官田成辈，外结勋臣刘孔昭、朱国弼、柳祚昌，镇将刘泽清、刘良佐等，而一听大铖计。
现代文：士英独握大权，内倚宦官田成之辈，外结勋臣刘孔昭、朱国弼、柳祚昌、镇将刘泽清、刘良佐等人，而专听阮大铖之计。
English: Shi Ying held all the power, and he leaned on the officials such as Tian Cheng and his contemporaries, as well as the honored vassals Liu Kongzhao, Zhu Guozhen, Liu Yuchang, and the generals Liu Zeching and Liu Liangzuo, while listening to the schemes of Nguyn Đc.

古文：尽起逆案中杨维垣、虞廷陛、郭如暗、周昌晋、虞大复、徐复阳、陈以瑞、吴孔嘉；其死者悉予赠恤，而与张捷、唐世济等比；若张孙振、袁弘勋、刘光斗皆得罪先朝，复置言路为爪牙。
现代文：他尽起逆案中的杨维垣、虞廷陛、郭如暗、周昌晋、虞大复、徐复阳、陈以瑞、吴孔嘉；已死的人都给赠官和抚恤，而与张捷、唐世济等人比同；像张孙振、袁弘勋、刘光斗都在先朝时得罪，这时又把他们安置在言路，作为爪牙。
English: Yang Weigaki, Yu Tingzong, Guo Ruyan, Zhou Changjin, Yu Dafu, Xu Foyang, Chen Yirui, Wu Kongjia, all of whom were involved in the counter-suit, have been given official gifts and pensions, and are compared to Zhang Jie, Tang Shiji, and others; Zhang Sun Zhen, Yuan Hongxun, and Liu Guangdou all committed crimes during the previous dynasty, and at that time they were placed on the path of words, as minions.

古文：朝政浊乱，贿赂公行。
现代文：朝政混乱，贿赂公行。
English: The imperial government was in disarray, and bribery was rampant.

古文：四方警报狎至，士英身掌中枢，一无筹画，日以锄正人引凶党为务。
现代文：四方警报不断传来，士英身掌中枢大权，一无筹划，每天专以铲除正人引进凶党为务。
English: The four-party warning kept coming, and Shi Ying was in charge of the central power. There was no plan, and every day was dedicated to the eradication of righteous people and the introduction of evil parties.

古文：初，举朝以逆案攻大铖，大铖憾甚。
现代文：当初，举朝以逆案攻击阮大铖，阮大铖非常愤恨。
English: At first, North Korea attacked Nguyn Đc with a counter-suit. Nguyn Đc was very angry.

古文：及见北都从逆诸臣有附会清流者，因倡言曰： 彼攻逆案，吾作顺案与之对。 
现代文：后来见到北都依从为逆的诸臣中有附会清流的人，他便倡言道： 他们攻击逆案，我就造顺案与他们相对。 
English: Later, when he saw that some of the vassals who had followed Hokuto's counter-proposal were affiliated with the Clear Stream Association, he advocated, "If they attack the counter-proposal, I will make a counter-proposal to oppose them."

古文：以李自成伪国号曰顺也。
现代文：这是因为李自成的伪国号叫顺。
English: This is because Li Zicheng's pseudo-country is called Shun.

古文：士英因疏纠从逆光时亨等；时亨名附东林，故重劾之。
现代文：士英随即上疏弹劾从逆的光时亨等人。光时亨属于东林党，所以从重弹劾他。
English: Shih Ying then went to impeach the traitor Guang Shih Heng and others. Guang Shih Heng belonged to the Donglin Party, so he was impeached again.

古文：大铖又诬逮顾杲及左光斗弟光先下狱，劾周镳、雷縯祚杀之。
现代文：阮大铖又诬陷并逮捕顾杲和左光斗的弟弟光先下狱，弹劾并杀了周镳、雷演祚。
English: Nguyn Đc also framed and arrested Gu H and Zuo Hu's younger brother, Hu Hu, who went to prison first, and impeached and killed Zhou Hu and Lê Đi.

古文：时有狂僧大悲出语不类，为总督京营戎政赵之龙所捕。大铖欲假以诛东林及素所不合者，因造十八罗汉、五十三参之目，书史可法、高弘图、姜曰广等姓名，内大悲袖中，海内人望，无不备列。
现代文：当时有个狂僧叫大悲，出语不类，被总督京营戎政赵之龙逮捕，阮大铖想诛杀东林党以及与他素不相合的人，便造十八罗汉、五十三参之名目，写上史可法、高弘图、姜曰广等人的姓名，塞进大悲的袖中，海内有名望之士，无不罗列其中。
English: At that time, there was a mad monk named Dabi, who uttered strange words and was arrested by Zhao Zhulong, the governor of Beijing Ying Rong Zheng. In order to kill the Donglin Party and people who were not compatible with him, Ruan Dabi made the names of eighteen Luohans and fifty-three Sang, wrote the names of Shi Kefa, Gao Hongtu, Jiang Zhaigang and other people, and stuffed them into Dabi's sleeve. Famous people in the country are all listed among them.

古文：钱谦益先已上疏颂士英，且为大铖讼冤修好矣，大铖憾不释，亦列焉，将穷治其事。
现代文：钱谦益先已上疏歌颂士英，而且还为阮大铖诉冤修好了，但阮大铖恨犹未消，也把他列入，将要究治他的事。
English: Qian Xianyik had already sung the praises of Shi Ying, and he had also settled the grievances for Ruan Daxuan, but Ruan Daxuan's hatred had not yet disappeared, and he was also included, and his case would be investigated.

古文：狱词诡秘，朝士皆自危，而士英不欲兴大狱，乃当大悲妖言律斩而止。
现代文：狱词诡秘，朝士人人自危。而士英不想造大案，于是判大悲犯妖言之罪斩首而止。
English: Prison terms are secretive, and all Asashi are at risk. As opposed to Shiiing, who did not want to make a big deal of it, he decided to behead Daisetsu, the perpetrator of the crime of witchcraft.

古文：张缙彦以本兵首从贼，贼败，缙彦窜归河南，自言集义勇收复列城，即授原官，总督河北、山西、河南军务，便宜行事。
现代文：张缙彦以本部之兵首先从贼，贼寇失败后，张缙彦窜回河南，自称要收集义勇收复各城，即被授予原官，总督河北、山西、河南军务，准许相机行事。
English: Zhang Qianyan was the first to use the soldiers of the headquarters to defeat the bandits. After the failure of the bandits, Zhang Qianyan returned to Henan, claiming that he wanted to collect volunteers to recover the cities, that is, he was awarded the original officer, the governor of Hebei, Shanxi and Henan military affairs, and allowed the camera to act.

古文：其他大僚降贼者，贿入，辄复其官。
现代文：其他投降贼人的大官，一送入贿赂，即得恢复原官。
English: Other high-ranking officials who surrendered to the bandits were reinstated as soon as the bribe was paid.

古文：诸白丁、录役输重赂，立跻大帅。
现代文：那些白丁、隶役只要输入重贿，立即可升为大帅。
English: Those non-commissioned officers and subordinates can be promoted to the rank of general as long as they pay a heavy bribe.

古文：都人为语曰： 职方贱如狗，都督满街走。 
现代文：京都百姓为此说道 ：职方贱如狗，都督满街走。 
English: For this reason, the people of Kyoto say: the workers are cheap as dogs, and the streets are full of them.

古文：其刑赏倒乱如此。
现代文：刑赏倒乱竟达如此地步。
English: This is how far the chaos of punishment and reward has gone.

古文：大清兵抵宿迁、邳州，未几引还。
现代文：大清兵抵达宿迁、邳州，不久引兵北还。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty arrived in Suqian and Zhangzhou, and soon withdrew to the north.

古文：史可法以闻，士英大笑不止，坐客杨士聪问故。
现代文：史可法上报朝廷，士英大笑不止，坐中客杨士聪问原因。
English: Shi Kefa reported to the imperial court. Shi Ying laughed uncontrollably. Yang Shicong, a guest, asked the reason.

古文：士英曰： 君以为诚有是事耶？ 
现代文：士英说： 君以为真的有此事吗？
English: Shi Ying said, "Do you think this really happened?"

古文：乃史公妙用也。
现代文：此乃是史公妙用。
English: This is a clever use of history.

古文：岁将暮，防河将吏应叙功，耗费军资应稽算，此特为序功、稽算地耳。 
现代文：已到了岁末，防河的将吏应该叙功了，耗费的军资也应核算了，此举是特为叙功、核算打下伏笔而已。 
English: At the end of the year, the river defense officers should be awarded, and the military funds expended should be accounted for. This move is just a prelude to awarding and accounting.

古文：侍讲卫胤文兼给事中，监高杰军。
现代文：侍讲卫胤文兼给事中，监督高杰部队。
English: In addition to his duties, he supervised Gao Jie's troops.

古文：杰死，胤文窥士英指，论可法督师为赘。
现代文：高杰死，卫胤文窥伺士英旨意，弹劾史可法督师无用。
English: Gao Jie is dead, Wei Yan Wen Pei serves the will of Shi Ying, and it is useless to impeach Shi Ke, the legal inspector.

古文：士英即擢胤文兵部右侍郎，总督杰营将士以分其权，可法益不得展布。
现代文：士英即提拔卫胤文为兵部右侍郎，总督高杰营的将士以分史可法之权，史可法更无法施为。
English: Shih Ying then promoted Wei Yanwen to the position of the right hand man of the military department, and the general officer of the Governor Gao Jieying had the power to divide the history and laws, and the history and laws could not be enforced.

古文：先是，左良玉接监国诏书，不肯拜，袁继咸强之，乃开读如礼。
现代文：原先，左良玉接到监国所发的诏书，不肯拜，袁继咸勉强他，这才依礼开读诏书。
English: Originally, when Zuo Liangyu received the imperial edict issued by the tutelary state, he refused to bow. Yuan Jixian forced him to do so, and only then did the imperial edict begin to be read according to etiquette.

古文：而属承天守备何志孔、巡按御史黄澍入贺，阴伺朝廷动静。
现代文：而他嘱咐承天守备何志孔、巡按御史黄澍入朝拜贺，暗中窥伺朝廷动静。
English: However, he ordered Chojeong Tenshu to prepare Ho Shikong and Junpo Goshi to enter the Imperial Palace to pay homage, secretly spying on the movements of the Imperial Court.

古文：澍挟良玉势，当陛见，面数士英奸贪不法，且言尝受张献忠伪兵部尚书周文江重贿，为题授参将，罪当斩。
现代文：黄澍挟左良玉之势，拜见福王时，当面历数士英奸贪不法之事，并且说他曾接受张献忠伪兵部尚书周文江的重贿，为周文江请授为参将，其罪当斩。
English: When Huang Xuan met with King Fu, he told him about the treachery and corruption of several British officers, and said that he had accepted a heavy bribe from Zhang Xianzhong and Zhou Wenjiang, a fake military official. Zhou Wenjiang was awarded the rank of general, and his crime should be punished.

古文：志孔亦论士英冈上行私诸罪。
现代文：何志孔也弹劾士英骗上营私等罪。
English: He Zhikong also impeached Shi Ying for deception and other crimes.

古文：司礼太监韩赞周叱志孔退，士英跪乞处分，澍举笏直击其背曰： 愿与奸臣同死。 
现代文：司礼监太监韩赞周将何志孔叱退，士英跪下请求处分。黄澍举笏直击士英之背，说： 愿与奸臣同死。 
English: Han Zanzhou, the eunuch and ceremonial supervisor, scolded He Zhikong, and Shi Ying knelt down to ask for punishment. Huang Qi raised his scepter and struck Shi Ying's back, saying, "I am willing to die with the traitor."

古文：士英大号呼，王摇首不言者久之，赞周即执志孔候命。
现代文：士英大声号呼，福王摇头，良久不语。韩赞周即抓住何志孔待命。
English: Shi Ying shouted loudly, Fu Wang shook his head and did not speak for a long time. Han Zan Zhou immediately grabbed He Zhikong and stood by.

古文：王因澍言意颇动，夜谕赞周，欲令士英避位。
现代文：福王因为韩赞周的话，心意颇动，当晚谕告韩赞周，想令士英避位。
English: Because of Han Zanzhou's words, King Fu was very moved. That evening, he sent a message to Han Zanzhou, asking him to dethrone Shi Ying.

古文：士英佯引疾，而赂福邸旧奄田成等向王泣曰： 上非马公不得立，逐马公，天下将议上背恩矣。
现代文：士英假装称病辞职，而贿赂福王邸的旧阉田成等人，让他们向王爷哭诉道 ：皇上没有马公便不能即位，现在逐出马公，天下将会说皇上背恩。
English: Shih Ying pretended to be ill and resigned, and bribed Fu Wang's former residence, Putian Cheng and others, to make them cry to the prince: The emperor can not ascend the throne without Ma Gong, and now he is expelled from Ma Gong, the world will say that the emperor is ungrateful.

古文：且马公去，谁念上者？ 
现代文：而且马公一去，还有谁为皇上着想？ 
English: And once Magong is gone, who else will think of the emperor?

古文：王默然，即慰留士英。
现代文：福王默然，即安慰挽留士英。
English: Fu Wang was silent, that is, he consoled and detained Shi Ying.

古文：士英亦畏良玉，请释志孔，而命澍速还湖广。
现代文：士英也害怕左良玉，请释放何志孔，而命黄澍速回湖广。
English: Shi Ying is also afraid of Zuo Liangyu. Please release He Zhikong and let Huang Qi return to Hukang.

古文：故都督掌锦衣卫刘侨者，尝遣戍，由周文江贿张献忠，受伪命，为锦衣指挥使。
现代文：原执掌锦衣卫的都督刘侨，曾被遣戍，通过周文江贿赂张献忠，接受伪命，被任为锦衣卫指挥使。
English: Liu Qiao, the former governor of Jinlingwei, was exiled, and through Zhou Wenjiang, he bribed Zhang Xianzhong to accept a false mission and was appointed as the commander of Jinlingwei.

古文：及良玉复蕲、黄，侨削发逃去，澍持之急。
现代文：到左良玉收复蕲州、黄州后，刘侨削发逃走，黄澍追捕他很急。
English: After Zuo Liangyu recaptured Zhangzhou and Huangzhou, Liu Qiao cut his hair and ran away. Huang Qi was in a hurry to catch him.

古文：而士英纳侨贿，令讦澍，遂复侨官，削澍职。
现代文：而士英接受刘侨的贿赂，令他攻击黄澍，遂给他恢复原官，削去黄澍的官职。
English: However, Shi Ying accepted Liu Qiao's bribe and ordered him to attack Huang Qi, and then restored him to his original position and removed Huang Qi's official position.

古文：寻以楚府中尉言，逮澍。
现代文：不久以楚府中尉的意见，逮捕黄澍。
English: Huang Qi was soon arrested on the advice of Lieutenant Chu Fu.

古文：良玉令部将群哗，欲下南京索饷，因保救澍。
现代文：左良玉令部将群起喧闹，想下南京索要军饷，借此保救黄澍。
English: Zuo Liangyu's generals will make a lot of noise and want to go to Nanjing to ask for military pay, in order to save Huang Qi.

古文：袁继咸为上疏代澍申理，士英不得已，乃免逮。
现代文：袁继咸为他上疏代黄澍申理，士英不得已，便免于逮捕，黄澍遂躲在左良玉军中。
English: Yuan Jixian acted as Huang Qi's deputy on his behalf. As a last resort, Shi Ying was exempted from arrest, and Huang Qi then hid in the army of Zuo Liangyu.

古文：澍遂匿良玉军中，良玉与士英由此有隙。及伪太子狱起，良玉遂假为兵端。
现代文：左良玉与士英由此产生了矛盾。到伪太子一案发生，左良玉遂以此为起兵的借口。
English: As a result, conflicts arose between Saoryotama and Shiei. When the fake prince case occurred, Saoryotama used this as an excuse to raise an army.

古文：太子之来也，识者指其伪，而都下士民哗然是之。
现代文：太子来时，认识的人指出他是假的，而都城百姓却哗然说是真的。
English: When the prince came, people who knew him pointed out that he was a fake, but the people of the capital said loudly that he was real.

古文：时又有童氏者，自称王妃，亦下狱。
现代文：当时还有一个姓童的，自称是王妃，也被关进监狱。
English: At that time, there was also a person surnamed Tong, who claimed to be Wangfei, and he was also put in prison.

古文：督抚、镇将交章争太子及童妃事。
现代文：督抚、镇将纷纷上书争论太子和童妃之事。
English: The superintendent and the mayor of the town wrote to each other to argue about the prince and the princess.

古文：王亟出狱词，遍示中外，众论益籍籍，谓士英等朋奸，导王灭绝伦理。
现代文：福王急忙出示狱词，向中外人士宣示，人们更加议论纷纷，说是士英等人朋比为奸，想引导王爷灭绝伦理。
English: Fu Wang hurriedly showed the prison sentence and announced to people at home and abroad that people were talking more and more, saying that Shi Ying and others were traitors and wanted to guide Wang Ye to exterminate ethics.

古文：澍在良玉军中，日夜言太子冤状，请引兵除君侧恶。
现代文：黄澍在左良玉军中，日夜说太子冤枉，请左良玉出兵清除君王身边的恶人。
English: Huang Yao, who was in the army of Zuo Liangyu, said day and night that the prince had done him an injustice and asked Zuo Liangyu to send troops to purge the wicked people around the king.

古文：良玉亦上疏请全太子，斥士英等为奸臣。
现代文：左良玉也上疏请保全太子，斥责士英等人为奸臣。
English: Zuo Liangyu also went up the stairs to ask for the prince's safety, and scolded Shi Ying and others for being traitors.

古文：又以士英裁其饷，大憾，移檄远近，声士英罪。
现代文：他又因士英裁减他的军饷，大恨，传檄远近各地，声讨士英之罪。
English: He also reduced his military pay because of Shi Ying, greatly hated him, spread the rumor far and wide, and blamed Shi Ying.

古文：复上疏言： 自先帝之变，士英利灾擅权，事事为难。
现代文：他又上疏说 ：自从先帝之变后，士英利用专权，事事为难。
English: He went on to say: Since the change of the former emperor, Shih Ying has been using his exclusive power, and everything is difficult.

古文：逆案先帝手定，士英首翻之。
现代文：逆案是先帝亲手判定，士英却为其翻案。
English: The reverse case was decided by the former emperor himself, but Shi Ying overturned it.

古文：《要典》先帝手焚，士英复修之。
现代文：《要典》是先帝亲手焚毁，士英却进行重修。
English: "Important Documents" was burned by the former emperor himself, but Shi Ying repaired it.

古文：越其杰贪焚遣戍滥授节钺。
现代文：越其杰因贪婪被遣戍边，士英却滥授予他节钺。
English: Yue Qijie was exiled for greed, but Shi Ying awarded him the title of "King."

古文：张孙振赃污绞犯，骤畀京卿。
现代文：张孙振因贪污被判绞刑，士英却实然授他京卿。
English: Zhang Sun Zhen was sentenced to death by hanging for corruption, but Shi Ying actually awarded him the title of Beijing.

古文：他如袁弘勋、杨文、刘泌、王燧、黄鼎等，或行同狗彘，或罪等叛逆，皆用之当路。
现代文：其他如袁弘勋、杨文骢、刘泌、王燧、黄鼎等人，有的行同猪狗，有的罪等叛逆，都被用来当道。
English: Others, such as Yuan Hongxun, Yang Wenzhong, Liu Xiu, Wang Hui, Huang Ding, and others, some of them are pigs and dogs, and some of them are crimes and other rebellions, all of which are used as Tao.

古文：己为首辅，用腹心阮大铖为添注尚书。
现代文：自己做首辅，又用心腹阮大铖为添注尚书。
English: He made himself the first assistant, and added notes to the book with his heart.

古文：又募死士伏皇城，诡名禁军，动曰废立由我。
现代文： 他还招募死士埋伏在皇城，诡名为禁军，动辄便说废立由我决定。
English: He also recruited dead soldiers to lie in ambush in the imperial city, under the guise of a forbidden army, and often said that it was up to me to abolish the government.

古文：陛下即位之初，恭俭明仁，士英百计诳惑，进优童艳女，伤损盛德。
现代文：陛下即位之初，恭敬俭朴，明察仁断，士英千方百计进行迷惑，进献优童艳女，伤损圣德。
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's accession to the throne, respectful and frugal, clear-sighted and benevolent, Shih Ying did everything possible to confuse, to present good and beautiful girls, and to injure sanctity.

古文：复引用大铖，睚眦杀人，如雷縯祚、周镳等，锻炼周内，株连蔓引。
现代文：还引用阮大铖，以睚眦之怨杀人，像雷演祚、周镳等人，被严刑拷打，株连蔓引。
English: It also quoted Nguyen Dai Quan as saying that he killed people out of spite, and that people like Lei Dian Quan and Zhou Quan were severely tortured and tortured.

古文：尤其甚者，借三案为题，凡生平不快意之人，一网打尽。
现代文：尤其过分的，是他代理三案为题，凡是他生平所不快意的人，一网打尽。
English: What is particularly excessive is that he is the agent of three cases, and all the people who are displeased with his life are eliminated.

古文：令天下士民，重足解体。
现代文：天下士民，因此而重足而立，丧魂落魄。
English: The world is made up of ordinary people, and as a result, we have to stand on our own two feet.

古文：目今皇太子至，授受分明。
现代文：如今皇太子到，授受分明。
English: Now that the crown prince has arrived, it is clear who will be crowned.

古文：大铖一手握定抹杀识认之方拱乾，而信朋谋之刘正宗，忍以十七年嗣君，付诸幽囚。凡有血气，皆欲寸磔士英、大铖等，以谢先帝。
现代文：阮大铖一手握定，抹杀认识太子的方拱乾，而相信朋比为谋的刘正宗，忍心将十七岁的嗣君，关进监狱，凡有血气之人，都想寸磔士英、大铖等人，以谢先帝。
English: Nguyn Đc was determined to wipe out all those who knew the prince, while Liu Zhengzong, who believed that the prince was plotting against him, had the heart to put the seventeen-year-old heir to the throne in prison. Anyone with a heart would want to thank the former emperor for Đc Đc, Đc Đc and others.

古文：乞立肆市朝，传首抒愤。 
现代文：乞请将他们处死，陈尸于市场，传首各地，以抒民愤。 
English: Please put them to death, display their bodies in the market, and send their heads to all parts of the country to express the people's indignation.

古文：疏上，遂引兵而东。
现代文：奏疏上呈后，他便引兵东下。
English: After the report was submitted, he led his troops to the east.

古文：士英惧，乃遣阮大铖、朱大黄、黄得功、刘孔昭等御良玉，而撤江北刘良佐等兵，从之西。
现代文：士英害怕了，便派阮大铖、朱大典、黄得功、刘孔昭等人抵御左良玉，而撤回江北刘良佐的军队，随他西上。
English: Shi Ying was afraid, so he sent Ruan Dajuan, Zhu Datuan, Huang Dergong, Liu Kongzhao and others to resist Zuo Liangyu, and withdrew Liu Liangzuo's army from the north of the Yangtze River and followed him to the west.

古文：时大清兵日南下，大理少卿姚思孝，御史乔可聘、成友谦请无撤江北兵，亟守淮、扬。
现代文：当时大清兵南下推进，大理寺少卿姚思孝，御史乔可聘、成友谦请不要撤江北兵，从速守卫淮安、扬州。
English: At that time, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty were advancing southward. Yao Sihiao, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, Goshi Qiao could be hired, and Chengyou Qian was asked not to withdraw the soldiers from the north of the river, and quickly guarded Huai'an and Yangzhou.

古文：士英厉声叱曰： 若辈东林，犹藉口防江，欲纵左逆入犯耶？
现代文：士英厉声叱道： 你们这帮东林党，还借口防江，你们想放左逆入京犯上吗？
English: Shi Ying sternly scolded, "You Donglin Party gangs, you are still using the excuse of river defense. Do you want to let the leftists invade Beijing and commit crimes?

古文：北兵至，犹可议款。
现代文：北兵到了，还可以和谈。
English: When the Northern soldiers arrived, there could still be peace talks.

古文：左逆至，则若辈高官，我君臣独死耳！ 
现代文：左逆一到，则你们这帮人得高官，而我君臣却要死了。 
English: When the time comes, you people will become high-ranking officials, while I, the sovereign, will die.

古文：力排思孝等议，淮、扬备御益弱。
现代文：他力排姚思孝等人的意见，淮、扬的防御更弱了。
English: He vigorously rejected the opinions of Yao Sihiao and others, and the defense of Huai and Yang was even weaker.

古文：会良玉死，其子梦庚连陷郡县，率兵至采石。
现代文：正值左良玉死，他的儿子左梦庚接连攻陷郡县，率兵到达采石。
English: Just as Zuo Liangyu died, his son Zuo Meng Geng successively invaded counties and counties, and led his soldiers to the quarry.

古文：得功等与相持，大铖、孔昭方虚张捷音，以邀爵赏，而大清兵已破扬州，逼京城。
现代文：黄得功等人与他相持不下，阮大铖、刘孔昭却虚张捷报，以邀封赏，而大清兵已经攻破扬州，逼近京城。
English: Huang Dergong and others could not keep up with him, but Nguyen Dai Quan and Liu Kong Zhao falsely announced their victory by inviting and awarding rewards, while the Qing soldiers had already broken through Yangzhou and were approaching the capital.

古文：五月三日，王出走太平，奔得功军。
现代文：五月三日，福王出走太平，奔向黄得功军。
English: On May 3rd, Fu Wang left Taiping and rushed to Huang De Gongjun.

古文：孔昭斩关遁。
现代文：刘孔昭斩关逃走。
English: Liu Kongzhao escaped.

古文：明日，士英奉王母妃，以黔兵四百人为卫，走浙江。
现代文：第二天，士英带上王母妃，以四百名黔兵护卫，逃向浙江。
English: The next day, Shih Ying fled to Zhejiang with the Empress Dowager Wang and four hundred soldiers.

古文：经广德州，知州赵景和疑其诈，闭门拒守。
现代文：经过广德州时，知州赵景和怀疑有诈，闭门拒守。
English: When passing through Guangdong, Chizhou Zhao Jinghe suspected fraud and closed the door.

古文：士英攻破，执景和杀之，大掠而去。
现代文：士英攻破州城，抓住赵景和并杀了他，大肆抢掠而去。
English: Shi Ying broke through the state capital, grabbed Zhao Jinghe and killed him, and went away with a large amount of loot.

古文：走杭州，守臣以总兵府为母妃行宫。
现代文：跑到杭州后，守臣以总兵府做母妃的行宫。
English: After running to Hangzhou, Shoucheng took the general military headquarters as his mother's palace.

古文：不数日，大铖、大典、方国安俱仓皇至，则得功已兵败死，王被擒，次日，请潞王监国，不受。
现代文：没过几天，阮大铖、朱大典、方国安也都仓皇到来，得知黄得功已兵败而死，福王被擒。第二天，请潞王监国，潞王不接受。
English: A few days later, Ruan Daju, Zhu Datian, and Fang Guoan also arrived in a panic, learning that Huang Dergong had been defeated and killed, and Fu Wang had been captured. The next day, they asked Fu Wang to supervise the country, but Fu Wang did not accept.

古文：未几，大兵至，王率众降，寻同母妃北去。
现代文：不久，大兵到来，潞王率众投降，不久同母妃北去。
English: Not long after, the soldiers arrived, and the king and his people surrendered. Soon, he and his wife went north.

古文：此即大器等之所议欲立者也。
现代文：潞王就是吕大器等人所议要建立为帝的人。
English: Shao Wang is the person whom Lu Daiqi and others wanted to establish as emperor.

古文：杭州既降，士英欲谒监国鲁王，鲁王诸臣力拒之。
现代文：杭州投降后，士英想拜谒监国的鲁王，鲁王诸臣极力反对他。
English: After the capitulation of Hangzhou, Shiying wanted to pay homage to King Lu of Guizhou. Lu's vassals strongly opposed him.

古文：大铖投朱大典于金华，亦为士民所逐，大典乃送之严州总兵方国安军。
现代文：阮大铖到金华投靠朱大典，也被士民所逐，朱大典于是把他送入严州总兵方国安军中。
English: When Nguyn Đi Quang went to Jinhua to seek the support of Zhu Dadian, he was also ousted by the scholars and people. Zhu Dadian then sent him to join the State Security Army of the State of Yan Province.

古文：士英，国安同乡也，先在其军中。
现代文：士英与方国安是同乡，先已在他军中。
English: Shi Ying and Fang Guo'an are from the same hometown, and he was already in his army.

古文：大铖掀髯指掌，日谈兵，国安甚喜。
现代文：阮大铖到后掀髯指掌，每天谈兵，方国安很高兴。
English: After the arrival of Nguyn Đi Quang, Nguyn Đi Quang Quang was very happy and talked about the war every day.

古文：而士英以南渡之坏，半由大铖，而己居恶名，颇以为恨。
现代文：而士英认为南渡之坏，一半由于阮大铖，自己却背上恶名，所以颇为恨他。
English: On the other hand, Shi Ying thought that Nandu's bad behavior was partly due to Ruan Daju, but he himself had a bad reputation, so he hated him.

古文：已，我兵击败士英、国安。
现代文：后来，我军击败士英、方国安。
English: Later, our army defeated Shi Ying and Fang Guoan.

古文：无何，士英、国安率众渡钱塘，窥杭州，大兵击败之，溺江死者无算。
现代文：不久，士英、方国安率众渡过钱塘江，窥视杭州，大兵将其击败，溺江而死者无数。
English: Soon, Shi Ying and Fang Guoan led the crowd across the Qiantang River and peered into Hangzhou. The soldiers defeated them, and countless people drowned in the river.

古文：士英拥残兵欲入闽，唐王以罪大不许。
现代文：士英拥残兵想进入福建，唐王因他罪大不准许。
English: Shi Ying, who supported the remnants of the army, wanted to enter Fujian, but Tang Wang did not allow him to do so because of his crime.

古文：明年，大兵巢湖贼，士英与长兴伯吴日生俱擒获，诏俱斩之。
现代文：第二年，大兵清剿湖贼，士英与长兴伯吴日生都被擒获，诏令将他们斩首。
English: In the second year, the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty captured the thieves of Lugu Lake, Shi Ying and Chang Xingbo Wu Linsheng, and ordered them to be beheaded.

古文：事具国史。
现代文：事见国史。
English: This is a matter of national history.

古文：大铖偕谢三宾、宋之晋、苏壮等赴江干乞降，从大兵攻仙霞关，僵仆石上死。
现代文：阮大铖偕同谢三宾、宋之晋、苏壮等人赴江岸乞请投降，随从大兵攻打仙霞关，阮大铖僵仆石上而死。
English: Nguyn Đc, together with Trn Hi, Trn Đc, Trn Đc and others, went to the riverbank to beg for surrender, followed the soldiers to attack Xianxia Pass, and Nguyn Đc died on the stone.

古文：而野乘载士英遁至台州山寺为僧，为我兵搜获，大铖、国安先后降。
现代文：而野史记载士英逃到台州山寺为僧，被我兵搜获；阮大铖、方国安先后投降。
English: However, the field history records that Shi Ying fled to Taizhou Mountain Temple as a monk and was captured by our soldiers; Ruan Daxuan and Fang Guoan surrendered successively.

古文：寻唐王走顺昌。
现代文：不久唐王逃到顺昌。
English: Tang Wang soon fled to Shunchang.

古文：我大兵至，搜龙扛，得士英、大铖、国安父子请王出关为内应疏，遂骈斩士英、国安于延平城下。
现代文：我大兵追到，搜查龙扛，获得士英、阮大铖、方国安父子请王爷出关做内应的奏疏，遂将他斩杀于延平城下。
English: Our soldiers caught up with him, searched the dragons and donkeys, and obtained the names of Shi Ying, Ruan Daju, and Fang Guo'an, and the father and son asked Wang Ye to go out to make a report, and then killed him at the foot of Yanping City.

古文：大铖方游山，自触石死，仍戮尸云。
现代文：当时阮大铖正在游山，自触石头而死，于是将他戮尸。
English: At the time, Nguyn Đc was hiking in the mountains. He died after touching a rock, and his body was dismembered.

