古文：宋子曰：霄汉之间云霞异色，阎浮之内花叶殊形。
现代文：宋先生说：天上的云霞有着七彩各异的颜色，大地上的花叶也是美丽多姿、异彩纷呈。
English: Mr. Song said: The clouds and haze in the sky have different colors, and the flowers and leaves on the ground are also beautiful and colorful.

古文：天垂象而圣人则之，以五彩彰施于五色，有虞氏岂无所用其心哉？
现代文：大自然呈现出种种美丽景象，上古的圣人遵循的提示，按照五彩的颜色将衣服染成青、黄、赤、白、黑五种颜色。
English: Nature presents a variety of beautiful scenes. Ancient sages followed the prompts and dyed clothes into blue, yellow, red, white and black according to the five colors.

古文：飞禽众而凤则丹，走兽盈而麟则碧，夫林林青衣，望阙而拜黄朱也，其义亦犹是矣。
现代文：白、黑五种颜色。虞舜就有意这样做，既然所有飞禽之中只有凤凰是火红的，遍地的野兽也只有麒麟是碧绿色的，那么一大群身着青衣的老百姓，要向皇宫里穿着黄衣红袍的君王朝拜，依据的也是这样的道理。
English: White and black are the five colors. Since only the phoenix is fiery red among all the birds, and only the unicorn is turquoise-green among all the beasts everywhere, the reason why a large group of ordinary people dressed in blue clothes should bow to the royal family wearing yellow robes in the imperial palace is also based on this.

古文：君子曰： 甘受和，白受采。 
现代文：曾有贤能的人说过：甜可以调和所有味道，白可以染成各种颜色。
English: A wise man once said: "Sweetness can be mixed with any flavor, and white can be dyed with any color."

古文：世间丝、麻、裘、褐皆具素质，而使殊颜异色得以尚焉，谓造物不劳心者，吾不信也。
现代文：丝、麻、皮和粗布等衣料都有素白的底色，因此才可能染出各种不同的颜色。如果说，创造万物不用智慧和心力，我不相信这样的说法。
English: Fabrics such as silk, linen, leather and coarse cloth all have a pure white base, which is why they can be dyed in a variety of different colors. If it is said that it does not require wisdom and effort to create all things, I do not believe this.

古文：○诸色质料
现代文：诸色质料
English: Multi-coloured materials

古文：大红色、莲红、桃红色、银红、水红色、木红色、紫色、赭黄色、鹅黄色、金黄色、茶褐色、大红官绿色、豆绿色、油绿色、天青色、蒲萄青色、蛋青色、翠蓝、天蓝玄色、月白草色二色、象牙色、藕褐色。
现代文：大红色。莲红色、桃红色、银红色、水红色。木红色。紫色。赭黄色。鹅黄色。金黄色。茶褐色。大红官绿色。豆绿色。油绿色。天青色。葡萄青色。蛋青色。翠蓝、天蓝色。玄色。月白、草白色。象牙色。藕褐色。
English: Deep red. Lotus red, peach red, silver red, aqua red. Wood red. Purple. Straw yellow. Goose yellow. Golden yellow. Tea brown. Deep reddish green. Bean green. Oil green. Sky blue. Grape blue. Egg blue. Emerald blue, sky blue. Black. Moon white, grass white. Ivory. Oyster brown.

古文：入内薄染即起，红焰之色隐然。此布一时重用。
现代文：附：染包头巾所用的深黑色，不是在蓝靛缸里染成的，而是把栗子壳或莲子壳在水中煮一天，捞出壳后剩下的水再加入铁砂和皂矾，在锅里再煮一晚，就染出深黑色了。
English: P.S. The deep black used for dyeing the bandana is not dyed in a blue crucible, but the chestnut shell or lotus seed shell is boiled in water for a day, the remaining water after removing the shell is added to the iron sand and soap, and boiled in a pot for another night, it is dyed deep black.

古文：○蓝淀
现代文：附：毛青布色的染法。蓝淀
English: Attached: The dyeing method for the color of chintz.

古文：凡蓝五种，皆可为淀。
现代文：蓝有五种，都可以用来制作深蓝色的染料，即蓝靛。
English: There are five kinds of blue, all of which can be used to make dark blue dye, that is, indigo blue.

古文：茶蓝即菘蓝，插根活；蓼蓝、马蓝、吴蓝等皆撒子生。
现代文：茶蓝，也就是菘蓝，扦插就能成活。但是蓼蓝、马蓝、吴蓝等品种就都要用种子繁殖。
English: Tea blue, also known as indigo blue, can be propagated by cuttings. However, indigo blue, horse blue, Wu blue and other varieties must be propagated by seeds.

古文：近又出蓼蓝小叶者，俗名苋蓝，种更佳。
现代文：近年又出现一种小叶的蓼蓝，俗名苋蓝的，是更好的品种。
English: In recent years, a small-leaved indigo has appeared, commonly known as indigo, which is a better variety.

古文：凡种茶蓝法冬月割获，将叶片片削下，入窖造淀。
现代文：种植茶蓝的方法是，在冬天割取茶蓝的时候，把叶子一片片剥落，放进花窖里制成蓝淀。
English: The method of planting tea blue is to peel off the leaves one by one when cutting tea blue in winter, and put them into the flower cellar to make blue dye.

古文：其身斩去上下，近根留数寸。薰干，埋藏土内。
现代文：把茎秆的两头切掉，只在靠近根部的地方留下几寸长的一段，熏干后再埋在土里贮藏。
English: Cut off both ends of the stalk, leaving only a few inches of the stalk near the root, smoke it dry and then bury it in the ground.

古文：春月烧净山土使极肥松，然后用锥锄，刺土打斜眼，插入于内，自然活根生叶。
现代文：到第二年春天时，放火将山上的杂草烧光，让土壤变得松软肥沃，然后用锥锄掘土，在土里打出斜眼，将保存的茶蓝根茎插进去，不久就会长出叶子和根。
English: By the next spring, set fire to the weeds on the mountain and let the soil become soft and fertile, then dig the soil with a cone, make a bevel in the soil, insert the preserved tea blue rhizome, and soon the leaves and roots will grow.

古文：其余蓝皆收子撒种畦圃中。暮春生苗，六月采实，七月刈身造淀。
现代文：其余的几种蓝都是把种子撒在园圃中，春末就会出苗，到六月采收种子，七月就可以将蓝茎割回来用于造淀了。
English: The remaining varieties of blue cucumbers are sown in the garden. The seedlings will emerge in late spring, and the seeds will be harvested in June. In July, the blue cucumbers can be cut back and used to make compost.

古文：凡造淀，叶者茎多者入窖，少者入桶与缸。水浸七日，其汁自来。
现代文：制作蓝淀的时候，茎和叶多的放进花窖里，少的放在桶里或缸里，用清水浸泡七天，叶子中的色素自然会溶于水中。
English: When making blue dye, put more stems and leaves in the flower cellar, less in a bucket or jar, soak in clean water for seven days, and the pigment in the leaves will naturally dissolve in the water.

古文：每水浆一石下石灰五升，搅冲数十下，淀信即结。
现代文：每一石蓝花汁液加入石灰五升，搅打几十下，就会凝结成蓝淀。
English: Add five liters of lime to each stone of blue flower juice, and beat it for dozens of times, and it will condense into a blue precipitate.

古文：水性定时，淀沉于底。
现代文：水静放以后，蓝淀就积沉在底部。
English: After the water is released, the blue sediment accumulates at the bottom.

古文：近来出产，闽人种山皆茶蓝，其数倍于诸蓝。山中结箬篓，输入舟航。
现代文：近来福建人在山地上普遍种植的都是茶蓝，在近来的出产中，茶蓝的数量比其他蓝的总和还要多几倍，在山上装入箬篓子再装上船往外运。
English: Recently, the Fujian people have generally planted camellias in the mountains. In recent production, the number of camellias is several times more than the sum of other camellias. They are loaded into rafts in the mountains and then loaded onto ships for export.

古文：其掠出浮沫晒干者曰靛花。
现代文：制作蓝淀时，把撇出的浮沫晒干后就叫 靛花 。
English: When making blue dye, the skimmed foam is dried in the sun, and then it is called blue dye.

古文：凡靛入缸必用稻灰水先和，每日手执竹棍搅动，不可计数，其最佳者曰标缸。
现代文：放在缸里的蓝淀一定要先用稻灰水搅拌调匀，每天用竹棍搅拌无数次，其中质量最好的叫做 标缸 。
English: The blue sediment placed in the cylinder must first be mixed with rice-ash water and stirred. It is stirred countless times a day with a bamboo stick, and the best quality is called the standard cylinder.

古文：○红花
现代文：红花
English: Red flowers grow

古文：红花场圃撒子种，二月初下种，若太早种者，苗高尺许即生虫如黑蚁，食根立毙。凡种地肥者，苗高二三尺。
现代文：红花是在园中用种子种出来的，二月初开始播种。如果播种太早，苗长到一尺多的高度，就会有如同黑蚁一类的小虫过来吃掉根部，根一旦被吃空了，花苗马上死掉。
English: Red flowers are grown from seeds in the garden, and sowing begins at the beginning of February. If the seeds are sown too early and the seedlings grow to a height of more than one foot, small insects such as black ants will come and eat the roots. Once the roots are eaten, the flower seedlings will die immediately.

古文：每路打橛，缚绳横阑，以备狂风拗折。
现代文：如果土地肥沃，红花苗可以蹿到两三尺高。这时要给每一行花苗都打桩支撑，绑上绳子，以防大风吹断花苗。
English: If the land is fertile, the red flower seedlings can grow up to two or three feet high. At this time, each row of flower seedlings should be supported by piling and tied with a rope to prevent the wind from blowing the flower seedlings.

古文：若瘦地尺五以下者，不必为之。
现代文：在土地不够肥沃的地方，苗不会长那么高，也就不必那样做了。
English: In places where the land is not fertile enough, the seedlings will not grow so high, so there is no need to do that.

古文：红花入夏即放绽，花下作求汇多，刺花出求上。
现代文：红花到了夏天就会开花了，花下结出球状花托和花苞，花托的苞片上有很多刺，花就长在球状花托上。
English: The red flowers will bloom in the summer, and the flowers will produce a spherical calyx and corolla. There are many thorns on the bracts of the corolla, and the flowers will grow on the spherical corolla.

古文：采花者必侵晨带露摘取。
现代文：采花的人一定要在天刚亮红花还带着露水的时候摘取。
English: Flower pickers must pick the red flowers when they are still bright and dewy.

古文：若日高露旰，其花即已结闭成实，不可采矣。
现代文：如果等到太阳升起以后，露水干了，红花就已经闭合而不方便摘了。
English: If you wait until after the sun rises and the dew dries, the saffron will have closed and will not be easy to pick.

古文：其朝阴雨无露，放花较少，旰摘无妨，以无日色故也，红花逐日放绽，经月乃尽。
现代文：如果遇上下雨天而没有露水的早晨，花开得比较少，因为没有太阳，晚点摘也可以。红花是一天天开放的，大约一个月才能开完。
English: If there is a rainy day and there is no dew in the morning, the flowers will bloom less, because there is no sun, it can be picked later. The red flowers are open every day, and it takes about a month to finish.

古文：入药用者不必制饼。
现代文：作为药用的红花不必制成花饼。
English: As a medicinal saffron does not have to be made into flower cakes.

古文：若入染家用者，必以法成饼然后用，则黄汁净尽，而真红乃现也。
现代文：如果是要用来制染料的则必须按照一定的方法制成花饼后再用，这样黄色的汁液已经除尽了，真正的红色就显出来了。
English: If it is to be used to make dye, it must be made into flower cakes according to a certain method and then used again, so that the yellow juice has been eliminated and the true red color appears.

古文：其子煎压出油，或以银箔贴扇面，用此油一刷，火上照干，立成金色。
现代文：红花的子经过煎压后可以榨出油，如果用银箔贴在扇面上，再刷上一层这种油，在火上烘干后，马上就会变成金黄色。
English: The oil can be squeezed out of the safflower seed after roasting and pressing. If you use silver foil to stick it on the fan face, and then brush a layer of this oil, after drying on the fire, it will immediately turn golden.

古文：○造红花饼法
现代文：造红花饼法
English: Artificial saffron cake method

古文：带露摘红花，捣熟以水淘，布袋绞去黄汁。
现代文：趁红花带露水时摘下，捣烂之后在水中淘洗，然后装入布袋里挤掉黄色汁液。
English: Take advantage of the dew when picking the saffron, wash it in water after pounding, and then put it in a cloth bag to squeeze out the yellow juice.

古文：又捣以酸粟或米泔清。
现代文：重复捣烂一次，用已发酵的淘米水再次淘洗，再装入布袋拧去汁液。
English: Repeatedly pounded once, washed again with fermented rice water, and then put into a cloth bag and wrung out the juice.

古文：又淘，又绞袋去汁，以青蒿覆一宿，捏成薄饼，阴干收贮。
现代文：然后在上面覆盖青蒿，过一夜后，第二天捏成薄饼，阴干后收藏。
English: Then the top is covered with green onions. After one night, it is made into pancakes the next day. After drying in the shade, it is collected.

古文：染家得法，我朱孔扬，所谓猩红也，
现代文：如果染色的技术很好，就可以把衣服染成鲜艳的猩红色。
English: If the dyeing technique is good, the clothes can be dyed bright scarlet.

古文：○附：燕脂燕脂古造法以紫矿染绵者为上，红花汁及山榴花汁者次之。
现代文：染庆典、贺礼用的大红纸，也必须使用这种红花饼，否则就会完全染不出颜色。附：燕脂古时候制造燕脂，以用紫铆做成并可染丝的为上品，用红花汁和山榴花汁做的要差一些。
English: This safflower cake must also be used for the big red paper used for dyeing celebrations and ceremonies, otherwise it will not be dyed at all. Attached: Yan Zi Yan Zi was made in ancient times, and the silk dyeable yakitori was the top grade, while the safflower juice and the pomegranate juice were inferior.

古文：近济宁路但取染残红花滓为之，值甚贱。
现代文：近来，山东济宁一带有人用染剩的红花渣滓来做，很便宜。
English: Recently, people in the Jining area of Shandong have been using dyed leftover saffron dross to make it, which is very cheap.

古文：其滓干者名曰紫粉，丹青家或收用，染家则糟粕弃也。
现代文：干的渣滓叫 紫粉 ，画家们有时用到它，而染坊则把它当做废物扔掉。
English: The dried residue is called purple powder, and painters sometimes use it, while dyers throw it away as waste.

古文：○槐花
现代文：槐花
English: Wax flower

古文：凡槐树十余年后方生花实。花初试未开者曰槐蕊，绿衣所需，犹红花之成红也。
现代文：槐树生长十几年后才能开花结果，它最初长出的花还没开放时叫做槐蕊，就像染红色要用红花一样，染绿衣服要用到它。
English: Eucalyptus trees take more than ten years to flower. The first flowers to grow are called stamens when they are not yet open. Just as red flowers are used to dye red, green clothes need to be dyed with it.

古文：取者张度籅稠其下而承之。
现代文：采摘时将竹筐成排放在槐树下将槐蕊收集起来。
English: When harvesting, bamboo baskets are placed in rows under the eucalyptus to collect the stamens.

古文：以水煮一沸，漉干捏成饼，入染家用。
现代文：将槐花加水煮开，捞起沥干后捏成饼，给染坊用。
English: The bracken is boiled with cream and water, then drained and made into a cake for the dyer.

古文：既放之。花色渐入黄，收用者以石灰少许晒拌而藏之。
现代文：已开的花慢慢变成黄色，有的人把它们收集起来撒上少量石灰拌匀后，收藏备用。
English: The flowers that have already bloomed slowly turn yellow. Some people collect them, sprinkle them with a small amount of lime, mix them well, and store them for later.

