古文：◎忠义二张桓，字彦威，真定藁城人。
现代文：张桓，字彦威，真定藁城人。
English: Zhang Kuan, the character Yan Wei, and the man from the city of Zhending.

古文：父木，知汝宁府，因家焉。
现代文：父张木，曾任汝宁知府，全家便徙居汝宁。
English: His father, Zhang Mu, was once the governor of Ruining, and the whole family moved to Ruining.

古文：桓以国子生释褐，授滑之白马丞，入补中书掾，擢国子典簿。
现代文：桓是国子生，受命在滑州府任白马县县丞。调入朝中任中书省属官，并被提升为国子典簿。
English: Huan was a son of the country, and was appointed to serve as the county magistrate of Baima County in the Slate Prefecture. He was transferred to the court as a subordinate official of the Central Literature Department, and was promoted to the National Children's Book.

古文：拜陕西行台监察御史，以言事不合去。
现代文：后又离京任陕西行台监察御史。因进谏有违皇帝的旨意，乃去职。
English: Later, he left Beijing to travel to Shaanxi and Taiwan to supervise imperial history. However, he left the post because it was against the emperor's will.

古文：其徒捽桓起跪，桓仰天大呼，詈叱弥厉，且屡唾贼面。
现代文：不久，汝宁发生动乱，桓避处确山。反抗朝廷的起事者久知桓名，敦请桓为帅，他不肯。六日后，桓得见起事者领袖，他对他们进行辱骂。
English: Soon after, a riot broke out in Yuning, and Huan's place of refuge was at the top of a mountain. The rioters who were rebelling against the imperial court had known Huan's name for a long time, and they urged Huan to be their leader, but he refused. Six days later, Huan met the leader of the rioters, and he hurled abuse at them.

古文：贼犹不忍杀，谓桓曰： 汝但一揖，亦恕汝死。 
现代文：起事者不杀他，只要他施以长揖，就可饶命不死。
English: If the instigator does not kill him, he can be spared death as long as he applies a long noose.

古文：桓瞋目曰： 吾恨不能手斩逆首，肯听汝诱胁而折腰哉！ 
现代文：桓声色俱厉地说 ：我恨不能亲手斩下你的首级，岂能因诱胁而折腰哉。 
English: In a boisterous voice, he said, "I wish I could cut off your head with my own hands, but I can't because of the threat.

古文：贼知终不可屈，遂刺之。年四十八。
现代文：起事者见其不可屈，终把他杀了，这时只有四十八岁。
English: The instigators found him unyielding and eventually killed him, who was only forty-eight years old at the time.

古文：贼后语人曰： 张御史真铁汉，害之可惜！ 
现代文：后来起事者说： 张御史真铁汉，害之可惜。 
English: Later, the rioters said: "Zhang Youshi is a real iron man, it's a pity.

古文：事闻，赠礼部尚书，谥忠洁。
现代文：桓的事迹向朝廷报告后，赠桓礼部尚书，谥忠洁。
English: After reporting Huan's deeds to the imperial court, he presented Huan's book to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Huan was loyal.

古文：李黼，字子威，颍人也。
现代文：李黼字子威，颍人也。
English: Zi Wei, a character from Li Zi, is also a deaf person.

古文：工部尚书守中之子，守中性卞急，遇诸子极严，每一饮酒，辄半月醉不解，黼百计承顺，求宁亲心，终不可得，跪而自讼，往往达旦，无几微厌怠之意。
现代文：父李守中，曾任工部尚书，对诸子极严。黼富有孝心，尽力顺从父亲。
English: His father, Li Shouzhong, was once a senior official in the Ministry of Industry, and he was extremely strict with his sons. He was very filial and tried his best to obey his father.

古文：黼曰： 王人虽微，《春秋》序于诸侯之上，尊君也，奈何后乎！ 
现代文：黼初入国子监为国学生。泰定四年科举考试中明经一科，名列第一，授翰林修撰。致和元年，黼代君王祭祀西岳。
English: At the beginning of his reign, his son-in-law entered the country as a national student. In the fourth year of Taiding's national examination, he ranked first in one subject, Ming Dynasty, and was awarded the Hanlin Shuxing. In the first year of the Heian period, the king of the Heian period worshiped Seigaku.

古文：省臣不敢对。改河南行省检校官，迁礼部主事，拜监察御史。
现代文：后改任河南行省检校官，迁升礼部主事，又拜为监察御史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Henan Provincial Inspector of Schools, promoted to the head of the Ceremonial Department, and became the Inspector of History.

古文：首言： 禴祠烝尝，古今大祭，今太庙唯二祭，而日享佛祠、神御，非礼也，宜据经行之。
现代文：黼提出三条意见：古今大祭，一年有四次，即春祠、夏筤、秋尝、冬。而今太庙唯二祭，却经常拜神求佛，这不合礼，应据《礼经》办事。
English: Zou put forward three opinions: the ancient and modern grand festivals are held four times a year, namely, the Spring Festival, the Summer Festival, the Autumn Festival, and the Winter Festival. However, there are only two festivals in the present Taimiao, but people often worship God and pray to Buddha. This is not proper and should be handled according to the "Book of Rites."

古文：成均，教化之基，不当隶集贤，宜属省臣兼领。
现代文：各省学校是教化重地，不当隶属于集贤院，宜由行省官员兼领。
English: Provincial schools are important places for education and enlightenment. They are improperly subordinated to Jixian Academy, and it is appropriate for provincial officials to take the lead.

古文：诸侯王岁赐有定额，分封易代之际，陈请恩例，世系戚疏，无成书可考，宜仿先代，修正玉牒。 
现代文：诸侯王每年赏赐都有定额，在分封和易代之际，往往陈请恩赐，而世系亲疏如何，都无成书可考。应模仿先代，修正皇帝族谱。
English: Princes and princes have an annual quota of rewards. On the occasion of division of territory and change of dynasty, they often ask for gifts, and there is no book to check how close the lineage is. We should imitate the previous generation and revise the imperial genealogy.

古文：皆不报。
现代文：但这些建议都未得到答复。
English: None of this has been approved.

古文：转江西行省郎中，入为国子监丞，迁宣文阁监书博士，兼经筵官。数与劝讲，每以圣贤心法为帝言之。俄中书命黼巡视河渠，黼上言曰： 蔡河源出京西，宋以转输之故，平地作堤，今河底填淤，高出地面，秋霖一至，横溃为灾，宜按故迹修浚。
现代文：后转江西行省郎中，入为国子监丞，升任宣文阁监书博士，兼经筵官，常向皇帝讲解至贤之道，不久中书命黼巡视河渠，黼视察后建议： 蔡河源自京西，宋朝因运输需要，平地作堤，今河底填淤，高出地面，秋汛一至，横溃为灾，故宜按旧道修浚。
English: Later, he was transferred to Jiangxi Province as a member of the cabinet of ministers, and became the vice-governor of the province, and was promoted to the post of the inspector of the cabinet of ministers, and also the eunuch, and often explained to the emperor the way of virtue. Soon, he was ordered to inspect the canals, and after the inspection, he suggested: The Cai River originated in the west of Beijing. In the Song Dynasty, due to transportation needs, the flat ground was used as a dike. Now the bottom of the river is filled with silt, which is higher than the ground. When the autumn rains come, it will be a disaster, so it is

古文：他日东河或有不测之阻，江、淮运物，当由此分道达京，万世之利也。 
现代文：他日东河受阻，江淮北运财物，当由此分道达京，此万世之利也。 这一建议也未得答复。
English: The other day, the East River was blocked, and the Jianghuai and Beibei were transporting goods, so it would be a great benefit to Beijing if the two rivers were separated. This suggestion also received no response.

古文：已而廷议内外官通调，授黼江州路总管。
现代文：其后，朝廷决定内外官互调，于是授黼为江州路总管。
English: After that, the imperial court decided to exchange officials from both inside and outside the country, so he was awarded the title of Jiangzhou Road General Manager.

古文：至正十一年夏五月，盗起河南，北据徐、蔡，南陷蕲、黄，焚掠数千里，造船北岸，锐意南攻。
现代文：至正十一年夏五月，河南农民起义，北据徐蔡，南陷蕲黄，驰骋数千里。并在长江北岸造船，准备南下。
English: In the summer and May of the eleventh year of the Taisho era, the peasants in Henan Province revolted, and Xu Cai was imprisoned in the north, and Zhou Huang was imprisoned in the south. They traveled thousands of miles. They built a ship on the north bank of the Yangtze River and prepared to go south.

古文：黼叹曰： 吾不知死所矣。 乃独椎牛飨士，激忠义以作士气，数日之间，纪纲粗立。
现代文：九江处于下游，乃江东、西咽喉之地，黼筑城挖壕，修械募兵，分守要害，并建议江西行省屯兵江北，挡住起义军进攻，俾得独拥大江之险，行省不听从。
English: Jiujiang is located downstream, it is the place of the East and West Throat of the Yangtze River. It is necessary to build a city, dig trenches, repair machinery, recruit soldiers, and guard the key points. It is also recommended that Jiangxi Province should send troops to the north of the Yangtze River to block the attack of the rebel army, so that it can exclusively hold the risk of the Yangtze River, but Jiangxi Province will not listen.

古文：十二年正月己未，贼渡江，陷武昌，威顺王及省臣相继遁，舳舻蔽江而下，江西大震。贼乘胜破瑞昌，右丞孛罗帖木儿方军于江，闻之，遁。
现代文：十二年正月九日，起义军渡江攻陷武昌，威顺王及地方官相继逃遁。起义军乘胜破瑞昌，右丞孛罗帖木儿正陈兵江上，闻义军来也逃走了，黼势孤立。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the 12th year, the rebel army crossed the river to attack Wuchang, and King Weishun and local officials fled one after another. The rebel army took advantage of the victory to break Ruichang, and the right-hand man, Luo Timur, was on the river. When the rebel army came, he also fled, and the situation was isolated.

古文：乡丁依险阻，乘高下木石，横尸蔽路，杀获二万余。
现代文：此时黄梅县主簿也孙帖木儿愿与起义军战，黼与之誓盟，共抗义军。及义军至，一面急檄诸乡落聚木石于险塞处，以断义军归路；一面统兵出战。他身先士卒，冲锋陷阵。
English: At this time, the main book of Huangmei County, Sun Timur, was willing to fight with the insurgents, and swore an alliance with them to resist the rebels. And when the rebels arrived, he hurried to the villages to gather stones and stones at the dangerous traffic jam to cut off the way back for the rebels; on the other hand, he led the soldiers into battle. He was the first to charge into battle.

古文：黼还，谓左右曰： 贼不利于陆，必由水道以舟薄我，苟失备御，吾属无唯类矣。 
现代文：也孙帖木儿亦继进，义军败退六十里，损失两万余人。战后，黼又谓左右说： 义军在陆上打了败仗，必将由水路以舟接近我，若不防备，我们都活不成。 
English: The rebel army was defeated and retreated sixty miles, losing more than twenty thousand people. After the war, Zou, also known as Left and Right, said: The rebel army lost the battle on land, and will surely approach me by boat through the waterway. If we do not take precautions, we will not survive.

古文：乃以长木数千，冒铁椎于杪，暗植沿岸水中，逆刺贼舟，谓之七星桩。
现代文：于是以长木数千，杪头装上铁锥，暗置于沿岸水中，是为七星桩，阻挡义军船只靠岸。
English: As a result, thousands of long trees and hoes were fitted with iron cones and hidden in the coastal water to act as seven-star piles, preventing the rebel ships from coming ashore.

古文：会西南风急，贼舟数千，果扬帆顺流鼓噪而至，舟遇桩不得动，进退无措，黼帅将士奋击，发火翎箭射之，焚溺死者无算，余舟散走。行省上黼功，请拜江西行省参政，行江州、南康等路军民都总管，便宜行事。
现代文：恰好当时西南风急，义军舟数千，扬帆鼓噪而至。舟为铁锥所刺，进退无措。黼率将士发火翎箭射之，焚、溺死者无数，黼亦因功升为江西行省参政兼江州、南康等路军民都总管，有自行处置军政事务之权。
English: Just at that time, there was a strong southwesterly wind, and thousands of ships of the Yi army came sailing noisily. The ships were pierced by iron cones, and they were helpless to advance or retreat. The soldiers were shot with arrows, and countless people were burned and drowned. Because of his achievements, he was also promoted to the position of Jiangxi Provincial Councillor and General Manager of Jiangzhou, Nankang and other military and civilian capitals, with the right to handle military and political affairs on his own.

古文：秉昭，冕季子也。事闻，赠黼摅忠秉义效节功臣、资德大夫、淮南江北等处行中书省左丞、上护军，追封陇西郡公，谥忠文。
现代文：其后义军声势大张，元朝守臣往往弃城逃遁。黼困守孤城，外无援兵。二月五日义军迫近城下，行省平章政事秃坚不花自北门遁。黼领兵登城，指挥坚守。义军焚西门，又转攻破东门而入。城破，黼与之巷战，高呼 杀我  ，毋杀百姓 ，被刺堕马后，不屈而死，葬于九江东门外。朝廷得报告后，赠黼摅忠秉义效节功臣、资德大夫、淮南江北等处行中书省左丞、上护军，追封陇西郡公，谥忠文。
English: After that, the rebels made a lot of noise, and the former court guards often abandoned the city and fled. They were trapped in a lonely city and had no reinforcements outside. On February 5, the rebels approached the city, and the provincial government of Pingzhang and the government of Bald Jian did not spend from the north gate. He led the soldiers to the city and commanded the defense. The rebels burned the west gate, and then attacked the east gate and entered. The city was broken, and they fought with it in the streets, shouting "Kill me, don't kill the people." After being stabbed and falling off the horse, he died unyieldingly and was buried outside the east gate of

古文：诏立庙江州，赐额曰崇烈。
现代文：诏立庙江州，赐额崇烈。
English: The imperial edict established Miao Jiangzhou and bestowed the title of Chong Rong.

古文：官其子秉方集贤待制。李齐，字公平，广平人。
现代文：李齐字公平，广平人。
English: Li Qi is the word for fairness, and Guangping is the first character.

古文：家甚贫，客于江南，工辞章。
现代文：家贫，在江南教书，工于辞章。
English: His family was poor, he taught in the south of the Yangtze River, and he worked as a clerk.

古文：元统元年进士第一。历佥河南淮西廉访司事，移知高邮府，有政声。
现代文：元统元年进士第一，历任河南淮西廉访司、高邮知府职，颇有政治声望。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was the first to join the Communist Party of China, and successively served as Henan, Huaixi, Lianyungang, and Gaopu prefectural governor. He has considerable political prestige.

古文：至正十年，盗突入府驿，取十二马去，齐躬追谢长等杀之。
现代文：至正十年，突有强人入府驿，取十二匹马去，齐亲自追杀，夺回马匹。
English: In the tenth year of the Taisho era, a strong man suddenly entered the government office, took twelve horses, and personally pursued and recaptured the horses.

古文：十一年，州人秦观保造兵仗，将图劫掠，复获而行诛。
现代文：十一年，州人秦观保造兵械，图谋不轨，亦为齐所擒诛。
English: In the eleventh year, Qin Guanbao, a man from the state, built military equipment and plotted to commit crimes. He was also arrested.

古文：十三年，泰州白驹场亭民张士诚为乱，破泰州。
现代文：十三年，泰州白驹场亭民张士诚起事，攻破泰州。
English: In the thirteenth year, Zhang Shicheng, a citizen of Taizhou Baiyun Pavilion, rose up and defeated Taizhou.

古文：河南行省遣齐往招降，被拘。
现代文：淮南行省遣齐招降，被拘。
English: He was sent to Huainan Province to recruit and demote Qi, and was detained.

古文：久之，贼酋自相杀，始纵齐来归。
现代文：后士诚等自相残杀，始纵齐归。
English: Afterward, Shicheng and others killed each other, and they all returned home.

古文：泰州平，贼徒尚蜂聚，士诚复鼓变，杀参知政事赵琏，掠官库民财，走入得胜湖，俄陷兴化县。
现代文：泰州一度重归朝廷控制，但起事群众有相当势力，再加上士诚的鼓动，杀参知政事赵琏，夺官库及富豪财产，进入得胜湖，攻下兴化县。
English: Taizhou was once returned to the control of the imperial court, but the rioting masses had considerable power, and with the encouragement of Shicheng, they killed the governor and politician Zhao Wei, seized the official treasury and the property of the rich, entered the Lake of Victory, and conquered Xinghua County.

古文：行省以左丞偰哲笃偕宗王镇高邮，使齐出守甓社湖。
现代文：行省以左丞亻契哲笃陪同宗王镇守高邮，使李齐出守甓社湖。
English: The governor accompanied Zongwang Zhen to guard Gaoyou with Zuo Zheng, and sent Li Qi to guard Shaoshe Lake.

古文：夏五月乙未，数贼入城，一噪呼而省宪官皆遁。
现代文：夏五月二十九日，义军攻入城内，省宪官皆逃遁。
English: On the 29th day of the 5th month of the summer, the rebels invaded the city, and the provincial gendarmes fled.

古文：齐急还救城，贼已闭门拒我，遂连兴化接得胜湖，舟舰四塞，蔓延入宝应县。
现代文：齐急自甓社湖还高邮救城，城不可入。义军乃连兴化，接得胜湖，蔓延入宝应县。
English: In a hurry, Gao Po rescued the city from Lingshe Lake, but the city could not be entered. The rebels were Lianxinghua, took over Shenghu, and spread into Baoying County.

古文：已而有诏：凡叛逆者赦之。
现代文：此时朝廷下诏，表示愿意赦免起事人等。
English: At this time, the imperial court issued an edict, expressing its willingness to pardon the rioters.

古文：诏至高邮，不得入，贼绐曰： 请李知府来，乃受命。 
现代文：诏至高邮，义军伪称 李知府来，我们愿受命 。行省急于求成，强求齐奉诏前往。
English: After the imperial edict was sent to Gaopeng, the rebels came to Li Prefecture under the false name of Li Zhifu, and we were willing to accept the order. The governor was anxious to succeed, and insisted that they all go to the imperial edict.

古文：行省强齐往，至则下齐狱中，齐益辩说，士诚本无降意，特迁延为缮饬计耳。官军谍知之，乃进攻城，士诚呼齐使跪，齐叱曰： 吾膝如铁，岂肯为贼屈！ 
现代文：实则士诚无降意，只想借往返交涉拖延时间，以修缮城郭而已，因此，下齐于狱中。官军得知此情，乃驱兵攻城。士诚呼齐使跪，齐拒之，说， 吾膝如铁，岂能为尔屈。 
English: Shichisei Shichisei had no intention of surrendering, he only wanted to use back-and-forth negotiations to delay the time to repair the castle, so he was imprisoned. When the government army learned of this, they drove the soldiers to attack the city. Shichisei Shichisei called for kneeling and refused, saying, "My knees are like iron, how can I give in?"

古文：论者谓大科三魁，若泰不华没海上，李黼陨九江，洎齐之死，皆不负所学云。
现代文：士诚怒，扌追碎其膝而使之歪倒。有人说，泰不华、李黼、李齐是大比中的三魁。泰没于海，黼陨于九江，齐死于高邮。彼等之死，皆可说不负所学也。
English: Some people say that Tai Bo-hwa, Li Yu and Li Qi are the three best players in the match. Tai didn't die at sea, Yu died in Jiujiang, and they all died at Gaoyou. Their deaths can be said to live up to what they have learned.

古文：褚不华，字君实，隰州石楼人，沉默有器局。
现代文：褚不华字君实，隰州石楼人，性格沉默，有器度。
English: 不华字君实, 州石楼人, silent in character, with good manners.

古文：泰定初，补中瑞司译史，授海道副千户，转嘉兴路治中，连拜南台、西台监察御史，迁河西道廉访佥事，移淮东。
现代文：自泰定初年，先后任中瑞司译史、海道副千户、嘉兴路治中、南台及西台监察御史、河西道廉访佥事、淮东副使。
English: Since the first year of Taiding, he has successively served as the translator of the history of the Central Swiss Division, the deputy of the Thousand Households Road, the inspector of the history of the Jiaxing Road, the South Taiwan and the West Taiwan, the inspector of the Henan-Hebei Road, and the deputy envoy of Huadong.

古文：未几，升副使。汝、颍盗发，势张甚。
现代文：汝州与颍州农民举行起义，声势很大。
English: Peasants in Ruzhou and Zhangzhou staged an uprising, which gained great momentum.

古文：不华行郡至淮安，极力为守御计。
现代文：不华巡视各郡，至淮安，极力策划抵抗义军防务，使义军受到重创。
English: Wuhua toured the counties as far as Huai'an, and tried his best to plan the defense against the rebels, causing the rebels to suffer heavy losses.

古文：贼至，多所斩获。且请知枢密院老章、判官刘甲守韩信城，相掎角为声援。
现代文：并请知枢密院老章，判官刘甲守韩信城，相犄角为声援。
English: And please know that the veteran of the Privy Council, Judge Liu Jia Shou Han Xincheng, is in solidarity with each other.

古文：复上章，劾总兵及诸将逗挠之罪。
现代文：还向朝廷检举总兵及诸将临战观望之罪。
English: He also denounced to the imperial court the soldiers and generals who had stood by and watched the battle.

古文：朝廷录其功，升廉访使，阶中奉大夫。
现代文：朝廷录其功，升为廉访使，官阶中奉大夫。
English: His achievements were recorded by the imperial court, and he was promoted to the post of unlicensed envoy, and became a middle-ranking doctor.

古文：甲有智勇，与贼战辄胜，贼惮之，号曰刘铁头，不华颇赖之。
现代文：刘甲有智勇，屡战辄胜，义军称之为 刘铁头 ，颇受不华信赖。
English: Liu Jia had wisdom and courage, and won many battles. The rebels called him Liu Tie Tou, and he was trusted by the rebels.

古文：总兵者闻不华劾己，益恚嫉，乃檄甲别将兵击贼，冀以困不华。
现代文：总兵闻不华揭发自己，益愤嫉，令甲将兵转战他处，企图使不华失去声援。
English: The commander-in-chief, Huan Buhua, exposed himself and became more and more cynical, so that the commander-in-chief transferred his soldiers to fight elsewhere, in an attempt to make Buhua lose his support.

古文：甲去，韩信城陷，贼乃掘堑相衔，揵水寨以围我。
现代文：甲去后，韩信城失守，义军乃掘堑相连，立水寨围困官兵。
English: After A's departure, Han Xincheng was lost to the rebels, who dug trenches and besieged the officers and soldiers at Lishuizhai.

古文：既而天长青军叛，普颜帖木尔所统黄军复叛，贼皆挟之来攻不华知事危，退入哈剌章营。
现代文：后来，有朝廷方面的天长青军和普颜帖木耳统率的黄军相继哗变，义军挟之来攻。不华知形势紧急，退入哈剌章营。
English: Later, the Tianchangqing Army led by the imperial court and the Yellow Army led by Puyan Timur mutinied one after another, and the rebels attacked. However, Huaxi knew the situation was urgent and retreated to the Haruzhang Camp.

古文：贼稍引去，乃出，抵杨村桥，贼奄至，杀廉访副使不达失里，啖其尸。
现代文：义军离去后，他才出来到杨村桥。没料到义军突然到来，杀廉访副使不达失里。
English: After the rebels left, he came out to Yangcun Bridge. He did not expect the sudden arrival of the rebels, and killed the corrupt deputy.

古文：不华以余兵入淮安。
现代文：不华带着残兵逃入淮安。
English: But Hua fled to Huai'an with the remaining soldiers.

古文：时城之东、西、南三面皆贼，惟北门通沭阳，阻赤鲤湖，指挥使魏岳、杨暹驻兵沭阳，淮安倚其刍饷，而赤鲤湖为贼据，沭阳之路又绝。
现代文：这时该城之东、西、南三面皆义军，惟北门通沭阳。淮安的粮草仰沭阳供给。
English: At this time, the three sides of the city, east, west and south, were occupied by the rebels, except for the north gate leading to Fenyang. The grain and grass of Huai'an supplied Fenyang.

古文：贼计孤城可取，进栅南琐桥。
现代文：但是义军占据了赤鲤湖，截断了去沭阳的道路。义军欲取淮安孤城，将栅栏推进到南琐桥。
English: However, the rebels occupied Lake Chek Lap Kok and cut off the road to Poyang. The rebels wanted to take the isolated city of Huai'an and pushed the fence to Nan Zuo Bridge.

古文：不华与元帅张存义出大西门，会佥事忽都不花兵突贼栅，殊死战，贼败走，追北二十余里。
现代文：不华与元帅张存义出大西门，恰好遇佥事忽都不花率兵冲义军栅栏，作拼死战斗，义军被迫北退二十余里。
English: Wuhua and the marshal Zhang Cunyi went out of the Great West Gate, and just as they met, they suddenly rushed to the fence of the rebel army and fought to the death. The rebel army was forced to retreat more than 20 miles north.

古文：城中食且绝，元帅吴德琇运粮万斛入河，竟为贼所掠，德琇仅以身免。
现代文：城中食粮断绝，元帅吴德王秀运粮万斛入河，竟为义军所掠，德王秀只身逃脱。
English: The food supply in the city was cut off, and Marshal Wu De Wang Xiu's transport of grain ran into the river. He was actually captured by the rebels, and De Wang Xiu escaped unharmed.

古文：贼与青军攻围，日益急，总兵者屯下邳，相去五百里，按兵不出，凡遣使十九辈告急，皆不听。
现代文：此后义军与青军围攻淮安日急，总兵屯于五百里外的下邳，按兵不动。不华十余次遣兵告急，皆不听。
English: After that, the rebels and the young army besieged the Huai'an Railway, and the total troops were stationed in the lower moat, 500 miles away, and did not move. However, more than ten times the soldiers were sent to the emergency, and they did not listen.

古文：城中饿者仆道上，即取啖之，一切草木、螺蛤、鱼蛙、燕乌，及靴皮、鞍韂、革箱、败弓之筋皆尽，而后父子夫妇老稚更相食，撤屋为薪，人多露处，坊陌生荆棘。
现代文：城中饿者仆道上，一切草木螺蛤、鱼蛙、燕乌及革华皮鞍革詹、皮箱乃至废弓之筋皆食尽，后来甚至有人相食的惨况。留下的人多露处，撤屋为薪，街坊生长荆棘。
English: On the path of the starving people in the city, all the plants and trees, snails, fish frogs, terns and cormorants, leather saddles, leather bags and even the sinews of the waste bows were all eaten up. Later, there was even a tragedy of cannibalism. The people left behind had more open spaces, the houses were used as firewood, and thorns grew in the neighborhoods.

古文：力既尽，城陷，不华犹据西门力斗，中伤见执，为贼所脔。
现代文：力既尽，城陷，不华坚守西门，兵尽援绝，城陷被俘，为义军所杀。
English: At the end of his strength, the castle fell, but Buhua held fast to the West Gate, and the soldiers did their best to help him. He was captured and killed by the rebels.

古文：次子伴哥，冒刃护之，亦见杀。时至正十六年十月乙丑也。
现代文：时至正十六年十月事也。
English: It happened in October of the 16th year of the Taisho era.

古文：不华守淮安五年，殆数十百战，精忠大节，人比之张巡云。
现代文：不华守淮安五年，身经百战，对朝廷忠心耿耿，人们把他比作唐代的张巡。
English: He guarded Huai'an for five years, fought in hundreds of battles, and was deeply loyal to the imperial court. People likened him to Zhang Xuan of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：朝廷闻之，赠翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封卫国公，谥曰忠肃，赙钞二百锭，以恤其家。
现代文：朝廷得报告，赠翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封卫国公，谥曰忠肃，赐钞两百锭以抚恤其家属。
English: The imperial court received a report, presented Hanlin with the title of bachelor, doctor of honor, pillar country, the title of defender of the country, the title of chastity, and gave a banknote of two hundred baht to support his family.

古文：郭嘉，字元礼，濮阳人。
现代文：郭嘉字元礼，濮阳人。
English: Guo Jia Zi Yuanli, a native of Shenyang.

古文：嘉慷慨有大志，始由国子生登泰定三年进士第，授彰德路林州判官，累迁翰林国史院编修官，除广东道宣慰使司都元帅府经历。未几，入为京畿漕运使司副使，寻拜监察御史。
现代文：祖郭昂，父郭惠，都是有战功的武将。嘉胸怀大志，由国子考中泰定三年进士，先后任彰德路林州判官、翰林国史院编修官、广东道宣慰使司都元帅府经历、京畿漕运使司副使、监察御史等职。
English: Guo's ancestor Guo Ang and his father Guo Hui were both military commanders with distinguished service in the war. With great ambition, Guo's son, Guo Jiao, passed the National Junior High School Entrance Examination and became a three-year probationer. He was successively appointed as a judge of Linzhou in Changde Road, an editor of the Hanlin Academy of National History, a consul general in Guangdao, a vice-envoy of the Gyeonggi River Navigation Division, and an inspector of history.

古文：会朝廷以海寇起，欲于浙东温、台、庆元等路立水军万户镇之，众论纷纭莫定。
现代文：海盗兴起时，朝廷欲于浙东温州、台州及庆元三路建立水军万户来防御。议论纷纷，莫衷一是。
English: When the pirates were on the rise, the imperial court wanted to establish a naval force of ten thousand households along the three routes of Wenzhou, Taizhou and Qingyuan in eastern Zhejiang to defend against them.

古文：擢嘉礼部员外郎，乘驿至庆元，与江浙行省会议可否。
现代文：乃提升嘉为礼部员外郎，使嘉驰至庆元，与江浙行省商议抗海盗事宜。
English: It was the promotion of Jia as a member of the Ceremonial Affairs Department that led Jiaqi to Qingyuan to discuss anti-piracy matters with Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces.

古文：嘉至，首询父老，知其弗便，请罢之。
现代文：嘉至庆元，先征地方父老之意，知其不便，始建议停办。
English: From the time of Jia to Qingyuan, it was the will of the local parents and elders to be the first to enlist, and knowing the inconvenience, it was initially proposed to be discontinued.

古文：会方择守令绥靖辽东，乃授嘉广宁路总管，兼诸奥鲁劝农防御。
现代文：朝廷为了绥靖辽东，乃授嘉为东宁路总管兼理后方士兵家属的农业生产和防御。
English: In order to pacify Liaodong, the imperial court appointed Jujia as the general manager of Dongning Road and in charge of the agricultural production and defense of the soldiers' families in the rear.

古文：属盗起，军旅数兴，供饷无虚日。民苦和籴转输，而吏胥得因时为奸。
现代文：屡有军事行动，需供粮饷。百姓苦于强制征购和转运粮食的困难，官吏也乘机敲诈勒索。
English: There are frequent military operations that require the supply of grain. The people suffer from the difficulties of compulsory purchase and transshipment of grain, and officials also take the opportunity to extort.

古文：嘉设法计其户口，第其甲乙，民甚便之。
现代文：嘉设法计民户口，分等负担，对百姓有利。
English: Jiaxing's efforts to count people's household registration and classify the burden are beneficial to the people.

古文：有诏团结义兵，嘉招集民数千，教以坐作进退，万、千、百夫各统以长，号令齐一，赏罚明信。
现代文：朝廷有诏要求结聚民兵，嘉招集百姓数千，按万夫、千夫、百夫的编制组织民兵，各设长统之，进行军事训练。这支队伍号令统一，赏罚分明。
English: The imperial court issued an edict demanding the gathering of the militia, and Jia summoned thousands of people to organize the militia according to the composition of 10,000 men, 1,000 men, and 100 men, each with a commander, and to conduct military training.

古文：故东方诸郡，钱粮之富，甲兵之精，称嘉为最。十八年，寇陷上京，嘉闻之，躬率义兵出御。
现代文：在东方各郡中，唯嘉之辖地兵精粮足。至正十八年，反元义军攻下上京辽阳，嘉率兵抵御。
English: Among the counties in the East, the soldiers under the jurisdiction of Wei Jia were well-fed. In the 18th year of the Zheng He, the anti-Yuan rebels conquered Shangjing Liaoyang, and Jia led the soldiers to resist.

古文：既而辽阳陷，嘉将众巡逻，去城十五里，遇青号队伍百余人，始言官军，嘉疑其诈，俄果脱青衣变红。
现代文：去城十五里，遇一支五百余人的队伍，自称官军，嘉怀疑他们是伪装之师，不久，他们脱下青衣，内穿红衣，实际是红巾军。
English: Fifteen miles from the city, he encountered a group of more than 500 people who called themselves the official army. He suspected that they were disguised soldiers. Soon, they took off their blue clothes and put on red clothes, but they were actually the Red Scarf Army.

古文：顷之，贼至，围城亘数十里，有大呼者曰： 辽阳我得矣，何不出降！ 
现代文：嘉分兵两队夹攻之，俘义军数百，死者无数。但义军势力日益强大，嘉见孤城无援，乃集诸同僚议攻守之策，众皆失措。
English: Two teams of Jiabin soldiers attacked simultaneously, captured hundreds of rebels, and killed countless people. However, the rebel forces were becoming increasingly powerful, and when Jiabin saw that there was no help for the lonely city, he gathered his colleagues to discuss the strategy of attack and defense, and everyone was at a loss.

古文：嘉挽弓射呼者，中其左颊，堕马死，贼稍引退，嘉遂开西门逐之，贼大至，力战以死。
现代文：嘉决计将家中所有衣服财物犒赏民兵，以鼓舞士气。且说 ：自我祖宗以来，对王室都有功勋，我现在尽忠朝廷，是分内之事。况身守此土，当置生死于度外，身外之物，又何足恤？ 不久，义军至，围城数十里，且高呼： 我已得辽阳，何不出降！ 嘉开西门迎战，众寡不敌，力战阵亡。
English: Jiading planned to reward the militia with all the clothes and belongings at home to encourage morale. And said: Since my ancestor, I have made contributions to the royal family, I am now loyal to the court, it is a matter of course. Moreover, I am defending this land, if I live and die outside the degree, what are the things outside the body? Soon, the rebel army arrived, besieged the city for dozens of miles, and shouted: I have won Liaoyang, why not surrender! Jiading West Gate met the battle, outnumbered, and died in battle.

古文：事闻，赠崇化宣力效忠功臣、资善大夫、河南江北等处行省左丞、上护军，封太原郡公，谥忠烈。
现代文：朝廷闻知，赠崇化宣力效忠功臣、资善大夫、河南江北等处行省左丞、上护军，封太原郡公，谥忠烈。
English: It was learned from the imperial court that Chonghua Xuanli was awarded the titles of meritorious vassal, meritorious doctor, provincial commissar of the north of the Yangtze River in Henan Province, and the title of Taiyuan County governor.

古文：喜同，周姓，河西人。
现代文：喜同，河西人。
English: Xitong, a native of Hexi.

古文：初为后宫卫士，众称其才，选充承徽寺经历，再调南阳县达鲁花赤。
现代文：初为后宫卫士，因有才被选为承徽寺经历，再调南阳县达鲁花赤。
English: At first, he was the guardian of the harem, but because of his experience, he was chosen to be the guardian of Chenghui Temple, and then he was transferred to Nanyang County, Daruhua County.

古文：俄而贼锋抵南阳，南阳无城无兵，贼入之若虚邑。喜同以计获数贼，诘之，云贼将大至。悉斩之，以安众心，昼夜督丁壮巡逻守备。
现代文：两年后红巾军起，陷邓州，抵南阳。时南阳无城无守兵，喜同用计俘义军数人，从口供中得知大队人马将至，于是日夜亲督丁壮巡逻守备。
English: Two years later, the Red Scarf Army rose up, fell into Dengzhou, and arrived in Nanyang. At that time, Nanyang had no city and no defenders. Xitong used a guidebook to capture several rebels. From the confession, he learned that a large group of people would be arriving, so the pro-supervisor Ding Zhuang patrolled and guarded day and night.

古文：时大司农钱木尔，以兵驻于诸葛庵，为贼所袭，死之。
现代文：有大司农钱木尔者，拥兵驻诸葛庵，遭义军袭击而死。
English: There was a farmer from Qianmul, who was stationed in Zhuge'an, who was attacked and killed by the rebels.

古文：俄而为他贼所追，身被数创，不能斗，遂见执，为所杀。
现代文：义军乃乘胜进攻南阳，喜同见义军势威难敌，决心死守，并对家人说 ：我们现在不能相互照顾了，宜各自逃生。我有守城之责，当以死报国。 
English: The rebels took advantage of their victory to attack Nanyang, rejoicing at the sight of the overwhelming power of the rebels, determined to defend themselves, and said to their families: We cannot take care of each other now, it is better to escape separately. I have the responsibility to defend the city, and I should repay the country with my death.

古文：妻邢氏，闻喜同力战死，帅家僮数人出走，遇贼，夺贼刀斫之，且骂且前，亦见杀。
现代文：南阳城中一片混乱，喜同鼓励兵丁与义军作殊死搏斗。义军知道喜同后无援军，进攻愈急。南阳城陷，喜同在突围中身被数创被俘，为义军所杀。妻邢氏，得知丈夫战死，乃率家僮数人出走，遇义军时拼死抵抗，亦被杀。
English: There was chaos in Nanyang City, and Xitong encouraged soldiers to fight to the death with the rebels. The rebels knew that Xitong had no reinforcements, and the attack became more urgent. Nanyang City fell, and Xitong was captured and killed by the rebels. When Xitong's wife learned that her husband had died in battle, she led several members of her family to escape, and when she was killed by the rebels, she fought to the death and was also killed.

古文：因极口肆詈，贼怒，寸割因。卞琛，大名人。
现代文：一家死二十余人，朝廷追赠南阳路判官。卞琛，大名人。
English: A family of more than 20 people died, and the court posthumously awarded the judge of Nanyang Road. He was a great celebrity.

古文：世为农夫，早游学京师，得补国子生，既而丁母忧，治农于家。
现代文：世代以农为业，早年游学京师，得补国子生。及母丧归家守孝、务农。
English: His family has been farmers for generations. In his early years, he traveled to study in Beijing to supplement his income. After his mother's death, he returned home to be a filial son and work in agriculture.

古文：至正十二年，邻郡盗起。未几，来剽掠，琛与从子小十、府史李仲亨等协谋，统丁壮数百人击贼。
现代文：至正十二年，邻郡人民起义反元，迅速扩展到大名，琛与侄子小十及府吏李仲亨商议，组织丁壮数百人与义军对抗。
English: In the twelfth year of the Taisho era, when the people of a neighboring county revolted against the Yuan Dynasty, and the rebellion quickly spread to the daimyo (feudal lords), Yao consulted with his nephew Xiaozhi and government official Li Zhongheng, and organized hundreds of Ding Zhuang to fight against the rebels.

古文：丁壮皆民兵，无弓矢之备，直以钩锄白铤当贼。
现代文：因丁壮皆百姓，无弓矢戈矛等武器，只能以镰刀锄头及木棒与义军周旋。
English: Because the Ding Zhuang were all civilians, they had no weapons such as bows, arrows, spears, and could only use sickles, hoes, and wooden sticks to negotiate with the rebels.

古文：贼矢雨集，琛众溃散，被擒。
现代文：义军矢如雨集，琛众溃败，小十、仲亨死，琛被擒。
English: The rebels' arrows rained down, the crowd was routed, Xiaozhizh, Zhongheng died, and Zou was captured.

古文：仲亨、小十皆死。贼素知琛，谕之曰： 汝从我，解汝缚；不从，杀汝。 
现代文：义军钦佩琛之为人，告诉琛说： 你如顺从我们，便松绑，如不从，便杀死你。 
English: The rebels admired him as a man and told him, "If you obey us, we will release you, but if you don't, we will kill you."

古文：琛唾骂曰： 我国子生也。
现代文：琛唾骂说 ：我国子生也。
English: He scolded them, saying, "Our country's children are also suffering.

古文：视汝逆贼，真狗彘也。吾宁义死，不从贼生！ 
现代文：你们背叛朝廷，不忠不义，我宁可为忠义而死，不愿从叛逆而生。 
English: You have betrayed the imperial court, you have been disloyal and unjust. I would rather die for loyalty than live in rebellion.

古文：以土埋井而去。
现代文：琛骂义军不止，屡劝不听，最后被杀。
English: He continued to abuse the rebels, repeatedly failed to listen to their advice, and was eventually killed.

古文：颜瑜，字德润，兖州曲阜人，兖国复圣公五十七代孙也。
现代文：颜瑜字德润，兖州曲阜人，是复圣公颜渊五十七代孙。
English: Yan Yu Zi Derun, a resident of Qufu, Zhangzhou, is the 57th generation grandchild of Fusheng Gong Yan Yuan.

古文：至正十八年，田丰起山东，瑜携家走郓城，道遇贼，以刃来胁瑜曰： 尔何人？ 瑜曰： 我东鲁书生也。 贼执瑜曰： 尔书生，吾不尔杀，可从我见主帅。 
现代文：因其品行道义优异被推举为邹及阳曲两县教谕。至正十八年，田丰在山东起事，瑜携家逃避郓城。路上遇到义军，瑜说自己是东鲁书生，义军说： 你是书生，我们不杀你，可是要随我们去见主帅。 
English: Because of his moral and ethical excellence, he was elected as the preceptor of the two counties of Shandong and Yangqu. In the 18th year, Tian Feng rose up in Shandong, and Yu and his family fled Shandong. On the way, he met the rebels. Yu said that he was a student of Donglu, and the rebels said: You are a student, we will not kill you, but we will follow you to see the coach.

古文：瑜骂曰： 尔贼，何主帅邪！ 
现代文：瑜骂道 ：你们是贼，何来主帅？ 
English: Yu scolded: You are thieves, why are you the coach?

古文：贼怒，欲杀瑜，瑜无惧色。
现代文：义军怒，欲杀之，瑜无惧色。
English: The rebels are angry and want to kill him, but Yu is undaunted.

古文：复使之写旗，瑜大诟曰： 尔大元百姓，天下乱，募尔为兵，而反为叛逆。
现代文：义军又欲使之写军旗上的字，瑜说： 你们是大元百姓，天下乱，你们不应朝廷召募当兵，今反而背叛朝廷，实不应该。
English: The rebel army also wanted him to write the words on the flag. Yu said, "You are the people of Taiyuan, the world is in turmoil. You should not have been recruited as soldiers by the imperial court, but now you are betraying the imperial court. This is really wrong."

古文：我腕可断，岂能为尔写旗从逆乎！ 贼以枪刺瑜，至死骂不绝口。其妻子皆为所害。
现代文：我腕可断，也不能为你们写旗。 义军怒，以枪刺瑜，瑜至死骂不绝口，其妻、子亦皆为义军所杀。
English: I can cut off my arm, but I can't write a flag for you. Enraged, the rebels stabbed Yu with a gun, and Yu cursed himself to death. His wife and son were also killed by the rebels.

古文：彦可力辞，乃迫以刀斧。
现代文：又有曹彦可，亳州人。适乡里中多目不识丁的农民起义。
English: There is also Cao Yan Ke, a native of Zhangzhou, who is suited to the uprising of many illiterate peasants in the countryside.

古文：彦可唾之曰： 我儒者，知有君父，宁死耳，岂为汝写旗者耶！ 
现代文：破亳城后，揭帛于竿，群劫彦可家，以刀斧迫使写旗。彦可唾之曰： 我儒生只知忠君孝父，宁可死，也不会为你们写旗。 
English: After the castle was breached, the swastika was unveiled on the pole, and a group of robbers attacked Hikoko's house, using swords and axes to force him to write the flag.Hikoko spit it out and said, "I was born a Confucian, but I only know how to be a loyal son and father. I would rather die than write a flag for you."

古文：贼怒，遂见害，年七十矣。
现代文：义军愤怒，遂见害，时年已七十。
English: He was 70 years old when he was killed in the rebels' rage.

古文：其家素贫，又死于乱，藁殡其尸。
现代文：彦可家素贫，又死于乱，死后是以草席裹尸下葬的。
English: Hikoko's family was poor and died in a riot. After his death, he was buried wrapped in a straw mat.

古文：贼既定，有司具以事闻，中书为给赀以葬，赐谥节愍。
现代文：义军失败后，地方官府向上具报此情，中书省拨给安葬费若干，皇帝赐谥节愍。
English: After the defeat of the rebel army, the local government reported this situation to the government, the People's Republic of China allocated a certain amount of funeral expenses, and the emperor bestowed the imperial edict.

古文：王士元，字尧佐，恩州人。
现代文：王士元字尧佐，恩州人。
English: Wang Shiyuan, a native of Enzhou.

古文：泰定四年进士，由棣州判官累迁知磁州。
现代文：泰定四年进士，曾任棣州判官及磁州知州。
English: Tai Ding has been a member of the Communist Party of China (CPC) for four years. He has served as a magistrate in Zhangzhou and a magistrate in Zhizhou.

古文：值军兴，馈饷需索日繁，民不堪命。
现代文：时正值朝廷用兵之际，经常征派军饷，人民负担不了。
English: At a time when the imperial court was recruiting soldiers, the people could not afford to pay the regular conscription fee.

古文：士元心念其民，力为区画，至为将士陵辱诃责，弗避也。
现代文：士元努力为百姓减轻负担，以致受到军队将士们的凌辱和呵责，也不回避。
English: The officers and soldiers worked hard to lighten the burden for the people, so that they were humiliated and scolded by the army officers, and they did not shy away.

古文：改知浚州。州滨黄河，尝经盗贼，城堞不完，市井空荒，士元邑邑不得志，而临事未尝易其素。
现代文：后改任氵睿州知州，氵睿州靠近黄河，也曾经发生过反对元朝统治的战乱，城堞不完整，市井荒废。士元悒悒不得志，但处事仍不改其一贯认真负责的态度。
English: Later, he was transferred to Zhouzhou, Zhouzhou, Zhouzhou is close to the Yellow River, there was also a war against the Yuan Dynasty, the city wall was incomplete, and the city was abandoned. Shi Yuanqi was discouraged, but he still did not change his usual conscientious and responsible attitude.

古文：至正十七年，贼复迫浚州，州兵悉溃散，士元坐堂上，顾其子致微使避贼，曰： 吾守臣，居此，职也。
现代文：至正十七年，义军再攻氵睿州，州兵皆溃散，士元自己独坐堂上，对儿子致微说 ，我是地方官，呆在这里不逃走，是我的职责所在。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Heian period, the rebel army attacked Zhaoruizhou again, the National Guard was dispersed, and the Shigen himself sat alone in the hall and said to his son Zhiyi, "I am a local official, it is my duty to stay here and not run away.

古文：若可逃生。 
现代文：至于你，是可以离此逃生的。 
English: As for you, you can get out of this.

古文：子侍立，不忍去。
现代文：其子不忍离去。
English: His son couldn't bear to leave.

古文：贼前问曰： 尔为谁？ 士元叱曰： 我王知州也。强贼识我否？ 
现代文：不久，义军至，问是何人，士元叱曰： 我王知州也，强贼识我否？ 
English: Soon, the rebels arrived and asked who they were. Shiyuan scolded, "I am also the king of Zhizhou, do the strong thieves know me?"

古文：贼欲缚士元，士元奋拳殴贼，贼怒，并其子杀之。杨朴，字文素，河南人。早以文学得推择为吏，任至滁州全椒县尹。滁界庐江，庐江陷于寇，滁人震动。
现代文：并挥拳殴打义军，遂被杀死，其子亦死。杨朴字文素，河南人。早年以文学得推举为吏，官至滁州全椒县尹。滁州与庐江接界，庐江陷落后，滁人震恐。
English: Yang Puzi was literate and a native of Henan Province. In his early years, he was chosen as an official for his literature, and his post went to Yin of Quanzhou's Quanzhou County. Quanzhou borders the Li River, and after the fall of the Li River, the people of Li were terrified.

古文：行省参政也先总兵于滁，不理军事，唯纵饮，至暮，城门不钥，寇入纵火，犹张烛挥杯，急逾城出走。
现代文：行省参政也先在滁指挥战争，但他不知兵，每天只是纵饮作乐而矣。及至暮，城门不锁，义军已入城纵火，也先才停杯逾城出走。
English: The provincial councillor also commanded the war in Handan first, but he did not know the soldiers, he just drank and had fun every day. At the end of the day, the city gate was not locked, the rebels had entered the city and set it on fire, and only then did they leave the city.

古文：朴度必死，乃尽杀其妻女，朝服坐堂上。
现代文：杨朴自认为必死，乃先杀害自己的妻女，然后穿朝服坐堂上等死。
English: Yang Pak thought he was going to die, so he killed his wife and daughter first, then put on the imperial robe and sat in the hall to wait for death.

古文：盗欲降之，朴指妻女示曰： 我已戕我属，政欲死官守耳，尚何云云！ 
现代文：义军至，欲使朴降服，朴指妻女尸体说 ：我已自己杀害了我的家属，我现在正想死在我的官位上，你们还有什么可说的呢！ 
English: When the rebels arrived and tried to force Park to surrender, Park pointed to the corpses of his wife and daughter and said, "I have killed my family members myself. I am about to die in my official position. What else can you say?"

古文：乃连唾之。贼絷朴，倒悬树上，而割其肉至尽，犹大骂弗绝。赵琏，字伯器，宏伟之孙也。
现代文：乃连连向义军脸上唾口沫，义军怒，捆朴，倒悬树上，尽割其肉至死。赵琏字伯器，赵宏伟的孙子。
English: He repeatedly spat in the face of the rebels, and the rebels were so angry that they tied him up, hung him upside down from a tree, and cut off all of his flesh until he died.

古文：至治元年，登进士第，授嵩州判官。
现代文：至治元年进士，授嵩州判官。
English: He entered the priesthood in the first year of the Heian period, and was awarded the title of Song Prefecture Judge.

古文：再调汴梁路祥符县尹。入为国子助教。累迁湖广行省左右司郎中。除杭州路总管。
现代文：后历任汴梁路祥符县尹、国子监助教、湖广行省左右司郎中、杭州路总管等职。
English: Later, he successively held the positions of Yin of Xiangfu County, Guozi Supervisor, Assistant Professor, Left and Right Secretary of Hubei Province, and General Manager of Hangzhou Road.

古文：杭于东南为剧郡，地大民夥，长吏多不称其职。
现代文：杭州是东南一带复杂难治的郡，地大人多，地位较高的官多不称职。
English: Hangzhou is a complicated and difficult-to-cure county in the southeastern region. There are many adults in the area, and many high-ranking officials are incompetent.

古文：琏为人强毅开敏，精力绝人，吏莫不服其明决，而不敢欺。
现代文：琏为人刚毅开朗，精力过人，僚吏莫不信服他的英明果断，有事不敢隐瞒。
English: He was a man of great courage and cheerfulness, with extraordinary energy. His colleagues could not but be convinced of his wisdom and decisiveness, and he did not dare to hide anything.

古文：浙右病于徭役，民充坊里正者，皆破其家。
现代文：浙右百姓苦于徭役，百姓担任坊正里正的，莫不弄得家庭破产。
English: The people of Zhejiang are hard-pressed to perform their duties, and the people are responsible for everything. There is no way to make the family go bankrupt.

古文：朝廷令行省召八郡守集议便民之法，琏献议以属县坊正为雇役，里正用田赋以均之，民咸以为便。
现代文：朝廷知道此情况不能继续，便令行省召集八郡守商讨便民之法，琏提议，对属县坊正的负担收雇役钱；对里正的负担，则在赋中均摊后征收，百姓都认为此法甚好。
English: The imperial court knew that this situation could not continue, so it ordered the provinces to convene eight counties to discuss the convenience of the law, and proposed that the burden of the county chief should be levied; the burden of the village chief should be levied after being evenly distributed among the fuzhong. The people all thought this law was very good.

古文：有盗诱其同恶，持刃出市，斫人以索金，市民乃户敛以予之，人无敢言者。
现代文：有坏人率领同党持刀在市内强索金钱，市民只好按户征收给与，无人敢说不给。
English: There is a villain leading the party and holding a knife in the city to extort money, the citizens have to collect and give according to the household, no one dares to say no.

古文：琏曰： 此不可长也。 
现代文：琏说： 此事不能继续！ 
English: Zou said, "This matter cannot continue!"

古文：遣卒掩捕之，尽戮诸市。
现代文：乃遣兵卒乘其不备将他们逮捕斩首示众。
English: But the dispatched soldiers took advantage of their unpreparedness to arrest them and behead them in public.

古文：逾年，召拜吏部侍郎。
现代文：次年召回朝拜为吏部侍郎。
English: The following year, he was recalled to the Imperial Court to serve as a chamberlain.

古文：杭人思之，刻其政绩于碑。
现代文：杭州人十分怀念，在他离任后将其政绩刻于碑上，以资表彰。
English: Hangzhou people miss him very much. After he left office, his political achievements were engraved on a monument to commend him.

古文：历中书左司郎中，除礼部尚书。寻迁户部，拜参议中书省事。
现代文：琏先后迁任中书左司郎中、礼部尚书、户部参议中书省事、山北辽东道廉访使。
English: He was successively transferred to the posts of the middle secretary of the left, the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the left, the honorable secretary of the honorable secretary, the councillor of the middle secretary of the house, and the visiting envoy of the Liao Dynasty of Shanbei Province.

古文：出为山北辽东道廉访使。是时河南兵起，湖广、荆襄皆陷，而两淮亦骚动。朝廷乃析河南地，立淮南江北行省于扬州，以琏参知政事。
现代文：当时河南农民起义军兴起，湖广、荆襄都失守，两淮也骚动不安，朝廷便分出河南一部分地区设立淮南江北行省于扬州，任琏为参知政事。
English: At that time, the Henan Peasants' Revolt Army arose, Huguang and Jingxiang were lost, and the two Huai Provinces were also in turmoil. The imperial court separated a part of Henan Province to establish Huainan Jiangbei Province in Yangzhou, and appointed Zou as the governor.

古文：琏方病水肿，即舆疾而行。
现代文：琏正患水肿病，抱病登车至扬州赴任。
English: Zou is suffering from edema disease and boarded the train to Yangzhou to take up the post.

古文：既至，分省镇淮安，又移镇真州。
现代文：既至，镇守淮安，后又移镇真州。
English: Even so, the town guard Huai'an, and then moved to the town of Zhenzhou.

古文：会张士诚为乱，突起海滨，陷泰州。兴化，行省遣兵讨之，不克。乃命高邮知府李齐往招谕之。士诚因请降，行省授以民职，且乞从征讨以自效。
现代文：当时，张士诚起兵于海滨，连下泰州、兴化，行省派兵征讨无效，乃命高邮知府李齐往招安，士诚因而请降，行省授士诚以民职，并要求士诚参加平叛以报效朝廷。
English: At that time, Zhang Shicheng raised an army on the seashore, marched down to Taizhou and Xinghua, and sent troops to the provinces to collect troops, but it was ineffective. He ordered Li Qi, the governor of Gaoyou, to recruit soldiers, and Shicheng therefore asked for a demotion. He sent soldiers to the provinces to perform civilian duties, and asked soldiers to participate in the rebellion to repay the imperial court.

古文：遂移琏镇泰州，琏乃趣士诚治戈船，趋濠、泗。士诚疑惮不肯发，又觇知琏无备，遂复反。
现代文：行省为了就近控制士诚，遂令琏移镇泰州，琏乃催促士诚准备兵船来濠、泗，士诚疑惧不肯起程，后又窥知琏无准备，便又起来造朝廷的反。
English: In order to control Shicheng more closely, the provincial government ordered him to move the town of Taizhou, but instead of urging Shicheng to prepare for the troop ship to sail, Shicheng hesitated and refused to set sail, and then realized that Shicheng was not prepared, so he rose up again to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：夜四鼓，纵火登城。
现代文：夜四鼓，纵火登城。
English: Four drums in the evening, setting fire to the city.

古文：琏力疾扪佩刀上马，与贼斗市衢。
现代文：琏忙执佩刀上马，与起义军展开巷战。
English: He quickly put on his sword and mounted his horse to fight the insurgents in the streets.

古文：贼围琏，邀至其船，琏诘之曰： 汝辈罪在不赦，今既宥尔诛戮，又锡以名爵，朝廷何负于汝，乃既降复反邪！
现代文：义军包围了赵琏，并邀请琏至其船。琏质问他们： 你们罪在不赦，现在我们已经宽恕你们，不杀你们，还赐给你们名爵，朝廷有哪一点对不起你们，致使你们投降后又造反呢？
English: The rebels surrounded Zhao Zhe and invited Zhe to their ship. Zhe questioned them: Your sins are unforgivable. Now that we have forgiven you, will not kill you, and have given you the title of nobility, is there anything the court is sorry for, causing you to surrender and rebel again?

古文：汝弃信逆天，灭不旋踵。我执政大臣，岂为汝贼辈屈乎！ 
现代文：你们弃信背叛天子，灭顶之灾已在眼前，我是执政大臣，岂能向你辈屈服？ 
English: You have forsaken your faith and betrayed the Son of Heaven. The disaster of annihilation is already in front of you. I am the ruling minister. How can I give in to you?

古文：即驰骑奋击贼，贼以槊撞琏坠地，欲舁登其舟，琏瞋目大骂，遂死之。
现代文：于是仍驰骑奋击。起义军以槊撞琏坠地，欲将琏抬上他们的兵船。琏目真目大骂，便被杀。
English: So he still rode and fought. The insurgents knocked him to the ground with a plough and wanted to carry him onto their warship. He cursed them and was killed.

古文：琬潜登白龙奥，舍于民家，绝粒不食。
现代文：琏仆扬儿以身护琏，亦被杀。动乱平定后，州民收琏尸，归葬于真州。
English: Zou's servant Yang'er, who was protecting Zou, was also killed. After the turmoil was quelled, the people of Zhou collected Zou's body and buried it in Zhenzhou.

古文：人劝之食，辄瞑目却之，七日而死。孙捴，字自谦，曹州人。
现代文：朝廷得知此情后，赐安葬费三百锭，还封其子赵锜为官。孙捴字自谦，曹州人。
English: After learning of this situation, the imperial court granted the funeral expenses of 300 baht, and also appointed his son Zhao Yao as an official. Sun Yao was a self-effacing man from Caozhou.

古文：至正二年进士，授济宁路录事。
现代文：至正二年进士，授济宁路录事。
English: He entered the priesthood in the second year of the Taisho era, and was awarded the Jining Road Record.

古文：张士诚据高邮叛，或谓其有降意，朝廷择乌马儿为使，招谕士诚，而用捴辅行。
现代文：张士诚在高邮起义时，或谓其有降意，朝廷择乌马儿为使，往招士诚，并用捴伴随。
English: When Zhang Shicheng revolted in Gaopou, the imperial court chose Umar as an envoy to summon Zhang Shicheng, and accompanied him with a scepter.

古文：捴家居，不知也。
现代文：时捴在家，不知此事。
English: When I was at home, I didn't know about it.

古文：中书借捴集贤待制，给驿，就其家起之。捴强行抵高邮，士诚不迓诏使。
现代文：中书藉口捴有集贤院待制之职，给以使用驿站的方便，捴勉强奉命到高邮，张士诚并不以礼相迎。
English: Zhang Shicheng did not greet him with courtesy, saying that he had been appointed to a position at the Jixian Academy and had been given the convenience of using the post office. He was only reluctantly ordered to go to Gaopeng.

古文：捴等既入城，反覆开谕，士诚等皆竦然以听。
现代文：捴等进入高邮城后，对士诚反复劝说，士诚肃敬地听着。
English: After entering Gaoyou City, Zou repeatedly persuaded Shicheng, and Shicheng listened respectfully.

古文：已而拘之他室，或日一馈食，或间日一馈食，欲以降捴，捴唯诟斥而已。
现代文：等捴讲完话后，士诚便将他拘于他室，有时一日给一顿饭，有时隔日给一顿饭，还想劝捴投降，捴只是咒骂而已。
English: After he finished speaking, Shicheng detained him in his room, sometimes giving him one meal a day, sometimes giving him one meal the next day. He also wanted to persuade him to surrender, but he only swore at him.

古文：乃令其党捶捴，肆其陵辱，捴不恤也。
现代文：士诚令其部下殴打捴，放肆凌辱捴，但捴一点也不惊恐。
English: Shicheng ordered his subordinates to beat him and abuse him, but he was not frightened at all.

古文：及士诚徙平江，捴与士诚部将张茂先谋，将捴所授站马札子，遣壮士浦四、许诚赴镇南王府，约日进兵复高邮。
现代文：士诚移驻平江，捴与士诚部将张茂先商议后，派壮士浦四、许诚，将捴送来的驿传文书送交镇南王府，约镇南王定期派兵来收复高邮。
English: Shicheng moved to Pingjiang, and after discussing Zhang Maosen with the Shicheng Department, he sent the strongmen Pu Si and Xu Cheng to deliver the letter sent by Shicheng to the King of Zhenan's palace, and ordered the King of Zhenan to regularly send soldiers to collect the high post.

古文：谋泄，执捴讯问，捴骂声不绝，竟为所害。
现代文：事情败露后，士诚执捴讯问，捴骂声不绝，终为士诚所杀。
English: After the affair was exposed, Shicheng was interrogated and verbally abused, and he was eventually killed.

古文：后贼中见失节者，辄自相嗤曰： 此岂孙待制耶！ 
现代文：后义军中有失节者时，经常自相讥刺说： 这难道是孙待制吗？ 
English: Later, when there was a member of the rebel army who was out of line, he would often sneer at himself and say, "Could it be Sun Tzu?

古文：事闻，赠翰林侍读学士、中奉大夫、护军，追封曹南郡公，谥忠烈。赐田三顷恤其家。
现代文：朝廷得知孙之事迹，赠翰林侍读学士、中奉大夫、护军，追封曹南郡公，谥忠烈，赐田三顷，抚恤其家属。
English: When the Imperial Court learned of Sun's deeds, they gave Hanlin a bachelor's degree in attendance, a middle-ranking doctor, a military escort, the title of Cao Nan County official, the title of a loyal soldier, three hectares of farmland, and pensions to his family members.

古文：石普，字元周，徐州人。
现代文：石普字元周，徐州人。
English: Shi Pu Zi Yuan Zhou, from Xuzhou.

古文：至正五年进士，授国史院编修官，改经正监经历。
现代文：至正五年进士，授国史院编修官，后改任经正监经历。
English: In the fifth year of the Taisho era, he was awarded the post of editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History. Later, he was transferred to the post of chief inspector.

古文：淮东、西盗起，朝廷方用兵，普以将略称，同佥枢密院事董钥尝荐其材，会丞相脱脱讨徐州，以普从行。
现代文：淮东淮西义军起事，朝廷方用兵之际，普一向以将略见称，同佥枢密院事董钥曾向朝廷推荐他的才能，恰好丞相脱脱讨伐徐州，便使石普从行。
English: When the Huai-Dong and Huai-Xi Uyghur armies revolted and the imperial court used troops, Pu had always been known as a general. His peer, the director of the Privy Council, had recommended his talent to the imperial court. It just so happened that the prime minister got rid of him to fight in Xuzhou, so he made Shi Pu follow suit.

古文：徐平录功，迁兵部主事，寻升枢密院都事，从枢密院官守淮安。
现代文：徐州平定后，论功行赏，迁升普为兵部主事。不久，又升为枢密院都事，随枢密院官守淮安。
English: After the pacification of Xuzhou, on the basis of merit and reward, he was promoted to be the head of the military department. Soon, he was promoted to the Privy Council, and Huai'an followed the Privy Council.

古文：时张士诚据高邮，普诣丞相，面陈破贼之策，且曰： 高邮负重湖之险，地皆沮洳，骑兵卒莫能前，与普步兵三万，保取之。
现代文：张士诚占据高邮，普向丞相面陈破张之策，且说： 高邮恃有大湖之险，多是低凹沼泽地，骑兵不能去，如给我三万步兵，保证能攻下高邮。
English: Zhang Shicheng occupied Gaoyou, Pu Xiangcheng met with Chen to defeat Zhang's strategy, and said: Gaoyou has the risk of large lakes, mostly low-lying swamps, cavalry can not go, if I give thirty thousand infantry, I can guarantee to capture Gaoyou.

古文：高邮既平，则濠、泗易破，普请先驱，为天下忠义倡。 
现代文：高邮一平定，濠泗便容易攻破，我愿为先锋，以忠义号召天下。 
English: Once Gaoyou is pacified, it will be easy to break through. I am willing to be a pioneer and call on the world with loyalty.

古文：丞相壮之，命权山东义兵万户府事，招民义万人以行。
现代文：丞相认为他有壮志，命他担任山东民兵万户府事，招民兵万人随行。
English: The prime minister thought that he had great ambition, and ordered him to serve as the Shandong militia of 10,000 households, and recruit 10,000 militia people to accompany him.

古文：而汝中柏者方用事，阴沮之，减其军半。
现代文：但这时汝中柏正当权，暗中破坏，将石普带的士兵减少一半。
English: However, at this time, You Zhongbai took advantage of the legitimate right and secretly destroyed it, reducing the soldiers of the Stone Belt by half.

古文：初令普便宜行事，及行，又使听淮南行省节制。
现代文：原先是同意石普自己可以相机做某些决定，但在动身时却又规定他要听淮南行省的节制。
English: Originally, he agreed that Shipp could make certain decisions for the camera, but when he set off, he stipulated that he would listen to the restraint of Huainan Province.

古文：普行次范水寨，日未夕，普令军中具食，夜漏三刻，下令衔枚趋宝应，其营中更鼓如平时。
现代文：石普的部队到达范水寨时，太阳已偏西，石普便下令部队开饭，深夜三刻，石普下令部队秘密转移到宝应，而军营中的更鼓伪装得像平时一样。
English: When Shippu's troops arrived at Fan Shuizhai, the sun had already moved west, and Shippu ordered the troops to have dinner. At three o'clock in the morning, Shippu ordered the troops to secretly move to Baoying, and the drums in the camp were disguised as usual.

古文：抵县，即登城，树帜城上，贼大惊溃，因抚安其民。
现代文：部队到达宝应后，便立即下令登城，把旗帜插在城上，起义军的守军大惊溃散，石普便出榜安民，收回了宝应。
English: After the troops arrived at Baoying, he immediately ordered them to climb the city and put the flag on the city. The defenders of the rebel army were surprised and dispersed, and Shipu came out to pacify the people and recovered Baoying.

古文：由是诸将疾普功，水陆进兵，乘胜拔十余寨，斩贼数百。
现代文：诸将妒嫉石普立功，便水陆争进，乘胜拔十余寨，斩起义军数百。
English: The generals were envious of Shi Pu's achievements, and they advanced by land and sea, conquering more than ten villages and defeating hundreds of rebels.

古文：将抵高邮城，分兵三队：一趋城东，备水战；一为夺兵，虞后；一普自将，攻北门。
现代文：将抵高邮城时，石普分兵三路：一趋城东，准备水战；一为奇兵，以断后路；石普自带一路攻北门。
English: When they were about to arrive at Gaoyoucheng, Shi Pu's detachment of soldiers took three routes: one was to head east of the city to prepare for a naval battle; one was a surprise attack to cut off the rear route; and Shi Pu took the whole way to attack the north gate.

古文：遇贼与战，贼不能支，遁入城。
现代文：义军不能支，退回城内。石普身先士卒，追击义军，并纵火烧城门。
English: The rebels could not hold out and retreated back into the city. Shipp was the first to pursue the rebels and set fire to the city gates.

古文：普先士卒蹑之，纵火烧关门，贼惧，谋弃城走。
现代文：义军恐惧，谋弃城走。
English: Frightened, the rebels decided to abandon the city.

古文：而援军望之，按不进。
现代文：但这时朝廷的援军取观望态度，按兵不动；而且忌妒石普。
English: But at this time, the reinforcements of the imperial court took a wait-and-see attitude and did not move; and they were jealous of Shi Pu.

古文：且忌普成功，总兵者遣蒙古军千骑，突出普军前，欲收先入之功。
现代文：总兵者派蒙古军千骑，突然出现在石普军队前面以夺取先入高邮之功。
English: The commander-in-chief sent a thousand horsemen from the Mongol army and suddenly appeared in front of the Sipu army to win the honor of being the first to enter Gaoyou.

古文：而贼以死捍，蒙古军恇怯，即驰回，普止之不可，遂为贼所蹂践，率坠水中。
现代文：守城义军誓死抵抗，蒙古军胆怯后退，石普极力阻止他们，阻止不住，遭义军反击，大多坠入水中。
English: Defending the city, the rebels vowed to resist to the death, the Mongolian army timidly retreated, Shipu tried to stop them, could not be stopped, and was counterattacked by the rebels, most of which fell into the water.

古文：普军乱，贼乘之。普勒余兵，血战良久，仗剑大呼曰： 大丈夫当为国死，有不进前者，斩！ 
现代文：石普军溃散，义军乃乘机进击，石普率残兵抵抗，血战良久，仗剑大呼曰 ：大丈夫当为国死，敢有不前进者，斩！ 
English: The Sipu army broke up, the rebels took advantage of the opportunity to attack, Sipu led the remnants of the resistance, the bloody battle lasted for a long time, and the sword shouted: "It's okay to die for the country, if you dare not advance, behead!

古文：奋击，直入贼阵中，从者仅三十人。
现代文：乃直入义军阵地，从者仅三十人。
English: Na went straight into the rebel positions, leaving only thirty followers behind.

古文：至日西，援绝，被创堕马，复步战数合。
现代文：至傍晚，援军不至，受伤坠马，复步战数合。
English: In the late afternoon, reinforcements did not arrive, the wounded fell off their horses, and the battle resumed.

古文：贼怒，先剜其臂肉，而后磔之。
现代文：乘立法招安，使其有自新之路。
English: by legislation, so that it has a path to self-renewal.

古文：杨乘，字文载，滨州渤海人。至正初，为介休县尹，民饥散为盗，乘立法招之，使自新，皆弃兵顿首，愿为良民。其后累官江浙行省左右司员外郎，坐海寇掠漕粮舟免官，寓居松江。
现代文：百姓抛弃兵器，愿为良民。其后，累官至江浙行省左右司员外郎，因漕运粮船被海寇抢劫而免官，寓居松江。
English: The people abandoned their weapons and were willing to be good citizens. Later, Gairo, who had been appointed to various posts in Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces, was relieved of his duties because the grain ship he was rowing was robbed by pirates. He lived in Matsue.

古文：张士诚入平江，其徒郭良弼、董绶言乘于士诚，士诚遣张经招乘，乘曰： 良弼、绶皆名臣，今已失节，顾欲引我，以济其恶邪！ 
现代文：张士诚入平江，其部下郭良弼、董绶推荐乘于士诚，士诚遣张经去招降乘，乘说 ：良弼与绶都是名臣，今皆叛朝廷，反来招我，大概是想我帮他们实现他们的邪恶意图！ 
English: Zhang Shicheng entered the Pingjiang River. His subordinates Guo Liangqi and Dong Qi recommended Zhang Shicheng, and Zhang Shicheng sent Zhang Jing to recruit and recruit, saying: Liang Qi and Zou are both famous ministers, now they are traitors to the imperial court, but they recruited me, probably wanting me to help them achieve their evil intentions!

古文：且让经平日读书云何，经俯首不能对。
现代文：又责问张经平日读书如何，经低头不能回答。
English: He also asked Zhang Jing how his reading was on weekdays. Zhang Jing bowed his head and could not answer.

古文：乘日与客痛饮，竟日不言。
现代文：乘乃与客痛饮，终日不言。
English: She drinks heavily with her guests and doesn't speak all day.

古文：客问： 盍行乎？ 
现代文：客问曰： 今后做何打算？ 
English: The guest asked: What do you plan to do in the future?

古文：乘曰： 乘以一小吏致身显官，有死而已，尚何行之有！ 
现代文：乘回答 ：乘以一小吏致身显官，有死而已，还往何处去！ 
English: Answer: By multiplying a small official to become a high-ranking official, there is only death, where else to go!

古文：经促其行愈急，乘乃整衣冠，自经死，年六十四。
现代文：张经见状更急于促使乘启程，乘整理衣冠自杀而死，时年六十四岁。
English: Zhang Jing, who was more eager to promote the departure, committed suicide by straightening his clothes and died at the age of sixty-four.

