古文：室昉，字梦奇，南京人。
现代文：室昉，字梦奇，南京人。
English: Muroto, the character Mengqi, is from Nanjing.

古文：幼谨厚笃学，不出外户者二十年，虽里人莫识。
现代文：幼时谨慎笃厚，好学，二十年足不出户，即使是同乡人也不认识他。
English: Prudent and studious as a child, he did not leave home for twenty years. Even his fellow countrymen did not know him.

古文：其精如此。
现代文：其精诚如此。
English: Qian Zhiwei's divination is so shrewd.

古文：会同初，登进士第，为卢龙巡捕官。
现代文：会同初年，登进士第，任卢龙巡捕官。
English: In the first year of the association, he was promoted to the first grade and served as Lulong patrol officer.

古文：太宗入汴受册礼，诏昉知制诰，总礼仪事。
现代文：太宗入汴京受册礼，诏令室昉为知制诰，总管礼仪事务。
English: Taizong entered Beijing to receive the registration ceremony, and the imperial edict designated his wife as the chief administrator of etiquette.

古文：天禄中，为南京留守判官。
现代文：天禄年间，任南京留守判官。
English: During the Tenroku era, he served as a magistrate in Nanjing.

古文：应历间，累迁翰林学士，出入禁闼十余年。
现代文：应历年间，累迁翰林学士，出入宫廷门户十余年。
English: Over the years, Hanlin Bachelors have been moving in and out of the palace for more than ten years.

古文：保宁间，兼政事舍人，数延问古今治乱得失，奏对称旨。
现代文：保宁年间，兼任政事舍人，皇上多次向他请教询问古今之治乱得失，奏答很合皇上旨意。
English: During the Boryeong era, he also served as a political adviser, and the emperor repeatedly asked him for advice about the benefits and drawbacks of the past and present, and the answer was very much in line with the emperor's will.

古文：上多昉有理剧才，改南京副留守，决讼平允，人皆便之。
现代文：皇上看中室昉有治理繁难事务的才能，改任他为南京副留守，判决案件公平合理，大家都觉得很适意。
English: According to the emperor, Zhong Muxun had the ability to manage difficult affairs, and he was appointed as the vice governor of Nanjing. The judgment of the case was fair and reasonable, and everyone felt very comfortable.

古文：迁工部尚书，寻改枢密副使，参知政事。
现代文：迁任工部尚书，不久改任枢密副使、参知政事。
English: He was transferred to the Ministry of Works and soon became a Privy Vice-Minister and a member of the Council of State.

古文：顷之，拜枢密使，兼北府宰相，加同政事门下平章事。
现代文：不久，拜为枢密使，兼北府宰相，加同政事门下平章事。
English: Soon, Bae became a privy councilor, concurrently the prime minister of Beifu, as well as a member of the cabinet.

古文：乾亨初，监修国史。
现代文：乾亨初年，监修国史。
English: In the first year of Qianheng, he supervised the national history.

古文：统和元年，告老，不许。
现代文：统和元年，请求告老还乡，不许。
English: In the year of unification and the first year, the request to return to the hometown is not allowed.

古文：进《尚书·无逸篇》以谏，太后闻而嘉奖。
现代文：他呈上《尚书？无逸篇》以进谏，太后得知后很是嘉许。
English: He submitted "Shang Shu? Muxiyuan" to the imperial court for approval, and the empress dowager was very appreciative after learning about it.

古文：二年秋，诏修诸岭路，昉发民夫二十万，一日毕功。
现代文：二年秋，诏令修筑各山岭道路，室昉征发民夫二十万，一个月就修完了。
English: In the autumn of the second year, the imperial edict ordered the construction of roads in the mountains, and Muroto conscripted and dispatched 200,000 people to complete the construction in just one month.

古文：是时，昉与韩德让、耶律斜轸相友善，同心辅政，整析蠹弊，知无不言，务在息民薄赋，以故法度修明，朝无异议。
现代文：当时，室昉与韩德让、耶律斜轸相交好，同心辅政，整治公害和积弊，知无不言，力求轻徭薄赋，使百姓得到休养生息，因此法度修明，朝廷中没有人持异议。
English: At that time, Muroto had a good relationship with Han Dejan and Yerut Yerut, supported the government with one heart and one mind, rectified public hazards and accumulated defects, knew what to say and what not to say, and strived to be frivolous and petty, so that the people could rest and recuperate. Therefore, the law was amended, and no one in the imperial court objected.

古文：八年，复请致政。诏入朝免拜，赐几杖，太后遣阁门使李从训持诏劳问，令常居南京，封郑国公。
现代文：八年，又请求辞官归田，诏令入朝免予朝拜，赐给坐几和手杖，太后派阁门使李从训携带诏书前往慰问，让他一直住在南京，封为郑国公。
English: In the eighth year, he also asked the magistrate to return to the field, the imperial edict exempted him from paying homage when entering the imperial court, and gave him a chair and a cane. The empress dowager sent Li Congxun to carry the imperial edict to offer condolences, so that he could live in Nanjing and be named Zheng Guogong.

古文：初，晋国公主建佛寺于南京，上许赐额。
现代文：当初，晋国公主在南京建佛寺，皇上允诺赐给匾额。
English: At first, Princess Jin Guo built a Buddhist temple in Nanjing, and the emperor promised to give her a large sum of money.

古文：昉奏曰： 诏书悉罪无名寺院。
现代文：室昉上奏说 ：诏书中曾说对于无正当理由而建的寺院要一律降罪。
English: Muroto Joso said, "In the imperial edict, it was said that all temples built without a legitimate reason would be punished.

古文：今以主请赐额，不惟违前诏，恐此风愈炽。 
现代文：现在因为公主的请求就赐给匾额，不仅违背了先前所颁的诏书，恐怕滥建寺院之风气将愈演愈烈了。 
English: Now, because of the princess's request, the amount of money has been given, which not only violates the previously issued imperial edict, but I am afraid that the culture of building temples indiscriminately will become more and more intense.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：表进所撰《实录》二十卷，手诏褒之，加政事令，赐帛六百匹。
现代文：上表呈进所撰《实录》二十卷，皇上亲草诏书褒奖他，升为政事令，赐给帛六百匹。
English: The above table was included in the 20 volumes of the "True Record" compiled, and the emperor praised him in a personal edict, elevated him to a government order, and gave him 600 horses.

古文：九年，荐韩德让自代，不从。
现代文：九年，推荐韩德让代替自己，皇上不从。
English: Nine years later, the emperor did not follow the recommendation to let Hande take his place.

古文：上以昉年老苦寒，赐貂皮衾褥，许乘辇入朝。
现代文：皇上因为室昉年老畏寒，赐给貂皮被褥，特准乘辇车入朝。
English: Due to the fact that the Empress's mother-in-law was too old and afraid of the cold, she was given a mink fur blanket and special permission to travel to the Imperial Palace by mink carriage.

古文：病剧，遣翰林学士张干就第授中京留守，加尚父。
现代文：室昉病重，皇上派翰林学士张干到府中去授予他中京留守之职，加号尚父。
English: Muroto was seriously ill, and the emperor sent the scholar of Hanlin, Zhang Gan, to Fuzhong to grant him the position of staying in Beijing, with the additional title of Shangfu.

古文：卒，年七十五。
现代文：不久去世，终年七十五岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 75.

古文：上嗟悼，辍朝二日，赠尚书令。
现代文：皇上叹息悲悼，为之停止上朝二日，追赠尚书令。
English: The emperor sighed in sorrow and stopped going to the Imperial Palace for two days, and issued a posthumous imperial edict.

古文：遗言戒厚葬。
现代文：室昉遗言严禁厚葬。
English: Muroko's last words forbid a lavish funeral.

古文：恐人誉过情，自志其墓。
现代文：又恐怕他人撰写墓志铭时称誉言过其实，自己做了墓志铭。
English: And I'm afraid that when others wrote their epitaphs, they exaggerated their praise and made their own epitaphs.

古文：耶律贤适，字阿古真，于越鲁不古之子。
现代文：耶律贤适，字阿古真，于越鲁不古之子。
English: Yelu Xianshi, also known as Aguzhen, was the son of Yue Longfu.

古文：嗜学，有大志，滑稽玩世，人莫之知。
现代文：酷爱读书，心存大志，圆转顺俗，玩世不恭，不为人所了解。
English: Passionate about reading, ambitious, well-rounded, cynical, incomprehensible.

古文：惟于越屋质器之，尝谓人曰： 是人当国，天下幸甚。 
现代文：只有于越屋质器重他，曾经对人说： 此人若能当政，天下就太幸运了。 
English: Only Yu Yueya, who held him in high esteem, once said to people: "If this man can become a politician, the world will be so lucky."

古文：应历中，朝臣多以言获谴，贤适乐于静退，游猎自娱，与亲朋言不及时事。
现代文：应历年间，朝臣大多因为上言遭贬谪，耶律贤适甘于默默地隐退，游玩打猎，想方设法让自己快乐，与亲戚朋友交谈也不涉及时政。
English: During the following years, most of the courtiers were disparaged because of the last words, and Yeruxian was willing to retreat silently, play hunting, find ways to make himself happy, and talk with relatives and friends without involving current affairs.

古文：会讨乌古还，擢右皮室详稳。
现代文：适逢讨伐乌古回来，提升为右皮室详稳。
English: Ugu came back in time for the crusade and was promoted to the right dermatological room.

古文：景宗在藩邸，常与韩匡嗣、女里等游，言或刺讥，贤适劝以宜早疏绝，由是穆宗终不见疑，贤适之力也。
现代文：景宗为藩王时，经常与韩匡嗣、女里等交游，有时上言讥刺朝政，贤适劝他应当早些疏远断绝时政，因此穆宗始终不曾猜疑景宗，乃是得力于贤适之功。
English: When Gyeongjong was the king of the domain, he often traveled with Han Kuang-jong, Nyong-ri, and others. Sometimes he would criticize the government, and Hyon-sik advised him to break away from the government earlier. Therefore, Mu-jong never suspected Gyeongjong, but was able to do so thanks to Hyon-sik.

古文：景宗立，以功加检校太保，寻遥授宁江军节度使，赐推忠协力功臣。
现代文：景宗即位，因功升为检校太保，不久遥授宁江军节度使，赐为推忠协力功臣。
English: When King Gyeongjong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of inspector of schools for his achievements. Soon after, he was awarded the title of the special envoy of the Ninggang Army, and was given the title of a meritorious subject for his loyalty and cooperation.

古文：时帝初践阼，多疑诸王或萌非望，阴以贤适为腹心，加特进同中书门下平章事。
现代文：当时皇上初登帝位，颇怀疑诸人心存非分之想，便暗中以贤适为心腹，升为特进中书门下平章事。
English: At that time, when the emperor ascended the throne for the first time, he was quite suspicious of the people's thoughts, so he secretly took Xiansu as his confidant and promoted him to the special promotion of the middle school.

古文：保宁二年秋，拜北院枢密使，兼侍中，赐保节功臣。
现代文：保宁二年秋，拜为北院枢密使，兼侍中，赐为保节功臣。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Boryeong, he was made a privy councilor of the Northern Court, and given the title of a meritorious subject of the festival.

古文：三年，为西北路兵马都部署。
现代文：三年，任西北路兵马都部署。
English: For three years, he was in charge of the Northwest Road troop deployment.

古文：贤适忠介肤敏，推诚待人，虽燕息不忘政务。
现代文：贤适忠诚耿介，优雅敏捷，以至诚之心待人，即使是休息时心中也不忘政务。
English: Gengsuke is loyal, graceful and agile, and treats people with sincerity. Even when he is resting, he does not forget about government affairs.

古文：以故百司首职，罔敢偷惰，累年滞狱悉决之。
现代文：因此他所辖百司之正职官员，都不敢偷懒，多年积下的案件都判决下来了。
English: As a result, all the full-time officials under his jurisdiction dare not be lazy, and the cases accumulated over the years have been adjudicated.

古文：大丞相高勋、契丹行宫都部署女里席宠放恣，及帝姨母、保母势薰灼，一时纳赂请谒，门若贾区。
现代文：大丞相高勋、契丹行宫都部署女里倚仗恩宠恣意妄为，又有皇上的姨妈、保姆仗势欺人。一时之间行贿的、请托的，门庭若市。
English: The grand vizier Gao Xun, the prime minister Gao Xun, and the prince of Khitan all deployed their wives to act arbitrarily, relying on their favors, and the emperor's aunts and nannies also used their influence to deceive others.

古文：贤适患之，言于帝，不报；以病解职，又不允，令铸手印行事。
现代文：贤适深以为患，上奏于皇上，皇上不回复；他借口有病请求去职，又不准，命他打按手印管理政事。
English: The emperor did not reply to his request to resign on the pretext that he was ill, but he was not allowed to do so, and he was ordered to leave his thumbprint on the post to manage government affairs.

古文：乾亨初，疾笃，得请。
现代文：乾亨初，病重，得以从其所请解职。
English: At the beginning of the year, Qian Heng was seriously ill and was able to be relieved of his duties.

古文：明年，封西平郡王，薨，年五十三。
现代文：次年，封为西平郡王，逝世，年五十三岁。
English: The following year, he was named the king of Xiping County, and died at the age of 53.

古文：子观音，大同军节度使。
现代文：子耶律观音，大同军节度使。
English: His son, Ye Lu Guanyin, was the Grand Marshal of the Datong Army.

古文：女里，字涅烈衮，逸其氏族，补积庆宫人。
现代文：女里，字涅烈衮，亡失其氏族来由，补为积庆宫人。
English: Onneli, known as Nirvana, lost her clan and became a member of the Jieqing Palace.

古文：应历初，为习马小底，以母忧去。
现代文：应历初年，担任习马小底，因为母丧去职。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he served as a student of Ma Xiaodi, because his mother passed away.

古文：一日至雅伯山，见一巨人，惶惧走。
现代文：一天，女里来到雅伯山，见到一个巨人，女里惊恐万状，掉头就跑。
English: One day, the woman came to the Jabber Mountain and saw a giant. Terrified, the woman turned around and ran.

古文：巨人止之曰： 勿惧，我地祇也。
现代文：巨人拦住他，说： 不要怕，我乃是地神。
English: The giant stopped him and said, "Don't be afraid, I am the god of the earth.

古文：葬尔母于斯，当速诣阙，必贵。 
现代文：将你的母亲下葬到这里，然后赶紧赴朝堂拜谒圣上，一定会显贵。 
English: To bury your mother here, and then rush to the temple to pay homage to the saint, will certainly be dignified.

古文：女里从之，累迁马群侍中。
现代文：女里依他所言而行，累官至马群侍中。
English: The woman did as he asked, and was ushered into the middle of the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：时景宗在藩邸，以女里出自本宫，待遇殊厚，女里亦倾心结纳。
现代文：当时景宗为藩王，因为女里出身于本宫，待他特别好，女里也尽心结纳。
English: At that time, Kagezong was the king of the domain, and since his wife was born in this palace, she treated him particularly well, and his wife was also very accommodating.

古文：及穆宗遇弑，女里奔赴景宗。
现代文：及至穆宗被害，女里赶赴景宗处。
English: When Mu Zong was injured, the woman rushed to Jing Zong's place.

古文：是夜，集禁兵五百以卫。
现代文：当夜，聚集禁兵五百护卫。
English: That night, 500 guards gathered.

古文：既即位，以翼戴功，加政事令、契丹行宫都部署，赏赉甚渥，寻加守太尉。
现代文：景宗即位之后，女里因为拥戴之功，升为政事令、契丹行宫都部署，赏赐十分丰厚，不久升任守太尉。
English: After the enthronement of King Gyeongjong, because of her role in supporting him, she was promoted to the position of regent, and the palace of Khitan was deployed. She received a very rich reward and was soon promoted to the position of captain of the guard.

古文：北汉主刘继元闻女里为上信任，遇其生日必致礼。
现代文：北汉主刘继元得知女里为皇上宠信任用，每逢他的生日总是送来礼物。
English: The lord of Northern Han, Liu Jiyuan, learned that his concubine was the emperor's favorite and trusted, and she always sent him gifts every time he had a birthday.

古文：女里素贪，同列萧阿不底亦好贿，二人相善。
现代文：女里一向贪财，同僚萧阿不底也好收受贿赂，两人十分相投。
English: The woman has always been greedy for money, and her colleague Xiao Ah did not hesitate to accept bribes. The two are very compatible.

古文：侧闻恣意游猎，甚于往日。万一有衔橛之变，搏噬之虞，悔将何及？
现代文：有人穿着用粆麻子衬里的毡裘，别人调侃他说： 如果遇上女里、阿不底，肯定会全都给你剥走了！ 
English: Someone was wearing a mink coat lined with nettle seeds, while others made fun of him, saying: "If you meet a woman, an atheist, they will surely take everything away from you!"

古文：况南有强敌，伺隙而动，闻之得无生心乎？
现代文：一时传为笑谈。
English: It was a joke at the time.

古文：伏望陛下节从禽酣饮之乐，为生灵社稷计，则有无疆之休。 
现代文：其贪鄙一至于此。保宁末年，因为私藏甲胄五百种获罪，有司审问他时，又从他袖中得到杀害枢密使萧思温的贼人的书信，被赐死。
English: At the end of his life, Boryn was found guilty of five hundred counts of concealing armor, and when a judge interrogated him, he received from his sleeve a letter from the thief who killed the confidential envoy Xiao Siwen, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：上览而称善，赐协赞功臣，拜武定军节度使，卒。
现代文：女里擅长辨识马匹，他曾经在野外行走，看见几处马迹，指着其中一种说： 这是奇特骏马。 
English: The woman is good at identifying horses. He once walked in the field, saw several horse tracks, pointed to one of them and said: This is a strange horse.

古文：耶律阿没里，字蒲邻，遥辇嘲古可汗之四世孙。
现代文：用自己的马将它换来，那马果然是匹难得的神骏。耶律阿没里，字蒲邻，遥辇嘲古可汗四世孙。
English: He exchanged it for his own horse, which turned out to be a rare sacred horse. Yerudamangli, also known as Purnima, was the fourth-generation descendant of the ancient Khan.

古文：幼聪敏。
现代文：幼时聪明机敏。
English: Clever and quick-witted at an early age.

古文：保宁中，为南院宣徽使。
现代文：保宁年间，任南院宣徽使。
English: During his time in Boryeong, he served as the Southern Court's Herald of the Annunciation.

古文：统和初，皇太后称制，与耶律斜轸参预国论，为都统。
现代文：统和初，皇太后执政，阿没里与耶律斜轸参预国家大计，担任都统。
English: At the beginning of the unification, the empress dowager was in power, and Anri and Yerut obliquely participated in the pre-national plan and served as the leader of the unification.

古文：以征高丽功，迁北院宣徽使，加政事令。
现代文：因为征讨高丽有功，迁任北院宣徽使，加政事令。
English: Because of his achievements in the conquest of Korea, he was transferred to the position of the North Korean Imperial Court's heraldic envoy, and given a government post.

古文：四年春，宋将曹彬、米信等侵燕，上亲征，阿没里为都监，屡破敌军。
现代文：四年春，宋将曹彬、米信等人侵犯燕地，皇上亲征，阿没里担任都监，多次击败敌军。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Song sent Cao Bin, Yixin and others to encroach on Yan's land. The emperor himself was enlisted, and Anri served as the inspector of the capital, defeating the enemy army many times.

古文：十二年，行在多盗，阿没里立禁捕法，盗始息。
现代文：十二年，皇上行宫多贼盗，阿没里设立禁捕法，盗贼这才止息。
English: In the twelfth year, when the emperor went to the palace, there were many thieves. Anri set up a ban on arrests, and the thieves only stopped.

古文：先是，叛逆之家，兄弟不知情者亦连坐。
现代文：在此之前，叛逆者之家，兄弟不知情者也遭连坐。
English: Earlier, the house of the rebel, the brother of the uninformed, was also raided.

古文：阿没里谏曰： 夫兄弟虽曰同胞，赋性各异，一行逆谋，虽不与知，辄坐以法，是刑及无罪也。
现代文：阿没里上谏说 ：兄弟尽管称为同胞，然而秉性各不相同，其中一人行叛逆之事，别人即使不知情，也仍要以法治罪，这是刑罚及于无罪之人了。
English: Anri said: "Although brothers are called compatriots, they are all different in nature. If one of them commits treason, the others will still be punished even if they do not know about it. This is the punishment for those who are not guilty.

古文：致仕，卒。阿没里性好聚敛，每从征所掠人口，聚而建城，请为丰州，就以家奴阎贵为刺史，时议鄙之。
现代文：希望从今以后，即使是同居之兄弟，不知情者也能免予连坐。 太后嘉许其建议并加以采纳，将它写成法律条文。阿没里此后不久即辞官，去世。阿没里生性喜好聚敛财富，每当随从征讨之时所俘掳的人口，都将他们集中起来建为城池，请求立为丰州，就便以家奴阎贵担任刺史，时论鄙薄之。
English: It is hoped that from now on, even if they are brothers who live together, those who do not know can be exempted from sitting together. The empress dowager praised his suggestion and adopted it, writing it into a legal provision. Anri resigned shortly thereafter and died. Anri's natural inclination is to accumulate wealth. Whenever the population captured at the time of the subjugation was gathered together and built into a castle, and asked to be made into a phoenix, he would use the family slave Yan Gui as a scapegoat, which was despicable.

古文：子贤哥，左夷离毕。
现代文：子贤哥，左夷离毕。
English: Zixian brother, Zuoying left.

