古文：《程材》所论，论材能行操，未言学知之殊奇也。
现代文：本书《程材》评论的问题，只评论了才能和操行，没有评论儒生和文吏在学问和知识方面的差异。
English: The book's review of "Cheng Zhai" only commented on ability and conduct, and did not comment on the differences between Confucian scholars and literati in terms of learning and knowledge.

古文：夫儒生之所以过文吏者，学问日多，简练其性，雕琢其材也。
现代文：儒生之所以超过文吏，是学问一天一天地增多，通过培养和引导，精心培养了他们的才能。
English: The reason why the Confucian scholars surpass the literati is that their knowledge is increasing day by day. Through training and guidance, they have carefully cultivated their talents.

古文：故夫学者所以反情治性，尽才成德也。
现代文：所以学习是为了改变自己的感情和本性，使自己的才能和品德完善起来。
English: Therefore, learning is to change one's feelings and nature, and to perfect one's talent and character.

古文：材尽德成，其比於文吏，亦雕琢者，程量多矣。
现代文：才能和品德完备了，他们比起那些同样精心下过工夫的文吏，衡量起来要高明得多。
English: They have perfected their talents and virtues, and they are much more intelligent than those who have also worked hard.

古文：贫人与富人，俱赍钱百，并为赙礼死哀之家。
现代文：穷人和富人，都拿一百钱送人，一齐作葬礼给办丧事的人家。
English: Both the rich and the poor gave a hundred pieces of money to the mourners, and together they made funerals for the mourners' families.

古文：知之者，知贫人劣能共百，以为富人饶羡有奇余也；不知之者，见钱俱百，以为财货贫富皆若一也。
现代文：知道他们情况的人，晓得穷人家只能提供一百钱，认为富人家富足而有多余；不知道他们情况的人，看见钱都是一百，认为钱财贫富都一样。
English: People who know their situation, know that the poor can only provide a hundred money, think that the rich are rich and have more than enough; people who do not know their situation, see money as a hundred, and think that money and wealth are the same.

古文：文吏、儒生有似於此。
现代文：文吏与儒生与这种情况相似。
English: The case of the literati and Confucianism is similar.

古文：皆为掾吏，并典一曹，将知之者，知文吏、儒生笔同，而儒生胸中之藏，尚多奇余；不知之者，以为皆吏，深浅多少同一量，失实甚矣。
现代文：他们都是掾史，都管理一个部门，地方长官了解他们的，知道文吏与儒生文字水平相同，但儒生心里的学问，还多得很；不了解他们的，认为都是下属官吏，知识的深浅多少是同一个水平，这就太不符合实际情况了。
English: They are all scholars, and they all manage a department. The local governors know them well, and they know that the civil servants are at the same level as the Confucian literati, but the Confucians still have a lot of knowledge. If they don't know them, they think that they are all subordinate officials, and their knowledge is more or less at the same level. This is too inconsistent with the actual situation.

古文：地性生草，山性生木。
现代文：地生性长草，山生性长树。
English: Ground-growing long grass, mountain-growing long trees.

古文：如地种葵韭，山树枣栗，名曰美园茂林，不复与一恆地庸山比矣。
现代文：如果地栽上冬葵与韭菜，山上种下枣树与栗树，命名叫美园茂林，就不再跟相同的普通地和山一样了。
English: If the ground is planted with hollyhocks and amaranth, and the mountain is planted with jujube trees and chestnut trees, and named Biyuan Maolin, it will no longer be the same as the same ordinary land and mountain.

古文：文吏、儒生，有似於此，俱有材能，并用笔墨，而儒生奇有先王之道。
现代文：文吏与儒生的情况跟这差不多。他们都有才能，都使用笔墨，但是儒生多有先王之道。
English: The situation of the literati and the Confucianists is similar. They both have talent and use pen and ink, but the Confucianists mostly have the way of the forefathers.

古文：先王之道，非徒葵韭枣栗之谓也。
现代文：先王之道，不仅仅是冬葵、韭菜、枣树、栗树这类普通的东西可比。
English: The way of the Ancients is not only comparable to ordinary things such as winter amethysts, amaranths, jujube trees, and chestnut trees.

古文：恆女之手，纺绩织经；如或奇能，织锦刺绣，名曰卓殊，不复与恆女科矣。
现代文：普通妇女的手，纺纱织布，如果有人有特殊本领，织锦刺绣，就命名叫卓殊，不再跟普通妇女同类了。
English: Ordinary women's hands, spinning and weaving, if someone has a special skill, brocade embroidery, they are named Zhuoshu, no longer the same as ordinary women.

古文：夫儒生与文吏程材，而儒生侈有经传之学，犹女工织锦刺绣之奇也。
现代文：儒生与文吏，衡量他们的才能，儒生多有经传的学问，就像妇女有擅长织锦刺绣的特别本领一样。
English: Confucians and literati, judging by their talents, Confucians mostly have the knowledge of scripture, just as women have a special ability to be good at brocade embroidery.

古文：贫人好滥，而富人守节者，贫人不足而富人饶侈。儒生不为非，而文吏好为奸者，文吏少道德，而儒生多仁义也。
现代文：穷人好胡作非为而富人遵守礼节，是由于穷人贫困而富人富足的缘故；儒生不为非作歹而文吏喜欢作恶，是因为文吏缺乏道德而儒生具有仁义的缘故。
English: The reason why the poor are good at misdeeds and the rich are good at etiquette is because the poor are poor and the rich are rich; the reason why the Confucianism is good at misdeeds and the literati are good at doing evil is because the literati are immoral and the Confucianism is benevolent.

古文：贫人富人，并为宾客，受赐於主人，富人不惭而贫人常愧者，富人有以效，贫人无以复也。
现代文：穷人和富人，都是宾客，接受主人的恩惠，富人不感到惭愧而穷人常常感到惭愧，是由于富人有用来报答的东西，而穷人没有用来报答的东西。
English: The rich are not ashamed, and the poor are often ashamed, because the rich have something to repay, and the poor have nothing to repay.

古文：儒生、文吏，俱以长吏为主人者也。
现代文：儒生和文吏都以长吏作为自己的主人。
English: Both Confucian scholars and clerks regard the chief clerk as their master.

古文：儒生受长吏之禄，报长吏以道；文吏空胸无仁义之学，居往食禄，终无以效，所谓尸位素餐者也。
现代文：儒生接受长吏的俸禄，用先王之道帮助长吏作为报答，文吏腹中空空，没有仁义的学问，占着官位，享受俸禄，始终没有东西来报答长吏，这可以说是占着位子白吃饭。
English: A Confucian scholar receives a salary from a magistrate and helps the magistrate as a reward in the manner of the previous king; a clerk has an empty stomach, no knowledge of benevolence and righteousness, occupies an official position, enjoys a salary, and always has nothing to repay the magistrate, which can be said to occupy a seat and eat for free.

古文：素者，空也；空虚无德，餐人之禄，故曰素餐。
现代文：素就是空，空虚没有道德，又拿别人的俸禄，所以叫做白吃饭。
English: The essence is emptiness, emptiness has no morality, and takes other people's salary, so it is called eating for free.

古文：无道艺之业，不晓政治，默坐朝庭，不能言事，与尸无异，故曰尸位。
现代文：没有先王之道和技艺本事，又不懂政治，沉默地坐在朝廷上，不能谈论国家大事，跟失去生命的尸体没有区别，所以叫做尸位。
English: There is no difference between a corpse that has lost its life and a corpse that does not have the wisdom and skills of the previous king, does not understand politics, sits in silence in the imperial court, cannot talk about national affairs, and is therefore called a corpse.

古文：然则文吏所谓尸位素餐者也。
现代文：这样就把文吏称作 尸位素餐 的人。
English: In this way, the clerks are called "corpse-eating" people.

古文：居右食嘉，见将倾邪，岂能举记陈言得失乎？
现代文：占着重要位子，享受着好的待遇，看见地方长官到处作恶，怎么会向他们上书论述利害得失呢？
English: If you occupy an important position, enjoy good treatment, and see local governors doing evil everywhere, how can you write to them to discuss the pros and cons?

古文：一则不能见是非，二则畏罚不敢直言。
现代文：一是他们不能看清得失，二是他们害怕惩罚不敢直说。
English: On the one hand, they cannot see the gains and losses clearly, and on the other hand, they are afraid of punishment and dare not speak frankly.

古文：《礼》曰： 情欲巧。 
现代文：《礼记·表记》上说： 感情要真诚，言辞要美妙。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette and Etiquette" says: Feelings should be sincere, words should be beautiful.

古文：其能力言者，文丑不好，有骨无肉，脂腴不足，犯干将相指，遂取间郤。
现代文：那些能够竭力进谏的人，文章写得不好，有骨无肉，修饰润色不够，违反了地方长官的意旨，于是就遭到疏远。
English: Those who are able to do their best are alienated because their articles are not well written, have no meat and bones, are not sufficiently embellished, and violate the will of local governors.

古文：为地战者不能立功名，贪爵禄者不能谏於上。
现代文：为地位而争斗的人不可能树立功绩和名声，贪图爵位俸禄的人不可能对长吏进谏。
English: It is impossible for those who fight for status to establish merit and fame, and those who covet the salary of a knighthood cannot advance to the chief officials.

古文：文吏贪爵禄，一日居位，辄欲图利，以当资用，侵渔徇身，不为将官显义。虽见太山之恶，安肯扬举毛发之言？
现代文：文吏贪图爵位俸禄，一旦做了官，就想谋取私利以作自己享受，就想凭着权势掠夺榨取别人的财物，而不替地方长官显扬仁义，即使看见滔天的罪恶，怎么又肯揭发出有点滴罪行的话来呢？
English: Civil servants covet knighthoods and salaries. Once they become officials, they want to seek personal gain for their own enjoyment. They want to use their power to plunder and squeeze other people's property, instead of showing benevolence for local governors. Even if they see a heinous crime, how can they reveal a little bit of crime?

古文：事理如此，何用自解於尸位素餐乎？
现代文：他们像这样处理事务，凭什么把自己从 尸位素餐 的指责中解脱出来呢？
English: How do they conduct business like this, and how do they absolve themselves of the charge of being deadbeats?

古文：儒生学大义，以道事将，不可则止，有大臣之志，以经勉为公正之操，敢言者也，位又疏远。
现代文：儒生学习大道理，用先王之道来帮助地方长官，要是不能这样就辞官退隐，他们有重臣的志向，用经书上的道理勉励自己要有公正的操行，是敢于进谏的人，但其地位又离地方长官很远。
English: Confucians study great principles, use the way of the ancestors to help local governors, and if they can't do that, they retire. They have the ambition of senior ministers, use the principles of scripture to encourage themselves to be fair, and are people who dare to advance, but their status is far from the local governors.

古文：远而近谏，《礼》谓之谄，此则郡县之府庭所以常廓无人者也。
现代文：地位疏远却硬要接近并谏阻地方长官，《礼记·表记》上说这种人是在巴结、奉承，这就是郡县官府中常常空无贤人的缘故。
English: They are distant in status, but they insist on getting close to and obstructing the local governors. "Reki·pengki" says that such people are fawning and flattering, which is the reason why there are often no wise men in the county government.

古文：或曰： 文吏笔扎之能，而治定簿书，考理烦事，虽无道学，筋力材能尽於朝庭，此亦报上之效验也。 
现代文：有人说： 文吏有写文书、章奏的能力，而且能处理好公文，研究和处理烦杂的事务，即使没有学习先王之道，但筋力才能都为朝廷用尽，这也是报答长吏的证明。 
English: Some people said: "Civil servants have the ability to write documents and chapters, and can handle official documents, research and deal with complicated matters. Even if they do not learn the way of the first king, but their strength and talent are exhausted by the imperial court. This is also a proof of rewarding officials."

古文：曰：此有似於贫人负官重责，贫无以偿，则身为官作，责乃毕竟。
现代文：我说：这有点像穷人欠了官府很多债，由于贫穷无法偿还，就亲自去为官府服劳役来抵债，这样债才能还清。
English: I said, "It's a bit like a poor person who owes a lot of debt to the government, and because he is too poor to repay it, he personally goes to work for the government to pay off the debt, so that the debt can be paid off."

古文：夫官之作，非屋庑则墙壁也。
现代文：给官府服劳役，不是盖房子就是筑墙壁。
English: They are forced to work for the government, either building houses or building walls.

古文：屋庑则用斧斤，墙壁则用筑锸。
现代文：盖房子则用斧斤，筑墙壁则用筑锸。
English: Houses are built with axes, walls with plowshares.

古文：荷斤斧，把筑锸，与彼握刀持笔何以殊？
现代文：扛斤斧，把筑锸，与那握刀拿笔有什么两样呢？
English: What is the difference between carrying an axe and chisel and holding a knife and a pen?

古文：苟谓治文书者报上之效验，此则治屋庑墙壁之人，亦报上也。
现代文：假如说能处理文书就是报答长吏的证明，那么这些建造房屋墙壁的人也算报答了长吏。
English: If being able to handle paperwork is proof of repaying officials, then these people who built the walls of the house are also considered to have repaid officials.

古文：俱为官作，刀笔斧斤筑锸钧也。
现代文：都是替官府服役，刀笔、斧斤、筑锸的作用是一样的。
English: They all serve for the government, and the role of the knife, pen, axe, and chisel is the same.

古文：抱布贸丝，交易有亡，各得所愿。
现代文：用布换丝，交换有无，各自得到想要的东西。
English: With cloth for silk, exchange with or without, each get what they want.

古文：儒生抱道贸禄，文吏无所抱，何用贸易？
现代文：儒生用先王之道换俸禄，文吏没有交换的东西，拿什么来交换呢？
English: The Confucians exchanged the former king's way for a salary, but what did the clerics exchange for what they did not exchange?

古文：农商殊业，所畜之货，货不可同，计其精粗，量其多少，其出溢者名曰富人，富人在世，乡里愿之。
现代文：农、商是不同的行业，所积储的货物是不一样的，盘算下它们的精粗，计算下它们的数量，要是它们远远超出别人就被称作富人。富人在社会上，同乡的人都很羡慕他。
English: Farmers and merchants are different industries, and the goods they accumulate are not the same. If you calculate their quality and quantity, if they are far more than others, they are called rich. In society, the rich are envied by their fellow countrymen.

古文：夫先王之道，非徒农商之货也，其为长吏立功致化，非徒富多出溢之荣也。
现代文：其实先王之道，不仅仅是农商那点货物，它能帮助长吏建立功绩和进行教化，不仅仅是财富多能远远超过别人的那点荣誉。
English: In fact, the Way of the Ancestor King is not just a bit of goods from an agricultural merchant. It can help officials establish merit and carry out enlightenment. It is not just a bit of honor that can far exceed others' wealth.

古文：且儒生之业，岂徒出溢哉？
现代文：况且儒生的事业，岂止是在数量上超过别人呢！
English: Moreover, the cause of Confucianism is not only superior to others in quantity!

古文：其身简练，知虑光明，见是非审，审尤奇也。
现代文：他们自身锻炼，心地光明，看得清是非，这些才是最珍贵的。
English: Their self-discipline, their light-heartedness, their ability to see right from wrong, these are the most precious things.

古文：蒸所与众山之材干同也，以为蒸，熏以火，烟热究浃，光色泽润，爇之於堂，其耀浩广，火灶之效加也。
现代文： 蒸 与山上的树干是同样东西，伐木做蒸，拿火来烤，用烟火的热量把它全部烤透，于是颜色光泽，在堂屋里点亮它，它的光芒照耀得很广阔，这是火灶的效用施加于它的缘故。
English: Steaming is the same thing as the tree trunks on the mountain, the wood is steamed, the fire is used to roast it, the heat of the fireworks is used to roast it all through, so the color is shiny, it is lit in the hall, and its light shines very widely, which is due to the effect of the stove on it.

古文：绣之未刺，锦之未织，恆丝庸帛，何以异哉？
现代文：绣没有刺，锦还没有织，跟普通的丝帛，又有什么区别呢？
English: Embroidery has no embroidery, brocade has not been woven, and what is the difference from ordinary silk cocoons?

古文：加五采之巧，施针缕之饰，文章炫耀，黼黻华虫，山龙日月。
现代文：刺上五颜六色精致的花纹，用针和丝线绣上各种装饰图案，花纹图案绚丽多彩，有斧形、 亚 形、野鸡以及山、龙、日、月等许多图案。
English: Colorful and delicate patterns are embroidered, and various decorative patterns are embroidered with needles and silk threads. The patterns are colorful and colorful, with axe shapes, sub-shapes, pheasants, and mountains, dragons, suns, moons, and many other patterns.

古文：学士有文章，犹丝帛之有五色之巧也。
现代文：学士有文采，就像丝帛刺上五颜六色精致的花纹一样。
English: The bachelor has a literary flair, just like a silk satin embroidered with colorful delicate patterns.

古文：本质不能相过，学业积聚，超逾多矣。
现代文：其实学士的本质不会超过一般人，但学问积累以后，就超过很多了。
English: In fact, the essence of a bachelor's degree will not exceed the average person, but after the accumulation of knowledge, it will exceed a lot.

古文：物实无中核者谓之郁，无刀斧之断者谓之朴。
现代文：植物的果实没有内核叫做郁，没有用刀斧加工过的木材叫做朴。
English: The fruits of plants without kernels are called Iku, and wood that has not been processed with a knife and axe is called Pak.

古文：文吏不学，世之教无核也，郁朴之人，孰与程哉？
现代文：文吏不学经书上教的东西，就像果实没有内核。这种像 郁朴 的人，能与谁比呢？
English: A scholar who does not study what is taught in the scriptures is like a fruit without a kernel. Who can be compared to such a simple-minded person?

古文：骨曰切，象曰瑳，玉曰琢，石曰磨，切琢磨，乃成宝器。
现代文：制骨器要切，作像牙器要瑳，造玉器要琢，做石器要磨，经过切磋琢磨加工，才能成为珍贵的器物。
English: Bone setters need to be cut, dental appliances need to be chiseled, jade-making tools need to be chiseled, and stone tools need to be ground. Only after careful grinding and processing can they become precious objects.

古文：人之学问知能成就，犹骨象玉石切瑳琢磨也。
现代文：人学问知识才能的形成，就像骨器、象牙器、玉器、石器要经过切、切、琢，磨加工才能成就一样。
English: The formation of human culture and knowledge ability, just as bone tools, ivory tools, jade tools, and stone tools need to be cut, cut, chiseled, and polished to achieve success.

古文：虽欲勿用，贤君其舍诸？
现代文：有了这种才能，即使自己想不被任用，贤明的君主又怎么肯舍弃他呢？
English: With a talent like that, how could a wise monarch give him up, even if he didn't want to be appointed?

古文：孙武、阖庐，世之善用兵者也，知或学其法者，战必胜。
现代文：孙武与吴王阖庐，都是世上善于用兵的人，如果有人学会了他们的兵法，打仗一定会胜利。
English: Sun Wu and Wu Wangtao were both good at using soldiers in the world. If someone learned their methods of warfare, they would surely win the war.

古文：不晓什伯之阵，不知击刺之术者，强使之军，军覆师败，无其法也。
现代文：不懂得列队摆阵，不知道搏击刺杀方法的人，强行让他指挥军队，军队就会失败覆灭，这不是孙武、阖庐的用兵方法。
English: If you force someone who does not know how to form a line and does not know how to fight and assassinate to command an army, the army will fail and be destroyed. This is not Sun Wu and Zou's method of using soldiers.

古文：谷之始熟曰粟。
现代文：谷类开始成熟叫粟。
English: Cereals are beginning to ripen.

古文：舂之於臼，簸其粃糠；蒸之於甑，爨之以火，成熟为饭，乃甘可食。
现代文：把它放在臼里舂，簸去瘪谷和糠壳，再放到甑里蒸，下面用火烧，蒸熟成饭，才香甜可吃。
English: Put it in a mortar and pestle, scoop out the bran and bran husk, and then steam it in a mortar and pestle, cook it over a fire, and then steam it to make rice. Only then will it be sweet enough to eat.

古文：可食而食之，味生肌腴成也。
现代文：能吃的东西吃了，才会长出肌肉显得丰满。
English: If you eat what you can eat, you will grow muscles and appear plump.

古文：粟未为米，米未成饭，气腥未熟，食之伤人。
现代文：粟没有舂成米，米没有蒸成饭，气味是生的还没有成熟，吃了会伤人。
English: The millet has not been pounded into rice, the rice has not been steamed into rice, the smell is raw and not yet ripe, and eating it will hurt people.

古文：夫人之不学，犹谷未成粟，米未为饭也。
现代文：人不学习，就像谷类没有长成粟，米没有蒸成饭一样。
English: People do not learn, just as cereals do not grow into millet, and rice is not steamed into rice.

古文：知心乱少，犹食腥谷，气伤人也。
现代文：知识和思想混乱贫乏，就像吃了生的谷类，气损伤人一样。
English: Confusion and poverty of knowledge and thought are like eating raw grain and being affected by the wind.

古文：学士简练於学，成熟於师，身之有益，犹谷成饭，食之生肌腴也。
现代文：学士在学问上下功夫磨炼，在老师教导下成熟起来，本身才变得对社会有好处，这就跟谷类最后蒸熟成饭，吃了能长出丰满的肌肉一样。
English: It is only when bachelors have worked hard on their studies and matured under the guidance of teachers that they themselves become beneficial to society, just as cereals are finally steamed into rice and eaten to grow plump muscles.

古文：铜锡未采，在众石之间，工师凿掘，炉橐铸铄乃成器。
现代文：铜和锡没有开采出来，在石头中间，经过工匠的开凿挖掘，炉火风箱的冶炼和铸造，才成为器具。
English: Copper and tin were not mined, but became utensils in the middle of the stone through the excavation of craftsmen, the smelting and casting of hearth and bellows.

古文：未更炉橐，名曰积石，积石与彼路畔之瓦、山间之砾，一实也。
现代文：没有经过炉火风箱的冶炼，称作积石。积石跟那路边的瓦片、山里的碎石，实际上是一样大。
English: The ones that haven't been smelted in a blast furnace are called agglomerates, and the agglomerates are actually the same size as the shingles on the side of the road and the rubble in the mountains.

古文：故夫谷未舂蒸曰粟，铜未铸铄曰积石，人未学问曰矇。
现代文：所以谷类没有舂过、蒸过叫粟，铜没有冶炼和铸造过叫积石，人没有学问叫矇。
English: Therefore, grain that has not been milled or steamed is called millet, copper that has not been smelted or cast is called agate, and a person who has not learned is called a baboon.

古文：矇者，竹木之类也。夫竹生於山，木长於林，未知所入。
现代文：没有学问愚昧的人，就是竹木之类，竹子长在山上，树木生在树林，不知道要被用到那里。
English: People who are uneducated and ignorant are like bamboo and trees. Bamboo grows in the mountains, and trees grow in the woods, and they don't know where they are going to be used.

古文：截竹为筒，破以为牒，加笔墨之迹，乃成文字，大者为经，小者为传记。
现代文：截断竹子做成竹筒，花破竹子可以做成竹简，用笔墨在上面书写，才成为文章，长的竹简写经，短的竹简作传记。
English: Cut off bamboo to make a bamboo tube, cut bamboo can be made into bamboo strips, write on it with pen and ink to become an article, long bamboo strips to write a sermon, short bamboo strips to make a biography.

古文：断木为椠，之为板，力加刮削，乃成奏牍。
现代文：断开木头做成椠，剖开椠做成板，用力加工刮削，才能成为写奏章的木简。
English: Only by breaking the wood into logs, cutting the logs into boards, and scraping them hard can they be used to write musical notations.

古文：夫竹木，粗苴之物也，雕琢刻削，乃成为器用。
现代文：竹子与木头都是粗糙的东西，经过雕琢刻削，才能成为器物使用。
English: Bamboo and wood are rough things, and only after being carved can they be used as utensils.

古文：况人含天地之性，最为贵者乎！
现代文：何况人怀有天地给的本性，是最可贵的呢！
English: What's more, human beings are endowed with the nature given by heaven and earth, which is the most precious!

古文：不入师门，无经传之教，以郁朴之实，不晓礼义，立之朝庭，植笮树表之类也，其何益哉？
现代文：不入老师门下，没有经传的教导，就像郁朴样的东西，不懂得礼义，站在朝廷上，就像树根竹竿，立根木柱之类一样，那有什么好处呢？
English: If you don't go under the tutelage of a teacher, if you don't have the teachings of the sutras, if you are like a rustic thing, if you don't know the meaning of etiquette, if you stand in the imperial court, just like the root of a tree, a bamboo pole, a pillar, and so on, what good is that?

古文：山野草茂，钩镰斩刈，乃成道路也。
现代文：山野的草很茂密，用镰刀割掉，才能成为道路。
English: The grass in the mountains is so thick that it has to be cut with a scythe before it can become a road.

古文：士未入道门，邪恶未除，犹山野草木未斩刈，不成路也。
现代文：读书人没有熟悉先王之道的时候，邪恶还没有除去，就像山野的杂草乱木还没有砍去割掉，不能成为道路一样。
English: When the reader is not familiar with the way of the former king, the evil has not been eliminated, just as the weeds and tangled trees in the mountains and fields have not been cut away and cannot become a road.

古文：染练布帛，名之曰采，贵吉之服也。
现代文：染煮过的布帛，叫做采，是高贵吉祥服装的材料。
English: The dyed and boiled cloth, known as zhe, is the material for noble and auspicious clothing.

古文：无染练之治，名縠粗，縠粗不吉，丧人服之。
现代文：没有染煮加工过的，叫縠粗，縠粗不吉祥，是死了人才穿的。
English: If it has not been dyed, boiled and processed, it is called coarse, and coarse is not auspicious. It is only worn by the dead.

古文：人无道学，仕宦朝庭，其不能招致也，犹丧人服粗，不能招吉也。
现代文：人没有学习先王之道，在朝廷做官，他不会给朝廷带来益处，就像死了人穿粗糙的衣服不会带来吉祥一样。
English: If a man does not learn the ways of the former king and becomes an official in the court, he will not bring benefit to the court, just as a dead man wearing rough clothes will not bring good luck.

古文：能削柱梁，谓之木匠。
现代文：能加工房柱屋梁的，叫做木匠。
English: A carpenter is a person who can machine the beams of a house.

古文：能穿凿穴坎，谓之士匠；能雕琢文书，谓之史匠。
现代文：会凿穴打洞的，叫做土匠。能修饰文书的，叫做史匠。
English: A person who can drill holes is called a potter. A person who can decorate documents is called a historian.

古文：夫文吏之学，学治文书也，当与木土之匠同科，安得程於儒生哉？
现代文：文吏的学问，只是学习办理公文，应该和木匠、土匠同类，怎么能跟儒生相比呢？
English: The knowledge of a clerk is just learning how to handle official documents. It should be the same as that of a carpenter or a potter. How can it be compared to that of a Confucian scholar?

古文：御史之遇文书，不失分铢；有司之陈笾豆，不误行伍。
现代文：御史办理文书，不出一点差错。主管祭祀的官吏陈列祭品，不会摆错行列。
English: There is not a single mistake in the paperwork of the imperial history. The officials in charge of the sacrificial rites will not make a mistake in the display of the sacrificial offerings.

古文：其巧习者，亦先学之，人不贵者也，小贱之能，非尊大之职也。
现代文：那些办理公文，摆祭品很熟悉的人，也是事先学过的，可是人们看不起他们，因为他们掌握的是低贱的本领，担任的不是人们尊重的重要职务。
English: Those who are familiar with handling official documents and offering sacrifices have also learned in advance, but people look down on them, because they have low-level skills and do not hold important positions that people respect.

古文：无经艺之本，有笔墨之末，大道未足而小伎过多，虽曰吾多学问，御史之知、有司之惠也。
现代文：没有经学的根基，只有耍笔杆微不足道的本事，这就是大道理懂得不够而小伎俩太多，即使说我的学问多，有御史的智慧，主管祭祀官吏的聪明也罢。
English: Without the foundation of learning, only the ability to play with a pen is insignificant. This is because I do not know enough about the great principles and too many tricks, even if I have a lot of knowledge, the wisdom of imperial history, and the wisdom of the officials in charge of sacrifices.

古文：饭黍梁者餍，餐糟糠者饱，虽俱曰食，为腴不同。
现代文：吃黍粱饱与吃糟糠饱，虽然都说吃饱了，但对人起的滋养作用不同。
English: Eating enough and eating too much, although both are said to be full, have different nourishing effects on people.

古文：儒生文吏，学俱称习，其於朝庭，有益不钧。
现代文：儒生和文吏，学到的东西都声称很熟练，但他们对于朝廷，好处是不一样大的。
English: Both the Confucianists and the literati claimed to be proficient in what they had learned, but their benefits to the imperial court were not the same.

古文：郑子皮使尹何为政，子产比於未能操刀使之割也。
现代文：郑国子皮让尹何治理政治，子产以一个人不会拿刀而让他去割东西常常会割伤自己作比喻。
English: Zheng Guo Zi Pi let Yin He govern politics. Zi Pang used the analogy of a person who can't hold a knife and let him cut things, he would often cut himself.

古文：子路使子羔为费宰，孔子曰： 贼夫人之子。 
现代文：子路让子羔做费邑的地方长官，孔子说： 害了别人的子弟。 
English: Confucius said, "You have harmed other people's children.

古文：皆以未学，不见大道也。
现代文：这都是因为他们年轻的时候没有学习，不懂得先王之道。
English: This is all because they didn't study when they were young and didn't know the ways of the ancestors.

古文：医无方术，云： 吾能治病。 
现代文：就像医师没有医术，说： 我能治病。 
English: It's like a doctor who doesn't know how to practice medicine saying, "I can cure diseases."

古文：问之曰： 何用治病？ 
现代文：别人问他： 用什么来治病呢？ 
English: Someone else asked him: What do you use to cure diseases?

古文：曰： 用心意。 
现代文：回答： 用心意。 
English: Answer: Do it with your heart.

古文：病者必不信也。
现代文：病人一定不会相信他。
English: The patient is not going to believe him.

古文：吏无经学，曰： 吾能治民。 
现代文：官吏不懂经学，说： 我能治理老百姓。 
English: Government officials do not understand the study of scripture and say, "I can govern the common people."

古文：问之曰： 何用治民？ 曰： 以材能。 
现代文：别人问他： 拿什么来治理老百姓呢？ 回答： 用才能。 
English: Someone asked him: What is the best way to govern the people? Answer: Use talent.

古文：是医无方术，以心意治病也，百姓安肯信向，而人君任用使之乎？
现代文：这跟医师没有医术，用心意来治病一样，老百姓怎么肯信赖，君主怎么能信任和使用他呢？
English: This is the same as a doctor who does not have the medical skills and intention to cure the disease. How can the people trust him, and how can the monarch trust and use him?

古文：手中无钱，之市使货主问曰 钱何在 ，对曰： 无钱 ，货主必不与也。
现代文：手里没有钱，到市场上去，假使老板问： 钱在哪里呢？ 回答说： 没有钱。 
English: If you go to the market and your boss asks you, "Where is the money?" and you answer, "I don't have any money."

古文：夫胸中不学，犹手中无钱也。欲人君任使之，百姓信向之，奈何也？
现代文：老板一定不肯给东西。看来，心中没学问，就像手里没有钱，想要君主信任、使用，老百姓信赖，怎么行呢？
English: The boss is sure to refuse to give anything. It seems that having no learning in one's heart is like having no money in one's hands. How can you expect the monarch to trust and use you, and the common people to trust you?

