古文：张纮字子纲，广陵人。
现代文：张纮，字子纲，广陵人。
English: Zhang Xuan, Zhizi Gang, Guangling people.

古文：游学京都，还本郡，举茂才，公府辟，皆不就，避难江东。
现代文：他曾到京城游学，后回到本郡，被推举为秀才，官府征召，他都没有就任，到江东避乱。
English: He went to study in Beijing, then returned to this county, was selected as a talented person, and was called up by the government, but he did not take office, and went to the east of the river to escape the turmoil.

古文：孙策创业，遂委质焉。
现代文：孙策创建基业时，张纮就投身依附孙策。
English: When Sun Ce founded the foundation, Zhang Ye devoted himself to following Sun Ce.

古文：表为正议校尉，从讨丹杨。
现代文：孙策上表请任他为正议校尉，后跟随孙策征讨丹杨。
English: Sun Ce asked him to be the principal lieutenant at the table, and then followed Sun Ce to recruit Danyang.

古文：策身临行陈，纮谏曰： 夫主将乃筹谟之所自出，三军之所系命也，不宜轻脱，自敌小寇。
现代文：孙策亲自上阵，张郃劝谏说： 将领是决定计策的人，三军命运都寄托在他身上，不可轻率行动，亲自和小敌交战。
English: Sun Ce personally went into battle, and Zhang Ye advised him: "The general is the one who decides the strategy. The fate of the three armies is entrusted to him. You should not act rashly and personally engage the small enemy.

古文：愿麾下重天授之姿，副四海之望，无令国内上下危惧。 
现代文：希望您能珍重上天授予您的才干，符合天下的期望，不要让天下臣民忧心惊惧。 
English: I hope you can cherish the talent bestowed on you by heaven, meet the expectations of the world, and do not let the subjects of the world worry.

古文：建安四年，策遣纮奉章至许宫，留为侍御史。
现代文：建安四年，孙策派遣张纮奏章到许昌皇宫奉上奏章，后留在那里担任侍御史。
English: In the fourth year of Jian'an, Sun Ce sent Zhang Ye to Xu Chang's palace to present him with the medal, and he stayed there to serve as an attendant.

古文：少府孔融等皆与亲善。
现代文：少府孔融等都和他关系友好。
English: Shofu Kong Rong and others are all on friendly terms with him.

古文：曹公闻策薨，欲因丧伐吴。纮谏，以为乘人之丧，既非古义，若其不克，成雠弃好，不如因而厚之。
现代文：曹操得知孙策去世，想要趁着丧事征讨东吴东吴，张纮劝谏，认为乘人丧事大举出兵，既不符合古代道义，如果攻而不胜，还会使两方结仇而丢弃往日盟好，不如趁机厚待东吴。
English: Cao Cao learned of Sun Ce's death and wanted to take advantage of the funeral to invade Dong Wu Dong Wu, but Zhang Ye advised him not to. Cao Cao thought that it was not in accordance with ancient morals to use the funeral to send a large number of soldiers. If the attack did not succeed, it would cause the two sides to take revenge and discard the good alliance of the past. It was better to take advantage of the opportunity to wait for Dong Wu.

古文：曹公从其言，即表权为讨虏将军，领会稽太守。
现代文：曹操采纳他的意见，随即上表任孙权为讨虏将军，兼任会稽太守。
English: Cao Cao adopted his opinion, and immediately appointed Sun Quan as the general to deal with the captives, as well as the auditor of the association.

古文：曹公欲令纮辅权内附，出纮为会稽东部都尉。
现代文：曹操想让张纮劝导孙权归降，又让张纮出京担任会稽东部都尉。
English: Cao Cao wanted Zhang Xuan to persuade Sun Quan to surrender, and he also wanted Zhang Xuan to leave Beijing to serve as the auditor of the Eastern Capital.

古文：后权以纮为长史，从征合肥。
现代文：后来孙权任命张郃为长史，跟随他征讨合肥。
English: Later, Sun Quan appointed Zhang Xuan as the leader of the Long History and followed him to conquer Hefei.

古文：权率轻骑将往突敌，纮谏曰： 夫兵者凶器，战者危事也。
现代文：孙权率领轻兵准备亲自前往突击敌人，张郃劝谏说： 兵器就是凶器，战争就是险事。
English: Sun Quan led the light soldiers to prepare to personally go to the assault on the enemy, and Zhang Ye advised him: Weapons are deadly weapons, and war is dangerous.

古文：今麾下恃盛壮之气，忽强暴之虏，三军之众，莫不寒心，虽斩将搴旗，威震敌场，此乃偏将之任，非主将之宜也。
现代文：现在您倚仗旺盛雄壮的气势，轻视强大凶暴的敌人，三军将士，无不寒心，虽说然斩杀敌将夺取帅旗，威震战场，但这是偏将的责任，不是主将该做的事。
English: Now you rely on the vigorous and majestic momentum, despise the powerful and ferocious enemy, the soldiers of the three armies, and are cold-hearted. Although it is said that killing the enemy will capture the handsome flag and shake the battlefield, but this is the responsibility of the general, not what the commander should do.

古文：愿抑贲、育之勇，怀霸王之计。 
现代文：希望您抑制住孟贲、夏育那样的莽撞，心中有成就霸业的计策。 
English: I hope that you will restrain the recklessness of Meng Wei and Xia Yu, and have the strategy of achieving hegemony in your heart.

古文：权纳纮言而止。
现代文：孙权采纳了他的建议，停止行动。
English: Sun Quan took his advice and stopped the action.

古文：既还，明年将复出军，纮又谏曰： 自古帝王受命之君，虽有皇灵佐於上，文德播於下，亦赖武功以昭其勋。
现代文：大军返回后，第二年，孙权将再次出兵，张郃又劝谏说： 自古以来帝王是承受天命的君主，虽然有皇灵在上辅助，在下有文教德行传扬，也要仰赖武功来彰显功绩。
English: After the return of the great army, the next year, Sun Quan will send out troops again. Zhang Ye also advised him: Since ancient times, the emperor is a monarch who bears the fate of heaven. Although there is a royal spirit on the top to assist, and there is a culture and religion to propagate, it is also necessary to rely on martial arts to highlight the merits.

古文：然而贵於时动，乃后为威耳。
现代文：然而武功贵在因时而动，然后树立威势。
English: However, Wu Gong Gui moves with the times, and then builds up its power.

古文：今麾下值四百之厄，有扶危之功，宜且隐息师徒，广开播殖，任贤使能，务崇宽惠，顺天命以行诛，可不劳而定也。 
现代文：现在您适逢汉家四百年未有之厄运，有扶助危难的功业，应该暂时停止战事修整军队，广泛开垦良田播种，选贤任能，以崇尚宽和为要务，施行仁惠政策，顺应天命征讨逆贼，这样就可以不劳师动众而天下平定。 
English: Now that you have the misfortune that the Han Dynasty has not had for four hundred years, and you have the merit of supporting the perilous, you should temporarily stop the war to refine the army, widely open up and sow good fields, select talents at will, take advocating broad harmony as an important duty, implement benevolent policies, and comply with the fate of heaven to recruit traitors. In this way, you can pacify the world without laboring to motivate the masses.

古文：於是遂止不行。
现代文：于是孙权停止了军事行动。
English: So Sun Quan stopped the military operations.

古文：纮建计宜出都秣陵，权从之。
现代文：张纮建议应当离开吴郡移都秣陵，孙权听从他的建议。
English: Zhang Ye suggested that they should leave Wu County and move the capital to Fuling, and Sun Quan followed his advice.

古文：令还吴迎家，道病卒。
现代文：孙权让张纮回吴郡将家属接来，在路上张纮病逝。
English: Sun Quan asked Zhang Ye to return to Wuxi County to pick up his family members, but Zhang Ye died of illness on the way.

古文：临困，授子靖留笺曰： 自古有国有家者，咸欲脩德政以比隆盛世，至於其治，多不馨香。
现代文：临死前，他张靖给孙权留下的信笺交给儿子张靖说： 自古以来有国有家的人，都想修治德政使盛世昌隆，至于他们的治理，大多没有理想的结果。
English: Before his death, he handed the letter to his son Zhang Jing, which was left by Zhang Jing to Sun Quan, and said: Since ancient times, people who have state-owned families have wanted to govern the German political envoy Sheng Shih Changlong. As for their governance, most of them have not achieved ideal results.

古文：非无忠臣贤佐，闇於治体也，由主不胜其情，弗能用耳。
现代文：不是没有忠臣良将相辅佐，不是不明白治国的根本，是因为君主不能克服自己的喜恶，不能重用他们。
English: It's not that they don't have loyal vassals and good generals to support each other, it's not that they don't understand the fundamentals of governing the country, it's because the monarch can't overcome their own likes and dislikes and can't reuse them.

古文：夫人情惮难而趋易，好同而恶异，与治道相反。
现代文：人之常情忌惮困境，趋向易事，喜好相同的意见而讨厌不同的意见，这和治理国家的道理正好相反。
English: Human nature abhors a dilemma, tends to the easy, likes the same opinions and hates different opinions, which is exactly the opposite of the principle of governing the country.

古文：传曰 从善如登，从恶如崩 ，言善之难也。
现代文：《易传》有言 跟随善意就像登山，跟随恶意就像崩山 ，是说学好不容易。
English: There is a saying in "I Chuan" that "following good intentions is like climbing a mountain, and following evil intentions is like falling down a mountain," which means that it is not easy to learn.

古文：人君承奕世之基，据自然之势，操八柄之威，甘易同之欢，无假取於人；而忠臣挟难进之术，吐逆耳之言，其不合也，不亦宜乎！
现代文：君主继承几代相传的基业，占据自然的趋势，掌握着八柄威势，对于好事好话很开心，没有向他人索取，而忠臣有着难以进谏的治国之策，说出逆耳的忠言，两者不能相互合意，不也是理所当然吗？
English: The monarch inherits the inheritance of several generations, occupies the natural trend, grasps the power of the eight, is very happy to say good things, and does not ask others, while the loyal subject has a difficult-to-implement national governance strategy, and utters unheard-of loyal advice. The two cannot agree with each other, is it not a matter of course?

古文：离则有衅，巧辩缘间，眩於小忠，恋於恩爱，贤愚杂错，长幼失叙，其所由来，情乱之也。
现代文：不合就会有嫌隙，巧言令色之人就在其间作乱，君主就会被假忠迷惑眼睛，贪恋小人的恩爱，于是贤愚混杂，长幼失序，这些情况产生的原因，是人情关系扰乱了正常的统治秩序。
English: Disagreements will lead to rifts, manipulative people will create turmoil, the monarch's eyes will be fooled by false loyalty, and he will be greedy for the love of a villain. As a result, the wise and the foolish will be mixed, and the children will be out of order. The reason for these situations is that human relations have disrupted the normal order of rule.

古文：故明君悟之，求贤如饥渴，受谏而不厌，抑情损欲，以义割恩，上无偏谬之授，下无希冀之望。
现代文：故此圣明的君主认识了这一点，求贤若渴，接受忠谏而不厌烦，克制感情、压抑情欲，为了道义而割舍恩爱，在上者无偏颇错误的任命，下位者也没有了胡乱的期望。
English: Wherefore the wise prince, knowing this, thirsted for virtue, and was not weary of receiving the faithful, but restrained his affections, and restrained his passions, and for the sake of virtue renounced love, and did not appoint unjustly in the first place, nor expect unjustly in the second.

古文：宜加三思，含垢藏疾，以成仁覆之大。 
现代文：您应当再三思虑，忍受辱垢、掩藏锋芒，以成就仁义覆盖天下的大业。 
English: You should think twice, endure the humiliation, hide the edge, and achieve the great cause of covering the world with benevolence and righteousness.

古文：时年六十卒。
现代文：张纮六十岁时去世。
English: Zhang Ye passed away at the age of 60.

古文：权省书流涕。
现代文：孙权看了他的遗书泪流满面。
English: Sun Quan read his suicide note with tears streaming down his face.

古文：纮著诗赋铭诔十馀篇。
现代文：张纮著有诗赋铭诔十多篇。
English: Zhang Ye has written more than ten poems.

古文：子玄，官至南郡太守、尚书。
现代文：他的儿子张玄，官至南郡太守、尚书。
English: His son, Zhang Xuan, rose to the position of the governor of Nan County and the title of Shangshu.

古文：玄子尚，孙皓时为侍郎，以言语辩捷见知，擢为侍中、中书令。
现代文：张玄的儿子张尚，孙皓在时担任侍郎，因善于言谈辩解为人所知，升任为侍中、中书令。
English: Zhang Xuan's son, Zhang Shang, and Sun Yat-sen served as chamberlains at the time. They were known for their ability to speak and reason, and were promoted to the positions of chamberlain and secretary.

古文：皓使尚鼓琴，尚对曰： 素不能。 
现代文：孙皓让张尚弹琴，张尚回答说： 我向来不会弹。 
English: Sun Yat-sen asked Zhang Shang to play the piano. Zhang Shang replied, "I have never been able to play.

古文：敕使学之。
现代文：孙皓下令要他学。
English: Sun Yat-sen ordered him to learn to sing.

古文：后晏言次说琴之精妙，尚因道 晋平公使师旷作清角，旷言吾君德簿，不足以听之。 
现代文：后来在宴会上言谈之间谈到弹琴的精妙时，张尚趁机说： 晋平公让师旷弹奏清幽的角音，师旷说： 我的国君德行浅薄，不足以我弹奏这样的琴音。  
English: Later, at a banquet, when talking about the subtlety of playing the piano, Zhang Shang took the opportunity to say: Jinping allowed Shiguang to play a clear horn sound. Shiguang said: My national virtue is shallow, not enough for me to play such a piano sound.

古文：皓意谓尚以斯喻己，不悦。
现代文：孙皓认为张尚是用这事来比譬自己，心中不悦。
English: Sun Yat-sen thought that Zhang Shang was using this matter to compare himself, and he was not pleased.

古文：后积他事下狱，皆追以此为诘，送建安作船。
现代文：后来因其他事情累积，孙皓将张尚下狱，讯问时总是用这件事诘问张尚，将张尚遣送到建安去造船。
English: Later, due to the accumulation of other matters, Sun Yat-sen sent Zhang Shang to prison. During the interrogation, he always used this matter to interrogate Zhang Shang, and sent Zhang Shang to Jian'an to build a ship.

古文：久之，又就加诛。
现代文：很久以后，又就地处死了他。
English: A long time later, he was executed on the spot.

古文：初，纮同郡秦松字文表，陈端字子正，并与纮见待於孙策，参与谋谟。
现代文：当初，张纮的同郡人秦松，字文表，陈端、字子正，都受到孙策的优待，参与谋划国家大事。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye's fellow countymen Qin Song, Zhi Wenbiao, Chen Duan and Zi Zheng all received preferential treatment from Sun Ce and participated in the planning of national events.

古文：各早卒。
现代文：这两人都早年去世。
English: Both died young.

古文：严畯字曼才，彭城人也。
现代文：严畯，字曼才，彭城人。
English: A strict disciplinarian, a man of talent, and a Pengcheng native.

古文：少耽学，善诗、书、三礼，又好说文。
现代文：他年少时沉溺学习，通晓《诗》、《书》、三《礼》，喜好《说文解字》。
English: When he was young, he was addicted to learning. He was familiar with "Poetry," "Books" and the three "Rites," and liked "Talking and Deciphering."

古文：避乱江东，与诸葛瑾、步骘齐名友善。
现代文：到江东避乱，和诸葛瑾、步骘齐名且关系很好。
English: He went to the east of the Yangtze River to escape the turmoil, and had a good relationship with Zhuge Liang and Bu Liang.

古文：性质直纯厚，其於人物，忠告善道，志存补益。
现代文：严畯性情质朴淳厚，他对于人才，能衷心劝告很好的道理，希望能有所裨益。
English: With a strict temperament, simple and honest, he can sincerely advise talents on good principles, hoping to be of benefit.

古文：张昭进之於孙权，权以为骑都尉、从事中郎。
现代文：张昭向孙权举荐他，孙权任命他为骑都尉、从事中郎。
English: Zhang Zhao recommended him to Sun Quan, and Sun Quan appointed him as a cavalry lieutenant and engaged in the middle.

古文：及横江将军鲁肃卒，权以畯代肃，督兵万人，镇据陆口。
现代文：等到横江将军鲁肃去世，孙权任命严畯接替鲁肃职务，督领一万兵士驻守陆口。
English: When the Yokoe general Rusu died, Sun Quan appointed Yan Xuan to take over Rusu's duties, commanding ten thousand soldiers stationed at Lukou.

古文：众人咸为畯喜，畯前后固辞： 朴素书生，不闲军事，非才而据，咎悔必至。 
现代文：众人都为严畯感到高兴，他先后坚决推辞，说： 我向来只是个书生，不参与军事，没有这方面的才干却占据这个职位，罪过与悔恨将会随之到来。 
English: Everyone was happy for Yan Xuan. He firmly declined successively, saying: I have always been just a student, I do not participate in the military, I have no talent in this area, but I occupy this position. Sin and remorse will follow.

古文：发言慷慨，至於流涕，权乃听焉。
现代文：言论激昂慷慨，以至于流泪。孙权才同意了他的想法。
English: His speech was so impassioned and generous that it brought tears to his eyes. Sun Quan agreed to his idea.

古文：世嘉其能以实让。
现代文：当时人都称赞他能根据自己的实际才能而让位。
English: He was lauded at the time for being able to step aside based on his actual talent.

古文：权为吴王，及称尊号，畯尝为卫尉，使至蜀，蜀相诸葛亮深善之。
现代文：孙权为吴王，直到登基，严畯曾担任卫尉，出使西蜀，蜀国丞相诸葛亮很赞赏他。
English: Sun Quan was the king of Wu until he ascended to the throne. Yan Xi served as a guard lieutenant and was sent to Western Shu. Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, appreciated him very much.

古文：不畜禄赐，皆散之亲戚知故，家常不充。
现代文：他平生不积蓄俸禄、赏赐，财物都分送亲朋故旧，家里经常拮据。
English: Throughout his life, he never saved his salary or rewards. He gave all of his belongings to his relatives and friends, and his family was always in a tight spot.

古文：广陵刘颖与畯有旧，颖精学家巷，权闻徵之，以疾不就。
现代文：广陵人刘颖与严畯有旧交情，刘颖在家钻研学问，孙权得知后便征召他，他称病不接受。
English: Liu Ying, a resident of Guangling, had an old friendship with Yan Xuan. Liu Ying was studying at home. After Sun Quan learned of this, he conscripted him. He said that he did not accept his illness.

古文：其弟略为零陵太守，卒官，颖往赴丧，权知其诈病，急驿收录。
现代文：他的弟弟刘略担任零陵太守，在官位上去世，刘颖前往奔丧，孙权知道他是装病，急忙传令将刘颖收捕审讯。
English: His brother Liu Liao served as the governor of Jilin Province and died in office. Liu Ying went to the funeral. Sun Quan knew that he was faking his illness and quickly ordered Liu Ying to be arrested for interrogation.

古文：畯亦驰语颖，使还谢权。
现代文：严畯也飞马告知刘颖情况，让他回来向孙权认罪。
English: Yan Hao also informed Liu Ying of the situation and asked him to come back and confess to Sun Quan.

古文：权怒废畯，而颖得免罪。
现代文：孙权非常愤怒，罢免了严畯，而刘颖却得以免罪。
English: Sun Quan was very angry and dismissed Yan Hui, while Liu Ying was acquitted.

古文：久之，以畯为尚书令，后卒。
现代文：过了很长时间，孙权又任命严畯为尚书令，严畯七十八岁时去世。
English: After a long time, Sun Quan appointed Yan Xuan as his secretary, and Yan Xuan died at the age of seventy-eight.

古文：畯著孝经传、潮水论，又与裴玄、张承论管仲、季路，皆传於世。
现代文：严畯平生著有《孝经传》、《潮水论》，又与裴玄、张承谈论管仲、季路，都流传后世。
English: Yan Xuan wrote "Biography of a Filial Piety" and "The Theory of Tides" in his lifetime. He also talked with Pei Xuan and Zhang Cheng about Guanzhong and Qilu, both of which have been passed down to posterity.

古文：玄字彦黄，下邳人也，亦有学行，官至太中大夫。
现代文：裴玄，字彦黄，下邳人，也有学问品行，官至太中大夫。
English: Pei Xuan, Zi Yanhuang, and the people of the Lower Yunnan also had the qualities of learning, and were promoted to the position of Tai Zhong Daifu.

古文：问子钦齐桓、晋文、夷、惠四人优劣，钦答所见，与玄相反覆，各有文理。
现代文：他问儿子裴钦关于齐桓公、晋文公、伯夷、柳下惠四人的优劣，裴钦说出自己的见解，与裴玄的看法有不同之处，但各有文采条理。
English: He asked his son Pei Qin about the merits and demerits of Qi Huan Gong, Jin Wenguang, Bo Yi, and Liu Shimo Hui. Pei Qin expressed his own opinions, which differed from Pei Xuan's, but each had a literary structure.

古文：钦与太子登游处，登称其翰采。
现代文：裴钦与太子孙登游乐交往，孙登夸奖他的笔墨文采。
English: Pei Qin interacted with the prince's grandson Deng Yu, and Sun Deng praised his penmanship.

古文：程秉字德枢，汝南南顿人也。
现代文：程秉传，程秉，字德枢，汝南郡南顿人。
English: Cheng Bing Chuan, Cheng Bing, surnamed Dezhu, from Nantong, Runan County.

古文：逮事郑玄，后避乱交州，与刘熙考论大义，遂博通五经。
现代文：他曾待奉郑玄，后来到交州避难，和刘熙考究讨论典籍大义，于是通晓五经。
English: He had been a disciple of Zheng Xuan and later took refuge in Jiaozhou. He studied and discussed the classics with Liu Xi and became well versed in the Five Classics.

古文：士燮命为长史。
现代文：士燮任命他为长史。
English: The scholar-officials appointed him as the chief historian.

古文：权闻其名儒，以礼徵，秉既到，拜太子太傅。
现代文：孙权得知他是名儒，以礼征召他。程秉到后，被任为太子太傅。
English: Sun Quan learned that he was a famous Confucian and summoned him with courtesy. After Cheng Bing arrived, he was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：黄武四年，权为太子登娉周瑜女，秉守太常，迎妃於吴，权亲幸秉船，深见优礼。
现代文：黄武四年，孙权为太子孙登纳娶周瑜的女儿，程秉兼任太常，到吴郡迎接太子妃，孙权亲自到程秉船上，他受到的礼待非常优厚。
English: In the fourth year of Huangwu, Sun Quan married Zhou Yu's daughter for the prince's grandson, Denna, and Cheng Bing also served as the grand steward. He went to Wu County to meet the princess. Sun Quan personally went to Cheng Bing's boat, and he received very good treatment.

古文：既还，秉从容进说登曰： 婚姻人伦之始，王教之基，是以圣王重之，所以率先众庶，风化天下，故诗美关雎，以为称首。
现代文：回朝后，程秉从容地向孙登进言： 婚姻是人伦的开端，帝王教化的基础，所以圣明帝王都很重视，用来作为民众的表率，教化天下，所以《诗经》赞美《关睢》，将它放在首篇。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Cheng Bing calmly made a suggestion to Sun Deng: Marriage is the beginning of human relations, the foundation of imperial education, so Emperor Shengming attached great importance to it, and used it as a model for the people to educate the world. Therefore, the "Song of Songs" praised "Guan Xuan" and put it in the first chapter.

古文：愿太子尊礼教於闺房，存周南之所咏，则道化隆於上，颂声作於下矣。 
现代文：希望太子在闺房中能尊崇礼教，留存《周南》中所歌咏的美德，那在上层就会有道义教化的昌隆，在下就会有称颂之声。 
English: It is hoped that the prince can respect the etiquette in the boudoir, and retain the virtues sung in "Zhou Nan," that is, there will be a moral education in the upper level, and there will be praise in the lower level.

古文：登笑曰： 将顺其美，匡救其恶，诚所赖於傅君也 
现代文：孙登笑着说： 发扬我的优点，匡正我的不足，实在是我仰赖太傅的地方。 
English: Sun Deng said with a smile, "Promoting my strengths and rectifying my shortcomings is really where I rely on the great master.

古文：病卒官。
现代文：程秉在职位上去世。
English: Cheng Bing died in office.

古文：著周易摘、尚书駮、论语弼，凡三万馀言。
现代文：著有《周易摘》、《尚书马交》、《论语弼》，共三万多字。
English: He is the author of "Zhou Yizhu," "Shang Shu Ma Jiao" and "On Language," with a total of more than 30,000 words.

古文：秉为傅时，率更令河南徵崇亦笃学立行云。
现代文：他为太子太傅时，率更县令，河南人徵崇也笃好学问修养德行。
English: When he was the crown prince, he was more like a county magistrate, and people in Henan admired him for being good at learning and cultivating virtue.

古文：阚泽字德润，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：阚泽，字德润，会稽郡山阴人。
English: Heze, the character Derun, is a member of the party committee of the county of Shanshan.

古文：家世农夫，至泽好学，居贫无资，常为人佣书，以供纸笔，所写既毕，诵读亦遍。
现代文：家中世代务农，到了阚泽喜爱学习，家中贫困没有钱财，就经常帮人抄书，以此换取纸笔。抄完书后，他也就将那部书全部诵读完毕。
English: His family has been farming for generations. When he came to Heze, he loved to study. His family was poor and had no money, so he often helped people copy books in exchange for paper and pens. After he finished copying a book, he also finished reading the entire book.

古文：追师论讲，究览群籍，兼通历数，由是显名。
现代文：他追记先生的说法，探究博览群书，并且通晓天算历法，因此显名。
English: He made a name for himself by following his teacher's advice, reading many books, and being familiar with the solar calendar.

古文：察孝廉，除钱唐长，迁郴令。
现代文：他被推举为孝廉，担任钱塘县县长，升为郴县县令。
English: He was elected as Xiaolian, served as the county magistrate of Qiantang County, and was promoted to the county magistrate of Handan County.

古文：孙权为骠骑将军，辟补西曹掾；及称尊号，以泽为尚书。
现代文：孙权担任骠骑将军时，征召他补任西曹掾，等到孙权登基，任命阚泽为尚书。
English: When Sun Quan served as the general of the imperial cavalry, he was conscripted to fill the post of West Cao Pi, and when Sun Quan ascended to the throne, he appointed Heze as Shang Shu.

古文：嘉禾中，为中书令，加侍中。
现代文：嘉禾年间，阚泽担任中书令，加授侍中。
English: During the Jiahe era, Heze served as a middle-ranking official and was awarded the title of junior chamberlain.

古文：赤乌五年，拜太子太傅，领中书如故。
现代文：赤乌五年，阚泽被任为太子太傅，依旧兼领中书令。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Akebono, Heze was appointed as the Crown Prince Taifu, and he still concurrently held the position of Chushiro.

古文：泽以经传文多，难得尽用，乃斟酌诸家，刊约礼文及诸注说以授二宫，为制行出入及见宾仪，又著乾象历注以正时日。
现代文：阚泽认为经传文章太多，很难全部得到应用。于是斟酌各家的说法，节选三《礼》文字及各家注解，并教授给两宫，为他们拟定了出入及与会见宾客的礼节，又著有《乾象历注》以纠正历法的偏差。
English: He thought that there were too many scriptures and it would be difficult to apply them all. So, taking into account the opinions of each family, he selected three "Rite" texts and annotations from each family, and taught them to the two palaces. He worked out the etiquette for them to enter and leave and meet with guests, and also wrote "Note on the Dry Elephant Calendar" to correct the deviation of the calendar.

古文：每朝廷大议，经典所疑，辄谘访之。
现代文：每当朝廷讨论大事，对于经典中有疑惑的地方，都咨询他的意见。
English: Whenever the imperial court discussed important matters, they consulted him about the doubts in the classics.

古文：以儒学勤劳，封都乡侯。
现代文：阚泽因为对儒学的勤奋钻研，被封为都乡侯。
English: Because of his diligent study of Confucianism, Heze was designated as a metropolitan township.

古文：性谦恭笃慎，宫府小吏，呼召对问，皆为抗礼。
现代文：他性情谦逊恭谨、笃实慎重，宫中官府的小吏，向他提问咨询，他都以礼相应。
English: His disposition was humble, respectful, and prudent. When minor officials from the government offices in the palace asked him for advice, he responded with courtesy.

古文：人有非短，口未尝及，容貌似不足者，然所闻少穷。权尝问： 书传篇赋，何者为美？ 
现代文：有人非议他的短处，他从未在言语上反击，脸上显出自己不足的样子，但所听到的非议渐渐减少。孙权曾问他： 书传诗赋，哪种最美？ 
English: Some people criticized his shortcomings, he never fought back verbally, his face showed his inadequacy, but the criticisms he heard gradually decreased. Sun Quan once asked him: book poetry, which is the most beautiful?

古文：泽欲讽喻以明治乱，因对贾谊过秦论最善，权览读焉。
现代文：阚泽想借此讽喻以彰显朝廷的治乱情况，就回答说贾谊的《过秦论》最好，孙权便览阅这篇文章。
English: Heze wanted to use this simile to highlight the chaotic situation of the imperial court, and replied that Jia Yi's "Over Qin" was the best, and Sun Quan read this article.

古文：初，以吕壹奸罪发闻，有司穷治，奏以大辟，或以为宜加焚裂，用彰元恶。
现代文：当初，由于吕壹的奸邪罪行被揭露，有关部门追究到底，奏请对他处以死刑，有的还认为应加以火烧车裂，用以彰显首倡之人的恶行。
English: At first, as Lu Yi's crime of treachery was revealed, the relevant departments investigated to the end and requested that he be sentenced to death. Some people also believed that the chariot should be set on fire to highlight the evil deeds of the initiator.

古文：权以访泽，泽曰： 盛明之世，不宜复有此刑。 
现代文：孙权就征询阚泽的意见，阚泽说： 盛明的朝代，不应再有这种极刑。 
English: Sun Quan asked Heze for his opinion. Heze said, "In the reign of Emperor Shengming, there should be no more such capital punishment.

古文：权从之。
现代文：孙权听从他的意见。
English: Sun Quan followed his advice.

古文：又诸官司有所患疾，欲增重科防，以检御臣下，泽每曰 宜依礼、律 ，其和而有正，皆此类也。
现代文：再加上各官署存在一些弊端，孙权打算增加律令条例，以驾驭朝臣，阚泽每次都说 应依照礼仪、法律 ，他平和且正直，都像这种情况。
English: In addition, there are some drawbacks in each government office, Sun Quan intends to add the Ritsuryo Ordinance to control courtiers, and Heze always says that it should be in accordance with etiquette, law, he is peaceful and honest, all like this situation.

古文：六年冬卒，权痛惜感悼，食不进者数日。
现代文：阚泽在赤乌六年冬去世，孙权痛心非常，心中哀悼，几天吃不下饭。
English: Heze passed away in the winter of the sixth year of Chao Wu. Sun Quan was heartbroken and could not eat for several days.

古文：泽州里先辈丹杨唐固亦修身积学，称为儒者，著国语、公羊、谷梁传注，讲授常数十人。
现代文：阚泽的同州前辈丹杨人唐固，也修身钻研，时人称为儒者。他著有《国语》、《公羊传》、《谷梁传》等书的注释，常有几十人听他的讲授。
English: Hanzawa's predecessor from the same prefecture, Tang Gu, also studied hard, and was known as a Confucian. He wrote commentaries on books such as "The National Language," "The Story of the Ram" and "The Story of Gu Liang," and often had dozens of people listen to his lectures.

古文：权为吴王，拜固议郎，自陆逊、张温、骆统等皆拜之。
现代文：孙权是吴王时，任命唐固为议郎，从陆逊、张温、骆统等人而下都拜他为师。
English: When Sun Quan was the king of Wu, he appointed Tang Gu as his adviser, and people from Lu Xun, Zhang Wen, Luo Di and so on all worshipped him as their teacher.

古文：黄武四年为尚书仆射，卒。
现代文：黄武四年，唐固任尚书仆射，后来去世。
English: In the fourth year of Huangwu, Tang Gu Ren Shang Shufu shot, and later died.

古文：薛综字敬文，沛郡竹邑人也。
现代文：薛综，字敬文，沛郡竹邑县人。
English: Xue Zimin, also known as Jingwen, was from Zhuyi County, Pei County.

古文：少依族人避地交州，从刘熙学。
现代文：他年少时跟随族人到交州避乱，跟随刘熙学习。
English: When he was young, he followed his people to Jiaozhou to escape the turmoil and studied with Liu Xi.

古文：士燮既附孙权，召综为五官中郎将，除合浦、交阯太守。
现代文：士燮归附孙权后，征召薛综担任五官中郎将，出任合浦、交阯太守。
English: After Shifang was annexed by Sun Quan, Xue Simi was conscripted to serve as the vice-commander of five officials, and became the governor of Hepu and Jiaozuo.

古文：时交土始开，刺史吕岱率师讨伐，综与俱行，越海南征，及到九真。
现代文：当时交州刚刚开发，刺史吕岱率军前往征讨，薛综与他一同前往，渡海南征，一直到九真。
English: At that time, Jiaozhou had just been developed, and Zhishu Lvong led the army to go to the conquest, and Xue Simi went with him, crossing the sea to the south, all the way to JiuZhen.

古文：事毕还都，守谒者仆射。
现代文：事件处理完后返回京城，兼任谒者仆射。
English: After the incident was dealt with, he returned to the capital and also served as a deputy sheriff.

古文：西使张奉於权前列尚书阚泽姓名以嘲泽，泽不能答。
现代文：西蜀使者张奉在孙权面前拆尚书阚泽姓名的字形来嘲弄阚泽，阚泽没有回复。
English: In front of Sun Quan, Zhang Bong, the envoy of Western Shu, mocked Heze by tearing the glyph of the name of Shangshu Heze. Heze did not reply.

古文：综下行酒，因劝酒曰： 蜀者何也？
现代文：薛综起身各处斟酒，趁劝酒之时对张奉说： 蜀是什么？
English: Xue Siming got up and poured wine everywhere, taking the opportunity to say to Zhang Feng: What is Shu?

古文：有犬为独，无犬为蜀，横目苟身，虫入其腹。 
现代文：有犬是独，没有犬是蜀，横目苟身，虫子进入腹中。 
English: If you have a dog, you are a dog; if you don't have a dog, you are a dog; if you are cross-eyed, you are cross-eyed; if you have worms, you have worms.

古文：奉曰： 不当复列君吴邪？ 
现代文：张奉说： 不应该再拆一下你们的吴字吗？ 
English: Zhang Feng said, "Shouldn't you tear down your Wu characters?"

古文：综应声曰： 无口为天，有口为吴，君临万邦，天子之都。 
现代文：薛综当即随口而出： 无口是天，有口是吴，君临天下，天子居所。 
English: Xue Zheng immediately blurted out: No mouth is heaven, mouth is Wu, the king is under heaven, the son of heaven's abode.

古文：於是众坐喜笑，而奉无以对。
现代文：于是在座众人都笑了，而张奉无以回答。
English: As a result, everyone present laughed, and Zhang Feng could not answer.

古文：其枢机敏捷，皆此类也。
现代文：薛综的机巧灵敏，都像这种情况。
English: Xue Zong's dexterity and sensitivity are like this situation.

古文：吕岱从交州召出，综惧继岱者非其人，上疏曰： 昔帝舜南巡，卒於苍梧。
现代文：吕岱受到征召出交州，薛综担心接替吕岱的人不是合适的人选，就上疏说： 过去舜帝南巡，后来在苍梧去世。
English: Lv Ying was called to leave Jiaozhou, and Xue Zhan was worried that the person who would succeed Lv Ying was not a suitable candidate. He said to Shang Shu, "In the past, Emperor Qian was on a southern tour, and later he died in Cangwu.

古文：秦置桂林、南海、象郡，然则四国之内属也，有自来矣。
现代文：秦代设置桂林、南海、象郡，这之后四郡归属中国，是自古以来的。
English: The Qin Dynasty set up Guilin, Nanhai, and Xiang County, after which the four counties belonged to China. This has been the case since ancient times.

古文：赵佗起番禺，怀服百越之君，珠官之南是也。
现代文：赵佗在番禺创业，安抚降服百越的君主，就是在珠官以南的地方。
English: Zhao Wei started his business in Panyu to appease the hundreds of monarchs who had surrendered, just south of Zhugan.

古文：汉武帝诛吕嘉，开九郡，设交阯刺史以镇监之。
现代文：汉武帝诛杀吕嘉，设置九郡，设置交阯刺史来镇守监控这些地方。
English: Emperor Hanwu killed Lujia, set up nine counties, and set up a town guard to monitor these places.

古文：山川长远，习俗不齐，言语同异，重译乃通，民如禽兽，长幼无别，椎结徒跣，贯头左衽，长吏之设，虽有若无。
现代文：地方遥远偏僻，风俗不同，语言各异，要经过多次翻译，百姓像禽兽一般，长幼无别，头上结发，脚下无鞋，头上扎带，衣襟左敞，设置的官吏，虽然有，但好像没有。
English: The places are remote and far away, the customs are different, the languages are different, and it is necessary to go through many translations. The people are like animals, there is no difference between the old and the young, they have hair on their heads, no shoes on their feet, headbands on their heads, their clothes are loose, and although there are government officials, it seems that there are none.

古文：自斯以来，颇徙中国罪人杂居其间，稍使学书，粗知言语，使驿往来，观见礼化。
现代文：从那以后，流放了很多中原地区的囚犯与他们杂居，逐渐让他们学习写字，慢慢知晓官话，驿使往来，让他们得知礼仪教化。
English: Since then, many exiled prisoners from the Central Plains have been living with them. Gradually, they learned to write, gradually learned the official language, and learned the etiquette.

古文：及后锡光为交阯，任延为九真太守，乃教其耕犁，使之冠履；为设媒官，始知聘娶；建立学校，导之经义。
现代文：后来锡光担任交阯太守、任延为九真太守，才教他们耕田犁地，让他们戴帽穿鞋；为他们设置媒官，使他们知道嫁娶；建立学校，用经典大义教导他们。
English: Later, when Xiguang served as the eunuch eunuch and Ren Yan as the nine true eunuch, he taught them to plow fields and hoe land, let them wear hats and shoes; set up a matchmaker for them, so that they knew how to get married; established a school, and taught them with the classics.

古文：由此已降，四百馀年，颇有似类。
现代文：从那以后四百多年，太守们大多这样做。
English: For more than 400 years after that, governors-general mostly did the same.

古文：自臣昔客始至之时，珠崖除州县嫁娶，皆须八月引户，人民集会之时，男女自相可適，乃为夫妻，父母不能止。
现代文：自从臣做为游子刚到此地之时，珠崖一带除州县治所行正式嫁娶外，其他地方都是等到八月自认门户，百姓集会时，男女自行相中合适的对象，便结成夫妻，父母不能阻止。
English: Since the time when the minister as a wanderer just arrived here, except for the official marriage conducted by the prefectural government of the prefecture, the Pearl Cliff area and other places wait until August to self-recognize the portal. When the people gather, men and women can choose the right object in their own eyes, and then they will become husband and wife. Parents can't stop them.

古文：交阯糜泠、九真都庞二县，皆兄死弟妻其嫂，世以此为俗，长吏恣听，不能禁制。
现代文：交阯的糜泠、九真的都庞这两个县，都是哥哥死后弟弟娶嫂，当地将此做为习俗，地方官吏放任自流，没有禁止限制。
English: In the two counties of Jiaxuan and Jiuquan, both of which are sparsely populated, it is customary for brothers to marry their sisters-in-law after the death of their brothers. Local officials allow this to happen without any restrictions.

古文：日南郡男女倮体，不以为羞。
现代文：日南郡的男女都是裸体，不感到羞耻。
English: Both men and women in Nichinan are naked and feel no shame.

古文：由此言之，可谓虫豸，有靦面目耳。
现代文：由此来看，他们就像虫兽一样，只不过有一张面孔而已。
English: From this point of view, they are like beasts of prey, but they only have one face.

古文：然而土广人众，阻险毒害，易以为乱，难使从治。
现代文：然而当地地广人众，地势艰险毒虫毒害，容易叛乱，难以使他们服从治理。
English: However, the vast local population, difficult terrain, dangerous poisonous insects, easy to rebel, it is difficult to make them submit to governance.

古文：县官羁縻，示令威服，田户之租赋，裁取供办，贵致远珍名珠、香药、象牙、犀角、玳瑁、珊瑚、琉璃、鹦鹉、翡翠、孔雀、奇物、充备宝玩，不必仰其赋入，以益中国也。
现代文：县里官吏统治控制他们，宣示法令使其服威，百姓的田租赋税，根据情况调整；可贵的是他们贡上从远处采集的贵重珍珠、香药、象牙、犀角、玳瑁、珊瑚、琉璃、鹦鹉、翡翠、孔雀等奇货特产，用以充实宝藏玩物，不必仰仗他们缴纳赋税，以使中原受益。
English: County officials rule and control them, proclaiming laws and regulations to make them obey, and the people's land rent and tax are adjusted according to the situation; what is precious is the precious pearls, incense, ivory, rhinoceros horns, clams, corals, glaze, parrots, emeralds, peacocks and other exotic goods and special products collected from afar by their tribute, which are used to enrich the treasure toys, and they do not have to rely on them to pay taxes in order to benefit the Central Plains.

古文：然在九甸之外，长吏之选，类不精覈。
现代文：然而在几千里外的藩属之地，地方官员的选择，大多不能仔细考察。
English: However, the choice of local officials in places belonging to the domain thousands of miles away cannot be carefully examined in most cases.

古文：汉时法宽，多自放恣，故数反违法。
现代文：汉代时法令宽松，官员大多放纵恣意，所以多次触犯法令。
English: During the Han Dynasty, laws and regulations were lax, and officials mostly indulged in arbitrariness, so they repeatedly violated laws and regulations.

古文：珠崖之废，起於长吏睹其好发，髡取为髲。
现代文：珠崖的衰颓，原因在于当地官吏看到当地人的漂亮头发，强行剪取下来用作制成假发。
English: The reason for the decline of the pearl cliff is that local officials saw the beautiful hair of local people and forcibly cut it down to make wigs.

古文：及臣所见，南海黄盖为日南太守，下车以供设不丰，挝杀主簿，仍见驱逐。
现代文：等到我到当地看到的情景，南海人黄盖为日南太守，一下车就因供应安排不丰盛，将主簿打死，而自己也被驱逐。
English: When I arrived, I saw the scene: Huang Gai, a Nanhai native, was appointed as the first governor of Nichinan Province. As soon as he got off the bus, he killed the bookkeeper because the supply was not plentiful, and he was also expelled.

古文：九真太守儋萌为妻父周京作主人，并请大吏，酒酣作乐，功曹番歆起舞属京，京不肯起，歆犹迫强，萌忿杖歆，亡於郡内。
现代文：九真太守儋萌为岳父周京设宴请客，一起请了大官，饮酒作乐，功曹番歆起身要与周京一同起舞，周京不肯起身，番歆依然强迫，儋萌愤而用杖击打番歆，将他打死在郡府中。
English: The 9th Empress Dowager Gu Meng held a banquet for her father-in-law Zhou Jing, and invited dignitaries together, drinking and making music. Gong Cao Panyu got up and wanted to dance with Zhou Jing. Zhou Jing refused to get up, but Panyu still forced him. In anger, Gu Meng hit Panyu with a cane and beat him to death in the county seat.

古文：歆弟苗帅众攻府，毒矢射萌，萌至物故。
现代文：番歆的弟弟番苗率众攻打郡府，用毒箭射儋萌，儋萌中箭身亡。
English: Panyu's younger brother, Panyu, led the crowd to attack the county seat. He used a poisoned arrow to shoot Panyu Meng, and Panyu Meng was killed by the arrow.

古文：交阯太守士燮遣兵致讨，卒不能克。
现代文：交阯太守士燮派兵前去征讨，一直未能攻克。
English: The governor of Jiaozuo Province, Zhu Xi, sent troops to conquer the city, but they were never able to conquer it.

古文：又故刺史会稽朱符，多以乡人虞褒、刘彦之徒分作长吏，侵虐百姓，强赋於民，黄鱼一枚收稻一斛，百姓怨叛，山贼并出，攻州突郡。
现代文：又有原刺史，会稽人朱符，将同乡人虞褒、刘彦等多人分别担任长官，侵犯虐害百姓，强迫百姓缴纳赋税。捕获一条黄鱼就要缴收稻子一斛，百姓怨愤反叛，山贼一同出动，侵略州郡。
English: There is also a history of the original stabbing, the auditor Zhu Fu, the fellow townsmen Yu Bo, Liu Yan and many others were appointed as chiefs, violated and abused the people, forced the people to pay taxes. If a yellowfish was caught, one basket of rice would be collected, the people were angry and rebelled, and the bandits went out together to invade the county.

古文：符走入海，流离丧亡。
现代文：朱符逃往海上，流亡至死。
English: Zhu Fu fled to the sea and lived in exile until his death.

古文：次得南阳张津，与荆州牧刘表为隙，兵弱敌强，岁岁兴军，诸将厌患，去留自在。
现代文：再有南阳人张津，与荆州牧刘表有嫌隙，自己势弱而敌军强大，年年出征，将领们都很厌烦，去留自便随意。
English: Then there is Zhang Jin from Nanyang, who has a grudge against Jingzhou Mu Liu. He is weak, but the enemy army is strong. He goes to war every year. The generals are bored, and they can stay as long as they like.

古文：津小检摄，威武不足，为所陵侮，遂至杀没。
现代文：张津稍加检阅震慑，但威势不足，被他们凌辱，最终被杀。
English: Zhang Jin was given a little shock and awe, but he was not powerful enough. He was abused and humiliated by them, and was eventually killed.

古文：后得零陵赖恭，先辈仁谨，不晓时事。
现代文：后有零陵人赖恭，是先辈中仁厚谨慎之人，但不通晓时事。
English: Lai Gong, who was the last person to be buried in the mausoleum, was a benevolent and prudent person among his predecessors, but he was not familiar with current affairs.

古文：表又遣长沙吴巨为苍梧太守。
现代文：刘表又派遣长沙人吴巨担任苍梧太守。
English: Liu Biao also sent Wu Jiu, a native of Changsha, to serve as Cangwu's governor.

古文：巨武夫轻悍，不为恭所服，辄相怨恨，逐出恭，求步骘。
现代文：吴巨是武夫，轻率骠悍，赖恭不信服他，互相怨恨，后来他驱赶赖恭，赖恭向步騭求援。
English: Wu Jiu was a warrior, reckless and fierce. Lai Qiong did not believe him, and they resented each other. Later, he drove Lai Qiong away, and Lai Qiong asked Bu Yao for help.

古文：是时津故将夷廖、钱博之徒尚多，骘以次鉏治，纲纪適定，会仍召出。
现代文：当时张津的旧将夷廖、钱博的部众很多，步陟马依次铲除，法令纲纪才安定下来，不久就被朝廷征召出境。
English: At that time, there were many followers of Zhangjin's former generals Yi Liao and Qian Bo, and they were eliminated one after another. Only after the laws and regulations were stabilized, he was soon summoned by the imperial court to leave the country.

古文：吕岱既至，有士氏之变。
现代文：吕岱来后，有士氏兴起的叛乱。
English: After Lv Ying's arrival, there was a rebellion by the Shi clan.

古文：越军南征，平讨之日，改置长吏，章明王纲，威加万里，大小承风。
现代文：他率领越军南征，平定讨伐之时，另设地方长官，彰明天子法令，威势影响天下，上下百姓望风归附。
English: He led the southward march of the Vietnamese army, and at the time of the pacification of the crusade, he set up another local governor, and promulgated the "Tomorrow's Children" decree, with the power to influence the world, and the people at all levels hoped for the wind to be attached.

古文：由此言之，绥边抚裔，实有其人。
现代文：由此来说，安定镇抚边疆地区，实在应该有适宜的人。
English: From this point of view, there really should be a suitable person in charge of stabilizing the border regions.

古文：牧伯之任，既宜清能，荒流之表，祸福尤甚。
现代文：州牧郡守的人选，必须清廉能干之人，荒远边陲之地，更是与百姓和国家祸福相依。
English: Candidates for county magistrate must be honest and capable, and in a remote and desolate land, they are more dependent on the people and the country.

古文：今日交州虽名粗定，尚有高凉宿贼；其南海、苍梧、郁林、珠官四郡界未绥，依作寇盗，专为亡叛逋逃之薮。
现代文：现在交州虽然表面上已大致平定，但还有高凉老贼。其中南海、苍梧、郁林、珠官四郡边界尚未安定，依然有盗贼作乱，是叛乱逃亡之人的专门聚集之地。
English: Now, although Jiaozhou has been largely pacified on the surface, there are still high and cold old thieves. Among them, the borders of Nanhai, Cangwu, Yulin and Zhuguan counties have not yet been stabilized, and there are still thieves making trouble. It is a special gathering place for people who have fled the rebellion.

古文：若岱不复南，新刺史宜得精密，检摄八郡，方略智计，能稍稍以渐治高凉者，假其威宠，借之形势，责其成效，庶几可补复。
现代文：如果吕岱不返回南方任职，新任刺史就应该精挑细选，要能统摄八郡，具有谋略智慧，能渐渐地治理高凉，给予他威势恩宠，赐予他权力地位，责令他有效治理，这样才能弥补吕岱调走的空缺。
English: If Lv Wei does not return to the south to take office, the new chief historian should be carefully selected. He should be able to supervise the eight counties, have strategic wisdom, and be able to gradually govern Gao Liang. Give him the grace of authority, give him a position of power, and order him to effectively govern, so as to make up for the vacancy caused by Lv Wei's transfer.

古文：如但中人，近守常法，无奇数异术者，则群恶日滋，久远成害。
现代文：如果只是中等人才，谨守常规礼法，而没有奇谋妙策，那邪恶势力就会越加滋长，长久必成大患。
English: If it is only middle-level talent, adhering to the conventional etiquette, but no ingenious strategy, then the evil forces will grow more and more, and it will become a big problem for a long time.

古文：故国之安危，在於所任，不可不察也。
现代文：所以国家的安危，就在于任用之人，不可不明察。
English: Therefore, the safety of the country lies in the person who makes the appointment, and this must not be overlooked.

古文：窃惧朝廷忽轻其选，故敢竭愚情，以广圣思。 
现代文：我私下担心朝廷忽略或轻视了交州官员的人选，故此冒昧地竭献愚忠，以扩展陛下圣明的思虑。 
English: I am privately worried that the court has overlooked or slighted the selection of the diplomatic officer, and thus I have the temerity to offer my foolish loyalty in order to expand His Majesty's sacred thoughts.

古文：黄龙三年，建昌侯虑为镇军大将军，屯半州，以综为长史，外掌众事，内授书籍。
现代文：黄龙三年，建昌侯孙虑担任镇军大将军，驻守半州，任命薛综为长史，对外主管各项事务，对内传授经典文集。
English: In the third year of Huanglong, Jianchang Hou Sun Qian served as the general of the town army, stationed in Hanzhou, appointed Xue Zong as the long history, in charge of various affairs, and taught classic collections to the inside.

古文：虑卒，入守贼曹尚书，迁尚书仆射。
现代文：孙虑去世后，薛综入朝为贼曹尚书，升任尚书仆射。
English: After the death of Sun Qian, Xue Siming entered the imperial court as the thief Cao Shangshu, and was promoted to the position of Shangshu minion.

古文：时公孙渊降而复叛，权盛怒，欲自亲征。
现代文：当时公孙渊投降东吴又叛变，孙权大怒，想亲自率军征讨。
English: At that time, Gongsun Yuan surrendered to Dongwu and rebelled. Sun Quan was furious and wanted to personally lead the army to fight.

古文：综上疏谏曰： 夫帝王者，万国之元首，天下之所系命也。
现代文：薛综上表劝谏说： 帝王之人，是万邦元首，天下依靠他维持生命的人。
English: Xue Zeng summed up the above table and advised: "The emperor's person is the head of all states, and the world relies on him to sustain life.

古文：是以居则重门击柝以戒不虞，行则清道案节以养威严，盖所以存万安之福，镇四海之心。
现代文：所以他的住处要重置门户敲击木柝以防止意外；出行时就要清扫道路限制车马速度以形成威严气势，这是为了保全大家平安的福气，安抚天下百姓。
English: Therefore, his residence should reset the portal and knock on the wooden stake to prevent accidents; when traveling, it is necessary to sweep the road and limit the speed of the car and horse to form a majestic momentum, which is to preserve everyone's safe fortune and appease the people of the world.

古文：昔孔子疾时，讬乘桴浮海之语，季由斯喜，拒以无所取才。
现代文：过去孔子厌恶时局，借言乘船到东海之上，季由很是高兴，他因无可取的才干才受到拒绝。
English: In the past, Confucius was disgusted with the current situation. He borrowed money to take a boat to the East Sea. Ji Yu was very happy. He was rejected because of his unattainable talent.

古文：汉元帝欲御楼船，薛广德请刎颈以血染车。
现代文：汉元帝想要乘御楼船，薛广德请求刎颈用血来染车。
English: Emperor Hanyuan wanted to take the golong boat, and Xue Guangde asked his nephew to dye the car with blood.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：水火之险至危，非帝王所宜涉也。
现代文：因为水、火是最危险物品，不是帝王应该触碰的。
English: Because water and fire are the most dangerous things, not something an emperor should touch.

古文：谚曰： 千金之子，坐不垂堂。 
现代文：谚语说 千金之躯，不能坐在堂屋的檐下 。
English: A proverb says that the body of a thousand gold cannot sit under the eaves of a great house.

古文：况万乘之尊乎？
现代文：更何况帝王之尊呢？
English: Not to mention the emperor's honor?

古文：今辽东戎貊小国，无城池之固，备御之术，器械铢钝，犬羊无政，往必禽克，诚如明诏。
现代文：现在辽东戎貊小国，没有坚固的城池和抵御的办法，武器不锋利，部队像牛羊群一样，出军前往必能攻克，实在像圣明诏书所说的。
English: At present, Liaodong Rongcheng is a small country, with no solid city and no means of defense. The weapons are not sharp, and the troops are like cattle and sheep. If they go out to invade, they will surely be able to conquer, just as the holy edict said.

古文：然其方土寒确，谷稼不殖，民习鞍马，转徙无常。
现代文：但是当地寒冷贫瘠，难以种植谷物，当地百姓善于乘马，时常迁徙。
English: However, the local area is cold and barren, making it difficult to grow grain. Local people are good at riding horses and often migrate.

古文：卒闻大军之至，自度不敌，鸟惊兽骇，长驱奔窜，一人匹马，不可得见，虽获空地，守之无益，此不可一也。
现代文：突然得知大军到来，估计不能抵抗，就像鸟兽四散，策马四散逃命，连一人一马都看不见，虽然得到了空城，守着也没有益处，这是不可出兵的第一个原因。
English: Suddenly learning of the arrival of a large army, it is estimated that it cannot resist, like birds and beasts scatter, horses scatter and flee for their lives, even a person can not see a horse, although it has obtained an empty city, there is no benefit in guarding, this is the first reason for not sending troops.

古文：加又洪流滉瀁，有成山之难，海行无常，风波难免，倏忽之间，人船异势。
现代文：再加上海水波涛汹涌动荡，又有成山岛的险难，海潮流动变化无常，风浪是难以避免的，瞬息之间，人和船的状态就不一样了。
English: In addition to the rough and turbulent waves of Shanghai water, there are also the perils of mountainous islands, the sea tide flow is fickle, the wind and waves are unavoidable, and the state of people and ships are different.

古文：虽有尧舜之德，智无所施，贲育之勇，力不得设，此不可二也。
现代文：即使有尧、舜的仁德，但智谋无法施展；有孟贲、夏育的勇猛，但力量无处得用，这是不可出兵的第二个原因。
English: Even if one has the benevolence of Yao and Shun, one cannot make use of wisdom and strategy; if one has the bravery of Meng Yao and Xia Yu, one cannot make use of strength. This is the second reason why it is impossible to send troops.

古文：加以郁雾冥其上，咸水蒸其下，善生流肿，转相洿染，凡行海者，稀无斯患，此不可三也。
现代文：还有浓雾弥漫天空，咸水在海面蒸发，脚容易患上流脓肿痛，又互相传染，凡航海之人，很少不患此病。这是不可出兵的第三个原因。
English: There is also a thick fog that fills the sky, salt water evaporates on the surface of the sea, and the feet are prone to swelling and swelling, and are contagious to each other. Those who sail rarely do not suffer from this disease. This is the third reason for not sending troops.

古文：天生神圣，显以符瑞，当乘平丧乱，康此民物；嘉祥日集，海内垂定，逆虏凶虐，灭亡在近。
现代文：天生神圣之人，上天会用祥瑞征兆来彰显，一定能平定祸乱，使百姓安康；吉祥的征兆日益呈现，天下即将平定，叛逆凶残之人，灭亡之日近在眼前。
English: Those who are born with divine nature will be highlighted by Heaven with auspicious and auspicious signs, and will surely be able to quell the calamity and make the people healthy; auspicious signs are increasingly appearing, the world is about to be pacified, and those who are rebellious and cruel, the day of their demise is close at hand.

古文：中国一平，辽东自毙，但当拱手以待耳。
现代文：中原一旦平定，辽东就会自行灭亡，只需拱手相待就好。
English: Once the Central Plains are pacified, Liaodong will perish on its own. It is enough to treat each other well.

古文：今乃违必然之图，寻至危之阻，忽九州之固，肆一朝之忿，既非社稷之重计，又开辟以来所未尝有，斯诚群僚所以倾身侧息，食不甘味，寝不安席者也。
现代文：如今却要违背必然的规律，寻找最艰险的阻隔，忽视天下的安稳，发泄一时的愤怒，既不是社稷的重大决策，又是奠定基业以来前所未有的，这确实是朝臣们所以侧身叹息，食不下味、辗转反侧的原因。
English: Today, however, it is necessary to violate the law of inevitability, search for the most difficult obstacle, ignore the stability of the world, and vent momentary anger. This is neither a major decision-making of the society, nor is it unprecedented since the foundation was laid. This is indeed the reason why the courtiers are sighing, unable to eat, and turning around.

古文：惟陛下抑雷霆之威，忍赫斯之怒，遵乘桥之安，远履冰之险，则臣子赖祉，天下幸甚。 时群臣多谏，权遂不行。
现代文：真诚希望陛下抑制雷霆之威，忍耐赫然发作的怒气，依就乘桥的安全，远离履冰的危险，那朝臣就能仰赖您的福祉，对天下也是至幸之事。 当时朝臣大多劝谏，孙权就没有出征。
English: I sincerely hope that your majesty will restrain the power of thunder, endure the rage of the great outburst, rely on the safety of the bridge and stay away from the danger of walking on ice, so that the courtiers can rely on your well-being, which is also a fortunate thing for the world. At that time, most of the courtiers advised Sun Quan not to go to war.

古文：正月乙未，权敕综祝祖不得用常文，综承诏，卒造文义，信辞粲烂。
现代文：黄龙三年正月二十二日，孙权敕令薛综著写称赞祭祖文辞时不得用一般的套语，薛综承领诏旨，仓促遣词造句，语意文辞华彩灿烂。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the third year of the Yellow Dragon, Sun Quan ordered Xue Zuo to not use general phrases when writing a speech praising the sacrifice of the ancestors. Xue Zuo accepted the imperial edict, hastily made sentences, and the meaning of the speech was brilliant.

古文：权曰： 复为两头，使满三也。 
现代文：孙权说： 再加上头尾部分，使赞辞凑满三个部分。 
English: Sun Quan said, "In addition to the first and last parts, the praise is composed of three parts.

古文：综复再祝，辞令皆新，众咸称善。
现代文：薛综又增添文辞，文辞义旨都很新颖，众人都交口称赞。
English: Xue Synthesis added more words, and the meaning of the words was very novel, and everyone praised each other.

古文：赤乌三年，徙选曹尚书。
现代文：赤乌三年，薛综转任选曹尚书。
English: In the third year of the Red Emperor Wu, Xue Zongyi was transferred to the post of Zeng Cao Shangshu.

古文：五年，为太子少傅，领选职如故。
现代文：赤乌五年，他担任太子少傅，依然担任选部职任。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Akihito, he served as the crown prince's young tutor, and still held the position of selector.

古文：六年春，卒。
现代文：赤乌六年春，薛综去世。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Red Emperor Wu, Xue Siming passed away.

古文：凡所著诗赋难论数万言，名曰私载，又定五宗图述、二京解，皆传於世。
现代文：他平生著写诗赋难论等共数万字，名为《私载》，又考定《五宗图述》、《二京解》，都流传于世。
English: He wrote tens of thousands of words in his lifetime, including poems on the theory of Fu Nan, called "My Record," and also wrote "A Description of the Five Schools of Thought" and "Two Views of Beijing," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：子珝，宫至威南将军，征交阯还，道病死。
现代文：薛珝的儿子薛繩，官至威南将军，出征交阯返回，在路上病死。
English: Xue Yao's son, Xue Jiao, who was an officer of General Winan, went to the front and returned, but died of illness on the way.

古文：珝弟莹，字道言，初为秘府中书郎，孙休即位，为散骑中常侍。
现代文：薛珝的弟弟薛莹，字道言，刚开始担任秘府中书郎，孙休登基后，薛莹担任散骑中常侍。
English: Xue Yao's younger brother, Xue Ying, the word Daogan, just began to serve as the secretary of the Privy Council. After Sun Xiu ascended to the throne, Xue Ying served as the equerry of the cavalry.

古文：数年，以病去官。
现代文：几年之后，因病辞官。
English: A few years later, he resigned due to illness.

古文：是岁，何定建议凿圣谿以通江淮，皓令莹督万人往，遂以多盘石难施功，罢还，出为武昌左部督。
现代文：孙皓即位之初，薛莹是左执法，升任选曹尚书，等到册立太子，又兼任太傅。建衡三年，孙皓追叹薛莹父亲薛综的遗文，就令薛莹续写。薛莹献出长诗一首。当年，何定建议开凿圣溪以连通长江、淮河，孙皓下令薛莹督领一万人前往，最后因许多巨石挡路难以施工，就搁置工程返还，出京担任武昌左部督。
English: At the beginning of Sun Yat-sen's accession to the throne, Xue Ying was the left law enforcement, promoted to the post of Cao Shangshu, and when he was crowned prince, he also served as Taifu. In the third year of Jianheng, Sun Yat-sen sighed for the remains of Xue Ying's father, Xue Simi, and ordered Xue Ying to continue writing. Xue Ying presented a long poem. That year, He Ding proposed to excavate the sacred stream to connect the Yangtze River and the Huai River. Sun Yat-sen ordered Xue Ying to lead 10,000 people to the project.

古文：后定被诛，皓追圣谿事，下莹狱，徙广州。
现代文：后来何定被诛杀，孙皓追究开凿圣溪的事情，将薛莹下狱，流放到广州。
English: Later, He Ding was assassinated, and Sun Yat-sen investigated the digging of the sacred stream and sent Xue Ying to prison and then to Guangzhou.

古文：右国史华覈上疏曰： 臣闻五帝三王皆立史官，叙录功美，垂之无穷。
现代文：右国史华核上疏说： 臣听说三皇五帝都设立史官，记述功绩美德，使之流传后世。
English: Shi Hua of the State of the Right said, "I have heard that the three emperors and five emperors all set up historians to record their merits and virtues so that they could be passed down to future generations.

古文：汉时司马迁、班固，咸命世大才，所撰精妙，与六经俱传。
现代文：汉朝时司马迁、班固，都是当时显名杰出的人才，所著写的史书文辞精妙，与六经一样流传后世。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Sima Qian and Ban Gu were both famous and outstanding talents at that time. The historical and literary diction they wrote was exquisite, and they were passed down to future generations just like the Six Classics.

古文：大吴受命，建国南土。
现代文：大吴国承受天命，在南方建国。
English: The Great State of Wu was destined by Heaven to establish a country in the south.

古文：大皇帝末年，命太史令丁孚、郎中项峻始撰吴书。
现代文：大皇帝末年，下令太史令丁孚、郎中项峻，开始撰写《吴书》。
English: At the end of the Great Emperor's life, Emperor Taishi ordered Ding Fu and his second-in-command, Xiang Jun, to begin writing "Wu Shu."

古文：孚、峻俱非史才，其所撰作，不足纪录。
现代文：但丁孚、项峻都不具有史官才干，他们撰作的文书，不值得记录下来。
English: However, neither Ding Fu nor Xiang Jun possessed the ability of a historian, and the documents they wrote were not worth recording.

古文：至少帝时，更差韦曜、周昭、薛莹、梁广及臣五人，访求往事，所共撰立，备有本末。
现代文：到了少帝时期，又诏令韦曜、周昭、薛莹、梁广及我共五人，查访寻求过去事实，一同著写，已经有了史书的完整材料。
English: In the period of the young emperor, Wei You, Zhou Zhao, Xue Ying, Liang Guang and I, a total of five people, visited and searched for past facts and wrote together, and we already had complete materials for the history book.

古文：昭、广先亡，曜负恩蹈罪，莹出为将，复以过徙，其书遂委滞，迄今未撰奏。
现代文：周昭、梁广在前去世，韦曜辜负皇恩触犯法令，薛莹出京担任将领，又因过失而被流放，这本史书的撰作就停滞了，至今未能撰成上奏。
English: Zhou Zhao and Liang Guang passed away before, Wei Yowu betrayed the imperial grace and violated the law, Xue Ying went to Beijing to serve as a general, and was exiled for negligence. The writing of this history book stagnated, and it has not been able to compile the prelude.

古文：臣愚浅才劣，適可为莹等记注而已，若使撰合，必袭孚、峻之迹，惧坠大皇帝之元功，损当世之盛美。
现代文：为臣才疏学浅，只适合为薛莹等人作作笔记注解而已，如果令我动手撰写刊合，一定会沿着丁孚、项峻的老路，恐怕要漏损大皇帝的大功，减损现时的盛美。
English: It is only suitable for making notes and annotations for Xue Ying and others. If I were to start writing and publishing, I would certainly follow the old path of Dingfu and Xiangjun. I am afraid that I would lose the great achievements of the great emperor and detract from the current prosperity.

古文：莹涉学既博，文章尤妙，同寮之中，莹为冠首。
现代文：薛莹学问广博，文笔更为精妙，同僚之中，他为首位。
English: Xue Ying's learning is extensive, his writing is more exquisite, and he is the first among his colleagues.

古文：今者见吏，虽多经学，记述之才，如莹者少，是以慺慺为国惜之。
现代文：现在在职官员，虽然多有经学之士，但记事叙作的才能，很少有能像薛莹这样的。
English: Although there are many scholars among the current officials, few have the ability to record and narrate like Xue Ying.

古文：实欲使卒垂成之功，编於前史之末。
现代文：所以我不辞烦劳地为国家惋惜他这个人才，实在是想使即将完成的《吴书》全部完成，使它得以编在前代史书的后面。
English: Therefore, I took the trouble to mourn his talent for the country, and really wanted to complete the "Wu Shu" that was about to be completed, so that it could be compiled at the back of the previous history book.

古文：奏上之后，退填沟壑，无所复恨。 
现代文：奏书上报之后，即使退朝填充沟壑，我也没有遗憾了。 
English: After the report was published, I had no regrets even if I had to retreat to fill the gully.

古文：皓遂召莹还，为左国史。
现代文：孙皓就将薛莹召回！任他为左国史。
English: Sun Yat-sen recalled Xue Ying! and appointed him as the left national historian.

古文：顷之，选曹尚书同郡缪祎以执意不移，为群小所疾，左迁衡阳太守。
现代文：不久，薛莹的同郡人，选曹尚书缪祎因为坚持自己意见，为奸小们疾恨，降职衡阳太守。
English: Soon, Xue Ying's fellow countyman, Zeng Cao Shangshu Miao Jun, because of his insistence on his own opinions and his hatred for the traitors, was demoted to Hengyang Taishu.

古文：既拜，又追以职事见诘责，拜表陈谢。
现代文：他到任后，又想到自己是因为本职事务被责备诘问，就上表陈情谢罪。
English: After he took office, he remembered that he had been reprimanded and interrogated because of his job, and he made a public apology.

古文：因过诣莹，复为人所白，云祎不惧罪，多将宾客会聚莹许。
现代文：就过路拜访薛莹，又受到小人的诽谤，说缪祎不认罪，邀集许多宾客在薛莹那里集会。
English: On the way to visit Xue Ying, he was slandered by villains, saying that Miao Wei did not admit guilt, and invited many guests to gather at Xue Ying.

古文：乃收祎下狱，徙桂阳，莹还广州。
现代文：朝廷就将缪祎收押下狱，流放桂阳，薛莹被遣送回广州。
English: The imperial court imprisoned Miao Wei and exiled him to Guiyang, while Xue Ying was sent back to Guangzhou.

古文：未至，召莹还，复职。
现代文：未到广州，朝廷又诏令薛莹返回，官复原职。
English: Before arriving in Guangzhou, the imperial court also ordered Xue Ying to return and be reinstated.

古文：是时法政多谬，举措烦苛，莹每上便宜，陈缓刑简役，以济育百姓，事或施行。
现代文：当时法政律令有很多错误，内容繁杂严苛，薛莹常常上奏提出有利国计民生的建议，请求减轻刑罚减少劳役，借以救助安抚百姓，其中有些也施行了。
English: At that time, there were many mistakes in the legal and political decrees, and the contents were complicated and severe. Xue Ying often made suggestions that were beneficial to the national economy and people's livelihood, and requested that the punishment be reduced and the labor service be reduced to help and appease the people. Some of them were also implemented.

古文：迁光禄勋。
现代文：后来薛莹升为光禄勋。
English: Later, Xue Ying Sheng was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：天纪四年，晋军征皓，皓奉书於司马伷、王浑、王濬请降，其文，莹所造也。
现代文：天纪四年，晋军征讨孙皓，孙皓将降书送往司马亻由、王浑、王氵睿处请求归降。其中的文辞，是薛莹拟写的。
English: In the fourth year of Tianji, the Jin army recruited Sun Yat-sen, and Sun Yat-sen sent a letter of surrender to Sima Qiyu, Wang Hun, and Wang Zhe Rui to request surrender. The words in it were written by Xue Ying.

古文：莹既至洛阳，特先见叙，为散骑常侍，答问处当，皆有条理。
现代文：薛莹到洛阳后，晋帝优先召见对他记叙功劳，担任散骑常侍，处事答问，都很有条理。
English: After Xue Ying arrived in Luoyang, Emperor Jin gave priority to summoning him to report on his merits, serve as a horseback riding attendant, and answer questions, all of which were very orderly.

古文：太康三年卒。
现代文：晋太康三年，薛莹去世。
English: Three years after Jin Taikang, Xue Ying passed away.

古文：著书八篇，名曰新议。
现代文：他撰写了文章八篇，名为《新议》。
English: He has written eight articles, entitled "A New Proposal."

古文：评曰：张纮文理意正，为世令器，孙策待之亚於张昭，诚有以也。
现代文：评曰：张纮文辞道理都很正大，是当时很好的人才，孙策对待他仅次于张昭，实在是有原因的。
English: The commentary said: Zhang Ye's words and deeds were all very upright, he was a very good talent at that time, Sun Ce treated him second only to Zhang Zhao, there is really a reason.

古文：严、程、阚生，一时儒林也。至畯辞荣济旧，不亦长者乎！
现代文：严畯、程秉、阚泽这些人，是一时的儒生，至于严畯辞别恩荣投奔旧主，不也是很忠厚吗！
English: Yan Xuan, Cheng Bing, and Heze, these people were once Confucianists. As for Yan Xuan saying goodbye to the old master, isn't he also very loyal?

古文：薛综学识规纳，为吴良臣。
现代文：薛综学问规范渊博，是吴国的良臣。
English: Xue Zongji had a profound knowledge of cultural norms and was a prominent minister of the State of Wu.

古文：及莹纂蹈，允有先风，然於暴酷之朝，屡登显列，君子殆诸。
现代文：等到薛莹遇到篡位，有先祖风范，但是在残酷爆烈的朝廷，多次登上高位，君子们应该对此努力。
English: Wait until Xue Ying encounters usurpation, there is an ancestral style, but in the cruel imperial court, many times ascended to high positions, gentlemen should work hard on this.

