古文：二十五年夏五月庚辰，卫侯出奔宋。
现代文：二十五年夏季，五月二十五日，卫出公逃亡到宋国。
English: In the summer of 1925, on May 25, Wei Deguang fled to Song.

古文：卫侯为灵台于藉圃，与诸大夫饮酒焉。褚师声子袜而登席。公怒。
现代文：卫出公在藉圃修造了灵台，和大夫们在那里喝酒，褚师声子穿着袜子登上席子，卫出公发怒。
English: Wei De Gong used the garden to build a memorial table, and the doctors drank wine there. Gong Shi Xiangzi wore socks and climbed onto the mat. Wei De Gong was furious.

古文：辞曰： 臣有疾，异于人。
现代文：褚师辩解说： 我脚上生疮，和别人不一样。
English: The acupuncturist explained, "The sores on my feet are different from others.

古文：若见之，君将之。是以不敢。 
现代文：如果见到了，君王会作呕的，因此不敢脱去袜子。 
English: The king would be disgusted if he saw it, so he did not dare to take off his socks.

古文：公愈怒。
现代文：卫出公更加生气。
English: Wei Deguang was even more angry.

古文：大夫辞之，不可。
现代文：大夫们都为褚师辩解，卫出公不同意。
English: The doctors all defended Gong Shi, but Wei Dewuang did not agree.

古文：褚师出，公其手曰： 必断而足。 
现代文：褚师退出。卫出公把手叉在腰上，说： 一定要砍断你的脚！ 
English: Wei De put his hand on his waist and said, "Be sure to cut off your foot!"

古文：闻之，褚师与司寇亥乘曰： 今日幸而后亡。 
现代文：褚师听了这话，就和司寇亥一起坐上车子说： 今天的事情能够落个逃亡就是幸运了。 
English: After listening to this, Zou Shi got into the car with Siko Hai and said, "It's lucky that today's incident was able to end in an escape.

古文：公之入也，夺南氏邑，而夺司寇亥政。
现代文：卫出公回国的时候，夺取了公孙弥牟的封邑，夺取了司寇亥的政权。
English: When Wei Degu returned to China, he seized the fief of Gongsun Yimou and the political power of Siko Hai.

古文：公使侍人纳公文懿子之车于池。
现代文：卫出公又派侍者把公文懿子的车子推到池塘里。
English: Wei De also sent a waiter to push the car of the official's mule into the pond.

古文：初，卫人翦夏丁氏，以其帑赐彭封弥子。
现代文：当初，卫国人灭了夏丁氏，把他的家财赐给彭封弥子。
English: At first, the defenders of the country destroyed the Xia Ding clan and gave his family's wealth to Peng Fenya.

古文：弥子饮公酒，纳夏戊之女，嬖，以为夫人。
现代文：弥子请卫出公喝酒，进献夏戊的女儿，卫出公宠爱她，让她做了夫人。
English: Yako invited Wei De Gong to drink and offered him Xia Wu's daughter. Wei De Gong loved her and made her his wife.

古文：其弟期，大叔疾之从孙甥也，少畜于公，以为司徒。
现代文：她的弟弟期，是太叔疾的从外孙，小时候养在卫出公的宫中，卫出公让他做司徒。
English: Her younger brother, the great-great-uncle's illegitimate grandson, was raised in the palace of Wei De Gong when he was a child, and Wei De Gong made him a tutor.

古文：夫人宠衰，期得罪。
现代文：夫人的宠爱衰减，期也就有了罪过。
English: As her mistress's affections waned, so did her guilt.

古文：公使三匠久。
现代文：卫出公使用三种匠人久久不让休息。
English: Three kinds of artisans have been working in Weide for a long time.

古文：公使优狡盟拳弥，而甚近信之。故褚师比、公孙弥牟、公文要、司寇亥、司徒期因三匠与拳弥以作乱，皆执利兵，无者执斤。使拳弥入于公宫，而自大子疾之宫噪以攻公。
现代文：卫出公派优狡和拳弥盟誓，而又很亲近信任他，所以褚师比、公孙弥牟、公文要、司寇亥、司徒期利用三种匠人和拳弥来发动叛乱，都拿着锐利的武器，没有武器的人拿着斧子，派拳弥进入公宫，而从太子疾的宫里呐喊攻打卫出公。
English: Wei Shih-kuo swore allegiance to Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongwen Yao, Shikohai, and Shitu, and trusted him very much. Therefore, Gongshih-kuo, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu, Gongsun Yimu

古文：鄄子士请御之。
现代文：鄄子士请求抵御。
English: The henchmen pleaded for resistance.

古文：弥援其手曰： 子则勇矣，将若君何？
现代文：拳弥拉着他的手，说： 您固然勇敢，可是打算把国君怎么办？
English: Kenmi took his hand and said, "You are certainly brave, but what do you plan to do with the sovereign?

古文：不见先君乎？
现代文：您没有见到过先君的结局吗？
English: Didn't you see the end of your predecessor?

古文：君何所不逞欲？
现代文：君王到哪里不能满足愿望呢？
English: Where is the king who does not grant wishes?

古文：且君尝在外矣，岂必不反。
现代文：而且君王曾经在外面待过，难道就一定不能回来吗？
English: And if the king has been away, must he not come back?

古文：当今不可，众怒难犯，休而易间也。 
现代文：现在不能那么做，众怒难犯。叛乱平定才容易离间作乱的人。 
English: You can't do that now. It's hard to offend when everyone is angry. It's easier to sow discord when the rebellion is quelled.

古文：乃出。
现代文：于是卫出公就动身出走。
English: As a result, Wei Deguang started to run away.

古文：将適蒲，弥曰： 晋无信，不可。 
现代文：准备到蒲地去，拳弥说： 晋国没有信用，不行。 
English: As he prepared to go to Puti, Ken'ya said, "If Jin has no trust, I can't go.

古文：将適鄄，弥曰： 齐、晋争我，不可。 
现代文：准备到鄄地去，拳弥说： 齐国和晋国在争夺我们，不行。 
English: When preparing to go to Handan, Ken'ya said, "Qi and Jin countries are competing for us, it's no good.

古文：将適泠，弥曰： 鲁不足与，请適城鉏以鉤越，越有君。 
现代文：准备到泠地去，拳弥说： 鲁国不足以亲附，请到城鉏去，可以联系越国。越国有能干的国君。 
English: When preparing to go to Handan, Keng Mya said, "It is not enough to be close to Lu, please go to Chengdu, you can contact Viet Nam. Viet Nam has a capable ruler.

古文：乃適城鉏。
现代文：于是就去了城鉏。
English: So he went to the castle.

古文：弥曰： 卫盗不可知也，请速，自我始。 
现代文：拳弥说： 卫国的盗贼是不是会来袭击您，还不能知道，请快点离开，从我开始。 
English: Ken'ya said, "I don't know if the thieves of national defense will come to attack you. Please leave quickly, starting with me."

古文：乃载宝以归。
现代文：于是就装上宝物回到了卫国。
English: So they loaded up the treasure and returned to the old country.

古文：公为支离之卒，因祝史挥以侵卫。
现代文：卫出公把士兵加以分散部署，利用祝史挥作为内应侵袭卫国。
English: Wei Degu deployed his soldiers in a dispersed manner, and used Zhu Shiwang as a means to invade the defense of the country.

古文：卫人病之。
现代文：卫国人以此为患。
English: The defenders of the country suffered from this.

古文：懿子知之，见子之，请逐挥。
现代文：公文懿子知道了，进见公孙弥牟，请求驱逐祝史挥。
English: When he learned of this, he went to see Gongsun Yimou and asked him to expel Zhu Shiwang.

古文：文子曰： 无罪。 
现代文：公孙弥牟说： 挥没有罪过。 
English: Gongsun Yimou said, "Wu is not guilty.

古文：懿子曰： 彼好专利而妄。夫见君之入也，将先道焉。
现代文：懿子说： 他专权好利而又行为不轨，要是见到国君进入，会在前面引路的。
English: Zou Zi said, "He is despotic and greedy, and his behavior is improper. If he sees the sovereign entering, he will lead the way in front of him."

古文：若逐之，必出于南门而適君所。夫越新得诸侯，将必请师焉。 
现代文：如果驱逐他，一定出南门而去国君那里，越国最近得到诸侯，一定会请求他们出兵的。 
English: If he is expelled, he will certainly go out of the south gate to the sovereign. Yue Guo has recently gained lords, and he will certainly ask them to send troops.

古文：挥在朝，使吏遣诸其室。
现代文：祝史挥正在朝廷上，下朝后，懿子就派官吏把他从家里遣送走了。
English: Zhu Shifang was in the imperial court, and after the fall of the dynasty, the emperor sent officials to deport him from his home.

古文：挥出信，弗内。
现代文：祝史挥出了城，住了两晚，想要回城，没有被接纳。
English: Zhu Xi went out of the city, stayed for two nights, wanted to return to the city, and was not accepted.

古文：五日，乃馆诸外里。遂有宠，使如越请师。
现代文：过了五天，就住在外里，于是就受到卫出公的宠信，派他到越国去请求出兵。
English: After five days, he went to live in the countryside, whereupon he won the favor of the Duke of Wei and was sent to Yue to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：六月，公至自越。季康子、孟武伯逆于五梧。
现代文：六月，哀公从越国回来，季康子、孟武伯到五梧迎接。
English: In June, Aigong returned from Yue Province, and Ji Kangzi and Meng Wubo came to Wu Wu to welcome him.

古文：郭重仆，见二子曰： 恶言多矣，君请尽之。 
现代文：郭重为哀公驾车，见到他们两位，回来对哀公说： 这两位的坏话多着呢，请君王当面一一追究。 
English: Guo Chong drove for Aigong, saw the two of them, came back and said to Aigong: These two have a lot of bad words, please ask the king to investigate them one by one in person.

古文：公宴于五梧。武伯为祝，恶郭重，曰： 何肥也！ 
现代文：哀公在五梧设宴，武伯祝酒，讨厌郭重，说： 你为什么那么肥胖？ 
English: Aigong held a banquet at Wu Wu. Wu Bo made a toast. He hated Guo Chong and said, "Why are you so fat?

古文：季孙曰： 请饮彘也。
现代文：季康子说： 请罚彘喝酒！
English: Ji Kangzi said, "Please give me a drink!

古文：以鲁国之密迩仇雠，臣是以不获从君，克免于大行，又谓重也肥。 
现代文：由于鲁国紧挨着仇敌，臣下因此不能跟随君王，才得免于远行，可是他又认为奔波辛苦的重长得肥胖。 
English: Since the kingdom of Lu was close to the enemy, the vassals could not follow the king, so they were spared the long journey, but he thought that the hard work of running was too fattening.

古文：公曰： 是食言多矣，能无肥乎？ 
现代文：哀公说： 这个人吃自己的话吃多了，能不肥胖吗？ 
English: Aiko said, "This man eats more than he says, can he not be fat?

古文：饮酒不乐，公与大夫始有恶。
现代文：大家虽然喝酒但都不高兴，哀公和大夫从此就互相有了厌恶感。
English: Although everyone was drinking, they were not happy. From then on, Aiko and the doctor had an aversion to each other.

