古文：毛公解《卫诗•淇奥》，分绿竹为二物，曰： 绿，王刍也。
现代文：西汉时鲁郡人毛公解释《诗经》卫风的《淇奥》时，把诗中的 绿竹 一词分为两种东西，他说：  绿 就是王刍， 竹 就是篇竹。 
English: When Mao Gong, a man from Shilu County in Western Han Dynasty, was explaining "Qiao" from "The Book of Songs," he divided the word "green bamboo" in the poem into two things. He said: "Green" is wang qi, and "bamboo" is zhen bambo.

古文：竹，萹竹也。 《韩诗》：竹字作，音徒沃反，亦以为萹筑。
现代文：《韩诗》中也说： 竹 字作 薄 ，音徒沃反，也以为是篇竹。
English: It is also said in the "Hangul Poetry" that the word "bamboo" means "thin" and "sound" means "reverse," which is also thought to be a bamboo.

古文：郭璞云： 王刍，今呼白脚莎，即泬蓐豆也。
现代文：东晋的文学家、训话学家郭璞解释说： 王刍现在叫 白脚莎 ，就是绿寿豆。
English: Guo Jun, a writer and scholar of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, explained: Wang Jun is now called Baifuxia, which means green bean.

古文：萹竹似小藜，赤茎节，好生道旁，可食。 
现代文：篇竹样子象小藜，红茎有节，喜欢生长在路边，可以食用。 
English: This bamboo looks like a small bamboo shoot. The red stem has knots. It likes to grow by the roadside and can be eaten.

古文：又云： 有草似竹，高五六尺，淇水侧人谓之菉竹。 
现代文：又说： 有一种草象竹子，高五六尺，淇水两岸的人称它为 绿竹 。 
English: He also said: There is a kind of grass like bamboo, five or six feet high, and people on both sides of the river call it green bamboo.

古文：案此诸说，皆北人不见竹之语耳。《汉书》： 下淇园之竹以为楗。 
现代文：认真研究上边约几种说法，都是北方没有见过竹的人的臆测。《汉书》上说： 砍下淇园的竹子作栏用。 
English: Carefully study the above several statements, they are all speculations of people who have not seen bamboo in the north. "Hanshu" said: Cut down the bamboo in the garden and use it as a column.

古文：寇恂为河内太守，伐淇园竹为矢百余万。
现代文：东汉初年的寇恂作河内太守时，曾砍伐淇园的竹子作了一百余万支箭。
English: In the early years of the Eastern Han Dynasty, when Emperor Goryeo was the ruler of Hanoi, he made more than a million arrows by cutting down the bamboo in the garden.

古文：《卫诗》又有 藋藋竹竿，以钓于淇 之句，所谓绿竹，岂不明甚，若白脚莎、泬豆，安得云猗猗青青哉？
现代文：《诗经》卫风的《竹竿》一诗有 长而尖的竹竿哟，可作鱼竿钓于淇水之上 的诗句，由此可见，所谓 绿竹 是一种生长在淇水边上的竹子是十分清楚的。
English: The poem "Bamboo Rod" of the "Shijing" Wei Feng has a long and sharp bamboo pole, which can be used as a fishing rod on the water. From this, it can be seen that the so-called "green bamboo" is a kind of bamboo growing on the edge of the water.

