古文：昔之得一者，天得一以清；地得一以宁；神得一以灵；谷得一以盈，万物得一以生；侯王得一以为天下正。
现代文：往昔曾得到过道的：天得到道而清明；地得到道而安宁稳定；神得到道而灵验有效；河谷得到道而充盈有生机；万物得到道而生长；君王诸侯得到道而成为天下的首领，使天下安定。
English: In the past, there were people who obtained the Way: heaven obtained the Way and became clear; earth obtained the Way and became peaceful and stable; gods obtained the Way and became effective; valleys obtained the Way and became full of vitality; all things obtained the Way and grew; kings and lords obtained the Way and became the leaders of the world, bringing stability to the world.

古文：其致之也，谓天无以清，将恐裂；地无以宁，将恐废；神无以灵，将恐歇；谷无以盈，将恐竭；万物无以生，将恐灭；侯王无以正，将恐蹶。
现代文：这就可以推论出其结论，道乃是天地万物运行的规律，如果天不遵循道以得清明，恐怕会崩裂；地不遵循道而不得安宁稳定，恐怕要塌陷；神不能遵循道而显灵，恐怕就要消失；河谷不能保持流水，恐怕要干涸；万物不能遵循规律保持生长，恐怕就会灭绝；君王诸侯不能遵循事物发展的规律使天下安定，政权恐怕就会被推翻。
English: This can be deduced to its conclusion that the Tao is the law of the operation of heaven and earth and all things. If heaven does not follow the Tao to obtain clarity, it will probably collapse; if the earth does not follow the Tao and is not peaceful and stable, it will probably collapse; if God cannot follow the Tao and reveal the spirit, it will probably disappear; if the valley cannot maintain flowing water, it will probably dry up; if all things cannot follow the law to maintain growth, it will probably become extinct; if kings and princes cannot follow the law of the development of things to stabilize the world, the regime will probably be overthrown.

古文：故贵以贱为本，高以下为基。
现代文：所以贵以贱为根本，高以低为基础。
English: Therefore, value is based on cheapness, and high is based on low.

古文：是以侯王自谓孤、寡、不穀。此非以贱为本邪？
现代文：因此王侯们自称为 孤 、 寡 、 不谷 ，这不就是以贱为根本吗？
English: That's why the princes call themselves the lonely, the widowed, and the destitute, isn't it, basing themselves on the humble?

古文：非乎？
现代文：难道不是这样吗？
English: Isn't that how it is?

古文：故至誉无誉。
现代文：所以最高的荣誉无须赞美称誉。
English: Therefore, the highest honor does not need to be praise.

古文：是故不欲琭琭如玉，珞珞如石。
现代文：所以有道的人君不应追求美玉般的尊贵华丽，而应像石头那样朴质坚忍、不张扬。
English: Therefore, a virtuous person should not pursue the preciousness and splendor of gems, but should be as simple and patient as a stone and not show off.

