古文：十三日，白赤丸如轮，平升玉盘之上，遥望日下，白气平铺天末，上有翠尖数点，则会仙诸峰也。
现代文：十三日一轮光芒四射的红日，缓缓升起在玉盘似的天幕上，遥望太阳底下，白色的云气平铺天际，云气上面耸出几个青翠的峰尖，那就是会仙等山峰。
English: On the 13th day, a round of radiant red sun slowly rises on the sky like a jade plate. Looking far and wide under the sun, white clouds spread across the sky, and several verdant peaks rise above the clouds, that is, peaks such as Huixian.

古文：仍从顶北下，十里，至空屋岐路处，遂不从东而从西下，里许而得混元观，则军峰之北下观也。
现代文：仍从军峰山顶北面下山，走十里，到有空屋子和路分岔的地方，便不从东边而从西边下去，一里左右到混元观，它就是军峰山北面的下观。
English: If you still go down the mountain from the north side of the top of the Junfeng Mountain, walk ten miles to the place where there is an empty house and a fork in the road, then go down not from the east but from the west, about one mile to the mixed view, it is the view below the north side of the Junfeng Mountain.

古文：其地已属抚之宜黄。
现代文：那里已经属于抚州府的宜黄县。
English: It already belongs to Yihuang County of Fuzhou Prefecture.

古文：循水北下，两山排闼，水泻其中，无甚悬突飞洄之态。
现代文：听说军峰山南面从车盘岭来的路上也有个下观。顺水流往北下去，两山对耸如门，水从中间倾泻出来，然而没有多少山石悬空突立和水流飘坠潇回的景象。
English: It is said that on the way from Chepokanling to the south of Junfeng Mountain, there is also a view from below. The water flows down to the north, the two mountains face each other like a door, and water pours out from the middle, but there are not many mountains and rocks protruding from the sky and the water flowing back and forth.

古文：又下五里，始至涧底，此军峰直北之水也。
现代文：又往下走五里，才到达山涧底，这是军峰山正北面的水流。
English: It took another five miles to reach the bottom of the ridge, which is the water flow directly north of Junfeng Mountain.

古文：既下山，境始开。又山一层横列于外，则鱼牙山也。
现代文：下了山，地势才开阔，远处又横列着一层山岭，那是鱼牙山。
English: After descending the mountain, the terrain opens up, and in the distance there is another layer of mountains, which is Yuya Mountain.

古文：又有一水自西南来，此军峰西壑之水，至此与北涧会。
现代文：又有一条水从西南面流来，这是军峰山西南山谷中流来的，到这里便和北面流下来的山涧水汇合。
English: There is another stream of water coming from the southwest, which flows from the southwest valley of the Junfeng Mountain. At this point, it merges with the mountain torrent water flowing down from the north.

古文：循水东北又五里，过袈裟石。
现代文：顺水流往东北又走五里，经过架装石。
English: Follow the stream to the northeast for another five miles, past the scaffolding.

古文：绾两涧之口，水出其间，百家之聚在其外，曰墟上。
现代文：它盘结在两条山涧水交汇的水口处，水从石头中间流出，有一个百来户人家的村子坐落在它外侧，叫墟上。
English: It is coiled at the mouth of the confluence of two mountain streams, water flows out from the middle of the stone, and a village of a hundred households is located on the outside of it, called the market.

古文：又有一水亦自西南来会，则鱼牙山之水也，与大溪合而北，西转下宜黄，为宜黄之源云。
现代文：又有一条水也从西南边流来汇合，那是鱼牙山的水，它与大溪汇合后往北流，然后折往西流下宜黄县，为宜黄水的上凉。
English: There is another water that also flows from the southwest to the confluence, that is, the water of Yuya Mountain. After it merges with the big stream, it flows northward, and then flows westward down Yiguang County, which is the upper cool of Yiguang Water.

古文：自墟上东北岐，路溯一小溪，十里至东源。
现代文：从墟上岔向东北，溯一条小溪而行，十里到东源。
English: From Huizhou, head northeast and follow a small stream for ten miles to Dongyuan.

古文：东向上岭，三里而登其上，曰板岭。
现代文：往东爬上山岭，三里登上岭头，那岭叫板岭。
English: Climb the ridge to the east and climb three miles to the top of the ridge. That ridge is called Banling.

古文：其水西流入宜，东南流入丰，东北流亦入宜，盖军峰北下之脊也。
现代文：板岭的水西面的流入宜黄县，东南面的流入南丰县，东北面的也流入宜黄县，大概它是军峰山往北延伸下来的山岭的岭脊。
English: The water from the west side of the plateau flows into Yihuang County, the southeastern side flows into Nanfeng County, and the northeastern side also flows into Yihuang County. It is probably the ridge of the mountain range extending northward from Junfeng Mountain.

古文：越岭而东，一里，复得坪焉。
现代文：越过板岭往东一里，又见到一块平地。
English: After crossing the plateau and going one mile to the east, I saw another flat land.

古文：山溪潆洄，数家倚之，曰章岭。
现代文：山澳绕流在平地周围，有几户人家居住在其间，地名叫章岭。
English: Shan'ao River flows around the plain, and several families live there. The place is called Zhangling.

古文：竟坞一里，水东出峡间，下坠深坑，有路随之，想走南丰道也。
现代文：从平坦的山坞中直走一里，水往东面流出山峡，向下坠入深谷中，有路沿水流而去，我想那是到南丰县的路。
English: After walking a mile straight from the flat dock, the water flowed out of the mountain gorge to the east and fell down into the deep valley. There was a road along the water flow, I think it was the road to Nanfeng County.

古文：其水东南去，必出南丰，则章岭一隙其为南丰属明矣。
现代文：那条水往东南流去，一定是流到南丰县，那么章岭这块狭长平地属于南丰县是很明显的了。
English: That water flowed to the southeast, it must have flowed to Nanfeng County, so it is obvious that this long and narrow flat land in Zhangling belongs to Nanfeng County.

古文：水口坠坑处，北有一径亦渐下北坑，则走下村道矣。
现代文：水流坠入谷中的水口的北面，有条山路也是渐渐下到北面的山谷中，那就是去下村的道路了。
English: To the north of the mouth where the water falls into the valley, there is a mountain road that gradually descends into the valley to the north, which is the road to the lower village.

古文：亦渐有溪北自下村出七里坑，达枫林而下宜黄，则下村以北又俱宜黄之属。
现代文：同样渐渐有溪流从北面的下村流出七里坑，再流到枫林而后流下宜黄，这样下村以北又都是宜黄县的辖地。
English: Similarly, a stream gradually flowed out of Shichirikeng from the lower village in the north, then flowed to Maple Forest and then flowed down to Yiwu, so that north of the lower village was the jurisdiction of Yiwu County.

古文：是水口北行一径，即板岭东度之脊也，但其脊甚平而狭，过时不觉耳。
现代文：这条从水口往北走的路，就是板岭往东边越过来的岭脊，只不过它很平坦而狭窄，经过时不觉得罢了。
English: This road from the water's mouth to the north is the ridge of the Banling Pass to the east, but it is very flat and narrow, so you don't feel it when you pass.

古文：下脊，北五里，至下村。
现代文：下了岭脊，往北走五里，到下村。
English: After descending the ridge, walk five miles north to Shimo-mura.

古文：又北二里，水入山夹中，两山逼束形容两山相距很近，挤紧收敛，使中间非常狭窄甚隘，而长水倾底，路潆盘绕山半，山有凹凸，路亦随之，名曰十八排，即七里坑也。
现代文：又往北走二里，水流入山峡中，两山紧夹，中间很狭窄，而长带似的水流斜贯向峡底，道路盘绕在山半腰，山时而凹陷时而凸起，路也随山势延伸，地名叫十八排，即七里坑。
English: Another two miles to the north, the water flows into the canyon, the two mountains are tightly clamped, the middle is very narrow, and the long ribbon-like water flow runs diagonally to the bottom of the canyon, the road is coiled around the middle of the mountain, the mountain is sometimes concave and sometimes convex, and the road also extends with the mountain, the place is called eighteen rows, that is, seven miles pit.

古文：已而下坑渡涧，复得平坞，始有人居，已明月在中流矣。
现代文：不久下到谷中渡过山沟水，又见到一个平坦的山坞，这才有人家居住，旋即，明月倒映在流水中了。
English: Not long after, I went down to the middle of the valley, crossed the ravine, and saw a flat dock, which was inhabited. Suddenly, the bright moon was reflected in the flowing water.

古文：又北二里，水复破峡而出。
现代文：又往北二里，水流又破峡而出。
English: Another two miles to the north, the water flowed out of the gorge.

古文：又一里，出峡，是为枫林内村。
现代文：又走一里，出了山峡，这里是枫林内村。
English: Walk another mile and you will come out of the gorge. This is Fenglin village.

古文：又一里，山开水转，而西度小桥，是为枫林，一名陈坊。
现代文：又走一里，山峦分开，水流曲绕，往西经过一座小桥，就是枫林，于是便投宿在村中。
English: After another mile, the mountains parted and the water meandered west, passing over a small bridge, which was the maple forest, so they stayed in the village.

古文：乃宿。十四日，平明饭，行，即从小桥循小溪北上。
现代文：十四日天大亮时吃饭，出发后，就从小桥处沿着小溪北上。
English: We had dinner at dawn on the 14th. After setting out, we walked north from the small bridge along the creek.

古文：盖枫林大溪西下宜黄，而小溪则北自南源分水而来者也。
现代文：大概枫林的大溪向西流下宜黄，而小溪却是从北面的南源分流来的。
English: The large stream of the maple forest probably flows westward to Yiguang, while the small stream is diverted from the southern source in the north.

古文：溯北上五里，入南湾坳，上分水岭，南为宜黄，北为南城，西南境逾岭为南源。
现代文：溯溪往北走五里，进入南湾坳，登上分水岭，岭南面为宜黄县，岭北面为南城县，西南方翻过一座山岭为南源。
English: Follow the creek for five miles to the north, enter the South Bay estuary, and ascend the watershed. The south side of the ridge is Yihang County, the north side of the ridge is Nancheng County, and the southwest overturns a mountain ridge is Nanyuan.

古文：五里至八角庄，为洪氏山庄。
现代文：走五里到八角庄，有条水往东面流下，我们没有顺水走。
English: After walking five miles to Octagon Village, there was a stream of water flowing down to the east. We did not follow the stream.

古文：有水东下，舍之。北上黄沙岭，二里逾岭，下巾儿漈，水亦东下，又舍之。
现代文：往北上了黄沙岭，二里后翻过岭，下到巾儿涤，那里的水也是往东流下，我们仍没有顺水走。
English: We went north to the Yellow Sand Ridge, and after two miles, we crossed the ridge and went down to a narrow strip of land, where the water also flowed eastward. We still did not follow the water.

古文：北溯一小水，三里，上栏寨门，平行岭上，为李家岭。
现代文：往北溯一条小水，行三里，登上栏寨门，然后从岭上平平地向前走，那岭为李家岭。
English: Go north along a small stream for three miles, climb onto the palisade gate, and then walk flatly forward from the ridge, which is Lijia Ridge.

古文：又一里，始下，下一里，则磁龟在焉。
现代文：又走一里，才往下，下行一里，到磁龟。
English: Walk another mile, and then go down, down a mile, to the magnetic turtle.

古文：磁龟者，罗圭峰玘所居也，在南城西南九十里，据李文正《东阳记》，北阻芙蓉，西阨连珠峰，南望军峰，东则灵峰迤逦，有石在溪桥之下，而不甚肖；其溪亦不甚大；自西而东，夹溪而宅，甚富，皆罗氏也。
现代文：磁龟是罗纪曾经居住过的地方，在南城县城西南九十里，据李文正《东阳记》的记载，此地北面被芙蓉峰阻隔，西面被连珠峰障塞，向南望是军峰山，东面则是曲折连绵的灵峰。有块石头在溪流的桥下边，但不很象龟；那溪也不很大；自西向东，溪两岸房屋相连，家家都很富裕，居民都姓罗。
English: Magnetic Turtle is the place where Luo Ji once lived, ninety miles southwest of Nancheng County. According to Li Wenzheng's "Dongyang Ji," the north side of this place is blocked by Hulong Peak, the west side is blocked by Mount Everest, looking south is Junfeng Mountain, and the east side is the meandering and continuous Lingfeng. There is a stone under the bridge of the stream, but it does not look like a turtle; the stream is not very big; from west to east, the houses on both sides of the stream are connected, the families are very rich, and the residents are surnamed Luo.

古文：问有花园坑，景亦没，无可观。
现代文：打听到有个花园坑，景物也已埋废，没有可观赏的。
English: I heard that there was a garden pit, and the scenery had been buried, and there was nothing to see.

古文：遂东北逾岭而下，溪自东南下坑中，路不能从也。
现代文：于是往东北越岭而下，溪流从东南流下深谷中，路不能顺溪走。
English: As a result, we went down to the northeast over the ridge, and the stream flowed down from the southeast into the deep valley. The road could not follow the stream.

古文：东下三里，山峡少开。
现代文：往东下去三里，山峡稍微变得开阔些。
English: Three miles to the east, the gorge widens slightly.

古文：又循一水，有桥跨之，曰云阳桥，水亦东南下，又舍之。
现代文：又顺着一条水而行，水流上有座桥横架着，叫云阳桥，桥以下水也流下东南方，我们又没有顺水走。
English: We also followed a stream of water. There was a bridge across the stream, called Yunyang Bridge. The water below the bridge also flowed down to the southeast, so we did not follow the stream.

古文：东逾一岭，又二里，曰乘龙坳，水亦南下。
现代文：往东越过一座山岭，又走二里，叫乘龙坳，水流也是流下南面去。
English: He crossed a mountain range to the east, walked another two miles, and called for a dragon raft. The water also flowed down to the south.

古文：复东上二里，曰鹅腰岭。
现代文：又往东朝上走二里，叫鹅腰岭。
English: Another two-mile walk to the east is called Gexiangling.

古文：平行岭上又二里，而下一里，曰鉏，其水始东行。
现代文：从岭上平平地又走二里，而后下行一里，叫钮源，此处水才往东流。
English: From the ridge, walk another two miles on level ground, and then one mile downhill, called Niuyuan, where the water flows eastward.

古文：始至磁龟，以为平地，至此历级而降，共十里而至歪排，皆循东下，始知磁龟犹在众山之心，众山之顶也。
现代文：刚到磁龟时，以为那里是平地，到此处逐级向下走，共十里到歪排，而且都是沿东面下行，这才知道磁龟仍然在众山环拱之中，仍然在众山顶上。
English: When I first arrived at the Magnetic Turtle, I thought it was flat land, but when I got here, I walked down step by step, a total of ten miles to the skew row, and all of them went down along the east side. Only then did I know that the Magnetic Turtle was still in the mountains, still on the top of the mountains.

古文：歪排以上多坠峡奔崖之流，但为居民造粗纸，濯水如滓因水被污染而混浊肮脏，失飞练悬殊之胜。
现代文：歪排以上有不少倾坠于峡谷中、奔泻在崖壁上的水流，只是因为附近居民造粗纸，水被污染得污黑脏秽，失去了飞练悬珠的优美景象。
English: Above the skewed row, there are many streams of water falling into the canyon and rushing on the cliff wall, but because the nearby residents make coarse paper, the water is polluted and dirty, and the beautiful sight of flying beads is lost.

古文：然鉏小水已如此，不知滋龟以东诸东南注壑者，其必有垂虹界瀑之奇，恨路不能从何。
现代文：钮源来的小水流已是这样，却不知磁龟以东往东南流注沟谷中的那些水流情形如何，我想一定有彩虹垂挂、飞瀑相间倾泻那样的奇景，遗憾的是不能沿着这些水流走。
English: The small water flow from the source is already like this, but I don't know what the water flow situation is in the valley where the magnetic turtle flows from east to southeast. I think there must be a rainbow hanging, and a wonderland like falling waterfalls. Unfortunately, I can't walk along these water flows.

古文：出歪排，其南山坞始开，水亦南去。
现代文：出了歪排，它南面的山坞才开阔起来，水也往南流去。
English: There was a crooked row, the dock on the south side of it only opened up, and the water also flowed south.

古文：又东逾黄土岭，共三里，则下岐东行平畴中。
现代文：又往东翻越黄土岭，共走三里，下到岔路中，往东从平坦的田野中走。
English: I climbed eastward over the Loess Ridge, walking a total of three miles, descending to the middle of Kushiro Road, and walking eastward through flat fields.

古文：五里，一溪自西北东去，有桥架其上，曰游真观前桥。
现代文：五里，一条溪水从西晒往东去，有座桥架在溪水上，叫游真观前桥。
English: For five miles, a stream flows from the west to the east. There is a bridge over the stream, called Yu Zhenguan Qianqiao.

古文：又东五里，则盱江自东南而北。
现代文：又往东五里，吁江从东南流往北去。
English: Another five miles to the east, the Hujiang River flows from the southeast to the north.

古文：是时日才下午，不得舟，宿于溪西之路东，其溪之东即新丰大市也。
现代文：这时才下午，没有找到船只，于是投宿在溪水西岸的路东村，溪水的东岸就是新丰大市。
English: At this time, it was only afternoon, and no boat could be found, so they stayed in Loudong Village on the west bank of the stream. The east bank of the stream is Xinfengdaishi.

古文：十五日，路东不得舟，遂仍从陆。
现代文：十五日在路东没有找到船，于是仍从陆路走。
English: On the fifteenth day, they did not find the boat on the east side of the road, so they still went by land.

古文：右江左山，于是纯北行矣。六里，为大安桥。
现代文：右面是江左面是山，从这里起尽是直向北走。行六里，为大安桥。
English: On the right is the river, on the left is the mountain. From here, walk straight north for six miles to Daan Bridge.

古文：又三十里，则从姑在望，入郡南门矣。
现代文：又行十三里，已经可以望见从姑山，随后进了建昌府南门。
English: After another thirteen miles, it was already visible from Gushan, and then entered the south gate of Jianchang Prefecture.

古文：十六日，过东门大桥，即从桥端南下。
现代文：十六日跨过东门大桥，就从桥端南下。
English: On the 16th, I crossed the East Gate Bridge and walked south from the end of the bridge.

古文：随沙岸，丛竹夹道，乔松拂云，江流雉堞右映，深树密篝左护，是曰中洲。
现代文：沿着沙岸走，丛密的竹子夹在路侧，高大的松树拂掠着云彩，城墙上排列如齿的矮墙倒映在右边江流中，左面有深树密著拦护，这是中洲。
English: Walking along the sandy shore, dense bamboo clinging to the side of the road, tall pine trees brushing the clouds, low walls lined up like teeth on the city wall reflected in the river on the right, and deep trees closely guarding on the left, this is Zhongzhou.

古文：有道观，今改为佛宇。
现代文：原来有座道观，如今改为佛寺。
English: Originally a Taoist temple, it has now been converted into a Buddhist temple.

古文：前二石将军古甚，刘文恭铉为之记，因程南云盱人，与刘同在翰苑故也。
现代文：寺前的两尊石将军像很古老，刘兹为它们作了记，这是因为程南云是建昌府人，与刘兹共同在翰林院供职。
English: The two statues of stone generals in front of the temple are very old, and Liu Zi made a record for them. This is because Cheng Nanyun is from Jianchang Prefecture and worked with Liu Zi at the Hanlin Academy.

古文：是日再醉于夏调御处。
现代文：这天再次在夏调御处喝醉酒。
English: On this day, I got drunk again in the summer palace.

古文：十七日，静闻随二担从麻源大路先往宜黄，余作钱、陈、刘诸书。
现代文：十七日静闻随同两个担夫从麻源大路先往宜黄县，我给钱、陈、刘等写信。
English: On the seventeenth day, Jingwen accompanied by two porters from Ma Yuan Road to Yihang County. I wrote to Qian, Chen, Liu and others.

古文：是晚榻于调御斋中。
现代文：这晚住宿在夏调御的书房中。
English: This night's accommodation is in the summer palace's study.

