古文：丞相公孙弘者，齐菑川国薛县人也，字季。
现代文：丞相公孙弘是齐地菑川国薛县的人，表字叫季。
English: The prime minister, Sun Hong, was from Xue County, Qichuan Province, and his name was Ji.

古文：少时为薛狱吏，有罪，免。
现代文：他年轻时当过薛县的监狱官员，因罪被免官。
English: When he was young, he worked as a prison officer in Xue County and was dismissed for his crime.

古文：家贫，牧豕海上。
现代文：他家里穷，只得到海边去放猪。
English: His family is poor, and the only thing they can afford is to go to the seaside to herd pigs.

古文：年四十馀，乃学春秋杂说。
现代文：直到四十多岁时，才学习《春秋》及各家解释《春秋》的著作。
English: It was not until he was in his forties that he began to study "Spring and Autumn" and the works that explain "Spring and Autumn."

古文：养後母孝谨。
现代文：他奉养后母孝顺而谨慎。
English: He raised his stepmother to be dutiful and prudent.

古文：建元元年，天子初即位，招贤良文学之士。
现代文：武帝建元元年，天子刚即位，就招选贤良文学之士。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, just after Emperor Tianzi ascended the throne, he invited scholars of literature.

古文：是时弘年六十，徵以贤良为博士。
现代文：这时，公孙弘已经六十岁，以贤良的身份被征召入京，当了博士。
English: At this time, Gongsun Hong was already sixty years old, and he was conscripted to Beijing as a virtuous person and became a doctor.

古文：使匈奴，还报，不合上意，上怒，以为不能，弘乃病免归。
现代文：他奉命出使匈奴，回来后向武帝报告情况，不合皇上的心意，皇上发怒，认为公孙弘无能，公孙弘就借有病为名，免官归家。
English: He was ordered to send an envoy to the Xiongnu, and upon his return he reported the situation to Emperor Wu. This did not meet the Emperor's wishes, and the Emperor became angry, believing that Gongsun Hong was incompetent. Gongsun Hong was relieved of his duties and returned home under the pretext that he was ill.

古文：元光五年，有诏徵文学，菑川国复推上公孙弘。
现代文：武帝元光五年，皇帝下诏书，征召文学，菑川国又推荐公孙弘。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Wu's reign, the emperor issued an edict calling for literature, and Gongsun Hong was recommended by the State of Lu.

古文：弘让谢国人曰： 臣已尝西应命，以不能罢归，原更推选。 
现代文：公孙弘向国人推让拒绝说： 我已经西去京城接受皇帝的任命，因为无能而罢官归来。希望改变推举的人选。 
English: "I have gone to the capital to accept the emperor's appointment, but I have been dismissed because of my incompetence. I hope to change the person who is elected," he said.

古文：国人固推弘，弘至太常。
现代文：国人却坚决推举公孙弘，公孙弘就到了太常那里。
English: However, the Chinese people resolutely voted for Gongsunhiro, and Gongsunhiro ended up in Taizhong.

古文：太常令所徵儒士各对策，百馀人，弘第居下。
现代文：太常让所征召的一百多个儒士分别对策，公孙弘的对策文章，按等次被排在最后边。
English: Too often, the more than one hundred Confucianists who were called up were assigned countermeasures, and Gongsun Hong's countermeasure article was ranked last in equal order.

古文：策奏，天子擢弘对为第一。
现代文：全部对策文章被送到皇帝那里，武帝把公孙弘的对策文章提拔为第一。
English: All the countermeasure articles were sent to the emperor, and Emperor Wu promoted Gongsunhong's countermeasure article to the first.

古文：召入见，状貌甚丽，拜为博士。
现代文：公孙弘被召去进见皇帝，武帝见他相貌非常漂亮，封他为博士。
English: Gongsunhong was summoned to see the emperor, and Emperor Wu saw that he was very handsome and made him a doctor.

古文：是时通西南夷道，置郡，巴蜀民苦之，诏使弘视之。
现代文：这时，汉朝开通西南夷的道路，在那里设置郡县，巴蜀人民对此感到困苦，皇帝命公孙弘前去视察。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty opened the road of Southwest Yiwu and set up counties there. The people of Bashu felt distressed about this, and the emperor ordered Sun Hongzhu to go and inspect.

古文：还奏事，盛毁西南夷无所用，上不听。
现代文：公孙弘视察归来，向皇帝报告，极力诋毁西南夷没有用处，皇上没采纳他的意见。
English: When Gongsun Hong returned from his inspection, he reported to the emperor that it was useless to denigrate the Xuanxi Yi, and the emperor did not accept his opinion.

古文：弘为人恢奇多闻，常称以为人主病不广大，人臣病不俭节。
现代文：公孙弘为人雄伟奇异，见闻广博，经常说人主的毛病在于心胸不广大，人臣的毛病在于不节俭。
English: Gongsun Hong was a great and wonderful man who was well-known. He often said that the fault of the master was not having a broad mind, and the fault of the vassal was not being frugal.

古文：弘为布被，食不重肉。
现代文：公孙弘盖布被，吃饭时不吃两种以上的肉菜。
English: Gongsun Hongge cloth quilt, do not eat more than two kinds of meat and vegetables when eating.

古文：後母死，服丧三年。
现代文：后母去世，他守丧三年。
English: When his stepmother died, he mourned her for three years.

古文：每朝会议，开陈其端，令人主自择，不肯面折庭争。
现代文：他每次上朝同大家议论政事，总是先开头陈述种种事情，让皇上自己去选择决定，不肯当面驳斥和在朝廷上争论。
English: Every time he went to the court to discuss political affairs with everyone, he always began by stating various things, letting the emperor choose and decide for himself, refusing to refute in person and argue in the court.

古文：於是天子察其行敦厚，辩论有馀，习文法吏事，而又缘饰以儒术，上大说之。
现代文：于是皇上观察他，发现他的品行忠厚，善于言谈，熟悉文书法令和官场事务，而且还能用儒学观点加以文饰，皇上非常喜欢他。
English: Therefore, the emperor observed him and found that he had a loyal character, was good at talking, was familiar with documents, laws, and government affairs, and could also decorate with Confucianism. The emperor liked him very much.

古文：二岁中，至左内史。
现代文：在两年之内，他便官至左内史。
English: Within two years, he had risen to the rank of internal affairs officer.

古文：弘奏事，有不可，不庭辩之。
现代文：公孙弘向皇帝奏明事情，有时不被采纳，也不在朝廷上争辩。
English: Gongsun Hong reported the matter to the emperor, but sometimes it was not accepted, and he did not argue in the court.

古文：尝与主爵都尉汲黯请间，汲黯先发之，弘推其後，天子常说，所言皆听，以此日益亲贵。
现代文：他曾经和主爵尉汲黯请求皇上在闲暇时间接见，汲黯先向皇上提出问题，公孙弘则随后把问题阐述得清清楚楚，皇上常常很高兴。
English: He once requested an audience with the Emperor in his spare time, together with Lord Lieutenant Kyubei. Kyubei first asked the Emperor a question, and then Gongsun Hiroshi explained the question clearly. The Emperor was often pleased.

古文：尝与公卿约议，至上前，皆倍其约以顺上旨。
现代文：他所说的事情都被采纳，从此，公孙弘一天比一天受到皇帝的亲近，地位显贵起来。
English: Everything he said was accepted, and from then on, Gongsun Hong became closer to the emperor day by day, and his status became more prominent.

古文：汲黯庭诘弘曰： 齐人多诈而无情实，始与臣等建此议，今皆倍之，不忠。 
现代文：他曾经与公卿们事先约定好了要向皇帝谈论的问题，但到了皇上面前，他却违背约定，而顺从皇上的意旨。汲黯在朝廷上责备公孙弘说： 齐地之人多半都欺诈而无真情，他开始时同我们一起提出这个建议，现在全都违背了，不忠诚。 
English: He had previously agreed with the nobles to discuss the issue with the emperor, but when he came before the emperor, he reneged on the agreement and obeyed the emperor's will. At the imperial court, he reproached Gongsun Hong and said: Most people in Qi are fraudulent and have no true feelings. He initially proposed this proposal with us, but now he has violated everything and is not loyal.

古文：上问弘。弘谢曰： 夫知臣者以臣为忠，不知臣者以臣为不忠。 
现代文：皇上问公孙弘，公孙弘谢罪说： 了解我的人认为我忠诚，不了解我的人认为我不忠诚。 
English: The emperor asked Gongsunhong, Gongsunhongxie said: Those who know me think I am loyal, those who do not know me think I am not loyal.

古文：上然弘言。
现代文：皇上赞同公孙弘的说法。
English: The Emperor agreed with Gongsunhiro's statement.

古文：左右幸臣每毁弘，上益厚遇之。
现代文：皇上身边的受宠之臣每每诋毁公孙弘，但皇上却越发厚待公孙弘。
English: The favored vassals around the emperor constantly slandered Sun Hong, but the emperor treated Sun Hong more and more generously.

古文：元朔三年，张欧免，以弘为御史大夫。
现代文：武帝元朔三年，张欧被免官，皇上用公孙弘当御史大夫。
English: In the third year of Emperor Wu's reign, Zhang Ou was dismissed from his post, and the emperor appointed Gongsun Hong as the imperial historian.

古文：是时通西南夷，东置沧海，北筑朔方之郡。
现代文：这时，汉朝正在开通西南夷，东边设置沧海郡，北边修建朔方郡城。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty was opening up Southwest Yiwu, setting up Canghai County in the east, and building Shuofang County Town in the north.

古文：弘数谏，以为罢敝中国以奉无用之地，原罢之。
现代文：公孙弘屡次劝谏皇上，认为这些做法是使中国疲惫不堪而去经营无用的地方，希望停做这些事情。
English: Gongsun Hong repeatedly advised Emperor Zou that these practices were making China tired and running a useless place, and hoped to stop doing these things.

古文：於是天子乃使硃买臣等难弘置朔方之便。
现代文：于是，武帝就让朱买臣等以设置朔方郡的有利情况来诘难公孙弘。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu allowed Zhu Baichen and others to set up a favorable situation in Shuofang County to make trouble for Sun Hong.

古文：发十策，弘不得一。
现代文：朱买臣等提出十个问题，公孙弘一个也答不上来。
English: Zhu Baichen and others raised ten questions, and Gongsun Hong couldn't answer a single one.

古文：弘乃谢曰： 山东鄙人，不知其便若是，原罢西南夷、沧海而专奉朔方。 
现代文：公孙弘便道歉说： 我是山东的鄙陋之人，不知筑朔郡有这些好处，希望停做通西南夷和置沧海郡的事，集中力量经营朔方郡城。 
English: Gongsun Hong then apologized and said, "I am a despicable person from Shandong. I did not know that there are these benefits in Zhukou County. I hope to stop doing things in Xianyangyi County and Canghai County, and concentrate on running Zhukou County.

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：皇上就答应了。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：汲黯曰： 弘位在三公，奉禄甚多。然为布被，此诈也。 
现代文：汲黯说： 公孙弘处于三公的地位，俸禄很多，但却盖布被，这是欺诈。 
English: Ji Ying said: Gongsun Hong is in the position of the three princes, the salary is a lot, but it is covered with a cloth, which is a fraud.

古文：上问弘。弘谢曰： 有之。
现代文：皇上问公孙弘，公孙弘谢罪说： 有这样的事。
English: The emperor asked Gongsun Hong, Gongsun Hong Xie Sin said: There is such a thing.

古文：夫九卿与臣善者无过黯，然今日庭诘弘，诚中弘之病。
现代文：九卿中与我好的人没有超过汲黯的了，但他今天在朝廷上诘难我，确实说中了我的毛病。
English: Among the nine nobles, there is no one who is more friendly to me than Kyubei, but he did pick a fight with me at court today, and he really hit the nail on the head.

古文：夫以三公为布被，诚饰诈欲以钓名。
现代文：我有三公的高贵地位却盖布被，确实是巧行欺诈，妄图钓取美名。
English: I have the noble status of the Three Kingdoms, but I am covered with a cloth. It is indeed a skillful deception, in a vain attempt to gain a good name.

古文：且臣闻管仲相齐，有三归，侈拟於君，桓公以霸，亦上僭於君。
现代文：况且我听说管仲当齐国的相，有三处住宅，其奢侈可与齐王相比，齐桓公依靠管仲称霸，也是对在上位的国君的越礼行为。
English: Moreover, I heard that when Guan Zhong was the ruler of Qi, he had three residences, the luxury of which could be compared to that of King Qi. Qi Huan relied on Guan Zhong for his supremacy, which was also an act of disrespect to the higher-ranking sovereigns.

古文：晏婴相景公，食不重肉，妾不衣丝，齐国亦治，此下比於民。
现代文：晏婴为齐景公的相，吃饭时不吃两样以上的肉菜，他的妾不穿丝织衣服，齐国治理得很好，这是晏婴向下面的百姓看齐。
English: He did not eat more than two kinds of meat and vegetables at meals, and his concubine did not wear silk clothes. The country of Qi was well governed. This was because he looked up to the people below.

古文：今臣弘位为御史大夫，而为布被，自九卿以下至於小吏，无差，诚如汲黯言。
现代文：如今我当了御史大夫，却盖布被，这是从九卿以下直到小官吏没有了贵贱的差别，真像汲黯所说的那样。
English: Now that I'm an Imperial Historian, I'm covered in cloth, which means that there is no distinction between the high and low, from the ninth lord down to minor officials, just as Kyubei said.

古文：且无汲黯忠，陛下安得闻此言。 
现代文：况且没有汲黯的忠诚，陛下怎能听到这些话呢！ 
English: Besides, how can His Majesty listen to these words if he does not have deep loyalty?

古文：天子以为谦让，愈益厚之。卒以弘为丞相，封平津侯。
现代文：武帝认为公孙弘谦让有礼，越发厚待他，终于让公孙弘当了丞相，封为平津侯。
English: Emperor Wu thought that Gongsun Hongqian was courteous and treated him more and more generously, and finally made Gongsun Hongqian the prime minister and made him the prince of Pingjin.

古文：弘为人意忌，外宽内深。
现代文：公孙弘为人猜疑忌恨，外表宽宏大量，内心城府很深。
English: Gongsun Hong is a man of suspicion and hatred, with a large amount of magnanimity on the outside and a deep inner city.

古文：诸尝与弘有卻者，虽详与善，阴报其祸。
现代文：那些曾经同公孙弘有仇怨的人，公孙弘虽然表面与他们相处很好，但暗中却加祸于人予以报复。
English: Those who once had a grudge against Gongsun Hong, although Gongsun Hong got along well with them on the surface, he secretly took revenge on them.

古文：杀主父偃，徙董仲舒於胶西，皆弘之力也。
现代文：杀死主父偃，把董仲舒改派到胶西国当相，都是公孙弘的主意。
English: It was all Gongsunhiro's idea to kill his master, Zhai, and to send Dong Zhongshu to Jiaoxi to become the prime minister.

古文：食一肉脱粟之饭。故人所善宾客，仰衣食，弘奉禄皆以给之，家无所馀。
现代文：他每顿饭只吃一个肉菜和脱壳的粗米饭，老朋友和他喜欢的门客，都靠他供给衣食，公孙弘的俸禄都用来供给他们，家中没有余财。
English: He only eats one meat dish and shelled coarse rice at each meal. His old friends and his favorite customers all rely on him to provide food and clothing. Gongsun Hong's salary is used to provide for them. There is no spare money in the family.

古文：士亦以此贤之。
现代文：士人都因为这个缘故认为他贤明。
English: For this reason, he was considered wise by the nobles.

古文：淮南、衡山谋反，治党与方急。弘病甚，自以为无功而封，位至丞相，宜佐明主填抚国家，使人由臣子之道。
现代文：淮南王和衡山王谋反，朝廷追究党羽正紧急的时候，公孙弘病得很厉害，他自己认为没有什么功劳而被封侯，官位升到丞相，应当辅助贤明的君王安抚国家，使人人都遵循当臣子的道理。
English: When King Huainan and King Hengshan were plotting a rebellion and the imperial court was urgently investigating the party, Gongsun Hong was very ill. He thought that he had no merit and was given the title of prince. He was promoted to the position of prime minister. He should help the wise king to pacify the country and make everyone follow the principle of being a courtier.

古文：今诸侯有畔逆之计，此皆宰相奉职不称，恐窃病死，无以塞责。
现代文：如今诸侯有反叛朝廷的阴谋，这都是宰相工作不称职的结果，害怕一旦默默病死，没有办法搪塞责任。
English: Now the princes are plotting to rebel against the imperial court. This is all the result of the prime minister's incompetent work. They are afraid that if they die of illness quietly, they will not be able to evade their responsibilities.

古文：乃上书曰： 臣闻天下之通道五，所以行之者三。
现代文：于是，他向皇帝上书说： 我听说天下的常道有五种，用来实行这五种常道的有三种美德。
English: So he wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: I have heard that there are five ways of life in the world, and that there are three virtues to be used to practice these five ways of life.

古文：曰君臣，父子，兄弟，夫妇，长幼之序，此五者天下之通道也。
现代文：君臣、父子、兄弟、夫妇和长幼的次序，这五方面是天下的常道。
English: The order of kings and ministers, father and son, brothers and sisters, husband and wife, and elder and younger, these five aspects are the common way of the world.

古文：智，仁，勇，此三者天下之通德，所以行之者也。
现代文：智慧、仁爱和勇敢，这三方面是天下的常德，是用来实行常道的。
English: Wisdom, benevolence and bravery, these three aspects are the world's common virtues, and are used to implement the common way.

古文：故曰 力行近乎仁，好问近乎智，知耻近乎勇 。
现代文：所以孔子说： 努力实践接近于仁，喜欢询问接近于智，知道羞耻接近于勇。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said, "Practicing hard is close to benevolence, liking to inquire is close to wisdom, and knowing shame is close to courage."

古文：知此三者，则知所以自治；知所以自治，然後知所以治人。
现代文：知道这三种情况，就知道怎样自我修养了。知道怎样自我修养，然后知道怎样治理别人。
English: If you know these three things, you will know how to cultivate yourself. If you know how to cultivate yourself, then you will know how to govern others.

古文：天下未有不能自治而能治人者也，此百世不易之道也。
现代文：天下没有不能自我修养却能去治理别人的，这是百代不变的道理。
English: There is no country in the world that cannot cultivate itself but can govern others. This is a principle that has remained unchanged for hundreds of generations.

古文：今陛下躬行大孝，鉴三王，建周道，兼文武，厉贤予禄，量能授官。
现代文：现在陛下亲行大孝，以三王为借鉴，建立起像周代那样的治国之道，兼备文王和武王的才德，鼓励贤才，给予俸禄，根据才能授予官职。
English: Now, His Majesty is personally practicing great filial piety, using the three kings as a reference, establishing a way of governing the country like that of the Zhou dynasty, combining the talents of King Wen and King Wu, encouraging talents, giving salaries, and awarding official positions according to talents.

古文：今臣弘罢驽之质，无汗马之劳，陛下过意擢臣弘卒伍之中，封为列侯，致位三公。
现代文：如今我的才质低劣，没有汗马之劳，陛下特意把我从行伍之间提拔起来，封为列侯，把我置于三公的地位。
English: Now that my talent is inferior and I do not have to work hard, His Majesty specially promoted me from the ranks, made me a vassal, and placed me in the position of the three princes.

古文：臣弘行能不足以称，素有负薪之病，恐先狗马填沟壑，终无以报德塞责。
现代文：我的品行才能不能同这高高的官位相称，平时又有病，恐怕先于陛下的狗马而死去，最终无法报答陛下的恩德和搪塞责任。
English: My moral ability is not commensurate with this high official position, I am sick in normal times, and I am afraid that I will die before His Majesty's dogs and horses, and ultimately I will not be able to repay His Majesty's kindness and prevarication.

古文：原归侯印，乞骸骨，避贤者路。 
现代文：我希望交回侯印，辞官归家，给贤者让路。 
English: I hope to hand back the marquis' seal, return the official to his home, and make way for the wise.

古文：天子报曰： 古者赏有功，褎有德，守成尚文，遭遇右武，未有易此者也。
现代文：武帝答复他说： 古代奖赏有功的人，褒扬有德的人，守住先人已成的事业要崇尚文德教化，遭遇祸患要崇尚武功，没有改变这个道理的。
English: Emperor Wu replied to him, "In ancient times, the principle of rewarding meritorious people, praising virtuous people, upholding the achievements of ancestors, advocating literary and moral education, and advocating martial arts in the face of adversity has not changed.

古文：朕宿昔庶几获承尊位，惧不能宁，惟所与共为治者，君宜知之。
现代文：我从前幸运地得以继承皇位，害怕不能安宁，一心想同各位大臣共同治理天下，你应当知道这一点。
English: You should know that I, who was fortunate enough to succeed to the throne, am afraid of not being able to live in peace and want to rule the world together with the ministers.

古文：盖君子善善恶恶，君若谨行，常在朕躬。
现代文：君子都喜欢善良的人而憎恶丑恶的人，你若谨慎行事，就可常留我的身边。
English: Gentlemen love the good and hate the bad. If you are careful, you can always stay with me.

古文：君不幸罹霜露之病，何恙不已，乃上书归侯，乞骸骨，是章朕之不德也。
现代文：你不幸得了霜露风寒之病，何必忧虑不愈，竟然上书要交回侯印，辞官归家，这样做就是显扬我的无德呀！
English: You, unfortunately, have caught the frost-dew-wind-cold disease. Why should you worry so much that you have to return the seal of the mayor when you submit a letter, and return the dictionary to your home? By doing so, I am showing my lack of virtue!

古文：今事少间，君其省思虑，一精神，辅以医药。 
现代文：现在事情稍微少了些，你应该减少思虑，集中精神，再以医药辅助治疗。 
English: Now that things are a little less hectic, you should reduce your worries, focus, and take medication.

古文：因赐告牛酒杂帛。
现代文：于是，武帝恩准公孙弘继续休假，赐给他牛酒和各种布帛。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu granted Sun Hong continued to take leave and gave him cow wine and all kinds of cloth.

古文：居数月，病有瘳，视事。
现代文：过了几个月，公孙弘的病情大有好转，就开始处理政事。
English: After a few months, Gongsunhiro's condition greatly improved, and he began to deal with political affairs.

古文：元狩二年，弘病，竟以丞相终。
现代文：前年，公孙弘患病，最终以丞相的身份死去。
English: The previous year, Gongsun Hong fell ill and eventually died as chancellor.

古文：子度嗣为平津侯。
现代文：他的儿子公孙度继承了平津侯的爵位。
English: His son Gong Sun Du inherited the peerage of Pingjin Marquis.

古文：度为山阳太守十馀岁，坐法失侯。
现代文：公孙度当山阳太守十多年，因为犯法而失去侯爵。
English: Gongsun Du was Shanyang Daju for more than ten years, but he lost his marquis because he broke the law.

古文：主父偃者，齐临菑人也。学长短纵横之术，晚乃学易、春秋、百家言。
现代文：主父偃是齐地临菑人，学习战国时代的纵横家的学说，晚年才开始学习《周易》《春秋》、诸子百家的学说。
English: His father, Zou, was a native of Linyi. He studied the teachings of the Zheng Heng family in the Warring States period, and only in his later years did he begin to study the teachings of "Zhou Yi," "Spring and Autumn" and the "Hundreds of Sons."

古文：游齐诸生间，莫能厚遇也。
现代文：他游于齐国许多读书人之间，没有谁肯厚待他。
English: He swam among many readers in Qi, and no one was willing to treat him well.

古文：齐诸儒生相与排摈，不容於齐。
现代文：齐国许多读书人都一起排斥他，使他无法留在齐地。
English: Many readers in Qi jointly ostracized him, making it impossible for him to stay in Qi.

古文：家贫，假贷无所得，乃北游燕、赵、中山，皆莫能厚遇，为客甚困。
现代文：他家境贫困，向人家借贷也借不到，就到北方的燕、赵、中山游学，各地都没人厚待他，做客很难。
English: His family was poor, and he couldn't borrow money from anyone, so he traveled to Yan, Zhao, and Zhongshan in the north to study. No one treated him well everywhere, and it was difficult to be a guest.

古文：孝武元光元年中，以为诸侯莫足游者，乃西入关见卫将军。
现代文：孝武帝元光元年，他认为各诸侯国都不值得去游学，就西入函谷关，去拜见卫青将军。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Yuan Guang, he thought that it was not worth visiting all the provinces to study, so he went west to Hanzhong Pass to visit General Wei Qing.

古文：卫将军数言上，上不召。
现代文：卫青大将军屡次向皇上推荐他，皇上不肯召见。
English: General Wei Qingdao repeatedly recommended him to the emperor, but the emperor refused to see him.

古文：资用乏，留久，诸公宾客多厌之，乃上书阙下。
现代文：他带的钱财已经花光，留在长安已经很久，诸侯的宾客们都很讨厌他，于是他向皇帝上书。
English: He had spent all the money he had brought with him, he had stayed in Chang'an for a long time, the guests of the princes hated him, so he wrote to the emperor.

古文：朝奏，暮召入见。
现代文：早晨进呈奏书，傍晚时皇帝就召见了他。
English: In the morning he presented his report, and in the evening the emperor summoned him.

古文：所言九事，其八事为律令，一事谏伐匈奴。
现代文：他所说的九件事，其中八件是法律条令方面的事，一件是关于征伐匈奴的事。
English: Of the nine things he mentioned, eight were about legal regulations, and one was about the conquest of the Huns.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：其原文是这样说的：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：臣闻明主不恶切谏以博观，忠臣不敢避重诛以直谏，是故事无遗策而功流万世。
现代文：我听说贤明的君主不厌恶深切的谏言而是广泛观察，忠诚的大臣不敢逃避重重的惩罚而直言劝谏，因此处理国家大事的好政策才不能遗失，而使功名流传万世。
English: I have heard that a wise ruler does not abhor profound criticism, but observes widely, and a loyal minister does not dare to evade heavy punishment and speak frankly. Therefore, a good policy for dealing with national affairs cannot be lost, but the merit will be passed down to the world.

古文：今臣不敢隐忠避死以效愚计，原陛下幸赦而少察之。
现代文：如今我不敢隐瞒忠心，逃避死亡，而要向您陈述我的愚昧想法，希望陛下赦免我的罪过，稍微考察一下我的想法。
English: Now that I dare not hide my loyalty and run away from death, I would like to tell you my foolish thoughts and hope that Your Majesty will forgive my sins and examine my thoughts a little.

古文：司马法曰： 国虽大，好战必亡；天下虽平，忘战必危。 
现代文：《司马法》上说： 国家虽然大，若是喜欢战争，就一定会灭亡；天下虽然太平，若是忘掉战争，就必然危险。 
English: "Sima Fa" said: Although the country is big, if it likes war, it will surely perish; although the world is peaceful, if it forgets war, it will inevitably be dangerous.

古文：天下既平，天子大凯，春蒐秋狝，诸侯春振旅，秋治兵，所以不忘战也。
现代文：天下已经平定，天子演奏《大凯》的乐章，春秋两季分别举行打猎活动，诸侯们在春天整顿军队，在秋天训练军队，是为了不忘记战争。
English: The country has been pacified, the emperor played the music of "The Great Conquest," hunting activities were held separately in the spring and autumn, the princes reorganized the army in the spring and trained the army in the autumn, in order not to forget the war.

古文：且夫怒者逆德也，兵者凶器也，争者末节也。
现代文：况且发怒是悖逆的行为，武器是不祥的东西，斗争是最差的节操。
English: Moreover, anger is a rebellious act, weapons are ominous things, and struggle is the worst kind of discipline.

古文：古之人君一怒必伏尸流血，故圣王重行之。
现代文：古代人君一发怒就一定尸首伏地，流血遍野，所以圣明的天子对待发怒的事非常慎重。
English: In ancient times, if a person lost his temper, his body would be thrown to the ground and blood would be spilled all over the countryside. Therefore, the Son of Heaven treated the matter of anger very carefully.

古文：夫务战胜穷武事者，未有不悔者也。
现代文：致力于打仗取胜、穷兵黩武的人，最后没有不后悔的。
English: Those who are committed to winning the war and fighting hard will regret it in the end.

古文：昔秦皇帝任战胜之威，蚕食天下，并吞战国，海内为一，功齐三代。
现代文：从前秦始皇凭借战胜对手的兵威，蚕食天下，吞并各个交战的国家，统一天下，其功业可与夏、商、周三代开国之君相同。
English: The former Qin Shihuang, by virtue of the military power of defeating the opponent, encroached on the world, annexed various warring countries, and unified the world. His achievements can be the same as Xia, Shang, and the third generation of the founding monarchs.

古文：务胜不休，欲攻匈奴，李斯谏曰： 不可。
现代文：但他一心取胜，不肯休止，竟想攻打匈奴。李斯劝谏说： 不可以攻匈奴。
English: But he was so determined to win that he did not want to stop and wanted to attack the Huns. Li Si advised him: "You cannot attack the Huns.

古文：夫匈奴无城郭之居，委积之守，迁徙鸟举，难得而制也。
现代文：那匈奴没有城郭居住，也无堆积的财物可守，到处迁徙，如同鸟儿飞翔，难以得到他们并加以控制。
English: The Xiongnu had no castle to live in, no hoarded wealth to guard, and they migrated everywhere like birds in flight, making it difficult to catch them and control them.

古文：轻兵深入，粮食必绝；踵粮以行，重不及事。
现代文：如果派轻便军队深入匈奴，那么军粮必定断绝；如果携带许多粮食进军，物资沉重难运，也是无济于事。
English: If light troops are sent deep into the Huns, then the food supply will certainly be cut off; if they march into the army with a lot of grain, the material will be heavy and difficult to transport, and it will not help.

古文：得其地不足以为利也，遇其民不可役而守也。
现代文：就是得到匈奴的土地，也无利可得，遇到匈奴百姓，也不能役使他们加以守护。
English: Even if you get the land of the Huns, there is no profit to be gained, and if you meet the Hun people, you cannot help them to guard it.

古文：胜必杀之，非民父母也。
现代文：战胜他们就必然要杀死他们，这并非是为民父母的君王所应做的事。
English: Defeating them necessarily means killing them, which is not what a king should do for his people.

古文：靡弊中国，快心匈奴，非长策也。 
现代文：使国家疲惫，而以打匈奴为心情愉快之事，这不是好政策。 
English: It is not a good policy to make the country tired and to take pleasure in beating the Hun.

古文：秦皇帝不听，遂使蒙恬将兵攻胡，辟地千里，以河为境。
现代文：秦始皇不采纳李斯的建议，就派蒙恬率兵去攻打匈奴，开阔了千里土地，以黄河为国界。
English: The First Emperor of Qin did not accept Li Si's suggestion and sent Meng Yao and his army to attack the Xiongnu, opening up thousands of miles of land, with the Yellow River as the national border.

古文：地固泽卤，不生五穀。
现代文：这些土地本是盐碱地，不生五谷。
English: Originally, these lands were saline and did not produce grain.

古文：然後发天下丁男以守北河。
现代文：这以后，秦朝调发全国的成年男人去守卫北河地区。
English: After this, the Qin Dynasty dispatched adult men from all over the country to guard the Beihe area.

古文：暴兵露师十有馀年，死者不可胜数，终不能逾河而北。
现代文：让军队在风沙日晒中呆了十多年，死的人不可胜数，始终没能越过黄河北进。
English: Let the army stay in the wind, sand and sun for more than ten years, the dead are countless, and they have never been able to cross the Yellow River to the north.

古文：是岂人众不足，兵革不备哉？
现代文：这难道是人马不足，武器装备不充裕吗？
English: Is this due to a shortage of manpower and insufficient weapons and equipment?

古文：其势不可也。
现代文：不是的，这是形势不允许呀！
English: No, the situation doesn't allow it!

古文：又使天下蜚刍輓粟，起於黄、腄、琅邪负海之郡，转输北河，率三十锺而致一石。
现代文：秦朝又让天下百姓飞速转运粮草，从黄县、腄县和琅邪郡靠海的县城起运，转运到北河，一般说来运三十钟粮食才能得到一石。
English: The Qin Dynasty also allowed the people of the world to quickly transfer grain and grass, starting from the county seat of Huang County, Yixian County and Yiyang County by the sea, and transferring to Beihe. Generally speaking, it takes 30 minutes to transport grain to get one stone.

古文：男子疾耕不足於粮饟，女子纺绩不足於帷幕。
现代文：男人努力种田，也不能满足粮饷的需求，女子纺布绩麻也不能满足军队帷幕的需求。
English: Men's efforts in farming cannot meet the demand for grain, and women's spinning of flax cannot meet the demand for army curtains.

古文：百姓靡敝，孤寡老弱不能相养，道路死者相望，盖天下始畔秦也。
现代文：百姓疲惫不堪，孤儿寡母和老弱之人得到供养，路上的死人一个挨一个，大概由于这些原因，天下百姓开始背叛秦王朝。
English: The people were exhausted, the orphans, widows and the old and weak were supported, and the dead on the road were killed one by one. It was probably for these reasons that the people of the world began to betray the Qin Dynasty.

古文：及至高皇帝定天下，略地於边，闻匈奴聚於代谷之外而欲击之。
现代文：待到汉高帝平定天下，攻取了边境的土地，听说匈奴聚积在代郡的山谷之外，就想攻打它们。
English: After the Hango Emperor had pacified the world and conquered the border lands, he heard that the Xiongnu were gathering outside the valley of Dai County and wanted to attack them.

古文：御史成进谏曰： 不可。
现代文：御史成进谏说： 不可进攻匈奴。
English: "Do not attack the Xiongnu," he said.

古文：夫匈奴之性，兽聚而鸟散，从之如搏影。
现代文：那匈奴的习性，像群兽聚积和众鸟飞散一样，追赶他们就像捕捉影子一样。
English: The habits of the Xiongnu, like beasts gathering and birds flying, chasing them like catching shadows.

古文：今以陛下盛德攻匈奴，臣窃危之。 
现代文：如今凭借陛下的盛德去攻打匈奴，我私下里认为是危险的。 
English: Now, to attack the Huns on the strength of his majesty's virtue, I secretly think it is dangerous.

古文：高帝不听，遂北至於代谷，果有平城之围。
现代文：汉高帝没有接受他的建议，于是向北进军到代郡的山谷，果然遭到平城被围困的危险。
English: Emperor Han Gao did not accept his suggestion, so he marched north to the valley of Dai County, and was indeed in danger of being besieged by Pingcheng.

古文：高皇帝盖悔之甚，乃使刘敬往结和亲之约，然後天下忘干戈之事。
现代文：汉高帝大概很后悔，就派刘敬前往匈奴缔结和亲之约。这以后，天下人民才忘记了战争的事。
English: Emperor Han Gao probably regretted it very much and sent Liu Jing to the Xiongnu to conclude a peace treaty. Only after this did the people of the world forget about the war.

古文：故兵法曰 兴师十万，日费千金 。
现代文：所以《孙子兵法》上说： 发兵十万，每天耗费千金。 
English: That's why "Sun Tzu's Art of War" says, "Sending out 100,000 soldiers costs a thousand dollars a day."

古文：夫秦常积众暴兵数十万人，虽有覆军杀将系虏单于之功，亦適足以结怨深雠，不足以偿天下之费。
现代文：秦朝经常聚积民众和屯兵几十万，虽然有歼灭敌军，杀死敌将、俘虏匈奴单于的军功，但也正好足以结下深仇大恨，不足以抵偿全国耗费的资财。
English: The Qin Dynasty often amassed hundreds of thousands of people and troops. Although the military exploits of annihilating the enemy army, killing the enemy general and capturing the Xiongnu were unique, they were just enough to create deep hatred and were not enough to compensate for the resources and wealth consumed by the whole country.

古文：夫上虚府库，下敝百姓，甘心於外国，非完事也。
现代文：这种上使国库空虚，下使百姓疲惫，扬威国外而心中欢乐的事，并非是完美的事情。
English: This kind of thing, which empties the state treasury on the one hand and exhausts the people on the other, which makes foreign countries proud and our hearts happy, is not a perfect thing.

古文：夫匈奴难得而制，非一世也。
现代文：那匈奴难以控制住，并非一代的事。
English: That Hun is hard to control, it's not a generation thing.

古文：行盗侵驱，所以为业也，天性固然。
现代文：他们走到哪里偷到那里，侵夺驱驰，以此为职业，天性本来如此。
English: Wherever they go, they steal there, invade and drive away, this is their profession, this is their nature.

古文：上及虞夏殷周，固弗程督，禽兽畜之，不属为人。
现代文：所以上自虞舜、夏朝、商朝和周朝，本来都不按法律道德的要求来督导他们，只把他们当作禽兽看待，而不把他们看作是人类。
English: Therefore, since the Yu Dynasty, the Xia Dynasty, the Shang Dynasty and the Zhou Dynasty, they did not supervise them according to the requirements of law and morality, and only regarded them as animals, not as human beings.

古文：夫上不观虞夏殷周之统，而下近世之失，此臣之所大忧，百姓之所疾苦也。
现代文：上不借鉴虞夏商周的经验，下却遵循近世的错误作法，这正是我最大的忧虑，是老百姓感到痛苦的事。
English: Not learning from the experience of Yu Xia Shang Zhou at the top, but following the wrong practices of modern times at the bottom, this is precisely my biggest concern, and it is a matter of pain for the common people.

古文：且夫兵久则变生，事苦则虑易。
现代文：况且战争持续时间长了，就会发生变乱；做事艰苦，就会使思想发生变化。
English: Moreover, if the war continues for a long time, there will be turmoil; if things are difficult, there will be a change in thinking.

古文：乃使边境之民弊靡愁苦而有离心，将吏相疑而外市，故尉佗、章邯得以成其私也。
现代文：这样就使边境的百姓疲惫愁苦，产生背离秦王朝的心情，使将军和官吏们相互猜疑而与外国人勾结，所以尉佗和章邯才能实现他们的个人野心。
English: In this way, the people on the border were exhausted and distressed, the mood of defection from the Qin Dynasty was created, and the generals and officials were suspicious of each other and colluded with foreigners, so that Yixuan and Zhangye could realize their personal ambitions.

古文：夫秦政之所以不行者，权分乎二子，此得失之效也。
现代文：那秦朝的政令所以不能推行的原因，就是因为国家大权被这两个人所分的结果，这就是政治的得和失的效验。
English: The reason why the Qin Dynasty's decrees could not be implemented was because the power of the state was divided by these two people. This was the test of political gains and losses.

古文：故周书曰 安危在出令，存亡在所用 。
现代文：所以《周书》上说： 国家的安危在于君王发布什么政令，国家的存亡在于君王用什么样的人。 
English: Therefore, the "Weekly News" said: The safety of the country depends on what decrees the monarch issues, and the survival of the country depends on what kind of people the monarch uses.

古文：原陛下详察之，少加意而熟虑焉。
现代文：希望陛下仔细考察这个问题，对此稍加注意，深思熟虑。
English: I hope His Majesty will consider this matter carefully, give it some attention, and give it some thought.

古文：是时赵人徐乐、齐人严安俱上书言世务，各一事。
现代文：这时，赵人徐乐、齐人严安都向皇帝上书，谈论当代重大事情，每人讲了一件事。
English: At this time, Zhao's Xu Le and Qi's Yan An both wrote to the emperor to talk about contemporary major events, and each of them told one thing.

古文：徐乐曰：臣闻天下之患在於土崩，不在於瓦解，古今一也。
现代文：徐氏在上书中说：我听说国家的忧患在于土崩，而不在于瓦解，从古到今都是一样的。
English: Mr. Xu said in the book: I heard that the country's sorrow lies in the landslide, not in the collapse. It has been the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：何谓土崩？
现代文：什么叫土崩呢？
English: What is a landslide?

古文：秦之末世是也。
现代文：秦朝末年就是这样。
English: This was the situation at the end of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：陈涉无千乘之尊，尺土之地，身非王公大人名族之後，无乡曲之誉，非有孔、墨、曾子之贤，陶硃、猗顿之富也，然起穷巷，奋棘矜，偏袒大呼而天下从风，此其故何也？
现代文：陈涉并没有诸侯的尊贵地位，也没有一尺一寸的封地，自己也不是王公大人和有名望的贵族的后代，没有家乡人对他的称赞，没有孔丘、墨翟、曾参的贤能，没有陶朱、猗顿的富有。但是，他从贫穷的乡间起兵，挥舞着戟矛，赤臂大喊，天下人闻风响应，这是什么原因呢？
English: Chen Zang did not have the noble status of princes, nor did he have a fief of a foot and an inch, nor was he the descendant of princes and famous nobles, nor was he praised by his hometown people, nor did he have the wisdom of Kongqiu, Mokou, Zengzang, nor the wealth of Tao Zhu and Xingtang. However, what was the reason for him to rise up from the poor countryside, waving his spear, shouting with his red arm, and the whole world responded to the wind?

古文：由民困而主不恤，下怨而上不知，俗已乱而政不脩，此三者陈涉之所以为资也。是之谓土崩。
现代文：这是由于人民贫困而国君不知体恤关照，下民怨恨而身处上位者并不知道，世俗已经败坏而政治不修明，这三项是陈涉用为凭借的客观条件，这就叫做土崩。
English: This is due to the fact that the people are poor and the sovereign does not know how to sympathize with them, the people are resentful and the people at the top do not know, the world has been corrupted and the politics are not clear, these three are the objective conditions that are used as the basis. This is called a landslide.

古文：故曰天下之患在於土崩。
现代文：所以说国家的忧患在于土崩。
English: Therefore, the country's concern lies in the landslide.

古文：何谓瓦解？
现代文：什么叫瓦解呢？
English: What is disintegration?

古文：吴、楚、齐、赵之兵是也。
现代文：吴、楚、齐、赵的军事叛乱就是这样。
English: The military rebellion of Wu, Chu, Qi and Zhao is just like this.

古文：七国谋为大逆，号皆称万乘之君，带甲数十万，威足以严其境内，财足以劝其士民，然不能西攘尺寸之地而身为禽於中原者，此其故何也？
现代文：吴、楚等七国阴谋叛乱，他们都自称万乘君王，有披甲的战士几十万，他们的威严足以使其封国之民畏服，他们的财物足以鼓励其封国的百姓，但是他们却不能向西夺取尺寸的土地，而他们自己却在中原被擒，这是什么原因呢？
English: Wu, Chu and the other seven states plotted a rebellion. They all claimed to be kings of the world, with hundreds of thousands of soldiers in armor. Their majesty was enough to awe the people they had conquered, and their wealth was enough to encourage the people they had conquered. However, they were unable to seize large amounts of land in the west, while they themselves were captured in the Central Plains. What was the reason for this?

古文：非权轻於匹夫而兵弱於陈涉也，当是之时，先帝之德泽未衰而安土乐俗之民众，故诸侯无境外之助。
现代文：不是他们权势比平民百姓轻，不是他们的军事力量比陈涉小，是因为正当那时候，先皇帝的思想还未衰弱，而安于乡土、喜欢时俗的百姓很多，所以诸侯们没有得到境外的援助，这就叫做瓦解。
English: It was not that their power was lighter than that of the common people, nor that their military strength was smaller than that of Chen Zhuang, but it was because at that time, the former emperor's thoughts had not yet weakened, and there were many people who were at ease in the countryside and liked the customs of the time, so the princes did not receive assistance from abroad. This is called disintegration.

古文：此之谓瓦解，故曰天下之患不在瓦解。
现代文：所以说国家的忧患不在于瓦解。
English: Therefore, the country's sorrow does not lie in the collapse.

古文：由是观之，天下诚有土崩之势，虽布衣穷处之士或首恶而危海内，陈涉是也。况三晋之君或存乎！
现代文：由此可见，天下若有土崩的形势，纵然是处于穷困境地的平民百姓，只要他们中有人首先发难，就可能使国家遭到危害，陈涉就是如此，何况或许还有三晋之类的国君存在呢！
English: From this it can be seen that if there is a landslide situation in the world, even if it is the common people in a poor predicament, as long as one of them is the first to get into trouble, the country may be harmed, this is the case, and there may even be kings such as Sanjin!

古文：天下虽未有大治也，诚能无土崩之势，虽有彊国劲兵不得旋踵而身为禽矣，吴、楚、齐、赵是也。况群臣百姓能为乱乎哉！
现代文：国家纵然是没有大治，若真能没有土崩的形势，虽然有强国和强大的军队起来造反，也会在转身之间遭到擒灭，吴、楚、齐、赵等国就是这样，何况群臣百姓起来造反呢！
English: Even if the country does not have great governance, if it can really avoid a landslide situation, although there are powerful countries and powerful armies rebelling, they will also be annihilated between turning around. This is the case with Wu, Chu, Qi, Zhao and other countries, not to mention the masses of people rebelling!

古文：此二体者，安危之明要也，贤主所留意而深察也。
现代文：这两种情况，是国家安危的明显的根本之处，希望贤明的君主多多留意，深刻地考察。
English: These two situations are obviously fundamental to the security of the country, and I hope that the wise monarch will pay more attention to them and study them deeply.

古文：间者关东五穀不登，年岁未复，民多穷困，重之以边境之事，推数循理而观之，则民且有不安其处者矣。
现代文：最近关东地区五谷歉收，年景还未恢复，百姓大多都很穷困，再加上边境一带的战争，按形势的发展和一般常理来看，老百姓将有不安心本地的情况了。
English: Recently, the grain harvest in the Kanto region has been poor, the situation has not yet recovered, and most of the people are very poor. Coupled with the war around the border, according to the development of the situation and common sense, the people will be worried about the local situation.

古文：不安故易动。易动者，土崩之势也。
现代文：不安心本地就容易流动，容易流动就是土崩的形势。
English: If you don't feel safe locally, it's easy to move, and easy to move is a landslide situation.

古文：故贤主独观万化之原，明於安危之机，脩之庙堂之上，而销未形之患。
现代文：所以，贤明的君主能独自看到万物变化的各种原因，明察安危的关键，只在朝廷上治理政事，就可以把没有形成的祸患加以消除。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch can independently see the various causes of changes in all things, clearly see the key to safety and security, and only administer political affairs in the court, and can eliminate the unformed disaster.

古文：其要，期使天下无土崩之势而已矣。
现代文：其中最关键的，就是想法使国家不出现土崩的形势而已。
English: The most important of these is the idea of preventing the country from collapsing.

古文：故虽有彊国劲兵，陛下逐走兽，射蜚鸟，弘游燕之囿，淫纵恣之观，极驰骋之乐，自若也。
现代文：所以纵然有强国和强大的军队，陛下仍然可以追赶走兽，射击飞鸟，扩展游宴的场所，无节制地放纵地观赏玩乐，尽情地享受驱马打猎的欢乐，一切安然自如。
English: Therefore, even if there are powerful countries and powerful armies, His Majesty can still chase away wild beasts, shoot birds, expand places for banquets, indulge in watching games without restraint, enjoy the joy of driving horses and hunting to the fullest, and everything is safe and sound.

古文：金石丝竹之声不绝於耳，帷帐之私俳优侏儒之笑不乏於前，而天下无宿忧。
现代文：各种乐器的演奏声不绝于耳，帷帐中与美女的情爱和俳优侏儒的笑声面前出现，然而国家却没有积久的忧患。
English: The sounds of various musical instruments are played incessantly, love with a beautiful woman and the laughter of a haiku dwarf appear in front of the curtain, but the country has no long-term worries.

古文：名何必汤武，俗何必成康！
现代文：名望何必定要像商汤、周武王那样，世俗何必定要像周成王、周康王时代那么淳美！
English: Why must fame be like Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu, and why must the world be as beautiful as the times of King Zhou Cheng and King Zhou Kang?

古文：虽然，臣窃以为陛下天然之圣，宽仁之资，而诚以天下为务，则汤武之名不难侔，而成康之俗可复兴也。
现代文：这两种情况确立了，然后就可以处于尊贵安全的实际境地，在当代传扬美名，扩大声誉，使天下之人亲近你，使四方边远之民服从你，你的余恩和遗德将盛传几代人，面朝南方，背靠屏风，卷起衣袖，与王公大人们作揖行礼，这是陛下所做的事情。我听说想实行王道，治理国家，就是没有成功，最差的结果也可以使国家安宁。
English: Once these two conditions have been established, you can then be in a real position of dignity and security, and in the present day, you can spread your fame and expand your reputation, bring the people of the world closer to you, and make the remote people of the four directions obey you. Your remaining grace and legacy will be passed down for generations. Face south, back to the screen, roll up your sleeves, and make a bow with the princes. This is what your majesty has done. I heard that if you want to practice the royal way and govern the country, you will not succeed. The worst result can also make the country peaceful.

古文：此二体者立，然後处尊安之实，扬名广誉於当世，亲天下而服四夷，馀恩遗德为数世隆，南面负扆摄袂而揖王公，此陛下之所服也。臣闻图王不成，其敝足以安。
现代文：只要安宁，陛下想得到什么，难道还有得不到的吗？你想做什么，难道还有做不成的吗？
English: As long as there is peace and quiet, is there anything that His Majesty wants that he cannot get? Is there anything that he cannot do that he wants to do?

古文：安则陛下何求而不得，何为而不成，何征而不服乎哉！
现代文：你想征讨谁，还有不降服的吗？
English: Who are you trying to win over, and what are you not giving up?

古文：严安上书曰：
现代文：严安上书说：
English: Yan'an said in his petition:

古文：臣闻周有天下，其治三百馀岁，成康其隆也，刑错四十馀年而不用。
现代文：我听说周朝治理天下，把国家治理得很好的时期有三百多年，成王和康王时期是最隆盛的，搁置刑罚四十多年不用。
English: I heard that the Zhou Dynasty ruled the world and governed the country well for more than three hundred years. The periods of King Cheng and King Kang were the most prosperous. There was no need to suspend the punishment for more than forty years.

古文：及其衰也，亦三百馀岁，故五伯更起。
现代文：待到周朝政治衰微时也有三百多年，所以五霸才能轮番兴起。
English: By the time of the Zhou Dynasty's political decline, there were still more than three hundred years to wait, so the Five Dynasties could rise in turn.

古文：五伯者，常佐天子兴利除害，诛暴禁邪，匡正海内，以尊天子。
现代文：五霸这些人经常辅佐天子，兴利除害，诛伐暴虐，禁止奸邪，在天下扶持正道，以此使天子得到尊贵。
English: These five overlords often support the heavenly son, eliminate harm, fight tyranny, prohibit evil, and support the right path in the world, so that the heavenly son can be honored.

古文：五伯既没，贤圣莫续，天子孤弱，号令不行。
现代文：五霸都去世后，贤圣之人没有继起者，使天子处于孤立软弱的地位，号令不能颁行。
English: After the death of the five overlords, there was no successor to the sages and saints, leaving the heavenly son in an isolated and weak position, unable to issue orders.

古文：诸侯恣行，彊陵弱，众暴寡，田常篡齐，六卿分晋，并为战国，此民之始苦也。
现代文：诸侯恣意行事，强大的欺凌弱小的，人多的损害人少的，田常篡夺了齐国的政权，六卿瓜分了晋国的土地，共同形成了战国纷争的局面，这是百姓苦难的开始。
English: Princes acted arbitrarily, the powerful bullied the weak, and the many harmed the few. Tian Chang usurped the power of Qi, and the six nobles divided the land of Jin, jointly forming the situation of warring states. This was the beginning of the people's suffering.

古文：於是彊国务攻，弱国备守，合从连横，驰车击毂，介胄生虮虱，民无所告愬。
现代文：于是强大的国家致力于战争，弱小的国家备战防守，出现合纵和连横的策略，使者的车子疾驰奔波，战士的铠甲帽盔生满虮虱，百姓的苦难无处申诉。
English: As a result, powerful countries are committed to war, weak countries prepare for war and defense, there are vertical and horizontal strategies, the messenger's car is speeding, the warrior's armor helmet is full of scabs, and the people's suffering has nowhere to complain.

古文：及至秦王，蚕食天下，并吞战国，称号曰皇帝，主海内之政，坏诸侯之城，销其兵，铸以为锺虡，示不复用。
现代文：待到秦王政时代，他蚕食天下，并吞战国，号称皇帝。统一国内的政治，毁坏诸侯国的都城，销毁诸侯的兵器，熔铸成钟虡，以显示不再用兵动武。
English: By the time of Qin's reign, he had encroached on the whole world, swallowed up the warring states, claimed to be the emperor, unified domestic politics, destroyed the capitals of the states, destroyed the weapons of the states, and melted them into bell towers to show that they would no longer use military force.

古文：元元黎民得免於战国，逢明天子，人人自以为更生。
现代文：善良的平民百姓才能免于战争的灾害，碰上圣明的天子，人人都认为得到了新生命。
English: Only when the good-hearted common people are spared from the disasters of war and encounter the Son of the Heavenly Father can everyone believe that they have been given a new life.

古文：乡使秦缓其刑罚，薄赋敛，省繇役，贵仁义，贱权利，上笃厚，下智巧，变风易俗，化於海内，则世世必安矣。
现代文：假如秦朝宽缓其刑罚，少征赋税，减轻徭役，尊重仁义，轻视权势利益，崇尚忠厚，鄙视智巧，改变风俗，使国内百姓得到教化，那么世世代代都会安宁。
English: If the Qin Dynasty were to relax its punishments, lower taxes, reduce the number of forced laborers, respect benevolence and righteousness, despise the interests of the powerful, advocate loyalty, despise cleverness, change customs, and enlighten the domestic people, then there would be peace for generations to come.

古文：秦不行是风而其故俗，为智巧权利者进，笃厚忠信者退；法严政峻，谄谀者众，日闻其美，意广心轶。
现代文：但是秦朝不推行这种政治，却因循从前的风俗，使得那些专做智巧权利之事的人得以进用，而那些忠厚诚信的人却被斥退；法律严酷，政治严峻，诌媚阿谀的人很多，天天听到他们的赞美声，于是心意满足，想入非非。
English: However, the Qin Dynasty did not implement this kind of politics, but followed the previous customs, so that those who specialized in clever and powerful things were able to advance, while those who were loyal and honest were rejected; the laws were harsh, the politics were severe, and there were many flattering people. Hearing their praises every day, their hearts were satisfied, and they wanted to know more.

古文：欲肆威海外，乃使蒙恬将兵以北攻胡，辟地进境，戍於北河，蜚刍輓粟以随其後。
现代文：一心想要扬威于海外，就派遣蒙恬率兵去攻打北方的匈奴，扩张土地，推进国境，戍守住黄河以北的地方，让百姓急运粮草，跟随其后。
English: With a single-minded desire to gain prestige overseas, he sent Mengye and his soldiers to attack the Xiongnu in the north, expand the land, push forward the border, hold the place north of the Yellow River, let the people rush grain and grass, and follow them.

古文：又使尉屠睢将楼船之士南攻百越，使监禄凿渠运粮，深入越，越人遁逃。
现代文：又派遣尉官屠睢率领水兵去攻打南方的百越，派监御史禄凿通运河，运送粮食，深入越地，越人逃跑。
English: He also sent the lieutenant Tu Youyou to lead the sailors to attack the hundred Vietcong in the south, and sent the overseer Shilu to dig a canal, transport grain, and go deep into the Vietcong. The Vietcong fled.

古文：旷日持久，粮食绝乏，越人击之，秦兵大败。
现代文：经过很长时间的相持，粮食乏绝，越人攻击秦兵，秦兵大败。
English: After a long time of mutual rivalry, food was scarce, the Viets attacked the Qin soldiers, and the Qin soldiers were defeated.

古文：秦乃使尉佗将卒以戍越。
现代文：秦就派赵佗率兵戍守越地。
English: Qin sent Zhao Jun and his soldiers to defend Yueji.

古文：当是时，秦祸北构於胡，南挂於越，宿兵无用之地，进而不得退。
现代文：正在这时，秦朝在北方同匈奴结怨，在南方同越人结仇，在无用的地方驻扎军队，只能进而不能退。
English: At this very time, the Qin Dynasty was feuding with the Xiongnu in the north and with the Viets in the south, stationing troops in useless places, and could only advance and not retreat.

古文：行十馀年，丁男被甲，丁女转输，苦不聊生，自经於道树，死者相望。
现代文：经过十多年，成年男子穿上铠甲上战场，成年女子转运粮食，痛苦而无法活下去，有的吊死在路旁的树上，死的人一个接着一个。
English: After more than ten years, adult men put on armor and went to the battlefield, adult women transported grain, suffering and unable to live, some hanged themselves on trees by the roadside, and the dead followed one after another.

古文：及秦皇帝崩，天下大叛。
现代文：等到秦始皇死去，天下人民多半反叛秦朝。
English: By the time Qin Shihuang died, most of the world's people had rebelled against the Qin Dynasty.

古文：陈胜、吴广举陈，武臣、张耳举赵，项梁举吴，田儋举齐，景驹举郢，周市举魏，韩广举燕，穷山通谷豪士并起，不可胜载也。
现代文：陈胜、吴广攻占陈县，武臣、张耳攻占赵地，项粱攻占吴县，田儋攻占齐地，景驹攻取郢，周市攻取魏地，韩广攻取燕地，穷山深谷，豪杰之士一同起兵，记也记不完。
English: Chen Sheng and Wu Guang conquered Chen County, Wu Zhen and Zhang Er conquered Zhao County, Xiang Yu conquered Wu County, Tian Yu conquered Qi County, Jing Yu conquered Qi County, Zhou Shi conquered Wei County, Han Guang conquered Yan County, Poor Mountains and Deep Valleys, and Heroes and Heroes joined forces. I can't remember it all.

古文：然皆非公侯之後，非长官之吏也。无尺寸之势，起闾巷，杖棘矜，应时而皆动，不谋而俱起，不约而同会，壤长地进，至于霸王，时教使然也。
现代文：但是，他们都不是公侯的后代，也并非大官的下属，没有一尺一寸的小小权势，从闾巷兴起，手持戟矛，顺应时势，都行动起来，没有预先谋画却同时起兵，没有约定却同时相会合，不断扩大土地，最后成为霸王，这是当时的教化使他们成为这个样子。
English: However, they were not the descendants of princes, nor were they the subordinates of great officials. They did not have the power of an inch and a half. They did not rise from the back alleys, armed with spears, and followed the trend of the times. They all took action. They did not plan in advance but raised an army at the same time. They did not have an agreement but met at the same time. They continued to expand the land and finally became overlords. This was the indoctrination of the time that made them this way.

古文：秦贵为天子，富有天下，灭世绝祀者，穷兵之祸也。
现代文：秦国是高贵的天子，是拥有天下的富豪，但却亡国亡家，这是穷兵黩武的结果。
English: Qin was a noble son of heaven, a rich man who owned the whole world, but he lost his country and his family. This was the result of a desperate war.

古文：故周失之弱，秦失之彊，不变之患也。
现代文：所以周朝的败亡在于国势软弱，秦朝的败亡在于国势强大，这是不会因时而变的原因。
English: Therefore, the defeat of the Zhou Dynasty lies in the weakness of the national power, and the defeat of the Qin Dynasty lies in the strength of the national power. This is a reason that will not change with time.

古文：今欲招南夷，朝夜郎，降羌僰，略濊州，建城邑，深入匈奴，燔其茏城，议者美之。
现代文：如今想招降南夷，使夜郎前来朝拜，降服羌、僰，攻夺?州，建立城邑，深入匈奴，烧毁它们的龙城，议论此事的人都加以赞美。
English: Now they want to invite the Nanyi to surrender, to make the Yelang come to pay homage, to surrender to the Xiongnu, the Yao, to conquer the Shanzhou, to build towns, to go deep into the Xiongnu, and to burn down their Longcheng. People who discuss this matter praise them.

古文：此人臣之利也，非天下之长策也。
现代文：这是做臣者的利益，并非是天下的长远大计。
English: This is in the interests of those in power, and is not a long-term plan for the world.

古文：今中国无狗吠之惊，而外累於远方之备，靡敝国家，非所以子民也。
现代文：如今中国没有狗叫的惊扰，却受着远方备战的牵累，使国家破败，这不是养育百姓的办法。
English: Today, China is not disturbed by the barking of dogs, but is burdened by preparations for war in faraway places, which has ruined the country. This is not the way to raise the people.

古文：行无穷之欲，甘心快意，结怨於匈奴，非所以安边也。
现代文：去实现无穷无尽的欲望，使心意畅快，而同匈奴结怨，这并不是安定边疆的办法。
English: It is not a way to stabilize the border to realize endless desires, to make the mind happy, and to have a grudge with the Xiongnu.

古文：祸结而不解，兵休而复起，近者愁苦，远者惊骇，非所以持久也。
现代文：结下怨恨而不能消除，战争停止而又重新产生，使近者蒙受愁苦，远者感到惊骇，这不是持久的办法。
English: It is not a lasting solution to create grudges that cannot be erased, wars that are halted only to be restarted, and misery for those who are near and terror for those who are far away.

古文：今天下锻甲砥剑，桥箭累弦，转输运粮，未见休时，此天下之所共忧也。
现代文：如今全国锻造铠甲，磨利刀剑，矫正箭杆，积累弓弦，转运粮食，看不到停止的时候，这是全国人民共同忧虑的事情。
English: Today, the whole country is forging armor, sharpening swords, straightening arrows, accumulating bow strings, and transporting grain, and there is no end in sight. This is a matter of common concern for the people of the whole country.

古文：夫兵久而变起，事烦而虑生。
现代文：那战争持续时间长，变故就会产生，事情繁杂，疑虑就会产生。
English: That war lasts a long time, accidents will occur, things are complicated, and doubts will arise.

古文：今外郡之地或几千里，列城数十，形束壤制，旁胁诸侯，非公室之利也。
现代文：现在外郡的土地有几千里，列城数十个，地理山川的形势可以控制百姓，胁迫附近的诸侯，这不是公室皇家的利益。
English: Now, there are thousands of miles of land outside the county, dozens of cities, and the situation of geographical mountains and rivers can control the people and coerce the nearby princes. This is not the interest of the official royal family.

古文：上观齐晋之所以亡者，公室卑削，六卿大盛也；下观秦之所以灭者，严法刻深，欲大无穷也。
现代文：看看历史上齐国和晋国所以被灭亡的原因，就是公室方面的势力衰微，六卿的势力太大了。再看看秦国所以灭亡的原因，就是刑法严酷，欲望大得无穷无尽。
English: If you look at the reasons for the demise of the states of Qi and Jin in history, you will find that the influence of the government waned and the power of the six nobles was too great. If you look at the reasons for the demise of the state of Qin, you will find that the criminal law was harsh and the desires were endless.

古文：今郡守之权，非特六卿之重也；地几千里，非特闾巷之资也；甲兵器械，非特棘矜之用也：以遭万世之变，则不可称讳也。
现代文：如今郡守的权力，不只象六卿那样大；土地几千里，不只是闾巷那点凭借；铠甲武器和各种军械，不只是戟矛那点用处。这样的客观条件，如果碰上天下重大变乱，那么其后果就不可讳言了。
English: Nowadays, the power of a county magistrate is not only as great as that of the six nobles; thousands of miles of land are not just a little help; armored weapons and all kinds of military equipment are not just a little help. Such objective conditions, if there is a major upheaval in the world, then the consequences cannot be concealed.

古文：书奏天子，天子召见三人，谓曰： 公等皆安在？
现代文：徐乐和严安的奏书送交天子，天子召见了主父偃和徐乐、严安，对他们说： 你们都在哪里啊？
English: The music books of Xu Le and Yan An were sent to the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven summoned the Lord's father Yao, Xu Le and Yan An, and said to them: "Where are you all?

古文：何相见之晚也！ 
现代文：为何我们相见得这样晚？ 
English: Why are we seeing each other so late?

古文：於是上乃拜主父偃、徐乐、严安为郎中。
现代文：于是，武帝就任命他们三人为郎中。主父偃屡次进见皇帝，上疏陈说政事。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu appointed the three of them to be his retainers. Master Zou repeatedly visited the emperor to discuss political affairs.

古文：数见，上疏言事，诏拜偃为谒者，迁为中大夫。一岁中四迁偃。
现代文：皇帝下令任命他为谒者，又升为中大夫。一年当中，四次提升主父偃的职务。
English: The emperor ordered him to be appointed as a magistrate, and he was promoted to the position of junior doctor. In the course of a year, he was promoted to the position of chief magistrate four times.

古文：偃说上曰： 古者诸侯不过百里，彊弱之形易制。
现代文：主父偃向皇上劝说道： 古代诸侯的土地不超过百里，强弱的形势很容易控制。
English: Father Zou advised the emperor, "The lands of the ancient princes did not exceed a hundred miles, and the situation of strength and weakness is easy to control.

古文：今诸侯或连城数十，地方千里，缓则骄奢易为淫乱，急则阻其彊而合从以逆京师。
现代文：如今的诸侯有的竟然拥有相连的几十个城市，土地纵横千里，天下形势宽缓时，则容易骄傲奢侈，做出淫乱的事情，形势急迫时，则依仗他们的强大，联合起来反叛朝廷。
English: Some of today's lords have dozens of cities connected to each other, and thousands of miles of land. When the situation in the world is relaxed, it is easy to be proud and extravagant, and do immoral things. When the situation is urgent, they rely on their strength and unite to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：今以法割削之，则逆节萌起，前日晁错是也。
现代文：现在如果用法律强行削减他们的土地，那么他们反叛的事就会产生，以前晁错的做法就出现这种情况。
English: Now, if their land is forcibly reduced by law, they will rebel, just as they did in the past.

古文：今诸侯子弟或十数，而適嗣代立，馀虽骨肉，无尺寸地封，则仁孝之道不宣。
现代文：如今，诸侯的子弟有的多达十几个，而只有嫡长子世世代代相继承，其余的虽然也是诸侯王的亲骨肉，却没有一点土地受封，那么仁爱孝亲之道就得不到显示。
English: Nowadays, there are as many as a dozen children of princes, but only the eldest son inherits from generation to generation. The rest, although they are also the flesh and blood of princes, have not been granted any land, so the way of benevolence and filial piety is not shown.

古文：原陛下令诸侯得推恩分子弟，以地侯之。
现代文：希望陛下命令诸侯可以推广恩德，把土地分割给子弟，封他们为侯。
English: I hope that His Majesty will order the lords to promote benevolence, divide the land among their sons, and make them lords.

古文：彼人人喜得所原，上以德施，实分其国，不削而稍弱矣。 
现代文：这些子弟人人高兴地实现了他们的愿望，皇上用这种办法施以恩德，实际上却分割了诸侯王的国土，不必削减他们的封地，却削弱了他们的势力。 
English: All of these sons and daughters happily fulfilled their wishes. The emperor used this method to grant favors, but in fact divided the land of the princes. They did not have to reduce their fiefs, but they weakened their power.

古文：於是上从其计。
现代文：于是，皇上听从了他的计策。
English: As a result, the Emperor followed his advice.

古文：又说上曰： 茂陵初立，天下豪桀并兼之家，乱众之民，皆可徙茂陵，内实京师，外销奸猾，此所谓不诛而害除。 
现代文：主父偃又劝皇帝说： 茂陵刚设置县，可以将天下豪强兼并之家和作乱的人，都迁到茂陵，内则充实京城，外则消除奸猾之人，这就叫做不诛杀而祸害被消除。 
English: Master Zou also advised the emperor, "Muling County has just been set up. The world's powerful annexation houses and troublemakers can all be moved to Muling. The inner city will be enriched, and the treacherous people will be eliminated. This is called eliminating the scourge without fighting.

古文：上又从其计。
现代文：皇上又听从了他的主张。
English: The Emperor again heeded his advice.

古文：尊立卫皇后，及发燕王定国阴事，盖偃有功焉。
现代文：尊立卫子夫当皇后，及揭发燕王刘定国的阴私，主父偃是有功的。
English: It is the merit of Master Zou to honor the guardian as the empress, and to expose the malevolence of the Yan King Liu Dingguo.

古文：大臣皆畏其口，赂遗累千金。
现代文：大臣们都畏惧主父偃的嘴，贿赂和赠送给他的钱，累计有千金之多。
English: The ministers are all afraid of the master's dirty mouth, bribes and gifts to him amount to thousands of dollars.

古文：人或说偃曰： 太横矣。 
现代文：有人劝说主父偃说： 你太横行了。 
English: Some people tried to dissuade him, saying, "You're too reckless.

古文：主父曰： 臣结发游学四十馀年，身不得遂，亲不以为子，昆弟不收，宾客弃我，我戹日久矣。
现代文：主父偃说： 我从束发游学以来已四十余年，自己的志向得不到实现，父母不把我当儿子看，兄弟们不肯收留我，宾客抛弃我，我穷困的时日已很久了。
English: Master Zou said, "It has been more than forty years since I went on a study tour to Sokfa. My aspirations have not been realized, my parents do not consider me as their son, my brothers do not want to take me in, my guests have abandoned me, and I have been poor for a long time.

古文：且丈夫生不五鼎食，死即五鼎烹耳。
现代文：况且大丈夫活着，如不能列五鼎而食，那么死时就受五鼎烹煮的刑罚好了。
English: Moreover, it's okay to be alive. If you can't eat the five ding, then it's better to be punished by the five ding when you die.

古文：吾日暮途远，故倒行暴施之。 
现代文：我已到日暮途远之时，所以要倒行逆施，横暴行事。 
English: I have come to the end of my days, so I will act perversely and wickedly.

古文：偃盛言朔方地肥饶，外阻河，蒙恬城之以逐匈奴，内省转输戍漕，广中国，灭胡之本也。
现代文：主父偃盛称朔方土地肥沃富饶，外有黄河为险阻，蒙恬在此筑城以驱逐匈奴，内省转运和戍守漕运的人力物力，这是扩大中国土地，消灭匈奴的根本。
English: The main father, Zou Sheng, said that the land of Shuofang was fertile and rich, and the Yellow River was a dangerous obstacle. Meng Zou built a city here to expel the Xiongnu, and the manpower and material resources of introspection, transshipment and defense of rowing transport, which was the basis for expanding China's land and eliminating the Xiongnu.

古文：上览其说，下公卿议，皆言不便。
现代文：皇上看完他的建议，就交给公卿们议论，大家都说不利。
English: After the emperor read his suggestion, he gave it to the nobles to discuss, and everyone said it was unfavorable.

古文：公孙弘曰： 秦时常发三十万众筑北河，终不可就，已而弃之。 
现代文：公孙弘说： 秦朝时曾经调发三十万人在黄河以北修城，最终也未修成，不久就放弃了。 
English: Gongsun Hong said: During the Qin Dynasty, 300,000 people were dispatched to build a city north of the Yellow River, but in the end it was not completed and was soon abandoned.

古文：主父偃盛言其便，上竟用主父计，立朔方郡。
现代文：主父偃盛称其利，皇上竟采纳主父偃的计策，设置了朔方郡。
English: His father, Jinsheng, called it a benefit, but the emperor actually adopted the strategy of his father, Jinsheng, and set up Shuofang County.

古文：元朔二年，主父言齐王内淫佚行僻，上拜主父为齐相。
现代文：元朔二年，主父偃向皇上讲了齐王刘次景在宫内淫乱邪僻的行为，皇上任命他当了齐相。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Shuo, the master's father, Zou, told the emperor about the lewd and perverse behavior of the king of Qi, Liu Ziqing, in the palace, and the emperor appointed him as Qi Xiang.

古文：至齐，遍召昆弟宾客，散五百金予之，数之曰： 始吾贫时，昆弟不我衣食，宾客不我内门；今吾相齐，诸君迎我或千里。
现代文：主父偃到了齐国，把他的兄弟和宾客都召来，散发五百金给他们，数落他们说 开始我贫穷的时候，兄弟不给我衣食，宾客不让我进门；如今我作了齐相，诸君中有人到千里以外去迎接我。
English: When my host arrived in Qi Province, he called his brothers and guests and distributed 500 gold coins to them. They said, "When I was poor, my brothers didn't give me food and clothing, and my guests wouldn't let me in the door. Now that I've made the grand appearance, some of you have come thousands of miles to meet me."

古文：吾与诸君绝矣，毋复入偃之门！ 
现代文：我同诸君绝交了，请不要再进我主父偃的家门！ 
English: I have broken off all relations with you. Please do not enter my master's house again!

古文：乃使人以王与姊奸事动王，王以为终不得脱罪，恐效燕王论死，乃自杀。
现代文：于是他就派人用齐王与其姐姐通奸的事来触动齐王，齐王以为终究不能逃脱罪责，害怕像燕王刘定国那样被判处死罪，就自杀了。
English: Therefore, he sent someone to touch King Qi with the adultery between him and his sister. King Qi thought that he could not escape the blame after all, and he was afraid of being sentenced to death like Yan Wang Liu Dingguo, so he committed suicide.

古文：有司以闻。
现代文：主持此事的官员把这事报告给皇上。
English: The official in charge of the matter reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：主父始为布衣时，尝游燕、赵，及其贵，发燕事。
现代文：主父偃开始当平民百姓时，曾经游历燕地和赵地，等到他当了大官后，就揭发了燕王的阴私。
English: When master father Yan started to be a commoner, he used to travel to Yan and Zhao. When he became a high-ranking official, he exposed Yan Wang's shady dealings.

古文：赵王恐其为国患，欲上书言其阴事，为偃居中，不敢发。
现代文：赵王害怕他成为赵国的祸患，想要上书皇帝讲述他的阴私，因为主父偃在朝中，不敢揭发。
English: King Zhao was afraid that he would become the scourge of Zhao. He wanted to write to the emperor to tell him about his shady dealings, because his father, Zhai, was in the middle of the court and did not dare to expose them.

古文：及为齐相，出关，即使人上书，告言主父偃受诸侯金，以故诸侯子弟多以得封者。
现代文：等到他当了齐相，走出函谷关，赵王就派人上书，告发主父偃接受诸侯的贿赂，因此，诸侯子弟中有很多因为这个原因而被封侯。
English: As soon as he was crowned emperor and came out of the Hangeul Pass, King Zhao sent a letter to inform his father that he had accepted bribes from the princes. As a result, many of the princes' sons and brothers were given the title of prince for this reason.

古文：及齐王自杀，上闻大怒，以为主父劫其王令自杀，乃徵下吏治。
现代文：等到齐王自杀了，皇上听到后，大怒，认为是主父偃威胁他的国王使其自杀的，就交给官吏审问。
English: When the emperor heard that King Qi had committed suicide, he was furious and thought that it was his father who had threatened his king to commit suicide. He handed him over to the officials for interrogation.

古文：主父服受诸侯金，实不劫王令自杀。
现代文：主父偃承认接受诸侯贿赂，实际上没有威胁齐王使他自杀。
English: The main father, Zou, admitted to accepting bribes from princes, but did not actually threaten King Qi to make him commit suicide.

古文：上欲勿诛，是时公孙弘为御史大夫，乃言曰： 齐王自杀无後，国除为郡，入汉，主父偃本首恶，陛下不诛主父偃，无以谢天下。 
现代文：皇上不想诛杀主父偃，这时公孙弘当御史大夫，就对皇上说： 齐王自杀，没有后代，封国被废除而变成郡，归入朝廷，主父偃是这事的罪魁，陛下不杀主父偃，无法向天下人民交待。 
English: The emperor didn't want to kill his father, so when Gongsun Hong became the imperial historian, he said to the emperor: King Qi committed suicide, there are no descendants, the fiefdom was abolished and turned into a county, incorporated into the imperial court, his father was the main culprit in this matter, if his majesty didn't kill his father, he couldn't tell the people around the world.

古文：乃遂族主父偃。
现代文：于是皇上就把主父偃家族的人都杀了。
English: As a result, the emperor killed his father and the rest of the family.

古文：主父方贵幸时，宾客以千数，及其族死，无一人收者，唯独洨孔车收葬之。
现代文：主父偃正在显贵受宠时，宾客的人数以千计，待到他被灭族而死，没有一个人为他收尸，唯独洨县人孔车为他收尸并埋葬了他。
English: When the lord father Zou was being favored by dignitaries, the number of guests was in the thousands. Until he was killed and died, no one collected his body for him, except for the Zou County manhole and buried him.

古文：天子後闻之，以为孔车长者也。
现代文：天子后来听说了这事，认为孔车是个长者。
English: When Tianzi heard about this later, he thought that Kongcha was an elder.

古文：太史公曰：公孙弘行义虽脩，然亦遇时。
现代文：太史公说： 公孙弘的品德行为虽然美好，但是也因为他遇到了好时机。
English: Taishikong said: Although Gongsunhong's moral behavior is good, it is also because he has encountered a good opportunity.

古文：汉兴八十馀年矣，上方乡文学，招俊乂，以广儒墨，弘为举首。
现代文：汉朝建国八十余年了，皇上正崇尚儒家学说，招揽才能超群的人才，以发展儒家和墨家学说，公孙弘是一个被选拔出来的人。
English: It has been more than 80 years since the founding of the Han Dynasty. The emperor is advocating the Confucian doctrine and recruiting outstanding talents to develop the Confucian and Mohist doctrines. Gongsun Hong is a person who has been selected.

古文：主父偃当路，诸公皆誉之，及名败身诛，士争言其恶。悲夫！
现代文：主父偃身居要职，诸位朝中高官都称赞他，待到他名声败坏，自身被杀，士人都争着讲他的坏处，真是可悲呀！
English: My father occupied an important position, and all the high-ranking officials of the DPRK and China praised him. However, when his reputation was tarnished and he was killed, they all tried to find something bad to say about him. What a pity!

古文：太皇太后诏大司徒大司空： 盖闻治国之道，富民为始；富民之要，在於节俭。
现代文：太皇太后王政君向大司徒马宫和大司空甄丰下诏书说： 听说治理国家之道，首先要使百姓富裕起来；使百姓富裕的关键，在于节俭。
English: The grand empress dowager Wang Zhengjun issued an edict to the grand steward Tu Ma Gong and the grand steward Ku Zhenfeng, saying: I have heard that the way to govern the country is to first make the people rich; the key to making the people rich lies in thrift.

古文：孝经曰 安上治民，莫善於礼 。 礼，与奢也宁俭 。
现代文：《孝经》上说： 使皇上平安，治理百姓，没有比用礼更好的了 。 礼，如其奢侈，宁愿节俭。 
English: "The Filial Piety Sutra" says: To keep the emperor safe and to govern the people, there is nothing better than to use etiquette. Etiquette, like its luxury, would rather be frugal.

古文：昔者管仲相齐桓，霸诸侯，有九合一匡之功，而仲尼谓之不知礼，以其奢泰侈拟於君故也。
现代文：从前，管仲当齐桓公的相，使齐桓公称霸诸侯，有九合诸侯，匡正天下的大功，然而仲尼说他不知礼，这是因为他奢侈过度而同国君相比拟的缘故。
English: Once upon a time, Guan Zhong was the official of King Qi Huan, and he made the King of Qi Huan be known as the ruler of all the princes. He had nine concordant princes, and was credited with ruling the world. However, Zhong Ni said that he did not know how to behave, because he was extravagant and compared himself to the king.

古文：夏禹卑宫室，恶衣服，後圣不循。
现代文：夏禹住矮小的房屋，穿粗劣的衣服，后代圣人不遵循他的做法。
English: Xia Yu lived in a small house and wore shabby clothes. The saint's descendants did not follow his example.

古文：由此言之，治之盛也，德优矣，莫高於俭。
现代文：由此可以说，国家政治隆盛时，君王的德行优厚，却没有高过节俭的。
English: From this it can be said that when national politics flourished, the monarch's virtue was excellent, but it was not higher than that of thrift.

古文：俭化俗民，则尊卑之序得，而骨肉之恩亲，争讼之原息。
现代文：用节俭的美德教化俗民，那么尊卑的次序就会形成，而父母兄弟间的骨肉恩情就会更加亲密，纷争诉讼的根源就会消失。
English: If the common people are educated with the virtue of thrift, then the order of superiority and inferiority will be formed, and the flesh-and-blood relationship between parents and brothers will be more intimate, and the root cause of disputes and lawsuits will disappear.

古文：斯乃家给人足，刑错之本也欤？可不务哉！
现代文：这就是家给人足，不用刑罚就能治好国家的根本啊，怎可不努力实践呢！
English: This is the essence of family giving people enough, and the country can be cured without punishment. How can we not practice hard!

古文：夫三公者，百寮之率，万民之表也。
现代文：那三公是百官的统帅，是万民的表率。
English: Those three princes are the commanders of a hundred officials and the models for all the people.

古文：未有树直表而得曲影者也。
现代文：没有树立起垂直标帜却得到弯曲影子的情况。
English: A situation where a vertical banner is not erected, but a curved shadow is obtained.

古文：孔子不云乎， 子率而正，孰敢不正 。 举善而教不能则劝 。
现代文：孔子不是说过吗： 你领着走正路，谁敢不走正路？  选拔贤能的人，教育能力差的人，那么人们就能得到鼓励。 
English: Didn't Confucius say, "If you lead people to the right path, who would dare not to take the right path? If you select people who are capable and educate those who are not, then people will be encouraged.

古文：维汉兴以来，股肱宰臣身行俭约，轻财重义，较然著明，未有若故丞相平津侯公孙弘者也。
现代文：汉朝兴盛以来，作为皇上股肱之臣的宰相都能亲身实行节俭，轻视钱财，重视道义，表现得非常突出的，没有象从前的丞相平津侯公孙弘的了。
English: Since the prosperity of the Han Dynasty, as a vassal of the emperor, the chancellor can personally practice thrift, despise money, attach importance to morality, and perform very prominently, unlike the former prime minister, Pingjin Hou Gong Sunhong.

古文：位在丞相而为布被，脱粟之饭，不过一肉。
现代文：他身居丞相的高官地位却盖着布被，吃粗糙饭食，每顿只不过吃一个肉菜。
English: Although he held the high-ranking position of chancellor, he was covered with a cloth quilt, ate coarse meals, and ate only one meat dish at each meal.

古文：故人所善宾客皆分奉禄以给之，无有所馀。
现代文：但对老朋友和他喜欢的宾客，却都分出一部分自己的俸禄供给他们，自己没有剩余的钱财。
English: But for old friends and his favorite guests, he allotted a portion of his salary to them, and he had no surplus money.

古文：诚内自克约而外从制。
现代文：他确实能够内心自我克制约束，而外表上却依据法律行事。
English: He is indeed capable of inner self-restraint and restraint, while outwardly acting according to the law.

古文：汲黯诘之，乃闻于朝，此可谓减於制度而可施行者也。
现代文：汲黯诘难他，这些事情才被皇上知道，这可以说是比制度规定的要降低一些，但却是可以施行的。
English: It was only after he had been harassed that these matters were brought to the emperor's attention. This may be said to be lower than what is required by the system, but it can be done.

古文：德优则行，否则止，与内奢泰而外为诡服以钓虚誉者殊科。
现代文：德行优厚就去做，否则就不去做，这同背地里奢侈而外表上假装节俭，以此沽名钓誉的人不同。
English: To do or not to do, according to one's virtue, is not the same as being extravagant behind the scenes while pretending to be frugal on the outside in order to make a name for oneself.

古文：以病乞骸骨，孝武皇帝即制曰 赏有功，襃有德，善善恶恶，君宜知之。
现代文：他以有病为由要求退职回家，汉武帝马上下令说： 奖赏有功的，表扬有德的，喜欢好人、讨厌坏人，这是你应当知道的。
English: He asked to return home on the grounds of illness, and Emperor Hanwu immediately ordered: "Reward the meritorious, praise the virtuous, love the good and hate the bad. This is what you should know."

古文：其省思虑，存精神，辅以医药 。
现代文：希望你少用心思，保养精神，再用医药辅助治疗。 
English: I hope that you will think less with your heart, maintain your spirit, and then use medicine to assist treatment.

古文：赐告治病，牛酒杂帛。
现代文：恩准假期，让他治病，赏赐他牛酒和各种布帛。
English: Grant him a holiday, let him cure his illness, and reward him with cow wine and all kinds of cloth.

古文：居数月，有瘳，视事。
现代文：过了几个月，公孙弘的病好了，就上朝办公。
English: After a few months, Gongsunhiro's illness was cured, and he went to work in the morning.

古文：至元狩二年，竟以善终于相位。
现代文：到元狩二年，他终于在丞相的官位上寿终正寝。
English: In the second year of the Genkan era, he finally passed away at the official rank of chancellor.

古文：夫知臣莫若君，此其效也。
现代文：了解大臣的没有超过国君的了，这就是例证。
English: This is an example of how a minister's understanding is no better than that of a sovereign.

古文：弘子度嗣爵，後为山阳太守，坐法失侯。
现代文：公孙弘的儿子公孙度继承了父亲的爵位，后来当了山阳太守，因犯法失掉侯爵。
English: Gongsunhiro's son Gongsundu inherited his father's title, and later became the governor of Sanyang, but lost his marquisate for breaking the law.

古文：夫表德章义，所以率俗厉化，圣王之制，不易之道也。
现代文：表彰道德大义，是为了引导时俗之人，勉励教化，这是圣王的制度，不可改变的道理。
English: To commend moral righteousness is to guide the people of the times and the world, and to encourage them to be educated. This is the system of the holy king, and the principle that cannot be changed.

古文：其赐弘後子孙之次当为後者爵关内侯，食邑三百户，徵诣公车，上名尚书，朕亲临拜焉。 
现代文：将恩赐公孙弘后代子孙中的嫡系者以关内侯的爵位，食邑三百户，用公车把他们送到京城，将他们的名字报到尚书那里，朕要亲临现场授予爵位。 
English: I will bestow the peerage of the Marquis of Guanai on the legitimate descendants of the descendants of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson

