古文：秦、赵战于长平，赵不胜，亡一都尉。
现代文：秦国、赵国在长平交战，赵国战败，死了一个都尉。
English: Qin and Zhao fought in Changping, Zhao was defeated, and a captain died.

古文：赵王召楼昌与虞卿曰： 军战不胜，尉复死，寡人使卷甲而趋之，何如? 
现代文：赵孝成王召见楼昌和虞卿说： 军队打仗失败了，都尉又战死了一个，寡人派全部甲兵去袭击秦军，怎么样？ 
English: Zhao Xiaocheng summoned Louchang and Yuqing and said: The army failed in the war, another captain died in the war, and nobody sent all the armored soldiers to attack the Qin army, how about it?

古文：楼昌曰： 无益也，不如发重使而为媾。 
现代文：楼昌说： 这样没有好处，不如派出一个重要的使者与秦国讲和。 
English: Louchang said, "This is no good. It is better to send an important envoy to make peace with Qin."

古文：虞卿曰： 夫言媾者，以为不媾者军必破，而制媾者在秦。
现代文：虞卿说： 那些谈论讲和的人，认为不讲和打仗就一定会失败。可是控制讲和的权力是在秦国手中。
English: Yuqing said, "Those who talk about declaring peace think that if they don't declare peace and fight a war, they will definitely fail. However, the power to control the declaration of peace is in the hands of Qin."

古文：且王之论秦也，欲破王之军乎?其不邪? 
现代文：再说对秦国来说，是想要打败大王的军队呢？还是不是这样？ 
English: Furthermore, for Qin, did they want to defeat the great king's army? Or not?

古文：王曰： 秦不遗余力矣，必且破赵军。 
现代文：赵孝成王说： 秦国是不遗余力了，一定要打败赵国军队。 
English: Zhao Xiaocheng Wang said: Qin has spared no effort to defeat Zhao's army.

古文：虞卿曰： 王聊听臣，发使出重宝以附楚、魏。
现代文：虞卿说： 大王姑且听从臣下的话，派使者拿出重要宝器去归附楚国、魏国。
English: Yu Jing said: Let the great king listen to the words of his vassals and send an envoy to take out important treasures to attach to Chu and Wei.

古文：楚、魏欲得王之重宝，必入吾使。
现代文：楚国、魏国想要得到大王的贵重宝物，一定会让我们的使者进入他们的国家。
English: The states of Chu and Wei, who wanted to obtain the great king's precious treasures, would certainly allow our emissaries to enter their countries.

古文：赵使入楚、魏，秦必疑天下合从也，且必恐。
现代文：赵国使者进入楚国、魏国，秦国就会怀疑天下诸侯在搞合纵，一定会恐惧。
English: If an emissary from Zhao entered Chu, Wei, and Qin, they would suspect that the princes of the world were conspiring, and they would certainly be afraid.

古文：如此，则媾乃可为也。 
现代文：如此，那么讲和的事才可以去做。 
English: Only then can peace talks take place.

古文：赵王不听，与平阳君为媾，发郑朱入秦，秦内之。
现代文：赵孝成王不听，用平阳君赵豹办理讲和事宜，派郑朱到秦国去，秦国接纳了郑朱。
English: Zhao Xiaocheng did not listen to the king, and sent Zheng Zhu to the State of Qin, which accepted Zheng Zhu.

古文：赵王召虞卿曰： 寡人使平阳君媾秦，秦已内郑朱矣，子以为奚如? 
现代文：赵孝成王召见虞卿说： 寡人派平阳君与秦国讲和，秦国已经接纳郑朱了，您觉得怎么样？ 
English: Zhao Xiaocheng summoned Yuqing and said: Many people sent Pingyang to talk peace with Qin. Qin has already accepted Zheng Zhu. What do you think?

古文：虞卿曰： 王必不得媾，军必破矣，天下之贺战胜者皆在秦矣。
现代文：虞卿说： 大王与秦国讲和不可能成功，赵国的军队一定被打败了，天下诸侯祝贺战争胜利的人已经到秦国了。
English: Yuqing said, "The war between the Great King and the State of Qin cannot be successful. The army of the State of Zhao must have been defeated. People from all over the world have come to the State of Qin to congratulate the victorious warlords.

古文：郑朱，赵之贵人也，而入于秦，秦王与应侯必显重以示天下。
现代文：郑朱，是赵国尊贵的人，进入秦国去讲和，秦昭王和应侯一定把这个显贵重要的使者给天下诸侯看。
English: Zheng Zhu, an honorable person from Zhao, entered Qin to make peace, and Qin Zhao Wang and Ying Hou must have shown this distinguished and important envoy to the princes of the world.

古文：楚、魏以赵为媾，必不救王。
现代文：楚国、魏国认为赵国讲和，一定不会援救大王。
English: The two countries of Chu and Wei believed that if Zhao went to Qin to sue for peace, they would not rescue the great king.

古文：秦知天下不救王，则媾不可得成也。 
现代文：秦国知道天下诸侯不援助大王，那么讲和是不会成功的。 
English: Qin knew that if the princes of the world did not come to the rescue of the great king, then the peace talks could not succeed.

古文：赵卒不得媾，军果大败。
现代文：赵国终于没能与秦国讲和，军队果然被打得大败。
English: Zhao finally failed to make peace with Qin, and the army was soundly defeated.

古文：王入秦，秦留赵王而后许之媾。
现代文：赵王入秦朝拜，秦国扣留赵王后答应赵国讲和。
English: Zhao Wang entered the Qin Dynasty to worship, Qin detained Zhao Wang and Zhao promised to make peace.

