古文：张九龄，字子寿，韶州曲江人。
现代文：张九龄，字子寿，韶州曲江人，七岁时就会写文章。
English: Zhang Jiuling, also known as Zi Shou, a native of Qujiang, Zhangzhou, could write articles at the age of seven.

古文：七岁知属文，十三以书干广州刺史王方庆，方庆叹曰： 是必致远。 
现代文：十三岁时带着他写的字去谒见广州刺史王方庆，王方庆看了感叹说 ：这孩子前程不可限量。 
English: When he was 13 years old, he took the letter he had written with him to see the Guangzhou scholar Wang Fangqing. Wang Fangqing sighed and said: "This child's future is limitless."

古文：会张说谪岭南，一见厚遇之。
现代文：当时张说贬谪岭南，见到他后对他极好。
English: At that time, Zhang said that he despised Lingnan and treated him very well after meeting him.

古文：居父丧，哀毁，庭中木连理。
现代文：父亲死，在父丧期间极尽孝道，哀痛至极。后来考中进士，调任校书郎。
English: After his father's death, he did his best to be a filial son during his father's funeral and was extremely sad. Later, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and was transferred to the position of school secretary.

古文：擢进士，始调校书郎，以道侔伊吕科策高第，为左拾遗。
现代文：那时玄宗尚在东宫，亲自策问天下之士，张九龄于伊吕科对策高第，升为左拾遗。
English: At that time, Xuanzong was still in the East Palace, personally interrogating the people of the world, and Zhang Julin was in Ilyushin University's Countermeasures High School, promoted to the left to collect relics.

古文：时玄宗即位，未郊见，九龄建言：天，百神之君，王者所由受命也。
现代文：后来玄宗即位，未行亲郊之礼，张九龄上疏说： 天，是百神之君，为王者是从天那里受命的。
English: Later, when Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he did not perform the ceremony of kinship with the countryside. Zhang Jiling said: "Heaven is the ruler of a hundred gods, and the king is ordered from heaven."

古文：自古继统之主，必有郊配，尽敬天命，报所受也。
现代文：自古以来，继承帝业之主，必定要行郊祀之礼，为的是敬受天命向天报告。
English: Since ancient times, the inheritor of the imperial inheritance must perform the suburban worship, in order to respect the mandate of heaven and report to heaven.

古文：不以德泽未洽，年谷未登，而阙其礼。
现代文：不可以因为还未降恩泽于民，年岁还未丰收而缺礼。
English: They should not be disrespectful because they have not yet shown their gratitude to the people and the harvest has not yet been plentiful.

古文：昔者周公郊祀后稷以配天，谓成王幼冲，周公居摄，犹用其礼，明不可废也。
现代文：古代周公郊祀，以后稷祀天，那是因为成王年幼。周公暂时摄政，尚且要行郊礼，表明此礼是不可废的。
English: In ancient times, Zhou Gong was worshipped in the suburbs, but later he was worshipped in heaven, because Cheng Wang was young. Zhou Gong was temporarily regent, but he still had to perform the suburb ritual, indicating that this ritual was indispensable.

古文：汉丞相匡衡曰： 帝王之事，莫重乎郊祀。 
现代文：汉朝的丞相匡衡说： 帝王的事，没有比郊礼更重要的了。 
English: Kuang Heng, the chancellor of the Han Dynasty, said: There is nothing more important for the emperor than the suburb ceremony.

古文：董仲舒亦言： 不郊而祭山川，失祭之序，逆于礼，故《春秋》非之。 
现代文：董仲舒也说： 不郊祀而去祭山川，违背了祭祀的秩序，于礼不合，所以《春秋》上批评他。 
English: Dong Zhongshu also said, "He went to the mountain and river without going to the temple, which violated the order of the ritual and was not in accordance with the etiquette, so he was criticized in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：臣谓衡、仲舒古之知礼。皆以郊之祭所宜先也。
现代文：臣认为匡衡、董仲舒，都是古代的懂礼的人，都以为郊祀应放在首位。
English: The vassal believed that Kuang Heng and Dong Zhongshu were both ancient people who knew etiquette, and both believed that the suburb worship should be placed first.

古文：陛下绍休圣绪，于今五载，而未行大报，考之于经，义或未通。
现代文：陛下继承大统，到今日已有五年了，而未行大报之礼。考证之于经传，在义上有所欠缺。
English: It has now been five years since His Majesty succeeded to the throne, but he has not performed the great ritual. This is based on the teachings of the sutras, and is deficient in terms of righteousness.

古文：今百谷嘉生，鸟兽咸若，夷狄内附，兵革用弭，乃怠于事天，恐不可以训。
现代文：如今百谷茂盛，鸟兽自如，夷狄归附，战争止息，竟然放松敬天之事，恐怕不足以为训。
English: Now that the crops are flourishing, the birds and beasts are free to roam, the barbarians have returned, the war has ended, and reverence for the heavens has been relaxed, I'm afraid that's not enough of a lesson.

古文：愿以迎日之至，升紫坛，陈采席，定天位，则圣典无遗矣。
现代文：希望能在至日登紫坛，陈采席，定天位，明天道。那圣朝的典则就完备了。 
English: I hope to be able to go up to the purple altar on the solstice, to sit at the throne, to set the position of heaven, and to preach tomorrow. Then the rules of the holy morning will be complete.

古文：又言：乖政之气，发为水旱。
现代文：又说： 背逆王政之气，表现为水旱灾害。
English: He also said: "Rebelling against the spirit of kingship has manifested itself in floods and droughts.

古文：天道虽远，其应甚迩。
现代文：天道虽远，但其反应的却很近。
English: Although heaven is far away, its reaction is very close.

古文：昔东海枉杀孝妇，天旱久之。
现代文：过去东海错杀了孝妇，以致天旱很久。
English: In the past, the East Sea mistakenly killed the filial wife, resulting in a long drought.

古文：一吏不明，匹妇非命，则天昭其冤。
现代文：一个官吏不明察，一个普通妇女冤死，天还要昭明她的冤屈。
English: A bureaucrat did not notice, an ordinary woman died unjustly, and heaven will reveal her grievances.

古文：况六合元元之众，县命于县令，宅生于刺史，陛下所与共治，尤亲于人者乎！
现代文：何况天下百姓，其性命都交在县令刺史手中。县令刺史，是与陛下共同治理天下的人，应该是亲近百姓的人。
English: In addition, the lives of the people of the world are in the hands of the county magistrate. The county magistrate is the person who governs the world together with His Majesty, and should be close to the people.

古文：若非其任，水旱之繇，岂唯一妇而已。
现代文：若所用非人，那水旱灾祸之由来，岂只是一个妇人呢？
English: And if it was not a man that did it, was it a woman that brought this evil on us?

古文：今刺史，京辅雄望之郡，犹少择之，江、淮、陇、蜀、三河大府之外，稍非其人。
现代文：现任的刺史，京辅周围及大的郡县尚能稍加选择，江、淮、陇、蜀、三河几个大府之外，颇有不称职的。
English: The current prick of history, around Beijing and the large counties can still be slightly selected, and there are quite incompetent ones in addition to several prefectures of Jiangsu, Huai, Fujian, Shuxi and Sanhe.

古文：繇京官出者，或身有累，或政无状，用牧守之任。为斥逐之地。
现代文：由京官出去的人，不是自身有过错，就是政绩不佳，把直接管理百姓的大任，作为斥责处分的办法。
English: People who leave the Beijing government, either through their own fault or because of poor political performance, take the responsibility of directly managing the people as a way of reprimanding and punishing.

古文：或因附会以忝高位，及势衰，谓之不称京职，出以为州。
现代文：也有的是因为依附某人而得高位，及至被依附者势衰，就说该人不称京官之职，将他贬到州里任职。
English: There are also those who have risen to high positions because they are dependent on someone, and when the dependent person's influence wanes, they say that the person is not qualified for the post of Beijing official, and demote him to a post in the prefecture.

古文：武夫、流外，积资而得，不计于才。
现代文：另外，还有武夫、流外，只要交钱就能得官，不计较其才能之有无。
English: In addition, there are warriors and exiles, as long as they pay money, they can get a post, regardless of their talent.

古文：刺史乃尔，县令尚可言哉？
现代文：刺史都像这样，县令就更不用说了。
English: The history of stabbing is all like this, not to mention the county ordinance.

古文：氓庶，国家之本，务本之职，乃为好进者所轻，承弊之民，遭不肖所扰，圣化从此销郁，繇不选亲人以成其敝也。
现代文：百姓，是国家的根本。治理根本的职务，竟然遭好为官者所轻视，百姓遭受那些不肖者的侵扰。天子圣明的教化被销蚀。这是因为没有选好恰当的人才造成的。
English: The people are the foundation of the country. The fundamental duty of governance is actually despised by those who would like to become officials, and the people are harassed by those unsavory people. The enlightenment of the Son of Heaven has been eroded. This is due to the failure to select the right talent.

古文：古者刺史入为三公，郎官出宰百里。
现代文：古代刺史入朝可为三公，郎官可以出京管理乡民。
English: In ancient times, the prince who entered the imperial court could be the third prince, and the vassal could go to Beijing to manage the villagers.

古文：京师衣冠所聚，身名所出，从容附会，不勤而成，是大利在于内，而不在于外也。
现代文：现在朝廷上人只能入京而不肯出京。京师是达官贵人集聚之处，只要从容依附，没有业绩也能升迁。由此可见，大利在于朝内而不在京外。
English: Nowadays, imperial courtiers can only enter the capital, but not leave it. The capital is a place where high-ranking officials gather. As long as they adhere to it, they can be promoted without performance. It can be seen that the power lies within the imperial court and not outside the capital.

古文：智能之士，欲利之心，安肯复出为刺史、县令哉？
现代文：即使有才能的人，有欲得利之心，怎肯再出京任刺史县令呢？
English: Even if a talented person has the desire to make a profit, how can he go to Beijing to serve as a county magistrate?

古文：国家赖智能以治，而常无亲人者，陛下不革以法故也。
现代文：国家要依赖智能之士才能治好，但却常缺少重视百姓的人。
English: The country needs to rely on intelligent people to heal, but it often lacks people who value the people.

古文：臣愚谓欲治之本，莫若重守令，守令既重，则能者可行。
现代文：臣认为要治好根本，最要紧的莫过于守令，重视了守令，那有才能者才肯去做。
English: The minister believed that in order to cure the root cause, the most important thing was to keep the order. He attached importance to keeping the order, and only those with talent would be willing to do it.

古文：宜遂科定其资：凡不历都督、刺史，虽有高第，不得任侍郎、列卿；不历县令，虽有善政，不得任台郎、给、舍；都督、守、令虽远者，使无十年任外。
现代文：应该制定各官阶的资历：凡没有担任过都督、刺史的人，虽有很高的门第，也不能任侍郎及列卿；凡没有担任过县令的人，即使有好的政绩，也不能任台郎、给、舍；都督、守、令即使是离京都远的，任期也不超过十年。
English: The qualifications for each official rank should be established: those who have not served as the governor or chief historian, although they have a high pedigree, cannot be appointed as chamberlains and lords; those who have not served as the county magistrate, even if they have good political achievements, cannot be appointed as Tairo, ga, sho; the term of office of the governor, shu, and magistrate, even if they are far from Kyoto, does not exceed ten years.

古文：如不为此而救其失，恐天下犹未治也。
现代文：假如不这样来弥补过失，恐怕天下是治理不好的。
English: If we don't make up for our mistakes in this way, I'm afraid the world will not be well governed.

古文：又古之选士，惟取称职，是以士修素行，而不为徼幸，奸伪自止，流品不杂。
现代文： 再有，古代选士，看其是否称职，所以士都看重自我修养，从不企图侥幸成功。奸邪欺伪自然消止，官吏的流品不杂。
English: In addition, the selection of officials in ancient times was based on whether they were competent, so they all valued self-cultivation and never tried to succeed by chance. Treachery and deceit were eliminated naturally, and officials were of high quality.

古文：今天下不必治于上古，而事务日倍于前，诚以不正其本而设巧于末也。所谓末者，吏部条章，举赢千百。
现代文：如今天下没有上古治理得那么好，而事务却较以前倍增，这是因为没有正其本而施巧于末的结果，所谓 末 ，就是吏部的条款章程，多到千百条。
English: If today's governance is not as good as that of the ancients, and affairs have multiplied more than before, this is because there is no proper basis and the result of applying skill to the end. The so-called "end" is the articles and regulations of the Ministry of Personnel, which have increased to thousands of articles.

古文：刀笔之人，溺于文墨；巧史猾徒，缘奸而奋。
现代文：执刀笔之人，沉溺于文墨，致使巧猾之徒得以逞奸。
English: He who wields the sword and the pen is addicted to writing and ink, which enables the cunning to commit treachery.

古文：凡称吏部能者，则曰自尉与主簿，繇主簿与丞，此执文而知官次者也，乃不论其贤不肖，岂不谬哉！
现代文：臣以为当初制造簿本，是为了防备遗忘。如今反倒去追求文章的精美，而忽略了人的才能，真是刻舟求剑之类。现在提及吏部有才能的，则说是由尉到主簿，由主簿到丞。这是根据记载知道他的官次，却不论他的能干与否，岂不是大错？
English: The vassal thought that the book was originally made to prevent forgetting. Nowadays, on the contrary, it pursues the beauty of the article, but ignores the talent of the person, it is really a kind of carving a boat for a sword. Now, when it comes to the talent of the cadre, it is said that it is from the lieutenant to the master book, from the master book to the junior. Is it not a big mistake to know his rank according to the records, but regardless of his ability or not?

古文：夫吏部尚书、侍郎，以贤而授者也，岂不能知人？
现代文：吏部尚书、侍郎，是因有才干才任他这个职位的，怎能不知人？
English: The clerk, the secretary, and the waiter were appointed to their positions because of their talents. How could they not know?

古文：如知之难，拔十得五，斯可矣。
现代文：如真的难以即刻识别，那么从十个人中间选拔五个该可以吧。
English: If it is really difficult to identify immediately, then it should be possible to select five out of ten people.

古文：今胶以格条，据资配职，为官择人，初无此意，故时人有平配之诮，官曹无得贤之实。
现代文：但如今，死扣条文，据资历配职，以致时人讥诮、官曹不贤。 臣认为选部的法则，其弊病在于不变。
English: But now, the deadlock clause, according to the seniority of the job, so that people ridicule, the official Cao is not virtuous. The minister believes that the law of the selection of the department, its drawback is unchanged.

古文：臣谓选部之法，敝于不变。今若刺史、县令精核其人，则管内岁当选者，使考才行，可入流品，然后送台，又加择焉，以所用众寡为州县殿最，则州县慎所举，可官之才多，吏部因其成，无庸人之繁矣。
现代文：如今若在刺史、县令中详细核查，在管内每年当选者，另考核其才能品德，可入流品的，送到台里再加选择，以所用人的多少来评定州县的好坏，那州县就会慎重对待所荐举的人。可任官的人才多了，吏部也可顺利完成任务，不会有那么多的庸人了。
English: Nowadays, if the details of the history and the county ordinance are checked in detail, and those who are elected annually within the jurisdiction are also examined for their talents and moral character, and those who can enter the mainstream are sent to Taili and then selected, and the quality of the county is evaluated by the number of people used, the county will carefully treat the people recommended. There are more talents who can be appointed, and the personnel department can successfully complete the task, and there will not be so many mediocre people.

古文：今岁选乃万计，京师米物为耗，岂多士哉？
现代文：如今每年考选有几万人，京师的粮食用品耗费甚大，难道是人才多吗？
English: Nowadays, tens of thousands of people are selected for the examination every year, and the food supplies of the Beijing Division are very expensive. Is it because there are more talents?

古文：尽冒滥抵此尔。
现代文：实在是滥竽充数的太多了。
English: It's really too much of an indiscriminate charge.

古文：方以一诗一判，定其是非，适使贤人遗逸，此明代之阙政也。天下虽广，朝廷虽众，必使毁誉相乱，听受不明，事则已矣。
现代文：现在只用一首诗就可定其才或庸，这样会使真正的人才漏掉。天下虽大，朝廷官员虽多，但若毁誉相乱，那事情也就不可能办好了。
English: Nowadays, only one poem can be used to determine a person's talent or mediocrity, which leads to the omission of true talent. Although the world is large and there are many officials in the imperial court, if reputation and reputation are in disarray, it is impossible to get things done.

古文：如知其贤能，各有品第，每一官缺，不以次用之，岂不可乎？
现代文：假如了解人的才能，各有品级等第，每有一官缺额，就可依次任用。
English: If you know people's talents, each has a rank and so on, and there is a vacancy for each rank, you can appoint them in turn.

古文：如诸司要官，以下等叨进，是议无高卑，唯得与不尔。
现代文：如各司的要职，以下一等的递进，那就无所谓人的高下，只是机会的得与不得罢了。
English: If the important posts in each division were to be promoted from the next to the first, then it wouldn't matter how high or low a person was, it would just be a matter of chance.

古文：故清议不立，而名节不修，善士守志而后时，中人进求而易操也。
现代文：所以平日的议论没有了，个人的名节不修了。高洁之士坚守其志而不肯媚时，中等人才追求进身就很容易了。
English: Therefore, there is no discussion on weekdays, and personal festivals are not cultivated. When high-quality people adhere to their aspirations and are not willing to be charming, it is easy for middle-level talents to pursue advancement.

古文：朝廷能以令名进人，士亦以修名获利，利之出，众之趋也。
现代文：若朝廷能以好名声鼓励人，士也以修名来得利，利之所出，是众人之所求。
English: If the imperial court can encourage people with a good reputation, people will also make profits by renaming. The source of profit is what everyone seeks.

古文：不如此，则小者得于苟求，一变而至阿私；大者许以分义，再变而成朋党矣。
现代文：若不这样，从小处说，只求苟得，进而只知谋私；从大处说，以义做交易，进而结为朋党。
English: Otherwise, from a small point of view, they only seek to gain, and then only know how to seek personal gain; from a large point of view, they trade in righteousness, and then become friends.

古文：故于用人不可不第其高下，高下有次，则不可以妄干，天下之士必刻意修饰，而刑政自清，此兴衰之大端也。
现代文：所以说，用人不可以不排列其才能的高下。才能分出了等级，就不会盲目用人，那天下之士定会刻意进修自守，刑政自然清正，这是有关国家兴衰的大事。 
English: Therefore, it is imperative for employers not to rank their talents from the highest to the lowest. If talents are graded, they will not blindly employ people. In that day, the people of the world will deliberately study and self-protect, and the criminal justice system will naturally be clean. This is an important matter for the rise and fall of the country concerned.

古文：俄迁左补阙。
现代文：不久，升任左补阙。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Zuoxi (左补) of Cangzhou.

古文：九龄自才鉴，吏部试拔萃与举者，常与右拾遗赵冬曦考次，号称详平。
现代文：张九龄颇能鉴别人才，吏部考试时，张九龄常与右拾遗赵冬曦一同参与评定，当时称他们考核为 详平 。
English: Zhang Jiuling is quite capable of judging other people's talents. During the examination of the cadre department, Zhang Jiuling often participated in the evaluation together with Zhao Dongxi, the Right Reviewer. At that time, he said that their assessment was "fair."

古文：改司勋员外郎。
现代文：后改任司勋员外郎。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Grand Officer of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：时张说为宰相，亲重之，与通谱系，常曰： 后出词人之冠也。 
现代文：那时，张说为宰相，十分看重他，且与他通谱系为同宗，常说张九龄是 后出词人之首位 。
English: At that time, Zhang Jiuling was the prime minister, he was very important to him, and he was the same lineage as him. It is often said that Zhang Jiuling was the first to come up with the lyrics.

古文：迁中书舍人内供奉，封曲江男，进中书舍人。
现代文：张九龄又升任中书舍人内供奉，封爵曲江男，进而为中书舍人。
English: Zhang Jiuling was also promoted to the position of the internal worshiper of the Chinese calligraphers, knighted Qu Jiangan, and then became the leader of the Chinese calligraphers.

古文：会帝封泰山，说多引两省录事主书及所亲摄官升山，超阶至五品。
现代文：皇帝去封泰山，张说挑选了两省的录事主书及他所亲近的人随从登山，将这些人越级升为五品。
English: When the emperor went to Mount Tai, Zhang said that he selected the chief recorders of the two provinces and the people close to him to accompany the climbers, and promoted these people to the fifth grade.

古文：九龄当草诏，谓说曰： 官爵者，天下公器，先德望，后劳旧。
现代文：张九龄负责草拟诏书，对张说说 ：官职爵位，是天下的公器，首先要看人的德行声望，然后再看他的劳绩年限。
English: Zhang Jiuling, who was in charge of drafting the edict, said to Zhang: "A title of nobility is the world's official instrument. First of all, it depends on a person's virtue and reputation, and then on his years of service.

古文：今登封告成，千载之绝典，而清流隔于殊恩，胥史乃滥章韨，恐制出，四方失望。
现代文：现在登山封禅成功，是千载的大典，一些有声望之人被排在殊恩之外，而一些胥吏却得以升官，我担心这样的制书一出，四方都会失望的。
English: Now that the success of the Mountaineering Feudal Zen is a thousand-year-old classic, some prestigious people have been excluded from the special favor, while some officials have been promoted. I am afraid that once such a book is made, all sides will be disappointed.

古文：方进草，尚可以改，公宜审计。 
现代文：现在刚刚送上草稿，还可以改动，望公仔细考虑衡量。 
English: Now that the draft has just been submitted, it can still be changed, and Wang Gong will carefully consider and measure it.

古文：说曰： 事已决矣，悠悠之言不足虑。 
现代文：张说说 ：事情已经决定了，那些牢骚话不足为虑。 
English: Zhang said, "Things have already been decided, so don't worry about those complaints."

古文：既而果得谤。
现代文：后来，果然受到批评。
English: Later, he was indeed criticized.

古文：御史中丞宇文融方事田法，有所关奏，说辄建议违之。
现代文：御史中丞宇文融正在拟定田税法，有所报告，张说都建议改变。
English: Vice-Minister of History Yu Wenyong is in the process of drafting the field tax law. According to the report, Zhang said that all suggested changes.

古文：融积不平，九龄为言，说不听。
现代文：宇文融心中十分不平，张九龄替他申说，张说不听。
English: Yu Wenyong felt very uneasy. Zhang Jiuling spoke for him, but Zhang did not listen.

古文：俄为融等痛诋，几不免，九龄亦改太常少卿，出为冀州刺史。
现代文：不久，张说受到宇文融等人的痛加诋毁，几乎不能免死。张九龄也改任太常少卿，出京为冀州刺史。
English: Soon, Zhang Jiuling said that he had been severely slandered by Yu Wenyong and others, and could hardly avoid death. Zhang Jiuling was also reappointed as Taizang Shaoqing, and went to Beijing to make history in Jizhou.

古文：以母不肯去乡里，故表换洪州都督。
现代文：因为母亲不肯离开乡里，所以上表请改为浩州都督。
English: Because my mother refused to leave the village, I asked her to change the name on the list to the Governor of Khost Province.

古文：徙桂州，兼岭南按察选补使。
现代文：后调桂州，兼岭南按察选补使。
English: Later, he was transferred to Guizhou, and also served as the deputy minister of Lingnan Province.

古文：始说知集贤院，尝荐九龄可备顾问。
现代文：当初，张说主管集贤院，曾推荐张九龄可任顾问。
English: At the beginning, Zhang said that the director of Jixian Academy had recommended Zhang Jiuling to be appointed as a consultant.

古文：说卒，天子思其言，召为秘书少监、集贤院学士，知院事。
现代文：张说死，天子想起张说说的话，召张九龄为秘书少监、集贤院学士，主管集贤院的工作。
English: When Zhang Sheng died, Tianzi remembered what Zhang Sheng had said and summoned Zhang Jiuling to be the secretary of the junior superintendent, the bachelor of Jixian Academy, and the supervisor of the work of Jixian Academy.

古文：会赐渤海诏，而书命无足为者，乃召九龄为之，被诏辄成。
现代文：那时要赐渤海诏书，而能写这样诏书的人找不到，于是召张九龄起草，渤海之事也就办成了。
English: At that time, an imperial decree was to be issued for the Bohai Sea, but no one who could write such an imperial decree could be found, so Zhang Jiuling was summoned to draft it, and the matter of the Bohai Sea was finally completed.

古文：迁工部侍郎，知制诰。
现代文：升张九龄为工部侍郎，管理草拟制诰事。
English: Zhang Jiuling was promoted to the assistant of the engineering department, managing the drafting of the anecdote.

古文：数乞归养，诏不许，以其弟九皋、九章为岭南刺史，岁时听给驿省家。
现代文：张九龄多次要求辞职，回去奉养母亲，均未得允许。因其弟弟张九皋、张九章是岭南刺史，就每年给假给驿马，让他们回去看望母亲。
English: Zhang Jiuling repeatedly asked to resign and go back to support his mother, but was not allowed. Because his younger brothers Zhang Jiulong and Zhang Jiuzhang are the history of Lingnan, he gives a leave of absence to the horses every year, so that they can go back to visit their mother.

古文：迁中书侍郎，以母丧解，毁不胜哀，有紫芝产坐侧，白鸠、白雀巢家树。
现代文：张九龄任中书侍郎时，因母丧而解职。丧期十分尽孝哀痛，居然在他坐席旁生出灵芝来，还有白鸠、白雀在他家树上建窠。
English: When Zhang Julin served as a junior secretary, he was relieved of his duties due to his mother's death. During the period of mourning, he was very filial and sorrowful. In fact, Ganoderma lucidum sprouted next to his seat, and egrets and white finches built nests on his family tree.

古文：是岁，夺哀拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：这一年，皇帝要夺哀起复他为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In this year, the emperor wanted to take pity on him and restore him as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the disciple of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：固辞，不许。
现代文：张九龄坚持辞谢，皇帝不许。
English: Zhang Juering insisted on resigning, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：明年，迁中书令。
现代文：第二年，任中书令。
English: In the second year of his appointment, he resigned.

古文：始议河南开水屯，兼河南稻田使。
现代文：以前他曾建议在河南开水屯，于是要他兼河南稻田使。
English: In the past, he had suggested setting up a water treatment plant in Henan, so he was asked to serve as Henan's rice field officer.

古文：上言废循资格，复置十道采访使。
现代文：上疏建议废除凭资格任官的办法，再次设置十道采访使。
English: Shangsu suggested abolishing the method of appointing officials based on qualifications, and re-establishing the Ten-Way Correspondence Envoy.

古文：李林甫无学术，见九龄文雅，为帝知，内忌之。
现代文：李林甫学问不大，见张九龄因文雅而受到皇帝的赏识，心中十分忌恨。
English: Li Linfu didn't have much knowledge, but he hated Zhang Juering when he saw that the emperor appreciated Zhang Juering's gentleness.

古文：会范阳节度使张守珪以斩可突干功，帝欲以为侍中。
现代文：那时范阳节度使张守皀因斩杀可突干有功，皇帝打算任张守皀为侍中。
English: At that time, Fan Yang's edict made Zhang Shouyi a meritorious person for killing, and the emperor planned to appoint Zhang Shouyi as an attendant.

古文：九龄曰： 宰相代天治物，有其人然后授，不可以赏功。
现代文：张九龄劝谏 ：宰相是代替天来治理天下的，有了当宰相的人才后，才能任职，不能用它来奖赏功劳。
English: Zhang Jiuling advised that the prime minister is to govern the world in place of heaven, and can only serve after having the talent to be the prime minister, and cannot use it to reward merit.

古文：国家之败，由官邪也。 
现代文：难道说国家的败亡，不是由官员的不称职和奸邪所致的吗？ 
English: Wasn't the downfall of the country caused by the incompetence and treachery of officials?

古文：帝曰： 假其名若何？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：只给一个空名可以吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Can I just give you an empty name?"

古文：对曰： 名器不可假也。
现代文：张九龄说： 名器，是不可以假借的。
English: Zhang Jiuling said: It is not allowed to borrow famous instruments.

古文：有如平东北二虏，陛下何以加之？ 
现代文：假如有人平定了东北二虏，那陛下加他们什么官呢？ 
English: If someone were to pacify the Northeasterners, what would His Majesty do with them?

古文：遂止。
现代文：此议就作罢。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：又将以凉州都督牛仙客为尚书，九龄执曰： 不可。
现代文：另一次准备把凉州都督牛仙客提拔为尚书。张九龄坚持说 ：不可以。
English: Another time, he was preparing to promote the Liangzhou governor, Niu Xianke, to Shangshu. Zhang Juling insisted: "No."

古文：尚书，古纳言，唐家多用旧相，不然，历内外贵任，妙有德望者为之。
现代文：尚书一职，是古代的纳言官，唐家多用旧相担任，或者用历任内外高职且德高望重的人担任。
English: The post of Shangshu was a high-ranking official in ancient times, and the Tang family mostly used the old minister to hold the post, or used people who had held high positions at home and abroad and were highly respected.

古文：仙客，河、湟一使典耳，使班常伯，天下其谓何？ 
现代文：牛仙客，只是河、湟的一个使典罢了，让他身任常伯，天下人将会怎么说？ 
English: Niu Xianke is just an envoy of He and Zou, let him be a permanent uncle, what will the world say?

古文：又欲赐实封，九龄曰： 汉法非有功不封，唐遵汉法，太宗之制也。
现代文：又准备赐牛仙客实封户，张九龄说 ：汉朝的法令，不是有功之人不封。唐遵汉法，是太宗定下的制度。
English: In addition, they are preparing to grant the Niu Xian guest a real house arrest, Zhang Jiling said: The Han Dynasty's decree is that no one who is not meritorious will be arrested. The Tang follows the Han Law, which is the system set by Taizong.

古文：边将积谷帛，缮器械，适所职耳。陛下必赏之，金帛可也，独不宜裂地以封。 
现代文：边将要储粮食布帛，修缮器械，实封户正是适应这种需要定下的，陛下要赏赐牛仙客，可赏钱财，不能封地给他。 
English: On the side, there will be stored grain cloth, repairing equipment, and the actual sealing of the house is to adapt to this need. His Majesty wants to reward the cow fairy, can reward money, can not give him a fief.

古文：帝怒曰： 岂以仙客寒士嫌之邪？
现代文：皇帝生气了，说： 你是因为牛仙客是个寒士而轻视他，是吧！
English: The emperor became angry and said: You despise Niu Xianke because he is a cold person, right?

古文：卿固素有门阅哉？ 
现代文：你难道是生来就有门阀的吗？ 
English: Were you born with a valve?

古文：九龄顿首曰： 臣荒陬孤生，陛下过听，以文学用臣。
现代文：张九龄叩头谢罪说 ：臣生于荒野之处，陛下错爱，以文学用臣。
English: Zhang Jiuling kowtowed to Xie Sin and said: "The subject was born in the wilderness, his majesty mistakenly loved him, and used literature to win the subject.

古文：仙客擢胥史，目不知书。
现代文：牛仙客升任胥吏，不读诗书。
English: Niu Xianke was promoted to the post of eunuch, but he did not read poetry.

古文：韩信，淮阴一壮夫，羞绛、灌等列。
现代文：韩信，只不过是淮阴一壮士，尚羞与周勃灌婴同列。
English: Han Xin is just a strongman of Huaiyin, which is on the same level as Zhou Boqin.

古文：陛下必用仙客，臣实耻之。 
现代文：陛下若一定要用牛仙客，臣以与他同列为耻。 
English: If His Majesty must use Niu Xianke, it would be a shame for his vassals to be lumped in with him.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：皇帝很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：翌日，林甫进曰： 仙客，宰相材也，乃不堪尚书邪？
现代文：第二天，李林甫进言： 牛仙客，有宰相之才，难道还不能担任一个尚书吗？
English: The next day, Li Linfu said, "Cow Immortal, if you have the talent of a prime minister, can't you also serve as a scholar?"

古文：九龄文吏，拘古义，失大体。 
现代文：张九龄是个文官，拘泥于古义，以致失大体。 
English: Zhang Jiuling is a civil servant, adhering to the ancient meaning, resulting in a loss of generality.

古文：帝由是决用仙客不疑。
现代文：皇帝因此决定要用牛仙客。
English: The emperor therefore decided to use the cowherd.

古文：九龄既戾帝旨，固内惧，恐遂为林甫所危，因帝赐白羽扇，乃献赋自况，其末曰： 苟效用之得所，虽杀身而何忌？ 
现代文：张九龄既已违逆皇帝的旨意，内心恐惧，担心被李林甫陷害，就借皇帝赐他一把白羽扇，献赋致谢，且自我表白。赋的末尾说： 只要能有效力的地方，即使杀身也心甘情愿。 
English: Since Zhang Julinling had already violated the emperor's will, he was afraid in his heart and worried that he would be framed by Li Linfu, so he borrowed the emperor to give him a white feather fan, presented it as a thank-you gift, and confessed himself. At the end of the gift, he said: As long as it can be effective, I am willing to kill myself.

古文：又曰： 纵秋气之移夺，终感恩于箧中。 
现代文：还说： 纵然秋气来临，不再用我，也始终感恩，安心地居于箧中。 
English: He also said: Even if the autumn comes and I am no longer needed, I will always be grateful and live in peace.

古文：帝虽优答，然卒以尚书右丞相罢政事，而用仙客。
现代文：皇帝虽然依旧很宽容地优待他，但终于以尚书右丞相罢了他的政事而用牛仙客。
English: Although the emperor was still very tolerant and treated him favorably, he finally used Niu Xianke after the Minister of the Right, Shang Shuxiu, resigned from his government.

古文：自是朝廷士大夫持禄养恩矣。
现代文：从此，朝廷大夫都只干拿俸禄，养尊处优了。
English: From then on, imperial court doctors were only interested in receiving a salary, and were given preferential treatment.

古文：尝荐长安尉周子谅为监察御史，子谅劾奏仙客，其语援谶书。
现代文：张九龄曾推荐长安尉周子谅为监察御史，周子谅检举揭发牛仙客，语言中援用了谶书。
English: Zhang Jiuling once recommended Chang'an lieutenant Zhou Zi Peng as the inspector of the imperial history, Zhou Zi Peng investigated and exposed Niu Xianke, and the language of the document was quoted.

古文：帝怒，杖子谅于朝堂，流瀼州，死于道。
现代文：皇帝很生气，在朝堂上杖责周子谅，流放到氵襄州，死在半路上。
English: The emperor was very angry. He reprimanded Zhou Zizong in the imperial court, exiled him to Zhangyang, and he died on the way.

古文：九龄坐举非其人，贬荆州长史。
现代文：张九龄因荐举不称职的人而犯罪，贬为荆州长史。
English: Zhang Jiuling committed a crime by recommending an incompetent person, and was demoted to Governor of Jing Province.

古文：虽以直道黜，不戚戚婴望，惟文史自娱，朝廷许其胜流。
现代文：他虽因恪守正直之道而被黜，并不忧戚地寄盼复官的期望，每日只以文史自娱，朝廷中都嘉许他为上品之人。
English: Although he was banished for adhering to the path of honesty, he did not anxiously expect to be reinstated. He only entertained himself with literature and history every day, and the imperial court praised him as a gentleman.

古文：久之，封始兴县伯，请还展墓，病卒，年六十八，赠荆州大都督，谥曰文献。
现代文：很久以后，封爵始兴县伯，上表请求回家乡扫墓，回去后病死，终年六十八岁。追赠荆州大都督，赐谥为 文献 。
English: After a long time, the knight of Shixing County requested the above table to go back to his hometown to sweep the graves, and he died of illness after returning. He was sixty-eight years old. He was posthumously awarded the title of Jingzhou Grand Governor, and was given a gong for literature.

古文：九龄体弱，有愬藉。
现代文：张九龄一向体弱，但很有风姿。
English: Zhang Jiuling has always been frail, but very elegant.

古文：故事，公卿皆搢笏于带，而后乘马。
现代文：以往的习惯，公卿都把笏插在衣带里，然后骑马。
English: In the old days, aristocrats would tuck their saddles into their belts and ride.

古文：九龄独常使人持之，因设笏囊，自九龄始。
现代文：张九龄则常让别人代他拿着，特制一个笏袋。
English: Zhang Jiuling, on the other hand, often lets someone else hold it for him and makes a special bag.

古文：后帝每用人，必曰： 风度能若九龄乎？ 
现代文：以后，朝臣们的笏也都装在笏袋里了。以后皇帝每用一新人，都要问： 他的风度能与九龄相比吗？ 
English: From then on, the courtiers' gongs were also placed in a gong bag. From then on, every time the emperor used a new person, he had to ask: Can his demeanor be compared to that of a nine-year-old?

古文：初，千秋节，公、王并献宝监，九龄上 事鉴 十章，号《千秋金鉴录》，以伸讽谕。
现代文：当初，千秋节时，公、王都要献宝镜，张九龄独独献《千秋金鉴录》十章，用以借古证今。
English: In the beginning, at the time of the Thousand Autumn Festival, the prince and the king had to offer a precious mirror, and Zhang Julin independently presented ten chapters of the "Thousand Autumn Gold Catalogue," which was used to borrow ancient evidence from the present.

古文：与严挺之、袁仁敬、梁升卿、卢怡善，世称其交能终始者。
现代文：张九龄与严挺之、袁仁敬、梁升卿、卢怡等人友善。世人都称道他们的交往能始终如一。
English: Zhang Jiuling is friendly with Yan Tingzhi, Yuan Renking, Liang Shengqing, Lu Yi and others. The world praises their consistent interaction.

古文：及为相，谔谔有大臣节。
现代文：到他任相位时，能不避权贵而直言，保持大臣的节度。
English: When he assumed the post, he was able to speak frankly without shying away from the powerful, and maintained the moderation of a minister.

古文：当是时，帝在位久，稍怠于政，故九龄议论必极言得失，所推引皆正人。
现代文：当时，皇帝已在位久，对国政渐有懈怠，所以张九龄有所议论时，必认真剖析得失，所推举引荐的都是正人君子。
English: At that time, the emperor had been on the throne for a long time, and there was a gradual slackening of national politics. Therefore, when Zhang Jiuling had a discussion, he must carefully analyze the gains and losses. All the recommended candidates were upright gentlemen.

古文：武惠妃谋陷太子瑛，九龄执不可。
现代文：武惠妃阴谋陷害太子瑛，张九龄执意认为不可以。
English: Princess Wu Huifei plotted to frame Prince Ying, but Zhang Julin was adamant that this was unacceptable.

古文：妃密遣宦奴牛贵儿告之曰： 废必有兴，公为援，宰相可长处。 
现代文：惠妃秘密派宦奴牛贵儿去对张九龄说 ：有废就有兴。公若肯援助，宰相之位可以长处了。 
English: Hui Fei secretly sent his servant, Niu Gui Er, to say to Zhang Juling: "If there is waste, there will be joy. If the public is willing to help, the position of prime minister can be advantageous."

古文：九龄叱曰： 房幄安有外言哉！ 
现代文：张九龄怒叱道 ：宫闱怎能干预朝廷之事？ 
English: Zhang Jiuling scolded angrily, "How can Gong Liang interfere in the affairs of the imperial court?"

古文：遽奏之，帝为动色，故卒九龄相而太子无患。
现代文：并立刻奏报皇帝，皇帝也为之感动。所以，张九龄在相位时，太子一直无事。
English: And immediately reported to the emperor, the emperor was also moved. Therefore, when Zhang Jiuling was in the phase, the prince had nothing to do.

古文：安禄山初以范阳偏校入奏，气骄蹇，九龄谓裴光庭曰： 乱幽州者，此胡雏也。 
现代文：安禄山最初以范阳偏校的身份入朝奏事，态度颇骄慢。张九龄对裴光庭说： 将来扰乱幽州的，必定是这个胡儿。 
English: At first, An Lushan entered the morning report as Fan Yang Chieng School, with a rather arrogant attitude. Zhang Juering said to Pei Guangting: In the future, it must be this Hul who disturbs Yuzhou.

古文：及讨奚、契丹败，张守珪执如京师，九龄署其状曰： 穰苴出师而诛庄贾，孙武习战犹戮宫嫔，守珪法行于军，禄山不容免死。 
现代文：及至讨伐奚及契丹失败，张守王圭把安禄山执送京师。张九龄在文件上批道： 过去穰苴出师，斩杀误期的庄贾，孙武训练士兵，斩杀不听令的宫嫔。张守王圭行令军中，安禄山不宜免死。 
English: When the crusade and Khitan failed, Zhang Shou Wang Gui sent Anlu Mountain to the Beijing division. Zhang Jiuling criticized on the document: In the past, the division was sent out, the late Zhuang Jia was killed, the Sun Wu trained soldiers were killed, and the palace guards who did not obey orders were killed. In Zhang Shou Wang Gui's marching army, Anlu Mountain should not be spared.

古文：帝不许，赦之。
现代文：皇帝不同意，竟赦了安禄山。
English: The emperor disagreed and pardoned Anlu Mountain.

古文：九龄曰： 禄山狼子野心，有逆相，宜即事诛之，以绝后患。 
现代文：张九龄说 ：安禄山狼子野心，貌有反相，应即刻斩杀，以绝后患。 
English: Zhang Jiuling said, "The ambition of the Anlu Mountain werewolf has the opposite appearance. It should be killed immediately, so as not to cause the death of the queen."

古文：帝曰： 卿无以王衍知石勒而害忠良。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你不要以王衍识石勒的事枉害忠良。 
English: The emperor said, "Don't take advantage of Wang Yan Zi Shi Le's situation to harm Zhong Liang.

古文：卒不用。
现代文：终于不用张九龄的意见。
English: Finally, Zhang Jiuling's opinion is not needed.

古文：帝后在蜀，思其忠，为泣下，且遣使祭于韶州，厚币恤其家。
现代文：皇帝后来避难到蜀，思念到张九龄的忠心，为之落泪。派使到韶州祭扫张九龄的墓，还赠厚礼抚慰其家属。
English: The emperor later took refuge in Shu. He missed Zhang Jiuling's loyalty and shed tears for him. He sent an envoy to sweep Zhang Jiuling's tomb at the Chenzhou Festival, and also gave a generous gift to comfort his family.

古文：开元后，天下称曰曲江公而不名云。
现代文：开元以后，天下都称张九龄为曲江公而不称其名。
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, the whole world called Zhang Juering Qujiang without mentioning his name.

古文：建中元年，德宗贤其风烈，复赠司徒。
现代文：建中元年，德宗赞扬其志操风烈，追赠司徒。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, Dezong praised his strong will and gave him the posthumous title of "Stu."

古文：子拯，居父丧，有节行，后为伊阙令。
现代文：张九龄的儿子张拯，在父丧期间，有节行，后来任伊阙令。
English: Zhang Jiuling's son, Zhang Zheng, during the period of his father's funeral, had a festival, and later served as Yiliang.

古文：会禄山盗河、洛，陷焉。而终不受伪官。
现代文：安禄山侵占河、洛，张拯未能离开，但始终不肯任伪官。
English: Anlu Mountain encroached on He and Luo, Zhang Zheng could not leave, but he always refused to serve as a pseudo-official.

古文：贼平，擢太子赞善大夫。
现代文：安乱平，升任太子赞善大夫。
English: An Ramphei was promoted to Crown Prince Zanzan Doctor.

古文：九龄弟九皋，亦有名，终岭南节度使。
现代文：其弟弟张九皋，也有名，最后任岭南节度使。
English: His brother Zhang Jiuyong, also famous, was the last Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：其曾孙仲方。
现代文：其曾孙为张仲方。
English: His great-grandson is Zhang Zhongfang.

