古文：语曰： 世乱识忠臣。 
现代文：俗话说： 世乱识忠臣。 
English: As the saying goes: The world is in turmoil, so are the loyal subjects.

古文：诚哉！
现代文：的确如此啊！
English: This is indeed the case!

古文：五代之际，不可以为无人，吾得全节之士三人焉，作《死节传》。
现代文：五代时候，不能认为没有忠臣，我得到保全志节的义士三人，作《死节传》。
English: At the time of the fifth generation, it cannot be considered that there are no loyal retainers. I got three loyalists to preserve the festival, to make "The Legend of the Dead Festival."

古文：○王彦章裴约刘仁赡附
现代文：王彦章字子明，郓州寿张人。
English: Wang Yanzhang, Zi Ming, and Zhang Zhou are in the cast.

古文：王彦章，字子明，郓州寿张人也。少为军卒，事梁太祖，为开封府押衙、左亲从指挥使、行营先锋马军使。
现代文：年轻时当兵，侍奉梁太祖，任开封府押衙，左亲从指挥使、行营先锋马军使。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier and served Liang Taizu. He was appointed as the governor of Kaifeng, and his left cousin was the commanding officer and the pioneer of the encampment.

古文：末帝即位，迁濮州刺史，又徙澶州刺史。
现代文：梁末帝登位，升任濮州刺史，又调任澶州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai ascended to the throne, was promoted to the post of prefect of Zhangzhou, and was transferred to the post of prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：彦章为人骁勇有力，能跣足履棘行百步。
现代文：王彦章为人骁悍勇猛有力，能赤脚踩在荆棘上走一百步。
English: Wang Yanzhang is a man of great courage and strength. He can walk barefoot on thorns for a hundred paces.

古文：持一铁枪，骑而驰突，奋疾如飞，而佗人莫能举也，军中号王铁枪。
现代文：手持一杆铁，骑马奔驰冲杀，迅猛如飞，而没有别的人能举起他的铁，军中称他为王铁鎗。
English: With a one-shot iron in his hand, he rode a horse and galloped to kill, as fast as flying, and no one else could lift his iron. In the army, he was called the king of iron.

古文：梁、晋争天下为劲敌，独彦章心常轻晋王，谓人曰： 亚次斗鸡小兒耳，何足惧哉！ 
现代文：梁、晋争夺天下，彼此成为劲敌，惟独王彦章心里常常轻视晋王，对人说： 亚次不过是斗鸡小儿罢了，哪里值得畏惧呢！ 
English: Liang and Jin competed for the whole world, and became fierce enemies of each other. However, Wang Yanzhang always despised Jin Wang in his heart, and said to people, "Ati is just a chicken fighting child, what is there to be afraid of!

古文：梁分魏、相六州为两镇，惧魏军不从，遣彦章将五百骑入魏，屯金波亭以虞变。
现代文：梁分魏、相等六州为两个镇，怕魏州军队不听从指挥，派王彦章率领五百骑兵进入魏州，屯驻在金波亭以防兵变。
English: Liang divided Wei, equal to six states, into two towns. Fearing that the Wei state army would not obey the command, he sent Wang Yanzhang to lead five hundred cavalry into Wei state and stationed in Jinbaoting to prevent a mutiny.

古文：魏军果乱，夜攻彦章。彦章南走，魏人降晋。
现代文：魏州军队果然作乱，晚上进攻王彦章，王彦章南逃，魏州人向晋投降。
English: The Weizhou army really made a disturbance, attacked Wang Yanzhang in the evening, Wang Yanzhang fled south, and the people of Weizhou surrendered to Jin.

古文：晋军攻破澶州，虏彦章妻子归之太原，赐以第宅，供给甚备，间遣使者招彦章，彦章斩其使者以自绝。
现代文：晋军攻破澶州，俘获王彦章的妻子儿女带回太原，赐给他们住宅，供给的东西很齐备，秘密派使臣招降王彦章，王彦章斩杀使臣自绝后路。
English: The Jin army broke through Bozhou, captured Wang Yanzhang's wife and children and brought them back to Taiyuan, gave them a house, and the supplies were very complete. Wang Yanzhang secretly sent envoys to recruit Wang Yanzhang, and Wang Yanzhang killed the envoys.

古文：然晋人畏彦章之在梁也，必欲招致之，待其妻子愈厚。
现代文：但晋人害怕王彦章在梁，一定要招降他，对他的妻子儿女更好了。
English: However, the Jin people were afraid that Wang Yanzhang was in the lead, so they had to invite him to surrender, which was better for his wife and children.

古文：自梁失魏、博，与晋夹河而军，彦章常为先锋。
现代文：自从梁失去魏、博二州，和晋沿黄河两岸驻军，王彦章常常担任先锋。
English: Since Liang lost Wei, Bo Erzhou, and Jin along the Yellow River, Wang Yanzhang often served as a pioneer.

古文：迁汝郑二州防御使、匡国军节度使、北面行营副招讨使，又徙宣义军节度使。
现代文：升任汝、郑二州防御使、匡国军节度使、北面行营副招讨使，又调任宣义军节度使。
English: He was promoted to Ye, Zheng Erzhou Defense Envoy, Kuangguo Army Festival Envoy, Beimen Campaign Deputy Invitation Envoy, and transferred to Xuanyi Army Festival Envoy.

古文：是时，晋已尽有河北，以铁锁断德胜口，筑河南、北为两城，号 夹寨 。
现代文：这时，晋已完全占据黄河以北，用铁锁截断德胜口，在黄河南、北两岸修筑两座城寨，号称 夹寨 。
English: At this time, Jin had completely occupied the north of the Yellow River, cut off De Shengkou with an iron lock, and built two walled towns on the south and north banks of the Yellow River, known as "Ji Zhai."

古文：而梁末帝昏乱，小人赵岩、张汉杰等用事，大臣宿将多被谗间，彦章虽为招讨副使，而谋不见用。
现代文：而梁末帝昏庸荒乱，小人赵岩、张汉杰等专权，大臣老将多遭受谗言离间，王彦章虽任招讨副使，而谋略不被采用。
English: However, the last Emperor Liang was confused and chaotic, the villains Zhao Yan and Zhang Hanjie wielded absolute power, and the veteran ministers were often sidetracked by insults. Although Wang Yanzhang was appointed vice-envoy, his strategy was not adopted.

古文：龙德三年夏，晋取郓州，梁人大恐，宰相敬翔顾事急，以绳内靴中，入见末帝，泣曰： 先帝取天下，不以臣为不肖，所谋无不用。
现代文：龙德三年夏，晋攻占鄣州，梁人十分恐惧，宰相敬翔眼看事情危急，把绳子藏在靴中，进宫见梁末帝，哭泣着说： 先帝夺取天下，不认为我不贤，我的谋略无不被采用。
English: In the summer of the third year of Longde, the Jin attacked and occupied Zhangzhou, and the Liang people were very afraid. The prime minister, Jing Xiang, saw the situation was critical, hid the rope in his shoes, went to the palace to see the last emperor of Liang, and wept and said: The former emperor did not think I was unworthy to conquer the world, and none of my strategies would not be adopted.

古文：今强敌未灭，陛下弃忽臣言，臣身不用，不如死！ 
现代文：如今强敌还没有消灭，陛下忽视我的意见，我不受重用，不如去死！ 
English: Now that the strong enemy has not been eliminated, His Majesty ignores my opinion, I do not accept heavy use, it is better to die!

古文：乃引绳将自经。
现代文：于是拿出绳子准备自缢。
English: So he took out a rope and prepared to hang himself.

古文：末帝使人止之，问所欲言。
现代文：梁末帝让人制止他，问他想说什么。
English: Liang Masti had someone stop him and ask him what he wanted to say.

古文：翔曰： 事急矣，非彦章不可！ 
现代文：敬翔说： 事情危急了，非王彦章不行！ 
English: Keixiang said, "Things are in a critical situation. Wang Yanzhang is not an option!"

古文：末帝乃召彦章为招讨使，以段凝为副。
现代文：梁末帝于是召王彦章任招讨使，任命段凝为副使。
English: Emperor Liang Mucu then summoned Wang Yanzhang to serve as a recruiting envoy and appointed Duan Jian as a deputy envoy.

古文：末帝问破敌之期，彦章对曰： 三日。 
现代文：梁末帝询问破敌的期限，王彦章回答说： 三天。 
English: Liang Mu Di asked about the time limit for defeating the enemy. Wang Yanzhang replied: "Three days."

古文：左右皆失笑。
现代文：左右的人都忍不住笑了。
English: People on both sides couldn't help but laugh.

古文：彦章受命而出，驰两日至滑州，置酒大会，阴遣人具舟于杨村，命甲士六百人皆持巨斧，载冶者，具鞴炭，乘流而下。
现代文：王彦章接受任命出征，飞驰两天赶到滑州，摆酒大宴，暗中派人在杨村准备战船，命令六百身穿镗甲的士兵都手持大斧，载上锻铁的工匠，带上鼓风器和柴炭，顺水而下。
English: Wang Yanzhang accepted the appointment to go to war, flew to Slanting for two days, held a big banquet, secretly sent people to Yangcun to prepare a warship, ordered six hundred soldiers wearing armor to carry a large axe, load a wrought iron craftsman, take a blower and firewood, and go down the water.

古文：彦章会饮，酒半，佯起更衣，引精兵数千，沿河以趋德胜。舟兵举锁烧断之，因以巨斧斩浮桥，而彦章引兵急击南城。浮桥断，南城遂破，盖三日矣。
现代文：王彦章聚集众人饮酒，酒喝到一半，假装起身更衣，率领几千精兵，沿河奔赴德胜口，船中的士兵挑起铁锁把它烧断，趁势周大斧砍断浮桥，而王彦章率兵猛攻南城，浮桥已断，南城于是被攻破，大概是三天吧。
English: Wang Yanzhang gathered all the people to drink, drank half of the wine, pretended to get up and change clothes, led several thousand elite soldiers, ran along the river to Dezhengkou, the soldiers in the ship picked up the iron lock and burned it, and took advantage of Zhou's big axe to cut the pontoon bridge, and Wang Yanzhang led the soldiers to storm Nancheng. The pontoon bridge was broken, and Nancheng was broken, about three days.

古文：是时庄宗在魏，以硃守殷守夹寨，闻彦章为招讨使，惊曰： 彦章骁勇，吾尝避其锋，非守殷敌也。
现代文：这时唐庄宗在魏州，以朱守殷守夹寨，听说王彦章任招讨使，震惊地说： 王彦章骁悍勇猛，我曾避开他的锋芒，不是朱守殷能够对付的。
English: At this time, Tang Zhuangzong in Weizhou, with Zhu Shou Yin Shou, said in shock when he heard that Wang Yanzhang was appointed as the summoning envoy: Wang Yanzhang is fierce and brave, I have avoided his edge, not Zhu Shou Yin can deal with it.

古文：然彦章兵少，利于速战，必急攻我南城。 
现代文：但王彦章的兵力少，速战速决纔有利，一定会猛攻我的南城。 
English: However, Wang Yanzhang's force is small, and it is advantageous to make a quick decision, so he will definitely attack my Nancheng.

古文：即驰骑救之，行二十里，而得夹寨报者曰： 彦章兵已至。 
现代文：随即飞马前去营救，走了二十里，遇上夹寨报信的人报告说： 王彦章的军队已到了。 
English: Then Pegasus went to the rescue, walked twenty miles, and met a messenger who reported: Wang Yanzhang's army has arrived.

古文：比至，而南城破矣。
现代文：等唐军赶到，南城已被攻破了。
English: By the time the Tang army arrived, Nancheng had already been breached.

古文：庄宗彻北城为筏，下杨刘，与彦章俱浮于河，各行一岸，每舟抃相及辄战，一日数十接。
现代文：唐庄宗拆除北城做成木筏，下浮至杨刘，和王彦章的战船都在黄河上漂浮，双方各沿一岸行驶，每当船筏接近就交战，一天几十次交锋。
English: Tang Zhuangzong dismantled Beicheng into rafts and floated down to Yang Liu, and Wang Yanzhang's warships floated on the Yellow River. Both sides drove along one bank, and fought whenever the rafts approached, dozens of times a day.

古文：彦章至杨刘，攻之几下。
现代文：王彦章到达杨刘，几乎要攻克了。
English: Wang Yanzhang reached Yang Liu and was about to defeat him.

古文：晋人筑垒博州东岸，彦章引兵攻之，不克，还击杨刘，战败。
现代文：晋人在博州束岸修筑堡垒，王彦章率兵进攻，设能攻克，返回来攻打杨刘，战败。
English: The Jin people built a fortress on the coast of Bozhou, Wang Yanzhang led the troops to attack, set up the ability to conquer, returned to attack Yang Liu, defeated.

古文：是时，段凝已有异志，与赵岩、张汉杰交通，彦章素刚，愤梁日削，而嫉岩等所为，尝谓人曰： 俟吾破贼还，诛奸臣以谢天下。 
现代文：这时，段凝已有二心，和赵岩、张汉杰相勾结，王彦章素来刚烈，气愤梁一天天削弱，而痛恨赵岩等人的所作所为，曾对人说： 等到我攻破贼军回来，将诛杀奸臣来告知天下。 
English: At this time, Duan Rong had two hearts. He colluded with Zhao Yan and Zhang Hanjie. Wang Yanzhang, who had always been strong-willed, was getting weaker and weaker day by day. He hated the actions of Zhao Yan and others, and once said to people, "Wait until I return from defeating the bandits, and tell the world that I killed the traitorous minister."

古文：岩等闻之惧，与凝叶力倾之。
现代文：赵岩等人听说后很害怕，和段凝协力想搞垮他。
English: After hearing this, Zhao Yan and the others were very afraid, and together with Duan Cong, they tried to defeat him.

古文：其破南城也，彦章与凝各为捷书以闻，凝遣人告岩等匿彦章书而上己书，末帝初疑其事，已而使者至军，独赐劳凝而不及彦章，军士皆失色。
现代文：攻破南城时，王彦章和段凝分别撰写捷报奏闻，段凝派人告诉赵岩等人隐瞒王彦章的捷报而上报自己的，梁末帝开初还怀疑这事，不久使臣到军中，只是赏赐慰劳段凝而不赏赐王彦章，士兵们都大惊失色。
English: When Nancheng was breached, Wang Yanzhang and Duan Rong separately wrote the report of the victory. Duan Rong sent someone to tell Zhao Yan and others to conceal Wang Yanzhang's victory report and report their own. Emperor Liangmu suspected this at the beginning. Soon, the envoy came to the army, but only rewarded Duan Rong for his hard work and did not reward Wang Yanzhang. The soldiers were shocked.

古文：及杨刘之败也，凝乃上书言： 彦章使酒轻敌而至于败。 
现代文：到杨刘兵败时，段凝于是上书说： 王彦章饮酒轻敌纔导致兵败。 
English: When Yang Liu was defeated, Duan Jian wrote a letter saying: Wang Yanzhang's drinking and belittling the enemy led to his defeat.

古文：赵岩等从中日夜毁之，乃罢彦章，以凝为招讨使。
现代文：赵岩等人从中日夜诋毁他，于是罢免王彦章，任命段凝为招讨使。
English: Zhao Yan and others slandered him day and night, so Wang Yanzhang was dismissed and Duan Jian was appointed as an envoy.

古文：彦章驰至京师入见，以笏画地，自陈胜败之迹，岩等讽有司劾彦章不恭，勒还第。
现代文：王彦章飞驰到京师进见，用手板在地上指画，陈述胜败的过程，赵岩等人暗示有关官员弹劾王彦章不恭敬，勒令他回家。
English: Wang Yanzhang rushed to the Beijing division to inspect, and used a fingerboard to draw on the ground, stating the process of victory and defeat. Zhao Yan and others hinted that the relevant officials impeached Wang Yanzhang for disrespect and ordered him to go home.

古文：唐兵攻兗州，末帝召彦章使守捉东路。
现代文：唐军进攻充州，梁末帝召王彦章，让他把守东路。
English: The Tang army attacked Chenzhou. Emperor Liangmu summoned Wang Yanzhang and asked him to guard the east road.

古文：是时，梁之胜兵皆属段凝，京师只有保銮五百骑，皆新捉募之兵，不可用，乃以属彦章，而以张汉杰监之。
现代文：这时，梁的强兵都归属段凝，京师只有保卫皇帝车驾的骑兵五百人，都是刚刚招募的士兵，不能用，于是将他们归属玉尘章，而以张漠杰监督他。
English: At this time, Liang's strong soldiers all belonged to Duan Rong, and the Beijing division only had five hundred cavalrymen to protect the emperor's chariot, all of whom were newly recruited soldiers. They could not be used, so they were assigned to Yu Ducheng, and Zhang Mo Jie supervised him.

古文：彦章至递坊，以兵少战败，退保中都；又败，与其牙兵百馀骑死战。
现代文：王彦章到达递坊，因兵少战败，退守中都：又被打败，和他的亲兵一百多人拼死作战。
English: Wang Yanzhang arrived at Difang, was defeated due to the small number of soldiers, and retreated to Zhongdu: he was defeated again, and more than a hundred of his relatives fought to the death.

古文：唐将夏鲁奇素与彦章善，识其语音，曰： 王铁枪也！ 
现代文：唐将夏鲁奇素来和王彦章关系很好，分辨出他的口音，说： 这是王铁鎗！ 
English: Tang general Xialuqi had always had a good relationship with Wang Yanzhang. He could distinguish his accent and said, "This is Wang Tieyao!"

古文：举槊刺之，彦章伤重，马踣，被擒。
现代文：举起长矛刺他，王彦章伤得很重，战马仆倒，被抓获。
English: He raised his spear and stabbed him. Wang Yanzhang was seriously injured, his horse fell down and he was captured.

古文：庄宗见之，曰： 尔常以孺子待我，今日服乎？ 
现代文：唐庄宗见到他，说： 你常常把我看成小孩子，现在服输了吗？ 
English: When Tang Zhuangzong saw him, he said, "You often think of me as a child. Are you disappointed now?"

古文：又曰： 尔善战者，何不守兗州而守中都？
现代文：又说： 你是会打仗的人，为什么不守兖州而守中都呢？
English: He also said, "You are a man who knows how to fight, why don't you defend Zhangzhou and Zhongdu?"

古文：中都无壁垒，何以自固？ 
现代文：中都没有壁最，拿什么固寄？ 
English: There is no wall in the middle, what should I take?

古文：彦章对曰： 大事已去，非人力可为！ 
现代文：王彦章回答说： 大势已去，不是个人的力量能够改变的！ 
English: Wang Yanzhang replied: The general trend has already gone, it is not the power of individuals that can change it!

古文：庄宗恻然，赐药以封其创。
现代文：唐庄宗感到凄怆，赐给他药以便医治他的创伤。
English: Tang Zhuangzong felt sad and gave him medicine to heal his wounds.

古文：彦章武人不知书，常为俚语谓人曰： 豹死留皮，人死留名。 其于忠义，盖天性也。
现代文：王彦章是个武臣，设有读遇书，常用俗语对人说： 豹死留皮，人死留名 他对于忠义，大概是出白天性。
English: Wang Yanzhang was a military officer, he had a book of eulogies, and he used to say to people, "Leopards leave their skins behind when they die, but people leave their names behind when they die."

古文：庄宗爱其骁勇，欲全活之，使人慰谕彦章，彦章谢曰： 臣与陛下血战十馀年，今兵败力穷，不死何待？
现代文：唐庄宗喜爱他的骁悍勇猛，想保全他，让他活下来，派人安慰晓谕王彦章，王彦章推辞说： 我和陛下血战十多年，如今兵败力尽，不死又等什么呢？
English: Tang Zhuangzong loved his bravery and courage, wanted to keep him safe and let him live, and sent someone to comfort Wang Yanzhang. Wang Yanzhang said, "I and Your Majesty have been fighting for more than ten years, and now we are exhausted. What are you waiting for if you don't die?"

古文：且臣受梁恩，非死不能报，岂有朝事梁而暮事晋，生何面目见天下之人乎！ 
现代文：而且我受梁的恩德，不死不能报答，哪有早晨服事梁晚上却服事晋的道理，这样活着有什么脸面见天下的人呢！ 
English: Moreover, the kindness I received from Liang cannot be repaid unless I die. There is no reason why I should serve Liang in the morning and Jin in the evening. If I live like this, what kind of face will I have in front of the world?

古文：庄宗又遣明宗往谕之，彦章病创，卧不能起，仰顾明宗，呼其小字曰： 汝非邈佶烈乎？
现代文：唐庄宗又派唐明宗前去开导他，千彦章因为创伤，卧床不能起来，抬头看着唐明宗，叫他的小字说： 你不是邈估烈吗？
English: Tang Zhuangzong also sent Tang Mingzong to enlighten him. Because of the trauma, Chihiko couldn't get up from his bed. He looked up at Tang Mingzong and told him to say: "Aren't you so brave?

古文：我岂苟活者？ 
现代文：我难道是苟且偷生的人？ 
English: Am I a fraud?

古文：遂见杀，年六十一。
现代文：于是被杀，时年六十一岁。
English: He was killed at the age of 61.

古文：晋高祖时，追赠彦章太师。
现代文：晋高祖时，追赠王彦章为太师。
English: When he was promoted to the position of high priest, he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：与彦章同时有裴约者，潞州之牙将也。庄宗以李嗣昭为昭义军节度使，约以裨将守泽州。
现代文：和王彦章同时的人裴约，是潞州下级军官唐庄宗任李嗣昭为昭义军节度使时，裴约凭借副将的身份守泽州。
English: At the same time as Wang Yanzhang, Pei You, a lower-ranking officer of the Zhangzhou Tangzhuang Zongren Li Shizhao, was the festival envoy of the Shao Yi Army. Pei You defended Zezhou by virtue of his status as vice-general.

古文：嗣昭卒，其子继韬以泽、潞叛降于梁，约召其州人泣而谕曰： 吾事故使二十馀年，见其分财飨士，欲报梁仇，不幸早世。
现代文：李嗣昭死后，他的儿子李继韬以泽、潞二州反叛，向梁投降，裴约召集他州中的人哭泣着晓论说： 我跟随已故的节度使二十多年，亲眼见到他分发财物犒赏士兵，想要向梁报仇，但却不幸早死。
English: After the death of Li Shizhao, his son Li Jizhe and Li Erzhou rebelled and surrendered to Liang. Peiyuo gathered the people in his state to weep and said: I have followed the late Shiduo for more than 20 years. I saw him with my own eyes distribute wealth to reward soldiers. He wanted to take revenge on Liang, but unfortunately died early.

古文：今郎君父丧未葬，违背君亲，吾能死于此，不能从以归梁也！ 
现代文：如今郎君还没有办完父亲的丧事，就违背父亲的意愿，我能死在这里，不能随他归附梁！ 
English: Now that my husband hasn't finished his father's funeral, he's going against my father's wishes. I can die here, I can't go with him!

古文：众皆感泣。
现代文：众人都感动得落泪。
English: Everyone was moved to tears.

古文：梁遣董璋率兵围之，约与州人拒守，求救于庄宗。
现代文：梁派董璋率兵包围他们，裴约和州中人抵抗坚守，向唐庄宗求救。
English: Liang sent Dong Xuan and his soldiers to encircle them, while Pei You and the people of Zhouzhong held out and appealed to Tang Zhuozong for help.

古文：是时，庄宗方与梁人战河上，而已建大号，闻继韬叛降梁，颇有忧色，及闻约独不叛，喜曰： 吾于继韬何薄？
现代文：这时，唐庄宗正和梁军在黄河打仗，并且已经建立国号，听说李继韬反叛投降梁，露出十分忧虑的神色，到获知裴约一人没有叛降时，高兴地说： 我对李继韬何曾慢待？
English: At this time, Tangzhuang Zongzheng and Liang Jun were fighting in the Yellow River, and had already established the country name. When he heard that Li Jixuan had rebelled and surrendered to Liang, he showed a very worried look. When he learned that Pei You alone had not rebelled, he said happily: Why did I wait for Li Jixuan?

古文：于约何厚？
现代文：对裴约何曾厚爱？
English: What was there to love about Peyo?

古文：而约能分逆顺邪！ 
现代文：而裴约却能够辨别逆顺！ 
English: But Pei You is able to distinguish between right and wrong!

古文：顾符存审曰： 吾不惜泽州与梁，一州易得，约难得也。
现代文：望着符存审说： 我不吝惜把泽州让给梁，一个州容易得到，裴约这样的人才难得。
English: Looking at Fu Cunxin, he said, "I don't begrudge giving Zezhou to Liang. It's easy to get a canton, but it's hard to get a talent like Pei You."

古文：尔识机便，为我取约来。 
现代文：你看着合适的机会，替我把裴约带来。 
English: You saw the right opportunity and brought Peyo to me.

古文：存审以五千骑驰至辽州，而梁兵已破泽州，约见杀。
现代文：符存审率领五千骑兵奔驰到辽州，而梁兵已攻破泽州，裴约被杀。
English: Fu Cunxin led five thousand cavalrymen to gallop to Liaozhou, while Liang soldiers had broken through Zezhou, and Pei You was killed.

古文：至周世宗时，又有刘仁赡者焉。仁赡字守惠，彭城人也。
现代文：到周世宗时，又有刘仁赡。刘仁赡字守惠，彭城人。
English: By the time of Zhou Shizong, there was also Liu Renyi. Liu Renyi, also known as Shou Hui, was from Pengcheng.

古文：父金，事杨行密，为濠、滁二州刺史，以骁勇知名。仁赡为将，轻财重士，法令严肃，少略通兵书。
现代文：父亲刘金跟随杨行密，任潦、滁二州刺史，以骁悍勇猛出名刘仁赡担任将官，轻视财物，看重将士，法令严肃，从小略通兵书。
English: His father, Liu Jin, followed Yang Xingmi, and was appointed to the post of commander-in-chief of the two states. Liu Renyi, who was famous for his bravery and courage, served as a general officer. He despised wealth, valued soldiers, and was serious about laws and regulations. He was a soldier from an early age.

古文：事南唐，为左监门卫将军、黄袁二州刺史，所至称治。
现代文：在南唐做官，任左监门卫将军、黄袁二州刺史，所到之地都政治清明安定。
English: He worked as an official in South Tang, served as the left supervisor of the gatekeeper general, and Huang Yuan engraved the history of the two states. The places he visited were all politically clear and stable.

古文：李景使掌亲军，以为武昌军节度使。
现代文：李景让他掌管亲军，任为武昌军节度使。
English: Li Jing put him in charge of his own troops and appointed him as the military commander of the Wuchang Army.

古文：周师征淮，先遣李穀攻自寿春，景遣将刘彦贞拒周兵，以仁赡为清淮军节度使，镇寿州。李穀退守正阳浮桥，彦贞见周兵之却，意其怯，急追之。
现代文：周军出征淮南，先派李谷从寿春进攻，李景派将领刘彦贞抵御周军，让刘仁赡任清淮军节度使，镇守寿州李谷退守正阳浮桥，刘彦贞见周军退却，估计他们害怕了，紧追他们。
English: Zhou's army set out for Huainan, first sending Li Gu to attack from Shuchun. Li Jing sent the general Liu Yanzhen to resist Zhou's army, let Liu Renyi serve as the Qing and Huai armies' commander, the town guard of Shuzhou Li Gu retreated to the Zhengyang floating bridge, Liu Yanzhen saw Zhou's army retreat, estimated that they were afraid, and followed them closely.

古文：仁赡以为不可，彦贞不听，仁赡独按兵城守。
现代文：刘仁赡认为不行，刘彦贞不听，刘仁赡独自按兵不动守城。
English: Liu Renyi did not think it was possible, Liu Yanzhen did not listen, and Liu Renyi defended the city alone.

古文：彦贞果败于正阳。
现代文：刘彦贞果然在正阳战败。
English: Liu Yanzhen was defeated at Zhengyang.

古文：世宗攻寿州，围之数重，以方舟载砲，自淝河中流击其城；又束巨竹数十万竿，上施版屋，号为 竹龙 ，载甲士以攻之，又决其水砦入于淝河。
现代文：周世宗进攻寿州，把它重重包围，用两船相并载着炮，从淝河中流炮击寿州城；又把几十万根大竹子捆扎在一起，上面盖上木屋，号称 竹龙 ，载上甲兵攻城，又决水寨之水流入淝河。
English: Zhou Shizong attacked Shuzhou, encircled it heavily, and used two ships to carry cannons side by side to bombard Shuzhou City from the middle stream of the Fen River; he also bundled hundreds of thousands of large bamboo together, covered it with a wooden house, known as the Bamboo Dragon, loaded it with armored soldiers to attack the city, and the water from the waterfall flowed into the Fen River.

古文：攻之百端，自正月至于四月不能下，而岁大暑，霖雨弥旬，周兵营寨水深数尺，淮、淝暴涨，砲舟竹龙皆飘南岸，为景兵所焚，周兵多死。
现代文：用各种方法攻城，从正月到四月都役能攻下，而这年非常炎热，大雨十多天不停，周军营寨水深几尺，淮河、淝河暴涨，炮船竹龙都漂到南岸，被李景的军队焚烧，周军死了很多人。
English: They used various methods to attack the city, and from the first month of the year to April, they were able to capture everything, but this year was very hot, with heavy rain for more than ten days non-stop, the Zhou camp was several feet deep in water, the Huaihe River and the Minhe River soared, and the gunboat Zhulong drifted to the south bank and was burned by Li Jing's army. Many Zhou soldiers died.

古文：世宗东趋濠梁，以李重进为庐、寿都招讨使。
现代文：周世宗东赴濠梁，让李重进任庐、寿二州都招讨使。
English: Zhou Shidong went to Shiliang and asked Li Chongjin to recruit envoys from Renjun and Shuzhou.

古文：景亦遣其元帅齐王景达等列砦紫金山下，为夹道以属城中。
现代文：李景也派他的元帅齐王李景达等人在紫金山下扎寨，修筑夹道连接城中。
English: Li Jing also sent his marshal Qi Wang Li Jingda and others to camp under the Purple Mountain and build a road connecting the city center.

古文：而重进与张永德两军相疑不协，仁赡屡请出战，景达不许，由是愤惋成疾。
现代文：而李重进和张永德两军相互猜疑不和，刘仁瞻多次请求出战，景达不允许，因此怨愤叹息而生病。
English: However, the two armies of Li Chongjin and Zhang Yongde were suspicious of each other and did not get along. Liu Renzhun repeatedly requested to go to war, but Jingda did not allow it. As a result, he became ill with resentment.

古文：明年正月，世宗复至淮上，尽破紫金山砦，坏其夹道，景兵大败，诸将往往见擒，而景之守将广陵冯延鲁、光州张绍、舒州周祚、泰州方讷、泗州范再遇等，或走或降，皆不能守，虽景君臣亦皆震慑，奉表称臣，愿割土地、输贡赋，以效诚款，而仁赡独坚守，不可下。
现代文：因此怨愤叹息而生病。紫金山下的营寨，毁坏夹道，李景的军队大败，将领们大多被俘获，而李景的守将广陵冯延鲁、光州张绍、舒州周祚、泰州方讷、泗州范再遇等人，有的逃跑，有的投降，都不能坚守，即使是李景君臣，也都震惊畏惧，上表称臣，愿意割让土地、献纳贡赋，以证明降服诚意，而刘仁赡独自坚守，不能攻下。
English: As a result, he fell ill with a sigh of resentment. The camp under the Purple Mountain was destroyed, Li Jing's army was defeated, and most of the generals were captured. However, Li Jing's guards, Guangling Feng Yanlu, Gwangju Zhang Shao, Shuzhou Zhou Qi, Taizhou Fangna, and Zhangzhou Fan Zaidi and others, some fled and some surrendered, but could not hold out. Even Li Jing's vassals were shocked and afraid, and they praised their vassals and were willing to cede land and pay tribute to prove their sincerity in surrendering, while Liu Renyi held out alone and could not be captured.

古文：世宗使景所遣使者孙晟等至城下示之，仁赡子崇谏幸其父病，谋与诸将出降，仁赡立命斩之，监军使周廷构哭于中门救之，不得，于是士卒皆感泣，愿以死守。
现代文：周世宗让孪景派来的使臣孙晟等人到城下告知刘仁赡，刘仁赡的儿子刘崇谏趁着他父亲患病，图谋和将领们出城投降，刘仁赡立即命令将他斩首，监军使周廷构在中门哭泣挽救他，没有救成，于是士兵们都感动得哭起来，愿意以死守城。
English: Zhou Shizong sent the envoy Sun Qian and others to the city to inform Liu Renyi. Liu Renyi's son Liu Chongyi took advantage of his father's illness to plot with the generals to surrender outside the city. Liu Renyi immediately ordered him to be beheaded. The overseer of the army made Zhou Tingjie cry at the middle gate to save him. There was no salvation, so the soldiers were moved to tears and were willing to defend the city with their lives.

古文：三月，仁赡病甚，已不知人，其副使孙羽诈为仁赡书，以城降。
现代文：三月，刘仁赡病重，已经不省人事，他的副使孙羽伪造刘仁赡的信，献城投降。
English: In March, Liu Renyi was seriously ill and already unconscious. His deputy, Sun Yu, forged a letter from Liu Renyi and surrendered the city.

古文：世宗命舁仁赡至帐前，叹嗟久之，赐以玉带、御马，复使入城养疾，是日卒。
现代文：周世宗命令把刘仁赡抬到营帐前，感叹很久，赐给他玉带、御马，又让他进城养病，这天死去。
English: Zhou Shizong ordered Liu Renyi to be carried to the front of the camp, sighed for a long time, gave him a jade belt and a horse, and let him go to the city to recover, and died that day.

古文：制曰： 刘仁赡尽忠所事，抗节无亏，前代名臣，几人可比！
现代文：诏书写道： 刘仁赡对他所事奉的人竭尽忠诚，坚守节操，无所亏损，前代的名臣，有几个能和他相提并论！
English: The edict wrote: Liu Renyi was loyal to the people he served, adhered to the principle of self-discipline, and did not lose anything. There are several famous ministers of the previous generation who can be compared to him!

古文：予之南伐，得尔为多。 
现代文：我出征南方，以得到你为最大收获。 
English: I went to the south to get the most out of you.

古文：乃拜仁赡检校太尉兼中书令、天平军节度使。
现代文：于是拜刘仁赡为检校太尉兼中书令、天平军节度使。
English: As a result, Bai Liu Renyi became a school inspector and middle school secretary, as well as a military commander of the Tianping Army.

古文：仁赡不能受命而卒，年五十八。
现代文：刘仁赡不能接受任命而死去，享年五十八岁。
English: Unable to accept the appointment, Liu Renyi died at the age of 58.

古文：世宗遣使吊祭，丧事官给，追封彭城郡王，以其子崇赞为怀州刺史，赐庄宅各一区。
现代文：因地宗派使臣吊祭刘仁赡，丧事由官府出资，追封为彭城郡王，任他的儿子刘崇赞为怀州刺史，赐给庄园、住宅各一处。
English: Because of the local religious sect, the envoy hanged Liu Renyi, the funeral was funded by the government, and he was posthumously crowned the king of Pengcheng County. His son, Liu Chongzan, was appointed the governor of Waizhou, and was given a manor and a residence.

古文：李景闻仁赡卒，亦赠太师。
现代文：李景听说刘仁赡死，也追封他为太师。
English: When Li Jing heard that Liu Renyi had died, he also made him Grand Master.

古文：寿州故治寿春，世宗以其难克，遂徙城下蔡，而复其军曰忠正军，曰： 吾以旌仁赡之节也。 
现代文：寿州原来的州治为寿春，周世宗因它难以制胜，于是将城迁到下蔡，而恢复它的军镇建置，称号为忠正军，说： 我用它来奖赏刘仁赡的忠节。 
English: Shoushu was originally ruled by Shuchun. Zhou Shizong, because it was difficult to win, moved the city to lower Cai, and restored its military town construction, with the title of Zhongzheng Army, saying: I use it to reward Liu Renyi's loyalty.

古文：呜呼，天下恶梁久矣！
现代文：唉，天下憎恶梁已经很久了！
English: Alas, the world has hated Liang for a long time!

古文：然士之不幸而生其时者，不为之臣可也，其食人之禄者，必死人之事，如彦章者，可谓得其死哉！
现代文：但不幸生在那个时代的义士，不做它的臣子是可以的，那些享用他主人俸禄的人，必然要为他主人的事而死，像王彦章这样的人，可以说是死得其所啊！
English: However, it is possible for a righteous person who was unfortunately born in that era not to be its vassal. Those who enjoy their master's salary must inevitably die for their master's cause. People like Wang Yanzhang can be said to have died in the right place!

古文：仁赡既杀其子以自明矣，岂有垂死而变节者乎？
现代文：刘仁赡既然杀死他的儿子来表明自己的意志，哪有临死变节的呢？
English: Since Liu Renyi killed his son to express his will, how can there be a deathbed defection?

古文：今《周世宗实录》载仁赡降书，盖其副使孙羽等所为也。
现代文：现在的《周世宗实录》载有刘仁赡的降书，这是他的副使孙羽等人写的。
English: The current "Zhou Shizong Record" contains Liu Renyi's letter of surrender, which was written by his deputy Sun Yu and others.

古文：当世宗时，王环为蜀守秦州，攻之久不下，其力屈而降，世宗颇嗟其忠，然止于为大将军。
现代文：当周世宗时，王环为蜀国守卫秦州，很久都攻不下来，后来他力尽而投降，周世宗很是赞赏他的忠诚，但只封为大将军。
English: At the time of Zhou Shizong, Wang Huan guarded Qinzhou for the State of Shu, and was unable to conquer it for a long time. Later, he did his best to surrender. Zhou Shizong highly appreciated his loyalty, but only made him a general.

古文：视世宗待二人之薄厚而考其制书，乃知仁赡非降者也。
现代文：就周世宗对他们两人厚薄不同并考察周世宗的制诰，可知刘仁瞻不是投降的人。
English: As far as Zhou Shizong is concerned, the thickness of the two of them is different and the control of Zhou Shizong is examined, it can be seen that Liu Renzhan is not a person who surrenders.

古文：自古忠臣义士之难得也！
现代文：从古到今忠臣义士难得啊！
English: From ancient times to the present, loyal subjects and righteous men are rare!

古文：五代之乱，三人者，或出于军卒，或出于伪国之臣，可胜叹哉！
现代文：五代乱世之时，这三个人，或出身于士兵，或出身于伪国的臣子，真令人不胜感叹呵！
English: At the time of the five generations of chaos, these three people, either born as soldiers, or born as vassals of a pseudo-state, are truly amazing!

古文：可胜叹哉！
现代文：真令人不胜感叹呵！
English: It's really amazing!

