古文：黄帝问曰：天有八风，经有五风，何谓？
现代文：黄帝问道：自然界有八风，人的经脉病变又有五风的说法，这是怎么回事呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What is the meaning of the saying that there are eight winds in nature and five winds in human's meridian pathology?

古文：岐伯对曰：八风发邪以为经风，触五脏，邪气发病。
现代文：歧伯答说：自然界的八风是外部的致病邪气，他侵犯经脉，产生经脉的风病，风邪还会继续经脉而侵害五脏，使五脏发生病变。
English: "The eight winds of nature are external pathogenic evil spirits. They invade the meridians and cause the disease of the meridians. The disease of the wind will continue to invade the meridians and affect the five internal organs, causing lesions in the five internal organs.

古文：所谓得四时之胜者，春胜长夏，长夏胜冬，冬胜夏，夏胜秋，秋胜春，所谓四时之胜也。
现代文：一年的四个季节，有相克的关系，比如春胜夏，夏胜冬，冬胜夏，夏胜秋，秋胜春，某个季节出现了克制它的季节气候，这就是所谓四时相胜。
English: The four seasons of the year have a competitive relationship, such as spring wins summer, summer wins winter, winter wins summer, summer wins autumn, autumn wins spring. In a certain season, a seasonal climate that restrains it has appeared. This is the so-called four-hour victory.

古文：东风生于春，病在肝，俞在颈项；南风生于夏，病在心，俞在胸胁；西风生于秋，病在肺，俞在肩背；北风生于冬，病在肾，俞在腰股；中央为土，病在脾，俞在脊。
现代文：东风生于春季，病多发生在肝，肝的经气输注于颈项。南风生于夏季，病多发生于心，心的经气输注于胸胁。西风生于秋季，病多发生在肺，肺的经气输注于肩背。北风生于冬季，病多发生在肾，肾的经气输注于腰股。长夏对应土，病位在脾，脾的经气输注于脊。
English: Dongfeng was born in the spring, and the disease mostly occurred in the liver, and the liver's meridian was injected into the neck. Nanfeng was born in the summer, and the disease mostly occurred in the heart, and the heart's meridian was injected into the chest wall. West Wind was born in the fall, and the disease mostly occurred in the lungs, and the lung's meridian was injected into the back of the shoulder. North Wind was born in the winter, and the disease mostly occurred in the kidney, and the kidney's meridian was injected into the groin. Changxia was born in the summer, and the disease was in the spleen, and the spleen's

古文：故春气者，病在头；夏气者，病在脏；秋气者，病在肩背；冬气者，病在四肢。
现代文：所以春季邪气伤人，多病在头部：夏季邪气伤人，多病在心：秋季邪气伤人，多病在肩背：冬季邪气伤人，多病在四肢。
English: Therefore, in the spring, the evil spirits hurt people and cause many diseases in the head; in the summer, the evil spirits hurt people and cause many diseases in the heart; in the fall, the evil spirits hurt people and cause many diseases in the shoulders; in the winter, the evil spirits hurt people and cause many diseases in the limbs.

古文：故春善病鼽衄，仲夏善病胸胁，长夏善病洞泄寒中，秋善病风疟，冬善病痹厥。
现代文：春天多发生鼽衄，夏天多发生在胸胁方面的疾患，夏季多发生腹泄等里寒证，秋天多发生风疟，冬天多发生痹厥。
English: In spring, there are more cases of convulsions, in summer, there are more cases of chest disease, in summer, there are more cases of diarrhea and other cold symptoms, in autumn, there are more cases of malaria, and in winter, there are more cases of paralysis.

古文：故冬不按蹻，春不鼽衄；春不病颈项，仲夏不病胸胁；长夏不病洞泄寒中，秋不病风疟，冬不病痹厥、飧泄，而汗出也。
现代文：若冬天不进行按脐等扰动阳气的活动，来年春天就不会发生鼽衄和颈项部位的疾病，夏天就不会发生胸胁的疾患，夏季就不会发生腹泄一类的里寒病，秋天就不会发生风疟病，冬天也不会发生痹厥、飨泄、汗出过多等病症。
English: If the activities that disturb the yang qi such as pressing the gong are not carried out in winter, the diseases of the gills and neck will not occur in the next spring, the diseases of the chest will not occur in the summer, the colds such as diarrhea will not occur in the summer, the malaria will not occur in the fall, and the diseases such as paralysis, excretion, and excessive sweating will not occur in the winter.

古文：夫精者，身之本也。故藏于精者，春不病温。
现代文：精，是人体的根本，所以阴精内藏而不妄泄，春天就不会得温热病。
English: The essence is the foundation of the human body, so the yin essence is hidden inside without venting, and there will be no fever in the spring.

古文：夏暑汗不出者，秋成风疟，此平人脉法也。
现代文：夏暑阳盛，如果不能排汗散热，到秋天就会酿成风疟病。这是诊察普通人四时发病的一般律。
English: In the summer, when the sun is at its peak, if you can't sweat to dissipate the heat, it will lead to typhoid fever in the fall. This is the general rule for diagnosing the onset of ordinary people at four o'clock.

古文：故曰：阴中有阴，阳中有阳。
现代文：所以说：阴阳之中，还各有阴阳。
English: Therefore, it is said that among yin and yang, there are also yin and yang.

古文：平旦至日中，天之阳，阳中之阳也；日中至黄昏，天之阳，阳中之阴也；合夜至鸡鸣，天之阴，阴中之阴也；鸡鸣至平旦，天之阴，阴中之阳也。
现代文：白昼属阳，平旦到中午，为阳中之阳。中午到黄昏，则属阳中之阴。黑夜属阴，暮夜到鸡鸣，为阴中之阴。鸡鸣到平旦，则属阴中之阳。人的情况也与此相应。
English: Daytime is the yang, the midday to midday is the yang of the yang. Midday to dusk is the yin of the yang. Night is the yin, the dusk to the crowing of the rooster is the yin of the yin. The crowing of the rooster to the midday is the yang of the yin. The human condition also corresponds to this.

古文：故人亦应之，夫言人之阴阳，则外为阳，内为阴。言人身之阴阳，则背为阳，腹为阴。
现代文：就人体阴阳而论，外部属阳，内部属阴。就身体的部位来分阴阳，则背为阳，腹为阴。
English: As far as the yin and yang of the human body are concerned, the outside is yang and the inside is yin. As far as the parts of the body are concerned, the back is yang and the abdomen is yin.

古文：言人身之脏腑中阴阳，则脏者为阴，腑者为阳。
现代文：从脏腑的阴阳划分来说，则脏属阴，腑属阳，肝、心、脾、肺、肾五脏都属阴。
English: In terms of the yin and yang division of the viscera, the viscera are yin, the gills are yang, and the liver, heart, spleen, lungs, and kidneys are all yin.

古文：肝、心、脾、肺、肾，五脏皆为阴，胆、胃、大肠、小肠、膀胱、三焦，六腑皆为阳。
现代文：胆、胃、大肠、小肠、膀胱三焦六腑都属阳。
English: The gallbladder, stomach, large intestine, small intestine, and bladder are all yang.

古文：所以欲知阴中之阴，阳中之阳者，何也？
现代文：了解阴阳之中复有阴阳的道理是什麽呢？
English: What is the reason for understanding that there is a yin and yang in the complex of yin and yang?

古文：为冬病在阴，夏病在阳，春病在阴，秋病在阳，皆视其所在，为施针石也。
现代文：这是要分析四时疾病的在阴在阳，以作为治疗的依据，如冬病在阴，夏病在阳，春病在阴，秋病在阳，都要根据疾病的部位来施用针刺和贬石的疗法。
English: This is to analyze the yin and yang of the four diseases at the same time as the basis for treatment. For example, the winter disease is in the yin, the summer disease is in the yang, the spring disease is in the yin, and the autumn disease is in the yang, and acupuncture and lithotripsy therapy should be applied according to the part of the disease.

古文：故背为阳，阳中之阳，心也；背为阳，阳中之阴，肺也；腹为阴，阴中之阴，肾也；腹为阴，阴中之阳，肝也；腹为阴，阴中之至阴，脾也。
现代文：此外，背为阳，阳中之阳为心，阳中之阴为肺。腹为阴，阴中之阴为肾，阴中之阳为肝，阴中的至阴为脾。
English: In addition, the back is the yang, the yang in the yang is the heart, the yin in the yang is the lung, the belly is the yang, the yang in the yang is the kidney, the yang in the yang is the liver, and the yin in the yang is the spleen.

古文：此皆阴阳表里，内外雌雄，相输应也。故以应天之阴阳也。
现代文：以上这些都是人体阴阳表里、内外雌雄相互联系又相互对应的例证，所以人与自然界的阴阳是相应的。
English: All of the above are examples of the interrelationship and mutual correspondence between the inner and outer sexes of the human body, so the yin and yang of man and nature are corresponding.

古文：帝曰：五脏应四时，各有收受乎？岐伯曰：有。
现代文：黄帝说：五脏除与四时相应外，它们各自还有相类的事物可以归纳起来吗吗？歧伯说：有。
English: Huang Di said, "Apart from the five viscera corresponding to the four o'clock, do they each have similar things that can be summarized?" Shuibo said, "Yes."

古文：东方青色，入通于肝，开窍于目，藏精于肝。其病发惊骇，其味酸，其类草木，其畜鸡，其谷麦，其应四时，上为岁星，是以春气在头也。
现代文：比如东方青色，与肝相通，肝开窍于目，经气内藏于肝，发病常表现为惊骇，在五味为酸，与草木同类，在五蓄为鸡，在五谷为麦，与四时中的春季相应，在天体为岁星，春天阳气上升，所以其气在头，在五音为角，其成数为八，因肝主筋。
English: For example, the oriental cyan, is connected with the liver, the liver opens to the eyes, is stored in the liver through the qi, the onset is often expressed as shock, in the five flavors as acid, with the same kind of plants, in the five crops as chicken, in the five grains as wheat, corresponding to the spring in the four o'clock, in the celestial body as the year star, in the spring the yang rises, so its qi is in the head, in the five tones as the angle, its composition is eight, because the liver is the main muscle.

古文：南方赤色，入通于心，开窍于耳，藏精于心，故病在五脏。其味苦，其类火，其畜羊，其谷黍，其应四时，上为荧惑星。是以知病之在脉也。其音徵，其数七，其臭焦。
现代文：此外，在嗅味为臊。南方赤色，与心相通，心开窍于耳，经气内藏与心，在五味为苦，与火同类，在五畜为羊，在五谷为黍，与四时中的夏季相应，在天体为荧惑星，他的疾病多发生在脉和五脏，在五音为徵，其成数为七。此外，在嗅味为焦。
English: In addition, in the sense of smell, it is red. In the south, it is connected with the heart, the heart opens the nose to the ear, and the heart is hidden in the air. In the five senses, it is bitter, the same as fire, in the five animals, it is sheep, in the five grains, it is straw, corresponding to the summer in the four hours, in the celestial body, it is a fluorescent planet. His disease mostly occurs in the veins and the five viscera. In the five tones, it is a sign, and its component is seven. In addition, in the sense of smell, it is a focus.

古文：中央黄色，入通于脾，开窍于口，藏精于脾，故病在舌本。其味甘，其类土，其畜牛，其谷稷，其应四时，上为镇星。是以知病之在肉也。其音宫，其数五，其臭香。
现代文：中央黄色，与脾相通，脾开窍于口，经气内藏于脾，在五味为甘，与土同类，在五畜为牛，在五谷为稷，与四时中的夏相应，在天体为镇星，他的疾病多发生在舌根和肌肉，在五音为宫，其生数为五。此外，在嗅味为香。
English: The central yellow color is related to the spleen, the spleen opens to the mouth and is hidden in the spleen through the qi, the five tastes are sweet, similar to the earth, the five animals are cattle, the five grains are earthworms, corresponding to the summer in the middle of the four seasons, the celestial body is the town star, his disease mostly occurs in the base of the tongue and muscles, the five tones are the palace, and the number of births is five. In addition, the smell is the fragrance.

古文：西方白色，入通于肺，开窍于鼻，藏精于肺，故病在背。其味辛，其类金，其畜马，其谷稻，其应四时，上为太白星。是以知病之在皮毛也。其音商，其数九，其臭腥。
现代文：西方白色，与肺相通，肺开窍于鼻，经气内藏于肺，在五味为辛，与金同类，在五畜为马，在五谷为稻，与四时中的秋季相应，在天体为太白星，他的疾病多发生在背部和皮毛，在五音为商，其成数为九。此外，在嗅味为腥。
English: Western white, connected with the lungs, the lungs open to the nose, the lungs are hidden in the air, the five flavors are spicy, the same kind as gold, the five animals are horses, the five grains are rice, corresponding to the autumn in the four o'clock, the celestial body is too white star, his disease mostly occurs in the back and fur, the five tones are merchants, its composition is nine. In addition, the smell is stale.

古文：北方黑色，入通于肾，开窍于二阴，藏精于肾，故病在谿。其味咸，其类水，其畜彘，其谷豆，其应四时，上为辰星。是以知病之在骨也。其音羽，其数六，其臭腐。
现代文：北方黑色，与肾相通，肾开窍于前后二阴，经气内藏于肾，在五味为咸，与水同类，在五畜为猪，在五谷为豆，与四时中的冬季相应，在天体为辰星，他的疾病多发生在溪和骨，在五音为羽，其成数为六。此外，其嗅味为腐。
English: The north is black, connected with the kidney, the kidney opening is before and after the yin and yang, the kidney is hidden in the kidney through the qi, the five flavors are salty, the same as water, the five animals are pigs, the five grains are beans, corresponding to the winter of the four hours, and the celestial body is the star. His disease mostly occurs in the stream and bone, and the five tones are feathers, which has a composition of six. In addition, its smell is rotten.

古文：故善为脉者，谨察五脏六腑，一逆一从，阴阳表里，雌雄之纪，藏之心意，合心于精，非其人勿教，非其真勿授，是谓得道。
现代文：所以善于诊脉的医生，能够谨慎细心地审查五脏六腑的变化，了解其顺逆的情况，把阴阳、表里、雌雄的对应和联系，纲目分明地加以归纳，并把这些精深的道理，深深地记在心中。
English: Therefore, a doctor who is good at diagnosing the pulse can carefully examine the changes in the five viscera and the six pharynx, understand their positive and negative conditions, and clearly summarize the correspondence and connection between yin and yang, inside and outside, and male and female, and keep these profound principles deeply in mind.

