古文：范泰、王淮之、王韶之、荀伯子范泰，字伯伦，顺阳山阴人也。
现代文：范泰字伯伦，顺阳山阴人。
English: Fan Tai Zi Bolen, Shunyang San Yin Ren.

古文：祖汪，晋安北将军、徐兗二州刺史。
现代文：祖父范江是晋朝安北将军，徐州、兖州两州的刺史。
English: His grandfather, Fan Jiang, was the general of Anbei of the Jin Dynasty, and was the chief historian of Xuzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：父宁，豫章太守。
现代文：父亲范宁是豫章太守。
English: Fanning's father was the governor of Henan Province.

古文：泰初为太学博士，卫将军谢安、骠骑将军会稽王道子二府参军。
现代文：范泰始任太学博士、卫将军谢安、骠骑将军会稽王刘道子两府的参军。
English: Fan Tai was the first to join the army as a doctor of science, Wei general Xie An, and Wei cavalry general Liu Daozi.

古文：荆州刺史王忱，泰外弟也，请为天门太守。
现代文：荆州刺史王忱是范的表弟，请他任天门太守。
English: Wang Zhen of Jingzhou, Fan's cousin, asked him to be the governor of Tianmen.

古文：忱嗜酒，醉辄累旬，及醒，则俨然端肃。
现代文：王忱喜欢喝酒，一醉达数十天，醒来时则非常庄重威严。
English: Wang Zhen likes to drink. He can stay drunk for dozens of days at a time, but when he wakes up, he is very solemn and dignified.

古文：泰谓忱曰： 酒虽会性，亦所以伤生。
现代文：范泰对他说： 酒虽让人适意但也伤身体。
English: Fan Tai said to him: Although alcohol is enjoyable, it is also harmful to the body.

古文：游处以来，常欲有以相戒，当卿沈湎，措言莫由，及今之遇，又无假陈说。 忱嗟叹久之，曰： 见规者众矣，未有若此者也。 或问忱曰： 范泰何如谢邈？ 忱曰： 茂度慢。 
现代文：我与你相处以来常想劝你，但总碰上你喝醉的时候话也就无从说起。现在有了机会却找不到恰当的理由了。 王忱听了叹息不已说： 规劝我的人很多还从没有像你这样的。 有人问王忱： 范泰与谢邈比怎么样？ 王说： 茂度傲慢。 
English: Since I've been with you, I've always wanted to persuade you, but when you're drunk, there's no way to start the conversation. Now that I have the opportunity, I can't find the right reason. Wang Zhen listened and sighed and said: Many people who have persuaded me have never been like you. Someone asked Wang Zhen: How are Fan Tai and Xie Yibin? Wang said: Maudu is arrogant.

古文：又问： 何如殷觊？ 忱曰： 伯通易。 
现代文：又问与殷凯比呢？ 王说： 伯通平易。 
English: And as for Ingeborg, the king said, "Behold, she is of a beautiful countenance."

古文：忱常有意立功，谓泰曰： 今城池既立，军甲亦充，将欲扫除中原，以申宿昔之志。
现代文：王忱总是想着建功立业，对范泰说： 现在我们的城池十分坚固，武器装备也充裕，我想扫除中原之敌，实现我早年的志向。
English: Wang Zhen always wanted to make achievements, and said to Fan Tai: Now our city is very strong, and weapons and equipment are abundant. I want to sweep away the enemies of the Central Plains and realize my early ambition.

古文：伯通意锐，当令拥戈前驱。
现代文：伯通有闯劲，应让他做先锋。
English: Bertone has the drive to be a pioneer.

古文：以君持重，欲相委留事，何如？ 
现代文：因你稳健持重，我想将留守后方的重任交给你，怎样？ 
English: Since you're a steady hand, I'd like to give you the responsibility of staying behind, how about that?

古文：泰曰： 百年逋寇，前贤挫屈者多矣。
现代文：范泰说： 一百多年来想消灭北方敌寇的贤能之士最终失败的很多啊！
English: Fan Tai said: For more than a hundred years, the wise men who wanted to eliminate the northern invaders ultimately failed a lot!

古文：功名虽贵，鄙生所不敢谋。 
现代文：功名虽可贵，可我却不想谋取它。 
English: Fame is a precious thing, but I don't want to seek it.

古文：会忱病卒。召泰为骠骑谘议参军，迁中书侍郎。
现代文：正好王忱病逝，朝廷征召范泰为骠骑咨议参军，调任中书侍郎。
English: Just as Wang Zhen died of illness, the imperial court conscripted Fan Tai to join the army as a cavalry officer, and he was transferred to the post of the secretary.

古文：时会稽王世子元显专权，内外百官请假，不复表闻，唯签元显而已。
现代文：当时会稽王后代元显把持朝政，朝廷和宫中百官请假，都不再上表给皇帝，只让元显签署就算了。
English: At that time, Yuan Xian, a descendant of the Qianlong Emperor, was in charge of the imperial government, and the imperial court and hundreds of officials in the palace asked for leave, and no longer presented the form to the emperor, but only let Yuan Xian sign it.

古文：泰建言以为非宜，元显不纳。
现代文：范泰提出意见认为这样不恰当，元显不采纳他的意见。
English: Fan Tai suggested that this was inappropriate, but Yuan Xian did not accept his suggestion.

古文：父忧去职，袭爵阳遂乡侯。
现代文：因范泰父亲去世，他服丧辞去官职。他继承了父亲阳遂乡侯的爵位。
English: Due to the death of Fan Tai's father, he resigned from his official post. He inherited his father's title of Yang Sui Township Marquis.

古文：桓玄辅晋，使御史中丞祖台之奏泰及前司徒左长史王准之、辅国将军司马珣之并居丧无礼，泰坐废徙丹徒。
现代文：桓玄辅佐晋朝，让御史中丞祖台之上书皇帝说范泰和前司徒左长史王准之以及辅国将军司马王王旬之都在服丧期间无视礼制，范泰因此被废除官职发配到丹徒。
English: In the reign of Emperor Jintao, Emperor Kuan Xuan's aide-de-camp Huan Xuan had the Grand Historian Zhongzheng Zuodai write a letter to the emperor saying that Fan Tai, the former Sidu Commander Zuochang Shi Wang Junzhi, and the Auxiliary General Sima Wang Shunzhi all ignored the etiquette during the funeral. As a result, Fan Tai was stripped of his official position and sent to Dantu.

古文：义旗建，国子博士。
现代文：刘裕起兵，范泰任国子博士。
English: Liu Yu is a soldier, Fan Tai is a doctor.

古文：司马休之为冠军将军、荆州刺史，以泰为长史、南郡太守。又除长沙相，散骑常侍，并不拜。
现代文：司马休之任冠军将军、荆州刺史，让范泰任长史、南郡太守，后又任命他为长沙相、散骑常侍，他都未就任。
English: Sima Xiu was appointed champion general, Jingzhou stabbed history, let Fan Tai be appointed long history, Nan County governor, and later appointed him as Changsha minister and horseback riding attendant, but he did not take office.

古文：入为黄门郎，御史中丞。
现代文：范泰入朝为黄门侍郎、御史中丞。
English: Fan Tai entered the imperial court as a Yellow Gate attendant and Goshi Chujo.

古文：坐议殷祠事谬，白衣领职。
现代文：因为议论殷祠之事失当，虽仍在职而无爵位。
English: Because it was inappropriate to discuss the matter of the Yin Temple, although he was still in office, he did not receive a knighthood.

古文：出为东阳太守。
现代文：后出京城任东阳太守。
English: Later, he went to Kyoto to serve as the governor of Dongyang.

古文：卢循之难，泰预发兵千人，开仓给禀，高祖加泰振武将军。
现代文：卢循事件中，范泰预先派一千多士兵，打开粮仓供给军粮，高祖因此加封范泰振武将军。
English: During the Luqun Incident, Fan Tai sent more than a thousand soldiers in advance to open the granary to supply the army with grain, and Gaozu therefore added the title of General Fan Tai Zhenwu.

古文：明年，迁侍中，寻转度支尚书。
现代文：第二年调任侍中，不久转任度支尚书。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, and soon after, he was transferred to the position of imperial secretary.

古文：时仆射陈郡谢混，后进知名，高祖尝从容问混： 泰名辈可以比谁？ 
现代文：当时仆射陈郡人谢混，在青年一辈中十分突出有名，高祖曾经随便问他： 范泰的名望可以和谁比？ 
English: At that time, Fan Tai's servant, Chen County native Xie Ming, was very prominent and famous among the younger generation. Gao Zu once casually asked him: Who can match Fan Tai's fame?

古文：对曰： 王元太一流人也。 
现代文：谢答道： 他与王元太一样属于最高一类的。 
English: Xie replied: Like Wang Yuanta, he belongs to the highest category.

古文：徙为太常。
现代文：范因而转任太常。
English: As a result, Fan was transferred to Taojang.

古文：初，司徒道规无子，养太祖，及薨，以兄道怜第二子义庆为嗣。
现代文：当初，司徒刘道规没有儿子收养了太祖。太祖死后道规领养了哥哥道怜的二儿子义庆为子嗣。
English: At first, Liu Daojun, a disciple of St. Peter, adopted his grandfather without a son. After his grandfather's death, Daojun adopted his elder brother Douren's second son, Yiqing, as his heir.

古文：高祖以道规素爱太祖，又令居重。
现代文：高祖因为道规一向疼爱太祖，而让他身处要职。
English: Gaozu always loved Taizu because of the moral code, so he put him in an important position.

古文：道规追封南郡公，应以先华容县公赐太祖。
现代文：追封道规为南郡公，想将道规原先的华容县公赐给太祖。
English: He wanted to bestow the original Huarong County prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural prefectural governor.

古文：泰议曰： 公之友爱，即心过厚。
现代文：范泰论此事说： 道规的友爱，于心太浓厚了。
English: Fan Tai said about this matter: The friendship of Taoism is too strong in my heart.

古文：礼无二嗣，讳宜还本属。 
现代文：按礼制不应有两个继承人，义隆应该仍旧用他的本来的封号。 
English: According to the etiquette, there should not be two heirs, and Yilong should still use his original title.

古文：从之。
现代文：高祖听从这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：转大司马左长史，右卫将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：范转任大司马左长史、右卫将军，加封散骑常侍。
English: Fan was transferred to the posts of grand secretary Ma Zuo Changshi, general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, and cavalryman of the Second Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：复为尚书，常侍如故。
现代文：又任尚书，仍照任常侍。
English: He was also appointed as courtier, but remained as a regular attendant.

古文：兼司空，与右仆射袁湛授宋公九锡，随军到洛阳。
现代文：兼任司空，与右仆射袁湛一起授九锡给宋公，随军队到了洛阳。
English: He also served as the second-in-command, and together with his right-hand man, Yuan Zhan, awarded Jiuxi to Song Gong, and went to Luoyang with the army.

古文：高祖还彭城，与共登城，泰有足疾，特命乘舆。
现代文：高祖回到彭城，与范泰一起登城楼，范脚有毛病，高祖特意让他乘轿登城。
English: Gaozu returned to Pengcheng and went up to the city tower with Fan Tai. Fan had a problem with his foot, so Gaozu let him go up to the city in a sedan.

古文：泰好酒，不拘小节，通率任心，虽在公坐，不异私室，高祖甚赏爱之。
现代文：范喜欢喝酒，不拘小节，性情旷达率意自然，即使在大庭广众的场合，也与在自己家里一样，高祖特别赏识和喜爱他。
English: Fan likes to drink, he is not fussy, his temperament is spontaneous, even in public, just like in his own home, Gaozu especially appreciates and loves him.

古文：然拙于为治，故不得在政事之官。
现代文：但他不善于政务，所以不能担任行政官职。
English: However, he is not good at government affairs, so he cannot serve as an executive official.

古文：迁护军将军，以公事免。
现代文：调任护军将军，因公事免去。
English: He was transferred to the position of General of the Guards, but was relieved of his duties.

古文：高祖受命，拜金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍。
现代文：高祖即位，任命他为金紫光禄大夫，加封散骑常侍。
English: Gao Zu ascended the throne, and appointed him as the doctor of the golden purple light, and the attendant of the imperial cavalry.

古文：明年，议建国学，以泰领国子祭酒。
现代文：次年，议论建立国学，以范泰为领国子祭酒。
English: The following year, discussions on the establishment of national studies began, with Fan Tai as the leading national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：泰上表曰：
现代文：范泰上表给皇帝写道：
English: Fan Tai wrote to the emperor on the table:

古文：臣闻风化兴于哲王，教训表于至世。
现代文： 臣听说好的风气在圣哲的君主统治下才能兴起，教化训示在昌明的时代才能盛行。
English: The vassal heard that a good culture can only emerge under the reign of a sage monarch, and that edification and instruction can only prevail in the era of Changming.

古文：至说莫先讲习，甚乐必寄朋来。
现代文：最高的学说都是从讲读学习开始的，很快乐的事一定要告诉朋友。
English: The highest teachings all begin with reading and studying, and you must tell your friends about the things that make you happy.

古文：古人成童入学，易子而教，寻师无远，负粮忘艰，安亲光国，莫不由此。
现代文：古时儿童到一定年龄就进入学校，人们相互交换子弟进行教育；寻找老师不辞遥远，背着粮食忘记辛劳，安慰父母荣耀国家，没有不是从此而来的。
English: In ancient times, children entered school when they reached a certain age, and people exchanged children with each other for education. Looking for a teacher without leaving far away, carrying grain to forget hard work, comforting parents and glorifying the country, all came from here.

古文：若能出不由户，则斯道莫从。
现代文：如果人们不走出自己的家门，那么这就行不通了。
English: If people don't get out of their houses, then it's not going to work.

古文：是以明诏爰发，已成涣汗，学制既下，远近遵承。
现代文：因此，英明的圣旨刚下达，就会天下奉行；学制一颁布，全国就会遵照执行。
English: Therefore, as soon as the wise Holy Will is issued, it will be followed by the whole world; as soon as the school system is promulgated, it will be implemented throughout the country.

古文：臣之愚怀，少有未达。
现代文：臣不聪明，小时候就学习不广博。
English: If you're not smart, you won't learn much when you're young.

古文：今惟新告始，盛业初基，天下改观，有志景慕。
现代文：而今宋朝始建，伟业刚刚奠基，社会变化一新，有志之士渴望能报效国家。
English: But now, the Song Dynasty has begun to be built, the foundation of a great cause has just been laid, the social changes are brand new, and people with aspirations are eager to serve the country.

古文：而置生之制，取少停多，开不来之端，非一涂而已。
现代文：但如今安置学生的制度却是取得少弃得多，开了一个不好的头，而不仅仅是糊涂啊。
English: But today's system of placing students is much more about getting something for nothing, and it has gotten off to a bad start, rather than just being muddled.

古文：臣以家推国，则知所聚不多，恐不足以宣大宋之风，弘济济之美。
现代文：我从家庭推想到国家，懂得积蓄不丰，恐怕不能够宏扬大宋的雄风，不能弘扬盛世之完美。
English: I inferred from the family to the country, knowing that the savings were not abundant, and I was afraid that I would not be able to carry forward the grand style of the Great Song Dynasty, and could not carry forward the perfection of the prosperous era.

古文：臣谓合选之家，虽制所未达，父兄欲其入学，理合开通；虽小违晨昏，所以大弘孝道。
现代文：我认为合选的家庭，即使制度上行不通，父母兄长要想让子弟进入学校的，情理上则应予以通融。其子弟即使不能早晚侍奉父兄，但入学则是大力弘扬孝道的。
English: In my opinion, even if the system doesn't work, it is reasonable for parents and brothers to be accommodating if they want their children to go to school. Even if their children can't serve their parents sooner or later, they should vigorously promote filial piety when they go to school.

古文：不知《春秋》，则所陷或大，故赵盾忠而书弑，许子孝而得罪，以斯为戒，可不惧哉！
现代文：不懂《春秋》的害处有时会很严重。所以赵盾忠诚却被视为弑君的人，许子孝顺却获罪，以此为戒，能不让人忧惧吗？
English: The harm of not understanding "Spring and Autumn" can sometimes be very serious. Therefore, Zhao Dun's loyalty is regarded as a person who betrays the king, but Xu Zi's filial piety is a crime. Can we not let people worry about this as a warning?

古文：十五志学，诚有其文，若年降无几，而深有志尚者，何必限以一格，而不许其进邪！
现代文：十五岁立志学习确实是制度规定的，如果年龄稍微小一点的人有强烈的学习愿望，又何必以某种制度限制他们而不让他们上进呢？
English: Setting out to study at the age of fifteen is indeed stipulated by the system. If people who are slightly younger have a strong desire to learn, why restrict them with a certain system and not let them advance?

古文：扬乌豫《玄》，实在弱齿；五十学《易》，乃无大过。
现代文：扬乌学习《玄》实际是从牙齿尚雅嫩的年纪开始的。五十岁学习《易》也没有什么大过错。
English: Yang Wu's study of "Xuan" actually began at the age when his teeth were still tender. There is nothing wrong with studying "Yi" at the age of fifty.

古文：昔中朝助教，亦用二品。
现代文： 过去中朝助教，也用官阶属二品的人。
English: In the past, teaching assistants in the Chinese and Korean dynasties also used people of second-class official ranks.

古文：颍川陈载已辟太保掾，而国子取为助教，即太尉淮之弟。
现代文：颍川陈载已被任命为太保掾，国子学让他任助教，他就是太尉陈准的弟弟。
English: Lu Chuan Chen Zai has been appointed as Tai Bo Xuan, and Guo Zi Xue has made him an assistant professor. He is the younger brother of Tai Ye Chen Jun.

古文：所贵在于得才，无系于定品。
现代文：重要的在于得到人才，不应被规定的品第束缚。
English: The important thing is to get talented people, and they should not be bound by the prescribed grades.

古文：教学不明，奖厉不著，今有职闲而学优者，可以本官领之，门地二品，宜以朝请领助教，既可以甄其名品，斯亦敦学之一隅。
现代文：教与学不明确，奖赏与鼓励不明显，如今那些无官职而学问好的人，可以给他们相应的官职，门第达到二品，应该以朝廷的名义任命他们为助教，就可以甄别他们的名位品第，也属促学的一项措施。
English: Teaching and learning are not clear, and rewards and encouragement are not obvious. Nowadays, those who have no official position but are good at learning can be given the corresponding official position, and their grade can reach the second grade. They should be appointed as teaching assistants in the name of the imperial court, and their name and grade can be distinguished. It is also a measure to promote learning.

古文：其二品才堪，自依旧从事。
现代文：至于那些刚够到二品的人，自然依照过去的办法行事。
English: As for those who have just reached the second grade, they naturally act according to the previous method.

古文：会今生到有期，而学校未立。
现代文： 现在恰逢到了入学的时候，学校却还没有建立。
English: Now it is time to go to school, but the school has not yet been built.

古文：覆篑实望其速，回辙已淹其迟。事有似赊而宜急者，殆此之谓。古人重寸阴而贱尺璧，其道然也。
现代文：将筐中的土倒掉要求快速，倒车时间长了速度就慢了，有的事情似乎可以迟缓而实际应该迅速处理的，大概说的就是这个道理。古人看重一寸光阴而轻视一尺白玉，道理也与此一样！ 
English: Pouring the soil out of the basket requires speed, reversing takes longer and the speed is slower, some things seem to be slow but should actually be dealt with quickly, roughly speaking, this is the reason. The ancients valued an inch of time and despised a foot of white marble, the reason is the same!

古文：时学竟不立。
现代文：那时国学最终也没有创立。
English: At that time, Kokugaku was not finally established.

古文：时言事者多以钱货减少，国用不足，欲悉市民铜，更造五铢钱。
现代文：当时大多数议论国事的人都以货币减少国家开支不足为由，要将老百姓的铜全部收购起来，再铸造五铢钱。
English: At that time, most people who discussed state affairs wanted to buy up all the copper from the common people and then mint five-baht coins, on the grounds that money would reduce the shortage of state expenditure.

古文：泰又谏曰：
现代文：范泰因此又劝谏说：
English: As a result, Fan Tai also advised Zou to say:

古文：流闻将禁私铜，以充官铜。民虽失器，终于获直，国用不足，其利实多。
现代文： 听说将要禁止老百姓藏铜，以之来补充官铜，百姓虽然失去铜器，最后却得到钱，国家费用不足，会获得很多利益。
English: It is said that the common people will be prohibited from hoarding copper, which will be used to supplement the official copper. Although the common people have lost copperware, they will eventually get money. The state expenses are insufficient, and they will get a lot of benefits.

古文：臣愚意异，不宁寝默。
现代文：臣愚意有所不同，不能沉默不言。
English: Vassal stupidity is different, and cannot be silenced.

古文：臣闻治国若烹小鲜，拯敝莫若务本。
现代文：我听说治理国家如烹小鱼，救治敝败没有不是从根本做起的。
English: I have heard that governing a country is like cooking a small fish, and that there is no remedy for corruption that does not start from the ground up.

古文：百姓不足，君孰与足。
现代文：老百姓不富，国家怎能富足。
English: If the people are not rich, how can the country be rich?

古文：未有民贫而国富，本不足而末有余者也。
现代文：从没有老百姓不富而国家却富裕的，根本不充足而枝末却富足的。
English: There has never been a time when the people were not rich, but the country was rich, or when there was not enough at all, but there was plenty at the end of the branches.

古文：故囊漏贮中，识者不吝；反裘负薪，存毛实难。
现代文：因此，口袋破了却往里放东西，聪明的人不会如此；反穿皮衣背柴草，要保存毛皮实在很困难。
English: Therefore, a wise man will not put something in a broken pocket; on the other hand, it is very difficult to keep the fur when wearing a fur coat.

古文：王者不言有无，诸侯不言多少，食禄之家，不与百姓争利。
现代文：国君不谈有和无，诸侯不谈多和少，吃国家俸禄的人不与老百姓争利益。
English: The sovereign does not talk about having and not having, the lords do not talk about more and less, and the people who eat the state salary do not compete with the people.

古文：故拔葵所以明治，织蒲谓之不仁，是以贵贱有章，职分无爽。
现代文：因此，拔去葵草来表明治理天下，织蒲草称之不仁，这样贵贱有章法，职责名分无差错。
English: Therefore, plucking the sunflower grass to indicate the governance of the world, and weaving the rushes to say that it is not benevolent. There is a rule for such nobility and nobility, and there is no mistake in the name of the duties.

古文：今之所忧，在农民尚寡，仓廪未充，转运无已，资食者众，家无私积，难以御荒耳。
现代文： 现在让人担忧的是农人仍然贫穷，仓库不充实，转移调运不停，消费的人多，家庭没有积蓄，这样是难以抵御荒年的啊。
English: What is worrying now is that farmers are still poor, warehouses are not full, transfer and transportation are non-stop, there are many people who consume, and families have no savings, so it is difficult to resist the lean years.

古文：夫货存贸易，不在少多，昔日之贵，今者之贱，彼此共之，其揆一也。
现代文：货物的贸易不在于多少，过去贵重的东西现在却很低贱，还是一样的东西，其道理也是一样的。
English: It doesn't matter how much goods are traded, things that were valuable in the past are now very cheap, they are still the same things, and the reason is the same.

古文：但令官民均通，则无患不足。
现代文：只要使官府与人民货物均衡流通，就不必担心国用不足。
English: As long as there is a balanced circulation of goods between the government and the people, there is no need to worry about a shortage of goods for state use.

古文：若使必资货广以收国用者，则龟贝之属，自古所行。寻铜之为器，在用也博矣。
现代文：如果一定要货币充足收归国有，那龟板贝壳一类的东西，从古代就流通作货币了，铜用来铸造器皿用途十分广泛。
English: If sufficient money must be nationalized, then things such as tortoiseshell shells have been circulated as money since ancient times, and copper is widely used for casting vessels.

古文：钟律所通者远，机衡所揆者大。
现代文：钟与乐器的声音传播遥远，机械与秤起的作用很大。
English: The sound of bells and musical instruments is far away, and machinery and scales play a large role.

古文：夏鼎负《图》，实冠众瑞，晋铎呈象，亦启休征。
现代文：夏鼎上绘着《河图》，实为众吉祥物之首，晋铎上呈现的图像也预示着好的征兆。
English: The "river map" is drawn on the Xia Ding, which is actually the first of many mascots, and the image presented on the Jin Gong also bodes well.

古文：器有要用，则贵贱同资；物有适宜，则家国共急。
现代文：器皿有重要的用途，贵重的和普通的作用相同，国家与家庭都一样急需。
English: utensils have important uses, both precious and common, and are as much needed by the state as by the family.

古文：今毁必资之器，而为无施之钱，于货则功不补劳，在用则君民俱困，校之以实，损多益少。
现代文：如今销毁非用不可的器皿而去造无处可用的钱币，对货物来说是功劳不能弥补耗费，对实用来说则是国君和人民一样陷入困境。核实这项措施的结果，可说是害多而益少。
English: Now, the destruction of indispensable utensils to make money that can be used nowhere, for goods, the credit cannot make up for the cost, and for practical use, the sovereign and the people are in trouble. The results of verifying this measure can be said to be more harmful than less.

古文：陛下劳谦终日，无倦庶务，以身率物，勤素成风，而颂声不作，板、渭不至者，良由基根未固，意在远略。
现代文：陛下终日辛劳，处理日常事务从无疲倦，以身作则，勤俭朴素成为习惯，可是却无雅颂那样的赞扬的声音，版图不达渭水，确实是因为根基不牢固，没有看到眼前的危险。
English: His Majesty toils all day long, he never gets tired of dealing with everyday affairs, he leads by example, diligence, frugality and simplicity have become a habit, but there is no praise like elegant praise, the territory is not up to scratch, it is indeed because the foundation is not solid, and he does not see the immediate danger.

古文：伏愿思可久之道，赊欲速之情，弘山海之纳，择刍收之说，则嘉谋日陈，圣虑可广。
现代文：诚愿陛下考虑长远的策略，放慢急功近利的心情，扩充山海物产，选择治国的学说，那么臣下每天都会陈述好的建议，陛下的考虑也更宽广。
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty will consider long-term strategies, slow down the mood of quick success and short-term gain, expand mountain and sea products, and choose the doctrine of governing the country. Then his subjects will present good suggestions every day, and His Majesty's consideration will be broader.

古文：其亡存心，然后苞桑可系。愚诚一至，用忘寝食。
现代文：打消收铜的这种想法国家就有了牢固的根本。臣真诚所至废寝忘食。 
English: The idea of abolishing the copper tax gave the country a solid foundation. The minister sincerely worked tirelessly.

古文：景平初，加位特进。
现代文：景平初年，范泰被加封特进，第二年退休。
English: In the first year of Jingping, Fan Tai was promoted and retired in the second year.

古文：明年，致仕，解国子祭酒。
现代文：解除国子祭酒。
English: Cancel the Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：少帝在位，多诸愆失，上封事极谏，曰：
现代文：少帝在位时，许多事件处理失当，范泰上书极力劝谏：
English: When the young emperor was on the throne, many incidents were handled improperly, and Fan Tai wrote a letter to strongly advise him:

古文：伏闻陛下时在后园，颇习武备，鼓鞞在宫，声闻于外；黩武掖庭之内，喧哗省闼之间，不闻将帅之臣，统御之主，非徒不足以威四夷，祗生远近之怪。
现代文： 我听说陛下常在后花园演习军事，宫外也能听到战鼓声。在宫廷中肆意习武，朝中也一片喧闹，却见不到作为将帅的大臣、统领军队的主帅。这样不仅不能够威慑四方少数民族，只能使社会出现混乱。
English: I have heard that His Majesty often conducts military drills in the back garden, and the sound of war drums can be heard outside the palace. In the court, martial arts are practiced freely, and there is a lot of noise in the court, but he cannot see the minister who is the general and the commander of the army. This is not only unable to deter the ethnic minorities in the four directions, but can only cause chaos in society.

古文：近者东寇纷扰，皆欲伺国瑕隙，今之吴会，宁过二汉关、河，根本既摇，于何不有。
现代文：最近东部的贼寇经常骚扰生事都是想趁朝廷的乱子。现在吴郡、会稽的地位超过了汉代的函谷关和黄河。国家的根本动摇了，什么事都会发生。
English: Recently, thieves and robbers in the east have often harassed and caused trouble in order to take advantage of the chaos of the imperial court. Now, the status of Wu County and the Audit Office has surpassed that of the Han Dynasty's Hangu Pass and the Yellow River. The country has been fundamentally shaken, and anything can happen.

古文：如水旱成灾，役夫不息，无寇而戒，为费渐多。
现代文：如果发生水旱灾害，服役的人仍然不停止，没有贼寇却派兵戒备，这样花费越来越多。
English: If there is a flood or drought disaster, the servicemen still do not stop, and if there is no bandit, they send soldiers to be on the alert, which costs more and more.

古文：河南非复国有，羯虏难以理期，此臣所以用忘寝食，而干非其位者也。
现代文：河南已不再属于我们所有，羯族的敌虏也难以情理推测他们会做什么。这就是我废寝忘食，干预职外之事的原因。
English: Henan no longer belongs to all of us, and it is difficult for the enemies of the Yao people to reasonably predict what they will do. This is why I do not sleep, forget to eat, and intervene in matters outside my duties.

古文：陛下践阼，委政宰臣，实同高宗谅暗之美。
现代文：陛下登基后将政事交给宰相大臣，实际与高宗的昏暗不明一样。
English: After His Majesty ascended to the throne, he handed over the affairs of state to the Prime Minister, which is actually the same as Gao Zong's dim and unclear.

古文：而更亲狎小人，不免近习，惧非社稷至计，经世之道。王言如丝，其出如纶，下观而化，疾于影响。
现代文：再加上亲近小人，自然免不了受他们的影响，我觉得远不是国家的大政方针和治理社会的办法。
English: Coupled with the fact that being close to villains, it is natural to be influenced by them, I think it is far from being a national policy and a way to govern society.

古文：伏愿陛下思弘古道，式遵遗训，从理无滞，任贤勿疑，如此则天下归德，宗社惟永。《书》云： 一人有庆，兆民赖之。 
现代文：国君的话如同蚕丝，说出来就像丝带一样，对百姓的影响比影子和声音还要快。臣真诚希望陛下致力于弘扬古道，遵照先帝的遗训，顺应情理不要阻挠，任用贤才不要猜疑，这样就会天下统一，宗庙国家永存。《尚书》上说： 天子有善事百姓就会拥护他。 
English: The words of the sovereign are like silk, spoken out like a ribbon, and the impact on the people is faster than the shadow and sound. I sincerely hope that His Majesty will be committed to promoting the ancient way, follow the last instruction of the former emperor, conform to reason, do not obstruct, and appoint talents without suspicion, so that the world will be unified and the ancestral temple country will last forever. "Shang Shu" said: If the son of heaven has a good deed, the people will support him.

古文：天高听卑，无幽不察，兴衰在人，成败易晓，未有政治在于上而人乱于下者也。
现代文：天虽高远听不见，但它明察秋毫。兴与衰都取决于人，成功与失败容易明了，从未有国家治理好了而人民却造反的。
English: Though heaven is high and far away, it cannot be heard, but it sees everything. Prosperity and decline all depend on people, success and failure are easy to see, and there has never been a country that has been well governed but the people have rebelled.

古文：臣蒙先朝过遇，陛下殊私，实欲尽心竭诚，少报万分；而惛耄已及，百疾互生，便为永违圣颜，无复自尽之路，贪及视息，陈其狂瞽。
现代文：臣承蒙前朝过分礼遇，现在陛下又特别爱护，实在想尽心竭诚才能稍稍报答万分之一。
English: As a vassal, I have been treated with excessive courtesy by the previous government, and now His Majesty is especially fond of me. I really want to do my best to repay him one ten-thousandth of a percent.

古文：陛下若能哀其所请，留心览察，则臣夕殒于地，无恨九泉。
现代文：不过我已年迈，发白头昏，百病缠身。总是不顾您的情面，也不顾我的后路，就我所见，陈述我狂妄的意见。陛下如能哀怜我的请求，留意我的意见，那么臣即使晚上死去，在九泉之下也无怨恨啊！ 
English: But I am old, white-haired, and sickly, and always, regardless of your feelings, regardless of my future, I present my arrogant opinion as I see it. If Your Majesty can pity my request and pay attention to my opinion, then even if the minister dies in the evening, there will be no resentment under the nine springs!

古文：少帝虽不能纳，亦不加谴。
现代文：少帝虽不采纳范泰的建议却也没有怪罪于他。
English: Although the young emperor did not accept Fan Tai's suggestion, he did not blame him.

古文：徐羡之、傅亮等与泰素不平，及庐陵王义真、少帝见害，泰谓所亲曰： 吾观古今多矣，未有受遗顾托，而嗣君见杀，贤王婴戮者也。 
现代文：徐羡之、傅亮等人与范泰一向不合，到庐陵王刘义真、少帝被害时，范泰对亲近的人说： 我对古今历史了解很多，还从未发现受先王临终嘱托，继位的君主和贤明的封王却被杀戮的。 
English: Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang and others had always been at odds with Fan Tai. When Liu Yizhen, the King of Fuling, and the young emperor were killed, Fan Tai said to those close to him: I know a lot about ancient and modern history, and I have never found that the succeeding monarch and the wise crown prince were killed at the last request of the former king.

古文：元嘉二年，表贺元正，并陈旱灾，曰：
现代文：元嘉二年，范泰上表庆贺元正，并陈述旱灾，表写道：
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, Fan Tai issued a proclamation to celebrate Yuan Zheng and to report on the drought. The proclamation read:

古文：元正改律，品物惟新。
现代文： 元正改变令律，品评事物皆以新的标准。
English: The Yuan Dynasty changed the rules of etiquette, and everything was judged by a new standard.

古文：陛下藉日新以畜德，仰乾元以履祚，吉祥集室，百福来庭。
现代文：陛下借新的岁月积蓄盛德，敬仰上天继承帝位，吉祥之气充满宫室，百福来临。
English: His Majesty will take advantage of the new years to accumulate virtue, admire the heavens to inherit the throne, the auspicious atmosphere will fill the palace, and the best of luck will come.

古文：顷旱魃为虐，亢阳愆度，通川燥流，异井同竭。
现代文：但不久旱魔肆虐，烈日爆晒，河流干涸，井泉枯竭。
English: Soon, however, the drought wreaked havoc, the scorching sun broke out, the rivers dried up, and the springs dried up.

古文：老弱不堪远汲，贫寡单于负水。
现代文：老弱的人不能忍受到远方取水，贫穷孤寡的人惮怕背水的劳苦。
English: The old and weak cannot endure the toil of fetching water from far away, and the poor and lonely are afraid of backwaters.

古文：租输既重，赋税无降，百姓怨咨。
现代文：国家收租繁重，又不降低赋税，百姓怨声不断。
English: The state collects heavy rents and does not reduce taxes, and the people are constantly complaining.

古文：臣年过七十，未见此旱。
现代文：臣年已超过七十还从未见过这么大旱灾。
English: My father-in-law, who is over 70, has never seen such a severe drought.

古文：阴阳并隔，则和气不交，岂惟凶荒，必生疾疫，其为忧虞，不可备序。
现代文：阴阳分隔和气不能相交，不仅出现荒年，还一定会疾病流行，它所带来的忧虑难以说尽。
English: The separation of yin and yang and qi cannot intersect. Not only will there be a year of famine, but there will also be an epidemic of disease. The worries it brings are inexhaustible.

古文：雩絜之典，以诚会事，巫祝常祈，罕能有感，上天之谴，不可不察。
现代文： 求雨祭神的典礼人们都以真诚之心去做，巫师祝工祈祷不停，上天却很少有感动的时候，人就该明白上天的谴责。
English: When people perform rain-worship ceremonies with a sincere heart, when wizards chant and pray incessantly, but heaven is rarely moved, people should understand heaven's condemnation.

古文：汉东海枉杀孝妇，亢旱三年；及祭其墓，澍雨立降，岁以有年。
现代文：汉代东海郡错杀了孝妇，大旱三年，祭祀了她的墓之后，甘霖马上从天而降，丰年持续了数载。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Donghai County killed a filial woman by mistake, and there was a severe drought for three years. After her tomb was dedicated, the rain immediately fell from the sky, and the good years lasted for several years.

古文：是以卫人伐邢，师兴而雨。
现代文：所以卫国攻打邢，军队一开动就下起了雨。
English: Therefore, the defense of the country was delayed, and it began to rain as soon as the army moved.

古文：伏愿陛下式遵远猷，思隆高构，推忠恕之爱，矜冤枉之狱，游心下民之瘼，厝思幽冥之纪。
现代文：真诚地希望陛下遵照古代的大道，谋求巨大的成就，推行忠诚宽恕的爱心，怜悯抚恤监狱中冤屈的人，关心下层百姓的苦难，牢记冥冥上天的纲纪。
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty will follow the ancient path, seek great achievements, promote the love of loyalty and forgiveness, have mercy on those who have been wronged in prison, care about the suffering of the lower classes, and keep in mind the heavenly discipline.

古文：令谤木竖阙，谏鼓鸣朝，察刍牧之言，总统御之要。
现代文：把让人民提意见的谤木竖立在朝廷中，让劝谏的鼓声在朝中敲响，考虑治国的学说，总揽统治国家的关键。
English: Let the people's opinions be raised in the imperial court, let the drums of persuasion sound in the DPRK and China, consider the doctrine of governing the country, and grasp the key to governing the country.

古文：如此，则苞桑可系，危几无兆。
现代文：这样的话，国家的根本就会牢固，差不多没有危险的征兆了。
English: In this way, the foundation of the country will be solid, and there will be almost no signs of danger.

古文：斯而灾害不消，未之有也。
现代文：从未有这样做了却不能消除灾害的。
English: No one has ever done this and not been able to eliminate disasters.

古文：故夏禹引百姓之罪，殷汤甘万方之过，太戊资桑谷以进德，宋景藉荧惑以修善，斯皆因败以转成，往事之昭晰也。
现代文：正因此夏禹将老百姓的罪过归结到自己身上，殷汤也甘愿承受天下人的过错，太戊借楮这种恶木来增进自己的德行，宋景借荧惑星来修养善行，这些都是借助失败而转化为成功，过去的例子是明白清晰的。
English: It is for this reason that Xia Yu attributed the sins of the common people to himself, Yin Tang was also willing to bear the faults of the people of the world, Ta Wu borrowed the evil tree to enhance his virtue, and Song Jing borrowed the fluorescent planet to cultivate good deeds. These are all transformed into success with the help of failure. The past examples are clear and clear.

古文：循末俗者难为风，就正路者易为雅。
现代文：遵循末俗难成教化，走正道易成雅正。
English: It is difficult to become enlightened by following the lowly and vulgar, but it is easy to become elegant and upright by following the righteous path.

古文：臣虽言不足采，诚不亮时，但猥蒙先朝忘丑之眷，复沾庐陵矜顾之末，息晏委质，有兼常款，契阔戎阵，颠狈艰危，厚德无报，授令路绝，此老臣兼不能自已者也。
现代文：臣的疾病一天天严重，到晚上就不指望早上仍能活着，现在遇上改元的庆典，有上表给陛下的机会，我的赤诚能得到一点点表达，臣死而无憾。总是违背圣上的意愿，对表跪拜，悲痛地呜咽。 
English: My father-in-law's illness was getting worse day by day, and at night I had no hope that he would still be alive in the morning. Now, when the celebration of the turn of the millennium was taking place, there was an opportunity given to His Majesty by the table, and I was able to express a little bit of my sincerity. My father-in-law died without regret. He always disobeyed His Holiness's wishes, bowed down to the table, and sobbed with grief.

古文：朽谢越局，无所逃刑。 泰诸子禁之，表竟不奏。
现代文：从此范泰驾着小船在东阳游赏，行为举止随心任性，不再过问朝廷政事。上司奏表皇上弹劾他，太祖并未拿他问罪。
English: From then on, Fan Tai sailed around the Dongyang in a small boat, behaved capriciously, and no longer asked questions about the affairs of the imperial court. His superiors wrote to the emperor to impeach him, but the great-grandfather did not charge him with a crime.

古文：三年，羡之等伏诛，进位侍中、左光禄大夫、国子祭酒，领江夏王师，特进如故。
现代文：当时太祖虽然亲自处理政事，徐羡之等人仍掌握着大权，范泰又上表劝谏太祖。因范泰的儿子们反对，这个奏表终未呈给太祖。元嘉三年徐羡之等人被杀，范泰升侍中、左光禄大夫、国子祭酒、江夏王的老师，特进的官位没有变。
English: At that time, although the great-grandfather personally dealt with political affairs, Xu Enzhi and others still held great power. Fan Tai also went to the table to advise the great-grandfather. Because the sons of Fan Tai objected, this report card was not presented to the great-grandfather. In the third year of the Yuan Jia, Xu Enzhi and others were killed. Fan Tai was promoted to the middle-ranked attendant, doctor of the Left Guanglu, tutor of the son of the state, and teacher of the king of Jiangxia. The official rank of the special promotion did not change.

古文：上以泰先朝旧臣，恩礼甚重，以有脚疾，起居艰难，宴见之日，特听乘舆到坐。
现代文：皇上因为范泰是前朝旧臣，对他尊重以礼相待，因他脚有毛病，起居不便，每逢宴会和朝见的时候，特意让他乘坐轿到场。
English: The emperor treated Fan Tai with respect and courtesy because he was a former minister of the former imperial court. Since he had problems with his feet and it was inconvenient for him to get around, whenever there was a banquet or a morning meeting, he would specially have him arrive in a limousine.

古文：累陈时事，上每优容之。
现代文：范泰屡次对时事发表意见，皇上总是优待宽容他。
English: Fan Tai repeatedly expressed his opinions on current affairs, and the emperor always treated him with preferential treatment and tolerance.

古文：其年秋，旱蝗，又上表曰：
现代文：这年秋天大旱又遭蝗灾，范泰又上表写道：
English: In the autumn of this year, when the drought was followed by a plague of locusts, Fan Tai again wrote the following:

古文：陛下昧旦丕显，求民之瘼，明断庶狱，无倦政事，理出群心，泽谣民口，百姓翕然，皆自以为遇其时也。
现代文： 陛下夙兴夜寐，关心人民的疾苦，判案公正，处理政事从不疲倦，理从民心而出，恩泽流布民间，百姓和顺，这些都让人觉得遇上盛世。
English: His Majesty wakes up in the night, cares about the people's sufferings, judges cases fairly, never gets tired of dealing with political affairs, reason comes from the people's heart, grace spreads among the people, and the people are harmonious. These all make people feel that they have encountered a prosperous world.

古文：灾变虽小，要有以致之。
现代文：发生灾害虽小但总有其原因。
English: Although disasters are small, they always have a cause.

古文：守宰之失，臣所不能究；上天之谴，臣所不敢诬。
现代文：有关官员的过失，我不能推究，上天的谴责，我也不敢无中生有。
English: I cannot infer the faults of the officials concerned, nor dare I make accusations out of thin air.

古文：有蝗之处，县官多课民捕之，无益于枯苗，有伤于杀害。
现代文：有蝗虫的地方，官府多役使百姓捕捉，这对枯败的禾苗毫无益处，反倒是杀害生灵。
English: Where there are locusts, the government often makes the people catch them, which is of no benefit to the withered seedlings, but rather kills living beings.

古文：臣闻桑谷时亡，无假斤斧，楚昭仁爱，不絜自瘳，卓茂去无知之虫，宋均囚有异之虎，蝗生有由，非所宜杀。
现代文：我知道楮等恶木的去除，不一定是人用刀斧去砍的，楚昭王仁爱，不祭神病却好了。卓茂去除无知之虫，宋均囚禁有异常征兆的老虎。出现蝗虫是有原因的，不该扑杀。
English: I know that the removal of evil trees such as thistles is not necessarily done by people with knives and axes. Chu Zhaowang is benevolent, but it is better not to sacrifice spiritual diseases. Zhuo Mao removed ignorant insects, Song Jun imprisoned tigers with abnormal symptoms. There is a reason for the appearance of locusts, and they should not be culled.

古文：石不能言，星不自陨，《春秋》之旨，所宜详察。
现代文：石头不会说话，星星也不会无故陨落，《春秋》的旨意，应该仔细用心体会。
English: Stones do not speak, stars do not fall for no reason. The will of "Spring and Autumn" should be carefully experienced.

古文：礼，妇人有三从之义，而无自专之道；《周书》父子兄弟，罪不相及，女人被宥，由来尚矣。
现代文： 奉行礼制的妇女有三从的节义，而无独断专行的道理，《周书》上父子兄弟，有罪不相互牵连，女性被宽宥，很早以前就是这样了。
English: Women who follow the etiquette have the meaning of the three attendants, and the principle of no arbitrariness. In the Zhou Shu, the father and son are brothers, the guilty are not involved with each other, and the woman is pardoned. This was the case a long time ago.

古文：谢晦妇女，犹在尚方，始贵后贱，物情之所甚苦，匹妇一至，亦能有所感激。
现代文：谢晦妻子女儿还在尚方，先前尊贵后来卑贱，情况非常悲苦，一个妇女做到这样，让人感动。
English: Xie Yu's wife and daughter are still in Shangfang. They used to be high-ranking and then lowly. The situation is very sad. It is moving to see a woman do this.

古文：臣于谢氏，不容有情，蒙国重恩，寝处思报，伏度圣心，已当有在。
现代文：我对谢氏不容有私情，承蒙国家的大恩惠，我处处想报答，私自揣度陛下的心思应当已经知道。
English: I am not allowed to have personal feelings for Xie, I have received great favors from the state, I always want to repay, I should have known the thoughts of His Majesty.

古文：礼春夏教诗，无一而阙也。
现代文： 按礼春夏时节教《诗经》，没有一点间断。
English: The "Song of Songs" is taught according to the rites of spring and summer, without a single break.

古文：臣近侍坐，闻立学当在入年。
现代文：我最近侍坐在陛下身边，知道建学校应当在丰收的年景。
English: I recently sat at His Majesty's side and I know that schools should be built in years of good harvests.

古文：陛下经略粗建，意存民食，入年则农功兴，农功兴则田里辟，入秋治庠序，入冬集远生，二涂并行，事不相害。
现代文：陛下治理国家的方针策略刚刚初步建立，心中想着百姓的衣食。丰年就会兴办农事，农事兴办就会开辟土地，到秋天建学校，到冬天召集四方学生，两件事一起做不会相互影响。
English: His Majesty's policies and strategies for governing the country have just been initially established, with the people's food and clothing in mind. In the year of plenty, agricultural work will be carried out, agricultural work will open up land, schools will be built in the fall, and students from all over the country will be gathered in the winter. Doing the two things together will not affect each other.

古文：夫事多以淹稽为戒，不远为患，任臣学官，竟无微绩，徒坠天施，无情自处。
现代文：干事情要戒绝拖延迟误，又要考虑能够持久。担任学官的人最终没有一点点成绩，白白辜负皇上的希望，自己还有什么情面。
English: When doing something, one should not procrastinate, but should also consider whether it can be sustained. Those who serve as academicians ultimately do not have a little bit of achievement, fail to live up to the emperor's hope in vain, and have no feelings.

古文：臣之区区，不望目睹盛化，窃慕子囊城郢之心，庶免荀偃不瞑之恨。
现代文：臣低贱不指望活到教化的盛世，心中仰慕子囊在郢建都的想法，希望能免除荀偃死不暝目的憾恨。
English: The lowly vassal did not expect to live to see the golden age of enlightenment. He admired the idea of building a capital in Xian and hoped to be spared the regret of dying without seeing it.

古文：臣比陈愚见，便是都无可采，徒烦天听，愧作反侧。
现代文：臣陈述愚见，也许无一点可取之处，白白烦扰陛下，心中因之惭愧不已！ 
English: A vassal stating a foolish opinion, perhaps without a single redeeming feature, bothers His Majesty for nothing, and his heart is filled with shame!

古文：书奏，上乃原谢晦妇女。
现代文：帝看了表后就原宥了谢晦妻女。
English: After the emperor looked at his watch, he forgave his wife and daughter.

古文：时司徒王弘辅政，泰谓弘曰： 天下务广，而权要难居；卿兄弟盛满，当深存降挹。
现代文：当时司徒王弘辅佐国政，范泰对王弘说： 国土务必要广阔，权重的官职难当。你兄弟众多，应该防备着沉落的时候。
English: At that time, Wang Guangfu, the governor of Sidu, was in charge of state affairs. Fan Tai said to Wang Hong, "The affairs of the country require a broad scope, and it is difficult to hold an important post. You have many brothers, and you should be prepared for the time of decline."

古文：彭城王，帝之次弟，宜征还入朝，共参朝政。 
现代文：彭城王是皇帝的二弟，应征召他到朝中共同参预朝政。 
English: Pengcheng Wang was the second brother of the emperor, and he was summoned to the court to participate in the pre-imperial politics.

古文：弘纳其言。
现代文：王弘接受了他的意见。
English: Wang Hong accepted his opinion.

古文：时旱灾未已，加以疾疫，泰又上表曰： 顷亢旱历时，疾疫未已，方之常灾，实为过差，古以为王泽不流之征。
现代文：当时旱灾仍未消除，又加上疾病流行。范泰又上表皇帝说： 大旱持续了好长时间，疾病仍未停止流行，为害程度远远超过普通的灾害。古人认为这是国王的恩泽不能惠及人民的征兆。
English: At that time, the drought had not yet been eliminated, and there was also an epidemic of disease. Fan Tai also said to the emperor: The drought lasted for a long time, and the disease had not yet stopped the epidemic, and the degree of harm was far more than ordinary disasters. The ancients believed that this was a sign that the king's grace could not benefit the people.

古文：陛下昧旦临朝，无懈治道，躬自菲薄，劳心民庶，以理而言，不应致此。
现代文：陛下从凌晨就上朝处理政事不敢懈怠。生活勤朴，为百姓操心劳碌，从情理来说不应有这样的灾害。
English: His Majesty did not dare to slack off in dealing with political affairs since he ascended the throne in the early hours of the morning. Living a simple life and working hard for the people, such a disaster should not have happened.

古文：意以为上天之于贤君，正自殷勤无已。陛下同规禹、汤引百姓之过，言动于心，道敷自远。
现代文：我认为上天要贤明的君主勤恳不止。陛下仿效夏禹、商汤将百姓的过错归于自己，话语发自内心，影响自然会悠远。
English: I think that God wants a wise monarch to be diligent. His Majesty, following the example of Xia Yu and Shang Tang, will attribute the people's mistakes to himself. The words come from his heart, and the influence will naturally be far-reaching.

古文：桑谷生朝而殒，荧惑犯心而退，非唯消灾弭患，乃所以大启圣明；灵雨立降，百姓改瞻，应感之来，有同影响。
现代文：楮这种恶木早上长出晚上枯死，荧惑星侵犯马上消退，这不仅仅是灾害消除祸患停止，而且应乘此大开圣明之道。这样雨水马上会降落，老百姓敬仰，影响就同影子、声音一样快速。
English: This kind of evil tree grows in the morning and withers in the evening, and the invasion of fluorescent planets immediately subsides. This is not only a disaster to eliminate the scourge, but should also take advantage of this to open the holy way. In this way, the rain will immediately fall, the people will admire, and the impact will be as fast as the shadow and the sound.

古文：陛下近当仰推天意，俯察人谋，升平之化，尚存旧典，顾思与不思，行与不行耳。
现代文：陛下现在应该对上尊承天意，对下体察臣下的谋划和天下升平的办法。按照古代典籍权衡想与不该想的，做与不该做的啊。
English: His Majesty should now respect the will of heaven above, and examine the plans of his subjects and the way to level the world below. According to ancient classics, weigh what you should and should not think, and what you should and should not do.

古文：大宋虽揖让受终，未积有虞之道，先帝登遐之日，便是道消之初。
现代文：大宋朝虽然承继天下，但还未积累舜帝那样的大道，先帝仙逝的日子就是道消除的开始。
English: Although the Great Song Dynasty succeeded the world, it has not yet accumulated the great roads like Emperor Xuan. The day of the death of Emperor Xian is the beginning of the elimination of roads.

古文：至乃嗣主被杀，哲籓婴祸，九服俳徊，有心丧气，佐命托孤之臣，俄为戎首。
现代文：到了继位的君主被杀，封王遭遇祸患，邦国犹豫观望，灰心丧气，先帝托孤的辅佐大臣很快成为专权的人。
English: The monarch who succeeded to the throne was killed, the crown prince suffered a disaster, the state hesitated to wait and see, discouraged, and the assistant minister of the former emperor quickly became an authoritarian person.

古文：天下荡荡，王道已沦，自非神英，拨乱反正，则宗社非复宋有。
现代文：天下动荡，王道沦丧。如果不是陛下英明，拨乱反正，那天下就不会再归宋所有了。
English: The world is in turmoil, the royal road is lost. If it were not for His Majesty's wisdom and rectification of the chaos, the world would no longer belong to Song.

古文：革命之与随时，其义尤大。
现代文：变革及时意义重大。
English: The change is timely and significant.

古文：是以古今异用，循方必壅，大道隐于小成，欲速或未必达。
现代文：古代与现在有不同的情况，但沿着旁门歪道走必定行不通。最高深的道理隐含在小事当中，过于性急未必能达到目的。
English: The situation in ancient times was different from that of today, but it is definitely not possible to follow the wrong path. The deepest truth is hidden in small things, and it may not be possible to achieve the goal by being too hasty.

古文：深根固蒂之术，未洽于愚心，是用猖狂妄作而不能缄默者也。
现代文：明哲保身不是我的愿望，所以我总是狂妄而任意行事不能保持沉默。
English: Self-preservation is not my desire, so I always act arrogantly and arbitrarily and cannot remain silent.

古文：臣既顽且鄙，不达治宜，加之以笃疾，重之以昏耄，言或非言而复不能无言，陛下录其一毫之诚，则臣不知厝身之所。 
现代文：臣既顽固又鄙陋，不能通达随便，身有重病，更加上已经年老昏愦，说了或说错了却不能不说。望陛下哪怕只接受我赤诚的一丝一毫，那臣也感激不尽。 
English: My vassal is both obstinate and despicable, he can't be reached at will, he is seriously ill, and even more so, he is old and feeble, he says or says the wrong thing, but he can't help saying it. I hope His Majesty will accept even the slightest bit of my sincerity, that vassal is also grateful.

古文：泰博览篇籍，好为文章，爱奖后生，孜孜无倦。
现代文：范泰博览经籍群书，喜欢写文章，爱好奖励提拔年轻人，为之孜孜不倦。
English: Fan Tai is well-versed in the classics, likes to write articles, likes to reward and promote young people, and is tireless.

古文：撰《古今善言》二十四篇及文集，传于世。
现代文：他著有《古今善言》一书共二十四篇，与他的文集一起流传于世。
English: He is the author of "Ancient and Modern Sayings," a book with a total of twenty-four articles, which has been passed down to the world together with his literary works.

古文：暮年事佛甚精，于宅西立祗洹精舍。
现代文：他晚年一心一意信佛，在他的住宅两边修了一座祗洹精舍。
English: In his later years, he believed in Buddhism with all his heart and built a hermitage on both sides of his house.

古文：五年，卒，时年七十四。
现代文：元嘉五年去世，享年七十四岁。
English: Yuan Jia died five years later at the age of 74.

古文：追赠车骑将军，侍中、特进、王师如故。谥曰宣侯。
现代文：朝廷追封他为车骑将军、侍中、特进，依然是封王的老师，谥号宣侯。
English: The imperial court promoted him to general of chariot and cavalry, chamberlain, and special envoy. He was still the teacher of the crowned king, and was given the posthumous title of prince.

古文：长子昂，早卒。
现代文：范泰的长子范昂，早亡。
English: Fan Tai's eldest son, Fan Ang, died prematurely.

古文：次子暠，宜都太守。
现代文：二儿子范詗，宜都太守。
English: His second son, Fan Qi, became the governor of Yidu.

古文：次晏，侍中、光禄大夫。
现代文：后一个儿子范晏，是侍中、光禄大夫。
English: The latter's son, Fan Ye, was a chamberlain and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：子晔，尚书驾部外兵郎，临贺太守。荀伯子，颍川颍阴人也。
现代文：小儿子广渊，文章写得好，是世祖的抚军咨议参军、领记室，因为受范晔的事牵连也被杀。荀伯子，颍川颍阴人。
English: The youngest son Guangyuan, the article is well written, is the ancestor of Fuzhou's military consultation, participation in the army, and the reception room, because he was involved in the matter of Fan Yu, he was also killed.

古文：祖羡，骠骑将军。父猗，秘书郎。
现代文：祖父荀羡，骠骑将军；父亲荀猗，秘书郎。
English: His grandfather was a general; his father was a secretary.

古文：伯子少好学，博览经传，而通率好为杂戏，遨游闾里，故以此失清涂。
现代文：伯子幼时十分喜爱学问，博览经籍群书。但性情通达率意，喜欢旁杂的游乐，在乡里闲荡游玩，他也因此仕进无望。
English: When he was a child, he was very fond of learning and read a lot of books. However, he had a quick-witted nature, liked side-splitting amusements, and wandered around the countryside. As a result, he was hopeless.

古文：解褐为驸马都尉，奉朝请，员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：后始任驸马都尉、奉朝请、员外散骑侍郎。
English: Later, he became the first captain of the steed, the servant of the emperor, and the horseback riding attendant.

古文：著作郎徐广重其才学，举伯子及王韶之并为佐郎，助撰晋史及著桓玄等传。
现代文：著作郎徐广看重他的才学，推荐伯子和王韶之同为佐郎，帮助编撰《晋史》以及撰写桓玄等人的传记。
English: The writer Lang Xu Guang valued his talent, recommending him to Boji and Wang Xi, both of whom were saro, to help compile the "History of Jin" and to write biographies of Kuan Xuan and others.

古文：迁尚书祠部郎。
现代文：升任尚书祠部郎。
English: He was promoted to the post of Shoshu Shoryoburo.

古文：义熙九年，上表曰： 臣闻咎由亡后，臧文以为深叹；伯氏夺邑，管仲所以称仁。
现代文：义熙九年伯子上表皇帝： 臣听说咎繇死后，臧文深深为之叹息；伯氏夺邑，管仲称之为仁。
English: In the ninth year of Yixi, Bo went to see the emperor: When the minister heard that Guan Yu had died, Zouwen sighed deeply; the Bo clan seized the county, and Guan Zhong called him Ren.

古文：功高可百世不泯，滥赏无崇朝宜许。
现代文：功德崇高历经百代不会泯灭，滥加赏赐则是任何伟大朝代也不允许的。
English: The sublime merits of a hundred dynasties will not be extinguished, and the abuse of rewards is not allowed in any great dynasty.

古文：故太傅钜平侯祜，明德通贤，宗臣莫二，勋参佐命，功成平吴，而后嗣阙然，烝尝莫寄。
现代文：太傅钜平侯祜，明德通贤，作为臣子忠心不贰，辅佐君王，功至消灭吴国，但他没有后嗣，连祭祀的人都没有。
English: Taifu Jianping Houyi, a man of great wisdom and virtue, was a loyal and selfless vassal, and assisted the king to the point of wiping out the State of Wu. However, he had no heirs, not even a sacrificial offering.

古文：汉以萧何元功，故绝世辄绍。
现代文：汉朝因为萧何的大功，总保持他的后代得以继承流传。
English: Because of Xiao He's great achievements, the Han Dynasty always kept his descendants from inheriting and passing down.

古文：愚谓钜平之封，宜同酂国。
现代文：我认为对钜平侯的封赏应该和赞阝国相同。
English: In my opinion, the reward for Zou Pinghou should be the same as that of Zangzhou.

古文：故太尉广陵公陈淮，党翼孙秀，祸加淮南，窃飨大国，因罪为利。
现代文：前太尉广陵公陈准是孙秀的党羽给淮南带来灾难，窃取大国之主的享受，可算是因罪为利。
English: Chen Jun, the former captain of Guangling, was a member of Sun Xiu's party who brought disaster to Huainan. Stealing the enjoyment of the ruler of a great country can be regarded as profiting from a crime.

古文：值西朝政刑失裁，中兴复因而不夺。
现代文：当时正值西朝政策刑罚失去公正，中兴之举也因此失去希望。
English: At that time, it was a time when the West's policies and punishments lost their fairness, and ZTE's move also lost hope.

古文：今王道惟新，岂可不大判臧否？
现代文：如今王道新始，怎能不严格区分赏与罚呢？
English: Now that the royal road is new, how can we not strictly distinguish between reward and punishment?

古文：谓广陵之国，宜在削除。
现代文：这样的话，广陵之国就应予以削除。
English: In this case, the country of Guangling should be deleted.

古文：故太保卫瓘，本爵萧阳县公，既被横祸，及进弟秩，始赠兰陵，又转江夏。
现代文：前太保卫馞本来的爵位是萧阳县公，遭受灾难后，就增加了他的品级等第，一开始赠他为兰陵公又转任江夏。
English: The former grand marshal Bao Weiwei's original title was Xiaoyang County Grand Marshal. After the disaster, his rank was increased by one grade, and he was initially given the title of Lanling County Grand Marshal and then transferred to Jiangxia.

古文：中朝公辅，多非理终，瓘功德不殊，亦无缘独受偏赏，宜复本封，以正国章。 
现代文：朝中许多大臣都没有一个合理的结局，卫馞功德并不突出，没有理由单独受到不合理的封赏，应该恢复过去的等级，以匡正国策。 
English: Many ministers of the DPRK and China did not have a reasonable outcome, and the merits of the guards and soldiers were not outstanding. There is no reason to receive unreasonable rewards alone. It is necessary to restore the previous level and rectify the national policy.

古文：诏付门下。
现代文：皇帝下诏将此表交给门下省执行。
English: The emperor decreed that this table be handed over to the subordinate provinces for implementation.

古文：前散骑常侍江夏公卫玙上表自陈曰： 臣乃祖故太保瓘，于魏咸熙之中，太祖文皇帝为元辅之日，封萧阳侯；大晋受禅，进爵为公。历位太保，总录朝政。于时贾庶人及诸王用事，忌瓘忠节，故楚王玮矫诏致祸。
现代文：前散骑常侍江夏公卫上表陈述自己的意见： 臣的祖先故太保卫馞，在魏咸熙年间，太祖文皇帝为元辅的时候封他为萧阳侯，大晋统一天下后晋爵为公，历位太保，总揽朝政，当时贾庶人及诸王专权，忌恨卫馞的忠节，因此楚王越假诏致使他遇难。
English: Former horseback rider and frequent attendant of Jiangxia Gongwei stated his opinion on the table: The ancestor of the minister was Tai Bao Wei Jie. During the Wei and Hanxi dynasties, when the Emperor Taizu Wen was the Yuan Fu, he was named Xiao Yang Hou. After the Great Jin Dynasty was unified, he was given the title of prince. He was a Tai Bao, and he was in charge of the imperial government. At that time, Jia commoners and kings had absolute power, and they hated Wei Jie's loyalty festival. Therefore, King Chu's false edict led to his death.

古文：前朝以瓘秉心忠正，加以伐蜀之勋，故追封兰陵郡公。
现代文：前朝因为卫馞秉心忠正再加上攻打蜀国的功劳，所以追封他为兰陵郡公。
English: The previous government, because of Wei Xuan's loyalty and his contribution to the attack on Shu, promoted him to the post of Lanling County Governor.

古文：永嘉之中，东海王越食兰陵，换封江夏，户邑如旧。
现代文：永嘉年间东海王越食邑在兰陵，卫馞的封地换到江夏，户邑数量没有增加。
English: During the Yongjia period, the East Sea Wang Yue food village was in Lanling, and the fief of Wei Gan was changed to Jiangxia, but the number of villages did not increase.

古文：臣高祖散骑侍郎璪，囗之嫡孙，纂承封爵。中宗元皇帝以曾祖故右卫将军崇承袭，逮于臣身。
现代文：臣的高祖散骑侍郎卫桑是卫馞的嫡孙，篡夺继承封爵，中宗皇帝让臣的曾祖前右卫将军卫崇承袭封爵，一直到臣。
English: The great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great

古文：伏闻祠部郎荀伯子表，欲贬降复封萧阳。
现代文：臣听说祠部郎荀伯子上表要贬降我的封爵恢复昔日的萧阳侯。
English: The vassal heard that the head of the ancestral hall wanted to demote my knighthood and restore the former Xiao Yang Hou.

古文：夫赵氏之忠，宠延累叶，汉祖开封，誓以山河。
现代文：因赵氏的忠诚恩宠延续数代，汉高祖开封，以泰山黄河为盟誓。
English: Due to the loyalty and grace of the Zhao clan, which continued for several generations, the ancestors of the Han Dynasty opened the seal and swore by Mount Tai and the Yellow River.

古文：伏愿陛下录既往之勋，垂罔极之施，乞出臣表，付外参详。 
现代文：恳请陛下考察臣祖上昔日的功勋，施行无所不至的恩泽，请将臣的上表对外公布以便定夺。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to examine the past merits of your ancestors and grant them all-encompassing favors. Please publish the names of your ancestors so that they can be selected.

古文：颍川陈茂先亦上表曰： 祠部郎荀伯子表臣七世祖太尉淮祸加淮南，不应滥赏。寻先臣以剪除贾谧，封海陵公，事在淮南遇祸之前。后广陵虽在扰攘之际，臣祖乃始蒙殊遇，历位元、凯。
现代文：颍川陈茂也上表说： 祠部郎荀伯子上表指责我的七世祖太尉陈准祸害淮南，不应对其过度赏赐；推究此事可知因祖先剪除贾谧，被封为海陵公，此事发生在淮南遇祸之前，后来尽管广陵在混乱之际，我的祖先才开始蒙受厚遇，历位元、凯。
English: Lu Chuan Chen Mao also said on the table: The ancestral hall minister, Lang Yaobang, on the table accused my seventh-generation ancestor, First Lieutenant Chen Jun, of wreaking havoc on Huainan and should not be over-rewarded; investigating this matter, it can be known that my ancestor cut off Jia Yao and was named Hailinggong. This happened before the disaster in Huainan. Later, although Guangling was in chaos, my ancestor began to receive favorable treatment.

古文：后被远外，乃作平州，而犹不至除国。
现代文：后来出朝到边远的地方，仍然到了平州，也没有到削除封国的地步。
English: Later, he went out of the country to a remote place, still to Pingzhou, and did not reach the point of removing the fief.

古文：良以先勋深重，百世不泯故也。
现代文：这实在是因为祖先的功绩巨大，历代不灭的原因。
English: This is really because of the great achievements of the ancestors, the reason for the immortality of the past.

古文：圣明御世，英辅系兴，曾无疑议，以为滥赏。
现代文：如今圣明的君主统治天下，英雄豪杰辅佐致力于国家中兴，大家都对此没有什么疑议，不认为是过度赏赐。
English: Nowadays, the monarch of Shenming rules the world, and the heroic hero Jie Fu Zu is committed to the national rejuvenation. Everyone has no doubts about this, and does not consider it to be an excessive reward.

古文：臣以微弱，未齿人伦，加始勉视息，封爵兼嗣。伏愿陛下远录旧勋，特垂矜察。 
现代文：臣还未成年时就继承了祖上的封地和爵位，伏愿陛下考察祖上昔日的功业，表现您的怜悯和圣察。 
English: When he was still a minor, he inherited his ancestor's fiefdom and peerage. I pray that Your Majesty will look into his ancestor's past deeds and show Your mercy and wisdom.

古文：诏皆付门下，并不施行。
现代文：皇上下诏将两人的表都交给门下省，最终并未施行。
English: The Emperor's edict handed both men's watches over to their subordinate provinces, but was ultimately not implemented.

古文：伯子为世子征虏功曹，国子博士。
现代文：伯子任世子征虏功曹、国子博士。
English: His highness appointed his descendants to recruit meritorious students, including Dr. Kuniko.

古文：妻弟谢晦荐达之，入为尚书左丞，出补临川内史。
现代文：因妻弟谢晦举荐而入朝任尚书左丞。后出朝补任临川内史。
English: He was recommended by his wife's younger brother, Seiya, and entered the imperial court as Shoshuzojo. Later, he was appointed to fill the post of Rinsenishi.

古文：昔武王克殷，封神农之后于焦，黄帝之后于祝，帝尧之后于蓟，帝舜之后于陈，夏后于巳，殷后于宋。
现代文：车骑将军王弘称赞他： 沉着稳重、朴质无华，有平阳侯的风度。 升任散骑常侍，又上表给皇帝： 臣见朝中百官的次序，陈留王在零陵王之上，我私下认为这有不恰当的地方。过去武王消灭殷商，将神农的后代封赏在焦，黄帝的后人封赏在祝，帝尧的后人封赏在蓟，帝舜的后人封赏在陈，夏的后人封赏在杞，殷的后人封赏在宋。
English: The cavalry general Wang Hong praised him: He was calm and steady, simple and unpretentious, and had the demeanor of a Pingyang marquis. He was promoted to the position of horseback riding attendant, and was also presented to the emperor: The vassal sees the order of the hundreds of officials in the dynasty, and Chen Liu Wang is above Ziling Wang, which I privately think is inappropriate. In the past, King Wu eliminated the Yin merchants and rewarded the descendants of Shennong in Jiao, the descendants of the Yellow Emperor were rewarded in Zhu, the descendants of the Emperor were rewarded in Yao, the descendants of the Emperor were rewarded in Chen, the descendants of Xia were

古文：巳、陈并为列国，而蓟、祝、焦无闻焉。
现代文：杞、陆都是列国，而蓟、祝、焦却没有什么名声。
English: Zhou and Lu are countries, while Zhou, Zhu and Jiao have little reputation.

古文：斯则褒崇所承，优于远代之显验也。
现代文：这是褒奖推崇承继的祖先，优于远代的证明。
English: This is a tribute to the ancestors of the successors, and a proof of the superiority of the distant generation.

古文：是以《春秋》次序诸侯，宋居巳、陈之上。考之近世，事亦有征。
现代文：所以《春秋》排列诸侯次序，宋在杞、陈之前，考察近代也有类似的情况。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" is arranged in the order of vassals, with the Song Dynasty preceding the Zhou and Chen dynasties, and a similar situation is observed in modern times.

古文：晋泰始元年，诏赐山阳公刘康子弟一人爵关内侯，卫公姬署、宋侯孔绍子一人驸马都尉。
现代文：晋泰始元年，皇帝下诏赐给山阳公刘康子弟一人关内侯的封爵，卫公姬署、守侯孔绍各一个儿子为驸马都尉。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jintai, the emperor issued an edict awarding a peerage to one of the sons of Liu Kang, the Duke of Shanyang, and one son each of Wei Gonghui and Kongshao, the Duke of Shanyang, as lieutenant of the Horse Guards.

古文：又泰始三年，太常上博士刘跂等议，称卫公署于大晋在三恪之数，应降称侯。
现代文：又泰始三年，太常上博士刘熹等人议论，认为卫公姬署对于大晋朝应在三恪之内，要降称侯。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Taizhong period, Dr. Liu Wei and others discussed that the Public Security Bureau should lower the title of the Great Jin Dynasty to a lower rank within three years.

古文：臣以零陵王位宜在陈留之上。 
现代文：臣认为零陵王位置应在陈留王之上。 
English: The vassal thought that the position of Ziling Wang should be above that of Chen Rui Wang.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：迁太子仆，御史中丞，莅职勤恪，有匪躬之称；立朝正色，外内惮之。
现代文：调任太子仆、御史中丞，在职勤勉谨慎，有匪躬之称。他在朝中整肃威严，人们都惧怕他。
English: Transferred to the position of the prince's servant, Goshi Chujo, he was diligent and prudent in his work, and was known as a gangster. He was strict and dignified in the court, and people were afraid of him.

古文：凡所奏劾，莫不深相谤毁，或延及祖祢，示其切直；又颇杂嘲戏，故世人以此非之。
现代文：凡是他想奏议弹劾的事，总是严加非议谤毁，有的还要涉及祖先，表现了他为人剀切刚直，但又夹杂着嘲戏的态度，所以世人都以此非难他。
English: All the things he wanted to impeach him for were always strictly non-slanderous, and some even involved his ancestors, which showed his uprightness, but mixed with mockery, so the world accused him of this.

古文：出补司徒左长史，东阳太守。
现代文：出朝补司徒左长史、东阳太守。
English: In the morning, Sui Tutu left Changshi and Dongyang Dazhu.

古文：元嘉十五年，卒官，时年六十一。
现代文：元嘉十五年死于官任上，时年六十一岁。
English: Yuan Jia died in office 15 years later, at the age of 61.

古文：文集传于世。
现代文：伯子有文集流传后世。
English: A collection of his works has been handed down to posterity.

