古文：周礼，王者立后，六宫，三夫人，九嫔，二十七世妇，八十一御妻，以听天下之内治。
现代文：周代的礼仪，天子设立王后，拥有六宫，三位夫人，九位嫔妃，二十七位世妇，八十一位御妻，以处理天下的内室事务。
English: According to the etiquette of the Zhou Dynasty, the emperor set up a queen with six palaces, three wives, nine concubines, twenty-seven concubines, and eighty-one wives to deal with the domestic affairs of the world.

古文：然受命继体之主，非独外相佐也，盖亦有内德助焉。
现代文：那么接受天命舆继位的君主，不仅有外朝宰相的辅佐，大概也有宫内贤明妇人的协助。
English: Then, the monarch who accepted the succession of the Mandate of Heaven not only had the assistance of the foreign prime minister, but probably also the assistance of the wise woman in the palace.

古文：汉魏已来，六宫之职，因袭增置，代不同矣。
现代文：汉、魏以来，六宫的职位，沿袭增设，各代不相同。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty, the positions of the Six Palaces have been added successively, and they are different for each generation.

古文：高祖承微接乱，光膺天历，以朴素自处，故后宫员位多阙。
现代文：高祖承接衰微祸乱之世，接受天命，以质朴约束自己，所以后宫的职位多有缺略。
English: Gao Zu undertook the world of decline and disaster, accepted the fate of heaven, and restrained himself with simplicity, so the position of the harem is often deficient.

古文：世祖天嘉初，诏立后宫员数，始置贵妃、贵嫔、贵姬三人，以拟古之三夫人。
现代文：世祖天嘉初年，下诏确立后宫名额，开始设置贵妃、贵嫔、贵姬三人，以仿效古代的三夫人。
English: In the first year of Emperor Tianjia, the following edict established the number of harem, and began to set up three people, Guifei, Guijie and Guiji, to emulate the three wives of ancient times.

古文：又置淑媛、淑仪、淑容、昭华、昭容、昭仪、修华、修仪、修容九人，以拟古之九嫔。
现代文：又设置淑媛、淑仪、淑容、昭华、昭容、昭仪、修华、修仪、修容共九人，以仿效古代的九嫔。
English: In addition, a total of nine people were set up, including Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei.

古文：又置婕妤、容华、充华、承徽、列荣五人，谓之五职，亚于九嫔。
现代文：又设置婕妤、容华、充华、承徽、列荣共五人，称为五职，地位低于九嫔。
English: A total of five people were also set up, including Gong, Yonghua, Chenghua, Chenghui, and Lierong, known as the Five Ranks, with a status lower than the Nine Ranks.

古文：又置美人、才人、良人三职，其职无员数，号为散位。
现代文：又设置美人、才人、良人三职，逭三职没有固定名额，称为散位。
English: In addition, there are three positions of beauty, talent, and virtue, but there is no fixed place for the third position, which is called "sanshi."

古文：世祖性恭俭，而嫔嫱多阙，高宗、后主内职无所改作。
现代文：世祖性格恭谦节俭，而女官多有缺略，高宗、后主时宫内职位没有什么改动。
English: The founder of the dynasty was respectful, modest and frugal, while the court ladies were often deficient, and there was little change in the positions within the court during the reigns of Emperor Gaozong and Empress Dowager.

古文：今之所缀，略备此篇。
现代文：现在对各帝皇后事迹加以缀集，大致收录在本篇中。
English: Now, the deeds of the emperors and queens are collected and roughly included in this article.

古文：高祖宣皇后章氏，讳要儿，吴兴乌程人也。
现代文：高祖宣皇后章氏，名要儿，是吴兴乌程人。
English: Gao Zu Xuan's Empress Zhang, in particular, is a Wu Xing Wucheng person.

古文：本姓钮，父景明为章氏所养，因改焉。
现代文：本来姓钮，父亲景明被章氏收养，因而改姓。
English: Originally surnamed Niu, his father, Jingming, was adopted by the Zhang family, thus changing his surname.

古文：景明，梁代官至散骑侍郎。
现代文：景明，在梁代官至散骑侍郎。
English: Kageaki, who rose from deputy governor to horseback-riding chamberlain in Ryō.

古文：后母苏，尝遇道士以小龟遗己，光采五色，曰： 三年有徵。 
现代文：皇后的母亲苏氏，曾经遇到道士把小乌龟送给自己，龟有五色光彩，道士说： 三年后有验证。 
English: The queen's mother, Su, once met a Taoist who gave her a small turtle. The turtle had five-colored brilliance. The Taoist said, "After three years, there will be verification."

古文：及期后生，而紫光照室，因失龟所在。
现代文：到了时间，皇后出生而紫色光彩照进室内，随之小龟不知去了何处。
English: When the time came, the queen was born and the purple glow shone into the room, and the little turtle didn't know where to go.

古文：少聪慧，美容仪，手爪长五寸，色并红白，每有期功之服，则一爪先折。
现代文：皇后幼时聪明有智慧，有美丽的容貌仪表，手指长五寸，颜色都是红白色，每当有亲属的丧事，就有一个指甲先折断。
English: When she was young, the queen was clever and wise, with beautiful features and appearance. Her fingers were five inches long and red and white in color. Whenever there was a relative's funeral, one of her fingernails would be broken first.

古文：高祖先娶同郡钱仲方女，早卒，後乃聘后。
现代文：高祖原先娶同郡钱仲方的女儿，早逝，后来才娶皇后。
English: Gaozu originally married the daughter of the county treasurer, but she died young and he later married the empress.

古文：后善书计，能诵《诗》及《楚辞》。
现代文：皇后善于书写计算，能朗读《诗经》和《楚辞》。
English: The empress is good at writing and calculating, and can read aloud the "Song of Songs" and the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：高祖自广州南征交止，命后与衡阳王昌随世祖由海道归于长城。
现代文：高祖从广州向南征伐交耻，命令皇后和衡阳王陈昌跟随世祖由海路回到长城。
English: Gaozhu marched south from Guangzhou to conquer Jiaojian, and ordered the empress and Hengyang King Chen Chang to follow Gaozhu by sea back to the Great Wall.

古文：侯景之乱，高祖下至豫章，后为景所囚。
现代文：侯景之乱时，高祖东下到豫章，皇后被侯景囚禁。
English: During the Houjing Rebellion, Gao Zu went east to Yuzhang, and the empress was imprisoned by Houjing.

古文：景平，而高祖为长城县公，后拜夫人。
现代文：侯景平定后，高祖被封为长城县公，皇后被策命为夫人。
English: After the subjugation of Houjing, Gao Zu was made the official of the Great Wall County, and the empress was appointed as his wife.

古文：及高祖践祚，永定元年立为皇后。
现代文：等到高祖登上帝位，永定元年被立为皇后。
English: When Gao Zu ascended to the throne, she was crowned empress in the first year of Yongding.

古文：追赠后父景明特进、金紫光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，拜后母苏安吉县君。
现代文：追赠皇后的父亲景明为特进、金紫光禄大夫，加授金色印章紫色丝带，封皇后的母亲苏氏为安吉县星。
English: The queen's father, Jingming, was posthumously awarded the title of "special promotion" and "gold, purple, and shining doctor," as well as a gold seal and a purple ribbon. The queen's mother, Su, was awarded the star of Anji County.

古文：二年，安吉君卒，与后父合葬吴兴。
现代文：二年，安吉君去世，和皇后的父亲合葬在呈兴。
English: Two years later, Angie died and was buried with the queen's father.

古文：明年，追封后父为广德县侯，邑五百户，谥曰温。
现代文：第二年，追封皇后的父亲为广德县侯，食邑五百户，谧号为温侯。
English: In the second year, the queen's father was named the lord of Guangde County, with 500 households in the county, and his posthumous name was Wen Hou.

古文：高祖崩，后与中书舍人蔡景历定计，秘不发丧，召世祖入纂，事在蔡景历及侯安都传。
现代文：高祖逝世，皇后和中书舍人基基历决定计策，秘密不发布丧事，召世祖入宫继位，事情记载在蔡景历和侯安都的传记中。
English: When Gaozu died, the empress and the person in charge of the Chinese school of calligraphy, Ji Jili, decided to make a plan, not to publish the secret of the funeral, and to invite the ancestor to enter the palace to succeed. The matter is recorded in the biographies of Cai Jingli and Hou Andu.

古文：世祖即位，尊后为皇太后，宫曰慈训。
现代文：世担登位，尊崇皇后为皇太后，宫室称慈训宫。
English: Shitan ascended the throne, revered the empress as the empress dowager, and the palace was called Cixin Palace.

古文：废帝即位，尊后为太皇太后。
现代文：鏖童登位，尊崇皇后为太皇太后。
English: Xing Tong ascended the throne, and the empress was revered as the great empress dowager.

古文：光大二年，后下令黜废帝为临海王，命高宗嗣位。
现代文：光大二年，皇后下令贬庐童为堕连王，命令直塞继位。
English: In the second year of Guangda University, the empress decreed that Xing Tong should be demoted to Fallen Lian Wang, and ordered Zhosai to succeed to the throne.

古文：太建元年，尊后为皇太后。
现代文：主建元年，尊崇皇后为皇太后。
English: In the first year of the main building, the revered empress became the empress dowager.

古文：二年三月丙申，崩于紫极殿，时年六十五。
现代文：二年三月丙申，皇后在苤捶殿逝世，时年六十五岁。
English: In March of the second year of Hsin, the empress died in the imperial palace, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：遗令丧事所须，并从俭约，诸有馈奠，不得用牲牢。
现代文：临终下令丧事所需物品，都尽量俭约，所有祭奠品，不许用牲畜。
English: On his deathbed, he ordered that everything needed for the funeral should be as frugal as possible, and that no livestock should be used for any offerings.

古文：世祖沈皇后，讳妙容，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：这年四月，群臣献上谧号为宣太后，将她合葬在万安陵。
English: In April of that year, the courtiers gave her the posthumous title of Empress Dowager Xuan and buried her together in the Wan'an Mausoleum.

古文：父法深，梁安前中录事参军。后年十馀岁，以梁大同中归于世祖。
现代文：皇后的亲属没有在朝廷中的，惟有族中远房兄长钮洽官位到中散大夫。世担沈皇后名麨查，是；呈璺亘递人。
English: There were no relatives of the empress in the imperial court, except for the eldest brother of the family, Zhongyuan Fang, who was promoted to the official rank of Zhongshan doctor. The world was worried about the name of the queen of Shen; he was the one who submitted it.

古文：高祖之讨侯景，世祖时在吴兴，景遣使收世祖及后。
现代文：父亲洼遝，是凿曲的安前中录事参军。皇后十多岁时，在曲蛔年间嫁给鲤。当时在昱璺，尽量派遣使者拘捕世祖和皇后。
English: The Empress was more than ten years old when she married Zhai during the Zhai Dynasty. At that time, in Zhai, they tried their best to send an envoy to arrest the ancestor and the Empress.

古文：景平，乃获免。
现代文：侯量平定，才得以免死。
English: Only when the situation was stabilized was he able to avoid death.

古文：高祖践祚，永定元年，后为临川王妃。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，永定元年，皇后为临川王妃。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, and in the first year of Yongding, the empress was Linchuan Wangfei.

古文：世祖即位，为皇后。
现代文：世担登位，为皇后。
English: Shetan ascended the throne and became the empress.

古文：追赠后父法深光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，封建城县侯，邑五百户，谥曰恭，追赠后母高绥安县君，谥曰定。
现代文：追赠皇后的父亲送遝为光禄大夫，加授金色印章紫色丝带，封建城县侯，食邑五百产，谧号为恭，追赠皇后的母亲高氏为绥安县君，谧号为定。
English: The father of the Queen's posthumous gift sent a gong to Dr. Guanglu, and was awarded a gold seal and purple ribbon. He was also awarded the title of Feudal Lord of the County and 500 products of the county, and his posthumous name was Gong. The mother of the Queen's posthumous gift, Gao, was given the title of Guanxianjun, and her posthumous name was fixed.

古文：废帝即位，尊后为皇太后，宫曰安德。
现代文：废帝登位，尊崇皇后为皇太后，宫室称安德宫。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, the empress was revered as the empress dowager, and the palace was called the Ander Palace.

古文：时高宗与仆射到仲举、舍人刘师知等并受遗辅政，师知与仲举恒居禁中参决众事，而高宗为扬州刺史，与左右三百人入居尚书省。
现代文：当时直塞和仆射到佺举、舍人刘应知等人都受遣韶辅佐朝政。面纫和仝哩长久住在宫中参与决定各项事务，而高宗担任扬州刺史，和左右三百人进入尚书省居住。
English: At that time, Zhosa and his attendant Zhaoju, Liu Yingzhi and others were all appointed as imperial aides. Mengzhu and Baili lived in the palace for a long time and participated in the decision of various affairs, while Gaozong served as Yangzhou scribe, and about 300 people came to live in Shangshu Province.

古文：师知见高宗权重，阴忌之，乃矫敕谓高宗曰： 今四方无事，王可还东府，经理州务。 
现代文：师知见高宗权力大，暗中忌妒他，就假称诏令对高宗说： 现在四方太平，大王可以回到束府，治理州中事务。 
English: Knowing that Gaozong wielded great power, and secretly envious of him, the master said to Gaozong, pretending to issue an imperial edict, "Now that the situation is peaceful, the great king can return to Sokfu and administer the affairs of the state."

古文：高宗将出，而谘议毛喜止之曰： 今若出外，便受制于人，譬如曹爽，愿作富家翁不可得也。 
现代文：高宗将要搬出，而谘议毛喜制止他说： 现在如果出居外面，就会受别人的控制，好比曹爽，想做一个富翁也不能做到。 
English: Gao Zong was about to move out, but Mao Xi, the councilor, stopped him, saying, "If you move out now, you will be controlled by others, just like Cao Shuang. If you want to be a rich man, you can't do it.

古文：高宗乃称疾，召师知留之与语，使毛喜先入言之于后。
现代文：高宗于是称病，召唤师知留下来和他谈话，派毛喜先进宫报告皇后。
English: Gaozong then called in sick, summoned Shizhi to stay and talk with him, and sent Mao Xi to report to the empress.

古文：后曰： 今伯宗年幼，政事并委二郎，此非我意。 
现代文：皇后说： 现在伯宗年纪小，政事都交给到仲举和刘师知，遣不是我的意思。 
English: The empress said, "Now that Bozong is young, the government affairs are left to Zhonghe and Liu Shizhi. It is not my intention to send him.

古文：喜又言于废帝，帝曰： 此自师知等所为，非朕意也。 
现代文：毛喜又说给废帝听，皇帝说： 这本是师知等人的所作所为，不是我的主意。 
English: Mao Xi also said to listen to the emperor, and the emperor said: This is what Shi Zhi and others have done, not my idea.

古文：喜出以报高宗，高宗因囚师知，自入见后及帝，极陈师知之短，仍自草敕请画，以师知付廷尉治罪。
现代文：毛喜出来报告高宗，高宗因此囚禁师知，自己进宫见皇后和皇帝，极力陈说师知的过失，随之亲手起草韶令请求签字，把师知交付廷尉治罪。
English: Mao Xi came out to report Gao Zong, Gao Zong therefore imprisoned Shi Zhi, went to the palace to see the queen and the emperor, tried his best to expose Shi Zhi's fault, and then personally drafted a royal decree to request signature, and handed Shi Zhi over to the courtier to be punished.

古文：其夜，于狱中赐死。
现代文：这天夜晚，师知在狱中被赐令自杀。
English: That night, Shichito was ordered to commit suicide in prison.

古文：自是政无大小，尽归高宗。
现代文：从此政事无论大小，都归于高宗。
English: From then on, all government affairs, no matter how big or small, came under the control of Gaozong.

古文：后忧闷，计无所出，乃密赂宦者蒋裕，令诱建安人张安国，使据郡反，冀因此以图高宗。
现代文：皇后忧愁烦闷无计可施，就秘密贿赂宦官蒋裕，命令他引诱建安人张安国，使安国占据郡城反叛，希望藉此来图取高宗。
English: Sorrowful and bored, the empress had nothing to do, so she secretly bribed the eunuch Jiang Yu and ordered him to seduce the Jianan people, Zhang Anguo, so that Anguo would occupy the county seat and rebel, hoping to use this to take Gaozong.

古文：安国事觉，并为高宗所诛。
现代文：安国的事情被察觉，都被高宗诛杀。
English: An Guo's activities were discovered, and all of them were killed by Gao Zong.

古文：时后左右近侍颇知其事，后恐连逮党与，并杀之。
现代文：当时皇后左右侍奉的人有不少知道遣件事，皇后担心逮捕党羽被牵连，全部杀了这些人。
English: At that time, many people around and serving the empress knew about the deportation, and the empress was worried about the arrest of party members being implicated, and killed all of these people.

古文：高宗即位，以后为文皇后。
现代文：高宗登位，策命皇后为塞皇后。
English: Gaozong ascended the throne, and the Empress Dowager became the Empress Dowager.

古文：陈亡入隋，大业初，自长安归于江南，顷之，卒。
现代文：速玺灭亡进入堕玺，主墓初年，从垦安回到江南，不久去世。
English: In the first year of the main tomb, he returned from Lu'an to the south of the Yangtze River and died soon after.

古文：后兄钦，随世祖征伐，以功至贞威将军、安州刺史。
现代文：皇后的哥哥沈钦，跟随世祖征伐，因功劳官至贞威将军、安州刺史。
English: The queen's brother, Shen Qin, followed his ancestor on the conquest, and became a meritorious officer to the rank of General Zhenwei and Anzhou Sashishi.

古文：世祖即位，袭爵建城侯，加通直散骑常侍、持节、会稽等九郡诸军事、明威将军、会稽太守，入为侍中、左卫将军、卫尉卿。
现代文：世祖登位，沈钦继承爵位为建擅堡，加授通直散骑常侍、持节、盒擅等九郡诸军事、明威将军、会稽太守，入京为侍中、左卫将军、卫尉卿。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and Shen Qin succeeded to the title of Jian Sanzhong, and was awarded the titles of Zhi Zhanzhong, Zhi Jie, Box Sanzhong, and other military titles in nine counties, Ming Wei General, and Cai Jian Dazhong. He entered Beijing as a chamberlain, a left guard general, and a guard lieutenant.

古文：光大中，为尚书右仆射，寻迁左仆射。
现代文：光大年间，担任尚书右仆射，不久升为左仆射。
English: During his time at Guangda University, he served as Shangshu's right-handed archer, and was soon promoted to left-handed archer.

古文：钦素无技能，奉己而已。
现代文：沈钦素来没有才能，不过严于律己而已。
English: Shen Qin had no talent, but he was very strict with himself.

古文：高宗即位，出为云麾将军、义兴太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：高宗登位，外出任云麾将军、羞兴太守，品级为中二千石。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and was appointed as the general of Yunnan Province and the governor of Shixing Province, with a rank of middle-ranking and 2,000 koku.

古文：太建元年卒，时年六十七，赠侍中、特进、翊左将军，谥曰成。
现代文：越叁元年去世，时年六十七岁，追赠侍中、特进、翊左将军，谧号为成。
English: Yue Xi died in the first year of the year, at the age of sixty-seven. He was posthumously awarded the titles of chamberlain, special envoy, and left-handed general. His posthumous name was Rong Cheng.

古文：子观嗣，颇有学识，官至御史中丞。
现代文：儿子逸塑继嗣，比较有学问见识，官至御史中丞。
English: His son, Yitsuko's successor, was more learned and insightful, and rose to the rank of goshi chujo.

古文：废帝王皇后，金紫光禄大夫固之女也。
现代文：厦查王皇后，是金紫光禄大夫王堡的女儿。
English: The Empress of Xiachao is the daughter of Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu Wangbao.

古文：天嘉元年，为皇太子妃，废帝即位，立为皇后。
现代文：玉墓元年，为皇太子妃，废壶登位，被立为皇后。
English: In the first year of the Jade Tomb, she was crown princess, ascended the throne, and was made empress.

古文：废帝为临海王，后为临海王妃。
现代文：废童被贬为堕扰王，皇后为临海王妃。
English: Wasted boy was relegated to the king of debauchery, and the queen was crowned the princess of Linhai.

古文：至德中薨。
现代文：在至垄年问逝世。
English: He died in the following year.

古文：后生临海嗣王至泽。
现代文：皇后生育临海嗣王至运。
English: The empress gave birth to King Lin Haizhe.

古文：至泽以光大元年为皇太子。
现代文：至攫在：达元年被立为皇太子。
English: He became crown prince in the first year of the year.

古文：太建元年，袭封临海嗣王。
现代文：左建元年，继承封爵为临海嗣王。
English: In the first year of Zuo Jian, he succeeded to the title of Lin Haizhuo.

古文：寻为宣惠将军，置佐史。
现代文：不久担任宣惠将军，设置佐史。
English: He soon assumed the position of General Xuan Hui, and set up the Sasifu.

古文：陈亡入长安。
现代文：龃灭亡后进入垦昼。
English: After the death of the dragonfly, the dragonfly enters the midday.

古文：高宗柳皇后，讳敬言，河东解人也。
现代文：高宗柳皇后名敬言，是河东解县人。
English: Empress Gaozongliu is a famous and respected figure. She is a native of He Donglu County.

古文：曾祖世隆，齐侍中、司空、尚书令、贞阳忠武公。
现代文：曾祖父世隆，是查朝侍中、司空、尚书令、贞阳忠武公。
English: His great-grandfather, Shilong, was a middle-ranking attendant of the Zha Dynasty, a secretary of the Kuo Dynasty, an official of the Shang Dynasty, and a loyal retainer of the Zhengyang Dynasty.

古文：祖恽，有重名于梁代，官至秘书监，赠侍中、中护军。
现代文：祖父柳惮，在梁代有大名声，官至秘书监，追赠侍中、中护军。
English: Grandfather Liu Shuo had a great reputation in the Liang Dynasty. He rose to the rank of secretary-supervisor, and was posthumously awarded the titles of chamberlain and middle-ranking military guard.

古文：父偃，尚梁武帝女长城公主，拜驸马都尉，大宝中，为鄱阳太守，卒官。
现代文：父亲柳偃，娶梁武帝的女儿长城公主，被任命为驸马都尉，左宜年间，担任鄱阳太守，在任上去世。
English: His father, Liu Xuan, married the daughter of Emperor Liangwu, the Great Wall Princess, and was appointed Captain of the Horse Guards. During Zuo Yi's reign, he served as the governor of Shenyang and died in office.

古文：后时年九岁，干理家事，有若成人。
现代文：皇后遣年九岁，料理家中事务，如同成年人。
English: The Empress was nine years old at the time of her enthronement, and she took care of household affairs as if she were an adult.

古文：侯景之乱，后与弟盼往江陵依梁元帝，元帝以长城公主之故，待遇甚厚。
现代文：侯景之乱时，皇后和弟弟柳盼前往江陵依附梁元帝，元帝因长城公主的缘故，接待很优厚。
English: During the Houjing Rebellion, the empress and her brother Liu Pan went to Jiangling to support Emperor Liang Yuan. Emperor Yuan received a very good reception because of the Great Wall Princess.

古文：及高宗赴江陵，元帝以后配焉。
现代文：等到高宗赶往江陵，元帝把皇后嫁给他。
English: When Gaozong rushed to Gangneung, Emperor Yuan married the empress to him.

古文：承圣二年，后生后主于江陵。
现代文：承圣二年，皇后在江陵生下后主。
English: In the second year of his consecration, the empress gave birth to a daughter in Gangneung.

古文：明年，江陵陷，高宗迁于关右，后与后主俱留穰城。
现代文：次年，江陵沦陷，高宗被迁到关右，皇后和后主都留在穣城。
English: The following year, when Gangneung fell, Gao Zong was moved to Guan Yu, but the empress and her husband remained in Handan.

古文：天嘉二年，与后主还朝，后为安成王妃。
现代文：天嘉二年，和后主回朝，皇后为安成王妃。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, and the empress returned to the imperial court, the queen was Ancheng Wangfei.

古文：高宗即位，立为皇后。
现代文：高宗登位，被立为皇后。
English: Gaozong ascended the throne and was made empress.

古文：后美姿容，身长七尺二寸，手垂过膝。
现代文：皇后容貌美丽，身高七尺二寸，手垂下来超过膝盖。
English: The queen was a beautiful woman, seven feet two inches tall, with her hands hanging down past her knees.

古文：初，高宗居乡里，先娶吴兴钱氏女，及即位，拜为贵妃，甚有宠，后倾心下之。
现代文：当初，高宗居住在乡间，先娶吴兴钱氏的女儿，等到即位，任命她为贵妃，很受宠爱，皇后尽心尊敬她。
English: At first, Gaozong lived in the countryside. He first married the daughter of Wu Xingqian, and when he ascended the throne, he appointed her as a noble consort. She was very beloved, and the queen respected her wholeheartedly.

古文：每尚方供奉之物，其上者皆推于贵妃，而己御其次焉。
现代文：每每尚方供奉的物品，上等的都推让给贵妃，而自己使用次等的。
English: For every object offered to the emperor, the noblest ones were given to the empress, while she herself used inferior ones.

古文：高宗崩，始兴王叔陵为乱，后主赖后与乐安君吴氏救而获免，事在叔陵传。
现代文：高宗逝世，堑墨王查噬作乱，厘圭依赖皇后以及銮圭昼呈氐的救护而得以免死，事情记载在叔陵的传记中。
English: After Gaozong's death, Shumo Wang Cha Cha caused a riot, and Li Gui was able to avoid death by relying on the assistance of the empress and Shugui Niangcheng, which is recorded in Shuling's biography.

古文：后主即位，尊后为皇太后，宫曰弘范。
现代文：堕圭登位，尊崇皇后为皇太后，宫室称弘范宫。
English: The fallen Gui ascended the throne, revered the empress as the empress dowager, and the palace was called the Hongfan Palace.

古文：当是之时，新失淮南之地，隋师临江，又国遭大丧，后主病疮，不能听政，其诛叔陵、供大行丧事、边境防守及百司众务，虽假以后主之命，实皆决之于后。
现代文：在遣个时候，国家刚失去淮南的领土，隋军又推进到垦辽边，另外国家遭受大丧事，后主患疮病不能处理政事，那时诛杀叔陵、办理大行皇帝丧事、边境防守以及百官事务，虽然假托后主的命令，实际上都由皇后决断。
English: At the time of the first dispatch, the country had just lost the territory of Huainan, and the Sui army had advanced to the edge of Liaoning. In addition, the country suffered a great tragedy, and the empress was unable to deal with political affairs due to her illness. At that time, the killing of the tomb, the handling of the funeral of the great emperor, the border defense and the affairs of the hundred officials, although the orders of the empress, were actually decided by the empress.

古文：后主疮愈，乃归政焉。
现代文：后主疮病痊愈才把大权归还给他。
English: It was only after he had recovered from his illness that he was given back his powers.

古文：陈亡入长安，大业十一年薨于东都，年八十三，葬洛阳之邙山。
现代文：陈国灭亡皇后进入长安，大业十一年在塞都逝世，遣年八十三岁，安葬在络匾的垄业。
English: The empress of the death of Chen Guo entered Chang'an. Daye died in the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year

古文：后性谦谨，未尝以宗族为请，虽衣食亦无所分遗。
现代文：皇后性格谦虚谨慎，未曾为宗族请求职位，即使衣食也没有赠送。
English: The empress is modest and prudent, and has never asked for a position for the clan, even if she did not give away food and clothing.

古文：弟盼，太建中尚世祖女富阳公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：弟弟堑噬，越叁年间娶世担的女儿宣垦蚣主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: His younger brother, Xuan Zhao, married the daughter of the world's most powerful man, Xuanzang, and was appointed the captain of the imperial horse.

古文：后主即位，以帝舅加散骑常侍。
现代文：后主登位，因是皇帝的舅父加授散骑常侍。
English: After the Lord ascended to the throne, because he was the Emperor's uncle, the Emperor's aide-de-camp.

古文：盼性愚戆，使酒，常因醉乘马入殿门，为有司所劾，坐免官，卒于家。
现代文：柳盼性情愚昧，酗酒任性，曾因醉酒骑马进入殿门，被有关官员弹劾，获罪免官，在家中去世。
English: Liupan had a foolish temperament and was a self-willed alcoholic. He once rode into the palace gate while drunk, was impeached by the relevant officials, acquitted, and died at home.

古文：赠侍中、中护军。
现代文：追赠侍中、中护军。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School and Junior High School Protector.

古文：后从祖弟庄，清警有鉴识，太建末，为太子洗马，掌东宫管记。
现代文：皇后的堂弟柳庄，清高机警有见识，太建末年，担任太子洗马，掌管东宫的文牍。
English: Liu Zhuang, the cousin of the empress, was an insightful high-ranking police officer. In the last years of the reign of Emperor Taiken, he served as the prince's horse washer and was in charge of the East Palace.

古文：后主即位，稍迁至散骑常侍、卫尉卿。
现代文：后主登位，逐渐升至散骑常侍、卫尉卿。
English: After the enthronement of the Lord, he gradually rose to the rank of knight-errant, Lord of the Guard.

古文：祯明元年，转右卫将军，兼中书舍人，领雍州大中正。
现代文：祯明元年，改任右卫将军，兼中书舍人，领雍州大中正。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was reassigned to the post of General of the Right Division of the Guard, and concurrently he was a member of the Junior High School Student Council, and was promoted to the rank of Senior Middle School Student of Yongzhou University.

古文：自盼卒后，太后宗属唯庄为近，兼素有名望，犹是深被恩遇。
现代文：自从柳盼去世以后，太后同宗的亲属惟独柳庄最亲近，加之一向有声望，因此深受恩情厚待。
English: Since Liu Pan's death, the relatives of the same family of the empress dowager are the closest to Liu Zhuang, and one of them is always prestigious, so they are treated with great kindness.

古文：寻迁度支尚书。
现代文：不久升为度支尚书。
English: It was soon promoted to Doushi Shangshu.

古文：陈亡入隋，为岐州司马。
现代文：陈国灭亡进入隋国，担任岐州司马。
English: After the death of Chen Guo, he entered Sui Guo and served as Qizhou Sima.

古文：后主沈皇后，讳婺华，仪同三司望蔡贞宪侯君理女也。
现代文：后主沈皇后名婺华，是仪同三司望蔡贞宪侯君理的女儿。
English: The later head of the Shen Empress, Mei Xinghua, was the daughter of the three emperors Wang Cai, Zhen Zhen, and Hou Junli.

古文：母即高祖女会稽穆公主。
现代文：母亲就是高祖的女儿会稽穆公主。
English: His mother was Princess Kechimuhime, the daughter of Emperor Gaozu.

古文：主早亡，时后尚幼，而毁瘠过甚。
现代文：公主早逝，当时皇后还幼小，而哀伤消瘦特别厉害。
English: The princess died early, when the empress was still a child, and her grief and emaciation were particularly severe.

古文：及服毕，每至岁时朔望，恒独坐涕泣，哀动左右，内外咸敬异焉。
现代文：等到服丧结束，每到四季和初一十五，总是独自坐着流泪，哀伤感动左右的人，内外亲属都敬重惊讶。
English: By the end of the mourning period, every four seasons and the first fifteen days of the year, I always sit alone and shed tears. People around me who are sad and moved, and relatives at home and abroad are all respectfully surprised.

古文：太建三年，纳为皇太子妃。
现代文：太建三年被娶为皇太子妃。
English: Three years later, Tai Jian was married to the crown princess.

古文：后主即位，立为皇后。
现代文：后主登位，立为皇后。
English: After the Lord ascended to the throne, she became the Empress.

古文：后性端静，寡嗜欲，聪敏强记，涉猎经史，工书翰。
现代文：皇后性格端庄沉静，很少有嗜好欲望，聪明敏捷记忆力强，涉猎经籍史书，擅长书法。
English: The character of the empress is dignified and quiet, she has few hobbies and desires, she is smart and agile, has a strong memory, dabbles in books of history, and is good at calligraphy.

古文：初，后主在东宫，而后父君理卒，后居忧，处于别殿，哀毁逾礼。
现代文：当初，后主在束宫，而皇后的父亲君理去世，皇后服丧，住在另外的房舍，哀伤毁损超出礼仪标准。
English: At first, the heir to the throne was at Sok Palace, but the queen's father, King Li, passed away, and the queen was in mourning, living in another house. The grief and damage exceeded the standards of etiquette.

古文：后主遇后既薄，而张贵妃宠倾后宫，后宫之政并归之，后澹然未尝有所忌怨。
现代文：后主对待皇后情意浅，而张贵妃受宠超过后宫所有的人，后宫的权力都归于贵妃，皇后漠然处之不曾有所忌妒怨恨。
English: The queen's husband treated the empress carelessly, while Zhang Guifei was favored more than all the people in the harem. The power of the harem was attributed to Guifei. The empress treated her indifferently without envy or resentment.

古文：而居处俭约，衣服无锦绣之饰，左右近侍才百许人，唯寻阅图史、诵佛经为事。
现代文：且居住生活俭朴节约，衣服没有锦绣的装饰，左右服侍的才百把人，惟独把搜寻阅览图书史册、朗诵佛经作为事务。
English: Moreover, they live a frugal and economical life, their clothes are not decorated with ornaments, and there are only a hundred or so people who serve them, but they only search, read the history books, and recite Buddhist sutras.

古文：陈亡，与后主俱入长安。
现代文：陈国灭亡，和后主一起进入长安。
English: After the death of Chen Guo, he and his descendants moved to Chang'an.

古文：及后主薨，后自为哀辞，文甚酸切。
现代文：等到后主逝世，皇后亲自写作哀辞，文字十分辛酸痛切。
English: When her husband died, the Empress herself wrote a letter of condolence, which was very poignant.

古文：隋炀帝每所巡幸，恒令从驾。
现代文：隋炀帝每次巡视，总是命她随从。
English: Sui and Qin emperors always ordered her to accompany them on every inspection tour.

古文：及炀帝为宇文化及所害，后自广陵过江还乡里，不知所终。
现代文：等到炀帝被宇文化及害死，皇后从广陵过长江回到乡间，后来不知到了何处。
English: After Emperor Gong was killed by Yu Culture, the empress returned from Guangling across the Yangtze River to the countryside, and then I don't know where she went.

古文：后无子，养孙姬子胤为己子。
现代文：皇后没有儿子，养孙姬的儿子陈胤为自己的儿子。
English: The empress had no son, but she adopted her granddaughter's son, Chen Tan, as her own.

古文：后宗族多有显官，事在君理传。
现代文：皇后的宗族显要的官员很多，事情记载在君理的传记中。
English: The empress's family included many prominent officials, as recorded in the biography of King Li.

古文：后叔君公，自梁元帝败后，常在江陵。
现代文：皇后的叔叔君公，自梁元帝失败后，常住在江陵。
English: The queen's uncle, the prince, has often lived in Gangneung since Emperor Liang Yuan's defeat.

古文：祯明中，与萧献、萧岩率众叛隋归朝，后主擢为太子詹事。
现代文：祯明年间，和萧真、萧岩率领部众叛变隋国归顺朝廷，后主擢升他为太子詹事。
English: During the following year, He Xiaozhen and Xiao Yan led the group of rebels to overthrow the Sui Dynasty and submit to the imperial court. He was later promoted to Prince Zhanji.

古文：君公博学有才辩，善谈论，后主深器之。
现代文：君公博学有辩才，善于谈论，篮圭很器重他。
English: Jun Gong is erudite, has debating skills, and is good at talking. He is very important to the basketball team.

古文：陈亡，隋文帝以其叛己，命斩于建康。
现代文：速厘灭亡，隋文帝因他背叛自己，下令在建康杀了他。
English: He died quickly, and Emperor Sui ordered that he be killed in Jiankang because he had betrayed himself.

古文：后主张贵妃，名丽华，兵家女也。
现代文：后主张贵妃名丽华，是兵家中的女子。
English: Later, it was claimed that Guifei Meilihua was a woman from a military family.

古文：家贫，父兄以织席为事。
现代文：家中贫穷，父兄以织席谋生。
English: The family was poor, and the father and brother earned their living as weavers.

古文：后主为太子，以选入宫。
现代文：后主为太子，丽华被挑选入宫。
English: After the lord became the prince, Li Hua was selected to enter the palace.

古文：是时龚贵嫔为良娣，贵妃年十岁，为之给使，后主见而说焉，因得幸，遂有娠，生太子深。
现代文：逭时龚贵嫔为良娣，贵妃遣年十岁，为良娣充任杂役，后主见到后喜欢她，因此得以宠幸，于是怀孕，生下太子陈深。
English: At that time, Guizhou Guizhou was Liangyao, Guifei was ten years old, and served as a servant for Liangyao. The queen mother liked her after seeing her, so she was favored, so she became pregnant and gave birth to Prince Chen Sheng.

古文：后主即位，拜为贵妃。
现代文：后主登位，任命她为贵妃。
English: After the Lord ascended to the throne, he appointed her as a noble consort.

古文：性聪惠，甚被宠遇。
现代文：她性格聪明柔顺，很受宠爱。
English: She is smart, gentle, and well-liked.

古文：后主每引贵妃与宾客游宴，贵妃荐诸宫女预焉，后宫等咸德之，兢言贵妃之善，由是爱倾后宫。
现代文：后主每每召唤贵妃和宾客游乐饮宴，贵妃推荐一些宫女参加，后宫的人都感激她，竞相说贵妃的好话，因此她受到的宠爱超过后宫所有人。
English: The lady-in-waiting would always invite the empress and her guests to an entertaining banquet. The empress would recommend some of her maids of honor to attend. The people in the harem were grateful to her and competed to say nice things about the empress. As a result, she was favored more than everyone in the harem.

古文：又好厌魅之术，假鬼道以惑后主，置淫祀于宫中，聚诸妖巫使之鼓舞。因参访外事，人间有一言一事，妃必先知之，以白后主。
现代文：又喜好祈祷和诅咒制胜的法术，凭藉鬼道来迷惑后主，在宫中设置不合礼制的祭祀，聚集一些妖法巫师使他们击鼓舞蹈，乘机访察外面的事情，民间有一句话一件事，贵妃必定首先知道，禀报给后主，因此后主更加器重贵妃。
English: She was also fond of praying and cursing magic spells for victory, using ghost paths to confuse the queen mother, setting up sacrificial rites in the palace that were not in accordance with the etiquette system, gathering some witch doctors to make them play drums and dance, and taking the opportunity to visit the outside world. The people had a saying that the princess must first know, and report it to the queen mother, so the queen mother valued the princess more.

古文：由是益重妃，内外宗族，多被引用。
现代文：贵妃内外的宗族，多被延聘任用。
English: The clans inside and outside of Guifei were mostly hired and appointed.

古文：及隋军陷台城，妃与后主俱入于井，隋军出之，晋王广命斩贵妃，榜于青溪中桥。
现代文：等到隋军攻克台城，贵妃和后主一起进入井中，隋军把他们拖出，晋王杨广命令斩杀贵妃，张榜挂在青溪中桥。
English: When the Sui army conquered Taicheng, Guifei and her husband went into the well together, the Sui army dragged them out, the Jin king Yang Guang ordered Guifei to be beheaded, and Zhangbang was hung on the bridge in Qingxi.

古文：史臣侍中郑国公魏徵考览记书，参详故老，云：后主初即位，以始兴王叔陵之乱，被伤卧于承香阁下，时诸姬并不得进，唯张贵妃侍焉。
现代文：史臣侍中郑国公魏征考察阅览图书记载，参照故老传说，说后主刚登位时，因为始兴王叔陵的叛乱，受伤睡在承香阁中，当时各姬侍都不能进去，惟独张贵妃在那裹侍奉。
English: According to the records of Zheng Guogong's Wei Enlistment Inspection and Reading of Books, which refer to the old legend, it is said that when the heir to the throne had just ascended the throne, because of the rebellion of Shixing Wang's uncle's tomb, he was injured and slept in the Chengxiang Pavilion. At that time, all the concubines could not enter, but only Zhang Guifei served there.

古文：而柳太后犹居柏梁殿，即皇后之正殿也。
现代文：而柳太后仍然住在拍梁殿，柏凿殿是皇后的正殿。
English: However, Empress Dowager Liu still lived in the Pat Liang Palace, and the Baijiu Palace was the main palace of the empress.

古文：后主沈皇后素无宠，不得侍疾，别居求贤殿。
现代文：后主沈皇后一向不受宠爱，不能侍奉疾病，另外住在求贤毖。
English: The late Empress Shen was always unloved, unable to serve due to illness, and lived in a hermitage.

古文：至德二年，乃于光照殿前起临春、结绮、望仙三阁。
现代文：至垄二年，于是在光盟殿前面修建堕昼、筮壁、望仙三合。
English: Two years later, in front of the Guangmeng Hall, they built the Three Conjunctions of the Sun, the Wall, and the Immortal.

古文：阁高数丈，并数十间，其窗牖、壁带、悬楣、栏槛之类，并以沈檀香木为之，又饰以金玉，间以珠翠，外施珠廉，内有宝床、宝帐、其服玩之属，瑰奇珍丽，近古所未有。
现代文：阗高几丈，都有几十间房，其窗户、壁带、悬楣、栏槛之类，都是用沉檀香木做成，又装饰金玉，间或用珍珠翡翠，外面安上珠帘，房内摆设有实床、宝帐，衣服玩物之类，珍奇瑰丽，为近代所没有。
English: There are dozens of rooms of different heights. The windows, wall strips, hanging baskets, sills, etc. are all made of sandalwood, decorated with gold and jade, occasionally with pearl jade, with pearl curtains on the outside, and solid beds, treasure chests, clothes and toys in the room, which are rare and magnificent, and have not been seen in modern times.

古文：每微风暂至，香闻数里，朝日初照，光映后庭。
现代文：每当微风突然吹来，香气飘到几里外，早晨太阳初照，光芒闪耀后庭。
English: Every time the breeze suddenly blows, the aroma floats a few miles away, the sun shines for the first time in the morning, and the light shines in the backyard.

古文：其下积石为山，引水为池，植以奇树，杂以花药。
现代文：又堆石头为假山，引水为池塘，种上奇特的树，花朵药草混杂其中。
English: They also piled up stones to make a rockery, diverted water to make a pond, planted strange trees, and mixed flowers and herbs.

古文：后主自居临春阁，张贵妃居结绮阁，龚、孔二贵嫔居望仙阁，并复道交相往来。
现代文：后主自己住在临春阁，张贵起住在绫垣盐，龚、一二贵嫔住在望仙盥，都通过楼阁间的天桥互相往来。
English: Later, the master himself lived in Linchun Pavilion, Zhang Guizhi lived in Shigaki Salt, and Zou and one or two noblemen lived in Wangxian Pavilion. They all communicated with each other through the skybridge between the pavilions.

古文：又有王、李二美人、张、薛二淑媛、袁昭仪、何婕妤、江修容等七人，并有宠，递代以游其上。
现代文：又有王、李二美人，亟、整二淑嫒，袁昭仪、何婕妤、辽俏堡等七人，都受宠爱，轮流到皇上那裹游乐。
English: There were also Wang, Li Ermei, Er, Jie Ershu, Yuan Zhaoyi, He Yao, Liao Qiao Bao and other seven people, all of whom were favored and took turns to visit the emperor.

古文：以宫人有文学者袁大舍等为女学士。
现代文：委任有文学才能的宫女袁大舍等人为女学士。
English: Appointed Yuan Dashe, a palace maiden with literary talent, and others as female bachelors.

古文：后主每引宾客对贵妃等游宴，则使诸贵人及女学士与狎客共赋新诗，互相赠答，采其尤艳丽者以为曲词，被以新声，选宫女有容色者以千百数，令习而歌之，分部迭进，持以相乐。
现代文：后主经常招引宾客连同贵妃等人游乐宴饮，让一些贵人及女学士同狎人弄臣一起赋新诗，互相赠答，采用最为艳丽的诗赋作为曲词，谱上新音调，选取姿色美丽的宫女成百上千人，命她们学习后歌唱，分部更替演唱，用来作为娱乐。
English: The empress dowager would often invite guests to join the empress and other dignitaries for a banquet. She would have some of the nobles and maids of honor play new poems with their jesters and give them to each other as gifts. She would use the most beautiful poems as melodies and new tones, and she would select hundreds of thousands of beautiful court ladies and order them to sing after their studies. They would sing in alternating groups for entertainment.

古文：其曲有《玉树后庭花》、《临春乐》等，大指所归，皆美张贵妃、孔贵嫔之容色也。
现代文：曲子有《玉树后庭花》、《临春乐》等，归结大意，都是赞美张贵妃、孔贵嫔的容貌姿色。
English: The tunes include "Jade Tree Backyard Flower," "Spring Music," etc. The bottom line is that they all praise the appearance and appearance of Zhang Guifei and Kong Guifei.

古文：其略曰： 璧月夜夜满，琼树朝朝新。 
现代文：大略是说： 如璧圆月夜夜满，挺拔琼树朝朝新。 
English: Roughly speaking: If the moon is full and the night is full, the morning will be bright and the morning will be new.

古文：而张贵妃发长七尺，鬒黑如漆，其光可鉴。
现代文：张贵妃头发长七尺，深黑如漆，光彩可照人。
English: Zhang Guifei's hair is seven feet long, dark as lacquer, with a radiant shine.

古文：特聪惠，有神采，进止闲暇，容色端丽。
现代文：特别聪明柔顺，有风采，举止悠闲，容貌端庄美丽。
English: They are particularly intelligent, gentle, graceful, with a laid-back demeanor and a dignified and beautiful appearance.

古文：每瞻视盼睐，光采溢目，照映左右。
现代文：每当瞻望顾盼，光彩从眼中闪出，照耀左右的人。
English: Whenever I look around, brilliance flashes from my eyes and shines on the people around me.

古文：常于阁上靓妆，临于轩槛，宫中遥望，飘若神仙。
现代文：常在阁上妆饰，凭临栏槛边，宫中遥远地望见她，飘逸如同神仙。
English: Often adorned on the attic, by the threshold of the parapet, she is seen far away in the palace, flowing like a fairy.

古文：才辩强记，善候人主颜色。
现代文：她多才善辩记忆力强，善于观察君主的心思。
English: She is versatile, a good debater, has a strong memory, and is good at observing the thoughts of the monarch.

古文：是时后主怠于政事，百司启奏，并因宦者蔡脱儿、李善度进请，后主置张贵妃于膝上共决之。
现代文：当时，后主懈怠政事，百官上奏，都是通过宦官蔡脱儿、李善度进呈，后主把张贵妃放在膝盖上共同决断。
English: At that time, the heir's laxity in government affairs and the rise of a hundred officials were all submitted through the eunuchs Cai De'er and Li Zandu. The heir put Zhang Guifei on his knee to make a joint decision.

古文：李、蔡所不能记者，贵妃并为条疏，无所遗脱。
现代文：李、蔡所不能记下的，贵妃都为他们逐条陈述，没有遗漏。
English: Li and Cai couldn't write it down, but Guifei went through it for them, item by item, leaving nothing out.

古文：由是益加宠异，冠绝后庭。
现代文：因此越发受宠，在后宫地位最高。
English: As a result, he became increasingly favored and held the highest position in the harem.

古文：而后宫之家，不遵法度，有挂于理者，但求哀于贵妃，贵妃则令李、蔡先启其事，而后从容为言之。
现代文：后宫的家属，不遵循法度，有触碍事理的，衹要向贵妃哀求，贵妃就令李、蔡先启奏这些事，然后不慌不忙地为那些人说话。
English: The family members of the harem, who do not follow the law and have obstructed things, have to plead with Guifei. Guifei asked Li and Cai to explain these things first, and then speak for those people in a leisurely manner.

古文：大臣有不从者，亦因而谮之，所言无不听。
现代文：大臣之中有不顺从的，也藉机诬陷，所说无不被听从。
English: Some of the ministers did not obey and took the opportunity to frame him. Nothing he said was disobeyed.

古文：于是张、孔之势，薰灼四方，大臣执政，亦从风而靡。
现代文：于是张、孔的势力，如烈焰盛于四方，大臣执掌权柄的，也随风倒向他们。
English: As a result, the power of Zhang and Kong spread like wildfire in all directions, and the ministers who held power also fell to them with the wind.

古文：阉宦便佞之徒，内外交结，转相引进，贿赂公行，赏罚无常，纲纪瞀乱矣。
现代文：宦官中阿谀逢迎的人，内外勾结，互相推荐升进，贿赂公然实行，赏罚没有常规，法度紊乱了。
English: Among eunuchs, those who are favored by the eunuchs are colluding inside and outside, recommending each other for promotion, bribery is openly practiced, rewards and punishments are not routine, and the legal system is disordered.

古文：史臣曰：《诗》表《关雎》之德，《易》著《乾坤》之基，然夫妇之际，人道之大伦也。
现代文：史臣曰：《诗经》表彰《关雎》的德行，《周易》显明《乾卦》、《坤卦》的根本，那么夫妇之间的关系，是社会规范中的重大关节。
English: Shichen said: "Shijing" commends the virtue of "Guanxi," "Zhou Yi" reveals the fundamentals of "Kengwa" and "Kunwa," then the relationship between husband and wife is an important joint in social norms.

古文：若夫作俪天则，燮赞王化，则宣太后有其懿焉。
现代文：至于像婚配依据自然法则，协助国家教化，宣之后有这样的美德。
English: As for the virtues such as marrying according to the laws of nature and helping to educate the country, they have been promulgated.

