古文：起阏逢阉茂，尽旃蒙作噩，凡十二年。
现代文：起，止，一共十二年。汉顺帝阳嘉三年
English: a total of twelve years. Han Shun Diyang Jia three years

古文：阳嘉三年夏，四月，车师后部司马率后王加特奴等，掩击北匈奴于阊吾陆谷，大破之；获单于母。
现代文：夏季，四月，汉朝驻车师后王国的车师后部司马，率领后王国国王加特奴，在阊吾陆谷向北匈奴发动突然袭击，大破北匈奴，俘虏了单于的母亲。
English: In the summer, in April, the Han Dynasty stationed the cavalry division of the Later Kingdom, the cavalry division of the Later Sima, led by the King of the Later Kingdom, Gatenu, launched a surprise attack on the Northern Xiongnu in the Xiangwu Valley, defeated the Northern Xiongnu, and captured the mother of Shan Yu.

古文：五月，戊戌，诏以春夏连旱，赦天下。
现代文：五月戊戌，顺帝下诏，因春季和夏季连续大旱，大赦天下。
English: In May, Emperor Shun issued an edict to pardon the country for the continuous drought in spring and summer.

古文：上亲自露坐德阳殿东厢请雨。
现代文：顺帝亲到德阳殿东厢庭院中，露天而坐，祈求上天降雨。
English: Emperor Shun went to the eastern courtyard of Deyang Palace and sat in the open air, praying for rain.

古文：以尚书周举才学优深，特加策问。
现代文：因尚书周举才学兼优，顺帝特地就此征询他的意见。
English: Since Shang Shuxu was a gifted scholar, Shun Di specifically asked him for his opinion.

古文：举对曰： 臣闻阴阳闭隔，则二气否塞。
现代文：周举回答说： 我曾经听说，阴阳闭隔，则二气一定闭塞不通。
English: Zhou Ji replied: I once heard that if the yin and yang are closed, then the two qi must be blocked.

古文：陛下废文帝、光武之法，而循亡秦奢移之欲，内积怨女，外有旷夫。
现代文：陛下废弃文帝、光武帝所建立的朴素节俭传统，而因袭促使秦朝灭亡的奢侈欲望，使宫廷内增加了许多怨恨的美女，而宫廷外却增加了许多已到婚龄而不得婚配的男子。
English: His Majesty abandoned the tradition of simplicity and frugality established by Emperor Wen and Emperor Guangwu, and the extravagant desires that led to the demise of the Qin Dynasty increased the number of resentful beauties in the court, while outside the court there were many more men who had reached the age of marriage and were not allowed to marry.

古文：自枯旱以来，弥历年岁，未闻陛下改过之效，徒劳至尊暴露风尘，诚无益也。
现代文：自从发生大旱以来，整整过去一年了，而没有听说陛下有改过的表现，徒劳至尊之体露坐风尘，实在无益。
English: It's been several years since the drought, and I haven't heard anything about the emperor's reformed words and deeds, so what's the use of exposing himself?

古文：陛下但务其华，不寻其实，犹缘木希鱼，却行求前。
现代文：陛下只是在问题的表面上下功夫，不去寻找它的实质所在，犹如缘木求鱼，也好比向后倒退，却想前进一样，于事无补。
English: Your Majesty is only working on the surface of the problem, not looking for the essence of it, like a fish begging for a fish, or like going backwards but wanting to go forward, which does not help.

古文：诚宜推信革政，崇道变惑，出后宫不御之女，除太官重膳之费。《易·传》曰： 阳惑天不旋日。 
现代文：应该诚心诚意地革除弊政，遵守先王制订的规章制度，改变目前奢侈腐化的混乱局面，放走后宫中未曾召幸过的美女，省去御膳房制作奢侈菜肴的费用。《易传》上说： 天子为善一日，上天立刻以善来回报。 
English: It is necessary to sincerely abolish the bad government, abide by the rules and regulations formulated by the previous king, change the current chaotic situation of luxury corruption, let go of the beautiful women who have not been summoned in the harem, and save the cost of making luxury dishes in the imperial dining room. "I Chuan" said: One day when God is good, God will immediately return good.

古文：惟陛下留神裁察！ 
现代文：请陛下留意裁夺！ 
English: Your Majesty, please pay attention to the cut!

古文：帝复召举面问得失，举对以 宜慎官人，去贪污，远佞邪。 
现代文：顺帝再次召见周举，当面询问朝政上的得失，周举回答说： 应该慎重地任命官吏，铲除贪污，疏远奸佞。 
English: Emperor Shun once again summoned Zhou Jie and asked him face-to-face about the gains and losses of the imperial government. Zhou Jie replied: It is necessary to carefully appoint officials, eradicate corruption, and alienate traitors.

古文：帝曰： 官贪污、佞邪者为谁乎？ 
现代文：顺帝又问： 谁是贪官污吏？谁是奸佞之臣？ 
English: Shun Di also asked: Who is a corrupt official? Who is a traitor's vassal?

古文：对曰： 臣从下州超备机密，不足以别群臣。
现代文：周举回答说： 我从下面的州刺史府，被擢升到掌管朝廷机密的尚书台，还没有能力辨别群臣。
English: Zhou Ji replied, "I have been promoted from the lower level of the State History Office to the Shang Shudi, which is in charge of the secrets of the imperial court, and I still do not have the ability to distinguish between ministers.

古文：然公卿大臣数有直言者，忠贞也；阿谀苟容者，佞邪也。 
现代文：然而，在三公、九卿等朝廷大臣中，凡是多次敢于直言不讳地批评朝政的，是忠贞之臣。而阿谀奉承和随声附和的，则是奸佞之臣。 
English: However, among the ministers of the Imperial Court, such as the three lords and nine nobles, those who dared to criticize the government of the Imperial Court many times were loyal vassals, while those who flattered and went along with it were traitors.

古文：太史令张衡亦上疏言： 前年京师地震土裂。
现代文：太史令张衡也上书说： 去年，京都洛阳发生地震，大地崩裂。
English: Zhang Heng, the Grand Historian, also wrote: Last year, an earthquake occurred in Luoyang, Kyoto, and the earth cracked.

古文：裂者，威分；震者，民扰也。
现代文：土地崩裂象征着权威分割；地震象征着人民受到惊扰。
English: The cracking of the earth symbolizes the division of authority; the earthquake symbolizes the disturbance of the people.

古文：窃惧圣思厌倦，制不专己，恩不忍割，与众共威。
现代文：我深恐陛下厌倦处理政务，政令不专由自己决定，或者不忍心割断私恩，导致与众人共享威权。
English: I am deeply afraid that His Majesty is tired of dealing with government affairs, and that his decrees are not decided exclusively by himself, or that he cannot bear to cut off personal favors, leading to the sharing of authority with everyone.

古文：威不可分，德不可共。
现代文：然而，威权是不可分割的，恩德也是不可共有的。
English: Dignity is indivisible, morality is inseparable.

古文：愿陛下思惟所以稽古率旧，勿使刑德八柄不由天子，然后神望允塞，灾消不至矣。 
现代文：但愿陛下考虑古代君主所制定的规章，千万不要使刑、德八种权柄，脱离帝王之手。然后，神圣的威严就获得充实，灾异就消失而不再来了。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will consider the rules established by the ancient monarchs, and never let the punishment and the eight powers of morality leave the emperor's hands. Then, the sacred majesty will be enriched, and the disaster will disappear and will not come again.

古文：衡又以中兴之后，儒者争学《图纬》，上疏言： 《春秋元命包》有公输班与墨翟，事见战国；又言别有益州，益州之置在于汉世。
现代文：张衡又因为东汉王朝建立以来，儒家学派的学者争相学习《图》、《纬》这种神秘的预言书，于是上书说： 《春秋元命包》一书中，载有公输般和墨翟，他俩的事都发生在战国时期；又提到别有益州，而益州的设置，是在汉代。
English: Zhang Heng also said that since the establishment of the Eastern Han Dynasty, scholars of the Confucian school have been competing to study the mysterious prophetic books such as "Tu" and "Wu," so the letter said: "In the book "Spring, Autumn, and New Year's Life Package," there is a public transport and inkstone, both of which occurred during the Warring States period; it also mentioned that the setting of the other beneficial state, and the beneficial state, was in the Han Dynasty.

古文：又刘向父子领校秘书，阅定九流，亦无《谶录》。
现代文：并且，刘向、刘歆父子主管皇家图书馆，校订群书，查阅审定九家学说时，也没有发现《谶录》这部书。
English: Moreover, when Liu Xiang and Liu Yao, father and son, were in charge of the Royal Library, proofreading the group of books, and checking and verifying the nine doctrines, they did not find the book "Zhen Lu."

古文：则知《图谶》成于哀、平之际，皆虚伪之徒以要世取资，欺罔较然，莫之纠禁。
现代文：由此可以推断，《图谶》成书于哀帝、平帝之际，都是虚妄之徒用来欺世盗名和骗取钱财的，欺骗的意图非常明显，但朝廷却没有加以查禁。
English: From this, it can be deduced that "Tu Han" was written on the occasion of the mourning of the emperor and the enthronement of the emperor, and was used by swindlers to deceive the world and defraud money. The intention of deception is very obvious, but the court did not ban it.

古文：且律历、卦候、九宫、风角，数有征效，世莫肯学，而竞称不占之书，譬犹画工恶图犬马而好作鬼魅，诚以实事难形而虚伪不穷也！
现代文：而且，律历、卦候、九宫、风角所作的预测，曾不断应验，世人不肯学习，却争相称赞谶纬之书，正犹如画工厌恶画狗画马，却喜好画鬼怪，确实是因为实在的事物很难画好，而虚无飘渺的东西可以信笔乱画。
English: Moreover, the predictions made by the Ritsuryo calendar, the Chinese horoscope, the Nine Palaces, and the Wind Angle, have been constantly fulfilled. The world refuses to learn, but they compete to praise the book of Zou Wei, just as a painter hates to paint dogs and horses, but likes to paint ghosts and monsters. It is indeed because real things are difficult to paint well, while nothingness and ethereal things can be drawn with a brush.

古文：宜收藏《图谶》，一禁绝之，则硃紫无所眩，典籍无瑕玷矣！ 
现代文：因此，对《图谶》这些神秘的预言书，朝廷应该加以收缴，一律禁绝，这样，朱色和紫色才不会混淆，圣人典籍也不致受到玷污！ 
English: Therefore, the imperial court should confiscate these mysterious prophetic books of "Tu" and ban them all. In this way, vermilion and purple will not be confused, and the classics of saints will not be tarnished!

古文：秋，七月，钟羌良封等复寇陇西、汉阳。
现代文：秋季，七月，钟羌种首领良封等再次进犯陇西郡和汉阳郡。
English: In the autumn, in July, the leader of the Zhongyu tribe, Liangfu, and others once again invaded Shaanxi and Hanyang counties.

古文：诏拜前校尉马贤为谒者，镇抚诸种。
现代文：顺帝下诏，任命前任护羌校尉马贤为谒者，负责镇压和安抚诸种羌人。
English: Emperor Shun issued an edict, appointing Ma Xian, the former lieutenant of the imperial bodyguard, as the executioner, responsible for suppressing and pacifying all kinds of criminals.

古文：冬，十月，护羌校尉马续遣兵击良封，破之。
现代文：冬季，十月，护羌校尉马续派兵进击良封，将其击破。
English: In the winter, in October, Captain Ma Zheng sent soldiers to attack Liangfeng and broke it.

古文：十一月，壬寅，司徒刘崎、司空孔扶免，用周举之言也。
现代文：十一月壬寅，司徒刘崎和司空孔扶，均被免职，这是由于顺帝采纳周举谏言的结果。
English: In November, Ren Yin, Liu Qi, and Kong Fu, were both removed from their posts as a result of Shun's acceptance of Zhou's criticism.

古文：乙己，以大司农黄尚为司徒，光禄勋河东王卓为司空。
现代文：乙巳，擢升大司农黄尚为司徒，光禄勋、河东郡人王卓为司空。
English: At the same time, Farmer Huang Shang was promoted to the position of Senior Secretary, and Guang Rukun and Wang Zhuo, a person from Hedong County, were promoted to the position of Secretary.

古文：耿贵人数为耿氏请，帝乃绍封耿宝子箕为牟平侯。
现代文：因耿贵人多次为她的娘家向顺帝说情，于是，顺帝封耿宝的儿子耿箕继承其父为牟平侯。
English: Because Geng Guizhen repeatedly interceded with Shun for her daughter's family, Shun's son, Geng Yao, who was given the title of Geng Bao, succeeded his father as Muping Hou.

古文：阳嘉四年
现代文：四年
English: Four years

古文：春，北匈奴呼衍王侵车师后部。帝令敦煌太守发兵救之，不利。
现代文：春季，北匈奴呼衍王侵犯车师后王国，顺帝命敦煌太守发兵救援，战事不利。
English: In the spring, the Northern Xiongnu, Huyan Wang, invaded the Kingdom of Khaishi, and Shun Di ordered the Dunhuang governor to send troops for rescue. The war was unfavorable.

古文：二月，丙子，初听中官得以养子袭爵。
现代文：二月丙子，首次允许宦官以养子继承爵位。
English: In February, Cixi, for the first time, allowed eunuchs to adopt sons to inherit peerages.

古文：初，帝之复位，宦官之力也，由是有宠，参与政事。
现代文：当初，顺帝之所以能够恢复帝位，是靠宦官的力量，因此，宦官得到皇帝的庞信，参与朝廷的政事。
English: At first, the reason why Emperor Shun was able to restore the imperial throne was due to the power of eunuchs. Therefore, eunuchs were trusted by the emperor and participated in the political affairs of the imperial court.

古文：御史张纲上书曰： 窃寻文、明二帝，德化尤盛，中官常侍，不过两人，近幸赏赐，裁满数金，惜费重民，故家给人足。
现代文：御史张纲上书说： 据我考察，文帝和明帝，德行教化，最有成就。而当时的中常侍不过二人，对宠爱亲信的赏赐，不过黄金数斤。珍惜经费，关心人民，所以，百姓家家富足。
English: Historian Zhang Gang wrote: According to my research, Emperor Wen and Emperor Ming were the most successful in cultivating virtue and enlightenment. At that time, there were only two regular attendants, and only a few pounds of gold were given to favored relatives and friends. People treasured money and cared about the people, so their families were rich.

古文：而顷者以来，无功小人，皆有官爵，非爱民重器、承天顺道者也。 
现代文：可是，近几年来，没有功劳的小人，都得到官禄爵位，这不是爱护人民，重视国家，顺应天道的作法。 
English: However, in recent years, petty people with no merit have all received official ranks and titles. This is not the practice of loving the people, valuing the country, and conforming to the heavenly way.

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：奏章呈上后，顺帝不理。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：纲，皓之子也。
现代文：张纲，即张皓的儿子。
English: Zhang Gang, the son of Zhang Ye.

古文：旱。
现代文：发生旱灾。
English: Drought.

古文：谒者马贤击钟羌，大破之。
现代文：谒者马贤进击并大破钟羌种人。
English: The eunuch Ma Xian entered the bell tower and defeated them.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，太尉施延免。
现代文：夏季，四月甲子，术尉施延被免官。
English: In the summer, in April, Lieutenant Shi Yan was dismissed.

古文：戊寅，以执金吾梁商为大将军，故太尉宠参为太尉。
现代文：戊寅，擢升执金吾梁商为大将军，任命前任太尉庞参为太尉。
English: Wu Ying, promoted the executioner Jin Wu Liang Shang to the rank of general, and appointed the former lieutenant Pang San to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：商称疾不起且一年，帝使太常桓焉奉策就第即拜，商乃诣阙受命。
现代文：梁商称病不起将近一年。于是，顺帝命太常桓焉，捧着任命策书到梁商家中，要拜授他为大将军，梁商这才到皇宫接受任命。
English: Liang Shang said that he could not afford to be ill for nearly a year. Therefore, Emperor Shun's life was too precarious, and he went to Liang Shang's home with the appointment plan, to confer him as a general. Liang Shang only then went to the imperial palace to accept the appointment.

古文：商少通经传，谦恭好士，辟汉阳巨览、上党陈龟为掾属，李固为从事中郎，杨伦为长史。
现代文：梁商自幼通晓儒家的经传，谦虚恭谨，喜爱人才，他延聘汉阳郡人巨览、上党郡人陈龟为掾属，李固为从事中良，杨伦为长史。
English: Liang Shang has been familiar with Confucianism since his childhood. He is modest, respectful, and likes talented people. He has hired Hanyang County's Gaozan and Shangdang County's Chen Kame as his subordinates, Li Gu as a middle-ranking official, and Yang Lun as a senior official.

古文：李固以商柔和自守，不能有所整裁，乃奏记于商曰： 数年以来，灾怪屡见。
现代文：李固因梁商为人柔弱温和，能守住自己，但没有能力整顿法纪，于是向梁商上书说： 数年以来，灾变怪异不断出现。
English: Li Gu wrote to Liang Shang, saying, "For several years, strange disasters have been occurring.

古文：孔子曰： 智者见变思形，愚者睹怪讳名。 
现代文：孔子说： 聪明的人见到灾变，考虑它形成的原因；愚蠢的人见到怪异，却假装没有看见。 
English: Confucius said: A wise man sees a calamity and considers the cause of its formation; a foolish man sees a strange thing and pretends not to see it.

古文：天道无亲，可为祗畏。
现代文：天道不论亲疏，所以可敬可畏。
English: Regardless of whether the Heaven Realm is close or far away, it can be respected and feared.

古文：诚令王纲一整，道行忠立，明公踵伯成之高，全不朽之誉，岂与此外戚凡辈耽荣好位者同日而论哉！ 
现代文：如果能够整顿朝廷纲纪，推行正道，选立忠良，则您就能继伯成之后，建立崇高的功业，成全不朽的荣誉，那些沉湎于荣华富贵，追求高位的一般外戚，怎能与你同日而语？ 
English: If you can rectify the discipline of the imperial court, promote the right path, and select the loyal ones, then you will be able to follow Bo Cheng to establish a lofty career and achieve immortal honor. How can those ordinary relatives who are addicted to glory and wealth and pursue high positions be the same as you?

古文：商不能用。
现代文：梁商不能采用。
English: Liang Shang did not listen.

古文：秋，闰八月，丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，闰八月丁亥朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in the leap month of August, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：冬，十月，乌桓寇云中，度辽将军耿晔追击，不利。
现代文：冬季，十月，乌桓侵犯云中郡。度辽将军耿晔率军追击，不利。
English: In winter, October, Wu Huan invaded Yunzhong County. Du Liao's General Geng Yao led the army to pursue, but to no avail.

古文：十一月，乌桓围晔于兰池城；发兵数千人救之，乌桓乃退。
现代文：十一月，乌桓将耿晔包围在兰池城，东汉朝廷派兵数千人前去救援，于是乌桓解围而去。
English: In November, Wuhuan besieged Geng Yao in Lanchi City. The Eastern Han Dynasty sent thousands of soldiers to rescue him, and Wuhuan broke the siege and left.

古文：十二月，甲寅，京师地震。
现代文：十二月丙寅，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In December, an earthquake hit Kyoto and Luoyang.

古文：永和元年
现代文：永和元年
English: In the first year of the Edo period

古文：春，正月，己巳，改元，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月己巳，改年号。大赦天下。
English: In the spring, the New Year's Day falls on the same day, and the name of the year is changed.

古文：冬，十月，丁亥，承福殿火。
现代文：冬季，十月丁亥，承福殿发生火灾。
English: In the winter, October Dinghai, a fire broke out in Chengfu Hall.

古文：十一月，丙子，太尉宠参罢。
现代文：十一月丙子，太尉庞参被免职。
English: In November, Second Lieutenant Pang San was relieved of his duties.

古文：十二月，象林蛮夷反。
现代文：十二月，象林县蛮夷起兵反叛。
English: In December, the barbarians in Xianglin County rebelled.

古文：乙巳，以前司空王龚为太尉。
现代文：乙巳，任命前任司空王龚为太尉。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yao, the former Siku, was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：龚疾宦官专权，上书极言其状。
现代文：王龚痛恨宦官专权，上书极力陈述他们的罪状。
English: Wang Qian hated the eunuch's exclusive power, and wrote a letter to strongly state their guilt.

古文：诸黄门使客诬奏龚罪；上命龚亟自实。
现代文：黄门宦官们指使门客，向朝廷诬告王龚有罪。顺帝命王龚及早亲自讲明真实情况。
English: The eunuchs of the Yellow Gate ordered the concubines to falsely accuse Wang Qi of guilt to the imperial court. Emperor Shun ordered Wang Qi to personally clarify the true situation as soon as possible.

古文：李固奏记于梁商曰： 王公以坚贞之操，横为谗佞所构，众人闻知，莫不叹栗。
现代文：李固向梁商上书说： 王龚具有坚贞的节操，无端遭受奸佞的陷害，大家听说这个消息，无不为之叹息恐惧。
English: Li Gu wrote a letter to Liang Shang, saying, "Wang Yao is a man of steadfast integrity. He was framed by traitors for no reason. When we heard the news, we were all filled with grief and fear.

古文：夫三公尊重，无诣理诉冤之义，纤微感概，辄引分决，是以旧典不有大罪，不至重问。
现代文：以三公的尊严地位，没有前往司法部门为自己申辩诉冤的道理。即令他对朝廷稍有不满，往往让他自杀，所以，按照惯例，没有大逆不道之罪，不至于审问三公。
English: With the dignity of the three princes, he did not go to the judicial department to defend himself. Even if he was a little dissatisfied with the court, he often let him commit suicide, so, according to the usual practice, there is no crime of high treason, and he will not interrogate the three princes.

古文：王公卒有它变，则朝廷获害贤之名，群臣无救护之节矣！
现代文：假如王龚突然发生其他意外，则朝廷就会蒙受谋害贤能的恶名，群臣就没有营救和保护忠良的气节了！
English: If any other accident were to suddenly happen to Wang Yao, then the imperial court would suffer the notoriety of plotting to harm the virtuous, and the courtiers would not have the stamina to rescue and protect the faithful!

古文：语曰： 善人在患，饥不及餐。 
现代文：俗话说： 好人正处在患难之中，我们即使再饿，也顾不上吃饭。 
English: As the saying goes: A good man, when in trouble, waits until he's hungry to eat.

古文：斯其时也！ 
现代文：这正是救人的时候。 
English: This is the time to save lives.

古文：商即言之于帝，事乃得释。
现代文：于是，梁商立即向顺帝进言，事情才告平息。
English: As a result, Liang Shang immediately sent a message to Shun Di, and things calmed down.

古文：是岁，以执金吾梁冀为河南尹。
现代文：本年，任命执金吾梁冀为河南尹。
English: This year, Guo Liangji was appointed as Henan Yin.

古文：冀性嗜酒，逸游自恣，居职多纵暴非法。
现代文：梁冀生性喜好饮酒，纵情作乐，为所欲为，居官多有暴虐不法的行为。
English: Liang Jizhe has a natural predilection for drinking, indulging in pleasure, doing whatever he wants, and many officials have violent and illegal behavior.

古文：父商所亲客雒阳令吕放以告商，商以让冀。
现代文：其父梁商所亲信的门客、洛阳县令吕放，将上述情况报告梁商，梁商因此责备了梁冀。
English: Luoyang County Governor Lü Fang, a trusted protégé of his father, Liang Shang, reported the above situation to Liang Shang, who blamed Liang Jie.

古文：冀遣人于道刺杀放，而恐商知之，乃推疑放之怨仇，请以放弟禹为雒阳令，使捕之；尽灭其宗、亲、宾客百馀人。
现代文：梁冀怀恨在心，竟派人在道路上刺死了吕放。而他又恐怕被父亲发觉，于是把罪行推到吕放的仇人身上，并请求任命吕放的弟弟吕禹为洛阳县令，让他来逮捕刺杀吕放的凶手。结果，吕禹将吕放的宗族、亲戚和宾客等一百余人全部诛杀。
English: With hatred in his heart, Liang Jie sent someone to stab Lv Fang to death on the road. Fearing that his father would find out, he blamed Lv Fang's enemies for the crime and requested that Lv Fang's brother Lv Yu be appointed Luoyang County magistrate to arrest Lv Fang's murderer. As a result, Lv Yu killed more than 100 people, including Lv Fang's family, relatives and guests.

古文：武陵太守上书，以蛮夷率服，可比汉人，增其租赋。
现代文：武陵郡太守向朝廷上书，认为武陵郡内的蛮夷已归服了汉朝，可以比照汉人，增加他们的田租和赋税。
English: The governor of Wuling County sent a letter to the imperial court, saying that the barbarians in Wuling County had been conquered by the Han Dynasty, and that they could increase their farm rents and taxes in accordance with the Han people.

古文：议者皆以为可。尚书令虞诩曰： 自古圣王，不臣异俗。
现代文：参加集议论的人都认为可行，但尚书令虞诩却说： 自古以来，圣明的君王对风俗习惯跟我们不同的民族，不当作自己的臣民。
English: Those who took part in the collective discussion thought it was feasible, but Shang Shuling and Gu Yao said: Since ancient times, the kings of the holy land have not regarded the customs and habits of peoples different from us as their own subjects.

古文：先帝旧典，贡税多少，所由来久矣；今猥增之，必有怨叛。计其所得，不偿所费，必有后悔。 
现代文：先帝已制定了规章，明确规定武陵蛮夷应缴纳的赋税额，时间已经很久了。而今滥行增加，必然引起他们的怨恨和反叛，计算所能得到的，抵偿不了所耗费的，定会后悔。 
English: It has been a long time since the former emperor formulated regulations to clearly stipulate the amount of tax to be paid by Wuling barbarians. But now the abuse has increased, which will inevitably cause their resentment and rebellion. If what can be calculated cannot compensate for what has been spent, they will surely regret it.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：顺帝没有采纳。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：澧中、漊中蛮果争贡布非旧约，遂杀乡吏，举种反。
现代文：其后，中和中蛮人各因所征收的贡布不是原来规定的数量而起来抗争，于是杀掉征收赋税的乡吏，全族反叛。
English: Afterwards, both the Chinese and the barbarians rose up to protest against the fact that the tribute collected was not the originally specified amount, so they killed the village official who collected the tax, and the whole nation rebelled.

古文：永和二年
现代文：永和二年
English: In the second year of the Edo period

古文：春，武陵蛮二万人围充城，八千人寇夷道。
现代文：春季，武陵郡蛮族二万人包围充城，八千人攻打夷道。
English: In the spring, 20,000 barbarians from Wuling County besieged and occupied the city, and 8,000 attacked Yidu.

古文：二月，广汉属国都尉击破白马羌。
现代文：二月，广汉属国都尉击破白马羌。
English: In February, the captain of the Guanghan vassal state defeated the White Horse.

古文：帝遣武陵太守李进击叛蛮，破平之。
现代文：顺帝派武陵郡太守李进率军进击反叛的蛮人，将其击破平定。
English: Emperor Shun sent Li Jinjun, the grand marshal of Wuling County, to lead an army to attack the rebellious barbarians and defeat and subdue them.

古文：进乃简选良吏，抚循蛮夷，郡境遂安。
现代文：于是，李进选用贤良的官吏，安抚蛮人，郡境之内方告安宁。
English: As a result, Li Jin selected virtuous officials to pacify the barbarians, and the county was pacified.

古文：三月，乙卯，司空王卓薨。
现代文：三月，司空王卓去世。
English: In March, Sikuo Wangzhuo passed away.

古文：丁丑，以光禄勋郭虔为司空。
现代文：丁丑，擢升光禄勋郭虔为司空。
English: Ding Yuxiu was promoted to Guanglu, and Guo Jian was promoted to Sikuo.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，京师地震。
现代文：夏季，四月丙申，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In the summer, in April, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：五月，癸丑，山阳君宋娥坐构奸诬罔，收印绶，归里舍。
现代文：五月癸丑，山阳君宋娥因勾结奸佞，以不实之辞诬陷他人而坐罪，顺帝下令收缴她的印信，并将她遣送回乡。
English: In May, Sanyang Prince Song E was found guilty of colluding with traitors and framing others with untrue words. Emperor Shun ordered the confiscation of her seal and sent her back to her hometown.

古文：黄龙、杨佗、孟叔、李建、张贤、史泛、王道、李元、李刚等九侯坐与宋娥更相赂遗，求高官增邑，并遣就国，减租四分之一。
现代文：黄龙、杨佗、孟叔、李建、张贤、史、王道、李元、李刚等九侯，因与宋娥互相贿赂，谋求高官和增加食邑，一律遣回他们的封国，减少所享用的封国租税的四分之一。
English: Huang Long, Yang Hui, Meng Shu, Li Jian, Zhang Xian, Shi, Wang Dao, Li Yuan, Li Gang and other nine princes, because they and Song E bribed each other to seek high-ranking officials and increase food, were all sent back to their fiefs, reducing the fief tax enjoyed by a quarter.

古文：象林蛮区怜等攻县寺，杀长吏。
现代文：象林郡蛮族首领区怜等攻打所在县的官府，杀害地方官吏。
English: The barbarian chieftains of Xianglin County, including Gu Lei, attacked the county government and killed local officials.

古文：交趾刺史樊演发交趾、九真兵万馀人救之；兵士惮远役，秋，七月，二郡兵反，攻其府。
现代文：交趾刺史樊演征发交趾郡和九真郡兵一万余人，前往救援。由于士兵害怕远征，秋季，七月，两郡士兵反叛，攻打太守府。
English: More than 10,000 soldiers from Jiaozuo County and Jiu Zhen County were sent to the rescue. Because the soldiers were afraid of the expedition, in the autumn, in July, the soldiers of the two counties rebelled and attacked the Taishou government.

古文：府虽击破反者，而蛮势转盛。
现代文：太守府虽将反叛士兵击败，然而蛮人的势力转强。
English: Although the Tai Shoufu defeated the rebel soldiers, the power of the barbarians grew stronger.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，上行幸长安。
现代文：冬季，十月甲申，顺帝巡视长安。
English: In winter, in October of Jiaxing, Shun Di inspected Chang'an.

古文：扶风田弱荐同郡法真博通内外学，隐居不仕，宜就加衮职。
现代文：扶风人田弱向顺帝推荐同郡人法真，称法真精通儒家的内学和外学，即《七纬》和《六经》，隐居乡里，不肯出来做官，应就地任命他为三公。
English: Tian Weak, a supporter of Emperor Shun, recommended to Emperor Shun that he should appoint the same person, Fa Zhen, as the Three Princes, saying that Fa Zhen was well versed in the internal and external teachings of Confucianism, that is, the "Seven Precepts" and the "Six Classics," and that he lived in seclusion in the countryside and did not want to become an official.

古文：帝虚心欲致之，前后四征，终不屈。
现代文：顺帝非常虚心地想请到他，前后四次征召，但法真始终不肯屈从。
English: Emperor Shun very humbly wanted to invite him, and summoned him four times, but Fa Zhen always refused to yield.

古文：友人郭正称之曰： 法真名可得闻，身难得而见。
现代文：他的朋友郭正称赞说： 法真，可以听见他的名，却很难见到他这个人。
English: His friend Guo Zheng praised: "Fa Zhen, you can hear his name, but it's hard to see him as a person.

古文：逃名而名我随，避名而名我追，可谓百世之师者矣！ 
现代文：他越是逃避名声，名声越是随着他，越是躲开名声，名声越是追着他，他这个人真可以说是百世之师了！ 
English: The more he avoids fame, the more fame follows him, the more he avoids fame, the more fame pursues him, he is truly a master of all time!

古文：真，雄之子也。
现代文：法真，即法雄的儿子。
English: Faxin, the son of Faxiong.

古文：丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：丁卯，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Luoyang, Kyoto.

古文：太尉王龚以中常侍张昉等专弄国权，欲奏诛之。
现代文：太尉王龚因中常侍张等独揽朝廷大权，打算提出弹劾，要求皇帝诛杀他们。
English: Captain Wang Qian planned to impeach the emperors for the fact that the middle-ranking attendant Zhang and others monopolized the power of the imperial court, and demanded that the emperors kill them.

古文：宗亲有以杨震行事谏之者，龚乃止。
现代文：后由于宗族和亲戚中有人用杨震的遭遇进行劝阻，王龚这才作罢。
English: Later, because some people in the clan and relatives used Yang Zhen's experience to dissuade him, Wang Xi did not do it.

古文：十二月，乙亥，上还自长安。
现代文：十二月乙亥，顺帝从长安返回京都洛阳。
English: In December, Emperor Shun returned from Chang'an to Kyoto and Luoyang.

古文：永和三年
现代文：永和三年
English: Three Years of Yonghe

古文：春，二月，乙亥，京师及金城、陇西地震，二郡山崩。
现代文：春季，二月乙亥，京都洛阳及金城郡、陇西郡发生地震，二郡发生山崩。
English: In the spring, in February, earthquake occurred in Luoyang, Kyoto, Kinjo-gun and Shaanxi-gun, and landslide occurred in two counties.

古文：夏，闰四月，己酉，京师地震。
现代文：夏季，闰四月已酉，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: Summer, Leap April is over, and an earthquake has occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：五月，吴郡丞羊珍反，攻郡府；太守王衡破斩之。
现代文：五月，吴郡丞羊珍反叛，攻打郡太守府。太守王衡将叛军击败，并斩杀羊珍。
English: In May, Wu County Governor Yang Zhen rebelled and attacked the county governor's office. Governor Wang Heng defeated the rebels and killed Yang Zhen.

古文：侍御史贾昌与州郡并力讨区怜等，不克，为所攻围；岁馀，兵谷不继。
现代文：侍御史贾昌和州郡官府合力讨伐区怜，没有取胜，反而受到区怜的围攻，过了一年多，援兵和粮秣都无法接济。
English: Attendant Shi Jiachang and the county government joined forces to fight against the district, but did not win. Instead, they were besieged by the district. After more than a year, reinforcements and grain were unable to be delivered.

古文：帝召公卿百官及四府掾属问以方略；皆议遣大将，发荆、扬、兗、豫四万人赴之。
现代文：顺帝召集三公、九卿、百官以及四府掾属询问对策。大家都主张派遣大将，征发荆州、扬州、兖州、豫州等四州士兵共四万人，前往交趾增援。
English: Emperor Shun called together the three princes, nine nobles, a hundred officials, and the four prefectures and their subordinates to inquire about countermeasures. They all advocated sending a general to recruit and dispatch a total of forty thousand soldiers from four states, including Jingzhou, Yangzhou, Ganzhou, and Yuzhou, to Kozuke for reinforcement.

古文：李固驳曰： 若荆、扬无事，发之可也。
现代文：李固反驳说： 如果荆州和扬州太平无事，便可以征发二州的士兵。
English: Li Gu retorted: If there is no trouble in Jingzhou and Yangzhou, then soldiers from the two states can be conscripted.

古文：今二州盗贼磐结不散，武陵、南郡蛮夷未辑，长沙、桂阳数被征发，如复扰动，必更生患，其不可一也。
现代文：而今，二州的盗贼，犹如磐石一样结合在一起，不肯离散；武陵郡和南郡的蛮族反叛，还没有安定。而长沙郡和桂阳郡的士兵，已被征发多次，如果再次征发，骚扰人民，必然发生新的变乱，这是不可征发的第一个理由。
English: At present, the bandits in the two counties are like a rock that sticks together and refuses to be separated; the barbarian rebellions in Wuling County and Nan County have not yet stabilized; and the soldiers in Changsha County and Guiyang County have been conscripted many times. If they are conscripted again and harass the people, new turmoil will inevitably occur. This is the first reason why they cannot be conscripted.

古文：又，兗、豫之人卒被征发，远赴万里，无有还期，诏书迫促，必致叛亡，其不可二也。
现代文：再者，兖州和豫州的人民，突然被征入伍，远征万里之外，没有归期，而诏书逼迫和催促急如星火，必然导致叛乱和逃亡，这是不可征发的第二个理由。
English: Furthermore, the people of Zhangzhou and Yuzhou were suddenly conscripted into the army and sent on an expedition thousands of miles away with no return date, and the imperial edict's persecution and urgent urging inevitably led to rebellion and escape. This is the second reason why they cannot be conscripted.

古文：南州水土温暑，加有瘴气，致死亡者十必四五，其不可三也。
现代文：南方州郡，水土潮湿，气候炎热，再加上瘴气，以致死亡的人必占十分之四五，这是不可征发的第三个理由。
English: Nanfangzhou County, the soil and water are humid, the climate is hot, coupled with radon gas, so that the death of people must account for four or five out of ten. This is the third reason why it is not possible to requisition.

古文：远涉万里，士卒疲劳，比至岭南，不复堪斗，其不可四也。
现代文：长途跋涉，行军万里，士卒疲劳不堪，等军队到达岭南，士卒已经没有战斗能力，这是不可征发的第四个理由。
English: Long-distance trekking, marching thousands of miles, the soldiers are exhausted, and when the army arrives in Lingnan, the soldiers are no longer able to fight. This is the fourth reason why they cannot be conscripted.

古文：军行三十里为程，而去日南九千馀里，三百日乃到，计人禀五升，用米六十万斛，不计将吏驴马之食，但负甲自致，费便若此，其不可五也。
现代文：按照规定的正常速度，每天行军三十里，而离日南郡有九千余里，需要行军三百天才可到达，按每人每天口粮五升计算，需要用米六十万斛，还不包括将领、军吏的口粮和驴、马的饲料，仅士兵自己携带，费用就如此巨大，这是不可征发的第五个理由。
English: According to the prescribed normal speed, the army marches 30 miles a day, but there are more than 9,000 miles from Nichinan County, which requires 300 days of marching to reach. Calculated according to the daily ration of 5 liters per person, it takes 600,000 baht of rice, not including the rations of generals and military officials and the feed for donkeys and horses. Only the soldiers carry it themselves, and the cost is so huge. This is the fifth reason why it is impossible to conscript.

古文：设军所在，死亡必众，既不足御敌，当复更发，此为刻割心腹以补四支，其不可六也。
现代文：军队战斗的地方，死亡的人一定很多，即然抵御不了敌人的进攻，就将再次征调援兵，这就犹如挖割心腹去补四肢，这是不可征发的第六个理由。
English: Where the army is fighting, there must be a lot of dead people. As soon as it cannot withstand the enemy's attack, reinforcements will be called up again. This is like cutting off the heart and stomach to make up for the limbs. This is the sixth reason why conscription should not be issued.

古文：九真、日南相去千里，发其吏民犹尚不堪，何况乃苦四州之卒以赴万里之艰哉！
现代文：九真和日南，两郡相隔仅一千里，征发当地的吏民，尚且不堪忍受，更何况征发四州的士兵，让他们忍受万里远征的痛苦？
English: Jiu Zhen and Nichinan, the two counties are only a thousand miles apart, and it is unbearable to conscript local officials and people, let alone conscript soldiers from four states, and let them endure the pain of a thousand-mile expedition?

古文：其不可七也。
现代文：这是不可征发的第七个理由。
English: This is the seventh reason why troops cannot be transferred.

古文：前中郎将尹就讨益州叛羌，益州谚曰： 虏来尚可，尹来杀我。 
现代文：从前，朝廷派中郎将尹就去讨伐益州的叛羌，益州有谚语说： 叛羌来了，还可；尹就来了，杀我。 
English: Once upon a time, a middle-ranking official named Yin went to Yizhou to recruit and subdue the rebellious people of Yizhou. A Yizhou proverb says: "When the enemy comes, I can bear it, but when Yin comes, I will be killed."

古文：后就征还，以兵付刺史张乔；乔因其将吏，旬月之间破殄寇虏。
现代文：其后，将尹就调回京都，把军队交付给益州刺史张乔。张乔依靠原有军队的将领和军吏，一个月之内，便将叛羌击破歼灭。
English: After that, Yin was transferred back to Kyoto, and the army was handed over to Zhang Qiao, the governor of Yizhou. Zhang Qiao relied on the generals and military officials of the original army, and defeated and annihilated the traitors within a month.

古文：此发将无益之效，州郡可任之验也。
现代文：这证明由朝廷派遣大将没有益处，而州郡地方官吏却足以胜任。
English: This is clear evidence that it is useless to send generals, but state and county officials can be appointed.

古文：宜更选有勇略仁惠任将帅者，以为刺史、太守，悉使共住交趾。
现代文：应该重新选派即勇敢而又有谋略，即仁惠而又可胜任将帅的人，担任州刺史和郡太守，命他们都驻守在交趾郡。
English: Those who are brave and resourceful, benevolent and competent as generals should be re-elected to serve as prefectural governor and county governor, and they should all be stationed in Jiaozi County.

古文：今日南兵单无谷，守既不足，战又不能，可一切徙其吏民，北依交趾，事静之后，乃命归本；还募蛮夷使自相攻，转输金帛以为其资；有能反间致头首者，许以封侯裂土之赏。
现代文：而今，日南郡兵力单薄，又无粮秣，守既守不住，战又不能战，可以暂时放弃它，先把官吏和人民迁徙到北方的交趾郡，等到乱事平定之后，再命他们返回日南郡。另外，招募和收买蛮夷，让他们互相攻杀，朝廷则供给金帛资助他们。如果有能够使用反间计离间敌人内部、斩杀蛮夷首领的，朝廷则许以封侯，赐以食邑。
English: Now, however, Nichinan County was thinly manned and had no provisions. It could not be defended and could not fight, so it could be temporarily abandoned. First, the officials and people were moved to Koji County in the north. After the turmoil was settled, they were ordered to return to Nichinan County. In addition, barbarians were recruited and bribed to attack and kill each other, and the imperial court provided gold ingots to support them. If anyone was able to use countermeasures to split the enemy from within and kill the barbarian leader, the imperial court would allow him to be a feudal lord and give him food.

古文：故并州刺史长沙祝良，性多勇决，又南阳张乔，前在益州有破虏之功，皆可任用。
现代文：前任并州刺史、长沙人祝良，勇敢果断；南阳人张乔，从前在益州建立过平定叛羌的功勋，他们都可以受到信任和重用。
English: Zhu Liang, a native of Changsha, who was formerly attached to Yizhou, has a very courageous and decisive nature, and Zhang Qiao, a native of Nanyang, who has previously defeated the enemy in Yizhou, can both be appointed.

古文：昔太宗就加魏尚为云中守，哀帝即拜龚舍为泰山守；宜即拜良等，便道之官。 
现代文：过去，汉文帝就在原地任命魏尚为云中郡太守，哀帝命使者到楚地拜授龚舍为泰山郡太守。应该就在原地拜授祝良等人，命他们直接前往交趾郡任职。 
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen appointed Wei Shang as the governor of Yunnan County in the same place, and the emissary of Emperor An's order went to Chudi to confer the position of the governor of Taishan County. Zhu Liang and others should be conferred in the same place, and they should be ordered to go directly to Koji County to serve.

古文：四府悉从固议，即拜祝良为九真太守，张乔为交趾刺史。
现代文：四府完全同意李固的意见。于是，顺帝在原地任命祝良为九真郡太守，张乔为交趾州刺史。
English: The four prefectures fully agreed with Li Gu's opinion. Therefore, Emperor Shun appointed Zhu Liang as the governor of Jiuzhen County and Zhang Qiao as the governor of Jiaozuo Province.

古文：乔至，开示慰诱，并皆降散。
现代文：张乔到任以后，对叛蛮开诚布公地进行安抚和诱劝，叛军全部投降或解散。
English: As soon as Zhang Qiao arrived, he made an open announcement, using the method of appeasing and enticing, so that all the enemy bandits surrendered and dispersed.

古文：良到九真，单车入贼中，设方略，招以威信，降者数万人，皆为良筑起府寺。
现代文：祝良到九真郡之后，单独乘车进入叛军大营，给他们指出生路，用威力和信誉进行招抚，叛军投降的有数万人，他们一同为祝良修筑郡太守府的官舍。
English: Zhu Liang went to Jiu Zhen, and the light-vehicle Jane went to the enemy, used strategy, attracted barbarians by force and integrity, and surrendered tens of thousands of people, all of whom built government offices for Zhu Liang.

古文：由是岭外复平。
现代文：从此，五岭以外地区恢复和平。
English: Since then, Lingwai has been pacified again.

古文：秋，八月，己未，司徒黄尚免。
现代文：秋季，八月己未，司徒黄尚被免官。
English: In the autumn, before August had passed, Siu Hoang was removed from his post.

古文：九月，己酉，以光禄勋长沙刘寿为司徒。
现代文：九月己酉，擢升光禄勋、长沙人刘寿为司徒。
English: In September, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order, and Changsha resident Liu Shou was promoted to the position of disciple.

古文：丙戌，令大将军、三公举刚毅、武猛、谋谟任将帅者各二人，特进、卿、校尉各一人。
现代文：丙戌，顺帝命大将军、三公向朝廷举荐刚毅、武猛、有谋略，可以担任将帅的人才，每人推荐二人；特进、九卿、校尉，每人推荐一人。
English: Hun Sen, Emperor Shun's great general, and the three princes recommended to the imperial court the man of fortitude, bravery, and strategy, who could serve as a general, each recommending two; Tejin, Jiuqing, and the lieutenant, each recommending one.

古文：初，尚书令左雄荐冀州刺史周举为尚书。
现代文：最初，尚书令左雄，推荐冀州刺史周举为尚书。
English: At first, Shang Shu ordered Zuo to recommend Jizhou Zhishi Zhou Ji as Shang Shu.

古文：既而雄为司隶校尉，举故冀州刺史冯直任将帅。
现代文：接着，左雄任司隶校尉，又推荐前任冀州刺史冯直有将帅之才。
English: Next, Zuo appointed Sili as a lieutenant, and also recommended the former Jizhou chief Feng Zhi to have the talent of a general.

古文：直尝坐臧受罪，举以此劾奏雄。
现代文：因冯直曾经犯过贪污罪，周举便就此弹劾左雄。
English: Because Feng Zhiang had once committed the crime of corruption, Zhou Jiu impeached Zuoxiong.

古文：雄曰： 诏书使我选武猛，不使我选清高。 
现代文：左雄说： 圣旨让我推荐武猛的人才，不是让我推荐品行清白高洁的人才。 
English: Zuo said, "The will of God is for me to recommend strong people, not for me to recommend people who are pure and virtuous.

古文：举曰： 诏书使君选武猛，不使君选贪污也。 
现代文：周举回答说： 圣旨是让你推荐武猛的人才，但也没有教你推荐犯有贪污罪的人。 
English: Zhou Ji replied, "The Holy Will instructs you to recommend strong talents, but it does not instruct you to recommend those who are guilty of corruption.

古文：雄曰： 进君，适所以自伐也。 
现代文：左雄又说： 我推荐了您，反受您的打击，恰恰是自作自受。 
English: Zuo also said, "I recommended you, but I was hit by you, and it was self-inflicted."

古文：举曰： 昔赵宣子任韩厥为司马，厥以军法戮宣子仆，宣子谓诸大夫曰： 可贺我矣！吾选厥也任其事。 
现代文：周举回答说： 过去，赵宣子任用韩厥为司马，韩厥却用军法将赵宣子的奴仆杀掉，赵宣子对各位大夫说： 你们应该向我祝贺，我推荐韩厥，他果然尽忠职守。 
English: Zhou Ji replied: In the past, Han Jue was appointed by Zhao Xuan Zi as his assistant, but Han Jue used military law to kill Zhao Xuan Zi's servant. Zhao Xuan Zi said to the doctors: You should congratulate me, I recommend Han Jue, he has indeed fulfilled his duties.

古文：今君不以举之不才误升诸朝，不敢阿君以为君羞；不寤君之意与宣子殊也。 
现代文：而今，承蒙您不嫌弃我没有才能，而误将我推荐到朝廷，所以，我不敢迎合您，让您蒙羞。可是，想不到您的看法和赵宣子完全不一样。 
English: Now, thanks to you, I am not ashamed to admit that I have no talent, and you have mistakenly recommended me to the Imperial Court. Therefore, I dare not pander to you and make you feel ashamed. However, it is inconceivable that your opinion is completely different from that of Zhao Xuanzi.

古文：雄悦，谢曰： 吾尝事冯直之父，又与直善；今宣光以此奏吾，是吾之过也！ 
现代文：左雄大为高兴，向周举道歉说： 我曾经做过冯直父亲的部属，又和冯直是好朋友。如今你因此而弹劾我，正是我的过错。 
English: Zuo Xiong was overjoyed and apologized to Zhou Jiu, saying, "I was once a subordinate of Feng Zhi's father and a good friend of Feng Zhi. Now you are impeaching me because of this, which is my fault.

古文：天下益以此贤之。
现代文：从此，天下的人对左雄更为尊敬。
English: Since then, people all over the world have more respect for Zuo.

古文：是时，宦官竞卖恩势，唯大长秋良贺清俭退厚。
现代文：这时，宦官倚仗皇帝的庞信，争相卖弄权势，唯有大长秋良贺清廉淡泊，谦让敦厚。
English: At this time, the eunuchs relied on the emperor's great faith and vied with each other to show off their power. Only the eldest, Qiu Lianghe, was unassuming and modest.

古文：及诏举武猛，贺独无所荐。
现代文：等到皇帝下诏，命各人推荐武力勇猛的人才时，唯独良贺没有举荐。
English: When the emperor issued an edict ordering everyone to recommend men of valor, only Liang He did not make a recommendation.

古文：帝问其故，对曰： 臣生自草茅，长于宫掖，既无知人之明，又未尝交加士类。
现代文：顺帝问他什么原因，良贺回答说： 我出生于荒野民间，在宫廷中长大，既没有识别人的聪明，又没有和有才能的人士交往。
English: When Emperor Shun asked him why, Liang He replied: "I was born in the wilderness among the common people, and grew up in the court. I did not have the wisdom to recognize people, nor did I associate with talented people.

古文：昔卫鞅因景监以见，有识知其不终。
现代文：过去，卫鞅由宦官景监推荐，有识之士就预见到他没有好结果。
English: From the avant-garde to the scene inspector, people with insight know that he will not have a good result.

古文：今得臣举者，匪荣伊辱，是以不敢！ 
现代文：现在，能得到我推荐的人，他不仅不会引以为荣，反而觉得是一种耻辱。因此我不敢举荐。 
English: Now, if someone gets a recommendation from me, it's not only not something to be proud of, it's something to be ashamed of, so I don't dare to recommend them.

古文：帝由是赏之。
现代文：顺帝从此赏识良贺。
English: Emperor Shun appreciated Ryoga from then on.

古文：冬，十月，烧当羌那离等三千馀骑寇金城，校尉马贤击破之。
现代文：冬季，十月，烧当羌人首领那离等，率领三千余骑兵，侵犯金城郡，护羌校尉马贤将其击破。
English: In the winter, in October, when the leader of the Xiongnu, Na Liu, led more than 3,000 cavalry to invade Jincheng County, Colonel Ma Xian defeated him.

古文：十二月，戊戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月戊戌朔，出现日食。
English: In December, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：大将军商以小黄门南阳曹节等用事于中，遣子冀、不疑与为交友；而宦言忌其宠，反欲陷之。
现代文：大将军梁商因为小黄门、南阳人曹节等在宫中当权，就命自己的儿子梁冀、梁不疑和曹节等结交。而其他宦官忌妒曹节受宠，反而想要陷害他。
English: General Liang Shang ordered his sons Liang Ji and Liang Doubtless to make friends with Cao Jie because Xiao Huangmen and Cao Jie of Nanyang were in power in the palace. Other eunuchs were jealous of Cao Jie's favour and wanted to frame him.

古文：中常侍张逵、蘧政、杨定等与左右连谋，共谮商及中常侍曹腾、孟贲，云： 欲征诸王子，图议废立，请收商等案罪。 
现代文：中常侍张逵、蘧政、杨定等，和他们左右的亲信勾结密谋，一同向顺帝诬告梁商和中常侍曹腾、孟贲，说： 梁商等准备征召诸王的儿子前来京都洛阳，图谋废黜皇上，另立新的皇帝，请将梁商等收捕治罪。 
English: Liang Shang and Liang Shang's attendants, Cao Teng and Meng Qi, said to Shun, "Liang Shang and his attendants are preparing to recruit the sons of kings to come to Kyoto and Luoyang in an attempt to depose the emperor and establish a new emperor. Please arrest Liang Shang and his attendants and bring them to justice."

古文：帝曰： 大将军父子，我所亲，腾、贲，我所爱，必无是，但汝曹共妒之耳。 
现代文：顺帝说： 大将军父子是我所亲信的，曹腾、孟贲是我所宠爱的，一定没有这回事，只是你们都忌妒他们罢了。 
English: Shun Di said, "The general father and son are my trusted ones, Cao Teng and Mencius are my favorites, there must be no such thing, but you are all just jealous of them."

古文：逵等知言不用，惧迫，遂出，矫诏收缚腾、贲于省中。
现代文：张逵等知道他们的谗言没有被顺帝采纳，恐惧杀身大祸降临到自己头上，于是退下，假传圣旨，在宫中逮捕曹腾和孟贲。
English: Zhang Xuan and the others knew that their reproach had not been accepted by Emperor Shun, and they feared that a great calamity would befall them, so they retreated, falsely transmitted the sacred edict, and arrested Cao Teng and Meng Yao in the palace.

古文：帝闻，震怒，敕宦者李歙急呼腾、贲释之；收逵等下狱。
现代文：顺帝闻讯大发雷霆，命宦官李歙急速传命释放曹腾、孟贲。并将张逵等人逮捕下狱。
English: When Emperor Shun heard the news, he was furious, and ordered the eunuch Li Qian to quickly release Cao Teng and Meng Qian. He also arrested and imprisoned Zhang Qian and others.

古文：永和四年
现代文：永和四年
English: The Year of Eternal Peace

古文：春，正月，庚辰，逵等伏诛。
现代文：春季，正月庚辰，张逵等人伏法被诛。
English: In the spring, Geng Chen, Zhang Ye and others were arrested.

古文：事连弘农太守张凤、安平相杨皓，皆坐死。
现代文：弘农郡太守张凤和安平国相杨皓，因被张逵等人牵连，都坐罪处死。
English: Zhang Feng, the governor of Hongnong County, and Yang Qi, the Anping Minister of State, were both sentenced to death for being implicated by Zhang Qi and others.

古文：辞所连染，延及在位大臣。
现代文：受口供牵连的，还涉及到在位的朝廷大臣。
English: Those implicated by confessions also involved the reigning ministers of the Imperial Court.

古文：商惧多侵枉，乃上疏曰： 《春秋》之义，功在元帅，罪止首恶。
现代文：梁商担心冤枉许多无辜者，于是上书说： 按照《春秋》上面所讲的道理，功勋归于元帅，罪恶仅惩办首恶。
English: Liang Shang was worried that he had wronged many innocent people, so he wrote a letter saying: According to the above-mentioned principle of "Spring and Autumn," the merit belongs to the marshal, and the crime only punishes the first evil.

古文：大狱一起，无辜者众，死囚久系，纤微成大，非所以顺迎和气，平政成化也。
现代文：大狱一起，无辜受害的人将会很多，身犯死罪的囚犯长久关押的监狱，细微小事会牵连成大事，这样不能顺应和气，治平政事，成就教化。
English: In a large prison, there will be many innocent victims. In a prison where prisoners who have committed capital crimes are detained for a long time, minor things will be entangled into major events. In this way, it is impossible to conform to harmony, regulate political affairs, and achieve enlightenment.

古文：宜早讫章，以止逮捕之烦。 
现代文：应该及早结案，停止逮捕的烦扰。 
English: The case should be closed as soon as possible and the hassle of arrest should be stopped.

古文：帝纳之，罪止坐者。
现代文：顺帝采纳，治罪仅限于当事人犯。
English: Adopted by Emperor Shun, the punishment is limited to the offender.

古文：二月，帝以商少子虎贲中郎将不疑为步兵校尉。
现代文：二月，顺帝任命梁商的小儿子虎贲中郎将梁不疑为步兵校尉。
English: In February, Emperor Shun appointed Liang Shang's youngest son, Hu Rong Zhong Lang, who undoubtedly made Liang an infantry lieutenant.

古文：商上书辞曰： 不疑童孺，猥处成人之位。
现代文：梁商上书辞让说： 梁不疑是个孩子，竟担任成人才可以担任的官职。
English: Liang Shang said in his resignation letter: Liang is undoubtedly a child, but he holds an official position that only adults can hold.

古文：昔晏平仲辞鄁殿以守其富，公仪休不受鱼飧以定其位。
现代文：过去，晏婴辞让殿的土地，用来保全自己的财富；公仪休不接受别人的赠鱼，用来保全自己的地位。
English: In the past, emperors used to give away land to preserve their wealth, and emperors did not accept gifts of fish from others to preserve their status.

古文：臣虽不才，亦愿固福禄于圣世！ 
现代文：我虽然没有才能，也希望在圣主之世保全我的财富和地位。 
English: Although I have no talent, I hope to preserve my wealth and position in the Lord's kingdom.

古文：上乃以不疑为侍中、奉车都尉。
现代文：于是，顺帝任命梁不疑为侍中、奉车都尉。
English: As a result, Emperor Shun undoubtedly appointed Liang as a chamberlain and lieutenant of the imperial carriage.

古文：三月，乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：三月乙亥，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In March, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：烧当羌那离等复反；夏，四月，癸卯，护羌校尉马贤讨斩之，获首虏千二百馀级。
现代文：烧当羌人首领那离等再次反叛。夏季，四月癸卯，护羌校尉马贤率军进行讨伐，将那离斩首，并斩杀和俘虏一千二百余人。
English: In the summer, at the beginning of April, Colonel Ma Xian led the troops in a crusade, decapitating Na Xiang, and killing and capturing more than 1,200 people.

古文：戊午，赦天下。
现代文：戊午，大赦天下。
English: At noon, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：五月，戊胡，封故济北惠王寿子安为济北王。
现代文：五月戊辰，将已故济北惠王刘寿的儿子刘安封为济北王。
English: In May, Wu Chen made Liu An, the son of the late Jibei Hui King Liu Shou, the king of Jibei.

古文：秋，八月，太原旱。
现代文：秋季，八月，太原郡发生旱灾。
English: In autumn, August, Taiyuan County was hit by a drought.

古文：永和五年
现代文：永和五年
English: The 5th Year of Yonghe

古文：春，二月，戊申，京师地震。
现代文：春季，二月戊申，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In the spring, in February, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：南匈奴句龙王吾斯、车纽等反，寇西河；招诱右贤王合兵围美稷，杀朔方、代郡长吏。
现代文：南匈奴句龙王吾斯和车纽等反叛，攻打西河郡，并引诱右贤王，合兵包围美稷，杀害朔方郡、代郡的地方官吏。
English: The Southern Xiongnu, led by the Dragon King Wuxi and the Dragon King Chenyu, rebelled, attacked the West River County, and lured the Righteous King to join forces to encircle Meizhou, killing the local officials of Shuofang County and Deyang County.

古文：夏，五月，度辽将军马续与中郎将梁并等发边兵及羌、胡合二万馀人掩击，破之。
现代文：夏季，五月，度辽将军马续和护匈奴中郎将梁并等征发边防军及羌人、胡人的军队，共二万余人，向南匈奴叛军发动突然袭击，将其击破。
English: In the summer, in May, General Du Liao Ma Zhi and the Xiongnu's protector, General Liang, both conscripted and dispatched the border guards and the armies of the Xiongnu and Hu people, a total of more than 20,000 people, to launch a surprise attack on the southern Xiongnu rebels and defeat them.

古文：吾斯等复更屯聚，攻没城邑。
现代文：吾斯等收拾残部，又重新聚集起来，攻陷城邑。
English: We picked up the pieces, regrouped, and stormed the city.

古文：天子遣使责让单于；单于本不预谋，乃脱帽避帐，诣并谢罪。
现代文：顺帝派使者严辞谴责南匈奴单于。单于休利本来没有参与吾斯等人的反叛阴谋，但因受到朝廷的谴责，感到惶恐不安，于是摘下帽子，离开营帐，亲自跑到梁并那里去认罪。
English: Emperor Shun sent an envoy to sternly denounce the Southern Huns to Shan Yu. Shan Yu Xuli had not participated in the rebel plot of us and others, but because he was condemned by the court, he felt frightened and uneasy, so he took off his hat, left the camp, and personally ran to Liang and confessed there.

古文：并以病征，五原太守陈龟代为中郎将。
现代文：正在这时，梁并因病被朝廷召回京都洛阳，任命五原郡太守陈龟接替护匈奴中郎将。
English: As Liang was conscripted, Chen Gui, the 5th Dalai Lama, took over as the second-in-command.

古文：龟以单于不能制下，逼迫单于及其弟左贤王皆令自杀。
现代文：陈龟认为单于不能控制部下，于是逼迫单于及他的弟弟左贤王一道自杀。
English: Chen Zhe believed that Zhan Yu could not control his subordinates, so he forced Zhan Yu and his brother Zuoxian Wang to commit suicide together.

古文：龟又欲徙单于近亲于内郡，而降者遂更狐疑。
现代文：陈龟还打算将单于的近亲都迁徙到内地各郡，因而已经降附的南匈奴部众更加狐疑不安。
English: Chen Zhe also wanted to move the close relatives of Shan Yu to the inland counties, which made the surrendering people even more suspicious.

古文：龟坐下狱，免。
现代文：结果，陈龟坐罪下狱，被免官。
English: As a result, Chen Kame was sent to prison for his crime and dismissed from his post.

古文：大将军商上表曰： 匈奴寇畔，自知罪极。
现代文：大将军梁商上书说： 匈奴背叛，四处劫掠，自知罪大恶极。
English: The great general Liang Shang wrote: The Huns betrayed and plundered everywhere, and they knew that their crime was extremely evil.

古文：穷鸟困兽，皆知救死，况种类繁炽，不可单尽。
现代文：穷鸟和困兽都知道救死，何况匈奴种族繁盛，不可能消灭净尽。
English: Both poor birds and beasts know how to save their lives. What's more, the Xiongnu race is flourishing and cannot be wiped out completely.

古文：今转运日增，三军疲苦，虚内给外，非中国之利。
现代文：如今粮秣的转运日益增加，军队疲劳艰苦，挖空内地，填补边疆，不是中国之福。
English: Nowadays, the transshipment of grain and straw is increasing day by day. The army is fatigued and hard-working, hollowing out the inland and filling the frontier. This is not a blessing for China.

古文：度辽将军马续，素有谋谟，且典边日久，深晓兵要；每得续书，与臣策合。
现代文：度辽将军马续素有谋略，并且主管边防时间已经很久，深晓用兵的要术。每次接到马续的书信，他的谋略总与我相合。
English: Du Liao's General Ma Congu always has a strategy, and has been in charge of border defense for a long time, and knows the essentials of using soldiers. Every time I receive a letter from Ma Congu, his strategy always coincides with mine.

古文：宜令续深沟高壁，以恩信招降，宣示购赏，明为期约。
现代文：应命马续深挖壕沟，高筑壁垒，用恩德信义招抚归降，公布悬赏条例，明确规定期限。
English: In response to the order, they successively dug deep trenches, built high barriers, used grace and sincerity to entice surrender, published reward regulations, and clearly stipulated the deadline.

古文：如此，则丑类可服，国家无事矣。 
现代文：这样，匈奴就可以归附，国家就可以无事了！ 
English: In this way, these races can be subdued, and the country can be safe.

古文：帝从之，乃诏续招降畔虏。
现代文：顺帝采纳，于是下诏命马续招降反叛的匈奴。
English: The emperor accepted his opinion, and issued an edict to recruit rebellious Huns.

古文：商又移书续等曰： 中国安宁，忘战日久。
现代文：梁商又给马续等人发送文书说： 中国境内安宁，忘掉战争的时间已经很久。
English: Liang Shang also sent a letter to Ma Cui and others saying: Central Plains is stable, and it has been a long time since the war was forgotten.

古文：良骑野合，交锋接矢，决胜当时，戎狄之所长而中国之所短也；强弩乘城，坚营固守，以待其衰，中国之所长而戎狄之所短也。
现代文：善骑良马进行夜袭，交锋时迅速放箭，当时一决胜负，这是匈奴的长处，而是中国的短处。可是，利用强弩，登城守卫，深沟坚壁，固守军营，等待敌人气势衰竭，这是中国的长处，而中匈奴的短处。
English: Riding a good horse well for a night attack, shooting arrows quickly when fighting, and winning a decisive battle at that time are the strengths of the Xiongnu, but the weaknesses of China. However, using a strong anchor, guarding the city, digging a strong wall, holding the camp, and waiting for the enemy's momentum to fail are the strengths of China, but the weaknesses of the Chinese and the Xiongnu.

古文：宜务先所长以观其变，设购开赏，宣示反悔，勿贪小功以乱大谋。 
现代文：应该先发挥我们的长处，观察敌人的变化，设立奖赏，宣布朝廷的招降之意，启发匈奴人的反悔之心，不要贪图小功而乱大谋。 
English: We should first give play to our strengths, observe the changes in the enemy, set up rewards, announce the intention of the imperial court to invite surrender, inspire the Huns' remorse, and do not covet small achievements and make big plans.

古文：于是右贤王部抑鞮等万三千口皆诣续降。
现代文：于是，右贤王的部下抑等一万三千人，都向马续投降。
English: As a result, King Ugyen's subordinates, numbering 13,000, all surrendered to Mahoryu.

古文：己丑晦，日有食之。
现代文：己丑晦，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs.

古文：初，那离等既平，朝廷以来机为并州刺史，刘秉为凉州刺史。
现代文：当初，烧当羌人首领那离等反叛被平定后，朝廷任命来机为并州刺史，刘秉为凉州刺史。
English: At the beginning, after the rebellion led by the leader of the Burnt Dangshan people, Naxi, was quelled, the imperial court appointed the opportune time to be the history of the annexation of the state, and Liu Bing to be the history of Liangzhou.

古文：机等天性虐刻，多所扰发；且冻、傅难种羌遂反，攻金城，与杂种羌、胡大寇三辅，杀害长吏。
现代文：来机等人天性暴虐刻薄，他们多方侵扰，大量征调，使羌族人民不堪忍受。于是且冻种和傅难种羌人反叛，攻打金城郡，又与其他种的羌人、胡人联合，大举侵犯三辅地区，杀害地方官吏。
English: When they had the opportunity, they were cruel and cruel by nature. They intruded in many ways and made a large number of conscription, which made the Dai people unbearable. Therefore, the Jiezong and Fuanzuo Dai people rebelled and attacked Jincheng County, and combined with other kinds of Dai people and Hu people to invade the Sanfu area and kill local officials.

古文：机、秉并坐征。
现代文：来机、刘秉都坐罪，被调回京都洛阳。
English: When the opportunity came, Liu Bing was conscripted together with the criminal.

古文：于是拜马贤为征西将军，以骑都尉耿叔为副，将左右羽林五校士及诸州郡兵十万人屯汉阳。
现代文：于是任命马贤为征西将军，骑都尉耿叔为他的副手，率左右羽林五校士，以及各州郡郡兵，共十万人，屯驻汉阳郡。
English: Therefore, he appointed Ma Xian as the general to conquer the west, and the cavalry captain Geng Shu as his deputy, and he led the five school soldiers of Yulin, and the soldiers of each state and county, a total of 100,000 people, stationed in Hanyang County.

古文：九月，令扶风、汉阳筑陇道坞三百所，置屯兵。
现代文：九月，命右扶风、汉阳修筑陇道坞壁三百座，每座坞壁都派兵把守。
English: In September, Fu Feng and Hanyang were ordered to build 300 earthen barriers for the defense of Lushan Road, and soldiers were stationed there.

古文：辛未，太尉王龚以老病罢。
现代文：辛未，太尉王龚因年老有病被罢官。
English: Xin Wei, Lieutenant Wang Qi was dismissed due to old age and illness.

古文：且冻羌寇武都，烧陇关。
现代文：且冻羌人攻打武都，焚烧陇关。
English: And the frozen invaders plundered the capital and burned Yingguan.

古文：壬午，以太常桓焉为太尉。
现代文：壬午，擢升太常桓焉为太尉。
English: At that time, he was promoted to the rank of Second Lieutenant.

古文：匈奴句龙王吾斯等立车纽为单于，东引乌桓，西收羌、胡等数万人攻破京兆虎牙营，杀上郡都尉及军司马，遂寇掠并、凉、幽、冀四州。
现代文：南匈奴句龙王吾斯等，拥立车纽为单于，东方和乌桓联合，西方集结羌人、胡人，约数万人，攻破京兆虎牙大营，杀死上郡都尉和军司马，于是劫掠并州、凉州、幽州和冀州。
English: Southern Huns, such as the Dragon King Us, held the cogwheel alone, the East and Wuhuan united, and the West gathered about tens of thousands of Xiongren and Hu people to break through the Jingzhao Huya camp, kill the Shangguan captain and the army secretary Ma, and then loot and annex the state, Liangzhou, Yuzhou and Jizhou.

古文：乃徙西河治离石，上郡治夏阳，朔方治五原。
现代文：东汉朝廷便将西河郡太守府迁往离石，上郡太守府迁往夏阳，朔方郡太守府迁往五原。
English: As a result, the imperial court moved the county seat of Xihe to Shishi, the county seat of Shang to Xiayang, and the county seat of Shuofang to Wuhuan.

古文：十二月，遣使匈奴中郎将张耽将幽州、乌桓诸郡营兵击车纽等，战于马邑，斩首三千级，获生口甚众。
现代文：十二月，派遣使匈奴中郎将张耽率领幽州乌桓部众及各郡的地方军，进击车纽等，在马邑会战，斩杀匈奴军三千人，俘虏了很多人。
English: In December, he dispatched Zhang Tan to lead the Yuzhou Wuhuan troops and the local troops of various counties to attack the carts and other vehicles, and fought in Mayi, killing three thousand Huns and capturing many people.

古文：车纽乞降，而吾斯犹率其部曲与乌桓寇钞。
现代文：车纽请求投降，而吾期仍率领其部众跟乌桓结合，继续劫掠。
English: Chenyu requested to surrender, but I still led his subordinates to unite with Wuhuan and continued to plunder.

古文：初，上命马贤讨西羌，大将军商以为贤老，不如太中大夫宋汉；帝不从。
现代文：最初，顺帝命马贤率军讨伐西羌，大将军梁商认为马贤年纪已老，不如任命太中大夫宋汉，顺帝没有听从。
English: At first, Emperor Shun ordered Ma Xian to lead the army to fight against Xicheng. General Liang Shang thought that Ma Xian was too old, and it would be better to appoint the Grand Vizier Song Han. Emperor Shun did not listen.

古文：汉，由之子也。
现代文：宋汉，即宋由的儿子。
English: Song Han, the son of Song Yu.

古文：贤到军，稽留不进。
现代文：马贤到军中上任以后，一直停留不肯前进。
English: After Ma Xian took up his post in the military, he refused to move forward.

古文：武都太守马融上疏曰： 今杂种诸羌转相钞盗，宜及其未并，亟遣深入，破其支党；而马贤等处处留滞。
现代文：武都郡太守马融向朝廷上书说： 如今西羌诸种部众互相攻劫抢掠，应该趁他们还没有汇合到一起，迅速派兵深入叛军，击破各个支党，可是马贤等却处处逗留拖延。
English: Ma Rong, the governor of Wudu County, wrote to the imperial court, "Nowadays, the various tribes in Xidi are attacking and plundering each other. It is necessary to take advantage of the fact that they have not yet come together to quickly send troops deep into the rebel army and break through the various branches, but Ma Xian and others are delaying everywhere.

古文：羌、胡百里望尘，千里听声，今逃匿避回，漏出其后，则必侵寇三辅，为民大害。
现代文：羌人和胡人，在百里以外，即可望见他们扬起的尘土；在千里以外，即可听到他们行军的声音。他们躲开汉军的锋芒，避免正面冲突，绕到汉军的背后，直接侵犯和劫掠三辅地区，给人民带来很大的祸害。
English: The Xiongnu and Hu people, a hundred miles away, you can see the dust they raise; a thousand miles away, you can hear the sound of their marching. They evade the edge of the Chinese army, avoid head-on conflict, go around the back of the Chinese army, directly invade and plunder the Sanfu area, and bring great harm to the people.

古文：臣愿请贤所不可，用关东兵五千，裁假部队之号，尽力率厉，埋根、行首以先吏士；三旬之中，必克破之。
现代文：我请求把马贤认为不能作战的关东地区的军队五千人交给我，仅借用部队的称号，我愿尽力率领和激励他们，誓不后退，为官兵带头，在三十天之内，必然可以打败叛羌。
English: I request that the five thousand troops in the Kanto region that Ma Xian believes cannot fight be handed over to me. Using only the title of the troops, I am willing to do my best to lead and inspire them, vow not to retreat, take the lead for the officers and soldiers, and within thirty days, I will surely defeat the traitors.

古文：臣又闻吴起为将，暑不张盖，寒不披裘；今贤野次垂幕，珍肴杂遝，儿子侍妾，事与古反。
现代文：我又听说，吴起为将，夏天再炎热，也不张开伞盖；冬天再寒冷，也不穿皮衣。而今，马贤在野外垂挂帐幕，珍味佳肴杂陈，儿子、侍妾侍奉左右，事事和古代名将相反。
English: I also heard that Wu Qixing was a general. In summer, when it was hot, he did not open his umbrella; in winter, when it was cold, he did not wear a fur coat. Now, Ma Xian hangs a tent in the open air, delicacies and delicacies are mixed, and his son and concubine serve around, which is the opposite of the ancient generals.

古文：臣惧贤等专守一城，言攻于西而羌出于东，且其将士将不堪命，必有高克溃叛之变也。 
现代文：我恐怕马贤等专守一个城池，声称攻打西方，而羌人却在东方出现，使得他部下的将领和士兵不堪奔命，必将有同郑国高克一样溃败反叛的变故。 
English: I'm afraid that Ma Xian and others only guard one city, claiming to attack the West, while the Xiongnu appear in the East, making the generals and soldiers of his subordinates unable to run for their lives. There will surely be the same change of defeating the rebellion as Zheng Guoguo.

古文：安定人皇甫规亦见贤不恤军事，审其必败，上书言状。
现代文：与此同时，安定人皇甫规也发现马贤不忧虑军事，估计他一定会失败，于是上书汇报情况。
English: At the same time, the stable person, Emperor Fu Rong, also found that Ma Xian was not worried about the military, and estimated that he would certainly fail, so he sent a letter to report the situation.

古文：朝廷皆不从。
现代文：朝廷都没有采纳。
English: Neither was accepted by the Imperial Court.

古文：永和六年
现代文：永和六年
English: Six years of peace

古文：春，正月，丙子，征西将军马贤与且冻羌战于射姑山，贤军败；贤及二子皆没，东、西羌遂大合。
现代文：春季，正月丙子，征西将军马贤和且冻羌人在射姑山会战，马贤的军队大败。马贤和他的两个儿子全都陈亡。于是，东羌和西羌大规模地汇合。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the general of the Western Expedition, Ma Xian, and the people of Jieyuan fought in Shigu Mountain. Ma Xian's army was defeated. Ma Xian and his two sons were all killed. Therefore, the Eastern and Western Eras converged on a large scale.

古文：闰月，巩唐羌寇陇西，遂及三辅，烧园陵，杀掠吏民。
现代文：闰月，巩唐羌人攻打陇西郡，军锋到达三辅地区，焚烧西汉历代皇帝坟墓陵园，屠杀劫掠官吏和人民。
English: In the leap month, the Gong and Tang clansmen attacked Shaanxi County, and the military front reached the Sanfu area, burning the tombs and cemeteries of the emperors of the Western Han Dynasty, slaughtering and looting officials and people.

古文：二月，丁巳，有星孛于营室。
现代文：二月丁巳，有异星出现在营室星座。
English: In February, a strange star appeared in the camp constellation.

古文：三月，上巳，大将军商大会宾客，宴于雒水；酒阑，继以《韭露之歌》。
现代文：三月上巳日，大将军梁商在洛水之滨大宴宾客。酒席将散时，又演奏常用来作挽歌的《薤露之歌》。
English: On the last day of March, the great general Liang Shang was a guest at a grand banquet on the banks of the Luoshui River. When the banquet was about to end, he played the "Song of Dew," which is often used as an elegy.

古文：从事中郎周举闻之，叹曰： 此所谓哀乐失时，非其所也，殃将及乎！ 
现代文：从事中郎周举听到后，叹息说： 这正是所谓的哀乐不合时，歌唱得不合场所，难道祸殃将要降临了吗？ 
English: After listening to Zhonglang Zhouyu, he sighed and said: This is exactly the so-called sorrow and joy at the wrong time, singing at the wrong place, is the disaster about to come?

古文：武都太守赵冲追击巩唐羌，斩首四百馀级，降二千馀人。
现代文：武都郡太守赵冲追击巩唐羌人，斩杀四百余人，招降二千余人。
English: Zhao Chong, the governor of Wudu County, chased Gong Tang, killed more than four hundred people and recruited more than two thousand people.

古文：诏冲督河西四郡兵为节度。
现代文：顺帝下诏，命赵冲督率河西四郡的地方军队，负责节制。
English: The imperial edict asked Inspector Zhao Chong to command the troops of the four counties.

古文：安定上计掾皇甫规上疏曰： 臣比年以来，数陈便宜：羌戎未动，策其将反；马贤始出，知其必败。误中之言，在可考校。
现代文：安定郡上计掾皇甫规上书说： 我近年以来，曾经多次向陛下提出建议。当羌人尚未发动时，我预计他们将要反叛；马坚统率大军刚开始出发时，我观察到他必然失败；要是有人认为这是侥幸说中的意见，那么可以进行查考核对。
English: In a letter to the Emperor Fu Jian of Anding County, he said: I have repeatedly made suggestions to His Majesty in recent years. When the Xiong people have not yet launched, I expect them to rebel; when Ma Jian led the army to start, I observed that he would inevitably fail; if someone thinks that this is a chance opinion, then it can be checked and verified.

古文：臣每惟贤等拥众四年，未有成功，县师之费，且百亿计，出于平民，回入奸吏。故江湖之人，群为盗贼，青、徐荒饥，襁负流散。
现代文：我每每想到，马贤等人统军四年，没有得到成功，出兵远征的费用，已将近一百亿，这些经费，虽然出自齐民百姓，却都流入贪官污吏之手，所以，江湖之人群起而为盗贼，青州和徐州一片饥荒，百姓背负小孩，四散逃亡。
English: I often think that Ma Xian and others united the army for four years, but did not succeed. The cost of the military expedition has been nearly ten billion. These funds, although from the Qimin people, have all flowed into the hands of corrupt officials. Therefore, the people of the rivers and lakes have become thieves. There is a famine in Qingzhou and Xuzhou. People are carrying children and fleeing everywhere.

古文：夫羌戎溃叛，不由承平，皆因边将失于绥御，乘常守安则加侵暴，苟竞小利则致大害，微胜则虚张首级，军败则隐匿不言。
现代文：羌人之所以反叛，不是由于天下太平而引起的，全是因为守边将帅不懂安抚治理之道，对于平常安分守己的羌人，则加以虐待，只贪图小利，终于招致大祸。获得微小的胜利，则向朝廷虚报斩杀人头的数量；打了败仗，便隐瞒不上报。
English: The reason why the Xiongnu rebelled was not caused by the world being at peace, it was all due to the fact that the commander of the frontier did not know how to pacify and govern. For the Xiongnu, who usually kept to themselves, he abused them, coveted small profits, and finally caused a great disaster. For a small victory, he falsely reported the number of heads cut off to the imperial court; when he lost the battle, he concealed it and did not report it.

古文：军士劳怨，困于猾吏，进不得快战以徼功，退不得温饱以全命，饿死沟渠，暴骨中原；徒见王师之出，不闻振旅之声。
现代文：战士辛苦怨愤，受制于奸猾的官吏，进不能速战以立功，退不得温饱以保全性命，饿死在沟渠里，尸骨暴露在原野之中。
English: The soldiers are hard-working and resentful, constrained by treacherous officials, unable to fight quickly to make merit, unable to maintain food and clothing to save their lives, starved to death in the ditch, and their bones are exposed in the wilderness.

古文：酋豪泣血，惊惧生变，是以安不能久，叛则经年，臣所以搏手扣心而增叹者也！
现代文：只看见朝廷的军队出塞御敌，却听不到他们凯旋归来的消息。羌人的首领极其悲痛地无声哭泣，非常惧怕会发生意外的变故，所以，不能保持长期的安定，一旦起兵反叛，就要经年累月。我所以搓手捶胸，叹息不已，就是这个原因。
English: I only saw the imperial army go out to defeat the enemy, but did not hear the news of their triumphant return. The leaders of the Xiongnu people cried silently with great sorrow, very afraid of unexpected changes, so they could not maintain long-term stability, and once they rebelled, it would take years and years. That is why I rubbed my hands together and sighed.

古文：愿假臣两营、二郡屯列坐食之兵五千，出其不意，与赵冲共相首尾。
现代文：我请求陛下，将扶风雍营和京兆虎牙营两营以及安定、陇西两郡暂时没有战斗任务的五千士兵借拨给我，我将对羌人发动出其不意的攻击，和赵冲前后呼应。
English: I request Your Majesty to lend me the two battalions of the Fufeng Yong Camp and the Beijing Zhaohua Camp, as well as the five thousand soldiers from the two counties of Ding'an and Shaanxi who do not have a combat mission for the time being. I will launch a surprise attack on the Xiang people, echoing Zhao Chong.

古文：土地山谷，臣所晓习；兵势巧便，臣已更之；可不烦方寸之印，尺帛之赐，高可以涤患，下可以纳降。
现代文：羌人地区的土地和山谷等地理形势，我素来很熟悉，用兵的战略和战术，我也已有经验。用不着一寸见方的印信，也用不着赏赐一尺布帛，最好的结果是铲除祸患，最低限度也可以使羌人降服。
English: I have always been familiar with the geographical situation of the land and valleys in the Xiang people's area, and I have experience in the strategy and tactics of using soldiers. There is no need for an inch-square seal letter, nor is it necessary to reward a foot of cloth. The best result is to eradicate the scourge, and at a minimum, the Xiang people can be subdued.

古文：若谓臣年少、官轻，不足用者，凡诸败将，非官爵之不高，年齿之不迈。
现代文：如果认为我年轻，官位又低，不足以任用，可那些战败的将帅，并不是官爵不高，年龄不老。
English: If you think that I am young and my official rank is too low to be appointed, then those defeated generals are not low-ranking and old.

古文：臣不胜至诚，没死自陈！ 
现代文：我以万分至诚，冒着死罪向陛下陈述自己的见解！ 
English: With the utmost sincerity, I risk the death penalty to present my opinion to His Majesty!

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：顺帝不能采纳。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：庚子，司空郭虔免。
现代文：庚子，司空郭虔被免官。
English: On the 16th, Secretary Guo Guoqian was relieved of his duties.

古文：丙午，以太仆赵戒为司空。
现代文：丙午，擢升太仆赵戒为司空。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Zhao Jie was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：夏，使匈奴中郎将张耽、度辽将军马续率鲜卑到谷城，击乌桓于通天山，大破之。
现代文：夏季，使匈奴中郎将张耽、度辽将军马续率领鲜卑部众到达城，在通天山进击乌桓，乌桓大败。
English: In the summer, the Xiongnu leader Zhang Tan and the general Du Liao led the fresh troops to the city and attacked Wuhuan in Tongtian Mountain. Wuhuan was defeated.

古文：巩唐羌寇北地。北地太守贾福与赵冲击之，不利。
现代文：巩唐羌人攻打北地郡，北地郡太守贾福和赵冲率军迎战，失利。
English: Gong Tang's troops attacked Beidai County. Beidai County Governor Jia Fu and Zhao Chong led their troops into battle, but were defeated.

古文：秋，八月，乘氏忠侯梁商病笃，敕子冀等曰： 吾生无以辅益朝廷，死何可耗费帑藏！
现代文：秋季，八月，乘氏侯梁商病重，告诫他的儿子梁冀等人说： 我活着的时候，没能辅佐朝廷，死后怎可耗费国家库藏？
English: In the autumn, in August, when Hou Liang Shang fell seriously ill, he admonished his son Liang Ji and others, saying, "When I was alive, I was unable to assist the imperial court. After my death, how can I spend the national treasury?

古文：衣衾、饭含、玉匣、珠贝之属，何益朽骨！
现代文：装殓的衣服单被，放在口中的含饭含玉，用作葬服的金缕玉衣，以及珠宝贝壳之类东西，对死人又有什么益处？
English: What are the benefits to the dead of such things as decorated clothes and sheets, rice and jade placed in the mouth, jade clothes used as funeral clothes, and jewel shells?

古文：百僚劳扰，纷华道路，只增尘垢耳。
现代文：劳累和骚扰文武百官，一路上弄得繁华盛丽，只是增加尘土和污垢罢了，应该都加以谢绝。 
English: It is only adding to the dirt and grime, and should be rejected.

古文：宜皆辞之。 
现代文：丙辰，梁商去世，顺帝亲来吊丧。
English: Cixin, Liang Shang passed away, Shun Di himself came to pay his respects.

古文：丙辰，薨；帝亲临丧。诸子欲从其诲，朝廷不听，赐以东园秘器、银镂、黄肠、玉匣。
现代文：他的儿子们准备遵照遗嘱来办理丧事，朝廷不许，赏赐东园制作的葬具一副，棺用白银雕花，椁用黄心柏木，以及玉衣一件。
English: His sons are preparing to carry out the funeral in accordance with the will, and the court does not allow them to do anything else, awarding a pair of funerary tools made by Dongyuan, a coffin with silver carved flowers, a coffin with yellow heart cypress wood, and a jade dress.

古文：及葬，赐轻车、介士，中宫亲送。
现代文：等到安葬时，又派武装士兵驾兵车护送。
English: When it was time for the burial, armed soldiers were sent to escort the cortege.

古文：帝至宣阳亭，瞻望车骑。
现代文：皇后梁亲自送灵。顺帝到宣阳亭，遥望丧葬车队。
English: Empress Liang personally sent the soul. Emperor Shun went to Xuanyang Pavilion and watched the funeral motorcade from afar.

古文：壬戌，以河南尹、乘氏侯梁冀为大将军，冀弟侍中不疑为河南伊。
现代文：壬戌，擢升河南尹、乘氏侯梁冀为大将军；梁冀的弟弟梁不疑为河南尹。
English: Rinchen was promoted to Henan Yin, and Liang Jie was promoted to general; Liang Jie's younger brother Liang was undoubtedly Henan Yin.

古文：臣光曰：成帝不能选任贤俊，委政舅家，可谓暗矣；犹知王立之不材，弃而不用。
现代文：臣司马光曰：汉成帝不能选任贤能，把政权交给舅父家族，可谓昏庸。但他总还知道王立没有才能，摒弃不用。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said, "Han Chengdi couldn't choose a virtuous person, so he handed over the power to his uncle's family, which can be described as dull. However, he always knew that Wang Li didn't have talent, so he discarded him."

古文：顺帝援大柄，授之后族，梁冀顽嚚凶暴，著于平昔，而使之继父之位，终于悖逆，荡覆汉室；校于成帝，暗又甚焉！
现代文：顺帝把朝廷大权交给皇后家族，而梁冀顽钝嚣张，凶狠暴虐，平时已很明显，却使他继承其父官位，终于导致狂悖叛逆，颠覆东汉王朝。跟成帝比较，昏庸更甚！
English: Emperor Shun handed over the power of the imperial court to the empress's family, while Liang Jizhang, who was obstinately arrogant and ferociously tyrannical, which was already obvious in ordinary times, made him inherit his father's official position, which finally led to rebellion and subversion of the Eastern Han Dynasty. Compared to Emperor Cheng, he was even dumber!

古文：初，梁商病笃，帝亲临幸，问以遗言。
现代文：当初，梁商病重，顺帝亲自到梁家探望，问他遗言。
English: At first, Liang Shang was seriously ill, Shun Di personally visited Liang's home and asked him his last words.

古文：对曰： 臣从事中郎周举，清高忠正，可重任也。 
现代文：梁商回答说： 我的从事中郎周举，清廉高洁，忠良正直，可以委以重任。 
English: Liang Shang replied: I am engaged in Zhonglang Zhouqi, clean and pure, loyal and honest, and can be entrusted with important tasks.

古文：由是拜举谏议大夫。
现代文：因此，顺帝任命周举为谏议大夫。
English: Therefore, Emperor Shun appointed Zhou Jiao as the doctor of the imperial edict.

古文：九月，诸羌寇武威。
现代文：九月，羌人诸种攻打武威郡。
English: In September, the Xiongnu attacked Wuwei County in various ways.

古文：辛亥晦，日有食之。
现代文：辛亥晦，出现日食。
English: On the eve of the Chinese New Year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，以羌寇充斥，凉部震恐，复徙安定居扶风，北地居冯翊。
现代文：冬季，十月癸丑，因处处有羌人劫掠，凉州震动惊恐，又把安定郡太守府迁到右扶风，把北地郡太守府迁到左冯翊。
English: In the winter, in October, due to robberies everywhere and the shock and panic in Liangzhou, the governor's office of Ding'an County was moved to Fu Feng, and the governor's office of Beidai County was moved to Zuo Feng.

古文：十一月，庚子，以执金吾张乔行车骑将军事，将兵万五千人屯三辅。
现代文：十一月庚子，擢升执金吾张乔代理车骑将军事务，率军一万五千人，驻守三辅。
English: In November, Geng Zi was promoted to the post of acting chariot and cavalry general in charge of Kingu Zhang Qiao, leading an army of fifteen thousand and stationed in Sanfu.

古文：荆州盗贼起，弥年不定；以大将军从事中郎李固为荆州刺史。
现代文：荆州盗贼纷起，经年不能平定。于是，朝廷任命大将军从事中郎李固为荆州刺史。
English: The Jingzhou bandits rose up and could not be subdued over the years. Therefore, the imperial court appointed a general to engage the middle-man Li Gu to stab the history of Jingzhou.

古文：固到，遣吏劳问境内，赦寇盗前衅，与之更始。
现代文：李固到任后，派遣官吏到所管辖的境内各地进行慰问，对盗贼从前的行为一律予以赦免，让他们重新做人。
English: After Li Gu took office, he sent officials to visit the territory to offer consolation, pardon the sins of the robbers before, and start from scratch with them.

古文：于是贼帅夏密等率其魁党六百馀人自缚归首，固皆原之，遣还，使自相招集，开示威法；半岁间，馀类悉降，州内清平。
现代文：于是，盗贼首领夏密等，率领他手下的头目六百余人，都将自己捆绑起来，自首投降。李固一律宽赦他们，让他们回去，互相招集，宣扬朝廷的声威和法令。半年之内，其余的盗贼全都投降，州内恢复平静。
English: As a result, the leader of the thieves, Xia Mi, and more than six hundred other leaders under his command, all tied themselves up and surrendered. Li Gu pardoned them all, let them go back, gather each other, and promote the prestige and decrees of the imperial court. Within half a year, the remaining thieves all surrendered, and calm was restored in the state.

古文：奏南阳太守高赐等臧秽；赐等重赂大将军梁冀，冀为之千里移檄，而固持之愈急，冀遂徙固为泰山太守。
现代文：李固向朝廷弹劾南阳郡太守高赐等贪赃枉法。高赐等用贵重礼物贿赂大将军梁冀，于是梁冀为高赐等发出一日奔驰千里的紧急文书，向李固求情。然而，李固却追查得更急。于是，梁冀将李固调任为泰山郡太守。
English: Li Gu appealed to the imperial court to impeach Nanyang County Governor Gao Jie and others for corrupt practices. Gao Jie and others bribed General Liang Jie with valuable gifts, so Liang Jie issued an urgent document for Gao Jie and others to travel thousands of miles a day to intercede with Li Gou. However, Li Gou pursued the matter more urgently. Therefore, Liang Jie transferred Li Gou to be the governor of Taishan County.

古文：时泰山盗贼屯聚历年，郡兵常千人追讨，不能制；固到，悉罢遣归农，但选留任战者百馀人，以恩信招诱之。
现代文：当时，泰山郡的盗贼聚集经年，郡太守府常派出上千名郡兵追剿和讨伐，都不能取胜。李固到任后，将郡兵全部解散，遣送回家务农，仅选择善战的郡兵约一百余名留下，用恩德和威信招降盗贼。
English: At that time, the thieves in Taishan County had been gathering for years, and the County Governor's Office often sent thousands of county soldiers to chase and fight them, but they could not win. After Li Gu took office, he disbanded all the county soldiers and sent them home to work in agriculture. He only chose about a hundred or so county soldiers who were good at fighting, and used grace and prestige to win over the thieves.

古文：未满岁，贼皆弭散。
现代文：不到一年，盗贼全部散去。
English: Within a year, the thieves had all fled.

古文：汉安元年
现代文：汉安元年
English: The First Year of Han'an

古文：春，正月，癸巳，赦天下，改元。
现代文：春季，正月癸巳，大赦天下。改年号。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year is auspicious, and there is a general amnesty.

古文：秋，八月，南匈奴句龙吾斯与薁鞬、台耆等复反，寇掠并部。
现代文：秋季，八月，南匈奴句龙王吾斯和、台耆等再次反叛，攻打劫掠并州。
English: In the autumn and August, the Southern Xiongnu, the Dragon King, Gushe, and the Taiyu rebelled again, attacking, plundering, and annexing the state.

古文：丁卯，遣侍中河内杜乔、周举、守光禄大夫周栩、冯羡、魏郡栾巴、张纲、郭遵、刘班分行州郡，表贤良，显忠勤；其贪污有罪者，刺史、二千石驿马上之，墨绶以下便辄收举。
现代文：丁卯，东汉朝廷派遣侍中河内人杜乔、周举，代理光禄大夫周栩、冯羡，魏郡人栾巴、张纲、郭遵、刘班，分别到各州郡进行视察，表扬有德行和忠于职守的地方官吏。对于贪赃枉法的人，属于刺史、郡太守等二千石以上的官吏，将他们的罪行用驿马迅速上奏朝廷；属于县令、县长及以下的官吏，便就地直接逮捕法办。
English: Dingwu, the Eastern Han Dynasty court dispatched the attendants Du Qiao and Zhou Ji, both from Hanoi, the acting Guanglu doctors Zhou Tu and Feng Qian, and the Wei County people Dongba, Zhang Gang, Guo Zun and Liu Ban, respectively, to inspect each state and county, praising the local officials who were virtuous and loyal to their duties. For those who were corrupt, officials with more than two thousand kilos, such as the county magistrate and the county magistrate, quickly reported their crimes to the court; officials who belonged to the county magistrate, the county governor and below were directly arrested and prosecuted on the spot.

古文：乔等受命之部，张纲独埋其车轮于雒阳都亭，曰： 豺狼当路，安问狐狸！ 
现代文：杜乔等接受使命后出发到各州郡，唯独张纲把车轮埋在洛阳城的都亭，他说： 豺狼当道，怎么去问狐狸？ 
English: After accepting the mission, Du Qiao and others set off to various states and counties, but Zhang Gang buried the wheels in the capital pavilion of Luoyang City. He said: The wolf is in charge, how can I ask the fox?

古文：遂劾奏： 大将军冀、河南尹不疑，以外戚蒙恩，居阿衡之任，而专肆贪叨，纵恣无极，多树谄谀以害忠良，诚天威所不赦，大辟所宜加也。
现代文：于是上书弹劾： 大将军梁冀、河南尹梁不疑，因身为外戚而蒙受皇恩，肩负辅佐皇帝的重任，却大肆贪污，任情纵欲。谨列举出他目无君王、贪赃枉法的十五件大事，这都是做臣子的人所切齿痛恨的。 
English: Therefore, a letter of impeachment was sent: The great generals Liang Jie and Yin Liang of Henan undoubtedly received royal favor because they were relatives, and shouldered the important task of assisting the emperor, but they were wantonly corrupt and indulged in sexual indulgence. I would like to list fifteen major events of him having no eyes for the king and being greedy and perverting the law, all of which are hated by those who are courtiers.

古文：谨条其无君之心十五事，斯皆臣子所切齿者也。 
现代文：奏章呈上去后，京都洛阳为之震惊。当时，皇后梁正大受庞幸，梁氏家族亲戚布满朝廷，顺帝虽知道张纲说得对，但不能采纳。
English: There are fifteen things that show that they have no heart for the emperor, and they are all hated by the courtiers.

古文：书御，京师震竦。时皇后宠方盛，诸梁姻族满朝，帝虽知纲言直，不能用也。
现代文：杜乔到兖州视察以后，向朝廷上表，称泰山郡太守李固的政绩为天下第一。
English: After Du Qiao inspected Zhangzhou, he presented a report to the imperial court, saying that the political performance of Li Gu, the governor of Taishan County, was the best in the world.

古文：杜乔至冶金兗州，表奏泰山太守李固政为天下第一，上征固为将作大匠。八使所劾奏，多梁冀及宦者亲党；互为请救，事皆寝遏。
现代文：于是，顺帝将李固征召到京都洛阳，任命他为将作大匠。八位使者向朝廷所弹劾的地方官吏，多数是梁冀和宦官的亲友和同党。由于皇亲和宦官互相请托和庇护，所有的弹劾案都被搁置。
English: As a result, Emperor Shun summoned Li Gu to Luoyang, Kyoto, and appointed him as the Grand Master. The eight emissaries to the imperial court to impeach local officials were mostly relatives, friends, and party members of Liang Jie and eunuchs. As the imperial relatives and eunuchs asked for mutual trust and protection, all impeachment cases were shelved.

古文：侍御史河南种暠疾之，复行案举。
现代文：侍御史、河南人种对此感到痛恨，再次进行举报。
English: The Imperial Household Agency and the Henan Ethnic Group were disgusted by this and reported it again.

古文：廷尉吴雄、将作大匠李固亦上言： 八使所纠，宜急诛罚。 
现代文：廷尉吴雄、将作大匠李固也上书说： 八位使者所指控的地方官吏，应迅速惩处。 
English: The courtier Wu Xiong and the master craftsman Li Gu also wrote: The local officials accused by the eight emissaries should be punished promptly.

古文：帝乃更下八使奏章，令考正其罪。
现代文：顺帝这才把八位使者的弹劾奏章，重新交付给有关官吏，命令审查定罪。
English: It was only then that Emperor Shun re-delivered the impeachment report of the eight envoys to the relevant officials and ordered a review of the conviction.

古文：梁冀恨张纲，思有以中伤之。
现代文：梁冀痛恨张纳，想找一个机会来陷害他。
English: Liang Jie hated Zhang Na and wanted to find an opportunity to frame him.

古文：时广陵贼张婴寇乱扬、徐间积十馀年，二千石不能制，冀乃以纲为广陵太守。
现代文：当时，广陵郡的盗贼首领张婴在扬州、徐州一带，作乱已有十余年，历任郡太守都无法镇压下去。于是，梁冀就任命张纲为广陵郡太守。
English: At that time, Zhang Rong, the leader of the thieves in Guangling County, had been wreaking havoc in Yangzhou and Xuzhou for more than ten years, and successive county governors were unable to suppress it. Therefore, Liang Jie appointed Zhang Gang as the governor of Guangling County.

古文：前太守率多求兵马，纲独请单车之职。
现代文：以前的广陵郡太守都请求朝廷多派兵马，而张纲却只乘一车前去上任。
English: The previous governors of Guangling County all requested the imperial court to send more soldiers and horses, but Zhang Gang only took one car to take office.

古文：既到，径诣婴垒门；婴大惊，遽走闭垒。
现代文：抵达广陵以后，就径直到张婴营垒大门，求见张婴。张婴大吃一惊，急忙下令紧闭营门。
English: After arriving at Guangling, he walked all the way to the gate of Zhang Jiao's camp and asked to see Zhang Jiao. Zhang Jiao was very surprised and quickly ordered the gate to be closed.

古文：纲于门外罢遣吏兵，独留所亲者十馀人，以书喻婴，请与相见。
现代文：张纲在门外将所有跟他前来的官吏和百姓都打发回去，仅留下十几个亲信，然后写信告诉张婴，请他出来见面。
English: Outside the gate, Zhang Gang sent back all the officials and people who had come with him, leaving only a dozen close friends. He then wrote a letter to Zhang Jiao, asking him to come out to meet him.

古文：婴见纲至诚，乃出拜谒。
现代文：张婴看到张纲十分诚恳，于是出营拜见。
English: Zhang Ying saw that Zhang Gang was very sincere, so he went out to meet him.

古文：纲延置上坐，譬之曰： 前后二千石多肆贪暴，故致公等怀愤相聚。
现代文：张纲让张婴坐在上座，开导他说： 过去历任郡太守，多数一味贪婪和残暴，使得你们心怀愤怒，聚众起兵。
English: Zhang Gang let Zhang Jiao sit in the upper seat and enlightened him, saying: In the past, the successive county governors were mostly greedy and cruel, which made you angry and gathered troops.

古文：二千石信有罪矣，然为之者又非义也。
现代文：郡太守的确有罪，然而你们这样做也不符合大义。
English: Two thousand koku is really guilty! However, it is also unjust for you to do so.

古文：今主上仁圣，欲以文德服叛，故遣太守来，思以爵禄相荣，不愿以刑罚相加，今诚转祸为福之时也。
现代文：如今主上仁爱圣明，准备用恩德消除叛乱，所以才派我来，想赐给你们封爵和官位，使你们荣耀，不愿意对你们施加刑罚，今天确实是转祸为福的大好时机。
English: Now the Lord is kind to the saints and is ready to use His grace to eliminate the rebellion. That is why He sent me. He wants to give you knighthoods and official positions to glorify you, and does not want to impose punishment on you. Today is indeed a great opportunity to turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：若闻义不服，天子赫然震怒，荆、扬、兗、豫大兵云合，身首横分，血嗣俱绝。
现代文：如果听到这些道理而不肯归附朝廷，天子赫然盛怒，征调荆州、扬州、兖州、豫州的大军，象云一样集合，你们就将身首异处，子孙灭绝。
English: If you hear these words and refuse to join the imperial court, the Son of Heaven will be furious, and the great armies of Jingzhou, Yangzhou, Zhangzhou, and Henzhou will gather like clouds, and you will lose your heads and exterminate your descendants.

古文：二者利害，公其深计之！ 
现代文：二者的利害，请你好好考虑。 
English: Please consider the interests of both sides.

古文：婴闻，泣下曰： 荒裔愚民，不能自通朝廷，不堪侵枉，遂复相聚偷生，若鱼游釜中，知其不可久，且以喘息须臾间耳！
现代文：张婴听后流着眼泪说： 我们这些野蛮的愚民，自己不能上通朝廷，不堪忍受残酷迫害，才聚集在一起苟且偷生，象鱼游锅中，自己也知道不能长久，只不过暂时苟延残喘而已。
English: After listening, Zhang Ying shed tears and said: "These barbaric fools, unable to go to the imperial court and unable to endure the cruel persecution, gathered together to live secretly. Like a fish swimming in a pot, they knew that they could not last long, but only lingered for a while.

古文：今闻明府之言，乃婴等更生之辰也！ 
现代文：今日听到您的开导，正是我们再生之时。 
English: Hearing your enlightenment today, it is time for us to be reborn.

古文：乃辞还营。
现代文：于是，张婴告辞回营。
English: As a result, Zhang Ying resigned and returned to the camp.

古文：明日，将所部万馀人与妻子面缚归降。
现代文：次日，张婴率领他的部众一万余人和妻子儿女，把手臂捆绑在背后，向张纲投降。
English: The next day, Zhang Ying led his army of more than ten thousand men, women, and children, tied his arms behind his back, and surrendered to Zhang Gang.

古文：纲单车入婴垒，大会，置酒为乐，散遣部众，任从所之；亲为卜居宅、相田畴；子弟欲为吏者，皆引召之。
现代文：然后，张纲独自乘车进入张婴的营垒，大摆筵席，饮酒作乐，遣散张婴的部众，听任他们去愿意投奔的地方。张纲还亲自为张婴选择住宅，查看田地，张婴的子孙想当地方官吏的，他都加以推荐任用。
English: Then, Zhang Gang drove alone into Zhang Jiao's camp, held a grand banquet, drank alcohol and made music, dismissed Zhang Jiao's subordinates, and allowed them to go where they wanted to go. Zhang Gang also personally selected houses for Zhang Jiao, inspected fields, and recommended the appointment of Zhang Jiao's children and grandchildren who wanted to be local officials.

古文：人情悦服，南州晏然。
现代文：人们心悦诚服，当地一片和平。
English: Nanzhou is safe and sound.

古文：朝廷论功当封，梁冀遏之。
现代文：朝廷评论功绩，应当封张纲侯爵，但受到了梁冀的阻挠。
English: The imperial court commented that Zhang Gang should be made a marquis, but this was blocked by Liang Jie.

古文：在郡一岁，卒；张婴等五百馀人为之制服行丧，送到犍为，负土成坟。
现代文：张纲在广陵郡任职一年后去世。张婴等五百余人，为他穿上丧服举哀，将他的灵柩送回家乡犍为，还为他运送泥土，筑成坟墓。
English: Zhang Gang died one year after taking office in Guangling County. More than 500 people, including Zhang Jiao, put on mourning clothes to mourn for him, sent his coffin home to his hometown, and also transported soil to build a grave for him.

古文：诏拜其子续为郎中，赐钱百万。
现代文：顺帝下诏，任命张纲的儿子张续为郎中，并赐钱一百万。
English: Emperor Shun issued an edict, appointing Zhang Gang's son Zhang Dui as a vassal, and gave him one million yuan.

古文：是时，二千石长吏有能政者，有雒阳令渤海任峻、冀州刺史京兆苏章、胶东相陈留吴祐。
现代文：当时，有才能和政绩的二千石官吏，包括洛阳令任峻、冀州刺史京兆尹人苏章、胶东国相陈留人吴。
English: At that time, there were officials of 2,000 koku who had talent and political achievements, including Luoyang's Renjun, Jizhou's Su Zhang, Jiaodong's Chen Ruimin and Wu.

古文：雒阳令自王涣之后，皆不称职。
现代文：自从王涣以后，所有的洛阳令都不称职。
English: Since Wang Qian, all Luoyang leaders have been incompetent.

古文：峻能选用文武吏，各尽其用，发奸不旋踵，民间不畏吏，其威禁猛于涣，而文理政教不如也。
现代文：任峻接任洛阳令后，善于选用文武官吏，使他们各尽其才，举发奸罪十分迅速，转足之间即可破案，民间也不再畏惧官吏。任峻的威严和震慑能力超过王涣，然而在礼文仪节、政治教化方面不如王涣。
English: After Renjun took over the command of Luoyang, he was good at selecting civil and military officials, so that each of them could do their best. He was very quick to report and solve the crime of treason, and the people were no longer afraid of officials. Renjun's majesty and deterrence ability exceeded that of Wang Qian, but he was not as good as Wang Qian in terms of etiquette and political education.

古文：章为冀州刺史，有故人为清河太守，章行部，欲案其奸臧，乃主太守为设酒肴，陈平生之好甚欢。
现代文：苏章任冀州刺史，他的一位故人是清河郡太守，苏章在辖区巡视，准备查问他的贪赃枉法罪行。于是他请这位太守备下酒和菜肴，畅叙平生友情，甚为欢洽。
English: Su Zhang is in charge of the history of Jizhou. One of his deceased relatives was the governor of Qinghe County. Su Zhang was on a tour of the jurisdiction, preparing to investigate his crimes of corruption. So he invited the governor to prepare wine and dishes, and to talk about his lifelong friendship, which was very pleasant.

古文：太守喜曰： 人皆有一天，我独有二天！ 
现代文：太守高兴地说： 别人都只有一个天，唯独我有两个天！ 
English: The abbot said happily, "Everyone else has only one day, but I have two days!"

古文：章曰： 今夕苏孺文与故人饮者，私恩也；明日冀州刺史案事者，公法也。 
现代文：以为老朋友苏章定能为他遮盖罪恶。苏章说： 今天晚上，我苏孺文跟故人喝酒，这是私情；明天，冀州刺史调查案情，则是国法。 
English: Su Zhang said: Tonight, Su Zhang and the deceased drank alcohol, which was a personal favor for both of us; tomorrow, the Jizhou court of justice will prosecute you, which is public law and selfless.

古文：遂举正其罪，州境肃然。
现代文：于是举发并判定了他的罪名，全州肃然。
English: As a result, he was indicted and convicted, and the whole state was stunned.

古文：后以摧折权豪忤旨，坐免。
现代文：苏章后因打击权贵而违背皇帝圣旨，获罪免官。
English: Su Zhanghou was removed from office for violating the emperor's edict by attacking the powerful.

古文：时天下日敝，民多愁苦，论者日夜称章，朝廷遂不能复用也。
现代文：当时，朝政日趋凋敝，人民更加忧愁困苦，议论时事的人日夜称赞苏章，但朝廷却不能再任用他。
English: At that time, the imperial government was withering away, the people were more sad and distressed, and people who discussed current affairs praised Su Zhang day and night, but the imperial court could no longer appoint him.

古文：祐为胶东相，政崇仁简，民不忍欺。
现代文：吴出任胶东国相，为政崇尚仁爱简约，百姓都不忍心欺骗他。
English: Wu served as the Minister of Jiaodong Province, advocating benevolence and simplicity for politics, and the people could not bear to deceive him.

古文：啬夫孙性，私赋民钱，市衣以进其父，父得而怒曰： 有君如是，何忍欺之！ 
现代文：有一位乡啬夫，名叫孙性，私自赋敛百姓钱财，买衣服送给自己的父亲。父亲得到衣服，大怒说： 你有这样的长官，怎么忍心欺骗他？ 
English: There was a miserly villager named Sun Zheng, who gathered money from the people to buy clothes to give to his father. When his father received the clothes, he said angrily, "You have such an official, how can you bear to deceive him?"

古文：促归伏罪。
现代文：催促他回去认罪。
English: urge him to come back and plead guilty.

古文：性惭惧诣阁，持衣自首。
现代文：孙性怀着惭愧和畏惧的心情，拿着衣服，到官府自首。
English: With feelings of shame and fear, Sun Zheng took his clothes and went to the government office to turn himself in.

古文：祐屏左右问其故，性具谈父言。
现代文：吴教左右退出，询问缘故，孙性就把父亲所说的话，全都告诉了吴。
English: Wu You pushed aside the people around him and asked him why. Sun Zi told him everything his father had said.

古文：祐曰： 掾以亲故受污秽之名，所谓 观过斯知仁矣。  
现代文：吴安慰他说： 你为父亲的缘故而蒙受了贪污的恶名，真是所谓：看他的过失，知道他有仁爱的品德。 
English: Wu comforted him and said, "You have received a bad reputation for corruption because of your father. It is true that it is said, 'Look at his faults and know that he has the character of benevolence.'

古文：使归谢其父，还以衣遗之。
现代文：他命孙性回家向父亲道谢，又把衣服赠给了孙性的父亲。
English: He told Sun Zi to go home and thank his father, and gave the clothes to Sun Zi's father.

古文：冬，十月，辛未，太尉桓焉、司徒刘寿免。
现代文：冬季，十月辛未，太尉桓焉和司徒刘寿均被免官。
English: In the winter, in October Xinwei, Taifu Huan Yan and Sitou Liu Shou were both dismissed.

古文：罕羌邑落五千馀户诣赵冲降，唯烧何种据参䜌未下。
现代文：罕羌村落五千余户，都向赵冲投降，唯有烧何种羌人，仍据守参，不肯归附。
English: More than five thousand households in Hanzhong village all surrendered to Zhao Chong. Only the burned Hanzhong people remained loyal and refused to be annexed.

古文：甲戌，罢张乔军屯。
现代文：甲戌，撤销张乔在三辅地区的军事防御。
English: Armor, revoke Zhang Qiao's military defense in the Sanfu area.

古文：十一月，壬午，以司隶校尉下邳赵峻为太尉，大司农胡广为司徒。
现代文：十一月壬午，擢升司隶校尉、下邳人赵峻为太尉，大司农胡广为司徒。
English: In the afternoon of November, Zhao Jun, who was promoted to the rank of sub-lieutenant, and Zhao Jun, who was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, were promoted to the rank of sub-lieutenant, and Farmer Hu Guang, who was promoted to the rank of major, was promoted to the rank of major.

古文：汉安二年
现代文：汉安二年
English: The Second Year of Han'an

古文：夏，四月，庚戌，护羌校尉赵冲与汉阳太守张贡击烧当羌于参丝，破之。
现代文：夏季，四月庚戌，护羌校尉赵冲和汉阳郡太守张贡，对据守在参的烧当种羌人发动攻击，将其击破。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Zheng, Zhao Chong, the captain of the garrison, and Zhang Gong, the governor of Hanyang County, launched an attack on the Yan Dang Sect, which was garrisoned in Sanxing, and defeated it.

古文：六月，丙寅，立南匈奴守义王兜楼储为呼兰若尸逐就单于。
现代文：六月丙寅，东汉朝廷封南匈奴守义王兜楼储为单于，号为呼兰若尸逐就单于。
English: In June of the same year, the Eastern Han Dynasty conferred the title of Southern Xiongnu, Guiding the King of Righteousness, and the name of Hulan if the corpse is removed.

古文：时兜楼储在京师，上亲临轩授玺绶，引上殿，赐车马、器服、金帛甚厚。
现代文：这时，兜楼储正在京都洛阳，顺帝亲自主持仪式，颁授单于玺印，引单于上殿，赏赐车马、器物、衣服、金银、丝织品，甚为丰厚。
English: At this time, the Emperor Shun personally presided over the ceremony. The award certificate was placed in the imperial seal, the citation was placed in the upper hall, and the chariots and horses, utensils, clothes, gold and silver, and silk fabrics were awarded, which was very rich.

古文：诏太常、大鸿胪与诸国侍子于广阳城门外祖会，飨赐、作乐、角抵、百戏。
现代文：又下令，命太常、大鸿胪，以及所有外国派到中国充当人质的王子，在广阳门外聚集祭祀路神，给兜楼储饯行，奏乐，还表演了摔跤和杂技等节目。
English: He also ordered that Mu Taizang, Dahong Que, and all the princes sent to China by foreign countries to serve as hostages, gathered outside the Guangyang Gate to worship the god of the road, play music, and perform wrestling and acrobatics.

古文：冬，闰十月，赵冲击烧当羌于阿阳，破之。
现代文：冬季，闰十月，赵冲率军在汉阳郡的阿阳县，进击烧当种羌人，将其击破。
English: In the winter, leap October, Zhao Chong led the army in Hanyang County's Ayang County, and attacked and burned Dangzong Xuanren, breaking it.

古文：十一月，使匈奴中郎将扶风马寔遣人刺杀句龙吾斯。
现代文：十一月，使匈奴中郎将右扶风人马，派人刺杀了句龙王吾斯。
English: In November, he ordered the Xiongnu Middle Lord to send someone to assassinate King Wus of the Qulong.

古文：凉州自九月以来，地百八十震，山谷坼裂，坏败城寺，民压死者甚众。
现代文：自九月以来，凉州共发生地震一百八十次。山崩谷裂，城郭和官府房舍全都遭到破坏，被压死的百姓很多。
English: Since September, a total of 180 earthquakes have occurred in Liangzhou. Landslides have split the valley, the city walls and government buildings have all been destroyed, and many people have been crushed to death.

古文：尚书令黄琼以前左雄所上孝廉之选，专用儒学、文吏，于取士之义犹有所遗，乃奏增孝悌及能从政者为四科；帝从之。
现代文：尚书令黄琼认为，先前左雄所上奏的关于孝廉的选举制度，只限于推荐精通经学的 儒学 和通晓公文格式的，对于选拔人才的原则还有遗漏。于是上书皇帝，请求增加 孝悌 和 有能力从政 两科，加上原有的 儒学 、 文吏 两科，共为四科。顺帝采纳。
English: Shang Shuling Huang Qiong believed that the election system on filial piety and morality previously proposed by Zuo Xiong was only limited to recommending Confucianism, which is proficient in the study of scripture, and knowledge of official document formats, and there were omissions in the principle of selecting talents. Therefore, the emperor requested to increase the two subjects of filial piety and ability to do politics, plus the original two subjects of Confucianism and literature, to a total of four subjects. Shunde accepted.

古文：建康元年
现代文：建康元年
English: Jiankang Year 1

古文：春，护羌从事马玄为诸羌所诱，将羌众亡出塞，领护羌校尉卫琚追击玄等，斩首八百馀级。
现代文：春季，护羌从事马玄，因受羌人的引诱，率领塞内的羌人，逃出塞外。兼任护羌校尉卫琚追击马玄等人，斩杀八百余人。
English: In the spring, the guardian was engaged in the Magyars, and because he was tempted by the Magyars, he led the Magyars in Senj and escaped from Senj. He also served as the guardian of the Magyars, and pursued Magyars and others, killing more than eight hundred people.

古文：赵冲复追叛羌到建威鹯阴河；军度竟，所将降胡六百馀人叛走；冲将数百人追之，遇羌伏后，与战而殁。
现代文：赵冲又追击叛羌，到达建威阴河，军队渡河完毕，他所率领的六百余名归降的胡人叛逃。赵冲率领数百人前往追击，在途中遭到叛羌的伏击，赵冲在与叛羌的战斗中陈亡。
English: Zhao Chong also pursued the traitors and arrived at the Jianweiyin River. After the army crossed the river, more than six hundred Hu people who had surrendered defected. Zhao Chong led hundreds of people to pursue and was ambushed by the traitors on the way. Zhao Chong died in the battle with the traitors.

古文：冲虽死，而前后多所斩获，羌由是衰耗。
现代文：赵冲虽然战死，但前后斩杀和俘虏的叛羌甚多。于是，羌人的势力衰退下去。
English: Although Zhao Chong was killed in the battle, there were many traitors who were killed and captured before and after the battle. As a result, the power of the rebels declined.

古文：诏封冲子为义阳亭侯。
现代文：顺帝下诏，封赵冲的儿子为义阳亭侯。
English: Emperor Shun decreed that Zhao Chong's son would be named Yiyangting.

古文：夏，四月，使匈奴中郎将马寔击南匈奴左部，破之。
现代文：夏季，四月，使匈奴中郎将马攻击南匈奴左部，将其击破。
English: In the summer, in April, he ordered the Xiongnu middle man to attack the horse to the left of the South Xiongnu and break it.

古文：于是胡、羌、乌桓悉诣寔降。
现代文：于是，胡人、羌人、乌桓人全向马归降。
English: As a result, the Hu people, the Ya people, and the Wu Huan people all surrendered to Ma.

古文：辛巳，立皇子炳为太子，改元，赦天下。
现代文：辛巳，立皇子刘炳为太子，改年号。大赦天下。
English: Soon after, the crown prince, Liu Ye, was made crown prince, and the name of the year was changed. There was a general amnesty.

古文：太子居承光宫，帝使侍御史种暠监其家。
现代文：太子住在承光宫，顺帝派侍御史种做太子宫中的总管。
English: The prince lived in the Chengguang Palace, and Emperor Shun sent the attendant Shizue to be the chief steward in the prince's womb.

古文：中常侍高梵从中单驾出迎太子，时太傅杜乔等疑不欲从而未决，暠乃手剑当车曰： 太子，国之储副，人命所系。
现代文：中常侍高梵从内宫乘一辆车子出来迎接太子。当时，太傅杜乔等感到怀疑，不想让高梵把太子接走，但又决定不下。于是，种手提宝剑，挡住车说： 太子是国家的王位继承人，关系着人民的生命。
English: The Lord-in-Waiting, Gao Fan, came out of the Inner Palace in a car to meet the prince. At that time, the Grand Duke Du Qiao and others felt doubtful and did not want Gao Fan to pick up the prince, but they could not decide. Therefore, he put his sword in his hand and blocked the car and said: The prince is the heir to the throne of the country and is related to the lives of the people.

古文：今常侍来，无诏信，何以知非奸邪？
现代文：如今常侍前来，没有诏书和符信，怎么知道不是奸谋呢？
English: Now that the attendants have come, without the imperial edict and the letter of credence, how do we know that it is not a treacherous plot?

古文：今日有死而已！ 
现代文：今天，只有一死而已。 
English: Today, there was only one death.

古文：梵辞屈，不敢对，驰还奏之。
现代文：高梵说不过种，不敢回答，急忙驱车回宫奏报。
English: Gao Van said that he was too shy to answer, and hurriedly drove back to the palace to report.

古文：诏报，太子乃得去。
现代文：拿来顺帝诏书后，太子才得以离开。
English: The prince was only able to leave after he had brought the imperial edict from Emperor Shun.

古文：乔退而叹息，愧暠临事不惑；帝亦嘉其持重，称善者良久。
现代文：杜乔退下后叹息，自愧不如种遇事不乱。顺帝也夸奖种持重谨慎，称赞了很久。
English: After Du Qiao retreated, he sighed, feeling ashamed of not being able to handle things well. Emperor Shun also praised him for being cautious and praised him for a long time.

古文：扬、徐盗贼群起，盘互连岁。
现代文：扬州、徐州的盗贼蜂拥而起，相互联合，连年不息。
English: Thieves from Yangzhou and Xuzhou flocked to join forces and have been at it for years.

古文：秋，八月，九江范容、周生等寇掠城邑，屯据历阳，为江、淮巨患；遣御史中丞冯绲督州兵讨之。
现代文：秋季，八月，九江贼帅范容、周生等，攻打劫掠城市和村落，屯驻据守历阳县，已经成为长江和淮河之间的巨大祸害。东汉朝廷派遣御史中丞冯绲，督率州的地方军队，前往讨伐。
English: In the autumn and August, the Jiujiang bandits Fan Rong, Zhou Sheng and others attacked and plundered cities and villages and stationed themselves in Liyang County, which had become a huge scourge between the Yangtze River and the Huai River. The East Han Dynasty sent the Imperial Historian, Lieutenant General Feng Qi, to supervise and lead the local army of the state to fight.

古文：庚午，帝崩于玉堂前殿。
现代文：庚午，顺帝在玉堂前殿驾崩。
English: At noon, Emperor Shun passed away in the front hall of the Jade Hall.

古文：太子即皇帝位，年二岁。
现代文：太子刘炳即皇帝位，年仅二岁。
English: Prince Liu Ye, the emperor, was only two years old.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊皇后梁为皇太后。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager.

古文：太后临朝。
现代文：皇太后临朝主管朝政。
English: The Empress Dowager is in charge of state affairs.

古文：丁丑，以太尉赵峻为太傅，大司农李固为太尉，参录尚书事。
现代文：丁丑，任命太尉赵峻为太傅，大司农李固为太尉，参与主持尚书事务。
English: Ding Yuxi appointed Tai Li Zhao Jun as Tai Fu, and Daishi Nong Li Gu as Tai Li, and participated in presiding over the affairs of Shang Shu.

古文：九月，丙午，葬孝顺皇帝于宪陵，庙曰敬宗。
现代文：九月丙午，将顺帝安葬在宪陵，庙号敬宗。
English: In the afternoon of September 3rd, Emperor Shun was buried in the Mausoleum of Emperor Shun, with the temple name Keizong.

古文：是日，京师及太原、雁门地震。
现代文：当日，京都洛阳，以及太原郡、雁门郡，均发生地震。
English: On the same day, earthquakes occurred in Kyoto and Luoyang, as well as in Taiyuan County and Ganmen County.

古文：庚戌，诏举贤良方正之士，策问之。
现代文：庚戌，皇太后下诏，命举荐 贤良方正 的人才，策问政事。
English: The empress dowager issued an edict to promote the talents of the virtuous Fang Zheng, and he was put in charge of political affairs.

古文：皇甫规对曰： 伏惟孝顺皇帝初勤王政，纪纲四方，几以获安；后遭奸伪，威分近习，受赂卖爵，宾客交错，天下扰扰，从乱如归，官民并竭，上下穷虚。
现代文：皇甫规对策说： 我认为，顺帝即位初年，勤于帝王政事，治理四方，几乎使天下得到安宁。后来受到奸佞的包围，朝廷大权旁落到左右亲近之手。他们收取贿赂，出卖官爵，宾客相互往来，使天下大乱。人民不堪忍受，投奔乱匪的心情，犹如还归故乡一样的迫切。全国的官吏和人民，都已穷困殆尽；举国上下，空虚到了极点。
English: "I think that Emperor Shun, in the first year of his reign, was diligent in the affairs of the imperial government, governing the four directions, and almost brought peace to the world. Later, he was surrounded by traitors, and the power of the imperial court fell into the hands of close friends on both sides. They took bribes, sold officials and nobles, and exchanged guests with each other, causing great turmoil in the world. The people were unbearable, and the mood of joining the bandits was as urgent as returning to their hometown. The officials and people across the country were exhausted; the whole country was empty to the extreme.

古文：陛下体兼乾坤，聪哲纯茂，摄政之初，拔用忠贞，其馀维纲，多所改正，远近翕然望见太平，而灾异不息，寇贼纵横，殆以奸臣权重之所致也。
现代文：陛下以慈母之身君临天下，聪明圣哲，纯洁高尚，刚一开始摄政，就选拔任用忠诚坚贞的人才，对其他法令规章，也多有改正，远近一致企望看到太平盛世。然而，灾异并没有止息，盗贼横行，大概是奸佞的权力太重所造成的。
English: His Majesty ruled the world as a motherly figure, a wise sage, pure and noble. From the very beginning of his regency, he selected and appointed loyal and steadfast people. Other laws and regulations have also been revised, and there is a near-unanimous desire to see a peaceful and prosperous world. However, the disasters have not stopped, and thieves are rampant, probably caused by the excessive power of traitors.

古文：其常侍尤无状者，宜亟黜遣，披扫凶党，收入财贿，以塞痛怨，以答天诫。
现代文：常侍中表现特别不好的，应该迅速罢黜和遣退，不仅要驱除这群作恶的人，还要没收他们所受的贿赂赃物，以此来安抚人民的痛苦和怨恨，回答上天的告诫。
English: In order to appease the pain and resentment of the people and respond to Heaven's admonition, the regular attendants who have performed particularly badly should be quickly dismissed and sent back, not only to expel this group of evildoers, but also to confiscate the bribes and stolen goods they have received.

古文：大将军冀、河南尹不疑，亦宜增修谦节，辅以儒术，省去游娱不急之务，割减庐第无益之饰。
现代文：大将军梁冀、河南尹梁不疑，也应该努力加强修养谦恭的节操，辅之以学习儒术，省去娱乐方面不急需的开支，削减家宅房舍没有益处的装饰。
English: There is no doubt that the great generals Liang Jie and Yin Liang of Henan Province should also make efforts to strengthen the discipline of cultivating modesty and courtesy, supplemented by learning Confucianism, eliminating unnecessary expenses in entertainment, and reducing the decoration of family houses that are not beneficial.

古文：夫君者，舟也；民者，水也；群臣，乘舟者也；将军兄弟，操楫者也。
现代文：君王是船，人民是水，群臣是船上的乘客，将军兄弟是划桨的水手。
English: The king is the ship, the people are the water, the courtiers are the passengers on the ship, and the general's brothers are the sailors paddling.

古文：若能平志毕力，以度元元，所谓福也。
现代文：如果大家齐心尽力，普渡众生，这就是福。
English: If everyone makes a concerted effort, Purdue people, this is a blessing.

古文：如其怠弛，将沦波涛，可不慎乎！
现代文：如果懈怠松驰，势将被波涛所吞没，能不慎重吗？
English: If the slack is loosened, the potential will be engulfed by the waves. Can we not be cautious?

古文：夫德不称禄，犹凿墉之趾以益其高，岂量力审功，安固之道哉！
现代文：一个人的德行，如果和他所担任的职位不相称，就犹如用挖墙脚来使墙壁加高一样，这岂是量力审功，追求安全的方法？
English: If a person's virtue is not commensurate with the position he holds, it is like digging the foot of the wall to make the wall higher. Is this the way to measure merit and pursue security?

古文：凡诸宿猾、酒徒、戏客，皆宜贬斥，以惩不轨。
现代文：凡是老奸巨滑、酒徒、嬉戏宾客，都应该贬黜斥退，以此惩罚不轨的行为。
English: Anyone who is a traitor, drunkard, or playful guest should be scorned and rejected as a punishment for improper behavior.

古文：令冀等深思得贤之福，失人之累。 
现代文：应命梁冀等人好好考虑得到贤才的福气和结交非人的严重后果。 
English: Let Liang Jie and others deeply consider the benefits of gaining sages and the misfortune of losing talents.

古文：梁冀忿之，以规为下第，拜郎中；托疾，免归，州郡承冀旨，几陷死者再三，遂沉废于家，积十馀年。
现代文：梁冀对皇甫规非常愤恨，将他的对策列为下等，拜授他为郎中，然后又借口说皇甫规有病，将他免职，并遣送回乡。州郡地方官吏顺承梁冀的意旨陷害皇甫规，皇甫规好几次差点都被他们害死。于是，皇甫规被埋没困顿在家，长达十余年之久。
English: Liang Jie was very angry with Wangfujing. He ranked his countermeasures as inferior, made him a vassal, and then dismissed him on the pretext that Wangfujing was ill and sent him back to his hometown. State and county local officials followed Liang Jie's intention to frame Wangfujing. Wangfujing was almost killed by them several times. As a result, Wangfujing was buried and trapped at home for more than ten years.

古文：扬州刺史尹耀、九江太守邓显讨范容等于历阳，败殁。
现代文：扬州刺史尹耀和九江郡太守邓显在历阳讨伐范容等人，兵败被杀。
English: Yin Yao, Yangzhou's crown prince, and Deng Xian, the governor of Jiujiang County, fought against Fan Rong and others in Liyang and were defeated and killed.

古文：冬，十月，日南蛮夷复反，攻烧县邑。
现代文：冬季，十月，日南郡的蛮夷再次起兵反叛，攻打焚烧县城和村落。
English: In the winter, in October, the barbarians of Nichinan County rebelled again, attacking and burning the county seat and villages.

古文：交趾刺史九江夏方招诱降之。
现代文：交趾刺史九江郡人夏方招诱他们归降。
English: Hsia Fang, a man from Jiujiang County who had a bitter history, lured them to surrender.

古文：十一月，九江盗贼徐凤、马勉等攻烧城邑；凤称无上将军，勉称皇帝，筑营于当涂山中，建年号，置百官。
现代文：十一月，九江郡盗贼徐凤、马勉，攻打焚烧城市和村落。徐凤自称无上将军，马勉自称皇帝，在当涂山中建筑营垒，建立年号，设置百官。
English: In November, the bandits Xu Feng and Ma Qian of Jiujiang County attacked and burned cities and villages. Xu Feng claimed to be the supreme general, and Ma Qian claimed to be the emperor. They built a camp in the Dangtu Mountains, established a year, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：十二月，九江贼黄虎等攻合肥。
现代文：十二月，九江郡盗贼黄虎等攻打合肥县。
English: In December, the Yellow Tigers, the thieves of Jiujiang, attacked Hefei.

古文：是岁，群盗发宪陵。
现代文：本年，一群盗贼发掘了安葬顺帝的宪陵。
English: This year, a group of thieves excavated the mausoleum.

古文：孝冲皇帝
现代文：汉孝皇帝
English: Emperor Han Xiao

古文：永嘉元年
现代文：汉冲帝永嘉元年
English: Emperor Huai Yongjia in the first year of Dingwu, AD

古文：春，正月，戊戌，帝崩于玉堂前殿。
现代文：春季，正月戊戌，冲帝在玉堂前殿驾崩。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Chong died in the front hall of the Jade Hall.

古文：梁太后以扬、徐盗贼方盛，欲须所征诸王侯到乃发丧。
现代文：梁太后因扬州、徐州的盗贼正在兴盛之时，打算等受征召的诸侯王、王子们抵达京都洛阳以后再发布冲帝去世的消息。
English: When Empress Dowager Liang's thieves from Yangzhou and Xuzhou were flourishing, she planned to wait for the princes to arrive in Kyoto's Luoyang before announcing Chongdi's death.

古文：太尉李固曰： 帝虽幼少，犹天下之父。今日崩亡，人神感动，岂有人子反共掩匿乎！
现代文：太尉李固说： 冲帝虽然年龄幼小，但他仍然是全国的君父，今天已经去世，人民和神明，无不为之悲痛，哪里有做子民的反而共同隐瞒君父去世消息的作法？
English: Captain Li Gu said: Although Chongdi is young, he is still the monarch father of the whole country. Today, he has passed away. The people and the gods are all grieving for him. On the other hand, where is the practice of hiding the news of the death of the monarch father together as a people?

古文：昔秦皇沙丘之谋及近日北乡之事，皆秘不发丧，此天下大忌，不可之甚者也！ 
现代文：从前，秦始皇死后的沙丘之谋，以及最近的迎立北乡侯之事，都是秘不发丧，这是天下最大的禁忌，绝对不可以这样作。 
English: In the past, the conspiracy of the sand dunes after the death of the First Emperor of Qin, as well as the recent event of welcoming the northern townships, were all secret. This is the biggest taboo in the world, and it is absolutely forbidden to do so.

古文：太后从之，即暮发丧。
现代文：梁太后听从，便于当天晚上发丧。
English: Empress Dowager Liang obeyed, and the funeral was held on the evening of the same day.

古文：征清河王蒜及渤海孝王鸿之子缵皆至京师。
现代文：受到征召的清河王刘蒜及渤海孝王刘鸿的儿子刘缵，都来到京都洛阳。
English: Liu Gan, the king of Qinghe, and Liu Ye, the son of Liu Hong, the king of Bohai, both came to Kyoto Luoyang.

古文：蒜父曰清河恭王延平；延平及鸿皆乐安夷王宠之子，千乘贞王伉之孙也。
现代文：刘蒜的父亲是清河恭王刘延平。刘延平和刘鸿，都是乐安王刘宠的儿子，千乘王刘伉的孙子。
English: Liu Yanping was the father of Liu Yanping, the king of Qinghe Gong. Liu Yanping and Liu Hong were the sons of Liu Ji, the king of Le'an, and the grandsons of Liu Yao, the king of Qianjiang.

古文：清河王为人严重，动止有法度，公卿皆归心焉。
现代文：清河王刘蒜为人严肃庄重，行动举止遵循法令制度，三公九卿都从心里归服。
English: Liu Garlic, the king of the Qing Dynasty, was a serious and dignified man. He acted and behaved in accordance with the legal system. The three princes and nine nobles all submitted to him from the bottom of their hearts.

古文：李固谓大将军冀曰： 今当立帝，宜择长年，高明有德，任亲政事者，愿将军审详大计，察周、霍之立文、宣，戒邓、阎之利幼弱！ 
现代文：李固对大将军梁冀说： 现在确定继位皇帝，应当选择年长，高超明智而有道德，能够亲自处理朝廷政事的人，请将军仔细考虑国家大计，体察当初周勃所以选立文帝、霍光之所以选立宣帝的道理，以邓氏家族和阎氏家族选立幼弱的前事为戒。 
English: Li Gu said to the general Liang Jie: Now that the succession of the emperor is to be determined, it is necessary to choose an older, highly wise and moral person who can personally handle the affairs of the imperial court. He asked the general to carefully consider the national plan, to observe the reason why Zhou Bo originally chose Emperor Wen and why Huo Guang chose Emperor Xuan, and to beware of the fact that the Deng family and the Yan family chose a young and weak person.

古文：冀不从，与太后定策禁中。
现代文：梁冀不听，与梁太后在宫中决策。
English: Liang Jie did not listen, and made decisions with Empress Dowager Liang in the palace.

古文：丙辰，冀持节以王青盖车迎缵入南宫。
现代文：丙辰，由梁冀持节，用封王的皇子乘用的青盖车迎接刘缵进入南宫。
English: On the day of the festival, Liu Bei was welcomed to the Southern Palace by Liang Ji in a covered wagon used by the crown prince.

古文：丁巳，封为建平侯。其日，即皇帝位，年八岁。
现代文：丁巳，刘缵被封为建平侯，并于当天即皇帝位，年仅八岁。
English: At the age of eight, Liu Bei was named Jianping Hou (建平侯) and became emperor on the same day.

古文：蒜罢归国。
现代文：清河王刘蒜则被遣回封国。
English: Liu Garlic, the king of the Qing Dynasty, was sent back to his fiefdom.

古文：将卜山陵，李固曰： 今处处寇贼，军兴费广，新创宪陵，赋发非一。
现代文：朝廷准备为冲帝刘炳选择墓地，修建陵园，李固说： 现在处处都是盗贼，军事费用浩大。如果要重新修建一个象宪陵那么大的陵园，征收赋税和调发徭役，不是一个小的数目。
English: The imperial court is preparing to choose a cemetery and build a necropolis for Emperor Liu Bei, Li Gu said: Now there are thieves everywhere, and military expenses are huge. If you want to rebuild a necropolis as large as the mausoleum, collecting taxes and dispatching officials is not a small amount.

古文：帝尚幼小，可起陵于宪陵茔内，依康陵制度。 
现代文：而且，冲帝年龄幼小，可以在顺帝宪陵之内修建一个陵园安葬，依照殇帝康陵的制度。 
English: Moreover, since Emperor Chong was so young, it was possible to build a mausoleum within Emperor Shun's mausoleum and bury him according to the system of Emperor Kang's mausoleum.

古文：太后从之。
现代文：梁太后听从。
English: The Queen Mother complied.

古文：己未，葬孝冲皇帝于怀陵。
现代文：己未，安葬冲帝，陵墓称为怀陵。
English: On the 21st, Emperor Xiaochong was buried in Huairing Mausoleum.

古文：太后委政宰辅，李固所言，太后多从之，黄门宦官为恶者一皆斥遣，天下咸望治平。而梁冀深忌疾之。
现代文：梁太后将朝廷大权交给三公等辅佐大臣，李固所提出的建议，梁太后大都予以采纳。凡是作恶的宦官，一律被排斥和遣退。天下人都期望政治清平，然而梁冀却对此深恶痛绝。
English: Empress Dowager Liang handed over the supreme power of the imperial court to the three princes and other assistant ministers, and most of the suggestions made by Li Gu were adopted by Empress Dowager Liang. All eunuchs who committed evil were excluded and sent back. The whole world expected political peace, but Liang Ji was deeply disgusted by this.

古文：初，顺帝时所除官多不以次；及固在事，奏免百馀人。
现代文：当初，顺帝时所任命的官吏，多数不按常规次序。等到李固当政时，奏准免职的有一百余人。
English: At first, most of the officials appointed by Emperor Shun did not follow the usual order. By the time Li Gu came to power, there were more than a hundred people who were dismissed.

古文：此等既怨，又希望冀旨，遂共作飞章诬奏固曰： 太尉李固，因公假私，依正行邪，离间近戚，自隆支党。
现代文：这批被免职的官吏，既对李固怨恨，又迎合梁冀的意旨，于是共同写匿名信诬告李固说： 太尉李固，假公济私，表面上依照正道办事，实际上却从事邪恶的勾当，挑拨离间皇室和近亲的关系，培植和加强自己的党羽。
English: This group of dismissed officials, both resentful of Li Gu and pandering to Liang Jie's intentions, jointly wrote an anonymous letter to falsely accuse Li Gu, saying: Captain Li Gu, fake public and private, on the surface according to the right path, but in fact engaged in evil activities, sowing discord between the royal family and close relatives, cultivating and strengthening his own party.

古文：大行在殡，路人掩涕，固独胡粉饰貌，搔头弄姿，槃旋偃仰，从容治步，曾无惨怛伤悴之心。
现代文：冲帝停柩在堂，路上的行人都掩面哭泣，唯独李固在脸上用胡粉修饰容貌，搔首弄姿，盘旋俯仰，不慌不忙地按照常规走路，没有凄惨悲伤的心情。
English: Chong Di paused in the hall, pedestrians on the road covered their faces and wept, except Li Gu, who used powdered whitewash on his face to beautify his appearance, gestured with a dagger, hovered, and walked unhurriedly according to the routine, without a sad mood.

古文：山陵未成，违矫旧政，善则称己，过则归君；斥逐近臣，不得侍送。
现代文：冲帝的陵园还没有建成，就改变原来的朝政，将功劳归于自己，过失归于君王。排斥逐退皇帝身边的近臣，使他们不能侍奉送葬。
English: Emperor Chong's mausoleum had not yet been built, so he changed the original imperial policy, attributing the credit to himself and the fault to the monarch. He expelled the emperor's close vassals, so that they could not attend the funeral.

古文：作威作福，莫固之甚矣！
现代文：作威作福，没有李固这样厉害的了！
English: Pretending to be virtuous is not as powerful as Li Gu!

古文：夫子罪莫大于累父，臣恶莫深于毁君，固之过衅，事合诛辟。 
现代文：做儿子最大的罪恶，莫过于连累父母；做臣子最大的罪恶，莫过于诽谤君王。李固的过错和罪恶，理应诛杀。 
English: To be a son's greatest sin is to annoy one's parents; to be a vassal's greatest sin is to slander the king. Li Gu's faults and sins should be fought and killed.

古文：书奏，冀以白太后，使下其书；太后不听。
现代文：奏章呈上后，梁冀面见梁太后，请求将奏章下交有关官吏查办，梁太后没有听从。
English: After the report was submitted, Liang Jie met the Empress Dowager Liang and requested that the report be submitted to the relevant officials for investigation. The Empress Dowager Liang did not listen.

古文：广陵贼张婴复聚众数千人反，据广陵。
现代文：广陵郡盗贼张婴又聚众数千人反叛，攻占广陵郡。
English: Zhang Ying, the thief of Guangling County, gathered thousands of people to rebel and occupied Guangling County.

古文：二月，乙酉，赦天下。
现代文：二月乙酉，大赦天下。
English: February acetylene, amnesty around the world.

古文：西羌叛乱积年，费用八十馀亿。
现代文：西羌诸种连年起兵反叛，东汉朝廷支出的军事费用达八十多亿。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty spent more than eight billion yuan on military expenses.

古文：诸将多断盗牢禀，私自润入，皆以珍宝货赂左右。
现代文：将领们多数都控制并盗取军饷，以饱私囊，又都用珍宝贿赂左右。
English: Most of the generals controlled and stole the military pay, filled their pockets, and bribed others with precious treasures.

古文：上下放纵，不恤军事，士卒不得其死者，白骨相望于野。
现代文：上下放纵，不忧虑军事，士卒不应死而死的，白骨相望，堆积旷野。
English: Indulgence above and below, military without worries, soldiers should not die and die, white bones looking at each other, piling up deserts.

古文：左冯翊梁并以恩信招诱叛羌；离湳、狐奴等五万馀户皆诣并降，陇右复平。
现代文：左冯翊梁并用朝廷恩德和信义招揽引诱叛变的羌人，于是离、狐奴等五万余户，都向梁并投降，陇石恢复安宁。
English: On the left, Feng Xuan Liang also used the imperial court's Ende and Xinyi to recruit and lure the rebellious Xiong people. As a result, more than 50,000 households, such as the Xiong people and the Xiong slaves, all surrendered to Liang Xian, and peace was restored in Xiongshi.

古文：太后以徐、扬盗贼益炽，博求将帅。
现代文：梁太后因为徐州、扬州的盗贼日益炽烈，广泛征求可以胜任将帅的人才。
English: Empress Dowager Liang, because of the increasingly fierce thieves in Xuzhou and Yangzhou, extensively solicited talents who could be competent generals.

古文：三公举涿令北海滕抚有文武才；诏拜抚九江都尉，与中郎将赵序助冯绲，合州郡兵数万人共讨之。
现代文：三公举荐涿县县令、北海人滕抚，称他有文武全才。梁太后下诏，任命滕扶为九江郡都尉，和中郎将赵序一道协助御史中丞冯绲，汇合州郡地方军队数万人，共同征剿。
English: The empress Dowager Liang issued an edict, appointing Teng Fu as the captain of Jiujiang County, and together with Zhong Lang, Zhao Xuan assisted the military historian, Lieutenant-General Feng Qi, and gathered tens of thousands of local troops from Zhoushou County to jointly recruit cadres.

古文：又广开赏募，钱、邑各有差。
现代文：又公开悬出赏格，按照剿灭盗贼功劳的高下赏赐金钱或食邑。
English: In addition, there is a wide range of rewards, money, and counties.

古文：又议遣太尉李固，未及行。三月，抚等进击众贼，大破之，斩马勉、范容、周生等千五百级。
现代文：还商议派太尉李固出征，还没有来得及动身，三月，滕抚等进击众盗贼，将其击破，斩杀贼帅马勉、范容、周生等一千五百人。
English: They also discussed sending Lieutenant Li Gu to the front, but he did not have time to leave. In March, Teng Fu and others attacked the thieves, defeated them, and killed the thieves Shuai Ma Qian, Fan Rong, Zhou Sheng and other 1,500 people.

古文：徐凤以馀众烧东城县。
现代文：贼帅徐凤率领残余部众焚烧东城县。
English: Thief-commander Xu Feng led the remnants to burn Dongcheng County.

古文：夏，五月，下邳人谢安应募，率其宗亲设伏击凤，斩之。
现代文：夏季，五月，下邳国人谢安响应朝廷的悬赏招募，率领他的宗族和亲戚设下埋伏，击斩徐凤。
English: In the summer, in May, Xie An, a citizen of Hebei Province, responded to the reward offered by the imperial court and led his clan and relatives to set up an ambush to kill Xu Feng.

古文：封安为平乡侯。
现代文：封谢安为平乡侯。
English: Fong Xie'an is the mayor of Pingxiang.

古文：拜滕抚中郎将，督扬、徐二州事。
现代文：擢升滕抚为中郎将，督率扬州和徐州二州的事务。
English: Teng Fuzi was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking general and supervised the affairs of Yangzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 孝殇皇帝即位逾年，君臣礼成。
现代文：丙辰，梁太后下诏说： 殇帝即位超过了一年，君臣名分已经确定，后又由安帝继承了传统帝业。
English: According to Emperor Xiancheng, Empress Dowager Liang issued an edict saying: Emperor Xizong has been on the throne for more than a year, the title of prince and vassal has been determined, and then Emperor An inherited the traditional imperial inheritance.

古文：孝安皇帝承袭统业，而前世遂令恭陵在康陵之上，先后相逾，失其次序。
现代文：然而前朝却将安帝的陵园恭陵排列在殇帝的陵园康陵之上，先后差错，次序颠倒，现在加以改正。 
English: However, the previous government ranked the Mausoleum of Emperor An and the Mausoleum of Emperor Gong higher than the Mausoleum of Emperor Gong. This was a mistake and the order was reversed. It has now been corrected.

古文：今其正之！ 六月，鲜卑寇代郡。
现代文：六月，鲜卑攻打代郡。
English: In June, Xianbei attacked Dai County.

古文：秋，庐江盗贼攻寻阳，又攻盱台。
现代文：秋季，庐江郡的盗贼攻打寻阳县，其后，又攻打盱台县。
English: In autumn, thieves from Minjiang County attacked Xiangyang County, and then attacked Xingtai County.

古文：滕抚遣司马王章击破之。
现代文：滕抚派遣司马王章将其击破。
English: Teng Fu dispatched Sima Wang Zhang to break it.

古文：九月，庚戌，太傅赵峻薨。
现代文：九月庚戌，太傅赵峻去世。
English: In September, Geng Yao, Taifu Zhao Jun passed away.

古文：滕抚进击张婴；冬，十一月，丙午，破婴，斩获千馀人。
现代文：滕抚进击贼帅张婴。冬季，十一月丙午，击破张婴，斩杀和俘虏一千余人。
English: Teng Fu entered and defeated the thief Zhang Jiao. In winter, on the afternoon of November 3rd, he defeated Zhang Jiao and killed and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：丁未，中郎将赵序坐畏懦、诈增首级，弃市。
现代文：丁未，中郎将赵序因临阵胆小怯懦和虚报斩杀贼人数目，被斩于闹市，尸体暴露街头。
English: Ding Wei, the middle brother, chopped off the number of thieves killed by Zhao Sequence due to timidity and cowardice and false report, and was chopped off in the downtown, and the bodies were exposed on the streets.

古文：历阳贼华孟自称黑帝，攻杀九江太守杨岑。
现代文：历阳盗贼华孟自称黑帝，攻杀九江郡太守杨岑。
English: Liyang thief Hua Meng called himself the Black Emperor and attacked and killed the governor of Jiujiang County, Yang Hui.

古文：滕抚进击，破之，斩孟等三千八百级，虏获七百馀人。
现代文：滕抚率军进击，将其击破，斩杀华孟等三千八百人，俘虏七百余人。
English: Teng Fu led the army to attack, defeated it, killed 3,800 people including Hua Meng, and captured more than 700 people.

古文：于是东南悉平，振旅而还。
现代文：于是，东南地区全部平定。
English: As a result, all of Southeast Asia was pacified, and the rectification of the military brigade was successful.

古文：以抚为左冯翊。
现代文：滕抚整顿军队，班师而回。任命滕抚为左冯翊。
English: Teng Fu reorganized the army and returned with his division. Teng Fu was appointed as the leader of the Left Feng Pi.

古文：永昌太守刘君世，铸黄金为文蛇，以献大将军冀；益州刺史种暠纠发逮捕，驰传上言。
现代文：永昌郡太守刘君世，用黄金铸成一条有花纹的蛇，奉献给大将军梁冀。益州刺史种将刘君世举发逮捕，并派人驾驿站车马将此情况上奏朝廷。
English: Liu Junshi, the governor of Yongchang County, used gold to cast a snake with a pattern, dedicated to General Liang Jie. Yizhou stabbed Liu Junshi and arrested him, and sent someone to report the situation to the imperial court.

古文：冀由是恨暠。
现代文：梁冀因此痛恨种。
English: As a result, Liang Jie hated seeds.

古文：会巴郡人服直聚党数百人，自称天王，暠与太守应承讨捕，不克，吏民多被伤害；冀因此陷之，传逮暠、承。
现代文：正在此时，巴郡人服直聚集同党数百人，自称天王，种和巴郡太守应承讨伐剿捕未能取胜，许多官吏和人民受到了伤害。
English: At this time, hundreds of people from the same party gathered in Ba County, claiming to be the king of heaven, and the governor of Ba County failed to win, and many officials and people were injured.

古文：李固上疏曰： 臣伏闻讨捕所伤，本非暠、承之意，实由县吏惧法畏罪，迫逐深苦，致此不详。
现代文：梁冀于是对种进行陷害，逮捕种和应承，押解到京都洛阳。李固上书说： 根据我所得到的情报，这次讨伐的剿捕造成的伤害，本不是种和应承的指示，实际是由于县级官府的官吏畏法惧罪，极力强迫和驱赶人民作战，以致造成这场伤害。
English: Liang Jie then framed him, arrested him and sent him to Kyoto Luoyang. Li Gu wrote: According to the information I obtained, the damage caused by the capture of this crusade was not an instruction from him, but was actually caused by the officials of the county-level government who were afraid of the law and tried their best to force and drive the people to fight.

古文：比盗贼群起，处处未绝。暠、承以首举大奸而相随受罪，臣恐沮伤州县纠发之意，更共饰匿，莫复尽心！ 
现代文：盗贼连续不断地纷纷而起，处处都未断绝，如果像种和应承这样首先向朝廷举发盗贼，却紧跟着就受到惩罚，我恐怕将使州县官吏举发盗贼的忠心受到伤害，以后便改为一同掩饰隐瞒真实情况，没有人再尽忠心！ 
English: Thieves continue to rise up one after another, and they are still everywhere. If thieves are first reported to the imperial court, as in the case of the seed and the heir, but then punished, I am afraid that the loyalty of the state and county officials who report the thieves will be harmed, and later it will be changed to cover up and conceal the true situation together. No one will be loyal anymore!

古文：太后省奏，乃赦暠、承罪，免官而已。
现代文：梁太后看到奏章，于是赦免了种和应承的罪，仅将他们二人免官。
English: When Empress Dowager Liang saw the report, she pardoned Zeng He for the crime he had committed, and only dismissed the two of them.

古文：金蛇输司农，冀从大司农杜乔借观之，乔不肯与；冀小女死，令公卿会丧，乔独不往，冀由是衔之。
现代文：金蛇被交付给掌管国库的司农。梁冀向大司农杜乔借看，杜乔不肯给他。另外，梁冀的小女儿去世，命三公和九卿都去吊丧，唯独杜乔不肯前往，梁冀从此对杜乔衔恨。
English: The golden snake was delivered to the farmer in charge of the treasury. Liang Jie borrowed it from the chief farmer Du Qiao, but Du Qiao refused to give it to him. In addition, Liang Jie's youngest daughter died, and the three princes and nine nobles all went to the funeral, but Du Qiao refused to go, and Liang Jie held a grudge against Du Qiao from then on.

