古文：开路神
现代文：开路神
English: God of open roads

古文：金刚遇开路神，羡之曰： 你我一般长大，我怎如你着好吃好。 
现代文：金刚神遇到开路神，羡慕地说： 我和你一样高大，却不如你吃得好，穿得好。 
English: When the God of King Kong met the God of Open Road, he said admiringly, "I am as tall as you, but I don't eat as well or dress as well as you.

古文：开路神曰： 阿哥不知，我只图得些口腹耳。
现代文：开路神回答说： 阿哥您不知道，我只图些口腹的享受。
English: The opener replied, "Brother, you don't know, I'm just trying to enjoy myself.

古文：若论穿着，全然不济，剥去一层遮羞皮，浑身都是篾片了。 
现代文：如果论穿着，完全不行，剥去一层遮羞皮，浑身就都是篾片了。 
English: When it comes to clothing, it's a complete no-go. If you peel off a layer of shyness, your whole body will be covered in moles.

古文：借脑子
现代文：借脑子
English: Borrowed brain

古文：苏州人极奉承大老官。
现代文：有个苏州人非常喜欢奉承有钱的人。
English: There is a man in Suzhou who is very fond of flattering rich people.

古文：平日常谓主人曰： 要以子替死，亦所甘心。 
现代文：他平时经常对主人说： 如果要我替你去死，我都甘心情愿。 
English: He would often say to his master, "If you want me to die for you, I will gladly do it."

古文：一日主病，医曰： 病入膏育，非药石所能治疗，必得生人脑髓配药，方可救得。 
现代文：有一天，主人得了病，医生看过说： 病已深入到内脏深处，吃药扎针都不能治好了，除非用活人的脑髓配药，才能救活。 
English: One day, the master fell ill, and the doctor read it and said, "The disease has penetrated deep into the internal organs, and can't be cured by taking pills or needles. It can only be cured by using the brain marrow of a living person."

古文：遍索无有。
现代文：那主人派人到处寻找活人的脑髓，都找不到。
English: The owner sent people everywhere to look for a living person's brain, but they couldn't find one.

古文：忽省悟曰： 某人平常自谓肯替死，岂吝惜一脑乎？ 
现代文：忽然想起来说： 某人平时常说愿意替我去死，决不会舍不得一个脑髓吧？ 
English: Suddenly remembering, he said, "Someone who often says he is willing to die for me would not begrudge me a brain, would he?

古文：即呼之至，告以故。乃大惊曰： 阿呀，使勿得，吾里苏州人，从来无脑子个。 
现代文：于是就急忙把那人叫来，向他说明叫他来的原因，那人大吃一惊，说： 哎呀，这可使不得，我们苏州人，从来都是没有脑子的。 
English: So he hurriedly called the man in and explained to him why he had been called in. The man was taken aback and said, "Oh dear, this can't be helped. We, the people of Suzhou, have never had any brains.

古文：蛐蟮
现代文：蛐蟮
English: 

古文：帮闲者自夸技能曰： 我件件俱精，天下无比。 
现代文：有一个专门靠侍候有钱人玩耍而谋生的人，自我吹嘘有本事，说： 我什么本领都精通，天下的人没有能和我相比的。 
English: There was once a man who made his living exclusively by waiting on rich people at play. He boasted of his skill and said, "I am proficient in every skill, and no one in the world can compare with me."

古文：一人曰： 只有一物最像。 
现代文：一个人听了说： 只有一种东西最像你。 
English: One person said: "There's only one thing that looks like you.

古文：问是何物，答曰： 蛐蟮。 
现代文：问是什么东西，回答说： 蛐蟮。 
English: Asked what it was, he replied: "A dragonfly."

古文：问： 何以像他？ 曰： 杀之无血，剐之无肉，要长就长，要短就短，又会唱曲，又会呵脬。 
现代文：又问为什么像他，回答说： 杀它没有血，剐它没有肉，要长就长，要短就短，又会唱曲子，又会讨好人。 
English: When asked why he was like him, he replied: "Kill it without blood, eat it without meat, long is long, short is short, can sing a tune, and can please good people."

古文：件件熟
现代文：件件熟
English: Familiar with the subject matter

古文：帮闲人除夜与妻同饭，忽然笑曰： 我想一生止受用得一个 熟 字。
现代文：有一个帮闲的人，除夕的晚上和妻子一块吃团年饭，忽然得意地笑着说： 我这一生，就凭一个 熟 字，就享受不完。
English: On the evening of New Year's Eve, a helper was having a group dinner with his wife, when he suddenly smiled with pride and said, "I can't enjoy my whole life with just one familiar word."

古文：你看大老官，哪个不熟；私窠小娘，哪个不熟？
现代文：你看有钱的大爷，哪个不熟？私娼妓女，哪个不熟？
English: You see, rich grandpa, which one don't you know? Private prostitute, which one don't you know?

古文：游船上，哪个不熟？
现代文：游乐船上，哪个不熟？
English: On a pleasure boat, which one is unfamiliar?

古文：戏子歌童，哪个不熟？
现代文：唱戏唱歌的，哪个不熟？
English: If you sing opera songs, which one are you not familiar with?

古文：箫管唱曲的朋友，哪个不熟？ 
现代文：吹箫唱曲的朋友，哪个不熟？ 
English: A friend who boasts of singing, which one is not familiar?

古文：说未毕，妻忽大恸。
现代文：还没等他说完，妻子忽然大哭起来。
English: Before he could finish, his wife burst into tears.

古文：其人问故，曰： 天杀的！你既件件皆熟，如何我这件过年布衫，偏不替我赎。 
现代文：问她为什么哭，妻子说： 你这该死的，既然你件件都熟，为什么我那件过年穿的衣服，不从当铺里赎回来？ 
English: Asking her why she was crying, the wife said: "You damn woman, since you know everything, why didn't you redeem my New Year's dress from the pawnshop?

古文：活千年
现代文：活千年
English: A thousand years old

古文：一门客谓贵人曰： 昨夜梦公活了一千年。 
现代文：有一个专爱奉承主人的门客对他的主人说： 我昨夜梦见您老活了一千年。 
English: A flatterer said to his master: "I dreamed last night that you had lived for a thousand years.

古文：贵人曰： 梦生得死，莫非不祥么。 
现代文：主人说： 梦生得死，恐怕是不吉利吧。 
English: The master said, "I'm afraid it's unlucky for a dream to come true.

古文：其人遽转口曰： 啐！我说差了。正是梦公死了一千年。 
现代文：那人急忙改口说： 呸，我说错了，我是梦见您老死了一千年。 
English: The man quickly changed his tone and said, "Oh, I misspoke. I dreamt that you died a thousand years ago.

古文：屁香
现代文：屁香
English: The smell of farts

古文：有奉贵人者，贵人偶撒一屁，即曰： 哪里伽楠香？ 
现代文：有个人喜欢奉承有钱有势的人，有钱人偶然放了一屁，那人马上说道： 哪里来的伽楠香？ 
English: There was a man who liked to flatter the rich and powerful. The rich man accidentally farted, and the man immediately said, "Where did the incense come from?"

古文：贵人惭曰： 我闻屁乃谷气，以臭为正。今反香，恐非吉兆。 
现代文：有钱人十分不安地说： 我听说屁是五谷之气，臭是正常的，现在反而香，恐怕不是好的预兆。 
English: The rich man said uneasily, "I've heard that farts are the smell of grain, and the smell is normal, but now it's smelly. I'm afraid it's not a good omen."

古文：其人即以手招气嗅之曰： 如今有点臭了。 
现代文：那人立即用手在空中招气一闻道： 现在有点臭了。 
English: The man immediately blew into the air with his hand and said, "It smells a bit now."

古文：撞席
现代文：撞席
English: Drum circle

古文：老鼠与獭结交。
现代文：老鼠与獭结交为朋友。
English: The mouse makes friends with the centipede.

古文：鼠先请獭。獭答席，邀鼠过河，暂住觅食。
现代文：老鼠先请獭赴宴，之后獭又设宴答谢老鼠，老鼠过河时，獭暂时去找东西吃。
English: The mouse first invited the stork to a banquet, after which the stork set up a banquet to thank the mouse. When the mouse crossed the river, the stork temporarily looked for something to eat.

古文：忽一猫见之欲捕，鼠慌曰： 请我的倒不见，吃我的倒来了。 
现代文：突然，一只猫看见了老鼠就扑过去捉，老鼠十分慌恐，边逃边说： 请我的看不见，吃我的倒来了。 
English: Suddenly, a cat saw a mouse and pounced on it to catch it. The mouse was very panicked and said as it ran away: "Please, I can't see, it's coming to eat me."

古文：屁股痛
现代文：屁股痛
English: A pain in the ass

古文：麻苍蝇与青苍蝇结为兄弟。
现代文：麻苍蝇和青苍蝇结拜为兄弟。
English: The pox fly and the blue fly are brothers.

古文：青蝇引麻蝇到一酒席上，麻蝇恣意饮啖，被小厮拿住。
现代文：一天，青苍蝇引路，带麻苍蝇来到一桌酒席上，麻苍蝇就大吃大喝起来，不料被仆人捉住。
English: One day, a blue fly led the way and brought a leprosy fly to a table of wine. The leprosy fly ate and drank until it was caught by a servant.

古文：将竹签插入屁股，递灯草与他使棍，半日才得脱身。
现代文：仆人用竹签插进麻苍蝇的屁股，另一端拴在一根灯草上，让苍蝇飞耍，麻苍蝇半天才脱身逃掉。
English: The servant used a bamboo stick to stick it into the fly's butt, and tied the other end to a piece of lantern grass to let the fly fly around. It took the fly half a day to escape.

古文：遇着青蝇泣诉曰： 承你挈带，吃倒尽有，只是屁股痛得紧。 
现代文：麻苍蝇遇见青苍蝇，哭着对他说： 多谢你带路，吃的倒什么都有，只是屁股疼得厉害。 
English: When the blue fly met the white fly, it cried and said to him, "Thank you for leading the way, you have everything to eat, but your bottom hurts terribly."

古文：梦里梦
现代文：梦里梦
English: Dream within a dream

古文：妓与客久别复会，各道相思。
现代文：妓女与嫖客久别后相会，各自述说相思之情。
English: A prostitute and her client meet after a long separation, and each of them recounts their longing for the other.

古文：妓云： 我无夜不梦见与你同食、同眠、同游戏，乃是积想所致。 
现代文：妓女说： 我没有一夜不梦见和你一起吃饭，一起睡觉，一起游玩，这是思念太深的缘故。 
English: The prostitute said, "I haven't gone a single night without dreaming of eating with you, sleeping with you, and playing with you. It's because I miss you so much."

古文：客曰： 我亦梦之。 
现代文：嫖客说： 我也梦见了你。 
English: The client said, "I dreamed about you, too."

古文：妓问曰： 梦怎的？ 
现代文：妓女问道： 梦见什么？ 
English: The prostitute asked, "What did you dream about?"

古文：客曰： 我梦见你不梦见我。 
现代文：嫖客说： 我梦见你没有梦见我。 
English: The client said: I dreamt that you didn't dream about me.

古文：年倒缩
现代文：年倒缩
English: The year in reverse

古文：一商人嫖妓，问其青春几何？妓曰： 十八。 
现代文：有个商人去妓院，碰到一个妓女，问她年龄多大，妓女说： 十八岁。 
English: A businessman went to a brothel, met a prostitute and asked her how old she was. The prostitute said: "Eighteen."

古文：越数年，商人生意折本，仍过其家，妓忘之。
现代文：过了几年，商人做生意亏了本，路过妓院又遇到那个妓女，妓女已经忘记他了。
English: A few years later, when the merchant had lost money in his business, he passed by the brothel and met the prostitute again, but she had already forgotten him.

古文：问其年，则曰： 十七。 
现代文：商人问妓女年龄，妓女回答说： 十七。 
English: The businessman asked the prostitute her age, and she replied: "Seventeen."

古文：又过数年，入其家问之，则曰： 十六。 
现代文：又过了几年，商人来到妓院，问那个妓女多大年龄，妓女回答说： 十六。 
English: A few years later, a businessman came to the brothel and asked the prostitute how old she was.

古文：商人忽涕泣不止。妓问何故？曰： 你的年纪，倒与我的本钱一般，渐渐地少了。想到此处，能不令人伤心。 
现代文：突然，商人涕哭不止，妓女问他为什么哭，商人说： 你的年纪，与我的本钱一样，越来越少了，想到这里，能不伤心吗？ 
English: Suddenly, the merchant burst into tears. The prostitute asked him why he was crying. The merchant said, "Your age, like my capital, is dwindling. Can you not feel sad when you think about this?

古文：父多一次
现代文：父多一次
English: My father more than once

古文：子好游妓馆，父责之曰： 不成器的畜生，我到娼家十次，倒有九次见你。 
现代文：儿子喜欢逛妓院，父亲责骂道： 不成器的畜生，我到妓院十次，倒有九次见到你！ 
English: My son likes to go to brothels. My father scolded him, "You worthless animal, I've been to a brothel ten times, but I've only seen you nine times!

古文：子曰： 这等说来，你还多我一次，反来骂我？ 
现代文：儿子回答说： 这样说来，你还比我多一次，为什么反倒要骂我？ 
English: His son replied: "So you have beaten me more than once, why do you curse me?

古文：龟渡
现代文：龟渡
English: Turtle crossing

古文：有一士欲过河，苦无渡船。
现代文：有一个秀才想过河，但苦于没有渡船，所以非常着急。
English: There was a talented man who wanted to cross the river, but he was in a hurry because there was no ferry.

古文：忽见有一大龟，士曰： 乌龟哥，烦你渡我过去，我吟诗谢你。 
现代文：忽然他看见了一只大乌龟，秀才说： 乌龟哥，麻烦你渡我过河去，我作一首诗谢你过河。 
English: Suddenly, he saw a big turtle. He said, "Brother turtle, please cross the river for me. I will write a poem to thank you for crossing the river."

古文：龟曰： 先吟后渡。 
现代文：乌龟说： 你先作诗，然后再渡你。 
English: The turtle said, "First you write a poem, and then I will give it to you."

古文：士曰： 莫被你哄，先吟两句，何如？ 
现代文：秀才说： 你不要骗我呀，要不，我先吟两句，怎么样？ 
English: The scholar said, "Don't lie to me. If not, how about I say a few words first?

古文：龟曰： 使得。 
现代文：乌龟说： 可以。 
English: The turtle said, "Yes."

古文：士吟曰： 身穿九宫八卦，四海龙王也怕。 
现代文：秀才便吟道： 身穿九宫八卦，四海龙王也怕。 
English: The scholar then intoned: Wearing the Nine Palace Pagoda, the Dragon King of the Four Seas is also afraid.

古文：龟喜甚，即渡士过河。
现代文：乌龟听了，非常高兴，就把秀才驮过了河。
English: When the turtle heard this, he was very happy and carried the scholar across the river.

古文：士续曰： 我是衣冠中人，不与乌龟答话。 
现代文：秀才过了河，又续了两句： 我是衣冠中人，不与乌龟答话。 
English: Xiu Cai crossed the river and continued with two sentences: I am a man of the cloth, and I don't talk back to turtles.

古文：新雷公
现代文：新雷公
English: New Lei Gong

古文：雷公欲诛忤逆子，子执其手曰： 且慢击。我且问你，是新雷公，还是旧雷公？ 
现代文：雷公要击不孝子，这个不孝子拉住雷公的手说： 你且慢击，我先问你一下，你是新雷公还是老雷公？ 
English: Lei Gong wanted to hit the unfilial son. The unfilial son took hold of Lei Gong's hand and said, "Just hit him slowly. Let me ask you first, are you the new Lei Gong or the old Lei Gong?"

古文：雷公曰： 何谓？ 
现代文：雷公说： 你问这话是什么意思？ 
English: Lei Gong said: What do you mean by that?

古文：其人曰： 若是新雷公，我竟该打死，若是旧雷公，我父忤逆我祖，你一向在哪里去了？ 
现代文：不孝子说： 如果是新雷公，我就该被打死，如果是老雷公，那么我父亲不孝顺我爷爷，你又到哪里去了？ 
English: The unfilial son said: If it is the new Lei Gong, I should be beaten to death, if it is the old Lei Gong, then my father is not filial to my grandfather, where have you gone?

古文：叫城门
现代文：叫城门
English: Calling the city gate

古文：一人最好唱曲，探亲回迟，城门已闭，因叫开门。
现代文：有一个人很喜欢唱曲，走亲戚回来晚了，城门已经关了，于是就上前叫门。
English: There was a man who loved to sing. When his relatives came back late, the gate was already closed, so he went to the front to shout for the gate.

古文：管门者曰： 你唱一曲我听，便放你进来。 
现代文：守城门的人说： 你唱一首曲我听听，我就放你进来。 
English: And the keeper of the gate said, Sing me a song, and I will let thee in.

古文：此人曰： 唱便唱，只是我唱，你要答应。 
现代文：唱曲的说： 唱就唱，只是我唱时，你要答应。 
English: The singer said: I'll sing if you sing, but when I sing, you have to agree.

古文：管门曰： 依你。 
现代文：守门人说： 好吧。 
English: The keeper said: OK.

古文：其人先说白云： 叫周仓！ 
现代文：唱曲人先念白说： 叫周仓！ 
English: The singer first said, "Call Zhou Cang!

古文：城上应曰： 嗄。 
现代文：城上答应： 嘎！ 
English: The castle replied: Gaa!

古文： 关爷爷在城外了。还不快迎！ 
现代文：唱曲人又念白： 关爷爷在城外了还不快迎？ 
English: The singer chanted again: Is Grandpa Guan still unwelcome outside the city?

古文：复应曰： 嗄。 
现代文：守门人又答应： 嘎！ 
English: The doorkeeper again agreed: Aha!

古文：其人曰： 你既晓得关爷在城外就该开门，如何还敢要我唱曲？ 
现代文：唱曲人说： 你既然知道你关爷爷在城外，就该赶快开门，怎么还敢叫我唱曲？ 
English: The singer said, "Since you know that your grandfather is out of town, you should open the door as soon as possible. How dare you ask me to sing?"

古文：不利语
现代文：不利语
English: Unfavorable language

古文：一翁无子，三婿同居。
现代文：有一个老人没有儿子，只有三个女儿，并和三个女婿住在一起。
English: There was an old man who had no sons, only three daughters, and he lived with his three sons-in-law.

古文：新造厅房一所，其长婿饮归，敲门不应，大骂牢门为何关得恁早！
现代文：老人新造了一所房子，一次大女婿外出喝酒回来，敲门没有人应，就大骂这牢门为何关得这样早。
English: The old man had built a new house, and one day his eldest son-in-law came back from drinking and knocked on the door, but no one answered, so he yelled at the jail about why the door was locked so early.

古文：翁怒，呼第二婿诉曰： 我此屋费过千金，不是容易挣的，不利之语，甚觉可恶。 
现代文：老人很生气，就对第二个女婿诉说： 我造这房子花了千金，不是容易挣来的，说出这样不吉利的话，实在可恶。 
English: The old man was very angry and said to his second son-in-law, "I spent a lot of money to build this house. It wasn't easy to earn. To say such an unlucky thing is really disgusting.

古文：次婿曰： 此房若卖也，只值五百金罢了。 
现代文：二女婿说： 这房子如果卖的话，最多不过卖五百金罢了。 
English: The second son-in-law said, "If this house is sold, it will only sell for a maximum of five hundred gold coins.

古文：翁愈怒。又呼第三婿述之。
现代文：老人更加生气，又把三女婿叫来，诉说这件事。
English: The old man was even more angry and called his third son-in-law to tell him about it.

古文：三婿云： 就是五百金劝阿伯卖了也罢，若然一场天火，连屁也不值。 
现代文：三女婿说： 就算是五百金，我劝你老伯还是卖了吧，不然一场大火烧了，连个屁也不值。 
English: The third son-in-law said, "Even if it is only five hundred gold coins, I advise you to sell your uncle, otherwise, if a fire broke out, it wouldn't even be worth a fart."

古文：吃荇叶
现代文：吃荇叶
English: Eating lettuce leaves

古文：清客贫甚，晨起无米，煮荇叶食之而出。
现代文：有一个清客很穷，早晨没有米下锅，就煮了一锅荇菜叶当饭吃。
English: There was a poor villager who had no pot to cook rice in the morning, so he boiled a pot of chive leaves to eat as a meal.

古文：少顷，赴富人席。
现代文：后来到了一个富人家里，过了一会儿，富人请他赴宴。
English: Then he went to a rich man's house, and after a while, the rich man invited him to a banquet.

古文：饮空心酒过多，遂大哕，而荇叶出焉。
现代文：因为肚子里没有饭，喝空心酒太多，他就呕吐起来，把荇菜叶也一块吐出来了。
English: Because there was no food in his stomach and he had drunk too much hollow wine, he vomited and spat out a leek leaf.

古文：恐人嘲笑，乃指而言曰： 好古怪，早上吃白滚汤时，用不多几个莲心，如何一会子小荷叶出得恁快？ 焦面鬼
现代文：他怕别人笑话他，就用手指着荇菜说： 好奇怪，早晨喝莲子汤，没吃几粒莲子，怎么这么快就长出小荷叶来了？ 焦面鬼
English: He was afraid that others would laugh at him, so he waved his finger at the stew and said, "It's very strange. I drank lotus seed soup in the morning, but I didn't eat a few lotus seeds. How did the small lotus leaves grow so quickly?"

古文：一帮闲途遇人家出丧，前有焦面鬼王，以为大老官人也，礼拜甚恭。
现代文：有个帮闲的人路上遇到一人家出丧，前面有焦面鬼王，以为是大老官人，因此对其礼拜十分谦恭。
English: On the way, a helper came across a family member who was in mourning. In front of him was a grim-faced ghost king. He thought he was a senior government official, so he was very polite to him.

古文：少顷，大雨如注。而鬼身上纸衣被雨濯去。闲汉曰： 白日见鬼，我只道是大老官，却原来也是个篾片。 
现代文：不一会，下起雨来，雨大如注，焦面鬼身上的纸衣被雨浇掉，那个闲汉说： 白天见鬼，我只道是大老官，原来却也是个篾片。 
English: After a while, it started to rain. The rain was so heavy that the paper coat on the ghost's body was washed away by the rain. The idler said, "Damn it, during the day, I was just a high-ranking official, but I turned out to be a piece of filth."

古文：咽糠
现代文：咽糠
English: pharynx

古文：一闲汉咽糠而出，忽遇大老官，留家早饭。
现代文：有个闲汉吃糠后出外，突然遇到大老官，大老官留闲汉在家吃早饭。
English: An idle man went out after eating strawberries. Suddenly, he met a senior official. The senior official left the idle man at home to have breakfast.

古文：答曰： 适间用狗肉过饱，饭是吃不下了，有酒饮几杯。 
现代文：闲汉回答说： 刚才过于饱食狗肉，饭是吃不下了，有酒倒可喝几杯。 
English: The idler replied: "Just now I was too full from eating dog meat. I can't eat the meal, but I can drink a few glasses of wine.

古文：既饮，忽吐而糠出焉。
现代文：喝酒之后突然呕吐，糠被吐了出来。
English: After drinking, he suddenly vomited and vomited pus.

古文：主见。惊问曰： 你说吃了狗肉，为何吐此？ 
现代文：主人见此吃惊地问道： 你说吃了狗肉，为何吐出糠来？ 
English: The owner was surprised and asked, "You said you ate dog meat, why did you vomit up maggots?"

古文：其人睨视良久。曰： 咦，我自吃的狗肉，想必狗曾吃糠来。 
现代文：闲汉睨视许久回答道： 咦，我自己吃的是狗肉，想必狗曾经吃糠来。 
English: The idler stared for a long time and replied, "Well, I myself eat dog meat, so the dog must have eaten grasshoppers."

古文：老白相
现代文：老白相
English: Old white phase

古文：荒岁闲汉无处活口，值官府于玄妙观施粥。
现代文：荒年闲汉没处吃饭，正好官府在玄妙观施舍米粥。
English: During the lean years, idlers had no place to eat, so the government gave out rice porridge in Xuanyuan.

古文：闲汉私议曰： 我等平昔鲜衣美食，今往吃，必贻人笑。 
现代文：闲汉们暗地里商议说： 我们平日穿好吃好，今天到那里吃粥，必让人耻笑。 
English: The idlers discussed among themselves, saying, "We dress well and eat well on weekdays, but if we go there today to eat porridge, it will be a disgrace.

古文：俄延久之。无奈腹中饿甚。曰： 姑待众饥民吃过，尾其后可也。 
现代文：过了半天，无奈肚子十分饥饿，说： 姑且等众饥民吃过，尾随在他们后面吧。 
English: After half a day, he was very hungry and said, "Let's wait until all the hungry people have eaten, and then follow them."

古文：远望人散而往，则粥已尽矣。乃以指拉食釜杓间余粥。
现代文：闲汉们望见众饥民散去之后前往，可是粥已没了，便用手指抠锅勺里的剩粥。
English: When the idlers saw that the hungry people had dispersed, they went there, but the porridge was gone, so they used their fingers to scoop up the leftover porridge.

古文：道士见而问之，答曰： 我等原是捞白相耳。 
现代文：道士看见后问他们干什么的，闲汉们回答道： 我们原是捞白相公。 
English: After seeing them, the Taoist priest asked them what they were doing. The idlers replied, "We were fishing for the White King."

古文：呵脬
现代文：呵脬
English: 呵

古文：一帮闲，见大老官生得面方耳圆，遂赞不置口。
现代文：有个帮闲的人，见大老官长得面方耳圆，于是赞不绝口。
English: A bystander was full of praise when he saw that the grand old official had a round face and ears.

古文：其人曰： 你又在此呵卵脬了。 
现代文：那人说： 你又在这里呵卵脬了。 
English: The man said, "Here you are again.

古文：泥高壁
现代文：泥高壁
English: Mud high walls

古文：燕子衔泥做巢，搬取蚯蚓上面土。
现代文：燕子衔泥做窠，搬取蚯蚓上面的土。
English: Swallow the mud to make a cocoon, remove the soil from the top of the cocoon.

古文：蚓愤极曰： 你要泥高顶壁，为何把我来晦气？ 
现代文：蚯蚓十分愤怒，说： 你要用泥筑高顶壁，为何衔我上面的泥土，让我晦气？ 
English: The earthworm was very angry and said, "If you are going to build a high wall out of mud, why did you pile the mud on top of me to make me unhappy?"

古文：燕子云： 我专怪你呵人家卵脬。 
现代文：燕子回答道： 我专怪你呵人家卵脬。 
English: Swallow replied, "I blame you for spoiling everyone's eggs."

古文：尿壶骂
现代文：尿壶骂
English: Urinal swearing

古文：一仆人之使，俗言鼻里。
现代文：有个地方的方言，把仆人叫做鼻里。
English: There is a local dialect that refers to servants as noses.

古文：鼻也，出倾夜壶。归告主人曰： 阿爹，方才尿鳖骂我。又骂阿爹。 
现代文：有一天，仆人倒尿壶，回来后向主人诉说道： 阿爹，方才尿壶骂我又骂阿爹。 
English: One day, the servant emptied the urinal, came back and told his master: Daddy, the urinal just scolded me and I scolded Daddy.

古文：主人曰： 胡说！尿鳖如何会骂人？ 
现代文：主人说： 胡说，尿壶怎么会骂人？ 
English: The owner said: Nonsense, how can a urinal swear?

古文：小使曰： 起初骂了我鼻，后连声骂曰： 鼻鼻鼻，鼻鼻鼻。 岂不把阿爹都骂在里头了？ 
现代文：仆人说： 起初它骂了我鼻，后连声骂道： 鼻鼻、鼻鼻、鼻鼻 ，岂不是把阿爹都骂在里头了？ 
English: The servant said, "At first, it cursed my nose, and then it kept on cursing, saying, "Nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose, nose."

古文：豁拳
现代文：豁拳
English: Hakuken

古文：嫖客与妓密甚，约同死。
现代文：有个嫖客跟妓女关系十分密切，相约同死。
English: There was a client who had a very close relationship with a prostitute, and they made a pact to die together.

古文：既设鸩酒二瓯，妓让客先饮，客饮毕，因促妓。妓伸拳曰： 我的量窄，与你豁了这盅罢。 
现代文：不久设置鸩酒两小盅，妓女让嫖客先喝，嫖客喝了之后，便催促妓女喝，妓女伸直拳头说： 我的量窄，给你喝了这盅算了。 
English: Soon, two small glasses of wine were set up. The prostitute asked the client to drink first. After the client drank, he urged the prostitute to drink. The prostitute stretched out her fist and said, "I only have a small amount, so I'll just drink this glass for you."

古文：取头
现代文：取头
English: Take the lead

古文：好赌者，家私输尽，不能过活，取绳上吊。
现代文：有个好赌的人，家里的东西都已输光，无法生活，便拿绳子上吊。
English: There was a man who was a good gambler. He had lost everything in his family and was unable to make a living, so he took a rope and hanged himself.

古文：忽见一鬼在梁上云： 快拿头来。 
现代文：忽然发现房梁上有一鬼，鬼说： 快拿头来。 
English: Suddenly, they found a ghost on the beam of the house. The ghost said, "Quick, get the head."

古文：此人曰： 也亏你开得这口，我输到这般地位，还来问我要头！ 
现代文：该人说： 亏你开得这口，我输到这般地步，还要向我要头。 
English: The man said: "It's thanks to you that I've been able to open this mouth, I've come this far, and I still want my head.

古文：捉头
现代文：捉头
English: Headhunting

古文：按君访察。匡章、陈仲子及齐人，俱被捉。
现代文：按君访察匡章、陈仲子与齐人，三人都被抓起来。
English: According to your inspection of Kuanzhang, Chen Zhongzi and Qi Ren, all three were arrested.

古文：匡自信孝子，陈清客，俱不请托。
现代文：匡章自信是孝子，陈仲子想自己是清客，所以二人都没有托人说情或行贿。
English: Kuanzhang is confident that he is a filial son, while Chen Zhongzi thinks of himself as a guest of honor, so neither of them asked for mercy or offered bribes.

古文：惟齐人有一妻一妾，馈送显者求解。
现代文：只有齐人有一妻一妾，便向有势力的人行贿，请求为其疏通。
English: Only qi people have one wife and one concubine, so they bribe influential people and ask them to smooth things over.

古文：显者为见按君，按君述三人罪状，都是败坏风俗的头目，所以访之。
现代文：显者为此去见按君，按君叙述了三人的罪行，都是败坏风俗的要犯，所以访察抓了他们。
English: For this reason, the eminent person went to see him, and he described the crimes of the three people. They were all important criminals who corrupted customs, so the inspection team arrested them.

古文：显者曰： 匡章出妻屏子，仲子离母避兄，老公祖捉得极正当。
现代文：显者说： 匡章抛弃妻子，仲子别母避兄，老公祖你捉得十分正确。
English: The clairvoyant said: Kuangzhang abandoned his wife, Zhongzi abandoned his mother, avoided his brother, and his father-in-law. You caught it very correctly.

古文：那齐人是叫化子的头，也捉他做甚么？ 
现代文：可是那齐人是叫花子的头，你捉他干什么？ 
English: But Hanako's head belongs to that Chichi person. What are you doing to catch him?

古文：白日鬼
现代文：白日鬼
English: Daydreamers

古文：法师上坛，焰口施食。
现代文：法师登上佛坛，口念佛语向鬼魂施舍饮食。
English: The master ascended the Buddhist altar, recited Buddhist sutras and offered food and drink to the ghosts.

古文：天将明矣，正要安寝，又见一班披枷带锁、折手断脚的饿鬼索食。
现代文：天快亮了，法师刚要就寝，又见一群披枷带锁、断手断脚的饿鬼前来索要吃的。
English: It was almost dawn, and the sorcerer was just about to go to bed, when he saw a group of hungry ghosts wearing shackles and chains, and with their hands and feet cut off, coming to ask for food.

古文：师问： 阳世作何生理，受此果报？ 
现代文：法师问： 你们在阳间是干什么活的，受此恶报？ 
English: The sorcerer asked, "What do you do in the sun, and why did you receive this evil reward?"

古文：众云： 皆是拐骗子、做中保、镶局害人的。 
现代文：饿鬼们说： 都是拐骗子，做保、开赌场害人的。 
English: The hungry ghosts said, "They are all kidnappers and swindlers, they do insurance, they open casinos and harm people.

古文：又问： 夜间为何不来同领法食？ 
现代文：法师又问： 夜里为何不来一同领取法食？ 
English: The master also asked: Why don't you come to receive the food together in the evening?

古文：答曰： 我们一班，都是白日鬼。 
现代文：饿鬼们回答说： 我们这些人，都是白日鬼。 
English: The hungry ghosts replied, "We are all day ghosts.

古文：份子头
现代文：份子头
English: The head of the party

古文：一人生平惯做份头，克扣人家银钱，死后阎王痛恨，发在黑暗地狱内受罪。
现代文：有个人一生惯做份头，克扣人家钱财，死后因为阎王痛恨，把他发往黑暗地狱里受罪。
English: Once upon a time, there was a man who spent his entire life as a grifter, stealing other people's money. After his death, because the king of hell hated him, he was sent to the darkness of hell to suffer.

古文：进狱时，即云： 列位在此，不见天日，何不出一公份，开个天窗！ 
现代文：份头进入地狱后，马上说道： 诸位在此，不见天日，为何不每人出一份钱，开个天窗。 
English: After entering hell for the first time, he immediately said: You are here, you will not see the light of day, why don't you each pay a fee and open a skylight.

古文：穿窬
现代文：穿窬
English: Wearing a scarf

古文：一士人夜读，见偷儿穴墙有声，时炉内滚汤正沸，提汤潜伺穴口。
现代文：有个人夜读，听见小偷挖墙有声。此时炉内开水正沸，便提开水壶暗暗地盯着挖墙的地方。
English: A man was reading at night when he heard the sound of a thief digging in the wall. At this time, the boiling water in the stove was boiling, so he opened the kettle and secretly stared at the place where the wall was being dug.

古文：及墙既穿，偷儿先以脚进，士遂擒住其两腿，徐以滚汤淋之。
现代文：等到墙被挖穿，小偷先将脚伸过，那个人马上按住两腿，慢慢地用开水浇小偷的两腿。
English: After waiting for the wall to be dug through, the thief put his foot through first, and the man immediately held down his legs and slowly poured boiling water over the thief's legs.

古文：贼哀告求释，士从容谓曰： 多也不敢奉承，只尽此一壶罢。 
现代文：小偷哀嗥求饶，那人从容地对小偷说： 多也不敢奉承，只浇一壶就算了。 
English: The thief wailed and begged for mercy. The man calmly said to the thief, "Don't flatter him too much. Just pour him a jug.

古文：抵偿
现代文：抵偿
English: Indemnification

古文：老虎欲啖猢狲，狲诳曰： 我身小不足以供大嚼。
现代文：老虎要吃猢狲，猢狲说： 我身体太小不够你吃。
English: The tiger wanted to eat the dragonfly, but the dragonfly said, "I am too small for you to eat.

古文：前山有一巨兽，堪可饱餐，当引导前去。 
现代文：前面山上有一巨兽，足够你饱餐，我可以引导你前去。 
English: There's a beast on the mountain ahead of you, big enough to feed you, and I can lead you to it.

古文：同至山前，一角鹿见之，疑欲啖己。乃大喝云： 你这小猢狲，许我十二张虎皮。今只拿一张来，还有十一张呢？ 
现代文：猢狲引老虎到了山前，有个角鹿见到它们，怀疑老虎要吃自己，便大声喝道： 你这小猢狲，答应拿十二张虎皮送给我，现在只拿一张来，还有十一张呢！ 
English: A roe deer saw the tigers and suspected that the tigers wanted to eat him, so he shouted: "You little roe deer, you promised to bring me twelve tiger skins, now bring me just one, there are eleven more!

古文：虎惊遁，骂曰： 不信这小猢狲这等可恶，倒要拐我抵销旧账！ 
现代文：老虎听到十分惊慌，赶忙逃跑，并骂道： 没想到这小猢狲这样可恶，倒要拐我抵销旧账。 
English: Hearing this, the tiger panicked, ran away in a hurry, and scolded: "I didn't think this chick was so disgusting, but she wants to kidnap me to settle an old score.

古文：吹喇叭
现代文：吹喇叭
English: Blow the trumpet

古文：乐人夜归，路见偷儿挖一壁洞，戏将喇叭插入吹起。
现代文：有个伴奏的人晚上回家，路上发现小偷挖开的一个墙洞，便开玩笑将喇叭插入墙洞里吹了一会。
English: A man with an accompanist came home in the evening and on the way found a hole in the wall that had been dug by a thief, so he jokingly plugged his horn into the hole in the wall and played for a while.

古文：内惊觉追赶，遇贼问云： 你曾见吹喇叭的么？ 
现代文：主人察觉后出来追赶，遇到小偷问道： 你曾看见吹喇叭的吗？ 
English: The owner noticed and ran after him. When he met the thief, he asked, "Have you ever seen him play the trumpet?"

古文：戒狗肉
现代文：戒狗肉
English: Stop eating dog meat

古文：乞儿戒吃狗肉，众丐劝曰： 不必。 
现代文：有个小乞丐戒吃狗肉，众乞丐劝道： 你不该戒吃狗肉。 
English: A little beggar stopped eating dog meat, and the beggars advised him: You shouldn't stop eating dog meat.

古文：曰： 我不食之久矣。 
现代文：小乞丐说： 我不吃狗肉已经很久了。 
English: The little beggar said, "I haven't eaten dog meat for a long time.

古文：众曰： 你便戒他，他却不戒你。 
现代文：众乞丐说： 你戒吃它，它却不戒吃你。 
English: The beggars said, "You can stop eating it, but it won't stop eating you."

古文：病烂腿
现代文：病烂腿
English: Ailing leg

古文：一乞儿病腿烂，仰卧市中。
现代文：有个小乞丐腿坏已烂，仰卧在街市里。
English: There was a little beggar with a rotten leg, lying on his back in the market.

古文：狗见之欲饫，乞儿曰： 畜生。少不得是你口里食。何须这般性急！ 
现代文：狗见到烂腿要啖。小乞丐说： 畜生，少不了是你口里食，何须性急！ 
English: When the dog saw the rotten leg, it wanted to scratch it. The little beggar said, "Bastard, what you need is food in your mouth. Why are you in such a hurry?"

古文：做仆
现代文：做仆
English: To be a servant

古文：有投靠做仆者。自言： 一生不会横撑船，不肯缩退走。见饭就住的。 
现代文：有个人寻找做仆人的差事，自称一生不会横撑船，不肯缩退后，见饭就住的。
English: There was a man who was looking for a job as a servant. He said that he would never stand up in a boat. He refused to back down, and lived from hand to mouth.

古文：主人喜而纳之。
现代文：有户人家的主人高兴地录用了他。
English: The owner of the house happily hired him.

古文：一日使捻河泥，辞曰： 说过不会横撑船。 
现代文：一天，主人让他捻河泥，仆人推辞说： 我说过不会横撑船。 
English: One day, the master asked him to twist the river mud, but the servant refused, saying: "I said I wouldn't hold the boat sideways.

古文：又使其插秧，曰： 说过不会缩退走。 
现代文：主人又让他插秧，仆人回答说： 说过不会缩退走。 
English: When his master asked him again to put out the fire, the servant replied, "I told you, I will not run away.

古文：主人愤甚。
现代文：主人十分愤怒。
English: The owner was furious.

古文：伺其饭，辄连进不止。乃以 见饭就住 语责之。
现代文：观察他吃饭，总是连进不止，于是用 见饭就住 的话斥责他。
English: Watching him eat, he was always hungry, so he scolded him with the words, "Eat as much as you want."

古文：其人张口向主人曰： 请看喉咙内曾见饭否？ 
现代文：仆人张嘴向主人说： 请看，喉咙里看得见饭吗？ 
English: The servant opened his mouth and said to his master, "Look, can you see any food in your throat?"

