古文：扁鹊者，勃海郡郑人也，姓秦氏，名越人。
现代文：扁鹊是渤海郡鄚人，姓秦，叫越人。
English: Bianqian is a native of Bohai County, surnamed Qin. He is also known as Yuejin.

古文：少时为人舍长。
现代文：年轻时做人家客馆的主管。
English: When he was young, he was the manager of a guest house.

古文：舍客长桑君过，扁鹊独奇之，常谨遇之。
现代文：有个姓长桑的客人到客馆来，只有扁鹊认为他是一个奇人，时常恭敬地对待他。
English: A guest by the name of Changsang came to the inn. Only Bian Que thought he was a strange person and often treated him with respect.

古文：长桑君亦知扁鹊非常人也。出入十馀年，乃呼扁鹊私坐，间与语曰： 我有禁方，年老，欲传与公，公毋泄。 
现代文：长桑君也知道扁鹊不是普通人，他来来去去有十多年了，一天叫扁鹊和自己坐在一起，悄悄和扁鹊说： 我有秘藏的医方，我年老了，想传留给你，你不要泄漏出去。 
English: Chang Sangjun also knew that Bian Que was not an ordinary person. He had been coming and going for more than ten years. One day, he asked Bian Que to sit with him and quietly said to Bian Que: "I have a secret cure. I am old and I want to pass it on to you. Don't leak it out."

古文：扁鹊曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：扁鹊说： 恭敬遵命。 
English: Bian Que said, "Respectfully follow my orders."

古文：乃出其怀中药予扁鹊： 饮是以上池之水三十日，当知物矣。 
现代文：他这才拿出怀中的药给扁鹊，并说： 用草木上的露水送服这种药，三十天后你就能知晓许多事情。 
English: Only then did he take out the medicine in his arms and give it to the stork, saying, "Take this medicine with the dew from the plants, and in thirty days you will be able to know many things."

古文：乃悉取其禁方书尽与扁鹊。
现代文：接着又拿出他的全部秘方交给了扁鹊。
English: Then he took out all his secret recipes and gave them to Bian Que.

古文：忽然不见，殆非人也。
现代文：忽然间人就不见了，大概他不是凡人吧。
English: All of a sudden, the man disappeared. He was probably not an ordinary man.

古文：扁鹊以其言饮药三十日，视见垣一方人。
现代文：扁鹊按照他说的话服药三十天，就能看见墙另一边的人。
English: By taking the medicine for thirty days as he said, Bian Que could see the people on the other side of the wall.

古文：以此视病，尽见五藏症结，特以诊脉为名耳。
现代文：因此诊视别人的疾病时，能看五脏内所有的病症，只是表面上还在为病人切脉。
English: Therefore, when diagnosing someone else's disease, you can see all the diseases within the five organs, but on the surface you are still cutting the patient's veins.

古文：为医或在齐，或在赵。
现代文：他有时在齐国行医，有时在赵国行医。
English: He sometimes practised medicine in Qi and sometimes in Zhao.

古文：在赵者名扁鹊。
现代文：在赵国时名叫扁鹊。
English: When he was in Zhao, his name was Bianjun.

古文：当晋昭公时，诸大夫彊而公族弱，赵简子为大夫，专国事。
现代文：在晋昭公的时候，众多大夫的势力强盛而国君的力量衰弱，赵简子是大夫，却独掌国事。
English: At the time of Jin Zhaogong, the power of many doctors was strong and the power of the sovereign was weak. Zhao Jianzi was a doctor, but he was in sole charge of state affairs.

古文：简子疾，五日不知人，大夫皆惧，於是召扁鹊。
现代文：赵简子病了，五天不省人事，大夫们都很忧惧，于是召来扁鹊。
English: Zhao Jianzi fell ill and was unconscious for five days. The doctors were very worried, so they called in the doctor.

古文：扁鹊入视病，出，董安于问扁鹊，扁鹊曰： 血脉治也，而何怪！
现代文：扁鹊入室诊视病后走出，大夫董安于向扁鹊询问病情，扁鹊说： 他的血脉正常，你们何必惊怪！
English: After examining and diagnosing the illness, Dr. Dong Anyu asked Bian Que about his condition. Bian Que said, "His blood is normal, why should you be surprised!"

古文：昔秦穆公尝如此，七日而寤。
现代文：从前秦穆公曾出现这种情形，昏迷了七天才苏醒。
English: Formerly, Qin Mu Gong was in this situation. He was in a coma for seven days before he woke up.

古文：寤之日，告公孙支与子舆曰： 我之帝所甚乐。
现代文：醒来的当天，告诉公孙支和子舆说： 我到了天帝那里十分快乐。
English: On the day I woke up, I told my father-in-law, my son-in-law and my daughter-in-law: I am very happy to be with the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：吾所以久者，適有所学也。
现代文：我所以去那么长时间，正好碰上天帝要指教我。
English: That's why I went for such a long time, just in time to meet the heavenly emperor to instruct me.

古文：帝告我： 晋国且大乱，五世不安。
现代文：天帝告诉我 晋国将要大乱，五代都不得安宁。
English: The Heavenly Emperor told me that there will be great turmoil in Jin Province, and the five generations will not have peace.

古文：其後将霸，未老而死。
现代文：之后将有人成为霸主，称霸不久他就会死去。
English: Then someone will become the overlord, and he will die soon after becoming overlord.

古文：霸者之子且令而国男女无别。  公孙支书而藏之，秦策於是出。
现代文：霸主的儿子将使他们的国家男女淫乱 。 公孙支把这些话记下收藏起来，后来秦国的史书才记载了此事。
English: The overlord's son will make their country's men and women fornicate. Gongsunzhi wrote down these words and collected them, and later the history books of Qin only recorded this.

古文：夫献公之乱，文公之霸，而襄公败秦师於殽而归纵淫，此子之所闻。
现代文：晋献公的淫乱，晋文公的称霸，及晋襄公打败秦军在殽山后放纵淫乱，这些都是您听过的。
English: You have heard of the immorality of Jin Keng Gong, the hegemony of Jin Wen Gong, and the immorality of Jin Xiang Gong after defeating the Qin army in Lushan.

古文：今主君之病与之同，不出三日必间，间必有言也。 
现代文：现在你们主君的病和他相同，不出三天就会痊愈，痊愈后必定也会说一些话。 
English: And now, behold, your master is sick of the same disease, and will be better in three days; and when he is better, he will also speak with you.

古文：居二日半，简子寤，语诸大夫曰： 我之帝所甚乐，与百神游於钧天，广乐九奏万舞，不类三代之乐，其声动心。
现代文：过了二天半，赵简子苏醒了，告诉众大夫说： 我到天帝那儿非常快乐，与百神游玩在天的中央，那里各种乐器奏着许多乐曲，跳着各种各样的舞蹈，不像上古三代时的乐舞，乐声动人心魄。
English: After two and a half days, Zhao Jianzi woke up and told the doctors, "I was very happy when I went to the Heavenly Emperor. I played with hundreds of gods in the middle of the sky, where various musical instruments played many pieces of music and danced a variety of dances. Unlike the music and dance of the three ancient dynasties, the music moved people's hearts.

古文：有一熊欲援我，帝命我射之，中熊，熊死。
现代文：有一只熊要抓我，天帝命令我射杀它，射中了熊，熊死了。
English: There was a bear trying to catch me, and God told me to shoot it. I shot the bear, and the bear died.

古文：有罴来，我又射之，中罴，罴死。
现代文：有一只罴走过来，我又射它，又射中了，罴也死了。
English: A badger came along, I shot it again, it was hit again, and the badger died.

古文：帝甚喜，赐我二笥，皆有副。
现代文：天帝非常高兴，赏赐我两个竹笥，里边都装有首饰。
English: Heavenly Father was very pleased and rewarded me with two bamboo shoots, both of which contained jewelry.

古文：吾见兒在帝侧，帝属我一翟犬，曰： 及而子之壮也以赐之。 
现代文：我看见我的儿子在天帝的身边，天帝把一只翟犬托付给我，并说： 等到你的儿子长大成人时赐给他。 
English: I saw my son at the side of the Heavenly Father. The Heavenly Father entrusted a mastiff to me and said: Wait until your son grows up and give it to him.

古文：帝告我： 晋国且世衰，七世而亡。
现代文：天帝告诉我说： 晋国将会一代一代地衰微下去，过了七代就会灭亡。
English: The Heavenly Emperor told me: Jin will decline from generation to generation, and after seven generations, it will perish.

古文：嬴姓将大败周人於范魁之西，而亦不能有也。  董安于受言，书而藏之。
现代文：秦国人将在范魁的西边打败周人，但他们也不能拥有他的政权。 董安于听了这些话后，记录并收藏起来。
English: The people of Qin will defeat Zhou on the west side of Fan Kui, but they can't have his power. After hearing these words, Dong Anyu recorded and collected them.

古文：以扁鹊言告简子，简子赐扁鹊田四万亩。
现代文：人们把扁鹊说过的话告诉赵简子，赵简子赐给扁鹊田地四万亩。
English: People told Zhao Jianzi what Bian Que had said, and Zhao Jianzi gave Bian Que 40,000 mu of farmland.

古文：其后扁鹊过虢。
现代文：后来扁鹊路经虢国。
English: Later, the Lianye Road passed through Shandong Province.

古文：虢太子死，扁鹊至虢宫门下，问中庶子喜方者曰： 太子何病，国中治穰过於众事？ 
现代文：正碰上虢国太子病逝，扁鹊来到虢国王宫门前，问一位喜好医术的中庶子说： 太子有什么病，为什么都城举行除邪去病的祭祀超过了其他许多事？ 
English: Just as the death of the Prince of Yunnan Province occurred, Bian Que came to the gate of the palace of the King of Yunnan and asked a middle child who was fond of medicine, saying: What is the illness of the Prince, why did the capital hold a ritual to remove the evil and remove the disease more than many other things?

古文：中庶子曰： 太子病血气不时，交错而不得泄，暴发於外，则为中害。
现代文：中庶子说： 太子的病是血气运行没有规律，阴阳交错而不能疏泄，猛烈地暴发在体表，实则内脏受到伤害。
English: The middle child said, "The prince's illness is caused by irregular blood and gas circulation. Yin and yang are intertwined and cannot be released. Violent outbreaks occur on the surface of the body, but the internal organs are actually harmed.

古文：精神不能止邪气，邪气畜积而不得泄，是以阳缓而阴急，故暴蹶而死。 
现代文：人体的正气不能制止邪气，邪气蓄积而不能疏泄，因此阳气衰微而阴邪炽盛，所以突然昏倒而死。 
English: The righteous energy of the human body cannot stop the evil energy. The evil energy accumulates and cannot be released. As a result, the yang energy fades away while the yin energy is ablaze. As a result, the person suddenly passes out and dies.

古文：扁鹊曰： 其死何如时？ 
现代文：扁鹊问： 他什么时候死的？ 
English: Bian Que asked: When did he die?

古文：曰： 鸡鸣至今。 
现代文：中庶子回答： 从鸡鸣到现在。 
English: The middle child replied, "From the crowing of the rooster to now."

古文：曰： 收乎？ 
现代文：又问： 收殓了吗？ 
English: He also asked: Has the situation been resolved?

古文：曰： 未也，其死未能半日也。 
现代文：回答说： 还没有，他死还不到半天呢。 
English: "Not yet," he replied, "he's been dead for less than half a day."

古文： 言： 臣齐勃海秦越人也，家在於郑，未尝得望精光侍谒於前也。
现代文： 请禀告虢君说，我是渤海郡的秦越人，家在鄚地，未能仰望君王的神采而拜见侍奉在他的面前。
English: I am a Qin and Yue man from Bohai County, and my home is in Handan. I have never been able to look up to the king and worship and serve him.

古文：闻太子不幸而死，臣能生之。  
现代文：听说太子不幸去世，我能使他复活。 
English: I heard that the crown prince passed away, and I can bring him back to life.

古文：中庶子曰： 先生得无诞之乎？
现代文：中庶子说： 先生该不是胡说吧？
English: The middle child said: Isn't the teacher talking nonsense?

古文：何以言太子可生也！
现代文：怎么说太子可以复活呢！
English: How can it be said that the prince can be resurrected!

古文：臣闻上古之时，医有俞跗，治病不以汤液醴洒，鑱石挢引，案扤毒熨，一拨见病之应，因五藏之输，乃割皮解肌，诀脉结筋，搦髓脑，揲荒爪幕，湔浣肠胃，漱涤五藏，练精易形。先生之方能若是，则太子可生也；不能若是而欲生之，曾不可以告咳婴之兒。 
现代文：我听说上古的时候，有个叫俞跗的医生，治病不用汤剂、药酒，镵针、砭石、导引、按摩、药熨等办法，一解开衣服诊视就知道疾病的所在，顺着五脏的腧穴，然后割开皮肤剖开肌肉，疏通经脉，结扎筋腱，按治脑髓，触动膏肓，疏理横隔膜，清洗肠胃，洗涤五脏，修炼精气，改变神情气色，先生的医术能如此，那么太子就能再生了；不能做到如此，却想要使他复活，那简直骗不了刚刚会笑的婴儿。 
English: I heard that in ancient times, there was a doctor named Zou, who cured diseases without the use of decoctions, medicinal wine, acupuncture needles, vermiculite, guidance, massage, medicated ironing and other methods. As soon as he opened his clothes for examination, he knew where the disease was. He followed the pits of the internal organs, then cut the skin to open the muscles, unblock the meridians, ligate the tendons, treat the brain marrow, touch the ointment, clear the diaphragm, clean the stomach, wash the internal organs, cultivate the essence, and change the appearance. If his medical skills can do this, then the prince can be

古文：终日，扁鹊仰天叹曰： 夫子之为方也，若以管窥天，以郄视文。
现代文：过了好久，扁鹊才仰望天空叹息说： 您说的那些治疗方法，就像从竹管中看天，从缝隙中看花纹一样。
English: After a long time, Bian Que looked up at the sky and said with a sigh: The treatment methods you mentioned are like looking at the sky through a bamboo tube, like looking at patterns through a crack.

古文：越人之为方也，不待切脉望色听声写形，言病之所在。
现代文：我用的治疗方法，不需给病人切脉、察看脸色、听声音、观察病人的体态神情，就能说出病因在什么地方。
English: The treatment method I use does not need to take the patient's pulse, look at the face, listen to the voice, observe the patient's body posture, and can tell where the cause of the disease is.

古文：闻病之阳，论得其阴；闻病之阴，论得其阳。
现代文：知道疾病外在的表现就能推知内有的原因；知道疾病内在的原因就能推知外在的表现。
English: Knowing the external manifestation of the disease can infer the internal cause; knowing the internal cause of the disease can infer the external manifestation.

古文：病应见於大表，不出千里，决者至众，不可曲止也。
现代文：人体内有病会从体表反应出来，据此就可诊断千里之外的病人，我决断的方法很多，不能只停留在一个角度看问题。
English: Diseases in the human body are reflected from the surface of the body, which can be used to diagnose patients thousands of miles away. There are many ways to make a decision, and you can't just look at the problem from one angle.

古文：子以吾言为不诚，试入诊太子，当闻其耳鸣而鼻张，循其两股以至於阴，当尚温也。 
现代文：你如果认为我说的不真实，你试着进去诊视太子，应会听到他耳有呜响、看到鼻翼搧动，顺着两腿摸到阴部，那里应该还是温热的。 
English: If you think I'm not telling the truth, try to go in and examine the crown prince. You should hear his ears ringing, see his nostrils fluttering, and feel his genitals along his legs, which should still be warm.

古文：中庶子闻扁鹊言，目眩然而不瞚，舌挢然而不下，乃以扁鹊言入报虢君。
现代文：中庶子听完扁鹊的话，眼呆滞瞪着不能眨，舌头翘着说不出话来，后来才进去把扁鹊的话告诉虢君。
English: After listening to Bian Que's words, the middle son couldn't blink his eyes, his tongue stuck out and he couldn't speak. Only later did he go in and tell Bian Que's words to Zou Jun.

古文：虢君闻之大惊，出见扁鹊於中阙，曰： 窃闻高义之日久矣，然未尝得拜谒於前也。
现代文：虢君听后十分惊讶，走出内廷在宫廷的中门接见扁鹊，说： 听到您崇高的品德已经很久了，然可是没有机会拜见您。
English: After hearing this, Zou Jun was very surprised. He went out of the inner court to meet Bian Que at the middle gate of the court and said, "I have heard about your noble character for a long time, but I haven't had a chance to meet you.

古文：先生过小国，幸而举之，偏国寡臣幸甚。
现代文：这次先生您路经我们小国，希望您能救助我们，我这个偏远国家的君王真是太幸运了。
English: This time, sir, you are passing through our small country. I hope you can help us. I am so lucky to be the king of this remote country.

古文：有先生则活，无先生则弃捐填沟壑，长终而不得反。 
现代文：有先生在就能救活我的儿子，没有先生在他就会抛尸野外而填塞沟壑，永远不能回来。 
English: If he had a teacher, he could have saved my son's life. If he didn't have a teacher, he would have been thrown into the wild to fill in a ravine, never to return.

古文：言末卒，因嘘唏服臆，魂精泄横，流涕长潸，忽忽承镴，悲不能自止，容貌变更。
现代文：话没说完，他就悲伤抽噎气郁胸中，精神散乱恍惚，长时间地流下眼泪，泪珠滚落沾在睫毛上，悲哀不能自我克制，容貌神情发生了变化。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he was in a sad convulsion, depressed, distracted, in a trance, shed tears for a long time, the tears rolled down and stained his eyelashes, he could not restrain himself from sadness, and his appearance changed.

古文：扁鹊曰： 若太子病，所谓 尸蹶 者也。
现代文：扁鹊说： 您的太子得的病，就是人们所说的 尸蹶 。
English: Bian Que said: Your prince's illness is what people call "corpse-walking."

古文：夫以阳入阴中，动胃繵缘，中经维络，别下於三焦、膀胱，是以阳脉下遂，阴脉上争，会气闭而不通，阴上而阳内行，下内鼓而不起，上外绝而不为使，上有绝阳之络，下有破阴之纽，破阴绝阳，色废脉乱，故形静如死状。
现代文：那是因为阳气陷入阴脉，脉气缠绕冲动了胃，经脉受损伤脉络被阻塞，分别下注入下焦、膀胱，因此阳脉下坠，阴气上升，阴阳两气会聚，互相团塞，不能通畅。阴气又逆而上行，阳气只好向内运行，阳气徒然在下在内鼓动却不能上升，在上在外被阻绝不能被阴气遣使，在上有隔绝了阳气的脉络，在下有破坏了阴气的筋纽，这样阴气破坏、阳气隔绝，使人的面色衰败血脉混乱，所以人会身体安静得像死去的样子。
English: That is because the yang falls into the yin vein, the pulse is entangled and stimulates the stomach, the damaged meridians are blocked, and the lower coke and bladder are injected separately, so the yang vein falls, the yin rises, and the yin and yang meet, block each other, and cannot flow smoothly. The yin goes up again, and the yang has to run inward. The yang is vainly agitating inside but cannot rise, and it can never be blocked outside by the yin. On the top, the yang vein is cut off, and on the bottom, the sinews of the yin are destroyed. This kind of yin destroys and cuts off the yang

古文：太子未死也。
现代文：太子实际没有死。
English: The crown prince is not actually dead.

古文：夫以阳入阴支兰藏者生，以阴入阳支兰藏者死。
现代文：因为阳入袭阴而阻绝脏气的能治愈，阴入袭阳而阻绝脏气的必死。
English: Because the yang can be cured by attacking the yin and blocking the foul air, and the yin can be cured by attacking the yang and blocking the foul air.

古文：凡此数事，皆五藏蹙中之时暴作也。
现代文：这些情况，都会在五脏厥逆时突然发作。
English: All of these conditions can come on suddenly when the five internal organs are out of kilter.

古文：良工取之，拙者疑殆。 
现代文：精良的医生能治愈这种病，拙劣的医生会因困惑使病人危险。 
English: A good doctor can cure the disease, but a bad doctor can confuse the patient and put him in danger.

古文：扁鹊乃使弟子子阳厉针砥石，以取外三阳五会。
现代文：扁鹊于是让他的弟子子阳磨砺针石，取三阳、五会下针。
English: Therefore, Bian Que asked his disciple Yang to sharpen the needle stone and take the needle from Sanyang and Wuhe.

古文：有间，太子苏。
现代文：过了一会儿，太子苏醒了。
English: After a while, the prince woke up.

古文：乃使子豹为五分之熨，以八减之齐和煮之，以更熨两胁下。
现代文：又让弟子子豹准备能入体五分的药熨，再加上八减方的药剂混和煎煮，交替在两胁下熨敷。
English: He also asked his disciple, Leopard, to prepare a five-point medicinal iron that can be absorbed into the body, and then mixed and boiled with an eight-subtract dose of medicine, and applied the iron under two coats alternately.

古文：太子起坐。
现代文：太子能够坐起来了。
English: The prince was able to sit up.

古文：更適阴阳，但服汤二旬而复故。
现代文：进一步调和阴阳，仅仅吃了汤剂二十天就身体恢复和从前一样了。
English: To further harmonize the yin and yang, just eat the decoction for twenty days and the body will recover as before.

古文：故天下尽以扁鹊为能生死人。
现代文：因此天下的人都认为扁鹊能使死人复活。
English: As a result, people all over the world believe that it can bring the dead back to life.

古文：扁鹊曰： 越人非能生死人也，此自当生者，越人能使之起耳。 
现代文：扁鹊却说： 我不是能使死人复活啊，这是他应该活下去，我能做的只是促使他恢复健康罢了。 
English: But Bian Que said, "I can't bring the dead back to life. He deserves to live. All I can do is help him regain his health."

古文：扁鹊过齐，齐桓侯客之。
现代文：扁鹊到了齐国，齐桓侯把他当客人招待。
English: When Bian Que arrived in Qi, Qi Han Hou invited him as a guest.

古文：入朝见，曰： 君有疾在腠理，不治将深。 
现代文：他到朝廷拜见桓侯，说： 您有小病在皮肤和肌肉之间，不治将会深入体内。 
English: He went to the imperial court to see Han Hou and said, "You have a minor illness between the skin and the muscles. If you don't treat it, it will spread deep into your body.

古文：桓侯曰： 寡人无疾。 
现代文：桓侯说： 我没有病。 
English: The lord said, "I am not ill."

古文：扁鹊出，桓侯谓左右曰： 医之好利也，欲以不疾者为功。 
现代文：扁鹊走出宫门后，桓侯对身边的人说： 医生喜爱功利，想把没病的人说成是自己治疗的功绩。 
English: After Bian Que walked out of the palace gate, Han Hou said to the people around him: "Doctors love utilitarianism, and want to say that people who are not sick are the merit of their own treatment.

古文：後五日，扁鹊复见，曰： 君有疾在血脉，不治恐深。 
现代文：过了五天，扁鹊再去见桓侯，说： 您的病已在血脉里，不治恐怕会深入体内。 
English: After five days, Bian Que went to see Han Hou again and said, "Your illness is already in your blood, and if you don't treat it, I'm afraid it will go deeper into your body."

古文：桓侯曰： 寡人无疾。 
现代文：桓侯说： 我没有病。 
English: The lord said, "I am not ill."

古文：扁鹊出，桓侯不悦。
现代文：扁鹊出去后，桓侯不高兴。
English: After Bian Que went out, Kan Hou was not happy.

古文：後五日，扁鹊复见，曰； 君有疾在肠胃间，不治将深。 
现代文：过了五天，扁鹊又去见桓侯，说： 您的病已在肠胃间，不治将更深侵入体内。 
English: Five days later, Bian Que went to see Han Hou again and said, "Your illness has already spread to your intestines and stomach, and it will invade deeper into your body if you don't treat it."

古文：桓侯不应。
现代文：桓侯不肯答话。
English: Kanhō refused to answer.

古文：扁鹊出，桓侯不悦。
现代文：扁鹊出去后，桓侯不高兴。
English: After Bian Que went out, Kan Hou was not happy.

古文：後五日，扁鹊复见，望见桓侯而退走。
现代文：过了五天，扁鹊又去，看见桓侯就向后退跑走了。
English: Five days later, Bian Que went again, and when he saw Huan Hou, he retreated and ran away.

古文：桓侯使人问其故。
现代文：桓侯派人问他跑的缘故。
English: Kanhō sent someone to ask him why he ran away.

古文：扁鹊曰： 疾之居腠理也，汤熨之所及也；在血脉，针石之所及也；其在肠胃，酒醪之所及也；其在骨髓，虽司命无柰之何。
现代文：扁鹊说： 疾病在皮肉之间，汤剂、药熨的效力就能达到治病的目的；疾病在血脉中，靠针刺和砭石的效力就能达到治病的目的；疾病在肠胃中，药酒的效力就能达到治病的目的；疾病进入骨髓，就是掌管生命的神也无可奈何。
English: Bian Que said: The disease is between the skin and the flesh, and the effect of the decoction and the medicine can achieve the purpose of curing the disease; the disease is in the blood, and the effect of the acupuncture and the vermiculite can achieve the purpose of curing the disease; the disease is in the intestine and the stomach, and the effect of the medicinal liquor can achieve the purpose of curing the disease; the disease enters the bone marrow, and the god who is in charge of life is helpless.

古文：今在骨髓，臣是以无请也。 
现代文：现在疾病已进入骨髓，我因此不敢请求为他治病了。 
English: Now that the disease has entered the bone marrow, I am afraid to ask for him to be cured.

古文：後五日，桓侯体病，使人召扁鹊，扁鹊已逃去。
现代文：过了五天后，桓侯身上患了重病，派人召请扁鹊，扁鹊已逃离齐国。
English: Five days later, Huan Hou fell seriously ill and sent someone to summon Bian Que. Bian Que had already fled Qi.

古文：桓侯遂死。
现代文：桓侯于是就病死了。
English: As a result, Kanhō fell ill and died.

古文：使圣人预知微，能使良医得蚤从事，则疾可已，身可活也。
现代文：假使桓侯能预先知道没有显露的病症，能够让好的医生及早诊治，那么疾病就能治好，性命就能保住。
English: If Huan Hou can know in advance that there is no obvious disease, and can let good doctors diagnose and treat early, then the disease can be cured and life can be saved.

古文：人之所病，病疾多；而医之所病，病道少。
现代文：人们担忧的是疾病太多，医生忧虑的是治病的方法太少。
English: People are worried that there are too many diseases, and doctors are worried that there are too few ways to treat them.

古文：故病有六不治：骄恣不论於理，一不治也；轻身重财，二不治也；衣食不能適，三不治也；阴阳并，藏气不定，四不治也；形羸不能服药，五不治也；信巫不信医，六不治也。
现代文：所以有六种患病的情形不能医治：为人傲慢放纵不讲道理，是一不治；轻视身体而看重钱财，是二不治；衣着饮食不适当，是三不治；阴阳错乱，五脏功能不正常，是四不治；形体非常羸弱，不能服药的，是五不治；迷信巫术不相信医术的，是六不治。
English: Therefore, there are six kinds of diseases that cannot be cured: those who are arrogant and unreasonable are incurable; those who despise the body and value money are incurable; those who dress and eat inappropriately are incurable; those who are disordered in yin and yang and have abnormal functions of the five internal organs are incurable; those who are very frail and cannot take medicine are incurable; and those who believe in witchcraft and do not believe in medicine are incurable.

古文：有此一者，则重难治也。
现代文：有这样的一种情形，就很难医治了。
English: When you have a condition like this, it's very difficult to treat.

古文：扁鹊名闻天下。
现代文：扁鹊名声传扬天下。
English: The fame of the flat gourd spread all over the world.

古文：过邯郸，闻贵妇人，即为带下医；过雒阳，闻周人爱老人，即为耳目痹医；来入咸阳，闻秦人爱小兒，即为小兒医：随俗为变。
现代文：他到邯郸时，闻知当地人尊重妇女，就做治妇女病医生；到洛时，听说周人敬爱老人，就做专治耳聋眼花四肢痹痛的医生；到了咸阳，闻知秦人喜爱孩子，就做治小孩疾病的医生；他随着各地的习俗来变化自己的医治范围。
English: When he arrived in Shandong, he heard that the local people respected women, so he became a doctor who treated women's diseases; when he arrived in Luo, he heard that the Zhou people respected the elderly, so he became a doctor who specialized in the treatment of deafness, eye and limb pain; when he arrived in Xianyang, he heard that the Qin people loved children, so he became a doctor who treated children's diseases; he changed his scope of treatment according to the customs of each region.

古文：秦太医令李醯自知伎不如扁鹊也，使人刺杀之。
现代文：秦国的太医令李醯自知医术不如扁鹊，派人刺杀了扁鹊。
English: The Grand Physician of the State of Qin ordered Li Qian, knowing that he was not as good at medicine as Bian Que, to send someone to assassinate Bian Que.

古文：至今天下言脉者，由扁鹊也。
现代文：到现在，天下谈论诊脉法的人，都遵从扁鹊的理论和实践。
English: Up to now, people around the world who talk about the pulse diagnosis method all follow the theory and practice of the flat palate.

古文：太仓公者，齐太仓长，临菑人也，姓淳于氏，名意。
现代文：太仓这个人，是齐国都城管理粮仓的长官，他是临菑人，姓淳于，名叫意。
English: This man, Taicang, was the official in charge of the granary in the capital city of Qi. He was from Linyi, his surname was Junyu, and his given name was Yu.

古文：少而喜医方术。
现代文：年轻却喜好医术。
English: Young but fond of medicine.

古文：高后八年，更受师同郡元里公乘阳庆。
现代文：汉高后八年，再次向同郡元里的公乘阳庆拜师学习医术。
English: Eight years after graduating from Henkel, he once again studied medicine with Gongzheng Yang Qingbai in the same county.

古文：庆年七十馀，无子，使意尽去其故方，更悉以禁方予之，传黄帝、扁鹊之脉书，五色诊病，知人死生，决嫌疑，定可治，及药论，甚精。
现代文：这时阳庆已七十多岁，没有能继承医术的后代，就让淳于意把从前学的医方全部抛开，然后把自己掌握的秘方全给了他，并传授给他黄帝、扁鹊的脉书，观察面部不同颜色来诊病的方法，使他预先知道病人的生死，决断疑难病症，判断能否治疗，以及药剂的理论，都十分精辟。
English: At this time, Yang Qing was more than seventy years old and had no descendants who could inherit the medical skills. He asked Jun Rongyi to throw away all the medical methods he had learned before, and then gave him all the secret recipes he had mastered. He also taught him the pulse book of Huangdi and Tiantai, the method of observing different colors of the face to diagnose diseases, so that he could know the patient's life and death in advance, determine difficult diseases, judge whether to treat, and the theory of pharmaceuticals, all of which were very incisive.

古文：受之三年，为人治病，决死生多验。
现代文：学了三年之后，他为人治病，预断死生，多能应验。
English: After three years of study, he was able to cure people and predict life and death.

古文：然左右行游诸侯，不以家为家，或不为人治病，病家多怨之者。
现代文：可是他往来于各诸侯国之间行医求学，不拿家当家，有时不肯为别人治病，因此许多病人都怨恨他。
English: However, he went back and forth between various provinces to practice medicine and study, did not take care of his family, and sometimes refused to treat others, so many patients resented him.

古文：文帝四年中，人上书言意，以刑罪当传西之长安。
现代文：汉文帝四年，有人上书朝廷控告他，根据刑律罪状，要用传车押解到长安去。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Hanwen's reign, someone sent a letter to the imperial court to accuse him. According to the criminal law charges, he was to be escorted to Chang'an by car.

古文：意有五女，随而泣。
现代文：淳于意有五个女儿，跟在后面哭泣。
English: Jun Yuyi, who has five daughters, follows behind, crying.

古文：意怒，骂曰： 生子不生男，缓急无可使者！ 
现代文：他发怒而骂道： 生孩子不生男孩，到紧要关头就没有可用的人！ 
English: He scolded angrily, "If you give birth to a child or a boy, there will be no one to use in a pinch!

古文：於是少女缇萦伤父之言，乃随父西。
现代文：于是最小的女儿缇萦听了父亲的话很感伤，就跟随父亲西行到了长安。
English: So the youngest daughter, Zou, was very sad to hear her father's words, and followed her father westward to Chang'an.

古文：上书曰： 妾父为吏，齐中称其廉平，今坐法当刑。
现代文：她上书朝廷说： 我父亲是朝廷的官吏，齐国人民都称赞他的廉洁公正，现在犯法被判刑。
English: She wrote to the court saying: My father is an official of the court, the people of Qi have praised his integrity and fairness, and now he has been sentenced for breaking the law.

古文：妾切痛死者不可复生而刑者不可复续，虽欲改过自新，其道莫由，终不可得。
现代文：我非常痛心处死的人不能再生，而受刑致残的人也不能再复原，即使想改过自新，也无路可行，最终不能如愿。
English: I am very sorry to say that people who have been executed cannot be reborn, and people who have been crippled by torture can no longer be rehabilitated. Even if they want to reform, there is no feasible way, and they will not be able to do so in the end.

古文：妾原入身为官婢，以赎父刑罪，使得改行自新也。 
现代文：我情愿自己没入官府做奴婢，来赎父亲的罪，使父亲能有改过自新的机会。 
English: I would rather not go to the government to work as a servant, to atone for my father's sins, so that my father could have a chance to reform.

古文：书闻，上悲其意，此岁中亦除肉刑法。
现代文：汉文帝看了缇萦的上书，悲悯她的心意赦免了淳于意，并在这一年废除了肉刑。
English: Emperor Hanwen read Zou's petition, felt sorry for her, pardoned her, and abolished corporal punishment that year.

古文：意家居，诏召问所为治病死生验者几何人也，主名为谁。
现代文：淳于意住在家里，皇帝下诏问他为人治病决断死生应验的有多少人，他们名叫什么。
English: When Jun Yu Zhi was at home, the emperor issued an edict and asked him how many people had fulfilled their vow to cure the sick and decide between life and death and what their names were.

古文：诏问故太仓长臣意： 方伎所长，及所能治病者？
现代文：诏书问前太仓淳于意的问题是： 医术有什么专长及能治愈什么病？
English: Taicang Jun's question before the edict was: What expertise does medicine have and what disease can it cure?

古文：有其书无有？
现代文：有没有医书？
English: Do you have a medical certificate?

古文：皆安受学？
现代文：都向谁学医的？
English: Who did they all study medicine with?

古文：受学几何岁？
现代文：学了几年？曾治好哪些人？
English: How many years have you been studying? Which people have you cured?

古文：尝有所验，何县里人也？何病？
现代文：他们是什么地方的人？得的什么病？
English: Where do they come from? What diseases do they suffer from?

古文：医药已，其病之状皆何如？
现代文：冶疗用药后，病情怎样？全部详细回答。 
English: After metallotherapy medication, how is your condition? Answer all questions in detail.

古文：具悉而对。 
现代文：淳于意回答说：
English: Jun spontaneously replied:

古文：臣意对曰：自意少时，喜医药，医药方试之多不验者。
现代文：我在年轻时，就喜好医术药剂之方，用学到的医术方剂试着给人看病大多没有效验。
English: When I was young, I was fond of herbal medicine. I tried to treat people with the herbal medicine I had learned, but most of them were not effective.

古文：至高后八年，得见师临菑元里公乘阳庆。
现代文：到了高后八年，得以拜见老师临菑氾里的公乘阳庆。
English: Eight years after graduating from high school, he was able to visit his teacher, Gongzheng Yangqing, who was in floods in Linyi.

古文：庆年七十馀，意得见事之。
现代文：阳庆这时七十多岁，我得以拜见侍奉他。
English: Yang Qing was in his seventies at the time, and I was able to visit and serve him.

古文：谓意曰： 尽去而方书，非是也。
现代文：他对我说： 全部抛开你学过的医书，这些是不正确的。
English: He said to me: 'Everything you've been taught in medical books aside, this is not true.

古文：庆有古先道遗传黄帝、扁鹊之脉书，五色诊病，知人生死，决嫌疑，定可治，及药论书，甚精。
现代文：我有古代先辈医家传授的黄帝、扁鹊的诊脉书，以及观察面部颜色不同来诊病的方法，使你能预断病人的生死，决断疑难病症，判定能否医治，还有药剂理论的书籍，都非常精辟。
English: I have books on the diagnosis of jaundice and alopecia areata that were taught to me by ancient doctors, as well as books on the theory of pharmacology, which are very incisive. I also have books on the methods of observing different facial colors to diagnose diseases, so that you can predict the life and death of patients, determine difficult diseases, and determine whether they can be treated.

古文：我家给富，心爱公，欲尽以我禁方书悉教公。 
现代文：我家中富足，只因我心里喜欢你，才想把自己收藏的秘方和书全都教授给你。 
English: My family is rich, and it is only because I like you in my heart that I want to teach you all the secret recipes and books in my collection.

古文：臣意即曰： 幸甚，非意之所敢望也。 
现代文：我说： 太幸运了，这些不是我敢奢望的。 
English: I said: "I'm so lucky, I didn't dare to hope for this.

古文：臣意即避席再拜谒，受其脉书上下经、五色诊、奇咳术、揆度阴阳外变、药论、石神、接阴阳禁书，受读解验之，可一年所。
现代文：说完我就离开坐席再次拜谢老师。我学习了他传授的《脉书》《上经》《下经》，从脸色诊病术、听诊术、从外观测度阴阳术、药理、砭石神术、房中术等秘藏书籍和医术，学习时注意解析体验，这样用了约一年时间。
English: I studied the "Pulse Book," "Upper Classic" and "Lower Classic" taught by him, from the face diagnosis, stethoscopy, external observation, yin and yang, pharmacology, flint divination, inter-room surgery and other secret books and medical techniques, and pay attention to the analysis experience when learning, so it took about one year.

古文：明岁即验之，有验，然尚未精也。
现代文：第二年，我试着为人治病，虽有效，还不精到。
English: In the second year, I tried to cure people. Although it was effective, it was not enough.

古文：要事之三年所，即尝已为人治，诊病决死生，有验，精良。
现代文：我一共向他学习了三年左右，我曾经治过的病人，诊视病情决断生死的人，都有效验，已达到了精妙的程度。
English: I have been learning from him for a total of about three years. The patients I have treated, the people whose diagnosis determines life and death, have all been effectively tested and have reached an exquisite level.

古文：今庆已死十年所，臣意年尽三年，年三十九岁也。
现代文：现在阳庆已死了十来年，我曾向他学习三年，我现在已经三十九岁了。
English: It has been ten years since Yang Qing died. I studied under him for three years. I am now thirty-nine years old.

古文：齐侍御史成自言病头痛，臣意诊其脉，告曰： 君之病恶，不可言也。 
现代文：齐国名叫成的侍御史自述得了头疼病，我诊完脉，告诉他说： 您的病情严重，不能一下子说清。 
English: The attendant, whose name was Cheng, told me that he had a headache. When I had finished examining his pulse, I told him, "Your condition is serious. I can't tell you everything at once.

古文：即出，独告成弟昌曰： 此病疽也，内发於肠胃之间，後五日当鍮肿，後八日呕脓死。 
现代文：出来后只告诉他的弟弟昌说： 这是疽病，在肠胃之间发生的，五天后就会肿起来，再过八天就会吐脓血而死。 
English: After he came out, he only told his younger brother Chang: "This is gangrene, it occurs between the intestines and the stomach, after five days it will swell up, and after eight days it will vomit blood and die."

古文：成之病得之饮酒且内。
现代文：成的病是酗酒后行房事得的。
English: The illness was the result of an alcohol-fuelled row.

古文：成即如期死。
现代文：成果然如期而死。
English: As it turned out, he died on schedule.

古文：所以知成之病者，臣意切其脉，得肝气。
现代文：我所以能诊知他的病，是因为切脉时，切得肝脏有病的脉气。
English: The reason why I was able to diagnose his illness was that when I cut the vein, the diseased pulmonary gas came out of the liver.

古文：肝气浊而静，此内关之病也。
现代文：脉气重浊而平静，这是内里严重而外表不明显的疾病。
English: The pulse is heavy and calm, which is a serious internal disease that is not obvious on the outside.

古文：脉法曰 脉长而弦，不得代四时者，其病主在於肝。
现代文：脉象理论说： 脉长而且像弓弦一样挺直，不能随四季的变化而更替，病主要在肝脏。
English: The pulse image theory says: The pulse is long and straight like a bow string, and cannot be replaced with the changes of the four seasons. The disease is mainly in the liver.

古文：和即经主病也，代则络脉有过 。
现代文：脉虽长而直硬却均匀和谐，是肝的经脉有病，出现了时疏时密躁动有力的代脉，就是肝的络脉有病。 
English: Although the veins are long, straight and hard, they are uniform and harmonious. It is the liver meridians that are diseased. A sporadic, dense and dynamic generation vein has appeared, that is, the hepatic vas deferens is diseased.

古文：经主病和者，其病得之筋髓里。
现代文：肝的经脉有病而脉均和的，他的病得之于筋髓。
English: If the meridians of the liver are diseased, but the arteries are normal, the disease is due to the sinew.

古文：其代绝而脉贲者，病得之酒且内。
现代文：脉象时疏时密忽停止忽有力，他的病得之于酗酒后行房事。
English: His pulse was intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent, intermittent.

古文：所以知其後五日而鍮肿，八日呕脓死者，切其脉时，少阳初代。
现代文：我所以知道他过了五天后会肿起来，再过八天吐脓血而死的原因，是切他的脉时，发现少阳经络出现了代脉的脉象。
English: The reason why I knew that he would swell up after five days and then vomit blood and die after eight days was that when I cut his vein, I found that the pulse pattern of the ancestral vein appeared in the Shao Yang meridian.

古文：代者经病，病去过人，人则去。
现代文：代脉是经脉生病，病情发展遍及全身，人就会死去。
English: The lineage is the meridians are sick, the disease develops throughout the body, people will die.

古文：络脉主病，当其时，少阳初关一分，故中热而脓未发也，及五分，则至少阳之界，及八日，则呕脓死，故上二分而脓发，至界而鍮肿，尽泄而死。
现代文：络脉出现病症，这时，在左手关部一分处出现代脉，这是热积郁体中而脓血未出，到了关上五分处，就到了少阳经脉的边界，到八天后会吐脓血而死，所以到了关上二分处会产生脓血，到了少阳经脉的边界就会肿胀，其后疮破脓泄而死。
English: When the disease appears in the vas deferens, the generation vein appears at the one-minute mark of the left hand, which is in the heat-accumulated body and does not bleed. At the five-minute mark, it will reach the border of the Shao Yang meridian. Eight days later, it will vomit and bleed to death. Therefore, at the two-minute mark, it will produce bleeding. At the border of the Shao Yang meridian, it will swell, and then it will rupture and bleed to death.

古文：热上则熏阳明，烂流络，流络动则脉结发，脉结发则烂解，故络交。
现代文：当初内热就熏灼着阳明经脉，并灼伤络脉的分支，络脉病变得就会经脉郁结发肿，经脉郁结发肿其后就会糜烂离解。所以络脉之间交互阻塞。
English: Initially, the internal heat will burn the yangming meridians, and burn the branches of the vas deferens. If the vas deferens becomes diseased, the vas deferens will swell, and the vas deferens will swell and then erode and dissolve. Therefore, the vas deferens will be blocked.

古文：热气已上行，至头而动，故头痛。
现代文：就使热邪上侵头部，头部受到侵扰，因此头疼。
English: It causes the fever to invade the head, and the head is disturbed, resulting in a headache.

古文：齐王中子诸婴兒小子病，召臣意诊切其脉，告曰： 气鬲病。病使人烦懑，食不下，时呕沫。
现代文：齐王二儿子的男孩生病，召我去切脉诊治，我告诉他说： 这是气膈病，这种病使人心中烦闷，吃不下东西，时常呕出胃液。
English: The boy of King Qi's second son fell ill and called me to take his pulse for diagnosis and treatment. I told him: "This is a disease of discouragement. This disease makes people feel depressed, unable to eat, and often vomits up gastric juice.

古文：病得之忧，数忔食饮。 
现代文：这种病是因为内心忧郁，常常厌食的缘故。 
English: This disease is caused by depression, often anorexia.

古文：臣意即为之作下气汤以饮之，一日气下，二日能食，三日即病愈。
现代文：我当即调制下气汤给他喝下，只一天膈气下消，又过了两天就能吃东西，三天后病就痊愈了。
English: I immediately prepared a gaseous soup and gave it to him to drink. It only took one day for the gaseous soup to dissipate, and after two days he was able to eat. Three days later, he was cured.

古文：所以知小子之病者，诊其脉，心气也，浊躁而经也，此络阳病也。
现代文：我之所以知道他的病情，是因为我切脉时，诊到心有病的脉象，脉象浊重急躁，这是阳络病。
English: The reason why I knew about his illness was that when I was cutting the vein, I detected the pulse of a diseased heart, the pulse of severe irritability, which is a sexually transmitted disease.

古文：脉法曰 脉来数疾去难而不一者，病主在心 。
现代文：脉象理论说： 脉达于手指时壮盛迅速，离开指下时艰涩而前后不一，病在心脏。 
English: The pulse image theory says: when the pulse reaches the finger, it grows rapidly, when it leaves the finger, it is difficult and inconsistent, and the disease is in the heart.

古文：周身热，脉盛者，为重阳。
现代文：周身发热，脉气壮盛，称作重阳。
English: The whole body is feverish, the pulse is vigorous, and it is called heavy sun.

古文：重阳者，逿心主。故烦懑食不下则络脉有过，络脉有过则血上出，血上出者死。
现代文：阳气过重，就会扰乱心神，所以心中烦闷，吃不下东西，就会络脉有病，络脉有病就会血从上出，血从上出人就会死亡。
English: If the yang qi is too heavy, it will disturb the mind, so the mind will be bored, unable to eat things, the vascular system will be sick, the vascular system will be sick, the blood will come out from the top, the blood will come out from the top, and the person will die.

古文：此悲心所生也，病得之忧也。
现代文：这是内心悲伤所得的病，病得之于忧郁。
English: This is a disease that comes from inner sadness, from melancholy.

古文：齐郎中令循病，众医皆以为蹙入中，而刺之。
现代文：齐国名叫循的郎中令生病，许多医生都认为是逆气从下厥起，向上逆行入腹胸之中，而用针刺法为他治疗。
English: Many doctors believe that Qi's second-in-command, named Xun, fell ill and was treated with acupuncture.

古文：臣意诊之，曰： 涌疝也，令人不得前後溲。 
现代文：我诊视后，说： 这是涌疝，这种病使人不能大小便。 
English: After my examination, I said, "This is dysentery. This disease makes people unable to urinate and defecate."

古文：循曰： 不得前後溲三日矣。 
现代文：循回答说： 已经三天不能大小便了。 
English: Xu replied, "I haven't been able to urinate or defecate for three days.

古文：臣意饮以火齐汤，一饮得前溲，再饮大溲，三饮而疾愈。
现代文：我用火剂汤给他服用，服一剂就能大小便，服第二剂后大小便非常通畅，服完第三剂就痊愈了。
English: I used pyrotechnic soup to give it to him. He was able to urinate and defecate after taking one dose. After taking the second dose, his urination was very smooth. After taking the third dose, he was cured.

古文：病得之内。
现代文：他的病是因房事造成的。
English: It is due to the immoderate conduct of the house.

古文：所以知循病者，切其脉时，右口气急，脉无五藏气，右口脉大而数。
现代文：我所以能知道他患的病，因我切脉时，他右手寸口的脉象急迫，脉象反映不出五脏患有病症，右手寸口脉象壮盛而快。
English: I was able to know the disease he was suffering from because when I took his pulse, the pulse at the base of his right arm felt urgent. The pulse did not reflect that he had a disease in his five organs. The pulse at the base of his right arm felt strong and fast.

古文：数者中下热而涌，左为下，右为上，皆无五藏应，故曰涌疝。
现代文：脉快是中焦、下焦热邪涌动，他的左手脉快是热邪往下流，右手脉快是热邪上涌，都没有五脏病气的反应，所以说是 涌疝 。
English: The fast pulse is the middle jiao, the lower jiao, the hot evil surging up, his left hand fast pulse is the hot evil flowing down, and the right hand fast pulse is the hot evil surging up, and there is no reaction of the five viscera, so it is said to be gushing.

古文：中热，故溺赤也。
现代文：中焦积热，所以尿是赤红色的。
English: There is heat build-up in the middle, so the urine is reddish-red.

古文：齐中御府长信病，臣意入诊其脉，告曰： 热病气也。然暑汗，脉少衰，不死。 
现代文：齐国名叫信的中御府长病了，我去他家诊治，切脉后告诉他说： 是热病的脉气，然而暑热多汗，脉稍衰，不致于死。 
English: I went to his home for treatment and told him after cutting the vein: "It is the pulse of fever, but it is hot and sweaty, and the pulse weakens slightly, so it will not cause death."

古文：曰： 此病得之当浴流水而寒甚，已则热。 
现代文：又说： 得这种病，是天气严寒时曾在流水中洗浴，洗浴后身体就发热了。 他说： 嗯，就是这样！
English: He also said, "I got this disease because I used to take a bath in running water when the weather was very cold, and my body became hot after taking a bath."

古文：信曰： 唯，然！往冬时，为王使於楚，至莒县阳周水，而莒桥梁颇坏，信则揽车辕未欲渡也，马惊，即堕，信身入水中，几死，吏即来救信，出之水中，衣尽濡，有间而身寒，已热如火，至今不可以见寒。 
现代文：去年冬天，我为齐王出使楚国，走到莒县阳周水边，看到莒桥坏得很厉害，我就揽住车辕不想过河，马突然受惊，一下子坠到河里，我的身子也淹进水里，差一点儿淹死，随从官吏马上跑来救我，我从水中出来，衣服全湿了，身体寒冷了一阵，冷一止住全身发热如火，到现在不能受寒。 
English: Last winter, I went to the water's edge around Yangzhou in Handan County on behalf of King Qi. I saw that the Handan Bridge was badly damaged. I grabbed the cart and didn't want to cross the river. My horse suddenly panicked and suddenly fell into the river. My body was also submerged in the water and I almost drowned. The officials immediately came to rescue me. I came out of the water, my clothes were completely wet, and my body was cold for a while. Once I stopped being cold, my whole body felt like it was on fire. I still can't stand the cold.

古文：臣意即为之液汤火齐逐热，一饮汗尽，再饮热去，三饮病已。
现代文：我立即为他调制液汤火剂驱除热邪，服一剂药不再出汗，服两剂药热退去了，服三剂药病止住了。
English: I immediately prepared a liquid decoction of fire for him to drive away the heat evil, took one dose of medicine to stop sweating, took two doses of medicine to make the fever go away, and took three doses of medicine to stop the disease.

古文：即使服药，出入二十日，身无病者。
现代文：又让他服药大约二十天，身体就像没病的人了。
English: He was put on medication for about 20 days, and his body became like that of someone who is not ill.

古文：所以知信之病者，切其脉时，并阴。
现代文：我所以知道他的病，是因为切脉时，发现他的脉象属于热邪归并身体内里的 并阴脉 。
English: The reason I knew about his illness was that when I cut his pulse, I found that his pulse belonged to the heat-induced degenerative process and was connected to the pudendal vein in the body.

古文：脉法曰 热病阴阳交者死 。
现代文：脉象理论说： 内热、外热错乱交杂的死。 
English: Pulse image theory says: internal heat, external heat, disorderly intermingled death.

古文：切之不交，并阴。
现代文：我切他的脉时，没有发现内热外热交杂的情形，但都是并阴脉。
English: When I cut his veins, I didn't find any mixture of internal and external heat, but they were all conjunctival veins.

古文：并阴者，脉顺清而愈，其热虽未尽，犹活也。
现代文：并阴脉，脉状顺的能用清法治愈，热邪虽没有完全消除，仍能治好保住性命。
English: And the yin vein, vein-like and smooth can be cured by clearing, although the fever is not completely eliminated, it can still be cured and life can be saved.

古文：肾气有时间浊，在太阴脉口而希，是水气也。
现代文：我诊知他的肾气有时重浊，我在太阴寸口依稀能切到这种情形，那是水气。
English: I diagnosed that his kidney gas was sometimes heavy, and I was able to vaguely see this at the base of his abdomen. It was water gas.

古文：肾固主水，故以此知之。
现代文：肾本是主管水液运行的，所以由此知道他的病情。
English: The kidneys are in charge of running the body's fluids, so they know about his condition.

古文：失治一时，即转为寒热。
现代文：如果一时失治，就会变成时寒时热的病。
English: If left untreated for a while, it will turn into a cold and fever.

古文：齐王太后病，召臣意入诊脉，曰： 风瘅客脬，难於大小溲，溺赤。 
现代文：齐国王太后有病，召我去诊脉，我说： 是风热侵袭膀胱，大小便困难，尿色赤红的病。 
English: King Qi's empress dowager was ill, and called me to see the doctor. I said, "It's a disease in which wind and fever invade the bladder, and it's difficult to urinate and defecate, and the urine turns red."

古文：臣意饮以火齐汤，一饮即前後溲，再饮病已，溺如故。
现代文：我用火剂汤给她喝下，吃一剂就能大小便了，吃两剂病就好了，尿色也和以前一样。
English: I gave her a cup of pyrotechnic soup, and she was able to urinate and defecate after one dose, and was fine after two doses. The color of her urine was the same as before.

古文：病得之流汗出氵循。氵循者，去衣而汗晞也。
现代文：这是出汗时解小便得的病。病是脱掉衣服而汗被吹干得的。
English: This is a disease caused by urinating while sweating. The disease is caused by taking off clothes and the sweat being blown away.

古文：所以知齐王太后病者，臣意诊其脉，切其太阴之口，湿然风气也。
现代文：我之所以知道齐王太后的病，是因为我替她切脉时，发现太阴寸口湿润，这是受风的脉气。
English: The reason why I knew about the illness of the Empress Dowager Qi was that when I was taking her pulse, I found that her mouth was moist, which was caused by the wind.

古文：脉法曰 沈之而大坚，浮之而大紧者，病主在肾 。
现代文：脉象理论说： 脉象用力切脉时大而坚实有力，轻轻切脉时大而紧张有力，是肾脏有病。 
English: The pulse image theory says: the pulse image is large and solid and powerful when the pulse is forcefully cut, and large and tense and powerful when the pulse is lightly cut. It is a kidney disease.

古文：肾切之而相反也，脉大而躁。
现代文：但我在肾的部位切脉，情况相反，脉象粗大躁动。
English: However, I cut the vein in the kidney area, but the opposite happened, the pulse was large and jerky.

古文：大者，膀胱气也；躁者，中有热而溺赤。
现代文：粗大的脉象是显示膀胱有病；躁动的脉象显示中焦有热，而尿色赤红。
English: A large pulse indicates that the bladder is diseased; an agitated pulse indicates that there is heat in the middle, and the urine color is red.

古文：齐章武里曹山跗病，臣意诊其脉，曰： 肺消瘅也，加以寒热。 
现代文：齐国章武里的曹山跗生病，我诊脉后说： 这是肺消病，加上寒热症。 
English: Cao Shanzhong from Zhangwu, Qi Province, fell ill. After my pulse was checked, he said, "This is a lung disease, combined with a cold and fever."

古文：即告其人曰： 死，不治。
现代文：我告诉他的家人说： 这种病必死，无法医治。
English: I told his family: "This is a fatal disease, there is no cure.

古文：適其共养，此不当医治。 
现代文：你们就满足病人的要求，去供养他，不必再医治了。 
English: Then you will fulfill the desire of him who is sick, and you will minister to him and cure him no more.

古文：法曰 後三日而当狂，妄起行，欲走；後五日死 。
现代文：医学理论说； 这种病三天后会发狂，乱走乱跑，五天后就死了。 
English: The medical theory says that after three days the disease will go mad, run amok, and die after five days.

古文：即如期死。
现代文：后来果然如期死了。
English: He later died as expected.

古文：山跗病得之盛怒而以接内。
现代文：山跗的病，是因为大怒后行房事得的。
English: Yamazaki's illness was caused by an argument after a big fight.

古文：所以知山跗之病者，臣意切其脉，肺气热也。
现代文：我所以知道山跗的病，是因为我切他的脉，从脉象发现他有肺气热。
English: The reason I knew about Hawthorn's illness was because I took his pulse and found out from the pulse pattern that he had emphysema.

古文：脉法曰 不平不鼓，形弊 。
现代文：脉象理论说： 脉来不平稳不鼓动的，身形羸弱。 
English: The pulse image theory says: If the pulse is not steady and does not beat, the body is weak.

古文：此五藏高之远数以经病也，故切之时不平而代。
现代文：这是肺、肝两脏多次患病的结果。所以我切脉时，脉状不平稳而且有代脉的现象。
English: This is the result of multiple illnesses of the lungs and liver. Therefore, when I cut the vein, the vein shape is not stable and there is a generation of veins.

古文：不平者，血不居其处；代者，时参击并至，乍躁乍大也。
现代文：脉不平稳的，是血气不能归藏于肝；代脉，时杂乱并起，时而浮躁，时而宏大。
English: If the pulse is not stable, it is because the blood gas cannot be attributed to the liver; the generation pulse is sometimes chaotic, sometimes impetuous, and sometimes grand.

古文：此两络脉绝，故死不治。
现代文：这是肺、肝两络脉断绝，所以说是死而不能治。
English: This is a severance of the pulmonary and hepatic vasculature, so it is said to be incurable.

古文：所以加寒热者，言其人尸夺。
现代文：我所以说 加以寒热 ，是因为他精神涣散躯体如尸。
English: I say cold and feverish because his body was like a corpse.

古文：尸夺者，形弊；形弊者，不当关灸鑱石及饮毒药也。
现代文：精神涣散躯体如尸的人，他的身体一定会羸弱；对羸弱的人，不能用针灸的方法，也不能服药性猛烈的药。
English: If a person's spirit is scattered and his body is like a corpse, his body will definitely be weak; for those who are weak, acupuncture cannot be used, nor can they take strong drugs.

古文：臣意未往诊时，齐太医先诊山跗病，灸其足少阳脉口，而饮之半夏丸，病者即泄注，腹中虚；又灸其少阴脉，是坏肝刚绝深，如是重损病者气，以故加寒热。
现代文：我没有为他诊治前，齐国太医已先诊治他的病，在他的足少阳脉口施灸，而且让他服用半夏丸，病人马上下泄，腹中虚弱；又在他的少阴脉施灸，这样便重伤了他的肝筋阳气。如此一再损伤病人的元气，因此说它是加上寒热的伤害。
English: Before I diagnosed and treated him, Dr. Qi Guotai had already diagnosed and treated his illness. He applied moxibustion to his foot's lesser yang vein and mouth, and asked him to take half a summer pill. The patient immediately defecated and was weak in the abdomen. He also applied moxibustion to his lesser yang vein, which seriously injured his hepatic muscle yang qi. This repeatedly damaged the patient's vitality, so it was said to be a cold and fever injury.

古文：所以後三日而当狂者，肝一络连属结绝乳下阳明，故络绝，开阳明脉，阳明脉伤，即当狂走。
现代文：所以说他 三天以后，当会发狂 ，是因为肝的络脉横过乳下与阳明经相连结，所以络脉的横过使热邪侵入阳明经脉，阳明经脉受伤，人就会疯狂奔路。
English: Therefore, he said that after three days, he would go mad, because the hepatic vas deferens crosses under the breast and connects with the yangming meridian, so the crossing of the vas deferens causes the heat evil to invade the yangming meridian, the yangming meridian is injured, and people will run wild.

古文：後五日死者，肝与心相去五分，故曰五日尽，尽即死矣。
现代文：过五天后死，是因肝心两脉相隔五分，肝脏的元气五天耗尽，元气耗尽人就死了。
English: If a person dies after five days, it is because the two veins of the liver are five minutes apart, and the liver's vitality is exhausted after five days. When the vitality is exhausted, the person dies.

古文：齐中尉潘满如病少腹痛，臣意诊其脉，曰： 遗积瘕也。 
现代文：齐国的中尉潘满如患小腹疼的病，我切他的脉后说： 这是腹中的气体遗留，积聚成了 瘕症 。 
English: Qizhou's Lieutenant Pan Manru was suffering from a disease of small abdominal pain. After I cut his pulse, I said: This is the gas left in the abdomen, which has accumulated into porphyria.

古文：臣意即谓齐太仆臣饶、内史臣繇曰： 中尉不复自止於内，则三十日死。 
现代文：我对齐国名叫饶的太仆、名叫由的内史说： 中尉如不能自己禁止房事，就会三十天内死去。 
English: I said to the eunuch of Qi named Rao and the inner historian named Yu: If the lieutenant can't prohibit the housework himself, he will die within thirty days.

古文：後二十馀日，溲血死。
现代文：过了二十多天，他就尿血而死。
English: After more than 20 days, he urinated blood and died.

古文：病得之酒且内。
现代文：他的病是因酗酒后行房而得。
English: His illness was brought on by an alcohol-fuelled sex session.

古文：所以知潘满如病者，臣意切其脉深小弱，其卒然合合也，是脾气也。
现代文：我之所以能知道他的病，是因为我给他切脉，脉象深沉小弱，这三种情形合在一起，是脾有病的脉气。
English: The reason why I was able to know about his illness was because I cut his pulse, and the pulse was deep and weak. These three conditions together are the symptoms of a spleen that is diseased.

古文：右脉口气至紧小，见瘕气也。
现代文：而且右手寸口脉脉来紧而小，显现了瘕病的脉象。
English: Moreover, the pulse at the right hand incision was tight and small, showing the pulse pattern of rickets.

古文：以次相乘，故三十日死。
现代文：两气互相制约影响，所以三十天内会死。
English: The two airs restrict and influence each other, so it will die within thirty days.

古文：三阴俱抟者，如法；痘俱抟者，决在急期；一抟一代者，近也。
现代文：太阴、少阴、厥阴三阴脉一齐出现，符合三十天内死的规律；三阴脉不一齐出现，决断生死的时间会更短；交会的阴脉和代脉交替出现，死期还短。
English: The three yin veins of yin, yang and yin appear together, which conforms to the rule of death within 30 days; the three yin veins do not appear together, and the time for deciding life and death will be shorter; the yin vein and generation vein of the meeting appear alternately, and the death period is still short.

古文：故其三阴抟，溲血如前止。
现代文：所以他的三阴脉同时出现；就像前边说的那样尿血而死。
English: Therefore, his three vaginal veins appeared at the same time; as mentioned earlier, he urinated blood and died.

古文：阳虚侯相赵章病，召臣意。
现代文：阳虚侯的宰相赵章生病，召我去，许多医生都认为是腹中虚寒。
English: Zhao Zhang, the vice-premier of Yanghu, fell ill and summoned me. Many doctors thought it was just a cold in the abdomen.

古文：众医皆以为寒中，臣意诊其脉曰： 迵风。 迵风者，饮食下嗌而辄出不留。
现代文：我诊完脉断定说： 是 迵风病  。迵风的病症，是饮食咽下，总又吐出来，食物不能容留在胃中。
English: At the end of my consultation, I concluded that it was hysteria. The symptoms of hysteria are swallowing food and always spitting it out. Food cannot stay in the stomach.

古文：法曰 五日死 ，而後十日乃死。
现代文：依医理说： 五天会死。 结果过了十天才死。
English: According to the doctor's theory, I would die in five days, but it took me ten days to die.

古文：病得之酒。
现代文：病因酗酒而生。
English: The disease is caused by alcoholism.

古文：所以知赵章之病者，臣意切其脉，脉来滑，是内风气也。
现代文：我所以能知道赵章的病，是因为我切他的脉时，脉象 滑 ，这是体内有风气的脉象。
English: The reason I was able to know about Zhao Zhang's illness is that when I cut his vein, the vein was slippery, which is a traditional vein in the body.

古文：饮食下嗌而辄出不留者，法五日死，皆为前分界法。
现代文：咽下食物总又吐出，胃中不能容纳，医理说五天会死，这是前面说的分界法。
English: If you swallow food, it will always come out again, and you can't hold it in your stomach. According to medical theory, you will die in five days. This is the demarcation method mentioned above.

古文：後十日乃死，所以过期者，其人嗜粥，故中藏实，中藏实故过期。
现代文：十天后才死，过期的原因，是因为他喜好喝粥，因此胃中充实，胃中充实所以超过预定死的时候。
English: He died ten days later. The reason for his death was that he liked to drink porridge, so his stomach was full. His stomach was full, so he passed the scheduled time of death.

古文：师言曰 安穀者过期，不安穀者不及期 。
现代文：我的老师说过： 胃能容留消化食物就能超过预定的死的时间，不能容留消化食物不到期限就会死。
English: My teacher said: If the stomach can hold the food for digestion, it can exceed the scheduled time of death; if it cannot hold the food for digestion, it will die before the deadline.

古文：济北王病，召臣意诊其脉，曰： 风蹶胸满。 
现代文：济北王生病了，召我去诊治，我说： 这是 风厥 ，使胸中胀满。 
English: King Jibei fell ill and called me for treatment. I said, "It's the wind, it's making my chest swell."

古文：即为药酒，尽三石，病已。
现代文：就为他调制药酒，喝了三天，病就好了。
English: So they mixed some medicinal wine for him, and after drinking it for three days, his illness was cured.

古文：得之汗出伏地。
现代文：他的病是因出汗时伏卧地上而得。
English: He contracted the disease from lying on the ground while sweating.

古文：所以知济北王病者，臣意切其脉时，风气也，心脉浊。
现代文：我所以知道济北王的病因，我切脉时，脉象有风邪，心脉重浊。
English: That's how I know the cause of Ji Beiguang's illness. When I cut the vein, the vein was like a cold, and the heart vein was heavy.

古文：病法 过入其阳，阳气尽而阴气入 。
现代文：依照病理 病邪入侵体表，体表的阳气耗尽，阴气就会侵入。 
English: According to the pathology, the pathogen invades the body surface, the yang of the body surface is exhausted, and the yin will invade.

古文：阴气入张，则寒气上而热气下，故胸满。
现代文：阴气入侵嚣张，就使寒气上逆而热气下流，就使人胸中胀满。
English: When the gloomy air invades, it makes the cold air flow up and the hot air flow down, causing the person's chest to swell.

古文：汗出伏地者，切其脉，气阴。
现代文：出汗时伏卧在地的人，切他的脉时，他的脉气阴寒。
English: He who lies on the ground when he is sweating, when his pulse is cut, his pulse is cold.

古文：阴气者，病必入中，出及瀺水也。
现代文：脉气阴寒的人，病邪必然会侵入内里，治疗时就应使阴寒随着汗液淋漓流出。
English: People with a cold pulse, the disease will inevitably invade the inside, and the treatment should make the cold flow out with the sweat.

古文：齐北宫司空命妇出於病，众医皆以为风入中，病主在肺，刺其足少阳脉。
现代文：齐国北宫司空名叫出於的夫人病了，许多医生都认为是风气侵入体内，主要是肺有病，就针刺足少阳经脉。
English: Many doctors believe that the custom invades the body, mainly the lungs are diseased, so they need to prick the foot with the Shao Yang meridians.

古文：臣意诊其脉，曰： 病气疝，客於膀胱，难於前後溲，而溺赤。
现代文：我诊脉后说： 是疝气病，疝气影响膀胱，大小便困难，尿色赤红。
English: After diagnosing my pulse, he said, "It's a hernia disease. Hernia affects the bladder, making it difficult to urinate and defecate, and the color of urine is red."

古文：病见寒气则遗溺，使人腹肿。 
现代文：这种病遇到寒气就会遗尿，使人小腹肿胀。 
English: When this disease encounters cold air, urine will be lost, causing the small abdomen to swell.

古文：出於病得之欲溺不得，因以接内。
现代文：她的病，是因为想解小便又不能解，然后行房事才得的。
English: Her illness was caused by trying to urinate and not being able to, and then having an affair.

古文：所以知出於病者，切其脉大而实，其来难，是蹶阴之动也。
现代文：我之所以知道她的病，是因为切脉时，脉象大而有力，但脉来艰难，那是厥阴肝经有变动。
English: The reason why I know about her illness is that when cutting the vein, the vein looks big and powerful, but the vein is difficult to come, that is, there is a change in the liver.

古文：脉来难者，疝气之客於膀胱也。
现代文：脉来艰难，那是疝气影响膀胱。
English: The pulse is difficult, it is a hernia affecting the bladder.

古文：腹之所以肿者，言蹶阴之络结小腹也。蹶阴有过则脉结动，动则腹肿。
现代文：小腹所以肿胀，是因厥阴络脉结聚在小腹，厥阴脉有病，和它相连的部位也会发生变化，这种变化就使得小腹肿胀。
English: The reason why the abdomen is swollen is due to the accumulation of the jueyin vein in the abdomen. The jueyin vein is diseased, and the parts connected to it will also change. This change will cause the abdomen to swell.

古文：臣意即灸其足蹶阴之脉，左右各一所，即不遗溺而溲清，小腹痛止。
现代文：我就在她的足厥阴肝经施炙，左右各炙一穴，就不再遗尿而尿清，小腹也止住了疼。
English: I burned her legs, abdomen and liver, and burned one hole on each side, so she no longer urinated and urinated, and the pain in her lower abdomen stopped.

古文：即更为火齐汤以饮之，三日而疝气散，即愈。
现代文：再用火剂汤给她服用，三天后，疝气消散，病就好了。
English: He then gave her a dose of pyrotechnic soup. Three days later, the bad breath had dissipated and she was fine.

古文：故济北王阿母自言足热而懑，臣意告曰： 热蹶也。 
现代文：从前济北王的奶妈说自己的足心发热胸中郁闷，我告诉她： 是热厥病。 
English: Once upon a time, the wet nurse of King Jibei said that she was depressed because her feet were hot and her chest was hot. I told her: It's heatstroke.

古文：则刺其足心各三所，案之无出血，病旋已。
现代文：在她足心各刺三穴，出针时，用于按住穴孔，不能使血流出，病很快就好了。
English: There are three holes in each of her feet, and when the needle is released, it is used to hold the hole, so that the blood cannot flow out, and the disease will soon be cured.

古文：病得之饮酒大醉。
现代文：她的病是因为喝酒大醉而得。
English: Her illness was brought on by binge drinking.

古文：济北王召臣意诊脉诸女子侍者，至女子竖，竖无病。
现代文：济北王召我给他的侍女们诊病，诊到名叫竖的女子时，看起来她没有病。
English: The king of Jibei called me to examine his maids, and when I examined the woman named Zhasa, she didn't seem to be ill.

古文：臣意告永巷长曰： 竖伤脾，不可劳，法当春呕血死。 
现代文：我告诉永巷长说： 竖伤了脾脏，不能太劳累，依病理看，到了春天会吐血而死。 
English: I told the head of the Yongxiang District: "If you injure your spleen, you shouldn't work too hard. According to the pathology, you will vomit blood and die in the spring.

古文：臣意言王曰： 才人女子竖何能？ 
现代文：我问济北王 这个人有什么才能？ 
English: I asked King Jibei, "What talent does this man have?"

古文：王曰： 是好为方，多伎能，为所是案法新，往年市之民所，四百七十万，曹偶四人。 
现代文：济北王说： 她喜好方技，有多种技能，能在旧方技是创出新意来，去年从民间买的，和她一样的四个人，共用四百七十万钱。 又问： 她是不是有病？ 
English: Ji Beiguang said: She is fond of Fangzhu, has a variety of skills, and can create new ideas in the old Fangzhu. She bought it from the people last year, and four people like her share 4.7 million yuan. He also asked: Is she sick?

古文：王曰： 得毋有病乎？ 
现代文：我回答说： 她病得很重，依病理会死去。 
English: I said, "She's very sick and she's going to die.

古文：臣意对曰： 竖病重，在死法中。 王召视之，其颜色不变，以为不然，不卖诸侯所。
现代文：济北王又一次叫她来就诊，她的脸色没有变化，认为我说的不对，没有把她卖给其他诸侯。
English: King Jibei asked her to come to the clinic again, but her face did not change. He thought I was wrong and did not sell her to other lords.

古文：至春，竖奉剑从王之厕，王去，竖後，王令人召之，即仆於厕，呕血死。
现代文：到了第二年春天，她捧着剑随王去厕所，王离去，她仍留在后边，王派人去叫她，她已脸向前倒在厕所里，吐血而死。
English: In the spring of the following year, she followed the king to the toilet with her sword in her hand. The king left, but she remained behind. The king sent someone to call her, but she had already fallen face forward in the toilet, vomited blood and died.

古文：病得之流汗。流汗者，法病内重，毛发而色泽，脉不衰，此亦内之病也。
现代文：她的病是因流汗引起，流汗的病人，依病理说是病重在内里，从表面看，毛发、脸色有光泽，脉气不衰，这也是内关的病。
English: Her illness was caused by perspiration. According to the pathology, patients with perspiration are said to be seriously ill inside. From the surface, the hair and face are shiny, and the pulse is not weak. This is also a disease of the internal organs.

古文：齐中大夫病齲齿，臣意灸其左大阳明脉，即为苦参汤，日嗽三升，出入五六日，病已。
现代文：齐国中大夫患龋齿病，我炙他的左手阳明脉，又立即为他调制苦参汤，每天用三升漱口，经过五六天，病就好了。
English: Dr. Qi Guozhong suffered from dental caries. I burned his left hand's yangming vein, and immediately prepared bitter ginseng soup for him. He rinsed his mouth with three liters of it every day. After five or six days, his illness was cured.

古文：得之风，及卧开口，食而不嗽。
现代文：他的病得自风气，以及睡觉时张口，食后不漱口。
English: His illness was caused by the culture and the fact that he slept with his mouth open and did not rinse his mouth after eating.

古文：菑川王美人怀子而不乳，来召臣意。臣意往，饮以莨锽药一撮，以酒饮之，旋乳。
现代文：菑川王的美人怀孕难产，召我诊治，我用莨菪药末一撮，用酒送服，很快就生产了。
English: The beauty of the King of Lu Chuan was pregnant and had difficulty giving birth. She called me for diagnosis and treatment. I used a pinch of lye powder and gave her clothes with wine, and she soon gave birth.

古文：臣意复诊其脉，而脉躁。
现代文：我又诊她的脉，发现脉象急躁。
English: I also checked her pulse and found it to be fast.

古文：躁者有馀病，即饮以消石一齐，出血，血如豆比五六枚。
现代文：脉急还有其他的病，就用消石一剂给她喝下，接着阴部流出血块来，约有五六枚血块像豆子一样大小。
English: She had an urgent pulse and other ailments, so he gave her a dose of cumin to drink, followed by a blood clot in her genitals. There were about five or six blood clots the size of beans.

古文：齐丞相舍人奴从朝入宫，臣意见之食闺门外，望其色有病气。臣意即告宦者平。
现代文：齐国丞相门客的奴仆跟随主人上朝进入王宫，我看到他在闺门外吃东西，望见他的容颜有病色，我当即把此事告诉了名叫平的宦官，他因喜好诊脉而向我学习。
English: I saw him eating outside the maiden's gate, and I saw his face was sickly. I immediately told this to a eunuch named Ping, who learned from me because of his penchant for diagnosing veins.

古文：平好为脉，学臣意所，臣意即示之舍人奴病，告之曰： 此伤脾气也，当至春鬲塞不通，不能食饮，法至夏泄血死。 
现代文：我就用这个奴仆做例子指导他，告诉他说： 这是伤害脾脏的容色，到明年春天，胸隔会阻塞不通，不能吃东西，依病理到夏天将泄血而死。 
English: I used this servant as an example to guide him and told him: This is the appearance of a damaged spleen, by next spring, the chest wall will be blocked, unable to eat, and according to the pathology, it will bleed to death by summer.

古文：宦者平即往告相曰： 君之舍人奴有病，病重，死期有日。 
现代文：他就到丞相那禀报说： 您门客的奴仆有病，病得很重，死期指日可待。 
English: So he went to the vizier Naaman and reported, "Your servant is ill, very ill, and his time to die is near.

古文：相君曰： 卿何以知之？ 
现代文：丞相问： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: The prime minister asked: How did you know?

古文：曰： 君朝时入宫，君之舍人奴尽食闺门外，平与仓公立，即示平曰，病如是者死。 
现代文：他回答说： 丞相上朝入宫时，他在闺门外吃饭，我和太仓公站在那里，太仓公告诉我，患这种病是要死的。 
English: He replied, "When the prime minister entered the palace in the previous morning, he was eating outside the maiden's gate, and I was standing there with Lord Taikura. Lord Taikura told me that I would die from this disease.

古文：相即召舍人而谓之曰： 公奴有病不？ 
现代文：丞相就把这个门客召请来问他： 您的奴仆有病吗？ 
English: So the chancellor summoned the concubine and asked him, "Is your servant ill?

古文：舍人曰： 奴无病，身无痛者。 
现代文：门客说： 我的奴仆没有病，身体没有疼痛的地方。 
English: And the keeper of the door said, My servant is not sick, neither is there any sorrow in his flesh.

古文：至春果病，至四月，泄血死。
现代文：到了春天果然病了，四月时，泄血而死。
English: In the spring he fell ill, and in April he bled to death.

古文：所以知奴病者，脾气周乘五藏，伤部而交，故伤脾之色也，望之杀然黄，察之如死青之兹。
现代文：我所以能知道他的病，是因知他的脾气普遍影响到五脏，脾受伤害就会在脸上某一部位显示相应的病色，伤脾之色，看上去脸色是黄的，仔细再看是青中透灰的死草色。
English: I was able to know about his illness because I knew that his temper generally affects the five viscera. If the spleen is injured, a certain part of the face will show the corresponding color of the disease, the color of the injured spleen. It looks like the face is yellow, and if you look at it carefully, it is the color of dead grass that is gray in the middle of the day.

古文：众医不知，以为大蟲，不知伤脾。
现代文：许多医生不知这种情形，认为是体内有寄生虫，不知是伤害了脾。
English: Many doctors don't know about this condition and think that there is a parasite in the body that has somehow damaged the spleen.

古文：所以至春死病者，胃气黄，黄者土气也，土不胜木，故至春死。
现代文：这个人所以到春天病重而死，是因脾病脸色发黄，黄色在五行属土，脾土不能胜肝木，所以到了肝木强盛的春天就会死去。
English: The reason why this man died in the spring after being seriously ill was that his face turned yellow due to spleen disease. Yellow belongs to the earth in the five elements, and the spleen cannot defeat the liver, so he will die in the spring when the liver is strong.

古文：所以至夏死者，脉法曰 病重而脉顺清者曰内关 ，内关之病，人不知其所痛，心急然无苦。若加以一病，死中春；一愈顺，及一时。
现代文：到夏天而死的原因，依照病理 病情严重，而脉象正常的是内关病。 内关病，病人不会感到疼痛，好像没有一点儿痛苦，如果再添任何一种病，就会死在仲春的二月；如果能精神愉快顺天养性，能够拖延一季度。
English: The causes of death in the summer, according to the pathology, the disease is serious, and the pulse is normal is the internal disease. the internal disease, the patient will not feel pain, it seems that there is no pain, if any disease is added, it will die in the middle of spring in February; if the spirit can be happy and natural, it can be delayed for a quarter.

古文：其所以四月死者，诊其人时愈顺。
现代文：他所以在四月死，我诊他的脉时，他精神愉快能顺天养性。
English: That's why he died in April. When I checked his pulse, he was cheerful and able to follow nature.

古文：愈顺者，人尚肥也。
现代文：他能够做到这样，人还算养得丰满肥腴，也就能拖延一些时候了。
English: If he can do this, even if a person has a plump and fat calf, he will be able to delay it for some time.

古文：奴之病得之流汗数出，於火而以出见大风也。
现代文：他的病是因流汗太多，受火烤后又在外面受了风邪而得。
English: His illness was caused by sweating too much, being roasted over a fire and then catching a cold outside.

古文：菑川王病，召臣意诊脉，曰： 蹶上为重，头痛身热，使人烦懑。 
现代文：菑川王病，召我去诊脉，我说： 这是热邪逆侵上部症状严重的 蹶 病，造成头疼身热，使人烦闷。 
English: I was called to the clinic by a doctor who said, "This is a fever that invades the upper part of the body, with severe symptoms. It causes headaches, body heat, and makes people feel tired.

古文：臣意即以寒水拊其头，刺足阳明脉，左右各三所，病旋已。
现代文：我就用冷水拍在他头上，并针刺他的足阳明经脉，左右各刺三穴，病很快好了。
English: I patted his head with cold water, and pricked his feet with needles to remove the yang-ming meridians, with three pricks on each side, and he soon recovered.

古文：病得之沐发未乾而卧。
现代文：他的病是因洗完头发，没擦干去睡觉引起的。
English: His illness was caused by washing his hair and going to bed without drying it.

古文：诊如前，所以蹶，头热至肩。
现代文：我前边的诊断是正确的，所以称作 蹶 ，是因热气逆行到头和肩部。
English: My anterior diagnosis was correct, hence the name "cold sores," due to the hot air travelling backwards to the head and shoulders.

古文：齐王黄姬兄黄长卿家有酒召客，召臣意。
现代文：齐王黄姬的哥哥黄长卿在家设酒席请客，请了我。
English: Qi Wang Huang Ji's brother Huang Changqing set up a banquet at home and invited me.

古文：诸客坐，未上食。
现代文：客人入座，还没上菜。
English: The guests are seated, but the food hasn't been served yet.

古文：臣意望见王后弟宋建，告曰： 君有病，往四五日，君要胁痛不可俯仰，又不得小溲。
现代文：我见王后弟弟宋建容色异常就说： 你有病，四五天前，你腰胁疼得不能俯仰，也不能小便。
English: I saw the queen's younger brother, Song Jian, with an abnormal complexion, and said: "You are ill. Four or five days ago, you had pain in your lower back and couldn't bend over or urinate.

古文：不亟治，病即入濡肾。
现代文：不赶快医治，病邪就会浸润肾脏。
English: If it is not treated quickly, the disease will infiltrate the kidneys.

古文：及其未舍五藏，急治之。
现代文：趁着还没滞留在五脏，迅速治愈。
English: Take advantage of the fact that it has not lingered in the internal organs and heal quickly.

古文：病方今客肾濡，此所谓 肾痺 也。 宋建曰： 然，建故有要脊痛。
现代文：现在你的病情只是病邪刚刚侵入浸润着肾脏，这就是人们说的 肾痹 。 宋建说： 你说对了，我确实曾腰脊疼过。
English: Now your condition is just that the disease has just invaded and infiltrated the kidneys, which is what people call "renal palsy." Song Jian said: You are right, I did have pain in my lumbar spine.

古文：往四五日，天雨，黄氏诸倩见建家京下方石，即弄之，建亦欲效之，效之不能起，即复置之。
现代文：四五天前，天正下雨，黄氏的女婿们到我家里，看到了我家库房墙下的方石，就要弄举起，我也想要效仿去做，举不起来，就把它放下了。
English: Four or five days ago, when it was raining, Mr. Huang's sons-in-law came to my house and saw the square stone under the wall of my family's storeroom. They wanted to lift it up, and I wanted to do the same. I couldn't lift it up, so I put it down.

古文：暮，要脊痛，不得溺，至今不愈。 
现代文：到了黄昏，就腰脊疼痛，不能小便了，到现在也没有痊愈。 
English: By dusk, I had pain in my lumbar spine and couldn't urinate. It still hasn't healed.

古文：建病得之好持重。
现代文：他的病是因喜好举重物引起。
English: His illness was caused by his fondness for weightlifting.

古文：所以知建病者，臣意见其色，太阳色乾，肾部上及界要以下者枯四分所，故以往四五日知其发也。
现代文：我所以能诊治他的病，是因看到他的容色，太阳穴处色泽枯干，两颊显示肾病部位边缘四分处色泽干枯，所以才知道四五天前病发作。
English: The reason why I was able to diagnose and treat his illness was because I saw his complexion, which was withered at the temples, and his cheeks, which showed withered at four points around the edges of the kidney disease site. That's why I knew the onset of the disease was four or five days ago.

古文：臣意即为柔汤使服之，十八日所而病愈。
现代文：我为他调制柔汤服用，十八天病就痊愈了。
English: I concocted a soup for him and took it, and he recovered after 18 days.

古文：济北王侍者韩女病要背痛，寒热，众医皆以为寒热也。臣意诊脉，曰： 内寒，月事不下也。 
现代文：济北王一个姓韩的侍女腰背疼，恶寒发热，许多医生都认为是寒热病，我诊脉后说： 是内寒，月经不通。 
English: A lady-in-waiting of the Northern King of Jibei, surnamed Han, had backache, chills and fever. Many doctors thought it was a cold and fever. After my diagnosis, she said, "It's a cold, and I can't menstruate."

古文：即窜以药，旋下，病已。
现代文：我用药为她熏灸，过一会儿，月经就来了，病好了。
English: I used medicine to cure her, and after a while, her period came and she recovered.

古文：病得之欲男子而不可得也。
现代文：她的病是因想得到男人却不能够引起的。
English: Her illness was caused by wanting a man and not being able to get one.

古文：所以知韩女之病者，诊其脉时，切之，肾脉也，啬而不属。
现代文：我所以能知道她的病，是切脉时，知道她的肾脉有病气，脉象涩滞不连续。
English: That's how I was able to know that she was ill, when I cut her vein, I knew that her renal vein was diseased, and the vein was like astringent and discontinuous.

古文：啬而不属者，其来难，坚，故曰月不下。
现代文：这种脉，出现得艰难而又坚实有力，所以就月经不通。
English: This vein appears difficult and solid, so menstruation is not possible.

古文：肝脉弦，出左口，故曰欲男子不可得也。
现代文：他的肝脉硬直而长，象弓弦一样，超出左手寸口位置，所以说病是想要得到男人却不能够造成的。
English: His hepatic vein is stiff and long, like the string of a bow, extending beyond the position of the tip of the left hand, so the disease is caused by wanting to get a man but not being able to.

古文：临菑氾里女子薄吾病甚，众医皆以为寒热笃，当死，不治。
现代文：临菑氾里一个叫薄吾的女人病得很重，许多医生都认为是寒热病，会死，无法医治。
English: In the floods in Linyi, a woman named Bo Guo was seriously ill. Many doctors believed that she was suffering from a cold and fever, and would die, and could not be cured.

古文：臣意诊其脉，曰： 蛲瘕。 
现代文：我诊脉后说： 这是 蛲瘕病 。 
English: After diagnosing my pulse, I said: This is rickets.

古文：蛲瘕为病，腹大，上肤黄粗，循之戚戚然。
现代文：这种病，使人肚子大，腹部皮肤黄而粗糙，用手触摸肚腹病人感到难受。
English: This disease causes a person to have a large belly, the skin of the abdomen is yellow and rough, and it is uncomfortable for the patient to touch the abdomen with his hands.

古文：臣意饮以芫华一撮，即出蛲可数升，病已，三十日如故。
现代文：我用芫花一撮用水送服，随即泄出约有几升的蛲虫，病也就好了。过了三十天，身体和病前一样。
English: I washed my clothes with a pinch of water and immediately released about a few litres of maggots, and my illness was cured. Thirty days later, my body is the same as it was before my illness.

古文：病蛲得之於寒湿，寒湿气宛笃不发，化为蟲。
现代文：蛲瘕病得自寒湿气，寒湿气郁积太多，不能发散，变化为虫。
English: Ringworm is caused by cold and dampness. Cold and dampness accumulate too much and cannot be dispersed. It turns into worms.

古文：臣意所以知薄吾病者，切其脉，循其尺，其尺索刺粗，而毛美奉发，是蟲气也。
现代文：我能知道她的病，因为我切脉时，循按尺部脉位，她尺部脉象紧而粗大，又毛发枯焦，这是有虫的病状。
English: I could tell her illness because when I cut the vein, I followed the position of the vein in the ulnar part. Her ulnar vein looked tight and coarse, and her hair was scorched. This was an insect-infested condition.

古文：其色泽者，中藏无邪气及重病。
现代文：她的脸色有光泽，是内脏没有邪气，病也不重的缘故。
English: Her face is shiny because her internal organs are not evil and she is not seriously ill.

古文：齐淳于司马病，臣意切其脉，告曰： 当病迵风。
现代文：齐国姓淳于的司马病了，我诊脉后说： 你应该是 洞风病 。
English: Sima, surnamed Chunyu in Qi Province, was ill. After my diagnosis, he said, "You must have cave fever."

古文：迵风之状，饮食下嗌辄後之。病得之饱食而疾走。 
现代文：洞风病的症状是，饮食咽下后就又呕吐出，得这种病的原因，是吃过饱饭就跑的缘故。 
English: The symptom of sinusitis is vomiting after swallowing food. The cause of this disease is running after a full meal.

古文：淳于司马曰： 我之王家食马肝，食饱甚，见酒来，即走去，驱疾至舍，即泄数十出。 
现代文：他回答说： 我到君王家吃马肝，吃得很饱，看到送上酒来，就跑开了，后来又骑着快马回家，到家就下泄几十次。 
English: He answered, "I went to the king's house to eat horse liver, and I ate until I was full. When I saw wine being served, I ran away. Later, I rode home on a fast horse. When I got home, I defecated dozens of times."

古文：臣意告曰： 为火齐米汁饮之，七八日而当愈。 
现代文：我告诉他说： 把火剂汤用米汁送服，过七八天就会痊愈。 
English: I told him, "Take the pyrotechnic soup and mix it with rice juice. In seven or eight days, you will be cured."

古文：时医秦信在旁，臣意去，信谓左右阁都尉曰： 意以淳于司马病为何？ 
现代文：当时医生秦信在一边，我离去后，他对左右阁的都尉说： 他认为司马得的什么病？ 
English: At that time, the doctor Qin Xin was on the side, and after I left, he said to the captains of the left and right cabinets: What disease does he think Sima De has?

古文：曰： 以为迵风，可治。 
现代文：回答说： 认为是洞风病，能够治疗。 
English: He replied, "I think it is a form of leprosy, and it can be cured."

古文：信即笑曰： 是不知也。
现代文：秦信就笑着说： 这是不知晓啊。
English: Qin Xin just smiled and said: I don't know.

古文：淳于司马病，法当後九日死。 
现代文：司马的病，依照病理会在九天后死去。 
English: According to the pathology of Sima's disease, he would die after nine days.

古文：即後九日不死，其家复召臣意。
现代文：经过九天没有死，司马家又召请我去。
English: After nine days without death, Sima's family called me again.

古文：臣意往问之，尽如意诊。
现代文：我去后询问病情，全像我所诊断的。
English: I went and asked about the condition and it was exactly as I had diagnosed.

古文：臣即为一火齐米汁，使服之，七八日病已。
现代文：我就为他调制火剂米汤让他服用，七八天后病就好了。
English: I prepared fire agent rice soup for him and let him take it. After seven or eight days, his illness was cured.

古文：所以知之者，诊其脉时，切之，尽如法。
现代文：我所以能知道他的病，是因诊他的脉时，他的脉像完全符合正常的法则。
English: I knew he was ill because when I checked his pulse, it was completely normal.

古文：其病顺，故不死。
现代文：他的病情和脉象一致，所以才不会死去。
English: His condition matches his pulse, so he won't die.

古文：齐中郎破石病，臣意诊其脉，告曰： 肺伤，不治，当後十日丁亥溲血死。 
现代文：齐国名叫破石的中郎得了病，我诊脉后，告诉他说： 肺脏伤害，不能医治了，会在十天后的丁亥日尿血而死。 
English: Zhong Lang of the State of Qi, whose name was "Broken Stone," fell ill. After I checked his pulse, I told him: "His lungs are injured and can't be cured. He will die after urinating blood ten days later on Dinghai Day."

古文：即後十一日，溲血而死。
现代文：过了十一天，他尿血而死。
English: Eleven days later, he urinated blood and died.

古文：破石之病，得之堕马僵石上。
现代文：他的病，是因从马背上摔到坚硬的石头上而得。
English: His illness was caused by a fall from horseback onto hard stone.

古文：所以知破石之病者，切其脉，得肺阴气，其来散，数道至而不一也。
现代文：我所以能诊知他的病，是因切他的脉，肺阴脉脉象来得浮散，好象从几条脉道而来，又不一致。
English: I was able to diagnose his illness by cutting his vein. The pulmonary vein seemed to come from several veins, and they were not consistent.

古文：色又乘之。
现代文：同时他脸色赤红，是心脉压肺脉的表现。
English: At the same time, his face turned red, a sign that his heart was beating faster than his lungs.

古文：所以知其堕马者，切之得番阴脉。
现代文：我所以能知道他是从马背上摔下来的，是因切得反阴脉。
English: I knew he had fallen from his horse because his anus was cut.

古文：番阴脉入虚里，乘肺脉。
现代文：反阴脉进入虚里的胃大络脉，然后侵袭肺脉。
English: The retroperitoneal vein enters the gastric vena cava in the sinus and then invades the pulmonary vein.

古文：肺脉散者，固色变也乘也。
现代文：他的肺脉又出现了 散脉 ，原应脸色白却变红，那是心脉侵袭肺的表现。
English: His pulmonary veins reappeared, and his face turned red instead of white, which is a sign of the heart attacking the lungs.

古文：所以不中期死者，师言曰： 病者安穀即过期，不安穀则不及期 。
现代文：他没有如期而死的原因是，我的老师说： 病人能吃东西喝水就能拖过死期，吃不下饭喝不下水会不到死期就死去。 
English: The reason why he didn't die on schedule is that my teacher said, "Patients can eat and drink to delay their death, but if they can't eat and drink, they will die before their death."

古文：其人嗜黍，黍主肺，故过期。
现代文：这个人喜欢吹黍米，黍能补肺气，所以就拖过了死期。
English: This man liked to blow glutinous rice, which can replenish the lungs, so he delayed his death.

古文：所以溲血者，诊脉法曰 病养喜阴处者顺死，养喜阳处者逆死 。
现代文：他尿血的原因，正如诊脉的理论所说： 病人调养时喜欢安静的就会气血下行而死，好动的就会气血上逆而死。 
English: The reason why he urinated blood is just like the theory of diagnosing the pulse says: When the patient is recuperating, if he likes to be quiet, his qi and blood will go down and he will die; if he is active, his qi and blood will go up and he will die.

古文：其人喜自静，不躁，又久安坐，伏几而寐，故血下泄。
现代文：这个人喜欢安静，不急躁，又能长时间地安稳坐着，伏在几案上睡觉，所以血就会从下排泄而出。
English: This person likes to be quiet, not impatient, and can sit quietly for a long time, sleep on several cases, so blood will be excreted from the bottom.

古文：齐王侍医遂病，自练五石服之。
现代文：齐王名叫遂的侍医生病，自己炼五石散服用。
English: When King Qi's personal physician, Sui, fell ill, he himself took the Five-Stone Powder.

古文：臣意往过之，遂谓意曰： 不肖有病，幸诊遂也。 
现代文：我去问候他，他说： 我有病，希望你为我诊治。 
English: I went to greet him, and he said, "I have an illness, and I would like you to treat me."

古文：臣意即诊之，告曰： 公病中热。
现代文：我立即为他诊治，告诉他： 您得的是内脏有热邪的病。
English: I immediately examined him and told him: You have a disease of the internal organs with fever.

古文：论曰 中热不溲者，不可服五石 。
现代文：病理说 内脏有热邪，不能小便的，不能服用五石散 。
English: According to the pathology, if the viscera are feverish and cannot urinate, it is impossible to take Wuxi San.

古文：石之为药精悍，公服之不得数溲，亟勿服。
现代文：石药药力猛烈，您服后小便次数减少，赶快别再服用。
English: The stone medicine has a strong potency. The number of times you urinate will decrease after taking it. Do not take it again.

古文：色将发臃。 
现代文：看你的脸色，你要生疮肿。 
English: Look at your face. You're going to be sore.

古文：遂曰： 扁鹊曰 阴石以治阴病，阳石以治阳病 。
现代文：他说： 从前扁鹊说过 阴石可以治阴虚有热的病，阳石可以治阳虚有寒的病 。
English: He said: Once upon a time, Bian Que said that Yin stone can cure Yin deficiency and heat disease, and Yang stone can cure Yang deficiency and cold disease.

古文：夫药石者有阴阳水火之齐，故中热，即为阴石柔齐治之；中寒，即为阳石刚齐治之。 
现代文：药石的方剂都有阴阳寒热的分别，所以内脏有热的，就用阴石柔剂医治；内脏有寒的，就用阳石刚剂医治。 
English: Medicinal stone prescriptions are divided into yin and yang cold and heat, so if the internal organs are hot, they will be treated with cinnamon softener; if the internal organs are cold, they will be treated with cinnamon.

古文：臣意曰： 公所论远矣。
现代文：我说： 您的谈论错了。
English: I said: Your discussion is wrong.

古文：扁鹊虽言若是，然必审诊，起度量，立规矩，称权衡，合色脉表里有馀不足顺逆之法，参其人动静与息相应，乃可以论。
现代文：扁鹊虽然说过这样的话，然而必须审慎诊断，确立标准、订立规矩，斟酌权衡，依据参照色脉表里、盛衰、顺逆的原则，参验病人的举动与呼吸是否谐调，才可以下结论。
English: Although Bian Que said this, it is necessary to make a careful diagnosis, establish standards, establish rules, consider and weigh, according to the principle of referring to the color pulse table, rise and fall, and reverse, and check whether the patient's movement and breathing are in harmony before making a conclusion.

古文：论曰 阳疾处内，阴形应外者，不加悍药及鑱石 。
现代文：医药理论说： 体内有阳热病，体表反应阴冷症状的，不能用猛烈的药和砭石的方法医治。 
English: The theory of medicine says: If there is yang fever in the body and the body surface reacts with cold symptoms, it cannot be treated with violent drugs and flints.

古文：夫悍药入中，则邪气辟矣，而宛气愈深。
现代文：因为强猛的药进入体内，邪气就会使热邪气更加恣肆，蓄积更深。
English: Because the strong medicine enters the body, the evil spirit will make the hot evil spirit more reckless and accumulate deeper.

古文：诊法曰 二阴应外，一阳接内者，不可以刚药 。
现代文：诊病理论说： 外寒多于内热的病，不能用猛烈的药。 
English: The theory of diagnosing diseases says: external cold is more prevalent than internal fever, and violent medicine should not be used.

古文：刚药入则动阳，阴病益衰，阳病益箸，邪气流行，为重困於俞，忿发为疽。 
现代文：因猛烈的药进入体内就会催动阳气，阴虚病症就会更严重，阳气更加强盛，邪气到处流动行走，就会重重团聚在腧穴，最后激发为疽。 
English: Due to the violent medicine entering the body, the yang qi will be driven, the yin deficiency disease will be more serious, the yang qi will be more vigorous, the evil qi will flow everywhere, it will be repeatedly reunited in the anus, and finally stimulated to gangrene.

古文：意告之後百馀日，果为疽发乳上，入缺盆，死。
现代文：我告诉他一百多天后，果然疽发在乳上，蔓延到锁骨上窝后，就死了。
English: I told him more than a hundred days later, and sure enough, the gangrene broke out on the breast, spread to the clavicle, and he died.

古文：此谓论之大体也，必有经纪。
现代文：这就是说理论只是概括大体情形，提出大体的原则。
English: That is to say, the theory only summarizes the general situation and puts forward the general principles.

古文：拙工有一不习，文理阴阳失矣。
现代文：平庸的医生如有一处没能深入学习理解，就会使识辨阴阳条理的事出现差错。
English: If a mediocre doctor fails to thoroughly study and understand one thing, he will make mistakes in distinguishing between yin and yang.

古文：齐王故为阳虚侯时，病甚，众医皆以为蹶。
现代文：齐王从前是阳虚侯时，病得很重，许多医生都认为是蹶病。
English: In the past, when King Qi was still a young man, he was very ill, and many doctors thought it was rickets.

古文：臣意诊脉，以为痺，根在右胁下，大如覆杯，令人喘，逆气不能食。
现代文：我为他诊脉，认为是痹症，病根在右胁下部，大小象扣着的杯子，使人气喘，逆气上升，吃不下东西。
English: I checked his pulse and thought it was polio. The root of the disease was in the lower part of the right hypochondrium. It was the size of a clasped cup, causing people to gasp for breath, their blood pressure to rise, and they were unable to eat.

古文：臣意即以火齐粥且饮，六日气下；即令更服丸药，出入六日，病已。
现代文：我就用火剂粥给他服用，过了六天，逆气下行；再让他改服丸药，大约过了六天，病就好了。
English: I gave him a dose of fire porridge, and after six days, his blood pressure went down. He was then switched to pills, and after about six days, his condition improved.

古文：病得之内。
现代文：他的病是房事不当而得。
English: It is due to the immoderate conduct of the house.

古文：诊之时不能识其经解，大识其病所在。
现代文：我为他诊脉时，不能识辨哪一经脉有了病，只是大体知道疾病所在部位。
English: When I checked his pulse, I couldn't identify which meridian was diseased, but I knew roughly where the disease was located.

古文：臣意尝诊安阳武都里成开方，开方自言以为不病，臣意谓之病苦沓风，三岁四支不能自用，使人瘖，瘖即死。
现代文：我曾经为安阳武都里名叫成开方的人诊治，他称自己没有病，我说他将被沓风病所苦，三年后四肢不能受自己支配，而且会喑哑不能出声，这时就会死去。
English: I once treated a man named Cheng Kai Fang in Anyang Wudu. He said that he was not sick. I said that he would suffer from leprosy. After three years, his limbs would not be under his control, and he would be mute and unable to speak, and then he would die.

古文：今闻其四支不能用，瘖而未死也。
现代文：现在听说他的四肢已不能动了，虽喑哑却还没有死。
English: Now I hear that he can no longer move his limbs, and although he is mute, he is not dead.

古文：病得之数饮酒以见大风气。
现代文：他的病是多次喝酒之后受了风邪引起的。
English: His illness was caused by a cold he caught after drinking too much.

古文：所以知成开方病者，诊之，其脉法奇咳言曰 藏气相反者死 。
现代文：我所以知道他的病，是因给他切脉时，发现他的脉象符合《奇咳术》的说法： 脏气相反的会死。 
English: The reason I knew about his illness was that when I cut his pulse, I found that his pulse pattern was consistent with the statement in "The Strange Coughing Technique": "The opposite of bad breath is death."

古文：切之，得肾反肺，法曰 三岁死 也。
现代文：切他的脉，得到肾气反冲肺气的脉象，依照这个道理，到了三年会死。
English: Cut his pulse, get the pulse image of the kidney qi rebounding the lung qi, according to this principle, he will die in three years.

古文：安陵阪里公乘项处病，臣意诊脉，曰： 牡疝。 
现代文：安陵坂里名叫项处的公乘有病，我为他诊脉，然后说： 这是牡疝病。 
English: A man in Anling Slope, named Xiang, was ill. I checked his pulse and said, "It's oyster disease."

古文：牡疝在鬲下，上连肺。
现代文：牡疝是发生在胸隔下，上连肺脏的病。
English: Oyster is a disease that occurs under the septum, connecting the lungs.

古文：病得之内。
现代文：是因行房事不节制而得。
English: It is due to the immoderate conduct of the house.

古文：臣意谓之： 慎毋为劳力事，为劳力事则必呕血死。 
现代文：我对他说： 千万不能做操劳用力的事，做这样的事就会吐血死去。 
English: I said to him, "You must never do anything that requires hard work. If you do such a thing, you will vomit blood and die."

古文：处後蹴踘，要蹶寒，汗出多，即呕血。
现代文：项处后来却去 蹴踘 ，结果腰部寒冷，汗出很多，吐了血。
English: However, he later went to the toilet, and as a result, his lower back was cold, he sweated a lot, and vomited blood.

古文：臣意复诊之，曰： 当旦日日夕死。 
现代文：我再次为他诊脉后说： 会在第二天黄昏时死去。 
English: After taking his pulse again, I said, "He will die at dusk the next day."

古文：即死。
现代文：到时就死了。
English: That's when he died.

古文：病得之内。所以知项处病者，切其脉得番阳。番阳入虚里，处旦日死。
现代文：他的病是因房事而得，我所以能知道他的病，是因为切脉时得到反阳脉，反阳的脉气进入上虚，第二天就会死。
English: His illness was caused by a house dispute. The reason I was able to know about his illness was that when he cut the vein, he got the anti-yang vein, and the anti-yang vein gas entered the supraventricular space, and he would die the next day.

古文：一番一络者，牡疝也。
现代文：一方面出现了反阳脉，一方面上连于肺，这就是牡疝。
English: On the one hand, there is an anti-solar vein, on the other hand, it is connected to the lungs, which is the oyster.

古文：臣意曰：他所诊期决死生及所治已病众多，久颇忘之，不能尽识，不敢以对。
现代文：臣淳于意说： 其他能正确诊治决断生死时间以及治好的病太多了，因为时间一长忘了，不能完全记住，所以不敢用这些来回答。
English: Minister Jun deliberately said: There are too many other diseases that can correctly diagnose and treat, decide the time of life and death, and cure. Because time has long forgotten, it can not be fully remembered, so I dare not use these to answer.

古文：问臣意： 所诊治病，病名多同而诊异，或死或不死，何也？ 
现代文：又问： 你所诊治的病，许多病名相同，却诊断结果名异，有的人死了，有的人还活着，这是为什么？ 
English: He also asked: Why is it that many of the diseases you treat have the same name, but the diagnoses are different, and some people are dead and some are still alive?

古文：对曰： 病名多相类，不可知，故古圣人为之脉法，以起度量，立规矩，县权衡，案绳墨，调阴阳，别人之脉各名之，与天地相应，参合於人，故乃别百病以异之，有数者能异之，无数者同之。
现代文：回答说： 从前病名大多是类似的，不能确切辨知，所以古代的圣人创立脉法，使人能用这些确立的标准，订立的规矩，斟酌权衡，依照规则，测量人的阴阳情形，区别人的脉象后各自命名，注意与自然变化的相应，参照人体情况，才能区别各种疾病使它们病名各异，医术高明的人能指出病名不同，医术不高看到的病是相同的。
English: He replied: In the past, most of the names of diseases were similar and could not be accurately identified. Therefore, the ancient sages created the pulse method to enable people to use these established standards, rules, and considerations to measure the yin and yang of people according to the rules. After distinguishing the pulse image of people, they were named separately. Pay attention to the corresponding natural changes and refer to the human body. Only by distinguishing various diseases can they be given different names. People with high medical skills can point out the different names of diseases. The diseases that are not high in medical skills are the same.

古文：然脉法不可胜验，诊疾人以度异之，乃可别同名，命病主在所居。
现代文：然而脉法不能全部应验，诊治病人要用分度脉的方法区别，才能区别相同名称的疾病，说出病因在什么地方。
English: However, the pulse method cannot be applied to all cases. In order to diagnose and treat patients, it is necessary to use the pulse grading method to distinguish between diseases with the same name and to tell where the cause is.

古文：今臣意所诊者，皆有诊籍。
现代文：现在我诊治的病人，都有诊治记录。
English: All the patients I treat now have a record of their treatment.

古文：所以别之者，臣意所受师方適成，师死，以故表籍所诊，期决死生，观所失所得者合脉法，以故至今知之。 
现代文：我所以这样区别疾病，是因我从师学医刚刚完成，老师就死去了，因此记明诊治的情形，预期决断生死的时间，来验证自己失误、正确的结果和脉象的对应关系，因为这个缘故到现在能够辨知各种的疾病。
English: The reason why I distinguish diseases in this way is that I have just finished learning from the teacher and the teacher died, so I remember the diagnosis and treatment situation, expect to determine the time of life and death, to verify my mistakes, the correct results and the corresponding relationship of pulse, because of this, I can now distinguish various diseases.

古文：问臣意曰： 所期病决死生，或不应期，何故？ 
现代文：又问： 你决断病人的死或活的时间，有时也不能应验，因为什么？ 
English: He also asked: You decide the time of death or life of the patient, and sometimes it does not happen, because of what?

古文：对曰： 此皆饮食喜怒不节，或不当饮药，或不当针灸，以故不中期死也。 
现代文：回答说： 这都是因为病人饮食喜怒不加节制，或者因为不恰当地服药，或者因为不恰当地用针炙治疗，所以会与预断的日期不相应而死。 
English: Answer: This is because the patient eats and drinks without restraint, or takes medicine inappropriately, or is treated with needles inappropriately, so he will die at an inappropriate time.

古文：问臣意： 意方能知病死生，论药用所宜，诸侯王大臣有尝问意者不？
现代文：又问： 在你正能够诊治病情的生死，论说药品的适应症时，各诸侯王朝的大臣有向你请教的吗？ 
English: He also asked: When you were able to diagnose the life and death of diseases and discuss the indications of drugs, did the ministers of various dynasties ask you for advice?

古文：及文王病时，不求意诊治，何故？ 
现代文：齐文王生病时，不请你去诊治，这是什么缘故？ 
English: When King Qiwen fell ill, he didn't ask you to treat him. What was the reason?

古文：对曰： 赵王、胶西王、济南王、吴王皆使人来召臣意，臣意不敢往。
现代文：回答说： 赵王、胶西王、济南王、吴王都曾派人召请我，我不敢前往。
English: He answered, "King Zhao, King Guoxi, King Jinan, and King Wu have all sent messengers to summon me, but I dare not go.

古文：文王病时，臣意家贫，欲为人治病，诚恐吏以除拘臣意也，故移名数，左右不脩家生，出行游国中，问善为方数者事之久矣，见事数师，悉受其要事，尽其方书意，及解论之。
现代文：齐文王生病时，我家中贫穷，要为人治病谋生，当时实在担心被官吏委任为侍医而受到束缚。所以我把户籍迁到亲戚邻居等人名下；不治理家事，只愿到处行医游学，长期寻访医术精妙的人向他求救，我拜见过几位老师，他们主要的本领我全学到了，也全部得到了他们的医方医书，并深入进行分析评定。
English: When King Qiwen fell ill, my family was poor, and we had to treat people to earn a living. At that time, I was really worried about being appointed as a personal physician by government officials. So I moved my household registration to relatives and neighbors; I did not manage household affairs, but only wanted to travel everywhere to study medicine. For a long time, I visited people with exquisite medical skills to ask him for help. I met several teachers, and I learned all their main skills. I also got all their medical books, and conducted in-depth analysis and evaluation.

古文：身居阳虚侯国，因事侯。
现代文：我住在阳虚侯的封国中，于是侍奉过他。
English: I lived in the fiefdom of Yang Xiu Hou, so I served him well.

古文：侯入朝，臣意从之长安，以故得诊安陵项处等病也。 
现代文：他入朝，我随他到了长安，因为这个缘故，才能给安陵的项处等人看过病。
English: When he ascended to the throne, I followed him to Chang'an. It was because of this that I was able to see the sick people at the Anlin Cemetery.

古文：问臣意： 知文王所以得病不起之状？ 
现代文：问我说： 你知道齐文王生病不起的原因吗？ 
English: Ask me: Do you know the reason why King Qiwen is sick?

古文：臣意对曰： 不见文王病，然窃闻文王病喘，头痛，目不明。
现代文：我回答说： 我没有亲眼看到齐文王的病情，不过我听说齐文王有气喘、头疼视力差的病。
English: I replied, "I haven't seen Qiwen Wang's illness with my own eyes, but I've heard that Qiwen Wang has asthma, headaches and poor eyesight.

古文：臣意心论之，以为非病也。
现代文：我推想，认为这不是病症。
English: I reasoned that it wasn't a medical condition.

古文：以为肥而蓄精，身体不得摇，骨肉不相任，故喘，不当医治。
现代文：因为他身体肥胖而聚积了精气，身体得不到活动，骨胳不能支撑肉躯，所以才气喘，这用不着医治。
English: Because his body is fat and has accumulated energy, the body cannot be active, the bones cannot support the body, so he is short of breath, which does not need to be treated.

古文：脉法曰 年二十脉气当趋，年三十当疾步，年四十当安坐，年五十当安卧，年六十已上气当大董 。
现代文：依照脉理说： 二十岁时人的脉气正旺应该做跑步的运动，三十岁时应该快步行走，四十岁时应该安坐，五十岁时应该安卧，六十岁以上时应该使元气深藏。 
English: According to the pulse theory: At the age of twenty, if a person's pulse is strong, he should do running, at the age of thirty, he should walk fast, at the age of forty, he should sit, at the age of fifty, he should lie down, and at the age of sixty or above, he should keep his vitality deep.

古文：文王年未满二十，方脉气之趋也而徐之，不应天道四时。
现代文：齐文王年令不满二十岁，脉气正旺应该多跑动却懒于活动，这是不顺应自然规律的表现。
English: King Qiwen is less than twenty years old, and his pulse is strong. He should run more, but he is lazy in activities. This is a manifestation of not conforming to the laws of nature.

古文：後闻医灸之即笃，此论病之过也。
现代文：后来听说有的医生用炙法为他治疗，马上病情就重起来，这是分析论断病情上的错误。
English: Later, I heard that some doctors treated him with the roasting method, and his condition immediately recovered. This is an error in the analysis and judgment of the condition.

古文：臣意论之，以为神气争而邪气入，非年少所能复之也，以故死。
现代文：根据我的分析，这是身体内正气上争而病邪之气侵入体内的表现。这种病症不是年青人能够康复的，因此他死了。
English: According to my analysis, this is a manifestation of the struggle between the righteous and the evil spirits in the body, which is not something a young man can recover from, so he died.

古文：所谓气者，当调饮食，择晏日，车步广志，以適筋骨肉血脉，以泻气。
现代文：对这样的病，应该调和饮食，选择晴朗天气，驾车或是步行外出，来开扩心胸，调和筋骨、肌肉、血脉、疏泻体内的郁积的旺气。
English: For such a disease, you should adjust your diet, choose a sunny weather, and go out by car or on foot to open your heart and expand your chest, and adjust the bones, muscles, blood vessels, and diarrhea in the body.

古文：故年二十，是谓 易 。法不当砭灸，砭灸至气逐。 
现代文：所以二十岁时，是人们说的 气血质实 的时期，从医理看应该用砭炙的治疗方法，使用这种方法就会导致气血奔逐不定。
English: Therefore, at the age of twenty, it is the time when people say that the qi and blood are stable. From a medical point of view, the treatment method should be used. Using this method will cause the qi and blood to run erratically.

古文：问臣意： 师庆安受之？
现代文：又问： 你的老师阳庆是跟谁学习的？
English: He also asked: Who did your teacher Yang Qing Zhuo study with?

古文：闻於齐诸侯不？ 
现代文：齐国的诸侯是否知道他？ 
English: Did the princes of Qi know about him?

古文：对曰： 不知庆所师受。
现代文：回答说： 我不知道阳庆的老师是谁？
English: He replied, "I don't know who Yang Qing's teacher is.

古文：庆家富，善为医，不肯为人治病，当以此故不闻。
现代文：阳庆家中非常富有，他精通医术，却不肯为人治病，也许因为这样他才不出名。
English: Yang Qing's family was very wealthy. He was a skilled doctor, but he refused to treat people. Maybe that's why he didn't become famous.

古文：庆又告臣意曰： 慎毋令我子孙知若学我方也。  
现代文：阳庆又告诉我说： 千万别使我的子孙后代知道你曾向我学习医术 。 
English: Yang Qing also told me: Don't let my future generations know that you once learned medicine from me.

古文：问臣意： 师庆何见於意而爱意，欲悉教意方？ 
现代文：又问： 你的老师阳庆是怎么看中并喜爱你的？怎么想把全部秘方医术传授给你的？ 
English: He also asked: How did your teacher Yang Qing like and love you? How did he want to teach you all the secret medical techniques?

古文：对曰： 臣意不闻师庆为方善也。
现代文：回答说： 我本来不知老师阳庆的医术精妙。
English: He replied, "I didn't know that Teacher Yang Qing's medical skills were so exquisite.

古文：意所以知庆者，意少时好诸方事，臣意试其方，皆多验，精良。
现代文：我后来所以知道，是因为我年轻时喜欢各家的医术医方，我曾用他的医方尝试，大多有效，而且精妙。
English: I later found out that it was because when I was young, I liked all kinds of medical techniques. I tried his methods, most of which were effective and ingenious.

古文：臣意闻菑川唐里公孙光善为古传方，臣意即往谒之。
现代文：我听说菑川唐里的公孙光擅长使用古代流传的医方，就去拜见他。
English: I heard that Gongsun Guang of the Tongchuan Tangri was good at using ancient medicine, so I went to see him.

古文：得见事之，受方化阴阳及传语法，臣意悉受书之。
现代文：我能做他的学生，从他那里学到调理阴阳的医方以及口头流传的医理，我全部接受记录下来。
English: I can be his student, learn from him the medicine for regulating yin and yang as well as the oral medicine, and I accept to record it all.

古文：臣意欲尽受他精方，公孙光曰： 吾方尽矣，不为爱公所。吾身已衰，无所复事之。
现代文：我想要全部学到他精妙的医术，公孙光说： 我的秘方医术都拿出来了，我对你不会有所吝惜，我已经老了，没有什么再让你学习的了。
English: I want to learn all of his exquisite medical techniques, Gongsun Guang said: My secret medical techniques are all out, I will not begrudge you, I am old, there is nothing more for you to learn.

古文：是吾年少所受妙方也，悉与公，毋以教人。 
现代文：这些都是我年轻时所学到的精妙医方，全教给你了，不要再教给别人。 
English: These are the subtle medicines I learned when I was young. I've taught them to you. Don't teach them to anyone else.

古文：臣意曰： 得见事侍公前，悉得禁方，幸甚。
现代文：我说： 我能侍奉学习在您的面前，得到全部秘方，这非常幸运。
English: I said, "I'm very lucky to be able to serve and study in front of you and get all the secret recipes.

古文：意死不敢妄传人。 
现代文：我就是死了也不敢随便传给别人。 
English: I wouldn't dare to pass it on to someone else even if I was dead.

古文：居有间，公孙光间处，臣意深论方，见言百世为之精也。
现代文：过了些日子，公孙光闲着没事，我就深入分析论说医方，他认为我对历代医方的论说是高明的。
English: After a few days, Gongsun Guang was idle and had nothing to do, so I deeply analyzed and discussed the medicine, and he thought that I was clever in discussing the medicine of past generations.

古文：师光喜曰： 公必为国工。
现代文：他高兴地说： 你一定会成为国医。
English: He said happily, "You will definitely become a national doctor."

古文：吾有所善者皆疏，同产处临菑，善为方，吾不若，其方甚奇，非世之所闻也。
现代文：我所擅长的医术都荒疏了，我的同胞兄弟住在临菑，精于医术，我不如他，他的医方非常奇妙，不是一般人所能了解的。
English: The medical skills I was good at have all been lost. My brother lives in Linyi and is good at medicine. I am not as good as he is. His medical methods are very strange and not something the average person can understand.

古文：吾年中时，尝欲受其方，杨中倩不肯，曰 若非其人也 。
现代文：我中年时，曾想向他请教，我的朋友杨中倩不同意，说： 你不是那种能学习医术的人。 
English: When I was middle-aged, I wanted to ask him for advice, but my friend Yang Zhongyao disagreed and said, "You are not the kind of person who can learn medicine."

古文：胥与公往见之，当知公喜方也。其人亦老矣，其家给富。 
现代文：必须我和你一起前往拜见他，他就会知道您喜爱医术了。他也老了，但家中富有。 
English: If I have to go with you to see him, he will know that you like medicine. He is also old, but his family is rich.

古文：时者未往，会庆子男殷来献马，因师光奏马王所，意以故得与殷善。
现代文：当时还没去，正好阳庆的儿子阳殷来给齐王献马，通过我的老师公孙光进献给齐王，因为这个缘故我和阳殷熟悉了。
English: At that time, Yang Qing's son Yang Yin came to present horses to King Qi, and through my teacher Gongsun Guangjin to King Qi, because of this, I became familiar with Yang Yin.

古文：光又属意於殷曰： 意好数，公必谨遇之，其人圣儒。 
现代文：公孙光又把我托付给阳殷说： 淳于意喜好医术，你一定要好好礼待他，他是倾慕圣人之道的人。 
English: Gongsun Guang also entrusted me to Yang Yin and said, "Jun Rongyi likes medicine, you must treat him well, he is a person who admires the way of saints."

古文：即为书以意属阳庆，以故知庆。
现代文：于是就写信把我推荐给阳庆，因此也就认识了阳庆。
English: So he wrote to recommend me to Yang Qing, and thus got to know Yang Qing.

古文：臣意事庆谨，以故爱意也。 
现代文：我侍奉阳庆很恭敬谨慎，所以他才喜爱我。 
English: I served Yang Qing very respectfully and cautiously, that's why he liked me.

古文：问臣意曰： 吏民尝有事学意方，及毕尽得意方不？何县里人？ 
现代文：又问： 官吏或百姓曾有人向你学医术吗？有人把你的医术全学会了吗？他们是哪里人？ 
English: He also asked: Did any official or commoner ever learn the art of medicine from you? Did anyone learn your entire art of medicine? Where did they come from?

古文：对曰： 临菑人宋邑。邑学，臣意教以五诊，岁馀。
现代文：回答说： 临菑人宋邑，他向我求教，我教他察看脸色诊病，学了一年多。
English: He replied, "Songyi, a resident of Linyi, came to me for advice. I taught him how to examine the complexion and diagnose diseases, and he studied for more than a year.

古文：济北王遣太医高期、王禹学，臣意教以经脉高下及奇络结，当论俞所居，及气当上下出入邪逆顺，以宜鑱石，定砭灸处，岁馀。
现代文：济北王派太医高明、王禹向我求教，我教给他们经脉上下分布的情形和异常脉络的连结位置，常常论说腧穴所处的方位，以及经络之气运行时的邪正顺逆的情况，怎样选定针对病症需要砭石针炙治疗的穴位，学了有一年多。
English: I taught them the situation of the distribution of the meridians up and down and the connection position of the abnormal vein network. I often discussed the position of the acupoints, as well as the situation of the meridians when the meridians are running, and how to select the acupoints for the treatment of diseases requiring acupuncture. I learned for more than a year.

古文：菑川王时遣太仓马长冯信正方，臣意教以案法逆顺，论药法，定五味及和齐汤法。
现代文：菑川王时常派遣名叫冯信的太仓署中管理马匹的长官前来，让我指教医术，我教他按摩的逆顺手法，论述用药的方法，以及判定药的性味和配伍调制汤剂。
English: King Minchuan often sent Feng Xin, the chief of the Taicang District Horse Management Office, to come to me to teach me medicine. I taught him how to massage backwards and forwards, how to use medicine, and how to judge the taste of medicine and the composition of soup.

古文：高永侯家丞杜信，喜脉，来学，臣意教以上下经脉五诊，二岁馀。
现代文：高永侯的家丞名叫杜信，喜好诊脉，前来求学，我把上下经脉的分布、《五色诊》教给了他，学了两年多的时间。
English: Gao Yonghou's son-in-law, named Du Xin, liked vein diagnosis and came to study. I taught him the distribution of the upper and lower veins and the "Five-Colour Diagnosis" and he studied for more than two years.

古文：临菑召里唐安来学，臣意教以五诊上下经脉，奇咳，四时应阴阳重，未成，除为齐王侍医。 
现代文：临菑召里叫唐安的人来求学，我教给他《五色诊》，上下经脉的位置，《奇咳术》，以及四时和阴阳相应各有偏重的道理，没有学成，就被任命做了齐王的侍医。
English: Linyi summoned Tang An's people to come to study. I taught him the "Five-Colored Diagnosis," the position of the upper and lower meridians, the "Strange Coughing Technique," and the principle that the four o'clock and yin and yang have their own weight. If he did not succeed, he was appointed as the attendant physician of King Qi.

古文：问臣意： 诊病决死生，能全无失乎？ 
现代文：又问： 你给人诊治病症断定人的死生，能完全没有失误吗？ 
English: He also asked: Can you diagnose and treat people and determine their life and death without any mistakes?

古文：臣意对曰： 意治病人，必先切其脉，乃治之。
现代文：回答说： 我医治病人时，一定先为他切脉后，才去医治。
English: He replied, "When I am treating a patient, I must first cut the patient's vein before treating him.

古文：败逆者不可治，其顺者乃治之。
现代文：脉象衰败与病情违背的不给他医治，脉象和病情相顺应的才给他医治。
English: He was not to be treated for a failing pulse that contradicted his condition, but only for a pulse that corresponded to his condition.

古文：心不精脉，所期死生视可治，时时失之，臣意不能全也。 
现代文：如果不能精心切脉，所断定的死生时间及能否治愈，也往往会出现差错，我不能完全没有失误。 
English: If you can't carefully cut the vein, the time of death and life and whether it can be cured will often be wrong. I can't be completely without mistakes.

古文：太史公曰：女无美恶，居宫见妒；士无贤不肖，入朝见疑。
现代文：太史公说： 女人无论美与丑，住进宫中就会被人嫉妒；士人无论贤与不贤，进入朝廷就会遭人疑忌。
English: Taishigong said, "Whether a woman is beautiful or ugly, she will be envied if she lives in a palace; whether a scholar is wise or unwise, he will be suspected if he enters the imperial court.

古文：故扁鹊以其伎见殃，仓公乃匿迹自隐而当刑。
现代文：所以扁鹊因为他的医术遭殃，太仓公于是自隐形迹还被判处刑罚。
English: Therefore, Bian Que suffered because of his medical skills, and Taicang Gong was also sentenced to a criminal penalty.

古文：缇萦通尺牍，父得以後宁。
现代文：缇萦上书皇帝，她的父亲才得到后来的平安。
English: It was only after she wrote a letter to the emperor that her father finally found peace.

古文：故老子曰 美好者不祥之器 ，岂谓扁鹊等邪？
现代文：所以老子说 美好的东西都是不吉祥之物 ，哪里说的是扁鹊这样的人呢？
English: That's why Lao Tzu said that all beautiful things are unlucky, but what about people like Bian Que?

古文：若仓公者，可谓近之矣。
现代文：象太仓公这样的人，也和这句话所说的意思接近啊。
English: People like Taicangong are also close to the meaning of this sentence.

