古文：袁洪愈，字抑之，吴县人。
现代文：袁洪愈，字抑之，吴县人。
English: Yuan Hongyu, also known as Yan Zhi, was from Wuxian County.

古文：举嘉靖二十五年乡试第一。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年获乡试第一。
English: In the 25th year of Jiajing, he won the first place in the township test.

古文：明年成进士，授中书舍人。
现代文：第二年考取进士，授职为中书舍人。
English: In the second year, he passed the entrance examination and was awarded the post of junior high school teacher.

古文：擢礼科给事中。
现代文：升任礼科给事中。
English: He is in the process of being promoted to the etiquette department.

古文：劾检讨梁绍儒阿附权要，文选郎中白璧招权鬻官，尚书万镗、侍郎葛守礼不检下。
现代文：他弹劾检讨梁绍儒阿谀、攀附权贵，文选郎中白璧揽权卖官，尚书万镗、侍郎葛守礼不督察下属。
English: He impeached and reviewed Liang Shao Ruaqi, who was attached to power, Wen Zheng's son-in-law Bai Bi, who was trying to sell power, Shang Shu Wanqi, and Ge Shouli, who did not supervise his subordinates.

古文：诏切责镗、守礼，下璧诏狱，斥绍儒于外。
现代文：世宗下诏痛责万镗、葛守礼，将白璧投入诏狱，梁绍儒被贬出京城。
English: King Sejong severely reprimanded Wan Xuan and Ge Shouli in the imperial edict, put Bai Bi in the imperial edict prison, and banished Liang Shauru from the capital.

古文：绍儒，大学士严嵩私人也。
现代文：梁绍儒是大学士严嵩的亲信。
English: Liang Shauru is a close confidant of university scholar Yan Shuang.

古文：已，陈边务数事，诏俱从之。
现代文：此后，他陈述过边防的数件事，世宗的诏令都依从了。
English: After that, he stated several things about border defense, and Shizong's edict was obeyed.

古文：嵩属吏部尚书吴鹏，出为福建佥事。
现代文：严嵩授意吏部尚书吴鹏，将他调出京城，担任福建佥事。
English: Yan Song sent Wu Peng, the secretary of the General Staff Department, to transfer him out of Beijing to take charge of Fujian affairs.

古文：历河南参议、山东提学副使、湖广参政，所在以清节著。
现代文：历任河南参议、山东提学副使、湖广参政，均以清正廉洁著称。
English: Successive Henan councillor, Shandong vice-envoy for education, and Hubei governor are all known for their honesty and integrity.

古文：嵩败，召为南京太仆少卿，就迁太常。
现代文：严嵩垮台，世宗召他担任南京太仆少卿，调任太常。
English: After Yan Song's downfall, Shizong called him to serve as Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing, and he was transferred to Taojang.

古文：隆庆五年，以疾归。
现代文：隆庆五年，因病回乡。
English: In the fifth year of Longqing, he returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：万历中，起故官，迁南京工部右侍郎，进右都御史，掌南院事，就改礼部尚书。
现代文：万历年间，出任原职。调任南京工部右侍郎，升任右都御史，负责南京翰林院的事务，改任礼部尚书。
English: During the Wanli era, he assumed his original position. He was transferred to the position of Right Attendant of the Nanjing Engineering Department, was promoted to the position of Right Metropolitan Historian, was responsible for the affairs of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy, and was reassigned to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：南京御史谭希思疏论中官、外戚，且请循旧制，内阁设丝纶簿，宫门置铁牌。
现代文：南京御史谭希思上奏抨击宦官、外戚，并请求遵循旧制，在内阁设置丝纶簿，在宫门设置铁牌。
English: The governor of Nanjing, Tan Heath, criticized the eunuchs and maternal relatives, and requested that the old system be followed, setting up a silk book in the cabinet and an iron plate at the palace gate.

古文：诏下南京都察院勘讯，将坐以诬罔。
现代文：神宗下诏指派南京都察院负责勘查、问讯，打算以诬陷、欺骗的罪名处理谭希思。
English: Under the edict of Emperor Jinzong, the South Kyoto Inquisition was assigned to investigate and interrogate, intending to deal with Tan Xi Si under the charges of false accusation and deception.

古文：洪愈已改官，代者未至，乃具言希思所陈，载王可大《国宪家猷》、薛应旂《宪章录》二书。
现代文：袁洪愈已经改任别职，代替他的人还没到任，于是他详细陈述谭希思所陈说的意见，在王可大的《国宪家猷》和薛应旗的《宪章录》两书中都有记载。
English: Yuan Hongyue had been transferred to another post, and his replacement had not yet arrived, so he made a detailed statement of the opinions expressed by Tan Heath, which were recorded in Wang Keda's "Constitutional Law" and Xue Yingqi's "Charter."

古文：帝以所据非颁行制书，谪希思杂职。
现代文：神宗认为他的依据不是朝廷颁布的制书，降了谭希思的职务。
English: Shenzong thought that his basis was not the book-making promulgated by the court, and demoted Tan Heath.

古文：洪愈寻上疏请禁干谒，又极谏屯田废坏之害，乞令商人中盐，免内地飞挽。
现代文：不久袁洪愈上奏请求禁止私人拜见显贵，并极力陈述屯田被荒废的害处，请求让商人依法承担盐的销售，以免内地急速运送。
English: Soon after, Yuan Hongyu petitioned for a ban on private visits to dignitaries, and vigorously stated the harm of abandoned fields, requesting that merchants be responsible for the sale of salt in accordance with the law, so as to avoid rapid transportation to the mainland.

古文：皆议行。
现代文：朝廷讨论后都予以施行。
English: All of them were implemented after discussion by the Imperial Court.

古文：万历十五年，就改吏部。
现代文：万历十五年，他改任吏部职。
English: After fifteen years of hard work, he was promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：其冬引年乞休。
现代文：当年冬天他请求退休。
English: That winter he asked to retire.

古文：帝重其清德，加太子少保致仕。
现代文：神宗看重他的清廉美德，加封他为太子少保，然后退休。
English: Shenzong valued his virtue of honesty and integrity. He was given the additional title of Prince Minor Protector, and then retired.

古文：希思，茶陵人。历右副都御史，巡抚四川。
现代文：袁洪愈为官四十多年，住所不曾增加一根椽木，出入朝廷都是徒步而行。七十四岁去世，巡抚周孔教捐款安葬了他。
English: Yuan Hongyu served as an official for more than forty years. He did not add a single beech tree to his residence, and he entered and left the imperial court on foot. He died at the age of seventy-four, and the procurator Zhou Kongji donated money to bury him.

古文：王廷瞻，字稚表，黄冈人。
现代文：封赠为太子太保，谥号安节。王廷瞻，字稚表，黄冈人。
English: The seal was presented to the Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Anjie. Wang Tingzhu, the word is a child's table, and Huanggang people.

古文：父济，参政。
现代文：父亲王济，曾官至参政。
English: His father, Wang Ji, had been a government official before entering politics.

古文：廷瞻举嘉靖三十八年进士，授淮安推官。
现代文：王廷瞻考取嘉靖三十八年的进士，授职为淮安推官。
English: Wang Tingzhu took the entrance examination for the 38th year of Jiajing and was awarded the post of Huai'an magistrate.

古文：入为御史，督畿辅屯政。
现代文：入朝担任御史，督理京郊的屯垦。
English: Entered the imperial court and served as imperial historian and superintendent of the imperial residences in the suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：穆宗在裕邸，欲易庄田，廷瞻不可。
现代文：穆宗还在裕邸，想变换庄田，王廷瞻不同意。
English: Mu Zong was still at Yu's residence and wanted to change to Shoda, but Wang Tingzhan did not agree.

古文：隆庆元年，所部久雨。
现代文：隆庆元年，京郊长期下雨。
English: In the first year of Longqing, it rained for a long time in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：请自三宫以下及裕府庄田改入乾清宫者，悉蠲其租。
现代文：他请求皇帝将三宫以下和裕府的庄田归入乾清宫的部分，全都蠲免租税。
English: He asked the emperor to classify the shoden below Sannomiya and in Yufu as part of the Qianqing Palace, and all of them would be exempt from tax.

古文：诏减十之五。
现代文：诏令减少十分之五。
English: The imperial edict was reduced by five-tenths.

古文：已，言勋戚庄田太滥，请于初给时裁量田数，限其世次，爵绝归官。
现代文：此后，他称勋臣、外戚的庄田过滥，请求皇帝在刚开始赏赐时估量田亩数额，限制他们世袭的代数，爵位取消，田地归还官府。
English: After that, he said that his great-grandson and maternal relative, Shoda, was too extravagant, and asked the emperor to estimate the amount of farmland when the reward was first given, limit their hereditary algebra, cancel the peerage, and return the fields to the government.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝定制认可。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：高拱再辅政，廷瞻常论拱，遂引疾归。
现代文：高拱再次辅佐朝政，王廷瞻时常抨击高拱，便称病回乡。
English: Gao Gong once again assisted the imperial government. Wang Tingzhu frequently criticized Gao Gong, and then returned to his hometown claiming to be ill.

古文：神宗立，起故官。
现代文：神宗即位，他出任原职。
English: When Shinso ascended the throne, he assumed his former position.

古文：历太仆卿。
现代文：历任太仆卿。
English: Successive Taihoku-kyo.

古文：万历五年，以右佥都御史巡抚四川。
现代文：万历五年，担任右佥都御史辖治四川。
English: For five years, he served as the right-hand man of the governor of Sichuan Province.

古文：番屡犯松潘。
现代文：西南少数民族屡次侵扰松潘。
English: Southwest ethnic minorities repeatedly invade Songpan.

古文：廷瞻令副使杨一桂、总兵官刘显剿之，歼其魁，群蛮纳款。
现代文：王廷瞻命令副使杨一桂、总兵官刘显围剿他们，歼灭了魁首，部众投诚。
English: Wang Tingzhang ordered the vice-envoy Yang Yigui and the general officer Liu Xian to encircle them, annihilate the leader, and the people of the department to surrender.

古文：风村、白草诸番，久居二十八砦，率男妇八千余人来降。
现代文：风村、白草等少数民族人，长期盘踞二十八个寨子，他们男女八千多人前来投降。
English: Ethnic minorities such as the Fengcun and Baicao have long occupied 28 stockades, and more than 8,000 men and women have come to surrender.

古文：复命总兵显讨建昌、傀厦、洗马、姑宰、铁口诸叛番，皆献首恶出降。
现代文：他又命令总兵刘显讨伐建昌、傀厦、洗马、姑宰、铁口等诸路叛乱的少数民族，他们都献出魁首出寨投降。
English: He also ordered the general Liu Xian to fight the rebellious ethnic minorities such as Jianchang, Gusha, Shima, Guzai, and Tiekou. They all surrendered to him.

古文：增俸一级，进右副都御史，抚南、赣。
现代文：他被增加一级俸禄，升任右副都御史，负责南昌、赣州地区。
English: His salary was increased by one grade, and he was promoted to the post of right vice-governor of the capital, in charge of Nanchang and Zhangzhou regions.

古文：入为南京大理卿。
现代文：他入京担任南京大理寺卿。
English: He entered Beijing to serve as the head of the Nanjing Dali Temple.

古文：历两京户部左、右侍郎，以右都御史出督漕运兼巡抚凤阳诸府。
现代文：历任两京户部左、右侍郎，任右都御史出京督理漕运同时巡察凤阳等府。
English: He served as the left and right attendant of the two Beijing households, and was appointed as the right capital official to supervise the transportation of the capital while inspecting Fengyang and other prefectures.

古文：宝应氾光湖堤蓄水济运，平江伯陈瑄所筑也。
现代文：宝应汜光湖堤蓄水以便利漕运，它是平江伯陈蠧修筑的。
English: Baoying Luguang Lake embankment impounds water to facilitate paddling. It was built by Pingjiang Bo Chenjun.

古文：下流无所泄，决为八浅，汇成巨潭，诸盐场皆没。
现代文：下游没有排泄口，冲决成八股急流，汇成一个大水潭，诸多盐场都被淹没。
English: There is no outlet downstream, and it rushes into eight rapids, merging into a large pool, and many salt farms are flooded.

古文：淮流复奔入，势益氵匈氵勇前巡抚李世达等议开越河避其险，廷瞻承之。
现代文：淮河水又奔腾而来，水势更加汹涌。前任巡抚李世达等人提议开挖河道避免此险，王廷瞻接受他们的提议。
English: The water of the Huai River is rushing again, and the water potential is more turbulent. The former governor Li Shida and others proposed to dig a river channel to avoid this risk, and Wang Tingzhang accepted their proposal.

古文：凿渠千七百七十六丈，为石闸三，减水闸二，石堤三千三十六丈，子堤五千三百九十丈，费公帑二十余万，八月竣事。
现代文：开凿了一千七百七十六丈长的渠道，修筑了三座石闸，两座泄水闸，修筑了三千三十六丈长的石堤，五千三百九十丈长的子堤，耗费公款二十多万两，历时八个月竣工。
English: A channel with a length of 1,776 meters was excavated, three stone gates and two sluice gates were built, a stone dike with a length of 336 meters and a sub-dike with a length of 539 meters were built, which cost more than 200,000 yuan and took eight months to complete.

古文：诏旨褒嘉，赐河名弘济。
现代文：皇帝下诏褒奖他，给河道赐名弘济。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict praising him and bestowing fame and prosperity on the river.

古文：进廷瞻户部尚书，巡抚如故。
现代文：他升任户部尚书，依旧巡抚故地。
English: He was promoted to the head of the household, still the governor of his hometown.

古文：寻改南京刑部尚书。
现代文：不久，他改任南京刑部尚书。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：未上，乞归。
现代文：却没有上任，请求回乡。
English: However, he did not take up the post and asked to return to his hometown.

古文：久之卒。
现代文：此后很久才去世。
English: He died a long time later.

古文：赠太子少保。
现代文：被赠封为太子少保。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：兄廷陈，见《文苑传》。郭应聘，字君宾，莆田人。
现代文：郭应聘，字君宾，莆田人。
English: Guo applies for a job, is called Junbin, and is from Putian.

古文：嘉靖二十九年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年的进士。
English: The 29th year of Jiajing.

古文：授户部主事。
现代文：授职为户部主事。
English: Assigned to be in charge of the Household Department.

古文：历郎中，出为南宁知府。
现代文：历任郎中，出京担任南宁知府。
English: Successive junior vassals went to Beijing to serve as Nanning prefectural governor.

古文：迁威茂兵备副使，转广东参政。
现代文：调任威茂兵备副使，转任广东参政。
English: He was transferred to the post of Deputy Envoy of Weimao Military Preparedness, and was transferred to Guangdong to participate in politics.

古文：从提督吴桂芳平李亚元，别击贼首张韶南、黄仕良等。
现代文：跟随提督吴桂芳平定李五元，攻击叛贼的首领张韶南、黄仕良等人。
English: He followed Admiral Wu Guifang to subdue Li Wenyuan and attack the rebel leaders Zhang Xunan, Huang Shiliang and others.

古文：迁广西按察使，历左、右布政使。
现代文：调任广西按察使，历任左、右布政使。
English: He was transferred to the post of inspector of Guangxi, and successively served as the left and right political envoys.

古文：隆庆四年大破古田贼，斩获七千有奇。
现代文：隆庆四年大败古田的叛民，斩杀七千多人。
English: In the fourth year of Longqing, the rebels of Gutian were defeated and more than seven thousand people were killed.

古文：已，从巡抚殷正茂平古田，再进秩。
现代文：此后，跟随巡抚殷正茂平定古田，再次升职晋级。
English: After that, he followed the governor Yin Zhengmao to subdue Ding Gutian, and was promoted again.

古文：正茂迁总督，遂擢应聘右副都御史代之。
现代文：殷正茂调任总督，于是提拔郭应聘担任右副都御史接替他。
English: Yin Zhengmao was transferred to the post of governor, so Guo was promoted to the post of right vice-governor to succeed him.

古文：府江瑶反。
现代文：府江瑶族反叛。
English: The Fujiang Yi people rebelled.

古文：府江上起阳朔，下达昭平，亘三百余里。
现代文：府江，上起阳朔，下达昭平，长达三百多里。
English: The Fujiang River, which rises in Yangshuo and descends in Zhaoping, is more than three hundred miles long.

古文：诸瑶夹江居，怙险剽劫。
现代文：诸寨瑶民夹江居住，倚仗险隘拦路打劫。
English: Zhuzhai and Hunan people live along the river, and rely on narrow roads to stop and rob.

古文：成化、正德间，都御史韩雍、陈金讨平之，至是攻围荔浦、永安，劫知州杨惟执、指挥胡翰。
现代文：成化、正德年间，都御史韩雍、陈金讨伐并平定了他们，现在他们围攻荔浦、永安，劫持知府杨惟执、指挥胡翰。
English: During the Chenghua and Zhengde dynasties, the prefectural governors Han Yong and Chen Jin fought and pacified them, and now they are besieging Lipu and Yongan, kidnapping the prefectural governor Yang Weixi, and commanding Hu Han.

古文：事闻，大学士张居正奏假便宜，寓书应聘曰： 炎荒瘴疠区，役数万众，不宜淹留，速破其巢，则余贼破胆。 
现代文：事情传出，大学士张居正上奏寻求机会，修书给郭应聘说： 炎热荒凉、瘴气缭绕的地区，动员数万人，不适宜长期逗留，迅速攻破他们的巢穴，那么其余的叛贼就会吓破胆。 
English: It was reported that Zhang Ju, a university scholar, was at the forefront of seeking opportunities and applied to Guo for a position as a book reviewer. He said, "In a hot, desolate and suffocating region, mobilizing tens of thousands of people is not suitable for a long-term stay. Quickly break through their lair, then the remaining traitors will be scared.

古文：应聘集土、汉兵六万，令总兵官李锡进讨。
现代文：郭应聘调集土兵、汉兵六万人，命令总兵官李锡率领前去讨伐。
English: Guo recruited and mobilized 60,000 soldiers, both Chinese and Taiwanese, and ordered the commander-in-chief, Li Xi, to lead them in the crusade.

古文：未行，而怀远瑶亦杀知县马希武反。
现代文：没等出发，而怀远的瑶民已经杀害了知县马希武，发动叛乱。
English: Before they could set out, however, the long-suffering Min people had already killed the magistrate Ma Xiwu and launched a rebellion.

古文：应聘与正茂议先征府江，三阅月悉定，乃檄锡讨怀远。
现代文：郭应聘与殷正茂商议先征讨府江，经过三个月才全部平定，于是指令李锡讨伐怀远地区。
English: Guo Anhe and Yin Zhengmao discussed the first conscription to fight the Fujiang River, and after three months it was all settled, then Li Xi was ordered to fight the Huaiyuan area.

古文：天大雨雪，无功而还。
现代文：天空下起大雨和雪，李锡无功而回。
English: There was heavy rain and snow in the sky, and Li Xi had no choice but to turn back.

古文：怀远，古牂牁，地界湖、贵靖、黎诸州，环郭皆瑶，编氓处其外。
现代文：怀远即是古时的爿羊，地跨湖、贵靖、黎等州，环绕城郭四周的都是瑶民，国家编民又居住在他们的外围。
English: Huaiyuan is the ancient Qiang sheep, stretching across the lake, Guizhing, Li and other states, surrounded by Qiang people, and the state-organized people live on their periphery.

古文：嘉靖中，征之不克，知县寄居府城，遥示羁縻而已。
现代文：嘉靖年间征伐怀远未能攻克，知县寄居在知府治所，遥遥显示一种管束罢了。
English: During the Jiajing Dynasty, the conquest of Huaiyuan could not be conquered, and Zhixian sojourned in the prefectural government, which only showed a kind of control.

古文：古田既复，瑶慑兵威，愿服属，希武始入其地。
现代文：古田被收复，瑶民慑于兵势表示愿意臣服，马希武才进入他的治所。
English: Furuta was recaptured, and the local people, intimidated by the army, expressed their willingness to submit. It was only then that Mashi Takeshi entered his place of jurisdiction.

古文：议筑城，董作过峻，瑶遂乱，希武见杀。
现代文：提议修筑城池，督察过于严峻，瑶民就叛乱了，马希武被杀。
English: He proposed to build a castle, but the inspector was too severe, so the people rebelled, and Mahiwu was killed.

古文：及是，师出无功。应聘益调诸路兵，镇抚白杲、黄土、大梅、青淇侗、僮，以孤贼势，而锡与诸将连破贼，斩其魁，怀远乃下。
现代文：到此，出师无功，郭应聘增调各路兵马，镇抚白杲、黄土、大梅、青淇等侗、僮地区，使叛贼成为孤立之势，李锡和诸将领们接连攻破叛贼的阵营，斩杀了他们的魁首，攻下怀远。
English: At this point, there was no success in dispatching a division, and Guo accepted the invitation to increase the number of soldiers and horses in all directions, and to pacify the Baiyun, Loess, Dayi, Qingyi and other areas, so that the traitors became isolated. Li Xi and the generals successively broke through the camp of the traitors, killed their leader, and captured the distant future.

古文：事皆具锡传。
现代文：事情详载于李锡传。
English: The incident is detailed in the biography of Li Xichuan.

古文：初议行师，锡以阳朔金宝岭贼近，欲先灭之。
现代文：开始商议出兵，李锡认为阳朔金宝岭的乱贼较近，想先消灭他们。
English: When they began to discuss sending troops, Li Xi thought that the bandits in Yangshuo Jinbaoling were closer and wanted to eliminate them first.

古文：应聘曰： 君第往，吾自有处。 
现代文：郭应聘说： 你只管前去，我自有办法。 
English: Guo Anying said: You just go ahead, I have my own way.

古文：锡行数日，应聘与按察使吴一介出不意袭杀其魁。
现代文：李锡出发后几天，郭应聘与按察使吴一介出其不意袭击并杀死金宝岭乱贼的首领。
English: A few days after Li Xi's departure, Guo Anhe and the inspector ordered Wu Yike to attack and kill the leader of the Jinbaoling bandits.

古文：比怀远克复，阳朔亦定，乃分遣诸将门崇文、杨照、亦孔昭等讨洛容、上油、边山。
现代文：等到怀远被攻克，阳朔也平定了，于是分路派遣门崇文、杨照、亦孔昭等将领讨伐洛容、上油、边山。
English: When Huaiyuan was conquered, Yangshuo was also pacified, so the division sent generals such as Mun Chongwen, Yang Zhao, and Yi Kong Zhao to fight against Falaorong, Shangyao, and Bianshan.

古文：五叛瑶悉平。
现代文：五股叛乱的瑶民全部平定。
English: The five groups of rebels were all put down.

古文：神宗大悦，进兵部右侍郎兼右副都御史，巡抚如故。
现代文：神宗很高兴，晋升他为兵部右侍郎兼右副都御史，巡抚原来的地区。
English: Shinso was delighted, and he was promoted to the position of Hyobusu-no-Utsujihiro (the right-hand man of the military) and Utsu-no-Utsushi (the right-hand man of the vice-governor of the capital) as well as the governor of his former region.

古文：万历二年，召为户部右侍郎，寻以忧归。
现代文：万历二年，他被召见并任命为户部右侍郎，不久，奔丧回乡。
English: In the second year of Wanli, he was summoned and appointed as the right-hand man of the household, and soon he went back to his hometown.

古文：八年起，改兵部，兼右佥都御史，仍抚广西。
现代文：八年，他出任兵部职，兼任右佥都御史，仍然巡抚广西。
English: Eight years later, he assumed the post of military commander and concurrently served as the right-hand magistrate of the imperial capital, still acting as the governor of Guangxi.

古文：时十寨初下，应聘与总督刘尧诲奏设三镇，隶宾州，以土巡检守之，而统于思恩参将，十寨遂安。
现代文：当时十座瑶寨刚刚被攻下，郭应聘与总督刘尧海奏请设立隶属宾州的三个镇，由当地的人担任巡检管理它们，并统属于思恩参将，十座瑶寨因此才安定。
English: At that time, the Ten Fortified Villages had just been conquered, and Guo Yingying and Governor Liu Bihai requested the establishment of three towns under the jurisdiction of Pennsylvania, and the local people served as patrols to manage them, and they all belonged to Sen Sen. Therefore, the Ten Fortified Villages were stable.

古文：进右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，总督两广军务。
现代文：他升任右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，统辖两广的军事事务。
English: He was promoted to the post of Utsu no goshi and Hyobusu no uwajiro, in charge of the military affairs of the two provinces.

古文：前总督多受将吏金，应聘悉谢绝。
现代文：前任总督大都接受将领、文官的贿赂，郭应聘一概谢绝了。
English: Most of the previous governors accepted bribes from generals and civil servants, and Guo declined all offers of employment.

古文：逾年，召掌南京都察院，以吴文华代。
现代文：过了一年，皇帝召他掌管南京都察院，由吴文华接替他。
English: A year later, the emperor called him to take charge of the Southern Kyoto Inquisition, and Wu Wenhua succeeded him.

古文：顷之，就拜兵部尚书，参赞机务。
现代文：不久，他就任兵部尚书，参与机要事务。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the secretary of the military department and participated in important affairs.

古文：久之，引疾归。
现代文：此后很久，他称病回乡。
English: Long after that, he called in sick.

古文：寻入为南京工部尚书，就改兵部。
现代文：郭应聘在广西时，上奏请求恢复陈献章、王守仁的祠堂。
English: When Guo was hired in Guangxi, he made a request to restore the ancestral hall of Chen Xianzhang and Wang Shuren.

古文：引疾去。仍起南京工部，力辞，虚位三年以待。
现代文：刘台被贬斥去戍守浔州，为他租住房供应食粮，死后又出资收殓他，将他的灵柩送归故乡，自己供奉他的像以示纪念。他在南京做官，与海瑞敦促节俭，士大夫不敢侈奢。
English: Liu Tai was banished to Guozhou, rented a house for him and supplied him with grain. After his death, he paid money to receive him, sent his coffin back to his hometown, and offered his portrait as a memorial. He worked as an official in Nanjing, and urged frugality with Hai Rui. The scholar and scholar did not dare to be extravagant.

古文：卒，年七十八。
现代文：他回乡七个月后去世。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 78.

古文：赠太子少保，谥襄惠。
现代文：赠封为太子少保，谥号襄靖。
English: He was given the title of Prince Minor Protector, and his posthumous name was Xiangjing.

古文：耿定向，字在伦，黄安人。
现代文：耿定向，字在伦，黄安人。
English: Geng directional, word in Lun, Huang An people.

古文：嘉靖三十五年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 35th year of Jiajing.

古文：除行人，擢御史。
现代文：授职为行人，升任御史。
English: He was given the post of chauffeur and promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：严嵩父子窃政，吏部尚书吴鹏附之。
现代文：严嵩父子窃取朝政，吏部尚书吴鹏攀附他们。
English: Yan Song and his son stole the imperial government, and Shangshu Wu Peng, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, followed them.

古文：定向疏鹏六罪，因言鹏婿学士董份总裁会试，私鹏子绍，宜并斥。
现代文：耿定向上书奏揭发吴鹏的六条罪状，进而称吴鹏的女婿、学士董份担任会试的总裁时，为吴鹏的儿子吴绍舞弊，应当一起予以贬斥。
English: Geng Ding revealed Wu Peng's six crimes in his written report to the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and then said that Wu Peng's son-in-law, the bachelor Dongfen, was Wu Peng's son Wu Shao's fraud when he served as president of the board of examiners, and should be denounced together.

古文：嵩为营护，事竟寝。
现代文：严嵩进行庇护，事情最后竟被搁置起来。
English: Yan Song went into hiding, and the case was eventually shelved.

古文：出按甘肃，举劾无所私。
现代文：他出京担任甘肃巡按御使，举荐与弹劾没有徇私。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the envoy of the Gansu inspection, and there was no favoritism between recommendation and impeachment.

古文：去任，行笥一肩。有以石经馈者，留境上而去。
现代文：离任时，行李只有一挑担，有人赠送石经给他，他将石经留在境内离去。
English: When he left office, he had only one piece of luggage. Someone gave him a stone sutra as a gift, and he left the stone sutra inside the country.

古文：还督南京学政。
现代文：返回朝廷，督导南京的学政。
English: He returned to the imperial court to supervise the academic administration of Nanjing.

古文：隆庆初，擢大理右寺丞。
现代文：隆庆初年，他升任大理寺的右寺丞。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he was promoted to U-ji cheng of Dali Temple.

古文：高拱执政，定向尝讥其褊浅无大臣度，拱嗛之。
现代文：高拱当权，耿定向曾经讥讽他气量狭小，没有大臣的气度，高拱对他怀恨在心。
English: Gao Gong was in power, Geng Ding once ridiculed him for his small stature and not having the dignity of a minister. Gao Gong held a grudge against him.

古文：及拱掌吏部，以考察谪定向横州判官。
现代文：等到高拱掌管吏部，以考核为名贬谪他为横州判官。
English: Wait until Gao Gong is in charge of the cadre department, and demean him as a judge of Hengzhou in the name of assessment.

古文：拱罢，量移衡州推官。
现代文：高拱被罢免后，他被委以衡州推官。
English: After Gao Gong was ousted, he was appointed as the magistrate of Hengzhou.

古文：万历中，累官右副都御史。
现代文：万历年间，他担任右副都御史。
English: During the Wanli era, he served as the right vice governor of the capital.

古文：吏部侍郎陆光祖为御史周之翰所劾，光祖已留，定向复颂光祖贤，诋之翰。
现代文：吏部侍郎陆光祖被御史周之翰弹劾，陆光祖已被留任，耿定向又称颂陆光祖贤明，批评周之翰。
English: Lu Guangzu, the attendant of the cadre department, was impeached by the imperial historian Zhou Zhihang. Lu Guangzu has been kept in office. Geng Dingli also praised Lu Guangzu's wisdom and criticized Zhou Zhihang.

古文：给事中李以谦言定向挤言官，定向求去，帝不问。
现代文：给事中李以谦称耿定向排挤言官，耿定向请求离去，皇帝不予追究。
English: In the matter, Li Yixian said that Geng Ding would expel the spokesman, Geng Ding would request to leave, and the emperor would not be investigated.

古文：历刑部左、右侍郎，擢南京右都御史。
现代文：他历任刑部的左、右侍郎，晋升为南京右都御史。
English: He served as the Left and Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department in successive terms, and was promoted to the post of Nanjing Utsu Imperial Historian.

古文：御史王藩臣劾应天巡抚周继，疏发逾月不以白定向。
现代文：御史王藩臣弹劾应天巡抚周继，奏疏下发了一个月也没有告诉耿定向。
English: Goshi Wang, a retainer of the domain, impeached Ying Tian's procurator, Zhou Ji, and did not inform Geng Ding for a month after the report was issued.

古文：定向怒，守故事力争，自劾求罢，且诋藩臣论劾失当。
现代文：耿定向很气愤，根据成例极力争辩，他弹劾自己请求罢免，并且批评王藩臣的弹劾不恰当。
English: Geng Ding was very angry. Based on the precedent, he strongly argued that he impeached himself and requested to be dismissed, and criticized the impeachment of Wang Hanjin as inappropriate.

古文：因言故江西巡抚陈有年、四川巡抚徐元泰皆贤，为御史方万山、王麟趾劾罢，今宜召用，而量罚藩臣。
现代文：并说前任江西巡抚陈有年、四川巡抚徐元泰都贤明，却被御史方万山、王麟趾弹劾罢职，现在应该将他们召回委以官职，而酌情惩罚王藩臣。
English: He also said that the former governor of Jiangxi Province, Chen Younian, and the governor of Sichuan Province, Xu Yuantai, were both wise, but were impeached and dismissed by the imperial historians Fang Wanshan and Wang Linzi. Now they should be recalled to their official positions, and Wang Han's ministers should be punished as appropriate.

古文：藩臣坐停俸二月。
现代文：王藩臣为此被停发两个月的俸禄。
English: Wang Han's salary was suspended for two months as a result.

古文：于是给事中许弘纲、观政进士薛敷教、南京御史黄仁荣及麟趾连章劾定向。
现代文：这时给事中许弘纲、观政进士薛敷教、南京御史黄仁荣，以及王麟趾接连上奏弹劾耿定向。
English: At this time, Xu Honggang, Xue Shikikyo, a political observer, Huang Ren Rong, the governor of Nanjing, and Wang Linzi successively petitioned for the impeachment of Geng Ding.

古文：麟趾言： 南台去京师远，章疏先传，人得为计。
现代文：王麟趾说： 南台距离京城较远，如果奏章先告诉别人，会使人别有应对的计谋。
English: Wang Linzi said: Nantai is far away from Beijing. If you tell others first, they will have other strategies to deal with it.

古文：如御史孙鸣治论魏国公徐邦瑞，陈扬善论主事刘以焕，皆因奏辞豫闻，一则夤缘幸免，一则捃摭被诬。
现代文：例如，御史孙鸣治疏论魏国公徐邦瑞，陈扬善疏论主事刘以涣，都因为奏章先被知晓，一个人因为巴结权贵而幸免，另一个则被借口他事蒙受诬陷。
English: For example, the chief historian Sun Mingzhi's slander of the Wei Guogong, Xu Bangrui, and Chen Yangshan's slander of the leading official, Liu Yijun, were all known first because of the composition. One person was spared because he was a powerful person, and the other was slandered on the pretext of other things.

古文：故迩来投揭有迟浃月者，事理宜然，非自藩臣始。 
现代文：所以，近来投递文书有的迟滞一个月，事情本来如此，不是从王藩臣开始的。 
English: Therefore, recently, there has been a one-month delay in the delivery of documents. As things stand, this did not start with Wang Hancheng.

古文：语并侵大学士许国、左都御史吴时来、副都御史詹仰庇。
现代文：话语同时侵犯了大学士许国、左都御史吴时来、副都御史詹仰庇。
English: At the same time, the discourse violated the university scholar Xu Guo, the left capital official Wu Shilai, and the deputy capital official Zhan Yangbi.

古文：执政方恶言者，勒敷教还籍省过，麟趾、仁荣亦停俸。
现代文：执政者正厌恶言官，勒令薛敷教回乡反省过错，王麟趾、黄仁荣也被停发俸禄。
English: The ruling party is loathing the speaker, ordering Xue Jiji to return to his hometown to reflect on his mistakes. Wang Linzi and Huang Renrong have also been suspended from receiving their salaries.

古文：时已除定向户部尚书督仓场，定向因力辞求退。
现代文：当时已经授任耿定向为户部尚书督理仓场，耿定向就极力诉说请求退休。
English: At that time, Geng Dingren had already been appointed to supervise the warehouse for the household department, and Geng Dingren strongly appealed for retirement.

古文：章屡上，乃许。
现代文：多次上奏，皇帝才批准。
English: It was played several times before the emperor approved it.

古文：卒，年七十三。
现代文：七十三岁时去世。
English: He died at the age of 73.

古文：赠太子少保，谥恭简。
现代文：他被赠封为太子少保，谥号恭简。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the title of prince's minor protector, 恭简.

古文：定向初立朝有时望。后历徐阶、张居正、申时行、王锡爵四辅，皆能无龃龉。
现代文：耿定向在列身朝廷之初名声很好，后来历经徐阶、张居正、申时行、王锡爵四位辅臣，都能平和相处。
English: Geng Dingli had a good reputation at the beginning of his service in the imperial court. Later, through the four assistant ministers, Xu Ji, Zhang Jizheng, Shin Shigong and Wang Xizhe, they were able to get along peacefully.

古文：至居正夺情，寓书友人誉为伊尹而贬言者，时议訾之。
现代文：到张居正丧事在身仍出理政事时，耿定向给友人写信称张居正为古时伊尹贤相，贬斥议论者，遭到当时舆论的批评。
English: When Zhang Juzheng's funeral was still a political event, Geng Duan wrote a letter to a friend saying that Zhang Juzheng was an ancient Yinxian minister and criticized the critics, which was criticized by the public opinion at that time.

古文：其学本王守仁。
现代文：他的学术思想本于王守仁。
English: His academic thought is based on Wang Shouren.

古文：尝招晋江李贽于黄安，后渐恶之，贽亦屡短定向。
现代文：他曾经招请晋江李贽去黄安，后来逐渐讨厌李贽，李贽也多次批评耿定向。
English: He once invited Jinjiang Lijuan to go to Huang'an, and then gradually hated Lijuan. Lijuan also repeatedly criticized Geng Dingrou.

古文：士大夫好禅者往往从贽游。
现代文：士大夫中好谈禅的人多跟李贽交往。
English: Among the scholar-officials who are good at talking about Zen, most of them are in contact with Li Lan.

古文：贽小有才，机辨，定向不能胜也。
现代文：李贽小有才气，善于辩说，耿定向不能胜他。
English: Li Jiaxiao has talent and is good at arguing. Geng Dinglu can't beat him.

古文：万历中，累官右佥都御史，督操江，疏陈矿使之患。
现代文：李贽任姚安知府，一天自己剃发，依然身穿官服坐在官堂上，上级官员勒令他辞职。
English: Li Wei was appointed to the Yao An Prefecture. One day, he shaved his hair and still wore his official uniform to sit in the official hall. The higher-ranking officials ordered him to resign.

古文：再迁南京兵部右侍郎。卒，赠尚书。
现代文：后居住在黄安，每天招引士人讲学，其中也有妇女，专门崇尚佛教，鄙视孔、孟儒学。
English: After that, he lived in Huang'an and invited scholars to lecture every day, including women, who advocated Buddhism and despised Confucius and Meng's Confucianism.

古文：王樵，字明远，金坛人。
现代文：后来北游通州，被给事中张问达所弹劾、逮捕，死于狱中。王樵，字明远，金坛人。
English: Later, in Tongzhou, Beiyu, he was impeached and arrested by Zhang Qida in the middle of the matter, and died in prison.

古文：父臬，兵部主事。
现代文：父亲王臬，任兵部主事。
English: His father, Wang Qi, was the head of the military department.

古文：谏武宗南巡，被杖。
现代文：劝谏武宗到南方去巡视，被杖责。
English: He advised Gong Wuzong to go to the south to inspect the situation and was punished with the cane.

古文：终山东副使。
现代文：死于山东副使的任上。
English: He died while serving as deputy envoy to Shandong.

古文：樵举嘉靖二十六年进士，授行人。
现代文：王樵考取嘉靖二十六年的进士，授职为行人。
English: Wang Hui was awarded the title of "walker" in the 26th year of Jiajing.

古文：历刑部员外郎。
现代文：历任刑部员外郎。
English: Gairo, a former member of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：著《读律私笺》，甚精核。
现代文：他撰写了《读律笺》，非常精粹。
English: He wrote "Reading the Rulings," which is very concise.

古文：胡宗宪计降汪直，欲赦直以示信。
现代文：胡宗宪设计将汪直收降，又想赦免汪直以便显示信誉。
English: Hu Zongxian designed to bring down Wang Zhi, and also wanted to pardon Wang Zhi in order to show his credibility.

古文：樵言此叛民与他纳降异，直遂诛。
现代文：王樵称这个叛民与其他接受招降的人不同，于是将汪直杀了。
English: Wang Qi said that this rebel was different from other people who accepted the offer of surrender, so he killed Wang Zhi.

古文：迁山东佥事，移疾归。
现代文：他调任山东佥事，称病回乡。
English: He was transferred to Shandong Anji and said that he was sick and returned to his hometown.

古文：万历初，张居正柄国，雅知樵，起补浙江佥事，擢尚宝卿。
现代文：万历初年，张居正执掌国政，一向了解王樵，启用他候补渐江佥事，升任尚宝卿。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Zhang Jiu was in charge of state affairs. He had always known Wang Qian and appointed him as the alternate of Zhanjiang Anji and promoted him to Shang Baoqing.

古文：刘台劾居正，居正乞归。
现代文：刘台弹劾张居正，张居正请求回乡。
English: Liu Tai impeached Zhang Juzheng, Zhang Juzheng requested to return to his hometown.

古文：诸曹奏留之，樵独请全谏臣以安大臣，略言： 自古明主欲开言路，言不当，犹优容之；大臣欲广上德，人攻己，犹荐拔之。
现代文：诸部上奏挽留他，唯独王樵请求保全劝谏的大臣以便使大臣们安心，大意是说： 自古贤明的君主想扩展言路，即使谏言不恰当，依然给予优待、宽容；大臣想扩展圣上的美德，别人攻击自己，依然举荐、选拔他。
English: Various ministries petitioned to retain him, but only Wang Xi requested the preservation of the minister who advised him in order to reassure the ministers, to the effect that: Since ancient times, the wise monarch wanted to expand his speech, even if the advice was inappropriate, he still gave preferential treatment and tolerance; the minister wanted to expand the sacred virtue, others attacked themselves, still recommended and selected him.

古文：如宋文彦博于唐介是也。
现代文：如同宋代的文彦博对待唐介。
English: Just as Fumihiko Hiroshi of the Song Dynasty treated Tang Jie.

古文：今居正留而台得罪，无乃非仁宗待唐介意乎！ 
现代文：现在张居正受挽留而刘台被定罪，显然不是仁宗对待唐介的遗意。 
English: Now that Zhang Ju is being detained and Liu Tai has been convicted, it is clearly not Rinzong's last wish for Tang Jie.

古文：居正大恚，出为南京鸿胪卿。
现代文：张居正大为恼怒，将他调出京城担任鸿胪卿。
English: Zhang Jizheng was so angry that he transferred him out of the capital to serve as Hongyuqing.

古文：旋因星变自陈，罢之。
现代文：不久因为陈述了星象的变异被罢免。
English: He was soon sacked for stating that the stars were changing.

古文：家居十余年，起南京太仆少卿，时年七十余矣。
现代文：在家居住了十多年，出任南京太仆少卿时，已是七十多岁的人了。
English: He lived at home for more than ten years, and was already over seventy years old when he became the Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing.

古文：岁中再迁大理卿，寻拜南京刑部右侍郎。
现代文：同年又调任大理寺卿，不久担任南京刑部右侍郎。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the position of the head of the Dali Temple, and soon became the right hand man of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：诚意伯刘世延主使杀人，樵当世延革任。
现代文：诚意伯刘世延指使他人杀人，王樵将刘世延判罪革职。
English: Liu Shiyan ordered others to commit murder in good faith, and Wang Yao convicted Liu Shiyan and dismissed him.

古文：寻就擢右都御史。
现代文：不久又升任右都御史。
English: He was soon promoted to Udō no goshi.

古文：肯堂好读书，尤精于医，所著《证治准绳》该博精粹，世竞传之。
现代文：给事中卢大中弹劾他衰老了，皇帝指令他退职休息。王樵恬静淡泊诚实谨慎，是位温和的长者。王樵精通经学，对《易》、《书》、《春秋》都有纂述。
English: In the middle of the matter, Lu Dazhong impeached him for aging, and the emperor ordered him to retire. Wang Shujing is honest and prudent, and is a gentle elder. Wang Shujing is proficient in the study of classics, and has compiled descriptions of "Easy," "Book" and "Spring and Autumn."

古文：魏时亮，字工甫，南昌人。
现代文：他死后，被赠封为太子少保，谥号恭简。魏时亮，字工甫，南昌人。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Prince Minor Protector, with the posthumous name of Jing Jian. Wei Shiliang, a calligrapher, was from Nanchang.

古文：嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Jiajing.

古文：授中书舍人，擢兵科给事中。
现代文：授职为中书舍人，升任兵科给事中。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle school teacher, and promoted to the post of military science teacher.

古文：隆庆元年正月七日，有诏免朝，越三日，复传免。
现代文：隆庆元年正月初七，穆宗下诏免去朝见，过了三天又传旨免予朝见。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first year of the Longqing era, Mu Zong issued an edict exempting him from going to see the emperor, and three days later he issued another edict exempting him from seeing the emperor.

古文：时亮以新政不宜遽怠，上疏切谏。
现代文：魏时亮认为新主不能马上就懈怠了，上奏劝谏。
English: Wei Shiliang believed that the new owner could not slack off immediately, and urged him to play.

古文：寻以左给事中副检讨许国使朝鲜。
现代文：不久，朝廷派遣魏时亮以左给事中的身份给检讨许国充当副职，出使朝鲜。
English: Soon, the imperial court sent Wei Shiliang to North Korea as a deputy to review the country in the capacity of a left-handed person.

古文：故事，王北面听诏，使者西面。
现代文：先前，王侯面朝北方听从诏令，使者面向西方宣诏。
English: In the past, princes faced north to obey imperial edicts, while emissaries faced west to issue them.

古文：时亮争之，乃南面宣诏。
现代文：魏时亮对此进行争辩，于是使者面向南宣布诏令。
English: Wei Shiliang disputed this, so the envoy faced south to announce the edict.

古文：还，进户科给事中，因列上辽东事宜。
现代文：回到朝廷，他被晋升为户科给事中，趁机向穆宗奏陈辽东的情况。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he was promoted to the position of household science, and took the opportunity to tell Mu Zong about Chen Liaodong's situation.

古文：已，请慎起居，罢游宴，日御便殿省章奏，召大臣裁决。
现代文：此后，他奏请穆宗谨慎起居，罢除游玩宴乐，每天亲临便殿审理奏章，招集大臣进行裁决。
English: After that, he asked Mu Zong to live prudently, to stop playing banquet music, to come to the hall every day to examine the record, and to convene the minister to make a ruling.

古文：报闻。
现代文：皇帝答复知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：兴都庄地八千三百顷，中官夺民田，复增八百顷，立三十六庄。
现代文：兴都有八千三百顷庄田，宦官强夺民田，又增加了八百顷，建立了三十六个庄园。
English: There were 8,300 hectares of shoen in Xing, and the eunuchs forcibly seized the people's fields, added another 800 hectares, and established 36 shoen.

古文：帝从抚按奏，属有司征租，还兼并者于民。
现代文：穆宗依照抚按大吏的奏疏，吩咐有司征收租税，将兼并的田归还给百姓。
English: Mu Zong, in accordance with the report of the Fuxian Dai Li, ordered the Yushi to collect taxes and return the annexed fields to the people.

古文：中官张尧为请，又许之。
现代文：宦官张尧为此请求穆宗，穆宗又同意让他们如此。
English: The eunuch Zhang Ye asked Mu Zong for this, and Mu Zong agreed to let them do so.

古文：时亮极谏，不纳。
现代文：魏时亮极力劝谏，穆宗不接受。
English: Wei Shiliang tried his best to persuade him, but Mu Zong did not accept.

古文：帝临朝，拱默未尝发一言。
现代文：穆宗每次来到朝殿，默然拱手，没有讲过一句话。
English: Every time Mu Zong came to the Imperial Palace, he silently left without saying a word.

古文：及石州陷，有请帝诘问大臣者。
现代文：等到石州陷落，有人奏请皇帝追究大臣的罪责。
English: When Sekishu fell, someone petitioned the emperor to investigate the minister's guilt.

古文：越二日，讲罢，帝果问石州破状。
现代文：过了两天，朝讲结束，皇上果然责问石州被攻陷的情况。
English: Two days later, at the end of the morning lecture, the Emperor did indeed ask about the circumstances of the fall of Sekishu.

古文：中官王本辄从旁诟诸臣欺蔽。
现代文：宦官王本在旁边动不动就指责诸位大臣欺瞒、蒙蔽皇上。
English: Wang Ben, the eunuch, stood by and accused the ministers of deceiving and blinding the emperor.

古文：帝愠，目慑之，本犹刺刺语。
现代文：皇上变了脸色，目光盯视着他，王本还在不断地数说。
English: The Emperor's face changed, his eyes stared at him, and Wang Ben continued to count.

古文：帝不悦而罢。
现代文：皇帝很不高兴地罢了朝。
English: Sejong was not happy and gave up.

古文：时亮劾本无人臣礼，大不敬，且数其不法数事。
现代文：魏时亮弹劾王本没有做臣民的礼节，是大不敬的罪行，并数说了他的几件不法的事。
English: Wei Shiliang impeached Wang Ben for not doing the etiquette of a subject, a crime of great disrespect, and counted several of his illegal things.

古文：疏虽不行，士论壮之。
现代文：奏疏虽然没有被采纳，但士人的舆论支持他。
English: Although the report was not adopted, the public opinion of the scholars supported him.

古文：十月初，诏停日讲。
现代文：十月初，穆宗下诏停止每天的讲授。
English: At the beginning of October, Mu Zong issued an edict to stop the daily lectures.

古文：时亮率同列言未冱寒，不宜遽辍。
现代文：魏时亮率领同僚上奏称天气还没有出现寒冻，不应该停止讲授。
English: Wei Shiliang led his colleagues to report that the weather had not yet frozen, and the lecture should not be stopped.

古文：俄请以薛瑄、陈献章、王守仁从祀文庙，章下所司。
现代文：不久，奏请将薛蠧、陈献章、王守仁在文庙祭祀，奏章下发到主管部门。
English: Soon after, So requested that Xue Qi, Chen Xianzhang, and Wang Shuren be sent to the competent department under So's chapter.

古文：又言方春东作，宜敕有司释轻系，停讼狱，诏可。
现代文：他又称正值春天万物复兴，应该敕令有司释放轻罪的犯人，停止诉讼，穆宗下诏同意了。
English: He also said that it was the time of spring and the revival of all things, and it was necessary to order the magistrate to release the prisoners of minor crimes and stop the proceedings. Mu Zong agreed.

古文：明年六月言： 今天下大患三：藩禄不给也，边饷不支也，公私交困也。
现代文：第二年六月他上奏称： 现在天下有三大忧患：藩府的俸禄不够供给，边地的军饷短缺，公私交困。
English: In June of the following year, he made a report saying: There are currently three major worries in the world: insufficient supply of salary from the domain government, shortage of military pay in outlying areas, and difficulties between the public and private sectors.

古文：宗藩有一时之计，有百世之计。
现代文：对于藩府朝廷有一时之计，有百世之计。
English: For the imperial court of the domain, there is a plan for the moment, and there is a plan for the future.

古文：亟立宗学，教之礼让，禄万石者岁捐五之一，二千石者十之一，千石者二十之一，以赡贫宗，立为定制。
现代文：赶紧建立宗学，教导礼让，每年俸禄达万石的王府教他捐献出五分之一，每年俸禄达二千石的捐献出十分之一，千石的让他捐出二十分之一，用来赡养贫穷的宗族之人，确立为定制。
English: He hastened to establish a patriarchal school to teach courtesy. The royal court, whose annual salary reached 10,000 koku, taught him to donate one-fifth, the annual salary of 2,000 koku to donate one-tenth, and the one-thousand koku to donate one-twentieth, to support the poor people of the clan, and established it as a custom.

古文：此一时计也。
现代文：这是一时之计。
English: This is a temporary measure.

古文：各宗聚居一城，贫日益甚，宜令就近散处，给闲田使耕以代禄；奸生之孽，重行黜削。
现代文：各个宗室聚集在一个城镇，一天天地更加贫困，应该在城镇附近分散居住，提供闲置的田让他们耕种以代替俸禄；滋事的罪孽之人，施行罢黜的重罚。
English: The various families gathered in one town, more and more impoverished day by day, should be dispersed near the town, providing idle fields for them to cultivate in lieu of salary; those who commit crimes, implement the heavy punishment of dismissal.

古文：此百世计也。
现代文：这是百世之计。
English: It's the best idea ever.

古文：边饷莫要于屯盐，近遴大臣庞尚鹏、邹应龙、凌儒经理，事权虽重，顾往河东者兼理四川，往江北者兼理山东、河南，往江南者兼理浙、湖、云、贵，重内地而轻塞下，非初旨也。
现代文：边防的军饷尤以屯田、盐税最重要，近选大臣庞尚鹏、邹应龙、凌儒经营筹办，权力虽然加重，不过派往河东的人兼管四川，派往江北的人兼管山东、河南，派往江南的人兼管浙江、湖广、云南、贵州，重视内地而轻视关塞地区，这不是本来的旨意。
English: The military cadres of the border defense are especially important in the fields and salt tax, and the newly elected ministers Pang Shangpeng, Zou Yinglong and Ling Ru are responsible for the operation and planning. Although the power is increased, the person sent to the east of the river also controls Sichuan, the person sent to the north of the river also controls Shandong and Henan, and the person sent to the south of the river also controls Zhejiang, Hunan, Yunnan and Guizhou. It is not the original intention to attach importance to the mainland and despise the Guanxi region.

古文：且一人领数道，旷远难周。
现代文：而且一个人管辖几个地区，辖区旷远难以照顾周全。
English: Moreover, one person has jurisdiction over several regions, and it is difficult to take good care of a vast jurisdiction.

古文：请在内地者专责巡抚，令尚鹏等三人分任塞下屯事，久任责成，有功待以不次，则利兴而边储自裕。
现代文：请让在内地的大臣专门负责巡抚的事情，命令庞尚鹏等三人分别负责关塞地区的屯田事宜，管理的时间久了就成了一种职责，功绩也紧随而至，则利事兴起，而边防储备可以自给。
English: Please let the minister in the mainland be specially responsible for the supervision of the affairs, and order Pang Shangpeng and three others to be responsible for the tundra affairs in the Kansai region separately. After a long time of management, it has become a responsibility. Merits will also follow, then beneficial things will arise, and the border defense reserve can be self-sufficient.

古文：今天下府库殚虚，百姓困瘁，而建议者欲罄天下库藏输内府，以济旦夕之用。脱州郡有变，何以待之？
现代文：现在全国的府库空虚，百姓困苦，而提出建议的人却想倾尽全国的库藏输往内府，用以接济旦夕之用，倘若州郡发生变乱，拿什么来应付？
English: Now the government treasuries across the country are empty, the people are suffering, and the people who made the proposal want to empty the national treasury and send it to the inner government, to be used for relief. If there is a disturbance in the state or county, what should be used to deal with it?

古文：夫守令以养民为职，要在劝农桑、清徭赋、重乡约、严保甲，而簿书狱讼、催科巧拙不与焉。 
现代文：郡守县令以养育百姓为职责，首要的就是劝民务农植桑、理清徭役赋税、重视乡规民约、严格保甲制度，减少狱案，对催科巧拙不予理睬。 
English: It is the duty of the county magistrate to nurture the people. The most important tasks are to encourage the people to plant mulberry trees, clarify the taxation of laborers, attach importance to the township regulations and the people's contract, strictly maintain the A-level system, reduce the number of prison cases, and ignore the clumsiness of urging science.

古文：疏上，多议行。
现代文：奏疏呈入，大都经讨论后实行。
English: Most of them were implemented after discussion.

古文：其冬，复疏言： 天下可忧在民穷，能为民纾忧者，知府而已，宜慎重其选。治行卓越，即擢京卿若巡抚，则人自激劝。
现代文：当年冬天他又上奏说： 天下值得忧虑的事情在于百姓贫穷，能替百姓排除忧虑的人是知府。应该慎重挑选他们，治政业绩卓越的人就升任京卿或巡抚，那么人就会自我激励。
English: In the winter of that year, he also made a report, saying: The most worrisome thing in the world is the poverty of the people. The people who can eliminate the worries for the people are the prefectural governments. They should be carefully selected. People with outstanding governance performance will be promoted to the post of kyokyo or governor, then people will be self-motivated.

古文：督学者，天下名教所系，当择学行兼懋者，毋限以时。
现代文：督学是关系到全国人伦理教育的人，应当挑选学问、德行俱佳的人，不对他做时间限制。
English: Supervisors are people who are related to the ethical education of the whole country. They should select people who are good at learning and morality, and do not set a time limit for him.

古文：教行望峻，则召为祭酒或入翰林，以示风励。 
现代文：德行和声望都高峻的人，就招来担任祭酒或者进入翰林院，以便显示风范。 
English: People of high virtue and reputation are invited to serve as sacrificial wine or enter the Hanlin Academy in order to show good manners.

古文：下部议，卒不行。
现代文：奏章下发给部里讨论，最后没有施行。
English: The report was sent to the ministry for discussion, but was not implemented in the end.

古文：三年，擢太仆少卿。
现代文：隆庆三年，他升任太仆少卿。
English: In the third year of Longqing, he was promoted to the post of Taigu Shaoqing.

古文：初，徐阶、高拱相构，时亮与朝臣攻去拱。
现代文：起初，徐阶、高拱互相攻击，魏时亮与朝廷大臣对高拱进行攻击，使他离去。
English: At first, Xu Jia and Gao Gong attacked each other. Wei Shiliang and the court minister attacked Gao Gong and forced him to leave.

古文：已而拱复入，考察言官，排异己者；时亮及陈瓒、张槚已擢京卿，皆被斥。
现代文：不久，高拱再次入阁，考核言官，排斥异己；魏时亮和陈瓒、张木贾已经升任京卿，他们都遭贬职。
English: Soon, Gao Gong re-entered the cabinet, examined the spokesmen, and excluded dissenters; Wei Shiliang, Chen Yao, and Zhang Mujia had been promoted to the Beijing cabinet, and they were all demoted.

古文：时亮坐不谨，落职。
现代文：魏时亮被指责办事不严谨，被免去官职。
English: Wei Shiliang was accused of not being rigorous in his work and was removed from his post.

古文：万历十二年，用丘橓、余懋学等荐，起南京大理丞。
现代文：万历十二年，因为丘木舜、余懋学等人的推荐，他出任南京大理寺丞。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, because of the recommendation of Qiu Muxuan, Yu Ying Xue and others, he was appointed as the Nanjing Dali Temple chancellor.

古文：累迁右副都御史，摄京营戎政，陈安攘要务十四事。
现代文：升任右副都御史，负责京营的戍卫任务，他陈述了安良攘奸的十四件重要的事情。
English: He was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital and was in charge of the defense of the capital. He recounted fourteen important events of the Anliang Campaign.

古文：寻请以水利、义仓、生养、赋役、清狱、弭盗、善俗七条课守令，岁终报部院及科，计吏时以修废定殿最。
现代文：不久又请求根据水利、义气、生养、赋役、清狱、清除盗贼、善导民俗等七件事考察郡守、县令，年终报告给部院和各科计算为官的时间，依照修行与旷废的情况确定最后的名次。
English: Soon, he also requested that the county governors and county magistrates should be investigated on the basis of seven matters, including water conservancy, righteousness, birth and upbringing, military service, prison cleaning, elimination of thieves, and good conduct of folk customs, and that the year-end report should be sent to the ministries and departments to calculate the time of officials, and the final ranking should be determined according to the situation of training and absenteeism.

古文：又请皇长子出阁讲学。
现代文：还请求皇长子出宫接受文化教育。
English: He also requested that the eldest son of the emperor leave the palace to receive cultural education.

古文：历刑部左、右侍郎，拜南京刑部尚书。
现代文：他历任刑部左、右侍郎，南京刑部尚书。
English: He served as the Left and Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department in successive terms, and was the First Secretary of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：逾年卒官。
现代文：过了一年死于任上。
English: He died in office a year later.

古文：时亮初好交游，负意气。
现代文：魏时亮起初喜欢交游，很有志向。
English: At first, Wei Shiliang liked to travel and was very ambitious.

古文：尝劾罢左都御史张永明，为时论所非。
现代文：曾经弹劾并罢免了左都御史张永明，被当时的舆论非议。
English: He once impeached and dismissed Zhang Yongming, the governor of the Left Capital, and was criticized by the public opinion at that time.

古文：槚见《邹应龙传》。
现代文：魏时亮也很后悔。中年，他遭受挫折和压抑，潜心研究心性理学。
English: Wei Shiliang also regretted it. In middle age, he suffered setbacks and depression, and devoted himself to studying psychopathology.

古文：郝杰，字彦辅，蔚州人。
现代文：天启年间，谥号庄靖。郝杰，字彦辅，蔚州人。
English: In the year of the Apocalypse, the surnames of Zhuo Jing, Zou Jie, and Yan Su, a native of Ulshu, came into use.

古文：父铭，御史。
现代文：父亲郝铭，任过御史。
English: His father, Kuang Ming, served as imperial historian.

古文：杰举嘉靖三十五年进士，授行人，擢御史。
现代文：郝杰考取嘉靖三十五年的进士，授职为行人，升任御史。
English: Gong Jie took the examination to enter the 35th year of Jiajing, was awarded the post of pedestrian, and was promoted to the post of historian.

古文：隆庆元年，巡抚畿辅。
现代文：隆庆元年，巡视京郊地区。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he toured the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：冬，寇大入永平，疏请蠲被掠地徭赋，且言： 比年罚行于文臣而于武弁，及于主帅而略于偏裨，请饬法以振国威。 
现代文：冬天，敌寇大举侵入永平，他上奏请求减少被劫掠地区的徭役、赋税，并称： 连年的处罚对文臣施行却对武将宽缓，追究主帅而忽略了偏将，请求整顿法纪以便振兴国威。 
English: In winter, enemy raiders invaded Yongping on a large scale. He petitioned to reduce the taxes and taxes in the plundered areas, and said: Years of punishment were imposed on the courtiers, but the generals were lenient, the commander was investigated, but the general was ignored, and the discipline was rectified in order to revitalize the national prestige.

古文：俱报可。
现代文：皇帝都答复可以。
English: Both emperors agreed.

古文：已，劾蓟督刘焘、巡抚耿随卿观望，寇退则断死者报首功，又夺辽东将士棒槌崖战绩，并论副使沈应乾，游击李信、周冕罪。
现代文：此后，他弹劾蓟州总督刘焘、巡抚耿随卿彼此观望，敌寇退却后他们斩取死者的首级报功，又窃夺辽东将士在棒槌的战绩，同时他抨击副使沈应乾，游击李信、周冕的罪行。
English: After that, he impeached the governor of Zhangzhou, Liu Wei, and the governor, Geng Suixing, for watching each other. After the retreat of the enemy bandits, they cut off the head of the deceased, and stole the achievements of the Liaodong soldiers in the stick and mallet. At the same time, he criticized the deputy envoy, Shen Yingqian, and the guerrilla war against Li Xin and Zhou Guanyin.

古文：帝为黜应乾，下信、冕狱，敕焘、随卿还籍听勘。
现代文：皇帝罢黜了沈应乾，将李信、周冕投入监狱，敕令刘焘、耿随卿返回原籍听候查处。
English: The emperor deposed Shen Yingqian, put Li Xin and Zhou Guanyin in prison, and ordered Liu Bei and Geng Suixing to return to their hometowns to await investigation.

古文：诏遣中官李祐督苏、杭织造，工部执奏，不从。
现代文：诏令宦官李佑督理苏、杭地区的织造，工部上奏，皇帝不听从劝谏。
English: The Emperor ordered the eunuch Li You to supervise the weaving in the Su and Hang regions, and the Ministry of Industry was summoned. However, the Emperor did not listen to Li You's advice.

古文：杰言： 登极诏书罢织造甫一年，敕使复遣，非画一之政。
现代文：郝杰说： 皇帝登基的诏书罢除织造才一年，又派遣专理的使者，这不是统一的政令。
English: Hao Jie said: It has only been a year since the emperor abrogated the edict of enthronement and dispatched a special envoy. This is not a unified decree.

古文：且内臣专恣，有司剥下奉之，损圣德非小。 
现代文：而且宦官专横放纵，有司盘剥下民侍奉他们，对圣德的损害不小。 
English: Moreover, the eunuchs were domineering and indulgent, and there were officials who stripped the people to serve them, which was not a small damage to the sanctity.

古文：帝终不听。
现代文：皇帝最终没有听从。
English: In the end, the emperor did not listen.

古文：驾幸南海子，命京营诸军尽从。
现代文：皇帝驾临南海子，命令京营的各马全部随从。
English: The emperor arrived in Nanhaizi and ordered all the horses from the Beijing camp to follow him.

古文：徐阶、杨博等谏，不听，杰复争之，卒不从。
现代文：徐阶、杨博等人劝谏，皇帝不听，郝杰又争辩此事，最终还是不听从劝谏。
English: Xu Ji, Yang Bo and others advised him, but the emperor did not listen, and Gong Jie disputed the matter, but ultimately did not listen to the advice.

古文：刑部侍郎洪朝选以拾遗罢，上疏自辨，杰等劾其违制，遂削职。
现代文：刑部侍郎洪朝选因为纠正皇帝的过失被罢免，上奏做自我辩解，郝杰等人弹劾他违背了定制，削夺了他的官籍。
English: As a result of correcting the emperor's mistake, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, Hong Chaoyuan, was removed from his post, and made a self-justification speech. He was impeached by Gong Jie and others for violating the custom and depriving him of his official registration.

古文：以尝论高拱非宰辅器，为所嫉。
现代文：因为他曾经评论高拱不是宰辅的材料，被嫉恨。
English: He was envied because he once commented that Gao Gong was not the material for a vice-premier.

古文：及拱再召，杰遂请急去。
现代文：等到高拱再次被召回，郝杰就赶紧请求离去。
English: When Gao Gong was called back again, Gong Jie quickly asked him to leave.

古文：拱罢，起故官。
现代文：高拱被罢免，他出任原职。
English: Gao Gong was ousted, and he took up his original post.

古文：旋以私议张居正逐拱非是，出为陕西使。
现代文：不久因为私下议论张居正驱逐高拱的不是，被调出京城担任陕西副使。
English: Soon, because he privately discussed whether Zhang Juzheng should expel Gao Gong, he was transferred out of Beijing to serve as deputy envoy to Shaanxi Province.

古文：再迁山东左布政使。
现代文：再调任山东左布政使。
English: He was then transferred to Shandong Zabu Political Envoy.

古文：被劾，降辽东苑马寺卿兼海道兵备，加山东按察使。
现代文：遭人弹劾，降职为辽东苑马寺卿兼任海道兵备，加封为山东按察使。
English: He was impeached and demoted to the post of Liaodongyuan Majiqing, concurrently serving as the military commander of the sea route, and was additionally appointed as the inspector of Shandong.

古文：十七年，擢右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：万历十七年，他升任右佥都御史，巡视辽东。
English: In the 17th year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the post of the right-hand capital governor and inspected Liaodong.

古文：以督诸将击敌，录一子官。
现代文：督率诸位将领抗击敌人，将他的一个儿子录入官籍。
English: The superintendent led the generals to fight against the enemy and enrolled one of his sons into the official register.

古文：时李成梁为总兵官，威望甚著，然上功不无抵欺。
现代文：当时李成梁担任总兵官，威望很高，然而他的功绩也不无虚假。
English: At that time, Li Chengliang served as the commander-in-chief, and his prestige was very high. However, his achievements were not without falsehood.

古文：寇入塞，或敛兵避，既退，始尾袭老弱，或乘虚捣零部，诱杀附塞者充首功，习以为常。
现代文：敌寇攻入关塞，他或者收拾兵马躲避，待敌退去，才尾随敌人袭击老弱之兵，或者乘虚捣毁零散的敌人，诱杀投靠关塞的人充作功绩，已经习以为常。
English: When the enemy invaded the pass, he would either gather his soldiers and horses and hide, wait for the enemy to retreat, and then follow the enemy to attack the old and weak soldiers, or take advantage of the situation to destroy the scattered enemies, and lure the people who supported the pass to make use of their merits. It has become commonplace.

古文：督抚诸臣庇之，杰独不与比。
现代文：督抚大臣都庇护他，郝杰却独不与其交结。
English: All the supervising ministers sheltered him, but Gong Jie refused to associate with him.

古文：十九年春，成梁用参将郭梦徵策，使副将李宁袭板升于镇夷堡，获老弱二百八十余级。
现代文：万历十九年春天，李成梁采用参将郭梦征的策略，派遣副将李宁在镇夷堡袭击敌人的营地，获得二百八十多老弱者的首级。
English: In the spring of the 19th year of the Wanli era, Li Chengliang used the strategy of Guo Mengsheng, sending Vice Admiral Li Ning to attack the enemy's camp in Zhenyi Fort, and obtained the heads of more than 280 old and weak people.

古文：师旋，为别部所遮，宁先走，将士数千人失亡大半，成梁饰功邀叙。
现代文：兵马回撤，被其他敌军拦截。李宁先逃跑了，数千将士损失大半，李成梁粉饰功劳要求晋级。
English: The soldiers and horses retreated and were intercepted by other enemy troops. Li Ning fled first, thousands of soldiers lost most of their lives, and Li Chengliang whitewashed his merits and demanded promotion.

古文：杰具奏草，直言其故，要总督蹇达共奏。达匿其草，自为奏论功。
现代文：郝杰详细上奏，直叙原委，要求总督蹇达共同上奏，蹇达隐匿了他的草稿，自己上奏请功。
English: Gong Jie played it in detail, and directly reported to the original committee, asking Governor Gong Da to play it together. Gong Da concealed his draft, and played it himself for credit.

古文：巡按御史胡克俭驰疏劾宁，词连成梁，亦诋杰。
现代文：巡按御史胡克俭策马呈奏弹劾李宁；奏词牵连李成梁，也诋毁了郝杰。
English: The inspecting magistrate Shi Hu Ke Jian Zhema made a report to impeach Li Ning; the report implicated Li Chengliang and slandered Gong Jie.

古文：兵部置宁罪不议。
现代文：兵部将李宁的罪行搁置不做讨论。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs has put Li Ning's crime on hold and will not discuss it.

古文：克俭大愤，尽发成梁、达隐蔽状。
现代文：胡克俭大为愤怒，详尽告发了李成梁、蹇达的欺瞒之罪。
English: Hu Kejian was very angry and denounced Li Chengliang and Xingda's crime of deception in detail.

古文：先是，十八年冬，海州被掠十三日，副将孙守廉不战，成梁亦弗救。
现代文：在此之前，万历十八年冬天，海州被劫掠了十三天，副将孙守廉不作战，李成梁也不救助。
English: Prior to this, in the winter of the 18th year of Wanli, Haizhou was looted for 13 days. Vice Admiral Sun Shulian did not fight, and Li Chengliang did not help.

古文：克俭既劾守谦，申时行、许国庇之，止令听勘。
现代文：胡克俭进而弹劾孙守廉，申时行、许国庇护他，只命令他听候考查。
English: Hu Kejian went on to impeach Sun Shouliang. Shen Jixing and Xu Guo sheltered him and only ordered him to wait for an investigation.

古文：克俭乃言： 臣初劾守廉，时行以书沮臣；及劾宁，又与国谕臣宽其罪。
现代文：胡克俭就说： 我起初弹劾孙守廉，申时行修书给我进行劝阻；等到我弹劾李宁，他又与许国告谕我宽免李宁的罪行。
English: Hu Kejian said: At first, I impeached Sun Shouliang, and when I petitioned him, he wrote a book to dissuade me; when I impeached Li Ning, he and Xu Guo told me to pardon Li Ning's crime.

古文：徇私背公，将坏边事。 
现代文：徇私情违背公理，将毁坏边防事务。 
English: Self-interest trumps justice and will ruin border affairs.

古文：并历诋一鹗、达及兵科给事中张应登朋奸欺罔，达置杰会稿功罪疏不奏，遂追数成梁前数年冒功状。
现代文：同时他逐一诋毁一鹗、蹇达以及兵科给事中张应登结成奸党欺骗皇帝，蹇达搁置郝杰总结功罪的奏疏不上报，追诉李成梁前几年冒充功绩的罪状。
English: At the same time, he denigrated one by one, Gongda, Xingda, and the military science, accusing Zhang Yingjie of being a traitor and deceiving the emperor, putting aside the report of Gongjie's summary of merits and not reporting it, and prosecuting Li Chengliang for the crime of impersonating merits in previous years.

古文：帝谓成梁前功皆由巡按勘报，克俭悬度妄议。
现代文：皇帝说李成梁以前的功绩都是由巡按大臣核查并报告，胡克俭妄自猜测议论。
English: The emperor said that Li Chengliang's previous exploits were all verified and reported by the Minister of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and that Hooker was speculating.

古文：卒置成梁等不问，而心以杰为不欺。
现代文：最后将李成梁等人的问题搁置不理，而内心认为郝杰没有欺骗他。
English: In the end, he ignored the problems of Li Chengliang and others, but in his heart he believed that Gong Jie did not deceive him.

古文：旋就进右副都御史。
现代文：不久，他升任右副都御史。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor.

古文：日本陷朝鲜，达遣裨将祖承训以三千人往，皆没。
现代文：日本攻占了朝鲜，蹇达派遣偏将祖承训率领三千人前往朝鲜，全军覆没。
English: Japan conquered Korea, and Sunda dispatched 3,000 men under the command of General Sojeong to Korea for training. The entire army was wiped out.

古文：事闻，杰亦被劾，帝特免之。
现代文：消息传出，郝杰也遭弹劾，神宗特别赦免了他。
English: The news came out that Gong Jie was also impeached, and Shenzong specially pardoned him.

古文：朝鲜王避难将入辽，杰请择境外善地处之，且周给其从官、卫士，报可。
现代文：朝鲜王准备到辽东避难，郝杰请求在境外选择一个好地方安置他，并且接济他的随僚、卫士，神宗答复可以。
English: The Korean king was preparing to take refuge in Liaodong. Gong Jie asked him to choose a good place to settle him outside the country, and to help his attendants and guards. Shenzong replied that he could.

古文：寻迁兵部右侍郎，总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：不久他升任兵部右侍郎，统辖蓟、辽保定地区的军务。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, in charge of military affairs in the regions of Shandong and Liao Baoding.

古文：召理戎政，进右都御史。
现代文：神宗召他负责兵部的政务，升他为右都御史。
English: Shenzong called him to be in charge of the political affairs of the military department, and he was promoted to the post of the Right Capital Imperial Historian.

古文：五年冬，逆党李恒茂论其衰朽，落职归。
现代文：日本受封与朝贡的议论兴起，郝杰说： 平秀吉死有余辜，如果加以封爵，境外的人民听到此事，会说我朝没有能人呢。 
English: When the discussion about Japan's knighthoods and tributes to the Imperial Court arose, Gong Jie said, "Ping Hideyoshi's death left a lot to be desired. If I were to give him a knighthood, when people outside of Japan heard about it, they would say that there are no capable people in my country."

古文：崇祯初，复官。卒赠尚书。
现代文：意见不合，他调任南京户部尚书。
English: When he disagreed, he was transferred to the household department in Nanjing.

古文：克俭本姓扶，冒胡姓，久之始复故。
现代文：称病回乡。后起用为南京工部尚书。
English: He claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown. Later, he was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：赵参鲁，字宗传，鄞人。
现代文：改任兵部职，参与机要事务，死于任上，赠封为太子少保。赵参鲁，字宗传，鄞人。
English: He was appointed to the post of the military department, participated in important affairs, died in office, and was awarded the title of the prince's minor protector. Zhao Sanlu, Zhaozong passed down, was a lazy person.

古文：隆庆五年进士。
现代文：隆庆五年的进士。
English: Longqing five-year star.

古文：选庶吉士，改户科给事中。
现代文：选任庶吉士，改为户科给事中。
English: He was appointed to the position of Shoko Kishi, and changed to the position of Hokke, which is still under consideration.

古文：万历二年，慈圣太后立庙涿州，祀碧霞元君。
现代文：万历二年，慈圣太后在涿州修庙，祭祀碧霞元君。
English: In the second year of the Wanli era, Empress Dowager Cixeng repaired a temple in Zhangzhou and made a sacrifice to Bixia Yuanjun.

古文：部科臣执奏，不从。
现代文：部科大臣执意劝谏，她不听。
English: The Minister of Science insisted on persuading her, but she would not listen.

古文：参鲁斥其不经，且言： 南北被寇，流害生民，兴役浚河，鬻及妻子。
现代文：赵参鲁斥责她不合常规，并且说： 南面北方都遭敌寇侵犯，祸害百姓，兴起工役疏浚河道，使他们卖妻卖子。
English: Zhao Sanlu rebuked her for her unconventional behavior, and said: Both the south and the north have been invaded by enemy pirates, harming the people, raising laborers to dredge the river, and making them sell their wives and children.

古文：陛下发帑治桥建庙，已五万有奇。
现代文：陛下拨钱修桥建庙，已经耗费五万多两。
English: His Majesty has allocated money to repair the bridge and build a temple, and has already spent more than fifty thousand taels.

古文：苟移振贫民，植福当更大。 
现代文：如果用于赈济贫民，造福应当更大。 
English: If used to help the poor, the benefits should be even greater.

古文：亦不听。
现代文：皇帝也不听从劝谏。
English: I can't listen to it either.

古文：南京中官张进醉辱给事中王颐，给事中郑岳、杨节交章论，未报，参鲁复上言： 进乃守备中官申信党，不并治信，无以厌人心。 
现代文：南京的宦官张进酒醉后侮辱给事中王颐，给事中郑岳、杨节接连上奏疏论，没有答复，赵参鲁又上奏说： 张进是守备宦官申信的党羽，不将申信一起治罪，不能平抑人心。 
English: Zhang Jin, the eunuch of Nanjing, after getting drunk, insulted Wang Xi, who was in the middle of the matter. Zheng Yue and Yang Jie, who were in the middle of the matter, successively made a speech on the lack of response. Zhao Sanlu also made a speech saying: Zhang Jin is a party member who guards the eunuch's letter. If he does not punish the letter together, he will not be able to pacify the hearts of the people.

古文：时信方结冯保，朝议遂夺岳等俸，谪参鲁高安典史。
现代文：当时申信正与冯保勾结，朝廷商议剥夺了郑岳等人的俸禄，将赵参鲁贬为高安典史。
English: At that time, Shenxin was colluding with Feng Bao, and the imperial court deliberated to deprive Zheng Yue and others of their salaries, and relegated Zhao Sanlu to the history of high security.

古文：迁饶州推官，擢福建提学佥事，请急归。
现代文：调任饶州推官，后升任福建提学佥事，因急事请求回乡。
English: He was transferred to the post of Raozhou magistrate, and later he was promoted to the post of Fujian chief magistrate. Due to an emergency, he requested to return to his hometown.

古文：遭丧，服除，仍督学福建。
现代文：又遭遇丧事，服丧期满后，仍然在福建督学。
English: He also suffered a bereavement, and after the period of mourning was over, he still oversaw his studies in Fujian.

古文：历南京太常卿。
现代文：历任南京太常卿。
English: Successive Nanjing Taizongqing.

古文：十七年，以右副都御史巡抚福建。
现代文：万历十七年，他担任右副都御史巡视福建。
English: In the 17th year of the Wanli era, he served as the right vice-governor of the capital to inspect Fujian.

古文：申严海禁，戮奸商通倭者。
现代文：陈述要严格实行海禁，斩杀勾结倭寇的奸商。
English: It was stated that the maritime ban should be strictly enforced, and profiteers who colluded with Japanese pirates should be killed.

古文：迁大理卿。
现代文：调任大理寺卿。
English: He was transferred to the position of Dariji-kyo.

古文：召为刑部左侍郎，改兵部，旋改吏部。
现代文：皇帝招他担任刑部左侍郎，改任兵部职，马上又改任吏部职。
English: The emperor invited him to serve as the left attendant of the criminal department, changed his post to the military department, and immediately changed his post to the administrative department.

古文：日本封贡议起，参鲁持不可。
现代文：日本受封与朝贡的议论出现，赵参鲁坚持不赞同。
English: Zhao Sanlu insisted that he did not agree with the discussion of Japan's annexation and tribute.

古文：总督顾养谦不怿，争于朝，且言参鲁熟倭情，宜任。
现代文：总督顾养谦不高兴，在朝廷与他争辩，并说赵参鲁熟悉倭寇的情况，应当担当起此任。
English: The governor, Gu Yaoqian, was not happy and argued with him in the imperial court, saying that Zhao Sanlu was familiar with the situation of wako and should take on this position.

古文：章下廷臣，参鲁复持前说，因著《东封三议》，辨利害甚悉。
现代文：奏章下发给朝廷大臣，赵参鲁还是坚持先前的观点；趁此撰写了《东封三议》，全面辩论了此举的利弊。
English: Zhao Sanlu still adhered to the previous point of view; he took advantage of this to write the "Three Proposals of Dongfeng" and comprehensively debated the pros and cons of this move.

古文：其后封事卒不成。
现代文：此后，封贡的事情终没有办成。
English: After that, the matter of the tribute was never settled.

古文：拜南京刑部尚书。
现代文：他被任命为南京刑部尚书。
English: He was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：诚意伯刘世延妄指星象，欲起兵勤王，被劾下吏，参鲁当以死。
现代文：诚意伯刘世延荒诞地指引星象，想发兵帮助君王，被弹劾而撤职，赵参鲁认为应当处死。
English: Zhao Sanlu believed that he should be put to death because he was impeached and removed from office for his sincere intention to guide the stars in a grotesque way and wanted to send troops to help the king.

古文：南京工部主事赵学仕以侵牟为侍郎周思敬所劾，拟戍。
现代文：南京工部主事赵学仕因为牟取私利被侍郎周思敬弹劾，准备将他发配边关。
English: Zhao Xuecheng, the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department, was impeached by his valet, Zhou Sijing, for seeking personal gain, and it was planned to transfer him to Bianguan.

古文：学仕移罪家僮，法司予轻比。
现代文：赵学仕将罪过转嫁到家僮的头上，法司给予他以轻轻责罚。
English: Zhao Xuecheng passed the blame onto Iecheng, and the magistrate gave him a light punishment.

古文：御史朱吾弼复劾之，并及参鲁，言学仕乃大学士志皋族父，故参鲁庇之。
现代文：御史朱吾弼又弹劾他，并牵连到赵参鲁；称赵学仕是大学士赵志皋的族父，所以赵参鲁庇护他。
English: His superior Zhu Wuxi also impeached him and implicated Zhao Sanlu; he said that Zhao Xuesi was the father of the university scholar Zhao Zhixuan, so Zhao Sanlu sheltered him.

古文：参鲁乞休。
现代文：赵参鲁请求退休。
English: Zhao Sanlu asked to retire.

古文：吏部尚书孙丕扬等言参鲁履行素高，不当听其去，诏留之。
现代文：吏部尚书孙丕扬等人称赵参鲁的品行一向高洁，不应当听任他离去，皇帝下诏挽留他。
English: Officials such as Shangshu Sun Jianyang and others said that Zhao Sanlu's conduct had always been noble and clean, and he should not be allowed to leave. The emperor issued an edict to retain him.

古文：累加太子太保。
现代文：加封为太子太保。
English: Gafu was appointed Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：致仕，卒，谥端简。
现代文：退休后去世，谥号端简。
English: She died after retirement, and was nicknamed "Tang Jian" (端简).

古文：张孟男，字元嗣，中牟人。
现代文：张孟男，字元嗣，中牟人。
English: Zhang Meng'an, Zi Yuan Zi, Zhong Mou Ren.

古文：嘉靖四十四年进士。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年的进士。
English: The 44th year of Jiajing.

古文：授广平推官。
现代文：授职为广平推官。
English: He was awarded the post of Guangping censor.

古文：稍迁汉中同知。
现代文：稍后调任汉中同知。
English: He was later transferred to Hanzhong Tongzhi.

古文：入为顺天治中，累进尚宝丞。
现代文：入京担任顺天治中，升任尚宝丞。
English: Entered Beijing as Shuntianzhi Middle School and was promoted to Shangbao Middle School.

古文：高拱以内阁兼吏部，其妻，孟男姑也，自公事外无私语。
现代文：高拱以内阁大臣身份兼管吏部，他的妻子是张孟男的姑姑，除了公事之外没有关于私人的谈话。
English: Gao Gong is a cabinet minister and in charge of the personnel department. His wife is Zhang Mengnan's aunt. Apart from business, there is no private conversation.

古文：拱憾之，四岁不迁。
现代文：高拱对此不满意，四年没有提升他。
English: Gao Gong was not satisfied with this and did not promote him for four years.

古文：及拱被逐，亲知皆引匿，孟男独留拱邸，为治装送之郊。
现代文：等到高拱被驱逐，他的亲朋知己都退避隐匿，唯独张孟男留在高拱的官邸替他收拾行装，送他至郊外。
English: When Gao Gong was ousted, his relatives, friends and acquaintances all retreated into hiding, except for Zhang Mengan, who stayed at Gao Gong's official residence to pack up and send him to the suburbs.

古文：张居正用事，擢孟男太仆少卿。
现代文：张居正掌权，将张孟男升为太仆少卿。
English: Zhang Jiu was in power, and promoted Zhang Mengan to the position of Taibo Shaoqing (太僕少卿).

古文：孟男复不附，失居正意，不调。
现代文：张孟男也不攀附，令张居正失望，没有调动他。
English: Zhang Mengan did not follow suit, leaving Zhang Juzheng disappointed and did not transfer him.

古文：久之，居正败，始累迁南京工部右侍郎。
现代文：此后很久，张居正衰败了，他才调任南京工部右侍郎。
English: Long after that, Zhang Juzheng fell into decline, and he was transferred to the post of the right hand man of the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：寻召入，以本官掌通政司事。
现代文：不久被召入北京，以原职掌管通政司事务。
English: He was soon called to Beijing to take charge of the affairs of the State Council in his former position.

古文：万历十七年，帝不视朝者八月，孟男疏谏，且言： 岭南人讼故都御史李材功，蔡人讼故令曹世卿枉，章并留中，其人系兵马司，橐饘不继，莫必其生，亏损圣德。 
现代文：万历十七年，皇帝已经八个月没有到朝房接见大臣，张孟男上奏劝谏，而且说： 岭南人为原来的都御史李材申报功绩，蔡地的人控诉原县令曹世卿枉法，奏章都被留在宫中，而将人关押在兵马司，饭食供给不足，莫非不想让他们活，使圣德遭受损害。 
English: In the seventeenth year of Wanli, the emperor had not been to the imperial palace to receive the minister for eight months. Zhang Mengnang made a speech to persuade him, and said: Lingnan people declared their merits for the original capital historian Li Zai, Cai people complained that the original county ordered Cao Shijing to abuse the law, and the speeches were all left in the palace, but the people were detained in the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division, and the food supply was insufficient. It was because they did not want to let them live, so that the sanctity suffered damage.

古文：帝心动，乃间一御门。
现代文：皇帝被说动了心，于是间或驾临一次朝房。
English: The emperor was so moved by the speech that he occasionally visited the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：其冬，改户部，进左侍郎。
现代文：当年冬天，他改任户部职，升任左侍郎。
English: In the winter of that year, he was reassigned to the position of head of the household and promoted to the position of left-hand waiter.

古文：寻拜南京工部尚书，就改户部。
现代文：不久又担任了南京工部尚书，改任户部职。
English: Soon after, he served as the secretary of the Nanjing Engineering Department and was reassigned to the Household Department.

古文：时留都储峙耗竭，孟男受事，粟仅支二年，不再岁遂有七年之蓄。
现代文：当时留都南京储备已经耗尽，张孟男接任时，粟仅有两年的储备，在他的努力下不到一年就有七年的储备量。
English: At that time, Nanjing's reserves had been depleted. When Zhang Meng'an took over, Mao had only two years of reserves, and under his efforts, he had seven years of reserves in less than a year.

古文：水衡修仓，发公羡二千金助之。
现代文：水衡官修筑粮仓，他调拨公家节余的二千两百银做资助。
English: The surveyor of waters built a granary, which he financed by allocating 2200 silver from the public surplus.

古文：或谓奈何耘人田，孟男曰： 公家事，乃画区畔耶？ 
现代文：有人说为什么替别人耕耘，张孟男回答： 公家的事情，是划分了区间的吗？ 
English: When someone asked why he was working for others, Zhang Mengnang replied, "In public affairs, is there a division of labor?

古文：南京御史陈所闻劾孟男贪鄙，吏部尚书孙鑨言孟男忠诚谨恪，台臣所论，事由郎官，帝乃留之。
现代文：南京御史陈所闻弹劾张孟男贪赃、鄙陋，吏部尚书孙钅龙称张孟男忠诚谨慎，御史的疏论，是由郎官所为，皇帝就挽留了他。
English: The Nanjing Imperial Historian Chen Sheng heard of the impeachment of Zhang Mengnang for corruption and meanness. Sun Yulong, the official of the Ministry of Personnel, said that Zhang Mengnang was loyal and prudent. The Imperial Historian's negligence was committed by his vassal, and the emperor retained him.

古文：孟男求去，不允。
现代文：张孟男请求离去，皇帝不准许。
English: Zhang Mengan asked to leave, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：再疏请，乃听归。
现代文：他再次上奏请求，皇帝才听任他回乡。
English: He appealed again, and the emperor allowed him to return home.

古文：久之，召拜故官。
现代文：很久以后，他才被召见并官复原职。
English: It was a long time before he was summoned and reinstated.

古文：三十年春，有诏罢矿税。
现代文：万历三十年春天，有诏令罢除矿税。
English: In the spring of the 30th year of Wanli, there was a decree to abolish the mineral tax.

古文：已，弗果行。
现代文：不久，事情没有施行。
English: Shortly afterwards, the measure was not implemented.

古文：孟男率同列谏，不报。
现代文：张孟男率领同僚劝谏，没有答复。
English: Zhang Meng'an led his colleagues to persuade him, but there was no response.

古文：加太子少保。
现代文：他被加封为太子少保。
English: He was given the additional title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：五上章乞归，不许。
现代文：五次上奏请求回乡，皇帝不允许。
English: After five requests to return to his hometown, the emperor did not allow it.

古文：时矿税患日剧，孟男草遗疏数千言，极陈其害，言： 臣备员地官，所征天下租税，皆鬻男市女、朘骨割肉之余也。
现代文：当时矿税的祸患一天天加剧，张孟男起草了几千字的遗疏，极力陈述矿税的危害，称： 我是户部官员，征收天下的租税，都是卖儿卖女，削骨割肉之后所得来的。
English: At that time, the scourge of the mineral tax was intensifying day by day. Zhang Meng'an drafted a memorandum of several thousand words, vigorously stating the harm of the mineral tax, saying: I am an official of the Household Department, collecting taxes from all over the world, all of which came from selling children and selling women, and after cutting bones and cutting meat.

古文：臣以催科为职，臣得其职，而民病矣。
现代文：我的职责就是催促科税，我尽了职，而百姓困穷。
English: My duty is to push for science and technology tax. I have done my duty, but the people are poor.

古文：万历间，南京户部尚书有清名者，前有张孟男，后则称承芳。
现代文：聚敛财富令百姓困穷，虐待百姓使国体动摇，有这样的大臣，怎么能任用他。我很哀叹，替陛下做杞人忧天的事。 
English: How can such a minister be appointed when he has amassed wealth and impoverished the people, abused the people and shaken the nation? I am very sorry to do such a terrible thing for His Majesty.

古文：寻就改吏部。
现代文：他嘱咐儿子呈交朝廷，第二天就去世了。
English: He ordered his son to submit to the imperial court, and he died the next day.

古文：卒官。赠太子太保，谥清敏。李祯，字维卿，安化人。
现代文：南京尚书赵参鲁等人奏陈他的清廉、忠诚，赠封他为太子太保。李祯，字维卿，安化人。
English: Nanjing Shangshu Zhao Sanlu and others praised him for his integrity and loyalty, and presented him with the title of Crown Prince Taibo. Li Yu, also known as Weiqing, was from Anhua.

古文：隆庆五年进士。
现代文：隆庆五年的进士。
English: Longqing five-year star.

古文：除高平知县，征授御史。
现代文：授职为高平知县，征召为御史。
English: The conferment of the post is for Gaoping Zhixian, and the call-up is for Guoshi.

古文：万历初，傅应祯以直言下诏狱，祯与同官乔严、给事中徐贞明拥入护视之，坐谪长芦盐运司知事。
现代文：万历初年，傅应祯因为秉直劝谏被投入诏狱，李祯与同僚乔岩、给事中徐贞明前往监狱探视他，结果被贬职为长芦盐运司知事。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Fu Yingtao was thrown into the imperial prison for his straightforward advice. Li Qian and his colleagues Qiao Yan and Xu Zhenming went to the prison to visit him. As a result, he was demoted to the governor of the Changlu Salt Transportation Department.

古文：迁归德推官、礼部主事，三迁顺天府丞。
现代文：调任归德推官、礼部主事，三次担任顺天府丞。
English: He was transferred to the position of Gui De (return to virtue) officer, the head of the ceremonial department, and served as Shuntianfu chancellor three times.

古文：十八年，洮、河有警，极言贡市非策，因历诋边吏四失。
现代文：万历十八年，洮、河地区出现警讯，他极力陈述贡市不是一种适宜策略，并趁机指责了边防官吏的四大过失。
English: In the 18th year of Wanli, when a warning appeared in the Minhe area, he strongly stated that tribute was not a suitable strategy, and took the opportunity to accuse the border officials of four major mistakes.

古文：帝以纳款二十年，不当咎始事，遂寝其议。
现代文：神宗认为已经互市通贡了二十年，不应当追究开始的事，于是压制了他的提议。
English: Shenzong thought that it had been 20 years since the two cities had paid tribute to each other, and that the matter should not be investigated, so he suppressed his proposal.

古文：以右佥都御史巡抚湖广，言： 知县梁道凝循吏，反注下考，宜惩挟私者以励其余。
现代文：他担任右佥都御史巡视湖广期间曾上书，说： 知县梁道凝遵循吏职，反而被记录下等考绩，应该惩罚徇私的人以便告诫其他的人。
English: During his inspection tour of Hukang, he wrote a letter saying: Liang Daogun of Zhixian County followed the duties of officials, but was recorded in the performance appraisal, and those who were selfish should be punished in order to warn others.

古文：荐举属吏，不应专及高秩，下僚如赵蛟、杨果者，亦当显旌之。 
现代文：推荐官吏不应该专门涉及高品级的人，像赵蛟、杨果等下级幕僚，也应当大肆表彰他们。 
English: The recommendation of officials should not only involve high-ranking people, but also lower-level staff members such as Zhao Wei and Yang Guo, and they should be commended.

古文：蛟、果，万历初以吏员超擢者也。
现代文：赵蛟、杨果是万历初年由吏员破格提拔的人。
English: Zhao Wei and Yang Guo were the first-year officials to be promoted in the first year of Wanli.

古文：诏皆报可。
现代文：神宗的诏令都答复可以。
English: The Emperor's edict of Shinshu can be answered.

古文：召为左佥都御史，再迁户部右侍郎。
现代文：他被招见并任命为左佥都御史，再调任户部右侍郎。
English: He was invited to a meeting and appointed as the Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian, and then transferred to the position of the Right Attendant of the Household.

古文：赵用贤以绝婚事被讦，户部郎中郑材复诋之。
现代文：赵用贤因为拒绝婚事而遭攻击，户部郎中郑材又诋毁他。
English: Zhao Yingxian was attacked for refusing to marry, and the head of the household, Zheng Zhai, slandered him.

古文：祯驳材疏，语侵其父洛。
现代文：李祯驳斥了郑材的奏疏，话语触犯了他的父亲郑洛。
English: Li Qian refuted Zheng Zai's slander, and his words offended his father Zheng Luo.

古文：材愤，疏诋祯，祯遂乞休，不允。
现代文：郑材在气愤中又上奏指斥李祯，李祯请求退休，神宗不允许。
English: In his anger, Zheng Zai once again rebuked Li Xuan. Li Xuan asked to retire, but Shen Zong did not allow it.

古文：御史宋兴祖请改材他部避祯，全大臣体，乃出材南京。
现代文：御史宋兴祖请求将郑材改派到其他的部以回避李祯，保全大臣的体统，神宗就将郑材调出京城派往南京。
English: Song Xingzu, the imperial historian, requested that Zheng Jia be reassigned to another ministry in order to evade Li Xi and preserve the minister's dignity. Shenzong transferred Zheng Jia out of Beijing and sent him to Nanjing.

古文：祯寻调兵部，进左侍郎。
现代文：李祯不久调往兵部升任左侍郎。
English: Soon after, Li Yao was transferred to the Military Department and promoted to the position of Left Attendant.

古文：二十四年，日本封贡事偾，首辅赵志皋、尚书石星俱被劾。
现代文：万历二十四年，日本受封朝贡的事情不成，首辅赵志皋、尚书石星都遭弹劾。
English: In the 24th year of Wanli, the matter of Japan receiving the imperial tribute was not accomplished, and the first assistant Zhao Zhixuan and Shang Shuxi Xingxing were both impeached.

古文：廷臣议战守，章悉下兵部。
现代文：朝廷大臣讨论战守的情况，奏章全部下达到兵部。
English: The ministers of the imperial court discussed the state of the defense, and all the reports reached the military department.

古文：祯等言： 今所议惟战守封三事。
现代文：李祯等人说： 现在所讨论的只是战、守与封贡三件事。
English: Li Wei and others said: What we are discussing now is only three things: war, defense, and tribute.

古文：封则李宗城虽征，杨方亨尚在。
现代文：封贡则李宗城虽被招回，杨方亨依然在职。
English: Although the tributary Li Zongcheng was called back, Yang Fangheng is still in office.

古文：若遽议罢，无论中国数百人沦于异域，而我兵食未集，势难远征。
现代文：如果就此提议罢黜，不要说将中国的几百人沉沦在异国他乡，而且我方的兵粮还没集结，形势很难进行远征。
English: If it is proposed to withdraw, not to mention leaving hundreds of Chinese soldiers stranded in a foreign land, and our soldiers' rations have not yet been assembled, the situation will be difficult to carry out the expedition.

古文：宜令方亨静俟关白来迎则封，不迎则止。
现代文：应该命令杨方亨静候朝廷通告，文书来就封贡，不来就终止此议。
English: Yang Fangheng should be ordered to wait for the announcement of the imperial court. If the document comes, the tribute will be paid, and if it does not come, the discussion will be terminated.

古文：我以战守为实务，而相机应之。
现代文：我认为战守是务实之举，应该伺机应变。
English: I believe that the war defense is a pragmatic move, and we should wait for the right time.

古文：且朝鲜素守礼，王师所屯，宜严禁扰掠。 
现代文：况且朝鲜一向遵守礼仪，我军的驻地，应该严禁骚扰、劫掠。 
English: Moreover, North Korea has always observed etiquette, and it is strictly forbidden to harass or loot the garrison of our army.

古文：得旨如议。
现代文：所得的圣旨采纳了他们的建议。
English: The resulting will incorporated their suggestions.

古文：而疏内言志皋、星当去。
现代文：但是他在奏疏中称赵志皋、石星应当离职。
English: However, in his report, he said that Zhao Zhisheng and Shi Xing should resign.

古文：诏诘祯，止令议战守事，何擅及大臣去留，姑勿问。
现代文：神宗下诏责备李祯，只指令议论战守的事情，为何擅自提及大臣的去留，姑且不予追究。
English: Emperor Jinzong issued an edict to reprimand Li Xi, ordering him to only discuss matters concerning the war, and not to investigate why he had mentioned the minister's departure without permission.

古文：志皋自是不悦。
现代文：赵志皋从此对李祯不满。
English: Since then, Zhao Zhisheng has been dissatisfied with Li Rong.

古文：明年，星得罪，命祯摄部事。
现代文：第二年，石星被治罪，神宗指令李祯负责部里的事务。
English: In the second year, Shi Xing was punished, and Shenzong ordered Li Xi to take charge of the affairs of the ministry.

古文：祯以平壤、王京、釜山皆朝鲜要地，请修建大城，兴屯开镇，且列上战守十五策，俱允行。
现代文：李祯认为平壤、王京、釜山都是朝鲜的要地，请求修建一座大城，兴屯田，开辟市镇，同时陈述了战守的十五条策略，都被同意施行。
English: Considering that Pyongyang, Wangjing, and Busan were all important places in Korea, Ri Yong requested the construction of a large city, the establishment of military camps, and the opening of towns, and at the same time stated the fifteen-point strategy for the war, all of which were agreed to be implemented.

古文：后又数上方略。
现代文：后来他又多次陈述方略。
English: Later, he reiterated his strategy several times.

古文：四川被寇，祯言： 川、陕接界，而松潘向无寇患者，以诸番为屏蔽也。
现代文：四川遭敌寇袭击。李祯上奏称： 四川与陕西接壤，但是松潘地区一向没有敌寇为患，是因为诸少数民族充当了屏障。
English: Sichuan was attacked by enemy corsairs. Premier Li Rong said: Sichuan shares a border with Shaanxi, but the Songpan region has never been affected by enemy corsairs, because ethnic minorities have acted as a barrier.

古文：自俺答西牧，陇右骚然。
现代文：自从俺答在西部放牧，陇右地区就一片骚乱。
English: Since I was allowed to graze in the west, there has been a riot in the right-hand area.

古文：其后陇右备严，寇不得逞，而祸乃移之川矣。
现代文：此后陇右防备森严，敌寇不能逞威，但祸乱就转移到了四川。
English: After that, the right bank of the Yangtze River was heavily fortified, and the enemy raiders could not assert themselves, but the calamity was transferred to Sichuan.

古文：今诸番强半折入于西部。
现代文：现在各少数民族大半都定居西部边疆。
English: Now, most of the ethnic minorities have settled in the western frontier.

古文：臣阅地图，从北界迤西间道达蜀地，多不隔三舍。
现代文：我浏览地图，从北部边界延伸至西部由小路抵四川，最多不过九十里。
English: I looked at the map. From the northern border to the west, and from the small road to Sichuan, it was only ninety miles at most.

古文：幸层岩叠嶂，屹然天险，如镇虏堡为漳腊门户，虹桥关为松城咽喉。
现代文：幸赖层岩叠嶂、天险屹立，如镇虏堡是漳脑的门户，虹桥关是松城的咽喉。
English: Fortunate strata of rock are stacked on top of each other, and natural hazards stand tall. For example, the town of Krupburg is the gateway to Camphor, and Hongqiao Pass is the throat of Songcheng.

古文：关堡之外，或岭或崖，皆可据守。
现代文：关堡之外，有岭有崖，都可以据守。
English: Outside the fortress, there are ridges and cliffs that can be defended.

古文：守阿玉岭，则不能越咂际而窥堡。
现代文：驻守阿玉岭，敌人就不能翻越天险窥视堡寨。
English: Stationed at Ayuling, the enemy cannot climb over the natural hazard to peep into the fortress.

古文：守黄胜场，则不敢逾塞墩而寇关。
现代文：驻守黄胜场，敌人就不敢跨过塞墩而扰关。
English: If you are stationed at Huang Sheng Square, the enemy will not dare to cross the barricade and disturb the pass.

古文：他如横山、寡石崖尤为要害，皆当亟议防御，令抚镇臣计画以闻。 
现代文：其他地方如横山、寡石崖尤其险要，都应该赶紧商讨设防，命令抚镇大臣报告计划。 
English: Other places, such as Hengshan and Oshiishi Cliff, are particularly dangerous, and they should urgently discuss fortification and order the Fuzhen Minister to report the plan.

古文：报可。
现代文：神宗答复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：祯质直方刚，署事规画颇当。
现代文：李祯性格刚直，办事的规划很恰当。
English: Li Yao has a straightforward personality, and his business planning is very appropriate.

古文：有欲即用为尚书者，志皋以故憾，阴沮之。
现代文：有人想推举他任尚书，赵志皋因为先前的不满，暗中阻拦。
English: Some people wanted to promote him to the post of minister, but Zhao Zhixuan secretly blocked it because of his previous dissatisfaction.

古文：而张位、沈一贯雅与经略邢玠、经理杨镐通，亦不便祯所为，言祯非将材，惟萧大亨堪任。
现代文：而且张位、沈一贯一向与经略邢、经理杨镐勾结，也不希望李祯任尚书；称李祯不是将材，只有萧大亨堪当此任。
English: Moreover, Zhang Yi and Shen have always been in collusion with the financial planner and manager Yang Yu, and they do not want Li Yu to be appointed as Shangshu; they say that Li Yu is not a leader, and only Xiao Dajeng is worthy of this position.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：神宗不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：其后玠、镐益无功，志皋等又请罢祯，御史况上进劾祯庸鄙。
现代文：此后邢、杨镐更加没有功绩，赵志皋等人又奏请罢免李祯，御史况上进弹劾李祯庸俗卑鄙。
English: Since then, Zhai and Yang Jie have done even less, and Zhao Zhixuan and others have called for the dismissal of Li Jie. The impeachment of Li Jie is vulgar and despicable.

古文：帝皆不听。
现代文：神宗都不听。
English: Emperor Wei did not listen to them.

古文：甘肃缺巡抚，祯以刘敏宽名上。
现代文：甘肃巡抚空缺，李祯报上刘敏宽的姓名。
English: The post of Gansu's inspector general was vacant, and Li Ying reported Liu Minkang's name.

古文：给事杨应文言敏宽方坐事勘，不当推举。
现代文：给事中杨应文称刘敏宽刚刚被勘查，不应当推举他。
English: During the event, Yang Yingwen said that Liu Minquan had just been surveyed and that he should not be elected.

古文：帝以诘祯，祯言： 前奉诏，敏宽须巡抚缺用，臣故举之。 
现代文：神宗责备李祯，李祯说： 先前遵照诏令刘敏宽等待着巡抚的空缺，所以我举荐了他。 
English: Shenzong reproached Li Yao, Li Yao said: Previously, according to the imperial edict, Liu Minquan was waiting for the vacancy of the procurator, so I recommended him.

古文：帝怒祯不引罪，调之南京。
现代文：神宗恼怒李祯不认罪，将他调到南京。
English: Enraged, Shenzong Li Yao pleaded not guilty and transferred him to Nanjing.

古文：后考察，南京言官拾遗及祯，遂命致仕。
现代文：随后进行考核，南京的言官上书牵涉到李祯，于是神宗命其退休。
English: Subsequently, an assessment was carried out, and a letter was sent to the governor of Nanjing implicating Li Wei, so Shensong ordered him to retire.

古文：久之，起南京刑部尚书。
现代文：此后很久，他出任南京刑部尚书。
English: It was not until much later that he was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：逾年复引疾，不俟报径归，帝怒。
现代文：过了一年又称病，没等到答复就径自回乡了，神宗很恼怒。
English: After a year, he called in sick again. Without waiting for a reply, he went back to his hometown. Shenzong was very angry.

古文：大学士叶向高言： 祯实病，不可深责。
现代文：大学士叶向高称： 李祯确实患病，不能过份指责。
English: Ye Xianggao, a university scholar, said: Li Yao is indeed ill, and cannot be blamed too much.

古文：十余年来，大臣乞休得请者，百无一二。
现代文：十多年来，大臣们请求退休获得批准的人，没有百分之一、二。
English: For more than a decade, ministers have asked for permission to retire less than one or two per cent of people.

古文：李廷机、赵世卿皆羁留数载，疏至百余上。
现代文：李廷机、赵世卿都被留任几年，上奏达一百多次。
English: Li Tingji and Zhao Shijing both remained in their posts for several years and were promoted more than 100 times.

古文：今尚书孙丕扬、李化龙又以考察军政疏不下，相率求去。
现代文：现在尚书孙丕扬、李化龙又因为考核军政的奏疏没有下发，相继请求离去。
English: Now, Shangshu Sun Jianyang and Li Hualong have also requested to leave one after another because the assessment of the military and political situation has not been issued.

古文：若复踵祯辙，实伤国体。
现代文：如果他们再效法李祯，实在有伤国家的体统。
English: If they follow the example of Li Wei again, it will really hurt the country's dignity.

古文：诸臣求去，约有数端。
现代文：各位请求离去的大臣，大约都有几条理由。
English: Each of the ministers who asked to leave had several reasons.

古文：疾病当去，被言当去，不得其职当去。
现代文：患疾病的人应当离去，被疏论的人应当离去，没有尽职的人应当离去。
English: Those who are ill should leave, those who have been sidetracked should leave, and those who have not fulfilled their duties should leave.

古文：宜曲体其情，可留留之，不可留则听之。 
现代文：应该体察他们的详情，可以留任的就挽留他，不可以留任者就听任他们离去。 
English: You should consider their details. If you can keep them, keep them. If you can't keep them, let them go.

古文：帝竟夺祯职闲住。
现代文：神宗最终剥夺了李祯的官职，让他闲居。
English: Shenzong eventually deprived Li Yao of his official position and let him live in idleness.

古文：未几卒。
现代文：不久他就去世了。
English: He died soon after.

古文：丁宾，字礼原，嘉善人。
现代文：丁宾，字礼原，嘉善人。
English: Ding Bin, Zhe Li Yuan, Jiashan Ren.

古文：隆庆五年进士。
现代文：隆庆五年的进士。
English: Longqing five-year star.

古文：授句容知县。
现代文：授职为句容知县。
English: The conferment of the post is from Yongchi County.

古文：征授御史。
现代文：征招为御史。
English: Conscription is history.

古文：大学士张居正，宾座主也，诬刘台以赃，属宾往辽东按之。
现代文：大学士张居正是丁宾的主考官，诬陷刘台窝藏赃物，嘱咐丁宾前往辽东调查。
English: Zhang Ju, a university graduate, was Ding Bin's chief examiner. He accused Liu Tai of hiding stolen goods and ordered Ding Bin to go to Liaodong to investigate.

古文：宾力辞，忤居正意，去官。
现代文：丁宾极力推辞，违背了张居正的心意而被撤职。
English: Ding Bin tried his best to refuse, but he violated Zhang Juzheng's will and was dismissed.

古文：万历十九年，用荐起故官，复以忧去。
现代文：万历十九年，他被推荐担任原职，又因奔丧而离职。
English: In the 19th year of Wanli, he was recommended to take up his original post, and left his post due to bereavement.

古文：起南京大理丞。
现代文：后起用为南京大理寺丞。
English: Later, he was assigned to Nanjing Dali Temple.

古文：累迁南京右佥都御史兼督操江。
现代文：升任南京右佥都御史兼督江防。
English: He was promoted to the post of Nanjing Uyezd Metropolitan Historian and Governor of Jiang'an.

古文：江防多懈，宾率将校乘一舟往来周视，增守兵戍要害，部内宴然。
现代文：江防很松懈，丁宾率领将校乘一艘船来回巡视，增加兵力防守要害的地方，辖区之内平安无事。
English: The river defense is very lax. Ding Bin led the officers to patrol back and forth by a boat, increase the number of troops to defend the key areas, and there is no problem within the jurisdiction.

古文：南卫世职率赴京师请袭，留滞不得官，宾请就南勘袭。
现代文：南卫的世袭官都要到京城请求办理世袭，滞留在那里却得不到官职，丁宾请求就在南京核查办理。
English: The hereditary officials of Nanwei all had to go to Beijing to apply for hereditary succession, but they could not get an official position if they stayed there. Dingbin's request was verified and processed in Nanjing.

古文：妖民刘天绪左道事觉，兵部尚书孙鑛欲穷治之，诏下法司讯鞫。
现代文：妖民刘天绪谋逆的事情被发觉，兵部尚书孙钅广想追索处治，诏令法司审讯。
English: When Liu Tianxu's treasonous plot was discovered, the military commander, Shangshu Sun Yiguang, wanted to take legal action and ordered the legal department to investigate.

古文：宾兼摄刑部大理事，力平反，论七人死，余皆获释。
现代文：丁宾兼管着刑部大理寺的事务，极力平反，判处七人死刑，其余的人全部释放。
English: Ding Bin, who was also in charge of the affairs of the criminal department of Dali Temple, tried his best to rehabilitate, sentenced seven people to death, and released all the rest.

古文：召拜工部左侍郎，寻擢南京工部尚书。
现代文：皇帝召见他并任命为工部左侍郎，不久升任南京工部尚书。
English: The emperor summoned him and appointed him as the left attendant of the Ministry of Industry, and soon he was promoted to the leading official of the Ministry of Industry in Nanjing.

古文：自上元至丹阳道路，尽易以石，行旅颂之。
现代文：从上元到丹阳的道路，全部铺换了石头，行人、商旅都称颂他。
English: The road from Shangyuan to Danyang has been completely paved with stone, and pedestrians and business travelers alike praise him.

古文：数引年乞罢，光宗立，始予致仕。
现代文：多次告老请求罢职，光宗即位才允许他退休。
English: He repeatedly petitioned the emperor for retirement, but the emperor only allowed him to retire when he ascended the throne.

古文：宾官南都三十年，每遇旱潦，辄请振贷，时出家财佐之。
现代文：丁宾在南都任了三十年的官吏，每次遇上旱涝，就请求赈济、借贷，时常拿出家产作为资助。
English: Dingbin has been a government official in Nantou for 30 years. Every time there is a drought, he asks for aid and loans, and often takes out his family property as financial support.

古文：初以御史家居，及丁忧归，连三年大饥，咸捐资以振。
现代文：开始以御史身份在家闲居。等到遭遇父母丧事而回乡，连续三年大饥荒，他每次都捐献钱财作为赈济。
English: He began to idle at home as an imperial historian. When he returned to his hometown after the death of his parents, there was a famine for three consecutive years, and he donated money as relief each time.

古文：至天启五年，复捐粟三千石振贫民，以资三千金代下户之不能输赋者。
现代文：到了天启五年，他又捐献三千石粟赈济贫民，拿出三千两白银替不能交赋税的贫困人家缴纳赋税。
English: At the beginning of the fifth year, he donated 3,000 koku of millet to the poor, and took out 3,002 silver to pay taxes for poor families who could not pay taxes.

古文：抚按录上其先后事，时已加太子少保，诏进太子太保，旌其门。
现代文：抚按记录报告了他前后的事迹，当时，他已经加封为太子少保，诏令升任太子太保，表彰他的家室。
English: According to the record, Fuzhou reported his previous and subsequent deeds. At that time, he had been awarded the title of Prince Junior Protector, and was promoted to Prince Grand Protector by imperial decree, in recognition of his family.

古文：以年高，三被存问。
现代文：因为他年事已高，三次受到皇帝问候。
English: Because of his old age, he was greeted by the emperor three times.

古文：崇祯六年卒，年九十一。
现代文：崇祯六年，他去世了，享年九十一岁。
English: Six years after his death, he passed away at the age of ninety-one.

古文：谥清惠。
现代文：谥号清惠。
English: 清惠.

古文：赞曰：南京卿长，体貌尊而官守无责，故为养望之地，资地深而誉闻重者处焉。
现代文：评论：南京的公卿吏长，地位尊宠却无实际责任，所以是养尊的地方，资历深而且声誉高的人都处在该地。
English: Comment: Nanjing's Kugyo Rikicho is a place where senior and highly reputable people are located. It is a place to nurture respect, as there is no actual responsibility for those who are favored in their position.

古文：或强直无所附丽，不为执政所喜，则以此远之。
现代文：或者强硬刚直，不做攀附，不被执政者喜欢，就以此来疏远他。
English: Or to alienate him by being tough and upright, not being attached, and not being liked by the ruler.

古文：袁洪愈诸人类以清强居优闲之地，不竟其用，亦以自全。
现代文：袁洪愈等人都是因为清正而被强迫居住在这悠闲的地方，他们的才干没能充分表现，也因此保全了自己。
English: Yuan Hongyu and others were forced to live in this leisurely place because of their righteousness. They did not fully demonstrate their talents, and thus preserved themselves.

古文：干时冒进之徒，可以风矣。
现代文：违背时尚积极冒进的人，可以讥讽他们。
English: Those who go against the fashion and go ahead can be ridiculed.

