古文：足太阳脉令人腰痛，引项脊尻背如重状，刺其郄中。太阳正经出血，春无见血。
现代文：足太阳经脉发病使人腰痛，痛时牵引项脊尻背，好像担负着沉重的东西一样，治疗时应刺其合穴委中，即在委中穴处刺出其恶血。
English: The pathogenesis of the solar meridians of the foot causes people to have low back pain. When the pain occurs, the traction point pulls the spine and buttocks, as if carrying something heavy. When treating, it should be stabbed in the middle of the joint, that is, the bad blood should be stabbed in the middle of the joint.

古文：少阳令人腰痛，如以针刺其皮中，循循然不可以俛仰，不可以顾。
现代文：若在春季不要刺出其血。足少阳胆经发病使人腰痛，痛如用针刺于皮肤中，逐渐加重不能前后俯仰，并且不能左右回顾。
English: If it is in spring, do not prick out the blood. The disease causes low back pain. If you prick the skin with a needle, the pain will gradually increase. Do not tilt forward and backward, and do not look back and forth.

古文：刺少阳成骨之端出血，成骨在膝外廉之骨独起者，夏无见血。
现代文：治疗时应刺足少阳经小腿胫骨上端出血，即在膝盖外侧高骨突起处，如果在夏季则不要刺出其血。
English: When treating, it is necessary to prick the leg of the young yang for bleeding through the upper end of the shinbone of the calf, that is, at the high bony protrusion on the outside of the knee. If it is in the summer, do not prick out the blood.

古文：阳明令人腰痛，不可以顾，顾如有见者，善悲。
现代文：足阳明胃经发病而使人腰痛，腰部不能左右转动，如果转动则容易产生幻觉，并且容易悲伤。
English: The disease causes people to have lower back pain, and the lower back can not turn left and right. If it turns, it is easy to produce hallucinations, and it is easy to be sad.

古文：刺阳明于胻前三痏，上下和之出血，秋无见血。
现代文：治疗时应刺足阳明胃经在小腿胫骨前的三次，使其上下合顺，刺其出血，秋季则不要刺出其血。
English: During treatment, the foot should be pricked three times in front of the calf tibia, so that the upper and lower legs are aligned, the blood should be pricked, and the blood should not be pricked in autumn.

古文：足少阴令人腰痛，痛引脊内廉。
现代文：足少阴肾经发病使人腰痛，痛时牵引到脊椎的内侧。
English: Foot-and-neck dysmenorrhea causes low back pain, which is drawn to the medial side of the spine.

古文：刺少阴于内踝上二痏，春无见血，出血太多，不可复也。
现代文：治疗时应刺足少阴肾经在内踝上两次，若在春季则不要刺出其血，如果出血太多，就会导致肾气损伤而不易恢复。
English: During treatment, the foot should be pricked twice on the inner ankle. If it is in the spring, do not prick out the blood. If there is too much bleeding, it will cause kidney gas damage and is not easy to recover.

古文：厥阴之脉令人腰痛，腰中如张弓弩弦。
现代文：足厥阴肝经发病使人腰痛，腰部强急如张弓弩弦一样。
English: Foot, leg, anus and liver disease causes low back pain, and the lower back is as tight as a bowstring.

古文：刺厥阴之脉，在腨踵鱼腹之外，循之累累然，乃刺之。
现代文：治疗时应刺足厥阴肝经的穴位，其部位在腿肚和足跟之间鱼腹之外，摸之有连续成串的结节，用针刺之。
English: When treating, it is necessary to prick the acupoints of the heel of the foot, which is located between the heel and the ball of the foot. There is a continuous series of nodules, which should be pricked with a needle.

古文：其病令人善言，默默然不慧，刺之三痏。
现代文：如果病人多言语或沉默抑郁不爽，可以针刺三次。
English: If the patient talks a lot or is depressed by silence, he or she can be needled three times.

古文：解脉令人腰痛，痛引肩，目䀮䀮然，时遗溲。
现代文：解脉发病使人腰痛，痛时会牵引到肩部，眼睛视物不清，时常遗尿。
English: The onset of demyelination causes people to have low back pain. When the pain occurs, it is drawn to the shoulder, the eyes are blurred, and urine is often lost.

古文：刺解脉，在膝筋肉分间郄外廉之横脉出血，血变而止。
现代文：治疗时应刺解脉，其部位在膝后大筋分肉间外侧的紫黑色横纹刺其出血，直到血色由紫变红才停止。
English: During treatment, the artery should be punctured and the site of the bleeding should be punctured with a purple-black stripe on the outer side of the large interosseous space behind the knee. The bleeding should not stop until the blood color changes from purple to red.

古文：解脉令人腰痛如引带，常如折腰状，善恐。
现代文：解脉发病使人腰痛，好像有带子牵引一样，常好像腰部被折断一样，并且时常有恐惧的感觉。
English: The onset of spina bifida causes low back pain that feels as if it is being pulled along by a band, often as if the lower back is being broken, and often with a feeling of fear.

古文：刺解脉，在郄中结络如黍米，刺之血射以黑，见赤血而已。
现代文：治疗时应刺解脉，在委中穴处有结滞如黍米者，刺之则有黑色血液射出，等到血色变红时即停止。
English: During treatment, the artery should be punctured. If there is a stagnation like sticky rice in the middle of the hole, black blood will be ejected from the puncture, and it will stop when the blood turns red.

古文：同阴之脉令人腰痛，痛如小锤居其中，怫然肿。
现代文：同阴脉发病使人腰痛，痛时胀闷沉重，好像有小针在里面一样，病处突然肿胀。
English: The onset of the same vein causes people to have lower back pain. When the pain is swollen and heavy, it is as if there is a small needle inside, and the affected area suddenly swells.

古文：刺同阴之脉，在外踝上绝骨之端，为三痏。
现代文：治疗时应刺同阴之脉，在外踝上绝骨之端处，针三次。
English: During treatment, the same vein should be pierced three times at the end of the proximal bone on the outer ankle.

古文：阳维之脉令人腰痛，痛上怫然肿。
现代文：阳维脉发病使人腰痛，痛并立即肿胀。
English: Yang diaeresis causes low back pain, pain and immediate swelling.

古文：刺阳维之脉，脉与太阳合腨下间，去地一尺所。
现代文：治疗时应刺阳维脉，穴位在阳维脉与足太阳膀胱经相合的小腿肚子上，距离足底一尺处。
English: The treatment should be to pierce the yang meridian, the point is on the calf's belly where the yang meridian meets the foot's solar plexus, one foot away from the sole.

古文：衡络之脉令人腰痛，不可以俛仰，仰则恐仆，得之举重伤腰，衡络绝，恶血归之。
现代文：衡络脉发病使人腰痛，不可以前俯和后仰，后仰则恐怕跌倒，这种病大多因为用力举重伤及腰部，使横络阻绝不通，淤血留滞在里面。
English: The onset of the vas deferens causes low back pain. It is not possible to bend forward and backward, and if you bend backward, you are likely to fall. This disease mostly affects the lower back due to heavy lifting, so that the transverse circulation is blocked and congestion remains inside.

古文：刺之在郄阳筋之间，上郄数寸，衡居，为二痏，出血。
现代文：治疗时应刺郄阳与大腿筋之间上行数寸处，视其血络横居满者针刺二次，令其出血。
English: During treatment, it is recommended to prick the area between the supine yang and the thigh muscle a few inches up. If the person's blood vessels are full, the needles should be pricked twice to induce bleeding.

古文：会阴之脉令人腰痛，痛上漯漯然汗出，汗干令人欲饮，饮已欲走。
现代文：会阴脉发病使人腰痛，痛则汗出不止，汗止则欲饮水，饮水后立即要小便。
English: The onset of the perineal vein causes low back pain, the pain is sweating more and more, and when the sweat stops, you want to drink water, and you want to urinate immediately after drinking water.

古文：刺直阳之脉上三痏，在蹻上郄下五寸横居，视其盛者出血。
现代文：治疗时应刺直阳之脉上三次，其部位在阳蹻脉的上面，委中穴下面五寸，视其血络盛满的地方刺其出血。
English: During treatment, it should be pricked three times on the vein of the direct sun, its site is above the impotence vein, five inches below the middle hole, and it should be pricked where it is full of blood and bleeding.

古文：飞阳之脉令人腰痛，痛上怫怫然，甚则悲以恐。
现代文：飞阳脉发病使人腰痛，痛的时候令人烦恼，厉害时因恐惧而感到悲伤。
English: Feiyang pulse causes people to have lower back pain. When it is painful, it is troublesome. When it is severe, people feel sad because of fear.

古文：刺飞阳之脉，在内踝上五寸，少阴之前与阴维之会。
现代文：治疗时应刺飞扬络在内踝上五寸的穴位，是足少阴肾经与阴维脉交会的地方。
English: When treating, the five-inch point on the inner ankle should be pierced with a flying spider, which is the place where the foot-less yin-kidney meridian and the yin-dimensional vein meet.

古文：昌阳之脉令人腰痛，痛引膺，目䀮䀮然，甚则反折，舌卷不能言。
现代文：昌阳脉发病使人腰痛，疼痛牵引胸膺部，眼睛视物昏花，严重时腰背向后反折，舌卷短不能言语。
English: The onset of Changyang pulse causes people to have lower back pain, pain pulls the chest and hips, eyes have blurred vision, in severe cases, the lumbar spine is bent backwards, the tongue is short and cannot speak.

古文：刺内筋为二痏，在内踝上大筋前太阴后，上踝二寸所。
现代文：治疗时应刺足大筋内侧二次，其穴位在内踝上足大筋的前面、足太阴脾经的后面，内踝上二寸处。
English: During treatment, the medial aspect of the big toe muscle should be pricked twice, the points of which are in front of the big toe muscle on the inner ankle, behind the metatarsophalangeal nerve, and two inches above the inner ankle.

古文：散脉令人腰痛而热，热甚生烦，腰下如有横木居其中，甚则遗溲。
现代文：散脉发病使人腰痛而发热，热甚则生心烦，腰下好像有一块横木梗阻其中，严重的会发生遗尿。
English: The onset of varicose veins causes people to have lower back pain and fever, and the heat is very upsetting. There seems to be a crossbar obstruction under the waist, and serious urine loss will occur.

古文：刺散脉在膝前骨肉分间，络外廉，束脉，为三痏。
现代文：治疗时应刺散脉在膝前骨肉分间，经络的外侧，看到有青筋缠束的地方，即用针刺三次。
English: When treating, the scattered vein should be pricked three times with a needle in the anterior medullary space of the knee, on the outside of the meridians, where there is a bundle of blue muscle.

古文：肉里之脉令人腰痛，不可以咳，咳则筋缩急。
现代文：肉里脉发病使人腰痛，痛得不能咳嗽，咳嗽则筋拘急挛缩。
English: The disease of the medulla oblongata causes people to have lower back pain, which is so painful that they can't cough. Coughing causes muscle contractions.

古文：刺肉里之脉为二痏，在太阳之外，少阳绝骨之后。
现代文：治疗时应刺肉里脉二次，其穴位在足太阳膀胱经的外前方，足少阳胆经绝骨穴后面。
English: It is necessary to puncture the medial iliac artery twice during treatment. The puncture site is located in the anterior part of the tarsal meridian, and in the posterior part of the tarsal meridian.

古文：腰痛，侠脊，而痛至头几几然，目䀮䀮欲僵仆，刺足太阳郄中出血。
现代文：腰痛挟脊背而痛，上连头部拘强不舒，眼睛昏花，好像要跌倒。治疗时应刺足太阳膀胱经的委中穴出血。
English: Low back pain, pain in the spine and back, head stiff and uncomfortable, eyes dizzy, as if about to fall. The treatment should be to prick the sole of the foot through the middle of the sun bladder.

古文：腰痛，上寒，刺足太阳、阳明；上热，刺足厥阴；不可以俛仰，刺足少阳；中热而喘，刺足少阴，刺郄中出血。
现代文：腰痛时，感觉身体上部寒冷，应刺足太阳膀胱经和足阳明胃经；感觉身体上部发热，应刺足厥阴肝经；腰痛不能俯仰的，应刺足少阳胆经；若内热而喘促的，应刺足少阴肾经，并刺委中穴的血络出血。
English: For lower back pain, if you feel cold in the upper part of the body, you should prick the solar bladder meridian and the solar gastric meridian; if you feel hot in the upper part of the body, you should prick the solar hepatic meridian; if you can't bend over because of lower back pain, you should prick the solar gallbladder meridian; if you are hot and wheezy, you should prick the solar kidney meridian, and prick the blood circulation of the middle hole.

古文：腰痛，上寒，不可顾，刺足阳明；上热，刺足太阴；中热而喘，刺足少阴。
现代文：腰痛时，感觉上部寒冷，头项强急不能回顾的，应刺足阳明胃经；感觉上部火热的，应刺足太阴脾经；感觉内里发热兼有气喘的，应刺足少阴肾经。
English: In case of low back pain, if the upper part feels cold and the first item is urgent and cannot be recalled, the foot should be pricked with the Yang Ming stomach meridian; if the upper part feels hot, the foot should be pricked with the Taiyin spleen meridian; if the inner part feels hot and has asthma, the foot should be pricked with the Shaoyin kidney meridian.

古文：大便难，刺足少阴。
现代文：大便困难的，应刺足少阴肾经。
English: Difficult to defecate, should prick foot Shao Yin Renal.

古文：少腹满，刺足厥阴。
现代文：少腹胀满的，应刺足厥阴肝经。
English: If you have a little bloated belly, you should prick your feet and do the Yin-Yang Liver Sutra.

古文：如折，不可以俛仰，不可举，刺足太阳。
现代文：腰痛犹如折断一样不可前后俯仰，不能上举的，应刺足太阳膀胱经。
English: The lower back pain should not be bent forward and backward as if it were broken, and if it cannot be lifted, it should be pricked with the solar urinary bladder.

古文：引脊内廉，刺足少阴。
现代文：腰痛牵引脊骨内侧的，应刺足少阴肾经。
English: For lumbago traction of the medial side of the spine, the foot should be pricked with the Shao Yin Kidney Sutra.

古文：腰痛引少腹，控䏚，不可以仰。刺腰尻交者，两踝胂上。
现代文：腰痛时牵引小腹，引动胁骨下面也疼痛而不能后仰，治疗时应刺腰与臀部交连处，其部位在两髋骨间挟脊两旁的坚肉处。
English: In case of low back pain, the lower abdomen is pulled, and it is also painful under the abductor and cannot be pulled back. The treatment should be performed at the intersection of the waist and buttocks, and its location is in the hard flesh on both sides of the intercostal space between the two hip bones.

古文：以月生死为痏数，发针立已。
现代文：针刺时以月亮的盈亏计算针刺的次数，针后会立即见效。
English: During acupuncture, the number of acupuncture needles is calculated by the profit and loss of the moon, and it will take effect immediately after acupuncture.

古文：左取右，右取左。
现代文：取穴时用缪刺的方法，即左侧痛刺右侧的下髎穴、右侧痛刺左侧的下髎穴。
English: The left disease affects the right acupoint, Shangyang hole; the right disease affects the left acupoint, Shangyang hole.

