古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 凡事皆须务本。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 任何事情都必须掌握根本。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: Everything must be grasped fundamentally.

古文：国以人为本，人以衣食为本，凡营衣食，以不失时为本。
现代文：国家以人民为根本，人民以衣食为根本，经营农桑衣食，以不失时机为根本。
English: The state takes the people as the foundation, the people take food and clothing as the foundation, the management of agricultural mulberry as the foundation, and not missing the opportunity as the foundation.

古文：夫不失时者，在人君简静乃可致耳。
现代文：要不失时机，只有君主不生事劳民才能做到。
English: In order not to miss the opportunity, only if the monarch does not cause trouble can the working people do it.

古文：若兵戈屡动，土木不息，而欲不夺农时，其可得乎？ 
现代文：假若连年打仗，营建不停，而又想不占用农时，能办得到吗？ 
English: If there is war for years on end, construction is incessant, and you don't want to take up farm time, can you do it?

古文：王珪曰： 昔秦皇、汉武，外则穷极兵戈，内则崇侈宫室，人力既竭，祸难遂兴。彼岂不欲安人乎？
现代文：大臣王珪说： 从前，秦始皇、汉武帝，对外穷兵黩武，对内大建宫室，人力既已用尽，灾祸也就接踵而至，他们难道就不想安定百姓吗？
English: Minister Wang Yao said: Once upon a time, Emperor Qin Shi Huang and Emperor Han Wu led armies abroad and built palaces at home. Once their manpower was exhausted, disasters would follow. Didn't they want to stabilize the people?

古文：失所以安人之道也。
现代文：只是没有使用安定百姓的正确方法。
English: It's just that they didn't use the right method of stabilizing the population.

古文：亡隋之辙，殷鉴不远，陛下亲承其弊，知所以易之。然在初则易，终之实难。
现代文：隋代灭亡的教训距今不远，陛下亲自承受了隋朝遗留下来的弊病，懂得怎样去改变，不过刚开始还比较容易，要坚持到底就很难。
English: The lesson of the demise of the Sui Dynasty is not far from now. His Majesty has personally endured the ills left behind by the Sui Dynasty and knows how to change. However, it is relatively easy at the beginning, but it is difficult to persevere to the end.

古文：伏愿慎终如始，方尽其美。 太宗曰： 公言是也。
现代文：我真希望陛下自始至终都能小心谨慎，从而善始善终。 太宗说： 你讲得很对。
English: I really hope that His Majesty will be careful from beginning to end, so that everything will go well. Emperor Taizong said: You are right.

古文：夫安人宁国，惟在于君。君无为则人乐，君多欲则人苦。朕所以抑情损欲，克己自励耳。 
现代文：安定百姓和国家，关键在于君主，君主能与民休息，百姓就欢乐，君主多私欲，百姓就痛苦，这就是我之所以不敢任情纵欲，而不断克制告诫自己的原因。 
English: The key to the stability of the people and the country lies in the monarch. If the monarch can rest with the people, the people will be happy. If the monarch is too selfish, the people will suffer. This is why I dare not indulge in indulgence, but constantly restrain myself and admonish myself.

古文：贞观二年，京师旱，蝗虫大起。
现代文：贞观二年，京城大旱，蝗虫成灾。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, there was a big drought in Beijing, and locusts were rampant.

古文：太宗入苑视禾，见蝗虫，掇数枚而咒曰： 人以谷为命，而汝食之，是害于百姓。
现代文：唐太宗亲自到田野去看稻谷，看见蝗虫猖獗，就捡起了几只并骂道： 百姓视稻谷为生命，你却把谷子吃了，你是在危害百姓啊。
English: Tang Taizong personally went to the field to look at the rice, saw the locusts rampant, picked up a few and scolded: The people regard the rice as life, but you ate the grain, you are endangering the people.

古文：百姓有过，在予一人，尔其有灵，但当蚀我心，无害百姓。 
现代文：如果说老百姓有罪过，那么责任也只在于国君一人，如果你真的有灵性，就应当只啃噬我的心脏，不要危害百姓。 
English: If the people are guilty, then the responsibility lies solely with the sovereign. If you are truly spiritual, you should only devour my heart and not harm the people.

古文：将吞之，左右遽谏曰： 恐成疾，不可。 
现代文：说完就要把蝗虫吃掉，左右的臣子大惊，连忙制止说： 吃了恐怕要生病，万万不可。 
English: After saying that he was going to eat the locusts, the courtiers on both sides were shocked and quickly put a stop to it, saying, "If you eat them, you might get sick. Don't do it."

古文：太宗曰： 所冀移灾朕躬，何疾之避？ 
现代文：唐太宗说： 我只希望把灾祸转移到我身上，还怕什么疾病呢？ 
English: Tang Taizong said, "I only hope to transfer the calamity to myself. What disease am I afraid of?

古文：遂吞之。
现代文：说完便一口将蝗虫吞下。
English: After saying this, he swallowed the locusts whole.

古文：自是蝗不复为灾。
现代文：从此，蝗虫不再成灾。
English: From then on, locusts were no longer a scourge.

古文：贞观五年，有司上书言： 皇太子将行冠礼，宜用二月为吉，请追兵以备仪注。 
现代文：贞观五年，主管大臣上书说： 皇太子即将举行加冠礼，在二月里举行才吉祥，请陛下增加兵卫仪仗的规模，使礼节齐备。 
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, the minister in charge sent a letter saying: The crown prince is about to hold a coronation ceremony, and it is auspicious to hold it in February. I would like to ask His Majesty to increase the scale of the guard of honor and make the etiquette complete.

古文：太宗曰： 今东作方兴，恐妨农事。 
现代文：太宗说： 如今百姓春耕刚开始，这样做怕要妨碍农事。 
English: Taizong said, "Nowadays, the people have just begun spring plowing, and they are afraid that doing so will interfere with farming.

古文：令改用十月。
现代文：于是下令将礼仪改在十月。
English: So he ordered that the ceremony be moved to October.

古文：太子少保萧瑀奏言： 准阴阳家，用二月为胜。 
现代文：太子少保萧瑀上奏说： 按照阴阳家的推算，在二月里举行最好。 
English: Prince's younger brother Bao Xiaohui said in his report: According to the calculations of yin and yang, it is best to hold it in February.

古文：太宗曰： 阴阳拘忌，朕所不行。
现代文：太宗说： 阴阳讲究禁忌，我从不信那一套。
English: Taizong said: Yin and yang are taboo, I never believe in that.

古文：若动静必依阴阳，不顾理义，欲求福祐，其可得乎？
现代文：如果一举一动都必须依照阴阳家的话去办，不顾天理道义，而想求得福佑吉祥，怎么可能呢？
English: If every move must be made in accordance with the words of yin and yang, regardless of the laws of nature and morality, and if you want to seek blessings, how is that possible?

古文：若所行皆遵正道，自然常与吉会。
现代文：如果所做的都遵照正道，自然会万事吉祥。
English: If everything you do is in accordance with the right path, everything will naturally be auspicious.

古文：且吉凶在人，岂假阴阳拘忌？
现代文：并且，吉凶取决于人，怎能听信阴阳禁忌呢？
English: Moreover, fortunes and misfortunes depend on people, so how can we believe in yin and yang taboos?

古文：农时甚要，不可暂失。 
现代文：农时很要紧，不能耽误片刻。 
English: Farming time is very important, we can't delay a moment.

古文：贞观十六年，太宗以天下粟价率计斗值五钱，其尤贱处，计斗值三钱，因谓侍臣曰： 国以民为本，人以食为命。
现代文：贞观十六年，唐太宗因为天下米价大都一斗值五个钱，更便宜的，一斗只值三个钱。因此，他对侍臣说： 国家以百姓为根本，百姓又以粮食为生命。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong, because most of the world's rice prices are worth five dollars a bucket, and the cheaper ones are only worth three dollars a bucket. Therefore, he said to his courtiers: The country is based on the people, and the people are based on grain.

古文：若禾黍不登，则兆庶非国家所有。
现代文：如果粮食不丰收，人们就不再为国家所有了。
English: If the grain harvest is not good, people will no longer be owned by the state.

古文：既属丰稔若斯，朕为亿兆人父母，唯欲躬务俭约，必不辄为奢侈。
现代文：既然粮食对国计民生关系如此重大，我又是百姓的衣食父母，只希望能够克勤克俭，不奢侈浮华，造福于民。
English: Since grain is so important to the national economy and people's livelihood, I am also the people's food and clothing parent. I only hope that I can be diligent and frugal, not extravagant and flashy, and benefit the people.

古文：朕常欲赐天下之人，皆使富贵，今省徭赋，不夺其时，使比屋之人恣其耕稼，此则富矣。
现代文：我常常想赏赐天下百姓，使他们都富裕尊贵。现在我减少赋役，不占用他们农耕的时间，使他们能够顺应天时，把庄稼种好，其实，这就是使他们富裕。
English: I have always wanted to reward the people of the world, to make them all rich and noble. Now I am reducing the fees, not taking up their farming time, so that they can adapt to the weather and grow their crops well. In fact, this is what makes them rich.

古文：敦行礼让，使乡闾之间，少敬长，妻敬夫，此则贵矣。
现代文：我还重视推行礼仪谦让的风气，让乡间的百姓，年轻的尊敬年长的，妻子尊敬丈夫，其实，这就是使他们尊贵。
English: I also attach importance to promoting the etiquette of modesty, so that the rural people, the young respect the elderly, the wife respects the husband, in fact, this is to make them noble.

古文：但令天下皆然，朕不听管弦，不从畋猎，乐在其中矣！ 
现代文：只要天下都能这样，我即使不听音乐、不打猎也乐在其中了。 
English: If only the whole world could be like this, I would enjoy it even if I didn't listen to music or go hunting.

