古文：◎舆服三
现代文：舆服三
English: Public dress three

古文：○文武官冠服命妇冠服内外官亲属冠服内使冠服侍仪以下冠服士庶冠服乐工冠服军隶冠服外蕃冠服僧道服色
现代文：文武官冠服命妇冠服内外官亲属冠服内使冠服侍仪以下冠服士庶冠服乐工冠服军隶冠服外蕃冠服僧道服色
English: Civil and military officers wear crowns as ordered, women wear crowns, internal and external officials wear crowns, relatives wear crowns, internal servants wear crowns, attendants wear crowns, subordinates wear crowns, musicians wear crowns, soldiers wear crowns, magistrates wear crowns, priests wear crowns, monks wear robes, and so on.

古文：群臣冠服：洪武元年命制公服、朝服，以赐百官。
现代文：群臣的礼帽和服饰。洪武元年，命令制作公服、朝服，以赏赐给各级官吏。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he ordered the production of official uniforms and court uniforms to reward officials at all levels.

古文：时礼部言： 各官先授散官，与见任职事高下不同。
现代文：当时礼部说： 各位官员先前被任命的有官名而无固定职务的散官，与现在担任的职务品级高低不同。
English: At that time, the Ministry of Etiquette said: "The officials who were previously appointed as non-officials with official titles and no fixed positions are different from the current positions in terms of rank.

古文：如御史董希哲前授朝列大夫澧州知州，而任七品职事；省司郎中宋冕前授亚中大夫黄州知府，而任五品职事。
现代文：例如御史董希哲先前被任命为朝列大夫澧州知州，然而担任七品的职务；省司郎中宋冕先前被任命焉亚中大夫黄州知腐，然而担任五品的职务。
English: For example, the Imperial Historian Dong Xizhe was previously appointed as the doctor of the imperial lineage in Zhangzhou and Zhizhou, but held the position of the seventh grade; the provincial secretary Zhong Song Guan was previously appointed as the doctor of the imperial lineage in Huangzhou and Zhifu, but held the position of the fifth grade.

古文：散官与见任之职不同，故服色不能无异，乞定其制。 
现代文：散官与现在担任的职务不同，所以衣服式样颜色不能没有差异，请求确定它的制度。 
English: It is requested that the system should be determined, as the position of liaison officer is different from the current position, so the style and color of clothing cannot be the same.

古文：乃诏省部臣定议。
现代文：于是诏令省部大臣讨论决定。
English: As a result, the ministers discussed and made a decision.

古文：礼部复言： 唐制，服色皆以散官为准。
现代文：礼部又说： 唐朝制度，衣服式样颜色都以散官为标准。
English: The etiquette department also said: "During the Tang Dynasty system, the style and color of clothing were all based on the standards of the officials.

古文：元制，散官职事各从其高者，服色因之。
现代文：元朝制度，散官职事官各自依从官品高的，衣服式样颜色由此确定。
English: According to the Yuan Dynasty system, the officials of the civil service and the officials of the civil service each followed the high standards of the officials, and the style and color of the clothes were determined accordingly.

古文：国初服色依散官，与唐制同。 
现代文：开国之初衣服式样颜色依据散官，与唐朝制度相同。 
English: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the style and color of clothing were determined by the officials, which was the same as the Tang Dynasty system.

古文：乃定服色准散官，不计见职，于是所赐袍带亦并如之。
现代文：于是规定衣服式样颜色根据散官，不考虑现任职务，于是所赏赐的袍服衣带也一概如此。
English: As a result, it was stipulated that the style and color of clothing should be based on the rank, regardless of the current position, so the robes and belts awarded were all the same.

古文：三年，礼部言： 历代异尚。
现代文：洪武三年，礼部说： 各个朝代所崇尚的颜色不一样。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the Ministry of Ceremonies said: The colors advocated by each dynasty are different.

古文：夏黑，商白，周赤，秦黑，汉赤，唐服饰黄，旗帜赤。
现代文：夏崇尚黑色，商崇尚白色，周崇尚赤色，秦崇尚黑色，漠崇尚赤色，唐服饰崇尚黄色，旗帜崇尚赤色。
English: Xia advocated black, Shang advocated white, Zhou advocated red, Qin advocated black, Miao advocated red, Tang clothing advocated yellow, and the flag advocated red.

古文：今国家承元之后，取法周、汉、唐、宋，服色所尚，于赤为宜。 
现代文：现今国家承接元朝的后面，效法周朝、汉朝、唐朝、宋朝，官服颜色所崇尚，用赤色焉适宜。 
English: Nowadays, the country follows the example of the Zhou Dynasty, the Han Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty, and the Song Dynasty after the Yuan Dynasty. The color of the official uniform is revered, and red is appropriate.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了礼部的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：文武官朝服：洪武二十六年定凡大祀、庆成、正旦、冬至、圣节及颁诏、开读、进表、传制，俱用梁冠，赤罗衣，白纱中单，青饰领缘，赤罗裳，青缘，赤罗蔽膝，大带赤、白二色绢，革带，佩绶，白袜黑履。
现代文：文武官朝服。洪武二十六年制定，凡是祭祀天地宗庙等的大祀、宣告皇帝祭祀封禅完毕的庆典、正月初一、冬至、皇帝的生日以及颁布诏书、宣读帝王的圣旨、进呈表章、传达帝王的命令，都采用有横脊的礼冠，赤色的绫罗上衣，白纱里衣，青色的领边，赤色的绫罗下裳，青色衣边，赤色的绫罗蔽膝，大带用赤、白两种颜色的绢，束衣用革带，佩系官印、勋章的彩色丝带佩绶，白色袜子黑色鞋。
English: It was established in the 26th year of the Hongwu Emperor that the ceremonial crown with a transverse ridge, a red satin blouse, a white satin blouse, a blue collar, a red satin petticoat, a blue hemline, a red satin knee cover, a red and white sash for the belt, a leather belt for the cassock, and a white ribbon for the official seal and medals should all be used for the grand worship of heaven, earth, ancestors and temples, the celebration announcing the completion of the emperor's sacrifice and the sealing of Zen, the first day of the first month, the winter solstice, the emperor's birthday

古文：一品至九品，以冠上梁数为差。
现代文：一品到九品，以帽子上梁的数目为差别。
English: From one item to nine items, the difference is based on the number of beads on the hat.

古文：公冠八梁，加笼巾貂蝉，立笔五折，四柱，香草五段，前后玉蝉。
现代文：公爵的帽子八道梁，罩巾貂蝉冠，簪笔五道折，四根柱，香草五截，前面后面有玉蝉首饰。
English: The duke's hat has eight beams, a hood with a cicada crown, five folds of a crayon, four columns, five sections of vanilla, and jade cicada jewelry on the front and back.

古文：侯七梁，笼巾貂蝉，立笔四折，四柱，香草四段，前后金蝉。
现代文：侯爵七道梁，罩巾貂蝉冠，簪笔四道折，四根柱，香草四截，前面后面金蝉首饰。
English: The marquis has seven beams, a hood, a cicada crown, four folds of a crayon, four columns, four cuts of vanilla, and gold cicada jewelry in front and behind.

古文：伯七梁，笼巾貂蝉，立笔二折，四柱，香草二段，前后玳瑁蝉。
现代文：伯爵七道梁，罩巾貂蝉冠，簪笔两道折，四根柱，香草两截，前面后面玳瑁蝉首饰。
English: The count has seven beams, a hood, a cicada crown, two folds of a cicada pen, four pillars, two pieces of vanilla, and cicada jewelry in front and behind.

古文：俱插雉尾。
现代文：都插野鸡尾羽毛。
English: It's all pheasant tail feathers.

古文：驸马与侯同，不用雉尾。
现代文：驸马与侯一样，不插野鸡尾羽毛。
English: Horses and mares alike do not have pheasant tail feathers.

古文：一品，冠七梁，不用笼巾貂蝉，革带与佩俱玉，绶用黄、绿、赤、紫织成云凤四色花锦，下结青丝网，玉绶环二。
现代文：一品官，帽子七道梁，不用罩巾貂蝉冠，革带和佩带都是玉制的，系官印等物的绶带用黄、绿、赤、紫织成云凤花纹的四种颜色的锦缎，下面系着青色的丝织的网，玉制的绶环两个。
English: An official of one grade, a hat with seven beams, a cicada crown without a hood, leather belts and straps are all made of jade, and the ribbons of official seals and other things are woven into four colors of brocade with yellow, green, red, and purple patterns, with a blue silk net below, and two jade rings.

古文：二品，六梁，革带，绶环犀，馀同一品。
现代文：二品官，六道梁，革带，绶带上饰犀牛角制成的环，其余与一品官相同。
English: Second-class officer, six beams, leather belt, ribbon decorated with a ring made of rhinoceros horn, the rest is the same as the first-class officer.

古文：三品，五梁，革带金，佩玉，绶用黄、绿、赤、紫织成云鹤花锦，下结青丝网，金绶环二。
现代文：三品官，五道梁，革带用金饰，佩玉装饰，绶带用黄、绿、赤、紫织成云中仙鹤花纹锦缎，下面系青色丝织的网，金制绶环两个。
English: Three articles of clothing, five beams, leather belt with gold decoration, pearl and jade decoration, ribbon with yellow, green, red and purple woven into a crane pattern brocade, below is a network of blue silk, two gold hoops.

古文：四品，四梁，革带金，佩药玉，馀同三品。
现代文：四品官。四道梁，革带用金饰，佩饰用经过药物煮炼后色泽光润的石料药玉制成，其余的与三品官一样。
English: Shihonkan. Four beams, leather straps with gold ornaments, ornaments made of stone medicine balls with a glossy color after being cooked with medicine, and the rest are the same as Shihonkan.

古文：五品，三梁，革带银，鈒花，佩药玉，绶用黄、绿、赤、紫织成盘雕花锦，下结青丝网，银镀金绶环二。
现代文：五品官，三道梁，革带用银装饰，上面嵌有花纹，佩饰用药玉，绶带用黄、绿、赤、紫织成盘旋飞翔猛雕花纹的锦缎，下面系结青色的丝织网，银制镀金绶环两个。
English: A five-tiered table, three beams, a leather belt decorated with silver, with a pattern embedded on top, beads for decoration, yellow, green, red, and purple braid woven into a cocoon with a swirling, flying, and heavily carved pattern, a blue silk web below, and two silver-plated hoops.

古文：一品至五品，笏俱象牙。
现代文：一品到五品，朝见皇帝时所执的狭长板子都是象牙制成。
English: From the first dish to the fifth, the long and narrow plates held by the emperor at the imperial court were made of ivory.

古文：六品、七品，二梁，革带银，佩药玉，绶用黄、绿、赤织成练鹊三色花锦，下结青丝网，银绶环二。
现代文：六品、七品，二道梁，革带用银饰，佩饰用药玉，绶带用黄、绿、赤织成练鹊纹的三种颜色的锦缎，下面系结青色的丝织成的网，银制绶环两个。
English: Six-piece, seven-piece, two-way beam, leather belt with silver decoration, charm beads with decoration, ribbon with yellow, green, red woven into three colors of brocade, blue silk woven net below, two silver hoop rings.

古文：独御史服獬廌。
现代文：惟独御史朝服用獬腐纹。
English: However, it was only the Emperor Shih Chao who took ginger.

古文：八品、九品，一梁，革带乌角，佩药玉，绶用黄、绿织成鸂氵鶒二色花锦，下结青丝网，铜绶环二。
现代文：八品、九品，一道梁，革带饰以黑色的角质材料，佩饰用药玉，绶带用黄、绿织成潞踞花纹的两种颜色的锦缎，下面系结青色的丝织成的网，铜制绶环两个。
English: Eight-piece, nine-piece, a beam, a leather strap decorated with black horny material, beads for decoration, two colors of brocade embroidered with yellow and green ribbon, a net woven with blue silk below, and two copper hoops.

古文：六品至九品，笏俱槐木。
现代文：六品到九品，朝板都用槐木制成。
English: From six to nine courses, the breakfast plates are all made of birch wood.

古文：其武官应直守卫者，别有服色。
现代文：负责值勤守卫的武官，朝服另有样式颜色。
English: The military attaché, who is in charge of the guards on duty, has a different style and colour for his royal uniform.

古文：杂职未入流品者，大朝贺、进表行礼止用公服。
现代文：没有入品级的其它官员，皇帝大会群臣朝拜庆贺、进献表奏行礼时祇穿公服。
English: Other officials who do not have an entry level, the emperor's general assembly of vassals, only wear official uniforms when worshiping and celebrating, and when presenting the table and performing the ceremony.

古文：三十年令视九品官，用朝服。
现代文：洪武三十年下令比照九品官，穿朝服。
English: In the 30th year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered that officials of nine ranks and above should wear imperial robes.

古文：嘉靖八年，更定朝服之制。
现代文：嘉靖八年，修改朝服的式样。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, the style of the imperial robe was revised.

古文：梁冠如旧式，上衣赤罗青缘，长过腰指七寸，毋掩下裳。
现代文：梁冠与以前的样式相同，上衣赤色绫罗青色衣边，长度超过腰七寸，不掩盖下面的裙子。
English: The crown of the beam is the same as the previous style, the blouse is red with blue edges, the length exceeds the waist by seven inches, and does not cover the skirt below.

古文：中单白纱青缘。
现代文：里衣用白纱制成，青色衣边。
English: The bodice is made of white gauze with blue trim.

古文：下裳七幅，前三后四，每幅三襞积，赤罗青缘。
现代文：下面的裙子用七幅，前面三幅后面四幅，每幅三个褶子，赤色绫罗青色衣边。
English: The skirt below has seven panels, the front three panels and the back four panels, each panel has three braids, and the hem is red with a blue border.

古文：蔽膝缀革带。
现代文：蔽膝连结革带。
English: Tie a leather belt around your knees.

古文：绶，各从品级花样。
现代文：绶带，各自依据品级织花样。
English: ribbon, each according to grade weaving patterns.

古文：革带之后佩绶，系而掩之。
现代文：革带的后面是佩绶，系在革带上而又掩盖革带。
English: At the back of the leather strap is a peach braid, which is attached to the leather strap and conceals it.

古文：其环亦各从品级，用玉犀金银铜，不以织于绶。
现代文：绶环也各依据品级，用玉、犀角、金、银、铜制成，不将它织在绶上。
English: The hoop rings are also made of jade, rhinoceros horn, gold, silver, and copper according to the grade, without weaving it on the hoop.

古文：大带表里俱素，惟两耳及下垂缘绿，又以青组约之。
现代文：大带表面里面都是素色，祇有两边充耳以及下垂部分镶绿色的边，又用青色的丝带缠住它。
English: Inside, the surface of the large ribbon is plain, only two sides are covered with ears and the drooping part is edged with green, and it is wrapped with a blue ribbon.

古文：革带俱如旧式。
现代文：革带都与从前的样式一样。
English: The leather straps are the same as before.

古文：珮玉一如《诗传》之制，去双滴及二珩。
现代文：佩戴的玉完全按照《诗传》中所说的制度，去掉一对下垂的珠串以及佩玉上面的两块横玉。
English: The jade worn is completely in accordance with the system mentioned in the "Poetry Biography," removing a pair of drooping strings of beads and the two horizontal beads on the top of the pearl.

古文：其三品以上玉，四品以下药玉，及袜履俱如旧式。
现代文：三品官以上用玉制，四品官以下用药玉制，至于袜鞋都与从前的样式一致。
English: Three grades of officials and above use jade system, four grades of officials and below use jade system, as for socks and shoes, they are consistent with the previous style.

古文：万历五年，令百官正旦朝贺毋僣蹑朱履。
现代文：万历五年，命令各级官吏正月初一朝拜庆贺，不得越分穿红色的鞋。
English: Five thousand years ago, officials at all levels were ordered to pay homage on the morning of the first day of the first month, and they were not allowed to wear red shoes.

古文：故事，十一月百官戴暖耳。
现代文：旧例，十一月各级官吏戴耳套。
English: As in the past, officials at all levels wear ear muffs in November.

古文：是年朝觐外官及举人、监生，不许戴暖耳入朝。
现代文：这年来朝见皇帝的外地官员以及举人、监生，不允许戴耳套入宫朝见。
English: This year, the foreign officials who came to see the emperor, as well as courtiers and warders, were not allowed to wear earrings into the palace to see the emperor.

古文：凡亲祀郊庙、社稷，文武官分献陪祀，则服祭服。
现代文：凡是皇帝亲自祭祀天地和祖先、土神谷神，文武官员向配祭者行敬酒献帛礼，陪从祭祀，就穿祭服。
English: Whenever the emperor himself offered a sacrifice to the gods of heaven and earth, ancestors, and the gods of the valley of the earth, and the civil and military officials offered a toast to the officiant and accompanied the sacrifice, they would wear the sacrificial vestments.

古文：洪武二十六年定，一品至九品，青罗衣，白纱中单，俱皂领缘。
现代文：洪武二十六年制定，一品到九品，青色罗衣，白纱里衣，都是黑色领边。
English: Enacted in the 26th year of Hongwu's reign, there are one-piece to nine-piece suits, blue robe, white gauze liner, all with black collars.

古文：赤罗裳，皂缘。赤罗蔽膝。
现代文：赤色绫罗裙，黑色衣边赤色萝制蔽膝。
English: Red satin skirt, black hem, red satin lapels.

古文：方心曲领。
现代文：方形心圆形领。
English: Square, heart-shaped collar.

古文：其冠带、佩绶等差，并同朝服。
现代文：祭祀礼帽、革带、佩锦、绶带的等级差别，一概与朝服相同。
English: The difference in rank between the ceremonial hat, leather belt, brocade, and ribbon is the same as that of the court dress.

古文：又定品官家用祭服。
现代文：还规定有品级的官员家祭穿的祭服。
English: It also stipulates the ceremonial dress to be worn by officials of certain ranks.

古文：三品以上，去方心曲领。
现代文：三品官以上，去掉方形心圆形领。
English: Above the third grade, remove the square heart-shaped collar.

古文：四品以下，并去珮绶。
现代文：四品官以下，还要去掉佩玉绶带。
English: Below the rank of Shihonkan, it is also necessary to remove the Peiyu umbilical cord.

古文：嘉靖八年，更定百官祭服。
现代文：嘉靖八年，重新制定各级官吏的祭服。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, the ceremonial dress of officials at all levels was reformulated.

古文：上衣青罗，皂缘，与朝服同。
现代文：上衣用青色绫罗，黑色衣边，与朝服相同。
English: The blouse is trimmed with blue satin, with black trim, the same as the morning dress.

古文：下裳赤罗，皂缘，与朝服同。
现代文：下面的衣裙用赤色绫罗，黑色衣边，与朝服相同。
English: The dress below is trimmed with red satin, with black trim, the same as the morning dress.

古文：蔽膝、绶环、大带、革带、佩玉、袜履俱与朝服同。
现代文：蔽膝、绶环、大带、革带、佩玉、袜鞋都与朝服相同。
English: The breeches, the collar, the belt, the leather belt, the beads and the socks are all the same as the morning dress.

古文：其视牲、朝日夕月、耕耤、祭历代帝王，独锦衣卫堂上官，大红蟒衣，飞鱼，乌纱帽，鸾带，佩绣春刀。
现代文：检查祭牲、祭祀日月、举行皇帝亲耕以勉励农耕的藉田礼、祭祀各个朝代的帝王，惟独锦衣卫官署长官，穿大红色蟒蛇花纹的衣服，绣有飞鱼花纹，乌纱帽，两端有排须的宽腰带，佩带绣春刀。
English: Checking the sacrificial animals, worshiping the sun and the moon, holding the emperor's personal cultivation to encourage farming, and worshiping the emperors of various dynasties, except for the chief of the brocade clothing guard, wearing a large red python-patterned dress, embroidered with flying fish patterns, a black gauze hat, a wide belt with beards at both ends, and wearing an embroidered spring knife.

古文：祭太庙、社稷，则大红便服。
现代文：祭祀祖庙、土神谷神，便穿大红色的便服。
English: They wear bright red casual clothes to worship the ancestral temple and the Valley of the Earth God.

古文：文武官公服：洪武二十六年定，每日早晚朝奏事及侍班、谢恩、见辞则服之。
现代文：文武官员公服。洪武二十六年制定。每天早朝晚朝向皇帝陈述事情以及陪同侍奉皇帝、拜谢皇帝的恩典、面见辞别皇帝就穿公服。
English: The civil and military official's official uniform. Enacted in the 26th year of Hongwu. Wearing the official uniform every morning and evening when reporting to the emperor, accompanying and serving the emperor, thanking the emperor for his grace, and bidding farewell to the emperor.

古文：在外文武官，每日公座服之。
现代文：在外地的文武官员，每天办公的时候穿公服。
English: Foreign civil and military officials wear official uniforms every day when they are at work.

古文：其制，盘领右衽袍，用纻丝或纱罗绢，袖宽三尺。
现代文：公服的样式，圆领衣襟右开的袍子，用贮麻丝或纱罗绢制成，袖子三尺宽。
English: A robe with a round neckline and right-hand open collar, made of stored linen or saris, with three-foot-wide sleeves.

古文：一品至四品，绯袍；五品至七品，青袍；八品九品，绿袍；未入流杂职官，袍、笏、带与八品以下同。
现代文：一品到四品官，徘红色衣袍；五品到七品官，青色衣袍；八品到九品官，绿色衣袍；没有品级的其它官吏，衣袍、朝笏、带与八品以下官吏相同。
English: Officials from the 1st to the 4th grade wear red robes; officials from the 5th to the 7th grade wear blue robes; officials from the 8th to the 9th grade wear green robes; other officials who do not have a rank wear the same robes, hats, and belts as officials below the 8th grade.

古文：公服花样，一品，大独科花，径五寸；二品，小独科花，径三寸；三品，散答花，无枝叶，径二寸；四品、五品，小杂花纹，径一寸五分；六品、七品，小杂花，径一寸；八品以下无纹。
现代文：公服上的花样：一品，大独科花，直径五寸；二品，小独科花，直径三寸；三品，散答花，没有枝叶，直径二寸；四品、五品，小杂花纹，直径一寸五分；六品、七品，小杂花，直径一寸；八品以下没有花纹。
English: Patterns on official uniforms: one-piece, large single flowers, diameter five inches; two-piece, small single flowers, diameter three inches; three-piece, scattered flowers, no branches and leaves, diameter two inches; four-piece, five-piece, small miscellaneous flowers, diameter one inch and five minutes; six-piece, seven-piece, small miscellaneous flowers, diameter one inch; no patterns below eight-piece.

古文：幞头：漆、纱二等，展角长一尺二寸；杂职官幞头，垂带，后复令展角，不用垂带，与入流官同。
现代文：幞头巾：用漆刷过的纱两等，帽子后部的展角长一尺二寸；不入品级的其它官吏的幞头巾，帽子后部用垂带，后来又命令用展角，不用垂带，与有品级的官员相同。
English: Headscarves: two grades of lacquered yarn, with the back of the hat extending one foot two inches; the headscarves of other officials not included in the grade, the back of the hat with a hanging band, and later ordered to use the extension angle, without a hanging band, the same as officials with a grade.

古文：笏依朝服为之。
现代文：朝板依据朝服制作。
English: The morning board is based on the morning dress.

古文：腰带：一品玉，或花或素；二品犀；三品、四品，金荔枝；五品以下乌角。
现代文：束在腰问的衣带：一品官用玉为饰，有的有花纹有的无花纹；二品以犀角为饰；三品、四品以金荔枝为饰，五品以下以黑色的角质物为饰。
English: Garment belts tied at the waist: one item is decorated with jade, some with patterns and some without patterns; two items are decorated with rhinoceros horns; three and four items are decorated with golden lychees, and the following five items are decorated with black horns.

古文：袜用青革，仍垂挞尾于下。
现代文：腰带带身用青色皮革，并在腰带下插着以示等级的各种饰物。
English: The belt is made of blue leather, and various accessories are inserted under the belt to indicate the grade.

古文：靴用皂。
现代文：靴用黑色。
English: Black wax for shoes.

古文：其后，常朝止便服，惟朔望具公服朝参。
现代文：后来，一般的朝见只穿便服，惟有朔日、望日要将公服穿戴整齐朝见参拜。
English: Later, the general morning watch only wore casual clothes, but the New Year's Day and New Year's Eve had to wear formal clothes neatly to attend the morning watch.

古文：凡武官应直守卫者，别有服色，不拘此制。
现代文：凡是负责值勤守卫的武官，另有样式颜色，不受这个制度的约束。
English: Any military attaché in charge of guard duty who has a different style and color is not bound by this system.

古文：公、侯、驸马、伯服色花样、腰带与一品同。
现代文：公、侯、驸马、伯爵衣服颜色花纹图样、腰带，与一品相同。
English: The dress of the prince, marquis, equestrian and count is identical in color, pattern and belt.

古文：文武官花样，如无从织造，则用素。
现代文：文武官员的花纹的式样，如果汝办法织锈，就用素色。
English: For the pattern of the civil and military officials, if you have to weave rust, use plain colors.

古文：百官入朝，雨雪许服雨衣。
现代文：各级官吏入官朝见，下雨下雪允许穿雨衣。
English: Government officials at all levels are allowed to wear raincoats in the morning when entering government offices, even if it is raining or snowing.

古文：奉天、华盖、武英诸殿奏事，必蹑履鞋，违者御史纠之。
现代文：在奉天、华盖、武英等宫殿上陈述事情，必须穿鞋，违反者御史会纠劾他。
English: It is mandatory to wear shoes when making a statement at the palaces of Bong Tian, Hua Gai, and Wu Ying. Violators will be reprimanded by the Emperor.

古文：万历五年，令常朝俱衣本等锦绣服色，其朝觐官见辞、谢恩，不论已未入流，公服行礼。
现代文：万历五年，命令经常的朝见都穿与官位相符的花纹色彩精致美观的丝织衣服，朝见的官员面见皇帝辞行、拜谢皇帝的恩德，无论是否入品级，都穿公服行礼。
English: Five thousand years ago, it was ordered that officials who regularly attended court should wear silk clothes with patterns and colors of exquisite beauty that matched their official rank. Officials who attended court should meet the emperor to resign and express gratitude for the emperor's kindness. Regardless of whether they were at the entry level or not, they should all wear official clothes and salute.

古文：文武官常服：洪武三年定，凡常朝视事，以乌纱帽、团领衫、束带为公服。
现代文：文武官员日常穿的服饰。洪武三年制定，凡是一般的朝见、处理政务，以乌纱帽、圆领衫、腰带焉公服。
English: The attire worn by civil and military officials on a daily basis. Enacted in the third year of Hongwu, the usual morning meeting and handling of government affairs, with a black wool cap, a round neck shirt, and a belt, is public dress.

古文：其带，一品玉，二品花犀，三品金鈒花，四品素金，五品银鈒花，六品、七品素银，八品、九品乌角。
现代文：腰带，一品官用玉装饰，二品官用有花纹的犀角装饰，三品官用金嵌镂花纹装饰，四品官用没有嵌花纹的金装饰，五品官用银嵌镂花纹装饰，六品官、七品官用没有嵌花纹的银装饰，八品官、九品官用黑色的角质材料装饰。
English: Belts, 1st class officers decorated with jade, 2nd class officers decorated with rhinoceros horns with patterns, 3rd class officers decorated with gold inlaid patterns, 4th class officers decorated with gold without inlaid patterns, 5th class officers decorated with silver inlaid patterns, 6th class officers and 7th class officers decorated with silver without inlaid patterns, 8th class officers and 9th class officers decorated with black horn material.

古文：凡致仕及侍亲辞闲官，纱帽、束带。
现代文：凡是退休以及侍奉父母辞职居家的官员，纱制的纱帽、腰带。
English: All retired officials and those who have resigned from serving their parents to live at home wear yarn hats and belts.

古文：为事黜降者，服与庶人同。
现代文：因为有罪被免职的，衣服与老百姓一样。
English: Those who are removed from office because of guilt wear the same clothes as the common people.

古文：至二十四年，又定公、侯、伯、驸马束带与一品同，杂职官与八品、九品同。
现代文：到了洪武二十四年，又规定公、侯、伯、驸马腰带与一品官相同，不入品级的其它官员与八品、九品官相同。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, it was also stipulated that the official, marquess, noble, and equestrian belts were the same as those of the first-grade officials, and other officials who were not included in the grade were the same as the eighth-grade and ninth-grade officials.

古文：朝官常服礼鞋，洪武六年定。
现代文：朝中官员常服中的礼鞋，洪武六年制定。
English: The ceremonial shoes worn by officials of the Chinese and Korean dynasties in their regular uniforms were established by Hongwu six years ago.

古文：先是，百官入朝，遇雨皆蹑钉靴，声彻殿陛，侍仪司请禁之。
现代文：这以前，各级官吏入宫朝见，遇到雨天都穿钉靴，声音响遍宫殿石阶，侍仪司请求禁止穿钉靴。
English: Prior to this, officials of all levels entered the palace for morning meetings, and when it rained, they all wore hobnailed boots. The sound echoed throughout the stone steps of the palace, and the master of ceremonies requested a ban on wearing hobnailed boots.

古文：太祖曰： 古者入朝有履，自唐始用靴。
现代文：太祖说： 古时候入宫朝见穿单底的履，从唐朝开始用靴。
English: The great-grandfather said: In ancient times, people wore single-sole shoes when entering the palace. From the Tang Dynasty, they began to use shoes.

古文：其令朝官为软底皮鞋，冒于靴外，出朝则释之。 
现代文：就下令朝中官员制软底皮鞋，罩在靴的外面，出了宫再脱掉它。 
English: He ordered the officials of the DPRK and China to make soft-soled leather shoes, cover the outside of the shoes, and take it off when they leave the palace.

古文：礼部言近奢侈越制。
现代文：礼部进言说近来奢侈超越了制度。
English: The head of the Ministry of Ceremonies said that recently, extravagance has overtaken the system.

古文：诏申禁之，仍参酌汉、唐之制，颁行遵守。
现代文：诏令申明禁止这种现象，仍旧参考汉朝、唐朝的制度，颁布执行遵守。
English: The imperial edict affirmed the prohibition of this phenomenon, still referring to the system of the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, promulgated and implemented.

古文：凡职官，一品、二品用杂色文绮、绫罗、彩绣，帽顶、帽珠用玉；三品至五品用杂色文绮、绫罗，帽顶用金，帽珠除玉外，随所用；六品至九品用杂色文绮、绫罗，帽顶用银，帽珠玛瑙、水晶、香木。
现代文：凡是各级官吏，一品、二品官用多种色彩的文绮、绫罗、彩绣，帽顶、帽珠用玉；三品官到五品官用多种色彩的文绮、绫罗，帽顶用金，帽珠除玉之外，随便选用；六品官到九品官用多种色彩的文绮、绫罗，帽顶用银，帽珠用玛瑙、水晶、香木。
English: For all officials at all levels, the first and second grade officials use multi-colored pennants, brooches, embroidered beads, caps, and beads with beads; the third grade officials to the fifth grade officials use multi-colored pennants, brooches, caps with gold, caps and beads with beads; the sixth grade officials to the ninth grade officials use multi-colored pennants, brooches, caps with silver, caps with agate, crystal, and fragrant wood.

古文：一品至六品穿四爪龙，以金绣为之者听。
现代文：一品到六品官穿绣四支爪子的龙形图案，听凭用金线刺绣来制作它。
English: A dragon-shaped pattern with four claws is embroidered on the robes of officials from the first to the sixth grade, and it can be made with gold thread embroidery.

古文：礼部又议： 品官见尊长，用朝君公服，于理未安。
现代文：礼部又建议： 有品级的官员进见地位高年纪大的人，穿朝见皇帝的公服，在道理上不妥。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies also suggested: It is not reasonable for officials with ranks to go to see people with high status and wear the emperor's official clothes.

古文：宜别制梁冠、绛衣、绛裳、革带、大带、大白袜、乌舄、佩绶，其衣裳去缘襈。
现代文：应该另外制作梁冠、纬色衣、绛色裙、革带、大带、大白袜、黑色的以木为复底的鞋、佩绶，上衣下裙去掉衣边。
English: In addition, it is necessary to make a crown, a plaid dress, a navy skirt, a leather belt, a large belt, large white socks, black shoes with a wooden sole, a scarf, and remove the hem from the top and bottom of the dress.

古文：三品以上佩绶，三品以下不用。 
现代文：三品官以上用佩绶，三品官以下不用。 
English: Those above the rank of Sanbonkan (third-ranked official) use pei nao, while those below the rank of Sanbonkan (third-ranked official) do not.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十二年，令文武官遇雨戴雨帽，公差出外戴帽子，入城不许。
现代文：洪武二十二年，下令文武官遇到雨天可戴雨帽，因公差外出可戴帽子，进入京城后不允许。
English: In the 22nd year of Hongwu, it was ordered that the civil and military officers could wear raincoats when it rained, and they could wear hats when they went out on duty, but they were not allowed to do so after entering the capital.

古文：二十三年定制，文官衣自领至裔，去地一寸，袖长过手，复回至肘。
现代文：洪武二十三年定下制度，文官衣服从衣领到衣边，离地一寸，袖长超过手，折叠回来的部分要到肘部。
English: In the 23rd year of Hongwu's reign, a system was established that the cuffs of civil servants' clothes should extend from the collar to the hem, one inch from the ground, the sleeve should be longer than the hand, and the folded back part should reach the elbow.

古文：公、侯、驸马与文官同。
现代文：公、侯、驸马与文官一样。
English: Princes, lords and noblemen are the same as civil servants.

古文：武官去地五寸，袖长过手七寸。
现代文：武官的衣边离地五寸，袖的长度超过手七寸。
English: The military attache's hemline is five inches from the ground, and the length of the sleeves exceeds seven inches.

古文：二十四年定，公、侯、驸马、伯服，绣麒麟、白泽。
现代文：洪武二十四年规定，公、侯、驸马、伯的常服，绣麒麟、白泽图案。
English: In the 24th year of Hongwu, it was stipulated that the ordinary clothes of the prince, marquess, steed, and noblemen should be embroidered with unicorns and white patterns.

古文：文官一品仙鹤，二品锦鸡，三品孔雀，四品云雁，五品白鹇，六品鹭鸶，七品鸂氵鶒，八品黄鹂，九品鹌鹑；杂职练鹊；风宪官獬廌。
现代文：文官一品锈仙鹤，二品绣锦鸡，三品绣孔雀，四品绣云雁，五品绣白鹏，六品绣鹭鸶，七品锈鶸溯，八品锈黄鹏，九品锈鹌鹑；不入品级的其它官吏锈练鹊；监察执行法纪的官员绣獬腐。
English: Civil servants are entitled to one grade of rusty crane, two grades of embroidered brocade chicken, three grades of embroidered peacock, four grades of embroidered cloud goose, five grades of embroidered white goose, six grades of embroidered pheasant, seven grades of rusty pheasant, eight grades of rusty yellow goose, nine grades of rusty pheasant; other officials who are not included in the grade of rusty pheasant; officials who supervise the implementation of laws and regulations are embroidered pheasant.

古文：武官一品、二品狮子，三品、四品虎豹，五品熊罴，六品、七品彪，八品犀牛，九品海马。
现代文：武官一品、二品绣狮子，三品、四品绣虎豹，五品绣熊罢，六品、七品绣彪，八品绣犀牛，九品锈海马。
English: There are one and two embroidered lions, three and four embroidered tigers and leopards, five embroidered bears, six and seven embroidered Biao, eight embroidered rhinoceroses, and nine embroidered rusty seahorses.

古文：又令品官常服用杂色纻丝、绫罗、彩绣。
现代文：又下令有品级的官员常服采用多种颜色的贮丝、绫罗、彩锈。
English: He also ordered the rank-and-file officials to wear multi-colored stockings, stockings, and rust-colored pants.

古文：官吏衣服、帐幔，不许用玄、黄、紫三色，并织绣龙凤文，违者罪及染造之人。
现代文：官吏衣服、帷幕，不许用玄、黄、紫三种颜色，并且不许织绣龙凤花纹，违背了的罪行牵连到染色制作的人。
English: Officials' clothes and curtains are not allowed to use the three colors of black, yellow and purple, and are not allowed to be embroidered with dragon and phoenix patterns. Those who violate the law are implicated in the crime of dyeing.

古文：朝见人员，四时并用色衣，不许纯素。
现代文：入朝参见的人员，一年四季一概穿彩色衣服，不许穿纯素色。
English: Those who enter the imperial court are required to wear colorful clothes all year round, and are not allowed to wear vegan colors.

古文：三十年，令致仕官服色与见任同，若朝贺、谢恩、见辞，一体具服。
现代文：洪武三十年，命令退休官员的服色与在职官员一样，如果朝觐庆贺、拜谢皇帝的恩德、面见辞别皇帝，一样穿戴官服。
English: In the 30th year of Hongwu, the retired officials were ordered to wear the same color as the serving officials. If they were to celebrate the hajj, thank the emperor for his kindness, or meet and bid farewell to the emperor, they should wear the same official uniform.

古文：景泰四年，令锦衣卫指挥侍卫者，得衣麒麟。
现代文：景泰四年，下令锦衣卫中指挥侍卫的人，可以穿绣麒麟图案的衣服。
English: In the fourth year of King Taejo, he ordered that the person who commanded the guards in the brocade guard could wear clothes with embroidered unicorn patterns.

古文：天顺二年，定官民衣服不得用蟒龙、飞鱼、斗牛、大鹏、像生狮子、四宝相花、大西番莲、大云花样，并玄、黄、紫及玄色、黑、绿、柳黄、姜黄、明黄诸色。
现代文：天顺二年，规定官吏平民的衣服不能用蟒龙、飞鱼、斗牛、大鹏、逼真的，狮子、四宝相花、大西番莲、大的云朵等图案，以及玄、黄、紫和玄色、黑、绿、柳黄、姜黄、明黄等颜色。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, it was stipulated that the clothes of government officials and civilians could not use dragons, flying fish, fighting bulls, great peng, realistic, lions, four-treasure flowers, large passionfruit, large clouds and other patterns, as well as black, yellow, purple and black, black, green, yellow, turmeric, bright yellow and other colors.

古文：弘治十三年奏定，公、侯、伯、文武大臣及镇守、守备，违例奏请蟒衣、飞鱼衣服者，科道纠劾，治以重罪。
现代文：弘治十三年上奏规定，公、侯、伯、文武大臣以及镇守、守备，违背规定上奏请求锈蟒纹衣服、绣飞鱼图案的衣服的人，科道官揭发弹劾，按重罪惩治。
English: According to the regulations of the 13th year of the Hongzhi era, the public officials, lords, townsmen, and ministers of literature and armed forces, as well as the town guards and garrisons, who violate the regulations and request the submission of rust-colored clothes and clothes with embroidered flying fish patterns, shall be exposed and impeached by the science and technology officials and punished as a serious crime.

古文：正德十一年设东、西两官厅，将士悉衣黄罩甲。
现代文：正德十一年，设立束、西两个官厅，将士镗甲外都穿黄色外套。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhengde, two government offices were set up in the Bund and the West, and the generals wore yellow coats.

古文：中外化之。
现代文：从京城到地方都仿效这种做法。
English: This practice has been emulated from the capital to the provinces.

古文：金绯盛服者，亦必加此于上。
现代文：穿金饰徘红袍鲜艳官服的，也必须在外面套上这种黄外套。
English: If you wear a brightly colored official uniform with gold ornaments and a red robe, you must also put on this yellow jacket outside.

古文：都督江彬等承日红笠之上，缀以靛染天鹅翎，以为贵饰，贵者飘三英，次者二英。
现代文：都督江彬等在承曰红笠帽的上面，用靛青色染的天鹅羽毛点缀，作为显贵的装饰，地位高的飘着三枝羽毛，稍次的飘着两枝羽毛。
English: On the top of the hat of the governor, Jiang Bin, there are swan feathers dyed with indigo dye. As a decoration for the dignitaries, three feathers of high status and two feathers of lesser status are floating.

古文：兵部尚书王琼得赐一英，冠以下教场，自谓殊遇。
现代文：兵部尚书王琼被赏赐一枝羽毛，戴着到演武场，自认为是特殊待遇。
English: Wang Qiong, a member of the military department of Shangshu, was awarded a feather and wore it to the martial arts arena, believing it to be a special treatment.

古文：其后巡狩所经，督饷侍郎、巡抚都御史无不衣罩甲见上者。
现代文：造以后皇帝出行视察所经过的地方，督饷侍郎、巡抚都御史没有不在镗甲外面穿外套拜见皇帝的。
English: When the emperor traveled to inspect the places he passed through after the construction of the Great Wall, there was no way that the vicar of the imperial palace and the governor of the capital would not wear a coat outside the armor to meet the emperor.

古文：十三年，车驾还京，传旨，俾迎候者用曳撒大帽、鸾带。
现代文：正德十三年，皇帝返回京城，传下圣旨，使迎接等候的人穿用长袖的军服曳撒大帽、鸾带。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhengde, the emperor returned to the capital and issued a sacred edict that the people waiting to greet him should wear long-sleeved military uniforms and wear large hats and sashes.

古文：寻赐群臣大红纻丝罗纱各一。
现代文：不久赏赐众臣大红纣麻丝衣、罗纱衣各一件。
English: He soon rewarded all of his vassals with a large red nettle silk robe and a loin cloth each.

古文：其服色，一品斗牛，二品飞鱼，三品蟒，四、五品麒麟，六、七品虎、彪；翰林科道不限品级皆与焉；惟部曹五品下不与。
现代文：其服饰色彩，一品官锈斗牛，二品官绣飞鱼，三品官绣蟒，四、五品官绣麒麟，六、七品官绣虎、彪；翰林科道官不论品级都赐与；惟有各部属官五品以下的不赐与。
English: For the color of their clothing, one grade of official rusty bull, two grades of official embroidered flying fish, three grades of official embroidered dragonfly, four or five grades of official embroidered unicorn, six or seven grades of official embroidered tiger, bau; Hanlin science and Taoist officials are given regardless of grade; however, officials under five grades are not given.

古文：时文臣服色亦以走兽，而麒麟之服逮于四品，尤异事也。
现代文：当时文臣服饰颜色也采用走兽，而且绣麒麟的衣服已用于四品官，尤其是奇怪的事情。
English: At that time, the color of Wenshen's clothing also used beasts, and the embroidered unicorn's clothes have been used for the four grade officials, especially for strange things.

古文：十六年，世宗登极诏云： 近来冒滥玉带，蟒龙、飞鱼、斗牛服色，皆庶官杂流并各处将领夤缘奏乞，今俱不许。
现代文：正德十六年，世宗继承皇位的诏书说： 近来过滥地佩玉带，蟒龙、飞鱼、斗牛服饰颜色，都被一般官吏杂职小官以及各地将领钻营奏请求得，现茌一律不允许。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, Sejong's imperial edict of succession to the throne said: "Recently, the wearing of jade belts, dragons, flying fish, and bullfighting costume colors have been requested by general officials, minor officials, and generals from all over the country. They are not allowed.

古文：武职卑官僣用公、侯服色者，亦禁绝之。 
现代文：任武职的小官越级采用公、侯的服饰颜色的，也全部禁止消除。 
English: It is also prohibited to eliminate all minor officials of military rank and above who adopt the dress colors of officials and courtiers.

古文：嘉靖六年复禁中外官，不许滥服五彩装花织造违禁颜色。
现代文：嘉靖六年，又禁令中央和地方官员，不允许遇滥穿五彩装花图案的布料及违背禁令的颜色制成的服饰。
English: In the sixth year of Jiajing, the central and local officials were prohibited from wearing fabrics with multicolored floral patterns and clothing made of colors that violated the ban.

古文：七年既定燕居法服之制，阁臣张璁因言： 品官燕居之服未有明制，诡异之徒，竞为奇服以乱典章。
现代文：嘉靖七年，制定了闲居时所穿服饰的制度后，大学士张璁就说： 有品级的官员闲居时的服饰没有明确规定，诡奇怪异的人，争相制作奇怪的衣服以使制度混乱。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, after the system of clothing worn when idling was formulated, Zhang Qi, a university scholar, said: The clothing worn by officials of rank when idling is not clearly defined, and strange people compete to make strange clothes to confuse the system.

古文：乞更法古玄端，别为简易之制，昭布天下，使贵贱有等。 
现代文：乞求另外效法古代的玄端服，另外制定简易的式样，下诏布告全国，使地位高的地位低的有等级差别。 
English: They begged for another imitation of the ancient Xuan Duan clothing, another simple design, and the following edict to be announced to the whole country, so that there would be a class difference between the high status and the low status.

古文：帝因复制《忠静冠服图》颁礼部，敕谕之曰： 祖宗稽古定制，品官朝祭之服，各有等差。
现代文：皇帝因此重新制作《忠静冠服图》颁发给礼部，下敕命晓谕礼部说： 祖宗考察古代规定制度，有品级的官员朝会与祭祀的服饰，各有等级差别。
English: Therefore, the emperor re-produced the "Chung Jing Guanfu Map" and issued it to the ceremonial department. The lower jaw ordered the ceremonial department to say: the ancestors examined the ancient system, the officials with the rank of the imperial meeting and the costumes of the sacrificial rites, each with a grade difference.

古文：第常人之情，多谨于明显，怠于幽独。
现代文：只是一般人的性情，大多在引人瞩目的地方谨慎，在幽僻独处的地方便怠惰。
English: It's just human nature. Most people are cautious in conspicuous places and lazy in secluded places.

古文：古圣王慎之，制玄端以为燕居之服。
现代文：古代圣明的君王对此很谨慎，规定将玄端这种黑色礼服作为闲居的衣服。
English: The kings of ancient China were very cautious about this, stipulating that this black dress should be used as idle clothing.

古文：比来衣服诡异，上下无辨，民志何由定。
现代文：近来衣服诡怪奇异，等级上下无从辨别，民心由什么来安定。
English: Recently, the clothes are strange and bizarre, the level is indistinguishable, and the people's hearts are stabilized by something.

古文：朕因酌古玄端之制，更名 忠静 ，庶几乎进思尽忠，退思补过焉。
现代文：朕因而参考古代玄端礼服的仪制，改名 忠静 ，希望上朝的时候想着尽忠心，退朝的时候想着补救过失。
English: Therefore, I changed my name to "Zhongjing" with reference to the ancient ceremonial dress of Xuanduan. I hope that when I ascend the throne, I will think about being loyal, and when I step down, I will think about remedying mistakes.

古文：朕已著为图说，如式制造。
现代文：朕已经昼出图形又有解说的文字，按照这种样式制造。
English: I have already made a graphic with explanatory text, made according to this style.

古文：在京许七品以上官及八品以上翰林院、国子监、行人司，在外许方面官及各府堂官、州县正堂、儒学教官服之。
现代文：在京城允许七品以上官员以及八品以上的翰林院、国子监、行人司官员，在外地允许地方政府长官以及各府的长官、州县的正职官、儒学教官穿戴它。
English: In Beijing, officials with seven or more official ranks and officials with eight or more official ranks of the Hanlin Academy, the State Children's Supervisor, and the Pedestrian Division are allowed to wear it. In other places, local government officials, prefectural officials, state and county officials, and Confucianism instructors are allowed to wear it.

古文：武官止都督以上。
现代文：武官祇有都督以上约官员可以穿。
English: Only military officers with the rank of governor can wear them.

古文：其馀不许滥服。 
现代文：其余的人不允许过滥穿戴。 
English: The rest of us aren't allowed to wear too much.

古文：礼部以图说颁布天下，如敕奉行。
现代文：礼部将这部既有图画又有解说的著作颁布全国，按敕命执行。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies promulgated this work, which contains both pictures and commentary, throughout the country, carrying it out to the letter.

古文：按忠静冠仿古玄冠，冠匡如制，以乌纱冒之，两山俱列于后。
现代文：考察忠静冠仿照古代的玄冠，帽框依照式样，用乌纱蒙住它，两座帽山都立在后部。
English: The examination of the Zhongjing Crown is modeled after the ancient black crown, the cap frame is in accordance with the style, it is covered with black yarn, and two cap mountains stand at the back.

古文：冠顶仍方中微起，三梁各压以金线，边以金缘之。
现代文：帽顶仍是正中微微凸起，三道梁各自用金线覆压，帽线用金镶边。
English: The top of the cap is still slightly raised in the middle, the three beams are each covered with gold wire, and the brim is inlaid with gold.

古文：四品以下，去金，缘以浅色丝线。
现代文：四品以下，去掉金，用浅色丝线镶边。
English: Four pieces or less, gold removed, bordered with light silk thread.

古文：忠静服仿古玄端服，色用深青，以纻丝纱罗为之。
现代文：忠静服仿照古代的玄端服，用深青色，用纣麻丝纱罗制作。
English: The Zhongjing uniform is modeled after the ancient Xuanduan uniform, with a deep blue color and made of nettle silk.

古文：三品以上云，四品以下素，缘以蓝青，前后饰本等花样补子。
现代文：三品官以上绣云纹，四品官以下无花纹，用蓝青色镶边，前胸后背装饰以锈有本等级花样的徽饰。
English: Three grades of officials and above have embroidered patterns, four grades of officials and below have no patterns, with blue-blue edging, and the front chest and back are decorated with rusted badges with this grade pattern.

古文：深衣用玉色。
现代文：上衣与下裙相连的深衣采用玉色。
English: The bodice and skirt are connected by a dark jade-colored bodice.

古文：素带，如古大夫之带制，青表绿缘边并里。
现代文：素绢缝制的大带，与古代大夫的带的式样相同，青色表面绿色镶边以及绿色里子。
English: A large plain satin belt, identical in style to the ancient doctor's belt, with a blue surface, green edging and a green lining.

古文：素履，青绿绦结。
现代文：素绢制的鞋子，青绿色鞋带。
English: Vegetarian shoes with turquoise laces.

古文：白袜。
现代文：白袜。
English: White socks.

古文：十六年，群臣朝于驻跸所，兵部尚书张瓒服蟒。
现代文：嘉靖十六年，众臣在皇帝出行时中途停留的地方朝见皇帝，兵部尚书张瓒穿绣有蟒纹的衣服。
English: In the 16th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, all the courtiers met with the emperor at the place where the emperor stopped off during his trip. The military commander Shangshu Zhang Rong wore clothes embroidered with wrinkles.

古文：帝怒，谕阁臣夏言曰： 尚书二品，何自服蟒？ 
现代文：皇帝发怒，告诉大学士夏言说： 尚书是二品官，何故穿绣织有蟒纹的衣服？ 
English: Enraged, the emperor told the scholar Xia Yan, "Shang Shu is a second-class official, why does he wear clothes embroidered with wrinkles?

古文：言对曰： 瓒所服，乃钦赐飞鱼服，鲜明类蟒耳。 
现代文：夏言回答说： 张瓒所穿，乃是皇帝赏赐的飞鱼服，鲜艳明丽像蟒服而已。 
English: Xia Yan replied, "What Zhang Ye is wearing is a flying fish costume given by the emperor. It is bright and shiny like a dragonfly costume.

古文：帝曰： 飞鱼何组两角？
现代文：皇帝说： 飞鱼为何编织两个角？
English: The emperor said, "Why does the flying fish weave two horns?

古文：其严禁之。 
现代文：要严厉禁止这种现象。 
English: This phenomenon should be strictly prohibited.

古文：于是礼部奏定，文武官不许擅用蟒衣、飞鱼、斗牛、违禁华异服色。
现代文：于是礼部上奏后规定，文武官员不允许擅自服用蟒衣、飞鱼、斗牛、禁止的华丽怪异的服饰颜色。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Etiquette issued a regulation stating that civil and military officials would not be allowed to take into their possession the forbidden ornate and bizarre clothing colors, such as the yakitori, flying fish, and bullfights.

古文：其大红纻丝纱罗服，惟四品以上官及在京五品堂上官、经筵讲官许服。
现代文：大红纡丝纱罗服，惟有四品以上官员以及在京城的五品官署长官、为皇帝讲论经史的讲官允许穿。
English: Only officials with four or more pins, the head of the five-pin office in the capital, and lecturers who give lectures on the history of the emperor are allowed to wear the red silk saree.

古文：五品官及经筵不为讲官者，俱服青绿锦绣。
现代文：五品官以及御前讲席不是讲官的，都穿青绿色锦锈。
English: The five dignitaries, as well as those in front of the throne who are not the speakers, are all dressed in blue-green brocade.

古文：遇吉礼，止衣红布绒褐。
现代文：遇到吉庆典礼，只穿红布绒褐。
English: When it comes to the auspicious ceremony, only wear red cloth suede.

古文：品官花样，并依品级。
现代文：有品级官员衣服的花样，都按照品级。
English: The patterns of the clothes of officials with rank are all in accordance with the rank.

古文：锦衣卫指挥，侍卫者仍得衣麒麟，其带俸非侍卫，及千百户虽侍卫，不许僣用。
现代文：锦衣卫的指挥，在皇帝身边护卫的仍旧可以穿麒麟服，领俸禄但不侍卫，以及虽然是侍卫的千户、百户，不许越级穿用。
English: The commander of the brocade guards, the guards around the emperor can still wear the unicorn uniform, receive a salary but do not serve as guards, and although they are the guards of thousands and hundreds of households, they are not allowed to wear them.

古文：历朝赐服：文臣有未至一品而赐玉带者，自洪武中学士罗复仁始。
现代文：各个朝代赏赐衣服，文臣有役到一品官却赏赐玉带的，从洪武年间学士罗复仁开始。
English: All dynasties awarded clothes, but it was not until the Hongwu era that the scholar Luo Fuzhen began to be awarded a jade belt.

古文：衍圣公秩正二品，服织金麒麟袍、玉带，则景泰中入朝拜赐。
现代文：衍圣公品级是正二品，穿用金丝织出麒麟图案的袍子，系玉带，则是景泰年间入宫朝拜赏赐的。
English: Yansheng's official rank was the second highest, and he wore a robe with a pattern of a unicorn woven from gold thread and a jade belt, which was given to him when he entered the palace to pay homage to Emperor Jing Tai.

古文：自是以为常。
现代文：从此作为经常的制度。
English: Since then, it has been a regular system.

古文：内阁赐蟒衣，自弘治中刘健、李东阳始。
现代文：内阁官员赏赐蟒衣，从弘治年间剀健、李束阳开始。
English: Cabinet officials have been awarding the gown, starting with He Jian and Li Sokyang during the Hongzhi era.

古文：麒麟本公、侯服，而内阁服之，则嘉靖中严嵩、徐阶皆受赐也。
现代文：麒麟本是公、侯的服饰，然而内阁官员穿用它，则是嘉靖年间严嵩、徐阶都受到赏赐的缘故。
English: Originally, the unicorn was the costume of princes and nobles, but it was worn by cabinet officials because during the Jiajing Dynasty, it was given to those who were tall and slow.

古文：仙鹤，文臣一品服也，嘉靖中成国公朱希忠、都督陆炳服之，皆以玄坛供事。
现代文：仙鹤，是文臣一品官的服饰，嘉靖年间成国公朱希忠、都督陆炳穿用它，都因为供奉祭祀道坛。
English: Cranes are the official attire of a civil servant, and Zhu Xizhong, the prince of Chengguo, and the governor of Chengguo, Lu Yao, both wore them during the Jiajing period, because they were used to worship the sacrificial altar.

古文：而学士严讷、李春芳、董份以五品撰青词，亦赐仙鹤。
现代文：至于学士严讷、李春芳、董份以五品的官位撰写上奏天庭或征召神将的青词，也赏赐仙鹤服。
English: As for the bachelor Yan Ne, Li Chun Fang, and Dongfen, they were also awarded a crane suit for writing the anthem of the heavenly garden or summoning the divine general with the official rank of the fifth grade.

古文：寻谕供事坛中乃用，于是尚书皆不敢衣鹤。
现代文：不久谕令供奉祭坛时纔穿，于是尚书都不敢穿仙鹤服。
English: Soon after, an edict was issued to wear hakama when offering to the altar, so Shoshu did not dare to wear a crane costume.

古文：后敕南京织闪黄补麒麟、仙鹤，赐严嵩，闪黄乃上用服色也；又赐徐阶教子升天蟒。
现代文：后来命令南京织闪黄色的绣麒麟、仙鹤纹补子这种标志官位品级的徽标，赏赐严嵩，闪黄乃是皇帝采用的衣服颜色；又赏赐徐阶教子升天蟒服。
English: Later, he ordered Nanjing to weave bright yellow embroidered unicorns and crane-patterned patches, which are the symbols of official rank and grade, to reward Yan Song, and bright yellow is the color of clothes used by the emperor; he also rewarded Xu Ji's godson for ascending to heaven.

古文：万历中，赐张居正坐蟒；武清侯李伟以太后父，亦受赐。
现代文：万历年间，赏赐张居正盘坐蟒图案的服饰；武清侯李伟因为是皇太后的父亲，也受到这种赏赐。
English: During the Wanli era, Zhang Ju was given a dress with a pattern of a sitting crane; Wu Qing Hou Li Wei also received this award because he was the father of the empress dowager.

古文：仪宾朝服、公服、常服：俱视品级，与文武官同，惟笏皆象牙；常服花样视武官。
现代文：宗室亲王、郡王的女婿的朝服、公服、常服，都依据品级，与文武官相同，只有朝笏都用象牙制作；常服的花色式样与武官一样。
English: The imperial robes, official robes, and regular robes of the prince of the family and the son-in-law of the county king are all based on class, the same as those of the civil and military officers. Only the imperial robes are made of ivory; the patterns of the regular robes are the same as those of the military officers.

古文：弘治十三年定，郡主仪宾鈒花金带，胸背狮子。
现代文：弘治十三年规定，郡主夫婿采用嵌有花纹的金带，衣服胸前背后绣狮子。
English: According to the regulations of the 13th year of the Hongzhi era, the prince's husband-in-law would wear a gold band with a pattern embedded in it, and a lion would be embroidered on the chest and back of his clothes.

古文：县主仪宾鈒花金带，郡君仪宾光素金带，胸背俱虎豹。
现代文：县主夫婿采用嵌有花纹的金带，郡君夫婿用不嵌花纹的金带，衣服胸前背后都绣虎豹。
English: The county head's husband-in-law uses a gold band with inlaid patterns, the county king's husband-in-law uses a gold band without inlaid patterns, and the clothes are embroidered with a tiger leopard on the front and back of the chest.

古文：县君仪宾鈒花银带，乡君仪宾光素银带，胸背俱彪。
现代文：县君夫婿用嵌有花纹的银带，乡君夫婿用不嵌花纹的银带，衣服胸前背后都锈彪。
English: The county prince's son-in-law wore a silver band with a pattern embedded in it, while the town prince's son-in-law wore a silver band without a pattern embedded in it. The front and back of their clothes were rusty.

古文：有僣用者，革去冠带，戴平头巾，于儒学读书习礼三年。
现代文：若有越级使用的人，便除去礼冠佩带，戴平头巾，到教授儒家学说的学校读书、练习礼仪三年。
English: If there are people who use it beyond their grade, they will remove the ceremonial crown, wear a flat headscarf, and go to a school that teaches Confucianism to study and practice etiquette for three years.

古文：状元及诸进士冠服：状元冠二梁，绯罗圆领，白绢中单，锦绶，蔽膝，纱帽，槐木笏，光银带，药玉佩，朝靴，毡袜，皆御前颁赐，上表谢恩日服之。
现代文：状元以及众进士的礼冠服饰。状元帽子两道梁，徘红色罗衣圆衣领，白绢裹衣，锦制绶带，蔽膝，纱帽，槐木制朝笏，光银带，药玉制佩饰，上朝时穿的靴子，毡制的袜子，都在皇帝面前颁发赏赐，上奏章答谢皇帝的恩德之日穿它。
English: The ceremonial crown attire of the emperor and his courtiers. The two-tiered cap of the emperor, the red robe with a round collar, the white satin wrap, the brocade ribbon, the knee cover, the gauze hat, the birch pilgrimage, the light silver belt, the medicinal jade jewelry, the boots worn during the Shang Dynasty, the socks made of maple, are all awarded in front of the emperor, and the emperor is thanked for wearing it on the Day of Grace.

古文：进士巾如乌纱帽，顶微平，展角阔寸馀，长五寸许，系以垂带，皂纱为之。
现代文：进士的头巾与乌纱帽相像，巾顶稍平，后部的展角有一寸多宽，长五寸左右，用垂带系着，黑纱制作而成。
English: Jin Shi's headscarf is similar to the black yarn cap, the top of the scarf is slightly flat, the back of the scarf has a width of more than an inch and a length of about five inches. It is tied with a hanging ribbon and made of black yarn.

古文：深蓝罗袍，缘以青罗，袖广而不杀。
现代文：深蓝色绫罗制袍服，镶以青罗边，袖宽而不剪裁缝合的缝。
English: A dark blue satin gown, edged in blue satin, with wide, uncut sleeves.

古文：槐木笏，革带、青鞓，饰以黑角，垂挞尾于后。
现代文：槐木制朝笏，革带、青色的带身，用黑色的角质材料装饰，腰带下插的垂头挞尾垂在后面。
English: Birch-wood loincloth, leather belt, blue strap, decorated with black horny material, with a hanging head and tail hanging behind the belt.

古文：廷试后颁于国子监，传胪日服之。
现代文：殿廷上的考试完后在国子监颁发，殿试公布名次的那天穿它。
English: It was worn on the day when the examination at the Imperial Court was over and the names of the winners were announced by the Imperial Procurator.

古文：上表谢恩后，谒先师行释菜礼毕，始易常服，其巾袍仍送国子监藏之。
现代文：上奏表答谢皇帝的恩德后，拜见先师孔子举行祭祀先师的释菜礼后，纔换成一般衣服，那些头巾袍服仍旧送回国子监保存。
English: After thanking the emperor for his benevolence, after visiting the master Confucius and holding a sacrificial ceremony to release the master's dishes, the cocoon was replaced with ordinary clothes. Those headscarves and robes were still sent back to the state nursery for preservation.

古文：命妇冠服：洪武元年定，命妇一品，冠花钗九树。
现代文：受封号命妇的礼帽服饰。洪武元年制定，受封号命妇一品，戴花钗九株。
English: A ceremonial hat for a woman who has been given a title of nobility. Enacted in the first year of Hongwu, it is worn by a woman who has been given a title of nobility and is adorned with nine wreaths of flowers.

古文：两博鬓，九钿。
现代文：两个宽大的发鬓，九枝钿。
English: Two wide hairpins, nine braids.

古文：服用翟衣，绣翟九重。
现代文：衣服采用织有野鸡羽毛图纹的衣服，锈野鸡羽毛图纹九重。
English: The clothes are woven with pheasant feather patterns, and there are nine rusty pheasant feather patterns.

古文：素纱中单，黼领，朱縠逯襈裾。
现代文：素色纱制的里衣，黑青相间的衣领，朱色糓镶边的衣襟。
English: A plain-coloured gauze bodice, a black-and-blue collar, and a collar trimmed with vermilion satin.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，以緅为领缘，加文绣重翟，为章二等。玉带。
现代文：蔽膝与下裙颜色一致，用青赤色帛作领边，加上有重迭野鶸图纹的锦绣，绣野鸡图纹二等。玉带。
English: The knee-length skirt is the same colour as the underskirt, with a blue-and-red frill for the neckline, plus brocade embroidery with overlapping patterns of wild boar, embroidered pheasant pattern second class.

古文：青袜舄，佩绶。
现代文：青色袜鞋，标志身份等级的彩色丝带。
English: Blue socks, colored ribbons to indicate rank.

古文：二品，冠花钗八树。
现代文：二品受封号妇女，戴花钗八株。
English: There are two women with sealed names, and they wear eight-branched wreaths.

古文：两博鬓，八钿。
现代文：两个宽大发鬓，八枝钿。
English: Two wide hairpins, eight braids.

古文：服用翟衣八等，犀带，馀如一品。
现代文：衣服用绣有野鸡碉毛图纹的衣服八等，犀角制成的衣带，其余的与一品命妇相同。
English: Eight of the dresses were embroidered with patterns of pheasant mane, and the rest were the same as the bride.

古文：三品，冠花钗七树。
现代文：三品命妇，戴花钗七株。
English: The Three Graces of the Goddess of Death, and the Seven Stems of the Lotus Flower.

古文：两博鬓，七钿。
现代文：两个宽大发鬓，七枝钿。
English: Two wide hairpins, seven braids.

古文：翟衣七等，金革带，馀如二品。
现代文：锈有野鸡羽毛图纹的衣服七等，金饰的革带，其余的与二品命妇相同。
English: Rusty clothes with pheasant feather patterns, leather belts with gold ornaments, and the rest are the same as second-class women.

古文：四品，冠花钗六树。
现代文：四品命妇，戴花钗六株。
English: There are four kinds of Myomen, and six kinds of Daibana.

古文：两博鬓，六钿。
现代文：两个宽大的发鬓，六枝钿。
English: Two wide hairpins, six braids.

古文：翟衣六等，金革带，馀如三品。
现代文：绣有野鹦羽毛冈纹的衣服六等，金饰革带，其余与三品命妇一样。
English: A dress embroidered with the feathers of a wild parrot is ranked sixth, with a gold-embellished leather belt. The rest are the same as those of the Three Graces.

古文：五品，冠花钗五树。
现代文：五品命妇，戴花钗五株。
English: A woman of five parts and a woman of five parts.

古文：两博鬓，五钿。
现代文：两个宽大的发鬓，五枝钿。
English: Two wide hairpins, five braids.

古文：翟衣五等，乌角带，馀如四品。
现代文：绣有野鸡羽毛图纹的衣服，黑色角质材料装饰的衣带，其余的与四品命妇一样。
English: A dress embroidered with a pheasant feather pattern, a belt decorated with black horny material, and the rest are the same as those worn by the Four Graces.

古文：六品，冠花钗四树。
现代文：六品命妇，戴花钗四株。
English: A six-figure woman, wearing a four-strand braid.

古文：两博鬓，四钿。
现代文：两个宽大的发鬓，四枝钿。
English: Two wide hairpins, four braids.

古文：翟衣四等，乌角带，馀如五品。
现代文：绣有野鸡羽毛图纹的衣服四等，黑色角质材料装饰的衣带，其余与五品命妇一样。
English: The clothes embroidered with pheasant feather patterns are fourth-rate, the belts decorated with black horny material, and the rest are the same as the five-grade mortal women.

古文：七品，冠花钗三树。
现代文：七品命妇，戴花钗三株。
English: The seven-figure mortal woman, wearing three-strands of flowers.

古文：两博鬓，三钿。
现代文：两个宽大的发鬓，三枝钿。
English: Two large hairpins, three braids.

古文：翟衣三等，乌角带，馀如六品。
现代文：绣有野鸡羽毛图纹的衣服，黑色角质材料装饰的衣带，其余的与六品命妇相同。
English: The clothes embroidered with pheasant feather patterns, the belt decorated with black horny material, the rest are the same as those of the Six Graces.

古文：自一品至五品，衣色随夫用紫。
现代文：从一品到五品命妇，衣服的颜色舆丈夫一致用紫色。
English: From one item to five items, the color of the husband's clothes is consistent with purple.

古文：六品、七品，衣色随夫用绯。
现代文：六品、七品命妇，衣服颜色与丈夫一样用徘红色。
English: A wife of six or seven names, her clothes are the same shade of red as her husband's.

古文：其大带如衣色。
现代文：她们的大带与衣服颜色一样。
English: Their large belts are the same colour as their clothes.

古文：四年，以古天子诸侯服衮冕，后与夫人亦服祎翟。
现代文：洪武四年，认为古代的天子诸侯穿戴绣龙纹的衮衣冠冕，君后与夫人也穿戴绣有野鸡的棒衣与绣野鸡羽毛图纹的衣服。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, it was believed that the ancient princes and princes wore embroidered dragon-patterned robes and crowns, and the queen and her consort also wore embroidered pheasant coats and embroidered pheasant feather patterns.

古文：今群臣既以梁冠、绛衣为朝服，不敢用冕，则外命妇亦不当服翟衣以朝。
现代文：现在众臣既然用梁冠、绛色衣服为朝服，不敢用冕，那么宫廷外命妇也不应当穿绣野鸡羽毛花纹的衣服来朝见。
English: Since the courtiers now wear crowns of beams and coats of ochre as their court dress, and do not dare to wear crowns, the empresses outside the court should not wear clothes embroidered with pheasant feathers to the imperial court.

古文：命礼部议之。
现代文：命令礼部讨论此事。
English: Ordered the etiquette department to discuss the matter.

古文：奏定，命妇以山松特髻、假鬓花钿、真红大袖衣、珠翠蹙金霞帔为朝服。
现代文：上奏章确定，命妇以山松特髻、假鬓花钿、真红大袖衣、珠翠蹙金霞帔，作为朝见的礼服。
English: It was determined in the opening chapter that the lady-in-waiting wore a mountain pine special brocade, a fake embroidered flower brocade, a crimson large sleeve dress, and a beaded emerald brocade and gold and blue brocade as a morning dress.

古文：以朱翠角冠、金珠花钗、阔袖杂色绿缘为燕居之用。
现代文：以朱翠角冠、金珠花钗、宽袖问杂绿色袖边，为闲居的常服。
English: With jade-green crown, gold-beaded braid, wide sleeves and mixed green cuffs, it is casual wear.

古文：一品，衣金绣文霞帔，金珠翠妆饰，玉坠。
现代文：一品命妇，穿戴金线锈的文霞帔礼服，用金珍珠翡翠装饰，玉坠。
English: A lady-in-waiting, wearing a rusty gold embroidered gown, decorated with golden pearls and jade, with a jade pendant.

古文：二品，衣金绣云肩大杂花霞帔，金珠翠妆饰，金坠子。
现代文：二品命妇，穿戴用金线锈云肩大杂花的霞帔，用金珍珠翡翠装饰，金坠子。
English: A second-class mortal woman, wearing a chrysanthemum with gold thread rust clouds shoulder large mixed flowers, decorated with gold pearl emerald, gold pendant.

古文：三品，衣金绣大杂花霞帔，珠翠妆饰，金坠子。
现代文：三品命妇，穿戴用金线绣大杂花的霞帔礼服，珍珠翡翠装饰，金坠子。
English: A woman of the three orders of life, wearing a chrysanthemum dress embroidered with gold thread and large flowers, decorated with emerald pearls and a gold pendant.

古文：四品，衣绣小杂花霞帔，翠妆饰，金坠子。
现代文：四品命妇，穿戴锈小杂花的霞帔礼服，翡翠装饰，金坠子。
English: A woman of the four orders of life, wearing a gauze gown with small rusty flowers, decorated with emeralds, and a gold pendant.

古文：五品，衣销金大杂花霞帔，生色画绢起花妆饰，金坠子。
现代文：五品命妇，穿戴嵌金色线的大杂花霞帔礼服，缀有突出花纹的色彩鲜艳的昼绢装饰品，金坠子。
English: The five-figure mortal woman, wearing a mixed-flowered chrysanthemum dress inlaid with gold thread, decorated with brightly colored day-glo ornaments with prominent patterns, and a gold pendant.

古文：六品、七品，衣销金小杂花霞帔，生色画绢起花妆饰，镀金银坠子。
现代文：六品、七品命妇，穿戴嵌金色线的小杂花霞帔礼服，缀有突出花纹的色彩鲜艳昀画绢装饰品，镀金的银坠子。
English: A six- or seven-tiered lady-in-waiting, wearing a small mixed-flower chrysanthemum gown inlaid with gold thread, brightly colored enamel decorations with prominent patterns, and a gold-plated silver pendant.

古文：八品、九品，衣大红素罗霞帔，生色画绢妆饰，银坠子。
现代文：八品、九品命妇，穿戴大红色没有花纹的绫罗霞帔礼服，色彩鲜艳的昼绢装饰，银坠子。
English: Eight grade, nine grade mortal woman, wearing a large red halo gown without patterns, brightly colored day gown decoration, silver pendant.

古文：首饰，一品、二品，金玉珠翠。
现代文：首饰，一品，二品命妇，金玉珍珠翡翠。
English: Jewelry, one-piece, two-piece wife, golden jade pearl jade.

古文：三品、四品，金珠翠。
现代文：三品、四品命妇，金珍珠翡翠。
English: Three- and four-course meal, golden pearl jade.

古文：五品，金翠。
现代文：五品命妇，金翡翠。
English: Five-class mortal wife, golden jade.

古文：六品以下，金镀银，间用珠。
现代文：六品以下，镀金银质偶尔用珍珠。
English: Less than six items, gold-plated silver, occasionally with pearls.

古文：五年，更定品官命妇冠服：一品，礼服用山松特髻，翠松五株，金翟八，口衔珠结。
现代文：洪武五年修改有品级官员命妇的礼帽服饰。一品命妇，礼服采用山松特髻，翠松五株，金织野鸡八只，口里衔着珍珠装饰的结。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu's reign, he modified the ceremonial hat attire for the wife of an official of a certain rank. For the wife of a certain rank, the gown was made of special mountain pine, five acacia trees, eight gold-woven pheasants, and a pearl-decorated knot at the mouth.

古文：正面珠翠翟一，珠翠花四朵，珠翠云喜花三朵；后鬓珠梭球一，珠翠飞翟一，珠翠梳四，金云头连三钗一，珠帘梳一，金簪二；珠梭环一双。
现代文：正面珍珠翡翠装饰的野鸡一只，珍珠翡翠装点的花四朵，珍珠翡翠装点的云喜花三朵；后鬓珠梭球一个，珍珠翡翠装饰的飞翔野鹦一只，珍珠翡翠装饰的梳子四把，金云头连三钗一股，珠帘梳一把，金簪两枝；珠梭环一对。
English: Front: a pheasant decorated with pearl emeralds, four flowers decorated with pearl emeralds, three cloud-like flowers decorated with pearl emeralds; back: a pearl shuttle ball, a flying parrot decorated with pearl emeralds, four combs decorated with pearl emeralds, a three-pronged golden cloud head, a pearl curtain comb, two gold braids; a pair of pearl shuttle rings.

古文：大袖衫，用真红色。
现代文：大袖衫，采用真红色。
English: A large-sleeved shirt, in true red.

古文：霞帔、褙子，俱用深青色。
现代文：霞帔、褙子，都采用深青色。
English: The deep blue color is used for both the hazelnut and the hazelnut.

古文：纻丝绫罗纱随用。
现代文：贮丝绫罗纱任随选用。
English: Optional storage yarn can be used.

古文：霞帔上施蹙金绣云霞翟文，鈒花金坠子。
现代文：霞帔礼服上用蹙金绣云霞野鸡花纹，嵌有花纹的金坠子。
English: The pheasant motif embroidered in platinum on the gown, and a gold pendant with the motif.

古文：褙子上施金绣云霞翟文。
现代文：褙子上用金线绣的云霞野鹦花纹。
English: On the satin embroidered with gold thread patterns of clouds and wild parrots.

古文：常服用珠翠庆云冠，珠翠翟三，金翟一，口衔珠结；鬓边珠翠花二，小珠翠梳一双，金云头连三钗一，金压鬓双头钗二，金脑梳一，金簪二；金脚珠翠佛面环一双；镯钏皆用金。
现代文：闲居穿的服饰采用珍珠翡翠修饰的祥云冠，珍珠翡翠装饰的野鸡三只，金线绣的野鹦一只，口里衔着珍珠装饰的结；鬓边珍珠翡翠装点的花两朵，小的用珍珠翡翠装饰的梳一对，金云头连三钗一枝，金压鬓双头钗两枝，金脑梳一把，金簪两枝；金脚珠翠佛面环一双；镯子臂钏都用金制。
English: The costumes worn by the idlers include a crown of clouds adorned with pearls and emeralds, three pheasants decorated with pearls and emeralds, a parrot embroidered with gold thread, a knot decorated with pearls in the mouth; two flowers decorated with pearls and emeralds on the ruffles, a pair of small combs decorated with pearls and emeralds, a three-pronged gold headband, a two-pronged gold necklace, a gold headband, and two gold bracelets; a pair of gold beaded Buddha's face rings; and a pair of gold bracelets.

古文：长袄长裙，各色纻丝绫罗纱随用。
现代文：长袄长裙，各种颜色的纡丝绫罗纱任随选用。
English: Long pleated skirt, various colors of satin crepe yarn optional.

古文：长袄缘襈，或紫或绿，上施蹙金绣云霞翟文。
现代文：长袄镶边，或用紫色或用绿色，上面用蹙金绣云霞野鸡花纹。
English: Long satin edging, either purple or green, topped with gold embroidered clouds and pheasants.

古文：看带，用红绿紫，上施蹙金绣云霞翟文。
现代文：看带，用红色绿色紫色，上面用蹙金绣云霞野鹦花纹。
English: Watch strap, with red, green and purple, topped with gold embroidered cloud parrot pattern.

古文：长裙，横竖金绣缠枝花文。
现代文：长裙，纵横交错金线绣的缠枝花花纹。
English: Long skirt, interlaced gold embroidered twine pattern.

古文：二品，特髻上金翟七，口衔珠结，馀同一品。常服亦与一品同。
现代文：二品命妇，高耸的发髻上金质野鸡装饰七只，口里衔着珍珠装饰的结，其余与一品受封号妇女相同。
English: There are seven golden pheasants on a towering hairpin, and a knot of pearls adorns her mouth. The rest of her is the same as the woman who received the title.

古文：三品，特髻上金孔雀六，口衔珠结。
现代文：闲居时的服饰也与一品命妇相同。三品命妇，特髻上金质孔雀装饰六只，口里衔着珍珠装饰的结。
English: When she is idle, her attire is the same as that of the first-ranked mortal woman. The third-ranked mortal woman is adorned with six golden peacocks on a special brooch, and wears a pearl-decorated knot in her mouth.

古文：正面珠翠孔雀一，后鬓翠孔雀二。
现代文：正面珍珠翡翠的孔雀装饰一只，后鬓翡翠装饰的孑雀两只。
English: One peacock decorated with pearl emerald on the front, two starlings decorated with emerald on the back.

古文：霞帔上施蹙金云霞孔雀文，鈒花金坠子。
现代文：霞帔礼服上用蹙金云霞孔雀图纹，嵌花的金坠子。
English: The gauze gown is embroidered with a gold cloud and peacock pattern, and has a flower-inlaid gold pendant.

古文：褙子上施金绣云霞孔雀文，馀同二品。
现代文：褙子上用金线锈云霞孑雀图纹，其余与二品一样。
English: The braid is decorated with a gold rusted cloud and star pattern, and the rest is the same as the other two items.

古文：常服冠上珠翠孔雀三，金孔雀二，口衔珠结。
现代文：闲居时穿戴的帼子上珍珠翡翠孔雀装饰三只，金孔雀装饰两只，口里衔着珍珠装饰的结。
English: Three peacocks adorned with pearls and emeralds, and two peacocks adorned with gold, are worn on the braid while lounging, and a knot of pearls adorns the mouth.

古文：长袄缘襈。
现代文：长袄镶边。
English: Long satin edging.

古文：看带，或紫或绿，并绣云霞孔雀文。
现代文：看带，或为紫色或为绿色，都绣云霞孔雀花纹。
English: Watch straps, either purple or green, are embroidered with clouds and peacocks.

古文：长裙，横竖襕并绣缠枝花文，馀同二品。
现代文：长裙，纵横的栏都刺绣缠枝花纹，其余与二品命妇相同。
English: Long skirt, the vertical and horizontal columns are embroidered with twine patterns, the rest are the same as the second-class widow.

古文：四品，特髻上金孔雀五，口衔珠结，馀同三品。
现代文：四品命妇，特髻上金质孔雀五只，口里衔着珍珠装饰的结，其余与三品命妇相同。
English: There are five gold peacocks on a special pedestal, and the mouth is adorned with a knot of pearls. The rest are the same as those of the Three Graces.

古文：常服亦与三品同。
现代文：闲居时穿的服饰也与三品命妇相同。
English: The clothing worn while idling is also the same as that of the Three Graces.

古文：五品，特髻上银镀金鸳鸯四，口衔珠结。
现代文：五品命妇，特髻上银质镀金鸳鸯装饰四只，口裹衔着珍珠装饰的结。
English: A five-figure mortal woman, with four silver-gilt cymbals adorning a special urn, her mouth encircled with a pearl-adorned knot.

古文：正面珠翠鸳鸯一，小珠铺翠云喜花三朵；后鬓翠鸳鸯二，银镀金云头连三钗一，小珠帘梳一，镀金银簪二；小珠梳环一双。
现代文：正面珍珠翡翠鸳鸯装饰一只，小珍珠铺上翡翠的云喜花三朵；后鬓翡翠鸳鸯装饰两只，银质镀金云头连三钗一枝，小珍珠帘梳一把，镀金的银簪两枝；小珍珠梳环一对。
English: The front side is decorated with one pearl jade brooch, three small pearls covered with jade clouds and flowers; the back side is decorated with two jade brooches, one silver gilded cloud head with three brooches, one small pearl curtain comb, two gold-plated silver brooches; a pair of small pearl comb rings.

古文：霞帔上施绣云霞鸳鸯文，镀金银鈒花坠子。
现代文：霞帔上用绣云霞鸳鸯花纹，镀金银质嵌有花纹的坠子。
English: The chandelier is decorated with an embroidered cloud chandelier pattern and a gold-plated silver pendant with a pattern.

古文：褙子上施云霞鸳鸯文，馀同四品。
现代文：褙子上用云霞鸳鸯花纹，其余与四品命妇相同。
English: On the braid, Yunxia embroidery patterns are used, and the rest is the same as that of the Four Graces.

古文：常服冠上小珠翠鸳鸯三，镀金银鸳鸯二，挑珠牌。
现代文：闲居穿的服饰帽子上小珍珠翡翠鸳鸯装饰三只，镀金银质鸳鸯两只，挑起的珍珠牌。
English: On the cap worn by the idler, there are three small pearls decorated with emerald enamel, two gold-plated silver enamel, and a raised pearl plate.

古文：鬓边小珠翠花二朵，云头连三钗一，梳一，压鬓双头钗二，镀金簪二；银脚珠翠佛面环一双。
现代文：鬓边小珍珠翡翠花两朵，云头连三钗一枝，梳一把，压鬓的双头钗两枝，镀金簪子两枝；银脚珍珠翡翠佛面环一对。
English: Two ruffled small pearl jade flowers, one three-pronged cymbal, one comb, two double-headed cymbals, two gold-plated pliers; a pair of silver-footed pearl jade Buddha's face rings.

古文：镯钏皆用银镀金。
现代文：镯子臂钏都用银质镀金。
English: The pliers are gold-plated with silver.

古文：长袄缘襈，绣云霞鸳鸯文。
现代文：长袄镶边，刺绣云霞鸳鸯花纹。
English: Long satin edging, embroidered clouds and mists pattern.

古文：长裙，横竖襕绣缠枝花文，馀同四品。
现代文：长裙，纵横栏绣缠枝花纹，其余与四品命妇相同。
English: Long skirt, vertical and horizontal bars embroidered with twine patterns, the rest is the same as that of the Four Graces.

古文：六品，特髻上翠松三株，银镀金练鹊四，口衔珠结。
现代文：六品命妇，特髻上翡翠松三株，银质镀金练鹊四只，口里衔着珍珠装饰的结。
English: A six-figure woman, with three emerald pine trees on a special gong, four silver-gilded gongs, and a pearl-decorated knot in her mouth.

古文：正面银镀金练鹊一，小珠翠花四朵；后鬓翠梭球一，翠练鹊二，翠梳四，银云头连三钗一，珠缘翠帘梳一，银簪二。
现代文：正面银质镀金练鹊一只，小珍珠翡翠花四朵；后鬓翡翠梭球一只，翡翠练鹊两只，翡翠梳四把，银质云头连三钗一枝，珍珠镶边翡翠帘梳一把，银簪两枝。
English: On the front side, there is a silver-plated gold brooch and four small pearl jade flowers; on the back side, there is a jade shuttle ball, two jade brooches, four jade combs, a silver cloud head with three brooches, a pearl-trimmed jade curtain comb, and two silver brooches.

古文：大袖衫，绫罗绢随所用。
现代文：大袖衫，绫罗绸绢任随选用。
English: Large-sleeved shirt, embroidered satin collar, can be used as desired.

古文：霞帔施绣云霞练鹊文，花银坠子。
现代文：霞帔用锈云霞练鹊花纹，嵌花银坠子。
English: Xia Yao uses rusty clouds to practice embroidery patterns, inlaid silver pendants.

古文：褙子上施云霞练鹊文，馀同五品。
现代文：褙子上用云霞练鹊花纹，其余与五品命妇相同。
English: On the braid, Yunxia is used to practice the embroidery pattern, and the rest is the same as that of the Five Elements.

古文：常服冠上镀金银练鹊三，又镀金银练鹊二，挑小珠牌；镯钏皆用银。
现代文：闲居的服饰帽子上镀金银质练鹊装饰三只，还有镀金银质练鹊两只，挑起的小珍珠牌；镯子臂钏都用银。
English: On the cap of the idle costume, there are three gold-plated silver drill pins, and two gold-plated silver drill pins, and a small pearl plate; the braids are all made of silver.

古文：长袄缘襈。
现代文：长袄镶边。
English: Long satin edging.

古文：看带，或紫或绿，绣云霞练鹊文。
现代文：看带，或为紫色或为绿色，刺绣云霞练鹊花纹。
English: Watch the ribbon, either purple or green, embroidering the clouds and practicing the embroidery pattern.

古文：长裙，横竖襕绣缠枝花文，馀同五品。
现代文：长裙，纵横栏绣缠枝花花纹，其余与五品命妇相同。
English: Long skirt, vertical and horizontal columns embroidered with twisted branches and flowers, the rest is the same as the five-tiered life of a woman.

古文：七品，礼服、常服俱同六品。
现代文：七品命妇，礼服、日常服，都与六品命妇相同。
English: The seven-class maids of honour, ceremonial dress and everyday dress are the same as the six-class maids of honour.

古文：其八品、九品礼服，惟用大袖衫、霞帔、褙子。
现代文：八品、九品命的礼服，祇穿戴大袖衫、霞帔、褙子。
English: Eight-piece, nine-piece life-size dresses, just wear a big-sleeved shirt, a halter top, and pigtails.

古文：大衫同七品。
现代文：大衫与七品命妇相同。
English: The blouse is the same as the one worn by the wife of the seven deities.

古文：霞帔上绣缠枝花，鈒花银坠子。
现代文：霞帔上刺绣缠枝花，嵌有花纹的银坠子。
English: The chrysanthemum is decorated with embroidered flowers and a silver pendant.

古文：褙子上绣摘枝团花。
现代文：褙子上刺锈摘枝团花。
English: The braids are pricked with rust to pluck the clumps of flowers.

古文：通用小珠庆云冠。
现代文：全用小珍珠祥云冠。
English: All-purpose small pearl rosary wreath.

古文：常服亦用小珠庆云冠，银间镀金银练鹊三，又银间镀金银练鹊二，挑小珠牌；银间镀金云头连三钗一，银间镀金压鬓双头钗二，银间镀金脑梳一，银间镀金簪二。
现代文：日常服饰也用小珍珠祥云冠，银掺杂镀金的银质练鹊装饰三只，还有银掺杂镀金的银质练鹊装饰两只，挑起的小珍珠牌；银掺杂镀金云头连三钗一枝，银掺杂镀金的压鬓双头钗两枝，银掺杂镀金脑梳一把，银掺杂镀金簪两枝。
English: Everyday clothing also uses small pearls Xiangyun crown, silver-doped gold-plated silver practice beads decorated with three, and silver-doped gold-plated silver practice beads decorated with two, raised small pearls; silver-doped gold-plated cloud head with three bracelets, silver-doped gold-plated embossed double-headed bracelets, silver-doped gold-plated comb, silver-doped gold-plated bracelets.

古文：长袄缘襈、看带并绣缠枝花，馀同七品。
现代文：长袄的绿边、看带都刺绣缠枝花，其余与七品命妇相同。
English: The green border of the long braid and the ribbon are embroidered with twine flowers, and the rest are the same as the Seven Graces.

古文：又定命妇团衫之制，以红罗为之，绣重雉为等第。
现代文：又规定命妇团衫的式样，以红色的绫罗制作它，刺锈重迭的野鸡花纹区别等级。
English: It also stipulates that the style of the women's team shirt should be made of red enamel, and the overlapping pheasant patterns should be of different grades.

古文：一品九等，二品八等，三品七等，四品六等，五品五等，六品四等，七品三等，其馀不用绣雉。
现代文：一品命妇九层，二品命妇八层，三品命妇七层，四品命妇六层，五品命妇五层，六品命妇四层，七品命妇三层，其余不用刺绣的野鹦花纹。
English: There are nine layers of Ipponmeizu, eight layers of IIpponmeizu, seven layers of IIIpponmeizu, six layers of IVpponmeizu, five layers of Vpponmeizu, four layers of VIpponmeizu, and three layers of VIIpponmeizu. The rest of the patterns do not require embroidery.

古文：二十四年定制，命妇朝见君后，在家见舅姑并夫及祭祀则服礼服。
现代文：洪武二十四年定下制度，命妇朝见皇帝皇后，在家拜见公公婆婆和丈夫以及祭祀就穿礼服。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, a system was established, ordering women to wear ceremonial dress when meeting the emperor and empress in the morning, when meeting their parents and husbands at home, and when attending religious services.

古文：公侯伯夫人与一品同。
现代文：公侯伯夫人与一品命妇相同。
English: The Dowager Countess is the same as the Dowager Countess.

古文：大袖衫，真红色。
现代文：大袖衫，真红色。
English: A big-sleeved shirt, bright red.

古文：一品至五品，纻丝绫罗；六品至九品，绫罗绢。
现代文：一品到五品命妇，贮丝绫罗；六品到九品命妇，绫罗绸绢。
English: From one grade to five grades, silk is used; from six grades to nine grades, silk is used.

古文：霞帔、褙子皆深青段。
现代文：霞帔、褙子都是深青色缎。
English: The hazelnuts and hazelnuts are dark blue.

古文：公侯及一品、二品，金绣云霞翟文；三品、四品，金绣云霞孔雀文；五品，绣云霞鸳鸯文；六品、七品，绣云霞练鹊文。
现代文：公侯以及一品、二品命妇，金线刺绣云霞野鹦花纹；三品、四品命妇，金线绣云霞孔雀花纹；五品命妇，绣云霞鸳鸯花纹；六品、七品命妇，刺绣云霞练鹊花纹。
English: Prince and one, two, three, four, five, four, five, six, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven, seven,

古文：大袖衫，领阔三寸，两领直下一尺，间缀纽子三，末缀纽子二，纽在掩纽之下，拜则放之。
现代文：大袖衫，衣领宽三寸，两边衣领垂直向下一尺，中间缝缀纽扣三颗，底部缝缀纽扣两颗，纽扣在用于装饰的假纽扣的下面，跪拜时就解开它们。
English: A large-sleeved shirt, the collar three inches wide, the two sides of the collar one foot vertically downward, three buttons sewn in the middle, two buttons sewn at the bottom, the buttons are below the fake buttons used for decoration, and they are undone when kneeling.

古文：霞帔二条，各绣禽七，随品级用，前四后三。
现代文：霞帔两条，各自刺绣乌七只，根据品级选用，前面四只后面三只。
English: Two chrysanthemums, each embroidered with seven waxes, selected according to grade, four at the front and three at the back.

古文：坠子中鈒花禽一，四面云霞文，禽如霞帔，随品级用。
现代文：坠子里嵌有花纹的乌一只，四面云霞花纹，鸟的花纹与霞帔上鸟的花纹一样，依据品级选用。
English: The pendant is inlaid with a pattern of a blackbird, and the four sides are decorated with cloud patterns. The pattern of the bird is the same as the pattern of the bird on the hawthorn, and is selected according to the grade.

古文：笏以象牙为之。
现代文：朝板用象牙制成。
English: The morning board is made of ivory.

古文：二十六年定，一品，冠用金事件，珠翟五，珠牡丹开头二，珠半开三，翠云二十四片，翠牡丹叶一十八片，翠口圈一副，上带金宝钿花八，金翟二，口衔珠结二。
现代文：洪武二十六年规定，一品命妇，帽子采用金器物，珍珠野鸡装饰五只，珍珠牡丹开头两个，珍珠半开三个，翡翠云片二十四片，翡翠牡丹叶十八片，翡翠口圈一副，上面带有金质宝钿花八朵，金质野鸡装饰两只，口裹衔着珍珠结两个。
English: According to the regulations of the 26th year of Hongwu, there will be a woman of the year, a hat using goldware, five pearl pheasants, two pearl peonies, three half-open pearls, twenty-four emerald cloud pieces, eighteen emerald peony leaves, a pair of emerald mouth rings with eight gold baobab flowers, two gold pheasants, and two pearl knots.

古文：二品至四品，冠用金事件，珠翟四，珠牡丹开头二，珠半开四，翠云二十四片，翠牡丹叶一十八片，翠口圈一副，上带金宝钿花八，金翟二，口衔珠结二。
现代文：二品到四品命妇，帽子采用金器物，珍珠野鸡装饰四只，珍珠牡丹开头两个，珍珠半开四个，翡翠云片二十四片，翡翠牡丹叶片十八片，翡翠日圈一副，上面带有金质宝钿花八朵，金质野鸡装饰两只，口里街着珍珠结两个。
English: Two- to four-tiered maid of honor, the hat is made of goldware, four pearl pheasants are decorated, two pearl peonies are at the beginning, four pearls are half-open, twenty-four emerald cloud pieces, eighteen emerald peony leaves, a pair of emerald sun circles, with eight gold baobab flowers on top, two gold pheasants are decorated, and two pearl knots at the mouth.

古文：一品、二品，霞帔、褙子俱云霞翟文，鈒花金坠子。
现代文：一品、二品命妇，霞帔、褙子都是云霞野鸡花纹，嵌有花纹的金质坠子。
English: The one-piece and two-piece ladies of death, the halberd and the dice are all Yunnan pheasant patterns, gold pendants embedded with patterns.

古文：三品、四品，霞帔、褙子俱云霞孔雀文，鈒花金坠子。
现代文：三品、四品命妇，霞帔、褙子都用云霞孔雀花纹，嵌有花纹的金质坠子。
English: The three-piece and four-piece ladies of the night, the necklace and bracelets are all decorated with clouds and peacocks, and the gold pendants are inlaid with patterns.

古文：五品、六品，冠用抹金银事件，珠翟三，珠牡丹开头二，珠半开五，翠云二十四片，翠牡丹叶一十八片，翠口圈一副，上带抹金银宝钿花八，抹金银翟二，口衔珠结子二。
现代文：五品、六品命妇，帽子采用涂金银质器物，珍珠野鸡装饰三只，珍珠牡丹开头两个，珍珠半开五个，翡翠云片二十四片，翡翠牡丹叶片十八片，翡翠口圈一副，上面带有涂金银质宝钿花八朵，涂金银质野鸡装饰两只，口里衔着珍珠结两个。
English: The five- and six-tiered ladies of the bedchamber, the hat is made of coated gold and silver utensils, three pearl pheasants are decorated, two pearl peonies are at the beginning, five pearls are half-open, twenty-four emerald clouds, eighteen emerald peony leaves, a pair of emerald mouth rings, with eight gold and silver-coated hawthorn flowers on top, two gold and silver-coated pheasants decorated, and two pearl knots in the mouth.

古文：五品，霞帔、褙子俱云霞鸳鸯文，镀金鈒花银坠子。
现代文：五品命妇，霞帔、褙子都用云霞鸳鸯花纹，镀金嵌有花纹的银质坠子。
English: The five-figure wife, the honeysuckle, and the hazelnut are all decorated with the honeysuckle pattern, and the gold-plated silver pendant is embedded with the pattern.

古文：六品，霞帔、褙子俱云霞练鹊文，鈒花银坠子。
现代文：六品命妇，霞帔、褙子都用云霞练鹊花纹，嵌有花纹的银质坠子。
English: The six-figure mortal woman, the honeysuckle, and the hazel all use the clouds to practice the embroidery pattern, and the silver pendant with the pattern.

古文：七品至九品，冠用抹金银事件，珠翟二，珠月桂开头二，珠半开六，翠云二十四片，翠月桂叶一十八片，翠口圈一副，上带抹金银宝钿花八，抹金银翟二，口衔珠结子二。
现代文：七品到九品命妇，帽子采用涂金银质器物，珍珠野鸡装饰两只，珍珠月桂开头两个，珍珠半开六个，翡翠云片二十四片，翡翠月桂叶十八片，翡翠口圈一副，上面带有涂金银质宝钿花八朵，涂金银质野鸡装饰两只，口里衔着珍珠结两个。
English: From the seventh grade to the ninth grade, the maid of honor, the hat uses coated gold and silver utensils, two pearl pheasants are decorated, two pearl laurels are opened, six pearls are half-open, twenty-four emerald clouds, eighteen emerald laurel leaves, a pair of emerald mouth rings, with eight gold and silver-coated hawthorn flowers, two gold and silver-coated pheasants are decorated, and two pearl knots are tied in the mouth.

古文：七品，霞帔、坠子、褙子与六品同。
现代文：七品命妇，霞帔、坠子、褙子，与六品命妇相同。
English: The seven-pronged dowry is the same as the six-pronged dowry.

古文：八品、九品，霞帔用绣缠枝花，坠子与七品同，褙子绣摘枝团花。
现代文：八品、九品命妇，霞帔采用绣缠枝花花纹，坠子与七品命妇相同，褙子刺锈摘枝团花。
English: Eight grade, nine grade maidens, the crest of the honeysuckle uses embroidered twine flower patterns, the pendant is the same as the seven grade maidens, and the braids are rusted to pick flowers.

古文：内外官亲属冠服：洪武元年，礼部尚书崔亮奉诏议定。
现代文：中央及地方官亲属的冠服。洪武元年，礼部尚书崔亮遵奉诏令商议制定。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Choe Ryong, the secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, issued an edict to discuss and formulate the dress code for the relatives of central and local officials.

古文：内外官父、兄、伯、叔、子、孙、弟、侄用乌纱帽，软脚垂带，圆领衣，乌角带。
现代文：中央及地方官的父亲、哥哥、伯伯、叔叔、儿子、孙子、弟弟、侄儿戴乌纱帽，软脚垂带，圆领上衣，黑色角质材料装饰的带子。
English: The fathers, brothers, uncles, uncles, sons, grandsons, brothers, and nephews of the central and local officials wear a black wool cap, a soft garter belt, a round-necked shirt, and a belt decorated with black horny material.

古文：品官祖母及母、与子孙同居亲弟侄妇女礼服，合以本官所居官职品级，通用漆纱珠翠庆云冠，本品衫，霞帔、褙子，缘襈袄裙，惟山松特髻子止许受封诰敕者用之。
现代文：有品级官员的祖母及母亲、和子孙一齐居住的亲弟弟侄儿媳妇的礼服，应该按照该官员所任官职的品级，都用漆纱镶嵌珍珠翡翠的祥云冠，本品级的衣衫，霞帔、褙子，镶边袄裙，惟有山松特髻子，只允许被朝廷授予了封诰敕书的人使用。
English: The gowns of the grandmother and mother of an official of a certain grade, and of the brothers and sisters, nephews and daughters-in-law, who live together with their children and grandchildren, should, according to the grade of the official position held by the official, all use lacquer yarn inlaid with pearls and emeralds of the Xiangyun Crown, and the shirts of this grade, satin, satin, and hemmed satin skirts, except for mountain pine special satin, are only allowed to be used by those who have been awarded a seal by the court.

古文：品官次妻，许用本品珠翠庆云冠、褙子为礼服。
现代文：有品级官员的次妻，允许用本品级官的珍珠翡翠装饰的祥云冠、褙子作为礼服。
English: The second wife of an official with a rank is allowed to use the official's pearl and jade-decorated crown and braid as a dress.

古文：销金阔领、长袄长裙为常服。
现代文：嵌金色线的阔领、长袄长裙为闲居穿的日常服饰。
English: A wide collar with gold embroidered lines and a long skirt with long pleats were the everyday clothing worn by idlers.

古文：二十五年，令文武官父兄、伯叔、弟侄、子婿，皆许穿靴。
现代文：洪武二十五年，命令文武官父亲哥哥、伯伯叔叔、弟弟侄儿、儿子女婿，都允许穿靴子。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, he ordered that the father's brother, uncle's uncle, brother's nephew, son's son-in-law of the military attaché were all allowed to wear boots.

古文：内使冠服：明初置内使监，冠乌纱描金曲脚帽，衣胸背花盘领窄袖衫，乌角带，靴用红扇面黑下〈木舂〉。
现代文：宦官的冠服。明朝初年设置内使监，戴以黑纱制成并用金粉描画的曲脚帽，衣服前胸后背有花纹的圆领窄袖衫，用黑色角质材料装饰的带，靴用红色鞋面黑色帮底。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the eunuch's crown robe was set up. He wore a bowler hat made of black yarn and painted with gold powder, a round-necked narrow-sleeved shirt with a pattern on the front, chest and back, a belt decorated with black horny material, and shoes with red uppers and black soles.

古文：各宫火者，服与庶人同。
现代文：各个宫里被合的仆役，服饰与平民相同。
English: The servants in each palace wore the same clothes as the commoners.

古文：洪武三年谕宰臣，内使监未有职名者，当别制冠，以别监官。
现代文：洪武三年谕令大臣，内使监没有职衔名籍的人，应当另外制作帽子，以与监官区别。
English: The Hongwu Three-yearly Decree ordered the minister, and those who do not have the title and nationality of the internal affairs inspector should make a hat separately to distinguish themselves from the inspector.

古文：礼部奏定，内使监凡遇朝会，依品具朝服、公服行礼。
现代文：礼部进奏章制定，内使监凡是遇到朝见皇帝的典礼，按照品级穿戴朝服、公行礼。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies issued a pre-ceremony chapter, and envoys were required to wear the imperial robe and perform the imperial salute according to their rank whenever they met the emperor for a ceremonial audience.

古文：其常服，葵花胸背团领衫，不拘颜色；乌纱帽；犀角带。
现代文：他们闲居时穿的日常服饰，胸前背后有葵花花纹的圆领衫，不论颜色；乌纱帽；犀角装饰的带。
English: The everyday clothes they wear when they are idle, a round neck shirt with a sunflower pattern on the front and back, regardless of color; a black hat; a belt decorated with rhinoceros horns.

古文：无品从者，常服团领衫，无胸背花，不拘颜色；乌角带；乌纱帽，垂软带。
现代文：没有品级的随从人员，闲居穿的日常服为圆领衫，胸前背后没有花纹，不论颜色；黑色角质材料装饰的带；乌纱帽，垂软带。
English: Unranked attendants, loafing around in everyday clothes, wear a round-necked shirt, with no pattern on the front or back of the chest, regardless of color; a belt decorated with black horny material; a black wool cap, and a hanging soft belt.

古文：年十五以下者，惟戴乌纱小顶帽。
现代文：年龄十五岁以下的，只戴乌纱小顶帽。
English: Those under the age of fifteen only wear a black cap.

古文：按《大政记》，永乐以后，宦官在帝左右，必蟒服，制如曳撒，绣蟒于左右，系以鸾带，此燕闲之服也。
现代文：查考《大政记》，永乐以后，宦官在皇帝身边的，必定服用绣有蟒纹的衣服，式样如同戎装曳撒，在左右两边刺锈蟒图纹，用鸾带系，这是闲居穿的衣服。
English: According to the "Great Political Record," after Yongle, eunuchs around the emperor must wear clothes embroidered with embroidered patterns. The style is like a military uniform, embroidered with rust patterns on the left and right sides, and tied with ribbons. This is casual wear.

古文：次则飞鱼，惟入侍用之。
现代文：次一等的就穿绣有飞鱼花纹的衣服，惟有入宫侍奉时穿它。
English: The second-highest rank wore clothes embroidered with flying fish patterns, but only when entering the palace to serve.

古文：贵而用事者，赐蟒，文武一品官所不易得也。
现代文：地位高贵又掌权的，赏赐蟒服，这是文武一品官所不容易获得的。
English: The noblest and most powerful officials were rewarded with the imperial robe, which was not easy to obtain for a man of letters and a military officer.

古文：单蟒面皆斜向，坐蟒则面正向，尤贵。
现代文：单蟒都向着偏斜的方向，坐蟒却朝着正面，尤其尊贵。
English: Single gongs are tilted in the direction, but sitting gongs are facing the front, which is especially noble.

古文：又有膝襕者，亦如曳撒，上有蟒补，当膝处横织细云蟒，盖南郊及山陵扈从，便于乘马也。
现代文：还有一种膝栏，也如同戎装曳撒，上面有绣有蟒纹的徽饰，在膝盖部位横纤着细云蟒，大概举行南郊以及皇帝陵墓的祭祀时护卫侍从穿着，是为了便于乘马。
English: There is also a kind of knee rail, which is also like a military costume, with a crest embroidered on it, and a thin cloud embroidered on the knee area. It was probably worn by the guards and attendants during the sacrifices held in the southern suburbs and the emperor's tomb, in order to make it easier to ride a horse.

古文：或召对燕见，君臣皆不用袍而用此；第蟒有五爪、四爪之分，襕有红、黄之别耳。
现代文：有时候皇帝召见对答平常接见，皇帝宦官都不穿袍，而穿蟒服；只是蟒有五个爪子、四个爪子的分别，栏有红色、黄色的差异而已。
English: Sometimes the emperor summons and receives ordinary audiences, and the emperor's eunuchs do not wear robes, but wear robes; it's just that the robes have five paws and four paws, and the columns have red and yellow differences.

古文：弘治元年，都御史边镛言： 国朝品官无蟒衣之制。
现代文：弘治元年，都御史边锈说： 我朝有品级官吏没有蟒衣制度。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, the Metropolitan Historian Bian Rust said: In my time, there was no dress code for officials of certain ranks.

古文：夫蟒无角、无足，今内官多乞蟒衣，殊类龙形，非制也。 
现代文：蟒没有角、没有足，现在宦官很多乞求穿蟒衣，非常像龙的形态，不合规矩。 
English: Dragonflies don't have horns or legs, and now many eunuchs are begging to wear a dragon robe, which is very similar to the shape of a dragon and is against the rules.

古文：乃下诏禁之。
现代文：于是下诏书禁止穿蟒服。
English: As a result, the Emperor issued an edict forbidding the wearing of such clothing.

古文：十七年，谕阁臣刘健曰： 内臣僣妄尤多。 
现代文：弘治十七年，皇帝训谕内阁大臣刘健说： 宦官非法超越礼制妄为的尤其多。 
English: In the 17th year of the Hongzhi era, the emperor ordered the cabinet minister Liu Jian to say: "There are especially many eunuchs who illegally overstep the etiquette.

古文：因言服色所宜禁，曰： 蟒、龙、飞鱼、斗牛，本在所禁，不合私织。
现代文：刘健趁机建议衣服花样颜色应当禁止，说： 蟒、龙、飞鱼、斗牛，本来在禁止的范围中，不应当私自编织。
English: Liu Jian took the opportunity to suggest that the colors of clothing patterns should be banned, saying: dragonflies, dragons, flying fish, bullfights, originally in the scope of the ban, should not be privately woven.

古文：间有赐者，或久而敝，不宜辄自织用。
现代文：偶尔有赏赐的，有的时间久了就破了，不应当擅自编织使用。
English: Occasionally there is a reward, sometimes it takes a long time to break, and it should not be used without permission.

古文：玄、黄、紫、皂乃属正禁，即柳黄、明黄、姜黄诸色，亦应禁之。 
现代文：玄、黄、紫、皂色是属于正当禁止的，就是柳黄、明黄、茎黄等颜色，也应当禁止。 
English: Dark, yellow, purple, and soapy colors are justifiably prohibited, that is, colors such as willow yellow, bright yellow, and stem yellow should also be prohibited.

古文：孝宗加意钳束，故申饬者再，然内官骄姿已久，积习相沿，不能止也。初，太祖制内臣服，其纱帽与群臣异，且无朝冠、幞头，亦无祭服。
现代文：孝宗特别注意控制束缚，所以命令整顿了好几次，然而宦官骄横放肆已经很久，长期以来形成的习惯递相沿袭，不能禁止最初，太祖制定宦官服饰，他们的纱帽与众臣不一样，而且没有上朝时戴的朝冠、幞头，也没有祭祀时穿的祭服。
English: Xiaozong paid special attention to controlling restraints, so the order was rectified several times. However, eunuchs have been arrogant and arrogant for a long time. The habits formed for a long time have been passed down, and cannot be prohibited. At first, the great ancestor made eunuch costumes. Their gauze caps are different from those of all his subjects, and there is no crown or skullcap worn during the reign, and there is no ceremonial dress worn during sacrifices.

古文：万历初，穆宗主入太庙，大榼冠进贤，服祭服以从，盖内府祀中霤、灶井之神，例遣中官，因自创为祭服，非由廷议也。
现代文：万历初年，穆宗的神位送入太庙，大宦官戴着进贤冠，穿着祭服跟从，大概宫中祭祀中溜、灶井的神，照例派遣宦官，宦官因而自己创制祭服，不是通过朝廷商量决定的。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the divine throne of Mu Zong was sent to the imperial temple, and the great eunuchs wore the crown of merit and followed in ceremonial clothes. The gods of the palace, such as Zhonglu and Zoujing, were usually sent as eunuchs, and the eunuchs thus created their own ceremonial clothes, which were not decided through discussions in the imperial court.

古文：侍仪舍人冠服：洪武二年，礼官议定。
现代文：侍仪舍人的翘服。洪武二年，负责礼仪的官员商量确定。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the officials in charge of etiquette discussed and decided.

古文：侍仪舍人导礼，依元制，展脚幞头，窄袖紫衫，涂金束带，皂纹靴。
现代文：侍仪舍人引导礼仪，依照元朝的制度，展脚幞头，窄袖紫衫，涂金腰带，黑色的有花纹的靴子。
English: Attendants guide the etiquette, in accordance with the system of the Yuan Dynasty, with open toes, a narrow-sleeved purple shirt, a gold-plated belt, and black patterned boots.

古文：常服：乌纱唐帽，诸色盘领衫，乌角束带，衫不用黄。
现代文：闲居穿的日常服，唐朝时戴的一种乌纱唐帽，各种颜色的圆领衫，黑色角质材料装饰的腰带，衫不用黄色。
English: Everyday clothes worn by idlers, a kind of black silk Tang cap worn during the Tang Dynasty, a round neck shirt of various colors, a belt decorated with black horny material, the shirt does not use yellow.

古文：四年，中书省议定，侍仪舍人并御史台知班，引礼执事，冠进贤冠，无梁，服绛色衣，其蔽膝、履、袜、带、笏，与九品同，惟不用中单。
现代文：洪武四年，中书省商量决定，侍仪舍人以及御史台掌管朝班仪节的人，引导礼仪办理事务，戴进贤冠，没有梁，穿绛色衣服，他们的蔽膝、鞋、袜；带、朝笏，与九品官相同，只是不穿里衣。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, it was decided in consultation with the Ministry of Education and Culture that the attendants of the ceremony and the people in charge of the ceremony of the morning shift on the History Channel would guide the etiquette of the ceremony, wear the crown of virtue, without beams, wear navy-colored clothes, and their knee covers, shoes, socks, belts, and chasubles would be the same as those of the nine dignitaries, except that they would not wear underwear.

古文：校尉冠服：洪武三年定制，执仗之士，首服皆缕金额交脚幞头，其服有诸色辟邪、宝相花裙袄，铜葵花束带，皂纹靴。
现代文：校尉的冠服。洪武三年规定制度，持兵杖的卫士冠都是缕金额交脚幞头，他们的衣服有各种颜色的绣有辟邪、实相花花纹的裙袄，铜葵花花纹的腰带，黑色有花纹的靴子。
English: The Hongwu three-year regulation system, the guard's crowns with canes are all intertwined, and their clothes have various colors of embroidered anti-evil, real flower pattern skirts, bronze sunflower pattern belts, black patterned boots.

古文：六年，令校尉衣只孙，束带，幞头，靴鞋。
现代文：洪武六年，命令校尉穿戴只孙服，腰带，幞头，靴子。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, he ordered the captain to wear only his grandson's uniform, belt, hat and boots.

古文：只孙，一作质孙，本元制，盖一色衣也。
现代文：只孙，又写作质孙，原本是元朝的式样，就是一种颜色的衣服。
English: Tassun, also written as quintessential grandson, was originally a style of the Yuan Dynasty, is a color of clothing.

古文：十四年改用金鹅帽，黑漆戗金荔枝铜钉样，每五钉攒就，四面稍起边襕，鞓青紧束之。
现代文：洪武十四年，改用金色的鹅毛装饰的帽子，黑漆描绘填嵌赤金的荔枝铜钉式样，每五颗铜钉搅集一处，四面稍起边框横栏，青色腰带紧紧束缚住它。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, he changed to a hat decorated with golden goose feathers. The black paint depicts a litchi copper nail pattern filled with red gold. Every five copper nails are collected in one place. The border is slightly raised on all sides, and a blue belt tightly binds it.

古文：二十二年，令将军、力士、校尉、旗军常戴头巾或榼脑。
现代文：洪武二十二年，命令将军、力士、校尉、旗军，平常戴头巾或磕脑。
English: In the 22nd year of Hongwu, he ordered generals, wrestlers, lieutenants, and standard-bearers to wear a headscarf or a skullcap.

古文：二十五年，令校尉、力士上直穿靴，出外不许。
现代文：洪武二十五年命令校尉、力士，入宫值班时穿靴，外出时不允许穿靴。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered the captain and wrestlers to wear shoes when entering the palace on duty, and not to wear shoes when going out.

古文：刻期冠服：宋置快行亲从官，明初谓之刻期。
现代文：刻期的冠服。宋朝设置快行跟从官，明朝初年称之为刻期。
English: The Song Dynasty established the fast-moving follower, and the first year of the Ming Dynasty was called the calendar year.

古文：冠方顶巾，衣胸背鹰鹞，花腰，线袄子，诸色阔匾丝绦，大象牙雕花环，行縢八带鞋。
现代文：戴方顶头巾，穿胸前背后锈有鹰鸥花纹的衣服，腰部有花纹，线织袄子，各种颜色的宽匾形丝带，大象牙雕花环，绑腿八带鞋。
English: Wearing a square-topped headscarf, wearing a dress with a rusted eagle embroidery pattern on the front and back of the chest, a pattern on the waist, woven braids, wide ribbon ribbons of various colors, elephant tusk carved wreaths, and eight-strap shoes.

古文：洪武六年，惟用雕刻象牙绦环，馀同庶民。
现代文：洪武六年，只用象牙雕刻成的带环，其余与平民相同。
English: Hongwu six years, only with ivory carved ring, the rest the same as civilians.

古文：儒士、生员、监生巾服：洪武三年，令士人戴四方平定巾。
现代文：儒学之士、生员、在园子监学习的监生的头巾衣服。洪武三年，下令读书人戴四方平定巾。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered the scholars to wear the four-cornered flat scarf.

古文：二十三年，定儒士、生员衣，自领至裳，去地一寸，袖长过手，复回不及肘三寸。
现代文：洪武二十三年，制定儒士、秀才衣服式样，从领到下裙，离地一寸，衣袖长度超过手，折叠回来的部分离肘部三寸。
English: In the 23rd year of Hongwu, the clothing style of Confucius and Xiu Cai was formulated. From the neckline to the lower skirt, it is one inch from the ground, the sleeve length exceeds the hand, and the folded back part is three inches from the elbow.

古文：二十四年，以士子巾服，无异吏胥，宜甄别之，命工部制式以进。
现代文：洪武二十四年，认为读书人的头巾衣服，与下级官吏没有区别，应当区别开来，命令工部设讣式样进呈。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, he thought that the headscarves and clothes of readers were no different from those of lower-level officials, and should be distinguished, and ordered the work department to set up and submit a pattern.

古文：太祖亲视，凡三易乃定。
现代文：太祖亲自察看，总共修改了三次纔决定。
English: Grandfather personally inspected and revised the decision three times in total.

古文：生员襕衫，用玉色布绢为之，宽袖皂缘，皂绦软巾垂带。
现代文：生员的栏衫，采用玉色布绢制作，宽袖黑边，黑色丝绳软巾垂带。
English: The lifeguard's shirt, made of jade-colored cloth, wide sleeves with black edges, black silk cord soft towel hanging belt.

古文：贡举入监者，不变所服。
现代文：通过科举考试进国子监的，不改变所穿的衣服。
English: Those who pass the imperial examination and enter the state kindergarten will not change the clothes they wear.

古文：洪武末，许戴遮阳帽，后遂私戴之。
现代文：洪武末年，允许戴遮阳帽，后来便私自戴这种帽子了。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's life, he was allowed to wear a sun visor, and later he wore such a hat himself.

古文：洪熙中，帝问衣蓝者何人，左右以监生对。
现代文：洪熙年间，皇帝问穿蓝色衣服的是何种人，左右侍从回答说是监生。
English: During the Hongxi era, when the emperor asked what kind of person was wearing blue clothes, the right and left attendants answered that it was a probationer.

古文：帝曰： 著青衣较好。 
现代文：皇帝说： 穿青色衣服比较好。 
English: The emperor said: It is better to wear blue clothes.

古文：乃易青圆领。
现代文：于是变成青色圆领。
English: It turned out to be a blue collar.

古文：嘉靖二十二年，礼部言士子冠服诡异，有凌云等巾，甚乖礼制，诏所司禁之。
现代文：嘉靖二十二年，礼部说读书人帽子衣服诡怪奇异，有的用凌云巾等式样的头巾，很违背礼法制度，诏令有关部门禁止这类现象。
English: In the 22nd year of Jiajing, the Ministry of Etiquette said that the hats and clothes of the readers were strange and bizarre, and some of them used headscarves like Lingyun scarves, which was very contrary to the etiquette system, and ordered the relevant departments to prohibit such phenomena.

古文：万历二年禁举人、监生、生儒僣用忠静冠巾，锦绮镶履及张伞盖，戴暖耳，违者五城御史送问。
现代文：万历二年禁止举人、监生、一般儒生越级用忠静冠巾，锦绮料子镶饰的鞋以及张设伞盖，戴耳套，违背的送交五城御史定罪。
English: In the second year of the Wanli era, it was forbidden to elevate people, inmates, and ordinary Confucian students to a higher level, and they were sentenced to be sent to the Five Cities Imperial History Museum if they used the Zhongjing wreath, or shoes decorated with brocade materials, or put up umbrella covers, or wore ear muffs.

古文：庶人冠服：明初，庶人婚，许假九品服。
现代文：平民的冠服。明朝初年，平民结婚，允许借穿九品衣服。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, commoners got married and were allowed to borrow nine articles of clothing.

古文：洪武三年，庶人初戴四带巾，改四方平定巾，杂色盘领衣，不许用黄。
现代文：洪武三年，平民起初戴四带头巾，改成四方平定头巾，驳杂颜色的圆领衣，不允许用黄色。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, civilians initially wore a four-banded headscarf, changed to a four-sided flat headscarf, and a round collar of mixed colors, and yellow was not allowed.

古文：又令男女衣服，不得僣用金绣、锦绮、纻丝、绫罗，止许、绢、素纱，其靴不得裁制花样、金线装饰。
现代文：又命令男女衣服，不能越分采用金绣、锦绮、纡丝、绫罗这些衣料，只许采用绸、绢、素纱，他们的靴子不能剪裁制作花样以及用金线装饰。
English: They also ordered that men's and women's clothing should not be made of gold embroidery, brocade, satin, and satin, but only of silk, satin, and plain yarn, and that their boots should not be trimmed or decorated with gold thread.

古文：首饰、钗、镯不许用金玉、珠翠，止用银。
现代文：首饰、钗、镯不允许用金玉、珍珠翡翠，只能用银。
English: It is not allowed to use gold or jadeite or jadeite pearls for jewelry, bracelets, or necklaces, but only silver.

古文：六年，令庶人巾环不得用金玉、玛瑙、珊瑚、琥珀。
现代文：洪武六年，命令平民缀在巾上的环不能用金玉、玛瑙、珊瑚、琥珀。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered the commoners not to use gold, onyx, coral or amber for the rings on their scarves.

古文：未入流品者同。
现代文：不入品级的人相同。
English: The same applies to those who do not make the grade.

古文：庶人帽，不得用顶，帽珠止许水晶、香木。
现代文：平民的帽子，不能用顶子，帽珠祇许用水晶、香木。
English: Civilian hats must not have a peak, and the beads may only be made of crystal or fragrant wood.

古文：十四年令农衣、纱、绢、布，商贾止衣绢、布。
现代文：洪武十四年，命令农民穿绸、纱、绢、布，商人祇许穿绢、布。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, he ordered the peasants to wear silk, yarn, embroidery and cloth, while the merchants were only allowed to wear embroidery and cloth.

古文：农家有一人为商贾者，亦不得衣、纱。
现代文：农民家庭中如有一个人是商人，也不能穿绸、纱。
English: If one member of a peasant family is a merchant, he or she is not allowed to wear silk or yarn.

古文：二十二年，令农夫戴斗笠、蒲笠出入市井不禁，不亲农业者不许。
现代文：洪武二十二年，命令农民可以戴斗笠、蒲笠，在集市中出入时不禁止，不亲自从事农业生产者不允许。
English: In the 22nd year of Hongwu, it was ordered that farmers could wear a cone hat and a paper hat. They were not prohibited from entering and leaving the market, and those who did not personally engage in agricultural production were not allowed.

古文：二十三年，令耆民衣制，袖长过手，复回不及肘三寸；庶人衣长去地五寸，袖长过手六寸，袖桩广一尺，袖口五寸。
现代文：洪武二十三年，命令规定年高有德的平民衣服的式样，袖子长度超过手，折叠回来的部分离肘部三寸；平民衣服的长度，离地五寸，袖长超过手六寸，袖管宽一尺，袖口宽五寸。
English: In the 23rd year of Hongwu's reign, an order was issued to stipulate that the length of the sleeve should be longer than the hand, and the folded back part should be three inches from the elbow; the length of the civilian clothes should be five inches from the ground, the sleeve length should be more than six inches, the sleeve tube should be one foot wide, and the cuff should be five inches wide.

古文：二十五年，以民间违禁，靴巧裁花样，嵌以金线蓝条，诏礼部严禁庶人不许穿靴，止许穿皮札〈革翁〉，惟北地苦寒，许用牛皮直缝靴。
现代文：洪武二十五年，因为民间违背禁令，靴子巧妙地裁剪花样，用金线蓝带镶嵌，诏令礼部严禁平民穿靴子，只许穿皮札翰鞋，惟有北方苦于严寒，允许穿牛皮直缝靴。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, because of the people's violation of the ban, the boots were cleverly cut with patterns and inlaid with gold thread and blue ribbon. The Ministry of Etiquette strictly prohibited civilians from wearing boots and only allowed them to wear leather shoes. Only in the north, suffering from severe cold, was it allowed to wear cowhide straight-stitched shoes.

古文：正德元年，禁商贩、仆役、倡优、下贱不许服用貂裘。
现代文：正德元年禁令商贩、仆人役夫、娼妓戏子、卑贱的人不允许穿貂裘。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, merchants, servants, prostitutes, actors, and low-class people were not allowed to wear gowns.

古文：十六年，禁军民衣紫花罩甲，或禁门或四外游走者，缉事人擒之。
现代文：正德十六年，禁止士兵平民穿紫花外套，在宫门或四处流浪的，负责侦察搜捕事务的人会逮捕他们。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, it was forbidden for soldiers and civilians to wear jackets with purple flowers. Those who wandered around the palace gate or elsewhere would be arrested by the person in charge of reconnaissance and search.

古文：士庶妻冠服：洪武三年定制，士庶妻，首饰用银镀金，耳环用金珠，钏镯用银，服浅色团衫，用纻丝、绫罗、绢。
现代文：百姓的妻子的冠服。洪武三年规定制度，百姓的妻子，首饰采用银镀金，耳环用金子珍珠，臂钏镯子用银，穿浅色团衫，用纡丝、绫罗、绸绢。
English: The Hongwu three-year regulation system, the people's wife, the jewelry is made of silver-plated gold, the earrings are made of gold pearls, the bracelets are made of silver, the light-colored blouses are made of silk, silk and silk.

古文：五年，令民间妇人礼服惟紫絁，不用金绣，袍衫止紫、绿、桃红及诸浅淡颜色，不许用大红、鸦青、黄色，带用蓝绢布。
现代文：洪武五年，下令民间妇人的礼服只能用紫色的粗绸，不许用金缕刺绣，袍子衫子只许紫、绿、桃红以及各种浅淡的颜色，不许用大红、鸦青、黄色，带用蓝色丝麻织物。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu, it was ordered that the dresses of the women of the people should only be made of purple coarse silk, and should not be embroidered with gold threads. The robes and shirts should only be made of purple, green, pink and various light colors, and should not be made of crimson, raven blue and yellow, and the belt should be made of blue silk fabric.

古文：女子在室者，作三小髻，金钗，珠头閟窄袖褙子。
现代文：未出嫁的女子，梳三个小发髻，金钗，珍珠装饰的头巾，窄袖褙子。
English: An unmarried woman wears three small hair buns, a gold braid, a headscarf decorated with pearls, and narrow-sleeved braids.

古文：凡婢使，高顶髻，绢布狭领长袄，长裙。
现代文：凡是女仆，高顶式发髻，丝麻织物制的窄领长袄，长裙。
English: Usually a maid, with a high-top hair bun, a long satin dress with a narrow neckline, and a long skirt.

古文：小婢使，双髻，长袖短衣，长裙。
现代文：年幼的女仆，一对发髻，长袖短衣，长裙。
English: A young maid, a pair of hairpins, a long-sleeved short dress, a long skirt.

古文：成化十年，禁官民妇女不得僣用浑金衣服，宝石首饰。
现代文：成化十年下禁令，官员平民妇女不能越分穿戴浑金衣服，宝石首饰。
English: After ten years of the ban, officials and civilian women can no longer wear gold clothes and jewelry.

古文：正德元年，令军民妇女不许用销金衣服、帐幔，宝石首饰、镯钏。
现代文：正德元年，命令士兵平民妇女不许穿用嵌金色线的衣服、帷幕，宝石首饰、镯子臂钏。
English: In the first year of the Zhengde era, soldiers ordered civilian women not to wear clothes, curtains, jewelry, and braids with gold thread.

古文：协律郎、乐舞生冠服：明初，郊社宗庙用雅乐，协律郎幞头，紫罗袍，荔枝带；乐生绯袍，展脚幞头；舞士幞头，红罗袍，荔枝带，皂靴；文舞生红袍，武舞生绯袍，俱展脚幞头，革带，皂靴。
现代文：协律郎、乐生、舞生的冠服。明朝初年，祭祀天地祖先时用雅乐，协律郎着幞头，紫罗袍，荔枝带；乐生穿徘红色袍，展脚幞头；舞士着幞头，红罗袍，荔枝带，黑色靴子；跳文舞的人穿红袍，跳武舞的人穿徘红袍，都是展脚幞头，革带，黑色靴子。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, when the ancestors of heaven and earth were sacrificed, the music was used, and the music master wore a skullcap, a violet robe, and a lychee belt; the music student wore a red robe and a wide-legged skullcap; the dancer wore a skullcap, a red robe, a lychee belt, and black boots; the dancer wore a red robe, and the dancer wore a wide-legged skullcap, a leather belt, and black boots.

古文：朝会大乐九奏歌工：中华一统巾，红罗生色大袖衫，画黄莺、鹦鹉花样，红生绢衬衫，锦领，杏红绢裙，白绢大口袴，青丝绦，白绢袜，茶褐鞋。
现代文：朝见皇帝时奏大乐九曲的奏歌艺人：戴中华一统巾，穿红罗色彩鲜艳的大袖衫，绘黄莺、鹦鹉花样，红色生绢衬衫，锦织衣领，杏红色绢裙，白绢大口裤，青丝带，白绢袜，茶褐色鞋。
English: The performers of the Nine Pieces of Great Music at the Emperor's Court: They wear a traditional Chinese scarf, a brightly-colored long-sleeved shirt with red embroidery and parrot patterns, a red gingerbread shirt, brocade collar, apricot-red pleated skirt, white pleated trousers, blue ribbon, white pleated socks, and tea-brown shoes.

古文：其和声郎押乐者：皂罗阔带巾，青罗大袖衫，红生绢衬衫，锦领，涂金束带，皂靴。
现代文：押乐的和声郎：戴黑色罗制宽带巾，穿青罗大袖衫，红色生绢衬衫，锦色衣领，镀金腰带，黑色高帮白色厚底的皂靴。
English: Accompanist: Wears a black wide-brimmed shawl, a blue-and-black long-sleeved shirt, a red gingham shirt, a brocade collar, a gold-plated belt, and black high-heeled white thick-soled soap boots.

古文：其三舞：一、武舞，曰《平定天下之舞》。
现代文：它的三种舞：一、武舞，名叫《平定天下之舞》。
English: It has three kinds of dances: one is the martial dance, called the "Dance of Pacifying the World."

古文：舞士皆黄金束发冠，紫丝缨，青罗生色画舞鹤花样窄袖衫，白生绢衬衫，锦领、红罗销金大袖罩袍，红罗销金裙，皂生色画花缘襈，白罗销金汗袴，蓝青罗销金缘，红绢拥项，红结子，红绢束腰，涂金束带，青丝大绦，锦臂韝，绿云头皂靴。
现代文：跳舞的人，都戴黄金束发冠，紫色丝带制的系冠带子，青色绫罗色彩鲜艳绘有跳舞的仙鹤花样的窄袖衫，白生绢衬衫，锦领、红色绫罗嵌金大袖的穿在外面的袍子，红色绫罗嵌金线的裙，黑色色彩鲜艳的绘花衣边，白色绫罗嵌金线的汗裤，蓝青色绫罗嵌金线的衣边，红绢围颈饰物，红结子，红绢束腰，涂金束带，青丝大带锦臂衣，绿云头黑色高帮白色厚底的靴子。
English: The dancers all wore golden hair crowns, crowning bands made of purple ribbons, blue satin-colored narrow-sleeved shirts brightly painted with dancing cranes, white satin shirts, brocade collars, red satin-embroidered gold robes with large sleeves, red satin-embroidered gold skirts, black brightly colored flowered hemlines, white satin-embroidered gold sweatpants, blue-blue satin-embroidered gold hemlines, red satin necklaces, red knots, red satin waistbands, gold-painted garter belts, blue silk large-band brocade jackets,

古文：舞师，黄金束发冠，紫丝缨，青罗大袖衫，白绢衬衫，锦领，涂金束带，绿云头皂靴。
现代文：舞蹈的人，戴黄金束发冠，紫色丝带制的系冠的带子，青色绫罗大袖衫，白绢衬衫，锦缎衣领，涂金束带，绿云头黑色高帮白色厚底的靴子。
English: A dancer, wearing a golden hair crown, a band of a crown made of purple ribbons, a blue satin blouse, a white satin blouse, a brocade collar, a gold-painted ribbon, a green top, a black high top and white thick-soled boots.

古文：一、文舞，曰《车书会同之舞》。
现代文：一、文舞，名叫《车书会同之舞》。
English: First, the literary dance, called "The Dance of the Car Book Club."

古文：舞士皆黑光描金方山冠，青丝缨，红罗大袖衫，红生绢衬衫，锦领，红罗拥项，红结子，涂金束带，白绢大口袴，白绢袜，茶褐鞋。
现代文：跳舞的人，都戴黑色光亮用金粉描绘的方山冠，青色丝线制的系冠带子，穿红色绫罗大袖衫，红色生绢衬衫，锦缎衣领，红色绫罗围颈饰物，红结子，涂金腰带，白绢大口裤，白绢袜，茶褐色的鞋。
English: The dancers are all wearing black shining square crowns painted with gold powder, crowning bands made of blue silk thread, red satin blouses, red satin blouses, brocade collars, red satin necklaces, red knots, gold-plated belts, white satin trousers, white satin socks, and tea-brown shoes.

古文：舞师冠服与舞士同，惟大袖衫用青罗，不用红罗拥项、红结子。
现代文：跳舞者帽子服饰与跳武舞的人相同，只是大袖衫用青色绫罗，不用红色绫罗围颈饰物、红结子。
English: Dancers wear the same hats and costumes as those who dance martial arts, but they wear a large-sleeved shirt with a blue halo, and do not use red halo necklaces or red knots.

古文：一、文舞，曰《抚安四夷之舞》。
现代文：一、文舞，名叫《抚安四夷之舞》。
English: First, the literary dance, called the "Dance of the Four Emperors of Fuan."

古文：舞士，东夷四人，椎髻于后，系红销金头绳，红罗销金抹额，中缀涂金博山，两傍缀涂金巾环，明金耳环，青罗生色画花大袖衫，红生色领袖，红罗销金裙，青销金裙缘，红生绢衬衫，锦领，涂金束带，乌皮靴。
现代文：跳舞的人，四个东夷人，在后面扎椎形发髻，系红色嵌金线头绳，红色绫罗嵌金线束在额上的头巾，中间系着涂金博山，两旁系着涂金巾环，明金耳环，青色绫罗色彩鲜明的绘花大袖衫，红色色彩鲜明的衣领和衣袖，红色绫罗嵌金线的下裙，青色嵌金线的裙边，红色生绢衬衫，锦缎衣领，涂金腰带，乌皮靴。
English: The dancers, four Eastern Yi people, tied a hairpin in the back, tied a red gold-embroidered head rope, a red gold-embroidered head scarf tied on the forehead, tied a gold-painted Mt. Bo in the middle, tied a gold-painted scarf ring, a gold-painted earring on both sides, a blue gold-painted large-sleeved shirt, a red-painted collar and sleeves, a red gold-painted skirt, a blue gold-painted skirt, a red ginger shirt, a brocade collar, a gold-painted belt, and black leather boots.

古文：西戎四人，间道锦缠头，明金耳环，红纻丝细摺袄子，大红罗生色云肩，绿生色缘，蓝青罗销金汗袴，红销金缘系腰合钵，十字泥金数珠，五色销金罗香囊，红绢拥项，红结子，赤皮靴。
现代文：四个西方戎族人，条纹锦缠头，明金耳环，红色贮丝细折袄子，大红绫罗色彩鲜艳的云肩，绿色色彩鲜艳的绿边，蓝青色绫罗嵌金线的汗裤，红色嵌金线绿边系腰合钵，十字泥金数珠，五彩嵌金线的绫罗香囊，红色绢围颈饰物，红色结子，赤色皮靴。
English: Four Western Eunuchs, striped brocade headbands, bright gold earrings, red silk-retaining fine-folded braids, large red embroidered brightly colored cloud shoulders, green brightly colored green edges, blue-blue embroidered gold-embroidered sweat pants, red embroidered gold-embroidered green-edged waist belt, cross-stitched gold beads, multicolored embroidered gold-embroidered embroidered incense, red embroidered necklace, red knots, red leather boots.

古文：南蛮四人，绾朝天髻，系红罗生色银锭，红销金抹额，明金耳环，红织金短袄子，绿织金细摺短裙，绒锦袴，间道纻丝手巾，泥金顶牌，金珠璎珞缀小金铃，锦行缠，泥金狮蛮带，绿销金拥项，红结子，赤皮靴。
现代文：四个南方蛮族人，绾朝天髻，系红色绫罗色彩鲜艳的银锭，红色嵌金线的抹额，明金耳环，红色织金短袄子，绿色织金细折短裙，绒锦裤，条纹贮丝手巾，泥金颜料涂饰的顶牌，缀着小金铃的用金子珍珠装点成的璎珞，锦绑腿布，泥金颜料绘有狮形的蛮带，绿色嵌金线围颈饰物，红结子，赤色皮靴。
English: Four southern barbarians, a red-dotted and brightly colored silver brooch, a red gold-inlaid plaster, bright gold earrings, red gold braided short braids, green gold braided short skirts, velvet brocade pants, striped silk hand towels, mud gold-painted top cards, small gold bells decorated with gold pearls, brocade leggings, mud gold-painted lion-shaped ribbons, green gold-embroidered necklaces, red knots, red leather boots.

古文：北翟四人，戴单于冠，貂鼠皮檐，双垂髻，红销金头绳，红罗销金抹额，诸色细摺袄子，蓝青生色云肩，红结子，红销金汗袴，系腰合钵，皂皮靴。
现代文：四个北方翟人，戴单于冠，貂鼠皮帽檐，一对下垂发髻，红色嵌金线的头绳，红色绫罗嵌金线的抹额，各种颜色的细褶袄子，蓝青色色彩鲜艳的云肩，红绪子，红色嵌金钱汗裤，系腰合钵，黑皮靴。
English: Four northerners, wearing a single crown, a moleskin cap, a pair of drooping hairpins, a red gold-embroidered head rope, a red embroidered gold-embroidered plaster, various colors of fine braids, a bright blue-and-blue colored shoulder, a red yuko, red money-embroidered sweat pants, a waist belt, and black leather shoes.

古文：其舞师皆戴白卷檐毡帽，涂金帽顶，一撒红缨，紫罗帽襻，红绿金绣袄子，白销金汗袴，蓝青销金缘，涂金束带，绿拥项，红结子，赤皮靴。
现代文：舞师都戴白色的帽檐上卷的毡帽，涂金帽顶，一撒红色系冠的带子，紫色绫罗帽襻，红绿金线刺绣的袄子，白色嵌金线的汗裤，蓝青色嵌金缆的绿边，涂金腰带，绿色围颈饰物，红色结子，赤色皮靴。
English: The dancers all wear white bonnets with rolled-up brims, gold-painted bonnets, a sprinkling of red crowning bands, purple satin bonnets, red and green gold embroidered braids, white sweatpants with gold embroidery, blue and green gold-painted cords with green edges, gold-painted belts, green necklaces, red knots, and red leather boots.

古文：凡大乐工及文武二舞乐工，皆曲脚幞头，红罗生色画花大袖衫，涂金束带，红绢拥项，红结子，皂皮靴。
现代文：凡是大乐师以及文舞武舞二舞的乐师，都戴曲脚幞头，穿红色绫罗色彩鲜艳的画花大袖衫，涂金腰带，红绢围颈饰物，红色结子，黑色皮靴。
English: All the great musicians, as well as the musicians of the classical dance, martial arts, and two dances, wear the bowed-legged mane, wear the brightly-colored red embroidered shirt, the gold-plated belt, the red satin necklace, the red knot, and the black leather shoes.

古文：四夷乐工，皆莲花帽，诸色细摺袄子，白销金汗袴，红销金缘，红绿绢束腰，红罗拥项，红结子，花靴。
现代文：四方少数民族的乐师，都戴莲花帽，各种颜色的细褶袄子，白色嵌金线汗裤，红色嵌金线绿边，红绿绢束腰，红色绫罗颈围饰物，红色结子，花色靴。
English: The musicians of the ethnic minorities in the four directions all wear lotus flower hats, fine braids of various colors, white sweat pants with embedded gold thread, red sweat pants with embedded gold thread and green border, red and green satin waistbands, red satin necklaces, red knots, and fancy shoes.

古文：永乐间，定殿内侑食乐。
现代文：永乐年间，制定殿内侍奉进食的侑食乐。
English: During the Yongle era, the eunuch's meal, which was served in the hall, was established.

古文：奏《平定天下之舞》，引舞、乐工，皆青罗包巾，青、红、绿、玉色罗销金胸背袄子，浑金铜带，红罗褡愬，云头皂靴，青绿罗销金包臀。
现代文：演奏《平定天下之舞》，引舞、乐师，都用青色绫罗制的裹头用的包巾，青，红、绿、玉色绫罗嵌金线的胸背袄子，潭金铜带，红色绫罗褡楗，云头黑色高帮白色厚底的靴子，青绿色绫罗嵌金线包臀。
English: During the performance of "Dance to Pacify the World," both the dance leader and the musicians used a blue enamel head wrap, blue, red, green, and jade enameled gold-embedded chest and back braids, a gold-plated copper belt, a red enameled hoop, black high-heeled shoes with white soles, and blue-green enameled gold-embedded hips.

古文：舞人服色如之。
现代文：舞人衣服的式样颜色舆他们一样。
English: The style and color of the dancers' clothes are the same.

古文：奏《抚安四夷之舞》，高丽舞四人，皆笠子，青罗销金胸背袄子，铜带，皂靴；琉球舞四人，皆棉布花手巾，青罗大袖袄子，铜带，白碾光绢间道踢袴，皂皮靴；北番舞四人，皆狐帽，青红纻丝销金袄子，铜带；伍鲁速回回舞四人，皆青罗帽，比里罕棉布花手巾，铜带，皂靴。
现代文：演奏《抚安四夷之舞》：高丽舞四人，都戴箬笠，穿青色绫罗嵌金胸背袄子，铜带，黑色高帮白色粉底的靴子；琉球舞四人，都穿戴棉布花手巾，青色绫罗大袖袄子，铜带，白碾光绢条纹踢裤，黑色皮靴；北番舞四人，都戴狐帽，穿青红贮丝嵌金线袄子，铜带；伍鲁速回回舞四人，都戴青罗帽，比里罕棉布花手巾，铜带，黑色高帮白色厚底靴。
English: Performance of the "Dance of the Four Barbarians of Fu'an": The four Goryeo dancers, all wearing skullcaps, wore blue satin embroidered gold chest back braids, copper belts, black high boots with white foundation; the four Ryukyuan dancers, all wearing cotton hand towels, blue satin embroidered large-sleeved braids, copper belts, white crimson striped kick pants, black leather boots; the four North Korean dancers, all wearing fox hats, wearing blue-and-red silk embroidered gold braids, copper belts; the four Wooruhai dance dancers, all wearing blue hats, birihan cotton hand towels, copper belts, black

古文：奏《车书会同之舞》，舞人皆皂罗头巾，青、绿、玉色皂沿边襕，茶褐线条皂皮四缝靴。
现代文：演奏《车书会同之舞》，舞蹈的人都戴黑色绫罗头巾，青、绿、玉色的黑色衣边外的沿、衣边、上衣与下裳相连的长衣下摆所加的作为下裳形制的横幅栏，茶褐色线丝黑皮四缝靴。
English: During the performance of "Dance of the Car Book Club," the dancers all wore black silk scarves, blue, green, and jade-colored black outer edges of the clothes, the edges of the clothes, the long coat hems connected to the underclothes, and the banner bar added as the underclothes, and brown thread and black leather four-stitched shoes.

古文：奏《表正万邦之舞》，引舞二人，青罗包巾，红罗销金项帕，红生绢锦领中单，红生绢销金通袖袄子，青线绦铜带，织锦臂韝，云头皂靴，各色销金包臀，红绢褡愬。
现代文：演奏《表正万邦之舞》，两名引舞，青色绫罗制的裹头用的包巾，红色绫罗嵌金线项帕，红色生绢锦领裹衣，红色生绢嵌金长袖袄子，青线丝铜带，织有彩色花纹丝织品制的臂衣，云头黑色靴，各种颜色的嵌金钱包臀，红色绢帛褡褪。
English: Performance of the "Dance of the Nations," two dancers, blue enamel head wrap, red enamel gold embroidered collar, red raw embroidered brocade collar wrap, red raw gold embroidered long-sleeved satin, blue silk-copper ribbon, colorful embroidered silk jersey, black shoes, various colors of money-embedded hips, red satin.

古文：舞人、乐工服色与引舞同。
现代文：跳舞人、乐师衣服的式样颜色，和引舞相同。
English: The style and color of the dancers' and musicians' clothes are the same as that of breakdancing.

古文：奏《天命有德之舞》，引舞二人，青幪纱如意冠，红生绢锦领中单，红生绢大袖袍，各色绢采画直缠，黑角偏带，蓝绢彩云头皂靴，白布袜。
现代文：演奏《天命有德之舞》，雨名引舞，戴青色的用纱蒙盖的如意冠，穿红色生绢锦领裹衣，红色生绢大袖袍，各种颜色的绢制成的绘有彩色图画的直缠，黑色角质材料装饰的偏带，蓝色绢制成的彩云头黑靴，白布袜。
English: They performed the "Dance of Destiny and Virtue," led by Rain Name, wearing a turquoise crown covered with gauze, wearing a red ginger brocade collar wrap, a red ginger long-sleeved robe, a straight wrap made of ginger in various colors and painted with colorful pictures, a side belt decorated with black horny material, black shoes made of blue ginger, and white socks.

古文：舞人、乐工服色与引舞同。
现代文：跳舞人、乐师衣服的式样颜色，与刳舞相同。
English: The style and color of the dancers' and musicians' clothes are the same as that of breakdancing.

古文：洪武五年，定斋郎、乐生、文武舞生冠服：斋郎，黑介帻，漆布为之，无花样；服红绢窄袖衫，红生绢为里；皂皮四缝靴；黑角带。
现代文：洪武五年，规定斋郎，乐生，文舞生，武舞生的帽子服饰。斋郎，戴黑色长耳裹发巾，以漆涂遇的布制作，没有花样；穿红色绢窄袖衫，红色生绢作为衫子的内层；黑皮四缝靴；黑色角质材料装饰的带子。
English: In the 5th year of Hongwu, the cap dress of Jairo, a music student, a literature student, and a martial arts student, was stipulated. Jairo, wearing a black long ear wrapped hair towel, made of lacquered cloth, without patterns; wearing a red narrow-sleeved shirt, with red ginger as the inner layer of the shirt; black leather four-stitched shoes; black horny material decorated strap.

古文：文舞生及乐生，黑介帻，漆布为之，上加描金蝉；服红绢大袍，胸背画缠枝方葵花，红生绢为里，加锦臂韝二；皂皮四缝靴；黑角带。
现代文：文舞生以及乐生，黑色的长耳裹发巾，以漆涂遇的布制作，上面有用金粉描绘的蝉形图案；穿红色绢制成的大绌袍，前胸后背绘缠枝方葵花，红色生绢为内眉，增加锦臂衣两件；黑皮四缝靴；黑色角质材料装饰的带。
English: Wen Dansheng and Le Sheng, black long ear-wrapped hair towels, made of lacquered cloth, with a cicada pattern drawn with gold powder; wearing a red satin robe made of red satin, with a sunflower embroidered on the front and back of the chest, red ginger for the inner eyebrows, adding two brocade jackets; black leather four-stitched shoes; black horny material decorated belt.

古文：武舞生，武弁，以漆布为之，上加描金蝉；服饰、靴、带并同文舞生。
现代文：武舞生，武冠，用以漆涂过的布制作，上面有用金粉描绘的蝉形图案；服饰、靴、带，都与文舞生相同。
English: Wudansheng, Wudang, is made of lacquered cloth with a crescent-shaped pattern painted on it with gold powder; the costumes, shoes, and belts are the same as those of Wen Dansheng.

古文：嘉靖九年定文、武舞生服制：圜丘服青纻丝，方泽服黑绿纱，朝日坛服赤罗，夕月坛服玉色罗。
现代文：嘉靖九年，规定文舞生、武舞生衣服的式样：圜丘祭天穿青纡丝，方泽祭地穿黑绿纱，朝日坛祭祀太阳穿赤色绫罗，夕月坛祭祀月亮穿玉色绫罗。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, the styles of the costumes for the dancers and martial artists were specified as follows: the sky at the Dangqiu Festival wore blue silk, the ground at the Fangze Festival wore black and green yarn, the sun at the Asahi Altar Festival wore red satin, and the moon at the Yuyue Altar Festival wore jade satin.

古文：宫中女乐冠服：洪武三年定制。
现代文：宫中女乐的冠服。洪武三年规定形制。
English: The ceremonial dress of courtly women's music. Hongwu three-year regulation.

古文：凡中宫供奉女乐、奉銮等官妻，本色皪髻，青罗圆领。
现代文：凡是内宫供奉女乐、奉銮等官妻，戴不加装饰的套网的假发髻，青色绫罗圆领。
English: The inner palace was usually dedicated to the wives of officials, such as court ladies and imperial concubines, who wore unadorned net wigs and blue satin collars.

古文：提调女乐，黑漆唐巾，大红罗销金花圆领，镀金花带，皂靴。
现代文：提调女乐，漆成黑色的唐式巾，大红色绫罗嵌金花圆领，镀金花带，黑色靴。
English: Up-tempo female music, black-painted Tang-style scarves, large red embroidered round collars with gold flowers, gold-plated flower belts, black shoes.

古文：歌章女乐，黑漆唐巾，大红罗销金裙袄，胸带，大红罗抹额，青绿罗彩画云肩，描金牡丹花皂靴。
现代文：歌章女乐，漆成黑色的唐式巾，大红色绫罗销金裙袄，束在胸部的带子，大红色绫罗抹额，青绿色绫罗制成的绘有彩色花纹的云肩，用金粉勾勒的牡丹花花纹黑靴。
English: Songs, women's music, a black-painted Tang-style scarf, a large red embroidered gold skirt, a ribbon tied around the chest, a large red embroidered plaster, a green and blue embroidered shoulder with a colorful pattern, and black shoes with a peony pattern outlined in gold powder.

古文：奏乐女乐，服色与歌章同。
现代文：奏乐女乐，衣服式样颜色与歌章女乐相同。
English: Women's music, dress style and color are the same as women's music.

古文：嘉靖九年，祀先蚕，定乐女生冠服。
现代文：嘉靖九年，祭祀教人养蚕的先蚕神，制定女乐生的帽子服饰。
English: In the ninth year of Jiajing, the first silkworm god who taught people to raise silkworms was worshiped, and the hat dress of female musicians was formulated.

古文：黑绉纱描金蝉冠，黑丝缨，黑素罗销金葵花胸背大袖女袍，黑生绢衬衫，锦领，涂金束带，白袜，黑鞋。
现代文：黑绉纱用金粉描绘的蝉形冠，黑色丝带制成的系冠的带子，黑色素罗制成的胸前背后有嵌金线葵花花纹的大袖女袍，黑色生绢衬衫，锦缎衣领，涂金束带，白袜，黑鞋。
English: A cicada-shaped crown made of gold-painted black satin, a lace band made of black ribbon, a large-sleeved woman's gown with a sunflower pattern inlaid with gold thread on the front and back of the chest made of black suede, a black ginger shirt, a brocade collar, a gold-painted ribbon, white socks, and black shoes.

古文：教坊司冠服：洪武三年定。
现代文：管理宫廷音乐的官署教坊司冠服。洪武三年制定。
English: It was formulated by Hongwu in the third year of his reign.

古文：教坊司乐艺，青字顶巾，系红绿褡愬。
现代文：教坊司的乐艺，青融字顶巾，系红绿色褡褪。
English: The music of the teacher's workshop, the top scarf of the word, is red and green.

古文：乐妓，明角冠，皂褙子，不许与民妻同。
现代文：乐妓，白色兽角制成的帽子，黑褙子，不许与平民妻子服饰相同。
English: Le Guo, white horns made of the hat, black braids, not allowed to be the same as the civilian wife dress.

古文：御前供奉俳长，鼓吹冠，红罗胸背小袖袍，红绢褡愬，皂靴。
现代文：皇帝跟前侍奉的俳优头目，戴鼓吹冠，穿红色绫罗胸背小袖袍，红色绢帛褡楗，黑色靴。
English: The leader of the haiku performers, who served the emperor, wore a trumpet-blowing crown, a red pleated caftan, a red jacket, and black shoes.

古文：色长，鼓吹冠，红青罗纻丝彩画百花袍，红绢褡愬。
现代文：管理乐工的色长，戴鼓吹冠，穿红青绫罗贮丝彩画百花袍，红绢褡楗。
English: The conductor of the orchestra is long-haired, wears a trumpet-blowing crown, wears a red-and-blue satin-and-silk embroidered robe with a hundred flowers, and a red cape.

古文：歌工，弁冠，红罗织金胸背大袖袍，红生绢锦领中单，黑角带，红熟绢锦脚袴，皂皮琴鞋，白棉布夹袜。
现代文：歌唱的人，戴鹿皮冠，红色绫罗织金线胸背大袖袍，红色生绢锦领裹衣，黑色角质村料装饰带，红色熟绢锦脚裤，黑皮琴鞋，白棉布双层袜。
English: A singer, wearing a deerskin crown, a red satin-knitted gold-threaded large-sleeved gown, a red raw silk brocade collar wrap, a black horny village fabric decorative belt, red ruffled brocade trousers, black leather piano shoes, white cotton double socks.

古文：乐工服色与歌工同。
现代文：乐师的衣服式样和颜色，与歌唱的人相同。
English: The musicians wore clothes of the same pattern and color as the singers.

古文：凡教坊司官常服冠带，与百官同；至御前供奉，执粉漆笏，服黑漆幞头，黑绿罗大袖襕袍，黑角偏带，皂靴。
现代文：凡是教坊司官员日常穿的衣服，与各级官员相同；到皇帝跟前侍奉，持着漆成白色的朝板，戴漆成黑色的幞头，穿黑绿色绫罗大袖栏袍，黑色角质材料装饰的偏带，黑色靴。
English: All the daily clothes worn by the officials of the church are the same as those of officials at all levels; they serve the emperor, holding a morning board painted white, wearing a black-painted headdress, wearing a black and green satin robe, black horny material decorated with side bands, and black shoes.

古文：教坊司伶人，常服绿色巾，以别士庶之服。
现代文：教坊司的伶人，平常戴绿色头巾，以与平民百姓的服饰区别开。
English: The teacher of the kindergarten, usually wears a green headscarf to distinguish him from the common people's clothing.

古文：乐人皆戴鼓吹冠，不用锦绦，惟红褡愬，服色不拘红绿。
现代文：乐人都戴鼓吹冠，不用锦带，只用红色褡楗，衣服颜色不拘泥于红绿。
English: Musicians wear trumpet-blowing crowns, no brocade is used, only red satin is used, and the color of clothing is not limited to red and green.

古文：教坊司妇人，不许戴冠，穿褙子。
现代文：教坊司妇女，不许戴帽，穿褙子。
English: Female teachers are not allowed to wear hats and must wear braids.

古文：乐人衣服，止用明绿、桃红、玉色、水红、茶褐色。
现代文：乐人衣服，只用明绿、桃红、玉色、水红、茶褐色。
English: Musician clothes, only with bright green, pink, jade, aqua, brown.

古文：俳、色长，乐工，俱皂头巾，杂色绦。
现代文：俳优头目、管理乐工的色长、乐师都是黑头巾，几种颜色混杂的丝带。
English: The leader of the haiku group, the leader of the musicians, and the musicians are all wearing black bandanas and ribbons of mixed colors.

古文：王府乐工冠服：洪武十五年定。
现代文：王府乐师的冠服。洪武十五年制定。
English: The ceremonial dress of the musicians of the royal court. It was established by Hongwu in 15 years.

古文：凡朝贺用大乐宴礼，七奏乐乐工俱红绢彩画胸背方花小袖单袍，有花鼓吹冠，锦臂韝，皂靴，抹额以红罗彩画，束腰以红绢。
现代文：凡是朝觐庆贺采用大乐宴礼，七奏乐乐师，都穿红绢彩画胸背方花小袖单袍，戴有花鼓吹冠，锦臂衣，黑色靴，抹额用绘有彩色花纹的红色绫罗，束腰用红绢。
English: The grand music banquet is always used for the celebration of the Hajj, and the seven musicians all wear red satin embroidered short-sleeved robes with flowers on the chest and back, flower trumpet crowns, brocade jackets, black shoes, red satin with colorful patterns on the forehead, and red satin on the waist.

古文：其馀乐工用绿绢彩画胸背方花小袖单袍，无花鼓吹冠，抹额以红绢彩画，束腰以红绢。
现代文：其余的，乐师用绿绢彩昼胸部背部有方花小袖单袍，戴无花鼓吹冠，抹额用绘有彩色花纹的红绢，束腰用红绢。
English: For the rest, the musicians wore a square-flowered short-sleeved single robe with a green satin lining on the back of the chest, a flowerless trumpet crown, a red satin with a colored pattern on the forehead, and a red satin on the waist.

古文：军士服：洪武元年令制衣，表里异色，谓之鸳鸯战袄，以新军号。
现代文：军士服饰。洪武元年命令制作衣服，表层和里层颜色不一样，称它为鸳鸯战袄，以新军为名号。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, an order was issued to make clothes with a different color on the outer layer and the inner layer. It was called "战" (战) and named after the New Army.

古文：二十一年，定旗手卫军士、力士俱红袢袄，其馀卫所袢袄如之。
现代文：洪武二十一年，规定旗手卫军士、力士，都穿红袢袄，其余卫所，像他们的一样穿袢袄。
English: In the 21st year of Hongwu, it was stipulated that the flag bearers, guards, soldiers and wrestlers should all wear red coats, and the rest of the guards should wear coats like them.

古文：凡袢袄，长齐膝，窄袖，内实以棉花。
现代文：凡是袢袄，长度与膝平齐，窄袖，里面用棉花充实。
English: Usually pleated, knee-length, narrow sleeves, padded inside with cotton.

古文：二十六年，令骑士服对襟衣，便于乘马也。
现代文：洪武二十六年，命令骑兵穿两襟对开，纽扣在胸前正中的对襟衣，因为方便乘马。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, he ordered the cavalry to wear a jacket with two open collars and a button in the middle of the chest, because it was convenient to ride a horse.

古文：不应服而服者，罪之。
现代文：不应该穿而穿的，判他的罪。
English: If a man puts on something he shouldn't, he's guilty.

古文：皂隶公人冠服：洪武三年定，皂隶，圆顶巾，皂衣。
现代文：仆役差人的帽子服饰。洪武三年规定，仆役，圆顶巾，黑色衣服。
English: The Hongwu three-year regulation requires servants to wear a round scarf and black clothes.

古文：四年定，皂隶公使人，皂盘领衫，平顶巾，白褡愬，带锡牌。
现代文：洪武四年规定，仆役差人，穿黑色圆领衫，戴平顶巾，白褡楗，带锡牌。
English: According to the four-year regulations of Hongwu, the servant policeman wears a black round-necked shirt, a flat headscarf, white socks, and a pewter badge.

古文：十四年，令各卫门祗禁，原服皂衣改用淡青。
现代文：洪武十四年，命令各个衙门祗禁，原来穿黑衣，改用淡青色。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, he ordered all officials to wear black instead of light blue.

古文：二十五年，皂隶伴当不许着靴，止用皮札〈革翁〉。
现代文：洪武二十五年，仆役中随从的差人，不允许穿靴，只穿皮札翰。外国君臣的冠服。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, the attendants of the servants were not allowed to wear shoes, but only wore leather jackets.

古文：外国君臣冠服：洪武二年，高丽入朝，请祭服制度，命制给之。
现代文：洪武二年，高丽来朝见，请求祭服制度，命令制作供给它。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, Goryeo came to the imperial court, requested the sacrificial clothing system, and ordered the production to supply it.

古文：二十七年，定蕃国朝贡仪，国王来朝，如赏赐朝服者，服之以朝。
现代文：洪武二十七年，规定番国朝见进贡的礼仪，国王来朝见，如果曾赏赐朝服的，穿朝服朝见。
English: In the 27th year of Hongwu, it stipulated the etiquette of paying tribute to the country's court, the king came to the court, and if he had awarded a court dress, he would wear a court dress to the court.

古文：三十一年，赐琉球国王并其臣下冠服。
现代文：洪武三十一年，赏赐琉球国国王以及他的臣子礼帽服饰。
English: In the 31st year of Hongwu, the king of the Ryukyu Kingdom and his vassals were awarded ceremonial headwear.

古文：永乐中，赐琉球中山王皮弁、玉圭，麟袍、犀带，视二品秩。
现代文：永乐年间，赏赐琉球中山王白鹿皮帽，玉圭，麒麟图案的衣袍，犀牛角装饰带，比照二品官级。
English: During the Yongle years, he awarded the Ryukyu mid-mountain king a white deerskin cap, a tamagui, a unicorn-patterned robe, and a rhinoceros horn decorative belt, comparing the two official ranks.

古文：宣德三年，朝鲜国王李濩言： 洪武中，蒙赐国王冕服九章，陪臣冠服比朝廷递降二等，故陪臣一等比朝臣第三等，得五梁冠服。
现代文：宣德三年，朝鲜国国王李构说： 洪武年间，承蒙赏赐有九种图案的国王礼帽服饰，番王臣子的礼帽饰比照朝廷依次降雨等，所以番国臣子一等，比照国内臣子第三等，获得五梁冠服。
English: In the third year of the Xuande era, King Ri Jong of Korea said: During the Hongwu era, the king's ceremonial hat attire with nine patterns was awarded, and the ceremonial hat embroideries of the prince's retainers were compared according to the order of rainfall in the imperial court. Therefore, the first-class state retainers and the third-class domestic retainers were awarded five-beam crown attire.

古文：永乐初，先臣芳远遣世子禔入朝，蒙赐五梁冠服。
现代文：永乐初年，我的祖上李芳远派遣王位继承人世子李提来朝见，承蒙赏赐五梁冠服。
English: In the first year of Yongle, my ancestor Li Fangyuan sent the heir to the throne, his son Li Ti, to the imperial court, and was rewarded with a five-beam crown.

古文：臣窃惟世子冠服，何止同陪臣一等，乞为定制。 
现代文：臣私下认为世子的帽子衣服，哪能只与国外臣子一等的相同，请求为此制定制度。 
English: Privately, the vassal thought that the hat and clothes of the heir could only be the same as those of the foreign vassal, and requested the establishment of a system for this purpose.

古文：乃命制六梁冠赐之。
现代文：于是命令制作六梁冠赏赐他。
English: Therefore, he was ordered to make a six-beam crown to reward him.

古文：嘉靖六年，令外国朝贡入，不许擅用违制衣服。
现代文：嘉靖六年命令外国朝见进贡的人，不允许擅自使用违背礼制的衣服。
English: In the sixth year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, he ordered that those who paid tribute to the foreign imperial court were not allowed to use clothes that violated the etiquette.

古文：如违，卖者、买者同罪。
现代文：如果违背，卖的人、买的人判处同样的罪。
English: If there is a breach, both the seller and the buyer are guilty of the same offence.

古文：僧道服：洪武十四年定，禅僧，茶褐常服，青绦玉色袈裟。
现代文：和尚道士的服饰。洪武十四年规定，禅僧，茶色布服为常服，青色丝玉色袈裟。
English: According to the regulations of the 14th year of Hongwu, a Zen monk should wear a brown cloth robe and a blue silk and jade robe.

古文：讲僧，玉色常服，绿绦浅红袈裟。
现代文：讲经的僧人，玉色为日常服饰，绿色丝浅红袈裟。
English: A Buddhist monk chanting sutras. Jade is his daily attire, with green silk and light red satin.

古文：教僧，皂常服，黑绦浅红袈裟。
现代文：教僧，黑色常服，黑丝浅红袈裟。
English: Teaching monk, black ordinary clothes, black silk and light red socks.

古文：僧官如之。
现代文：管理寺庙与僧人事务的和尚与教僧一样。
English: Monks who manage the affairs of temples and monks are the same as priests.

古文：惟僧录司官袈裟，绿文及环皆饰以金。
现代文：惟有执掌寺院僧尼事务的官署僧录司的官员，披袈裟，绿色图案以及环都用金装饰。
English: Only the officials of the Monastic Records Division of the government office in charge of the affairs of monks and nuns in the temple, capes, green patterns and rings are decorated with gold.

古文：道士，常服青法服，朝衣皆赤，道官亦如之。
现代文：道士，日常穿青法服，朝衣都是赤色，管理道观与道士事务的道官也像这样。
English: Daoists wear their youthful Buddhist robes and morning robes in red on a daily basis, as do the Daoist officials who manage Daoism and Daoist affairs.

古文：惟道录司官法服、朝服，绿文饰金。
现代文：惟有执掌道观与道士事务的官署道录司的官员，法服、朝服，绿色图案用金装饰。
English: Only the officials of the Taoist Records Division of the Government Office, who are in charge of Taoism and Taoist affairs, wear the legal uniform, the morning uniform, and the green pattern is decorated with gold.

古文：凡在京道官，红道衣，金襕，木简。
现代文：凡是在京城的科道官，红色道衣，金栏，木简。
English: All the Taoist scholars in the capital, red robes, gold columns, wooden slats.

古文：在外道官，红道衣，木简，不用金襕。
现代文：在外地的道官，红道衣，木简，不用金栏。
English: In the field of Taoist officials, red robes, wooden strips, do not use the gold column.

古文：道士，青道服，木简。
现代文：道士，青道服，木简。
English: Taoist priest, young man's robe, woodblock print.

