古文：燕礼。小臣戒与者。
现代文：宴饮的礼仪：小臣留群臣。
English: The etiquette of banqueting: the lesser vassal remains the greater vassal.

古文：膳宰具官馔于寝东。
现代文：膳宰在路寝的东边准备群臣的饮食。
English: The butler prepares the meals for the courtiers on the east side of the road.

古文：乐人县。
现代文：乐人挂上新的钟磬。
English: The musicians hang up the new bells.

古文：设洗、篚于阼阶东南，当东霤。罍水在东，篚在洗西，南肆。
现代文：在东阶的东南方对着东边屋檐滴水处放置洗和篚。罍和水在东边。篚在洗的西边，靠南陈设。
English: In the southeast of the east steps, place the washer and ladle opposite the east eaves drip. The washer and water are on the east side. The ladle is on the west side of the washer, facing south.

古文：设膳篚在其北，西面。
现代文：盛饭食的篚在它的北边，朝西。
English: The feeding gulls are to the north of it, to the west.

古文：司宫尊于东楹之西，两方壶，左玄酒，南上。
现代文：司宫在东楹柱的西边政置两个方壶。两个方壶，左边的放玄酒，以南边为上位。
English: On the west side of the east pillar, the palace secretary placed two square jars. The two square jars, on the left, hold wine, and on the south side, the higher-ranking wine.

古文：公尊瓦大两，有丰，幂用綌若锡，在尊南，南上。
现代文：国君的酒器瓦大两个，有丰，遮盖的巾用粗葛布和细麻布，在方壶的南边，以南边为上位。
English: Guojun's wine jars are two large and rich, covered with coarse and fine linen, on the south side of the square jug, and the south side is the upper side.

古文：尊士旅食于门西，两圆壶。
现代文：在寝门的西侧为已入官而未受正禄之士设两个圆壶。
English: On the west side of the sleeping door, there are two jars for those who have entered the government but have not received their salary.

古文：司宫筵宾于户西，东上，无加席也。
现代文：司宫在户西为宾设席，以东边为上位，没有增加的席。
English: The imperial palace set up seats for guests on the west side of the house, with the east side as the upper level, and there were no additional seats.

古文：射人告具。
现代文：主持宴礼的人报告： 准备完毕。 
English: The host of the banquet reports: Preparations are complete.

古文：小臣设公席于阼阶上，西乡，设加席。
现代文：小臣在东阶上为国君设席，席头朝西，设置加席。
English: On the east steps, the ministers set up seats for the sovereign, with the head of the table facing west, and additional seats.

古文：公升，即位于席，西乡。
现代文：国君登堂在席位上就坐，面向西。
English: When the Emperor enters the hall, he takes a seat facing west.

古文：小臣纳卿大夫，卿大夫皆入门右，北面东上。
现代文：小臣引卿大夫，卿大夫皆从门的右边进入，面朝北，以东为上位。
English: The junior ministers lead the lord doctors, and the lord doctors all enter from the right side of the door, facing north, with the east as the upper level.

古文：士立于西方，东面北上。
现代文：士站立在西边，面朝东，以北边为上位。
English: The judges stand on the west side, facing east, with the north side at the top.

古文：祝史立于门东，北面东上。
现代文：祝史站立在门的东边，面朝北，以东边为上位。
English: Zhu Xi stood on the east side of the gate, facing north, with the east side as the upper one.

古文：小臣师一人在东堂下，南面。
现代文：小臣之长一人在东堂下，面朝南。
English: The head of one of the junior ministers is in the lower part of the east hall, facing south.

古文：士旅食者立于门西，东上。
现代文：已入官而未受正禄之士站立在门的西边，以东边为上位。
English: Those who have entered the government without receiving the highest salary stand on the west side of the gate, and those on the east side are higher-ranking.

古文：公降立于阼阶之东南，南乡尔卿，卿西面北上；尔大夫，大夫皆少进。
现代文：国君下堂站立在东阶的东南，面朝南，向卿揖礼，卿进前面朝西以北为上位；向大夫揖礼，大夫皆稍前进。
English: The sovereign stands in the southeast of the east steps, facing south, bowing to the lord, with the lord in front and the west facing north as the superior; bowing to the doctor, with the doctors all advancing slightly.

古文：射人请宾。
现代文：射人请命主宾。
English: The guest of honor is requested to shoot the shooter.

古文：公曰： 命某为宾。 
现代文：国君说： 命某大夫为主宾。 
English: The sovereign said: I order a certain doctor to be the chief guest.

古文：射人命宾，宾少进，礼辞。
现代文：射人把国君的命令转告主宾。主宾稍进前，推辞 自己不敏 。
English: The archer relayed the sovereign's order to the chief guest, who stepped forward and excused himself as being insensitive.

古文：反命。又命之，宾再拜稽首，许诺，射人反命。
现代文：射人把主宾的言辞报告给国君。国君再次命令，往夏二次主宾再拜稽首，答应。射人再次向国君报告。
English: The archer reported the words of the chief guest to the sovereign. The sovereign again ordered that the chief guest bow his head twice in the summer and promised. The archer again reported to the sovereign.

古文：宾出立于门外，东面。
现代文：主宾走出站立于门外，面朝东。
English: The chief guest came out and stood outside the door, facing east.

古文：公揖卿大夫，乃升就席。
现代文：国君向卿大夫拱手行礼，然后登堂就席。
English: The sovereign bowed to the doctor and then took his seat.

古文：小臣自阼阶下，北面，请执幂者与羞膳者。
现代文：小臣自东阶下，面朝北，请拿瓦大盖巾和进献食物的人。
English: Minions from the east steps of the lower, facing north, please take a large towel and donate food.

古文：乃命执幂者，执幂者升自西阶，立于尊南，北面，东上。
现代文：命令拿盖巾的人，从西阶登堂，站立在方壶南边，面朝北，以东边为上位。
English: Order the person with the headscarf to enter the church from the west steps and stand on the south side of the square jug, facing north, with the east side as the upper one.

古文：膳宰请羞于诸公卿者。
现代文：膳宰向诸公卿进献美味的食物。
English: The butler brought delicious food to the nobles.

古文：射人纳宾。
现代文：射人引主宾进。
English: The shooters usher the main guests in.

古文：宾入，及庭，公降一等揖之。公升就席。
现代文：主宾进入，到堂前，国君走下一级台级，向主宾拱手行礼，国君登堂就席。
English: The chief guest enters, and before arriving at the hall, the sovereign steps down one rung, bowing to the chief guest, and the sovereign takes his seat.

古文：宾升自西阶，主人亦升自西阶，宾右北面至再拜，宾答再拜。
现代文：主宾从西阶登堂，主人也从西阶登堂。主宾在右面，面朝北，主人为主宾到来行再拜礼。
English: The chief guest enters the hall from the west steps, and the host also enters the hall from the west steps. The chief guest is on the right, facing north, and the host enters the hall from the west steps.

古文：主人降洗，洗南，西北面。
现代文：主宾再拜答礼。主人下堂洗爵，在洗的南边，面朝西北。
English: The chief guest then returns the salute. The host comes down the hall to be baptised, on the south side of the font, facing northwest.

古文：宾降，阶西，东面。
现代文：主宾下堂，在台阶西边，面朝东。
English: The chief guest goes down the hall, on the west side of the steps, facing east.

古文：主人辞降，宾对。
现代文：主人辞谢主宾降，主宾答谢。
English: The host declined to thank the guest of honor, and the guest of honor responded with thanks.

古文：主人北面盥，坐取觚洗。宾少进，辞洗。
现代文：主人面朝北洗手，坐下取觚洗涮，主宾稍进前说： 谢洗觚。 
English: The host washes his hands facing north, sits down and takes the basin. The guest of honor steps forward and says, "Thank you, basin."

古文：主人坐奠觚于篚，兴对。
现代文：主人坐下把觚放置在篚里，站起身来回答说： 应当做！ 
English: The master sat down, placed the plough in the furrow, stood up and replied: "It must be done!

古文：宾反位。
现代文：主宾返回原来位置。
English: The chief guest returns to his seat.

古文：主人卒洗，宾揖，乃升。
现代文：主人洗涮完，主宾拱手行礼然后登堂。
English: After the host washed the dishes, the guest of honor bowed and then entered the hall.

古文：主人升。
现代文：宰夫登堂。
English: Zeif enters the hall.

古文：宾拜洗。
现代文：主宾拜谢洗觚。
English: The chief guest, Bai Xie, washed his hair.

古文：主人宾右奠觚答拜，降盥。
现代文：主人在主宾的右侧放置觚回拜，然后下堂洗手。
English: The host places the gong on the right side of the guest of honor, bowing, and then goes down to wash his hands.

古文：宾降，主人辞。
现代文：主宾下堂，主人辞谢。
English: The chief guest is leaving the hall, and the host is saying thank you.

古文：宾对，卒盥。宾揖升。
现代文：主宾回答。洗手毕，主宾拱手行礼登堂。
English: The chief guest replied. After washing his hands, the chief guest entered the hall with a bow.

古文：主人升，坐取觚。
现代文：主人登堂，坐下取觚。
English: The master enters the hall, sits down and takes the gong.

古文：执幂者举幂，主人酌膳，执幂者反幂。
现代文：拿盖巾的人拿起盖巾，主人斟美酒，拿盖巾的人再盖上盖巾。
English: The person with the handkerchief picks up the handkerchief, the host pours the wine, and the person with the handkerchief puts the handkerchief back on.

古文：主人筵前献宾。
现代文：主人在筵席前进献主宾。
English: The host advances at the table to present the guest of honor.

古文：宾西阶上拜，筵前受爵，反位。
现代文：主宾在西阶上拜谢，在筵席前接受酒爵，回到原位。
English: The chief guest bows his thanks on the west steps, accepts the wine award before the banquet, and returns to his original seat.

古文：主人宾右拜送爵。
现代文：主人在主宾右边为送上酒爵行拜礼。
English: To the right of the main guest, the host is performing a ritual to give him a bottle of wine.

古文：膳宰荐脯醢，宾升筵。
现代文：膳宰进献干肉、肉酱，主宾登上筵席。
English: After the meal, dry meat and meat sauce are served, and the chief guest takes his seat at the table.

古文：膳宰设折俎。
现代文：膳宰摆上盛牲体骨的俎。
English: The meal was served on a platter with animal bones.

古文：宾坐，左执爵，右祭脯醢，奠爵于荐右，兴；取肺，坐绝祭，哜之，兴加于俎；坐梲手，执爵，遂祭酒，兴；席末坐啐酒，降席，坐奠爵，拜，告旨，执爵兴。
现代文：主宾坐下，左手拿酒爵，右手祭干肉、肉酱，把酒爵放在祭物的右边，站起，取肺，坐下穷尽祭物，尝之，站起来把祭物放在俎上，坐下擦手，拿起酒爵，然后祭酒，站起来到席的末端坐下饮酒。走下席位，坐下放下酒爵，拜谢，说： 味道鲜美 ，拿着酒爵站起。
English: The chief guest sits down, takes the liquor in his left hand, offers the dried meat and meat sauce in his right hand, places the liquor on the right side of the offering, stands up, takes the lungs, sits down, exhausts the offering, tastes it, stands up, places the offering on the urn, sits down, wipes his hands, picks up the liquor, then offers the wine, stands up to the end of the table and sits down to drink.

古文：主人答拜。
现代文：主人回拜。
English: The host returns the compliment.

古文：宾西阶上北面坐卒爵，兴；坐奠爵，遂拜。
现代文：主宾在西阶上面朝北坐下喝完爵中酒，站起，坐下放爵，然后拜谢。
English: The chief guest sits facing north on the top of the west staircase, finishes drinking the wine, stands up, sits down, releases the knight, and then says thanks.

古文：主人答拜。
现代文：主人回拜。
English: The host returns the compliment.

古文：宾以虚爵降，主人降。
现代文：主宾拿着空酒爵下堂。主人下堂。
English: The chief guest leaves the hall with an empty wine goblet. The host leaves the hall.

古文：宾洗南坐奠觚，少进，辞降。主人东面对。
现代文：主宾在洗的南边坐下放下觚，站起稍进前辞谢主人下堂。主人面朝东回对。
English: The chief guest sits down on the south side of the bath, puts down the shovel, stands up and steps forward a little to bow to the host. The host faces east and faces back.

古文：宾坐取觚，奠于篚下，盥洗。
现代文：主宾坐下取觚放在篚南，洗手洗觚。
English: The chief guest sat down, took out the bowl and placed it on the south side of the bowl. He then washed his hands.

古文：主人辞洗。
现代文：主人辞谢。
English: The host declined.

古文：宾坐奠觚于篚，兴，对。
现代文：主宾坐下把觚放在篚中，站起来回答。
English: The chief guest sat down and put the urn in the urn, stood up and answered.

古文：卒洗，及阶，揖，升。
现代文：洗涮完毕，到台阶，拱手行礼登堂。
English: After washing the dishes, go to the steps and enter the church with a bow.

古文：主人升，拜洗如宾礼。
现代文：主人登堂拜谢主宾洗觚，如同主宾的礼仪。
English: The host enters the hall to thank the guest and washes the dishes, as is the guest's etiquette.

古文：宾降盥，主人降。
现代文：主宾下堂洗手，主人下堂。
English: The chief guest goes down the hall to wash his hands, the host goes down the hall.

古文：宾辞降，卒盥，揖升，酌膳，执幂如初，以酢主人于西阶上。
现代文：主宾辞谢主人下堂，洗毕，拱手行礼登堂，斟美酒，揭盖巾与开始相同，在西阶上用酒回敬主人。
English: The chief guest thanks the host, goes down the hall, washes up, goes back to the hall, pours the wine, uncovers the towel as he did at the beginning, and returns the host's thanks with wine on the west steps.

古文：主人北面拜受爵，宾主人之左拜送爵。
现代文：主人面向北行拜谢礼接受酒爵，主宾在主人左边为送酒爵行拜谢礼。
English: The host faces north to receive the toast, and the guest of honor is on the host's left to give the toast.

古文：主人坐祭，不啐酒，不拜酒，不告旨；遂卒爵，兴；坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，不尝酒，不拜酒，不说 味道鲜美 ；然后喝完爵中酒，站起。
English: The host sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, does not taste the wine, does not worship the wine, does not say, "It tastes delicious"; then he finishes drinking the wine and stands up.

古文：宾答拜。
现代文：坐下放下酒爵，行拜礼，拿爵站起。
English: Sit down, put down the wine goblet, bow, take the goblet and stand up.

古文：主人不崇酒，以虚爵降尊于篚。
现代文：主宾回拜。主人不添酒，拿空爵下堂，放在篚中。
English: The chief guest returns the bow. The host does not add wine, takes the empty jar down the hall and places it in the urn.

古文：宾降，立于西阶西。
现代文：主宾下堂，站立在西阶西边。
English: The chief guest leaves the hall and stands on the west side of the west steps.

古文：射人升宾，宾升立于序内，东面。
现代文：射人请主宾登堂。主宾登堂站立在西墙内，面朝东。
English: The archer invites the chief guest to enter the hall. The chief guest enters the hall and stands inside the west wall, facing east.

古文：主人盥，洗象觚，升实之，东北面献于公。
现代文：主人洗手，洗有象骨装饰的觚，登堂斟满酒，面朝东北献给国君。
English: The host washes his hands, washes the ivory-decorated urn, enters the hall, fills it with wine, and faces northeast to present it to the sovereign.

古文：公拜受爵。
现代文：国君拜谢接受象觚。
English: The Emperor accepted the elephant as thanks.

古文：主人降自西阶，阼阶下北面拜送爵。
现代文：主人从西阶下堂，在东阶面朝北为献上象觚行拜礼。
English: The host goes down the hall from the west steps and faces north on the east steps to offer prayers.

古文：士荐脯醢，膳宰设折俎，升自西阶。
现代文：士进献干肉、肉酱，膳宰摆设盛牲体的俎，从西阶登堂。
English: The priests enter to offer dried meat and meat sauce, and the butler sets out the yoke containing the animal's body. They enter the hall from the west steps.

古文：公祭如宾礼，膳宰赞授肺。不拜酒，立卒爵，坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。
现代文：国君祭如同主宾仪礼，膳宰献国君肺，不为酒行拜礼，站着喝完爵中酒，坐下放下爵，行拜礼，拿爵站起。
English: The King's Festival is like the ceremony of the chief guest. The meal is offered to the lungs of the king, and there is no prayer for the sake of wine. After drinking the wine, the king stands up, sits down, puts down his sword, prays, and stands up.

古文：主人答拜，升受爵以降，奠于膳篚。
现代文：主人回拜礼，登堂接受爵后下堂，放在膳篚中。
English: The host returns to the service, enters the hall to receive the dowager duchess, and places her in the dining table.

古文：更爵，洗，升酌膳酒以降；酢于阼阶下，北面坐奠爵，再拜稽首。
现代文：更换酒爵，洗涮，然后登堂酌膳酒，然后下堂。在东阶下接受国君敬酒，面朝北坐下放下酒爵，两次拜谢，行稽首礼。
English: Change the sake ring, wash the gourd, then enter the hall to drink the meal wine, and then leave the hall. Accept the toast of the sovereign under the east steps, sit down facing north, put down the sake ring, give thanks twice, and perform the head bow.

古文：公答再拜。
现代文：国君两次回拜礼。
English: The Emperor bowed again.

古文：主人坐祭，遂卒爵，再拜稽首。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，然后喝完爵中酒，两次拜谢，行稽首礼。
English: The host sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, and then, after drinking the mid-month wine, he offers two thanksgivings and performs the ceremonial bow.

古文：公答再拜，主人奠爵于篚。
现代文：国君回拜两次。主人把爵放在篚中。
English: The sovereign returned the bow twice. The host placed the earl in the urn.

古文：主人盥洗，升，媵觚于宾，酌散，西阶上坐奠爵，拜宾。宾降筵，北面答拜。
现代文：主人洗手，登堂，把觚送给主宾，主人从方壶中斟酒。在西阶上坐下放下爵，向主宾行拜礼，主宾走下筵席，面朝北回拜。
English: The host washes his hands, enters the hall, gives the gong to the main guest, the host pours wine from a square jug. He sits down on the west steps, puts down the gong, and bows to the main guest. The main guest steps down from the table, faces north, and bows back.

古文：主人坐祭，遂饮，宾辞。卒爵，拜，宾答拜。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，然后饮酒；主宾辞谢，喝尽爵中酒，行拜礼；主宾回拜。
English: The host sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, and then drinks; the guest of honor thanks the host, drinks all the wine in the jar, and prays; the guest of honor prays back.

古文：主人降洗，宾降，主人辞降，宾辞洗。
现代文：主人下堂洗觚，主宾下堂，主人辞谢主宾下堂，主宾辞谢主人洗觚。
English: The host goes down the hall to wash dishes, the guest of honor goes down the hall, the host thanks the guest of honor goes down the hall, the guest of honor thanks the host for washing dishes.

古文：卒洗，揖升。不拜洗。
现代文：洗觚完毕，拱手施礼登堂，不为洗觚行拜礼。
English: After washing the gourd, he went to the temple to pray, but he did not perform the ritual.

古文：主人酌膳。
现代文：主人斟美酒。
English: The host pours the wine.

古文：宾西阶上拜，受爵于筵前，反位。
现代文：主宾在西阶上行拜礼，在筵前接受酒爵，回到原位。
English: The chief guest performs a prayer on the west steps, receives the wine award in front of the altar, and returns to his original place.

古文：主人拜送爵。
现代文：主人送酒爵，行拜谢礼。
English: The host sends the baron a bottle of wine and thanks him profusely.

古文：宾升席，坐祭酒，遂奠于荐东。
现代文：主宾登上席位，坐下祭酒，然后把酒爵放在祭物的东边。
English: The chief guest mounts the seat, sits down the sacrificial wine, and then places the wine goblet on the east side of the offering.

古文：主人降复位。
现代文：主人下堂回到原位。
English: The host went down the hall and returned to his original position.

古文：宾降筵西，东南面立。
现代文：主宾从筵席西边下堂，面朝东南站立。
English: The chief guest enters the hall from the west side of the table and stands facing southeast.

古文：小臣自阼阶下请媵爵者，公命长。
现代文：小臣从东阶下请国君命献爵的人。
English: A person whose vassal invites the sovereign to offer a knighthood from beneath the East Steps.

古文：小臣作下大夫二人媵爵。
现代文：国君命下大夫中为首的人。小臣传达君命使下大夫二人送爵。
English: The person who is the first among the doctors appointed by the sovereign. The junior minister conveys the sovereign's order to have the two doctors knighted.

古文：媵爵者阼阶下，皆北面再拜稽首；公答再拜。
现代文：送爵的人从东阶下，都面朝北，两次行稽首礼。国君两次回拜。
English: The person presenting the knighthood comes down from the east steps, facing north, and performs the bow twice. The sovereign returns the bow twice.

古文：媵爵者立于洗南，西面北上，序进，盥洗角觯；升自西阶，序进，酌散；交于楹北，降；阼阶下皆奠觯，再拜稽首，执觯兴。
现代文：送爵的人站立在洗的南边，面朝西，以北边为上位。按顺序进前，洗手、洗角觯。自西阶登堂，按顺序进前，从方壶中斟酒，在西楹柱北边交错。下堂，都在东阶下放下觯，行两次稽首礼，拿起觯站起。
English: The person giving the knighthood stood on the south side of the wash, facing west, with the north side as the higher side. Proceed in order, wash your hands, wash the angle braid. From the west steps to the hall, proceed in order, pour wine from the square jug, and interlace on the north side of the west pillar. Down the hall, all put down the shovel under the east step, perform two bowing ceremonies, pick up the shovel and stand up.

古文：公答再拜。
现代文：国君两次回拜。
English: The Emperor bowed again.

古文：媵爵者皆坐祭，遂卒觯，兴；坐奠觯，再拜稽首，执觯兴。
现代文：送爵的人都坐下祭酒，然后喝尽觯中洒，站起。坐下放下觯，两次行稽首礼。拿着觯站起。
English: Everyone who is giving a knighthood sits down, drinks the sacrificial wine, and then stands up after drinking all the wine in the urn. Sit down, put down the urn, and perform the bowing twice. Stand up with the urn.

古文：公答再拜。
现代文：国君两次回拜。
English: The Emperor bowed again.

古文：媵爵者执觯待于洗南。
现代文：送爵的人拿着觯站在洗的南边等待君命。
English: The bearer of the knighthood stood on the south side of the Wash with a scepter, awaiting the death of the monarch.

古文：小臣请致者。若君命皆致，则序进，奠觯于篚，阼阶下皆再拜稽首；公答再拜。
现代文：小臣请国君指定献觯的人，如果国君命令 一起进献 ，则按顺序进前，放觯在篚中，都在东阶下两次行稽首礼，国君回礼两次。
English: If the vassal asks the sovereign to designate a person to present the imperial scepter, and if the sovereign orders them to present the imperial scepter together, then they will advance in order, place the imperial scepter in the middle of the imperial scepter, and both of them will perform the ceremonial bow twice under the east steps, and the sovereign will return the bow twice.

古文：媵爵者洗象觯，升实之；序进，坐奠于荐南，北上；降，阼阶下皆再拜稽首，送觯。公答再拜。
现代文：送爵的人洗有象骨装饰的觯，登堂斟满酒，依顺序进前，坐下。放象觯在祭物的南边，以北边上位。下堂，都在东阶下两次行稽首礼，送上象觯，国君回两次拜礼。
English: The bearer of the knighthood washes the urn decorated with elephant bones, fills it with wine, and proceeds to the altar in order, then sits down. The urn is placed on the south side of the offering, with the north side at the top. In the next hall, there are two bowing ceremonies under the east steps, the urn is presented, and the sovereign performs two prostrations.

古文：公坐取大夫所媵觯，兴以酬宾。
现代文：国君坐下取过大夫所献的觯，站起来用它酬待主宾。
English: The sovereign sat down, took the scepter offered by the doctor, stood up and used it to reward the chief guest.

古文：宾降，西阶下再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾下堂，在西阶下两次拜谢、行稽首礼。
English: The chief guest went down the hall, bowed twice under the west steps, and performed the ceremonial bow.

古文：公命小臣辞，宾升成拜。
现代文：国君命令小臣辞谢，主宾登堂又两次拜谢，行稽首礼。
English: The sovereign ordered the junior minister to withdraw his thanks, and the chief guest entered the hall to offer two more thanks and perform the ceremonial bow.

古文：公坐奠觯，答再拜，执觯兴，立卒觯。
现代文：国君坐下，放下觯，回礼两次，拿觯站起，站着喝尽觯中酒。
English: The sovereign sat down, put down the gong, bowed twice, stood up with the gong, and drank all the wine in the gong.

古文：宾下拜，小臣辞。宾升，再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾下堂行拜礼，小臣辞谢，主宾登堂，两次拜谢，行稽首礼。
English: The chief guest goes down to the hall for a prayer, the junior minister says thank you, the chief guest enters the hall, says thank you twice, and performs the ceremonial head salute.

古文：公坐奠觯，答再拜，执觯兴。
现代文：国君坐下，放下觯，回礼两次，拿着觯站起。
English: The sovereign sits down, puts down the gong, returns the salute twice, and stands up holding the gong.

古文：宾进受虚爵，降奠于篚，易觯洗。
现代文：主宾进前接受空爵，下堂放在篚中，换觯洗涮。
English: The chief guest steps forward to receive the empty gong, then places it in the gong and changes the gong.

古文：公有命，则不易不洗，反升酌膳觯，下拜。
现代文：国君有命令，则不用换不用洗，转身登堂向觯中斟美酒，下堂拜谢。
English: If the sovereign has an order, there is no need to change or wash, turn around and pour good wine into the gourd in the hall, and bow down in the hall.

古文：小臣辞。宾升，再拜稽首。
现代文：小臣辞谢，主宾登堂，两次拜谢，行稽首礼。
English: After the minister's resignation, the chief guest entered the hall, bowed twice, and performed the ceremonial head bow.

古文：公答再拜。
现代文：国君回礼两次。
English: The Emperor bowed again.

古文：宾以旅酬于西阶上，射人作大夫长升受旅。
现代文：按次序，主宾在西阶上向众人敬酒。射人让大夫中为首的登堂接受敬酒。
English: According to the order, the guest of honor gave a toast to everyone on the west steps. The shooters let the head of the doctors enter the hall to accept the toast.

古文：宾大夫之右坐奠觯，拜，执觯兴；大夫答拜。
现代文：主宾在大夫的右边坐下放置酒觯，行拜礼，拿着觯站起，大夫回拜礼。
English: The chief guest sits down on the right side of the doctor, places the wine goblet, performs the service, stands up with the goblet, and the doctor returns to the service.

古文：宾坐祭，立饮，卒觯不拜。
现代文：主宾坐下祭酒，站着饮酒，饮尽觯中酒，不行拜礼。
English: The chief guest sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, drinks while standing, drinks all the wine in the gourd, and does not pray.

古文：若膳觯也，则降更觯洗，升实散。
现代文：如果是象觯，就要下堂更换角觯洗涮，登堂从方壶中斟酒。
English: If it is like a gourd, it is necessary to go down to the hall to change the angle of the gourd, wash the gourd, and pour the wine from the square pot.

古文：大夫拜受。宾拜送。
现代文：大夫拜谢接受，主宾为送上酒觯拜谢。
English: The doctor accepted the apology, and the guest of honor accepted the apology for the sake.

古文：大夫辩受酬，如受宾酬之礼，不祭。
现代文：大夫们都接受了敬酒，如同接受主宾敬酒的礼仪，不祭酒。
English: The doctors all accepted the toast, as is the etiquette of accepting the toast of the chief guest, without offering wine.

古文：卒受者以虚觯降尊于篚。
现代文：最后接受的人拿空觯下堂，将它放在篚中。
English: The final recipient takes the empty urn down the hall and places it in the urn.

古文：主人洗，升，实散，献卿于西阶上。
现代文：主人洗觯登堂，从方壶中斟酒，在西阶上献给卿。
English: The host washes and goes to the hall, pours wine from a square jug, and offers it to the lord on the west steps.

古文：司宫兼卷重席，设于宾左，东上。
现代文：司宫为卿铺设双重的缁布，放置在主宾的左边，以东边为上位。
English: The imperial palace lays a double-layered cloth for the lord, placing it on the left side of the chief guest, with the east side as the upper side.

古文：卿升，拜受觚；主人拜送觚。
现代文：卿登堂，拜谢接受觚。主人为送上觚行拜谢礼。
English: The lord enters the hall, bows in thanks and accepts the gong. The host bows in thanks for presenting the gong.

古文：卿辞重席，司宫彻之，乃荐脯醢。
现代文：卿辞让重席，司宫撤去重席，然后进献干肉、肉酱。
English: The lord resigned from the heavy seat, the palace removed the heavy seat, and then presented dried meat and meat sauce.

古文：卿升席坐，左执爵，右祭脯醢，遂祭酒，不啐酒；降席，西阶上北面坐卒爵，兴；坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。
现代文：卿登席坐下，左手拿爵，右手祭干肉、肉酱，接着祭酒，不饮酒，下席，面朝北在西阶上座坐下，喝完爵中酒，站起，坐下放下爵，行拜礼。拿着爵站起。
English: The lord enters the table, sits down, takes the chalice with his left hand, offers dried meat and meat sauce with his right hand, then the sacrificial wine, does not drink alcohol, leaves the table, sits down facing north on the upper seat on the west step, finishes drinking the wine in the chalice, stands up, sits down, puts down the chalice, performs the prayer. Takes the chalice and stands up.

古文：主人答拜，受爵。
现代文：主人回拜礼，接受爵。
English: The master returns to worship and receives a knighthood.

古文：卿降复位。
现代文：卿下堂回到原位。
English: Sir, the lower hall is back to its original position.

古文：辩献卿，主人以虚爵降，奠于篚。
现代文：向卿敬酒，要都敬遍，主人拿空爵下堂，放在篚中。
English: If you want to propose a toast to your lord, you should do it all the way through. The host should leave the hall empty-handed and place it in the urn.

古文：射人乃升卿，卿皆升就席。
现代文：射人于是引卿登堂，卿都登堂就席。
English: The archers then led the nobles into the hall, and they all took their seats.

古文：若有诸公，则先卿献之，如献卿之礼；席于阼阶西，北面东上，无加席。
现代文：如果有小国国君在，就要在卿前先进献他们，进献的礼仪与进献卿的相同。为他们在东阶西边设席。面朝北以东边为上位，是增加的席。
English: If there are minor sovereigns present, they should be presented first before the nobles, and the etiquette for presenting them is the same as that for presenting the nobles. Seats are set up for them on the west side of the east tier. Facing north with the east side being higher, they are additional seats.

古文：小臣又请媵爵者，二大夫媵爵如初。
现代文：小臣又一次请国君命定献爵的人。二大夫献爵与开始时相同。
English: The junior minister once again asked the sovereign to appoint a person to confer the title of knight. The second daifu conferred the same title as at the beginning.

古文：请致者。若命长致，则媵爵者奠觯于篚，一人待于洗南。
现代文：请国君命定进献的人，如果国君命二大夫中为长的人进献，那么，送爵的人就把觯放在篚中，一人在洗的南边等待。
English: The person who asks the sovereign to order the donation, if the sovereign orders the eldest of the two doctors to donate, then the person who sends the knighthood will put the urn in the urn, and one will wait on the south side of the wash.

古文：长致，致者阼阶下再拜稽首，公答再拜。
现代文：为长的人进献，进献的人在东阶下两次行稽首礼，国君回拜两次。
English: For those who are long, the offering is made, and those who make the offering perform the bowing ceremony twice under the east steps, and the sovereign returns the bow twice.

古文：洗象觯，升，实之，坐奠于荐南，降，与立于洗南者二人皆再拜稽首送觯，公答再拜。
现代文：进献的人洗象觯，登堂斟满酒，坐下，放象觯在祭物的南边，下堂、与站在洗南边的二个人一起为送上象觯两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。
English: The person making the offering washes the elephant dung, goes up to the hall, fills it with wine, sits down, places the elephant dung on the south side of the offering, goes down to the hall, and together with the two people standing on the south side of the wash, performs two prostrations for the offering of the elephant dung, and performs the head bowing ceremony.

古文：公又行一爵，若宾，若长，唯公所酬。
现代文：国君回拜两次。国君又斟一爵酒，或主宾或公卿之首，任国君随意敬酒。
English: The sovereign returns the bow twice. The sovereign also pours a bottle of wine, or the head of the chief guest or noble, and the sovereign is free to make a toast.

古文：以旅于西阶上，如安。
现代文：卿在西阶上向大夫敬酒，仪礼如同原先一样。
English: The lord made a toast to the doctor on the west steps, with the same ceremony as before.

古文：大夫升，拜受觚，主人拜送觚。
现代文：大夫全都接受敬酒，接受敬酒的人拿着空酒觯下堂，放在篚中。
English: The doctors all accept the toast, and the person receiving the toast takes the empty wine goblet down the hall and places it in the urn.

古文：大夫坐祭，立卒爵，不拜既爵。
现代文：主人洗觚登堂，在西阶上向大夫献酒，大夫登堂接受酒爵。坐下祭酒，站起来喝完爵中酒，不为喝完酒行拜礼。
English: The host washes and goes up to the hall, offers wine to the doctor on the west steps, and the doctor goes up to the hall to receive the wine. He sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, stands up to finish the wine, and does not pray for the sake of drinking the wine.

古文：主人受爵。大夫降复位。
现代文：主人受爵，大夫下堂回到原位。
English: The host received a knighthood, the doctor left the hall and returned to his original position.

古文：胥荐主人于洗北。西面，脯醢，无脀。
现代文：膳宰的属吏在洗的北边，面朝西向主人进献干肉、肉酱，没有牲体。
English: The steward of the butcher's house stood on the north side of the laver, facing west, and presented his master with dried meat and meat sauce, but no animals.

古文：辩献大夫，遂荐之，继宾以西，东上。
现代文：向大夫进献酒，全部献过。接着在西边向宾进献，以东边为上位。
English: The wine was offered to the doctor, and it was all offered. Next, the wine was offered to the guests on the west side, with the east side being the highest.

古文：卒，射人乃升大夫，大夫皆升，就席。
现代文：完毕，射人才请大夫登堂，大夫都登堂就席。
English: When it was over, the shooters invited the doctors to come into the hall, and they all took their seats.

古文：席工于西阶上，少东。
现代文：在西阶上稍东的地方设乐工席。
English: On the west steps, slightly to the east, there is a musician's seat.

古文：乐正先升，北面立于其西。
现代文：乐正先登堂，面朝北站在席位的西边。
English: Le Zheng entered the hall first, facing north and standing on the west side of the seat.

古文：小臣纳工，工四人，二瑟。
现代文：小臣引导乐工进入，乐工四人，两人鼓瑟。
English: The minister led the musicians in, four musicians and two drummers.

古文：小臣左何瑟，面鼓，执越，内弦，右手相。
现代文：小臣在左边拿着瑟，鼓在前。拿着瑟底的小孔，瑟弦朝里。
English: The junior minister holds the se on the left, the drum in front. Holds the small hole at the bottom of the se, the se string in the morning.

古文：入，升自西阶，北面东上坐。
现代文：右手扶着乐工进入，从西阶登，面朝北，以东边为上坐。
English: Enter holding the musician with your right hand, climb the steps from the west, face north, and sit on the east side.

古文：小臣坐授瑟，乃降。
现代文：小臣坐下，把瑟交给乐工，然后下堂。
English: The junior minister sits down, hands the cello to the musician, and then leaves the hall.

古文：工歌《鹿鸣》、《四牡》、《皇皇者唬攥一人拜受爵，主人西阶上拜送爵。
现代文：乐工歌唱《鹿鸣》、《四牡》、《皇皇者华》。歌唱完毕，主人洗觚，登堂献给乐工，乐工不站起，把瑟放在左边；乐工之长行拜礼，接受爵。主人在西阶上为接受爵行拜礼。
English: Musicians sing "Deersong," "Four Horses" and "Emperor's Flower." After the singing, the owner washes the gong and goes into the hall to dedicate it to the musician. The musician does not stand up, but places the gong on the left; the musician prays for a long time and receives a knighthood. The owner prays for receiving a knighthood on the west steps.

古文：荐脯醢。使人相祭。
现代文：进献干肉、肉酱，派人帮助乐工祭肉、祭酒。
English: They donated dried meat and meat sauce, and sent people to help the musicians prepare the sacrificial meat and sacrificial wine.

古文：卒爵，不拜。
现代文：喝完酒不行拜礼。
English: You can't go to church after drinking.

古文：主人受爵。众工不拜受爵，坐祭，遂卒爵。
现代文：主人接过空爵，众乐工接受酒爵，不行拜礼。坐下祭酒，接着喝尽爵中酒。
English: The host accepted the empty chalice, the musicians accepted the chalice, but they could not pray. They sat down to drink the sacrificial wine, and then drank all the wine in the chalice.

古文：辩有脯醢，不祭。
现代文：众乐工都有干肉、肉酱，不祭酒。
English: All musicians have dried meat and meat sauce, but no sacrificial wine.

古文：主人受爵，降奠于篚。
现代文：主人接过空爵，下堂，放在篚中。
English: The master took over the empty jar, went down the hall, and placed it in the urn.

古文：公又举奠觯。唯公所赐。
现代文：国君又举起放在祭物南边的酒觯，或主宾或卿，任随国君赐予。
English: The sovereign then held up the goblet of wine that had been placed on the south side of the offering, and gave it to whomever he wished, whether he was the chief guest or a nobleman.

古文：以旅于西阶上，如初。
现代文：国君在西阶上依次向大夫敬酒，如同向主宾或卿敬酒的礼节一样。
English: The sovereign toasts the doctor in turn on the west staircase, as is the etiquette for toasting the chief guest or lord.

古文：卒，笙入，立于县中。奏《南陔》、《白华》、《华黍》。
现代文：敬酒结束，吹笙人进入，站在悬的中央。演奏《南陔》、《白华》、《华黍》。
English: After the toast, the piper enters and stands in the middle of the ceiling. He plays "Nankan," "Baihua" and "Huaqin."

古文：主人洗，升，献笙于西阶上。
现代文：主人洗爵，登堂，在西阶上献爵给吹笙的人。
English: The host is knighted, enters the church, and offers a knighthood to the boaster on the west steps.

古文：一人拜，尽阶，不升堂，受爵，降；主人拜送爵。
现代文：吹笙之首者行拜礼，走到台阶尽头，不登堂，接受酒爵，下堂；主人为献上酒爵行拜礼。
English: The one who blows the first trumpet performs the service, walks to the end of the steps, does not enter the hall, receives the wine goblet, and leaves the hall; the host performs the service to present the wine goblet.

古文：阶前坐祭，立卒爵，不拜既爵，升，授主人。
现代文：吹笙人在台阶前坐下祭酒，站起来喝尽爵中酒，喝完酒不行拜礼，登堂，把空爵交给主人。
English: The piper sits down in front of the steps to drink the sacrificial wine, stands up and drinks all the wine in the chalice. After drinking the wine, he may not perform the ritual, but must enter the hall and give the empty chalice to the host.

古文：众笙不拜受爵，降；坐祭，立卒爵。辩有脯醢，不祭。
现代文：众吹笙人不行拜礼，接过酒爵，下堂；坐下祭酒，站着喝完爵中酒，众吹笙人都有干肉、肉酱，不祭。
English: All the trumpeters can't do the ritual. After receiving the chalice, they go down the hall; sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, and stand up to drink the wine from the chalice. All the trumpeters have dried meat and meat sauce, but no sacrifice.

古文：乃间：歌《鱼丽》，笙《由庚》；歌《南有嘉鱼》，笙《崇丘》；歌《南山有台》，笙《由仪》。
现代文：然后交替着唱歌、吹奏。歌唱《鱼丽》，笙奏《由庚》；歌唱《南有嘉鱼》，笙奏《崇丘》；歌唱《南山有台》，笙奏《由仪》。
English: Then they alternated between singing and blowing. They sang "Fish" and played "Yu Geng"; they sang "Nan You Jiayu" and played "Chongqiu"; they sang "Nanshan You Tai" and played "Yu Yi."

古文：遂歌乡乐：《周南·关雎》、《葛覃》、《卷耳》，《召南·鹊巢》、《采蘩》、《采苹》。
现代文：接着歌唱乡乐：《周南》的《关雎》、《葛覃》、《卷耳》，《召南》的《鹊巢》、《采蘩》、《采蘋》。
English: Next, they sang folk songs: "Zhou Nan"'s "Guan Zi," "Ge Zi" and "Curl Ear," and "Zhao Nan"'s "Crow's Nest," "Cherry Picking" and "Apple Picking."

古文：大师告于乐正曰： 正歌备。 
现代文：大师告诉乐正说： 正歌成备。 
English: The master told Le Zheng: "Prepare for the main song."

古文：乐正由楹内、东楹之东，告于公，乃降复位。
现代文：乐正从楹柱里边到东楹柱的东边向国君报告，然后下堂回到原位。
English: Le Zheng reports to the sovereign from the inside of the pillar to the east of the east pillar, and then returns to his original position.

古文：射人自阼阶下，请立司正，公许。
现代文：射人在东阶下请国君设司正，国君答应了。
English: At the foot of the east steps, the archer asked the sovereign to set up a secretary, and the sovereign agreed.

古文：射人遂为司正。
现代文：于是射人成了司正。
English: As a result, the shooter became the chief of police.

古文：司正洗角觯，南面坐奠于中庭；升，东楹之东受命，西阶上北面命卿、大夫： 君曰以我安！ 
现代文：司正洗角觯，面朝南坐下，在中庭放下角觯，登堂，在东楹柱的东边接受国君的命令，在西阶上面朝北命令卿、大夫说： 国君说： 为我安心留下。  
English: The secretary-general washed the gong, sat down facing south, put down the gong in the atrium, entered the hall, received the sovereign's order on the east side of the east gong pillar, and ordered the lord and doctor to face north on the west staircase, saying: The sovereign said: Stay for my sake.

古文：卿、大夫皆对曰： 诺！敢不安？ 
现代文：卿、大夫都回答说： 是，怎么敢不安坐！ 
English: Both sir and doctor replied, "Yes, how dare you not sit up straight!"

古文：司正降自西阶，南面坐取觯，升酌散，降，南面坐奠觯，右还，北面少立，坐取觯，兴，坐不祭，卒觯，奠之，兴，再拜稽首，左还，南面坐取觯，洗，南面反奠于其所，升自西阶，东楹之东，请彻俎降，公许。
现代文：坐下取觯，站起，再坐下，不祭酒。喝尽觯中酒，放下空觯，站起，两次行稽首礼，向左转身，面朝南坐下取觯，洗觯，面朝南把空觯放回原位。司正从西阶登堂，在东楹柱的东边，请求国君撤俎，然后下堂，国君允许。
English: Sit down to take the gong, stand up, sit down again, do not offer wine. Drink all the wine in the gong, put down the empty gong, stand up, perform the head bow twice, turn to the left, face south, sit down to take the gong, wash the gong, face south to put the empty gong back in place. The secretary is entering the hall from the west steps, on the east side of the east gong pillar, requesting the sovereign to withdraw the gong, and then leaving the hall, with the sovereign's permission.

古文：告于宾，宾北面取俎以出。
现代文：告之于主宾，主宾面朝北取俎出去，交给随从的人。
English: He told this to the chief guest, who went to the north to fetch the anchor and give it to the attendant.

古文：膳宰彻公俎，降自阼阶以东。
现代文：膳宰撤国君的俎，从东阶下堂向东去。
English: Zenzai withdrew Kunigimi's scepter and went eastward from the east steps of the hall.

古文：卿、大夫皆降，东面北上。
现代文：卿、大夫都下堂，面朝东，以北边为上位。
English: Sirs and doctors all go down the hall, facing east, with the north side being higher.

古文：宾反入，及卿、大夫皆说屦，升就席。
现代文：主宾返回入内，和卿、大夫一起脱鞋登堂就席。
English: The chief guest returned inside, took off his shoes with the lord and doctor, and took his seat.

古文：公以宾及卿、大夫皆坐，乃安。
现代文：国君与主宾及卿、大夫都坐下，才安定下来。
English: The sovereign, the chief guest, the lord and the doctor all sat down before settling down.

古文：羞庶羞。
现代文：进献众多的美味食品。
English: Many delicious foods will be on offer.

古文：大夫祭荐。
现代文：大夫祭进献的祭物。
English: It is the offering of the Dafu Matsuri.

古文：司正升受命，皆命：君曰： 无不醉！ 
现代文：司正登堂接受国君的命令，命令主宾、卿、大夫。国君说： 不能不喝醉！ 
English: The secretary was just entering the hall to receive the sovereign's order, ordering the chief guest, lord, and doctor. The sovereign said, "I can't help but get drunk!"

古文：宾及卿、大夫皆兴，对曰： 诺！敢不醉？ 
现代文：主宾及卿、大夫都站起回答说： 是，不敢不醉！ 
English: The chief guest, the lord, and the doctor all stood up and replied: "Yes, I dare not not get drunk!

古文：皆反坐。
现代文：即都返回原位坐下。
English: They all returned to their original positions and sat down.

古文：主人洗，升，献士于西阶上。
现代文：主人洗觯，登堂，在西阶上献给士。
English: The host washes the bowl, enters the hall, and offers it to the priest on the west steps.

古文：士长升，拜受觯，主人拜送觯。
现代文：为首的士登堂，行拜礼接受觯；主人为送上酒觯行拜礼。
English: The head priest enters the church and performs the service to receive the chalice; the host priest performs the service to serve the wine.

古文：士坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵。
现代文：士坐下祭酒，站着喝酒，喝完酒不行拜礼。
English: The priests sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, and drink it standing up. After drinking the wine, they cannot pray.

古文：其他不拜，坐祭，立饮。
现代文：其他众士不行拜礼。坐下祭酒，站着喝酒。
English: The rest of the people do not pray. They sit down to drink the sacrificial wine and drink it standing up.

古文：乃荐司正与射人一人、司士一人、执幂二人，立于觯南，东上。
现代文：于是推出司正与射人一人，司士一人，执幂二人，都站在觯的南边，以东边为上位。
English: Then, the shooters were led out, and one of the shooters, one of the shooters, and two of the shooters stood on the south side of the raft, with the east side being the higher side.

古文：辩献士。
现代文：向所有的士献酒。
English: A toast to all the taxi drivers.

古文：士既献者立于东方，西面北上。乃荐士。
现代文：已经被献过的士站在东方，面朝西以北边为上位，然后向士进献干肉、肉酱。
English: Those who have already been sacrificed stand in the east, facing west with the north as the upper side, and then offer dried meat and meat sauce to the priests.

古文：祝史，小臣师，亦就其位而荐之。
现代文：祝史、小臣师也就近在他的位置上进献干肉、肉酱。
English: Zhushi, the junior minister, also recently presented dried meat and meat sauce in his place.

古文：主人就旅食之尊而献之。
现代文：主人走近已入官而未受正禄的士，献酒。
English: The host approached the taxi driver, who had joined the civil service but was not receiving a salary, and offered him a drink.

古文：旅食不拜，受爵，坐祭，立饮。
现代文：已为官而未受正禄的士不行拜礼，接受酒爵，坐下祭酒，站着饮酒。
English: Those who have been officials but have not received the official stipend cannot perform the ritual, accept the wine award, sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, and stand up to drink.

古文：若射，则大射正为司射，如乡射之礼。
现代文：如果射箭，那么，大射正就作司射，如同乡射的礼仪。
English: If it's archery, then the grand archery is just like the local archery.

古文：宾降洗，升媵觚于公，酌散，下拜。
现代文：主宾下堂洗觚，登堂向国君献觚。主宾从方壶中斟酒，下堂行拜礼。
English: The chief guest washes the dishes in the hall, enters the hall to present the dishes to the sovereign. The chief guest pours wine from a square jug, and goes down the hall to pray.

古文：公降一等，小臣辞。
现代文：国君走下一级台级，小臣辞谢。
English: The sovereign steps down one rung, the vassal resigns.

古文：宾升，再拜稽首，公答再拜。
现代文：主宾登堂，两次行稽首礼。国君回拜两次。
English: The chief guest entered the hall and performed the ceremonial bow twice. The sovereign bowed twice.

古文：宾坐祭，卒爵，再拜稽首，公答再拜。
现代文：主宾坐下祭酒，喝尽爵中酒。两次行稽首礼，国君两次回拜。
English: The chief guest sat down and drank all of the sacrificial wine. He performed the ceremonial bow twice, and the sovereign bowed twice.

古文：宾降洗象觯，升酌膳，坐奠于荐南，降拜。小臣辞。
现代文：主宾下堂洗象觯，登堂斟上美酒，坐下把象觯放在祭物的南边，下堂行拜礼，小臣辞谢。
English: The chief guest washes the elephant dung in the lower hall, goes up to the hall, pours the wine, sits down and places the elephant dung on the south side of the offering, goes down to the hall for worship, and the vassal thanks him.

古文：宾升成拜，公答再拜。
现代文：主宾登堂两次行稽首礼。国君回拜两次。
English: The chief guest entered the hall twice to perform the ceremonial bow. The sovereign bowed twice.

古文：宾反位。
现代文：主宾返回席位。
English: The chief guest returns to his seat.

古文：公坐取宾所媵觯，兴。
现代文：国君坐下取主宾所献上的象觯，站起来。
English: The sovereign sat down, took the elephant skull offered by the chief guest, and stood up.

古文：唯公所赐。
现代文：任随国君赐与。
English: It is bestowed by the sovereign.

古文：受者如初受酬之礼，降更爵洗，升酌膳，下拜。小臣辞。
现代文：接受赐予的人所用的礼仪与原先主宾接受敬酒的礼仪相同。接受赐与的人下堂更换酒爵，洗爵，登堂，斟美酒，下堂行拜礼，小臣辞谢。
English: The etiquette used by the recipient of the gift is the same as that of the original guest of honor receiving a toast. The recipient of the gift goes down to the hall to change the brandy, baptize, enter the hall, pour the wine, go down to the hall for worship, and thank the minister.

古文：升成拜，公答拜。
现代文：登堂，两次行稽首礼。国君回拜。
English: He entered the hall and performed the ceremonial head bow twice. The sovereign returned the bow.

古文：乃就席，坐行之。
现代文：然后就席位坐下劝酒。
English: Then he sat down on a seat and began to persuade them to drink.

古文：有执爵者。唯受于公者拜。
现代文：有拿酒爵斟酒的士，只有从国君处接受酒爵才行拜礼。
English: If there is a priest who pours wine, he must receive it from the sovereign before he can perform the rite.

古文：司正命执爵者爵辩，卒受者兴以酬士。
现代文：司正命令拿酒爵斟酒的士要给堂上所有的人都斟遍。
English: The master of ceremonies ordered that everyone in the hall should be served with a bottle of sake from the sake brewer.

古文：大夫卒受者以爵兴，西阶上酬士。
现代文：最后接受斟酒的人站起来向士敬酒。
English: At the end, the person receiving the pour stood up to make a toast.

古文：士升，大夫奠爵拜，士答拜。
现代文：最后接受酒爵的大夫拿着酒爵站起来在西阶上向士敬酒。
English: At the end, the doctor who received the award stood up with the award and toasted the soldiers on the west steps.

古文：大夫立卒爵，不拜，实之。
现代文：士登堂，大夫放下酒爵行拜礼。
English: In the Shiden-do hall, the doctor put down his sake and went to pray.

古文：士拜受，大夫拜送。
现代文：士回拜礼。大夫站着吃完爵中酒。
English: The priest returns to the service. The doctor stands and finishes his wine.

古文：士旅于西阶上，辩。
现代文：不行拜礼。斟酒，士行拜礼接受。大夫为送上酒爵行拜礼。
English: Prayer is not allowed. The pouring of wine is acceptable, but the priestly prayer is not. The doctor prays for the sake of the baron.

古文：士旅酌。卒。
现代文：士在西阶上向堂下的人敬酒，全敬遍。
English: On the west staircase, the priests toasted to the people below, and everyone drank a toast.

古文：主人洗，升自西阶，献庶子于阼阶上，如献士之礼。
现代文：士之间依次斟酒、敬酒，完毕。主人洗觚，从西阶登堂，在东阶上献给庶子。其礼仪与献士的礼仪相同。
English: The host washes the goblet, enters the hall from the west steps, and offers it to the son-in-law on the east steps. The etiquette is the same as that of the officiant.

古文：辩，降洗，遂献左右正与内小臣，皆于阼阶上，如献庶子之礼。
现代文：献遍，下堂洗觚，然后献给左右正和内小臣，都在东阶上，礼仪与献庶子的礼仪相同。
English: The offering, the washing of the ashes in the hall, and then the offering to the left, right, and inner ministers are all on the east steps. The etiquette is the same as that for the offering of an illegitimate child.

古文：无算爵。
现代文：然后不计酒爵地饮酒。
English: They then proceeded to drink to excess.

古文：士也，有执膳爵者，有执散爵者。
现代文：士人有的拿着斟着美酒的酒爵；有人拿着斟着方壶酒的酒爵。
English: Some of the scholars were holding wine goblets filled with fine wine; others were holding wine goblets filled with goblet wine.

古文：执膳爵者酌以进公，公不拜，受。
现代文：拿着斟有美酒酒爵的士，用以进献国君，国君不行拜礼接受。
English: Take a taxicab filled with fine wine and liquor to present to the sovereign, who is not allowed to receive worship.

古文：执散爵者酌以之公，命所赐。
现代文：拿着斟有方壶酒酒爵的士，向国君进献，国君赐给他们。
English: Holding a square jug of liquor, they presented it to the sovereign, who gave it to them.

古文：所赐者兴受爵，降席下，奠爵，再拜稽首。
现代文：受赏赐的人站起来接受酒爵，从席位西边下来，放下酒爵，行两次稽首礼。
English: The recipient of the award stood up to receive the award, came down from the west side of the seat, put down the award, and performed two bowing ceremonies.

古文：公答拜。
现代文：国君回拜。
English: The sovereign returns the salute.

古文：受赐爵者以爵就席坐，公卒爵，然后饮。
现代文：接受赏赐酒爵的人拿着酒爵就席位坐下，国君喝完爵中酒，然后庶子饮。
English: The recipient of the award sits down on a seat with the award, the sovereign finishes drinking the wine, and then the bastard drinks it.

古文：执膳爵者受公爵，酌，反奠之。
现代文：拿着美酒的人接过国君的空爵，斟满酒，放回国君席前祭物南边。
English: The person with the fine wine took the empty jar from the sovereign, filled it with wine, and placed it back in front of the sovereign's seat on the south side of the offering.

古文：受赐爵者兴，授执散爵，执散爵者乃酌行之。唯受爵于公者拜。
现代文：接受赏赐酒爵的人站起，把酒爵交给拿方壶酒的人，拿方壶酒的人于是斟满酒饮酒。
English: The recipient of the award stood up and handed the award to the recipient of the goblet, who proceeded to drink the entire goblet.

古文：卒受爵者兴，以酬士于西阶上。
现代文：只有接受国君赐爵的人行拜礼。所有接过酒爵的人站起来，在西阶上向士敬酒。
English: Only those who receive knighthoods from the sovereign are saluted, and all those who receive them stand up and drink to them on the West Steps.

古文：士升，大夫不拜，乃饮，实爵。
现代文：士登堂，大夫不行拜礼，饮酒，然后斟满酒。
English: Shitendo, doctors can't worship, drink alcohol, and then fill up with wine.

古文：士不拜，受爵。
现代文：士不行拜礼，接受酒爵。
English: You can't worship a priest, you have to accept a baron.

古文：大夫就席。士旅酌，亦如之。
现代文：大夫就席，士走到台阶上斟酒，也是如此。
English: The doctor takes his seat, the bartender goes to the steps to pour the wine, and so on.

古文：公有命彻幂，则卿大夫皆降，西阶下北面东上，再拜稽首。
现代文：国君有命令撤去遮盖酒壶的巾，则卿大夫都下堂，在西阶下面朝北，以东边为上位，行两次稽首礼。
English: If the sovereign has the order to remove the scarf covering the wine jug, then the lord doctors all go down the hall, face north below the west steps, with the east side as the upper level, and perform two bowing ceremonies.

古文：公命小臣辞。
现代文：国君命令小臣辞谢。
English: The sovereign ordered the vassal to resign.

古文：公答再拜，大夫皆辟。
现代文：国君回拜两次，大夫都避开。
English: The sovereign returned the salute twice, but the doctor avoided him.

古文：遂升，反坐。
现代文：于是登堂返回原位坐下。
English: He then returned to his seat and sat down.

古文：士终旅于上，如初。
现代文：士在西阶上结束劝酒，如同原来一样。
English: On the west steps, the priest concluded the procession, just as before.

古文：无算乐。
现代文：然后歌唱、吹奏不计曲数。
English: Then they sing and play an unlimited number of songs.

古文：宵，则庶子执烛于阼阶上，司宫执烛于西阶上，甸人执大烛于庭，阍人为大烛于门外。
现代文：夜晚，庶子在东阶上拿着火烛，司宫在西阶上拿着火烛。甸人在中庭拿着大火烛，门人在门外拿着大火烛。
English: In the evening, the son-in-law carried a lighted candle on the east step, the chief priest carried a lighted candle on the west step, the dean carried a lighted candle in the courtyard, and the doorkeeper carried a lighted candle outside the door.

古文：宾醉，北面坐取其荐脯以降。奏《陔》。
现代文：主宾醉，面朝北坐下拿取进献的干肉下堂。奏《陔夏》乐。
English: The chief guest is drunk, faces north, sits down, takes the dry meat that has been brought in, and goes down to the hall. The music of "Summer" is played.

古文：宾所执脯以赐钟人于门内霤，遂出。卿、大夫皆出。
现代文：主宾拿着干肉在门内屋檐下赐与掌管钟鼓的人，然后出门。卿、大夫都出门。
English: The chief guest takes the dried meat and gives it to the person in charge of the bells and drums under the eaves inside the gate, and then goes out. The lord and the doctor both go out.

古文：公不送。
现代文：国君不送。
English: The sovereign does not send them.

古文：公与客燕。
现代文：国君与四方来的使者宴饮。
English: The sovereign feasted with envoys from all over.

古文：曰： 寡君有不腆之酒，以请吾子之与寡君须臾焉。使某也以请。 
现代文：国君派人对客人说： 敝国国君有不好的酒，以请您与敝国国君坐一会儿，派我来请您。 
English: The sovereign sent someone to say to the guest: "My sovereign has some bad wine, so I would like to invite you to sit with my sovereign for a while. I have been sent to invite you."

古文：对曰： 寡君，君之私也。君无所辱赐于使臣，臣敢辞。 
现代文：客人的上介回答说： 敝国国君，是受到恩惠的人，贵国君屈尊对使臣有所赐，臣冒昧地辞谢。 
English: The guest's representative replied: "Your majesty, you are a favored person. Your majesty's condescension is a gift to your envoy, and your envoy has the temerity to decline.

古文： 寡君固曰不腆，使某固以请！ 
现代文：国君的使者说： 酒不好，国君派我再次邀请！ 
English: The envoy of the sovereign also said: "The wine is not good. The sovereign has sent me another invitation."

古文： 寡君，君之私也。君无所辱赐于使臣，臣敢固辞！ 
现代文：客人的上介又回答： 敝国国君，是受到您的恩惠的人，您屈尊对使臣有所赐，臣冒昧地再次辞谢。 
English: The guest's representative also replied: "Your Majesty, I am a person who has received your favor. Your condescension has been a blessing to the envoy. The envoy has the temerity to thank you again.

古文： 寡君固曰不腆，使某固以请！ 
现代文：国君的使者又说： 酒不好，国君派我又次邀请。 
English: The envoy of the sovereign also said: "The wine is not good. The sovereign has sent me another invitation."

古文： 某固辞，不得命，敢不从？ 
现代文：回答说： 我再次辞谢，没得到允命，怎敢不从命。 
English: He replied: I again decline, I have not been given an order, how dare I not follow my orders.

古文：致命曰： 寡君使某，有不腆之酒，以请吾子之与寡君须臾焉！ 
现代文：于是主国使者转达国君的命令说： 敝国国君有不好的酒，派我来请您和敝国国君坐一会儿。 
English: So the emissary of the host country conveyed the sovereign's order and said: "Your Excellency has some bad wine. I have been sent to invite you and your Excellency to sit down for a while.

古文： 君贶寡君多矣，又辱赐于使臣，臣敢拜赐命！ 
现代文：邻国使臣说： 您赐予敝国国君许多，又屈尊赐予使臣，臣冒昧拜谢宴饮的命令。 
English: The envoy of a neighboring country said: You have given many gifts to the sovereigns of my country, and you have condescended to give orders to the envoys, and the envoys have dared to offer thanksgiving banquets.

古文：记。燕，朝服，于寝。其牲，狗也，亨于门外东方。
现代文：在路寝饮，穿朝服，祭牲用狗，在门外东边烹煮。
English: Sleeping and drinking on the road, wearing imperial robes, sacrificing animals with dogs, and cooking on the east side outside the gate.

古文：若与四方之宾燕，则公迎之于大门内，揖让升。宾为苟敬，席于阼阶之西，北面，有脀，不哜肺，不啐酒。
现代文：如果和四方的来宾宴饮，那么，国君就在大门内迎接，拱手行礼谦让登堂，宾客如果坐在国君的近侧，在东阶的西边设席位，面朝北。有进献的牲体，不尝肺，不饮酒。
English: If you are having a banquet with guests from four directions, then the sovereign will greet you at the gate, bow and make a gesture to let you enter the hall. If the guests are sitting close to the sovereign, set up seats on the west side of the east steps, facing north. If there is a sacrificial animal, do not taste the lungs, do not drink alcohol.

古文：其介为宾。无膳尊，无膳爵。
现代文：宾客的介做主宾，没有美酒，没有美的酒爵。
English: There is no fine wine, no fine wine baron, when the guest's representative is the chief guest.

古文：与卿燕，则大夫为宾。
现代文：和卿宴饮，则大夫作为主宾。
English: When the lord of the manor is dining, the doctor is the chief guest.

古文：与大夫燕，亦大夫为宾。
现代文：和大夫宴饮，也是大夫做主宾。
English: A banquet with the doctor, who is also the chief guest.

古文：羞膳者与执幂者，皆士也。羞卿者，小膳宰也。
现代文：进献饭食的人和拿中的人都是士。为卿进献饭食的人是小膳宰。
English: The one who offers the meal and the one who takes it are both nobles. The one who offers the meal for the lord is a lesser eunuch.

古文：若以乐纳宾，则宾及庭，奏《肆夏》；宾拜酒，主人答拜，而乐阕。
现代文：如果用乐曲引导主宾进入，那么主宾到中庭时奏《肆夏》乐曲，主宾为酒行拜礼，主人回拜时乐曲终止。
English: If the music is used to guide the main guest into the room, then the music of "The Summer" will be played when the main guest enters the atrium, the main guest will be the host, and the music will end when the host returns.

古文：公拜受爵，而奏《肆夏》；公卒爵，主人升，受爵以下，而乐阕。
现代文：国君行拜礼接受酒时奏《肆夏》乐曲。国君喝完酒，主人登堂接过空爵下堂时乐曲终止。
English: The music of "Blessed Summer" is played when the sovereign is receiving wine at a church service. The music ends when the sovereign has finished drinking and the master enters the hall to receive the vacant peer and leaves the hall.

古文：升歌《鹿鸣》，下管《新宫》，笙入三成，遂合乡乐。
现代文：登堂时歌唱《鹿鸣》，下堂时管乐吹奏《新官》，笙加入吹奏《南陔》三诗。
English: When entering the hall, they sang "Deersong," and when leaving the hall, the pipe band played "New Official," and the gongs joined in to play the three poems of "Nanjing."

古文：若舞，则《勺》。
现代文：接着合奏乡乐，如果舞蹈，就用《酌》乐伴奏。
English: Next, the ensemble plays folk music, and if it's a dance, it's accompanied by the music from "Drinking."

古文：唯公与宾有俎。
现代文：只有国君和主宾有俎。
English: Only the sovereign and the chief guest have a quarrel.

古文：献公，曰： 臣敢奏爵以听命。 
现代文：向国君献酒时说： 臣不敢冒昧进献酒爵，听从您的命令。 
English: When offering wine to the sovereign, he said: "The vassal dares not venture into offering wine to the sovereign, but obeys your order.

古文：凡公所辞，皆栗阶。
现代文：凡是被国君答应献酒的大臣都是一步一级台阶的急趋。
English: Any minister who is promised a drink by the sovereign is one step closer to the top.

古文：凡栗阶，不过二等。
现代文：凡是一步一级而升，不超过两级台阶。
English: Every step is a step up, no more than two steps.

古文：凡公所酬，既拜，请旅侍臣。
现代文：凡是国君所敬的酒，已经行过拜礼，然后请示国君向群臣敬酒。
English: All the wine that the sovereign honors has been blessed, and then the sovereign is asked to make a toast to the courtiers.

古文：凡荐与羞者，小膳宰也。有内羞。
现代文：凡进献干肉、肉酱和饭食的人都是小膳宰。也有中馈女工做的食物。
English: Everyone who brings dried meat, meat sauce and food is a small meal. There is also food made by middle-class female workers.

古文：君与射，则为下射，袒朱襦，乐作而后就物。
现代文：如果国君参与射箭，那么就做下射，露出红色上衣，乐曲奏起后就站在射箭的地方。
English: If the sovereign participates in archery, then he shoots downwards, revealing a red jacket, and stands in the place of archery after the music begins.

古文：小臣以巾授矢，稍属。
现代文：小臣用巾把箭递给国君。
English: The vassal handed the arrow to the sovereign in a handkerchief.

古文：不以乐志。既发，则小臣受弓以授弓人。
现代文：国君发一枝，小臣递一技，不以乐曲节奏为限。已经射完，小臣就接过弓，把它交给拿弓的人。
English: The sovereign shoots one stick, the vassal passes one trick, not limited to the rhythm of the music. When the shooting is over, the vassal takes the bow and gives it to the person with the bow.

古文：上射退于物一笴，既发，则答君而俟。
现代文：上射退到射箭处后边三尺的地方，上射已经射完，就面向国君等待。
English: The upper shot retreated to a place three feet behind the archery place, the upper shot had finished, and he waited facing the sovereign.

古文：若饮君，燕，则夹爵。
现代文：如果要国君喝罚酒，宴饮中就要用夹爵的办法。
English: If you want the sovereign to drink fine wine, you must use the method of the baronet during the banquet.

古文：君在，大夫射，则肉袒。
现代文：国君在场，大夫射箭就要露出左臂。
English: In the presence of the sovereign, the doctor would have to show his left arm to shoot an arrow.

古文：若与四方之宾燕，媵爵，曰： 臣受赐矣。
现代文：如果和四方的宾客宴饮，主宾向国君献觯说： 臣接受赐予。
English: If you are dining with guests from four directions, the chief guest should offer a bowl to the sovereign and say, "The vassal accepts the gift."

古文：臣请赞执爵者。 
现代文：臣请求佐助拿酒爵的人。 
English: The vassal asked Sasuke to get the baron's man.

古文：相者对曰： 吾子无自辱焉。 有房中之乐。
现代文：辅佐礼仪的相以国君的命令回答说： 您不要过分客气， 有弦歌《周南》、《召南》的诗乐。
English: The attendant who assisted with the etiquette, in accordance with the sovereign's order, replied: "Don't be too polite, there is a string song "Zhou Nan" and the poetry of "Zhao Nan."

