古文：艾万年，米脂人。
现代文：艾万年，米脂人。
English: Ai Wan Nian, rice fat man.

古文：由武学生从军，积功至神木参将。
现代文：早年由武学生从军作战，积累战功做到神木参将。
English: In his early years, he fought in the army as a martial arts student, and accumulated military merit to become a shinboku sansho.

古文：崇祯四年从曹文诏复河曲。
现代文：崇祯四年，万年跟着曹文诏收复了河曲。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Emperor Wanren followed Cao Wenzhao to recover Hequ.

古文：点灯子入山西，万年从文诏连败之桑落镇、花地窊、雾露山。都司王世虎、守备姚进忠战死。
现代文：点灯子进入山西后，万年跟着文诏在桑落镇、花地纞、雾露山连连打败他，都司王世虎、守备姚进忠战死。
English: After lighting the lantern and entering Shanxi, he followed the edict of the emperor for ten thousand years and defeated him in the towns of Sanluo, Huadi, and Wulu Mountain. The governor Wang Shigu and the guard Yao Jinzhong were killed in the battle.

古文：贼退屯石楼之康家山，西距河三十里。绥德知州周士奇、守备孙守法伏兵含峪，渡河袭杀之。
现代文：贼寇退驻石楼地区的康家山，往西距离黄河三十里，绥德知州周士奇、守备孙守法在含峪埋下伏兵，渡过黄河突袭成功杀掉了点灯子。
English: The bandits retreated to Kangjia Mountain in Shilou District, 30 miles west of the Yellow River. Zhou Shichi from Shide County and Sun Shoufa, a guard, ambushed the soldiers under the Yangtze River, and crossed the Yellow River to successfully kill the lanterns.

古文：五年从参政樊一蘅讨平不沾泥。
现代文：五年万年跟随参政樊一衡讨伐、平定了不沾泥。
English: For five years and ten thousand years, I have followed the Sanzheng Zou Yiheng crusade, and I have not been affected by the mud.

古文：山西告警，隶文诏东讨，与李卑一月奏五捷。又与贺人龙败八大王、扫地王兵。
现代文：山西传来战警，万年隶属于文诏部下东讨，和李卑一起一个月内五次告捷，又和贺人龙一道打败了八大王、扫地王的贼兵。
English: The war policemen came from Shanxi Province. They have been subordinated to the Ministry of Civil Affairs for thousands of years. Together with Li Bi, they won five times in one month. Together with He Renlong, they defeated the eight kings and the scavengers.

古文：明年，贼将东遁，连破之延家山、亢义村、贾寨村，擢副总兵。
现代文：第二年贼兵打算向东逃窜时，万年在延家山、亢义村、贾家村连连打败他们，被提升为副总兵。
English: The following year, when the bandits planned to flee to the east, he defeated them in succession in Yanjiayama, Shinyi Village, and Jiajia Village, and was promoted to deputy general.

古文：初，山西既中贼，其土寇亦乘间起，三关王刚、孝义通天柱、临县王之臣皆残破城邑。
现代文：当初山西在受到流寇侵扰之后，当地的土匪也乘机而起，三关的王刚、孝义的通天柱、临县的王之晋都打家劫舍，破坏城镇。
English: At the beginning, after Shanxi was invaded by bandits, local bandits also took the opportunity to rise up. Wang Gang from Sankuan, Tong Tianzhu from Xiaoyi, and Wang Zhijin from Lin County all robbed homes and destroyed towns.

古文：后见贼衰，相继归顺，然阴结党不散。
现代文：后来看到流寇衰败，他们相继归顺，但暗中拉帮结伙不肯解散。
English: Later, seeing the decline of the rebel bandits, they successively surrendered, but secretly pulled the gang together and refused to disband.

古文：巡抚戴君恩新视事，谋诛之。
现代文：巡抚戴君恩刚刚上任，打算除掉他们。
English: Inspector Dai Jun'en has just taken office and intends to get rid of them.

古文：七年正月迎春，召王刚宴，杀之，并杀通天柱于他所，而万年亦捕杀王豹五与其党领兵王，生擒翻山动，姬关锁、掌世王，献俘京师，晋中巨盗略靖。
现代文：七年正月迎春时，君恩召王刚来参加宴会，把他杀了，又在别的地方杀死了通天柱，万年也捕杀了王豹五和他的同伙领兵王，活捉了翻山动、姬关锁、掌世王，把他们送到了京师，山西的巨盗大都被平定了。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, at the time of the Spring Festival, Jun En called Wang Gang to attend a banquet and killed him. He also killed the pillar of heaven in another place. He also killed Wang Bao Wu and his accomplice, the leader of the army, and captured alive the king of mountain climbing, the king of Hieguan locks, and the ruler of the world. He sent them to Beijing Division, and most of the giant thieves in Shanxi were pacified.

古文：豹五即之臣也。
现代文：豹五也就是之臣。
English: Leopard Five is also a retainer.

古文：有议君恩杀降者，给事中张第元力言诸贼蹂躏之惨，请录万年功。
现代文：有人议论说万年杀害降人，给事中张第元极力陈述这些土匪糟踏山西的惨状，请登录万年的功绩。
English: Some people have talked about the eternal killing of people, and Zhang Diyuan, who was present at the event, tried his best to state that these bandits had wreaked havoc on Shanxi. Please record the eternal achievements.

古文：万年适遘疾告归，寻加署都督佥事。
现代文：万年当时正生病请假在家，不久朝廷给他加官试任都督佥事。
English: He was on sick leave at home at the time, and the court soon promoted him to the post of governor on a trial basis.

古文：八年二月，上疏言：
现代文：八年二月，万年上书说：
English: In February of the eighth year, he wrote:

古文：臣仗剑从戎七载，复府谷，解孤山围，救清水、黄甫、木瓜十一营堡。转战高山，设伏河曲，有马镇、虎头岩、石台山、西川之捷。
现代文： 我仗剑从军历经七载，收复府谷，解孤山之围，援救过清水、黄甫、木瓜等十一座营堡，转战于崇山峻岭之中，在河曲打过埋伏，先后取得了马镇、虎头岩、石台山、西川之战的胜利。
English: I have been in the army for seven years, recovered Fugu Valley, lifted the siege of the lonely mountain, rescued eleven camp forts such as Shimizu, Huangfu, and Papaya, fought in the mountains and mountains, and ambushed in Hequ, and successively achieved victory in the battle of Ma Town, Hougou Rock, Shitai Mountain, and West River.

古文：战平阳、汾州、太原，复临县及虒亭驿。大小数十战，精力尽耗。
现代文：在山西先后战于平阳、汾州、太原，收复了临县及虎亭驿，大大小小几十场战斗下来，精力都耗尽了。
English: In Shanxi, they fought successively in Pingyang, Zhangzhou and Taiyuan, and recovered Lin County and Hu Tingyi. After dozens of battles, both large and small, their energy was exhausted.

古文：与臣共事者李卑，溘先朝露。
现代文：和我一起共事的李卑，已经溘然长逝了。
English: Li Bi, who worked with me, has passed away.

古文：臣病势奄奄，犹力战冀北。
现代文：我病势奄奄，仍然在冀北力战。
English: I'm still fighting for my health in Hebei.

古文：又抚剿王刚、豹五、领兵王、通天柱，解散贼一万三千有奇。
现代文：去年又招抚、剿灭了王刚、豹五、领兵王、通天柱等，解散了一万三千多贼兵。
English: Last year, Wang Gang, Leopard Five, the leader of the army, Tong Tian Zhu, etc. were invited and annihilated, and more than 13,000 bandits were disbanded.

古文：蒙恩许臣养病，而督臣洪承畴檄又至，臣不敢不力疾上道。但念灭贼之法，不外剿抚，今剿抚俱未合机宜，臣不得不极言。
现代文：皇上开恩批准我在家养病，而督臣洪承畴的征召檄文又来了，我不敢不扶病上路，但考虑消除贼寇的办法不外乎剿灭或招安，现在剿灭和招安两种办法都不得当，我不得不斗胆直言。
English: The Emperor graciously allowed me to nurse my illness at home, but the call for enlistment issued by the Dictator and Minister Hong Chengzheng came again. I did not dare to go on the road without taking care of my illness, but I considered that the only way to eliminate the bandits was to exterminate them or recruit them. Now, both methods of extermination and recruitment of them are not appropriate. I had to speak out.

古文：夫剿贼不患贼多，患贼走。
现代文： 剿灭贼寇不怕他人多，怕他流窜。
English: If you want to exterminate a bandit, don't be afraid that there are more of them, but be afraid that they will escape.

古文：盖叠嶂重峦，皆其渊薮，兵未至而贼先逃，所以难灭，其故则兵寡也。
现代文：重峦叠嶂都是贼兵的聚集点，官兵还没到他就先跑掉了，所以不好消灭他，原因在于官兵人手少。
English: The overlapping ditches are all gathering points for the bandits. Before the officers and soldiers arrive, he runs away first, so it is not easy to eliminate him. The reason is that there are few officers and soldiers.

古文：当事非不知兵寡，因糗粮不足，为苟且计，日引月长，以至于今，虽多措饷，多设兵，而已不可救矣。
现代文：掌权者并不是不知道官兵人少，只是因为粮草不足，所以做那种得过且过的打算，天长日久，延续到现在，即使多凑饷，多派兵力，也已经无法挽救了。
English: It is not that those in power do not know that the number of officers and soldiers is small, it is just that because of the shortage of grain and grass, they have made the kind of plan to get by, for a long time, and continue to this day. Even if they make more efforts and send more troops, it can no longer be saved.

古文：宜合计贼众多寡，用兵若干，饷若干，度其足用，然后审察地利，用正用奇，用伏用间，或击首尾，或冲左右，有不即时殄灭者，臣不信也。
现代文：我认为应该合计贼兵到底有多少，应该用多少官兵，多少粮饷，估计够用时，再审察地利，或者正面进攻，或者奇兵袭击，或者打埋伏，或者走小路，或者打击贼兵首尾，或者冲击贼兵左右，这样我不相信还会有不能立即消灭的。
English: I think that we should calculate the total number of bandits, how many officers and soldiers should be used, and how much grain should be used. When it is estimated to be enough, we should re-examine the situation, or make a frontal attack, or a surprise attack, or ambush, or take a side road, or strike the bandits from end to end, or strike around the bandits, so I don't believe that there will be any that can't be eliminated immediately.

古文：次则行坚壁清野之法，困贼于死地，然后可言抚。
现代文： 其次就是推行坚壁清野的办法，把贼兵困于死地，然后才能谈论招安。
English: The second is to implement the method of strong walls and clear fields, trapping the bandits to death, and then we can talk about recruiting.

古文：盖群贼携妻挈子，无城栅，无辎重，暮楚朝秦，传食中土，以剽掠为生。
现代文：群贼拖家带口，没有城栅，没有辎重，晚上在湖北早上就到了陕西，在中原地带辗转觅食，以剽掠为生。
English: The group of thieves dragged their families with them, had no city gates, no baggage, and arrived in Shaanxi in the morning after spending the night in Hubei. They wandered around the Central Plains in search of food and made a living by pillaging.

古文：诚令附近村屯移入城郭，储精兵火器以待之，贼衣食易尽，生理一绝，鸟惊鼠窜。
现代文：假如让附近乡村的居民迁入城中，城中准备精兵火器等着他，贼兵衣食不足，容易用完，生路一断绝，就会如同飞鸟一样惊逃，如老鼠一样亡命了。
English: If the residents of the nearby villages were allowed to move into the city, the city would be prepared with elite soldiers and firearms waiting for him. The robbers would not have enough food and clothing and would easily run out. Once their way of life was cut off, they would flee like a bird and die like a mouse.

古文：然后选精锐，据要害以击之；或体陛下好生之心，诛厥渠魁，宥其协从，不伤仁，不损威，乃抚剿良策。
现代文：然后朝廷派遣精锐部队，占据要害打击他们；或者陛下体察爱惜生灵的善心，杀掉贼首，宽恕那些胁从的百姓，这样无害于爱人之德，无损于朝廷尊严就消除了贼寇，这才是剿灭、招安的好办法呀。 
English: Then the imperial court would send elite troops to occupy the key points and fight them; or His Majesty would consider the kindness of caring for the living, kill the thieves, and forgive the people who were intimidated, thus eliminating the thieves without harming the virtue of loving people and without compromising the dignity of the imperial court. This is a good way to exterminate and attract peace.

古文：帝深嘉之，下所司议行，然卒不能用其策也。
现代文：崇祯皇帝十分称赞他的主意，把他的奏议交给有关部门讨论执行，但最终还是没能使用他的计策。
English: Emperor Chongzhen highly praised his idea and submitted his proposal to the relevant departments for discussion and implementation, but ultimately failed to use his strategy.

古文：寻授孤山副总兵，戍平凉。
现代文：不久万年出任孤山副总兵，驻守平凉。
English: Soon he was appointed deputy commander of the Lone Mountain and stationed in Pingliang.

古文：当是时，总督洪承畴迫六月灭贼之期，急进战。
现代文：这个时候，总督洪承畴迫于六个月消灭贼寇的限期，急于进战。
English: At this time, Governor Hong Chengzhuang was under pressure to meet the six-month deadline for eliminating the bandits, and was eager to go to war.

古文：诸将见贼众兵寡，咸自揣不敌，而势不可止。
现代文：将领们看到贼兵多官兵人少，都自己猜想打贼兵不过，但势不得已。
English: When the generals saw that the bandits were outnumbered by officers and soldiers, they all thought that they had no choice but to fight the bandits.

古文：万年及副将刘成功、柳国镇，游击王锡命合兵三千，以六月十四日至宁州之襄乐，遇贼大战，斩首数百。
现代文：万年和副将刘成功、柳国镇，游击王锡命联合了三千官兵，于六月十四日到达宁州襄乐一带遇上贼兵展开大战，斩敌数百人。
English: The 10,000-year-old warlord Liu Chenggong, the vice-general Liu Chenggong, the town of Liu Guozhen, and the guerrilla Wang Xi combined the lives of 3,000 officers and soldiers. On June 14, they arrived in the Xiangle area of Ningzhou, where they met the robber soldiers and launched a large-scale war, killing hundreds of enemies.

古文：伏兵骤起，围之数重。
现代文：突然伏兵出来把他们包围了几层。
English: Suddenly, the ambush came out and surrounded them for several floors.

古文：万年、国镇力战不支，皆战殁。
现代文：万年、国镇拼死相战，体力不支，都阵亡了。
English: For thousands of years, towns and villages fought to the death, exhausted, and died in battle.

古文：军中失二将，为夺气。
现代文：成功、锡命带着重伤逃回来，士卒死了一千多人。
English: Success, tin life escaped back with serious injuries, more than a thousand soldiers died.

古文：猛如虎，本塞外降人，家榆林，积功至游击。
现代文：朝廷得知后按规定对万年给予了追赠和抚恤。猛如虎，原来是从塞外过来归附的降人，家住在榆林，早年从军，积累战功做到游击将军。
English: After the imperial court learned of this, it gave Wan Nian a follow-up gift and a pension in accordance with regulations. He was fierce as a tiger. Originally, he was a subordinate who came from outside of Tibet, lived in Yulin, joined the army in his early years, and accumulated military exploits to become a guerrilla general.

古文：崇祯五年，击邢红狼于高平，解其围。
现代文：崇祯五年，如虎在高平攻打邢红狼，解除了他对高平的围困。
English: In the fifth year of his reign, Emperor Chongzhen, like a tiger, attacked the Red Wolves in Gaoping, lifting his siege on Gaoping.

古文：明年败贼寿阳黑山，覆姬关锁军。
现代文：第二年，他又在寿阳黑山打败贼寇，铲除了姬关锁的贼兵。
English: The next year, he defeated the bandits in Shouyang Black Mountain and eradicated the bandits in Jiguan Lock.

古文：已，从曹文诏追贼西偃、碧霞村，斩混世王。
现代文：后来跟着曹文诏在西偃、碧霞村追击贼寇，斩杀了混世王。
English: Later, he followed Cao Wenzhao to chase the bandits in Xidi and Bixia Village, and killed the king of mixed race.

古文：与颇希牧逐贼寿阳东。又与陈国威、马杰破来远寨。
现代文：接着他跟颇希牧一道在寿阳东部追赶贼寇，又和陈国威、马杰一道打下了来远寨。
English: Then, together with Po Ximu, he chased the bandits in the eastern part of Shouyang, and together with Chen Guowei and Ma Jie, they built Laiyuanzhai.

古文：从文诏大破贼范村。
现代文：之后他跟随文诏在范村把贼寇打得大败。
English: After that, he followed the edict and defeated the bandits in Fan Village.

古文：国威以步卒三百夜劫贼红山岭，如虎、杰及虎大威、和应诏击杀九条龙。
现代文：国威率领三百名步兵在红山岭夜袭贼寇，如虎、马杰及虎大威、和应诏打败并杀掉了九条龙。
English: Guowei led three hundred infantrymen to attack the bandits at night in Hongshanling, such as Tiger, Majet and Tiger Dawei, and Ying Zhao defeated and killed nine dragons.

古文：寻以巡抚许鼎臣命，由文水入山剿贼。
现代文：不久，按照巡抚许鼎臣的命令，如虎从文水出发进山里边剿贼。
English: Soon, in accordance with the order of the governor Xu Dingchen, the tiger set out from Wenshui and went into the mountains to fight the bandits.

古文：又与大威、应诏、杰由皋落山剿东犯之贼，并有功。
现代文：又跟大威、应诏、马杰一道经过皋落山去剿除东犯的贼寇，前前后后都立下了战功。
English: Together with Dawei, Ying Zhao and Ma Jie, they also went through the mountains of Yingliao to remove the East criminal bandits, and they all made great achievements in the war.

古文：贼流入畿南，山西警渐息，如虎仍隶鼎臣。
现代文：贼寇流入畿南后，山西的战事渐渐平息了，如虎仍然隶属鼎臣的指挥。
English: After the bandits flowed into South Gyeongsang Province, the war in Shanxi gradually subsided, and Rugao was still under the command of the Great Minister.

古文：七年剿贼沁源，馘五条龙。
现代文：七年，奉命到沁源剿贼，斩杀了贼将五条龙。
English: In the seventh year, he was ordered to go to Lianyuan to kill the thief, and he killed five dragons.

古文：如虎骁勇善战，与虎大威齐名。
现代文：如虎为人骁勇、果断，善于打仗，与虎大威一样有名气。
English: If the tiger is courageous, decisive, and good at fighting, it is as famous as the tiger Dai Rong.

古文：戴君恩、吴甡相继为巡抚，并委任之。
现代文：戴君恩、吴生生相继担任山西巡抚，都重用他。
English: Dai Jun'en and Wu Sheng's successively served as the Shanxi governor, and both made heavy use of him.

古文：以功进参将。
现代文：朝廷因功提拔他做了参将。
English: The imperial court promoted him to the rank of general due to his merits.

古文：其年冬，贼在河南，欲乘冰北渡，如虎、大威扼之河滨。
现代文：那年冬天，贼寇在黄河南面，想乘黄河结冰的机会北渡，如虎、大威在黄河北岸阻击他们。
English: That winter, the bandits were on the south side of the Yellow River and wanted to take advantage of the opportunity of the Yellow River freezing to cross to the north.

古文：八年二月与大威、国威斩剧贼高加计。山西贼尽平，用甡荐加副总兵。
现代文：八年二月，如虎和大威、国威斩杀了贼兵大将高加计，山西的贼寇全部被平定了，如虎因为吴生生的举荐被提升为副总兵。
English: In February of the eighth year, Rugao, Dawei and Guowei killed the general of the bandits, Gao Jia, and all the bandits in Shanxi were subdued. Rugao was promoted to deputy general because of Wu Sheng Sheng's recommendation.

古文：其冬以防河功，加署都督佥事。
现代文：这年冬天又因为保卫黄河的战功，担任都督佥事。
English: This winter, because of his war exploits in defending the Yellow River, he served as the prefectural governor.

古文：连岁防河及援剿河南贼，劳绩甚著。
现代文：连续几年，如虎在防守黄河以及援助南岸剿贼方面，战功十分显著。
English: For several years in a row, Ruhu has made remarkable achievements in the defense of the Yellow River and the assistance to the South Bank bandits.

古文：十一年冬，京师有警，如虎督兵勤王。
现代文：十一年冬天，京师周围发生战事，如虎率兵前去勤王。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, there was a battle around the capital division, and the tiger led the soldiers to go to the king.

古文：明年四月擢蓟镇中协总兵官。
现代文：第二年四月，朝廷提拔他担任蓟镇中协总兵官。
English: In April of the following year, the imperial court promoted him to the post of general officer of the Shanzhen Chinese People's Association.

古文：十三年坐事落职，发边方立功。
现代文：十三年，如虎因事被剥夺了官职，发配到边境上立功赎罪。
English: Thirteen years later, Ruhu was stripped of his official position and sent to the border to atone for his sins.

古文：督师杨嗣昌请于朝，令从入蜀。
现代文：督师杨嗣昌向朝廷申请让他跟着自己到四川去了。
English: Superintendent Yang Shichang applied to the imperial court to let him follow him to Sichuan.

古文：十一月，监军万元吉大飨将士于保宁。
现代文：十一月，监军万元吉在保宁隆重犒赏官兵将士。
English: In November, the supervisor of the army, Yuan Ji, held a grand award ceremony for officers and soldiers in Boryeong.

古文：以诸军进止不一，擢如虎为正总统，张应元副之，率军趋绵州。分遣诸将屯要害。
现代文：因为各部队去留有别，就提升如虎为正总统，张应元为副总统，一起率军奔赴绵州，分派各个将领驻扎在要害地带。
English: Because of the difference between the troops, Ruhu was promoted to the president and Zhang Yingyuan to the vice president. They led the army to Mianzhou together and assigned the generals to be stationed in the key areas.

古文：而元吉自间道走射洪，扼蓬溪以待贼。
现代文：元吉自己从小路上进军射洪，守住蓬溪等待贼兵过来。
English: Yuanji himself marched from a small road to shoot the flood, guarding Pengxi and waiting for the bandits to come.

古文：贼方屯安岳界，侦官军且至，宵遁，抵内江。
现代文：贼寇当时正驻扎在安岳境内，侦察到官兵就要来了，当夜就逃窜到内江去了。
English: At that time, the bandit was stationed in the territory of Anyue. He detected that the officers and soldiers were about to arrive, and fled to Neijiang that night.

古文：如虎简骁骑追之。元吉、应元营安岳城下，以扼其归路。
现代文：如虎挑选精干的骑兵在后面追击，元吉、应元把军营扎在安岳城下，切断他们的归路。
English: As the tiger picked out the elite cavalry and chased them, Yuanji and Yingyuan set up a military camp under the city of Anyue, cutting off their way back.

古文：十二月，张献忠陷泸州，其地三面阻江，惟立石站可北走。
现代文：十二月，张献忠打下泸州，这个地方三面临江，只有立石站一个地方可以向北边出去。
English: In December, Zhang Xianzhong laid siege to Zhangzhou. This place faces the Yangtze River on three sides, and there is only one place, Liushi Station, where you can go north.

古文：元吉以贼居绝地，将遣大兵南捣其老巢，而伏兵旁塞玉蟾寺，蹙贼北窜永川，逆而击之，可尽殄。
现代文：元吉认为贼寇这下住在绝地，打算派遣大军从南边直捣他们的老巢，在他们旁边的要塞玉蟾寺埋下伏兵，准备在贼寇北窜永川时，给他们一个迎头痛击，以为这下就可以把他们全部歼灭了。
English: Genji thought that the bandits were now living in the Jedi territory, and planned to send a large army from the south to directly attack their lair, and set up an ambush at the fortress of Yulun Temple next to them, preparing to give them a head-on blow when the bandits were north of the Yongchuan River, thinking that this would wipe them all out.

古文：永川知县已先遁，城中止丞簿一二人。
现代文：可是永川知县已经先逃跑了，城中只有一两个县丞、主簿之类的人。
English: However, Nagakawa Chigata had already run away first, and there were only one or two people in the city, such as the county magistrate and the chief clerk.

古文：如虎觅向导不可得，夜宿西关空舍。及抵立石，贼已先渡南溪返走。
现代文：如虎找不到向导，晚上就在西关的空房中宿营，等他赶到立石站时，贼寇已经渡过南溪回头先跑掉了。
English: If the tiger can't find a guide, it will camp in an empty room in Xiguan in the evening. By the time he arrives at the standing stone station, the thief has already crossed the Nanxi River and run away.

古文：关中将贺人龙军隔水不击，贼遂越成都，走汉川、德阳，渡绵河入巴州。
现代文：关中军的将领贺人龙带兵驻在对岸也不打，贼寇于是越过成都，跑到汉川、德阳，渡过绵河进入了巴州。
English: The general of the Guanzhong army, He Renlong, stationed with soldiers on the opposite bank, did not fight, so the bandits crossed Chengdu, ran to Hanchuan and Deyang, crossed the Mianhe River and entered Bazhou.

古文：明年正月，嗣昌亲统舟师下云阳，檄诸将陆追贼，诸军乃尽蹑贼后。
现代文：第二年正月，嗣昌亲率水师进驻云阳，传令各位将官在陆地上追击贼寇，于是各路官兵都跟踪在贼寇后面。
English: In the first month of the second year, Tsuchimasa's relatives marched into Yunyang with sailors and ordered the generals to pursue the bandits on land. As a result, all officers and soldiers followed behind the bandits.

古文：贼折而东返，归路悉空，不可复遏。
现代文：贼寇突然取路向东回走，归路上没有防守，所以官兵没办法再拦住他们。
English: The bandits suddenly took the road to the east and went back. There was no defense on the way back, so the officers and soldiers had no way to stop them.

古文：如虎所将止六百骑，余皆左良玉部兵，骄悍不可制，所过肆焚掠，惟参将刘士杰勇敢思立功。
现代文：如虎所率领的只有六百多骑兵是自己的部下，剩下的都是左良玉部队的士兵，他们骄悍成性，无法管制，所过之处大肆烧杀抢劫，只有参将刘士杰勇敢作战，想要立功。
English: Only the more than six hundred cavalrymen led by Ruhu were his own subordinates. The rest were soldiers from Zuo Liangyu's troops. They were arrogant and uncontrollable, and they burned and looted wherever they went. Only Liu Shijie fought bravely and wanted to make a contribution.

古文：诸军从良玉，多优闲不战。改隶如虎，驰逐山谷风雪中，咸怨望。
现代文：这些部队跟着良玉时，很多时间都悠闲自在，不打仗，现在隶属如虎部下，总是在山谷、风雪中奔驰作战，都有了怨言。
English: When these troops followed Liangyu, they spent a lot of time at leisure and did not fight. Now they are subordinate to Ruohu's subordinates, always galloping to fight in the valley, wind and snow, and they all have complaints.

古文：谣曰： 想杀我左镇，跑杀我猛镇。 
现代文：他们编顺口溜说： 左镇想死我，猛镇跑死我。 
English: They say in unison: Zuozhen wants to kill me, Mengzhen is running to kill me.

古文：时贺人龙兵已大噪西归，所恃止如虎，元吉深忧之。
现代文：当时贺人龙的部队已经大吵大闹地西撤了，这里能依靠的只有如虎了，元吉对此深感忧虑。
English: At that time, He Renlong's troops had already retreated to the west noisily. The only thing that could be relied on here was the tiger. Yuanji was deeply worried about this.

古文：贼自巴州至开县，官军追之，遇诸黄陵城。
现代文：贼寇自巴州开到开县，官兵追击他们，在黄陵城遇上了贼寇。
English: The bandits drove from Bazhou to Kaishan, the officers and soldiers chased them, and met the bandits in Huangling City.

古文：日晡雨作，诸将疲乏，请诘朝战。
现代文：当时天色已暗，正下着雨，将领们都疲倦了，请求明天早上再打。
English: It was dark, it was raining, the generals were tired and asked to fight again in the morning.

古文：士杰奋曰： 四旬逐贼，今始及之。
现代文：士杰精神抖擞地说 ：追了四十天，现在才追上这些贼。放着不打，我不干！ 
English: Shijie said with high spirits, "I've been chasing them for forty days, and now I've caught up with these thieves. If you don't let me go, I won't do it!"

古文：舍弗击，我不能也。 
现代文：拿着武器就出发了，如虎鼓励其他将领们跟了上去。士杰在前，所向披靡。
English: He took his weapons and set off. Ruhu encouraged the other generals to follow him. Shijie was ahead, and he was invincible.

古文：执戈先，如虎激诸军继之。士杰所当，辄摧陷。献忠登高望官军，见无后继，密抽壮骑潜行箐谷中，乘高大呼驰下。
现代文：献忠登上高处观看官军的阵势，看到没有后援，就暗中抽调精锐的骑兵从长满林木的山谷中开出来，居高临下，大叫着飞奔而下。
English: Xianzhong ascended to a high place to watch the position of the government army. Seeing that there was no backup, he secretly drafted elite cavalry to drive out of the wooded valley, stand tall, shout and rush down.

古文：良玉兵先溃，士杰及游击郭开、如虎子先捷并战死。
现代文：良玉的部队首先溃退了，士杰及游击郭开、如虎的儿子先捷都阵亡了。
English: Liang Yu's troops were the first to retreat. Shi Jie and the guerrillas Guo Kai and Ruhu's son Xian Jie all died in the battle.

古文：如虎率亲兵力战，部将挟上马，溃围出，旗纛军符尽失。
现代文：如虎率领自己的亲兵奋力厮杀，部将把他扶上马，突围而出，军旗、军符都丢失了。
English: If the tiger led his own soldiers to fight and kill, the commander would put him on a horse and break out of the encirclement, and the military flag and military emblem would be lost.

古文：乃收残卒从嗣昌下荆州。
现代文：于是收回残兵，跟着嗣昌到了荆州。
English: So he took back the remaining soldiers and followed Tsuchimasa to Jingzhou.

古文：及嗣昌死，率所部扼德安、黄州。
现代文：等嗣昌死后，如虎率领自己的队伍驻守在德安、黄州。
English: After the death of Taishi Chang, Ruhu led his team to stay in De'an and Huangzhou.

古文：会疽发背，不能战，退屯承天，寻移驻南阳。
现代文：后来他背上长了疽疮，不能打仗，就退驻承天，不久又移驻南阳。
English: Later, when he developed gangrene on his back and was unable to fight, he withdrew to Heungcheon and soon moved to Nanyang.

古文：十一月，李自成覆傅宗龙兵，乘势来攻。
现代文：十一月，李自成打垮了傅宗龙的部队，乘胜来攻打南阳。
English: In November, Li Zicheng defeated Fu Zonglong's troops and took advantage of the victory to attack Nanyang.

古文：如虎与刘光祚凭城固守，用计杀贼精卒数千。
现代文：如虎和刘光祚借着城墙顽强地守御作战，设计杀死了贼寇几千名精兵。
English: With the help of the city wall, Ruhu and Liu Guangyao tenaciously defended the battle and killed several thousand elite soldiers of the bandits.

古文：贼言之再三，复骂曰： 若此，须换却心肝。 
现代文：后来城被打了下来，如虎手提着短兵器和贼兵展开巷战，他大喊着往返冲击，鲜血染红了战袍、衣袖。
English: Later, when the city was knocked down, he carried a short weapon like a tiger and fought with the bandits in the streets. He shouted back and forth, and the blood stained his tunic and sleeves.

古文：贼笑曰： 换不难。 遂剖心剜肝而死。
现代文：经过唐王府门口时，他朝北叩头在地，感谢皇上对他的大恩，自称没力气打下去了，然后就被贼兵用刀剑给戮死了。
English: When he passed through the gate of the Tang royal palace, he bowed to the ground facing north, thanked the emperor for his great favor, said that he did not have the strength to fight on, and then he was killed by the robbers with a sword.

古文：尤世威，榆林卫人。与兄世功、弟世禄并勇敢知名。
现代文：光祚及分守参议艾毓初、南阳知县姚运熙都在这次事变中死难，唐王也遇害了。尤世威，榆林卫人。他和哥哥世功、弟弟世禄三个人都作战勇敢，知名当时。
English: Guangyao Guangyao and his deputies Ai Yunchu and Yao Yunxi of Nanyangzhi County all died in this incident, and Tang Wang was also killed. You Shiwei, the guardian of Yulin. He and his brother Shigong and his brother Shilu were all three brave fighters, and were well known at the time.

古文：天启中，世威积官建昌营参将，调守墙子路。
现代文：天启年间，世威做官做到建昌营参将，调守墙子路。
English: In the year of the Apocalypse, Shih Wei, as an official, made Jianchang a battalion commander and guarded Wanzi Road.

古文：七年迁山海中部副总兵。
现代文：七年升任山海中部副总兵。
English: Seven years later, he was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief of troops in central Shanhai Province.

古文：宁远告警，从大帅满桂赴援，力战城东有功，增秩受赐。
现代文：宁远告警，他跟着大帅满桂赴援，在城东力战，立下战功，得到提级和赏赐。
English: Ning alerted far away, he followed the general Man Gui to go to the rescue, fought hard in the east of the city, made war achievements, and was promoted and rewarded.

古文：崇祯二年擢总兵官，镇守居庸、昌平。
现代文：崇祯二年，世威升任总兵官，镇守居庸、昌平。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, Shi Wei was promoted to the general officer, and the town guards Ju Yong and Chang Ping were promoted.

古文：其冬，京师戒严，命提兵五千防顺义。
现代文：这年冬天，京师戒严，朝廷命令他率兵五千防守顺义。
English: This winter, the imperial court ordered him to lead five thousand soldiers to defend Shunyi when martial law was declared in Beijing.

古文：俄命还镇，防护诸陵。
现代文：不久命令他返回驻地，防护皇陵。
English: Soon he was ordered to return to the garrison to guard the imperial mausoleum.

古文：四年代宋伟为山海总兵官，积资至左都督。
现代文：四年，他接替宋伟担任山海总兵官，累计资历升到左都督。
English: In four years, he succeeded Song Wei as the commander-in-chief of the mountain and sea, and his cumulative experience rose to the left governor.

古文：七年命偕宁远总兵官吴襄驰援宣府。坐拥兵不进，褫职论戍。
现代文：七年，朝廷命令他和宁远总兵官吴襄一起驰援宣府，因为他拥兵不进，被剥夺官职，判处戍边。
English: In the seventh year, the imperial court ordered him and the Ningyuan general officer Wu Xiang to ride together to support the Xuanwu, because he did not support the soldiers, he was deprived of his official position and sentenced to be punished.

古文：未行，会流贼躏河南，诏世威充为事官，与副将张外嘉统关门铁骑五千往剿。
现代文：尚未动身，正好流贼在破坏河南，朝廷诏令世威充任办事官员，与副将张外嘉统率山海关关门的五千铁骑前往剿贼。
English: Before they set off, just as the bandits were destroying Henan, the imperial court ordered Shwei to act as an official, and he and Vice Admiral Zhang Gao Jia led the five thousand cavalrymen who closed the mountain customs to the bandits.

古文：明年正月，贼陷凤阳。
现代文：第二年正月，贼寇打下了凤阳。
English: In the first month of the second year, the bandits laid siege to Fengyang.

古文：世威以二千五百骑赴之，抵亳州。会总督洪承畴出关讨贼，次信阳，命世威趋汝州。
现代文：世威带领二千五百名骑兵前往，开到亳州时，碰上总督洪承畴出关讨贼，驻扎在信阳，传令世威赶赴汝州。
English: Shi Wei led 2,500 cavalrymen to Zhangzhou, and when he drove to Zhangzhou, he met the governor Hong Chengzhuang, who was stationed in Xinyang, and ordered Shi Wei to rush to Ruzhou.

古文：甫二日，承畴亦至。
现代文：他才到两天，承畴也来了。
English: He only arrived two days ago, and so did Zhengzhou.

古文：时贼见河南兵盛，悉奔入关中。
现代文：当时贼寇看到河南的官兵势力强盛，都跑到关中去了。
English: At that time, the bandits saw that Henan's officers and soldiers were strong, and they all ran to Guanzhong.

古文：承畴将入关征讨，乃大会诸将，令分防汝、雒诸要害。
现代文：承畴打算入关征讨，就把各位将领都召集来，命令他们分守汝州、雒南的各处要害。
English: When Chengzheng planned to enter the customs and collect taxes, he called all the generals together and ordered them to guard the key areas in Ruzhou and southern Anhui.

古文：以世威部下皆劲旅，令与参将徐来朝分驻永宁、卢氏山中，以扼雒南兰草川、朱阳关之险。
现代文：因为世威的部下都是精兵强将，承畴让他和参将徐来朝分别驻守在永宁、卢氏一带的山里，以便扼守雒南兰草川、朱阳关的天险。
English: Because Shwei's subordinates were all elite soldiers and strong generals, he had him and General Xu Laixiang stationed in the mountains around Yongning and Lu respectively, in order to guard the natural hazards of Lanzo River and Zhuyang Pass in southern Anhui Province.

古文：戒之曰： 灵、陕，贼所出入，汝勿懈！ 
现代文：承畴告诫他说： 灵草川、陕州是贼寇出入的门户，你可不要放松啊！ 
English: Chengzhuang warned him: Lingcao River and Shaanxi Province are the gateway for thieves and robbers, you should not relax!

古文：及承畴既入关，贼避之而南，复由蓝田走卢氏。扼于世威，仍入商、雒山中。
现代文：等承畴入关后，贼寇躲开他向南逃，又从蓝田逃到卢氏来，被世威拦截后，又逃进商州、雒南一带山中。
English: After entering the customs such as Chengzhuang, the thief and robber fled southward to avoid him, and fled from Lantian to Lu. After being intercepted by Shiwei, he fled into the mountains of Shangzhou and southern Anhui.

古文：来朝所部三千人不肯入山，大噪。贼至，来朝逃，一军尽殁。
现代文：来朝所率领的三千士兵不肯进山，大吵大闹，贼兵来后，来朝逃跑了，他的部队全部覆灭了。
English: The three thousand soldiers led by him refused to go into the mountains, and they quarreled loudly. After the invaders came, he fled to the North, and all his troops were destroyed.

古文：世威军暴露久，大疫，与贼战失利。世威及游击刘肇基、罗岱俱负重伤，军大溃。
现代文：世威的军队在野外驻久了，发生了严重的病疫，跟贼兵交战失利，世威及游击刘肇基、罗岱都负了重伤，官军大败。
English: Shiyi's army had been stationed in the field for a long time. A serious disease broke out, and they lost the battle with the bandits. Shiyi and the guerrillas Liu Zhaoji and Luo Wei were seriously injured, and the government army was defeated.

古文：贼遂越卢氏，走永宁。
现代文：贼寇于是越过卢氏，直奔永宁。
English: The bandits then crossed the Lu and headed straight for Yongning.

古文：事闻，命解任侯勘。
现代文：这事朝廷知道后，就命令把世威解除职务，听候查处。
English: After the Imperial Court learned of this, it ordered that Shiewei be relieved of his duties, pending an investigation.

古文：十年，宣大总督卢象升言： 世威善抚士卒，晓军机，徒以数千客旅久戍荒山，疾作失利。
现代文：十年，宣大总督卢象升说： 世威善于安抚士卒，懂得军事，只是因为他的几千客兵久守荒山，发生病疫，才交战失利。
English: Ten years later, Lu Xiangsheng, the governor of Xuanda, said: Shiewei was good at pacifying soldiers and knew military affairs. It was only because several thousand of his guest soldiers had stayed in the barren mountains for a long time and disease broke out that they lost the battle.

古文：今当用兵时，弃之可惜。 
现代文：现在正值用兵之时，不用他是可惜的。 
English: Now is the time of conscription, it would be a pity not to use him.

古文：乃命赴象升军自效。
现代文：朝廷于是命令世威跟着象升的大军立功自赎。
English: The imperial court then ordered Shwe to follow Xiang Sheng's army and redeem himself.

古文：及象升战殁，自免归。
现代文：等象升战死，世威自请罢免，回家去了。
English: As soon as Zeng Sheng died in battle, Shie Wei voluntarily resigned and went home.

古文：十五年以廷臣荐，命与弟世禄赴京候调。召对中左门，复告归。
现代文：十五年，因为朝臣的推荐，崇祯皇帝命令世威和他的弟弟世禄赴京，等候调用，召他们到中左门问了一次话，他们又请假回乡去了。
English: In 15 years, because of the recommendation of the courtier, Emperor Chongzhen ordered Shiwei and his brother Shi Lu to go to Beijing to wait for the call, summoned them to the center-left gate to ask a question, and they asked for leave to go back to their hometown.

古文：明年十月，李自成陷西安，传檄榆林招降。
现代文：第二年十月，李自成打下西安，传发檄文到榆林招降。
English: In October of the following year, Li Zicheng attacked Xi'an and sent a message to Yulin to invite them to surrender.

古文：总兵官王定惧，率所部精兵弃城走。
现代文：总兵官王定怕了，率领部下的精兵弃城逃跑了。
English: The commander-in-chief, Wang Ding, was afraid, and led his elite soldiers to abandon the city and flee.

古文：时巡抚张凤翼未至，城中士马单弱，人心汹汹。
现代文：当时巡抚张凤翼还没到任，榆林城里兵马单弱，人心惶惶。
English: At that time, the governor Zhang Fengyi had not yet arrived at his post, and the soldiers and horses in Yulin City were weak and panicked.

古文：布政使都任亟集副将惠显、参将刘廷杰等与里居将帅世威及王世钦、王世国、侯世禄、侯拱极、王学书、故延绥总兵李昌龄议城守。众推世威为主帅。
现代文：布政使都任赶忙召集副将惠显、参将刘廷杰等以及赋闲在家的将帅世威及王世钦、王世国、侯世禄、侯拱极、王学书及原延绥总兵李昌龄一起讨论守城，大家公推世威当主帅。
English: The envoys of the Bu government hurriedly convened Vice-General Huixian, General Liu Tingjie, and other generals who were idle at home, including Shuai Shewei, Wang Shichin, Wang Shiguo, Hou Shiluo, Hou Gongji, Wang Xueshu, and former Yancheng general Li Changling, to discuss the defense of the city, and everyone publicly recommended Shewei to be the commander.

古文：无何，贼十万众陷延安，下绥德，复遣使说降。
现代文：不久，贼军十万兵力打下延安，占领了绥德，又派使者来劝降。
English: Not long after, the bandit army of a hundred thousand soldiers defeated Yan'an and occupied Shunde, and sent an envoy to persuade them to surrender.

古文：廷杰大呼曰： 长安虽破，三边如故。
现代文：廷杰大声喊叫说： 长安虽然被打下了，三边依旧有官兵驻着。
English: Tingjie shouted loudly: Although Chang'an has been defeated, there are still officers and soldiers stationed on three sides.

古文：贼皆中州子弟，杀其父兄而驱之战，必非所愿。
现代文：贼兵都是中州子弟，杀死他们的父兄然后驱使他们来打仗，当然不是他们心甘情愿的。
English: The bandits were all children from Zhongzhou, and they killed their fathers and brothers and then forced them to fight. Of course, they didn't do it willingly.

古文：榆林天下劲兵，一战夺其气，然后约宁夏、固原为三师迭进，贼可平也。 
现代文：榆林号称天下强兵，只要我们一战之下打掉他们的锐气，然后约宁夏、固原的部队来，安排三处兵力轮流出击，贼寇是可以平定的。 
English: Yulin is known as the strongest army in the world. As long as we defeat their spirit under the First World War, and then the troops from Ningxia and Guyuan come and arrange three troop rotations to attack, the bandits can be pacified.

古文：众然其言，乃歃血誓师，简卒乘，缮甲仗，各出私财佐军。
现代文：他们都同意他的意见，于是就歃血誓师，简选兵力，修整兵器，各自捐出自家的私财充作军费，准备防贼。
English: They all agreed with his opinion, so they swore an oath of blood, simplified the selection of troops, repaired weapons, and each donated their own private money as military expenses to prepare for anti-thieves.

古文：守具未备，贼已抵城下。
现代文：防守的战备尚未齐全，贼寇已兵临城下。
English: The defensive preparations were not yet complete, and the bandits were already at the foot of the city.

古文：延杰募死士，乞师套部。
现代文：廷杰召募死士，又向河套的部落借兵。
English: Tingjie called for recruits and borrowed soldiers from the tribes in Hetao.

古文：师将至，贼分兵却之，攻城甚力。
现代文：这些军队将到榆林时，贼寇分兵击退了他们，一面更加用力攻城。
English: When these armies were about to reach Yulin, the bandit detachments repulsed them and attacked the city even more vigorously.

古文：官军力战，杀贼无算。
现代文：官军奋力作战，杀死了无数的贼兵。
English: The government troops fought hard and killed countless bandits.

古文：贼益众来攻，起飞楼逼城中，矢石交至，世威等战益厉。
现代文：贼寇增加兵力来攻打，架起飞楼威慑城中，箭头、飞石不断地打过来，世威等更加勇猛战斗。
English: Thieves and bandits increased their forces to attack and fight, a take-off tower was erected to deter them from entering the city, arrows and flying stones kept coming, and the world was more courageous in battle.

古文：守七昼夜，贼乃穴城，置大炮轰之，城遂破。
现代文：他们防守了七个昼夜，贼兵挖地道通向城墙，又放大炮轰炸，城终于失守。
English: They defended for seven days and nights, the robber soldiers dug a tunnel leading to the city wall, and the large cannons bombarded, and the city was finally lost.

古文：世威等犹督众巷战，妇人竖子亦发屋瓦击贼，贼尸相枕藉。
现代文：世威等人继续指挥官兵巷战，妇女、儿童也扔房瓦打击贼兵，贼兵的尸体堆满各处。
English: Siyi and others continued to fight the commander and soldiers in the alley. Women and children also threw house tiles to fight the bandits, whose bodies were piled up everywhere.

古文：既而力不支，任死之，侯世禄父子及学书俱不屈死。
现代文：后来他们体力不支了，都任阵亡，侯世禄父子和学礼都不屈而死。
English: Later, their physical strength was exhausted, and they were all killed in battle. Both Hou Shilu and his son Xu Lai died.

古文：贼怒廷杰勾套部，磔之，至死骂不绝口。
现代文：贼寇恨廷杰联合河套的部落军，把他绞杀了，廷杰至死骂不绝口。
English: Thieves hated Tingjie and the united tribal army of Hetao, and strangled him. Tingjie cursed endlessly until his death.

古文：世威、世钦、世国、昌龄并被执，缚至西安。
现代文：世威、世钦、世国、昌龄都被活捉，绑送西安。
English: Shi Wei, Shi Qin, Shi Guo and Chang Ling were all captured alive and taken to Xi'an.

古文：自成坐秦王府欲降之，四人不屈膝。
现代文：自成坐在秦王府里想让他们投降，他们四个不愿屈膝拜他。
English: Zicheng sat in King Qin's palace and tried to get them to surrender, but the four of them refused to bow down and worship him.

古文：自成曰： 诸公皆名将，助我平天下，取封侯，可乎？ 
现代文：自成说： 你们几个都是名将，帮我打定天下，博取封侯，怎么样？ 
English: Zicheng said: Several of you are famous generals, how about helping me to win the world and win the title?

古文：众骂曰： 汝驿卒，敢大言侮我！ 
现代文：他们骂道 ：你一个小小的驿卒，也敢说大话侮辱我们！ 
English: They scolded: "You, a petty thief, dare to talk big and insult us!"

古文：世国，威弟，保定总兵官继子，由柳沟总兵官罢归。
现代文：自成笑了，上前来为他们松绑，世钦唾骂说： 驿卒不要过来，弄脏了将军的衣服！ 
English: Smiling to himself, he came forward to untie them, and Shichin swore: "Don't come over here, you dirty the general's clothes!"

古文：甫数日，竟拒贼以死。
现代文：自成恼了，把他们都给杀死了。
English: He got angry and killed them all.

古文：世威弟世禄，为宁夏总兵官，累著战功，至是与世威同死。
现代文：世威的弟弟世禄曾经当过宁夏总兵官，历次立下战功，现在跟世威一同死去。
English: Seiwei's younger brother, Shi Lu, was once the commander-in-chief of Ningxia, and he distinguished himself in the war. Now, he is dying together with Seiwei.

古文：世威从弟翟文为靖边营副将。尝从洪承畴败闯贼于凤翔之官亭，斩首七百余级。
现代文：世威的堂弟翟文是靖边营副将，曾经跟着洪承畴在凤翔的官亭打败闯贼，斩获七百多首级。
English: Shie Wei's cousin, Nie Wen, is the vice-commander of the Jingbian Battalion. He once followed Hong Chengzang to defeat a burglar in Fengxiang's official pavilion and won more than seven hundred heads.

古文：至是，率敢死士出南门奋击，杀伤甚众，中矢死。
现代文：到这个时候，他率领敢死队出南门跟贼兵厮杀，杀死了很多贼兵，自己也中箭身亡。
English: At this time, he led a death squad out of the south gate to fight against the bandits, killed many bandits, and was himself killed by an arrow.

