古文：燕文公时，秦惠王以其女为燕太子妇。
现代文：燕文公时，秦惠王把他的女儿嫁给燕国的太子做妻子。
English: When Yan Wen was in public, Qin Hui Wang married his daughter to the prince of Yan as his wife.

古文：文公卒，易王立。
现代文：燕文公去世后，易王继位。
English: After the death of Yanwen Gong, Yi Wang succeeded to the throne.

古文：齐宣王因燕丧攻之，取十城。
现代文：齐宣王趁着燕国大丧进攻燕国，夺取了燕国的十座城池。
English: King Qi Xuan took advantage of the great loss of Yan Guo to attack Yan Guo and captured ten cities in Yan Guo.

古文：武安君苏秦为燕说齐王，再拜而贺，因仰而吊。
现代文：武安君苏秦为燕国的利益去游说齐宣王。苏秦见了宣王，先拜了两拜表示祝贺，接着就仰起头来念悼词。
English: Wu'an ruler Su Qin lobbied Qi Xuan Wang for the interests of Yan. When Su Qin saw Xuan Wang, he first bowed twice to express his congratulations, and then raised his head to deliver a eulogy.

古文：齐王案戈而却曰： 此一何庆吊相随之速也？ 
现代文：齐王手按铁戈向后退了几步，问道： 你这是怎么回事，为什么庆贺之后就马上念起了悼词？ 
English: Qi Wang took a few steps back and asked: What's the matter with you, why did you immediately recite the eulogy after the celebration?

古文：对曰： 人之饥所以不食乌喙者，以为虽偷充腹，而与死同患也。
现代文：苏秦答道： 人饿的时候，之所以不吃乌头，是认为即使能填满肚子，但是会马上死去。
English: Su Qin replied: When people are hungry, the reason why they do not eat aconite is that they think that even if they can fill their stomachs, they will die immediately.

古文：今燕虽弱小强秦之少婿也。
现代文：现在燕国虽然比较弱小，但是和强大的秦国也是翁婿之邦。
English: Now, although Yan is relatively weak and small, it is also a son-in-law state with the powerful Qin.

古文：王利其十城，而深与强秦为仇。
现代文：大王贪图十个城邑的便宜而和秦国结下愁怨。
English: The great king coveted the cheapness of the ten cities and developed a grudge against the Qin state.

古文：今使弱燕为雁行，而强秦制其后，以招天下之精兵，此食乌喙之类也。 
现代文：现在如果让弱小的燕国做先锋，而强大的秦国做后盾，从而用天下的精兵进攻齐国，这与吃乌喙来充饥是一个道理。 
English: Now if we let the weak Yan country be the vanguard, and the powerful Qin country be the backstop, and thus attack Qi with the best soldiers in the world, this is the same reason as eating oysters to satisfy hunger.

古文：齐王曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：齐宣王说： 既然如此，该如何办呢？ 
English: Qi Xuanwang said: Since this is the case, how should it be handled?

古文：对曰： 圣人之制事也。转祸而为福，因败而为功。
现代文：苏秦回答说： 圣人做事情，能够转祸为福，将失败转为成功。
English: Su Qin replied: When a sage does things, he can turn misfortune into blessing, and turn failure into success.

古文：故桓公负妇人而名益尊，韩献开罪而交愈固，此皆转祸而为福，因败而为功者也。
现代文：因此尽管齐桓公虽有女色的牵连，自己的名声却更加的尊贵；韩献子虽因杀人获罪，但自己的地位却更加稳固，这些都是转祸为福、败转胜的例子。
English: Therefore, although Prince Qi Huan was involved with a woman, his reputation was more honorable; although Han Xianzi was convicted of murder, his position was more stable. These are all examples of turning misfortune into good fortune and victory into defeat.

古文：王能听臣，莫如归燕之十城，卑辞以谢秦。
现代文：大王可以听从我的意见，不如归还燕国的十座城池，并用谦恭的言辞向秦国道歉。
English: The great king can listen to my opinion, it is better to return the ten castles of Yan and apologize to Qin with humble words.

古文：秦知王以己之故归燕城也，秦必德王。
现代文：当秦王知道大王是因为他的缘故而归还了燕国的十座城邑，一定会感激大王。
English: When King Qin knew that the great king had returned the ten cities of Yan Province because of him, he would surely be grateful to the great king.

古文：燕无故而得十城，燕亦德王。是弃强仇而立厚交也。
现代文：燕国平白无故收回城邑，也会感激大王，这样一来大王就避开了强敌，反而和他们建立了深厚的友谊吗？
English: Would Yan's country also be grateful to the great king for reclaiming the towns without any reason, so that the great king avoided a strong enemy and instead established a deep friendship with them?

古文：且夫燕、秦之俱事齐，则大王号令天下皆从。
现代文：再说燕秦都会讨好齐国，那么大王发号施令，天下诸侯又有谁不会听从呢？
English: Besides, Yan and Qin will all please Qi, so if the great king issues orders, who among the world's lords will not obey?

古文：是王以虚辞附秦，而以十城取天下也。此霸王之业矣。所谓转祸为福，因败成功者也。 
现代文：大王只用话语表示亲近秦国，又以十座城邑取得天下的支持，这可是霸主的事业，也是所谓转祸为福，因败建功的好办法。 
English: The great king only used words to express his closeness to Qin, and won the support of the world with ten cities. This is the cause of the overlord, and it is also a good way to turn misfortune into blessing, and to build on defeat.

古文：齐王大说，乃归燕城。以金千斤谢其后，顿首塗中，愿为兄弟而请罪于秦。
现代文：齐宣王听了以后很高兴，于是把燕国的十座城池归还，随后又送千金表示致歉，并在半路上叩头，希望结为兄弟之邦，恳请秦国赦罪。
English: After hearing this, King Qi Xuan was very happy, so he returned the ten castles in Yan's country, and then sent thousands of gold to apologize, and bowed down halfway, hoping to become a brotherly country, and implored Qin to pardon the crime.

