古文：圣人之所以为治道者三：一曰 利 ，二曰 威 ，三曰 名 。
现代文：圣人用来作为治理国家的措施有三种：第一是利禄，第二是威权，第三是名望。
English: There are three kinds of measures used by sages to govern a country: the first is riroku, the second is authority, and the third is fame.

古文：夫利者，所以得民也；威者，所以行令也；名者，上下之所同道也。
现代文：利禄是用来赢得民众的，威利是用来推行政令的，名称是君臣共同遵行的准则。
English: Leroy is used to win over the people, Willy is used to push through executive orders, and the name is the code that the monarch and the ministers follow together.

古文：非此三者，虽有不急矣。
现代文：除了这三种，即使还有别的措施，也不是急需的了。
English: Even if there are other measures in addition to these three, they are not urgently needed.

古文：今利非无有也，而民不化上；威非不存也，而下不听从；官非无法也，而治不当名。
现代文：现在利禄不是没有，民众却不受君主感化；威权不是不存在，民众却不去服从；官府不是没有法令，但办事时却没有严格按照明文规定。
English: Now, the people are not immune to the influence of the monarch, even though there is no relu; the authority is not non-existent, even though the people do not obey it; the government is not without laws and regulations, but it does not act in strict accordance with the written regulations.

古文：三者非不存也，而世一治一乱者，何也？
现代文：这三种措施不是不存在，但社会有时安定，有时混乱，为什么呢？
English: These three measures are not non-existent, but society is sometimes stable and sometimes chaotic. Why?

古文：夫上之所贵与其所以为治相反也。
现代文：是因为君主推崇的东西和他用来治理国家的措施相违背。
English: It is because what the monarch promotes contradicts the measures he uses to govern the country.

古文：夫立名号，所以为尊也；今有贱名轻实者，世谓 高 。
现代文：设立名位称号，本是用来表示尊贵的，而现在有人轻视名位和实权，世俗却称赞他们高尚。
English: The establishment of titles was originally used to indicate nobility, but now some people despise titles and real power, but the world praises them as noble.

古文：设爵位，所以为贱贵基也；而简上不求见者，谓之 贤 。
现代文：设立爵位等级，本是用来作为区别贵贱基本标准的，但是对君主傲慢而不愿求见的人，世俗却称赞他们贤明。
English: The establishment of peerage ranks was originally used as a basic criterion for distinguishing between nobility and lowliness, but the world praised the wisdom of those who were arrogant to the monarch and did not want to see them.

古文：威利，所以行令也；而无利轻威者，世谓之 重 。
现代文：威利是用来推行政令的，而对于那些无视利禄和轻视权威的人，世俗却称赞他们庄重。
English: The willy is used to push through executive orders, while those who disregard protocol and flout authority are lauded as dignified by the world.

古文：法令，所以为治也；而不从法令为私善者，世谓之 忠 。
现代文：法令是用来治理国家的，但对于那些不遵从法令而为私门效劳的人，世俗却称赞他们忠诚。
English: Laws are used to govern the country, but for those who do not obey the law and work for private interests, the world praises their loyalty.

古文：官爵，所以劝民也；而好名义不进仕者，世谓之 烈士 。
现代文：官爵是用来勉励民众的，但对于那些追求声誉而不肯做官的人，世俗却称赞他们是有气节的人。
English: A title of nobility is used to encourage the people, but for those who pursue fame and do not want to be an official, the world praises them as people with stamina.

古文：刑罚，所以擅威也；而轻法不避刑戮死亡之罪者，世谓之 勇夫 。
现代文：刑罚是用来独揽威严的，但对于那些无视法令、不怕刑杀的亡命之徒，世俗却称赞他们是勇士。
English: Punishment is used to gain prestige, but for those outlaws who ignore the law and are not afraid of punishment, the world praises them as warriors.

古文：民之急名也，甚其求利也；如此，则士之饥饿乏绝者，焉得无岩居苦身以争名于天下哉？
现代文：民众急于追求名声，超过了追求实利；这样，一些沦落到饥饿贫困境地的士人，哪能不隐居深山折磨自己以便在天下挣得名声呢？
English: People are eager to pursue fame, more than the pursuit of real profits; so, some scholars who are reduced to starvation and poverty, how can they not seclude themselves in the mountains and torture themselves to earn fame in the world?

古文：故世之所以不治者，非下之罪，上失其道也。
现代文：所以，社会得不到安宁的原因，不是下面的罪过，而是君主失去了治国的原则。
English: Therefore, the reason why society does not have peace is not because of the sins below, but because the monarch has lost the principle of governing the country.

古文：常贵其所以乱，而贱其所以治，是故下之所欲，常与上之所以为治相诡也。
现代文：君主常常尊重那些造成祸乱的行为，而轻视那些能使社会安定的措施，因此下层人士向往的，就经常和君主应该用来治国的措施背道而驰。
English: Monarchs have always respected those actions that cause mischief, and despised those measures that can stabilize society, so that the lower classes often yearn for the opposite of the measures that monarchs should use to govern the country.

古文：今下而听其上，上之所争也。
现代文：现在让臣子听从君主，是君主的当务之急。
English: Now it is the monarch's urgent task to get his subjects to obey him.

古文：而惇悫纯信，用心怯言，则谓之 窭 。
现代文：但对于忠厚老实、纯朴诚信、做事专心、说话谨慎的行为，却被说成是贫陋无礼。
English: But for the behavior of being loyal, honest, simple and sincere, concentrating on work, and speaking cautiously, it is said to be poor and impolite.

古文：守法固，听令审，则谓之 愚 。
现代文：严格遵守法度，认真听从政令，却被说成是愚笨。
English: Strictly abide by the law, conscientiously obey government orders, but they are said to be stupid.

古文：敬上畏罪，则谓之 怯 。
现代文：尊敬君主，害怕犯罪，却被说成是胆小。
English: Respect the monarch, fear crime, but are said to be timid.

古文：言时节，行中适，则谓之 不肖 。
现代文：言论适合时宜而有分寸，行为符合法治而恰如其分，却被说成是没有出息。
English: Words are appropriate and measured, actions are in accordance with the rule of law and appropriate, but they are said to be futile.

古文：无二心私学，听吏从教者，则谓之 陋 。
现代文：对君主没有二心而不从事私学，听从官吏而遵循教化，却被说成是浅薄。
English: Those who are loyal to the monarch and do not engage in self-education, who listen to officials and follow education, are said to be shallow.

古文：难致，谓之 正 。
现代文：不接受君主的召唤，却被称为正直。
English: Not to accept the monarch's summons is called honesty.

古文：难予，谓之 廉 。
现代文：不接受君主的赏赐，却被称为清廉。
English: They do not accept rewards from the monarch, but they are called incorruptible.

古文：难禁，谓之 齐 。
现代文：不接受君主的制约，却被称为平等。
English: They do not accept the constraint of the monarch, but they are called equal.

古文：有令不听从，谓之 勇 。
现代文：有令不听从，却被称为勇敢。
English: Some disobey orders and are called brave.

古文：无利于上，谓之 愿 。
现代文：对君主毫无益处，却被称为厚道。
English: Of no use to the sovereign, it is called benevolence.

古文：少欲、宽惠、行德，谓之 仁 。
现代文：缺乏上进精神，为人与世无争，善于行德施惠，却被称为仁义。
English: They lack the spirit of advancement, have no quarrel with the world, and are good at practicing virtue and benefiting others, but they are called benevolence and righteousness.

古文：重厚自尊，谓之 长者 。
现代文：为人持重而妄自尊大，却被称为长者。
English: Self-important and arrogant, they are called elders.

古文：私学成群，谓之 师徒 。
现代文：私立学派，结帮成群，却被称为师徒道统。
English: Private schools, however, are organized in groups and are known as "teachers and disciples of Taoism."

古文：闲静安居，谓之 有思 。
现代文：沉默寡言，安于现状，无所事事，却被称为善于思考问题。
English: Taciturn, comfortable with the status quo, idle, but said to be good at thinking things through.

古文：损仁逐利，谓之 疾 。
现代文：损害道义，追逐私利，却被称为机灵。
English: They damage morality and pursue selfish interests, but they are called clever.

古文：险躁佻反覆，谓之 智 。
现代文：凶险浮躁，反复无常，却被称为聪明。
English: Dangerous, impetuous, capricious, yet they are called clever.

古文：先为人而后自为，类名号，言泛爱天下，谓之 圣 。
现代文：主张先人后己，对官爵高低同等看待，宣扬泛爱天下的，却被称为圣人。
English: He was called a saint, even though he advocated self-reliance, treated high and low officials equally, and preached universal love for the world.

古文：言大本，称而不可用，行而乘于世者，谓之 大人 。
现代文：鼓吹一般原则、根本规律，理论站得住而实际不可用，干起事来悖于社会常法的，却被称为是伟人。
English: He is called a great man when he advocates general principles and fundamental laws, when his theories are sound but cannot be applied in practice, and when he does things that are contrary to social norms.

古文：贱爵禄，不挠上者，谓之 杰 。
现代文：轻视爵位俸禄，不服从君主统治的，却被称为俊杰。
English: Those who despise peerage and salary, and disobey the rule of the monarch, are called Junjie.

古文：下渐行如此，入则乱民，出则不便也。
现代文：臣下习染这种风气到如此地步，在内就会扰乱民众，出外就会不利于祖国。
English: If the vassals become accustomed to this culture to such an extent, it will disturb the people internally, and it will be detrimental to the motherland if they go abroad.

古文：上宜禁其欲，灭其迹，而不止也，又从而尊之，是教下乱上以为治也。
现代文：君主本该禁止他们的欲望，废除他们的非法活动，这样尚且阻挡不住，还要去推波助澜尊重他们，这是教导臣下犯上作乱，还想达到天下大治。
English: The monarch should have forbidden their desires, abolished their illegal activities, which are still unstoppable, and promoted respect for them, which is to teach his subjects to commit disorder and want to achieve world peace.

古文：凡所治者，刑罚也；今有私行义者尊。
现代文：总的说来，君主用来治理国家是靠的刑罚，而现在自行其是的人却得到尊重。
English: On the whole, the monarch used to govern the country by means of punishment, but now those who do their own thing are respected.

古文：社稷之所以立者，安静也；而躁险谗谀者任。
现代文：国家得以维系是靠的社会安定，而现在浮躁凶险、搬弄是非、阿谈奉承的人却受到任用。
English: The country is sustained by social stability, but now impetuous and dangerous people, those who play games and flatter are appointed.

古文：四封之内所以听从者，信与德也；而陂知倾覆者使。
现代文：全国民众服从君主而令行禁止，靠的是信义和德行，但现在那些狡猾奸诈而惯于诬馅倾轧的人却得到使用。
English: The whole nation obeyed the monarch and imposed the ban, relying on faith and virtue, but now those who are cunning and treacherous and are accustomed to falsification are being used.

古文：令之所以行，威之所以立者，恭俭听上；而岩居非世者显。
现代文：法令得以实行，威严得以树立，靠的是臣下恭敬虔诚地听从君主，但现在那些隐居深山、攻击现实的人却声名显赫。
English: Decrees are carried out and dignity is established by the subjects' respectful and devout obedience to the monarch, but now those who live in seclusion in the mountains and attack reality are famous.

古文：仓廪之所以实者，耕农之本务也；而綦组、锦绣、刻画为末作者富。
现代文：粮仓得以充实，靠的是把农耕作为本业，但现在那些从事纺织、刺绣、雕刻之类末业的人反而富裕。
English: The granary was enriched by making agriculture the main occupation, but now those who are engaged in textile, embroidery, carving and other industries are rich.

古文：名之所以成，城池之所以广者，战士也；今死士之孤饥饿乞于道，而优笑酒徒之属乘车衣丝。
现代文：名望得以树立，地域得以扩大，靠的是打仗的士兵；现在阵亡战士的孤儿却饥饿不堪，到处流浪乞讨，而那些优伶酒徒却高车大马穿锦衣绣。
English: Reputation was built and territory expanded on the backs of soldiers who fought; now the orphans of dead soldiers are starving and wandering around begging, while those who drank themselves into a stupor are dressed in fine clothes.

古文：赏禄，所以尽民力易下死也；今战胜攻取之士劳而赏不霑，而卜筮、视手理、狐虫为顺辞于前者日赐。
现代文：赏赐俸禄是用来换取民众为君主卖命的，现在有战功的人劳而无赏，而那些在君主跟前占卜、看手相、弄神作鬼、巧言奉承的人却经常得到赏赐。
English: The reward of a salary was given in exchange for the people working for the monarch. Nowadays, those who have war merit work without reward, but those who are in the presence of the monarch for divination, palmistry, trickery, and flattery are often rewarded.

古文：上握度量，所以擅生杀之柄也；今守度奉量之士欲以忠婴上而不得见，巧言利辞行奸轨以幸偷世者数御。
现代文：君主掌握法律条令是为了控制生杀大权，但现在奉公守法的人想用逆耳的忠言向君主进谏却得不到接见，而那些花言巧语、内外行奸、在社会上侥幸投机的人却经常得到晋见。
English: The monarch's mastery of the laws and regulations is to control the power of life and death, but now the law-abiding people who want to use treacherous loyalties to the monarch are not received, while those who use rhetoric, internal and external adultery, and lucky speculation in society are often received.

古文：据法直言，名刑相当，循绳墨，诛奸人，所以为上治也，而愈疏远；謟施顺意从欲以危世者近习。
现代文：根据法令直言不讳，名实相符，遵循有关规定，铲除奸邪的人，为的是帮助君主治理国家，但君主却越发要加以疏远；而那些逢迎取媚、顺从君主的意愿和欲望而危害国家的人却成了亲信。
English: According to the decree, those who are outspoken, true to their names, and follow the relevant regulations, and root out those who are treacherous, in order to help the monarch govern the country, but the monarch is increasingly trying to alienate them; and those who are in danger of the country when they meet the charm and obey the wishes and desires of the monarch have become close friends.

古文：悉租税，专民力，所以备难充仓府也，而士卒之逃事伏匿、附托有威之门以避徭赋而上不得者万数。
现代文：征收租税，集中民力，是为了防备国难、充实仓库，而士兵逃避耕战，躲藏起来，依附于权门贵族来偷免得役赋税，结果使君主失去了劳力，这样的人竞数以万计。
English: The purpose of collecting taxes and concentrating the people's power was to prepare for a national calamity and replenish the storehouses, while the soldiers evaded the agricultural war, hid, and attached themselves to the aristocrats to evade taxes. As a result, the monarch lost his labor force, and there were tens of thousands of such people competing.

古文：夫陈善田利宅，所以战士卒也，而断头裂腹、播骨乎平原野者，无宅容身，身死田亩；而女妹有色，大臣左右无功者，择宅而受，择田而食。
现代文：拿出好的田地房屋作为赏赐，是为了鼓励士兵奋勇作战的，而一方面，那些身首异处、尸骨抛散在荒野上的战士，活着没有房子容身，死后田地还要被夺去；另一方面，有姿色的少女、没有功劳的大臣和亲信们，却挑选好的房屋和田地尽情享受。
English: On the one hand, those soldiers whose heads are scattered and whose bones are strewn in the wilderness have no houses to live in, and their fields will be taken away after they die; on the other hand, attractive young girls, undeserving ministers and their cronies choose good houses and fields to enjoy.

古文：赏利一从上出，所善制下也；而战介之士不得职，而闲官之士尊显。
现代文：赏赐一律由君主颁发，是为了便于驾驭臣下的，但披甲野战的士兵得不到赏赐和职位，游手好闲的所谓学者却得以显贵。
English: All rewards are issued by the monarch, in order to make it easier to control his subjects, but soldiers in armor and in the field do not receive rewards and positions, while idle so-called scholars are ennobled.

古文：上以此为教，名安得无卑，位安得无危？
现代文：君主拿了这些反常现象作为教化，名声怎能不卑下，权位怎能不危险？
English: The monarch took these abnormal phenomena as enlightenment. How could his reputation not be degraded, and how could his position of power not be dangerous?

古文：夫卑名位者，必下之不从法令、有二心无私学反逆世者也；而不禁其行、不破其群以散其党，又从而尊之，用事者过矣。
现代文：使君主名声卑下、权位危险的人，一定就是那些不服从法令，怀有二心而专搞私学，反叛现实社会的人。假如不禁止他们的行为，不解散他们的群党，还要去尊重他们，那就是当权者的过错了。
English: The people who bring down the reputation of the monarch and endanger the position of power must be those who disobey the laws and regulations, have double-mindedness and engage in private education, and rebel against the real society. If you do not prohibit their actions, do not dissolve their group parties, but still respect them, that is the fault of those in power.

古文：上世之所以立廉耻者，所以属下也；今士大夫不羞污泥丑辱而宦，女妹私义之门不待次而宦。
现代文：君主树立廉耻标准，是用来劝勉臣下的。现在士大夫却不以肮脏卑鄙的勾当为耻而做官，有裙带关系和私人交情的人不按官阶次第而升官。
English: Monarchs set up standards of probity to encourage their subjects, but now magistrates are not ashamed to do dirty and despicable things as officials, and people with nepotism and personal relationships are not promoted according to official ranks.

古文：赏赐之，所以为重也；而战斗有功之士贫贱，而便辟优徒超级。
现代文：赏赐是用来使人尊贵的，但现在英勇作战的有功之士却贫贱不堪，而那些谄媚逢迎的人和优伶酒徒却得以越级做官。
English: The awards were designed to make people respectable, but now the meritorious soldiers who fought bravely are poor and miserable, while the sycophants and drunkards have been promoted to higher ranks.

古文：名号诚信，所以通威也；而主掩障，近习女谒并行，百官主爵迁人，用事者过矣。
现代文：名号和功业相符合关系到君主的威势和尊严，然而现实是君主受到蒙蔽，近臣宫女同时弄权，各个部门都能给人定爵和提升官吏。
English: It is related to the prestige and dignity of the monarch to match the name and career, but the reality is that the monarch is blinded, the courtiers and concubines are also power-hungry, and all departments can give people knighthoods and promote officials.

古文：大臣官人，与下先谋比周，虽不法行，威利在下，则主卑而大臣重矣。
现代文：这些反常现象表明当权者措施已经严重失当了。大臣任人为官，先与亲信密谋策划，植党营私，尽管他们不按法律行事，但赏罚大权已被臣下操纵了，结果君主地位就变得卑贱而大臣权势就变重了。
English: These anomalies indicate that the measures taken by those in power have been seriously misguided. Ministers appoint people to office, first conspire with their close friends, and plant parties and individuals. Although they do not act according to the law, the power to reward and punish has been manipulated by their subjects. As a result, the status of the monarch has become low and the power of the minister has become heavy.

古文：夫立法令者，以废私也。
现代文：确立法令的目的是为了废止私行。
English: The purpose of the Order is to abolish private practice.

古文：法令行而私道废矣。
现代文：法令得以贯彻，私行就必被废止。
English: If the decree is implemented, private businesses will be abolished.

古文：私者，所以乱法也。
现代文：私行是扰乱法令的罪魁。
English: Private banks are the main culprits in flouting the law.

古文：而士有二心私学、岩居路、托伏深虑，大者非世，细者惑下；上不禁，又从而尊之以名，化之以实，是无功而显，无劳而富也。
现代文：现在那些怀有二心专搞私学、隐居山林、老谋深算的士人，重则诽谤现实，轻则造谣惑众。君主不加以禁止，还要进一步用美名抬高他们，用实利提拔他们，结果就是使无功者显贵，无劳者富有。
English: Nowadays, those double-minded scholars who specialize in private study, live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, and are cunning and calculating, are more likely to slander reality, and less likely to create rumors to deceive the public. The monarch does not prohibit them, but will further elevate them with a good name, and promote them with real profits. The result is to make the unmeritorious noble, and the unproductive rich.

古文：如此，则士之有二心私学者，焉得无深虑、勉知诈与诽谤法令，以求索与世相反者也？
现代文：这样一来，怀有二心专搞私学的士人怎能不挖空心思、玩弄智巧和诽谤法令，去拼命追求那些和当代政治背道而驰的东西呢？
English: How, then, can a double-minded, self-taught scholar not dig into the depths of his soul, play with cunning and libel laws, and desperately pursue those things that run counter to contemporary politics?

古文：凡乱上反世者，常士有二心私学者也。
现代文：大凡危害君主统治、反对现实社会的，常常就是那些身怀异心大搞私学的人。
English: Those who do great harm to the rule of the monarchy and oppose the real society are often those who engage in private education with a different mind.

古文：故《本言》曰： 所以治者，法也；所以乱者，私也。
现代文：所以《本言》说： 国家安定靠的是法，国家混乱棍子在私。
English: Therefore, "The Word" says: The stability of the country depends on the law, and the chaos of the country depends on me.

古文：法立，则莫得为私矣。 
现代文：法立起来的话，就没有人再行私了。 
English: If the rule of law is established, no one will be able to do this anymore.

古文：故曰：道私者乱，道法者治。
现代文：所以说：倾向于私行的，社会必然混乱；倾向于法的，社会一定大治。
English: Therefore, it is said that if people tend to do things for themselves, society will inevitably be in chaos; if people tend to do things according to the law, society will definitely be in chaos.

古文：上无其道，则智者有私词，贤者有私意。
现代文：君主不用法治，聪明的人就有违法言论，贤能的人就有违法企图。
English: Monarchs do not need the rule of law, clever people have illegal speech, and virtuous people have illegal attempts.

古文：上有私惠，下有私欲，圣智成群，造言作辞，以非法措于上。
现代文：君主有法外的恩惠，下面就有非法的欲望，圣人和智者就会成群结队地制造谣言和诡辩，用非法手段对付君主。
English: If a prince has extralegal favors, then he will have illegal desires, and sages and wise men will flock to create rumors and sophistries and use illegal means to deal with the prince.

古文：上不禁塞，又从而尊之，是教下不听上、不从法也。
现代文：君主不严加禁止，反而对这些人大加尊崇，那就是教育下属不听从君主、不服从法令。
English: The monarch does not strictly prohibit, but highly respects these people, that is, educating subordinates not to obey the monarch, not to obey the law.

古文：是以贤者显名而居，奸人赖赏而富。
现代文：结果就造成了贤人以显赫的名声处在高位、奸人依赖赏赐而富裕起来的现象。
English: As a result, a phenomenon has been created in which wise men occupy high-ranking positions with illustrious reputations, while crooks rely on rewards to become rich.

古文：贤者显名而居，奸人赖赏而富，是以上不胜下也。
现代文：贤人以显赫的名声处在高位，奸人依赖赏赐而富裕起来，正因如此，君主便再也控制不住臣下了。
English: It is for this reason that the prince can no longer control his subjects.

