古文：冯立，武德中为东宫率，甚被隐太子亲遇。太子之死也，左右多逃散，立叹曰： 岂有生受其恩，而死逃其难！ 
现代文：冯立，唐武德年间东宫统帅，深受太子李建成的厚待，太子死后，他以前的随从有很多都逃走了，冯立感叹道：哪有在太子活着的时候受他的恩惠，太子死了各自逃走避难的道理？
English: Feng Li, the commander-in-chief of the East Palace during the reign of Tang Wude, was treated very well by Prince Li Jiancheng. After the death of the prince, many of his former followers fled. Feng Li lamented: What is the reason for the prince to be favored by him while he was alive, and for the prince to escape and take refuge separately after his death?

古文：于是率兵犯玄武门，苦战，杀屯营将军敬君弘。谓其徒曰： 微以报太子矣。 
现代文：于是率兵在玄武门与秦王李世民的军队苦战，杀死屯营将军敬君弘，然后对手下随从说： 只有以这些微不足道的事来报答太子了。 
English: So he led his soldiers in a bitter battle with the army of Qin King Li Shimin at the Xuanwu Gate, killed the camp general, Jing Junhong, and then said to his opponent's follower: Only with these trifling things can we repay the prince.

古文：遂解兵遁于野。俄而来请罪，太宗数之曰： 汝昨者出兵来战，大杀伤吾兵，将何以逃死？ 
现代文：然后解散军队躲藏起来，第二天，冯立面见太宗李世民请罪，太宗对他说： 你昨天带兵来和我的军队战斗，使我的军队受到严重的损失，你如何能够逃过这项死罪？ 
English: Then he disbanded the army and went into hiding. The next day, Feng Li met with Emperor Taizong of Li Shimin to plead guilty. Emperor Taizong said to him: You brought soldiers to fight against my army yesterday, causing my army to suffer serious losses. How could you get away with this capital crime?

古文：立饮泣而对曰： 立出身事主，期之效命，当战之日，无所顾惮。 
现代文：冯立哭着回答： 我冯立生来侍奉太子，希望能够为他卖命，所以当时战斗的时候，我没有顾忌太多。 
English: Feng Li replied in tears: I, Feng Li Sheng, came to serve the crown prince, hoping to work for him, so when I was fighting, I didn't have too many scruples.

古文：因歔欷悲不自胜，太宗慰勉之，授左屯卫中郎将。立谓所亲曰： 逢莫大之恩幸而获免，终当以死奉答。 
现代文：说完悲痛不已，太宗好言安慰他，并封他为左屯卫中郎将，冯立对他的亲信说： 遇到这样大的罪过却免于一死，我一定要以死报答圣上。 
English: After expressing his grief, Emperor Taizong consoled him with kind words and appointed him as the General of the Left Division of Guards. Feng Li said to his close relatives, "In the face of such a great sin, I was spared death. I must repay the saint with death."

古文：未几，突厥至便桥，率数百骑与虏战于咸阳，杀获甚众，所向皆披靡，太宗闻而嘉叹之。
现代文：不多久，突厥攻打便桥，冯立率一百余名骑兵与突厥兵大战于咸阳，杀死突厥兵许多人，所到之处无人能敌，太宗听说后大加赞叹。
English: Not long after, the Turks attacked Benqiao, and Feng Li led more than a hundred cavalrymen to fight the Turks in Xianyang, killing many Turkish soldiers. Everywhere he went, no one was able to defeat him. Taizong was greatly impressed when he heard about it.

古文：时有齐王元吉府左车骑谢叔方率府兵与立合军拒战，及杀敬君弘、中郎将吕衡，王师不振，秦府护军尉尉迟敬德乃持元吉首以示之，叔方下马号泣，拜辞而遁。明日出首，太宗曰： 义士也。 
现代文：当时，齐王李元吉府上左车骑谢叔方率府兵与冯立一同作战，等敬君弘、中郎将吕衡被杀，士气低沉，秦王府护军军尉尉迟恭杀死李元吉并拿着李元吉的人头让谢叔方看，谢叔方下马大哭，离开了军队逃走了，第二天便自首了，太宗说： 谢叔方真是仁义。 
English: At that time, the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, rode on the left side of the carriage and led the troops of Xie Shifang and Feng Li to fight together. After Jing Junhong and Zhong Lang killed the general Lv Heng, the morale was low. The lieutenant of the Qin Wangfu Protective Army killed Li Yuanji and held the head of Li Yuanji for Xie Shifang to see. Xie Shifang got off the horse and cried loudly, left the army and fled, and surrendered the next day. Taizong said: Xie Shifang is really benevolent.

古文：命释之，授右翊卫郎将。
现代文：命令左右释放谢叔方，并封他为右翊卫郎将。
English: He ordered that Xie Shifang be released and appointed him as the commander of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：贞观元年，太宗尝从容言及隋亡之事，慨然叹曰： 姚思廉不惧兵刃，以明大节，求诸古人，亦何以加也！ 
现代文：贞观元年，太宗曾经谈论到隋朝灭亡的事情，感慨地说： 姚思廉不顾及生命危亡，用来表明臣子应有的节操，即使拿古人与他相比，也没有人能超过他。 
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong once talked about the demise of the Sui Dynasty, and said with emotion: Yao Siliang, regardless of life and death, used to show the discipline that a courtier should have. Even if you compare him to the ancients, no one can surpass him.

古文：思廉时在洛阳，因寄物三百段，并遗其书曰： 想卿忠节之风，故有斯赠。 
现代文：当时姚思廉正在洛阳，太宗寄给他三百段丝帛，并写了一封信： 想着你忠孝大节的风骨，因此有这些馈赠。 
English: At that time, Yao Silian was in Luoyang. Emperor Taizong sent him three hundred silk cocoons, and wrote a letter: Thinking of the spirit of your loyalty and filial piety festival, hence these gifts.

古文：初，大业末，思廉为隋代王侑侍读，及义旗克京城时，代王府僚多骇散，惟思廉侍王，不离其侧。
现代文：隋朝末年，姚思廉担任隋代王侑的侍读，到义军攻克京城时，代王府的许多幕僚都逃散了。只有姚思廉侍奉代王，不离左右。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, Yao Siliang served as an attendant to Wang Xi of the Sui Dynasty. When the rebels conquered the capital, many of the staff of the royal court fled. Only Yao Siliang served the king.

古文：兵士将升殿，思廉厉声谓曰： 唐公举义兵，本匡王室，卿等不宜无礼于王！ 
现代文：兵士要到殿上捉拿代王，思廉严厉地叫道： 唐公举义兵，本意在于匡复王室，你等在代王面前不得无礼！ 
English: The soldiers wanted to go to the palace to capture the acting king. Silian shouted sternly, "Tang publicly raised a volunteer army, with the intention of restoring the royal family. You must not be rude in front of the acting king!"

古文：众服其言，于是稍却，布列阶下。
现代文：众人敬服他的言行，稍稍退却后排列在殿堂的台阶下。
English: The crowd revered his words and actions, retreated a little and then lined up at the bottom of the steps of the hall.

古文：须臾，高祖至，闻而义之，许其扶代王侑至顺阳閤下，思廉泣拜而去。
现代文：没过多久，高祖来了，听了别人的讲述后认为他很忠义，允许他扶代王侑到顺阳阁，思廉哭泣着拜谢而去。
English: Not long after, Gao Zu arrived. After listening to others' stories, he thought Gao Zu was very loyal and allowed him to escort Wang Yao to Shunyangge on his behalf. Weeping, he bowed and left.

古文：见者咸叹曰： 忠烈之士，仁者有勇，此之谓乎！ 
现代文：看到这事的人都感叹地说： 真是忠义刚烈的人啊！人们说仁义的人有勇气，不就是说他吗？ 
English: People who saw this all exclaimed, "What a loyal and strong-willed person! People say that a benevolent person has courage, isn't that what he is?

古文：贞观二年，将葬故息隐王建成、海陵王元吉，尚书右丞魏征与黄门侍郎王珪请预陪送。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗将要埋葬息隐王建成、海陵王元吉，尚书右丞魏徵与黄门侍郎王珪请求陪灵送葬。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong was going to bury Xiying Wang Jiancheng, Hailing Wang Yuanji, Shangshu Yu Rong Wei Zheng and Huangmen waiter Wang Xi requested to accompany the spirit to the funeral.

古文：上表曰： 臣等昔受命太上，委质东宫，出入龙楼，垂将一纪。
现代文：并向太宗上表说： 我等受命于太上皇，在东宫做事，出入东宫将近十二年。
English: He also said to Emperor Taizong, "We have been working in the East Palace under the order of the Emperor Taizong, and have been in and out of the East Palace for nearly twelve years.

古文：前宫结衅宗社，得罪人神，臣等不能死亡，甘从夷戮，负其罪戾，置录周行，徒竭生涯，将何上报？
现代文：隐太子与皇室中的一些人勾结叛乱，得罪了百姓和神灵，我们都甘愿受罚受死，担负罪过，但却没有如愿。陛下既往不咎，反而赐予官职，臣等怎样报答呢？
English: The Hidden Prince colluded with some people in the imperial family to start a rebellion, offending the people and the gods. We were all willing to be punished and die, to bear the guilt, but it did not go as planned. Your Majesty has not blamed anyone in the past, but has given them official positions. How will your subjects repay you?

古文：陛下德光四海，道冠前王，陟冈有感，追怀棠棣，明社稷之大义，申骨肉之深恩，卜葬二王，远期有日。
现代文：陛下德义广播，道义超过历代国君，想着过去之情，能够明晓国家大义，展示骨肉间的深情，重新安葬二王。
English: His Majesty's virtue broadcasting, morality surpassing all previous generations of emperors, thinking about the feelings of the past, being able to know the country's great justice, showing the deep feelings between the flesh and blood, re-burying the two kings.

古文：臣等永惟畴昔，忝曰旧臣，丧君有君，虽展事君之礼；宿草将列，未申送往之哀。
现代文：现在离安葬的日子不远了，我们是二王旧臣，旧君死后又侍奉新君，已施行了侍奉新君的礼节，而旧君的坟上长满了野草，万事尽毕，可是我们还没表达送葬的哀思。
English: Now the day of burial is not far away. We are the two kings' old vassals. After the death of the old king, we served the new king. We have already carried out the etiquette of serving the new king. And the grave of the old king is overgrown with weeds. Everything is over, but we have not yet expressed our sorrow for the funeral.

古文：瞻望九原，义深凡百，望于葬日，送至墓所。 
现代文：瞻望墓地，希望在安葬的当天，我们能送二王的灵柩到墓地。 
English: Looking over the cemetery, we hope that on the day of the burial, we will be able to take the coffins of the two kings to the cemetery.

古文：太宗义而许之，于是宫府旧僚吏，尽令送葬。
现代文：太宗感于魏徵等人的情义，允许了他们。于是太宗下令，凡是二王宫中的官吏都去送葬。
English: Emperor Taizong was moved by the plight of Wei Zheng and the others and allowed them to go. Therefore, Emperor Taizong ordered that all the officials in the palace of the two kings go to the funeral.

古文：贞观五年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 忠臣烈士，何代无之，公等知隋朝谁为忠贞？ 
现代文：贞观五年，太宗对侍臣们说： 忠臣烈士，哪一个朝代没有呢？你们知道隋朝谁是忠孝贞良的人？ 
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: "Loyal martyrs, which dynasty does not have one? Do you know who is a loyal and virtuous person in the Sui Dynasty?

古文：王珪曰： 臣闻太常丞元善达在京留守，见群贼纵横，遂转骑远诣江都，谏炀帝，令还京师。
现代文：王珪说： 我听说太常丞元善达留守京城，见群贼乘机叛乱，于是到江都，向隋炀帝进谏，让他还师京城。
English: Wang Yao said: I heard that the Grand Vizier Yuan Shanda stayed behind in Beijing and saw a group of thieves take advantage of the opportunity to rebel, so I went to Jiangdu to approach the Sui and Qian Emperors and ask him to return the capital.

古文：既不受其言，后更涕泣极谏，炀帝怒，乃远使追兵，身死瘴疠之地。
现代文：炀帝不听劝告，元善达哭着极力劝谏，炀帝大怒，于是派遣他到边塞从军，最后死在瘴疠横行的地方。
English: Emperor Yao did not listen to the advice, Yuan Shanda cried and tried his best to persuade Yao, Emperor Yao was furious, so he sent him to the frontier fortress to join the army, and finally died in the place where Yao was rampant.

古文：有虎贲郎中独孤盛在江都宿卫，宇文化及起逆，盛惟一身，抗拒而死。 
现代文：还有虎贲郎中独孤盛在江都作卫士，当宇文化及起兵叛逆时，独孤盛一人，抗拒而死。 
English: There is also the story of Tigress, in which only one man, Lomonosov, served as a guardian in the Yangtze River. When the Yu culture rebelled and raised an army, only one man, Lomonosov, resisted and died.

古文：太宗曰： 屈突通为隋将，共国家战于潼关，闻京城陷，乃引兵东走。
现代文：太宗说： 屈突通为隋将，在潼关作战，听说京城陷落，便领兵向东逃窜。
English: Taizong said: Qu Jutong was a Sui general who fought in Shaoguan. When he heard that the capital had fallen, he led his soldiers to flee to the east.

古文：义兵追及于桃林，朕遣其家人往招慰，遽杀其奴。
现代文：当我们的军队追到桃林的时候，我派遣他的家人前去招安，他就杀掉他的家奴。
English: When our army chased him to the peach grove, I sent his family to seek safety, and he killed his manservant.

古文：又遣其子往，乃云： 我蒙隋家驱使，已事两帝，今者吾死节之秋，汝旧于我家为父子，今则于我家为仇雠。 
现代文：后来我们又派遣他儿子去，他却说： 我蒙受隋朝任用，已经侍奉两代帝王。现在是我以死保全节的时候，你我过去是父子关系，现在我们是仇敌。 
English: Later, we sent his son, but he said, "I was appointed by the Sui Dynasty and have served two generations of emperors. Now is the time for me to preserve the festival with my death. You and I used to have a father-son relationship, but now we are enemies."

古文：因射之，其子避走，所领士卒多溃散。
现代文：于是拿箭射他儿子，他的儿子只好逃走了。最后他所带领的士兵全都逃走，只剩他一人。
English: So he shot his son with an arrow; and his son fled, and all the people who were with him fled; and he was left alone.

古文：通惟一身，向东南恸哭尽哀，曰： 臣荷国恩，任当将帅，智力俱尽，致此败亡，非臣不竭诚于国。 
现代文：屈突通向东南方向大声痛哭着说： 我承受国恩，担当统帅，智能与力量都用完了，导致今天的失败，不是我对国家不忠诚。 
English: "I am the recipient of the nation's grace, I am the commander-in-chief, I have exhausted my intelligence and strength, and today's failure was not caused by my disloyalty to the nation," said Qu Ducheng, weeping loudly in the southeastern direction.

古文：言尽，追兵擒之。
现代文：话没说完，我们追上的兵士就擒住了他。
English: Before he could finish, the soldier we had overtaken grabbed him.

古文：太上皇授其官，每托疾固辞。
现代文：太上皇授给他官职，他托病拒绝了。
English: His father-in-law offered him an official post, but he declined on the grounds of illness.

古文：此之忠节，足可嘉尚。 
现代文：这种忠义操守，足堪嘉奖。 
English: This kind of loyalty is worthy of an award.

古文：因敕所司，采访大业中直谏被诛者子孙闻奏。
现代文：于是下令有关部门，查访在隋炀帝大业年间因敢于直谏而被诛者之子孙，上奏朝廷。
English: He then ordered the relevant departments to visit the son and grandson of those who were executed for daring to defy the emperor during the reign of Emperor Sui, and report to the imperial court.

古文：贞观六年，授左光禄大夫陈叔达礼部尚书，因谓曰： 武德中，公曾进直言于太上皇，明朕有克定大功，不可黜退云。
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗加封左光禄大夫陈叔达为礼部尚书，对他说： 武德年间，你曾向太上皇直言进谏，申明我有打败敌人平定疆土的功劳，不可以罢免我。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong appointed Zuo Guanglu's doctor Chen Shuda as the ceremonial secretary, and said to him: "During the years of Wu De, you once made a direct appeal to the Empress Dowager, affirming that I had the merit of defeating the enemy and pacifying the territory, and that I could not be dismissed.

古文：朕本性刚烈，若有抑挫，恐不胜忧愤，以致疾毙之危。
现代文：我本性刚烈，如碰到挫折，恐怕承受不起忧愤之情，从而导致疾病终至死亡。
English: I have a strong nature, and if I encounter a setback, I'm afraid I won't be able to bear the sadness and anger, which will lead to illness and death.

古文：今赏公忠謇，有此迁授。 
现代文：今天为了表彰你的忠心正直，所以将升迁你。 
English: Today, in recognition of your loyalty and integrity, you will be promoted.

古文：叔达对曰： 臣以隋氏父子自相诛戮，以致灭亡，岂容目睹覆车，不改前辙？
现代文：陈叔达回答： 我认为隋朝父子自相残害，是导致灭亡的灾祸，我那时怎能容许眼看车要倾覆，而不管后车不改前辙呢？
English: Chen Shuda replied: I think that the Sui Dynasty and father and son killing each other is a calamity that leads to destruction. How could I allow the car to overturn at that time, regardless of the fact that the rear car did not change the previous situation?

古文：臣所以竭诚进谏。 
现代文：这正是我极力进谏的原因。 
English: That's why I'm pushing so hard.

古文：太宗曰： 朕知公非独为朕一人，实为社稷之计。 
现代文：太宗说： 我知道你并不是为我一个人，而是为了整个国家大计。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I know that you are not doing this for me alone, but for the whole country.

古文：贞观八年，先是桂州都督李弘节以清慎闻，及身殁后，其家卖珠。
现代文：贞观八年，桂州都督李弘节以清廉谨慎闻名，李弘节死后，他的家里要变卖珠宝。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, Li Hongjie, the governor of Guizhou, was known for his cleanliness and prudence. After Li Hongjie's death, his family wanted to sell the jewelry.

古文：太宗闻之，乃宣于朝曰： 此人生平，宰相皆言其清，今日既然，所举者岂得无罪？
现代文：太宗听了这件事，在朝堂上说： 此人在世的时候，宰相都说他清廉，今天既然这样，那么推举他的人怎能没有罪过呢？
English: When Emperor Taizong heard about this, he said in the court: "When this man was alive, the prime ministers all said that he was innocent. Since this is the case today, how can the people who elected him not be guilty?

古文：必当深理之，不可舍也。 
现代文：必须好好地查证一下，不可掉以轻心呀。 
English: It must be properly verified, and it must not be taken lightly.

古文：侍中魏征承间言曰： 陛下生平言此人浊，未见受财之所，今闻其卖珠，将罪举者，臣不知所谓。
现代文：侍中魏徵私下对太宗说道： 陛下一直说这个人不清白，但没有看到他接受财物。现在听说他的妻子卖珠宝，又要治他的罪。我不知道这是什么原因。
English: Attendant Wei Zheng privately said to Emperor Taizong: Your Majesty has always said that this man is not innocent, but did not see him accept the property. Now I hear that his wife is selling jewelry and wants to punish him. I don't know why.

古文：自圣朝以来，为国尽忠，清贞慎守，终始不渝，屈突通、张道源而已。
现代文：自圣朝以来，为国尽忠，清廉谨慎，自始至终不改的，只不过是屈突通、张道源罢了。
English: Since the Holy Dynasty, he has been loyal to the country, honest and prudent, and has not changed from beginning to end.

古文：通子三人来选，有一匹羸马，道源儿子不能存立，未见一言及之。
现代文：突通三个儿子来应选，只有一匹不好的马，张道源的儿子穷得无法维持生计，没有见陛下有一句话涉及这件事。
English: All of a sudden, his three sons were up for election, but there was only one bad horse. Zhang Daoyuan's son was too poor to make a living. His Majesty did not say a word about this.

古文：今弘节为国立功，前后大蒙赏赉，居官殁后，不言贪残，妻子卖珠，未为有罪。
现代文：现在弘节为国家立下汗马功劳，前前后后都大受奖赏，弘节死后，并没有什么关于他贪婪的言论，妻子卖掉珠宝首饰，并没有什么罪过。
English: Now that Hongjie has made great contributions to the country, he has been greatly rewarded before and after. After the death of Hongjie, there was no talk about his greed, and his wife sold her jewelry, and there was no crime.

古文：审其清者，无所存问，疑其浊者，旁责举人，虽云疾恶不疑，是亦好善不笃。
现代文：认为一个人清白，就什么都好；怀疑一个人不清白，就连举荐的人都要受到责备，虽然说痛恨邪恶没有什么过错，但是喜欢善行却也不见得深厚。
English: To think that a man is innocent is all right; to suspect that he is not innocent is a reproach even to his recommenders; and though there is nothing wrong in hating evil, there is nothing profound in liking good.

古文：臣窃思度，未见其可，恐有识闻之，必生横议。 
现代文：我暗暗思量这种做法，没有见到其中可以值得称道的，我担心有见识的人听到这些事，必然产生许多不好的议论。 
English: I have reflected on this course of action, and I see nothing commendable in it, and I fear that many bad things will come of it to the ears of intelligent people.

古文：太宗抚掌曰： 造次不思，遂有此语，方知谈不容易。并勿问之。
现代文：太宗听了拍手称赞道： 这是我做事不好，没有思考成熟，说错了话，现在才知道一个人要不说错话也不容易呀，李弘节的事不要过问了。
English: After listening to the applause, Taizong said: This is because I am not good at doing things, I am not mature in my thinking, and I said the wrong thing. Now I know that it is not easy for a person to say the wrong thing. Don't ask about Li Hongjie.

古文：其屈突通、张道源儿子，宜各与一官。 
现代文：像屈突通、张道源的儿子，都应该各授予一个官职。 
English: Like the sons of Qu Zhutong and Zhang Dogen, they should each be awarded an official post.

古文：贞观八年，太宗将发诸道黜陟使，畿内道未有其人，太宗亲定，问于房玄龄等曰： 此道事最重，谁可充使？ 
现代文：贞观八年，太宗准备派遣各道黜陟使，唯独关内道这个地方没有找到合适的人选，太宗决定亲自确定这方面的人选，太宗问房玄龄： 这个地方的事务最为重要，谁可以担当这个重任。 
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong prepared to dispatch envoys from various provinces, but no suitable candidates were found in Guanai Province. Emperor Taizong decided to personally determine the candidates in this regard. Emperor Taizong asked Fang Xuanling: The affairs of this place are the most important, who can take on this important task?

古文：右仆射李靖曰： 畿内事大，非魏征莫可。 
现代文：右仆射李靖说： 关内道的事务重大，只有魏徵才行。 
English: His right-hand man, Li Jing, said, "The affairs of Guanei Province are very important, and only Wei Zheng can do it.

古文：太宗作色曰： 朕今欲向九成宫，亦非小，宁可遣魏征出使？
现代文：太宗严肃地说： 我要到九成宫，这也不是小事，怎么可以派遣魏徵出使？
English: Taizong said seriously: I want to go to Jiu Chenggong, which is no small matter. How can I send a Wei envoy?

古文：朕每行不欲与其相离者，适为其见朕是非得失。
现代文：我每次出行都不想与其分开，实在是为了让他观察我的是非得失。
English: Every time I travel, I don't want to be separated from him, because I really want him to observe my pros and cons.

古文：公等能正朕不？
现代文：你们能够匡正我的错误吗？
English: Can you correct my mistake?

古文：何因辄有所言，大非道理。 
现代文：为什么说出这样的话来，太没有道理了。 
English: It doesn't make sense why he would say that.

古文：乃即令李靖充使。
现代文：于是命令李靖担任关内道黜陟使。
English: Therefore, he ordered Li Jing to serve as the Guanai Road Commissioner.

古文：贞观九年，萧瑀为尚书左仆射。
现代文：贞观九年，萧瑀担任尚书左仆射。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, Xiao Yu served as Shang Shuxi's second-in-command.

古文：尝因宴集，太宗谓房玄龄曰： 武德六年已后，太上皇有废立之心，我当此日，不为兄弟所容，实有功高不赏之惧。
现代文：一次，与一些大臣在一起宴饮时，太宗对房玄龄说： 武德六年以后，太上皇有废立储君的意思。我在这个时候的确功劳很大，却不能够被兄弟们容忍，的确有害怕赏罚不分明的担忧。
English: Once, at a banquet with some ministers, Emperor Taizong said to Fong Xuanling: "After six years of virtue and morality, the Emperor has the intention of abolishing the position of crown prince. At this time, I have indeed made great contributions, but I cannot be tolerated by my brothers. I am indeed afraid of unclear rewards and punishments.

古文：萧瑀不可以厚利诱之，不可以刑戮惧之，真社稷臣也。 
现代文：萧瑀这个人不能用财物引诱他，不能用刑罚威胁他，真是国家的人才啊。 
English: Xiao Wei is a person who can't lure him with wealth and can't threaten him with punishment. He is truly a national talent.

古文：乃赐诗曰： 疾风知劲草，板荡识诚臣。 
现代文：于是赐诗写道： 大风能够知晓劲草的品格，患难能够考验大臣的忠心。 
English: So he wrote: The wind can tell the character of the reed grass, and the tribulation can test the loyalty of the minister.

古文：瑀拜谢曰： 臣特蒙诫训，许臣以忠谅，虽死之日，犹生之年。 
现代文：萧瑀拜谢说： 承蒙你的训诫，赞许我的忠贞，我虽死犹生。 
English: Xiao Yu Bai Xie said: I accept your admonition and praise my loyalty, even though I am still alive.

古文：贞观十一年，太宗行至汉太尉杨震墓，伤其以忠非命，亲为文以祭之。
现代文：贞观十一年，太宗行至汉太尉杨震墓，为他的忠贞而死于非命感到十分悲伤，亲自撰文祭奠他。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong went to the tomb of Han Taifang Yang Zhen, felt very sad for his loyalty and death, and personally wrote an article to pay tribute to him.

古文：房玄龄进曰： 杨震虽当年夭枉，数百年后方遇圣明，停舆驻跸，亲降神作，可谓虽死犹生，没而不朽。
现代文：房玄龄进言道： 杨震当年死得冤枉，数百年后才遇到英明的圣主，圣主停下高贵的车马，与神一同拜祭他，这真是虽死犹生。
English: Fang Xuanling said, "Yang Zhen died unjustly that year, and it was hundreds of years later that he met the wise Lord. The Lord stopped the noble chariot and horse, and worshiped him together with God. This is truly life and death.

古文：不觉助伯起幸赖欣跃于九泉之下矣。
现代文：他在九泉之下也会感到高兴。拜读陛下的祭文，既感动，又欣慰。
English: He will also feel happy under the nine springs. Reading His Majesty's dedicatory text is both moving and gratifying.

古文：伏读天文，且感且慰，凡百君子，焉敢不勖励名节，知为善之有效！ 贞观十一年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 狄人杀卫懿公，尽食其肉，独留其肝。
现代文：凡是有德行节操的君子，怎敢不勉励名节，知道为善终有好报。 贞观十一年，太宗对侍臣们说： 夷狄杀掉卫懿公，吃掉他身上所有的肉，只留下他的心肝。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: "Kill Wei Zheng, eat all his flesh, and leave only his heart.

古文：懿公之臣弘演呼天大哭，自出其肝，而内懿公之肝于其腹中。今觅此人，恐不可得。 
现代文：懿公的臣子弘演呼天抢地的大哭，用刀取出自己的心肝，而把懿公的心肝藏在自己的腹中，今天要找到这类人，恐怕不容易了。 
English: It's not easy to find such a person today, as Shigong's vassal Hongyuan cries out to the heavens and the earth, takes out his own heart with a knife, and hides Shigong's heart in his belly.

古文：特进魏征对曰： 昔豫让为智伯报仇，欲刺赵襄子，襄子执而获之，谓之曰： 子昔事范、中行氏乎？智伯尽灭之，子乃委质智伯，不为报仇；今即为智伯报仇，何也？ 
现代文：特进魏徵回答说： 古代豫让为智伯报仇，想刺杀赵襄子，襄子抓获了他，对他说： 你曾经在范氏、中行氏的名下做臣子，可是智伯把他们全杀光了，你于是投身智伯，你不为你的主人报仇；现在却要为智伯报仇，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Tejin Wei Qian replied, "In ancient times, Yu Jian took revenge for Zhi Bo and wanted to assassinate Zhao Xiangzi. Xiangzi captured him and said to him, "You used to be a vassal under the name of Fan and Zhong Xing, but Zhi Bo killed them all, so you joined Zhi Bo. You don't take revenge for your master; but now you want to take revenge for Zhi Bo. Why is that?"

古文：让答曰： 臣昔事范、中行，范、中行以众人遇我，我以众人报之。
现代文：豫让回答说： 我辅佐范氏和中行氏时，他们像对待普通人那样对待我，所以我用普通人报答人的方法报答他。
English: Yu Zhan replied: When I assisted Fan and Zhong Xing, they treated me like an ordinary person, so I repaid him like an ordinary person.

古文：智伯以国士遇我，我以国士报之。 
现代文：智伯用对待贤士的礼节对待我，当然我也要以贤士的方式报答他。 
English: Zhibo treated me with the etiquette of a sage, and of course I must repay him in the manner of a sage.

古文：在君礼之而已。亦何谓无人焉？ 
现代文：这一切都取决于国君对臣子的态度，怎么能说没有这种人呢？ 
English: It all depends on the attitude of the sovereign towards his vassals. How can we say that there are no such people?

古文：贞观十二年，太宗幸蒲州，因诏曰： 隋故鹰击郎将尧君素，往在大业，受任河东，固守忠义，克终臣节。
现代文：贞观十二年，太宗游幸蒲州，下诏说： 隋朝已故鹰击郎将尧君素，大业年间受命守护黄河以东的地区，他恪守忠义，尽忠臣节。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong traveled to Puzhou and issued the following edict: The late eagle-slaying general of the Sui Dynasty, Xing Junsu, was ordered to guard the area east of the Yellow River during the Great Work. He was scrupulously loyal and fulfilled the Loyalty Day.

古文：虽桀犬吠尧，有乖倒戈之志，疾风劲草，实表岁寒之心。
现代文：虽然他明珠暗投，确实违背了弃恶投明的做法，但疾风之中方见劲草，寒冬季节才显松柏。
English: Although he cast his pearls secretly, he really violated the practice of abandoning evil and casting light, but in the middle of a gale, he saw vigorous grass, and in the cold winter season, he saw pine and cypress.

古文：爰践兹境，追怀往事，宜锡宠命，以申劝奖。
现代文：对隋朝来说，毕竟表现出他的一片忠心。现在重蹈旧境，回忆往事，想起来应该给予他奖励。
English: For the Sui Dynasty, after all, he showed a piece of loyalty. Now he repeats the old situation, recalls the past, and he should be rewarded for remembering.

古文：可追赠蒲州刺史，仍访其子孙以闻。 
现代文：可追封他为蒲州刺史，寻访调查一下他子孙的情况报上来。 
English: It is possible to trace him back to the history of Puzhou, visit and investigate his descendants, and report the situation.

古文：贞观十二年，太宗谓中书侍郎岑文本曰： 梁、陈名臣，有谁可称？
现代文：贞观十二年，唐太宗对中书侍郎岑文本说： 梁、陈两朝有名望的大臣，有谁可以值得称道？
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the Chinese scribe Lang Yu: Liang and Chen were famous ministers of the two dynasties, who is worthy of praise?

古文：复有子弟堪招引否？ 
现代文：他们还有子弟可以推荐任用吗？ 
English: Do they have any children to recommend for appointment?

古文：文本奏言： 隋师入陈，百司奔散，莫有留者，惟尚书仆射袁宪独在其主之傍。
现代文：岑文本启奏道： 隋军攻入陈朝时，陈朝百官逃奔散离，没有留下来的，只有尚书仆射袁宪独自留在他的主子身边。
English: When the Sui army invaded the Chen Dynasty, hundreds of officials of the Chen Dynasty fled and dispersed, and only Shang Shuxu's servant, Sho Yuan Xian, remained alone with his master.

古文：王世充将受隋禅，群僚表请劝进，宪子国子司业承家，托疾独不署名。
现代文：王世充将要接受隋越王杨侗的禅让，百官纷纷上表劝他当皇帝，只有袁宪的儿子国子司业袁承家借口有病未在劝进表上签名。
English: Wang Shichong was going to accept the abdication of the Sui and Yue King Yang Zhen. Hundreds of officials went to the table to persuade him to become emperor. Only Yuan Xian's son, the Secretary of State Yuan Chengjia, did not sign the petition on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：此之父子，足称忠烈。
现代文：这样的父子，足可称为忠烈。
English: Such a father and son can be called loyal.

古文：承家弟承序，今为建昌令，清贞雅操，实继先风。 
现代文：袁承家的弟弟袁承序，现在做建昌县令，为官清廉，情操雅正，真能继承父兄的风骨。 
English: Yuan Chengxu, the younger brother of the Yuan Cheng family, is now the county magistrate of Jianchang County. He is a clean official with an upright attitude. He can truly inherit the spirit of his father and brother.

古文：由是召拜晋王友，兼令侍读，寻授弘文馆学士。
现代文：于是召进袁承序任命为晋王友，并叫他陪侍指导晋王读书，不久又升他为弘文馆学士。
English: Therefore, Yuan Chengxun was summoned and appointed as a friend of Jin Wang, and he was asked to accompany and guide Jin Wang to study, and soon he was promoted to a scholar of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：贞观十五年，诏曰： 朕听朝之暇，观前史，每览前贤佐时，忠臣徇国，何尝不想见其人，废书钦叹！
现代文：贞观十五年，唐太宗下诏说： 我处理朝政的空闲时间，阅读前朝史书，每看到古代的贤臣辅助国家，忠义的臣子以死为国效命，我真恨不得与他们相见，然而只能掩卷叹息！
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang issued an edict saying, "I spend my free time dealing with court politics and reading pre-imperial history books. Whenever I see ancient wise men assisting the country and loyal courtiers serving the country with death, I really can't wait to meet them. However, I can only hide my sigh!

古文：至于近代以来，年岁非远，然其胤绪，或当见存，纵未能显加旌表，无容弃之遐裔。
现代文：近代以来，时间距离现在还不算久远，我们还可以找到忠臣烈士的子孙加以表彰，就不要有所遗弃。
English: Since modern times, the time is not so long ago, we can still find the descendants of the loyal martyrs to commend them, so don't abandon them.

古文：其周、隋二代名臣及忠节子孙，有贞观已来犯罪配流者，宜令所司具录奏闻。 
现代文：周、隋两代名臣和以忠尽节的臣子的后代，在贞观以后犯了罪被流放发配的，命令负责管辖他们的人把情况整理好报上来。 
English: Zhou and Sui dynasties eminent courtiers and descendants of loyal courtiers who committed crimes and were exiled after Zhenguan, ordered the person in charge of them to sort out the situation and report it.

古文：于是多从矜宥。
现代文：于是对这些人从轻发落，并予以抚慰。
English: As a result, these people were treated with leniency and comforted.

古文：贞观十九年，太宗攻辽东安市城，高丽人众皆死战，诏令耨萨延寿、惠真等降，众止其城下以招之，城中坚守不动。
现代文：贞观十九年，太宗进攻辽东安市城，城中高丽军民都拼命战斗。太宗诏令先前投诚的高丽部落酋长延寿、惠真等人率众驻扎在安市城下来招降，城中的高丽军民依然坚守不动。
English: In the 19th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong attacked the city of An, Liaodong, and the Korean soldiers and civilians in the city fought desperately. Emperor Taizong ordered the Korean tribal chiefs Yan Shou and Huizhen, who had previously surrendered, to lead the people stationed in the city of An to surrender, but the Korean soldiers and civilians in the city remained steadfast.

古文：每见帝幡旗，必乘城鼓噪。
现代文：每次看到太宗的旗帜，就登城擂鼓呐喊。
English: Every time they see the flag of Taizong, they go to the city to play drums and shout.

古文：帝怒甚，诏江夏王道宗筑土山，以攻其城，竟不能克。
现代文：太宗非常恼怒，命令江夏王李道宗在城边构筑土山来攻城，最终也没能攻克。
English: Taizong was very angry and ordered the King of Jiangxia, Li Daozong, to build a mound of earth on the edge of the city to attack the city, but he was ultimately unable to conquer it.

古文：太宗将旋师，嘉安市城主坚守臣节，赐绢三百匹，以劝励事君者。
现代文：太宗将要退兵时，赞赏安市城的守将能坚守臣子的气节，赏赐给他绢三百匹，来勉励忠心侍奉君主的人。
English: When Emperor Taizong was about to retire from the army, he praised the governor of Anshi City for being able to hold fast to his vassal's spirit, and rewarded him with three hundred yakitori to encourage those who faithfully served the monarch.

