古文：景延广，字航川，陕州人也。
现代文：景延广，字航川，陕州人。
English: Jing Yanguang, surnamed Hangchuan, a native of Shaanxi.

古文：父建，累赠太尉。
现代文：他的父亲景建，累赠太尉。
English: His father, Jing Jian, was awarded the rank of captain.

古文：延广少习射，以挽强见称。
现代文：景延广年轻时学习射箭，以挽力强劲著称。
English: Jing Yanguang learned archery when he was young and was known for his strong pulling power.

古文：梁开平中，邵王硃友诲节制于陕，召置麾下，友诲坐谋乱，延广窜而获免。
现代文：后梁开平年间，邵王朱友诲节制陕州，把他召到部下，朱友诲犯密谋叛乱罪，景延广逃出幸免于难。
English: After Liang Kaiping's reign, Shao Wang Zhu Youyi took control of Shaanxi and summoned him to his subordinates. Zhu Youyi committed the crime of plotting rebellion, but Jing Yanguang escaped and survived.

古文：后事华州连帅尹皓，皓引荐列校，隶于汴军，从王彦章拒庄宗于河上。
现代文：后来事奉华州连帅尹皓，尹皓引荐他为列校，隶属于汴军，跟随王彦章在黄河边上拒挡唐庄宗。
English: Later, he served the Huazhou company commander Yin Zong. Yin Zong recommended him to the regiment. He was affiliated with the Han army and followed Wang Yanzhang on the edge of the Yellow River to resist Tangzhuangzong.

古文：及中都之败，彦章见擒，而延广被数创，归于汴。
现代文：到中都梁军战败，王彦章被擒，而景延广多处受伤，回到了汴州。
English: By the middle of the year, Liang's army was defeated, Wang Yanzhang was captured, and Jing Yanguang was injured in many places and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：唐天成中，明宗幸夷门，会硃守殷拒命，寻平之。
现代文：后唐天成年间，唐明宗临幸夷门，碰上朱守殷违抗君命，不久平定。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, when the Emperor came of age, the Tang and Ming Dynasties faced Zhu Shouyin, who disobeyed the Emperor's order and was soon subdued.

古文：延广以军校连坐，将弃市。
现代文：景延广因任朱守殷军校而受牵连，将要问斩弃市。
English: Jing Yanguang is implicated because of his position as Zhu Shou Yin Military Academy, and will be asked to leave the city.

古文：高祖时为六军副使，掌其事，见而惜之，乃密遣遁去，寻收为客将。
现代文：高祖当时担任六军副使，主持这件事，看到后哀怜他，于是偷偷放他逃去，不久又把他收容为客将。
English: Gaozu was the deputy envoy of the Sixth Army at that time, presided over this matter, saw him and felt sorry for him, so he secretly let him escape, and soon received him as a guest.

古文：及张敬达之围晋阳，高祖付以戎事，甚有干城之功。
现代文：到张敬达围困晋阳时，高祖将战事交付给他，很有保卫城池的功绩。
English: When Zhang Jingda besieged Jinyang, Gaozu handed over the war to him, which was a great achievement in defending the city.

古文：高祖即位，授侍卫步军都指挥使、检校司徒，遥领果州团练使，转检校太保，领夔州节度使。
现代文：高祖登上皇位后，任命他为侍卫步军都指挥使、检校司徒，遥任果州团练使，调任检校太保，兼夔州节度使。
English: After Emperor Gaozhu ascended the throne, he appointed him as the commander of the palace guards and foot soldiers, the inspector of the school, the distant envoy of the Guozhou Regiment, the transfer of the inspector of the school, and the festival envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：四年，出镇滑台。
现代文：天福四年，出镇滑台。
English: Tenfuku four years, out of town slide.

古文：五年，加检校太傅，移镇陕府。
现代文：五年，加检校太傅，移镇陕府。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to Shaanxi Province.

古文：六年，召为侍卫马步都虞候，移镇河阳。
现代文：六年，召为侍卫马步都虞候，移镇河阳。
English: Six years later, he was called to serve as a bodyguard for Ma Bu Du Yu, and moved to the town of Heyang.

古文：七年，转侍卫亲军都指挥使、检校太尉。
现代文：七年，调任侍卫亲军都指挥使、检校太尉。
English: In the seventh year, he was transferred to the post of the commanding officer of the Imperial Guards and the lieutenant of the inspection.

古文：其年夏，高祖晏驾，延广与宰臣冯道等承顾命，以少帝为嗣。
现代文：这年夏天，高祖去世，景延广与宰相冯道等遵承皇嘱，立少帝为继承人。
English: In the summer of that year, Gaozu died, and Jing Yanquan and the prime minister, Feng Dao, followed the emperor's order and appointed the young emperor as his successor.

古文：至是，景延广说帝囚荣于狱，凡辽国贩易在晋境者，皆杀之，夺其货。
现代文：发丧以后，京城的人不准相互交谈，文武百官赴丧，不到内廷宫门，都令下马，因此失之于骄横暴虐。
English: After the funeral, the people of Beijing were not allowed to talk to each other, and all the civil and military officials went to the funeral, and they were ordered to dismount if they did not reach the palace gate of the Inner Court, so they lost it in arrogance and tyranny.

古文：大臣皆言辽国不可负，乃释荣，慰赐而遣之。
现代文：少帝即位以后，景延广认为都是自己的功劳，不久加同平章事，更有骄矜夸功之态。
English: After the enthronement of the young emperor, Jing Yanguang believed that it was all his own merit, and soon he was awarded the title of Tongping, and he was even more proud and boastful.

古文：告契丹曰： 先帝则北朝所立，今上则中国自策，为邻为孙则可，无臣之理。 
现代文：朝廷派使臣到契丹告丧，没有丧奏书牍，不称臣子，而称晚辈，契丹震怒，派使臣来指斥，景延广于是奏请契丹回图使乔荣禀告契丹国主说 ：先帝是契丹所立，现今皇上则是中国自己册立，为邻邦为晚辈则可，决无为臣之理。 
English: The imperial court sent envoys to Khitan to mourn, but did not send a mourning letter, and did not call them vassals, but called them juniors. Khitan was furious, and sent envoys to rebuke them. Jing Yanguang then asked Khitan to return the letter so that Qiao Rongyi could tell the Khitan sovereign, "The former emperor was established by Khitan, but the current emperor was established by China itself. It is okay to be a junior for a neighboring country, but there is no reason to be a vassal.

古文：且言： 晋朝有十万口横磨剑，翁若要战则早来，他日不禁孙子，则取笑天下，当成后悔矣。 
现代文：并且说 ：晋朝有十万口横磨剑，您老头如要打仗就早点来，他日管不住孙辈，则被天下耻笑，就后悔莫及了。 
English: He also said, "The Jin Dynasty had 100,000 sharpened swords. If your old man wanted to fight, he should have come earlier. If he couldn't control his grandchildren, he would have been ridiculed by the world, and he would have regretted it.

古文：由是与契丹立敌，干戈日寻。
现代文：从此与契丹为敌，战争经常发生。
English: Since then, they have been enemies with the Khitans, and there have been frequent wars.

古文：初，高祖在位时，宣借杨光远骑兵数百，延广请下诏遣还，光远由此忿延广，怨朝廷，遣使泛海构衅。
现代文：当初，高祖在位的时候，宣谕借给杨光远骑兵几百名，景延广请求下诏索还，杨光远因此憎恨景延广，怨恨朝廷，便派使臣渡海，与景延广结下怨恨。
English: At first, when Gao Zu was on the throne, he lent several hundred cavalrymen to Yang Guangyuan by proclamation, and requested Jing Yanquan to return them. Yang Guangyuan therefore hated Jing Yanquan and resented the imperial court, so he sent envoys across the sea to settle his grudge with Jing Yanquan.

古文：天福八年十二月，契丹乃南牧。
现代文：天福八年十二月，契丹向南进攻。
English: In December of the 8th year of Tianfu, Khitan attacked the south.

古文：九年正月，陷甘陵，河北储蓄悉在其郡。
现代文：九年正月，攻陷了甘陵，黄河以北的储蓄全在甘陵郡内。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, Ganling was captured, and all the savings north of the Yellow River were in Ganling County.

古文：少帝大骇，亲率六师，进驻澶渊。延广为上将，凡六师进退，皆出胸臆，少帝亦不能制，众咸惮而忌之。
现代文：少帝非常惊恐，亲自率领六军，进驻澶渊，景延广担任上将，大凡六军进退行止，都出自他的主意，少帝也不能控制他，大家都因害怕而感到恐惧。
English: The young emperor was very alarmed. He personally led the Six Armies into the Abyss, with Jing Yanguang as the admiral. The advance and retreat of the Six Armies were all his idea. The young emperor could not control him, and everyone was terrified.

古文：契丹既至城下，使人宣言曰： 景延广唤我来相杀，何不急战！ 
现代文：契丹到了澶渊城下之后，派人宣告说： 景延广召唤我来相杀，怎么不赶快来战！ 
English: After Khitan arrived at the castle town of Zouyuan, he sent someone to announce: "Jing Yan Guan has summoned me to come and fight, why don't you come and fight!"

古文：一日，高行周与蕃军相遇于近郊，以众寡不敌，急请济师，延广勒兵不出，是日行周幸而获免。
现代文：一天，高行周与蕃军在近郊相遇，因众寡悬殊，急请增援军队，景延广按兵不动，这天高行周侥幸免于一死。
English: One day, Gao Xing Zhou and the Wei army met in the suburbs. Due to the disparity in numbers, reinforcements were urgently requested, and Jingyuanguang did not move. On this day, Gao Xing Zhou narrowly escaped death.

古文：及契丹退，延广犹闭栅自固，士大夫曰： 昔与契丹绝好，言何勇也；今契丹至若是，气何惫也。 
现代文：等到契丹退去，景延广还紧闭栅栏自己固守，士大夫都说： 过去与契丹断绝友好，话说得是多么豪壮，现在契丹到了则像这样，气概又是多么的羸弱。 
English: When the Khitan retreated, Jing Yan Guan still closed the fence tightly and clung to himself. The scholars all said: In the past, when we broke off friendship with the Khitan, how powerful the words were, but now that the Khitan has arrived, it is like this, and how weak the spirit is.

古文：时延广在军，母凶问至，自澶渊津北移于津南，不信宿而复莅戎事，曾无戚容，下俚之士亦闻而恶之。
现代文：当时景延广在军中，母亲去世的消息传来，他从澶渊渡口的北岸转移到渡口南岸，不到两夜就又亲临军事，不曾有忧伤的表情，乡里人士听到这样的事也感到厌恶。
English: At that time, Jing Yanguang was in the army, and the news of his mother's death came. He moved from the north bank of the Shanyuan ferry to the south bank of the ferry, and within two nights he was in the military again. He never had a sad expression, and the villagers were disgusted to hear such a thing.

古文：时有太常丞王绪者，因使德州回，与延广有隙，因诬奏与杨光远通谋，遣吏絷于麾下，锻成其事。
现代文：当时太常丞王绪出使德州回来，与景延广有隔阂，因此他诬告王绪与杨光远暗通谋反，派官吏抓到帐下，罗织罪名。
English: At that time, Grand Prince Wang Xu was sent back to Texas, and there was a wide gap between him and Jing Yan. Therefore, he falsely accused Wang Xu and Yang Guangyuan of secretly plotting against him, and sent officials to arrest them and fabricate charges.

古文：判官卢亿累劝解不从，寻有诏弃市，时甚冤之。
现代文：判官卢亿一再劝解不予听从，不久，少帝下诏问斩王绪，时人以为这是非常冤屈的。
English: The judge Lu Yuan repeatedly persuaded him not to obey, and soon after, the young emperor issued an edict to behead Wang Xu, which was thought to be very unjust.

古文：少帝还京，尝幸其第，进献锡赉，有如酬酢，权宠恩渥，为一朝之冠。
现代文：少帝回到京城，曾经驾临景延广的宅第，进献物品、赏赐礼物，像主客相互敬酒酬答一般，权势恩宠，为一朝之冠。
English: When the young emperor returned to the capital, he once came to Jing Yanguang's mansion to present items and give gifts, like the host and guest reciprocating with a toast. The grace of power is the crown of a dynasty.

古文：开运三年冬，契丹渡滹水。诏遣屯孟津，将戒途，由府署正门而出，所乘马腾立不进，几坠于地，乃易乘而行，时以为不祥之甚。
现代文：不久与宰相桑维翰不谐和，少帝也畏惧他难于控制，于是便罢免了他的兵权，出任洛都留守、兼侍中。因此他便郁郁不得志，又担心契丹强盛，国家难以拯救，自己将要受到危害，便只管纵情享受，日夜饮酒为事，不再以辅佐君王为意。开运三年冬，契丹渡过滹水，少帝下诏派他屯守孟津，将要登上征途时，他从府衙正门出来，坐骑腾空立起不进，几乎将他摔下地，于是更换乘马出发，当时认为这是很不吉祥的预兆。
English: Soon he was at odds with the prime minister, Sanveikhan, and the young emperor feared that he would be difficult to control, so he dismissed him from his military authority and appointed him to stay in Lod and serve as an aide-de-camp. Therefore, he was despondent, and worried that Khitan was strong, the country was difficult to save, and he would be harmed, so he only indulged in indulgence, drinking day and night, and no longer intended to assist the king. In the winter of the third year of operation, Khitan crossed Surabaya, and the young emperor sent him to guard Mengjin. When he was about to embark on the journey, he came

古文：及王师降契丹，延广狼狈而还。
现代文：到晋军投降契丹，景延广狼狈回朝。
English: When the Jin army surrendered to the Khitans, Jing Yan Guang fled back to the North.

古文：时契丹主至安阳，遣别部队长率骑士数千，与晋兵相杂，趋河桥入洛，以取延广。
现代文：当时契丹国主到达安阳，派遣别部队长率数千骑兵，与晋兵混杂，奔赴河桥进入洛阳来抓捕景延广。
English: At that time, the Khitan ruler arrived in Anyang and dispatched several thousand cavalrymen led by the captain of another army, mixed with Jin soldiers, to rush to Heqiao and enter Luoyang to capture Jing Yanguang.

古文：戒曰： 如延广奔吴走蜀，便当追而致之。 
现代文：告诫说 ：哪怕景延广逃往吴国、跑到蜀国，也要追赶抓回。 
English: He warned that even if Jing Yanguang fled to Wuzhong and Shu, they should still catch up with him and bring him back.

古文：延广曰： 丕，臣之从事也，以职相随，何罪而亦为缧囚？ 
现代文：当时景延广担心顾念家人，不能引决自尽。契丹杀到之后，便与从事阎丕乘轻骑到封丘谒见契丹国主，和阎丕一并被抓起来。景延广说 ：阎丕，是我的从事，因职责而跟随我，他有什么罪也被拘捕起来？ 
English: At that time, Jing Yanguang was worried about his family and could not commit suicide. After Khitan was killed, he rode a light horse to Fengqiu to see the king of Khitan, and was arrested together with him. Jing Yanguang said: "Yanquan is my occupation, and he followed me because of his duties. What crime did he commit to be arrested?"

古文：契丹释之。
现代文：契丹释放了阎丕。
English: The Khitans released him.

古文：因责延广曰： 致南北失欢，良由尔也。 
现代文：于是指斥景延广说 ：使南北失去交好关系，确实是因为你。 
English: Then, referring to the rebuff, he said, "It is really because of you that the North and South have lost friendly relations."

古文：乃召乔荣质证前事，凡有十焉。
现代文：便召唤乔荣当面对证以前发生的事，总计有十件。
English: He then summoned Qiao Rong to testify in person about what had happened before, a total of ten cases.

古文：始荣将入蕃时，绐延广云： 某恐忽忘所达之语，请纪于翰墨。 
现代文：当初，乔荣将入蕃时，哄骗景延广说 ：我担心一时忘记你所要转达的话语，请用笔墨写下来。 
English: At first, when Qiao Rong was about to enter the coffin, he coaxed Jing Yanguang and said, "I'm worried that I'll forget the words you want to convey for a moment. Please write them down with a pen and ink."

古文：延广信之，乃命吏备记其事。
现代文：景延广相信他，便命令官吏完备地记下了这件事。
English: Jing Yanguang believed him and ordered officials to make a complete record of the incident.

古文：荣亦憸巧善事人者也，虑他日见诘，则执之以取信，因匿其文于衣中。
现代文：乔荣也算得是逢迎弄巧善于事奉人的了，考虑到他日被责难，就拿这来作为凭信，因此把那文字藏在衣服里。
English: Qiao Rong, who is also considered to be a charmer and good at serving people, took it as a credence that he was reprimanded that day, so he hid the text in his clothes.

古文：至是，延广始以他语抗对，荣乃出其文以质之，延广顿为所屈。每服一事，则受牙筹一茎，此契丹法也。
现代文：到这时，景延广开始时竭力辩驳，乔荣便拿出那文字来对质，景延广顿时被他折服，每承认一件事，就受牙筹一根，这是契丹的刑法。
English: At this time, Jing Yanguang tried to argue at the beginning, Qiaorong took out the text to confront him, Jing Yanguang was immediately convinced by him, and every time he admitted a thing, he was punished with a toothpick, which is the criminal law of Qidan.

古文：延广受至八茎，但以面伏地，契丹遂咄之，命锁延广臂，将送之北土。
现代文：景延广受了八根牙筹之后，就以面伏地，契丹国主斥骂他，下令用枷锁铐上景延广，送往北方。
English: After Jing Yan Guang suffered eight teeth, he fell face down on the ground. The Khitan ruler scolded him and ordered him to be shackled with chains and sent to the north.

古文：《东都事略》：昝居润尝为枢密院小吏，景延广留守西京，补为右职。
现代文：这天，到达陈桥民家住在草屋里，景延广害怕再受酷刑，到晚上趁着看守大意时，用手扼住咽喉自杀而死。
English: On this day, after arriving at Chen Qiao's home and living in a grass hut, Jing Yanguang was afraid of being tortured again. In the evening, he took advantage of the guards' suggestion and strangled himself with his hand.

古文：契丹犯京师，以兵围延广家。故吏悉避去，居润为全护其家，时论称之。
现代文：虽然事情已经到了这一地步，人们还是认为他很悲壮，时年五十六岁。
English: Although it had come to this, he was still regarded as a tragic figure, aged fifty-six.

古文：汉高祖登极，诏赠中书令。
现代文：汉高祖登上皇位，下诏追赠中书令。
English: Henkel's ancestor ascended the throne and issued a posthumous imperial edict.

古文：永康王举兵攻国母，以伟王为前锋，国母发兵拒之，以彦韬为排阵使，彦韬降于伟王，伟王置之帐下，其后卒于幽州。
现代文：景延广小时，曾经泛舟洞庭湖，船到湖中碰上大风，帆裂舵折，大家都非常恐惧。过了一会，驾船人指着水波说： 贤圣来保护，你们中间一定有显贵的人。 
English: When Jing Yan Guan was a child, he once went white-water rafting on Dongting Lake. When the boat encountered a strong wind in the lake, the sail cracked and the rudder broke. Everyone was very afraid. After a while, the boatman pointed to the water wave and said: Wise men come to protect, there must be dignitaries among you.

古文：张希崇，字德峰，幽州蓟县人也。
现代文：不久得以渡过洞庭，景延广最终位至将相，并非偶然的事情。张希崇，字德峰，幽州蓟县人。
English: It was no accident that he was able to pass through Dongting soon after, and that Jing Yan Guo was eventually promoted to general. Zhang Xitong, also known as Defeng, was from Yuzhou County.

古文：父行简，假蓟州玉田令。
现代文：其父张行简代理过蓟州玉田县令。
English: His father, Zhang Xingjian, was the deputy governor of Yutian County in Zhangzhou.

古文：俄而守光败，唐庄宗命周德威镇其地，希崇以旧籍列于麾下，寻遣率偏师守平州。
现代文：张希崇年少时精通《左传》，又特别爱好吟诵咏叹诗词文赋。唐昭宗天年间，刘守光做燕地统帅，性情惨毒残酷，不喜欢文人，张希崇于是弃文投奔刘守光，刘守光接收了他，后来慢慢提升为副将。
English: When Zhang Xizong was young, he was proficient in "Zhu Chuan" and was particularly fond of reciting arias. During the reign of Tang Zhaotian, Liu Shouguang was the commander of Yan Di. He was cruel and did not like literati. Zhang Xizong abandoned literature and joined Liu Shouguang. Liu Shouguang accepted him and later slowly promoted him to vice-commander.

古文：安巴坚南攻，陷其城，掠希崇而去。
现代文：不久，刘守光吃了败仗，唐庄宗派周德威镇守燕地，张希崇因原载名册被收容在周德威的部下，不久派他率领非主力部队驻守平州。
English: Soon, Liu Shouguang was defeated, and the Tangzhuang sectarian Zhou Dewei took the lead in guarding Yan. Zhang Xizong was detained under Zhou Dewei because of the original roster, and soon he was sent to lead a non-major force stationed in Pingzhou.

古文：安巴坚询希崇，乃知其儒人也，因授元帅府判官，后迁卢龙军行军司马，继改蕃汉都提举使。
现代文：辽太祖耶律阿保机向南进攻，攻下平州，俘获了张希崇并带着他离开平州北去。耶律阿保机询问张希崇，才知道他是文人儒生。因此拜封他为元帅府判官。后提升为卢龙军行军司马，接着改任蕃汉都提举使。
English: The Grandfather of the Liao Dynasty, Yelu Baoji, attacked the south, conquered Pingzhou, captured Zhang Xizhong and took him away from Pingzhou to the north. Yelu Baoji asked Zhang Xizhong, only to find out that he was a literati Confucian. Therefore, he was appointed as a judge of the Marshal's Office. Later, he was promoted to the marching Sima of the Lulong Army, and then he was appointed as the envoy of the Han Dynasty.

古文：天成初，契丹平州节度使卢文进南归，契丹以希崇继其任，遣腹心总边骑三百以监之。
现代文：天成初年，伪平州节度使卢文进南归，契丹国主让张希崇接替了平州节度使的职位，并派心腹领三百边骑监督他。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, the pseudo Pingzhou Festival caused Lu Wen to enter the south and return. The Khitan ruler asked Zhang Xitong to take over the position of the Pingzhou Festival envoy, and sent 300 cavalrymen to supervise him.

古文：希崇莅事数岁，契丹主渐加宠信。
现代文：张希崇上任几年后，契丹国主逐渐宠信他。
English: A few years after Zhang Xizong took office, the Khitan ruler gradually came to trust him.

古文：一日，登郡楼私自计曰： 昔班仲升西戍，不敢擅还，以承诏故也。
现代文：一天，张希崇登上州城楼台，私下盘算谋划说： 从前班超在西陲戍守，不敢擅自回去，是因为接受皇上诏谕的缘故。
English: One day, Zhang Xizhong boarded the platform of the state capital, and secretly planned and plotted: "Formerly, the superintendent was in Xidi, and he dared not go back without permission, because he accepted the emperor's edict.

古文：我今入关，断在胸臆，何恬安于不测之地而自滞耶！ 
现代文：我现在打算入关回去，决断在于自己。怎么能坦然安心在这种不测之地停留！ 
English: I now plan to go back to prison, the decision is up to me. How can I stay calmly and safely in such an unpredictable place!

古文：部曲皆泣下沾衣，且曰： 明公欲全部曲南去，善则善矣，如敌众何？ 
现代文：于是召集杰出的手下汉人，对他们说： 我困陷在这里，喝奶酪、穿裘皮，活着时不能与亲情故旧相见，死了则变成这穷野荒漠的孤魂野鬼。南望家乡山山水水，过一天就像过一年一样漫长。你们难道不思念家乡？ 
English: So he called together his outstanding Chinese subordinates and said to them: I am stuck here, drinking cheese and wearing furs. When I am alive, I cannot meet with my relatives, and when I die, I become a lonely ghost of this poor desert. Looking south at my hometown's landscape, a day is as long as a year. Don't you miss your hometown?

古文：《欧阳史》作 麾下皆言兵多不可俱亡，因劝希崇独去。 
现代文：部下汉人都泪流湿衣，说： 明公打算率领部下全部南归，好的确是好，只是对众多的契丹人怎么办？ 
English: His Chinese subordinates were all in tears and wet clothes, saying: "Ming Gong intends to lead all his subordinates back to the south. Good is indeed good, but what about the numerous Khitan people?

古文：希崇曰： 俟明日首领至牙帐，则先擒之，契丹无统领，其党必散。
现代文：张希崇说 ：到明天把契丹人头领叫到节度使大帐，先擒住他们，契丹兵失去了统帅将领，部众就一定会分散瓦解。
English: Zhang Xitong said: By tomorrow, the Khitan leaders will be called to the festival to make a big account, first arrest them, the Khitan soldiers have lost their commander-in-chief, and the troops will surely disperse and collapse.

古文：且平州去王帐千余里，待报至征兵，逾旬方及此，则我等已入汉界深矣，何用以众少为病！ 
现代文：再说，平州离契丹王宫一千多里，等到消息传去，契丹国主再调兵，十天以后才能到达这里，那时我们已经进入汉人地界很远了。用不着因敌众我寡而忧患！ 
English: Moreover, Pingzhou is more than a thousand miles away from the palace of the Khitan king. When the news spread that the ruler of the Khitan kingdom would send troops, it would take ten days to reach here. At that time, we were already far into the Han territory. There was no need to worry about the small number of enemies!

古文：众大喜。
现代文：听后，大家都非常高兴。
English: After listening, everyone was very happy.

古文：是日，希崇于郡斋之侧，坎隙地，贮石灰。
现代文：当天，张希崇在郡守府第的旁边空隙地挖了陷阱，贮藏了石灰。
English: On the same day, Zhang Xitong dug a trap in a vacant space next to the county government building and stored lime.

古文：明旦，首领与群从至，希崇饮以醇酎数钟，既醉，悉投于灰阱中毙焉。
现代文：第二天，契丹头领与众多的随从来到帅帐，张希崇拿出几坛醇酒给他们喝，把他们灌醉以后，就全部投入石灰坑里淹死了。
English: The next day, the Khitan leader and many of his followers came to Shuai Zhuang. Zhang Xitong took out several jars of alcohol for them to drink. After getting them drunk, he threw them all into the lime pit and drowned them.

古文：其徒营于北郭，遣人攻之，皆溃围奔去，希崇遂以管内生口二万余南归。
现代文：他们的徒众扎营在城北，张希崇就派人去攻打他们，最后，都溃败突围奔逃而去。张希崇于是率领所管辖的活着的二万多人南归后唐。
English: Their followers camped in the north of the city, and Zhang Xizhong sent men to attack them. In the end, they were all defeated and broke out of the encirclement and fled. Zhang Xizhong then led the more than twenty thousand people under his jurisdiction to return south to the Later Tang.

古文：唐明宗嘉之，授汝州防御使。
现代文：唐明宗奖励他，任他为汝州防御史。
English: Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty rewarded him and allowed him to write the defense history of Ruzhou.

古文：希崇既之任，遣人迎母赴郡。
现代文：张希崇就任汝州后，派人接母亲来汝州。
English: After Zhang Xizong took office in Ruzhou, he sent someone to pick up his mother to come to Ruzhou.

古文：母及境，希崇亲肩板舆行三十里，观者无不称叹。
现代文：母亲到了汝州地界，张希崇亲自为母亲抬轿子走了三十多里，看到的人没有不称赞叹服他孝顺的。
English: When his mother arrived at the border of Ruzhou, Zhang Xitong personally carried the palanquin for his mother for more than thirty miles. People who saw him did not fail to praise and admire his filial piety.

古文：历二年，迁灵州两使留后。
现代文：过了二年，升迁为灵州两使留后。
English: After two years, he was promoted to Lingzhou Second Envoy.

古文：先是，灵州戍兵岁运粮经五百里，有剽攘之患。
现代文：此前，每年戍守灵州的士兵运输粮食要走五百里，有遭受抢劫的忧患。
English: Previously, the soldiers stationed in Lingzhou had to travel 500 miles each year to transport grain, and they were worried about being robbed.

古文：希崇乃告谕边士，广务屯田，岁余，军食大济。
现代文：张希崇于是告诉戍边将士，广泛从事开荒种地，屯积粮食。一年多后，军队的粮食大为充足。
English: Zhang Xitong then told the soldiers of the Lijiang side to extensively engage in clearing wasteland and accumulating grain. More than a year later, the army's grain was more than sufficient.

古文：玺书褒之，因正授旄节。
现代文：皇上诏书褒奖他，因此正式授予他镇守一方的旄节。
English: The Emperor's edict commended him, thus officially awarding him the title of town guardian.

古文：清泰中，希崇厌其杂俗，频表请觐，诏许之。
现代文：清泰年间，张希崇厌烦了那里不纯的习俗，接连上表请求朝见皇上，末帝下诏准允了他。
English: During the Qing and Tai Dynasties, Zhang Xizong was fed up with the impure customs there. He repeatedly requested to see the emperor, and the late emperor granted his request.

古文：至阙未久，朝廷以安边有闻，议内地处之，改邠州节度使。
现代文：到了京城不久，朝廷因听说他安定边疆有功，提议在内地安置他，改任为州节度使。
English: Shortly after arriving in the capital, the imperial court, having heard of his achievements in stabilizing the frontier, proposed that he be resettled in the hinterland and reassigned as the state festival envoy.

古文：及高祖入洛，与契丹方有要盟，虑为其所取，乃复除灵武。
现代文：到晋高祖进入洛阳，与契丹将有重要盟约，担心灵武会被契丹攻取，于是又派他出任灵武节度使。
English: When Jin Gaozu entered Luoyang, he would have an important alliance with Khitan. He was worried that Lingwu would be conquered by Khitan, so he sent him to serve as a Lingwu festival envoy.

古文：希崇叹曰： 我应老于边城，赋分无所逃也。 
现代文：张希崇叹息说 ：我应该老死在边陲城邑了，命中注定逃不出这个地方。 
English: Zhang Xitong sighed and said, "I should have died of old age in a border town. I am doomed to never escape this place."

古文：因郁郁不得志，久而成疾，卒于任，时年五十二。
现代文：因此郁郁不得志，积久成疾，最后死在职位上。其时年仅五十二岁。
English: As a result, depressed and discouraged, he became ill for a long time, and finally died in office. He was only fifty-two years old.

古文：希崇自小校累官至开府仪同三司、检校太尉，三历方面，封清河郡公，食邑二千户，赐靖边奉国忠义功臣，亦人生之荣盛者也。
现代文：张希崇从小校接连升到开府仪同三司、检校太尉，多次主持一方的军政事务，赐封清河郡公，享受俸禄三千户，赐为清边奉国忠义功臣，也可称得上是荣耀华贵一生的人了。
English: Zhang Xitong was successively promoted from a primary school to Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and then to a lieutenant of the inspection of schools. He presided over the military and political affairs of one side many times, granted the title of Qinghe County official, enjoyed the salary of three thousand households, and was awarded as a loyal and meritorious servant of the Qing side. He can also be said to be a glorious and splendid person.

古文：《欧阳史》：赠太师。希崇素朴厚，尤嗜书，莅事之余，手不释卷。
现代文：张希崇一向纯朴厚道，特别偏爱读书，在主事的闲暇，手不释卷。
English: Zhang Xizhong has always been a pure and simple person. He especially likes to read books. In his spare time, he is always busy with his work.

古文：不好酒乐，不蓄姬仆。
现代文：不喜欢纵酒行乐，不豢养妾婢仆从。
English: They don't like to drink and carouse, and they don't like to keep concubines and servants.

古文：祁寒盛暑，必俨具衣冠，厮养之辈，未尝闻亵慢之言。
现代文：严寒酷暑，也一定穿戴整齐，干粗活的杂役人员，也不曾听到轻薄不逊的言语。
English: In the severe cold and heat, they must also be neatly dressed, and handymen who do rough work have never heard frivolous words.

古文：事母至谨，每食必侍立，俟盥漱毕方退，物议高之。
现代文：服侍母亲，最为谨慎小心，每当母亲吃饭时，他都一定侍立在旁，等到母亲洗漱完毕才退下。大家都认为他品德高尚。
English: He was most careful to serve his mother, and whenever she was eating, he always stood by and waited until she had finished washing before leaving. Everyone thought he was of high moral character.

古文：性虽仁恕，或遇奸恶，则嫉之若仇。
现代文：他性情虽然仁厚宽恕，但如果碰上奸诈邪恶的事情，则像憎恨仇人那样。
English: Although his nature is benevolent and forgiving, when it comes to treacherous and evil things, it is like hating the enemy.

古文：在邠州日，有民与郭氏为义子，自孩提以至成人，因愎戾不受训，遣之。
现代文：在州任刺使的日子里，有个人给郭氏做义子，郭氏一直把他从孩提时代抚养到长大成人。后因为他性情暴躁不服从管教，被郭氏赶出去。
English: During his time as a state-appointed assassin, there was a man who was Guo's son-in-law. Guo had raised him from childhood to adulthood. Later, he was driven out by Guo because of his hot temper and disobedience to discipline.

古文：郭氏夫妇相次俱死。
现代文：郭氏夫妇紧接着都相继去世，郭家的亲生儿子已经长大成人。
English: Mr. and Mrs. Guo both died in quick succession, and the Guo family's own son is now an adult.

古文：郭氏有嫡子，已长，时郭氏诸亲与义子相约，云是亲子，欲分其财物，助而讼之，前后数政不能理，遂成疑狱。
现代文：当时，郭家亲朋好友与那义子相约，都说他是郭氏的亲生儿子，要分得郭家的财产，帮助他打官司，前后经历几个执政官都不能断案，于是成了疑案。
English: At that time, relatives and friends of the Guo family made an appointment with the son of the Guo family, saying that he was the biological son of the Guo family, and that he wanted to divide the Guo family's property and help him fight the lawsuit. After experiencing several consuls, the case could not be dismissed, so it became a doubtful case.

古文：希崇览其诉，判云： 父在已离，母死不至。正称假子，孤二十年抚养之恩；傥曰亲兒，犯三千条悖逆之罪。
现代文：张希崇查阅了那状词，宣判说 ：父亲活着时，已经离开，母亲死的时候，又不去尽孝，作为养子，不过辜负了二十年抚养之恩而已；如果说是亲生儿子，那就冒犯了三千条悖逆不孝的罪过，极大地损害了名教。
English: Zhang Xitong examined the indictment and pronounced the sentence: When the father was alive, he had already left, and when the mother died, he did not show filial piety. As an adopted son, however, he only failed to live up to the grace of twenty years of upbringing; if it was a biological son, then he committed three thousand sins of disobedience and unfilial piety, and greatly damaged the famous religion.

古文：颇为伤害名教，安敢理认田园！
现代文：怎么还敢到衙门去申辩继承财产！
English: How dare they go to court to claim their inherited property!

古文：其生涯并付亲子，所讼人与朋奸者，委法官以律定刑。 
现代文：郭氏的遗产都一并给亲生儿子继承，那些诉讼的人与朋比为奸的人，交给司法官按刑律定罪。 
English: Guo's estate will be jointly inherited by his biological son, and the litigants and accomplices will be handed over to judicial officers to be convicted according to criminal law.

古文：闻者服其明。
现代文：听到判决的人都佩服他明察。
English: Everyone who heard the verdict admired his clear-sightedness.

古文：希崇亦善观象，在灵州日，见月掩毕口大星，经月复尔，乃叹曰： 毕口大星，边将也，月再掩之，吾其终欤！ 
现代文：张希崇还精通观测天象，在灵州做官时，观察到月亮遮盖了毕宿口上的大星，经过一个月才恢复到原来的样子，于是叹着气说： 毕宿口上的大星，是地上的边疆将领，月亮再一次遮盖它时，我的生命就完结了！ 
English: Zhang Xizhong is also proficient in observing celestial objects. When he was an official in Lingzhou, he observed that the moon covered the great star on the Bi lodge, and it took a month to recover to its original appearance. So he sighed and said: The great star on the Bi lodge is the frontier general on earth. When the moon covers it again, my life will be over!

古文：果卒于郡。
现代文：后来果然死在灵武郡。
English: He later died in Lingwu County.

