古文：起屠维单阏，尽重光大荒落，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。晋纪十三晋元帝太兴二年
English: It lasted a total of three years, from the 13th year of the Jin Dynasty to the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Taoxing

古文：中宗元皇帝中太兴二年
现代文：春季，二月，刘遐、徐龛在寒山攻击周抚，攻破并杀死周抚。
English: In the spring, in February, Liu Bei and Xu Bei attacked Zhou Fu in the cold mountains, broke through and killed Zhou Fu.

古文：春，二月，刘遐、徐龛击周抚于寒山，破斩之。初，掖人苏峻帅乡里数千家结垒以自保，远近多附之。曹嶷恶其强，将攻之，峻帅众浮海来奔。
现代文：当初，掖县人苏峻率领乡里数千家民众营造壁垒自保，远近民众大多附从。曹嶷恨苏峻势力强大，准备攻击他，苏峻率部众渡海投奔东晋。
English: At first, Su Jun, a native of Handan County, led thousands of people in the village to build barriers for self-protection, and most of the people near and far followed. Cao Gan hated Su Jun's powerful forces and prepared to attack him, and Su Jun led the people to cross the sea to East Jin.

古文：帝以峻为鹰扬将军，助刘遐讨周抚，有功；诏以遐为临淮太守，峻为淮陵内史。
现代文：元帝任苏峻为鹰扬将军，因为帮助刘遐讨伐周抚有功，下诏任刘遐为临淮太守，苏浚为淮陵内史。
English: The Yuan Emperor appointed Su Jun as the general of Yingyang, and because of his great contribution in helping Liu Bei to fight Zhou, the next emperor appointed Liu Bei as the governor of Linhuai, and Su Jun as the historian of Huairing.

古文：石勒遣左长史王修献捷于汉，汉主曜遣兼司徒郭汜授勒太宰、领大将军，进爵赵王，加殊礼，出警入跸，如曹公辅汉故事；拜王修及其副刘茂皆为将军，封列侯。
现代文：石勒派左长史王向汉主献俘告捷，汉主刘曜派兼司徒郭汜授石勒为太宰、领大将军，晋升爵位为赵王，给予特殊礼遇，出入宫禁，如同曹操辅佐汉室的旧制。拜王和他的副将刘茂为将军，封为列侯。
English: Shi Le sent Zuo Chang Shi Wang to offer captives to the Han master and achieved success. The Han master Liu You sent Guo Yu, who was also a disciple of Shi Le, to make Shi Le the Dazai and leading general. He was promoted to the peerage of Zhao Wang, given special courtesy, and forbidden to enter and leave the palace, just like the old system of Cao Cao's assistants in the Han court. Bai Wang and his vice-commander Liu Mao were made generals and made vassals.

古文：修舍人曹平乐从修至粟邑，因留仕汉，言于曜曰： 大司马遣修等来，外表至诚，内觇大驾强弱，俟其复命，将袭乘舆。 
现代文：王的舍人曹平乐随从王到粟邑，顺势留在汉国做官，他对刘曜说： 大司马石勒派王等人前来，外表至为忠诚，实则是窥察您的强弱，等他回去报告后，将要袭击您。 
English: Cao Pingle, Wang's concubine, followed Wang to Siaoyu and stayed in China to work as an official. He said to Liu You, "Grandmaster Ma Shiller sent Wang and others to come. Outwardly, they are very loyal, but in reality, they are spying on your strengths and weaknesses. When he returns to report, he will attack you."

古文：时汉兵实疲弊，曜信之。乃追汜还，斩修于市。
现代文：当时汉军的确疲敝，刘曜相信了曹平乐所言，于是命人追回郭汜，在街市上杀了王。
English: At that time, the Han army was indeed exhausted. Liu You believed what Cao Pingle said, so he ordered someone to recover Guo Gan and killed Wang in the market.

古文：三月，勒还至襄国。
现代文：三月，石勒回到襄国。
English: In March, Shi Le returned to Xiangguo.

古文：刘茂逃归，言修死状。勒大怒曰： 孤事刘氏，于人臣之职有加矣。
现代文：刘茂逃回，告知王死的情况，石勒大怒，说： 孤侍奉刘氏，已经超过了臣下该尽的本职。
English: Liu Mao fled back and informed Wang of the circumstances of his death. Shi Le was furious and said, "Serving Liu alone is more than a vassal should do.

古文：彼之基业，皆孤所为，今既得志，还欲相图。
现代文：刘氏的基业，都是我所创下的。现在他志得意满，却反过来想算计我。
English: Mr. Liu's foundation business was all created by me. Now he is full of pride, but on the other hand, he wants to take advantage of me.

古文：赵王、赵帝，孤自为之，何待于彼邪！ 
现代文：赵王、赵帝，孤自己就能做，哪里还要等他呢！ 
English: King Zhao, Emperor Zhao, he can do it all by himself, why should we wait for him!

古文：乃诛曹平乐三族。
现代文：于是诛杀曹平乐三族。
English: So he killed the three families of Cao Pingle.

古文：帝令群臣议郊祀，尚书令刁协等以为宜须还洛乃修之。
现代文：元帝令群臣商议郊祀之事，尚书令刁协等人认为应该等还都洛阳之后再举行。
English: Emperor Yuan ordered the courtiers to discuss the matter of suburban worship, and Shang Shuling and others believed that it should be held after returning to Luoyang.

古文：司徒荀组等曰： 汉献帝都许，即行郊祀。何必洛邑！ 
现代文：司徒荀组等人说： 汉献帝迁都许昌，马上便举行郊祀，又何必等回到洛邑时！ 
English: The Stubbs group and others said, "The relocation of the Han Emperor to Xuchang made it possible to hold the suburb worship right away, so why wait to return to Luoyang!

古文：帝从之，立郊丘于建康城之巳地。
现代文：元帝听从了荀组等人意见，在建康城的巳地建立郊祀园丘。
English: The Yuan Emperor listened to the opinions of the Xing group and others and established a suburban worship park at the site of Jiankang City.

古文：辛卯，帝亲祀南郊。
现代文：辛卯，元帝亲自到南郊祭天，因为还没有北郊，所以连同地祗合并祭祀。
English: According to Xinwu, Emperor Yuan personally went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to Heaven, but since there was no northern suburb, the sacrifices were combined with the ground hail.

古文：以未有北郊，并地祗合祭之，诏： 琅邪恭王宜称皇考。 贺循曰： 《礼》，子不敢以己爵加于父。 乃止。
现代文：元帝下诏说： 琅邪恭王应当称作皇考。 贺循说： 根据《礼》，儿子不敢把自己的爵位加在父亲身上。 
English: Emperor Yuan issued an edict saying, "King Gongyakong should be called the imperial examination." He Xun said, "According to the "Rituals," a son dare not confer his title on his father.

古文：初，蓬陂坞主陈川自称陈留太守。祖逖之攻樊雅也，川遣其将李头助之。
现代文：于是停止执行。当初，蓬陂坞主陈川自称陈留太守，祖逖攻打樊雅之时，陈川派部将李头助战。
English: Therefore, the execution was stopped. At the beginning, Chen Chuan, the master of Penghu Dockyard, called himself Chen Liu Taishu. When Zhu Xi attacked Hiya, Chen Chuan sent Li Tou to help in the battle.

古文：头力战有功，逖厚遇之。
现代文：李头力战建功，祖逖对他另眼相看。
English: Li Touli made great achievements in the war, and the ancestors looked at him with different eyes.

古文：头每叹曰： 得此人为主，吾死无恨！ 
现代文：李头常常感叹说： 能得到祖逖做自己的主公，我死无遗憾。 
English: Li Tou often sighed and said, "I have no regrets about being able to have Zhu Xi as my master.

古文：川闻而杀之。
现代文：陈川听说，杀了李头。
English: Chen Chuan was heard to have killed Li Tou.

古文：头党冯宠帅其众降逖，川益怒，大掠豫州诸郡，逖遣兵击破之。
现代文：李头的党徒冯宠率领部众投降祖逖，陈川更加恼怒，大肆攻掠豫州诸郡，祖逖派兵打败了他。
English: Li's henchman Feng Zhaotong led the troops to surrender to Zhu Xi. Chen Chuan was even more angry and attacked and plundered the counties of Yuzhou. Zhu Xi sent troops to defeat him.

古文：夏，四月，川以浚仪叛，降石勒。
现代文：夏季，四月，陈川占据浚仪背叛，投降石勒。
English: In the summer, in April, Chenchuan occupied the dredge, betrayed and surrendered to Shile.

古文：周抚之败走也，徐龛部将于药追斩之，及朝廷论功，而刘遐先之；龛怒，以泰山叛，降石勒，自称兗州刺史。
现代文：周抚败逃时，是徐龛的部将于药追上并杀了周抚，等到朝廷论功时，却是刘遐占先。徐龛生气，占据泰山背叛，投降石勒，自称兖州刺史。
English: When Zhou Fuzhou was defeated and fled, it was Xu Gan's division that caught up with and killed Zhou Fuzhou. When the imperial court discussed the merits, it was Liu Gan who took the lead. Xu Gan became angry, occupied Mount Tai, betrayed, surrendered to Shile, and claimed to be the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：汉主曜还，都长安，立妃羊氏为皇后，子熙为皇太子，封子袭为长乐王，阐为太原王，冲为淮南王，敞为齐王，高为鲁王，徽为楚王；诸宗室皆进封郡王。
现代文：汉主刘曜回到长安，定都于此，立后妃羊氏为皇后，儿子刘熙为太子。封儿子刘袭为长乐王，刘阐为太原王，刘冲为淮南王，刘敞为齐王，刘高为鲁王，刘徽为楚王，各宗室子弟都进封郡王。
English: The Han ruler Liu You returned to Chang'an and set up his capital here. He made his empress Dowager Yang the empress and his son Liu Xi the crown prince. His sons Liu Wei as the King of Changle, Liu Yan as the King of Taiyuan, Liu Chong as the King of Huainan, Liu Chang as the King of Qi, Liu Gao as the King of Lu, and Liu Hui as the King of Chu. All the sons of the family were crowned as county kings.

古文：羊氏，即故惠帝后也。
现代文：羊氏就是过去晋惠帝的皇后。
English: Ms. Yang is the empress of the former Emperor Jinhui.

古文：曜尝问之曰： 吾何如司马家儿？ 
现代文：刘曜曾经问她说： 我比起司马家的孩子怎么样？ 
English: Liu You once asked her: How do I compare to the Sima children?

古文：羊氏曰： 陛下开基之圣主，彼亡国之暗夫，何可并言！
现代文：羊氏说： 陛下是开基的圣主，他是亡国的昏君，怎么能相提并论！
English: Mr. Yang said, "Your Majesty is the founder of the foundation, he is the founder of the country, how can we compare!

古文：彼贵为帝王，有一妇、一子及身三耳，曾不能庇。
现代文：他贵为帝王时，只有一个夫人、一个孩子和他自己三个人，竟然都不能庇护。
English: When he was emperor, he only had one wife, one child and himself, and he couldn't even protect all three of them.

古文：妾于尔时，实不欲生，意谓世间男子皆然。
现代文：我在那时实在是不想活了，以为世上的男人都是这样。
English: At that time, I really did not want to live, thinking that all men in the world were like that.

古文：自奉巾栉已来，始知天下自有丈夫耳！ 
现代文：自从做了您的妻子，才知道天下自有大丈夫。 
English: Since I became your wife, I know that everything is fine.

古文：曜甚宠之，颇干预国事。
现代文：刘曜非常宠爱她，羊氏常干预国事。
English: Liu You was very fond of her, and Yang would often interfere in state affairs.

古文：南阳王保自称晋王，改元建康，置百官，以张寔为征西大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：南阳王司马保自称晋王，改年号为建康，设置百官，任张为征西大将军，开府仪同三司。
English: Nanyang King Sima Bao called himself Jin Wang, changed his era name to Jiankang, set up a hundred officials, appointed Zhang as the general of the Western Expedition, and set up a government with three departments.

古文：陈安自称秦州刺史，降于汉，又降于成。
现代文：陈安自称秦州刺史，投降汉，后又投降成汉。
English: Chen An called himself Qinzhou stabbing history, surrendering Han, and then surrendering into Han.

古文：上邽大饥，士众困迫，张春奉保之南安祁山。
现代文：上发生严重饥荒，士民困迫，张春侍奉司马保去南安的祁山。
English: There was a severe famine in the upper reaches of the country and the people were in dire straits. Zhang Chun went to Shaoshan in Nan'an to serve Sima Bao.

古文：寔遣韩璞帅步骑五千救之；陈安退保绵诸，保归上邽。
现代文：张派遣韩璞率领步、骑兵五千救援司马保，陈安退守绵诸，司马保回到上。
English: Zhang dispatched Han Zheng to lead the way, five thousand cavalrymen to rescue Sima Bao, Chen An retreated to Mianzhu, and Sima Bao returned to the top.

古文：未几，保复为安所逼，寔遣其将宋毅救之，安乃退。
现代文：不久，司马保又被陈安进逼，张派部将宋毅救援，陈安才退军。
English: Soon after, Sima Bao was forced back by Chen An, Zhang sent Song Yi to the rescue, and Chen An finally withdrew.

古文：江东大饥，诏百官各上封事。
现代文：江南发生严重饥荒，元帝下诏让百官各自上书奏事。
English: A severe famine occurred in the south of the Yangtze River, and Emperor Yuan issued an edict ordering all officials to report the matter in writing.

古文：益州刺史应詹上疏曰： 元康以来，贱《经》尚道，以玄虚宏放为夷达，以儒术清俭为鄙俗。宜崇奖儒官，以新俗化。 
现代文：益州刺史应詹上疏说： 自元康年间以来，轻视经典，崇尚道学，把玄虚弘放视作平达，把儒术、清俭看作鄙俗，应当尊崇和奖掖儒官，来革新风俗教化。 
English: Yizhou historian Ying Zhan Shang Zuo said: Since the Yuan and Kang dynasties, the classics have been despised, Taoism has been advocated, the occult has been regarded as unworthy, Confucianism and frugality have been regarded as vulgar, and the Confucian officials should be respected and rewarded in order to innovate and enlighten the customs.

古文：祖逖攻陈川于蓬关，石勒遣石虎将兵五万救之，战于浚仪，逖兵败，退屯梁国。
现代文：祖逖在蓬关进攻陈川，石勒派石虎率兵五万救援，两军在浚仪交战，祖逖兵败，退军驻屯梁国。
English: Zu Xi attacked Chenchuan in Pengguan, Shile sent Shiguo to lead 50,000 soldiers to rescue, the two armies fought in Dongyi, Zu Xi was defeated and withdrew to Tuen Liang.

古文：勒又遣桃豹将兵至蓬关，逖退屯淮南。
现代文：石勒又派桃豹率兵到达蓬关，祖逖退守淮南。
English: Shi Le also sent Taobao and his soldiers to Pengguan, while Zu Xi retreated to Huainan.

古文：虎徙川部众五千户于襄国，留豹守川故城。
现代文：石虎将陈川部众五千户迁徙到襄国，留下石豹守卫陈川故城。
English: The stone tiger migrated the five thousand households of Chenchuan to Xiangguo, leaving the stone leopard to guard Chenchuan Old Town.

古文：石勒遣石虎击鲜卑日六延于朔方，大破之，斩首二万级，俘虏三万馀人。
现代文：石勒派遣石虎在朔方重创鲜卑族日六延，斩首二万，俘虏三万多人。孔苌攻取了幽州诸郡。
English: Shi Le dispatched the Stone Tiger in the direction of Shuo to inflict heavy losses on the Xianbei people in Zhiliyan, beheading 20,000 and capturing more than 30,000. Kong Yao conquered the counties of Yuzhou.

古文：孔苌攻幽州诸郡，悉取之。段匹磾士众饥散，欲移保上谷，代王郁律勒兵将击之，匹磾弃妻子奔乐陵，依邵续。
现代文：段匹的士众因饥饿离散，段匹想移军保守上谷，代王郁律领兵准备攻击他，段匹丢弃妻子儿女逃奔乐陵，依附邵续。
English: Duanpi's soldiers were dispersed due to hunger. Duanpi wanted to move his army to protect Shanggu. On behalf of Wang Yu Lu, the leader of the soldiers prepared to attack him. Duanpi abandoned his wife and children and fled to Le Ling. He followed Shao Zhuang.

古文：曹嶷遣使赂石勒，请以河为境，勒许之。
现代文：曹嶷派使者给石勒送去财物，请求以黄河作为分界，石勒答应了。
English: Cao Pi sent an envoy to Shiller to send him property and requested that the Yellow River be used as the boundary, and Shiller agreed.

古文：梁州刺史周访击杜曾，大破之。
现代文：梁州刺史周访进攻杜曾，大胜。
English: Liangzhou stabbed Zhou Qi, attacked Du Zeng, and won a great victory.

古文：马俊等执曾以降，访斩之，并获荆州刺史第五猗，送于武昌。
现代文：马隽等人抓住杜曾投降，周访斩杀杜曾。并抓获荆州刺史第五猗，送往武昌。
English: Ma Yu and others captured Du Zeng, who surrendered, and Zhou Yicheng killed Du Zeng. They also captured the fifth eunuch of Jingzhou Jishi and sent him to Wuchang.

古文：访以猗本中朝所署，加有时望，白王敦不宜杀，敦不听而斩之。
现代文：周访因为第五猗本是朝廷任命，而且有一定声望，告诉王敦最好不要杀他，王敦不听，杀了第五猗。
English: Zhou Zhi told Wang Dun that it was best not to kill him, because the Fifth Empress was appointed by the imperial court and had a certain reputation. Wang Dun did not listen and killed the Fifth Empress.

古文：初，敦患杜曾难制，谓访曰： 若擒曾，当相论为荆州。 
现代文：当初，王敦忧虑杜曾难以控制，对周访说： 如果能擒获杜曾，我将论功让你治理荆州。 
English: At first, Wang Dun was worried that Du Zeng was difficult to control, and said to Zhou Qian: If I can capture Du Zeng, I will let you govern Jingzhou.

古文：及曾死而敦不用。
现代文：等到杜曾死后，王敦不用周访。
English: After Du Zeng's death, Wang Dun did not have to make weekly visits.

古文：王廙在荆州，多杀陶侃将佐；以皇甫方回为侃所敬，责其不诣己，收斩之。
现代文：王在荆州，杀了许多陶侃的将佐，因为皇甫方回是陶侃所敬重的人，王责怪他不拜诣自己，把他拘捕杀害。
English: In Jingzhou, the king killed many of Tao Kan's generals. Because Emperor Fang Hui was a respected person by Tao Kan, the king accused him of not obeying him and arrested and killed him.

古文：士民怨怒，上下不安。
现代文：士人民众因此怨怒，上下关系紧张。
English: As a result, the public is angry and relations between the upper and lower ranks are strained.

古文：帝闻之，征廙为散骑常侍，以周访代为荆州刺史。
现代文：元帝听说这件事，征召王任散骑常侍，让周访代替王任荆州刺史。
English: When Emperor Yuan heard about this, he conscripted Wang Ren, a knight errant, and sent Zhou Qian to replace Wang Ren, a statesman from Jingzhou.

古文：王敦忌访威名，意难之。
现代文：王敦嫉妒周访有威名，有意为难。
English: Wang Dun was jealous of Zhou Ziyi's prestige and deliberately put himself in a difficult situation.

古文：从事中郎郭舒说敦曰： 鄙州虽荒弊，乃用武之国，不可以假人，宜自领之，访为梁州足矣。 
现代文：从事中郎郭舒劝王敦说： 本州虽然荒凉凋敝，却是用武之地，不可以让人占有，应当自己管辖。周访治理梁州就够了。 
English: Guo Shu, a middle-ranking official, advised Wang Dun, saying: Although this state is desolate, it is a place of use. People should not be allowed to occupy it, it should be governed by itself. It is enough to visit and govern Liangzhou.

古文：敦从之。
现代文：王敦听从了他的话。
English: Wang Dun obeyed his words.

古文：六月，丙子，诏加访安南将军，馀如故。
现代文：六月，丙子，元帝下诏授予周访安南将军，其余职务不变。
English: In June, Emperor Xizong of the Yuan Dynasty issued an edict awarding Zhou Ying to General Annan. The rest of his duties remained unchanged.

古文：访大怒，敦手书譬解，并遗玉环、玉碗以申厚意。
现代文：周访大为恼怒。王敦亲自写信劝解，并赠玉环、玉碗表示看重之意。
English: Wang Dun personally wrote a letter of persuasion, and presented a jade ring and a jade bowl to show his appreciation.

古文：访抵之于地，曰： 吾岂贾竖，可以宝悦邪！ 
现代文：周访扔在地上，说： 我难道是商人和小孩吗？怎么可以用宝物来让我高兴呢！ 
English: Zhou Wei threw it on the ground and said, "Am I a businessman and a child? How can I use a treasure to make me happy?"

古文：访在襄阳，务农训兵，阴有图敦之志，守宰有缺辄补，然后言上；敦患之，而不能制。
现代文：周访在襄阳发展农业、训练士卒，暗藏谋算王敦的心志。官吏有缺员就自行补录，然后才上报。王敦对他深以为患但又不能控制他。
English: Zhou Zhi developed agriculture and trained cadres in Yangyang, secretly plotting Wang Dun's ambition. If there was a shortage of officials, he would make up for it himself, and then report it. Wang Dun was deeply concerned about him, but he could not control him.

古文：魏该为胡寇所逼，自宜阳帅众南迁新野，助周访讨杜曾有功，拜顺阳太守。
现代文：魏该被胡族敌寇所逼迫，从宜阳率领部众向南迁徙到新野，因帮助周访讨伐杜曾有功，被拜为顺阳太守。
English: Wei Gui was persecuted by Hu enemies and led his people from Yiyang to migrate south to Nianye. He was worshipped as the Shunyang Emperor because he helped Zhou Qi to fight the Du.

古文：赵固死，郭诵留屯阳翟，石生屡攻之，不能克。
现代文：赵固死，郭诵屯军阳翟，石生多次进攻，不能取胜。
English: Zhao Gu died, Guo Chetun army impotent, Shisheng attacked many times, unable to win.

古文：汉主曜立宗庙、社稷、南北郊于长安，诏曰： 吾之先，兴于北方。光文立汉宗庙以从民望。
现代文：汉主刘曜在长安建立宗庙、社稷和南郊、北郊，下诏说： 我的祖先从北方开始兴盛，光文建立汉国宗庙是为了顺从民众愿望。
English: Liu You, the Han ruler, built ancestral temples, shrines and temples in the southern and northern suburbs of Chang'an. He said in his edict: My ancestors began to prosper in the north. Guangwen built the Han ancestral temple in order to comply with the wishes of the people.

古文：今宜改国号，以单于为祖。
现代文：现在应当改国号，奉单于为祖。
English: Now it is time to change the country's name and honor the founder.

古文：亟议以闻！ 
现代文：尽快论议上报！ 
English: Discuss and report as soon as possible!

古文：群臣奏： 光文始封卢奴伯，陛下又王中山；中山，赵分也，请改国号为赵。 
现代文：群臣上奏说： 光文最早受封卢奴伯，陛下又曾在中山称王。中山本是赵国领土，请求改国号为赵。 
English: A group of courtiers reported: Guangwen was the first to receive the title of Lunubo, and His Majesty was also crowned king in Zhongshan. Zhongshan was originally the territory of Zhao, and requested to change the country name to Zhao.

古文：从之。以冒顿配天，光文配上帝。
现代文：刘曜听从，将冒顿配祀上天，光文配祀上天。
English: Liu Yeo obeyed, and the sacrilegious Tong was enshrined in heaven, and Guangwen was enshrined in heaven.

古文：徐龛寇掠济、岱，破东莞。
现代文：徐龛寇掠济水、泰山之间，攻破东莞。
English: Xu Junko raided between Jishui and Mount Tai, and broke through Dongguan.

古文：帝问将帅可以讨龛者于王导，导以为太子左卫率太山羊鉴，龛之州里冠族，必能制之。
现代文：元帝向王导询问将帅中有谁能够征讨徐龛，王导认为太子左卫率泰山人羊鉴，是徐龛州里的显贵豪族，必能制服徐龛。
English: The Yuan Emperor asked Wang Du who among the generals would be able to subdue Xu Xi, and Wang Du believed that Prince Zuo Wei, the leader of the Tai Shan people, was a prominent and powerful family in Xu Xi, and would surely be able to subdue Xu Xi.

古文：鉴深辞，才非将帅，郗鉴亦表鉴非才，不可使；导不从。
现代文：羊鉴恳切地推辞，认为自己不是将帅之才；郗鉴也上表认为羊鉴不是合适的人选，不能委派，王导不听。
English: Yang Jian earnestly refused, believing that he was not a good general; Zou Jian also believed that Yang Jian was not a suitable candidate, and could not be appointed. Wang Du did not listen.

古文：秋，八月，以羊鉴为征虏将军、征讨都督，督徐州刺史蔡豹、临淮太守刘遐、鲜卑段文鸯等讨之。
现代文：秋季，八月，任羊鉴为征虏将军、征讨都督，总领徐州刺史蔡豹、临淮太守刘遐、鲜卑部段文鸯等讨伐徐龛。
English: In the autumn, in August, Ren Yangjian was the leader of recruiting generals, recruiting governors, and the general leader of Xuzhou Zhishi Cai Bao, Linhuai Taishu Liu Wei, and Xianbei Department Duan Wen Wei, etc. to fight against Xu Wei.

古文：冬，石勒左、右长史张敬、张宾、左、右司马张屈六、程遐等，劝勒称尊号，勒不许。
现代文：冬季，石勒的左、右长史张敬、张宾，左、右司马张屈六、程遐等劝石勒称皇帝尊号，石勒不同意。
English: In winter, Shi Le's left and right prefects Zhang Jing and Zhang Bin, left and right sub-commanders Zhang Quliu and Cheng Yao, etc. advised Shi Le to call the emperor by his honorific title, but Shi Le did not agree.

古文：十一月，将佐等复请勒称大将军、大单于、领冀州牧、赵王，依汉昭烈在蜀、魏武在鄴故事，以河内等二十四郡为赵国，太守皆为内史，准《禹贡》，复冀州之境，以大单于镇抚百蛮，罢并、朔、司三州，通置部司以监之；勒许之。
现代文：十一月，将佐们又请求石勒称大将军、大单于、领冀州牧、赵王，依照蜀汉昭烈帝刘备在蜀、魏武帝曹操在邺的旧例，以河内等二十四郡为赵国，太守都改为内史，根据《尚书·禹贡》，恢复冀州的行政区划，以大单于的身份镇抚众蛮族；撤销并州、朔州、司州的建置，合置部司监管，石勒同意了。
English: In November, the commander-in-chief also asked Shi Le to call himself the great general, the great ruler of Jizhou, the ruler of Jizhou, and the king of Zhao. In accordance with the old example of Shu Han Emperor Liu Bei in Shu and Wei Emperor Cao Cao in Handan, the twenty-four counties including Hanoi were designated as Zhao, and the governorates were changed to Inner History. According to "Shang Shu Yu Gong," the administrative division of Jizhou was restored, and the barbarians were pacified with the status of the great ruler of Jizhou; the establishment of the unified state, Shu and Jizhou was revoked, and the supervision of

古文：戊寅，即赵王位，大赦，依春秋时列国称元年。
现代文：戊寅，石勒即后赵王位，大赦天下，依照春秋时列国旧例称元年。
English: Wu Yin, Shi Le immediately after the Zhao throne, amnesty to the world, in accordance with the Spring and Autumn Period, the old example of the countries is called the first year.

古文：初，勒以世乱，律令烦多，命法曹令史贯志，采集其要，作《辛亥制》五千文；施行十馀年，乃用律令。
现代文：当初，石勒因为世事紊乱，律令烦多，命法曹令史贯志采撷纲要，作《辛亥制》五千字，施行十多年，才用律令。
English: At first, because of the turmoil in the world, Shi Le was very bored with the ritsuryo system, so he ordered a legal scholar to compile a 5,000-word outline of the history of the ritsuryo system, which took more than ten years to implement.

古文：以理曹参军上党续咸为律学祭酒；咸用法详平，国人称之。
现代文：任理曹参军上党人续咸为律学祭酒，续咸运用法律细致、公平，受到国人的称赞。
English: Ren Li Cao joined the army, and the party members continued to drink wine to celebrate the study of law, and continued to apply the law in a meticulous and fair manner, which was praised by the Chinese people.

古文：以中垒将军支雄、游击将军王阳领门臣祭酒，专主胡人辞讼，重禁胡人，不得陵侮衣冠华族，号胡为国人。
现代文：任用中垒将军支雄、游击将军王阳兼门臣祭酒，专管胡人的诉讼，严厉禁止胡人，不许他们欺陵污辱具有较高文化的汉人，把胡人称作国人。
English: He appointed Zhongbei General Zhi Xiong and Guerrilla General Wang Yang, who was also a vassal, to be in charge of the Hu people's lawsuits, strictly prohibited the Hu people, forbade them from bullying and insulting the Han people with higher culture, and called the Hu people "nationals."

古文：遣使循行州郡，劝课农桑。
现代文：派遣使者巡行州郡，鼓励、督促农业生产。
English: Sending envoys to tour the prefectures and counties to encourage and urge agricultural production.

古文：朝会始用天子礼乐、衣冠、仪物，从容可观矣。
现代文：朝会时开始用天子的礼乐，衣冠、仪物都充足可观。
English: At the morning meeting, they began to use the music of the heavenly messenger, and the robes, crowns, and ceremonial objects were all sufficiently impressive.

古文：加张宾大执法，专总朝政；以石虎为单于元辅、都督禁卫诸军事，寻加骠骑将军、侍中、开府，赐爵中山公；自馀群臣，授位进爵各有差。
现代文：升张宾为大执法，专门总理朝政，任石虎为单于元辅、都督禁卫各种军务，不久又担任骠骑将军、侍中、开府，赐爵为中山公。其余群臣，授官进爵各有等次。
English: Zhang Bin was promoted to major law enforcement, specifically the prime minister of the dynasty, and Shi Hu was appointed to the post of deputy prime minister, the governor of the capital to guard various military affairs, and soon he served as the cavalry general, the attendant, and the head of the government, and was awarded the title of Zhongshan. The rest of the ministers were awarded the rank of knight.

古文：张宾任遇优显，群臣莫及；而廉虚敬慎，开怀下士，屏绝阿私，以身帅物，入则尽规，出则归美。
现代文：张宾得到的职位高、待遇优厚，群臣没有可比拟的；但他本人却谦虚、恭敬、小心，真诚地折节下士，杜绝私情，以身作则，入朝时直言规谏，出外却将美誉归功于主上，石勒非常看重他。
English: Zhang Bin received a high position and excellent treatment, and there is no comparable minister; but he himself is modest, respectful, careful, sincerely compromises corporals, eliminates personal feelings, leads by example, and is forthright when entering the court, but owes his reputation to the Lord when going abroad. Shi Le is very important to him.

古文：勒甚重之，每朝，常为之正容貌，简辞令，呼曰右侯而不敢名。
现代文：每次上朝，经常因为张宾的缘故端正容貌，修饰辞令，以右侯称呼张宾，不叫他的名字。
English: Every time he went to court, he would often straighten up his appearance for the sake of Zhang Bin, embellish his words, and call Zhang Bin by his right name instead of his first name.

古文：十二月，乙亥，大赦。
现代文：十二月，乙亥，东晋大赦天下。
English: In December, the Eastern Jin Dynasty was overthrown.

古文：平州刺史崔毖，自以中州人望，镇辽东，而士民多归慕容廆，心不平。
现代文：平州刺史崔毖自以为在中州享有声望，现在镇守辽东，而士民却大多归附慕容，心中不服。
English: Cui Wei, the governor of Pingzhou, thought that he enjoyed a reputation in Zhongzhou. Now he is the governor of Liaodong, but most of the people are attached to Murong, and they are not satisfied.

古文：数遣使招之，皆不至，意廆拘留之，乃阴说高句丽、段氏、宇文氏，使共攻之，约灭廆，分其地。
现代文：多次派遣使者招纳士民，但他们全都不来。崔毖怀疑是慕容羁留他们，于是暗地游说高句丽、段氏和宇文氏，让他们共同攻伐慕容，约定翦灭慕容后，共同瓜分他的辖地。
English: He repeatedly sent emissaries to recruit soldiers and civilians, but none of them came. Choe Son suspected that Murong had detained them, so he secretly lobbied Goguryeo, the Duan clan, and the Uwen clan to jointly attack Murong, and agreed to divide his territory after eliminating him.

古文：毖所亲勃海高瞻力谏，毖不从。
现代文：崔毖的亲信、勃海人高瞻极力劝谏，崔毖不听。
English: Choi Min's close friend, Bo Hai's Gao Zhan, tried to persuade Choi Min, but Choi Min would not listen.

古文：三国合兵伐廆。诸将请击之，廆曰： 彼为崔毖所诱，欲邀一切之利。
现代文：高句丽、段氏、宇文氏三国合兵攻伐慕容，慕容部下众将请战，慕容说： 他们被崔毖诱惑，想乘机谋利。
English: Goguryeo, the Duan clan, and the Uwen clan of the three countries joined forces to attack Murong. Murong's subordinates would invite them to fight. Murong said, "They were tempted by Cui Gan and wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to make a profit."

古文：军势初合，其锋甚锐，不可与战，当固守以挫之。
现代文：军势刚刚会合，锋头正锐，现在不能和他们交战，应当固守以挫其锐气。
English: The army has just gathered, the front is very sharp, now we can't fight with them, we should hold fast to frustrate their sharpness.

古文：彼乌合而来，既无统壹，莫相归服，久必携贰，一则疑吾与毖诈而覆之，二则三国自相猜忌。
现代文：他们乌合前来，既没有统一的号令，互相之间又不服气，时间久了必然产生二心，一来怀疑我和崔毖共使欺诈，想消灭他们；二来三国之间也互相猜忌。
English: They came in a swarm, without a unified call, and were not convinced of each other. After a long time, two hearts would inevitably arise. On the one hand, they suspected that I and Cui Gan had committed fraud and wanted to destroy them; on the other hand, there was mutual suspicion between the two countries.

古文：待其人情离贰，然后击之，破之必矣。 
现代文：等到他们人心离散，然后进攻，一定能打败他们。 
English: Wait until their hearts are scattered, and then attack, you will be able to defeat them.

古文：三国进攻棘城，廆闭门自守，遣使独以牛酒犒宇文氏。
现代文：三国军队进攻棘城，慕容闭门固守，派遣使者单独用牛和酒犒劳宇文氏。
English: The armies of the three countries attacked Thorn Town, Murong closed the door and held fast, sending an emissary to fetch the Lau Yuen clan alone with cattle and wine.

古文：二国疑宇文氏与廆有谋，各引兵归。
现代文：高句丽和段氏怀疑宇文氏与慕容勾结，各自领军退还。
English: Goguryeo and Duan suspected that Uwen and Murong were in cahoots and withdrew their respective armies.

古文：宇文大人悉独官曰： 二国虽归，吾当独取之。 
现代文：宇文氏首领悉独官说： 高句丽和段氏虽然回去，我要独自攻取慕容。 
English: The leader of the Uwen clan said: Although Goguryeo and the Duan clan go back, I want to capture Murong by myself.

古文：宇文氏士卒数十万，连营四十里。
现代文：宇文氏士卒有数十万，营寨相连有四十里。
English: There are hundreds of thousands of Uwen's followers, and the encampments are connected by forty miles.

古文：廆使召其子翰于徒河。
现代文：慕容派人从徒河征召儿子慕容翰。
English: Murong sent someone to recruit his son, Murong Han, from Tuhe.

古文：翰遣使白廆曰： 悉独官誉国为寇，彼众我寡，易以计破，难以力胜。
现代文：慕容翰派遣使者告诉慕容说： 悉独官倾国来犯，敌众我寡，易于智取，难以力敌。
English: Muronghan sent an emissary to tell Murong: You are the only official who has come to the country to commit crimes. You have few enemies. It is easy to outwit your enemies, but difficult to defeat them.

古文：今城中之众，足以御寇，翰请为奇兵于外，伺其间而击之，内外俱奋，使彼震骇不知所备，破之必矣。
现代文：现在城中的军队，已足以防御，我请求作为外面的奇兵，伺机攻击，内外同时发兵，使他们惊骇而不知道如何防备，这样一定能打败他们。
English: Now that the troops in the city are strong enough to defend themselves, I ask you to act as the surprise troops outside, wait for the right time to attack, and send troops both inside and outside at the same time, so that they are shocked and do not know how to defend themselves. This will surely defeat them.

古文：今并兵为一，彼得专意攻城，无复它虞，非策之得者也。
现代文：如果现在把兵力集中在一处，他们便能专心攻城，没有其他顾虑，这不是合适的对策。
English: If they now concentrate their forces in one place, they will be able to concentrate on attacking the city and have no other concerns, which is not an appropriate response.

古文：且示众以怯，恐士气不战先沮矣。 
现代文：而且这是向民众表示内心的怯惧，恐怕还没作战士气就要先丧失了。 
English: Moreover, this is an expression of inner fear to the people, and I'm afraid that the battle morale will be lost first.

古文：廆犹疑之。
现代文：慕容犹疑不决。
English: Murong hesitated.

古文：辽东韩寿言于廆曰： 悉独官有凭陵之志，将骄卒惰，军不坚密，若奇兵卒起，掎其无备，必破之策也。 
现代文：辽东人韩寿对慕容说： 悉独官有侵凌进逼的志向，将领骄纵，士卒惫惰，军队组织松散，如果使用奇兵突然发难，在他们没有防备时实施攻击，这是必定取胜的策略。 
English: Han Shou, a resident of Liaodong, said to Murong: "All the officials have the ambition to invade and invade, the generals are arrogant, the soldiers are tired, and the army is loosely organized. If the use of a miracle soldier suddenly causes trouble and attacks when they are unprepared, this is a strategy that is sure to win.

古文：廆乃听翰留徒河。
现代文：慕容这才同意慕容翰留在徒河。
English: It was only then that Murong agreed to let Muronghan stay in Tuhe.

古文：悉独官闻之，曰： 翰素名骁果，今不入城，或能为患，当先取之，城不足忧。 
现代文：悉独官听说慕容翰留在徒河，说： 慕容翰素来以骁勇果敢闻名，现在不进城，或许会成为祸患，应当先攻取他，城里不足为患。 
English: Hearing that Muronghan had stayed in Tuhe, the sole official said: Muronghan has always been famous for his bravery and courage. If he does not enter the city now, he may become a scourge. He should be captured first. The city is not enough.

古文：乃分遣数千骑袭翰。
现代文：于是分出数千骑兵攻击慕容翰。
English: As a result, thousands of cavalry were dispatched to attack Muronghan.

古文：翰知之，诈为段氏使者，逆于道曰： 慕容翰久为吾患，闻当击之，吾已严兵相待，宜速进也！ 
现代文：慕容翰得知此事，派人假扮成段氏的使者，在路上迎住悉独官的骑兵，对他们说： 慕容翰长久以来就是我心头之患，听说你们将要进攻他，我们已严阵以待，你们可以快速前进。 
English: When Muronghan learned of this, he sent someone pretending to be Duan's messenger to meet the cavalry on the road and said to them: "I've been worried about Muronghan for a long time. I've heard that you're going to attack him. We've been waiting in line. You can advance quickly."

古文：使者既去，翰即出城，设伏以待之。
现代文：使者离开以后，慕容翰立即出城，设下埋伏等待宇文氏的军队。
English: After the messenger left, Muronghan immediately left the city and set an ambush for the army of the Uwen clan.

古文：宇文氏之骑见使者，大喜驰行，不复设备，进入伏中。
现代文：宇文氏的骑兵见到使者，大为高兴，骑马驰行，不再防备，进入了伏击圈中。
English: Seeing the messenger, the cavalrymen of the Uwen clan were overjoyed. They rode on horseback, no longer guarded, and entered the ambush circle.

古文：翰奋击，尽获之，乘胜径进，遣间使语廆出兵大战。
现代文：慕容翰突然攻击，全部俘获了他们。又乘胜进军，同时派遣密使告诉慕容，让他出兵大战。
English: Muronghan suddenly attacked and captured them all. He took advantage of the victory to march into the army, and at the same time sent a secret envoy to tell Murong to go to war.

古文：廆使其子皝与长史裴嶷将精锐为前锋，自将大兵继之。
现代文：慕容令其子慕容和长史裴嶷率领精锐士卒为前锋，自己统领大军随后。
English: Murong ordered his sons Murong and Changshi Peiqi to lead the elite soldiers to the front, and then he himself led the army.

古文：悉独官初不设备，闻廆至，惊，悉众出战。
现代文：悉独官原先没有设防，听说慕容来了，大惊，倾巢出战。
English: He was surprised to hear that Murong was coming, as he had not set up any defences, and rushed out to fight.

古文：前锋始交，翰将千骑从旁直入其营，纵火焚之。
现代文：两军前锋刚刚交战，慕容翰率领千余骑兵从旁侧直冲入悉独官军营，纵火焚烧。
English: The forwards of the two armies had just engaged in battle, and Muronghan, leading more than a thousand cavalrymen, rushed from the side straight into the military camp of the South Korean dictator and set it on fire.

古文：众皆惶扰，不知所为。遂大败，悉独官仅为身免。
现代文：悉独官的士卒都惶恐不安，不知所措，结果大败，悉独官只身逃脱。
English: The officers and men of the Siddiquan were terrified and at a loss. As a result, they suffered a crushing defeat, and the Siddiquan escaped alone.

古文：廆尽俘其众，获皇帝玉玺三纽。
现代文：慕容尽数俘获他的士众，缴获到皇帝玉玺三纽。
English: Murong did his best to capture his warriors and captured Emperor Yulong Sanyu.

古文：崔毖闻之，惧，使其兄子焘诣棘城伪贺。
现代文：崔毖听说此事，心中恐惧，让他兄长之子崔焘到棘城假装祝贺。
English: When Cui Gan heard about this, he was so afraid that he sent his brother's son Cui Gan to Thorn Town to pretend to congratulate him.

古文：会三国使者亦至，请和，曰： 非我本意，崔平州教我耳。 
现代文：正巧高句丽、宇文氏、段氏三国使者也来请和，都说： 我们本来并不想与你为敌，是崔毖让我们这么做的。 
English: It just so happened that emissaries from three countries, including Goguryeo, the Uwen clan and the Duan clan, came to invite him, and they all said, "We didn't want to be your enemy, but Cui Gan made us do it."

古文：廆以示焘，临之以兵，焘惧，首服。
现代文：慕容让崔焘见三国使者，执刀相对，崔焘害怕，低头臣服。
English: Murong let Cui Gan see the envoys of the three countries, holding a sword opposite, Cui Gan was afraid, bowed down and submitted.

古文：廆乃遣焘归谓毖曰： 降者上策，走者下策也。 引兵随之。
现代文：慕容便让崔焘回去对崔毖说： 投降是上策，逃跑是下策， 并带兵随后而行。
English: Murong then told Choe Son to go back and said to Choe Son: "Surrender is the best policy, running away is the worst policy," and led the soldiers to follow.

古文：毖与数十骑弃家奔高句丽，其众悉降于廆。
现代文：崔毖带着数十骑弃家逃奔高句丽，部众全部投降慕容。
English: Cui Gan fled to Goguryeo with dozens of abandoned horses, and all his followers surrendered to Murong.

古文：廆以其子仁为征虏将军，镇辽东，官府、市里，案堵如故。
现代文：慕容任儿子慕容仁为征虏将军，镇守辽东，官府、市里，一仍其旧。
English: Murongren's son, Murongren, was a conscript general, town guard of Liaodong, government office, and city, all of which are still the same.

古文：高句丽将如奴子据于河城，廆遣将军张统掩击，擒之，俘其众千馀家；以崔焘、高瞻、韩恒、石琮归于棘城，待以客礼。
现代文：高句丽将领如奴子占据于河城，慕容派将军张统突然袭击，擒获如奴子，俘虏部众一千多家。因为崔焘、高瞻、韩恒、石琮归附棘城，慕容以客人的礼节对待他们。
English: The Goguryeo generals occupied Hecheng like slaves, and the Murong faction's general Zhang Tong suddenly attacked and captured more than a thousand prisoners. Because Cui Xi, Gaozhan, Han Heng, and Shijie were attached to Thorn City, Murong treated them with the etiquette of guests.

古文：恒，安平人；琮，鉴之孙也。
现代文：韩恒是安平人，石琮是石鉴的孙子。
English: Han Heng is from Anping, and Shijie is the grandson of Shijian.

古文：廆以高瞻为将军，瞻称疾不就，廆数临候之，抚其心曰： 君之疾在此，不在它也。
现代文：慕容任高瞻为将军，高瞻以有病为由不干。慕容多次亲临问侯，抚摸他的心口说： 您的病在这儿，不在别处。
English: Murong appointed Gaozhan as a general, but Gaozhan resigned on the grounds that he was ill. Murong personally visited Gaozhan many times, stroked his heart and said: Your illness is here, not somewhere else.

古文：今晋室丧乱，孤欲与诸君共清世难，翼戴帝室。
现代文：现在晋王室丧乱，孤想和诸君共同廓清世上的灾难，辅翼、拥戴帝室。
English: Now that the Jin royal family is in disarray, I desperately want to work with you all to clear up the world's disasters, and support and embrace the imperial family.

古文：君中州望族，宜同斯愿，奈何以华、夷之异，介然疏之哉！
现代文：您是中州的名门望族，应当与我同有此愿，为何因为华夏、夷族的区别，便耿耿于怀，故意疏远呢！
English: You are a famous and respected family in Chuzhou, and you should share this wish with me. Why are you so bitter and deliberately alienated because of the difference between Huaxia and the barbarians?

古文：夫立功立事，惟问志略何如耳，华、夷何足问乎！ 
现代文：至于立功成事，只问志向、谋略怎样便可以了，何须再问是华夏还是夷族呢！ 
English: As for making achievements, it is enough to ask about one's aspiration and strategy. There is no need to ask whether one is a Chinese or a barbarian!

古文：瞻犹不起，廆颇不平。
现代文：高瞻还是不肯出来做官，慕容心中颇为忿忿不平。
English: Gaozhan still refused to become an official, and Murong was quite angry.

古文：龙骧主簿宋该，与瞻有隙，劝廆除之，廆不从。
现代文：龙骧主簿宋该与高瞻有矛盾，劝慕容除去高瞻，慕容没有听从。
English: Song Gui, the main book of Longjing, had a conflict with Gaozhun. He advised Murong to remove Gaozhun, but Murong did not listen.

古文：瞻以忧卒。
现代文：高瞻因忧虑而死。
English: Gaozhan died of worry.

古文：初，鞠羡既死，苟晞复以羡子彭为东莱太守。
现代文：当初，鞠羡已死，苟又让鞠羡的儿子鞠彭任东莱太守。
English: At first, Ju Qian was dead, and Gou appointed Ju Qian's son, Ju Peng, as the governor of Donglai.

古文：会曹嶷徇青州，与彭相攻；嶷兵虽强，郡人皆为彭死战，嶷不能克。
现代文：适逢曹嶷到青州巡行，和鞠彭相互攻击。曹嶷的军队虽强，但郡民都为鞠彭拼命死战，曹嶷不能取胜。
English: At the right time, Cao Pi marched to Qingzhou, and he and Ju Peng attacked each other. Although Cao Pi's army was strong, the people of the county fought desperately for Ju Peng, and Cao Pi could not win.

古文：久之，彭叹曰： 今天下大乱，强者为雄。
现代文：相持日久，鞠彭叹息说： 现在天下大乱，强大者是英雄。
English: After holding each other for a long time, Mu Peng sighed and said: Now the world is in turmoil, and the powerful are heroes.

古文：曹亦乡里，为天所相，苟可依凭，即为民主，何必与之力争，使百姓肝脑涂地！
现代文：曹嶷也是同乡之人，有天相助。只要可以依靠，便可为民众主宰，何必和他力争，使老百姓肝脑涂地呢！
English: Cao Pi is also a fellow villager, with heavenly help. As long as you can rely on him, you can rule the people. Why should you fight with him and make the people's hearts sink?

古文：吾去此，则祸自息矣。 
现代文：我离开这里，战祸就会自然停止。 
English: When I leave here, the scourge of war will naturally stop.

古文：郡人以为不可，争献拒嶷之策，彭一无所用，与乡里千馀家浮海归崔毖。
现代文：郡里人民都认为这样不行，争相进献抵抗曹嶷的计谋，鞠彭一个不用，随同乡里数千家民众渡海归附崔毖。
English: The people of the county all thought that this was not possible, and they scrambled to offer resistance to Cao Pi's stratagem. They did not need a single jiaopeng, and thousands of people from the same township went across the sea to join Cui Pi.

古文：北海郑林客于东莱，彭、嶷之相攻，林情无彼此。
现代文：北海人郑林旅居东莱，对于鞠彭、曹嶷之间的争斗，无所偏向。
English: Zheng Lin, a man from the North Sea who lives in Donglai, has no preference for the battle between Ju Peng and Cao Yao.

古文：嶷贤之，不敢侵掠，彭与之俱去。
现代文：曹嶷认为他有贤德、不敢侵犯、劫掠。鞠彭和他一同离开。
English: Cao Pi thought that he was virtuous and did not dare to invade or plunder. Ji Peng left with him.

古文：比至辽东，毖已败，乃归慕容廆。
现代文：到了辽东，崔毖已经失败，鞠彭等于是归附慕容。
English: By the time they reached Liaodong, Cui Gan had already failed, and Ji Peng was about to be annexed by Murong.

古文：廆以彭参龙骧军事。
现代文：慕容让鞠彭参与龙骧军事。
English: Murong let Ji Peng participate in the Longjing military.

古文：遗郑林车牛粟帛，皆不受，躬耕于野。
现代文：赠送郑林车乘、服牛、粟谷、布帛，郑林都不接受，亲自在田野里耕种。
English: Zheng Lin did not accept gifts of carts, clothes, cattle, millet, and cloth, but cultivated the fields himself.

古文：宋该劝廆献捷江东，廆使该为表，裴嶷奉之，并所得三玺诣建康献之。
现代文：宋该劝慕容向江南晋王室献俘、告捷。慕容派宋该撰写上表，让裴嶷奉持，连同得到的三个玉玺，一起送到建康进献。
English: Song should have persuaded Murong to offer captives to the Jin royal family in the south of the Yangtze River and achieve victory. Murong sent Song to write the above table, let Pei Jun hold it, and send it to Jiankang together with the three jade urns he received.

古文：高句丽数寇辽东，廆遣慕容翰、慕容仕伐之；高句丽王乙弗利逆来求盟，翰、仁乃还。
现代文：高句丽多次侵扰辽东，慕容让慕容翰、慕容仁领军攻伐。高句丽国王乙弗利迎上请求缔结盟约，慕容翰、慕容仁这才回师。
English: Goguryeo repeatedly invaded eastern Liaodong, and Murong ordered Muronghan and Murongren to lead the attack. The king of Goguryeo, Yifu Li, came to ask for an alliance, and only then did Muronghan and Murongren return.

古文：是岁，蒲洪降赵，赵主曜以洪为率义侯。
现代文：这年，蒲洪投降前赵，前赵主刘曜封蒲洪为率义侯。
English: In this year, Pu Hong surrendered to the former Zhao, and the former Zhao lord Liu Youfeng took Pu Hong as his vassal.

古文：屠各路松多起兵于新平、扶风以附晋王保，保使其将杨曼、王连据陈仓，张顗、周庸据阴密，路松多据草壁，秦陇氐、羌多应之。
现代文：屠各部落的路松多起兵于新平、扶风，归附晋王司马保。司马保派部将杨曼、王连占据陈仓，张、周庸占据阴密，路松多占据草壁，秦州、陇州的氐人和羌人大多响应他们。
English: In Xinping and Fufeng, the majority of the Lushong of all the Tu tribes raised an army and attached themselves to the Jin king Sima Bao. Sima Bao sent Yangman and Wang Lian to occupy Chencang, Zhang and Zhou Yong to occupy Yinmi, Lushong mostly occupied Caowei, and most of the Yao and Yao people in Qinzhou and Zhangzhou responded to them.

古文：赵主曜遣诸将攻之，不克；曜自将击之。
现代文：前赵主刘曜派遣多员将领攻伐，不能取胜，刘曜准备自己亲征。
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu You dispatched a number of generals to attack, unable to win, Liu You prepared to march himself.

古文：中宗元皇帝中太兴三年
现代文：太兴三年
English: Three years of Taixing

古文：春，正月，曜攻陈仓，王连战死，杨曼奔南氐。
现代文：春季，正月，刘曜进攻陈仓，王连战死，杨曼逃奔南氐。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Liu You attacked Chen Cang, Wang Lian was killed, and Yang Man fled to Nanluo.

古文：曜进拔草壁，路松多奔陇城；又拔阴密。晋王保惧，迁于桑城。
现代文：刘曜进而攻取草壁，路松多逃往陇城。刘曜又攻取阴密，晋王司马保恐惧，迂都于桑城。
English: Liu You went on to capture Caowai, and Lu Songduo fled to Lucheng. Liu You also captured Yinmi, and Jin Wang feared Sima Bao, and bypassed Sancheng.

古文：曜还长安，以刘雅为大司徒。
现代文：刘曜回到长安，任刘雅为大司徒。
English: Liu You returned to Chang'an and appointed Liu Ya as the chief disciple.

古文：张春谋奉晋王保奔凉州，张遣其将阴监将兵迎之，声言翼卫，其实拒之。
现代文：张春筹划侍奉晋王司马保逃奔凉州，张派遣部将阴监带兵来迎，说是护卫，其实是阻拦。
English: Zhang Chun planned to serve the Jin king Sima Bao to escape to Liangzhou, Zhang dispatched the department to welcome the Yin Guan with soldiers, saying that it was an escort, but in fact it was an obstacle.

古文：段末柸攻段匹磾，破之。
现代文：段末进攻段匹，打败了段匹的军队。
English: At the end of the passage, they attacked the Dan horse and defeated the army of the Dan horse.

古文：匹磾谓邵续曰： 吾本夷狄，以慕义破家。
现代文：段匹对邵续说： 我本来是夷族，因为仰慕君臣大义，招致兵败家破。
English: Duanpi said to Shao Zhai: I was originally a barbarian, because I admired the great righteousness of the princes and ministers, which led to the defeat of the soldiers and the destruction of the family.

古文：君不忘久要，请相与共击末柸。 
现代文：您如果不忘我们的旧约，便请和我共同抗击段末。 
English: If you do not forget our Old Testament, then please join me in resisting the end of the paragraph.

古文：续许之。
现代文：邵续答应了。
English: Shao Lian agreed.

古文：遂相与追击末杯，大破之。
现代文：于是和段匹共同追击段末，使段末的军队受到重创。
English: As a result, he and Duanpi jointly chased Duanluo, and the army of Duanluo suffered heavy losses.

古文：匹磾与弟文鸯攻蓟。后赵王勒知续势孤，遣中山公虎将兵围厌次，孙苌攻续别营十一，皆下之。
现代文：段匹和兄弟段文鸯进攻蓟州，后赵王石勒知道邵续势单力薄，派遣中山公石虎率军围攻厌次，又让孔苌进攻邵续，攻下十一座别营。
English: Duan Bi and his brother Duan Wenqi attacked Zhangzhou. Later, Zhao Wangshile, knowing that Shao Zhai's strength was weak, sent Zhongshan Gong Shihu and his army to besiege Weiyi, and let Kong Wei attack Shao Zhai and capture eleven separate battalions.

古文：二月，续自出击虎，虎伏骑断其后，遂执续，使降其城。
现代文：二月，邵续亲自率军出击石虎，石虎埋伏骑兵截断其退路，结果抓住了邵续，并让他向城中军民劝降。
English: In February, Shao Zheli personally led the army to attack the stone tiger, and the stone tiger ambushed the cavalry to cut off its escape route. As a result, Shao Zheli was caught, and he was allowed to persuade the soldiers and civilians in the city to surrender.

古文：续呼兄子竺等谓曰： 吾志欲报国，不幸至此。汝等努力奉匹磾为主，勿有贰心！ 
现代文：邵续呼唤兄长的儿子邵竺等人，对他们说： 我的志向是想报效国家，不幸落到了这步田地，你们努力尊奉段匹为主帅，不要有异心。 
English: Shao continued to call his brother's son Shao Jun and others, saying to them: My ambition is to serve the country, unfortunately, I have fallen into this field. You should strive to respect the cadres as the head coach, and do not have any other intentions.

古文：匹磾自蓟还，未至厌次，闻续已没，众惧而散，复为虎所遮。文鸯以亲兵数百力战，始得入城，与续子缉、兄子存、竺等婴城固守。
现代文：段匹从蓟州归来，还没到厌次，听说邵续已被俘，部众惊恐逃散，又被石虎乘势攻击，段文鸯依仗数百亲兵的奋力死战，才得以进入厌次城中，和邵续的儿子邵缉、邵续兄长之子邵存、邵竺等人环城固守。
English: When Duan Bi returned from Zhangzhou, he had not yet arrived at Yanzi. He had heard that Shao Lian had been captured, that his subordinates had fled in panic, and that he had been attacked by the stone tigers. Duan Wenyi had to rely on hundreds of his own soldiers to fight to the death before he could enter the city of Yanzi. Together with Shao Lian's son Shao Zhi, Shao Lian's elder brother's son Shao Cun, Shao Lian and others, he held on to the city.

古文：虎送续于襄国，勒以为忠，释而礼之，以为从事中郎。
现代文：石虎把邵续解送到襄国，石勒认为邵续是忠贞之士，释放了他，以礼相待，任为从事中郎。
English: Shihu sent Shao Zheliang to Xiangguo. Shiller thought Shao Zheliang was a loyal person and released him. He treated him with courtesy and appointed him as a middle man.

古文：因下令： 自今克敌，获士人，毋得擅杀，必生致之。 
现代文：继而下令说： 从今以后克敌致胜，俘获士人不许擅自杀害，一定要活着送来。 
English: He then ordered: From now on, to defeat the enemy and achieve victory, captured soldiers must not commit suicide, and must be sent back alive.

古文：吏部郎刘胤闻续被攻，言于帝曰： 北方籓镇尽矣，惟馀邵续而已；如使复为石虎所灭，孤义士之心，阻归本之路。
现代文：吏部郎刘胤听说邵续受到攻击，向元帝上言说： 北方的藩镇已经尽失，只剩下邵续一处了。如果让他再被石虎攻灭，会使贞义士心感孤寂，并阻塞回归祖国的道路。
English: Upon hearing that Shao Zhai was under attack, Liu Yan, an official, petitioned the Yuan Emperor, saying, "The northern towns have all been lost, and there is only one Shao Zhai left. If Shao Zhai were to be destroyed by the stone tigers again, it would make the virtuous people feel lonely and block the road back to the motherland."

古文：愚谓宜发兵救之。 
现代文：我认为应当发兵救助。 
English: I think we should send troops to help.

古文：帝不能从。
现代文：元帝没有听从。
English: Emperor Yuan did not listen.

古文：闻续已没，乃下诏以续位任授其子缉。
现代文：后来听说邵续已受陷被擒，于是下诏把邵续的职位授予其子邵缉。
English: Later, it was heard that Shao Lian had been arrested and detained, so the next edict awarded Shao Lian's position to his son Shao Ri.

古文：赵将尹安、宋始、宋恕、赵慎四军屯洛阳，叛，降后赵。
现代文：前赵将军尹安、宋始、宋恕、赵慎的四支军队驻屯洛阳，叛国投降后赵。
English: The four armies of former Zhao generals Yin'an, Song Shi, Song Shun and Zhao Shen were stationed in Luoyang, and Zhao surrendered after betraying the country.

古文：后赵将石生引兵赴之；安等复叛，降司州刺史李矩。
现代文：后赵将领石生率军前往洛阳，尹安等人又背叛后赵，向晋的司州刺史李矩投降。
English: Later, Zhao's general Shisheng led the army to Luoyang, and Yin'an and others betrayed Zhao and surrendered to Jin's governor Shizhi Liqun.

古文：矩使颍川太守郭默将兵入洛。
现代文：李矩让颍川太守郭默带兵进入洛阳。
English: Li Rui asked Guo Mei, the governor of Luochuan, to lead the troops into Luoyang.

古文：石生虏宋始一军，北渡河。
现代文：石生俘获宋始这支军队，向北渡过黄河。
English: Shi Sheng captured Song Shi's army and crossed the Yellow River to the north.

古文：于是河南之民皆相帅归矩，洛阳遂空。
现代文：于是黄河以南的民众都相互牵引归附李矩，洛阳城为之一空。
English: As a result, the people south of the Yellow River were all attracted to each other, and Luoyang City became empty.

古文：三月，裴嶷至建康，盛称慕容廆之威德，贤俊皆为之用，朝廷始重之。
现代文：三月，裴嶷到达建康，盛赞慕容有威德，贤隽之士都乐意为他效力，朝廷这才开始重视慕容。
English: In March, when Pei Jun arrived in Jiankang, he praised Murong's virtue, and all the wise men were willing to work for him. It was only then that the court began to pay attention to Murong.

古文：帝谓嶷曰： 卿中朝名臣，当留江东，朕别诏龙骧送卿家属。 
现代文：元帝对裴嶷说： 您本是朝中名臣，应当留在江东，朕另外下诏让龙骧将军慕容把您的家属送来。 
English: Emperor Yuan said to Pei Jun: You are a famous minister of the dynasty, you should stay in the east of the Yangtze River. In addition, I will issue an order to let Longjing General Murong bring your family members.

古文：嶷曰： 臣少蒙国恩，出入省闼，若得复奉辇毂，臣之至荣。
现代文：裴嶷说： 我自小蒙受晋室的恩宠，出入宫禁，如果能重新侍奉皇上，是我无上的荣耀。
English: Pei Yao said: I have been favored by the Jin family since I was a child, and I have been banned from entering the palace. If I can serve the emperor again, it will be my greatest honor.

古文：但以旧京沦没，山陵穿毁，虽名臣宿将，莫能雪耻，独慕容龙骧竭忠王室，志除凶逆，故使臣万里归诚。
现代文：只是因为旧日京都沦陷，山陵毁败，即使是名臣宿将，也没有能够报仇雪耻。只有龙骧将军慕容尽忠于王室，立志赶除凶逆，所以派我不远万里前来表示忠诚。
English: However, because of the fall of Kyoto in the old days and the destruction of the mountains, even famous retainers and commanders were not able to avenge the disgrace. Only General Murong was loyal to the royal family and determined to drive out the rebels, so he sent me thousands of miles away to show my loyalty.

古文：今臣来而不返，必谓朝廷以其僻陋而弃之，孤其向义之心，使懈体于讨贼，此臣之所甚惜，是以不敢徇私而忘公也。 
现代文：现在如果我来而不返，他一定认为朝廷因为他偏远落后而抛弃他，辜负他崇尚大义之心，惰怠讨伐逆贼之事，而这正是我所珍视的，所以我不敢因为个人私利而忘却公义。 
English: Now, if I come and do not return, he must think that the imperial court has abandoned him because he is remote and backward, betrayed his heart of advocating great righteousness, and laziness in fighting against traitors, which is what I cherish, so I dare not forget justice because of personal self-interest.

古文：帝曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：元帝说： 您说的对。 
English: Emperor Gao said: Just as you said.

古文：乃遣使随嶷拜廆安北将军、平州刺史。
现代文：于是派遣使者随同裴嶷前往，赐封慕容为安北将军、平州刺史。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy to accompany Baekhyun and gave Murong the titles of Anbei General and Pingzhou Historian.

古文：闰月，以周顗为尚书左仆射。
现代文：闰月，晋任周为尚书左仆射。
English: In the leap month, Jinren Zhou was the left-handed shot of Shang Shuxu.

古文：晋王保将张春、杨次与别将杨韬不协，劝保诛之，且请击陈安；保皆不从。
现代文：晋王司马保部将张春、杨次和别将杨韬不和，劝司马保杀杨韬，并且请求击陈安，司马保都没听从。
English: Jin Wang's Sima Bao Department ordered Zhang Chun and Yang Zhihe not to quarrel with Yang Hui, persuaded Sima Bao to kill Yang Hui, and asked him to attack Chen An. Sima Bao did not listen.

古文：夏，五月，春，次幽保，杀之。
现代文：夏季，五月，张春、杨次软禁司马保，并杀了他。
English: In the summer, in May, Zhang Chun and Yang Zi put Sima Bao under house arrest and killed him.

古文：保体肥大，重八百斤，喜睡，好读书，而暗弱无断，故及于难。
现代文：司马保身高体胖，重八百斤，嗜睡，喜欢读书，但糊涂懦弱，缺少决断，所以遇难。
English: Sima Bao was tall and fat, weighed 800 pounds, was sleepy, liked to read, but was confused, weak, and lacked determination, so he died.

古文：保无子，张春立宗室子瞻为世子，称大将军。
现代文：司马保没有儿子，张春立宗室子弟司马瞻为王世子，自称大将军。
English: Sima Bao did not have a son, but Zhang Chunli's younger brother Sima Zhan was the king's son and called himself the great general.

古文：保众散，奔凉州者万馀人。
现代文：司马保的部众离散，逃奔到凉州的有一万多人。
English: Sima Bao's followers scattered, and more than 10,000 fled to Liangzhou.

古文：陈安表于赵主曜，请讨瞻等。
现代文：陈安上表给前赵主刘曜，请求征讨司马瞻等人。
English: Chen An sent a petition to the former Zhao master Liu You, requesting the investigation of Sima Zhan and others.

古文：曜以安为大将军，击瞻，杀之；张春奔枹罕。
现代文：刘曜任陈安为大将军，进攻司马瞻并杀了他。张春逃奔到罕。
English: Liu You appointed Chen An as the general, attacked Sima Zhan and killed him. Zhang Chun fled to Han.

古文：安执杨次，于保柩前斩之，因以祭保。
现代文：陈安抓住扬次，在司马保灵柩前将他斩首，用来祭奠司马保。
English: Chen An grabbed Yang Zi and beheaded him in front of Sima Bao's coffin to pay tribute to Sima Bao.

古文：安以天子礼葬保于上邽，谥曰元王。
现代文：陈安用对待天子的礼节把司马保葬于上，谥号元王。
English: Chen An used the etiquette of treating the son of heaven to bury Sima Bao on the top, the nickname of the former king.

古文：羊鉴讨徐龛，顿兵下邳，不敢前。
现代文：羊鉴征讨徐龛，在下邳停兵，不敢前进。
English: Yang Jian conscripted Xu Yao, halted at the lower mound, and did not dare to advance.

古文：蔡豹败龛于檀丘，龛求救于后赵。
现代文：蔡豹在檀丘击败徐龛，徐龛向后赵求救。
English: Cai Pan defeated Xu Yao in Dangqiu, and Xu Yao turned to Zhao for help.

古文：后赵王勒遣其将王伏都救之，又使张敬将兵为之后继。
现代文：后赵王石勒派部将王伏都救援，又让张敬率军作为后援。
English: After that, Zhao Wangshile sent a detachment to rescue Wang Fudu, and let Zhang Jing lead the army as a backup.

古文：勒多所邀求，而伏都淫暴，龛患之。
现代文：石勒向徐龛多有索求，而王伏都又淫荡残暴，徐龛为之忧患。
English: Shi Le has many requests for Xu Yao, but Wang Fudu is lewd and cruel, which worries Xu Yao.

古文：张敬至东平，龛疑其袭己，乃斩伏都等三百馀人，复来请降。
现代文：张敬部到达东平，徐龛怀疑他是来袭击自己，于是将王伏都等三百多人斩首，又向东晋请降。
English: When Zhang Jingbe arrived in Dongping, Xu Xi suspected that he had come to attack him, so he beheaded more than three hundred people including Wang Fudu, and then asked Dongjin to surrender.

古文：勒大怒，命张敬据险以守之。
现代文：石勒勃然大怒，命令张敬占据险要地形固守。
English: Shi Le flew into a rage and ordered Zhang Jing to occupy and hold the dangerous terrain.

古文：帝亦恶龛反覆，不受其降，敕鉴、豹以时进讨。
现代文：元帝也憎恶徐龛反覆无常，不接受他的请降，敕令羊鉴、蔡豹按原计划进发征讨。
English: Emperor Yuan also detested Xu Xi's capriciousness, and did not accept his request to abdicate. He ordered Yang Jian and Cai Pan to go ahead with the requisition as originally planned.

古文：鉴犹疑惮不进，尚书令刁协劾奏鉴，免死除名，以蔡豹代领其兵。
现代文：羊鉴仍然疑虑、忌惮，停止不前，尚书令刁协上疏弹劾羊鉴，敕令免除职务，饶其不死，让蔡豹代为指挥军队。
English: Yang Jian remained doubtful and fearful, and did not move forward. Shang Shuling and Shang Xie impeached Yang Jian, relieved him of his duties, spared his life, and let Cai Pao take command of the army.

古文：王导以所举失人，乞自贬，帝不许。
现代文：王导因为自己荐举的人选不当，自请贬职，元帝不同意。
English: Wang Du volunteered to be demoted because the person he recommended was not the right choice. Emperor Yuan did not agree.

古文：六月，后赵孔苌攻段匹磾，恃胜而不设备，段文鸯袭击，大破之。
现代文：六月，后赵孔苌进攻段匹，恃仗取得的胜利便不再防备，段文鸯趁势攻击，孔苌大败。
English: In June, after Zhao Kongjun attacked Duanpi, the victory won in the battle was no longer guarded, Duanwenjun took advantage of the situation to attack, and Duanwenjun was defeated.

古文：京兆人刘弘客居凉州天梯山，以妖术惑众，从受道者千馀人，西平元公张寔左右皆事之。
现代文：京兆人刘弘客居凉州的天梯山，用妖术迷惑民众，随他受道的人有一千多，西平元公张身边的人也都崇奉他。
English: Liu Hongke, a man of Jing Zhao, lived on Tiantai Mountain in Liangzhou and used magic to confuse the people. There were more than a thousand people who followed his path, and the people around Xi Ping Yuan Gong Zhang also worshiped him.

古文：帐下阎涉、牙门赵卬，皆弘乡人，弘谓之曰： 天与我神玺，应王凉州。 
现代文：张的帐下阎涉、牙门赵，都是刘弘的同乡。刘弘对他们说： 上天送给我神玺，应当统治凉州。 
English: Zhang's subordinate Yan Zhou and Zhangmen Zhao were Liu Hong's fellow townsmen. Liu Hong said to them: Heaven has given me a god, and I should rule Liangzhou.

古文：涉、卬信之，密与寔左右十馀人谋杀寔，奉弘为主。
现代文：阎涉、赵深信不疑，私下与张身边的十多人密谋杀害张，侍奉刘弘为主君。
English: Yan Zhan and Zhao are convinced that they conspired with more than ten people around Zhang to kill Zhang and serve Liu Hong as the lord.

古文：寔弟茂知其谋，请诛弘。
现代文：张的弟弟张茂得知他们的计划，请求诛杀刘弘。
English: Zhang's younger brother, Zhang Mao, learned of their plan and asked Zang to kill Liu Hong.

古文：寔令牙门将史初收之，未至，涉等怀刃而入，杀寔于外寝。
现代文：张命令牙门将史初拘捕刘弘。史初还未到刘弘处，阎涉等人怀藏凶器入内。把张杀死在外寝。
English: Zhang ordered the gatekeeper to arrest Liu Hong at the beginning of the story. Before the gatekeeper arrived at Liu Hong's place, Yan Zhu and others hid the murder weapon inside. He killed Zhang and slept outside.

古文：弘见史初至，谓曰： 使君已死，杀我何为！ 
现代文：刘弘见史初到来，对他说： 张使君已经死了，为什么还要杀我！ 
English: Liu Hong saw Shi Zuo arrive and said to him: Zhang Jizhong is dead, why do you still want to kill me!

古文：初怒，截其舌而囚之，轘于姑臧市，诛其党与数百人。
现代文：史初发怒，把他割掉舌头后关了起来，在姑臧城的街市上处以车裂的酷刑，并诛杀刘弘党徒数百人。
English: He was so angry that he cut off Liu Hong's tongue and then locked him up, tortured him with a broken cart in the streets of Guzheng, and killed hundreds of Liu Hong's party members.

古文：左司马阴元等以寔子骏尚幼，推张茂为凉州刺史、西平公，赦其境内，以骏为抚军将军。
现代文：左司马阴元等人认为张的儿子张骏的年龄幼小，推举张茂为凉州刺史、西平公，在境内赦免罪犯，任张骏为抚军将军。
English: Zuo Si Ma Yin Yuan and others thought that Zhang Ye's son Zhang Ye was too young, and promoted Zhang Mao to be the governor of Liangzhou, Xi Ping Gong, pardoned criminals in the territory, and appointed Zhang Ye as the general of the army.

古文：丙辰，赵将解虎及长水校尉尹车谋反，与巴酋句徐、库彭等相结；事觉，虎、车皆伏诛。
现代文：丙辰，前赵将领解虎和长水校尉尹车谋反，与巴族酋长句徐、厍彭等人相勾结，事发后，解虎、尹车都被处决。
English: Xing Chen, the former Zhao general, led the dissolving tigers and the Changshui school captain Yin Che to conspire to rebel, and colluded with the Ba chiefs Gu Xu, Yao Peng and others. After the incident, the dissolving tigers and Yin Che were all executed.

古文：赵主曜囚徐、彭等五十馀人于阿房，将杀之；光禄大夫游子远谏曰： 圣王用刑，惟诛元恶而已，不宜多杀。 
现代文：前赵主刘曜将句徐、厍彭等五十多人囚禁在阿房，准备统统杀掉。光禄大夫游子远进谏说： 圣贤的君主施用刑罚，只不过诛杀元凶而已，不宜滥杀。 
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu You imprisoned more than fifty people, including Guan Xu and Zi Peng, in A-Fang, and prepared to kill them all. Guanglu Doctor Yu Zi Yuanjin said: The saintly monarch imposes punishment, but only kills the culprit. It is not appropriate to kill indiscriminately.

古文：争之，叩头流血。
现代文：为此直言诤谏，以至叩头流血。
English: Because of this, he was outspoken, even to the point of making the head of a servant bleed.

古文：曜怒，以为助逆而囚之；尽杀徐、彭等，尸诸市十日，乃投于水。
现代文：刘曜发怒，认为这是帮助叛逆因而把游子远囚禁起来，尽杀句徐、厍彭等五十多人，暴尸于街市达十天，然后将尸首投弃水中。
English: Liu Yu was furious and thought that this was helping the rebellion, so he imprisoned Yu Zi Yuan and killed more than fifty people, including Gu Xu and Zi Peng. The dead bodies were in the market for ten days, and then the bodies were thrown into the water.

古文：于是巴众尽反，推巴酋句渠知为主，自称大秦，改元曰平赵。
现代文：于是巴族民众都起来造反，推举巴族酋长句渠知为首，自称大秦，改年号为平赵。
English: As a result, the people of the Ba people all rebelled and elected the chief of the Ba people, Gu Quizhi, as their leader. He called himself Da Qin and changed his name to Ping Zhao.

古文：四山氐、羌、巴、羯应之者三十馀万，关中大乱，城门昼闭。
现代文：四山的氐族、羌族、巴族、羯族人有三十多万群起响应，关中因此大乱，城门白天也关闭。
English: More than three hundred thousand people from the Shan, Shan, Ba and Shan ethnic groups in the four mountains responded. As a result, there was chaos in Guanzhong, and the city gates were closed during the day.

古文：子远又从狱中上表谏争，曜手毁其表曰： 大荔奴，不忧命在须臾，犹敢如此，嫌死晚邪！ 
现代文：游子远又从狱中上表诤谏，刘曜撕毁表文说： 这个大荔的奴仆，不担忧自己命在须臾，还敢如此，是嫌死得晚吗？ 
English: When the wanderer came back from prison, Liu Ye tore up the letter and said, "This slave of Dali, who did not fear for his life in Xuhui, still dared to do so. Is it too late to die?

古文：叱左右速杀之。
现代文：叱令手下人立即杀掉他。
English: He ordered his men to kill him immediately.

古文：中山王雅、郭汜、硃纪、呼延晏等谏曰： 子远幽囚，祸在不测，犹不忘谏争，忠之至也。
现代文：中山王刘雅、郭汜、朱纪、呼延晏等人规谏说： 游子远遭幽禁，朝不保夕，依然不忘诤谏，这是最大的忠贞。
English: Liu Ya, Guo Qi, Zhu Ji, Hu Yanqi and others of the Central Mountain King said: "The wanderer is far away from being imprisoned, and he is not safe in the morning and evening, and he still does not forget his duty. This is the greatest loyalty.

古文：陛下纵不能用，奈何杀之！
现代文：陛下即使不能听用其言，又怎么能杀他呢！
English: Your Majesty, if you cannot listen to his words, how can you kill him?

古文：若子远朝诛，臣等亦当夕死，以彰陛下之过，天下将皆舍陛下而去，陛下谁与居乎！ 
现代文：如果游子远早上被杀死，我们也当在晚上死去，以此显示陛下的过错，这样天下人都将舍弃陛下而离去，陛下与谁为伍呢？ 
English: If the wanderer was killed in the early morning, we should die in the evening to show His Majesty's fault, so that the world will abandon His Majesty and leave. Who is His Majesty with?

古文：曜意解，乃赦之。
现代文：刘曜怒意缓和，于是赦免了游子远。
English: Liu You's anger eased, so he pardoned Youzi Yuan.

古文：曜敕内外戒严，将自讨渠知。
现代文：刘曜敕令都城内外严加戒备，自己将亲征句渠知。
English: Liu Yuxuan ordered the capital and its surroundings to be on high alert, and he would personally investigate the matter.

古文：子远又谏曰： 陛下诚能用臣策，一月可定，大驾不必亲征也。 
现代文：游子远又进谏说： 陛下如果确实能用我的计谋，一个月可以平定叛乱，大驾也不必亲征。 
English: The wanderer went further into the forest and said, "Your Majesty, if you can really use my stratagem, you can put down the rebellion in a month, and you won't have to personally lead the troops.

古文：曜曰： 卿试言之。 
现代文：刘曜说： 你说说看。 
English: Liu You said: You tell me.

古文：子远曰： 彼非有大志，欲图非望也，直畏陛下威刑，欲逃死耳。
现代文：游子远说： 他们造反并非因为有什么远大志向，想要图谋帝王之业，只不过是畏惧陛下威严的刑罚，想逃免一死罢了。
English: Yuziharu said, "They didn't rebel because they had lofty ambitions and wanted to plot the emperor's career, but because they feared the majesty of the emperor's punishment and wanted to avoid death."

古文：陛下莫若廊然大赦，与之更始；应前日坐虎、车等事，其家老弱没入奚官者，皆纵遣之，使之自相招引，听其复业。
现代文：陛下不如普遍地实行赦免，让他们重新做人。前些时日受解虎、尹车之事牵连坐罪，其家人中被籍没为奴的老弱者，全都释放遣返，让他们自己互相招引，允许他们重操旧业。
English: It would be better for His Majesty to grant a general amnesty and let them become human beings again. The old and weak members of his family, who were implicated in the cases of Jiefu and Yincha, should all be released and repatriated. Let them attract each other and allow them to resume their old businesses.

古文：彼既得生路，何为不降！
现代文：他们既然得到生路，怎么会不降服呢！
English: How can they not surrender when they have been given a way out!

古文：若其中自知罪重，屯结不散者，愿假臣弱兵五千，必为陛下枭之。
现代文：假如其中有人自知罪孽深重，因而聚集不散，希望调给我弱兵五千，我一定为陛下翦除他们。
English: If any of them, knowing that they have sinned grievously, shall gather themselves together, and shall not disperse, and shall offer to me five thousand men, I will destroy them for thy majesty.

古文：不然，今反者弥山被谷，虽以天威临之，恐非岁月可除也。 
现代文：不这样的话，现在造反的人漫山遍野，即使凭借天威去征讨，恐怕也不是短期内可以翦除的。 
English: Otherwise, the people who are rebelling now are everywhere, and even if they are subdued by the power of heaven, I am afraid that they cannot be eliminated in the short term.

古文：曜大悦，即日大赦，以子远为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督雍、秦征讨诸军事。
现代文：刘曜大为高兴，即日大赦天下，任游子远为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、总领雍州、秦州征讨等军事事务。
English: Liu Youda was very happy. On the same day, the emperor pardoned the whole country, and appointed Yu Zi Yuan as the general of cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, the general of Yongzhou and Qinzhou, and other military affairs.

古文：子远屯于雍城，降者十馀万；移军安定，反者皆降。
现代文：游子远屯军雍城，投降的人有十多万。移军至安定，反叛者都归降。
English: Wanderers from far and wide camped in Yongcheng, and more than one hundred thousand people surrendered. When the army was transferred to a stable place, the rebels all surrendered.

古文：惟句氏宗党五千馀家保于阴密，进攻，灭之，遂引兵巡陇右。
现代文：只有句氏宗族五千多家在阴密固守，游子远率军进攻，将其歼灭，于是率军巡行陇右。
English: Only the more than five thousand clan members of the Gu clan held fast in the shadows, and the wanderer led the army to attack and annihilate them, so he led the army to march to the right.

古文：先是氐、羌十馀万落据险不服，其酋虚除权渠自号秦王。
现代文：此前氐族、羌族的十多万村落凭仗险要地势不肯降服，其酋长虚除权渠自号秦王。
English: Previously, more than one hundred thousand villages of the Yao and Shan ethnic groups refused to surrender because of the perilous situation, and their chiefs falsely removed their power and called themselves Qin Wang.

古文：子远进造其壁，权渠出兵拒之，五战皆败。
现代文：游子远率军进逼其壁垒，虚除权渠率兵出战，五战都失败了。
English: Yu Ziyuan led the army to advance and force its barriers, and the virtual removal of power led the soldiers to go to war, and all five wars failed.

古文：权渠欲降，其子伊馀大言于众曰： 往者刘曜自来，犹无若我何，况此偏师，何谓降也！ 帅劲卒五万，晨压子远垒门。
现代文：虚除权渠想投降，他的儿子伊余向部众高声煽动说： 以前刘曜自己来，尚且没把我们怎么样，何况这仅是偏师，为什么要投降？ 自己率领五万精锐士卒，于清晨进逼至游子远壁垒门前。
English: He wanted to surrender, and his son, Yi Yu, loudly incited his subordinates, saying, "Before Liu You himself came, he didn't treat us well, and besides, this is only a partial division, why should we surrender?

古文：诸将欲击之，子远曰： 伊馀勇悍，当今无敌，所将之兵，复精于我。
现代文：游子远手下诸将想反击，游子远说： 伊余十分悍勇，当今天下无敌，他统领的军队也比我方精锐。
English: Yu Ziyuan's subordinates wanted to fight back, and Yu Ziyuan said, "Iyu is very brave, he is invincible today, and his army is more elite than ours.

古文：又其父新败，怒气方盛，其锋不可当也，不如缓之，使气竭而后击之。 
现代文：况且又正当他父亲刚刚战败之时，伊余怒气正盛，锐不可挡。不如暂缓出战，等他们士气衰竭然后攻击他们。 
English: Moreover, just as his father had just been defeated, Iyo's anger was at its peak and was unstoppable. It would be better to postpone going to war, wait for their morale to fail and then attack them.

古文：乃坚壁不战。
现代文：于是坚壁不战。
English: As a result, the hard-liners did not fight.

古文：伊馀有骄色，子远伺其无备，夜，勒兵蓐食，旦，值大风尘昏，子远悉众出掩之，生擒伊馀，尽俘其众。
现代文：伊余有骄傲的神色，游子远乘他不加防备，夜间率领军队在寝席上进食，第二天凌晨，正逢大风刮起尘土弥漫，游子远率军全数突袭，活捉伊余，部众都当了俘虏。
English: Iyo had a proud look, Yoriko rode ahead of him unprepared, at night he led the army to eat at the bedside, early the next morning, just as the wind was blowing and the dust was thick, Yoriko led the entire army to raid, capture Iyo alive, and all his subordinates were taken prisoner.

古文：权渠大惧，被发、面请降。
现代文：虚除权渠大为恐慌，披散着头发、用刀割破脸皮，请求归降。
English: He panicked, ruffled his hair, slashed his face with a knife, and pleaded for surrender.

古文：子远启曜，以权渠为征西将军、西戎公，分徙伊馀兄弟及其部落二十馀万口于长安。
现代文：游子远禀报刘曜，任虚除权渠为征西将军、西戎公，分别把伊余兄弟及其部落二十多万人迁徙至长安。
English: The wanderer Yu Zi reported to Liu You that Ren Hui had been removed from power as General of the Western Expedition and Lord of the Western Expedition, and the Iyu brothers and more than 200,000 members of their tribe were relocated to Chang'an.

古文：曜以子远为大司徒、录尚书事。
现代文：刘曜任游子远为大司徒、录尚书事。
English: Liu You, the wandering son, was the chief disciple and recorded the records.

古文：曜立太学，选民之神志可教者千五百人，择儒臣以教之。
现代文：刘曜建立太学，遴选精神、志向可堪教诲的士民一千五百人，选择儒臣来教授他们。
English: Liu You established Taigaku, and selected 1,500 scholars who had the spirit and aspiration to be teachable, and chose Confucian scholars to teach them.

古文：作酆明观及西宫，起陵霄台于滈池，又于霸陵西南营寿陵。
现代文：建造丰明观和西宫，在池边建起陵霄台，又在霸陵西南修筑寿陵。
English: Fengmingyuan and the West Palace were built, a mausoleum ridge was built on the edge of the pond, and a mausoleum was built in the southwest of Bailing.

古文：侍中乔豫、和苞上疏谏，以为： 卫文公承乱亡之后，节用爱民，营建宫室，得其时制，故能兴康叔之业，延九百之祚。
现代文：侍中乔豫、和苞上疏规谏，认为： 卫文公在乱亡之后，节俭费用、爱恤士民，营造的宫室，符合当时建制，所以能振兴卫康叔的基业，延续九百年的国运。
English: The chamberlains, Qiao Yu and He Xuan Shangzhu Zhiguo, believed that: After the death of Emperor Weiwen, the palace built by Weiwen was in line with the system at that time, with frugal expenses and love for scholars and commoners, so it could revitalize Uncle WeiKang's foundation and continue the nine-hundred-year national movement.

古文：前奉诏书营酆明观，市道细民咸讥其奢曰： 以一观之功，足以平凉州矣！ 
现代文：先前奉承诏书营建丰明观，市井小民都讥讽其奢侈，说： 用修建一座观的人力，足以平定凉州了！ 
English: Previously flattering the edict to build Fengming outlook, the common people all ridiculed its extravagance, saying: The manpower to build one outlook is enough to pacify Liangzhou!

古文：今又欲拟阿房而建西宫，法琼台而起陵霄，其为劳费，亿万酆明；若以资军旅，乃可兼吴、蜀而壹齐、魏矣！
现代文：现在又要比拟阿房宫而建造西宫，效法琼台而造陵霄台，这需要的人力、费用，远超营建丰明观的亿万倍，如果用以资助军旅，便可以兼并晋、蜀，统一齐、魏了！
English: Now, compared to building the West Palace to imitate the Afang Palace, and building the Mausoleum to imitate the Qiongtai, the manpower and cost required are far more than the construction of the Fengming Palace. If it is used to finance the military expedition, it can annex Jin, Shu, and unify Qi and Wei!

古文：又闻营建寿陵，周围四里，深三十五丈，以铜为椁，饰以黄金；功费若此，殆非国内之所能办也。
现代文：又听说营建寿陵，周长有四里，深三十五丈，用铜做棺椁，以黄金为饰，耗费如此的人力、费用，恐怕不是国内所能承担的。
English: I also heard that the construction of the Shuling Mausoleum, with a circumference of four miles and a depth of thirty-five feet, made of copper coffins and decorated with gold, consumes so much manpower and expense, I am afraid it is not something that can be borne domestically.

古文：秦始皇下锢三泉，土未干而发毁。自古无不亡之国、不掘之墓，故圣王之俭葬，乃深远之虑也。
现代文：秦始皇陵掘穿三重泉水，以金属浇铸，但墓土未干便被发掘毁坏，自古以来没有不灭亡的国家，也没有不被盗掘的陵墓，所以圣贤的君王葬事从俭，这是有深远考虑的。
English: The tomb of the First Emperor of Qin was excavated with triple spring water and cast with metal, but the grave soil was excavated and destroyed before it was dry. Since ancient times, there has been no country that has not perished, and there is no mausoleum that has not been robbed. Therefore, it is a far-reaching consideration that the saints and sages should be frugal in their funerals.

古文：陛下奈何于中兴之日，而踵亡国之事乎！ 曜下诏曰： 二侍中恳恳有古人之风，可谓社稷之臣矣。
现代文：陛下怎么能在国家中兴之时，去重蹈亡国的覆辙呢 刘曜下诏说： 二位侍中恳恳忠诚有古人的风范，可以说是国家的股肱之臣。
English: How could His Majesty repeat the mistakes of the late emperor when the country was in the process of rejuvenation, Liu You said in his next edict: The two attendants are earnestly loyal and have the demeanor of the ancients, and can be said to be the vassals of the country.

古文：其悉罢宫室诸役，寿陵制度，一遵霸陵之法。
现代文：还是停止所有宫室的建造，寿陵的建制，完全依照霸陵的成例。
English: Or stop the construction of all palace chambers, the establishment of mausoleums, in full accordance with the example of tyrannical mausoleums.

古文：封豫安昌子，苞平舆子，并领谏议大夫；仍布告天下，使知区区之朝，欲闻其过也。 
现代文：赐封乔豫为安昌子，和苞为平舆子，同时兼谏议大夫职。就此布告天下，使大家知道我的朝廷希望能听到对过失的指责。 
English: I hereby announce to the world that I have conferred the titles of Anchang's son on Qiao Yu and Pingwuzi's son on He Yu, and concurrently conferred the title of doctor on both of them, so that everyone will know that my imperial court hopes to hear the accusations of wrongdoing.

古文：又省酆水囿以与贫民。
现代文：此外还省并丰水囿苑，交给贫民使用。
English: In addition, Fengshui Gongyuan was merged into the province and handed over to the poor for use.

古文：祖逖将韩潜与后赵将桃豹分据陈川故城，豹居西台，潜居东台，豹由南门，潜由东门，出入相守四旬，逖以布囊盛土如米状，使千馀人运上台，又使数人担米，息于道。
现代文：祖逖的部将韩潜和后赵的将军桃豹分别割据陈川老城，桃豹占据西台，出入经由南门，韩潜占据东台，出入经由东门，双方相持坚守达四十天。祖逖用许多布袋盛土，好象盛满粮米的样子，派一千多人输运到台上。又让一些人担挑真米，在路边休息。
English: Zu Xi's army divided Han Xuan and Hou Zhao's general Taobao into the old city of Chenchuan, with the Taobao occupying the west side and entering and leaving through the south gate, and the Han Xuan occupying the east side and entering and leaving through the east gate. Both sides held out for forty days. Zu Xi used many cloth bags filled with soil, as if full of grain, to transport more than a thousand people to the stage. He also let some people pick up real rice and rest on the side of the road.

古文：豹兵逐之，弃担而走。
现代文：桃豹的士兵追来，祖逖的部下丢下担子逃走。
English: The soldiers of the Peacock and Leopard chased after them, and Zhu Xi's men left their burdens behind and fled.

古文：豹兵久饥，得米，以为逖士众丰饱，益惧。
现代文：桃豹的士卒挨饿已有很长时间，得到粮米，便以为祖逖的部众生活丰饱，心中更为恐惧。
English: Peacock's soldiers have been starving for a long time, and when they get grain and rice, they think that Zu Xi's subordinates are living a full life, and they are even more afraid.

古文：后赵将刘夜堂以驴千头运粮馈豹，逖使韩潜及别将冯铁邀击于汴水，尽获之。
现代文：后赵将领刘夜堂用一千头驴子为桃豹运来军粮，祖逖派遣韩潜和别将冯铁在汴水截击，全数劫获。
English: Later, Zhao's general Liu Yatang used a thousand donkeys to transport military rations for the peacocks, and Zu Xi sent Han Xian and General Feng Tie to intercept them in Surabaya, and all of them were captured.

古文：豹宵遁，屯东燕城，逖使潜进屯封丘以逼之。
现代文：桃豹因此连夜遁逃，驻屯于东燕城。祖逖让韩潜进军驻扎在封丘，威逼桃豹。
English: As a result, Taobao fled in the middle of the night and was stationed in Dongyancheng. Zuyu ordered Hanqian to enter the army and stationed it in Fengqiu, threatening Taobao.

古文：冯铁据二台，逖镇雍丘，数遣兵邀击后赵兵，后赵镇戍归逖者甚多，境土渐蹙。
现代文：冯铁占据了陈川老城的东、西二台，祖逖则镇守雍丘，经常派遣士兵截击后赵军队，后赵国镇戍的士卒归降祖逖的很多，国土也日渐缩小。
English: Feng Tie occupied the east and west sides of Chenchuan Old Town, while Zhu Xi guarded Yongqiu, often sending soldiers to intercept the post-Zhao army. Many of the post-Zhao soldiers returned to Zhu Xi, and the land was gradually shrinking.

古文：先是，赵固、上官巳、李矩、郭默，互相攻击，逖驰使和解之，示以祸福，遂皆受逖节度。
现代文：以前，赵固、上官已、李矩、郭默等人互相攻战，祖逖派遣使者前往调解，剖析利害，这些人便都接受祖逖的调度。
English: In the past, Zhao Gu, Shangguan Ya, Li Rui, Guo Mo and others fought against each other. Zu Xi sent emissaries to mediate and analyze the interests. These people all accepted Zu Xi's dispatch.

古文：秋，七月，诏加逖镇西将军。
现代文：秋季，七月，元帝下诏授予祖逖镇西将军。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Yuan issued an imperial edict awarding Zhu Xi Zhen the title of general.

古文：逖在军，与将士同甘苦，约己务施，劝课农桑，抚纳新附，虽疏贱者皆结以恩礼。
现代文：祖逖在军中，与将士们同甘共苦，严于律己，宽于待人，鼓励、督促农业生产，抚慰安置新近归附的兵民，即使是关系疏远、地位低贱的人也施恩礼遇去结交他们。
English: In the army, Zhu Xi shared the joys and sorrows with the soldiers. He was strict with himself and lenient with others. He encouraged and urged agricultural production, comforted and resettled the newly annexed soldiers and people, and even those who were distant and low-ranking were gracious enough to befriend them.

古文：河上诸坞，先有任子在后赵者，皆听两属，时遣游军伪抄之，明其未附。
现代文：黄河流域的许多坞堡，只要是此前有人质被扣留在后赵的，都听任他们同时听命后赵和晋，并且不时派遣流动作战的军队佯装抄掠，以表明他们并未归附自己。
English: Many dockyards in the Yellow River basin, as long as there were hostages previously detained in Hou Zhao, allowed them to simultaneously obey the orders of Hou Zhao and Jin, and from time to time sent mobile combat troops to pretend to plunder, to show that they did not attach themselves.

古文：坞主皆感恩，后赵有异谋，辄密以告，由是多所克获，自河以南，多叛后赵归于晋。
现代文：坞主们都感恩戴德，只要后赵有什么特殊举动，便秘密传告祖逖，因此战事常胜，俘获良多。黄河以南士民大多背叛后赵而归附东晋。
English: The owners of the docks were very grateful. Whenever Hou Zhao made any special move, he would secretly inform his ancestors. As a result, the war was often won and many were captured. Most of the people south of the Yellow River betrayed Hou Zhao and joined the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：逖练兵积谷，为取河北之计。
现代文：祖逖训练士兵，积蓄粮食，为收复黄河以北的失地做准备。
English: Zhu Xi trained soldiers, stored grain, and prepared to recover the lost land north of the Yellow River.

古文：后赵王勒患之，乃下幽州为逖修祖、父墓，置守冢二家，因与逖书，求通使及互市。
现代文：后赵王石勒为此忧患，于是下令让幽州守吏为祖逖修葺祖父和父亲的陵墓，并安置两户人家看守坟冢。然后写信给祖逖，要求互通使节和开放贸易。
English: Later, Zhao Wangshile was worried about this, so he ordered the Yuzhou guards to repair the tombs of his grandfather and father for Zu Xi, and placed two families to guard the tombs. Then he wrote to Zu Xi, requesting the exchange of envoys and the opening of trade.

古文：逖不报书，而听其互市，收利十倍。
现代文：祖逖不回复他的信，但是听任双方来往贸易，因而获取了十倍的利润。
English: Zhu Xi did not reply to his letter, but allowed the two sides to trade with each other, and thus obtained ten times the profit.

古文：逖牙门童建杀新蔡内史周密，降于后赵，勒斩之，送首于逖，曰： 叛臣逃吏，吾之深仇，将军之恶，犹吾恶也。 
现代文：祖逖的牙门童建杀死新蔡内史周密，投降后赵。石勒将童建斩首，把首级送给祖逖说： 叛臣逃吏，是我深以为恨的。将军憎恶的人，也是我所憎恶的。 
English: Zu Rong's henchman Tong Jian killed Xin Cai, and after surrendering, Zhao Shiller beheaded Tong Jian and sent the head to Zu Rong, saying: "I deeply hate traitors and deserters. I also hate those who are hated by the general."

古文：逖深德之，自是后赵人叛归逖者，逖皆不纳，禁诸将不使侵暴后赵之民，边境之间，稍得休息。
现代文：祖逖深为感动，从此凡后赵叛降归附的人，祖逖都不接纳，禁止众将侵犯、攻掠后赵民众，两国边境之间，逐渐得以休养生息。
English: Zhu Xi was deeply moved. From then on, Zhu Xi did not accept anyone who had surrendered to Zhao, and forbade the general public to invade, attack and plunder the Zhao people. The border between the two countries was gradually restored.

古文：八月，辛未，梁州刺史周访卒。
现代文：八月，辛未，梁州刺史周访去世。
English: In August, Xin Wei, the leader of the Liangzhou Zhishi, died.

古文：访善于抚纳士众，皆为致死。
现代文：周访善于抚慰军士，大家都愿为他效命。
English: Zhou Zhi is good at soothing the sergeant, and everyone is willing to work for him.

古文：知王敦有不臣之心，私常切齿。敦由是终访之世，未敢为逆。
现代文：周访知道王敦有不甘为臣的心志，私下经常切齿为恨，王敦因此在周访活着的时候，一直不敢反叛。
English: Zhou Ziyi knew that Wang Dun had the spirit of not being willing to be a subject, and he often gritted his teeth in private. Therefore, when Zhou Ziyi was alive, Wang Dun never dared to rebel.

古文：敦遣从事中郎郭舒监襄阳军，帝以湘州刺史甘卓为梁州刺史，督沔北诸军事，镇襄阳。
现代文：王敦派遣从事中郎郭舒到襄阳监察军队，元帝让湘州刺史甘卓为梁州刺史，总领沔水以北地区所有军事事务，镇守襄阳。
English: Wang Dun dispatched Guo Shu, a middle-ranking official, to Yangyang to supervise the army, and the Yuan Emperor made Gan Zhuo, the military governor of Xiangzhou, the military governor of Liangzhou, and the commander of all military affairs in the area north of Surabaya, the town guard of Yangyang.

古文：舒既还，帝征为右丞；敦留不遣。
现代文：郭舒回去后，元帝征召他任右丞，王敦却留住不放行。
English: After Guo Shu returned, the Yuan Emperor conscripted him to serve as the second-in-command, but Wang Dun did not let him go.

古文：后赵王勒遣中山公虎帅步骑四万击徐龛，龛送妻子为质，乞降，勒许之。
现代文：后赵王石勒派遣中山公石虎率步兵、骑兵四万攻击徐龛，徐龛把妻子、儿子送到后赵为人质，乞求投降，石勒答应了。
English: Afterward, Zhao Wang Shile sent Zhongshan Gong Shihu with 40,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Xu Yao. Xu Yao sent his wife and son to Zhao Wang as hostages, begged for surrender, and Shile agreed.

古文：蔡豹屯卞城，石虎将击之，豹退守下邳，为徐龛所败。
现代文：蔡豹屯军于卞城，石虎准备攻击他，蔡豹退守到下邳，被徐龛击败。
English: Cai Pan's garrison was in Handan City. Shi Hu was preparing to attack him. Cai Pan retreated to Lower Handan and was defeated by Xu Xi.

古文：虎引兵城封丘而旋，徙士族三百家置襄国崇仁里，置公族大夫以领之。
现代文：石虎率领军队在封丘修建城堡，然后回军，迁徙三百家士族安置在襄国的崇仁里，设置了公族大夫来统领他们。
English: Shihu led the army to build a castle in Fengqiu, then returned to the army, migrated three hundred warrior families to settle in Chongren in Xiangguo, and set up a public doctor to command them.

古文：后赵王勒用法甚严，讳 胡 尤峻。
现代文：后赵王石勒施用刑法非常峻刻，特别忌讳 胡 这个字眼。
English: After Zhao Wangshile imposed the criminal law, it was very severe, and the word "Hu" was especially taboo.

古文：宫殿既成，初有门户之禁。
现代文：当时后赵的宫殿已经建成，开始有出入门户的限制。
English: By that time, Zhao's palace had already been built, and there were restrictions on the entrance and exit portals.

古文：有醉胡乘马，突入止车门。
现代文：有一个胡人喝醉了酒，骑马闯入止车门。
English: There was a drunken goose who rode his horse into the car door.

古文：勒大怒，责宫门小执法冯翥。
现代文：石勒大发雷霆，叱责宫门小执法冯翥。
English: Shi Le flew into a rage and scolded the small-time palace gate enforcer Feng Ye.

古文：翥惶惧忘讳，对曰： 向有醉胡，乘马驰入，甚呵御之，而不可与语。 
现代文：冯翥惊惶恐惧，忘了忌讳，对石勒说： 刚才有个醉酒胡人骑马冲进来，我虽极力呵斥禁止他，但简直没法和他交谈。 
English: Shocked and afraid, Feng Yu forgot his taboo and said to Shi Lu: Just now, a drunken barbarian rushed in on horseback. Although I shouted at him to stop, I could hardly talk to him.

古文：勒笑曰： 胡人正自难与言。 
现代文：石勒笑着说： 胡人本来就难以和他们言谈。 
English: Shi Ler said with a smile: It's hard for Hu people to talk to them.

古文：怒而不罪。
现代文：饶恕了冯翥，不再追究。
English: He forgave Feng Xuan and no longer pursued him.

古文：勒使张宾领选，初定五品，后更定九品。
现代文：石勒让张宾总领铨选官员事宜，起初将官衔定为五品，后来改定为九品。
English: Shi Le asked Zhang Bin to be in charge of the selection of officials. At first, the official title was set at five products, and later changed to nine products.

古文：命公卿及州郡岁举秀才、至孝、廉清、贤良、直言、武勇之士各一人。
现代文：令公卿和州郡长官按年度推举秀才、至孝、廉清、贤良、直言、武勇者各一人。
English: The court nobles and prefectural and county governors shall nominate one outstanding person, filial son, incorruptible, virtuous, outspoken, and valiant person each year.

古文：西平公张茂立兄子骏为世子。
现代文：西平公张茂立兄长张的儿子张骏为世子。
English: Xiping Prince Zhang Maoli's eldest brother Zhang's son Zhang Ye became the heir.

古文：蔡豹既败，将诣建康归罪，北中郎将王舒止之。
现代文：蔡豹战败之后，准备到建康领受罪责，被北中郎将王舒制止。
English: After Cai Pan's defeat, he prepared to go to Jiankang to accept the blame, but was stopped by the Northern Middle Lord Wang Shu.

古文：帝闻豹退，遣使收之。
现代文：元帝听说蔡豹退还不来，派使者前去拘捕他。
English: When Emperor Yuan heard that Cai Leopard could not be returned, he sent an envoy to arrest him.

古文：舒夜以兵围豹，豹以为它寇，帅麾下击之；闻有诏，乃止。
现代文：王舒夜间派兵包围蔡豹，蔡豹以为是别的敌寇，率领麾下士兵攻击，听说有元帝诏书，这才停止。
English: Wang Shu sent soldiers to surround Cai Pan at night. Cai Pan thought it was another enemy, and led his soldiers to attack. When he heard that there was an imperial edict from the Yuan Emperor, he stopped.

古文：舒执豹送建康，冬，十月，丙辰，斩之。
现代文：王舒抓住蔡豹送到建康，冬季，十月，丙辰，蔡豹被斩首。
English: Wang Shu caught Cai Pan and sent him to Jiankang. In the winter, in October, Cai Pan was beheaded.

古文：王敦杀武陵内史向硕。
现代文：王敦杀死武陵内史向硕。
English: Wang Dun killed Wuling Naishi Xiang Shuo.

古文：帝之始镇江东也，敦与从弟导同心翼戴，帝亦推心任之，敦总征讨，导专机政，群从子弟布列显要，时人为之语曰： 王与马，共天下。 
现代文：元帝开始统治江东的时候，王敦和堂弟王导同心同德，共同拥戴和辅佐，元帝也推心置腹，重用他们。王敦总领征讨军事，王导把持机要政务，门生子弟各自占据显要的职位，当时人因此有这样的说法： 王与马，共天下。 
English: When Emperor Yuan began to rule the eastern part of the Yangtze River, Wang Dun and his cousin Wang Duan shared the same ideals, supported and assisted each other, and Emperor Yuan also put his heart and soul into reusing them. Wang Dun was the leader of military recruitment, Wang Duan was in charge of important government affairs, and his protégés each occupied prominent positions. At that time, people therefore had this saying: The king and the horse are the same.

古文：后敦自恃有功，且宗族强盛，稍益骄恣，帝畏而恶之。乃引刘隗、刁协等以为腹心，稍抑损王氏之权，导亦渐见疏外。
现代文：后来王敦自恃有功，而且宗族势力强盛，越来越骄恣拔扈，元帝因畏惧而憎恶，于是提拔刘隗、刁协等人作为自己的心腹，逐渐抑制和削弱王氏的职权，王导也逐渐被疏远。
English: Later, Wang Dun considered himself to have made a great contribution, and the clan's power was strong, and he became more and more arrogant and arbitrary. The Yuan Emperor was afraid and hated him, so he promoted Liu Bei, Zou He and others as his confidants, gradually suppressing and weakening the authority of the Wang clan, and Wang Du was gradually alienated.

古文：中书郎孔愉陈导忠贤，有佐命之勋，宜加委任；帝出愉为司徒左长史。
现代文：中书郎孔愉向元帝陈述王导的忠贤，认为有辅佐王室的功勋，应当加以任用，也被元帝贬黜为司徒左长史。
English: The chief scribe, Kong Yu, told the Yuan Emperor about Wang Du's faithfulness, and that he should be appointed because he had the merit of assisting the royal family. He was also relegated by the Yuan Emperor to the status of a scholar of the Left Long History.

古文：导能任真推分，澹如也，有识皆称其善处兴废。
现代文：王导能够听任自然，安守本分，性情澹泊，了解其为人的都称赞他能妥善对待职位的升降。
English: Wang Du was able to let nature take its course, safely perform his duties, and keep his temper in check. Those who knew him as a person all praised his ability to properly handle the promotion and demotion of his position.

古文：而敦益怀不平，遂构嫌隙。
现代文：但王敦却更加心怀不满，于是与元帝之间产生了裂痕和矛盾。
English: However, Wang Dun was more dissatisfied, and a rift and contradiction arose between him and the Yuan Emperor.

古文：初，敦辟吴兴沈充为参军，充荐同郡钱凤于敦，敦以为铠曹参军。
现代文：当初，王敦征召吴兴人沈充为参军，沈充把同郡人钱风推荐给王敦，王敦任用他为铠曹参军。
English: At first, Wang Dun conscripted Wu Xing's Shen Chong to join the army. Shen Chong recommended Qian Feng, who was from the same county, to Wang Dun. Wang Dun appointed Qian Cao to join the army.

古文：二人皆巧谄凶狡，知敦有异志，阴赞成之，为之画策。
现代文：这二人都是奸巧谄谀、凶恶狡诈之徒，知道王敦心怀异志，暗地促成，为王敦出谋划策。
English: Both of them were cunning, vicious and cunning. They knew that Wang Dun harbored different ideas, and secretly facilitated and made plans for Wang Dun.

古文：敦宠信之，势倾内外。
现代文：王敦宠信他们，二人权势倾重内外。
English: Wang Dun trusted them, and the two of them were influential both at home and abroad.

古文：敦上疏为导讼屈，辞语怨望。
现代文：王敦给元帝上疏，为王导鸣冤叫屈，言辞之间颇多怨恨。
English: There was a lot of resentment between Wang Dun's words of resentment towards the Yuan Emperor, and Wang Du's words of complaint.

古文：导封以还敦，敦复遣奏之。
现代文：王导把疏文加封，退还给王敦，王敦又遣使奏上。
English: Wang Du sealed the epistle and returned it to Wang Dun. Wang Dun also sent an envoy to listen to it.

古文：左将军谯王承，忠厚有志行，帝亲信之。
现代文：左将军、谯王司马，为人忠厚而有节操，元帝亲近并信任他。
English: General Zuo, Shao Wang Sima, was a loyal and disciplined man. The Yuan Emperor was close to him and trusted him.

古文：夜，召承，以敦疏示之，曰： 王敦以顷年之功，位任足矣；而所求不已，言至于此，将若之何？ 
现代文：元帝夜间召见司马，把王敦的上疏拿给他看，说： 以王敦近年来的功劳，现在的职位已够大了，但他的索求却没有止境，以至说出这样的话，现在怎么办呢？ 
English: The Yuan Emperor summoned Sima at night, showed him Wang Dun's epaulets, and said: With Wang Dun's achievements in recent years, his current position is already big enough, but his demands are endless, so much so that he said such a thing. What should we do now?

古文：承曰： 陛下不早裁之，以至今日，敦必为患。 
现代文：司马说： 陛下不早点处置他，以至到今天的地步，王敦必定会成为国家的祸患。 
English: Sima said, "If His Majesty does not dispose of him sooner, Wang Dun will surely become a national calamity.

古文：刘隗为帝谋，出心腹以镇方面。
现代文：刘隗为元帝出主意，派自己的心腹去镇守各地。
English: Liu Bei came up with an idea for Emperor Yuan and sent his henchmen to guard the towns in various regions.

古文：会敦表以宣城内史沈充代甘卓为湘州刺史，帝谓承曰： 王敦奸逆已著，朕为惠皇，其势不远。
现代文：适逢王敦上表，要让宣城内史沈充代替甘卓任湘州刺史。元帝对司马说： 王敦叛逆的行为已经昭著，照这样的情势下去不会很久，朕就要遭受惠帝那样的命运了。 
English: At the time of Wang Dun's death, Shen Chong, the historian of Xuancheng, was to replace Gan Zhuo Ren, the historian of Xiangzhou. Emperor Yuan said to Sima: Wang Dun's rebellious behavior has already become notorious, it won't be long before this situation continues, I'm about to suffer the same fate as Hui Di.

古文：湘州据上流之势，控三州之会，欲以叔父居之，何如？ 
现代文：湘州占据长江上游的地势，控制着荆州、交州、广州的交会处，我想让叔父您镇守那里，不知如何？ 
English: Xiangzhou occupies the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, controlling the junction of Jingzhou, Jiaozhou and Guangzhou. I want your uncle to guard there, I don't know how?

古文：承曰： 臣奉承诏命，惟力是视，何敢有辞！
现代文：司马说： 我既奉承诏令，必定尽力而为，哪敢再说什么！
English: Sima said, "Since I flatter the imperial edict, I must do my best, how dare I say anything else!"

古文：然湘州经蜀寇之馀，民物凋弊，若得之部，比及三年，乃可即戎；苟未及此，虽复灰身，亦无益也。 
现代文：不过湘州经历蜀人杜的寇乱之后，人民稀少，物产凋敝，如果我去治理，得等到三年之后，才有能力参加战事。如果不到三年，即使粉身碎骨，也不能有太大的帮助。 
English: However, after Hunan experienced the Shu Rebellion, the people were scarce and the goods were withered. If I were to govern, I would have to wait until three years later before I could participate in the war. If less than three years, even if I were crushed, I could not be of much help.

古文：十二月，诏曰： 晋室开基，方镇之任，亲贤并用，其以谯王承为湘州刺史。 
现代文：十二月，元帝下诏说： 自从晋王室建立基业以来，任命方镇大员，都是宗亲和贤良并用，现任命谯王司马为湘州刺史。 
English: In December, Emperor Yuan issued the following edict: Since the foundation of the Jin royal family, the appointment of Fang Town officials has been based on both ancestry and merit. Now, the appointment of Gong Wang Sima is the history of Hunan.

古文：长沙邓骞闻之，叹曰： 湘州之祸，其在斯乎！ 
现代文：长沙人邓骞听说此事，叹息说： 湘州的祸乱，恐怕由此而生了！ 
English: When Changsha resident Deng Wei heard about this, he said with a sigh: I'm afraid this is how the disaster in Hunan came about!

古文：承行至武昌，敦与之宴，谓承曰： 大王雅素佳士，恐非将帅才也。 
现代文：司马行至武昌，王敦设宴招待他，对司马说： 大王平素是德才兼备的读书人，恐怕不是将帅之才。 
English: When Sima went to Wuchang, Wang Dun invited him to a banquet and said to Sima, "The great king is a scholar with both virtue and talent, but I am afraid he is not a great general.

古文：承曰： 公未见知耳，铅刀岂无一割之用！ 
现代文：司马说： 您不知道就是了，即使是铅刀又怎能连一割之用都没有呢！ 
English: Sima said, "You just don't know. How can even a lead knife not be even one-tenth as useful?"

古文：敦谓钱凤曰： 彼不知惧而学壮语，足知其不武，无能为也。 
现代文：王敦对钱凤说： 他不知畏惧却要学豪言壮语，足以知晓他不通军事，不会有什么作为。 
English: Wang Dun said to Qian Feng, "He is fearless, but he needs to learn how to speak boldly. It is enough to know that he is not familiar with military affairs and will not be able to do anything.

古文：乃听之镇。
现代文：于是听任司马到任。
English: As a result, Sima was appointed to the post.

古文：时湘土荒残，公私困弊，承躬自俭约，倾心绥抚，甚有能名。
现代文：当时湘州土地荒芜，官府和私人均财用短缺，司马带头节俭，尽心安绥和抚恤民众，很有能干的名声。
English: At that time, land in Hunan was barren, and both government and private sectors were short of funds. Sima took the lead in frugality, and did his best to pacify and support the people. He had a reputation for being very capable.

古文：高句丽寇辽东，慕容仁与战，大破之，自是不敢犯仁境。
现代文：高句丽进犯辽东，慕容仁与他们作战，大败来犯之敌，高句丽从此不敢侵犯慕容仁的边境。
English: Goguryeo invaded Liaodong, Murongren fought with them, defeated the invading enemy, and Goguryeo no longer dared to invade Murongren's border.

古文：中宗元皇帝中太兴四年
现代文：太兴四年
English: Four years of Taixing

古文：春，二月，徐龛复请降。
现代文：春季，二月，徐龛再次向东晋请降。
English: In the spring, in February, Xu Yao once again went to the Eastern Jin Dynasty to ask for a reduction.

古文：张茂筑灵钧台，基高九仞。
现代文：张茂修筑灵均台，台基高九仞。
English: Zhang Maoshu built the Lingyuan Platform, with a height of nine meters as its foundation.

古文：武陵阎曾夜叩府门呼曰： 武公遣我来，言 何故劳民筑台！  
现代文：武陵人闫曾夜间叩击张茂府门，大声呼叫说： 武公张轨派我来说： 为什么扰劳百姓修筑此台！  
English: The people of Wuling once knocked on Zhang Maofu's gate at night, shouting loudly: "Wu Gong Zhang Railing sent me to say: Why bother the people to build this platform!

古文：有司以为妖，请杀之。
现代文：主管官员认为这是妖人，请求把闫曾处死。
English: The official in charge thought it was a demon and requested that Xing Zeng be executed.

古文：茂曰： 吾信劳民。曾称先君之命以规我，何谓妖呼！ 
现代文：张茂说： 我的确使百姓辛劳，闫曾假称先君的意思来规劝我，怎能说是妖孽呢！ 
English: Zhang Mao said, "I have indeed made the people work hard. How can it be said that I am a sorcerer, when I once pretended to be the forefather's will and tried to persuade them?

古文：乃为之罢役。
现代文：于是为此停止工役。
English: As a result, the forced labor was stopped.

古文：三月，癸亥，日中有黑子。
现代文：三月，癸亥，太阳中出现黑子。
English: In March, in the middle of winter, black spots appear in the sun.

古文：著作佐郎河东郭璞以帝用刑过差，上疏，以为： 阴阳错缪，皆繁刑所致。
现代文：著作佐郎、河东人郭璞认为是元帝滥用刑罚所致，上疏说： 阴阳发生错乱，都是因刑罚苛繁所致。
English: The authors, Saro and Guo Wei, a person from Hedong, believed that it was caused by the abuse of punishment by the Yuan Emperor. Shang Su said: The disorder of yin and yang was caused by the harsh punishment.

古文：赦不欲数，然子产知铸刑书非政之善，不得不作者，须以救弊故也。
现代文：赦免罪人不应当频繁，然而春秋郑国的子产也知道铸刑书并非治国的好办法，不得不这样做的原因，是想以挽救时弊。
English: Pardoning criminals should not be frequent, however, the sons and daughters of the Spring and Autumn Zheng also know that the casting of the punishment book is not a good way to govern the country. The reason for having to do so is to save the time.

古文：今之宜赦，理亦如之。 
现代文：现在应当赦免罪人，道理也是一样的。 
English: Now it is time to pardon the guilty, and the principle is the same.

古文：后赵中山公虎攻幽州刺史段匹磾于厌次，孔苌攻其统内诸城，悉拔之。
现代文：后赵的中山公石虎，进攻驻守厌次城的东晋幽州刺史段匹，孔苌攻克了幽州辖属的多座城池。
English: Later, Zhao's Zhongshan Gong Shihu attacked Dongjin Yuzhou, which was garrisoned in Weiyi City, and conquered many cities and towns under Yuzhou's jurisdiction.

古文：段文鸯言于匹磾曰： 我以勇闻，故为民所倚望。
现代文：段文鸯对段匹说： 我以勇悍闻名，所以受民众倚重，寄予期望。
English: Duan Wenqi said to Duan Pi: I am famous for my bravery, so I am trusted by the people and have high expectations.

古文：今视民被掠而不救，是怯也。
现代文：现在眼看百姓被劫掠而不去救助，这是怯弱的表现。
English: Now it is a sign of cowardice to see people being robbed and not help them.

古文：民失所望，谁复为我致死！ 
现代文：民众失去期望，谁还有再为我效命呢？ 
English: If the people lose hope, who will continue to serve me?

古文：遂帅壮士数十骑出战，杀后赵兵甚众。
现代文：于是率领壮士数十人驰马出战，杀掉的后赵士兵为数众多。
English: As a result, he led dozens of strong men to go to war on horseback, killing a large number of Hou Zhao soldiers.

古文：马乏，伏不能起。虎呼之曰： 兄与我俱夷狄，久欲与兄同为一家。
现代文：段文鸯的坐骑疲乏过度，伏地无法站起，石虎对段文鸯大声呼叫说： 兄长和我同是夷狄之人，我很久以来就想和兄长像一家人一样相处。
English: Duan Wenzhong's horse was too tired and could not stand up. Shihu called out loudly to Duan Wenzhong, saying, "My brother and I are both Yidi people. I have wanted to get along with my brother like a family for a long time.

古文：今天不违愿，于此得相见，何为复战！
现代文：如今上天成全了我的愿望，和兄长在这里相见，为什么还要打呢！
English: Now that God has fulfilled my wish to meet my brother here, why do we still have to fight?

古文：请释仗。 
现代文：请放下武器。 
English: Please put down your weapons.

古文：文鸯骂曰： 汝为寇贼，当死日久，吾兄不用吾策，故令汝得至此。
现代文：段文鸯骂道： 你是寇贼，早就该死了，只因我的兄长不用我的计谋，才让你活到今天。
English: Duanwen scolded: You are a bandit, you should have died a long time ago, it is only because my brother did not use my trick that you are still alive today.

古文：我宁斗死，不为汝屈！ 
现代文：我宁愿战死，决不向你屈服！ 
English: I would rather die in battle than give in to you!

古文：遂下马苦战，槊折，执刀战不已，自辰至申。
现代文：于是下马苦战。长矛折断后，又持刀苦斗不止，从辰时一直打到申时。
English: So they dismounted and fought hard. After the lance broke, they continued to fight bitterly with their swords, from the hour of the hour to the hour of the hour.

古文：后赵兵四面解马罗披自鄣，前执文鸯；文鸯力竭被执，城内夺气。
现代文：后赵士兵四面包围，解下战马的罗披护住身体，向前抓住段文鸯。段文鸯力竭被俘，城内兵民因此斗志消沉。
English: Afterward, Zhao soldiers surrounded him on all four sides, took off the robe of the war horse to protect his body, and grabbed forward Duan Wenshu. Duan Wenshu was captured with all his strength, and the soldiers and civilians in the city were depressed.

古文：匹磾欲单骑归朝，邵续之弟乐安内史洎勒兵不听。
现代文：匹欲单骑归朝，邵续之弟乐安内史洎勒兵不听；洎复欲执台使王英送于虎。
English: He wanted to return to the imperial court on horseback, but his younger brother, Le An, did not listen to him; he wanted to return to the throne, so he sent Wang Ying to the tiger.

古文：洎复欲执台使王英送于虎，匹磾正色责之曰： 卿不能遵兄之志，逼吾不得归朝，亦已甚矣！复欲执天子使者？
现代文：匹正色责之曰： 卿不能遵兄之志，逼吾不得归朝，亦已甚矣，复欲执天子使者；我虽夷狄，所未闻也！ 
English: "You can't force me to return to the Imperial Court, and it's already too late. I've lost my desire to hold on to the messenger of the Son of Heaven. Even though I'm a barbarian, it's unheard of!

古文：我虽夷狄，所未闻也！ 洎与兄子缉、竺等舆榇出降。
现代文：洎与兄子缉、竺等舆榇出降。
English: He and his elder brother and son-in-law, Zou, and others were promoted and demoted according to public opinion.

古文：匹磾见虎曰： 我受晋恩，志在灭汝，不幸至此，不能为汝敬也。 
现代文：匹见虎曰： 我受晋恩，志在灭汝，不幸至此，不能为汝敬也。 
English: Pichenghu said, "I have received the grace of promotion, and I am determined to destroy you. Unfortunately, I cannot respect you.

古文：后赵王勒及虎素与匹磾结为兄弟，虎即起拜之。
现代文：后赵王勒及虎素与匹结为兄弟，虎即起拜之。
English: Later, Zhao Wangle and Tiger Su became brothers, and Tiger worshipped him.

古文：勒以匹磾为冠军将军，文鸯为左中郎将，散诸流民三万馀户，复其本业，置守宰以抚之。
现代文：勒以匹为冠军将军，文鸯为左中郎将，散诸流民三万余户，复其本业，置守宰以抚之。
English: Le took Pi as the champion general, Wenyi as the left middle commander, scattered them to more than 30,000 displaced households, resumed his own business, and kept Zhai and Fuzhi.

古文：于是幽、冀、并三州皆入于后赵。
现代文：于是幽州、冀州、并州都被并入后赵版图。
English: As a result, Yuzhou, Jizhou, and Bingzhou were all incorporated into the post-Zhao territory.

古文：匹磾不为勒礼，常著朝服，持晋节；久之，与文鸯、邵续皆为后赵所杀。
现代文：段匹不行后赵的礼节，经常穿着东晋的朝服，手持晋朝的符节。久而久之，段匹和段文鸯、邵续等同被后赵所杀。
English: When Duanpi failed to follow Zhao's etiquette, he often wore the Eastern Jin Dynasty's imperial robes and held the Jin Dynasty's symbols. Over time, Duanpi and Duanwen and Shao Lian were equally killed by Emperor Zhao.

古文：五月，庚申，诏免中州良民遭难为扬州诸郡僮客者，以备征役。
现代文：五月，庚申，中州的良民因为战乱，有不少沦为扬州诸郡豪强士族的家僮、佃客，元帝下诏免除他们的奴仆身份，准备战争时征召服役。
English: In May, Goshun, the good people of Chuzhou were affected by the war, and many of them were reduced to being the servants and clients of the powerful warrior clans in the counties of Yangzhou. Emperor Yuan issued an edict exempting them from the status of slaves, and they were conscripted to serve in the war.

古文：尚书令刁协之谋也，由是众益怨之。
现代文：这是尚书令刁协的主意，因此豪门士族都更怨恨他。
English: This was the idea of Shang Shuling's association, so the high-ranking nobles all resented him even more.

古文：终南山崩。
现代文：终南山出现山崩。
English: A landslide occurred on Nanshan Mountain.

古文：秋，七月，甲戌，以尚书仆射戴渊为征西将军、都督司、兗、豫、并、雍、冀六州诸军事、司州刺史，镇合肥；丹杨尹刘隗为镇北将军、都督青、徐、幽、平四州诸军事、青州刺史，镇淮阴。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲戌，东晋任命尚书仆射戴渊为征西将军，都督司、兖、豫、并、雍、冀六州诸军事，司州刺史，镇守合肥；任丹杨尹刘隗为镇北将军，都督青、徐、幽、平四州军务及青州刺史，镇守淮阴。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Eastern Jin Dynasty of Jiaozuo appointed Shang Shudi to be the general of the Western Expedition, the military governor of six states, namely, Jiaozuo, Henan, Henan, Yonghe and Hebei, and the governor of Hefei; and appointed Danyang Yin Liu to be the general of the North, the military governor of four states, namely, Qing, Xu, Yu and Ping, and the governor of Qing, and the governor of Huaiyin.

古文：皆假节领兵，名为讨胡，实备王敦也。
现代文：此二人均持朝廷符节统领军队，名义上是征讨胡人，其实是防备王敦。
English: Both of them led the army with the imperial insignia, nominally to subjugate the Hu people, but actually to protect Wang Dun.

古文：隗虽在外，而朝廷机事，进退士大夫，帝皆与之密谋。
现代文：刘隗虽在外地，但朝廷的机密事宜、任免士大夫等，元帝都和他秘密商议。
English: Although Liu Bei was out of the country, Emperor Yuan secretly discussed with him the confidential matters of the imperial court, the appointment and dismissal of court officials, and so on.

古文：敦遗隗书曰： 顷承圣上顾眄足下，今大贼未灭，中原鼎沸，欲与足下及周生之徒戮力王室，共静海内。
现代文：王敦送信给刘隗说： 近来承蒙圣上垂青您，现在国家的大敌未能翦灭，中原鼎沸，我想和您以及周等人同心合力辅佐王室，共同平定海内。
English: Wang Dun sent a message to Liu Bei, saying: Recently, thanks to the blessing of the Holy Father, you have been blessed with youth. Now, the great enemy of the country has not been annihilated, and the Central Plains are in full swing. I would like to work with you and Zhou and others to support the royal family and jointly pacify the inland.

古文：若其泰也，则帝祚于是乎隆；若其否也，则天下永无望矣。 
现代文：此事如能行得通，那么国运由此昌隆。否则国家便永远没有希望了。 
English: If this can work, then the national movement will flourish. Otherwise, the country will never have hope.

古文：隗答曰：  鱼相忘于江湖，人相忘于道术。  竭股肱之力，效力以忠贞 ，吾之志也。 
现代文：刘隗回答说：  鱼得处于江湖就会彼此相忘，人为追求道义也会彼此相忘 ， 竭尽自身的力量，以效忠贞 ，这是我的志向。 
English: Liu Yao replied, "Fish will forget each other when they are in the river and lake, and people will forget each other when they pursue morality. I will do my best to be loyal and faithful. This is my aspiration."

古文：敦得书，甚怒。
现代文：王敦得到这封信，勃然大怒。
English: Upon receiving the letter, Wang Dong flew into a rage.

古文：壬午，以骠骑将军王导为侍中、司空、假节、录尚书、领中书监。
现代文：壬午，东晋任骠骑将军王导为侍中、司空、假节、录尚书、领中书监。
English: At the same time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed the cavalry general Wang Du as the attendant, the steward of the sky, the false festival, the record of the book, and the supervisor of the book.

古文：帝以敦故，并疏忌导。
现代文：元帝本因王敦缘故，连同王导也疏远、猜忌。
English: Because of Wang Dun, the former emperor and Wang Du were estranged and suspicious of each other.

古文：御史中丞周嵩上疏，以为： 导忠素竭诚，辅成大业，不宜听孤臣之言，惑疑似之说，放逐旧德，以佞伍贤，亏既往之恩，招将来之患。 
现代文：御史中丞周嵩上疏认为： 王导忠诚无私、尽心竭力，帮助建立大业，不应当听信个别臣僚之言，被似是而非的说法迷惑，放逐旧日的功臣，使其与奸佞同伍。这样会使往日的恩德荡然无存，为今后招来祸患。 
English: Historian Zhou Song Shangsuo believed that: Wang Du was loyal and selfless, and did his best to help build a great cause. He should not listen to the words of individual ministers, be confused by specious arguments, banish the heroes of the past, and make them join the traitors. This will make the kindness of the past disappear and bring disaster in the future.

古文：帝颇感寤，导由是得全。
现代文：元帝颇有感悟，王导的职位因此得以保全。
English: Emperor Yuan was quite impressed, and Wang Du's position was thus preserved.

古文：八月，常山崩。
现代文：八月，常山山崩。
English: In August, Mount Cho collapsed.

古文：豫州刺史祖逖，以戴渊吴士，虽有才望，无弘致远识；且己翦荆棘、收河南地，而渊雍容，一旦来统之，意甚怏怏；又闻王敦与刘、刁构隙，将有内难，知大功不遂，感激发病；九月，壬寅，卒于雍丘。
现代文：豫州刺史祖逖认为戴渊是吴地人，虽具有才能和名望，但没有远大的抱负和远见卓识；而且自己披荆斩棘，收复河南失地，而戴渊却从从容容，突然前来坐享其成，心中怏怏不乐。又听说王敦与刘隗、刁协之间相互结怨，国家将有内乱，知道统一北方的大业难以成功，受到很大刺激，引发了重病。九月，壬寅，死于雍丘。
English: Zhu Xi, the Henan Provincial Historian, believed that Dai Yuan was a native of Wuxi. Although he had talent and fame, he did not have great ambition and foresight. Moreover, he had made great efforts to recover the lost territory in Henan. However, Dai Yuan did not take it easy and suddenly came to enjoy his success, and his heart was not happy. He also heard that Wang Dun, Liu Xi, and Zou Xie had a grudge against each other and that there would be civil unrest in the country. Knowing that the great cause of unifying the north would not succeed, he was greatly stimulated and caused a serious illness. In September, he died in Yongqiu,

古文：豫州士女若丧父母，谯、梁间皆为立祠。
现代文：豫州的男女百姓都像失去了自己的亲生父母，谯国、粱国之间都为祖逖建立祠堂。
English: Both men and women in Yuzhou feel as if they have lost their own biological parents, and ancestral halls have been built for their ancestors in and between the two countries.

古文：王敦久怀异志，闻逖卒，益无所惮。
现代文：王敦长久以来就心怀不轨，听说祖逖去世，更加肆无忌惮。
English: Wang Dun had been harboring evil thoughts for a long time. When he heard that Zu Xi passed away, he became even more unscrupulous.

古文：冬，十月，壬午，以逖弟约为平西将军、豫州刺史，领逖之众。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬午，东晋朝廷让祖逖的兄弟祖约任平西将军和豫州刺史，统领祖逖的部众。
English: In the winter, October, Renpo, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court let Zu Yao's brother Zu Yo serve as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Yuzhou, leading Zu Yao's subordinates.

古文：约无绥御之才，不为士卒所附。
现代文：祖约缺乏抚慰和驾驭士众的才能，所以不受士卒们的拥戴。
English: Zuyo lacked the ability to soothe and control the soldiers, so he was not loved by the soldiers.

古文：初，范阳李产避乱依逖，见约志趣异常，谓所亲曰： 吾以北方鼎沸，故远来就此，冀全宗族。
现代文：当初，范阳人李产为避战乱依附祖逖，见祖约志趣不同寻常，便对自己亲近的人说： 我因为北方局势动荡，所以远远地来到这里，希望能保全宗族家人。
English: At first, Li Sang, a Fanyang man, clung to his ancestor to avoid the war, and when he saw that his ancestor's interest was unusual, he said to those close to him: Because of the turbulent situation in the north, I came here from far away, hoping to preserve my clan family.

古文：今观约所为，有不可测之志。
现代文：现在我看祖约的所作所为，心怀叵测。
English: Now I look at the deeds of the patriarchs and wonder.

古文：吾托名姻亲，当早自为计，无事复陷身于不义也，尔曹不可以目前之利而忘久长之策。 
现代文：我要以联结姻亲的名义，及早为自己安排脱身之计，不再侍奉再次使我陷身于不义境地的人了。你们这些人不可因为眼前的利益而忘却长久之计。 
English: In the name of the alliance of the in-laws, I want to arrange a way out for myself as soon as possible, and I will no longer serve those who have once again put me in an unjust situation. You people must not forget the long-term plan because of the immediate benefits.

古文：乃帅子弟十馀人间行归乡里。
现代文：于是率领子弟十多人抄小路回归乡里。
English: He then led more than a dozen of his children on a short walk back to the countryside.

古文：十一月，皇孙衍生。
现代文：十一月，皇孙司马衍出生。
English: In November, the emperor's grandson Sima Yan was born.

古文：后赵王勒悉召武乡耆旧诣襄国，与之共坐欢饮。
现代文：后赵王石勒把武乡全部的耆旧故老们召到襄国，和他们坐在一起欢乐宴饮。
English: Afterward, Zhao Wangshile invited all the old people of Wuxiang to Xiangguo, and sat down with them for a joyful banquet.

古文：初，勒微时，与李阳邻居，数争沤麻池相殴，阳由是独不敢来。
现代文：当初，石勒身份卑微低贱时，和李阳是邻居，多次因争夺沤麻的池子相互殴斗，所以只有李阳因此不敢来。
English: At first, when Shiller's status was humble and lowly, he and Li Yang were neighbors and repeatedly fought each other over the nettle pond, so only Li Yang was afraid to come.

古文：勒曰： 阳，壮士也；沤麻，布衣之恨；孤方兼容天下，岂仇匹夫乎！ 
现代文：石勒说： 李阳是勇士。当初因沤麻结恨，是平民时的恩怨，孤正准备兼并天下，怎会怀恨一介平民呢？ 
English: Shi Ler said: Li Yang is a warrior. At the beginning, he held a grudge because of stinging nettles. It was a grudge when he was a commoner. He was preparing to annex the world. How could he hold a grudge against a commoner?

古文：遽召与饮，引阳臂曰： 孤往日厌卿老拳，卿亦饱孤毒手。 
现代文：于是急速征召李阳前来参加宴饮。石勒挽着李阳的胳臂说： 孤过去饱受您的老拳，您也饱尝我的毒手。 
English: So he quickly summoned Li Yang to come to the banquet. Shi Le took Li Yang's arm and said: You have suffered from your old fist in the past, and you have also suffered from my cruel hand.

古文：因拜参军都尉。
现代文：于是封李阳为参军都尉。
English: As a result, Li Yang was given the rank of lieutenant.

古文：以武乡比丰、沛，复之三世。
现代文：石勒把自己的故里武乡，比作汉皇室的故里丰县和沛县，免除武乡三代人的赋税和徭役。
English: Shi Le compared his hometown, Wuxiang, to Feng County and Pae County, the ancestral home of the Han royal family, exempting three generations of Wuxiang from taxes and corvée.

古文：勒以民始复业，资储未丰，于是重制禁酿，郊祀宗庙，皆用醴酒，行之数年，无复酿者。
现代文：石勒因为百姓刚刚恢复旧业，财物储备不丰饶，因此严厉禁止酿酒。郊祀宗庙，都用一夜而成的醴酒。如此推行数年，不再有酿酒的人。
English: Because the people of Shiloh had just resumed their old occupations, and their financial reserves were not abundant, they strictly prohibited the brewing of alcohol. The suburbs worshiped the ancestral temple, and they all used the liquor made overnight. After several years of this, there were no more people brewing alcohol.

古文：十二月，以慕容廆为都督幽、平二州、东夷诸军事、车骑将军、平州牧，封辽东公，单于如故，遣谒者即授印绶，听承制置官司守宰。
现代文：十二月，元帝任命慕容为都督幽州、平州、东夷诸军事及车骑将军、平州牧，封为辽东公，仍旧保留单于的称号，派遣谒者当即授予印绶，允许他秉承皇帝旨意设置官府机构、委任官员。
English: In December, Emperor Yuan appointed Murong as the governor of Yuzhou, Pingzhou, Dongyi military and cavalry generals, Pingzhou pastors, and was named Liaodonggong. He still retained the title of singly, and those who sent him were immediately awarded seal money, allowing him to set up government agencies and appoint officials in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：廆于是备置僚属，以裴嶷、游邃为长史，裴开为司马，韩寿为别驾，阳耽为军谘祭酒，崔焘为主簿，黄泓、郑林参军事。
现代文：慕容于是配置了完备的僚属，任用裴嶷、游邃为长史，裴开为司马，韩寿为别驾，阳耽为军谘祭酒，崔焘为主簿，黄泓、郑林参与军事。
English: Murong then arranged a complete set of subordinates, appointing Pei Hao and You Hao as Long Shi, Pei Kai as Sima, Han Shou as Bie Jie, Yang Tan as Military Adviser and Sacrificial Wine, Cui Hao as Master, Huang Qi and Zheng Lin to participate in military affairs.

古文：廆立子皝为世子。作东横，以平原刘赞为祭酒，使皝与诸生同受业，廆得暇，亦亲临听之。
现代文：慕容又立儿子慕容为世子，并建造学舍，让平原人刘出任祭酒，让慕容和学子们一块从师学习。慕容闲暇时，自己也前来听讲。
English: Murong also set up his son Murong as the heir, and built a schoolhouse, let the plainsman Liu serve as the sacrificial wine, and let Murong and the students study together. When Murong was at leisure, he also came to listen to the lecture.

古文：皝雄毅多权略，喜经术，国人称之。
现代文：慕容性格勇敢坚定，处事颇多权略，爱好研习经义，受到国人的称赞。
English: Murong's character is brave and firm, he has a lot of power and strategy, likes to study the sutras, and is praised by the Chinese people.

古文：廆徙慕容翰镇辽东，慕容仁镇平郭。
现代文：慕容调慕容翰镇守辽东，让慕容仁镇守平郭。
English: Let Murongjun and Muronghan guard Liaodong, and let Murongren guard Pingguo.

古文：翰抚安民夷，甚有威惠；仁亦次之。
现代文：慕容翰安顿、抚慰百姓和胡夷，恩威并重；慕容仁也追随效仿他。
English: Muronghan settled down, comforted the people and Hui, and was respected equally; Murongren also followed his example.

古文：拓跋猗㐌妻惟氏，忌代王郁律之强，恐不利于其子，乃杀郁律而立其子贺傉，大人死者数十人。
现代文：拓跋猗的妻子惟氏疑忌代王拓跋郁律势力强盛，怕对自己所生的儿子不利，于是杀害了拓跋郁律，立自己所生的拓跋贺为世子，部落首领被杀的有数十人。
English: The wife of Tuobao, Wei Shi, suspected that the power of Tuobao Yu Lu was strong in the reign of King Tuobao, and feared that it would be unfavorable to her own son, so she killed Tuobao Yu Lu and set up her own son, Tuobao He, as the heir. Dozens of tribal leaders were killed.

古文：郁律之子什翼犍，幼在襁褓，其母王氏匿于袴中，祝之曰： 天苟存汝，则勿啼。 久之，不啼，乃得免。
现代文：拓跋郁律的儿子拓跋什翼犍此时年龄幼小，尚在襁褓之中，母亲王氏把他藏匿在自己的裤中，对天祷祝说： 天命如果想让你活下去，你就别啼哭， 结果很久不哭，因此幸免。
English: At this time, Tuoba Yu Lu's son, Tuoba Shih Tzu, was very young and still in his infancy. His mother, Wang Zi, hid him in her pants and said to the heavenly prayer: If the fate of heaven wants you to live, don't cry. As a result, he didn't cry for a long time, so he was spared.

古文：惟氏专制国政，遣使聘后赵，后赵人谓之 女国使 。
现代文：惟氏把持了国政，派遣使者与后赵修好，后赵人称使者为 女国使 。
English: However, she took control of state affairs and sent an envoy to mend fences with Hou Zhao. Hou Zhao called the envoy a "female envoy."

