古文：太宗上
现代文：太宗本纪
English: Taizong Hongji

古文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝讳世民，高祖第二子也。
现代文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝名世民，高祖第二个儿子。
English: Emperor Taizong, the second son of Emperor Gaozu, was a great man of the world.

古文：母曰太穆顺圣皇后窦氏。
现代文：母名太穆顺圣皇后窦氏。
English: Her mother's name was Empress Dou of Taimo Shunsheng.

古文：隋开皇十八年十二月戊午，生于武功之别馆。
现代文：隋朝开皇十八年十二月二十二日，出生在武功之正宫以外的宫室。
English: On December 22nd, the 18th year of the Sui Dynasty, he was born in a palace other than the main palace.

古文：时有二龙戏于馆门之外，三日而去。
现代文：当时有两条龙在馆门之外游戏，三天以后飞去。
English: At that time, there were two dragons playing outside the gate of the museum. Three days later, they flew away.

古文：高祖之临岐州，太宗时年四岁。
现代文：高祖光临岐州，太宗当时四岁。
English: Gaozu was born in Kishu and Taizong was four years old at the time.

古文：有书生自言善相，谒高祖曰： 公贵人也，且有贵子。 
现代文：有个书生自称善于看相，晋见高祖道： 您是贵人，而且有贵子。 
English: There was a scholar who claimed to be good at reading faces, and he told Gao Zu: You are a noble person, and you have a noble son.

古文：见太宗，曰： 龙凤之姿，天日之表，年将二十，必能济世安民矣。 
现代文：见到太宗，道： 龙凤的姿容，天日之相貌，到二十岁，必定能济世安民。 
English: When he saw Taizong, he said, "With the appearance of a dragon and phoenix and the appearance of the sun and the moon, when you are twenty years old, you will surely be able to bring peace and security to the world."

古文：高祖惧其言泄，将杀之，忽失所在，因采 济世安民 之义以为名焉。
现代文：高祖害怕他的言语泄露，将要杀他，忽然不见，因此采纳 济世安民 之义来作为名字。
English: Gaozu was afraid that his words would be leaked, that he would be killed, and that he would suddenly disappear, so he adopted the name "Ji Shi Anmin no Righteousness" (济世安民之義).

古文：太宗幼聪睿，玄鉴深远，临机果断，不拘小节，时人莫能测也。
现代文：太宗幼时聪明机智，高明的见解非常深远，面临关键大事刚毅果断，不拘小节，当时人没有一个人能够估量他。
English: When Taizong was young, he was clever and witty, his insight was far-reaching, he was brave and decisive in the face of crucial events, and he was not petty. At that time, no one could measure up to him.

古文：大业末，炀帝于雁门为突厥所围，太宗应募救援，隶屯卫将军云定兴营。
现代文：大业末年，隋炀帝在雁门被突厥所包围，太宗响应招募去救援，隶属于屯卫将军云定兴大营。
English: At the end of the Taie period, the Sui Dynasty was besieged by the Turks at the Gate of the Wild Goose. In response, Taizong was recruited to go to the rescue. He was affiliated with the general of the garrison, Yun Dingxing.

古文：将行，谓定兴曰： 必赍旗鼓以设疑兵。
现代文：将要出行，太宗对云定兴道： 一定要携带旗鼓来设置疑兵。
English: About to travel, Taizong said to Yunding Xing: "Be sure to bring a banner and drum to set up doubters."

古文：且始毕可汗举国之师，敢围天子，必以国家仓卒无援。
现代文：再说始毕可汗全国的军队敢于包围天子，必定是认为国家仓猝之间无人救援。
English: Moreover, when the army of the whole country dared to encircle Tianzi at the beginning of Bi Khan, they must have thought that there was no one to rescue the country in a hurry.

古文：我张军容，令数十里幡旗相续，夜则钲鼓相应，虏必谓救兵云集，望尘而遁矣。
现代文：我们张大军容，让军旗连绵数十里，夜晚就让钲和鼓声互相呼应，胡虏必定认为救兵已大军云集，就会望军队扬起的尘土而逃遁了。
English: We display a large military presence, let the military flag fly for dozens of miles, and let the cymbals and drums echo each other at night. Hurru must think that the rescuers have gathered a large army, and they will look at the dust raised by the army and flee.

古文：不然，彼众我寡，悉军来战，必不能支矣。 
现代文：不然的话，敌众我寡，他们全军来战，我们必不能支持了。 
English: Otherwise, we will not be able to support our enemies, who are few and far between, and whose entire army is coming to fight.

古文：定兴从焉。
现代文：定兴采纳了太宗的建议。
English: Ding Xing accepted Taizong's suggestion.

古文：师次崞县，突厥候骑驰告始毕曰：王师大至。
现代文：云定兴的军队驻扎在崞县，突厥侦察骑兵飞马报告始毕道： 隋朝大军已到。 
English: Yun Dingxing's army was stationed in Jixian County, and the Turkish reconnaissance cavalry Pegasus report began: The Sui Dynasty army has arrived.

古文：由是解围而遁。
现代文：由此突厥解围遁逃而去。
English: As a result, the Turks broke the siege and fled.

古文：及高祖之守太原，太宗时年十八。
现代文：等到高祖留守太原，太宗已经十八岁了。
English: By the time Gaozu left Taiyuan, Taizong was already eighteen years old.

古文：有高阳贼帅魏刀兒，自号历山飞。来攻太原，高祖击之，深入贼阵。
现代文：有高阳贼酋魏刀儿，自己号称历山飞，来攻太原，高祖击之，深入贼人阵营中。
English: Gaoyang bandit chief Wei Cutter, who called himself Leshanfei, came to attack Taiyuan. Gaozhu defeated him and penetrated deep into the bandit camp.

古文：太宗以轻骑突围而进，射之，所向皆披靡，拔高祖于万众之中。
现代文：太宗用精锐的骑兵突围而进，弓箭所射，敌军溃散，在万众敌营之中救出高祖。
English: Taizong used the elite cavalry to break through the encirclement, shot by bows and arrows, the enemy army broke up, and rescued Gaozu among the many enemy camps.

古文：适会步兵至，高祖与太宗又奋击，大破之。
现代文：恰值我步军已到，高祖与太宗又奋力攻击，大破敌军。
English: Just as our marching troops arrived, Gaozu and Taizong attacked again and defeated the enemy.

古文：时隋祚已终，太宗潜图义举，每折节下士，推财养客，群盗大侠，莫不愿效死力。
现代文：当时隋朝命运已终，太宗暗中图谋起义，常常降低身份推崇士人，拿出财物来供养门客，群侠大盗，没有一个人不愿效死力。
English: At that time, the fate of the Sui Dynasty was over. Taizong secretly plotted an uprising, often lowering the status of revered scholars, taking out property to support his guests, and bandits. No one was unwilling to use deadly force.

古文：及义兵起，乃率兵略徇西河，克之。
现代文：等到义军起事，乃率军攻打西河并宣布政令，攻下了西河。
English: When the rebels rose up, he led the army to attack the West River and announced a government decree, capturing the West River.

古文：拜右领大都督，右三军皆隶焉，封燉煌郡公。
现代文：任命为右领大都督，右三军都隶属于他，被封为火敦煌郡公。
English: He was appointed as the right-collar grand governor, the three right-wing armies were subordinate to him, and he was named the Fire Dunhuang County Governor.

古文：大军西上贾胡堡，隋将宋老生率精兵二万屯霍邑，以拒义师。
现代文：起义大军往西攻打贾胡堡，隋将宋老生率领精兵二万人屯扎在霍邑以抗拒义军。
English: The insurgent army attacked Jahu Fort to the west, and the Sui Dynasty stationed Song Laosheng, leading 20,000 elite soldiers, in Huoyu to resist the rebels.

古文：会久雨粮尽，高祖与裴寂议，且还太原，以图后举。
现代文：恰值久雨粮尽，高祖与裴寂议论，暂且回太原，以后再图谋举事。
English: Just as the long rains and grain ran out, Gaozu and Peizhang discussed, temporarily returned to Taiyuan, and then tried to do something.

古文：太宗曰： 本兴大义以救苍生，当须先入咸阳，号令天下；遇小敌即班师，将恐从义之徒一朝解体。
现代文：太宗曰： 本来兴起大义是为了挽救苍生百姓，应当先攻下咸阳，号令天下；遇到小小敌军就退军，恐怕跟从起义的人将会一时解散。
English: Emperor Taizong said: Originally, the Great Righteousness arose in order to save the common people. It was necessary to conquer Xianyang first, and then proclaim it to the world. If a small enemy army was encountered, the army would retreat. I am afraid that those who followed the uprising would temporarily disband.

古文：还守太原一城之地，此为贼耳，何以自全！ 
现代文：回军守卫太原一个城池，这是为贼打算，拿什么来自我保全！ 
English: The returning troops are guarding a castle in Taiyuan. This is a plan for thieves to take what they can for their own protection!

古文：高祖不纳，促令引发。
现代文：高祖不采纳，催促命令引军出发。
English: Gaozu did not accept this, and urged that the order to lead the troops be issued.

古文：太宗遂号泣于外，声闻帐中。
现代文：太宗于是在外大声嚎泣，哭声传到高祖帐中。
English: So Taizong cried loudly outside, and the cries spread to Gaozou.

古文：高祖召问其故，对曰： 今兵以义动，进战则必克，退还则必散。
现代文：高祖召见他问哭的缘故，太宗对答说： 现在军队凭借仁义起事，进战则必胜，退还则军队必溃散。
English: Gaozu summoned him to ask the reason for his tears, and Taizong replied, "Nowadays, the army revolts by virtue of benevolence and righteousness. If it goes to war, it will be victorious, but if it retreats, the army will be dispersed."

古文：众散于前，敌乘于后，死亡须臾而至，是以悲耳。 
现代文：众军在前面溃散，敌军在后面乘虚进攻，死亡马上就到面前，因此悲痛啊！ 
English: The army is dispersed in front, the enemy attacks in the rear to take advantage of the situation, death immediately comes to the fore, so woe!

古文：高祖乃悟而止。
现代文：高祖这才醒悟而停止回军。
English: Only then did Gaozu come to his senses and stop returning to the army.

古文：八月己卯，雨霁，高祖引师趣霍邑。
现代文：八月一日，雨止，高祖率军奔赴霍邑。
English: On August 1, when the rain stopped, Gao Zu and his army rushed to Huoyu.

古文：太宗恐老生不出战，乃将数骑先诣其城下，举鞭指麾，若将围城者，以激怒之。
现代文：太宗怕宋老生不出战，于是率领几个骑兵先奔到城下，举鞭指挥，好像要围城的样子，以激怒宋老生。
English: Taizong was afraid that Song Laosheng would not fight, so he led several cavalrymen to rush to the city first, raised the whip and commanded, as if to surround the city, in order to anger Song Laosheng.

古文：老生果怒，开门出兵，背城而阵。
现代文：老生果然被激怒，开门出兵，背靠城而扎阵。
English: The old man was really enraged, opened the door and sent out soldiers, with his back to the city.

古文：高祖与建成合阵于城东，太宗及柴绍阵于城南。
现代文：高祖与建成在城东会合扎阵，太宗及柴绍在城南扎阵。
English: Gaozu and Jiancheng met in the east of the city, while Taizong and Chai Shao met in the south of the city.

古文：老生麾兵疾进，先薄高祖，而建成坠马，老生乘之，高祖与建成军咸却。
现代文：老生指挥军队猛冲，首先直逼高祖，而建成坠落马下，老生乘势攻击，高祖与建成都退军。
English: Lao Sheng commanded the army to rush, first pushing Gao Zu, while Jiancheng fell under the horse, Lao Sheng took advantage of the situation to attack, Gao Zu and Jiancheng both withdrew.

古文：太宗自南原率二骑驰下峻坂，冲断其军，引兵奋击，贼众大败，各舍仗而走。
现代文：太宗从南面率领两千骑兵冲下高坡，冲断了老生的军队，率领军队奋力攻击，贼众大败，贼兵都抛弃武器而逃。
English: Taizong led two thousand cavalry from the south to rush down the high slope, broke through the old army, led the army to attack hard, the thieves were defeated, and the thieves abandoned their weapons and fled.

古文：悬门发，老生引绳欲上，遂斩之，平霍邑。
现代文：霍邑悬挂的城门已经悬挂起来，宋老生拉住绳子想要爬上城，太宗趁势斩了他，平定了霍邑。
English: The hanging gate of Huoyu was already up. Song Laosheng pulled the rope to climb up to the city. Taizong took advantage of the situation to kill him and pacify Huoyu.

古文：至河东，关中豪杰争走赴义。
现代文：到了河东，关中豪杰争着奔赴参加义军。
English: When they arrived in Hedong, the heroes of Guanzhong rushed to join the rebels.

古文：太宗请进师入关，取永丰仓以赈穷乏，收群盗以图京师，高祖称善。
现代文：太宗请求进军入关，攻取永丰仓来赈济穷困，收服群盗来谋取京都，高祖认为很好。
English: Taizong asked Gaozu to march into the pass, capture Yongfeng Cang to relieve the poverty, and subdue the bandits to capture Kyoto. Gaozu thought it was a good idea.

古文：太宗以前军济河，先定渭北。
现代文：太宗以前军渡过黄河，先平定渭北。
English: Before Taizong, the army crossed the Yellow River and first settled in northern Shandong.

古文：三辅吏民及诸豪猾诣军门请自效者日以千计，扶老携幼，满于麾下。
现代文：三辅的官员、百姓以及豪杰绅士到军门请求献身报效者每天用上千人来计算，扶老携幼，布满在大旗之下。
English: The officials, commoners, and gallant gentlemen of Sanfu who come to the military gate to ask for dedication and service are counted in thousands every day. They are accompanied by the elderly and children, and they are all under the big flag.

古文：收纳英俊，以备僚列，远近闻者，咸自托焉。
现代文：太宗收留采纳英俊豪杰以作为备用的官员，远近听说此事的人，都来献身投效。
English: Taizong adopted the handsome hero as a standby official, and those who heard about it from far and wide came to devote themselves to the work.

古文：师次于泾阳，胜兵九万，破胡贼刘鹞子，并其众。
现代文：军队在泾阳驻扎，精锐之兵九万，击破胡贼刘鹞子，兼并了他的部队。
English: The army stationed in Fenyang, with ninety thousand elite soldiers, defeated the traitor Liu Zizi and annexed his troops.

古文：留殷开山、刘弘基屯长安故城。
现代文：留下殷开山、刘弘基屯扎在长安故城。
English: Leaving behind Yin Kaishan, Liu Hongji settled in Chang'an Old Town.

古文：太宗自趣司竹，贼帅李仲文、何潘仁、向善志等皆来会，顿于阿城，获兵十三万。
现代文：太宗率军亲自奔赴司竹，贼酋李仲文、何潘仁、向善志等人都率兵来会合，屯兵在阿城，获得兵士十三万。
English: Taizong personally led the army to Sizhu, and the bandit chiefs Li Zhongwen, He Panren, Xiang Zenshi and others led the soldiers to the meeting, and the soldiers were stationed in Acheng, gaining 130,000 soldiers.

古文：长安父老赍牛酒诣旌门者不可胜纪，劳而遣之，一无所受。
现代文：长安父老拿牛、酒到军门的很多，太宗慰劳他们而后送走他们，什么也不接受。
English: Chang'an's father used to bring a lot of cattle and wine to the military gate, too much to comfort them and then send them away, and would not accept anything.

古文：军令严肃，秋毫无所犯。
现代文：军令严明整肃，秋毫无犯。
English: The military ordered a strict purge, and no crimes were committed in the fall.

古文：寻与大军平京城。
现代文：不久太宗与大军平定京城。
English: Soon, Emperor Taizong and a large army conquered the capital.

古文：高祖辅政，受唐国内史，改封秦国公。
现代文：高祖辅助国政，任唐国内史，改封为秦国公。
English: Gao Zu assisted in state affairs, served as Tang's domestic historian, and was renamed Qin Guogong.

古文：会薛举以劲卒十万来逼渭滨，太宗亲击之，大破其众，追斩万余级，略地至于陇坻。
现代文：恰值薛举精兵十万前来逼近渭水之滨，太宗亲自攻打，大破其部众，追杀一万多人，攻占敌军土地一直到陇坻。
English: Just as Xue raised 100,000 elite soldiers and approached the coast of Surabaya, Taizong personally attacked, defeated his subordinates, chased and killed more than 10,000 people, and captured the enemy's land all the way to Handan.

古文：义宁元年十二月，复为右元帅，总兵十万徇东都。
现代文：义宁元年十二月，太宗再次被任命为右元帅，统兵十万攻取东都。
English: In December of the first year of Yining, Taizong was once again appointed as the right field marshal, leading 100,000 soldiers to capture Dongdu.

古文：及将旋，谓左右曰： 贼见吾还，必相追蹑。 
现代文：等到将要回军时，对左右的人道 ：贼人见我回军，必定会相继跟踪追击。 
English: When I am about to return to the army, I am sure that the humanitarians on the right and the thieves on the left will follow and chase me when I return to the army.

古文：设三伏以待之。
现代文：设下三次埋伏以等待追兵。
English: Set up three ambushes to wait for the pursuit.

古文：俄而隋将段达率万余人自后而至，度三王陵，发伏击之，段达大败，追奔至于城下。
现代文：不久，隋将段达率领一万多人从后追到，过三王陵时，太宗发动伏兵攻击，段达大败，追杀敌军直到城下。
English: Soon after, Sui general Duan Da led more than ten thousand people to chase after them. When they passed the Three Kings' Tombs, Taizong launched an ambush attack. Duan Da was defeated and chased the enemy army to the foot of the city.

古文：因于宜阳、新安置熊、谷二州，戍之而还。
现代文：于是在宜阳、新安设置熊、谷二州，派人留守而回。
English: So in Yiyang and Xin'an, they set up Xiongnu and Gu Nizhou, and sent people to stay behind and return.

古文：徙封赵国公。
现代文：迁徙改封太宗为赵国公。
English: Emperor Taizong was transferred to Zhao Guogong.

古文：高祖受禅，拜尚书令、右武候大将军，进封秦王，加授雍州牧。
现代文：高祖即皇帝位，任命太宗为尚书令、右武侯大将军，晋封秦王，加授为雍州牧。
English: Gaozu, that is, the emperor's throne, appointed Taizong as Shang Shuling, Uwuhou Grand General, promoted Qin Wang, and awarded him the title of Yongzhou Mu.

古文：武德元年七月，薛举寇泾州，太宗率众讨之，不利而旋。
现代文：武德元年七月，薛举入侵泾州，太宗率众军加以讨伐，不胜而回。
English: In July of the first year of Wu De, Xue Qiu invaded Zhangzhou, and Emperor Taizong led the army to fight against him, but was defeated and had to return.

古文：九月，薛举死，其子仁杲嗣立。
现代文：九月，薛举死，其子仁杲继立。
English: In September, Xue Jiu died, and his son, Ren Jiu, succeeded him.

古文：太宗又为元帅以击仁杲，相持于折墌城，深沟高垒者六十余日。
现代文：太宗又被任命为元帅攻击仁杲，两军在折土庶城相持不下，双方挖深沟筑起高高营垒相持六十多天。
English: Taizong was also appointed as the field marshal to attack Renju. The two armies could not hold out against each other in the town of Ochi, and the two sides dug a deep ditch and built a high camp to hold out for more than sixty days.

古文：贼众十余万，兵锋甚锐，数来挑战，太宗按甲以挫之。
现代文：贼众十多万，军队的气势强盛，多次前来挑战，太宗按兵不动以挫败他的锐势。
English: With more than a hundred thousand thieves and a powerful army, Taizong repeatedly came to challenge him, but he did not move his troops to defeat him.

古文：贼粮尽，其将牟君才、梁胡郎来降。
现代文：贼人粮食已完，贼将牟君才、梁胡郎前来投降。
English: The thieves have run out of food, so they bring Mujuntai and Liang Hulang to surrender.

古文：太宗谓诸将军曰： 彼气衰矣，吾当取之。 
现代文：太宗对诸将军道 ：敌军锐气丧失衰退了，我军当攻取他们。 
English: Taizong told the generals, "The enemy's army has lost its spirit and is in decline. Our army should attack them."

古文：遣将军庞玉先阵于浅水原南以诱之，贼将宗罗并军来拒，玉军几败。
现代文：派将军庞玉先在浅水原南扎阵以引诱贼人，贼将宗罗日侯集中军队前来抗击，庞玉军几乎失败。
English: He first sent General Pang Yu to the south of the shallow water plain to lure the thieves. The thieves concentrated the army of Zongluo to fight back, and Pang Yu's army almost failed.

古文：既而太宗亲御大军，奄自原北，出其不意。
现代文：不久太宗亲统大军出其不意覆盖了浅水原北。
English: Soon, Taizong Kinshicho's large army unexpectedly covered the northern part of Asakusihara.

古文：罗望见，复回师相拒。
现代文：宗罗日侯远远望见，再次回军抗拒。
English: Zongluo could be seen in the distance, and he once again returned to the army to resist.

古文：太宗将骁骑数十入贼阵，于是王师表里齐奋，罗大溃，斩首数千级，投涧谷而死者不可胜计。
现代文：太宗率领精锐骑兵数十人攻入贼阵，于是太宗之军里外配合一齐奋力攻击，罗日侯全军溃败，太宗斩贼首级数千个，掉入山涧山谷而死者不可胜计。
English: Taizong led dozens of elite cavalry to break into the bandit formation, so Taizong's army and the outside world cooperated to attack together, the whole army of Luo Rihou was defeated, Taizong cut off thousands of heads of bandits, fell into the Hailu Valley and the dead were incalculable.

古文：太宗率左右二十余骑追奔，直趣折墌以乘之。
现代文：太宗率领随从二十多个骑兵追赶逃跑敌军，笔直奔赴折土庶而追逐敌军。
English: Taizong led more than 20 cavalrymen to chase the fleeing enemy army, and went straight to Oritubo to chase the enemy army.

古文：仁杲大惧，婴城自守。
现代文：仁杲十分恐惧，环城守卫。
English: Nien Nien was very scared, and the ring of the city was guarded.

古文：将夕，大军继至，四面合围。
现代文：将晚，太宗大军陆续到来，四面合围。
English: Late in the morning, Taizong's large army arrived one after another and surrounded them on all sides.

古文：诘朝，仁杲请降，俘其精兵万余人、男女五万口。
现代文：早晨，仁杲请降，太宗俘虏他的精兵一万余人，男女五万口。
English: In the morning, Rinchen pleaded for surrender, and Taizong captured more than ten thousand of his elite soldiers, including fifty thousand men and women.

古文：既而诸将奉贺，因问曰： 始大王野战破贼，其主尚保坚城，王无攻具，轻骑腾逐，不待步兵，径薄城下，咸疑不克，而竟下之，何也？ 
现代文：不久诸将祝贺，因趁机问道： 刚开始大王野战攻破贼人，贼酋还保有坚固城池，而大王没有攻战之器具，用轻骑兵转战追逐，不等待步兵，直接迫于敌人城下，都怀疑不能战胜，然而竟然攻下了，这是什么缘故？ 
English: The generals soon congratulated him, and took the opportunity to ask: Why is it that at the very beginning of the war, the great king attacked and defeated the bandits, while the bandits still had a strong fortress, while the great king did not have the equipment to attack and pursue the enemy, used light cavalry to go from battle to battle, did not wait for the infantry, and directly pressed the enemy under the city, doubting that he could not win, yet he actually captured it?

古文：太宗曰： 此以权道迫之，使其计不暇发，以故克也。
现代文：太宗道 ：这是用权宜之计逼迫他，使他们的计谋没有机会发出，因为这个原因战胜。
English: Tai Zongdao: It was a case of using a stopgap measure to persecute him, so that their plan wouldn't have a chance to work, and because of this, they won.

古文：罗恃往年之胜，兼复养锐日久，见吾不出，意在相轻。
现代文：罗日侯依靠往年取胜，加之长期养足了锐气，见我军不出，心中对我轻视。
English: Luo Rihou relied on previous years to win, and in addition to long-term sharpening, he despised me in his heart when he saw that our army did not come out.

古文：今喜吾出，悉兵来战，虽击破之，擒杀盖少。
现代文：现在敌军见我出战，十分高兴，全部军队前来作战，虽然我已击破他，但擒捉杀掉的还少。
English: Now the enemy is very happy to see me go to war. The whole army has come to fight. Although I have defeated him, I have not caught and killed many badgers.

古文：若不急蹑，还走投城，仁杲收而抚之，则便未可得矣。
现代文：假若不急速追逐，敌军回军投入折土庶城，仁杲收拢安抚，那就不可能战胜了。
English: If it were not for the rapid pursuit, the enemy's retreating army throwing itself into the surrounding city of Orochi, and the benevolent forces closing in to pacify it, it would have been impossible to win.

古文：且其兵众皆陇西人，一败披退，不及回顾，散归陇外，则折墌自虚，我军随而迫之，所以惧而降也。
现代文：再说敌军兵众都是陇西人，战败逃散，来不及回顾，败逃到陇外，则折土庶城自然空虚，我军随后压下，所以恐惧而投降。
English: In addition, the enemy soldiers were all Shaanxi people. They were defeated and fled, and it was too late to look back. If they were defeated and fled to the outside of Shaanxi, the abandoned city was naturally empty. Our army was then suppressed, so they were afraid and surrendered.

古文：此可谓成算，诸君尽不见耶？ 
现代文：这些可谓是已定的计划，诸君难道全部不见吗？ 
English: These are the plans that have already been made. Don't you all see it?

古文：诸将曰： 此非凡人所能及也。 
现代文：诸将道 ：这不是普通人所能赶得上的。 
English: Zhushang said: This is not something that ordinary people can catch up with.

古文：获贼兵精骑甚众，还令仁杲兄弟及贼帅宗罗、翟长孙等领之。
现代文：获得贼兵精锐骑兵很多，仍令仁杲兄弟及贼帅宗罗日侯、翟长孙等率领。
English: He gained a lot of elite cavalry soldiers, still led by the brothers of Rinchen and the thief-commander Zongluo, Zou Changsun and so on.

古文：太宗与之游猎驰射，无所间然。
现代文：太宗与他们游乐骑射，没有什么距离隔阂。
English: Taizong rode with them, and there was not much distance between them.

古文：贼徒荷恩慑气，咸愿效死。
现代文：投降的贼徒感恩并慑于太宗的威势，都愿意以死报效。
English: The surrendering bandits were grateful and intimidated by Taizong's might, and were willing to pay for their actions with their lives.

古文：时李密初附，高祖令密驰传迎太宗于豳州。
现代文：当时李密刚刚归附，高祖命令李密骑驿马到豳州迎太宗。
English: At that time, Li Mi had just been annexed, Gao Zu ordered Li Mi to ride a horse to Zhangzhou to welcome Taizong.

古文：密见太宗天姿神武，军威严肃，惊悚叹服，私谓殷开山曰： 真英主也。
现代文：李密见太宗天姿英明威武，军威严肃，悚惧叹服，私下对殷开山道 ：真是英明之主也。
English: Li Mi saw Emperor Taizong's heavenly appearance, his wisdom and power, and his military power as serious, and he was horrified and sighed. Privately, he said to Yin Kai Shan Dao: "He really is a wise lord."

古文：不如此，何以定祸乱乎？ 
现代文：不是这样，凭什么来平定祸乱呢？ 
English: Otherwise, on what basis can the calamity be calmed down?

古文：凯旋，献捷于太庙。
现代文：太宗凯旋，在太庙献捷。
English: Emperor Taizong's triumphant return, offering victory in the Great Temple.

古文：拜太尉、陕东道行台尚书令，镇长春宫，关东兵马并受节度。
现代文：任命太宗为太尉、陕东道行台尚书令，镇守长春宫，关东兵马全部受他节制调度。
English: Taizong was appointed to the rank of Taijun, the Shaanxi host was given the title of Tai Shang Shuling, the town guard was given the title of Changchun Palace, and the soldiers and horses of the Kwantung Army were all controlled by him.

古文：寻加左武候大将军、凉州总管。
现代文：不久又加授左武侯大将军、凉州总管。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of General of Zuowu County and Governor of Liangzhou.

古文：宋金刚之陷浍州也，兵锋甚锐。
现代文：宋金刚攻陷浍州，军队气势强盛。
English: Song King Kong invaded and occupied Bozhou, and the army was in full strength.

古文：高祖以王行本尚据蒲州，吕崇茂反于夏县，晋、浍二州相继陷没，关中震骇，乃手敕曰： 贼势如此，难与争锋，宜弃河东之地，谨守关西而已。 
现代文：高祖因为王行本还占据蒲州，吕崇茂在夏县反叛，晋、浍二州接着陷落，关中震动惊骇，于是下手令道： 贼人气势像这样厉害，难以与他们争胜负，应该抛弃河东之地，只好好守住关西罢了。 
English: Gaozu, because Wang Xingben was still occupying Puzhou, and Lü Chongmao was rebelling in Xia County, and Jin and Yan two states were next to fall, Guanzhong was shocked and alarmed, so he gave the order: "The influence of the thieves is so strong that it is difficult to compete with them in terms of victory and defeat. We should abandon the land east of the river and just hold on to Guanzhong."

古文：太宗上表曰： 太原王业所基，国之根本，河东殷实，京邑所资。
现代文：太宗上表道 ：太原是王业的基础，国家的根本，河东富裕是京城的凭借。
English: Taizong Shangpu said: Taiyuan is the foundation of the king's career, the foundation of the country, and the prosperity of Hedong is the advantage of Beijing.

古文：若举而弃之，臣窃愤恨。
现代文：假若全部抛弃，臣私下感到憋闷遗憾。
English: If I were to abandon everything, I would privately feel sad and regretful.

古文：愿假精兵三万，必能平殄武周，克复汾、晋。 
现代文：希望借助臣精兵三万，必定能消灭平定刘武周，克复汾、晋。 
English: It is hoped that with the help of 30,000 vassals and elite soldiers, they will surely be able to eliminate the pacification of Liu Wu Zhou, and the restoration of Xuan and Jin.

古文：高祖于是悉发关中兵以益之，又幸长春宫亲送太宗。
现代文：高祖于是全部调遣关中兵加给太宗，又亲自驾临长春宫送太宗。
English: Gaozhu then dispatched all the middle-ranking soldiers to Taizong, and personally drove to the Changchun Palace to see Taizong off.

古文：二年十一月，太宗率众趣龙门关，履冰而渡之，进屯柏壁，与贼将宋金刚相持。
现代文：二年十一月，太宗率军队奔赴龙门关，踏冰而渡过黄河，进驻柏壁，与贼将宋金刚对峙。
English: In November of the second year, Taizong led the army to Longmenguan, crossed the Yellow River on the ice, stationed in Baiji, and confronted the thief Song King Kong.

古文：寻而永安王孝基败于夏县，于筠、独孤怀恩、唐俭并为贼将寻相、尉迟敬德所执，将还浍州。
现代文：不久永安王孝基在夏县被打败，于筠、独孤怀恩、唐俭都被贼将寻相、尉迟敬德所俘，将要回到浍州去。
English: Soon, Yongan Wang Xiaoji was defeated in Xia County, and Yu Yu, Du Guowai En, and Tang Jian were all captured by the thief, the thief, the thief, and the thief, and will return to Zhangzhou.

古文：太宗遣殷开山、秦叔宝邀之于美良川，大破之，相等仅以身免，悉虏其众，复归柏壁。
现代文：太宗派殷开山、秦叔宝在美良川拦截，大破贼军，寻相等人仅仅本人逃脱，太宗全部俘虏他的部众，再回柏壁。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Yin Kaishan and Qin Shubao to intercept them at the Mila River. Only Emperor Taizong himself escaped with the Great Defeat of the Thieves' Army and the Seekers. Emperor Taizong captured all of his subordinates and then returned to Baiji.

古文：于是诸将咸请战，太宗曰： 金刚悬军千里，深入吾地，精兵骁将，皆在于此。
现代文：于是众将都请战，太宗道： 金刚是奔走千里的孤军，深入我地，精兵强将，都在这里。
English: As a result, all generals were invited to fight. Taizong said, "King Kong is a lone army that has traveled thousands of miles, deep into our land. All the best soldiers and strong generals are here."

古文：武周据太原，专倚金刚以为捍。
现代文：刘武周占据太原，专门依靠宋金刚来抵抗。
English: Liu Wuzhou occupied Taiyuan, relying exclusively on Song Jingang to resist.

古文：士卒虽众，内实空虚，意在速战。
现代文：士卒虽多，内面实际很空虚，意在速战。
English: Although there are many soldiers, they are actually very empty inside, and the intention is to fight quickly.

古文：我坚营蓄锐以挫其锋，粮尽计穷，自当遁走。 
现代文：我巩固营垒，养精蓄锐以挫折他的锋芒，贼粮尽计穷，自当逃跑。 
English: I fortified the camp, conserved the spirit of the sharpshooter in order to frustrate his sharpness, and tried my best to escape.

古文：三年二月，金刚竟以众馁而遁，太宗追之至介州。
现代文：三年二月，宋金刚终于因为军众饥饿而逃遁，太宗率军直追到介州。
English: In February of the third year, Song King Kong finally fled because of the army's hunger, and Taizong led the army straight to Jiezhou.

古文：金刚列阵，南北七里，以拒官军。
现代文：宋金刚排列军阵，南北七里长，以抗拒官军。
English: Song King Kong lined up his army, seven miles long from north to south, to resist the government army.

古文：太宗遣总管李世勣、程咬金、秦叔宝当其北，翟长孙、秦武通当其南。
现代文：太宗派总管李世责力、程咬金、秦叔宝抵挡宋金刚的北面军队，翟长孙、秦武通抗击宋金刚南面的军队。
English: Li Shileili, Cheng Jijin, and Qin Shubao, the chiefs of the Tai sect, resisted the northern army of Song Jingang, and the eldest grandson, Qin Wudong, resisted the southern army of Song Jingang.

古文：诸军战小却，为贼所乘。
现代文：诸军战斗稍稍退却，被贼兵所战胜。
English: The fighting troops retreated a little and were defeated by the bandits.

古文：太宗率精骑击之，冲其阵后，贼众大败，追奔数十里。
现代文：太宗率精锐骑兵攻击他，冲击他行阵的后部，贼众大败，追打数十里。
English: Taizong led the elite cavalry to attack him, hit the rear of his line, defeated the thieves, and chased them for dozens of miles.

古文：敬德、相率众八千来降，还令敬德督之，与军营相参。屈突通惧其为变，骤以为请。
现代文：敬德、寻相率领残部八千人来归降，仍旧命敬德统率，与太宗军营混在一起，屈突通害怕尉迟敬德发生叛变，迅速以此向太宗请求不要让尉迟敬德率兵。
English: Jingde and Guoxiang led the remaining eight thousand people to surrender, and still ordered Jingde to lead the troops, and mixed with the Taizong army camp. Qu Jutong was afraid of the mutiny of Lieutenant Qi Jingde, and quickly asked Taizong not to let Lieutenant Qi Jingde lead the troops.

古文：太宗曰： 昔萧王推赤心置人腹中，并能毕命，今委任敬德，又何疑也。 
现代文：太宗道 ：过去萧王对人推心置腹，都能尽力效命，现在委任敬德，又何必疑惧。 
English: Taizongdao: In the past, Xiao Wang put his heart and soul into people and was able to serve them to the best of his ability. Now that he has appointed Jingde, why should he be afraid?

古文：于是刘武周奔于突厥，并、汾悉复旧地。诏就军加拜益州道行台尚书令。
现代文：这时刘武周奔到突厥，并、汾二州又全部恢复了旧地，高祖诏命就在军中加拜太宗为益州道行台尚书令。
English: At this time, Liu Wuzhou rushed to Turkey, and the two states were all restored to the old land. Gao Zu Dao ordered that Taizong should be added to the army for the Yizhou Road.

古文：七月，总率诸军攻王世充于洛邑，师次谷州。
现代文：七月，太宗统率各军在洛邑攻打王世充，军队驻扎在谷州。
English: In July, Emperor Taizong led the army to attack Wang Shichong in Luoyang, and the army was stationed in Guzhou.

古文：世充率精兵三万阵于慈涧，太宗以轻骑挑之。
现代文：世充率精兵三万在慈涧扎阵，太宗用轻骑兵引逗他。
English: Shizeng led thirty thousand elite soldiers in the battle of Cixi, and Taizong teased him with light cavalry.

古文：时众寡不敌，陷于重围，左右咸惧。
现代文：当时众寡不敌，太宗陷入重围，左右的人都恐惧。
English: At that time, the enemy was outnumbered, Taizong was surrounded, and people on both sides were afraid.

古文：太宗命左右先归，独留后殿。
现代文：太宗命令左右的人先行归营，独自一人率军在最后。
English: Taizong ordered the people around him to return to camp first, and he led the army alone at the end.

古文：世充骁将单雄信数百骑夹道来逼，交抢竞进，太宗几为所败。
现代文：世充的勇将单雄信数百骑兵夹道进逼，争先进攻，太宗几乎被他打败。
English: Satchon's bravery pushed hundreds of cavalrymen of Shan Xiongxin to advance and fight for the first attack. Taizong was almost defeated by him.

古文：太宗左右射之，无不应弦而倒，获其大将燕颀。
现代文：太宗张弓箭左右射敌，贼众没有一个不是应弦而倒，俘虏了世充的大将燕颀。
English: Taizong shot the enemy with his bow and arrow left and right, and none of the thieves did not fall in line, capturing the general of the world, Yan Xuan.

古文：世充乃拔慈涧之镇归于东都。
现代文：世充于是将慈涧之兵改移回到东都。
English: Shichong then transferred Cixi's soldiers back to Dongdu.

古文：太宗遣行军总管史万宝自宜阳南据龙门，刘德威自太行东围河内，王君廓自洛口断贼粮道。
现代文：太宗派行军总管史万宝从宜阳往南占据龙门，刘德威从太行往东包围河内，王君廓从洛口斩断贼军运粮通道。
English: Shi Wanbao, the commander-in-chief of the Tai Sect's march, occupied Longmen from Yiyang to the south, Liu Dewei encircled Hanoi from Taihang to the east, and Wang Juncao cut off the rebel army's grain transportation channel from Lokou.

古文：又遣黄君汉夜从孝水河中下舟师袭回洛城，克之。
现代文：又派黄君汉连夜从孝水河中下舟船偷袭回洛城，攻克了回洛城。
English: Huang Junhan also sent a boat from the middle of the Xiaoshui River to sneak back to Los Angeles at night, and conquered Los Angeles.

古文：黄河已南，莫不响应，城堡相次来降。
现代文：黄河以南，没有一个地方不响应，城堡一个接一个前来归降。
English: South of the Yellow River, there is no place that does not respond, and castles come forward one after another to surrender.

古文：大军进屯邙山。
现代文：大军进驻邙山。
English: A large army entered Shaoshan.

古文：九月，太宗以五百骑先观战地，卒与世充万余人相遇，会战，复破之，斩首三千余级，获大将陈智略，世充仅以身免。
现代文：九月，太宗用五百骑兵先行观察战场地势，终于与王世充一万多人相遇，两军交战，太宗再次攻破了他，斩首级三千个，俘虏了大将陈智略，世充仅仅本人逃脱。
English: In September, Taizong used five hundred cavalrymen to observe the battlefield situation ahead of time, and finally encountered more than ten thousand people with Wang Shichong. The two armies fought. Taizong defeated him again, beheaded three thousand, and captured General Chen Zhiliu. Shichong was the only one to escape.

古文：其所署筠州总管杨庆遣使请降，遣李世勣率师出轘辕道安抚其众。
现代文：他所部署的筠州总管杨庆派使者请求归降，太宗派李世责力率军从頧辕道出去安抚杨庆的部众。
English: Yang Qing, the general manager of Zhangzhou deployed by him, sent an envoy to request the surrender, and Li Shili, the leader of the Taizong faction, led the army to pacify Yang Qing's subordinates.

古文：荥、汴、洧、豫九州相继来降。
现代文：荥、汴、洧、豫九州一个一个前来归降。
English: ,,, and 豫Kyushu came forward one by one to surrender.

古文：世充遂求救于窦建德。
现代文：世充于是向窦建德求救。
English: Therefore, Shichong asked Dou Jiande for help.

古文：四年二月，又进屯青城宫。
现代文：武德四年二月，太宗又进驻青城宫。
English: In February of the 4th year of Wude's reign, Taizong was once again stationed at the Qingcheng Palace.

古文：营垒未立，世充众二万自方诸门临谷水而阵。
现代文：太宗营垒尚未建立，世充之军队二万人从方诸门面临谷水扎阵。
English: Taizong's camp had not yet been established, and Shichong's army of twenty thousand men was facing the valley from all sides.

古文：太宗以精骑阵于北邙山，令屈突通率步卒五千渡水以击之，因诫通曰： 待兵交即放烟，吾当率骑军南下。 
现代文：太宗以精锐骑兵在北邙山扎阵，令屈突通率五千步兵渡水攻击王世充，并趁机告诫通道 ：等到双方交战时就放烟，我当率骑兵南下。 
English: With his elite cavalry, Taizong set up a line of battle in the North Lushan Mountains. He ordered his 5,000 infantrymen to cross the water to attack Wang Shichong, and took the opportunity to admonish the channel: When the two sides are at war, they will release smoke. I should lead the cavalry south.

古文：兵才接，太宗以骑冲之，挺身先进，与通表里相应。
现代文：双方军队才接战，太宗用骑兵冲锋，自己挺身冲锋在前，与屈突通里外呼应。
English: The armies of both sides only engaged in battle when Taizong charged with cavalry, charging forward on his own, echoing Qu Du's words inside and out.

古文：贼众殊死战，散而复合者数焉。
现代文：贼众拼死作战，多次打散又多次聚合。
English: The thieves fought to the death, repeatedly dispersing and repeatedly gathering.

古文：自辰及午，贼众始退。
现代文：从早晨七点至九点一直战到下午一点，贼众才开始退却。
English: They fought from seven to nine in the morning until one in the afternoon, when the bandits began to retreat.

古文：纵兵乘之，俘斩八千人，于是进营城下。
现代文：太宗指挥兵士追击，俘获、斩首共八千人，于是进兵屯营到城下。
English: Taizong commanded the soldiers to pursue, captured and beheaded a total of eight thousand people, and then marched into the camp to the city.

古文：世充不敢复出，但婴城自守，以待建德之援。
现代文：世充不敢再出战，只是环城自守，以等待窦建德救援。
English: Sichong didn't dare to fight again, but just ringed the city to defend himself and wait for Dou Jiande's rescue.

古文：太宗遣诸军掘堑，匝布长围以守之。
现代文：太宗派遣诸军挖掘壕沟，环绕布置长期围守。
English: Emperor Taizong sent troops to dig trenches and set up a long-term encirclement.

古文：吴王杜伏威遣其将陈正通、徐召宗率精兵二千来会于军所。
现代文：吴王杜伏威派遣他的大将陈正通、徐召宗率精兵二千人前来在太宗军营会合。
English: King Du Fuwei of Wu dispatched his generals Chen Zhengtong and Xu Zhaozong with 2,000 elite soldiers to meet at the Taizong military camp.

古文：伪郑州司马沈悦以武牢降，将军王君廓应之，擒其伪荆王王行本。
现代文：伪郑州司马沈悦以武牢来投降，将军王君廓响应，活捉伪荆王王行本。
English: The pseudo Zhengzhou Sima Shenyue surrendered to the armed prison, the general Wang Junku responded, and captured the pseudo Jing Wang Wangxing.

古文：会窦建德以兵十余万来援世充，至于酸枣。
现代文：恰巧窦建德率兵十余万来援救王世充，到达酸枣。
English: Coincidentally, Dou Jiande led more than a hundred thousand soldiers to rescue Wang Shichong and arrived at the sour jujube.

古文：萧瑀、屈突通、封德彝皆以腹背受敌，恐非万全，请退师谷州以观之。
现代文：萧王禹、屈突通、封德彝都因为腹背受敌，恐怕不是万全之策，请求退师到谷州来观看形势。
English: Xiao Wangyu, Qu Jutong, and Fong Deyu all requested to retire to Guzhou to observe the situation because they had suffered from the enemy.

古文：太宗曰： 世充粮尽，内外离心，我当不劳攻击，坐收其敝。
现代文：太宗道 ：世充粮食已尽，内外离心，我军不需攻击，可以坐收敌军破败之功。
English: Tai Zongdao: The world's supply of grain has been exhausted, and the internal and external centrifuges have been destroyed. Our army does not need to attack, and can take the credit for the enemy's defeat.

古文：建德新破孟海公，将骄卒惰，吾当进据武牢，扼其襟要。
现代文：建德新近攻破孟海公，将官骄傲士兵怠惰，我军当进攻占据武关，扼守山川要冲。
English: Jiande has recently defeated Meng Haigong, the generals are proud and the soldiers are lazy. When our army attacks, it will occupy Wuguan and hold the mountains and rivers.

古文：贼若冒险与我争锋，破之必矣。
现代文：贼假若与我军争胜负，我攻破贼军是必然的了。
English: If the bandits were to compete with our army for victory or defeat, it was inevitable that I would defeat the bandits.

古文：如其不战，旬日间世充当自溃。
现代文：如果不战，十日之间世充当会自我崩溃。
English: If there is no war, the world order will collapse within ten days.

古文：若不速进，贼入武牢，诸城新附，必不能守。
现代文：若不急速进攻，贼军进入武牢，诸城刚刚归附，必定不能坚守。
English: If there is no rapid attack, the thief army will enter the armed prison, the cities have just been annexed, and they will not be able to hold on.

古文：二贼并力，将若之何？ 
现代文：二贼力量合并，将能把他们怎么办呢？ 
English: What will the merger of the two forces do to them?

古文：通又请解围就险以候其变，太宗不许。
现代文：屈突通又请求解围到险要之处以等候敌军内部生变，太宗不同意。
English: Qu Zhutong also requested that the encirclement be lifted to the critical point to wait for the enemy's internal transformation, but Taizong did not agree.

古文：于是留通辅齐王元吉以围世充，亲率步骑三千五百人趣武牢。
现代文：于是留屈突通辅助齐王元吉以包围王世充，亲自率领骑兵三千五百人奔赴武牢。
English: As a result, Ru Qu suddenly assisted Qi Wang Yuanji to encircle Wang Shichong, and personally led 3,500 cavalrymen to the military prison.

古文：建德自荥阳西上，筑垒于板渚，太宗屯武牢，相持二十余日。
现代文：窦建德从荥阳西上，筑营垒在板渚，太宗驻军在武牢，两军对峙二十多天。
English: Dou Jiande marched west from Fenyang, built a camp at Banzhu, and Taizong garrisoned troops at Wuye. The two armies were in a standoff for more than twenty days.

古文：谍者曰： 建德伺官军刍尽，候牧马于河北，因将袭武牢。 
现代文：探听消息的人报告道 ：建德探听官军牲畜的饲料已尽，等候在黄河北岸放马吃草时，趁机偷袭武牢。 
English: The person who was listening to the news reported: Jian De listening to the news that the feed of the official army's livestock had run out, while waiting for the horses to graze on the north bank of the Yellow River, he took the opportunity to raid the military prison.

古文：太宗知其谋，遂牧马河北以诱之。
现代文：太宗知道他们的阴谋，于是放马在黄河北岸吃草来诱敌。
English: Taizong knew about their plot, so he let horses graze on the north bank of the Yellow River to lure the enemy.

古文：诘朝，建德果悉众而至，陈兵氾水，世充将郭士衡阵于其南，绵互数里，鼓噪，诸将大惧。
现代文：早晨，建德果然率全部兵马到来，陈列军队在汜水之上，世充大将郭士衡扎阵在南面，绵延数里，呐喊，诸将大为恐惧。
English: In the morning, Jian De did indeed lead all the soldiers and horses to arrive, displaying the army on the surface of Surabaya. Shicheng General Guo Shiheng set up camp in the south, stretching for several miles, shouting, the generals were very afraid.

古文：太宗将数骑升高丘以望之，谓诸将曰： 贼起山东，未见大敌。
现代文：太宗率几名骑兵登上高高土丘遥望敌军，对诸将道： 贼人起兵山东，没有遇见过强大的敌人。
English: Taizong led several cavalrymen to climb a high mound to look at the enemy army from a distance, and said to the generals: "Thieves have raised an army in Shandong, but they have not encountered a powerful enemy."

古文：今度险而嚣，是无政令；逼城而阵，有轻我心。
现代文：现在渡过险要之处而叫嚣，这是没有政令的表现；逼近城墙扎阵，有轻视我们的思想。
English: To cry out now, when we have passed the critical point, is a sign that there is no decree; to close ranks against the city wall is to despise our thoughts.

古文：我按兵不出，彼乃气衰，阵久卒饥，必将自退，追而击之，无往不克。
现代文：我按兵不出，敌军气势便衰竭，扎阵太久士卒饥饿，必将自我撤退，这时再来追击，可以无往而不胜。
English: If I do not go out, the enemy's momentum will be exhausted. If I stay in the battle too long, I will be starving, and I will have to retreat. Then I will come back to pursue, and I can go nowhere but win.

古文：吾与公等约，必以午时后破之。 
现代文：我与你们约定，必定在午时以后攻破敌军。 
English: I made a promise with you that I would definitely break through the enemy army after noon.

古文：建德列阵，自辰至午，兵士饥倦，皆坐列，又争饮水，逡巡敛退。
现代文：建德排出阵势，从上午七点直到下午一点，兵士又饿又累，都坐在阵列中，又争着饮水，顷刻间又收敛退却。
English: From seven o'clock in the morning until one o'clock in the afternoon, the soldiers, hungry and tired, sat in the array, fought for drinking water, and suddenly retreated.

古文：太宗曰： 可击矣！ 
现代文：太宗道 ：可以攻击了！ 
English: Taizondo: We can attack now!

古文：亲率轻骑追而诱之，众继至。
现代文：亲自率领轻装的骑兵追击引诱敌军，大军陆续赶到。
English: He personally led the light cavalry to chase and lure the enemy army, and the large army arrived one after another.

古文：建德回师而阵，未及整列，太宗先登击之，所向皆靡。
现代文：建德回军扎阵，还来不及整顿阵列，太宗先行攻击，攻击所向，敌军纷纷溃散。
English: Jian De's army returned to the front, but it was too late to rectify the array. Taizong attacked first, and the enemy army dispersed one after another.

古文：俄而众军合战，嚣尘四起。
现代文：不久，众军会合作战，尘土飞扬，呼叫四起。
English: Soon, armies will fight together, dust will fly, shouts will ring out.

古文：太宗率史大奈、程咬金、秦叔宝、宇文歆等挥幡而入，直突出其阵后，张我旗帜。
现代文：太宗率史大奈、程咬金、秦叔宝、宇文歆等挥动大旗冲入，直接突入到阵后，张挂我军旗帜。
English: Taizong led by Shi Daina, Cheng Ji Jin, Qin Shubao, Yu Wenjun and others rushed into the battle waving big flags, directly rushed into the rear of the battle, and hung our army's flag.

古文：贼顾见之，大溃。
现代文：贼人回头看见官军旗帜，全军崩溃。
English: The thief looked back and saw the flag of the government army, and the whole army collapsed.

古文：追奔三十里，斩首三千余级，虏其众五万，生擒建德于阵。
现代文：追逐攻打三十里，斩首级三千多个，俘虏贼众五万，在阵中活捉窦建德。
English: He chased and attacked for thirty miles, beheaded more than three thousand, captured fifty thousand thieves, and captured Dou Jiande alive in the battle.

古文：太宗数之曰： 我以干戈问罪，本在王世充，得失存亡，不预汝事，何故越境，犯我兵锋？ 
现代文：太宗责备他道： 我兴师问罪，本在王世充，得失存亡，不干你事，为什么越过边境，冒犯我军锋锐？ 
English: Emperor Taizong reproached him, saying, "I have sinned by raising up a disciple, this is in the king's realm, whether I survive or perish is none of your business, why did you cross the border and offend our army's vanguard?

古文：建德股栗而言曰： 今若不来，恐劳远取。 
现代文：建德恐惧，两腿发抖说 ：现在我假若不来，怕麻烦你远远地攻取我！ 
English: Jiande was terrified, his legs trembling, and said, "If I don't come now, I'm afraid you'll have to attack me from far away!"

古文：高祖闻而大悦，手诏曰； 隋氏分崩，崤函隔绝。
现代文：高祖听后大喜，亲手写诏书道： 隋朝分崩，崤山、函谷关隔绝。
English: After hearing this, Gao Zu was overjoyed and wrote the following edict with his own hand: The Sui Dynasty collapsed, and Lushan and Hantan Pass were cut off.

古文：两雄合势，一朝清荡。
现代文：两雄会合，一朝清平。
English: The two men met, and peace was restored at once.

古文：兵既克捷，更无死伤。
现代文：军队已经获胜，更没有死伤。
English: The army has been victorious, and there have been no deaths or injuries.

古文：无愧为臣，不忧其父，并汝功也。 
现代文：做臣子的不惭愧，做君父的不担忧，都是你的功劳。 
English: It is to your credit that you are not ashamed to be a courtier, and that you do not worry about being a father.

古文：乃将建德至东都城下。
现代文：于是带建德到东都城下。
English: So I took Jian De to the eastern city of Cangzhou.

古文：世充惧，率其官属二千余人诣军门请降，山东悉平。
现代文：王世充恐惧，统率他的官属二千多人到军门请求归降，山东全部平定。
English: Wang Shichong was terrified. He led more than two thousand of his officials and subordinates to the military gate to request surrender, and Shandong was completely pacified.

古文：太宗入据宫城，令萧瑀、窦轨等封守府库，一无所取，令记室房玄龄收隋图籍。
现代文：太宗进入占据宫城，令萧王禹、窦轨等人封存守卫府库，什么东西都不取，只令记室房玄龄收取隋朝地图与户籍。
English: When Emperor Taizong entered and occupied Miyagi, he ordered Xiao Wangyu, Douluo and others to seal and guard the guardhouse, and they did not take anything, but ordered the recorder to collect the Sui Dynasty map and household registration.

古文：于是诛其同恶段达等五十余人，枉被囚禁者悉释之，非罪诛戮者祭而诔之。
现代文：于是杀了共同作恶的段达等五十多人，冤枉被囚禁者全部释放，无罪而被杀者加以祭祀并写祭文致以哀悼。
English: So he killed more than fifty people, including Danda, who had committed evil together, released all the prisoners who had been wrongfully imprisoned, and sacrificed the innocent victims and wrote a memorial to mourn them.

古文：大飨将士，班赐有差。
现代文：用酒食大大款待将士，按品级等第颁赐物品。
English: The soldiers were greatly entertained with wine and food, and the first award items were selected according to the grade.

古文：高祖令尚书左仆射裴寂劳于军中。
现代文：高祖令尚书左仆射裴寂在军中慰劳。
English: Gaozu ordered Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Pei, to serve in the army.

古文：六月，凯旋。
现代文：六月，凯旋。
English: In June, they made a triumphant return.

古文：太宗亲披黄金甲，阵铁马一万骑，甲士三万人，前后部鼓吹，俘二伪主及隋氏器物辇辂献于太庙。
现代文：太宗亲自披挂黄金铠甲，排列铁马一万骑兵，穿铠甲士兵三万人，前后部都敲鼓吹号，在太庙贡献俘虏的二伪主窦建德、王世充以及隋朝器物车乘。
English: Taizong himself wore golden armor, lined up 10,000 cavalrymen on iron horses, 30,000 soldiers wearing armor, and beat drums and trumpets in front and behind. The two pseudo-lords Dou Jiande and Wang Shichong, as well as the Sui Dynasty artifacts, were taken to the temple.

古文：高祖大悦，行饮至礼以享焉。高祖以自古旧官不称殊功，乃别表徽号，用旌勋德。
现代文：高祖认为自古以来旧的官阶与特殊功劳不相称，于是另外发徽号，以表彰功勋德望。
English: Gaozu believed that since ancient times, the old official ranks were not commensurate with special merits, so he issued another badge to commend the merits and expectations.

古文：十月，加号天策上将、陕东道大行台，位在王公上。
现代文：十月，加太宗天策上将封号、陕东道大行台，位在王公之上。
English: In October, Emperor Taizong of Jiaotong sealed the title of "Supreme Commander of Heaven's Armies" and "Grand Marshal of Shaanxi Province" and ascended to the throne.

古文：增邑二万户，通前三万户。
现代文：增加食邑二万户，连以前的共计三万户。
English: The number of restaurants has increased by 20,000, bringing the previous total to 30,000.

古文：赐金辂一乘，衮冕之服，玉璧一双，黄金六千斤，前后部鼓吹及九部之乐，班剑四十人。
现代文：赐给金车一辆，王公之衮衣和冠冕一套，玉璧一双，黄金六十斤，前后部鼓吹及九部之乐，仪仗四十人。
English: He gave a golden chariot, a set of royal robes and crowns, a pair of jade beads, sixty pounds of gold, the front and back of the trumpet and nine pieces of music, and forty honor guards.

古文：于时海内渐平，太宗乃锐意经籍，开文学馆以待四方之士。
现代文：这时海内渐渐太平，太宗于是专心一意读图书经籍，开文学馆以接待四方才学之士。
English: At this time, the sea gradually became peaceful, so Taizong concentrated on reading books and opened a literature museum to receive scholars from all over the country.

古文：行台司勋郎中杜如晦等十有八人为学士，每更直阁下，降以温颜，与之讨论经义，或夜分而罢。
现代文：行台司勋郎中杜如晦等十八人为学士，每次在阁下轮流值班，太宗则降低身份以温和态度与学士们讨论经义，有时谈论到半夜才结束。
English: Eighteen members of the Academy, including the Master of Ceremonies, the Honorable Lord Chung-du Ryuhyeong, took turns to be on duty each time. Taizong lowered his status to discuss the meaning of the sutras with the Academy members in a gentle manner, and sometimes the discussion lasted until midnight.

古文：未几，窦建德旧将刘黑闼举兵反，据洺州。
现代文：不久，窦建德旧将刘黑闼举兵造反，占据氵名州。
English: Not long after, Dou Jiande led Liu Heixuan's former troops to rebel and occupy Yanming Prefecture.

古文：十二月，太宗总戎东讨。
现代文：十二月，太宗总统全军向东去讨伐他。
English: In December, President Taizong's entire army marched east to fight him.

古文：五年正月，进军肥乡，分兵绝其粮道，相持两月。
现代文：五年正月，进军肥乡，分兵断绝他运粮的通道，双方对峙两个月。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the army marched into Feixiang, the detachment cut off his grain transportation channel, and the two sides confronted each other for two months.

古文：黑闼窘急求战，率步骑二万，南渡洺水，晨压官军。
现代文：刘黑闼被胁迫急于求战，率领步兵、骑兵二万人，南渡氵名水，早晨便迫近官军。
English: Under duress, Liu Hefei was eager to go to war. He led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to Nandu, and in the morning, he approached the government army.

古文：太宗亲率精骑，击其马军，破之，乘胜蹂其步卒，贼大溃，斩首万余级。
现代文：太宗亲自率领精锐骑兵，攻击他的骑兵，攻破了他，乘胜冲击践踏他的步兵，贼兵崩溃，斩首级一万多个。
English: Taizong personally led the elite cavalry, attacked his cavalry, defeated him, took advantage of the impact to trample his infantry, the robbers collapsed, and more than 10,000 were beheaded.

古文：先是，太宗遣堰洺水上流使浅，令黑闼得渡。
现代文：先前太宗派人筑坝堵塞氵名水上流使水流变浅，让刘黑闼得已渡水。
English: Previously, the Tai Sect sent people to build a dam to block the upstream flow of the Ermei River and make the water flow shallow, so that Liu Heyao could cross the water.

古文：及战，乃令决堰，水大至，深丈余，贼徒既败，赴水者皆溺死焉。
现代文：等到作战之时，才命令挖开拦河坝，大水冲到，一丈多深，贼兵已经战败，逃到水中都淹死了。
English: It was not until the time of the battle that the order was given to dig up the barrage, and the water rushed in, so deep that the robber soldiers had already been defeated and had all drowned in the water.

古文：黑闼与二百余骑北走突厥，悉虏其众，河北平。
现代文：刘黑闼与二百多骑兵往北逃到突厥，太宗全部俘虏了刘黑闼的部众，河北平定。
English: Liu Heixuan and more than two hundred cavalrymen fled north to Turkey. Taizong captured all of Liu Heixuan's followers, and Hebei was pacified.

古文：时徐圆朗阻兵徐、兗，太宗回师讨平之，于是河、济、江、淮诸郡邑皆平。
现代文：当时徐圆朗带兵在徐、兖二州阻碍太宗，太宗这时便回师讨伐平定了徐圆朗，于是河、济、江、淮所有州郡城镇都平定。
English: At that time, Xu Yuanlang led an army to obstruct Taizong's advance in the two prefectures of Xu and Handan. At that time, Taizong counterattacked and defeated Xu Yuanlang. As a result, all the towns in the prefectures of He, Jie, Jiang and Huai were defeated.

古文：十月，加左右十二卫大将军。
现代文：十月，加授太宗左右十二卫大将军。
English: In October, he was awarded the title of Taizong of the Left and Right and the title of General of the Twelve Guards.

古文：七年秋，突厥颉利、突利二可汗自原州入寇，侵扰关中。
现代文：七年秋，突厥颉利、突利两个可汗王从原州入侵，侵略扰乱关中。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year, two khan kings, Turku Qili and Turli, invaded from Wonju and invaded and disturbed Guanzhong.

古文：有说高祖云： 只为府藏子女在京师，故突厥来，若烧却长安而不都，则胡寇自止。 
现代文：有人说服高祖道 ：只因为府藏子女金帛在京都，故而突厥前来入侵，假若烧掉长安而不建为都城，那么胡人自必停止入侵。 
English: Some people convinced Gao Zu Dao that the Turks came to invade only because the children of Fuzang, the Jin brothers, were in Kyoto. If they had burned Chang'an and not built it as the capital, then the Hu people would have stopped invading.

古文：高祖乃遣中书侍郎宇文士及行山南可居之地，即欲移都。
现代文：高祖于是派遣中书侍郎宇文士及巡行山南可以居住的好地方，即想迁移京都。
English: Gaozu then dispatched Chushojiro Uwenshi and Junko Shannan to find a good place to live, that is, he wanted to move to Kyoto.

古文：萧瑀等皆以为非，然终不敢犯颜正谏。
现代文：萧王禹等人都认为不妥当，然而终究不敢冒犯高祖的威严而直言劝谏。
English: Xiao Wangyu and others thought it was inappropriate, but in the end they did not dare to offend Gao Zu's majesty and advised him bluntly.

古文：太宗独曰： 霍去病，汉廷之将帅耳，犹且志灭匈奴。
现代文：惟独太宗道 ：霍去病，是汉朝的将帅啊，还立志消灭匈奴。
English: However, Taizongdao said, "Hao is ill, he is a Han dynasty general, and he is determined to exterminate the Xiongnu."

古文：臣忝备籓维，尚使胡尘不息，遂令陛下议欲迁都，此臣之责也。
现代文：臣惭愧位列封王，尚且使胡人入侵不止，竟然令皇上议论想要迁都，这是我做臣下的责任。
English: As a vassal, I am ashamed to be a vassal king, and to have the Hu people invade more and more, and even to have the emperor discuss moving the capital. This is my responsibility as a vassal.

古文：幸乞听臣一申微效，取彼颉利。
现代文：希望皇上听任臣报效一次微劳，攻取那个颉利。
English: I hope that the emperor will let his vassal repay the favor with a little labor and capture that bounty.

古文：若一两年间不系其颈，徐建移都之策，臣当不敢复言 。
现代文：假若一两年内不将他捉住，慢慢商议迁都的策略，臣再不敢重说反对迁都。 
English: If he is not caught within a year or two, and the strategy of moving the capital is slowly discussed, the minister will not dare to repeat his opposition to moving the capital.

古文：高祖怒，仍遣太宗将三十余骑行刬。
现代文：高祖愤怒，仍旧派遣太宗率领三十多个骑兵巡行关中拟定铲平敌人之计划。
English: Gaozu was furious, but still sent Taizong to lead more than thirty cavalry to patrol the pass and draw up a plan to defeat the enemy.

古文：还日，固奏必不可移都，高祖遂止。
现代文：太宗回军之日，坚决奏请不可迁都，高祖于是停止迁都。
English: On the day of Emperor Taizong's return to the capital, Emperor Gaozong firmly requested that the capital should not be moved, and Emperor Gaozong stopped moving the capital.

古文：八年，加中书令。
现代文：八年，加太宗中书令。
English: Eight years later, he became a lay preacher in the Cathay Sect.

古文：九年，皇太子建成、齐王元吉谋害太宗。
现代文：九年，皇太子建成、齐王元吉谋害太宗。
English: In the ninth year, Crown Prince Jiancheng and King Qi Yuanji plotted to kill Emperor Taizong.

古文：六月四日，太宗率长孙无忌、尉迟敬德、房玄龄、杜如晦、宇文士及、高士廉、侯君集、程知节、秦叔宝、段志玄、屈突通、张士贵等于玄武门诛之。
现代文：六月四日，太宗率长孙无忌、尉迟敬德、房玄龄、杜如晦、宇文士及、高士廉、侯君集、程知节、秦叔宝、段志玄、屈突通、张士贵等在玄武门杀了建成、元吉。
English: On June 4, Emperor Taizong led his eldest grandson Mu Mui, his second-in-command Jingde, Fang Xuanling, Du Rugao, Wu Wenshi, Gao Shilan, Hou Junshi, Cheng Zhi Jie, Qin Shubao, Duan Zhixuan, Qu Jutong, Zhang Shigui and others to kill Jiancheng and Yuanji at the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：甲子，立为皇太子，庶政皆断决。
现代文：六月八日，太宗被立为皇太子，各种政务皆由太宗决断。
English: On June 8, Taizong was appointed crown prince, and all kinds of government affairs were decided by Taizong.

古文：太宗乃纵禁苑所养鹰犬，并停诸方所进珍异，政尚简肃，天下大悦。
现代文：太宗于是放掉宫廷花园中所养的鹰犬，并停止收取各方所进贡的奇珍异宝，政理崇尚简要严肃，天下人大喜。
English: Emperor Taizong then let go of the eagle dogs raised in the palace garden, and stopped collecting the strange and wonderful treasures paid by all parties. The government advocated simplicity and seriousness, and the whole world was delighted.

古文：又令百官各上封事，备陈安人理国之要。
现代文：又命令百官各个呈上封章奏事，详细陈述安定人心治国的关键。
English: He also ordered all the officials to submit sealed reports detailing the key to governing the country in a stable manner.

古文：己巳，令曰： 依礼，二名不偏讳。
现代文：十三日，命令道： 依照礼法，皇帝的两个名字不要为某一个字而避讳。
English: On the 13th, he ordered: According to the etiquette, the two names of the emperor should not be avoided for a certain word.

古文：近代已来，两字兼避，废阙已多，率意而行，有违经典。
现代文：近代以来，两个名字都避讳，废缺地方已经很多，任意避讳，有违经典。
English: Since modern times, both names have been shunned, and there are already many places where they are no longer used. To shun them arbitrarily is contrary to the classics.

古文：其官号、人名、公私文籍，有 世民 两字不连续者，并不须讳。 
现代文：那些官号、人名、公私文籍图书，有 世民 两个字不连续的，并不须要避讳。 
English: Those official titles, personal names, public and private literature books, there are people in the world whose two words are not consecutive, and there is no need to avoid them.

古文：罢幽州大都督府。
现代文：撤销幽州大都督府。
English: Revoke the Yuzhou Grand Governor's Office.

古文：辛未，废陕东道大行台，置洛州都督府，废益州道行台，置益州大都督府。
现代文：十五日，废除陕东道大行台，设置氵名州都督府；废除益州道行台，设置益州大都督府。
English: On the 15th, the Shaanxi Provincial Highway Administration was abolished, and the Shennai Provincial Governor's Office was established; the Yizhou Provincial Highway Administration was abolished, and the Yizhou Provincial Governor's Office was established.

古文：壬午，幽州大都督庐江王瑗谋逆，废为庶人。
现代文：二十六日，幽州大都督庐江王瑗图谋叛逆，废弃他为普通百姓。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Yuzhou's grand governor, Jiang Wangyao, plotted a rebellion and abandoned him as an ordinary citizen.

古文：乙酉，罢天策府。
现代文：二十九日，撤销天策府。
English: On the 29th, the Tianzefu was abolished.

古文：七月壬辰，太子左庶子高士廉为侍中，右庶子房玄龄为中书令，尚书右仆射萧瑀为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书杨恭仁为雍州牧，太子左庶子长孙无忌为吏部尚书，右庶子杜如晦为兵部尚书，太子詹事宇文士及为中书令，封德彝为尚书右仆射。
现代文：七月六日，太子左庶子高士廉任侍中，右庶子房玄龄任中书令，尚书右仆射萧王禹为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书杨恭仁为雍州牧，太子左庶子长孙无忌为吏部尚书，右庶子杜如晦为兵部尚书，太子詹事宇文士及为中书令，封德彝为尚书右仆射。
English: On July 6th, the prince's left illegitimate son Gao Shiliang was appointed as a junior attendant, the right illegitimate son Bo Xuanling was appointed as a middle secretary, the prince's right servant Sho Wang Yu was appointed as the prince's left secretary, the prince's left illegitimate son Yang Guoren was appointed as the Yongzhou magistrate, the prince's left illegitimate son Mu Muyi was appointed as the prince's secretary, the prince's right illegitimate son Du Rugao was appointed as the prince's military secretary, the prince's son Zhan Shiyu was appointed as the writer and the middle secretary, and the prince'

古文：八月癸亥，高祖传位于皇太子，太宗即位于东宫显德殿。
现代文：八月八日，高祖传位给皇太子，太宗在东宫显德殿即位。
English: On August 8, Gao Zu passed the throne to the crown prince, and Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne in the East Palace, the Hende Hall.

古文：遣司空、魏国公裴寂柴告于南郊。
现代文：派司空、魏国公裴寂在南郊烧柴祭天。
English: Paisikong and Wei Guogong Pei Rong burned firewood in the southern suburbs to celebrate the day.

古文：大赦天下。武德元年以来责情流配者并放还。
现代文：大赦天下，武德元年以来由于直言被责罚流放的人都放回来。
English: There was a general amnesty, and all those who had been punished and exiled for speaking out since the first year of the Wude era were allowed to return.

古文：文武官五品已上先无爵者赐爵一级，六品已下加勋一转。
现代文：文武官员五品以上先前无爵位者赐给爵位一级，六品以下加勋级一等。
English: Civil and military officials with five or more pins who did not previously have a knighthood were awarded a first-class knighthood, and those with six or fewer pins were awarded a first-class decoration.

古文：天下给复一年。
现代文：天下免赋税徭役一年。
English: He was exempted from paying taxes for one year.

古文：癸酉，放掖庭宫女三千余人。
现代文：十八日，放宫廷宫女三千人回家。
English: On the 18th, 3,000 court ladies were sent home.

古文：甲戌，突厥颉利、突利寇泾州。
现代文：十九日，突厥颉利、突利入侵泾州。
English: On the 19th, the Turks and Turks invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：乙亥，突厥进寇武功，京师戒严。
现代文：二十日，突厥入侵武功，京师戒严。
English: On the 20th, the Turks invaded Wugong, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：丙子，立妃长孙氏为皇后。
现代文：二十一日，立妃子长孙氏为皇后。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the eldest grandson became the queen.

古文：亲出玄武门，驰六骑幸渭水上，与颉利隔津而语，责以负约。
现代文：二十四日，突厥入侵高陵。二十六日，行军总管尉迟敬德与突厥在泾阳大战，大破突厥，斩首级一千多个。二十八日，突厥颉利到达渭水边，与颉利隔渭水对话，斥责他背弃定约。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Turks invaded Goryeo. On the twenty-sixth day, the commander-in-chief of the marching army, Yi Jingde, fought with the Turks in the Shenyang War, defeating the Turks and beheading more than a thousand of them. On the twenty-eighth day, the Turk Guli arrived at the edge of Surabaya, held a dialogue with Guli across Surabaya, and rebuked him for abandoning the treaty.

古文：俄而众军继至，颉利见军容既盛，又知思力就拘，由是大惧，遂请和，诏许焉。
现代文：不久大军陆续到达，颉利见军容盛大威严，又知道执失思力被捕，由此大为恐惧，于是请求和解，诏令同意。
English: Soon, the large army arrived one after another. Seeing the grandeur and majesty of the army, and knowing that he had been arrested, he was very afraid, so he asked for reconciliation, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：即日还宫。
现代文：太宗当天回宫。
English: Taizong returned to the palace the same day.

古文：乙酉，又幸便桥，与颉利刑白马设盟，突厥引退。
现代文：三十日，太宗又驾到便桥，与颉利杀白马而设盟誓，突厥带兵退走。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Taizong again drove to the Benqiao and made an oath with Meli to kill the white horse, and the Turks retreated with their soldiers.

古文：九月丙戌，颉利献马三千匹、羊万口，帝不受，令颉利归所掠中国户口。
现代文：九月一日，颉利献马三千匹，羊一万口，太宗不受，命令颉利归还掳掠的中国人口。
English: On September 1st, Goryeo offered 3,000 horses and 10,000 sheep, but Taizong did not accept, and ordered Goryeo to return the captured Chinese population.

古文：丁未，引诸卫骑兵统将等习射于显德殿庭，谓将军已下曰： 自古突厥与中国更有盛衰。
现代文：二十二日，太宗率领所有禁军步骑将领在显德殿殿廷学习射箭，对将军及其以下的官员说： 从古以来，突厥与中国互有盛衰。
English: On the 22nd, Taizong led all the foot cavalry generals of the forbidden army to learn archery at the court of the Hende Dynasty, and said to the general and his subordinate officials: Since ancient times, the Turks and China have had their ups and downs.

古文：若轩辕善用五兵，即能北逐獯鬻；周宣驱驰方、召，亦能制胜太原。
现代文：像轩辕善于使用五种兵器，就能北逐獯鬻；周宣王在方、召驱马驰骋，也能在太原取胜。
English: Like Xuan Zang, who was good at using five kinds of weapons, he was able to conquer the north; Zhou Xuan Wang, who was in the north, could call horses to gallop, and could also win in Taiyuan.

古文：至汉、晋之君，逮于隋代，不使兵士素习干戈，突厥来侵，莫能抗御，致遗中国生民涂炭于寇手。
现代文：到了汉、晋之君王，直到隋代，不让兵士平素练习干戈等兵器，突厥来侵犯，没有人能够抵御，致使中国百姓在敌寇手中处于极端困苦的处境。
English: In the Han and Jin dynasties, and until the Sui Dynasty, soldiers were not allowed to practice weapons such as martial arts, and the Turks invaded, and no one could resist, resulting in the Chinese people being in an extremely difficult situation in the hands of the enemy.

古文：我今不使汝等穿池筑苑，造诸淫费，农民恣令逸乐，兵士唯习弓马，庶使汝斗战，亦望汝前无横敌。 
现代文：我现在不让你们挖池塘筑花园，建造所有过分糜费的东西，不让农民放纵安逸享乐，兵士只练习射箭骑马，期望使你们能够战斗，也期望你们前面没有强敌。 
English: Now I don't want you to dig ponds, make gardens, build all kinds of extravagant things, don't let farmers indulge in leisure and pleasure, soldiers only practice archery and horseback riding, hoping to enable you to fight, and hoping that there is no strong enemy in front of you.

古文：于是每日引数百人于殿前教射，帝亲自临试，射中者随赏弓刀、布帛。
现代文：于是每天率领数百人在殿前教他们射箭，皇帝亲自面试，射中者随即赏赐弓刀、布匹绸缎。
English: Therefore, he led hundreds of people in front of the hall every day to teach them archery. The emperor personally interviewed them, and those who hit the target were immediately rewarded with bows, swords, and cloths.

古文：朝臣多有谏者，曰： 先王制法，有以兵刃至御所者刑之，所以防萌杜渐，备不虞也。
现代文：朝中有很多劝谏的臣子，他们说： 先王制度法令，有拿武器到皇帝处所的人处以刑法，用来在坏事尚未发生前就加以防止，这是防备意料不到的事。
English: There were many courtiers in the imperial court who tried to dissuade him. They said, "The imperial system decrees that anyone who brings weapons to the emperor's residence will be punished by the criminal law, which is used to prevent bad things before they happen. This is to prevent unexpected things.

古文：今引裨卒之人，弯弧纵矢于轩陛之侧，陛下亲在其间，正恐祸出非意，非所以为社稷计也。 
现代文：现在率领副将士卒一类的人，在皇宫殿前檐下平台及台阶上弯弓放箭，皇帝陛下却在旁边，正恐怕祸出意外，这不是用来为国家考虑的做法。 
English: Now, leading a group of vice-admirals and soldiers, bowing and shooting arrows on the lower platform and steps in front of the Imperial Palace, with His Majesty the Emperor by his side, is, I'm afraid, out of the question. This is not the way to think about the country.

古文：上不纳。
现代文：皇上不采纳。
English: The Emperor did not listen.

古文：自是后，士卒皆为精锐。
现代文：从此以后，士兵都成精锐部队。
English: Since then, soldiers have become an elite force.

古文：壬子，诏私家不得辄立妖神，妄设淫祀，非礼祠祷，一皆禁绝。
现代文：二十七日，诏令私人之家，不得擅权建立妖神，随意设立不适当的祭祀，不合礼法的祭祀祈祷，一概禁绝。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that private homes should not have the power to establish evil spirits, set up inappropriate sacrificial rites at will, and make sacrificial prayers that are not in accordance with etiquette and law. All of these were forbidden.

古文：其龟易五兆之外，诸杂占卜，亦皆停断。
现代文：除了龟甲兽骨五种占卜以外，其他杂七杂八的占卦卜卦，也都停止断绝使用。
English: In addition to the five kinds of divination of tortoiseshell and animal bones, the use of other miscellaneous divination methods has also been discontinued.

古文：长孙无忌封齐国公，房玄龄邢国公，尉迟敬德吴国公，杜如晦蔡国公，侯君集潞国公。
现代文：长孙无忌封为齐国公，房玄龄封为邢国公，尉迟敬德封为吴国公，杜如晦封为蔡国公，侯君集封为潞国公。
English: The eldest grandson, Mujie, was given the title of Qi Guo Gong, Fang Xuanling was given the title of Shao Guo Gong, Yi Shi Jing De was given the title of Wu Guo Gong, Du Ruo Wei was given the title of Cai Guo Gong, and Hou Jun Ji was given the title of Shao Guo Gong.

古文：冬十月丙辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十一月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of winter, November 1, is the new moon, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：癸亥，立中山王承乾为皇太子。
现代文：八日，立中山王承乾为皇太子。
English: On the 8th, King Zhongshan Chengyan was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：癸酉，裴寂食实封一千五百户，长孙无忌、王君廓、尉迟敬德、房玄龄、杜如晦一千三百户，长孙顺德、柴绍、罗艺、赵郡王孝恭一千二百户，侯君集、张公谨、刘师立一千户，李世勣、刘弘基九百户，高士廉、宇文士及、秦叔宝、程知节七百户，安兴贵、安修仁、唐俭、窦轨、屈突通、萧瑀、封德彝、刘义节六百户，钱九陇、樊世兴、公孙武达、李孟常、段志玄、庞卿恽、张亮、李药师、杜淹、元仲文四百户，张长逊、张平高、李安远、李子和、秦行师、马三宝三百户。
现代文：十八日，裴寂食实际封户一千五百户。长孙无忌、王君廓、尉迟敬德、房玄龄、杜如晦食实封一千三百户。长孙顺德、柴绍、罗艺、赵郡王孝恭食实封一千二百户。侯君集、张公瑾、刘师立食实封一千户。李世责力、刘弘基食实封九百户。高士廉、宇文士及、秦叔宝、程知节食实封七百户。安兴贵、安修仁、唐俭、窦轨、屈突通、萧王禹、封德彝、刘义节食实封六百户。钱九陇、樊世兴、公孙武达、李孟常、段志玄、庞卿恽、张亮、李药师、杜淹、元仲文食实封四百户。张长逊、张平高、李安远、李子和、秦行师、马三宝食实封三百户。
English: On the 18th day of the month, 1,500 households were actually sealed by Pei Shizhao's food. 1,300 households were actually sealed by the food of the eldest grandson of Mu Mu Mu, Wang Junku, Yi Xi Jingde, Fang Xuanling, and Du Ru Rukai; 1,200 households were actually sealed by the food of the eldest grandson of Shunde, Chai Shao, Luo Yi, and Zhao Gu Wang Xiaogong; 1,000 households were actually sealed by the food of Hou Junji, Zhang Gongyao, and Liu Shili; 900 households were actually sealed by the food of Li Shili and Liu Hongji; 700 households were actually sealed by the food of Gao Sh

古文：十一月庚寅，降宗室封郡王者并为县公。
现代文：十一月五日，宗室封为郡王者一律降封为县公。
English: On November 5th, all those who had been granted the title of county king were downgraded to county magistrate.

古文：十二月癸酉，亲录囚徒。
现代文：十二月十九日，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒罪状。
English: On December 19, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' charges.

古文：是岁，新罗、龟兹、突厥、高丽、百济、党项并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，新罗、龟兹、突厥、高丽、百济、党项都派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: In that year, Silla, Kozu, Turku, Goryeo, Baekje and Taekwon-do all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：贞观元年春正月乙酉，改元。
现代文：贞观元年春正月一日，改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Zhenguan, the era was changed.

古文：辛丑，燕郡王李艺据泾州反，寻为左右所斩，传首京师。
现代文：十七日，燕郡王李艺占据泾州造反，不久被左右的人所杀，传送首级到京师示众。
English: On the 17th, Yan County's Wang Liyi occupied Zhangzhou and rebelled. He was soon killed by people on both sides and his head was sent to Beijing to be displayed to the public.

古文：庚午，以仆射窦轨为益州大都督。
现代文：以仆射窦轨为益州大都督。
English: The grand governor of Yishu was named as Fu Sha Douluo.

古文：三月癸巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：三月十日，皇后亲自养蚕。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the eldest grandchild of the Empress held a ceremony to commemorate the silkworm.

古文：尚书左仆射、宋国公萧瑀为太子少师。
现代文：尚书左仆射、宋国公萧王禹为太子少师。
English: Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Song Guogong Xiao Wangyu, became the prince's young teacher.

古文：丙午，诏： 齐故尚书仆射崔季舒、给事黄门侍郎郭遵、尚书右丞封孝琰等，昔仕鄴中，名位通显，志存忠谠，抗表极言，无救社稷之亡，遂见龙逢之酷。
现代文：二十三日，皇上下诏： 齐已故尚书仆射崔季舒、给事黄门侍郎郭遵、尚书右丞封孝琰等人，过去在邺中做官，名位显贵，心存忠诚正直，上表抗争极谏，设法挽救国家的危亡，却遭到像关龙逢一样的被囚禁杀害的酷刑。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor issued the following edict: the late Shang Shufu Sha Cui Jishu, the Yellow Gate attendant Guo Zun, the Shang Shujing Yujing Feng Xiaojun, and others, who had been officials in the past, held prominent positions, were loyal and honest, were extremely resistant to the table, and tried to save the country from peril, but were tortured and killed like Guan Longfeng.

古文：其季舒子刚、遵子云、孝琰子君遵，并以门遭时谴，淫刑滥及。
现代文：崔季舒之子崔刚、郭遵之子郭云、封孝琰之子封君遵，都因为家门遭到灾祸，高氏滥用刑法而受到株连。
English: Cui Gang, the son of Cui Jishu, Guo Yun, the son of Guo Zun, and Fong Jun Zun, the son of Fong Xiaojun, were all punished for the abuse of criminal law by Gao.

古文：宜从褒奖，特异常伦，可免内侍，量才别叙。 
现代文：应该表扬奖励，特别与一般伦常关系不同，可以免除在宫廷侍候，而量才录用，另外议定官职。 
English: They should be commended and rewarded. In particular, unlike the general ethical relationship, they can be exempted from waiting at the court, and only hired when they are qualified. In addition, official positions should be agreed upon.

古文：夏四月癸巳，凉州都督、长乐王幼良有罪伏诛。
现代文：夏四月十二日，凉州都督、长乐王幼良被判死刑。
English: On April 12, Liangzhou's governor, Changle Wang Yuliang, was sentenced to death.

古文：六月辛巳，尚书右仆射、密国公封德彝薨。
现代文：六月一日，尚书右仆射、密国公封德彝去世。
English: On June 1st, Shoshu's right-hand man Shozo, who held the official title of Mikuni, passed away.

古文：壬辰，太子少保宋国公萧瑀为尚书左仆射。
现代文：十二日，太子少师宋国公萧王禹为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 12th, the prince's apprentice, Song Guogong Xiao Wang Yu, became his right-hand man.

古文：是夏，山东诸州大旱，令所在赈恤，无出今年租赋。
现代文：这年夏天，山东各州大旱灾，命令所在地赈济抚恤，不出今年田租赋税。
English: In the summer of this year, the provinces of Shandong were hit by a severe drought, and the local governments were ordered to provide subsidies and not to raise the farm rent tax this year.

古文：秋七月壬子，吏部尚书、齐国公长孙无忌为尚书右仆射。
现代文：秋七月二日，吏部尚书、齐国公长孙无忌为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Shangshu of the cadre department and the grandson of the first prince of Qi Province became Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：八月戊戌，贬侍中、义兴郡公高士廉为安州大都督。
现代文：八月十九日，贬侍中、义兴郡公高士廉为安州大都督。
English: On August 19th, Gong Gao Shilian of Yixing County, a disgraced courtier, became the grand governor of Anzhou.

古文：户部尚书裴矩卒。
现代文：户部尚书裴矩去世。
English: The head of the household, Sho Sho Pei Minoru, has passed away.

古文：是月，关东及河南、陇右沿边诸州霜害秋稼。
现代文：这年，关东及河南陇右沿边疆各州遭霜危害秋季庄稼。
English: This year, frosts in Guandong and Henan provinces as well as other provinces along the Chinese border harmed the autumn crops.

古文：九月辛酉，命中书侍郎温彦博、尚书右丞魏徵等分往诸州赈恤。
现代文：九月十二日，命中书侍郎温彦博、尚书右丞魏征等分头到各州赈济抚恤。
English: On September 12, Wen Yanbo, the bookkeeper, and Wei Zheng, the bookkeeper's right-hand man, who were killed in the attack, were sent to various states to receive pensions.

古文：中书令、郢国公宇文士及为殿中监。
现代文：中书令、郢国公宇文士及任殿中监。
English: He was awarded the title of Chushiro, the title of Shokoku-Kozu-Senshi, and appointed to the position of chugoku chugoku chugoku.

古文：御史大夫、检校吏部尚书、参预朝政、安吉郡公杜淹署位。
现代文：御史大夫、检校吏部尚书、参预朝政、安吉郡公杜淹可于姓名前加书官衔。
English: Goshi-taifu, kengyo-iri-bu shosho, sanpaku-chosei, and Anji-gun gongdu-nin can add shosho rank to their names.

古文：十二月壬午，上谓侍臣曰： 神仙事本虚妄，空有其名。
现代文：十二月四日，皇上对侍臣道： 神仙之事本虚假不实，空有其名。
English: On December 4th, the emperor said to his attendants: "The matter of the immortals is false and unreal, and their name is empty.

古文：秦始皇非分爱好，遂为方士所诈，乃遣童男女数千人随徐福入海求仙药，方士避秦苛虐，因留不归。
现代文：秦始皇特别爱好，于是被讲神仙方术的人所欺诈，竟派遣童男童女数千人随徐福入海求仙药，方术之士躲避秦朝严酷刑法，因而留海外不归。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang had a particular fondness for it, so he was cheated by those who spoke of the divine magic, and he sent thousands of boys and girls to follow Xu Fu into the sea to seek the magic potion. The magicians of the magic avoided the Qin Dynasty's strict torture methods, and thus did not return home.

古文：始皇犹海侧踟蹰以待之，还至沙丘而死。
现代文：秦始皇还在海边徘徊等待仙药，回来到沙丘而病死。
English: Qin Shihuang was still wandering on the beach waiting for the elixir, came back to the sand dunes and died of illness.

古文：汉武帝为求仙，乃将女嫁道术人，事既无验，便行诛戮。
现代文：汉武帝为求仙，竟将女儿嫁给道术之人，事情既然无验证，便将道术之士杀掉。
English: Emperor Hanwu, in his quest for immortality, married his daughter to a Daoist. Since there was no verification, he killed the Daoist.

古文：据此二事，神仙不烦妄求也。 
现代文：根据这两件事，神仙不须多加妄求。 
English: Judging from these two things, immortals cannot be sought indiscriminately.

古文：尚书左仆射、宋国公萧瑀坐事免。
现代文：尚书左仆射、宋国公萧王禹犯法免职。
English: Shangshu Zuofu shot, Song Guogong Xiao Wangyu removed from office for breaking the law.

古文：戊申，利州都督义安王孝常、右武卫将军刘德裕等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：三十日，利州都督义安王孝常、右武卫将军刘德裕等人谋反，被判死刑。
English: On the 30th, the governor of Lizhou, Yi'an Wang Xiaochang, and the right wing general Liu Deyu and others conspired to rebel and were sentenced to death.

古文：是岁，关中饥，至有鬻男女者。
现代文：这年，关中是荒年，以至于有卖儿女的。
English: This year, Guanzhong was a year of famine, so much so that there were people who sold their children.

古文：二年春正月辛丑，尚书右仆射、齐国公长孙无忌为开府仪同三司。
现代文：贞观二年春正月，尚书右仆射、齐国公长孙无忌为开府仪同三司。
English: In the first month of the second year of Zhenguan, Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha, and the eldest grandson of Qi Guo Guo were the first three officials to attend the opening ceremony.

古文：徙封汉王属为恪王，卫王泰为越王，楚王祐为燕王。
现代文：迁移改封汉王恪为蜀王，卫王泰为越王，楚王为燕王。
English: The relocation changed the titles of Han Wang Ke to Shu Wang, Wei Wang Tai to Yue Wang, and Chu Wang to Yan Wang.

古文：复置六侍郎，副六尚书事，并置左右司郎中各一人。
现代文：再次设置六侍郎，副六尚书事，并设置左右司郎中各一人。
English: Again, six attendants are set up, six deputy clerks, and one person from each of the left and right clerks.

古文：前安州大都督、赵王元景为雍州牧，蜀王恪为益州大都督，越王泰为扬州大都督。
现代文：前安州大都督、赵王元景为雍州牧，蜀王恪为益州大都督，越王泰为扬州大都督。
English: Former Anzhou Grand Governor, Zhao Wangyuanjing is the Yongzhou Patriarch, Shu Wangke is the Yizhou Grand Governor, and Yue Wangtai is the Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：二月丙戌，靺鞨内属。三月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月九日，归附。三月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The 9th of February, attached. The 1st of March, New Year's Day, has a solar eclipse.

古文：丁卯，遣御史大夫杜淹巡关内诸州。
现代文：二十日，派遣御史大夫杜淹巡视关内各州。
English: On the 20th, Dr. Du Yu, the chief historian, was dispatched to inspect all the states in Guanai.

古文：出御府金宝，赎男女自卖者还其父母。
现代文：拿出后宫金银宝器，把出卖自己的男女赎还给他们的父母。
English: Take out the gold and silver treasures of the harem and redeem the men and women who sold themselves to their parents.

古文：庚午，大赦天下。
现代文：二十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：夏四月己卯，诏骸骨暴露者，令所在埋瘗。
现代文：夏四月三日，诏令凡是暴露的尸骨，命令所在地埋葬。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor decreed that all the exposed bones should be buried.

古文：丙申，契丹内属。
现代文：二十日，契丹归附。
English: On the 20th, Khitan was annexed.

古文：初诏天下州县并置义仓。
现代文：首次诏令天下州县都设置义仓。
English: For the first time, all prefectures and counties in the country were ordered to set up charity warehouses.

古文：夏州贼帅梁师都为其从父弟洛仁所杀，以城降。
现代文：夏州贼酋梁师都被其堂弟洛仁所杀，率城池归降。
English: Xiazhou bandit chief Liang Shih was killed by his cousin Luo Ren and led the city to surrender.

古文：五月，大雨雹。
现代文：五月，下大冰雹。
English: In May, large hailstones fell.

古文：六月庚寅，皇子治生，宴五品以上，赐帛有差，仍赐天下是日生者粟。
现代文：六月十五日，皇子李治出生，宴请五品以上官员，按品级等第赐给绸缎，又赏赐天下这一天出生的人以粟米。
English: On June 15th, the day of the birth of Prince Riji, a banquet was held for officials with five or more court ranks, and silk and satin were given out according to rank, and people born on this day around the world were rewarded with corn.

古文：辛卯，上谓侍臣曰： 君虽不君，臣不可以不臣。
现代文：十六日，皇上对侍臣道： 君王即使不像君王，臣子不可以不像臣子。
English: On the 16th, the emperor said to his courtiers: Even if the king does not look like a king, the vassal must not look like a vassal.

古文：裴虔通，炀帝旧左右也，而亲为乱首。
现代文：裴虔通是隋炀帝的左右侍从之臣，然而他亲自成为祸乱之首。
English: Pei Qiantong was the right and left attendant of the Sui Dynasty, but he himself became the head of the calamity.

古文：朕方崇奖敬义，岂可犹使宰民训俗。 
现代文：朕正崇尚奖励忠孝仁义，岂可以仍使百姓顺应这种风俗。 
English: If we are advocating rewarding loyalty, filial piety and benevolence, how can we still make the people conform to this custom?

古文：诏曰：天地定位，君臣之义以彰；卑高既陈，人伦之道斯著。
现代文：诏命道 ：天地定下君臣之位，君臣之道义因此表明；高低的地位既然已经陈述，人伦之道这才明确。
English: The Emperor's edict said: Heaven and earth have established the position of the prince and the subject, and the principles of the prince and the subject have thus been made clear; now that the high and low positions have been stated, the principles of human ethics are clear.

古文：是用笃厚风俗，化成天下。
现代文：因此风俗淳厚，教化天下。
English: Therefore, the customs are profound and the world is enlightened.

古文：虽复时经治乱，主或昏明，疾风劲草，芬芳无绝，剖心焚体，赴蹈如归。
现代文：即使时常经过治和乱，君主有的昏庸有的英明，但疾风知劲草，留芳千古的忠臣不会断绝，剖心焚体，视死如归。
English: Even if there is frequent peace and disorder, and some monarchs are dull and some are wise, but the wind blows and the grass withers, the loyal retainers of thousands of years will not be broken, the heart will be cut and the body will be burned, and it will be like returning from the dead.

古文：夫岂不爱七尺之躯，重百年之命？
现代文：难道他们不爱惜自己七尺之躯，不重视自己的性命？
English: Don't they care about their own seven-foot bodies, don't they value their own lives?

古文：谅由君臣义重，名教所先，故能明大节于当时，立清风于身后。
现代文：谅必是由于君臣义重，等级名分和礼教在前，故能在当时明白大节，在身后树立清名。
English: It must have been due to the fact that the monarchs and the subjects had a high sense of duty, rank and reputation, and the teaching of etiquette, that they were able to understand the Great Festival at that time and establish a clear reputation behind them.

古文：至如赵高之殒二世，董卓之鸩弘农，人神所疾，异代同愤。
现代文：至于赵高杀害秦二世，董卓鸩杀弘农王，人神所痛恨，不同朝代共同愤恨。
English: As for Zhao Gao's killing of Qin II and Dong Zhuoqi's killing of Hongnong Wang, they were hated by people and gods, and they were resented by different dynasties.

古文：况凡庸小竖，有怀凶悖，遐观典策，莫不诛夷。
现代文：况且凡庸俗小人，胸怀凶狠叛逆，闲暇时观看典籍，没有一个人不被诛杀。
English: Moreover, ordinary vulgar villains, with fierce rebellion in their hearts, watch classics in their spare time, and no one is not killed.

古文：辰州刺史、长蛇县男裴虔通，昔在隋代，委质晋籓，炀帝以旧邸之情，特相爱幸。
现代文：辰州刺史、长蛇县男裴虔通，过去在隋代，曾寄身于晋王手下，炀帝由于老臣之情，特加喜爱宠信。
English: Pei Qiantong, the prince of Chenzhou and the man of Changsha County, lived under the Jin Dynasty in the Sui Dynasty. Emperor Qian was especially fond of him due to his status as a senior minister.

古文：遂乃志蔑君亲，潜图弑逆，密伺间隙，招结群丑，长戟流矢，一朝窃发。
现代文：终于心无君上，暗中图谋杀害皇帝，窥探时机，招集一些叛逆，长矛飞箭，一朝暗中发动。
English: Finally, he became desperate and secretly plotted to assassinate and kill the emperor. He spied an opportunity, summoned some rebels, flew with spears and arrows, and secretly launched the attack.

古文：天下之恶，孰云可忍！
现代文：天下之大恶如此，谁能加以容忍！
English: So great is the evil in the world, who can tolerate it!

古文：宜其夷宗焚首，以彰大戮。
现代文：本应消灭他的宗族，焚烧他的首级，以死刑向天下表明。
English: They should have wiped out his clan, burned his head, and used the death penalty to show the world.

古文：但年代异时，累逢赦令，可特免极刑，除名削爵，迁配驩州。
现代文：但由于年代不同，累次遇到大赦之令，可以特别免除死刑，削除官职爵位，发配充军到州。 
English: However, due to the different ages, they have repeatedly encountered amnesty orders, which can specifically exempt them from the death penalty, remove official titles and ranks, and send them to the state.

古文：秋七月戊申，诏： 莱州刺史牛方裕、绛州刺史薛世良、广州都督府长史唐奉义、隋武牙郎将高元礼，并于隋代俱蒙任用，乃协契宇文化及，构成弑逆。
现代文：秋七月四日，诏曰： 莱州刺史牛方裕、绛州刺史薛世良、广州都督府长史唐奉义、隋武牙郎将高元礼，都在隋朝受到重用，竟然勾结宇文化及，构成谋杀帝王之罪。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, the imperial edict stated that: Laizhou's Shishi Niu Fangyu, Zhangzhou's Shishi Xue Shiliang, Guangzhou's governor Shitang Bongyi, and Sui Wu's warlord Gao Yuanli were all heavily used in the Sui Dynasty, and they even colluded with Yu Wenjun, which constituted the crime of murdering the emperor.

古文：宜依裴虔通，除名配流岭表。 
现代文：应该依照处理裴虔通之法，削除官职爵位，发配充军到岭表。 
English: In accordance with the law on the treatment of Pei Qiantong, the official rank and title should be removed, and the army should be dispatched to Ling table.

古文：太宗谓侍臣曰： 天下愚人，好犯宪章，凡赦宥之恩，唯及不轨之辈。
现代文：太宗对侍奉之臣说 ：天下愚昧之人，喜欢犯法，凡是大赦宽免的恩德，只是施及到遵守法律的人身上。
English: Emperor Taizong said to his vassal: "There are many ignorant people in the world who like to break the law. The grace of amnesty and forgiveness is only extended to those who abide by the law."

古文：古语曰： 小人之幸，君子之不幸。 
现代文：古话说： 小人的幸运，是君子的不幸。 
English: As the old saying goes: The misfortune of a gentleman is the fortune of a ruffian.

古文： 一岁再赦，好人喑哑。 
现代文： 一年赦免两次，好人会从此不再说话。 
English: Two pardons a year, a good man would never speak again.

古文：凡养稂莠者伤禾稼，惠奸宄者贼良人。
现代文：凡是培育恶草者伤害庄稼，给予犯法作乱的人以恩惠是危害好人。
English: Anyone who harms crops by cultivating weeds, or gives favors to those who break the law and cause trouble, is harming good people.

古文：昔文王作罚，刑兹无赦。
现代文：过去文王作刑法，施刑而不赦免。
English: In the past, King Wen made criminal law, imposed punishment and did not pardon.

古文：又蜀先主尝谓诸葛亮曰： 吾周旋陈元方、郑康成间，每见启告理乱之道备矣，曾不语赦也。 
现代文：另外蜀先主刘备曾经对诸葛亮说 ：我在陈元方、郑康成之间交际应酬，常见他们谈及文启文告治与乱的办法很详备了，从不谈及大赦之事。 
English: In addition, Liu Bei, the ancestor of Shu, once said to Zhuge Liang: I was in the social intercourse between Chen Yuanfang and Zheng Kangcheng, and they often talked about the detailed methods of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the pro

古文：夫小人者，大人之贼，故朕有天下已来，不甚放赦。
现代文：小人，是大人的危害，所以朕据有天下以来，不大发布大赦。
English: A villain is a danger to adults, so I have not issued an amnesty since the beginning of the world.

古文：今四海安静，礼义兴行，非常之恩，施不可数，将恐愚人常冀侥幸，唯欲犯法，不能改过。 
现代文：现在四海平定，礼义兴起施行，特别的恩德，不可多次施行，如果多发布大赦，恐怕愚昧之人将会常常希望侥幸大赦，只想犯法，不能改过。 
English: Now the four seas have been pacified, courtesy and righteousness have been implemented, and special grace cannot be implemented more than once. If more amnesties are issued, I am afraid that ignorant people will often hope for a lucky amnesty, just want to break the law, and cannot be corrected.

古文：八月甲戌朔，幸朝堂，亲览冤屈。
现代文：八月一日，是朔日，皇上驾到朝堂，亲自鉴察冤屈。
English: On August 1st, New Year's Day, the Emperor drove to the Imperial Palace to inspect the grievances in person.

古文：自是，上以军国无事，每日视膳于西宫。
现代文：从此，皇上认为军国无事，每天到西宫侍候父母吃饭。
English: From then on, the Emperor believed that there was nothing wrong with the military, and went to the Western Palace every day to wait on his parents for dinner.

古文：癸巳，公卿奏曰： 依礼，季夏之月，可以居台榭。
现代文：二十日，公卿奏道 ：依照礼制，夏季，皇上可以居住在台榭。
English: On the 20th, the court noble said, "According to the etiquette, in the summer, the emperor can live in the palace."

古文：今隆暑未退，秋霖方始，宫中卑湿，请营一阁以居之。 
现代文：现在盛暑未退，秋雨连绵开始，宫中低下潮湿，请兴建一个楼阁来居住。 
English: Now that the summer heat has not subsided, the autumn rains have begun, and the palace is damp, please build a pavilion to live in.

古文：帝曰： 朕有气病，岂宜下湿。
现代文：皇上道： 朕有湿气之病，难道适宜住在低下潮湿之处。
English: Empress Dowager: I have the disease of dampness. Is it suitable to live in a place with low humidity?

古文：若遂来请，糜费良多。
现代文：但假若同意公卿兴建楼阁的请求，耗费太多。
English: But if it is built, it will waste a lot of manpower and material resources.

古文：昔汉文帝将起露台，而惜十家之产。
现代文：过去汉文帝将兴建承露台，然而爱惜建台乃十家的产业而作罢。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen would build a succession of terraces, but he spared no expense and decided to build only ten properties.

古文：内外文武群官年高致仕、抗表去职者，参朝之日，宜在本品见任之上。 
现代文：朕的德行不及汉文帝，然而所耗的费用超过了他，难道能说这是做人民父母的思想吗？ 终究不允许。
English: I am not as virtuous as Emperor Hanwen, but I spend more money than him. Can we say that this is the thought of being the people's parents? After all, it is not allowed.

古文：丁未，谓侍臣曰： 妇人幽闭深宫，情实可愍。
现代文：这月，河南、河北大霜冻，人们遭遇大饥荒。九月四日，皇上对侍臣道： 妇人关闭在深宫，情况实在可怜。
English: This month, Henan and Hebei were hit by a big frost, and people suffered from a great famine. On September 4, the emperor said to his courtiers: "The situation is really pitiful. Women are shut up in the Deep Palace.

古文：隋氏末年，求采无已，至于离宫别馆，非幸御之所，多聚宫人，皆竭人财力，朕所不取。
现代文：隋朝末年，采求宫女不止，至于离宫别馆，不是皇帝驾到之地，多多聚集宫人妇女，都竭尽了人力财力，是朕所不取的。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, there were more than just courtesans. As for the palace annex, it was not the place where the emperor arrived. Many courtesans and women gathered there. They had exhausted their human and financial resources. I did not want to take it.

古文：且洒扫之余，更何所用？
现代文：再说她们除洒扫宫庭之外，还有什么用处？
English: Besides, what use are these women except for cleaning the palace?

古文：今将出之，任求伉俪，非独以惜费，亦人得各遂其性。 
现代文：现在将她们放出，任凭她们选择配偶，这不仅仅是怕浪费，也是让这些妇女满足各人的性格追求。 
English: Releasing them now, and letting them choose their mates, is not just about avoiding waste, it is also about allowing these women to fulfil their individual personalities.

古文：于是遣尚书左丞戴胄、给事中杜正伦等，于掖庭宫西门简出之。
现代文：于是派尚书左丞戴胄、给事中杜正伦等，在掖庭宫西门挑选后遣送出去。
English: Therefore, he sent Shangshu Zu Rong Dai and Du Zhenglun to the West Gate of the Summer Palace to select and send them out.

古文：冬十月庚辰，御史大夫、安吉郡公杜淹卒。
现代文：冬十月七日，御史大夫、安吉郡公杜淹去世。
English: On October 7th, the winter, Dr. Mishi, Anji County Gong Duan passed away.

古文：戊子，杀瀛州刺史卢祖尚。
现代文：十五日，杀瀛州刺史卢祖尚。
English: On the 15th, he killed Zhangzhou thorn Slu Zushang.

古文：十一月辛酉，有事于圆丘。
现代文：十一月十九日，在圆丘有事。
English: On the 19th of November, there was an incident at the roundabout.

古文：十二月壬午，黄门侍郎王珪为侍中。
现代文：十二月十日，黄门侍郎王王圭为侍中。
English: On December 10th, Huangmen waiter Wang Wang Gui became a chamberlain.

古文：三年春正月辛亥，契丹渠帅来朝。
现代文：三年春正月九日，契丹大帅来朝见。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the third year of spring, General Qidan came to see the emperor.

古文：戊午，谒太庙。
现代文：十六日，晋谒太庙。
English: On the sixteenth day of the month of Jin, the Great Temple was completed.

古文：癸亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：二十一日，皇上亲自耕种征用民用耕种的田。
English: On the 18th, the emperor himself went to work on his family farm.

古文：辛未，司空、魏国公裴寂坐事免。
现代文：二十九日，司空、魏国公裴寂犯法免官。
English: On the 29th, Sikuo and Wei Guogong Peizhang were removed from office for violating the law.

古文：二月戊寅，中书令、邢国公房玄龄为尚书左仆射，兵部尚书、检校侍中、蔡国公杜如晦为尚书右仆射，刑部尚书、检校中书令、永康县公李靖为兵部尚书，右丞魏徵为守秘书监，参预朝政。
现代文：二月六日，中书令、邢国公房玄龄为尚书左仆射，兵部尚书、检校侍中、蔡国公杜如晦为尚书右仆射，刑部尚书、检校中书令、永康县公李靖为兵部尚书，尚书右丞魏征试用为秘书监，参预朝政。
English: On February 6, Xuanling of the Ministry of Education and Public Housing of Shandong Province was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Vice-Minister of Education, Du Rugao of Cai Guogong was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, Shangshu of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of Education and Public Housing of Yongkang County and Li Jing of the Ministry of Military Affairs were appointed as Shangshu's left-hand man, Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Vice-Minister of Education were appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man,

古文：夏四月辛巳，太上皇徙居大安宫。
现代文：夏四月十日，太上皇迁居大安宫。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Emperor moved to the Daan Palace.

古文：甲子，太宗始于太极殿听政。
现代文：二十三日，太宗开始在太极殿听政。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizong began to listen to politics in the Taiji Hall.

古文：五月，周王元方薨。
现代文：五月，周王元方去世。
English: In May, Zhou Wangyuanfang passed away.

古文：六月戊寅，以旱，亲录囚徒。
现代文：六月八日，因为干旱，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒罪状。
English: On June 8th, because of the drought, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：遣长孙无忌、房玄龄等祈雨于名山大川，中书舍人杜正伦等往关内诸州慰抚。
现代文：派遣长孙无忌、房玄龄等人在名山大川求雨，中书舍人杜正伦等人往关内各州安抚慰问。
English: The eldest grandson Mubi, Fusa Genrin and others were sent to pray for rain in the famous mountain river, and Du Zhenglun, a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and others were sent to appease and offer condolences to various states in Guanai.

古文：又令文武官各上封事，极言得失。
现代文：又命令文武官员各人上密封的奏章，尽量说出朝政得失。
English: He also ordered the civil and military officials to each put on a sealed record to tell as much as possible about the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：已卯，大风折木。
现代文：九日，大风吹断了树木。
English: On the 9th, high winds blew down trees.

古文：秋八月己巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋八月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of autumn in August is the new moon day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：薛延陀遣使朝贡。
现代文：薛延陀派使者前来朝贡。
English: Xue Yanta sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月癸丑，诸州置医学。
现代文：九月十六日，各州设置医学。
English: On September 16th, the states set up Medicaid.

古文：冬十一月丙午，西突厥、高昌遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十一月九日，西突厥、高昌派使者前来朝贡。
English: In winter, on November 9, Western Turkistan and Gochang sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：庚申，以并州都督李世勣为通汉道行军总管，兵部尚书李靖为定襄道行军总管，以击突厥。
现代文：二十二日，以并州都督李世责力为通汉道行军总管，兵部尚书李靖为定襄道行军总管，以打击突厥。
English: On the 22nd, with the unified state governor Li Shili as the general manager of the Tonghan Road march, and the military department's Shangshu Li Jing as the general manager of the Dingyang Road march, in order to combat the Turks.

古文：十二月戊辰，突利可汗来奔。
现代文：十二月二日，突利可汗奔来归附。
English: On December 2, the Turik Khan rushed to annex it.

古文：癸未，杜如晦以疾辞位，许之。
现代文：十七日，杜如晦因病辞去官位，太宗同意。
English: On the 17th, Du Rubei resigned from his post due to illness, and Emperor Taizong agreed.

古文：癸丑，诏建义以来交兵之处，为义士勇夫殒身戎阵者各立一寺，命虞世南、李伯药、褚亮、颜师古、岑文本、许敬宗、硃子奢等为之碑铭，以纪功业。
现代文：闰十二月十七日，诏令建立义军以来交兵之处，替义士勇夫在阵战中牺牲者各建立一座寺庙。命令虞世南、李伯药、褚亮、颜师古、岑文本、许敬宗、朱子奢等人为他们立碑刻铭文，以记载他们的功业。
English: On the 17th day of the 12th month of the leap year, the imperial edict was issued to establish a temple in each of the places where the rebels had fought since the battle, and to build a temple for the heroes who died in the battle. Ordered Yu Shennan, Li Boyu, Yu Liang, Yan Shigu, Yu Wenwen, Xu Jingzong, Zhu Zixu and others to erect monuments and inscriptions for them to record their deeds.

古文：是岁，户部奏言：中国人自塞外来归及突厥前后内附、开四夷为州县者，男女一百二十余万口。
现代文：这年，户部奏称：中国人从塞外归来及突厥前前后后归附、开辟四边少数民族地区为州县的地方，男女有一百二十余万人口
English: In that year, the Ministry of the Interior reported that the ethnic minority areas on the four sides of the country had been made into prefectures and counties after the return of the Chinese from abroad and the annexation of the Turkic peoples, with a population of more than 1.2 million men and women

