古文：蔡谟姚元起闾勦孙稚索逊冯述任怀仁王明王彪之王凝之姚牛桓恭阮瑜之刘澄刘道锡赵吉司马隆
现代文：蔡谟姚元起闾勦孙稚索逊冯述任怀仁王明王彪之王凝之姚牛桓恭阮瑜之刘澄刘道锡赵吉司马隆
English: Cai Mu, Yao Yuanqi, his grandson, Chuxuxu Xiong, Feng Xiu Ren, Huairen, Wang Ming, Wang Biao, Wang Jian, Yao Niu, Huan Gong, Ruan Yu, Liu Cheng, Liu Daoxi, Zhao Jieshmalong

古文：蔡谟
现代文：蔡谟
English: Cai Mow

古文：蔡谟征为光禄大夫，在家，忽闻东南啼哭声，有若新死。
现代文：蔡谟被任命光禄大夫，有一天在家里忽然听见东南方有啼哭声，好象谁家死了人似地。
English: Zaimu was appointed as a doctor of Guanglu, one day at home he suddenly heard sobbing in the southeast, as if someone had died.

古文：便见一少年女，死人并离啼哭。
现代文：只见一个年轻女子，离死人很远，在那啼哭。
English: I saw a young woman, far away from the dead, crying.

古文：不解所为，恐是人家忿争耳。
现代文：蔡谟弄不清是怎么回事，心想这女子大概和死人有过怨恨吧。
English: Cai Mu couldn't figure out what was going on, thinking that the woman probably had a grudge against the dead man.

古文：忽闻呼魂声，便见生女。
现代文：忽然又听到叫魂声，就见那女子腾空而起升上了天。
English: And suddenly I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither.

古文：从空中去上天，意甚恶之。
现代文：蔡谟心里很讨厌。不久就得了病死去。
English: Cai Mu felt very bad about it. He soon fell ill and died.

古文：少时疾患，遂薨。又一说，谟在厅事上坐，忽闻邻左复魄声。
现代文：又一种说法是：蔡谟在家中前厅上坐着，忽然听见左邻家有叫魂的声音，就出门去看。
English: Another version is that Jaume was sitting in the hallway of his home when he suddenly heard a commotion in his left-hand neighbour's house and went out to investigate.

古文：乃出庭前望，正见新死之家，有一老妪，上著黄罗半袖，下著缥裙，飘然升天。
现代文：正好看见新死了人的邻居家，有一个老太太，上身穿黄罗半袖衫，下身穿淡青色裙子，飘然升上天空。
English: Just in time to see the newly dead person's neighbor, there was an old lady, wearing a yellow-and-red short-sleeved shirt on her upper body and a pale blue skirt on her lower body, floating up into the sky.

古文：闻一唤声，辄回顾，三唤三顾。
现代文：听见下面招魂声，她就回一次头，下面喊了三次，老太太回三次头，在空中恋恋不舍地徘徊了好久。
English: Hearing the calling of the spirit below, she turned her head once, shouted three times below, the old lady turned her head three times, and lingered in the air for a long time.

古文：徘徊良久，声既绝，亦不复见。
现代文：地上的喊魂声没了，老太太才消失。
English: The screams on the ground stopped, and the old lady disappeared.

古文：问丧家，云，亡者衣服如此。姚元起
现代文：蔡谟问死人那家邻居，那家人说死的老太太穿的真的是蔡谟看见的那样子衣服。姚元起
English: Zhaimou asked the dead man's neighbor, and the family said that the dead old lady was really wearing the same clothes as Zhaimou saw.

古文：河内姚元起，居近山林，举家恒入野耕种。
现代文：河内人姚元起，家住在树林边上，全家人都出去种地，只留一个七岁的女儿看家，后来就发现女孩日渐消瘦。
English: Yao Yuanqi, a native of Hanoi, lived on the edge of a forest. His whole family went out to farmland, leaving only a seven-year-old daughter to look after the house. Later, he noticed that the girl was getting thinner.

古文：唯有七岁女守屋，而渐觉瘦，父母问女，女云：常有一人，长丈余而有四面，面皆有七孔。
现代文：父母问是怎么回事，女孩说，家里经常有个人来，这人一丈多高，有四张面孔，每张脸上也有七窍，自称是高天大将军。
English: When her parents asked what was going on, the girl said that there was a man who often came to the house. This man was as tall as a man, had four faces, each face also had seven orifices, and claimed to be a high-ranking general.

古文：自号离天大将军，来辄见吞，迳出下部。
现代文：这怪物每次来都把女孩吞下去，然后又拉出来。
English: Every time the monster comes, it swallows the girl and pulls her out.

古文：为此数过。云：慎勿道我，道我，当长留腹中。阖门骇惋，遂移避。
现代文：怪物还警告小女孩不许告诉人，如果告诉人，就把她永远留在肚子里，全家一听十分害怕，赶快迁到别处去躲避起来了。
English: The monster also warned the little girl not to tell anyone. If she did, he would keep her in his belly forever. The whole family was very scared and quickly moved to another place to hide.

古文：闾勦
现代文：闾勦
English: 

古文：吴兴武唐闾勦，凌晨闻外拍手，自出看。
现代文：吴兴县的武塘有个闾勦，早晨听见外面有拍手声，就出去看。
English: Wu Tang in Wuxing County has a dragonfly. In the morning, when I heard clapping outside, I went out to have a look.

古文：见二乌帻吏，迳将至渚，云：官使乘船送豆至。
现代文：看见两个戴黑头巾的官员，将他抓住直弄了河滩，说：官府让你驾船把豆子送去。
English: Seeing two officials wearing black hoods, he grabbed him and dragged him to the bank of the river, saying, "The government has asked you to send the beans by boat."

古文：乃令勦枻，二吏絙挽。
现代文：就让闾勦划桨，两个官员在岸上拉縴绳。
English: Just let the paddles do the paddling and the two officials on shore pull the reins.

古文：至嘉兴郡，暂住逆旅。乃平望亭，潜逃得归。
现代文：到了嘉兴郡，一块住进旅店，后来走到平望亭，闾勦终于逃脱了到家。
English: When they arrived in Jiaxing County, they stayed in a hotel together. Later, they walked to Pingwang Pavilion, and the quail finally escaped to their home.

古文：十余日，外复有呼声，又见二吏云：汝何敢委叛。
现代文：十几天后，又听见外面有喊他的声音，那两个官对闾勦说：你怎么竟敢抗命脱逃！
English: A dozen days later, he heard someone shouting for him outside. The two officials said to Zou: "How dare you disobey orders and escape!

古文：将至船，犹多菽，又令捉枻船，二吏絙挽。
现代文：又把他弄到船上，这次船上装了很多粮食。还是让他划桨，两个官员还是拉縴。
English: They got him on the boat again, this time with a lot of grain. They still let him paddle, and the two officials still pulled the oars.

古文：始前至嘉乐故塚，谓勦曰：我须过一处，留汝在后，慎勿复走。
现代文：船到了嘉乐的一片坟地时，官说：我们先去一个地方，你暂时留下，这回可不许再逃。
English: When the boat arrived at a cemetery in Jiale, the official said: "We will go to a place first, you can stay for a while, but this time you must not run away again."

古文：若有饮食，自当相唤。
现代文：如果有吃喝，我们会来叫你的。
English: If there's anything to eat or drink, we'll call you.

古文：须臾，一吏呼勦上。见高门瓦屋，欢嚥盈堂。
现代文：不大工夫一个官员来叫他，进了一个高门的大瓦房，只见里面一屋子人正在吃酒席。
English: It didn't take long for an official to call him, and he entered a large tiled room with a high door, only to see a room full of people having a drink.

古文：仍令勦行酒，并赐炙啖。
现代文：他们让闾勦喝酒，还给他肉吃。
English: They gave him wine to drink and meat to eat.

古文：天将晓，二吏云：而见去，汝且停。
现代文：天快亮时，两个官员说：我们现在走了，你先等一等。
English: Near dawn, two officials said, "We're leaving now, you wait."

古文：顷之，但见高坟森木。
现代文：一转眼间什么都没了，只见周围是高大的坟墓和阴森的树林。
English: In the blink of an eye, everything is gone, surrounded by tall tombs and gloomy woods.

古文：勦心迷乱，其家寻觅，经日方得。
现代文：闾勦心迷神乱，他家里找他很久才在坟地发现他。
English: He was so obsessed that his family searched for him for a long time before they found him in the cemetery.

古文：寻发大疮而死。
现代文：回去后身上生了大疮，不久就死去了。
English: When he returned, he was covered in sores and died soon after.

古文：孙稚
现代文：孙稚
English: Sun Waki

古文：晋孙稚，字法晖，齐般阳县人也。
现代文：晋代有个孙稚，字法晖，山东般阳县人。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a Sun Wuchang, who was fluent in Chinese and came from Banyang County in Shandong Province.

古文：父祚，晋太中大夫。
现代文：父亲叫孙祚，是晋朝太中大夫。
English: His father, Sun Yat-sen, was a doctor of the imperial court during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：稚幼奉佛法，年十八，以咸康元年八月亡。
现代文：孙稚从小就信奉佛法，咸康元年八月，才十八岁就死了。
English: Sun Zhi believed in Buddhism from a young age, and died in August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiankang at the age of eighteen.

古文：祚后移居武昌，至三年四月八日，沙门于法阶行尊像。经家门，夫妻大小出观，见稚亦在人众之中，随侍像行。
现代文：父亲孙祚后来迁居到武汉。咸康三年四月八日那天，和尚把寺庙的神抬出来游行，经过孙祚家时全家都出来看，突然看见已死的孙稚也在游行的人群时，守护着神像走。
English: His father, Sun Yat-sen, later moved to Wuhan. On the 8th day of the 4th month of the 3rd year of the Heian period, the monk carried the god of the temple out for a parade. When he passed by Sun Yat-sen's house, the whole family came out to watch. Suddenly, they saw the dead Sun Chuk also walking in the crowd of the parade, guarding the statue.

古文：见父母，见跪问讯，随共还家。
现代文：孙祚看见了父母，就跪下问安，并一起回到家里。
English: When Sun Yat-sen saw his parents, he knelt down to greet them, and they returned home together.

古文：祚先病，稚去，无他祸祟，不自将护所致耳。
现代文：这时孙祚有病，孙稚说：这病没什么大的祸患和鬼祟作怪，是由于父亲没有自身维护的原因，以五月份就会好的。
English: At this time, Sun Yat-sen was ill, and Sun Zhi said, "This illness is not a great evil or a mystery. It is because my father did not take care of himself. He will get better in May."

古文：五月当差，言毕辞去，其年七月十五日复归。跪拜问讯，悉如生时。说其外祖父为泰山府君，见稚，说母字曰：汝是某甲儿耶？
现代文：说完就走了。这年七月十五孙稚又回家来，跪拜问安和活着时一样，说：外祖父是冥间的泰山府君，并见过我，向我提到我母亲的名字说 你不是某某的儿子吗？
English: After saying this, he left. In July of this year, the fifteenth grandchild came home again, kneeled down and asked for greetings as he did when he was alive, saying, "My grandfather is the Taishan prefect of the underworld, and he saw me and mentioned my mother's name to me and said, "Aren't you the son of so-and-so?"

古文：未应便来，那得至此。
现代文：你阳寿未尽，并没召你来怎么就来了？ 
English: You haven't reached the end of your life, and you haven't been called to come, so why did you come?

古文：稚答伯父将来，欲以代謰，有教推问，欲鞭解之，稚救嵿得原。
现代文：我说我伯父马上会来，是我要替伯父领罪才来的。不一会就见伯父被抓来，就要受到拷打，我努力营救才得免罪。
English: I said that my uncle would be coming soon, and that I had come to plead my uncle's case. It didn't take long before I saw that my uncle had been arrested and was about to be tortured, and I had to work hard to save him before I was exonerated.

古文：稚兄容，字思渊，时在其侧，稚谓曰：虽离故形，在优乐处。
现代文：这时孙稚回家，见到哥哥在旁边。
English: At this time, Sun Zhi went home and saw his brother next to him.

古文：但读书，无他作，愿兄无忧也，他但勤精进，福自随人矣。
现代文：哥哥叫孙容，字思渊。孙稚对哥哥说，我虽然离开人世，但却也身在优乐之中，每天只是读书，哥哥不必为我担心，只要勤奋努力，福份也就随之而来了。
English: His brother's name was Sun Rong, pronounced "Siu Yuan." Sun Waka said to his brother, "Although I am no longer alive, I am still in the midst of bliss. I just study every day. My brother doesn't have to worry about me. As long as I work hard, good fortune will follow."

古文：我二年学成，当生国王家。
现代文：我再学二年就期满，将投生到人间一个国王家去。
English: I will complete my studies in another two years, and I will be born into a royal family on earth.

古文：同辈有五百人，今在福堂，学成，皆当上生第六天上。
现代文：我们一同学习的有五百人，都在福堂读书。这五百人学成后都会升到第六层天上去当神仙。
English: There are five hundred of us studying together, all of whom are studying at Fukudo. When these five hundred people have completed their studies, they will all ascend to the sixth layer of heaven to become immortals.

古文：我本亦应上生，但以解救先人，因缘缠缚，故独生王家耳。
现代文：我本来也可以升到六层天，但因为我解救伯父，人间的因缘纠缠不断，所以才让我投胎到人间的国王家去。
English: I could have ascended to the sixth heaven, but because I rescued my uncle, I was born into the family of the king of the human world.

古文：到五年七月七日复归。说邾城当有寇难，事例甚多，悉皆如言。
现代文：咸康五年七月七日孙稚又回来了，这次说邾城将会发生流寇作乱，还说了不少事，后来都应验了。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of the fifth year of the reign of Hamkang, Sun Wukong came back again. This time, he said that there would be a bandit uprising in Lucheng. He also said a lot of things, all of which later came true.

古文：家人祕之，故无传者。又云：先人多人罪謰，宜为作福。
现代文：只是他家对孙稚还阳回家的事一直保密，所以一直没有人知道，孙稚还说：咱家的长辈祖先们都有不同的罪过，你们要常常祭礼神灵好替先辈赎罪。
English: However, his family had kept the matter of Sun Wukong returning home a secret, so no one knew about it. Sun Wukong also said, "Our elders and ancestors all have different sins. You should often offer sacrifices to the gods in order to atone for the sins of your ancestors."

古文：一一如法者受上福。次者次福。
现代文：我现在已经快转世人间了，不必再作法事祭祀我，要祭祀就是为了救先人，希望父亲兄弟多积善积德才是。
English: Now that I am about to return to the world, there is no need to perform the ritual sacrifice for me. The purpose of the sacrifice is to save the ancestors. I hope that my father and brothers will accumulate more virtues.

古文：若不能然，徒费设耳。当使平等，心无彼我，其福乃多。
现代文：以后家里作祭神的供品时一定要新鲜洁净，最洁净的能得到上等的福佑，稍次的得的福佑也必然少，如果祭品不好不净，上供等于白上，对神灵要平等对待，不分你我，这样福才会多。
English: In the future, when making an offering to the gods at home, it must be fresh and clean. The cleanest can receive the highest blessing, and the blessing received a little later will inevitably be less. If the sacrifice is not good or clean, the offering is equal to the white, and the gods should be treated equally, regardless of you and me, so that the blessing will be more.

古文：祚时有婢，稚未还时，忽疾殆死。通身皆痛。
现代文：孙祚当时有个使女在孙稚没回来时忽然病得要死了，全身痛得难忍。
English: At that time, there was a maid in Sun Yat-sen's household who suddenly became deathly ill when Sun Chih did not return, and her whole body was in unbearable pain.

古文：稚云：此婢欲叛，我前与鞭，不复得去耳。
现代文：孙稚回来后才对父亲说：咱家这个使女打算逃跑，我前几天抽了她一顿鞭子，她再不能跑了。
English: When Sun Chih returned, he said to his father, "This servant girl of our family is planning to run away. I gave her a whipping a few days ago, and she can no longer run away.

古文：推问婢云，前实欲叛，与人为期，日垂至而便住云耳。
现代文：后来审问这个使女，果然前几天和一个人约好某一天一同逃跑，到了那天使女却没能跑成。
English: Later, they interrogated the maid, and sure enough, a few days before, she had made an appointment with someone to run away together on a certain day, but when she arrived, she was unable to do so.

古文：索逊
现代文：索逊
English: Sosson

古文：升平中，徐州刺史索逊，乘船往晋陵。
现代文：开平年间，徐州刺史索逊坐船到晋陵去。
English: During the period of Kaiping, Xuzhou poet Suo Song took a boat to Jinling.

古文：会暗发，回河行数里，有人寄索载，云：我家在韩塚，脚痛不能行，寄君船去。
现代文：天黑时出发，船沿河岸去了几里地时，有个人要求搭船，说：我家在韩家坟，脚痛得走不动了，请让我搭你的船去吧。
English: We set off at nightfall, and when the boat had travelled a few miles along the riverbank, a man asked for a ride, saying: "My home is in Han's grave, my feet hurt so much I can't walk, please let me go on your boat."

古文：四更时，至韩塚，此人便去。
现代文：四更时到了韩家坟那人就上岸走了。
English: When he arrived at Han's grave in the fourth watch, the man went ashore and left.

古文：逊二人牵船，过一渡，施力殊不便。骂此人曰：我数里载汝来，迳去，不与人牵船，欲与痛手。
现代文：索逊和另一个人拖着船过一个渡口，很费力气，就骂那个人说：你坐我们船走了好几里，只管走了也不来帮忙拉拉船，怕你的手痛是不？
English: Sosson and another man dragged the boat across a ferry, with a lot of effort, and scolded the man, saying: "You've traveled several miles on our boat, but you won't come to help pull the boat, for fear of hurting your hand?

古文：此人便还，与牵，不觉用力而得渡，人便迳入诸塚间。
现代文：那人就回来帮着拉船，船一点也不费力就过了渡口，那人就走进韩家坟去了。
English: The man came back to help pull the boat. The boat passed the ferry without any effort, and the man went into the Han family grave.

古文：逊疑非人。
现代文：索逊怀疑那是鬼，就派人跟在后面偷偷观察。
English: Suspecting that it was a ghost, Sosson sent someone to spy on it from behind.

古文：使窃寻看，此经塚间，便不复见。须臾复出，至一塚呼曰：载公。
现代文：那人走到坟墓中就不见了。过了一会那人又出来走到一个坟前喊道：载公！
English: The man went into the grave and disappeared. After a while, the man came out again and went to a grave and shouted: "Congratulations!

古文：有出者应。
现代文：坟里就钻出个人来答应。
English: People were falling over themselves to say yes.

古文：此人说：我向载人船来，不为共牵，奴便欲打我，今当往报之。欲暂借甘罗来。
现代文：那人说：刚才搭一个人的船回来，没帮他们拉船，他们就要打我。我要去报复他们，把你的大甘罗借给我用用。
English: The man said, "I have just come back in a man's boat, and they are going to beat me for not helping them to pull the boat. I am going to take revenge on them. Lend me your big sweet potato."

古文：载公曰：坏我甘罗，不可得，此人无所苦，我试之耳。
现代文：载公说：借给你甘罗弄坏了，我没处再弄到。那人没办法，只好说，我不过试试看。
English: Cang Gong said, "The amaro I lent you broke, and I have nowhere to get more. The man had no choice but to say, I'll just try it."

古文：逊闻此，即还船，须臾。
现代文：索逊听到这里就跑回船上。
English: When Sosson heard this, he ran back to the boat.

古文：岸上有物来。赤如百斗篅，长二丈许，迳来向船，逊便大呼：奴载我船，不与我牵。不得痛手，方便载公甘罗。今欲击我，今日要当打坏奴。
现代文：不一会儿就见岸上来了个东西，空空地像个能装一百斛粮食的大囤子，有两大多长，直着站船冲过来，索逊就大叫道：你这个家伙白坐我的船，怕手痛不帮忙拉船，又借了载公的甘罗来撞我，看我今天不打烂你这个东西！
English: Soon he saw something coming ashore. It looked like a large empty raft that could hold a hundred bushels of grain. There were two large, long, upright boats rushing to the shore. Soson shouted: "You are the guy who took my boat for nothing, who didn't help to pull the boat for fear of getting a sore hand, and who borrowed a cartload of manure to hit me with. See if I don't break you today!

古文：甘罗忽然失却，于是遂进。
现代文：大囤了顿时消失，他们才接着上路了。
English: The loud banging suddenly stopped, and they continued on their way.

古文：冯述
现代文：冯述
English: Feng Shu

古文：上党冯述，晋元熙中，为相府将。
现代文：上党人冯述，晋元熙年间当相府将，休假回虎牢关。
English: Feng Shu, a member of the Shang Party, said that during the reign of Emperor Jin Yuanxi, when he was the minister of the government, he took a vacation and returned to the tiger.

古文：假归虎牢，忽逢四人，各持绳及杖，来赴述，述策马避焉。
现代文：路上忽然遇到四个人，都拿着绳子和木杖，直奔冯述而来。冯述忙策马避开，不敢往前走。
English: On the road, they suddenly encountered four people, all of whom were holding ropes and wooden sticks and were heading straight for Feng Shu. Feng Shu tried to avoid the horses and did not dare to go forward.

古文：不肯进，四人各捉马一足，倏然便倒河上。
现代文：那四个人一个人抓住一条马腿，冯述一下就落马摔倒在河边。
English: One of the four men grabbed a horse's leg, and as soon as Feng told him about it, he fell off his horse and fell down by the river.

古文：问述：欲渡否？
现代文：四个人问冯述想过河吗？
English: Four people asked Feng Shu, "Have you ever been to the river?"

古文：述曰：水深不测，既无舟楫，何由得过？
现代文：冯述说：河水深不可测，又没有渡船，怎么过得去？
English: Feng Shu said: "The river is unfathomably deep, and there is no ferry, how can I get around?

古文：君正欲见杀耳？
现代文：你们不正好杀了我吗？
English: Did you kill me for no reason?

古文：四人云：不相杀，当持君赴官。
现代文：四个人说：我们不是要杀你，而是要带你去官府。
English: Four people said: "We're not going to kill you, we're going to take you to the authorities."

古文：遂复捉马脚，涉河而北。
现代文：说着他们就抓着马腿，趟河而过。
English: As they spoke, they grabbed the horse's leg and waded across the river.

古文：述但闻波浪声，而不觉水。
现代文：冯述只听到波浪声一点没觉得有水。
English: Feng Shu only heard the sound of waves and did not feel any water.

古文：垂至岸，四人相谓曰：此人不净，那得将去。
现代文：快上岸时，那四个人商量说：这个人不干净，带他去怎么行？
English: And when they were come to land, the four men reasoned with one another, saying, This man is not clean; how can we bring him in?

古文：时述有弟服，深恐鬼离之，便当溺水死，乃鞭马作势，迳登岸，述辞谢曰：既蒙恩德，何敢复烦劳。
现代文：当时冯述正为死去的弟弟服丧，深怕鬼丢下不管而被淹死。就乘势猛打马跳上岸去，回头对他们说：已经领教了你们的恩德，不敢再麻烦你们了！
English: At that time, Feng Shu was in mourning for his dead brother. He was deeply afraid that the ghost would abandon him and he would be drowned. So he rode his horse hard and jumped ashore. He turned to them and said, "I have learned from your kindness, I dare not trouble you again!"

古文：任怀仁
现代文：任怀仁
English: Ren Huairin

古文：晋升平元年，任怀仁年十三，为台书佐。
现代文：晋升平元年时任怀仁十三岁，已当了台书佐。
English: When he was promoted to the first year of the Heian period, he was 13 years old and had already become a member of the Secretariat.

古文：乡里有王祖复为令史，恒宠之。
现代文：乡里有个王祖被起用当了令史，一直很宠着他。
English: There is a Wang Zu in the village who has been appointed as the chief historian and has always been very fond of him.

古文：怀仁已十五六矣，颇有异意，祖衔恨。
现代文：任怀仁到十五岁时，有些讨厌王祖了。
English: By the time Ren Huairen was fifteen, some people hated Wang Zu.

古文：至嘉兴，杀怀仁，以棺殡埋于徐祚家田头。祚后宿息田上，忽见有塚。至朝中暮三时食，辄分以祭之，呼云：田头鬼，来就我食。
现代文：王祖怀恨在心，二人一起去嘉兴时，王祖杀了任怀仁，装进棺材埋在徐祚家的地头上，徐祚种田休息时发现田中的新坟，每天早中晚三餐都分出些饭菜祭祀，并喊道：田头的鬼，来和我一起吃饭吧。
English: Wang Zu harbored hatred in his heart. When the two of them went to Jiaxing, Wang Zu killed Ren Huairen, put him in a coffin and buried him on the land of Xu Hui's family. When Xu Hui was taking a break from farming, he found a new grave in the field. Every morning, noon and night, he would set aside some food for sacrifice, and shouted: "Devil of the field, come eat with me."

古文：至瞑眠时，亦云：来伴我宿。
现代文：晚上睡觉时也说：田头鬼，来伴我入眠吧。
English: When I go to bed at night, I also say, "Tanogami, come sleep with me."

古文：如此积时。后夜忽见形云：我家明当除服作祭，祭甚丰厚，君明随去。
现代文：这样过了很久，任怀仁忽然现了形，对徐祚说：我们家里明天要为我设坛祭祷，祭祀的食物十分丰盛，你随我去吧。
English: After this had gone on for a long time, Ren Huairen suddenly appeared and said to Xu Yao, "Tomorrow, our family is going to set up an altar for me. The sacrificial food is very rich. You should follow me."

古文：祚云：我是生人。不当相见。
现代文：徐祚说：我是外人，不应该去的。
English: Xu Wei said: I am a foreigner, I should not go.

古文：鬼云：我自隐君形。
现代文：任怀仁说：我可以让你隐形。
English: Ren Huairen said: I can make you invisible.

古文：祚便随鬼去。计行食顷，便到其家。
现代文：徐祚就跟着任怀仁走，一顿饭工夫就到了任家。
English: Xu Yao followed Ren Huairen and arrived at Ren's home in time for a meal.

古文：家大有客，鬼将祚上灵座，大食灭，合家号泣，不能自胜，讼其儿还。
现代文：见这家客人很多，鬼就把徐祚弄到灵座上，把祭坛上的酒肉一扫而光。全家一看，都说任怀仁回家来了，就痛哭号啕起来。
English: Seeing that there were many guests in the house, the ghost made Xu Yao sit on the altar and swept away the wine and meat on the altar. When the whole family saw that Ren Huairen had come home, they burst into tears.

古文：见王祖来，便曰：此是杀我人。
现代文：这时鬼看见王祖也来了，就大喊，他就是杀我的人！
English: At this time, the ghost saw that Wang Zu was also coming and shouted, "He is the one who killed me!"

古文：犹畏之，便走出。祚即形露，家中大惊，具问祚，因叙本末。
现代文：王祖吓得赶快跑了，徐祚也现出自己，家时人大惊，问徐祚是怎么回事，徐祚就如实说了。
English: Wang Zu was so scared that he quickly ran away. Xu Yao also showed himself. People at home were shocked. When they asked Xu Yao what was going on, Xu Yao told them the truth.

古文：遂随祚迎丧，既去，鬼便断绝。
现代文：于是家里的人就跟着徐祚到田头去迎任怀仁的棺材，从此鬼也就没有了。
English: As a result, the people in the family followed Xu Yao to Tiankou to meet Huairen's coffin, and from then on the ghost was gone.

古文：王明
现代文：王明
English: Wang Ming

古文：东莱王明儿，居在江西，死经一年，忽形见。
现代文：东莱有个人叫王明儿，住在江西，死了一年后突然现形回家住了好几天。
English: In Donglai, there was a man named Wang Ming'er, who lived in Jiangxi Province. A year after his death, he suddenly returned home and lived there for several days.

古文：还家经日，命招亲好，叙平生，云：天曹许以暂归。
现代文：他让招来亲朋好友，讲了很多事，他说：天曹允许我暂时还阳回家看看。
English: He invited his friends and relatives and told them a lot of things. He said, "God has allowed me to return home for a while.

古文：言及将离，语便流涕。
现代文：一说到很快又要分别，就涕泪交流。
English: As soon as they said that they would soon be separating, they exchanged tears.

古文：问讯乡里，备有情焉。
现代文：问候乡亲们的生活，十分重感情。
English: Greetings to the lives of the villagers, very heavy feelings.

古文：敕儿曰：吾去人间，便已一周，思覩桑梓。
现代文：他对儿子说：虽然离开人间才一年，但特别想念故乡的一切。
English: He said to his son: Although I have only been away from the world for a year, I miss everything about my hometown.

古文：命儿同观乡闾。行经邓艾庙，令烧之，儿大惊曰：艾生时为征东将军，没而有灵，百姓祠以祈福，奈何焚之？
现代文：他让儿子领他到家乡各处走走看看，经过邓艾庙时，他告诉儿子把庙烧掉。儿子大惊说：邓艾生前是征东将军，死后也有神灵，百姓都向他祈求保佑呢，为什么要烧他的庙？
English: He asked his son to show him around his hometown. When he passed by Deng Ai Temple, he told his son to burn it down. His son was shocked and said, "Deng Ai was a general who went to conquer the East in his lifetime. After his death, he was also a god. People pray to him for blessings. Why burn his temple?"

古文：怒曰：艾今在尚方摩铠，十指垂掘，岂其有神？
现代文：王明儿生气的说：邓艾现在阴间干的是擦摩铠甲的差事，十个手指都快磨坏了，还有什么神灵能保佑下界？
English: Wang Ming'er said angrily, "Deng Ai is now in the underworld doing the job of wiping the scabbard. Her ten fingers are almost worn out. What other gods can bless the underworld?"

古文：因云：王大将军亦作牛，驱驰殆毙。
现代文：王大将军也作了牛，被人驱赶快要累死了。
English: General Wang also became a cow and was driven to the verge of death from exhaustion.

古文：桓温为卒，同在地狱。
现代文：桓温只不过当了个阴间的小兵。
English: Kan-Wen has become nothing more than a pawn of the underworld.

古文：此等并困剧理尽，安能为人损益。
现代文：这些人在阴间都在受各种罪，能给人间带来什么福？
English: These people are suffering from all kinds of sins in the underworld. What blessing can they bring to mankind?

古文：汝欲求多福者，正当恭慎，尽忠孝顺。
现代文：你们想求福，只有老老实实作人，尽忠尽孝，别惹神气，就是积德行善了。
English: If you want to ask for blessings, you only need to be an honest person, be loyal and filial, do not provoke arrogance, and accumulate virtue and do good.

古文：无恚怒，便善流无极。又令可录指爪甲，死后可以赎罪。
现代文：他还让平时把指甲剪下来以后积存起来，死后可以赎罪。
English: He also had his fingernails clipped so that they could be saved for atonement after his death.

古文：又使高作户限，鬼来入人室内，记人罪过，越限拨脚，则忘事矣。王彪之
现代文：还让把门坎作得高一些，鬼到家来记人的罪过，走时让高门坎一绊，就把记的罪过都忘了。王彪之
English: He also made the doorknob a little higher, so that when the ghosts came home, they would remember people's sins, and if they tripped over the high doorknob when they left, they would forget all the sins they remembered. Wang Biao Zhi

古文：晋王彪之，年少未官。
现代文：晋进有个王彪之，年纪很轻，也没有做官。
English: Wang Biao, a very young man who had never been an official, was promoted.

古文：尝独坐斋中，前有竹。忽闻有叹声，彪之畅然，怪似其母，因往看之。见母衣服如昔，彪之跪拜歔欷。
现代文：有一次，他一个人坐在书房里，忽然听见书房前的竹丛中有人叹息，声音像是他死去的母亲，觉得十分奇怪，就出去看，虽然看见母亲穿着活着时的衣服站在那里。彪之哭着跪拜后，母亲说：你马上要有大祸临头。
English: Once, when he was sitting alone in his study, he suddenly heard someone sighing in the bamboo grove in front of the study, a voice that sounded like his dead mother. He felt very strange, so he went out to look, although he saw his mother standing there in the clothes she was wearing when she was alive. After crying and kneeling, his mother said, "A great disaster is about to befall you."

古文：母曰：汝方有奇厄，自今以去。当日见白狗，若能东行出千里，三年，然后得免灾。
现代文：从现在往后，你会看见一只白狗，如果你能出去一千里，三年以后你就能免灾了。
English: From now on, you will see a white dog. If you can go out a thousand miles, you will be safe in three years.

古文：忽不复见。
现代文：说完母亲就突然不见了，彪之一夜悲痛之极。
English: After saying this, her mother suddenly disappeared, and the whole night was full of grief.

古文：彪之悲怅达旦，既明，独见一白狗。
现代文：天亮后，真就看见一只白狗，这狗总随时随地跟着他。
English: After dawn, he really saw a white dog, which always followed him wherever he went.

古文：恒随行止，便经营竹装，装往会稽。
现代文：他就立刻收拾行装，打算往会稽方面去。
English: He immediately packed up and left, intending to go to the audit office.

古文：及出千里外，所见便肃然都尽。
现代文：等走出千里以外时，那个跟他的白狗就不见了。
English: When he was thousands of miles away, the man and his white dog were gone.

古文：过三年乃归，复还先斋住。
现代文：三年后，王彪之才又回来，还是住进原来的房子。
English: Three years later, Wang Biao Zhicang came back and still lived in the original house.

古文：忽闻前声，往见母如先。谓：从吾，故来庆汝。
现代文：忽然又听见他母亲的声音，就出去又看见了母亲，母亲说：你听了我话，所以我来祝贺你。
English: And suddenly he heard his mother's voice again, and went out, and saw his mother; and his mother said, Thou hast obeyed my voice; therefore I will give thee a blessing.

古文：汝自今已后，年逾八十，位班台司。
现代文：你以后可以活到八十以外，官可以做到班台司。
English: In the future, you can live beyond the age of eighty, and you can become a shift supervisor.

古文：皆如母言。
现代文：后来一切都像他母亲说的应验了。
English: Then everything happened just as his mother had said.

古文：王凝之
现代文：王凝之
English: Wang Xizhi

古文：晋左军琅邪王凝之，夫人谢氏，顿亡二男，痛惜过甚，衔泪六年。
现代文：晋时左军琅邪人王凝之的两个儿子突然死去，夫人谢氏悲痛欲绝，哭了六年。
English: The two sons of Wang Xunzhi, a left-wing military leader and villain in the Jin Dynasty, died suddenly, and his wife, Xie, was overwhelmed with grief and cried for six years.

古文：后忽见二儿俱还，并著械，慰其母曰：可自割，儿并有罪謰，宜为作福。
现代文：有一天两个儿子忽然一块回来了，都戴着枷锁。他俩劝母亲说：你不必伤心，割舍我俩吧，我俩是因为有罪才被阴间捉去的，请以后为我们祈祷就行了。
English: One day, the two sons suddenly returned together, both wearing shackles. They persuaded their mother to say: "You don't have to be sad, just let us be. We were both sent to the underworld because of our sins. Please just pray for us in the future."

古文：于是得止哀，而勤为求请。
现代文：谢氏就从此不再悲伤，只是经常祭告神灵为儿子赎罪。
English: Since then, Mr. Xie has never been sad, but has often offered sacrifices to the gods to atone for his son's sins.

古文：姚牛
现代文：姚牛
English: Yao Niu

古文：须县民姚牛，年十余。父为乡人所杀，牛尝卖衣服，市刀戟，图欲报仇。
现代文：须县有个姚牛，才十多岁，他的父亲就被人杀害了，姚牛卖了衣服买来刀枪，立志报仇。
English: There is a Yao Niu in Su County. He was just over ten years old when his father was killed. Yao Niu sold his clothes to buy a knife and gun, determined to take revenge.

古文：后在县门前相遇，手刃之于众中，吏擒得。
现代文：后来在县衙门前姚牛遇见了杀父的仇人，当着众人的面亲手把他杀死了。
English: Later, in front of the county gate, Yao Niu met his father's killer and killed him with his own hands in front of everyone.

古文：官长深矜孝节，为推迁其事，会赦得免。
现代文：县衙把姚牛抓去，县令感念姚牛的孝心和胆量，就设法开脱他的杀人罪，希望遇见大赦能免死。
English: The county magistrate arrested Yao Niu, and the county magistrate, impressed by Yao Niu's filial piety and courage, tried to acquit him of the crime of homicide, hoping to meet with an amnesty to avoid death.

古文：又为州郡论救，遂得无他。
现代文：县令又给郡里州里写呈文开脱营救姚牛，最后姚牛终于无罪释放。
English: The county magistrate also wrote a letter to the county and the county to justify the rescue of Yao Niu. Finally, Yao Niu was finally acquitted.

古文：令后出猎，逐鹿入草中，有古深井数处。
现代文：后来县令一次出去打猎追一头鹿，鹿钻进草丛。
English: Later, the county magistrate once went out hunting to chase a deer, and the deer ran into the grass.

古文：马将趣之，忽见一翁，举杖击马。马惊避，不得及鹿。令奴引弓将射之，翁曰：此中有井，悲君堕耳。
现代文：草丛里有几口古井，马都要踏着古井时，忽然出来一个老人举起拐杖打马，马一惊就躲开了，由于没有追上鹿，县令命令随从拉起弓来要射那老人，老人说：草丛里有井，怕你陷入井中我才打马。
English: There were several old wells in the bushes. When the horses had to trample through the old wells, an old man suddenly came out and raised his crutch to beat the horse. The horse was surprised and ran away. Since he did not catch up with the deer, the county magistrate ordered his followers to pull up their bows to shoot the old man. The old man said, "There are wells in the bushes. I only beat the horse because I am afraid you will fall into the well."

古文：令曰：汝为何人？
现代文：县令说：你是谁？
English: The county magistrate said, "Who are you?"

古文：翁长跽曰：民姚牛父也，感君活牛，故来谢。
现代文：老人说：我是姚牛的父亲，感谢你救了他的命，我特来报答你。
English: The old man said, "I am the father of Yao Niu, thank you for saving his life, I am here to repay you."

古文：因灭不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：桓慕
现代文：桓慕
English: Kanmu

古文：桓慕为桓石民参军，在丹徒，所住廨，床前一小隐穴，详视是古墓，棺已朽坏。
现代文：桓恭担任桓石民参军时，在丹徒县的住所里，床前有一个塌下去的小洞，仔细看原来是个古墓，棺木已坏。
English: When Huan Qiong was in the army as a member of the Huan Shi Min, there was a small hole that had collapsed in front of his bed in his residence in Dantu County. On closer inspection, it turned out to be an ancient tomb, and the coffin was broken.

古文：桓食，常先以鲑饭投穴中，如此经年。
现代文：从此桓恭每次吃饭时都是夹些饭菜鱼肉扔到小洞里，这样持续了几年。
English: From then on, every time Huan Gong had a meal, she would throw some fish meat into the small hole, and this went on for several years.

古文：后眠始觉，见一人在床前云：吾终没以来，七百余年，后绝嗣灭，蒸尝莫及。
现代文：有一天刚睡醒时看见一个人站在床前说：我已经死了七百多年了，由于没有后代祭奠我，我早就没吃过什么好东西了。
English: One day, when he had just woken up, he saw a man standing in front of his bed and saying: "I have been dead for more than seven hundred years, and since there are no descendants to pay tribute to me, I haven't eaten anything good for a long time."

古文：君恒食见播及，感德无已。
现代文：现在你经常给我东西吃，使我万分感激。
English: Now you often give me something to eat, which makes me very grateful.

古文：依君籍，当应为宁州刺史。
现代文：我已看了你阴司的簿子，现特告诉你：你以后将做宁州刺史。
English: I've already read the book of your genitals, and I'm here to tell you: you will be the history of Ningzhou in the future.

古文：后果如言。
现代文：后来果然应验。
English: It was later fulfilled.

古文：阮瑜之
现代文：阮瑜之
English: Nguyn Xuân

古文：晋太元十年，阮瑜之居在始兴佛图前。少孤贫不立，哭泣无时。
现代文：晋太元十年，阮瑜之住在始兴佛塔前，他年少时失去父母，家中贫困不能自立，经常痛哭。
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Jintao, when he was living in front of the Shixing Pagoda, he lost his parents at a young age, was unable to support himself due to poverty in his family, and often cried bitterly.

古文：忽见一鬼，书塼著前云：父死归玄冥，何为久哭泣？
现代文：忽然看见一个鬼，在砖上写了一首诗给他看：父死归玄冥，何为久哭泣？
English: Suddenly, he saw a ghost, who wrote a poem on a brick to show him: Father's death is beyond the pale, why cry for so long?

古文：即后三年中，君家可得立。
现代文：即后三年中，君家可得立。
English: In the three years that followed, the Monk's House was able to establish itself.

古文：仆当寄君家，不使有损失，勿畏我为凶，要为君作吉。
现代文：仆当寄君家，不使有损失。勿畏我为凶，要为君作吉。
English: If you send a servant to your master's house, do not fear to lose him; do not fear to offend him, but fear to do him good.

古文：后鬼恒在家，家须用者，鬼与之。
现代文：从此鬼就在家里常住下了。
English: Since then, the ghost has often lived in the house.

古文：二三年，君小差，为鬼作食，共谈笑语议。阮问姓，答云：姓李名留之，是君姊夫耳。
现代文：家里须用的东西鬼都能弄来，这样过了二三年，家境好了一些，平时阮瑜之给鬼作饭，与鬼谈论十分融洽，问鬼的姓名，鬼说：我姓李叫留之，就是你死去的姐夫呀。
English: After two or three years of this, the family situation improved a bit. In ordinary times, Nguyn Yúzhi would cook for the ghost, and they would talk with each other very harmoniously. When he asked the ghost's name, the ghost said, "My name is Li Yàu Zhi, and I am your dead brother-in-law."

古文：阮问：君那得来？鬼云：仆受罪已毕，今暂生鬼道，权寄君家。
现代文：阮瑜之又问怎么来的，鬼说：我在阴间的罪已经受完，现在暂时作鬼，到你家来小住。
English: Ruan Yuzhi also asked how he came. The ghost said, "I have already suffered for my sins in the underworld. Now I am temporarily acting as a ghost and come to your home to live.

古文：后四五年当去。
现代文：再过四五年就走了。
English: He'll be gone in four or five years.

古文：曰：复何处去？答曰：当生世间。
现代文：问他还要到是哪里去，鬼说：转世到人间去呀。
English: When asked where else he wanted to go, the demon said, "To be reincarnated into the human world."

古文：至期，果别而去。
现代文：过了四五年，鬼果然告别不再来。
English: After four or five years, the ghost did indeed say goodbye and never came back.

古文：刘澄
现代文：刘澄
English: Liu Cheng

古文：晋义熙五年，彭城刘澄，常见鬼。及为左卫司马，与将军巢营廨宇相接，澄夜相就坐语。见一小儿赭衣，手把赤帜，团团似芙蓉花。
现代文：晋义熙五年，彭城有个刘澄，能看见鬼，后来刘澄当了左卫司马，他的公府和巢将军的营房紧挨着，有一次刘澄夜里和巢将军在一起坐着闲聊，看见一个穿赫红衣的小孩，手里拿着红旗，不停地转像一团团芙蓉花。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Jin Yixi, there was a Liu Cheng in Pengcheng who could see ghosts. Later, Liu Cheng became a left guardsman. His government office was right next to the barracks of General Nest. Once, Liu Cheng was sitting and chatting with General Nest at night. He saw a child dressed in crimson, holding a red flag in his hand, constantly turning like a cluster of hibiscus flowers.

古文：数日，巢大遭火。
现代文：几天后，巢营的房子就遭了大火。
English: A few days later, the nesting house was destroyed by fire.

古文：刘道锡
现代文：刘道锡
English: Liu Daoxi

古文：刘道锡与从弟康祖，少不信有鬼。从兄兴伯，少来见鬼。
现代文：刘道锡和堂弟康祖从小就不相信有鬼，堂兄兴伯却从小就能看见鬼。
English: Liu Daoxi and his cousin Kang Zu did not believe in ghosts since childhood, but his cousin Xing Bo could see ghosts since childhood.

古文：但辞论，不能相屈。
现代文：双方一辩论起来，兴伯总说服不了刘道锡。
English: Once the two sides began to debate, Xingbo could not convince Liu Daoxi.

古文：尝于京口长广桥宅东，云：有杀鬼，在东篱上。道锡笑，便问其处，牵兴伯俱去，捉大刀欲斫之。
现代文：在京口长广桥住宅的东面，兴伯看见了一个杀鬼，就在东面篱笆上，问及了地方刘道锡笑着拉康祖一同奔鬼而去，拿着大刀想去砍鬼。
English: On the east side of the residential building of Changguangqiao, Jingkou, Xingbo saw a ghost slayer. On the east fence, Liu Daoxi asked about the place, laughed, and took Kangzu to run away with the ghost. He wanted to take a big knife to cut the ghost.

古文：兴伯在后唤云：鬼击汝。
现代文：兴伯忽然在身后喊：鬼要打你了！
English: Xingbo suddenly shouted behind him: "The ghost is going to beat you up!"

古文：道锡未及鬼处，便闻如有大杖声，道锡因倒地，经宿乃醒，一月日都差。
现代文：刘道锡还没走到鬼躲的地方，就听见一个大棍打下来的声音，接着就倒在地上昏过去，过了一夜未醒过来，一个多月才好。
English: Before Liu Daoxi reached the hiding place, he heard the sound of a big stick hitting him, and then he fell to the ground and fainted. He did not wake up after one night, and it was more than a month before he felt better.

古文：兴伯复云：厅事东头桑树上，有鬼，形尚孺，长必害人。
现代文：有次兴伯又说：大厅东头桑树上有个鬼，不过年龄很小，长大后一定会害人。
English: Once, Xingbo also said: There is a ghost in the mulberry tree at the east end of the hall, but it is very young and will certainly harm people when it grows up.

古文：康祖不信，问在树高下，指处分明。
现代文：康祖不信，问那小鬼在树的什么地方，兴伯很清楚地指出鬼躲的地方。
English: Kang Zu didn't believe him and asked where the little ghost was in the tree. Xing Bo clearly pointed out the place where the ghost was hiding.

古文：经十余日，是月晦夕，道锡逃暗中，以戟刺鬼所住。便还，人无知者。
现代文：过了十几天，一个月月末的晚上，刘道锡藏在暗中，用长戟向鬼躲的地方刺去，刺完就回去了，没有人知道。
English: A dozen days later, on the evening of the end of the month, Liu Daoxi hid in the dark, stabbed the place where the ghost was hiding with a long dagger, stabbed it and went back, no one knew.

古文：明日，兴伯早来，忽惊曰：此鬼昨夜那得人刺之，殆死，都不能复动，死亦当不久。
现代文：第二天一早兴伯来后忽然惊呀地说：那个鬼昨晚让谁给刺了？快死了，都不能动了，肯定活不了多久。
English: Early the next morning, after Xing Bo came, he suddenly said in surprise, "Who let that ghost stab me last night? I'm dying, I can't move, I'm sure I won't live long."

古文：康大笑。
现代文：康祖大笑起来。
English: Kang Zu burst out laughing.

古文：赵吉
现代文：赵吉
English: Zhao Ji

古文：邺县故尉赵吉，常在田陌间。
现代文：邺县原来的县尉赵吉常在田间小路里闲逛。
English: Zhao Jizhong, the former county officer of Jixian County, often roams the country lanes.

古文：昔日有一蹇人死，埋在陌边。
现代文：过去曾有一个跛子死后埋在路边。
English: In the past, a lame man died and was buried by the roadside.

古文：远方人行十余步，忽作蹇，赵怪问其做，远人笑曰：前有一蹇鬼，故效以戏耳。
现代文：二十年后，有一天有一个远方人走到赵吉门口，忽然跛着走路。赵吉很奇怪，问是怎么回事，那人笑着说：前面有一个瘸鬼，我是在学他闹着玩呢。
English: Twenty years later, one day, a man from far away walked up to Zhao Ji's door, suddenly walking with a limp. Zhao Ji was very strange, asked what was going on, the man smiled and said: There is a ghost in front of me, I am learning from him to make fun of him.

古文：司马隆
现代文：司马隆
English: Smalon

古文：东魏徐，忘名，还作本郡卒，墓在东安灵山。墓先为人所发，棺柩已毁。谢玄在彭城，将有齐郡司马隆、弟进、及东安王箱等，共取坏棺，分以作车。
现代文：东魏有个徐某，忘了他名字，回到本郡作太守时去世，墓在东安灵山上，墓先被人挖开了，里面的棺材已经损坏，谢玄在彭城时，齐郡的司马隆、司马隆的弟弟司马进、东安王箱等人，把墓中的棺木取来做了个车。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, there was a man named Xu, whose name was forgotten, who died when he returned to this county to become the eunuch. His grave was on Dong'an Lingshan Mountain. The grave was first dug up, and the coffin inside was damaged. When Xie Xuan was in Pengcheng, Sima Long from Qi County, Sima Jin, Sima Long's brother, Wang Fang from Dong'an, and others took the coffin from the grave and made a cart.

古文：少时三人悉见患，更相注连，凶祸不已。
现代文：不久三个人都得了病，后来祸事就一个接着一个。
English: Soon all three fell ill, and then disaster followed disaster.

古文：箱母灵语子孙曰：箱昔与司马隆兄弟，取徐府君墓中棺为车，隆等死亡丧破，皆由此也。
现代文：王箱死去的母亲显灵对子孙们说，王箱以前和司马隆兄弟取了徐府君墓中的棺木作车，所以他们的死、病以及家中的破败，都是因为那件事造成的。
English: The spirit of Wang Bo's dead mother appeared to her children and grandchildren and said that Wang Bo and the Sima Long brothers had previously taken the coffin from Xu Fujun's tomb to make a cart, so their death, illness and the ruin of their home were all caused by that incident.

