古文：黄帝问于少俞曰：五味入于口也，各有所走，各有所病。
现代文：黄帝问少俞道：五味进入口内，各有它喜欢趋走的地方，也各有它所引发的病症。
English: Huang Di asked Shao Xuan Dao: Five flavors enter the mouth, each has its favorite place to go, and each has the disease caused by it.

古文：酸走筋，多食之，令人癃；咸走血，多食之，令人渴；辛走气，多食之，令人洞心；苦走骨，多食之，令人变呕；甘走肉，多食之，令人悗心。
现代文：酸味趋走于筋，多食酸味，使人小便不通；咸味趋走于血，多食咸味，使人发渴；辛味趋走于气，多食辛味，使人感觉内心有空虚感；苦味趋走于骨，多食苦味，使人发生呕吐；甘味趋走于肉，多食甘味，使人心胸烦闷。
English: Sourness tends to go to the sinews, eating more sourness, making people urinate; saltiness tends to go to the blood, eating more saltiness, making people thirsty; pungency tends to go to the qi, eating more pungency, making people feel empty inside; bitterness tends to go to the bones, eating more bitterness, making people vomit; sweetness tends to go to the flesh, eating more sweetness, making people upset.

古文：余知其然也，不知其何由？
现代文：我知道五味食用过度会分别引发上述症状，但不知道是因为什么，我想知道其中的道理。
English: I know that excessive consumption of five flavors can cause the above symptoms separately, but I don't know why, I want to know the reason.

古文：愿闻其故。少俞答曰：酸入于胃，其气涩以收，上之两焦，弗能出入也，不出即留于胃中，胃中和温，则下注膀胱，膀胱之胞薄以懦，得酸则缩绻，约而不通，水道不行，故癃。
现代文：少俞回答说：酸味进入胃内，它的气涩滞不滑并有收敛作用，只能上行至于上中两焦，不能随着气机出入而吸收转化，只能停留在胃中，胃中温和，便会向下渗注于膀胱，膀胱的外壁薄而软，受到酸味的作用便紧缩蜷曲，致使膀胱出口收束不通，以至于小便不通，因而造成小便不利的癃闭症。
English: Xiao Yao replied: Sour taste enters the stomach, its gas is stagnant and slippery and has an astringent effect, it can only go up. As for the upper middle two joules, it can not be absorbed and transformed as the gas engine enters and exits, it can only stay in the stomach. It is mild in the stomach, and it will seep down to the bladder. The outer wall of the bladder is thin and soft. It is compressed and curled by the action of sour taste, causing the outlet of the bladder to contract and not pass, so that the urine does not pass, thus causing urinary incontinence.

古文：阴者，积筋之所终也，故酸入而走筋矣。
现代文：阴器，是宗筋汇聚的地方，所以说酸味进入胃中，是趋走于筋的。
English: The genitals are the place where the sinews come together, so when sourness enters the stomach, it tends to go to the sinews.

古文：黄帝曰：咸走血，多食之，令人渴，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：咸味趋走于血，食咸味过多会使人口渴是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What is the reason that saltiness tends to go with blood, and eating too much saltiness will make people thirsty?

古文：少俞曰：咸入于胃，其气上走中焦，注于脉，则血气走之，血与咸相得则凝，凝则胃中汁注之，注之则胃中竭，竭则咽路焦，故舌本干而善渴。
现代文：少俞回答说：咸味进入胃中，其气向上趋走于中焦，渗注于诸脉，脉是血气运行之处，血与咸味相遇，则血脉凝涩；血脉凝涩，胃内的汁液就渗注于血；胃内汁液渗注于血，则胃内汁液枯竭；胃内汁液枯竭，则咽喉焦干，所以舌根发干而易觉口渴。
English: Shao Wei replied: The salty taste enters the stomach, its qi moves upward to the mid-core, and seeps into the veins. The veins are where the blood gas flows. When the blood and the salty taste meet, the blood is coagulated; when the blood is coagulated, the juice in the stomach seeps into the blood; when the juice in the stomach seeps into the blood, the juice in the stomach is exhausted; when the juice in the stomach is exhausted, the throat is dry, so the tongue is dry and it is easy to feel thirsty.

古文：血脉者，中焦之道也，故咸入而走血矣。
现代文：血脉是取道于中焦而通血气的，所以咸味进入中焦，便趋走于血。
English: The blood vein takes a path in the middle of the coke and passes through the blood gas, so the salty taste enters the middle of the coke and tends to go to the blood.

古文：黄帝曰：辛走气，多食之，令人洞心，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：辛味趋走于气，多食辛味，使人觉得心中空虚是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What is the reason why pungent taste tends to go with qi, and pungent taste is eaten more, making people feel empty in their hearts?"

古文：少俞曰：辛入于胃，其气走于上焦，上焦者，受气而营诸阳者也，姜韭之气熏之，营卫之气不时受之，久留心下，故洞心。
现代文：少俞回答说：辛味进入胃中，其气趋走于上焦。上焦是纳受水谷所化精微之气而营护诸阳气的，姜、韭菜的辛气熏蒸上焦，营卫之气也不时受到辛味的刺激，而长时留滞胃中，所以出现内心空虚的感觉。
English: Shao Wei replied: The pungent taste enters the stomach, and its qi tends to go to the upper coke. The upper coke is to absorb the fine qi converted by the valley and protect the yang qi. The pungent taste of ginger and leeks is smoked and steamed to the upper coke. The qi of the upper coke is also stimulated by the pungent taste from time to time, and stays in the stomach for a long time, so there is a feeling of inner emptiness.

古文：辛与气俱行，故辛入而与汗俱出。
现代文：辛味趋走于卫气，与卫气同行，所以辛味入胃后，就会和汗液一起发散出来。
English: The pungent taste tends to walk in the atmosphere and go along with the atmosphere, so after the pungent taste enters the stomach, it will be dispersed together with the sweat.

古文：黄帝曰：苦走骨，多食之，令人变呕，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：苦味趋走于骨，过食苦味会让人呕吐，这又是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked, "Bitterness tends to go to the bone, overeating bitterness will make people vomit, what is the reason for this?

古文：少俞曰：苦入于胃，五谷之气皆不能胜苦，苦入下脘，三焦之道皆闭而不通，故变呕。
现代文：少俞回答说：苦味进入胃中，胃中的五谷之气都敌不过苦味，苦味进入下脘之后，三焦的气行之路俱都闭塞不通，所以让人呕吐。
English: Shao Wei replied: Bitterness enters the stomach, and the qi of the five grains in the stomach is no match for the bitterness. After the bitterness enters the lower jaw, the path of the qi of the three joules is all blocked, so people vomit.

古文：齿者，骨之所终也，故苦入而走骨，故入而复出，知其走骨也。
现代文：牙齿是胃的终了处，苦味进入胃中，先趋走于骨，而后复出于齿，所以知道苦味是趋走于骨的。
English: The teeth are the end of the stomach. When bitterness enters the stomach, it tends to go to the bones first, and then out of the teeth, so we know that bitterness tends to go to the bones.

古文：黄帝曰：甘走肉，多食之。令人悗心，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：甘味趋走于肉，过食甘味，使人感到心胸烦闷，是什么原因呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What is the reason that sweetness tends to go with meat, and overeating sweetness makes people feel depressed?

古文：少俞曰：甘入于胃，其气弱小，不能上至于上焦，而与谷留于胃中者。
现代文：少俞回答说：甘味进入胃中，其气弱小，不能上行至于上焦，而是与谷物一起留在胃中。
English: "Sweetness enters the stomach, its gas is weak, it can't go up as far as scorching, but it stays in the stomach with the grain," Shao Wei replied.

古文：令人柔润者也，胃柔则缓，缓则虫动，虫动则令人悗心。
现代文：甘味能使胃变得柔润，胃柔润则胃壁松弛，胃壁松弛，胃中的寄生虫就会蠕动，虫蠕动，则使人心中烦闷。
English: Sweetness can make the stomach soft, and softness of the stomach relaxes the stomach wall, and the stomach wall relaxes, and the parasites in the stomach will wriggle, and the worms will wriggle, which makes people feel bored.

古文：其气外通于肉，故甘走肉。
现代文：甘味之气外通于肉，所以说甘味趋走于肉。
English: The sweetness of the air is transmitted to the meat, so it is said that the sweetness tends to the meat.

