古文：汉光武建武三十年，车驾东巡，群臣上言，即位三十年，宜封禅泰山。
现代文：汉光武建武三十年，汉光武帝到东部巡视，众大臣进言说，皇帝即位三十年了，应该到泰山举行祭天地的典礼。
English: Thirty years after the founding of Han Kuangwu, Emperor Han Kuangwu went on a tour to the east. The ministers said that the emperor had been on the throne for thirty years and should hold a ceremony to celebrate heaven and earth on Mount Tai.

古文：诏曰： 即位三十年，百姓怨气满腹，吾谁欺？
现代文：光武帝下诏说： 我即位三十年，老百姓怨气满腹，我欺骗谁？
English: Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying: I have been on the throne for thirty years, and the people are full of resentment. Who am I deceiving?

古文：欺天乎！
现代文：欺骗天吗！
English: Are you trying to trick God?

古文：何事污七十二代之编录！
现代文：为什么要玷污古来封禅泰山的七十二代帝王的记录呢！
English: Why tarnish the record of the seventy-two emperors who have ruled Mount Tai since ancient times!

古文：若郡县远遣吏上寿，盛称虚美，必髡令屯田。 
现代文：如果各郡各县从远地派官员来祝寿，以热烈的称誉作出虚假的赞美，一定判以剃发的刑罚，并让他去垦荒种田。 
English: If counties send officials from far away to celebrate the birthday and make false praise with enthusiastic praise, they must be sentenced to shave their hair and let him go to the wasteland to farm.

古文：从此群臣不敢复言。
现代文：从这以后，大臣们不敢再说封禅的事了。
English: After that, ministers no longer dared to talk about the Fuzen.

古文：后二年，上斋，夜读《河图会昌符》，曰 赤刘之九，会命岱宗。 
现代文：过了两年，汉光武进行斋戒，在晚上读《河图会昌符》，书上说； 赤刘之九，会命岱宗。 
English: Two years later, Han Guangwu went on a fast and read "Hetu He Chang Fu" in the evening. The book said, "Red Liu Zi Niu, He Meizong."

古文：感此文，乃诏梁松等按索《河》、《洛》谶文言九世封禅事者，遂奏三十六事。
现代文：汉光武对这段话有所感悟，就下令让梁松等查阅《河图》、《洛书》中说到第九代祭天地的文字，于是大巨们上报说有关的诚文有三十六条。
English: Han Guangwu was impressed by this passage, and ordered Liang Song and others to consult the "River Map" and the "Book of Luo" to find the words of the ninth generation of worshipping heaven and earth, so the great giants reported that there were thirty-six sincere articles.

古文：于是求武帝元封故事，以三月行封禅礼。
现代文：于是请求汉武帝元封年间的封禅之制，在三月举行的祭天地的典礼。
English: Therefore, he asked Emperor Hanwu to abolish the feudal Zen system that had been in place since the Yuan Dynasty, and to hold a ceremony to celebrate heaven and earth in March.

古文：唐太宗贞观五年，群臣以四夷咸服，表请封禅，诏不许。
现代文：唐太宗贞观五年，大臣们认为四方各族都臣服于唐了，就上表请求皇上祭拜天，皇上不同意。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang, the ministers thought that all ethnic groups in the four directions had been subjugated to Tang, so they asked the emperor to worship heaven, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：六年，复请，上曰： 卿辈皆以封禅为帝王盛事，朕意不然。
现代文：唐贞观六年，又请求，皇上说： 你们都把祭拜天地的典礼看成是帝王的盛大的事情，我的想法不是这样的。
English: After six years of watching Tang Zhengu, he made another request, saying to the emperor: "You all regard the ceremony of worshipping heaven and earth as a grand event of the emperor, but I do not think so.

古文：若天下乂安，家给人足，虽不封禅，庸何伤乎？
现代文：如果全国的社会安定，家家富裕，人人丰足，即使不举行祭天典礼，又有什么妨碍呢？
English: If there is social stability throughout the country, families are rich, and everyone is well-off, even if there is no celebration of the Day of the Dead, what is the obstacle?

古文：昔秦始皇封禅，而汉文帝不封禅，后世岂以文帝之贤不及始皇邪？
现代文：当年秦始皇举行过祭天地的典礼，而汉文帝没有举行过祭天地的典礼，后代难道会认为汉文帝没有秦始皇贤明吗？
English: At that time, Qin Shihuang held the ceremony of sacrificing heaven and earth, while Han Wendi did not hold the ceremony of sacrificing heaven and earth. Will future generations think that Han Wendi is wise without Qin Shihuang?

古文：且事天，扫地而祭，何必登泰山之颠，封数尺之土，然后可以展其诚敬乎？ 
现代文：再说敬奉上天只要清除尘土就可以祭拜了，为什么一定要登上泰山顶峰，筑起几尺高的土坛，这才可以表示对天地的崇敬诚心呢？ 
English: Besides, worshipping the heavens can be done as long as the dust is cleared away. Why is it necessary to climb to the top of Mount Tai and build an earthen altar several feet high? This is the only way to show reverence for heaven and earth.

古文：已而欲从其请，魏郑公独以为不可，发六难以争之，到以谓崇虚名而受实害。会河南、北大水、遂寝。
现代文：不久又想实行大臣们的请求，唯独魏征认为不可以，他发出六次责难来争辩、甚到说祭祀天地的大典是崇尚虚妄的名声而会造成实际的好处，由于碰上黄河南北发生大水灾，这件事就停止了。
English: Soon he wanted to carry out the request of the ministers, but Wei Zheng thought it was not possible. He issued six rebukes to argue, even saying that the grand ceremony of sacrificing heaven and earth was advocating a false reputation and would cause practical benefits. Due to the large floods in the north and south of the Yellow River, the matter stopped.

古文：十年，复使房乔裁定其礼，将以十六年二月，有事于泰山，会星孛太微而罢。
现代文：贞观十年，太宗又让房乔考虑决定这项典礼，将要在贞观十六年二月在泰山上举行，又碰上彗星出现在太微坦而作罢。
English: Ten years after the enthronement, Emperor Taizong asked Fang Qiao to consider whether the ceremony should be held on Mount Tai in February of the 16th year of the enthronement, but he decided against it when the comet appeared too faint.

古文：予谓二帝皆不世出盛德之主，灼知封禅之非，形诸诏告，可谓著明。
现代文：我认为，这两个皇帝都是世上罕有的具有崇高威望的君主，清楚地知道封禅是不对的，并记录在他们的诏令之中，可以说英明卓著。
English: In my opinion, these two emperors are the world's rare monarchs with lofty prestige, who clearly know that fusing is wrong, and recorded it in their edict, which can be said to be outstandingly wise.

古文：然不能几时，自为翻覆。
现代文：然而没有多长时间自己又作出反复改变决定。
English: However, it didn't take long for me to make the decision to change my hair again and again.

古文：光武惑于谶记，太宗好大喜名，以今观之，盖所以累善政耳。
现代文：汉光武帝是被诚语预言所迷惑，唐太宗则是喜好做大事、成大名。在现在看来，这是影响了良好政治的地方。
English: Emperor Guangwu of Han was bewitched by the prophecies of Zhengjing, while Emperor Taizong of Tang liked to do great things and become famous. It now seems that this is what influenced good politics.

