古文：凡说之难：非吾知之有以说之之难也，又非吾辩之能明吾意之难也，又非吾敢横失而能尽之难也。
现代文：大凡进说的困难：不是难在我的才智能够用来向君主进说，也不是难在我的口才能够阐明我的意见，也不是难在我敢毫无顾忌地把看法全部说出来。
English: The great difficulty of speech: not that it is difficult for my wit to be able to address the sovereign, nor that it is difficult for my eloquence to express my opinions, nor that it is difficult for me to dare to express all my opinions without scruple.

古文：凡说之难：在知所说之心，可以吾说当之。
现代文：大凡进说的困难：在于了解进说对象的心理，以便用我的说法适应他。
English: The difficulty of the great introduction: it is to understand the psychology of the subject of the introduction, in order to adapt to him with my words.

古文：所说出于为名高者也，而说之以厚利，则见下节而遇卑贱，必弃远矣。
现代文：进说对象想要追求美名的，却用厚利去说服他，就会显得节操低下而得到卑贱待遇，必然受到抛弃和疏远。
English: If the target wants to pursue fame, but uses money to persuade him, he will appear to have low self-discipline and receive inferior treatment, and will inevitably be abandoned and alienated.

古文：所说出于厚利者也，而说之以名高，则见无心而远事情，必不收矣。
现代文：进说对象想要追求厚利的，却用美名去说服他，就会显得没有心计而又脱离实际，必定不会被接受和录用。
English: If the interviewee wants to pursue high profits, but uses a good name to persuade him, he will appear to be reckless and out of touch with reality, and will certainly not be accepted and hired.

古文：所说阴为厚利而显为名高者也，而说之以名高，则阳收其身而实疏之；说之以厚利，则阴用其言显弃其身矣。
现代文：进说对象暗地追求厚利而表面追求美名的，用美名向他进说，他就会表面上录用而实际上疏远进说者；用厚利向他进说，他就会暗地采纳进说者的主张而表面疏远进说者。
English: If the target of gossiping secretly pursues wealth and ostensibly pursues fame, if he is gossiped about with fame, he will ostensibly hire and actually alienate the gossiper; if he is gossiped about with wealth, he will secretly adopt the gossiper's opinion and ostensibly alienate the gossiper.

古文：此不可不察也。
现代文：这是不能不明察的。
English: This principle cannot be ignored.

古文：夫事以密成，语以泄败。
现代文：事情因保密而成功，谈话因泄密而失败。
English: If the event can be kept secret, it will be a success, but if the secret is leaked during the talk, it will be a failure.

古文：未必其身泄之也，而语及所匿之事，如此者身危。
现代文：未必是进言者泄露了秘密，而是谈话中触及到君主心中隐匿的事，如此就会身遭危险。
English: It is not necessarily that the speaker has divulged a secret, but that the conversation has touched on something hidden in the monarch's heart, and so they are in danger.

古文：彼显有所出事，而乃以成他故，说者不徒知所出而已矣，又知其所以为，如此者身危。
现代文：君主表面上做这件事，心里却想借此办成别的事，进说者不但知道君主表面所做的事，而且知道他要这样做的意图，像这样的情况进说者就会身遭危险。
English: In a case like this, where the prince is ostensibly doing one thing, but in his heart wants to do something else, and the speaker knows not only what the prince is ostensibly doing, but also what he intends to do, the speaker is in danger.

古文：规异事而当，知者揣之外而得之，事泄于外，必以为己也，如此者身危。
现代文：进说者筹划一件不平常的事情并且符合君主心意，聪明人从外部迹象上把这事猜出来了，事情泄露出来，君主一定认为是进说者泄露的，如此就会身遭危险。
English: The storyteller plans an unusual event and it is in accordance with the monarch's will, the wise person guesses the event from the external signs, the event leaks out, the monarch must think that the storyteller leaked, so he will be in danger.

古文：周泽未渥也，而语极知，说行而有功，则德忘；说不行而有败，则见疑，如此者身危。
现代文：君主恩泽未厚，进说者谈论却尽其所知，如果主张得以实行并获得成功，功德就会被君主忘记；主张行不适而遭到失败，就会被君主怀疑，如此就会身遭危险。
English: The king's favour is not great, and the talker talks as much as he knows. If the proposal is carried out and succeeds, the merit will be forgotten by the king; if the proposal is not carried out and fails, it will be suspected by the king, so it will be in danger.

古文：贵人有过端，而说者明言礼义以挑其恶，如此者身危。
现代文：君主有过错，进说者倡言礼义来挑他的毛病，如此就会身遭危险。
English: The sovereign is at fault, and it is dangerous for the speaker to find fault with him in the name of propriety.

古文：贵人或得计而欲自以为功，说者与知焉，如此者身危。
现代文：君主有时计谋得当而想自以为功，进说者同样知道此计，如此就会身遭危险。
English: A prince sometimes knows a good stratagem and wants to take the credit for it. A statesman also knows a good stratagem and is in danger.

古文：强以其所不能为，止以其所不能已，如此者身危。
现代文：勉强君主去做他不能做的事，强迫君主停止他不愿意停止的事，如此就会身遭危险。
English: Compel a prince to do what he cannot, compel a prince to stop what he will not, and you are in danger.

古文：故与之论大人，则以为间己矣；与之论细人，则以为卖重。
现代文：所以进说者如果和君主议论大臣，就被认为是想离间君臣关系；和君主谈论近侍小臣，就被认为是想卖弄身价。
English: Therefore, if a gossip talks about a minister with the monarch, it is considered to be trying to break the monarch-servant relationship; if a gossip talks about a close servant with the monarch, it is considered to be trying to sell himself.

古文：论其所爱，则以为借资；论其所憎，则以为尝己也，径省其说，则以为不智而拙之；米盐博辩，则以为多而交之。
现代文：谈论君主喜爱的人，就被认为是拉关系；谈论君主憎恶的人，就被认为是搞试探。说话直截了当，就被认为是不聪明而笨拙；谈话琐碎详尽，就被认为是罗嗦而冗长。
English: To talk of those whom the sovereign loves, is looked upon as intriguing; to talk of those whom the sovereign hates, is looked upon as tempting; to speak plainly, is looked upon as unintelligent and clumsy; to talk minutely, is looked upon as wordy and long.

古文：略事陈意，则曰怯懦而不尽；虑事广肆，则曰草野而倨侮。
现代文：简略陈述意见，就被认为是怯懦而不敢尽言；谋事空泛放任，就被认为是粗野而不懂礼貌。
English: To express an opinion briefly is regarded as cowardice and not daring to say it all; to do nothing is regarded as being rude and not knowing how to be polite.

古文：此说之难，不可不知也。
现代文：这些进说的困难，是不能不知道的。
English: It is impossible not to be aware of the difficulties of lobbying.

古文：凡说之务，在知饰所说之所矜而灭其所耻。
现代文：大凡进说的要领，在于懂得粉饰进说对象自夸之事而掩盖他所自耻之事。
English: The essence of a great speech lies in knowing how to whitewash the subject's self-praise and cover up his self-shame.

古文：彼有私急也，必以公义示而强之。
现代文：君主有私人的急事，进说者一定要指明这合乎公义而鼓励他去做。
English: The sovereign has a private emergency, and the speaker must point out that it is just and encourage him to do it.

古文：其意有下也，然而不能已，说者因为之饰其美而少其不为也。
现代文：君主有卑下的念头，但是不能克制，进说者就应把它粉饰成美好的而抱怨他不去干。
English: The prince has base thoughts, but cannot restrain them; the pretender must make them beautiful, and complain that he does not act on them.

古文：其心有高也，而实不能及，说者为之举其过而见其恶，而多其不行也。
现代文：君主有过高的企求，但实际却达不到，进说者就为他举出此事的缺点并揭示它的坏处，而称赞他不去做。
English: The monarch has too high aspirations, but the reality is not up to it, and the commentator points out the shortcomings of the matter and reveals its bad points for him, and praises him for not doing it.

古文：有欲矜以智能，则为之举异事之同类者，多为之地，使之资说于我，而佯不知也以资其智。
现代文：君主想自夸才智，进说者就替他举出别的事情中的同类情况，多给他提供根据，使他从我处借用说法，而我却假装不知道，这样来帮助他自夸才智。
English: When the prince wished to boast of his wisdom, the orator supplied him with examples of the same kind in other matters, and gave him more reasons to borrow from me, while I pretended not to know, and thus helped him to boast of his wisdom.

古文：欲内相存之言，则必以美名明之，而微见其合于私利也。
现代文：进说者想向君主进献与人相安的话，就必须用好的名义阐明它，并暗示它合乎君主私利。
English: If the speaker wishes to offer the monarch words of conciliation, he must present them in a good light and imply that they are in the monarch's interest.

古文：欲陈危害之事，则显其毁诽而微见其合于私患也。
现代文：进说者想要陈述有危害的事，就明言此事会遭到的毁谤，并暗示它对君主也有害处。
English: If the speaker wants to make a harmful statement, he states that the matter will be slandered and implies that it is harmful to the monarch.

古文：誉异人与同行者，规异事与同计者。
现代文：进说者称赞另一个与君主行为相同的人，规划另一件与君主考虑相同的事。
English: The narrator praises another person for the same action as the monarch, and plans another thing with the same consideration as the monarch.

古文：有与同污者，则必以大饰其无伤也；有与同败者，则必以明饰其无失也。
现代文：有和君主污行相同的，就必须对它大加粉饰，说它没有害处；有和君主败迹相同的，就必须对它明言掩锦，说他没有过失。
English: If there is anything in common with the monarch's dirty deeds, it must be glossed over and said to be harmless; if there is anything in common with the monarch's corruptions, it must be glossed over and said to be innocent.

古文：彼自多其力，则毋以其难概之也；自勇其断，则无以其谪怒之；自智其计，则毋以其败躬之。
现代文：君主自夸力量强大时，就不要用他为难的事去压抑他；君主自以为决断勇敢时，就不要用他的过失去激怒他；君主自以为计谋高明时，就不要用他的败绩去困窘他。
English: When a prince boasts of great strength, do not oppress him with his difficulties; when a prince thinks he is brave and decisive, do not anger him with his faults; when a prince thinks he is clever and cunning, do not embarrass him with his defeats.

古文：大意无所拂悟，辞言无所击摩，然后极骋智辩焉。
现代文：进说的主旨没有什么违逆，言辞没有什么抵触，然后就可以充分施展自己的智慧和辩才了。
English: There is no contradiction in the theme of the speech, and there is no contradiction in the words, and then you can give full play to your wisdom and argumentation.

古文：此道所得，亲近不疑而得尽辞也。
现代文：由这条途径得到的，是君主亲近不疑而又能畅所欲言。
English: The result of this approach is a monarch who is unquestionably close and can speak freely.

古文：伊尹为宰，百里奚为虏，皆所以干其上也。
现代文：伊尹做过厨师，百里奚做过奴隶，都是为了求得君主重用。
English: Yi Yin worked as a cook, and Bai Lijun worked as a slave, all in order to gain the favor of the monarch.

古文：此二人者，皆圣人也；然犹不能无役身以进，如此其污也！
现代文：这两个人都是圣人，但还是不能不通过做低贱的事来求得进用，他们的卑下一至于此！
English: These two are saints, but they still have to do lowly things to get ahead, and they are lowly, and so on!

古文：今以吾言为宰虏，而可以听用而振世，此非能仕之所耻也。
现代文：假如把我的话看成像厨师和奴隶所讲的一样，而可以来纳来救世，这就不是智能之士感到耻辱的了。
English: If my words are to be regarded as those of a cook or a slave, and are to be accepted as saving the world, it is not the wise man who will feel humiliated.

古文：夫旷日离久，而周泽既渥，深计而不疑，引争而不罪，则明割利害以致其功，直指是非以饰其身，以此相持，此说之成也。
现代文：经过很长的时间，君主的恩思泽已厚，进说者深入谋划不再被怀疑，据理力争不再会获罪，就可以明确剖析利害来成就君主的功业，直接指明是非来端正君主的言行，能这样相互对待，是进说成功了。
English: After a long period of time, the monarch's benevolence has been deepened, the forward-thinking person's in-depth planning is no longer suspected, and according to reason and effort, there will be no more crime. It is possible to clearly analyze the interests to achieve the monarch's cause, and directly point out the rights and wrongs of the monarch's words and deeds. If we can treat each other in this way, the forward-thinking is successful.

古文：昔者郑武公欲伐胡，故先以其女妻胡君以娱其意。
现代文：从前郑武公想讨伐胡国，故意先把自己的女儿嫁给胡国君主来使他快乐。
English: Once upon a time, Zheng Wukong wanted to invade the Kingdom of Hu, and he purposely married his daughter to the monarch of Hu to make him happy.

古文：因问于群臣： 吾欲用兵，谁可伐者？ 大夫关其思对曰： 胡可伐。 武公怒而戮之，曰： 胡，兄弟之国也。
现代文：然后问群臣： 我想用兵，可以攻打哪个国家？ 
English: Then he asked his ministers: If I want to use soldiers, which country can I attack?

古文：子言伐之，何也？ 胡君闻之，以郑为亲己，遂不备郑。
现代文：大夫关其思回答说： 胡国可以讨伐。 武公发怒而杀了他，说： 胡国是兄弟国家，你说讨伐它，是何道理？ 胡国君主听说了，认为郑国和自己友好，于是不再防备郑国。
English: Wu Gong got angry and killed him, saying: Hu is a brotherly country, what is the reason for you to say that you want to fight it? The monarch of Hu heard this and thought that Zheng and himself were friendly, so he no longer guarded Zheng.

古文：郑人袭胡，取之。
现代文：郑国偷袭了胡国，攻占了它。
English: Zheng attacked Hu secretly and conquered it.

古文：宋有富人，天雨墙坏。其子曰： 不筑，必将有盗。 其邻人之父亦云。
现代文：宋国有个富人，下雨把墙淋塌了，他儿子说： 不修的话，必将有盗贼来偷。 邻居的老人也这么说。
English: There was a rich man in the Song Dynasty whose wall was washed away by the rain. His son said, "If we don't repair it, thieves will come to steal it," and the old man next door said the same thing.

古文：暮而果大亡其财。
现代文：到了晚上，果然有大量财物被窃。
English: In the evening, a large amount of property was stolen.

古文：其家甚智其子，而疑邻人之父。
现代文：这家富人认为儿子很聪明，却对邻居老人起了疑心。
English: The wealthy family thought their son was very clever, but became suspicious of their elderly neighbour.

古文：此二人说者皆当矣，厚者为戮，薄者见疑，则非知之难也，处知则难也。
现代文：关其思和这位老人的话都恰当，而重的被杀，轻的被怀疑；那么，不是了解情况有困难，而是处理所了解的情况很困难。
English: Both Guan Qixin and the old man's words are appropriate, and the heavy is killed, the light is suspected; then, it is not difficult to understand the situation, but it is difficult to deal with the situation that is understood.

古文：故绕朝之言当矣，其为圣人于晋，而为戮于秦也，此不可不察。
现代文：因此，绕朝的话本是对的，但他在晋国被看成圣人，在秦国却遭杀害，这是不可不注意的。
English: Therefore, it is correct to say that he bypassed the imperial court, but it should be noted that he was regarded as a saint in the State of Jin, but was killed in the State of Qin.

古文：昔者弥子瑕有宠于卫君。
现代文：从前弥子瑕曾受到卫国国君的宠信。
English: Once upon a time, Yashiko was favored by the Emperor of Japan.

古文：卫国之法：窃驾君车者刖。
现代文：卫国法令规定，私自驾驭国君车子的，论罪要处以刖刑。
English: The National Defense Law stipulates that the crime of driving the sovereign's car without permission is punishable by whipping.

古文：弥子瑕母病，人间往夜告弥子，弥子矫驾君车以出。
现代文：弥子瑕母亲病了，有人抄近路连夜通知弥子瑕，弥子瑕假托君命驾驭君车而出。
English: Yashiko's mother was ill, and someone took a shortcut and notified her overnight. Yashiko went out to drive her car, trusting in her mother's life.

古文：君闻而贤之，曰： 孝哉！
现代文：卫君听说后，却认为他德行好，说： 真孝顺啊！
English: After hearing this, Wei Jun thought he was virtuous and said, "What a filial son!

古文：为母之故，亡其刖罪。 
现代文：为了母亲的缘故，忘了自己会犯别罪。 
English: For my mother's sake, I forgot that I would commit a crime.

古文：异日，与君游于果围，食桃而甘，不尽，以其半啖君。君曰： 爱我哉！
现代文：另一天，他和卫君在果园游览，吃桃子觉得甜，没有吃完，就把剩下的半个给卫君吃。卫君说： 多么爱我啊！
English: On another day, he and Wei Jun were touring an orchard. Eating a peach felt sweet. When he had not finished, he gave the other half to Wei Jun to eat. Wei Jun said, "How much I love you!"

古文：亡其口味以啖寡人。 
现代文：不顾自己口味来给我吃。 
English: Regardless of their own taste, they came to eat me.

古文：及弥子色衰爱弛，得罪于君，君曰： 是固尝矫驾吾车，又尝啖我以馀桃。 
现代文：等到弥子瑕色衰爱弛时，得罪了卫君，卫君说： 这人本来就曾假托君命私自驾驭我的车子，又曾经把吃剩的桃子给我吃。 
English: When Yako's beauty faded and her love waned, she offended Wei Jun. Wei Jun said, "This man had once secretly driven my car on your orders, and once gave me leftover peaches to eat.

古文：故弥子之行未变于初也，而以前之所以见贤而后获罪者，爱憎之变也。
现代文：所以，虽然弥子瑕的行为和当初并没两样，但先前称贤、后来获罪的原因，是卫君的爱憎有了变化。
English: Therefore, although Yaziko's behavior is the same as it was at the beginning, the reason why he was previously praised and later convicted is that the love and hate of Wei Jun have changed.

古文：故有爱于主，则智当而加亲；有赠于主，则智不当见罪而加疏。
现代文：所以被君主宠爱时，才智就显得恰当而更受亲近；被君主憎恶时，才智就显得不恰当，遭到谴责而更被疏远。
English: Wherefore, when favoured by a prince, it is proper and more familiar; when hated by a prince, it is improper, condemned, and more alienated.

古文：故谏说谈论之士，不可不察爱憎之主而后说焉。
现代文：所以谏说谈论的人不可不察看君主的爱憎，然后进说。
English: Therefore, those who speak and discuss must look at the monarch's likes and dislikes, and then proceed.

古文：夫龙之为虫也，柔可狎而骑也；然其喉下有逆鳞径尺，若人有婴之者，则必杀人。
现代文：龙这种动物，驯服时可以戏弄着骑它；但它喉下有一尺来长的逆鳞，如果有人动了这些逆鳞，龙就会会杀死他。
English: The dragon is an animal that, when tamed, can be ridden playfully; but it has a foot-long inverse scale under its throat, and if someone moves these inverse scales, the dragon will kill him.

古文：人主亦有逆鳞，说者能无婴人主之逆鳞，则几矣。
现代文：君主也有逆鳞，进说者能不触动君主的逆鳞，就差不多了。
English: Monarchs also have an inverse scale, and it's almost as if the speaker can not touch the inverse scale of the monarch.

