古文：俞大猷，字志辅，晋江人。
现代文：俞大猷，字志辅，晋江人。
English: 大,字志輔,晋江人.

古文：少好读书。受《易》于王宣、林福，得蔡清之传。
现代文：少年时就喜好读书，师从王宣、林福学习《易经》，得蔡清学术真传。
English: When he was a boy, he liked to read. He studied "I Ching" from Wang Xuan and Lin Fu, and obtained the true academic biography of Cai Qing.

古文：又闻赵本学以《易》推衍兵家奇正虚实之权，复从受其业。
现代文：又听说赵本学以《易经》的道理来探究军事学上战术运用的灵活变化，俞大猷就又上门学习。
English: I also heard that Zhao Ben Xue used the principles of "I Ching" to explore the flexible changes in the application of tactics in military science, and Yan Daxuan went to the door to study.

古文：尝谓兵法之数起五，犹一人之身有五体，虽将百万，可使合为一人也。
现代文：俞大猷曾经说兵法术数从五起，犹如人身有手、足、头五体一样，虽然领有百万之众，但可以使他们协调一致、合为一人之用。
English: Zou Dazhao once said that the number of martial arts starts from five, just as a human being has hands, feet, and five heads. Although there are millions of people, they can be coordinated and used as one.

古文：已，又从李良钦学剑。
现代文：不久，又跟从李良钦学剑法。
English: Soon after, he learned swordsmanship from Li Liangqin.

古文：家贫屡空，意尝豁如。
现代文：家里虽然屡告贫乏，但他却意气自如。
English: Although his family was often impoverished, he was free-spirited.

古文：父殁，弃诸生，嗣世职百户。
现代文：父亲病逝后，俞大猷放弃学业，继承了百户的世袭职务。
English: After his father died of illness, Zou Dajuan gave up his studies and inherited the hereditary position of the hundred households.

古文：举嘉靖十四年武会试。除千户，守御金门。
现代文：嘉靖十四年武科会试，俞大猷中了武举，升千户职，负责保卫金门。
English: In the 14th year of Jiajing, he passed the martial arts examination. He was promoted to the highest rank and was responsible for the defense of Kinmen.

古文：军民嚣讼难治，大猷导以礼让，讼为衰止。
现代文：这里的官军市民常无事取闹，告到公庭，难于治理。俞大猷采取教化的方法，诱导他们以礼让为先，诉讼为之停息。
English: The government officials, soldiers and citizens here often make trouble out of nothing and go to the court, which is difficult to control. The magistrate takes the method of education and induces them to be polite first, and the lawsuit is suspended.

古文：海寇频发，上书监司论其事。
现代文：当时海寇之祸迭起，俞大猷上书提刑按察使司发表自己对此事的见解。
English: At that time, the scourge of sea pirates was on the rise, and the Inspector-General of the Ministry of Public Security issued a written notice to the Inspector-General of the Ministry of Public Security to express his views on the matter.

古文：监司怒曰： 小校安得上书？ 
现代文：按察使恼怒地说 ：小军校怎配上书言事？ 
English: According to the inspector, he said angrily: How can a small military school be equipped with literature?

古文：杖之，夺其职。
现代文：将俞大猷一顿乱杖，并剥夺了他千户的武职。
English: He was beaten with a cane and deprived of his military position.

古文：尚书毛伯温征安南，复上书陈方略，请从军。
现代文：尚书毛伯温出征安南，俞大猷又上书陈述作战方略，请求从军出战。
English: Shang Shu Mao Bowen went to Annan to fight, and Zou Daqi also submitted a letter to state the battle strategy and requested to go to war.

古文：伯温奇之。会兵罢，不果用。
现代文：毛伯温对俞大猷的军事见解颇感惊奇，可惜正值撤兵，未能立即起用。
English: Mao Bowen was quite surprised by the military views of Zou Daqi, but unfortunately, it was the time of the withdrawal of troops, and he could not use it immediately.

古文：二十一年，俺答大入山西，诏天下举武勇士。
现代文：嘉靖二十一年，北方蒙古俺答部大举攻掠山西，皇帝下诏选举天下壮武勇士。
English: In the 21st year of Jiajing, the northern Mongolian army invaded Shanxi in a big way, and the emperor issued an edict to select the world's strongest warriors.

古文：大猷诣巡按御史自荐，御史上其名兵部。
现代文：俞大猷亲自到巡按御史面前自荐，御史将他的名字上报兵部。
English: 大 himself came to recommend himself to the inspector general, who reported his name to the military department.

古文：会伯温为尚书，送之宣大总督翟鹏所。
现代文：当时毛伯温仍为兵部尚书，他将俞大猷送到宣大总督翟鹏处。
English: At that time, Mao Bowen was still a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and he sent the imperial edict to Xuan Peng, the governor of Xuan Peng.

古文：召见论兵事，大猷屡折鹏。鹏谢曰： 吾不当以武人待子。 
现代文：翟鹏召见俞大猷讨论军事方略，俞大猷每每以灼见折服翟鹏，翟鹏内疚地说 ：我不该以对待武卒的态度接待你。 
English: Zou Peng summoned Zou Daju to discuss military strategy. Zou Daju bowed to Zou Peng with every insight. Zou Peng said with guilt: I should not receive you with the attitude of a warrior.

古文：下堂礼之，惊一军，然亦不能用。
现代文：并离开自己的座位上前施礼致意，此举使全军震惊，然而翟鹏终究也未重用大猷。
English: He also left his seat to salute, which shocked the whole army. However, in the end, Nie Peng did not use the big hammer again.

古文：大猷辞归，伯温用为汀漳守备。
现代文：大猷告辞归去，毛伯温又起用他为汀州、漳州守备。
English: Dazhao resigned and returned, and Maobowen appointed him to guard Tingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：莅武平，作读易轩，与诸生为文会，而日教武士击剑。
现代文：俞大猷驻扎武平，建 读易轩 ，与当地读书人一起举办文会，诗词唱和，每天还要教授武士击剑。
English: Zou Daqi stationed in Wuping, built the Yixuan Reading Room, held literary meetings with local readers, sang poetry, and taught samurai fencing every day.

古文：连破海贼康老，俘斩三百余人。
现代文：他曾率兵连续攻破海盗康老部，俘虏、斩杀三百多人。
English: He once led soldiers to continuously break through the pirate Kang Lao Bu, capturing and killing more than three hundred people.

古文：擢署都指挥佥事，佥书广东都司。
现代文：因此，俞大猷被提升为署理都指挥佥事，隶属广东都司。
English: Therefore, Zou Dajuan was promoted to the post of acting commander of the capital, subordinate to the Guangdong Capital Bureau.

古文：新兴恩平峒贼谭元清等屡叛，总督欧阳必进以属大猷。
现代文：新兴、恩平等山地民族以潭元清为首屡次背叛朝廷，总督欧阳必进将此事交俞大猷处理。
English: The newly-emerging, benevolent and equal mountain people led by Tan Yuanqing repeatedly betrayed the imperial court, and Governor Ouyang Bijin dealt with the matter in a grand manner.

古文：乃令良民自为守，而亲率数人遍诣贼峒，晓以祸福，且教之击剑，贼骇服。有苏青蛇者，力格猛虎，大猷绐斩之，贼益惊。
现代文：俞大猷请百姓自卫，自己又亲率几位随从遍访各峒的造反者，跟他们阐明顺逆的利害，并教他们击剑之法，各峒的反叛者都惊恐地接受了俞大猷的劝告。有一个能力搏猛虎的名叫苏青蛇的人不太服气，俞大猷设计将他除掉，反叛者愈发惊恐。
English: The rebels of all the counties accepted the advice of the Grand Vizier in horror. There was a man named Su Qing Zhe, who was able to fight a fierce tiger, but he was not convinced. The Grand Vizier planned to eliminate him, and the rebels became more and more frightened.

古文：乃诣何老猫峒，令归民侵田，而招降渠魁数辈。二邑以宁。
现代文：于是大猷又去何老猫峒，命令他们归还侵夺的民田，并招降反叛头目数人，新兴、恩平二县为之安宁。
English: As a result, Daju went to He Laojiao again, ordered them to return the occupied people's fields, and recruited several rebel leaders, and the two counties of Xinxing and Enping became peaceful.

古文：二十八年，朱纨巡视福建，荐为备倭都指挥。
现代文：嘉靖二十八年，朱纨巡视福建，推荐俞大猷为备倭都指挥。
English: In the 28th year of Jiajing, Zhu Xi made an inspection tour of Fujian, recommending Zou Daqi as a candidate for the command of the capital.

古文：会安南入寇，必进奏留之。
现代文：这时正值安南人入侵，欧阳必进上奏留俞大猷效力。
English: At this time, it was the time of the invasion of the Annamese, and Ouyang must advance upstream to retain its great influence.

古文：先是，安南都统使莫福海卒，子宏瀷幼。
现代文：此前，安南都统使莫福海去世，儿子宏氵翼尚幼。
English: Prior to this, Annan and Duterte had caused the death of Mofukhae, whose son, Hong Hongyi, was still a child.

古文：其大臣阮敬谋立其婿莫敬典，范子仪谋立其党莫正中，互雠杀。
现代文：大臣阮敬想拥立他的女婿莫敬典，另一大臣范子仪想拥立其党羽莫正中，二人相互仇杀。
English: Minister Nguyen Quynh wanted to support his son-in-law Mo Quynh, while another minister, Fan Ziyi, wanted to support his party colleague Mo Zhengzhong. The two had a vendetta against each other.

古文：正中败，挈百余人来归。子仪收残卒遁海东。
现代文：莫正中兵败，带百余人投靠明朝，范子仪收集残卒逃往海东。
English: Mo Zheng was defeated in the battle and took more than a hundred people to the Ming Dynasty. Fan Ziyi collected the remaining soldiers and fled to the East Sea.

古文：至是妄言宏瀷死，迎正中归立。
现代文：这时范子仪假称宏氵翼已死，来迎正中回安南即位。
English: At this time, Fan Ziyi pretended that Hong Xuan Ying was dead to usher in the enthronement of Annan.

古文：剽掠钦、廉等州，岭海骚动。
现代文：范子仪侵略钦、廉等州，使边境居民惶恐不安。
English: Fan Ziyi's invasion of Qin, Lian and other provinces made the border residents fearful and uneasy.

古文：必进檄大猷讨之。
现代文：欧阳必进传檄俞大猷进兵征讨，俞大猷部快速开到廉州。
English: Ouyang must go to Chuanzhong and Dalat to recruit soldiers, and Dalat and Dalat quickly drove to Lianzhou.

古文：驰至廉州，贼攻城方急。
现代文：此时，敌人正在猛烈地攻击廉州城。
English: At this time, the enemy was fiercely attacking Lianzhou City.

古文：大猷以舟师未集，遣数骑谕降，且声言大兵至。贼不测，果解去。
现代文：俞大猷鉴于水军未到，难以歼敌，于是派遣骑兵数人前往劝降，并声称明朝大兵立即开到，敌人不知真情，果然解围而去。
English: In view of the fact that it was difficult to destroy the enemy before the arrival of the navy, Zou Daqi sent several cavalrymen to persuade the enemy to surrender, and claimed that the soldiers would arrive immediately in the morning. The enemy did not know the truth, and the siege was lifted and they left.

古文：无何，舟师至，设伏冠头岭。
现代文：不多时，水军赶到，在冠头岭伏击敌人。
English: Not long after, the navy arrived and ambushed the enemy at Guan Touling.

古文：贼犯钦州，大猷遮夺其舟。追战数日，生擒子仪弟子流，斩首千二百级。穷追至海东云屯，檄宏瀷杀子仪函首来献。
现代文：敌人又进犯钦州，俞大猷拦截了敌人舟船，连续追战数天，生擒范子仪的弟弟范子流，杀死敌人一千二百多名，并乘胜追击到海东云屯，传檄宏氵翼，要他杀掉子仪，以首级献于军前，宏氵翼照办，安南兵事平息。
English: The enemy also invaded Qinzhou. Zou Daqi intercepted the enemy's boat and pursued it for several days. Fan Ziliu, the younger brother of Fan Ziyi, killed more than 1,200 of the enemy, and took advantage of the victory to pursue it to Yuntun on the east coast. He told Hong Ziyi that he should kill Ziyi and offer his head to the front of the army. Hong Ziyi complied, and Annan's military affairs calmed down.

古文：事平，严嵩抑其功不叙，但赉银五十两而已。
现代文：严嵩为了抑制俞大猷，不为其报功，只以赠银五十两作罢。
English: In order to restrain Yan Song's ambition, Yan Song did not reward him, but only gave him fifty-two pieces of silver.

古文：是年，琼州五指山黎那燕构感恩、昌化诸黎共反，必进复檄大猷讨。
现代文：同年，琼州五指山黎民那燕串通感恩、昌化黎民诸部共同反叛，欧阳必进又调俞大猷讨伐。
English: In the same year, Qiongzhou Wuzhishan Limin Nayan colluded with the Thanksgiving and Changhua Limin Ministries to jointly rebel, and Ouyang Bifing also launched a large-scale counterattack.

古文：而朝议设参将于崖州，即以大猷任之。乃会广西副将沈希仪诸军，擒斩贼五千三百有奇，招降者三千七百。
现代文：当时朝廷议设崖州参将，以俞大猷担任此职，于是俞大猷会同广西副将沈希仪等官军进攻反叛者，共俘虏、杀死叛贼五千三百多人，招降三千七百人。
English: At that time, the imperial court proposed to appoint Jiaozhou's senior general, and Zou Daju took this position. Therefore, Zou Daju, together with Guangxi's vice-general Shen Xiyi and other government troops, attacked the rebels, captured and killed more than 5,300 traitors, and recruited and surrendered 3,700 people.

古文：大猷言于必进曰： 黎亦人也，率数年一反一征，岂上天生人意？
现代文：俞大猷上书欧阳必进说 ：黎民也是人呀，隔几年就反叛一次征讨一次，这难道符合上天怜恤生民的意旨？
English: Ouyang Bijin said in his letter to the emperor, "The Lebanese people are also human beings. Every few years, they rebel once, and they are conquered once. Is this in line with God's mercy for the people?

古文：宜建城设市，用汉法杂治之。 
现代文：应该建立城池，设立市镇，用治理汉人的方法进行综合治理，这样才能安民。 
English: It is necessary to build cities and towns, set up towns, and carry out comprehensive governance with the method of governing the Han people, so that the people can be safe.

古文：必进纳其言。
现代文：欧阳必进采纳了他的建议。
English: Ouyang Bijin accepted his suggestion.

古文：大猷乃单骑入峒，与黎定要约，海南遂安。
现代文：于是俞大猷单人匹马进入山寨，与黎民确定共处的原则，海南遂告安静。
English: As a result, Zou Dajuan single-handedly entered the cottage and determined the principle of coexistence with the Lai people, and then Hainan fell silent.

古文：三十一年，倭贼大扰浙东。
现代文：嘉靖三十一年，倭寇大举侵扰浙东。
English: In the 31st year of Jiajing, the Japanese invaders invaded eastern Zhejiang on a large scale.

古文：诏移大猷宁、台诸郡参将。
现代文：皇帝诏令调任俞大猷为宁波、台州诸府参将。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to transfer the post of 大 to Ningbo and Taizhou prefectures.

古文：会贼破宁波昌国卫，大猷击却之。
现代文：当时倭寇攻破了宁波昌国卫，俞大猷率兵击退敌人。
English: At that time, the wokou broke through the Ningbo Changguowei, and Zou Daqi led the troops to repel the enemy.

古文：复攻陷绍兴临山卫，转掠至松阳。
现代文：倭寇又攻陷绍兴临山卫，转攻至松阳。
English: The wokou also attacked Shaoxing, Linshanwei, and turned to attack Songyang.

古文：知县罗拱辰力御贼，而大猷邀诸海，斩获多，竟坐失事停俸。
现代文：知县罗拱辰奋力抵御海寇的进攻，俞大猷在海上阻截敌人，有较大的战果，但竟被朝廷以失事停俸。
English: Luo Gongchen of Zhixian County fought hard to resist the attack of the sea pirates, and Yu Daju intercepted the enemy at sea, and achieved great success in battle, but he was actually suspended by the imperial court for losing his job.

古文：未几，逐贼海中，焚其船五十余，予俸如故。
现代文：不久，又追杀海寇于海中，焚敌船五十余艘，因此撤销了停俸的处分。
English: Soon, he also chased pirates in the sea and burned more than 50 enemy ships, so the suspension of pay was revoked.

古文：越二年，贼据宁波普陀。
现代文：二年之后，海寇据守波普陀。
English: Two years later, Haikoh took over Poputo.

古文：大猷率将士攻之，半登，贼突出，杀武举火斌等三百人，坐戴罪办贼。俄败贼吴淞所，诏除前罪，仍赉银币。
现代文：俞大猷率领将士攻击，攻至半山，海寇突然出击，杀死武举人火斌等三百人，朝廷因此给他以戴罪剿寇的处分，不久在吴淞大败海寇，诏令取消上述处分，并赐银币。
English: Zou Daqi led the attack of the generals and attacked halfway up the mountain. The sea pirates suddenly attacked and killed three hundred people, including the military leader Hu Bin. As a result, the court punished him with the crime of being a sea pirate. He soon defeated the sea pirates in Wuxi. The imperial decree cancelled the above-mentioned punishment and gave him silver coins.

古文：贼自健跳所入掠，大猷运战破之。旋代汤克宽为苏松副总兵。
现代文：海寇从健跳所入侵，俞大猷北部接连破敌，很快取代汤克宽任苏松副总兵职务。
English: Seagulls invaded from the Jianping Station, and the northern part of Shandong Province broke the enemy one after another, and soon replaced Tong Ke Kuan as the deputy commander of Su Song.

古文：所将卒不三百人，徵诸道兵未集，贼犯金山，大猷战失利。
现代文：当时俞大猷手下兵卒不超过三百人，调集的各路兵卒尚未到来，海寇趁机进犯金山，俞大猷作战失利。
English: At that time, there were no more than three hundred soldiers under the command of Yu Daxuan. The soldiers from all directions had not yet arrived. The pirates took the opportunity to attack Jinshan Mountain, and Yu Daxuan lost the battle.

古文：时倭屯松江枯林者盈二万，总督张经趣之战，大猷固不可。
现代文：这时倭寇屯集在松江柘林的兵力有二万多人，总督张经督促俞大猷出战，俞大猷坚持不可轻举妄动。
English: At this time, there were more than twenty thousand troops of wokotons gathered in Songjiang Yulin. Governor Zhang Jingdu urged Yan Dajuan to go to war, and Yan Dajuan insisted that he should not act rashly.

古文：及永顺、保靖兵稍至，乃从经大破贼于王江泾，功为赵文华、胡宗宪所攘，不叙。坐金山失律，谪充为事官。
现代文：等到永顺、保靖兵卒陆续赶到时，才随张经大败倭寇于王江泾，但功劳被赵文华、胡宗宪所冒领，并因金山战败事，被朝廷贬谪为一般办事官员。
English: When Yongshun and Baojing soldiers arrived one after another, it was only after Zhang Jing's great defeat of the Wokou in the Wangjiang Uprising, but the credit was taken by Zhao Wenhua and Hu Zongxian, and because of the defeat of Jinshan, he was demoted by the imperial court to a general clerk.

古文：柘林倭虽败，而新倭三十余艘突青村所，与南沙、小乌口、浪港诸贼合，犯苏州陆泾坝，直抵娄门，败南京都督周于德兵。
现代文：柘林倭寇虽然败北，但新增援的倭寇乘战船三十余艘突破青村所，与南沙、小乌口、浪港诸路贼人汇合，进犯苏州陆泾坝，直逼娄门，击败南京都督周于德所率部队。
English: Although the Yulin Wokou was defeated in the north, the newly-supported Wokou took more than 30 warships to break through the Qingmura Station, converged with the Nansha, Xiao Wukou, and Langgang bandits, and attacked the Suzhou Landfill Dam, reaching the Yamen, defeating the troops led by the South Kyoto Governor Zhou Yude.

古文：贼复分为二，北掠浒墅，南掠横塘，延蔓常熟、江阴、无锡之境，出入太湖。
现代文：海寇又分为二路，北路攻掠浒墅，南路骚扰横塘，兵势蔓延到常熟、江阴、无锡等地，进退于太湖之中。
English: The sea pirates were divided into two routes. The northern route attacked and plundered the villa, and the southern route harassed Hengtang. The troops spread to Changshu, Jiangyin, Wuxi and other places, advancing and retreating in the Taihu Lake.

古文：大猷偕副使任环大败贼陆泾坝，焚舟三十余。
现代文：俞大猷与副使任环大败海寇于陆泾坝，烧毁敌船三十余艘。
English: 大 and vice-commander Ren Huan defeated the sea pirates at Lulongba, and burned more than 30 enemy ships.

古文：又遮击其自三丈浦出海者，沉七艘，贼乃退泊三板沙。
现代文：又在三丈浦对向海外逃走的倭寇予以拦击，击沉敌船七艘，海寇退往三板沙停泊。
English: In addition, wako fleeing overseas were intercepted in Sanzhoura, seven enemy ships were sunk, and the wako retreated to Sanbaisha for berthing.

古文：顷之，他倭犯吴江。大猷及环又邀破之莺脰湖，贼走嘉兴。
现代文：不多时，另外一支倭寇进犯吴江，俞大猷与任环又在莺月豆湖处伏击，倭寇逃往嘉兴。
English: Not infrequently, another wokou would invade the Wujiang River, and Shidao and Renhuan would ambush the wokou at the Shougetsuzhu Lake, and the wokou would flee to Jiaxing.

古文：三板沙贼掠民舟将遁，大猷追击于马迹山，擒其魁。
现代文：三板沙倭寇掠夺民船作逃跑的打算，俞大猷追击到马迹山，擒获倭寇头目。
English: The Sanban Sha wokou plundered the people's boat with the intention of escaping, and Zou Daqi chased them to Ma Ruishan and captured the leader of the wokou.

古文：金泾、许浦、白茅港贼俱出海，大猷追击于茶山，焚五舟。
现代文：金泾、许清、白茅港的倭寇见势不妙，都乘船出海，俞大猷追击到荣山，焚毁五艘敌船。
English: The wokou of Jincheng, Xuqing, and Baimao Port did not fare well. They all went out to sea by boat, and pursued the 大 to Rongshan, burning five enemy ships.

古文：贼走保马迹山、三板沙，将士复追及，坏其三舟。
现代文：倭寇逃到马迹山、三板沙，官军又追上，破坏了三艘敌船。
English: The wokou fled to Ma Lushan and Sanban Sha, and the government army caught up with them, destroying three enemy ships.

古文：江阴蔡港倭亦去，官兵分击于马迹、马图、宝山。
现代文：江阴蔡港倭寇也企图逃走，官军在马迹山、马图、宝山分别与敌作战。
English: The wokou of Jiangyin Cai Gang also tried to escape, and the government army fought with the enemy in Ma Lushan, Matu and Baoshan.

古文：值飓风作，贼舟多覆。
现代文：正值飓风掀起，海盗船沉没不少。
English: At the time of the hurricane, the pirate ship sank a lot.

古文：柘林倭亦为官兵所击沉二十余舟，余贼退登陆。
现代文：柘林的倭寇亦遭官军攻击，击沉船只二十余艘，其余的倭寇退到岸上。
English: Yulin's wokou were also attacked by the government army, sinking more than twenty ships, and the remaining wokou retreated to the shore.

古文：已，复泛舟出海。
现代文：稍后，又乘船向海外逃窜。
English: He later fled overseas by boat.

古文：大猷及佥事董邦政分击，获九舟。
现代文：俞大猷与佥事董邦政分路攻击，俘获敌船九艘。
English: Zou Daju and An Ji Dong Bang Zheng attacked separately and captured nine enemy ships.

古文：而贼又遭风坏三舟，余三百人登岸，走据华亭陶宅镇，屡败赵文华等大军。
现代文：在大风的袭击下，敌人又损失战船三艘，剩下的三百人回头登岸，逃到华亭陶宅镇驻守，屡次击败赵文华所率大部官军。
English: Under the attack of high winds, the enemy lost three more warships, and the remaining three hundred people returned to the shore, fled to Huating Taozhu Town, and repeatedly defeated most of the government troops led by Zhao Wenhua.

古文：夜屯周浦永定寺，官兵四集进围之。
现代文：入夜倭寇屯驻周浦永定寺，官军四面合围。
English: As night fell, the wokotun was stationed at Yongding Temple in Zhoupu, surrounded on all sides by government troops.

古文：而柘林失风贼九舟巢于川沙洼，纠合至四十余艘，势犹未已。
现代文：此时柘林遭风暴袭击的九船倭寇屯集于川沙洼，并纠合其他失散倭寇船只共计四十余艘，兵势尚未止息。
English: At this time, the nine wako ships that were attacked by the storm in Yulin gathered in Chuan Shaha, and a total of more than forty other lost wako ships were entangled, and the troops had not yet stopped.

古文：巡抚曹邦辅劾大猷纵贼，帝怒，夺其世荫，责取死罪招，立功自赎。
现代文：巡抚曹邦辅弹劾俞大猷放纵敌人，嘉靖帝恼怒，剥夺其世袭特权，并说他该当死罪，令俞大猷立功赎罪。
English: The governor Cao Bangfu impeached Yu Daxuan for indulging the enemy, and Emperor Jiajing was angry and deprived him of his hereditary privileges, saying that he should be sentenced to death, and ordered Yu Daxuan to make meritorious deeds to atone for his sins.

古文：时周浦贼围急，乘夜东北奔，为游击曹克新所邀，斩首百三十，遂与川沙洼贼合。
现代文：由于官军对周浦倭寇围攻甚急，倭寇乘夜色掩护向东北逃窜，遭到游击曹克新的拦截，杀死敌人一百三十名，其余倭寇遂与川沙洼的倭人汇合。
English: As the government army was in a hurry to besiege the Zhoupu wokou, the wokou took advantage of the cover of night to flee to the northeast. They were intercepted by the guerrilla Cao Ke, who killed one hundred and thirty of the enemy. The remaining wokou eventually merged with the Japanese in Chuan Shaha.

古文：诸军日夜击海。
现代文：各路官军日夜攻击，川沙洼的倭寇烧掉营地乘船出海。
English: The government troops attacked day and night from all directions, and the wokou of Kawasawa burned down their camp and sailed out to sea.

古文：大猷偕副使王崇古入洋追之，及于老鹳觜，焚巨舰八，斩获无算。
现代文：俞大猷带副使王崇古入海追击，在老鹳嘴赶上敌人，焚毁倭寇大船八艘，杀伤无数。
English: Wang Chonggu, the vice-envoy of the Grand Cordon, chased the enemy into the sea, caught up with the enemy in Laozhou, burned eight large wokou ships, and killed and injured countless people.

古文：余贼奔上海浦东。
现代文：残余倭寇逃往上海浦东。
English: The remaining wokou fled to Pudong, Shanghai.

古文：初，以倭患急，特命都督刘远为浙江总兵官，兼辖苏、松诸郡，数月无所为。
现代文：起初，因倭患严重，特地任命都督刘远为总兵官，兼职管辖苏、松诸郡，在几个月的时间内毫无作为。
English: At first, due to the serious Yamato disease, the governor Liu Yuan was specially appointed as the chief military officer, part-time jurisdiction of Su and Songzhu counties, and did nothing for several months.

古文：廷臣争言大猷才。
现代文：廷臣争说俞大猷有将才。
English: The courtiers argued that 大 was a great general.

古文：三十五年三月遂罢远，以大猷代。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年三月遂将刘远罢免，任命俞大猷为总兵官。
English: In March of the 35th year of Jiajing, Liu Yuan was removed from his post, and Yu Daxi was appointed as the commander-in-chief.

古文：贼犯西庵、沈庄及清水洼。大猷偕邦政击败之，贼走陶山，诏还世荫。
现代文：倭寇进犯西庵、沈庄及清水洼，俞大猷偕同董邦政击败敌人，倭寇逃到陶山，皇帝为此诏令归还俞大猷世袭特权。
English: The wokou invaded Xian, Shenzhuang and Qingshuiwa. Zou Daqi and Dong Bangsheng led the way in defeating the enemy. The wokou fled to Taoshan. For this, the emperor returned Zou Daqi's hereditary privilege by imperial edict.

古文：贼自黄浦遁出海，大猷追败之。
现代文：倭人自黄浦向外逃遁，俞大猷追击挫伤敌人。
English: The Wa fled out of Huangpu, but were pursued and wounded by the enemy.

古文：其年冬，以与平徐海功，加都督佥事。
现代文：这年冬天，因为参与讨平徐海的功劳，加职为都督佥事。
English: This winter, because he took part in the efforts to settle the dispute over Xu Hai's merits, he was promoted to the post of prefect.

古文：海既平，浙西倭悉靖。
现代文：徐海部众被讨平后，浙西的倭患止息。
English: After Xu Haibe's people were subdued, the Japanese invasion of western Zhejiang came to an end.

古文：独宁波舟山倭负险，官兵环守不能克。
现代文：只有宁波舟山的倭寇依据险要，与官军抗衡，官军将其围困，而难以攻克。
English: Only the wako in Zhoushan, Ningbo, competed with the government army on the basis of danger, and the government army besieged it, but it was difficult to overcome.

古文：是时土兵狼兵悉已遣归，而川、贵所调麻寮、大剌、镇溪、桑植兵六千始至。
现代文：此时作战勇猛的狼兵、士兵都已遣散放归，而从四川、贵州调集的麻寮、大剌、镇溪、桑植六千名士兵刚到。
English: At this time, the wolf soldiers and soldiers who fought bravely have been demobilized and repatriated, and the six thousand soldiers mobilized from Sichuan and Guizhou have just arrived.

古文：大猷乘大雪，四面攻之。贼死战，杀土官一人。
现代文：俞大猷乘大雪天，四面攻击舟山倭寇，倭寇拼死作战，杀死了士官一名。
English: Taking advantage of the heavy snow, 大 attacked the Zhoushan wokou on all sides. The wokou fought to the death and killed a non-commissioned officer.

古文：诸军益竞，进焚其栅，贼多死，其逸出者复殪，贼尽平。
现代文：各路官军愈益争先，冲上去焚毁了敌人栅栏，倭寇死亡甚多，逃出来的也被歼灭，舟山倭寇被官军扫平。
English: The government troops on all routes increasingly raced ahead, rushed up and burned the enemy fences, many wako died, and those who escaped were also annihilated. The wako in Zhoushan were wiped out by the government troops.

古文：加大猷署都督同知。明年，胡宗宪方图汪直，用卢镗言将与通市，大猷力争不可。
现代文：第二年，胡宗宪正以计谋取汪直，听从卢镗的建议与汪直通市贸易，俞大猷表示坚决的反对。
English: In the second year, Hu Zongxian tried to win over Wang Zhi by trickery, and followed Lu Yao's suggestion to trade with Wang Zhi Tong City. Yu Daxuan expressed his firm opposition.

古文：及直诱入下吏，其党毛海峰等遂据舟山，阻岑港自守。
现代文：后来汪直被诱捕下狱，汪直余党毛海峰等于是据守舟山，在岑港设寨阻挡官军。
English: Later, Wang Zhi was entrapped and sent to prison. Mao Haifeng, the remaining member of Wang Zhi's party, guarded Zhoushan and set up a fortress in Da Nang to block the government army.

古文：大猷环攻之，时小胜。
现代文：俞大猷围击，不时有一些小的胜利。
English: Great  siege, from time to time there are some small victories.

古文：然苦仰攻，将士先登多死，新倭又大至。
现代文：然而仰攻不利，冲上去的将士多被敌人杀死。倭寇大批增援而来。
English: However, the uphill attack was not successful, and many of the soldiers who rushed up were killed by the enemy. A large number of wako reinforcements came.

古文：朝廷趣宗宪甚急，宗宪谩为大言以对。
现代文：朝廷急切地督促胡宗宪出战，胡宗宪以大话敷衍。
English: The imperial court eagerly urged Hu Zongxian to go to war, and Hu Zongxian made a lot of big talk.

古文：廷臣竞诋宗宪，并劾大猷。
现代文：朝中士大夫竞相诋毁胡宗宪，并弹劾俞大猷。
English: The sergeant-doctor of the morning competed to discredit Hu Zongxian and impeach Zang Dazhong.

古文：乃夺大猷及参将戚继光职，期一月内平贼。
现代文：于是撤销俞大猷及参将戚继光的职务，并以一月为期限，平定倭寇。
English: As a result, he revoked the posts of 大 and 参将戚继光, and set a deadline of January to quell the wako.

古文：大猷等惧，攻益力，贼益死守。
现代文：俞大猷等感觉压力甚大，于是对倭寇发动了更加猛烈的攻击，倭寇也更加死守。
English: 大 and others felt a great deal of pressure, so they launched an even more violent attack on the wokou, and the wokou defended even more fiercely.

古文：三十七年七月乃自岑港移柯梅，造舟成，泛海去。
现代文：三十七年七月倭寇才自岑港移驻柯梅，造起一批战船后，泛舟逃去。
English: In July 1937, the wokou moved from Da Nang to Ke Mei. After building a number of warships, they escaped by raft.

古文：大猷等横击之，沈其一舟，余贼遂扬帆而南，流劫闽、广。
现代文：俞大猷等在海上拦截，击沉倭船一艘，其余倭寇于是乘船向南，流动攻掠闽、广一带。
English: 大 and others intercepted them at sea and sank one Wa ship. The rest of the Wa pirates then sailed south to attack and plunder  and Guang areas.

古文：大猷先后杀倭四五千，贼几平。
现代文：俞大猷先后杀倭四五千人，几乎平定倭患。
English: 大 successively killed four to five thousand people in Wa, almost quelling the Wa epidemic.

古文：而官军围贼已一年，宗宪亦利其去，阴纵之，不督诸将邀击。
现代文：由于官军将倭寇围击一年而不能攻破，胡宗宪觉得倭寇出走更有利，于是暗地让敌人溜出，并不督兵邀击。
English: Since the government army besieged the wokou for a year and could not break through, Hu Zongxian felt that it was more advantageous for the wokou to leave, so he secretly let the enemy slip out and did not invite the soldiers to attack.

古文：比为御史李瑚所劾，则委罪大猷纵贼以自解。帝怒，逮系诏狱，再夺世荫。
现代文：等到御史李瑚就此事弹劾胡宗宪时，胡宗宪则将罪责推到俞大猷头上，嘉靖帝大怒，下令逮捕俞大猷，再次剥夺他的世袭荫庇的特权。
English: When the Grand Historian Li Hui impeached Hu Zongxian over this matter, Hu Zongxian shifted the blame to Xing Daxuan. Emperor Jiajing was furious and ordered the arrest of Xing Daxuan, depriving him once again of the privilege of hereditary patronage.

古文：陆炳与大猷善，密以己资投严世蕃解其狱，令立功塞上。
现代文：陆炳与俞大猷的私人关系很好，他暗地里用自己的家私向严世蕃行贿，俞大猷得以出狱，并命他去边塞立功赎罪。
English: Lu Yao had a good personal relationship with Yan Daxuan. He secretly bribed Yan Shiyan with his personal belongings to get Yan Daxuan out of prison and ordered him to go to the frontier to redeem himself.

古文：大同巡抚李文进习其才，与筹军事。
现代文：大同巡抚李文进了解俞大猷的才华，跟他一起筹划军事。
English: Li Wenjin, the Datong governor, understood the talent of Zou Daqi and planned the military strategy together with him.

古文：乃造独轮车拒敌马。
现代文：于是俞大猷设计制造出抵御敌人骑兵的独轮车。
English: Therefore, Zou Daqi designed and manufactured a unicycle to resist enemy cavalry.

古文：尝以车百辆，步骑三千，大挫敌安银堡。
现代文：他曾用百辆独轮车、三千骑兵，在安银堡大败敌人。
English: He used one hundred unicycles and three thousand cavalry to defeat the enemy in An Yin Fort.

古文：文进上其制于朝，遂置兵车营。
现代文：李文进向朝廷推荐了俞大猷的这一战车御敌之法，朝廷因此设置了兵车营。
English: Li Wenzhin recommended to the imperial court the method of using a large number of chariots to repel the enemy, and the imperial court therefore set up a chariot battalion.

古文：京营有兵车，自此始也。
现代文：京师营卫中有兵车营这一编制，从此时开始。
English: The establishment of a military vehicle battalion in the guard of the Beijing divisional battalion began at this time.

古文：文进将袭板升，谋之大猷，果大获，诏还世荫。
现代文：李文进准备偷袭蒙古部落，就商于俞大猷，依计行事，果然大有战绩。
English: Li Wenjin was preparing to attack the Mongolian tribe by stealth. He discussed the matter with Zou Daqi and acted according to his plan. As it turned out, he achieved great results.

古文：寇掠广武，大猷拒却之。
现代文：朝廷因此赐还俞大猷世代荫庇子孙的特权，接着敌人攻掠广武，俞大猷又将其击退。
English: As a result, the imperial court gave back the privilege to the descendants of Yingbi in the generation of Zou Dazhao, and then the enemy attacked and plundered Guangwu, and Zou Dazhao repulsed it.

古文：先论平汪直功，许除罪录用。
现代文：此前在评定平息汪直倭患的功劳时，朝廷同意将俞大猷免罪录用。
English: Previously, when evaluating the merits of quelling the Wang Zhiwa epidemic, the imperial court agreed to absolve Yan Daxuan from the crime.

古文：及是，镇篁有警，川湖总督黄光升荐大猷，即用为镇篁参将。
现代文：至此，镇出现匪情，川湖总督黄光升向朝廷推荐了俞大猷，俞大猷即任命为镇参将。
English: At this point, banditry appeared in the town, and Huang Guangsheng, the governor of Sichuan Lake, recommended Zou Daxuan to the imperial court. Zou Daxuan was then appointed as the town's general.

古文：广东饶平贼张琏数攻陷城邑，积年不能平。
现代文：广东饶平贼人张琏，数次攻陷城邑，多年没有平定。
English: Zhang Ye, a bandit from Raoping, Guangdong, attacked and captured several towns, but they were not pacified for many years.

古文：四十年七月诏移大猷南赣，合闽、广兵讨之。
现代文：嘉靖四十年七月，皇帝下诏调俞大猷去南赣，集合福建、广东兵力讨伐。
English: In July of the 40th year of Jiajing, the emperor issued an edict to move the capital to Nanlu, gathering troops from Fujian and Guangdong for the crusade.

古文：时宗宪兼制江西，知琏远出，檄大猷急击。
现代文：这时胡宗宪兼管江西，他知道张琏远离巢穴，要俞大猷迅速追击。
English: At this time, Hu Zongxian, who was also in charge of Jiangxi, knew that Zhang Ye was far away from the lair, and he wanted to quickly pursue Zhang Dawei.

古文：大猷谓： 宜以潜师捣其巢，攻其必救，奈何以数万众从一夫浪走哉？ 
现代文：俞大猷说 ：应以奇兵偷袭他的巢穴，攻击他必须救护的要害，怎么可以用数万人的部队跟着张琏一人到处流动呢？ 
English: Zou Daqi said: It is necessary to make a surprise attack on his lair, attack the key that he must rescue, how can tens of thousands of troops be used to follow Zhang Ye everywhere?

古文：乃疾引万五千人登柏嵩岭，俯瞰贼巢。
现代文：于是迅速带一万五千人登上柏高岭，俯视盗贼营地。
English: So he quickly led fifteen thousand people up Mount Baikal to look down on the thieves' camp.

古文：琏果还救，大猷连破之，斩首千二百余级。
现代文：张琏果然回来救援，俞大猷连败张琏，斩敌一千二百余人。
English: Zhang Ye did indeed come back to the rescue. He defeated Zhang Ye in a row, defeating more than twelve hundred people.

古文：贼惧，不出。
现代文：盗贼恐惧，守营不出。
English: Thieves are feared, the camp cannot be defended.

古文：用间诱琏出战，从阵后执之，并执贼魁萧雪峰。
现代文：俞大猷用计诱张琏出战，派人从阵后将其擒获，还擒获另一头目萧雪峰。
English: Zou Dazhao used a trick to lure Zhang Xuan into battle, and sent people to capture him from behind the line, and also captured another leader, Xiao Xuefeng.

古文：广人攘其功，大猷不与较。
现代文：广东人将功据为己有，俞大猷亦不计较。
English: Guangdong people take the merits as their own, and do not care about the great achievements.

古文：散余党二万，不戮一人。
现代文：俞大猷遣散张琏余部二万人，没有杀戮一个。
English: The rest of Zhangye's 20,000 people were dismissed without killing a single person.

古文：擢副总兵，协守南、赣、汀、漳、惠、湖诸郡。
现代文：俞大猷升为副总兵，协助驻守南、赣、汀、漳、惠、潮诸郡。
English: He was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief and assisted in garrisoning the counties of Nan, Handan, Ting, Handan, Hui and Chaozhou.

古文：遂乘胜征程乡盗，走梁宁，擒徐东洲。
现代文：又乘胜征讨程乡的盗贼，梁宁逃走，徐东洲被擒获。
English: The thieves in Chengxiang also took advantage of the victory, Liang Ning fled, and Xu Dongzhou was captured.

古文：林朝曦者，独约黄积山大举。官军攻斩积山，朝曦遁，后亦为徐甫宰所灭。
现代文：林朝曦约请黄积山谋求大举抗拒官军，官军攻破贼营，斩了黄积山，林朝曦逃去，但后来也被徐甫宰所击灭。
English: Lin Zhaoxi invited Huang Jishan to seek a large-scale resistance against the government army. The government army broke through the thief camp and cut off Huang Jishan. Lin Zhaoxi fled, but was later destroyed by Xu Fuzai.

古文：大猷寻擢福建总兵官，与戚继光复兴化城，共破海倭。
现代文：不久俞大猷升为福建总兵官，与戚继光一道攻下兴化城，共同击败海上倭寇。
English: Soon after, Yan Daxuan was promoted to the general officer of Fujian Province. Together with Qi Jiguang, they captured Xinghua City and defeated the sea pirates.

古文：详《继光传》。
现代文：事迹详载于戚继光传。
English: Details of his deeds are recorded in the biography of Qi Jiguang.

古文：继光先登，受上赏，大猷但赉银币。
现代文：由于戚继光率先破城，得到最高奖赏，俞大猷仅被赐给银币而已。
English: Since Qi Jiguang was the first to break through the city and received the highest reward, the grand prize was only given to silver coins.

古文：四十二年十月徙镇南赣。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年十月俞大猷调任南赣。
English: In October of the 42nd year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was transferred to the Southern Wei.

古文：明年改广东。
现代文：四十三年改任广东。
English: In 1943, he was transferred to Guangdong Province.

古文：潮州倭二万与大盗吴平相掎角，而诸峒蓝松三、伍端、温七、叶丹楼辈日掠惠、潮间。
现代文：当时潮州倭寇二万人与大盗吴平相互支撑，而蓝松三、伍端、温七、叶丹楼等人则经常在惠州、潮州一带劫掠。
English: At that time, 20,000 Chaozhou wokou and the great thief Wu Ping supported each other, while Lan Song San, Wu Duan, Wen Qi, Ye Dan Lou and others often looted in Huizhou and Chaozhou.

古文：闽则程绍录乱延平，梁道辉扰汀州。
现代文：福建则有程绍禄祸乱延平，梁道辉骚扰汀州。
English: In Fujian, Cheng Shaolu caused the Yanping disaster, and Liang Daohui harassed Tingzhou.

古文：大猷以威名慑群盗，单骑入绍禄营，督使归峒，因令驱道辉归，两人卒为他将所灭。
现代文：俞大猷以自己的威名震慑这些为非作歹者，他单骑闯入程绍禄驻地，督促程绍禄回到山寨，并要程绍禄将梁道辉赶回去。
English: Zou Dajuan used his prestige to deter these wrongdoers. He rode alone into Cheng Shao Lu's residence, urged Cheng Shao Lu to return to the cottage, and asked Cheng Shao Lu to drive Liang Daohui back.

古文：惠州参将谢敕与伍端、温七战，失利。以 俞家军 至，恐之，端乃驱诸酋以归。
现代文：程、梁二人最后被另一支官军消灭，惠州参将谢敕与伍端、温七作战失利，谢以 俞家军 来了恐吓对方，伍端听说，赶忙带着一帮山寨的酋长回去了。
English: Cheng and Liang were finally wiped out by another government army. Huizhou's senior general Xie Jun and Wu Duan and Wen Qi lost the battle. Xie and Wu Duan's army came to intimidate the other side. Wu Duan heard of this and hurriedly returned with a group of fake sheikhs.

古文：无何，大猷果至，七被擒。
现代文：不久，俞大猷果真来到惠州，擒获温七。
English: Not long after, 大果真 came to Huizhou and won the first prize.

古文：端自缚，乞杀倭自效。
现代文：伍端自己负荆请罪，请上阵杀倭以弥补自己的过失。
English: If you have committed a crime, please go to war to make up for your mistake.

古文：大猷使先驱，官军继之，围倭邹塘，一日夜克三巢，焚斩四百有奇，又大破之海丰。倭悉奔崎沙、甲子诸澳，夺渔舟入海。
现代文：俞大猷以伍端部众为先锋，官军随后，在邹塘包围了倭寇，一昼夜连破三处倭寇巢穴，焚死、斩杀倭寇四百多人，又在海丰大败倭寇，倭寇全部逃到崎沙、甲子等处，抢夺渔民船只向大海方向逃去。
English: After that, the government army surrounded the wokou in Shuitang, broke three wokou nests in one day and night, burned and killed more than 400 wokou, and defeated the wokou in Haifeng. The wokou all fled to Jinsha, Jiazi and other places, robbed fishermen's boats and fled to the sea.

古文：舟多没于风，脱者二千余人，还保海丰金锡都。
现代文：倭寇船只在海中多遇风沉没。侥幸脱险的二千多人，退守海丰金锡都。
English: The wako ships were mostly sunk by the wind in the sea. More than two thousand people, who were lucky to escape danger, retreated to Haifeng Jinshidu.

古文：大猷围之两月，贼食尽，欲走。
现代文：俞大猷将其围困达两月之久，倭寇粮尽，意欲逃去。
English: 大 besieged it for two months. The wokou ran out of food and wanted to escape.

古文：副将汤克宽设伏邀之，手斩其枭将三人。
现代文：副将汤克宽设兵伏击，亲自杀死倭之悍将三人。
English: The vice-commander, Tonkekan, set an ambush for the soldiers and personally killed three of the warriors.

古文：参将王诏等继至，贼遂大溃。
现代文：参将王诏等人随后赶到，倭寇遂被击溃。
English: Wang Zhao and others arrived later, and the wokou were eventually defeated.

古文：乃移师潮州，以次降蓝松三、叶丹楼。
现代文：于是移师潮州，依次降伏蓝松三、叶丹楼。
English: As a result, the division moved to Chaozhou, surrendering Lansong 3rd and Ye Danlou in turn.

古文：遂使招降吴平，居之梅岭。
现代文：并派人招降吴平，将吴平安置在梅岭。
English: He also sent someone to recruit Wu Ping and place Wu Ping'an in Meiling.

古文：平未几复叛，造战舰数百，聚众万余，筑三城守之，行劫滨海诸郡县。
现代文：不久吴平又举兵反叛，建造战船数百艘，聚集部众一万多人，筑起三座城池固守，经常在滨海地区劫掠。
English: Soon after, Wu Ping raised an army to rebel, built hundreds of warships, gathered more than ten thousand people, built three fortresses to hold fast, and often plundered the coastal areas.

古文：福建总兵官戚继光袭平，平遁保南澳。
现代文：福建总兵官戚继光攻击了吴平，吴平逃往南澳。
English: General Qi Jiguang attacked Wu Ping, and Wu Ping fled to Nan'ao.

古文：四十四年秋入犯福建，把总朱玑等战没于海中。
现代文：四十四年秋天，吴平进入福建，把总朱玑等人在海上阵亡。
English: In the autumn of the 44th year, Wu Ping entered Fujian and killed the general Zhu Xi and others at sea.

古文：大猷将水兵，继光将陆兵，夹击平南澳，大破之。平仅以身免，奔据饶平凤凰山。
现代文：俞大猷率水兵，戚继光领陆军夹击吴平于南澳，大败敌人，吴平侥幸留了一条性命率部脱逃，逃到了饶平凤凰山。
English: Zhu Daqi led the sailors, and they followed the light of the territorial army to attack Wu Ping in Nan'ao, defeated the enemy, and Wu Ping luckily left a life-saving escape, and fled to the Raoping Phoenix Mountain.

古文：继光留南澳。大猷部将汤克宽、李超等蹑贼后，连战不利，平遂掠民舟出海。
现代文：戚继光留守南澳，俞大猷的部将汤克宽、李超等跟踪追击，却连续为敌人所败，吴平又掠夺民船流窜海上。
English: Qi Jiguang stayed in Nan'ao, and Tong Keqiang, Li Chao and other generals of the Grand Army of Wei followed and pursued, but they were continuously defeated by the enemy. Wu Ping also plundered civilian ships on the sea.

古文：闽广巡按御史交章论之，大猷坐夺职。
现代文：闽、广的巡按御史纷纷上疏责难，俞大猷因此受到撤职的处分。
English: and 广's inspecting magistrates have been criticized for negligence in the past, and  大 was removed from office as a result.

古文：平卒为克宽所追击，远遁以免，不敢入犯矣。
现代文：吴平终为汤克宽追击远逃，再不敢上陆劫掠了。
English: Wu Ping finally chased and fled far away for Tang Kekuan, and then dared not go ashore to plunder.

古文：河源、翁源贼李亚元等猖獗。总督吴桂芳留大猷讨之，征兵十万，分五哨进。
现代文：河源、翁源贼人李亚元等活动猖獗，总督吴桂芳留俞大猷征讨，征兵十万，分五路进击。
English: The activities of the bandits Li Yayuan of Heyuan and Wengyuan were rampant, and the governor Wu Guifang ordered a large-scale conscription, enlisting 100,000 soldiers and attacking in five directions.

古文：大猷使间携贼党而亲捣其巢，生擒亚元，俘斩一万四百，夺还男妇八万余人。
现代文：俞大猷用计亲捣贼巢，生擒李亚元，俘虏、斩杀敌人共计一万零四百人，救回被裹挟的男女八万余人。
English: Zou Dadao used his cunning to smash the thieves' nest, capturing Li Yayuan alive, capturing and killing a total of 10,400 enemies, and rescuing more than 80,000 men and women who were trapped.

古文：乃还大猷职，以为广西总兵官。
现代文：于是朝廷又恢复了俞大猷的职务，调任广西总兵官。
English: As a result, the imperial court reinstated the post of the grand eunuch and transferred him to the post of the military commander of Guangxi.

古文：故事：以勋臣总两广兵，与总督同镇梧州。帝用给事中欧阳一敬议，两广各置大帅，罢勋臣，乃召恭顺侯吴继爵还京，以大猷代，予平蛮将军印。
现代文：按照旧例，用有功之臣总管两广官军，与总督同驻梧州，皇帝采用给事中欧阳一敬的建议，在广东、广西各置将帅，罢除勋臣总管兵事的办法。于是召恭顺侯吴继爵回京，代以俞大猷，并授予俞大猷平蛮将军印信。
English: According to the old practice, with the meritorious vassals in charge of the military of the two provinces, and with the governor stationed in Wuzhou, the emperor adopted the suggestion of giving respect to Ouyang in the middle of the matter, and set up generals in Guangdong and Guangxi, and dismissed the method of dismissing the general in charge of military affairs. He then called Jing Shun marquis Wu Jijie to return to Beijing, and appointed him as the grand marshal, and awarded the seal of the grand marshal Ping Man to the general.

古文：而以刘显镇广东。
现代文：而用刘显镇守广东。
English: Instead, they used Liu Xian to defend Guangdong.

古文：两广并置帅，自大猷及显始也。
现代文：两广同时设置大帅，从俞大猷及刘显开始。
English: At the same time, the two regions will set up a general manager, starting with Zou Daqi and Liu Xian.

古文：伍端死，其党王世桥复叛，劫执同知郭文通。
现代文：降将伍端死后，他的部属王世桥又起兵反叛，劫持了同知郭文通。
English: After the death of the surrendering general Wu Duan, his subordinate Wang Shixiao rebelled and kidnapped his comrade Guo Wentong.

古文：大猷连败之，其部下执以献。进署都督同知。
现代文：俞大猷连续击败王世桥，王世桥的部下将他抓住献给了俞大猷，因此，俞大猷升为都督同知。
English: Zou Daqian defeated Wang Shibiao in succession. Wang Shibiao's subordinates captured him and presented him to Zou Daqian. As a result, Zou Daqian rose to the position of governor.

古文：海贼曾一本者，吴平党也。既降复叛，执澄海知县，败官军，守备李茂才中炮死。
现代文：海寇曾一本，本来是吴平的同伙，后降于官军，至此又叛降，劫持澄海知县，击败官军，守备李茂才也中炮身亡。
English: Once upon a time, Haikou was originally an associate of Wu Ping, and later fell to the government army. At this time, he also rebelled, hijacked Chenghai County, defeated the government army, and guarded Li Maocai, who also died in the cannon.

古文：诏大猷暂督广东兵协讨。
现代文：皇帝诏令俞大猷暂时督率广东兵协助讨伐。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to temporarily supervise and lead the Guangdong soldiers to assist the crusade.

古文：隆庆二年，一本犯广州，寻犯福建。
现代文：隆庆二年，曾一本进攻广州，后又攻掠福建。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he once attacked Guangzhou, and later attacked and plundered Fujian.

古文：大猷合郭成、李锡军擒灭之。
现代文：俞大猷集合郭成、李锡部队剿灭了曾一本及其部众。
English: Guo Cheng and Li Xi's forces gathered at the Great Hall of the People and annihilated Zeng Bin and his followers.

古文：录功，进右都督。
现代文：俞大猷因功升为右都督。
English: He was promoted to the post of right-hand governor for his achievements.

古文：广西古田僮黄朝猛、韦银豹等，嘉靖末尝再劫会城库，杀参政黎民表。
现代文：广西古田僮人黄朝猛、韦银豹等，在嘉靖末年曾经两次劫掠省城官库，杀害参政黎民表。
English: In the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Guanxi Gutian Qianren, including Huang Chaomeng and Wei Yinpiao, twice plundered the provincial government treasury and killed Li Minbiao, a politician.

古文：巡抚殷正茂征兵十四万，属大猷讨之。
现代文：巡抚殷正茂征兵十四万，交俞大猷统属征讨。
English: The governor Yin Zhengmao conscripted 140,000 soldiers, and all of Jiaotong University were conscripted.

古文：分七道进，连破数十巢。
现代文：俞大猷分兵七路，连续攻破数十处贼人巢穴。
English: There were seven detachments of soldiers in Dadaocheng, and they continuously broke through dozens of thieves' nests.

古文：贼保潮水，巢极巅，攻十余日未下。
现代文：贼人力保潮水寨，该寨建在高山的顶端，官兵攻十余日未能奏效。
English: The village was built on the top of a high mountain, and it took more than ten days for the officers and soldiers to attack it.

古文：大猷佯分兵击马浪贼，而密令参将王世科乘雨夜登山设伏。
现代文：俞大猷假意分兵进攻马浪之敌，而密遣参将王世科率兵乘夜雨之机登山设下伏兵。
English: 大 pretended to attack the enemy of Ma Lang with a detachment of soldiers, but secretly sent General Wang Shike and his soldiers to climb the mountain in the night rain to set up an ambush.

古文：黎明炮发，贼大惊。诸军攀援上，贼尽死。
现代文：天刚亮，大炮骤发，敌人大惊，各路部队乘机攀缘而上，敌人全军覆没。
English: It was just dawn, the cannon burst, the enemy was shocked, all the troops took the opportunity to climb up, and the enemy's entire army was wiped out.

古文：马浪诸巢相继下。斩获八千四百有奇，擒朝猛、银豹，百年积寇尽除。进世荫为指挥佥事。
现代文：马浪等贼人巢穴相继被官军攻克，共计杀死、俘虏敌人八千四百多名，活捉了黄朝猛、韦银豹，百年来的贼寇之患一朝尽除，俞大猷因功享有世袭荫庇子孙的特权，升为指挥佥事。
English: Ma Lang and other thieves' lairs were successively conquered by the government army, a total of more than 8,400 enemies were killed and captured, the Yellow Dynasty and Wei Silver Leopard were captured alive, and the suffering of thieves and robbers over the past hundred years was eliminated in one day. Because of his achievements, Zou Daju enjoyed the privilege of hereditary shadow descendants and was promoted to command anecdote.

古文：大猷为将廉，驭下有恩。数建大功，威名震南服。而巡按李良臣劾其奸贪，兵部力持之，诏还籍候调。
现代文：俞大猷是一位廉洁的将帅，对部下颇有恩惠，数建奇功，名震南部疆土，而巡按李良臣以奸贪之罪弹劾他，兵部坚决为其辩诬，皇帝诏令大猷回原籍听候差遣。
English: Zou Dazhao was an incorruptible general who was very kind to his subordinates. He made several miraculous feats and was famous in the southern territory. However, the inspector Li Liangchen impeached him for the crime of embezzlement, the military department resolutely defended him, and the emperor ordered Zou Dazhao to return to his hometown to await dispatch.

古文：起南京右府佥书。
现代文：后来起用为南京右府佥书。
English: Later, it was used as Nanjing Yufu Yinshu.

古文：未任，以都督佥事为福建总兵官。
现代文：未及赴任，后又以都督佥事出任福建总兵官。
English: Before taking office, he served as the military commander of Fujian Province with the title of governor.

古文：万历元年秋，海寇突闾峡澳，坐失利夺职。复以署都督佥事起后府佥书，领车营训练。三疏乞归。卒，赠左都督，谥武襄。
现代文：万历元年秋天，海寇突袭闾峡澳，因战事失利俞大猷被剥夺职务，又以署理都督佥事起用为后府佥书，训练车营，三次上疏，请求退休，不久，去世，赠左都督衔，谥号为武襄。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Wanli era, the sea pirates raided Yanxia'ao. Due to the defeat in the war, Yan Dajun was deprived of his duties. He was also appointed as the acting governor of Anji to serve as the post governor, training camp, three times upstream, requested retirement, and soon died, was given the title of left governor, and his nickname was Wu Xiang.

古文：大猷负奇节，以古贤豪自期。
现代文：俞大猷负有奇节，以古代贤人豪士为自己的楷模。
English: 大负有奇节, with ancient sages and heroes as their role models.

古文：其用兵，先计后战，不贪近功。
现代文：他用兵，先谋略而后征战，眼光远大，不贪近功。
English: He used soldiers, strategized first and then went to war. He was far-sighted and not greedy for short-term gains.

古文：忠诚许国，老而弥笃，所在有大勋。
现代文：忠诚为国的精神老而弥笃，所到之处屡有大功。
English: The spirit of loyalty to the country is old and profound, and he has made great contributions everywhere he has gone.

古文：武平、崖州、饶平旨为祠祀。
现代文：武平、崖州、饶平都为之立祠祭祀。
English: Wuping, Yazhou, and Raoping have all built small shrines for him.

古文：戚继光，字元敬，世登州卫指挥佥事。
现代文：谭纶曾给他写信说 ：在节制部伍的精明上，您不如谭纶；在赏罚的分明上，您不如戚继光；在作战的勇猛快捷上，您不如刘显。
English: Tan Xuan once wrote to him, saying: In the shrewdness of the temperance department, you are not as good as Tan Xuan; in the clarity of reward and punishment, you are not as good as Qi Jiguang; in the bravery and speed of combat, you are not as good as Liu Xian.

古文：父景通，历官都指挥，署大宁都司，入为神机坐营，有操行。
现代文：然而这些都是小智，您则为大将之才。 戚继光，字元敬，世袭登州卫指挥佥事。父亲戚景通，曾升迁为都指挥，署理大宁都司，后进京执掌神机营，颇有操行。
English: However, these are all small wisdom, and you are the talent of the general. Relative Jiguang, character Yuan Jie, hereditary ascension to the State Guard commander anecdote. Father's relative Jing Tong, who was promoted to the capital commander, deputy director of the Daming Capital, and then went to Beijing to take charge of the Shenji camp, is quite active.

古文：继光幼倜傥负奇气。
现代文：戚继光幼时即风流潇洒、气宇不凡。
English: When Qi Jiguang was young, he was a dashing and extraordinary person.

古文：家贫，好读书，通经史大义。
现代文：家里较为贫寒，但戚继光喜好读书，并掌握了经史要义。
English: His family was relatively poor, but Qi Jiguang liked to read and mastered the essentials of history.

古文：嘉靖中嗣职，用荐擢署都指挥佥事，备倭山东。
现代文：嘉靖中继承武职，被人推荐为署理都指挥佥事，到山东防倭。
English: Jiajing inherited the military post, was recommended as acting commander of the capital, and went to Shandong to defend against the Japanese.

古文：改佥浙江都司，充参将，分部宁、绍、台三郡。
现代文：后改任浙江都司，以参将职分掌宁波、绍兴、台州三郡。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Zhejiang Province, and was in charge of the three counties of Ningbo, Shaoxing and Taizhou.

古文：三十六年，倭犯乐清、瑞安、临海，继光援不及，以道阻不罪。
现代文：嘉靖三十六年，倭寇进犯东清、瑞安、临海，戚继光救援不及，因为道路险阻的缘故朝廷没有降罪。
English: In the 36th year of Jiajing, the wokou invaded East Qing, Rui'an and Linhai, but the imperial court did not commute the crime because of the dangerous road.

古文：寻会俞大猷兵，围汪直余党于岑港。
现代文：不久会合俞大猷部，将汪直余部围困于岑港。
English: They would soon meet with the Shandong authorities and besiege the remaining part of Wang Zhi in Da Nang.

古文：久不克，坐免官，戴罪办贼。
现代文：由于久围不下，戚继光受到免除官职的处分，戴罪讨倭。
English: As the siege did not end for a long time, Qi Jiguang was punished by being relieved of his official duties, and he was made to pay a fine.

古文：已而倭遁，他倭复焚掠台州。
现代文：不多时倭寇突围逃走，另一支倭寇又焚烧劫掠台州。
English: Not infrequently, a wokou broke through the encirclement and fled, while another wokou burned and looted Taizhou.

古文：给事中罗嘉宾等劾继光无功，且通番。
现代文：给事中罗嘉宾等人弹劾戚继光没有战功，而且有勾结敌寇的嫌疑。
English: For Luo Jiabin and others, the impeachment of Qi Jiguang had no military merit, and there was a suspicion of collusion with the enemy.

古文：方按问，旋以平汪直功复官，改守台、金、严三郡。
现代文：有关部门正准备拿他是问，很快又因平定汪直的功劳恢复官职，转任台州、金华、严州三郡太守。
English: The relevant departments were preparing to interrogate him, and he was soon restored to his official position due to the merits of Pingding Wang Zhi, and transferred to Taizhou, Jinhua, and Yanzhou.

古文：继光至浙时，见卫所军不习战，而金华、义乌俗称慓悍，请召募三千人，教以击刺法，长短兵迭用，由是继光一军特精。
现代文：戚继光初到浙江时，见卫所官军久不训练，战斗力低下，而金华、义乌民众一向剽悍，请求招募三千人，教授搏击阵法，长短兵器配合使用，因此，戚继光的部队尤其精悍。
English: When Qi Jiguang first arrived in Zhejiang, he saw that the official troops of the Coast Guard Station had not been trained for a long time, and their combat effectiveness was low. However, the people of Jinhua and Yiwu had always been tough, and they requested the recruitment of three thousand people, the teaching of the fighting array method, and the use of long and short weapons. Therefore, Qi Jiguang's troops were particularly tough.

古文：又以南方多薮泽，不利驰逐，乃因地形制阵法，审步伐便利，一切战舰、火器、兵械精求而更置之。 戚家军 名闻天下。
现代文：又鉴于南方多为水乡湖区，不利于长距离驰战，于是根据地形研制阵法，为了步战的方便，一切战船、火器、兵械进行精心的选择和调换。由此， 戚家军 名扬天下。
English: In view of the fact that the south is mostly water townships and lake areas, which is not conducive to long-distance fighting, the formation method was developed according to the terrain, and all warships, firearms and armaments were carefully selected and exchanged for the convenience of foot combat. As a result, the relative army became famous all over the world.

古文：四十年，倭大掠桃渚、圻头。
现代文：嘉靖四十年，倭寇大肆劫掠桃渚、圻头。
English: In the 40th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, wokou (Japanese pirates) plundered Taozhu and Shantou.

古文：继光急趋宁海，扼桃渚，败之龙山，追至雁门岭。
现代文：戚继光迅速赶到宁海，扼守桃渚，在龙山击败倭寇，追到雁门岭。
English: Qi Jiguang quickly rushed to Ninghai, defended Taozhu, defeated the wokou in Longshan, and chased them to Ganmenling.

古文：贼遁去，乘虚袭台州。继光手歼其魁，蹙余贼瓜陵江尽死。
现代文：倭寇逃走，并乘虚袭击台州，戚继光亲手斩杀倭寇头目，将倭寇残余人员逼进瓜陵江，全部溺死。
English: The wokou escaped and took advantage of the situation to attack Taizhou. Qi Jiguang personally killed the leader of the wokou and forced the remaining members of the wokou into the Gualing River, where they all drowned.

古文：而圻头倭复趋台州，继光邀击之仙居，道无脱者。
现代文：在圻头的倭寇又赶往台州，戚继光在仙居中途伏击，倭寇无一脱逃。
English: The wokou in Shantou rushed to Taizhou, and Qi Jiguang ambushed halfway in Xianju. None of the wokou escaped.

古文：先后九战皆捷，俘馘一千有奇，焚溺死者无算。
现代文：前后九战九胜，俘虏斩敌计一千多人，烧死、淹死的倭寇无法统计。
English: Nine battles, nine victories, more than a thousand captives and enemies killed, and the number of burned and drowned wako cannot be counted.

古文：总兵官卢镗、参将牛天锡又破贼宁波、温州。
现代文：总兵官卢镗、参将牛天锡又在宁波、漫州大破倭寇。
English: Commander-in-chief Lu Wei and general Niu Tianxi defeated the Wokou in Ningbo and Manchuria.

古文：浙东平，继光进秩三等。
现代文：浙东倭患平息，戚继光加俸禄三级。
English: East Zhejiang's wafang disease subsided, and the relative of Jiguang was promoted to the third level.

古文：闽、广贼流入江西。
现代文：福建、广东倭寇流窜至江西。
English: Fujian and Guangdong wokou migrated to Jiangxi.

古文：总督胡宗宪檄继光援。
现代文：总督胡宗宪调戚继光前往救援。
English: Governor Hu Zongxian dispatched his relative Jiguang to the rescue.

古文：击破之上坊巢，贼奔建宁。
现代文：戚继光攻破倭寇上坊的营地，倭寇逃向建宁。
English: Qi Jiguang broke through the camp of the wokou Shangfang, and the wokou fled to Jianning.

古文：继光还浙江。
现代文：戚继光回到浙江。
English: Qi Jiguang returned to Zhejiang.

古文：明年，倭大举犯福建。
现代文：次年，倭寇大举进犯福建。
English: The following year, wokou made a large-scale invasion of Fujian.

古文：自温州来者，合福宁、连江诸倭攻陷寿宁、政和、宁德。
现代文：从温州方向来的倭寇，会合福宁、连江的众倭寇攻陷寿宁、政和、宁德。
English: The wokou coming from the direction of Wenzhou joined the wokou from Funing and Lianjiang to invade Shuning, Zhenghe and Ningde.

古文：自广东南澳来者，合福清、长乐诸倭攻陷玄钟所，延及龙严、松溪、大田、古田、莆田。
现代文：自广东南澳来者，会合福清，长乐诸路倭寇攻陷玄钟所，延及龙岩、松溪、大旧、古田、莆田等地。
English: Coming from Nan'ao in Guangdong, they joined the Japanese invaders from Fuqing, Changle and other places to seize the bell tower, extending to Longyan, Songxi, Dagu, Gutian, Putian and other places.

古文：是时宁德已屡陷。
现代文：这时宁德屡次被倭寇攻破。
English: At this time, Ningde was repeatedly invaded by Japanese invaders.

古文：距城十里有横屿，四面皆水路险隘，贼结大营其中。
现代文：距离宁德城十里处的横屿，四面皆为水路险隘，倭寇在此安下大营。
English: The island of Hengyu, ten miles from Ningde City, is surrounded on all sides by narrow waterways, and it was here that the wako set up camp.

古文：官军不敢击，相守逾年。
现代文：官军不敢贸然攻击，相持一年有余。
English: The government troops did not dare to attack rashly, and they held out for more than a year.

古文：其新至者营牛田，而酋长营兴化，东南互为声援。
现代文：新近到来的倭寇屯聚在牛田，倭寇头目驻在兴化，东南相互呼应。
English: The newly arrived wokou gathered in Ushida, the leader of the wokou was stationed in Xinghua, and the southeast corresponded with each other.

古文：闽中连告急，宗宪复檄继光剿之。
现代文：福建因此连续告急，胡宗宪又调戚继光征讨。
English: As a result, Fujian has been in a continuous state of emergency, and Hu Zongxian has called on his relatives to follow suit.

古文：先击横屿贼。
现代文：戚继光首先进攻横屿倭寇。
English: Qi Jiguang was the first to attack the Yokoyu wako.

古文：人持草一束，填壕进。
现代文：冲锋的士卒每人持一捆草，填平壕沟前进。
English: The storming soldiers each carried a bundle of grass to fill the trench and advance.

古文：大破其巢，斩首二千六百。
现代文：大破敌营，杀死倭寇二千六百多人。
English: The enemy camp was destroyed, and more than 2,600 wako were killed.

古文：乘胜至福清，捣败牛田贼，覆其巢，余贼走兴化。
现代文：乘胜追至福清，击败牛田倭寇，并捣毁其营地，倭寇余部逃到兴化。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, he chased them to Fuqing, defeated the Ushida wako, and destroyed their camp. The rest of the wako fled to Luohe.

古文：急追之，夜四鼓抵贼栅。连克六十营，斩首千数百级。
现代文：戚继光急速追赶，半夜时分抵达倭寇屯聚之地，连续攻破六十营，杀倭一千多人。
English: Qi Jiguang quickly caught up, arriving at midnight at the place where the wokou were gathered, continuously breaking through sixty battalions and killing more than a thousand people in Wa.

古文：平明入城，兴化人始知，牛酒劳不绝。
现代文：黎明入城，兴化人才知道 戚家军 到，酒肉慰劳不断。
English: Entering the city at dawn, the people of Xinghua knew that their relatives had arrived, and they were constantly comforted with wine and meat.

古文：继光乃旋师。
现代文：戚继光于是回师。
English: Qi Jiguang then returned to his teacher.

古文：抵福清，遇倭自东营澳登陆，击斩二百人。
现代文：抵达福清时，正遇倭寇从东营澳登陆，击毙倭寇二百人。
English: When he arrived in Fuqing, he was confronted with a wokou landing from Dongyingao, and killed 200 wokou.

古文：而刘显亦屡破贼。闽宿寇几尽。
现代文：刘显也屡次击破倭寇，福建倭寇几乎灭绝。
English: Liu Xian has also repeatedly defeated wokou, and Fujian wokou is almost extinct.

古文：于是继光至福州饮至，勒石平远台。
现代文：于是戚继光到福建举行祭饮之礼，刻石纪事于平远台而还。
English: As a result, Qi Jiguang went to Fujian to hold a ceremony of sacrifice and drinking, and the stone chronicle was engraved in Pingyuan.

古文：及继光还浙后，新倭至者日益众，围兴化城匝月。
现代文：等戚继光回到浙江后，新来的倭寇日益增多，并围困兴化城达一月之久。
English: After Qi Jiguang returned to Zhejiang, the number of newly arrived wokou increased day by day, and they besieged Xinghua City for a month.

古文：会显遣卒八人赍书城中，衣刺 天兵 二字。
现代文：正碰上刘显派士卒八人携带文书入城，士卒衣服上刺有 天兵 二字。
English: Liu Hsien sent eight soldiers to the city to carry documents. The soldiers had the word "Heavenly Soldier" embroidered on their clothes.

古文：贼杀而衣其衣，绐守将得人，夜斩关延贼。
现代文：倭寇杀死这八名官兵，穿上他们的衣服，欺骗守将入城，夜晚破门迎接倭寇。
English: The wokou killed the eight officers and soldiers, put on their clothes, tricked the guards into entering the city, and broke down the gate at night to meet the wokou.

古文：副使翁时器、参将毕高走免，通判奚世亮摄府事，遇害，焚掠一空。
现代文：副使翁时器、参将毕高逃走，通判奚世亭代理政事，被倭寇杀害，兴化城被焚烧抢劫一空。
English: The deputy envoy, Weng Jike, and the general Bi Gao fled, and were killed by wokou, and Xinghua City was burned and looted.

古文：留两月，破平海卫，据之。
现代文：倭寇在此滞留两月，又攻破平海卫，并以此为据点。
English: The wako stayed here for two months, breached the sea defences, and used it as a stronghold.

古文：初，兴化告急，时帝已命俞大猷为福建总兵官，继光副之。
现代文：开始，兴化告急时，皇帝已任命俞大猷为福建总兵官，戚继光为副总兵。
English: At the beginning, when Xinghua was in an urgent situation, the emperor had appointed Zou Daqi as the general officer of Fujian and Qi Jiguang as the deputy general officer.

古文：及城陷，刘显军少，壁城下不敢击。
现代文：兴化城失陷后，刘显士卒较少，守在城下而不敢攻击。
English: After the fall of Xinghua City, Liu Xianshi had fewer soldiers, so he stayed at the foot of the city and did not dare to attack.

古文：大猷亦不欲攻，需大军合以困之。
现代文：俞大猷也不想进攻，想调兵合围困住敌人。
English: Yan Daxu did not want to attack, he wanted to surround the enemy with troops.

古文：四十二年四月，继光将浙兵至。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年四月，戚继光率浙江兵赶到。
English: In April of the 42nd year of Jiajing, a group of Zhejiang soldiers arrived.

古文：于是巡抚谭纶令将中军，显左，大猷右，合攻贼于平海。
现代文：于是巡抚谭纶命令戚继光为中锋，刘显居左，俞大猷居右，合力攻击倭寇于平海。
English: As a result, the inspector Tan Yu ordered Qi Jiguang to be the center, Liu Xian to be on the left, and Zou Daxuan to be on the right, and to jointly attack the wokou at Pinghai.

古文：继光先登，左右军继之，斩级二千二百，还被掠者三千人。
现代文：戚继光率先突破，左右军相继跟上，杀死倭寇二千二百人，放还被掠夺的百姓三千人。
English: Qi Jiguang was the first to break through, and the left and right armies followed one after another, killing 2,200 wako and returning 3,000 plundered people.

古文：纶上功，继光首，显、大猷次之。
现代文：谭纶向朝廷报功，戚继光功居榜首，刘显、俞大猷次之。
English: Tan Xuan reported his achievements to the imperial court, with Qi Jiguang at the top of the list, followed by Liu Xian and Zou Daqi.

古文：帝为告谢郊庙，大行叙赉。
现代文：嘉靖帝为此在郊庙行告谢之礼，大张旗鼓地给功臣颁奖。
English: For this, Emperor Jiajing gave a speech of thanks in a suburb temple and presented awards to meritorious subjects with great fanfare.

古文：继光先以横屿功，进署都督佥事，及是进都督同知，世荫千户，遂代大猷为总兵官。
现代文：戚继光先因平定横屿倭寇之功，升为署理都督佥事，至此又升为都督同知，世代荫庇千户之职，于是取代俞大猷为总兵官。
English: Qi Jiguang was promoted to the post of acting governor-general due to his success in subduing the Japanese invaders on Hengyu Island, and then he was promoted to the post of governor-general, the post that has been held by thousands of families for generations, and he replaced Zou Daqi as the chief military officer.

古文：明年二月，倭余党复纠新倭万余，围仙游三日。继光击败之城下，又追败之王仓坪，斩首数百级，余多坠崖谷死，存者数千奔据漳浦蔡丕岭。
现代文：次年二月，倭寇余党又纠集新来倭寇一万多人，围困仙游三日，戚继光在城下击败倭寇，又追击倭寇于王仓坪，斩杀倭寇数百名，倭寇多坠落峡谷而死，剩下的数千人逃奔到漳浦蔡丕岭。
English: In February of the following year, the remaining wokou party gathered more than 10,000 newly arrived wokou and besieged Senyu for three days. Qi Jiguang defeated the wokou under the city, chased the wokou to Wangcangping, and killed hundreds of wokou. Most of the wokou fell into the canyon and died, and the remaining thousands fled to Caiyuling.

古文：继光分五哨，身持短兵缘崖上，俘斩数百人，余贼遂掠渔舟出海去。
现代文：戚继光分兵五路，身带短兵刃爬崖而上，俘虏、杀死倭寇几百人，倭寇残余于是掠夺渔舟船逃往海外。
English: Qi Jiguang split his army five ways, climbed up the cliff with a short sword, captured and killed hundreds of wokou, and the remnants of the wokou then plundered fishing boats and fled overseas.

古文：久之，倭自浙犯福宁，继光督参将李超等击败之。乘胜追永宁贼，斩馘三百有奇。
现代文：很久之后，倭寇从浙江进犯福宁，戚继光督率参将李超等击败倭寇，乘胜追歼永宁倭寇，杀倭三百多人。
English: After a long time, the wokou from Zhejiang invaded Funing, and the relative Jiguang Guo led the general Li Chao and others to defeat the wokou, and took advantage of the victory to chase and destroy the Yongning wokou, killing more than 300 people.

古文：寻与大猷击走吴平于南澳，遂击平余孽之未下者。
现代文：不久与大猷在南澳击败吴平，并征讨不肯降服的吴平余部。
English: Soon after, he defeated Wu Ping in Nan'ao together with Daju, and subjugated the rest of Wu Ping who refused to surrender.

古文：继光为将号令严，赏罚信，士无敢不用命。与大奠均为名将。操行不如，而果毅过之。
现代文：戚继光统兵号令严肃，赏罚分明，言之有信，士卒莫不为其冲锋陷阵，他与俞大猷均为名将，操行虽不及俞大猷，但果敢刚毅超过俞大猷。
English: The order of Qi Jiguang's soldiers was serious, the rewards and punishments were clear, and the words were credible. There was no reason for the soldiers to charge into the battle. He and Zou Daqi were both famous generals. Although his conduct was not as good as that of Zou Daqi, his courage and fortitude exceeded that of Zou Daqi.

古文：大猷老将务持重，继光则飚发电举，屡摧大寇，名更出大猷上。
现代文：大猷老成持重稳健，戚继光则如飙风闪电迅捷威猛，多次摧毁强倭，其名气更在俞大猷之上。
English: Daxing has been stable and steady for a long time, but Qi Jiguang is as swift and powerful as the wind and lightning, and has repeatedly destroyed Qiangwa. Its reputation is even higher than that of Daxing.

古文：隆庆初，给事中吴时来以蓟门多警，请召大猷、继光专训边卒。
现代文：隆庆初年，因蓟州镇屡有边患，给事中吴时来请召俞大猷、戚继光专门训练边兵。
English: In the first year of Longqing, due to frequent border problems in Luzhou Town, Wu Shilai invited Zou Daxuan and Qi Jiguang to specially train border soldiers.

古文：部议独用继光，乃召为神机营副将。
现代文：兵部讨论结果是仅用戚继光，于是召戚继光为神机营副将。
English: The result of the discussion of the military department was that only Qi Jiguang was used, so Qi Jiguang was called as the vice-general of the Shenji battalion.

古文：会谭纶督师辽、蓟，乃集步兵三万，征浙兵三千，请专属继光训练。
现代文：正逢谭纶在辽、蓟督兵，为此集步兵三万，征浙兵三千，请求委托戚继光训练。
English: At the same time, Tan Xuan was in Liao and Shandong to supervise soldiers. To this end, he gathered 30,000 infantrymen, recruited 3,000 soldiers from Zhejiang, and requested that Qi Jiguang be entrusted with the training.

古文：帝可之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：二年五月命以都督同知总理蓟州、昌平、保定三镇练兵事，总兵官以下悉受节制。
现代文：隆庆二年五月，任命戚继光以都督同知职总理蓟州、昌平、保定三镇练兵事宜，总兵官以下均受其节制。
English: In May of the 2nd year of Longqing, Qi Jiguang was appointed as the governor of the three towns of Zhangzhou, Changping and Baoding, and was also appointed as the prime minister. The general officer and below were subject to his restraint.

古文：至镇，上疏言：
现代文：戚继光到蓟州后上疏：
English: After his relative Jiguang went to Zhangzhou, he went to Shangsu:

古文：蓟门之兵，虽多亦少。
现代文： 蓟门之兵，名义上众多而实际上不足，为何如此说呢？
English: Why do the gatekeepers, nominally numerous but in fact insufficient, say this?

古文：其原有七营军不习戎事，而好末技，壮者役将门，老弱仅充伍，一也。边塞逶迄，绝鲜邮置，使客络释，日事将迎，参游为驿使，营垒皆传舍，二也。寇至，则调遣无法，远道赴期，卒毙马僵，三也。守塞之卒约束不明，行伍不整，四也。临阵马军不用马，而反用步，五也。家丁盛而军心离，六也。乘障卒不择冲缓，备多力分，七也。
现代文：原因有七条：驻屯军人不习兵事，而好微末之技，壮健的兵卒为将帅役使差遣，只有老弱的兵卒在部队充数，这是第一；边寨曲折漫长，却极少设立通邮机构，使臣宾客来往不断，每天迎接不暇，参将、游击成为驿使，营房关垒变成了驿站，此为第二；敌寇来犯，而调遣无方，长途奔赴，人马两伤，为第三；防守边塞的士卒缺乏严明的约束，行伍不整，为第四；作战中骑兵不用马，反而徒步，这是第五；家兵气盛而军心离散，这是第六；树立边寨障碍而不选择轻重缓急，防备地点众多而使兵力分散，这是第七。
English: There are seven reasons for this: firstly, the garrison soldiers are not trained in military affairs, but they have poor skills; secondly, the strong soldiers are sent to dispatch the officers and envoys, and only the old and weak soldiers are in the troops; thirdly, the border villages are long and tortuous, but they rarely set up postal institutions; the envoys and guests are constantly coming and going, and there is no time to meet them every day; the general and the guerrillas become envoys, and the camp barrier becomes a station; thirdly, the enemy invaders come, but there is no way to dispatch them, they go a long distance, and both men and horses are

古文：七害不除，边备曷修？
现代文：这七条弊害不除，边备怎能完好。
English: If these seven evils are not eliminated, how can the border be kept intact?

古文：而又有士卒不练之失六，虽练无益之弊四。
现代文： 并且还有士卒不训练的六条过失，虽然训练但无益处的弊端又有四条。
English: In addition, there are six faults that soldiers and soldiers do not train, and four drawbacks that are not beneficial despite training.

古文：何谓不练？
现代文：什么叫不训练？
English: What do you call not training?

古文：夫边所藉惟兵，兵所藉惟将；今恩威号令不足服其心，分数形名不足齐其力，缓急难使，一也。有火器不能用，二也。弃土著不练，三也。诸镇入卫之兵，嫌非统属，漫无纪律，四也。班军民兵数盈四万，人各一心，五也。练兵之要在先练将。
现代文：边寨所依赖的是兵卒，兵卒所依赖的是将帅；现今恩威号令不能让人心服，营规条例不能使其齐心协力，无论舒缓还是急促都难以驱使，这是第一；拥有火器而不知道使用，这是第二；对当地百姓放弃训练，这是第三；从各镇调来充实边防的兵卒，以自己非当地卫所统辖，漫无纪律，这是第四；偏师民兵超过四万人，且人各一心，这是第五；练兵的要务首先在于练将。
English: The outpost depended on the soldiers, and the soldiers depended on the commander; nowadays, the order of "Enwei" is not convincing, the camp regulations cannot make them work together, and it is difficult to drive them whether it is easy or urgent, this is the first; owning firearms without knowing how to use them, this is the second; abandoning the training of local people, this is the third; soldiers who are transferred from various towns to enrich the border defense, are not under the jurisdiction of the local garrison, and are undisciplined, this is the fourth; there are more than forty thousand militias in different divisions, and they are all one-sided, this is the fifth; the

古文：今注意武科，多方保举似矣，但此选将之事，非练将之道，六也。
现代文：眼下注意武举考试，多种途径的选择荐举与此类似，但这是选将，并非练将之道，这是第六。
English: At the moment, pay attention to the martial arts exam. There are many ways to choose. The recommended move is similar to this, but this is the way to choose a general, not the way to train a general. This is the sixth step.

古文：何谓虽练无益？
现代文：何谓虽练无益呢？
English: After all, what good is practice without practice?

古文：今一营之卒，为炮手者常十也。
现代文：现今一营兵卒，作为炮手的常有十人。
English: Nowadays, there are often ten gunners in a battalion.

古文：不知兵法五兵迭用，当长以卫短，短以救长，一也。三军之士各专其艺，金鼓旗帜，何所不蓄？今皆置不用，二也。
现代文：不知兵法中各种兵器交互使用，应当以长卫短，短以救长，这是第一；三军的士卒各有擅长之技，战鼓军旗等，都应有所准备，现今都弃置不用，这是第二。
English: I don't know, in the art of war, all kinds of weapons should be used interchangeably. The first is that the long guard should be the shortest and the short guard should be the longest. The second is that the soldiers of the three armies should have their own skills, war drums, banners, etc. should be prepared, and now they are all abandoned and useless.

古文：弓矢之力不强于寇，而欲藉以制胜，三也。
现代文：拉弓射箭的功力不能比敌人更强，而想以此取胜，这是第三。
English: The third is that the skill of drawing a bow and shooting an arrow cannot be stronger than that of the enemy, but that one should try to win by this means.

古文：教练之法，自有正门。
现代文：教练之法，各有渊源系统。
English: Each coach's method has its own system of origin.

古文：美观则不实用，实用则不美观，而今悉无其实，四也。
现代文：外表美观则不实用，实用则不美观，当今训练全无实在内容，这是第四。
English: Appearance is not practical, practical is not beautiful, and today's training has no real content, which is the fourth.

古文：臣又闻兵形象水，水因地而制流，兵因地而制胜。
现代文： 臣又听说兵形如水，水随地而流动，用兵要根据不同的地形环境而决定取胜的战法。
English: The minister also heard that the shape of the army is like water, water flows with the land, and the use of soldiers should be determined according to different terrain and environment.

古文：蓟之地有三。平原广陌，内地百里以南之形也。
现代文：蓟州的地形有三种，广阔的平原田野，是内地百里以南的地形。
English: There are three types of terrain in Luzhou. The vast plains and fields are the terrain 100 miles south of the mainland.

古文：半险半易，近边之形也。
现代文：险阻平易参半，是内地靠近边塞的地形。
English: The perilous obstacle is flat and mixed, and is the terrain of the inland near the border fort.

古文：山谷仄隘，林薄蓊翳，边外之形也。
现代文：山谷狭隘，树大林深，是边塞之外的地形。
English: The valley is narrow, the trees are deep, and the terrain is beyond the border fortress.

古文：寇入平原，利车战。
现代文：敌人进入平原，利于车战。
English: The enemy has entered the plain, which is conducive to vehicular combat.

古文：在近边，利马战。
现代文：在靠近边关的内地长于马战。
English: In the hinterland, which is close to the border, it is longer than the horse race.

古文：在边外，利步战。
现代文：在边关之外，宜于步战。
English: Outside the border, it is better to fight on foot.

古文：三者迭用，乃可制胜。
现代文：三者交互使用，才可能获得战争胜利的主动权。
English: It is only through the mutual use of the three that it is possible to gain the initiative to win the war.

古文：今边兵惟习马耳，未娴山战、林战、谷战之道也，惟浙兵能之。
现代文：现今边兵只练习骑马，不熟悉山战、林战、狭谷之战的阵法，这只有浙江兵能做得到。
English: At present, the frontier soldiers only practice riding horses, and are not familiar with the formation of mountain warfare, forest warfare, and valley warfare, which can only be done by Zhejiang soldiers.

古文：愿更予臣浙东杀手、炮手各三千，再募西北壮士，足马军五枝，步军十枝，专听臣训练，军中所需，随宜取给，臣不胜至愿。
现代文：请还给我浙东杀手、炮手各三千名，再募西北壮士，配备充足的骑兵部队五支，步兵十支，听我专门训练，军中所需诸物，随时供应，这是我最大的心愿。 
English: Please give me back three thousand killers and gunners from eastern Zhejiang, recruit more strong men from the northwest, equip five cavalry units and ten infantry units, listen to my special training, and supply all kinds of things needed in the army at any time. This is my greatest wish.

古文：又言： 臣官为创设，诸将视为缀疣，臣安从展布？ 
现代文：又说 ：我的官职为初设，诸位将官视作多余的职位，我如何从容行事呢？ 
English: He also said: My office is a newly created one, you all regard the office as a superfluous position, how can I act calmly?

古文：章下兵部，言蓟镇既有总兵，又设总理，事权分，诸将多观望，宜召还总兵郭琥，专任继光。
现代文：戚继光的奏章下到兵部，皇上说蓟镇既然有总兵，又设总理，事务之权分割，诸位将官多作观望状，应召还总兵郭琥，专门任用戚继光。
English: Qi Jiguang's report was sent to the military department, and the emperor said that since there was a general and a prime minister in Shantou, the power of affairs should be divided. The generals were mostly on the sidelines, and the general was recalled and Qi Jiguang was specially appointed.

古文：乃命继光为总兵官，镇守蓟州、永平、山海诸处，而浙兵止弗调。
现代文：于是任命戚继光为总兵官，镇守蓟州、永平、山海等处，而浙江兵停止北调。
English: As a result, Qi Jiguang was appointed as the chief military officer, guarding Bozhou, Yongping, Shanhai and other places, while Zhejiang soldiers stopped moving north.

古文：录破吴平功，进右都督。
现代文：考录平定吴平的功劳，戚继光升任右都督。
English: Wu Ping's merits were recognized in the examination record, and Qi Jiguang was promoted to the post of the right-hand governor.

古文：寇入青山口，拒却之。
现代文：敌寇侵入青山口，官军击退了敌人。
English: Enemy raiders invaded Aoyamaguchi, and the government army repulsed the enemy.

古文：自嘉靖以来，边墙虽修，墩台未建。
现代文：自嘉靖以来，边墙虽然修复，但没有建立墩台。
English: Since Jiajing, although the side walls have been repaired, no stadium has been built.

古文：继光巡行塞上，议建敌台。
现代文：戚继光在塞上巡视，倡议建设敌台。
English: Qi Jiguang made an inspection tour on the dam, advocating the construction of an enemy station.

古文：略言： 蓟镇边垣，延袤二千里，一瑕则百坚皆瑕。
现代文：大概意思是说： 蓟州边墙，绵延二千里，一处出了毛病，其他各处虽然坚固也均遭祸及。
English: It is probably meant to say: the Zhangzhou border wall, stretching for two thousand miles, has a problem in one place, and all other places, although solid, are also affected by the disaster.

古文：比来岁修岁圮，徒费无益。
现代文：近年来，年年修建却年年崩塌，空费无益之钱。
English: In recent years, buildings have been constructed year after year, only to collapse year after year. The money spent on construction is useless.

古文：请跨墙为台，睥睨四达。
现代文：请跨墙建筑敌台，以望四方。
English: Please build the enemy base across the wall and look in all directions.

古文：台高五丈，虚中为三层，台宿百人，铠仗糗粮具备。
现代文：台高五丈，中间空虚，分上中下三层，每台安置百人，兵器铠甲干粮俱备。
English: Five stories high, empty in the middle, divided into upper, middle and lower three floors, each accommodating a hundred people, with armament, armor and dry rations at the ready.

古文：令戍卒画地受工，先建千二百座。
现代文：命令边兵画地计工，先建一千二百座。
English: He ordered the border troops to draw up a plan for the construction of 1,200 seats.

古文：然边卒木强，律以军法将不堪，请募浙人为一军，用倡勇敢。 
现代文：然而边卒质朴，强制施以军法恐怕他们受不了，请募集浙江人组成一军，以提倡勇敢精神。 
English: However, the border guards are simple, I am afraid they can't bear to enforce martial law. Please recruit Zhejiang people to form an army to promote the spirit of bravery.

古文：督抚上其议，许之。
现代文：总督、巡抚将戚继光的建议报告给皇上，批复。
English: The governor and governor-general reported Qi Jiguang's suggestion to the emperor for approval.

古文：浙兵三千至，陈郊外。天大雨，自朝至日昃，植立不动。
现代文：浙江兵三千人开到，列阵于郊外，适逢大雨，自早晨至午后，笔直站立不动。
English: Three thousand Zhejiang soldiers arrived, lined up in the suburbs, coincided with heavy rain, from morning to afternoon, standing upright and motionless.

古文：边军大骇，自是始知军令。
现代文：边军大为惊异，从此知道军令的严肃。
English: The border troops were greatly surprised, and from then on knew the seriousness of the military order.

古文：五年秋，台功成。精坚雄壮，二千里声势联接。
现代文：隆庆五年秋，敌台修成，坚固雄壮，在二千里的边塞上声势联接。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Longqing, the enemy station was built, solid and strong, and it was connected to the sound potential on the two-thousand-mile border.

古文：诏予世荫，赉银币。
现代文：诏令赐予世代荫庇特权，并赏给银币。
English: The edict bestowed the privilege of generational shade and rewarded him with silver coins.

古文：继光乃议立车营。车一辆用四人推挽，战则结方阵，而马步军处其中。
现代文：戚继光建议设立车营，每一辆车用四人推拉，战时则结为方阵，马步军居中。
English: Qi Jiguang suggested setting up a car camp, with four people pushing and pulling each car. In wartime, they would form a square, with the horse-and-foot soldiers in the middle.

古文：又制拒马器，体轻便利，遏寇骑冲突。
现代文：又制作拒马器，这种兵器轻巧便利，可以阻遏敌人骑兵的冲击。
English: They also produced a horse repeller, a light and convenient weapon that could stop the impact of enemy cavalry.

古文：寇至，火器先发，稍近则步军持拒马器排列而前，间以长枪、筤筅。
现代文：敌寇来到，先放火器，接近则由步兵持拒马器排列向前，兼用长枪、筅。
English: When the enemy came, they first set fire to their weapons. When they approached, the infantry lined up in front, holding horse-drawn deflectors. They also used long guns and crossbows.

古文：寇奔，则骑军逐北。
现代文：敌寇逃跑，则以骑兵追杀。
English: If the enemy bandits fled, they were chased by cavalry.

古文：又置辎重营随其后，而以南兵为选锋，入卫兵主策应，本镇兵专戍守。
现代文：又将辎重营放在阵后，以南方兵为前锋，调来的援兵以策应为主，本镇兵卒专门戍守。
English: He also placed the Shao heavy battalion in the rear of the line, with the soldiers from the south as the vanguard, and the reinforcements brought in were mainly for strategy. The soldiers from this town were specially guarded.

古文：节制精明，器械犀利，蓟门军容遂为诸边冠。
现代文：节制精明，兵器锋利，蓟门军容风纪遂成为诸边之冠。
English: With prudent restraint and sharp weapons, the Qimen army's demeanor and discipline have become the best in the region.

古文：当是时，俺答已通贡，宣、大以西，烽火寂然。
现代文：当此时，蒙古俺答部已往来朝贡，宣府、大同以西战火平熄。
English: At this time, the Mongolian army had already paid tribute to the imperial court, and the war between Xuanwu and Datong had ended peacefully.

古文：独小王子后土蛮徙居插汉地，控弦十余万，常为蓟门忧。
现代文：只有移居安插在汉地的小王子的后代土蛮，拥有部众十多万，常常侵扰蓟门。
English: Only the descendants of the little prince who emigrated and settled in Han, the barbarians, have more than a hundred thousand followers and often invade the gate.

古文：而朵颜董狐狸及其兄子长昂交通土蛮，时叛时服。
现代文：而朵颜董狐狸及兄长的儿子长昂与土蛮勾结，时而叛乱，时而归服。
English: But Doan Dong Fox and his elder brother's son Chang'ang colluded with the barbarians, sometimes rebelling, sometimes submitting.

古文：万历元年春，二寇谋入犯。
现代文：万历元年春天，朵颜董狐狸与长昂图谋进犯。
English: In the spring of the first year of Wanli, Doan Dong Fox and Chang Ao plotted to attack.

古文：驰喜峰口，索赏不得，则肆杀掠，猎傍塞，以诱官军。
现代文：他们奔驰到喜峰口，勒索封赏不成，就肆意杀掠，并在边塞附近围猎，以诱使官军出战。
English: They raced to the mouth of the peak, and when they couldn't extort a reward, they killed and plundered at will, and hunted around the border fortress to lure the government army into battle.

古文：继光掩击，几获狐狸。
现代文：戚继光率兵出击，几乎生擒狐狸。
English: Qi Jiguang led the soldiers to attack, almost killing the fox.

古文：其夏，复犯桃林，不得志去。
现代文：这年夏天，朵颜董狐狸又进犯桃林，但未能遂其意愿而去。
English: In the summer of this year, Doan Dong the fox invaded the peach grove again, but he was unable to leave as he wished.

古文：长昂亦犯界岭。
现代文：长昂亦来进犯界岭。
English: Chang'an also came to invade the ridge.

古文：官军斩获多，边吏讽之降，狐狸乃款关请贡。廷议给以岁赏。
现代文：官军俘虏杀伤了许多敌人，守边的明朝官吏婉言劝说敌人归降，朵颜董狐狸于是叩关请求通贡，朝廷讨论给以岁赏。
English: The prisoners of the government army killed and wounded many of the enemy. The Ming Dynasty officials guarding the border gently persuaded the enemy to surrender. Doan Dong Fox then knocked on the gate to request a tribute, and the imperial court discussed giving a reward.

古文：明年春，长昂复窥诸口不得入，则与狐狸共逼长秃令入寇。
现代文：第二年春天，长昂又窥视各边关塞口，但无计进入，就与狐狸共逼长秃使之入侵。
English: In the spring of the second year, Chang'an peered at the dam gates on all sides, but without any plan to enter, he and the fox forced the long-haired to invade.

古文：继光逐得之以归。
现代文：戚继光率官军逐敌于塞外，并俘长秃而归。
English: Qi Jiguang led the official army to chase the enemy out of Tibet, and captured Changbald and returned.

古文：长秃者，狐狸之弟，长昂叔父也。
现代文：长秃，是狐狸的弟弟，长昂的叔父。
English: Nagaharu is the younger brother of Fox and the uncle of Nagaharu.

古文：于是二寇率部长亲族三百人，叩关请死罪，狐狸服素衣叩头乞赦长秃。
现代文：于是狐狸、长昂二人率部落头目及亲族三百人，叩关请赦死罪，狐狸身穿白色的衣服叩头请求赦免长秃。
English: So the fox and Chang'ang, two people, led by the tribal leader and three hundred relatives, knocked on the gate to ask for forgiveness of the death penalty, and the fox, wearing white clothes, bowed down to ask for the pardon of Chang'ao.

古文：继光及总督刘应节等议，遣副将史宸、罗端诣喜峰口受其降。
现代文：戚继光与总督刘应节等商议，派遣副将史宸、罗端去喜峰口受降。
English: Qi Jiguang conferred with Governor Liu Yingjie and others, and dispatched Vice Generals Shi Yan and Luo Duan to Xifengkou to accept the surrender.

古文：皆罗拜，献还所掠边人，攒刀设誓。
现代文：狐狸等罗列而拜，献还所掠夺的边民，并聚刀盟誓再不入侵。
English: Foxes and others line up and bow, offer to return the plundered borderers, and swear not to invade again.

古文：乃释长秃，许通贡如故。
现代文：明朝释放了长秃，允许通贡如前。
English: In the morning, Nagaharu was released, and the tribute was allowed to continue.

古文：终继光在镇，二寇不敢犯蓟门。
现代文：由于戚继光在任，这二部敌人不敢进犯蓟门。
English: Since Qi Jiguang was in office, these two enemies did not dare to attack the imperial court.

古文：寻以守边劳，进左都督。
现代文：不久以守边之功，戚继光被提升为左都督。
English: Soon, Qi Jiguang was promoted to the left governor with the merit of protecting the border.

古文：已，增建敌台，分所部十二区为三协，协置副将一人，分练士马。
现代文：已而，增筑敌台，分所辖十二防区为三协，每协置副将一人，分别训练士卒兵马。
English: Since then, the number of enemy stations has increased, and the twelve defense zones under the jurisdiction of the branch have become the three associations, each association has one vice-general, respectively, the training officer and the soldiers and horses.

古文：炒蛮入犯，汤克宽战死，继光被劾，不罪。
现代文：炒蛮进犯，汤克宽战死，戚继光被弹劾，但没有治罪。
English: He was accused of reckless aggression, Tong Kek Kuan was killed in action, and Qi Jiguang was impeached, but no criminal charges were brought.

古文：久之，炒蛮偕妻大嬖只袭掠边卒，官军追破之。
现代文：很久以后，炒蛮又携妻大嬖只袭击剽掠明朝边卒，官军追逐击破炒蛮部。
English: After a long time, the fried barbarian and his wife only attacked and plundered the Ming Dynasty border guards, and the government army chased and defeated the fried barbarian.

古文：土蛮犯辽东，继光急赴，偕辽东军拒退之。
现代文：土蛮进犯辽东，继光与辽东官军一道击退敌人。
English: The barbarians invaded Liaodong, and Jiguang and the Liaodong government army together repelled the enemy.

古文：继光已加太子太保，录功加少保。
现代文：戚继光已加太子太保，录功加少保。
English: Qi Jiguang has been awarded the title of crown prince and the title of minor prince.

古文：自顺义受封，朝廷以八事课边臣：曰积钱谷、修险隘、练兵马、整器械、开屯田、理盐法、收塞马、散叛党。三岁则遣大臣阅视，而殿最之。
现代文：自顺义王受封，朝廷以八项内容考核边臣：即积聚钱粮、修建关隘、训练兵马、整理器械、开辟屯田、理清盐法、收集塞马、解散叛党，每隔三年即遣大臣检阅巡视，考定等级。
English: Since Shunyi Wang received the title, the imperial court has been assessing the border guards with eight items: namely, the accumulation of money and grain, the construction of the pass, the training of soldiers and horses, the arrangement of equipment, the opening of the occupied fields, the clarification of the salt method, the collection of Saima, and the dissolution of the rebel party. Every three years, the minister is sent to inspect the inspection and assess the level.

古文：继光用是频荫赉。
现代文：继光因此频受封赠。
English: As a result, Jiguang was frequently presented with awards.

古文：南北名将马芳、俞大猷前卒，独继光与辽东李成梁在。
现代文：南北名将马芳、俞大猷先后离世，独戚继光与李成梁仍然健在。
English: The famous generals of the north and south, Ma Fang and Zou Daqi, have passed away successively, and their only relatives, Jiguang and Li Chengliang, are still alive.

古文：然蓟门守甚固，敌无由入，尽转而之辽，故成梁擅战功。
现代文：由于蓟门防守十分强固，敌人无从得入，于是尽数转攻辽东，因此李成梁颇得建功的机会。
English: Since the defense of the gate was very strong, the enemy could not get in, so he tried his best to attack Liaodong, so Li Chengliang had a good chance to make contributions.

古文：自嘉靖庚戌俺答犯京师，边防独重蓟。增兵益饷，骚动天下。
现代文：自嘉靖庚戌年俺答进犯京师后，边防独重蓟门，增加兵卒，补充饷源，天下为之惊动。
English: From the year of Jiajing to the year of Geng Zi, after the invasion of the Beijing division, the border defense increased the number of gates, increased the number of soldiers, and supplemented the number of sources. The whole world was shocked.

古文：复置昌平镇，设大将，与蓟相唇齿。
现代文：又设置昌平镇，委任大将，昌平与蓟门互为唇齿。
English: He also set up Changping Town, appointed a general, and Changping and Qimen became close friends.

古文：犹时躏内地，总督王忬、杨选并坐失律诛。
现代文：边寇仍然不时蹂躏内地，总督王忄予、杨选因军事失利而遭杀身之祸。
English: The border raiders still ravaged the inland from time to time, and the governors Wang Xiyu and Yang Xuan were killed as a result of military defeat.

古文：十七年间，易大将十人，率以罪去。
现代文：十七年间，调换大将十人，这些人均因罪去职。
English: In seventeen years, ten generals have been replaced, and all of them have been removed from office for crimes.

古文：继光在镇十六年，边备修饬，蓟门宴然。
现代文：戚继光在边镇十六年，边关防务完备，蓟门安然。
English: Qi Jiguang has been in the border town for 16 years, the border defense is complete, and the gate is safe.

古文：继之者，踵其成法，数十年得无事。
现代文：继任者，随其成法，数十年间太平无事。
English: His successors followed his example, and there was peace and tranquility for decades.

古文：亦赖当国大臣徐阶、高拱、张居正先后倚任之。
现代文：戚继光的功绩也有赖于当国大臣徐阶、高拱、张居正的先后倚重信任。
English: Qi Jiguang's achievements also depend on the trust placed in him by the current ministers Xu Ju, Gao Gong and Zhang Jizheng.

古文：居正尤事与商确，欲为继光难者，辄徙之去。
现代文：尤其是张居正，诸事均与继光商量，有想与继光为难者，张居正总是将其调走。
English: Especially Zhang Juzheng, all matters are discussed with the successor, and if there is a difficulty with the successor, Zhang Juzheng always transfers it away.

古文：诸督抚大臣如谭纶、刘应节、梁梦龙辈咸与善，动无掣肘，故继光益发舒。
现代文：诸位督抚大臣如谭纶、刘应节、梁梦龙等人均与继光友善，从不牵制继光，所以戚继光能够更加自由发挥其长。
English: All the supervising ministers such as Tan Zhen, Liu Yingcai, Liang Menglong and others are friendly with Jiguang and never restrain Jiguang, so Jiguang can play his strengths more freely.

古文：居正殁半岁，给事中张鼎思言继光不宜于北，当国者遽改之广东。
现代文：张居正死后半年，给事中张鼎思说戚继光不宜于守北，当朝大臣即将其改任广东。
English: Half a year after Zhang Jizheng's death, Zhang Dingxi said in the middle of the matter that it was not appropriate for a relative to succeed him in the north, and when he became a minister, he was transferred to Guangdong.

古文：继光悒悒不得志，强一赴，逾年即谢病。
现代文：戚继光郁郁不得志，勉强赴任，一年后即告病请归。
English: Qi Jiguang was depressed and discouraged, he reluctantly took up the post, and a year later he was ill and asked to return.

古文：给事中张希皋等复劾之，竟罢归。
现代文：给事中张希皋等又弹劾他，戚继光竟因此罢职归乡。
English: Zhang Xichen and others also impeached him, and Qi Jiguang resigned from his post and returned home.

古文：居三年，御史傅光宅疏荐，反夺俸。
现代文：家居三年，御史傅光宅上疏推荐戚继光，反而遭到剥夺俸禄的处分。
English: After three years of living at home, he was deprived of his salary. Instead, he was recommended to go to the residence of the Imperial Historian Fu Guang.

古文：万历初，累官署都督佥事，提督京城巡捕。
现代文：戚继光也抑郁而逝。戚继光历任南北边防重任，声誉显著。在南方战功特盛，北方则专门致力于防守。
English: Qi Jiguang also passed away in depression. Qi Jiguang held important positions in the north-south border defense, and his reputation was remarkable. In the south, he was very successful in war, while in the north, he was dedicated to defense.

古文：未几，谢事归。
现代文：戚继光所著的《纪效新书》、《练兵纪实》，为兵家所看重。
English: Qi Jiguang's "New Book of Records" and "Record of Military Training" are valued by soldiers.

古文：张元勋，字世臣，浙江太平人。
现代文：张元勋，字世臣，浙江太平人。
English: Zhang Yuanxun, a world-renowned scholar, was born in Taiping, Zhejiang.

古文：嗣世职为海门卫新河所百户。
现代文：承袭世职任海门卫新河所百户。
English: There are hundreds of families who have inherited the position of Haimen Weixinhe School.

古文：沈毅有谋。
现代文：他深沉坚毅有计谋。
English: He's deep and tough and cunning.

古文：值倭警，隶戚继光麾下。
现代文：时值有倭寇侵犯的消息，他隶属戚继光麾下。
English: At the time, there was news of a Wokou invasion, and he was under the command of his relative, Jiguang.

古文：有功，进千户。
现代文：作战有功，晋升为千户。
English: For meritorious service in battle, he was promoted to chihaku.

古文：从破横屿诸贼，屡进署都指挥佥事，充福建游击将军。
现代文：他随从戚继光攻破横屿诸贼，晋升为署都指挥佥事，充任福建游击将军。
English: He followed Qi Jiguang to break through the bandits of Hengyu, and was promoted to the commander of the capital, and served as the guerrilla general of Fujian.

古文：隆庆初，破倭福安，改南路参将。
现代文：隆庆初期，攻破福安倭寇，改任南路参将。
English: At the beginning of the Longqing era, he defeated Fu'an Wokou and was appointed as the South Road General.

古文：从李锡破曾一本，进副总兵。
现代文：他随从李锡攻破曾一本，晋升副总兵。
English: He was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief after defeating Zeng Ying from Li Xi.

古文：五年春，擢署都督佥事，代郭成为总兵官，镇守广东。
现代文：五年春天，他被提升为署都督佥事，代郭成任总兵官，镇守广东。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, he was promoted to the post of prefectural governor, acting as the chief military officer, and the town guard of Guangdong.

古文：惠州河源贼唐亚六、广州从化贼万尚钦、韶州英德贼张廷光劫掠郡县，莫能制。
现代文：惠州河源敌贼唐亚六、广州从化敌贼万尚钦、韶州英德的敌贼张廷光劫抢郡县，不能控制。
English: Huizhou Heyuan's enemy thief Tang Yalong, Guangzhou's enemy thief Wan Shangqin, and Zhang Tingguang's enemy thief Zhang Yingde robbed counties and counties, and could not be controlled.

古文：明年，元勋进剿。
现代文：第二年，张元勋进剿他们。
English: The following year, Zhang Yuanxun joined them.

古文：斩馘六百有奇，亚六等授首，余党悉平。
现代文：歼俘敌贼六百多人，唐亚六等人授首，余党均被平定。
English: More than six hundred people were killed and captured, Tang Ya and six others were given their heads, and the rest of the party were all subdued.

古文：肇庆恩平十三村贼陈金莺等，与邻邑苔村三巢贼罗绍清、林翠兰、谭权伯，藤峒、九迳十寨贼黄飞莺、丘胜富、黄高晖、诸可行、黄朝富等，相煽为乱。
现代文：肇庆恩平十三村的敌贼陈金莺等人，与邻邑苔村三巢敌贼罗绍清、林翠兰、谭权伯，藤峒、九径十寨的敌贼黄飞莺、丘胜富、黄高晖、诸可行、黄朝富等人，相互煽动作乱。
English: Zhao Qing Enping's thirteenth village's enemy bandit Chen Jinqi and others, and the neighboring three villages' enemy bandits Luo Shaoqing, Lin Cuilan, Tan Quan Bo, Fengtai, and the nine villages' enemy bandits Huang Feiqi, You Shengfu, Huang Gaoqi, Zhu Feifu, Huang Chaofu and others, instigated mutual chaos.

古文：故事：两粤惟大征得叙功，雕剿不叙，故诸将不乐雕剿。
现代文：按惯例，两粤只有大征才能叙功，小规模的进剿是不叙功的，所以诸将不喜欢小规模的进剿。
English: According to the usual practice, only large-scale land reclamation can be described as meritorious, and small-scale land reclamation cannot be described as meritorious. Therefore, they do not like small-scale land reclamation.

古文：总督殷正茂与元勋计，令雕剿得论功，诸军争奋。
现代文：总督殷正茂与张元勋商议，小规模进击敌巢也记功，诸军争相奋战。
English: Governor Yin Zhengmao and Zhang Yuanxun deliberated, small-scale attacks on the enemy's nest were also credited, and the armies fought hard.

古文：正茂又密遣副将梁守愚、游击王瑞等屯恩平，若常戍者，掩不备，斩翠兰等，生擒绍清、权伯以献。
现代文：殷正茂又秘密派遣副将梁守愚、游击王瑞等人屯兵恩平，像经常守戍在那里的人，乘敌贼不备，歼斩林翠兰等人，生擒罗绍清、谭权伯献给殷正茂。
English: Yin Zhengmao also secretly dispatched vice-commander Liang Shouwu, guerrilla Wang Rui and others to the Enping garrison. Like those who often guard the castle, they took advantage of the enemy's lack of preparedness, killed Lin Cui Lan and others, and sacrificed the live cubs of Luo Shaoqing and Tan Quan Bo to Yin Zhengmao.

古文：其诸路雕剿者，效首功二千四百有奇，还被掠子女千三百余人，生得金莺，惟高晖等亡去。
现代文：诸路剿击敌巢的人，获首功二千四百多人，放还被抢掠来的子女一千三百多人，生擒陈金莺，只有黄高晖等人逃跑了。
English: Of the people who went out to attack the enemy's nest, more than 2,400 people received the first merit, more than 1,300 children who were robbed were released, Chen Jinqi was still alive, and only Huang Gaoqi and others escaped.

古文：元勋逐北至藤峒，又生获胜富、可行、朝富等八十人。
现代文：张元勋向北到达藤峒，又生擒丘胜富、诸可行、黄朝富等八十八人。
English: Zhang Yuanxun went north to Fujian, and eighty-eight people, including Shaoqiu Shengfu, Zhu Fei, and Huang Chaofu, were born.

古文：部将邓子龙等亦获高晖、飞莺。
现代文：部将邓子龙等人抓获黄高晖、黄飞莺。
English: Deng Zilong and others were arrested together with Huang Gaoqi and Huang Feiqi.

古文：三巢、十寨、十三村诸贼尽平，余悉就抚。
现代文：三巢、十寨、十三村的所有敌贼全部被平定，其余的全部被安抚。
English: All the enemy bandits in Sanxu, Juzhai, and Zhusancun were completely subdued, and all the rest were pacified.

古文：惠、潮地相接，山险木深。
现代文：惠州、潮州两地相接处，山高险阻树木深茂。
English: At the junction of Huizhou and Chaozhou, the mountains are covered with thick trees.

古文：贼首蓝一清、赖元爵与其党马祖冒、黄民太、曾廷凤、黄鸣时、曾万璋、李仲山、卓子望、叶景清、曾仕龙等各据险结砦，连地八百余里，党数万人。
现代文：贼首蓝一清、赖元爵与同党马祖昌、黄民太、曾廷凤、黄鸣时、曾万璋、李仲山、卓子望、叶景清、曾仕龙等人各自占据险要结砦，控制方圆八百多里，同党有几万人。
English: Thief-in-chief Lan Yiching, Lai Yuanjie, and fellow party members Ma Zuchang, Huang Mingtai, Zeng Tingfeng, Huang Minglu, Zeng Wanzhong, Li Zhongshan, Zhuo Zibang, Ye Jingqing, Zeng Shilong, and others each occupied a key stronghold, controlling a radius of more than 800 miles, with tens of thousands of people in the same party.

古文：正茂议大征。
现代文：殷正茂提议对他们进行大规模征讨。
English: Yin Zhengmao proposed a large-scale campaign against them.

古文：会金莺等已灭，诸贼颇惧。
现代文：正遇上陈金莺等人被消灭，诸贼恐惧。
English: Just as Chen Jinyu and others were being wiped out, the thieves were terrified.

古文：廷凤、万璋并遣子入学，祖昌、景清亦佯乞降。
现代文：曾廷凤、曾万璋一起送子入学，马祖昌、叶景清也假意乞求投降。
English: Zeng Tingfeng and Zeng Wanzhong sent their children to school together, and Mazu Chang and Ye Jingqing also pretended to beg for surrender.

古文：正茂知其诈，征兵四万，令参将李诚立、沈思学、王诏，游击王瑞等分将之，元勋居中节制，监司陈奎、唐九德、顾养谦、吴一介监其军，数道并进。
现代文：殷正茂知道他们使诈，征兵四万，下令由参将李诚立、沈思学、王诏，游击王瑞等人分别带领，张元勋在其中节制他们，监司陈奎、唐九德、顾养廉、吴一介监督这些军队，几路兵马齐头并进。
English: Yin Zhengmao knew that they were committing fraud and conscripted 40,000 soldiers. He ordered that General Li Chengli, Shen Siyu, Wang Zhao, and the guerrilla Wang Rui should lead the troops separately. Zhang Yuanxun was among those who restrained them. The supervisors Chen Kui, Tang Jiu De, Gu Yiliang, and Wu Yijie supervised these troops, and several soldiers marched side by side.

古文：贼败，乃凭险自守。
现代文：敌贼被打败，他们还凭借险要进行固守。
English: The enemy bandits were defeated, and they continued to defend themselves by resorting to desperate measures.

古文：官军遍搜深箐邃谷间。
现代文：官军搜遍深林邃谷也找不到他们。
English: The government troops searched the deep forests and valleys but could not find them.

古文：而元勋偕九德，追亡至南岭。一日夜驰至养谦所，击破李坑，生得子望等。
现代文：而张元勋和唐九德，追击逃亡叛贼至南岭，一天一夜跑步赶到顾养廉的戍所，击破李坑，生擒卓子望等人。
English: But Zhang Yuanxun and Tang Jiu De chased the fleeing traitors to Nanling, ran all day and night to reach Gu Yanglian's hiding place, defeated Li Heng, and captured Zhuo Ziwang and others.

古文：明年破乌禽嶂。
现代文：第二年击破乌禽嶂。
English: In the second year, the blackbird chrysalis was broken.

古文：仕龙阻高山，元勋佯饮酒高会，忽进兵击擒之。
现代文：曾仕龙被高山阻拦，张元勋假装饮酒庆祝，忽然进兵击破曾仕龙并生擒他。
English: Zeng Shilong was blocked by the mountain, Zhang Yuanxun pretended to drink to celebrate, suddenly the soldiers defeated Zeng Shilong and stabbed him.

古文：先后获大贼首六十一人，次贼首六百余人，破大小巢七百余所，擒斩一万二千有奇。
现代文：张元勋先后俘歼大贼头六十一人，次等贼头六百多人，击破大小敌巢七百多所，生擒斩杀敌贼一万二千多人。
English: Zhang Yuanxun successively captured and annihilated the first sixty-one major bandits, more than six hundred minor bandits, broke more than seven hundred enemy nests, large and small, and killed more than twelve thousand enemy bandits.

古文：帝为宣捷，告郊庙，进元勋署都督同知，世荫百户。
现代文：皇帝为他宣传捷功，告郊庙，晋升张元勋为署都督同知，世荫百户。
English: The emperor publicized his achievements for him, sued the suburb temple, promoted Zhang Yuanxun to the post of prefectural governor, and he was known to hundreds of households.

古文：元勋复讨斩余贼千三百有奇，抚定降者。
现代文：张元勋又征讨斩杀敌人余党一千三百多人，安抚平定投降的人。
English: Zhang Yuanxun also conscripted and killed more than 1,300 enemy remnants to pacify those who surrendered.

古文：巨寇皆靖。
现代文：倭寇都被平定。
English: The wako were all subdued.

古文：潮州贼林道乾之党诸良宝既抚复叛，袭杀官军，掠六百人入海。
现代文：潮州敌贼林道乾的同党诸良宝被安抚后又行反叛，袭杀官军，抢掠六百人带入大海。
English: After being pacified, Chaozhou's enemy and thief Lin Daoqian's fellow party member Zhu Liangbao rebelled again, attacked and killed the government army, and robbed and plundered six hundred people into the sea.

古文：再犯阳江，败走。
现代文：侵犯阳江，被打败后逃走。
English: Invaded Yangjiang, was defeated and fled.

古文：乃据潮故巢，居高山巅，不出战。
现代文：他盘据潮州的老巢穴，居住在高山顶上，不出来交战。
English: He has set his sights on his old lair in Chaozhou, lives on the top of a high mountain, and will not come out to fight.

古文：官军营淤泥中。
现代文：官军扎营在淤泥之中。
English: Government troops are camped in the mud.

古文：副将李诚立挑战，坠马伤足，死者二百人。
现代文：副将李诚立挑战，坠下马来跌伤脚，损失二百多人。
English: Vice Admiral Li Chengli challenged, fell off the horse and hurt his foot, losing more than two hundred people.

古文：贼出掠而败，走巢固守。
现代文：敌贼出来抢掠而被打败，逃回巢穴固守。
English: The enemy thieves came out to plunder and were defeated. They fled back to their lairs and held fast.

古文：元勋积草土与贼垒平，用火攻之，斩首千一百余级。
现代文：张元勋堆积草土和敌贼堡垒平，用火攻击敌贼，斩杀一千一百多敌人。
English: Zhang Yuanxun piled up the grass and the enemy's fortress, attacked the enemy with fire, and killed more than 1,100 enemies.

古文：时万历二年三月也。
现代文：这时是万历二年三月。
English: It was now March of the second year of Wanli.

古文：捷闻，进世荫一级。
现代文：捷报奏报朝廷，张元勋被增进世荫一级。
English: The victory was reported to the imperial court, and Zhang Yuanxun was promoted to the first level of the world.

古文：遗孽魏朝义等四巢亦降。
现代文：敌贼遗孽魏朝等四巢也向官军投降。
English: The remnants of the traitorous Wei Dynasty and other four nests also surrendered to the government army.

古文：寻与胡宗仁共平良宝党林凤。
现代文：不久张元勋与胡宗仁共同平定诸良宝的同党林凤。
English: Soon, Zhang Yuanxun and Hu Zongren jointly subdued Zhu Liangbao's fellow party member Lin Feng.

古文：惠、潮遂无贼。
现代文：惠州、潮州于是敌贼全无。
English: As a result, Huizhou and Chaozhou have no enemies.

古文：其冬，倭陷铜鼓石、双鱼城。
现代文：这一年冬天，倭寇攻陷铜鼓石、双鱼城。
English: In the winter of that year, wako (Japanese pirates) captured Bronze Drum Rock and the Twin Fish City.

古文：元勋大破之儒峒，俘斩八百余级。
现代文：张元勋在儒洞大破倭寇，俘歼八百多人。
English: Zhang Yuanxun defeated the Wokou in Zhudong, capturing and killing more than 800 people.

古文：进秩为真。
现代文：给予真正晋级。
English: Give them a real promotion.

古文：五年，从总督凌云翼大征罗旁贼，斩首万六千余级。
现代文：五年，张元勋随从总督凌云翼大规模征讨罗旁敌贼，斩杀敌贼一万六千多人。
English: In the fifth year, Zhang Yuanxun followed the governor Ling Yunyi to wage a large-scale campaign against the enemies around Luo, killing more than 16,000 of them.

古文：进都督，改荫锦衣。
现代文：晋升为都督，改世荫锦衣卫官。
English: He was promoted to the governor of the capital, and became a ceremonial bodyguard.

古文：寻以疾致仕，卒于家。
现代文：不久因病辞职，死在家里。
English: He soon resigned due to illness and died at home.

古文：元勋起小校。大小百十战，威名震岭南。
现代文：张元勋出身小校，身经大小战斗百十次，威名震岭南。
English: Zhang Yuanxun was born in a small school. He has been through a hundred battles of all sizes. He is famous in the south of Shilin.

古文：与广西李锡并称良将。
现代文：他与广西李锡并称良将。
English: He and Guangxi Li Xi are both considered to be good generals.

