古文：宣帝九男，穆张皇后生景帝、文帝、平原王干，伏夫人生汝南文成王亮、琅邪武王伷、清惠亭侯京、扶风武王骏，张夫人生梁王肜，柏夫人生赵王伦。
现代文：宣帝有九个儿子，穆张皇后生景帝、文帝、平原司马王干，伏夫人生汝南文成王司马亮、琅邪武王司马伷、清惠亭侯司马京、扶风武王司马骏，张夫人生梁王司马肜，柏夫人生赵王司马伦。
English: Emperor Xuan had nine sons. Empress Mu Zhang gave birth to Emperors Jing and Wen, Emperor Pingyuan gave birth to Emperors Sima and Wang Gan, Empress Fu gave birth to Emperors Yunan and Wencheng, Emperors Sima and Wang Liang, Emperors Xizhong and Wang Zhaowu, Emperors Qing Huiting and Hou and Wang Fufu, Emperors Zhang gave birth to Emperors Liang and Wang Sima and Wang Gan, Emperors Zhang gave birth to Emperors Liang and Wang Fufu, Emperors Zhang gave birth to Emperors Liang and Wang Fufu, Em

古文：亮及伦别有传。
现代文：司马亮及司马伦另有传。
English: Sima Liang and Sima Lun have other stories.

古文：平原王榦，字子良。
现代文：平原王司马干字子良。
English: Plain Wang Sima Gan Zi Liang.

古文：少以公子魏时封安阳亭侯，稍迁抚军中郎将，进爵平阳乡侯。
现代文：年少时以公子身份在魏被封为安阳亭侯，逐渐迁任抚军中郎将，进爵平阳乡侯。
English: As a young man, he was given the title of lord of Anyangting in the Wei Dynasty. Gradually, he was transferred to the position of vice-commander of the Fuxing Army and became the lord of Pingyang Township.

古文：五等建，改封定陶伯。
现代文：五等爵位建立，改封定陶伯。
English: The fifth class of peerage was established, and the title of "Tao Bo" was established.

古文：武帝践阼，封平原王，邑万一千三百户，给鼓吹、驸马二匹，加侍中之服。
现代文：武帝登基，封他为平原王，封邑一万一千三百户，给鼓吹、驾副车的马两匹，加侍中的服饰。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was named the King of the Plain, with 11,300 fiefs, two horses for preaching and driving the second carriage, and the attire of an attendant.

古文：咸宁初，遣诸王之国，干有笃疾，性理不恆，而颇清虚静退，简于情欲，故特诏留之。
现代文：咸宁初年，派遣诸王赴封国，司马干有重病，不能保持理性，而又很喜好清静虚无退让，很少欲望，因而特地下韶书留下他。
English: In the first year of Xianning, Sima Gan was seriously ill and unable to maintain rationality, but he was very fond of peace and quiet, and had little desire. Therefore, he left him in secret.

古文：太康末，拜光禄大夫，加侍中，特假金章紫绶，班次三司。
现代文：太康末年，官拜光禄大夫，加任侍中，特别假用金印章紫绶带，列位同于三司。
English: At the end of Taikang's life, he was given the title of Baiguanglu Doctor, and was also appointed as an attendant, and was given a special fake gold seal with a purple ribbon. He was also ranked in the Third Division.

古文：惠帝即位，进左光禄大夫，侍中如故，剑履上殿，入朝不趋。
现代文：惠帝即位，进位为左光禄大夫，侍中的职位依旧，佩剑穿鞋上殿，入朝不用小步急行。
English: Emperor Hui ascended to the throne. He was promoted to the position of Doctor of the Left Hand, and the position of chamberlain remained the same. He wore a sword and shoes to enter the palace. He did not have to walk the short distance to enter the court.

古文：榦虽王大国，不事其务，有所调补，必以才能。
现代文：司马干虽然是大封国的王，不料理政务，如果有调职补任，必定根据才能。
English: Although Sima Gan is the king of a large fiefdom, he does not handle government affairs. If there is a transfer of posts, it must be based on ability.

古文：虽有爵禄，若不在己，秩奉布帛，皆露积腐烂。
现代文：虽然有爵位俸禄，好像不在自己身上，俸禄布帛，都堆在露天腐烂。
English: Although there is a knighthood salary, it does not seem to be on their own, and the salary cloths are all piled up in the open and rotting.

古文：阴雨则出犊车而内露车，或问其故，对曰： 露者宜内也。 
现代文：阴雨天则赶出牛车而让没有帷盖的车入库，有人间是什么缘故，回答说： 没有帷盖的车适宜收藏。 
English: On cloudy and rainy days, ox carts were driven out and cars without curtains were put into the garage. Some people asked why, and replied: Cars without curtains are suitable for collection.

古文：朝士造之，虽通姓名，必令立车马于门外，或终夕不见。
现代文：朝廷官员走访他，虽然通报了姓名，必定让来人的车马停立在门外，或许一整天也不见。
English: When he was visited by court officials, even though his name was announced, they would make the visitors' car and horse stand outside the door, and he might not be seen for the whole day.

古文：时有得观，与人物酬接，亦恂恂恭逊，初无阙失。
现代文：有时得以拜见，和别人应酬交往，也很恭敬谦逊，起初没有缺漏失误。
English: Sometimes I was able to visit, socialize with others, and I was also very respectful and humble. At first, there were no mistakes.

古文：前后爱妾死，既敛，辄不钉棺，置后空室中，数日一发视，或行淫秽，须其尸坏乃葬之。
现代文：前后爱妾死，已经入殓，总是不钉上棺材，放在后面的空房中，每隔几天打开看一次，或许做些淫秽事，等到尸体腐烂才下葬。
English: After the death of a beloved concubine, the coffin, which is always not nailed, is placed in an empty room in the back, opened every few days to see if there is anything obscene, and the body is not buried until it has decomposed.

古文：赵王伦辅政，以榦为卫将军。
现代文：赵王司马伦辅佐朝政，任命司马干为卫将军。
English: Zhao Wang appointed Sima Gan as Wei general.

古文：惠帝反正，复为侍中，加太保。
现代文：惠帝废而复立，司马干又做诗中，加任太保。
English: Hui Di was abolished and reinstated, Sima Gan was made a poet, and he was appointed as Taibao.

古文：齐王冏之平赵王伦也，宗室朝士皆以牛酒劳冏，榦独怀百钱，见冏乂之，曰： 赵王逆乱，汝能义举，是汝之功，今以百钱贺汝。
现代文：齐王司马同平定赵王司马伦时，宗室成员朝廷官吏都用牛酒慰劳司马同，惟独司马干怀揣百钱，见到司马同拿出来，说： 赵王叛逆作乱，你能行义举，是你的功劳，现在用百钱来祝贺你。
English: When King Sima Tong of Qi subdued King Sima Lun of Zhao, the members of the royal family and the officials of the imperial court all consoled Sima Tong with cow wine. However, Sima Gan, who was carrying a hundred money, saw Sima Tong take it out and said, "King Zhao rebelled and caused a disturbance. It is to your credit that you can perform a good deed. Now I will congratulate you with a hundred money."

古文：虽然，大势难居，不可不慎。 
现代文：虽然这样，你很难占有大势，不能不谨慎。 
English: Even so, it is difficult for you to occupy the general trend, and you must be cautious.

古文：冏既辅政，榦诣之，冏出迎拜。
现代文：司马间辅佐朝政后，司马干去拜访，司马同出来迎拜。
English: After Sima Ma assisted the imperial government, Sima Gan went to visit, and Sima Tong came out to greet him.

古文：榦入，踞其床，不命冏坐，语之曰： 汝勿效白女兒， 其意指伦也。
现代文：司马干进屋后，蹲坐在司马冈的床上，不让司马同坐下，对他说： 你不要效仿女人。 这话的意思是指司马伦。
English: After Sima Gan entered the house, he squatted down on Sima Gang's bed, not allowing Sima to sit down with him, and said to him, "Don't imitate a woman."

古文：及冏诛，榦哭之恸，谓左右曰： 宗室日衰，唯此兒最可，而复害之，从今殆矣！ 
现代文：等到司马同被杀，司马干哭得很是悲痛，对左右的人说： 宗室逐渐衰败，衹有这个儿子最行，而又杀害了他，从今以后危险了! 
English: When Sima Tong was killed, Sima Gan wept bitterly and said to the people around him, "The family house is gradually deteriorating. You had this son who was the best, but you killed him. From now on, you are in danger!"

古文：东海王越兴义，至洛阳，往视干，干闭门不通。
现代文：东海王司马越举义，到达洛阳，去看望司马干，司马干闭门不出。
English: The king of the East Sea, Sima Yueyi, arrived in Luoyang to visit Sima Gan. Sima Gan did not go out behind closed doors.

古文：越驻车良久，干乃使人谢遣，而自于门间窥之。
现代文：司马越的车停留了很久，司马干才派人送客，而自己从门缝中窥视。
English: Sima Yue's car stayed for a long time. Sima Gan sent someone to see the guests off, while he peered through the cracks in the door.

古文：当时莫能测其意，或谓之有疾，或以为晦迹焉。
现代文：当时没人能测度他的用意，有人说他有病，有人认为他隐晦行迹。
English: At the time, no one could gauge his intentions. Some said he was ill, others thought he was hiding.

古文：永嘉五年薨，时年八十。
现代文：永嘉五年去世，时年八十岁。
English: Yongjia died five years later, at the age of 80.

古文：会刘聪寇洛，不遑赠谥，有二子，世子广早卒，次子永以太熙中封安德县公，散骑常侍，皆为善士。
现代文：适逢刘聪入侵洛阳，没有闲暇赠他谧号。有两个儿子，长子司马广死得早，次子司马永于太熙年问被封为安德县公，散骑常侍，他们都是好人。
English: When Liu Cong invaded Luoyang, there was no time to give him a posthumous title. He had two sons, the eldest son Sima Guang died early, the second son Sima Yong was named the Andes County Governor in the Tahei era, and rode horseback. They were all good people.

古文：遇难，合门堙灭。
现代文：遇难，满门灭绝。
English: The ship was wrecked and the entire crew was wiped out.

古文：琅邪武王伷，字子将，正始初封南安亭侯。
现代文：琅邪武王司马佃字子将，正始初年被封为南安亭侯。
English: The evil warlord Sima Qian's son-in-law was named the Prince of Nan'an for the first time.

古文：早有才望，起家为宁朔将军，监守鄴城，有绥怀之称。
现代文：很早就有才气名望，最初做官为宁朔将军，监守邺城，有善于安抚使人归顺的名声。
English: He was famous for his talent from early on. He first served as the general of Ningshuo, guarding Lucheng, and had a reputation for being good at appeasing people.

古文：累迁散骑常侍，进封东武乡侯，拜右将军、监兗州诸军事、兗州刺史。
现代文：逐渐迁任散骑常侍，晋封束武乡侯，官拜右将军、监兖州诸军事、兖州刺史。
English: Gradually, he was transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, promoted to the position of provincial governor, appointed to the position of county magistrate, promoted to the position of provincial governor, promoted to the position of right general, appointed to the position of the military governor of Zhangzhou, and appointed to the position of the military governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：五等初建，封南皮伯。
现代文：五等爵位建立，封为南皮伯。
English: The fifth class of peerage was established, with the title of South Peebles.

古文：转征虏将军、假节，武帝践阼，封东莞郡王，邑万六百户。
现代文：转任征虏将军、假节。武帝登皇位，封他为东莞郡王，封邑一万零六百户。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was named the king of Dongguan County, with 10,600 fiefs.

古文：始置二卿，特诏诸王自选令长。
现代文：开始设置二卿时，特地下诏让诸王自选令长。
English: At the beginning of the establishment of the two nobles, it was specifically decreed that the kings should choose their own commanders.

古文：伷表让，不许。
现代文：司马佃上表推让，皇上不准许。
English: Sima Yu made concessions at the table, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：入为尚书右仆射、抚军将军，出为镇东大将军、假节、徐州诸军事，代卫瓘镇下邳。
现代文：入朝为尚书右仆射、抚军将军，出任镇束大将军、假节、都督徐州诸军事，代替卫璀镇守下邳。
English: He entered the imperial court as Shangshu's right-hand man and general of the army, and served as the general of the town of Zhenzhu, the general of the festival, the military governor of Xuzhou, and the commander of the town of Weihai.

古文：伷镇御有方，得将士死力，吴人惮之。
现代文：司马佃镇守御敌有方，将士们愿以死效力，吴国人怕他。
English: Sima Qian guarded the town against the enemy. The soldiers were willing to fight to the death. The people of Wu were afraid of him.

古文：加开府仪同三司，改封琅邪王，以东莞益其国。
现代文：加授开府仪同三司，改封琅邪王，用东莞来扩充他的封国。
English: He was additionally awarded the title of Kaifu and the Three Departments, changed his title to the King of Evil, and used Dongguan to expand his fief.

古文：平吴之役，率众数万出涂中，孙皓奉笺送玺绶，诣伷请降，诏曰： 琅邪王伷督率所统，连据涂中，使贼不得相救。
现代文：在平定县厘的战役中，率领几万人从途生出兵，孙皓奉送书信玺绶，到司马佃那裹请求投降。韶书说： 琅邪王司马伯督率着自己统管的军队，连接占据涂中，使敌人不能相救。
English: In the battle of Pingding County, Sun Yat-sen led tens of thousands of people to send troops from Tongsheng. Sun Yat-sen sent a letter to Sima Yat-sen to request his surrender. The letter said: "The evil king Sima Bo-duk led his army and occupied Tu-zhong, making it impossible for the enemy to save themselves.

古文：又使琅邪相刘弘等进军逼江，贼震惧，遣使奉伪玺绶。
现代文：又派堕邪相刘弘等人进军逼近长江，敌人震惊恐惧，派使者奉送伪玺绶。
English: He also sent the fallen evil emperor Liu Hong and others to march closer to the Yangtze River, the enemy was shocked and frightened, and sent an envoy to send a fake raft.

古文：又使长史王恆率诸军渡江，破贼边守，获督蔡机，斩道降附五六万计，诸葛靓、孙奕皆归命请死，功勋茂著。其封子二人为亭侯，各三千户，赐绢六千匹。 
现代文：司马佃又派长史王恒率各部渡长江，攻破敌人边防守备，捕获督蓝毯，斩首及投降归附的有五六万人，谴姜担、遝塞等人都归顺请罪。司马佃功勋显著，封他两个儿子为亭侯，各封三千户，赐绢六千匹。 
English: Sima Qian also sent the head of Shi Wang Heng to cross the Yangtze River with the leaders of various departments, broke through the enemy's border defense preparations, captured the blue blanket, beheaded and surrendered to the attachment of 560,000 people, and condemned Jiangtang, Yu Xie and others to submit to the crime. Sima Qian's merits are remarkable, and his two sons were appointed as pavilion lords, with 3,000 households and 6,000 horses each.

古文：顷之，并督青州诸军事，加侍中之服。
现代文：不久，一并督青州诸军事，加侍中的服饰。
English: Soon, all the generals of Qingzhou were in military attire, as well as the attendants.

古文：进拜大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：进位为大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general, and the ceremony of opening the government and the three offices were abolished.

古文：伷既戚属尊重，加有平吴之功，克己恭俭，无矜满之色，僚吏尽力，百姓怀化。
现代文：司马佃既因为是皇亲国戚而地位尊贵，又有平定吴的功劳，克制自己恭敬不放纵，没有矜功自满的样子，僚属尽力，百姓感化依附。
English: Sima Yu not only has a high status because he is a relative of the emperor and a relative of the country, but also has the merit of pacifying Wu, restraining himself from respect and indulgence, and not being complacent about his achievements. His colleagues are doing their best, and the people are influenced and attached.

古文：疾笃，赐床帐、衣服、钱帛、秔梁等物，遣侍中问焉。
现代文：病重，赐床帐、衣服、钱帛、粳粱等物品，派遣侍中去问候他。
English: He was seriously ill, and they gave him a bed sheet, clothes, money, socks, and other items, and sent a servant to greet him.

古文：太康四年薨，时年五十七。
现代文：太康四年去世，时年五十七岁。
English: Taikang died four years later at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：临终表求葬母太妃陵次，并乞分国封四子，帝许之。
现代文：临终上表请求葬在母太妃陵墓旁，并请求把自己的封国分封给四个儿子，皇帝答应了。
English: On his deathbed, he asked to be buried next to the mausoleum of his mother, the Empress Dowager, and requested that his fief be divided among his four sons. The emperor agreed.

古文：子恭王觐立。
现代文：儿子恭王司马塑继承王位。
English: The son of King Gong, Sima Shuo, succeeded to the throne.

古文：又封次子澹为武陵王，繇为东安王，漼为淮陵王。
现代文：又封次子墨擅为逮匿王，司马繇为东安王，司马淮为淮陵王。
English: In addition, the second son of Fu Huan was the King of Guanxi, Sima Qian was the King of Dong'an, and Sima Huai was the King of Huairing.

古文：觐字思祖，拜冗从仆射。
现代文：司马觐字思祖，官拜冗从仆射。
English: Sima Qian is a kind of thinker, and the government worships and obeys Zhu Yao.

古文：太熙元年薨，时年三十五。
现代文：太熙元年去世，时年三十五岁。
English: Tae Hee died in 1981, at the age of thirty-five.

古文：子睿立，是为元帝。
现代文：儿子司马睿继承王位，也就是五童。
English: His son Sima Rui will succeed to the throne, that is, five children.

古文：中兴初，以皇子裒为琅邪王，奉恭王祀。
现代文：恢复帝业之初，让皇子司马裒做堕墨王，供奉恭王的祭祀。
English: At the beginning of the restoration of imperial rule, the prince Sima Zang was made the Fallen Ink King to offer sacrifices to King Gong.

古文：裒早薨，更以皇子焕为琅邪王。
现代文：司马裒死得早，改让皇子司马焕做琅邪王。
English: Sima Yao died early, so the prince Sima Huan became the evil king.

古文：其日薨，复以皇子昱为琅邪王。
现代文：那天去世，又以皇子司马昱为琅邪王。
English: He died that day, and was succeeded by his son Sima Qian as the evil king.

古文：咸和之初，既徙封会稽，成帝又以康帝为琅邪王，康帝即位，封成帝长子哀帝为琅邪王。
现代文：咸和初年，司马昱改封到会稽后，成帝又让康帝做琅邪王。康帝即位，封成帝长子哀帝为琅邪王。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Sima Yi was transferred to the position of Censor, and Emperor Cheng also made Emperor Kang the Evil King. Emperor Kang ascended to the throne, and Emperor Cheng's eldest son Emperor Ai was made the Evil King.

古文：哀帝即位，以废帝为琅邪王。
现代文：哀帝即位，让废帝做琅邪王。
English: Emperor Pai ascended to the throne, leaving the deposed emperor as the evil king.

古文：废帝即位，以会稽王摄行琅邪国祀。
现代文：废帝即位，以会稽王代理琅邪国的祭祀。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and the sacrificial rites of the evil kingdom were carried out by the king's representative.

古文：简文帝登阼，琅邪王无嗣。
现代文：简文帝登基，琅邪王没人继承。
English: Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, and there was no one to succeed the evil king.

古文：及帝临崩，封少子道子为琅邪王。
现代文：等到皇帝临终，封小儿子道子为琅邪王。
English: When the emperor was on his deathbed, he appointed his youngest son, Doji, as the evil king.

古文：道子后为会稽王，更以恭帝为琅邪王。
现代文：道子后来做会稽王，改让恭帝做琅邪王。
English: Later, Doji became the king of party discipline, and gave the throne to Gongdi to become the king of evil.

古文：帝既即位，琅邪国除。
现代文：恭帝即位后，琅邪国取消。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gong, the imperial edict was revoked.

古文：武陵庄王澹字思弘。
现代文：武陵庄王司马澹字思弘。
English: Wulingzhuang Wang Simatang, also known as Sihong.

古文：初为冗从仆射，后封东武公，邑五千二百户。
现代文：起初任冗从仆射，后来被封为东武公，封邑五千二百户。
English: At first, Ren Zhao was subordinate to Hubei, and later he was given the title of Dongwu Gong, with 5,200 fiefs.

古文：转前将军、中护军。
现代文：转任前将军、中护军。
English: He was transferred to the post of the former general, the middle guard.

古文：性忌害，无孝友之行。
现代文：生性忌妒害人，没有孝顺友善的品行。
English: People who are envious by nature do not have filial piety and friendliness.

古文：弟东安王繇有令名，为父母所爱，澹恶之如仇，遂谮繇于汝南王亮，亮素与繇有隙，奏废徙之。
现代文：弟弟东安王司马繇有好名声，被父母所爱，司马澹讨厌他如同仇人，于是在汝南王司马亮那裹说司马繇的坏话，司马亮平素和司马繇有矛盾，奏请废置迁徙他。
English: His younger brother, Dongan King Sima Ye, had a good reputation and was loved by his parents, but Sima Ye hated him like an enemy. Therefore, he said bad things about Sima Ye in the presence of King Sima Liang of Yunnan. Sima Liang and Sima Ye were always at odds, so he asked for his removal.

古文：赵王伦作乱，以澹为领军将军。
现代文：赵王司马伦作乱，让司马澹作领军将军。
English: Zhao Wang Sima Lun caused a riot, leaving Sima Ye as the leading general.

古文：澹素与河内郭俶、俶弟侃亲善。
现代文：司马澹一向与河内郭俶、司马俶的弟弟亲善。
English: Sima Ye has always been friendly with Hanoi Guo Ye, Sima Ye's younger brother.

古文：酒酣，俶等言张华之冤，澹性酗酒，因并杀之，送首于伦，其酗虐如此。
现代文：酒喝到兴头上，壑也等人说到退茎的冤屈，司马澹生性酗酒，于是把两人都杀了，把首级送给司马伦，他就这样撤酒疯行暴虐。
English: They drank until they were merry, and Zou and the others talked about the grievances of the retiring stalks, and Sima Xing was born with alcoholism, so he killed both of them and gave the head to Sima Lun. In this way, he went mad from drinking and became violent.

古文：澹妻郭氏，贾后内妹也。
现代文：司马澹的妻子塑氐，是置后的内妹。
English: Sima Yao's wife, Shu Yao, is the youngest sister.

古文：初恃势，无礼于澹母。
现代文：起初凭仗着家势，对司马澹的母亲无礼。
English: At first, he was rude to Sima Yi's mother, relying on the family name.

古文：齐王冏辅政，澹母诸葛太妃表澹不孝，乞还繇，由是澹与妻子徙辽东。
现代文：齐王司马同辅佐朝政，司马澹母诸葛太妃上表说司马澹不孝，乞求让回来，因此司马澹与妻儿迁徙到辽塞。
English: The king of Qi, Sima Tongfu, who was an aide-de-camp to the court, and Sima Yan's mother, Zhuge Taifei, publicly said that Sima Yan was not filial and begged to be allowed to return, so Sima Yan and his wife and children moved to Liaosai.

古文：其子禧年五岁，不肯随去，曰： 耍当为父求还，无为俱徙。 
现代文：他儿子司马禧年纪五岁，不肯跟着去，说： 应当为父亲请求回来，不该一起迁徙。 
English: His five-year-old son, Sima Xi, refused to go with him, saying: "You should ask your father to come back, you shouldn't migrate together."

古文：陈诉历年，太妃薨，繇被害，然后得还。
现代文：陈诉多年，太妃去世，司马繇被害，然后得以回朝。
English: The case went on for many years, the princess died, Sima Ye was killed, and then he was able to return to the imperial court.

古文：拜光禄大夫、尚书、太子太傅，改封武陵王。
现代文：官拜光禄大夫、尚书、太子太傅，改封武陵王。
English: He was given the official titles of Bai Guanglu Daifu, Shang Shu, and Prince Taifu, and was also given the title of Wuling Wang.

古文：永嘉末为石勒所害，子哀王喆立。
现代文：永嘉末年被石勒杀害，儿子哀王司马喆继嗣。
English: At the end of Yongjia's life, he was killed by Shi Le, and his son, Ai Wang Simasong, became his successor.

古文：喆字景林，拜散骑常侍，亦为勒所害。
现代文：司马喆字景林，官拜散骑常侍，也被石勒杀害。
English: Sima Qian Zi Jinglin, a regular attendant at the official banquet, was also killed by Shi Le.

古文：无子，其后元帝立皇子晞为武陵王，以奉澹祀焉。
现代文：没有儿子，后来元帝立皇子司马晞为武陵王，来供奉司马澹的祭祀。
English: There was no son, and later the Yuan Emperor appointed the prince Sima Ye as the King of Wuling to offer the sacrifice of Sima Ye.

古文：东安王繇字思玄。
现代文：东安王司马繇字思玄。
English: Dong'an Wang Simatang Zi Xuan.

古文：初拜东安公，历散骑黄门侍郎，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：起初为东安公，历任散骑黄门侍郎，迁任散骑常侍。
English: At first, he was Dongan Gong, and successively he served as Zangjie Huangmen Zirong, and then he was transferred to Zangjie Changzirong.

古文：美须髯，性刚毅，有威望，博学多才，事亲孝，居丧尽礼。
现代文：胡子长得美，性情刚毅，有威望，博学多才，事奉亲人孝顺，居丧穷尽礼仪。
English: The beard is beautiful, the temperament is tough, there is prestige, erudition and versatility, serving relatives with filial piety, and exhausting etiquette.

古文：诛杨骏之际，繇屯云龙门，兼统诸军，以功拜右卫将军，领射声校尉，进封郡王，邑二万户，加侍中，兼典军大将军，领右卫如故。
现代文：诛杀杨骏时，司马繇屯兵于云龙置，兼统领众军，因有功官拜右卫将军，兼射声校尉，晋封为郡王，封邑两万户，加任侍中，兼典军大将军，仍兼任右卫将军。
English: At the time of the assassination of Yang Hui, Sima Yu was garrisoned in Yunlongji, and he was also the leader of the army. Due to his meritorious service, he was promoted to the rank of General Bai Yuwei, and he was also promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Jie Sheng. He was also promoted to the rank of county king, 20,000 households in the county, and he was also promoted to the rank of Vice Admiral, and he was also promoted to the rank of Grand General of the Army, and he was still concurrently the General of the Right Division.

古文：迁尚书右仆射，加散骑常侍。
现代文：迁任尚书右仆射，加任散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shoshu's right-hand man, and was also assigned to the position of Sangi's regular attendant.

古文：是日诛赏三百余人，皆自繇出。
现代文：这一天诛罚赏赐三百余人，命令都从司马繇那裹发出。
English: On this day, more than 300 people were punished and rewarded, and the orders were all issued from Sima Gan.

古文：东夷校尉文俶父钦为繇外祖诸葛诞所杀，繇虑俶为舅家之患，是日亦以非罪诛俶。
现代文：束夷校尉文仿的父亲塞敛被旦屋登的外祖诸姜诞所杀，旦屋逊担心塞坦是舅舅家的祸患，造天也把文做无罪而杀掉。
English: Captain Shokui's father, Zazen, was killed by Tan Yaten's maternal ancestor, Zhu Jiangzhao. Tan Yaten was worried that Zazen was a scourge to his uncle's family, so he killed him without any guilt.

古文：繇兄澹屡构繇于汝南王亮，亮不纳。
现代文：司马繇的哥哥司马澹屡次在汝南王司马亮那裹给司马亮罪名，司马亮不听信。
English: Sima Liang's brother Sima Liang repeatedly accused Sima Liang in the court of King Sima Liang of Yunnan Province, but Sima Liang did not listen.

古文：至是以繇专行诛赏，澹因隙谮之，亮惑其说，遂免繇官，以公就第，坐有悖言，废徙带方。
现代文：到此时因司马繇在诛罚赏赐上独断专行，司马澹乘机说司马繇的坏话，司马亮被司：锤的说辞迷惑，于是免了繇圣的官，以公的身份回宅第，因有悖逆言论获罪，废置迁徙到带方。
English: At this time, because Sima Yi acted arbitrarily in awarding rewards and punishments, Sima Yi took the opportunity to speak ill of Sima Yi. Sima Liang was confused by Sima Yi's words, so he released the sacred official, returned home as a public figure, was found guilty of rebellious speech, and moved to the capital.

古文：永康初，征繇，复封，拜宗正卿，迁尚书，转左仆射。
现代文：永康初年，征召司马繇，恢复封爵，官拜宗正卿，迁任尚书，转任左仆射。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, Sima Ye was conscripted, his knighthood was restored, he was given the official title of Zong Zhengqing, he was transferred to the post of Shang Shu, and he was transferred to the post of Zuo Shu.

古文：惠帝之讨成都王颖，时繇遭母丧在鄴，劝颖解兵而降。
现代文：惠帝讨伐成都王司马颖时，正值司马繇在邺为母亲办丧事，劝司马颖放下兵器投降。
English: When Hui Di attacked Wang Sima Ying in Chengdu, Sima Ying was at her mother's funeral in Handan and persuaded Sima Ying to lay down her weapons and surrender.

古文：及王师败绩，颖怨繇，乃害之。
现代文：等到皇帝的军队战败，司马颖怨恨司马繇，于是杀了他。
English: When the emperor's army was defeated, Sima Ying held a grudge against Sima Yu and killed him.

古文：后立琅邪王觐子长乐亭侯浑为东安王，以奉繇祀。
现代文：后来立琅邪王司马觐的儿子长乐亭侯司马浑为束安王，来供奉司马繇的祭祀。
English: Later, the son of the evil king Sima Qian, Chao Leting Hou Sima Hun, was appointed as the king of Sokan to offer sacrifices to Sima Qian.

古文：寻薨，国除。
现代文：不久去世，封国被取消。
English: He died soon after, and the state seal was cancelled.

古文：淮陵元王漼字思冲。
现代文：淮陵元王司马淮字思冲。
English: Huairing Yuan Wang Sima Huai Zi thought of rushing.

古文：初封广陵公，食邑二千九百户。
现代文：起初被封为广陵公，采邑两千九百户。
English: At first, he was given the title of Guangling Gong, with 2,900 households in the county.

古文：历左将军、散骑常侍。
现代文：历任左将军、散骑常侍。
English: Successive left generals, horseback riding attendants.

古文：赵王伦之篡也，三王起义，漼与左卫将军王舆攻杀孙秀，因而废伦。
现代文：赵王司马伦篡位时，三王起义，司马灌和左卫将军王舆攻杀孙秀，因而废了司马伦。
English: When Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne, the three kings revolted, Sima Guan and the left guard general Wang Ying attacked and killed Sun Xiu, thus abolishing Sima Lun.

古文：以功进封淮陵王，入为尚书，加侍中，转宗正、光禄大夫。
现代文：因有功进位为淮陵王，入朝任尚书，加任侍中，转任宗正、光禄大夫。
English: He was promoted to King of Huairing for his meritorious service, and was appointed to the post of Shangshu when he entered the imperial court. He was also appointed to the post of Jizhong (侍中) and then to the posts of Zongzheng (宗正) and Guanglu Dafu (光禄大夫).

古文：薨，子贞王融立。
现代文：去世，儿子贞王司马融继嗣。
English: He died and was succeeded by his son, Zhenwang Sima Rong.

古文：薨，无子，安帝时立武陵威王孙蕴为淮陵王，以奉元王之祀，位至散骑常侍。
现代文：去世，没有儿子，安帝时立武陵威王的孙子司马蕴为淮陵王，来供奉元王的祭祀，官位做到散骑常侍。
English: He died without a son, and Sima Yun, the grandson of King Wuling Wei of the Andean Dynasty, became King Huairing, came to offer the sacrifice of the former king, and achieved the official rank of horseback riding attendant.

古文：薨，无子，以临川王宝子安之为嗣。
现代文：去世，没有儿子，以临!王司马宝的儿子安之继嗣。
English: He died without a son and was succeeded by Erin, the son of Wang Sima Bao.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：清惠亭侯京，字子佐，魏末以公子赐爵。
现代文：清惠亭侯司马京字子佐，魏末年以公子身份被赐予爵位。
English: He was given a peerage as a noble son at the end of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：年二十四薨，追赠射声校尉，以文帝子机字太玄为嗣。
现代文：二十四岁去世，追赠射声校尉，让文帝的儿子司马机字太玄继嗣。
English: He died at the age of twenty-four and was posthumously awarded the rank of lieutenant of the firing squad, so that Emperor Wen's son, Sima Ji, surnamed Taigen, could become his successor.

古文：泰始元年，封燕王，邑六千六百六十三户。
现代文：泰始元年，封为燕王，封邑六千六百六十三产。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taishi, he was given the title of "King of the Swallows" and made 6,663 products.

古文：机之国，咸宁初征为步兵校尉，以渔阳郡益其国，加侍中之服。
现代文：司马机去封国，咸宁初年征召他为步兵校尉，用渔阳郡来扩充他的封国，加侍中的服饰。
English: The driver of the horse went to seal the country, and in the first year, Xianning recruited him as an infantry lieutenant, using Yuyang County to expand his seal the country and add the dress of the attendant.

古文：拜青州都督、镇东将军、假节，以北平、上谷、广宁郡一万三百三十七户增燕国为二万户。
现代文：官拜青州都督、镇束将军、假节，用北平、上谷、广密郡一万零三百三十七户把燕国增至两万户。
English: The officials paid homage to the governor of Qingzhou, the general of the township of Zhenzu and the holiday, and used the 10,337 households in Beiping, Shanggu and Guangmi counties to increase the number of households in Yan'an to 20,000.

古文：薨，无子，齐王冏表以子几嗣。
现代文：去世，没有儿子，齐王司马间上表用自己的儿子司马几继嗣。
English: Having died without a son, King Sima of Qi used his own son Sima Qian as his successor.

古文：后冏败，国除。
现代文：后来司马同失败，封国被取消。
English: Later, Sima Tong failed, and the fiefdom was cancelled.

古文：扶风武王骏，字子臧。
现代文：扶风武王司马骏字子臧。
English: Fu Feng Wu Wang Sima Yao Zi Yao.

古文：幼聪惠，年五六岁能书疏，讽诵经籍，见者奇之。
现代文：年幼时聪惠，五六岁能书写奏疏，朗诵经籍，看到的人称奇。
English: When she was young, Cong Hui, five or six years old, could write songs and recite scriptures. People were amazed when they saw her.

古文：及长，清贞守道，宗室之中最为俊望，魏景初中，封平阳亭侯。
现代文：等到长大，清静贞正遵守道义，在宗室中最有美名。魏景初年中，被封为平阳亭侯。
English: When she grew up, Qing Jingzhen adhered to morality and had the most beautiful name in the family. In the first year of Wei Jing, she was given the title of Pingyang Tinghou.

古文：齐王芳立，骏年八岁，为散骑常侍侍讲焉。
现代文：齐王曹芳即位，司马骏八岁，做散骑常侍侍讲。
English: Qi Wang Cao Fang ascended to the throne, Sima Yao was eight years old, and became a strolling attendant.

古文：寻迁步兵、屯骑校尉，常侍如故。
现代文：不久迁任步兵、屯骑校尉，常侍的职位依旧。
English: He was soon transferred to an infantryman and a cavalry captain, but his position as a regular attendant remained the same.

古文：进爵乡侯，出为平南将军、假节、都督淮北诸军事，改封平寿侯，转安东将军。
现代文：进爵为乡侯，出任平南将军、假节、都督淮北诸军事，改封平寿侯，转任安束将军。
English: He was ennobled as a township lord, served as the military general of Pingnan, the false festival, and the governor of Huaibei, changed his title to Pingshou Hou, and was transferred to the general of Anzukou.

古文：咸熙初，徙封东牟侯，转安东大将军，镇许昌。
现代文：咸熙初年，改封东牟侯，转任安东大将军，镇守许昌。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianxi, he was given the title of Dongmou, transferred to the post of General Anton, and became the town guard of Xuchang.

古文：武帝践阼，进封汝阴王，邑万户，都督豫州诸军事。
现代文：武帝登上皇位后，晋封为汝阴王，封邑一万户，都督豫州诸军事。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he was promoted to King of Ruyin, with ten thousand households in fiefs and the military as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：吴将丁奉寇芍陂，骏督诸军距退之。
现代文：吴国将领丁奉入侵芍陂，司马骏督率诸军抵御击退敌军。
English: Ding Bong, the general of the State of Wu, invaded Yunnan, and Sima Yu, the governor of Yunnan, led the troops to resist and repel the enemy forces.

古文：迁使持节、都督扬州诸军事，代石苞镇寿春。
现代文：迁任使持节、都督扬州诸军事，代替石苞镇守寿春。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the Jichiji Festival and the military governor of Yangzhou, replacing the governor of Shishu Town, Shuchun.

古文：寻复都督豫州，还镇许昌。
现代文：不久又都督豫州，回去镇守许昌。
English: Soon he became the governor of Yuzhou again and returned to the town of Xuchang.

古文：迁镇西大将军、使持节、都督雍凉等州诸军事，代汝南王亮镇关中，加衮冕侍中之服。
现代文：迁任镇西大将军、使持节、都督雍凉等州诸军事，代替汝南王司马亮镇守关中，加授衮冕侍中的服饰。
English: He was transferred to the military of the Zhenxi Grand General, the Envoys' Festival, the Governor of Yongliang and other states, and replaced the Runan King Sima Liang as the guard of the town, and was awarded the costume of the crowned attendant.

古文：骏善扶御，有威恩，劝督农桑，与士卒分役，已及僚佐并将帅兵士等人限田十亩，具以表闻。
现代文：司马骏善于安抚统治，有威严恩惠，劝告督促农业桑植，与士卒分担劳役，自己和幕僚助手以及将帅兵士等人限种田十亩，都上表报告。
English: Sima Qian was good at appeasing the government, had the dignity of grace, advised and urged agricultural mulberry planting, shared labor service with soldiers, and limited himself and staff assistants and generals and soldiers to ten mu of farmland, all of which were reported above.

古文：诏遣普下州县，使各务农事。
现代文：韶书命令普及到各州县，使人们各自从事农事。
English: The imperial edict spread to every prefecture and county, forcing people to engage in farming independently.

古文：咸宁初，羌虏树机能等叛，遣众讨之，斩三千余级。
现代文：咸宁初年，羌族树机能等人反叛，司马骏派遣众人讨伐他们，斩杀三千多人。
English: In the first year of Xianning, the Yao people rebelled, and Sima Yi sent people to fight them, killing more than three thousand people.

古文：进位征西大将军。开府辟召，仪同三司，持节、都督如故。
现代文：进位为征西大将军，建府署征召辅吏，任仪同三司，持节、都督职位依旧。
English: He was promoted to the position of General of the Western Expedition, the Construction Administration called up auxiliary officers, and he was appointed to the same position as the three departments, but he still held the position of the festival and the governor.

古文：又诏骏遣七千人代凉州守兵。
现代文：又下韶令司马骏派七千人代替凉州守兵。
English: He also ordered Sima Qian to send seven thousand people to replace the Liangzhou guards.

古文：树机能、侯弹勃等欲先劫佃兵，骏命平虏护军文俶督凉、秦、雍诸军各进屯以威之。
现代文：树机能、侯弹勃等人想先劫掠佃兵，司马骏命令平虏护军文仿督凉、秦、雍诸军各进军屯兵来威慑他们。
English: Shukuren, Hou Piao Bo and others wanted to loot and plunder the Han soldiers first. Sima Qian ordered to pacify and protect the troops, and the troops of Wen, Du Liang, Qin and Yong marched into the camp to deter them.

古文：机能乃遣所领二十部弹勃面缚军门，各遣入质子。
现代文：机能于是遣送自己统领的二十部及弹勃反绑自己来到军门，各自派自己儿子入为人质。
English: The functionaries then dispatched their commanders of the 20th Division and the 1st Battalion to the military gate, and each sent his son as a hostage.

古文：安定、北地、金城诸胡吉轲罗、侯金多及北虏热冏等二十万口又来降。
现代文：安定、北地、金城几地的胡人吉轲罗、侯金多及北虏热同等二十万人又来投降。
English: Stability, the north, Jincheng several places of the Hu people, Guizhong Luo, Hou Jintao and North Krupye equal to two hundred thousand people came to surrender.

古文：其年入朝，徙封扶风王，以氐户在国界者增封，给羽葆、鼓吹。
现代文：逭一年司马骏入朝，改封扶风王，用氐人户在封国界内的人增加他的封邑户数，给羽葆、鼓吹。
English: One year after Sima Qian entered the imperial court, he changed his fief to Fu Feng Wang and increased the number of households in his fief with the help of people within the fief's borders.

古文：太康初，进拜骠骑将军，开府、持节、都督如故。
现代文：太康初年，晋封为骠骑将军，开府、持节、都督的职位依旧。
English: In the first year of Taikang, he was promoted to the general of the imperial cavalry, and the positions of the head of the prefecture, the head of the festival, and the governor remained the same.

古文：骏有孝行，母伏太妃随兄亮在官，骏常涕泣思慕，若闻有疾，辄忧惧不食，或时委官定省。
现代文：司马骏有孝顺的品行，母亲伏太妃跟随兄长司马亮在官任上，司马骏常落泪思慕，如果听说母亲有病，就忧虑担心吃不下饭，有时放下官职去省视问安。
English: Sima Yi has a filial character. His mother, Princess Futa, followed his elder brother, Sima Liang, into official positions. Sima Yi often shed tears in contemplation. If he heard that his mother was ill, he would worry that he would not be able to eat. Sometimes, he would give up his official duties and go to the provincial capital to see if she was well.

古文：少好学，能著论，与荀顗论仁孝先后，文有可称。
现代文：年少时好学，能著书立论，与荀颌论述仁与孝的先后，文章有可称道之处。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn. He was able to write a book on benevolence and filial piety. The article is commendable.

古文：及齐王攸出镇，骏表谏恳切，以帝不从，遂发病薨。
现代文：等到齐王司马攸出京师去自己的封国，司马骏上表劝谏恳切，因为皇帝不从，于是发病去世。
English: When the king of Qi, Sima You, sent out the Beijing division to go to his own fiefdom, Sima Yan went to the table to advise him earnestly, because the emperor did not follow, so he died of the disease.

古文：追赠大司马，加侍中、假黄钺。
现代文：追赠大司马，加任侍中、假黄铁。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of grand steward, and was also appointed as an attendant and a fake yellow iron.

古文：西土闻其薨也，泣者盈路，百姓为之树碑，长老见碑无不下拜，其遗爱如此。
现代文：西部的人听说他死了，满路上的人为他哭泣，百姓为他立碑，长者老人见到碑没有不下拜的，他留下的爱戴就是这样。
English: People in the west heard that he had died, people all over the road cried for him, the people erected a monument for him, and the elderly did not fail to bow when they saw the monument. This is the love he left behind.

古文：有子十人，暢、歆最知名。
现代文：有十个儿子，司马畅、司马歆最知名。
English: They had ten sons, Sima Chang and Sima Yao being the most famous.

古文：暢字玄舒。
现代文：司马畅字客赶。
English: Sima Chang wrote, "Let's hurry."

古文：改封顺阳王，拜给事中、屯骑校尉、游击将军。
现代文：改封为顺阳王，官拜给事中、屯骑校尉、游击将军。
English: His title was changed to Shunyang Wang, and he was given the titles of official courtier, cavalry officer, and guerrilla general.

古文：永嘉末，刘聪入洛，不知所终。
现代文：丞台末年，塑坠进入盗厘，不知司马畅的结局。
English: At the end of his life, the plastic pendant went into pawnbroking, and he did not know the outcome of Sima Chang.

古文：新野庄王歆字弘舒。
现代文：新野庄王司马歆字弘舒。
English: Shinnosho Wang Simakoji, also known as Hongshu.

古文：武王薨后，兄暢推恩请分国封歆。
现代文：武王死了以后，兄长司马畅推广恩宠请求分割国土封给司马歆。
English: After the death of King Wu, his elder brother Sima Chang extended his favor and requested that the territory be divided and given to Sima Ye.

古文：太康中，诏封新野县公，邑千八百户，仪比县王。
现代文：太康年间，下韶封司马歆为新野县公，封邑一千八百户，礼仪舆县王相同。
English: During the Taikang era, Sima Ye, the lower eunuch, was the lord of Nino County. There were 1,800 households in the fief, and the etiquette was the same as that of the king of I County.

古文：歆虽少贵，而谨身履道。
现代文：司马歆虽然少年富贵，而能自身谨慎履行道义。
English: Although Sima Ye is a rich young man, he is able to carefully fulfill his moral duty.

古文：母臧太妃薨，居丧过礼，以孝闻。
现代文：母亲臧太妃去世，服丧超过礼制，因孝而闻名。
English: When his mother, Empress Dowager Cixi, died, he went beyond the formal mourning system and became famous for his filial piety.

古文：拜散骑常侍。
现代文：官拜散骑常侍。
English: He was a regular attendant of the imperial court.

古文：赵王伦篡位，以为南中郎将。
现代文：赵王司马伦篡位，以司马歆为南中郎将。
English: Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne, with Sima Ye as the Southern Vice Admiral.

古文：齐王冏举义兵，移檄天下，歆未知所从。
现代文：齐王司马同发动义兵，在天下传送檄文，司马歆不知该听谁的。
English: The king of Qi, Sima Tong, mobilized volunteers and transmitted the message around the world. Sima Tong didn't know who to listen to.

古文：嬖人王绥曰： 赵亲而强，齐疏而弱，公宜从赵。 
现代文：受宠的王绥说： 赵王亲近而强大，齐王疏远而弱小，公应追随赵王。 
English: The favored Wang Yao said: Zhao Wang is close and powerful, Qi Wang is distant and weak, the public should follow Zhao Wang.

古文：参军孙洵大言于众曰： 赵王凶逆，天下当共讨之，大义灭亲，古之明典。 
现代文：参军孙洵对众人大声说： 赵王凶虐叛逆，天下应当共同讨伐他，大义灭亲，是古代圣明的法则。 
English: Sun Yat-sen, who had joined the army, said loudly to the crowd: King Zhao was a cruel and rebellious man, and the whole world should fight against him together. It was the ancient sacred law to kill relatives in the name of justice.

古文：歆从之。
现代文：司马歆依从了他。
English: Sima Yi obeyed him.

古文：乃使洵诣冏，冏迎执其手曰： 使我得成大节者，新野公也。 
现代文：于是派孙洵去见司马同，司马间迎上去拉着他的手说： 使我能成就大的节操的，是新野公啊。 
English: So he sent Sun Yat-sen to see Sima Tong. Sima Tong greeted him, took him by the hand and said, "It is Lord Nino who has enabled me to achieve great self-restraint."

古文：冏入洛，歆躬贯甲胄，率所领导冏。
现代文：司马间进入洛阳，司马歆亲披甲胄，率领部下为司马间作向导。
English: Sima Ma entered Luoyang. Sima Qian put on armor and led his subordinates to act as guides for Sima Ma.

古文：以勋进封新野郡王，邑二万户。
现代文：因为有功晋封为新野郡王，封邑两万户。
English: Because of his meritorious service, he was promoted to the position of the king of Nino County, and 20,000 households in the county fief went bankrupt.

古文：迁使持节、都督荆州诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：迁任使持节、都督荆州诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Jingzhou, the general of Zhenan, and the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：歆将之镇，与冏同乘谒陵，因说冏曰： 成都至亲，同建大勋，今宜留之与辅政。
现代文：司马歆将赴任所，与司马同同车去拜谒陵墓，趁机劝司马同说： 成都王至亲，共同建立大功勋，如今应留下他参与辅佐朝政。
English: Sima Yi will go to the post office, and take the same car with Sima to visit the tomb of Gong, and take the opportunity to persuade Sima Yi to say: Chengdu King's dearest relative, jointly build a great achievement, now should leave him to participate in supporting the government.

古文：若不能尔，当夺其兵权。 
现代文：如果不行，应当剥夺他的兵权。 
English: If not, he should be stripped of his commission.

古文：冏不从。
现代文：司马同不听从。
English: Sima Tong did not listen.

古文：俄而冏败，歆惧，自结于成都王颖。
现代文：不久司马间失败，司马歆恐惧，主动舆成都王司马颖结交。
English: Soon, Sima failed, Sima was afraid, and took the initiative to make friends with Wang Sima Ying.

古文：歆为政严刻，蛮夷并怨。
现代文：司马歆治政严厉苛刻，蛮夷都抱怨。
English: Sima Yi's administration was harsh and severe, and the barbarians all complained.

古文：及张昌作乱于江夏，歆表请讨之。
现代文：等到张昌在江夏作乱，司马歆上表请求讨伐他。
English: When Zhang Chang started a riot in Jiangxia, Sima Yu made a request to fight him.

古文：时长沙王乂执政，与成都王颖有隙，疑歆与颖连谋，不听歆出兵，昌众日盛。
现代文：当时长沙王司马义执政，与成都王司马颖有矛盾，怀疑司马歆与司马颖合谋，不让司马歆出兵，张昌的人马一天比一天强盛。
English: At that time, the ruler of Changsha, Sima Yi, was in power. He had a conflict with the ruler of Chengdu, Sima Ying. Sima Yi was suspected of conspiring with Sima Ying. Sima Yi was not allowed to send troops. Zhang Chang's men became stronger and stronger day by day.

古文：时孙洵为从事中郎，谓歆曰： 古人有言，一日纵敌，数世之患。
现代文：当时孙洵任从事中郎，对司马歆说： 古人有言，一天姑息养奸，能造成几代人的忧患。
English: At that time, Sun Qianren was engaged in the middle, and said to Sima Qian: The ancients said that indulging in adultery for one day can cause the sorrow of several generations.

古文：公荷籓屏之任，居推毂之重，拜表辄行，有何不可！
现代文：公担负着王室藩篱屏障的重任，处在辅佐朝廷的重要位置上，上呈表章就行动，有什么不可以!
English: A public official bears the heavy responsibility of the barrier of the royal enclosure, is in an important position of assisting the imperial court, and acts on the presentation of the badge, what is not allowed!

古文：而使奸凶滋蔓，祸衅不测，岂维翰王室，镇静方夏之谓乎！ 
现代文：而使奸邪凶虐滋长蔓延，灾祸难于预测，这难道能叫作支撑王室镇抚中原吗! 
English: But to allow treachery and evil to grow and spread, with calamity difficult to predict, can this really be called supporting the royal family in pacifying the Central Plains?

古文：歆将出军，王绥又曰： 昌等小贼，偏裨自足制之，不烦违帝命，亲矢石也！ 
现代文：司马歆将要出兵，王绥又说： 张昌这一类小贼寇，偏将裨将就足以制服他们，用不着违反皇帝命令，亲临战场! 
English: Sima Yao was about to send troops, and Wang Yao added: Zhang Chang was one of these petty thieves and robbers, and a little help would be enough to subdue them. There was no need to violate the emperor's order and go to the battlefield!

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是收兵。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：昌至樊城，歆出距之，众溃，为昌所害。
现代文：张昌到了樊城，司马歆出兵抵御他，军队溃败，被张昌杀害。
English: Zhang Chang arrived in Lucheng, Sima Yi sent troops to resist him, the army was defeated, and Zhang Chang was killed.

古文：追赠骠骑将军。
现代文：追赠为骠骑将军。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Horse.

古文：无子，以兄子劭为后，永嘉末没于石勒。
现代文：没有儿子，以兄长的儿子司马劭为继承人，永嘉末年死于石勒。
English: He had no son, but took his elder brother's son Sima Ye as his heir. Yongjia died in Shile at the end of his life.

古文：梁孝王肜，字子徽，清修恭慎，无他才能，以公子封平乐亭侯。
现代文：梁孝王司马肜字子徽。清静修行恭敬谨慎，没有别的才能，以公子身份被封为平乐亭侯。
English: Liang Xiao Wang Sima Zi Zi Hui. Quietly practicing respect and prudence, with no other talent, he was given the title of Pingle Pavilion as a nobleman.

古文：及五等建，改封开平子。
现代文：等到五等爵位建立，改封为开平子。
English: Wait until the fifth class peerage is established, and change the seal to Kaipingzi.

古文：武帝践阼，封梁王，邑五千三百五十八户。
现代文：武帝登上皇位，封他为梁王，封邑五千三百五十八户。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was named Liang Wang, with 5,358 fiefs.

古文：及之国，迁北中郎将，督鄴城守事。
现代文：等到去所封国，迁任北中郎将，督邺城防守事宜。
English: He waited until he went to his fiefdom and was transferred to the position of Northern Vice Admiral to supervise the defense of the castle.

古文：时诸王自选官属，肜以汝阴上计吏张蕃为中大夫。
现代文：当时诸王自己挑选官吏下属，司马肜以汝阴上计吏张蕃为中大夫。
English: At that time, the kings themselves selected their subordinate officials, and Sima Yu selected Zhang Yu, the chief accountant of Ruyin, as the middle doctor.

古文：蕃素无行，本名雄，妻刘氏解音乐，为曹爽教伎，蕃又往来何晏所，而恣为奸淫。
现代文：张蕃一向没有好品行，本名雄，妻子刘氏懂音乐，为曹爽教授歌伎。张蕃又往来于何晏处，而恣意做奸淫的事。
English: Zhang Ye has never been of good moral character. His wife, Liu Shi, knows music and teaches Kabuki for Cao Shuang. Zhang Ye also goes to and from various places, and arbitrarily commits adultery.

古文：晏诛，徙河间，乃变名自结于肜。
现代文：何晏被杀，迁徙到河间，于是改名主动与司马肜结交。
English: After he was killed and moved to Kawama, he changed his name and took the initiative to befriend Sima Ye.

古文：为有司所奏，诏削一县。
现代文：被有关官吏奏报，下韶削减司马肜一个县。
English: It was reported by the relevant officials that Sima Yi would be reduced by one county.

古文：咸宁中，复以陈国、汝南南顿增封为次国。
现代文：咸宁年间，又把陈国、汝南南顿增封为附属国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianning, he also added Chen Province and Runan Nantong Province as subordinate provinces.

古文：太康中，代孔洵监豫州军事，加平东将军，镇许昌。
现代文：太康年间，代替孔洵监豫州军事，加任平东将军，镇守许吕。
English: During the Taikang period, he replaced Kong Qian as the supervisor of the military in Yuzhou, and was also appointed as the general of Pingdong and the town guard of Xu Lv.

古文：顷之，又以本官代下邳王晃监青徐州军事，进号安东将军。
现代文：不久，又以原职代替下邳王司马晃监青州、徐州军事，进号为安东将军。
English: Soon, he replaced Wang Simakang, the military governor of Qingzhou and Xuzhou, with his original post, and was given the title of General Anton.

古文：元康初，转征西将军，代秦王柬都督关中军事，领护西戎校尉。
现代文：元康初年，转任征西将军，代替秦王司马塞都督关中军事，兼任护西戎校尉。
English: In the first year of Yuan Kang, he was transferred to the post of General of the Western Expedition, replacing Qin Wang Sima, the military governor of Guanzhong, and concurrently serving as the captain of the Western Defense Force.

古文：加侍中，进督梁州。
现代文：加任侍中，进位督梁州。
English: He was also appointed to the position of chamberlain and promoted to the position of governor of Liangzhou.

古文：寻征为卫将军、录尚书事，行太子太保，给千兵百骑。
现代文：不久被征任卫将军、录尚书事，代理太子太保，授给他士兵一千人马一百匹。
English: Soon he was appointed General of the Guards, recorded in the records, acting for the Crown Prince Taibo, and given a thousand soldiers and a hundred horses.

古文：久之，复为征西大将军，代赵王伦镇关中，都督凉、雍诸军事，置左右长史、司马。
现代文：很久后，又任征西大将军，代替赵王司马伦镇守关中，都督凉、雍诸军事，设置左右长史、司马。
English: A long time later, he was also appointed as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, replacing Zhao Wang Simarun, guarding the middle gate of the town, and the military governors Liang and Yong, and setting up the left and right long history and Sima.

古文：又领西戎校尉，屯好畤，督建威将军周处、振威将军卢播等伐氐贼齐万年于六陌。
现代文：又兼任西戎校尉，屯兵在好峙，在六陌监督建威将军且处、振威将军卢钟等人讨伐氐族敌寇查万年。
English: He also served as the captain of Xi Rong, the garrison was in a good standoff, and he supervised General Jian Wei and General Lu Zhong and others to fight against the Yao enemy in Lu Miao.

古文：肜与处有隙，促令进军而绝其后，播又不救之，故处见害。
现代文：司马肜舆旦处有矛盾，催促他进军而断绝了他的后援，卢播又不救他，因而周处被害。
English: Sima Qian had conflicts everywhere, urged him to march and cut off his backup, Lu Bo didn't save him, and as a result, there was damage all around.

古文：朝廷尤之。
现代文：朝廷指责司马肜。
English: The imperial court accused Sima Yu of being a traitor.

古文：寻征拜大将军、尚书令、领军将军、录尚书事。
现代文：不久征召他为大将军、尚书令、领军将军、录尚书事。
English: Soon, he was called up to be the general, the commander of the army, the leader of the army, and the secretary of the army.

古文：肜尝大会，谓参军王铨曰： 我从兄为尚书令，不能啖大脔。
现代文：司马肜曾经大会宾客，对参军工丝说： 我堂兄任尚书令，不能吞食权利。
English: Sima Yao was once a guest at the congress, and said to a military worker: My cousin is still in charge of writing, so he can't have the right to eat.

古文：大脔故难。 
现代文：权利是很难得的。 
English: Rights are hard to come by.

古文：铨曰： 公在此独嚼，尚难矣。 
现代文：王耸说： 公在这裹独吞大权，尚且难啊。 
English: Wang Xuan said, "It is still difficult for the public to swallow the power of autocracy.

古文：肜曰： 长史大脔为谁？ 
现代文：司马肜说： 长史中谁最有权? 
English: Sima Yi said: Who has the most power in the long history?

古文：曰： 卢播是也。 
现代文：回答说： 是卢播。 
English: He replied, "It's Lu Bo."

古文：肜曰： 是家吏，隐之耳。 
现代文：司马肜说： 那是家臣，别提他。 
English: Sima Yi said: That is a vassal, don't mention him.

古文：铨曰： 天下咸是家吏，便恐王法不可复行。 
现代文：王铨说： 天下都是家臣，恐怕王法就不能再推行了。 
English: Wang Yao said: The whole world is a vassal, I'm afraid the king's law can no longer be implemented.

古文：肜又曰： 我在长安，作何等不善！ 
现代文：司马肜又说： 我在长安，哪样事做得不好! 
English: Sima Wei also said: I am in Chang'an, what kind of things are not done well!

古文：因指单衣补幰以为清。
现代文：于是指着单衣补忆表示自己清廉。
English: So he pointed to his shirt to show that he was clean.

古文：铨答曰： 朝野望公举荐贤才，使不仁者远。
现代文：王铨回答说： 朝廷内外指望公举荐贤才，使不仁的人远离朝廷。
English: Wang Yao replied, "Both inside and outside the court, we hope to publicly recommend the wise, and keep the unkind away from the court.

古文：而位居公辅，以衣补幰，以此为清，无足称也。 
现代文：而您位居三公辅相，因为单衣补忆，就把这当作清廉，不值得称道。 
English: And you are in the three public and auxiliary ministers, because you wear a single garment to make up for it, this is considered to be unscrupulous, and is not worthy of praise.

古文：肜有惭色。
现代文：司马肜现出惭愧的神色。
English: Sima Ye showed a look of shame.

古文：永康初，共赵王伦废贾后，诏以肜为太宰、守尚书令，增封二万户。
现代文：永康初年，和趟王司马伦一起废贾后，诏书任命司马肜为太宰、守尚书令，增加封邑两万户。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, after Wang Sima Lun was dethroned, the imperial edict appointed Sima Qian as Dazai and Shou Shang Shuling, increasing the number of fiefs by 20,000.

古文：赵王伦辅政，有星变，占曰 不利上相。 
现代文：赵王司马伦辅佐朝政，有星象变化，占卜结果说 不利上相 。
English: Zhao Wang Sima Lianfu, the assistant of the imperial government, had a change in the stars, and the result of divination was unfavorable.

古文：孙秀惧伦受灾，乃省司徒为丞相，以授肜，猥加崇进，欲以应之。
现代文：孙秀怕司马伦受灾祸，于是减省司徒为丞相，把这个职位授给司马肜，苟且加以提升，想以此应和星象。
English: Sun Xiu was afraid that Sima Lun would be affected by the calamity, so he demoted Sito to the position of chancellor, and gave this position to Sima Ye. He wanted to be promoted, and wanted to be in harmony with the stars.

古文：或曰： 肜无权，不益也。 
现代文：有人说： 司马肜没有权，没有好处。 
English: Some people say: Sima Ye has no right, no benefit.

古文：肜固让不受。
现代文：司马肜坚决推辞不接受。
English: Sima Yi resolutely refused to accept the resignation.

古文：及伦篡位，以肜为阿衡，给武贲百人，轩悬之乐十人。
现代文：等到司马伦篡位，任命司马肜主持朝政，给武士百人，轩悬的乐队十人。
English: Wait until Sima Lun usurps the throne, appoint Sima Ye to preside over the imperial court, give 100 samurai and 10 musicians to the orchestra.

古文：伦灭，诏以肜为太宰，领司徒，又代高密王泰为宗师。
现代文：司马伦被灭，诏书任命司马肜为太宰，兼司徒，又代替高密王司马泰任宗师。
English: Sima Lun was exterminated, and the imperial edict appointed Sima Ye as Dazai, and also Sitou, and also replaced Gaomi Wang Sima Tai as grandmaster.

古文：永康二年薨，丧葬依汝南文成王亮故事。
现代文：永宁二年去世，丧葬按照汝南文成王司马亮的先例。
English: Yongning died two years later, and his funeral followed the precedent of Runan Wencheng Wang Sima Liang.

古文：博士陈留蔡克议谥曰： 肜位为宰相，责深任重，属尊亲近，且为宗师，朝所仰望，下所具瞻。
现代文：博士陈留人蔡克议论谧号说： 司马肜的官位是宰相，责任重大，亲属关系尊贵亲近，况且又是宗师，上被朝廷所敬仰，下为百姓所瞻望。
English: Commenting on the appointment, Dr. Chen Liuren Cai Ke said: Sima Yi's official position is the prime minister, with heavy responsibilities, noble and close kinship relations, and moreover, he is a mentor. He is admired by the imperial court and looked up to by the people.

古文：而临大节，无不可夺之志；当危事，不能舍生取义；愍怀之废，不闻一言之谏；淮南之难，不能因势辅义；赵王伦篡逆，不能引身去朝。
现代文：然而在大节面前，没有不可改变的志向；面对危难的事情，不能舍弃生命去追求正义；愍怀太子被废时，没听到他一句劝谏；淮南王发难时，不能趁势辅助正义；赵王司马伦篡位叛逆，不能抽身离开朝廷。
English: However, in the face of the great festival, there is no immutable ambition; in the face of dangerous things, we cannot give up our lives to pursue justice; when the crown prince was abolished, we did not hear him say a word of advice; when King Huainan was in trouble, we could not take advantage of the situation to assist justice; Zhao Wang Simalen usurped the throne and rebelled, and we could not withdraw from the court.

古文：宋有荡氏之乱，华元自以不能居官，曰 君臣之训，我所司也。
现代文：宋国有荡氏的动乱，华元白认为不能身居官位，说： 君臣的规范，是我所掌管的。
English: After the turmoil in the Song Dynasty, Hua Yuanbai believed that he could not hold an official position, saying, "I am in charge of the standards of princes and ministers."

古文：公室卑而不正，吾罪大矣！ 
现代文：公室地位卑微而不能纠正，我的罪大啊! 
English: The status of the office is low and cannot be corrected, my sin is great!

古文：夫以区区之宋，犹有不素餐之臣，而况帝王之朝，而有苟容之相，此而不贬，法将何施！
现代文：一个小小的宋国，尚且有无功不受禄的大臣。何况帝王的朝廷，而有苟且容身的宰相，造要是不贬损，怎么施行法治呢!
English: In a small Song dynasty country, there are still ministers who are meritorious or unmeritorious. What's more, the emperor's court, and the meticulous and dignified prime minister, if they are not derogatory, how can they enforce the rule of law?

古文：谨案《谥法》 不勤成名曰灵 ，肜见义不为，不可谓勤，宜谥曰灵。 
现代文：谨案缢法》 不勤政而成名叫做灵，司马肜见到正义的事不去做，不能说是勤，应取谧号为灵。 
English: "Being famous without being diligent in politics is called spirit. If Sima Yi sees that justice is not done, it cannot be said that he is diligent. He should take his nickname as spirit.

古文：梁国常侍孙霖及肜亲党称枉，台乃下符曰： 贾氏专权，赵王伦篡逆，皆力制朝野，肜势不得去，而责其不能引身去朝，义何所据？ 
现代文：梁国常侍孙霖及司马肜的亲信党羽声称冤屈，官署于是下公文说： 贾氏专权，趟王司马伦篡位叛逆，都以威力控制朝廷内外，司马肜在那种形势下不能离开，而指责他不能抽身离开朝廷，根据的是什么义理呢? 
English: Liang Guo's frequent attendant Sun Lin and Sima Yu's close party members claimed grievances, and the government office then issued a public document saying: Jia's exclusive power, Wang Sima Lun's usurpation and rebellion, all used power to control the inside and outside of the imperial court. Sima Yu could not leave under that situation, and accused him of not being able to withdraw from the imperial court. What is the basis for this?

古文：克重议曰： 肜为宗臣，而国乱不能匡，主颠不能扶，非所以为相。
现代文：蔡克重新议论说： 司马肜是宗室大臣，然而国家动乱不能匡正。君主被颠覆不能扶助，做宰相不该是这样的。
English: Czajk re-argued: Sima Yi is the family minister, but the national turmoil cannot be rectified. The monarch cannot be supported if he is overthrown, and this should not be the case when he is the prime minister.

古文：故《春秋》讥华元乐举，谓之不臣。
现代文：因此《春秋》讥讽华元乐举，说他们不像大臣。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" ridiculed Huayuan Leju, saying that they were not like ministers.

古文：且贾氏之酷烈，不甚于吕后，而王陵犹得杜门；赵王伦之无道，不甚于殷纣，而微子犹得去之。
现代文：再说买氏的酷虐暴烈，不比吕后更厉害，而王陵仍得以闭门不出；赵王司马伦的无道，不比殷纣王更严重，而微子还能够离去。
English: Furthermore, the cruelty and violence of the Buy clan was no more severe than that of the Lyu Emperor, but the royal tomb was still able to remain closed; the wickedness of the Zhao King Sima Lun was no more serious than that of the Yin Xi Wang, but the microbe was still able to leave.

古文：近者太尉陈准，异姓之人，加弟徽有射钩之隙，亦得托疾辞位，不涉伪朝。
现代文：近代的有太尉陈准，是外姓的人，由于兄弟陈徽有曾背叛趟王司马伦而有旧仇，也得以声称有病，不入伪朝廷。
English: In modern times, there was a captain Chen Jun, a person with a foreign surname, who had an old grudge because his brother Chen Hui had once betrayed Wang Simaren, and was also able to claim that he was ill and would not enter the fake court.

古文：何至于肜亲伦之兄，而独不得去乎？
现代文：何况司马肜是司马伦的亲兄长，却偏偏无法离去呢?
English: What's more, Sima Ye is Sima Lun's older brother, but he just can't leave?

古文：赵盾入谏不从，出亡不远，犹不免于责，况肜不能去位，北面事伪主乎？
现代文：赵盾入朝劝谏不被听从，出外逃亡没有走远，尚且不能免于罪责，何况司马肜不能辞去官位，面朝北事奉伪君主呢?
English: Zhao Dun's advice to the North was not heeded, his escape did not go far, and yet he could not be exempted from criminal responsibility. What's more, Sima Yi could not resign from his post and serve the pseudo-monarch facing north.

古文：宜如前议，加其贬责，以广为臣之节，明事君之道。 
现代文：应该按照先前的议论，对他加以贬损责难，来推广作臣的节操，明确事奉国君的道理。 
English: In accordance with the previous discussion, it is necessary to make derogatory accusations against him in order to promote the discipline of being a minister and clearly serve the principle of the sovereign.

古文：于是朝廷从克议。
现代文：于是朝廷依从蔡克的议论。
English: As a result, the imperial court followed Zeik's arguments.

古文：肜故吏复追诉不已，故改焉。
现代文：司马肜过去的下属不断地追诉，因而又改了谧号。
English: Sima Yu's former subordinates constantly pursued the case, so he changed his nickname again.

古文：无子，以武陵王澹子禧为后，是为怀王，拜征虏将军，与澹俱没于石勒。
现代文：司马肜没有儿子，以武陵王司马澹的儿子司马禧继嗣，也就是怀王。官拜征虏将军，和司马澹都死于石勒。
English: Sima Yi did not have a son, and he was succeeded by Sima Xi, the son of King Sima Yi of Wuling, also known as King Huai. Both the general and Sima Yi died in Shilu.

古文：元帝时，以西阳王羕子悝为肜嗣，早薨，是为殇王。
现代文：元帝时，以西阳王司马素的儿子司马悝为司马肜的后人，死得早，也就是殇王。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, Sima Yu, the son of Sima Su, the king of Xiyang, was Sima Yu's descendant, but he died early, that is, he was the king of Zhai.

古文：至是怀王子翘自石氏归国得立，是为声王，官至散骑常侍。
现代文：到这时坛王的儿子旦墨翘从互压那裹回国得以继承王位，也就是声王，官做到散骑常侍。
English: At this time, the son of the king of the altar, Dan Mogao, was able to inherit the throne from the mutual pressure and return to the country, that is, the king of the voice, and the official became a straggler.

古文：薨，无子，诏以武陵威王子逢为翘嗣，历永安太仆，与父晞俱废徙新安。
现代文：死，没有儿子，诏书令武陵威王的儿子司马琏继嗣司区塑，历任丞室太仆，和父亲旦区肿一同被废迁徙到新安。
English: He died without a son, and the imperial edict ordered that the son of King Wuling Wei, Sima Yan, who was the successor of Sikuo Shuo, and who had successively served as the second-in-command of the imperial household, and his father, Tang Quan Yu, were both exiled to Xin'an.

古文：薨，太元中复国，子和立。
现代文：死，太元年间恢复封国，儿子司马稣继承王位。
English: He died and the feudal state was restored in the first year of the Taiyuan era, and his son Sima Xiu succeeded to the throne.

古文：薨，子珍之立。
现代文：死，儿子珍之继嗣。
English: His son, Zhen's heir, dies.

古文：桓玄篡位，国臣孔璞奉珍之奔于寿阳，义熙初乃归，累迁左卫将军、太常卿。
现代文：桓玄篡位，封国的臣王孔璞送至逃到寿阳，义熙初年才回去，逐渐迁任左卫将军、太常卿。
English: Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, and the vassal of the feudal state, King Kong Pi, was sent to escape to Shouyang. Yixi returned only in the first year, and was gradually transferred to the position of General of the Left Division of the Guards and Grand Secretary.

古文：刘裕伐姚泓，请为谘议参军，为裕所害。国除。
现代文：刘裕讨伐姚巡，请!缒做谘议参军，被塑隘所害，封国被取消
English: Liu Yu fought against Yao Jun, please!  advised to join the army, was harmed by Shuxia, and the state seal was cancelled

古文：文帝九男，文明王皇后生武帝、齐献王攸、城阳哀王兆、辽东悼惠王定国、广汉殇王广德，其乐安平王鉴、燕王机、皇子永祚、乐平王延祚不知母氏。
现代文：文帝有九个儿子，文明王皇后生武帝、齐献王攸、城阳哀王兆、辽东悼惠王定国、广汉殇王广德，其乐安平王鉴、燕王机、皇子永祚、乐平王延祚不知母亲是谁。
English: Emperor Wen had nine sons, including Emperor Wudi, who was born to the Empress of the Kingdom of Civilization, King You, who was born to the King of Qi, King Zhao, who was born to the King of Liaodong, King Dingguo, who was born to the King of Guanghan, who was born to the King of Guangde, who was born to the King of Anping, who was born to the King of Yan, who was born to the King of Yan, who was born to the Prince of Yongzheng, and who was born to the King of Leping, who was born to the King of Yan. I don't know who his mother was.

古文：燕王机继清惠亭侯，别有传。
现代文：燕王机继嗣清惠亭堡，另外有传。
English: Yan Wangji's successor, Qing Huiting Fort, is also said to have existed.

古文：永祚早亡，无传。
现代文：永祚死得早，没有传。
English: Yong Xuan died early and did not pass on.

古文：齐献王攸，字大猷，少而岐嶷。
现代文：齐献王司马攸字大猷。年少时就聪慧。
English: Qi Xian Wang Sima You is a great scholar. He was very clever when he was young.

古文：及长，清和平允，亲贤好施，爱经籍，能属文，善尺牍，为世所楷。
现代文：等到长大，清静和气公允，亲近贤人喜好施舍，爱好经典书籍，能写文章，善于书信，被世人所效法。
English: When he grows up, he will be calm and fair-minded, be close to sages, like to give alms, love classic books, be able to write articles, be good at writing letters, and be imitated by the world.

古文：才望出武帝之右，宣帝每器之。
现代文：才气名声比武帝大，宣帝常器重他。
English: His reputation for talent was greater than that of Emperor Wu, and Emperor Xuan was always more important to him.

古文：景帝无子，命攸为嗣。
现代文：景帝没有儿子，让司马攸作继承人。
English: Emperor Jing had no son, leaving Sima You as the heir.

古文：从征王凌，封长乐亭侯。
现代文：跟随征讨王浚，被封为长乐亭侯。
English: Following the conquest of Wang Jun, he was made the Marquis of Changle Pavilion.

古文：及景帝崩，攸年十岁，哀动左右，大见称叹。
现代文：等到景帝去世，司马攸年仅十岁，悲哀感动了周围的人，很是受到称颂赞叹。
English: By the time Emperor Jing died, Sima You was only ten years old. The sadness moved the people around him, and he was praised and admired.

古文：袭封舞阳侯。
现代文：承袭了舞阳侯的封号。
English: He inherited the title of Maiyang.

古文：奉景献羊后于别第，事后以孝闻。
现代文：在另外的宅第事奉景献羊后，事奉皇后以孝闻名。
English: After serving the scene in another mansion and sacrificing a sheep, he served the empress and was known for his filial piety.

古文：复历散骑常侍、步兵校尉，时年十八，绥抚营部，甚有威惠。
现代文：又历任散骑常侍、步兵校尉，当时十八岁，安抚军营部属，很有威严与恩惠。
English: In addition, successive stragglers, infantry captains, who were eighteen years old at the time, pacified the camp subordinates, with great dignity and grace.

古文：五等建，改封安昌侯，迁卫将军。
现代文：五等爵位建立，改封为安昌侯，迁任卫将军。
English: The fifth-class title of nobility was established, and the title was changed to Anchang Hou, and the post of Wei general was transferred.

古文：居文帝丧，哀毁过礼，杖而后起。
现代文：为文帝服丧，悲哀毁容超过礼制，拄着木杖才能站立起来。
English: For Emperor Wen, mourning, grief and disfigurement exceed the etiquette, and he can only stand up with a wooden cane.

古文：左右以稻米干饭杂理中丸进之，攸泣而不受。
现代文：手下人用稻米干饭做成丸状给他吃，司马攸哭着不接受。
English: His subordinates made a round of dried rice with rice for him to eat, but Sima You did not accept it, crying.

古文：太后自往勉喻曰： 若万一加以他疾，将复如何！
现代文：太后亲自去开导他说： 如果万一得了其他疾病，又该怎么办呢?
English: His mother-in-law herself went to enlighten him, saying, "What if you get some other disease?

古文：宜远虑深计，不可专守一志。 
现代文：应该从长远考虑，不能专守着一个想法。 
English: We should think in the long term and not stick to one idea.

古文：常遣人逼进饮食，司马嵇喜又谏曰： 毁不灭性，圣人之教。
现代文：常派人逼司马攸吃东西，司马嵇喜又劝谏说： 哀伤而不泯灭性情，这是圣人的教化。
English: They often sent people to force Sima You to eat, and Sima Yanxi also advised him: "It is the enlightenment of a saint to mourn without extinguishing one's disposition."

古文：且大王地即密亲，任惟元辅。
现代文：况且大王处在宗室近亲的位置，担任着辅佐朝政的重任。
English: Moreover, the great king is in the position of a close relative of the family, and serves as an important assistant to the government.

古文：匹夫犹惜其命，以为祖宗，况荷天下之大业，辅帝室之重任，而可尽无极之哀，与颜闵争孝！
现代文：普通人为了祖宗尚且爱惜性命，何况你担负着天下的大业，担负着辅佐皇室的重任，怎能尽没有边际的悲哀，与颜渊闵损争孝呢!
English: Ordinary people still cherish their lives for the sake of their ancestors, not to mention that you are responsible for the great cause of the world and the important task of assisting the royal family. How can you have boundless sorrow and fight for filial piety with Yan Yuan!

古文：不可令贤人笑，愚人幸也。 
现代文：不能让贤人嘲笑，让愚人庆幸。 
English: You can't have the wise mocking and the foolish rejoicing.

古文：喜躬自进食，攸不得已，为之强饭。
现代文：嵇喜亲自奉上饮食，司马攸不得已，勉强吃饭。
English: Yan Xi personally served the meal, and Sima You had no choice but to eat.

古文：喜退，攸谓左右曰： 嵇司马将令我不忘居丧之节，得存区区之身耳。 
现代文：嵇喜退下后，司马攸对左右的人说： 嵇司马将让我不忘居丧的礼节，得以保全我小小的身躯。 
English: After Zou Xi retreated, Sima You said to the people around him: Zou Sima will let me not forget the etiquette of mourning, and will be able to preserve my small body.

古文：武帝践阼，封齐王，时朝廷草创，而攸总统军事，抚宁内外，莫不景附焉。
现代文：武帝登上皇位，封司马攸为齐王。当时朝廷刚创立，司马攸总管军事，镇抚安宁内外，没有不依附的。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he appointed Sima You as the king of Qi. At that time, the imperial court had just been founded, and Sima You was in charge of the military, maintaining peace and tranquility both at home and abroad.

古文：诏议籓王令自选国内长吏，攸奏议曰； 昔圣王封建万国，以亲诸侯，轨迹相承，莫之能改。
现代文：韶书议论藩王让他们自选封国内的高级官吏，司马攸奏议说： 过去圣王封建万国，用以亲近诸侯，规矩代代相承，没人能改变。
English: "In the past, holy kings used to build feudal kingdoms to get close to the lords, and the rules were passed down from generation to generation. No one can change this," said Sima You.

古文：诚以君不世居，则人心偷幸；人无常主，则风俗伪薄。
现代文：实在是因为国君不世代相传，就会人心暗存侥幸；人们没有稳定的主人，就会风俗虚伪不淳厚。
English: In fact, because the sovereign is not handed down from generation to generation, there will be a fluke in the hearts of the people; if people do not have a stable master, the customs will be hypocritical and dishonest.

古文：是以先帝深览经远之统，思复先哲之轨，分土画疆，建爵五等，或以进德，或以酬功。
现代文：因此先帝深入考究了治理万世的道统，考虑恢复先代圣哲的规矩，划分土地疆界，建立五等爵位，或者是为了推崇美德，或者是为了酬劳功臣。
English: Therefore, the former emperor deeply studied the doctrine of governing the world, and considered restoring the rules of the previous sages, dividing the land boundaries, and establishing five ranks, either to promote virtue, or to reward meritorious service.

古文：伏惟陛下应期创业，树建亲戚，听使籓国自除长吏。
现代文：我以为陛下是顺应天意创立大业，树立封建亲戚，听任藩国自行任命高级官吏。
English: I thought that His Majesty was following the will of heaven to create a great cause, establish feudal relatives, and allow the domain to appoint senior officials on its own.

古文：而今草创，制度初立，虽庸蜀顺轨，吴犹未宾，宜俟清泰，乃议复古之制。 
现代文：然而现今初创大业，制度刚刚建立，虽然庸蜀顺从，吴还没有臣服，应当等到清平安泰，再商议恢复古代制度。 
English: However, the system has just been established, and although Yongshu is obedient, Wu has not yet submitted. It is necessary to wait until the Qing and Heian dynasties, and then discuss the restoration of the ancient system.

古文：书比三上，辄报不许。
现代文：奏章接连送上三次，都回答说不同意。
English: He was sent the score three times in succession, but he replied that he did not agree with it.

古文：其后国相上长吏缺，典书令请求差选。
现代文：这之后国相上报说高级官吏缺乏，典书令请求差遣推选。
English: After that, the minister of state reported that there was a lack of senior officials, and sent a request for election.

古文：攸下令曰： 忝受恩礼，不称惟忧。
现代文：司马攸下命令说： 愧受恩宠礼遇，担忧的就是不称职。
English: Sima You said in his next order: To be unworthy of being treated with grace and courtesy, to worry is to be incompetent.

古文：至于官人叙才，皆朝廷之事，非国所宜裁也。
现代文：至于授官职论才干，都是朝廷的事，不是封国适宜裁定的。
English: As for the appointment of officials and the ability to do so, it is a matter for the imperial court, not a decision on the appropriateness of sealing the country.

古文：其令自上请之。 
现代文：我命令向上请求此事。 
English: I've ordered a high-level inquiry.

古文：时王家人衣食皆出御府，攸表租秩足以自供，求绝之。
现代文：当时王府家人衣食都由皇家提供，司马攸上表说租赋俸禄足以自给，请求不再供给。
English: At that time, the royal household's food and clothing were provided by the royal family. Sima You said that the rent and salary were sufficient for self-sufficiency and requested that they no longer be provided.

古文：前后十余上，帝又不许。
现代文：前后十多次上表，皇帝又不准许。
English: More than a dozen times before and after the table, the emperor did not allow.

古文：攸虽未之国，文武官属，下至士卒，分租赋以给之，疾病死丧赐与之。
现代文：司马攸虽然没去自己的封国，但对文武官吏，下至士卒，都是把租赋俸禄分给他们，如有疾病死亡丧葬就馈赠他们。
English: Although Sima You did not go to his own fiefdom, he distributed the rent and salary to civil and military officials, from the highest to the lowest, and gave them gifts if they died of illness or were buried.

古文：而时有水旱，国内百姓则加振贷，须丰年乃责，十减其二，国内赖之。
现代文：有时发生旱涝灾害，就对国内百姓加以赈济借贷，等到丰收的年头才收回，少要十分之二，国内依赖他。
English: Sometimes, when droughts and floods occur, the Chinese people are given relief and loans, and they are not recovered until the year of the bumper harvest. At least two-tenths of the country depends on him.

古文：迁骠骑将军，开府辟召，礼同三司。
现代文：迁任骠骑将军，并设府署征召辅吏，礼仪如同三司。
English: Transferred to the post of cavalry general, and set up a prefectural office to recruit auxiliary officers, the etiquette is like the three divisions.

古文：降身虚己，待物以信。
现代文：降低身份使自己谦虚，用诚信待人。
English: Lower your status to make yourself humble, and treat others with integrity.

古文：常叹公府不案吏，然以董御戎政，复有威克之宜，乃下教曰： 夫先王驭世，明罚敕法，鞭扑作教，以正逋慢。
现代文：经常感叹公府不考查官吏，然而以督察控制军政，才会再有适当的威严约束，于是下教令说： 前代帝王统治国家，明确刑罚整饬法律，把鞭打作为教训方式，来纠正拖延怠慢。
English: He often lamented that the government did not examine officials, but controlled the military government with inspectors, and only then would there be proper authority and restraint, so he issued an edict saying: The previous emperor ruled the country, clarified the punishment and rectified the law, and used whipping as a lesson to correct delay and negligence.

古文：且唐虞之朝，犹须督责。
现代文：况且唐、虞的朝代，还得督察责求。
English: Moreover, the Tang and Yu dynasties also had to be reprimanded by inspectors.

古文：前欲撰次其事，使粗有常。
现代文：以前我想论述造件事，使督察法大致固定下来。
English: Previously, I wanted to discuss the construction of the case, so that the inspector's law is roughly fixed.

古文：惧烦简之宜，未审其要，故令刘、程二君详定。
现代文：又担心繁简上是否合适，没能审核它的要点，因而命令刘、程两人详细考定。
English: He was also worried about whether it was appropriate in terms of complexity and simplicity, and was unable to review its main points, so he ordered Liu and Cheng to make a detailed assessment.

古文：然思惟之，郑铸刑书，叔向不韪；范宣议制，仲尼讥之。
现代文：然而又想到，郑国铸造刑书，叔向否定；范宣议论制度，佺星讥讽他。
English: However, it also occurred to me that Zheng Guo had forged a punishment letter, which Xiang Xiang denied; Fan Xuan discussed the system, and Gong Xing ridiculed him.

古文：令皆如旧，无所增损。
现代文：命令完全依照旧典，没有增加减损。
English: The order is in full accordance with the old code, without any additional derogation.

古文：其常节度所不及者，随事处决。
现代文：那些平常规则没有论及的，根据事情论处决断。
English: Those not covered by the normal rules are decided on a factual basis.

古文：诸吏各竭乃心，思同在公古人之节。
现代文：所有官吏各自尽心竭力，一心放在公事上是古人的节操。
English: All government officials should make every effort to devote themselves to public affairs, which is the principle of ancient people.

古文：如有所阙，以赖股肱匡救之规，庶以免负。 
现代文：如果有所缺漏，要靠朝廷重臣们匡正救助的规定，差不多可以免去责任。 
English: If there are any omissions, it is up to the chief ministers of the imperial court to rectify the provisions of the bailout, and they can almost be exempted from responsibility.

古文：于是内外祗肃。
现代文：于是内外恭敬整肃。
English: As a result, there was a respectful purge inside and outside the country.

古文：时骠骑当罢营兵，兵士数千人恋攸恩德，不肯去，遮京兆主言之，帝乃还攸兵。
现代文：当时骠骑这一职务应当取消营兵，兵士几千人依恋司马攸的恩德，不肯离去，拦住京兆官员诉说，皇帝于是退还司马攸的营兵。
English: At that time, the post of cavalry should have been abolished. Several thousand soldiers attached themselves to Sima You's benevolence and refused to leave. They stopped the Beijing Zhao officials to complain, and the emperor then returned Sima You's soldiers.

古文：攸每朝政大议，悉心陈之。
现代文：司马攸每逢参与朝政的议论，都详尽陈述。
English: Whenever Sima You took part in discussions on imperial politics, he made detailed statements.

古文：诏以比年饥馑，议所节省，攸奏议曰： 臣闻先王之教，莫不先正其本。
现代文：韶书认为连年饥荒，商议该节省的事。司马攸奏议说： 我听说先代帝王的教化，没有不先端正根本的。
English: According to the imperial edict, there would be famine for years on end, so they had to discuss how to save money. Sima You said: I heard that the previous emperor's enlightenment was nothing less than radical.

古文：务农重本，国之大纲。
现代文：务农业重根本，是国家的大纲。
English: to place agriculture at the core of the national agenda.

古文：当今方隅清穆，武夫释甲，广分休假，以就农业。
现代文：如今四方安定，武士脱下盔甲，四散休假，去从事农业。
English: Now that the situation is stable in all directions, the samurai have taken off their armor and gone on vacation to engage in agriculture.

古文：然守相不能勤心恤公，以尽地利。
现代文：然而地方官不能努力体恤公务，来充分发挥地利。
English: However, local officials cannot make an effort to be conscientious of their official duties to give full play to the region.

古文：昔汉宣叹曰： 与朕理天下者，惟良二千石乎！ 
现代文：过去漠宣帝叹息说： 和我治理天下的人，衹有好的太守啊! 
English: In the past, Emperor Mu Xuan sighed and said, "Those who govern the world with me, do not have good governors!"

古文：勤加赏罚，黜陟幽明，于时翕然，用多名守。
现代文：及时加以赏罚，罢黜昏官提升贤臣，那时很是安定，任用的多是著名的太守。
English: At that time, it was very stable to reward and punish in a timely manner, to dismiss incompetent officials and promote wise men. Most of the appointees were famous governors.

古文：计今地有余羡，而不农者众，加附业之人复有虚假，通天下谋之，则饥者必不少矣。
现代文：算计着如今土地有剩余，而不务农的人很多，加上归附农业的人中又有虚假，从全国考虑，那么挨饿的人一定不少。
English: Considering that there is a surplus of land today, but there are many people who do not work in agriculture, plus there is falsehood among those who are attached to agriculture, considering the whole country, there must be a lot of people who are starving.

古文：今宜严敕州郡，检诸虚诈害农之事，督实南亩，上下同奉所务。
现代文：现在应当严厉敕令州郡，检查那些虚伪欺诈损害农业的事，督促充实农田，上下一同重视所从事的事。
English: Now it is time to sternly order the prefectures and counties to check those hypocritical and fraudulent things that damage agriculture, urge the enrichment of farmland, and attach great importance to the things they are engaged in.

古文：则天下之谷可复古政，岂患于暂一水旱，便忧饥馁哉！
现代文：这样天下的谷物可以恢复到古时的水平，难道还怕短暂一时的水灾旱灾，便要担心饥荒吗!
English: In this way, the world's grain can be restored to the level of ancient times. Are we still afraid of short-term floods, droughts, and famines?

古文：考绩黜陟，毕使严明，畏威怀惠，莫不自厉。
现代文：考核政绩决定罢黜升迁，一律要求严明，畏惧威严感怀恩惠，没有不自己发奋的。
English: In assessing the performance of the government and deciding on the dismissal and promotion of the top leaders, all of them have strict requirements, fear of majesty, a sense of gratitude, and no one is not self-motivated.

古文：又都邑之内，游食滋多，巧伎末业，服饰奢丽，富人兼美，犹有魏之遗弊，染化日浅，靡财害谷，动复万计。
现代文：此外都邑内，不务农而有饭吃的越来越多，凭藉技艺工巧末等行业，服饰奢侈华丽，富人加倍奢华，仍旧有魏遣留下的弊端，接受教化时间不长，浪费财物粮食，动辄又是以万计数。
English: In addition, there are more and more people in the capital city who do not work in agriculture but have food to eat. They are skilled in crafts and other industries. Their clothing is extravagant and luxurious, and the rich are doubly luxurious. They still have the drawbacks left by the Wei Dynasty. They do not have a long time to receive enlightenment. They waste wealth and grain, and they are constantly counting by tens of thousands.

古文：宜申明旧法，必禁绝之。
现代文：应当申明过去的法律，一定要禁止断绝这种现象。
English: The laws of the past should be affirmed, and this phenomenon must be prohibited and eliminated.

古文：使去奢即俭，不夺农时，毕力稼穑，以实仓廪。
现代文：使人放弃奢华改为俭朴，不侵夺农时，全力耕种收割，来充实仓库。
English: Let people give up luxury and change to frugality, do not encroach on farm time, make every effort to cultivate and harvest, to enrich the warehouse.

古文：则荣辱礼节，由之而生，兴化反本，于兹为盛。 
现代文：这样荣辱礼节，从此产生，兴起教化返回根本，从此昌盛。 
English: This kind of honor and disgrace etiquette has emerged from this, and the rise of enlightenment has returned to the root, and has flourished ever since.

古文：转镇军大将军，加侍中，羽葆、鼓吹，行太子少傅。
现代文：转任镇军大将军，加任侍中，用羽葆、鼓吹，代理太子少傅。
English: He was transferred to the post of the general of the town army, and was also appointed as an attendant, using feathers and propaganda to act as the young prince.

古文：数年，授太子太傅，献箴于太子曰： 伊昔上皇，建国立君，仰观天文，俯察地理，创业恢道，以安人承祀，祚延统重，故援立太子。
现代文：几年后，被授职为太子太傅，向太子进言说： 过去上古的帝王，建立国家确立君位，抬头看天文，低头察地理，创立大业弘扬道义，来安定人民继承祭祀，福祚延续道统相传，因而确立太子。
English: A few years later, he was given the post of Crown Prince Taifu (太子太傅) and gave advice to the Crown Prince, saying: In the past, emperors of ancient times established the country and established the throne, looked up at astronomy, looked down at geography, created a great cause to promote morality, to stabilize the people's inheritance of sacrifice, and established the crown prince.

古文：尊以弘道，固以贰己，储德既立，邦有所恃。
现代文：用弘大的道义使他尊贵，用自己副手的身份使他地位稳固，太子的德行确立了，国家就有了依靠。
English: He used his great morality to make him honorable, and his status as his deputy to make his position stable. Once the virtue of the prince was established, the country could rely on him.

古文：夫亲仁者功成，迩佞者国倾，故保相之材，必择贤明。
现代文：那些亲善仁义的太子功业告成，接近奸佞的太子国家倾覆，因此保傅宰相的人选，一定要挑贤明的人。
English: Those princes who are kind, benevolent and righteous have accomplished their work, and the prince countries that are close to treachery have been overthrown. Therefore, the candidate for the prime minister of Baofu must be a wise person.

古文：昔在周成，旦奭作傅，外以明德自辅，内以亲亲立固，德以义济，亲则自然。
现代文：过去在周成王时，旦奭担任傅，在外靠明德自我辅助，在内靠对家人亲善求得稳固，德靠义成事，亲善则不勉强。
English: In the past, during the reign of King Zhoucheng, Danzhang served as the leader, relying on wisdom and virtue to help himself externally, and relying on kindness to his family to seek stability internally. Virtue depends on righteousness, while kindness is not forced.

古文：嬴废公族，其崩如山；刘建子弟，汉祚永傅。
现代文：赢氏废弃公族，他的溃败如同山崩；刘氏封建子弟，汉代的帝业长久留传。
English: The abandoned public clans of the Win clan, his defeat was like a landslide; the feudal sons of the Liu clan, the imperial heritage of the Han Dynasty has long been passed down.

古文：楚以无极作乱，宋以伊戾兴难。
现代文：楚因为无极作乱，宋因为伊戾兴难。
English: Chu because of unrest, Song because of Ili.

古文：张禹佞给，卒危强汉。
现代文：张禹能说善辩，最终危及强盛的汉朝。
English: Zhang Yu was able to argue well, eventually endangering the powerful Han Dynasty.

古文：辅弼不忠，祸及乃躬；匪徒乃躬，乃丧乃邦。
现代文：辅佐的人不忠诚，灾祸殃及你的身体；不衹是你的身体，还要丧亡你的国家。
English: If your helper is not faithful, disaster will befall your body; if he is not faithful, your body will not live, and your nation will perish.

古文：无曰父子不间，昔有江充；无曰至亲匪贰，或容潘崇。
现代文：不要说父子不会有隔阂，过去有江充的先例；不要说至亲之间没有贰心，或许会有潘崇那样的人。
English: Don't say that there will be no estrangement between father and son, there is a precedent of Jiang Chong in the past; don't say that there is no hard feelings between relatives, there may be people like Pan Chong.

古文：谀言乱真，谮润离亲，骊姬之谗。晋侯疑申。
现代文：奉承的话可以乱真，诬陷的影响可以离间亲人，骊姬的谗言，使晋侯怀疑申生。
English: Flattering words can distort the truth, the influence of frame-up can alienate relatives, and the nagging words of the concubine can make the prince suspect Shensheng.

古文：固亲以道，勿固以恩；修身以敬，勿托以尊。
现代文：稳固亲情要用道，不要用恩；修身要靠敬，不要寄托于尊贵。
English: To strengthen family ties, one should use the Tao, not grace; to cultivate oneself, one should rely on respect, not on nobility.

古文：自损者有余，自益者弥昏。
现代文：自我贬损的人有余地，自我满足的人更昏庸。
English: Self-deprecating people have room, self-satisfied people are more dull.

古文：庶事不可以不恤，大本不可以不敦。
现代文：各种事情不能不体恤，根本大事不能不敦厚。
English: All kinds of things cannot but be sympathetic, and fundamental events cannot but be thoughtful.

古文：见亡戒危，睹安思存。
现代文：见到灭亡就要戒备危险，看到安定就要想到生存。
English: When you see destruction, you should be alert to danger; when you see stability, you should think about survival.

古文：冢子司义，敢告在阍。 
现代文：长子主持道义，我冒昧地告诉看门人。 
English: I had the temerity to tell the doorman that the eldest son was in charge of morality.

古文：世以为工。
现代文：世人认为造篇箴言写得精巧。
English: The world thinks it is clever to make up a proverb.

古文：咸宁二年，代贾充为司空，侍中、太傅如故。
现代文：咸宁二年，代替买充任司空，侍中、太傅的职位依旧。
English: In the second year of Xianning, he was appointed to the post of secretary in place of Maid of Honor, and the posts of chamberlain and grand steward remained the same.

古文：初，攸特为文帝所宠爱，每见攸，辄抚床呼其小字曰 此桃符座也 ，几为太子者数矣。
现代文：起初，司马攸特别被文帝宠爱，每次见到司马攸，就拍着床叫他的小名说 这是桃符的座位 ，几乎立为太子的情况有多次。
English: At first, Sima You was especially favored by Emperor Wen. Every time he saw Sima You, he patted the bed and called out his nickname, saying, "This is the seat of the peach charm." There were many times when he was almost crowned prince.

古文：及帝寝疾，虑攸不安，为武帝叙汉淮南王、魏陈思故事而泣。
现代文：等到皇帝卧病，担心司马攸不安，为武帝叙述汉代淮南王、魏陈思王的故事而哭泣。
English: He waited until the emperor was bedridden, worried that Sima You was uneasy, and wept as Emperor Wu recounted the stories of Huainan Wang and Wei Chen Si Wang in the Han Dynasty.

古文：临崩，执攸手以授帝。
现代文：临死，拉着司马攸的手托付给武帝。
English: On his deathbed, he took Sima You's hand and entrusted it to Emperor Wu.

古文：先是太后有疾，既瘳，帝与攸奉觞上寿，攸以太后前疾危笃，因歔欷流涕，帝有愧焉。
现代文：逭之前太后有病，病好了以后，皇帝与司马攸捧着酒杯祝寿，司马攸因为太后先前的病危重，于是献欷流泪，皇帝觉得惭愧。
English: The empress dowager had been ill before, but after she recovered from her illness, the emperor and Sima You held a wine glass to celebrate her birthday. Sima You was in tears because of the empress dowager's previous illness, and the emperor felt ashamed.

古文：攸尝侍帝疾，恆有忧戚之容，时人以此称叹之。
现代文：司马攸曾经在皇帝病时侍奉，总是有忧戚的面容，当时的人因此而称赞感叹。
English: Sima You once served the emperor when he was ill. He always had a sorrowful countenance, and people at the time praised and lamented him for this.

古文：及太后临崩，亦流涕谓帝曰： 桃符性急，而汝为兄不慈，我若遂不起，恐必不能相容。
现代文：等到太后临终，也流着泪对皇帝说： 桃符性急，而你作兄长的不慈爱，我如果就此一病不起，恐怕你们一定不能相容。
English: When the empress dowager was on her deathbed, she also said to the emperor with tears streaming down her face, "Peach charms are impatient, and you, as the elder brother, are unkind. If I become ill because of this, I'm afraid you two will not be compatible."

古文：以是属汝，勿忘我言。 
现代文：因此嘱托你，别忘了我的话。 
English: Therefore, I beg you, do not forget my words.

古文：及帝晚年，诸子并弱，而太子不令，朝臣内外，皆属意于攸。
现代文：到了皇帝晚年，几个儿子都懦弱，而太子又不贤，朝廷内外，都有意立司马攸。
English: In the emperor's later years, several of his sons were weak, and the crown prince was not virtuous. Both inside and outside the court, everyone wanted to install Sima You.

古文：中书监荀勖、侍中冯紞皆谄谀自进，攸素疾之。
现代文：中书监荀勖、侍中冯鱿都阿谀奉承自我钻营，司马攸一向厌恶他们。
English: Sima You has always disliked the fact that the Censors and the Chamberlains of the Chinese Academy of Letters, including Feng Yu, are all self-serving flatterers.

古文：勖等以朝望在攸，恐其为嗣，祸必及己，乃从容言于帝曰： 陛下万岁之后，太子不得立也。 
现代文：荀勖等人因为朝廷的期望在司马攸，恐怕他继嗣，灾祸必定殃及自己，于是不动声色地对皇帝说： 陛下万岁之后，太子无法立为皇帝。 
English: Because the expectations of the imperial court were on Sima You, I am afraid that he would succeed, and the disaster would surely befall himself. Therefore, Zou and others said to the emperor without a murmur: Long live His Majesty, the prince cannot be made emperor.

古文：帝曰： 何故？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 为什么呢? 
English: The emperor said, "Why?

古文：勖曰： 百僚内外皆归心于齐王，太子焉得立乎！
现代文：荀勖说： 百官内外都心向齐王，太子怎么能继位呢?
English: Zou said: Hundreds of officials at home and abroad have their hearts set on King Qi. How can a prince succeed to the throne?

古文：陛下试诏齐王之国，必举朝以为不可，则臣言有征矣。 
现代文：陛下试着下韶命整去所封国，必定是满朝人不同意，那么我的话就有了证明丫。 
English: If His Majesty tries to go to the fenced country with all his might, it is certain that the Manchurian people will not agree, and then my words will have proof.

古文：紞又言曰： 陛下遣诸侯之国，成五等之制者，宜先从亲始。
现代文：冯鱿又说： 陛下派遣诸侯赴封国，完成五等爵位的制度，应该从亲人开始。
English: Feng Yu also said: His Majesty sent princes to fiefdoms to complete the system of fifth-class peerage, it should start with relatives.

古文：亲莫若齐王。 
现代文：亲人没有比齐王更亲的了。 
English: There is no closer relative than King Qi.

古文：帝既信勖言，又纳紞说，太康三年乃下诏曰： 古者九命作伯，或入毗朝政，或出御方岳。
现代文：皇帝相信了荀勖的话以后，又接受了冯鱿的意见，在太康三年下韶书说： 古代官爵为九命的作伯，或入朝辅佐朝政，或出京统治四方。
English: After the emperor believed Zou's words, he also accepted Feng Zou's opinion, and in the third year of Taikang, the imperial edict said: "Ancient officials and nobles are the role models of the nine lives, or enter the court, assist the court, or rule the four directions from Beijing.

古文：周之吕望，五侯九伯，实得征之，侍中、司空、齐王攸，明德清暢，忠允笃诚。
现代文：周代的吕望，对五侯九伯，都可以征讨。侍中、司空、齐王司马攸，美德清静昌盛，忠诚公允。
English: Lvang of Zhou Dynasty can be enquired for the Five Princes and Nine Peers, including the Chamberlain, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager.

古文：以母弟之亲，受台辅之任，佐命立勋，劬劳王室，宜登显位，以称具瞻。
现代文：凭着同母弟的身份，担负着三公的重任，辅佐天命建立功勋，为王室辛劳，应该登上显赫的官位。
English: By virtue of his status as a younger brother of the same mother, he shouldered the heavy responsibilities of the Three Princes, assisted the Mandate of Heaven to establish merits, worked hard for the royal family, and should ascend to a prominent official position.

古文：其以为大司马、都督青州诸军事，侍中如故，假节，将本营千人，亲骑帐下司马大车皆如旧，增鼓吹一部，官骑满二十人，置骑司马五人。
现代文：来满足大家的期望。任命他为大司马、都督青州诸军事，侍中的职位依旧，假节，统领本营兵士千人，亲骑帐下司马大车都依旧，增加鼓吹一部，官骑补足二十人，设置骑司马五人。
English: To meet everyone's expectations, he was appointed as the grand steward and the military governor of Qingzhou, the position of the steward was still the same, the holiday, the command of the battalion of a thousand soldiers, and the car of the steward under the riding account were still the same, and the propaganda was increased by one part, the official riding was supplemented by twenty people, and the horse riding was set up by five people.

古文：余主者详案旧制施行。 
现代文：其余由主事的人按旧制施行。 
English: The rest will be carried out by the person in charge according to the old system.

古文：攸不悦，主簿丁颐曰： 昔太公封齐，犹表东海；桓公九合，以长五伯。
现代文：司马攸不高兴，主簿丁颐说： 过去太公封在齐，仍在束海显赫；齐桓公九合诸侯，在五霸中最强。
English: Sima You was not happy, and the main book, Ding Xi, said: In the past, the Tai Gong was Qi, and it was still prominent in the Zakkai; Qi Kuan Gong was the strongest of the nine princes in the Five Dynasties.

古文：况殿下诞德钦明，恢弼大籓，穆然东轸，莫不得所。
现代文：何况殿下大德钦敬圣明，辅弼大的封国，整肃东行，人人各得其所。
English: What's more, His Imperial Highness is a great moralist, reveres the sacred, supports the great vassal of the country, and travels to the east for rectification. Everyone has their place.

古文：何必绛阙，乃弘帝载！ 
现代文：何必衹有在朝廷，才能弘大帝业! 
English: Why do you have to be in the imperial court in order to promote the imperial cause!

古文：攸曰： 吾无匡时之用，卿言何多。 
现代文：司马攸说： 我没有匡正时事的能力，卿哪来那么多话。 
English: Sima You said, "I don't have the ability to rectify current affairs. Sir, why are you talking so much?"

古文：明年，策攸曰： 於戏！
现代文：第二年，给司马攸策书说： 啊!
English: The following year, he told Sima Youzheng: Ah!

古文：惟命不于常，天既迁有魏之祚。
现代文：天命不常在，天已经迁移了魏的朝廷帝业。
English: The will of heaven is not always present, and heaven has already moved the imperial court of Wei.

古文：我有晋既受顺天明命，光建群后，越造王国于东土，锡兹青社，用籓翼我邦家。
现代文：我晋朝已经接受依顺了上天的命令，荣封诸王，远在东方建立了王国，赐给他东方之地，来保卫辅助我们国家。
English: I, Jin Dynasty, have accepted and obeyed Heaven's command, crowned kings, established kingdoms far away in the East, and bestowed upon him the land of the East to defend and assist our country.

古文：茂哉无怠，以永保宗庙。 
现代文：美好啊永不怠慢，永远保卫宗庙。 
English: Beautiful ah never neglect, always defend the ancestral temple.

古文：又诏下太常，议崇锡之物，以济南郡益齐国。
现代文：又给太常下诏书，商议尊崇赏赐的物品，用济南郡增益齐国。
English: He also issued an imperial edict to the Grand Duchess, and discussed the items to be given as rewards, and used Jinan County to increase the country's wealth.

古文：又以攸子寔为北海王。
现代文：又任命司马攸的儿子司马窟为北海王。
English: He also appointed Sima You's son Sima Gu as the king of the North Sea.

古文：于是备物典策，设轩悬之乐、六佾之舞，黄钺朝车乘舆之副从焉。
现代文：于是准备物品仪节，设置轩悬的乐队、六佾的乐舞行列，黄铁朝车乘舆的副车跟从。
English: As a result, preparations were made for the ceremonial festival, setting up a band hanging in the courtyard, a six-tiered music and dance procession, and a yellow iron morning train followed by a second train.

古文：攸知勖、紞构己，愤怨发疾，乞守先后陵，不许。
现代文：司马攸知道荀勖、冯鱿陷害自己，愤怒怨恨而生病，乞求守在先后陵地，不允许。
English: Sima You knew that Zou and Feng Ye had framed themselves, and became ill with anger and resentment, and begged to be allowed to stay in the mausoleum.

古文：帝遣御医诊视，诸医希旨，皆言无疾。
现代文：皇帝派遣御医诊治，那些医生迎合皇帝旨意，都说没病。
English: The emperor sent doctors to treat him, and those doctors, bowing to the emperor's wishes, said that he was not ill.

古文：疾转笃，犹催上道。
现代文：病转重，仍催他上路。
English: When his illness worsened, he was still urged to go on the road.

古文：攸自强入辞，素持容仪，疾虽困，尚自整厉，举止如常，帝益疑无疾。
现代文：司马攸自己勉强入朝辞行，他平素保持容貌仪表，病虽重，还是自我整肃，举止如同平常，皇帝更怀疑他没病。
English: Sima You himself reluctantly resigned from the imperial court. He normally maintained his appearance and appearance. Although he was seriously ill, he was still self-disciplined and behaved as usual. The emperor even doubted that he was not ill.

古文：辞出信宿，欧血而薨，时年三十六。
现代文：出行住了两夜，吐血而死，当时三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six years old when he vomited blood and died after a two-night stay.

古文：帝哭之恸，冯紞侍侧曰： 齐王名过其实，而天下归之。
现代文：皇帝哭得悲痛，冯鱿在旁边侍奉说： 齐王的名声超过了实际，而天下人心向着他。
English: The emperor wept with grief, and Feng Li, a servant, said: "The reputation of King Qi exceeds reality, and the hearts of the world are turning to him.

古文：今自薨陨，社稷之福也，陛下何哀之过！ 
现代文：如今自己去世，是国家的福，陛下为什么要过度悲伤! 
English: Now that his own death is a blessing for the country, why should His Majesty be overly sad!

古文：帝收泪而止。
现代文：皇帝不再流泪哭泣。
English: The emperor no longer wept.

古文：诏丧礼依安平王孚故事，庙设轩悬之乐，配飨太庙。
现代文：下诏命丧礼依照安平王司马孚的先例，庙裹设轩悬的乐队，在太庙拊祭。
English: The following edict ordered the funeral to follow the precedent of Anping King Sima Fu, the temple was wrapped with a band, and the funeral ceremony was held in the Great Temple.

古文：子冏立，别有传。
现代文：儿子司马同继位，另有传。
English: His son Sima also succeeded to the throne, according to another legend.

古文：攸以礼自拘，鲜有过事。
现代文：司马攸用礼自我约束，极少有过失。
English: Sima You uses the etiquette of self-restraint and rarely makes mistakes.

古文：就人借书，必手刊其谬，然后反之。
现代文：向别人借书，必定亲手改正书中的谬误，然后再还书。
English: If you borrow a book from someone, you must correct the errors in the book with your own hands, and then return the book.

古文：加以至性过人，有触其讳者，辄泫然流涕。
现代文：加上纯厚的性情超过常人，如有触犯他避讳的情况，就潸然落泪。
English: In addition, his pure and generous nature surpasses that of an ordinary person. If there is a situation that offends his shyness, he bursts into tears.

古文：虽武帝亦敬惮之，每引之同处，必择言而后发。
现代文：即便是武帝也敬畏他，每逢叫他在一起时，一定要想好了言辞再开口。
English: Even Emperor Wu was in awe of him. Whenever he was called together, he had to think of the right words before speaking.

古文：三子：蕤、赞、寔。
现代文：三个儿子：司马蕤、司马赞、司马寔。
English: Three sons: Sima Ye, Sima Zhan and Sima Ye.

古文：蕤字景回，出继辽东王定国。
现代文：司马蕤字景回，过继给辽东王定国。
English: Sima Qian Zi Jing Hui was succeeded by Liaodong Wang Dingguo.

古文：太康初，徙封东莱王。
现代文：太康初年，改封为东莱王。
English: In the first year of Taikang, he changed his title to King of Donglai.

古文：元康中，历步兵、屯骑校尉。
现代文：元康年间，历任步兵、屯骑校尉。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, he was an infantryman and a cavalry captain.

古文：蕤性强暴，使酒，数陵侮弟冏，冏以兄故容之。
现代文：司马蕤性格强暴，酗酒任性，屡次欺凌侮辱弟弟司马间，旦墨旦因为他是兄长而宽容他。
English: Sima Yan is violent, alcoholic and headstrong. He repeatedly bullies and insults his younger brother Sima Ma. Dan Modan tolerates him because he is his elder brother.

古文：冏起义兵，赵王伦收蕤及弟北海王寔系廷尉，当诛。
现代文：司马同发动义兵，司马伦收捕司马蕤及弟弟北海王司马富交给廷尉，判杀头。
English: Sima Tong rallied volunteers, Sima Lun captured Sima Ye and his brother Beihai Wang Sima Fu and handed them over to the imperial lieutenant, who sentenced them to death.

古文：伦太子中庶子祖纳上疏谏曰： 罪不相反，恶止其身，此先哲之弘谟，百王之达制也。
现代文：司马俭的太子中庶子担铀上疏劝谏说： 罪不涉及别人，恶仅限于他自身，这是先代哲人的弘大谋略，百世帝王通行的制度。
English: Sima Jian's prince's middle son and son-in-law, Guan Yuanzhang, advised the emperor: Sin does not involve others, evil is limited to himself. This is a grand strategy of the previous philosophers, a system that has been used by a hundred emperors.

古文：是故鲧既殛死，禹乃嗣兴；二叔诛放，而邢卫无责。
现代文：因此鲧被杀而死，禹继嗣兴盛；笪赵被诛杀，基赵被流放，而砸蛮没有责任。
English: Therefore, Zhai Zhao was killed and died, and Yu Jizhe prospered; Zhao Zhao was killed, and Qi Zhao was exiled, but there was no responsibility for the defeat.

古文：逮乎战国，及至秦汉，明恕之道寝，猜嫌之情用，乃立质任以御众，设从罪以发奸，其所由来，盖三代之弊法耳。
现代文：开明宽恕的道止息，猜忌嫌疑的心思通行，于是用人质来控制他人，设立连坐法来发现奸邪。这些方法的来源，大概是三代的有害的法律。
English: The way of enlightened forgiveness has ceased, suspicion and suspicion have spread, so they use hostages to control others, and set up the method of joint sitting to discover the evil. The source of these methods is probably the three generations of harmful laws.

古文：蕤、寔，献王之子，明德之胤，宜蒙特宥，以全穆亲之典。 
现代文：司马蕤、司马寔，是献王的儿子，有明德者的后代，应受到特别的宽宥，来成全和睦亲人的典章。 
English: Sima Yu, Sima Yu, is a devoted son of the king, the offspring of a wise and virtuous man, and should be specially pardoned to complete the ceremony of reconciling relatives.

古文：会孙秀死，蕤等悉得免。
现代文：适逢孙秀死，司马蕤等人全得以免难。
English: When Sun Xiu died, Sima Yu and the others were all spared.

古文：冏拥众入洛，蕤于路迎之。
现代文：司马蕤率领兵众迎之，司马蕤在路旁迎接他。
English: Sima Yi led the troops to welcome him, and Sima Yi greeted him on the side of the road.

古文：冏不即见，须符付前顿。
现代文：司马冏不立即见他，要等交付兵符前军安顿。
English: Sima Yi did not see him immediately, and had to wait for the soldiers to be delivered and the troops to be settled.

古文：蕤恚曰： 吾坐尔殆死，曾无友于之情！ 
现代文：司马蕤怨恨说： 我受你牵连差一点丧命，怎么没有亲友之情! 
English: Sima Yi said resentfully, "I almost lost my life because of your involvement, how can I not have the feelings of relatives and friends!"

古文：及冏辅政，诏以蕤为散骑常侍，加大将军，领后军、侍中、特进，增邑满二万户。
现代文：等到司马冏辅佐朝政，下诏任命司马蕤为散骑常侍，加任大将军，兼后军、侍中、特进，增加封邑补足两万户。
English: When Sima Qian became the assistant of the imperial government, the next imperial edict appointed Sima Qian as the cavalryman, and he was appointed as the general, the rear guard, the chamberlain, and the special envoy, and the number of fiefs was increased to make up for 20,000 households.

古文：又从冏求开府，冏曰： 武帝子吴、豫章尚未开府，宜且须后。 
现代文：司马蕤又向司马同请求开设府署，司屋旦说： 亘堕的儿子呈王、辽童工还没有开设府署，应该等以后再说。 
English: Sima Yu also asked Sima Tong to open a prefectural office. Siyadan said, "Watadu's sons, Chengwang and Liao Tong, have not yet opened a prefectural office, so we should wait until later."

古文：蕤以是益怨，密表冏专权，与左卫将军王舆谋共废冏。
现代文：司马蕤因此更加怨恨，秘密上表说司马同专权，舆左卫将军工舆谋划一同废了旦区旦。
English: As a result, Sima Yao became even more resentful. He secretly made a public statement that Sima and the dictatorship and Muzawei had abolished the workers' and peasants' plan together.

古文：事觉，免为庶人。
现代文：事情败露，被免为庶民。
English: The affair was exposed, and he was dismissed as a commoner.

古文：寻诏曰： 大司马以经识明断，高谋远略，猥率同盟，安复社稷。
现代文：不久下韶说： 大司马见识广判断明，谋略高速，率领同盟，安定恢复国家。
English: Not long after, he said: "Big Sima has seen and judged widely, strategized at high speed, led the alliance, and restored the country stably."

古文：自书契所载，周召之美未足比勋，故授公上宰。
现代文：自从有文字记载以来，旦公、丑公的贤明也不足以和他的功勋相比，因而授他上宰职位。
English: Since written records have existed, the wisdom of Tang Gong and Ugongong is not enough to compare with his merits, so he was awarded the post of Shangzai.

古文：东莱王蕤潜怀怨妒，包藏祸心，与王舆密谋，图欲谮害。
现代文：束莱王司马蕤暗中忌妒，包藏祸心，与王舆密谋，想诬告陷害。
English: The king of Sokrai, Sima Yao, was secretly jealous, harbored evil intentions, conspired with Wang Shou, and wanted to frame him.

古文：收舆之日，蕤与青衣共载，微服奔走，经宿乃还。
现代文：收捕王舆那天，司屋茎和下人同车，身穿便服为王舆奔走，一宿才回家。
English: On the day of Wang Yiwu's arrest, Siyu and his subordinates rode in the same car, dressed in casual clothes to run for Wang Yiwu, and did not return home for one night.

古文：奸凶赫然，妖惑外内。
现代文：奸诈凶险显而易见，迷惑内外。
English: The treachery and peril are plain to see, both within and without.

古文：又前表冏所言深重，虽管蔡失道，牙庆乱宗，不复过也。
现代文：此外司马蕤先前上表弹劾司马冈所用的言辞深重，就是管蔡背离道义，牙庆搞乱宗族，也超不过司马蕤的措辞。
English: In addition, the rhetoric used by Sima Yi to impeach Sima Gang in the previous table is profound, that is, Guan Cai deviated from morality, Ya Qing messed up the clan, but also exceeded Sima Yi's wording.

古文：《春秋》之典，大义灭亲，其徙蕤上庸。 
现代文：《春秋》的典章，大义灭亲，把司马蕤迁徙到上庸。 
English: The ceremony of "Spring and Autumn," the righteous destruction of relatives, moved Sima Ye to Shangyong.

古文：后封微阳侯。
现代文：后来封司马蕤为微阳侯。
English: Later, he was made Weiyang marquis.

古文：永宁初，上庸内史陈锺承冏旨害蕤。
现代文：永宁初年，上庸内史陈钟禀承司马同的旨意杀害了司马蕤。
English: In the first year of Yongning, Chen Zhongxuan, a member of the Shangyong Inner Court, killed Sima Ye by the order of Sima Tong.

古文：死，诏诛锺，复蕤封，改葬以王礼。
现代文：司马同死后，下诏书诛杀陈钟，恢复司马蕤的封地，按王礼改葬。
English: After Sima Tong's death, he issued an edict to kill Chen Zhong, restore Sima Tong's fief, and have him reburied according to royal etiquette.

古文：赞字景期，继广汉殇王广德后。
现代文：司马赞字景期，过继给广汉殇王广德后人。
English: During the Sima Zang period, he was succeeded by the descendants of Guangde, the King of the Han Dynasty.

古文：年六岁，太康元年薨，谥冲王。
现代文：六岁时死，当时是太康元年，谧号是冲王。
English: He died at the age of six, in the first year of Taikang. His nickname was Chong Wang.

古文：寔字景深，初为长乐亭侯。
现代文：司马寔字景深，起初是长乐亭侯。
English: Sima Ye's character, Jing Sheng, was originally from Changle Pavilion.

古文：攸以赞薨，又以寔继广汉殇王后，改封北海王。
现代文：司马攸因为司马赞死了，又让司马塞过继给广漠殇王作后人，改封为北海王。
English: Sima You, because Sima Zan died, also allowed Sima Xie to be the successor to the King of Guangmushi, and changed his title to the King of the North Sea.

古文：永宁初为平东将军、假节，加散骑常侍，代齐王冏镇许昌。
现代文：永宁初年任平束将军、假节，加任散骑常侍，代替齐王司马间镇守许昌。
English: In the first year of Yongning's reign, he was appointed as the general of Hirazuka, in the second year, he was appointed as the knight errant, and in the third year, he was appointed as the knight errant, replacing Qi Wang Simama as the warden of Xu Chang.

古文：寻进安南将军，都督豫州军事，增邑满二万户。
现代文：不久进位为安南将军、都督豫州军事，增加封邑补足两万户。
English: He was soon promoted to General Annan, the military governor of Yuzhou, and the number of fiefdoms was increased to make up for 20,000 households.

古文：未发，留为侍中、上军将军，给千兵百骑。
现代文：没出发，留任侍中、上军将军，授他千名士兵百匹战马。
English: He did not set out, but stayed on as a chamberlain and general of the army, to whom he gave a thousand soldiers and a hundred horses.

古文：城阳哀王兆，字千秋，年十岁而夭。
现代文：城阳哀王司马兆字千秋，十岁时夭折。
English: King Sima Zhaozhu, who was mourned by the city, died at the age of ten.

古文：武帝践阼，诏曰： 亡弟千秋，少聪慧，有夙成之质，不幸早亡，先帝先后特所哀愍。
现代文：武帝登上皇位，下韶书曰： 我死去的弟弟千秋少年聪慧，有早熟的气质。不幸早早故去，先帝先后特别哀伤。
English: Emperor Wu ascended the throne, and the imperial edict said: My deceased brother was a bright young man with a precocious temperament. Unfortunately, he died early, and the former emperor was particularly sad.

古文：先后欲绍立其后，而竟未遂，每追遗意，情怀感伤。
现代文：先后想延续他的后人，而最终没如意，每当追思遣愿，情怀感伤。
English: He wanted to continue his descendants successively, but in the end it did not work out. Whenever he thought about his wish, he felt sad.

古文：其以皇子景度为千秋后，虽非典礼，亦近世之所行，且以述先后本旨也。 
现代文：立皇子景度为千秋的后人，虽然不符典章礼制，也是近世所通行的，况且是为了遵循先后的本意。 
English: Although it does not conform to the ceremonial system, it is also common in modern times, and it is also to follow the original intention.

古文：于是追加兆封谥。
现代文：于是追加司马兆的封谧。
English: As a result, the seal of Sima Zhao was added.

古文：景度以泰始六年薨，复以第五子宪继哀王后。
现代文：景度在泰始六年去世，又以第五个儿子司马宪继嗣哀王。
English: Keito died in the sixth year of Taizhi and was succeeded by his fifth son, Sima Xian.

古文：薨，复以第六子祗为东海王，继哀王后。
现代文：去世，又以第六个儿子司马祗为东海王，作哀王的后人。
English: He died, and the sixth son, Sima Ye, became the king of the East Sea, the descendant of the king of lamentation.

古文：薨，咸宁初又封第十三子遐为清河王，以继兆后。
现代文：去世，咸宁初年又封第十三个儿子司马遐为清河王，作司马兆的后人。
English: In the first year after Xianning's death, his thirteenth son, Sima Zhao, was named the King of Qinghe, making him Sima Zhao's descendant.

古文：辽东悼惠王定国，年三岁薨。
现代文：辽东悼惠王定国，三岁时死去。
English: Liaodong mourns Hui Wangding, who died at the age of three.

古文：咸宁初追加封谥，齐王攸以长子蕤为嗣。
现代文：咸宁初年追加封谧，齐王司马攸让长子司马蕤继嗣。
English: In the first year of Xianning's reign, he was additionally given the title of prince, and the king of Qi, Sima You, gave his eldest son, Sima Yao, the title of heir.

古文：蕤薨，子遵嗣。
现代文：司马蕤去世，儿子司马遵继嗣。
English: Sima Yao died, and his son Sima Zun succeeded him.

古文：广汉殇王广德，年二岁薨。
现代文：广汉殇王广德，两岁时死去。
English: Guang De, King of the Han Dynasty, died at the age of two.

古文：咸宁初追加封谥，齐王攸以第五子赞绍封。
现代文：咸宁初年追加封谧，齐王司马攸让第五个儿子司马赞继承封爵。
English: In the first year of Xianning's reign, he was additionally knighted, and the king of Qi, Sima You, allowed his fifth son, Sima Zan, to inherit the knighthood.

古文：薨，攸更以第二子寔嗣广德。乐安平王鉴，字大明，初封临泗亭侯。
现代文：死，改让第二子直继嗣。乐安平王司马鉴字大明，起初封为临泗亭侯。
English: After his death, his second son became his direct heir. Le Anping Wang Sima Jian Zi Daming, was originally named Linyi Ting Zang.

古文：武帝践阼，封乐安王。
现代文：武帝登上皇位，封他为乐安王。
English: Emperor Wu ascended the throne and named him King Le An.

古文：帝为鉴及燕王机高选师友，下诏曰： 乐安王鉴、燕王机并以长大，宜得辅导师友，取明经儒学，有行义节俭，使足严惮。
现代文：皇帝为司马鉴及燕王司马机认真挑选师长朋友，下诏书说： 乐安王司马鉴、燕王司马机都已长大，应该有辅导他们的师长朋友，选取精通经典儒学，有好品行节约俭朴的人，使他们足以敬畏。
English: The emperor carefully selected teachers and friends for Sima Jian and Yan Wang Sima Ji, and the next edict said: Le An Wang Sima Jian and Yan Wang Sima Ji are all grown up, they should have teachers and friends to guide them, and select people who are proficient in classical Confucianism, have good morals, and are thrifty and frugal, so that they are enough to be feared.

古文：昔韩起与田苏游而好善，宜必得其人。 
现代文：过去韩起和田苏交往从而好行善，应当一定得到称职的人。 
English: In the past, Han Zi and Tian Su interacted to do good deeds, so they should definitely get a competent person.

古文：泰始中，拜越骑校尉。
现代文：泰始年间，官拜越骑校尉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he became a lieutenant of the Yue cavalry.

古文：咸宁初，以齐之梁邹益封，因之国，服侍中之服。
现代文：咸宁初年，用齐国的梁邹扩充封地，于是赴封国，穿戴侍中的服饰。
English: In the first year of Xianning, he expanded the fief with the state of Qi, so he went to the fief and wore the dress of the middle servant.

古文：元康初，征为散骑常侍、上军大将军，领射声校尉。
现代文：元康初年，征召他任散骑常侍、上军大将军，兼射声校尉。
English: In the first year of Yuan Kang, he was conscripted as a straggler, a general, and a captain.

古文：寻迁使持节、都督豫州军事、安南将军，代清河王遐镇许昌，以疾不行。
现代文：不久迁任使持节、都督豫州军事、安南将军，代替清河王司马遐镇守许昌，因病没有成行。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of envoy to hold the festival, the military governor of Yuzhou, General Annan, and replaced the Qing River King Sima Qian as the town guard of Xu Chang. Due to illness, he did not make the trip.

古文：七年薨，子殇王籍立。
现代文：七年去世，儿子殇王司马籍继位。
English: He died seven years later, and was succeeded by his son, Shao Wang Simaseki.

古文：薨，无子，齐王冏以子冰绍鉴后。
现代文：去世，没有儿子，齐王司马间让儿子司马冰作司马鉴的后代。
English: When King Sima of Qi died without a son, he asked his son Sima Bing to become the descendant of Sima Jian.

古文：以济阴万一千二百一十九户改为广阳国，立冰为广阳王。
现代文：用济阴一万一千二百一十九户改为广阳国，立司马冰做广阳王。
English: The eleven thousand two hundred and nineteen households in Jiyin were changed to Guangyang Province, and Sima Bing was made the king of Guangyang.

古文：冏败，废。
现代文：司马间失败，广阳王被废。
English: Sima failed, Guangyang Wang was scrapped.

古文：乐平王延祚，字大思，少有笃疾，不任封爵。
现代文：乐平王延祚字大思，小时有重病，不胜任封爵。
English: King Leping of Yancheng thought too much, had a serious illness at an early age, and was not competent to be knighted.

古文：太康初，诏曰： 弟祚早孤无识，情所哀愍。
现代文：太康初年，诏书说： 弟司马延祚早年丧父尚幼小无知，令人哀伤同情。
English: In the first year of Taikang, the imperial edict said: Sima Yanjun's younger brother Sima Yanjun lost his father at an early age, he was too young and ignorant, which was sad and pitiful.

古文：幼得笃疾，日冀其差，今遂废痼，无复后望，意甚伤之。
现代文：小时患重病，每天盼着病好，如今竟成了残废，不再有治好的指望，心中很是哀伤。
English: I was seriously ill for an hour and hoped for a cure every day. Now I am crippled and have no hope of a cure. My heart is very sad.

古文：其封为乐平王，使有名号，以慰吾心。 
现代文：封他为乐平王，使他有个名号，来安慰我的心。 
English: I named him King Leping, and gave him a title to comfort my heart.

古文：寻薨，无子。
现代文：不久死去，没有儿子。
English: He died soon after, without a son.

古文：史臣曰：平原性理不恆，世莫之测。
现代文：史臣曰：平原王情绪理智不稳定，世上没人能猜度他。
English: Shichen said: the king of the plain is emotionally and intellectually unstable, and no one in the world can guess him.

古文：及其处乱离之际，属交争之秋，而能远害全身，享兹介福，其愚不可及已！
现代文：说到他处在动乱离散的年代，生活在交兵争斗的时期，却能远离灾害保全自身，享受大福，他的愚昧别人是达不到的!
English: He said that he was in a turbulent and dispersed era, living in a period of warring and fighting, but he was able to protect himself from disasters and enjoy great blessings. His ignorance is beyond others!

古文：琅邪武功既暢，饰之以温恭，扶风文教克宣，加之以孝行，抑宗室之可称者也。
现代文：琅邪王武功既好，再加上温和恭敬，扶风王文采教化出众，再加上孝行，或者是宗室中可以称道的人吧。
English: It is not only good to be able to defeat the evil king in martial arts, but also to be gentle and respectful. It is also good to be able to support the king in literature and education, and it is also good to be a filial son, or a person who can be praised in the family.

古文：齐王以两献之亲，弘二南之化，道光雅俗，望重台衡，百辟具瞻，万方属意。
现代文：齐王以文帝、景帝的宗亲身份，弘扬《周南》、《召南》的教化，道德光照雅俗，名望在宰辅中重大，百官景仰，万方归心。
English: As the great-grandfather of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, King Qi promoted the enlightenment of "Southern Zhou" and "Southern Zhao," the morality of which shines with elegance and custom, the fame of which is great among the emperors, the admiration of a hundred officials, and the hearts of all people.

古文：既而地疑致逼，文雅见疵，紞勖陈蔓草之邪谋，武皇深翼子之滞爱。
现代文：后来地位高而遭疑惑逼迫，文采儒雅而被挑毛病，冯鱿、荀勖拿出如同蔓草的奸邪计谋，武帝深深地维护着对儿子难解的爱心。
English: Later, the high-ranking Emperor Wu was persecuted by suspicion, his elegant style of writing was criticized, and Feng Xi and Zou came up with treacherous schemes like weeds. Emperor Wu deeply maintained his difficult love for his son.

古文：遂乃褫龙章于衮职，徙侯服于下籓，未及戒涂，终于愤恚，惜哉！
现代文：于是剥夺了齐王在朝中的权力，迁徙到千里外的封国，没等到筹备登程，就死于愤恨，可惜啊!
English: As a result, he deprived King Qi of his power in the middle of the court, moved to a fief thousands of miles away, and died of resentment without waiting for preparations for the journey. What a pity!

古文：若使天假之年而除其害，奉缀衣之命，膺负图之托，光辅嗣君，允厘邦政，求诸冥兆，或废兴之有期，徵之人事，庶胜残之可及，何八王之敢力争，五胡之能竞逐哉！
现代文：假如上天给他年寿而且除掉他的政敌，奉命作心腹之臣，接受治国的重托，辅佐继位的皇帝，确实能治理国家政治，那么从阴间的征兆测算，或许废兴自有时，从人世间的事态证明，可能胜败可以推求，八王哪敢力争，五胡怎能争逐!
English: If heaven gave him longevity and eliminated his political enemies, if he was ordered to be a subordinate subject, received the entrustment of governing the country, and assisted the emperor who succeeded to the throne, and if he could indeed govern the country's politics, then from the signs of the underworld, perhaps the abolition of prosperity from time to time, from the state of affairs in the world, possible victory or defeat can be inferred, how dare the eight kings strive, how can the five Hu compete!

古文：《诗》云 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁， 攸实有之； 谗人罔极，交乱四国， 其荀冯之谓也。
现代文：《诗》说 没有贤人，国家就衰败了 ，司马攸实在可以证实逭话； 奸臣说人坏话没有止境，扰乱四面八方 ，说的大概是荀勖、冯统一类人吧。
English: "Poetry" says that without wise men, the country will decline, Sima Youyou can actually confirm this saying; treacherous vassals say bad things about people without end, disrupting all directions, probably said by Zou and Feng Rongyi.

古文：赞曰：文宣孙子，或贤或鄙。
现代文：赞曰：文帝、宣帝的子孙，有的贤明有的鄙下。
English: Zang said: The descendants of Emperor Wen and Emperor Xuan, some are wise and some are despicable.

古文：扶风遗爱，琅邪克己。
现代文：扶风王留下爱心，琅邪王约束克制自身。
English: The king of the wind leaves love, and the king of evil restrains himself.

古文：澹谄凶魁，肜参衅始。
现代文：司马澹谄媚凶虐数第一，司马肜参与了公报私仇。
English: Sima Qianmei was the first in the number of brutalities. Sima Qianmei participated in the communique of personal vendetta.

古文：干虽静退，性乖恆理。
现代文：司马干虽然清虚退让，但性情理智不稳定。
English: Although Sima Gan is pure and humble, he is mentally unstable.

古文：彼美齐献，卓尔不群。
现代文：那美好的齐献王，出类拔萃。
English: That wonderful Zi Xian Wang is outstanding.

古文：自家刑国，纬武经文。
现代文：自己治理国家，文武双全。
English: Self-governance of the country, both literature and martial arts are complete.

古文：木摧于秀，兰烧以薰。
现代文：树木因高大而被砍伐，兰花因能熏香而被烧掉。
English: Trees were cut down because they were too tall, and orchids were burned because they could burn incense.

