古文：张易之王准王毛仲李林甫卢绚李辅国韦渠牟鱼朝恩元载路岩高湘
现代文：张易之王准王毛仲李林甫卢绚李辅国韦渠牟鱼朝恩元载路岩高湘
English: The king of Zhang Yi, the king of Maozhong, the king of Maozhong, the king of Linfu, the king of Lu, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, the king of Wei

古文：卢隐
现代文：卢隐
English: Lu Ying

古文：张易之
现代文：张易之
English: Zhang Yizhi

古文：张易之、昌宗，时初入朝，官位尚卑，谄附者乃呼为五郎、六郎。
现代文：张易之、昌宗，初入朝廷时，官位尚低微，谄媚者称他们为五郎、六郎，后来，大家也都这样叫了。
English: When Zhang Yizhi and Chang Zong first entered the imperial court, their official ranks were still low. Their flatterers called them Goro and Rokuro. Later, everyone called them the same.

古文：自后因以成俗。张昌仪兄弟恃易之、昌宗之宠，所居奢溢，逾于王者。
现代文：张昌仪兄弟依仗张易之、昌宗的宠幸，住宅过份豪华，超过一般王公。
English: Zhang Changyi's brothers relied on Zhang Yi's and Changzong's favors, and the house was excessively luxurious, exceeding that of an ordinary prince.

古文：末年，有人题其门曰：一两丝，能得几时络？
现代文：武则天末年，有人在他大门上写道：一两丝能纺几日线？
English: In the last days of the Wu Zetian era, someone wrote on his gate: How many yarns can one or two threads spin?

古文：昌仪见之，遽命笔续其下曰：一日即足。
现代文：张昌仪看到，立刻命人拿笔在下面写道：一日即足。
English: Zhang Changyi saw this and immediately ordered someone to take a pen and write the following: "One day is enough."

古文：未几祸及。
现代文：不久，遭了祸，身败名裂。
English: Soon, disaster struck, and he was disgraced.

古文：张昌宗之贵也，武三思谓之王子晋后身，为诗以赠之，诗至今犹存。
现代文：张昌宗的显贵，武三思说他象周灵王太子晋一样短寿，并写诗赠给他，这诗至今仍然存在。
English: Zhang Changzong's eminence, Wu Sansi said that he was as short-lived as Zhou Ling Wang Taizi Jin, and wrote a poem to him, which still exists today.

古文：王准
现代文：王准
English: Wang Jun

古文：王鉷之子准为卫尉少卿，出入宫中，以斗鸡侍帝左右。
现代文：王鉷的儿子王准任卫尉少卿，经常出入宫中，他会斗鸡，经常在皇帝左右侍候。
English: Wang Zhen's son, Wang Zhen, was appointed to the position of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Guards. He often went in and out of the palace. He could fight cocks and often waited on the emperor's right and left.

古文：时李林甫方持权恃势。林甫子岫为将作监，以入侍帷幄。
现代文：当时李林甫刚有权势，他的儿子李岫任主将监军，经常出入皇帝的内室。
English: At that time, Li Linfugang was powerful, and his son Li Xi served as the commander-in-chief and overseer of the army, often entering and leaving the emperor's inner room.

古文：岫常为准所侮，而不敢发一言。
现代文：李岫常受王准的欺侮，而不敢发一言。
English: Li Yao was often bullied by Wang Jun and did not dare to say a word.

古文：一旦准尽率其徒过驸马王瑶私第。
现代文：一天，王准率领他的一伙人经过驸马王瑶的住处。
English: One day, Wang Quanzhong led a group of his men to pass by the residence of Xingma Wang Yao.

古文：瑶望尘趋拜，准挟弹，命中于瑶巾冠之上，因折其玉簪，以为簪笑乐。
现代文：王瑶并摆设酒宴让王准寻欢作乐。
English: Wang Yao also arranged a wine banquet for Wang Jun to have fun.

古文：遂致酒张乐，永穆公主亲御匕，公主即帝之长女也，仁孝端淑，颇推于戚里，帝特所钟爱。
现代文：永穆公主亲自把勺侍候他们。永穆公主是皇帝的长女，为人仁义孝顺，端庄贤淑，被人们称赞，皇帝也特别喜爱她，亲戚邻居都尊敬他。
English: Princess Yongmu personally served them with a spoon. Princess Yongmu is the eldest daughter of the emperor, a benevolent, filial, dignified and virtuous person, praised by the people. The emperor also particularly likes her, and relatives and neighbors respect him.

古文：准既去，或有谓瑶曰：鼠辈虽恃其父势，然长公主，帝爱女，君待之或阙，帝岂不介意邪？
现代文：王准走后，有人对王瑶说：这些鼠辈，依仗他父亲的权势作威作福，可是，大公主是皇帝的爱女，你对待她象对待下人似的让她侍候王准，皇帝能不介意吗？
English: After Wang Jun left, someone said to Wang Yao: "These rats rely on their father's power to dominate and do good. However, the great princess is the emperor's beloved daughter. If you treat her like a subordinate and have her wait on Wang Jun, will the emperor not mind?"

古文：瑶曰：天子怒，无所畏；但性命系七郎，安敢不尔？
现代文：王瑶说：皇帝发怒，我不怕。但我的性命系在七郎的手里，我敢不那样做吗？
English: Wang Yao said, "I am not afraid of the emperor's anger, but my life is in Shichiro's hands. Do I dare not do that?

古文：时人多呼为七郎。其盛势横暴，人之所畏也如是。
现代文：当时人们都把王准叫七郎，他盛气凌人，横暴一方，人们非常畏惧他。
English: At that time, people called Wang Zheng as Shichiro. He was arrogant and violent, and people were very afraid of him.

古文：王毛仲
现代文：就象王瑶畏惧他一样。王毛仲
English: Just as Wang Yao feared him. Wang Maozhong

古文：王毛仲本高丽人，玄宗在藩邸，与李宜得服勤左右，帝皆爱之。每待宴，与姜皎同榻，坐于帝前。
现代文：王毛仲是高丽人，玄宗做藩王的时候，他和李宜得在皇帝左右服侍，皇帝非常喜爱他，每当侍宴时，他和姜皎同坐一床，坐在皇帝面前。
English: Wang Maozhong was a native of Goryeo. When Xuanzong was the king of the domain, he and Li Yi had to serve around the emperor. The emperor loved him very much. Whenever there was a banquet, he and Jiang Chen would sit on the same bed, sitting in front of the emperor.

古文：既而贵倨恃旧，益为不法。
现代文：因此，他在同僚中很傲慢，做一些不法的事，皇帝常常宽容他。
English: As a result, he was arrogant among his peers, did some illegal things, and the emperor often tolerated him.

古文：帝常优容之，每遣中官问讯。毛仲受命之后，稍不如意，必恣其凌辱，而后遣还。
现代文：皇帝每次有事派宦官去他家里，他受命之后，稍不如意，必然要随意凌辱宦官，而后把宦官撵走。
English: Every time the emperor sent a eunuch to his house for some reason, he was bound to abuse the eunuch at will, and then send the eunuch away.

古文：高力士、杨思勖忌之颇深，而未尝敢言于帝。
现代文：高力士、杨思勖非常憎恨他，却没敢向皇帝说。
English: Gao Lixi and Yang Siyu hated him very much, but they did not dare to tell the emperor.

古文：毛仲妻李氏既诞育三日，帝命力士赐以酒食金帛甚厚，仍命其子为五品官。
现代文：王毛仲的妻子生子三天，皇帝命令高力士送去了很多酒食和金银布匹，又任命他儿子为五品官。
English: Three days after Wang Maozhong's wife gave birth to a son, the emperor ordered Gao Lixing to send a lot of wine, food, gold and silver cloth, and appointed his son as the fifth grade official.

古文：力士既还，帝曰：毛仲喜否，复有何词？
现代文：力士回来时，皇帝问。毛仲高兴不？他说什么了？
English: When the wrestlers returned, the emperor asked, "Is Mao Zhong happy? What did he say?"

古文：力士曰：出其儿以示臣，熟眄褓中曰：此儿岂不消三品官？
现代文：力士说：他抱出婴儿给我看，自己注视着襁褓中的小儿，说： 这个孩子起码也应是三品官。
English: The wrestler said: He held out the baby to show me. He looked at the child in the cradle and said: This child should at least be a third-grade official.

古文：帝大怒曰：往诛韦氏，此贼尚持两端，避事不入，我未尝言之。今敢以赤子恨我邪？
现代文：玄宗大怒，说：以前诛杀韦氏时，此贼两面讨好，避事不介入，我未曾说他，现在，他竟敢因为孩子事恨我。
English: Xuanzong was furious and said, "In the past, when I fought and killed Mr. Wei, this thief was accommodating to both sides and avoided getting involved. I never told him, but now, he dares to hate me because of the child."

古文：由是恩义益衰。
现代文：从此，皇帝对他的恩宠逐渐减弱。
English: From then on, the emperor's favour towards him gradually waned.

古文：帝自先天在位后十五年，至开府者唯四人。
现代文：皇帝从先天年间开始在位的十五年中做到开府的只有四人。
English: In the fifteen years that the emperor has been on the throne since the day before yesterday, only four people have been able to open the capital.

古文：后父王仁皎、姚崇、宋璟、王毛仲而已。李林甫
现代文：这四人是皇后父亲王仁皎、姚崇、宋璟、王毛仲。李林甫
English: The four are the queen's father, Wang Renzhong, Yao Chong, Song Qi, and Wang Maozhong. Li Linfu

古文：张九龄在相位，有謇谔匪躬之诚。
现代文：张九龄任宰相时，非常正直、刚毅，尽职尽责。
English: When Zhang Julin served as prime minister, he was very honest, courageous, and conscientious.

古文：玄宗既在位年深，稍怠庶政。
现代文：唐玄宗在位年久，对于朝政有些松懈。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang had been on the throne for a long time, and he was somewhat lax about imperial politics.

古文：每见帝，无不极言得失。李林甫时方同列，闻帝意，阴欲中之。
现代文：张九龄每次见到皇帝，他都能把朝廷的得失说出来，当时，李林甫刚到相位，他想暗地里中伤张九龄，迎合帝意。
English: Every time Zhang Juering saw the emperor, he was able to talk about the gains and losses of the imperial court. At that time, Li Linfu had just arrived at the stage, he wanted to secretly slander Zhang Juering and cater to the imperial will.

古文：时欲加朔方节度使牛仙客实封，九龄因称其不可。甚不叶帝意。
现代文：当时皇帝要对朔方节度使牛仙客进行实封。九龄说不行，很不合皇帝的旨意。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to seal the Niu Xianke to the Shuo Fang Festival. Jiuling said no, it was very inconsistent with the emperor's will.

古文：他日，林甫请见，屡陈九龄颇怀诽谤。
现代文：另一天，李林甫请见皇帝时，对张九龄进行了诽谤。
English: On another day, when Li Linfu went to see the emperor, he slandered Zhang Jiuling.

古文：于时方秋，帝命高力士持白羽扇以赐，将寄意焉。
现代文：初秋的时候，皇帝命高力士赐给张九龄白羽扇，这里面寄寓了皇帝不用张九龄的意思。
English: At the beginning of autumn, the emperor ordered Gao Lixi to give Zhang Jiuling a white feather fan, which implied that the emperor did not need Zhang Jiuling.

古文：九龄惶恐，因作赋以献；又为归燕诗以贻林甫，其诗曰：海燕何微眇，乘春亦暂来。
现代文：张九龄接到后明白了皇帝的意思，也很恐慌，因此他作了一篇赋献给了皇帝。又给李林甫写了一首《归燕诗》。这首诗是：海燕何微眇，乘春亦暂来。
English: After receiving the letter, Zhang Juling understood the emperor's meaning and panicked, so he wrote a poem dedicated to the emperor. He also wrote a poem for Li Linfu, "A Return to Yan." The poem is: "Haiyan, why are you so weak? Spring is coming."

古文：岂知泥滓贱，只见玉堂开。
现代文：岂知泥滓溅，只见玉堂开。
English: You wouldn't know muddy splashing, only to see the Jade Hall open.

古文：绣户时双入，华轩日几回。
现代文：绣户时双入，华轩日几回。
English: When embroidering, double-entry, Huaxuan several times a day.

古文：无心与物竞，鹰隼莫相猜。
现代文：无心与物竞，鹰隼莫相猜。
English: There is no intention to compete with things, and the eagle cannot guess.

古文：林甫览之，知其必退，恚怒稍解。
现代文：李林甫一看，知道了张九龄必退，愤怒才有所缓解。
English: When Li Linfu saw this, he knew that Zhang Jiuling had to step down, and his anger eased.

古文：九龄洎裴耀卿罢免之日，自中书至月华门，将就班列，二人鞠躬卑逊，林甫处其中，抑扬自得。
现代文：张九龄和裴耀卿被罢免那天，从中书省到月华门，站在班列之中，二人鞠躬时非常谦卑，李林甫也在其中，非常傲慢。
English: On the day that Zhang Julinling and Pei Yaoqing were removed from their posts, they went from Zhongshu to Yuehua Gate and stood in the middle of the procession. When they bowed, they were very humble. Li Linfu was also there, very arrogant.

古文：林甫视其诏，大怒曰：犹为左右丞相邪？
现代文：旁观者窃语说：这是一雕挟两兔。一会儿，皇帝下诏，命张九龄，裴耀卿为左右仆射，罢掉了宰相之职。
English: Onlookers whispered: This is a carving of two rabbits. A moment later, the emperor issued an edict, ordering Zhang Julin, with Pei Yaoqing as his right and left flanks, to abolish the post of prime minister.

古文：二人趋就本班，林甫目送之。
现代文：李林甫大怒说。这还不是左右丞相吗？李林甫目送张、裴二人急步回到班列。
English: Li Linfu said angrily, "Isn't this the left and right chancellor?" Li Linfu saw Zhang off, and the two Bais hurried back to the queue.

古文：公卿已下视之，不觉股栗。
现代文：公卿以下的诸官看到李林甫这副凶相，不觉两腿发颤。
English: When the officials below the court noble saw Li Linfu's evil countenance, they felt their legs trembling.

古文：卢绚
现代文：卢绚
English: Lu Hua

古文：玄宗宴于勤政楼下，巷无居人。
现代文：唐玄宗在勤政楼设宴，胡同里没有老百姓。
English: Tang Xuan Zong held a banquet in the Gongzheng Building, but there were no ordinary people in the alley.

古文：宴罢，帝犹垂帘以观。
现代文：宴会结束，皇帝仍然在楼上垂帘观看。
English: At the end of the banquet, the emperor was still watching from upstairs.

古文：兵部侍郎卢绚谓帝已归宫掖，垂鞭按辔，横纵楼下。
现代文：兵部侍郎卢绚以为皇帝已经回宫，平稳地骑马走在楼下。
English: Lu Hua, the attendant of the military department, thought that the emperor had already returned to the palace, and rode downstairs smoothly.

古文：绚负文雅之称，而复风标清粹。帝一见，不觉目送之，问左右曰：谁？
现代文：卢绚平时就很文雅，而又风度高洁，仪表俊逸，皇帝一见，不自觉地目送了他一段。皇帝问左右近臣：这是谁？
English: Lu Hua Rong was very elegant in ordinary times, with a refined demeanor and a handsome appearance. At first sight, the emperor involuntarily gave him a look. The emperor asked his right and left courtiers: Who is this?

古文：近臣具以绚名氏对之。
现代文：近臣便把卢绚的姓名告诉了皇帝。
English: A close retainer then told the emperor Lu Hua's name.

古文：帝亟称其蕴藉。
现代文：皇帝非常称赞他含蓄宽容。
English: The emperor praised him highly for his implicit tolerance.

古文：是时林甫方持权忌能，帝之左右宠幸，未尝不厚以金帛为贿。由是帝之动静，林甫无不知之。
现代文：这时李林甫正掌权，他嫉贤妒能，他以金银财物买通皇帝的宠幸者，因此，皇帝的一言一行，李林甫没有不知道的。
English: At this time, Li Linfu was in power. He was jealous and envious. He bought the emperor's favorites with gold, silver and property. Therefore, Li Linfu did not know the emperor's every word and deed.

古文：翌日，林甫召绚之子弟谓曰：贤尊以素望清崇，今南方藉才，圣上有交广之寄，可乎？
现代文：第二天，李林甫把卢绚的儿子找来对他说：你父亲威望很高，受到人们的尊崇，现在南方缺乏人才，皇帝把这事寄托在你父亲身上，可以吗？
English: The next day, Li Linfu called Lu Huan's son and said to him, "Your father has a high reputation and is respected by the people. There is a shortage of talent in the south. The emperor has entrusted this matter to your father. Is that okay?"

古文：若惮遐方，即当请老。不然，以宾詹仍分务东洛，亦优贤之命也。
现代文：若是怕远的话，就应该以老请退，不然的话，以宾詹的身份到东都洛阳去。这是对你父亲的优待。
English: If you are afraid of the distance, you should ask your father to leave, otherwise, you should go to Luoyang, the eastern capital, as a Binzhan. This is preferential treatment for your father.

古文：子归而具道建议可否，于是绚以宾詹为请。
现代文：你回去把这件事完完全全对你父亲讲述一遍。可以吗？于是卢绚请求担任宾詹。
English: Can you go back and tell your father the whole story? Lu Huan then asked to be the pen pal.

古文：林甫恐乖众望，出于华州刺史。
现代文：李林甫怕有悖于众望，让卢绚出任华州刺史。
English: Li Linfu was afraid to go against the public's wishes and let Lu Hua take the lead in the history of Huazhou.

古文：不旬月，诬其有疾，为郡不理，授太子詹事，员外安置
现代文：不过一个月，又诬卢绚有病不能管理郡事，授他任太子詹事，只是一个员外，不是正经官职。
English: However, a month later, he was unable to manage county affairs due to illness, and he was given the post of Crown Prince Zhanji, which was just an extra post, not a regular official post.

古文：李辅国
现代文：李辅国
English: Li Fuguo

古文：玄宗为太上皇，在兴庆宫居。
现代文：唐肃宗继位后，玄宗当了太上皇，居住在兴庆宫。
English: After Emperor Suizong of Tang Dynasty succeeded to the throne, Emperor Xuanzong became the emperor and lived in Xingqing Palace.

古文：久雨初晴，幸勤政楼。
现代文：一天，久雨初晴，玄宗到了勤政楼。
English: One day, after a long rain and in the early hours of the morning, Xuanzong arrived at the Gongzheng Building.

古文：楼下市人及街中往来者，喜且泫然曰：不期今日再得见太平天子。
现代文：楼下的市民和来往行人，见到了玄宗，流着欢喜的眼泪，高呼万岁，声音惊天动地。
English: Downstairs, citizens and passers-by, seeing Xuanzong, shed tears of joy, shouted "long live!" and the sound was earth-shattering.

古文：传呼万岁，声动天地。时肃宗不豫，李辅国诬奏云：此皆九仙媛、高力士、陈玄礼之异谋也。
现代文：当时肃宗正生病，李辅国上奏，诬陷说：这都是九仙媛、高力士、陈玄礼搞的阴谋。他私自下诏，将太上皇迁到西内。
English: At that time, Su Zong Zheng was ill, and Li Yu Guo made a speech, falsely saying, "This is all a conspiracy of the Nine Immortals, Gao Lixi, and Chen Xuanli." He privately issued an edict to move the emperor to the West.

古文：下矫诏迁太上皇于西内，给其扈从部曲，不过老弱三二十人。及中逵，攒刃曜日，辅国统之。
现代文：护送太上皇的人，只配了二三十个老弱者，到了交叉路口，四面八方却都有执刀的卫士，他们都听从李辅国的命令。
English: There were only twenty or thirty old and weak men to escort the emperor. When they reached the crossroads, there were guards with swords on all sides, and they all obeyed the orders of Li Yuxuo.

古文：太上皇惊，欲坠马数四，赖左右扶持乃上。
现代文：看到这种情况，太上皇很吃惊，好几次掉下马来，都被服侍者扶上了马。
English: Seeing this situation, the Emperor was very surprised. He fell off his horse several times, but the attendants helped him back on.

古文：高力士跃马而前，厉声曰：五十年太平天子，李辅国汝旧臣，不宜无礼，李辅国下马！
现代文：高力士骑马来到李辅国面前说：太上皇是五十年的太平天子，李辅国你也是老臣了，不应该这样无礼，你给我下马。
English: Gao Lixi rode a horse and rode to Li Yu's country and said: "Your Majesty is the Taiping Heavenly Child of fifty years, Li Yu's country, you are also an elder minister, you should not be so impolite, get off my horse."

古文：辅国不觉失辔而下。
现代文：李辅国赶紧下了马。
English: Li Fuguo quickly dismounted.

古文：宣太上皇诰曰：将士各得好生。
现代文：高力士宣示了太上皇的旨意，将士们应该忠于职守。
English: Colossus proclaimed the emperor's will that soldiers should be loyal to their duties.

古文：于是辅国令兵士咸韬刃于鞘中，齐声云：太上皇万福。
现代文：于是李辅国命令士兵把刀放回刀鞘内，齐声喊，太上皇万福，纷纷向太上皇叩拜。
English: So Li Yu ordered the soldiers to put their swords back in their scabbards and shouted in unison, "Long live the Emperor!" and bowed to the Emperor one after another.

古文：一时拜舞。力士又曰：李辅国拢马！
现代文：高力士又说，李辅国牵马。
English: Gao Lixi also said that Li Yu's country is leading the horse.

古文：辅国遂著靴，出行拢马，与兵士等护侍太上皇，平安到西内。
现代文：李辅国赶紧穿上靴子，去牵马，和兵士们一齐护送太上皇平安到了西内。
English: Li Fuguo quickly put on his boots, went to lead the horse, and together with the soldiers escorted the Emperor safely to the West.

古文：辅国领众既退，太上皇泣持力士手曰：微将军，阿瞒已为兵死鬼矣。
现代文：李辅国领众人退出后，太上皇哭着拉住了高力士的手说，多亏你呀！若不，我已成刀下鬼了。
English: After Li Yu led everyone out of the room, the Empress Dowager, weeping, took Gao Lixi's hand and said, "Thanks to you! If not, I would have been killed by the sword."

古文：既而九仙媛、力士、玄礼。长流远恶处，此皆辅国之矫诏也。
现代文：不久九仙媛、高力士、陈玄礼，都流放到瘴气多的地方，这都是李辅国下的假诏书。
English: Soon, Jiu Xian Yuan, Gao Lixi, and Chen Xuanli were all exiled to places with a lot of bad breath. These were all fake imperial edicts issued under the reign of Li Yu.

古文：时肃宗大渐，辅国专朝，意西内之复有变故也。
现代文：当时肃宗病危，李辅国专权，他也怕西内太上皇再有什么变故。
English: At that time, Su Zong was critically ill, Li Yu was the sole ruler of the country, and he was also afraid of what would happen to the Emperor of the West.

古文：韦渠牟
现代文：韦渠牟
English: Weiqiu Mou

古文：贞元末，太府卿韦渠牟、金吾李齐运、度支裴延龄、京兆尹嗣道王实，皆承恩宠事，荐人多得名位。
现代文：唐德宗贞元末年，太府卿韦渠牟、金吾李齐运、度支裴延龄、京兆尹嗣道王实等人，都得到皇上的恩宠，他们推荐的人，都得到了名位。
English: In the last years of Tang Dezong Zhengyuan, Dafu Qing Wei Quimu, Kingu Li Qiyun, Du Zhi Pei Yanling, Jing Zhao Yin Zi Dao Wang Si and others all received the grace of the emperor, and the people they recommended were all given prestigious positions.

古文：时刘师老、穆寂、皆应科目，渠牟主持穆寂，齐运主持师老。
现代文：当时，刘师老、穆寂来应选。渠牟主管穆寂，齐运主管师老。
English: At that time, Liu Shilao and Mu Jia came to apply for the election. Du Mou was in charge of Mu Jia, and they were in charge of Shilao.

古文：会齐运朝对，上嗟其羸弱，许其致政，而师老失授。
现代文：恰赶上齐运上朝时。皇上说李齐运身体软弱，让他回家，而师老就没有授官。
English: Just in time for the arrival of Qi Yun to the imperial court. The emperor said that Li Qi Yun was weak and let him go home, but Shi Lao was not given a post.

古文：故无名子曰：太府朝天升穆老，尚书倒地落刘师。
现代文：一个无名人说：太府朝天升穆老，尚书倒地落刘师。
English: A nameless person said: Taifu ascended to heaven and became Mu Lao, Shangshu fell to earth and became Liu Shi.

古文：又渠牟因对德宗，德宗问之曰：我拟用郑絪作宰相，如何？
现代文：有一次韦渠牟面对德宗。德宗问他：我想用郑絪作宰相，怎么样？
English: Once, Wei Qumu confronted Dezong. Dezong asked him, "I want to use Zheng Qi as prime minister, how about it?"

古文：渠牟曰：若用此人，必败陛下公事。
现代文：渠牟说，若用此人，必定会坏了皇上的大事。
English: Qu Mu said that if this person were to be used, it would certainly ruin the emperor's great undertaking.

古文：他日又问，对亦如此。
现代文：以后又问他，他仍然这样回答。
English: Asked again later, he said the same thing.

古文：帝曰：我用郑絪定也，卿勿更言。
现代文：皇帝说，我用郑絪已定了，你不用再说了。
English: The emperor said, "I've already decided to use Zheng Zhen, you don't need to say anything else."

古文：絪即昭国司徒公也。
现代文：郑絪便被任为昭国司徒公，后又入相位。
English: Zheng Yao was then appointed to the post of Shao Guo Si Tuo Gong, and later he was promoted again.

古文：再入相位，以清俭文学，号为贤相，于今传之。
现代文：他以清廉、节俭，文章著称，人称为贤相，至今流传。
English: He was known for his integrity, frugality, and writings, and was known as a wise man, which has been passed down to this day.

古文：渠牟之毁滥也。
现代文：渠牟的诋毁是不真实的。
English: Shu's slander is untrue.

古文：鱼朝恩
现代文：鱼朝恩
English: Yu Chaon

古文：鱼朝恩专权使气，公卿不敢仰视。
现代文：鱼朝恩非常专权，好主观，一般的公卿不敢抬头看他。
English: Yu Chaon was very authoritarian, very subjective, and the average courtier did not dare to look up to him.

古文：宰臣或决政事，不预谋者，则睚眦曰：天下之事，岂不由我乎？
现代文：宰相大臣决定政事时，不先和他讲，他便瞪大眼睛说：天下之事，怎么不由我？
English: When the Prime Minister decides to do something political, he doesn't talk to him first, so he just stares wide-eyed and says, "Why can't I decide what happens in the world?

古文：于是帝恶之。
现代文：因而，皇帝很厌恶他。
English: As a result, the emperor detested him.

古文：而朝恩幼子令徽，年十四五，始给事于内殿。
现代文：鱼朝恩的小儿子鱼令徽，才十四五岁，开始时在内殿当差。
English: The youngest son of Yu Chaon, Yu Ling Hui, was only fourteen or fifteen years old when he started working in the inner hall.

古文：帝以朝恩故，遂特赐绿。
现代文：皇帝因为鱼朝恩的缘故，特赐绿衣。
English: The emperor, out of gratitude for the fish, gave him a green coat.

古文：未浃旬月，同列黄门位居令徽上者，因叙立于殿前，恐其后至，遂争路以进。无何，误触令徽臂。
现代文：不到半月，有一次鱼令徽和同列黄门侍郎争路。鱼令徽怕落在后面，往前挤，不知是谁误碰了一下鱼令徽的臂膀。
English: Less than half a month later, there was a fight between Yu Rong Hui and a Yellow Gate waiter in the same row. Yu Rong Hui was afraid of falling behind and pushed forward. I don't know who accidentally touched Yu Rong Hui's arm.

古文：乃驰归，告朝恩，以班次居下，为同列所欺。
现代文：他就急速跑回去告诉鱼朝恩说，因为他的班次在后，被同列者欺负。
English: He quickly ran back to tell Yu Chaon that because his shift was behind, he was bullied by his peers.

古文：朝恩怒，翌日，于帝前奏曰：臣幼男令徽，位居众僚之下，愿陛下特赐金章，以超其等。
现代文：鱼朝恩大怒。第二天，在皇帝面前上奏说，我小儿子令徽，职位在同僚之下，愿陛下特赐金腰带，以便超过别人。
English: The next day, he made a report in front of the emperor, saying, "My youngest son, Rong Hui, is in a position below his colleagues. May His Majesty give him a special gold belt so that he can surpass others."

古文：不言其绯而便求紫。
现代文：不说要穿着绯色服而要求着紫服。
English: Not to mention wearing navy blue and asking for purple.

古文：帝犹未语，而朝恩已令所司，捧紫衣而至。令徽即谢于殿前。
现代文：皇帝还没说话，鱼朝恩便命令管此事的人，捧来了紫衣，鱼令徽立刻向皇帝谢恩。
English: Before the emperor could speak, Yu Chaoyuan ordered the person in charge of the matter to bring a purple robe, and Yu Linghui immediately thanked the emperor.

古文：帝虽知不可，强谓朝恩曰：卿男著章服，大宜称也。
现代文：皇帝虽然知道不能这样做，却强装笑脸对鱼朝恩说：你儿子穿紫衣，扎金腰带，非常合适。
English: Although the emperor knew that he could not do so, he forced a smile on his face and said to Yu Chaon: Your son is wearing a purple robe and a gold belt, which is very suitable.

古文：鱼氏在朝动无畏惮，他皆仿此。
现代文：鱼朝恩在朝中事无忌惮，无所畏惧，都是强加于人。
English: Yu Chaon is unscrupulous, fearless, and imposes everything on others.

古文：其同列黄门，寻逐于岭表。
现代文：他小儿子虽然同列黄门，不久便放逐岭南。
English: Although his youngest son was placed in the same category as Huangmen, he was soon banished to Lingnan.

古文：及朝恩被杀，天下无不快焉。
现代文：到鱼朝恩被杀时，天下人无不称快。
English: By the time Chaoen was killed, everyone in the world was rejoicing.

古文：元载
现代文：元载
English: Originally uploaded by

古文：元载在中书，有丈人自宣州货所居来投，求一职事。
现代文：元载在中书省，他的丈人把房子卖了，来投奔他，想谋一职。
English: At the beginning of the year, his father-in-law sold his house and came to him to look for a job.

古文：中书度其人材不任职事，赠河北一函书而遣之。
现代文：元载审度他的丈人，不能任职，便写了一封致河北官员的信叫他丈人拿走了。
English: He wrote a letter to an official in Hebei to tell his father-in-law to take it away.

古文：丈人惋怒，不得已，持书而去。
现代文：他丈人既惋惜又很生气，不得已，只好拿信走了。
English: His father-in-law was so sorry and angry that he had no choice but to take the letter and leave.

古文：既至幽州，念破产而来，止得一书，书若恳切，犹可望。乃折视之，更无一词，唯署名而已。
现代文：到了幽州，想到自己破产而来，只得了一封信，信若写得恳切，还有希望，他便把信折开看了，信上没有一句话，只有元载的署名。
English: When he arrived in Yuzhou, he thought that he was bankrupt and received only a letter. If the letter was written earnestly, there was still hope, so he opened the letter and read it. There was not a word on the letter, only Yuan Zai's signature.

古文：大悔，怒欲回。念已行数千里，试谒院僚。
现代文：他非常悔恨，想回去，可是已经走了数千里路。他便抱着一种试试看的心理去拜访院僚。
English: He was very remorseful and wanted to go back, but he had already walked thousands of miles. He went to visit the hospital staff with a try-and-see mentality.

古文：院僚问：既是相公丈人，岂无缄题？
现代文：院僚问，你既然是相公丈人，能没有书信吗？
English: The hospital staff asked, since you are the father-in-law, can you not have a letter?

古文：曰：有。
现代文：他说，有。
English: "Yes," he said.

古文：判官大惊，立命谒者上白。
现代文：判官大惊，立刻叫拜访者上来讲话。
English: The magistrate was shocked and immediately called the visitor up to speak.

古文：斯须，乃有大校持箱，复请书。
现代文：一会儿，有一大校捧一木箱，他便把信投入箱中。
English: After a while, there was a big school with a wooden box, and he put the letter into the box.

古文：书既入，馆之上舍，留连积月。及辞去，奉绢一千匹。
现代文：然后便请中书的丈人到上好的馆舍住着。他住了一个月，才辞别而去，走时还奉赠一千匹绢。
English: Then he invited Chusho's father-in-law to live with him in a fine mansion. He stayed for a month before bidding farewell and leaving, accompanied by a gift of a thousand yakitori.

古文：又元载子伯和势倾中外，福州观察使寄乐妓十人。既至，半岁不得送。
现代文：又，元载的儿子元伯和，势力很大，朝内外知名。福州观察使想送给他十名乐妓，到了京城后，半年多没办法送到他家，派来的人便观察他家大门经常出入的人。
English: In addition, Yuan Bohe, the son of Yuan Zai, was very powerful and well-known inside and outside the imperial court. The Fuzhou observation envoy wanted to give him ten prostitutes. After arriving in Beijing, he was unable to deliver them to his house for more than half a year. The person sent to observe the people who frequently entered and exited the gate of his house.

古文：使者窥伺门下出入频者，有琵琶康昆仑最熟，厚遗求通。
现代文：其中有一个善弹琵琶的康昆仑与派来的人最熟悉，便用厚礼打通他，才把乐妓送去。
English: One of them, Kang Kunlun, who was a good pipa player, was most familiar with the person who had been sent, so he used a courtesy call to get through to him before sending the geisha away.

古文：既送妓，伯和一试奏，尽以遗之。
现代文：元伯和让她们演奏一遍试听，听后不满意，全打发走了。
English: Yuan Bohe asked them to play and audition once, but they were not satisfied after listening, and all of them were dismissed.

古文：先有段和尚善琵琶，自制西梁州。昆仑求之不与。
现代文：原先有个善弹琵琶的段和尚，他自己制了《西梁州》的乐曲，康昆仑想得到这支乐曲，他没给康昆仑。
English: Originally, there was a Duan monk who was good at playing the lute. He composed the music for "Xiliangzhou" by himself. Kang Kunlun wanted to get this music, but he did not give it to Kang Kunlun.

古文：至是以乐之半赠之，乃传焉。今曲调梁州是也。
现代文：后来，段和尚只给了康一半，便传播开了，就是现在的曲调《梁州》。路岩
English: Later, Duan Monk only gave Kang half, and then it spread, which is the current tune "Liangzhou."

古文：路岩路岩出镇坤维也，开道中衢，恣为瓦石所击。
现代文：路岩出镇西南作节度使，鸣锣开道直到中街，被瓦块、石头击打。
English: The road rock southwest of the town was used as a set point, and the road was opened until Zhongjie Street. It was hit by bricks and stones.

古文：故京尹温璋，诸子之党也。
现代文：从前的京兆府尹温璋，是牛僧孺一党的。
English: In the former Beijing Zhaofu, Yin Wenxuan was the leader of the Niu Xiangxuan faction.

古文：岩以薛能自省郎权知京兆府事，李蠙之举也。
现代文：路岩知道薛能从一个省郎提升到京兆府是李蠙推举的。
English: Lu Yan knew that Xue Neng's promotion from a provincial governor to the governor of Beijing and Shandong Province was the result of Li Yao's recommendation.

古文：至是岩谓能曰：临行劳以瓦砾相饯。
现代文：于是路岩向薛能说：我在临行时，劳驾你用石头瓦块为我饯行。
English: So the boulder said to Xue Neng, "When I am about to walk, please use the stone blocks to walk for me."

古文：能徐举手板对曰：旧例，宰相出镇，府司无例发人防守。
现代文：薛能慢慢地举起手板对他说：这是惯例，宰相出外镇守，府司从不派人警戒。
English: Xue Neng slowly raised his hand and said to him, "This is the usual practice. The prime minister goes out to guard the town, but the prefectural government never sends anyone to stand guard.

古文：岩有惭色，懿宗晚节，朝政多门。
现代文：路岩面有愧色。
English: The pavement is blackened.

古文：岩年少固位，邂逅致此，一旦失势，当岐路者，率多仇隙。
现代文：唐懿宗晚年时，政出多门，路岩虽然年少，但官做的很稳固，突然到这个地步，一旦失掉权势，当年的仇人都会来攻击他。
English: In Tang Xizong's later years, there were many political leaders. Although Lu Yan was young, he was a very stable official. It suddenly came to this point. Once he lost power, the enemies of that year would attack him.

古文：附丽之徒，钓射时态，志在谀媚，雷同一词。
现代文：那些趋炎附势之流，在寻找机会，对他进行阿谀谄媚。众口一词。
English: Those who seek to inflame the situation are looking for opportunities to flatter him.

古文：中外腾沸，其实未然也。
现代文：天下沸腾。其实也不完全这样。
English: The whole world is in an uproar. Actually, it's not quite like that.

古文：始岩淮南与崔铉作支使，除监察。
现代文：开始时，路岩在淮南给崔铉作佐官，最后当了宰相。
English: At the beginning, Lu Yan served as an adjutant to Cui Gan in Huainan, and finally became the prime minister.

古文：不十年，城门不出，而致位卿相。物禁太盛，暴贵不祥，良有以哉！
现代文：物质享受不应过火，人若是很快达到显贵，便是不祥之兆，这就是例子。
English: Material enjoyment should not be overdone, and it is an ominous sign if a person quickly achieves prominence, this is an example.

古文：初铉以岩为必贵。
现代文：初时，崔铉认为路岩必然显贵。
English: At the beginning, Cui Wei thought that the road rock must be conspicuous.

古文：常曰：路十终须与他那一位也。
现代文：他曾经说，路十终究是要做宰相的。
English: He once said that he wanted to be prime minister after all.

古文：自监察入翰林，铉犹在淮南，闻之曰：路十如今便入翰林，如何到老！
现代文：路岩从监察御史到翰林府，崔铉一直在淮南，听到了这件事说，路十现在就当了翰林，到老怎么办？
English: Lu Yan had been in Huainan from Supervision of Imperial History to Hanlin Prefecture. When he heard about this, he said that Lu 10 was now Hanlin. What should he do when he got there?

古文：皆如所言。
现代文：后来证明正如崔铉所说的那样。
English: It later turned out to be just as Cui Yao had said.

古文：高湘
现代文：高湘
English: Gaoxiang

古文：元和初黜八司马：韦执谊崖州，韩泰虔州，柳宗元永州，刘禹锡朗州，韩晔饶州，凌准连州，程异柳州。
现代文：唐宪宗元和初年，贬了八位司马：韦执谊到崖州、韩泰到虔州、柳宗元到永州，刘禹锡到朗州、韩晔到饶州、凌准到连州、程异到柳州。
English: In the first year of Tang Xian Zongyuan and the first year of Tang Xian Zongyuan, eight Sima were demoted: Wei Xiyu to Yazhou, Han Tai to Qianzhou, Liu Zongyuan to Yongzhou, Liu Yuxi to Langzhou, Han Wei to Raozhou, Ling Jun to Lianzhou, Cheng Yi to Liuzhou.

古文：及咸通，韦保衡、路岩作相，除不附己者十司户：崔沆循州，李渎绣州，萧遘播州，崔彦融雷州，高湘高州，张颜潘州，李贶勤州，杜裔休端州，郑彦持义州，李藻费州。
现代文：到了咸通年间。韦保衡、路岩作了宰相，排斥了不附合他们的十司户：崔沆到循州、李渎到绣州、萧遘到播州、崔彦融到雷州、高湘到高州、张颜到潘州、李贶到勤州、杜裔休到端州、郑彦持到义州、李藻到费州。
English: Wei Baoheng and Lu Yan became chancellors and ousted the ten officials who did not join them: Cui Jun went to Xuzhou, Li Guor went to Shuzhou, Xiao Jun went to Banzhou, Cui Yan Rong went to Leizhou, Gao Xiang went to Gaozhou, Zhang Yan went to Panzhou, Li Jun went to Qinzhou, Du Rongxiu went to Danzhou, Zheng Yan Mochi went to Yizhou, and Li Jiao went to Feizhou.

古文：内绣州、潘州、雷州三人不回。
现代文：其中到绣州、潘州、雷州三人不准回京。
English: Among them, three people from Zhouzhou, Panzhou and Leizhou were not allowed to return to Beijing.

古文：初，高湜与弟湘少不相睦。
现代文：最初，高湜与他弟弟高湘年幼时不太和睦。
English: At first, Gao Jun and his younger brother Gao Xiang did not get along well when they were young.

古文：咸通末，既出高州，湜雅与路岩相善，见岩，阳救湘。
现代文：懿宗咸通末年，高湘到了高州。高湜平素和路岩关系很好。高湜去见路岩，假意去给高湘说情。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xizong's reign, Gao Xiang went to Gaozhou. Gao Xingping and Luyan had a good relationship. Gao Xing went to see Luyan and pretended to intercede for Gao Xiang.

古文：岩曰：某与舍人皆是京兆府荷枷者。
现代文：路岩说：我和我的亲近左右都是待罪的人啊。
English: Lu Yan said, "My relatives and I are all criminals.

古文：先是刘瞻志欲除岩，温璋希旨，别制新枷数十待之。
现代文：先是刘瞻想要除掉路岩，温璋顺从他的意思，制造了十副新枷。
English: First, Liu Zhan wanted to remove the paving stones, and Wen Qi obeyed his wishes and made ten pairs of new shackles.

古文：瞻以人情附己，不甚缄密，其计泄焉。
现代文：刘瞻以为别人都倾向他，不太保密，但是他的计谋泄露出去了。
English: Liu Zhan thought that others were inclined to him, not very confidential, but his scheme leaked out.

古文：故居岩之后，湜既知举，问岩所欲言。
现代文：因此官职在路岩之后。高湜主持考试时，问路岩有什么事。
English: Therefore, the official position is after Luyan. When Gao Wei presided over the examination, he asked Luyan what was the matter.

古文：时岩以去年停举，已潜奏，恐有遗滞，请加十人矣，既托湜以五人。
现代文：路岩托请高湜增加五人，高很高兴他提的人数比较少，喜形于外。在此之先，路岩以去年停止科考，已潜奏给皇帝，恐怕还有遗漏，请求增加十人。不几天，十个人的诏书下来了。
English: Lu Yanbo asked Gao Yao to increase the number of people by five. Gao was very happy that the number of people he proposed was relatively small, and was overjoyed. Prior to this, Lu Yanbo had stopped scientific research last year, and had secretly played to the emperor, I am afraid there are omissions, requesting an increase of ten people. A few days later, the edict of ten people came down.

古文：岩执诏，笑谓湜曰：前者五人，侍郎所惠也。今之十人，某自致也。
现代文：高湜不知道路岩向皇帝潜奏这件事。路岩拿着诏书对高湜笑着说，那五个人是侍郎照顾我的，这十个人，是我自己办的。
English: Gao Gan didn't know that Lu Yan was secretly playing this trick on the emperor. Taking the edict, Lu Yan smiled and said to Gao Gan, "Those five people were attendants who took care of me, but I took care of these ten people myself."

古文：湜竟依其数放焉。
现代文：高湜就按这个数放了榜。
English: Takahata made the list based on this number.

古文：湘到任，嗔湜不佑己，尝赋诗云：唯有高州是当家。
现代文：高湘到任，怪兄高湜不为他说情，曾赋诗发牢骚说，唯有高州是当家，意思是说还得靠自己啊！
English: When Gao Xiang took office, the strange elder brother Gao Yulong did not intercede for him, and once wrote a poem to complain that only Gaozhou was the head of the family, meaning that he had to rely on himself!

古文：卢隐、李峭皆滑帅王铎之门生，前后黜辱者数矣。隐、峭物议，以为咸袵席不修。
现代文：卢隐、李峭都是滑州节度使王铎的门生，前后被他们迫害的人很多，大家对卢隐、李峭议论纷纷，都以为这是朝纲不正的原因。
English: Lu Yin and Li Qiao were both disciples of Wang Qiao, the governor of the State Council of the State of Chuzhou. There were many people who were persecuted by them before and after. Everyone talked about Lu Yin and Li Qiao, and thought that this was the reason for the injustice of the morning program.

古文：隐以从兄携为相，特除右司员外郎。
现代文：卢隐他的亲叔伯哥哥卢携是宰相，他出任了右司员外郎。
English: Lu Yin's uncle, uncle and elder brother, Lu Cui, was the prime minister, and he served as the right secretary and foreign minister.

古文：右丞崔沆不听隐省上，仍即见携于私第。
现代文：右丞崔沆不同意卢隐在尚书省任官。崔沆便到卢携家里去找他。
English: Right-hand man Choe Son did not agree with Lu Yin's appointment to Shangshu Province. Choe Son then went to Lu's home to find him.

古文：携未知之，欣然而出。
现代文：卢携不知道内情，很高兴地出来迎接崔沆。
English: Lu Zhi did not know the inside story, and was happy to come out to meet Cui Yong.

古文：沆曰：员外前日入省，时议未息，今复除纠司员外，省中固不敢辞，他曹唯相公命，携大怒，驰入曰：舍弟极屈，即当上陈。
现代文：崔沆说：员外前天进入尚书省，大家的议论还没停止。今天又出任纠司员外，尚书省固然不敢推辞，其他人只能听从你的意见。卢携大怒，很快进入室内说：我的弟弟很冤屈，他应该向朝庭陈述。
English: Cui Yao said, "The day before yesterday, an outsider came to Shangshu, and everyone's discussion hasn't stopped. Today, you've been appointed as a rectifier. Of course, Shangshu doesn't dare to refuse, and others can only listen to your opinion. Lu, furious, quickly entered the room and said, "My brother is very aggrieved, he should make a statement to the court."

古文：既上，沆乃求假。
现代文：上奏完了，崔沆就请了假。
English: After the performance, Cui Wei took a leave of absence.

古文：携即时替沆官。
现代文：卢隐马上任用了别人接替了崔沆的官职。
English: Lu Yin immediately appointed someone else to take over the official position of Cui Gan.

古文：沆谓人曰：吾见丞郎出省郎，未见省郎出丞郎。
现代文：崔沆对别人说，我只见过丞相出任省郎，未见过省郎出任丞相。
English: Cui Wei said to others, I have only seen a chancellor as a minister, but I have never seen a minister as a chancellor.

古文：隐初自太常博士除水部员外，为右丞李景温揖焉。迨右司之命，景温之旨也。
现代文：卢隐初由太常博士任水部员外，是右丞李景温推举的，到他任右司员外郎时，也是李景温的旨意。
English: Lu Yin was first appointed by Dr. Taizang as a member of the Ministry of Water Resources, and was recommended by the right-hand man, Li Jingwen. When he was appointed as the right-hand man, it was also the will of Li Jingwen.

古文：至是而遂其志矣。
现代文：这时随了卢隐的心意。
English: At this time, Lu Ying's mind followed.

古文：是时谏官亦有陈其疏者，携曰：谏官似狗，一个吠，则一时有声。
现代文：此时，谏官也有陈述不同意见的。卢携说，谏官是条狗，一个叫，都跟着叫。
English: At this time, the eunuch also stated a different opinion. Lu Zhu said that the eunuch is a dog, one calls, they all follow.

