古文：邵亢，字兴宗，丹阳人。
现代文：邵亢，字兴宗，丹阳人。
English: Shao Jun, Zi Xingzong, Danyang people.

古文：幼聪发过人，方十岁，日诵书五千言。
现代文：从小聪敏勤奋过人，十岁时就每天读书五千字。
English: From a young age, Xiao Congmin was extremely diligent. By the age of ten, he was reading five thousand words a day.

古文：赋诗豪纵，乡先生见者皆惊伟之。
现代文：诗作风格豪放，乡村先生们见了都很惊奇他的不凡。
English: His poetic style was bold, and the country gentlemen were surprised to see him.

古文：再试开封，当第一，以赋失韵，弗取。
现代文：两次在开封应试，应当算第一名，由于所写的赋没有押准韵，没有录取。
English: Two times in Kaifeng to take the exam, should be counted as the first place, because the written assignment did not match the rhyme, no admission.

古文：范仲淹举亢茂才异等，时布衣被召者十四人，试崇政殿，独亢策入等，除建康军节度推官。
现代文：范仲淹很推崇他的出众才华。当时没有功名而被宣召的有十四人，在崇政殿考试，只有邵亢达到了要求，被任命为建康军节度推官。
English: Fan Zhongyun highly respected his outstanding talent. At that time, there were fourteen people who were called up without merit. In the examination at the Chongzheng Hall, only Shao Wei met the requirements and was appointed as the Jiankang Army Festival Supervisor.

古文：或言所对策字少，不应式，宰相张士逊与之姻家，故得预选，遂报罢。
现代文：有人说邵亢的答卷字数太少，不合规范，只因宰相张士逊与他有姻亲关系，他才参加了预选，于是取消了资格。
English: Some people said that the number of words in Shao Jun's answer sheet was too few and not up to standard. He only participated in the preselection because the Prime Minister Zhang Shisong was related to him by marriage, so he was disqualified.

古文：而士逊子实娶它邵，与亢同姓耳。
现代文：然而张士逊的媳妇仅与邵亢同姓而已，并非一家。
English: However, Zhang Shisun's daughter-in-law only shares the same surname as Shao Jun, and they are not a family.

古文：士逊既不能与直，亢亦不自言。
现代文：士逊不肯出面说话，邵亢也不自辩。
English: The scholar did not want to come forward to speak, and Shao Jun did not defend himself.

古文：赵元吴叛，亢言： 用兵在于择将，今天下久不知战，而所任多儒臣，未必能应变。
现代文：西夏反叛，邵亢说： 打仗要选好将领。现在太平日久，不懂战争，当官的多是文弱书生，未必能应付变局。
English: When the Western Xia rebelled, Shao Jun said: It is necessary to choose a good general to fight a war. Nowadays, it has been peaceful for a long time, and people do not understand war. Most of the officials are uneducated and weak, and may not be able to cope with the changes.

古文：武人得长一军，又已老，讵能身先矢石哉？
现代文：武人能独挡一面的，又年事已高，谁还能身先士卒？
English: If a warrior can single-handedly defend one side, and he is old, who can lead the way?

古文：间起故家恩幸子弟，彼安识攻守之计？
现代文：偶尔起用了一些老臣后代，他们怎懂攻守战略战术？
English: Occasionally, some descendants of old ministers have been used. How do they understand offensive and defensive strategies and tactics?

古文：况将与卒素不相附，又亡坚甲利兵之御。
现代文：况且将领与士卒平时没有建立什么关系，又没有武器上的优势。
English: Moreover, the relationship between generals and soldiers was not established in peacetime, and there was no advantage in weapons.

古文：此不待两军相当，而胜败之机，固已形矣。 因献《兵说》十篇。
现代文：这说明，不必等到两军对阵，谁胜谁负，已很明了了。 因而献上《兵说》十篇。
English: This shows that it is not necessary to wait until the two armies face each other, and it is already clear who will win and who will lose.

古文：召试秘阁，授颍州团练推官。
现代文：皇上在秘阁测试他后，授职颍州团练推官。
English: After the emperor tested him in the secret cabinet, he was appointed as the commander of the Bozhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：晏殊为守，一以事诿之。
现代文：晏殊为知州，具体事务都交付邵亢办。
English: Especially for Zhizhou, the specific affairs have been handed over to the Shaoqi Office.

古文：民税旧输陈、蔡，转运使又欲覆折缗钱，且多取之。
现代文：民间赋税原先要运往陈、蔡，转运使想让老百姓折成钱后再交，而且想多征一些。
English: Originally, people's taxes were to be sent to Chen and Cai, but the forwarding agent wanted the people to fold them into money before paying, and wanted to collect more.

古文：亢言： 民之移输，劳费已甚。
现代文：邵亢说 ：老百姓要将粮米送到异地交纳，所消耗的人力财力太多了。
English: Shao Wei said: People have to send grain and rice to other places for payment, which consumes too much manpower and financial resources.

古文：方仍岁水旱，又从而加取，无乃不可乎？ 遂止。
现代文：目前每年水灾旱灾，还要加征，这怎么可以呢？ 
English: At present, floods, droughts and other calamities are added to the tax every year. How can this be?

古文：入为国子监直讲、馆阁校勘、同知太常礼院。
现代文：转运使才放弃了企图。入朝任国子监直讲、馆阁校勘、同知太常礼院。
English: The envoy only gave up his attempt after the transfer. He entered the imperial court and was appointed as the direct lecturer of the provincial education inspector, the school inspector of the pavilion, and the tutor of the Taizhong Academy.

古文：张贵妃薨，立园陵，禁京城乐一月，亢累疏罢之。
现代文：张贵妃死，皇上命令修园陵，禁止京城一个月的娱乐活动，邵亢屡次上书反对，才停罢。
English: After the death of Zhang Guifei, the emperor ordered the gardens to be repaired and banned entertainment activities in the capital for one month. Shao Jun repeatedly sent a letter to the emperor to oppose the ban.

古文：进集贤校理。
现代文：升为集贤校理。
English: He was promoted to Shixian schoolmaster.

古文：仁宗继嗣未立，亢言： 国之外患在边圉，然御之之术，不过羁縻勿绝而已。
现代文：仁宗未立太子，邵亢说 ：国家的外患在边疆地区，但驾驭的方式很简单，不过是牵制而不绝交而已。
English: Prior to the enthronement of Prince Nizong, Shao Wei said: The country's external problems are in the border areas, but the way to control them is simple, but it is only to contain them and not to break off diplomatic relations.

古文：内患则不然，系社稷之安危，不可不蚤定也。 提点开封县镇公事。
现代文：内患则不然，关系到国家的安危，不可不早定。 被任命为提点开封县镇公事。
English: If it is not an internal problem, it is related to the safety of the country, and it must be determined in advance.

古文：比有纵火者，一不获则主吏坐罪，民或自燔其居以中吏。
现代文：当时法律，如有失火，一旦抓不到纵火犯则处罚主管官吏，有些老百姓往往自焚其家以陷害跟他有仇的官吏。
English: At that time, the law stated that if there was a fire and the arsonist was not caught, the officials in charge would be punished. Some people often set fire to their own homes to frame officials with whom they had a grudge.

古文：亢请非延及旁舍者，虽失捕，得勿坐。徙为府推官，改度支判官。
现代文：邵亢请求修改法律，要求只要火灾没有祸及邻居的，即使没查出纵火犯，也可不追究主管官吏。又调任府推官，再改任度支判官。
English: Shao Jun requested to amend the law to require that as long as the fire did not harm the neighbors, even if the arsonist was not found, the responsible officials could not be investigated. He was also transferred to the prefectural magistrate and then to the magistrate.

古文：契丹遣使贺乾元节，未至，仁宗崩。
现代文：辽国派使者来祝贺乾元节，还未到，仁宗死。
English: Liao sent an envoy to congratulate the Qianyuan Festival, but before he arrived, Renzong died.

古文：议者谓宜却，或欲俟其及国门而谕使之还，亢请令奉书至柩前，使见嗣君。
现代文：大臣们有些认为应通知使者返回，有些认为应等使者到京城后再告诉使者，请他回去。邵亢请求让使者将贺书送到仁宗的棺材前，使使者拜见新君主。
English: Some of the ministers thought that the envoy should be told to return, others thought that they should wait until the envoy arrived in the capital before telling the envoy and asking him to return. Shao Jun requested that the envoy send a congratulatory letter to the coffin of Nanzong, so that the envoy could meet the new monarch.

古文：从之。
现代文：大家听从了邵亢的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：选为颍王府翊善，加直史馆。
现代文：邵亢被选为颍王府翊善，加直史馆。
English: Shaoqin was selected as the King's Palace of Shaoqin, and was added to the Museum of History.

古文：召对群玉殿，英宗访以世事，称之曰： 学士真国器也。 擢同修起居注。
现代文：在群玉殿与皇上答对时，英宗考他世事，并称赞说： 你真是国家的优异人才啊！ 升任同修起居注。
English: When Gunjyuden answered the Emperor's question, Emperor Yingzong asked him about his life and praised him, saying, "You are truly an outstanding talent of the country!

古文：建言： 陛下初政，欲治国者先齐家，颍王且授室，愿采用古昏礼。
现代文：向英宗建议说： 您刚即位，想治好国家必先处理好家政，颍王可以结婚了，希望能采用古代婚礼成婚。
English: Xiang Yingzong suggested: You have just ascended the throne, if you want to heal the country, you must first deal with the housekeeping, the king can get married, and I hope you can get married with an ancient wedding.

古文：公主下降，不宜厌舅姑之尊。 帝深纳之。
现代文：公主下嫁，不应当比她的公公婆婆还尊贵。 英宗深以为是。
English: For a princess to marry, she should not be more distinguished than her father-in-law and mother-in-law.

古文：他日，谕王曰： 以翊善端直朴厚，辍为谏官矣。 王出道帝语，遂以知制诰知谏院。
现代文：有一天，英宗对颍王说： 你府上的翊善，端直朴厚，不久就要任谏官。 颍王转告了邵亢。于是邵亢任知制诰、知谏院。
English: One day, Yingzong said to Shao Wang, "The eunuchs in your palace are good, upright and simple, and will soon be appointed as eunuchs." Shao Wang conveyed the message to Shao Yu, and Shao Yu was appointed to Zhisheng and Zhisheng.

古文：东宫建，为右庶子。
现代文：颍王的太子地位确定后，又担任右庶子。
English: After the prince's status was confirmed, he also served as the second son.

古文：神宗立，迁龙图阁直学士。
现代文：神宗即位后，改任龙图阁直学士。
English: After Shinso ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the direct master of Longtu Ge.

古文：有谮之者曰： 先帝大渐时，亢尝建垂帘之议。 御史吴申即论之。
现代文：有人攻击他说 ：英宗病重时，邵亢曾建议英宗死后由皇后垂帘听政。 御史吴申以此为据议论邵亢。
English: Some people attacked him, saying that when Yingzong was seriously ill, Shao Jun had suggested that after Yingzong's death, the empress should take over the reins of government.

古文：帝知其妄，置不问。
现代文：神宗知道这是诬蔑，不予理睬。
English: Shenzong knew that this was slander and ignored it.

古文：亢自诉曰： 方先帝不豫，群臣莫得进见，臣无由面陈，必有章奏。
现代文：邵亢自己申辩说 ：先帝重病时，群臣都无法进宫，我也没法当面向先帝建议什么。
English: Shao Wei himself argued: When the former emperor was seriously ill, the courtiers could not enter the palace, and I could not suggest anything to the former emperor in person.

古文：乞索之禁中，若得之，臣当伏诛；不然，则谗臣者，岂宜但已，愿下狱考实。 帝不许。
现代文：若有建议，只能是书面的。请在宫中找一下，如果找到了我的这种奏章，我愿被处死；不然，那诬谄我的人岂能逍遥法外？我希望能调查清楚。 皇上不愿扩大事态。
English: If there is a suggestion, it can only be in writing. Please look for it in the palace. If you find my kind of music, I would like to be executed; otherwise, will the person who slandered me go unpunished? I hope I can investigate clearly. The Emperor does not want to expand the situation.

古文：时待制以上为帅、守，每他徙必迁职秩，亢请未满两岁者勿推恩。
现代文：当时待制以上是帅、守，每当调任他官，也能保留他的官、俸。邵亢请求对于任帅、守等官未满两年的不得推恩于子弟。
English: At that time, those who had been on duty for more than two years were marshals and guardsmen, and whenever they were transferred to another post, they could also retain their post and salary. Shao Jun requested that those who had been appointed as marshals and guardsmen for less than two years should not be grateful to their children.

古文：王陶劾韩琦，吴奎与之辨。
现代文：王陶弹劾韩琦，吴奎为韩琦辩护。
English: Wang Tao impeached Han Kui, Wu Kui defended Han Kui.

古文：亢诋奎所言颠倒，失大臣体，盖欲亻并撼琦。
现代文：邵亢指斥吴奎言语颠三倒四，有失大臣风度。大概邵亢想把韩琦一并扳倒。
English: Shao Jun pointed out that Wu Kuei's speech was all over the place and lacked the demeanor of a minister. Shao Jun probably wanted to bring down Han Jun together.

古文：琦与奎竟同日去。
现代文：韩琦、吴奎竟然同一天被调离。
English: Han Zheng and Wu Kui were even transferred from the same day.

古文：进枢密直学士、知开封府。
现代文：升为枢密直学士、知开封府。
English: He was promoted to Privy Direct Bachelor, Chikaifu.

古文：亢遇事敏密，吏操辞牍至前，皆反覆阅之。人或以为劳，亢曰： 决是非于须臾，正当尔。
现代文：邵亢处事作风严谨，吏员送来的案牍，都反复研究，别人认为罗嗦，他说 ：须臾之间就要判断出诉讼各方的是非曲直，理应认真。
English: Shao Jun's work style is rigorous. He repeatedly studies the case files sent by the clerk. Others think that Luo Jun, he said: it is necessary to judge the rights and wrongs of the parties to the lawsuit, and it should be serious.

古文：初虽烦，后乃省也。 籍里闾恶少年与吏之废停者，一有所犯，皆迁处之，畿下斗讼为之衰止。
现代文：刚开始是很烦，如判断不错，以后就省事了。 登录乡里间的不良青少年和开除的官吏，一旦他们有什么不良举动，就驱逐出去，京城脚下的争斗为之消失。
English: At the beginning, it is very annoying, if the judgment is good, it will save trouble in the future. The bad teenagers and dismissed officials in the countryside will be expelled as soon as they have any bad behavior, and the struggle at the foot of the capital will disappear.

古文：拜枢密副使。
现代文：拜为枢密副使。
English: He was a Privy Counsellor.

古文：夏人诱杀知保安军杨定，朝廷谋西讨。
现代文：西夏诱杀知保定军杨定，朝廷策划讨伐西夏。
English: Western Xia lured and killed Yang Ding of the Baoding Army, and the imperial court planned to attack Western Xia.

古文：亢曰： 天下财力殚屈，未宜用兵，唯当降意抚纳，俟不顺命，则师出有名矣。 因条上其事。
现代文：邵亢说： 国库空虚，民力凋敝，不能用兵，只应责以大义，等他们不听责劝后再出兵，就师出有名了。 因而逐条陈述理由。
English: "The treasury is empty, the people's strength is withered, we can't use the army, we should only use the army for a just cause, and if they don't use the army after being advised to do so, they will become famous," said Shao Wei, explaining the reasons one by one.

古文：诏报之曰： 中国民力，大事也。
现代文：皇上批示说 ：国家的财力是大事。
English: The Emperor's instruction said: "The country's financial strength is the most important thing.

古文：兵兴之后，不无倍率，人心一摇，安危所系。
现代文：兵马一动，就有可能失败，人心一动摇，就会威胁国家的安全。
English: If soldiers and horses move, there is a possibility of failure, and if people's hearts are shaken, it will threaten the security of the country.

古文：今动自我始，先违信誓，契丹闻之，将不期而自合，兹朕所深忧者。当悉如卿计。 未几，夏主谅祚死，国人执杀定者来请和。
现代文：不久，西夏君主谅祚死，西夏人抓了杀杨定的凶手前来求和。有人建议趁机攻占西夏的塞门，邵亢认为趁人之危不义，于是没有进攻西夏。
English: Soon after, the Western Xia monarch was killed, and the Western Xia people caught the murderer of Yang Ding and came to sue for peace. Some people suggested taking advantage of the opportunity to capture the Western Xia's Saimen, but Shao Jun thought that it was unfair to take advantage of people's danger, so he did not attack Western Xia.

古文：或欲乘此更取塞门地，亢以为幸人之丧，非义也，乃止。亢在枢密逾年，无大补益，帝颇厌之，尝与谏官孙觉言，欲以陈升之代亢，而使守长安。
现代文：邵亢在枢密干了一年多，对朝政没有提出什么好的建议，皇帝有些讨厌他，曾对谏官孙觉说，想用陈升之替代邵亢，派邵亢充任长安守。孙觉立即弹劾邵亢，推荐陈升之。
English: Shao Jun worked in the privy council for more than a year and did not offer any good suggestions for the government. The emperor somewhat disliked him. He once told the eunuch Sun Jue that he wanted to replace Shao Jun with Chen Sheng and appoint Shao Sheng as Changan governor. Sun Jue immediately impeached Shao Jun and recommended Chen Sheng.

古文：觉遽劾亢荐升之，帝怒其希指，黜觉，亢亦引疾辞，以资政殿学士知越州。
现代文：皇上恼怒孙觉曲意逢迎，罢免了他。邵亢也借口生病辞职，以资政殿学士身份任越州知州。
English: The emperor was irritated with Sun Juequ and dismissed him. Shao Jun also resigned on the pretext of illness, and took up the post of Yuezhou Zhizhou as a scholar of the House of Councillors.

古文：报下捷疾，一无壅滞，人服其敏云。
现代文：历任郑、郓、亳三州知州。死时六十一岁。追封为吏部尚书，在其家乡赐给他房宅。谥号 安简 。
English: Successively held the posts of Zheng, Zou and Zou in the three states of Zhizhou. He was sixty-one years old at the time of his death. He was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu, and was given a house in his hometown. His posthumous name was Anjian.

古文：钱惟演，字希圣，吴越王俶之子也，少补牙门将，从俶归朝，为右屯卫将军。
现代文：钱惟演，字希圣，吴越王钱亻叔的儿子。小的时候充任牙门将，随钱亻叔归顺宋朝，任右屯卫将军。
English: Qian Yu Sheng, also known as Xisheng, is the son of Qian Ye's uncle, the king of Wuyue. As a child, he served as a gatekeeper. When Qian Ye's uncle returned to the Song Dynasty, he became the general of the Right Tunwei.

古文：历右神武军将军。
现代文：曾任右神武军将军。
English: He was once a general of the Right Shinto Army.

古文：博学能文辞，召试学士院，以笏起草立就，真宗称善。
现代文：博学多才，善写文章，应试学士院时，在手板笏上写文章挥笔而成，真宗认为他很不错。
English: He is an erudite and versatile person, good at writing articles. When he was taking the entrance examination for the Academy, he wrote an article on a palette knife with a wave of his hand. Shinshu thought he was very good.

古文：改太仆少卿，献《咸平圣政录》。
现代文：改任太仆少卿，献上《咸平圣政录》一书。
English: He was reappointed as Taigu Shaoqing and presented the book "Xianping Shengzhi Luo."

古文：命真秘阁，预修《《册府元龟》，诏与杨亿分为之序。
现代文：被任命为直秘阁，参与修撰《册府元龟》，同杨亿一起分别写序。
English: He was appointed as a direct secretary of the cabinet, participated in the compilation of "Chengfu Yuanjie," and wrote the preface together with Yang Yi separately.

古文：除尚书司封郎中、知制诰，再迁给事中、知审官院。
现代文：任尚书司封郎中、知制诰，又迁任给事中、知审官院。
English: He was appointed as Shang Shushi, Feng Rongzhong and Zhisheng, and then transferred to Zhizhong and Zhisheng.

古文：大中祥符八年，为翰林学士，坐私谒事罢之。
现代文：大中祥符八年，任翰林学士，因犯营私罪而被撤职。
English: In the eighth year of Xiangfu, he was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, and was dismissed for committing a private crime.

古文：寻迁尚书工部侍郎，再为学土、会灵观副使。
现代文：不久又转任尚书工部侍郎，再为学士、会灵观副使。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of chamberlain of the Shang calligraphy department, and then to the post of bachelor and vice-envoy of the Confucianism.

古文：又坐贡举失实，降给事中。
现代文：又因贡举失实，降职为给事中。
English: In addition, due to the fact that the tribute was false, the demotion is in the process of being given.

古文：复工部侍郎，擢枢密副使、会灵观使兼太子宾客，更领祥源观。
现代文：恢复其工部侍郎之职，升任枢密副使、会灵观使兼太子宾客，又管领祥源观。
English: He was restored to his position as an attendant of the Ministry of Works, and was promoted to the position of a Privy Vice-Minister, the Minister of Spiritual Guidance and a guest of the Crown Prince, as well as the leader of the Shogen School.

古文：累迁工部尚书。
现代文：经多次升任至工部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the Ministry of Industry and Trade several times.

古文：仁宗即位，进兵部。
现代文：仁宗即位后，钱惟演进入兵部。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Qian Weiwen entered the military.

古文：王曾为相，以惟演尝位曾上，因拜枢密使。
现代文：王曾任宰相，因为钱惟演的官位曾经高于他，于是任钱惟演为枢密使。
English: Wang had served as prime minister, and because Qian had been higher-ranking than him, he appointed Qian as a privy councillor.

古文：故事，枢密使必加检校官，惟演止以尚书充使，有司之失也。
现代文：在过去，任枢密使必加封检校官，钱惟演只以尚书身份任枢密使，这是有关人员的疏忽所致。
English: In the past, the appointment of a privy councillor required the appointment of a procurator, and Qian Xueyuan was only appointed as a privy councillor in his official capacity. This was due to the negligence of the relevant personnel.

古文：初，惟演见丁谓权盛，附之，与为婚。
现代文：当初，钱惟演看到丁谓权势大，就投靠他，结为姻亲。
English: At first, when Qian Wo Rong saw that Ding was powerful, he took him under his wing and they became in-laws.

古文：谓逐寇准，惟演与有力焉。
现代文：丁谓排挤走寇准，钱惟演是出了力的。
English: Ding said that it was a great effort to oust the bandits, and the money was well spent.

古文：及序枢密题名，独刊去准，名曰 逆准 ，削而不书。
现代文：等到排列历任枢密时，单单不列寇准，称寇准为 逆准 ，削去不予记录。
English: When arranging the successive Privy Councils, they simply did not list the Kojun, calling the Kojun the "reverse Kojun" (逆准), and omitting it from the records.

古文：谓祸既萌，惟演虑并得罪，遂挤谓以自解。
现代文：丁谓罪行暴露后，钱惟演害怕被牵连，于是排挤丁谓以求解脱。
English: After Ding Zuo's crime was exposed, Qian Youxuan was afraid of being implicated, so he ousted Ding Zuo to seek relief.

古文：宰相冯拯恶其为人，因言： 惟演以妹妻刘美，乃太后姻家，不可与机政，请出之。 乃罢为镇国军节度观察留后，即日改保大军节度使、知河阳。
现代文：宰相冯拯讨厌他的人品，因而向皇上建议说： 惟演将妹妹嫁给了刘美，那么他就是太后的亲家，因此不能够参与朝政机要，请调走他。 于是调任镇国军节度观察留后，即日又改任保大军节度使、知河阳。
English: The prime minister, Feng Zheng, disliked his character, so he suggested to the emperor: "But if he married his sister to Liu Mei, then he is a relative of the empress dowager, so he cannot participate in the government, so please transfer him." So, after being transferred to observe the festival of the town's national army, he was transferred to be the festival envoy of the national army, Zhihayang, the same day.

古文：逾年，请入朝，加同中书门下平章事、判许州。
现代文：过了一年，请求回京，被任为同中书门下平章事、许州通判。
English: After a year, he requested to return to Beijing and was appointed as the deputy chief judge of Dongzhong Shumen and the chief judge of Xuzhou.

古文：未即行，冀复用，侍御史鞠咏奏劾之，惟演乃亟去。
现代文：他没有立即赴任，希望再次被起用，侍御史鞠咏弹劾他，他才急急忙忙去赴任。
English: He did not take office immediately, hoping to be reappointed, but he was impeached by the chamberlain Shi Muxuan and hurried to take office.

古文：天圣七年，改武胜军节度使。
现代文：天圣七年，改任武胜军节度使。
English: In the seventh year of Tian Sheng, he was reassigned as the festival envoy of the victorious army.

古文：明年来朝，上言先垅在洛阳，愿守宫钥。
现代文：次年前来朝觐时，上书说，皇室先人坟墓在洛阳，希望能去守护。
English: The following year, when he came to the hajj, he wrote that the tombs of his royal ancestors were in Luoyang, and he hoped to go and guard them.

古文：即以判河南府，再改泰宁军节度使。
现代文：于是任为河南府通判，又改任泰宁军节度使。
English: As a result, he was appointed as the Henan Provincial Judge-General, and was also reappointed as the Taining Army Festival Envoy.

古文：惟演雅意柄用，抑郁不得志。
现代文：钱惟演很想当大官，但一直郁郁不得志。
English: Qian Wei Yuan really wanted to be a high-ranking official, but he was always depressed.

古文：及帝耕籍田，求侍祠，因留为景灵宫使。
现代文：后来皇上举行籍田礼，求一名侍祠，因而留用他为景灵宫使。
English: Later, the emperor held a registration ceremony and asked for an attendant, thus retaining him as an envoy to the Jingling Palace.

古文：太后崩，诏还河南。
现代文：刘太后死，诏令他回河南。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Liu, he was ordered to return to Henan.

古文：惟演不自安，请以庄献明肃太后、庄懿太后并配真宗庙室，以希帝意。
现代文：钱惟演自己觉得不安，请求以庄献明肃太后、庄懿太后并配真宗庙室，以讨好仁宗。
English: Feeling uneasy, Qian Yuwen asked Zhuang to present the Empress Dowager Mingshu and Empress Dowager Zhuangye with the True Sect's temple room in order to please Rinzong.

古文：惟演既与刘美亲，又为其子暧娶郭后妹，至是，又欲与庄懿太后族为婚。
现代文：钱惟演曾同刘美结亲，又为他的儿子钱暧娶了郭皇后的妹妹，到这时，又想与庄懿太后的族人通婚。
English: Qian Yuwen had married Liu Mei and married the sister of Empress Guo for his son Qian Yao. At this time, he also wanted to marry a member of Empress Zhuangyao's clan.

古文：御史中丞范讽劾惟演擅议宗庙，且与后家通婚姻。
现代文：御史中丞范讽弹劾他擅自议论宗庙配享制度，而且又同皇后家通婚姻。
English: He was impeached for discussing the allocation system of the ancestral temple without permission, and he also married into the empress' family.

古文：落平章事，为崇信军节度使，归本镇。
现代文：被撤平章事，任为崇信军节度使，返回河南。
English: He was stripped of his title and appointed as the chief envoy of the Chongxin Army, and returned to Henan.

古文：未几，卒，特赠侍中。
现代文：不久，死，特追赠为侍中。
English: Shortly after his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of chamberlain.

古文：太常张瑰按，《谥法》敏而好学曰 文 ，贪而败官曰 墨 ，请谥文墨。
现代文：太常张瑰根据《谥法》 敏而好学称为文，贪而被撤职称为墨 这一条，请求赠给钱惟演谥号 文墨 。
English: According to the "Shu Law," Zhang Rui, who is keen and good at learning, is called Wen, and who is greedy and is dismissed is called Mo. This article requests that money be given, but the performance is called Wenmo.

古文：其家诉于朝，诏章得象等覆议，以惟演无贪黩状，而晚节率职自新，有惶惧可怜之意，取《谥法》追悔前过曰 思 ，改谥曰思。
现代文：钱氏家属上诉，诏令章得象等人重新议定，因为钱惟演没有贪污等劣迹，而且晚年忠于职守，有悔过自新、谨慎从事之意，根据《谥法》 追悔前过曰思 这一条，改谥思。
English: After the appeal of Qian's family members, the imperial edict was re-negotiated by Qian and others, because Qian had no bad deeds such as corruption, and he was loyal to his duties in his later years, had the intention of repenting and reforming, and practicing prudently, according to the "Shu Law" Think before you repent This article, change your way of thinking.

古文：庆历间，二太后始升祔真宗庙室，子暧复诉前议，乃改谥曰文僖。
现代文：庆历年间，刘、李两太后才一起配享真宗，钱惟演之子钱暧提出这是他父亲先前提的建议，于是改谥号曰 文僖 。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, it was only after Liu and Li became empresses that they shared the True Sect together. Qian Qian, Qian Qian's only son, suggested that this was his father's original idea, so he changed his name to Wen Qian.

古文：惟演出于勋贵，文辞清丽，名与杨亿、刘筠相上下。
现代文：钱惟演出身贵族，文笔清新优美，才名与杨亿、刘筠在伯仲之间。
English: Qian Wei is an aristocrat, his writing is fresh and beautiful, and his talent is on a par with Yang Yuanzhong and Liu Ye.

古文：于书无所不读，家储文籍侔秘府。尤喜奖厉后进。
现代文：于书无所不读，家中藏书与国家图书馆相等，特别喜欢鼓励、提拔后进。
English: Yu read everything, and his family's book collection was equal to that of the national library. He especially liked to encourage and promote the younger generation.

古文：初，真宗谥号称 文 ，惟演曰 真宗幸澶渊御契丹，盟而服之，宜兼谥 武 。
现代文：开始，真宗的谥号是 文 ，惟演说，真宗亲自带兵到澶渊抵抗契丹，迫使辽军求和，应该兼谥 武 。
English: At first, the nickname of Zhenzong was "Wen," but the speech began that Zhenzong personally led the army to the Yangtze River to resist the Khitan, forcing the Liao army to sue for peace, and should also be armed.

古文：下有司议，乃加谥 武定 。
现代文：仁宗令大臣们讨论，于是加谥 武定 。
English: Emperor Nenzong ordered the ministers to discuss the matter, and Wuding was promoted.

古文：所著《典懿集》三十卷，又著《金坡遗事》、《飞白书叙录》《逢辰录》、《奉藩书事》。
现代文：著有《典懿集》三十卷，及《金坡遗事》、《飞白书叙录》、《逢辰录》、《奉藩书事》。
English: He is the author of the "Collection of Classics" in thirty volumes, as well as "The Remains of Jinpo," "Flying White Book Narration," "Feng Chen Record" and "Bonghan Records."

古文：景臻子忱，在《外戚传》。
现代文：钱惟演曾对人说： 我平生的遗憾，就是未曾在黄纸案卷上划押。 
English: Qian Yueyuan once said to people: My lifelong regret is that I have not been recorded on the yellow paper case file.

古文：易字希白。
现代文：就是说没能当过中书。钱易，字希白。
English: That is to say, I have not been able to become a Chinese book. Money is easy, the word is white.

古文：始，父倧嗣吴越王，为大将胡进思所废，而立其弟俶。
现代文：从前，其父钱亻宗即位为吴越王，被大将胡进思废，而改立钱亻宗的弟弟钱亻叔。
English: Once upon a time, his father Qian Xizong was enthroned as the king of Wu Yue. He was overthrown by the general Hu Jin, and Qian Xizong's younger brother Qian Xizong was installed instead.

古文：俶归朝，群从悉补官，易与兄昆不见录，遂刻志读书。
现代文：钱亻叔归降宋朝，其属下都在宋朝做了官，只有钱易与其兄钱昆没有被录用，于是他们即发奋读书。
English: Uncle Qian Rong returned to the Song Dynasty, and his subordinates all became officials in the Song Dynasty. Only Qian Yi and his brother Qian Kun were not hired, so they began to study hard.

古文：昆字裕之，举进士，为治宽简便民，能诗，善草隶书，累官右谏议大夫，以秘书监于家。
现代文：钱昆字裕之，考中进士。为政宽松简便，很照顾民众的利益，诗写得非常漂亮，又擅长于草书、隶书，最后官至右谏议大夫，以秘书监身份退休回家。
English: Qian Kunzhi Yuzhi, a candidate in the middle school entrance examination. For politics, he is easy-going and simple, takes care of the interests of the people, writes very beautiful poems, and is good at cursive and cursive writing. He was the last official to become a doctor of right-hand speech, and retired home as a secretary supervisor.

古文：易年十七，举进士，试崇政殿，三篇，日未中而就。
现代文：钱易十七岁时考中进士。参加崇文殿的考试时，三篇文章不到中午他就完成了。
English: Qian Yi was 17 years old when he took the junior high school entrance examination. When he took the examination at Chongwen Hall, he finished three essays before noon.

古文：言者恶其轻俊，特罢之。然自此以才藻知名。
现代文：言官觉得他很轻率，不稳重，故意不录取他，然而从此以后他的才学就出了名。
English: Officials thought he was reckless, unstable, and deliberately did not admit him, but since then his talent has become famous.

古文：太宗尝与苏易简论唐世文人，叹时无李白。
现代文：宋太宗曾同苏易简一起讨论唐代文人，太宗遗憾当世没有产生像李白这样的才子，苏易简说： 当今进士钱易，创作的歌、诗大概不在李白之下。 
English: Song Taizong once discussed Tang Dynasty writers with Su Yi Jian. Taizong regretted that the world had not produced such a talent as Li Bai. Su Yi Jian said: Today's scholar Qian Yi, the creation of songs and poems is probably not under Li Bai.

古文：易简曰： 今进士钱易，为歌诗殆不下白。 太宗惊喜曰： 诚然，吾当自布衣召置翰林。 值盗起剑南，遂寝。
现代文：太宗惊喜地说 ：如果真是这样，我就把他从平民直接提升为翰林。 正碰上剑南盗贼兴起，这事就被搁下了。
English: Taizong said in surprise, "If that's true, I'll promote him directly from a commoner to a Hanlin." Just as the Jianan thieves were on the rise, the matter was shelved.

古文：真宗在东宫，图山水扇，会易作歌，赏爱之。
现代文：宋真宗当太子时，画山水扇，碰上钱易作歌，览后对他非常欣赏。
English: When Song Zhenzong was crown prince, he painted landscapes and fans. When he came across money, it was easy for him to compose songs. After the exhibition, he was greatly admired.

古文：易再举进士，就开封府试第二。
现代文：钱易再次考进士，终于考取了，录为开封府第二名。
English: Qian Yi took the entrance examination again, and finally passed the examination, and was recorded as the second place in Kaifeng.

古文：自谓当第一，为有司所屈，乃上书言试《朽索之驭六马赋》，意涉讥讽。
现代文：他自认为应当是第一，只因被主考官压制了才落得第二，于是上了一篇《朽索之驭六马赋》议论考试，含有讥讽味道。
English: He thought that he should be the first, but only because he was suppressed by the chief examiner, he ended up second, so he took a "The Rope of Six Horses" discussion exam, which contained a sarcastic flavor.

古文：真宗恶其无行，降第二。
现代文：真宗很讨厌他的这种品行，降他为第三名。
English: Shinso was disgusted by his behavior and demoted him to third.

古文：明年，第二人中第，补濠州团练推官。
现代文：一年后，以第二名中第，任为濠州团练推官。
English: A year later, with the second place in the middle, he was appointed as the pusher of the Zhangzhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：召试中书，改光禄寺丞、通判蕲州。
现代文：被召到中书测试，改任光禄寺丞、蕲州通判。
English: He was called to the Chinese calligraphy test, and was reassigned to the posts of Guanglu Jiezheng and Zhangzhou Tongzhan.

古文：奏疏曰： 尧放四罪而不言杀，彼四者之凶，尚恶言杀，非尧仁之至乎？
现代文：钱易上书说 ：尧流放四大罪人而不处死，岂不是尧的仁厚达到了顶点吗？
English: Qian Yi wrote in a letter: "If you banish the four great sinners without executing them, isn't your benevolence reaching its peak?

古文：古之肉刑者劓、椓、黥、刖皆非死，尚以为虐。
现代文：古代的肉刑有劓、蒼、黥、刖，都不是死刑，但古人还认为太残酷。
English: In ancient times, the methods of corporal punishment included caning, flogging, and beating, which were not capital punishment, but were still considered too cruel by the ancients.

古文：近代以来，断人手足，钩背烙筋，身见白骨而犹视息，四体分落乃方绝命。
现代文：近代以来，砍断手脚，钩背烙筋，使犯人体无完肤，露出白骨，还不断气，四肢离开了身躯才断气。
English: Since modern times, cutting off hands and feet, hooking back and searing sinews, so that the offender's body has no skin, exposing white bones, but also no breath, the limbs left the body before the breath.

古文：以此示人，非平世事也。
现代文：采用这样的酷刑，不是太平盛世之举。
English: The use of such torture is not an act of pacifism.

古文：今四方长吏竞为残暴，婺州先断贼手足，然后斩之以闻。
现代文：目前，地方长官一个比一个残暴，婺州官府，先砍断犯人手脚，然后斩首示众。
English: At present, local governors are more brutal than each other, and the Zhangzhou government first cut off prisoners' hands and feet, and then beheaded them.

古文：寿州巡检使磔贼于闤阓之中，其旁犹有盗物者。
现代文：寿州巡检使将犯人碎尸于牢房中，旁边还住着盗贼。
English: An inspector from the Shoushu District Inspection Office chopped up the corpse of a prisoner in his cell, next to which lived a thief.

古文：使严刑可诫于众，则秦之天下无叛民矣。
现代文：假使严刑可以警示民众，那么秦朝就不会有造反的老百姓了。
English: If severe punishment could warn the people, then there would be no rebellious people in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：臣以谓非法之刑，非所以助治，惟陛下除之。 帝嘉纳其言。
现代文：我认为不合法的刑罚，不能帮助统治，望陛下废除。 皇上高兴地采纳了他的建议。
English: I think that illegal punishment is not conducive to governing, and I hope that His Majesty will abolish it. The Emperor gladly accepted his suggestion.

古文：景德中，举贤良方正科，策入等，除秘书丞、通判信州。
现代文：景德年间，参与贤良方正科考试合格，任秘书丞、信州通判。
English: During the reign of King Jingde, he participated in and passed the examination of the virtuous party, and served as secretary-general and Shinshu magistrate.

古文：东封泰山，献《殊祥录》，改太常博士、直集贤院。
现代文：皇上东封泰山时，他献上《殊祥录》，又改任太常博士、直集贤院。
English: When Emperor Taishan was exiled to the East, he presented the "Record of Distinguished Merit" and was appointed to the post of Doctor of the First Rank and the post of Jishixian Academy.

古文：祀汾阴，幸亳州，命修《车驾所过图经》，献《宋雅》一篇，迁尚书祠部员外郎。
现代文：皇上祭祀汾阴，视察亳州，命他编撰《车驾所过图经》，献上《宋雅》一篇，升任尚书祠部员外郎。
English: The emperor made a religious offering to Gu Yin, inspected Zhangzhou, ordered him to compile the "Chauffeur's Bible," presented him with a copy of "Song Ya," and promoted him to the member of the Shangshu Shrine.

古文：坐发国子监诸科非其人，降监颍州税。数月，召还。
现代文：因他主考国子监诸科误取不该录用的人，降职监颍州税，几个月后召回京城。
English: Because he was the chief examiner of the National Children's Supervision of all subjects, he mistakenly recruited people who should not be hired, demoted the supervisor to the state tax, and recalled him to Beijing a few months later.

古文：久之，判三司磨勘司。
现代文：许久之后，任判三司磨勘司。
English: After a long time, he was assigned to the Third Division of the Bureau of Mining and Quarrying.

古文：上言： 官物在籍，而三司移文厘正，或其数细微，辄历年不得报，徒扰州县。
现代文：他上书说 ：官府的财政收入都登记在册，三司进行核对，有些数目太细太小，几年后还无法核实完上报，白白增加地方政府的烦恼。
English: He said in a letter: The financial income of government offices is all registered, and the three departments check it. Some amounts are too small and too small, and it is impossible to verify the report after several years, which adds to the troubles of local governments.

古文：自今官钱百、谷斗、帛二尺以下，非欺绐者除之。 真宗雅眷词臣，其典掌诰命，皆躬自柬拔。
现代文：从今以后，官府收支一百文钱、一斗谷、二尺帛以下的，只要不是假的就不必一一登录了。 真宗喜欢诗人，身边掌管文秘机要的，他都要亲自选拔。
English: From now on, the government's income and expenditure of 100 mon, 1 dogu and less than 2 shaku, as long as they are not fake, do not have to be registered one by one.Zhenzong likes poets, and he must personally select those who are in charge of the secret writing machine around him.

古文：擢知制诰、判登闻鼓院、纠察在京刑狱。
现代文：提升钱易为知制诰，判登闻鼓院，纠察在京刑狱。
English: Qian Yi was promoted to the position of intellectual, sentenced to attend the Drum Academy, and picketed the Beijing Detention Center.

古文：累迁左司郎中，为翰林学士，
现代文：官至左司郎中，为翰林学士。
English: He was a middle-ranking official to the left of Siro, and a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：儤直未满，卒。
现代文：因连续几天值班，未满期就累死了。
English: Due to being on duty for several days in a row, he died of exhaustion before the end of his shift.

古文：仁宗怜之，召其妻盛氏至禁中，赐以冠帔。
现代文：仁宗怜惜他，召他妻子盛氏到宫中，赐给凤冠霞披。
English: Yan Zong took pity on him, called his wife Shengji to the palace, and gave Feng Guan Xia Pu to her.

古文：易才学瞻敏过人，数千百言，援笔立就。又善寻尺大书行草，及喜观佛书，尝校《道藏经》，著《杀生戒》，有《金闺》、《瀛州》、《西垣制集》一百五十卷，《青云总录》、《青云新录》《南部新书》、《洞微志》一百三十卷。
现代文：钱易聪明过人，几千字的文章提笔就成，又擅长于写几尺大的行草书，爱读佛家著作，曾校勘过《道藏经》，著有《杀生戒》，有《金闺》、《瀛州》、《西垣制集》一百五十卷，《青云总录》、《青云新录》、《南部新书》、《洞微志》一百三十卷。
English: Qian Yiyi is extremely clever. He can write an article of several thousand words with the stroke of a pen. He is also good at writing cursive books several feet long. He loves to read Buddhist writings. He once inspected the "Tibetan Taoism" at school. He is the author of "Killing Precepts," "Golden Maiden," "Changzhou" and "Sigaki Collection" in 150 volumes, "Qingyun General Record," "Qingyun New Record," "Southern New Book" and "Dong Weixi" in 130 volumes.

古文：子彦远、明逸，相继皆以贤良方正应诏。
现代文：其子彦远、明逸，都相继应试贤良方正科合格而任官。
English: His sons, Hikoyan and Mingyat, were successively appointed to government posts after passing the examination of virtuous persons.

古文：宋兴以来，父子兄弟制策登科者，钱氏一家而已。
现代文：自宋朝开国以来，父子兄弟都科举登第的，就只有钱氏一家了。
English: Since the Song Dynasty founded the country, the Qian family is the only one in which both father and son brothers have made it to the top.

