古文：邾文公卜迁于绎，史曰： 利于民而不利于君。 
现代文：郭国的国君郭文公要史官占卜，把国都从郭迁到绎吉凶如何？史官答说： 有利于老百姓，可是对国君却不利。 
English: Guo Wengong, the ruler of Guo Province, asked the historian for a divination. How would it be to move the capital from Guo Province to Yuanzhong? The historian replied: It would be good for the people, but it would not be good for the ruler.

古文：邾子曰： 命在养民，死之短长，时也。
现代文：郭文公听后说： 国君的使命就在于让老百姓得到好处，我个人寿命的长短，就听天由命吧！
English: After listening, Guo Wengong said: The mission of the sovereign is to benefit the people. As for the length of my personal life, I will leave it to fate.

古文：民敬利矣，迁也吉莫如之。 
现代文：只要对老百姓有利，迁了就是最大的吉祥。 
English: As long as it is beneficial to the people, relocation is the greatest good luck.

古文：遂迁于绎，未几而卒。
现代文：于是迁到了绎，不久，郭文公就死了。
English: So they moved to Iduka, and soon Guo Wengong died.

古文：君子曰： 知命。 
现代文：有德行的人都说郭文公是 了解天命 。
English: Virtuous people all say that Guo Wengong is the one who understands the destiny.

古文：楚昭王之季年，有云如众赤鸟，夹日以飞三日。周太史曰： 其当王身乎？
现代文：楚昭王末年，有块云彩像一群红色的鸟模样，围绕太阳接连飞了三天于是周朝的太史说： 红云挡住了太阳就挡住了国王的身体，与国君不利。
English: In the late years of King Chu Zhao, a cloud resembled a flock of red birds and flew around the sun for three days in a row. Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty's official historian said: If a red cloud blocks the sun, it blocks the king's body and is unfavorable to the sovereign.

古文：若玦之，可移于令尹、司马。 
现代文：应当举行祭典，祷告上天，就可把灾难降到令尹和司马的身上。 
English: A festival should be held, and prayers should be made to heaven, so that the calamity can be brought down on Ling Yin and Sima.

古文：王曰： 除腹心之疾而置诸股肱，何益？
现代文：楚昭王说： 把心里和腹腔中的疾病移到四肢上能有什么益处呢？
English: Chu Zhao Wang said: What is the benefit of transferring diseases in the heart and abdominal cavity to the limbs?

古文：不縠不有大过，天其夭诸？
现代文：假如我没有大的过错，上天何必让我早死？
English: If I didn't make a big mistake, why would God let me die early?

古文：有罪受罚，又焉移之？ 
现代文：如果我有了罪应当受到惩罚，又何必移给另人？ 
English: If I am guilty and deserve to be punished, why should I be transferred to another person?

古文：遂弗禜。
现代文：所以不去举行祭典。
English: That's why I'm not going to the festival.

古文：孔子曰： 楚昭王知大道矣，其不失国也宜哉！ 
现代文：对子这件事孔子评价说： 楚昭王是知道大道理的，他是不应该失去国家的。 
English: Confucius commented on the matter: "Chu Zhao Wang knows the truth, he should not lose the country.

古文：按宋景公出人君之言三，荧惑为之退舍；邾文、楚昭之言，亦是物也，而终不蒙福，天道远而不可知如此。
现代文：考究一下此中的道理，当年宋景公连续发表过几次国君应当发表的英明言词，结果那些企图去迷惑他的小人都不得不退避三舍。可是郑文公、楚昭王说的话是同样性质的，竟没有得到一点好处。天理不可猜测竟然到这种地步。
English: Let's examine the reason for this. In that year, Song Jing Gong issued several consecutive wise words that should be issued by the sovereign. As a result, those who tried to confuse him had to retreat. However, the words of Zheng Wen Gong and Chu Zhao Wang were of the same nature, and they did not get any benefit. It is impossible to guess the reason why it got to this point.

