古文：高句丽者，出于夫余，自言先祖朱蒙。
现代文：高句丽国，出于夫余，自称其先祖是朱蒙。
English: Goguryeo, for its part, claimed that its ancestors were Zhu Meng.

古文：朱蒙母河伯女，为夫余王闭于室中，为日所照。
现代文：朱蒙的母亲为河伯之女，被夫余王关在一所屋子里。
English: Zhu Meng's mother was Hebe's daughter and was locked up in a room by her husband, Yu Wang.

古文：引身避之，日影又逐。
现代文：她被日光照射，抽身避开，日影又追逐她。
English: The sun shines on her, she turns away, and the shadows chase her.

古文：既而有孕，生一卵，大如五升。
现代文：不久她就有了身孕，后生下一卵，大有五升。
English: She soon became pregnant and gave birth to a five-litre egg.

古文：夫余王弃之与犬，犬不食；弃之与豕，豕又不食；弃之于路，牛马避之；后弃之野，众鸟以毛茹之。
现代文：夫余王把它丢给狗吃，狗不吃；丢给猪吃，猪也不吃；抛弃在路旁，牛马见了都躲避它；后来把它丢弃在荒野，众鸟用羽毛将它盖上。
English: Husband Yu Wang threw it to the dogs to eat, but the dogs did not eat it; threw it to the pigs to eat, but the pigs did not eat it; abandoned it by the roadside, and the cows and horses avoided it when they saw it; later he abandoned it in the wilderness, and the birds covered it with feathers.

古文：夫余王割剖之，不能破，遂还其母。
现代文：夫余王又用刀割剖它，不能破开，于是把它还给其母。
English: Her husband, Yu Wang, cut it with a knife, but couldn't open it, so he returned it to his mother.

古文：其母以物裹之，置于暖处，有一男破壳而出。
现代文：其母用东西裹上，放在温暖的地方，不久便有一个男孩破壳而出。
English: His mother wrapped him in something and put him in a warm place, and soon a boy came out of his shell.

古文：及其长也，字之曰朱蒙，其俗言 朱蒙 者，善射也。
现代文：到了他长大之后，给他取名叫朱蒙，当地方言所说 朱蒙 ，是善射的意思。
English: When he grew up, he was given the name Zhu Meng, which in the local dialect means "good archer."

古文：夫余人以朱蒙非人所生，将有异志，请除之，王不听，命之养马。
现代文：夫余人认为朱蒙非人所生，将来必有异心，请求把他除掉。夫余王不听，命他去养马。
English: Mr. and Mrs. Yu believed that Zhu Meng was not a man, and that he would have a different heart in the future, and asked to get rid of him. Mr. Yu Wang did not listen, and ordered him to raise a horse.

古文：朱蒙每私试，知有善恶，骏者减食令瘦，驽者善养令肥。
现代文：朱蒙常常私下里试骑，知道马有好有坏，就对好马减食使其瘦弱，对劣马则精心喂养使其肥壮。
English: Zhu Meng often tried to ride privately. Knowing that there are good and bad horses, he reduced food for good horses to make them thin, and carefully fed bad horses to make them fat.

古文：夫余王以肥者自乘，以瘦者给朱蒙。
现代文：夫余王把肥马拿来自己骑，把瘦马给朱蒙骑。
English: Husband Yu Wang took the fat horse to ride himself, and gave the thin horse to Zhu Meng to ride.

古文：后狩于田，以朱蒙善射，限之一矢。
现代文：后来到野外打猎，因朱蒙善射，夫余王限他一箭射中猎物。
English: Later, he went hunting in the field. Because Zhu Meng was a good shot, his husband Yu Wang limited him to one arrow to hit the prey.

古文：朱蒙虽矢少，殪兽甚多。
现代文：朱蒙虽然箭少，但射死的野兽甚多。
English: Although Zhu Meng has few arrows, he has shot many beasts.

古文：夫余之臣又谋杀之。
现代文：夫余的大臣们又策划要杀掉他。
English: Other ministers plotted to kill him.

古文：朱蒙母阴知，告朱蒙曰： 国将害汝，以汝才略，宜远适四方。 
现代文：朱蒙的母亲得知以后就暗地里对他说： 夫余国人想要害死你，凭你的才略，你应当远走四方。 
English: After Zhu Meng's mother learned of this, she secretly said to him: "Other people in our country want to kill you, so you should go far and wide, depending on your talent."

古文：朱蒙乃与乌引、乌违等二人，弃夫余，东南走。
现代文：朱蒙就与乌引、乌违等二人离开夫余往东南逃走。
English: Zhu Meng left her husband and fled to the southeast with two others, including Wu Ying and Wu You.

古文：中道遇一大水，欲济无梁，夫余人追之甚急。
现代文：中途遇上一条大河，要渡过去却没有桥，夫余人在后追得很急。
English: Halfway there was a big river, but there was no bridge to cross it. Mrs. Yu was in a hurry to catch up.

古文：朱蒙告水曰： 我是日子，河伯外孙，今日逃走，追兵垂及，如何得济？ 
现代文：朱蒙对着河水请求说： 我是太阳的儿子，河伯的外孙，今天逃到这里，追兵已经临近，如何得以渡过去？ 
English: Zhu Meng pleaded with the river otter, saying: I am the son of the sun, the grandson of Hebe, I fled here today, the pursuers are already approaching, how can I get across?

古文：于上鱼鳖并浮，为之成桥，朱蒙得渡，鱼鳖乃解，追骑不得渡。
现代文：于是水中的鱼龟一齐游到水面，替他搭成一座桥，让朱蒙渡过河去，然后鱼龟散开，追骑无法渡水。
English: As a result, all the fish turtles in the water swam to the surface to build a bridge for Zhu Meng to cross the river. The fish turtles then dispersed, and the rider was unable to cross the water.

古文：朱蒙遂至普述水，遇见三人，其一人著麻衣，一人著纳衣，一人著水藻衣，与朱蒙至纥升骨城，遂居焉，号曰高句丽，因以为氏焉。
现代文：朱蒙终于到达普述水，遇见三个人，其中一人穿麻衣，一人穿纳衣，一个穿水藻衣，与朱蒙一起到纥升骨城，就定居在这里，号称高句丽，因此便以这作为姓氏。
English: Zhu Meng finally reached the Susu River, met three people, one of whom was wearing a hemp coat, one was wearing a camel coat, and one was wearing a seaweed coat, and went with Zhu Meng to the bone city of Jinsheng, and settled here, known as Goguryeo, so he took this as his surname.

古文：初，朱蒙在夫余时，妻怀孕，朱蒙逃后生一子，字始闾谐。
现代文：当初，朱蒙在夫余时，妻子怀有身孕，在朱蒙逃走之后生下一子，小名叫始闾谐。
English: At first, when Zhu Meng was still married, his wife was pregnant. After Zhu Meng fled, she gave birth to a son, whose name was Shih Jie.

古文：及长，知朱蒙为国主，即与母亡而归之，名之曰闾达，委之国事。
现代文：他长大后，得知朱蒙当了国主，就同母亲逃出来投奔其父。朱蒙给他取名叫闾达，并将国事委付给他。
English: When he grew up and learned that Zhu Meng had become the ruler of the country, he fled with his mother to join his father. Zhu Meng named him Xingda and gave him the State Affairs Commission.

古文：朱蒙死，闾达代立。
现代文：朱蒙死后，闾达继立。
English: After Zhu Meng's death, Zunda succeeded him.

古文：闾达死，子如栗代立。
现代文：闾达死，其子如栗继立。
English: He died and was succeeded by his son, Rukuri.

古文：如栗死，子莫来代立，乃征夫余，夫余大败，遂统属焉。
现代文：如栗死，其子莫来继立。于是出兵攻打夫余，夫余大败，终于成为其属国。
English: When Chestnut died, his son Mola succeeded him. So he sent troops to attack Fuyu. Fuyu was defeated and eventually became his vassal state.

古文：莫来子孙相传，至裔孙宫，生而开目能视，国人恶之。
现代文：莫来子孙相传，传至其后裔宫，宫一生下来就张开眼睛能看东西，国人都讨厌他。
English: Mola's descendants passed it down to his descendant, Miya. When Miya was born, he opened his eyes and could see. The people of the country hated him.

古文：及长凶虐，国以残破。
现代文：宫长大后凶狠暴虐，国家因此而残破。
English: He grew up to be a violent tyrant, and the country perished because of him.

古文：宫曾孙位宫亦生而视，人以其似曾祖宫，故名为位宫，高句丽呼相似为 位 。
现代文：宫的曾孙位宫也是生下来就能看到东西，人们因他像其曾祖父宫，所以取名叫位宫一一一高句丽把相似叫作 位 。
English: Miyu's great-grandson, Igu, was also born with the ability to see. People called him Igu because he resembled his great-grandfather, Miyu.

古文：位宫亦有勇力，便弓马。
现代文：位宫也有勇力，熟习弓马。
English: The Empress Dowager also has courage and is familiar with archery and horse riding.

古文：魏正始中，入寇辽西安平，为幽州刺史母丘俭所破。
现代文：魏正始年间，位宫进犯辽东西安平，为幽州刺史毋丘俭所破。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, the imperial court invaded eastern and western Anping in Liao, and was defeated by the Yuzhou Sashishi.

古文：其玄孙乙弗利，利子钊，烈帝时与慕容氏相攻击。建国四年，慕容元真率众伐之，入自南陕，战于木底，大破钊军，乘胜长驱，遂入丸都，钊单马奔窜。
现代文：他的玄孙乙弗利，利之子钊，烈帝时与慕容氏相互攻击，建国四年，慕容元真率兵攻伐，从南陕出兵，战于木底，大破钊军，乘胜长驱直入，最后攻入丸都，钊一人骑马逃窜。
English: His great-great-grandson Yifu Li, Li's son Zhai, and Emperor Li attacked each other with the Murong clan. In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic, Murong Yuanzhen led an army to attack, sent troops from southern Shaanxi, fought in Moudi, destroyed the enemy army, drove straight into the victorious Chang, and finally invaded Mardu. Zhou fled on horseback.

古文：元真掘钊父墓，载其尸，并掠其母妻、珍宝、男女五万余口，焚其宫室，毁丸都城而还。
现代文：慕容元真掘开钊父亲的坟墓，将尸体运走，并抢走他的母妻、珍宝和男女五万余口，焚烧其宫室，摧毁丸都城而还。
English: Murong Yuanzhen dug up his father's grave, carried the body away, and robbed his mother and wife, precious treasures and more than fifty thousand men and women, burned his palace, destroyed the capital city and returned.

古文：自后钊遣使来朝。阻隔寇仇，不能自达。
现代文：自此以后钊遣使来朝，由于仇敌阻隔，不能到达。
English: Since then, the envoys sent to Korea have been unable to arrive due to the enemy's blockade.

古文：钊后为百济所杀。
现代文：钊后来为百济国所杀。
English: He was later killed by Baekje.

古文：世祖时，钊曾孙琏始遣便者安东奉表贡方物，并请国讳，世祖嘉其诚款，诏下帝系外名讳于其国，遣员外散骑侍郎李敖拜琏为都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领护东夷中郎将、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王。
现代文：世祖时，钊的曾孙琏开始派使者安东奉表，进贡方物，并请求给本国帝王赐给名号。世祖赞赏他的诚恳，就下令给这个国家世代帝王赐以名讳，派员外散骑侍郎李敖拜琏为都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领护东夷中郎将、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王。
English: At the time of the founding fathers, the great-grandson of Yao, Yao, began to send an envoy, Anton, to present a table, pay tribute, and request that the emperor of his country be given a name. The founding fathers appreciated his sincerity, and ordered that the emperor of this country be given a name, and sent the foreign cavalry and horseman Li Jibai to be the military governor of Liaohai, the general of the East Conquest, the general of the East Yizhong, the founding father of Liaodong County, and the king of Goguryeo.

古文：敖至其所居平壤城，访其方事，云：辽东南一千余里，东至栅城，南至小海，北至旧夫余，民户参倍于前魏时。
现代文：李敖到琏所居的平壤城，查访这个地方的情况，说：辽东南一千余里，东至栅城，南至小海，北至旧夫余，民户是魏以前的三倍。
English: Li Yu went to Pyongyang City, where Yu lived, to inspect the situation of this place, and said: "More than a thousand miles southeast of Liaoning, east to Jiaocheng, south to Xiaohai, and north to Jiuyuan, the number of households is three times that before the Wei Dynasty.

古文：其地东西二千里，南北一千余里。
现代文：其地域东西二千里，南北一千余里。
English: Its area is 2,000 miles from east to west and more than 1,000 miles from north to south.

古文：民皆土著，随山谷而居，衣布帛及皮。
现代文：老百姓都是土著，沿着山谷居住，穿布帛和兽皮。
English: The people are indigenous and live along the valley, wearing cloth and animal skins.

古文：土田薄脊，蚕农不足以自供，故其人节饮食。
现代文：土地薄瘠，养蚕务农不足以自给，所以那里的人饮食很节俭。
English: The land is thin and sericulture and agriculture are not enough for self-sufficiency, so the people there eat very sparingly.

古文：其俗淫，好歌舞，夜则男女群聚而戏，无贵贱之节，然洁净自喜。
现代文：那里的风俗尚淫，喜好歌舞，一到夜晚男女就群聚而嬉戏，没有贵贱之分，但都能洁身自好。
English: The customs there are lascivious, they like to sing and dance, and at night men and women get together and play. There is no distinction between rich and poor, but everyone can be themselves.

古文：其王好治宫室。
现代文：国王喜欢营造宫室。
English: Kings like to build palaces.

古文：其官名有谒奢、太奢、大兄、小兄之号。
现代文：官职有谒奢、太奢、大兄、小兄等称号。
English: Official positions have titles such as 奢,太奢,大兄,小兄.

古文：头著折风，其形如弁，旁插鸟羽，贵贱有差。
现代文：官员们头戴折风，其形状如冠，旁边插上鸟羽，以显示贵贱的差别。
English: Officials wear a crown-shaped headdress with bird feathers on the side to show the difference between rich and poor.

古文：立则反拱，跪拜曳一脚，行步如走。
现代文：站立时两手反拱，跪拜时拖着一条腿，走路时就像跑一样。
English: When standing, both hands arch backwards, when kneeling, drag one leg, and when walking, it's like running.

古文：常以十月祭天，国中大会。
现代文：规定每年十月祭天，这是全国性的大聚会。
English: It is stipulated that the October Festival will be held every year, which is a national grand gathering.

古文：其公会，衣服皆锦绣，金银以为饰。
现代文：人们因公事相聚，都要穿上锦绣衣服，佩带金银装饰。
English: When people get together for business, they all have to put on brocade clothes and wear gold and silver decorations.

古文：好蹲踞。食用俎凡。
现代文：人们喜欢蹲踞而坐，吃饭时用俎几这种器皿。
English: People like to squat and sit, and they use this kind of utensil when eating.

古文：出三尺马，云本朱蒙所乘，马种即果下也。
现代文：那里盛产三尺马，说是其先祖朱蒙所骑小马，是一种名叫果下的矮种马。
English: There is an abundance of three-foot horses, said to be ponies ridden by their ancestors Zhu Meng, a type of dwarf stallion named Guoshimo.

古文：后贡使相寻，岁致黄金二百斤，白银四百斤。
现代文：后来贡使前来搜寻这种马，一年进贡黄金二百斤，白银四百斤。
English: Later, tributary envoys came to search for this kind of horse. The annual tribute was 200 kilos of gold and 400 kilos of silver.

古文：时冯文通率众奔之，世祖遣散骑常侍封拨诏琏令送文通，琏上书称当与文通俱奉王化，竟不送。
现代文：那时冯文通率众投奔高句丽，世祖派散骑常侍封拨拟诏书给琏，令其送回冯文通，琏上书说应当与冯文通一同遵奉王化，竟然拒不送还。
English: At that time, Feng Wentong led the masses to go to Goguryeo, and the patriarchs sent Zangjie Zangjie to assign the imperial edict to Zou, ordering him to send it back to Feng Wentong. The imperial edict said that he should follow Wanghua with Feng Wentong, but he refused to send it back.

古文：世祖怒，欲往讨之。乐平王丕等议待后举，世祖乃止，而文通亦寻为琏所杀。
现代文：世祖大怒，要出兵前往讨伐，乐平王拓跋丕等人建议等以后再行动，世祖才作罢，但不久冯文通也被琏所杀。
English: The ancestor was furious and wanted to send troops to the crusade, but Leping Wang Tuobao and others suggested waiting until later to act. Only then did the ancestor give up, but soon Feng Wentong was also killed by the crossbow.

古文：后文明太后以显祖六宫未备，敕琏令荐其女。
现代文：后来文明太后因显祖六宫尚未齐全，下令要琏送其女入宫。
English: Later, the empress dowager ordered her daughter to be sent to the palace because the sixth palace was not yet complete.

古文：琏奉表，云女已出嫁，求以弟女应旨，朝廷许焉，乃遣安乐王真、尚书李敷等至境送币。
现代文：琏进奏章说女儿已经出嫁，请求让其弟之女应选，朝廷准许，就派安乐王拓跋真、尚书李敷等送聘礼到高句丽。
English: Hao Jin Songzhang said that his daughter had already married, and requested that his brother's daughter should be chosen. With the approval of the court, he sent Anle Wang Tuobazhen, Shangshu Li Shiki and others to Goguryeo to present the engagement gift.

古文：琏惑其左右之说，云朝廷昔与冯氏婚姻，未几而灭其国，殷鉴不远，宜以方便辞之。
现代文：琏身边官员对他说，昔日朝廷与冯氏通婚，不久就灭了那个国家，殷鉴不远，应当找借口拒绝此事。
English: The officials around him told him that in the past, the imperial court married the Feng family, and soon destroyed that country. It was not far away, and he should find an excuse to refuse the matter.

古文：琏遂上书妄称女死。
现代文：琏听了左右的蛊惑，就上书妄称其侄女已死。
English: After listening to the left and right demagoguery, she wrote a letter claiming that her niece had died.

古文：朝廷疑其矫诈，又遣假散骑常侍程骏切责之，若女审死者，听更选宗淑。
现代文：朝廷怀疑他虚假欺诈，又派假散骑常侍程骏急切询问，如果该女确实死了，就任凭他另选一名同宗的女子。
English: The court suspected him of deception and fraud, and dispatched a roving equerry, Cheng Yu, to urgently inquire whether, if the woman had indeed died, he would be allowed to choose another woman from the same family.

古文：琏云： 若天子恕其前愆，谨当奉诏。 
现代文：琏说： 假若天子宽恕我先前的过错，我就遵奉朝廷旨意。 
English: Zou said: If the Son of Heaven forgives the previous mistakes, he must respectfully accept the edict.

古文：会显祖崩，乃止。
现代文：恰逢显祖去世，此事才作罢。
English: It was only after the death of Emperor Xianzu that the matter was settled.

古文：至高祖时，琏贡献倍前，其报赐亦稍加焉。
现代文：到高祖时，琏向朝廷贡奉进献的物品比以前成倍增加，得到朝廷的回报赏赐也渐有增加。
English: By the time of Gao Zu, the number of items presented as tribute to the imperial court had doubled, and the rewards received from the imperial court had also gradually increased.

古文：时光州于海中得琏所遣诣萧道成使余奴等，高祖诏责琏曰： 道成亲杀其君，窃号江左，朕方欲兴灭国于旧邦，继绝世于刘氏，而卿越境外交，远通篡贼，岂是籓臣守节之义！
现代文：当时光州在海中截获琏派往朝见萧道成的使者余奴等人，将他们送往朝廷，高祖下诏痛责琏说： 萧道成杀了他的国君，窃位称帝于江右，我正要帮助刘宋振兴汉邦，延续刘氏的江山，而你却越境与萧道成交结，远通窃国之贼，这难道是藩臣守节的理义！
English: At that time, Gwangju intercepted in the middle of the sea the envoy Yu Nong and others sent by Gong to the court to see Xiao Daoren, and sent them to the imperial court. Gao Zu under the imperial edict scolded Gong and said: Xiao Daoren killed his sovereign, stole the throne and claimed to be the emperor of the right side of the river. I was about to help Liu Song to revitalize the Han state and continue the Liu dynasty, but you crossed the border and made contact with Xiao Daoren, a long-distance thief of the country. Is this the logic of the vassal's festival?

古文：今不以一过掩卿旧款，即送还籓，其感恕思衍，只承明宪，辑宁所部，动静以闻。 
现代文：现在我不因你这一过失而埋没你往日的诚意，即把使者送回国，望你感恩思过，遵守朝廷法令，安抚你的部属，一切行动都应上报朝廷。 
English: Now, I will not bury your past sincerity because of this fault of yours, that is, to send the envoy back to the country, I hope you will be grateful, abide by the imperial decree, appease your subordinates, and all actions should be reported to the imperial court.

古文：太和十五年，琏死，年百余岁。
现代文：太和十五年，琏死，年百余岁。
English: Emperor Xiaowen died at the age of 15 and lived for more than 100 years.

古文：高祖举哀于东郊，遣谒者仆射李安上策赠车骑大将军、太傅、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王，谥曰康。
现代文：高祖在东郊为之举哀，并派谒者仆射李安上前往，封赠琏为车骑大将军、太傅、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王，谥号为康。
English: Gao Zu mourned for him in the eastern suburbs, and sent a messenger to shoot Li An to go to the top. He was awarded the titles of General of the Cavalry, Taifu, the founder of Liaodong County, and King of Goguryeo, and his posthumous name was Kang.

古文：又遣大鸿胪拜琏孙云使持节、都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领护东夷中郎将、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王，赐衣冠服物车旗之饰，又诏云遣世子入朝，令及郊丘之礼。
现代文：又派大鸿胪授予琏的孙子云为使持节、都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领护东夷中郎将、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王，赐给衣冠服物车旗之饰，又诏令云派世子入朝，让他参加祭祀天地的礼仪。
English: He also dispatched the Great Great Horned Owl to award Yun, the grandson of Yao, as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Liaohai, the general of the East Conquest, the leader of the East Yizhong, the founding father of Liaodong County, and the king of Goguryeo, and gave him the crown of clothing, the decoration of the chariot flag, and ordered Yun to send his son to the imperial court and let him participate in the ritual of sacrificing heaven and earth.

古文：云上书辞疾，惟遣其从叔升于随使诣阙，严责之。
现代文：云上书推辞有病，只派他的堂叔升于随来使到朝廷，因此受到严厉指责。
English: Yun Shangshu's resignation was ill-advised, and he only sent his cousin to be promoted to the imperial envoy, and was severely criticized for this.

古文：自此岁常贡献。
现代文：从此云每年照例向朝廷纳贡。
English: From that time on, the yunun paid tribute to the imperial court every year.

古文：正始中，世宗于东堂引见其使芮悉弗，悉弗进曰： 高丽系诚天极，累叶纯诚，地产土毛，无愆王贡。
现代文：正始年间，世宗在东堂接见云的使者芮悉弗，芮悉弗向世宗进言说： 高句丽远在天际，世世代代对朝廷绝对忠诚，国内只有土地上出产的五谷，而对朝廷的贡奉却从无差错。
English: At the beginning of the year, Sejong received the messenger of the clouds, Junsifu, in the east hall. Junsifu gave advice to Sejong, saying: Goguryeo is far away in the sky, and has been absolutely loyal to the imperial court for generations. There is only grain produced on the land in the country, but the tribute to the imperial court has never been wrong.

古文：但黄金出自夫余，珂则涉罗所产。
现代文：但进贡的黄金出自夫余，美玉则是涉罗所产。
English: However, the gold for the tribute came from Fujouyu, while the precious stones came from Zhanluo.

古文：今夫余为勿吉所逐，涉罗为百济所并，国王臣云惟继绝之义，悉迁于境内。
现代文：现在夫余被勿吉国驱逐，涉罗被百济国吞并，臣国之主云考虑要继续竭尽的道义，就迁到国境之内。
English: Now that Hanyu has been expelled by Beiji, and Zhanluo has been annexed by Beiji, the lord of the vassal state is considering the morality of continuing to exhaust, and moved to within the national borders.

古文：二品所以不登王府，实两贼是为。 
现代文：而黄金美玉之所以不能进奉朝廷，实在是勿吉、百济两贼所为。 
English: However, the reason why the gold and gems could not be presented to the imperial court was actually caused by the two thieves, Bekichi and Baekje.

古文：世宗曰： 高丽世荷上将，专制海外，九夷黠虏，实得征之。
现代文：世宗说： 高丽世代担负着大将之责，专门遏制海外，九夷黠虏，确实可以征讨它。
English: Sejong said: The Koryo generation has shouldered the responsibility of generals, specifically to contain overseas, Jiujiang invaders, and can indeed conquer it.

古文：瓶罄，耻，谁之咎也？
现代文：国家残破，是谁的罪过呢？
English: Whose fault is it that the country is in ruins?

古文：昔方贡之愆，责在连率。卿宜宣朕旨于卿主，务尽威怀之略，揃披害群，辑宁东裔，便二邑还复旧墟，土毛无失常贡也。 
现代文：昔日方贡的过失，责任在于地方官，你应当向你的国主传达我的旨意，务必极尽威怀之略，翦灭害群，安抚东边边远之地，使夫余、涉罗二处，恢复旧地，照常向朝廷进献土地产物。 
English: The fault of the tributary in the past, the responsibility lies with the local officials. You should convey my will to your sovereign. Be sure to do your best to intimidate, eliminate the harmful groups, pacify the remote areas in the east, and restore the old land in the remaining two areas, and donate the land products to the imperial court as usual.

古文：神龟中，云死，灵太后为举哀于东堂，遣使策赠车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王。
现代文：神龟年间，云死，灵太后在东堂为他举哀吊唁，派使者封赠云为车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王。
English: During the years of the Divine Turtle, Yun died, and the Empress Dowager held a condolence for him in the East Hall, and sent an envoy to present Yun as the General of the Chariot and Cavalry, the Lieutenant of Dongyi, the Founder of Liaodong County, and the King of Goguryeo.

古文：又拜其世子安为安东将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高句丽。
现代文：又授予其世子安为安东将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王。
English: He also awarded his descendant, An, with the titles of General of Andong, Lieutenant of Tongyi, Founder of Liaodong County, and King of Goguryeo.

古文：正光初，光州又于海中执得萧衍所授安宁东将军衣冠剑佩，及使人江法盛等，送于京师。
现代文：正光初年，光州又在海中截获萧衍给安授予宁东将军的衣冠剑佩，以及使者江法盛等，送至京师。
English: In the first year of Zheng Guang, Gwangju also intercepted Xiao Yan's cloak and sword given to An by Ningdong General, as well as the emissary, Jiang Hao Sheng, and sent them to Beijing Division.

古文：安死，子延立。
现代文：安死，其子延继位。
English: After the death of Emperor An, his son Yan ascended the throne.

古文：出帝初，诏加延使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、领护车夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王，赐衣冠服物车旗之饰。
现代文：出帝初年，诏令授延为使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高句丽王，赐给衣冠服物车旗之饰。
English: In the first year of the emperor's enthronement, the imperial edict extended the festival to the emperor's envoys, horseback riding attendants, chariot and cavalry generals, lieutenant of Dongyi, the founder of Liaodong County, and the king of Goguryeo, and gave them the decoration of clothing crown, clothing and chariot flag.

古文：安等至海滨，遇风飘荡。
现代文：天平年间，诏令加授延为侍中、骠骑大将军，其余职位都与过去一样。
English: During the Tenpyo era, the Emperor's edict was extended to make him an equerry and grand cavalry general, and the rest of the positions were the same as before.

古文：竟不达而还。勿吉国，在高句丽北，旧肃慎国也。
现代文：延死，其子成即位，一直到武定末年，高句丽国的贡使年年都到朝廷进奉。勿吉国，在高句丽的北边，就是旧时的肃慎国。
English: After Yan's death, his son Cheng ascended to the throne, and until the last years of Wuding, tributary envoys from Goguryeo were sent to the imperial court every year. Bekhi, in the north of Goguryeo, was the old Sushen.

古文：邑落各自有长，不相总一。
现代文：勿吉国内的村落各自有它的特点，并不完全相一致。
English: Each of the villages in Beji has its own characteristics, and they are not completely the same.

古文：其人劲悍，于东夷最强。
现代文：国内的人强劲慓悍，在东部各族中属于最强悍的。
English: The people in the country are strong and tough, and they are the toughest among all the ethnic groups in the east.

古文：言语独异。
现代文：它的语言和其他民族很不一样。
English: Its language is very different from that of other peoples.

古文：常轻豆莫娄等国，诸国亦患之。
现代文：勿吉国经常轻侮豆莫娄等国，其四邻各国也非常惧怕它。
English: Countries such as Mozambique are often treated with contempt by the country of Beji, and its four neighboring countries are also very afraid of it.

古文：去洛五千里。
现代文：勿吉离洛阳有五千里地。
English: Beiji is 5,000 miles away from Luoyang.

古文：自和龙北二百余里有善玉山，山北行十三日至祁黎山，又北行七日至如洛环水，水广里余，又北行十五日至太鲁水，又东北行十八日到其国。
现代文：从和龙向北行二百余里有善玉山，出山往北走十三天到达祁黎山，又从祁黎山向北走七天到如洛瑰水，河面有一里多宽，再向北走十五天到太鲁水，从太鲁水往东北行走十八天才到达勿吉国境内。
English: There are more than 200 Shan Yushan in the northbound direction from Hulong. It takes 13 days to get to the north of the mountain and 13 days to get to Mount Balai. It takes 7 days to get to the north of Mount Balai and the river is more than a kilometer wide. It takes 15 days to get to the north of the river and the river is more than a kilometer wide. It takes 18 days to get to the north of the river and the river is more than a kilometer wide and the river is more than a kilometer wide.

古文：国有大水，阔三里余，名速末水。
现代文：国内有一条大河，河面阔三里多，名叫速末水。
English: There is a large river in China, the surface of the river is more than three miles wide, called the fast water.

古文：其地下湿，筑城穴居，屋似形冢，开口于上，以梯出入。
现代文：勿吉国的地势低下，地面潮湿，人们修筑城墙挖掘土室用来居住，土屋的形状就像是一座坟冢，在上方开一个口子，进出室内都要用梯子。
English: The terrain of Beji is low, the ground is wet, people are building city walls and digging earthen houses to live in. The shape of the earthen house is like a tomb, with an opening at the top, and you have to use a ladder to get in and out of the room.

古文：其国无牛，有车马，佃则偶耕，车则步推。
现代文：勿吉国没有牛，但有车子和马匹，耕作时用双马拉犁，车子都由人推着走。
English: There are no cattle in Beshikode, but there are carts and horses. Double horse-drawn ploughs are used for farming, and the carts are pushed by people.

古文：有粟及麦穄，菜则有葵。
现代文：农作物有小米、麦子和糜子，疏菜主要有葵菜。
English: Crops include millet, wheat and millet starch, and vegetables mainly include sunflower greens.

古文：水气醎凝，盐生树上，亦有盐池。
现代文：那里水气中含有盐碱，凝结在树上好像树也能长出盐来，各地也有一些盐池。
English: There, the water vapor contains salt and alkali, which condenses on the trees as if the trees can also grow salt. There are also some salt ponds around the country.

古文：多猪无羊。
现代文：人们喂养的牲畜多数是猪而没有羊。
English: The livestock that people feed are mostly pigs and no sheep.

古文：嚼米醖酒，饮能至醉。
现代文：当地人把米嚼碎用来酿酒，这种酒喝了可以使人醉。
English: Locals chew up the rice to make wine, which can be intoxicating when drunk.

古文：妇人则布裙，男子猪犬皮裘。
现代文：女人们穿着布做的裙子，男人则穿猪皮和狗皮制成的衣服。
English: The women wear dresses made of cloth, while the men wear clothes made of pig and dog skin.

古文：初婚之夕，男就女家执女乳而罢，便以为定，仍为夫妇。
现代文：男女初婚那天晚上，男子去到女方家中捉弄一下女子的乳房就住手，用这种方式作为定婚，两人便成为夫妇。
English: On the evening of a man and woman's first marriage, the man goes to the woman's home and teases the woman's breasts and stops, using this as a marriage ceremony, and the two become a couple.

古文：俗以人溺洗手面。
现代文：那里的习俗，用人的尿来洗手洗脸。
English: The custom there is to wash hands and face with human urine.

古文：头插虎豹尾。
现代文：人们喜欢在头上插上虎和豹的尾巴。
English: People like to put tiger and leopard tails on their heads.

古文：善射猎，弓长三尺，箭长尺二寸，以石为镞。
现代文：勿吉国的人擅长射猎，他们使用的弓有三尺长，箭有一尺二寸长，用磨尖的石头做箭镞。
English: The people of Beji are good at shooting. They use a three-foot-long bow and a one-foot-two-inch-long arrow, and use sharpened stones to make arrowheads.

古文：其父母春夏死，立埋之，冢上作屋，不令雨湿；若秋冬，以其尸捕貂，貂食其肉，多得之。
现代文：当地人的父母如果在春季和夏季死去，就立即埋葬，在坟墓上盖一个小屋，不让雨水把坟墓淋湿；如果父母在秋季和冬季死去，就把他的尸体用来捕貂，貂来吃死者的肉，就很容易把它捕捉到。
English: If the parents of the local people die in the spring and summer, they will be buried immediately, and a hut will be built on the grave to prevent rainwater from wetting the grave; if the parents die in the autumn and winter, they will use his body to catch trout, and the trout will eat the meat of the dead, so it is easy to catch it.

古文：常七八月造毒药傅箭镞，射禽兽，中者便死，煮药毒气亦能杀人。
现代文：人们常常在七八月间制造毒药，把毒药附着在箭镞上，用来射杀飞禽走兽，猎物一中箭就立即致死，熬煮毒药所产生的毒气也能把人毒死。
English: People often make poisons between July and August, and attach the poison to arrowheads to shoot birds and beasts. If the prey is hit by an arrow, it will immediately die. The poison gas produced by boiling the poison can also poison people.

古文：国南有徒太山，魏言 大皇 ，有虎豹罴狼不害人，人不得山上溲污，行迳山者，皆以物盛。
现代文：勿吉国南部有徒太山，大魏国的人则称之为 大白 ，山里的虎豹、熊罴、狼经常出来害人，人们不敢在山上大小便或者洗东西，敢于径直走进山里的人，都能获得丰盛的物品。
English: In the southern part of Beiji Province, there is the Wutai Mountain, which the people of the Great Wei Dynasty called the Great White Mountain. The tigers and leopards, bears and wolves in the mountain often come out to harm people. People do not dare to urinate or wash on the mountain. Those who dare to walk straight into the mountain can get rich goods.

古文：去延兴中，遣使乙力支朝献。
现代文：延兴年间，勿吉国派遣使者乙力支前来朝廷进贡。
English: During the Yanxing Dynasty, the State of Beiji sent an envoy, Ailizhong, to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：太和初，又贡马五百匹。
现代文：太和初年，又来进贡马五百匹。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, another five hundred horses were presented as tribute.

古文：乙力支称：初发其国，北船溯难河西上，至太氵河，沉船于水，南出陆行，渡洛孤水，从契丹西界达和龙。
现代文：乙力支自称：当初从勿吉国出发，乘船从难河溯水西上，到了太氵尔河，就把船沉入河底，改从陆路往南行走，渡过洛孤水，然后从契丹国西部边境到达和龙城。
English: He said that he originally set out from the country of Bekji and traveled westward by boat along the Nanhe River. When he reached the Taedong River, he sank the boat into the bottom of the river. Instead, he walked south by land, crossed the Loqiao Water, and then reached the city of Hulong from the western border of Qidan.

古文：自云其国先破高句丽十落，密其百济谋从水道并力取高句丽，遣乙力支奉使大国，请其可否。
现代文：乙力支说他们勿吉国早先打败高句丽国的十个部落，又秘密地同百济国谋划，打算从水路合力攻取高句丽，特地派遣乙力支奉使大魏国，向朝廷请示这样做是否妥当。
English: Ailishi said that they did not want the ten tribes of Goguryeo to defeat the ten tribes of Goguryeo earlier, and secretly planned with Baekje to jointly capture Goguryeo from the waterway. Ailishi specially sent an envoy to the Great Wei State to ask the court whether it was appropriate to do so.

古文：诏敕三国同是籓附，宜共和顺，勿相侵扰。
现代文：皇帝诏敕认为勿吉、百济和高句丽三国同样都是大魏的藩属，应当和顺共处，不要互相侵犯骚扰。
English: Emperor Zhaozhou believed that the three provinces of Beiji, Baekje and Goguryeo belonged to the Great Wei Dynasty and should coexist harmoniously, and should not encroach on or harass each other.

古文：乙力支乃还。
现代文：于是乙力支就回国去了。
English: So Aitrich went back to his country.

古文：从其来道，取得本船，泛达其国。
现代文：他们还是从原路走到太氵尔河，从水里打捞起原来的船只，乘船从水路到达国中。
English: They still walked from the original road to the Taitung River, salvaged the original boat from the water, and took the boat from the waterway to the middle of the country.

古文：九年，复遣使侯尼支朝献。
现代文：太和九年，勿吉国又派使者侯尼支来大魏朝贡进献。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiwa era, the State of Besshi sent an envoy, Hou Nizhi, to bring tribute to the Great Wei Dynasty.

古文：明年复入贡。
现代文：第二年再次前来朝贡。
English: The next year, they came again to pay tribute.

古文：其傍有大莫卢国、复钟国、莫多回国、库娄国、素和国、具弗伏国、匹黎尔国、拔大何国、郁羽陵国、库伏真国、鲁娄国、羽真侯国，前后各遣使朝献。
现代文：勿吉国的四周有大莫卢国、覆钟国、莫多回国、库娄国、素和国、具伏弗国、匹黎尔国、拔大何国、郁羽陵国、库伏真国、鲁娄国、羽真侯国，这些部族先后都曾派遣使者向大魏国朝贡进献。
English: Besieged on all sides by the kingdoms of Great Molu, Over the Bell, Modo Hui, Kuching, Suwa, Guvufu, Piriel, Batu, Iku, Kuwujin, Luzhong, and Yazhong, these tribes successively sent emissaries to pay tribute to the Great Wei.

古文：太和十二年，勿吉复遣使贡楛矢方物于京师。
现代文：太和十二年，勿吉又派使者来京师进贡用木苦木做杆的箭以及各种土特产。
English: In the 12th year of the Taiwa era, Bekichi also sent an envoy to Beijing to bring tribute, arrows made of wood and bitter wood, and various local specialties.

古文：十七年，又遣使人婆非等五百余人朝献。
现代文：十七年，又派使者婆非等五百多人前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In the seventeenth year, he sent more than five hundred emissaries, including his mother-in-law, to pay tribute.

古文：景明四年，复遣使候力归等朝贡。
现代文：景明四年，再次派使者俟力归等人来朝贡。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of King Jingming, he again sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：自此迄于正光，贡使相寻。
现代文：从这时一直到正光年间为止，进贡的使者相继而来。
English: From that time until the year of the full moon, the envoys of tribute came one after another.

古文：尔后，中国纷扰，颇或不至。
现代文：尔后，由于中国动乱纷扰，很有一段时间没有派使者前来。
English: After that, because of the turmoil in China, no envoys were sent for a long time.

古文：兴和二年六月，遣使石久云等贡方物，至于武定不绝。
现代文：兴和二年六月，勿吉又派遣使者石久云等人来进贡当地土产，一直到武定年间都没有断绝。
English: In June of the second year of the Heian period, Bekichi also sent envoys such as Sekijuun to pay tribute to local local products, and they did not stop until the Wuding period.

