古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之下太元八年
现代文：起，止，一共两年。孝武帝太元八年
English: It lasted for a total of two years. Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne in the eighth year of the Taiyuan era.

古文：春，正月，秦吕光发长安，以鄯善王休密驮、车师前部王弥窴为乡导。
现代文：春季，正月，前秦吕光发兵长安，以鄯善王休密驮、车师前部王弥作为向导。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the former Qin Emperor Luguang sent troops to Chang'an, with the sage Wang Shumizhao and the charioteer Wang Qianbu as guides.

古文：三月，丁巳，大赦。
现代文：三月，丁巳，东晋实行大赦。
English: In March, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：夏，五月，桓冲帅众十万伐秦，攻襄阳；遣前将军刘波等攻沔北诸城；辅国将军杨亮攻蜀，拔五城，进攻涪城；鹰扬将军郭铨攻武当。
现代文：夏季，五月，桓冲率领十万兵众讨伐前秦，攻打襄阳。派前将军刘波等攻打沔北各城。辅国将军杨亮攻打蜀地，攻下了五座城池，又进军攻打涪城。鹰扬将军郭铨攻打武当。
English: In the summer, in May, Huan Chong led a hundred thousand soldiers to fight against the former Qin and attack Xiangyang. He sent the former general Liu Bo and others to attack the cities in the north of Shandong. The auxiliary general Yang Liang attacked Shoudi, captured five cities and advanced to attack Shicheng. The eagle general Guo Wei attacked Wudang.

古文：六月，冲别将攻万岁、筑阳，拔之。
现代文：六月，桓冲的别将攻打万岁、筑阳，攻了下来。
English: In June, Huanchong's division attacked Wanzhe and Chikuyang and took them down.

古文：秦王坚遣征南将军巨鹿公睿、冠军将军慕容垂等帅步骑五万救襄阳，兗州刺史张崇救武当，后将军张蚝、步兵校尉姚苌救涪城；睿军于新野，垂军于邓城。
现代文：前秦王苻坚派遣征南将军钜鹿公苻睿、冠军将军慕容垂等率领五万步、骑兵救援襄阳，派兖州刺史张崇救援武当，派后将军张蚝、步兵校尉姚苌救援涪城。桓睿驻军于新野，慕容垂驻军于邓城。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian dispatched the southward-conquering general Mu Lugu Gong Yu Rui and the champion general Mu Rongtui, leading 50,000 troops, cavalry to rescue Xiangyang, sent Zhang Chong, the governor of Zhangzhou, to rescue Wudang, and sent the rear admiral Zhang Hui and the infantry lieutenant Yao Hui to rescue Handan. Huan Rui was stationed in Xinyo, and Mur Rongtui was stationed in Dengcheng.

古文：桓冲退屯沔南。
现代文：桓冲后退驻扎在沔南。
English: Kanchong retreated and was stationed in South Gyeongsang.

古文：秋，七月，郭铨及冠军将军桓石虔败张崇于武当，掠二千户以归。
现代文：秋季，七月，郭铨以及冠军将军桓石虔在武当打败了张崇，掳掠了二千户百姓后返回。
English: In the autumn, in July, Guo Gan and the champion general Huan Shikian defeated Zhang Chong in Wudang and returned after plundering two thousand households.

古文：巨鹿公睿遣慕容垂为前锋，进临沔水。
现代文：钜鹿公苻睿派慕容垂作为前锋，进军来到沔水。
English: Mu Rongtui was sent to Surabaya as a forward by the Duke of Elk.

古文：垂夜命军士人持十炬，系于树枝，光照数十里。
现代文：慕容垂夜晚命令军中士兵每人手持十个将束苇系在树枝上做成的火把，光照数十里。
English: In the evening, Murong ordered the soldiers in the army to each hold ten torches made of bundles of straw tied to tree branches, illuminating dozens of miles.

古文：冲惧，退还上明。
现代文：桓冲害怕了，退回上明。
English: Kanchon got scared and retreated back to Jomei.

古文：张蚝出斜谷，杨亮引兵还。
现代文：张蚝率兵出了斜谷，杨亮带兵返回。
English: Zhang Xuan led the soldiers out of the valley, Yang Liang led the soldiers back.

古文：冲表其兄子石民领襄城太守，戍夏口，冲自求领江州刺史；诏许之。
现代文：桓冲上表章请求让他哥哥的儿子桓石民兼任襄阳太守，戍守夏口。桓冲自我请求兼任江州刺史。朝廷下达诏令同意了。
English: Huan Chong requested that his brother's son, Huan Shimin, also serve as Yangyang's governor, and Hsia Kou's governor. Huan Chong himself requested that he also serve as the governor of Jiangzhou. The imperial court issued a decree and agreed.

古文：秦王坚下诏大举入寇，民每十丁遣一兵；其良家子年二十已下，有材勇者，皆拜羽林郎。
现代文：前秦王苻坚下达诏令，开始大举入侵东晋。百姓中每十个成年人选派一人充军，良家子弟中年龄在二十岁以下，有才能勇气的人，全都授官羽林郎。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian issued an imperial decree and began a large-scale invasion of the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Among the people, every ten adults were selected to join the army, and all the talented and courageous children under the age of twenty were given the title of Ulin Lang.

古文：又曰： 其以司马昌明为尚书左仆射，谢安为吏部尚书，桓冲为侍中；势还不远，可先为起第。 
现代文：又说： 晋朝任命司马昌明为尚书左仆射，谢安为吏部尚书，桓冲为侍中。以此形势来看，凯旋的时间不会太远，可以先行起身于家，出任官职。 
English: He also said: The Jin dynasty appointed Sima Changming as Shangshu's left-hand man, Xie An as Shangshu's secretary, and Huanchong as a chamberlain. From this situation, the time of triumph will not be too far away, you can get up first at home and take office.

古文：良家子至者三万馀骑，拜秦州主簿，金城赵盛之为少年都统。
现代文：良家子弟应征的有三万多骑兵，苻坚任命秦州主簿赵盛之为少年都统。
English: There are more than thirty thousand cavalrymen enlisted by the sons and daughters of the Liang family. Zou Jian appointed the chief accountant of Qin State, Zhao Shengwei, as the leader of the young people.

古文：是时，朝臣皆不欲坚行，独慕容垂、姚苌及良家子劝之。
现代文：这时，满朝大臣都不想让苻坚出征，唯独慕容垂、姚苌及良家子弟对此加以劝勉。
English: At this time, all the ministers of the Manchu Dynasty did not want Yu Jian to go to war, but Mu Rongtuo, Yao Yu and Liang Jia's younger brother tried to persuade him.

古文：阳平公融言于坚曰： 鲜卑、羌虏，我之仇雠，常思风尘之变以逞其志，所陈策画，何可从也！
现代文：阳平公苻融向苻坚进言说： 鲜卑、羌族的虏臣，是我们的仇敌，经常盼望着风云变化以实现他们的心愿，他们所陈献的办法，怎么能听从呢！
English: Yang Ping Gong Rong said to Xuan Jian: Xiang Biao Rong, the subordinate of the Yao people, is our enemy, always looking forward to changes in the wind and clouds to realize their wishes, how can we listen to the methods they have presented!

古文：良家少年皆富饶子弟，不闲军旅，苟为谄谀之言以会陛下之意耳。
现代文：良家少年全都是富豪子弟，不熟悉军事，只是苟且进上阿谀奉承之言以迎合陛下的心愿。
English: The boys of good families are all the children of the rich, they are not familiar with the military, but they are eager to advance the words of flattery to meet the wishes of His Majesty.

古文：今陛下信而用之，轻举大事，臣恐功既不成，仍有后患，悔无及也！ 
现代文：如今陛下相信并采纳了他们的话，轻率地进行大规模行动，臣恐怕既不能成就战功，随之还会产生后患，悔之不及！ 
English: Now, His Majesty believed and accepted their words, and rashly carried out a large-scale operation. I am afraid that the minister will not be able to achieve military exploits, and there will be subsequent problems. I can't regret it!

古文：坚不听。
现代文：苻坚没有听从。
English: Yan Jian did not listen.

古文：八月，戊午，坚遣阳平公融督张蚝、慕容垂等步骑二十五万为前锋；以兗州刺史姚苌为龙骧将军，督益、梁州诸军事。
现代文：八月，戊午，苻坚派遣阳平公苻融督帅张蚝、慕容垂等人的步、骑兵二十五万人作为前锋，任命兖州刺史姚苌为龙骧将军，督益、梁州诸军事。
English: In the afternoon of August, Yu Jian dispatched Yangping's civil affairs and economic development superintendent Zhang Qian, Murongtui and others, as well as 250,000 cavalry as forwards, and appointed Zhangzhou's general Yao Qian as the general of Longyan, and the military superintendents of Duyix and Liangzhou.

古文：坚谓苌曰： 昔朕以龙骧建业，未尝轻以授人，卿其勉之！ 
现代文：苻坚对姚苌说： 过去我靠龙骧将军的官位建立了大业，未曾轻易地把这个官位授予别人，你努力干吧！ 
English: Yu Jian said to Yao Yao: In the past, I built a great career by relying on the official rank of Longyu General. I have never easily awarded this official rank to others. You should work hard!

古文：左将军窦冲曰： 王者无戏言，此不祥之征也！ 
现代文：左将军窦冲说： 君王无戏言，这话是不祥之兆！ 
English: Zuo General Dou Chong said, "The king has no choice, this is an ominous sign!"

古文：坚默然。
现代文：苻坚沉默不语。
English: Yu Jian was silent.

古文：慕容楷、慕容绍言于慕容垂曰： 主上骄矜已甚，叔父建中兴之业，在此行也！ 
现代文：慕容楷、慕容绍向慕容垂进言说： 主上的骄纵傲慢已经非常严重，叔父建立中兴大业，就在此行！ 
English: Murong Kai and Murong Shao said to Murong Diao: The Lord's arrogance has become very serious. My uncle is on his way to establish ZTE!

古文：垂曰： 然。
现代文：慕容垂说： 对。
English: Murong Diao said: That's right.

古文：非汝，谁与成之！ 
现代文：除了你们，谁能和我一起成就大业呢！ 
English: Apart from you, who can achieve great things with me?

古文：甲子，坚发长安，戎卒六十馀万，骑二十七万，旗鼓相望，前后千里。
现代文：甲子，苻坚发兵长安，将士共有六十多万，骑兵二十七万，旌旗战鼓遥遥相望，绵延千里。
English: There are more than 600,000 soldiers, 270,000 cavalrymen, and thousands of miles of battle flags and drums in Chang'an.

古文：九月，坚至项城，凉州之兵始达咸阳，蜀、汉之兵方顺流而下，幽、冀之兵至于彭城，东西万里，水陆齐进，运漕万艘。
现代文：九月，苻坚抵达项城，凉州的军队刚刚到达咸阳，蜀、汉的军队正顺流而下，幽州、冀州的军队到了彭城，东西万里，水陆并进，运输军粮的船只多达万艘。
English: In September, Yu Jian arrived in Xiangcheng. The troops from Liangzhou just arrived in Xianyang. The troops from Shu and Han were sailing down the river. The troops from Yuzhou and Jizhou arrived in Pengcheng. There were thousands of miles between the East and the West, land and water, and as many as ten thousand ships transporting military supplies.

古文：阳平公融等兵三十万，先至颍口。
现代文：阳平公苻融等人的部队三十万人，先期抵达颍口。
English: The 300,000 troops led by Yangping Gongjun Rong and others arrived at the gate ahead of schedule.

古文：诏以尚书仆射谢石为征虏将军、征讨大都督，以徐、兗二州刺史谢玄为前锋都督，与辅国将军谢琰、西中郎将桓伊等众共八万拒之；使龙骧将军胡彬以水军五千援寿阳。
现代文：东晋下达诏令，任命尚书仆射谢石为征虏将军、征讨大都督，任命徐、兖二州刺史谢玄为前锋都督，与辅国将军谢琰西中郎将桓伊等人的兵众八万人抵抗前秦。让龙骧将军胡彬带领五千水军援助寿阳。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty issued an imperial edict, appointing Shang Shuxu's servant, Sha Xie Shi, as the conquering general and the conquering grand governor, appointing Xu and Xie Erzhou's aide, Shi Xie Xuan, as the vanguard governor, and the general of the Auxiliary State, Xie Xizhongro, led the 80,000 soldiers of Huan Yi and others to resist the former Qin. Let Longyu's general, Hu Bin, lead five thousand naval troops to aid Shouyang.

古文：琰，安之子也。
现代文：谢琰是谢安的儿子。
English: Xie Jun is the son of Xie An.

古文：是时，秦兵既盛，都下震恐。
现代文：这时前秦的军队已经非常强盛，东晋京城里的人震惊恐惧。
English: At this time, the army of the former Qin Dynasty was already very strong, and the people in the East Jin capital were shocked and afraid.

古文：谢玄入，问计于谢安，安夷然，答曰： 已别有旨。 
现代文：谢玄入朝，向谢安询问应对之策，谢安一副平静的样子，回答说： 已经另有打算了。 
English: Xie Xuan went to the North and asked Xie An what he should do. Xie An looked calm and replied, "I already have other plans."

古文：既而寂然。
现代文：紧接着就闭口无言。
English: Then there was silence again.

古文：玄不敢复言，乃令张玄重请。
现代文：谢玄不敢再问，就让张玄重新请求指令。
English: Xie Xuan did not dare to ask again, so he asked Zhang Xuan to request the order again.

古文：安遂命驾出游山墅，亲朋毕集，与围棋赌墅。
现代文：谢安于是就命令驾车出游山间别墅，亲戚朋友云集，与谢玄在别墅玩围棋赌博。
English: Xie An then ordered to drive out of the mountain villa, relatives and friends gathered, and Xie Xuan played Go gambling in the villa.

古文：安棋常劣于玄，是日，玄惧，便为敌手而又不胜。
现代文：谢安的棋术一直不如谢玄，这天，谢玄由于内心恐惧，在有利的形势下投子打劫，反而还不能获胜。
English: Xie An's chess skills have always been inferior to Xie Xuan's. On this day, Xie Xuan could not win because of his inner fear.

古文：安遂游陟，至夜乃还。
现代文：谢安于是就登山漫游，到晚上才回来。
English: So Xie An went hiking and did not return until the evening.

古文：桓冲深以根本为忧，遣精锐三千入援京师。
现代文：桓冲对国家的根基大业深以为忧，派精锐部队三千人入城保卫京师。
English: Kanchon was deeply concerned about the fundamental cause of the country and sent 3,000 elite troops into the city to defend the capital.

古文：谢安固却之，曰： 朝廷处分已定，兵甲无阙，西籓宜留以为防。 
现代文：谢安固执地阻拦他，说： 朝廷的处理办法已经决定，士兵武器都不缺乏，应该留在西藩之地以作防备。 
English: Xie An obstinately blocked him, saying: The court's solution has been decided, soldiers are not short of weapons, they should stay in the west territory to be prepared.

古文：冲对佐吏叹曰： 谢安右有庙堂之量，不闲将略。
现代文：桓冲对藩府参佐叹息道： 谢安有身居朝廷的气量，但不熟悉带兵打仗的方法。
English: Kanchong sighed to the Han government councilor: Xie An has the stamina to live in the imperial court, but he is not familiar with the methods of leading soldiers into battle.

古文：今大敌垂至，方游谈不暇，遣诸不经事少年拒之，众又寡弱，天下事已可知，吾其左衽矣！ 
现代文：如今大敌临头，还尽情游玩，高谈阔论不止，只派遣未经战事的年轻人前去抵抗，再加上数量不足，力量软弱，天下的结局已经可以知道了，我们将要受外族的统治了！ 
English: Now the great enemy is at our door, still playing, still talking, still sending only untried young men to oppose us. Add to this the fact that we are outnumbered and outgunned, and the end of the world is already in sight. We are going to be ruled by a foreign people!

古文：以琅邪王道子录尚书六条事。
现代文：东晋任命琅邪王司马道子为录尚书六条事。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed the evil king Sima Daozi to record six things.

古文：冬，十月，秦阳平公融等攻寿阳；癸酉，克之，执平虏将军徐元喜等。
现代文：冬季，十月，前秦阳平公苻融等攻打寿阳。癸酉，攻克了寿阳，擒获了平虏将军徐元喜等人。
English: In winter, October, the former Qin Yang Ping Gong Rong and others attacked Shouyang. They conquered Shouyang and captured the general Xu Yuanxi and others.

古文：融以其参军河南郭褒为淮南太守。
现代文：苻融任命他的参军河南人郭褒为淮南太守。
English: Zhi Rong appointed Guo Bao, a soldier from Henan Province, as the governor of Huainan.

古文：慕容垂拔郧城。
现代文：慕容垂攻下了郧城。
English: Murongdiao captured Shicheng.

古文：胡彬闻寿阳陷，退保硖石，融进攻之。
现代文：胡彬听说寿阳被攻陷，后退守卫硖石，苻融进军攻打硖石。
English: When Hu Bin heard that Shouyang had fallen, he retreated to defend Zhanshi, and then marched to attack Zhanshi.

古文：秦卫将军梁成等帅众五万屯于洛涧，栅淮以遏东兵。
现代文：前秦卫将军梁成等率领五万兵众驻扎在洛涧，沿淮河布防以遏制东面的部队。
English: Former Qin Wei general Liang Cheng and others led 50,000 soldiers stationed in Luoyang and set up defenses along the Huai River to contain the troops in the east.

古文：谢石、谢玄等去洛涧二十五里而军，惮成，不敢进。
现代文：谢石、谢玄等在距离洛涧二十五里的地方驻军，由于惧怕梁成而不敢前进。
English: Xie Shi, Xie Xuan and others stationed their troops in a place twenty-five miles away from Luoyang, but they did not dare to advance because they were afraid of Liang Cheng.

古文：胡彬粮尽，潜遣使告石等曰： 今贼盛，粮尽，恐不复见大军！ 
现代文：胡彬的粮食耗尽，秘密地派遣使者向谢石等报告说： 如今贼寇强盛而我的粮食已经耗尽，恐怕不能再见到大军了！ 
English: When Hu Bin's grain supply was exhausted, he secretly sent an envoy to report to Xie Shi and others: "Nowadays, the bandits are strong and my grain supply has been exhausted. I'm afraid I won't be able to see the great army anymore!"

古文：秦人获之，送于阳平公融。
现代文：前秦人擒获了胡彬，把他送交给阳平公苻融。
English: Former Qin people captured Hu Bin and sent him to Yangping Gongjunjun.

古文：融驰使白秦王坚曰： 贼少易擒，但恐逃去，宜速赴之！ 
现代文：苻融急速派使者向前秦王苻坚报告说： 现在贼寇力量不足，容易擒获，只是怕他们逃走，应该迅速率兵前来。 
English: Xuan Rong quickly sent an envoy to report to the former Qin King Yu Jian: Now the thieves and robbers are underpowered and easy to capture, but if they are afraid to escape, they should quickly lead the soldiers to come.

古文：坚乃留大军于项城，引轻骑八千，兼道就融于寿阳。
现代文：苻坚于是就把大部队留在项城，带领八千轻装骑兵，日夜兼程赶赴寿阳与苻融汇合。
English: Xuan Jian then left the large force in Xiangcheng, leading eight thousand light cavalry, and made a round trip to Shouyang to meet with Luo Rong.

古文：遣尚书硃序来说谢石等以 强弱异势，不如速降。 
现代文：苻坚派尚书朱序前去劝说谢石等人，认为： 形势强弱悬殊，不如迅速投降。 
English: Zou Jian sent Shang Shu and Zhu Xiu to persuade Xie Shi and others, arguing that: Given the disparity in strength, it is better to surrender quickly.

古文：序私谓石等曰： 若秦百万之众尽至，诚难与为敌。
现代文：朱序私下里却对谢石等人说： 如果秦国的百万兵众全部抵达，确实难以与他们抗衡。
English: Zhu Xiu privately said to Xie Shi and others: If all the million soldiers of Qin arrived, it would be really difficult to compete with them.

古文：今乘诸军未集，宜速击之；若败其前锋，则彼已夺气，可遂破也。 
现代文：如今乘着各路军队尚未会集，应该迅速攻击他们。如果能打败他们的前锋部队，那他们就已经丧失了士气，最终就可以攻破他们。 
English: Now that the various armies have not yet assembled, we should quickly attack them. If we can defeat their vanguard, then they have already lost their morale, and we can finally break them.

古文：石闻坚在寿阳，甚惧，欲不战以老秦师。
现代文：谢石听说苻坚在寿阳，十分害怕，想用不交战的办法来拖垮前秦的军队。
English: Xie Shi heard that Yu Jian was in Shouyang. He was very scared and wanted to use non-combat methods to defeat the former Qin army.

古文：谢琰劝石从序言。
现代文：谢琰劝说谢石听从朱序的话。
English: Xie Qi persuaded Xie Shi to listen to Zhu Xuan.

古文：十一月，谢玄遣广陵相刘牢之帅精兵五千人趣洛涧，未至十里，梁成阻涧为陈以待之。
现代文：十一月，谢玄派广陵相刘牢之率领五千精兵开赴洛涧，在离洛涧十里的地方，梁成扼守山涧布署兵阵以等待刘牢之。
English: In November, Xie Xuan sent 5,000 soldiers to Luoyang under the command of Liu Jiao, the minister of Guangming Mausoleum. At a place ten miles away from Luoyang, Liang Cheng waited for Liu Jiao by guarding the troops of the Shanxi Provincial People's Commissariat for Civil Affairs.

古文：牢之直前渡水，击成，大破之，斩成及弋阳太守王咏，又分兵断其归津，秦步骑崩溃，争赴淮水，士卒死者万五千人。执秦扬州刺史王显等，尽收其器械军实。
现代文：刘牢之径直向前渡河，攻击梁成，大败梁成，斩杀了梁成以及弋阳太守王咏。又分派部队继绝了他们归途上的渡口，前秦的步、骑兵全都崩溃，争先恐后地逃向淮水，死亡的士兵有一万五千人，抓获了前秦扬州刺史王显等人，全部收缴了他们的武器军粮。
English: Liu Dole went straight ahead to cross the river, attacked Liangcheng, defeated Liangcheng, killed Liangcheng and Wang Qian, the governor of Fenyang. He also dispatched troops to cut off the ferry on their way back. The former Qin's infantry and cavalry all collapsed and scrambled to escape to Huai Shui. Fifteen thousand soldiers died, captured the former Qin Yangzhou assassin Wang Xian and others, and confiscated all their weapons and rations.

古文：于是谢石等诸军水陆继进。
现代文：于是谢石等各路军队，从水路、陆路相继进发。
English: As a result, troops from all directions, including Xie Shi's, successively advanced by water and land.

古文：秦王坚与阳平公融登寿阳城望之。见晋兵部阵严整，又望见八公山上草木，皆以为晋兵，顾谓融曰： 此亦劲敌，何谓弱也！ 
现代文：前秦王苻坚与阳平公苻融登上寿阳城观望，只见东晋的军队布阵严整，又望见了八公山上的草木，也以为都是东晋的士兵，苻坚掉头对苻融说： 这也是强敌，怎么能说他软弱呢！ 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian and Yang Ping Gong Rong ascended Shouyang City to watch, only to see the Eastern Jin army arrayed in strict formation. They also saw the plants and trees on the Eight Mountains, and thought they were all Eastern Jin soldiers. Yu Jian turned around and said to Yu Rong: This is also a strong enemy, how can he say he is weak!

古文：怃然始有惧色。
现代文：茫然若失，脸上开始有了恐惧的神色。
English: Dazed, his face began to take on a look of fear.

古文：秦兵逼肥水而陈，晋兵不得渡。
现代文：前秦的军队紧逼淝水而布阵，东晋的军队无法渡过。
English: The army of the former Qin Dynasty was pressing close to Surabaya, and the army of the Eastern Jin Dynasty was unable to pass.

古文：谢玄遣使谓阳平公融曰： 君悬军深入，而置陈逼水，此乃持久之计，非欲速战者也。
现代文：谢玄派使者对阳平公苻融说： 您孤军深入，然而却紧逼淝水部署军阵，这是长久相持的策略，不是想迅速交战的办法。
English: Xie Xuan sent an emissary to Yangping Gongjun Rong to say: You have advanced alone, yet you are pressing Surabaya to deploy military formations. This is a strategy of long-term mutual support, not a way to fight quickly.

古文：若移陈小却，使晋兵得渡，以决胜负，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：如果能移动兵阵稍微后撤，让晋朝的军队得以渡河，以决胜负，不也是很好的事情吗！ 
English: Wouldn't it be a good thing if we could move the line of troops back a little, so that the Jin army could cross the river to decide the outcome of the war?

古文：秦诸将皆曰： 我众彼寡，不如遏之，使不得上，可以万全。 
现代文：前秦众将领都说： 我众敌寡，不如遏制他们，使他们不能上岸，这样可以万无一失。 
English: The former Qin generals all said, "I have few enemies. It is better to contain them and prevent them from coming ashore. In this way, there will be no mistakes."

古文：坚曰： 但引兵少却，使之半渡，我以铁骑蹙而杀之，蔑不胜矣！ 
现代文：苻坚说： 只带领兵众稍微后撤一点，让他们渡河渡到一半，我们再出动铁甲骑兵奋起攻杀，没有不胜的道理！ 
English: Yu Jian said: Just lead the soldiers to retreat a little bit, let them cross the river halfway, and then we will send out the armored cavalry to attack and kill, there is no invincible reason!

古文：融亦以为然，遂麾兵使却。
现代文：苻融也认为可以，于是就挥舞战旗，指挥兵众后退。
English: Yan Rong also thought it was possible, so he waved the battle flag and ordered the soldiers to retreat.

古文：秦兵遂退，不可复止，谢玄、谢琰、桓伊等引兵渡水击之。
现代文：前秦的军队一退就不可收拾。谢玄、谢琰、桓伊等率领军队渡过河攻击他们。
English: As soon as the former Qin army retreated, they could not be stopped. Xie Xuan, Xie Yao, Huan Yi and others led the army across the river to attack them.

古文：融驰骑略陈，欲以帅退者，马倒，为晋兵所杀，秦兵遂溃。
现代文：苻融驰马巡视军阵，想来率领退逃的兵众，结果战马倒地，苻融被东晋的士兵杀掉，前秦的军队于是就崩溃了。
English: Zhaoyong rode his horse to inspect the army line and wanted to lead the retreating soldiers. As a result, the horse fell to the ground. Zhaoyong was killed by the soldiers of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and the former Qin army collapsed.

古文：玄等乘胜追击，至于青冈。秦兵大败，自相蹈藉而死者，蔽野塞川。
现代文：谢玄等乘胜追击，一直追到青冈，前秦的军队大败，自相践踏而死的人，遮蔽山野堵塞山川。
English: Xie Xuan and others took advantage of the victory and chased them all the way to Qinggang, where the former Qin army was defeated and trampled to death, blocking the mountains and blocking the mountains and rivers.

古文：其走者闻风声鹤唳，皆以为晋兵且至，昼夜不敢息，草行露宿，重以饥冻，死者什七、八。
现代文：逃跑的人听到刮风的声音和鹤的鸣叫声，都以为是东晋的军队将要来到，昼夜不敢停歇，慌不择路，风餐露宿，冻饿交加，死亡的人十有七八。
English: Those who fled heard the sound of the wind blowing and the cranes singing, and all thought that the East Jin army was about to arrive. Day and night, they did not dare to stop, they hurriedly chose their path, ate and slept in the open, suffered from cold and hunger, and seven out of ten died.

古文：初，秦兵小却，硃序在陈后呼曰： 秦兵败矣！ 
现代文：当初，前秦的军队稍微后撤时，朱序在军阵后面高声呼喊： 秦军失败了！ 
English: At first, when the former Qin army retreated slightly, Zhu Xuan shouted loudly behind the army line: The Qin army has failed!

古文：众遂大奔。
现代文：兵众们听到后就狂奔乱逃。
English: When the soldiers heard this, they ran away.

古文：序因与张天锡、徐元喜皆来奔。
现代文：朱序乘机与张天锡、徐元喜都来投奔东晋。
English: Zhu Xue took the opportunity to join Zhang Tianxi and Xu Yuanxi in the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：获秦王坚所乘云母车及仪服器械、军资珍宝畜产不可胜计，复取寿阳，执其淮南太守郭褒。
现代文：缴获了前秦王苻坚所乘坐的装饰着云母的车乘。又攻取了寿阳，抓获了前秦的淮南太守郭褒。
English: They captured the carriage decorated with mica that the former Qin King Yu Jian rode in. They also captured Shouyang and captured the former Qin Emperor Huainan Taishou Guobao.

古文：坚中流矢，单骑走至淮北，饥甚，民有进壶飧、豚髀者，坚食之，赐帛十匹，绵十斤。
现代文：苻坚中了流箭，单身匹马逃到淮河以北，十分饥饿，有的百姓送来了盛在壶里的水泡饭、猪骨头，苻坚吃了下去，赏赐给他们十匹布帛，十斤绵。
English: Hao Jian was hit by a stray arrow, and his single horse fled to the north of the Huai River. He was very hungry. Some people brought him boiled rice and pork bones in a pot. Hao Jian ate them and was rewarded with ten pieces of cloth and ten pounds of cotton.

古文：辞曰： 陛下厌苦安乐，自取危困。
现代文：这些人推辞说： 陛下厌倦困苦，安于享乐，自取危难。
English: They retorted, "Your Majesty is weary of hardship, content with pleasure, and takes his own peril.

古文：臣为陛下子，陛下为臣父，安有子饲其父而求报乎？ 
现代文：我是陛下的儿子，陛下是我的父亲，哪里有儿子给父亲饭吃还求取报偿的呢！ 
English: I am your majesty's son, your majesty is my father, where is there a son who would give his father a meal and still ask for a reward?

古文：弗顾而去。
现代文：他们连赏赐的那些东西看也没看就离开了。
English: They didn't even look at the things they were given and left.

古文：坚谓张夫人曰： 吾今复何面目治天下乎！ 
现代文：苻坚对张夫人说： 我如今再以什么面目去治理天下呢！ 
English: Yu Jian said to Mrs. Zhang: What kind of face will I use to rule the world now?

古文：潸然流涕。
现代文：说着便潸然泪下。
English: She burst into tears as she spoke.

古文：是时，诸军皆溃，惟慕容垂所将三万人独全，坚以千余骑赴之。
现代文：这时，前秦的各路军队全都溃散，唯独慕容垂所统领的三万人完整保全，苻坚带领一千多骑兵到了他那里。
English: At this time, all the armies of the former Qin Dynasty had been dispersed. Only the 30,000 men under the command of Mu Rongtui remained intact, and Yu Jian led more than a thousand cavalrymen to him.

古文：世子宝言于垂曰： 家国倾覆，天命人心皆归至尊，但时运未至，故晦迹自藏耳。
现代文：长子慕容宝向慕容垂进言说： 宗族国家覆灭，天命人心全都归于极其尊贵的帝王，只是时运还未到来，所以应该掩饰形迹躲藏起来。
English: The eldest son, Murong Bao, said to Murong Du, "The country of the clan has been overthrown, and all the hearts of the destined people belong to the extremely noble emperors. However, the time has not yet come, so we should cover up the traces and hide.

古文：今秦主兵败，委身于我，是天借之便以复燕祚，此时不可失也，愿不以意气微恩忘社稷之重！ 
现代文：如今秦主兵败，委身于我们，这是上天赐予的有利时机以恢复燕国的国统，这个时机不可丧失，愿您不要因为受到过恩义小惠而忘掉了国家的重任！ 
English: Now that Qin's main army has been defeated, he has committed himself to us. This is a favorable opportunity given by heaven to restore the national unity of Yan. This opportunity must not be lost. May you not forget the important task of the country because you have received small favors!

古文：垂曰： 汝言是也。
现代文：慕容垂说： 你说得对。
English: Murong Zhui said: You are right.

古文：然彼以赤心投命于我，若之何害之！
现代文：然而他以一片赤诚之心把自身的安全交给我，为什么要伤害他！
English: However, with all sincerity, he entrusted his own safety to me, why hurt him!

古文：天苟弃之，何患不亡？
现代文：假如上天抛弃他，不用担心他不灭亡。
English: If heaven abandons him, he need not fear that he will not perish.

古文：不若保护其危以报德，徐俟其衅而图之！既不负宿心，且可以义取天下。 
现代文：不如在危难中保护他以报答他的恩德，慢慢地等待他的灾祸，然后再图谋他，这样既不违背往日的心愿，而且能够以道义征服天下。 
English: It would be better to protect him in times of danger to repay his kindness, slowly wait for his misfortune, and then plot against him, so as not to violate the wishes of the past, but to be able to conquer the world with morality.

古文：奋威将军慕容德曰： 秦强而并燕，秦弱而图之，此为报仇雪耻，非负宿心也；兄奈何得而不取，释数万之众以授人乎？ 
现代文：奋威将军慕容德说： 秦国强大的时候吞并了燕国，秦国软弱的时候图谋他，这是报仇雪耻，不是违背往日的心愿。哥哥你为什么得到了却不占取，放弃数万兵众而授予别人呢？ 
English: Fenwei General Murong De said: When Qin was strong, it annexed Yan. When Qin was weak, it plotted against him. This was revenge, not a violation of past wishes. Why did you get your brother but not occupy him? Why did you give up tens of thousands of soldiers and give him to others?

古文：垂曰： 吾昔为太傅所不容，置身无所，逃死于秦，秦主以国士遇我，恩礼备至。
现代文：慕容垂说： 我过去被太傅慕容评所不容，无处安身，逃死到了秦国，秦国主像对待国中才能出众的人那样对待我，恩义礼遇备至。
English: Murong Du said: I used to be disliked by Taifu Murong Du and had nowhere to go. I escaped and died in Qin. The Lord of Qin treated me as if I were one of the most talented people in the country. I was treated with the utmost courtesy.

古文：后复为王猛所卖，无以自明。秦主独能明之，此恩何可忘也！
现代文：以后我又被王猛所出卖，无法自我明辩，秦国主偏偏就能明察，这样的恩情怎么能忘记呢！
English: Later, I was betrayed by Wang Meng, unable to defend myself, but the Lord of Qin could see it clearly, how could I forget such a favor!

古文：若氐运必穷，吾当怀集关东，以复先业耳，关西会非吾有也。 
现代文：如果氐族人的命运必定穷尽，我应当招纳关东的民众，以光复先帝的大业，关西之地必定不会归我所有！ 
English: If the fate of the Yi people must be exhausted, I should recruit the people of Kanto from now on, in light of the great cause of the previous emperor, the land of Kansai will certainly not belong to me!

古文：冠军行参军赵秋曰： 明公当绍复燕祚，著于图谶。
现代文：冠军行参军赵秋说： 明公您应当继承光复燕国的国统，这已经明显地表现在图谶上了。
English: Zhao Qiu, a champion marching to join the army, said: Ming Gong, you should inherit the national unification of Guangfu and Yan, which has been clearly shown on the map.

古文：今天时已至，尚复何待！
现代文：如今天时已经来到，还要等待什么！
English: If today is the day, what are we waiting for?

古文：若杀秦主，据鄴都，鼓行而西，三秦亦非苻氏之有也！ 
现代文：如果杀掉秦国主苻坚，占据邺都后击鼓西行，三秦之地也就不会归苻氏所有了！ 
English: If you kill the Qin sovereign, Qian Jian, occupy the capital of Qin, and march westward beating drums, the land of the Three Qin Dynasties will not be owned by the Qin clan!

古文：垂亲党多劝垂杀坚，垂皆不从，悉以兵授坚。
现代文：慕容垂的亲信党羽大多都劝他杀掉苻坚，慕容垂一概没有听从，命令把军队交给苻坚。
English: Most of Mu Rongtui's trusted party members advised him to kill Xuan Jian. However, Mu Rongtui did not listen at all and ordered the army to be handed over to Xuan Jian.

古文：平南将军慕容屯郧城，闻坚败，弃其众遁去；至荥阳，慕容德复说暐起兵以复燕祚，暐不从。
现代文：平南将军慕容驻扎在郧城，听说苻坚失败后，抛弃了他的兵众而逃走。到达荥阳，慕容德又劝说慕容起兵以恢复前燕的国统，慕容没有听从。
English: The Pingnan general Murong was stationed in Fucheng. When he heard that Yu Jian had failed, he abandoned his troops and fled. When he arrived in Fenyang, Murong persuaded Murong to raise an army to restore the former Yan's national unity. Murong did not listen.

古文：谢安得驿书，知秦兵已败，时方与客围棋，摄书置床上，了无喜色，围棋如故。
现代文：谢安接到了驿站传递的书信，知道前秦的军队已经失败，当时他正与客人玩围棋，拿着信放到了床上，毫无高兴的样子，继续下棋。
English: When Xie An received the letter from the post office, he knew that the former Qin army had failed. At that time, he was playing Go with his guests. He took the letter and put it on the bed. He was not happy at all and continued to play chess.

古文：客问之，徐答曰： 小儿辈遂已破贼。 
现代文：客人问他是什么事，他慢条斯理地回答说： 小孩子们已经最终攻破了寇贼。 
English: Asked by a visitor what had happened, he replied slowly and rationally: "The children have finally defeated the burglars.

古文：既罢，还内，过户限，不觉屐齿之折。
现代文：下完棋以后，他返回屋里，过门槛时，高兴得竟然连屐齿被折断都没有发觉。
English: After playing chess, he returned to the house, and when he crossed the threshold, he was so happy that he didn't even notice that his teeth were broken.

古文：丁亥，谢石等归建康，得秦乐工，能习旧声，于是宗庙始备金石之乐。
现代文：丁亥，谢石等人返回建康，由于得到了前秦的音乐工匠，熟悉过去的音乐，从此宗庙当中开始有了钟磬乐器演奏音乐。
English: Dinghai, Xie Shi and others returned to Jiankang, and since they had obtained the music craftsmen of the former Qin Dynasty and were familiar with the music of the past, they began to have the bell and gong musical instruments play music in the middle of this ancestral temple.

古文：乙未，以张天锡为散骑常侍，硃序为琅邪内史。
现代文：乙未，任命张天锡为散骑常侍，朱序为琅邪内史。
English: B Wei, appointed Zhang Tianxi as a straggler, Zhu Xue as a member of the Inner History of the Ancestors.

古文：秦王坚收集离散，比至洛阳，众十馀万，百官、仪物，军容粗备。
现代文：前秦王收拢逃散的兵众，等到抵达洛阳时，兵众已有十多万，属僚百官、礼仪器物、军事装备粗略齐备。
English: The former Qin king gathered the scattered soldiers, and by the time he arrived in Luoyang, there were more than one hundred thousand soldiers, hundreds of officials, ceremonial instruments, and military equipment.

古文：慕容农谓慕容垂曰： 尊不迫人于险，其义声足以感动天地。
现代文：慕容农对慕容垂说： 您不在险境里逼迫别人，这种道义的名声足以感动天地。
English: Murong Nong said to Murong Du: You do not persecute others in a dangerous situation. This moral reputation is enough to move heaven and earth.

古文：农闻秘记曰： 燕复兴当在河阳。 
现代文：我听说图谶中记载： 燕国的复兴应当在河阳。 
English: I heard that it was recorded in the map: The revival of Yan's country should start in Heyang.

古文：夫取果于未熟与自落，不过晚旬日之间，然其难易美恶，相去远矣！ 
现代文：在尚未成熟时就摘取果实与等待瓜熟蒂落相比，从时间上看不过是十来天的差距，然而它们的难易美恶程度，却相差甚远。 
English: Compared to picking the fruit when it is not yet ripe and waiting for the rind to fall off, it is only a ten-day gap in terms of time, but their degree of difficulty and difficulty is very different.

古文：垂心善其言，行至渑池，言于坚曰： 北鄙之民，闻王师不利，轻相扇动，臣请奉诏书以镇慰安集之，因过谒陵庙。 
现代文：慕容垂在内心里赞同他的话，行进到渑池时，他向苻坚进言说： 北方边远之地的百姓，听说您的军队出师不利，轻率地互相鼓动作乱，我请求尊奉诏书去镇抚招纳他们，顺便路过拜谒先帝的陵庙。 
English: Murongdiao agreed with his words in his heart, and when he was marching to Dianchi Lake, he said to Xuan Jian: "People in the remote areas of the north, I heard that your army was unfavorable, and rashly encouraged each other to make trouble. I request you to issue an edict to encourage and recruit them, and pass by the mausoleum of Emperor Xuan.

古文：坚许之。
现代文：苻坚同意了。
English: Yu Jian agreed.

古文：权翼谏曰： 国兵新破，四方皆有离心，宜征集名将，置之京师，以固根本，镇枝叶。
现代文：权翼劝谏苻坚说： 国家的军队刚刚失败，四方全都有离心倾向，应该征召集合名将，把他们安置在京城，以稳固根基，安定枝叶。
English: The authorities urged Yu Jian to say: The national army has just failed, all four sides have centrifugal tendencies, it is necessary to recruit a collection of famous generals and place them in the capital to consolidate the foundation and stabilize the branches.

古文：垂勇略过人，世豪东夏，顷以避祸而来，其心岂止欲作冠军而已哉！
现代文：慕容垂勇猛谋略过人，世代都是中原以东的豪杰，不久前因为躲避灾祸而前来归附，他的本心难道仅仅是想做一个冠军将军吗！
English: Murong Zhuang bravely outmaneuvered the others. His generation were all heroes east of the Central Plains. Not long ago, he came to China to escape the calamity. Was his real intention just to become a champion general?

古文：譬如养鹰，饥则附人，每闻风飙之起，常有陵霄之志，正宜谨其绦笼，岂可解纵，任其所欲哉！ 
现代文：就像养育苍鹰，它饥饿的时候依附于人，每当听到狂风骤起，就常常有飞越云霄的志向，正当应该紧闭藩笼的时候，岂能放纵它，听任它为所欲为呢！ 
English: It is like raising a goshawk. When it is hungry, it clings to people. Whenever it hears a sudden gust of wind, it often has the ambition to fly over the clouds. When it is right to close the cage, how can you indulge it and let it do whatever it wants!

古文：坚曰： 卿言是也。
现代文：苻坚说： 你说得对。
English: Yu Jian said: You are right.

古文：然朕已许之，匹夫犹不食言，况万乘乎？ 
现代文：然而朕已经同意了他，一般人尚不食言，何况是万乘君主呢！
English: However, I have already agreed with him. The average person does not go back on his word, let alone the emperor!

古文：若天命有废兴，固非智力所能移也。 
现代文：如果天命要有废兴的事变发生，本来就不是靠智慧与力量所能能改变的。 
English: If it is the destiny of heaven to have a disastrous event occur, it is not something that can be changed by wisdom and power.

古文：翼曰： 陛下重小信而轻社稷，臣见其往而不返，关东之乱，自此始矣。 
现代文：权翼说： 陛下重视小的信誉而轻视国家政权，依我之见，他一定是去而不返，关东之乱，从此就要开始了。 
English: The power wing said: His Majesty attaches great importance to small credibility and despises the state power, in my opinion, he must go and not return, the Kanto riot will begin from now on.

古文：坚不听，遣将军李蛮、闵亮、尹国帅众三千送垂。
现代文：苻坚没有听，派遣将军李蛮、闵亮、尹国率领三千兵众护送慕容垂。
English: Yu Jian did not listen and sent generals Li Man, Yu Liang, and Yin Guo to escort Mu Rongtui with 3,000 soldiers.

古文：又遣骁骑将军石越帅精卒三千戍鄴，骠骑将军张蚝帅羽林五千戍并州，镇军将军毛当帅众四千戌洛阳。
现代文：又派骁骑将军石越率领三千精锐士兵戍守邺城，派骠骑将军张蚝率领五千羽林军戍卫并州，派镇军将军毛当率领四千兵众戍卫洛阳。
English: He also sent the cavalry general Shi Yue to lead 3,000 elite soldiers to defend Luoyang, the cavalry general Zhang Jun to lead 5,000 feather troops to defend the annexation of Luoyang, and the township army general Mao Dang to lead 4,000 soldiers to defend Luoyang.

古文：权翼密遣壮士邀垂于河桥南空仓中，垂疑之，自凉马台结草筏以渡，使典军程同衣己衣，乘己马，与僮仆趣河桥。
现代文：权翼悄悄地派遣勇士邀请慕容垂到河桥以南的空仓房中，慕容垂对此产生了怀疑，用草绳编结成筏子从凉马台渡过了河，让典军程同穿上自己的衣服，骑上自己的马，与童仆一起奔赴河桥。
English: The authorities quietly dispatched warriors to invite Murongdian to an empty warehouse south of the river bridge. Murongdian became suspicious of this and crossed the river from Liangmadai by weaving grass ropes into rafts. He asked Dianjuncheng to put on his own clothes, ride his own horse, and run to the river bridge with his servants.

古文：伏兵发，同驰马获免。
现代文：权翼埋伏在这里的军队发起攻击，程同策马逃脱。
English: The army ambushed here by the authorities launched an attack, and Cheng escaped with his horse.

古文：十二月，秦王坚至长安，哭阳平公融而后入，谥曰哀公。
现代文：十二月，前秦王苻坚抵达长安，痛哭了阳平公苻融之后才进入，给苻融定谥号为哀公。
English: In December, the former Qin King Yu Jian arrived in Chang'an, and only entered after Yang Ping Gong Rong had wept bitterly, giving Rong Rong the posthumous name of "Aigong."

古文：大赦，复死事者家。
现代文：实行大赦，恢复征收战死者家属的赋税。
English: An amnesty will be implemented, and the collection of taxes from the families of the war dead will be resumed.

古文：庚午，大赦。
现代文：庚午，东晋实行大赦。
English: At noon, the Eastern Jin Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：以谢石为尚书令。
现代文：任命谢石为尚书令。
English: Appointed Xie Shi as Shang Shuling.

古文：进谢玄号前将军，固让不受。
现代文：晋升谢玄的称号为前将军，谢玄固执地辞让，不接受。
English: Xie Xuan was promoted to the title of former general, but he stubbornly refused to accept.

古文：谢安婿王国宝，坦之之子也；安恶其为人，每抑而不用，以为尚书郎。
现代文：谢安的女婿王国宝，是王坦之的儿子。谢安讨厌他的为人，总是压制着他而不加以任用，让他担任尚书郎。
English: Xie An's son-in-law, Wang Guobao, is the son of Wang Tan Zhi. Xie An hates him as a person, always suppressing him and not appointing him, letting him serve as Shang Shuro.

古文：国宝自以望族，故事唯作吏部，不为馀曹，固辞不拜，由是怨安。
现代文：王国宝自以为出身于名门望族，按惯例只在吏部供职，其它官署一概不干，因此对于任命固执地辞让，不予就任。并因此而怨恨谢安。
English: Wang Guobao thought that he was born into a prestigious family, and according to the usual practice, he only served in the personnel department, and did not work in any other government departments. Therefore, he stubbornly refused to accept the appointment, and was not allowed to take office. And for this reason, he resented Xie An.

古文：国宝从妹为会稽王道子妃，帝与道子皆嗜酒，狎昵邪谄，国宝乃谮安于道子，使离间之于帝。
现代文：王国宝的表妹是会稽王司马道子的妃子，孝武帝与司马道子全都喜欢喝酒，互相亲昵邪媚，王国宝于是就向司马道子说谢安的坏话，让司马道子挑拨谢安与孝武帝的关系。
English: Wang Guobao's cousin was the concubine of the tutor Wang Sima Daozi. Emperor Xiaowu and Sima Daozi both liked to drink alcohol and were affectionate with each other. Wang Guobao then spoke ill of Xie'an to Sima Daozi and asked Sima Daozi to stir up the relationship between Xie'an and Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：安功名既盛，而险诐求进之徒，多毁短安，帝由是稍疏忌之。
现代文：谢安的功名已经非常显赫，然而那些行为邪恶，追求进升的人，却大都诋毁谢安，孝武帝从此逐渐疏远猜忌谢安。
English: Xie An's achievements have been very prominent. However, those who have committed evil deeds and pursued advancement have mostly slandered Xie An. Emperor Xiaowu gradually distanced himself from Xie An.

古文：初开酒禁，增民税米，口五石。
现代文：东晋开始放开禁酒的戒令，增加百姓的米粮税额，每人纳粮五石。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty began to relax the prohibition of alcohol, increase the amount of rice grain tax for the people, and increase the grain allowance to five kilos per person.

古文：秦吕光行越流沙三百馀里，焉耆等诸国皆降。
现代文：前秦吕光率兵穿越沙漠三百多里，焉耆等各国全都投降。
English: Former Qin Liguang led his soldiers more than three hundred miles across the desert, and all other countries surrendered.

古文：惟龟兹王帛纯拒之，婴城固守，光进军攻之。
现代文：只有龟兹王帛纯抵抗他们，环城固守，吕光进军攻击他们。
English: Only Kamezi Wang Qichun resisted them, ringed the city and defended it, while Luguang marched to attack them.

古文：秦王坚之入寇也，以乞伏国仁为前将军，领先锋骑。
现代文：前秦王苻坚入侵东晋的时候，任命乞伏国仁为前将军，统领作为先锋的骑兵。
English: When the former Qin King He Jian invaded the East Jin, he appointed Begg Guoren as the former general, commanding the cavalry as the vanguard.

古文：会国仁叔父步颓反于陇西，坚遣国仁还讨之。
现代文：恰巧乞伏国仁的叔父乞伏步颓在陇西反叛，苻坚派乞伏国仁返回去讨伐他。
English: Coincidentally, Guo Guozhen's uncle, Guo Guozhu, rebelled in Shaanxi, and Guo Jian sent Guo Guozhen back to fight him.

古文：步颓闻之，大喜，迎国仁于路。
现代文：乞伏步颓听说以后，非常高兴，到半路去迎接乞伏国仁。
English: After hearing about the begging walk, I was very happy and went halfway to meet the begging Kunihito.

古文：国仁置酒，大言曰： 苻氏疲民逞兵，殆将亡矣，吾当与诸君共建一方之业。 
现代文：乞伏国仁摆好酒大声说： 苻氏使民众疲惫而炫耀军队，大概快要灭亡了，我应当与诸君共同建立一方大业。 
English: Begging Guoren, he set out the wine and said in a loud voice: Mr. Xing has made the people tired and flaunted the army. He is probably about to perish. I should establish a great cause together with you.

古文：及坚败，国仁遂迫胁诸部，有不从者，击而并之，众至十馀万。
现代文：等到苻坚失败以后，乞伏国仁于是就胁迫各部族，有不听从的，就加以攻击，然后吞并，部众达到了十多万人。
English: After the failure of Jianjian, Guozhu Guozhen then coerced the tribes, attacking and then annexing those who did not obey, and the number of followers reached more than one hundred thousand.

古文：慕容垂至安阳，遣参军田山修笺于长乐公丕。
现代文：慕容垂抵达安阳，参军田山写信给长乐公苻丕。
English: When Murong Du arrived in Anyang, he wrote a letter to Changle Gongjun after joining the Tianshan Army.

古文：丕闻垂北来，疑其欲为乱，然犹身自迎之。
现代文：苻丕听说慕容垂从北方来，怀疑他想作乱，但还是亲自去迎接他。
English: He had heard that Murong Du was coming from the north and suspected that he wanted to cause trouble, but he went to meet him in person.

古文：赵秋劝垂于座取丕，因据鄴起兵，垂不从。
现代文：赵秋劝慕容垂在座位上擒获苻丕，顺势占据邺城起兵，慕容垂没有听从。
English: Zhao Qiu advised Mu Rongtiao to sit on the seat, but he did not listen to him. As a result, Mu Rongtiao raised an army to occupy the city.

古文：丕谋袭击垂，侍郎天水姜让谏曰： 垂反形未著，而明公擅杀之，非臣子之义；不如待以上宾之礼，严兵卫之，密表情状，听敕而后图之。 
现代文：苻丕谋划袭击慕容垂，侍郎、天水人姜让劝谏他说： 慕容垂没有表露出反叛的迹象，然而明公您却要擅自杀掉他，这不是作为臣子的应有之义。不如用上宾之礼对待他，再派士兵严密地守护他，秘密地进上表章报告情况，听候敕令，然后再对他做出处置。 
English: He was plotting to attack Murongtai, and his attendant, the man from Tianshui, Jiang Zang, advised him: "Murongtai has not shown any signs of rebellion, yet you want to kill him without permission. This is not the proper meaning of being a courtier. It is better to treat him with the courtesy of a guest, and then send soldiers to closely guard him, secretly enter the palace to report the situation, listen to the imperial order, and then deal with him.

古文：丕从之，馆垂于鄴西。
现代文：苻丕听从了这一意见，让慕容垂住在邺西的馆舍。
English: He listened to this opinion and let Murong live in a mansion in Shaanxi.

古文：垂潜与燕之故臣谋复燕祚，会丁零翟斌起兵叛秦，谋攻豫州牧平原公晖于洛阳，秦王坚驿书使垂将兵讨之。
现代文：慕容垂暗地里与前燕的旧臣图谋恢复前燕的国统，恰好这时丁零人翟斌起兵背叛了前秦，图谋在洛阳攻打豫州牧平原公苻晖，前秦王苻坚通过驿站送信，让慕容垂统领军队去讨伐他们。
English: Murong Zhu secretly plotted with the former Yan's old vassals to restore the former Yan's national unity. It was just at this time that Ding Zi's subordinate, Yu Bin, betrayed the former Qin Dynasty by raising an army and plotting to attack the Yuzhou Mu Plain in Luoyang. The former Qin King Yu Jian sent a message through the station, asking Murong Zhu to lead the army to fight them.

古文：石越言于丕曰： 王师新败，民心未安，负罪亡匿之徒，思乱者众，故丁零一唱，旬日之中，众已数千，此其验也。
现代文：石越向苻丕进言说： 国王的军队刚遭失败，民心尚未安定，负罪逃亡之徒，渴望祸乱的人很多，所以丁零人一带头，十来天时间，响应的人已有数千，这就是证明。
English: "The king's army has just suffered a defeat, the people's hearts are not yet stable, there are many guilty fugitives, and there are many people who yearn for calamity," Shi Yue said to Zou Jin, "so it is proof that there are thousands of people who have responded to Ding Zi's call in the past ten days.

古文：慕容垂，燕之宿望，有兴复旧业之心。今复资之以兵，此为虎傅翼也。 
现代文：慕容垂，是燕国德高望重的人，有振兴恢复旧业的心愿，如今再交给他军队，这是为虎添翼。 
English: Mu Rongtui is a highly respected person in Yan's country. He has the desire to revitalize and restore the old industry. Now, the army has been handed over to him. This is adding wings to the tiger.

古文：丕曰： 垂在鄴如藉虎寝蛟，常恐为肘腋之变。今远之于外，不犹愈乎！
现代文：苻丕说： 慕容垂在邺城犹如卧虎睡蛟，经常害怕他制造肘腋之变，如今让他远行在外，不是似乎更好一些吗？
English: Zou said, "Mulong has been hanging out in Handan like a sleeping tiger. I was always afraid that he would cause trouble. Now, it seems better to let him travel far away.

古文：且翟斌凶悖，必不肯为垂下，使两虎相毙，吾从而制之，此卞庄子之术也。 
现代文：而且翟斌凶暴悖逆，一定不肯甘居下风，让两虎俱伤，我紧跟着去控制他们，这是卞庄子的策略。 
English: Moreover, Yu Bin is ferocious and rebellious, and he will not be willing to stay behind and let the two tigers hurt each other. I will follow closely to control them. This is Yu Zhuangzi's strategy.

古文：乃以羸兵二千及铠仗之弊者给垂，又遣广武将军苻飞龙帅氐骑一千为垂之副，密戒飞龙曰： 垂为三军之帅，卿为谋垂之将，行矣，勉之！ 
现代文：于是苻丕就给了慕容垂二千老弱的士兵以及一些残次的铠甲兵器，又派广武将军苻飞龙率领一千氐族骑兵协助慕容垂。苻丕秘密地告诫苻飞龙说： 慕容垂是三军的主帅，你是图谋慕容垂的将领，出发，努力吧！ 
English: So Yao gave Mu Rongtui two thousand old and weak soldiers and some remnants of armored weapons, and also sent Guangwu General Yao Feilong to lead a thousand Yao cavalry to assist Mu Rongtui. Yao secretly warned Yao Feilong, saying: Mu Rongtui is the commander of the three armies, you are the general who is plotting against Mu Rongtui, let's go, work hard!

古文：垂请入鄴城拜庙，丕弗许，乃潜服而入；亭吏禁之，垂怒，斩吏烧亭而去。
现代文：慕容垂请求进入邺城拜谒宗庙，苻丕没有同意，慕容垂于是就穿上便服进了邺城。守卫宗庙的官吏不让他进去，慕容垂十分愤怒，杀掉官吏、烧毁庙亭后离开了。
English: Mu Rongtai requested to enter Shicheng to pay homage to the ancestral temple, but Yu did not agree, so Mu Rongtai put on civilian clothes and entered Shicheng. The officials guarding the ancestral temple did not allow him to enter, Mu Rongtai was very angry, killed the officials, burned the temple pavilion and left.

古文：石越言于丕曰： 垂敢轻侮方镇，杀吏烧亭，反形已露，可因此除之。 
现代文：石越向苻丕进言说： 慕容垂胆敢轻视侮辱一方长官，杀官吏烧庙亭，反叛的形迹已经显露，可以就此而除掉他。 
English: Shi Yue said to Yao Jin, "Murong Diao Dares to Despise and Insult a Party Official, Kill Officials and Burn a Temple Pavilion, Traces of Rebellion Have Been Revealed, and He Can Be Eliminated for This.

古文：丕曰： 淮南之败，垂侍卫乘舆，此功不可忘也。 
现代文：苻丕说： 在淮南失败的时候，慕容垂在主上车前马后奉侍守卫，这个功劳不能忘记。 
English: Zou said: When Huainan failed, Murongdian served as a guard before and after the main car. This achievement cannot be forgotten.

古文：越曰： 垂尚不忠于燕，安能尽忠于我？
现代文：石越说： 慕容垂对燕国尚且不忠，怎么能对我们尽忠呢！
English: Shi Yue said, "Murongtai is not loyal to Yan Guo, how can he be loyal to us?"

古文：失今不取，必为后患。 
现代文：错过了今天就无法除掉他，肯定要成为后患。 
English: If we miss him today, we won't be able to get rid of him. He'll definitely be a problem later on.

古文：丕不从。
现代文：苻丕没有听从。
English: The baboon did not listen.

古文：越退，告人曰： 公父子好为小仁，不顾大计，终当为人擒耳。 
现代文：石越退下去以后，告诉人们说： 苻丕父子喜欢施行小恩小惠，而不顾天下大计，最终将会被别人所擒。 
English: After Shi Yue retreated, he told the people: "You father and son like to do small favors, regardless of the world's big plans, and will eventually be stolen by others.

古文：垂留慕容农、慕容楷、慕容绍于鄴，行至安阳之汤池，闵亮、李毘自鄴来，以丕与苻飞龙所谋告垂。
现代文：慕容垂把慕容农、慕容楷、慕容绍留在邺城，当他行进到安阳的汤池时，闵亮、李毗从邺城赶了上来，把苻丕与苻飞龙的图谋告诉了慕容垂。
English: Murongdiao left Murong Nong, Murong Kai, and Murong Shao in Lucheng. When he marched to the hot spring of Anyang, Gu Liang and Li Wei came up from Lucheng and told Murongdiao the plot of the dragonfly and the dragonfly.

古文：垂因激怒其众曰： 吾尽忠于苻氏，而彼专欲图吾父子，吾虽欲已，得乎！
现代文：慕容垂以此激发兵众们的义愤，说： 我尽忠于苻氏，而他却专门想图谋我们父子，我虽然想善罢甘休，能行吗！ 
English: With this, Murongdeli aroused the righteous indignation of the soldiers, saying, "I am loyal to the Shun clan, but he is trying to plot against our father and son. Even though I want to quit, can I do it?

古文：乃托言兵少，停河内募兵，旬日间，有众八千。
现代文：于是就借口兵力不足，停留在河内招募兵众，十天时间已经拥有八千兵众。
English: Then, on the pretext of insufficient troops, he stayed in Hanoi to recruit soldiers, and in ten days he already had eight thousand soldiers.

古文：平原公晖遣使让垂，趣使进兵。
现代文：平原公苻晖派遣使者责备慕容垂，督促他率兵前进。
English: Pingyuan sent an envoy to reprimand Mu Rongtui and urge him to lead the troops forward.

古文：垂谓飞龙曰： 今寇贼不远，当昼止夜行，袭其不意。 
现代文：慕容垂告诉苻飞龙说： 如今离寇贼不远，应当白天休息夜间前进，以攻其不意。 
English: Murongdiao told Zou Feilong, "Nowadays, we are not far from the bandits. We should rest during the day and advance at night to surprise them."

古文：飞龙以为然。
现代文：苻飞龙认为有理。
English: Zou Feilong thought it was reasonable.

古文：壬午，夜，垂遣世子宝将兵居前，少子隆勒兵从己，令氐兵五人为伍；阴与宝约，闻鼓声，前后合击氐兵及飞龙，尽杀之，参佐家在西者皆遣还，并以书遗秦王坚，言所以杀飞龙之故。
现代文：壬午，夜晚，慕容垂派长子慕容宝统领军队居前，小儿子慕容隆带领军队跟随自己，命令氐族士兵每五人为一个编制单位。他暗地里与慕容宝已有约定，当听到战鼓声后，前后合击氐族士民以及苻飞龙，把他们全部杀尽，参佐当中有家在西方的人，慕容垂全都让他们还乡，并且给前秦王苻坚送信，陈述所以要杀掉苻飞龙的原因。
English: At noon, in the evening, Murongdiao sent his eldest son, Murong Bao, to lead the army, and his youngest son, Murong Long, led the army to follow him, and ordered the Yao soldiers to form a unit of five each. He had secretly agreed with Murong Bao that when he heard the sound of the war drums, he would fight the Yao people and the Yao Feilong and kill them all. Among the advisers, there were people with families in the West. Murongdiao let them all return to their hometowns, and sent a letter to the former Qin king, Yu Jian, stating the reason for killing the Yao Feilong

古文：初，垂从坚入鄴，以其子麟屡尝告变于燕，立杀其母，然犹不忍杀麟，置之外舍，希得侍见。
现代文：当初，慕容垂跟随苻坚进入邺城，因为他的儿子慕容麟曾经多次向前燕慕容评告发事变，所以立即杀掉了他的母亲，然而尚不忍心杀掉慕容麟，让他住在城外的馆舍，很少见他。
English: At first, Murongdiao followed Yu Jian into Handan City, because his son Muronglin had repeatedly reported the incident to the former Yan Murong, so he immediately killed his mother. However, he did not have the heart to kill Muronglin, so he let him live in a mansion outside the city and rarely saw him.

古文：乃杀苻飞龙，麟屡进策画，启发垂意，垂更奇之，宠待与诸子均矣。
现代文：等到杀了苻飞龙以后，慕容麟屡屡进献计策，对慕容垂多有启发，慕容垂转而认为他不一般，对他的宠爱和其他的儿子一样了。
English: After he had killed the dragon, Murong Lin repeatedly made suggestions, which inspired Murong Tie. Murong Tie thought that he was not ordinary, and his affection for him was the same as that of other sons.

古文：慕容凤及燕故臣之子燕郡王腾、辽西段延等闻翟斌起兵，各帅部曲归之。
现代文：慕容凤以及前燕旧臣的儿子燕郡人王腾、辽西人段延等，听说翟斌起兵，各自率领部曲家兵归附了他。
English: Murongfeng, as well as Wang Teng, a native of Yan County and Duan Yan, a native of West Liaoning Province, both sons of former Yan's old vassal, heard that Yu Bin had raised an army, and each of them led some Qu family soldiers to join him.

古文：平原公晖使武平武侯毛当讨斌。
现代文：平原公苻晖让武平武侯毛当讨伐翟斌。
English: The plain public opinion let Wu Ping and Wu Hou Mao to fight against Bin.

古文：慕容凤曰： 凤今将雪先王之耻，请为斩此氐奴。 
现代文：慕容凤说： 我今天将要为先王雪耻，请求为将军斩杀这个氐奴。 
English: Murongfeng said, "Today, I am going to shame the former king Xue Rong and ask him to kill this scoundrel for the sake of the general."

古文：乃擐甲直进，丁零之众随之，大败秦兵，斩毛当；遂进攻陵云台戍，克之，收万馀人甲仗。
现代文：于是就身披铠甲，一往直前，丁零的兵众紧随其后，大败前秦的军队，斩杀了毛当。接着又进军攻打戍卫陵云台的军队，攻克了他们，缴获了一万多人的铠甲兵器。
English: So he put on his armor and marched straight ahead, followed by Ding Zi's soldiers, defeated the former Qin army and killed Mao Dang. Then he marched to attack the army of Yuntai, conquered them and captured more than ten thousand armored weapons.

古文：癸未，慕容垂济河焚桥，有众三万，留辽东鲜卑可足浑潭集兵于河内之沙城。
现代文：癸未，慕容垂渡过黄河以后焚烧了桥梁，拥有三万兵众，留下辽东的鲜卑人可足浑谭在河内的沙城会集兵众。
English: Not long ago, after Murong Du crossed the Yellow River, he burned the bridges and had 30,000 soldiers, leaving the Liaodong nobles to gather soldiers in Hanoi's Shacheng.

古文：垂遣田山如鄴，密告慕容农等使起兵相应。
现代文：慕容垂派田山到邺城，秘密地告诉慕容农等，让他们起兵响应。
English: Murong Du sent Tian Shan to Lucheng to secretly tell the Murong farmers to raise an army in response.

古文：时日已暮，农与慕容楷留宿鄴中；慕容绍先出，至蒲池，盗丕骏马数百匹以待农、楷。
现代文：当时天色已晚，慕容农与慕容楷留在邺城中过夜。慕容绍先行出城，到了蒲池，偷盗了苻丕的数百匹骏马以等待慕容农、慕容楷。
English: At that time, it was late in the day, and Murong Nong and Murong Kai stayed in Shicheng for the night. Murong Shao went out of the city first, went to Putuo, and stole hundreds of horses from Shicheng to wait for Murong Nong and Murong Kai.

古文：甲申晦，农、楷将数十骑微服出鄴，遂同奔列人。
现代文：甲申晦，慕容农、慕容楷带领数十名骑兵身着便服出了邺城，于是他们就一起奔赴列人县。
English: A Shenwei, Murong Nong and Murong Kai led dozens of cavalrymen dressed in civilian clothes out of Lucheng, so they rushed to Liren County together.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之下太元九年
现代文：太元九年
English: In the ninth year of the Taigen

古文：春，正月，乙酉朔，秦长乐公丕大会宾客，请慕容农不得，始觉有变。
现代文：春季，正月，乙酉朔，前秦长乐公苻丕大规模地宴请宾客，邀请慕容农却没有见着人，方才发觉事有变故。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the second month of the year, the former Qin Emperor Changle held a large-scale banquet to invite guests, and invited the Murong farmers, but they did not see anyone. It was only then that they realized that something had changed.

古文：遣人四出求之，三日，乃知其在列人，已起兵矣。
现代文：派人四出寻找，三天以后，才知道他在列人县，已经起兵反叛了。
English: They sent people out to look for him, and three days later they found out that he was in Lehen County and had already raised an army to rebel.

古文：慕容凤、王腾、段延皆劝翟斌奉慕容垂为盟主；斌从之。
现代文：慕容凤、王腾、段延全都劝翟斌尊奉慕容垂为盟主，翟斌听从了。
English: Murongfeng, Wang Teng, and Duan Yan all advised Yu Bin to honor Murongtu as the leader, and Yu Bin obeyed.

古文：垂欲袭洛阳，且未知斌之诚伪，乃拒之曰： 吾来救豫州，不来赴君。
现代文：慕容垂想袭击洛阳，但暂且还不知道翟斌是否有诚意，就拒绝他说： 我是来救援豫州的，不是来投奔您。
English: Murong longed to attack Luoyang, but for the time being he did not know whether Yu Bin Rong was sincere, so he refused and said: I came to rescue Yuzhou, not to run to you.

古文：君既建大事，成享其福，败受其祸，吾无预焉。 
现代文：您既然要干大事，成功则享受其福，失败则承受其祸，我不参与此事。 
English: Since you want to do great things, enjoy the blessings of success, and suffer the misfortunes of failure, I will not participate in this matter.

古文：丙戌，垂至洛阳，平原公晖闻其杀苻飞龙，闭门拒之。
现代文：丙戌，慕容垂抵达洛阳，平原公苻晖听说他杀了苻飞龙，把他拒之门外。
English: When Mu Rongtai arrived in Luoyang, the Plain Public Security Bureau heard that he had killed Zou Feilong and turned him away.

古文：翟斌复遣长史郭通往说垂，垂犹未许。
现代文：翟证又派长史郭通前去劝说慕容垂，慕容垂还是没有同意做盟主。
English: Xuan Zhen also sent his commander Shi Guotong to persuade Murong Diao, but Murong Diao still did not agree to be the leader.

古文：通曰： 将军所以拒通者，岂非以翟斌兄弟山野异类，无奇才远略，必无所成故邪？
现代文：郭通说： 将军之所以拒绝郭通的原因，难道不是认为翟斌的弟兄们是身居山野的异族，没有超人的才能和远大的谋略，肯定无所作为的缘故吗？
English: Guo Tong said: Isn't the reason why the general rejected Guo Tong that the brothers of Yu Bin were an alien race living in the mountains and fields, without superhuman talent and far-reaching strategy, and would certainly do nothing?

古文：独不念将军今日凭之，可以济大业乎！ 
现代文：为什么唯独不考虑将军今天凭借他们，就可以成就大业呢！ 
English: Why don't they consider that the general can achieve great things with their help today!

古文：垂乃许之。
现代文：听了这话，慕容垂就同意了。
English: Upon hearing this, Murong Du agreed.

古文：于是斌帅其众来与垂会，劝垂称尊号。
现代文：于是翟斌率领他的兵众前来与慕容垂会合，劝慕容垂称帝王的尊号。
English: Therefore, Yu Bin led his soldiers to come and meet with Mu Rongtai, and persuaded him to call himself the emperor's honorific.

古文：垂曰： 新兴侯，吾主也，当迎归返正耳。 
现代文：慕容垂说： 新兴侯慕容，是我们的国主，应当迎接他回去重归正统。 
English: Murong Diao said, "The up-and-coming lord Murong is our sovereign, and we should welcome him back to return to orthodoxy.

古文：垂以洛阳四面受敌，欲取鄴而据之，乃引兵而东。
现代文：慕容垂考虑到洛阳四面受敌，想攻取邺城据守，于是就率兵东进。
English: Considering that Luoyang was besieged on all sides, Murongdeli wanted to capture Lucheng and hold it, so he led his troops eastward.

古文：故扶馀王馀蔚为荥阳太守，及昌黎鲜卑卫驹各帅其众降垂。
现代文：过去的扶馀王馀蔚任荥阳太守，他和昌黎的鲜卑人卫驹各自率领自己的兵众投降了慕容垂。
English: Yu Wei, the former Fuyu Wang, served as the governor of Shenyang, and he and Wei Wei, the Xianbei of Changli, each led their own troops to surrender to Murongdali.

古文：垂至荥阳，群下固请上尊号，垂乃依晋中宗故事，称大将军、大都督、燕王，承制行事，谓之统府。
现代文：慕容垂抵达荥阳，众属下执意请求进上尊号，慕容垂就依据晋元帝的遗规，自称大将军、大都督、燕王，秉承君主的旨意行事，称为统府。
English: When Murongdiao arrived in Shenyang, all his subordinates insisted on asking him to be promoted to the title of honor. According to the rules left by Emperor Jin Yuan, Murongdiao called himself the general, the grand governor, and the king of swallows, and acted in accordance with the will of the monarch, known as the government.

古文：群下称臣，文表奏诰，封拜官爵，皆如王者。
现代文：众属下称臣，文表奏疏，封爵授官，全者和君王一样。
English: All his subordinates were honored as his vassals, his official documents were scrupulously kept, and he was knighted, just like a king.

古文：以弟德为车骑大将军，封范阳王；兄子楷为征西大将军，封太原王；翟斌为建义大将军，封河南王；馀蔚为征东将军，统府左司马，封扶馀王；卫驹为鹰扬将军，慕容凤为建策将军。
现代文：慕容垂任命他的弟弟慕容德为车骑大将军，封为范阳王；任命哥哥的儿子慕容楷为征西大将军，封为太原王；任命翟斌为建义大将军，封为河南王；任命馀蔚为征东将军、统府左司马，封为扶馀王；任命卫驹为鹰扬将军，慕容凤为建策将军。
English: Murong Li appointed his younger brother Murong De as the general of cavalry and cavalry, and named him King Fan Yang; appointed his brother's son Murong Kai as the general of western conquest, and named him King Taiyuan; appointed Yu Bin as the general of Jianyi, and named him King of Henan; appointed Yu Wei as the general of eastern conquest, the governor of Zuo Sima, and named him King Fu Yu; appointed Wei Wei as the general of Yingyang, and named Murong Feng as the general of construction.

古文：帅众二十馀万，自石门济河，长驱向鄴。
现代文：率领二十多万兵众，从石门渡过了黄河，长驱直入，奔赴邺城。
English: Led more than two hundred thousand soldiers, crossed the Yellow River from Shimen, drove straight in, and rushed to Lucheng.

古文：慕容农之奔列人也，止于乌桓鲁利家，利为之置馔，农笑而不食。
现代文：慕容农奔赴列人县的时候，在乌桓人鲁利家中停留，鲁利给他准备了食物，慕容农报之一笑，不吃。
English: When the Murong farmer rushed to Leheng County, he stopped at the home of the Wuhuan man Ruli. Ruli prepared food for him. The Murong farmer laughed and refused to eat.

古文：利谓其妻曰： 恶奴，郎贵人，家贫无以馔之，奈何？ 
现代文：鲁利对他妻子说： 恶奴，君郎是贵人，家穷没有什么可给他吃，怎么办呢！ 
English: Rulli said to his wife: "Villain, the prince is a noble, the poor have nothing to give him to eat, what should we do?

古文：妻曰： 郎有雄才大志，今无故而至，必将有异，非为饮食来也。
现代文：妻子说： 他有雄才大志，如今无缘无故地来到，必将有不寻常的事情，不是为了吃喝才来的。
English: His wife said: "He's very ambitious, he's come here for no reason, there's bound to be something out of the ordinary, he's not here for the food and drink.

古文：君亟出，远望以备非常。 
现代文：你赶快出去，望远处以防备不测。 
English: You'd better get out of here and stay out of sight, just in case.

古文：利从之。
现代文：鲁利听从妻子的吩咐。
English: Rulli follows his wife's orders.

古文：农谓利曰： 吾欲集兵列人以图兴复，卿能从我乎？ 
现代文：慕容农对鲁利说： 我想在列人县集结兵众以图谋复兴，你能跟我一起干吗？ 
English: Murongong Nong said to Ruli: I want to gather soldiers in Liren County to try to revive it. Can you join me?

古文：利曰： 死生唯郎是从。 
现代文：鲁利说： 不论生死，都跟从君郎。 
English: Rulli said, "No matter whether I live or die, I will follow Junro."

古文：农乃诣乌桓张骧，说之曰： 家王已举大事，翟斌等咸相推奉，远近响应，故来相告耳。 
现代文：慕容农于是就到乌桓人张骧那里，劝他说： 我家君王已经发动了复兴旧业的大事，翟斌等人全都推举尊奉他，远近的民众全都响应，所以我来告诉你。 
English: Murong Nong then went to Zhang Xuan of Wuhuan and persuaded him: "The king of my family has started the great task of reviving the old business, and all the people, including Yu Bin, have elected and honored him, and the people from far and near have all responded, so I'm here to tell you.

古文：骧再拜曰： 得旧主而奉之，敢不尽死！ 
现代文：张骧叩头两拜，说： 得到了过去的君主而尊奉他，怎么敢不尽死效忠呢！ 
English: Zhang Ye bowed twice and said, "How dare you not be loyal to the death when you have gained the respect of the past monarch!"

古文：于是农驱列人居民为士卒，斩桑榆为兵，裂襜裳为旗，使赵秋说屠各毕聪。
现代文：于是慕容农就让住在列人的居民作为士兵，砍桑树榆树作为兵器，撕下衣襟作为旗帜，派赵秋去劝说屠各人毕聪。
English: As a result, the Murong farmers made the residents of Lerun serve as soldiers, cut down the mulberry tree as a weapon, tore off the collar as a flag, and sent Zhao Qiu to persuade the Tu people to assassinate Bi Cong.

古文：聪与屠各卜胜、张延、李白、郭超及东夷馀和、敕勒、易阳乌桓刘大各帅部众数千赴之。
现代文：毕聪与屠各人卜胜、张延、李白、郭超以及东夷人馀和、敕勃、易阳的乌桓人刘大各自率领部众数千人投奔慕容农。
English: Bi Cong and the Tu people Bu Sheng, Zhang Yan, Li Bai, Guo Chao, as well as the Dongyi people Yu He, Zibo, and the Wuhuan people Liu Dai of Yiyang each led thousands of people to join the Murong farmers.

古文：农假张骧辅国将军，刘大安远将军，鲁利建威将军。
现代文：慕容农暂时任命张骧为辅国将军，刘大为安远将军，鲁利为建威将军。
English: Murong Nong temporarily appointed Zhang Ye as the auxiliary general, Liu Da as the general of Anyuan, and Ruli as the general of Jianwei.

古文：农自将攻破馆陶，收其军资器械，遣兰汗、段赞、赵秋、慕舆悕略取康台牧马数千匹。
现代文：慕容农亲自率兵攻克了馆陶，收缴了那里的军粮武器，派兰汗、段、赵秋、慕舆掠夺了康台的牧马数千匹。
English: Murong Nong personally led the troops to conquer Guantao and seized the military food and weapons there, while Pailan Khan, Duan, Zhao Qiu, and Mu Yiwu plundered thousands of Khandai's horses.

古文：汗，燕王垂之从舅；赞，聪之子也。
现代文：兰汗是后燕王慕容垂的堂舅；段是段聪的儿子。
English: Lanhan was the cousin of Houyan King Murongtui; Duan was the son of Duan Cong.

古文：于是步骑云集，众至数万，骧等共推农为使持节、都督河北诸军事、骠骑大将军，监统诸将，随才部署，上下肃然。
现代文：于是步、骑兵云集，兵众多达数万，张骧等人共同推举慕容农为使持节、都督河北诸军事、骠骑大将军，对于众将领，则根据他们的才能加以任用，上上下下，恭敬顺从。
English: As a result, the infantry and cavalry gathered in droves, and the number of soldiers reached tens of thousands. Zhang Xun and others jointly elected Murong Nong to be the envoy of the festival, the governor of Hebei Province, the military, and the cavalry general. For the generals, they were appointed according to their talents, up and down, respectful and obedient.

古文：农以燕王垂未至，不敢封赏将士。
现代文：慕容农考虑到后燕王慕容垂还未抵达，不敢擅自赐封将赏将士。
English: Murong farmers did not dare to give the award to the soldiers without authorization, considering that Emperor Murong had not yet arrived.

古文：赵秋曰： 军无赏，士不往。今之来者，皆欲建一时之功，规万世之利，宜承制封拜，以广中兴之基。 
现代文：赵秋说： 军队没有奖赏，士兵不会勇往直前，如今前来投奔的人，全都是想建立一时的战功，以谋求长远的利益，应该秉承国王的旨意对他们封爵授官，以扩大中兴大业的根基。 
English: Zhao Qiu said: The army has no reward, the soldiers will not go forward. The people who have come to run away now are all people who want to build a temporary war record in order to seek long-term benefits. They should be knighted according to the king's will in order to expand the foundation of ZTE's great cause.

古文：农从之，于是赴者相继；垂闻而善之。
现代文：慕容农听从了他的意见，于是前来投奔的人络绎不绝。
English: The Murong farmer listened to his advice, and the stream of people who came to join him never stopped.

古文：农西招库傉官伟于上党，东引乞特归于东阿，北召光烈将军平睿及睿兄汝阳太守幼于燕国；伟等皆应之。
现代文：慕容垂听说了以后，对此加以赞扬。慕容农派使者招纳上党的库官伟，在东面延引东阿的乞特归，在北面征召后燕国的光烈将军平睿及平睿的哥哥汝阳太守平幼，库官伟等人全都响应他。
English: After hearing about this, Murong Du praised it. Murong's agricultural envoys recruited Ku Guan Wei from the upper party, in the east, Yan brought back the East A's beggar, and in the north, recruited the brilliant general Ping Rui and Ping Rui's brother Ruyang Taizhou Pingyao from the lower Yan country. Ku Guan Wei and others all responded to him.

古文：又遣兰汗等攻顿丘，克之。
现代文：慕容农又派兰汗攻打顿丘，攻了下来。
English: Murong Nong also sent Lan Han to attack Dongqiu and took it.

古文：农号令整肃，军无私掠，士女喜悦。
现代文：慕容农号令严肃，军队秋毫无犯，男女百姓十分高兴。
English: The Murong farmer's call was serious, the army did not commit any crimes in the autumn, and the men and women of the people were very happy.

古文：长乐公丕使石越将步骑万馀讨之。
现代文：长乐公苻丕让石越统领一万多步、骑兵讨伐慕容农。
English: Changle Gongjun let Shi Yue lead more than ten thousand paces, and the cavalry fought against Murong farmers.

古文：农曰： 越有智勇之名，今不南拒大军而来此，是畏王而陵我也；必不设备，可以计取之。 
现代文：慕容农说： 石越有多勇多谋的名声，如今不在南边抵抗大军而来这里，这是畏惧燕王慕容垂而欺负我。他们肯定没做防备，可以使用计谋战胜他们。 
English: Murong Nong said, "Ishi Yue's reputation of being brave and resourceful is why he didn't come to the south to resist the large army. It was because he was afraid of the swallow king Murong Dui and bullied me. They certainly didn't take precautions and could have used strategies to defeat them.

古文：众请治列人城，农曰： 善用兵者，结士以心，不以异物。
现代文：兵众们请求慕容农据守列人城，慕容农说： 善于用兵的人，凝聚兵众靠的是赢得人心，不靠别的什么东西。
English: The soldiers asked Murong Nong to defend the city. Murong Nong said: Those who are good at using soldiers to rally the troops rely on winning people's hearts, not on anything else.

古文：今起义兵，唯敌是求，当以山河为城池，何列人之足治也！ 
现代文：如今兴起义兵，只要是敌人就攻击，应当以山河作为城池，一个小小的列人城哪里值得据守呢！ 
English: Nowadays, when a volunteer army is raised, as long as it is an enemy, it will attack. Mountains and rivers should be used as fortresses. A small city of commoners is not worth defending!

古文：辛卯，越至列人西，农使赵秋及参军綦毋滕击越前锋，破之。
现代文：辛卯，石越抵达列人城西，慕容农让赵秋及参军綦毋滕攻打石越的前锋部队，打败了他们。
English: Xinwu, Shih Yue arrived in the west of Liancheng, Murong farmers let Zhao Qiu and Shan Jun fight against Shih Yue's forward troops, and defeated them.

古文：参军太原赵谦言于农曰： 越甲仗虽精，人心危骇，易破也，宜急击之。 
现代文：参军太原人赵谦慕容农进言说： 石越的铠甲兵仗虽然精良，但人心惊恐畏惧，所以容易被攻破，应该迅速攻击他们。 
English: Zhao Qianmu Rongnong, a Taiyuan man who joined the army, said: Although the armored warfare of Shiyue is excellent, the people's hearts are frightened and afraid, so it is easy to be broken, and they should be attacked quickly.

古文：农曰： 彼甲在外，我甲在心，昼战，则士卒见其外貌而惮之，不如待暮击之，可以必克。 
现代文：慕容农说： 他们的铠甲在身外，我们的铠甲在心里，白天交战，则士兵们看见他们表面上的精良装备就会畏惧，不如等到晚上再攻击他们，必定取胜。 
English: Murong Nong said: Their armor is on the outside, our armor is on the inside. If they fight during the day, the soldiers will be afraid when they see the sophisticated equipment on the surface. It is better to wait until the evening to attack them, and they will surely win.

古文：令军士严备以待，毋得妄动。
现代文：慕容农命令士兵严阵以待，不得轻举妄动。
English: Murong Nong ordered the soldiers to wait in a tight line and not to make any rash moves.

古文：越立栅自固，农笑谓诸将曰： 越兵精士众，不乘其初至之锐以击我，方更立栅，吾知其无能为也。 
现代文：石越修建栅栏自守，慕容农笑着对众将领说： 石越武器精良，兵力众多，不乘着刚刚抵达后的锐气攻击我们，反而在建栅栏防御，我知道他们是没有能力进攻了。 
English: Shi Yue built a fence to protect itself. Murong Nong said to the generals with a smile: "Shi Yue has sophisticated weapons and a large number of troops. They are not attacking us with the spirit they have just arrived, but are building a fence to defend themselves. I know they have no ability to attack."

古文：向暮，农鼓噪出，陈于城西。牙门刘木请先攻越栅，农笑曰： 凡人见美食，谁不欲之，何得独请！
现代文：等到天黑以后，慕容农击鼓呼喊出发，在城西摆开战阵，牙门刘木请求作为先锋攻击石越的栅栏，慕容农笑着说： 凡人见到美食，谁不想吃，怎么能够独自请求呢！
English: After dark, the Murong farmers set off to the west of the city, beating drums and shouting. Fangmen Liu Mu requested to be the vanguard to attack Shiyue's fence. The Murong farmer smiled and said, "When ordinary people see delicious food, if they don't want to eat it, how can they ask for it on their own?"

古文：然汝猛锐可嘉，当以先锋惠汝。 
现代文：然而你的勇猛锋锐值得赞赏，应当把先锋的角色优待给你。 
English: However, your bravery is commendable, and you should be given the role of vanguard.

古文：木乃帅壮士四百腾栅而入，秦兵披靡；农督大众随之，大败秦兵，斩越，送首于垂。
现代文：刘木于是就率领四百名勇士越过栅栏冲入敌阵，前秦的军队惊慌溃逃。慕容农督率大军追击，大败了前秦的军队，斩杀了石越，把他的首级送了到慕容垂那里。
English: Liu Mu then led four hundred warriors to rush over the fence into the enemy lines, and the former Qin army panicked and fled. Murong Nongguo led a large army in pursuit, defeated the former Qin army, killed Shi Yue, and sent his head to Murong Tie.

古文：越与毛当，皆秦之骁将也，故秦王坚使助二子镇守；既而相继败没，人情骚动，所在盗贼群起。
现代文：石越与毛当，都是前秦的勇猛战将，所以前秦王苻坚让他们辅助两个儿子镇守，此后相继失败死亡，人心骚动，他们所在的地方盗贼群起。
English: Both Shi Yue and Mao Dang were brave warriors of the former Qin Dynasty. Therefore, the former Qin King Jian Jian let them assist his two sons to defend the town. After that, they failed and died one after another. People's hearts were agitated, and thieves swarmed in the place where they were.

古文：庚戌，燕王垂至鄴，改秦建元二十年为燕元年，服色朝仪，皆如旧章。
现代文：庚戌，后燕王慕容垂抵达邺城，改前秦建元二十年为后燕元年，官员服饰的颜色及朝廷礼仪，全都一如旧制。
English: Geng Zi and Emperor Yan's consort, Queen Murong, arrived in Handan, and the year was changed from 20 years before Qin Jian Yuan to the year after Yan Yuan. The color of officials' clothing and the imperial court etiquette were all the same as the old system.

古文：以前岷山公库傉官伟为左长史，肖尚书段崇为右长史，荥阳郑豁等为从事中郎。
现代文：任命从前的岷山公库官伟为左长史，从前的尚书段崇为右长史，荥阳人郑豁等人为从事中郎。
English: Former Lushan Public Treasury official Guan Wei was appointed as the left chief historian, former Shang Shudan Chong was appointed as the right chief historian, and Zheng Huan, a native of Shenyang, was appointed as the middle historian.

古文：慕容农引兵会垂于鄴，垂因其所称之官而授之。
现代文：慕容农带领军队与慕容垂在邺城会合，慕容垂将他自称的官职正式授予了他。
English: Murong Nong led the army to meet with Murong Diao in Handan, and Murong Diao officially awarded him his self-proclaimed official position.

古文：立世子宝为太子，封从弟拔等十七人及甥宇文输、舅子兰审皆为王；其馀宗族及功臣封公者三十七人，侯、伯、子，男者八十九人。
现代文：立长子慕容宝为太子，封堂弟慕容拔等十七人以及外甥宇文输、舅舅的儿子兰审为王，其余的宗族亲属及有功之臣被封为公的有三十七人，被封为侯、伯、子、男的有八十九人。
English: The eldest son, Murong Bao, was made the crown prince, and seventeen people, including his cousin, Murong Bao, as well as his nephew, Uwen Tsao, and his uncle's son, Lan Zi, were made kings. The remaining relatives of the clan and meritorious vassals were made princes, and thirty-seven people were made princes, and eighty-nine people were made lords, great lords, sons, and men.

古文：可足浑潭集兵得二万馀人，攻野王，拔之，引兵会攻鄴。
现代文：可足浑谭聚集到了二万兵众，攻打野王，攻了下来，又率领军队与慕容垂会合攻打邺城。
English: However, Futan Tan gathered up to twenty thousand soldiers, attacked the wild king, defeated him, and led the army to join forces with Murongdol to attack the city.

古文：平幼及弟睿、规亦帅众数万会垂于鄴。
现代文：平幼以及他的弟弟平睿、平规也率领数万兵众在邺城与慕容垂会合。
English: Hirayuki and his younger brothers, Hirai and Hiraiki, also led tens of thousands of soldiers to join Murongdol in Yeongseong.

古文：长乐公丕使姜让诮让燕王垂，且说之曰： 过而能改，今犹未晚也。 
现代文：长乐公苻丕派姜让谴责后燕王慕容垂，并且劝他说： 有过错而能够改正，如今还不晚。 
English: Changle Public Security Bureau sent Jiang Zang to reprimand Yan Wang Murongdiao, and advised him: It is not too late to correct mistakes.

古文：垂曰： 孤受主上不世之恩，故欲安全长乐公，使尽众赴京师，然后修复国家之业，与秦永为邻好。
现代文：慕容垂说： 我承受了主上罕见的恩惠，所以想保全长乐公，让他带领全部军队返回京师长安，然后我修整恢复国家的大业，与秦国永远结为友好邻邦。
English: Murongdeli said: I have received a rare grace from the Lord, so I want to preserve Changle Gong, let him lead all the troops back to Beijing and Chang'an, and then I will rectify and restore the great cause of the country, and forever be a friendly neighbor with Qin.

古文：何故暗于机运，不以鄴城见归？
现代文：为什么他不识时务，不将邺城归还给我呢？
English: Why doesn't he understand the current situation and return the city of Handan to me?

古文：若迷而不复，当穷极兵势，恐单马求生，亦不可得也。 
现代文：如果他执迷不悟，我就应当动用全部兵力攻打，恐怕他想单身匹马逃窜求生，也是不可能的了。 
English: If he persists, I will have to use all my forces to attack him, and I'm afraid it will be impossible for him to escape on his own.

古文：让厉色责之曰： 将军不容于家国，投命圣朝，燕之尺土，将军岂有分乎？
现代文：姜让厉言正色地责备慕容垂说： 将军在自己的国家无处容身，投靠圣朝，燕国狭小的地域，难道能有你的份吗？
English: Jiang Zang sternly reproached Mu Rongtai, saying: "The general has nowhere to hide in his own country, and he has taken refuge in the Holy Dynasty, in the small area of Yan's country. Can there be a place for you?

古文：主上与将军风殊类别，一见倾心，亲如宗戚，宠逾勋旧，自古君臣际遇，有如是之厚者乎？
现代文：主上与将军风俗不同，种族有异，然而却一见倾心，亲如一家，对你的宠待超过了功勋旧臣，自古君臣相遇，有像这样优厚的吗？
English: The lord and the general have different customs and different races, but they fall in love at first sight, like a family, and they treat you with favor beyond the merits of the old minister, since the ancient monarchs and ministers met, is there such a generous one?

古文：一旦因王师小败，遽有异图。
现代文：一旦因为君王的军队遭受了小小的失败，你马上就另有图谋！
English: As soon as you suffer a small defeat at the hands of the king's army, you immediately think of something else!

古文：长乐公，主上元子，受分陕之任，宁可束手输将军以百城之地乎？
现代文：长乐公是主上的嫡传长子，接受分治一方辅佐君王的重任，他难道能把百城之地拱手让给你吗？
English: Changle Gong is the eldest legitimate son of the Lord, accepting the important task of dividing and assisting the king. Can he really give you the land of a hundred cities?

古文：将军欲裂冠毁冕，自可极其兵势，奚更云云！
现代文：将军想背弃君主，自然可以大动兵威，哪里用得着说那么多话呢！
English: If a general wants to betray his sovereign, he can of course use military force. There is no need to talk so much!

古文：但惜将军以七十之年，悬首白旗，高世之忠，更为逆鬼耳！ 
现代文：只可惜将军以七十高龄，像被周武王杀掉的商纣一样把头颅悬挂在白旗上，往日超越世俗的忠诚，反而要变成叛逆之鬼！ 
English: It's just a pity that at the ripe old age of seventy, the general has hung his head on a white flag, just like the merchants who were killed by King Zhou Wu. In the past, he transcended worldly loyalty and instead became a rebellious ghost!

古文：垂默然。
现代文：慕容垂沉默不语。
English: Murong fell silent.

古文：左右请杀之，垂曰： 彼各为其主耳，何罪！ 
现代文：周围的人请求杀掉姜让，慕容垂说： 那是各为其主而已，有什么罪过！ 
English: The people around him begged him to kill Jiang Zhan, but Murong Liu said, "That's up to each of you, what's the crime!

古文：礼而归之，遗丕书及上秦王坚表，陈述利害，请送丕归长安。
现代文：对他以礼相待，送他回去了。并给苻丕送信，给前秦王苻坚进上表章，陈述利害，请求送苻丕返回长安。
English: He treated him with courtesy and sent him back. He also sent a letter to Zheng Zheng, to the former King of Qin, Zheng Jianjin, stating his interests and requesting that Zheng Zheng return to Chang'an.

古文：坚及丕怒，复书切责之。
现代文：苻坚和苻丕十分愤怒，复信痛切地责备了慕容垂。
English: Xuan Jian and Yao were very angry, and the reply letter bitterly reproached Mu Rongtui.

古文：鹰扬将军刘牢之攻秦谯城，拔之。
现代文：东晋鹰扬将军刘牢之攻打前秦的谯城，攻了下来。
English: Eastern Jin general Liu Diao attacked the former Qin capital of Fucheng and took it.

古文：桓冲遣上庸太守郭宝攻秦魏兴、上庸、新城三郡，拔之。
现代文：桓冲派上庸太守郭宝攻打前秦的魏兴、上庸、新城三郡，攻了下来。
English: Kunchun sent Shangyong Taishu Guo Bao to attack the three counties of Wei Xing, Shangyong and Xincheng in the former Qin Dynasty, and conquered them.

古文：将军杨佺期进据成固，击秦梁州刺史潘猛，走之。
现代文：将军杨期进军占据了成固，攻击前秦梁州刺史潘猛，赶跑了他。
English: The general Yang Zi marched into and occupied Chenggong, attacked the former Qin Liangzhou chief Pan Meng, and drove him away.

古文：佺期，亮之子也。
现代文：杨期是杨亮的儿子。
English: Yang Jie is the son of Yang Liang.

古文：壬子，燕王垂攻鄴，拔其外郭，长乐公丕退守中城。
现代文：壬子，后燕王慕容垂攻打邺城，攻下了外城，长乐公苻丕退守中城。
English: In Imzi, the late Yan Wang Murong attacked the city of Zou, captured the outer city, and Changle Gongzhu retreated to the middle city.

古文：关东六州郡县多送任请降于燕。
现代文：关东六州的郡县大都送来人质请求向后燕投降。
English: Most of the counties in the six prefectures of Kanto sent requests for the hostages to surrender to Houyan.

古文：癸丑，垂以陈留王绍行冀州刺史，屯广阿。
现代文：癸丑，慕容垂任命陈留王慕容绍代理冀州刺史，驻扎在广阿。
English: At the same time, Murongli appointed Chen Liuwang Murongshao as the deputy governor of Jizhou, stationed in Guang'an.

古文：丰城宣穆公桓冲闻谢玄等有功，自以失言，惭恨成疾；二月，辛巳，卒。
现代文：丰城宣牧公桓冲听说谢玄等人建立了战功，自认为以前的话说错了，愧恨交加，酿成疾病。二月，辛巳，桓冲去世。
English: After hearing that Xie Xuan and others had made war exploits, Fengcheng Xuanmu Gong Kanchong thought that what he had said before was wrong, and he was filled with remorse, which led to illness. In February, Xin Si, Kanchong passed away.

古文：朝议欲以谢玄为荆、江二州刺史。
现代文：朝廷议论要让谢玄出任荆、江二州刺史。
English: The imperial court discussed appointing Xie Xuan to the post of Jing, Jiang Erzhou stabbing history.

古文：谢安自以父子名位太盛，又惧桓氏失职怨望，乃以梁郡太守桓石民为荆州刺史，河东太守桓石虔为豫州刺史，豫州刺史桓伊为江州刺史。
现代文：谢安自认为自己父子的名声职位太引人注目，又害怕桓氏家族的人因为失掉职位而怀恨在心，就任命梁郡太守桓石民为荆州刺史，河东太守桓石虔为豫州刺史，豫州刺史桓伊为江州刺史。
English: Xie An thought that his father's and son's prestigious positions were too eye-catching, and he was afraid that the Huan family members would hold grudges because they lost their positions. He appointed Liang County Governor Huan Shimin as the governor of Jingzhou, the governor of Hedong Province Huan Shikian as the governor of Yuzhou, and the governor of Yuzhou Huan Yi as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：燕王垂引丁零、乌桓之众二十馀万为飞梯地道以攻鄴，不拔；乃筑长围守之，分处老弱于肥乡，筑新兴城以置辎重。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂带领丁零、乌桓的二十多万兵众架设云梯、开挖地道用来攻打邺城，没有攻下。于是就建筑包围工事坚守，分别将老弱兵众安置在肥乡，建筑新兴城用来放置轻重装备。
English: Later, Yan Wang Murongdeli led more than two hundred thousand soldiers, including Ding Zi and Wu Huan, to erect ladders and dig tunnels to attack Lucheng, but failed to capture it. Therefore, he insisted on the construction of the encirclement, and placed the old and weak soldiers in Feixiang, and the construction of the emerging city was used to place light and heavy equipment.

古文：秦征东府官属疑参军高泰，燕之旧臣，有贰心。泰惧，与同郡虞曹从事吴韶逃归勃海。
现代文：前秦征东府的官属们怀疑参军高泰是前燕的旧臣，怀有二心，高泰害怕了，与同郡的虞曹从事吴韶逃回勃海。
English: The officials and subordinates of the former Qin conquest of the East suspected that Gao Tai, who joined the army, was the former Yan's old minister. Gao Tai was afraid and fled back to Bohai with Yu Cao from the same county.

古文：韶曰： 燕军近在肥乡，宜从之。 
现代文：吴韶说： 燕国的军队近在肥乡，应该归附他们。 
English: Wu Gan said, "Yan Guo's army is close to Feixiang, we should join them.

古文：泰曰： 吾以避祸耳；去一君，事一君，吾所不为也！ 
现代文：高泰说： 我们为的是逃避灾祸而已，离开一个君主，又去事奉另一个君主，这是我所不愿意干的！ 
English: Gao Tai said, "We are only trying to escape the calamity. I don't want to leave one ruler to serve another!"

古文：申绍见而叹曰： 去就以道，可谓君子矣！ 
现代文：申绍见到他后感叹地说： 离开与归附全都依循一定的道理，可以称得上是君子啊！ 
English: After seeing him, Shen Shao said with a sigh: "Leaving and joining all follow a certain principle, you can be called a gentleman!

古文：燕范阳王德击秦枋头，取之，置戍而还。
现代文：后燕范阳王慕容德攻击前秦的枋头，攻了下来，设置了守卫力量后返回。
English: Later, Yan Fanyang Wang Murongde attacked the former Qin's Shantou, attacked it, set up a guard force and returned.

古文：东胡王晏据馆陶，为鄴中声援，鲜卑、乌桓及郡县民据坞壁不从燕者尚众；燕王垂遣太原王楷与镇南将军陈留王绍讨之。
现代文：东胡人王晏占据着馆陶，声援邺中，鲜卑、乌桓以及郡县的民众据守坞堡壁垒不服从后燕的人尚有许多。后燕王慕容垂派太原王慕容楷与镇南将军陈留王慕容绍讨伐他们。
English: The Eastern Hu people, Wang Qian, occupied Guan Tao, and there were still many people who did not obey Hou Yan, who were supported by the people of Xingbei, Xianbei, Wuhuan and counties and counties. Hou Yan King Murong sent Taiyuan King Murong Kai and Jinan General Chen Liu Wang Murong Shao to fight them.

古文：楷谓绍曰： 鲜卑、乌桓及冀州之民，本皆燕臣。今大业始尔，人心未洽，所以小异。
现代文：慕容楷对慕容绍说： 鲜卑、乌桓以及冀州的民众，本来都是燕国的属臣，如今大业刚刚开始，人心尚未融洽，这就是导致小有不同的原因。
English: Murong Kai said to Murong Shao: Xianbei, Wuhuan and the people of Jizhou were originally all vassals of Yan. Now the great cause has just begun, and the hearts of the people are not yet harmonious. This is the reason for the small differences.

古文：唯宜绥之以德，不可震之以威。
现代文：只应该用仁德安抚他们，不能靠威势震慑他们。
English: We should only use benevolence to appease them, and not rely on intimidation to deter them.

古文：吾当止一处，为军声之本，汝巡抚民夷，示以大义，彼必当听从。 
现代文：我应当停留在一个地方，作为军队声威的根基，你去巡视安抚民众夷狄，向他们展示大义，他们就一定会听命服从。 
English: I should stay in one place, as the foundation of the army's voice, you go on patrol to appease the people of Yidi, show them the great justice, they will surely obey.

古文：楷乃屯于辟阳。
现代文：慕容楷于是就驻扎在辟阳。
English: Murong Kai was then stationed in Biyang.

古文：绍帅骑数百往说王晏，为陈祸福，晏随绍诣楷降，于是鲜卑、乌桓及坞民降者数十万口。
现代文：慕容绍率领数百骑兵前去劝说王晏，为他陈述祸福，王晏跟随慕容绍到慕容楷那里投降，于是鲜卑、乌桓以及守卫在坞堡中的民众投降的有数十万人。
English: Murong Shao led hundreds of cavalrymen to persuade Wang Yao to come forward and state the misfortunes and blessings for him. Wang Yao followed Murong Shao to Murong Kai and surrendered there. As a result, hundreds of thousands of Xianbei, Wuhuan and the people guarding the dockyard surrendered.

古文：楷留其老弱，置守宰以抚之，发其丁壮十馀万，与王晏诣鄴。
现代文：慕容楷将其中的老弱者留下，设置地方官吏以安抚他们，派遣其中十多万身强力壮的成年人，与王晏一起到邺城。
English: Murong Kai left the old and weak among them, set up local officials to appease them, and sent more than one hundred thousand strong adults to Shicheng with Wang Yao.

古文：垂大悦，曰： 汝兄弟才兼文武，足以继先王矣！ 
现代文：慕容垂十分高兴地说： 你们弟兄的才能文武兼备，足以继承先王的事业！ 
English: Murongdeli was very pleased and said, "Your brothers' talents, both literary and military, are enough to carry on the work of the former king!"

古文：三月，以卫将军谢安为太保。
现代文：三月，东晋任命卫将军谢安为太保。
English: In March, Wei general Xie An was appointed as Taibao.

古文：秦北地长史慕容泓闻燕王垂攻鄴，亡奔关东，收集鲜卑，众至数千。还屯华阴，败秦将军强永，其众遂盛。
现代文：前秦北地长史慕容泓听说后燕王慕容垂攻打邺城，逃奔到关东，收拢会集鲜卑人，多达数千，返回驻扎在华阴，打败了前秦将军强永，他的兵众于是就更多了。
English: Former Northern Qin governor Shi Murongjun heard that the late Yan Wang Murong was about to attack Yancheng, fled to Guandong, gathered thousands of people, and returned to be stationed in Huayin. He defeated the former Qin general Qiang Yong, and his soldiers became more numerous.

古文：自称都督陕西诸军事、大将军、雍州牧、济北王，推垂为丞相、都督陕东诸军事、领大司马、冀州牧、吴王。
现代文：慕容泓自称都督陕西诸军事、大将军、雍州牧、济北王，推举慕容垂为丞相、都督陕东诸军事、领大司马、冀州牧、吴王。
English: Muronglu claimed to be the military governor of Shaanxi Province, the great general, the Yongzhou herdsman, and the king of Jibei Province. Muronglu was elected as the prime minister, the military governor of Shaanxi Province, the leader of the great horse, the Jizhou herdsman, and the king of Wu Province.

古文：秦王坚谓权翼曰： 不用卿言，使鲜卑至此。
现代文：前秦王苻坚对权翼说： 没听你的话，让鲜卑人到了如此地步。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian said to Quan Ying: I didn't listen to you, and I let a lowly person get to this point.

古文：关东之地，吾不复与之争，将若泓何？ 
现代文：关东之地，我不再和他们争夺，但拿慕容泓怎么办呢？ 
English: I will no longer compete with them for the land of Kanto, but what about Murongyao?

古文：乃以广平公熙为雍州刺史，镇蒲阪。
现代文：于是就任命广平公苻熙为雍州刺史，镇守蒲阪。
English: Therefore, he appointed Guangping Gong Rongxi as the chief historian of Yongzhou and the town guard of Busan.

古文：征雍州牧巨鹿公睿为都督中外诸军事、卫大将军、录尚书事，配兵五万；以左将军窦冲为长史，龙骧将军姚苌为司马，以讨泓。
现代文：征召雍州牧钜鹿公苻睿为都督中外诸军事、卫大将军、录尚书事，给他配备五万士兵；任命左将军窦冲为长史，龙骧将军姚苌为司马，来讨伐慕容泓。
English: He conscripted Yongzhou Muye De Gong Xuan Rui as the governor of the military, Wei Dai generals and record books, and equipped him with fifty thousand soldiers; appointed Zuo general Dou Chong as the long history, and Longjing general Yao Jie as the Sima, to fight against Murong Jie.

古文：平阳太守慕容冲亦起兵于平阳，有众二万，进攻蒲阪；坚使窦冲讨之。
现代文：平阳太守慕容冲也在平阳起兵，拥有二万兵众，进军攻打蒲阪。苻坚派窦冲去讨伐他。
English: The governor of Pingyang, Murong Chong, also raised an army in Pingyang, with 20,000 soldiers, and marched to attack Busan. Yu Jian sent Dou Chong to fight him.

古文：库傉官伟帅营部数万至鄴，燕王垂封伟为安定王。
现代文：库官伟率领部众数万人抵达邺城，后燕王慕容垂封库官伟为安定王。
English: Ku Kuan Wei led tens of thousands of people to arrive in Handan City, after which King Yan Murong crowned Ku Kuan Wei as the king of stability.

古文：秦冀州刺史阜城侯定守信都，高城男绍在其国，高邑侯亮、重合侯谟守常山，固安侯鉴守中山。
现代文：前秦冀州刺史阜城侯苻定戍守信都，高城男爵苻绍在他的封地，高邑侯苻亮、重合侯苻谟戍守常山，固安侯苻鉴戍守中山。
English: Former Qin and Hebei prefectural governor of Zhishifu city of Gaocheng, Gaocheng baron, Gaoshao was in his fief, Gaoyu governor of Guiliang, Chonghe governor of Jingshan, Guan governor of Zhongshan.

古文：燕王垂遣前将军、乐浪王温督诸军攻信都，不克；夏，四月，丙辰，遣抚军大将军麟益兵助之。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂派前将军、乐浪王慕容温督帅各路军队攻打信都，没有攻克。夏季，四月，丙辰，派抚军大将军慕容麟增兵协助他们。
English: Later, Yan Wang Murongdiao sent the former general, Le Lang Wang Murongwen to attack the capital, but failed to conquer it. In the summer, in April, the general of the Fuzhou army, Muronglin, sent more troops to help them.

古文：定、鉴，秦王坚之从叔；绍、谟，从弟；亮，从子也。
现代文：苻定、苻鉴是前秦王苻坚的堂叔；苻绍、苻谟是他的堂弟；苻亮是他的侄子。
English: Yu Ding and Yu Jian were the cousins of the former Qin King Yu Jian; Yu Shao and Yu Mo were his cousins; Yu Liang was his nephew.

古文：温，燕王垂之弟子也。
现代文：慕容温是后燕王慕容垂弟弟的儿子。
English: Murongwen was the son of a younger brother of the late King Murongdu.

古文：慕容泓闻秦兵且至，惧，帅众将奔关东。
现代文：慕容泓听说前秦的军队将要到达，很害怕，率领兵众准备逃奔关东。
English: When Murong Yao heard that the former Qin army was about to arrive, he was very scared and led the soldiers to prepare to flee to Guandong.

古文：秦巨鹿愍公睿粗猛轻敌，欲驰兵邀之。
现代文：前秦钜鹿公苻睿鲁莽轻敌，想要迅速出兵在半路拦截他们。
English: The former Qin general Qianglu wanted to quickly dispatch troops to intercept them in the middle of the road.

古文：姚苌谏曰： 鲜卑皆有思归之志，故起而为乱，宜驱令出关，不可遏也。
现代文：姚苌劝谏苻睿说： 鲜卑人全都有思念归返的心情，所以才起兵作乱，应该驱使他们出关，不能阻截。
English: Yao Zhe advised Zhaorui that: all the people of Xianbei are in the mood of longing to return, that's why they started a riot. They should be driven out of the pass, not intercepted.

古文：夫执鼷鼠之尾，犹能反噬于人。
现代文：抓住了鼷鼠的尾巴，它还能反咬人一口。
English: If you catch a mole by the tail, it will bite you back.

古文：彼自知困穷，致死于我；万一失利，悔将何及！
现代文：他们自知陷于穷途末路，必将要与我们拼命，万一失利，后悔将怎么来得及。
English: They know that they are at the end of their rope and will fight us tooth and nail. If they fail, they will not have time to regret it.

古文：但可鸣鼓随之，彼将奔败不暇矣。 
现代文：只能击鼓紧随他们，他们将全力溃逃。 
English: Only drumming will follow them, and they will flee with all their might.

古文：睿弗从，战于华泽，睿兵败，为泓所杀。
现代文：苻睿没有听从劝告，在华泽交战，苻睿的军队失败，苻睿被慕容泓杀掉。
English: Zha Rui did not listen to the advice, and fought in Huazhe. Zha Rui's army failed, and Zha Rui was killed by Murong Yao.

古文：苌遣龙骧长史赵都、参军姜协诣秦王坚谢罪；坚怒，杀之。
现代文：姚苌派龙骧长史赵都、参军姜协到前秦王苻坚那里谢罪，苻坚十分愤怒，杀掉了他们。
English: Yao Zhen sent Long Zhen Chang Shi Zhaodu and Sangun Jiang Xie to the former Qin King Yu Jian to apologize. Yu Jian was very angry and killed them.

古文：苌惧，奔渭北马牧。于是天水尹纬、尹详、南庞演等纠扇羌豪，帅其户口归苌者五万馀家，推苌为盟主。
现代文：姚苌害怕了，逃奔到渭北的牧马之地，于是天水人尹纬、尹详、南安人庞演等，纠集煽动羌族豪强，率领他们的民户丁口归附姚苌的，共有五万多家，推举姚苌为盟主。
English: Yao Yao was afraid and fled to the north of Shandong to the land of the herdsmen. Therefore, the people of Tianshui, including Yin Wei, Yin Zhe and Nan'an's Pang Xuan, gathered and incited the powerful people of Shandong to lead their households to join Yao Yao, a total of more than 50,000 people, and elected Yao Yao as the leader.

古文：苌自称大将军、大单于、万年秦王，大赦，改元白雀，以尹详、庞演为左、右长史，南安姚晃及尹纬为左、右司马，天水狄伯支等为从事中郎，羌训等为掾属，王据等为参军，王钦卢、姚方成等为将帅。
现代文：姚苌自称大将军、大单于、万年秦王，实行大赦，改年号为白雀，任命尹详、庞演为左、右长史，南安人姚晃及尹纬为左、右司马，天水人狄伯支等为从事中郎，羌训等为掾属，王据等为参军，王钦卢，姚方成等为将帅。
English: Yao Wei called himself the great general, the great single in, the everlasting king of Qin, implemented an amnesty, changed the year name to the white sparrow, appointed Yin Ji, Pang Yun as the left and right long history, the Nan'an people Yao Xiao and Yin Wei as the left and right Sima, the Tianshui people Di Bo branch and so on as the engaged middlemen, the Shao training and so on as the subordinates, the Wang Zheng and so on as the soldiers, Wang Qinlu, Yao Fangcheng and so on as the generals.

古文：秦窦冲击慕容冲于河东，大破之；冲帅鲜卑骑八千奔慕容泓。
现代文：前秦窦冲在黄河以东攻击慕容冲，大败慕容冲。慕容冲率领八千鲜卑骑兵投奔慕容泓。
English: Qin Douchong attacked Murongchong east of the Yellow River and defeated Murongchong. Murongchong led eight thousand cavalrymen to Murongwu.

古文：泓众至十馀万，遣使谓秦王坚曰： 吴王已定关东，可速资备大驾，奉送家兄皇帝，泓当帅关中燕人翼卫乘舆，还返鄴都，与秦以虎牢为界，永为邻好。 
现代文：慕容泓的兵众达到十多万，他派遣使者告诉前秦王苻坚说： 吴王慕容垂已经平定了关东，可以迅束就此准备车驾，奉送家兄慕容皇帝，慕容泓要率领关中的燕国人守卫车乘，返回邺都，与秦国以虎牢为界，永远结为友邻。 
English: Murong Hui's army reached more than one hundred thousand, and he sent an envoy to tell the former Qin King Yu Jian: "Wu King Murong Hui has already pacified Guandong, you can quickly prepare a chariot and send it to your brother, Emperor Murong. Murong Hui should lead the Yan people in Guanzhong to guard the chariot and return to the capital, and make the tiger a boundary with Qin, and forever be friends and neighbors.

古文：坚大怒，召慕容责之曰： 今泓书如此，卿欲去者，朕当相资。
现代文：苻坚听后勃然大怒，召来慕容责备他说： 如今慕容泓的信中把话说到了这种地步，你想离开的时候，我将提供帮助。
English: After hearing this, Hao Jian flew into a rage and summoned Murong to scold him, saying: "Nowadays, Murong Yao's letter has reached this point. If you want to leave, I will help you.

古文：卿之宗族，可谓人面兽心，不可以国士期也！ 
现代文：你的宗族亲戚，可以称得上是人面兽心，无法把他们作为国士来寄于期望！ 
English: Your clan relatives can be said to be human-like and animal-like, and it is impossible to pin expectations on them as a statesman!

古文：叩头流血，涕泣陈谢。
现代文：慕容叩头叩得流了血，哭泣着表示谢罪。
English: Murong patted his head until it bled, and wept to express his gratitude.

古文：坚久之曰： 此自三竖所为，非卿之过。 
现代文：过了许久，苻坚说： 事情是由慕容垂、慕容泓、慕容冲三个家伙所干的，不是你的过错。 
English: After a long time, Yu Jian said, "It's not your fault, it was done by three guys, Murong Zhuang, Murong Yao and Murong Chong.

古文：复其位，待之如初。
现代文：于是恢复了慕容的职位，对待他像当初一样。
English: So they reinstated Murong's position and treated him the same as before.

古文：命以书招谕泓、冲及垂。
现代文：苻坚命令慕容写信招纳劝谕慕容泓、慕容冲以及慕容垂。
English: Yu Jian ordered Murong to write a letter to recruit Murong Yao, Murong Chong and Murong Tie.

古文：密遣使谓泓曰： 吾笼中之人，必无还理；且燕室之罪人也，不足复顾。
现代文：慕容秘密地派使者告诉慕容泓说： 我是笼中之人，肯定没有回归的道理；况且我还是燕王室的罪人，不值得你们再顾念。
English: Murong secretly sent an emissary to tell Murong Yu that: I am a caged person, there is certainly no reason to return; moreover, I am still a sinner of the Yan royal family, I am not worthy of your further consideration.

古文：汝勉建大业，以吴王为相国，中山王为太宰、领大司马，汝可为大将军、领司徒，承制封拜，听吾死问，汝便即尊位。 
现代文：你们努力建成大业，让吴王慕容垂做相国，中山王慕容冲做太宰、兼大司马，你可以做大将军、兼司徒，秉承我的旨意封爵授官，听到我死了的消息后，你就可以即皇帝的尊位。 
English: You should work hard to build a great cause, and let Wu King Murongdian be the father of the country, and Zhongshan King Murongchong be the Dazaifu and the grand steward. You can be the general and the steward, and be knighted according to my will. After hearing the news of my death, you can be the emperor.

古文：泓于是进向长安，改元燕兴。
现代文：慕容泓于是进军长安，改年号为燕兴。
English: Therefore, Murong Jun marched into Chang'an and changed his era name to Yanxing.

古文：燕王垂以鄴城犹固，会僚佐议之。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂因为邺城尚在固守，会集僚属辅佐商议此事。
English: After the death of Yan Wang Murong, because Shicheng was still holding fast, the members of the meeting discussed the matter.

古文：右司马封衡请引漳水灌之；从之。
现代文：右司马封衡请求引来漳水灌入城中，慕容垂听从了。
English: At the request of the right-hand man, Ma Fengheng, Surabaya water was brought in and poured into the city. Murong Du listened.

古文：垂行围，因饮于华林园，秦人密出兵掩之，矢下如雨，垂几不得出，冠军大将军隆将骑冲之，垂仅而得免。
现代文：慕容垂到了打猎场，顺便在华林园饮酒，前秦人秘密出兵对他突然袭击，乱箭如雨射来，慕容垂几乎没能逃出，冠军大将军慕容隆带领骑兵冲击敌人，慕容垂才幸免于难。
English: Murongdiao went to the hunting ground and had a drink in the Chinese Forest Garden. The former Qin Dynasty secretly sent soldiers to attack him suddenly. They shot arrows at him in a hail of arrows. Murongdiao was almost unable to escape. The champion general Muronglong led the cavalry to attack the enemy. Murongdiao only survived.

古文：竟陵太守赵统攻襄阳，秦荆州刺史都贵奔鲁阳。
现代文：竟陵太守赵统攻打襄阳，前秦荆州刺史都贵逃奔鲁阳。
English: Zhao Tong, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, attacked Xiangyang, while the former Qin emperor Jingzhou stabbed Shigui and fled to Luyang.

古文：五月，秦洛州刺史张五虎据丰阳来降。
现代文：五月，前秦洛州刺史张五虎占据丰阳，前来向东晋役降。
English: In May, the former Qin and Luozhou Zhang Five Tigers occupied Fengyang, and came to the East for promotion and demotion.

古文：梁州刺史杨亮帅众五万伐蜀，遣巴西太守费统等将水陆兵三万为前锋。
现代文：东晋梁州刺史杨亮率领五万兵众讨伐蜀，派遣巴西太守费统统率三万水军、陆军作为前锋。
English: Yang Liang, the governor of Liang Prefecture in East Jin, led fifty thousand soldiers to fight against Shu, and sent the Brazilian Emperor Fei to lead the thirty thousand navy and army as a forward.

古文：亮屯巴郡，秦益州刺史王广遣巴西太守康回等拒之。
现代文：杨亮驻扎在巴郡，前秦益州刺史王广派巴西太守康回等人抵抗他们。
English: Yang Liang was stationed in Ba County, and the former Qin and Yizhou ruler Wang Guang sent the Brazilian governor Kang Hui and others to resist them.

古文：秦苻定、苻绍皆降于燕，燕慕容麟引兵西攻常山。
现代文：前秦的苻定、苻绍全都投降了后燕。后燕慕容麟带领军队西攻常山。
English: The former Qin states of Luding and Zhishao all surrendered to Houyan. Houyan Muronglin led the army westward to attack Changshan.

古文：后秦王苌进屯北地，秦华阴、北地、新平、安定羌胡降之者十馀万。
现代文：后秦王姚苌进军驻扎在北地，前秦华阴、北地、新平、安定的羌人、胡人投降的有十多万。
English: After Qin King Yao Jian marched into the army stationed in the north, before Qin Huayin, the north, Xinping, the stable of the Xiongnu, the Hu people surrendered more than one hundred thousand.

古文：六月，癸丑朔，崇德太后褚氏崩。
现代文：六月，癸丑朔，东晋崇德太后褚氏去世。
English: In June, at the dawn of the new year, the Dowager Empress Dowager Zou of the Eastern Jin Dynasty passed away.

古文：秦王坚自帅步骑二万以击后秦，军于赵氏坞，使护军将军杨璧等分道攻之；后秦兵屡败，斩后秦王苌之弟镇军将军尹买。
现代文：前秦王苻坚亲自率领步、骑兵二万人攻打后秦，驻军于赵氏坞，让护军将军杨壁等人分路进攻。后秦的军队屡战屡败，后秦王姚苌的弟弟镇军将军姚尹买被斩杀。
English: Former Qin King Yao Jian personally led the way, and 20,000 cavalry attacked Later Qin, stationed troops in Zhao's dock, and let the escort general Yang Bi and others attack separately. Later Qin's army was repeatedly defeated, and the younger brother of Later Qin King Yao Jian, the town army general Yao Yin Bai, was beheaded.

古文：后秦军中无井，秦人塞安公谷、堰同官水以固之。
现代文：后秦驻军的地方没有水井，前秦人堵塞了安公谷、拦截了同官水以围困他们。
English: There were no wells in the places where the post-Qin troops were stationed. The former Qin blocked the Angong Valley and intercepted the official water to besiege them.

古文：后秦人恟惧，有渴死者。
现代文：后秦人惊慌恐惧，有人干渴而死。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, people panicked and feared, and some people died of thirst.

古文：会天大雨，后秦营中水三尺，绕营百步之外，寸馀而已，后秦军复振。
现代文：恰巧天下大雨，后秦的军营积水三尺，环绕军营百步以外，积水仅仅一寸多而已，后秦的军队又振奋了起来。
English: It just so happened that there was a heavy rain, and the military camp of Houqin was flooded with three feet of water. The water around the military camp was only a little more than one inch, and the army of Houqin was excited again.

古文：秦王坚叹曰： 天亦佑贼乎！ 
现代文：前秦王苻坚叹息道： 上天也保佑寇贼啊！ 
English: Former Qin King Yao Jian sighed and said: Heaven also bless the bandits!

古文：慕容泓谋臣高盖等以泓德望不如慕容冲，且持法苛峻，乃杀泓，立冲为皇太弟，承制行事，置百官；以盖为尚书令。
现代文：慕容泓的谋臣高盖等人认为慕容泓的道德威望不如慕容冲，而且执行法律苛刻严峻，于是就杀掉了慕容泓，立慕容冲为皇太弟，秉承国王的旨意行事，设置了百官。任命高盖为尚书令。
English: Murong Jun's adviser Gao Gai and others believed that Murong Jun's moral prestige was not as high as that of Murong Chong, and that the enforcement of laws was harsh and severe, so they killed Murong Jun, appointed Murong Chong as the crown prince, acted in accordance with the king's will, and set up a hundred officials. Gao Gai was appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：后秦王苌遣其子嵩为质于冲以请和。
现代文：后秦王姚苌派遣儿子姚嵩作为人质到慕容冲那里，以请求和好。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Jie sent his son Yao Song as a hostage to Murongchong to ask for peace.

古文：将军刘春攻鲁阳，都贵奔还长安。
现代文：东晋将军刘春攻打鲁阳，都贵逃回长安。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty general Liu Chun attacked Luyang, and Du Gui fled back to Chang'an.

古文：后秦王苌帅众七万击秦，秦王坚遣杨璧等拒之，为苌所败；获杨璧及右将军徐成、镇军将军毛盛等将吏数十人，苌皆礼而遣之。
现代文：后秦王姚苌率领七万兵众攻打前秦，前秦王苻坚派杨壁等人抵抗，被姚苌打败。擒获了杨壁以及右将军徐成、镇军将军毛盛等将帅官吏数十人，姚苌对他们全都以礼相待，然后放他们回去了。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Jian led 70,000 soldiers to attack the former Qin, and the former Qin King Jian Jian sent Yang Bi and others to resist, and was defeated by Yao Jian. He captured Yang Bi and dozens of generals and officials such as Right General Xu Cheng and Town Army General Mao Sheng. Yao Jian treated them all with courtesy, and then let them go back.

古文：燕慕容麟拨常山，秦苻亮、苻谟皆降。
现代文：后燕慕容麟攻下了常山，前秦的苻亮、苻谟全都投降。
English: Later, Yan Muronglin captured Changshan, and the former Qin emperors Yan Liang and Jiumu all surrendered.

古文：麟进围中山，秋，七月，克之，执苻鉴。
现代文：慕容麟进军包围中山，秋季，七月，攻克了中山，抓获了苻鉴。
English: Muronglin marched to encircle Zhongshan. In the autumn, in July, he conquered Zhongshan and captured Longyan.

古文：麟威声大振，留屯中山。
现代文：慕容麟威势名声大振，留驻中山。
English: Muronglin, with a strong reputation, stayed in Zhongshan.

古文：秦幽州刺史王永、平州刺史苻冲帅二州之众以击燕。
现代文：前秦幽州刺史王永、平州刺史苻冲率领二州的兵众攻击后燕。
English: Wang Yong, the former Qin governor of Yuzhou, and Gong Chong, the former governor of Pingzhou, led the troops of the two states to attack Houyan.

古文：燕王垂遣宁朔将军平规击永，永遣昌黎太守宋敞逆战于范阳，敞兵败，规进据蓟南。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂派平朔将军平规反击王永，王永派昌黎太守宋敞在范阳迎战，宋敞的军队被打败，平规进军占据了蓟城以南。
English: Later, Yan King Murong Lian sent Ping Shuo General Ping Gui to counterattack Wang Yong, Wang Yong sent Chang Li to defend Song Zhan in Fanyang, Song Zhan's army was defeated, and Ping Gui's army occupied the south of Lucheng.

古文：秦平原公晖帅洛阳、陕城之众七万归于长安。
现代文：前秦平原公苻晖率领洛阳、陕城的七万兵众回到了长安。
English: The 70,000 soldiers from Luoyang and Shaanxi returned to Chang'an under the leadership of the former Qin general, Guo Jun.

古文：益州刺史王广遣将军王虬帅蜀汉之众三万北救长安。
现代文：益州刺史王广派遣将军王虬率领蜀汉的三万兵众悲伤救援长安。
English: Wang Guang, the governor of Yizhou, dispatched General Wang Qian to lead the 30,000 soldiers of Shuhan to rescue Chang'an.

古文：秦王坚闻慕容冲去长安浸近，乃引兵归，遣抚军大将军高阳公方戍骊山，拜平原公晖为都督中外诸军事、车骑大将军、录尚书事，配兵五万以拒冲。
现代文：前秦王苻坚听说慕容冲逐渐逼近长安，就带领军队返回，派抚军大将军苻方戍守骊山，任命平原公苻晖为都督中外诸军事、车骑大将军、录尚书事，配备五万兵众以抵抗慕容冲。
English: When the former Qin King Yu Jian heard that Murongchong was gradually approaching Chang'an, he led the army back, sent the general of the army of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general

古文：冲与晖战于郑西，大破之。
现代文：慕容冲与苻晖在郑西交战，大败苻晖。
English: Murongchong and Yao fought in Zhengxi and were soundly defeated by Yao.

古文：坚又遣前将军姜宇与少子河间公琳帅众三万拒冲于灞上；琳、宇皆败死，冲遂据阿房城。
现代文：苻坚又派前将军姜宇与小儿子河间公苻琳率领三万兵众在灞上抵抗慕容冲，苻琳、姜宇全都战败死亡，慕容冲于是就占据了阿房城。
English: Yu Jian also sent the former general Jiang Yu and his youngest son, Kawamakong Yulin, to lead 30,000 soldiers to resist Murongchong on the raft. Yulin and Jiang Yu were all defeated and died, and Murongchong then occupied Afang City.

古文：泰康回兵数败，退还成都。
现代文：前秦康回的军队多次失败，退回到成都。
English: The army of the former Qin Kanghu repeatedly failed and retreated to Chengdu.

古文：梓潼太守垒袭以涪城来降。
现代文：梓潼太守垒袭率涪城投降了东晋。
English: With the attack rate of Zizhao's garrison, the Eastern Jin surrendered the city.

古文：荆州刺史桓石民据鲁阳，遣河南太守高茂北戍洛阳。
现代文：荆州刺史桓石民占据了鲁阳，派河南太守高茂北进戍守洛阳。
English: The people of Jingzhou occupied Luyang and sent the governor of Henan Province, Gao Mao Bei, to Luoyang.

古文：己酉，葬康献皇后于崇平陵。
现代文：己酉，东晋在崇平陵安葬了康献皇后。
English: On the 28th, Empress Kangxian was buried in the Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：燕翟斌恃功骄纵，邀求无厌；又以鄴城久不下，潜有贰心。
现代文：后燕的翟斌自恃有功，傲慢无忌，邀官求赏，贪得无厌。又因为邺城久围不下，私下里怀有背叛之心。
English: Houyan's Qibin prided himself on his achievements, was arrogant and unscrupulous, invited officials to seek rewards, and was insatiably greedy. Moreover, because Qicheng could not be besieged for a long time, he secretly harbored a heart of betrayal.

古文：太子宝请除之，燕王垂曰： 河南之盟，不可负也。
现代文：太子慕容宝请求除掉他，后燕王慕容垂说： 河南的盟誓，不能背弃。
English: Prince Murong Bao asked to get rid of him, after which King Yan Murong said: The oath of Henan cannot be abandoned.

古文：若其为难，罪由于斌。
现代文：如果他要发难，罪过出于翟斌。
English: If he wants to make trouble, the fault lies with Yu Bin.

古文：今事未有形而杀之，人必谓我忌惮其功能；吾方收揽豪杰以隆大业，不可示人以狭，失天下之望也。
现代文：如今事情尚未发生而杀掉他，人们一定会说我忌恨害怕他的功劳与才能。我正在收罗招揽英雄豪杰以使大业昌盛，不能向人们表现出狭隘，以丧失天下人的期望。
English: If I were to kill him now, before it happened, people would say that I was jealous of his merits and talents, that I was recruiting heroes and heroines to make my business prosper, and that I should not be narrow-minded and lose the world's expectations.

古文：藉彼有谋，吾以智防之，无能为也。 
现代文：假如他怀有阴谋，我以智谋防范他，他也无所作为。 
English: If he is scheming, I will outwit him and he will do nothing.

古文：范阳王德、陈留王绍、骠骑大将军农皆曰： 翟斌兄弟恃功而骄，必为国患。 
现代文：范阳王慕容德、陈留王慕容绍、骠骑大将军慕容农都说： 翟斌兄弟居功自傲，一定会成为国家的祸患。 
English: Fan Yang Wang Murongde, Chen Liu Wang Murongshao, and the cavalry general Murong Nong all said: The Bin brothers are proud of their achievements and will surely become a national scourge.

古文：垂曰： 骄则速败，焉能为患？
现代文：慕容垂说： 傲慢必然导致迅速失败，怎么能成为祸患呢！
English: Murongdeli said: Arrogance inevitably leads to rapid failure, how can it be a disaster!

古文：彼有大功，当听其自毙耳。 
现代文：他立有大功，应当听凭他自取灭亡。 
English: He has made a great contribution and should be left to his own devices.

古文：礼遇弥重。
现代文：慕容垂对翟斌的礼遇越发优厚。
English: Murongdiao's courtesy to Yu Bin became more and more generous.

古文：斌讽丁零及其党请斌为尚书令。
现代文：翟斌暗示丁零人及自己的同党请求让他出任尚书令。
English: Yu Bin hinted that Ding Ziren and his own party members requested him to serve as Shang Shuling.

古文：垂曰： 翟王之功，宜居上辅；但台既未建，此官不可遽置耳。 
现代文：慕容垂说： 以翟王的功劳，应该位居宰相，只是官署尚未建立，此官无法迅速设置。 
English: Mu Rongtai said: With the merits of King Gong, he should be the prime minister, but the government office has not yet been established, and this official cannot be set up quickly.

古文：斌努，密与前秦长乐公丕通谋，使丁零决堤溃水；事觉，垂杀斌及其弟檀、敏，馀皆赦之。
现代文：翟斌非常愤怒，暗地里与前秦长乐公主苻丕互通计谋，让丁零人开决输引漳水的堤防，把水放走，事情泄露，慕容垂杀掉了翟斌及他的弟弟翟檀、翟敏，其余的人全都赦免了。
English: Yu Bin was very angry. He secretly plotted with the former Qin Dynasty Changle Princess Zou to let Ding Ziren open the dike to divert the water, let the water go, the matter leaked out, Murong killed Yu Bin and his brothers Yu Dang and Yu Min, and the rest of the people were all pardoned.

古文：斌兄子真，夜将营众北奔邯郸，引兵还向鄴围，欲与丕内外相应。
现代文：翟斌哥哥的儿子翟真，趁夜带领军营里的兵众向北逃向邯郸，途中又掉头开向后燕围攻邺城的包围圈，想和苻丕形成内外呼应之势。
English: Yu Zhen, the son of Yu Bin's brother, took advantage of the night to lead the soldiers in the military camp to flee north to Yu, and on the way he turned around and drove back to the encirclement of Yanbei to attack Yu City, hoping to form an internal and external resonance with Yu.

古文：太子宝与冠军大将军隆击破之，真还走邯郸。
现代文：太子慕容宝与冠军大将军慕容隆打败了他们。翟真又掉头逃向邯郸。
English: Prince Murong Bao and the champion general Murong Long defeated them. Yu Zhen turned his back and fled to Luoyang.

古文：太原王楷、陈留王绍言于垂曰： 丁零非有大志，但宠过为乱耳。
现代文：太原王慕容楷、陈留王慕容绍向慕容垂进言说： 丁零人并非胸怀大志，只是因为过分地宠待了他们，所以才背叛作乱罢了。
English: The King of Taiyuan, Murong Kai, and the King of Chenliu, Murong Shao, spoke to Murong Diao, saying, "The people of Dingye are not ambitious. It is only because we have pampered them excessively that they have betrayed and caused turmoil.

古文：今急之则屯聚为寇，缓之则自散。散而击之，无不克矣 垂从之。
现代文：如今若要迅速消灭他们，那他们就会聚集起来，成为寇贼，如果暂时不理睬他们，他们就会自我离散，等到离散以后再攻打他们，攻无不克。 慕容垂听从了这一意见。
English: If they were to be eliminated quickly, they would gather together and become bandits. If they were to be ignored for a while, they would disperse on their own. Once they had dispersed, they would be attacked, and attacked relentlessly. Murongdol listened to this advice.

古文：龟兹王帛纯窘急，重赂狯胡以求救；狯胡王遣其弟呐龙、侯将馗帅骑二十馀万，并引温宿、尉头等诸国兵合七十馀万以救龟兹；秦吕光与战于城西，大破之。
现代文：龟兹王帛纯处境困窘危急，给狯胡送去优厚的礼物以求救援。狯胡王派他的弟弟呐龙、侯将馗率领二十多万骑兵，同时带领温宿、尉须等各国军队共计七十多万人前去救援龟兹。前秦吕光和他们在城西交战，大败了他们。
English: The turtle king, Yaochun, was in a difficult and critical situation, and sent a generous gift to Yan Hu for rescue. Yan Hu sent his younger brother, Nalong, and the warlord, Hou, to lead more than two hundred thousand cavalry, and at the same time led more than seven hundred thousand troops from various countries, such as Onjuku and Yeosu, to rescue the turtle. The former Qin Liguang fought with them in the west of the city, and defeated them.

古文：帛纯出走，王侯降者三十馀国。
现代文：帛纯出逃，三十多国的王侯投降。
English: Emperor Qizhun fled, and more than thirty countries surrendered.

古文：光入其城，城如长安市邑，宫室甚盛。
现代文：吕光进入龟兹人的城内，城里如同长安的都市，宫室非常华丽。
English: Luguang entered the city of the Kuez people. The city was like the city of Chang'an, and the palace was very gorgeous.

古文：光抚宁西域，威恩甚著，远方诸国，前世所不能服者，皆来归附，上汉所赐节传。
现代文：吕光抚慰安宁西域地区，威势与恩德十分明显，远方各国，前代所未能臣服的，全都前来归附，并献上汉朝时赐给他们的苻节凭证。
English: In the western region of Anning, where Luguang was consoling, his power and benevolence were very obvious. People from far away countries, who had not been able to submit to the previous generation, all came to attach themselves, and presented the certificate of the Festival of Dedication given to them by the Han Dynasty.

古文：光皆表而易之，立帛纯弟震为龟兹王。
现代文：吕光全都进上表章请求为他们更换，立帛纯的弟弟帛震为龟兹王。
English: Lu Guang all went to the watch chapter to request a replacement for them, and set up his pure younger brother, Zou Zhen, as the king of tortoises.

古文：八月，翟真自邯郸北走，燕王垂遣太原王楷、骠骑大将军农帅骑马追之，甲寅，及于下邑。
现代文：八月，翟真从邯郸北逃，后燕王慕容垂派太原王慕容楷、骠骑大将军慕容农率领骑兵追击他，到下邑时追了上去。
English: In August, Yu Zhen fled from northern Anhui Province. Later, Yan Wang Murongli sent the Taiyuan King Murongkai and his cavalry general Murong Nong to chase him. They caught up with him when they reached the lower town.

古文：楷欲战，农曰： 士卒饥倦，且视贼营不见丁壮，殆有他伏。 
现代文：慕容楷想与他交战，慕容农说： 士兵饥饿疲倦，而且在敌人的军营中看不见身强力壮的成年人，恐怕在其他地方有埋伏。 
English: When Murong Kai wanted to fight him, Murong Nong said, "The soldiers are hungry and tired, and there are no able-bodied adults to be seen in the enemy's camp. I'm afraid there are ambushes in other places."

古文：楷不从，进战，燕兵大败。
现代文：慕容楷没有听从，进军交战，后燕的军队大败。
English: Murong Kai disobeyed, marched into battle, and defeated Hou Yan's army.

古文：真北趋中山，屯于承营。
现代文：翟真向北开赴中山，驻扎在承营。
English: Yu Zhen went north to Zhongshan and was stationed in Chengying.

古文：鄴中刍粮俱尽，削松木以饲马。
现代文：邺城中饲料、粮食全都耗尽，只能砍下松树枝喂马。
English: All the fodder and grain in the city were exhausted, and they could only cut down pine branches to feed the horses.

古文：燕王垂谓诸将曰： 苻丕穷寇，必无降理，不如退屯新城，开丕西归之路，以谢秦王畴昔之恩，且为讨翟真之计。 
现代文：后燕王慕容垂对众将领说： 苻丕是势穷力竭的敌寇，一定没有投降的道理。我们不如退驻新城，为苻丕让开西返的道路，以此来感谢秦王昔日的恩情，而且可以作为讨伐翟真的计策。 
English: Afterward, Yan Wang Murong said to the generals: "Quan is an exhausted enemy, so there is no reason to surrender. We might as well retreat to Xincheng and let Quan return to the west, as a way to thank the Qin King for his kindness in the past, and it can be used as a real strategy to fight against Quan.

古文：丙寅夜，垂解围趋新城。
现代文：丙寅那天夜晚，慕容垂解除了对邺城的包围，开赴新城。
English: That night, Murongdiao lifted the siege on Lucheng and went to Xincheng.

古文：遣慕容农徇清河、平原，征督租赋，农明立约束，均适有无，军令严整，无所侵暴，由是谷帛属路，军资丰给。
现代文：派慕容农带兵巡行清河、平原，监督征收田租赋税。慕容农明确地公布了条令，使贫富之家的分担适当，军纪严明，无所侵扰，因此交纳粮食、布匹的人络绎不绝，军队的给养丰富充足。
English: The Murong farmers sent soldiers to patrol the clear rivers and plains to supervise the collection of farm rents and taxes. The Murong farmers clearly announced the rules and regulations, so that the distribution of the poor and rich families was appropriate, the military discipline was strict, and there was no intrusion. Therefore, the people who paid grain and cloth were endless, and the army was richly supplied.

古文：戊寅，南昌文穆公郗愔薨。
现代文：戊寅，东晋南昌文穆公郗去世。
English: Wu Yin, East Jin Nanchang Wenmu Gongyi passed away.

古文：太保安奏请乘苻氏倾败，开拓中原，以徐、兗二州刺史谢玄为前锋都督，帅豫州刺史桓石虔等伐秦。
现代文：东晋太保谢安进上奏章，请求乘苻氏失败之机，开拓中原地区，任命徐、兖二州刺史谢玄为前锋都督，率领豫州刺史桓石虔讨伐前秦。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Taipo Xie An entered the record, requesting to take the opportunity of the failure of the Xiong clan to develop the Central Plains region, appointing Xu and Zou as the two states of Shi Xie Xuan as the vanguard governor, and leading the Yuzhou state of Shi Huan Shi Qian to fight the former Qin.

古文：玄至下邳，秦徐州刺史赵迁弃彭城走，充进据彭城。
现代文：谢玄抵达下邳，前秦徐州刺史赵迁放弃彭城逃走，谢玄进军占据了彭城。
English: Xie Xuan arrived in Jiaozuo, the former Qin Xuzhou ruler Zhao Qian abandoned Pengcheng and fled, and Xie Xuan marched into and occupied Pengcheng.

古文：秦王坚闻吕光平西域，以光为都督玉门以西诸军事、西域校尉；道绝，不通。
现代文：前秦王苻坚听说吕光平定了西域，任命吕光为都督玉门以西诸军事、西域校尉。
English: Former Qin King Jian Jian heard that Luguang had pacified the western region, and appointed Luguang as the military governor west of Yumen and the lieutenant of the western region.

古文：秦幽州刺史王永求救于振威将军刘库仁，库仁遣其妻兄公孙希帅骑三千救之，大破平规于蓟南，乘胜长驱，进据唐城，与慕容麟相持。
现代文：因为道路被阻绝，任命无法通达。前秦幽州刺史王永向振威将军刘库仁求救，刘库仁派他妻子的哥哥公孙希率领三千骑兵前去救援，在蓟南大败平规的军队，乘胜长驱直入，进军占据了唐城。
English: Because the road was blocked, the appointment could not be made. The former Qin Yuzhou scribe Wang Yong appealed to General Liu Curen for help. Liu Curen sent his wife's brother Gong Sunxi to lead three thousand cavalry to the rescue. In southern Fujian, he defeated the army and drove straight into the victory, marching into and occupying Tangcheng.

古文：九月，谢玄使彭城内史刘牢之攻秦兗州刺史张崇。
现代文：九月，谢玄让彭城内史刘牢之攻打前秦兖州刺史张崇。
English: In September, Xie Xuan let Pengcheng Inner History Liu Ye's attack on former Qin Xizhou assassin Zhang Chong.

古文：辛卯，崇弃鄄城奔燕。
现代文：辛卯，张崇放弃了鄄城投奔后燕。
English: After Xinwu, Zhang Chong abandoned Shicheng and went to work in Houyan.

古文：宁之据鄄城，河南城堡皆来归附。
现代文：刘牢之石据了鄄城，河南城邑村堡里的人全都前来归附东晋。
English: Liu Diao's stone was based in Handan City, and all the people in the cities, towns and villages of Henan Province came to join the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：太保安上疏自求北征。
现代文：东晋太保谢安上疏，请求亲自出征北伐。
English: Eastern Jin Taipo Xie An Shang Shou requested to personally go to the Northern Expedition.

古文：甲午，加安都督扬、江等十五州诸军事，加黄钺。
现代文：朝廷让谢安担任都督扬、江等十五州诸军事，并授予他黄钺。
English: The imperial court appointed Xie An as the military governor of Yang, Jiang and other 15 states, and awarded him the Yellow Ribbon.

古文：慕容冲进逼长安，秦王坚登城观之，叹曰： 此虏何从出哉！ 
现代文：慕容冲进军逼临长安，前秦王苻坚登上城墙观望，感叹地说： 这些敌虏是从哪里出来的呢！ 
English: Murong stormed into the army and forced it to approach Chang'an. Former Qin King Qian Jian climbed onto the city wall to watch and sighed: Where did these enemies come from?

古文：大呼责冲曰： 奴何苦来送死！ 
现代文：接着大声责备慕容冲说： 你小子何苦来送死！ 
English: Then he loudly scolded Murongchong, saying, "What a pain it is for you to die!

古文：冲曰： 奴厌奴苦，欲取汝为代耳！ 
现代文：慕容冲说： 我厌倦了我的困苦，想捉拿你来代替！ 
English: Murongchong said, "I'm tired of my hardships and want to capture you instead!"

古文：冲少有宠于坚，坚遣使以锦袍称诏遗之。冲遗詹事称皇太弟令答之曰： 孤今心在天下，岂顾一袍小惠！
现代文：慕容冲小的时候很得苻坚的宠爱，苻坚派使者带着锦袍宣称是皇帝诏令送给慕容冲的，慕容冲则派詹事宣称皇太弟他回答说： 我如今的志向在于夺取天下，岂能看得上一件锦袍这样的小恩小惠！
English: When Murongchong was a child, he was very much favored by Yan Jian. Yan Jian sent an envoy with a brocade robe to claim that the emperor had given it to Murongchong by imperial decree. Murongchong sent Zhan Ji to claim that he was the brother of the crown prince. He replied, "My ambition now is to conquer the world. How can I see such a small favor of a brocade robe!

古文：苟能知命，君臣束手，早送皇帝！自当宽贷苻氏，以酬曩好。 
现代文：假如能够知天命，君主臣下就应该停止抵抗，及早把皇帝慕容送来，自然就可以宽恕苻氏以酬报过去的好处。 
English: If you can know the fate of heaven, the monarchs and their subjects should stop resisting and send Emperor Murong to you as soon as possible, and you can naturally forgive the Shun clan for the benefits of the past.

古文：坚大怒曰： 吾不用王景略、阳平公之言，使白虏敢至于此！ 
现代文：苻坚勃然大怒，说： 我没有听从王猛、阳平公苻融的话，使鲜卑白虏胆敢放肆到这种地步！ 
English: Zou Jian flew into a rage and said, "I did not listen to Wang Mengmao and Yang Ping Gong Rongyu, and I allowed Xianbei Bai Rui to dare to be so reckless!"

古文：冬，十月，辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，辛亥朔，出现日食。
English: In the winter of October, Xinhai New Year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：乙丑，大赦。
现代文：乙丑，东晋实行大赦。
English: Second, the Eastern Jin Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：谢玄遣阴陵太守高素攻秦青州刺史苻郎，军至琅邪，朗来降。
现代文：谢玄派阴陵太守高素攻打前秦青州刺史苻朗，军队抵达琅邪，苻朗前来投降。
English: Xie Xuan sent the governor of Yinling, Gao Su, to attack the former Qin governor of Qingzhou, Zhi Shih Lang. The army arrived at Ziyi, and Zhi Lang came to surrender.

古文：朗，坚之从子也。
现代文：苻朗是苻坚的侄子。
English: Yu Lang is Yu Jian's nephew.

古文：翟真在承营，与公孙希、宋敞遥相首尾。
现代文：翟真在承营，与公孙希、宋敞首尾相应。
English: Hao Zhen is in Chengying, corresponding to Gongsun Xi and Song Zhan.

古文：长乐公丕遣宦者冗从仆射清河光祚，将兵数百赴中山，与真相结。
现代文：长乐公苻丕派宦官冗从仆射清河人光祚带领数百兵众奔赴中山，与翟真相勾结。
English: Changle Gongjun sent eunuch Zou Zi to lead hundreds of soldiers to Zhongshan, and colluded with Zou Jianzhen.

古文：又遣阳平太守邵兴将数千骑，招集冀州故郡县，与祚期会襄国。
现代文：又派阳平太守邵兴带领数千骑兵招纳会集冀州过去的郡县，与光祚约期在襄国会合。
English: He also sent Yangping Taishou Shao Xing to lead thousands of cavalry recruiters to gather the counties and counties of Jizhou in the past, and meet with Guangyao in Xiangguo.

古文：是时，燕军疲弊，秦势复振，冀州郡县皆观望成败，赵郡人赵粟等起兵柏乡以应兴。
现代文：这时，后燕的军队疲惫，而前秦的威势又重新振作，冀州的郡县全都观望成败，赵郡人赵粟等在柏乡起兵以响应邵兴。
English: At this time, Houyan's army was exhausted, while the former Qin's might was reinvigorated. Counties and counties in Jizhou all watched the success or failure. Zhao County's Zhao Sohu and others raised an army in Baoxiang in response to Shao Xing.

古文：燕王垂遣冠军大将军隆、龙骧将军张崇将兵邀击兴，命骠骑大将军农自清河引兵会之。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂派冠军大将军慕容隆、龙骧将军张崇带领兵众迎击邵兴，命令骠骑大将军慕容农带领军队从清河出发，与他们会合。
English: Later, Yan Wang Murong sent the champion generals Murong Long and Longyu Zhang Chong to lead the troops to meet Shao Xing, and ordered the cavalry general Murong Nong to lead the army from Qinghe to meet them.

古文：隆与兴战于襄国，大破之；兴走至广阿，遇慕容农，执之。
现代文：慕容隆与邵兴在襄国交战，邵兴的军队大败，邵兴逃到了广阿，遇上了慕容农，抓获了他。
English: Muronglong and Shao Xing fought in Xiangguo, Shao Xing's army was defeated, Shao Xing fled to Guang'a, met Murong Nong and captured him.

古文：光祚闻之，循西山走归鄴。
现代文：光祚听说以后，沿着西山逃回邺城。
English: After hearing the news, Guangya fled back to Lucheng along the West Mountain.

古文：隆遂击赵粟等，皆破之，冀州郡县复从燕。
现代文：慕容隆于是就攻击赵粟等人，把他们全都打败，冀州的郡县又归顺了后燕。
English: Muronglong then attacked Zhao Saha and others, defeated them all, and counties and counties in Jizhou surrendered to Houyan.

古文：刘库仁闻公孙希已破平规，欲大举兵以救长乐公丕，发雁门、上谷、代郡兵，屯繁畤。
现代文：刘库仁听说公孙希已经打败了平规的军队，想大举出兵以救援长乐公苻丕，他出动了雁门、上谷、代郡的军队，驻扎在繁。
English: Liu Kuren heard that Gongsun Xi had defeated the regular army and wanted to send a large number of soldiers to rescue Changle Gongjun. He dispatched the troops from Yanmen, Shanggu and Dai County and stationed them in Shandong.

古文：燕太子太保舆句之子文、零陵公慕舆虔之子常时在库仁所，知三郡兵不乐远所，因作乱，夜，攻库仁，杀之，窃其骏马奔燕。
现代文：前燕太子太保慕舆句的儿子慕舆文、零陵公慕舆虔的儿子慕舆常，这时在刘库仁处，他们知道三郡的军队不愿意远征，因此就反叛作乱，趁夜攻打刘库仁，把他杀掉了，偷了他的骏马，逃奔后燕。
English: At that time, Liu Curen's troops knew that the troops of the three counties did not want to go on an expedition, so they rebelled, attacked Liu Curen at night, killed him, stole his horse, and fled to Houyan.

古文：公孙希之众闻乱自溃，希奔翟真。
现代文：公孙希的兵众听到叛乱的消息后自我溃散，公孙希投奔翟真。
English: After hearing the news of the rebellion, the soldiers of Gongsun Xi dispersed themselves, and Gongsun Xi rushed to Shizhen.

古文：库仁弟头眷代领库仁部众。
现代文：刘库仁的弟弟刘头眷代替刘库仁统领部众。
English: Liu Kuren's younger brother, Liu Touyan, replaced Liu Kuren as the head of the leading group.

古文：秦长乐公丕遣光祚及参军封孚召骠骑将军张蚝、并州刺史王腾于晋阳以自救，蚝、腾以众少不能赴。
现代文：前秦长乐公苻丕派光祚及参军封孚到晋阳征召骠骑将军张蚝、并州刺史王腾救援自己，张蚝、王腾因为兵力不足不能前往。
English: The former Qin emperor Changle Gongjun sent Guangyao and the army member Fengfu to Jinyang to recruit the cavalry general Zhang Yao, and the statesman Wang Teng to rescue himself. Zhang Yao and Wang Teng could not go because of the shortage of troops.

古文：丕进退路穷，谋于僚佐。
现代文：苻丕进退无路，便和僚属辅佐们商量。
English: When there was no way out, he consulted with his colleagues and assistants.

古文：司马杨膺请自归于晋，丕未许。
现代文：司马杨膺请求自动归附东晋，苻丕不同意。
English: Sima Yangyao requested the automatic annexation of Eastern Jin, but Yu disagreed.

古文：会谢玄遣龙骧将军刘牢之等据碻磝，济阳太守郭满据滑台，将军颜肱、刘袭军于河北；丕遣将军桑据屯黎阳以据之。
现代文：恰好这时谢玄派龙骧将军刘牢之等占据，派济阳太守郭满占据滑台，派将军颜肱、刘袭驻军于黄河以北，苻丕派将军桑据驻扎在黎阳以抵抗他们。
English: Just at this time, Xie Xuan sent General Longyu Liu Diao and others to occupy, sent Jiyang Taishou Guoman to occupy the slide, sent Generals Yan Qi and Liu Qi to garrison troops north of the Yellow River, and sent General Zang to be stationed in Liang to resist them.

古文：刘袭夜袭据，走之，遂克黎阳。
现代文：刘袭夜晚袭击桑据，赶跑了他，于是攻克了黎阳。
English: Liu Zai attacked Sangzhi at night, drove him away, and then conquered Liyang.

古文：丕惧，乃遣从弟就与参军焦逵请救于玄，致书称 欲假途求粮，西赴国难，须援军既接，以鄴与之。
现代文：苻丕害怕了，就派堂苻就与参军焦逵向谢玄请求救援，给他写信说： 想借路求粮，西赴国难，等到援军一到，就把邺城拱手交出。
English: He was afraid, so he sent his son-in-law and his son-in-law, who had joined the army, to Xie Xuan to ask for help. He wrote to him, "If you want to take the road to ask for grain, it is difficult to go west. As soon as the reinforcements arrive, you will give up the city of Handan."

古文：若西路不通，长安陷没，请帅所领保守鄴城。 
现代文：如果西路不通，长安失陷，请求您率领军队来保全守卫邺城。 
English: If the western route is impassable and Chang'an falls, I ask you to lead the army to protect and guard Lucheng.

古文：逵与参军姜让密谓杨膺曰： 今丧败如此，长安阻绝，存亡不可知。
现代文：焦逵与参军姜让秘密地对杨膺说： 如今惨败到如此地步，长安的音讯隔绝，存亡不得而知。
English: Jiao Wei and Jiang Zang secretly said to Yang Xuan, "Nowadays, the fiasco has reached such a stage that Chang'an is cut off from the outside world, and its survival is unknown.

古文：屈节竭诚以求粮援，犹惧不获；而公豪气不除，方设两端，事必无成。
现代文：丧失气节竭尽诚意以求取粮食和援军，还害怕得不到。而你若不去掉感情义气，态度左右摇摆，事情也终将无成。
English: If you are discouraged, you will exhaust your sincerity in seeking food and reinforcements, and you will be afraid of not getting them. And if you do not get rid of your emotional loyalty, and your attitude wavers from side to side, things will eventually fail.

古文：宜正书为表，许以王师之至，当致身南归；如其不从，可逼缚与之。 
现代文：应该把书信改为表章，告诉他君王的军队到达时，就将投身南归晋朝。如果苻丕不服从，可以逼迫捆绑他交给晋朝。 
English: The letter should be changed to a cover letter, telling him that when the king's army arrives, he will surrender to the Jin Dynasty. If he does not obey, he can be forced to tie him up and hand him over to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：膺自以力能制丕，乃改书而遣之。
现代文：杨膺自以为他的力量能够控制苻丕，于是就改写了书信后送走了。
English: Yang Xuan thought that his strength could control the dragonfly, so he rewrote the letter and sent it away.

古文：谢玄遣晋陵太守滕恬之渡河守黎阳。
现代文：谢玄派晋陵太守滕恬之渡过黄河戍守黎阳。
English: Xie Xuan sent the Jin imperial governor of the imperial mausoleum, Teng Xizhi, across the Yellow River to govern Liyang.

古文：恬之，修之曾孙也。
现代文：滕恬之是滕的曾孙。
English: Teng Xizhi is Teng's great-grandson.

古文：朝廷以兗、青、司、豫既平，加玄都督徐、兗、青、司、冀、幽、并七州诸军事。
现代文：东晋朝廷认为兖、青、司、豫各州已经平定，任命谢玄为都督徐、兖、青、司、冀、幽、并七州诸军事。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court believed that the states of Min, Qing, Si and Hen had been pacified, and appointed Xie Xuan as the governor of Xu, Min, Qing, Si, Hebei and Yu, and the military of seven states.

古文：后秦王苌闻慕容冲攻长安，会群僚议进止，皆曰： 大王宜先取长安，建立根本，然后经营四方。 
现代文：后秦王姚苌听说慕容冲攻打长安，召集群臣商议是继续进军，还是停止前进，群臣们都说：大王应该先攻取长安，建立根基，然后再经营四方。 
English: After the Qin King Yao Wei heard that Murong had stormed and attacked Chang'an, he summoned a group of ministers to discuss whether to continue advancing or to stop advancing. The ministers all said: The great king should first capture Chang'an, establish a foundation, and then manage the four directions.

古文：苌曰： 不然。
现代文：姚苌说： 不对。
English: Yao Yao said, "That's not right."

古文：燕人因其众有思归之心以起兵，若得其志，必不久留关中。
现代文：燕人是因为他们的兵众思归心切才起兵进攻，如果他们的志向得以实现，肯定不会在关中久留。
English: The Swallows only attacked because their soldiers were desperate to return home. If their ambition is realized, they will certainly not stay in Guanzhong for long.

古文：吾当移屯岭北，广收资实，以待秦亡燕去，然后拱手取之耳。 
现代文：我应当移驻九以北，广泛地储备粮食、物资，以等待秦国的灭亡，燕人的离去，然后就可以拱手获取关中。 
English: I should move to the north of Jiujiang, extensively stockpile grain and materials to wait for the demise of Qin and the departure of the Yan people, and then I can acquire Guanzhong.

古文：乃留其长子兴守北地，使宁北将军姚穆守同官川，自将其众攻新平。
现代文：于是姚苌就留下他的长子姚兴守卫北地，让宁北将军姚穆守卫同官川，自己统率兵众攻打新平。
English: As a result, Yao Wei left his eldest son, Yao Xing, to guard the north, and let the Ningbei general, Yao Mu, guard Tongguan River, while he led the troops to attack Xinping.

古文：初，新平人杀其郡将，秦王坚缺其城角以耻之，新平民望深以为病，欲立忠义以雪之。
现代文：当初，新平人杀掉了本郡的将领，前秦王苻坚把他们的城墙去掉了一个角，用以羞辱他们，新平的贤俊豪杰都觉得这是一桩心病，想要建立忠义以洗涮耻辱。
English: At first, the Xinping people killed the county's generals, and the former Qin King Jian Jian removed a corner of their city wall to humiliate them. Xinping's virtuous heroes thought it was a disease of the heart, and wanted to establish loyalty to wash away their shame.

古文：及后秦王苌至新平，新平太守南安苟辅欲降之，郡人辽西太守冯杰、莲勺令冯羽、尚书郎赵义、汶山太守冯苗谏曰： 昔田单以一城存齐。
现代文：等到后秦王姚苌抵达新平，新平太守南安人苟辅想要投降，本郡人辽西太守冯杰、莲勺令冯羽、尚书郎赵义、汶山太守冯苗劝谏他说： 过去田单以一个城的力量保存了齐国。
English: After the arrival of the Qin King Yao Wei in Xinping, the people of Nan'an, the provincial governor of Xinping, wanted to surrender, and the people of Liaoxi, the provincial governor of Liaoxi, Feng Jie, Lian Zhao Ling, Feng Yu, Shang Shulang Zhao Yi, and the provincial governor of Wenshan, Feng Miao, advised him to surrender. He said: In the past, Tian Shan preserved Qi with the strength of a city.

古文：今秦之州镇，犹连城过百，奈何遽为叛臣乎！ 
现代文：如今秦国的州镇，还有一百多城邑相连，为什么要匆忙地作叛臣呢！ 
English: Nowadays, there are more than a hundred cities and towns in Qin Province, so why hurry to become a traitor?

古文：辅喜曰： 此吾志也，但恐久而无救，郡人横被无辜。
现代文：苟辅高兴地说： 这正是我的心愿。只是怕时间长了无人救援，郡中的百姓横遭无辜之祸。
English: "That's exactly what I want," he said happily. "But I'm afraid that no one will come to the rescue for a long time, and the people in the county will suffer an innocent disaster."

古文：诸君能尔，吾岂顾生哉！ 
现代文：诸君尚能如此，我难道还能怕死吗！ 
English: Gentlemen, if you can still do this, can I still be afraid of death?

古文：于是凭城固守。
现代文：于是他们就凭借城墙固守。
English: So they clung to the city walls.

古文：后秦为土山地道，辅亦于内为之，或战地下，或战山上，后秦众死者万馀人。
现代文：后秦的军队在城外修筑土山地道，苟辅在城内也同样修筑，双方有时在地道内交战，有时在土山上交战，后秦死亡的人有一万多。
English: Later Qin's army built tunnels in the mountains outside the city, and Goufu also built tunnels inside the city. The two sides sometimes fought in tunnels, and sometimes fought on the mountains. More than 10,000 people died during the Later Qin Dynasty.

古文：辅诈降以诱苌，苌将入城，觉之而返；辅仗兵邀击，几获之，又杀万馀人。
现代文：苟辅谎称投降以引诱姚苌，姚苌准备入城，发觉以后返回去。苟辅预先埋伏的军队半路迎击，差一点擒获了姚苌，又斩杀了一万多人。
English: Gou Fu lied about surrendering to lure Yao Hong, Yao Hong was preparing to enter the city and returned after he found out. Gou Fu met the ambushed army halfway, almost captured Yao Hong, and killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：陇西处士王嘉，隐居倒虎山，有异术，能知未然，秦人神之。
现代文：陇西处士王嘉，隐居在倒虎山，有异常之术，能预知未来，秦国人把他当作神仙。
English: Wang Jia, a magistrate in western Shaanxi Province, lived in seclusion in Qianhu Mountain. He had an unusual ability to predict the future, and the people of Qin regarded him as a god.

古文：秦王坚、后秦王苌及慕容冲皆遣使迎之。
现代文：前秦王苻坚、后秦王姚苌以及慕容冲全都派使者去迎接他。
English: Former Qin King Jie Jian, later Qin King Yao Jie, and Murong Chong all sent emissaries to meet him.

古文：十一月，嘉入长安，众闻之，以为坚有福，故圣人助之，三辅堡壁及四山氐、羌归坚者四万馀人。
现代文：十一月，王嘉进入长安，众人听说以后，认为苻坚有福，所以圣人帮助他，三辅地区的村镇军营以及依山而居的氐族、羌族人归附苻坚的有四万多人。
English: In November, Wang Jia entered Chang'an. After people heard about it, they thought He Jian was blessed, so the saint helped him. More than forty thousand people from the villages and towns in the Sanfu area, as well as the military camps of the Shan people and the Shan people living in the mountains, joined He Jian.

古文：坚置嘉及沙门道安于外殿，动静咨之。
现代文：苻坚把王嘉及僧人道安安置在外殿，行动与否全都要向他们询问。
English: Yu Jian placed Wang Jia and the monk Zhuo An in the outer hall, and asked them whether they wanted to do anything or not.

古文：燕慕容农自信都西击丁零翟辽于鲁口，破之。
现代文：后燕慕容农从信都向西到鲁口攻打丁零人翟辽，打败了他。
English: Later, Yan Murongongong, a farmer from Xindu, went west to Lukou to fight against Ding Ziren and Bao Liao, and defeated him.

古文：辽退屯无极，农屯藁城以逼之。
现代文：翟辽退到无极县防守，慕容农驻扎在藁城以威逼他。
English: Yan Liao retreated to Wuji County for defense, and Murong Nong stationed in Yancheng to intimidate him.

古文：辽，真之从兄也。
现代文：翟辽是翟真的堂兄。
English: Gong Liao is Gong Zhen's cousin.

古文：鲜卑在长安城中者犹千馀人，慕容绍之兄肃，与慕容阴谋结鲜卑为乱。
现代文：在长安城中的鲜卑人尚有一千多，慕容绍的哥哥慕容肃与慕容暗地里谋划聚集鲜卑人作乱。
English: There were still more than a thousand Xingbei people in Chang'an City. Murong Shao's brother Murong Su and Murong secretly plotted to gather Xingbei people to make trouble.

古文：十二月，白坚，以其子新昏，请坚幸其家，置酒，欲伏兵杀之。
现代文：十二月，慕容告诉苻坚说，因为他的儿子刚刚结婚，请苻坚到他家去，置酒招待，实则想埋伏士兵杀掉苻坚。
English: In December, Murong told Yu Jian that since his son had just got married, he would like to invite Yu Jian to his home and serve him wine. In reality, he wanted to ambush the soldiers and kill Yu Jian.

古文：坚许之，会天大雨，不果往。
现代文：苻坚答应了，恰巧天下大雨，没有去成。
English: Yu Jian agreed, but it happened to be raining heavily, so he didn't go.

古文：事觉，坚召及肃，肃曰： 事必泄矣，入则俱死。
现代文：事情泄露，苻坚召见慕容及慕容肃，慕容肃说： 事情肯定泄露了，进去则全都被杀。
English: When the affair leaked out, Yu Jian called Murong and Murong Su to see him. Murong Su said: "The affair has definitely leaked out. If they go in, they will all be killed."

古文：今城内已严，不如杀使者驰出，既得出门，大众便集。
现代文：如今城内已经严密布防，不如杀掉使者冲出去，逃出城门以后，我们的兵众就可以聚集起来。 
English: Now that the city has been heavily fortified, it is better to kill the messenger and rush out. After escaping from the city gate, our soldiers can gather.

古文：不从，遂俱入。
现代文：慕容没听他的话，于是就一起入宫去见苻坚。
English: Murong didn't listen to him, so they went to the palace together to see Yu Jian.

古文：坚曰： 吾相待何如，而起此意 ？
现代文：苻坚说： 我待你们怎么样，你们反而产生了这样的意图！ 
English: Yu Jian said, "No matter how I treat you, you have such an intention!

古文：饰辞以对。
现代文：慕容遮遮掩掩地搪塞。
English: Murong covertly prevaricates.

古文：肃曰： 家国事重，何论意气！ 
现代文：慕容肃说： 宗族国家事关重大，还谈什么感情义气！ 
English: Murong Su said: The clan state is of great importance, what kind of emotional loyalty can we talk about!

古文：坚先杀肃，乃杀及其宗族，城内鲜卑无少长、男女，皆杀之。
现代文：于是苻坚先杀掉了慕容肃，接着又杀掉了慕容以及他的宗族亲属，城内的鲜卑人不论男女老幼，全都被杀。
English: So Yan Jian first killed Murong Su, then Murong and his clan relatives, and all the men, women and children in the city were killed.

古文：燕王垂幼子柔，养于宦者宋牙家为牙子，故得不坐，与太子宝之子盛乘间得出，奔慕容冲。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂的小儿子慕容柔，养育在宦官宋牙家里，作为宋牙的儿子，所以没有坐罪被杀，他与太子慕容宝的儿子慕容盛乘机逃出，投奔了慕容冲。
English: Murong Rou, the youngest son of the late Yan Wang Murong Diao, was raised in the eunuch Song Ya's family. As the son of Song Ya, he was not killed for his crime. He and the son of Prince Murong Bao, Murong Sheng, took the opportunity to escape and fled to Murong Chong.

古文：燕慕容麟、慕容农合兵袭翟辽，大破之，辽单骑奔翟真。
现代文：后燕慕容麟、慕容农会合军队袭击翟辽，大败翟辽，翟辽只身匹马投奔翟真。
English: After Yan Muronglin and the Murong Peasants' Association's army attacked Yan Liao, Yan Liao was heavily defeated, and Yan Liao went all the way to Benzhen.

古文：燕王垂以秦长乐公丕犹据鄴不去，乃更引兵围鄴，开其西走之路。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂因为前秦长乐公苻丕还在据守邺城不肯离去，就又带领军队包围了邺城，同时为他放开了西逃的道路。
English: Later, Yan Wang Murongtui, because the former Qin Emperor Changle Gongjunjun still refused to leave the city, led the army to encircle the city, and at the same time opened the way for him to escape to the west.

古文：焦逵见谢玄，玄欲征丕任子，然后出兵；逵固陈丕款诚，并述杨膺之意，玄乃遣刘牢之、滕恬之等帅众二万救鄴。
现代文：焦逵见了谢玄，谢玄想要征召苻丕的人质，然后才出兵。焦逵恳切地陈述苻丕的忠诚，并且诉说了杨膺的意图，谢玄于是就派刘牢之、腾恬之等率领二万兵众救援邺城。
English: Jiao Tong met Xie Xuan. Xie Xuan wanted to conscript Jiao Tong's hostages before sending troops. Jiao Xun earnestly stated Jiao Tong's loyalty and told Yang Xuan's intention. Xie Xuan then sent Liu Diao Zhi, Teng Zhi and others to rescue Jiao Tong with 20,000 soldiers.

古文：丕告饥，玄水陆运米二千斛以馈之。
现代文：苻丕报告粮食断绝，谢玄通过水路、陆路运去二千斛米送给他。
English: Zhai reported that the grain supply had been cut off, and Xie Xuan transported two thousand mu of rice to him by water and land.

古文：秦梁州刺史潘猛弃汉中，奔长安。
现代文：前秦梁州刺史潘猛放弃了汉中，逃奔到长安。
English: Former Qin Liangzhou assassin Pan Meng abandoned Hanzhong and fled to Chang'an.

