古文：子曰： 夫《易》何为者也？
现代文：孔子说： 易经是作什么的呀？
English: Confucius said: What does the I Ching do?

古文：夫《易》开物成务，冒天下之道，如斯而已者也。 
现代文：《易经》即是开创万物成就事务，包括天下一切道理，如此而已的一门学问呀。
English: "I Ching" is a matter of creating all things, including all the principles of the world, so it is just a matter of learning.

古文：是故圣人以通天下之志，以定天下之业，以断天下之疑。
现代文：所以圣人以《易》通达天下一切人的心志，以《易》肇定天下的事业，并以之决断天下一切的嫌疑。 
English: Therefore, the sage used "Yi" to reach the hearts of all people in the world, used "Yi" to determine the cause of the world, and used it to resolve all suspicions in the world.

古文：是故蓍之德圆而神，卦之德方以知，六爻之义易以贡。
现代文：所以蓍草占筮用四十九根，其德性是圆通而神妙，六十四卦的德性是方正而有睿智，每卦皆有六爻，其意是很简易而贡献在我们面前的。
English: Therefore, the virtue of the forty-nine syllables of the Analects of Confucius is round and wonderful, and the virtue of the sixty-four syllables of the Analects of Confucius is upright and wise, and each syllable of the Analects of Confucius has six syllables. The meaning is very simple and beneficial to us.

古文：圣人以此洗心，退藏于密，吉凶与民同患。
现代文：圣人以此洗涤修炼之心，退藏于深秘之处，吉凶与百姓同其忧患。
English: In this way, the saint cleanses the heart of cultivation, retreats to a secret place, and shares the good fortune and misfortune with the people.

古文：神以知来，知以藏往，其孰能与于此哉！
现代文：《易经》之神妙足以知道将来变化之理，其智慧足以储藏既往的知识经验。谁能参赞于此呢？
English: The "I Ching" is wonderful enough to know the reason for future changes, and its wisdom is enough to store past knowledge and experience. Who can advise on this?

古文：古之聪明睿知，神武而不杀者夫。
现代文：唯有古之聪明深智，神武而不嗜杀人者能如此而已。
English: Only those who are ancient, wise and profound, and who are not murderous, can do so.

古文：是以明于天之道，而察于民之故，是兴神物以前民用。
现代文：所以明白天的道理，而复能观察百姓的事故，是以天地兴起蓍草的神妙之物，以为民前用，使趋吉避凶于未做事之前。
English: Therefore, to understand the principles of heaven, and to be able to observe the people's misfortunes, is a miraculous thing that sprung up from heaven and earth, and is used by the people to bring good luck and avoid evil before doing anything.

古文：圣人以此斋戒，以神明其德夫。
现代文：圣人以此斋戒其心，以神明他德业的幽深吧！
English: Let the saint thus fasten his heart, and the god the depths of his virtue!

古文：是故阖户谓之坤，辟户谓之乾，一阖一辟谓之变，往来不穷谓之通，见乃谓之象，形乃谓之器，制而用之谓之法，利用出入，民咸用之谓之神。
现代文：《易》之阴阳变通象器法神八者之理，随处可见，比如以门户比喻，关起门户来则疏畅而光明。此即谓之 乾 ；一关一开，相续不穷，就叫做 变 ；一开一关使人们可以自由自在的出入往来，未有穷尽，就叫做 通 ；显现于外面，有物象可观，就叫做 象 ；表现于器用，有尺度的大小，合于规矩方圆的形状，就叫做 器 ；制定屋宇之时，即用门户以出入，有法度可寻，就叫做 法 ；利用它来出出入入，往来不穷，百姓常常利用它而不知，就叫做 神 。
English: The yin and yang of "Yi" can be seen everywhere, for example, with the metaphor of a portal. When the portal is closed, it is clear and bright. This is called "dry"; when it is opened, it is called "change"; when it is opened, it allows people to freely enter and exit, and is not exhausted, it is called "pass"; when it appears outside, it is called "image"; when it is expressed in a tool, it is called "instrument"; when it is used to design a building, it is called "law"; when it is used to enter and exit, it is called "instrument"; and when it is used to design a building, it is called "

古文：是故《易》有太极，是生两仪。两仪生四象。四象生八卦。八卦定吉凶，吉凶生大业。是故法象莫大乎天地；变通莫大乎四时；县象着明莫大乎日月；崇高莫大乎富贵；备物致用，立成器以为天下利，莫大乎圣人探赜索隐，钩深致远，以定天下之吉凶，成天下之亹亹者，莫大乎蓍龟。
现代文：所以《易经》之原始有太极，太极即阴阳未生浑茫广大之气，太极变而产生天地，是谓两仪；两仪变而产生金木水火，是谓四象；四象变而生生天地水火风雷山泽，是谓乾坤坎离巽震艮兑八卦；由此八卦相重而产生六十四卦三百八十四爻，以含盖宇宙万象，而系之以辞用断吉凶，因此有了《易经》；遵循《易经》之道即能趋吉避凶，而造成伟大的事业。所以可以使人取法的现象，没有比天地更大的了；穷则变，变则通的，没有比四时更大的了。悬挂物象，显著光明，照耀天下的，没有比日月更大的了；崇高的事业，没有比富而且贵更大的了；具备器物，以适人类的适用，设立完成许多器具以利益天下的，没有比圣人更伟大的了；探求繁杂的物象，索求幽隐的事理，钩求深远的道术，使人获致远大的前途，以决定天下的吉凶，成就天下勤勉的事业的，没有比卜筮所用的 蓍草 和 龟甲 更伟大的了。
English: Therefore, the origin of "I Ching" is Taiji. Taiji is the yin and yang, which did not give rise to a vast and vast atmosphere. Taiji changed to produce heaven and earth, which is called the two instruments; the two instruments changed to produce gold, wood, water and fire, which is called the four elements; the four elements changed to produce heaven and earth, water, fire, wind, thunder and mountains, which is called the wind and lightning, which is called the wind and lightning, which is called the wind and lightning, which is called the wind and lightning, which is called the wind and lightning, which is called the wind and lightning, which is called the wind and lightning,

古文：是故天生神物，圣人则之；天地变化，圣人效之；天垂象，见吉凶，圣人像之；河出图，洛出书，圣人则之。《易》有四象，所以示也。
现代文：所以天生蓍草和龟的神物，圣人就取用它以作卜筮为人所取法。天地的变化，圣人就效法它。天垂示物象，现出吉凶的征兆，圣人就取法它。黄河有龙马负图，洛水有神龟负书的祥瑞征兆，圣人于是效法它，运用它。《易》有以上 神物、变化。
English: Therefore, the natural deities of the reed grass and turtle, the sage took it as a divination method. The changes in the heavens and the earth, the sage imitated it. The heavens showed objects, the signs of good and evil appeared, and the sage took it. The Yellow River had the dragon and horse negative map, the Luo Water had the auspicious sign of the divine turtle negative book, and the sage then imitated it and used it. "Yi" has the above divine things and changes.

古文：系辞焉，所以告也；定之以吉凶，所以断也。
现代文：天象、河图洛书 的四象，所以启示智慧的泉源而作成《易经》六十四卦三百八十四爻。又系之以文辞，所以告诉我们智慧的哲理。
English: The four heavenly bodies and the four heavenly bodies of the Book of Hathoroth are the source of the revelation of wisdom in the I Ching, sixty-four chapters, three hundred and eighty-four syllables. They are also based on literature, so they tell us the philosophy of wisdom.

