古文：陈蕃王允陈蕃字仲举，汝南平舆人也。
现代文：◆陈蕃传，陈蕃字仲举，汝南平舆人。
English: ◆ Chen Yizhong, Chen Zi Zhi Zhongji, Ru Nanping, and others.

古文：祖河东太守。
现代文：祖父做过河东太守。
English: My grandfather was once the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：蕃年十年，尝闲处一室，而庭宇芜秽。父友同郡薛勤来候之，谓蕃曰： 孺子何不洒埽以待宾客？ 
现代文：陈蕃十五岁时，曾住一室，无事可做，而室内外十分肮脏，父亲的朋友同郡人薛勤来看他，对陈蕃说： 小孩子，为什么不打扫清洁迎接客人呢？ 
English: When Chen Yao was 15 years old, he once lived in a room with nothing to do, and the inside and outside were very dirty. His father's friend and fellow county resident Xue Qin came to see him and said to Chen Yao: "Little child, why don't you clean up and greet your guests?

古文：蕃曰： 大丈夫处世，当埽除天下，安事一室乎！ 
现代文：陈蕃说 ：大丈夫在世，应当扫除天下的垃圾，哪能只顾自己一室呢？ 
English: Chen Yao said: It's okay to be alive, we should sweep away the garbage of the world, how can we just take care of our own room?

古文：勤知其有清世志，甚奇之。
现代文：薛勤知道他有澄清天下的志气，非常赞赏他。
English: Xue Qin knew that he had the ambition to clarify the world, and appreciated him very much.

古文：初仕郡，举孝廉，除郎中。
现代文：最初，在郡里出仕，被推举为孝廉，授郎中。
English: At first, he served in the county and was elected as a filial son, the second son.

古文：遭母忧，弃官行丧。
现代文：因母亲去世，辞官居丧。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post.

古文：服阕，刺史周景辟别驾从事，以谏争不合，投传而去。
现代文：服丧期满，刺史周景召他为别驾从事，因劝谏意见不一，弃符离去。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Zhou Jingshi called him to engage in another drive, and because of the difference of opinion between the two, he abandoned the letter and left.

古文：后公府辟举方正，皆不就。
现代文：后来公府征举方正，都不去。
English: Later, the public office conscripted Fang Zheng, but he did not go.

古文：太尉李固表荐，征拜议郎，再迁为乐安太守。
现代文：太尉李固上表荐举他，授议郎，再升为乐安太守。
English: Second Lieutenant Li Gu recommended him on the list, conferred on him the title of councillor, and then promoted him to the position of Le'an governor.

古文：时，李膺为青州刺史，名有威政，属城闻风，皆自引去，蕃独以清绩留。
现代文：这时，李膺任青州刺史，治政严，有威名。属城听了消息的，都自己要求离去，陈蕃因为政绩清廉，一个人留下来。
English: At this time, Li Qian was a prominent figure in the history of Qingzhou, with a reputation for strict governance. Upon hearing the news, all those who belonged to the city asked to leave. Chen Qian, because of his clean political record, remained alone.

古文：郡人周璆，高洁之士。
现代文：郡人周趚，洁身自爱，前后郡守招请，不肯去。
English: County resident Zhou Qi, chaste and self-respecting, was repeatedly invited by the county magistrate, but refused to go.

古文：前后郡守招命莫肯至，唯蕃能致焉。
现代文：只有陈蕃能够招他去。陈蕃称他的字，不叫他的名，非常尊敬他。
English: Only Chen Xi can invite him. Chen Xi calls him by his first name, not his surname, and respects him very much.

古文：字而不名，特为置一榻，去则县之。
现代文：特别为他安一张床，周趚走了，就把床悬起来。
English: A special bed was set up for him. When Zhou Ye left, he hung the bed up.

古文：璆字孟玉，临济人，有美名。民有赵宣葬亲而不闭埏隧，因居其中，行服二十余年，乡邑称孝，州郡数礼请之。郡内以荐蕃，蕃与相见，问其妻子，而宣五子皆服中所生。
现代文：老百姓赵宣葬亲不闭墓道，住在里面，服丧二十多年，乡邑都称他的孝行，州郡几次以礼请他。郡里把他推荐于陈蕃，问到他的妻子儿女，知道赵宣的五个儿女，都是居丧期间生的。
English: Zhao Xuan, an ordinary citizen, buried his relatives without closing the cemetery, lived in it, and mourned for more than 20 years. The townships all praised his filial piety, and the county invited him several times. The county recommended him to Chen Qi, asked about his wife and children, and knew that Zhao Xuan's five children were all born during the funeral.

古文：蕃大怒曰： 圣人制礼，贤者俯就，不肖企及。
现代文：陈蕃于是大怒说 ：圣人制礼，有品行道德的人，都得遵守，不肖的人，也应该努力做到。
English: Chen Yao then said angrily, "The rite of a saint is the most important, and people with moral character must abide by it. People who are not good-looking should also make an effort to do so."

古文：且祭不欲数，以其易黩故也。
现代文：并且祭祀不须次数太多，太多，反而不敬。
English: Moreover, there is no need to perform the ritual too many times, it is too much, but disrespectful.

古文：况及寝宿冢藏，而孕育其中，诳时惑众，诬污鬼神乎？ 
现代文：你现在睡在墓中，在墓中养儿育女，欺世盗名，迷惑群众，污辱鬼神，岂有此理！ 
English: You are now sleeping in the grave, raising children in the grave, deceiving the world, confusing the masses, and insulting ghosts and gods. Is there any reason for this?

古文：遂致其罪。
现代文：于是办了他的罪。
English: So they punished him for his sin.

古文：大将军梁冀威震天下，时遣书诣蕃，有所请托，不得通，使者诈求谒，蕃怒，笞杀之，坐左转脩武令。
现代文：大将军梁冀是威震天下的人，当时派人送信给陈蕃，请陈蕃办私事。送信的人不得见，于是说假话请求见陈蕃，陈蕃发怒，把送信的打死了，因罪降为修武令。
English: General Liang Ji was a powerful man. At that time, he sent a letter to Chen Xuan, asking Chen Xuan to handle a private matter. The sender could not be seen, so he lied and asked to see Chen Xuan. Chen Xuan got angry, killed the sender, and was reduced to martial law for the crime.

古文：稍迁，拜尚书。
现代文：稍得升迁，被任为尚书。
English: He received a slight promotion and was appointed to Shangshu.

古文：时，零陵、桂阳山贼为害，公卿议遣讨之，又诏下州郡，一切皆得举孝廉、茂才。
现代文：这时零陵、桂阳山贼为害，公卿研究要派军队去打，皇帝又诏令州郡，权宜推选孝廉、茂才。
English: At this time, the Ziling and Guiyang mountain bandits were harmed, the noble research wanted to send troops to fight, and the emperor also ordered the prefectures to expediently elect Xiaolian and Maocai.

古文：蕃上疏驳之曰： 昔高祖创业，万邦息肩，抚养百姓，同之赤子。
现代文：陈蕃上疏辨驳，说 ：以前高祖创立大业，海内人民，如释重负，官吏抚养百姓，如同自己的儿子一样。
English: Chen Xuan said, "In the past, Gao Zu created a great cause, the inland people were relieved of the heavy burden, and the officials raised the people like their own sons.

古文：今二郡之民，亦陛下赤子也。致令赤子为害，岂非所在贪虐，使其然乎？
现代文：现在二郡的老百姓，都是皇上的儿子，导致儿子们为害的原因，难道不是当地官吏贪污暴虐造成的吗？
English: Now the common people of the two counties are all the emperor's sons. Wasn't it the corruption and tyranny of local officials that caused the sons to do harm?

古文：宜严敕三府，隐核牧守令长，其有在政失和，侵暴百姓者，即便举奏，更选清贤奉公之人，能班宣法令情在爱惠者，可不劳王师，而群贼弭息矣。
现代文：应该严厉责成三府，暗暗地考核州牧太守县令长，那些为政乖乱，残害百姓的人，立即向朝廷揭发，另选清正贤明、廉洁奉公，能够宣扬法令，爱护百姓的人去代替他们，这样可以不必烦劳大军，盗贼自然可以平息啊！
English: The three prefectures should be sternly ordered to secretly examine the prefectural governors of the prefectures, and those who are politically disorderly and injure the people should be immediately exposed to the imperial court, and those who are clean, wise, and honest should be selected to replace them. They should be able to promote laws and regulations and love the people. In this way, there is no need to bother the army, and the thieves can naturally be calmed down!

古文：又三署郎吏二千余人，三府掾属过限未除，但当择善而授之，简恶而去之。
现代文：又，三署郎官二千多人，三府里的属官超过规定限额还未加任用，只应该选择好的授予官职，那些昏庸不法的挑出来不要他们。
English: In addition, there are more than 2,000 subordinate officials in the three bureaus, and the subordinate officials in the three prefectures have exceeded the prescribed quota and have not been appointed. Only the good ones should be selected for official positions, and those who are stupid and illegal should not be selected.

古文：岂烦一切之诏，以长请属之路乎！ 
现代文：这样，哪里还要您下诏权宜推举人才，因而助长请托的风气呢？ 
English: In this way, where do you need to issue an order to expediently nominate talents, thus promoting the culture of entrustment?

古文：以此忤左右，故出为豫章太守。
现代文：因这个得罪了皇帝身边的人，被外放为豫章太守。
English: Because of this, the person who offended the emperor's entourage was exiled to the position of Yuzhang Taishu.

古文：性方峻，不接宾客，士民亦畏其高。
现代文：陈蕃性情严肃方正，不接待宾客，士民也敬畏他的清高。
English: Chen Xi's disposition is serious and upright, he does not receive guests, and the scholars and the people are also in awe of his clearness.

古文：征为尚书令，送者不出郭门。
现代文：征召他任尚书令，送行的人都没走出外城门。
English: He was conscripted into the Imperial Guard, and those who saw him off did not go out of the outer gate.

古文：迁大鸿胪。会白马令李云抗疏谏，桓帝怒，当伏重诛。蕃上书救云，坐免归田里。
现代文：升任大鸿胪，正遇上白马县令李云上疏直言劝谏，桓帝大为震怒，李云应被处死，陈蕃上书救李云，获罪被罢免回家。
English: After he was promoted to the position of the Great Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnan

古文：复征拜议郎，数日迁光禄勋。
现代文：又被征任议郎，几天之后，升任光禄勋。
English: He was also appointed to the post of Heiro, and a few days later, he was promoted to Koroku-Honne.

古文：时，封赏逾制，内宠猥盛，蕃乃上疏谏曰：臣闻有事社稷者，社稷是为；有事人君者，容悦是为。
现代文：当时封爵赏赐超过制度，皇宫内的宠臣外戚，权势很盛，陈蕃于是上疏劝谏说 ：我听说奉事社稷的，一切为了社稷；奉事人君的，一切为了得到人君的欢喜。
English: At that time, the award of knighthoods exceeded the system, and the favorite vassals and relatives in the imperial palace were very powerful. Therefore, Chen Xi was persuaded to say: I heard that those who serve the society, do everything for the society; those who serve the people, do everything to get the pleasure of the people.

古文：今臣蒙恩圣朝，备位九列，见非不谏，则容悦也。
现代文：现在我蒙皇上的恩宠，位在九卿，见到皇上有不好的地方而不劝谏，那就不过只在图得皇上的欢喜而已。
English: Now that I am favored by the emperor and am in the ninth rank, if I see something bad in the emperor and do not advise him, it is only to gain the emperor's pleasure.

古文：夫诸侯上象四七，垂耀在天，下应分土，籓屏上国。高祖之约，非功臣不侯。
现代文：诸侯上象二十八宿，垂象在天，下应分土，藩屏王室，汉高祖约法，不是功臣不得封侯。
English: Princes are like the twenty-eight mansions, like the stars in the sky, they should be given land, the royal family of the Han Dynasty, and the ancestors of the Han Dynasty. If they are not meritorious, they should not be made princes.

古文：而闻追录河南尹邓万世父遵之微功，更爵尚书令黄儁先人之绝封，近习以非义授邑，左右以无功传赏，授位不料其任，裂土莫纪其功，至乃一门之内，侯者数人，故纬象失度，阴阳谬序，稼用不成，民用不康。
现代文：可是，听说您追记河南尹邓万世的父亲邓遵的微小功劳，重新授给尚书令黄隽的先人已绝封的爵位，内侍们通过不正当的途径得到封邑，左右的宠臣无功受赏，授予官职不考虑实际能力，裂土分封不考核实际功勋，以至一家之内，封侯的有几个人，所以日月失度，阴阳错乱，稼禾不熟，民财不丰。
English: However, I have heard that you have remembered the small merits of Deng Zun, the father of Henan's Yin Deng Wansei, and re-awarded the peerage to the ancestors of Shang Shuling Huang Qi, who had never been knighted. The courtiers obtained fiefdoms through improper means, and the favorites of the right and left were awarded without merit. The official position was awarded without considering the actual ability, the land was divided into fiefs without examining the actual merits, and even within a family, there were several people who were knighted. Therefore, the sun and moon lost their power, the yin and yang were disordered, the crops were not ripe, and the

古文：臣知封事已行，言之无及，诚欲陛下从是而止。
现代文：我知道封事已经进行，说了也无济于事，但衷心希望皇上到此为止。
English: I know that the sealing has already taken place, and it is useless to say anything, but I sincerely hope that the Emperor will stop here.

古文：又比年收敛，十伤五六，万人饥寒，不聊生活，而采女数千，食肉衣绮，脂油粉黛不可赀计。
现代文：又近年征税，百姓十分之五六受到伤害。万人饥寒，生活困难。然而宫女数千，吃肉穿绮，油脂粉黛等各种开支，不可统计。
English: In addition, taxes have been imposed in recent years, and five-sixths of the people have been harmed. People are hungry and cold, and life is difficult. However, there are thousands of concubines, and various expenses such as eating meat, wearing coats, and using fat powders cannot be counted.

古文：鄙谚言 盗不过五女门 ，以女贫家也。
现代文：俗语说 ：盗不过五女门 ，是因为女儿多使家里贫穷。
English: As the saying goes: "A thief can only steal five women's doors, because it's the daughters who keep the family poor."

古文：今后宫之女，岂不贫国乎！
现代文：现在后廷宫女，难道不会把国家弄贫吗？
English: Now the ladies of the court, won't they impoverish the country?

古文：是以倾宫嫁而天下化，楚女悲而西官灾。
现代文：所以倾宫的宫女出嫁了，天下的风气也转变了。
English: Therefore, the palace maidens of the palace have married, and the culture of the world has also changed.

古文：且聚而不御，必生忧悲之感，以致并隔水旱之困。
现代文：楚女在西宫发愁生怨，把她们收在一起，而不亲近，一定要生忧愁之感，招致并隔水旱之困。
English: Chu women in the West Palace are worried and resentful, keeping them together, but not close, must create a sense of sadness, causing difficulties in water and drought.

古文：夫狱以禁止奸违，官以称才理物。
现代文：监狱是用来禁止违法乱纪的，官吏要称职治理。
English: Prisons are used to prohibit violations of the law and discipline, and officials should administer them competently.

古文：若法亏于平，官失其人，则王道有缺。
现代文：如果执法不公平，做官的不得人，国家的政治就要遭到损害。
English: If law enforcement is unfair and officials are incompetent, the country's politics will be damaged.

古文：而令天下之论，皆谓狱由怨起，爵以贿成。
现代文：使天下的人都说监狱是由于民怨而兴起的，爵位是因为行贿才得到的。
English: So that people all over the world say that prisons have arisen because of people's grievances, and knighthoods have come about because of bribery.

古文：夫不有臭秽，则苍蝇不飞。
现代文：不又臭又脏，哪里飞来苍蝇呢？
English: If it's not smelly and dirty, where do the flies come from?

古文：延熹六年，车驾幸广成校猎。蕃上疏谏曰：
现代文：您应采访得失，择忠从善，下诏把选举人才这类事交给尚书、三公办理，使奖赏处罚，各有主管，这难道不是值得庆幸的吗？ 
English: You should interview gains and losses, choose loyalty from good, and issue an edict to entrust such matters of election talents to Shangshu and San Gong for handling, so that rewards and punishments are in charge of each. Isn't this worth celebrating?

古文：臣闻人君有事于苑囿，唯仲秋西郊，顺时讲武，杀禽助祭，以敦孝敬。
现代文：桓帝采纳了他不少意见，放出宫女五百人，只赐封黄隽为关内侯，邓万世为南乡侯。延熹六年，桓帝驾临广成苑围猎，陈蕃上疏劝谏说： 我听说帝王到苑囿狩猎，只在仲秋祭祀天地的时候。顺应时节，操练武备射杀禽兽，有助祭祀，用来敦孝敬之情。
English: Emperor Kuan adopted many of his suggestions, releasing five hundred palace maids, but only giving Huang Qi the title of Guan Nai Hou and Deng Wan Shi the title of Nan Xiang Hou. Six years later, Emperor Kuan came to Guangcheng Garden to hunt, and Chen Xiangxiao advised him to say: I heard that the emperor hunted in the garden only during the mid-autumn festival to worship heaven and earth. According to the time of the year, practicing martial arts and shooting birds and animals is conducive to sacrifice, and is used to enhance the feeling of filial piety.

古文：如或违此，则为肆纵。
现代文：如果违反这些，就算是放纵无度了。
English: If you violate these rules, it's considered to be excessive indulgence.

古文：故皋陶戒舜 无教逸游 ，周公戒成王 无槃于游田 。
现代文：所以皋陶教训舜 无教逸游 ，周公教训成王 无于游田 。
English: Therefore, learning from Tao is not learning from wandering, and learning from Zhou Gong is not learning from Yu Tian.

古文：虞舜、成王狱有此戒，况德不及二主者乎！
现代文：虞舜、成王尚且要以此为戒，何况德行不及二主的呢！
English: This should serve as a warning to those who aspire to become kings, not to mention the fact that they are not as virtuous as the two lords!

古文：夫安平之时，尚宜有节，况当今之世，有三空之厄哉！
现代文：天下太平的时候，还要有节制，何况现在有 三空 的困厄呢。
English: When the world is at peace, there must also be restraint, and what's more, there are the hardships of the Three Empties now.

古文：田野空，朝廷空，仓库空，是谓三空。
现代文：田野空，朝廷空，仓库空，这就所谓 三空 。
English: The fields are empty, the court is empty, and the warehouses are empty. This is called the Three Empties.

古文：加兵戎未戢，四方离散，是陛下焦心毁颜，坐以待旦之时也。岂宜扬旗曜武，骋心舆马之观乎！
现代文：加上用兵不止，四方百姓流离失散，这正是您伤心憔悴，夜不能入睡的时候，怎么能耀武扬威，醉心于车马驰骋的场面呢。
English: In addition, the use of troops has not stopped, and the people in all directions have been displaced and dispersed. This is exactly when you are heartbroken and can't sleep at night. How can you show off your military prowess and be fascinated by the scene of horses and chariots galloping?

古文：又秋前多雨，民始种麦。今失其劝种之时，而令给驱禽除路之役，非贤圣恤民之意也。
现代文：又，初秋多雨，是百姓开始播种的时机，反而要他们驱禽赶兽，从事开辟道路的劳役，这不是贤明圣君体恤百姓的心啊。
English: In addition, early autumn is rainy, which is the time for the people to start sowing seeds. Instead, they are asked to drive away birds and animals and engage in labor to open up roads. This is not the heart of a wise saint to sympathize with the people.

古文：齐景公欲观于海，放乎琅邪，晏子为陈百姓恶闻旌旗舆马之音，举首嚬眉之感，景公为之不行。
现代文：齐景公想去观海，去琅笽，晏子对齐景公叙述了百姓不爱听旌旗舆马的声音，摇头皱眉的情况，景公因此不去了。
English: Qi Jing Gong wanted to go to see the sea, go to the reeds, the reeds against the reeds, Qi Jing Gong described the situation that the people did not like to listen to the sound of the banner and the horse, shaking his head and frowning, so Jing Gong did not go.

古文：周穆王欲肆车辙马迹，祭公谋父为诵《祈招》之诗，以止其心。
现代文：周穆王想周行天下，任心所为，到处都有他的车辙马迹，祭公谋父为他读《祈招》之诗，用以阻止他的这种思想。
English: Zhou Mu Wang wanted to travel around the world and do whatever he wanted, and there were traces of his footsteps everywhere. He asked his father to read the poem "Invitation to Prayer" to him in order to stop this kind of thought.

古文：诚恶逸游之害人也。
现代文：真正痛恶游乐的害人啊！ 
English: Woe to those who truly detest amusement!

古文：书奏不纳。
现代文：奏书送上，桓帝没有采纳。
English: The report was submitted, but Emperor Kanto did not accept it.

古文：自蕃为光禄勋，与五宫中郎将黄琬共典选举，不偏权富，而为势家郎所谮诉，坐免归。
现代文：自从陈蕃作了光禄勋，他同五官中郎将黄琬共同掌管官吏的选举，不偏袒权贵，因而被豪门子弟诬陷控告，获罪罢官回家。
English: Ever since Chen Xi was awarded the Order of the Star, he and the five official middlemen put Huang Xi in charge of the election of officials together, and did not favor the powerful. As a result, he was framed and accused by the rich man's younger brother, and was convicted and sent home.

古文：顷之，征为尚书仆射，转太中大夫。
现代文：不久，征召为尚书仆射，转调太中大夫。
English: Soon after, he was conscripted as Shang Shuxubei and transferred to Taizhong Dafu.

古文：八年，代杨秉为太尉。
现代文：延熹八年代替杨秉为太尉。
English: In the 1880s, he replaced Yang Bing as captain.

古文：蕃让曰：  不愆不忘，率由旧章 ，臣不如太常胡广。齐七政，训五典，臣不如议郎王暢。
现代文：陈蕃辞让说 ：不过误，不遗失，循用旧典文章，我不如太常胡广；辨别日、月、金、木、水、火、土七政，解说五典，我不如议郎王畅。
English: Chen Shijie said: I am not mistaken, I am not lost, I follow the ancient texts, I am not as good as Hu Guang; I can distinguish the sun, moon, money, wood, water, fire, and soil, and explain the five classics, I am not as good as the king.

古文：聪明亮达，文武兼姿，臣不如刑徒李膺。 
现代文：聪明豁达，文武全才，我不如癆刑徒李膺。 
English: Clever and open-minded, literate and well-versed in martial arts, I am not as good as the convict Li Yao.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：桓帝不许。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：中常侍苏康、管霸等复被任用，遂排陷忠良，共相阿媚。
现代文：中常侍苏康、管霸等人再次被起用，他们排挤诬陷忠良大臣，彼此阿谀勾结。
English: Su Kang, Guanba and others were appointed again. They crowded out and framed Minister Zhongliang and colluded with each other.

古文：大司农刘祐、廷尉冯绲、河南尹李膺，皆以忏旨，为之抵罪。
现代文：大司农刘、廷尉冯绲、河南尹李膺，都因违背皇上的意旨而受到惩处。
English: Grand Secretary Liu Nong, Imperial Lieutenant Feng Qi, and Henan Yin Lijun were all punished for violating the emperor's will.

古文：蕃因朝会，固理膺等，请加原宥，升之爵任。
现代文：陈蕃借朝会之机，坚决为李膺等人申诉，请求皇上宽免他们，提升他们的官爵。
English: Chen Yu took the opportunity of the imperial meeting to appeal resolutely for Li Yu and others, asking the emperor to pardon them and promote them to the rank of nobility.

古文：言及反复，诚辞恳切。
现代文：反复申诉，词意恳切。
English: Repeated complaints, the words are earnest.

古文：帝不听，因流涕而起。
现代文：桓帝不理，陈蕃因此流泪起身而出。
English: Emperor Kantei ignored him, so Chen Zhe got up in tears and left.

古文：时，小黄门赵津、南阳大猾张汜等，奉事中官，乘势犯法，二郡太守刘质、成瑨考案其罪，虽经赦令，而并竟考杀之。
现代文：当时小宦官赵津、南阳大恶霸张汜等人，奉侍宦官，仗着他们的权势作恶犯法，太原、南阳二郡太守刘王质、成缙审讯他们，虽有皇帝赦免他们的命令，但仍然讯问到底，处死了他们。
English: At that time, minor eunuch Zhao Jin, Nanyang big bully Zhang Ye and others served as eunuchs and used their power to commit crimes. Taiyuan, Nanyang two counties eunuch Liu Wangxi and Cheng Ye interrogated them, and although the emperor pardoned them, they still interrogated them to the end and executed them.

古文：宦官怨恚，有司承旨，遂奏质、瑨罪当弃市。
现代文：宦官们对他们怀恨在心。官吏秉承意旨，于是上奏皇帝，刘王质、成缙罪当处死。
English: The eunuchs held a grudge against them. The officials followed through with their intention, and the emperor, Liu Wangxi, was sentenced to death for high treason.

古文：又山阳太守翟超，没入中常侍侯览财产，东海相黄浮，诛杀下邳令徐宣，超、浮并坐髡钳，输作左校。
现代文：又，山阳太守翟超没收了中常侍侯览的财产，东海相黄浮处死了下邳县令徐宣，翟超、黄浮都受了髡钳之刑，被押往左校劳役。
English: In addition, Shanyang governor Gong Chao confiscated the property of the middle-ranking attendant Hou Xiang, and the East China Sea minister Huang Fuyi killed the lower-ranking county official Xu Xuan. Gong Chao and Huang Fuyi were both sentenced to hard labor and sent to Zuo School for forced labor.

古文：蕃与司徒刘矩、司空刘茂共谏请质、瑨、超、浮等，帝不悦。有司劾奏之，矩、茂不敢复言。
现代文：陈蕃和司徒刘矩、司空刘茂一起劝谏皇帝，请求宽免刘王质、成缙、翟超、黄浮等人，桓帝不高兴，官吏弹劾他们，刘矩、刘茂不敢再说什么了。
English: Chen Xi, Liu Rui, Liu Mao, and Liu Rui, together with Liu Rui and Liu Mao, urged the emperor to pardon Liu Wangjing, Cheng Hui, Tong Chao, Huang Fu and others. The emperor was not happy, and the officials impeached them. Liu Rui and Liu Mao did not dare to say anything more.

古文：蕃乃独上疏曰：
现代文：陈蕃独自上疏。
English: Chen Yao went up the stairs alone.

古文：臣闻齐桓修霸，务为内政；《春秋》于鲁，小恶必书。宜先自整敕，后以及人。
现代文：说 ：我听说齐桓公修霸业，主要在修治内政，《春秋》对于鲁国，微小的过错，也一定要写上去，应当先自己修养好，然后才可以要求别人。
English: He said, "I have heard that Qi Kuan Gong is cultivating hegemony, mainly in the governance of domestic affairs. For Lu Province, "Spring and Autumn," minor mistakes must also be written down. You should cultivate yourself first, and then you can ask others.

古文：今寇贼在外，四支之疾；内政不理，心腹之患。
现代文：现在贼寇在外猖獗，是四肢的病痛；但内政紊乱，却是心腹的祸患。
English: Now the banditry is rampant outside, it is a disease of the limbs; but the internal disorder is a scourge of the inner circle.

古文：臣寝不能寐，食不能饱，实忧左右日亲，忠言以疏，内患渐积，外难方深。
现代文：我睡觉睡不着，吃饭吃不饱，实在担心一天比一天亲近您身边的人，讲献忠言的人日益被疏远，内部祸患越来越严重，外部灾难正在加深。
English: I can't sleep, I can't eat enough, I'm really worried about the people who are closer to you day by day, the people who are loyal to you are increasingly alienated, the internal disaster is getting worse, and the external disaster is deepening.

古文：陛下超从列侯，继承天位。
现代文：皇上以列侯继承皇位。
English: The Emperor succeeds to the throne as a vassal.

古文：小家畜产百万之资，子孙尚耻愧失其先业，况乃产兼天下，受之先帝，而欲懈怠以自轻忽乎？
现代文：小家蓄产百万的财富，子孙还耻于失去先人的产业，何况产兼天下，受之先帝，而想懈怠不自重吗？
English: A small family accumulates and produces millions of wealth, and the descendants are still ashamed of losing the ancestor's industry. What's more, they produce the whole world, and they are supported by the former emperor. Is it not self-important to slack off?

古文：诚不爱已，不当念先帝得之勤苦邪？
现代文：真的不爱惜自己，不应当想想先帝得天下的勤苦吗？
English: If you really don't care about yourself, shouldn't you think about the hard work of the previous emperor?

古文：前梁氏五侯，毒遍海内，天启圣意，收而戮之，天下之议，冀当小平。
现代文：从前梁冀一门五侯，祸害遍天下，上天启发您圣明的思想，把他们收捕处死，天下的舆论，是希望社会稍得平安。
English: Once upon a time, Liang Jie was the ruler of five provinces, and the evil spread all over the world. Heaven inspired your holy thoughts, arrested them and put them to death. The world's public opinion is hoping that society will have a little peace.

古文：明鉴未远，覆车如昨，而近习之权，复相扇结。
现代文：那些明显的鉴戒就在眼前，覆车的教训犹如昨日，可是宦官的权势，又互相鼓动勾结。
English: Those clear admonitions are right in front of us, the lesson of covering the car is like yesterday, but the power of the eunuchs is encouraging collusion with each other.

古文：小黄门赵津、大猾张汜等，肆行贪虐，奸媚左右，前太原太守刘质、南阳太守成王晋，纠而戮之。虽言赦后不当诛杀，原其诚心，在乎去恶。
现代文：小宦官赵津、大恶霸张汜等人任意贪污、残暴，阿谀奉承您左右的宠臣，前太原太守刘王质、南阳太守成缙，收捕处决他们，虽说赦后不当处死，推求他们的真心，在于为您除去虚假。
English: The petty eunuch Zhao Jin, the big bully Zhang Ye, and others arbitrarily corrupt and brutal, and flatter your favorite subjects around you, the former Taiyuan Emperor Liu Wangjing and Nanyang Emperor Chengyi, arrest and execute them, although they were pardoned and unjustly executed, and implore their sincerity to remove the falsehood for you.

古文：至于陛下，有何悁悁？
现代文：那么您又有什么可生气的呢？
English: So what have you got to be angry about?

古文：而小人道长，营惑圣听，遂使天威为之发怒。如加刑谪，已为过甚，况乃重罚，令伏欧刀乎！
现代文：小人道长，迷惑了您，使您大发雷霆。如处刑责罚，已经太过了，何况处以极刑致令杀戮呢？
English: The little man, sir, has puzzled you and made you very angry; it would be too much to inflict punishment, and how much more to kill him by capital punishment?

古文：又，前山阳太守翟超、东海相黄浮，奉公不桡，疾恶如仇，超没侯览财物，浮诛徐宣之罪，并蒙刑坐，不逢赦恕。览之从横，没财已幸；宣犯衅过，死有余辜。
现代文：又，前山阳太守翟超、东海相黄浮，奉公守法，疾恶如仇、翟超没收侯览的财产，黄浮处决徐宣，两人都因此获罪受刑，得不到您的赦免宽恕，侯览为非作歹，只没收他的财产已属万幸，徐宣犯有罪过，死有余辜。
English: In addition, the former Shanyang Taishu Gong Chao and the East China Sea counterpart Huang Fu, both of whom were law-abiding and law-abiding, had a grudge against each other. Gong Chao confiscated the property of Hou Xuan, while Huang Fu executed Xu Xuan. Both of them were convicted and sentenced for this, and they could not receive your pardon and forgiveness. Hou Xuan was not guilty of any wrongdoing, and it was fortunate that only his property was confiscated. Xu Xuan was guilty of a crime and deserved to die.

古文：昔丞相申屠嘉召责邓通，洛阳令董宣折辱公主，而文帝从而请之，光武加以重赏，未闻二臣有专命之诛。
现代文：以前丞相申屠嘉叫来文帝宠臣加以斥责，洛阳令董宣当面斥责光武帝的姐姐湖阳公主，文帝向申屠嘉请求免杀邓通，光武帝还重赏了董宣，没有听说对这两位大臣因独断专行而加以处罚。
English: In the past, the prime minister Shen Tu Jia called the emperor's favorite minister to reprimand him, Luoyang ordered Dong Xuan to reprimand Emperor Guangwu's sister, Princess Huyang, in person, Emperor Wen asked Shen Tu Jia not to kill Deng Tong, Emperor Guangwu also rewarded Dong Xuan, and it was not heard that the two ministers were punished for arbitrariness.

古文：而今左右群竖，恶伤党类，妄相交构，致此刑谴。
现代文：现在您身边的那些小臣们，恶意伤害党人，随便罗织捏造罪名，致刘王质、成缙于冤狱。
English: Now those ministers around you, maliciously harming Party members, have fabricated charges at will, taken Liu Wang as a hostage, and sentenced him to unjust imprisonment.

古文：闻臣是言，当复啼诉。
现代文：听到我的这些话，您的宠信又要号哭申诉了。
English: Hearing these words of mine, your favorite letter is crying and complaining again.

古文：陛下深宜割塞近习豫政之源，引纳尚书朝省之事，公卿大官，五日壹朝，简练清高，斥黜佞邪。
现代文：您应该断绝堵塞内侍宠臣干预政事之源，接受尚书们到朝廷和尚书省办公，公卿大官，每五天朝会一次，选用清正高尚的人，罢免斥退邪恶之流。
English: You should cut off the source of interference in political affairs by your inner attendants and favorite subjects, accept noblemen and women to work in the Imperial Court and the Ministry of Literature, noblemen and dignitaries to meet once every five days, select honest and noble people, dismiss and expel the evil current.

古文：于是天和于上，地洽于下，休祯符瑞，岂远乎哉！
现代文：这样，天在上和顺，地在下润洽，美好的符瑞，难道还遥远吗？
English: In this way, heaven is harmonious above and the earth is moist below, a beautiful harmony, is it still far away?

古文：陛下虽厌毒臣言，凡人主有自勉强，敢以死陈。
现代文：您虽厌恶我的话，但凡是帮人主的，都有自强的心，所以敢于冒死陈奏。 
English: Although you detest my words, anyone who is a helper of the Lord has a strong heart, so he dares to risk his life.

古文：帝得奏愈怒，意无所纳，朝廷众庶莫不怨之。
现代文：桓帝看了他的奏章，更加恼怒。一点也没有采纳。朝廷不少人恨了他。
English: Emperor Kan saw his performance and was even more angry. He did not accept it at all. Many people in the imperial court hated him.

古文：宦官由此疾蕃弥甚，选举奏议，辄以中诏谴却，长史已下多至抵罪。犹以蕃名臣，不敢加害。
现代文：宦官因此更加痛恨陈蕃，他选举出人才送上奏章，宦官立即借皇帝的名义斥责退回，他属下的长史以下许多官吏多被借故治罪，因为陈蕃是当代名臣，还不敢加害他。
English: As a result, the eunuch hated Chen Xi all the more. He selected a talented person to present the medal. The eunuch immediately rebuked him in the name of the emperor and sent him back. Many officials under him, including Long Shi, were punished because Chen Xi was a famous contemporary minister and they did not dare to harm him.

古文：质字文理，高唐人。瑨字幼平，陕人。
现代文：刘王质字文理，高唐人、成缙字幼平，陕县人。
English: Liu Wangjie's family name is Wenli, Gao Tang's family name is Gaotang, Chenglu's family name is Youping, and they are from Shaanxi.

古文：并有经术称，处位敢直言，多所搏击，知名当时，皆死于狱中。
现代文：都以经术著名，在官敢于说直话，对于一些坏事，多有抨击。有名当时，都死在监狱中。
English: Both were famous for their penmanship, dared to speak the truth in office, and were often criticized for some bad things. Famous at the time, they all died in prison.

古文：九年，李膺等以党事下狱考实。
现代文：延熹九年，李膺等人由于党人事件被关进监狱受审。
English: Nine years later, Li Wei and others were put in prison for trial due to the party member incident.

古文：蕃因上疏极谏曰：臣闻贤明之君，委心辅佐；亡国之主，讳闻直辞。
现代文：陈蕃因而上书极力劝谏说： 我听说贤明的国君，信赖辅佐大臣；亡国之君，不愿听大臣的直话。
English: As a result, Chen Xi wrote a letter to try to persuade him, saying, "I have heard that a wise sovereign trusts the assistant minister, but a dead sovereign does not want to listen to the minister's direct words.

古文：故汤武虽圣，而兴于伊吕；桀纣迷惑，亡在失人。
现代文：所以汤、武的兴，是因为有伊尹、吕望这样的贤臣；桀、纣的昏乱，以致灭亡，是因为不得人。
English: Therefore, the rise of Tang and Wu was due to the presence of wise ministers such as Yi Yin and Lü Wang; the confusion of Han and Lu, which led to their demise, was due to the absence of people.

古文：由此言之，君为元首，臣为股肱，同体相须，共成美恶者也。
现代文：由此说来，君王是首领，臣子是股肱，同体相互为用，为好为恶。
English: Therefore, the king is the leader, the vassal is the follower, and the same body is used for each other, for good and evil.

古文：伏见前司隶校尉李膺、太仆杜密、太尉掾范滂等，正身无玷，死心社稷。
现代文：我看到前司隶校尉李膺、太仆杜密、太尉掾范滂等人刚正清白，死心塌地为国家。
English: I saw that the former lieutenant Li Jun, the eunuch Du Mi, the eunuch Fan Jun and others were upright and innocent, and worked hard for the country.

古文：以忠忏旨，横加考案，或禁锢闭隔，或死徙非所。
现代文：因为忠直，违反了您的意旨，横遭拷打审讯，有的被禁锢隔绝，有的或死去或流放到他们不该去的地方。
English: Because of their loyalty, in violation of your will, they were tortured and interrogated, some were imprisoned and isolated, and some died or were exiled to places where they should not go.

古文：杜塞天下之口，聋盲一世之人，与秦焚书坑儒，何以为异？
现代文：堵住天下的嘴，将全社会的人变成聋子瞎子，这与秦朝焚书坑儒有什么区别？
English: What is the difference between this and the Qin Dynasty's practice of burning books in order to shut the mouths of the world and turn the entire society into deaf and blind?

古文：昔武王克殷，表闾封墓，今陛下临政，先诛忠贤。
现代文：从前周武王灭了商朝，在商朝忠臣的家门树立标志，为他们培修坟墓。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wu annihilated the Shang Dynasty, set up a sign at the door of the family of the loyal subjects of the Shang Dynasty, and built a tomb for them.

古文：遇善何薄？待恶何优？夫谗人似实，巧言如簧，使听之者惑，视之者昏。
现代文：现在您执掌大政，首先杀害贤明忠诚的大臣，对待好人为什么这样刻薄，对待坏人为什么又那样优厚？谗谄之人，花言巧语，似乎说得实在，使听的人迷惑，看的人迷糊。
English: Now that you are in power, why do you first kill the wise and loyal ministers, why are you so mean to the good people, and why are you so kind to the bad people?

古文：夫吉凶之效，存乎识善；成败之机，在于察言。
现代文：吉凶之见，在于识善，成败之机，决定于听言。
English: The view of auspicious and inauspicious is to be aware of the good, and the opportunity for success or failure is determined by listening.

古文：人君者，摄天下之政，秉四海之维，举动不可以违圣法，进退不可以离道规。
现代文：人君，统管国家的大政，掌握四海之内的纲纪，举止进退不可违背先圣的法度和道德规矩。
English: People's prince, in charge of the country's great politics, mastering the internal discipline of the four seas, must not act contrary to the sacred laws and moral rules.

古文：谬言出口，则乱及八方，何况髡无罪于狱，杀无辜于市乎！
现代文：错话出口，就会扰乱四面八方，何况用有髡刑治无罪于狱中，杀无辜于街市呢！
English: If a wrong word is uttered, it will cause disturbances everywhere, not to mention the use of the cane to punish the innocent in prison and the killing of the innocent in the streets!

古文：昔禹巡狩苍梧，见市杀人，下车而哭之曰： 万方有罪，在予一人！ 
现代文：从前夏禹巡狩苍梧，看见街上杀人，就下车哭着说： 万方有罪，在予一人！ 
English: Once upon a time, Xia Yu, who was on a hunting tour, saw a murder in the street, got out of the car and cried, "Everyone is guilty, I am the only one!"

古文：故其兴也勃焉。
现代文：所以夏禹很快就兴盛起来。
English: So Xia Yu soon prospered.

古文：又青、徐炎旱，五谷损伤，民物流迁，茹菽不足。
现代文：又，青州、徐州炎热干旱，五谷不收，百姓背井离乡，连粗粮也不够吃。
English: In addition, Qingzhou and Xuzhou are hot and arid, grain is not harvested, people leave their hometowns, and even coarse grains are not enough to eat.

古文：而宫女积于房掖，国用尽于罗纨，外戚私门，贪财受赂，所谓 禄去公室，政在大夫 。
现代文：然而宫女充满后廷，国家财富为她们花费净尽，外戚私门，贪财受贿。这就是孔子所说的 俸禄与公室无关，政令出于大夫 。
English: However, the harem is full of courtesans, the national wealth is spent for them, the maternal relatives are private, and they are greedy for money and take bribes. This is what Confucius said: "Salary has nothing to do with the office, the government order comes from the doctor."

古文：昔春秋之末，周德衰微，数十年间无复灾眚者，天所弃也。
现代文：从前春秋之末，周朝的德泽衰微，几十年没有见到什么灾异，这是为老天爷所抛弃了。
English: From the end of the previous spring and autumn, the Zhou Dynasty's virtue was fading, and it had not seen any disasters for decades. This was abandoned by God.

古文：天之于汉，悢々无已，故殷勤示变，以悟陛下。
现代文：老天爷对于汉朝，还是眷念不忘，所以加意表示变异，启发皇上。
English: As for the Han Dynasty, it is still remembered fondly, so it was added to indicate variation and enlighten the emperor.

古文：除妖去孽，实在修德。臣位列台司，忧责深重，不敢尸禄惜生，坐观成败。
现代文：铲除妖人孽种，关键在您加强自己的修养，我居三公之位，担心自己责任重大，不敢空受俸禄，贪生保命，坐观汉朝天下兴亡。
English: The key to eradicating demons and evil is to strengthen your self-cultivation. I am in the position of the three kings, I am worried about my great responsibility, I do not dare to receive a salary in vain, I am greedy for life, and I sit and watch the rise and fall of the Han Dynasty.

古文：如蒙采录，使身首分裂，异门而出，所不恨也。
现代文：我的建议如蒙采纳，即使杀了我，身首异处，我也不以为恨。 
English: If my suggestion is accepted, even if they kill me and take my head, I won't think it's hate.

古文：帝讳基言切，托以蕃辟召非其人，遂策免之。
现代文：桓帝不高兴陈蕃说的话直切，借口陈蕃辟举选用的人才不适当，于是罢免了他。
English: Emperor Kuan was displeased with Chen Yao's blunt words. On the pretext that Chen Yao's choice of talent was inappropriate, he dismissed him.

古文：永康元年，帝崩。窦后临朝，诏曰： 夫民生树君，使司牧之，必须良佐，以固王业。
现代文：永康元年，桓帝去世，窦皇后执掌朝政，下诏书说： 百姓生来就要立君，以管理他们。还必须有贤良的辅佐大臣，来巩固王家大业。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, when Emperor Kuan died and Empress Dou took charge of the imperial government, the following imperial decree was issued: The people are born to establish a prince to manage them. There must also be a virtuous assistant minister to consolidate the great cause of the royal family.

古文：前太尉陈蕃，忠清直亮。其以蕃为太傅，录尚书事。 
现代文：前太尉陈蕃，忠诚清正，为人坦荡，现在任命陈蕃为太傅并管理尚书事宜。 
English: Former First Lieutenant Chen Hao, a loyal, upright and straightforward person, has now appointed Chen Hao as the Second Lieutenant and is in charge of the bookkeeping.

古文：时，新遭大丧，国嗣未立，诸尚书胃惧权官，托病不朝。
现代文：当时刚遭国丧，还没有确定皇位继承人，各尚书害怕触怒朝中权臣，都假称有病不上朝办事。
English: At that time, the country had just suffered a national mourning, and the heir to the throne had not yet been determined. All the eminent scholars were afraid of offending the powerful ministers in the court, so they pretended to be ill and did not go to the court.

古文：蕃以书责之曰： 古人立节，事亡如存。
现代文：陈蕃写信责备他们说： 古人讲究节操，侍奉去世君主的态度如同他还活着一样。
English: Chen Yao wrote a letter to reproach them: The ancients were particular about discipline, and they served the deceased monarch as if he were still alive.

古文：今帝祚未立，政事日蹙，诸君奈何委荼蓼之苦，息偃在床？
现代文：现在皇嗣还没有定下来，政事日益紧迫，诸君为什么抛弃国家的苦难不管，在家躺着休息呢？
English: Now that the heir to the throne has not yet been determined, and political affairs are becoming increasingly urgent, why do you abandon the suffering of the country and lie at home to rest?

古文：于义不足，焉得仁乎！ 
现代文：在义已经很亏缺了，哪能谈得上仁呢？ 
English: Justice is already in very short supply, so how can we talk about benevolence?

古文：诸尚书惶怖，皆起视事。
现代文：各位尚书惶惶恐怖，都去朝廷办公。
English: With trepidation and fear, all of you went to work at the Imperial Court.

古文：灵帝即位，窦太后复优诏蕃曰： 盖褒功以劝善，表义以厉俗，无德不报，《大雅》所叹。
现代文：灵帝即皇位后，窦太后再次下诏表彰陈蕃 ：奖功以劝善，表扬义烈以激励风俗，没有不报之德行，正如《大雅》所咏叹。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Lingdi, Empress Dowager Dou once again issued an imperial edict to commend Chen Xi: reward merit with exhortation, praise the virtuous with encouragement of customs, there is no unreported virtue, as "Daya" lamented.

古文：太傅陈蕃，辅弼先帝，出内累年。忠孝之美，德冠本朝；謇愕之操，华首弥固。
现代文：太傅陈蕃，辅佐先帝，担任京官多年，既忠且孝，德行为本朝第一，直言忠谏，到老不辍。
English: Grand Master Chen Xi, an assistant to the former emperor, served as a Beijing official for many years. He was both loyal and filial, and his moral conduct was the first in this dynasty. He was outspoken and loyal, and he never stopped.

古文：今封蕃高阳乡侯，食邑三百户。 
现代文：现在封陈蕃为高乡侯，食邑三百户。 
English: Now, Chen Qi is a high-ranking township official, and there are 300 households in the food village.

古文：蕃上疏让曰：使者即臣庐，授高阳乡侯印绶，臣诚悼心，不知所裁。
现代文：陈蕃上疏辞让，说： 使者到我家，授我高阳乡侯印绶，我真是恐惧不知如何是好。
English: Chen Yao said, "The envoy came to my home and gave me the Gaoyang Township seal. I was really scared and didn't know what to do.

古文：臣闻让，身之文，德之昭也，然不敢盗以为名。
现代文：我听说谦让，这是立身的光采，德行的显著。
English: I've heard of modesty, which is the brilliance of one's standing, and a notable virtue.

古文：窃惟割地之封，功德是为。臣孰自思省，前后历职，无他异能，合亦食禄，不合亦食禄。
现代文：然而不敢盗取为名，我想割地封侯，主要表彰功德，我反复思考，前后历任职务，并没有特别好的功绩，合也食禄，不合也食禄。
English: However, I did not dare to steal as a name. I wanted to cut the land and seal the feudal lordships, mainly to commend the merits. I thought over and over again. I did not have particularly good achievements in my previous posts, and I was rewarded when I did well and punished when I did not.

古文：臣虽无素洁之行，窃慕 君子不以其道得之，不居也 。
现代文：我虽说没有廉洁之行，还是羡慕 君子不以其道得之，不居也 的高尚品德。
English: Although I am not a man of integrity, I still admire the noble character of a gentleman who does not live up to it.

古文：若受爵不让，掩面就之，使皇天震怒，灾流下民，于臣之身，亦何所寄？
现代文：如果受爵不辞让，厚着脸皮接受，使皇天震怒，灾害降于老百姓，我也置身何处呢？
English: If receiving a knighthood is unyielding and accepted with a thick skin, causing the wrath of the emperor and disasters to befall the people, where do I stand?

古文：顾惟陛下哀臣朽老，戒之在得。
现代文：只想皇上可怜我老朽，戒在贪得。 
English: I just want the emperor to take pity on my decrepitude and stop being greedy.

古文：窦太后不许，蕃复固让，章前后十上，竟不受封。
现代文：窦太后不许，陈蕃一再坚决辞让，前后递上奏章十次，终于没有受封。
English: Empress Dowager Dou did not allow it, and Chen Xi repeatedly and resolutely refused to concede, and submitted the report ten times, and finally did not receive the seal.

古文：初，桓帝欲立所幸田贵人为皇后。蕃以田氏卑微，窦族良家，争之甚固。帝不得已，已立窦后。
现代文：起先，桓帝想立宠爱的田贵人为皇后，陈蕃认为田氏出身卑微，窦氏是良家大族，争立窦氏很坚决，桓帝不得已立窦氏为皇后。
English: At first, Emperor Kuan wanted to make his favorite, Tian Guizhou, the empress. Chen Xi thought that the Tian clan was from a humble background, while the Dou clan was from a noble family. They fought hard to make the Dou clan the empress. Emperor Kuan had no choice but to make the Dou clan the empress.

古文：及后临朝，故委用于蕃。
现代文：所以窦太后执掌朝政后，任用陈蕃。
English: Therefore, after Empress Dowager Dou took charge of the imperial government, Chen Xi was appointed.

古文：蕃与后父大将军窦武，同心尽力，征用名贤，共参政事，天下之士，莫不延颈想望太平。
现代文：陈蕃和窦太后的父亲大将军窦武，同心尽力，起用名流贤士，共同参与国家政治，天下之士无不伸长脖子盼望天下太平。
English: Chen Xi and General Dou Wu, the father of Empress Dowager Dou, made concerted efforts, appointed famous sages, and jointly participated in national politics. People all over the world craned their necks in the hope of world peace.

古文：而帝乳母赵娆，旦夕在太后侧，中常侍曹节、王甫等与共交构，谄事太后。
现代文：然而桓帝的乳母赵娆，早晚都在窦太后身边，中常侍曹节、王甫等同她勾结，讨好太后。
English: However, Emperor Kuan's wet nurse, Zhao Yao, was always by Empress Dowager Dou's side, and the middle-ranking attendants, Cao Jie and Wang Fu, colluded with her to please Empress Dowager Dou.

古文：太后信之，数出诏命，有所封拜，及其支类，多行贪虐。蕃常疾之，志诛中官，会窦武亦有谋。
现代文：太后信任他们，多次下诏令，给他们封爵授官，而他们的爪牙，大都贪婪暴虐，陈蕃常恨这帮人，决心消灭宦官，正好窦武也有谋划。
English: The empress dowager trusted them, repeatedly issued imperial decrees, and gave them knighthoods and offices. However, most of their minions were greedy and tyrannical. Chen Xi often hated these people and was determined to eliminate the eunuchs. Dou Wu also had a plan.

古文：蕃自以既从人望而德于太后，必谓其志可申，乃先上疏曰：
现代文：陈蕃认为自己既顺从人们的心愿，又对太后有过功德，认为自己的目的一定可实现，于是先向太后上疏。
English: Chen Yao thought that he had not only obeyed the wishes of the people, but had also made contributions to the empress dowager. He thought that his goal would definitely be achieved, so he first approached the empress dowager.

古文：臣闻言不直而行不正，则为欺乎天而负乎人。
现代文：说 ：我听说说话不正直，行为不端正，那就是欺骗上天，辜负世人。
English: Saying, I have heard that he that speaketh unrighteousness, and worketh unrighteousness, deceives his own soul, and deceiveth the world.

古文：危言极意，则群凶侧目，祸不旋踵。
现代文：直言尽意，会受到那群凶恶坏蛋的仇视，马上会招致大祸。
English: To be outspoken is to incur the enmity of that horrid crew of ruffians, and to invite instant disaster.

古文：钧此二者，臣宁得祸，不敢欺天也。
现代文：掂量两者，我愿得祸，不敢欺骗上天。
English: Weighing the two, I am willing to get into trouble, and dare not deceive heaven.

古文：今京师嚣嚣，道路喧哗，言侯览、曹节、公乘昕、王甫、郑飒等与赵夫人诸女尚书并乱天下。附从者升进，忤逆者中伤。
现代文：现在京师舆论沸腾，道路喧哗，说侯览、曹节、公乘昕、王甫、郑飒等人与赵娆夫人等各位宫中女官一起扰乱天下，追随他们的升官，反对他们的，就受到惩罚。
English: Now the public opinion in Beijing is boiling and the roads are noisy, saying that Houxiang, Cao Jie, Gongzheng, Wang Fu, Zheng Qi and others, together with the ladies of the palace such as Mrs. Zhao Qi, are disturbing the world. If you follow their promotion and oppose them, you will be punished.

古文：方今一朝群臣，如河中木耳，泛泛东西，耽禄畏害。
现代文：现在满朝大臣，就像河中的浮木，东漂西浮，贪图禄位，惧怕被害。
English: Now the ministers of the Manchurian government are like driftwood in the river, floating from east to west, coveting positions and fearing damage.

古文：陛下前始摄位，顺天行诛，苏康、管霸并伏其辜。
现代文：您不久前开始摄政的时候，顺从天意，实行诛罚、苏康、管霸都被治罪处死。
English: When you began your regency not long ago, you obeyed the will of heaven and carried out the punishment of punishment, and Su Kang and Guan He were all sentenced to death.

古文：是时，天地清明，人鬼欢喜，奈何数月复纵左右？
现代文：当时天地清明，人、鬼都高兴，为什么才过几个月您又放纵左右侍从？
English: At that time, heaven and earth were clear, and people and ghosts were happy. Why did you indulge your right and left attendants only a few months later?

古文：元恶大奸，莫此之甚。
现代文：大恶大奸，没有比他们更厉害的。
English: There is no greater evil, no greater traitor.

古文：今不急诛，必生变乱，倾危社稷，其祸难量。
现代文：如果现在不马上处决他们，一定会发生变乱？危害国家，祸害实难逆料。
English: If we don't execute them right now, there's bound to be a riot? A danger to the country, a real scourge.

古文：愿出臣章宣示左右，并令天下诸奸知臣疾之。
现代文：希望把我的奏章给您左右的人看，并让天下那些坏家伙知道我痛恨他们。 
English: I'd like to show my record to all of you and let the bad guys out there know that I hate them.

古文：太后不纳，朝廷闻者莫不震恐。
现代文：窦太后没有采纳，朝廷里听说了的没有不震惊的。
English: Empress Dowager Dou did not adopt it, and what the court heard was nothing short of shocking.

古文：蕃因与窦武谋之，语在《武传》。
现代文：陈蕃因与窦武商量，语在《窦武传》。
English: Chen Yingying discussed with Dou Wu, the words are in "Dou Wu Biography."

古文：用理泄，曹节等矫诏诛武等。
现代文：事情泄露时，曹节等人伪造太后的命令杀了窦武等人。
English: When the affair leaked out, Cao Jie and others forged the empress's order to kill Dou Wu and others.

古文：蕃时年七十余，闻难作，将官属诸生八十余人。并拔刃突入承明门，攘臂呼曰： 大将军忠以卫国，黄门反逆，何云窦氏不道邪？ 
现代文：陈蕃当时七十多岁，听说变乱发生，率领属官和学生八十余人，一起拔刀冲进承明门，振臂高喊： 大将军忠诚卫国，宦官造叛乱，怎么说窦氏不守臣道呢？ 
English: At that time, Chen Qi, who was in his 70s, heard that a mutiny had taken place. He led more than 80 subordinate officers and students, and together they drew their swords and rushed into the Chengming Gate, waving their arms and shouting: The general is loyal to the motherland, and the eunuchs are creating a rebellion. How can you say that the Dou clan is not following the path of a subject?

古文：王甫时出，与蕃相迕，适闻其言，而让蕃曰： 先帝新弃天下，山陵未成，窦武何功，兄弟父子，一门三侯？
现代文：王甫当时从宫里出来，正好听到了他的话，就斥责陈蕃说： 先帝刚刚去世，陵墓还未修成，窦武有什么功劳，而兄弟父子一门三人封侯？
English: At that time, Wang Fu came out of the palace, just heard his words, and rebuked Chen Qi, saying: The former emperor has just died, the mausoleum has not yet been completed, what is Dou Wu's merit, and three brothers, a father and a son have been knighted?

古文：又多取掖庭宫人，作乐饮宴，旬月之间，赀财亿计。
现代文：另外，他弄走很多宫女，饮酒作乐，一月之内，搜括财富以亿计。
English: In addition, he got away with many concubines, enjoyed drinking, and within a month, amassed a fortune of hundreds of millions.

古文：大臣若此，是为道邪？
现代文：大臣如此，这是臣道吗？
English: Is this the way of a minister?

古文：公为栋梁，枉桡阿党，复焉求贼！ 
现代文：你是国家的栋梁，徇私枉法，结成朋党，还到哪里捉贼子？ 
English: You are the pillar of the country, you abuse the law for personal gain, and you have formed a crony party. Where do you go to catch thieves?

古文：遂令收蕃。
现代文：于是命令逮捕陈蕃。
English: He then ordered the arrest of Chen Xi.

古文：蕃拔剑叱甫，甫兵不敢近，乃益人围之数十重，遂执蕃送黄门北寺狱。
现代文：陈蕃拔剑大声喝叱王甫，王甫的兵士不敢靠近他。于是增兵包围陈蕃等人几十层，捉了陈蕃关进宦官掌管的北寺狱中。
English: Chen Xuan drew his sword and shouted at Wang Fu, and Wang Fu's soldiers dared not approach him. Therefore, more soldiers surrounded Chen Xuan and others for dozens of floors and caught Chen Xuan Guan in the North Temple Prison, which was under the control of the eunuch.

古文：黄门从官驺蹋踧蕃曰： 死老魅！复能损我曹员数，夺我曹禀假不？ 
现代文：宦官的随从骑士对陈蕃又踢又踩，骂陈蕃 ：死老鬼，你还能裁减我们的人员，剥夺我们的额外收入吗？ 
English: The eunuch's attendant knight kicked and stepped on Chen Yao, and scolded Chen Yao: "Dead old man, can you still reduce our personnel and deprive us of extra income?

古文：即日害之。徙其家属于比景，宗族、门生、故吏皆斥免禁锢。
现代文：当天就杀害了他，把他的家属流放到比景，宗族、门生、旧部属都免职禁锢。
English: On the same day, he was killed, and his family members were exiled to a place of exile. His relatives, disciples, and former subordinates were all relieved of their duties and imprisoned.

古文：蕃友人陈留朱震，时为铚令，闻而弃官哭之，收葬蕃尸，匿其子逸于甘陵界中。
现代文：陈蕃的朋友陈留人朱震当时作钅至县县令，听到消息，弃官哭祭陈蕃，收葬陈蕃的尸体。把陈蕃的儿子陈逸藏在甘陵境内。
English: Zhu Zhen, Chen Yao's friend and Chen Rui's subordinate, was at that time a deputy to the county magistrate. When he heard the news, he wept for Chen Yao and buried Chen Yao's body. He hid Chen Yao's son Chen Yi in the territory of Ganling.

古文：事觉系狱，合门桎梏。震受考掠，誓死不言，故逸得免。
现代文：事情被发觉后，朱震被捕入狱，全家人被关押起来，朱震受严刑拷打，但他宁死不说出陈逸的去向。
English: After the matter was discovered, Zhu Zhen was arrested and imprisoned, his entire family was detained, and Zhu Zhen was severely tortured, but he would rather die than tell Chen Yat's whereabouts.

古文：后黄巾贼起，大赦党人，乃追还逸，官至鲁相。
现代文：陈逸因而得以逃脱。后来黄巾发难起事，朝廷大赦党人，于是把陈逸找出来，后来陈逸官至鲁相。
English: Chen Yat was thus able to escape. Later, the Yellow Turban Rebellion broke out, and the imperial court amnestied the party members, so Chen Yat was found, and later Chen Yat was sent to Lushan.

古文：震字伯厚，初为州从事，奏济阴太守单匡臧罪，并连匡兄中常侍车骑将军超。
现代文：朱震字伯厚，最初作州从事，上书揭发济阴太守单匡贪赃罪，而且牵涉到单匡的哥哥中常侍车骑将军单超。
English: Zhu Zhenzhe Baohu, initially engaged in state-building, published a book exposing the corruption of Jiyin Taishou Shan Kuang, and implicated Shan Kuang's brother, the middle-ranking chariot-riding general Shan Chao.

古文：桓帝收匡下廷尉，以谴超，超诣狱谢。
现代文：桓帝下令拘捕单匡，交廷尉审讯，并斥责单超，单超到监狱认罪。
English: Emperor Kuan ordered the arrest of Shan Kuang, sent him to the court for interrogation, and reprimanded Shan Chao. Shan Chao confessed to the crime in prison.

古文：三府谚曰： 车如鸡栖马如狗，疾恶如风朱伯厚。 
现代文：三府有谚语说 ：车如鸡栖马如狗，疾恶如风朱伯厚。 
English: There is a saying in the three prefectures: "Cars are like chickens, horses are like dogs, and diseases are like the wind.

古文：论曰：桓、灵之世，若陈蕃之徒，咸能树立风声，抗论惽俗。
现代文：史官评论说：桓帝、灵帝时期，像陈蕃这类人，都能树立好的风气名声，直言评论沉闷的现实，奔走于艰难险阻之中，和宦官同朝较量高低，结果招来杀身大祸。
English: The historian commented: During the reigns of Emperor Kantei and Emperor Lingdi, people like Chen Xi could establish a good reputation and reputation, comment on the dull reality, run in the midst of difficulties and dangers, and compete with eunuchs and the North, resulting in a fatal disaster.

古文：而驱驰嶮厄之中，与刑人腐夫同朝争衡，终取灭亡之祸者，彼非不能洁情志，违埃雾也。愍夫世士以离俗为高，而人伦莫相恤也。以遁世为非义，故屡退而不去；以仁心为己任，虽道远而弥厉。
现代文：他们并不是不能洁身自守，避世隐居，而是可怜一般世士以远离尘俗为高尚，对于人伦道德却不关心。他们认为逃离尘世是不义的行为，所以多次遭到罢免，仍然不肯离开现实；以倡导仁德之心为己任，尽管知道这条道路是漫长的，却更加坚定。
English: It's not that they can't keep themselves clean and live in seclusion, but that they pity ordinary people for being noble by staying away from the world, but they don't care about human ethics. They think that escaping the world is an unjust act, so they have been dismissed many times, but they still refuse to leave reality; they take it as their duty to advocate the heart of benevolence, and although they know that this road is long, they are more determined.

古文：及遭际会，协策窦武，自谓万世一遇也。
现代文：到遇上桓帝和窦太后交替之际，为窦武出谋划策，自己认为这是千载难遇的机会。
English: On the occasion of the alternation of Emperor Huan and Empress Dowager Dou, he came up with a plan for Dou Wu, which he thought was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：懔懔乎伊、望之业矣！
现代文：他们所追求的伊尹、太公辅佐君王的业绩，多么严正啊！
English: Their pursuit of the performance of Yi Yin and Taigong Fu Zi Wang, how rigorous it is!

古文：功虽不终，然其信义足以携持民心。
现代文：事情虽然没有成功，但他们的信义，足以扶持民心。
English: Although things did not work out, their loyalty was enough to support the people's hearts.

古文：汉世乱而不亡，百余年间，数公之力也。
现代文：汉代大乱，但不灭亡，一百多年间，是陈蕃等人的力量呀。
English: The Han Dynasty was in great turmoil, but it did not perish. For more than a hundred years, it was the strength of Chen Xi and others.

古文：王允字子师，太原祁人也。
现代文：◆王允传，王允字子师，太原郡祁县人。
English: ◆Wang Yun Chuan, Wang Yun's calligrapher, from Min County, Taiyuan County.

古文：世仕州郡为冠盖。
现代文：世世代代为州郡官。
English: He's been a county official for generations.

古文：同郡郭林宗尝见允而奇之，曰： 王生一日千里，王佐才也。 
现代文：同郡郭林宗曾经见王允，大为赏识，说： 王生一日千里，王佐之才啊。 
English: Guo Linzong of the same county once saw Wang Yun, greatly appreciated him, and said: Wang Sheng is a thousand miles a day, and he is a great talent.

古文：遂与定交。
现代文：就与他结为知己。
English: I became friends with him.

古文：年十九，为郡吏，时，小黄门晋阳赵津贪横放恣，为一县巨患，允讨捕杀之。
现代文：年十九，为郡吏。当时小黄门晋阳赵津贪横跋扈，为一县的大患，王允把他收捕杀了。
English: In the 19th year, he was a county official. At that time, Xiao Huangmen Jinyang Zhao Jin was greedy, and he was a big problem in the county. Wang Yun arrested and killed him.

古文：而津兄弟谄事宦官，因缘谮诉，桓帝震怒，征太守刘质，遂下狱死。
现代文：赵津的兄弟谄媚宦官，借以诬诉，桓帝震怒，召太守刘王质投入监狱而死。
English: Zhao Jin's brother courted the eunuch with a false accusation, and Emperor Huan was so furious that he had the eunuch Liu Wangxi thrown into prison, where he died.

古文：允送丧还平原，终毕三年，然后归家。
现代文：王允送刘王质丧还平原，整整三年，然后回家。
English: Wang Yun sent Liu Wang hostage back to the plain, a full three years, and then went home.

古文：复还仕，郡人有路佛者，少无名行，而太守王球召以补吏，允犯颜固争，球怒，收允欲杀之。
现代文：再出仕，郡里人路佛，年轻无操行，太守王球召他补吏，王允胆敢触犯王球，力争不可，王球发怒，收捕了王允，想把他杀了。
English: Once more he was sent out to serve. Lu Buddha, a resident of the county, was young and inexperienced. The governor Wang Qiu called him to fill the post. Wang Yun dared to offend Wang Qiu, but he could not fight back. Wang Qiu became angry, arrested Wang Yun and wanted to kill him.

古文：剌史邓盛闻而驰传辟为别驾从事。
现代文：刺史邓盛知道了，驰马传令举为别驾从事。
English: When Deng Sheng learned of this, he ordered the horse-drawn carriage to be used as a special vehicle.

古文：允由是知名，而路佛以之废弃。
现代文：王允由此著了名，路佛却因此被废弃了。
English: Wang Yun became famous for this, but the Road Buddha was abandoned as a result.

古文：允少好大节，有志于立功，常习诵经传，朝夕试驰射。
现代文：王允年轻时好大节，有志为国立功。经常诵读经传，早晚学驰马射箭。
English: When Wang Yun was young, he was good at the grand festival and aspired to be a national merit. He often recited scriptures and learned horse riding and archery in the morning and evening.

古文：三公并辟，以司徒高第为侍御史。
现代文：三公都征召他，按司徒高第任侍御史。
English: He was called up by the three princes and became the second-highest-ranking chamberlain in history.

古文：中平元年，黄巾贼起，特选拜豫州刺史。
现代文：中平元年，黄巾贼暴动，王允被特选任豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, the Yellow Turban Thieves rioted, and Wang Yun was specially selected to be appointed as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：辟荀爽、孔融等为从事，上除禁党。
现代文：他征荀爽、孔融等人为从事，上书解除党禁。
English: He was artificially engaged in the recruitment of Zhuang Shuang, Kong Rong and others, and lifted the party ban.

古文：讨击黄巾别帅，大破之，与左中郎将皇甫嵩、右中郎将朱俊等受降数十万。
现代文：讨伐黄巾别帅，大胜。与左中郎将皇甫嵩、右中郎将朱亻等受降黄巾贼几十万人。
English: The crusade against the Yellow Turbans was a great success, and hundreds of thousands of Yellow Turbans were surrendered, including the left middle commander, Emperor Fusong, and the right middle commander, Emperor Zhu Xi.

古文：于贼中得中常侍张让宾客书疏，与黄巾交通，允具发其奸，以状闻。
现代文：在贼中得到中常侍张让宾客的书信，与黄巾来往，王允彻底揭发其奸情，报告了朝廷。
English: Among the thieves, Wang Yun thoroughly exposed the treachery of Zhang Zhan's guest, and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：灵帝责怒让，让叩头陈谢，竟不能罪之。
现代文：灵帝发怒，责斥张让，张让叩头请罪，灵帝居然没有治他的罪。
English: The Holy Spirit was angry and rebuked Zhang Zhan. Zhang Zhan kowtowed and pleaded guilty, but the Holy Spirit did not punish him.

古文：而让怀协忿怨，以事中允。明年，遂传下狱。
现代文：张让却怀恨在心，因事中伤王允，第二年，逮捕入狱。
English: Zhang Zhan, however, harbored a grudge against Wang Yun. He was arrested and imprisoned the following year for injuring Wang Yun in the incident.

古文：会赦，还复刺史。
现代文：遇着大赦，仍为刺史。
English: In the case of an amnesty, it is still a stab at history.

古文：旬日间，复以他罪被捕。
现代文：仅仅十天，又因他罪被捕。
English: Just ten days later, he was arrested again for his crime.

古文：司徒杨赐以允素高，不欲使更楚辱，乃遣客谢之曰： 君以张让之事，故一月再征。凶慝难量，幸为深计。 
现代文：司徒杨赐认为王允德行高，不想使他经受痛苦侮辱，于是派宾客告诉他说： 君因张让的事，一月再次征召，凶祸不可估量，你应当深思熟虑。 
English: Szeto Yang Zi thought that Wang Yunde was a high-ranking official and did not want him to suffer pain and humiliation, so he sent a guest to tell him: You were called up again in January because of Zhang Zhan, the evil is immeasurable, you should think deeply.

古文：又诸从事好气决者，共流涕奉药而进之。
现代文：又各从事好气决勇的，都流着眼泪奉药与王允。
English: In addition, all those who were engaged in good spirits and bravery shed tears and followed Wang Yun.

古文：允厉声曰： 吾为人臣，获罪于君，当伏大辟以谢天下，岂有乳药求死乎！ 
现代文：王允厉声说： 我为人臣，犯了皇上的罪，应当服极刑以谢天下，难道可以饮药求死吗？ 
English: Wang Yun said in a strong voice: I am a subject, I have committed the emperor's crime, I should serve the capital punishment to thank the world, can I drink medicine to die?

古文：投杯而起，出就槛车。
现代文：投杯起身，径上囚车。
English: Pour a cup, get up, and walk to the prison van.

古文：既至廷尉，左右皆促其事，朝臣莫不叹息。
现代文：既至廷尉，左右的人都催促处理其事，朝臣没有不叹息的。
English: Even if it was a courtier, people on both sides urged him to deal with the matter, and the courtier could not help but sigh.

古文：大将军何进、大尉袁隗、司徒杨赐共上疏请之曰： 夫内视反听，则忠臣谒诚；宽贤矜能，则义士厉节。
现代文：大将军何进、太尉袁隗、司徒杨赐联盟上书请说： 人君内视反听，有自知之明，忠臣就竭诚以事皇上，对贤者宽其小过，奖励他的才能，义士就更加严格要求自己。
English: Grand General He Jin, First Lieutenant Yuan Qi, and Sifu Yang Qi, in their letter to the alliance, please say: People see and hear what they want to see and hear, and have self-knowledge, loyal subjects are dedicated to the emperor, and are lenient with the wise and reward his talent, and the righteous are more strict with themselves.

古文：是以孝文纳冯唐之说，晋悼宥魏绛之罪。
现代文：所以孝文皇帝采纳了冯唐的意见，晋悼公原宥了魏绛的罪过。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen adopted the opinion of Feng Tang, and Jin Yue Gongyuan pardoned Wei Xuan's sins.

古文：允以特选受命，诛逆抚顺，曾未期月，州境澄清。
现代文：王允是按特选任用的。杀戮叛逆，抚慰归顺，不到一个月，州境扫清。
English: Wang Yun was appointed on the basis of a special selection. Killing the rebels, appeasing them, and making them submit. In less than a month, the state border was cleared.

古文：方欲列其庸勋，请加爵赏，而以奉事不当，当肆大戮。
现代文：正想列举他的功勋，报请朝廷加爵赏赐，却因奉事不当，应处极刑。
English: He was about to enumerate his merits and ask the imperial court to award him a knighthood, but he was sentenced to capital punishment for improper service.

古文：责轻罚重，有亏众望。
现代文：责斥轻，处罚重，有失众望。
English: The reprimand is light, the punishment is heavy, and there is a loss of public hope.

古文：臣等备位宰相，不敢寝默。
现代文：我等位在宰相，不敢默不作声。
English: As prime minister, I dare not remain silent.

古文：诚以允宜蒙三槐之听，以昭忠贞之心。 
现代文：我们的确认为王允应该蒙三槐之听讼，以明忠贞之心。 
English: We do think that Wang Yun should be given a three-pronged hearing to prove his loyalty.

古文：书奏，得以减死论。
现代文：奏上皇帝，得以减死论罪。
English: Reported to the emperor, he was able to commute the death sentence.

古文：是冬大赦，而允独不在宥，三公咸复为言。
现代文：这年冬天大赦，王允却不在赦宥之内，三公又再次为他说话。
English: This winter, there was an amnesty, but Wang Yun was not included in the amnesty, and the three princes spoke for him again.

古文：至明年，乃得解释。
现代文：到第二年，才得到获释。
English: He was not released until the following year.

古文：是时，宦者横暴，睚眦触死。
现代文：这时宦官横暴，偶有小怨小忿，就要遭到他们害死。
English: At this time, eunuchs are violent, and if they have a small grudge, they will be killed.

古文：允惧不免，乃变易名姓，转侧河内、陈留间。
现代文：王允怕不免遭宦官陷害，于是改名换姓，流浪河内、陈留间。
English: Wang Yun was afraid of being framed by eunuchs, so he changed his name and surname, wandered around Hanoi, and stayed in Chen.

古文：及帝崩，乃奔丧京师。
现代文：灵帝逝世，奔丧回京师。
English: When Emperor Lingdi died, he went back to Beijing.

古文：时，大将军何进欲诛宦官，召允与谋事，请为从事中郎，转河南尹。
现代文：这时大将军何进想诛杀宦官，找了王允商量，请他任从事中郎，调河南尹。
English: At this time, the great general He Jin wanted to kill the eunuch, so he consulted with Wang Yun and asked him to be appointed as a middle-ranking official and to transfer Henan Yin.

古文：献帝即位，拜太仆，再迁守尚书令。
现代文：献帝继位，任为太仆，再调署理尚书令。
English: He was offered the imperial succession, appointed as a great servant, and then transferred to the post of Imperial Secretary.

古文：初平元年，代杨彪为司徒，守尚书令如故。
现代文：初平元年，代杨彪为司徒，还是署理尚书令。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Yang Biao's deputy was Shitou, and his deputy was Shang Shuling.

古文：及董卓迁都关中，允悉收敛兰台、石室图书秘纬要者以从。
现代文：董卓迁都关中，王允把全部兰台、石室图书秘纬中重要的收集起来带到关中。
English: When Dong Zhuo moved to Guanzhong, Wang Yun brought all the important collections of the LanTai and Stone Room books to Guanzhong.

古文：既至长安，皆分别条上。
现代文：到了长安，都分类条上。
English: When I got to Chang'an, everything was on the classifieds.

古文：又集汉朝旧事所当施用者，一皆奏之。
现代文：又收集汉朝旧事应当施用的，都一一奏上。
English: In addition, they collected the old things of the Han Dynasty that should be applied, and played them one by one.

古文：经籍具存，允有力焉。
现代文：经籍得以保全，王允是有功的。
English: Wang Yun deserves credit for preserving his family name.

古文：时董卓尚留洛阳，朝政大小，悉委之于允。允矫情屈意，每相承附，卓亦推心，不生乖疑，故得扶持王室于危乱之中，臣主内外，莫不倚恃焉。
现代文：当时董卓还留在洛阳，朝政大小，都托王允处理，王允假情屈意，惟命是从，董卓也信任王允，不生乖疑之心，所以能够扶持王室于危乱之中，天子、朝臣，内内外外，没有不依靠他的。
English: At that time, Dong Zhuo was still in Luoyang. Wang Yun was entrusted with all the affairs of state and government, and Wang Yun gave in to his false feelings and obeyed his orders. Dong Zhuo also trusted Wang Yun and did not have a suspicious heart, so he was able to support the royal family in the midst of the crisis. There was no prince or courtier, both at home and abroad, who did not rely on him.

古文：允见卓祸毒方深，篡逆已兆，密与司隶校尉黄琬、尚书郑公业等谋共诛之。
现代文：王允看见董卓的祸毒日深，篡夺帝位的逆谋已经露出来了，暗内地与司隶校尉黄琬、尚书郑公业等人谋议共同杀掉董卓。
English: Wang Yun saw that Dong Zhuo's malignancy was deepening day by day, and his counter-plot to usurp the imperial throne had already been exposed. He secretly plotted to kill Dong Zhuo together with Sifu Lieutenant Huang Qi, Shangshu Zheng Gongye and others.

古文：乃上护羌校尉杨瓚行左将军事，执金吾士孙瑞为南阳太守，并将兵出武关道，以讨袁术为名，实欲分路征卓，而后拔天子还洛阳。
现代文：于是奏请护羌校尉杨瓒行左将军事，执金吾士孙瑞为南阳太守，都带兵出武关道，以讨伐袁术为名，实际上是想分路征讨董卓，然后拥天子还洛阳。
English: Therefore, he requested the left-wing military commander Yang Xing, who was the captain of the garrison, and the left-wing military commander Sun Rui, who was the governor of Nanyang, to lead the soldiers out of Wuguan Road. In the name of fighting Yuan Shu, they actually wanted to go separate ways to fight Dong Zhuo, and then take Tianzi back to Luoyang.

古文：卓疑而留之，允乃引内瑞为仆射，瓚为尚书。
现代文：董卓怀疑，留王允，王允于是引士孙瑞为仆射、杨瓒为尚书。
English: Dong Zhuo suspected that Wang Yun was staying, so Wang Yun invited Sun Rui to be his assistant and Yang Jie to be his secretary.

古文：二年，卓还长安，录入关之功，封允为温侯，食邑五千户。
现代文：二年，董卓回长安，叙入关的功劳，封王允为温侯，食邑五千户。
English: Two years later, Dong Zhuo returned to Chang'an and was awarded the honor of entering the customs. Wang Yun was awarded the title of "Wen Hou" and his food village grew to 5,000 households.

古文：固让不受。
现代文：王允坚决辞让不接受。
English: Wang Yun resolutely refused to accept the resignation.

古文：士孙瑞说允曰： 夫执谦守约，存乎其时。
现代文：士孙瑞说王允： 谦虚俭朴，这要看时间行事。
English: Judge Sun Rui said to Wang Yunlu: Be modest and frugal. It depends on the time.

古文：公与董太师并位俱封，而独崇高节，岂和光之道邪？ 
现代文：您与董太师并位俱封，而您独突出自己高节，不受封爵，难道是胡里胡涂，与人相混不显露自己的办法吗？ 
English: You and Dong Taishi are both knighted, and you are the only one to highlight your high rank and not be knighted. Is it a trick to mix with people without revealing your own methods?

古文：允纳其言，乃受二千户。
现代文：王允接受了他的意见，受二千户。
English: Wang Yun accepted his suggestion and accepted 2,000 households.

古文：三年春，连雨六十余日，允与士孙瑞、杨瓚登台请霁，复结前谋。
现代文：三年春，一连落雨六十多天，王允与士孙瑞、杨瓒登台请老天爷放晴。
English: In the spring of the third year, after more than sixty days of continuous rain, Wang Yun, along with scholars Sun Rui and Yang Qi, went on stage to ask God to make it clear.

古文：瑞曰： 自岁末以来，太阳不照，霖雨积时，月犯执法，彗孛仍见，昼阴夜阳，雾气交侵，此期应促尽，内发者胜。
现代文：再次商讨诛杀董卓的事。士孙瑞说 ：自从岁尾以来，不见太阳，久雨不晴，月犯执法星，彗星孛星仍现，白天阴，晚上阳，雾气相侵，这是其应短促完结，从内部发动的胜利。
English: Discussing the murder of Dong Zhuo once again, Judge Sun Rui said, "Since the end of the year, the sun has not been seen, the rain has not been clear, the moon has been a criminal law enforcement star, the comet is still present, the daytime is cloudy, the evening is sunny, and the fog is invading. This is a victory that should be short-lived and launched from within.

古文：几不可后，公其图之。 
现代文：机不可失，您赶快图谋吧。 
English: There is no time to lose. Make your plans quickly.

古文：允然其言，乃潜结卓将吕布，使为内应。
现代文：王允认为士孙瑞说的对。于是暗暗地结合董卓将吕布，使他为内应。
English: Wang Yun thought that what Sun Rui said was right. So he secretly combined with Dong Zhuo to take Lv Bu and make him the leader.

古文：会卓入贺，吕布因刺杀之。
现代文：正值董卓入朝贺献帝病愈，吕布因得间杀了董卓。
English: At the time when Dong Zhuo entered the morning greeting to offer his respects to the emperor, Lv Bu killed Dong Zhuo in the heat of the moment.

古文：语在《卓传》。
现代文：语在《董卓传》。
English: This incident is recorded in detail in "The Biography of Dong Zhuo."

古文：允初议赦卓部曲，吕布亦数劝之。
现代文：王允开始想赦免董卓的部属，吕布也多次劝王允。
English: Wang Yun began to want to pardon Dong Zhuo's subordinates, and Lv Bu also repeatedly persuaded Wang Yun.

古文：既而疑曰； 此辈无罪，从其主耳。
现代文：但王允终于怀疑，说： 这些人无罪，只是跟着董卓罢了。
English: But Wang Yun finally doubted, saying: These people are not guilty, they are just following Dong Zhuo.

古文：今若名为恶逆而特赦之，适足使其自疑，非所以安之之道也。 
现代文：现在如果认为他们是恶逆特赦免他们，那正好使他们自己疑惑起来，这不是使他们安定不动的办法。 
English: Now if they are considered to be ruffians and they are pardoned, it will just make them doubt themselves. This is not the way to keep them stable.

古文：吕布又欲以卓财物班赐公卿、将校，允又不从。
现代文：吕布又想把董卓的财物赏赐公卿、将校，王允又不准。
English: Lv Bu also wanted to give Dong Zhuo's property to nobles and officers, but Wang Yun refused.

古文：而素轻布，以剑客遇之。
现代文：王允平日却看不起吕布，以剑客对待他。
English: Wang Yun usually looked down on Lü Bu and treated him as a swordsman.

古文：布亦负有功劳，多自夸伐，既失意望，渐不相平。
现代文：吕布也认为自己有功劳，自吹自擂，既不得意，渐渐与王允不和了。
English: Lü Bu also thought he had merit and boasted about it, but he was disappointed and gradually fell out with Wang Yun.

古文：允性刚棱疾恶，初惧董卓豺狼，故折节图之。
现代文：王允性情刚烈，疾恶如仇。开始怕董卓这只豺狼，所以压抑自己，屈志相从。
English: Wang Yun had a strong character and hated evil. He began to be afraid of Dong Zhuo, the wolf, so he suppressed himself and obeyed him.

古文：卓既歼灭，自谓无复患难，及在际会，每乏温润之色，杖正持重，不循权宜之计，是以群下不甚附之。
现代文：董卓被歼灭之后，自己认为再没有什么患难了，在公共场合，很少温润的颜色，主持正道持重，不用权宜之计，因此在他下面的人，也不很拥护他。
English: After Dong Zhuo was annihilated, he thought that there would be no more hardships. In public, he rarely wore a warm color, presided over the right path, and did not use expedient measures. Therefore, the people under him did not support him very much.

古文：董卓将校及在位者多凉州人，允议罢其军。
现代文：董卓的将校及在职的多是凉州人，王允研究把原来董卓的部队撤销。
English: Most of Dong Zhuo's officers and employees were from Liangzhou. Wang Yun studied and revoked the original Dong Zhuo's troops.

古文：或说允曰： 凉州人素惮袁氏而畏关东。今若一旦解兵，则必人人自危。
现代文：有人对王允说： 凉州人一向怕袁氏而畏关东，现在如果一旦撤销，关东就必然人人自危。
English: Someone said to Wang Yun, "People in Liangzhou have always been afraid of the Yuan Dynasty, but they are afraid of the Kanto region. If the Yuan Dynasty is revoked, everyone in the Kanto region will be in danger.

古文：可以皇甫义真为将军，就领其众，因使留陕以安抚之，而徐与关东通谋，以观其变。 
现代文：可以皇甫义真为将军，带领这支部队，从而使留在陕地安抚他们，慢慢地与关东通谋，观察其变。 
English: It is possible for Emperor Fu Yizhen to be a general and lead this army, so that he can stay in Shaanxi to appease them, slowly conspire with Guandong, and observe its changes.

古文：允曰： 不然。关东举义兵者，皆吾徒耳。
现代文：王允说： 不然，关东举义兵的，都是我的人啊。
English: Wang Yun said, "Otherwise, all the people in the Kanto region who raised a volunteer army are my people."

古文：今若距险屯陕，虽安凉州，而疑关东之心，甚不可也。 
现代文：现在如果距险驻兵陕地，虽然可以安抚凉州，使关东发生疑心，这是极不可以的。 
English: Now, if the troops stationed in Shaanxi are far away from the danger, although it can appease Liangzhou and make Kanto suspicious, this is absolutely unacceptable.

古文：时，百姓讹言，当悉诛凉州人，遂转相恐动。
现代文：当时百姓谣言，会全部诛杀凉州人，于是互相恐惧骚动。
English: At that time, there was a rumor among the people that they would all fight and kill the people of Liangzhou, so they were afraid of each other and rioted.

古文：其在关中者，皆拥兵自守。
现代文：在关中的，都拥兵自守。
English: In Guanzhong, they all have soldiers to defend themselves.

古文：更相谓曰： 丁彦思、蔡伯喈但以董公亲厚，并尚从坐，今既不赦我曹，而欲解兵，今日解兵，明日当复为鱼肉矣。 
现代文：并且互相转告说： 丁彦思、蔡伯喈只因与董公相好，就都被株连获罪。现在既然不赦免我辈，又想把部队撤销，今天撤销，明天我们就为鱼肉，听人宰割了啊！ 
English: And they told each other: Ding Yanshi and Cai Boqin were both convicted of the same crime just because they were friendly with Dong Gong. Now that they do not pardon our generation, they want to revoke the troops, revoke them today, and tomorrow we will be slaughtered for fish and meat!

古文：卓部曲将李傕、郭汜等先将兵在关东，因不自安，遂合谋为乱，攻围长安。
现代文：董卓的部属将李莈、郭汜等先前将兵在关东，因此不自安，于是共谋为乱，围攻长安。
English: Dong Zhuo's subordinates, including Li Jun and Guo Jun, had previously stationed soldiers in Kanto, so they were not at ease, so they conspired to create chaos and besiege Chang'an.

古文：城陷，吕布奔走。
现代文：城破，吕布逃走。
English: The city is destroyed and Lüb escapes.

古文：布驻马青琐门外，招允曰： 公可以去乎？ 
现代文：吕布驻马青琐门外，招呼王允说： 您可以走了吗？ 
English: Lü Bu stationed outside Ma Qingzo's gate, beckoned Wang Yun and said: "Can you leave?

古文：允曰： 若蒙社稷之灵，上安国家，吾之愿也。
现代文：王允说 ：如果得到皇上的保佑，上安国家，是我的愿望。
English: Wang Yun said, "If I receive the emperor's blessing, it is my wish to become the emperor of Shangan."

古文：如其不获，则奉身以死之。朝廷幼少，恃我而已，临难苟免，吾不忍也。
现代文：不然，就以身殉国。皇上幼小，靠我而已，遇患难，图侥幸逃避，我不忍啊。
English: Otherwise, I will die for my country. The emperor is young, he can only rely on me, if he is in trouble, he will try to escape with a fluke, I can't bear it.

古文：怒力谢关东诸公，勤以国家为念。 
现代文：多多拜托关东诸公，要以国家为念。 
English: As much as possible, please the people of the Kanto region, and keep the country in mind.

古文：初，允以同郡宋翼为左冯翊，王宏为右扶风。
现代文：起先，王允用同郡宋翼为左冯翊、王宏为右扶风。
English: At first, Wang Yun used Song Ying of the same county as the left Feng Xuan and Wang Hong as the right Fu Feng.

古文：是时，三辅民庶炽盛，兵谷富实，李傕等欲即杀允，惧二郡为患，乃先征翼、宏。
现代文：当时三辅百姓炽盛，兵多，粮食也多，李莈等想杀掉王允，害怕二郡为患。于是先征召宋翼、王宏。
English: At that time, the people of Sanfu were in full swing, there were many soldiers and much food. Li Xi and others wanted to kill Wang Yun, fearing that the two counties would be in trouble. Therefore, Song Ying and Wang Hong were conscripted first.

古文：今日就征，明日俱族。
现代文：王宏派使者说宋翼 ：郭汜、李莈因我二人在外，所以没有危害王允。
English: Wang Hong sent an envoy to say to Song Ying: Guo Jun and Li Jun did not harm Wang Yun because we were both outside.

古文：计将安出？ 翼曰： 虽祸福难量，然王命所不得避也。 
现代文：今天我们应征，明天一定皆遭族灭，有什么主意呢？ 宋翼说 ：虽然祸福不可料，但王命不可逃避啊。 
English: Today we are conscripted, tomorrow we will all be exterminated, what is the plan? Song Ying said: Although misfortune and fortune cannot be expected, the king's life cannot be escaped.

古文：宏曰： 义兵鼎沸，在于董卓，况其党与乎！
现代文：王宏说： 义兵之所以汹汹，在于董卓，何况他的党羽呢？
English: Wang Hong said: The reason why the volunteer soldiers are so fierce is because of Dong Zhuo, not to mention his followers.

古文：若举兵共讨君侧恶人，山东必应之，此转祸为福之计也。 
现代文：如果率领部队共同讨伐君主身边的恶人，山东一定会响应，这是转祸为福之计。 
English: If you lead the troops to jointly fight the evildoers around the monarch, Shandong will certainly respond. This is a way to turn misfortune into good fortune.

古文：翼不从。
现代文：宋翼不从。
English: Song Ying did not comply.

古文：宏不能独立，遂俱就征，下廷尉。
现代文：王宏一个人不能独立，于是就都应征，把他们送到司法机关。
English: Wang Hong couldn't be independent on his own, so he conscripted them all and sent them to the judicial organs.

古文：乃收允及翼、宏，并杀之。
现代文：李莈于是逮捕王允及宋翼、王宏，都处以极刑。
English: Li Gan then arrested Wang Yun, Song Ying and Wang Hong, and they were all sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：允时年五十六。
现代文：王允这时五十六岁。
English: Wang Yun was 56 years old at the time.

古文：长子侍中盖、次子景、定及宗族十余人皆见诛害，唯兄子晨、陵得脱归乡里。
现代文：长子侍中王盖、次子王景、王定及宗族十余人都被杀害，只有兄子王晨、王陵得以逃归乡里。
English: The eldest son, Wang Gai (侍中), the second son, Wang Jing (王景), Wang Ding (王定) and more than ten members of the clan were killed. Only the elder brother, Wang Chen (王晨) and Wang Ling (王陵) were able to escape to the countryside.

古文：天子感恸，百姓丧气，莫敢收允尸者，唯故吏平陵令赵戬弃官营丧。
现代文：天子悲痛，百姓丧气，没有敢于去收王允尸体的，独有旧吏平陵令赵戬弃官营丧。
English: The emperor was grief-stricken, the people were discouraged and did not dare to collect Wang Yun's body. Only the old official Ping Ling ordered Zhao Xuan to abandon the official mourning.

古文：王宏字长文，少有气力，不拘细行。
现代文：王宏字长文，年轻时有气力，不注重小节。
English: Wang Hongzhi is a long-winded writer. When he was young, he was energetic and did not pay attention to the small section.

古文：初为弘农太守，考案郡中有事宦官买爵位者，虽位至二千石，皆掠考收捕，遂杀数十人，威动邻界。
现代文：开始作弘农太守，审讯郡里有奉侍宦官买爵位的，虽然官位到了二千石，都收捕拷打，杀了几十人，威震邻郡。
English: He began as the governor of Hongnong, and interrogated the eunuchs in the county to buy a peerage. Although the official rank reached 2,000 koku, they were all arrested and tortured, and dozens of people were killed, shaking the neighboring counties.

古文：素与司隶校尉胡种有隙，及宏下狱，种遂迫促杀之。
现代文：平日与司隶校尉胡种有矛盾，王宏下狱，胡种就急不可待把他杀了。
English: On an ordinary day, he had a conflict with the police lieutenant Hu Zeng. When Wang Hong was sent to prison, Hu Zeng killed him in a hurry.

古文：宏临命诟曰： 宋翼竖儒，不足议大计。
现代文：王宏临死时骂说 ：宋翼是蠢儒，不足与谋大事。
English: When Wang Hong was on the verge of death, he cursed: Song Ying is a stupid man, who lacks and seeks great things.

古文：胡种乐人之祸，祸将及之。 
现代文：胡种幸灾乐祸，祸害要降临他的。 
English: The goose doth rejoice in his calamity, and destruction cometh upon him.

古文：种后眠辄见宏以杖击之，因发病，数日死。
现代文：胡种后来睡觉常见王宏用杖打他，因而发了病，不几天就死了。
English: After that, Mr. Hu went to bed, and Wang Hong often beat him with a cane. As a result, he fell ill and died within a few days.

古文：后迁都于许，帝思允忠节，使改殡葬之，遣虎贲中郎将奉策吊祭，赐东园秘器，赠以本官印绶，送还本郡。
现代文：后来迁都许昌，天子思念王允的忠节，改葬王允，派虎贲中郎将奉命吊祭，赐东园秘器，赐他本官印绶，送还本郡。
English: Later, the capital was moved to Xuchang, and Tianzi thought about Wang Yun's Loyalty Festival, changed the funeral for Wang Yun, and sent the middle son of the tiger cub to be ordered to hang the sacrifice, give the East Garden secret utensils, give him the official seal, and send it back to the county.

古文：封其孙黑为安乐亭侯，食邑三百户。
现代文：封王允孙王黑为安乐亭侯，食邑三百户。
English: Wang Yun's grandson, Wang He, was named the lord of Anle Pavilion, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：士孙瑞字君策，扶风人，颇有才谋。
现代文：士孙瑞字君荣，扶风县人。很有才干谋略。
English: Shisun Rui Zi Jun Rong, a native of Fufeng County, is a very talented strategist.

古文：瑞以允自专讨董卓之劳，故归功不侯，所以获免于难。
现代文：士孙瑞因王允自专讨伐董卓的功劳，归功王允，不受封侯，所以得以免于一死。
English: Judge Sun Rui was exempted from death because he was not given the title of vassal, which was due to Wang Yun's efforts to fight against Dong Zhuo on his own.

古文：后为国三老、光禄大夫。
现代文：后为国三老、光禄大夫。
English: Later, he became one of the Three Elders of the country and the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：每三公缺，杨彪、皇甫嵩皆让位于瑞。
现代文：三公出缺，杨彪、皇甫嵩都让位给士孙瑞。
English: The three princes vacated their positions, and Yang Biao and Wang Fusong gave their places to Shisun Rui.

古文：兴平二年，从驾东归，为乱兵所杀。
现代文：兴平二年，从天子驾东归，被乱兵杀死。
English: In the second year of the Xingping era, he returned from the east with the son of heaven and was killed by the soldiers.

古文：赵戬字叔茂，长陵人，性质正多谋。
现代文：赵戬字叔茂，长陵县人，性情质朴正派，有谋略。
English: Zhao Xunzha Shumo, a native of Changling County, has a simple and decent temperament and a good sense of strategy.

古文：初平中，为尚书，典选举。
现代文：永平中，为尚书，管选举。
English: Yongping Middle School, for the record, is in charge of elections.

古文：董卓数欲有所私授，戬辄坚拒不听，言色强厉。
现代文：董卓多次想私让他干什么，赵戬坚决不听，严词厉色。
English: Dong Zhuo repeatedly wanted me to tell him what to do, but Zhao Yao resolutely refused to listen and used harsh words.

古文：卓怒，召将杀之，众人悚栗，而戬辞貌自若。
现代文：董卓发怒，把他叫去准备杀他，大家都害怕，赵戬言词形貌不改常态。
English: Dong Zhuo got angry and called him to prepare to kill him. Everyone was afraid. Zhao Jun's words and appearance did not change the normal state.

古文：卓悔，谢释之。
现代文：董卓后悔，把他释放了。
English: Dong Zhuo regretted and released him.

古文：长安之乱，客于荆州，刘表厚礼焉。
现代文：长安大乱，客居荆州，刘表以厚礼待他。
English: Chang'an was in turmoil, he was staying in Jingzhou, and Liu Table treated him with great courtesy.

古文：及曹操平荆州，乃辟之，执戬手曰： 恨相见晚。 
现代文：曹操平定荆州，辟举他。握着赵戬的手说： 恨相见太晚了。 
English: Cao Cao pacified Jingzhou and sent him away. Holding Zhao Yao's hand, he said, "It's too late to hate each other.

古文：卒相国钟繇长史。
现代文：死于相国钟繇长史任上。
English: He died at the same time as his father-in-law, Zhong Xuan Changshi, took office.

古文：论曰：士虽以正立，亦以谋济。
现代文：史官评论说：士大夫虽然立身处事以正，但也不妨用权谋相济。
English: The historian commented, "Although the scholar-official should be upright in his dealings, he might as well use his power to help others.

古文：若王允之推董卓而引其权，伺其间而敝其罪，当此之时，天下悬解矣。
现代文：如王允推重董卓而引用他的权威，乘其不备而治其罪，当时，天下安泰啊。
English: If Wang Yun promoted Dong Zhuo and invoked his authority, taking advantage of his unpreparedness to punish his crime, at that time, the world was safe.

古文：而终不以猜忤为衅者，知其本于忠义之诚也。
现代文：终究没有被猜忤成罪的原因，是知道他一片诚心，本于忠义。
English: After all, the reason why he was not convicted was that he was sincere and loyal.

古文：故推卓不为失正，分权不为苟冒，伺间不为狙诈。
现代文：所以王允推重董卓不能叫做失正，分权不能叫做随便采取的措施，乘其不备不能叫做诡诈。
English: Therefore, Wang Yun's promotion of Dong Zhuo cannot be called a miscarriage of justice, the decentralization of power cannot be called a random measure, and taking advantage of its inadequacy cannot be called trickery.

古文：及其谋济意从，则归成于正也。
现代文：等到谋划实现，就归于正，而不用谋了。
English: Wait until the plan is realized, it will be corrected, and there will be no need for a plan.

