古文：孝明皇帝九子：贾贵人生章帝；阴贵人生梁节王暢；余七王本书不载母氏。
现代文：◆孝明八王传，孝明皇帝有九个儿子：贾贵人生章帝；阴贵人生梁节王刘畅；其余七王本书没有记载母氏。
English: ◆ According to the legend of the eight kings of Xiaoming, Emperor Xiaoming had nine sons: Emperor Jia Guizhong; Emperor Liang Jie, Emperor Liang Jie; the remaining seven kings have no mother's name recorded in the book.

古文：千乘哀王建，永平三年封。
现代文：千乘哀王刘建，永平三年封。
English: Liu Jian, the thousand-year-old mourning king, and Yongping, the three-year-old prince.

古文：明年薨。
现代文：第二年死去。
English: He died the following year.

古文：年少无子，国除。
现代文：年少没有儿子，国除。
English: There is no son of the year, except for the country.

古文：陈敬王羡，永平三年封广平王。
现代文：陈敬王刘羡，永平三年封为广平王。
English: Chen Jingwang Liu Sheng, Yongping three years as Guangping Wang.

古文：建初三年，有司奏遣羡与巨鹿王恭、乐成王党俱就国。
现代文：建初三年，有司奏遣刘羡与巨鹿王刘恭、乐成王刘党都到封地去。
English: In the first three years after the founding of the dynasty, Liu En, Liu Gong, the Great Deer King, and Liu Dang, the Musician King, were all sent to the fief.

古文：肃宗性笃爱，不忍与诸王乖离，遂皆留京师。
现代文：肃宗性厚爱，不忍心与诸王分开，于是都留在京师。
English: They had a deep reverence for Buddhism and could not bear to be separated from the kings, so they all stayed in Beijing.

古文：明年，案舆地图，令诸国户口皆等，租入岁各八千万。
现代文：第二年，按地图，使诸国户口都均等，租入每年八千万。
English: In the second year, according to the map, the household registration of all countries will be equalized, and the rent will increase by 80 million per year.

古文：羡博涉经书，有威严，与诸儒讲论于白虎殿。
现代文：刘羡博涉经书，有威严，与诸儒讲论在白虎观。
English: Liu Enbo's sutra-related books are dignified, and his lectures with Confucianism are in the White Tiger View.

古文：是时，诸国无复租禄，而数见虏夺，并日而食，转死沟壑者甚众，夫人姬妾多为丹陵兵乌桓所略云。
现代文：七年，皇上认为广平在北边，多有边费，于是改为西平王，分汝南八县为封地。等到皇帝死后，遗诏改封为陈王，食淮阳郡，那年往封地去。立三十七年死去。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor thought that Guangping was in the north, and there were more border fees, so he changed it to Xiping Wang, and divided eight counties in the south of Ryu for the fief. After the death of the emperor, the will was changed to Chen Wang, Huaiyang County, and went to the fief that year. He died in the thirty-seventh year.

古文：彭城靖王恭，永平九年赐号灵寿王。
现代文：儿子思王刘钧为嗣。彭城靖王刘恭，永平九年赐号灵寿王。
English: He was succeeded by his son, King Si Liu Ye. King Jing of Pengcheng, King Liu Gong, was given the title of King Ling Shou in the ninth year of Yongping.

古文：十五年，封为臣鹿王。
现代文：十五年，封为巨鹿王。
English: Fifteen years later, he was named the King of the Giant Deer.

古文：建初三年，徙封江陵王，改南郡为国。
现代文：建初三年，改封江陵王，改南郡为封地。
English: In the first three years of construction, it was renamed Jiangling Wang, and Nan County was changed into a fief.

古文：元和二年，三公上言江陵在京师正南，不可以封，乃徙为六安王，以庐江郡为国。
现代文：元和二年，三公上言江陵在京师正南，不可以封，于是改为六安王，以庐江郡为封地。
English: In the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty, the three princes said that Jiangling was in the south of Beijing Division, and it could not be sealed, so it was changed to Lu'an King, with Lijiang County as the fief.

古文：肃宗崩，遗诏徙封彭城王，食楚郡，其年就国。
现代文：肃宗死后，遗诏改封彭城王，食楚郡，同年往封地。
English: After the death of Su Zong, his will changed the fief to Pengcheng Wang, Shizuochu County, and he moved to the fief in the same year.

古文：恭敦厚威重，举动有节度，吏人敬爱之。
现代文：刘恭敦厚威重，举动有节度，官民敬爱他。
English: Liu Juntong is dignified and dignified, his behavior is restrained, and officials and the public adore him.

古文：永初六年，封恭子阿奴为竹邑侯。
现代文：永初六年，封刘恭之子阿奴为竹邑侯。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongzheng era, Anu, the son of Liu Qiong, was named the mayor of Zhubei.

古文：元初三年，恭以事怒子酺，酺自杀。
现代文：元初三年，刘恭因事对儿子刘酉甫发怒，刘酉甫自杀。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Qiong became angry with his son Liu Shifu, and Liu Shifu committed suicide.

古文：国相赵牧以状上，因诬奏恭祠祀恶言，大逆不道。
现代文：国相赵牧把情况上告，因诬奏刘恭祠祀时出恶言，大逆不道。
English: Minister of State Zhao Mu reported the situation to the authorities, saying that it was an act of high treason to utter bad words while playing a fake Liu Gongshi.

古文：立七年，魏受禅，以为崇德侯。
现代文：有司奏请杀掉他。刘恭上书为自己辩解。
English: If there is a matchmaker, please kill him. Liu Qiong wrote a letter to defend himself.

古文：乐成靖王党，永平九年赐号重熹王，十五年封乐成王。
现代文：朝廷认为他素著行义，下令考实，没有证据，赵牧因此下狱，碰着大赦免去死罪。刘恭立四十六年死去，儿子考王刘道嗣。乐成靖王刘党，永平九年赐号重熹王，十五年封乐成王。
English: The imperial court believed that he was well-versed in righteousness, ordered an examination of the facts, and there was no evidence, so Zhao Mu went to prison and was pardoned from the death penalty. Liu Gongli died in 46 years, and his son, King Kao, Liu Daozhi. Le Cheng Jing Wang Liu Party, in Yongping 9 years, was given the title of King Shou, and in 15 years, he was given the title of King Le Cheng.

古文：党聪惠，善《史书》，喜正文字。
现代文：刘党很聪明，会《史书》，喜正文字。
English: Liu Ting is very clever, he can read "History Books" and enjoy writing.

古文：与肃宗同年，尤相亲爱。
现代文：与肃宗同年，特别亲爱。
English: He was born in the same year as Suson, and is very dear to him.

古文：建初四年，以清河之游、观津，勃海之东光、成平，涿郡之中水、饶阳、安平、南深泽八县益乐成国。
现代文：建初四年，把清河的游、观津，勃海之东光、成平，涿郡之中水、饶阳、安平、南深泽八县加进乐成国。
English: In the first four years of construction, the eight counties of Qinghe's Yu, Guanzin, Bohai's Dongguang, Chengping, Zongshui, Raoyang, Anping, and Minamishe County were added to Lecheng.

古文：及帝崩，其年就国。
现代文：等到皇帝死去，同年到封地去。
English: Wait until the emperor dies, and go to the fiefdom in the same year.

古文：党急刻不遵法度。
现代文：刘党急刻不遵守法度。
English: Liu's party is in no hurry to comply with the law.

古文：旧禁宫人出嫁，不得适诸国。
现代文：按旧例禁止宫人出嫁，不得到封地去。
English: According to the old rules, palace courtiers were forbidden to marry, and they were not allowed to inherit fiefs.

古文：有故掖庭技人哀置，嫁为男子章初妻，党召哀置入宫与通，初欲上书告之，党恐惧，乃密赂哀置姊焦使杀初。事发觉，党乃缢杀内侍三人，以绝口语。
现代文：有旧掖庭技人哀置，嫁给男子章初为妻，刘党召哀置进宫和他通奸，章初想上书告他，刘党害怕，于是秘密收买哀置的姐焦使她杀掉章初，事情发觉了，刘党便缢杀太监三人，以灭口实。
English: There was an old court musician named Aji, who was married to a man named Zhang Chuang. The Liu faction summoned Aji to the palace to commit adultery with him. Zhang Chuang wanted to sue him in writing. The Liu faction was afraid, so they secretly bribed Aji's sister Jiao to kill Zhang Chuang. When the affair was discovered, the Liu faction killed three eunuchs to cover up the truth.

古文：立三十四年，国除。
现代文：刘党立二十五年死去，儿子哀王刘崇嗣。
English: Liu Tonglian died 25 years ago, and his son, Liu Chongzhi, mourned his death.

古文：下邳惠王衍，永平十五年封。
现代文：下邳惠王刘衍，永平十五年封。
English: Hui Wang Liu Yan, Yongping 15 years old.

古文：衍有容貌，肃宗即位，常在左右。
现代文：刘衍有容貌，肃宗即位，常在左右。
English: Liu Yan has the appearance, Su Zong is enthroned, often on the right and left.

古文：建初初冠，诏赐衍师傅已下官属金、帛各有差。
现代文：建初年间，刘衍刚行冠礼，诏赐刘衍师傅以下官属金帛等物，各有区别。
English: During the first year of construction, Liu Yan Gang performed the coronation ceremony, and the emperor gave Liu Yan Shifu and his subordinates official gold ingots and other items, each with its own difference.

古文：四年，以临淮郡及九江之钟离、当涂、东城、历阳、全椒合十七县益下邳国。
现代文：建初三年，将临淮郡及九江之钟离、当涂、东城、历阴、全椒共十七县加入下邳国。
English: In the first three years of construction, a total of seventeen counties, including Linhuai County, Zhongli, Dangtu, Dongcheng, Liyin and Quanzhe, were added to Heshan Province.

古文：帝崩，其年就国。
现代文：帝死后，当年去封地。
English: After the death of the emperor, he went to the fiefdom.

古文：贼平复国，数月薨。立五十七年，年九十。
现代文：刘衍后来有心病，而太子刘有罪被废，诸姬争着想立子为嗣，连上书相告言。
English: Liu Yan later suffered from a heart disease, while Prince Liu Guanzhong was deposed, and all the concubines vied with each other to become his heir, and even wrote to the emperor to complain.

古文：子哀王宜嗣，数月薨，无子，建安十一年国除。
现代文：和帝可怜她们，派彭城靖王刘恭到下邳正其嫡庶，立儿子刘成为太子。刘衍立五十四年死去，儿子贞王刘成嗣。
English: The emperor took pity on them and sent Liu Gong, the king of Jing in Pengcheng, to the Lower Yangtze River to legitimize his illegitimate son Liu, who became the crown prince. Liu Yanli died in 54 and his son Zhenwang Liu became the heir.

古文：梁节王暢，永平十五年封为汝南王。
现代文：梁节王刘畅，永平十五年封为汝南王。
English: Liu Chang, the King of Liangjie, and Yongping, the King of Southern Ru, were enthroned fifteen years later.

古文：母阴贵人有宠，暢尤被爱幸，国土租入倍于诸国。
现代文：母阴贵人有宠于帝，刘畅尤其被宠爱，国土租入比其他国封地加一倍。
English: Liu Chang was especially favored by the emperor, and the land he rented was double that of other fiefs.

古文：肃宗立，缘先帝之意，赏赐恩宠甚笃。
现代文：肃宗即位，顺着先帝的意思，赏赐恩宠很厚。
English: Su Zong ascended the throne, in accordance with the wishes of the former emperor, and was rewarded with great grace.

古文：建初二年，封暢舅阴棠为西陵侯。
现代文：建初二年，封刘畅舅父阴棠为西陵侯。
English: In the second year of Jianchu, Liu Chang's uncle, Yin Tang, was appointed as Xiling marquis.

古文：四年，徙为梁王，以陈留之郾、宁陵、济阴之薄、单父、己氏、成武，凡六县，益梁国。
现代文：四年，徙为梁王，将陈留之郾、宁陵，济阴之薄、单父，己氏、成武等六县加入梁国封地。
English: In four years, he became the King of Liang and added six counties, including Chen Liu Zi, Ningling, Jiyin Zi Bo, Shanpu, Ji Shi, and Chengwu, to the fiefdom of Liang.

古文：帝崩，其年就国。
现代文：帝死后，当年去封地。
English: After the death of the emperor, he went to the fiefdom.

古文：暢性聪惠，然少贵骄，颇不遵法度。
现代文：刘畅性聪惠，然而少年贵骄，不大遵守法度。
English: Liu Chang is an intelligent person, but he is arrogant and does not abide by the law.

古文：归国后，数有恶梦，从官卞忌自言能使六丁，善占梦，暢数使卜筮。
现代文：到封地后，多次有恶梦，从官卞忌自己说能使六丁，会占梦，刘畅数次使他占卜筮。
English: After arriving at the fiefdom, he had nightmares many times. From the official, he said that he could make Liuding, he would dream, and Liu Chang made him divination several times.

古文：又暢乳母王礼等，因此自言能见鬼神事，遂共占气，祠祭求福。
现代文：又刘畅之乳母王礼等，借此自言能见鬼神事，于是一道占气，祠祭求福。
English: In addition, Liu Chang's nanny Wang Li and others took advantage of this to say that they could see ghosts and gods, so they all held their breath and prayed for good luck at the ancestral shrine.

古文：忌等谄媚，云神言王当为天子。
现代文：卞忌等谄媚刘畅，说神言王应当做天子。
English: Zi Boi and other flatterers like Liu Chang said that the King of God's Word should be the Son of Heaven.

古文：暢心喜，与相应答。
现代文：刘畅心喜，和他们应答。
English: Liu Changxin was delighted, and they responded accordingly.

古文：永元五年，豫州刺史、梁相举奏暢不道，考讯，辞不服。
现代文：永元九年，豫州刺史梁相举奏刘畅大逆不道，考问，辞不服。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongyuan era, Yu Zhi Liang played Liu Chang, who was a traitor and refused to take the examination.

古文：有司请征暢诣廷尉诏狱，和帝不许。
现代文：有司请求召刘畅到廷尉那里坐牢，和帝不同意。
English: Yushi requested that Liu Chang be summoned to the court lieutenant to be imprisoned, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：有司重奏除暢国，徙九真，帝不忍，但削成武、单父二县。
现代文：有司又奏免除刘畅的封地，迁到九真，帝不忍心，只削去成武、单父两县。
English: Yushi also played the role of exempting Liu Chang's fief and moved to Jiu Zhen, but the emperor could not bear it and only cut off Chengwu and the two single-parent counties.

古文：暢惭惧，上疏辞谢曰：臣天性狂愚，生在深宫，长养傅母之手，信惑左右之言。
现代文：刘畅惭愧害怕，上疏辞谢道： 臣天性狂愚，生在深宫之中，长于傅母之手，信惑左右的话。
English: Liu Chang was ashamed and afraid, and Shang Zuo thanked him and said, "Vassals are naturally foolish, born in the depths of the palace, better than the hands of the Fu mother, and are swayed by persuasion.

古文：及至归国，不知防禁。
现代文：等到归国，不知防禁。
English: I didn't know about the ban until I got back home.

古文：从官侍史利臣财物，荧惑臣暢。
现代文：从官侍史为了谋取财物，荧惑我的心。
English: In order to obtain wealth, I seduced my heart from an official.

古文：臣暢无所昭见，与相然诺，不自知陷死罪，以至考案。
现代文：臣畅没有觉察，和他们互相然诺，不知自陷死罪，以至犯了罪。
English: Minister Chang did not notice, and they made promises to each other, unwittingly committing a capital crime, and thus committing a crime.

古文：肌栗心悸，自悔无所复及。
现代文：内心害怕，自悔也来不及。
English: I'm scared inside, and it's too late to repent.

古文：自谓当即时伏显就，魂魄去身，分归黄泉。
现代文：自以为当被杀掉，魂魄离身，分归黄泉。
English: He thought he should be killed, his soul departed from him, and he was relegated to hell.

古文：不意陛下圣德，枉法曲平，不听有司，横贷赦臣。
现代文：不意陛下圣德，枉法曲平，不听有司之言，赦免了我。
English: Unintentionally, His Holiness forgave me because I violated the law and did not listen to His words.

古文：战栗连月，未敢自安。
现代文：战忄栗连月，不敢自安。
English: I shuddered for months, not daring to relax.

古文：上念以负先帝而令陛下为臣收污天下，诚无气以息，筋骨不相连。
现代文：上念有负先帝之恩，使陛下替臣收恶天下，的确使臣无气以息，筋骨不相连。
English: It is said that the Emperor's grace made His Majesty's vassal conquer the world. Indeed, the vassal is lifeless and his bones are not connected.

古文：臣暢知大贷不可再得，自誓束身约妻子，不敢复出入失绳墨，不敢复有所横费。
现代文：臣畅知道宽大不可再得，自己发誓要束身约妻子，不敢再出入不讲规矩，不敢再有浪费。
English: Knowing that magnanimity can never be regained, he swore to bind himself to his wife, not daring to enter or leave without following the rules, and not daring to be wasteful.

古文：租入有余，乞裁食睢阳、穀孰、虞、蒙、宁陵五县，还余所食四县。
现代文：租入有剩余，请求裁减睢阳、谷熟、虞、蒙、宁陵五县，还剩下四县。
English: There is a surplus of rent, and it is requested to reduce the five counties of Fenyang, Guzhu, Yu, Meng and Ningling. There are still four counties left.

古文：臣暢小妻三十七人，其无子者愿还本家。
现代文：臣有小妻三十七人，那些无子的愿回本家。
English: The vassal has thirty-seven concubines, and those without children wish to return to their families.

古文：自选择谨敕奴婢二百人，其余所受虎贲、官骑及诸工技、鼓吹、仓头、奴婢、兵弩、厩马皆上还本署。
现代文：自选择谨数束力奴婢二百人，其余所受虎贲、官骑和诸工技、鼓吹、仓头、奴婢、兵弩、厩马都上还本署。
English: Two hundred slaves and maidservants were selected, and the rest of the tigers, officials, horsemen, craftsmen, propagandists, warehouse foremen, slaves, soldiers, and stable horses were returned to this office.

古文：臣暢以骨肉近亲，乱圣化，污清流，既得生活，诚无心面目以凶恶复居大宫，食大国，张官属，藏什物。
现代文：臣畅以骨肉至亲，乱圣化，氵于清流，既得生活，的确无面目以凶恶居大宫，食大国，张官属，藏什物。
English: The vassal is a flesh-and-blood relative, unholy, wandering in the clear stream, having gained life, indeed without face, living in the palace with ferocity, eating the country, Zhang officials, hiding things.

古文：愿陛下加大恩，开臣自悔之门，假臣小善之路，令天下知臣蒙恩，得去死就生，颇能自悔。
现代文：愿陛下加大恩，开臣自悔之门，假臣小善之路，使天下知臣蒙恩，能去死就生，颇能自悔。
English: May His Majesty increase His grace, open the door of self-repentance for His vassals, and make the path of a false vassal less virtuous, so that all the world's wise vassals may receive grace, and be able to die and live, and be able to repent.

古文：臣以公卿所奏臣罪恶诏书常置于前，昼夜诵读。
现代文：臣将公卿所奏罪恶诏书常置于前，昼夜诵读。
English: The vassal would often place the imperial edict of crime issued by the nobles in front of him and read it day and night.

古文：臣小人，贪见明时，不能即时自引，惟陛下哀臣，令得喘息漏刻。
现代文：臣本小人，贪见明时，不能即肘自引，望陛下哀臣，使得喘息漏刻。
English: Subordinate villain, greedy to see the light, unable to pull himself up by his own bootstraps, hoping for His Majesty's pity, causing him to miss his moment to breathe.

古文：若不听许，臣实无颜以久生，下入黄泉，无以见先帝，此诚臣至心。
现代文：如不听许，臣实无颜以久生，下入黄泉，无以见先帝。这的确是臣一片至心。
English: If he did not listen, the vassal would have no face to live long, go down to hell, and would not be able to see the former emperor. This is indeed the heart of the vassal.

古文：臣欲多还所受，恐天恩不听许，节量所留，于臣暢饶足。
现代文：臣想多还所受，恐天恩不听许，节量所留，于臣畅已足够了。 
English: If you want more, you will get more. If you want to save more, you will have enough.

古文：诏报曰： 朕惟王至亲之属，淳淑之美，傅相不良，不能防邪，至令有司纷纷有言。
现代文：皇上诏书回报道： 朕惟王至亲之属，淳淑之美，傅相不良，不能防止邪恶，至使有司纷纷有言。
English: The imperial edict reported back: "I am the king's closest relative, the beauty of Atsushi, the bad appearance, can not prevent evil, so that there are words in succession.

古文：今王深思悔过，端自克责，朕恻然伤之。志匪由王，咎在彼小子。
现代文：今王深思悔过，端自克责，朕很难过。志非由王，过在那班小子。
English: Now that Wang has deeply repented and begun to take responsibility for himself, I am very sad. It is up to Wang whether or not to have sex with that group of boys.

古文：一日克己复礼，天下归仁。
现代文：一日克己复礼，天下归仁。
English: One day of refraining from repeating the salute, the world will return to benevolence.

古文：王其安心静意。茂率休德。
现代文：王其安心静意，茂率休德。
English: Wang Qi is calm and quiet, Mao Zedong is calm and quiet.

古文：《易》不云乎： 一谦而四益。
现代文：《易经》不是说过吗： 一谦而四益。
English: Didn't the "I Ching" say, "Be modest, and gain four benefits"?

古文：小有言，终吉。 
现代文：小有言，绝吉。 
English: Small talk, no action.

古文：强食自爱。 
现代文：强食自爱。 
English: A compulsive eater and a narcissist.

古文：豹立八年薨，子暠嗣。
现代文：刘畅坚决退让，奏章数上，终不同意。刘畅立二十七年死去，子恭王刘坚嗣。
English: Liu Chang resolutely conceded, and finally disagreed on the number of movements. Liu Changli died in 277, and his son, King Liu Jianzhi, succeeded him.

古文：三十二年，遭黄巾贼，弃国走。建安十一年国除。
现代文：淮阳顷王刘日丙，永平十五年封常山王。建初四年，徙为淮阳王，将汝南之新安、西华加入淮阴国。立十六年死去，未及立嗣。
English: Liu Rihei, the king of Huaiyang, became the king of Changshan in the 15th year of Yongping. In the 4th year of Jianchuan, he became the king of Huaiyang and added Xin'an and West China to Huaiyin. He died in the 16th year of his reign, before he could have an heir.

古文：济阴悼王长，永平十五年封。
现代文：济阴悼王刘长，永平十五年封。
English: King Liu Chang was mourned in Jilin, and Yongping was enthroned for fifteen years.

古文：建初四年，以东郡之离狐、陈留之长垣益济阴国。
现代文：建初四年，将东郡之离狐，陈留之长垣加入济阴国。
English: In the first four years of construction, the Fox of the East County and the Nagagaki of the Chen stay were added to Jilin Province.

古文：立十三年，薨于京师，无子，国除。
现代文：立十三年，死在京师，无子，封地废除。
English: He died in the thirteenth year after the establishment of the capital, without a son, and the fief was abolished.

