古文：王裔老张弘让寇鄘呼延冀安凤成叔弁襄阳选人祖价
现代文：王裔老张弘让寇鄘呼延冀安凤成叔弁襄阳选人祖价
English: Zhang Hong, an old man of royal descent, let the robbers call Yan, Jian, Fengcheng, Shuben, Yangyang, and selected the ancestor price.

古文：王裔老
现代文：王裔老
English: Old Royalists

古文：华州下邽县东南三十余里，曰延年里，里西南有故兰若，而无僧居。
现代文：华州下邽县东南三十余里，叫延年里。里西南有一旧庙，而无僧人居住。
English: Thirty-odd miles southeast of Huazhou's Xiamen County, called Yanli, there is an old temple in the southwest of the county, but no monks live there.

古文：唐元和八年，翰林学士白居易丁母忧，退居下邽县。
现代文：唐元和八年，翰林学士白居易母丧，返回下邽县居住。
English: In the eighth year of the Tang Dynasty, Hanlin Baccalaureate Bai Juyi mourned his mother's death and returned to live in Xiamen County.

古文：七月，其从祖兄曰皞，自华州来访居易，途出于兰若前。及门，见妇女十许人，衣黄绫衣，少长杂坐，会语于佛屋下，声闻于门。
现代文：七月，他的堂兄名皋从华州来探访白居易。途经庙前，到庙门，看见妇女十人左右，穿着黄绫衣，年少年长的杂乱而坐，正在佛屋下说话，于门前就能听到声音。
English: In July, his cousin Meituan came from Huazhou to visit Bai Juyi. Passing through the front of the temple, to the temple gate, he saw about ten women, wearing yellow embroidered clothes, sitting in a jumble of ages and ages, talking under the Buddhist house. Voices could be heard in front of the door.

古文：皞热行方渴，将就憩，且求饮。
现代文：皞走的又热又渴，要在那休息，想要点水喝。
English: They are hot and thirsty, they want to rest there, they want to drink some water.

古文：望其从者萧士清未至，因下马，系缰于门柱。
现代文：看他随从的人萧士清没到，于是下马，在门柱上系好缰绳。
English: Seeing that his followers had not arrived, he dismounted and tied the bridle on the gatepost.

古文：举首，忽不见，自意其退藏于窗闼之间。
现代文：抬头，那些人忽然都不见了，自己心想她们退藏在窗门之间，跟着进去也不见。
English: Looking up, those people suddenly disappeared. I thought they had retreated to hide between the windows and doors, and I couldn't see them follow me in.

古文：从之不见，又意其退藏于屋壁之后。
现代文：又想她们退藏到屋墙的后面。进去，又没看见。
English: I thought they were going to hide behind the wall. I went in and didn't see them.

古文：从之，又不见。周视其四旁，则堵墙环然无隙缺。复视其聚谈之所，尘埃幂然，无足迹。由是知其非人，悸然大异之。上马急驱，来告居易。
现代文：环视四周，墙壁环绕没有空缺，再看她们聚集谈话的地方，尘埃覆盖，没有足迹。因此知道她们不是人，惊悸感到很奇异，上马急驰，来告诉白居易。
English: Looking around, there were no vacancies around the walls, and then looking at the place where they gathered to talk, covered with dust and without footprints. Therefore, knowing that they were not people, the horse felt very strange and rushed to tell Bai Juyi.

古文：且闻其所言，云云甚多，不能殚记。
现代文：又听他说的话，说了很多，不能全记，大概多数说的王裔如此。
English: I also listened to what he said, he said a lot, I can't remember all of it, probably like most of the royal descendants.

古文：方徙居於兰若之东北百余步，葺墙屋，筑场艺树仅毕，明日而入。
现代文：看他的词意，好象相互之间有多次的来往。那地方距离白居易的住舍有八九里，于是共同前往寻访。
English: Looking at the meaning of his words, it seems that there were multiple visits between them. The place is eight or nine miles away from Bai Juyi's residence, so they went to search together.

古文：既入。不浃旬而裔死，不越月而妻死，不逾时而裔之二子二妇及一孙亦死。
现代文：那地方果然有叫王裔的，就是那里的人，才搬到庙东北百余步的地方居住。修理房屋、筑场植树将近完毕，第二天搬进去，进入后，不过十天王裔就死了。不过一个月妻子死了，不过一个季节王裔的二个儿子二个儿媳妇和一个孙子也死了。
English: The repair of the house, the construction site and the planting of trees were nearly completed, and they moved in the next day. However, ten days after moving in, Wang Zi died. However, his wife died in a month, but in one season, Wang Zi's two sons, two daughters-in-law and one grandson also died.

古文：止余一子，曰明进，大恐惧，不知所为。意新居不祥，乃撒屋拔树。夜徙去，遂免。
现代文：只剩一个儿子，叫明进。他非常恐惧，不知该怎么办，心想新居不吉利，就撒屋拔树，夜间搬迁离去，于是幸免。
English: There was only one son left, named Mingjin. He was very scared and didn't know what to do. Thinking that his new home was unlucky, he uprooted the house and moved away in the night. He was spared.

古文：张弘让
现代文：张弘让
English: Zhang Hongzhan

古文：元和十二年，寿州小将张弘让，娶兵马使王暹女。
现代文：元和十二年，寿州小将张弘让。娶兵马使王暹女儿为妻。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Hongzhan, a young general from Shoushu, married the daughter of the military commander Wang Siam.

古文：淮西用兵方急，令狐通为刺史。
现代文：淮西用兵正危急，令狐通此时为淮西剌史。
English: Huaixi's military was in a critical situation, which made Foxconn become the leader of Huaixi at this time.

古文：弘让妻重疾累月，每思食，弘让与具。
现代文：弘让的妻子重病已有好几个月，每当想吃什么，弘让就给她准备齐全，后来又不吃。
English: Hongzhang's wife has been seriously ill for several months. Whenever she wants to eat something, Hongzhang prepares it for her and then doesn't eat it.

古文：后不食，如此自夏及秋，乍进乍退，弘让心终不怠。
现代文：象这样从夏天到秋天，忽然好忽然坏，弘让的心意终究不懈怠。
English: Like this, from summer to autumn, suddenly good, suddenly bad, Hongyan's heart will not slacken after all.

古文：冬十月，其妻忽思汤饼，弘让与具之。工未竟，遇军中给冬衣，弘让遂请同志王士征妻为馔。弘让乃去。
现代文：冬十月，他的妻子忽然想吃汤饼，弘让给她准备，工夫没到，遇到军中发放冬衣，弘让于是请志趣相同的王士征的妻子给做食品，弘让才离开。
English: In the winter of October, his wife suddenly wanted to eat soup cakes. He gave her time to prepare, but the time was not enough. When the army distributed winter coats, he asked the wife of Wang Shizheng, who had the same interests, to make food, and then he left.

古文：士征妻馔熟，就床欲进，忽然弘让妻自额鼻中分半，一手一股在床，流血殷席。
现代文：士征的妻子做好了食品，靠床要给她进食，忽见弘让的妻子从额鼻中间分为两半，一手一大腿在床上，流血染红了床席。
English: Shizheng's wife had prepared food, and the bedside attendant wanted to feed her. Suddenly, he saw that Hongzhang's wife was split into two halves from the middle of the forehead and nose, with one hand and one leg on the bed, and the blood stained the bed seat red.

古文：士征妻惊呼，告营中。
现代文：士征的妻子吃惊喊叫，报告到军营里。
English: The conscript's wife screamed in shock and reported to the barracks.

古文：军人妻诸邻来，共观之，竞问莫知其由。
现代文：军人的妻子和各位邻居前来，共同观看，争相探问没有知道那原因的。
English: Military wives and neighbors came to watch, scrambling to find out what went wrong.

古文：俄而吏报通，使人检视。
现代文：一会儿吏急速通报，派人检验。
English: After a while, the officials made a quick announcement and sent someone to inspect it.

古文：其日又非昏暝，二妇素无嫌怨，遂为吏所录。
现代文：那天又不昏暗，二位妇人平素没有仇怨，于是被官吏带走。
English: It wasn't dark that day, and the two women had no grudge against each other, so they were taken away by officials.

古文：弘让奔归，及丧所，忽闻空中妇悲泣云：某被大家唤将看儿去。烦君多时，某不得已，君终不见弃。大家索君恳求耳。
现代文：弘让跑回来，到丧亡的地方，忽然听到空中妇人悲伤哭泣说：我被婆婆叫去看小孩，烦劳你多时，我没有办法，你终究不抛弃我，婆婆要你恳求。
English: Hongzhan ran back to the place of death, and suddenly heard the Lady in the Sky crying sadly and saying, "I was called by my mother-in-law to see the child. I have been bothering you for a long time. I have no choice. After all, you will not abandon me. My mother-in-law wants you to plead."

古文：先是弘让营居后小圃中，有一李树，妇云：君今速为某造四分食，置李树下。君则向树下哀祈，某必得再履人世也。
现代文：先让弘让住在营房的后小园中，那里有一棵李子树。妇人告诉他：你现在赶紧给我送四分饭，放到李子树下，你就向树下哀求祈祷，我就能再踏上人间。
English: At first, Zhan Hongzhan lived in a small park behind the barracks, where there was a plum tree. The woman told him: "Now, hurry up and bring me four-cent meal, put it under the plum tree, and then you can beg and pray under the tree, and I will be able to set foot on earth again."

古文：弘让依其言，陈馔，恳祈拜之。
现代文：弘让按着他说的，摆好食品，恳切地祈祷跪拜。
English: Hongzhan did as he said, set out the food, prayed earnestly and knelt down.

古文：忽闻空中云：还汝新妇。
现代文：忽然听到空中说：还给你新媳妇。
English: Suddenly, I heard a voice in the air saying, "I will give you back your new daughter-in-law."

古文：便闻王氏云：接我以力。
现代文：就听到王氏说：用力接我。
English: I heard Mr. Wang say, "Pick me up by force."

古文：弘让如其言接之，俄觉赫然半尸薄下，弘让抱之。
现代文：弘让按照她说的接她，片刻发觉明显的半具尸体轻轻落下，弘让抱住她。
English: Hirohito picked her up as she said, and for a moment he noticed that the apparent half-dead body was gently falling, and Hirohito hugged her.

古文：遽闻王氏云：速合床上半尸。
现代文：立刻听到王氏说：赶快与床上半尸合上。
English: Wang was immediately heard saying: "Hurry up and join the half-dead body on the bed."

古文：比弘让拳曲持半尸到床，王氏声声云：勘其剖处，无所参差。
现代文：等弘让蜷曲身子持半尸到床，王氏一声接一声说道：看准那剖开的地方，不要有长短不齐。
English: When Tohiro asked her to curl up and carry the half-dead body to the bed, Wang said one after another, "Pay attention to where you cut it open. Don't have uneven lengths."

古文：弘让尽力与合之，令等其旧。
现代文：弘让尽力给合上，让她恢复原样。
English: Hiromasa did his best to close it and restore it to its original state.

古文：王氏云：覆之以衾，无我问三日。
现代文：王氏说：用被盖上，三日不要问我。
English: And he said, Cover me with thy bedclothes, and let me not be seen for three days.

古文：弘让如其教。三日后，闻呻吟，乃云：思少饘粥。
现代文：弘让象她教的那样，三日后，听到呻吟声，说：想少喝点稠粥。
English: Three days later, she heard a moaning sound and said, "I want to drink less thick porridge."

古文：弘让以饮灌其喉，尽一杯。又云：具无相问。
现代文：弘让往她嘴里灌使其喝下。喝完一碗，又说：全都不要再问。
English: After drinking a bowlful, he said, "Don't ask any more questions."

古文：七日则泯如旧，但自项及脊彻尻，有痕如刀伤。前额及鼻，贯胸腹亦然。
现代文：七日就完全如旧，只是从颈项到脊背臀部，有象刀伤的痕迹，前额到鼻贯空到胸腹也是这样。
English: On the seventh day he was completely the same as before, except that from his neck to his back and buttocks there were marks like knife wounds, and the same was true from his forehead to his nose and down to his chest and abdomen.

古文：一年，平复如故。
现代文：一年后，平复得象原来一样。
English: A year later, it was back to normal.

古文：生数子。
现代文：生了几个孩子。
English: She gave birth to several children.

古文：此故友庞子肃亲见其事。
现代文：这是故友庞子肃亲眼看见的事情。
English: This is what the late friend Pang Zi Su saw with his own eyes.

古文：寇鄘
现代文：寇鄘
English: 寇

古文：元和十二年，上都永平里西南隅，有一小宅，悬榜云：但有人敢居，即传元契奉赠，及奉其初价。
现代文：元和十二年。长安永平里西南角，有一个小宅院，悬挂榜文说，只要有人敢居住，就把房契奉赠给他，只要给他当初的房价。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, in the southwest corner of Yongpingli, Chang'an, there was a small residential compound with a notice saying that as long as someone dared to live there, the house deed would be presented to him, as long as he was given the original house price.

古文：大历年，安太清始用二百千买得，后卖与王姁。传受凡十七主，皆丧长。布施与罗汉寺，寺家赁之，悉无人敢入。
现代文：大历年，安太清始用二百千买到，后来卖给王姁，传卖共十七个主人，都死了长者，布施给罗汉寺，寺家出租它，全都无人敢入住。
English: In the year of the great calendar, An Taiqing initially bought the crane for two hundred thousand, later sold it to Wang Yao, and passed it on to a total of seventeen owners, all of whom were elders who had died, gave it to the Luohan Temple, and the temple family rented it out, and no one dared to move in.

古文：有日者寇鄘，出入于公卿门，诣寺求买，因送四十千与寺家。
现代文：有个占卜的人叫寇鄘，在公卿之家出入，到寺院要买，于是送四十千给寺家。
English: There was a soothsayer called Colossus, who went in and out of the court noble's house, and when he went to the temple to buy it, he sent forty thousand to the temple.

古文：寺家极喜，乃传契付之。
现代文：寺家非常高兴，就把方契给他。
English: The temple family was very happy and gave him the deed.

古文：有堂屋三间，甚庳，东西厢共五间，地约三亩，榆楮数百株。门有崇屏，高八尺，基厚一尺，皆炭灰泥焉。
现代文：有正房三间，很低矮，东西厢房共五间，土地大约三亩，榆树楮树几百棵；门前有高大屏风，八尺高，基厚一尺，都是用炭灰抹的。
English: There are three main rooms, very low, a total of five east and west wing rooms, about three acres of land, hundreds of eucalyptus trees; there is a tall screen in front of the door, eight feet high, one foot thick, all with charcoal.

古文：鄘又与崇贤里法明寺僧普照为门徒。
现代文：鄘又成为崇贤里法明寺僧普照门徒。
English: He also became a disciple of the monk Fuzhao of the Faming Temple in Chongxianli.

古文：其夜，扫堂独止，一宿无事。
现代文：那天夜里，打扫了屋子独自休息，一宿无事。
English: That night, I cleaned the house and rested alone. There was nothing the whole night.

古文：月明，至四更，微雨，鄘忽身体拘急，毛发如碟，心恐不安。
现代文：月明，到四更天，下了小雨，鄘忽然感到身体拘束紧张，毛发象要分裂，心里恐惧不安。
English: At four o'clock in the morning, there was a light rain. Suddenly, he felt constrained and tense, his hair felt like it was going to split, and his heart was filled with fear.

古文：闻一人哭声，如出九泉。
现代文：听到一个人的哭声，好象出自地下。
English: To hear a person crying, it's like it's coming from underground.

古文：乃卑听之，又若在中天。
现代文：再细听，又好象在空中。
English: If you listen closely, it's like singing in the air.

古文：其乍东乍西，无所定。
现代文：那声音忽东忽西，没有固定的地方。
English: The sound is erratic, with no fixed location.

古文：欲至曙，声遂绝。
现代文：要到天亮时，声音才断绝。
English: It was not until dawn that the noise stopped.

古文：鄘乃告照曰：宅既如此，应可居焉。
现代文：鄘告诉普照：房子即使这样，还是可以居住的。
English: Hao told Puzhao that the house could still be lived in.

古文：命照公与作道场。
现代文：让普照给作道场。
English: Let it shine brightly for the dojo.

古文：至三更，又闻哭声。
现代文：到了三更，又听到哭声。
English: When it got to the third watch, I heard crying again.

古文：满七日，鄘乃作斋设僧，方欲众僧行食次，照忽起，于庭如有所见，遽厉声逐之，喝云：这贼杀如许人。
现代文：满七天，鄘作斋饭招待僧人。刚要让众僧坐定吃饭，普照忽然起来，在院子好象看见了什么，就厉声叫喊追逐，喝道：这贼杀了这么多人！
English: After seven full days, he invited the monks to break their fast. Just as he was about to have all the monks sit down to eat, Pucho suddenly stood up. In the courtyard, as if he had seen something, he shouted loudly and chased after them, shouting, "This thief has killed so many people!"

古文：绕庭一转，复坐曰：见矣见矣。
现代文：在院子里绕了一圈，又坐下说：看见了看见了。
English: He walked around the courtyard, sat down again and said, "I see, I see."

古文：遂命鄘求七家粉水解秽。俄至门崇屏，洒水一杯，以柳枝扑焉。屏之下四尺开，土忽颓圯，中有一女人，衣青罗裙红袴锦履绯衫子。其衣皆是纸灰，风拂，尽飞于庭，即枯骨籍焉。
现代文：于是让鄘要七家的脏水粪便，一会儿到门的高大屏风前，洒水一杯，用柳枝扑在上面，屏风下边四尺裂开，土突然掉落，中间有一女人，穿着青罗裙红裤子黄鞋红衫子，那衣都是纸灰，风一吹，在院里飞尽，就露出了纷乱的枯骨。
English: So he asked the stork to collect the dirty water and excrement from seven households. A moment later, it arrived in front of the tall screen at the door, sprinkled a cup of water and flung it on top with a willow branch. The lower edge of the screen cracked four feet, and the soil suddenly fell off. In the middle was a woman wearing a blue-and-rose skirt, red pants, yellow shoes, and a red shirt. The clothes were all paper ash. As soon as the wind blew, they flew away in the courtyard, revealing a jumble of dead bones.

古文：乃命织一竹笼子，又命鄘作三两事女衣盛之。送葬渭水之沙州，仍命勿回头，亦与设洒馔。
现代文：让编织一个竹笼子，又让鄘作三两件侍女衣服装上，送到渭水的沙洲安葬，仍然命令不须回头，也给摆设了酒食。
English: Let them weave a bamboo cage, and let them make three or two maidservant dresses and put them on, and send them to the sandbank in Surabaya to be buried, and still order them not to turn back, and also provide them with wine and food.

古文：自后小大更无恐惧。
现代文：从那以后大人小孩再没有恐惧。
English: Since then, adults and children have no fear.

古文：初郭汾阳有堂妹，出家永平里宣化寺，汾阳王夫人之顶谒其姑，从人颇多。后买此宅，往来安置。
现代文：当初郭汾阳有个堂妹，出家在永平里宣化寺。汾阳王夫人摩拜她的小姑子，跟随的人很多，后来买了这个宅第，安置来往的人。
English: At the beginning, Guo Fenyang had a cousin who became a monk at Yongpingli Xuanhua Temple. The wife of King Fenyang worshipped her younger sister-in-law and was followed by many people. Later, she bought this house to accommodate people who came and went.

古文：或闻有青衣不谨，遂失青衣。夫人令高筑崇屏，此宅因有是焉。亦云，青衣不谨，洩漏游处，由是生葬此地焉。
现代文：有人听说有个婢女不谨慎，就失去了婢女，夫人让修筑高大的屏风，此宅于是就有这些事；也有的说，婢女不谨慎，泄漏这个游览的地方，因此活埋在这里。
English: Some people heard that a maid was careless and lost her maid, and the lady had a tall screen built, so this house had these things; others said that the maid was careless and leaked this place of visit, so she was buried alive here.

古文：呼延冀
现代文：呼延冀
English: Huanan County

古文：咸和中，呼延冀者，授忠州司户，携其妻之官。至泗水，遇盗。尽夺其财物，乃至裸衫。
现代文：咸和年间，呼延冀，被授予忠州司户，携带他的妻子上任，到达泗水，遇到强盗，把他们的财物全都夺去，致使他们赤身露体。
English: During the Han and Heian periods, he was awarded the post of Chungju steward in Ho Yanji and took his wife with him to the post. When he arrived in Surabaya, he was confronted by robbers who took away all of his belongings, leaving him naked.

古文：冀遂与其妻於路旁访人烟。
现代文：冀就和他的妻子在路旁寻找人家。
English: Ji and his wife started looking for a home on the side of the road.

古文：俄逢一翁，问其故，冀告之。
现代文：一会儿遇见一个老翁，问他们原因，冀告诉了他。
English: After a while, he met an old man and asked him why. Ji told him.

古文：老翁曰：南行之数里，即我家，可与家属暂宿也。
现代文：老翁说：向南走几里，就是我家，可以和家属暂住。
English: The old man said, "A few miles to the south is my home. I can stay with my family for a while.

古文：冀乃与老翁同至其家。
现代文：冀就和老翁一同到他家。
English: Ji went with the old man to his home.

古文：入林中，得一大宅，老翁安存一室内，设食遗衣。
现代文：进入林子里，看见一大宅院。老翁把他们安排在一屋内，摆设饭食赠送衣服。
English: Entering the forest, they saw a large mansion. The old man arranged them in a room, set out meals and gave them clothes.

古文：至深夜，亲就冀谈话。
现代文：到了深夜，亲自与冀谈话，又准备了酒菜。
English: In the late evening, I talked with Ji in person, and prepared wine and vegetables.

古文：复具酒肴，曰：我家唯有老母。君若未能携妻去，欲且留之，伺到官再来迎，亦可。
现代文：说：我家只有老母，你如果不能携带妻子离去，要暂且留下她，等到任再来迎接，也是可以的。
English: He said, "I only have my mother at home. If you can't take your wife with you, you can leave her for the time being and wait for someone else to come and greet you.

古文：我见君贫，必不易相携也。
现代文：我看你贫穷，一定不适合携带家眷呀。
English: I see you're poor, you're definitely not fit to bring your family.

古文：冀思之良久，遂谢而言曰：丈人既悯我如是，我即以心素托丈人。
现代文：冀想了很久，于是拜谢说道：丈人既然如此怜悯我，我就诚心诚意托付于丈人。
English: After thinking for a long time, Bai Xie said, "Since my father-in-law has so much compassion for me, I sincerely entrust myself to him."

古文：我妻本出官人也，能歌，仍薄有文艺。然好酒，多放荡。留之后，幸丈人拘束之。
现代文：我妻本来出自官宦人家，能歌，还略微有些文艺才能，可是喜欢酒，放荡成性，留下她以后，希望丈人约束她。
English: My wife was originally from an official family, she could sing, and had some literary talent, but she liked wine and became a libertine. After I left her, I hoped that my father-in-law would discipline her.

古文：老翁曰：无忧，但自赴官。
现代文：老翁说：不用担心，你自管去赴任。
English: The old man said, "Don't worry, you can go to work on your own."

古文：明日，冀乃留妻而去。
现代文：第二天，冀就留下妻子而离开。
English: The next day, Ji left his wife behind.

古文：临别，妻执冀手而言曰：我本与尔远涉川陆，赴一薄官，今不期又留我于此。
现代文：临分别时，妻子拉着冀的手说道：我本来与你远涉水陆，奔赴一小官，现在没想到又留我在这里。
English: On the eve of their separation, his wife took Ji Ji's hand and said, "I used to travel far and wide with you, rushing to a small government post, and now I didn't expect you to leave me here.

古文：君若不来迎我，我必奔出，必有纳我之人也。
现代文：你如果不来接我，我一定私奔离开，一定有要我的人。
English: If you don't come to pick me up, I'm sure to run away, there must be someone who wants me.

古文：泣泪而别。
现代文：哭泣洒泪而别。
English: Weep and shed tears and say goodbye.

古文：冀到官，方谋远迎其妻。忽一日，有达一书者，受之，是其妻书也。
现代文：冀到任，正想远道去接他的妻子，忽然一天，来了一个传达信的人，接受了，是他妻子的信。
English: When Ji arrived at the post, he was thinking of going far away to pick up his wife. Suddenly, one day, a letter carrier came and accepted his wife's letter.

古文：其书曰：妾今自裁此书，以达心绪，唯君少览焉。
现代文：那信中说：我现在亲自写这封信，来表达我的心绪，希望你慢慢地看。
English: The letter said: I am writing this letter myself now to express my feelings, and I hope you will read it slowly.

古文：妾本歌妓之女也，幼入宫禁，以清歌妙舞为称。固无妇德妇容。及宫中有命，掖庭选人，妾得放归焉。
现代文：我本来是个歌妓的女儿，幼时进入宫廷，凭着清歌妙舞而出名，本来就没有妇德妇容，直到宫中有了命令，选入宫中旁舍，才得以放出回家。
English: Originally, I was the daughter of a courtesan. As a child, I entered the court and became famous for my singing and dancing. Originally, I did not have the appearance of a virtuous woman. It was not until there was an order from the court that I was chosen to live in the palace annex that I was able to return home.

古文：是时也，君方年少，酒狂诗逸，在妾之邻。妾即不拘，君亦放荡。
现代文：那时，你正年少，喝酒纵情写诗豪放，在我的邻舍，我既然不拘谨，你也放荡不羁。
English: At that time, you were a young man, drinking and writing poetry. In my neighborhood, since I was not a prude, you were also a libertine.

古文：君不以妾不可奉苹蘩，遂以礼娶妾。
现代文：你不因为我不会做家务，就按照礼仪娶我。
English: You don't marry me because I can't do housework, you marry me according to etiquette.

古文：妾既与君匹偶，诸邻皆谓之才子佳人。
现代文：我与你成为配偶，各位邻里都认为是才子佳人。
English: You and I are going to be married, and everyone in the neighborhood thinks you're a wonderful person.

古文：每念花间同步，月下相对，红楼戏谑，锦闱言誓。即不期今日之事也。悲夫！
现代文：每当想起在花间共同散步，月下相对，红楼戏笑，锦闱中发誓，就没想到今天的事情，可悲呀！
English: Whenever I think of walking together among the flowers, under the moon, laughing at the Red House, and swearing in the brocade, I didn't think of today's events. How sad!

古文：老父家有一少年子，深慕妾，妾已归之矣。
现代文：因何情义绝断，你把我的身体象鞋一样抛弃，留在荒郊野外，不考虑我孤独。
English: For what reason did you abandon my body like a shoe, leaving it in the wilderness, without considering my loneliness.

古文：君其知之。冀览书掷书，不胜愤怒，遂抛官至泗水。
现代文：从你上任，眼泪流的不能制止，想到你的薄情，我又为什么坚守贞洁呢？
English: Since you took office, tears have been flowing uncontrollably. Thinking of your tender feelings, why do I still insist on chastity?

古文：本欲见老翁及其妻，皆杀之。访寻不得，但见一大塚，林木森然。
现代文：老父家有一个少年儿子，很爱慕我，我已经归他了，现在让你了解这一切。冀看完信扔掉信，无比愤怒。于是弃官到泗水，本来想看见老翁和他的妻子，都杀掉，却寻找不着，只见一个大坟，林木繁密。
English: The old man's family had a young son, who loved me very much. I had become his property, and now I want you to know all about it. After reading the letter and throwing it away, he was furious. So he resigned his post and went to Surabaya. He originally wanted to kill the old man and his wife, but he couldn't find them. All he saw was a large grave, with a dense forest.

古文：冀毁其塚，见其妻已死在塚中，乃取尸祭，别葬之而去。
现代文：冀毁掉那坟，看见他的妻子已死在坟中，就取出尸体祭奠，另外安葬而离开。
English: He wanted to destroy the grave, and when he saw that his wife was already dead in the grave, he took out the corpse as a memorial, buried it separately, and left.

古文：安凤
现代文：安凤
English: An Feng

古文：安凤，寿春人，少与乡里徐侃友善，俱有才学。
现代文：安凤是寿春人，年少时与乡里徐侃友好，都有才学。
English: An Feng is a Shouchun person. When he was young, he was friendly with Xu Kan in the village. They both have the ability to learn.

古文：本约同游宦长安，侃性纯孝，别其母时，见母泣涕不止，乃不忍离。
现代文：本来约定一起到长安去做官，徐侃本性非常孝顺，告别他母亲时，看见他母亲泣涕不止，就不忍心离开。
English: Originally, they had agreed to go to Chang'an together to become officials. Xu Kanshu was very filial by nature. When he said goodbye to his mother, he couldn't bear to leave when he saw his mother crying endlessly.

古文：凤至长安，十年不达，耻不归。
现代文：凤到了长安，十年未得通达，认为耻辱不回家。
English: When Feng arrived in Chang'an, she had not been able to get through for ten years, and thought it was a shame not to go home.

古文：后忽逢侃，携手叙阔别，话乡里之事，悲喜俱不自胜。
现代文：后来忽然遇见徐侃，携手共叙阔别之情，谈论乡里的事情，一同住在旅馆里多日。
English: Later, he suddenly met Xu Kan, and together they shared their feelings of separation, talked about things in the countryside, and lived together in a hotel for many days.

古文：同寓旅舍数日，忽侃谓凤曰：我离乡一载，我母必念我，我当归。
现代文：忽然徐侃对安凤说：我离开家乡一年了，我母亲一定想念我，我应该回去了。
English: Suddenly, Xu Kan said to An Feng: I have been away from home for a year, my mother must miss me, I should go back.

古文：君离乡亦久，能同归乎？
现代文：你离开故乡也很久了，能和我一起回去吗？
English: You have been away from your hometown for a long time. Can you come back with me?

古文：凤曰：我本不勤耕凿，而志切於名宦。今日远离乡国，索米於长安，无一公卿知。十年之漂荡，大丈夫之气概，焉能以面目回见故乡之人也？
现代文：凤说：我本来就不勤于耕作，却志向恳切于功名官位，现在远离故乡，求富贵于长安，没有一个公卿了解，十年的漂泊流荡，大丈夫的气概，怎么能凭这面目回去见故乡的人呢？
English: Feng said: Originally, I was not diligent in farming, but I aspired earnestly to a prestigious official position. Now I am far away from my hometown, seeking wealth and prestige in Chang'an, and no nobles understand. After ten years of wandering and wandering, I am in good spirits. How can I return to see the people of my hometown with this face?

古文：因泣谓侃曰：君自当宁亲，我誓不达不归矣！
现代文：于是哭泣对侃说：你自己应该回去看望亲人，我发誓不达目的决不回去！
English: Then, crying, she said, "You should go back and visit your relatives yourself. I swear that I will never go back if I don't achieve my goal!"

古文：侃留诗曰：君寄长安久，耻不还故乡。
现代文：徐侃留诗道：君寄长安久，耻不还故乡。
English: Xu Kanliu said in his poem: You have been sent to Chang'an for a long time, but you should not return to your hometown.

古文：我别长安去，切在慰高堂。
现代文：我别长安去，切在慰高堂。
English: I don't want to go to Chang'an, I want to go to the comfort high school.

古文：不意与离恨，泉下亦难忘。
现代文：不意与离恨，泉下亦难忘。
English: Unintentionally and leaving hate, Izumi is also unforgettable.

古文：凤亦以诗赠别曰：一自离乡国，十年在咸秦。
现代文：安凤也以诗赠别道：一自离乡国，十年在咸秦。
English: An Feng also gave a poem as a parting gift: once he left his home country, he spent ten years in Hamchin.

古文：泣尽卞和血，不逢一故人。
现代文：泣尽卞和血，不逢一故人。
English: Crying out for peace and blood, not for a dead man.

古文：今日旧友别，羞此漂泊身。
现代文：今日旧友别，羞此漂泊身。
English: Today we say goodbye to an old friend. Shame on me for drifting away.

古文：离情吟诗处，麻衣掩泪频。
现代文：离情吟诗处，麻衣掩泪频。
English: At the part where she sings about being separated from her lover, she covers her tears with her clothes.

古文：泪别各分袂，且及来年春。
现代文：泪别各分袂，且及来年春。
English: The tears will be separated, and it will be next spring.

古文：凤犹客长安。
现代文：凤还客居长安。
English: Feng also stayed in Chang'an.

古文：因夜梦侃，遂寄一书达寿春。首叙长安再相见，话幽抱之事。
现代文：因为夜梦徐侃，于是寄一封信送到寿春，先叙述了长安再次相见，谈论远大抱负的事情。
English: Because of the night dream, he sent a letter to Shouchun, first describing how they met again in Chang'an and talked about their great ambitions.

古文：侃母得凤书，泣谓附书之人曰：侃死已三年。
现代文：徐侃的母亲得到安凤的信，哭着对寄递书信的人说，徐侃已死三年了。
English: When Xu Kan's mother received An Feng's letter, she cried and told the person who delivered the letter that Xu Kan had been dead for three years.

古文：却到长安，告凤，凤垂泣叹曰：我今日始悟侃别中 泉下亦难忘 之句。
现代文：送信人回到长安，告诉安凤，凤垂泪叹道：我今天才明白徐侃赠诗中 泉下亦难忘 这句话。
English: The sender returned to Chang'an and told Anfeng. Feng sighed with tears and said, "I only understood today that Quanxue is also unforgettable in Xu Kan's poem."

古文：成叔弁
现代文：成叔弁
English: Chengshu dialect

古文：元和十三年，江陵编户成叔弁有女曰兴娘，年十七。
现代文：元和十三年。江陵普通百姓成叔弁有个女儿叫兴娘。十七岁。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Cheng Shuben, an ordinary citizen of Gangneung, had a daughter named Xing Niang, who was 17 years old.

古文：忽有媒氏诣门云：有田家郎君，愿结姻媛，见在门。
现代文：忽然有个媒人进门说：有个田家公子，愿与你家结成姻缘。现在门外。
English: Suddenly, a matchmaker came to the door and said, "There is a young man from the Tian family who would like to marry into your family. He is now outside the door."

古文：叔弁召其妻共窥之，人质颇不惬，即辞曰：兴娘年小，未办资装。
现代文：叔弁召呼他的妻子一起看他，长相很不满意，就推辞说：兴娘年龄小，没有备办资产嫁妆。
English: Uncle Ben called his wife to see him together. She was very dissatisfied with his appearance, so she said: Xing's daughter is young, and she has no assets to prepare for a dowry.

古文：门外闻之，即趋入曰：拟田郎参丈人丈母。
现代文：门外听说了，就急忙走进屋说：田郎参拜丈人丈母。
English: When the people outside heard about this, they hurried into the house and said, "Taro, come and visit your father-in-law and mother-in-law."

古文：叔弁不顾，遽与妻避之。
现代文：叔弁不看，就与妻回避他。
English: If Uncle Ben doesn't look, he and his wife will avoid him.

古文：田奴曰：田四郎上界香郎，索尔女不得耶？
现代文：田奴说：田四郎是上界香郎，要你的女儿还不行吗？
English: Tano said, "Tashiro is a high-ranking karo, is it still not okay to want your daughter?"

古文：即笑一声，便有二人自空而下，曰：相呼何事？
现代文：就笑了一声，便有两个人，从空中落下来，说：招呼我们有什么事？
English: And he laughed, and two men fell out of the sky and said, "Why do you call us?"

古文：况小郎娘子魂识已随足下，慕足下深矣。黎庶何知？不用苦怪。
现代文：田说：成家现有一女儿，我现在和他们商量，确实不愿意，二位公子认为如何？二人说：他本来不知道，怎么能不可以，希望让我和他们谈谈。
English: Tian said: Cheng Jia now has a daughter, I am now discussing with them, I really don't want to, what do the two boys think? The two said: He didn't know, how could he not, I hope I can talk to them.

古文：言讫，而兴娘大叫于房中曰：嫁与田四郎去。
现代文：况且小公子和小娘子灵魂已相识，已经跟随了你，深深地爱慕你，黎民百姓怎么能明白，不要太责备他。说完，兴娘在房中大叫道：嫁给田四郎去！
English: Moreover, the souls of the little boy and the little girl have already met, have followed you, and deeply love you. How can the people of Lai understand, and not blame him too much? Having said that, Xing Niang shouted in the room: Go marry Tashiro!

古文：叔弁既觉非人，即下阶辞曰：贫家养女，不喜观瞩。四郎意旨，敢不从命。
现代文：叔弁已经感觉到不是正常人，就下阶辞谢道：贫家养活的小女儿，不喜欢观看，四公子的旨意，怎敢不从命？
English: Uncle Ben has already felt that he is not a normal person, and he thanks the lower echelon: the little daughter who is raised by a poor family does not like to watch, the will of the four boys, how dare he not follow his life?

古文：但且坐，与媒氏商量，无太匆匆也。
现代文：只是暂且坐下，和媒人商量商量，不要太匆忙。
English: Just sit down for a while, discuss with the matchmaker, and don't be too hasty.

古文：四人相顾大笑曰：定矣。
现代文：四人相看大笑道：定了。
English: The four of them looked at each other and burst out laughing.

古文：叔弁即令市果实，备茶饼，就堂垂帘而坐。
现代文：叔弁就让人去买果品，准备茶饭，在堂上垂帘而坐。
English: Shu Ben would have people buy fruit, prepare tea and rice, and sit in the hall with the curtains drawn.

古文：媒氏曰：田家意不美满，四郎亦太匆匆。今三郎君总是词人，请联句一篇然后定。
现代文：媒人说：田家认为也不美满，四公子也太匆忙，现在三公子毕竟是个词人，请联句一篇然后再定。
English: The matchmaker said: The Tian family thinks it is not satisfactory, the four boys are too hasty, and now the three boys are, after all, a lyricist. Please write a couplet and then decide.

古文：众皆大笑乐曰：老妪但作媒，何必议他联句事。
现代文：众人都大笑乐道：老太婆只是作媒何必说让他联句的事。
English: Everyone burst out laughing: the old woman was just a matchmaker, why should she make him a couplet?

古文：媒氏固请，田郎良久乃吟曰：一点红裳出翠微。秋天云静月离离。
现代文：媒人坚持请联句，田公子过了很久才吟道：一点红裳出翠微，秋天云静月离离。
English: The matchmaker insisted on asking for a couplet, and it took a long time for Tian Gongzi to chant: A little red dress comes out green, and autumn clouds and quiet months depart.

古文：田请叔弁继之，叔弁素不知书，固辞，往复再四。食顷，忽闻堂上有人语曰：何不云： 天曹使者徒回首，何不从他九族卑？
现代文：田请叔弁接着联。叔弁本来不知书，坚决推辞，往复再三，一顿饭的工夫，忽然听到堂上有人说道：为什么不说，天曹使者徒回首，何不从他九族卑。
English: Tian asked Shuben to continue. Shuben didn't know how to read, so he firmly refused and repeatedly asked to be excused. After a meal, he suddenly heard someone in the hall say: "Why not say, 'Heaven's messenger, why don't you look back, why don't you lower yourself from his nine tribes?'"

古文：言讫，媒与三人绝倒大笑曰：向道魔语，今欲何如？
现代文：说完，媒婆与三人笑得前仰后合道：才刚说鬼话，现在要怎么办？
English: Having said that, the matchmaker and the three of them laughed uproariously and said in unison, "You've just been talking nonsense, what do you want to do now?"

古文：四人一时趋出，不复更来。
现代文：四人同时急忙走出。没有再来，他女儿象醉人说胡话。
English: The four of them hurried out at the same time. He didn't come back, and his daughter was babbling like a drunk.

古文：其女若醉人狂言，四人去后，亦遂醒矣。
现代文：四人离开后，也就醒了。
English: He woke up after the four of them left.

古文：襄阳选人
现代文：襄阳选人
English: Yangyang selects candidates

古文：于頔镇襄阳时，选人刘某入京，逢一举人，年二十许，言语明朗，同行数里，意甚相得，因籍草。
现代文：于頔镇襄阳时，选人刘某进京，遇到一个举人，年龄二十岁左右，言谈明了响亮。一起走了几里，想法很合得来，于是坐在草地上。
English: In Xiangyang, Handan Town, when Liu Mou, a candidate, entered Beijing, he met a nominator, about 20 years old, who spoke loudly and clearly. They walked a few miles together, and the idea was very compatible, so they sat on the grass.

古文：刘有酒，倾数杯。
现代文：刘有酒，倒了几杯。
English: Liu has wine and pours a few glasses.

古文：日暮，举人指歧径曰：某弊止从此数里，能左顾乎？
现代文：天黑，举人指着岔道说：我的住处距离这里只有几里，能够光顾吗？
English: It was dark, and a man pointed up the driveway and said, "My place is only a few miles from here, can I visit you?"

古文：刘辞以程期，举人因赋诗曰：流水涓涓长芹牙，织乌双飞客还家。
现代文：刘推辞要赶路。举人于是赋诗道：流水涓涓长芹牙，织鸟双飞客还家。
English: Liu declined, saying he had to hurry. So, he had someone recite a poem: The running water dragonfly grows its fangs, and the weaver bird and its two passengers return home.

古文：荒村无人作寒食，殡宫空对棠梨花。
现代文：荒村无人作寒食，殡宫空对棠梨花。
English: No one is making cold food in the deserted village, and the funeral hall is empty of peach blossoms.

古文：至明，刘归襄阳州，因往寻访举人，惟有殡宫存焉。
现代文：到天亮，刘回襄阳州，就去寻找举人，只有殡宫在那里。
English: When Liu returned to Xiangyang at dawn, he went to look for a courier, but only the funeral home was there.

古文：祖价
现代文：祖价
English: Ancestral Price

古文：进士祖价，詠之孙也。
现代文：进士祖价。是祖詠的孙子。
English: He was a disciple of Zu Kua, the grandson of Zu Rong.

古文：落第后，尝游商山中，行李危困。
现代文：落第后。尝游览到商山里。行囊窘困，晚上来到一个驿馆。
English: After losing. Try a tour to Shangshanli. The trip was in trouble, and in the evening I came to a gong hall.

古文：夕至一孤驿，去驿半里已来，有一空佛寺，无僧居，价与仆夫投之而宿。秋月甚明，价独玩月，来去而行。
现代文：距离驿站半里左右，有一空佛寺。无僧居。祖价与补人投奔去住宿。秋月很明亮，祖价独自欣赏月光，来回地走动。
English: About half a mile from the post station, there is an empty Buddhist temple. There is no monk's residence. Zuwari and the mendicant rushed to stay. The autumn moon was very bright, Zuwari enjoyed the moonlight alone and walked back and forth.

古文：忽有一人，自寺殿后出，揖价共坐，语笑说经史，时时自吟。
现代文：忽然有一个人，从寺殿后面出来，与价作揖共同坐下。谈笑说经史，时时自己吟诵。
English: Suddenly, a man came out from the back of the temple and sat down with the priest, chatting and laughing about the scriptures and chanting to himself.

古文：价烹茶待之，此人独吟不已。又云：夫人为诗，述怀讽物。若不精不切，即不能动人。
现代文：祖价煮茶招待他。这人独自吟诵不停，又说：人作诗，抒发情怀讽喻时物，如果不精粹不确切，就不能感动人。
English: The man kept chanting on his own, and said, "People write poems, express feelings, and use metaphors, but if they are not refined and accurate, they cannot move people.

古文：今夕偶相遇，后会难期，辄赋三两篇，以述怀也。
现代文：今晚偶然相遇，以后相会就很有日子了，就赋三两篇，用来表达我的胸怀。
English: Tonight, by chance, we met, and there will be plenty of time to meet in the future, so I will write three or two articles to express my heart.

古文：遂朗吟云：家住驿北路，百里无四邻。
现代文：于是朗颂道：家住驿北路，百里无四邻。
English: So he sang: I live on Shunbei Road, there are no neighbors for a hundred miles.

古文：往来不相问，寂寂山家春。
现代文：往来不相问，寂寂山家春。
English: If they don't talk to each other, it's a lonely mountain spring.

古文：又吟：南冈夜萧萧，青松与白杨。
现代文：又吟道：南冈夜萧萧，青松与白杨。
English: Also chant: Nangang night Xiao Xiao, young pine and poplar.

古文：家人应有梦，远客已无肠。
现代文：家人应有梦，远客已无肠。
English: Family members should have a dream, away fans have no guts.

古文：又吟：白草寒路里，乱山明月中。
现代文：又吟：白草寒路里，乱山明月中。
English: Meitou: In the cold road of white grass, in the middle of the chaotic mountains.

古文：是夕苦吟罢，寒烛与君同。
现代文：是夕苦吟罢，寒烛与君同。
English: Let the evening wail, and the cold candle sing with thee.

古文：诗讫，再三吟之。
现代文：诗吟完，又再三吟诵。
English: After chanting the poem, chant it again and again.

古文：夜久，遂揖而退。
现代文：夜深，于是作揖而退去。
English: It was late at night, so he made a hasty retreat.

古文：至明日，问邻人，此前后数里，并无人居，但有书生客死者，葬在佛殿后南冈上。
现代文：到了第二天，寻问邻居，回答说：这前后几里，并没有人住，只有一个客死的书生，葬在佛殿后边的南冈上。
English: On the second day, he asked his neighbor and answered: "For several miles around, there is no one living here. There was only one foreign student who died and was buried on the south hill behind the Buddhist temple.

古文：价度其诗，乃知是鬼。为文吊之而去。
现代文：祖价猜度他的诗，才知道是鬼，写了祭文吊唁后离去。
English: The ancestor guessed his poem, only to find out that it was a ghost, wrote an offering of condolence and left.

