古文：故至诚无息。
现代文：所以，极端真诚是永不停止的。
English: Therefore, extreme sincerity never stops.

古文：不息则久，久则征。
现代文：永不停止就会保持长久，保持长久就会显露出来。
English: If you never stop, you will stay for a long time, and if you stay for a long time, you will be revealed.

古文：征则悠远。悠远，则博厚。博厚，则高明。
现代文：显露出来就会悠远，悠远就会广博深厚，广博深厚就会高大光明。
English: If it is revealed, it will be far away, far away will be broad and deep, broad and deep will be high and bright.

古文：博厚，所以载物也。高明，所以覆物也。悠久，所以成物也。
现代文：广博深厚的作用是承载万物；高大光明的作用是覆盖万物；悠远长久的作用是生成万物。
English: The role of the vast and profound is to carry all things; the role of the lofty and bright is to cover all things; the long-lasting role is to generate all things.

古文：博厚，配地。高明，配天。悠久，无疆。
现代文：广博深厚可以与地相比，高大光明可以与天相比，悠远长久则是永无止境。
English: The vastness and depth can be compared to the earth, the height and brightness can be compared to the sky, and the far and long is endless.

古文：如此者，不见而章，不动而变，无为而成。
现代文：达到这样的境界，不显示也会明显，不活动也会改变，无所作为也会有所成就。
English: Reaching such a state, inactivity will also be obvious, inactivity will change, and inaction will achieve something.

古文：天地之道，可一言而尽也。其为物不贰，则其生物不测。
现代文：天地的法则，简直可以用一个 诚 字来囊括：诚本身专一不二，所以生育万物多得不可估量。
English: The law of heaven and earth can be summed up in one sentence: as a thing, it is pure and one, and therefore it is immeasurable in all things.

古文：天地之道，博也、厚也、高也、明也、悠也、久也。
现代文：大地的法则，就是广博、深厚、高大、光明、悠远、长久。
English: The laws of the earth are vast, deep, lofty, bright, far-reaching and long-lasting.

古文：今夫天斯昭昭之多，及其无穷也，日月星辰系焉，万物覆焉。
现代文：今天我们所说的天，原本不过是由一点一点的光明聚积起来的，可等到它无边无际时，日月星辰都靠它维系，世界万物都靠它覆盖。
English: What we call the sky today was originally nothing more than the accumulation of bits and pieces of light, but when it became boundless, the sun, moon, and stars were all sustained by it, and everything in the world was covered by it.

古文：今夫地一撮土之多，及其广厚载华岳而不重，振河海而不洩，万物载焉。
现代文：今天我们所说的地，原本不过是由一撮土一撮土聚积起来的，可等到它广博深厚时，承载像华山那样的崇山峻岭也不觉得重，容纳那众多的江河湖海也不会泄漏，世间万物都由它承载了。
English: The land we are talking about today was originally just made up of piles of soil, but when it became vast and deep, it did not feel heavy to carry such a high mountain as Huashan, nor did it leak to accommodate the many rivers, lakes and seas. Everything in the world was carried by it.

古文：今夫山一卷石之多，及其广大，草木生之，禽兽居之，宝藏兴焉。
现代文：今天我们所说的山，原本不过是由拳头大的石块聚积起来的，可等到它高大无比时，草木在上面生长，禽兽在上面居住，宝藏在上面储藏。
English: What we call a mountain today was originally nothing more than a fist-sized pile of rocks, but when it was immeasurably tall, plants and trees grew on it, animals lived on it, and treasures were stored on it.

古文：今夫水，一勺之多，及其不测，鼋、鼍、蛟、龙、鱼、鳖生焉，货财殖焉。诗云， 维天之命，於穆不已。 
现代文：今天我们所说的水，原本不过是一勺一勺聚积起来的，可等到它浩瀚无涯时，蛟龙鱼鳖等都在里面生长，珍珠珊瑚等值价的东西都在里面繁殖。《诗经》上说： 只有上天的定命，深远不止。 
English: The water we are talking about today was originally just accumulated spoonful by spoonful, but when it became vast and boundless, dragon fish and other fish grew in it, and things of the same value as pearl corals were bred in it. "The Book of Songs" says: Only God's predestined destiny is far more profound.

古文：盖曰，天之所以为天也。 於乎不显，文王之德之纯。 
现代文：这大概是说天之所以成为天的原因。啊，难道不光明！
English: This is probably the reason why the sky is the sky. Ah, isn't it bright!

古文：盖曰，文王之所以为文也。纯亦不已。
现代文：文王的德行这么纯洁，这大概是说文王之所以被尊奉为文王，是因为他纯一，而且永无止境。
English: The fact that King Wen's virtue is so pure probably means that the reason why he is revered as King Wen is because he is pure and endless.

