古文：宋子曰：人有十等，自王公至于舆台，缺一焉而人纪不立矣。
现代文：宋先生说：人分十个等级，从高贵的王、公到低贱的舆、台，其中缺少一个等级，人的立身处世之道就建立不起来了。
English: Mr. Song said: People are divided into ten levels, from the noble king and prince to the lowly commoner and commoner. If one level is missing, a person's way of standing up in the world cannot be established.

古文：大地生五金以利用天下与后世，其义亦犹是也。
现代文：大地产生出贵贱不同的各种金属，以供人类及其子孙后代使用，这两者的意义都是一样的。
English: The earth produces all kinds of metals, both precious and base, for the use of mankind and its posterity, and both have the same significance.

古文：贵者千里一生，促亦五六百里而生；贱者舟车稍艰之国，其土必广生焉。
现代文：贵金属，大概一千里之外才有一处出产，近的也要五六百里才有。五金中最贱的金属，在交通稍有不便的地方，就会有大量的储藏。
English: For precious metals, there is only one place of production about a thousand miles away, and the nearest one is five or six hundred miles away. The cheapest metal in hardware, in places with slightly inconvenient transportation, will have a large amount of storage.

古文：黄金美者，其值去黑铁一万六千倍，然使釜？斤、斧不呈效于日用之间，即得黄金，直高而无民耳。
现代文：最好的黄金，价值要比黑铁高一万六千倍，然而，如果没有铁制的锅、刀、斧之类供人们日常生活之用，即使有了黄金，也不过好比只有高官而没有百姓罢了。
English: The best gold is worth 16,000 times more than black iron, but if there are no iron pots, knives, axes, etc. for people's daily use, even if there is gold, it is just like having only high-ranking officials and no people.

古文：懋迁有无，货居《周官》泉府，万物司命系焉。
现代文：金属的另一种作用是铸成钱币，作为贸易交往中的流通手段，由《周礼》所说的泉府一类官员掌管铸钱，以牢牢控制一切货物的命脉。
English: Another function of metals is to mint money, as a means of circulation in trade exchanges. Officials such as Quanfu, mentioned in "Zhou Li," are in charge of minting money to firmly control the lifeblood of all goods.

古文：其分别美恶而指点重轻，孰开其先而使相须于不朽焉？
现代文：至于分别金属的好与坏，指出它们价值的轻与重，这是谁开的头，使得它们彼此相辅相成而又永远地起作用呢？
English: As for distinguishing between good and bad metals, pointing out the lightness and heaviness of their value, who was it who opened the head, so that they complement each other and work forever?

古文：○黄金
现代文：黄金
English: Gold from

古文：凡黄金为五金之长，熔化成形之后，住世永无变更。
现代文：黄金是五金之中最贵重的，一旦熔化成形之后，就永远不会发生变化。
English: Gold is the most valuable of all metals. Once it has been melted and shaped, it will never change.

古文：白银入洪炉虽无折耗，但火候足时，鼓鞲而金花闪烁，一现即没，再鼓则沉而不现。
现代文：白银入烘炉熔化虽然不会有损耗，但当温度够高，用风箱鼓风引起金花闪烁，出现一次就没有了，再鼓风也不再出现金花。
English: Although there will be no loss when silver is melted in an oven, when the temperature is high enough, the blower is used to cause the gold flowers to flicker. Once they appear, they are gone, and the blower will no longer appear.

古文：惟黄金则竭力鼓鞲，一扇一花，愈烈愈现，其质所以贵也。
现代文：只有黄金，用力鼓风时，鼓一次金花就闪烁一次，火越猛金花出现越多，这是黄金之所以珍贵的原因。
English: There is only gold. When the wind is blowing hard, the drum flashes gold flowers once, and the fiercer the fire, the more gold flowers appear. This is the reason why gold is precious.

古文：凡中国产金之区，大约百余处，难以枚举。
现代文：中国的产金地区约有一百多处，难以列举。
English: It is difficult to enumerate more than a hundred gold-producing regions in China.

古文：山石中所出，大者名马蹄金，中者名橄榄金、带胯金，小者名瓜子金。
现代文：山石中所出产的，大的叫马蹄金，中的叫橄榄金或带胯金，小的叫瓜子金。
English: The large ones are called horseshoe gold, the medium ones are called olive gold or banded gold, and the small ones are called melon seed gold.

古文：水沙中所出，大者名狗头金，小者名麦夫麦金、糠金。
现代文：在水沙中所出产的，大的叫狗头金，小的叫麦麸金、糠金。
English: What is produced in the water and sand, the big one is called dog's head gold, the small one is called wheat bran gold, and the small one is called straw gold.

古文：平地掘井得者，名面沙金，大者名豆粒金。
现代文：在平地挖井得到的叫面沙金，大的叫豆粒金。
English: The gold obtained by digging wells on flat ground is called face sand gold, and the large one is called bean grain gold.

古文：皆待先淘洗后冶炼而成颗块。
现代文：这些都要先经淘洗然后进行冶炼，才成为整颗整块的金子。
English: All of this must first be washed and then smelted to become a whole piece of gold.

古文：金多出西南，取者穴山至十余丈见伴金石，即可见金。
现代文：黄金多数出产自西南部，采金的人开凿矿井十多丈深，一看到伴金石，就可以找到金了。
English: Most of the gold is produced in the southwestern part of the country. Miners dig mines more than ten meters deep, and they can find gold as soon as they see the accompanying precious stones.

古文：其石褐色，一头如火烧黑状。
现代文：这种石呈褐色，一头好像给火烧黑了似的。
English: The stone is brown, with one end blackened as if by fire.

古文：水金多者出云南金沙江，此水源出吐蕃，绕流丽江府，至于北胜州，回环五百余里，出金者有数截。
现代文：蕴藏在河里的沙金，大多产于云南的金沙江，这条江发源于青藏高原，绕过丽江府，流至北胜州，迂回达五百多里，产金的有好几段。
English: Most of the gold in the river is produced by the Jinsha River in Yunnan. The river originates in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, bypasses Lijiang Prefecture, and flows to North Shengzhou, a detour of more than five hundred miles, producing gold in several sections.

古文：又川北潼川等州邑与湖广沅陵、溆浦等，皆于江沙水中淘沃取金。
现代文：此外还有四川省北部的潼川等州和湖南省的沅陵、溆浦等地，都可在江沙中淘得沙金。
English: In addition, there are other states such as Luochuan in the northern part of Sichuan Province and Hunan Province's Fuling, Weipo and other places, all of which can earn sand gold in the sands of the river.

古文：千百中间有获狗头金一块者，名曰金母，其余皆麦夫麦形。
现代文：在千百次淘取中，偶尔才会获得一块狗头金，叫做金母，其余的都不过是麦麸形状的金屑。
English: In the thousands of times of mining, only a piece of dog's head gold, called gold mother, is occasionally obtained, and the rest are nothing more than straw-shaped gold shavings.

古文：入冶煎炼，初出色浅黄，再炼而后转赤也。
现代文：金在冶炼时，最初呈现浅黄色，再炼就转化成为赤色。
English: When gold is smelted, it initially appears light yellow, and when it is refined, it turns red.

古文：儋、崖有金田，金杂沙土之中，不必深求而得，取太频则不复产，经年淘炼，若有则限。
现代文：海南岛的澹、崖两县地区都有砂金矿，金夹杂在沙土中，不必深挖就可以获得。但淘取太频繁，便不会再出产，一年到头都这样挖取、熔炼，即使有也是很有限的了。
English: There are alluvial gold mines in the Min and Yap counties of Hainan Island. Gold is mixed in the sandy soil and can be obtained without digging deep. However, if the mining is too frequent, it will not be produced again. It is mined and smelted like this all year round, and even if there is, it is very limited.

古文：然岭南夷獠洞穴中金，初出如黑铁落，深挖数丈得之黑焦石下。
现代文：在广东、广西少数民族地区的洞穴中，刚挖出来的金好像黑色的氧化铁屑，这种金要挖几丈深，在黑焦石下面才能找到。
English: In the caves in the minority areas of Guangdong and Guangxi, the newly excavated gold looks like black iron oxide chips. This kind of gold has to be dug several feet deep and can only be found under the black coke.

古文：初得时咬之柔软，夫匠有吞窃腹中者亦不伤人。
现代文：初得时拿来咬一下，是柔软的，采金的人有的偷偷把它吞进肚子里去也不会对人有伤害。
English: Bite it when you first get it. It's soft. Some gold miners secretly swallow it into their stomachs, and it won't hurt anyone.

古文：河南蔡、矾等州邑，江西乐平、新建等邑，皆平地掘深井取细沙淘炼成，但酬答人功所获亦无几耳。
现代文：河南省的汝南县和巩县一带，江西的乐平、新建等地，都是在平地开挖很深的矿井，取得细矿砂淘炼而得到金的，可是由于消耗劳动力太大，扣除人工费用外，所得也就很少了。
English: The areas around Runan County and Gong County in Henan Province, and Leping, Xinzhuang and other places in Jiangxi, all obtained gold by digging very deep mines on flat land and obtaining fine mineral sands for refining. However, due to the excessive consumption of labor, there was little income after deducting labor costs.

古文：大抵赤县之内隔千里而一生。
现代文：大概在我国要隔千里才会找到一处金矿。
English: It would probably take thousands of miles to find a gold mine in our country.

古文：《岭南录》云居民有从鹅鸭屎中淘出片屑者，或日得一两，或空无所获。
现代文：《岭表录》中说： 有人从鹅、鸭屎中淘取金屑，多的每日可得一两，少的则毫无所获。 
English: "Ridge Table" says: Some people take gold from goose and duck droppings, most can get one or two per day, while a few get nothing.

古文：此恐妄记也。
现代文：这个记载恐怕是虚妄不可信的。
English: I'm afraid this account is untrue.

古文：凡金质至重，每铜方寸重一两者，银照依其则，寸增重三钱。银方寸重一两者，金照依其则，寸增重二钱。
现代文：金是最重的东西，假定铜每立方寸重一两，则银每立方寸要增加三钱重量；再假定银每立方寸重一两，则金每立方寸增加重量二钱。
English: Gold is the heaviest thing. Assuming that copper weighs one or two per cubic inch, then silver has to increase its weight by three dollars per cubic inch; assuming again that silver weighs one or two per cubic inch, then gold has to increase its weight by two dollars per cubic inch.

古文：凡金性又柔，可屈折如枝柳。
现代文：黄金的另一种性质就是柔软，能像柳枝那样屈折。
English: Another property of gold is that it is soft and can be bent like a willow branch.

古文：其高下色，分七青、八黄、九紫、十赤。
现代文：至于它的成分高低，大抵青色的含金七成，黄色的含金八成，紫色的含金九成，赤色的则是纯金了。
English: As far as its composition is concerned, mostly the blue contains 70% gold, the yellow contains 80% gold, the purple contains 90% gold, and the red is pure gold.

古文：登试金石上，立见分明。
现代文：把这些金在试金石上划出条痕，用比色法就能够分辨出它的成色。
English: The gold is then marked on a touchstone, and its color can be distinguished using a colorimetric method.

古文：凡足色金参和伪售者，唯银可入，余物无望焉。
现代文：纯金如果要掺和别的金属来作伪出售，只有银可以掺入，其他金属都不行。
English: If pure gold is to be mixed with other metals to be sold as counterfeit, only silver can be mixed in, not other metals.

古文：欲去银存金，则将其金打成薄片剪碎，每块以土泥裹涂，入坩锅中硼砂熔化，其银即吸入土内，让金流出以成足色。
现代文：如果要想除银存金，就要将这些杂金打成薄片，剪碎，每块用泥土涂上或包住，然后放入坩埚里加入硼砂熔化，这样银便被泥土所吸收，让金水流出来，成为纯金。
English: If you want to remove the silver deposit, it is necessary to beat these scrap gold into thin slices, cut them into pieces, coat or wrap each piece with soil, and then put it in a crucible and add molten borax. In this way, the silver is absorbed by the soil, allowing the gold to flow out and become pure gold.

古文：然后入铅少许，另入坩锅内，勾出土内银，亦毫厘具在也。
现代文：然后另外放一点铅入坩埚里，又可以把泥土中的银吸附出来，而丝毫不会有损耗。
English: Then put another bit of lead into the crucible, and the silver in the soil can be adsorbed out without any loss.

古文：凡色至于金，为人间华美贵重，故人工成箔而后施之。
现代文：黄金以其华美的颜色为人所贵重，因此人们将黄金加工打造成金箔用于装饰。
English: Gold is precious to people because of its gorgeous color, so people use gold processing to make gold leaf for decoration.

古文：凡金箔每金七分造方寸金一千片，粘铺物面，可盖纵横三尺。
现代文：每七厘黄金捶成一平方寸的金箔一千片，把它们黏铺在器物表面，可以盖满三尺见方的面积。
English: One thousand sheets of gold leaf, one square inch for every seven centimeters of gold, are glued to the surface of the utensil and can cover an area of three feet square.

古文：凡造金箔，既成薄片后，包入乌金纸内，竭力挥椎打成。
现代文：金箔的制法是：把金捶成薄片，再包在乌金纸里，用力挥动铁锤打成。
English: The method of making gold leaf is: the gold is beaten into thin sheets, then wrapped in black and gold paper, and beaten with a hammer.

古文：凡乌金纸由苏、杭造成，其纸用东海巨竹膜为质。
现代文：乌金纸由苏州或杭州制造，用东海大竹膜做原料。
English: The ebony paper is made in Suzhou or Hangzhou, using the East China Sea bamboo film as raw material.

古文：用豆油点灯，闭塞周围，止留针孔通气，熏染烟光而成止纸。
现代文：纸做成后点起豆油灯，封闭着周围，只留下一个针眼大的小孔通气，经过灯烟的熏染制成乌金纸。
English: After the paper is made, a soybean oil lamp is lit and sealed around it, leaving only a small hole with a large pinhole for ventilation. After the lamp smoke is smoked and dyed, it is made into black and gold paper.

古文：每纸一张打金箔五十度，然后弃去，为药铺包朱用，尚末破损，盖人巧造成异物也。
现代文：每张乌金纸供捶打金箔五十次后就不要了，还未破损的话，可以给药铺作包朱砂之用，这是凭精妙工艺制造出来的奇妙东西。
English: Each piece of black and gold paper is used to beat the gold foil fifty times, and then it is no longer needed. If it is still intact, it can be used to wrap cinnabar for the pharmacy. This is a wonderful thing made with exquisite craftsmanship.

古文：凡纸内打成箔后，先用硝熟猫皮绷急为小方板，又铺线香灰撒墁皮上，取出乌金纸内箔覆于其上，钝刀界画成方寸。
现代文：夹在乌金纸里的金片被打成箔后，先把硝制过的猫皮绷紧成小方板，再将香灰撒满皮面，拿出乌金纸里的金箔放上去，用钝刀画成一平方寸的方块。
English: After the gold leaf clipped in the black gold paper is beaten into a foil, first tighten the cat skin made of glass into a small square plate, then sprinkle the scented ash over the skin, take out the gold foil in the black gold paper and put it up, and draw a square inch square with a blunt knife.

古文：口中屏息，手执轻杖，唾湿而挑起，夹于小纸之中。
现代文：然后屏住呼吸，拿一根轻木条用唾液黏湿一下，黏起金箔，夹在小纸片里。
English: Then hold your breath, take a piece of balsa wood, wet it with saliva, glue the gold foil, and sandwich it in a small piece of paper.

古文：以之华物，先以熟漆布地，然后粘贴。
现代文：用金箔装饰物件时，先用熟漆在物件表面上涂刷一遍，然后将金箔黏贴上去。
English: When decorating an object with gold leaf, first paint the surface of the object with a varnish, and then glue the gold leaf on.

古文：秦中造皮金者，硝扩羊皮使最薄，贴金其上，以便剪裁服饰用，皆煌煌至色存焉。
现代文：陕西省中部制造的皮金，是用硝制过的羊皮拉至极薄，然后把金箔贴在皮上，供剪裁服饰使用。这些器物皮件因此都显出辉煌夺目的美丽颜色。
English: Manufactured in central Shaanxi Province, the gold-plated sheepskins are made of nitro-plated sheepskin, which is stretched to extremely thin, and then the gold foil is affixed to the skin for use in tailoring. As a result, these leather goods all show brilliant and beautiful colors.

古文：凡金箔粘物，他日敝弃之时，刮削火化，其金仍藏灰内。
现代文：凡用金箔黏贴的物件，如果日后破旧不用，可以刮下来用火烧，金质就留在灰里。
English: All the objects pasted with gold leaf, if worn out and not used in the future, can be scraped off and burned with fire, leaving the gold in the ashes.

古文：滴清油数点，伴落聚底，淘洗入炉，毫厘无恙。
现代文：加进几滴菜子油，金质又会积聚沉底，淘洗后再熔炼，可以全部回收而毫无损耗。
English: Add a few drops of rapeseed oil, and the gold will accumulate and sink to the bottom. After washing and refining, it can be completely recovered without any loss.

古文：凡假借金色者，杭扇以银箔为质，红花子油刷盖，向火熏成。
现代文：杭州的扇子是用银箔做底，涂上一层红花子油，再在火上熏一下做成金色的。
English: The fans in Hangzhou are made of silver foil on the bottom, coated with a layer of saffron oil, and then smoked on the fire to make them golden.

古文：广南货物以蝉蜕壳调水描画，向火一微炙而就，非真金色也。
现代文：广东、广西的货物是用蝉蜕壳磨碎后浸水来描画，再用火稍微烤一下做成金色的，这些都不是真金的颜色。
English: The goods in Guangdong and Guangxi are painted with cicada shells that have been ground and soaked in water, and then slightly roasted with fire to make them golden. These are not the color of real gold.

古文：其金成器物呈分浅淡者，以黄矾涂染，炭火炸炙，即成赤宝色。
现代文：即使由金做成的器物，因成色较低而颜色浅淡的，也可用黄矾涂染，在猛火中烘一烘，立刻就会变成赤宝色。
English: Even utensils made of gold, which are light in color due to low chroma, can be painted with yellow enamel. Once baked in a fierce fire, they will immediately turn into a red-gold color.

古文：然风尘逐渐淡去，见火又即还原耳。
现代文：但是日子久了又会逐渐褪色，如果把它拿到火中焙一下，则又可以恢复赤宝色。
English: But after a long time, it will gradually fade, and if you take it to the fire and roast it, you can restore the red-gold color.

古文：○银
现代文：银
English: Silver Wax

古文：凡银中国所出，浙江、福建旧有坑场，国初或采或闭。
现代文：中国产银的情况大体上是这样的：浙江和福建两省原有的银矿坑场，到了明初之时，有的仍然在开采中，但是有的已经关闭了。
English: The situation of China's silver production is generally as follows: the original silver mine pits in Zhejiang and Fujian provinces, by the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, some were still being mined, but some had been closed.

古文：江西饶、信、瑞三郡有坑从末开。
现代文：江西饶州、信州和瑞州三个州县，有些银坑还从来没有开采过。
English: Some silver pits have never been mined in the three prefectures and counties of Raozhou, Xinzhou and Ruizhou in Jiangxi Province.

古文：湖广则出辰州，贵州则出铜仁，河南则宜阳赵保山、永宁秋树坡、卢氏高嘴儿、嵩县马槽山，与四川会川密勒山、甘肃大黄山等，皆称美矿。其他难以枚举。
现代文：湖南省的辰州，贵州省的铜仁，河南省的宜阳县赵保山、永宁县秋树坡、卢氏县高嘴儿、嵩县马槽山，四川省的会川密勒山，以及甘肃省的大黄山等处，都有优良的产银矿场，其余的地方就难以一一列举了。
English: Chenzhou in Hunan Province, Tongren in Guizhou Province, Zhao Baoshan in Yiyang County, Qiu Shupo in Yongning County, Gaozuer in Luzhi County, Mazuo Mountain in Song County, Huichuan Mille Mountain in Sichuan Province, and Dashuang Mountain in Gansu Province all have excellent silver-producing mines. The rest of the places are difficult to list.

古文：然生气有限，每逢开采，数不足则括派以赔偿。
现代文：然而，这些银矿一般而言都没有多少产量。因此每次开采时，如果采银的数量还达不到原定的最低限额，那么参加开采银矿的人就得摊派钱财用来赔偿。
English: However, these silver mines generally do not produce much, so every time they mine, if the amount of silver mined does not reach the original minimum amount, then the people who participate in the mining of silver will have to allocate money to compensate.

古文：法不严则窃争而酿乱，故禁戒不得不苛。
现代文：如果法制不严，就很容易出现偷窃争夺而造成祸乱的事件，所以禁戒律令又不得不十分严苛。
English: If the legal system is not strict, it is easy for theft and scramble to cause disasters, so the prohibition order has to be very strict.

古文：燕、齐诸道，则地气寒而石骨薄，不产金、银。
现代文：河北和山东一带，由于天气寒冷，石层又薄，因而不出产金银。
English: In Hebei and Shandong, due to the cold weather, the stone layer is thin, so gold and silver are not produced.

古文：然合八省所生，不敌云南之半，故开矿煎银，唯滇中可永行也。
现代文：以上八省合起来的产银总量还比不上云南省的一半呢，所以开矿炼银，只有在云南一省可以常办不衰。
English: The total amount of silver produced by the above eight provinces combined is less than half that of Yunnan Province. Therefore, only one province in Yunnan can continuously mine and refine silver.

古文：凡云南银矿，楚雄、永昌、大理为最盛，曲靖、姚安次之，镇沅又次之。
现代文：云南的银矿，以楚雄、永昌和大理三个地方储量最为丰富，曲靖、姚安位居其次，镇沅又居其次。
English: Yunnan's silver mines, with Chuxiong, Yongchang and Dali as the three places with the most abundant reserves, Qujing and Yao'an ranked second, and Zhenyao ranked second.

古文：凡石山硐中有铆砂，其上现磊然小石，微带褐色者，分丫成径路。
现代文：凡是石山洞里蕴藏有银矿的，在山上面就会出现一堆堆带有微褐色的小石头，分成若干个支脉。
English: Whenever there is silver ore in a cave, a pile of small brownish stones will appear on the top of the mountain, divided into several branches.

古文：采者穴土十丈或二十丈，工程不可日月计。
现代文：采矿的人要挖土一二十丈深才能找到矿脉，这种巨大的工程强度不是几天或者几个月所能完成的。
English: Miners have to dig down to a depth of ten or twenty feet to find the vein, and this huge engineering effort cannot be completed in a few days or months.

古文：寻见土内银苗，然后得礁砂所在。
现代文：找到了银矿苗以后，才能知道银矿具体所在。
English: Only after finding the silver mine seedlings can we know the specific location of the silver mine.

古文：凡樵砂藏深土，如枝分派别，各人随苗分径横挖而寻之。上耆横板架顶，以防崩压。
现代文：银矿埋藏得很深，而且像树枝那样有主干、枝干。采矿的工人跟踪着银矿苗分成几路横挖找矿，一边挖一边还要搭架横板用以支撑坑顶，以防塌方。
English: The silver mine is buried very deep, and has a trunk and branches like branches. The mining workers follow the silver mine seedlings to dig horizontally in several ways to find ore. While digging, they also have to set up a cross plate to support the top of the pit to prevent it from collapsing.

古文：采工篝灯逐径施，得矿方止。
现代文：采矿的工人提着灯笼分头挖掘，一直到取得矿砂为止。
English: The miners dig with their lanterns until they get the ore.

古文：凡土内银苗，或有黄色碎石，或土隙石缝有乱丝形状，此即去矿不远矣。
现代文：在土里的银矿苗，有的掺杂着一些黄色碎石，有的在泥隙石缝中出现有乱丝的形状，这都表明银矿就在附近了。
English: Silver mine seedlings in the soil, some of which are mixed with some yellow gravel, and some of which have the shape of tangled wires in the crevices of mudstone, all indicate that the silver mine is nearby.

古文：凡成银者曰礁，至碎者如砂，其面分丫若枝形者曰铆，其外包环石块曰矿。
现代文：银矿石中，含银较多的成块矿石叫做礁，细碎的叫做砂，其表面分布成树枝状的叫做铆，外面包裹着的石块叫做围岩。
English: In the silver ore, the ore containing more silver is called the reef, the finely divided ore is called the sand, the surface of which is distributed in the form of branches is called the cocoon, and the stone that is wrapped around the outside is called the surrounding rock.

古文：矿石大者如斗，小者如拳，为弃置无用物。
现代文：围岩大的像斗，小的像拳头，都是可以抛弃的废物。
English: The big ones, like the bucket, and the small ones, like the fist, are all waste that can be discarded.

古文：其礁砂形如煤炭，底衬石而不甚黑，其高下有数等。
现代文：礁砂形状像煤炭，底下垫着石头因而显得不那么黑。礁砂的品质分几个等级。
English: The reef sand is shaped like coal and is padded with stone underneath to make it less black. The quality of the reef sand is divided into several levels.

古文：出土以斗量，付与冶工，高者六七两一斗，中者三四两，最下一二两。
现代文：刚出土的矿砂用斗量过之后，交给冶工去炼。矿砂品质高的每斗可以炼出纯银六七两，中等的矿砂可以炼出纯银三四两，最差的可以炼出的纯银只有一二两。
English: After the newly unearthed mineral sand has been weighed in buckets, it is handed over to the smelter to be refined. Each bucket of high-quality mineral sand can refine 6 to 7 ta of sterling silver, medium-quality mineral sand can refine 3 to 4 ta of sterling silver, and the worst can only refine 1 to 2 ta of sterling silver.

古文：凡礁砂入炉，先行拣净淘洗。
现代文：礁砂在入炉之前，先要进行手选、淘洗。
English: Before the reef sand is put into the furnace, it must first be hand-selected and washed.

古文：其炉土筑巨墩，高五尺许，底铺瓷屑、炭灰，每炉受礁砂二石。
现代文：炼银的炉子是用土筑成的，土墩高约五尺左右，炉子底下铺上瓷片和炭灰之类的东西，每个炉子可容纳含银矿石二石。
English: The furnace for smelting silver is made of earth, the mound is about five feet high, and the bottom of the furnace is covered with porcelain and carbon ash. Each furnace can hold two stones containing silver ore.

古文：用栗木炭二百斤，周遭丛架。
现代文：用栗木炭二百斤，在矿石周围叠架起来。
English: Two hundred catties of chestnut charcoal were stacked around the ore.

古文：靠炉砌砖墙一朵，高阔皆丈余。
现代文：靠近炉旁还要砌一道砖墙，高和宽各一丈多。
English: Next to the stove, a brick wall had to be built, more than a meter high and wide.

古文：风箱安置墙背，合两三人力，带拽透管通风。用墙以抵炎热，鼓鞲之人方克安身。
现代文：风箱安装在墙背，由两三个人拉动鼓风。靠这一道砖墙来隔热，拉风箱的人才能有立身之地。
English: The bellows are mounted on the back of the wall, and two or three people pull the air. The brick wall is used to insulate the room, so that the person pulling the bellows has a place to stand.

古文：炭尽之时，以长铁叉添入。
现代文：等到炉里的炭烧完时，就用长铁又陆续添加。
English: When the charcoal in the furnace has finished burning, the cream is added successively with a long iron.

古文：风火力到，礁砂溶化成团。
现代文：如果火力够了，炉里的矿石就会熔化成团，这时的银还混在铅里而没有被分离出来。
English: If the fire is strong enough, the ore in the furnace will melt into a mass. At this time, the silver is still mixed with the lead and is not separated.

古文：此时银隐铅中，尚未出脱，计礁砂二石溶出团约重百斤。冷定限出，另入分金炉内，用松木炭匝围，透一门以辨火色。
现代文：两石银矿石熔成团后约有一百斤。冷却后取出，放入另一个名叫分金炉或者虾蟆炉的炉子里，用松木炭围住熔团，透过一个小门辨别火色。
English: After cooling, it is taken out and placed in another furnace called the gold-splitting furnace or the shrimp furnace, and the molten mass is surrounded with pine charcoal, and the color of the fire can be distinguished through a small door.

古文：其炉或施风箱，或使交Ψ。
现代文：可以用风箱鼓风，也可以用扇子来回扇。
English: You can use a bellows to blow air, or you can use a fan to fan back and forth.

古文：火热功到，铅沉下为底子。
现代文：达到一定的温度时，熔团会重新熔化，铅就沉到炉底。
English: When a certain temperature is reached, the melt will re-melt and the lead will sink to the bottom of the furnace.

古文：频以柳枝从门隙入内燃照，铅气净尽，则世宝凝然成象矣。
现代文：要不断用柳树枝从门缝中插进去燃烧，如果铅全部被氧化成氧化铅，就可以提炼出纯银来了。
English: If all the lead is oxidized into lead oxide, pure silver can be extracted.

古文：此初出银，亦名生银。
现代文：刚炼出来的银叫做生银。
English: Newly refined silver is called raw silver.

古文：倾定无丝纹，即再经一火，当中止现一点圆星，滇人名曰 茶经 。
现代文：倒出来凝固以后的银如果表面没有丝纹，就要再熔炼一次，直到凝固的银锭中心出现一种云南人叫 茶经 的一点圆星。
English: After pouring out the solidified silver, if there is no silk on the surface, it must be melted again until the center of the solidified ingot appears a round star, which the Yunnan people call the Tea Sutra.

古文：逮后入铜少许，重以铅力熔化，然后入槽成丝。
现代文：接着加入一点铜，再重新用铅来协助熔化，然后倒入槽里就会现出丝纹了。
English: Then add a bit of copper, then lead again to help it melt, and pour it into the trough to reveal the strands.

古文：其楚雄所出又异，彼硐砂铅气甚少，向诸郡购铅佐炼。
现代文：云南楚雄的银矿有些不一样，那里的矿砂含铅太少，还要向其他地方采购铅来辅助炼银。
English: The silver mines in Chuxiong, Yunnan, are somewhat different. The ore there contains too little lead, and lead has to be purchased from other places to supplement silver refining.

古文：每礁百斤，先坐铅二百斤于炉内，然后煽炼成团。
现代文：每炼银矿石一百斤，就得先在炉子里垫二百斤铅，然后才鼓风将矿砂冶炼成团。
English: For every hundred pounds of silver ore smelted, two hundred pounds of lead must be placed in the furnace before the wind can blow the ore into clumps.

古文：其再入虾蟆炉沉铅结银，则同法也。
现代文：至于再转到虾蟆炉里使铅沉下分离出银的方法则是相同的。
English: As for the method of separating the silver from the lead by sinking it into the shrimp oven, it is the same.

古文：此世宝所生，更无别出。
现代文：银的开采和熔炼用的就是这种方法，并没有其他方法。
English: This is the way silver is mined and smelted, there is no other way.

古文：方书、本草，无端妄想妄注，可厌之甚。
现代文：讲炼丹的方书和谈医药的《本草纲目》中，常常没有根据地乱想乱注，真是令人十分讨厌。
English: It is really very annoying that in the "Principles of Materia Medica," which is a textbook on alchemy and a textbook on medicine, there is often a lot of unsubstantiated wishful thinking.

古文：大抵坤元精气，出金之所三百里无银，出银之所三百里无金，造物之情亦大可见。
现代文：一般说来，金和银都是大地里面隐藏着的宝气的精华，因此产金的地方三百里之内没有银矿，产银的地方三百里之内也没有金矿。大自然的安排设计，从这里也能看出个大概。
English: Generally speaking, gold and silver are the essence of the precious gas hidden in the earth, so there is no silver mine within 300 miles of the place where gold is produced, and there is no gold mine within 300 miles of the place where silver is produced. Nature's arrangement and design can also be seen roughly from here.

古文：其贱役扫刷泥尘，入水漂淘而煎者，名曰淘厘锱。
现代文：有的干粗活儿的人把扫刷到的泥尘放进水里进行淘洗，然后再加以熬炼，这就叫做淘厘锱。
English: Some people who do rough work put the dust from the sweeping brush into the water for washing, and then refine it, which is called washing.

古文：一日功劳轻者所获三分，重者倍之。
现代文：操劳一天，少的只能得到三分银子，多的也只有六分银子。
English: For a day's work, a poor man might get three silver coins, and a rich man only six.

古文：其银俱日用剪、斧口中委余，或鞋底粘带布于衢市，或院宇扫屑弃于河沿，其中必有焉，非浅浮土面能生此物也。
现代文：这些银屑都是平常从剪刀或者斧子口上掉下来的，或者是由鞋底带到街道地面，或者是从院子房舍扫出来被抛弃在河边的。泥尘中必然会夹杂着一些银屑，这并不是浅的浮土上所能出产的。
English: These pieces of silver usually fall from the mouth of a pair of scissors or an axe, or are brought to the street floor by the soles of shoes, or are swept out of the courtyard house and abandoned at the river's edge.

古文：凡银为世用，惟红铜与铅两物可杂入成伪。然当其合琐碎而成钣锭，去疵伪而造精纯，高炉火中，坩锅足炼。撒硝少许，而铜、铅尽滞锅底，名曰银锈。
现代文：世间使用的银，只有红铜和铅两种金属可以掺混进去用来作假，但是把碎银铸成银锭的时候，就可以除去杂质加以提纯。方法是将杂银放在坩埚里，送进高炉里用猛火熔炼，撒上一些硝石，其中的铜和铅便全部结在埚底了，这就叫做银锈。
English: The silver used in the world can only be mixed with red copper and lead, two metals that can be used for counterfeiting. However, when the crushed silver is cast into ingots, the impurities can be removed and purified. The method is to place the mixed silver in the ingot, send it to the blast furnace to be melted with a fierce fire, sprinkle some saltpeter, and the copper and lead will all be at the bottom of the ingot. This is called silver rust.

古文：其灰池中敲落者，名曰炉底。
现代文：那些敲落在灰池里的叫做炉底。
English: Those that land in the ash pond are called hearthstones.

古文：将锈与底同入分金炉内，填火土甑之中，其铅先化，就低溢流，而铜与粘带余银，用铁条逼就分拨，井然不紊。
现代文：将银锈和炉底一起放进分金炉里，用土甑子装满木炭起火熔炼，铅就会首先熔化，流向低处，剩下的铜和银可以用铁条分拨，两者就截然分开了。
English: Put the silver rust and the bottom of the furnace together into the gold-splitting furnace, fill the crucible with charcoal and start the fire for smelting. The lead will melt first and flow to the bottom, and the remaining copper and silver can be divided by iron bars, and the two will be completely separated.

古文：人工、天工亦见一斑云。
现代文：人工与天工的关系由此可见一斑。
English: This clearly shows the relationship between man and nature.

古文：炉式并具于后。
现代文：炉的式样附图于左边。
English: A model of the furnace is shown on the left.

古文：○附朱砂银
现代文：附：朱砂银
English: Attached: cinnabar wax

古文：凡虚伪方士以炉火惑人者，唯朱砂银愚人易惑。
现代文：那些虚伪的方士用炉火骗人的方法中，用朱砂银愚弄人是比较容易的。
English: It is easier to fool people with cinnabar and silver than it is to fool them with fire.

古文：其法以投铅、朱砂与白银等分，入罐封固，温养三七日后，砂盗银气，煎成至宝。
现代文：在罐子里放入铅、朱砂、白银等物，封存起来，用火低温养二十一天后，朱砂含有银的成分，成为很好的宝物。
English: Put lead, cinnabar, silver and other things into the jar, seal it, and keep it at a low temperature for twenty-one days. The cinnabar contains silver components and becomes a good treasure.

古文：拣出其银，形有神丧，块然枯物。
现代文：把银子挑出来，剩下的已经没有银的样子，光有渣滓了。
English: Picked out the silver, the rest of the silver has no appearance, only the dregs.

古文：入铅煎时，逐火轻折，再经数火，毫忽无存。
现代文：放铅炼时，随着火力铅有损耗，再炼几次，一点儿都不剩了。
English: When the lead is put into the furnace for refining, there is a loss of lead due to the heat, and after several times of refining, there is nothing left.

古文：折去砂价、炭资、愚者贪惑犹不解，并志于此。
现代文：损失了朱砂、炭的钱，笨人还抱着贪恋不放，我把这也记录下来。
English: Lost cinnabar, charcoal money, stupid people still clinging to love, I also recorded this.

古文：○铜
现代文：铜
English: Copper Wax

古文：凡铜供世用，出山与出炉只有赤铜。
现代文：世间用的铜，开采后经过熔炼得来的只有红铜一种。
English: There is only one kind of copper used in the world, red copper, which is obtained by smelting after mining.

古文：以炉甘石或倭铅参和，转色为黄铜，以砒霜等药制炼为白铜；矾、硝等药制炼为青铜；广锡参和为响铜；倭铅和写为铸铜。
现代文：但是如果加入炉甘石或锌共同熔炼，就会转变成黄铜；如果加入砒霜等药物，可以炼成白铜；加入明矾和硝石等药物可炼成青铜；加入锡的得响铜；加入锌的得铸铜。
English: However, if calamine or zinc is added and smelted together, it will be converted into brass; if drugs such as arsenic are added, it can be refined into cupro-nickel; if drugs such as alum and saltpeter are added, it can be refined into bronze; if tin is added, it can be converted into sonorous copper; if zinc is added, it can be converted into cast copper.

古文：初质则一味红铜而已。
现代文：然而最基本的质地不过是红铜一种而已。
English: However, the most basic texture is just a kind of red copper.

古文：凡铜坑所在有之。《山海经》言出铜之山四百六十七，或有所考据也。
现代文：铜矿到处都有，《山海经》一书中提到全国产铜的地方共有四百三十七处，这或许是有根据的。
English: There are copper mines everywhere. The Book of the Mountains and the Sea mentions a total of 437 copper-producing places in the country, which may be well-founded.

古文：今中国供用者，西自四川、贵州为最盛。东南间自海舶来，湖广武昌、江西广信皆饶铜穴。
现代文：今天中国供人使用的铜，要算西部的四川、贵州两省出产为最多，东南多是从国外由海上运来的，湖北省的武昌以及江西省的广信，都有丰富铜矿。
English: Today, the copper used by people in China is mostly produced in the western provinces of Sichuan and Guizhou. In the southeast, most of the copper is shipped from abroad by sea. Wuchang in Hubei Province and Guangxin in Jiangxi Province are both rich in copper ore.

古文：其衡、瑞等郡，出最下品曰蒙山铜者，或入冶铸混入，不堪升炼成坚质也。
现代文：从湖南衡州、瑞州等地出产的蒙山铜，品质低劣，仅可以在铸造时掺入，不能熔炼成坚实的铜块。
English: The Mengshan copper produced from Hengzhou, Ruizhou and other places in Hunan Province is of inferior quality. It can only be mixed during casting, and cannot be smelted into solid copper blocks.

古文：凡出铜山夹土带石，穴凿数丈得之，仍有矿包其外，矿状如姜石，而有铜星，亦名铜璞，煎炼仍有铜流出，不似银矿之为弃物。
现代文：产铜的山总是夹土带石的，要挖几丈深才能得到，取得的矿石仍然有围岩包在外层。围岩的形状好像礓石那样，表面呈现一些铜的斑点，这又叫做铜璞。把它拿到炉里去冶炼，仍然会有一些铜流出来，不像银矿石那样完全是废物。
English: The mountains that produce copper are always silted with rock. It is necessary to dig several feet deep to get it, and the ore obtained still has the surrounding rock wrapped in the outer layer. The shape of the surrounding rock is like flint, with some copper spots on the surface, which is also called copper ingot. If it is taken to the furnace for smelting, there will still be some copper flowing out, unlike silver ore, which is completely waste.

古文：凡铜砂在矿内，形状不一，或大或小，或光或暗，或如石，或如姜铁。
现代文：铜砂在矿里的形状不一样，有的大，有的小，有的光，有的暗，有的像黄铜矿石，有的则像礓铁。
English: Copper sands have different shapes in the mine, some are large, some are small, some are light, some are dark, some are like brass ore, and some are like pig iron.

古文：淘洗去土滓，然后入炉煎炼，其熏蒸傍溢者，为自然铜，亦曰石髓铅。
现代文：把铜砂夹杂着的土滓洗去，然后入炉熔炼，经过熔化后从炉里流出来的，就是自然铜，也叫石髓铅。
English: The copper sand mixed with the earthenware was washed away and then smelted in the furnace. After melting, the natural copper, also known as stone lead, flowed out of the furnace.

古文：凡铜质有数种。有全体皆铜，不夹铅、银者，洪炉单炼而成。
现代文：铜矿石有几个品种，其中有全部是铜而不夹杂铅和银的，只要入炉一炼就成。
English: There are several varieties of copper ore, all of which are copper without the addition of lead and silver, and can be made as soon as they are put into the furnace.

古文：有与铅同体者，其煎炼炉法，傍通高低二孔，铅质先化从上孔流出，铜质后化从下孔流出。
现代文：有的却和铅混杂在一起，这种铜矿的冶炼方法是：在炉旁留高低两个孔，先熔化的铅从上孔流出，后熔化的铜则从下孔流出。
English: Some, however, are mixed with lead. The method of smelting this copper ore is to leave two holes high and low next to the furnace. The first molten lead flows out of the upper hole, and the second molten copper flows out of the lower hole.

古文：东夷铜又有托体银矿内者，入炉炼时，银结于面，铜沉于下。
现代文：日本等处的铜矿，也有与银矿在一块的，当放进炉里去熔炼时，银会浮在上层，而铜沉在下面。
English: There are copper mines in Japan and other places that are in one piece with silver mines. When placed in a furnace for smelting, the silver will float on the upper layer, while the copper sinks below.

古文：商舶漂入中国，名曰日本铜，其形为方长板条。
现代文：由商船运进中国的铜，叫做日本铜，它是铸成长方形的板条状的。
English: The copper brought to China by merchant ships is called Japanese copper, and it is cast into long, square slats.

古文：漳郡人得之，有以炉再炼，取出零银，然后泻成薄饼，如川铜一样货卖者。
现代文：福建漳州人得到后，有把这种铜入炉再炼，取出其中零星的银，然后铸成薄饼模样，像四川的铜那样出售。
English: After the people of Luzhou in Fujian obtained it, they put the copper into a furnace to refine it, took out the scattered silver, and then cast it into the shape of pancakes and sold it like copper in Sichuan.

古文：凡红铜升黄色为锤锻用者，用自风煤炭百斤，灼于炉内，以泥瓦罐载铜十斤，继入炉甘石六斤坐于炉内，自然熔化。
现代文：由红铜炼成可以锤锻的黄铜，要用一百斤自风煤放入炉里烧，在一个泥瓦罐里装铜十斤、炉甘石六斤，放入炉内，让它自然熔化。
English: From red copper to brass that can be hammered and forged, it is necessary to use one hundred pounds of wind-blown coal to put it into the furnace and burn it. Put ten pounds of copper and six pounds of calcite in a clay jar and put it into the furnace to let it melt naturally.

古文：后人因炉甘石烟洪飞损，改用倭铅。
现代文：后来人们因为炉甘石挥发得太厉害，损耗很大，就改用锌。
English: Later, people switched to zinc because the calamine evaporated too much and the loss was great.

古文：每红铜六斤，入倭铅四斤，先后入罐熔化，冷定取出，即成黄铜，唯人打造。
现代文：每次红铜六斤，配锌四斤，先后放入罐里熔化，冷却后取出即是黄铜，供人们打造各种器物。
English: Each time, six catties of red copper and four catties of zinc are put into the tank to be melted, and after cooling, brass is taken out, which is used to make various utensils.

古文：凡用铜造响器，用出山广锡无铅气者入内。
现代文：制造乐器用的响铜，要把不含铅的两广产的锡放进罐里与铜同熔。
English: To make the sonorous copper used in musical instruments, two lead-free tin ingots are placed in a jar and melted together with the copper.

古文：钲、镯之类，皆红铜八斤，入广锡二斤。铙、钹、铜与锡更加精炼。
现代文：制造锣、鼓一类乐器，一般用红铜八斤，掺入广锡二斤；锤制铙、钹所用铜、锡还须进一步精炼。
English: To make cymbals, drums and other musical instruments, eight catties of red copper are generally used, mixed with two catties of wide tin; the copper and tin used for hammering cymbals and cymbals must be further refined.

古文：凡铸器，低者红铜、倭铅均平分两，甚至铅六铜四。高者名三火黄铜、四火熟铜，则铜七而铅三也。
现代文：一般质量差的铜器，含红铜和锌各一半，甚至锌占六成而铜占四成；好的铜器则要用经过三次或四次熔炼的所谓三火黄铜或四火熟铜来制成，其中含铜七成、铅三成。
English: Copperware of generally poor quality contains half of red copper and half of zinc, and even 60% of zinc and 40% of copper; good copperware is made of so-called three-fire brass or four-fire cooked copper that has been smelted three or four times, and contains 70% copper and 30% lead.

古文：凡造低伪银者，唯本色红铜可入。
现代文：那些制造假银的，只有纯铜可以混入。
English: For those who make counterfeit silver, only pure copper may be mixed in.

古文：一受倭铅、砒、矾等气，则永不和合。
现代文：如果掺杂有锌、砒、矾等物质，永远都不能互相结合。
English: If doped with zinc, cadmium, rhenium and other substances, they can never be combined with each other.

古文：然铜入银内，使白质顿成红色，洪炉再鼓，则清浊浮沉立分，至于净尽云。
现代文：然而铜混进银里，使白色立刻变成红色，再入炉鼓风熔炼，等它全部熔化后，此时哪个清、哪个浊、哪个浮、哪个沉，就能辨识得清清楚楚，银和铜便分离得干干净净了。
English: However, copper is mixed into silver, so that the white immediately turns red, and then it is blown into the furnace and smelted. After it is all melted, at this time, which is clear, which is turbid, which is floating, and which is sinking, can be clearly identified, and silver and copper are separated cleanly.

古文：○附：倭铅
现代文：附：倭铅
English: Attached: Waseda University

古文：凡倭铅古书本无之，乃近世所立名色。
现代文： 倭铅 在古书里本来没有什么记载，只是到了近代才有了这个名字。
English: Originally, there was no record of the yakitori in ancient books, but it was only in modern times that it acquired this name.

古文：其质用炉甘石熬炼而成。繁产山西太行山一带，而荆、衡为次之。
现代文：它是由炉甘石熬炼而成的，大量出产于山西省的太行山一带，其次是湖北省荆州和湖南省衡州。
English: It is made from calamine stone and is produced in large quantities in the Taihang Mountains in Shanxi Province, followed by Jingzhou in Hubei Province and Hengzhou in Hunan Province.

古文：每炉甘石十斤，装载入一泥罐内，封裹泥固以渐砑干，勿使见火拆裂。
现代文：熔炼的方法是：每次将十斤炉甘石装进一个泥罐里，在泥罐外面涂上泥封固，再将表面碾光滑，让它渐渐风干。千万不要用火烤，以防泥罐拆裂。
English: The method of smelting is as follows: each time, put ten pounds of calamine into a mud pot, coat the outside of the mud pot with mud to seal it, then grind the surface smooth and let it dry gradually. Do not use fire to prevent the mud pot from breaking.

古文：然后逐层用煤炭饼垫盛，其底铺薪，发火煅红，罐中炉甘石熔化成团，冷定毁罐取出。每十耗去其二，即倭铅也。
现代文：然后用煤饼一层层地把装炉甘石的罐垫起来，在下面铺柴引火烧红，最终泥罐里的炉甘石就能熔成一团了。等到泥罐冷却以后，将罐子打烂后取出来的就是倭铅，每十斤炉甘石会损耗两斤。
English: Then, with a layer of coal cake, they padded up the pot containing the calamine and spread firewood underneath to ignite the fire. Eventually, the calamine in the clay pot was able to melt into a ball. After the clay pot had cooled, the pot was broken and the result was yakitori. For every ten kilos of calamine, two kilos were lost.

古文：此物无铜收伏，入火即成烟飞去。
现代文：但是，这种倭铅如果不和铜结合，一见火就会挥发成烟。
English: However, if this yakitori is not combined with copper, it will evaporate into smoke at the first sight of fire.

古文：以其似铅而性猛，故名之曰倭云。
现代文：由于它很像铅而又比铅的性质更猛烈，所以把它叫做 倭铅 。
English: Because it is very similar to lead and more violent than the nature of lead, it is called "Wao lead."

古文：○铁
现代文：铁
English: Iron ore

古文：凡铁场所在有之，其铁浅浮土面，不生深穴，繁生平阳、冈埠，不生峻岭高山。
现代文：全国各地都有铁矿，而且都是浅藏在地面而不深埋在洞穴里。出产得最多的，是在平原和丘陵地带，而不在高山峻岭上。
English: There are iron mines all over the country, and they are shallowly buried in the ground rather than buried deep in caves. The highest production is in the plains and hilly areas, not on the high mountains.

古文：质有土锭、碎砂数种。
现代文：铁矿石有土块状的 土锭铁 和碎砂状的 砂铁 等好几种。
English: There are several types of iron ore, such as clod-like soil-mined iron ore and crushed sand-like sand iron ore.

古文：凡土锭铁，土面浮出黑块，形似枰锤。遥望宛然如铁，之则碎土。
现代文：铁矿石呈黑色，露出在泥土上面，形状好像秤锤，从远处看上去就像一块铁，用手一捏却成了碎土。
English: The iron ore is black, exposed on top of the soil, shaped like a scale hammer, from a distance it looks like a piece of iron, but with a pinch of the hand it becomes crushed earth.

古文：若起冶煎炼，浮者拾之，又乘雨湿之后牛耕起土，拾其数寸土内者。
现代文：如果要进行冶炼，就可以把浮在土面上的这些铁矿石拾起来，还可以在下雨地湿时，用牛犁耕浅土，把那些埋在泥土里几寸深的铁矿石都捡起来。
English: If you want to carry out smelting, you can pick up these iron ores floating on the surface of the soil. When it rains and the ground is wet, you can use ox hoes to plow shallow soil and pick up the iron ores buried a few inches deep in the soil.

古文：耕垦之后，其块逐日生长，愈用不穷。
现代文：犁耕过之后，铁矿石还会逐渐生长，用个不完。
English: After ploughing, the iron ore will gradually grow, and it will be used endlessly.

古文：西北甘肃，东南泉郡，皆锭铁之薮也。燕京、遵化与山西平阳，则皆砂铁之薮也。
现代文：我国西北的甘肃和东南的福建泉州都盛产这种 土锭铁 ，而北京、遵化和山西临汾都是盛产 砂铁 的主要地区。
English: Gansu in the northwest of China and Quanzhou in the southeast of Fujian both have abundant production of this kind of earthenware, while Beijing, Zunhua and Linyi in Shanxi are all major areas with abundant production of sand iron.

古文：凡砂铁一抛土膜即现其形，取来淘洗，入炉煎炼，熔化之后与锭铁无二也。
现代文：至于 砂铁 ，一挖开表土层就可以找到，把它取出来后进行淘洗，再入炉冶炼。这样熔炼出来的铁跟来自 土锭铁 的完全是一种品质。
English: As for the sand iron, it can be found as soon as the surface soil layer is excavated, and after it is taken out, it is washed and then smelted in the furnace. The iron smelted in this way is completely of the same quality as that from the earthenware.

古文：凡铁分生、熟，出炉未炒则生，既炒则熟。
现代文：铁分为生铁和熟铁两种：其中已经出炉但是还没有炒过的是生铁，炒过以后便成了熟铁。
English: Iron can be divided into pig iron and wrought iron: pig iron that has been baked but not stir-fried becomes wrought iron after it has been stir-fried.

古文：生熟相和，炼成则钢。
现代文：把生铁和熟铁混合熔炼就变成了钢。
English: When pig iron is mixed with wrought iron and smelted, the result is steel.

古文：凡铁炉用盐做造，和泥砌成。其炉多傍山穴为之，或用巨木匡围，朔造盐泥，穷月之力不容造次。
现代文：炼铁炉是用掺盐的泥土砌成的，这种炉大多是依傍着山洞而砌成的，也有些是用大根木头围成框框的。用盐泥塑造出这样一个炉子，非得要花个把月时间不可，不能轻率贪快。
English: Most of these furnaces are built next to a cave, and some are surrounded by large logs. It takes months to build such a furnace with salt mud, and you can't be too greedy.

古文：盐泥有罅，尽弃全功。
现代文：盐泥一旦出现裂缝，那就会前功尽弃了。
English: Once cracks appear in the salt sludge, all previous efforts will be wasted.

古文：凡铁一炉载土二千余斤，或用硬木柴，或用煤炭，或用木炭，南北各从利便。
现代文：一座炼铁炉可以装铁矿石两千多斤，燃料有的用硬木柴，有的用煤或者用木炭，南方北方可根据方便就地取料。
English: An iron-making furnace can contain more than two thousand pounds of iron ore. Some of the fuel is hardwood, some is coal or charcoal, and the material can be taken from the south or north according to convenience.

古文：扇炉风箱必用四人、六人带拽。
现代文：鼓风的风箱要由四个人或者六个人一起推拉。
English: Four or six people have to push and pull the bellows together.

古文：土化成铁之后，从炉腰孔流出。炉孔先用泥塞。
现代文：铁矿石化成了铁水之后，就会从炼铁炉腰孔中流出来，这个孔要事先用泥塞住。
English: After the iron ore is converted into molten iron, it will flow out of the waist hole of the iron furnace. This hole should be plugged with mud in advance.

古文：每旦昼六时，一时出铁一陀。
现代文：白天十二个钟头当中，每两个钟头就能炼出一炉子铁来。
English: Of the twelve hours of the day, a furnace of iron can be made every two hours.

古文：既出即叉泥塞，鼓风再熔。
现代文：出铁之后，立即用叉拨泥把孔塞住，然后再鼓风熔炼。
English: After the iron is cast, immediately plug the hole with a forked dowel, and then blow the air to smelt.

古文：凡造生铁为冶铸用者，就此流成长条、圆块，范内取用。
现代文：如果是造供铸造用的生铁，就让铁水注入条形或者圆形的铸模里。
English: In the case of pig iron for casting, the molten iron is poured into a bar or round mold.

古文：若造熟铁，则生铁流出时相连数尺内，低下数寸筑一方塘，短墙抵之。
现代文：如果是造熟铁，便在离炉子几尺远而又低几寸的地方筑一口方塘，四周砌上矮墙。
English: If it is made of wrought iron, then a square pond is built a few feet away from the stove and a few inches lower, and a low wall is built around it.

古文：其铁流入塘内，数人执持柳木棍排立墙上，先以污潮泥晒干，舂筛细罗如面，一人疾手撒扌艳，众人柳棍疾搅，即时炒成熟铁。
现代文：让铁水流入塘内，几个人拿着柳木棍，站在矮墙上。事先将污潮泥晒干，舂成粉，再筛成像面粉一样的细末。一个人迅速把泥粉均匀地撤播在铁水上面，另外几个人就用柳棍猛烈搅拌，这样很快就炒成熟铁了。
English: Let the molten iron water flow into the pond, a few people holding willow sticks, standing on the low wall. First, the sludge mud was dried, pounded into powder, and then sifted into fine flour-like particles. One person quickly spread the mud powder evenly on the molten iron water, and several other people stirred it vigorously with willow sticks, so the iron would soon be cooked.

古文：其柳棍每炒一次，烧折二三寸，再用则又更之。
现代文：柳木棍每炒一次便会燃掉二三寸，再炒时就得更换一根新的。
English: Every time a willow stick is stir-fried, it will burn two or three inches of wax, and when it is stir-fried again, it has to be replaced with a new one.

古文：炒过稍冷之时，或有就塘内斩划成方块者，或有提出挥椎打圆后货者。
现代文：炒过以后，稍微冷却时，有的人就在塘里划成方块，有的人则拿出来锤打成圆块，然后出售。
English: After stir-frying, when it cools down a little, some people draw squares in the pond, while others take them out, hammer them into round blocks, and then sell them.

古文：若济阳诸冶，不知出此也。
现代文：但是湖南浏阳那些冶铁场却并不懂得这种技术。
English: However, those iron and steel plants in Liuyang, Hunan Province, do not understand this technology.

古文：凡钢铁炼法，用熟铁打成薄片如指头阔，长寸半许，以铁片束尖紧，生铁安置其上，又用破草履盖其上，泥涂其底下。
现代文：炼钢的方法是：先将熟铁打成约有寸半长像指头一般宽的薄片，然后把薄片包扎尖紧，将生铁放在扎紧的熟铁片上面。再盖上破草鞋，在熟铁片底下还要涂上泥浆。
English: The method of steelmaking is as follows: First, the wrought iron is beaten into a thin sheet about an inch and a half long, like the width of a finger, and then the thin sheet is tightly bandaged, and the pig iron is placed on the tightly bound wrought iron sheet. Then the grass shoes are covered, and mud is also coated under the wrought iron sheet.

古文：洪炉鼓鞲，火力到时，生钢先化，渗淋熟铁之中，两情投合，取出加锤。
现代文：投进洪炉进行鼓风熔炼，达到一定的温度时，生铁会先熔化而渗到熟铁里，两者相互融合。
English: Thrown into the blast furnace for blast furnace smelting, when a certain temperature is reached, the pig iron will first melt and seep into the wrought iron, and the two will fuse with each other.

古文：再炼再锤，不一而足。
现代文：取出来后进行敲打，再熔炼再敲打，如此反复进行多次。
English: After it is taken out, it is beaten, then melted and beaten again, and this is repeated many times.

古文：俗名团钢，亦曰灌钢者是也。
现代文：这样锤炼出来的钢，俗名叫做团钢，也叫做灌钢。
English: The steel tempered in this way is colloquially known as "gang steel" or "poured steel."

古文：凡倭夷刀剑有百炼精纯、置日光檐下则满室辉曜者，不用生熟相和炼，又名此钢为下乘云。
现代文：日本出的一种刀剑，用的是经过百炼的精纯的好钢，白天放在日光下，那么整个屋子都非常明亮。这种钢不是用生铁和熟铁炼成的，有人把它称为次品。
English: A sword from Japan is made of high-quality steel that has undergone hundreds of rounds of refinement. If it is placed in the sunlight during the day, the entire room will be very bright. This steel is not made of pig iron or wrought iron, and some people call it a defective product.

古文：夷人又有以地溲淬刀剑者，云钢可切玉，亦末之见也。
现代文：日本人又有用地溲来淬刀剑的，据说这种钢刀可以切玉，但也未曾见过。
English: The Japanese are also useful at sharpening swords. It is said that this steel knife can cut jade, but it has never been seen.

古文：凡铁内有硬处不可打者名铁核，以香油涂之即散。
现代文：打铁时铁里偶尔会出现一种非常坚硬的、打不散的硬块，这东西叫做铁核。如果涂上香油再次敲打，铁核就会消散了。
English: When striking the iron, a very hard, indissoluble hard piece occasionally appears in the iron, this thing is called the iron core. If it is coated with balm and struck again, the iron core will dissipate.

古文：凡产铁之阴，其阳出慈石，第有数处不尽然也。
现代文：凡是在山的北坡有铁矿的，山的南坡就会有磁石，好几个地方都有这种现象，但并不是全都如此。
English: Wherever there is iron ore on the northern slope of a mountain, there will be magnetite on the southern slope of the mountain. This phenomenon occurs in several places, but not all of them.

古文：○锡
现代文：锡
English: Tin

古文：凡锡中国偏出西南郡邑，东北寡生。
现代文：中国的产锡地主要分布在西南地区，而以东北地区尤其少。
English: China's tin-producing areas are mainly distributed in the southwestern region, with the northeastern region being particularly scarce.

古文：古书名锡为 贺 者，以临贺郡产锡最盛而得名也。
现代文：古书中称锡为 贺 ，是因为广西贺县一带产锡最多而得名。
English: In ancient books, tin was called He, because the area around He County in Guangxi produced the most tin, hence the name.

古文：今衣被天下者，独广西南丹、河池二州居其十八，衡、永则次之。
现代文：今天供应全国的大量的锡，仅广西的南丹、河池二州就占了八成，湖南的衡州、永州次之。
English: Today, Nantan and Hechi in Guangxi alone account for 80% of the country's supply of tin, followed by Hengzhou and Yongzhou in Hunan.

古文：大理、楚雄即产锡甚盛，道远难致也。
现代文：云南的大理、楚雄虽然产锡很多，但路途遥远，难以供应内地。
English: Although Dali and Chuxiong in Yunnan produce a lot of tin, they are far away and it is difficult to supply the mainland.

古文：凡锡有山锡、水锡两种。
现代文：锡矿分为山锡和水锡两种。
English: There are two types of tin ore: mountain tin and water tin.

古文：山锡中又有锡瓜、锡砂两种，锡瓜块大如小瓠，锡砂如豆粒，皆穴土不甚深而得之。
现代文：山锡又分锡瓜和锡砂两种。锡瓜的块度好像个小葫芦瓜，锡砂则像豆粒，都可以在不很深的地层里找到。
English: There are two types of mountain tin: tin gourd and tin sand. The size of the tin gourd is like a small gourd, while the tin sand is like a bean, both of which can be found in shallow strata.

古文：间或土中生脉充刃，致山土自颓，恣人拾取者。
现代文：偶尔还会有这样的情况，原生矿床所含的矿脉露出地表后受到风化和崩解，而形成呈条带状分布的次生矿，可任凭人们拾取。
English: Occasionally, the veins contained in the primary ore deposit are exposed to the surface and weathered and disintegrated, forming a strip-like distribution of secondary ore that can be picked up by people.

古文：水锡衡、永出溪中，广西则出南丹州河内，其质黑色，粉碎如重罗面。
现代文：水锡，在湖南衡州和永州两地产于小溪里，广西则产于南丹河里。这种水锡是黑色的，细碎得好像是筛过了的面粉。
English: Water tin, produced in small streams in Hengzhou and Yongzhou in Hunan Province, and in the Nandan River in Guangxi Province, is black and finely ground, as if it were sifted flour.

古文：南丹河出者，居民旬前从南淘至北，旬后又从北淘至南。愈经淘取，其砂日长，百年不竭。
现代文：南丹河出产水锡，居民十天前从南淘到北，十天后再从北淘到南，这些矿砂不断生长出来，千百年都取之不尽。
English: The Nantan River produces cassiterite. Ten days ago, residents moved from Nantao to the north, and ten days later, they moved from Nantao to the south. These minerals continue to grow and are inexhaustible for thousands of years.

古文：但一日功劳淘取煎炼不过一斤。会计炉炭资本，所获不多也。
现代文：但是，一天的淘取和熔炼也就不过一斤左右，计算所耗费的炉炭成本，获利实在是不多。
English: However, one day of mining and smelting is only about one kilogram, and the profit is really not much when calculating the cost of furnace coal consumed.

古文：南丹山锡出山之阴，其方无水淘洗，则接连百竹为枧，从山阳枧水淘洗土滓，然后入炉。
现代文：南丹的山锡产于山的北坡，那里缺水淘洗，因此就用许多根竹管接起来当导水槽，从山的南坡引水过来洗矿，把泥沙除掉，然后入炉。
English: Nantan's mountain tin is produced on the northern slope of the mountain, where there is a lack of water for washing. Therefore, many bamboo pipes are used to connect the conduction tank, and water is brought from the southern slope of the mountain to wash the ore, remove the sediment, and then enter the furnace.

古文：凡炼煎亦用洪炉，入砂数百斤，丛架木炭亦数百斤，鼓鞲熔化。
现代文：熔炼时也要用洪炉，每炉入锡砂数百斤，添加的木炭也要数百斤，一起鼓风熔炼。
English: When smelting, it is also necessary to use a blast furnace. Each furnace is filled with hundreds of pounds of tin sand, and hundreds of pounds of added charcoal are also smelted together.

古文：火力已到，砂不即熔，用铅少许勾引，方始沛然流注。
现代文：当火力足够时，锡砂还不一定能马上熔化，这时要掺少量的铅去勾引，锡才会大量熔流出来。
English: When the firepower is sufficient, the tin sand may not be able to melt immediately. At this time, it is necessary to add a small amount of lead to attract, and a large amount of tin will be melted.

古文：或有用人家炒锡剩灰勾引者。
现代文：也有采用别人的炼锡炉渣去勾引的。
English: There are also those who use other people's tin slag to lure them.

古文：其炉底炭末、瓷灰铺作平地，傍安铁管小槽道，熔时流出炉外低池。
现代文：洪炉炉底用炭末和瓷灰铺成平池，炉旁安装一条铁管小槽，炼出的锡水引流入炉外低池内。
English: The bottom of the blast furnace is paved with charcoal powder and porcelain ash to form a flat pool. An iron tube trough is installed next to the furnace, and the refined tin water is led into a low pool outside the furnace.

古文：其质初出洁白，然过刚，承锤即拆裂。入铅制柔，方充造器用。
现代文：锡出炉时洁白，可是太过硬脆，一经敲打就会碎裂，要加铅使锡质变软，才能用来制造各种器具。
English: Tin is white when it comes out of the furnace, but it is too hard and brittle. Once it is beaten, it will break. Lead must be added to soften the tin before it can be used to make various appliances.

古文：售者杂铅太多，欲取净则熔化，入醋淬八九度，铅尽化灰而去。
现代文：市面上卖的锡掺铅太多，如果需要提纯，就应该在把它熔化后与醋酸反复接触八九次，其中所含的铅便会形成渣灰而被除去。
English: There is too much leaded tin sold on the market. If it needs to be purified, it should be melted and repeatedly contacted with acetic acid eight or nine times. The lead contained in it will form slag and be removed.

古文：出锡唯此道。
现代文：生产纯锡只有这么一种方法。
English: There is only one way to produce pure tin.

古文：方书云马齿苋取草锡者，妄言也；谓砒为锡苗者，亦妄言也。
现代文：有的医药书说什么可以从马齿苋中提取草锡，这是胡说。所谓发现了砒就一定有锡矿的苗头的说法，也是信口胡言。
English: Some medical books say that grass tin can be extracted from purslane, which is nonsense. The so-called discovery of purslane must have the seedling of tin mine is also hogwash.

古文：○铅
现代文：铅
English: Lead

古文：凡产铅山穴，繁于铜、锡。
现代文：产铅的矿山比产铜矿和锡矿的矿山都要多。
English: More mines produce lead than copper or tin.

古文：其质有三种，一出银矿中，包孕白银。初炼和银成团，再炼脱银沉底，曰银矿铅，此铅云南为盛。
现代文：铅矿的质地有三种：第一种产白银矿铅，这种矿，初炼时和银熔成一团，再炼时脱离银而沉底，名为银铅矿，以我国云南出产为最多。
English: There are three kinds of texture of lead ore: the first kind is silver-producing lead ore. This kind of ore, when first refined, is fused with silver, and when refined again, it is separated from silver and sinks to the bottom. It is called silver-lead ore. Yunnan produces the most lead ore in China.

古文：一出铜矿中，入烘炉炼化，铅先出，铜后随，曰铜山铅，此铅贵州为盛。
现代文：第二种夹杂在铜矿里，入洪炉冶炼时，铅比铜先熔化流出，名为铜山铅，以我国贵州出产为最多。
English: The second kind is mixed in copper mines. When it is smelted in a blast furnace, the lead melts and flows out before the copper. It is called copper mountain lead. Guizhou produces the most lead in China.

古文：一出单生铅穴，取者穴山石，挟油灯寻脉，曲折如采银矿，取出淘洗煎炼，名曰草节铅，此铅蜀中嘉、利等州为盛。
现代文：第三种产自山洞中找到的纯铅矿，开采的人凿开山石，点着油灯在山洞里寻找铅脉，好像采银矿时的那种曲折情况。采出来后再加淘洗、熔炼，名为草节铅，这种矿以四川的嘉州和利州出产为最多。
English: The third type of pure lead ore is produced from the ore found in caves. Miners cut open the rock and search for lead veins in the cave with oil lamps, similar to the twists and turns of silver mining. After it is mined, it is washed and smelted. It is called grass-seed lead. This type of ore is produced the most in Sichuan's Jiazhou and Lizhou.

古文：其余雅州出钓脚铅，形如皂荚子，又如蝌斗子，生山涧沙中。
现代文：除此之外，还有四川的雅州出产有钓脚铅，形状像个皂荚子，又好像蝌蚪，出自山涧的沙里。
English: In addition, there is also Yazhou in Sichuan, which produces fishing-foot lead, shaped like a soap-duster and resembling a clam, from the sands of the mountains.

古文：广信郡上饶、饶郡乐平出杂铜铅，剑州出阴平铅，难以枚举。
现代文：江西广信郡的上饶和饶郡的乐平等地还出产有杂铜铅，剑州还出产有阴平铅，在这里难以一一列举。
English: Shangrao in Guangxin County, Jiangxi Province, and Lefeng in Rao County, Jiangxi Province, also produced mixed copper-lead, while Yinping Lead was also produced in Jianzhou. It is difficult to list them all here.

古文：凡银矿中铅，炼铅成底，炼底复成铅。
现代文：银矿铅的熔炼方法是：先从银铅矿中提取银，剩下的作为 炉底 ，再把 炉底 炼成铅。
English: The method of smelting lead from silver ore is as follows: first extract silver from silver-lead ore, use the rest as the bottom of the furnace, and then refine the bottom of the furnace into lead.

古文：草节铅单入烘炉煎炼，炉傍通管注入长条土槽内，俗名扁担铅，亦曰出山铅，所以别于凡银炉内频经煎炼者。
现代文：草节铅则单独放入洪炉里冶炼，洪炉旁通一条管子以便浇注入长条形的土槽里，这样铸成的铅俗名叫做扁担铅，也叫做出山铅，用以区别从银炉里多次熔炼出来的那种铅。
English: Grass-seed lead was smelted separately in a blast furnace. A tube ran alongside the blast furnace so that it could be poured into a long strip-shaped earthen trough. The lead cast in this way is colloquially known as flat-back lead, and is also called mountain lead, to distinguish it from the kind of lead that is repeatedly smelted in a silver furnace.

古文：凡铅物值虽贱，变化殊奇，白粉、黄丹，皆其显像。
现代文：铅的价值虽然低贱，可是变化却特别奇妙，白粉和黄丹便是一种明显的体现。
English: Although the value of lead is low, the changes are particularly strange, and white powder and rutile are a clear manifestation.

古文：操银底于精纯，勾锡成其柔软，皆铅力也。
现代文：此外，促使白银矿的 炉底 提炼精纯、使锡变得很柔软，都是铅起的作用。
English: In addition, it is the role of lead to promote the refinement of the bottom of the furnace of the silver mine and to make the tin very soft.

古文：○附：胡粉
现代文：附：胡粉
English: Attached: goose down

古文：凡造胡粉，每铅百斤，熔化，削成薄片，卷作筒，安木甑内。
现代文：制作胡粉的方法是：先把一百斤铅熔化之后再削成薄片，卷成筒状，安置在木甑子里面。
English: The method of making gofun is: first melt a hundred pounds of lead, then cut it into thin slices, roll it into a tube, and place it inside the wooden dowel.

古文：甑下甑中各安醋一瓶，外以盐泥固济，纸糊甑缝。
现代文：甑子下面及甑子中间各放置一瓶醋，外面用盐泥封固，并用纸糊严甑子缝。
English: Place a bottle of vinegar under each pair of pliers and in the middle of each pair of pliers, seal the outside with salt mud, and tightly sew the pliers with paper paste.

古文：安火四两，养之七日。期足启开，铅片皆生霜粉，扫入水缸内。
现代文：用大约四两木炭的火力持续加热，七天之后，再把木盖打开，就能够见到铅片上面覆盖着的一层霜粉，将粉扫进水缸里。
English: After seven days, when the lid is opened, a layer of frosted powder can be seen on top of the lead sheet, which is swept into the water tank.

古文：未生霜者，入甑依旧再养七日，再扫，以质尽为度，其不尽者留作黄丹料。
现代文：那些还未产生霜的铅再放进甑子里，按照原来的方法再次加热七天后，再次收扫，直到铅用尽为止，剩下的残渣可作为制黄丹的原料。
English: The lead that has not yet produced frost is then placed in the crucible, reheated according to the original method seven days later, and then cleaned again until the lead is exhausted. The remaining residue can be used as raw material for making rhubarb.

古文：每扫下霜一斤，入豆粉二两、蛤粉四两，缸内搅匀，澄去清水，用细灰按成沟，纸隔数层，置粉于上。
现代文：每扫下霜粉一斤，加进豆粉二两、蛤粉四两，在缸里把它们调和搅匀，澄清之后再把水倒去。用细灰做成一条沟，沟上平铺几层纸，将湿粉放在上面。
English: Sweep off one kilo of frosting powder, add two kilos of bean powder and four kilos of baking powder, mix them in a jar, clarify and then pour away the water. Use fine ash to make a trench, spread several layers of paper on the trench, and place the wet powder on top.

古文：将干，截成瓦定形，或如磊鬼，待干收货。
现代文：快干的时候把湿粉截成瓦形或者是方块状，等到完全风干之后才收藏起来。
English: When quick-drying, cut the wet powder into blocks or blocks. Wait until it is completely dry before storing it.

古文：此物古因辰、韶诸郡专造，故曰韶粉。今则各省直饶为之矣。
现代文：由于古代只有湖南的辰州和广东的韶州制造这种粉，所以也把它叫做韶粉，到今天全国各省都已经有制造了。
English: Since only Cangzhou in Hunan and Ganzhou in Guangdong produced this powder in ancient times, it was also called wolfberry powder, and today it has been produced in all provinces of the country.

古文：其质入丹青，则白不减。揸妇人颊，能使本色转青。
现代文：这种粉如果用做颜料，能够长期保持白色；如果妇女经常用它来粉饰脸颊，涂多了就会使脸色变青。
English: If this powder is used as a pigment, it can keep white for a long time; if women often use it to whiten their cheeks, applying too much will turn the face blue.

古文：胡粉投入炭炉中，仍还熔化为铅，所谓色尽归皂者。
现代文：将胡粉投入炭炉里面烧，仍然会还原为铅，这就是所谓一切的颜色终归还会变回黑色。
English: If goose down is put into a charcoal stove and burned, it will still be reduced to lead, which means that the color of everything will eventually turn back to black.

古文：○附：黄丹
现代文：附：黄丹
English: Attached: Pomegranate

古文：凡炒铅丹，用铅一斤，土硫黄十两，硝石一两。
现代文：制炼铅丹的方法是用铅一斤、土硫黄十两、硝石一两配合。
English: The method of producing plumbago is to use one pound of lead, ten pounds of soil sulfur, and one or two pounds of saltpeter.

古文：熔铅成汁，下醋点之。
现代文：铅熔化变成液体后，加进一点醋。
English: After the lead has melted into a liquid, add a little vinegar.

古文：滚沸时下硫一块，少顷入硝少许，沸定再点醋，依前渐下硝、黄。待为末，则成丹矣。
现代文：沸腾时再投入一块硫黄，过一会儿再加进一点硝石，沸腾停止后再按程序加醋，接着再加硫黄和硝石，就这样下去直到炉里的东西都成为粉末，就炼成黄丹了。
English: When boiling, put another piece of sulfur, after a while add a bit of saltpeter, after the boiling stops, add vinegar according to the procedure, then add sulfur and saltpeter, and continue in this way until everything in the furnace becomes powder, and it is refined into rutile.

古文：其胡粉残剩者，用硝石、矾石炒成丹，不复用醋也。
现代文：如要将制胡粉时剩余的铅炼成黄丹，那就只有用硝石、矾石加进去炒，不必加醋了。
English: If you want to distill the remaining lead from the production of cinnamon powder into rutabaga, then you only need to add saltpeter and vermiculite to stir-fry, and there is no need to add vinegar.

古文：欲丹还铅，用葱白汁拌黄丹馒炒，金汁出时，倾出即还铅矣。
现代文：如想把黄丹还原成铅，则要用葱白汁拌入黄丹，慢火熬炒，等到有黄汁流出时，倒出来就可得到铅了。
English: If you want to reduce the yellow danish to lead, you should mix the yellow danish with the white onion juice, cook it on a slow fire, and when the yellow juice flows out, you can pour it out to get the lead.

