古文：张和胡媚儿中部民板桥三娘子关司法长乐里人陈武振海中妇人画工
现代文：张和胡媚儿中部民板桥三娘子关司法长乐里人陈武振海中妇人画工
English: Zhang He and Hu Mei'er Central Minbanqiao Three Daughters Guan Judicial Chief Le Li People Chen Wu Zhen Middle-aged Women Painter

古文：张和
现代文：张和
English: Zhang and

古文：唐贞元初，蜀郡豪家，富拟卓郑。
现代文：唐德宗贞元初年，蜀郡有这么一户富豪之家，富足可比卓、郑。
English: In the first year of Tang Dezongzheng, Shu County had such a rich family, whose wealth was comparable to Zhuo and Zheng.

古文：蜀之名姝，无不毕致，每按图求之。
现代文：蜀郡所有的美女，没有不主动上门的。每次来之前，都要先送一幅画像。
English: Of all the beautiful women in Shu County, there is no one who does not come to the door. Before each visit, they must first send a picture.

古文：媒盈其门，常恨无可意者。
现代文：媒婆们把他家的门槛都挤破了，可遗憾的是没有一个中意的。
English: The matchmakers all tried to break through the threshold of his house, but unfortunately none of them were successful.

古文：或言：坊正张和，大侠也。幽房闺稚，无不知之，盍以诚投乎？
现代文：有人说现任坊正的张和，实际上是一个大侠，闺房幽院，全在他心里装着，你何不试心诚意地请他帮忙呢？
English: Some people say that Zhang He, the current Fang Zheng, is actually a great hero, a boudoir and a courtyard, all in his heart. Why don't you sincerely ask him for help?

古文：豪家子乃以金帛夜诣其居告之，张和欣然许之。
现代文：这位富豪之子就带着金银布帛等礼物，当天夜里来到张和家把自己的意思说了。张和欣然答应下来。
English: The rich man's son came to Zhang He's home in the evening of the same day with gifts such as gold, silver and cloth, and said what he wanted. Zhang He gladly agreed.

古文：异日，与豪家子皆出西郭一舍，入废兰若，有大像巍然，与豪家子升像之座。
现代文：一天，张和与富豪之子一起出了西城门，走进一座旧寺庙。这里，有一座大佛像巍然矗立。张和与富豪之子攀上佛像的底坐。
English: One day, Zhang He and the rich man's son went out of the West Gate together and walked into an old temple. Here, a large Buddha statue stood tall. Zhang He and the rich man's son climbed onto the base of the Buddha statue.

古文：和引手扪佛乳揭之。乳坏成穴，如碗，即挺身入穴，引豪家子臂，不觉同在穴中。
现代文：张和伸手将佛像的乳部揭开，里面有一个碗状的洞，随即将身子一挺钻进洞中，然后又拽住富豪之子的胳膊，把他也拉了进去。
English: Zhang He stretched out his hand and opened the breast of the Buddha statue, revealing a bowl-shaped hole inside. He then pushed his body into the hole, and then grabbed the arm of the rich man's son and pulled him in.

古文：通行数十步，忽睹高门崇墉，状如州县。
现代文：走了几十步远，忽然看见高高的城墙和大门，看样子像州府县衙。
English: After walking a few dozen steps, I suddenly saw the high city wall and gate, which looked like a prefectural castle.

古文：和扣门五六，有丸髻婉童迎拜曰：主人望翁来久矣。
现代文：张和上前敲了五六下房门，一个留着发髻的漂亮小孩出来迎接说：我家主人已经盼你很久了！
English: Zhang He knocked on the door five or six times, and a beautiful child with a bun in her hair came out to greet him and said, "My landlord has been looking forward to you for a long time!

古文：有顷，主人出，紫衣贝带，侍者十余，见和甚谨。
现代文：有顷，主人走了出来，身上是紫衣宝带，跟着十几个侍从，但对张和却十分恭敬。
English: All of a sudden, the owner came out, wearing a purple robe and sash, followed by a dozen attendants, but he was very respectful to Zhang He.

古文：和指豪家子曰：此少君子也，汝可善侍，予有切事须返，不坐而去。
现代文：张和指着富豪之子道；这位少年君子。你可要好好对待他。我有急事必须马上返回，不能坐了！
English: Zhang He pointed to the son of a rich man; this young gentleman. You have to treat him well. I have to return immediately, I can't sit down!

古文：言讫，已失和所在。
现代文：话音刚落，张和便没影了。
English: As soon as the words were out of his mouth, Zhang He disappeared.

古文：豪家子心异之，不敢问。
现代文：富豪之子感到诧异，却又不敢问。
English: The rich man's son was surprised, but did not dare to ask.

古文：主人延于中堂，珠玑缇绣，罗列满目。
现代文：主人在中堂摆下筵席，珠光宝气，绫罗绸缎，山珍海味，真是琳琅满目，应有尽有。
English: The host set up a banquet in the middle of the hall. It was rich in jewels, rich in silk and satin, and rich in mountain and sea delicacies. It was truly a dazzling array of delicacies.

古文：具陆海珍膳，命酌。
现代文：主人向他敬酒。随即，进来一些翘首弄姿的歌妓，一个个飘然欲仙。
English: The host made a toast to him. Immediately, some geishas with their heads cocked came in, one after the other lusting for immortality.

古文：进妓交鬟撩鬓，缥然神仙，其舞杯闪球之令，悉新而多思。有金器，容数升，云擎鲸口，钿以珠粒。
现代文：席间，以抛球行酒令，不但新奇而且需要多加考虑。桌上有一个金子铸的器皿，能容下好几升，大口，上面镶嵌着珍珠。
English: Between the tables, the ball toss is not only a novelty, but also requires a lot of consideration. On the table there is a gold-cast vessel that can hold several liters, a large spout, with pearls set on top.

古文：豪家子不识，问之。
现代文：富豪之子不知这是何物，使询问了一句。
English: The rich man's son didn't know what it was, so he asked.

古文：主人笑曰：此次皿也，本拟伯雅。
现代文：主人笑笑说：这是第二等的器皿，本来是仿造伯雅酒杯制成的。
English: The owner smiled and said, "This is a second-rate utensil, originally made from an imitation Boya goblet.

古文：豪家子竟不解。
现代文：富豪之子竟然没听明白主人的话。
English: The rich man's son did not listen to his master's words.

古文：至三更，主人忽顾妓曰：无废欢笑，予暂有所适。
现代文：到了三更天，主人忽然对歌妓们说：不要停止歌舞欢笑，我暂时得去办点别的事情。
English: On the third day, the owner suddenly said to the singers: "Don't stop singing, dancing and laughing, I have to do something else for the time being."

古文：揖客而起，骑从如州牧，列炬而出。
现代文：遂站起向客人告别，从坐骑和随从上看像个州牧，打着火把列队而出。
English: Then he stood up to bid farewell to the guests, looking like a state herdsman from his mount and his followers, and marched out with torches.

古文：豪家子因私于墙隅，妓中年差暮者，遽就谓曰：嗟乎！君何以至是？
现代文：富豪之子到墙角小便，歌妓中有一个年龄较大的走上前去，对他说：哎呀，你何必这样呢？
English: The rich man's son went to a corner to urinate, and an older courtesan came up to him and said, "Oh, why do you have to do that?

古文：我辈已为所掠，醉其幻术，归路永绝。
现代文：我们已被人用幻术掳到此地，归途永断。
English: We have been taken to this place by magic, and we will never be able to return.

古文：君若要归，但取我教。
现代文：你如果想要回去，那就听我告诉你一个办法：取来七尺白绢，说几句斋戒的话。
English: If you want to go back, then let me tell you a way: get a seven-foot egret and say a few words of fasting.

古文：受以七尺白练，戒曰：可执此，候主人归，诈祈事设拜，主人必答拜，因以练蒙其颈。
现代文：然后拿着它等主人回来，假装祈祷拜谢，主人必然会答谢。这时候，你用白绢勒住他的脖子就行了。
English: Then hold it and wait for the owner to return, pretend to pray and give thanks, the owner will certainly answer. At this time, you just need to strangle his neck with a birch branch.

古文：将曙，主人还。豪家子如其教，主人投地乞命曰：死妪负心，终败吾事，今不复居此。
现代文：天快亮的时候，主人回来了，富豪之子照那歌妓说的去做，主人倒在地上乞求饶命说：这个死老婆子没有良心，终于败坏了我的大事。现在，我不能再住此地了！
English: When it was nearly dawn, the owner returned, and the son of the rich man did as the singer had said. The owner fell to the ground and begged for his life, saying, "This dead old woman has no conscience, and has finally ruined my great cause. Now, I can no longer live here!"

古文：乃驰骑他去。
现代文：说完，便跨上马奔驰而去。
English: Having said that, he got on his horse and galloped away.

古文：所教妓即与豪家子居。
现代文：那位歌妓便与富豪之子同居了。
English: The courtesan ended up living with the rich man's son.

古文：二年忽思归。妓亦不留。大设酒乐饯之。
现代文：二年之后，他忽然想回家，歌妓也不挽留，大设酒乐为他饯行。
English: Two years later, he suddenly wanted to go home, and the singer didn't want to stay. She went on a drinking spree for him.

古文：饮阑，妓自持锸，开东墙一穴，亦如佛乳，推豪家子于墙外，乃长安东墙下，遂乞食方达蜀。
现代文：然后，那歌妓亲自拿一把锤，在东墙掘开一个洞，亦像佛像乳部的那个洞一样。她把富豪之子推到墙外，原来竟是长安城的东墙下面。接着，他一路乞讨才回到蜀郡。
English: Then, the singer herself took a hammer and dug a hole in the east wall, just like the hole in the breast of the Buddha statue. She pushed the rich man's son outside the wall, which turned out to be under the east wall of Chang'an City. Then, he begged all the way back to Shu County.

古文：其家失已多年，意其异物，道其初始信。
现代文：他的家里因他走失多年，怀疑他是鬼，他把当初的情景讲出来之后人们才相信。
English: His family suspected him of being a ghost because he had been missing for years, but people only believed him after he told them what had happened.

古文：胡媚儿
现代文：胡媚儿
English: Hummel sings

古文：唐贞元中，杨州坊市间，忽有一妓术丐乞者，不知所从来。
现代文：唐代贞元年间，扬州的街道上，忽然间出现一个靠幻术行乞的女艺人，不知道从何处来，她自称姓胡，叫媚儿。
English: During the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, on the streets of Yangzhou, there suddenly appeared a female beggar who relied on illusions. I don't know where she came from. She called herself Hu and was called Mei Er.

古文：自称姓胡，名媚儿，所为颇甚怪异。旬日之后，观者稍稍云集。
现代文：好表演的幻术十分怪异，十天之后，观众越来越多，她每天都能获一千万钱。
English: The illusion of a good performance is very strange, after ten days, the audience is more and more, she can get ten million money every day.

古文：其所丐求，日获千万。一旦，怀中出一琉璃瓶子，可受半升。
现代文：一天早晨，她从怀中掏一个玻璃瓶子，可容半升，表里通明，仿佛中间什么也没有似的。
English: One morning, she pulled from her bosom a half-liter glass bottle, clear inside and out, as if there were nothing in between.

古文：表里烘明，如不隔物，遂置于席上。初谓观者曰：有人施与满此瓶子，则足矣。
现代文：她把瓶子放在席子上，第一次对观众说：如果有人施舍的钱能够装满这个瓶子，我就知足了。
English: Placing the bottle on the mat, she told the audience for the first time: "If someone's charity money can fill this bottle, I will be satisfied."

古文：瓶口刚如苇管大。
现代文：这个瓶子的嘴刚有芦苇管那么粗细。
English: The mouth of this bottle is just as thick as a reed pipe.

古文：有人与之百钱，投之，琤然有声，则见瓶间大如粟粒，众皆异之。
现代文：有人拿出一百钱，向瓶子里投去，只听当的一声，钱真的进入瓶中，然而一枚枚却只有米粒大小。观众们都很吃惊。
English: Someone took out a hundred dollars and threw it into the bottle, but to everyone's surprise, the money did go into the bottle, but it was only the size of a grain of rice. The audience was stunned.

古文：复有人与之千钱，投之如前。
现代文：又有人给媚儿一千钱，跟方才一样投进瓶中。
English: Someone else gave Maier a thousand money and threw it into the bottle, just like Fang Cai.

古文：又有与万钱者，亦如之。
现代文：结果同前面一样。又有给一万钱的，也是那样。
English: The result is the same as before. If you give them another ten thousand, it's the same.

古文：俄有好事人，与之十万二十万，皆如之。
现代文：一会儿有几个好事者，你拿十万钱我拿二十万钱，结果全都是那样。
English: There are a few good-doers at a time, you take 100,000 yuan and I take 200,000 yuan, and the results are all like that.

古文：或有以马驴入之瓶中，见人马皆如蝇大，动行如故。
现代文：还有骑驴马等钻入瓶子里的，只见那人和驴马全都像苍蝇那么大，动作还是原来的样子。
English: There were also donkey and horse rides, etc. that had been put into the bottle, only to see that the man and the donkey and horse were all as big as flies, and the movements were still the same.

古文：须臾，有度支两税纲，自扬子院，部轻货数十车至。
现代文：俄顷，有两个掌财政的税官，从扬子院率十车轻浮货路过这里，均驻足而视。
English: Suddenly, there were two tax officials in charge of finance. About ten cars of light goods from Yangzi Courthouse passed by here, and they all stopped and stared.

古文：驻观之，以其一时入，或终不能致将他物往，且谓官物不足疑者。
现代文：他们也想同时进入，看看最终能否带着其他东西前往，并说这是官家的东西，用不着怕。
English: They also want to enter at the same time, to see if they can eventually go with other things, and say that this is a government thing, don't be afraid.

古文：乃谓媚儿曰：尔能令诸车皆入此中乎？
现代文：他们对胡媚儿说：你能够让这些车辆都进瓶子里去吗？
English: They said to Hummel: Can you get all these cars into a bottle?

古文：媚儿曰：许之则可。
现代文：胡媚儿说：只要允许就可以。
English: Hummel said: as long as it is allowed.

古文：纲曰：且试之。
现代文：税官说：你可以试验一下。
English: The tax inspector said: You can try it.

古文：媚儿乃微侧瓶口，大喝，诸车辂辂相继，悉入瓶，瓶中历历如行蚁然。
现代文：胡媚儿就微侧瓶口，大吼一声，那些车辆便滚滚向前，相继都进入瓶中。瓶子里就像爬进一行蚂蚁，历历可数。
English: Hu Mei'er pointed to the side of the bottle, shouted loudly, and those vehicles rolled forward and entered the bottle one after another. It was like a line of ants crawling into the bottle.

古文：有顷，渐不见，媚儿即跳身入瓶中。
现代文：一会儿，便看不见了。这时，只见胡媚儿纵身一跃跳入瓶中。
English: After a while, I couldn't see him. At that moment, I saw Hummel jump into the bottle.

古文：纲乃大惊，遽取扑破，求之一无所有。
现代文：税官大惊，当即抓起那瓶子拍碎，结果什么也没有。
English: The tax inspector was so shocked that he immediately grabbed the bottle and smashed it, but nothing happened.

古文：从此失媚儿所在。
现代文：从此，便不知道胡媚儿到什么地方去了。
English: Since then, it is not known where Hummel has gone.

古文：后月余日，有人于清河北，逢媚儿，部领车乘，趋东平而去。
现代文：一个多月之后，有人在清河北面，看见胡媚儿率领着那些车辆，朝东平而去。
English: More than a month later, someone on the north side of the Qinghe River saw Hummel leading those vehicles, heading east.

古文：是时，李师道为东平帅也。中部民
现代文：当时，李师道正在东平的军队中任主将。中部民
English: At that time, Li Shidao was serving as a captain in Dongping's army.

古文：唐元和初，有天水赵云，客游鄜畤，过中部县，县僚有燕。
现代文：唐代元和初年，从天水来了一个叫赵云的人，欲到鄜县祭天地五帝的地方游览一番。经过中部县时，官吏们设宴招待他。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Tang Dynasties, a man named Zhao Yun came from Tianshui to visit the place where the Five Immortals of Heaven and Earth were enshrined in Yixian County. When he passed through the central county, the officials held a banquet to invite him.

古文：吏擒一人至，其罪不甚重，官僚欲纵之。
现代文：捕吏擒来一个人，罪不太重，官吏们想放了他。
English: The arresting officers brought in a man with a minor offense, and the officials wanted to release him.

古文：云醉，固劝加刑，于是杖之。
现代文：这时，赵云喝醉了，劝说他们加刑，于是那人受到了杖笞。
English: At this time, Zhao Yun was drunk and persuaded them to increase the sentence, so the man was beaten with a cane.

古文：累月，云出塞，行及芦子关，道逢一人，要之言款。
现代文：几个月后，赵云来到塞外，走到芦子关时，在路上遇见一个人，说是想要款待他。
English: A few months later, when Zhao Yun came to Louziguan, he met a man on the road and said that he wanted to entertain him.

古文：日暮，延云下道过其居。去路数里，于是命酒偶酌。既而问曰：君省相识耶？
现代文：当时天色已晚，那人领赵云走了好几里路，回到家中摆上酒席，一边劝酒一边问道：你想起来没有，咱们已经是老相识了？
English: At that time, it was late in the day. The man led Zhao Yun on a journey of several miles. He returned home and set up a banquet table. While persuading him to drink, he asked: "Don't you remember, we have known each other for a long time?

古文：云曰：未尝此行，实昧平生。
现代文：赵云说：这地方我从未来过，咱们实在是素昧平生。
English: Zhao Yun said, "I've never been to this place before. We've never met.

古文：复曰：前某月日，于中部值君，某遭罹横罪，与君素无仇隙，奈何为君所劝，因被重刑？
现代文：那人又说：前些日子，有一天我于中部县见到了你，你使我吃了不少苦头。我与你向来没有什么仇隙，没想到你会那样对他们说，所以我被处以重刑。
English: The man also said, "A few days ago, one day I saw you in Chubu Prefecture, and you caused me a lot of suffering. I have never had any grudge against you, and I didn't expect you to say that to them, so I was punished severely.

古文：云遽起谢之。
现代文：赵云明白了，赶忙起来谢罪。
English: Zhao Yun understood, and hurried up to apologize.

古文：其人曰：吾望子久矣，岂虞于此获雪小耻！乃令左右，拽入一室。室中有大坑，深三丈余，坑中唯贮酒糟十斛。
现代文：那个人说：我在这等你很久了，没料到在这里得到消除耻辱的机会说完就命令手下人把赵云拽进一个屋子，屋内有大坑，三丈多深，坑内只贮存着十斛酒糟。
English: The man said, "I've been waiting for you here for a long time. I didn't expect to get a chance to get rid of my shame here." After he finished speaking, he ordered his subordinates to drag Zhao Yun into a room. There was a large pit inside, three stories deep, and only ten barrels of wine were stored in the pit.

古文：剥去其衣，推云于中。
现代文：他令手下人扒下赵云的衣服，把他推入坑中。
English: He ordered his men to rip off Zhao Yun's clothes and push him into the pit.

古文：饥食其糟，渴饮其汁，于是昏昏几一月，乃缚出之。
现代文：他饿了就吃那酒糟，渴了就喝里面的水。就这样，他昏昏沉沉地过了近一个月，那人才把他绑了上来。
English: When he was hungry, he ate the lees, and when he was thirsty, he drank the water, and in this way, after he had been unconscious for nearly a month, the man tied him up.

古文：使人蹙鴳鼻额，援捩支体，其手指肩髀，皆改旧形。提出风中，倏然凝定。至于声韵亦改。遂以贱隶蓄之，为乌延驿中杂役。
现代文：派人挤压赵云的五官，扭转其肢体。他的手指和肩髀，便全变了形，经风一吹，随即定型，而且连声音语调也改了，就把他作为贱奴留下来，在乌延驿站当杂役。
English: Someone was sent to squeeze Zhao Yun's five senses and twist his limbs. His fingers and shoulder blades all changed shape, and when the wind blew, they were immediately shaped, and even the tone of his voice changed. He was kept as a lowly slave and worked as a handyman at Wuyan Railway Station.

古文：累岁，会其弟为御史，出按灵州狱。云以前事密疏示之。
现代文：一年之后，赶上弟弟以御史身份到灵州监狱巡行，赵云便把这些事秘密地告诉了他。
English: A year later, when he caught up with his younger brother on a tour of Lingshou Prison in his capacity as imperial historian, Zhao Yun told him these things in secret.

古文：其弟言于观察使李铭，由是发卒讨寻，尽得奸宄，乃复灭其党。
现代文：他的弟弟回去后就对观察使李铭讲了，李铭当即派士兵寻访，抓住了那个妖人，又剿灭了他的同党。
English: After his brother returned, he told Li Ming about the observation. Li Ming immediately sent soldiers to investigate, caught the monster, and exterminated his fellow party members.

古文：临刑亦无隐匿，云：前后如此变改人者，数世矣！
现代文：临刑之前，那妖人也不想隐瞒，说道：我这样改变人的形体音容，前前后后算起来，一共有好几代了！
English: Before the execution, the goblin didn't want to hide, saying: "I've been changing people's shapes and voices like this for several generations!

古文：板桥三娘子
现代文：板桥三娘子
English: The Three Daughters of Banqiao

古文：唐汴州西有板桥店。
现代文：唐代，汴州西边有个板桥旅店，店里的女老板叫三娘子，不知道从何处而来。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Banqiao Inn on the west side of Luzhou. The female owner of the inn was called San Niangzi, but it is not known where she came from.

古文：店娃三娘子者，不知何从来，寡居，年三十余，无男女，亦无亲属。有舍数间，以鬻餐为业，然而家甚富贵，多有驴畜。
现代文：她三十多岁年纪，无女无儿，一直是独自一人，连个亲戚也没有，却有不少房屋。她以卖粥饭为业，然而家里却很富裕，有许多头驴。
English: She is in her thirties, has no daughter or child, has always been alone, has not even one relative, but has many houses. She sells porridge and rice as a business, but her family is very rich and has many donkeys.

古文：往来公私车乘，有不逮者，辄贱其估以济之。人皆谓之有道，故远近行旅多归之。
现代文：往来路过的公私车辆，有不能当天赶到目的地，她总是降价接待他们，人们都说她经营有方，因此远远近近的旅客都到这里食宿。
English: Public and private vehicles passing by, whether they can reach the destination on the same day or not, she always receives them at a reduced price. People say that she is a good manager, so the passengers from far and near come here to eat and sleep.

古文：元和中，许州客赵季和，将诣东都，过是宿焉。
现代文：元和年间，有位从许州来的客人叫赵季和，想去往东都洛阳，路过此地便住下了。
English: During the Yuan and He years, a guest from Huzhou named Zhao Jihe, who wanted to go to the eastern capital Luoyang, passed by this place and stayed there.

古文：客有先至者六七人，皆据便榻。
现代文：在他之前，还有六七个客人，把方便一点的床位全占了。
English: Before him, there were six or seven other guests, taking up all the more comfortable beds.

古文：季和后至，最得深处一榻，榻邻比主人房壁。
现代文：赵季和是后来的，只好睡最里面的一张铺。这张铺紧靠着墙，隔壁后便是女老板的房间。
English: Zhao Jihe came later and had to sleep in the innermost bunk. This bunk is close to the wall, and next door is the female boss's room.

古文：既而，三娘子供给诸客甚厚。夜深致酒，与诸客会饮极欢。
现代文：当天，三娘子对这些客人招待得十分周到，深夜还来向他们敬酒，说说笑笑，开怀畅饮。
English: On the same day, the Third Daughter was very thoughtful in her invitation to these guests, and late at night she came to toast them, talk and laugh, and drink heartily.

古文：季和素不饮酒，亦预言笑。
现代文：赵季和向来不喝酒，也不与他们谈笑。
English: Zhao Jihe never drinks alcohol, nor does he talk and laugh with them.

古文：至二更许，诸客醉倦，各就寝。
现代文：到了二更天，客人们都醉倒了，便各自睡下。
English: By two in the morning, the guests were so drunk that they all fell asleep.

古文：三娘子归室，闭关息烛。
现代文：三娘子回到自己房里，关门吹了蜡烛。
English: The third daughter went back to her room, closed the door and blew out the candles.

古文：人皆熟睡，独季和转展不寐。
现代文：人们都进入了梦乡，惟独赵季和翻来复去睡不着。
English: People all went to sleep, except for Zhao Jihe, who couldn't sleep.

古文：隔壁闻三娘子窸窣，若动物之声。
现代文：忽然，他听见隔壁窸窣作响，像是搬动什么东西的声音，于是，他便透过缝隙窥视。
English: Suddenly, he heard banging next door, as if something was being moved, so he peered through the gap.

古文：偶于隙中窥之，即见三娘子向覆器下，取烛挑明之。
现代文：只见那三娘子走到招魂用具前，把蜡烛挑亮了，然后从箱子里拿出一副犁杖，还有一个木头牛，一个木头人，都只有六七寸大小。
English: I saw the three girls go to the spirit-raising equipment, light the candles, and then take out a pair of canes from the box, as well as a wooden cow and a wooden man, all only six or seven inches in size.

古文：二物便行走，小人则牵牛驾耒耜，遂耕床前一席地，来去数出。
现代文：三娘子把它们放在灶坑前，喷上水，木头人和木头牛便行走起来。小人牵着牛拉着犁杖，随即开始耕床前的地，来来回回地忙碌着。
English: The three maids placed them in front of the cooking pit, sprayed them with water, and the wooden man and the wooden cow began to walk. The little man led the cow and pulled the cane, and then began to plow the ground in front of the bed, busy going back and forth.

古文：又于厢中，取出一裹荞麦子，受于小人种之。
现代文：三娘子又从箱子里拿出一袋荞麦种子，让小人种上了。
English: The third daughter took out a bag of buckwheat seeds from the box and let the little man plant them.

古文：须臾生，花发麦熟，令小人收割持践，可得七八升。
现代文：一会儿，那荞麦便发芽了，接着就开花就成熟了。三娘子让小人收割脱皮，得到了七八升荞麦。
English: In a moment, the buckwheat sprouted, and then the flowers bloomed and ripened. The third daughter had the villain harvest and peel the skin, and got seven or eight liters of buckwheat.

古文：又安置小磨子，碾成面讫，却收木人子于厢中，即取面作烧饼数枚。
现代文：又安上个小石磨，把荞麦磨成面才算完事。然后，三娘子把木头人木斗牛收回箱子里，当即用那面做了一些烧饼。
English: He also installed a small stone grinder to grind the buckwheat into noodles before it was done. Then, the third daughter took the wooden bull back into the box and immediately made some burnt cakes with that side.

古文：有顷鸡鸣，诸客欲发，三娘子先起点灯，置新作烧饼于食床上，与客点心。
现代文：有顷鸡鸣，旅客们要动身了。三娘子先起来点上灯，把新做的烧饼放到盘子上端给他们。
English: There was a rooster crowing, and the passengers were about to set off. The third daughter got up first, lit the lamp, and put the newly made fried cake on a plate and served it to them.

古文：季和心动遽辞，开门而去，即潜于户外窥之。
现代文：赵季和心中疑惑恐惧没有吃，开门而去，蹲在窗外偷偷地观察动静。
English: With doubt and fear in his heart, Zhao Ji did not eat, opened the door and left, crouching outside the window to secretly observe the movement.

古文：乃见诸客围床，食烧饼未尽，忽一时踣地，作驴鸣，须臾皆变驴矣。
现代文：只见那几位客人围在桌前，烧饼还没有吃光，忽然同时跌倒在地上，像驴那样叫起来，不一会儿便都变成了驴。
English: The guests were sitting around the table, and they had not yet eaten all the burnt bread, when all of a sudden they fell to the ground at the same time and began to bray like donkeys, and soon they all turned into donkeys.

古文：三娘子尽驱入店后，而尽没其货财。
现代文：三娘子把他们全部赶到店后，而把所有的财物据为己有。
English: The third daughter chased them all to the back of the store and took possession of all their belongings.

古文：季和亦不告于人，私有慕其术者。
现代文：赵季和没把这件事告诉别人，暗自却钦佩她这套幻术。
English: Zhao Jihe did not tell others about this, but secretly admired her illusion.

古文：后月余日，季和自东都回，将至板桥店，预作荞麦烧饼，大小如前。
现代文：一个多月之后，赵季和从洛阳返回，快到板桥店的时候，他事先准备好一些荞麦烧饼，大小同三娘子做的一样。
English: More than a month later, when Zhao Jihe returned from Luoyang and was about to arrive at the Banqiao store, he prepared some buckwheat pancakes in advance, the same size as the one made by the third daughter.

古文：既至，复寓宿焉，三娘子欢悦如初。
现代文：来到店中，三娘子见他还要住宿，像当初一样高兴。
English: When he came to the store, the third daughter saw that he wanted to stay overnight, and was as happy as she was at the beginning.

古文：其夕更无他客，主人供待愈厚。
现代文：这天夜里没有别的客人，三娘子待他更加热情。
English: There were no other guests that night, and the third daughter treated him even more warmly.

古文：夜深，殷勤问所欲。
现代文：半夜，三娘子向他献殷勤问道：你还有什么要求吗？
English: In the middle of the night, the third daughter asked him politely, "Do you have any other requests?"

古文：季和曰：明晨发，请随事点心。
现代文：赵季和回答：我明天早晨出发，请随便准备些点心。
English: Zhao Jihe replied: I will leave tomorrow morning, please prepare some snacks.

古文：三娘子曰：此事无疑，但请稳睡。
现代文：三娘子说：这事你不用考虑，请安心睡吧。
English: The third daughter said, "You don't have to think about it. Please sleep peacefully."

古文：半夜后，季和窥见之，一依前所为。
现代文：半夜过后，赵季和又透过缝隙向三娘子房间窥视，一切又同上次一样。
English: After midnight, Zhao Jihe peered into the third daughter's room through the gap again. Everything was the same as before.

古文：天明，三娘子具盘食，果实烧饼数枚于盘中讫，更取他物。季和乘间走下，以先有者易其一枚，彼不知觉也。
现代文：天亮了，三娘子端来点心盘子，上面摆着几张烧饼。趁她回去拿别的东西时，赵季和赶紧拿出自己准备好的烧饼，从盘子里偷换下来一个，三娘子没有发觉。
English: At dawn, the third daughter brought a dim sum plate with a few slices of burnt cake on it. When she went back to get something else, Zhao Jihe quickly took out the burnt cake she had prepared and secretly replaced one from the plate. The third daughter didn't notice.

古文：季和将发，就食，谓三娘子曰：适会某自有烧饼，请撤去主人者，留待他宾。
现代文：赵季和快要走的时候，刚要吃烧饼时对三娘子说：刚巧我自己的烧饼还没有吃完，请把你端来的这些撤下去，留着招待别的客人吧。
English: When Zhao Jihe was about to leave, just as he was about to eat the burnt cake, he said to the third daughter: "It just so happens that I haven't finished eating my own burnt cake yet. Please take these down and keep them for other guests."

古文：即取己者食之。
现代文：说罢，他便掏出自己带的烧饼吃起来。
English: Having said that, he took out the burnt cake he had brought with him and began to eat it.

古文：方饮次，三娘子送茶出来。季和曰：请主人尝客一片烧饼。
现代文：刚吃了第二个，三娘子送茶出来，赵季和说：请你尝尝我带的烧饼吧。
English: Having just eaten the second, the third daughter brought out tea, and Zhao Jihe said, "Please try the burnt cake I brought with me."

古文：乃拣所易者与啖之。
现代文：说完就把刚刚偷换下来的那张烧饼递给三娘子吃。
English: Having said that, he handed the slice of burnt cake that he had just stolen to the third daughter to eat.

古文：才入口，三娘子据地作驴声。即立变为驴，甚壮健。
现代文：三娘子刚咬了一口，便趴在地上发出驴的叫声，随即变成了一头驴，很健壮。
English: As soon as the third daughter took a bite, she lay down on the ground and let out a donkey's cry, and immediately turned into a donkey, very robust.

古文：季和即乘之发，兼尽收木人木牛子等。
现代文：赵季和骑上她就出发了，并将木头人木头牛等也带了去。
English: Zhao Jihe got on her horse and set off. She also took the wooden man, wooden cow and so on with her.

古文：然不得其术，试之不成。
现代文：然而，他怎么也弄不明白那幻术的要领，试了几次都失败了。
English: However, he couldn't figure out the essence of the illusion. He tried several times and failed.

古文：季和乘策所变驴，周游他处，未尝阻失，日行百里。
现代文：他赶着这头由人变成的驴，周游四方，日行百里，从来没有迷路受阻。
English: He drove this human-turned-donkey, traveling in all directions, a hundred miles a day, never getting lost.

古文：后四年，乘入关，至华岳庙东五六里，路旁忽见一老人，拍手大笑曰：板桥三娘子，何得作此形骸？
现代文：四年之后，他骑驴进关，到华山岳庙东边五六里处，路旁有一个老人，忽然拍手大笑道：板桥三娘子，你怎么变成了这副模样？
English: Four years later, when he rode a donkey into the pass, five or six miles east of the Huashan Mountain Temple, an old man on the side of the road suddenly clapped his hands and laughed loudly: "Three Daughters of Banqiao, how did you become like this?"

古文：因捉驴谓季和曰：彼虽有过，然遭君亦甚矣！可怜许，请从此放之。
现代文：说完，他捉住驴对赵季和说；她虽有罪过，但被你这么一折腾，也够可怜的了，请在这里放了她吧。
English: Having said that, he caught the donkey and said to Zhao Jiwa, "Although she is guilty, it's pitiful that you are so upset about her. Please release her here."

古文：老人乃从驴口鼻边，以两手擘开，三娘子自皮中跳出，宛复旧身，向老人拜讫，走去。更不知所之。
现代文：老人说完，把驴的鼻子用两手一掰，三娘子从皮肉中跳了出来，当即恢复原形。三娘子向老人跪谢完毕，转身而去，谁也不知道她到了什么地方。
English: After the old man finished speaking, he rubbed the donkey's nose with both hands, and the third daughter jumped out of the skin and immediately returned to her original form. After the third daughter knelt down to thank the old man, she turned around and left. No one knew where she had gone.

古文：关司法
现代文：关司法
English: Department of Justice

古文：郓州司法关某，有佣妇人姓钮。
现代文：郓州司法姓关，不知其名。他家中有位女佣姓钮。
English: Zhangzhou judicial surname Guan, I do not know his name. There is a maid surnamed Niu in his family.

古文：关给其衣食，以充驱使。
现代文：关司法供她衣食，为的是使她更加听自己使唤。
English: The authorities provided her with food and clothing in order to make her more obedient.

古文：年长，谓之钮婆，并有一孙，名万儿，年五六岁，同来。
现代文：她的年龄渐渐大了，上下都叫她钮婆。钮婆还有一个孙子，叫万儿，年龄只有五六岁，每次都随钮婆一起来。
English: She is getting older, and everyone calls her Nuba. Nuba also has a grandson, called Wan'er, who is only five or six years old, and he always comes with Nuba.

古文：关氏妻亦有小男，名封六，大小相类。
现代文：关司法的妻子也有个小男孩儿，叫封六，与万儿高矮相仿。
English: The wife of Guan Zhengyi also has a little boy, named Feng Liu, who is the same height as Wan Er.

古文：关妻男常与钮婆孙同戏，每封六新制衣，必易其故者与万儿。
现代文：这两个孩子在一起玩耍嬉戏。每当封六做件新衣服，必定把换下来的旧衣服送给万儿。
English: The two children play together. Whenever Fanyu makes a new dress, he must give the old dress to Wan'er.

古文：一旦，钮婆忽怒曰：皆是小儿，何贵何贱？
现代文：一天早晨，钮婆忽然发怒道：都是小孩儿，怎么还有贵贱之分？
English: One morning, Nuba suddenly became angry and said, "They are all children, how can there be a distinction between rich and poor?

古文：而彼衣皆新，而我儿得其旧！甚不平也。
现代文：你们家孩子全穿新的，我孙子总穿旧的，这太不公平了！
English: Your children all wear new clothes, my grandson always wears old ones, it's so unfair!

古文：关妻问曰：此吾子，尔孙仆隶耳。
现代文：关司法的妻子道：这是我的儿子，你的孙子是他的奴仆。
English: Guan's wife said, "This is my son, and your grandson is his slave."

古文：吾念其与吾子年齿类，故以衣之，奈何不知分理？
现代文：我念他和我儿子年龄相仿，因此才把衣服送给他，你怎么不明事理？
English: I thought he was the same age as my son, that's why I gave him the clothes, why can't you see reason?

古文：自此故衣亦不复得矣！
现代文：从此以后，万儿连旧衣服也得不到了。
English: From then on, Wan'er couldn't even get old clothes.

古文：钮婆笑曰：二子何异也？
现代文：钮婆冷笑着对关司法的妻子说：这两个孩子有什么不同呢？
English: "What's the difference between these two children?" Niu Bao sneered at Guan's wife.

古文：关妻又曰：仆隶那与好人同。
现代文：关司法的妻子说：奴仆怎么能跟主人相同呢？
English: The wife of the judge said, "How can a slave be equal to his master?"

古文：钮婆曰：审不同？某请试之。
现代文：钮婆说：要弄清他们同与不同，必须先试验一下。
English: Nuba said: To find out if they are the same or different, you must first experiment.

古文：遂引封六及其孙，悉内于裙下，著地按之。
现代文：随即，她把封六和万儿都拉到身边，用裙子一盖往地上按去。
English: Immediately, she pulled Feng Li and Wan Er close to her and pressed them to the ground with the top of her skirt.

古文：关妻惊起夺之，两子悉为钮婆之孙，形状衣服皆一，不可辩。
现代文：关司法的妻子惊叫一声，上前去夺，结果两个孩子都变成了钮婆的孙子，模样和衣服全都一样，怎么也分辩不清。
English: Justice Guan's wife screamed in shock and went to grab it. As a result, the two children became Nuba's grandchildren. Their appearance and clothes were all the same, and it was hard to tell them apart.

古文：乃曰：此即同矣！
现代文：钮婆说：你看，他们是不是相同？
English: Nuba said: Look, aren't they the same?

古文：关妻大惧，即与司法同祈请恳至，曰：不意神人在此。
现代文：关司法的妻子吓坏了，与丈夫一起找钮婆乞求原谅，说：想不到仙人来到我们面前！
English: Frightened, the wife of Justice Kwan went with her husband to Niu Bao to beg for forgiveness, saying, "I didn't expect a fairy to come to us!

古文：自此一家敬事，不敢以旧礼相待矣。
现代文：从这以后，全家好好敬待她，再也不敢像从前那样了！
English: From then on, the whole family treated her with great respect and never dared to do the same again!

古文：良久，又以二子致裙下按之，即各复本矣。
现代文：良久，她把裙子里的两个孩子又往地上一按，他们便各自恢复了原样。
English: After a long time, she pushed the two children in the skirts to the floor again, and they each recovered their original appearance.

古文：关氏乃移别室居钮婆，厚待之，不复使役。
现代文：关司法把另外一间的房间让给钮婆居住，待她很优裕，不再当佣人使唤了。
English: Guan Zhengyi gave another room to Nuba to live in, and treated her very well. She no longer worked as a servant.

古文：积年，关氏颇厌怠，私欲害之。
现代文：过了几年，关司法感到十分厌烦，想暗害她。
English: After a few years, Guan Zhengyi felt very bored and wanted to assassinate her.

古文：令妻以酒醉之，司法伏户下，以钁击之，正中其脑，有声而倒。
现代文：一天，他让妻子用酒将其灌醉，自己趴在窗户底下，用镐头猛地一击，正中钮婆的脑袋，她咚的一声倒在地上。
English: One day, he got his wife drunk with wine, lay down under the window, and with a sharp blow with a hoe, he hit her in the head, and she fell to the ground with a thud.

古文：视之，乃栗木，长数尺。
现代文：关司法上前一看，原来是根栗木，有好几尺长。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a chestnut tree, several feet long.

古文：夫妻大喜，命斧砍而焚之。
现代文：两口子大喜，让手下人用斧子砍碎再烧掉。
English: The two were overjoyed, and asked their men to chop up the rope with an axe and then burn it.

古文：适尽，钮婆自室中出曰：何郎君戏之酷也？
现代文：栗木刚烧完，钮婆从屋子里走出来，说：为什么你要这样过分地耍戏我呀？
English: As soon as the chestnuts had finished burning, Nuba came out of the house and said, "Why are you playing with me so excessively?

古文：言笑如前，殊不介意。
现代文：她谈笑如故，好像不介意的样子。
English: She's chatting away, seemingly unconcerned.

古文：郓州之人知之，关不得已，将白于观察使。
现代文：郓州的上上下下全知道了这件事。关司法迫不得已，想向观察使说明详情。
English: Everyone in Zhangzhou knew about it. Guan Zhengyi desperately wanted to explain the details to the observers.

古文：入见次，忽有一关司法，已见使言说，形状无异。
现代文：来到观察使的下榻之处，他忽然看见已经有一个关司法，正同观察使谈话呢，他长得跟真关司法一模一样。
English: When he came to the place where the observer was staying, he suddenly saw that there was already a judge, who was talking to the observer. He looked exactly like the real judge.

古文：关遂归，及到家，堂前已有一关司法先归矣。
现代文：关司法急忙回到家里，堂前已经有一个关司法先他而到，可自己的妻子竟然没有认出来。
English: Guan Zhengyi hurriedly returned home. There was already a Guan Zhengyi ahead of him, but his wife did not recognize him.

古文：妻子莫能辩之，又哀祈钮婆，涕泣拜请，良久渐相近，却成一人。
现代文：夫妻俩又向钮婆乞求救助，并痛哭流涕地跪下请罪。良久，那个假关司法渐渐向真关司法靠近，直至合为一人。
English: The husband and wife again begged for help from Niu Ba, and knelt down in tears to plead guilty. For a long time, the fake justice gradually approached the real justice, until they became one.

古文：自此其家不复有加害之意。至数十年，尚在关氏之家，亦无患耳。
现代文：从此，关司法不再想加害于钮婆了，过了几十年，钮婆一直住在关家，再也没有麻烦了。
English: From then on, Guan Zhengyi no longer wanted to harm Niu Bao. After several decades, Niu Bao has been living in Guan's home, and there is no more trouble.

古文：长乐里人
现代文：长乐里人
English: People from Changle

古文：唐宝历中，长乐里门有百姓刺臂，数十人环瞩之。
现代文：唐代宝历年间，长乐里门口有个老百姓用刀自刺胳臂，几十个人在围观。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a commoner who stabbed himself in the arm with a knife at the entrance to Changle Village. Dozens of people were watching.

古文：忽有一人，白襕，倾首微笑而去。
现代文：忽然来了一个穿白连衣裤的人，看了一眼后，低头微笑而去。
English: Suddenly, a man in a white suit approached, took one look, bowed his head and smiled before walking away.

古文：未十步，百姓子刺血如衂，痛苦次骨。
现代文：没有走上十步，那个老百姓胳臂上血流如注，一直疼到骨头。
English: Before he had taken ten steps, the old man's arm was bleeding profusely, and he was in pain all the way to the bone.

古文：食顷，出血斗余，众人疑向观者所为，令其父从而求之。其人不承，其父拜数十，乃捻辙土若祝，可傅此。
现代文：一顿饭的工夫，出了足有一斗的血。大家都怀疑这是方才那个穿白连衣裤的人干的，便让那个自刺胳膊的老百姓的父亲上前追问，穿白连衣裤的人不承认，那位做父亲的连连跪拜磕头。穿白连衣裤的人说：你用手搓点车道沟里的土祷告一下。敷在伤口上就好了。
English: During a meal, there was a bucket of blood. Everyone suspected that the man in the white trousers had done it, so they asked the father of the citizen who had stabbed himself in the arm to come forward. The man in the white trousers did not admit it, and the father knelt down and bowed his head. The man in the white trousers said: "Use your handkerchief to touch the dirt in the driveway ditch and say a prayer. Just apply it to the wound."

古文：如其言血止。
现代文：照他说的去做，那人的血果然止住了。
English: He did as he was told, and the man's bleeding stopped.

古文：陈武振
现代文：陈武振
English: Chen Wuzhen

古文：唐振州民陈武振者，家累万千，为海中大豪。犀象玳瑁仓库数百，先是西域贾漂泊溺至者，因而有焉。
现代文：唐代振州人陈武振，家中积有万金，为沿海诸岛的一位大富豪，犀牛角、象牙以及玳瑁之类的宝物，在仓库里存着成百上千。先前，他是随西域商船落水漂泊到此，所以才发起来的。
English: Chen Wuzhen, a native of Zhenzhou in the Tang Dynasty, has accumulated tens of thousands of dollars in his family, and is a very rich man in the coastal islands. He has hundreds of rhino horns, ivory and ivory treasures in his warehouse. Previously, he had drifted here with the western merchant ships. That's why he started it.

古文：海中人善咒术，俗谓得牟法。
现代文：海岛上的人都善于咒术，俗称得牟法。
English: People on the island are good at magic, commonly known as Demu.

古文：凡贾舶经海路，与海中五郡绝远，不幸风漂失路，入振州境内，振民即登山披发以咒咀。
现代文：任招讨使的韦公干，像对待兄长一样对待陈武振。陈武振后来所有财物妻室被没收入官。
English: Wei Gonggan, who was appointed as a recruiting agent, treated Chen Wuzhen like an older brother. Chen Wuzhen was later stripped of all his property and wife.

古文：起风扬波，舶不能去，必漂于所咒之地而止，武振由是而富。招讨使韦公干，以兄事武振，武振没入。公干之室亦竭矣。
现代文：韦公干的家里财源也就枯竭了。
English: Wei Gonggan's family's financial resources also dried up.

古文：海中妇人
现代文：海中妇人
English: The Lady from the Sea

古文：海中妇人善厌媚，北人或妻之。
现代文：海岛上的女人善于用巫术和妖媚迷人，北方一些男人有的便娶她们作妻子。
English: The women of the islands are skilled in sorcery and enchantment, and some men from the north take them as wives.

古文：虽蓬头伛偻，能令男子酷爱，死且不悔。
现代文：这些女人虽然蓬头垢面且伛偻着身子，却能讨男人们的喜欢，并一个个至死不悔。
English: These women, despite their unkempt appearance and covered bodies, are able to please men, and one by one they do not regret it.

古文：苟弃去北还，浮海荡不能进，乃自返。
现代文：如果男人扔下妻子回北方老家，坐船过海时船就不往前走，于是只好再回到妻子身边。
English: If a man abandons his wife and returns to his hometown in the north, the boat will not go forward when crossing the sea, so he has to return to his wife.

古文：画工
现代文：画工
English: Painter

古文：唐进士赵颜，于画工处得一软障，图一妇人甚丽。
现代文：唐代，有个叫赵颜的进士，从画工那里得到一个布制屏障，上面画了一个女子，异常美丽。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, a scholar named Zhao Yan received a cloth barrier from a painter, on which a woman was painted, extraordinarily beautiful.

古文：颜谓画工曰：世无其人也，如何令生，某愿纳为妻。
现代文：赵颜对画工说：世间没有这样的人呵。如果真能让她活了，我愿娶她为妻。
English: Zhao Yan said to the painter: "There is no such person in the world. If I can really let her live, I would like to marry her."

古文：画工曰：余神画也，此亦有名，曰真真。
现代文：画工说：这是我的神来之笔呵。她也有个名字，唤作真真。
English: The artist said: "This is my magic pen. It also has a name, it's called Zhenzhen.

古文：呼其名百日，昼夜不歇，即必应之。
现代文：只要你连续一百天昼夜不停地叫她的名字，她就一定能够答应。
English: If you call her name day and night for a hundred days in a row, she will definitely say yes.

古文：应则以百家彩灰酒灌之，必活。
现代文：等她答应之后，你就马上用一百家的彩灰酒灌她，一定会活的。
English: As soon as she agrees, you will immediately fill her with a hundred kinds of colored gray wine, and she will surely live.

古文：颜如其言，遂呼之百日，昼夜不止。乃应曰：喏。急以百家彩灰酒灌，遂活。下步言笑，饮食如常。
现代文：赵颜照他说的去做了，一直昼夜不歇地连呼一百天真真的名字，画上的女子果然应了一声：哎赵颜又急忙用百家彩灰酒灌她，有顷，她真的活了，并从画上走下来，有说有笑，而且吃喝同正常人一样。
English: Zhao Yan did as he said, calling out a hundred innocent and real names all day and night, and the woman on the painting answered: Oh, Zhao Yan hastily poured her with a hundred colors of gray wine. Suddenly, she really lived, and walked down from the painting, talking and laughing, and eating and drinking like a normal person.

古文：曰：谢君召妾，妾愿事箕帚。
现代文：她说：谢谢你把我唤来，我愿意做你的妻子，好好服侍你。
English: She said, "Thank you for calling me. I am willing to be your wife and serve you well."

古文：终岁，生一儿，儿年两岁，友人曰：此妖也，必与君为患！
现代文：一年以后，真真生下一个孩子。孩子长到两岁的时候，有个朋友对他说：这女人是个妖怪，必然会给你带来灾难。
English: A year later, Zhen Zhen gave birth to a child. When the child was two years old, a friend said to him: "This woman is a monster and will surely bring you disaster."

古文：余有神剑，可斩之。
现代文：我这有把神剑，你可以用它斩了她！
English: I have a magic sword, you can cut her with it!

古文：其夕，乃遗颜剑。剑才及颜室。
现代文：当天晚上，那位朋友把剑送给赵颜，赵颜刚把剑带进屋子，真真便哭着说：我是南岳的地仙呵。
English: That evening, the friend gave the sword to Zhao Yan. As soon as Zhao Yan brought the sword into the house, she cried and said, "I am the fairy godmother of Nanyue."

古文：真真乃泣曰：妾南岳地仙也，无何为人画妾之形，君又呼妾名，既不夺君愿。君今疑妾，妾不可住。
现代文：不知为什么被人画去了形体，你又叫我的名字，我不想让你失望才走下来的。你今天开始怀疑我了，我也就不能再与你生活下去了。
English: I don't know why someone drew my body, and you called my name. I didn't want to disappoint you, so I came down. You started to doubt me today, and I can't live with you anymore.

古文：言旋，携其子却上软障，呕出先所饮百家彩灰酒。
现代文：说罢，带着孩子飘然入了软障，并吐出先前喝下的百家彩灰酒。
English: Having said that, I fainted with my child, and vomited up the wine I had drunk earlier.

古文：睹其障，唯添一孩子，皆是画焉。
现代文：赵颜看看那软障，除了真真又多了个孩子，全是画的呀。
English: Zhao Yan, look at that soft spot. In addition to Zhen Zhen and another child, it's all painted.

