古文：董卓字仲颍，陇西临洮人也。
现代文：董卓字仲颖，是陇西临洮人。
English: Dong Zhuo Zi Zhongying is from Linyi, Shaanxi Province.

古文：性粗猛有谋。
现代文：性情粗猛有谋略。
English: He's rough around the edges and he's got a plan.

古文：少尝游羌中，尽与豪帅相结。
现代文：年轻时曾在羌中游历，尽力和头领们结交。
English: When he was young, he traveled in the middle of the country and tried his best to make friends with the leaders.

古文：后归耕于野，诸豪帅有来从之者，卓为杀耕牛，与共宴乐，豪帅感其意，归相敛得杂畜千余头以遗之，由是以健侠知名。
现代文：后来回家种地，众头领有来投奔他的，董卓为他们宰杀耕牛，和他们一块饮宴作乐，头领们感谢他的情意，回去后收罗到各类牲畜干余头来赠送他，从此他以勇健侠气知名。
English: Later, when he went back home to farm the land, many chiefs came to him. Dong Zhuo slaughtered oxen for them and had a banquet with them. The chiefs thanked him for his kindness. After returning home, they collected all kinds of livestock and leftovers to give to him. From then on, he was known for his bravery and chivalry.

古文：为州兵马掾，常徼守塞下。
现代文：被任用为州裹的兵马掾，曾在塞下巡逻守备。
English: Appointed as a state-level terracotta warrior, he once patrolled and guarded under the dam.

古文：卓膂力过人，双带两鞬，左右驰射，为羌胡所畏。
现代文：董卓体力过人，佩带两个弓匣，左右奔驰发射，羌胡人都害怕他。
English: Dong Zhuo is physically superior to others, wears two bow cases, shoots left and right, and people with moustaches are afraid of him.

古文：桓帝末，以六郡良家子为羽林郎，从中郎将张奂为军司马，共击汉阳叛羌，破之，拜郎中，赐缣九千匹。
现代文：桓帝末年，以六郡良家子弟的身份为羽林郎，跟从中郎将张奂做军司马，一起去攻打汉阳叛逆的羌人，打败了他们，被封为郎中，赏捆绢九千匹。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Kuan, he took the identity of the son of a good family in Rikugun as Uebayashi-ro, and together with Chu-ro, who made Zhang Ye the army's steward, he went to fight the rebellious Hanyang people, defeated them, and was made a high-ranking vassal with a reward of nine thousand yakitori.

古文：卓曰： 为者则己，有者则士。 
现代文：董卓说： 记功的是我自己，立功的则是将士们。 
English: Dong Zhuo said: I am the one who deserves the credit, but it is the soldiers who deserve the credit.

古文：乃悉分与吏兵，无所留。
现代文：于是全都分给将士，一点不留。
English: So they were all given to the soldiers, leaving nothing behind.

古文：稍迁西域戊己校尉，坐事免。
现代文：逐步升任为西域戊己校尉，因事被免职。
English: He was gradually promoted to the rank of West Region Wuzi Captain, but was dismissed due to the incident.

古文：后为并州刺史，河东太守。
现代文：后来做并州刺史，河东太守。
English: Later, he became the governor of Henan Province and the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：中平元年，拜东中郎将，持节，代卢植击张角于下曲阳，军败抵罪。
现代文：中平元年，任命他为束中郎将，持节，代卢植到下曲阳攻打张角，兵败被治罪。
English: In the first year of the Zhongping era, he was appointed as the general of the middle son of Sokcho, held a festival, and sent Lu to the lower Quyang to attack Zhangjiao. He was defeated and punished.

古文：其冬，北地先零羌及枹罕河关群盗反叛，遂共立湟中义从胡北宫伯玉、李文侯为将军，杀护羌校尉泠征。
现代文：那年冬天，北地先零羌和袍罕河关群盗反叛，就共同拥立湟中归附的胡人北宫伯玉、李文侯为将军，杀护羌校尉泠征。
English: In the winter of that year, a group of bandits rebelled in the first few counties in the north and in Bao Han River Pass, and they jointly supported the Hu people Bei Gong Bo Yu and Li Wen Hou, who were attached to Yunnan, as generals, and killed and conscripted the lieutenant of Yunnan.

古文：伯玉等乃劫致金城人边章、韩遂，使专任军政，共杀金城太守陈懿，攻烧州郡。
现代文：伯玉等人劫持来金城人边章、韩遂，使他们专门管理军政，一同杀害金城太守陈懿，攻打焚烧州郡。
English: Bo Yu and others kidnapped the Jincheng people, Bianzhang and Han Sui, and made them specifically manage the military and political affairs. Together, they killed the Jincheng governor Chen Qi and attacked and burned the county.

古文：明年春，将数万骑入寇三辅，侵逼园陵，托诛宦官为名。
现代文：第二年春天，带领数万骑兵入侵三辅，逼近皇家陵园，而假藉诛杀宦官的名义。
English: In the spring of the next year, he led tens of thousands of cavalrymen to invade Sanfu, approaching the royal cemetery, while pretending to kill eunuchs.

古文：诏以卓为中郎将，副左车骑将军皇甫嵩征之。
现代文：朝廷下诏任命董卓为中郎将，做左车骑将军皇甫嵩的副手去征伐他们。
English: Under the imperial edict, the court appointed Dong Zhuo as the middle-ranking general, and he became the deputy of the left-wheeled cavalry general Wang Fusong to conquer them.

古文：嵩以无功免归，而边章、韩遂等大盛。
现代文：皇甫嵩因没有成效而被免职召回，而边章、韩遂等气势大盛。
English: Wang Fusong was removed from his post and recalled due to ineffectiveness, while Bian Zhang and Han Sui were very successful.

古文：朝廷复以司空张温为车骑将军，假节，执金吾袁滂为副。
现代文：朝廷又以司空张温为车骑将军，假节，执金吾袁滂为副手。
English: The imperial court also appointed Zhang Wen, the Secretary of the Air Force, as the general of the cavalry, and Yuan Shao, the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, as his deputy.

古文：拜卓破虏将军，与荡寇将军周慎并统于温。
现代文：任命董卓为破虏将军，与荡寇将军周慎一并受张温统辖。
English: He appointed Dong Zhuo as the general to defeat the bandits, and together with Zhou Sheng, the general of the bandits, he was under the jurisdiction of Zhang Wen.

古文：并诸郡兵步骑合十余万，屯美阳，以卫园陵。
现代文：合并各郡步骑兵共十余万，驻扎美隧，以保卫皇家陵园。
English: A total of more than one hundred thousand infantrymen from all counties were stationed in Meidong to protect the royal cemetery.

古文：章、遂亦进兵美阳。
现代文：边章、韩遂也进兵美阳。
English: Bian Zhang and Han Sui also marched into Miyang.

古文：温、卓与战，辄不利。
现代文：张温、董卓与他们交战，总是失利。
English: Zhang Wen and Dong Zhuo fought with them and always lost.

古文：十一月，夜有流星如火，光长十余丈，照章、遂营中，驴马尽鸣。贼以为不祥，欲归金城。卓闻之喜，明日，乃与右扶风鲍鸿等并兵俱攻，大破之，斩首数千级。
现代文：十一月，夜有流星如火，光芒长十余丈，照耀边章、韩遂营中，驴马一齐呜叫，贼寇认为不吉利，想回金球，董皇听说后大喜，第二天，就和右扶风鲍游等人合兵一起进攻，大败敌人，斩首数千级。
English: In November, there was a meteor in the night that was like a fire. The light was more than ten meters long, shining on the border chapter and the Han Sui camp. Donkeys and horses cried together. Thieves and robbers thought it was unlucky and wanted to return to the golden ball. After hearing this, Emperor Dong was overjoyed. The next day, he attacked together with the right wind Baoyu and others, defeated the enemy, and beheaded thousands of levels.

古文：章、遂败走榆中，温乃遣周慎将三万人追讨之。
现代文：边章、韩遂败逃到榆中，张温就派周慎带三万人追击他们。
English: When Bianzhang and Han successfully escaped to Yuzhong, Zhang Wen sent Zhou Sheng with 30,000 men to pursue them.

古文：温参军事孙坚说慎曰： 贼城中无谷，当外转粮食。坚愿得万人断其运道，将军以大兵继后，贼必困乏而不敢战。
现代文：张温的参军事孙坚对周慎说： 贼兵城中无粮，会从外面运粮食，希望给我几万人截断他们的粮道，将军带大兵跟在后面，贼兵一定困乏不敢交战。
English: Sun Jian, a member of Zhang Wen's military, said to Zhou Sheng: The thief soldiers have no grain in the city, they will transport grain from outside, hoping to give me tens of thousands of people to cut off their food supply, the general and soldiers are following behind, the thief soldiers must be exhausted and dare not fight.

古文：若走入羌中，并力讨之，则凉州可定也。 
现代文：如果逃入羌中，合力攻打他们，那么这州就可以平定。 
English: If we escape into the bush and join forces to attack them, then the state can be pacified.

古文：慎不从，引军围榆中城。
现代文：凰垣不听，领兵围捡生城。
English: Hoogegaki did not listen, and the leaders surrounded and besieged the city.

古文：而章、遂分屯葵园狭，反断慎运道。
现代文：而边童、整遂分兵屯驻整厘游，反断了哩堕的粮道。
English: However, the border guards and the rectification detachment stationed in Zheliu, broke the fallen grain road.

古文：慎惧，乃弃车重而退。
现代文：周慎害怕，就丢弃辎重退兵。
English: Zhou Sheng was afraid, so he threw away the anchor and retreated.

古文：温时亦使卓将兵三万讨先零羌，卓于望垣北为羌胡所围，粮食乏绝，进退逼急。
现代文：张温当时也派了董卓领兵三万讨伐先零羌，董卓在望垣北被差塑包围，粮食断绝，进退困难。
English: At that time, Zhang Wen also sent Dong Zhuo to lead thirty thousand soldiers to fight against the First Division. At that time, Dong Zhuo was surrounded by the Second Division in the north of Wangyak, and had no food, and it was difficult to advance and retreat.

古文：乃于所度水中伪立焉，以为捕鱼，而潜从焉下过军。
现代文：于是在渡过的河上筑了一道堰，装作捕鱼，却悄悄地从堰北后撤回军队。
English: So he built a dam across the river, pretended to be fishing, but quietly withdrew his army from behind the dam.

古文：比贼追之，决水已深，不得度。
现代文：等到贼寇来追他，放的水已经深了，不能渡过。
English: By the time the robber chased him, the water was too deep to cross.

古文：时，众军败退，唯卓全师而还，屯于扶风，封黧乡侯，邑千户。
现代文：当时各路军队败退，衹有董卓军队完整无损地退回，驻扎在扶风，封他为帘乡侯，食邑一千户。
English: At that time, the armies of all directions were defeated and retreated, but Dong Zhuo's army returned intact and stationed in Fufeng. He was awarded the title of "Curtain Township," with a thousand households.

古文：三年春，遣使者持节就长安拜张温为太尉。
现代文：中平三年春天，朝廷派使者持符节到长安任命张温为太尉。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Zhongping era, the imperial court sent an envoy to Chang'an to appoint Zhang Wen as a captain.

古文：三公在外，始之于温。
现代文：三公在京城之外，张温首开其例。
English: Zhang Wen was the first to set an example of the Three Kingdoms outside the capital.

古文：其冬，征温还京师，韩遂乃杀边章及伯玉、文侯，拥兵十余万，进围陇西。
现代文：那年冬天，征召张温回京，韩遂就杀了边章和伯玉、文侯，领兵十余万，进军围攻陇西。
English: That winter, Zhang Wen was called up to return to Beijing, and Han Sui killed Bian Zhang, Bo Yuping, and Wen Hou, led more than 100,000 soldiers, and marched into the siege of Shaanxi.

古文：太守李相如反，与遂连和，共杀凉州刺史耿鄙。
现代文：太守李相如反叛，与韩遂联合，一起杀了凉州刺史耿鄙。
English: The governor Li Xiangru rebelled, allied with Han Sui, and together they killed the Yangzhou assassin Geng Yao.

古文：而鄙司马扶风马腾，亦拥兵反叛，又汉阳王国，自号 合众将军 ，皆与韩遂合。
现代文：而耿鄙的司马扶风马腾，也领兵反叛，又有汉阳王国，自称 合众将军 ，都和韩遂联合。
English: However, the despicable Sima Fufeng and Ma Teng, who also led the rebellion, and the Kingdom of Hanyang, which called itself the United States, all united with Han Sui.

古文：共推王国为主，悉令领其众，寇掠三辅。
现代文：共同推举王国为头领，带着他们全部兵马，入侵抢掠三辅。
English: They jointly elected the kingdom as the leader, and took all their soldiers and horses to invade and plunder Sanfu.

古文：五年，围陈仓。
现代文：中平五年，包围陈仓。
English: In the middle of the fifth year of the Heian period, Chen Cang was surrounded.

古文：乃拜卓前将军，与左将军皇甫嵩击破之。
现代文：朝廷于是任命董卓为前将军，与左将军皇甫嵩击败了他们。
English: The imperial court then appointed Dong Zhuo as the former general, and he defeated them with the left general Wang Fusong.

古文：韩遂等复共废王国，而劫故信都令汉阳阎忠，使督统诸部。忠耻为众所胁，感恚病死。
现代文：韩遂等人又共同废黜了王国，而劫持了原信都令汉阳间忠，让他统率各部，阎忠耻于被众人胁迫，气愤发病死去。
English: Han Sui and others also jointly deposed the kingdom, and hijacked the original capital to make Hanyang Zhongzhong, let him lead all departments, Yan Zhongshong was ashamed of being coerced by everyone, and died of anger.

古文：遂等稍争权利，更相杀害，其诸部曲，并各分乖。
现代文：韩遂等人之间逐渐争权夺利，自相残杀，其各路兵马也都分崩瓦解。
English: Han Sui and others gradually competed for power and profit, killing each other, and their armies and horses also disintegrated.

古文：六年，征卓为少府，不肯就，上书言： 所将湟中义从及秦胡兵皆诣臣曰： 牢直不毕，禀赐断绝，妻子饥冻。 牵挽臣车，使不得行。
现代文：中平六年，征召董卓为少府，不肯就任，上书说： 我所带的湟中归附部落以及秦胡兵都来对我说： 粮饷不齐，朝廷颁发的东西也都断绝，老婆孩子挨饿受冻，扶着我的车子，使我不能上路。
English: In the middle of the sixth year of the Heian period, Dong Zhuo was conscripted as a minor prefect, but he refused to take up the post, writing in a letter, "All the soldiers from the subordinate tribes and the Qin and Hu clans that I brought with me came to me and said, 'The food supply is uneven, everything issued by the imperial court has been cut off, my wife and children are starving and freezing, and they are holding up my car so that I can't get on the road.

古文：羌胡敝肠狗态，臣不能禁止，辄将顺安慰，增异复上。 
现代文：羌胡人狼心狗肺，臣不能禁止，只好斗胆违背旨意顺应他们进行安抚。
English: The vassal could not forbid them to do so, but had no choice but to comply with their wishes and appease them.

古文：朝廷不能制，颇以为虑。
现代文：有别的情况再上奏。 朝廷不能管辖，对他很是担心。
English: There are other circumstances that come into play. The court can't control him, and they are very worried about him.

古文：及灵帝寑疾，玺书拜卓为并州牧，令以兵属皇甫嵩。
现代文：等到灵帝得病，用玺印诏书任命董卓为并州牧，让他把兵交给皇甫嵩。
English: When Emperor Lingdi fell ill, he appointed Dong Zhuo to be the co-provincial herdsman with an imperial rescript, and asked him to hand over the soldiers to Emperor Fusang.

古文：卓复上书言曰： 臣既无老谋，又无壮事，天恩误加，掌戎十年。
现代文：董卓又上书说： 臣既无深谋远虑，又无壮举，承皇上错爱，使我掌管兵马十年。
English: Dong Zhuo also wrote: "The vassal has neither forethought nor great feat. Following the emperor's mistaken love, I have been in charge of the soldiers and horses for ten years.

古文：士卒大小相狎弥久，恋臣畜养之恩，为臣奋一旦之命。
现代文：士卒大小关系亲近日久，留恋我对他们的养育之恩，愿意为臣尽力。请求把他们带，效力于边疆。 
English: I have been close to the officers and men for a long time, and I am nostalgic for the grace of their upbringing, and I am willing to do my best for the minister. I request you to take them and serve in the frontier.

古文：乞将之北州、效力边垂。 于是驻兵河东，以观时变。及帝崩，大将军何进、司隶校尉袁绍谋诛阉宦，而太后不许，乃私呼卓将兵入朝，以胁太后。
现代文：于是驻兵河东，以观察形势变化。等到灵帝驾崩，大将军何进、司隶校尉袁绍谋划诛杀宦官，而太后不答应，于是他们私自召董卓带兵入朝，以胁迫太后。
English: When Emperor Lingdi passed away, General He Jin and Lieutenant Yuan Shao planned to assassinate the eunuch, but the Empress Dowager did not agree, so they secretly summoned Dong Zhuo to bring soldiers to the imperial court to coerce the Empress Dowager.

古文：卓得召，即时就道。
现代文：董卓得召后，当天上路。
English: After being summoned, Dong Zhuo hit the road the same day.

古文：并上书曰： 中常侍张让等窃幸承宠，浊乱海内。
现代文：并上书说： 中常侍张让等人窃据恩宠，搅乱天下。
English: The petition also said: "Zhang Zhan and others have stolen the grace and disturbed the world.

古文：臣闻扬汤止沸，莫若去薪；溃痈虽痛，胜于内食。
现代文：臣听说扬汤止沸，不如釜底抽薪；弄破恶疮虽疼，胜似它侵入内部。
English: The minister heard that it is not as good to draw water from the bottom of the kettle to stop the boiling of the soup; although it is painful to break the boil, it is better to let it invade the inside.

古文：昔赵鞅兴晋阳之甲，以逐君侧之恶人。
现代文：从前趟鞅兴晋阳之兵，以驱逐君主身边的恶人。
English: From the previous trip, the soldiers of Lixing and Jinyang came to expel the evil people around the monarch.

古文：今臣辄鸣钟鼓如洛阳，请收让等，以清奸秽。 
现代文：如今臣则鸣鼓到洛阳，抓捕张让等人，以消除奸恶污秽。 
English: Now the minister is beating the drum to Luoyang, arresting Zhang Zhan and others in order to eliminate the evil and filth.

古文：卓未至而何进败，虎贲中郎将袁术乃烧南宫，欲讨宦官，而中常侍段珪等劫少帝及陈留王夜走小平津。
现代文：董卓未到而何进败死，虎贲中郎将袁术就烧了南宫，要讨伐宦官，而中常侍段珪等劫持少帝和陈留王夜间逃往小平津。
English: Prior to the arrival of Dong Zhuo, He Jin was defeated and died. The middle brother of Tigress, Tigress, burned the South Palace of Yuan Shu to fight the eunuchs, while the middle attendant, Duan Yu, and others kidnapped the young emperor and Chen Liu Wang and fled to Xiaopingjin at night.

古文：卓远见火起，引兵急进，未明到城西，闻少帝在北芒，因往奉迎。
现代文：董卓从远处看到火起，领兵火速前进，天未明到城西，听说少帝在北芒，于是前去迎接。
English: Dong Zhuo saw the fire from a distance, led the soldiers to advance rapidly, and went to the west of the city before dawn. He heard that the young emperor was in Beimang, so he went to meet him.

古文：帝见卓将兵卒至，恐怖涕泣。
现代文：少帝看到董卓带着兵马来到，害怕而哭泣。
English: The young emperor was afraid and cried when he saw Dong Zhuo coming with his horses and chariots.

古文：卓与言，不能辞对；与陈留王语，遂及祸乱之事。
现代文：董卓和他说话，他不能回答；和陈留王说话，才弄明白祸乱的事由。
English: When Dong Zhuo spoke to him, he could not answer; when he spoke to Chen Liu Wang, he understood the cause of the calamity.

古文：卓以王为贤，且为董太后所养，卓自以与太后同族，有废立意。
现代文：董卓认为陈留王贤明，而且是董太后所生，董卓自以为与太后同族，有了废立皇帝的打算。
English: Dong Zhuo believed that Chen Liu Wang was a wise man, and that he was born to Empress Dowager Dong. Dong Zhuo thought that he was a member of the same family as the Empress Dowager and had the intention of overthrowing the emperor.

古文：初，卓之入也，步骑不过三千，自嫌兵少，恐不为远近所服，率四五日辄夜潜出军近营，明旦乃大陈旌鼓而还，以为西兵复至，洛中无知者。
现代文：当初，董卓进京时，步骑兵不过三干，自己嫌兵少，怕不被远近各处所服，大约有四五天总是夜裹偷偷把军队从城裹开出来在附近扎营，天亮后却大张旗鼓回城，使人以为西边的军队又到了，洛阳城中无人知道。
English: At the beginning, when Dong Zhuo entered Beijing, there were only three infantry and cavalry, and he did not like the small number of soldiers and was afraid of not being obeyed everywhere. For about four or five days, he always sneaked the army out of the city at night and camped nearby. After dawn, he returned to the city with great fanfare, making people think that the army in the west had arrived again, and no one in Luoyang City knew.

古文：寻而何进及弟苗先所领部曲皆归于卓，卓又使吕布杀执金吾丁原而并其众，卓兵士大盛。
现代文：不久何进和他弟弟何苗先前率领的军队都归顺了董卓，董卓又让吕布杀了执金吾丁原而兼并了他的部众，董卓军队大大增多。
English: Soon, He Jin and his brother He Miao, who had previously led the army, all surrendered to Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo also let Lv Bu kill U Ding Yuan and annex his subordinates. Dong Zhuo's army greatly increased.

古文：乃讽朝廷策免司空刘弘而自代之。
现代文：于是示意朝廷罢免司空刘弘而自己取代他。
English: He then signaled to the imperial court to dismiss Liu Hong, the secretary of the imperial court, and to replace him with himself.

古文：因集议废立。
现代文：接着又召集朝臣商议废立皇上。
English: Next, they called together the courtiers to discuss abolishing the Emperor.

古文：百僚大会，卓乃奋首而言曰： 大者天地，其次君臣，所以为政。
现代文：百官群集，董卓于是昂着头发话： 最大的是天地关系，其次为君臣关系，这是为政的根本。
English: Hundreds of officials gathered, so Dong Zhuo held his head high and said: The biggest is the relationship between heaven and earth, followed by the relationship between monarchs and subjects. This is the foundation of politics.

古文：皇帝暗弱，不可以奉宗庙，为天下主。
现代文：皇帝糊涂懦弱，不能够事奉宗庙，做天下的君主。
English: The emperor is stupid and cowardly, unable to serve the ancestral temple and be the monarch of the world.

古文：今欲依伊尹、霍光故事，更立陈留王，何如？ 
现代文：如今想依照伊尹、霍光的旧例，改立陈留王，如何？ 
English: Now you want to follow the old example of Yi Yin and Huo Guang and re-establish Chen Rui Wang, how about that?

古文：公卿以下莫敢对。
现代文：公卿以下无人敢说话。
English: No one below the peerage dares to speak out.

古文：卓又抗言曰： 昔霍光定策，延年按剑。有敢沮大议，皆以军法从之。 
现代文：董卓又高声说： 从前霍光定决议，田延年按剑监督，有敢阻碍方针大计的，都以军法从事。 
English: Dong Zhuo also said in a loud voice, "In the past, those who wanted to pass resolutions, those who wanted to supervise Tian Yan Nian by the sword, and those who dared to obstruct policies and plans were all dealt with by military law.

古文：坐者震动。
现代文：在座的都受到震撼。
English: Everyone here is in shock.

古文：尚书卢植独曰： 昔太甲既立不明，昌邑罪过千余，故有废立之事。
现代文：衹有尚书卢植说： 从前太甲即位以后昏暗，吕邑王罪过有一千多条，所以有废立的事。
English: Lu Zhi said, "Once upon a time, after Taiga ascended the throne, it was dark, and the king of Lüyi committed more than a thousand offenses, so there was a case of abdication.

古文：今上富于春秋，行无失德，非前事之比也。 
现代文：当今皇上尚且年轻，行为没有不当之处，不能和以前的事例相比。 
English: The current emperor is still young, and there is nothing improper about his behavior, which cannot be compared to previous cases.

古文：卓大怒，罢坐。
现代文：董卓大怒，离席而去。
English: Dong Zhuo was furious and left the table.

古文：明日复集群僚于崇德前殿，遂胁太后，策废少帝。
现代文：第二天又在崇德前殿召集百官，接着就威逼太后，要她下诏废少帝。
English: The next day, hundreds of officials were summoned to the front hall of the Chongde Palace, and then they threatened the empress dowager, demanding that she issue an edict abolishing the young emperor.

古文：曰： 皇帝在丧，无人子之心，威仪不类人君，今废为弘农王。 
现代文：说： 皇帝在为先帝服丧期间，没有做儿子的心态，仪表举止不像个君主，如今废为弘农王。 
English: He said: "During the period of mourning for the former emperor, the emperor did not have the mentality of being a son, his appearance and behavior were not like a monarch, and now he is no longer the King of Hongnong.

古文：乃立陈留王，是为献帝。
现代文：于是立陈留王，造就是献帝。
English: Therefore, Chen Liu Wang was set up, and the building was dedicated to the emperor.

古文：又议太后蹙迫永乐太后，至令忧死，逆妇姑之礼，无孝顺之节，迁于永安宫，遂以弑崩。
现代文：又指出太后逼迫永乐太后，使她忧郁而死，违背婆媳之礼，没有孝顺的品质，把她迁移到永安宫，接着被谋害而死。
English: He also pointed out that the Empress Dowager persecuted the Yongle Empress Dowager, made her melancholy and died, violated the mother-in-law's gift, had no filial qualities, moved her to Yongan Palace, and then was killed and died.

古文：卓迁太尉，领前将军事，加节传斧钺虎贲，更封郿侯。
现代文：董卓升任太尉，代理前将军事务，加玺节乘驿站车马的凭证与斧铁虎贲武士，改封郡侯。
English: Dong Zhuo was promoted to the rank of captain, acting for the former general affairs, and was awarded the certificate of riding a horse and carriage on the Festival of Dedication, and the title of county magistrate.

古文：卓乃与司徒黄琬、司空杨彪，俱带鈇锧诣阙上书，追理陈蕃、窦武及诸党人，以从人望。
现代文：董卓于是与司徒黄琬、司空杨彪，都带着鈇钻入朝上书，要求追查陈蕃、宝武以及诸党人，以顺从人们的意愿。
English: Therefore, Dong Zhuo, together with the secretary Huang Qi and the secretary Kuang Yang Biao, all took the initiative to submit a letter to the government, demanding the investigation of Chen Qi, Baowu and other party members in order to comply with the wishes of the people.

古文：于是悉复蕃等爵位，擢用子孙。
现代文：于是完全恢复了陈蕃等人的爵位，提拔任用其子孙。
English: As a result, the titles of Chen Qi and others were fully restored, and their descendants were promoted and appointed.

古文：寻进卓为相国，入朝不趋，剑履上殿。
现代文：不久进封董卓为相国，可以入朝不趋，带剑穿鞋上殿。
English: Soon after, Dong Zhuo was granted the status of a vassal state, which allowed him to enter the imperial court and enter the palace with a sword and shoes.

古文：封母为池阳君，置令丞。
现代文：封他母亲为池阳君，并为她设置令丞等官员。
English: He appointed his mother as Ikeyang-kun and set up officials such as Ryo-jo and others for her.

古文：是时，洛中贵戚室第相望，金帛财产，家家殷积。
现代文：当时洛阳城中帝王亲族的宅第相连，金帛财产，家家都积蓄很多。
English: At that time, the residences of the emperor's relatives in Luoyang City were connected, and families had accumulated a lot of gold and property.

古文：卓纵放兵士，突其庐舍，淫略妇女，剽虏资物，谓之 搜牢 。人情崩恐，不保朝夕。及何后葬，开文陵，卓悉取藏中珍物。
现代文：董卓放纵士兵，冲进他们家裹，奸淫掳掠妇女，抢劫财物，把这叫作 搜牢 ，人心崩溃恐慌，朝不保夕等到何后下葬，又挖开文陵，董卓把墓中的珍宝全都取走。
English: Dong Zhuo indulged soldiers, stormed into their homes, raped and abducted women, robbed property, called this "searching the prison," people's hearts broke down and panicked, waited for the grave to be buried, and dug up the tombstones, Dong Zhuo took away all the treasures in the tomb.

古文：又奸乱公主，妻略宫人，虐刑滥罚，睚眦必死，群僚内外莫能自固。
现代文：又奸污骚扰公主，霸占抢掠宫女，滥施酷虐的刑罚，有一点仇的一定杀死，宫廷内外的百官没人能够自保。
English: They also raped, defiled, and harassed princesses, occupied, robbed, and plundered palace maids, imposed cruel punishments indiscriminately, and killed anyone who had a bit of a grudge. No one in or out of the court could protect themselves.

古文：卓尝遣军至阳城，时人会于社下，悉令就斩之，驾其车重，载其妇女，以头系车辕，歌呼而还。
现代文：董卓曾派军队到阳城，当时人们正在土地庙前集会，董卓命令上前把人们全都杀死，把车上的财物拉走，装上抢来的妇女，把人头系在车辕上，唱着喊着回京城。
English: Dong Zhuo once sent troops to Yangcheng. At that time, people were gathering in front of a local temple. Dong Zhuo ordered them to kill all the people, take away the property on the car, load the robbed women, tie their heads to the car frame, and sing and shout back to Beijing.

古文：又坏五铢钱，更铸小钱，悉收洛阳及长安铜人、钟虚、飞廉、铜马之属，以充铸焉。
现代文：又毁坏五铢钱，改铸小钱，尽数搜取洛阳和长安铜人、钟虚、飞廉、铜马之类，来充作铸钱的材料。
English: They also destroyed the five-baht coins, changed them into small coins, and searched for as many Luoyang and Chang'an bronze men, bell-shaped, flying horses, and bronze horses as possible to use as materials for minting money.

古文：故货贱物贵，谷石数万。
现代文：因此钱贱物贵，谷子一石值钱数万。
English: As a result, money is cheap, and a stone of millet is worth tens of thousands.

古文：又钱无轮郭文章，不便人用。
现代文：另外他铸的钱没有轮廓花纹，不便于人们使用。
English: In addition, the money he casts has no contour pattern, which is inconvenient for people to use.

古文：时人以为秦始皇见长人于临兆，乃铸铜人。
现代文：当世人认为秦始皇在临洮见到长人，于是铸造了铜人。
English: When the world thought that Qin Shi Huang had seen the Elder in Linyi, he had the bronze man cast.

古文：卓，监洮人也，而今毁之。
现代文：董卓，是临洮人，如今却毁了它。
English: Dong Zhuo, a Linyi man, has now destroyed it.

古文：虽成毁不同，凶暴相类焉。
现代文：虽说铸造熔毁不同，凶暴却是相似的。
English: Though casting meltdowns are different, the ferocity is similar.

古文：卓素闻天下同疾阉官诛杀忠良，及其在事，虽行无道，而犹忍性矫情，擢用群士。乃任吏部尚书汉阳周珌、侍中汝南伍琼、尚书郑公业、长史何颙等。
现代文：董卓一向听说天下人都痛恨宦官诛杀忠良，等到他把持朝政，虽说不行正道，却也还矫饰性情，提拔任用众多士人，任命如吏部尚书汉阳周秘、侍中汝南伍琼、尚书郑公业、长史何显等。
English: Dong Zhuo had always heard that people around the world hated eunuchs who killed the loyal, and when he became the ruler of the dynasty, although he did not follow the right path, he also embellished his temperament, promoted and appointed many nobles, and appointed such officials as Shangshu Hanyang Zhou Ji, Yu Nan Wu Qiong, Shangshu Zheng Gongye, and Changshi He Xian.

古文：以处士荀爽为司空。
现代文：任用没有官职的士人荀爽为司空。
English: The appointment of a layman without an official post, Shuang Shuang, as the Siku.

古文：其染党锢者陈纪、韩融之徒，皆为列卿。
现代文：那些受党锢牵连的陈纪、韩融等人，都做了列卿。
English: Chen Ji, Han Rong and others, who were implicated by the Party, were all promoted to the peerage.

古文：幽滞之士，多所显拔。
现代文：沉沦埋没的人士，多被提拔。
English: Those who sank into oblivion were mostly promoted.

古文：以尚书韩馥为冀州刺史，侍中刘岱为兗州刺史，陈留孔亻由为豫州刺史，颍川张咨为南阳太守。
现代文：任用尚书韩馥为冀州刺史，侍中刘岱为兖州刺史，陈留孔佃为豫州刺史，颖川张咨为南阳太守。
English: Shangshu Han Zhe was appointed as the governor of Jizhou, Liu Zhe as the governor of Zhangzhou, Chen Liu Kong Zhe as the governor of Henan, and Yingchuan Zhang Zhe as the governor of Nanyang.

古文：卓所亲爱，并不处显职，但将校而已。
现代文：董卓的亲信，并不处于显要职位，衹是将校而已。
English: Dong Zhuo's cronies are not in prominent positions, they are just officers.

古文：初平元年，馥等到官，与袁绍之徒十余人，各兴义兵，同盟讨卓，而伍琼、周珌阴为内主。
现代文：初平元年，韩馥等到任，与袁绍等十余人，各兴义兵，结盟讨伐董卓，而伍琼、周秘密作内应。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Heian period, when Han Xizhi was in office, he allied with Yuan Shao and more than ten other people, each a volunteer, to fight against Dong Zhuo, while Wu Qiong and Zhou secretly responded.

古文：初，灵帝末，黄巾余党郭太等复起西河白波谷，转寇太原，遂破河东，百姓流转三辅，号为 白波贼 ，众十余万。
现代文：当初，灵帝末年，黄巾余党郭太等又在西河白波谷起事，转而侵犯太原，接着攻破河东，百姓流亡到三辅，称他们为 白波贼 ，部众十余万。
English: At first, in the last years of Emperor Ling, Huang Yan Yu, the Party Guo Tai and others again rose up in the Bai Bo Valley of the West River, invaded Taiyuan instead, and then broke through to the east of the river. The people were exiled to Sanfu, calling them Bai Bo thieves, with more than 100,000 followers.

古文：卓遣中郎将牛辅击之，不能却。
现代文：董卓派中郎将牛辅攻打他们，不能退敌。
English: Dong Zhuo sent Zhong Lang to attack them with oxen, but they could not fight back.

古文：又闻东方兵起，惧，乃鸩杀弘农王，欲徙都长安。
现代文：等听到东方讨伐董卓的兵兴起，董卓恐惧，就用鸩酒毒死弘农王，要迁都长安。
English: When Dong Zhuo heard that soldiers from the East had risen up to fight against him, he was afraid and poisoned King Hong Nong with poisoned wine in order to move the capital to Chang'an.

古文：会公卿议，太尉黄琬、司徒杨彪廷争不能得，而伍琼、周珌又固谏之。
现代文：召集公卿商议，太尉黄琬、司徒杨彪在廷上力争不成，伍琼、周耻又极力劝阻。
English: The court nobles were summoned for deliberation, and the courtier Huang Qi and the scholar Yang Biao could not succeed in their efforts at the court, and Wu Qiong and Zhou Shian tried their best to dissuade them.

古文：卓因大怒曰： 卓初入朝，二子劝用善士，故相从，而诸君到官，举兵相图。
现代文：董卓于是大怒说： 我刚入朝时，这二人劝我用有德之士，因此就听从了，而各位到任后，却举兵来打我。
English: Dong Zhuo then said angrily, "When I first came to the imperial court, these two men advised me to use a virtuous person, so I obeyed, but after you took office, you raised an army to fight me.

古文：此二君卖卓，卓何用相负！ 
现代文：这二位出卖我，我有什么对不起他们的！ 
English: These two are betraying me, I don't feel sorry for them at all!

古文：遂斩琼、珌。
现代文：于是斩了伍琼、周琐。
English: So he beheaded Wu Qiong and Zhou Zuo.

古文：而彪、琬恐惧，诣卓谢曰： 小人恋旧，非欲沮国事也，请以不及为罪。 
现代文：杨彪、黄琬害怕，到董卓那裹道歉说： 小人留恋旧地，不是想要阻止国家大事啊，请治我们考虑不周的罪过。 
English: Yang Biao and Huang Qi were afraid, so they went to Dong Zhuo and apologized, saying: "The villain is nostalgic for the old country, not trying to stop the national event, but please cure our ill-considered sins."

古文：卓既杀琼、珌，旋亦悔之，故表彪、琬为光禄大夫。
现代文：董卓杀了伍琼、周泌后，很快也就后悔了，因此上表请任命杨彪、黄琬为光禄大夫。
English: After Dong Zhuo killed Wu Qiong and Zhou Xiu, he soon regretted it. Therefore, please appoint Yang Biao and Huang Qi as Guanglu doctors.

古文：于是迁天子西都。
现代文：于是把天子迁往西都。
English: As a result, the emperor was moved to the western capital.

古文：初，长安遭赤眉之乱，宫室营寺焚灭无余，是时唯有高庙、京兆府舍，遂便时幸焉。
现代文：当初，长安遭受赤眉时的动乱，宫室与文武官舍都被焚烧毁坏，逭时衹剩高庙、京兆府邸，于是择吉日让皇帝搬了进去。
English: At first, Chang'an suffered from the turmoil of the Red Eyebrows, the palace room and the civil and military official residences were all burned and destroyed, and at that time, there were only the high temple and the imperial palace, so the emperor moved in on the auspicious day.

古文：后移末央宫。
现代文：后来又挪到未央宫。
English: Later, it was moved to Miang Palace.

古文：于是尽徙洛阳人数百万口于长安，步骑驱蹙，更相蹈藉，饥饿寇掠，积尸盈路。
现代文：于是把洛阳数百万人都迁往长安，步骑兵一路驱赶逼迫，互相践踏，又遭饥饿掠夺，路上堆满了尸体。
English: As a result, millions of Luoyang people were moved to Chang'an, and the infantrymen drove and persecuted them all the way, trampled on each other, were starved and plundered, and the road was full of corpses.

古文：卓自屯留毕圭苑中，悉烧宫庙官府居家，二百里内无复孑遗。
现代文：董卓自己驻留在毕圭苑中，把周围宫庙官署民宅全部烧毁，二百里以内再无人烟。
English: Dong Zhuo himself stayed in the middle of Biguiyuan, burned down all the private houses of the surrounding palace and temple government, and there was no one within two hundred miles.

古文：又使吕布发诸帝陵，及公卿已下冢墓，收其珍宝。
现代文：又派吕布挖开各皇帝陵墓，以及公卿以下百官的坟茔，搜罗其中的珍宝。
English: He also sent Lü Bu to excavate the mausoleums of various emperors, as well as the tombs of hundreds of officials below the nobility, to collect the treasures therein.

古文：时，长沙太守孙坚亦率豫州诸群兵讨卓。
现代文：当时长沙太守孙坚也率领着豫州各郡兵马讨伐董卓。
English: At that time, Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, also led the troops and horses of various counties in Yuzhou to fight against Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓先遣将徐荣、李蒙四出虏掠。
现代文：董卓先派将军徐荣、李蒙四出掳掠。
English: Dong Zhuo first sent the generals Xu Rong and Li Meng out to plunder.

古文：荣遇坚于梁，与战、破坚，生禽颍川太守李旻、亨之。
现代文：徐荣在梁城遇到孙坚，和他交战，大败孙坚，生擒颖太守李曼，煮杀了他。
English: Xu Rong met Sun Jian in Liangcheng, fought with him, defeated Sun Jian, and killed him.

古文：卓所得义兵士卒，皆以布缠裹，倒立于地，热膏灌杀之。
现代文：董卓所掳获的义兵士卒，都用布缠裹，倒立在地上，用热油灌死。
English: The captured soldiers of Dong Zhuo were all wrapped in cloth, stood upside down on the ground, and were doused with hot oil.

古文：时，河内太守王匡屯兵河阳津，将以图卓。
现代文：当时河内太守王匡屯兵河阳津，想要攻打董卓。
English: At that time, the governor of Hanoi, Wang Kuang, wanted to attack Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓遣疑兵挑战，而潜使锐卒从小平津过津北，破之，死者略尽。
现代文：董卓派疑兵挑战，而让精兵偷偷从小平津过渡口北，打败王匡，把他的兵几乎杀光。
English: Dong Zhuo sent the suspect soldiers to challenge, and let the elite soldiers sneak from Xiaopingjin to Jiaokou North to defeat Wang Kuang and kill almost all of his soldiers.

古文：明年，孙坚收合散卒，进屯梁县之阳人。
现代文：第二年，孙坚收集打散的兵卒，进驻梁县的阳人。
English: In the second year, Sun Jian gathered the scattered soldiers and stationed them in Yangren, Liang County.

古文：卓遣将胡轸、吕布攻之。
现代文：董卓派部将胡轸、吕布进攻他。
English: Dong Zhuo sent Hu Yao and Lv Bu to attack him.

古文：布与轸不相能，军中自惊恐，士卒散乱。
现代文：吕布与胡轸不和，军中惊恐，士卒四散。
English: Lvbu and Hu Yao had a disagreement, the army panicked, and the soldiers scattered.

古文：坚追击之，轸、布败走。
现代文：孙坚追击他们，胡轸、吕布败走。
English: Sun Jian chased after them, while Hu Yao and Lv Bu fled in defeat.

古文：卓遣将李傕诣坚求和，坚拒绝不受，进军大谷，距洛九十里。
现代文：董卓派将军李催到孙坚那裹求和，孙坚拒绝不接受，进军大谷，距洛阳九十里。
English: Dong Zhuo sent General Li to urge Sun Jian to sue for peace. Sun Jian refused to accept and marched into Datan, ninety miles from Luoyang.

古文：卓自出与坚战于诸陵墓间，卓败走，却屯黾池，聚兵于陕。
现代文：董卓亲自出兵和孙坚在众皇陵地带交战，董卓败走，退兵驻守龟池，在陕地集结兵马。
English: Dong Zhuo personally sent troops to fight with Sun Jian in the area of the imperial tombs. Dong Zhuo was defeated and retreated, stationed in Guechi and gathered soldiers and horses in Shaanxi.

古文：坚进洛阳宣阳城门，更击吕布，布复破走。
现代文：孙坚进洛阳宣阳城门，又攻打吕布，吕布又战败逃走。
English: Sun Jian entered the city gate of Luoyang Xuanyang, attacked Lvbu, and Lvbu was defeated and fled.

古文：坚乃埽除宗庙，平塞诸陵，分兵出函谷关，至新安、黾池间，以雀戈卓后。
现代文：孙坚于是打扫皇家宗庙，填补被挖开的各处陵墓，分兵出函谷关，到新安、醒池之间，以截断董卓后路。
English: Sun Jian then cleaned the royal ancestral temple, filled in the various mausoleums that had been dug up, and sent troops out of Hanyu Pass, to Xin'an and between Xiechi, to cut off Dong Zhuo's rear path.

古文：卓谓长史刘艾曰： 关东诸将数败矣，无能为也。
现代文：董卓对长史刘艾说： 关东诸将战败几次了，干不出什么名堂了。
English: Dong Zhuo said to Liu Ai, the chief historian: The Guandong generals have been defeated several times, and they can't do anything great.

古文：唯孙坚小戆，诸将军宜慎之。 
现代文：衹有孙坚有点气，各位将军要小心。 
English: Sun Jian has a bit of a temper, all generals should be careful.

古文：乃使东中郎将董越屯黾池，中郎将段煨屯华阴，中郎将牛辅屯安邑，其余中郎将、校尉布在诸县，以御山东。
现代文：于是派东中郎将董越驻醒池，中郎将段煨驻华阴，中郎将牛辅驻安邑，其余中郎将、校尉分布在各县，以抵御山东的军队。
English: Therefore, he sent Dong Zhong Lang to station Dong Yue in Xiechi, Zhong Lang to station Duan Yao in Huayin, Zhong Lang to station Niu Fu in Anyu, and the rest of the Zhong Lang and the captain were distributed in each county to resist the army of Shandong.

古文：卓讽朝廷使光禄勋宣璠持节拜卓为太师，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：董卓示意朝廷派光禄勋宣瑶持符节拜董卓为太师，位置在诸侯王之上。
English: Dong Zhuo indicated that the imperial court should send Guanglu Xun to proclaim and hold the festival to worship Dong Zhuo as the Grand Master, a position above the princes.

古文：乃引还长安。
现代文：于是退兵回长安。
English: As a result, the soldiers withdrew back to Chang'an.

古文：百官迎路拜揖，卓遂僭拟车服，乘金华青盖，爪画两轓，时人号 竿摩车 ，言其服饰近天子也。
现代文：百官到路边迎接参拜。董卓非分使用超越他身份的车马服饰，乘坐有金花的青伞盖车，勾画车厢两边的障板，当时人称为 竿摩车 ，是说他的服饰近于天子。
English: Hundreds of officials came to the roadside to welcome the worshippers. Dong Zhuofei used car and horse costumes that exceeded his status, rode on a blue umbrella covered car with gold flowers, and outlined the barrier plates on both sides of the car. At that time, people called it a horse-drawn carriage, saying that his clothing was close to the heavenly son.

古文：以弟旻为左将军，封鄠侯，兄子璜为侍中、中军校尉，皆典兵事。
现代文：任命他的弟弟董曼为左将军，封鄂侯，哥哥的儿子董璜为侍中、中军校尉，都掌握军队。
English: He appointed his younger brother, Dong Man, as General Zuo and vassal of E, and his elder brother's son, Dong Yao, as an aide-de-camp and lieutenant of the Central Army, all of whom had command of the army.

古文：于是宗族内外，并居列位。
现代文：于是宗族内外，都居官位。
English: As a result, all members of the clan, both inside and outside the family, hold official positions.

古文：其子孙虽在髫，男皆封侯，女为邑君。
现代文：他的子孙即使还是幼儿，也都男的封侯，女的为邑君。
English: His children and grandchildren, even if they are still small children, are all male feudal lords, and the female ones are village chiefs.

古文：数与百官置酒宴会，淫乐纵恣。
现代文：董卓数次与百官大摆酒筵，纵欲狂欢。
English: On several occasions, Dong Zhuo had large-scale drinking parties with hundreds of officials and indulged in orgies.

古文：乃结垒于长安城东以自居。
现代文：自己在长安城东扎寨居住。
English: He lives in Dongzazhai, Chang'an City.

古文：又筑坞于郿，高厚七丈，号曰 万岁坞 。
现代文：又在鄘修筑城堡，高厚各七丈，称为 万岁坞 。
English: He also built a castle in Handan, each seven stories high, known as the Million-Year Dock.

古文：积谷为三十年储。
现代文：储蓄了三十年的粮食。
English: We have been saving grain for 30 years.

古文：自云： 事成，雄据天下；不成、守此足以毕老。 
现代文：自己说： 事情成功，就雄据天下；不成功，守在这裹也足以养老。 
English: Say to yourself: If things go well, you will rule the world; if things don't go well, you can stay here and live to a ripe old age.

古文：尝至郿行坞，公卿已下祖道于横门外。
现代文：曾到鄘巡视城堡，公卿以下百官都到横门外为他设祭送行。
English: He once went to Shao to inspect the castle, and hundreds of officials, including nobles, came to the side gate to hold a festival to see him off.

古文：卓施帐幔饮设，诱降北地反者数百人，于坐中杀之。先断其舌，次斩手足，次凿其眼目，以镬煮之。
现代文：董卓搭起帐篷摆设酒宴，把诱降来的北地反叛者数百人，在筵席上杀死，先割下舌头，再砍掉手脚，再挖去眼睛，放进锅裹煮。
English: Dong Zhuo set up a tent and held a banquet. He killed hundreds of lured Northland rebels at the banquet. First, he cut off their tongues, then their hands and feet, then their eyes, and put them in a pot to boil.

古文：未及得死，偃转杯案间。
现代文：没死的，在筵席间翻滚挣扎。
English: Undead, tumbling and struggling between the tables.

古文：会者战栗，亡失匕箸，而卓饮食自若。
现代文：与会者吓得发抖，拿不住筷子，而董卓饮食神色自如。
English: Attendees were shaking with fear, unable to hold their chopsticks, while Dong Zhuo, the caterer, looked at ease.

古文：诸将有言语蹉跌，便戮于前。
现代文：诸将有言语失当的，便就地杀死。
English: Anyone who speaks out of turn is to be killed on the spot.

古文：又稍诛关中旧族，陷以叛逆。
现代文：又逐次诛杀关中旧时的名门大族，诬陷他们叛逆罪。
English: He also successively killed the old noble families in Guanzhong and framed them for treason.

古文：时，太史望气，言当有大臣戮死者。
现代文：当时太史观测云气，说会有大臣被杀死。
English: At that time, Taishi observed the atmosphere and said that a minister would be killed.

古文：卓乃使人诬卫尉张温与袁术交通，遂笞温于市，杀之，以塞天变。
现代文：董卓就使人诬告卫尉张温和袁术勾结，于是在街市上鞭打张温，杀了他，以应付天象的变化。
English: Dong Zhuo had people falsely accuse the guard Zhang Wen and Yuan Shu of collusion, so he whipped Zhang Wen in the street market and killed him to cope with the change of the celestial elephant.

古文：前温出屯美阳，令卓与边章等战，无功，温召又不时应命，既到而辞对不逊。
现代文：以前张温出京驻兵美阳，命令董卓与边章等作战而不胜，张温召他又不及时返回，到了以后又言语不逊让。
English: In the past, Zhang Wen went to Beijing to garrison Miyang, and ordered Dong Zhuo to fight against Bian Zhang and others, but he was not victorious. Zhang Wen called him not to return in time, and later he did not mince words.

古文：时孙坚为温参军，劝温陈兵斩之。
现代文：当时孙坚做张温的参军，劝张温布置军队杀了他。
English: At that time, Sun Jian, as Zhang Wen's military enlistment, persuaded Zhang Wen to arrange an army to kill him.

古文：温曰： 卓有威名，方倚以西行。 
现代文：张温说： 董卓有威名，正要靠他向西进兵呢。 
English: Zhang Wen said, "Dong Zhuo is a man of prestige, and we are relying on him to lead the troops to the west.

古文：坚曰： 明公亲帅王师，威振天下，何恃于卓而赖之乎？
现代文：孙坚说： 明公亲自率领朝廷军队，威震天下，有什么要依赖董卓的呢？
English: Sun Jian said, "Ming Gong personally led the imperial army, which made the world tremble. Why should we rely on Dong Zhuo?

古文：坚闻古之名将，杖钺临众，未有不断斩以示威武者也。
现代文：我听说古时的名将，仗剑治军，没有不斩杀以示威武的。
English: I heard that in ancient times, there were no famous generals who fought with swords and ruled the army without killing to demonstrate martial arts.

古文：故穰苴斩庄贾，魏绛戮杨干。
现代文：所以穣苴斩庄贾，魏绛杀杨干。
English: That's why he beheaded Zhuang Jia, and Wei Xuan killed Yang Gan.

古文：今若纵之，自亏威重，后悔何及！ 
现代文：今天如果放过他，自损威望，后悔莫及！ 
English: If we let him go today, we will lose our prestige, and we will regret it!

古文：温不能从，而卓犹怀忌恨，故及于难。
现代文：张温不采纳，而董卓还是心裹怀恨，因此张温遭了难。
English: Zhang Wen did not accept, but Dong Zhuo still harbored a grudge, so Zhang Wen was in trouble.

古文：温字伯慎，少有名誉，累登公卿，亦队与司徒王允共谋诛卓，事未及发而见害。
现代文：张温字伯慎，年轻时有声誉，逐步升至公卿，也暗地与司徒王允共同谋划杀董卓，还未来得及动手而被害。
English: Zhang Wenziboshen, who had a reputation when he was young and gradually rose to nobility, also secretly plotted to kill Dong Zhuo together with the scholar Wang Yun, but he did not have time to take action and was killed.

古文：越骑校尉汝南伍孚忿卓凶毒，志手刃之，乃朝服怀佩刀以见卓。
现代文：越骑校尉汝南伍孚，恨董皇凶残，一心要亲手杀他，就在朝服襄藏了刀去见董卓。
English: Yue cavalry captain Runan Wufu, who hated Emperor Dong's cruelty and wanted to kill him with his own hands, hid his sword in his morning coat and went to see Emperor Dong.

古文：孚语毕辞去，卓起送至阁，以手抚其背，孚因出刀刺之，不中。
现代文：伍孚说完话告辞离去，董卓起身送他到阁中，用手拍他的后背，鱼呈就抽出刀来刺董皇，没有刺中。
English: After Wu Fu finished his speech and left, Dong Zhuo got up and took him to the pavilion. He patted him on the back with his hand. The fish then pulled out a knife to stab Emperor Dong, but missed.

古文：卓自奋得免，急呼左右执杀之，而大诟曰： 虏欲反耶！ 
现代文：董卓自救得免，急喊左右捕杀他，大骂伍孚说： 贼奴想造吗！ 
English: Dong Zhuo was able to save himself from being killed. He shouted frantically to capture and kill him. He cursed Wu Fu and said, "Do you want to be a thief and a slave?

古文：孚大言曰： 恨不得磔裂奸贼于都市，以谢天地！ 
现代文：伍孚大喊道： 恨不得把奸贼在大街上剁成碎块，以告慰天地！ 
English: Wufu shouted: I can't wait to smash the traitor into pieces on the street to console the world!

古文：言未毕而毙。
现代文：话未说完就被杀死。
English: He was killed before he could finish speaking.

古文：时，王允与吕布及仆射士孙瑞谋诛卓。
现代文：当时王允与吕布和仆射士孙瑞谋划杀董卓。
English: At that time, Wang Yun plotted with Lü Bu and his henchman Sun Rui to kill Dong Zhuo.

古文：有人书 吕 字于布上，负而行于市，歌曰： 布乎！ 
现代文：有人在布上写了个 吕 字，背着在集市上走，唱着： 布啊！ 
English: Someone wrote a 吕 character on a piece of cloth and walked around the market with it on his back, singing: Cloth!

古文：有告卓者，卓不悟。
现代文：有人告诉董卓，董卓没有悟出来。
English: Someone told Dong Zhuo that Dong Zhuo did not come to his senses.

古文：三年四月，帝疾新愈，大会未央殿。
现代文：初平三年四月，皇帝的病刚好，在未央殿举行盛大集会。
English: In April of the third year of the Heian period, just as the emperor fell ill, a grand assembly was held in the Emperor's Residence.

古文：卓朝服升车，既而马惊堕泥，还入更衣。
现代文：董卓身穿朝服登车，接着马受惊掉在泥裹，回屋内换衣服。
English: Dong Zhuo boarded the bus in his morning dress, then the horse got scared and got covered in mud. He went back inside to change his clothes.

古文：其少妻止之，卓不从，遂行。
现代文：其妾不让他去，董卓不听，就出发了。
English: His concubine wouldn't let him go, but Dong Zhuo didn't listen and set off.

古文：乃陈兵夹道，自垒及宫，左步右骑，屯卫周匝，令吕布等扞卫前后。
现代文：于是夹道排列军队，从他的驻地营垒到皇宫，左右步兵骑兵，一层层严密护卫，令吕布等在前后警戒。
English: As a result, the army lined up side by side, from his encampment to the imperial palace, with infantry and cavalry on the right and left, closely guarded one layer at a time, so that Lü Bu was on guard in front and behind.

古文：王允乃与士孙瑞密表其事，使瑞自书诏以授布，令骑都尉李肃与布同心勇士十余人，伪着卫士服于北掖门内以待卓。
现代文：王允和士孙瑞秘密上奏杀董卓之事，让士孙瑞自己写下韶书送给吕布，令骑都尉李肃和与吕布同心的勇士十余人，穿上董卓卫士的服装在北掖门内等着董卓。
English: Wang Yun and the scholar Sun Rui secretly recorded the killing of Dong Zhuo, and let the scholar Sun Rui himself write a letter to Lv Bu, and ordered the cavalry captain Li Su and more than ten warriors who were like-minded with Lv Bu to put on Dong Zhuo's guardian's clothing and wait for Dong Zhuo inside the North Gate.

古文：卓将至，马惊不行，怪惧欲还。
现代文：董卓快走到时，马受惊不肯往前走，他觉得奇怪害怕想回去。
English: When Dong Zhuo walked quickly, the horse was frightened and refused to go forward. He felt strangely afraid and wanted to go back.

古文：吕布劝令进，遂入门。
现代文：吕布劝他进宫，于是就进了宫门。
English: Lü Bu advised him to enter the palace, so he entered the palace gate.

古文：肃以戟刺之，卓衷甲不入，伤臂墯车，顾大呼曰： 吕布何在？ 
现代文：李肃用戟刺他，董卓裹面穿着销甲刺不进，手臂受伤掉下车来，回头大叫： 吕布在哪裹？ 
English: Li Su stabbed him with a shovel, Dong Zhuo, wearing a suit of armor, could not get in, his arm was injured, he fell off the car and shouted back: Where is Lv Bu?

古文：布曰： 有诏讨贼臣。 
现代文：吕布应声说： 有诏书讨伐贼臣。 
English: Lv Bu replied, "There is an edict to fight against the thief-in-chief.

古文：卓大骂曰： 庸狗敢如是邪！ 
现代文：董卓大骂： 喂养的狗竟敢这样！ 
English: Dong Zhuo scolded loudly: "How dare you do this to the dogs you feed!

古文：布应声持矛刺卓，趣兵斩之。
现代文：吕布应声持矛刺董卓，促令士兵杀了他。
English: Lü Bu responded by stabbing Dong Zhuo with a spear, prompting the soldiers to kill him.

古文：主簿田仪及卓仓头前赴其尸，布又杀之。
现代文：主簿田仪和董卓的奴仆跑到他尸体前，吕布又杀了他们。
English: The chief bookkeeper, Tian Yi, and Dong Zhuo's servant ran to his corpse, and Lü Bu killed them.

古文：驰赍赦书，以令宫陛内外。
现代文：使人骑马带着赦免的韶书，号令宫廷内外。
English: He had men ride on horseback with letters of pardon to be carried in and out of the court.

古文：士卒皆称万岁，百姓歌舞于道。
现代文：士卒都高呼万岁，百姓们在街道上载歌载舞。
English: The soldiers shouted "long live" and the people danced and sang in the streets.

古文：长安中士女卖其珠玉衣装市酒肉相庆者，填满衔肆。
现代文：长安城中男女卖掉珠宝衣服买酒肉庆贺的，挤满了街上的店铺。
English: Men and women in Chang'an City sold their jewelry and clothes to buy wine and meat to celebrate, and the shops on the street were crowded.

古文：使皇甫嵩攻卓弟旻于眉阝坞，杀得母妻男女，尽灭其族。
现代文：朝廷命皇甫嵩到鄘坞攻打董卓的弟弟董曼，杀了他母亲妻子男女老少，把他的家族全部杀光。
English: The imperial court ordered Emperor Fusong to attack Dong Zhuo's younger brother Dong Man, kill his mother, wife, men, women and children, and kill his entire family.

古文：乃尸卓于市。
现代文：于是把董卓的尸体扔在街上示众。
English: He then dumped Dong Zhuo's body in the street for all to see.

古文：天时始热，卓素充肥，脂流于地。
现代文：天气当时渐热，董卓一向肥胖，尸体的油脂流到地上。
English: The weather was getting hot at the time, and Dong Zhuo had always been fat. The body's grease dripped onto the ground.

古文：守尸吏然火置卓脐中，光明达曙，如是积日。
现代文：守尸的官吏用芯子点上火放在董卓肚脐眼裹，一直燃烧到天亮，这样延续了好几天。
English: The officials guarding the corpse lit a fire with a wick and wrapped it around Dong Zhuo's navel and eyes, and kept it burning until dawn, which lasted for several days.

古文：诸袁门生又聚董氏之尸，焚灰扬之于路。
现代文：袁氏的门生们又把破碎的董卓尸体聚拢起来，烧成灰撒在道路上。
English: Yuan's protégés gathered up the broken bodies of Dong Zhuo and burned them to ashes on the road.

古文：坞中珍藏有金二三万斤，银八九万斤，锦绮缋纨素奇玩，积如丘山。
现代文：他的城堡中藏有金子二三万斤，银子八九万斤，锦帛谷米珍奇玩物堆积如山。
English: His castle contains 230,000 kilos of gold, 890,000 kilos of silver, and a mountain of Koenji rice and other curiosities.

古文：初，卓以牛辅子婿，素所亲信，使以兵屯陕。
现代文：当初，董卓以牛辅为女婿，平素十分亲信，派他带兵驻扎陕。
English: At first, Dong Zhuo took Niu Fu as his son-in-law, who was usually very close to him, and sent him to station troops in Shaanxi.

古文：辅分遣其校尉李傕、郭汜、张济将步骑数万，击破河南尹朱俊于中牟。
现代文：牛辅分派他的校尉李催、郭汜、张济带步骑兵数万，在中牟打败河南尹朱俊。
English: Niu Fu dispatched his lieutenants Li Xie, Guo Wei and Zhang Jie with tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to defeat Henan Yin Zhujun in Zhongmou.

古文：因掠陈留、颍川诸县，杀略男女，所过无复遗类。
现代文：趁机抢掠陈留、颖各县，杀掳男女，所过之处抢掠一光。
English: They took advantage of the opportunity to loot Chenliu and Ying counties, killing and capturing men and women, and looting everything they passed.

古文：吕布乃使李肃以诏命至陕讨辅等，辅等逆与肃战，肃败走弘农，布诛杀之。
现代文：吕布就派李肃带着朝廷韶命到陕地讨伐牛辅等人，牛辅等与李肃交战，李肃败逃到弘农，吕布杀了他。
English: Lv Bu sent Li Su to Shaanxi with the imperial command to fight Niu Fu and others. Niu Fu and others fought with Li Su. Li Su fled to Hongnong and Lv Bu killed him.

古文：其后朱辅营中无故大惊，辅惧，乃赍金宝逾城走。
现代文：后来牛辅营中无故大惊，牛辅害怕，就带着金银珠宝翻城墙逃走。
English: Later, the camp of Niu Fu was shocked for no reason, and Niu Fu was afraid, so he took the gold and silver jewelry, climbed over the city wall and fled.

古文：左右利其货，斩辅，送首长安。
现代文：他的随从贪图他的财物，斩了牛辅，把他的头送到长安。
English: His followers coveted his property, beheaded Niu Fu, and sent his head to Chang'an.

古文：傕、汜等以王允、吕布杀董卓，故忿怒并州人，并州人其在军者男女数百人，皆诛杀之。
现代文：李催、郭汜等人因为王允、吕布杀了董卓，因此恨并州人，把在他们军队中的数百名并州男女统统杀死。
English: Because Wang Yun and Lü Bu killed Dong Zhuo, Li Hao, Guo Jue and others hated the annexationists and killed all the hundreds of annexationist men and women in their army.

古文：牛辅既败，众无所依，欲各散去。
现代文：牛辅死后，众人无所适从，打算各自散去。
English: After the death of Niu Fu, everyone was at a loss and decided to disperse.

古文：傕等恐，乃先遗使诣长安，求乞赦免。
现代文：李催等人害怕，就先派人到长安，乞求赦免。
English: Li Xie and the others were afraid, so they first sent someone to Chang'an to beg for forgiveness.

古文：王允以为一岁不可再赦，不许之。
现代文：王允认为一年内不能两次赦免，不答应他。
English: Wang Yun thought that he could not be pardoned twice in one year, so he did not agree.

古文：傕等益怀忧惧，不知所为。
现代文：李催等人更加害怕，不知该怎么办。
English: Li Xie and the others were even more scared and didn't know what to do.

古文：武威人贾诩时在傕军，说之曰： 闻长安中议欲尽诛凉州人，诸君若弃军单行，则一亭长能束君矣。
现代文：武威人买谢当时在李催军中，鼓动他们说： 听说长安城裹议论要杀光凉州人，各位如果丢下军队独自行路，那么一个亭长就能把你们绑起来。
English: At that time, the people of Wuwei paid tribute to them in the Li Hao army, and encouraged them to say: I heard that Chang'an City was talking about killing all the people of Liangzhou. If you leave the army and travel alone, then a warden can tie you up.

古文：不如相率而西，以攻长安，为董公报仇。
现代文：不如一起领兵向西，以攻打长安，为董公报仇。
English: It would be better to lead the army to the west together to attack Chang'an and take revenge for Dong Zhao.

古文：事济，奉国家以正天下；若其不合，走未后也。 
现代文：事情成功，奉国家以匡正天下；如果不成，再逃走也不晚啊。 
English: If the matter is successful, it will serve the country to rectify the world; if not, it is not too late to escape.

古文：傕等然之，各相谓曰： 京师不赦我，我当以死决之。
现代文：李催等人认为说得对，互相议论说： 京城不赦免我们，我们要以死相拼。
English: Li Xie and others thought this was right, and said to each other: If the capital does not pardon us, we will fight to the death.

古文：若攻长安克，则得天下矣；不克，则抄三辅妇女财物，西归乡里，尚可延命。 
现代文：如果打下长安，就得天下了；打不下，就抢了三辅的妇女财物，西归故乡，还可以多活几天。 
English: If you defeat Chang'an, you will be able to conquer the world; if you fail, you will rob Sanfu's women and property, return to your hometown, and live a few more days.

古文：众以为然，于是共结盟，率军数千，晨夜西行。
现代文：众人认为对，于是共同结盟，率领敷千军队，昼夜西行。
English: Everyone agreed that this was the right thing to do, so they formed an alliance and led a thousand-strong army, marching west day and night.

古文：王允闻之，乃遣卓故将胡轸、徐荣击之于新丰。
现代文：王允听说后，就派董卓过去的将领胡轸、徐荣在新丰迎击。
English: After Wang Yun heard about it, he sent Dong Zhuo's former generals Hu Wei and Xu Rong to Xinfeng to meet the attack.

古文：荣战死，轸以众降。
现代文：徐荣战死，胡轸带着兵投降。
English: Xu Rong was killed in the battle, while Hu Yao surrendered with his soldiers.

古文：傕随道收兵，比至长安，已十余万，与卓故部曲樊稠、李蒙等合，围长安。
现代文：李催沿途收罗散兵，等到长安，已经十余万人，与董卓的旧部下樊稠、李蒙等人会合，包围长安。
English: Li urged Luo to gather scattered soldiers along the way, and by the time they reached Chang'an, more than 100,000 people had gathered with Dong Zhuo's old subordinates Zeng Cong and Li Meng to encircle Chang'an.

古文：城峻不可攻，守之八日，吕布军有叟兵内反，引傕众得入。
现代文：城墙高陡不能攻打，守了八天，吕布军中有蜀兵在城内叛变，接应李催军得以入城。
English: The high and steep city wall could not be attacked and defended for eight days. There were Shu soldiers in the Lvbu army who mutinied in the city, and they were able to enter the city in response to Li Hao's army.

古文：城溃，放兵虏掠，死者万余人。
现代文：城被攻破，纵兵掳掠，死的有一万余人。
English: The city was breached, the soldiers were taken captive, and more than ten thousand people died.

古文：杀卫尉种拂等。
现代文：杀了卫尉种拂等人。
English: He killed the guardsman, Tanehisa, and others.

古文：吕布战败出奔。
现代文：吕布战败逃出城外。
English: Defeated, Lvbu fled the city.

古文：王允奉天子保宣平城门楼上。
现代文：王允保护天子守在宣平城门楼上。
English: Wang Yun protects Tian Zi Gu on the upper floor of the gate of Xuanping Castle.

古文：于是大赦天下。
现代文：这时大赦天下。
English: At this time, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：李傕、郭汜、樊稠等皆为将军。
现代文：李催、郭汜、樊稠等都封为将军。
English: Li Hao, Guo Zhe, Zhaozhou and others were all appointed as generals.

古文：遂围门楼，共表请司徒王允出，问： 太师何罪？ 
现代文：于是包围了门楼，共同上表要司徒王允出来，问他 太师有什么罪 。
English: So they surrounded the gatehouse, and together they made a request to the king of the scribes to come out and ask him what crime the abbot was guilty of.

古文：允穷蹙乃下，后数日见杀。
现代文：王允无奈只好下来，几天后被杀。
English: Wang Yun had no choice but to come down and was killed a few days later.

古文：傕等葬董卓于眉阝，并收董氏所焚尸之灰，合敛一棺而葬之。
现代文：李催等人把董卓葬在郡，并收取董氏焚尸骨灰，放在一口棺材裹下葬。
English: Li Xie and others buried Dong Zhuo in the county, and collected Mr. Dong's cremated ashes, wrapped them in a coffin and buried them.

古文：葬日，大风雨，霆震卓墓，流水入藏，漂其棺木。
现代文：下葬那天，风大雨大，雷击董卓墓，雨水流进墓穴，把棺材漂了起来
English: On the day of the funeral, it was windy and rainy, and lightning struck Dong Zhuo's tomb. Rainwater flowed into the tomb, and the coffin floated up

古文：傕又迁车骑将军，开府，领司隶校尉，假节。
现代文：奎值又升任车骑将军，开府，领司隶校尉，假节。
English: Kuijian was also promoted to general of chariot and cavalry, head of the prefectural government, lieutenant of county magistrate, and deputy governor.

古文：汜后将军，稠右将军，张济为镇东将军，并封列侯。
现代文：室巡为后将军，叁姻为右将军，退渣为镇东将军，都封列侯。
English: The chamber inspector was the rear general, the son-in-law was the right general, and the son-in-law was the east town general, all of whom were vassals.

古文：傕、汜、稠共秉朝政。
现代文：奎值、塾担、坠周共同执掌朝政。
English: Kuijian, Shudan, and Shuzhou jointly presided over the imperial government.

古文：济出屯弘农。
现代文：张搪出京驻守至递。
English: Zhang Jie left Beijing and was stationed in Hongnong.

古文：以贾诩为左冯翊，欲侯之。
现代文：任命买翅为左冯翊尹，还要给他封侯。
English: He was appointed to buy wings for Zuo Feng Rongyin, and he was also given the title of marquess.

古文：诩曰： 此救命之计，何功之有！ 
现代文：贾翅说： 我造主意不过是救命之计，哪有什么功劳！ 
English: Jia Ying said: My idea is just a life-saving measure, what is the merit!

古文：固辞乃此。
现代文：坚决推辞才作罢。
English: Only a firm refusal is acceptable.

古文：更以为尚书典选。
现代文：改任为尚书典选。
English: He was reappointed as the chief editor of the book.

古文：明年夏，大雨昼夜二十余日，漂没人庶，又风如冬时。
现代文：第二年夏天，大雨昼夜不停下了二十多天，百姓被冲走淹死，风冷得如同冬天。
English: In the summer of the following year, heavy rain fell day and night for more than twenty days, people were swept away and drowned, and the wind was as cold as winter.

古文：帝使御史裴茂讯诏狱，原系者二百余人。其中有为傕所枉系者，傕恐茂赦之，乃表奏茂擅出囚徒，疑有奸故，请收之。
现代文：皇帝派御史裴茂审理钦犯案子，原来关押的有二百多人，其中有被李催冤枉的，李催怕裴茂把他们放出来，就上表奏告裴茂擅自释放囚徒，怀疑他别有用心，要求把他抓起来。
English: The emperor sent the imperial secretary Pei Mao to try the Qin criminal case. Originally, there were more than 200 people in custody, including those who had been wronged by Li Cao. Li Cao was afraid that Pei Mao would release them, so he sent a letter to Pei Mao accusing him of releasing prisoners without authorization, suspected him of having ulterior motives, and demanded that he be arrested.

古文：诏曰： 灾异屡降，阴雨为害，使者衔命宣布恩泽，原解轻微，庶合天心。
现代文：朝廷下诏说： 灾害和反常的事物不断出现，淫雨成灾，使者奉命布施皇恩，赦免那些罪过轻微的，以求符合天意。
English: The imperial court issued a decree saying: Disasters and abnormal things continue to occur, the rain becomes a disaster, and the messenger is ordered to grant royal grace and pardon those with minor sins in order to conform to the will of heaven.

古文：欲释冤结而复罪之乎！
现代文：想化解冤仇还能再加罪于他吗！
English: If you want to resolve the grudge, can you add more guilt to him?

古文：一切勿问。 
现代文：什么也不再追问。 
English: No more questions.

古文：初，卓之入关，要韩遂、马腾共谋山东。
现代文：当初，董卓入关时，邀韩遂、马腾一起共谋山东。
English: At first, when Dong Zhuo entered the pass, he invited Han Sui and Ma Teng to conspire together in Shandong.

古文：遂、腾见天下方乱，亦欲倚卓起兵。
现代文：韩遂、马腾见天下将乱，也想依靠董卓起兵。
English: When Han Sui and Ma Teng saw that the world would be in chaos, they also wanted to rely on Dong Zhuo to raise an army.

古文：兴平元年，马腾从陇右来朝，进屯霸桥。
现代文：兴平元年，马腾从陇右来朝见皇帝，驻扎霸桥。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, Ma Teng came to see the emperor from the right bank of the Yangtze River and was stationed at the bridge.

古文：时腾私有求于傕，不获而怒，遂与侍中马宇、右中郎将刘范、前凉州刺史种劭、中郎将杜禀合兵攻傕，连日不决。
现代文：当时马腾私下有求于李催，没达到而发怒，于是就和侍中马宇、右中郎将刘范、前凉州刺史独劭、中郎将杜禀合兵来打李催，连战几天不分胜负。
English: At that time, Ma Teng privately asked Li Xi for help, but he was angry when he couldn't get it, so he joined forces with Ma Yu, the second-in-command, Liu Fan, the second-in-command of the right, and Du Wei, the second-in-command of the left, to fight Li Xi, and the battle lasted for several days.

古文：韩遂闻之，乃率众来欲和腾、傕，既而复与腾合。
现代文：韩遂听到了，就率部众来想使马腾、李催和解，不久又和马腾联合起来。
English: Hearing this, Han Sui led his subordinates to urge reconciliation between Ma Teng and Li, and soon united with Ma Teng.

古文：使兄子利共郭汜、樊稠与腾等战于长平观下。
现代文：李催派他哥哥的儿子李利和郭汜、樊稠与马腾等人战于长平观下。
English: Li urged his brother's son, Li Li, to fight against Guo Yao, Gong Cong and Ma Teng at the instigation of Changping.

古文：遂、腾败，斩首万余级，种劭、刘范等皆死。
现代文：韩遂、马腾战败，斩首万余级，种劭、刘范等都战死。
English: Han Sui and Ma Teng were defeated and beheaded by more than ten thousand, while Zeng Yao and Liu Fan died in battle.

古文：遂、腾走还凉州，稠等又追之。
现代文：韩遂、马腾逃回凉州，樊稠等人又追击。
English: Han Sui and Ma Teng fled back to Liangzhou, and Gong Chou and others pursued them.

古文：韩遂使人语稠曰： 天下反覆未可知，相与州里，今虽小违，要当大同，欲共一言。 
现代文：韩遂派人对樊稠说： 天下事反覆无常难以预料，你我同乡，今天虽有些小摩擦，恐怕还会走到一起的，想和你谈一谈。 
English: Han Sui sent a message to Gong Chou, saying, "Things in this world are unpredictable. You and I, my fellow countrymen, although there is some minor friction today, I am afraid we will still come together. I would like to talk with you."

古文：乃骈马交臂相加，笑语良久。
现代文：于是二人并马拉着手臂，说笑了很久。
English: So the two of them held hands and laughed for a long time.

古文：军还，利告傕曰： 樊、韩骈马笑语，不知其辞，而意爱甚密。 
现代文：军队撤回后，李利告诉李催说： 樊稠、韩遂并马说笑，不知说的什么，但看看关系很亲密。 
English: After the withdrawal of the army, Li Li told Li Xuan that: "Han Cong, Han Sui and Ma are joking, I don't know what to say, but look at the relationship is very close.

古文：于是傕、稠始相猜疑。
现代文：于是李催、樊稠开始互相猜疑。
English: As a result, Li Xie and Gao Zongguo began to suspect each other.

古文：犹加稠及郭汜开府，与三公合为六府，皆参选举。
现代文：但还是让朝廷加任樊稠与郭汜开府，与三公合为六府，都参与选拔举荐官吏。
English: However, he still allowed the imperial court to appoint Gong Chuxu and Guo Junkai as prefectures, and combined the three prefectures into six prefectures, all of which participated in the selection of recommended officials.

古文：时，长安中盗贼不禁，白日虏掠，傕、汜、稠乃参分城内，各备其界，犹不能制，而其子弟纵横，侵暴百姓。
现代文：当时长安城中盗贼管制不住，白抢劫，李催、郭汜、樊稠于是把城中分成三份，各守其地，还是不能控制，而他们的子弟横行不法，侵害百姓。
English: At that time, the thieves in Chang'an City could not be controlled, and they robbed for money. Li Xie, Guo Wei, and Gao Zong then divided the city into three parts, each guarding their own land, but they still could not control it, and their children were rampant in lawlessness, infringing on the people.

古文：是时，谷一斛五十万，豆、麦二十万，人相食啖，白骨委积，臭秽满路。
现代文：当时谷米一斛五十万钱，豆麦二十万，人吃人，白骨堆积，污秽满路。
English: At that time, a bushel of grain was worth five hundred thousand yuan, soybeans and wheat two hundred thousand yuan, people ate people, white bones piled up, and the road was full of filth.

古文：帝使侍御史侯汶出太仓米豆为饥人作糜，经日而死者无降。
现代文：皇帝派侍御史侯汶搬出太仓米豆为饥民做粥，过了几天死的人数并未下降。
English: The emperor sent his attendant, Shi Houwen, to carry rice and beans out of Taicang to make porridge for the starving people. After a few days, the number of deaths did not decrease.

古文：帝疑赋恤有虚，乃亲于御前自加临检。既知不实，使侍中刘艾出让有司。
现代文：皇帝怀疑赈济有假，便亲自做粥检验，得知虚假后，派侍中刘艾出朝责备有关人员。
English: The emperor suspected that the donation was fake, so he personally inspected the porridge. After learning that it was fake, he sent Liu Ai, a chambermaid, to the imperial court to reprimand the relevant personnel.

古文：于是尚书令以下皆诣省阁谢，奏收侯汶考实。
现代文：于是尚书令以下都到宫门前谢罪，奏请逮捕侯汶审问。
English: As a result, Shang Shuling and the following all went to the front of the palace gate to apologize for the crime and to request the arrest and interrogation of Hou Wen.

古文：诏曰： 未忍致汶于理，可杖五十。 
现代文：下诏说： 不忍把侯汶送去审判，可以杖五十。 
English: The next edict said: If you can't bear to send Houwen to trial, you can have fifty canes.

古文：自是后多得全济。
现代文：从此以后百姓多得到救济而保全性命。
English: Since then, many people have received relief and saved their lives.

古文：明年春，傕因会刺杀樊稠于坐，由是诸将各相疑异，傕、汜遂复理兵相攻。
现代文：第二年春天，李催乘聚会之机把樊稠杀死在座位上，从此诸将互相猜疑，李催、郭汜又整顿兵马互相攻杀。
English: In the spring of the second year, Li Xie took the opportunity of the gathering to kill Gao Chouzhu on the seat. From then on, the generals were suspicious of each other. Li Xie, Guo Gan and the rectification soldiers attacked and killed each other.

古文：安西将军杨定者，故卓部曲将也。惧傕忍害，乃与汜合谋迎天子幸其营。
现代文：安西将军杨定，是董卓旧时部将，害怕李催加害，就和郭汜合谋把天子接到他们的营内。
English: Anxi General Yang Ding, a former general of Dong Zhuo, was afraid of Li's urging to inflict harm, so he conspired with Guo Gan to bring Tianzi into their camp.

古文：傕知其计，即使兄子暹将数千人围宫。
现代文：李催得知了他们的计谋，立刻派他哥哥的儿子李暹带数千人包围皇宫，用三辆车子接天子、皇后。
English: Li Huan learned of their plot and immediately sent his brother's son, Li Siam, with thousands of men to surround the palace and use three cars to pick up the emperor and the empress.

古文：以车三乘迎子、皇后，太尉杨彪谓暹曰： 古今帝王，无在人臣家者。诸君举事，当上顺天心，奈何如是！ 
现代文：太尉杨彪对李暹说： 自古以来的帝王，没有住在臣子家裹的。各位做事，要上顺天意，怎么能这样！ 
English: Captain Yang Biao said to Li Siam: Since ancient times, emperors have not lived in the homes of their vassals. How can you do things according to God's will?

古文：暹曰： 将军计决矣。 
现代文：李暹说： 将军主意已定了。 
English: Li Siam said: The general has made up his mind.

古文：帝于是遂幸傕营，彪等皆徒从。
现代文：皇帝于是就到了李催的营中，杨彪等人都徒步跟随。
English: The emperor then arrived at Li Xiang's camp, with Yang Biao and others following on foot.

古文：乱兵入殿。掠宫人什物，傕又徙御府金帛乘舆器服，而放火烧宫殿宫府居人悉尽。
现代文：乱兵进入宫内，抢劫宫女财物，李催又把宫廷里的金帛车辇器物服饰搬走，而放火把宫殿官署烧光。
English: The rioting soldiers entered the palace and robbed the palace women of their belongings. Li He also took away the gold, chariots, utensils, and clothing in the palace, and set fire to the palace government office.

古文：帝使杨彪与司空张喜等十余人和傕、汜，汜不从，遂质留公卿。
现代文：皇帝派杨彪与司空张喜等十余人劝李催、郭汜和解，郭汜不答应，遂即把公卿扣作人质。
English: The emperor sent more than ten people, including Yang Biao and Zhang Xi, to persuade Li Xie and Guo Gan to reconcile. Guo Gan did not agree, so he immediately took the nobleman hostage.

古文：彪谓汜曰： 将军达人间事，奈何君臣分争，一人劫天子，一人质公卿，此可行邪？ 
现代文：杨彪对郭汜说： 将军懂得人世间的道理，怎么能君臣相争，一人劫持天子，一人扣押公卿，这样做可以吗？ 
English: Yang Biao said to Guo Wei: The general understands the principles of the human world, how can princes and ministers fight, one person kidnaps the son of heaven, one person detains the nobles, is it okay to do so?

古文：汜怒，欲手刃彪。
现代文：郭汜发怒，要拿刀杀了杨彪。
English: Guo Jun was so angry that he wanted to kill Yang Biao with a knife.

古文：彪曰： 卿尚不奉国家，吾岂求生邪！ 
现代文：杨彪说： 你尚且不服从朝廷，我难道还求生吗！ 
English: Yang Biao said: Even though you disobeyed the imperial court, do I still want to live?

古文：左右多谏，汜乃止。
现代文：左右之人多来劝解，郭汜才作罢。
English: More people from the left and right came to persuade him, but Guo Yao refused.

古文：遂引兵攻傕，矢及帝前，又贯傕耳。
现代文：于是领兵攻打李催，箭射到了皇帝跟前，还射穿丁李催的耳朵。
English: So the leader of the army attacked Li Xi, and shot an arrow into the emperor's side, and also pierced Ding Li Xi's ear.

古文：傕将杨奉本白波贼帅，乃将兵救傕，于是汜众乃退。
现代文：李催的将军杨奉本是白波贼头领，带兵来救李催，于是郭汜的军队才退回。
English: Li Hao's general, Yang Bong, who was the leader of the Bai Bo bandits, led the troops to rescue Li Hao, so Guo Yao's army retreated.

古文：是日，傕复移帝幸其北坞，唯皇后、宋贵人俱。
现代文：当天，李催又把皇帝搬到他的北城堡，衹有皇后、宋贵人和皇帝在一起。
English: On the same day, Li Xie also moved the emperor to his north castle, bringing the empress, Song Guizhou and the emperor together.

古文：傕使校尉监门，隔绝内外。
现代文：李催派校尉把门，断绝内外联系。
English: Li He dispatched a lieutenant to hold the door and cut off internal and external contact.

古文：寻复欲徙帝于池阳黄白城，君臣惶惧。
现代文：不久又想把皇帝迁到池阳黄白城，君臣都害怕起来。
English: Soon, he wanted to move the emperor to Chiyang Huangbai City, and the princes and ministers were afraid.

古文：司徒赵温深解譬之，乃止。
现代文：司徒趟温解说了半天，才作罢。
English: It took Stout half a day of warm explanations before he gave up.

古文：诏遣谒者仆射皇甫郦和傕、汜。
现代文：朝廷派谒者仆射皇甫郦劝和李催、郭汜。
English: The imperial court dispatched courtiers such as Emperor Fusang to persuade Li Xie and Guo Yao.

古文：郦先譬汜，汜即从命。
现代文：皇甫郦先去劝说郭汜，郭汜就答应了。
English: Emperor Fuxiong first went to persuade Guo Yu, and Guo Yu agreed.

古文：又诣傕，傕不听。
现代文：又到李催那里，李催不听。
English: He went to Li Xie again, but Li Xie did not listen.

古文：曰： 郭多，盗马虏耳，何敢欲与我同邪！
现代文：说： 郭多是个盗马贼罢了，怎么敢和我一样呢！
English: He said: Guo Duo is just a horse thief, how dare he be like me!

古文：必诛之。
现代文：一定要杀了他。
English: We have to kill him.

古文：君观我方略士众，足办郭多不？
现代文：你看我的用兵韬略和军队，够不够收拾郭多？
English: Do you think my strategy of using soldiers and the army is enough to clean up Guoduo?

古文：多又劫质公卿。所为如是，而君苟欲左右之邪！ 
现代文：郭多又劫持公卿，做出这样的事，而你还想帮助他吗！ 
English: Guo Duo has kidnapped a noble and done such a thing, and you still want to help him!

古文：汜一名多。
现代文：郭汜又名郭多。
English: Guo Tong, also known as Guo Dao.

古文：郦曰： 今汜质公卿，而将军胁主，谁轻重乎？ 
现代文：皇甫郦说： 如今郭汜扣押公卿，而将军胁迫君主，谁轻谁重呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Nowadays, Guo Gan is detaining nobles, while the general is coercing the monarch. Who is more important?

古文：傕怒，呵遣郦，因令虎贲王昌追杀之。
现代文：李催发怒，呵斥赶走皇甫郦，又命令虎贲王昌追杀他。
English: Li Cao flew into a rage, yelled at Wang Fuxi to drive him away, and ordered Wang Chang to chase and kill him.

古文：昌伪不及，郦得以免。
现代文：王昌假装没追上，皇甫郦得以幸免。
English: Wang Chang pretended not to have caught up, and Wang Fuxiong was spared.

古文：傕乃自为大司马。
现代文：李催就自封为大司马。
English: Li Hailu appointed himself as the grand steward.

古文：与郭汜相攻连月，死者以万数。
现代文：和郭汜一连几个月互相攻杀，死者以万计数。
English: He and Guo Yao attacked and killed each other for months on end, with tens of thousands of deaths.

古文：张济自陕来和解二人，仍欲迁帝权幸弘农。
现代文：张济从陕来调解二人，想把皇帝暂时迁到弘农。
English: Zhang Jie from Shaanxi came to mediate between the two and wanted to temporarily move the emperor to Hongnong.

古文：帝亦思旧京，因遣使郭请傕求东归，十反乃许。
现代文：皇帝也思念旧京，于是派人恳请李催要求东归，去了十趟才获准。
English: The emperor also missed the old Beijing, so he sent someone to implore Li to urge him to return to the East. It took ten trips before he was allowed to leave.

古文：车驾即日发迈。
现代文：车驾即日出发。
English: We set off by car the same day.

古文：李傕出屯曹阳。
现代文：李催离长安驻扎曹阳。
English: Li Xie left Chang'an and stationed in Caoyang.

古文：以张济为骠骑将军，复还屯陕。
现代文：封张济为骠骑将军，又回陕驻守。
English: Zhang Jie was appointed as the cavalry general and returned to Shaanxi to garrison.

古文：迁郭汜车骑将军，杨定后将军，杨奉兴义将军。
现代文：升郭汜为车骑将军，杨定为后将军，杨奉为兴义将军。
English: Sheng Guozhen was the general of chariot and cavalry, Yang was the general of rear, and Yang Bong was the general of Xingyi.

古文：又以故牛辅部曲董承为发集将军。
现代文：又封牛辅以前的部下董承为安集将军。
English: He also made Dong Cheng, a former subordinate of Niu Fu, a general of Anji.

古文：汜等并侍送乘舆。
现代文：郭汜等人一起护送天子车驾。
English: Guo Wei and others escorted Tianzi to the car.

古文：汜遂复欲胁帝幸眉阝，定、奉、承不听。
现代文：郭汜又想胁迫皇帝到郦去，杨定、杨奉、董承不答应。
English: Guo Gan also wanted to coerce the emperor to go to Handan, but Yang Ding, Yang Bong and Dong Cheng did not agree.

古文：汜恐变生，乃弃军还就李傕。
现代文：郭汜怕出事，就丢下军队回去找李催。
English: Guo Gan was afraid of an accident, so he left the army and went back to look for Li Xiang.

古文：车驾进至华阴。宁辑将军段煨乃具服御及公卿以下资储，请帝幸其营。
现代文：车驾走到华阴，宁辑将军段煨准备了服饰车马和公卿以下官员的生活物资，请皇帝到他营中去。
English: The car drove to Huayin. General Duan Rong of Ningji prepared clothes, horses, and daily necessities for officials below the nobility, and invited the emperor to come to his camp.

古文：初，杨定与煨有隙，遂诬煨欲反，乃攻其营，十余日不下。
现代文：当初，杨定和段煨有矛盾，于是就诬蠛段煨要造，于是攻打他的营寨，十几天打不下来。
English: At first, Yang Ding had a conflict with Duan Xuan, so he falsely accused Duan Xuan of plotting to overthrow him. As a result, Yang Ding attacked Duan Xuan's camp and was unable to defeat Duan Xuan for ten days.

古文：而精犹奉给御膳，禀赡百官，终无二意。
现代文：而段煨仍旧供给皇帝膳食，供养百官，始终没有二心。
English: However, Duan Xuan still supplied the emperor with food and supported hundreds of officials. He never had any second thoughts.

古文：李傕、郭汜既悔令天子东，乃来救段煨，因欲劫帝而西。
现代文：李催、郭汜已后悔放天子束归，于是来救段煨，趁机想劫持皇帝西行。
English: Li Xie and Guo Yao regretted letting the emperor go, so they came to rescue Duan Yao and took advantage of the opportunity to kidnap the emperor and go west.

古文：杨定为汜所遮，亡奔荆州。
现代文：杨定被郭汜拦截，逃奔荆州。
English: Yang Ding was intercepted by Guo Gan and fled to Jingzhou.

古文：而张济与杨奉、董承不相平，乃反合傕、汜，共追乘舆，大战于弘农东涧。
现代文：而张济和杨奉、董承不和，就反而联合李催、郭汜，一起追赶皇帝车驾，大战于弘农束涧。
English: But Zhang Jie and Yang Bong and Dong Cheng did not get along, so they instead united with Li Xie and Guo Jie to chase the emperor's chariot and fight in Hongnongzhuan.

古文：承、奉军败，百官士卒死者不可胜数，皆弃其妇女辎重，御物符策典籍，略无所遗。
现代文：董承、杨奉兵败，死了的百官士卒数不清。都丢下女眷辎重，皇帝用的器物符契简策法典图籍，丢得精光。
English: Dongcheng and Yang Bong were defeated, and the number of officers who died was countless. They all lost their wives and concubines, and the objects used by the emperor, such as documents of the Simplified Chinese Legal Code, were lost.

古文：射声校尉沮俊被创坠马。李傕谓左右曰： 尚可活不？ 
现代文：射声校尉沮俊受伤落马，李催问左右的人说： 他还能活吗？ 
English: Li asked the people around him, "Can he still be alive?

古文：俊骂之曰： 汝等凶逆，逼迫天子，乱臣贼子，未有如汝者！ 
现代文：沮俊骂他说： 你们这些凶徒逆贼，逼迫天子，乱臣贼子没有像你们这样的！ 
English: Dejected, Jun scolded him, "You thugs and traitors, persecutors of the Son of Heaven, and ruffians and thieves, there is no one like you!

古文：傕使杀之。
现代文：李催叫人杀了他。
English: Li urged someone to kill him.

古文：天子遂露次曹阳。
现代文：天子于是露宿在曹阳。
English: As a result, Tianzi ended up sleeping rough in Caoyang.

古文：承、奉乃谲傕等与连和，而密遣间使至河东，招故白波帅李乐、韩暹、胡才及南匈奴右贤王去卑，并率其众数千骑来，与承、奉共击傕等，大破之，斩首数千级，乘舆乃得进。
现代文：董承、杨奉假意和李催等人联合，而秘密派人到河东，联合以前白波的头领李乐、韩暹、胡才以及南匈奴右贤王去卑，一同率领他们的部众数千骑而来，和董承、杨奉共同攻击李催等人，大败他们，斩首数千级，皇帝的车驾才得以前进。
English: Dong Cheng, Yang Bong pretended to unite with Li Xie and others, but secretly sent people to the east of the river, united with the former leaders of the White Wave, Li Le, Han Siem, Hu Cai, and the Southern Hun King Uxian, and led thousands of their men to ride together. Together with Dong Cheng and Yang Bong, they attacked Li Xie and others, defeated them, and beheaded thousands of levels. The emperor's chariot was able to advance.

古文：董承、李乐拥卫左右，胡才、杨奉、韩暹、去卑为后距。
现代文：董承、李乐护卫左右，胡才、杨奉、韩暹、去卑做后卫。
English: Dong Cheng, Li Le guard the left and right, Hu Cai, Yang Bong, Han Siem, and Deng Biao guard the top.

古文：傕等复来战，奉等大败，死者甚于东涧。
现代文：李催等又来攻战，杨奉等大败，死的人比在束涧时还多。
English: Li Xie et al. came to attack again, Yang Bong et al. were defeated, and more people died than at the time of Sokcho.

古文：自东涧兵相连缀四十里中，方得至陕，乃结营自守。
现代文：从束涧开始四十里当中攻杀连续不断，好不容易到陕，于是扎营守卫。
English: They attacked and killed continuously for forty miles from Sokcho, and finally made it to Shaanxi, where they set up camp.

古文：时残破之余，虎贲羽林不满百人，皆有离心。
现代文：当时遭难之后，虎贲羽林卫士不满百人，都有离去的心思。
English: At that time, after the calamity, there were less than a hundred Tiger Feather Forest Guardians, all of whom had thoughts of leaving.

古文：承、奉等夜乃潜议过河，使李乐先度具舟舡，举火为应。
现代文：董承、杨奉夜裹偷偷商量过黄河，让李乐先去准备船只，举火为应。
English: Dong Cheng and Yang Feng secretly discussed crossing the Yellow River at night, and asked Li Le to prepare a boat and light a fire.

古文：帝步出营，临河欲济，岸高十余丈，乃以绢缒而下。
现代文：皇帝步行出营，到了黄河边要过河，岸高十几丈，就用绢系着缒下去。
English: The emperor left the camp on foot, and when he reached the bank of the Yellow River, he had to cross the river. The bank was more than ten meters high, so he tied a cormorant with a halter and went down.

古文：余人或匍匐岸侧，或从上自投，死亡伤残，不复相知。
现代文：其余人有的从岸边往下爬，有的从上面跳下来，死亡伤残，不知有多少。
English: The rest of the people, some of whom climbed down from the shore, and some of whom jumped from above, died or were maimed, I don't know how many.

古文：争赴舡者，不可禁制，董承以戈击披之，断手指于舟中者可掬。
现代文：争着往船上爬的，难以禁止，董承用兵器乱砍，船仓裹剁下的手指头一捧一捧的。
English: It was hard to stop them from scrambling onto the boat. Dong He Rong used weapons to slash indiscriminately, wrapping the hold of the boat under his armpits and snapping his fingers one by one.

古文：同济唯皇后、宋贵人、杨彪、董承及后父执金吾伏完等数十人。
现代文：同天子一起过河的衹有皇后、宋贵人、杨彪、董承以及皇后的父亲执金吾伏完等数十人。
English: Dozens of people including the Empress, Song Guijin, Yang Biao, Dong Cheng and the Empress's father, Jie Jinwubuan, crossed the river with him.

古文：其宫女皆为傕兵所掠夺，冻溺死者甚众。
现代文：宫女都被李催的兵抢走，冻死淹死的很多。
English: The palace maids were all snatched away by Li Xi's soldiers, and many of them froze to death or drowned.

古文：既到大阳，止于人家，然后幸李东营。
现代文：到了大阳以后，住在百姓家裹，然后天子到李乐营裹去。
English: After arriving in Dayang, he lived in the homes of the common people, and then he went to Li Le Camp.

古文：百官饥饿，河内太守张杨使数千人负米贡饷。
现代文：百官饥饿，河内太守张杨派数千人背米进贡粮饷。
English: Hundreds of officials were starving, and Hanoi's governor Zhang Yang sent thousands of people to carry rice as tribute.

古文：帝乃御牛车，因都安邑。
现代文：皇帝这才坐着牛车，定都在安邑。
English: It was only then that the emperor rode in an ox-drawn carriage, and he always rode in Ami.

古文：河东太守王邑奉献绵帛，悉赋公卿以下。
现代文：河东太守王邑奉献布帛，都给予公卿以下百官。
English: The Cloth of Dedication of Wangyue, the Governor of East China's Hebei Province, was given to hundreds of officials from the nobility on down.

古文：封邑为列侯，拜胡才征东将军，张、杨为安国将军，皆假节、开府。
现代文：封王邑为列侯，拜胡才为征东将军，张杨为安国将军，全都假节、开府。
English: Fongwangyip was a vassal, Baihucai was a general to conquer the East, Zhang Yang was a general of An Guo, all of which were festivals and the opening of the capital.

古文：其垒壁群竖，竞求拜职，刻印不给，至乃以锥画之。
现代文：其他带兵的小人，争相来求封官，以至刻印来不及，就用锥子刻画。
English: Other dwarfs with soldiers, scrambling to seal the official, so that the stamp is too late, they are carved with cones.

古文：或赍酒肉就天子燕饮。
现代文：有人带酒肉来天子逭裹吃喝。
English: Some people bring meat and wine to eat and drink.

古文：又遣太仆韩融至弘农，与傕、汜等连和。
现代文：皇帝又派太仆韩融到弘农，与李催、郭汜等人讲和。
English: The emperor also sent the eunuch Han Rong to Hongnong to make peace with Li Xie, Guo Wei and others.

古文：傕乃放遣公卿百官，颇归宫人妇女，及乘舆器服。
现代文：李催这才放回公卿百宫，也归还一些宫女家眷，以及皇帝的车驾器物服饰。
English: Li Huan only then returned the hundreds of palaces of the nobles, and also returned some of the families of the imperial concubines, as well as the emperor's chariots, equipment, and clothing.

古文：初，帝入关，三辅户口尚数十万，自傕、汜相攻，天子东归后，长安城空四十余日，强者四散，蠃者相食，二三年间，关中无复人迹。
现代文：当初，皇帝入关时，三辅的户口还有数十万，自从李催、郭汜互相攻杀，天子束归以后，长安四十多天成为空城，身体强壮的四处逃散，衰弱的被人吃掉，二三年之内，关中再无人烟。
English: At the beginning, when the emperor entered the customs, there were still hundreds of thousands of household accounts in Sanfu. Since Li Xie and Guo Wei attacked and killed each other, and Tianzi returned, Chang'an has become an empty city for more than forty days. The strong have fled everywhere, and the weak have been eaten. Within two or three years, there will be no one in the customs.

古文：建安元年春，诸将争权，韩暹遂攻董承，承奔张杨，杨乃使承先缮修洛宫。
现代文：建安元年春天，诸将争夺权利，韩暹攻打董承，董承投奔张杨，张杨让董承先修缮洛阳的宫殿。
English: In the spring of the first year of Jianan, the generals fought for power. Han Siem attacked Dongcheng, Dongcheng ran to Zhang Yang, Zhang Yang let Dongcheng repair the palace in Luoyang first.

古文：七月，帝还至洛阳，幸杨安殿。
现代文：七月，皇帝回到洛阳，入杨安殿。
English: In July, the emperor returned to Luoyang and entered the Yang'an Palace.

古文：张杨以为己功，故因以 杨 名殿。
现代文：张杨把这看成是自己的功劳，所以就用 杨 字来给宫殿命名。
English: Zhang Yang regarded this as his own achievement, so he named the palace after the character Yang.

古文：乃谓诸将曰： 天子当与天下共之，朝廷自有公卿大臣，杨当出扞外难，何事京师？ 
现代文：他对诸将说： 天子应当是天下人的天子，人人都有保护的责任，朝廷裹自有公卿大臣，我应该出外抵御外患，在京城裹干什么？ 
English: He said to the generals: the Son of Heaven should be the Son of Heaven for the people of the world, everyone has the responsibility to protect, the imperial court is wrapped in its own court nobles and ministers, I should go abroad to resist foreign attacks, what should I do in the capital?

古文：遂还野王。
现代文：就回了野王。
English: So he led his troops back to the wild king.

古文：杨奉亦出屯梁。
现代文：杨奉也出京驻扎在梁。
English: Yang Feng also went to Beijing and was stationed in Liang.

古文：乃以张杨为大司马，杨奉为车骑将军，韩暹为大将军，领司隶校尉，皆假节钺。
现代文：于是朝廷封张杨为大司马，杨奉为车骑将军，韩暹为大将军，兼任司隶校尉，全都授予符节斧钹。
English: As a result, the imperial court named Zhang Yang as the grand steed, Yang Bong as the chariot and cavalry general, Han Siem as the grand general, concurrently serving as the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant, and all of them were awarded the Fu Jie axe.

古文：暹与董承并留宿卫。
现代文：韩暹和董承都留在京中守卫皇宫。
English: Han Siem and Dong Cheng both stayed in Beijing to guard the imperial palace.

古文：暹矜功盗睢，干乱政事，董承患之，潜召兗州牧曹操。
现代文：韩暹居功自傲为所欲为，扰乱政事，董承感到忧虑，秘密召引兖州牧曹操。
English: Han Siew Ju, proud of his achievements, did whatever he wanted and disrupted political affairs. Dong Cheng was worried and secretly summoned Zhangzhou Mu Cao Cao.

古文：操乃诣阙贡献，禀公卿以下，因奏韩暹、张杨之罪。
现代文：曹操于是到朝廷贡奉物品，赠给公卿以下百官，趁机奏报韩暹、张杨的罪过。
English: Cao Cao then went to the imperial court to pay tribute and give gifts to hundreds of officials below the nobility, taking the opportunity to report the sins of Han Siem and Zhang Yang.

古文：暹惧诛，单骑奔杨奉。
现代文：韩暹怕被杀，单骑投奔杨奉。
English: Han Siem was afraid of being killed, so he rode alone to join Yang Bong.

古文：帝以暹、杨有翼车驾之功，诏一切勿问。
现代文：皇帝因为韩暹、张杨有保驾之功，下诏说一切不再追问。
English: Because Han Siem and Zhang Yang were able to drive safely, the emperor decreed that all questions would no longer be asked.

古文：于是封卫将军董承、辅国将军伏完等十余人为列侯，赠沮俊为弘农太守。
现代文：于是封卫将军董承、辅国将军伏完等十余人为列侯，追赠沮局为弘晨太守。
English: As a result, more than ten feudal guard generals, including Dong Cheng and Fu Guo, were appointed as vassals, and the position of Hongcheng governor-general became vacant.

古文：曹操以洛阳残荒，遂移帝幸许。
现代文：酉操以洛阳残破为由，即把皇帝迁到许。
English: On the grounds that Luoyang was in ruins, he moved the emperor to Xu.

古文：杨奉、韩暹欲要遮车驾，不及，曹操击之，奉、暹奔袁术，遂纵暴杨、徐间。
现代文：杨奉、韩暹想要阻拦车驾，没有赶上，曹操攻击他们，杨奉、韩暹投奔袁术，即在扬州、徐州一带肆意作恶。
English: Yang Bong and Han Siem wanted to stop the car and did not catch up, Cao Cao attacked them, Yang Bong and Han Siem threw themselves at Yuan Shu, that is, they wantonly committed evil in Yangzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：明年，左将军刘备诱奉斩之。
现代文：第二年，左将军刘备诱杀了杨奉。
English: The following year, General Liu Bei lured Yang Bong to his death.

古文：暹惧，走还并州，道为人所杀。
现代文：韩暹害怕，逃回并州，路上被人杀死。
English: Han Siem was afraid, fled back to Anhui Province, and was killed on the way.

古文：胡才、李乐留河东，才为怨家所害，乐自病死。
现代文：胡才、李乐留在河东，胡才被仇家杀害，李乐病死。
English: Hu Cai and Li Le stayed in Hedong, Hu Cai was killed by his enemies, and Li Le died of illness.

古文：张济饥饿，出至南阳，攻穰，战死。
现代文：张济军无粮，离开自己的地盘到南阳，攻穣，战死。
English: Zhang Ji's army had no food, so they left their own territory and went to Nanyang, attacked and died in battle.

古文：郭汜为其将伍习所杀。
现代文：郭汜被他的部将伍习杀死。
English: Guo Gan was killed by his subordinate Wu Xi.

古文：三年，使谒者仆射裴茂诏关中诸将段煨等讨李傕，夷三族。
现代文：建安三年，朝廷派谒者仆射裴茂持韶书命关中诸将段煨等人讨伐李催。灭其三族。
English: In the third year of the Jian'an era, the imperial court dispatched the three generals, including Duan Yu and others, to fight against Li He and destroy his three clans.

古文：以段煨为安南将军，封乡侯。
现代文：任命段煨为安南将军，封闵乡侯。
English: He appointed Duan Yu as General Annan, and made him a county magistrate.

古文：四年，张杨为将杨丑所杀。
现代文：建安四年，张杨被他的部将杨丑杀死。
English: In the fourth year of Jian'an, Zhang Yang was killed by his subordinate Yang Jiu.

古文：以董承为车骑将军，开府。
现代文：任命董承为车骑将军，开府。
English: He appointed Dong Cheng as the general of chariot and cavalry and opened the government.

古文：自都许之后，权归曹氏，天子总己，百官备员而已。
现代文：自从迁都许之后，曹操掌权，天子自顾不暇，百官都是充数而已。
English: Since the relocation of the capital, Cao Cao has been in power, the Son of Heaven has no time to take care of himself, and all the officials are just numbers.

古文：帝忌操专逼，乃密诏董承，使结天下义士共诛之。
现代文：献帝恨曹操专权逼迫，于是秘密下诏给董承，让他结交天下义士共同除掉曹操。
English: Emperor Xian hated Cao Cao's authoritarian persecution, so he secretly issued an edict to Dong Cheng, asking him to make friends with the world's righteous to jointly eliminate Cao Cao.

古文：承遂与刘备同谋，未发，会备出征，承更与偏将军王服、长水校尉种辑、议郎吴硕结谋。
现代文：董承就和刘备一起谋划，还未动手，碰上刘备出征，董承又和偏将军王服、长水校尉种辑、议郎吴硕合谋。
English: Dong Cheng and Liu Bei plotted together, but before they could act, Liu Bei was sent to the front, and Dong Cheng conspired with General Wang Fu, Captain Changshui, and Wu Shuo.

古文：事泄，承、服、辑、硕皆为操所诛。
现代文：事情泄漏，董承、王服、种辑、吴硕都被曹操所杀。
English: When the affair leaked out, Cao Cao killed Dong Cheng, Wang Fu, Zangdi, and Wu Shuo.

古文：韩遂与马腾自还凉州，更相战争，乃下陇据关中。
现代文：韩遂与马腾自从回到凉州，战争不断，攻下陇地占据关中。
English: Since Han Sui and Ma Teng returned to Liangzhou, the war has continued, and they have captured and occupied Guanzhong.

古文：操方事河北，虑其乘间为乱，七年，乃拜腾征南将军，遂征西将军，并开府。
现代文：曹操当时正对付河北，怕他们乘机作乱，建安七年，就让朝廷封马腾征南将军，封韩遂征西将军，均开府。
English: Cao Cao was dealing with Hebei at the time. Fearing that they would take advantage of the situation to create turmoil, he ordered the imperial court to appoint Ma Teng as General of the South and Han as General of the West in the seventh year of Jianan.

古文：后征段煨为大鸿胪，病卒。
现代文：后来征召段煨为大鸿胪，段煨病死。
English: Later, Duan Yu was conscripted to be a great general, but he died of illness.

古文：复征马腾为卫尉，封槐里侯。
现代文：又征召马腾为卫尉，封槐里侯。
English: He also conscripted Ma Teng as an officer of the imperial guard and made him a vassal lord.

古文：腾乃应召，而留子超领其部典。
现代文：马腾应召而去，留下儿子马超带领他的部队。
English: Ma Teng was called away, leaving his son Ma Chao to lead his troops.

古文：十六年，超与韩遂举关中背曹操，操击破之，遂、超败走，腾坐夷三族。
现代文：建安十六年，马超与韩遂以关中地区反叛曹操，曹操击败了他们，韩遂、马超败逃，马腾因此被减三族。
English: In the 16th year of Jian'an, Ma Chao and Han Sui rebelled against Cao Cao in Guanzhong area. Cao Cao defeated them, and Han Sui and Ma Chao fled. As a result, Ma Teng was reduced to three tribes.

古文：超攻杀凉州刺史韦康，复据陇右。
现代文：马超又攻杀凉州刺史韦康，再次占据陇右。
English: Ma Chao also attacked and killed Liangzhou assassin Shi Weikang, once again occupying the right flank.

古文：十九年，天水人杨阜破超，超奔汉中，降刘备。
现代文：建安十九年，天水人杨阜击败马超，马超逃到汉中，投降了刘备。
English: In the 19th year of Jianan, Yang Fu of Tianshui defeated Ma Chao. Ma Chao fled to Hanzhong and surrendered to Liu Bei.

古文：韩遂走金城羌中，为其帐下所杀。
现代文：韩遂跑到金城羌地，被其部下杀死。
English: Han then ran to Jincheng and was killed by his subordinates.

古文：初，陇西人宗建在枹罕，自称 河首平汉王，署置百官三十许年。
现代文：当初，陇西人宗建在抱罕，自称 河首平汉王 ，分封百官三十多年。
English: At the beginning, Zong Jian, a native of Shaanxi Province, lived in Bukhan and called himself the King of HeShou Pinghan. He was given a hundred official titles and held them for more than thirty years.

古文：曹操因遣夏侯渊击建，斩之，凉州番平。
现代文：曹操就派夏侯渊攻打宗建，斩了他，凉州全部平定。
English: Cao Cao sent Xia Houyuan to attack Zong Jian and killed him, and all of Liangzhou was pacified.

古文：论曰：董卓初以虓虎阚为情，因遭崩剥之势，故得蹈藉彝伦，毁裂畿服。夫以刳肝斫趾之性，则群生不足以厌其快，然犹折意缙绅，迟疑陵夺，尚有盗窃之道焉。
现代文：论曰：董卓当初本性凶暴强悍，因为赶上天下动乱的形势，所以得以践踏常理，祸害天下，以他那种剖腹取肝断人脚历的残忍性情，则杀尽天下苍生也不能满足他的快意，然而尚能谦抑对待官绅士人，也并未决心对皇室欺凌篡夺，还算存有盗贼之道。
English: On the other hand, Dong Zhuo's original nature was fierce and strong. Because he caught up with the turbulent situation in the world, he was able to trample on common sense and harm the world. With his cruel disposition of disembowelment, he could not satisfy his desire to kill all the people in the world. However, he was still able to treat officials and gentlemen with modesty. He did not decide to usurp the royal family, and there was still a way of stealing.

古文：及残寇乘之，倒山倾海，昆冈之火，自兹而焚，《版》、《荡》之篇，于焉而极。
现代文：到后来贼寇又乘势作乱，翻山倒海，烈火毒焰，从此而燃，天下动荡，至此达到顶点。
English: Later, the thieves and robbers took advantage of the situation to create turmoil, turning the mountains into the sea, igniting the flames, and the world was in turmoil, which reached its climax.

古文：呜呼，人之生也难矣！
现代文：呜呼，人活着真难啊！
English: Alas, it's so hard to stay alive!

古文：天地之不仁甚矣！
现代文：天地真是太不仁德丫啊！
English: Heaven and earth are so unkind!

古文：赞曰：百六有会，《过》、《剥》成灾。
现代文：赞曰：逢百六阴极注定厄运，国家失度小人得志成灾祸。
English: Zang said: every hundred and six cathode is doomed to doom, the country's loss of control villain has become a disaster.

古文：董卓滔天，干逆三才。
现代文：董卓罪恶滔天，天怒地愤人怨。
English: Dong Zhuo's crimes are monstrous, and he is enraged by human grievances.

古文：方夏崩沸，皇京烟埃。
现代文：天下崩溃沸腾，京城烽烟滚滚。
English: The world is collapsing and boiling, and the capital city is in smoke.

古文：无礼虽及，余祲遂广。
现代文：多行无礼虽殃及自身，遣下祸患却随之蔓延。
English: Although many acts of rudeness affect oneself, the evil that is sent down spreads.

古文：矢延王辂，后缠魏象。
现代文：流矢飞到天子车旁，刀兵环绕皇家宫阙。
English: Streams of arrows flew to the celestial chariot, and swordsmen circled the royal palanquin.

古文：区服倾回，人神波荡。
现代文：天下动荡，入神不宁。
English: The world is in turmoil.

