古文：苏厉谓周君曰： 败韩、魏，杀犀武，攻赵，取蔺、离石、祁者，皆白起。
现代文：说客苏厉对周王说： 战胜韩、魏国，杀死韩将犀武，攻占赵国的蔺、离石、祁等地的，都是秦将白起。
English: Su Li, a lobbyist, said to King Zhou, "The victory over Korea and Wei, the killing of the Korean general Sai Wu, and the capture of Zhao's Huan, Liishi, and Huan are all the result of Qin's will.

古文：是攻用兵，又有天命也。
现代文：白起善于用兵，又有上天眷顾。
English: Baiqi is good at using soldiers, and has the patronage of heaven.

古文：今攻梁，梁必破，破则周危，君不若止之。
现代文：现在白起率军攻梁国，梁也必然会一败涂地，大梁一旦被攻破，那西周就危在旦夕了。所以君王一定要劝阻制止他。
English: Now Bai is leading an army to attack Liang's country, and Liang will inevitably be defeated. Once Liang is defeated, the Western Zhou will be in danger. Therefore, the king must dissuade and stop him.

古文：谓白起曰： 楚有养由基者，善射；去柳叶者百步而射之，百发百中。
现代文：应该派使者去见白起，可以对他说： 楚国有一个名叫养由基的人，擅长射箭，百步之内射柳叶能够百发百中，因此旁人都称赞他箭术好。
English: They should send an envoy to see Baiqi and say to him: There is a man in the State of Chu named Yao Yuki, who is good at archery. He can shoot a hundred willow leaves within a hundred paces, so others praise him for his good archery.

古文：左右皆曰善。有一人过曰，善射，可教射也矣。
现代文：有一个人从他的旁边经过，说： 既然如此擅长射箭，就可以训练他人箭术了。
English: A man who passed by him said, "Since you are so good at archery, you can train others in archery."

古文：养由基曰，人皆善，子乃曰可教射，子何不代我射之也。
现代文：养由基听到后说，人人都说我专门射箭好，你却偏要叫我去训练他人箭术，您为什么不替我射呢？ 
English: After hearing this, Yao Yuki said, "Everyone says that I am good at archery, but you want me to train others in archery. Why don't you shoot for me?"

古文：客曰，我不能教子支左屈右。
现代文：过路人说： 我并不能教您左手拉弓，用力向前伸出，右手拉弦，用力向后弯曲那种射箭的方法。
English: The passer-by said, "I can't teach you the left-hand-draw-the-bow-and-push-it-forward, right-hand-draw-the-string-and-push-it-back method of archery.

古文：夫射柳叶者，百发百中，而不已善息，少焉气力倦，弓拨矢钩，一发不中，前功尽矣。
现代文：但是，您射柳叶能百发百中，却不趁着射得好的时候休息休息，过一会儿，当气力衰竭，感到疲倦，弓身不正，箭杆弯曲时，您若一箭射出而不中，岂不前功尽弃了吗！ 
English: However, if you can shoot a hundred shots in a hundred, but do not take advantage of the time to rest when you shoot well, after a while, when your strength is exhausted, you feel tired, the bow is not right, and the arrow is bent, if you shoot one arrow and do not hit, will you not have given up all your achievements!

古文：今公破韩、魏，杀厚武，而北攻赵，取蔺、离石、祁者，公也。
现代文：如今您击败了韩、魏两国的军队，又杀了犀武，向北攻打赵国，夺取了蔺地、离石和祁地的都是您。
English: Now you have defeated the armies of both Han and Wei, killed the Rhineland troops, attacked Zhao to the north, and seized the Fengtian, Liushi and Fengtian.

古文：公之功甚多。
现代文：您的功劳已很大了。
English: You have done a great service.

古文：今公又以秦兵出塞，过两周，践韩而以攻梁，一攻而不得，前功尽灭，公不若称病不出也。 
现代文：现在又率领秦国的军队出塞，经过东、西两周，侵犯韩国，攻打魏国的都城大梁，如果进攻不能取得胜利，就前功尽弃了，您不如假装生病，不去攻打大梁。 
English: Now you are leading the army of Qin out of the citadel, passing through the East and West for two weeks, invading South Korea, and attacking the capital of Wei, Dalian. If the attack is not successful, you will have given up all your achievements. You might as well pretend to be ill and not attack Dalian.

