古文：北海相孔融闻太史慈避地东太史慈海，数使人馈问其母。
现代文：原文北海相孔融听说太史慈因受人牵连到东海避祸，就经常派人带着食物，金钱照顾他母亲的生活。
English: The North Sea statesman Kong Rong heard that Taishi Ci often sent people with food and money to take care of his mother's life because he was involved in escaping from the East Sea.

古文：后融为黄巾贼所围，慈适还，闻之，即从间道入围，见融。
现代文：有一次孔融被黄巾贼围困，这时太史慈已由东海回来，听说孔融被围，就从小径潜入贼人的包围圈中见孔融。
English: Once, Kong Rong was besieged by thieves in yellow scarves. At that time, Taishi Ci had returned from the East China Sea. When he heard that Kong Rong was besieged, he sneaked into the encirclement of the thieves from the trail and saw Kong Rong.

古文：融使告急于平原相刘备。
现代文：孔融遂请太史慈突围向平原相刘备求援，但这时贼人已经合围，小路也不通了，很难突围。
English: Kong Rong then asked Taishi Ci to break out of the encirclement and go to the plains to Liu Bei for help, but by this time the thieves had already closed in, and the path was impassable, making it difficult to break out.

古文：时贼围已密，众难其出，慈乃带鞬弯弓，将两骑自从，各持一的持之，开门出，观者并骇。慈径引马至城下堑内，植所持的射之，射毕还。
现代文：太史慈拿着弓箭，率领两名骑士，让两名骑士各持一个箭靶，三人打开城门出来。贼人大吃一惊，屏息以待，只见太史慈牵着马走到城墙下，开始练习射箭，等到箭都射完了，就牵着马回去。
English: Taishi Ci took a bow and arrow, led two knights, let two knights each hold an arrow target, and the three of them opened the city gate. The thieves were stunned and waited with bated breath, only to see Taishi Ci lead the horse under the city wall and start practicing archery. When the arrows were all shot, he led the horse back.

古文：明日复然，如是者再。
现代文：第二天仍然如此。
English: The next day it was still the same.

古文：围下人或起或卧，乃至无复起者。
现代文：几天后，贼人每天见太史慈出城门，以为他又出来练习射箭，坐的坐，躺的躺，理都不理他。
English: A few days later, the thief saw Taishi out of the gate every day, thinking that he had come out to practice archery again. He sat, sat, lay down, and ignored him.

古文：慈遂严行蓐食，鞭马直突其围。比贼觉，则驰去数里许矣，竟从备乞兵解围。
现代文：谁知太史慈这次却忽然快马冲出，穿过贼人的包围，等到贼人发觉，太史慈已经在好几里路外了。最后顺利地向刘备求来援兵，解了孔融之围。
English: Who knew that this time, however, Mr. Shi Ci suddenly rushed out on a fast horse, broke through the encirclement of the thieves, and by the time the thieves found out, Mr. Shi Ci was already several miles away. Finally, he successfully asked Liu Bei for reinforcements and broke the siege of Kong Rong.

