古文：弘治十年，命户部刘大夏出理边饷，或曰： 北边粮草，半属中贵人子弟经营，公素不与先辈合。恐不免刚以取祸。 
现代文：原文明孝宗弘治十年，朝廷命令户部刘大夏到边境掌理粮饷。有人说： 北方的粮草，大半属于宦官的子弟经营，您一向与这些亲贵不合，恐怕免不了因刚直而招来祸害。 
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Hongzong, the imperial court ordered Liu Daxia, the head of the household department, to go to the border to take charge of grain. Some people said: The grain and grass in the north are mostly operated by the children of eunuchs. You have always been at odds with these relatives. I am afraid that you will inevitably cause harm due to your rigidity.

古文：大夏曰： 处事以理不以势，俟至彼图之。 
现代文：刘大夏说： 做事要讲求合理而不能硬来，等我到那里以后自然会想得出办法。 
English: Liu Daxia said, "When doing things, we should be reasonable and not force things. When I get there, I will naturally come up with a solution.

古文：既至，召边上父老日夕讲究，遂得其要领。
现代文：刘大夏到任后请来边境上的地方父老，早晚和他们研究，于是完全掌握了处理的要领。
English: After Liu Daxia took office, he invited local elders on the border to study with them sooner or later, so he fully mastered the essentials of handling.

古文：一日，揭榜通衢云： 某仓缺粮若干石，每石给官价若干，凡境内外官民客商之家，但愿输者，米自十石以上，草自百束以上，俱准告。 
现代文：有一天，刘大夏在交通要道上贴出告示说： 某仓库缺少米粮若干石，每石给官价若干元，凡是境内外的官吏、人民或商人，只要愿意运米十石以上、草一百束以上的都批准。 
English: One day, Liu Daxia posted a notice on a major traffic road, saying: "A certain warehouse is short of rice grain by several stone. Each stone is given an official price of several yuan. All officials, people or merchants at home and abroad who are willing to transport more than ten stone of rice and more than one hundred bunches of grass are approved.

古文：虽中贵子弟亦不禁。
现代文：虽是官宦子弟也不禁止。
English: Even if they are the sons and daughters of government officials, they are not prohibited from performing.

古文：不两月，仓场充轫。盖往时粮百石、草千束方准告，以故中贵子弟争相为市，转买边人粮草，陆续运至，牟利十五。
现代文：不到两个月，仓库都满了，因为以往运送米粮得高达一百石、草高达一千束才得批准，因而一边百姓无力竞争，只能由少数官宦子弟相互争取，加以垄断，买入边境上的粮草，陆续运来，利润高达五成。
English: In less than two months, the warehouses were full, because in the past, permission was required to transport up to 100 kilos of rice and up to 1,000 bunches of grass. As a result, the people were unable to compete, and only a small number of government officials and their cronies could compete with each other, monopolize, buy grain and grass on the border, and transport them one after another, with a profit of up to 50%.

古文：自此法立，有粮草之家自得告输，中贵子弟即欲收籴，无处可得，公有余积，家有余财。
现代文：自从订立这个办法，有粮草的人家可以自己运送，宦官子弟虽然想收买，也买不到，于是公家得到更多的粮草，民家则得到相当的利润。
English: Since the establishment of this method, people with grain and grass can transport it themselves, and the eunuchs cannot buy it even though they want to buy it, so the public sector gets more grain and grass, and the private sector gets a considerable profit.

古文：忠宣法诚善，然使不召边上父老日夕讲究，如何得知？
现代文：刘大夏的方法实在很好，然而假使不请边境上的父老来早晚研究，怎么能知道？
English: Liu Daxia's method is really good. However, if you don't invite the parents on the border to study sooner or later, how can you know?

古文：能如此虚心访问，实心从善，何官不治？
现代文：能如此虚心请教，真心听从善言，有什么事做不好？
English: To be able to humbly ask for advice and sincerely listen to kind words, what is there not to like?

古文：何事不济？
现代文：有什么事成不了呢？
English: What can't be done?

古文：昔唐人目台中坐席为 痴床 ，谓一坐此床，骄倨如痴。
现代文：从前唐朝人把御史台的座席看成 痴床 ，说一坐上这个床，就骄傲自得，使人如白痴一般。
English: In the past, people in the Tang Dynasty regarded the seat of the Imperial History Channel as a "fool's bed," saying that once you sit on this bed, you will be proud of yourself, making you look like an idiot.

古文：今上官公坐皆 痴床 矣，民间利病，何由上闻？
现代文：当今朝廷官员都是坐在这样的痴床上，民间的利病怎么能传给皇帝知道呢？
English: Today's court officials are sitting in such a bed of fools, how can the people's profit and loss be passed on to the emperor?

