古文：李芳，穆宗朝内官监太监也。
现代文：李芳，是穆宗朝内官监的太监。
English: Li Fang was a eunuch of the Mu Zong Dynasty.

古文：帝初立，芳以能持正见信任。
现代文：穆宗刚即位时，李芳以能够主持正理获得皇上信任。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, Li Fang gained the emperor's trust by being able to preside over the ceremony.

古文：初，世宗时，匠役徐杲以营造躐官工部尚书，修卢沟桥，所侵盗万计。
现代文：当初，在世宗时期，工匠徐杲由营造人员直接升任工部尚书，负责维修芦沟桥，侵吞钱财以万计。
English: At first, during the reign of King Sejong, the craftsman Xu Jun was directly promoted from the construction staff to the engineering department of Shangshu, responsible for the maintenance of Lugu Bridge, and embezzled tens of thousands of money.

古文：其属冒太仆少卿、苑马卿以下职衔者以百数。
现代文：他的属下冒任太仆寺少卿、苑马卿以下官职的有上百个。
English: Among his subordinates, there were over a hundred who were appointed to official positions such as the Junior Secretary of the Taigu-ji Temple and the Secretary of the Yuanma.

古文：隆庆元年二月，芳劾之。
现代文：隆庆元年二月，李芳弹劾他。
English: In February of the first year of Longqing, Li Fang impeached him.

古文：时杲已削官，乃下狱遣戍，尽汰其所冒冗员。
现代文：当时徐杲已被撤职，于是将他投进监狱，遣去戍边，并将所有冒任的官员全部裁汰。
English: At that time, Xu Rong had been removed from his post, so he was thrown into prison, sent to the periphery, and all the officials who took office were eliminated.

古文：又奏革上林苑监增设皂隶，减光禄岁增米盐及工部物料，以是大为同类所嫉。
现代文：他还上奏革除上林苑监增设的皂隶，减少光禄寺每年增加的粮米食盐，以及工部所需的建筑材料，为此他深为同类所忌恨。
English: He also petitioned for the removal of the soaps that had been added by the superintendent of forests and gardens, and the reduction of the annual increase in grain, rice, salt, and construction materials needed by the construction department of Koroku-ji Temple, for which he was deeply hated by his peers.

古文：而是时，司礼诸阉滕祥、孟冲、陈洪方有宠，争饰奇技淫巧以悦帝意，作鳌山灯，导帝为长夜饮。
现代文：而那时候，司礼监的阉官滕祥、孟冲、陈洪正受到皇上宠爱，争相搞一些奇技淫巧的东西来取悦皇上，制作鳌山灯，引导皇上做长夜之饮。
English: At that time, the eunuchs Teng Xiang, Meng Chong and Chen Hong, who were the supervisors of etiquette, were favored by the emperor, competing to engage in some tricks to please the emperor, making lanterns, and guiding the emperor to make long night drinks.

古文：芳切谏，帝不悦。
现代文：李芳恳切劝谏，皇上不高兴。
English: Li Fang earnestly advised him, but the emperor was not pleased.

古文：祥等复媒孽之，帝遂怒，勒芳闲住。
现代文：滕祥等人又挑拨是非，陷害李芳，皇上于是大怒，勒令李芳闲住。
English: Teng Xiang and others stirred up trouble and framed Li Fang. The emperor was furious and ordered Li Fang to stay idle.

古文：二年十一月复杖芳八十，下刑部监禁待决。
现代文：二年十一月又将李芳杖打八十下，监禁在刑部等候处理。
English: In November of the following year, Li Fang was given 80 strokes of the cane and detained at the Criminal Investigation Department to await trial.

古文：尚书毛恺等言： 芳罪状未明，臣等莫知所坐。 
现代文：尚书毛恺等人说： 李芳的罪状还不清楚，臣等不知该判什么罪。 
English: Shangshu Maoqi and others said: Li Fang's charges are still unclear, and the ministers do not know what crime to convict him of.

古文：帝曰： 芳事朕无礼，其锢之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：李芳对朕无礼，禁锢他。 
English: The emperor said: Li Fang was rude to me, so imprison him.

古文：芳锢，祥等益横。前司礼太监黄锦已革荫，祥辄复予之。
现代文：李芳被禁锢后，滕祥等人更加骄横，前司礼监黄锦已被革掉荫封，滕祥擅自重新给他。
English: After Li Fang was imprisoned, Teng Xiang and others became even more arrogant. The former chief etiquette inspector Huang Jin had been stripped of his title, and Teng Xiang arbitrarily gave it back to him.

古文：工部尚书雷礼劾祥： 传造采办器物及修补坛庙乐器，多自加徵，糜费巨万。
现代文：工部尚书雷礼弹劾滕祥，说滕祥在 传造采办器物和修补神坛宗庙的乐器时，多擅自加额征收，浪费达数万之多。
English: Shang Shulei of the Ministry of Works impeached Tengxiang, saying that when Tengxiang was building the equipment and repairing the musical instruments of the shrine's ancestral temple, he increased the levy without authorization, wasting tens of thousands.

古文：工厂存留大木，斩截任意。
现代文：工厂存留的大木，他任意裁截。
English: The large trees left over from the factory were cut down at his discretion.

古文：臣礼力不能争，乞早赐罢。 
现代文：臣雷礼无力与他抗争，乞请尽早将臣罢免。 
English: Minister Lei Lei is powerless to fight him, so please remove him as soon as possible.

古文：帝不罪祥，而令礼致仕。
现代文：皇上不给滕祥加罪，反而令雷礼退休。
English: The emperor did not punish Teng Xiang, but instead retired Lei Li.

古文：冲传旨下海户王印于镇抚司，论戍，法司不预闻。
现代文：孟冲传圣旨将海户王印投进镇抚司监狱，判他戍边，法司竟不能干预。
English: Meng Chong transmitted the holy will to throw Haido Wangyin into the prison of the town's magistrate, sentencing him to death, but the magistrate could not intervene.

古文：纳肃藩辅国将军缙贵贿，越制得嗣封肃王。
现代文：他收取肃藩辅国将军朱缙火贵的贿赂，使朱缙火贵得越制袭封为肃王。
English: He received a bribe from Zhu Xi, the general of Su Province, which made Zhu Xi the king of Su.

古文：洪尤贪肆，内阁大臣亦有因之以进者。
现代文：陈洪尤其贪婪，内阁大臣中也有的是通过他而得以进用的。
English: Chen Hong is particularly greedy, and some cabinet ministers have been promoted through him.

古文：三人所糜国帑无算。
现代文：三人所浪费的国库钱财无数。
English: The treasury money wasted by the three of them is incalculable.

古文：帝享太庙，三人皆冠进贤冠，服祭服以从，爵赏辞谢与六卿埒。
现代文：皇上到太庙祭祀，三人都戴着进贤冠、穿着祭服相从，所得封赏和褒奖与六卿相同。
English: When the emperor went to the Imperial Temple for the ritual, all three of them wore the crown of merit and followed him in ceremonial dress. They received the same rewards and awards as the six nobles.

古文：廷臣论劾者，太常少卿周审怡以外补去，给事中石星、李已、陈吾德，御史詹仰庇，尚宝丞郑履淳，皆廷杖削籍。
现代文：弹劾他们的廷臣多受到迫害，太常寺少卿周怡被调补外官，给事中石星、李已、陈吾德，御史詹仰庇、尚宝丞郑履淳，都被廷杖并撤职。
English: Most of the courtiers who impeached them were persecuted, and Zhou Yi, the junior secretary of the Taizhong Temple, was transferred to the position of foreign minister, and Shi Xing, Li Ye, Chen Ude, Gu Shi Zhan Yang Pi, and Shang Baozhe Zheng Luchun were all given the cane and removed from their posts.

古文：三人各荫锦衣官至二十人，而芳独久系狱。
现代文：三人各庇荫锦衣官达二十人，而李芳长期被关在狱中。
English: Each of the three men sheltered as many as twenty officials, and Li Fang was imprisoned for a long time.

古文：四年四月，刑科都给事中舒化等以热审届期，请宥芳，乃得释，充南京净军。
现代文：四年四月，刑科给事中舒化等人说热审已经到期，请求宽宥李芳。李芳这才获得释放，被发往南京充净军。
English: In April of the same year, the Criminal Investigation Department told the people involved in the case, such as Shu Hua and others, that the hot trial had expired and asked for clemency for Li Fang. Only then was Li Fang released and sent to the Nanjing Detention Center.

古文：冯保，深州人。
现代文：冯保，深州人。
English: Feng Bao, from Shenzhen.

古文：嘉靖中，为司礼秉笔太监。隆庆元年提督东厂兼掌御马监事。
现代文：嘉靖年间任司礼监秉笔太监，隆庆元年提督东厂兼管御马监事务。
English: During the Jiajing period, he served as the chief ceremonial supervisor, Bingpen Eunuch, and in the first year of the Longqing period, he also served as the admiral of the East Factory and was in charge of supervising horse affairs.

古文：时司礼掌印缺，保以次当得之，适不悦于穆宗。
现代文：当时司礼监掌印太监空缺，冯保依资历该由他担任，但他正不被穆宗看中。
English: At that time, there was a vacancy for the chief eunuch and ceremonial supervisor, and Feng Bao should have been appointed by him according to his qualifications, but he was not favored by Mu Zong.

古文：大学士高拱荐御用监陈洪代，保由是疾拱。
现代文：大学士高拱推荐御用监的陈洪来取代他，冯保由此而忌恨高拱。
English: Gao Gong, a university scholar, recommended Chen Hong, a supervisor, to replace him. Feng Bao hated Gao Gong for this.

古文：及洪罢，拱复荐用孟冲。
现代文：到陈洪被罢免后，高拱又推荐孟冲。
English: After Chen Hong was dismissed, Gao Gong recommended Meng Chong.

古文：冲故掌尚膳监者，例不当掌司礼。
现代文：孟冲原来执掌尚膳监，按例不应执掌司礼监。
English: Meng Chong was originally in charge of the food inspector, and as usual should not be in charge of the ceremonial inspector.

古文：保疾拱弥甚，乃与张居正深相结，谋去之。
现代文：冯保更加忌恨高拱，于是与张居正深相勾结，图谋去掉高拱。
English: Feng Bao hated the high arch even more, so he colluded with Zhang Juzheng to remove the high arch.

古文：会居正亦欲去拱专柄，两人交益固。
现代文：正好张居正也想去掉高拱，独专大权，两人的交情更加深厚。
English: Just as Zhang Juzheng also wanted to get rid of the high arch, the monopoly power, the friendship between the two is more profound.

古文：穆宗得疾，保密属居正豫草遗诏，为拱所见，面责居正曰： 我当国，奈何独与中人具遗诏。 
现代文：穆宗得病后，冯保秘密嘱咐张居正预先起草遗诏，被高拱看见，当面斥责张居正说 ：我在主持国政，你为何单独与宦官准备遗诏？ 
English: After Mu Zong fell ill, Feng Bao secretly ordered Zhang Juzheng to draft the will in advance. Gao Gong saw this and rebuked Zhang Juzheng in person, saying: I am in charge of state affairs, why are you preparing the will alone with the eunuch?

古文：居正面赤谢过。
现代文：张居正脸红了，向他道歉。
English: Zhang Juzheng blushed and apologized to him.

古文：拱益恶保，思逐之。
现代文：高拱更加厌恶冯保，想驱逐他。
English: Gao Gong was even more disgusted with Feng Bao and wanted to expel him.

古文：穆宗甫崩，保言于后妃，斥孟冲而夺其位，又矫遗诏令与阁臣同受顾命。
现代文：穆宗刚去世，冯保就向后妃进言，将孟冲斥退，夺过了他的位置，还假传遗诏令他与内阁大臣一同受遗命辅政。
English: As soon as Mu Zong died, Feng Bao made a suggestion to the empress dowager, drove Meng Chong away, took over his position, and also falsified the will to order him and the cabinet minister to be appointed and assisted by the government.

古文：及帝登极，保升立宝座旁不下，举朝大骇。
现代文：到皇上登基时，冯保高高站在宝座旁不下去，举朝大惊。
English: When the emperor ascended to the throne, Feng Baogao stood so tall next to the throne that he couldn't get down, shocking the emperor.

古文：保既掌司礼，又督东厂，兼总内外，势益张。
现代文：冯保既已掌管司礼监，又提督东厂，权兼内外，势力更大。
English: Feng Bao has been in charge of the Department of Ceremonial Supervision as well as the East Factory of the Admiralty, with both internal and external powers, and his influence is even greater.

古文：拱讽六科给事中程文、十三道御史刘良弼等，交章数其奸，而给事中雒遵、陆树德又特疏论列，拱意疏下即拟旨逐保。
现代文：高拱暗示六科给事中程文、十三道御史刘良弼等，各自上书历数冯保的奸状，而给事中雒遵、陆树德又特别上奏陈述，高拱想这奏疏批下来后便起草圣旨逐出冯保。
English: Gao Gong alluded to the fact that the six disciplines, including the middle-range text, and the 13 disciplines, including Liu Liangyao, had each submitted a report on Feng Bao's treachery, and that in the middle of the matter, Xun Zun and Lu Shude had also submitted a special report. Gao Gong thought that after this report was approved, he would draft a holy will to expel Feng Bao.

古文：而保匿其疏，亟与居正定谋，遂逐拱去。
现代文：但冯保将那份奏疏藏了起来，急忙与张居正商定对策，终于将高拱赶下了台。
English: However, Feng Bao hid the report and hastily agreed on a countermeasure with Zhang Jiusheng, finally driving Gao Gong off the stage.

古文：初，穆宗崩，拱于阁中大恸曰： 十岁太子，如何治天下。 
现代文：当初，穆宗去世时，高拱在内阁十分悲痛地说： 十岁天子，怎么能治天下！ 
English: At first, when Mu Zong died, Gao Gong said very sadly in the cabinet: Ten-year-old son of heaven, how can you rule the world!

古文：保谮于后妃曰： 拱斥太子为十岁孩子，如何作人主。 
现代文：冯保便在后妃面前诬陷高拱说 ：高拱将太子斥为十岁孩子，说他怎能做人主！ 
English: Feng Bao then framed Gao Gong in front of the empress, saying: Gao Gong dismissed the prince as a ten-year-old child, saying how could he be the master!

古文：后妃大惊，太子闻之亦色变。
现代文：后妃大惊，太子听说后也为之色变。
English: The Empress was shocked, and the Crown Prince also changed color after hearing about it.

古文：迨拱去，保憾犹未释。
现代文：到高拱离去后，冯保还余恨未消。
English: After Gao Gong left, Feng Bao still had some regrets.

古文：万历元年正月，有王大臣者，伪为内侍服，入乾清宫，被获下东厂。
现代文：万历元年正月，有个叫王大臣的，穿上宦官的服装，混进乾清宫，被擒获后交给东厂。
English: In the first month of the first year of Wanli, there was a man named Wang Minister, who put on eunuch's clothing, mixed into the Qianqing Palace, was captured and handed over to the East Factory.

古文：保欲缘此族拱，与居正谋，令家人辛儒饮食之，纳刃其袖中，俾言拱怨望，遣刺帝。
现代文：冯保想借此机会将高拱灭族，便与张居正策划，令家仆辛儒给王大臣供应饮食，并将一把刀塞到他的袖中，让他说是因为高拱有怨恨情绪，派他来行刺皇上的。
English: Feng Bao wanted to take this opportunity to exterminate Gao Gong, so he and Zhang Ju were plotting, ordering the servant Xin Ru to supply food to the minister Wang, and tucking a knife into his sleeve to let him say that because Gao Gong had resentment, he was sent to assassinate the emperor.

古文：大臣许之。
现代文：王大臣答应了。
English: Minister Wang agreed.

古文：逾日，锦衣都督朱希孝等会鞫。
现代文：过了一天，锦衣卫都督朱希孝等人会审。
English: A day later, Jin Yi Wei Governor Zhu Xi Xiao and others will be put on trial.

古文：大臣疾呼曰： 许我富贵，乃掠治我耶！
现代文：王大臣大声疾呼道 ：已答应让我富贵，干嘛还要拷打我？
English: Minister Wang cried out, "You have promised to make me rich, why do you still want to torture me?"

古文：且我何处识高阁老？ 
现代文：而且我到哪儿去认识高阁老？ 
English: And where can I go to get to know Gao Ke Lao?

古文：希孝惧，不敢鞫而罢。
现代文：朱希孝害怕了，不敢再审下去。
English: Zhu Xixiao was scared and did not dare to continue the trial.

古文：会廷臣杨博、葛守礼等保待之，居正亦迫众议微讽保。
现代文：正好廷臣杨博、葛守礼等人保高拱，张居正也迫于舆论而悄悄暗示冯保。
English: Just as the courtiers Yang Bo, Ge Shouli and others kept the high arch, Zhang Jizheng was also forced by public opinion to quietly hint at Feng Bao.

古文：保意稍解，乃以生漆酒喑大臣，移送法司坐斩，拱获免。
现代文：冯保恨意稍解，便用生漆酒将王大臣灌哑，移交给法司判了斩刑，高拱得以免祸。
English: Feng Baohui was a little relieved, so he drugged Wang Jian with raw lacquer wine and handed him over to the law department, which sentenced him to beheading. Gao Gong was spared.

古文：由是举朝皆恶保，而不肖者多因之以进。
现代文：从此举朝都厌恶冯保，而不肖之徒却多靠着他得以升迁。
English: From that time on, the imperial court detested Feng Bao, but most of the traitors relied on him for promotion.

古文：慈圣太后遇帝严。
现代文：慈圣太后对皇上管束很严。
English: Empress Dowager Cixing kept a tight rein on the emperor.

古文：保倚太后势，数挟持帝，帝甚畏之。
现代文：冯保倚仗太后的威势，多次挟持皇上，皇上很怕他。
English: Feng Bao relied on the grandeur of the empress dowager and held the emperor hostage many times. The emperor was very afraid of him.

古文：时与小内竖戏，见保入，辄正襟危坐曰： 大伴来矣。 
现代文：皇上时常与小宦官戏耍，一见到冯保进来，便正襟危坐，说 ：大伴来了。 
English: The emperor often played with the little eunuch, and as soon as he saw Feng Bao come in, he sat up straight and said, "Big Brother is here."

古文：所昵孙海、客用为乾清宫管事牌子，屡诱帝夜游别宫，小衣窄袖，走马持刀，又数进奇巧之物，帝深宠幸。
现代文：皇上用所亲爱的孙海、客用为乾清宫管事牌子，他们屡次引诱皇上夜游别宫，身穿小衣窄袖，走马持刀；他们还多次进献一些奇巧之物，皇上更加宠爱他们。
English: The Emperor used Sun Hai, who was dear to him, and the guests used the brands of the officials in charge of the Qianqing Palace. They repeatedly lured the Emperor to visit other palaces at night, wearing small clothes with narrow sleeves, walking on horseback with a knife. They also repeatedly presented some strange things, and the Emperor loved them even more.

古文：保白太后，召帝切责。
现代文：冯保将这些事汇报太后，太后召皇上来严加责备。
English: Feng Bao reported these matters to the empress dowager, who summoned the emperor to reprimand him severely.

古文：帝长跪受教，惶惧甚。
现代文：皇上长跑受教，十分惶恐。
English: The emperor was taught long-distance running and was very frightened.

古文：保属居正草帝罪己手诏，令颁示阁臣。
现代文：冯保嘱咐张居正起草皇上罪己手诏，令他颁示内阁大臣。
English: Feng Bao ordered Zhang Ju, who was drafting the imperial edict, to present it to the cabinet ministers.

古文：词过挹损，帝年已十八，览之内惭，然迫于太后，不得不下。
现代文：张居正起草的这份手诏用词过于谦损，皇上已十八岁了，看后心中惭愧，但迫于太后的压力，不得不接受。
English: The handwritten edict drafted by Zhang Juzheng was too humble. The emperor was already eighteen years old and felt ashamed after reading it. However, under pressure from the empress dowager, he had to accept it.

古文：居正乃上疏切谏。
现代文：张居正于是上疏恳切劝谏。
English: Zhang Jizheng then earnestly advised Shang Zuo to leave.

古文：又缘保意劾去司礼秉笔孙德秀、温太及掌兵伏局周海，而令诸内侍俱自陈。
现代文：他还顺着冯保的心意弹劾司礼监秉笔太监孙德秀、温太以及掌兵仗局的周海，使他们因此被撤职。
English: In accordance with Feng Bao's wishes, he also impeached Sun Dexiu, the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch.

古文：由是保所不悦者，斥退殆尽，时八年十一月也。
现代文：他还令各个宦官自述工作得失。由此凡是冯保不喜欢的人，被斥退殆尽。这是八年十一月。
English: He also ordered each eunuch to give an account of his work. As a result, all those who were not liked by Feng Bao were expelled. This was in November 2008.

古文：保善琴能书。
现代文：冯保善于抚琴和书法。
English: Feng Bao is good at playing the piano and calligraphy.

古文：帝屡赐牙章曰 光明正大 ，曰 尔惟盐梅 ，曰 汝作舟楫 ，曰 鱼水相逢 ，曰 风云际会 ，所以待之甚隆。
现代文：皇上多次赐给他牙章，分别刻着 光明正大 、 尔惟盐梅 、 汝作舟楫 、 鱼水相逢 、 风云际会 ，显出待他很厚。
English: The emperor repeatedly gave him tooth stamps, engraved respectively with the words "bright and upright," "salt and plum," "you make the boat," "fish and water meet," and "wind and clouds meet," showing that he was treated very well.

古文：后保益横肆，即帝有所赏罚，非出保口，无敢行者。
现代文：后来冯保更加骄横，即使皇上做出什么赏罚决定，如果不是出于冯保之口，没有人敢执行。
English: Later, Feng Bao became more arrogant. Even if the emperor made any reward or punishment decision, if it was not from Feng Bao's mouth, no one would dare to carry it out.

古文：帝积不能堪，而保内倚太后，外倚居正，帝不能去也。
现代文：皇上已不堪忍受，但冯保内倚太后，外倚张居正，皇上还不能将他除去。
English: The emperor could not bear it any longer, but Feng Bao was the empress dowager inside and Zhang Ju Zheng outside, and the emperor could not get rid of him.

古文：然保亦时引大体。
现代文：但冯保也时常维持大体。
English: But Feng Bao also often maintained the general.

古文：内阁产白莲，翰林院有双白燕，居正以进。
现代文：内阁产白莲，翰林院有一双白燕，张居正将它们进献给皇上。
English: The cabinet produces white lotus, and Hanlin Academy has a pair of white swallows. Zhang Ju is presenting them to the emperor.

古文：保使使谓居正曰： 主上冲年，不可以异物启玩好。 
现代文：冯保派使者对张居正说： 主上还小，不可用奇异的东西启发他玩好。 
English: Feng Bao sent an emissary to say to Zhang Ju Zheng: The master is still young, and he should not use strange things to inspire him to play well.

古文：又能约束其子弟，不敢肆恶，都人亦以是称之。
现代文：他还能约束他的子弟，使他们不敢肆意作恶，京都官民也因此而称赞他。
English: He was also able to restrain his sons, so that they would not dare to do evil, and Kyoto officials and citizens praised him for this.

古文：居正固有才，其所以得委任专国柄者，由保为之左右也。
现代文：张居正固有才干，他所以能够被委任专掌国政，也是靠了冯保的帮助。
English: Zhang Jizheng's inherent talent, which enabled him to be appointed to be in charge of state affairs, also relied on Feng Bao's help.

古文：然保性贪，其私人锦衣指挥徐爵、内官张大受，为保、居正交关语言。
现代文：但冯保性贪，他的私人锦衣卫指挥徐爵、宦官张大受，都与冯保、张居正交往。
English: However, Feng Bao was sexually greedy, and his personal brocade and clothing guard commander Xu Jie and eunuch Zhang Dashu were all in contact with Feng Bao and Zhang Jiusheng.

古文：且数用计使两人相疑，旋复相好，两人皆在爵术中。
现代文：徐爵还多次用计使冯、张二人相互怀疑，不久又复归于好，两人都在他的算计之中。
English: Xu Jie also repeatedly used tricks to make Feng and Zhang suspect each other, and they soon reconciled. Both of them were in his calculations.

古文：事与筹画，因恃势招权利，大臣亦多与通。
现代文：他凡事参与筹画，趁机恃势谋取权利，大臣也多与他交往。
English: He participated in the planning of everything, took advantage of opportunities to seek power, and the minister also interacted with him.

古文：爵夜至禁门，守卫者不敢诘，其横如此。
现代文：徐爵夜间到禁门，守卫的人竟不敢询问，他就是这么骄横。
English: When Xu Jie went to the forbidden gate at night, the guards didn't dare to question him. That's how arrogant he was.

古文：居正之夺情及杖吴中行等，保有力焉。
现代文：张居正的 夺情 以及杖打吴中行等事，冯保都出了力。
English: Feng Bao was instrumental in Zhang Juzheng's infatuation and in beating Wu Zhongxing with a cane.

古文：已而居正死，其党益结保自固。
现代文：不久张居正死，他的党徒进一步与冯保勾结，以巩固自己的地位。
English: Soon, Zhang Jiu was dying, and his followers further colluded with Feng Bao to consolidate their position.

古文：居正以遗疏荐其座主潘晟入阁，保即遣官召之。
现代文：张居正用遗疏推荐他的座主潘晟入阁，冯保马上派官去召他。
English: Zhang Juzheng used the bequest to recommend his host, Pan Xuan, to the cabinet, and Feng Bao immediately sent an official to summon him.

古文：御史雷士桢、王国，给事中王继光相继言其不可用，晟中途疏辞。
现代文：御士雷士桢、王国，给事中王继光相继说他不可用，潘晟便中途上疏推辞。
English: Wang Jiguang, the commander of Lai Shizhen and the kingdom, successively said that he could not be used in the matter, and Pan Xuan resigned on the way.

古文：内阁张四维度申时行不肯为晟下，拟旨允之，帝即报可。
现代文：内阁张四维估计申时行不肯居潘晟之下，起草圣旨批准潘晟的辞呈，皇上马上批准了。
English: Zhang Siwei's cabinet estimated that Shenshixing did not want to be subordinate to Pan Zheng, and drafted a decree to approve Pan Zheng's resignation, which was immediately approved by the emperor.

古文：保时病起，诟曰： 我小恙，遽无我耶？ 
现代文：冯保当时刚病好，骂道 ：我有了点小病，马上便把我弃在一边了？ 
English: Feng Bao had just recovered from an illness at the time, and scolded, "I have a minor illness, and you immediately cast me aside?

古文：皇太子生，保欲封伯爵，四维以无故事难之，拟荫弟侄一人都督佥事。
现代文：皇太子出生，冯保想给自己封伯爵，张四维引故事为难他，拟让他庇荫侄儿一人为都督佥事。
English: When the crown prince was born, Feng Bao wanted to make himself an earl. Zhang Siwei puzzled him by telling him a story, intending to let him protect his nephew as a duke.

古文：保怒曰： 尔由谁得今日，而负我！ 
现代文：冯保怒道 ：你是靠谁才有今日的？现在反而背叛了我！ 
English: Feng Bao fumed, "Who did you rely on to get where you are today? Instead, you betrayed me!"

古文：御史郭惟贤请召用吴中行等，保责其党护，谪之。
现代文：御史郭惟贤请召用吴中行等人，冯保责备他袒护他们，将他贬职。
English: Gu Guo Wei Xian asked for Wu Zhong Xing and others to be summoned, but Feng Bao scolded him for protecting them and demoted him.

古文：吏部尚书王国光罢，保辄用其乡人梁梦龙代。
现代文：吏部尚书王国光被罢，冯保擅自用他的同乡梁梦龙来代替。
English: The head of the personnel department, Shang Shuxu Wang Guan Guang, was ousted, and Feng Bao arbitrarily replaced him with his countryman Liang Menglong.

古文：爵、大受等窃权如故。
现代文：徐爵、张大受等人窃权如故。
English: The theft of power by Xu Jie, Zhang Dazhu and others continues unabated.

古文：然是时太后久归政，保失所倚，帝又积怒保。
现代文：但这时太后已归政很久，冯保失去倚靠，皇上又积怒于他。
English: But by that time, the empress dowager had been in power for a long time, Feng Bao had lost his trust, and the emperor was angry with him.

古文：东宫旧阉张鲸、张诚间乘陈其过恶，请令闲住。
现代文：东宫旧阉张鲸、张诚乘隙陈述他的过恶，请令他闲住。
English: The East Palace's former eunuchs Zhang Zhai and Zhang Zhengyi took advantage of the gap to report his misdeeds. Please let him stay idle.

古文：帝犹畏之，曰： 若大伴上殿来，朕奈何？ 
现代文：皇上还害怕他，说： 如果大伴上殿来，朕怎么办？ 
English: The emperor was still afraid of him and said, "What will I do if my grand companion comes to court?

古文：鲸曰： 既有旨，安敢复入。 
现代文：张鲸说： 既已下了圣旨，他怎敢再进来？ 
English: Zhang Jiu said, "How dare he come in again after he has already made his vow?"

古文：乃从之。
现代文：皇上才听从了。
English: So he followed the advice of Gong Su.

古文：会御史李植、江东之弹章入，遂谪保奉御，南京安置，久之乃死。
现代文：正好御史李植、江东之弹劾冯保的奏章也呈进来了，皇上便将冯保贬为奉御，发往南京安置，过了很久才死。
English: Just as the report of the impeachment of Feng Bao by the imperial historian Li Zhi and Jiangdong also came in, the emperor demoted Feng Bao to a vassal and sent him to Nanjing for resettlement, where he died a long time later.

古文：其弟佑、从子邦宁并官都督，削职下狱，瘐死。
现代文：他的弟弟冯佑、从子邦宁都官居都督，这时都被削职下狱，死于狱中。
English: His younger brother, Feng You, and son-in-law, Bonning, were both demoted from their posts and sent to prison, where they died.

古文：大受其党周海、何忠等八人，贬小火者，司香孝陵。
现代文：张大受及其党羽周海、何忠等八人，被贬为小火者，到孝陵司香。
English: Eight people, including Zhang Dayu and his followers Zhou Hai and He Zhong, were reduced to minor firefighters and sent to Xiaoling for incense.

古文：爵与大受子，烟瘴永戍。
现代文：徐爵和张大受的儿子，被永远遣往烟瘴之地戍边。
English: The son of Xu Jie and Zhang Datong was sent to the Land of Smoky Mountains, Shandong Province, forever.

古文：尽籍其家，保金银百余万，珠宝瑰异称是。
现代文：将他们全部抄家，获得冯保的金银百余万，珠宝奇珍也不少。
English: He ransacked all of their homes and obtained more than one million yuan of Feng Bao's gold and silver, as well as many rare jewels.

古文：保之发南京也，太后问故。
现代文：冯保被发往南京时，太后问其原因。
English: When Feng Bao was sent to Nanjing, the Empress Dowager asked him why.

古文：帝曰： 老奴为张居正所惑，无他过，行且召还。 
现代文：皇上说 ：这老奴为张居正所迷惑，没别的过错，过后将会把他召回。 
English: The emperor said, "This old man is bewildered by Zhang Jizheng, there is no other fault, he will be recalled later."

古文：时潞王将婚，所需珠宝未备，太后间以为言。
现代文：当时潞王将要成婚，所需的珠宝未备，太后闲时说起。
English: At that time, King Yao was about to get married, but the jewelry he needed was not ready, so his mother-in-law began to talk about it idly.

古文：帝曰： 年来无耻臣僚，尽货以献张、冯二家，其价骤贵。 
现代文：皇上说： 近年来一些无耻臣僚，尽将珠宝买来献给张、冯两家，使珠宝价钱骤然上涨。 
English: The emperor said: In recent years, some shameless ministers have bought jewelry to dedicate to Zhang and Feng, causing the price of jewelry to rise sharply.

古文：太后曰： 已籍矣，必可得。 
现代文：太后说： 已将他们抄家了，肯定获得不少。 
English: The empress dowager said, "I've already ransacked their homes, and I'm sure I've gained a lot.

古文：帝曰： 奴黠猾，先窃而逃，未能尽得也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：这些奴才很狡猾，先窃出逃亡了，未能全部获得。 
English: The emperor said, "These slaves are very cunning. They stole and fled first, but they didn't get everything."

古文：而其时，锦衣都督刘守有与僚属张昭、庞清、冯昕等，皆以籍罪人家，多所隐没，得罪。
现代文：而那时候，锦衣卫都督刘守有与属下张昭、庞清、冯昕等人，都借抄没罪犯之家，隐没不少钱财，因此而获罪。
English: At that time, Liu Shouyu, the governor of Jinlingwei, and his subordinates Zhang Zhao, Pang Qing, Feng Qi, and others, all borrowed money from the criminal's home and lost a lot of money, so they were convicted.

古文：张鲸，新城人，太监张宏名下也。
现代文：张鲸，新城人，属太监张宏名下。
English: Zhang Jiali, a resident of Xincheng, belongs to the eunuch Zhang Hong.

古文：内竖初入宫，必投一大珰为主，谓之名下。
现代文：内竖刚一入宫，必须投靠某个大为主人，称为名下。
English: As soon as a vajra enters the palace, it must go to the service of a great lord, known by his name.

古文：冯保用事，鲸害其宠，为帝画策害保。
现代文：冯保专权用事时，张鲸嫉妒他受宠，便为皇上献计谋害他。
English: When Feng Bao was in charge, Zhang Jiali was jealous that he was favored, so he plotted to kill him for the emperor.

古文：宠谓鲸曰： 冯公前辈，且有骨力，不宜去之。 
现代文：张宏对张鲸说 ：冯公是前辈，而且有骨气，不宜除去他。 
English: Zhang Hong said to Zhang Yu: Feng Gong is a senior, and has a backbone, it is not appropriate to remove him.

古文：鲸不听。
现代文：张鲸不听。
English: Zhang Jia didn't listen.

古文：既谮逐保，宏遂代保掌司礼监，而鲸掌东厂。
现代文：陷害逐出冯保后，张宏遂取代冯保执掌司礼监，而张鲸之辈掌东厂。
English: After Feng Bao was ousted in a frame-up, Zhang Hong succeeded in replacing Feng Bao as ceremonial supervisor, while Zhang Jiali's descendants took control of the East Factory.

古文：宏无过恶，以贤称，万历十二年卒。
现代文：张宏没有过恶，以贤能著称，万历十二年去世。
English: Zhang Hong did not commit any crimes and was known for his virtue. He passed away in the twelfth year of Wanli.

古文：张诚代掌司礼监。
现代文：张诚取代他掌司礼监。
English: Zhang Cheng replaced him as chief proctor.

古文：十八年，鲸罢东厂，诚兼掌之。
现代文：十八年，张鲸被罢去东厂职务。张诚便兼掌东厂。
English: In 18 years, Zhang Jiali was dismissed from the East Factory. Zhang Cheng also took charge of the East Factory.

古文：二十四年春，以诚联姻武清侯，擅作威福，降奉御，司香孝陵，籍其家，弟侄皆削职治罪。
现代文：二十四年春，因张诚与武清侯联姻，擅作威福，将他降为奉御，发往孝陵司香，并将他抄家，弟侄都被撤职治罪。
English: In the spring of the twenty-fourth year, because of Zhang Cheng and Wu Qinghong's marriage, he was reduced to a vassal, sent to Xiaoling Sika, and his home was raided. His brothers and nephews were removed from their posts and punished.

古文：鲸性刚果，帝倚任之。
现代文：张鲸性刚毅果断，皇上倚信他。
English: Zhang Jiali is resolute and resolute, and the emperor trusts him.

古文：其在东厂兼掌内府供用库印，颇为时相所惮。
现代文：他在东厂时兼掌内府供应库印，颇为当时的宰相所忌惮。
English: When he was in charge of the East Factory, he was also in charge of the inner-prefecture supply seal, which was quite feared by the prime minister at the time.

古文：而其用事司房邢尚智，招权受赇。
现代文：而他任用事司房的刑尚智，招权受贿。
English: But he appointed the secretary of the office of punishment, Shang Zhi, to receive bribes.

古文：万历十六年冬，御史何出光劾鲸及其党鸿胪序班尚智与锦衣都督刘守有相倚为奸，专擅威福，罪当死者八。
现代文：万历十六年冬，御史何出光弹劾张鲸和他的党羽鸿胪寺序班刑尚智与锦衣卫都督刘守有狼狈为奸，专擅刑赏，有八人应处以死罪。
English: In the winter of the 16th year of the Wanli era, the imperial court impeached Zhang Jiali and his followers, including eight who should be sentenced to death.

古文：帝命鲸策励供事，而削尚智、守有职，余党法司提问。
现代文：皇上勉励张鲸，仍让他供事，而免去刑尚智、刘守有的职务，其他党徒交给法司审问。
English: The emperor encouraged Zhang Jiali and still let him serve, but exempted Shang Zhi and Liu Shouyi from punishment, and other party members were handed over to the legal department for interrogation.

古文：给事中陈尚象、吴文梓、杨文焕，御史方万策、崔景荣复相继论列，报闻。
现代文：给事中陈尚象、吴文梓、杨文焕、御史方万策、崔景荣又相继上书论奏，回报说知道了。
English: During the presentation, Chen Shangxiang, Wu Wenzi, Yang Wenhong, Gu Shifang Wanshe, and Cui Jingrong successively delivered book reviews, and the feedback was clear.

古文：法司奏鲸等赃罪，尚智论死，鲸被切责。
现代文：法司上奏称张鲸等犯了贪污罪，结果刑尚智被判死罪，张鲸受到严厉斥责。
English: The Supreme People's Procuratorate announced that Zhang Jiali and others had committed the crime of corruption. As a result, Shang Zhi was sentenced to death, and Zhang Jiali was severely reprimanded.

古文：给事中张应登再疏论之，御史马象乾并劾大学士申时行阿纵。
现代文：给事中张应登再上疏弹劾张鲸，御史马象乾还弹劾大学士申时行庇护他。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhang Yingdeng went to the court again to impeach Zhang Jiali, and Goshima Xiangqian also supported him when he impeached the university judge.

古文：帝皆不听，命下象乾诏狱。
现代文：皇上都不听，命将马象乾投进监狱。
English: The emperor did not listen, and ordered Ma Xiangqian to be thrown into prison.

古文：以时行及同官许国、王锡爵等申救，象乾疏乃留中。
现代文：因申时行和同僚许国、王钅易爵等人的申救，皇上才将马象乾的奏疏留中不发。
English: It was because of the pleas for help from Shih-hong and his colleagues, such as Xu Guo and Wang Zhi Yi Jie, that the emperor kept Ma Xiangqian's report from being published.

古文：给事中李沂至谓帝纳鲸金宝，故宽鲸罪。
现代文：给事中李沂甚至说皇上接受张鲸的金宝，所在才宽宥了张鲸的罪过。
English: During the incident, Li Yao even said that the emperor only forgave Zhang Hui's sins because he accepted Zhang Hui's gold treasure.

古文：帝大怒，言沂等为张居正、冯保报复，杖六十，削其官，鲸亦私家闲住。
现代文：皇上大怒，说李沂等人为张居正、冯保报复，将他杖打六十下，撤了他的职，张鲸也回家闲住。
English: The emperor was furious, saying that Li Qian and others had retaliated against Zhang Jizheng and Feng Bao, beat him with a cane for sixty strokes, removed him from his post, and Zhang Jiali also went home to stay idle.

古文：已而南京兵部尚书吴文华率南九卿请罪鲸而宥言者，帝亦不听。
现代文：不久南京兵部尚书吴文华率领南九卿请求加罪张鲸而宽宥言官，皇上也不听。
English: Not long after, Wu Wenhua, the head of the Nanjing Military Department, led the Southern Nine Lords to plead for Zhang Jiali to be punished, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：寻复召鲸入。
现代文：不久又将张鲸召入宫。
English: Soon after, Zhang Jia was summoned to the palace.

古文：给事中陈与郊、御史贾希夷、南京吏部尚书陆光祖、给事中徐常吉、御史王以通等言益力，俱不报。
现代文：给事中陈与郊、御史贾希夷、南京吏部尚书陆光祖、给事中徐常吉、御史王以通等人更极力反对，都不见回报。
English: Chen and Suburban, Goshi Jia Xiyi, Nanjing Libe Shangshu Lu Guangzu, Goshi Xu Changji, Goshi Wang Yitong and others opposed more strenuously, but there was no return.

古文：最后大理评事雒于仁上酒色财气四箴，指鲸以贿复进。
现代文：最后大理寺评事雒于仁上奏《酒色财气》四篇箴言，指责张鲸通过贿赂重新获得任用。
English: In the end, the critic of Dali Temple, Gong Yuren, recited the four proverbs of "Wine and Wealth" and accused Zhang Jiali of using bribery to get reappointed.

古文：帝怒甚，召申时行等于毓德宫，命治于仁罪，而召鲸，令时行等传谕责训之，鲸宠遂衰。
现代文：皇上更加愤怒，将申时行等召到毓德宫，命令将雒于仁治罪，又将张鲸召来，令申时行等人传谕加以训斥，张鲸所受的宠爱从此衰落。
English: The emperor was even more enraged. He summoned Shin Shih-hong and others to the Summer Palace, ordering them to be lenient in dealing with the crime. He also summoned Zhang Jia and ordered Shin Shih-hong and others to be reprimanded. Zhang Jia's favorability declined from then on.

古文：尚智后减死充军。
现代文：刑尚智后来被免了死罪，发配充军。
English: Shangzhi was later acquitted of the death penalty and sentenced to military service.

古文：陈增，神宗朝矿税太监也。
现代文：陈增，是神宗朝的矿税太监。
English: Chen Zeng was the mining tax eunuch of the Shensong Dynasty.

古文：万历十二年，房山县民史锦奏请开矿，下抚按查勘，不果行。
现代文：万历十二年，房山县民史锦奏请开矿，皇上交给巡按调查，最后没有批准。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, Fangshan County's Min Shi Jinso requested to open a mine, and the emperor handed it over to the inspection and investigation, and finally did not approve.

古文：十六年，中使祠五台山，还言紫荆关外广昌、灵丘有矿砂，可作银冶。
现代文：十六年，宦官使者上五台山祭祀，回来后说紫荆山外的广昌、灵丘有矿砂，可以炼银。
English: Sixteen years ago, the eunuch's emissary went to Mount Wutai to offer sacrifices. After returning, he said that Guangchang and Lingqiu outside Mount Bauhinia had mineral sand that could be used to make silver.

古文：帝闻之喜，以大学士申时行等言而止。
现代文：皇上听后很高兴，但因大学士申时行的反对而止。
English: The Emperor was very pleased to hear this, but he did not do so because of the opposition of the Daigaku Shishi.

古文：十八年，易州民周言、张世才复言阜平、房山各产矿砂，请遣官开矿。
现代文：十八年，易州百姓周言、张世才又说阜平、房山都产矿砂，请遣官开矿。
English: In the 18th year, the people of Yizhou, Zhou Yan and Zhang Shicai, said that Fuping and Fangshan were producing mineral sand, and asked the officials to open the mine.

古文：时行等仍执不可。
现代文：申时行等人仍持反对意见。
English: Shin Shigyo and others still hold opposing views.

古文：至二十年，宁夏用兵，费帑金二百余万。
现代文：到二十年，宁夏用兵，耗费国库黄金二百余万。
English: By the 20th century, Ningxia had used soldiers and spent more than 2 million yuan of gold from the state treasury.

古文：其冬。朝鲜用兵，乎尾八年，费帑金七百余万。
现代文：这年冬，朝鲜用兵，前后八年，耗费国库黄金七百余万。
English: In the winter of that year, North Korea used soldiers for the first time in eight years, and spent more than seven million gold coins from the national treasury.

古文：二十七年，播州用兵，又费帑金二三百万。
现代文：二十七年，播州用兵，又耗费库金二三百万。
English: In the 27th year, Banzhou used soldiers and spent 23 million yuan of treasury money.

古文：三大征踵接，国用大匮。
现代文：三大战事接连发生，国家资财严重缺乏。
English: Three major wars occurred one after another, and the country was seriously short of funds and resources.

古文：而二十四年，乾清、坤宁两宫灾。
现代文：而二十四年，乾清、坤宁两宫失火。
English: However, in the 24th year, the Qianqing Palace and Kunning Palace were destroyed by fire.

古文：二十五年，皇极、建极、中极三殿灾。
现代文：二十五年，皇极、建极、中极三殿失火。
English: Twenty-five years ago, the three halls of the Emperor's Palace, the Emperor's Residence, and the Emperor's Middle Palace caught fire.

古文：营建乏资，计臣束手，矿税由此大兴矣。
现代文：修建缺乏资金，财政官员束手无策，矿税从此大兴了。
English: Due to the lack of funds for construction, financial officials were at a loss, and mining taxes have since boomed.

古文：其遣官自二十四年始，其后言矿者争走阙下，帝即命中官与其人偕往，天下在在有之。
现代文：遣官收税从二十四年开始，此后说开矿的人争相奔走于朝廷，每次皇上都立即命令宦官随来人前往，以致天下处处都有矿监。
English: The sending of officials to collect taxes began in the 24th year. After that, people who said they were mining rushed to the imperial court. Every time, the emperor immediately ordered eunuchs to follow, so that there were mine inspectors everywhere in the world.

古文：真、保、蓟、永则王亮，昌黎、迁安则田进，昌平、横岭、涞水、珠宝窝山则王忠，真定复益以王虎，并采山西平定、稷山，浙江则曹金，后代以刘忠，陕西则赵钦，山西则张忠，河南则鲁坤，广东则李凤、李敬，云南则杨荣，辽东则高淮，江西则潘相，福建则高寀，湖广则陈奉，而增奉敕开采山东。
现代文：真定、保定、蓟州、永州一带则有王亮；昌黎、迁安一带则有田进；昌平、横岭、涞水、珠宝窝山则有王忠；后来真定又增加王虎，并征取山西平定、稷山的矿税；浙江则有曹金，后来又换了刘忠；陕西则是赵钦，山西张忠，河南鲁坤，广东李凤、李敏，云南杨荣，辽东高淮，江西潘相，福建高采，湖广陈奉，而陈增则奉敕开采山东。
English: In the areas of Jinding, Baoding, Luzhou, and Yongzhou, there was Wang Liang; in the areas of Changli and Qian'an, there was Tianjin; in Changping, Hengling, Shishui, and Zhushunwoshan, there was Wang Zhong; later, in Jinding, Wang Hu was added, and the mineral taxes of Pingding and Lushan in Shanxi were collected; in Zhejiang, there was Cao Jin, and later, Liu Zhong; in Shaanxi, there was Zhao Qin, Zhang Zhong in Shanxi, Lukun in Henan, Li Feng and Li Min in Guangdong, Yang Rong in Yunnan, Ga

古文：通都大邑皆有税监，两淮则有盐监，广东则有珠监，或专遣，或兼摄。
现代文：通都大邑都有税监，两淮则有盐监，广东则有珠监，这些人有的是专门派遣，有的是兼管。
English: There are tax inspectors in major cities and towns, salt inspectors in Zhuhai, and pearl inspectors in Guangdong. Some of these people are specially dispatched, and some are concurrently in charge.

古文：大珰小监纵横绎骚，吸髓饮血，以供进奉。
现代文：这些大小监纵横骚扰，吸髓饮血，来供奉皇上。
English: These supervisors, big and small, harassed him from side to side, sucking his marrow and drinking his blood to worship the emperor.

古文：大率入公帑者不及什一，而天下萧然，生灵涂炭矣。
现代文：大概入国库的不到十分之一，而天下已经萧条，生灵涂炭了。
English: Probably less than a tenth goes into the state coffers, while the country is already in a depression and lives are in tatters.

古文：其最横者增及陈奉、高淮。
现代文：最为横行的是陈增、陈奉和高淮。
English: The most rampant are Chen Zeng, Chen Bong and Gao Huai.

古文：二十四年，增始至山东，即劾福山知县韦国贤，帝为逮问削职。
现代文：二十四年，陈增刚到山东，便弹劾福山县知县韦国贤，皇上下令逮捕审问，撤了他的职。
English: As soon as Chen Zeng arrived in Shandong in 1924, he impeached Wei Guoxian of Zhixian County, Fukuyama County, and the emperor ordered his arrest and interrogation, and removed him from his post.

古文：益都知县吴宗尧抗增，被陷几死诏狱。
现代文：益都知县吴宗尧抗逆陈增，被陷害几乎死在诏狱之中。
English: Wu Zong, Yidu County, resisted Chen Zeng, was framed and almost died in prison.

古文：巡抚尹应元奏增二十大罪，亦罚俸。
现代文：巡抚尹应元上奏陈增二十大罪，也被罚俸。
English: The procurator general, Yin Yingyuan, reported Chen Zeng's twenty major crimes, and was also fined.

古文：已，复命增兼徵山东店税，与临清税监马堂相争。
现代文：过后，皇上又命陈增兼征山东店税，导致他与临清税监马堂相争。
English: Later, the emperor also ordered Chen Zeng to collect the Shandong store tax, which led to a dispute between him and the Linqing Tax Supervisor Ma Tang.

古文：帝为和解，使堂税临清，增税东昌。
现代文：皇上为他们调解，让马堂征收临清税，陈增征收东昌税。
English: The emperor mediated for them and let Madang collect Linqing tax and Chen Zeng collect Dongchang tax.

古文：增益肆无忌，其党内阁中书程守训、中军官仝治等，自江南北至浙江，大作奸弊。
现代文：陈增更加肆无忌惮，他的党羽内阁中书程守训、中军官仝治等人，从大江南北到浙江，大作奸弊。
English: Chen Zeng was even more unscrupulous. His party's cabinet members, including Shicheng Shouxun and Zengzhi, a Chinese military officer, committed major frauds from the north and south of the Yangtze River to Zhejiang.

古文：称奉密旨金宝，募人告密。
现代文：他自称奉皇上密旨寻找金宝，募人告密。
English: He claimed to have been sent by the emperor to search for gold and treasure and to recruit informers.

古文：诬大商巨室藏违禁物，所破灭什伯家，杀人莫敢问。
现代文：他诬陷大商巨室藏有违禁物品，使上百家被害得家破人亡。他杀人也没有人敢过问。
English: He framed a large merchant's huge house for the possession of prohibited items, causing hundreds of families to be killed. No one dared to question his murder.

古文：御史刘曰梧具以状闻，盐务少监鲁保亦奏守训等阻塞盐课，帝俱弗省。
现代文：御史刘曰梧将这些情况上报，盐务少监鲁保也上奏程守训等阻拦盐税的上交，皇上都不理会。
English: The Emperor did not pay any attention to the fact that the Imperial Historian Liu Caiwu reported the situation to the Emperor, and the Salt Supervisor Lu Bao also reported to the Emperor to observe the rules and regulations to prevent the salt tax from being handed over.

古文：久之，凤阳巡抚李三才劾守训奸赃。
现代文：后来，凤阳巡抚李三才弹劾程守训贪赃。
English: Later, Fengyang's procurator Li Sancai impeached Cheng Shouxun for corruption.

古文：蓟辽总督蹇达再疏暴淮罪，乃召归，而以通湾税监张晔兼领其事。
现代文：陈增害怕了，便搜出程守训违禁的珍宝以及贿赂赃银四十余万，上报朝廷。
English: Chen Zeng was afraid, so he searched out the treasures prohibited by the Cheng Shouxun and bribed more than 400,000 yuan, and reported them to the imperial court.

古文：获阳竟死狱中，邦才至四十一年乃释。梁永，御马监监丞也。
现代文：皇上命将程守训押上京师审问，后来判了死罪。而陈增在山东肆行作恶十年，到三十三年才死。梁永，是御马监监丞。
English: The emperor sent Cheng Shouxun to Beijing for interrogation, and later sentenced him to death. Chen Zeng, on the other hand, lived in Shandong for ten years and died in 1933. Liang Yong was the overseer of Mima.

古文：万历二十七年二月命往陕西徵收名马货物。
现代文：万历二十七年二月奉命到陕西征收名马货物。
English: In February of the 27th year of Wanli, he was ordered to go to Shaanxi to collect famous horse goods.

古文：税监故不典兵，永独畜马五百匹，招致亡命，用千户乐纲出入边塞。
现代文：税监原本不掌管军队，梁永却私自蓄养马匹五百，招致亡命之徒，用千户乐纲率领出入边塞。
English: Originally, the tax inspector did not control the army, but Liang Yong raised five hundred horses on his own, invited the outlaws, and led them into and out of the border fortress with the music of a thousand households.

古文：富平知县王正志发其奸，并劾矿监赵钦。
现代文：富平知县王正志揭发他的奸状，并弹劾矿监赵钦。
English: Wang Zhengzhi of Fuping County exposed his treachery and impeached the mine supervisor Zhao Qin.

古文：诏逮正志，瘐死诏狱中。
现代文：皇上令逮捕王正志，后来他死在诏狱之中。
English: The emperor ordered the arrest of Wang Zhengzhi, who later died in prison.

古文：渭南知县徐斗牛，廉吏也。
现代文：渭南知县徐斗牛，是个廉洁的官员。
English: Xu Dou Niu, from Nanzhi County, Fujian Province, is an incorruptible official.

古文：永责赂，箠毙县吏卒，斗牛愤恨自缢死。
现代文：梁永索求贿赂，还打死了本县吏卒，徐斗牛愤恨自缢而死。
English: Liang Yong solicited bribes and killed a county official, while Xu Dou Niu killed himself in anger.

古文：巡抚贾待问奏之，帝顾使永会勘。
现代文：巡抚贾待问将此事上奏，皇上却令梁永参与调查。
English: The governor Jia Zhidong reported the matter, but the emperor ordered Liang Yong to participate in the investigation.

古文：永反劾西安同知宋贤，并劾待问有私，请皆勘。
现代文：梁永倒过来弹劾西安府同知宗贤，并弹劾贾待问有私情，请求对他们进行调查。
English: Liang Yong turned around and impeached Xi'an government confidant Zongxian, and impeached Jia Jiao for having personal feelings, requesting an investigation into them.

古文：帝从之，而宥待问。
现代文：皇上听从了，但宽宥了贾待问。
English: The emperor obeyed, but pardoned Jia Zhidong.

古文：永又请兼镇守职衔。
现代文：梁永又请求兼镇守之职。
English: Liang Yong also requested the post of town guard.

古文：又请率兵巡花马池、庆阳诸盐池，徵其课。
现代文：又请率兵巡视花马池、庆阳等盐池，对它们征税。
English: He also asked his soldiers to inspect salt ponds such as Hanama Pond and Qingyang Pond, and levy taxes on them.

古文：缘是帅诸亡命，具旌盖鼓吹，巡行陕地。
现代文：他因此率领那帮亡命之徒打着旌旗伞盖，吹吹打打，巡视陕西地区。
English: As a result, he led the gang of desperadoes to patrol the Shaanxi region with the banner and umbrella.

古文：尽发历代陵寝，搜摸金玉，旁行劫掠。
现代文：他将历代陵墓全部挖掘，搜求金银玉器，劫掠邻近地区。
English: He excavated all the mausoleums of all ages, searched for gold, silver and jade, and plundered the surrounding area.

古文：所至，邑令皆逃。
现代文：所到之处，县令全都逃亡。
English: Wherever they went, the magistrates fled.

古文：杖死县丞郑思颜、指挥刘应聘、诸生李洪远等。
现代文：他杖死县丞郑思颜、指挥刘应聘、生徒李洪远等人。
English: He cane to death county magistrate Zheng Siyan, conductor Liu Beiyan, student Li Hongyuan and others.

古文：纵乐纲等肆为淫掠，私宫良家子数十人。
现代文：他放任乐纲等人肆意淫掠，私自阉割良家子弟数十人。
English: He allowed others such as Le Gang to engage in wanton sexual predation, and personally castrated dozens of children from good families.

古文：税额外增耗数倍，蓝田等七关岁得十万。
现代文：在正项税额之外，他把折耗之征增加了数倍，蓝田等七关仅这一项每年就得十万钱。
English: In addition to the positive tax amount, he increased the depreciation fee several times, and Lantian and other seven gates alone earned 100,000 yuan a year.

古文：复用奸人胡奉言，索咸阳冰片五十斤、羊毛一万斤、麝香二十斤。
现代文：他又采纳奸人胡奉的建议，索要咸阳冰片五十斤，羊毛一万斤，麝香二十斤。
English: He also took the advice of the traitor Hu Bong and asked for 50 catties of Xianyang ice chips, 10,000 catties of wool, and 20 catties of musk.

古文：知县宋时际怒，勿予。
现代文：知县宋时际很愤怒，不给他。
English: Zhixian Song Shiji was furious and refused to give him the money.

古文：咸宁人道行遇盗，迹之，税使役也，知县满朝荐捕得之。
现代文：咸宁有人途中遇到强盗，追寻他们的踪迹，发现是税使所派，知县满朝荐捉拿了他们。
English: Some people in Xianning encountered robbers on the way, followed their tracks, found that they were sent by the tax authorities, and were caught by the county's Manchurian recommendation.

古文：永诬时际、朝荐劫税银，帝命逮时际，而以朝荐到官未久，镌秩一级。
现代文：梁永便诬告宋时际、满朝荐抢劫税银，皇上下令逮捕宋时际，而满朝荐因到官不久，被降一级。
English: Liang Yong falsely accused Song Shijie and Manchurian Recommendation of robbing taxes and silver. The emperor ordered the arrest of Song Shijie, while Manchurian Recommendation was demoted one level because he had not been in office for long.

古文：陕西巡抚顾其志尽发其奸，且言秦民万众，共图杀永。
现代文：陕西巡抚顾其志全部揭发了梁永的奸状，并说陕西人民万众一心，共图杀死梁永。
English: Gu Qizhi, the governor of Shaanxi Province, revealed all of Liang Yong's treachery, and said that the people of Shaanxi were united in a common plan to kill Liang Yong.

古文：大学士沈鲤、朱赓请械永归，以安众心。
现代文：大学士沈鲤、朱赓请将梁永押解回来，以安民心。
English: please release Liang Yong and bring him back, for the peace of mind of the people.

古文：帝悉置不报，而释时际勿逮，复朝荐官。
现代文：皇上都搁置一边，不做答复，但释放了宋时际，并给满朝荐恢复原职。
English: The emperor put all of them aside and did not reply, but he released Song Shiji and recommended to the Manchu Dynasty that they resume their original duties.

古文：会御史余懋衡方按陕西，永惧，使纲鸩懋衡几死。
现代文：正好御史余懋衡正巡按陕西，梁永害怕了，便派乐纲用毒酒害余懋衡，使他差点死去。
English: At the same time, Liang Yong was on a tour in Shaanxi Province. Liang Yong was afraid, so he sent Music Guan to poison Yu Xuanheng with poisoned wine, causing him to almost die.

古文：讼于朝，言官攻永者数十疏，永部下诸亡命乃稍稍散。
现代文：余懋衡向朝廷投诉，言官上了数十篇奏疏攻击梁永，梁永部下的那些亡命之徒于是渐渐散去。
English: Yu Yu Heng complained to the imperial court, and the spokesman wrote dozens of reports attacking Liang Yong. Those outlaws under Liang Yong then gradually dispersed.

古文：其渠魁王九功、石君章等赍重宝，辎軿盈路，诈为上供物，持剑戟弓弩，结阵以行。
现代文：他们的首领王九功、石君章等人带着重宝，车辆盈路，诈称上交供物，手持剑戟弓弩，结成阵式前进。
English: Their leaders, Wang Jiu Gong, Shi Junzhang and others, marched with heavy treasures, a large number of vehicles, falsely claiming to be delivering offerings, holding swords, bows and arrows, and marched in formation.

古文：而永所遣人解马匹者，已乘邮传先发。
现代文：而梁永派去押送马匹的人，已先乘邮车出发。
English: However, the person sent by Liang Yong to escort the horses had already left by mail train.

古文：九功等急驰，欲追及与同出关。
现代文：王九功等人拼命驱赶，想追上去一同出关。
English: Wang Jiugong and others desperately drove them away, hoping to catch up and leave the pass together.

古文：朝荐疑其盗，见九功等后至无验，逻兵与格斗，追至渭南，杀数人，尽夺其装。
现代文：满朝荐怀疑他们是强盗，见后来到达的王九功等人没有凭据，便派兵拦住与他们格斗，杀死了几个人，将他们的行装全部夺了过来。
English: He suspected that they were robbers, and when he saw that Wang Jiu Gong and others who arrived later had no evidence, he sent soldiers to stop and fight with them, killed several people, and took all of their clothing.

古文：御史懋衡以捕盗杀伤闻。
现代文：御史余懋衡上报说满朝荐捉拿强盗，多有杀伤。
English: The Imperial Historian, Yu Qianheng, reported that the Manchurian Emperor recommended the capture of the robbers, and many were killed.

古文：永大窘，听乐纲谋，使人系疏发中驰奏： 九功等各贡名马、金珠、睛绿诸宝物，而咸宁知县朝荐承余御史指，伏兵渭南遮劫之，脔君章等，诬以盗。 
现代文：梁永很窘迫，听取乐纲的计谋，派人将奏疏系在头发中，飞驰上奏说： 王九功等人各自来进贡名马、金珠、绿宝石等宝物，而咸宁知县满朝荐承余御史的旨意，在渭南伏兵拦截，将石君章等人碎尸，诬为盗贼。 
English: Liang Yong was very embarrassed. After listening to the scheme of the music program, he sent someone to tie the cords in his hair and ran up to play: Wang Jiu Gong and others each came to pay tribute to famous horses, gold beads, emeralds and other treasures, while Xianning Zhixian recommended the Manchurian court to follow the will of Yu Guishi, intercepted the ambush in southern Fujian, and crushed the corpses of Shi Junzhang and others, falsely accusing them of theft.

古文：他若山东张晔、河南鲁坤、四川丘乘云辈，皆为民害。
现代文：皇上大怒说： 御史被毒害已无恙，而满朝荐竟代为报复，而且还抢劫贡物。 
English: The emperor was furious and said, "Goshi was poisoned and is now dead, but the Manchurian court recommended revenge and looted the tribute.

古文：迨帝崩，始下遗诏罢矿税，撤诸中使还京。
现代文：敕令逮捕满朝荐，而令巡按护送梁永等人回京。
English: The imperial edict ordered the arrest of Manchoshin, while the order patrol escorted Liang Yong and others back to Beijing.

古文：陈矩，安肃人。
现代文：这是三十四年的事。陈矩，安肃人。
English: This is a matter of thirty-four years. Chen Qi, An Su Ren.

古文：万历中，为司礼秉笔太监。
现代文：万历年间，任司礼监秉笔太监。
English: During the Wanli years, he was appointed as the chief eunuch of Bingpeng.

古文：二十六年提督东厂。
现代文：二十六年提督东厂。
English: Twenty-six years Admiral East Plant.

古文：为人平恕识大体。
现代文：他为人平直宽和，识大体。
English: He is a level-headed and broad-minded person with a good general knowledge.

古文：尝奉诏收书籍，中有侍郎吕坤所著《闺范图说》，帝以赐郑贵妃，妃自为序，鋟诸木。
现代文：他曾奉皇上之命收集书籍，其中有侍郎吕坤所著的《闺范图说》，皇上将它赐给郑贵妃，贵妃为这本书写了序，刊刻出版。
English: He had collected books on the emperor's orders, including "The Tale of the Maidens" by his attendant Lü Kun. The emperor gave it to Zheng Guifei, who wrote the preface for the book and had it published.

古文：时国本未定，或作《闺范图说》跋，名曰《忧危竑议》，大指言贵妃欲夺储位，坤阴助之，并及张养蒙、魏允贞等九人，语极妄诞。
现代文：当时太子还没确定，有人为《闺范图说》做了一篇跋，名叫《忧危议》，大意说贵妃欲夺取储君之位，吕坤暗中帮助她，并且涉及到张养蒙、魏允贞等九人，语言非常荒诞。
English: At that time, the crown prince was still undecided. Someone wrote an article for "A Tale of a Courtesan" called "A Tale of Worry," to the effect that the princess wanted to seize the position of crown princess, and Lu Kun secretly helped her, and it involved nine people, including Zhang Yaimeng and Wei Yunzhen. The language was very absurd.

古文：逾三年，皇太子立。
现代文：过了三年，皇太子确立。
English: Three years later, the crown prince was established.

古文：至三十一年十一月甲子昧爽，自朝房至勋戚大臣门，各有匿名书一帙，名曰《续忧危竑议》，言贵妃与大学士朱赓，戎政尚书王世扬，三边总督李汶，保定巡抚孙玮，少卿张养志，锦衣都督王之桢，千户王名世、王承恩等相结，谋易太子，其言益妄诞不经。
现代文：到三十一年十一月甲子日凌晨，从朝房到各个勋戚大臣的门口，都有一封匿名信，名叫《续忧危议》，说贵妃与大学士朱赓、兵部尚书王世扬、三边总督李汶、保定巡抚孙玮、少卿张养志、锦衣卫都督王之桢、千户王名世、王承恩等人相勾结，图谋更换太子，语言更加荒诞不经。
English: By the early morning of November 31st, there was an anonymous letter from the Imperial Household to the door of each Minister of the Imperial Family, named "Continuation of Worries and Dangers," saying that Guifei had colluded with the university scholar Zhu Xi, the military official Wang Shiyang, the governor of the three sides Li Wen, the governor of Baoding Sun Qian, the junior minister Zhang Yazhi, the governor of the Jin Yi Wei capital Wang Zhixuan, the thousand-household king Mingshi, Wang Cheng'en and others to replace the crown prince, and the language was even more absurd.

古文：矩获之以闻，大学士赓奏亦入。
现代文：陈矩把这封信交给皇上，大学士朱赓也进去了。
English: Chen Ni handed the letter to the emperor, and Zhu Xi, a university scholar, also went in.

古文：帝大怒，敕矩及锦衣卫大索，必得造妖书者。
现代文：皇上大怒，敕令陈矩和锦衣卫大加搜索，一定要查出制造妖书的人。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered Chen Rong and Jin Rongwei to do a thorough search to find out who had made the demonic book.

古文：时大狱猝发，缉校交错都下，以风影捕系，所株连甚众。
现代文：当时大案突然发生，侦缉官校在都城四处活动，捕风捉影，滥加拘捕，因此被牵连的人很多。
English: At that time, a major case suddenly occurred, and the detective school was active all over the capital, chasing the wind and arresting indiscriminately, so many people were implicated.

古文：之桢欲陷锦衣指挥周嘉庆，首辅沈一贯欲陷次辅沈鲤、侍郎郭正域，俱使人属矩。
现代文：王之桢想陷害锦衣卫指挥周嘉庆，首辅沈一贯想陷害次辅沈鲤、侍郎郭正域，他们都派人嘱咐陈矩。
English: Wang Zhisheng wanted to frame Jin Rongwei's commander Zhou Jiaqing, the first assistant Shen always wanted to frame the second assistant Shen Yao and the waiter Guo Zhengwei, and they all sent people to order Chen Rui.

古文：矩正色拒之。
现代文：陈矩严正拒绝了他们。
English: Chen Rui sternly refused them.

古文：已而百户蒋臣捕皦生光至。
现代文：不久百户蒋臣将生光捉来。
English: Soon, the hundred households of Chiang Ch'ien captured the raw light.

古文：生光者，京师无赖人也，尝伪作富商包继志诗，有 郑主乘黄屋 之句，以胁国泰及继志金，故人疑而捕之。
现代文：生光是京师无赖之徒，曾伪造富商包继志的诗，其中有 郑主乘黄屋 一句，以此来威胁国泰和包继志，索取黄金，所以人们怀疑而将他逮捕。
English: Sheng Guang was a ruffian of the Beijing School. He had forged a poem of the rich merchant Bao Jizhi, including "Zheng Lord Rides the Yellow House," in order to threaten Guotai and Bao Jizhi and demand gold. Therefore, people suspected and arrested him.

古文：酷讯不承，妻妾子弟皆掠治无完肤。
现代文：对他严刑审问他都不承认，妻妾子弟都被拷打得体无完肤。
English: His wife, concubine and children were all tortured beyond recognition.

古文：矩心念生光即冤，然前罪已当死，且狱无主名，上必怒甚，恐辗转攀累无已。
现代文：陈矩心想生光即便是冤枉，但先前的罪名已够判他死罪，而且此案如果没有主犯，皇上必定非常愤怒，恐怕将辗转牵连不已。
English: Chen Rongxin wanted to be acquitted even if he was wronged, but the previous charges were enough to sentence him to death, and if there was no main culprit in this case, the emperor must be very angry, and I'm afraid he will be entangled forever.

古文：礼部侍郎李廷机亦以生光前诗与妖书词合。
现代文：礼部侍郎李廷机也认为生光前面的诗句与妖书词语相合。
English: Li Tingji, a waiter in the etiquette department, also believes that the verse in front of the raw light is consistent with the words of the fairy tale.

古文：乃具狱，生光坐凌迟死。
现代文：于是定案，生光被凌迟处死。
English: As a result, the case was closed, and Shoko was executed by lynching.

古文：鲤、正域、嘉庆及株连者，皆赖矩得全。
现代文：沈鲤、郭正域、周嘉庆以及其他受牵连的人，都赖陈矩得以保全。
English: Shen Yao, Guo Zhengwei, Zhou Jiaqing and other implicated people all rely on Chen Rui to be preserved.

古文：三十三年掌司礼监，督厂如故。
现代文：三十三年陈矩执掌司礼监，仍提督东厂。
English: Thirty-three years later, Chen Rui is still in charge of the director of ceremonies and is still the admiral of the East Factory.

古文：帝欲杖建言参政姜士昌，以矩谏而止。
现代文：皇上想杖打提建议的参政姜士昌，因陈矩的劝谏而止。
English: Jiang Shichang, who proposed to the emperor to participate in politics, was dissuaded by Chen Rui.

古文：云南民杀税监杨荣，帝欲尽捕乱者，亦以矩言获免。
现代文：云南百姓杀死税监杨荣，皇上想全部逮捕暴乱的人，也因陈矩的劝解而得以避免。
English: The people of Yunnan killed the tax inspector Yang Rong, and the emperor wanted to arrest all the rioters, which was also avoided by Chen Rui's persuasion.

古文：明年奉诏虑囚，御史曹学程以阻封日本酋关白事，系狱且十年，法司请于矩求出，矩谢不敢。
现代文：第二年他奉诏令向囚犯讯察决狱的情况，御史曹学程因为阻拦日本酋长的报告，被关在狱中已将近十年，法司请求陈矩放他出来，陈矩推辞说不敢。
English: The following year, he was ordered by imperial edict to inquire about the conditions of the prisoner's release from prison. Mishi Cao Xuecheng had been imprisoned for nearly ten years for obstructing the report of the Japanese chief. The justice department asked Chen Rui to release him, but Chen Rui did not dare to refuse.

古文：已而密白之，竟重释，余亦多所平反。
现代文：过后他偷偷告诉皇上。曹学程竟得释放，其他人也多获得平反。
English: Later, he secretly told the emperor that Cao Xuecheng had been released and that many others had been rehabilitated.

古文：又明年卒，赐祠额曰清忠。
现代文：又过了一年，陈矩去世，皇上赐给祠堂匾额叫 清忠 。
English: After another year, Chen Rui passed away, and the emperor gave a plaque to the ancestral hall called Qingzhong.

古文：自冯保、张诚、张鲤相继获罪，其党有所惩，不敢大肆。
现代文：自从冯保、张诚、张鲤相继犯罪后，他们的党羽有所警戒，不敢肆意妄为。
English: Since Feng Bao, Zhang Zhengyi, and Zhang Xuan committed crimes one after another, their party members have been cautious and dare not act recklessly.

古文：帝亦恶其党盛，有缺多不补。
现代文：皇上也厌恶他们结党太盛，出了空缺多不再补。
English: The Emperor was also disgusted by their excessive party-building, and when vacancies occurred, they were often not filled.

古文：迨晚年，用事者寥寥，东厂狱中至生青草。
现代文：到了晚年，弄权的人寥寥，东厂狱中甚至长出青草。
English: In his later years, few people tried to seize power, and grass even grew in the East Factory Prison.

古文：帝常膳旧以司礼轮供，后司礼无人，乾清宫管事牌子常云独办，以故侦卒稀简，中外相安。
现代文：皇上的日常膳食原由司礼监轮流供给，后来司礼监无人，由乾清宫的管事牌子常云独自承办，因此侦探稀少，中外相安。
English: The emperor's daily meals were originally supplied by the Master of Ceremonies on a rotating basis. Later, there was no Master of Ceremonies, and the steward of the Qianqing Palace, Changyun, undertook the work independently. As a result, there were few detectives, and China and foreign countries were safe.

古文：惟四方采榷者，帝实纵之，故贪残肆虐，民心愤怨，寻致祸乱云。
现代文：但四方采办的宦官，实是皇上放任他们，所以他们贪婪肆虐，民心怨愤，不久终于导致了祸乱。
English: However, the eunuchs procured by the four sides were actually allowed by the emperor, so their greed raged and the people's resentment soon led to disaster.

古文：王安，雄县人，初隶冯保名下。
现代文：王安，雄县人，最初隶属于冯保名下。
English: Wang An, a native of Xiongxian County, was initially subordinated to Feng Bao.

古文：万历二十二年，陈矩荐于帝，命为皇长子伴读。
现代文：万历二十二年，陈矩向皇上推荐他，任命为皇长子伴读。
English: In the 22nd year of Wanli, Chen Ru recommended him to the emperor and appointed him as the eldest son of the emperor.

古文：时郑贵妃谋立己子，数使人摭皇长子过。
现代文：当时郑贵妃图谋立自己的儿子为太子，多次派人收集皇长子的过失。
English: At that time, Zheng Guifei tried to set up her own son as the prince, and repeatedly sent people to collect the faults of the eldest son.

古文：安善调护，贵妃无所得。 梃击 事起，贵妃心惧。
现代文：王安善加调护，贵妃一无所得。 梃击 一事发生后，贵妃心中害怕。
English: Wang Anshan adjusted and adjusted, and Guifei got nothing. 击 After the incident, Guifei was afraid in her heart.

古文：安为太子属草，下令旨，释群臣疑，以安贵妃。
现代文：王安为太子起草，颁下令旨，解除群臣的疑虑，以安贵妃之心。
English: Wang An drafted and issued an order for the crown prince to relieve the doubts of the courtiers, with the heart of An Guifei.

古文：帝大悦。
现代文：皇上非常高兴。
English: The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：光宗即位，擢司礼秉笔太监，遇之甚厚。
现代文：光宗即位后，将他升为司礼监秉笔太监，待他很厚。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong, he was promoted to the position of Sirei Supervisor Bingpen Eunuch, and he was treated very well.

古文：安用其客中书舍人汪文言言，劝帝行诸善政，发帑金济边，起用直臣邹元标、王德完等，中外翕然称贤。
现代文：王安采纳他的门客中书舍人汪文言的建议，劝皇上实行一系列善政，发放国库金银接济边防，起用正直的大臣邹元标、王德宗等人，朝廷内外一致称赞他贤能。
English: Wang An took the advice of Wang Wenyan, a scholar and one of his disciples, and advised the emperor to implement a series of good policies, to issue treasury gold and silver to support the border defense, and to appoint honest ministers such as Xuan Yuanbiao and Wang Dezong. Both inside and outside the court, he was unanimously praised for his ability.

古文：大学士刘一燝、给事中杨涟、御史左光斗等皆重之。
现代文：大学士刘一火景、给事中杨涟、御史左光斗等人都敬重他。
English: People such as Liu Yiguo, a university professor, Yang Zhen, a middle-ranking official, and Zuo Guangdou, a senior official, all respect him.

古文：初，西宫李选侍怙宠陵熹宗生母王才人，安内忿不平。
现代文：当初，西宫的李选侍仗着皇上的宠爱迫害熹宗的生母王才人，王安心中忿忿不平。
English: At first, Li Xuanbi of the West Palace, acting as the emperor's favorite, persecuted Wang Cai Ren, the birth mother of Emperor Xizong, and Wang Anxin became angry and disgruntled.

古文：及光宗崩，选侍与心腹阉李进忠等谋挟皇长子自重，安发其谋于涟。
现代文：到光宗去世后，选侍与心腹阉官李进忠等人图谋挟持皇太子，以增加自己的份量，王安向杨涟揭露了她的阴谋。
English: After Guangzong's death, Wang An revealed her plot to Yang Hui, in which Wang An and her confidant, eunuch Li Jinzhong, and others plotted to seize the crown prince in order to increase their own power.

古文：涟偕一燝等入临，安绐选侍抱皇长子出，择吉即位，选侍移别宫去。
现代文：杨涟和刘一火景等人一同去向皇上遗体告别，王安骗选侍将皇长子抱出来，择吉日即位，选侍移往别宫去。
English: Yang Xi and Liu Yiguo and others went together to bid farewell to the emperor's body. Wang An deceived the attendants to pick up the emperor's eldest son, chose the auspicious day to ascend the throne, and moved the attendants to another palace.

古文：事详一燝等传。
现代文：事详刘一火景等人的传记。
English: The biographies of Liu Yi Huojing and others are detailed.

古文：熹宗心德安，言无不纳。
现代文：熹宗心中感激王安，他的话无不采纳。
English: Xizong was grateful to Wang An in his heart and accepted his words.

古文：安为人刚直而疏，又善病，不能数见帝。
现代文：王安为人刚直而粗率，又多病，不能常见皇上。
English: Wang An is an upright and rude person, and he is often ill. He cannot be a common emperor.

古文：魏忠贤始进，自结于安名下魏朝，朝日夕誉忠贤，安信之。
现代文：魏忠贤刚进宫时，与王安名下的魏朝结交，魏朝早晚都称赞魏忠贤，王安相信了。
English: When Wei Zhongxian just entered the palace, he made friends with the Wei Dynasty under the name of Wang An. The Wei Dynasty praised Wei Zhongxian morning and evening, and Wang An believed it.

古文：及安怒朝与忠贤争客氏也，勒朝退，而忠贤、客氏日得志，忌安甚。
现代文：后来王安怒魏朝和魏忠贤争夺客氏，勒令魏朝退出，而魏忠贤、客氏日益得志，很忌恨王安。
English: Later, Wang An was angry with the Wei Dynasty and Wei Zhongxian for competing for the Hakka clan, and ordered the Wei Dynasty to withdraw, while Wei Zhongxian and the Hakka clan became increasingly ambitious and hated Wang An.

古文：天启元年五月，帝命安掌司礼监，安以故事辞。
现代文：天启元年五月，皇上命王安执掌司礼监。王安引故事推辞。
English: In May of the year 1 of the Apocalypse, Wang An, by order of the emperor, took charge of the superintendent of ceremonies. Wang An cited the story in his resignation.

古文：客氏劝帝从其请，与忠贤谋杀之。
现代文：客氏劝皇上批准他的辞呈，与魏忠贤图谋杀害他。
English: He persuaded the emperor to approve his resignation and conspired with Wei Zhongxian to murder him.

古文：忠贤犹豫未忍，客氏曰： 尔我孰若西李，而欲遗患耶？ 
现代文：魏忠贤犹豫不忍，客氏说： 你我比西宫李选侍怎么样，还想留下后患吗？ 
English: Wei Zhongxian hesitated and could not bear it, and Mr. Guest said, "How are you and I compared to Xigong Li's choice of attendants? Do you still want to be left behind?

古文：忠贤意乃决，嗾给事中霍维华论安，降充南海子净军，而以刘朝为南海子提督，使杀安。
现代文：魏忠贤才下了决心，唆使给事中霍维华弹劾王安，将他降到南海子充净军，而以刘朝任南海子提督，让他杀死王安。
English: Wei Zhongxiancai made up his mind and instigated the leader of the incident, Hovihua, to impeach Wang An, demote him to the Nanhai Zi Cleansing Army, and appoint Liu as the Admiral of Nanhai Zi, and let him kill Wang An.

古文：刘朝者，李选侍私阉，故以移宫盗库下狱宥出者。
现代文：刘朝，是李选侍私阉，原先因涉及移宫和偷盗仓库财物被下狱，后得宽宥出狱。
English: Liu, who was Li Xuan's personal concubine, was originally jailed for involvement in the palace relocation and theft of warehouse property, but was later pardoned and released.

古文：既至，绝安食。
现代文：他到任后，不给王安饮食。
English: After he took office, Wang An was deprived of food and drink.

古文：安取篱落中芦菔啖之，三日犹不死，乃扑杀之。
现代文：王安取篱笆中的芦苇和萝卜来吃，三天还不死，刘朝于是将他打死。
English: Wang An took the asparagus and radish from the hedge to eat, and he did not die for three days. Liu Dynasty then beat him to death.

古文：安死三年，忠贤遂诬东林诸人与安交通，兴大狱，清流之祸烈矣。
现代文：王安死后三年，魏忠贤遂诬蔑东林党人与王安交通，兴起大狱，使清流之士受到残酷迫害。
English: Three years after Wang An's death, Wei Zhongxian slandered the Donglin Party members and Wang An Jiaotong, instigated a large-scale prison, and cruelly persecuted the people of Qingliu.

古文：庄烈帝立，赐祠额曰昭忠。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，赐给他祠堂匾额叫 昭忠 。
English: After Emperor Zhuangde ascended to the throne, he was given an ancestral hall scepter called Zhaozhong.

古文：魏忠贤，肃宁人。
现代文：魏忠贤，肃宁人。
English: Wei Zhongxian, from Suning.

古文：少无赖，与群恶少博，少胜，为所苦，恚而自宫，变姓名曰李进忠。
现代文：少时无赖，与一群恶少年赌博，他输后很苦恼，便恨而自宫，改姓名叫李进忠。
English: When he was a young ruffian, he gambled with a group of bad boys. He was very distressed after losing, so he left the palace in disgust and changed his name to Li Jinzhong.

古文：其后乃复姓，赐名忠贤云。
现代文：后来又改回原姓，得皇上赐名为魏忠贤。
English: Later, he changed back to his original surname and was given the name Wei Zhongxian by the emperor.

古文：忠贤自万历中选入宫，隶太监孙暹，夤缘入甲字库，又求为皇长孙母王才人典膳，谄事魏朝。
现代文：魏忠贤自万历年间被选入宫，隶属于太监孙暹，靠巴结他进入了甲字库。他又请求做皇长孙的母亲王才人的典膳，巴结上了魏朝。
English: Wei Zhongxian was elected to the palace in the Wanli era, and was subordinate to the eunuch Sun Siam. He entered the A-character library by means of patronage. He also requested to be the mother of the emperor's eldest grandson, Wang Cai Ren, and became a patron of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：朝数称忠贤于安，安亦善遇之。
现代文：魏朝多次向王安称赞魏忠贤，王安也就善待他。
English: The Wei Dynasty repeatedly praised Wei Zhongxian to Wang An, and Wang An also treated him well.

古文：长孙乳媪曰客氏，素私侍朝，所谓对食者也。及忠贤入，又通焉。客氏遂薄朝而爱忠贤，两人深相结。
现代文：长孙的乳母叫客氏，一向私下服侍魏朝，这就是所谓的对食关系，到魏忠贤进宫后，客氏又与他勾通，客氏于是冷遇魏朝而喜爱魏忠贤，两人结成了很深的关系。
English: The nanny of the eldest grandson was called Kake, who had always served the Wei Dynasty in secret. This is the so-called reciprocal relationship. After Wei Zhongxian entered the palace, Kake also colluded with him. Kake was cold to the Wei Dynasty and loved Wei Zhongxian. The two formed a deep relationship.

古文：光宗崩，长孙嗣立，是为熹宗。
现代文：光宗去世，长孙即位，这就是熹宗。
English: Guangzong died, and his eldest grandson ascended to the throne. This was the beginning of Jianzong.

古文：忠贤、客氏并有宠。
现代文：魏忠贤和客氏并受宠爱。
English: Wei Zhongxian and the Hakka clan were also favored.

古文：未逾月，封客氏奉圣夫人，荫其子侯国兴、弟客光先及忠贤兄钊俱锦衣千户。
现代文：没过一个月，封客氏为奉圣夫人，荫封她的儿子侯国兴、弟弟客光先以及魏忠贤的哥哥魏钊为锦衣卫千户。
English: Within a month, Lady Feng Sheng had been enthroned, and her son Hou Guoxing, her brother Gao Guangxian, and Wei Zhongxian's brother Wei Yao were crowning thousands of households.

古文：忠贤寻自惜薪司迁司礼秉笔太监兼提督宝和三店。
现代文：魏忠贤不久从惜薪司升任司礼监秉笔太监兼提督宝和三店。
English: Wei Zhongxian was soon promoted from the paymaster to the ceremonial supervisor, the pen eunuch and the admiral of the treasure and three stores.

古文：忠贤不识字，例不当入司礼，以客氏故，得之。
现代文：魏忠贤不识字，按例不能进司礼监，但因客氏的缘故，他得以破例。
English: Wei Zhongxian was illiterate and could not be promoted to the position of ceremonial supervisor as usual, but he was able to make an exception for the sake of the guest.

古文：天启元年诏赐客氏香火田，叙忠贤治皇祖陵功。
现代文：天启元年诏令赐给客氏香火田，给魏忠贤记治理皇祖陵墓的功劳。
English: The Emperor's edict in the first year of the Heian period gave the Kake clan the incense field and Wei Zhongxian the honor of managing the imperial mausoleum.

古文：御史王心一谏，不听。
现代文：御史王心一劝谏，皇上不听。
English: The emperor did not listen to the prince's heartfelt advice.

古文：及帝大婚，御史毕佐周、刘兰请遣客氏出外，大学士刘一燝亦言之。
现代文：到皇上大婚时，御史毕佐周、刘兰请将客氏遣出宫外，大学士刘一火景也这么说。
English: When it came to the emperor's grand wedding, the imperial advisers Bi Zuo Zhou and Liu Lan asked that Mr. Kake be sent out of the palace, and so did the university scholar Liu Yi Huo Jie.

古文：帝恋恋不忍舍，曰： 皇后幼，赖媪保护，俟皇祖大葬议之。 
现代文：皇上恋恋不舍，说： 皇后年幼，尚需老媪护理，等皇祖大葬后再谈。 
English: The Emperor was not willing to give up, and said, "The Empress is still young, and still needs to be nursed. Let's wait until after the Emperor's great funeral."

古文：忠贤颛客氏，逐魏朝。
现代文：魏忠贤独占客氏，逐出魏朝。
English: Wei Zhongxian monopolized the Hakka clan and expelled it from the Wei Dynasty.

古文：又忌王安持正，谋杀之，尽斥安名下诸阉。
现代文：他又忌恨王安主持正道，阴谋杀死了他，将他名下的阉官全部斥退。
English: He also hated Wang An for presiding over the righteous path, plotted to kill him, and expelled all the eunuchs under his name.

古文：客氏淫而狠。
现代文：客氏淫毒凶狠。
English: Mr. Guest is vicious and venomous.

古文：忠贤不知书，颇强记，猜忍阴毒，好谀。
现代文：魏忠贤不知书，但记忆力很好，性猜疑残忍而且阴毒，好阿谀奉承。
English: Wei Zhongxian did not know how to read, but he had a good memory. His sexual suspicions were cruel and malicious, and he was a good flatterer.

古文：帝深信任此两人，两人势益张，用司礼临王体乾及李永贞、石元雅、涂文辅等为羽翼，宫中人莫敢忤。
现代文：皇上非常信任这两个人。两人势力更加嚣张，他们用司礼监王体乾和李永贞、石元雅、涂文辅等人为羽翼，宫中人都不敢忤逆他们。
English: The emperor trusted these two men very much. Their power was even more arrogant. They used the chief proctor of ceremonies, Wang Tieqian, as well as Li Yongzhen, Shi Yuan Ya, and Tu Wenju, as their wings. No one in the palace dared to oppose them.

古文：既而客氏出，复召入。
现代文：后来客氏出宫，但不久又被召入。
English: Later, Kakeuji left the palace, but was soon called back.

古文：御史周宗建、侍郎陈邦瞻、御史马鸣起、给事中侯震昜先后力诤，俱被诘责。
现代文：御史周宗建、侍郎陈邦瞻，御史马鸣起、给事中侯震先后极力谏阻，都受到斥责。
English: The imperial historian Zhou Zongjian, his attendant Chen Bangzhan, the imperial historian Ma Mingting, and the courtier Zhou Zhongzheng were all reprimanded for their strong resistance.

古文：给事中倪思辉、朱钦相、王心一复言之，并谪外，尚未指及忠贤也。
现代文：给事中倪思辉、朱钦相、王心一又向皇上进言，都被贬往外地。他们都还没有指向魏忠贤呢。
English: In the process, Ni Sihui, Zhu Qingsiang, and Wang Xinyi also made suggestions to the emperor, and they were all banished to foreign countries. They have not yet pointed to Wei Zhongxian.

古文：忠贤乃劝帝选武阉、炼火器为内操，密结大学士沈纮为援。
现代文：魏忠贤于是劝皇上选择武阉人，制造火器在宫内操练，并秘密勾结大学士沈翭为援。
English: Wei Zhongxian then advised the emperor to choose martial artists, to make firearms to practice in the palace, and to secretly collude with the university scholar Shen Yao for support.

古文：又日引帝为倡优声伎，狗马射猎。刑部主事刘宗周首劾之，帝大怒，赖大学士叶向高救免。
现代文：他又每天引导皇上沉溺于倡优声伎、狗马射猎之中，刑部主事刘宗周首先弹劾他，皇上大怒，赖大学士叶向高相救，才得以获免。
English: He also led the emperor every day to indulge in advocating excellent acoustics and dog-horse shooting. The head of the criminal department, Liu Zongzhou, first impeached him, the emperor was furious, and only by relying on the university scholar Ye Xianggao to save him was he able to be released.

古文：初，神宗在位久，怠于政事，章奏多不省。
现代文：当初，神宗在位年久，对政事已感到厌倦，章奏多不批阅。
English: At first, Shinso, who had been on the throne for a long time, was tired of politics, and did not approve most of the chapters.

古文：廷臣渐立门户，以危言激论相尚，国本之争，指斥营禁。
现代文：廷臣逐渐建立起门户，他们以过激惊人的言论为时尚，借国本之争，指斥宫禁。
English: The courtiers gradually built up a portal, and they were in vogue with their excessive and startling remarks, taking advantage of the national dispute and denouncing the palace ban.

古文：宰辅大臣为言者所弹击，辄引疾避去。
现代文：宰辅大臣被言官弹劾攻击，常常被迫称病引退。
English: The Vice-Minister was impeached and attacked by the spokesman, and was often forced to call in sick.

古文：吏部郎顾宪成讲学东林书院，海内士大夫多附之， 东林 之名自是始。
现代文：吏部尚书顾宪成在东林书院讲学，海内士大夫多依从他。 东林 之名从此而始。
English: Shangshu Gu Xiancheng lectured at Donglin College, and many doctors of internal medicine followed him. This is where the name Donglin began.

古文：既而 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三案起，盈廷如聚讼。
现代文：后来 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三案发生，整个朝廷如同在打官司。
English: Later, the three cases of "assault," "red circle" and "moving the palace" occurred, and the entire imperial court seemed to be involved in a lawsuit.

古文：与东林忤者，众目之为邪党。
现代文：与东林党相对抗的，众人便把他目为邪党。
English: When he opposed the Donglin Party, people regarded him as an evil party.

古文：天启初，废斥殆尽，识者已忧其过激变生。
现代文：天启初年，大臣几乎全被罢免斥退，有识之士已担忧搞得过激将要发生变乱。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, almost all the ministers were dismissed and expelled. People with insight were already worried that things would get too extreme and that there would be a revolution.

古文：及忠贤势成，其党果谋倚之以倾东林。
现代文：到魏忠贤势力形成后，他的党徒果然图谋要依靠他排挤东林党。
English: After the formation of Wei Zhongxian's forces, his party members tried to rely on him to oust Donglin's party.

古文：而徐大化、霍维华、孙杰首附忠贤，刘一燝及尚书周嘉谟并为杰劾去。
现代文：而徐大化、霍维华、孙杰首先依附魏忠贤，刘一火景和尚书周嘉谟都被孙杰弹劾而离去。
English: However, Xu Dahua, Huo Weihua and Sun Jie first followed Wei Zhongxian, while Liu Yi Huoqing and the monk Shu Zhou Jia Mu were all impeached by Sun Jie and left.

古文：然是时叶向高、韩爌方辅政，邹元标、赵南星、王纪、高攀龙等皆居大僚，左光斗、魏大中、黄尊素等在言路，皆力持清议，忠贤未克逞。
现代文：但当时叶向高、韩火广正在辅政，邹元标、赵南星、王纪、高攀龙等都官居高位，左光斗、魏大中、黄遵素等人在言路，他们都全力主持清议，魏忠贤没能得逞。
English: However, at that time, Ye Xianggao and Han Huiguang were supporting the government, Zou Yuanbiao, Zhao Nansing, Wang Ji, Gaopanlong and others were high-ranking officials, Zuo Guangdou, Wei Daizhong, Huang Zunsu and others were talking, they all tried their best to preside over the clear discussion, Wei Zhongxian did not succeed.

古文：二年叙庆陵功，荫忠贤弟侄锦衣卫指挥佥事。
现代文：二年评修庆陵功，荫封魏忠贤的侄儿为锦衣卫指挥佥事。
English: In the second year, a nephew of Wei Zhongxian, the eunuch of Wei Zhongxian, was selected as the conductor of Jin Yiwei.

古文：给事中惠世扬、尚书王纪论沈纮交通客、魏，俱被谴去。
现代文：给事中惠世扬、尚书王纪评论沈翭与魏忠贤、客氏交通，结果都被贬职。
English: Hui Shiyang, Shang Shou Wang Ji, Shen Zhen, Wei Zhongxian, and Hakka Jiaotong were all demoted as a result.

古文：会初夏雨雹，周宗建言雹不以时，忠贤谗慝所致。
现代文：正好初夏下冰雹，周宗建说冰雹下得不合时令，是魏忠贤谗言和邪恶造成的。
English: Just as the early summer hailstorm, Zhou Zongjian said that the hailstorm was out of season, which was caused by Wei Zhongxian's slander and evil.

古文：修撰文震孟、太仆少卿满朝荐相继言之，亦俱黜。
现代文：修撰文震孟、太仆寺少卿满朝荐也相继这样说，都被罢免。
English: Zhen Meng, the author of the essay, and Man Chaorui, the deacon of the temple, also said this one after another, and they were all dismissed.

古文：三年春，引其私人魏广微为大学士。
现代文：三年春，魏忠贤引荐私人魏广微为大学士。
English: In the spring of the third year, Wei Zhongxian introduced the private Wei Guangwei to the university.

古文：令御史郭巩讦宗建、一燝、元标及杨涟、周朝瑞等保举熊廷弼，党邪误国。
现代文：令御史郭巩攻讦周宗建、刘一火景、邹元标以及杨涟、周朝瑞等人保举熊廷弼，说他们袒护奸邪之徒，误了国家。
English: Guogong, the imperial historian, ordered Zhou Zongjian, Liu Yiguo, Xuan Yuanbiao, as well as Yang Xuan and Zhou Chaorui, to defend Xiong Tingtao, saying that they had failed the country by protecting evil-doers.

古文：宗建驳巩受忠贤指挥，御史方大任助宗建攻巩及忠贤，皆不胜。
现代文：周宗建反驳郭巩受了魏忠贤的指使，御史方大任也助宗建攻击郭巩和魏忠贤，但都不获胜。
English: Zhou Zongjian refuted that Guo Gong had been ordered by Wei Zhongxian, and the Grand Historian also helped Zongjian attack Guo Gong and Wei Zhongxian, but neither won.

古文：其秋，诏忠贤及客氏子国兴所荫锦衣官并世袭。
现代文：这年秋，皇上诏令魏忠贤和客氏的儿子侯国兴所庇荫的锦衣官准予世袭。
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor issued an imperial edict to allow Wei Zhongxian and Hakka's son, Guo Guoxing, to succeed to the post of brocade official.

古文：兵部尚书董汉儒、给事中程注、御史汪泗论交谏，不从。
现代文：兵部尚书董汉儒、给事中程注、御史汪泗论纷纷劝谏，皇上不从。
English: The Emperor did not follow the advice of the War Department's Shangshu Dong, Han Ju, Zhaozhong Note, and Goshi Wang, who all advised him.

古文：忠贤益无忌，增置内操万人，衷甲出入，恣为威虐。
现代文：魏忠贤更加肆无忌惮，将内操军增加到一万人，内穿甲衣出入宫禁，恣意作威施虐。
English: Wei Zhongxian was even more unscrupulous. He increased the number of troops under his command to ten thousand, banned the wearing of armor inside the palace, and arbitrarily used coercion and violence.

古文：矫诏赐光宗选侍赵氏死。
现代文：他假传圣旨将光宗的选侍赵氏赐死。
English: He falsely transmitted the sacred edict to have the Zhao clan, Guangzong's chosen servants, put to death.

古文：裕妃张氏有娠，客氏谮杀之。
现代文：裕妃张氏有身孕，客氏阴谋杀死了她。
English: Ms. Zhang was pregnant, and Mr. Guo conspired to kill her.

古文：又革成妃李氏封。
现代文：又革除成妃李氏的封号。
English: It also revoked the imperial seal of the Chengfei Li clan.

古文：皇后张氏娠，客氏以计堕其胎，帝由此乏嗣。
现代文：皇后张氏妊娠，客氏施计将她堕了胎。皇上因此缺乏子嗣。
English: Empress Zhang was pregnant, but Kake manipulated her into miscarrying, leaving the emperor without an heir.

古文：他所害宫嫔冯贵人等，太监王国臣、刘克敬、马鉴等甚众。
现代文：其他被害的还有冯贵人等宫嫔，以及太监王国臣、刘克敬、马鉴等人。
English: Other victims included imperial concubines such as Feng Guijin, as well as eunuchs such as Wang Guoxin, Liu Kegui, and Ma Jian.

古文：禁掖事秘，莫详也。
现代文：禁宫事秘，无法详尽了解。
English: The details of the Forbidden City are secret and cannot be fully understood.

古文：是冬，兼掌东厂事。
现代文：这年冬，魏忠贤兼领东厂事务。
English: In the winter of that year, Wei Zhongxian also took charge of the affairs of the East Factory.

古文：四年，给事中傅櫆结忠贤甥傅应星为兄弟，诬奏中书汪文言，并及左光斗、魏大中。
现代文：四年，给事中傅木魁交结魏忠贤的外甥傅应星为兄弟，上书诬告中书汪文言，并且连及左光斗、魏大中。
English: In four years, Fu Yingxing, the nephew of Fu Mikui and Wei Zhongxian, falsely accused Wang Wenyan, and even Zuo Guangdou and Wei Daizhong.

古文：下文言镇抚狱，将大行罗织。
现代文：汪文言被投进镇抚司监狱，并将被大行罗织罪名。
English: Wang Wenyan was thrown into the Zhenfushi Prison and will be charged with a large number of crimes.

古文：掌镇抚刘侨受叶向高教，止坐文言。
现代文：执掌镇抚司的刘乔接受叶向高的教导，不给汪文言定罪。
English: Liu Qiao, who was in charge of the town's magistrate, accepted Ye Xianggao's teaching and did not convict Wang Wenyong.

古文：忠贤大怒，削侨籍，而以私人许显纯代。
现代文：魏忠贤大怒，将刘乔撤职除名，用私人许显纯来代替他。
English: Wei Zhongxian was furious, removed Liu Qiao from his post and replaced him with a private Xu Xianjun.

古文：是时御史李应升以内操谏，给事中霍守曲以忠贤乞祠额谏，御史刘廷佐以忠贤滥荫谏，给事中沈惟炳以立枷谏，忠贤皆矫旨诘责。
现代文：这时御史李应升就内操的事进谏，给事中霍守典因魏忠贤乞求祠堂匾额而进谏，御史刘廷佐以魏忠贤滥加荫封进谏，给事中沈惟炳以设枷锁进谏，魏忠贤都假传圣旨给予斥责。
English: At this time, the Grand Historian Li Yingxing made a report on the matter of internal discipline, the Grand Historian Huo Shuxian made a report on the matter of Wei Zhongxian's begging for the donation of the ancestral hall, the Grand Historian Liu Tingzuo made a report on the matter of Wei Zhongxian's abuse of power, the Grand Historian Shen Weixuan made a report on the matter of setting shackles on Wei Zhongxian, and the Grand Historian Wei Zhongxian gave a reprimand on the matter of false transmission of the sacred will.

古文：于是副都御史杨涟愤甚，劾忠贤二十四大罪。
现代文：于是副都御史杨涟非常愤怒，弹劾魏忠贤二十四大罪。
English: As a result, the vice-governor of the capital, Shi Yangjun, was very angry and impeached Wei Zhongxian for the twenty-four major crimes.

古文：疏上，忠贤惧，求解于韩广不应，遂趋帝前泣诉，且辞东厂，而客氏从旁为剖析，体乾等翼之。
现代文：奏疏上呈后，魏忠贤害怕了，向韩火广请求调解。韩火广不答应，他便跑到皇上面前哭诉，并辞掉东厂职务。而客氏从旁为他解释，王体乾等人也一起护着他。
English: After the report was submitted, Wei Zhongxian was afraid and asked Han Huiguang to mediate. Han Huiguang did not agree, so he ran to the emperor to cry and resigned from the East Factory. Mr. Kake explained for him from the side, and Wang Tieqian and others also protected him.

古文：帝懵然不辨也。遂温谕留忠贤，而于次日下涟疏，严旨切责。
现代文：皇上懵然不辨真相，便温语安慰他，而在第二天打回杨涟的奏疏，痛加斥责。
English: The emperor did not seem to recognize the truth, so he consoled him with gentle words, but on the next day he beat back Yang Xuan's insolence and severely reprimanded him.

古文：涟既绌，魏大中及给事中陈良训、许誉卿，抚宁侯朱国弼，南京兵部尚书陈道亨，侍郎岳元声等七十余人，交章论忠贤不法。
现代文：杨涟既被斥责，魏大中以及给事中陈良训、许誉卿，抚宁侯朱国弼，南京兵部尚书陈道亨，侍郎岳元声等七十余人，纷纷上奏魏忠贤的不法事。
English: Not only was Yang Jie reprimanded, but more than 70 people, including Wei Daizhong, Chen Liangxun, Xu Rongqing, Zhu Guozhen, Fuxing Hou, Chen Daoheng, Shangshu of the Nanjing Military Department, and Yue Yuanxuan, the servant of Wei Zhongxian, reported Wei Zhongxian's illegal activities.

古文：向高及礼部尚书翁正春请遣忠贤归私第以塞谤，不许。
现代文：叶向高和礼部尚书翁正春请将魏忠贤遣回私宅，以平息公众的指责。皇上不许。
English: Ye Xianggao and the head of the etiquette department, Shang Shuong Zhengchun, requested that Wei Zhongxian be sent back to his private home to quell public criticism. The emperor would not allow it.

古文：当是时，忠贤愤甚，欲尽杀异己者。
现代文：那时，魏忠贤很气愤，想将异己者全部杀掉。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian was very angry and wanted to kill all the dissidents.

古文：顾秉谦因阴籍其所忌姓名授忠贤，使以次斥逐。
现代文：顾秉谦便偷偷地把魏忠贤所忌恨的人记录下来，交给他，让他逐个将他们贬斥。
English: Gu Bingqian secretly recorded the people that Wei Zhongxian detested and gave them to him so that he could disparage them one by one.

古文：王体乾复昌言用廷杖，威胁廷臣。
现代文：王体乾又倡议用廷杖，威胁廷臣。
English: Wang Tieqian also advocated the use of the imperial scepter to threaten courtiers.

古文：未几，工部郎中万燝上疏刺忠贤，立杖死。
现代文：不久，工部郎中万火景上书指责魏忠贤，立即被杖死。
English: Not long after, the foreman of the construction department, Wan Huo Jie, accused Wei Zhongxian in a letter and was immediately beaten to death.

古文：又以御史林汝翥事辱向高，向高遂致仕去，汝翥亦予杖。廷臣俱大詟。
现代文：魏忠贤又借御史林汝翥的事侮辱叶向高，叶向高因此辞职而去，而林汝翥也被杖打，廷臣都很恐惧。
English: Wei Zhongxian also insulted Ye Xianggao by taking advantage of Lin Ruxuan's affair. Ye Xianggao resigned as a result, and Lin Ruxuan was also beaten with a cane. The courtiers were very afraid.

古文：一时罢斥者，吏部尚书赵南星、左都御史高攀龙、吏部侍郎陈于廷及杨涟、左光斗、魏大中等先后数十人，已又逐韩爌及兵部侍郎李邦华。
现代文：一时间被罢斥的有吏部尚书赵南星、左都御史高攀龙、吏部侍郎陈于廷以及杨涟、左光斗、魏大中等前后数十人。其后又驱逐韩火广和兵部侍郎李邦华。
English: Zhao Nansing, the secretary of the General Office of the CPC Central Committee, Gao Panglong, the secretary of the General Office of the CPC Central Committee, and Chen Yuting, the secretary of the General Office of the CPC Central Committee, as well as Yang Hui, Zuo Guangdou, and dozens of people around Wei Da Middle School, were expelled for a while. Later, Han Huiguang and Li Banghua, the secretary of the General Office of the CPC Central Committee, were expelled.

古文：正人去国，纷纷若振槁。
现代文：正直之士离开朝廷，就如摇动枯树纷纷落下的叶子一样。
English: Honest men leave the court like leaves falling from a withered tree.

古文：乃矫中旨召用例转科道。
现代文：魏忠贤于是假传圣旨用旧例转科道官员。
English: Wei Zhongxian then used the old example of the false transmission of the holy will to convert officials.

古文：以朱童蒙、郭允厚为太仆少卿，吕鹏云、孙杰为大理丞，复霍维华、郭兴治为给事中，徐景濂、贾继春、杨维垣为御史，而起徐兆魁、王绍徽、乔应甲、徐绍吉、阮大铖、陈尔翌、张养素、李应荐、李嵩、杨春懋等，为之爪牙。
现代文：以朱童蒙、郭允厚为太仆少卿，吕鹏云、孙杰为大理寺丞，恢复霍维华、郭兴治为给事中，徐景濂、贾继春、杨维垣为御史，而起用徐兆魁、王绍徽、乔应甲、徐绍吉、阮大铖、陈尔翌、张养素、李应荐、李嵩、杨春懋等人作为他的爪牙。
English: Zhu Tongmeng, Guo Yunhou as the servant of the young lord, Lv Pengyun, Sun Jie as the president of the Dali Temple, Huo Weihua and Guo Xingzhi as the vice-presidents, Xu Jingyao, Jia Jichun, Yang Weigaki as the president, and Xu Zhaokui, Wang Shaohui, Qiao Yingjia, Xu Shaoji, Ruan Daju, Chen Erqiao, Zhang Yaxu, Li Yingren, Li Song, Yang Chunlian and others as his minions.

古文：未几，复用拟戍崔呈秀为御史。
现代文：不久，又起用拟被遣戍的崔呈秀为御史。
English: Soon, Cui Chengxiu, who was about to be exiled, was appointed as imperial historian.

古文：呈秀乃造《天鉴》、《同志》诸录，王绍徽亦造《点将录》，皆以邹元标、顾宪成、叶向高、刘一燝等为魁，尽罗入不附忠贤者，号曰东林党人，献于忠贤。忠贤喜，于是群小益求媚忠贤，攘臂攻东林矣。
现代文：崔呈秀于是编造《天鉴录》、《同志录》等，王绍徽也编造《点将录》，都以邹元标、顾宪成、叶向高、刘一火景等为魁首，并将不依附于魏忠贤的人全部网罗进去，将他们指为东林党人，献给魏忠贤，魏忠贤很高兴，于是这帮小人更加向魏忠贤献媚，连手攻击东林党。
English: Cui Hengxiu then fabricated "Tian Jian Lu," "Comrade Jian Lu" and so on, and Wang Shaohui also fabricated "Ding Shou Lu," all of which were led by Xuan Yuan Bo, Gu Xian Cheng, Ye Xiang Gao, Liu Yi Huo Jing, and so on, and all the people who did not adhere to Wei Zhongxian were caught up in it, and they were referred to as Donglin Party members and dedicated to Wei Zhongxian. Wei Zhongxian was very pleased, so this gang of villains flattered Wei Zhongxian even more and attacked the Donglin Party together.

古文：初，朝臣争三案及辛亥、癸亥两京察与熊廷弼狱事，忠贤本无预。
现代文：当初，朝臣争论三案以及辛亥、癸亥这两年的京察和熊廷弼一案，魏忠贤本没有参预。
English: At first, Wei Zhongxian did not take part in the three cases where courtiers were arguing, nor in the case of the two-year inspection of Beijing and Xiongding in Xinhai and Yanhai.

古文：其党欲藉忠贤力倾诸正人，遂相率归忠贤，称义儿，且云： 东林将害翁。 
现代文：其党徒想凭借魏忠贤的权力排挤那些正直之士，便相继归附魏忠贤，自称义子，并且说： 东林党将要害您老人家。 
English: His party members wanted to use Wei Zhongxian's power to push out those honest people, so they successively joined Wei Zhongxian, claiming to be his son-in-law, and said: "The Donglin Party will harm you, old man."

古文：以故，忠贤欲甘心焉。
现代文：因此，魏忠贤也想自图快意。
English: Therefore, Wei Zhongxian also wants to be happy.

古文：御史张讷、倪文焕，给事中李鲁生，工部主事曹钦程等，竞搏击善类为报复。而御史梁梦环复兴汪文言狱，下镇抚司拷死。
现代文：御史张讷、倪文焕，给事中李鲁生，工部主事曹钦程等，竞相打击报复好人，而御史梁梦环又重兴汪文言一案，将他下到镇抚司拷打至死。
English: Superintendents Zhang Ne and Ni Wenhuan, as well as Li Lusheng, who was in charge of the case, and Cao Qincheng, the head of the engineering department, competed to retaliate against the good man, while superintendent Liang Menghuan revived the case of Wang Wenyan and tortured him to death at the Zhenfuxi Division.

古文：许显纯具爰书，词连赵南星、杨涟等二十余人，削籍遣戍有差。
现代文：许显纯编录囚犯供辞的文书，词语连及赵南星、杨涟等二十余人，使他们或被撤职或被遣戍。
English: Xu Xianjun compiled the documents of the prisoners' confessions, including the words of more than 20 people, including Zhao Nansing and Yang Hui, so that they were either dismissed or deported.

古文：逮涟及左光斗、魏大中、周朝瑞、袁化中、顾大章等六人，至牵入熊廷弼案中，掠治死于狱。
现代文：又逮捕杨涟、左光斗、魏大中、周朝瑞、袁化中、顾大章等六人，将他们牵连进熊廷弼案中，投进监狱，拷打至死。
English: They also arrested six people, including Yang Qian, Zuo Guangdou, Wei Dazhong, Zhou Chaorui, Yuan Huazhong, and Gu Dazhang, implicated them in the Xiong Tingyao case, threw them into prison, and tortured them to death.

古文：又杀廷弼，而杖其姻御史吴裕中至死。又削逐尚书李宗延、张问达，侍郎公鼐等五十余人，朝署一空。
现代文：又杀熊廷弼，将他的亲家御史吴裕中杖打至死，又将尚书李宗延、张问达，侍郎公鼐等五十余人撤职逐出，朝中机构为之一空。
English: He also killed Xiong Tingyao, beat his kinsman, the imperial secretary Wu Yuzhong, to death with a cane, and removed more than fifty people from their posts, including Shangshu Li Zongyan, Zhang Qianda, and Zhi Lang Gongyao, leaving the government and the Chinese institutions in a state of chaos.

古文：而特召元诗教、刘述祖等为御史，私人悉不次超擢。于是忠贤之党遍要津矣。
现代文：而特召亓诗教、刘述祖等人为御史。凡是魏忠贤的私人都得越级升迁，于是魏忠贤的党羽遍布各个要害部门了。
English: However, Gong Shi Jiao, Liu Shuzu and others were specially summoned to serve as imperial historians. All of Wei Zhongxian's private servants had to be promoted beyond their ranks, so Wei Zhongxian's followers were spread throughout all key departments.

古文：当是时，东厂番役横行，所缉访无论虚实辄糜烂。
现代文：那时候，东厂的缉捕人员四出横行，凡他们缉访过的地方，不管情况是虚是实，都被整得稀烂。
English: At that time, the arresting officers of the East Plant were rampant, and all the places they visited, whether the situation was false or true, were dilapidated.

古文：戚臣李承恩者，宁安大长公主子也，家藏公主赐器。忠贤诬以盗乘舆服御物，论死。
现代文：外戚李承恩，是宁安大长公主的儿子，家中藏有公主赐给的器物，魏忠贤诬告他盗窃乘舆服饰等禁物，将他判了死罪。
English: Wei Zhongxian falsely accused his relative Li Cheng'en, the son of the eldest princess of Ning'an, of stealing forbidden items such as the princess's gifts, and sentenced him to death.

古文：中书吴怀贤读杨涟疏，击节称叹。奴告之，毙怀贤，籍其家。
现代文：中书吴怀贤读杨涟的奏疏时，击掌赞叹，家奴将他告发，结果怀贤被杀死，家也被抄了。
English: When the Chinese scholar Wu Huaixian read Yang Xuan's Song Zuo, he clapped his hands in admiration. His manservant denounced him. As a result, Huaixian was killed and his house was plundered.

古文：武弁蒋应阳为廷弼讼冤，立诛死。
现代文：武弁蒋应阳为熊廷弼讼冤，立即被诛死。
English: Wuben Jiang Yingyang sued for damages and was immediately strangled to death.

古文：民间偶语，或触忠贤，辄被擒僇，甚至剥皮、刲舌，所杀不可胜数，道路以目。
现代文：民间偶有言语触犯了魏忠贤，便被捉拿杀戮，甚至被剥皮、割舌，被杀者不可胜数，人们路上相遇，只能以目传意，不敢言语。
English: People occasionally violated Wei Zhongxian's speech, and were caught and killed, and even skinned and cut their tongues. The number of people who were killed was countless. People met on the road and could only communicate with their eyes, and dared not speak.

古文：其年，叙门功，加恩三等，荫都督同知。
现代文：这年，记门功，魏忠贤得加恩三等，庇荫都督同知。
English: In this year, Wei Zhongxian won the third prize of Ga'en, and he was also known as the patron of the capital.

古文：又荫其族叔魏志德都督佥事。
现代文：又荫封他的族叔魏志德为都督佥事。
English: He also crowned his uncle Wei Zhide as the city's governor.

古文：擢傅应星为左都督，且旌其母。而以魏良卿佥书锦衣卫，掌南镇抚司事。
现代文：升傅应星为左都督，并表彰他的母亲，而以魏良卿为佥书锦衣卫，掌南镇抚司事务。
English: Shenfu Yingxing was the left-hand governor and commended his mother, while Wei Liangqing was the right-hand deputy governor and was in charge of the affairs of Nan Town.

古文：六年二月，卤簿大驾成，荫都督佥事。复使其党李永贞伪为浙江太监李实奏，逮治前应天巡抚周起元及江、浙里居诸臣高攀龙、周宗建、缪昌期、周顺昌、黄尊素、李应升等。
现代文：六年二月，皇帝仪仗队组成，魏忠贤得以庇荫都督佥事，他又派党羽李永贞假冒浙江大盗李实上奏，逮捕惩治前应天巡抚周起元以及已辞官归乡的江浙籍人高攀龙、周宗建、缪昌期、周顺昌、黄遵素、李应升等。
English: In February of the sixth year, the emperor's honor guard was formed, and Wei Zhongxian was able to patronize the duke. He also sent the party feather Li Yongzhen to pretend to be the great thief of Zhejiang, Li Shizhen, to arrest and punish the former governor of Yingtian, Zhou Qimuan, as well as the people of Jiangsu and Zhejiang who had resigned and returned to their hometowns, such as Gao Panglong, Zhou Zongjian, Mu Changdi, Zhou Shunchang, Huang Zunsu, and Li Yingsheng.

古文：攀龙赴水死，顺昌等六人死狱中。
现代文：高攀龙投水而死，周顺昌等人死于狱中。
English: Gao Panglong was drowned, and Zhou Shunchang and others died in prison.

古文：苏州民见顺昌逮，不平，殴杀二校尉，巡抚毛一鹭为捕颜佩韦等五人悉诛死。
现代文：苏州百姓见周顺昌被捕，很不平，便打死了两名校尉，巡抚毛一鹭便逮捕颜佩韦等五人，将他们诛死。
English: When the people of Suzhou saw Zhou Shunchang being arrested, they were very angry and killed two lieutenants. The inspector Mao Yijian arrested Yan Peiwei and five others and strangled them to death.

古文：刑部尚书徐兆魁治狱，视忠贤所怒，即坐大辟。
现代文：刑部尚书徐兆魁治理狱案，凡是魏忠贤所恨的人，便判以重刑。
English: The Department of Criminal Law wrote to Xu Zhaokui to handle the prison case. Anyone who was hated by Wei Zhongxian was sentenced to a heavy sentence.

古文：又从霍维华言，命顾秉谦等修《三朝要典》，极意诋诸党人恶。
现代文：魏忠贤又听从霍维华的意见，命顾秉谦等人编修《三朝要典》，竭力毁谤东林党人。
English: Wei Zhongxian also listened to Huo Weihua's opinion and ordered Bing Qian and others to compile the "Three Dynasties Compendium" in an effort to defame the Donglin Party members.

古文：御史徐复阳请毁讲学书院，以绝党根。
现代文：御史徐复阳请拆毁讲学书院，以绝党根。
English: Minister of Education Xu Fuxiang, please demolish the lecture college to eradicate the roots of the party.

古文：御史卢承钦又请立东林党碑。
现代文：御史卢承钦又请立东林党碑。
English: His Excellency Lu Chengqin also requested the erection of the Donglin Party Monument.

古文：海内皆屏息丧气。
现代文：海内人士都屏息丧气。
English: People at home and abroad are holding their breath.

古文：霍维华遂教忠贤冒边功矣。
现代文：霍维华于是教魏忠贤在边防冒进邀功。
English: Huo Weihua then instructed Wei Zhongxian to make a great contribution to the border defense.

古文：辽阳男子武长春游妓家，有妄言，东厂擒之。
现代文：辽阳男子武长春逛妓家，说了些妄言，被东厂擒拿。
English: Wu Changchun, a man from Liaoyang, went to a brothel, said some nonsense, and was caught by the East Factory.

古文：许显纯掠治，故张其辞云： 长春敌间，不获且为乱，赖厂臣忠智立奇勋。 
现代文：许显纯将他拷打治罪，故意夸大其辞说： 长春是敌人间谍，如不擒获将有变乱，赖东厂臣属忠诚机智，立下奇功。 
English: Xu Xianchun tortured and punished him, and deliberately exaggerated his words, saying: Changchun is an enemy spy, if it is not captured, there will be turmoil, Lai Dong factory vassal is loyal and witty, and has made miraculous achievements.

古文：诏封忠贤侄良卿为肃宁伯，赐宅第、庄田，颁铁券。
现代文：皇上诏封魏忠贤的侄儿良卿为肃宁伯，赐给宅第、庄田，颁给铁券。
English: The emperor anointed Wei Zhongxian's nephew, Liangqing, as Suningbo, gave him a mansion and a manor, and awarded him an iron certificate.

古文：吏部尚书王绍徽请崇其先世，诏赠忠贤四代如本爵。
现代文：吏部尚书王绍徽请尊崇他的先世，皇上诏令赠魏忠贤以上四世为肃宁伯。
English: Wang Shaohui, the Chief of the General Staff, requested that his predecessors be honored, and the Emperor gave Wei Zhongxian and the four generations above him the title of Suningbo.

古文：忠贤又矫诏遣其党太监刘应坤、陶文、纪用镇山海关，收揽兵柄。
现代文：魏忠贤又假传圣旨派他的党羽太监刘应坤、陶文、纪用镇守山海关，收揽兵权。
English: Wei Zhongxian also sent his party eunuchs Liu Yingkun, Tao Wen and Ji Zhen to guard the mountain customs and collect military power.

古文：再叙功，荫都督同知，世袭锦衣卫指挥使，各一人。
现代文：再给他记功，庇荫都督同知和世袭锦衣卫指挥使各一人。
English: He was also given a merit, and the patronage of the governor of the capital and the hereditary commanding officer of the Imperial Guards each received one.

古文：浙江巡抚潘汝桢奏请为忠贤建祠。
现代文：浙江巡抚潘汝桢奏请为魏忠贤建祠堂。
English: Pan Rude, the governor of Zhejiang Province, called for the construction of an ancestral hall for Wei Zhongxian.

古文：仓场总督薛贞言草场火，以忠贤救，得无害。
现代文：仓场总督薛贞说草场失火，赖魏忠贤救助，得以无害。
English: Warehouse Governor Xue Zhen said that the pasture was on fire, and Lai Wei Zhongxian came to the rescue to make it harmless.

古文：于是颂功德者相继，诸祠皆自此始矣。
现代文：于是为他歌功颂德的人相继不断，各地祠堂都从此开始兴建。
English: As a result, people have continued to sing his praises, and ancestral halls have begun to be built all over the country.

古文：编修吴孔嘉与宗人吴养春有仇，诱养春仆告其主隐占黄山，养春父子瘐死。
现代文：编修吴孔嘉与同宗人吴养春有仇，便诱使吴养春的奴仆告发主人隐占黄山，吴养春父子结果都死于狱中。
English: Editor Wu Kongjia had a grudge against Wu Yaochun, a member of the same clan, and induced Wu Yaochun's slave to denounce his master's occupation of Huangshan. As a result, both Wu Yaochun and his son died in prison.

古文：忠贤遣主事吕下问、评事许志吉先后往徽州籍其家，株蔓残酷。
现代文：魏忠贤派主事吕下问、评事许志吉先后往徽州抄他的家，株连相属，非常残酷。
English: Wei Zhongxian sent the director Lü Shimo Qian and the critic Xu Zhijie to Huizhou to copy his home, and they belong to each other, which is very cruel.

古文：知府石万程不忍，削发去，徽州几乱。
现代文：知府石万程心中不忍，削发挂职而去，徽州几乎酿成祸乱。
English: Chifu Shi Wancheng could not bear it in his heart, he cut off his hair, quit his job and went away. Huizhou almost became a disaster.

古文：其党都督张体乾诬扬州知府刘铎代李承恩谋释狱，结道士方景阳诅忠贤，铎竟斩。
现代文：其党羽都督张体乾诬告扬州知府刘铎代李承恩图谋陈解狱案，勾结方术士方景阳诅咒魏忠贤，结果刘铎竟被斩首。
English: His henchman, the governor of Yangzhou, Zhang Tiegan, falsely accused the governor of Yangzhou, Liu Ye, of conspiring to release Chen from prison, and colluded with the sorcerer Fang Jingyang to curse Wei Zhongxian. As a result, Liu Ye was beheaded.

古文：又以睚眦怨，诬新城侯子锦衣王国兴，论斩，并黜主事徐石麒。
现代文：又以睚眦之怨，诬告新城侯的儿子锦衣卫官员王国兴，将他判以死罪，并罢免主事徐石麒。
English: He also falsely accused the official Wang Guoxing, the son of the new mayor, Jin Rongwei, and sentenced him to death, and dismissed the main person in charge, Xu Shijun.

古文：御史门克新诬吴人顾同寅、孙文豸诔熊廷弼，坐妖言律斩。
现代文：御史门克新诬告吴县人顾同寅、孙文豸写诔文祭奠熊廷弼，两人被判犯了妖言罪斩首。
English: Goshmengke Xin falsely accused Gu Tongyin and Sun Wenyi, two people from Wuxian County, of writing a eulogy for Xiong Tingyao, and the two were found guilty of saying evil words and beheaded.

古文：又逮侍郎王之寀，毙于狱。
现代文：又逮捕侍郎王之肕，将他毙死狱中。
English: He also arrested the king's butler, Wang Zhiqi, and had him killed in prison.

古文：凡忠贤所宿恨，若韩爌、张问达、何士晋、程注等，虽已去，必削籍，重或充军，死必追赃破其家。
现代文：凡是魏忠贤素来所恨的，像韩火广、张问达、何士晋、程注等人，虽已离职，也要将他们从官籍中除名，重的则被充军，死了的还要追赃，将他破家。
English: All those who had been hated by Wei Zhongxian, such as Han Huiguang, Zhang Qida, He Shijin, Cheng Zhu, and others, although they had left office, were also to be removed from the official register, the heavy ones were conscripted into the army, and the dead ones were to be pursued and their families broken up.

古文：或忠贤偶忘之，其党必追论前事，激忠贤怒。
现代文：有些魏忠贤偶然忘了的，他的党羽一定追论前事，激起魏忠贤的怒火。
English: There are some things that Wei Zhongxian accidentally forgot, and his followers are sure to discuss the past and arouse the anger of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：当此之时，内外大权一归忠贤。内竖自王体乾等外，又有李朝钦、王朝辅、孙进、王国泰、梁栋等三十余人，为左右拥护。
现代文：那时候，内外大权全归于魏忠贤，阉官除王体乾等人外，还有李朝庆、王朝辅、孙进、王国泰、梁栋等三十余人，做左右拥护。
English: At that time, all the power at home and abroad belonged to Wei Zhongxian. In addition to Wang Tieqian and other eunuchs, there were more than 30 people such as Li Chaoqing, Dynasty Auxiliary, Sun Jin, Wang Guotai, Liang Dong, etc., who supported the left and right.

古文：外廷文臣则崔呈秀、田吉、吴淳夫、李夔龙、倪文焕主谋议，号 五虎 。武臣则田尔耕、许显纯、孙云鹤、杨寰、崔应元主杀僇，号 五彪 。
现代文：外廷文臣有崔呈秀、田吉、吴淳夫、李夔龙、倪文焕主谋议，称为 五虎 ；武臣则有田尔耕、许显纯、孙云鹤、杨寰、崔应元主杀戮，称为 五彪 。
English: Foreign courtiers including Cui Chengxiu, Tian Ji, Wu Junfu, Li Yulong, and Ni Wenhuan took the lead in the deliberation, which was called the Five Tigers; military courtiers included Tian Erko, Xu Xianjun, Sun Yunhe, Yang Hui, and Cui Yingyuan, which was called the Five Brides.

古文：又吏部尚书周应秋、太仆少卿曹钦程等，号 十狗 。
现代文：还有吏部尚书周应秋、太仆寺少卿曹钦程等人，称为 十狗 。
English: There are also officials such as Shang Shuxu, Zhou Yingqiu, and Cao Qincheng, who is also called the Ten Dogs.

古文：又有 十孩儿 、 四十孙 之号。
现代文：又有 十孩儿 、 四十孙 等名号。
English: He also has 10 children, 40 grandchildren and other titles.

古文：而为呈秀辈门下者，又不可数计。
现代文：而做崔呈秀这帮人门下的，又不可胜数。
English: And there are countless people who are under the tutelage of Cui Hengxiu's gang.

古文：自内阁、六部至四方总督、巡抚，遍置死党。
现代文：从内阁、六部到四方总督、巡抚，都遍布他的死党。
English: From the cabinet and the six ministries to the governors-general and governors-general of the four provinces, his die-hard supporters are everywhere.

古文：心忌张皇后，其年秋，诬后父张国纪纵奴不法，矫中宫旨，冀摇后。帝为致奴法，而诮让国纪。
现代文：他内心忌恨张皇后，这年秋，便诬告皇后的父亲张国纪纵奴犯法，然后假传中宫旨意，企图撼动张皇后，皇上为他按奴法治罪，并责备张国纪。
English: He hated Empress Zhang in his heart. In the autumn of that year, he falsely accused the Empress's father, Zhang Guoji, of breaking the law by enslaving slaves, and then falsely transmitted the will of the Middle Palace in an attempt to shake Empress Zhang. The Emperor punished him for the crime of enslavement and blamed Zhang Guoji.

古文：忠贤未慊，复使顺天府丞刘志选、御史梁梦环交发国纪罪状，并言后非国纪女。
现代文：魏忠贤不满意，又派顺天府丞刘志选、御史梁梦环轮番揭发张国纪的罪状，并说皇后不是张国纪的女儿。
English: Wei Zhongxian was not satisfied, and sent Shun Tianfu, Liu Zhizhen, and Gu Shi, Liang Menghuan, to expose Zhang Guoqi's crimes, and said that the empress was not Zhang Guoqi's daughter.

古文：会王体乾危言沮之，乃止。
现代文：正好王体乾危言劝阻，魏忠贤这才罢了。
English: It was Wang Tie who dissuaded Wei Zhongxian with stern words, and Wei Zhongxian was the only one to succeed.

古文：其冬，三殿成。
现代文：这年冬，三殿建成。
English: This winter, the third hall was completed.

古文：李永贞、周应秋奏忠贤功，遂进上公，加恩三等。
现代文：李永贞、周应秋上奏魏忠贤的功绩，皇上遂进封魏忠贤为上公，加恩三等。
English: Li Yongzhen and Zhou Yingqiu extolled the exploits of Wei Zhongxian in the autumn, and the emperor finally appointed Wei Zhongxian as Shangguo, ranking him third.

古文：魏良卿时已晋肃宁侯矣，亦晋宁国公，食禄如魏国公例，再加恩荫锦衣指挥使一人，同知一人。
现代文：魏良卿那时已晋封肃宁侯，这时又晋封肃宁公，食禄按魏国公例发给，再加恩庇荫锦衣卫指挥使一人、同知一人。
English: At that time, Wei Liangqing had been promoted to Suining Hou, and at that time he was promoted to Suining Gong. The food allowance was issued according to the official regulations of the State of Wei, and one person was added to the patronage, one person was added to the protection, one person was added to the protection and one person was added to the protection.

古文：工部尚书薛凤翔奏给赐第。
现代文：工部尚书薛凤翔上奏给魏忠贤赐府第。
English: Xue Fengxiang of the Ministry of Works presented Wei Zhongxian with the title of prefect.

古文：已而太监陶文奏筑喜峰隘口成，督师王之臣奏筑山海城，刑部尚书薛贞奏大盗王之锦狱，南京修孝陵工竣，甘镇奏捷，蕃育署丞张永祚获盗，并言忠贤区画方略。
现代文：不久太监陶文上奏喜峰隘口筑成，督师王之臣上奏筑山海关城，刑部尚书薛贞上奏大盗王之锦狱案，南京修建孝陵竣工，甘镇奏捷，蕃育署丞张永祚擒获盗贼，他们都说是出于魏忠贤的筹划和计策。
English: Soon after, the eunuch Tao Wen oversaw the construction of the Xifeng Pass, the superintendent Wang's vassal oversaw the construction of the Mountain Customs City, the criminal department Shangshu Xue Zhen oversaw the Great Thief Wang Jin prison case, the construction of the Xiaoling was completed in Nanjing, Gan Town was successful, and Zhang Yongyao, the secretary of the Education Bureau, was captured by thieves. They all said that they were due to Wei Zhongxian's planning and strategy.

古文：忠贤又自奏三年缉捕功，诏书褒奖。
现代文：魏忠贤又自己上奏三年缉捕的功劳，皇上下诏褒奖。
English: Wei Zhongxian also reported the merits of the three-year arrest himself, and received the Emperor's commendation.

古文：半岁中，所荫锦衣指挥使四人、同知三人、佥事一人。
现代文：半年之中，魏忠贤所庇荫的有锦衣卫指挥使四人、同知三人、佥事一人。
English: In half a year, there were four officers and envoys, three acquaintances, and one anecdote from those sheltered by Wei Zhongxian.

古文：授其侄希孟世袭锦衣同知，甥傅之琮、冯继先并都督佥事，而擢崔呈秀弟凝秀为蓟镇副总兵。
现代文：又授给他的侄儿希孟世袭锦衣卫同知，外甥傅之琮、冯继先为都督佥事，而升崔呈秀的弟弟崔凝秀为蓟镇副总兵。
English: It was also awarded to his nephew Ximeng hereditary Jin Yi Wei Tongzhuang, his nephews Fu Ziqi and Feng Jianxian as the city governors, and the younger brother of the ascending Cui Jianxiu, Cui Jianxiu, as the deputy commander-in-chief of Shanzhen.

古文：名器僣滥，于是为极。
现代文：名器被僭越滥用，至此达到了极点。
English: The abuse of this famous instrument has reached an all-time high.

古文：其同类尽镇蓟、辽，山西宣、大诸阨要地。
现代文：他的同党全部坐镇蓟、辽，以及山西宣府、大同各险要之地。
English: His fellow party members all live in Zhenya and Liao, as well as in Shanxi Xuanfu and Datong, all important places.

古文：总兵梁柱朝、杨国栋等岁时赂名马、珍玩绝。
现代文：总兵梁柱朝、杨国栋等人每年都向他奉献名马以及珍玩之物，从不间断。
English: General Liang Zhuchao, Yang Guodong and others have dedicated famous horses and rare toys to him every year, without interruption.

古文：七年春，复以崔文升总漕运，李明道总河道，胡良辅镇天津。
现代文：七年春，又派崔文升总督漕运，李明道总督河道，胡良辅镇守天津。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, he also sent Cui Wensheng, the governor of Cao Yun, Li Mingdao, the governor of He Dao, and Hu Liangyu, the town guard of Tianjin.

古文：文升故侍光宗药，为东林所攻者也。
现代文：崔文升原来曾侍奉光宗服药，受到东林党的攻击。
English: Cui Wensheng had previously served as a druggist to Emperor Guangzong and was attacked by the Donglin Party.

古文：海内争望风献谄，诸督抚大吏阎鸣泰、刘诏、李精白、姚宗文等，争颂德立祠，汹汹若不及。
现代文：海内争相望风献媚，督抚大臣如阎鸣泰、刘诏、李精白、姚宗文等，争相为魏忠贤颂德立祠，纷纷攘攘，唯恐不及。
English: The interior of the country is vying for the favor of the wind, and the supervising ministers such as Yan Mingtai, Liu Zhao, Li Jingbai, Yao Zongwen, etc. are vying to build the Wei Zhongxian Ode to Virtue Shrine. They are rushing to do so, but they are too late.

古文：下及武夫、贾竖、诸无赖子亦各建祠。
现代文：下及武夫、商贾小人。无赖之徒也都为他建祠。
English: His subordinates, warriors, merchants and villains, as well as ruffians, also built shrines to him.

古文：穷极工巧。攘夺民田庐，斩伐墓木，莫敢控愬。
现代文：这些祠堂都建得极为工巧，他们侵占百姓田宅，砍伐坟地树木，谁也不敢控诉他们。
English: These ancestral halls were built with great skill. They occupied people's homes and cut down trees in cemeteries. No one dared to sue them.

古文：而监生陆万龄至请以忠贤配孔子，以忠贤父配启圣公。
现代文：而监生陆万龄甚至请求以魏忠贤配祭孔子，以魏忠贤的父亲配祭启圣公。
English: The ward Lu Wanling even asked Wei Zhongxian to be the sacrificial offering for Confucius, and Wei Zhongxian's father to be the sacrificial offering for Qixing.

古文：初，潘汝祯首上疏，御史刘之待会藁迟一日，即削籍。
现代文：当初，潘汝祯首先上书，御史刘之待会藁迟了一天，即被撤职除名。
English: At the beginning, Pan Ruxuan was the first to submit a letter, and Liu Zhiwei was one day late, that is, he was removed from his post and expelled.

古文：而蓟州道胡士容以不具建祠文，遵化道耿如杞入祠不拜，皆下狱论死。
现代文：而蓟州道胡士容因不备具建祠书文，遵化道耿如杞因入祠不拜，都被投入狱中，判了死罪。
English: However, Bozhou Dao's Hu Shirong was sentenced to death because he did not have the necessary documents to build an ancestral shrine, and Zunhua Dao's Geng Ruxuan was sentenced to death because he did not worship at the ancestral shrine.

古文：故天下风靡，章奏无巨细，辄颂忠贤。
现代文：因此天下的风气，章奏无论巨细，都称颂魏忠贤。
English: Therefore, the world's culture, regardless of the size of the chapter, praises Wei Zhongxian.

古文：宗室若楚王华煃、中书朱慎鉴，勋戚若丰城侯李永祚，廷臣若尚书邵辅忠、李养德、曹思诚，总督张我续及孙国桢、张翌明、郭允厚、杨维和、李时馨、汪若极、何廷枢、杨维新、陈维新、陈欢翼、郭如暗、郭希禹、徐溶辈，佞词累牍，不顾羞耻。
现代文：宗室如楚王朱华、中书朱慎鉴，功勋外戚如丰城侯李永祚，廷臣如尚书邵辅忠、李养德、曹思诚，总督张我续以及孙国桢、张翌明，郭允厚、杨维和、李时馨、汪若极、何廷枢、陈维新、陈尔翼、郭如、郭希禹、徐溶等人，都是佞词连篇，不顾羞耻。
English: Family members such as King of Chu Zhu Hua, Chinese scholar Zhu Shengjian, distinguished relatives such as Fengcheng Prince Li Yongqin, courtiers such as Shangshu Shao Shuizhong, Li Yade, Cao Sicheng, Governor Zhang Yixu, as well as Sun Guozhong, Zhang Zhe Ming, Guo Yunhou, Yang Wei, Li Shixin, Wang Ruoji, He Tingzhu, Chen Weixin, Chen Erqi, Guo Ru, Guo Xiyu, Xu Rong and others, are all slanderous, regardless of shame.

古文：忠贤亦时加恩泽以报之。
现代文：魏忠贤也时常给他们加以恩泽作为报答。
English: Wei Zhongxian also often rewarded them with favors.

古文：所有疏，咸称 厂臣 不名。
现代文：所有的奏疏，都称魏忠贤为 厂臣 而不称其名。
English: All the sources refer to Wei Zhongxian as "Factory Minister" without mentioning his name.

古文：大学士黄立极、施凤来、张瑞图票旨，亦必曰 朕与厂臣 ，无敢名忠贤者。
现代文：大学士黄立极、施凤来、张瑞图在起草圣旨时，也必说 朕与厂臣 ，没有人敢直写魏忠贤的名字。
English: When the university scholars Huang Li Ji, Shi Feng Lai, and Zhang Ritu drafted the will, they must also say "I and the factory minister," no one dared to write Wei Zhongxian's name directly.

古文：山东产麒麟，巡抚李精白图象以闻。
现代文：山东产麒麟，巡抚李精白画下图像上报朝廷。
English: Shandong produced Kirin, the image drawn by the inspector Li Jingbai was reported to the imperial court.

古文：立极等票旨云： 厂臣修德，故仁兽至。 
现代文：黄立极等起草圣旨说： 厂臣修德，故仁兽到。 
English: Huang Lijie and others drafted the sacred edict, saying: Factory officials should cultivate virtue, so animals should be treated with benevolence.

古文：其诬罔若此。
现代文：妄言欺骗竟至于此。
English: This is what happens when you lie and cheat.

古文：前后赐奖敕无算，诰命皆拟九锡文。
现代文：皇上前后赐给他嘉奖令无数，所发给的诰命都仿九锡文。
English: The emperor gave him countless orders of commendation, all of which were in imitation of Jiuxiwen.

古文：是年自春及秋，忠贤冒款汪烧饼、擒阿班歹罗銕等功，积荫锦衣指挥使至十有七人。
现代文：这年从春到秋，魏忠贤冒领汪烧饼擒获阿班歹罗铁的功劳，累计庇荫锦衣卫指挥使达十七人。
English: This year, from spring to autumn, Wei Zhongxian took the lead in baking cakes and won the credit of Aban Gangrao Iron, with a total of seventeen envoys.

古文：其族孙希孔、希孟、希尧、希舜、鹏程，姻戚董芳名、王选、杨六奇、杨祚昌，皆至左、右都督及都督同知、佥事等官。
现代文：他的族孙希孔、希孟、希尧、希舜、鹏程，姻亲董芳名、王选、杨六奇、杨祚昌，都官至左、右都督和都督同知、佥事等。
English: His family members include Sun Xikong, Xi Meng, Xiyu, Xiyu, Peng Cheng, his in-laws, Dong Fangmei, Wang Xuan, Yang Luoqi, Yang Yuchang, the governors of the left and right capitals, the governors' acquaintances, and anecdotes.

古文：又加客氏弟光先亦都督。
现代文：客氏的弟弟光先也加封为都督。
English: Katsuaki, Kake's younger brother, was also appointed as the new governor.

古文：魏抚民又从锦衣改尚宝卿。
现代文：魏抚民又从锦衣卫调任尚宝卿。
English: Wei Fumin was also transferred from Jin Rongwei to Shang Baoqing.

古文：而忠贤志愿犹未极，会袁崇焕奏宁远捷，忠贤乃令周应秋奏封其从孙鹏翼为安平伯。
现代文：而魏忠贤的志愿还没达到，正好袁崇焕上奏宁远捷报，魏忠贤于是令周应秋上奏封他的族孙魏鹏翼为安平伯。
English: However, Wei Zhongxian's wish was not fulfilled, just as Yuan Chonghuan reported the news of Ningyuan's victory, Wei Zhongxian ordered Zhou Yingqiu to report the news of his grandson Wei Pengyi as Anping Bo.

古文：再叙三大工功，封从子良栋为东安侯，加良卿太师，鹏翼少师，良栋太子太保。
现代文：再记三大工程功劳，封他的侄子良栋为东安侯，加封良卿为太师，鹏翼为少师，良栋为太子太保。
English: He also mentioned the three great achievements of the project, naming his nephew Liang Dong as the Dong'an marquis, Ji Feng Liang Jie as the grand master, Peng Ying as the junior master, and Liang Dong as the prince grand tutor.

古文：因遍赉诸廷臣。用呈秀为兵部尚书兼左都御史，独绌崇焕功不录。
现代文：于是他普遍赏赐群臣，用崔呈秀为兵部尚书兼左都御史，唯独将袁崇焕的功劳废弃不录。
English: As a result, he generally rewarded his courtiers, using Cui Chengxiu as the military secretary and left-wing imperial historian, but abandoned Yuan Chonghuan's merits.

古文：时鹏翼、良栋皆在襁褓中，未能行步也。
现代文：当时鹏翼、良栋都还在襁褓之中，还不能走路呢。
English: At that time, both Peng Ying and Liang Dong were still in their infancy and unable to walk.

古文：良卿至代天子飨南北郊，祭太庙。
现代文：良卿甚至还代天子供祭南北郊社，祭祀太庙。
English: On behalf of the Heavenly Child Festival, Ryokei even held a festival in the southern and northern suburbs of the shrine, which was dedicated to the Great Temple.

古文：于是天下皆疑忠贤窃神器矣。
现代文：于是天下都怀疑魏忠贤要篡夺政权了。
English: As a result, the whole world suspected that Wei Zhongxian wanted to usurp power.

古文：帝性机巧，好亲斧锯髹漆之事，积岁不倦。
现代文：皇上性机巧，好动斧锯以及涂漆之类的事情，累年不倦。
English: The emperor's dexterity, good at moving axes and saws and painting things, has been tireless for many years.

古文：每引绳削墨时，忠贤辈辄奏事。
现代文：每次在拉线削墨时，魏忠贤之辈常来奏事。
English: Every time when the ink was sharpened in the drawing line, Wei Zhongxian's generation often came to make a report.

古文：帝厌之，谬曰： 朕已悉矣，汝辈好为之。 
现代文：皇上很厌烦，荒谬地说： 我已知道了，你们好自为之。 
English: The emperor was very tired and said absurdly: I already know, you can do it yourselves.

古文：忠贤以是恣威福惟己意。
现代文：魏忠贤因此便任凭自己的意愿恣行威福。
English: As a result, Wei Zhongxian was allowed to do as he pleased.

古文：岁数出，辄坐文轩，羽幢青盖，四马若飞，铙鼓鸣镝之声，轰隐黄埃中。
现代文：他一年中多次出行，每次总是坐着文轩，羽帘青盖，四马如飞，铙鼓鸣镝之声，随着轰隆而过的车轮，隐没在飞扬的黄土之中。
English: He travels several times a year, and each time he always sits in Wen Xuan, the curtains are blue-covered, the four horses are flying, the gongs and drums are ringing, and the wheels that pass by with a roar are hidden in the flying loess.

古文：锦衣玉带靴裤握刀者，夹左右驰，厨传、优伶、百戏、舆隶相随属以万数。
现代文：锦衣卫官校腰围玉带，踏靴着衤夸，提刀相随，夹驰于左右，厨师、优伶、百戏、奴婢这些随从的人，又以万计。
English: The brocade-clad guardsmen wear jade belts around their waists, their boots are adorned with shamrocks, they carry swords and ride side-by-side, and they are accompanied by thousands of cooks, noblewomen, actors and actresses, and servants.

古文：百司章奏，置急足驰白乃下。
现代文：百官的奏章，要用快马才能赶上。
English: It takes a fast horse to catch up with the music of a hundred officials.

古文：所过，士大夫遮道拜伏，至呼九千岁，忠贤顾盼未尝及也。
现代文：所过之处，士大夫遮道拜伏，欢呼九千岁，而魏忠贤还左顾右盼，不加理睬。
English: Wherever he passed, the scholar-bureaucrat covered the road, bowed down, and cheered for the nine-thousand-year-old, while Wei Zhongxian also looked left and right, ignoring him.

古文：客氏居宫中，胁持皇后，残虐宫嫔。
现代文：客氏居于宫中，胁持皇后，残虐宫嫔。
English: The Kake clan lived in the palace, kept the empress under duress, and cruelly beat the palace servants.

古文：偶出归私第，驺从赫奕照衢路，望若卤簿。
现代文：偶尔出宫回私宅，侍从声威显赫，光照道路，看上去就像是皇上的仪仗队。
English: Occasionally leaving the palace to return to the private residence, the attendants are prominent and illuminate the road, looking like the emperor's honor guard.

古文：忠贤故騃无他长，其党日夜教之，客氏为内主，群凶煽虐，以是毒痡海内。
现代文：魏忠贤原来愚笨无所长，他的党羽便日夜教他，又有客氏做内主，于是群凶肆虐，荼毒海内。
English: Wei Zhongxian was originally stupid and incompetent, and his followers taught him day and night, with the Hakka clan acting as his boss. As a result, a group of thugs wreaked havoc and poisoned the country.

古文：七年秋八月，熹宗崩，信王立。
现代文：七年秋八月，熹宗逝世，信王即位。
English: In the autumn and August of the seventh year, Emperor Taizong died, and Emperor Nobunaga ascended to the throne.

古文：王素稔忠贤恶，深自儆备，其党自危。
现代文：信王素来熟知魏忠贤的罪恶，自己深加戒备，魏忠贤的党羽开始恐惧了。
English: Believing Wang had always been familiar with Wei Zhongxian's crimes, he was on high alert. Wei Zhongxian's followers began to fear him.

古文：杨所修、杨维垣先攻崔呈秀以尝帝，主事陆澄原、钱元悫，员外郎史躬盛遂交章论忠贤。
现代文：杨所修、杨维垣先攻击崔呈秀以试探皇上心意，主事陆澄原、钱元悫，员外郎史躬盛于是纷纷论奏魏忠贤。
English: Yang Shoshu and Yang Weigaki first attacked Cui Hengxiu to test the emperor's will, and Lu Chengyuan, Qian Yuanqian, and Wangai Langshi Misheng, who were in charge of the investigation, then discussed Wei Zhongxian.

古文：帝犹未发。
现代文：但皇上还隐而不发。
English: However, the Emperor did not even utter a word.

古文：于是嘉兴贡生钱嘉徵劾忠贤十大罪：一并帝，二蔑后，三弄兵，四无二祖列宗，五克削藩封，六无圣，七滥爵，八掩边功，九朘民，十通关节。
现代文：于是嘉兴贡生钱嘉征弹劾魏忠贤十大罪：一与皇帝并列，二蔑视皇后，三搬弄兵权，四无二祖列宗，五克削藩王封爵，六目无圣人，七滥加爵赏，八掩盖边功，九剥削百姓，十交通关节。
English: As a result, Jia Xing Gongsheng Qian Jia Zheng impeached Wei Zhongxian for ten major crimes: one, being on the same level as the emperor; two, despising the empress; three, abusing military power; four, not having two ancestors; five, depriving the king of the domain of the title; six, not having a saint; seven, abusing the award of the title; eight, covering up the frontier exploits; nine, exploiting the people; and ten, the traffic junction.

古文：疏上，帝召忠贤，使内侍读之。
现代文：奏疏呈上后，皇上召见魏忠贤，让内官读给他听。
English: After the report was submitted, the emperor summoned Wei Zhongxian and asked the inner official to read it to him.

古文：忠贤大惧，急以重宝啖信邸太监徐应元求解。
现代文：魏忠贤非常恐惧，急忙用重宝贿赂信邸的太监徐应元，求他解救。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very afraid, and hurriedly bribed Xu Yingyuan, the eunuch of the residence, with heavy treasure, and asked him to rescue him.

古文：应元，故忠贤博徒也。
现代文：徐应元是魏忠贤从前的赌友。
English: Xu Yingyuan is a former gambling friend of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：帝知之，斥应元。
现代文：皇上知道这事，便斥责徐应元。
English: The emperor knew about this and reprimanded Xu Yingyuan.

古文：十一月，遂安置忠贤于凤阳，寻命逮治。
现代文：十一月，便将魏忠贤发往凤阳安置，不久又命将他逮捕惩治。
English: In November, Wei Zhongxian was sent to Fengyang for resettlement, and soon he was ordered to be arrested and punished.

古文：忠贤行至阜城，闻之，与李朝钦偕缢死。
现代文：魏忠贤行到阜城时，听到后一项命令，便与李朝钦一起上吊自杀。
English: When Wei Zhongxian went to Fucheng, he heard the latter order and hanged himself together with Li Chaochun.

古文：诏磔其尸。悬首河间。
现代文：诏令将魏忠贤肢解，悬头于河间府。
English: The imperial edict ordered Wei Zhongxian to be dismembered and his head to be hung in the city of Kawama.

古文：笞杀客氏于浣衣局。
现代文：将客氏鞭死于浣衣局。
English: The whip of the Kakka clan was killed by the Tsukuda clan.

古文：魏良卿、侯国兴、客光先等并弃市，籍其家。
现代文：魏良卿、侯国兴、客光先等都被处死，并暴尸街头，还抄了他们的家。
English: Wei Liangqing, Hou Guoxing, and Ke Guangxian were all executed, and their bodies were dragged through the streets, and their homes were ransacked.

古文：客氏之籍也，于其家得宫女八人，盖将效吕不韦所为，人尤疾之。
现代文：在抄客氏的家时，得八名宫女，大概想仿效吕不韦所为，所以人们尤其憎恨她。
English: She was particularly hated because she had eight maids of honour, who presumably wanted to emulate what Lü Buwei had done, when she raided the homes of her clients.

古文：崇祯二年命大学士韩爌等定逆案，始盖逐忠贤党，东林诸人复进用。
现代文：崇祯二年二月命大学士韩火广等人审定逆案，这才将魏忠贤的党羽尽数逐出，东林党人又得以进用。
English: In February of the second year of Chongzhen, Han Huiguang, a university scholar, and others were appointed to verify the counter-case. This was the only way to expel Wei Zhongxian's party members as much as possible, and the Donglin party members were able to be used again.

古文：诸丽逆案者日夜图报复。
现代文：那些与逆案有关的人日夜图谋报复。
English: Those involved in the case have been plotting revenge day and night.

古文：其后温体仁、薛国观辈相继柄政，潜倾正人，为翻逆案地。
现代文：其后温体仁、薛国观之辈相继执政，他们暗中排挤正直人士，为翻逆案做准备。
English: After that, the generation of Wen Tianzhen and Xue Guokun successively ruled the country. They secretly pushed out honest people and prepared for the overturning of the Constitution.

古文：帝亦厌廷臣党比，复委用中珰。而逆案中阮大铖等卒肆毒江左，至于灭亡。
现代文：皇上也厌恶廷臣结党营私，于是又委任宦官，而逆案中的阮大铖等人终于肆毒于江左，直到灭亡。
English: The emperor was also disgusted by courtiers who formed a party to fight against him, so he appointed eunuchs, and Nguyn Đc and others involved in the counter-coup finally poisoned Qung Thái until their demise.

古文：王体乾、李永贞、涂文辅，皆忠贤党。
现代文：王体乾、李永贞、涂文辅，都是魏忠贤的党羽。
English: Wang Tieqian, Li Yongzhen, and Tu Wenshu were all followers of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：体乾，昌平人，柔佞深险。
现代文：王体乾，昌平人，为人阴柔奸险。
English: The king's body is dry, the people are prosperous, and the people are feminine and soft.

古文：熹宗初，为尚膳太监，迁司礼秉笔。
现代文：熹宗在位初期，他任尚膳监太监，后升司礼监秉笔太监。
English: In the early days of Emperor Taizong's reign, he served as the eunuch in charge of food, and later as the eunuch in charge of etiquette.

古文：王安之辞司礼掌印也，体乾急谋于客、魏夺之，而置安于死。
现代文：王安推辞司礼监掌印太监之职后，体乾急忙与客氏、魏忠贤策划将它夺了过来，并置王安于死地。
English: After Wang An resigned from the post of ceremonial overseer and chief eunuch, he hurriedly plotted with the Kake clan and Wei Zhongxian to take it over and put Wang An to death.

古文：用是，一意附忠贤，为之尽力。
现代文：此后，他一心依附魏忠贤，为他效力。
English: After that, he wholeheartedly adhered to Wei Zhongxian and served him.

古文：故事，司礼掌印者位东厂上。
现代文：按惯例，司礼监掌印太监位在东厂提督之上。
English: According to the usual practice, the chief eunuch supervising the ceremony ranks higher than the admiral of the East Factory.

古文：体乾避忠贤，独处其下，故忠贤一无所忌。
现代文：王体乾为引避魏忠贤，便将自己排在东厂之下，因此魏忠贤毫无顾忌。
English: In order to evade Wei Zhongxian, Wang Tieqian ranked himself below the East Factory, so Wei Zhongxian had no scruples.

古文：杨涟劾忠贤疏上，帝命体乾诵之，置疏中切要语不读，涟遂得谴。
现代文：杨涟弹劾魏忠贤的奏疏上呈后，皇上命王体乾诵读，体乾将奏疏中切中要害的内容略去不读，杨涟于是受到谴责。
English: After Yang Jie impeached Wei Zhongxian, the imperial edict was read aloud in the imperial rescript. Yang Jie omitted the most important contents of the imperial rescript and was condemned.

古文：万燝之死，出体乾意。
现代文：万景之死，是出于王体乾的主意。
English: The death of the view is from the idea of Wang Taixuan.

古文：忠贤不识字，体乾与永贞等为之谋主，遇票红文书及改票，动请御笔，体乾独奏，忠贤默然也。
现代文：魏忠贤不识字，王体乾和李永贞等人为他主谋，凡遇到将内阁起草的批示用红笔批出的文书和更改内阁批示的，动辄要请皇上亲笔批写，这时都是王体乾独奏，魏忠贤默然不语。
English: Wei Zhongxian was illiterate, and Wang Tieqian and Li Yongzhen were his masterminds. Whenever he came across a document approving the instructions drafted by the cabinet with a red pen or a change in the instructions of the cabinet, he would ask the emperor to approve it with his own hand. At this time, Wang Tieqian was the soloist, and Wei Zhongxian was silent.

古文：及忠贤冒陵工、殿工、边功等赏，体乾、永贞辈亦各荫锦衣官数人。
现代文：后来魏忠贤冒领陵墓工程、宫殿工程、边功的奖赏，王体乾、李永贞之辈也各得庇荫锦衣卫官衔数人。
English: Later, Wei Zhongxian took the lead in the mausoleum project, the palace project, and the reward for frontier service. Wang Tieqian and Li Yongzhen also won several titles of patronage and clothing guard.

古文：尝疑选人受益、黄愿素为钱谦益、黄尊素兄弟，欲并柰锢，其阿媚忠贤如此。
现代文：他曾怀疑被选中的钱受益、黄原素是钱谦益、黄尊素的兄弟，想禁锢他们。他向魏忠贤献媚竟做到这等地步。
English: He suspected that he was chosen to benefit from the money, that Huang Yuan Su was the brother of Qian Qianyi and Huang Zun Su, and wanted to imprison them. He flattered Wei Zhongxian to such an extent.

古文：及庄烈帝定逆案，革体乾职，籍其家。
现代文：到庄烈帝定逆案后，王体乾被革职，还被抄了家。
English: After the case against Zhuang Rong Rong was decided, Wang Tieqian was dismissed from his post and his house was confiscated.

古文：永贞，通州人。
现代文：李永贞，通州人。
English: Li Yongzhen, from Tongzhou.

古文：万历中为内侍，犯法被系者十八年，光宗立，得释。
现代文：万历年间做宦官，因犯法被关了十八年，光宗即位后获释。
English: As a eunuch during the Wanli era, he was imprisoned for eighteen years for breaking the law, and was released after the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong.

古文：忠贤用事，引其党诸栋、史宾等为秉笔。
现代文：魏忠贤专权时，推荐他的党羽诸栋、史宾等人，任为秉笔太监。
English: When Wei Zhongxian was in power, he recommended his followers Zhu Dong, Sping and others to be appointed as eunuchs.

古文：永贞入栋幕，与忠贤掌班刘荣为死友。
现代文：李永贞进入诸栋的幕帐，与魏忠贤的掌班刘荣结为死友。
English: Li Yongzhen entered the curtain of Zhu Dong, and became a close friend of Liu Rong, the head of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：栋死，夤缘得通于忠贤，由文书房升秉笔太监，匝月五迁，与体乾、文辅及石元雅共为忠贤心腹。
现代文：诸栋死后，他巴结上了魏忠贤，由文书房升为秉笔太监，一个月之内五次升迁，与王体乾、涂文辅和石元雅一起成为魏忠贤的心腹。
English: After the death of Zhu Dong, he became Wei Zhongxian's confidant. He was promoted from the clerk's office to the eunuch with a pen. He was promoted five times within a month. He became Wei Zhongxian's confidant together with Wang Tieqian, Tu Wenshu and Shi Yuanya.

古文：凡章奏入，永贞等先钤识窾要，白忠贤议行。
现代文：凡章奏呈入后，永贞等人先打开了解重要内容，汇报魏忠贤，商议执行。
English: After each chapter was submitted, Yongzhen and others first opened to understand the important content, reported to Wei Zhongxian, and discussed the implementation.

古文：崔呈秀所献诸录，永贞等各置小册袖中，遇有处分，则争出册告曰： 此某录中人也。 
现代文：崔呈秀所献的各种名录，永贞等人都将这些小册放在袖中，遇有要处理的对象，便争相拿出册子告诉魏忠贤说： 这人在名录中。 
English: The various directories presented by Cui Hengxiu, Yongzheng and others all put these brochures in their sleeves. If there is an object to be dealt with, they scramble to take out the brochures and tell Wei Zhongxian: This person is in the directory.

古文：故无得免者。
现代文：以故没有人得以幸免。
English: So no one was spared.

古文：永贞性贪，督三殿工，治信王邸，所侵没无算。
现代文：永贞性贪婪，他在监督三殿工程，以及负责建信王邸时，侵吞的财物无数。
English: Conscientious and greedy, he embezzled countless assets while overseeing the construction of the Third Palace and the Prince's Residence.

古文：庄烈帝立，永贞阳引退，行十五万金于体乾及司体王永祚、王本政求援。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，永贞假称引退，用十五万金向王体乾和司礼监王永祚、王本政行贿求援。
English: After Emperor Zhuangde ascended to the throne, Yongzhen pretended to retire and used 150,000 gold to bribe Wang Yongxu and Wang Bensheng, the supervisors of the Imperial Household Agency, for assistance.

古文：三人恶其反覆，首于帝。
现代文：三人厌恶他反复无常，向皇上自首。
English: The three abhorred his capriciousness and surrendered to the emperor.

古文：永贞惧，遂亡去。
现代文：永贞害怕了，便逃走。
English: Yongzhen was scared and ran away.

古文：既而被获，谪凤阳，寻以伪草李实奏，逮至，伏诛。
现代文：后来被抓获，贬到凤阳，不久因他伪造李实的奏章，将他逮捕诛杀。
English: Later, he was caught and banished to Fengyang. Shortly after, he was arrested and killed for forging Li Si's record.

古文：文辅，初为客氏子侯国兴授读，谄附忠贤，由司礼秉笔历掌御马监，总督太仓、节慎二库。
现代文：涂文辅，最初为客氏的儿子侯国兴授读，巴结依附魏忠贤，由司礼监秉笔太监历任御马监太监，总督太仓、节慎二库。
English: Tu Wenzhu, originally read by Hou Guoxing, the son of the Hakka clan, supported Wei Zhongxian, and was successively appointed as the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch.

古文：若愚当忠贤时，禄赐未尝一及，既幽囚，痛己之冤，而恨体乾、文辅辈之得漏网也，作《酌中志》以自明，凡四卷，见者邻之。
现代文：他夺取宁安长公主的府第做官署，名叫 户工总部 。他的侍从骑卒常有数百人，侍郎以下官员在公堂上都依礼拜见他，势力出于群阉之上。
English: He seized the residence of the chief princess of Ning'an and made it into a government office, called the Household Industry Headquarters. His attendants and equerries often numbered in the hundreds, and officials from the equerry on down paid him homage in the public hall. His power was above the crowd.

古文：崔文升者，郑贵妃宫中内侍也。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，他又依附徐应元，被贬往南京。崔文升，是郑贵妃宫中的宦官。
English: After Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, he followed Xu Yingyuan and was banished to Nanjing. Cui Wensheng was a eunuch in the court of Empress Zheng Guifei.

古文：光宗立，升司礼秉笔，掌御药房。
现代文：光宗即位后，升任司礼监秉笔太监，掌御药房。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong, he was promoted to the position of Siyuan (officer of etiquette) and Binpeng (eunuch) and was in charge of the pharmacy.

古文：时贵妃进帝美女四人，帝幸焉，既而有疾。
现代文：当时贵妃给皇上进献四名美女，皇上很宠爱她们，不久得了病。
English: At that time, Guifei presented the emperor with four beautiful women. The emperor loved them very much and soon fell ill.

古文：文升用大黄药，益剧，不视朝。
现代文：崔文升给皇上服用大黄药，皇上病得更重，不能视朝。
English: Cui Wensheng gave the emperor rhubarb medicine. The emperor became even more ill and was unable to see the emperor.

古文：外廷汹汹，皆言文升受贵妃指，有异谋。
现代文：外廷闹开了，都说崔文升受贵妃指使，有异谋。
English: The court was in an uproar. Everyone said that Cui Wensheng was ordered by the empress and that there was a conspiracy.

古文：给事中杨涟言： 陛下哀毁之余，万几劳瘁。
现代文：给事中杨涟说： 陛下在哀痛之余，又日理万机，心力交瘁。
English: During the event, Yang Mi said: "In addition to grief, Your Majesty has been working very hard.

古文：文升误用伐药，又构造流言，谓侍御蛊惑，损陛下令名。
现代文：崔文升误用伐药，又制造流言，说侍臣嫔妃蛊惑皇上，损害了陛下令名。
English: Cui Wensheng misused lumbering chemicals and created a rumor that his valet, Zoufei, had seduced the emperor, damaging the reputation of the emperor.

古文：陛下奈何置贼臣于肘腋间哉！ 
现代文：陛下为什么要将这种贼臣放在身边呢？ 
English: Why does Your Majesty keep such a traitor around?

古文：然构造之说，涟疑文升误用药，故为此以图御罪，其实出于文升果否，未知也。
现代文：但制造流言之说，是杨涟怀疑崔文升误用药，所以崔文升要这么做想推卸罪责，其实此事是否是崔文升所为，还不知道。
English: However, the rumor says that it was Yang Jie who suspected Cui Wensheng of misusing drugs, so Cui Wensheng wanted to do this to shift the blame. In fact, it is not yet known whether the matter was committed by Cui Wensheng.

古文：未几，光宗服鸿胪丞李可灼红丸，遂崩。
现代文：不久，光宗服下鸿胪寺丞李可灼进的红丸，便去世了。
English: Soon after, Red Maru, who was a disciple of Emperor Guangzong and a disciple of Hongye Temple's priest Li Ke, passed away.

古文：言者交攻可灼及阁臣方从哲，惟御史郑宗周等直指文升。
现代文：人们纷纷攻击李可灼和内阁大臣方从哲，只有御史郑宗周等人直接指责崔文升。
English: People attacked Li Kegui and cabinet minister Fang Congzhe one after another, but only the imperial historian Zheng Zong Zhou and others directly accused Cui Wensheng.

古文：给事中魏大中言文升之恶不下张差，御史吴甡亦谓其罪浮河灼。
现代文：给事中魏大中说崔文升的罪恶不亚于张差，御史吴繰也说他的罪在李可灼之上。
English: During the incident, Wei Dada said that Cui Wensheng's crime was no less than Zhang Zha, and Gu Shi Wu Cui also said that his crime was above Li Kegui.

古文：下廷议，可灼论戍，文升谪南京。
现代文：这事交给大臣在朝廷上议论，最后判李可灼戍边，崔文升贬去南京。
English: This matter was handed over to the minister for discussion at the imperial court, and finally Li Kegui was sentenced to exile, and Cui Wensheng was banished to Nanjing.

古文：及忠贤用事，召文升总督漕运兼管河道。
现代文：到魏忠贤专权时，将崔文升召任总督漕运兼管河道。
English: When Wei Zhongxian came to power, he appointed Cui Wensheng as the governor of rowing and river.

古文：庄烈帝即位，召回。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，将他召回。
English: After Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, he was recalled.

古文：御史吴焕复劾之。
现代文：御史吴焕又弹劾他。
English: Chief Secretary Wu Huan also impeached him.

古文：疏甫上，文升即结同党伏宫门号哭，声彻御座。
现代文：奏疏刚递上，文升即勾结同党拜伏在宫门号哭，声音直传到皇上御座。
English: As soon as the report was submitted, Wen Sheng immediately colluded with the party to bow down and cry at the palace gate, and the sound was transmitted directly to the emperor's throne.

古文：帝大怒，并其党皆杖一百，充孝陵净军。
现代文：皇上大怒，将他和他的同党一起每人杖打一百，发往孝陵充净军。
English: The emperor was so angry that he and his party were each caned a hundred times and sent to the filial piety purification army.

古文：张彝宪，庄烈帝朝司礼太监也。
现代文：张彝宪，是庄烈帝朝的司礼监太监。
English: Zhang Qianxian was the eunuch of the ceremonial overseer of the Zhuang Dynasty.

古文：帝初即位，鉴魏忠贤祸败，尽撤诸方镇守中官，委任大臣。
现代文：皇上初即位时，鉴于魏忠贤的祸败，将各地镇守宦官全部撤回，转而委任大臣。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne at the beginning of his reign, in view of the disastrous defeat of Wei Zhongxian, he withdrew all the town guard eunuchs from various regions and appointed ministers instead.

古文：既而廷臣竞门户，兵败饷绌，不能赞一策，乃思复用近侍。
现代文：后来廷臣竞相建立门户，战事不利，粮饷不足，他们却不能献上一策，皇上于是想重新起用宦官。
English: Later, courtiers competed to establish portals, the war was unfavorable, food was insufficient, but they could not offer a plan, so the emperor wanted to re-appoint eunuchs.

古文：崇祯四年九月，遣王应朝等监视关、宁，又遣王坤宣府，刘文忠大同，刘允中山西，监视军马。
现代文：崇祯四年九月，派遣王应朝等人监视山海关、宁远，又派王坤到宣府，刘文忠到大同，刘允中到山西，监视军马。
English: In September of the fourth year of Chongzhen, Wang Yingchao and others were sent to monitor Shanhaiguan and Ningyuan, and Wang Kun was sent to Xuanfu, Liu Wenzhong to Datong, and Liu Yunzhong to Shanxi to monitor the army and horses.

古文：而以彝宪有心计，令钩校户、工二部出入，如涂文辅故事，为之建署，名曰户工总理，其权视外总督，内团营提督焉。
现代文：而因张彝宪有心计，令他探索考核户、工二部出入官员，仿原先涂文辅所为，并为他建了官署，名叫户工总理，权力同于外面的都督和京师的团营提督。
English: However, because Zhang Bingxian had a plan, he made him explore the assessment of officials entering and leaving households and the Second Division of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, imitating what Tu Wenju originally did, and built a government office for him, named the Prime Minister of Household Industry, with the same power as the outside governor and the regimental admiral of the Beijing Division.

古文：给事中宋可久、冯元飙等十余人论谏，不纳。
现代文：给事中宋可久、冯元飙等十余人弹劾他，皇上不采纳。
English: More than ten people, including Song Kegui and Feng Yuan Rong, impeached him, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：吏部尚书闵洪学率朝臣具公疏争，帝曰： 苟群臣殚心为国，朕何事乎内臣。 
现代文：吏部尚书闵洪学率领朝臣一起上一封奏疏争辩，皇上说： 如果群臣尽心为国，朕又何必用内臣呢？ 
English: The cadre department's secretary, Hong Xue, led the courtiers in a letter of protest and argument, and the emperor said: If the courtiers are dedicated to the country, why do I need to use the vassals?

古文：众莫敢对。
现代文：众人都不敢回答。
English: People didn't dare to respond.

古文：南京侍郎吕维祺疏责辅臣不能匡救，礼部侍郎李孙宸亦以召对力谏，俱不听。
现代文：南京侍郎吕维祺上疏责备宰辅大臣不能匡救国家，礼部侍郎李孙宸也奉皇上的召见极力劝谏，皇上都不听。
English: Lu Wei, the chamberlain of Nanjing, reproached the Vice-Minister for not being able to save the country, and Li Sun Ying, the chamberlain of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was also summoned by the emperor to strongly advise him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：彝宪遂按行两部，踞尚书上，命郎中以下谒见。
现代文：张彝宪于是监察两部，位居尚书之上，命郎中以下官员依礼谒见。
English: Zhang Jianxian then supervised the two departments, ranking above Shangshu, and the officials below him were received according to the etiquette.

古文：工部侍郎高弘图不为下，抗疏乞归，削籍去。
现代文：工部侍郎高弘图不甘愿居张彝宪之下，上疏请辞职，结果被除名而去。
English: Gao Hongtu, an attendant of the engineering department, was not willing to stay under Zhang Xianxian. He was asked to resign by Shang Shu, but he was removed from his post.

古文：彝宪益骄纵，故勒边镇军器不发。
现代文：张彝宪更加骄横，故意扣住边镇的军器不发。
English: Zhang Yuxian was even more arrogant, deliberately holding back the military equipment from the border town.

古文：管盔甲主事孙肇兴恐稽滞军事，因劾其误国。
现代文：管盔甲的主事孙肇兴怕延误军事，便弹劾他误国。
English: Sun Zhaoxing, who was in charge of the armor, was afraid of delaying the military, so he impeached him for misleading the country.

古文：帝命回奏，罪至遣戍。
现代文：皇上命令回奏，孙肇兴被判遣去戍边。
English: The emperor ordered a rematch, and Sun Zhaoxing was sentenced to be sent to Fuxian.

古文：主事金铉、周镳皆以谏斥去。
现代文：主事金铉、周镳都因进谏被斥退。
English: Both the main person in charge, Jin Qi and Zhou Qi, were expelled from the meeting because of their interference.

古文：工部尚书周士朴以不赴彝宪期，被诘问，罢去。
现代文：工部尚书周士朴因不赴张彝宪的约会，被责问罢免。
English: Zhou Shupo of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce was reprimanded and dismissed for not going to Zhang Yuxian's appointment.

古文：是时，中珰势复大振。
现代文：那时，宦官的势力重新大振。
English: At that time, the power of the eunuchs began to grow again.

古文：王坤至宣府，甫逾月，即劾巡按御史胡良机。
现代文：王坤到了宣府，刚过一个月，便弹劾巡按御史胡良机。
English: Wang Kun arrived at Xuanwu, and just a month later, he had a good opportunity to impeach the inspector.

古文：帝落良机职，命坤按治。
现代文：皇上将胡良机撤职，命王坤处理此事。
English: The emperor removed Hu Liangji from his post and ordered Wang Kun to deal with the matter.

古文：给事中魏呈润争之，亦谪外。
现代文：给事中魏呈润为他争辩，也被贬任地方官。
English: Wei Chengrun argued for him in the matter, and was also demoted to local official.

古文：坤性狂躁敢言，朝中大吏有欲倚之相倾挤者。
现代文：王坤性格急躁，敢说话，朝中有些大官想倚靠他排斥异己。
English: Wang Kun is impetuous and outspoken, and some high-ranking officials in the imperial court want to rely on him to expel dissidents.

古文：于是坤抗疏劾修撰陈于泰，谓其盗窃科名，语侵周延儒。
现代文：于是王坤上疏弹劾修撰陈于泰，说他盗窃科举功名，内容牵涉到周延儒。
English: As a result, Wang Kun wrote an impeachment essay on Chen Yutai, saying that he had stolen academic honors, the content of which involved Zhou Yanru.

古文：给事中傅朝佑言坤妄干弹劾之权，且其文词练达，机锋挡激，必有阴邪险人主之，其意指温体仁。
现代文：给事中傅朝佑说王坤不正当地盗用弹劾权，并且他写的文词简练通达，语意深远，富于挑衅性，一定有阴险小人为他主谋，这意思是指温体仁。
English: In the case, Fu Chaoyu said that Wang Kun improperly misappropriated the power of impeachment, and that the words he wrote were concise, profound, and provocative. There must be a sinister villain who masterminded him, which means warm body and mind.

古文：帝置不问。
现代文：皇上搁置一边，不问。
English: Leave the Emperor aside and do not question him.

古文：左副都御史王志道言： 近者内臣举动，几于手握皇纲，而辅臣终不敢一问。至于身被弹击，犹忍辱不言。
现代文：左副都御史王志道说： 近来宦官的举动，几乎是手握皇权，而宰辅大臣竟不敢过问一下，甚至自己被弹劾攻击，还忍辱不言。
English: Left Vice-Governor Wang Zhidao said, "Recently, the eunuchs have been acting as if they were holding the imperial power in their hands, while the Vice-Minister did not dare to ask questions, even when he was impeached and attacked, he did not say a word.

古文：何以副明主之知？ 
现代文：这怎能对圣明君主的智慧有所助益呢？ 
English: How can this be beneficial to the wisdom of the Sage-Monarch?

古文：皆备责延儒，欲以动帝。
现代文：这都是谴责周延儒，想这样来感动皇上。
English: All of this is to condemn Zhou Yanzhu and to try to impress the emperor.

古文：帝怒，削其籍。
现代文：皇上大怒，将他除名。
English: The emperor was furious and stripped him of his title.

古文：时帝方一意用内臣，故言者多得罪。
现代文：当时皇上正一意任用宦官，所以议论的人大多得罪。
English: At that time, the emperor was determined to appoint eunuchs, so most of the people who talked about it were offended.

古文：到八年八月始下诏曰： 往以廷臣不职，故委寄内侍。
现代文：到八年八月，皇上才下诏说： 以前因为廷臣没有见识，所以委任宦官。
English: It was not until August of the eighth year that the emperor issued an edict saying: Previously, eunuchs were appointed because courtiers lacked insight.

古文：今兵制粗立，军饷稍清，尽撤监视总理。 
现代文：现在军事制度已大致建立，军饷的筹办稍稍明确，现将所有监理总理的宦官全部撤回。 
English: Now that the military system has been generally established and the military pay system is somewhat clear, all the eunuchs of the supervising prime minister will be withdrawn.

古文：又明年，命彝宪守备南京，寻死。
现代文：又过了一年，命张彝宪任南京守备，他不久死。
English: A year later, Zhang Bingxian was appointed to guard Nanjing, but he died soon after.

古文：然帝卒用高起潜辈典兵监镇，驯至开关延贼，遂底灭亡。
现代文：但皇上终于还是用高起潜之辈掌握军队，监督各地重镇，最后发展到宦官开关纳贼，直到灭亡。
English: However, the emperor finally used the high-ranking generals to control the army, supervise the major towns around the country, and finally developed to eunuchs to accept thieves until his death.

古文：高起潜，在内侍中，以知兵称，帝委任之。
现代文：高起潜，在宦官中以懂得军事著称，受到皇上的重用。
English: A high diver, he was known among eunuchs for his knowledge of military affairs, and was much used by the emperor.

古文：五年命偕其侪吕直督诸将征孔有德于登州，明年凯旋。
现代文：五年他受命与同伴吕直督领各将到登州征讨孔有德，第二年凯旋。
English: In the fifth year, he was ordered to go to Dengzhou with his companion, Governor Lu Zhizhong, to recruit Kong Youde. They returned in triumph the following year.

古文：时流贼大炽，命太监陈大金、阎思印、谢文举、孙茂霖等为内中军，分入大帅曹文诏、左良玉、张应昌诸营，名曰监军，在边镇者，悉名监视。
现代文：当时流贼势力很盛，皇上命太监陈大金、阎思印、谢文举、孙茂霖等人为内中军，分派入大帅曹文诏、左良玉、张应昌各营中，名叫监军，而分到边镇的，都叫监视。
English: At that time, the influence of the bandits was very strong. The Emperor ordered the eunuchs Chen Dajin, Yan Siyin, Xie Wencu, Sun Maolin and others to form the Inner Chinese Army. They were assigned to the battalions of the great generals Cao Wenzhao, Zuo Liangyu, and Zhang Yingchang, and were called the monitoring army, while those assigned to the border towns were called the monitoring.

古文：而起潜得监视宁、锦诸军。
现代文：而高起潜得以监视宁远、锦州各军。
English: However, the high-altitude submarine was able to monitor the armies of Ningyuan and Jinzhou.

古文：已而诸监多侵克军资，临敌辄拥精兵先遁，诸将亦耻为之下，缘是皆无功。
现代文：后来那些太监多侵吞军用物资，而临阵对敌时却总是拥着精兵首先遁走，各将领也羞为他们的下属，因此都无所作为。
English: Later, those eunuchs mostly embezzled military supplies, but when facing the enemy, they always grabbed the elite soldiers and ran away first. The generals were ashamed to be their subordinates, so they did nothing.

古文：八年尽撤诸镇内臣，惟起潜监视如故。
现代文：八年皇上全部撤回各镇的宦官，只有高起潜仍旧担任监视。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor withdrew all the eunuchs from the towns, only Gao Qianqian still served as a monitor.

古文：九年七月复遣太监李国辅、许进忠等分守紫荆、倒马诸关，孙惟武、刘元斌防马水河。
现代文：九年七月皇上又派太监李国辅、许进忠等人分守紫荆关、倒马关等关口，孙元斌防卫马永河。
English: In July of the ninth year, the emperor sent the eunuchs Li Guo-fu, Xu Jinzhong and others to guard the gates of the Bauhinia Pass, the Fallen Horse Pass and other gates, and Sun Yuanbin to defend the Ma Yong River.

古文：时兵部尚书张凤翼出督援军，宣大总督梁廷栋亦引兵南，特命起潜为总监，给金三万、赏功牌千，以司礼大珰张云汉、韩赞周副之。
现代文：当时兵部尚书张凤翼出去率领援军，宣大总督梁廷栋也领兵南下，皇上特命高起潜为总监，给他黄金三万两、赏功牌一千枚，派司礼监大宦官张云汉、韩赞周辅佐他。
English: At that time, Shangshu Zhang Fengyi of the Ministry of Military Affairs went out to lead the reinforcements, and Liang Tingdong, the governor of Xuanda, also led the troops to the south. The emperor specially ordered Gao Jiankui to be the director general, gave him thirty thousand taels of gold and one thousand merit medals, and sent Zhang Yunhan, the eunuch of the chief eunuch, and Han Zhan Zhou to assist him.

古文：然起潜实未尝决一战，惟割死人首冒功而已。
现代文：但高起潜实际上不曾打过一仗，只是割下死人的头冒功而已。
English: However, the high-ranking diver never actually fought a battle, but only cut off the dead man's head and took credit for it.

古文：明年，起潜行部视师，令监司以下悉用军礼。
现代文：第二年，高起潜巡视所辖地区，检阅军队，命令监司以下官员都要对他行军礼。
English: In the second year, Gao Qiqian inspected the area under his jurisdiction, reviewed the army, and ordered the officials below the supervisor to give him a military salute.

古文：永平道刘景耀、关内道杨于国疏争，被黜。
现代文：永平道刘景耀、关内道杨于国上疏反对，被撤职。
English: Liu Jingyao of Yongping Road and Yang Yu of Guanzhong Road opposed the move and were removed from their posts.

古文：既而与兵部尚书杨嗣昌比，致宣大总督卢象升孤军战殁，又匿不言状，人多疾之。
现代文：后来他与兵部尚书杨嗣昌勾结，致使宣大总督卢象升孤军战死，而他还将这件事隐瞒下来，所以人们多恨他。
English: Later, he colluded with Yang Shichang of the Ministry of Military Affairs, resulting in the death of Lu Xiangsheng, the governor of Xuan Da, and he also concealed the matter, so people hated him more.

古文：十七年，李自成将犯阙，帝复命起潜监宁、前诸军，而以杜勋镇宣府。
现代文：十七年，李自成将要侵犯禁宫，皇上又命高起潜监宁、前各军，而用杜勋镇守宣府。
English: In the seventeenth year, Li Zicheng was about to invade the Forbidden City, and the emperor ordered the troops to guard the Xuanwu Palace.

古文：勋至镇即降贼。
现代文：杜勋到镇后便投降了贼人。
English: When Du Xun arrived in the town, he surrendered to the thieves.

古文：事闻，廷臣请急撤城守太监，忽传旨云： 杜勋骂贼殉难，予荫祠。 
现代文：这事传到朝廷后，廷臣请尽快撤掉城守太监，忽然间传下圣旨说： 杜勋骂贼殉难，给予庇荫并祭祀他。 
English: After the matter came to the attention of the imperial court, the courtiers requested that the eunuch guarding the city be removed as soon as possible. Suddenly, a sacred edict was issued, saying: "Du Xun should revile the thief's martyrdom, give him protection and worship him."

古文：盖为内臣蒙蔽也。
现代文：这是皇上为宦官所蒙蔽的结果。
English: This was the result of the emperor being hoodwinked by eunuchs.

古文：未几，勋从贼至，自成设黄幄坐广宁门外，秦、晋二王左右席地坐，勋侍其下，呼城上请入见。
现代文：不久，杜勋随从贼人来到，李自成架着黄幄坐在广宁门外，秦、晋两位王爷席地而坐，杜勋在他们下面侍候，呼喊城上的人请求让他进城见皇上。
English: Soon, Du Xun arrived with the thieves. Li Zicheng sat outside the Guangning Gate with a yellow scepter. The two princes Qin and Jin sat on the ground. Du Xun waited below them, shouting to the people on the city to ask him to enter the city to see the emperor.

古文：守城诸珰缒之上，同入大内，盛称贼势，劝帝自为计。
现代文：守城的宦官将他吊了上来，一同进入大内，说贼人势力很强，劝皇上为自己打算。
English: The eunuch guarding the city hung him up, and together they entered the inner court, saying that the thief was very powerful, and advised the emperor to make plans for himself.

古文：左右请留之，勋曰： 不返，则二王危。 
现代文：左右的人请将他留下来，杜勋说 ：我如果不回去，则二王就要危险。 
English: The people around him asked him to stay. Du Xun said, "If I don't go back, the two kings will be in danger."

古文：乃纵之出，复缒下，语守城诸珰曰： 吾曹富贵固在也。 
现代文：于是放他出城，将他又吊了下去。他走时对守城的宦官说 ：我们的富贵总是在的。 
English: So they let him go out of the city and hanged him again, and as he went away he said to the eunuch who was guarding the city, "Our riches have always been with us.

古文：俄而城陷，诸珰皆降。
现代文：不久京城陷落，宦官们都投降了。
English: Soon after, the capital fell and the eunuchs surrendered.

古文：及贼败将遁，乃下令尽逐内竖，无贵贱老弱皆号哭徒跣，破面流血，走出京城门。
现代文：后来贼人战败，将要逃走时，便下令将宦官全部逐出，结果他们不分贵贱老弱都号哭，赤脚而行，头破血流地走出京城的大门。
English: Later, when the thieves were defeated and were about to flee, he ordered all the eunuchs to be driven out. As a result, all of them, rich and poor, old and weak, cried, walked barefoot, and walked out of the gates of the capital with their heads bleeding.

古文：贼遂捆载其金帛珠宝西去。
现代文：贼人于是将金银珠宝装载，向西而去。
English: The thieves then loaded up the gold, silver and jewels and headed west.

古文：初，内臣奉命守城，已有异志，令士卒皆持白杨杖，朱其外，贯铁环于端使有声，格击则折，至是贼即以其杖驱焉。
现代文：当初，宦官奉命守城，已有了异心，他们令士卒都拿着白杨杖，将其染红，在木杖的顶端穿上铁环，使它能发出声响，一旦格斗就会折断。到这时贼人逃走时，贼人就用这些木杖驱赶他们。
English: At first, the eunuchs had been ordered to defend the city, but they had already become hostile. They ordered the soldiers to take poplar sticks, dye them red, and put an iron ring on the top of the stick so that it could make a sound and would break if they fought. At this time, when the thieves fled, the thieves used these sticks to drive them away.

古文：广宁门之启，或日太监曹化淳献之，或曰化淳实守东直门，而化淳入国朝，上疏奏辨甚力，时仓卒莫能明也。
现代文：广宁门的开启，有人说是太监曹化淳献给贼人的，又有人说曹化淳实际上是守东直门，而曹化淳进入我大清朝后，上疏极力申辩，当时仓卒之间，一时难以搞清楚。
English: Some people say that the opening of the Guangning Gate was dedicated by the eunuch Cao Huajun to the thieves, while others say that Cao Huajun was actually guarding the Dongzhimen Gate. After Cao Huajun entered the Qing Dynasty, Shangxo vigorously defended it. At that time, it was difficult to figure out between the storehouses.

古文：起潜赴宁、前，中道弃关走。福王召为京营提督，后亦降于我大清。
现代文：高起潜前往宁、前，中途弃关而走，福王将他招为京营提督，后来也投降了我大清。
English: Gao took up diving and went to Ning and Qian, abandoning the pass halfway and walking away. King Fu invited him to be the admiral of the Beijing camp, and later he also surrendered to I Daqing.

古文：王承恩，太监曹化淳名下也，累官司礼秉笔太监。
现代文：王承恩，属太监曹化淳名下，历任到司礼监秉笔太监。
English: Wang Cheng'en, under the name of the eunuch Cao Huachun, successively served as the eunuch of the eunuch Bingpen.

古文：崇祯十七年三月，李自成犯阙，帝命承恩提督京营。
现代文：崇祯十七年三月，李自成侵犯禁宫，皇上命承恩提督京营部队。
English: In March of the seventeenth year of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng violated the Forbidden City, and the emperor ordered Admiral En to lead the Beijing camp troops.

古文：是时，事势已去，城陴守卒寥寥，贼架飞梯攻西直、平则、德胜三门。
现代文：当时，大势已去，守城士卒寥寥，贼人架设飞梯进攻西直门、平则门、德胜门三门。
English: At that time, the general momentum had already gone, the defenders of the city were few, and the thieves set up flying ladders to attack the three gates of West Zhaomen, Pingzhemen, and Deshengmen.

古文：承恩见贼坎墙，急发炮击之，连毙数人，而诸珰泄泄自如。
现代文：承恩见贼人挖城墙，急忙发炮攻击，一连击毙了几个人，宦官们便沾沾自喜。
English: Seeing the thieves digging up the city wall, the eunuchs were so grateful that they quickly fired a cannon to attack, killing several people in quick succession.

古文：帝召承恩，令亟整内官，备亲征。
现代文：皇上诏见承恩，叫他赶快整顿宦官，准备亲征。
English: The emperor saw his gratitude and told him to quickly rectify the eunuchs and prepare to enlist himself.

古文：夜分，内城陷。
现代文：到了晚上，内城失陷。
English: By nightfall, the inner city had fallen.

古文：天将曙，帝崩于寿皇亭，承恩即自缢其下。
现代文：天将亮时，皇上在寿皇亭驾崩，承恩也在亭下上吊。
English: At dawn, the emperor died in the Shouwang Pavilion, and Shion also hanged himself under the pavilion.

古文：福王时，谥忠愍。
现代文：福王时期，给他谥号叫忠愍。
English: During the time of King Fu, he was given the nickname Zhongzheng.

古文：本朝赐地六十亩，建祠立碑旌其忠，附葬故主陵侧。
现代文：大清朝赐给土地六十亩，建祠立碑以表彰他的忠诚，将他附葬在故主庄烈帝陵之侧。
English: The Qing Dynasty gave him sixty mu of land, built a shrine and erected a monument to commend his loyalty, and buried him next to the tomb of the late Emperor Zhuang.

古文：方正化，山东人。
现代文：方正化，山东人。
English: The people of Shandong are becoming more and more orthodox.

古文：崇祯时，为司礼太监。
现代文：崇祯时期，任司礼监太监。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he served as eunuch and ceremonial supervisor.

古文：十五年冬，畿辅被兵，命总监保定军务，有全城功，已而撤还。
现代文：十五年冬，京畿地区遭受兵灾，他受命总监保定军务，立下了保全城池之功，不久撤回。
English: In the winter of 1915, when the Gyeonggi region suffered a military disaster, he was appointed director-general of the military affairs of Baoding and was credited with the preservation of the city, but he soon withdrew.

古文：十七年二月复命出镇，正化顿首辞，帝不许。
现代文：十七年二月，皇上又命他出去镇守，方正化叩头推辞，皇上不准。
English: In February of the seventeenth year, the emperor ordered him to go out and defend the town, but he refused to do so.

古文：又顿首曰： 奴此行万无能为，不过一死报主恩尔。 
现代文：他又叩头说 ：奴才此行绝无所作为，不过是以一死报答主上恩德而已。 
English: He also kowtowed and said, "This journey of a slave accomplishes nothing, but he is repaying his master's kindness with his death."

古文：帝亦垂涕遣之。
现代文：但皇上还是含泪派他出去。
English: But the emperor still sent him out in tears.

古文：既至，与同知邵宗元等登陴共守。
现代文：他到任后，与同知邵宗元等人登城共守。
English: After he took office, he and his friend Shao Zongyuan and others jointly guarded the city.

古文：有请事者，但曰： 我方寸已乱，诸公好为之。 
现代文：凡有人来请示，他总是说： 我方才已乱，各位好自为之吧！ 
English: Whenever someone came to ask for instructions, he always said: We've just made a mess of things, you can do it yourselves!

古文：及城陷，击杀数十人，贼问： 若为谁？ 
现代文：城池失陷后，他击杀数十人，贼人问他： 你是谁？ 
English: After the city fell, he killed dozens of people. Thieves asked him: Who are you?

古文：厉声曰： 我总监方公也！ 
现代文：他厉声说道： 我是总监方公！ 
English: He said sharply, "I am Director General Fang Gong!

古文：贼攒刀斫杀之，其从奄皆死。
现代文：贼人乱刀将他砍死，他的随从宦官也死了。
English: Thieves hacked him to death, and his attendant eunuch also died.

古文：时内臣殉难者，更有故司礼掌印太监高时明，司礼秉笔太监李凤翔，提督诸监局太监褚宪章、张国元四人。
现代文：当时殉难的宦官，还有原司礼监掌印太监高时明，司礼监秉笔太监李凤翔，提督诸监局太监褚宪章、张国元四人。
English: The eunuchs who were martyred at that time were the four eunuchs Gao Shiming, the former eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch Gao Yingming, the eunuch

古文：督东厂太监王之心家最富，既降，贼勒其赀，拷死。
现代文：提督东厂的太监王之心家中最富，他投降后，贼人向他勒索钱财，将他拷打而死。
English: Admiral East Factory's eunuch Wang Xin was the richest in his family. After he surrendered, thieves extorted money from him and tortured him to death.

古文：南渡时，建旌忠祠祀诸死难者，以王承恩为正祀，内臣正化等附祀，而之心亦滥与焉。
现代文：南渡时期，建旌忠祠祭祀那些死难者，以王承恩为正祀，宦官方正化等人附祀，而王之心也得以混了进去。
English: During the Nandu period, Wang Cheng'en was the main deity of the loyalty shrine built to worship those who died, and others such as Wang Guozhong and Wang Zhenghua were attached to the shrine, and Wang Xin was also able to get in.

