古文：少时，日记书数千言。
现代文：杨维桢，字廉夫，山阴人。年少时每日记诵数千言。
English: Yang Weizhong, known as Lianfu, is from Shanyin. When he was young, he memorized thousands of words every day.

古文：父宏，筑楼铁崖山中，绕楼植梅百株，聚书数万卷，去其梯，俾诵读楼上者五年，因自号铁崖。
现代文：父亲杨宏在铁崖山中修筑一楼，绕楼植梅数百株，楼中藏书万卷，拿走楼梯，让维桢在楼上读书，时达五年。维桢因此自号铁崖。
English: His father, Yang Hong, built the first floor in the middle of the cliff, planted hundreds of plum trees around the building, collected thousands of books in the building, took away the stairs, and let Wei Wei study upstairs for five years. Therefore, Wei Wei called himself the cliff.

古文：元泰定四年成进士，署天台尹，改钱清场盐司令。
现代文：元泰定四年进士，代任天台府尹，后改任钱清场盐司令。
English: Yuan Taiding was promoted to officer four years later, and took the place of Yin of Tiantai Prefecture. Later, he was appointed commander of Qianqing salt fields.

古文：狷直忤物，十年不调。
现代文：维桢禀性急躁耿直，易与人不合，以至于十年不能和好。
English: Vajrasattva is impatient and straightforward, and is easily at odds with others, so much so that he cannot be reconciled for ten years.

古文：会修辽、金、宋三史成，维桢著《正统辩》千余言，总裁官欧阳元功读且叹曰： 百年后，公论定于此矣。 
现代文：编修辽、金、宋三史时，维祯著《正统辩》千余言，总裁欧阳元功读后赞叹说： 百年后，公论定在其中。 
English: When compiling the three histories of Liao, Jin and Song, Wei Zeng wrote "Orthodoxy Debate" with more than a thousand words. President Ouyang Yuan Gong said with admiration after reading it: A hundred years later, the public debate is settled.

古文：将荐之而不果，转建德路总管府推官。
现代文：于是推荐他参与三史的编修，未被接纳，转任建德路推官。
English: As a result, he was recommended to participate in the compilation of the three histories, but was not accepted, and was transferred to the post of Jian De Lu.

古文：擢江西儒学提举，未上，会兵乱，避地富春山，徙钱塘。
现代文：后提升为江西儒学提举。尚未上任，反元斗争蜂起，维祯避乱于富春山，后迁居钱塘，张士诚多次聘请他，他坚持不就。
English: Later, he was promoted to Jiangxi Confucianism. Before he took office, the anti-Yuan struggle uprising, Wei Wei took refuge in Fuchun Mountain, and later moved to Qiantang. Zhang Shicheng hired him many times, but he insisted on not doing so.

古文：张士诚累招之，不赴，遣其弟士信咨访之，因撰五论，具书复士诚，反覆告以顺逆成败之说，士诚不能用也。又忤达识丞相，徙居松江之上，海内荐绅大夫与东南才俊之士，造门纳履无虚日。酒酣以往，笔墨横飞。或戴华阳巾，披羽衣坐船屋上，吹铁笛，作《梅花弄》。或呼侍儿歌《白雪》之辞，自倚凤琶和之。宾客皆蹁跹起舞，以为神仙中人。
现代文：又派弟张士信去访求咨询。维祯撰写五论，并复信张士诚，反复讲述顺逆成败之说，士诚未能采用。维祯得罪了丞相达识，因而迁居松江之上，海内扌晋绅大夫与东南才俊之士，每日登门邀请，常常是酒酣以往，秉笔而书；或戴华阳巾，披羽衣，坐在船中，吹铁笛，做《梅花弄》；或呼歌女唱《白雪》之辞，自己以琵琶伴奏，宾客皆翩翩起舞，自以为是神仙中人。
English: He also sent his brother Zhang Shigu to visit for consultation. Wei Wei wrote five theories and replied to Zhang Shicheng, repeatedly telling the story of success and failure, but Shicheng could not adopt it. Wei Wei offended the wise men and women, so he moved to Songjiang. The gentleman doctors in Hainan Province and the talented people in Southeast China were invited to the door every day, often drinking wine and writing with a pen; or Dai Huayang towel, wearing a feather coat, sitting in a boat, playing an iron flute, doing "Plum Blossom"; or the singing woman sang the words of "White Snow," accompanying herself with a lute, and the guests danced, thinking

古文：洪武二年，太祖召诸儒纂礼乐书，以维桢前朝老文学，遣翰林詹同奉币诣门，维桢谢曰： 岂有老妇将就木，而再理嫁者邪？ 
现代文：洪武二年，太祖召集诸儒士编纂礼乐书，因维祯是前朝有声望的文学之士，遣翰林詹同带着礼物去登门聘请，维祯辞谢说： 岂有将入土的老妇再嫁的吗？ 
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the great-grandfather gathered all the Confucian scholars to compile a book of rites and music. Since Wei Zheng was a renowned literary man in the previous dynasty, he sent Han Lin Zhan with a gift to the door to hire him. Wei Zheng thanked him and said, "Is there such a thing as remarrying an old woman who has fallen into the earth?"

古文：明年，复遣有司敦促，赋《老客妇谣》一章进御，曰： 皇帝竭吾之能，不强吾所不能则可，否则有蹈海死耳。 
现代文：第二年又令地方官府去敦促他入京，维祯赋《老客妇谣》一章进呈，并称 ：皇帝可以使我用尽自己的才能，但不能强迫我做不能做到的事，否则我就跳海自尽。 
English: The next year, he ordered the local government to urge him to go to Beijing. Weifu submitted a chapter of "The Old Lady's Ballad" and said: "The emperor can make me use up my talents, but he cannot force me to do what I cannot do, otherwise I will jump into the sea and commit suicide."

古文：帝许之，赐安车诣阙廷，留百有一十日，所纂叙便例定，即乞骸骨。帝成其志，仍给安车还山。
现代文：帝只得允许他不参加礼乐书的编纂工作，但仍赐车接他来朝廷，留住了一百一十天。他所写的编纂凡例定稿后，即呈请回乡，太祖成全了他的愿望，仍备车送他归还。
English: The emperor had to allow him not to participate in the compilation of the ritual music book, but still gave him a car to pick him up at the court and kept him for one hundred and ten days. After the final draft of the compilation rules he wrote, he was invited to return to his hometown. The great-grandfather fulfilled his wish and still had a car ready to return him.

古文：史馆胄监之士祖帐西门外，宋濂赠之诗曰： 不受君王五色诏，白衣宣至白衣还 ，盖高之也。
现代文：史馆高级官员在西门外设置饯别帷帐，宋濂赠诗曰： 不受君王五色诏，白衣宣至白衣还。 对他十分尊崇。
English: Senior officials of the Museum of History set up a farewell curtain outside the West Gate, and Song Tao presented a poem saying: "If you do not accept the king's five-color edict, the white coat will be returned to the white coat." He was highly respected.

古文：抵家卒，年七十五。
现代文：维祯抵家不久就去世了，享年七十五岁。
English: Shortly after arriving home, Wei Wei passed away at the age of 75.

古文：维桢诗名擅一时，号铁崖体，与永嘉李孝光、茅山张羽、锡山倪瓒、昆山顾瑛为诗文友，碧桃叟释臻、知归叟释现、清容叟释信为方外友。
现代文：维祯的诗名噪一时，号 铁崖体 ，与永嘉李孝光、茅山张羽、锡山倪瓒、昆山顾瑛为诗文之友，与碧桃叟释臻、知归叟释现、清容叟释信为僧道之友。
English: Wei Wei's poem name is "Iron Cliff Body," and he is friends with Yongjia Li Xiaoguang, Maoyan Zhang Yu, Xishan Ni Rong, Kunshan Gu Ying as a poet, and friends with Bi Taojun, Zhigui, Shigen, Qing Rong, Shixin as a monk.

古文：张雨称其古乐府出入少陵、二李间，有旷世金石声。
现代文：张雨称维祯的古乐府诗与杜少陵、二李不相上下，有绝代金石之声。
English: Zhang Yu said that Wei Wei's Gulefu poem is on a par with Du Shaoling and Er Li, and has the voice of an absolute gem.

古文：官副提举。张士诚据吴，遂不仕。
现代文：宋濂称赞维祯的论文，如看商周的青铜器皿，云雷成文，寒光四射。其诗震天动地，严峻庄重，下笔如神，不愧为名家之作。
English: Song Tao praised Wei Wei's thesis, such as looking at the bronze ware of Shang Zhou, the clouds are written, and the cold light shines everywhere. His poem is earth-shattering, severe and solemn, the pen is like a god, and it is worthy of a famous family.

古文：居仁，字宅之，中泰定三年乡试，隐居教授，自号云松野衲。
现代文：维祯迁居松江时，与华亭陆居人及侨居的钱帷善一唱一和。
English: When Wei Wei moved to Songjiang, he was in harmony with the land-dwellers and overseas Chinese in Huating.

古文：两人既殁，与维桢同葬干山，人目为三高士墓。
现代文：陆、钱二人死后，与维祯同葬于干山，人们视为 三高士 墓。
English: After the death of Lu and Qian, they were buried together with Wei Wei in Ganshan. People regard this as the tomb of the three high-ranking officials.

古文：胡翰，字仲申，金华人。
现代文：胡翰，字仲申，金华人。
English: Hu Han, Zhi Zhong Shen, Jin Hua Ren.

古文：幼聪颖异常儿。
现代文：幼时聪明超常。
English: He was unusually bright as a child.

古文：七岁时，道拾遗金，坐守侍其人还之。
现代文：七岁时，在路上拾金，坐待失主来取。
English: At the age of seven, he picked up money on the road and waited for the owner to pick it up.

古文：长从兰溪吴师道、浦江吴莱学古文，复登同邑许谦之门。
现代文：长大后从兰奚谷吴师道、甫江吴莱学古文，又向同乡许谦登门求教。
English: After he grew up, he learned ancient literature from Wushidao and Fujiang Wulai in Lanyu Valley, and also went to his fellow villager Xu Qian for advice.

古文：同郡黄溍、柳贯以文章名天下，见翰文，称之不容口。
现代文：当时，同郡黄氵晋、柳贯以文章远近闻名，而看了胡翰的文章后，满口赞誉。
English: At that time, Huang Yujin and Liu Gang from the same county were well-known for their articles, and after reading Hu Han's article, they were full of praise.

古文：游元都，公卿交誉之。
现代文：漫游至元朝都城，公卿交口称赞。
English: He wandered to the capital city of the Yuan Dynasty and was praised by court nobles.

古文：与武威余阙、宣城贡师泰尤善。
现代文：他与武威余阙、宣城贡师泰为至交。
English: He was a close friend of Wuwei Yuxuan and Xuancheng Gong Shitai.

古文：或劝之仕，不应。
现代文：有人劝他去做官，他不去，回到家乡。
English: Some people advised him to become an official, but he did not go and returned to his hometown.

古文：既归，遭天下大乱，避地南华山，著书自适。
现代文：元末天下大乱，他避乱于南华山，著书立说，自有乐趣。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the world was in turmoil. He took refuge in Nanhuashan, wrote books, and had fun.

古文：文章与宋濂、王祎相上下。
现代文：其文章与宋濂、王不相上下。
English: His articles are on a par with those of Song Xi and Wang.

古文：太祖下金华，召见，命与许元等会食中书省。
现代文：太祖攻下金华，召见他，命与许元等在中书省任职。
English: The great-grandfather captured Jinhua, summoned him, and ordered him and Xu Yuan to serve in the Ministry of Literature.

古文：后侍臣复有荐翰者，召至金陵。
现代文：后来侍臣中又有人向太祖推荐胡翰，太祖召他至金陵。
English: Later, one of the attendants recommended Hu Han to the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather called him to Jinling.

古文：时方籍金华民为兵，翰从容进曰： 金华人多业儒，鲜习兵，籍之，徒糜饷耳。 
现代文：当时朝廷正在金华征民为兵，翰从容谏劝道： 金华人多是读书人，很少练习武艺，征他们为兵，是徒费军饷！ 
English: At that time, the imperial court was recruiting people in Jinhua as soldiers. Han Congrong advised: Jinhua people are mostly readers and rarely practice martial arts. Recruiting them as soldiers is a waste of money!

古文：太祖即罢之。
现代文：太祖立即下令停征。
English: The great-grandfather immediately ordered to stop conscription.

古文：授衢州教授。
现代文：授翰为衢州教授。
English: Zhu Han is a professor in Zhangzhou.

古文：洪武初，聘修《元史》，书成，受赉归。
现代文：洪武初，聘他参与修纂《元史》，书成后，受赏而归。
English: At the beginning of the Hongwu era, he was hired to participate in the revision of the Yuan History. After the book was completed, he was rewarded and returned.

古文：爱北山泉石，卜筑其下，徜徉十数年而终，年七十有五。
现代文：他喜爱北山的泉石，筑屋于山下，留恋于此十数年而终，年七十五岁。
English: He loved the spring stones of Kitayama, built a house at the foot of the mountain, and yearned for this place for more than ten years, until he died at the age of seventy-five.

古文：所著有《春秋集义》，文曰《胡仲子集》，诗曰《长山先生集》。
现代文：学术著作有《春秋集议》，其文有《胡仲子集》，其诗有《长山先生集》。
English: His academic works include "Spring and Autumn Collection," his essays include "Hu Zhongzi Collection," and his poems include "Nagayama Collection."

古文：李善长奏官之，力辞归。
现代文：苏伯衡，字平仲，金华人，宋朝门下侍郎苏辙的后裔。
English: Su Boheng, also known as Pingzhong, was a descendant of Jin Hua Ren, a retainer of the Song Dynasty.

古文：伯衡警敏绝伦，博洽群籍，为古文有声。元末贡于乡。
现代文：父亲苏友龙，受业于许谦，做过肖山县令。伯衡机敏无双，博览群书，古文写得好，元末为本乡贡生。
English: His father, Su Yulong, was educated by Xu Qian and served as the governor of Xiaoshan County. Bo Heng was a peerless tactician, well-versed in books, wrote ancient texts well, and was a tribute student of his hometown at the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：太祖置礼贤馆，伯衡与焉。
现代文：太祖设礼贤馆，伯贤应召。
English: The great-great-grandfather set up the Hall of Reverence for the Wise Men, and the wise men were summoned.

古文：岁丙午用为国子学录，迁学正。
现代文：太祖称帝之前三年，任命他为国子监学录，后任学正。
English: Three years before his great-grandfather was crowned emperor, he was appointed as the son of the country to supervise the school record, and later as the school principal.

古文：被荐，召见，擢翰林编修。力辞，乞省觐归。
现代文：由于他人的举荐，太祖召见他，升为翰林编修，但他辞归省亲。
English: Due to the recommendation of others, Taizu summoned him and promoted him to editor of Hanlin, but he resigned to his provincial relatives.

古文：洪武十年，学士宋濂致仕，太祖问谁可代者，濂对曰： 伯衡，臣乡人，学博行修，文词蔚赡有法。 
现代文：洪武十年，学士宋濂退休，太祖问谁可代替，宋濂回答道 ：伯衡是臣的同乡，学问渊博，道德高尚，文章蔚为可观。 
English: In the tenth year of Hongwu, the bachelor Song Xi retired. The great-grandfather asked who could replace him. Song Xi replied: "Bo Heng is a fellow countryman of the minister. He is well-read, has high morals, and his articles are impressive."

古文：太祖即征之，入见，复以疾辞，赐衣钞而还。
现代文：太祖立即召见他，他却因病辞谢。洪武二十一年，受聘主持会试。
English: His grandfather immediately summoned him, but he resigned due to illness. At the age of 21, Hongwu was hired to preside over the audition.

古文：二十一年聘主会试，事竣复辞还。寻为处州教授，坐表笺误，下吏死。
现代文：事毕又辞职返乡。不久，聘为处州教授，因对朝廷的奏章中有错误而被交司法官问罪处死。
English: After the incident, he resigned and returned to his hometown. Soon, he was hired as a professor in Wanzhou, and because there was an error in his report to the imperial court, he was brought before a judicial officer, arraigned, and executed.

古文：二子恬、怡，救父，并被刑。
现代文：两个儿子苏恬、苏怡为救父也被处死。
English: His two sons, Su Shi and Su Yi, were also executed for saving their father.

古文：王冕，字元章，诸暨人。
现代文：王冕，字元章，诸暨人。
English: The crown, the signet, and all the people.

古文：幼贫，父使牧牛，窃入学舍，听诸生诵书，墓乃返，亡其牛，父怒挞之，已而复然。
现代文：年幼家贫，给人放牛，因多次贪听私塾读书，很晚才归，丢失了牛，屡遭父亲痛打，但他始终不改。
English: His family was poor when he was young, and he was given cattle to herd. Because of his eagerness to attend private school, he often came home late, lost his cattle, and was repeatedly beaten by his father, but he never changed.

古文：母曰： 儿痴如此，曷不听其所为。 
现代文：母亲说： 冕儿既然如此痴心向学，由他去吧。 
English: His mother said, "Since Guanyin is so eager to learn, let him go.

古文：冕因去依僧寺，夜坐佛膝上，映长明灯读书。
现代文：于是王冕躲在庙里，夜间借佛前油灯读书。
English: So Wang Guorong hid in the temple and borrowed the oil lamp in front of the Buddha to read at night.

古文：会稽韩性闻而异之，录为弟子，遂称通儒。
现代文：会稽人韩性非常器重他，收为弟子。韩性死后，诸生奉王冕为师。
English: Han Seong, the auditor of the association, valued him very highly and took him on as a disciple. After Han Seong's death, all sentient beings followed Wang Guan as their teacher.

古文：性卒，门人事冕如事性。屡应举不中，弃去，北游燕都，客秘书卿泰不花家，拟以馆职荐，力辞不就。
现代文：王冕多次参加科举，但每试不中，从此放弃科举仕途，北游燕京，在元秘书监泰不花家中的教馆为师。泰不花推荐他出来做官，王冕极力推辞。
English: Wang Guanyin repeatedly participated in the imperial examinations, but failed every time, and henceforth gave up his career in the imperial examinations. He traveled to Yanjing in the north and became a teacher at the former secretary Jian Tai Fuxa's home school. Tai Fuxa recommended him to become an official, but Wang Guanyin strongly declined.

古文：既归，每大言天下将乱，携妻孥隐九里山，树梅千株，桃杏半之，自号梅花屋主，善画梅，求者踵至，以幅长短为得米之差。
现代文：他常说天下将会大乱，便带着妻子儿女隐居于九里山中，屋前舍后种梅树千株，桃杏各五百株，自号 梅花屋主 。他工于画梅，求画的人日月不断。他自己也靠做画换米度日。
English: He often said that there would be great turmoil in the world, so he took his wife and children to live in seclusion in the nine-mile mountains, planted a thousand plum trees in front of the house and five hundred peach and apricot trees behind the house, and called himself the owner of the plum blossom house.

古文：太祖起淮南，献书言事，用为中书典签。
现代文：他曾仿《周官》著书一卷，认为 持此书辅助明主，可以完成伊尹、吕尚经邦济世之功业。 
English: He once wrote a book on the model of "Zhou Guan" and believed that holding this book to assist the enlightened master could complete the work of Yi Yin and Lushang to help the world.

古文：洪武初，从事大都督府，出为知县。
现代文：太祖在婺州访得王冕，安置在幕府，授予咨议参军。
English: The great-grandfather was crowned in Bozhou, placed in the shogunate, and granted the right to join the army.

古文：阅两考，以病告归，久之卒。戴良，字叔能，浦江人。
现代文：但刚接任便一夕病卒。戴良，字叔能，浦江人。
English: But as soon as he took over, he fell ill overnight. Dai Liang, nicknamed Uncle Neng, is from Pujiang.

古文：通经、史百家暨医、卜、释、老之说。
现代文：通经、史、诸子百家及医、卜、佛、老之说。
English: There are hundreds of schools of literature, history, medicine, divination, Buddhism, and ancient wisdom.

古文：学古文于黄溍、柳贯、吴莱。
现代文：从黄氵晋、柳贯、吴莱学古文。
English: He learned ancient literature from Huang Qi Jin, Liu Gang and Wu Lei.

古文：贯卒，经纪其家。
现代文：柳贯逝世后，良为他料理家务。
English: After the death of Liu Yan, Liang did the housework for him.

古文：太祖初定金华，命与胡翰等十二人会食省中，日二人更番讲经、史，陈治道。
现代文：太祖初平定金华，命良与胡翰等十二人在中书省任职，每天二人轮流为太祖讲解经史，论述治国之道。
English: At the beginning of the Great Patriarch's reign, twelve people, including Jinhua, Myoryo, and Hu Han, served in the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Every day, two people took turns to explain the history of the scriptures to the Great Patriarch and discuss the way of governing the country.

古文：明年，用良为学正，与宋濂、叶仪辈训诸生。
现代文：第二年，授良为学正，与宋濂、叶仪等一同训导诸生。
English: In the second year, Zhu Rong became the head of the school, and together with Song Xi and Ye Yi, he taught all the students.

古文：太祖既旋师，良忽弃官逸去。
现代文：太祖班师，良忽然弃官而去。
English: The forefather of the team, Ryo suddenly resigned and left.

古文：辛丑，元顺帝用荐者言，授良江北行省儒学提举。良见时事不可为，避地吴中，依张士诚。
现代文：元至正二十一年，顺帝授良为江北行省儒学提举，良见元朝大势已去，避居于吴中，投附于张士诚。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Yuan to Zheng dynasties, Shun Emperor Zhuliang promoted Confucianism to the north of the Yangtze River, and Liang thought that the Yuan Dynasty was no longer powerful, so he took refuge in Wuzhong and attached himself to Zhang Shicheng.

古文：久之，见士诚将败，挈家泛海，抵登、莱，欲间行归扩廓军，道梗，寓昌乐数年。
现代文：以后，又见士诚将败，携家取海道抵登、莱，准备投奔扩廓贴木儿，由于道路不通，在昌乐寓居数年。
English: Later, he also saw that Shicheng was about to be defeated, and he took his family to take the highway to arrive in Deng, Lai, and was ready to rush to expand and affix wood. Because the road was impassable, he lived in Changle for several years.

古文：洪武六年始南还，变姓名，隐四明山。
现代文：洪武六年，良始南归，改姓易名，隐居于四明山。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, Liangshi returned to the south, changed his surname and changed his name, and lived in seclusion in Shiming Mountain.

古文：太祖物色得之。十五年召至京师，试以文，命居会同馆，日给大官膳，欲官之，以老疾固辞，忤旨。明年四月暴卒，盖自裁也。
现代文：太祖访知，于洪武十五年召至京师南京，考试他的文才，命居于会同馆，每日以大官的膳食款待，拟复其官，良以年老有病而力辞，因而有忤皇帝的旨意，第二年四月，就自尽了。
English: In the fifteenth year of Hongwu's reign, the great-grandfather Guizhi was summoned to Nanjing, the capital of China, to examine his literary talent. He lived in the guesthouse of the association. Every day, he was treated to the meals of dignitaries. He wanted to be reinstated as a dignitary, but Liang argued that he was too old and sick. Therefore, he was ordered by the emperor to commit suicide in April of the following year.

古文：元亡后，惟良与王逢不忘故主，每形于歌诗，故卒不获其死云。
现代文：元亡之后，只有戴良与王逢不忘元朝皇帝，常把自己的感情表现在诗歌中。
English: After the death of Yuan, only Dai Liang and Wang Feng did not forget the emperor of the Yuan Dynasty, and often expressed their feelings in poetry.

古文：良世居金华九灵山下，自号九灵山人。
现代文：戴良世居金华九灵山下，自号 九灵山人 。
English: Dai Liang has lived in Jinhua Jiuling Mountain for generations. He calls himself a Jiuling Mountain Man.

古文：逢，字原吉，江阴人。
现代文：王逢，字原吉，江阴人。
English: Wang Feng, also known as Yuan Ji, is from Jiangyin.

古文：至正中，作《河清颂》，台臣荐之，称疾辞。
现代文：元至正年间做《河清颂》，御史台推荐他为官，他称病辞谢。
English: During the Yuan and Zheng dynasties, he did "Song of the River Qing," and the History Channel recommended him for an official post. He said that he was grateful for his illness.

古文：张士诚据吴，其弟士德用逢策，北降于元以拒明。
现代文：张士诚占据江浙一带，其弟张士德听从王逢的话，北降元廷以抗明。
English: Zhang Shicheng occupied the area of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, his brother Zhang Shide obeyed the words of Wang Feng, and the northern descent of the Yuan Dynasty was resisted.

古文：太祖灭士诚，欲辟用之，坚卧不起，隐上海之乌泾，歌咏自适。
现代文：太祖灭士诚后，欲召用王逢，王逢坚决不受命，隐居于上海乌泾，以歌咏自怡。
English: After the great-grandfather's death, he wanted to call Wang Feng, but Wang Feng resolutely refused the order and lived in seclusion in Shanghai's Wuxi, enjoying himself by singing.

古文：鹤年好学洽闻，精诗律，楚昭、庄二王咸礼敬之。
现代文：洪武十五年征为文学，地方官府催他上任。这时其子王掖为通事司令，因父年高，叩头恳请吏部下令免其官职。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu's enlistment for literature, the local government urged him to take up the post. At that time, his son Wang Qian was the commander of communications, and because of his father's age, he implored the officials to order his removal from office.

古文：正统中，宪王刻其遗文行世。
现代文：六年以后去世，终年七十。著作有《梧溪诗集》七卷。逢自称 席帽山人 。
English: He died six years later, at the age of 70. He was the author of the seven-volume "Wu Xi Poetry Collection." He called himself a "Shihatsu mountain man."

古文：危素，字太仆，金溪人，唐抚州刺史全讽之后。
现代文：危素，字太仆，金奚谷人，唐抚州刺史危全讽之后。
English: After the irony of danger, the character of the servant, the person of the Valley of the Golden Plough, and the history of Tang Fuzhou.

古文：少通《五经》，游吴澄、范梈门。
现代文：危素年少即通《五经》，登门向吴澄、范木亨求学。
English: He read the "Five Classics" at a young age and went to study with Wu Cheng and Fan Mu Heng.

古文：至正元年用大臣荐授经筵检讨。
现代文：元至正元年，因大臣的推荐，朝廷授为经筵检讨。
English: From the year of Yuan to the first year of Zheng, due to the recommendation of the minister, the Imperial Court awarded it to the Economic Review.

古文：修宋、辽、金三史及注《尔雅》成，赐金及宫人，不受。
现代文：参预编修宋、辽、金三史及注《尔雅》，书成赐金及宫女，均不受纳。
English: The three pre-editors, Xiu Song, Liao, and Jin, as well as the annotator of "Er Ya" and the authors of "Shoucheng Ji Jin" and "Gongnuo" were not accepted.

古文：由国子助教迁翰林编修。
现代文：由国子助教升翰林编修，编纂后妃等传。
English: It was edited by Kuniko assistant professor Shouhanlin and compiled by Houyi.

古文：纂后妃等传，事逸无据，素买饧饼馈宦寺，叩之得实，乃笔诸书，卒为全史。
现代文：由于有些记载遗失，无据可依，危素便买了一些饧饼馈送宦官，向他们询得一些实情，写进书中，终成全史。
English: Since some records were lost and there was no evidence to rely on, Dangsu bought some cakes to feed the eunuchs, asked them for some facts, wrote them down in a book, and finally made a complete history.

古文：迁太常博士、兵部员外郎、监察御史、工部侍郎，转大司农丞、礼部尚书。
现代文：后历任太常博士、兵部员外郎、监察御史、工部侍郎，最后至大司农丞、礼部尚书。
English: Later, he successively held the positions of Taichō hakase, Hyobusan gairo, kanshō goshi, kobo waiters, and finally to daishi nojo and reibu shosho.

古文：时乱将亟，素每抗论得失。
现代文：这时，时局已不稳定，危素多次上章议论朝政之得失。
English: At this time, the situation was already unstable, and discussions on the merits and demerits of the imperial government were held many times.

古文：十八年参中书省事，请专任平章定住总西方兵，毋迎帝师悮军事，用普颜不花为参政，经略江南，立兵农宣抚使司以安畿内，任贤守令以抚流窜之民。
现代文：至正十八年，参预中书省事，提出一系列建议：请专任平章定住总领西部兵马；毋迎帝师以误军事；用普颜不花为参政，经略江南；立兵农宣抚使司以安定畿内；任贤守令来安抚流民，等等。
English: By the 18th year of the Taisho era, Sanghyo Chusho had made a series of suggestions: to appoint a full-time Taijang as the commander-in-chief to settle the western troops and horses; not to welcome the emperor with military mistakes; to participate in politics with a plain face and not with flowers, but with the south of the Yangtze River; to set up soldiers and peasants to preach and send officers to stabilize the Kinai region; to appoint sages to keep order to pacify the displaced people, and so on.

古文：且曰： 今日之事，宜卧薪尝胆，力图中兴。 
现代文：并说： 今日之事，应卧薪尝胆，力图中原。 
English: He also said, "Today's events should make us lie down, take a deep breath, and try to find a middle ground.

古文：寻进御史台治书侍御史。
现代文：不久，晋升为御史台治书侍御史。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of chief historian of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：二十年拜参知政事，俄除翰林学士承旨，出为岭北行省左丞。
现代文：二十二年，拜参知政事。不久，又任翰林学士承旨，出任岭北行省左丞。
English: In 1922, he was appointed to the post of political advisor to the governor. Soon after, he was appointed as the successor of Hanlin Biao, and served as the governor of Lingbei Xing Province.

古文：言事不报，弃官居房山。
现代文：因其建议不为朝廷采纳而弃官隐居房山。
English: As his suggestion was not accepted by the imperial court, he resigned from his post and went into seclusion in Fangshan.

古文：素为人侃直，数有建白，敢任事。
现代文：素为人刚直，多次向朝廷建议，又敢于任事。
English: He is known for his straightforwardness, has repeatedly advised the Imperial Court, and dares to take on new responsibilities.

古文：上都宫殿火，敕重建大安、睿思二阁，素谏止之。
现代文：上都宫殿遭火灾，朝廷令重建大安、睿思二阁，为素谏止。
English: The Shangdu Palace was destroyed by fire, and the Imperial Court ordered the reconstruction of the Da'an and Ruisi Palaces.

古文：请亲祀南郊，筑北郊，以斥合祭之失。
现代文：他奏请皇帝亲至南郊祭天，另筑北郊祭地，斥责天地合祭的错误。
English: He requested the emperor to build a temple in the southern suburb and another one in the northern suburb, and criticized the mistake of combining the temple and the heaven.

古文：因进讲陈民间疾苦，诏为发钱粟振河南、永平民。
现代文：在向皇帝讲述时，陈述民间疾苦，朝廷因而诏发钱粮，赈济河南、永平的饥民。
English: When he told the story to the emperor, he described the suffering of the common people, and the imperial court issued an edict to distribute money and grain to help the starving people in Henan and Yongping.

古文：淮南兵乱，素往廉问，假便宜发楮币，振维扬、京口饥。
现代文：淮南兵乱，素去进行考察，自行决定发官币，赈济维扬、京口饥民。
English: During the Huainan War, he went to inspect the situation, issued official coins at his own discretion, and helped the Viyang and the starving people in Jingkou.

古文：居房山者四年。明师将抵燕，淮王帖木儿不花监国，起为承旨如故。
现代文：素在房山住了四年，明军将进至燕京，淮王贴木儿不花代理国政，起任素仍为翰林学士承旨。
English: Although he had lived in Fangshan for four years, the Ming army was about to enter Yanjing, and Huai Wangstechu'er did not spend any time acting as a state official. He was still a scholar of Hanlin at the time of his appointment.

古文：素甫至而师入，乃趋所居报恩寺，入井。寺僧大梓力挽起之，曰： 国史非公莫知。公死，是死国史也。 
现代文：素刚到京，明军就进入燕京，素跑到报恩寺投井自尽，被该寺僧人大梓救起，劝他说： 国史非公莫知，公死，是国史之死。 
English: As soon as he arrived in Beijing, the Ming army entered Yanjing. He ran to Buonji Temple and committed suicide by throwing himself into a well. He was saved by the monk of the temple, Dazi, who advised him: "National history is not public knowledge. Public death is the death of national history."

古文：素遂止。
现代文：素才息自尽的念头。
English: The idea of suicide is not new.

古文：兵迫史库，往告镇抚吴勉辈出之，《元实录》得无失。
现代文：明军迫近史库，素去求援镇抚吴勉等救出，从而使《元实录》未受损失。
English: The Ming army was approaching the historical library, and the governor Wu Tsun, who went to ask for help, was rescued, so that the "Original Record" did not suffer any loss.

古文：洪武二年授翰林侍讲学士，数访以元兴亡之故，且诏撰《皇陵碑》文，皆称旨。
现代文：洪武二年，授翰林侍讲学士，他多次探求元兴亡的原因，且奉诏撰《皇陵碑》，都令太祖满意。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, Han Lin was awarded a bachelor's degree as a lecturer. He repeatedly explored the reasons for the rise and fall of the Yuan Dynasty, and compiled the "Imperial Tomb Monument" according to the imperial edict, all of which satisfied the great-grandfather.

古文：顷之，坐失朝，被劾罢。
现代文：不久，因没有上朝而被劾罢官。
English: Soon after, he was impeached and removed from office for failing to attend the imperial court.

古文：居一岁，复故官，兼弘文馆学士，赐小库，免朝谒。
现代文：一年后又复职，兼弘文馆学士。皇帝赐他小车，准免朝拜。
English: A year later, he was reinstated and became a scholar of the Hongwen Academy. The emperor gave him a carriage and allowed him to be exempted from the imperial court.

古文：尝偕诸学士赐宴，屡遣内官劝之酒，御制诗一章，以示恩宠，命各以诗进，素诗最后成，帝独览而善之曰： 素老成，有先忧之意。 
现代文：太祖赐宴诸学士，多次遣宦官劝酒，并亲赋诗一首以显示对臣子们的恩宠，并命各学士也赋诗进呈。素的诗最后写成，太祖看后连声称好，说： 素老成，有先天下忧而忧之意。 
English: The great-grandfather gave a banquet to the scholars, sent eunuchs to persuade them to drink wine many times, and personally composed a poem to show his grace to the courtiers, and ordered the scholars to also compose poems. The poem was finally written, and the great-grandfather declared his approval after seeing it, saying: "Soul Lao Cheng, there is a sense of being worried about the world."

古文：时素已七十余矣。
现代文：这年素已年高七十。
English: He was in his seventies at the time.

古文：御史王著等论素亡国之臣，不宜列侍从，诏谪居和州，守余阙庙，岁余卒。
现代文：御史王著等认为素本是亡国之臣，不宜列入侍从。于是将他谪居和州，守余阙庙。
English: According to the book "Mishi no Okimi" and others, Motomoto was a vassal of a defeated country and should not have been included as an attendant. Therefore, he was confined to live in Waju and keep the Yushin temple.

古文：先是，至元间，西僧嗣古妙高欲毁宋会稽诸陵。
现代文：一年后去世。早在至元年间，西域僧人嗣古妙高要毁掉宋朝皇帝在会稽的诸陵墓。
English: He died a year later. As early as the first year of the 21st century, the Western Regions Monk He Gu Mya Gao wanted to destroy the mausoleums of the Song Dynasty emperors.

古文：夏人杨辇真珈为江南总摄，悉掘徽宗以下诸陵，攫取金宝，裒帝后遗骨，瘗于杭之故宫，筑浮屠其上，名曰镇南，以示厌胜，又截理宗颅骨为饮器。
现代文：夏人杨辇真珈为江南总摄，把宋徽宗以后的皇陵掘出，以攫取金宝，将帝后的遗骨收集起来葬于杭州故宫，上筑一塔，名曰： 镇南塔 ，以表示镇服。还把宋理宗的头骨用作饮器。
English: Yang Jizhenjia, a summer resident, was the general photographer of the southern part of the Yangtze River. He excavated the imperial tombs of Song Huizong and later emperors in order to extract gold and treasure. He collected the remains of emperors and buried them in the Hangzhou Forbidden City. He built a tower on top, called the South Tower of the Town, to symbolize the town. He also used the skull of Song Rizong as a drinking vessel.

古文：真珈败，其资皆籍于官，颅骨亦入宣政院，以赐所谓帝师者。
现代文：真伽倒台后，其财产都被没收归官，头骨也送入宣政院，赐给所谓 帝师 。
English: After the fall of Shinga, his property was confiscated and he was returned to office, and his skull was also sent to Xuan Zheng Yuan and given to the so-called "Emperor."

古文：素在翰林时，宴见，备言始末。
现代文：素在翰林院受皇帝召见时，详细讲述了事情的原尾。
English: When he was summoned by the emperor to Hanlin Academy, he gave a detailed account of the events.

古文：帝叹息良久，命北平守将购得颅骨于西僧汝纳所，谕有司厝于高坐寺西北。
现代文：太祖叹息不已。命北平守将从西域僧人那里购得头骨，诏令官府暂时安葬于高坐寺西北。
English: The great-grandfather sighed. He ordered the Beiping governor to buy the skull from the monks in the western region, and ordered the government to temporarily bury it in the northwest of the Koza Temple.

古文：其明年，绍兴以永穆陵图来献，遂敕葬故陵，实自素发之云。
现代文：第二年，绍兴进献永穆陵图，将理宗头骨葬于宋朝陵园。这件事实际上是危素提议的。
English: The following year, Shaoxing presented the Yongmul Mausoleum Map and buried the skull of Li Zong in the Song Dynasty Mausoleum. This was actually proposed by Jiang Su.

古文：张以宁，字志道，古田人。
现代文：张以宁，字志道，古田人。
English: Zhang Yining, Zhi Dao, Gutian Ren.

古文：父一清，元福建、江西行省参知政事。
现代文：父名一清，元代为福建、江西行省参知政事。
English: His father's name was Iqing, and in the Yuan Dynasty, he was the governor of Fujian and Jiangxi provinces.

古文：以宁年八岁，或讼其伯父于县系狱，以宁诣县伸理，尹异之，命赋《琴堂诗》，立就，伯父得释，以宁用是知名。
现代文：以宁八岁时，有人指控其伯父，县衙将其伯父逮捕下狱，以宁到县衙去讲理。知县认为此孩童非凡，命他赋《琴堂诗》，他秉笔立就，伯父得以释放，以宁由此闻名。
English: When Enin was eight years old, someone accused his uncle. The county magistrate arrested his uncle and sent him to prison. Enin went to the county magistrate to explain his actions. The magistrate thought the child was extraordinary and ordered him to write "Kintang Poem." He did so, and his uncle was released. This is how Enin became famous.

古文：泰定中，以《春秋》举进士，由黄岩判官进六合尹，坐事免官，滞留江、淮者十年。
现代文：元泰定年间，他以通《春秋》而举进士。由黄岩判官而晋升为六合府尹。因某事犯法而免官，滞留江、淮十年之久。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taiding of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded a knighthood for his translation of "Spring and Autumn." He was promoted from Huangyan judge to Liuhefu Yin. He was removed from office for violating the law, and stayed in Jiang and Huai for ten years.

古文：顺帝征为国子助教，累至翰林侍读学士，知制诰。
现代文：元顺帝征他为国子助教，官至翰林侍读学士、知制诰。
English: The Yuan Shun Emperor appointed him as the assistant teacher of the son of the state, the official Zhi Hanlin attended the bachelor's degree, and the intellectual system was established.

古文：在朝宿儒虞集、欧阳元、揭傒斯、黄溍之属相继物故，以宁有俊才，博学强记，擅名于时，人呼小张学士。
现代文：在朝中，一些有声望的学者如虞集、欧阳玄、揭亻奚斯、黄氵晋等，相继去世，以宁有才华，博学强记，闻名于时，人称 小张学士 。
English: In the middle of the dynasty, some renowned scholars such as Yu Ju, Ouyang Xuan, Jie Ye Shi, Huang Qi Jin, etc. passed away one after another. He was talented, erudite, and well-known at the time, and was known as Xiao Zhang Biao.

古文：明师取元都，与危素等皆赴京，奏对称旨，复授侍讲学士，特被宠遇。
现代文：明军占据元朝京都北京，以宁与危素都被召到明都南京，对皇帝的询问都做了满意的回答，授侍讲学士，特别受到宠遇。
English: The Ming army occupied Kyoto and Beijing in the Yuan Dynasty, and both Yining and Gui Su were summoned to the Ming capital of Nanjing. They answered the emperor's inquiries satisfactorily, and were especially favored to be awarded the degree of Bachelor of Arts.

古文：帝尝登钟山，以宁与朱升、秦裕伯等扈从拥翠亭，给笔札赋诗。
现代文：太祖曾登钟山，以宁与朱升、秦裕伯等扈从拥翠亭，帝给纸笔命他们赋诗。
English: The great-grandfather once climbed Mount Zhongshan, and Yining, Zhu Sheng, Qin Yubo and other emperors came from Shucui Pavilion. The emperor gave them paper and pens to write poems.

古文：洪武二年秋，奉使安南，封其主陈日煃为国王，御制诗一章遣之。
现代文：洪武二年秋，以宁奉旨出使安南，封其主陈日火奎为国王。临行时，太祖题诗一首送行。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Hongwu, Yining sent Annan by order, and named his master Chen Rihokui as king. When leaving, the great ancestor sent a poem.

古文：甫抵境，而日煃卒，国人乞以印诏授其世子，以宁不听，留居洱江上，谕世子告哀于朝，且请袭爵。
现代文：他刚入安南境，陈日火奎死。安南人请求将皇帝诏书授其嫡长子，以宁不肯。在洱江留居三天，告谕王子去向朝廷告哀，请求承袭王爵。
English: He had just entered the Annamese territory, and died on the day of Chen fire. The Annamese requested that the emperor's edict be given to his eldest son, but he refused. He stayed in the Li River for three days and told the prince to go to the court to mourn and ask to inherit the title of prince.

古文：既得令，俟后使者林唐臣至，然后入境将事。
现代文：以宁得朝廷之命，等待后派的使者林唐臣到后再入安南境办事。
English: He preferred to receive the order of the imperial court and wait for the arrival of the envoy sent later, Lin Tangcheng, and then enter the Annan territory to work.

古文：事竣，教世子服三年丧，令其国人效中国行顿首稽首礼。
现代文：他在安南教王子服丧三年，令安南人仿效中国行叩拜礼。
English: He held a three-year mourning ceremony for the prince in Annan, and had the people of Annan follow China's practice of drumming.

古文：天子闻而嘉之，赐玺书，比诸陆贾、马援，再赐御制诗八章。
现代文：太祖闻知，嘉奖以宁，赐诏书，把他比作陆贾、马援，又赐御制诗八章。
English: The great-grandfather, Wenzhi, praised Yining, gave him an imperial edict, compared him to Lu Jia and Ma Yuan, and gave him eight chapters of poems.

古文：及还，道卒，诏有司归其柩，所在致祭。
现代文：后逝于回国途中，诏令地方官府送灵柩归其故乡，沿途州县都要祭奠。
English: After he passed away on his way back to China, he ordered the local government to send his casket to his hometown, and all the prefectures along the way should pay tribute to him.

古文：以宁为人洁清，不营财产，奉使往还，补被外无他物。
现代文：以宁为人洁净无瑕，不营财产，奉使安南往返，除衣被行装外，别无他物。
English: I would rather be clean and without blemish, have no property, be sent back and forth by Annan, and have nothing but the clothes on my back.

古文：裕伯博辨善论说，占奏悉当帝意，帝数称之。出知陇州，卒于官。赵壎，字伯友，新喻人，好学，工属文。元至正中举于乡，为上犹教谕。洪武二年，太祖诏修《元史》，命左丞相李善长为监修官，前起居注宋濂、漳州府通判王祎为总裁官，征山林遗逸之士汪克宽、胡翰、宋僖、陶凯、陈基、曾鲁、高启、赵汸、张文海、徐尊生、黄篪、傅恕、王锜、傅著、谢徽为纂修官，而壎与焉。以是年二月，开局天界寺，取元《经世大典》诸书，用资参考。
现代文：洪武二年，太祖诏修《元史》，命左丞相李善长为监修官，前修《起居注》宋濂、漳州府通判王为总裁官，征山林的隐逸之士汪克宽、胡翰、宋僖、陶凯、陈基、曾鲁、高启、赵氵方、张文海、徐尊生、黄諶、傅恕、王钅奇、傅著、谢徽等为纂修官，埙也参与其事，于当年二月在天界寺开局，取元《经世大典》等书作为参考。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the great ancestor Zhao Zhaoxu revised the "Yuan Shi" and ordered the left chancellor Li Zhenchang to be the supervisor, the previous revision of the "Resident's Note" Song Xun and the prefectural governor of Zhangzhou, Tong Zhan Wang, to be the president, and the recessive people of the mountains and forests, Wang Kekuan, Hu Han, Song Xun, Tao Kai, Chen Ji, Zeng Lu, Gao Qi, Zhao Yifang, Zhang Wenhai, Xu Zun Sheng, Huang Qi, Fu Shou, Wang Qiqi, Fu Zhu and Xie Hui to

古文：至八月成，诸儒并赐赍遣归。
现代文：至八月完成，诸儒遣散归家。
English: It was completed by August, and the Confucianists were dismissed and returned home.

古文：年八十三卒。吴志淳，字主一，元末知靖安、都昌二县。
现代文：但顺帝一朝史实不全，于是命儒士欧阳佑等往北平采访遗事。
English: However, the history of Emperor Shun was incomplete, so the Confucian scholar Ouyang You and others were ordered to go to Beiping to interview the relics.

古文：奏除待制翰林，为权幸所阻，避兵于鄞。朱芾，字孟辨，洪武初，官编修，改中书舍人。
现代文：佑等于次年二月回朝，重开史局，仍以宋濂、王为总裁，征召四方文学士朱右、贝琼、朱廉、王彝、张孟兼、高逊志、李懋、李汶、张宣、张简、杜寅、殷弼、俞寅及埙为纂修官。两次开局编修共三十人，而埙两次入选。费时六月而成书，诸儒多授官，只有赵埙、朱右、朱廉三人不受而归。
English: Yu returned to China in February of the following year and reopened the History Bureau, still with Song Tao and Wang as president, and enlisted the four literary scholars Zhu Yu, Bei Qiong, Zhu Lian, Wang Qi, Zhang Meng Kian, Gao Xun Zhi, Li Wei, Li Wen, Zhang Xuan, Zhang Jian, Du Yin, Yin Qi, Zou Yin and Zou Qi as compilers and editors. A total of 30 people were editors at the beginning of the two times, and Zou was selected twice. It took six months to complete the book, and many people were awarded positions, but only Zhao Wei, Zhu Yu and Zhu Lian were not accepted and

古文：陶宗仪，字九成，黄岩人。
现代文：陶宗仪，字九成，黄岩人。
English: Tao Zongyi, character Jiuxian, Huangyan people.

古文：父煜，元福建、江西行枢密院都事。
现代文：父名陶煜，元代任福建、江西行枢密院都事。
English: His father's name was Tao Jun, and he was the deputy of the Yuan Dynasty in Fujian and Jiangxi provinces of the Privy Council.

古文：晚岁，有司聘为教官，非其志也。
现代文：宗仪年少时曾参加过科举考试，但不中即罢，潜心钻研古学，在浙东拜张翥、李孝先、杜本等人为师。
English: When she was young, Zongyi took the imperial examinations, but did not pass, so she devoted herself to the study of antiquities. She studied under Zhang Xuan, Li Xiaoxian, and Du Ben in East Zhejiang.

古文：二十九年率诸生赴礼部试，读《大诰》，赐钞归，久之卒。
现代文：其诗文均有造诣，尤其精于篆文书法，一生不肯为官。洪武二十九年率领其学生赴南京参加礼部会试，宣读《大诰》。归家不久即病逝。
English: All of his poems were accomplished, especially his mastery of the calligraphy, and he refused to be an official for the rest of his life. In 1929, Hongwu led his students to Nanjing to participate in the ceremonial examination and read out the "Great Calligraphy." He died of illness soon after returning home.

古文：所著有《辍耕录》三十卷，又葺《说郛》、《书史会要》、《四书备遗》，并传于世。
现代文：著有《辍耕录》三十卷。他对《说郛》、《书史会要》、《四书备遗》等书，进行修残补缺，使传于世。
English: He is the author of "Dropping the Cultivation Record" with 30 volumes. He repaired and repaired the books such as "The Story of the Cranes," "The History of Books" and "The Four Books" so that they would be passed down to the world.

古文：顾德辉，字仲瑛，昆山人。
现代文：顾德辉，字仲瑛，昆山人。
English: Gu Dehui, nicknamed Zhongying, is from Kunshan.

古文：家世素封，轻财结客，豪宕自喜。
现代文：其家世代无授官封爵之人，却也富有，而他轻财好客，豪放不拘。
English: A member of a family that has not been knighted for generations, he is also wealthy, and he is generous with his money and hospitality.

古文：年三十，始折节读书，购古书、名画、彝鼎、秘玩，筑别业于茜泾西，曰玉山佳处，晨夕与客置酒赋诗其中。
现代文：三十岁才立志读书，购买古书、名画、彝鼎、古玩等，别建一室于茜泾西，题名曰 玉山佳处 。从早至晚与宾客在此饮酒赋诗。
English: At the age of thirty, he decided to study, buy old books, famous paintings, paintings, antiques, and so on. He built a room in Xi'an West, with the title of "Yushan Jiachang." From morning to night, he drank with guests here.

古文：四方文学士河东张翥、会稽杨维桢、天台柯九思、永嘉李孝光，方外士张雨、于彦、成琦、元璞辈，咸主其家。
现代文：四方文学之士如河东张翥、会稽杨维桢、天台柯九思、永嘉李孝光等以及僧道如张雨、于彦、成琦、元璞等人，都来做客。
English: Literary figures from the four directions, such as Hedong Zhangye, Caijing Yang Weirong, Tiantai Ke Jiu Si, Yongjia Li Xiaoguang, as well as monks such as Zhang Yu, Yu Yan, Cheng Yao, and Yuan Yao, all came to be guests.

古文：园池亭榭之盛，图史之富暨饩馆声伎，并冠绝一时。
现代文：其园林池水亭台楼阁之盛，图书史籍之多以及送人礼物、声伎等等，在当时是首屈一指。
English: Its gardens, ponds, pavilions and towers were in full bloom, and it had a large number of books and historical documents, as well as gifts, sound effects, etc. At that time, it was second to none.

古文：而德辉才情妙丽，与诸名士亦略相当。
现代文：德辉才情并茂，与诸名士不相上下。
English: De Hui is as talented as other famous people.

古文：尝举茂才，授会稽教谕，辟行省属官，皆不就。
现代文：曾中秀才，授会稽教谕，又征为浙江行省官员，他都不去就任。
English: He is not going to take up his post, despite having been awarded the title of "Junior Distinguished Scholar" and the title of "Teaching Instructor" by the Association, as well as being enlisted as an official of Zhejiang Province.

古文：张士诚据吴，欲强以官，去隐于嘉兴之合溪。
现代文：张士诚占据苏、浙，招收知名之士，东南儒士不少去投附。士诚欲强迫德辉去做官，他拒绝了，隐居于嘉兴之合溪。
English: Zhang Shicheng occupied Su and Zhejiang and recruited famous people, and many Southeast Confucianists came to invest. Shicheng wanted to force De Hui to become an official, but he refused and lived in seclusion in Hexi, Jiaxing.

古文：寻以子元臣为元水军副都万户，封德辉武略将军、飞骑尉、钱塘县男。
现代文：不久，因其子元臣为元水军副都万户，封德辉为武略将军、飞骑尉、钱塘男爵。
English: Soon, because of his son, the former vassal became the former Vice Admiral of the Imperial Japanese Navy, and Fong De Hui became General Wu Liang, Flight Lieutenant, and Baron Qiantang.

古文：母丧归绰溪，士诚再辟之，遂断发庐墓，自号金粟道人。
现代文：母亲去世，他回到绰溪。士城再次征用他，他便断发守孝于母亲墓边，自号 金粟道人 。
English: After his mother's death, he returned to Zhaoxi. Shicheng requisitioned him again, and he broke off his filial duty at his mother's graveside, calling himself Jin Mao Taoist.

古文：及吴平，父子并徙濠梁。
现代文：埙向太祖进言说 ：小国之丧，不废大国之礼。 
English: Zou said to his great-grandfather, "The death of a small country does not invalidate the gratitude of a great country."

古文：洪武二年卒。士诚之据吴也，颇收召知名士，东南士避兵于吴者依焉。
现代文：太祖非常高兴，命他与宋濂同在史馆任职，濂待他以兄。曾奉诏撰《甘露颂》，太祖称赞写得好。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased and ordered him to work with Song Tao at the Museum of History, treating him as an older brother. He had been ordered to write "Ode to Nectar," which the great-grandfather praised as well written.

古文：孙作，字大雅，江阴人。
现代文：出京任靖江王府长史。寿终。孙作，字大雅，江阴人。
English: He went to Beijing and served as the governor of the Jingjiang Royal Capital. He died at the end of his life. He was the grandson of Sun Zuo, a man of great elegance, and a native of Jiangyin.

古文：为文醇正典雅，动有据依。
现代文：其文纯正雅典，言之有据。
English: The text is pure Athens, and the saying is well-founded.

古文：尝著书十二篇，号《东家子》，宋濂为作《东家子传》。
现代文：曾著书十二篇，总名为《东家子》，宋濂为他做《东家子传》。
English: He has written twelve books, the overall title of which is "The Son of the Eastern Family," and Song Tao wrote "The Son of the Eastern Family" for him.

古文：元季，挈家避兵于吴，尽弃他物，独载书两簏。
现代文：元末，携家避乱于吴，将其他东西都抛弃了，唯独载书两筐。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he took his family to Wu to escape the turmoil, abandoning everything else, except for two baskets of books.

古文：后辟武夷书院山长，迁邵武尉，不赴。
现代文：张士诚请他去做官，他因母病立即辞官归家，客居于松江，大家都为他买田置屋居住。
English: Zhang Shicheng asked him to become an official. Due to his mother's illness, he immediately resigned from his post and returned home, living as a guest in Matsue. Everyone bought land and houses for him to live in.

古文：内附后，例徙濠梁，数月放归，卒。
现代文：洪武六年，朝廷聘他去编修《大明日历》，授官翰林编修，而他请求改任太平府教授。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, the imperial court hired him to edit the "Great Chinese Calendar" and appointed Hanlin to edit it, and he requested to be reassigned as a professor at the Taiping Prefecture.

古文：智，洪武十年被荐，起家广西佥事，著廉声。袁凯，字景文，松江华亭人。
现代文：后朝廷召他回京任国子监助教，不久又为中都助教，仅一年又回到国子监，提升为司业。逝于家乡。袁凯，字景文，松江华亭人。
English: Afterward, the imperial court called him back to Beijing to serve as assistant professor of the State Children's Supervisor, and soon he was assistant professor of the Central Government, and only a year later he returned to the State Children's Supervisor and was promoted to the position of the Division of Education. He died in his hometown. Yuan Kai, surnamed Jingwen, a resident of Huating, Songjiang.

古文：元末为府吏，博学有才辨，议论飙发，往往屈座人。
现代文：元末为府吏。博学有辩才，发起议论来有如暴风一般，往往使在座的人难以对付。
English: He was a government official at the end of the Yuan Dynasty. He was erudite and eloquent, and he would start a discussion like a storm, which often made it difficult for those present to deal with.

古文：洪武三年荐授御史。
现代文：洪武三年被荐举授为御史。
English: Three years later, Hong Wu was recommended to be conferred the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：武臣恃功骄恣，得罪者渐众，凯上言： 诸将习兵事，恐未悉君臣礼。请于都督府延通经学古之士，令诸武臣赴都堂听讲，庶得保族全身之道。 
现代文：国初，武臣恃功骄横，得罪的人日多，凯上书说 ：诸将习于用兵，恐不知君臣之礼，请于都督府聘请通经学古之士，令诸武臣去都堂听讲，这样才是他们保族保身之道。 
English: At the beginning of the country, samurai retainers were proud of their achievements, and more and more people were offended by them. Kai Shangshu said, "All generals are accustomed to using soldiers, and they may not know the etiquette of lords and ministers. Please hire a scholar of ancient times at the governor's office, and have the retainers go to the capital hall to listen to lectures. This is how they can protect themselves."

古文：帝敕台省延名士直午门，为诸将说书。
现代文：太祖采纳他的建议，令御史台和中书省聘请名士轮流在午门为诸将讲经说礼。
English: The great-grandfather accepted his suggestion and ordered the Imperial History Channel and the Central Literature Department to hire celebrities to take turns at the noon gate to recite sutras for the dignitaries.

古文：后帝虑囚毕，命凯送皇太子覆讯，多所矜减。
现代文：太祖审判罪犯后，怕凯送皇太子复审时，会怜悯他们而宽大处理。
English: After the great-grandfather judged the criminals, he feared that when Kai sent the crown prince to review the case, he would pity them and deal with them leniently.

古文：凯还报，帝问 朕与太子孰是？ 凯顿首言： 陛下法之正，东宫心之慈。 
现代文：凯回来后，帝问道： 朕与太子谁处理得对， 凯叩头回答说： 陛下之法正直，太子之心慈。 
English: After Kai's return, the emperor asked, "Who handled it better, me or the prince?" Kai answered, "Your majesty's way is honest, and the prince's heart is kind."

古文：帝以凯老猾持两端，恶之。
现代文：太祖认为他老奸巨猾，两面讨好而厌恶他。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was a cunning traitor, and detested him for being two-faced.

古文：凯惧，佯狂免，告归，久之以寿终。
现代文：凯惶恐不安，告假回乡。不久寿终。
English: With trepidation and anxiety, Kai took a leave of absence and returned to his hometown. He died soon after.

古文：凯工诗，有盛名。
现代文：袁凯工于诗，颇有名声。
English: Yuan Kaigong is famous for his poetry.

古文：性诙谐，自号海叟。
现代文：性诙谐，自号 海叟 。
English: He has a witty personality and goes by the name of Seagull.

古文：背戴乌巾，倒骑黑牛，游行九峰间，好事者至绘为图。
现代文：他常背披乌巾，倒骑黑牛，游于九峰山间，爱管闲事的人把他绘成图。
English: He often wore a black scarf on his back, rode a black bull upside down, and swam among the mountains of Jiufeng. Nosy people drew pictures of him.

古文：初，在杨维桢座，客出所赋《白燕诗》，凯微笑，别作一篇以献。维桢大惊赏，遍示座客，人遂呼袁白燕云。
现代文：有次，在杨维桢家做客，有位客人拿出所赋《白燕诗》请大家看，凯微笑不语，另做一篇献与大家，维桢大惊，十分欣赏，给每个客人传阅，由此人们叫他 袁白燕 。
English: Once, when he was a guest at Yang Weiyan's house, a guest took out his poem "White Swallow" and asked everyone to read it. Kai smiled and did not say a word. He also made a dedication to everyone. Weiyan was shocked and appreciated it very much. He passed it on to every guest, so people called him Yuan Baiyan.

古文：高启，字季迪，长洲人。
现代文：高启，字季迪，长洲人。
English: Gao Qi, Zi Di, Changzhou people.

古文：博学工诗。
现代文：学识广博，工于诗词。
English: He has a broad knowledge and is good at poetry.

古文：张士诚据吴，启依外家，居吴淞江之青丘。
现代文：张士诚占据苏浙，启在外祖父家，住于吴淞江之青丘。
English: Zhang Shicheng occupied Suzhou and Zhejiang, set up in his grandfather's house, and lived in the Qingqiu of Wuxi River.

古文：洪武初，被荐，偕同县谢徽召修《元史》，授翰林院国史编修官，复命教授诸王。
现代文：洪武初年，被荐举，与同县谢徽被征召参与编纂《元史》，授翰林院国史编修官，又命他教授诸王。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, he was recommended for promotion, and was enlisted to participate in the compilation of the "Former History" along with the same county's Xie Hui, and was awarded the position of national history editor of Hanlin Academy, and was also ordered to teach kings.

古文：三年秋，帝御阙楼，启、徽俱入对，擢启户部右侍郎，徽吏部郎中。
现代文：洪武三年，帝在宫中楼台召见他们，升启为户部右侍郎，徽为吏部郎中。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the emperor summoned them in the middle of the palace and promoted them to the position of the right-hand man of the household and the middle-man of the staff.

古文：启自陈年少不敢当重任，徽亦固辞，乃见许。已，并赐白金放还。
现代文：启奏称自己年少不敢当此重任，徽也极力推辞，蒙恩准，随后赐他俩白金放还。
English: Kaiso said that he was too young to take on such a heavy responsibility, and Hui also strongly declined, which was graciously accepted, and then he gave them both platinum and released them.

古文：启尝赋诗，有所讽刺，帝嗛之未发也。
现代文：启曾赋诗，诗中有所讽刺，太祖甚为不满，但未表示出来。
English: Kai Zeng wrote a poem, there was some irony in the poem, the great-grandfather was very dissatisfied, but did not express it.

古文：及归，居青丘，授书自给。
现代文：启归家后，居于青丘，靠教书为生。
English: After returning home, he lived in Qingqiu and made a living by teaching.

古文：知府魏观为移其家郡中，旦夕延见，甚欢。
现代文：知府魏观将他家迁到郡城，旦夕相见，二人相处甚欢。
English: Governor Wei Guan moved his family to the county seat. They saw each other every day and enjoyed each other very much.

古文：观以改修府治，获谴。
现代文：观因改修府衙而受到谴责。
English: Guan was reprimanded for renovating government offices.

古文：帝见启所作上梁文，因发怒，腰斩于市，年三十有九。
现代文：太祖见到启为府衙所做的上梁文，大怒，将启处斩。时年三十九岁。
English: The great-grandfather was thirty-nine years old when he was enraged by what Kai had done for the prefectural government and had him beheaded.

古文：明初，吴下多诗人，启与杨基、张羽、徐贲称四杰，以配唐王、杨、卢、骆云。
现代文：其后，门人柴钦在修《永乐大典》时，建议将其师所撰之《声音文字通》收编进去。
English: Later, when his disciple Chai Qin was revising the Yongle Grand Text, he suggested that the "Sound and Character Dictionary" written by his teacher should be included.

古文：基，字孟载，其先蜀嘉州人，祖宦吴中，生基，遂家焉。
现代文：朝廷命立即去捴谦家中索取。杨基，字孟载，祖籍四川嘉州，祖父在吴做官，基出生在吴，故也是吴人。
English: The imperial court immediately ordered to go to Zou Qian's home to collect it. Yang Ji, surnamed Meng Zai, was originally from Jiazhou, Sichuan. His grandfather was an official in Wuxi. Ji was born in Wuxi, so he was also from Wuxi.

古文：九岁背诵《六经》，及长著书十万余言，名曰《论鉴》。
现代文：杨基九岁能背诵《六经》，长大后著书十万余言，题名《论鉴》。
English: At the age of nine, Yang Ji could recite the "Six Classics," and when he grew up, he wrote a book of more than 100,000 words, entitled "Discussion."

古文：遭乱，隐吴之赤山。
现代文：元末战乱，基隐居于吴中赤山。
English: During the war at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Ji lived in seclusion in Wuzhong Chakshan.

古文：张士诚辟为丞相府记室，未几辞去，客饶介所。
现代文：张士诚请他去任丞相府记室，未多久即辞去了，客居于铙介家中。
English: Zhang Shicheng invited him to work as a secretary in the chancellor's office, but he soon resigned and went to live as a guest in Shinsuke's home.

古文：明师下平江，基以饶氏客安置临濠，旋徙河南。洪武二年放归。
现代文：明军攻下平江，基因为是饶氏家中之客而被安置于临濠，随即迁于河南，洪武二年放回。
English: The Ming army conquered Pingjiang, and Ji was placed in Linyi because he was a guest of the Rao family, and then moved to Henan. He was released back to Hongwu two years later.

古文：寻起为荥阳知县，谪居钟离。
现代文：不久，起任基为荥阳知县，又贬到钟离。
English: Soon, the starting base was Shiyang County, and it was reduced to Zhongli.

古文：被荐为江西行省幕官，以省臣得罪，落职。
现代文：其后被荐举为江西行省幕官，因省臣得罪，他也被夺职。
English: After that, he was recommended as a provincial shogun of Jiangxi Province, but he was also deprived of his post due to the offense of the provincial minister.

古文：六年起官，奉使湖广。
现代文：洪武六年，又起用为官，奉使至湖广。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, he was appointed as an official and sent to Hukang.

古文：召还，授兵部员外郎，迁山西副使。
现代文：召回京，相继授兵部员外郎、山西副使。
English: He was recalled to Kyoto and successively awarded the positions of Geiro, member of the military department, and vice-envoy to Shanxi.

古文：进按察使，被谗夺官，谪输作，竟卒于工所。
现代文：晋升为按察使，因被诬陷而夺官，贬去服劳役，死于做工之地。
English: He was promoted to the position of inspector, but because he was framed, he lost his position, was demoted to labor service, and died in his place of work.

古文：初，会稽杨维桢客吴中，以诗自豪。
现代文：此前，会稽杨维桢客居于吴中，以诗自豪。
English: Previously, Yang Weiqi, the auditor of the association, lived in Wuzhong and was proud of his poetry.

古文：以政绩卓异，擢河南左布政使。大军征洮、岷，道其境，坐犒劳不时，下狱瘐死。王行，字止仲，吴县人。
现代文：基在维桢家做客时，赋《铁笛歌》一首，维桢惊喜，与基共同做东，对一同来游的人说： 我在吴又得一铁，你们向他学习比向老铁学要好。 王行，字止仲，吴县人。
English: When Ji was a guest at Wei Xuan's house, he played "Iron Flute Song" to Wei Xuan's surprise, and he and Ji became co-hosts, saying to the people who came to visit together: I got another iron in Wu, and it is better for you to learn from him than from the old iron.

古文：幼随父依卖药徐翁家，徐媪好听稗官小说，行日记数本，为媪诵之。
现代文：幼随父住在卖药者徐翁家中，徐妈妈好听小官们的故事，行每天写几本为老妈妈讲诵。
English: When she was young, she lived with her father in the home of drug seller Xu Weng. Xu's mother loved to listen to the stories of minor officials and would write several books every day for her old mother to read.

古文：未弱冠，谢去，授徒齐门，名士咸与交。富人沈万三延之家塾，每文成，酬白金镒计，行辄麾去曰： 使富而可守，则然脐之惨不及矣。 洪武初，有司延为学校师。
现代文：徐妈妈很高兴，说给老翁听，老翁教他读《论语》，今天讲授，他明日即可背诵，翁十分惊异，把家中所有的书尽数让他攻读，于是基本能贯通经史及百家之言。不到二十岁便拜别老翁，去齐门招徒授学，名士都与他交往。
English: Mother Xu was very happy and told the old man to listen. The old man taught him to read the Analects of Confucius, lecturing today, and he could recite it tomorrow. The old man was very surprised and asked him to study all the books in the house as much as possible. As a result, he was basically able to go through the history of the scriptures and hundreds of sayings. When he was less than twenty years old, he bid farewell to the old man and went to the door to recruit students to teach. Celebrities all interacted with him.

古文：已，谢去，隐于石湖。
现代文：富人沈万三聘他去家中教导子弟，学生每成文一篇，酬白银数十两，行立即离去。
English: A rich man named Shen Wan San hired him to go to his home and teach his children. The student was paid a few dozen taels of silver for each essay he wrote. He left immediately.

古文：其二子役于京，行往视之，凉国公蓝玉馆于家，数荐之太祖，得召见。
现代文：洪武初年，地方官府延请他为学校教师，随后又辞去，隐居于石湖。其二子在京服役，行去看望，凉国公蓝玉将他接到家中居住，并多次向太祖举荐，太祖召见了他。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the local government extended an invitation to him to become a school teacher, but he later resigned and lived in seclusion in Shihhu. His two sons were serving in Beijing and went to visit him. Prince Yang Guo received him at his home and recommended him to his great-grandfather several times. The great-grandfather summoned him.

古文：后玉诛，行父子亦坐死。
现代文：以后玉被诛，行父子也株连处死。
English: After that, Yu was arrested, and Xing and his son were also executed.

古文：始吴中用兵，所在多列炮石自固，行私语所知曰： 兵法柔能制刚，若植大竹于地，系布其端，炮石至，布随之低昂，则人不能害，而炮石无所用矣。 
现代文：太祖，攻取吴中时，到处多用炮石来防守，行私下对好友说： 兵法说以柔能制刚，如果在地上树立许多大竹，系布于竹端，炮石打来落在布上，随竹的弹性忽高忽低，伤不了人，则炮石就起不了作用。 
English: When Emperor Taizu conquered Wuzhong, he mostly used cannon stones to defend everywhere. He privately said to his friends: According to the law of war, it is necessary to use flexibility to control stiffness. If a lot of large bamboos are erected on the ground, and they are covered at the end of the bamboo, and the cannon stones fall on the cloth, and the elasticity of the bamboo changes from high to low, and they cannot hurt people, then the cannon stones will not work.

古文：俄擢户部侍郎，以阅实户口，出为大同府同知，进知府。孙蕡，字仲衍，广东顺德人。
现代文：后来，常遇春攻平江就用这种办法。行自负知兵法，因此招来祸殃。孙蕡，字仲衍，广东顺德人。
English: Later, this method was often used in the case of the spring attack on the Pingjiang River. Sun Yat-sen, also known as Zhongyan, was from Shunde, Guangdong.

古文：性警敏，书无所不窥。诗文援笔立就，词采烂然。
现代文：禀性机敏，无书不读，诗文提笔立就，词藻灿烂然。
English: He is quick-witted and astute. He does not read without a book. His poetry and prose are well-written, and his words are brilliant.

古文：负节概，不妄交游。何真据岭南，开府辟士，与王佐、赵介、李德、黄哲并受礼遇，称五先生。
现代文：何真占据岭南，开府扩地，贲艹与王佐、赵介、李德、黄哲都为何真以礼相待，并称 五先生 。
English: Why did He Zhen occupy the southern part of Lingnan and expand the capital? Why did He Zhen treat Wang Zuo, Zhao Jie, Li De and Huang Zhe with courtesy and call them Mr. Five?

古文：廖永忠南征，蕡为真草降表，永忠辟典教事。
现代文：明朝廖永忠南征，贲艹为真起草降表。永忠征贲艹主管教育。
English: In the morning, Liao Yongzhong marched to the south and drafted a letter of resignation. Yongzhong marched in charge of education.

古文：洪武三年始行科举，蕡与其选，授工部织染局使，迁虹县主簿。
现代文：洪武三年，开始实行科举，贲艹考中，授工部织染局使，后调任虹县主簿。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he began to implement the science examination, and in the middle of the entrance examination, he was assigned to the Weaving and Dyeing Bureau of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and then transferred to the Hongxian Master Book.

古文：兵燹后，蕡劳徕安辑，民多复业。
现代文：战乱之后，贲艹安抚流民，勉励他们耕种，民多复业。
English: After the war, Zou appeased the displaced people, encouraged them to cultivate, and many people resumed their jobs.

古文：居一年，召为翰林典籍，与修《洪武正韵》。
现代文：在虹县仅一年，被召为翰林典籍，参与修撰《洪武正韵》。
English: In just one year in Hongxian County, he was called to be a Hanlin classic, and participated in the compilation of "Hongwu Zhengyi."

古文：九年遣监祀四川。居久之，出为平原主簿。
现代文：洪武九年，派往四川监督祭祀，以后调任平原县主簿。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, he was sent to Sichuan to supervise the sacrificial rites, and later he was transferred to the main book of Pingyuan County.

古文：坐累逮系，俾筑京师望都门城垣。
现代文：因犯过失罪被逮捕，罚修京师望都门城墙。
English: He was arrested for the crime of negligence and punished for repairing the city wall of Beijing Shibangdu Gate.

古文：蕡讴唫为粤声，主者以奏。召见，命诵所歌诗，语皆忠爱，乃释之。
现代文：贲艹唱粤语歌，太祖召见他，命他朗诵所唱歌词，句句是忠爱之情，因而赦免释放。
English: When he sang a Cantonese song, the great-grandfather summoned him and ordered him to recite the lyrics of the song. The sentence was loyalty, so he was pardoned and released.

古文：十五年起为苏州经历，复坐累戍辽东。
现代文：洪武十五年，起任苏州经历，又因犯罪而罚到辽东戍边。
English: In the 15 years since Hongwu took office, he has been to Suzhou and was punished for a crime in Liaodong.

古文：已，大治蓝玉党，蕡尝为玉题画，遂论死。临刑，作诗长讴而逝。
现代文：其后，搜捕蓝玉党羽，贲艹因为曾为玉题画而论处死罪，临刑，做诗长歌而逝。
English: After that, the Blue Jade Party was searched and arrested. He was sentenced to death because he had been involved in the painting of jade inscriptions. At the end of his sentence, he wrote a long poem and passed away.

古文：时门生黎贞亦戍辽东，蕡尸乃得收敛。
现代文：当时，贲艹的门生黎贞也在辽东戍边，贲艹尸为之收殓。
English: At that time, Zou's protégé, Li Zhen, was also in Liaodong Province, and Zou's body was cremated.

古文：贞，字彦晦，新会人。
现代文：黎贞字彦晦，广东新会人。
English: Lai Zhengyi, a member of the Guangdong New Society.

古文：工诗文，尝为本邑训导，以事被诬，戍辽阳十八年，从游者甚众。放还卒。
现代文：工于诗文，曾为本县训导，被诬陷而在辽东戍边十八年，来向他求教者甚众，刑满释放回家而卒。
English: He worked in poetry and literature, and was once a tutor in our county. He was framed and spent 18 years in Liaodong Province. Many people came to ask him for advice. He was released after serving his sentence and returned home.

古文：蕡所著，有《通鉴前编纲目》、《孝经集善》、《理学训蒙》及《西庵集》、《和陶集》，多佚不传。
现代文：孙蕡著有《通鉴前编纲目》、《孝经集善》、《理学训蒙》及《西庵集》，《和陶集》。多遗失不传。
English: Sun Zhen wrote "The Preliminary Outline of the General Commentary," "The Collection of Filial Piety," "The Science of Discipline," "The Collection of the Western Ancestors" and "The Collection of Chinese Ceramics." Many of his works have been lost and cannot be passed on.

古文：番禺赵纯称其究极天人性命之理，为一时儒宗云。
现代文：番禺赵纯说他深入研究了天人性命之理，为一代儒学宗师。
English: Panyu Zhao Jun said that he deeply studied the principle of the life of nature, and was a generation of Confucian masters.

