古文：包拯吴奎赵抃唐介
现代文：包拯，字希仁，是庐州合肥县人。
English: Bao Zheng, alias Xiren, is a native of Hefei County, Ganzhou.

古文：包拯，字希仁，庐州合肥人也。始举进士，除大理评事，出知建昌县。以父母皆老，辞不就。
现代文：当初考取进士后，拜官为大理评事，出任建昌知县。因为父母都年事已高，他推辞不去就职。
English: After initially taking the entrance examination, Baikan became a Dali critic and served as Jianchangchi County. Because his parents were both elderly, he refused to take up the post.

古文：得监和州税，父母又不欲行，拯即解官归养。
现代文：又调和州监税，父母更不愿随行，他便辞官回家奉养。
English: He also reconciled with the state tax inspector, and his parents were even more reluctant to accompany him, so he resigned and went home to raise his children.

古文：后数年，亲继亡，拯庐墓终丧，犹裴徊不忍去，里中父老数来劝勉。
现代文：过了几年，双亲相继去世，包拯就在墓旁造屋居住守孝，到守丧期满，仍然徘徊不忍离去，邻里父老曾多次过来劝他结束守丧。
English: A few years later, his parents passed away one after another, and Bao Zheng built a house next to the grave to live in filial piety. When the mourning period was over, he still lingered and could not bear to leave. Neighbors had come over several times to persuade him to end the mourning.

古文：久之，赴调，知天长县。
现代文：过了很久，包拯才去吏部接受调选，便做了天长知县。
English: After a long time, Bao Zheng only went to the cadre department to accept the transfer, and then made Tianchangchixian.

古文：有盗割人牛舌者，主来诉。
现代文：有个盗者割了一人家的牛舌，失主来县上诉，包拯说： 只管回去，把牛杀了卖掉。 
English: A thief cut the tongue of a cow belonging to a family. The owner came to the county to appeal. Bao Zheng said: Just go back, kill the cow and sell it.

古文：拯曰： 第归，杀而鬻之。 寻复有来告私杀牛者，拯曰： 何为割牛舌而又告之？ 盗惊服。
现代文：过后不久又有一人来县报告，说有人私自杀牛，请予处理。包拯对这个人说 ：你为什么割了人家的牛舌又反来告他的状？ 盗窃者听后十分惊恐，立即服罪了。
English: Shortly after that, another person came to the county to report that someone had illegally killed a cow, so please deal with it. Bao Zheng said to this person: "Why did you cut off someone's cow's tongue and then sue him?" The thief was very frightened after hearing this and immediately confessed.

古文：徙知端州，迁殿中丞。
现代文：调任端州知州，升迁为殿中丞。
English: He was transferred to Hanzhu Chizhou, and was promoted to the position of Tenjo chujo.

古文：端土产砚，前守缘贡，率取数十倍以遗权贵。
现代文：端州地方出产上好的砚台，以前的州官借进贡之名，大都从这里索取几十倍的进贡量去赠送权贵。
English: Former prefectural officials borrowed the name "tribute" from Xingtai, a place in Danzhou that produced fine yakitori, and most of them asked for dozens of times the amount of tribute from here to present to dignitaries.

古文：拯命制者才足贡数，岁满不持一砚归。
现代文：包拯为了杜绝这种弊端，叫做砚台的人只做足够进贡的数量。他在那里一年任期届满，没有拿一个端砚回来。
English: In order to prevent this kind of malpractice, Bao Zheng only paid a sufficient amount of tribute to the person called Xingtai. He did not take a single endowment back at the end of his one-year term.

古文：寻拜监察御史里行，改监察御史。
现代文：接着，拜监察御史里行，改任监察御史。
English: Next, he was transferred to the post of inspector-general of history.

古文：时张尧佐除节度、宣徽两使，右司谏张择行、唐介与拯共论之，语甚切。
现代文：这时，张尧佐做了节度、宣徽两使，右司谏张择行、唐介和包拯共同参他升官不当，言辞十分激切。
English: At this time, Zhang Xunzu made the two envoys of the festival and the proclamation of the emblem, the right secretary Zhang Zixing, Tang Jie and Bao Zheng jointly attended his promotion improperly, and the rhetoric was very heated.

古文：又尝建言曰： 国家岁赂契丹，非御戎之策。
现代文：又曾建议皇帝： 国家每年给契丹纳币来求和，这不是抵挡敌人的办法，而应当训练一个强大的军队，选任有谋略的将领，致力加强边境防务。 
English: He also advised the emperor: The country should pay an annual sum of Khitan coins. This is not a way to resist the enemy, but it should train a strong army, appoint tactful generals, and strive to strengthen border defense.

古文：宜练兵选将，务实边备。 又请重门下封驳之制，及废锢赃吏，选守宰，行考试补荫弟子之法。
现代文：又请求重视门下封驳的规定，以及罢免、禁锢贪官污吏，选择有德有才的人担任州县长官，对补荫弟子实行考试录取的办法。
English: He also requested that attention be paid to the provisions of shutting the door under the door, as well as the removal and imprisonment of corrupt officials, the selection of virtuous and talented people to serve as state and county governors, and the implementation of the examination admission method for the disciples of Shuyin.

古文：当时诸道转运加按察使，其奏劾官吏多摭细故，务苛察相高尚，吏不自安，拯于是请罢按察使。
现代文：当时，各道转运使兼任按察使，他们奏劾官吏大多拾取人家无关原则的细小事故，专门以这种苛察相夸耀来表现自己，使官吏们忧心不安，包拯于是请求朝廷废止了按察使的设置。
English: At that time, the envoys of each province and autonomous region also served as inspectors, and they reported to the officials that they mostly picked up minor accidents that had nothing to do with the principle of others, and specially showed themselves with this kind of criticism, which made the officials worried and uneasy. Bao Zheng then requested the court to abolish the establishment of inspectors.

古文：去使契丹，契丹令典客谓拯曰： 雄州新开便门，乃欲诱我叛人，以刺疆事耶？ 拯曰：涿州亦尝开门矣，刺疆事何必开便门哉？ 其人遂无以对。
现代文：一次，他出使契丹。契丹授意接待官员，问包拯： 你们在雄州城新近开辟了便门，是打算引诱我们的叛人，用来刺探我们的边防情报吗？ 包拯回答说 ：你们在涿州不是也开了便门，刺探边情为什么一定要用开便门的办法呢？ 这位官员无言以对。
English: On one occasion, he sent the Khitan. The Khitan instructed the reception officer to ask Bao Zheng: You recently opened a toilet door in the city of Xiongzhou, are you planning to lure our traitors and use them to spy on our border defense intelligence? Bao Zheng replied: You did not open a toilet door in Zhangzhou, why do you have to use the method of opening a toilet door to spy on the border? The official was speechless.

古文：历三司户部判官，出为京东转运使，改尚书工部员外郎、直集贤院，徙陕西，又徙河北，入为三司户部副使。
现代文：历任三司户部判官，出任京都转运使，改任尚书工部员外郎、直集贤院，迁陕西，又转调河北，入朝任三司户部副使。
English: Successive judges of the Third Division of the Household Division, he served as a transfer envoy to Kyoto, was reassigned to Shang Shuxigong member Wairo, and Jiji Xianin, moved to Shaanxi, and was transferred to Hebei, and entered the court as a deputy envoy of the Third Division of the Household Division.

古文：秦陇斜谷务造船材木，率课取于民；又七州出赋河桥竹索，恒数十万，拯皆奏罢之。
现代文：秦州、陕州、斜谷一带官府衙门的造船材木，大都向百姓征来；而且秦、成等七州交付河桥所用竹索，一年常在数十万竿，对这些负担，包拯上奏后都免去。
English: Qin, Shaanxi, and the area around the valley of the government gate, the majority of the shipbuilding timber was requisitioned from the people; and the bamboo ropes used for river bridges in Qin, Chengdu and other seven states were often in the hundreds of thousands of poles a year. After the rescue package was announced, these burdens were eliminated.

古文：契丹聚兵近塞，边郡稍警，命拯往河北调发军食。
现代文：契丹在关塞附近聚集军队，边境的州郡逐渐发来警报，朝廷命令包拯到河北征调军用粮草。
English: The Khitan gathered troops near Guansai, and the border counties gradually sent out alerts. The imperial court ordered Bao Zheng to go to Hebei to recruit and transfer military grain and grass.

古文：拯曰： 漳河沃壤，人不得耕，刑、洺、赵三州民田万五千顷，率用牧马，请悉以赋民。 从之。
现代文：包拯上书说 ：漳河一带是一片肥沃的土地，然而人们不得耕种生产，邢州、氵名州、赵州有民田一万五千顷，大多被用来牧马，请把这些土地全部交还百姓，让他们耕作种植。 
English: Bao Zheng wrote: The area around the Min River is a fertile land, but people are not allowed to cultivate and produce. There are 15,000 hectares of private fields in Luzhou, Yunnan, and Zhao, most of which are used to herd horses. Please return all these lands to the people and let them cultivate and plant.

古文：解州盐法率病民，拯往经度之，请一切通商贩。
现代文：朝廷听从了这个意见。解州池盐的专卖法令，不利于百姓，包拯到那里筹划，请准一律听凭自由买卖。
English: The imperial court listened to this opinion. The decision to lift the monopoly on the sale of Chuzhou pond salt is not conducive to the people. If Bao Zheng plans to go there, please allow free trade.

古文：除天章阁待制、知谏院。
现代文：拜天章阁待制、知谏院。
English: Bai Tianzhangge is under construction, and Zhishan Courtyard is nearing completion.

古文：数论斥权幸大臣，请罢一切内除曲恩。
现代文：这期间，他几次上朝时指斥权幸大臣，请求废止一切宫廷内部的封官和私恩。
English: During this period, he rebuked the minister of state several times during his visits to the imperial court, and requested the abolition of all official seals and private favors within the court.

古文：又列上唐魏郑公三疏，愿置之坐右，以为龟鉴。
现代文：又列呈唐代魏征的三疏，希望皇帝放在座右，用来作为借鉴。
English: It also listed the three dynasties of Wei and Zheng dynasties in the Tang Dynasty, hoping that the emperor would put it on the right side of the seat and use it as a reference.

古文：又上言天子当明听纳，辨朋党，惜人才，不主先入之说，凡七事；请去刻薄，抑侥幸，正刑明禁，戒兴作，禁妖妄。
现代文：并向仁宗进言：应当明智地听取和接受合理的意见，明辨帮派的问题，爱惜人才，不要先听什么就信什么，共七件事；请求免去冷酷寡恩的人，抑制投机取巧的行为，端正刑法，彰明禁令，戒除不必要的建造，禁止邪说和妄言。
English: He also gave advice to Rinzong: one should wisely listen to and accept reasonable opinions, clearly distinguish the problems of gangs, cherish talents, and not believe what one hears first, a total of seven things; ask for the removal of cold-hearted people, curb opportunistic behavior, rectify the criminal law, clarify the ban, eliminate unnecessary construction, and prohibit evil and false speech.

古文：朝廷多施行之。
现代文：朝廷对于包拯的这些建议大多予以施行。
English: The imperial court implemented most of Bao Zheng's suggestions.

古文：除龙图阁直学士、河北都转运使。
现代文：拜龙图阁直学士、河北都转运使。
English: Bai Long Tu Ge is a direct bachelor, and Hebei Province is a transit envoy.

古文：尝建议无事时徙兵内地，不报。
现代文：以前，包拯曾经建议，在边境无战事时将军队迁到内地，没有得到答复。
English: In the past, Bao Zheng once suggested that the army should be moved inland when there was no war on the border, but he did not get a reply.

古文：至是，请： 罢河北屯兵，分之河南兖、郓、齐、濮、曹、济诸郡，设有警，无后期之忧。
现代文：这时他又上书请求： 停罢河北屯兵，将这些军队分散到黄河以南的兖、郓、齐、濮、曹、济各郡，如果有情况，也无后顾之忧。
English: At this time, he also submitted a request: to stop the Hebei garrison and disperse these troops to the counties of Zhuang, Quan, Qi, Handan, Cao and Jijia south of the Yellow River. If there is a situation, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：借曰戍兵不可遽减，请训练义勇，少给糇粮，每岁之费，不当屯兵一月之用，一州之赋，则所给者多矣。 不报。
现代文：假如说兵不可以一下子大量削减，那么请训练义勇，少给粮食，这样每年所需费用，还不到屯兵一个月所需要的费用，一州所收的赋税支付后还有多的。 
English: If it is said that soldiers cannot be reduced in large numbers all at once, then please train volunteers and give less grain, so that the annual cost required is less than the cost required by the garrison for one month, and the taxes collected by one state are still more after payment.

古文：徙知瀛州，诸州以公钱贸易，积岁所负十余万，悉奏除之。
现代文：又没有得到答复。迁任瀛州知州，各州都用公钱进行贸易，多年来已亏付十余万贯，包拯上奏请求都予以免除。
English: He did not receive a reply. He moved to Zhangzhou and Zhizhou. Each state uses public money to conduct trade. Over the years, he has lost more than 100,000 yuan. All requests for bailout are exempted.

古文：以丧子乞便郡，知扬州，徙庐州，迁刑部郎中。
现代文：因为儿子死去，包拯请求到近便而事简的郡任职，于是被改任扬州知州，迁庐州知州，又升为刑部郎中。
English: Because of his son's death, Bao Zheng requested to work in a convenient county, so he was reassigned to Yangzhou Chizhou, moved to Zhangzhou Chizhou, and was promoted to the junior member of the criminal department.

古文：坐失保，任左授兵部员外郎、知池州。
现代文：因举荐人材失当，包拯受到处分，被降职为兵部员外郎、池州知州。
English: As a result of improperly recommending personnel, Bao Zheng was punished and demoted to the position of a member of the military department of Wairo and Chizhou of Chizhou.

古文：复官，徙江宁府，召权知开封府，迁右司郎中。
现代文：包拯恢复官职调任江宁府知府，又被从江宁府召回，代理开封知府，升迁右司郎中。
English: Bao Zheng resumed his official position and was transferred to the governor of Jiangning Prefecture. He was also recalled from Jiangning Prefecture, acting as the governor of Kaifeng, and was promoted to the junior secretary of the Right Division.

古文：拯立朝刚毅，贵戚宦官为之敛手，闻者皆惮之。
现代文：包拯在朝治事刚强坚定，那些贵戚、宦官因而有所收敛，一听见他都十分害怕。
English: Bao Zheng was strong and firm in governing the court, and those noble relatives and eunuchs were somewhat restrained, and he was very afraid when he heard this.

古文：人以包拯笑比黄河清，童稚妇女，亦知其名，呼曰 包待制 。
现代文：人们把包拯的笑脸比作黄河变清那样难得见到，儿童妇女也知道他的名字，称他为 包待制 。
English: People compare Bao Zheng's smiling face to the Yellow River becoming clear, which is so rare to see. Children and women also know his name, calling him Bao Zheng.

古文：京师为之语曰： 关节不到，有阎罗包老。 旧制，凡讼诉不得径造庭下。
现代文：京城的人流传一句话说： 关节不到，有阎罗包老。 旧日的规定，凡是来衙门诉讼的人，进门后不能够直行到大堂阶下。
English: People in the capital have a saying: "If you can't get a joint, you're doomed." According to the old rules, anyone who comes to sue the door can't go straight to the lobby steps after entering the door.

古文：拯开正门，使得至前陈曲直，吏不敢欺。
现代文：包拯改变陈规，打开府中正门，使他们得以直接到堂前陈述是非，从而使胥吏不敢欺负他们。
English: Bao Zheng changed the stereotype, opened the main gate of the government, so that they could directly come to the court to state their rights and wrongs, so that the officials would not dare to bully them.

古文：中官势族筑园榭，侵惠民河，以故河塞不通，适京师大水，拯乃悉毁去。
现代文：宦官和豪门贵族为自己修建园榭，侵占了惠民河边的土地，因此使河道阻塞不通。恰好京城发了一次大水，包拯便下令将那些楼台亭阁全部拆掉。
English: Eunuchs and wealthy aristocrats built gardens for themselves and occupied the land along the Huimin River, thus blocking the river. It just so happened that there was a flood in the capital, and Bao Zheng ordered that all those buildings and pavilions be torn down.

古文：或持地券自言有伪增步数者，皆审验劾奏之。
现代文：有人手持地契去找包拯，说地契上就是这样写的。
English: Someone went to Bao Zheng with the land deed in hand, saying that this was what was written on the deed.

古文：迁谏议大夫、权御史中丞。
现代文：升迁谏议大夫、权且代理御史大夫。
English: He was promoted to the post of doctor of deliberation and the post of doctor of history.

古文：奏曰： 东宫虚位日久，天下以为忧，陛下持久不决，何也？ 仁宗曰： 卿欲谁立？ 拯曰： 臣不才备位，乞豫建太子者，为宗庙万世计也。
现代文：包拯上奏说 ：东宫太子的位置空缺已经很久了，天下人都为此感到担忧，陛下这么长久地不作出决定，是为什么呢？ 仁宗问他说 ：你认为立谁为好呢？ 包拯回答道 ：臣下无能，还没有考虑，我请求早立太子，是为宗庙万世之大计着想的。
English: Bao Zheng spoke up and said, "The position of the crown prince of the Eastern Palace has been vacant for a long time, and the whole world is worried about it. Why has His Majesty not made a decision for such a long time?" Renzong asked him, "Who do you think should be appointed?" Bao Zheng replied, "The vassals are incompetent and have not thought about it. I request that the crown prince be appointed early, for the sake of the eternal plan of the ancestral temple."

古文：陛下问臣欲谁立，是疑臣也。
现代文：陛下问我想立谁，这是怀疑我。
English: Your Majesty asked me whom I wanted to appoint, and it was me you suspected.

古文：臣年七十，且无子，非邀福者。 帝喜曰： 徐当议之。 请裁抑内侍，减节冗费，条责诸路监司，御史府得自举属官，减一岁休暇日，事皆施行。
现代文：仁宗听了大为高兴，说： 这件事还要慢慢商议。 请求裁减内侍，减少不必要的费用，按条文督促各路监司尽忠职守，御史府可以自己举荐所属官员，减少官吏一年的休假日期，这些建议都得以施行。
English: Ninsong was very pleased to hear this and said, "This matter needs to be discussed slowly. The requests to reduce the number of palace attendants, reduce unnecessary expenses, urge all supervisors to perform their duties in accordance with regulations, allow the Imperial Household Agency to nominate its own officials, and reduce the one-year vacation period for officials have all been implemented.

古文：张方平为三司使，坐买豪民产，拯劾奏罢之；而宋祁代方平，拯又论之；祁罢，而拯以枢密直学士权三司使。
现代文：张方平做三司使时，因为买土豪的财产，包拯上章弹劾，使他罢了官；宋祁接替了张方平，包拯又弹劾他；宋祁被免后，就由包拯以枢密直学士暂代三司使。
English: When Zhang Fangping was the third envoy, because he bought the property of local magnates, Bao Zheng impeached him and removed him from office; Song Tao succeeded Zhang Fangping, and Bao Zheng impeached him again; after Song Tao was removed, Bao Zheng temporarily replaced the third envoy with a privy direct bachelor.

古文：欧阳修言： 拯所谓牵牛蹊田而夺之牛，罚已重矣，又贪其富，不亦甚乎！ 拯因家居避命，久之乃出。
现代文：对此欧阳修说 ：包拯是所谓牵牛踩踏了田而夺了人家的牛，处罚已经很重了，可他又贪图肥缺来做那个职务，不也是过分了吗？ 
English: In response, Ouyang Xiu said: Bao Zheng is the so-called cowherd who trampled the fields and took away other people's cattle. The punishment is already very heavy, but he is greedy and greedy to do that job. Isn't it too much?

古文：其在三司，凡诸管库供上物，旧皆科率外郡，积以困民。
现代文：包拯因此待在家里，以躲避代理三司的命令，过了很久才出来任职。他主持三司期间改变了过去的一些做法，以前，凡是各种封藏于仓库供皇帝用的物品，都从各地科派，造成百姓困难。
English: As a result, Bao Zheng stayed at home to evade the orders of the acting Third Division, and only came out to take office after a long time. During his chairmanship of the Third Division, he changed some of the past practices. Previously, all kinds of items sealed in warehouses for the use of the emperor were sent from various regions, causing difficulties for the people.

古文：拯特为置场和市，民得无扰。
现代文：包拯特此设立市场，公私实行公平买卖，此后百姓不再受到侵忧。
English: Bao Zheng hereby set up a market, and the public and private sectors will carry out fair trade, after which the people will no longer be affected.

古文：吏负钱帛多缧系，间辄逃去，并械其妻子者，类皆释之。
现代文：原来司里吏员欠下金钱布匹，大多受到监禁，其中有些人往往逃走，就连带拘禁了他们的妻子儿女，像这一类情形的包拯都释放了他们。
English: Originally, most of the officials were imprisoned because they owed money or cloth, and some of them often ran away. They were even detained with their wives and children. In this kind of situation, Bao Zheng released them.

古文：迁给事中，为三司使。
现代文：升迁为给事中，为三司使。
English: The promotion is in the process of being given, and it is from the Third Division.

古文：数日，拜枢密副使。
现代文：几天以后，拜枢密副使。
English: A few days later, the Deputy Privy Counsellor arrived.

古文：顷之，迁礼部侍郎，辞不受，寻以疾卒，年六十四。
现代文：不久，调任礼部侍郎，他推辞不受，旋即因患病逝世，终年六十四岁。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of etiquette attendant. He did not accept the resignation and died of illness at the age of 64.

古文：赠礼部尚书，谥孝肃。
现代文：死后封赠礼部尚书，谥号孝肃。
English: He was posthumously awarded the posthumous title of Shangshu, and his posthumous name was Xiaoshu.

古文：拯性峭直，恶吏苛刻，务敦厚，虽甚嫉恶，而未尝不推以忠恕也。
现代文：包拯性格严峻正直，他厌恶官吏做事苛刻，为人敦厚，虽然十分痛恨坏人，但未尝不推重以忠恕待人。
English: Bao Zheng's character is stern and honest. He detests officials who are harsh in their work and is a generous person. Although he hates bad people very much, he does not hesitate to treat people with loyalty.

古文：与人不苟合，不伪辞色悦人，平居无私书，故人、亲党皆绝之。
现代文：他不轻易与人相交，不会用伪装的甜言笑脸来讨别人喜欢，平时没有私人请托的书信，旧友、亲戚同乡都断绝往来。
English: He does not easily socialize with others, does not use disguised sweet words and smiles to please others, usually does not have personal letters, old friends, relatives and fellow villagers have broken off contacts.

古文：虽贵，衣服、器用、饮食如布衣时。
现代文：地位虽然显贵，可是衣服、器用、饮食同当平民时一样。
English: Although the position is distinguished, the clothes, dexterity, and diet are the same as when they were civilians.

古文：尝曰： 后世子孙仕宦，有犯赃者，不得放归本家，死不得葬大茔中。
现代文：他经常嘱咐说 ：我的后代子孙做了官，若有犯贪污罪的，就不得回老家，死了不许葬在祖坟中。
English: He often said, "If any of my descendants or descendants become officials and commit corruption, they will not be allowed to return to their hometown, and if they die, they will not be allowed to be buried in their ancestral graves."

古文：不从吾志，非吾子若孙也。 初，有子名繶，娶崔氏，通判潭州，卒。
现代文：不顺从我的心意，就不是我的子孙。 早先，包拯有一个儿子名叫纟意，娶崔氏为妻，任潭州通判，已死。
English: If they do not follow my will, they are not my children and grandchildren. Earlier, Bao Zheng had a son named Xun Yi, who married a Cui family member and served as the chief judge of Tan Province. He died.

古文：崔守死，不更嫁。
现代文：其妻崔氏一直守节，至死都没有再嫁人。
English: His wife, Cui, always observed the festival and never remarried until her death.

古文：拯尝出其媵，在父母家生子，崔密抚其母，使谨视之。
现代文：包拯曾经逐走一位偏房，这位小妾在自己父母家生了一个儿子，崔氏暗地里照顾她们母子，派人精心地看护她们。
English: Bao Zheng once evicted a concubine who had given birth to a son in her parents' home. Cui secretly took care of her mother and son and sent someone to carefully look after them.

古文：繶死后，取媵子归，名曰綖。
现代文：纟意死后，崔氏就接回了这位小妾的儿子，取名为纟延。
English: After Yuyi's death, Cui took back the concubine's son and named him Yu Yan.

古文：有奏议十五卷。
现代文：包拯共有奏章十五卷。
English: Baozheng has a total of 15 volumes of music.

古文：吴奎，字长文，濰州北海人。
现代文：吴奎，字长文，潍州北海人。
English: Wu Kuei, a long-tail writer, is from the Beizhou North Sea.

古文：性强记，于书无所不读。举《五经》，至大理丞，监京东排岸。
现代文：记忆力强，博览群书。通过《五经》科贡举考试，官至大理寺丞，监管京东排岸司的工作。
English: He has a strong memory and is well-versed in books. He passed the "Five Classics of Confucianism" scholarship examination, and was promoted to the post of Daliji-sensei, supervising the work of the Beijing East Coastal Patrol Division.

古文：庆历宿卫之变，奎上疏曰： 涉春以来，连阴不解，《洪范》所谓 皇之不极，时则有下伐上 者。
现代文：仁宗庆历年间御前侍卫政变后，吴奎上书说： 开春以来，阴雨连绵，气候反常。正如《洪范》所说： 上梁不正，则会导致以下犯上的。 
English: After the coup d'état of the imperial guards during the reign of Emperor Nianzong, Wu Kui wrote: Since the beginning of spring, it has been rainy and rainy, and the weather is abnormal. As "Hong Fan" said: If Shang Liang is not correct, it will lead to the following crimes.

古文：今卫士之变，起于肘腋，流传四方，惊骇群听。闻皇城司官六人，其五已受责，独杨怀敏尚留。
现代文：中央发生兵变，动摇根本，影响极坏。听说皇城司官六人中已处罚五人，只一杨怀敏留用。
English: A mutiny occurred in the center, shaking the foundation and having a very bad impact. I heard that five of the six imperial city magistrates had been punished, and only one, Yang Huimin, was retained.

古文：人谓陛下私近幸而屈公法，且获贼之际，传令勿杀，而左右辄屠之。
现代文：人们说皇上任人唯亲，以情枉法。活捉反贼后，您下令留活口，有人却擅自杀掉了，这些人必然是反贼的同党，杀人是为了灭口，否则，为什么不听指挥？ 
English: People say that the emperor is a cronyist and uses the law of unrequited love. After the anti-thieves were captured alive, you ordered that they be kept alive, but some people killed themselves without permission. These people must be the anti-thieves' fellow party members. The killing was done to silence them. Otherwise, why not listen to the command?

古文：此必其党欲以灭口，不然，何以不奉诏？ 遂乞召对面论，仁宗深器之。再迁殿中丞，策贤良方正入等，擢太常博士、通判陈州。入为右司谏，改起居舍人，同知谏院。
现代文：于是请求仁宗召见面议，深受仁宗器重。再升为殿中丞、策贤良方正人等，又升为太常博士、陈州通判。后调回京城任右司谏，又改任起居舍人、同知谏院，专给皇上提建议。
English: He then requested to be summoned by Emperor Nanzong for discussion, which was highly valued by Emperor Nanzong. He was then promoted to the positions of palace vice-commander, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamberlain, grand chamber

古文：每进言，惟劝帝禁束左右奸幸。
现代文：多次极言进谏，都是劝仁宗约束近侍佞媚拍马之辈。
English: Many times, extreme words have been used to persuade Rinzong to restrain close attendants and flatter horses.

古文：内东门阑得赂遗物，下吏研治，而开封用内降释之。
现代文：内东门司乱收贿赂，交给吏部追究时，开封府鉴于他们是亲近皇帝的官吏，就把他们释放了。
English: When the Inner East Mengzi received bribes indiscriminately and were investigated by the personnel department, the Kaifeng government released them because they were officials close to the emperor.

古文：奎劾尹魏瓘，出瓘越州。
现代文：吴奎于是上书弹劾开封府尹魏馞，结果魏馞被调到越州。
English: Wu Kuei then wrote a letter of impeachment to the Kaifeng government of Yin Weiqi, and as a result, Weiqi was transferred to Yuezhou.

古文：彭思永论事，诏诘所从受。奎言： 御史法许风闻，若穷核主名，则后谁敢来告以事？
现代文：彭思永论事时，仁宗追问其中一些消息来源，吴奎代答说： 按照法律，御史有权保护其消息的来源，如果盘根问底，那以后还有谁敢为我们提供情况？
English: When discussing the matter with Peng Siyong, Renzong questioned some of the sources. Wu Kui Dai replied: According to the law, the Imperial Historian has the right to protect the source of his information. If the root is questioned, then who will dare to provide us with information?

古文：是自涂其耳目也。 上为罢不问。
现代文：这岂不是自己遮掩自己的耳目吗？ 仁宗于是不再追问了。
English: Isn't that like covering one's own ears and eyes? Rinzong didn't pursue the matter any further.

古文：郭承祐、张尧佐为宣徽使，奎连疏其不当，承祐罢使，出尧佐河中。
现代文：郭承佑、张尧佐任宣徽使，吴奎接连上书说他们不称职，结果郭免职，张调到河阳。
English: Guo Chengyou and Zhang Yingsu were appointed as heraldic envoys, and Wu Kui successively wrote a letter saying that they were incompetent. As a result, Guo was relieved of his duties, and Zhang was transferred to Heyang.

古文：皇祐中，颇多灾异，奎极言其徵曰： 今冬令反燠，春候反寒，太阳亏明，五星失度，水旱作沴，饥馑荐臻，此天道之不顺也。自东徂西，地震为患，大河横流，堆阜或出，此地道之不顺也。邪曲害政，阴柔蔽明，群小纷争，众情壅塞，西、北贰敌，求欲无厌，此人事之不和也。
现代文：皇年间，天灾颇多，吴奎分析其症候说 ：今年冬暖春寒，太阳不够明亮，五大行星运行失度，水旱二灾作恶，饥荒接踵而至，这是天道不顺；从东到西，地震为患，黄河改道，地面还冒出山来，这是地道不顺；邪恶势力妨害朝政，阴险小人挡住了皇上的光明，尔虞我诈，明争暗斗，下情难以上达，西夏、辽国二敌，欲壑难填，这是人事不和。
English: During the reign of the emperor, there were a lot of natural disasters, and Wu Kui analyzed their symptoms and said: this year's winter is warm and spring is cold, the sun is not bright enough, the five planets are running out of control, floods and droughts are two disasters, and famine follows one after another, which is the way of heaven is not smooth; from east to west, earthquakes are plagued, the Yellow River is diverted, and the ground is also emerging from the mountains, which is the way of heaven is not smooth; evil forces obstruct the government of the dynasty, insidious villains block the light of the emperor, cheating, fighting, and it is difficult to reach

古文：夫帝王之美，莫大于进贤退不肖。
现代文：帝王的品德最重要的就是亲近君子而斥退小人。
English: The most important of the emperor's virtues is to be close to the gentleman and to repel the villain.

古文：今天下皆谓之贤，陛下知之而不能进；天下皆谓之不肖，陛下知之而不能退。
现代文：现在有天下公认的贤才，您知道了却不提拔；天下公认的宵小，您识破了却不斥退。
English: Now there are world-recognized sages, you know but do not promote; world-recognized nightingales, you see through but do not reject.

古文：内宠骄恣，近习回挠，阴盛如此，宁不致大异乎？
现代文：嫔妃骄恣，近侍邪恶，阴风如此旺盛，怎能不导致天灾人祸？
English: The empress is arrogant, her attendants are evil, and the gale is so strong, how can it not lead to natural disasters and man-made disasters?

古文：又十数年来下令及所行事，或有名而无实，或始是而终非，或横议所移，或奸谋所破，故群臣百姓，多不甚信，以谓陛下言之虽切而不能行，行之虽锐而不能久。
现代文：几十年来您发下的文件或开展的一些工作，有些是有名无实，有些被下面的官吏变了样，有些因迁就莫衷一是的议论而改变，有些被奸贼蓄意破坏。因而全国上下，都已不大相信政令的权威，以为皇上说得再好也未必行动，即使雷厉风行地行动一阵子也未必能坚持办好，不过是一阵风而已。
English: Some of the documents you have issued or some of the work you have carried out over the past decades have been forged, some have been changed by lower-level officials, some have been changed by accommodating different opinions, and some have been deliberately destroyed by traitors. As a result, people all over the country have little faith in the authority of decrees. They think that no matter how well the emperor speaks, he may not act, and even if he acts vigorously, he may not be able to insist on doing a good job for a while. It is just a wind.

古文：臣愿谨守前诏，坚如金石，或敢私挠，必加之罪，毋为人所测度，而取轻于天下。 
现代文：我希望皇上能将以前下发的文件坚决执行，坚定不一，持之以恒，谁敢阻挠，严惩不贷，不要被人猜疑而被天下人轻视。 
English: I hope that the Emperor will resolutely implement the previously issued documents, be firm and consistent, persevere, who dare to obstruct, severely punish, and not be suspected and despised by the world.

古文：唐介论文彦博，指奎为党，出知密州。
现代文：唐介弹劾文彦博时，指责吴奎是文彦博同党，于是调吴奎任密州知州。
English: When Tang Jie impeached Wen Yanbo, he accused Wu Kuei of being a member of Wen Yanbo's party, so Wu Kuei was transferred to Mishu Zhizhou.

古文：加直集贤院，徙两浙转运使。
现代文：后任集贤院直院，又转任两浙转运使。
English: Later, he served as Jixianin Naoin, and was also transferred to the two Zhejiang transfer envoys.

古文：入判登闻检院、同修起居注、知制诰。
现代文：又回京师供职于登闻检院，任同修起居注、知制诰。
English: He also returned to Beijing to serve as a teacher at the Beijing Public Security Bureau, and was appointed as a fellow practitioner.

古文：奉使契丹，会其主加称号，要入贺。
现代文：出使辽国，正碰上辽主加称号，要他进去庆贺。
English: An envoy from Liao Province, who had just been given the title of Lord of Liao, asked him to go inside to celebrate.

古文：奎以使事有职，不为往。
现代文：吴奎认为职有分工，没有去。
English: Wu Kuei thought that there was a division of labor and did not go.

古文：归遇契丹使于涂，契丹以金冠为重，纱冠次之。
现代文：回国时路上遇到辽国使者。辽国以金冠为大，纱冠次之。
English: On his way back to China, he met an emissary from Liao, a country famous for its gold crowns, followed by its silk crowns.

古文：故事，使者相见，其衣服重轻必相当。
现代文：老规矩是，两国使者相近，服饰体现出的品级应相当。
English: The old rule is that the emissaries of the two countries are similar, and the clothing should reflect the same class.

古文：至是，使者服纱冠，而要奎盛服。
现代文：这次辽国的使者是纱冠，而吴奎是盛服。
English: This time, Liaoning's envoy is the crown, and Wu Kui is the robe.

古文：奎杀其仪以见，坐是出知寿州。
现代文：于是吴奎降其服饰等级以会见辽使。回国后他也因此而被调任寿州知州。
English: As a result, Wu Kuei lowered his clothing grade to meet the Liao envoy. After returning home, he was transferred to Shoushu Chizhou for this reason.

古文：至和三年，大水，诏中外言得失。
现代文：至和三年闹水灾，诏令朝野议论朝政得失。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, there was a flood, and the Emperor ordered the Emperor and the common people to discuss the merits and demerits of the imperial government.

古文：奎上疏曰： 陛下在位三十四年，而储嗣未立。
现代文：吴奎上书说 ：皇上在位三十四年了，还未确定皇位继承人。
English: Wu Kuei said in a letter: The emperor has been on the throne for thirty-four years, and the heir to the throne has not yet been determined.

古文：在礼，大宗无嗣，则择支子之贤者。
现代文：据礼制，嫡系无子，就要在旁系中择贤而立。
English: According to the etiquette system, if there is no son in the direct line, it is necessary to choose a virtuous person from the collateral line.

古文：以昭穆言，则太祖、太宗之曾孙，所宜建立，以系四海之望。
现代文：就左昭右穆的血统而言，应立太祖、太宗的曾孙为太子，这是众望所归。
English: As far as the lineage of Zuo Zhaomu is concerned, the great-grandfather and the great-grandson of the great-grandfather should be appointed as the prince, which is what everyone hopes for.

古文：俟有皇子则退之，而优其礼于宗室，谁曰不然？
现代文：等您有亲子后再改立，而给曾立为太子的人以一定地位，谁说不合理呢？
English: Who would say that it is unreasonable to give a certain status to a person who has been appointed as crown prince after you have a son or daughter and then change the position?

古文：陛下勿听奸人邪谋，以误大事。
现代文：皇上不要听小人的鬼话，误了大事。
English: Emperor, don't listen to villains. You're missing the point.

古文：若仓卒之际，柄有所归，书之史册，为万世叹愤。
现代文：若变生仓促，以致大权旁落，记录在史册上，也为万代后人所叹惜愤恨。
English: If the change of life is hasty, so that great power falls by the wayside, it will be recorded in the annals of history, and it will also be regretted and resented by future generations.

古文：臣不愿以圣明之资，当危亡之比。
现代文：我不愿意皇上以如此贤明的资质而遇到不测。
English: I don't want the emperor to meet with an accident with such a wise qualification.

古文：此事不宜优游，愿蚤裁定。
现代文：这件事不能犹豫，但愿您早日决定。
English: This matter cannot be hesitated, and I hope you will make a decision as soon as possible.

古文：定之不速，致宗祀无本，郁结群望，推之咎罚，无大于此。 帝感其言，拜翰林学士，权开封府。
现代文：不迅速定夺，宗族即无所本。
English: If the decision is not made quickly, the clan will have nowhere to go.

古文：奎达于从政，应事敏捷，吏不敢欺。
现代文：导致宗族不和的最大原因就是无所本。 
English: The biggest cause of clan discord is the lack of a proper foundation.

古文：富人孙氏辜榷财利，负其息者，至评取物产及妇女。
现代文：仁宗被他感动，拜官翰林学士，兼开封府知府。吴奎在开封从政，机智果断，下吏不敢欺瞒。富人孙氏放高利贷，欠债的人受其迫害，直至被夺家产、妻女。
English: Rinzong was moved by him, and became an official of the Hanlin Academy, and also the governor of Kaifeng. Wu Kui was in politics in Kaifeng, he was witty and decisive, and his subordinates did not dare to deceive him. The rich Sun family issued usury loans, and those who owed debts were persecuted by him, until they were deprived of their homes and their wives and daughters.

古文：奎发孙宿恶，徙其兄弟于淮、闽，豪猾畏敛。
现代文：任职三月，政绩显赫。升任端明殿学士、成都府知府。
English: He was appointed to the post in March, and his political achievements were outstanding. He was promoted to the post of Duanming Dian Baccalaureate and the post of Chengdu prefectural governor.

古文：居三月，治声赫然。
现代文：为避亲讳，改任郓州。
English: In order to avoid scandal, he was transferred to Zhangzhou.

古文：除端明殿学士、知成都府，以亲辞，改郓州，复还翰林，拜枢密副使。治平中，丁父忧，居丧毁瘠，庐于墓侧，岁时洁严祭祀，不为浮屠事。
现代文：又回翰林院，拜为枢密副使。英宗治平年间，父死，悲痛伤身，在墓旁搭棚守墓，逢年过节时以洁净食物庄严地祭奠，不举行佛教礼仪。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yingzong, his father died, and he was grief-stricken. He set up a pavilion next to the grave to guard the grave, and solemnly paid homage with pure food at the time of the festival every year. Buddhist rituals were not held.

古文：神宗初立，奎适终制，以故职还朝。
现代文：神宗即位时，吴奎刚守满孝，官复原职。
English: When Emperor Shenzong ascended to the throne, Wu Quigang kept filial piety and was reinstated as an official.

古文：逾月，参知政事。
现代文：一月后，升任参知政事。
English: One month later, he was promoted to the post of vice-governor.

古文：时已召王安石，辞不至，帝顾辅臣曰： 安石历先帝朝，召不赴，颇以为不恭。
现代文：当时神宗已经召见王安石，王不来，神宗对左右大臣说 ：王安石是先帝的大臣，先帝请不动，我很以为他不恭顺。
English: At that time, Shenzong had already summoned Wang Anshi, but Wang did not come. Shenzong said to the left and right ministers: Wang Anshi is the minister of the former emperor, please do not move, I thought he was not obedient.

古文：今又不至，果病耶，有所要耶？
现代文：现在又请不来，是真的病了吗？还是有什么条件呢？ 
English: Now you can't come, are you really sick? Or are there any conditions?

古文：曾公亮曰： 安石文学器业，不敢为欺。 奎曰： 臣尝与安石同领群牧，见其护短自用，所为迂阔。
现代文：曾公亮说 ：王安石是个学者，不会玩弄权术的。 吴奎却说： 我曾与王安石共事，此人有错不认，刚愎自用，其主张也很迂阔。
English: Zeng Guoliang said: Wang Anshi is a scholar and does not play power games. Wu Kui, however, said: I once worked with Wang Anshi, this person does not admit mistakes, is stubborn and self-serving, and his ideas are very broad.

古文：万一用之，必紊乱纲纪。 乃命知江宁。
现代文：万一受重用，必然紊乱朝纲。 于是命王安石任江宁知府。
English: In the unlikely event that he were to be given important duties, the imperial system would inevitably be disrupted. Therefore, Wang Anshi was appointed as the governor of Jiangning.

古文：奎尝进言： 陛下在推诚应天，天意无他，合人心而已。
现代文：吴奎曾对神宗说： 陛下对天诚敬，天意无他，只是合人心罢了。
English: Wu Kuei once said to Shenzong, "Your majesty has sincere respect for Heaven, and there is no other than Heaven's will, but it is just what suits your heart."

古文：若以至诚格物，物莫不以至诚应，则和气之感，自然而致。
现代文：若以至诚待万物，万物无不回报以至诚，则上下祥和的气氛自然形成。
English: If you treat all things with utmost sincerity, and all things reciprocate with utmost sincerity, a peaceful atmosphere will naturally form.

古文：今民力困极，国用窘乏，必俟顺成，乃可及他事。
现代文：现在民力凋敝，国库空虚，必须先安民，才能谈其他。
English: Now that the people's power has withered and the treasury is empty, we must first pacify the people before we can talk about anything else.

古文：帝王所职，惟在于判正邪，使君子常居要近，小人不得以害之，则自治矣。 帝因言： 尧时，四凶犹在朝。 奎曰： 四凶虽在，不能惑尧之聪明。
现代文：帝王的职责，就在于判断正邪，使君子常常居于关键职位，小人无法伤害，天下自然就大治了。 神宗反驳说： 以尧的圣明，朝廷也有四凶。 吴奎说： 四凶虽然在，但不能妨害尧的圣明。
English: The emperor's duty is to judge right and wrong, so that the gentleman is often in a key position, the villain can not hurt, and the world will naturally be ruled.Shenzong countered: With the sacred light of the dragonfly, the court also has four evil spirits.Wu Kui said: Although the four evil spirits are present, they can not interfere with the sacred light of the dragonfly.

古文：圣人以天下为度，未有显过，固宜包容，但不可使居要近地尔。 帝然之。
现代文：圣人以天下为己任，小人没有显著的劣行时，就应该包容，不能以潜在的可能性处罚人。
English: A saint takes the whole world as his responsibility, and a villain should be tolerated when he does not have any obvious misdeeds, and should not punish people with potential possibilities.

古文：御史中丞王陶，以论文德不押班事诋韩琦，奎状其过。
现代文：只不过不能把他们放在重要岗位上。 神宗认为有道理。御史中丞王陶，因为韩琦不去文德殿押班而弹劾韩琦跋扈，吴奎揭发王陶的险恶用心。
English: However, they should not be placed in important positions. Shenzong thought it was reasonable. Wang Tao, the chief historian, was the first to impeach Han Zhaopu for not going to work at the Palace of Literature and Art, and Wu Kui exposed Wang Tao's sinister intentions.

古文：诏除陶翰林学士，奎执不可。陶又疏奎阿附。
现代文：皇上下令改任王陶为翰林学士，吴奎仍坚决反对，王陶又反告吴奎阿附韩琦。
English: The emperor ordered Wang Tao to be appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, but Wu Kui still resolutely opposed it. Wang Tao also counter-sued Wu Kui for attaching Han Yu.

古文：陶既出，奎亦以资政殿大学士知青州。
现代文：王陶被调出京城，吴奎也以资政殿大学士任青州知州。
English: Wang Tao was transferred out of Beijing, and Wu Kui was also transferred from Qingzhou to Chizhou as a member of the Senate.

古文：司马光谏曰： 奎名望清重，今为陶绌奎，恐大臣皆不自安，各求引去。
现代文：司马光劝皇帝说 ：吴奎名声好，德高望重，现在因为王陶而贬谪吴奎，恐怕大臣们会感到不安而辞官。
English: Sima Guang advised the emperor: Wu Kuei had a good reputation and was highly respected. Now, because of Wang Tao, Wu Kuei is being disparaged. I'm afraid the ministers will feel uneasy and resign.

古文：陛下新即位，于四方观听非宜。 帝乃召奎归中书。
现代文：皇上刚即位，这样做会不利于您的形象的。 神宗乃召回吴奎去中书任职。
English: The Emperor has just ascended to the throne, and it would be detrimental to your image to do so.

古文：及琦罢相，竟出知青州。明年薨，年五十八。
现代文：韩琦罢相后，吴奎出任青州知州，一年后逝世，享年五十八岁。
English: After the retirement of Han Zheng, Wu Kuei took up the post of Qingzhou Zhizhou, and died a year later at the age of 58.

古文：赠兵部尚书，谥曰文肃。
现代文：追认兵部尚书，谥号文肃。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and his posthumous name was Bunsu.

古文：奎喜奖廉善，有所知辄言之，言之不从，不止也。
现代文：吴奎喜好奖掖廉洁善良之人，知无不言，皇上不听他的他就不罢休。
English: Wu Kuei likes people who are honest, virtuous and virtuous. He knows everything. If the emperor does not listen to him, he will not stop.

古文：少时甚贫，既通贵，买田为义庄，以赒族党朋友。
现代文：出身贫寒，当官后，买田修 义庄 ，救济乡邻亲友。
English: He came from a poor background, and after he became an official, he bought a field to cultivate in Yizhuang to help his neighbors and relatives.

古文：没之日，家无余资，诸子至无屋以居，当时称之。
现代文：死时家无余财，儿子们甚至无房子可住，为时人称道。
English: At the time of his death, the family had no spare money, and his sons did not even have a house to live in, which was commendable at the time.

古文：赵抃，字阅道，衢州西安人。
现代文：赵抃，字阅道，衢州西安人。
English: Zhao Wei, the character reading the road, is a native of Xian, Zhangzhou.

古文：进士及第，为武安军节度推官。
现代文：进士及第后，任武安军节度推官。
English: He was promoted to the rank of officer, and later, he served as the military governor of the Wu'an Army.

古文：人有赦前伪造印，更赦而用者，法吏当以死。抃曰： 赦前不用，赦后不造，不当死。 谳而生之。
现代文：有人在大赦前伪造公章，在大赦后使用，执法人员认为他该死，赵抃说： 大赦前没有使用，大赦后没有制造，不该死。 终使得罪犯免于一死。
English: Someone forged an official seal before the amnesty, used it after the amnesty, and law enforcement officers thought he deserved to die, Zhao Wei said: It was not used before the amnesty, it was not made after the amnesty, and it did not deserve to die.

古文：知崇安、海陵、江原三县，通判泗州。
现代文：历任崇安、海陵、江原三县知县，泗州通判。
English: Successive Chong'an, Hailing, Jiangyuan three counties, Zhixian, Luzhou pass sentence.

古文：濠守给士卒廪赐不如法，声欲变，守惧，日未入，辄闭门不出。
现代文：濠州知州不按规定给士卒发放衣食等物，兵士扬言要兵变。知州害怕了，太阳还未下山就紧闭城门不办公了。
English: Chizhou of Zhangzhou did not distribute food and clothing to the soldiers according to regulations, and the soldiers threatened to mutiny. Chizhou was afraid, and closed the gates before the sun went down.

古文：转运使檄抃摄治之，抃至，从容如平时，州以无事。
现代文：转运使函令赵抃代他处理此事。赵抃到濠州，像平时一样从容办公，该州才太平了。
English: The transfer envoy ordered Zhao Jun to deal with the matter on his behalf. Zhao Jun went to Ganzhou and worked as calmly as usual, and the state was peaceful.

古文：翰林学士曾公亮未之识，荐为殿中侍御史，弹劾不避权幸，声称凛然，京师目为 铁面御史。 其言务欲朝廷别白君子小人，以谓： 小人虽小过，当力遏而绝之；君子不幸诖误，当保全爱惜，以成就其德。 温成皇后之丧，刘沆以参知政事监护，及为相，领事如初。
现代文：翰林学士曾公亮不认识赵抃，却举荐他为殿中侍御史。弹劾不避权贵佞幸，美誉雀起，京师称之为 铁面御史 。他极力要求朝廷区分君子、小人，以为： 小人虽然过失小，也应努力清除；君子不幸犯了过失，却应保全爱惜，以成就其德行。 温成皇后死，刘沆以参知政事身份监办丧事，为相后，仍兼监护丧事。
English: The scholar Hanlin once publicly did not know Zhao Yao, but recommended him as a palace attendant. Impeachment does not avoid power and prestige, and praise is rising, and the Beijing division is called the iron-faced imperial historian. He strongly demanded that the imperial court distinguish between a gentleman and a villain, believing that: although the villain's fault is small, it should also be eliminated; a gentleman has unfortunately made a mistake, but should be preserved and cherished to achieve his virtue. When the Queen Wencheng died, Liu Yao oversaw the funeral in his capacity as a government official, and he was still the guardian of the funeral.

古文：抃论其当罢，以全国体。又言宰相陈执中不学无术，且多过失；宣徽使王拱辰平生所为及奉使不法；枢密使王德用、翰林学士李淑不称职；皆罢去。
现代文：赵抃认为这种一身多任有碍政体，又说宰相陈执中不学无术，错失又多；宣徽使王拱辰自己及手下人颇有不法行为；枢密使王德用、翰林学士李淑不称职：这些人于是都被罢免。
English: Zhao Yu believed that this kind of one-man-one-vote was a hindrance to the political system. He also said that the Prime Minister Chen Xizhong was uneducated and unskilled, and made many mistakes; the proclamation of the emblem caused Wang Gongchen himself and his subordinates to commit illegal acts; the Privy Councilor Wang Deyan and the Hanlin Scholar Li Shu were incompetent: these people were then dismissed.

古文：吴充、鞠真卿、刁约以治礼院吏，马遵、吕景初、吴中复以论梁适，相继被逐。
现代文：吴充、鞠真卿、刁约因制裁礼仪院吏佐，马遵、吕景初、吴中复因为议论梁适，相继被放逐。
English: Wu Chun, Mu Zhenqing, and Xing You were exiled one after another for sanctioning the Vice-President of the Ceremonial Court, and Ma Zun, Lv Jingchu, and Wu Zhongfu were exiled for discussing Liang Shi.

古文：抃言其故，悉召还。
现代文：赵抃为他们辩护，都被召回。
English: Zhao Wei defended them, and they were all recalled.

古文：吕溱、蔡襄、吴奎、韩绛既出守，欧阳修、贾黯复求郡。
现代文：吕溱、蔡襄、吴奎、韩绛出任地方官后，欧阳修、贾黯又请求出任郡官。
English: After Lv Ying, Cai Xiang, Wu Kui, and Han Xing were appointed as local officials, Ouyang Xiu and Jia Ying also requested to be appointed as county officials.

古文：抃言： 近日正人端士纷纷引去，侍从之贤如修辈无几，今皆欲去者，以正色立朝，不能谄事权要，伤之者众耳。 修、黯由是得留，一时名臣，赖以安焉。
现代文：赵抃向皇上说： 最近品行端正之士纷纷出走，皇上身边的贤才如欧阳修这样的已没有几个。现在想到地方上去的人，都是因为他们为人正直，不事权贵。真令众臣伤心啊。 皇上于是留用欧阳修、贾黯，一代名臣，得以保全。
English: Zhao Wei said to the emperor, "Recently, people with good morals have been leaving in droves, and there are few sages around the emperor such as Ouyang Xiu. Now I think of people who go to other places because they are honest and do not care about power. It really makes all the subjects sad. The emperor then kept Ouyang Xiu and Jia Qian, a generation of famous subjects, to be preserved.

古文：请知睦州，移梓州路转运使，改益州。
现代文：赵抃请求调任睦州知州，改任梓州路转运使，又改任益州。
English: Zhao Wei requested to be transferred to Muzhou Zhizhou, changed to Zizhou Road Transshipment Envoy, and changed to Yizhou.

古文：蜀地远民弱，吏肆为不法，州郡公相馈饷。
现代文：蜀地地远民穷，官吏肆无忌惮地胡作非为，州郡公然互相行贿。
English: The people in Shu are poor, the officials are reckless, and the prefectures and counties openly bribe each other.

古文：抃以身帅之，蜀风为变。
现代文：赵抃以身作则，蜀地风气为之一变。
English: Zhao Wei is leading by example, and the Shu culture is changing.

古文：穷城小邑，民或生而不识使者，抃行部无不至，父老喜相慰，奸吏竦服。
现代文：穷城小镇，老百姓有的一生没见过朝廷命官，而赵抃足迹无所不至，父老乡亲大感欣慰，奸狡的官吏不得不悚惧服从。
English: In a poor town, the common people had never seen a court official in their entire lives, but Zhao Wei's footprints were everywhere, the parents and relatives were greatly gratified, and the treacherous officials had to obey.

古文：召为右司谏。
现代文：赵抃又被召回京师任右司谏。
English: Zhao Yao was also recalled to the capital to serve as the right secretary.

古文：内侍邓保信引退兵董吉烧炼禁中，抃引文成、五利、郑注为比，力论之。
现代文：内侍邓保信勾引退兵董吉在宫中炼丹，赵抃比之为文成、五利、郑注等妖道，极力指斥其不是。
English: The palace attendant Deng Baoxin hooked up with the retired soldier Dong Ji to brew dan in the palace. Zhao Yao likened it to the demonic practices of Wencheng, Wuli and Zhengzhu, and vehemently denied that it was.

古文：陈升之副枢密，抃与唐介、吕海、范师道言升之奸邪，交结宦，进不以道。
现代文：陈升之任副枢密，赵抃与唐介、吕诲、范师道共同揭露陈升之奸邪，勾结宦官，不是通过正常渠道上来的。
English: Chen Sheng was appointed deputy privy councillor, and Zhao Jun and Tang Jie, Lu Yan and Fan Shidao jointly exposed Chen Sheng's treachery and collusion with eunuchs, which did not come up through normal channels.

古文：章二十余上，升之去位。抃与言者亦罢，出知虔州。
现代文：上书二十多次，升之垮台，赵抃同弹劾者也一道被撤职，赵抃出任虔州知州。
English: The petition was submitted more than 20 times, resulting in the downfall of Shengzhi. Zhao Wei was removed from office together with the impeachers, and Zhao Wei was appointed as the leader of Qianzhou Zhizhou.

古文：虔素难治，抃御之严而不苛，召戒诸县令，使人自为治。
现代文：虔州一向难治，赵抃的统治严厉而不苛刻，将政令下达给各县令，层层监督，人自为治。
English: Qianzhou has always been difficult to govern. Zhao Wei's rule was strict but not harsh. He issued decrees to the county governors, supervised from layer to layer, and people governed themselves.

古文：令皆喜，争尽力，狱以屡空。
现代文：各县令都愿意人尽其力，监狱为之一空。
English: All prefectural governments are willing to do their best, and the prisons are empty.

古文：岭外仕者死，多无以为归，抃造舟百艘，移告诸郡曰： 仕宦之家，有不能归者，皆于我乎出。 于是至者相继，悉授以舟，并给其道里费。
现代文：岭外做官的死了，多半无法归葬，赵抃造船百只，告诫各郡说： 官宦人家有无法回家的，我都帮助。 于是来求助的人接踵而至，赵抃都给他们船只、盘缠。
English: Officials outside the Ling died, and most of them could not be buried. Zhao Wei built a hundred boats and warned the counties, saying, "If there are officials who can't go home, I will help them." So people who came to ask for help came one after another, and Zhao Wei gave them boats and coils.

古文：召为侍御史知杂事，改度支副使，进天章阁待制、河北都转运使。
现代文：后来回京任侍御史知杂事，又改任度支副使，升天章阁待制、河北都转运使。
English: Later, he returned to Beijing and was appointed as the attendant of the history of knowledge of miscellaneous matters, and was also reappointed as the deputy envoy, ascended to the heavens, and was transferred to the capital of Hebei Province.

古文：时贾昌朝以故相守魏，抃将按视府库，昌朝使来告曰： 前此，监司未有按视吾藏者，恐事无比，若何？
现代文：当时曾任宰相的贾昌朝主管魏，赵抃要检察府库，昌朝派人来劝告说： 以前的监司是从不检察我的库藏的。没有先例怎么办？ 
English: At that time, Jia Chang, who had been the prime minister, and Wei Zhao, the head of Zhao Wei, wanted to inspect the treasury of the procuratorate. Chang sent a person to advise: The previous supervisors never inspected my treasury. What if there is no precedent?

古文：抃曰： 舍是，则他郡不服。 竟往焉。
现代文：赵抃说： 魏郡不查，其他郡就不会服气。 
English: Zhao Wei said: If Wei County does not investigate, other counties will not be convinced.

古文：昌朝不悦。
现代文：坚持查了，昌朝很不高兴。
English: After insisting on checking, Chang Chao was very unhappy.

古文：初，有诏募义勇，过期不能办，官吏当坐者八百余人。抃被旨督之，奏言： 河朔频岁丰，故应募者少，请宽其罪，以俟农隙。 从之。
现代文：当时，官吏因不能按期招募够义勇乡兵而受罚的已达八百余人，赵抃奉诏督责此事，他回报皇帝说： 河朔地区由于连年丰收，故乡民应募的少，请从宽处理那些官吏，等农闲时再说。 
English: At that time, more than 800 officials had been punished for not being able to recruit enough volunteer soldiers on schedule. Zhao Zhaohong supervised the matter. He returned to the emperor and said: Due to successive years of bumper harvests in the Hexuo region, the number of local villagers to be recruited is small. Please treat those officials with leniency, and wait until the farmers are idle.

古文：坐者获免，而募亦随足。
现代文：皇上答应了。受罚者被平反，义勇也招募足了。
English: The emperor agreed. Those who had been punished were rehabilitated, and many volunteers were recruited.

古文：昌朝始愧服。
现代文：昌朝才羞愧地对赵抃心悦诚服了。
English: It was only with a sense of shame that Chang Chao became convinced of Zhao Xinshu's sincerity.

古文：加龙图阁直学士、知成都，以宽为治。
现代文：赵抃又任龙图阁学士、成都府知府，以宽为治。
English: Zhao Wei was also appointed as the bachelor of Longtu Pavilion and the prefect of Chengdu, with a wide range.

古文：抃向使蜀日，有聚为妖祀者，治以峻法。
现代文：赵抃从前出使蜀州时，对聚众搞迷信活动的治以严刑峻法。
English: When Zhao Wei was on a previous mission to Shuzhou, he imposed harsh punishments on those who gathered to engage in superstitious activities.

古文：及是，复有此狱，皆谓不免。
现代文：这次重来，又有人犯同样的罪，都以为在劫难逃了。
English: This time, someone committed the same crime again, and everyone thought they were doomed.

古文：抃察其亡他，曰： 是特酒食过耳。 刑首恶而释余人，蜀民大悦。
现代文：赵抃看罪犯没有其他劣行，就说 ，这仅仅是骗酒食的小过失。 只处罚了首恶，放了其他人，蜀人大为高兴。
English: Seeing that the criminal did not have any other bad deeds, Zhao Wei said that this was just a minor offense of cheating on food and drink. Only the first evil was punished, and the others were released, and the Shu people were very happy.

古文：会荣諲除转运使，英宗谕諲曰： 赵抃为成都，中和之政也。 
现代文：正值荣任转运使，英宗对砎说： 赵抃治理成都，行的是中和之政。 
English: At the time of his appointment as envoy, Yingzong said to Zhai: Zhao Zhai's governance of Chengdu is a policy of neutralization.

古文：神宗立，召知谏院。
现代文：神宗即位后，召赵抃知谏院。
English: After Shinshu ascended to the throne, he summoned Zhao Shizhen.

古文：故事，近臣还自成都者，将大用，必更省府，不为谏官。
现代文：照老规矩，近臣从成都回来就会担负重任，必然去省府任职，不当谏官。
English: According to the old rules, close vassals would take on heavy responsibilities when they returned from Chengdu, and they would inevitably go to serve in the provincial government, making them improper eunuchs.

古文：大臣以为疑，帝曰： 吾赖其言耳，苟欲用之，无伤也。 及谢，帝曰： 闻卿匹马入蜀，以一琴一鹤自随，为政简易，亦称是乎？ 未几，擢参知政事。
现代文：大臣大惑不解，神宗说： 我是想发挥他仗义直言的优点，将采纳他的主张，不是小看他。 赵抃谢恩时，神宗说： 听说你单身匹马入蜀，以一琴一鹤自随，政策宽松平和，也能干唇枪舌剑的谏官吗？ 不久，升为参知政事。
English: The minister was puzzled, and Shenzong said, "I want to give play to his virtue of being forthright and honest, and I will adopt his ideas, not look down on him." When Zhao Yao thanked him, Shenzong said, "I heard that you are a single horse into Shu, with a harp and a crane, with a loose and peaceful policy, and can also be a eunuch with a sharp tongue? Soon, he was promoted to the post of vice-governor.

古文：抃感顾知遇，朝政有未协者，必密启闻，帝手诏褒答。
现代文：赵抃感谢皇上的知遇之恩，朝政有不妥当处，总是秘密上告，神宗也常亲笔回书表扬他。
English: Zhao Yao thanked the emperor for his kindness. There were some inappropriate things in the imperial government, and he always appealed to the emperor in secret. Shenzong often wrote back to praise him.

古文：王安石用事，抃屡斥其不便。
现代文：王安石当权，赵抃屡屡反对他的主张。
English: Wang Anshi was in power, and Zhao Jun repeatedly opposed his proposal.

古文：韩琦上疏极论青苗法，帝语执政，令罢之。
现代文：韩琦也上书反映青苗法对民间的危害。神宗同执政大臣们商量后，停止了青苗法。
English: Han Zheng also submitted a letter reflecting the harm of the Young Seedlings Law to the people. Shenzong stopped the Young Seedlings Law after discussing with the ruling ministers.

古文：时安石家居求去，抃曰： 新法皆安石所建，不若俟其出。 既出，安石持之愈坚。
现代文：王安石正在家休假，想辞官。赵抃说： 新法都是王安石创立，不如等他假满归来再说。 王安石回来后，推行新法更坚决。
English: Wang Anshi is on vacation at home and wants to resign. Zhao Yu said: The new law was created by Wang Anshi, it is better to wait for him to return. After Wang Anshi returned, the implementation of the new law was more resolute.

古文：抃大悔恨，即上言： 制置条例司建使者四十辈，骚动天下。
现代文：赵抃非常悔恨帮他，向神宗说 ：制置条例司设使者四十余人，扰乱天下。
English: Zhao Wei was very remorseful for helping him, and said to Shenzong, "The Department of Regulations has set up more than forty emissaries to disturb the world.

古文：安石强辩自用，诋天下公论以为流俗，违众罔民，顺非文过。
现代文：安石善于诡辩，刚愎自用，诋毁天下公论为庸俗，违背众议，欺瞒民众，文过饰非。
English: Anshi was good at sophistry, used arrogance to his own advantage, denigrated the world's public opinion as vulgar, went against public opinion, deceived the people, and embellished the truth.

古文：近者台谏侍从，多以言不听而去；司马光除枢密，不肯拜。
现代文：近来谏官们多因说话无人听而辞职，司马光受聘枢密，不肯赴任。
English: Recently, many eunuchs have resigned because no one listened to what they had to say. Sima Guang was hired as a privy councillor, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：今去重而取轻，失大而得小，惧非宗庙社稷之福也。 奏入，恳乞去位，拜资政殿学士、知杭州，改青州，时京东旱蝗，青独多麦，蝗来及境，遇风退飞，尽堕水死。
现代文：而且事有轻重，体有大小，一时的财富利润是轻，人心的得失才是重；青苗使者的去取荣辱是小，左右大臣的取舍为大。现在因小失大，去重取轻，我担心这不是国家的福气啊！ 奏章送给皇上后，请求辞官，被任命为资政殿学士、杭州知州，改任青州知州。当时京东旱灾、蝗灾，青州麦多，蝗虫飞到青州边境，遇狂风阻遏，都落水淹死了。
English: Moreover, things have weight and size, the momentary wealth profit is light, the gain and loss of the people's heart is heavy; the honor and disgrace of the young emissary is small, and the choice of the left and right ministers is large. Now, because of small loss and large loss, it is easy to take again, I am afraid that this is not a blessing of the country! After the report was sent to the emperor, he requested a dictionary and was appointed as a scholar of the palace of capital affairs, Hangzhou Chizhou, and was reappointed to Qingzhou Chizhou. At that time, there was a drought in Jingdong, a locust disaster, and a locust

古文：成都以戍卒为忧，遂以大学士复知成都。
现代文：成都因为戍卒困扰，赵抃以大学士身份再任成都。
English: Because Chengdu is plagued by absenteeism, Zhao Wei was reappointed to Chengdu as a university professor.

古文：召见，劳之曰： 前此，未有自政府往者，能为朕行乎？ 对曰： 陛下有言，即法也，奚例之问？ 因乞以便宜从事。
现代文：皇上召见时慰劳说： 还没有过从中央政府下到成都去的先例，你能为了我破一次例吗？ 赵抃回答说 ：陛下的话就是法律，何必管例不例呢？ 因而请求允许他相机行事。
English: When the emperor summoned him, he consoled him saying, "There is no precedent for someone from the central government to go to Chengdu, can you make an exception for me?" Zhao Zhe replied, "Your Majesty's words are the law, why do you need to make an exception? Therefore, he asked to be allowed to take pictures."

古文：既至蜀，治益尚宽。
现代文：到成都后，政令比上次更宽简。
English: After arriving in Chengdu, the decree was more lenient than the previous one.

古文：有卒长立堂下，呼谕之曰： 吾与汝年相若，吾以一身入蜀，为天子抚一方。
现代文：有个卒长站在堂下，赵抃喊他说： 我同你年岁相当，我单身匹马入蜀，为天子镇抚一方。
English: There was a postmaster standing under the hall. Zhao Yao shouted to him, "I'm the same age as you. I'm a single man who entered Shu on horseback. I'm the son of heaven.

古文：汝亦宜清谨畏戢以率众，比戍还，得余赀持归，为室家计可也。 人喜转相告，莫敢为恶，蜀郡晏然。
现代文：你也应清廉谨慎威严地统率士卒，等戍期满，分得些余财回家，替妻儿考虑，岂不好？ 人们欣喜地奔走相告，不敢再为恶，蜀郡一片升平景象。
English: You should also lead the cadres with integrity, prudence and majesty, and when your term of service is over, get some extra money to go home and think about your wife and children, isn't it good? People rushed to tell each other with joy, they dared not do evil again, and Shu County was flattened.

古文：剑州民私作僧度牒，或以为谋逆告，抃不师畀狱吏，以意决之，悉从轻比。
现代文：剑州有人伪造和尚的度牒，被告为企图谋反，赵抃不将案件交给司法人员，而由自己判断，皆从轻处理。
English: In Jianzhou, someone forged a monk's death certificate, and the defendant was accused of attempting to rebel. Zhao Wei did not submit the case to judicial personnel, but judged by himself, and they were all treated lightly.

古文：谤者谓其纵逆党，朝廷取具狱阅之，皆与法合。
现代文：诽谤者诬告赵抃纵容叛党，朝廷取来审案记录一看，认为赵抃的判决都符合法律。
English: The slanderer falsely accused Zhao Jun of conniving at treason against the Party. The court took a look at the trial record and found that Zhao Jun's verdicts were all in accordance with the law.

古文：茂州夷剽境上，惧讨乞降，乃缚奴将杀之，取血以受盟。
现代文：茂州少数民族在边境抢掠后，害怕官府讨伐，请求投降，就绑了一个奴隶，想杀死后取血为盟。
English: After the Maozhou ethnic minorities looted the border, they were afraid of the government's crusade and asked for surrender, so they tied up a slave, wanted to kill him and then take blood as an ally.

古文：抃使易用牲，皆欢呼听命。
现代文：赵抃让他们改用牲口，放了奴隶，大家都欣然听令。
English: Zhao Wei told them to use livestock instead, and freed the slaves, and everyone gladly obeyed.

古文：乞归，越州。
现代文：赵抃请求回来后，改任越州。
English: After Zhao Jun's request to return, he was reassigned to Yuezhou.

古文：吴越大饥疫，死者过半。
现代文：吴越闹饥荒，人口死亡过半。
English: Wuyue suffered a famine, and more than half of the population died.

古文：抃尽救荒之术，疗病，埋死，而生者以全。
现代文：赵抃奋力救荒，治病救人，掩埋死者，使生者得以保全。
English: Zhao Wei worked hard to save the wasteland, cure the sick, save people, bury the dead, and preserve the living.

古文：下令修城，使得食其力。
现代文：让老百姓修城，以使他们得到口钱。
English: Let the people build the city, so that they can get the money.

古文：复徙杭，以太子少保致仕，而官其子屼提举两浙常平以便养。
现代文：又调任杭州，以太子少保的身份退休，其子山兀被封为提举两浙常平，以便就近照顾他的晚年。
English: He was also transferred to Hangzhou, retired as a minor, and his son, Yamazaki, was given the title of two Zhejiang Changping, in order to take care of his old age.

古文：屼奉抃遍游诸名山，吴人以为荣。
现代文：山兀带他遍游江南名山大川，吴人感到自豪。
English: The Wu people are proud that the hawthorn has taken him all over the famous mountains and rivers in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：元丰七年，薨，年七十七。
现代文：元丰七年，赵抃死，享年七十七岁。
English: In the seventh year of Yuanfeng, Zhao Xi died at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：赠太子少师，谥曰清献。
现代文：追赠为太子少师，谥号 清献 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Prince Junior Instructor, and his posthumous name was changed to Qingxian.

古文：抃长厚清修，人不见其喜愠。
现代文：赵抃忠厚淳朴，善良温和，喜怒不形于色。
English: Zhao Wei is loyal and honest, kind and gentle, and his emotions are always the same.

古文：平生不治赀业，不畜声伎，嫁兄弟之女十数、他孤女二十余人，施德茕贫，盖不可胜数。
现代文：平生不治家产，不养歌伎，帮兄弟之女十余人、其他孤女二十余人办嫁妆，其他抚恤孤寡贫寒之事，不可胜数。
English: In his lifetime, he did not manage the family property, did not support Kabuki, helped more than ten daughters of his brothers and more than twenty other orphan girls to pay dowry, and countless other things to support the poor and lonely.

古文：日所为事，入夜必衣冠露香以告于天，不可告，则不敢为也。
现代文：白天所做之事，晚上必然服饰庄重地烧香，告诉上天，凡是不能对天说的事就不做。
English: What you do during the day, you must wear at night, burn incense solemnly, and tell the heavens that you will not do anything that you cannot tell the heavens.

古文：其为政，善因俗施设，猛宽不同，在虔与成都，尤为世所称道。
现代文：从政时，因地制宜，不同情况不同政策，在虔州和成都的政绩，尤其为世人称道。
English: When engaging in politics, according to local conditions, different situations, different policies, the political achievements in Qianzhou and Chengdu are especially praised by the world.

古文：神宗每诏二郡守，必以抃为言。
现代文：神宗以后每次训导这二郡的继任，都要把赵抃作为楷模。
English: After Shensong, every successor to the leadership of these two counties should take Zhao Yu as a model.

古文：要之，以惠利为本。
现代文：总之，以增加人民财富为根本。
English: In a word, it is based on increasing the wealth of the people.

古文：屼卒，子云又以毁死，人称其世孝。
现代文：晚年修行炼道，颇有心得，临死与儿子赵山兀诀别时，说话仍有条有理，安然去世。
English: In his later years, he practiced the path of cultivation. He had a lot of experience. When he said goodbye to his son, Zhao Shanzhong, on his deathbed, he still spoke in an orderly manner. He passed away peacefully.

古文：唐介，字子方，江陵人。
现代文：宰相韩琦曾称道说：赵抃真是世人表率，我也赶不上。唐介，字子方，江陵人。
English: Prime Minister Han Zheng once said: "Zhao Zheng is truly an example for the world, I can't keep up. Tang Jie, Zhizi Fang, Jiangling people.

古文：父拱，卒漳州，州人知其贫，合钱以赙，介年尚幼，谢不取。
现代文：父唐拱死于漳州时，众人知道唐家贫穷，想凑钱为他送葬，唐介虽然年龄幼小，却婉言谢绝了众人的好意。
English: When Tang Gong's father died in Zhangzhou, everyone knew that the Tang family was poor and wanted to raise money to pay for his funeral. Although Tang Jie was young, he politely declined everyone's kindness.

古文：擢第，为武陵尉，调平江令。
现代文：后被人提拔为武陵县尉，又调任平江县令。
English: Later, he was promoted to lieutenant of Wuling County and transferred to Pingjiang County.

古文：民李氏赀而吝，吏有求不厌，诬为杀人祭鬼。
现代文：李财主富有而吝啬，官吏们对他巧取豪夺没有得到满足，诬告他杀人祭鬼。
English: Li Cai Shou was rich and stingy, but the officials were not satisfied with his plunder, and falsely accused him of being a murderer.

古文：岳守捕其家，无少长楚掠，不肯承。
现代文：岳州太守逮捕他家老小，不分皂白地加以拷打，都不承认。
English: The governor of Yuezhou arrested his youngest son and tortured him indiscriminately, but he did not confess.

古文：更属介讯之，无他验。
现代文：又派唐介去刑讯，没有什么证据。
English: They also sent Tang Jie to interrogate him, but there was no evidence.

古文：守怒白于朝，遣御史方偕徙狱别鞫之，其究与介同。
现代文：太守大怒，向朝廷报告，朝廷派御史方偕下来，换一个监狱分别审问李家老小，结果与唐介所审相同。
English: Tai Shou was furious and reported to the imperial court. The imperial court sent the imperial historian to interrogate Li Jia Lao Xiao in a different prison. The result was the same as that of Tang Jie's trial.

古文：守以下得罪，偕受赏，介未尝自言。
现代文：太守以下全部受罚，方偕受赏，唐介也没有主动请功。
English: Taishu and his subordinates were all punished, Fang Yao was rewarded, and Tang Jie did not take the initiative to ask for a reward.

古文：知莫州任丘县，当辽使往来道，驿吏以诛索破家为苦。
现代文：唐介又调任莫州任丘县知县。任丘处于辽使往返的道路上，驿站官吏常被使者敲诈勒索，苦不堪言。
English: Tang Jie was also transferred to Renqiu County, Mozhou. Renqiu was on the way to and from the Liao envoys, and the station officials were often extorted and blackmailed by the envoys, which was very painful.

古文：介坐驿门，令曰： 非法所应给，一切勿与。稍毁吾什器者，必执之。 皆帖伏以去。
现代文：唐介坐在驿站门口，传令说： 法令没有规定供应的一概不得供应，胆敢毁坏我处的一草一木，就坚决关押。 
English: Tang Jie was sitting at the gate of the station, and the message said: "If the law does not stipulate the supply, it must not be supplied. If you dare to destroy every blade of grass in our place, you will be resolutely detained."

古文：沿边塘水岁溢，害民田，中人杨怀敏主之，欲割邑西十一村地猪涨潦，介筑提兰之，民以为利。
现代文：使者都服服帖帖地离开了。边境水塘年年发大水，淹没良田，中人杨怀敏主持治理，用城西四十一村蓄洪，唐介主持筑堤，老百姓受了益。
English: The envoys all left obediently. Year after year, the border reservoir produced large amounts of water and flooded good fields. Yang Huimin, a middle-ranking official, presided over the management, used the 41 villages west of the city for flood storage, and Tang Jie presided over the construction of dikes. The common people benefited.

古文：通判德州，转运使崔峄取库绢配民而重其估。介留牒不下，且移安抚司责数之。
现代文：又改任德州通判，转运使崔峄拿库存绢帛高价配售给老百姓，唐介扣住这道命令不下达，并向安抚司揭发此事。
English: He was also transferred to the Texas Intermediate People's Court, and the transshipment made Cui Xuan take the inventory and sell it to the people at a high price. Tang Jie did not issue this order, and exposed the matter to the Pacifying Division.

古文：峄怒，数驰檄按诘，介不为动。
现代文：崔峄大为不满，数次派人追逼唐介快快下文。
English: Cui Rong was very dissatisfied and sent people to chase Tang Jie several times.

古文：既而果不能行。
现代文：唐介总是拖延，最后终于没有执行这道命令。
English: Tang Jie always delayed, and finally did not carry out this order.

古文：入为监察御史里行，转殿中侍御史。
现代文：后来调到京城任监察御史里行，又改任殿中侍御史。
English: Later, he was transferred to Kyoto to serve as an inspector of imperial history, and then he was reassigned to serve as imperial historian.

古文：启圣院造龙凤车，内出珠玉为之饰。介言： 此太宗神御所在，不可喧渎；后宫奇靡之器，不宜过制。 诏亟毁去。
现代文：启圣院新造 龙凤车 ，装饰珠玉，唐介批评说： 这里是太宗的牌位所在，不可喧闹亵渎；后宫稀奇侈靡的玩具，也不能超出制度的规定。 
English: Tang Jie criticized the newly-built dragon and phoenix chariot, decorated with jewels, of the Kai Sheng Yuan, saying, "This is where Tai Zong's cards are located, so you can't be noisy and profane; the rare and extravagant toys of the harem can't exceed the rules of the system.

古文：张尧佐骤除宣徽、节度、景灵、群牧四使，介与包拯、吴奎等力争之，又请中丞王举正留百官班庭论，夺其二使。
现代文：皇上立即下令毁了龙凤车。张尧佐一步登天的诏命草拟升任宣徽、节度、景灵、群牧四使，唐介与包拯、吴奎等极力反对，又请中丞王举正同百官一起讨论，结果剥夺了张尧佐两个官职。
English: The emperor immediately ordered the dragon and phoenix chariot to be destroyed. Zhang Ye Zuo, who had ascended to the heavens, drafted the edict to be promoted to the four envoys of Xuan Hui, Jiedu, Jingling, and Qunmu. Tang Jie, Bao Zheng, Wu Kui, and others strongly objected, and also asked Zhongzheng Wang to discuss it with the hundred officials. As a result, Zhang Ye Zuo was deprived of two official positions.

古文：无何，复除宣徽使、知河阳。介谓同列曰： 是欲与宣徽，而假河阳为名耳，不可但已也。 而同列依违，介独抗言之。
现代文：不久，张尧佐又被任用为宣徽使、河阳知府，唐介对百官说 ：皇上是想封他宣徽使，而以河阳知府为名，我们不能就此罢休啊。 然而百官都明哲保身，只唐介坚决出面反对。
English: Not long after, Zhang Xunza was appointed as the heraldic envoy to Kheyang Prefecture. Tang Jie said to the hundred officials, "The emperor wanted to appoint him as the heraldic envoy, but with Kheyang Prefecture as the name, we can't just give up. However, the hundred officials all knew how to protect themselves, and only Tang Jie resolutely came out against it."

古文：仁宗谓曰： 除拟本出中书。 介遂劾宰相文彦博守蜀日造间金奇锦，缘阉侍通宫掖，以得执政；今显用尧佐，益自固结，请罢之而相富弼。
现代文：仁宗说 ：任职令是中书省下的。 唐介于是弹劾宰相文彦博在蜀之日曾私自织造错金的奇妙锦缎，勾结宦官，在皇宫寻找内应，才谋得相位；现在又重用张尧佐，显然是想勾结得更紧。建议皇帝撤掉文彦博，任用富弼为相。
English: Emperor Tang then impeached the prime minister, Fumihiko, who on the day of Shu had himself woven a wonderful brocade of the wrong gold, and who had colluded with eunuchs to seek favor in the imperial palace in order to obtain a position; and now he was re-employing Zhang Xuanzuo, obviously wanting to collude even more closely. He recommended that the emperor remove Fumihiko and appoint Fumihiko as the prime minister.

古文：又言谏官吴奎表里观望，语甚切直。
现代文：又批评谏官吴奎脚踩两只船，措词严厉。
English: He also criticized the eunuch Wu Kui for stepping on two boats, using harsh words.

古文：帝怒，却其奏不视，且言将远窜。
现代文：仁宗大怒，拒绝看他的奏章，声称要把他调到偏远的地方去。
English: Enraged, he refused to look at his scores and said he wanted to transfer him to a remote location.

古文：介徐读毕，曰： 臣忠愤所激，鼎镬不避，何辞于谪？ 帝急召执政示之曰： 介论事是其职。
现代文：唐介慢慢读完皇帝的意见后说： 臣受忠义的鼓舞，坐监狱、赴刑场也在所不惧，怎会害怕边远地方呢？ 仁宗急忙召见执政大臣说 ：唐介发表意见是他的职责。
English: After Tang Jie slowly read the emperor's opinion, he said, "A vassal is inspired by loyalty and is not afraid of going to prison or the place of execution, so how can he be afraid of a remote place?" Rinzong hurriedly summoned the ruling minister and said, "It is Tang Jie's duty to express his opinion."

古文：至谓彦博由妃嫔致宰相，此何言也？
现代文：至于说文彦博是通过我的嫔妃才得到宰相职位的，岂有此理？
English: As for saying that Fumihiko Fumihiko only got the position of prime minister through my wife, is there any truth to this?

古文：进用冢司，岂应得预？ 时彦博在前，介责之曰： 彦博宜自省，即有之，不可隐。 彦博拜谢不已，帝怒益甚。
现代文：启用宰相，嫔妃岂得干预？ 当时文彦博在旁，唐介指责说： 彦博应该反躬自省，假使有这种丑事，不能隐瞒。 彦博不停地谢罪，仁宗更加恼怒。
English: At that time, Fumihiko Fumihiko was by his side, and Tang Jie reproached him, saying, "Hikobo should reflect on himself, if there is such a scandal, he cannot hide it." Hikobo kept apologizing, and Rinzong became even more angry.

古文：梁适〈口七〉介使下殿，修起居注蔡襄趋进救之。
现代文：梁适喝斥唐介，让他下殿，修起居注蔡襄也上前救护他。
English: Liang Shih shouted at Tang Jie and told him to leave the hall. Cai Xiang also came forward to help him.

古文：贬春州别驾，王举正言以为太重，帝旋悟，明日取其疏入，改置英州，而罢彦博相，吴奎亦出。
现代文：结果，仁宗把他降级为春州别驾。王举正认为这个处罚太重了，仁宗醒悟过来，第二天又改派到英州，撤了文彦博的职，吴奎也贬到地方去了。
English: As a result, Rinzong demoted him to the rank of Chunzhou special driver. Wang Zhurong thought that this punishment was too heavy, Rinzong came to his senses, and the next day he was reassigned to Yingzhou, removed from the post of Wen Yanbo, and Wu Kui was also demoted to the local level.

古文：又虑介或道死，有杀直臣名，命中使护之。
现代文：仁宗怕唐介死在路上，自己背上伤害耿直大臣的恶名，就派中使护送他。
English: Renzong was afraid that Tang Jie would die on the road and hurt the bad reputation of Minister Geng Zhi on his own back, so he sent an envoy to escort him.

古文：梅尧臣、李师中皆赋诗激美，由是直声动天下，士大夫称真御史，必曰唐子方而不敢名。
现代文：梅尧臣、李师中都作诗热情地赞美他，从此他坦率耿直嫉恶如仇的美名轰动天下，士大夫们谈论 真正的御史 时，都必然说 唐子方 ，而不敢直呼其名。
English: Both Mei Xuan's and Li Shizhong's students wrote poems to praise him enthusiastically. From then on, his reputation as an outspoken and vengeful person caused a sensation all over the world. When discussing real imperial history, scholars and officials would inevitably say "Tang Zi Fang" and would not dare to call his name directly.

古文：数月，起监郴州税，通判潭州，知复州，召为殿中侍御史。
现代文：几月后，受提拔主管郴州税务，任潭州通判、复州知州，又被召回京城任殿中侍御史。
English: A few months later, he was promoted to be the head of Bozhou taxation, appointed as the general judge of Tanzhou and the chizhou of Fuzhou, and was recalled to Beijing to serve as the chief historian.

古文：遣使赐告。
现代文：到朝廷谢恩时，仁宗慰劳他说： 您从被降职到地方以来，从未写信回来谈私事，可算是操守坚贞啊。 
English: When he received the thanks of the Imperial Court, he was consoled by Rinzong, who said, "Since you were demoted to a local post, you have never written back to discuss personal matters, which can be regarded as integrity.

古文：趣诣阙下。
现代文：唐介叩头谢恩，从此议论时事更无所顾忌。
English: Tang Jie kowtowed to Shane, and from then on, he had no qualms about discussing current affairs.

古文：入对，帝劳之曰： 卯迁谪以来，未尝以私书至京师，可谓不易所守矣。 介顿首谢，言事益无所顾。
现代文：不久对仁宗说： 臣既然担当御史，说的不被听从必然要力争，争得太激烈了就会得罪陛下，希望能辞职。 
English: He soon said to Rinzong, "Since the minister is in charge of imperial history, if what he says is not obeyed, he must fight hard. If he fights too hard, he will offend His Majesty. I hope he will resign."

古文：他日请曰： 臣既任言责，言之不行将固争，争之重以累陛下，愿得解职。 换工部员外郎、直集贤院，为开封府判官，出知扬州，徙江东转运使。
现代文：于是调任工部员外郎、直集贤院、开封府判官，又任扬州知州，再转任江东转运使。
English: As a result, he was transferred to be a member of the Ministry of Industry, Gairo, Jishixi Xianin, judge of Kaifeng Prefecture, and Yangzhou Chizhou, and then transferred to be the Koto East Transport Envoy.

古文：御史吴中复言，介不宜久居外。
现代文：御史吴中复向仁宗说： 唐介不应该长期担任地方官。 
English: Guishi Wu Zhongfu said to Rinzong: Tang Jie should not serve as a local official for a long time.

古文：文彦博再当国，奏： 介向所言，诚中臣病，愿如中复言。 然但徒河东。
现代文：文彦博重当宰相后也对仁宗说 ：唐介从前对我的批评，确实很针对我的缺点，希望您能采纳中复的意见。 但仁宗只调他到河中。
English: After Fumihiko Hiroshige became prime minister, he also said to Nintsune: "Tangsuke's criticism of me in the past was really aimed at my shortcomings, I hope you can adopt the opinion of the mediator.

古文：久之，入为度支副使，进天章阁待制，复知谏院。
现代文：很久以后，调回京城任度支副使，升天章阁待制，再到谏院任职。
English: After a long time, he was transferred back to Beijing as a vice-envoy of the imperial court, was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun, and then served at the Summer Palace.

古文：帝自至和后，临朝渊默。
现代文：仁宗从至和年以后，很少与臣下勾通。
English: From the 17th century onwards, Ninsong rarely consorted with his subjects.

古文：介言： 君臣如天地，以交泰为理。
现代文：唐介说： 君臣关系好比是天地，天地交泰，才是正理。
English: Tang Jie said: The relationship between the prince and the vassal is like heaven and earth, and it is only right that heaven and earth should have friendly relations.

古文：愿时延群下，发德音，可否万几，以幸天下。 又论：宫禁干丐恩泽，出命不由中书，宜有以抑绝；赐予嫔御之费，多先朝时十数倍，日加无穷，宜有所朘损；监司荐举，多得文法小吏，请令精择端良敦朴之士，毋使与憸薄者同进；诸路走马承受凌扰郡县，可罢勿遣，以权归监司；兖国公主夜开禁门，宜劾宿卫主吏，以严宫省。
现代文：希望能经常召集群臣，做些指示，共同讨论事情，以造福于天下。 又说： 后宫不该替别人向皇上伸手要官；诏命的草拟不通过中书的情况，应该设法制止；赐给嫔妃的钱物，已比前代多几十倍，而且还在天天增长，没有止境，应有所限制；监司推荐的官员多是些只会深文周纳、咬文嚼字的具体办事员，请您下令，精选品行端正、善良敦厚的才子，不可使歹毒刻薄者混入；派往各地的采购人员欺侮地方，应撤回，所需物品直接交给监司采办；兖国公主夜晚擅自开启禁宫的门，应警告宿卫人员的主管，严格宫禁的规章制度。 
English: He also said: the harem should not extend its hand to the emperor on behalf of others; the situation that the draft of the imperial edict does not pass the Chinese book should be stopped; the money and goods given to the empress dowager have increased dozens of times over the previous generation, and are still growing every day, there is no limit, and there should be restrictions; the officials recommended by the director of supervision are mostly specific clerks who can only read and write, please order that the talents who are well-behaved and kind-hearted should not be mixed with those who are mean-spirited; the procurement personnel sent to various places should be withdrawn, and the required items should be directly

古文：帝悉开纳之。
现代文：这些建议都被采纳了。
English: These recommendations have been accepted.

古文：御史中丞韩绛劾宰相富弼，弼家居求罢，绛亦待罪。
现代文：御史中丞韩绛弹劾宰相富弼，富弼回家请求辞职，韩绛也等待处罚。
English: Vice-Minister of History Han Zheng impeached Prime Minister Fuxi, Fuxi went home to ask for resignation, and Han Zheng also awaited punishment.

古文：介与王陶论绛以危法中伤大臣，绛罢。
现代文：唐介与王陶批评韩绛中伤大臣，结果韩被免职。
English: Tang Jie and Wang Tao criticized Han Jie for slandering the minister, and as a result, Han Jie was dismissed.

古文：介嫌于右宰相，请外，以知荆南。
现代文：唐介与右宰相不和，请求外调，任荆南知府。
English: Tang Jie did not get along with the Right Vice-Minister and requested to be transferred to Jingnan Prefecture.

古文：敕过门下，知银台司何郯封还之，留权开封府。
现代文：任命书经过门下省时，被知银台司何郯扣住退回，于是重新留任为开封代理知府。
English: When the letter of appointment passed through the subordinate ministry, it was returned by the well-known Bank of Taiwan Secretary He Yan, so he was reappointed as the acting governor of Kaifeng.

古文：旋以论罢陈升之，亦出知洪州。
现代文：不久因为弹劾了陈升之，调任洪州知州。
English: Soon after Chen Shengzhi was impeached, he was transferred to Hongzhou Zhizhou.

古文：加龙图阁直学士、河北都转运使，枢密直学士、知瀛州。
现代文：又被任命为龙图阁直学士、河北都转运使、枢密直学士、瀛州知州。
English: In addition, he was appointed as the direct bachelor of Longtu Ge, the transfer envoy of Hebei Province, the direct bachelor of the Privy Council, and the star of Zhangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：治平元年，召为御史中丞。
现代文：英宗治平元年，唐介回京任御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yingzong, Tang Sui returned to Beijing to take up the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：英宗谓曰： 卿在先朝有直声，故用卿，非繇左右言也。 介曰： 臣无状，陛下过听，愿献愚忠。
现代文：英宗说 ：您在先朝时有敢于仗义直言的美誉，因此我才任用您，不是听了左右人的建议才用您的。 唐介说 ：臣没有什么优点，陛下把我说得太好了，我愿意对您尽忠尽力。
English: Yingzong said, "During the previous reign, you had the reputation of being brave, honest, and outspoken, which is why I appointed you, rather than listening to the advice of those around you." Tang Jie said, "I don't have any merits as a minister. Your Majesty spoke very well about me, and I am willing to do my best to be loyal to you."

古文：自古欲治之主，亦非求绝世惊俗之术，要在顺人情而已。
现代文：自古以来想求得天下大治的君主，都不一定要找到惊世骇俗、空前绝后的政策，主要的思路不过是顺乎人心而已。
English: Since ancient times, monarchs who wanted to rule the world did not have to find a shocking, unprecedented policy, the main idea was just to please the people.

古文：祖宗遗德余烈，在人未远，愿览已成之业以为监，则天下蒙福矣。
现代文：祖宗传下的治世良方，现在都还有踪可寻，望您能以祖宗已经完成了的大业为镜子，天下就会沾您的光了。 
English: There are still traces to be found of the good governance methods passed down by our ancestors. I hope you can use the great cause that our ancestors have accomplished as a mirror, and the world will see your light.

古文：明年，以龙图阁学士知太原府。帝曰： 朕视河东，不在中执法下，暂烦卿往耳。 夏人数扰代州边，多筑堡境上。
现代文：次年，唐介以龙图阁学士的身份任太原知府，英宗对他说： 我认为黄河以东地区的重要性，不在中央政府执法官之下，暂时麻烦您去担此重任吧。 西夏常常侵扰代州边境，并在边境修筑了多个堡垒。
English: The following year, Tang Jie was appointed governor of Taiyuan as a Longtuge scholar, and Ying Zong said to him: "I think the importance of the area east of the Yellow River is not under the enforcement of the central government, please take on this responsibility for the time being.

古文：介遣兵悉撤之，移谕以利害，遂不敢动。
现代文：唐介派兵撤掉了这些堡垒，发函对西夏晓以利害，于是夏人就不敢再动了。
English: The Tang emperor sent troops to remove these fortresses, and sent a letter to the Western Xia Xiao, so the Xia people did not dare to move again.

古文：神宗立，以三司使召。
现代文：神宗即位后，召他回来任三司使。
English: After Shinso ascended to the throne, he was called back to serve as the third envoy.

古文：熙宁元年，拜参知政事。
现代文：熙宁元年，升为参知政事。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted to Sangi Seiji.

古文：先时，宰相省阅所进文书于待漏舍，同列不得闻。
现代文：从前，宰相在待漏舍审阅下面送来的文书时，同僚不能知道。
English: Once upon a time, when the Prime Minister was reviewing the document sent below in the waiting room, his colleagues could not know.

古文：介谓曾公亮曰： 身在政府而文书弗与知，上或有所问，何辞以对？ 乃与同视，后遂为常。
现代文：唐介对曾公亮说 ：政府官员不了解文书的内容，皇上一旦问起来怎么回答？ 从此才容许同僚同看，后来就习以为常了。
English: Tang Jie said to Zeng Gongliang: Government officials do not understand the content of the document, how will the emperor answer once he asks? From then on, he allowed his colleagues to look at it together, and later he got used to it.

古文：帝欲用王安石，公亮因荐之，介言其难大任。
现代文：神宗想起用王安石，曾公亮也顺势推荐他，唐介却说王安石难当大任。
English: Shenzong thought of using Wang Anshi, and Zeng Guoliang also recommended him, but Tang Jie said that Wang Anshi would not be able to take on such a big responsibility.

古文：帝曰： 文学不可任耶？
现代文：神宗说 ：王安石的文学才气不够吗？
English: Shenzong said: Is Wang Anshi's literary talent not enough?

古文：吏事不可任耶？
现代文：治政能力不够吗？经术不够吗？ 
English: Is the ability to govern not enough? Is the ability to manage not enough?

古文：经术不可任耶？ 对曰： 安石好学而泥古，故论议迂阔，若使为政，必多所变更。 退谓公亮曰： 安石果用，天下必困扰，诸公当自知之。 中书尝进除目，数日不决，帝曰： 当问王安石。 介曰： 陛下以安石可大用，即用之，岂可使中书政事决于翰林学士？
现代文：唐介回答说： 王安石虽然有学问，但泥古不化，会读书不会活用，因而迂腐顽固，若让他执掌政事，必然会剧烈地变更传统。 散朝后又对曾公亮说 ：如果王安石真的受重用，天下必然受害，你们应该明了这一点。 中书省曾呈送拟任官员表，几天无法决定，皇帝说 ：可以请王安石最后裁定。 唐介说 ：您以为王安石可以重用，重用就是了，岂能让中书省把政事交给一个翰林学士来决断？
English: Tang Jie replied, "Although Wang Anshi is learned, he is not able to change with the times. He can't read and can't make use of his knowledge, so he is pedantic and obstinate. If he is allowed to take charge of government affairs, he will inevitably drastically change the tradition." After the fall of the Qing Dynasty, Tang Jie also said to Zeng Gongliang, "If Wang Anshi is really given important duties, the whole world will inevitably suffer, you should understand this." The Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture had submitted a list of officials to be appointed, and it was impossible to decide for several days. The emperor said, "You can ask Wang Anshi

古文：臣近每闻宣谕某事问安石，可即行之，不可不行，如此则执政何所用，恐非信任大臣之体也。
现代文：臣近来听说您常让某事某事请王安石决定，王同意就办，不同意就不行，既然这样，宰相等官还有什么用？这恐怕不是信任大臣，必然是认为臣等无才。
English: Recently, the minister heard that you often ask Wang Anshi to decide on something, and the king agrees to do it, and does not agree. In this case, what is the use of the prime minister and other officials? This is probably not to trust the minister, but to think that the minister and others are incompetent.

古文：必以臣为不才，愿先罢免。 
现代文：我愿意先被罢官。 
English: I'd like to be fired first.

古文：安石既执政，奏言： 中书处分札子，皆称圣旨，不中理者十八九，宜止令中书出牒。 帝愕然。
现代文：王安石任宰相后，启奏皇上说： 皇上直属的中书省处理政务的答刂子，都用圣旨的名义，不合理的却有十之八九，应该只让中书省发牒。 神宗吃了一惊。
English: After Wang Anshi was appointed prime minister, he said in a message to the emperor, "In the name of the imperial edict, the government affairs of the Central Literature Department, which is directly under the emperor, are all in the name of the imperial edict, but it is unreasonable in nine cases out of ten. It should only be the Central Literature Department that should issue the edict." Shenzong was taken aback.

古文：介曰： 昔寇准用札子迁冯拯官不当，拯诉之，太宗谓： 前代中书用堂牒，乃权臣假此为威福。
现代文：唐介说： 从前寇准发答刂子调冯拯的官职，不合理，遭到冯拯的控告，太宗认为 ：前代中书省只用堂牒，权臣趁机作威作福。
English: Tang Jie said: It is unreasonable to transfer Feng Zheng's official post from the former Qiao Jun to the post of the answer-giver, and was accused by Feng Zheng. Taizong believed that: the previous generation of the Ministry of Education and Culture only used the dictum, and the powerful minister took the opportunity to do good.

古文：太祖时以堂帖重于敕命，遂削去之。
现代文：太祖看到中书的堂帖比圣旨还威风，就取消了中书行下行文书的权力。
English: The great-grandfather saw that the dojo of the Chinese book was more prestigious than the holy will, so he canceled the power of the Chinese book and the downline document.

古文：今复用札子，何异堂帖？ 
现代文：现在又重新用答刂子，这与堂帖有什么不同呢？ 
English: Now they are using the dice again. How is this different from the dōjo?

古文：张洎因言： 废札子，则中书行事，别无公式。 太宗曰： 大事则降敕，其当用紥子，亦须奏裁。
现代文：张洎解释说： 废掉了答刂子，那中书省行文就没有格式可参照了。 太宗说 ：重要的事由皇帝直接发敕，该用答刂子的小事，也应该先请示皇帝。 
English: Zhang Ye explained: With the abolition of the answer dice, there is no format to refer to in the Chinese book and provincial prose. Taizong said: Important matters should be sent directly by the emperor, and minor matters that should be answered with the answer dice should also be requested by the emperor.

古文：此所以称圣旨也。
现代文：所以以后中书的答刂子都称为圣旨。
English: Therefore, from now on, the answers in Chinese books will be called "sacred decrees."

古文：如安石言，则是政不自天子出，使辅臣皆忠贤，犹为擅命，苟非其人，岂不害国？ 帝以为然，乃止。
现代文：像王安石所说的，那政令就不是皇上所发了。如果宰相忠诚有才，也是越权，若不是那么忠诚能干，岂不误了国家大事？ 神宗觉得有理，才没有变更。
English: As Wang Anshi said, the decree was not issued by the emperor. If the prime minister is loyal and talented, he will exceed his authority. If he is not so loyal and capable, will he not miss the national event? Shenzong felt that it was reasonable, so he did not change it.

古文：介自是数与安石争论。
现代文：唐介从此多次同王安石争论。
English: Since then, Tang Jie has repeatedly argued with Wang Anshi.

古文：安石强辩，而帝主其说。介不胜愤，疽发于背，薨，年六十。
现代文：王强辞夺理，而神宗又偏袒他，唐介不胜羞愤，背上发疽而死，年六十岁。
English: Wang Qiang made excuses, and Shenzong favored him. Tang Jie was so ashamed that he died of gangrene on his back, at the age of sixty.

古文：介为人简伉，以敢言见惮。
现代文：唐介为人淳朴豪爽，以敢讲真话而为人所惧。
English: Tang Jie is a straightforward and courageous person, and is feared for daring to speak the truth.

古文：每言官缺，众皆望介处之，观其风采。
现代文：每次言官空缺，朝野都希望唐介能补任，以便看他发挥才干。
English: Every time there is a vacancy for a spokesman, Asano hopes that Tang Jie can fill the post, so that he can show his talent.

古文：神宗谓其先朝遗直，故大用之。
现代文：神宗称他是先帝遗留给他的忠臣，因而很重用他。
English: Shinso said that he was a loyal retainer bequeathed to him by the former emperor, so he used him a lot.

古文：然居政府，遭时有为，而扼于安石，少所建明，声名减于谏官、御史时。
现代文：但他直接管政事之后，正应大展所长，却受王安石阻扰，少所建树，声名反而不如他担任谏官、御史时。
English: However, after he took direct control of government affairs, he was supposed to be a great leader, but he was obstructed by Wang Anshi. He did not accomplish much, and his reputation was not as good as when he was a eunuch and imperial historian.

古文：比疾亟，帝临问流涕，复幸其第吊哭，以画像不类，命取禁中旧藏本赐其家。赠礼部尚书，谥曰质肃。
现代文：病重时，神宗问起他的病情就哭，还亲往他的宅第吊唁他，因为画师所画的遗像不太准确，神宗还拿出皇宫中收藏的画像赐给他的家人。追认礼部尚书，谥号 质肃 。
English: When he was gravely ill, Shinsō asked about his condition and wept. He also went to his residence to offer condolences, because the portrait painted by the artist was not accurate. Shinsō also took out a picture from the collection of the Imperial Palace and gave it to his family.

古文：子淑问、义问，孙恕。
现代文：儿子叫淑问、义问，孙子名恕。
English: His son's names are Shu Qian and Yi Qian, and his grandson's name is Zhuo.

