古文：李光进，本河曲部落稽阿跌之族也。
现代文：李光进，本为河曲部落稽阿跌族人。
English: Li Guangjin was originally a member of the Qin Azul tribe of the Hequ tribe.

古文：父良臣，袭鸡田州刺史，隶朔方军。
现代文：父良臣，承袭鸡田州刺史，隶属朔方军。
English: His father was a high-ranking courtier. He inherited the history of the Jitian prefecture and was affiliated with the Shuo Fang Army.

古文：光进姊适舍利葛旃，杀仆固瑒而事河东节度使辛云京。
现代文：光进姊嫁给舍利葛旃，葛旃杀仆固而归附河东节度使辛云京。
English: Guangjin's sister was married to the sister of Ge Yao, Ge Yao killed his servant Gu and became a vassal of the Eastern Song Dynasty, which made Xin Yunjing rise.

古文：光进兄弟少依葛旃，因家于太原。
现代文：光进兄弟从小依傍葛旃，因此定居于太原。
English: Ever since they were little, the Hikari brothers have been close to the Ge family, which is why they settled in Taiyuan.

古文：光进勇毅果敢，其武艺兵略次于葛旃。
现代文：光进勇毅果敢，其武艺兵略次于葛旃。
English: Guangjin is brave and courageous, and his martial arts soldiers are slightly inferior to those of Ge Yao.

古文：肃宗自灵武观兵，光进从郭子仪破贼，收两京，累有战功。
现代文：肃宗自灵武观察战局，光进跟从郭子仪破贼，收复两京，屡立战功。
English: Su Zong observed the war situation from Lingwu, Guangjin followed Guo Ziyi to break the bandits, recovered the two capitals, and repeatedly made war achievements.

古文：至德中，授代州刺史，封范阳郡公，食邑二百户。
现代文：至德年间，授代州刺史，封范阳郡公，食邑二百户。
English: During the reign of Zhi De, he was awarded the title of State Historian, the title of Fanyang County Governor, and the number of food villages reached two hundred.

古文：上元初，郭子仪为朔方节度，以军讨大同、横野、清夷，范阳及河北残寇，用光进为都知兵马使。
现代文：上元初，郭子仪为朔方节度使，率军讨伐大同、横野、清夷、范阳及河北残寇，任命光进为都知兵马使。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, Guo Ziyi was appointed as an envoy of the Shuo faction, and led the army to fight against Datong, Yokono, Qingyi, Fanyang and the Hebei rebels, and appointed Guangjin as an envoy of the Sich soldiers and horses.

古文：寻迁渭北节度使。
现代文：不久，升为渭北节度使。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the Northern Song Dynasty envoy.

古文：永泰初，进封武威郡王。
现代文：永泰初年，进封武威郡王。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, he was crowned King of Wuwei County.

古文：大历四年，检校户部尚书，知省事。
现代文：大历四年，检校户部尚书，知省事。
English: In the fourth year of the lunar calendar, the inspection of the school's household department is still in progress.

古文：未几，又转检校刑部尚书、兼太子太保。
现代文：不久，又转任检校刑部尚书、兼太子太保。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the school inspection and punishment department, and also became the crown prince's bodyguard.

古文：是岁冬十月，葬母于京城之南原，将相致祭者凡四十四幄，穷极奢靡，城内士庶，观者如堵。
现代文：这年冬十月，葬母于京城之南原，将相致祭者共有四十四幄，奢华铺张至极。城内士人庶民，观者如堵。
English: In the winter of October of that year, a total of forty-four wreaths were laid by the funeral mother in the southern plain of the capital. The ceremony was extravagant to the extreme. The townspeople were ordinary people, and the onlookers were stunned.

古文：元和四年，王承宗反。范希朝引师救易定，表光进为步都虞候，战于木刀沟，光进有功。
现代文：元和四年，王承宗反叛，范希朝领兵援救易定，上表奏请光进为步都虞候，战于木刀沟，光进有功。
English: In the 4th year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, Wang Chengzong rebelled, Fan Xi led the troops to rescue Yiding, the above table shows that Guangjin was invited to be the governor of the capital, and fought in Xutanggou, and Guangjin was meritorious.

古文：六年，拜银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书，充单于大都护、振武节度使。
现代文：元和六年，拜银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书，充任单于大都护、振武节度使。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, Baiyin Qingguanglu Doctor and Shangshu of the School Inspection Department were appointed as single in Daduo and Zhenwu.

古文：诏以光进夙有诚节，克著茂勋，赐姓李氏。
现代文：诏书称光进素有竭诚效忠之节操，又建树丰功，赐姓李氏。
English: The imperial edict said that Guangjin was known for his dedication and loyalty, and was awarded the surname of Li.

古文：其弟光颜除洺州刺史，充本州团练使。
现代文：其弟光颜授氵名州刺史，充任本州团练使。
English: His younger brother, Guangyan, was awarded the title of famous state history, and served as the Honshu group training envoy.

古文：兄弟恩泽同时，人皆叹异。
现代文：兄弟同时奉享恩泽，人皆惊叹。
English: Brothers at the same time enjoy grace, everyone is amazed.

古文：八年，迁灵武节度使。
现代文：元和八年，调任灵武节度使。
English: In 1871, he was transferred to the post of Lingwuzhong sedentary envoy.

古文：光进尝从马燧救临洺，战洹水，收河中，皆有功。
现代文：李光进曾随马燧援救临氵名，战于洹水，收复河中，皆有功。
English: Li Guangjin had accompanied Ma Jun to rescue Linyi, fought in Surabaya, and recovered in the river, all of which were meritorious.

古文：前后军中之职，无所不历；中丞、大夫悉曾兼带。
现代文：前军后军中之职务，没有未曾担任过的，中丞、大夫之职也都兼任过。
English: There is no post in the army after the former army that he has not held, and he has also served as a junior middle officer and a doctor.

古文：先是救易定之师，光进、光颜皆在其行，故军中呼光进为大大夫，光颜为小大夫。
现代文：当初援救易定之师，光进、光颜皆在其中，故军中呼光进为大大夫，光颜为小大夫。
English: At the beginning of the rescue of Icing's division, both Guangjin and Guangyan were among them. In the former army, Guangjin was called the big doctor, and Guangyan was called the little doctor.

古文：十年七月卒。
现代文：元和十年七月李光进去世。
English: In July of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Guangjin died.

古文：光进兄弟少以孝睦推于军中。
现代文：李光进兄弟年少即以孝顺父母、弟兄和睦在军中享名。
English: At a young age, Li Guangjin's brothers became famous in the army for their filial piety and brotherly harmony.

古文：及居母丧，三年不归寝室。
现代文：及至守母之丧，三年不归居室。
English: Until the death of his mother, he did not return to his room for three years.

古文：光颜先娶妻，其母委以家事。
现代文：光颜先娶妻，其母将家务交付与她。
English: Guangyan married his wife first, and his mother handed over the housework to her.

古文：母卒，光进始娶。
现代文：母亡，光进始娶妻。
English: After his mother's death, Guang Jinxi married a wife.

古文：光颜使其妻奉管籥、家籍、财物，归于其姒。
现代文：光颜让自己的妻子将管钥、家谱、财物，都交归于嫂。
English: Guangyan asked his wife to hand over the key, family tree and property to her sister-in-law.

古文：光进命反之，且谓光颜曰： 新妇逮事母，尝命以主家，不可改也。 
现代文：光进命妻子还交弟媳，并对光颜道： 弟媳初来即侍奉母亲，母亲曾命她主持家事，不能更改。 
English: Guangjin's wife also had a younger sister-in-law, and said to Guangyan: My younger sister-in-law served my mother when she first came. My mother had ordered her to preside over the housework, and she couldn't change.

古文：因相持泣良久，乃如初。
现代文：于是弟兄臂膀相持流泣良久，仍如先前一样过日子。
English: So the brothers wept for a long time, holding each other's hands, and went on living their lives as before.

古文：卒时年六十五，赠尚书左仆射。
现代文：李光进去世时年六十五，追赠尚书左仆射。
English: When Li Guangjin died at the age of sixty-five, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu Zuopuzha.

古文：光颜与兄光进以葛旃善骑射，兄弟自幼皆师之，葛旃独许光颜之勇健，己不能逮。
现代文：李光颜与兄光进因葛旃善骑射，兄弟俩自幼皆跟随他习武，葛旃惟独赞李光颜勇健，连自己也不能赶上。
English: Li Guangyan and her brother Guangjin are riding and shooting because of Ge Min Shan. Both brothers have been following his martial arts training since childhood. Ge Min is the only one who praises Li Guangyan's bravery. Even he can't catch up.

古文：及长，从河东军为裨将，讨李怀光、杨惠琳，皆有功。
现代文：等到年长，李光颜从河东军为副将，讨伐李怀光、杨惠琳皆有功。
English: When she was older, Li Guangyan was promoted to vice-general from the Hedong Army. Li Huaguang and Yang Huilin both made great contributions to the crusade.

古文：后随高崇文平蜀，搴旗斩将，出入如神，由是稍稍知名。
现代文：后随高崇文平定蜀乱，夺旗斩将，出入贼军去来如神，从此小有名气。
English: Later, with Gao Chongwen, he pacified the Shu Rebellion, captured the flag and defeated the general, and went in and out of the thief army like a god. Since then, he has been a little famous.

古文：自宪宗元和已来，历授代、洺二州刺史、兼御史大夫。
现代文：自宪宗元和以来，历授代、氵名二州刺史、兼御史大夫。
English: Since the time of Kensei Muneyoshi, he has served as the chief historian of two prefectures, as well as the chief historian.

古文：九年，将讨淮、蔡，九月，迁陈州刺史，充忠武军都知兵马使。
现代文：元和九年，朝廷准备讨伐淮、蔡叛乱，九月，李光颜调任陈州刺史，充任忠武军都知兵马使。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court prepared to fight against the Huai and Cai rebellions, and in September, Li Guangyan was transferred to Chenzhou to serve as the loyal military envoy.

古文：逾月，迁忠武军节度使、检校工部尚书。
现代文：一月后，升忠武军节度使、检校工部尚书。
English: One month later, Shang Zhongwu, the military attaché to the Qing Dynasty, wrote a letter to the inspection department of the school.

古文：会朝廷征天下兵，环申、蔡而讨吴元济，诏光颜以本军独当一面。
现代文：正值朝廷征召天下兵马，包围申州、蔡州讨伐吴元济，诏命李光颜以本部军马独当一面。
English: It was the time when the imperial court called up the world's soldiers and horses to encircle Shenzhou and Caizhou to fight against Wu Yuanji, and ordered Li Guangyan to take the lead as the head of the army and horses.

古文：光颜于是引兵临溵水，抗洄曲。
现代文：李光颜于是领兵临氵殷水，在洄曲抗击叛军。
English: Li Guangyan then led the troops to Linyi and Yinshui, and fought against the rebels in Zongqu.

古文：明年五月，破元济之师于时曲。
现代文：次年五月，在时曲大败吴元济军。
English: In May of the following year, Wu Yuanji's army suffered a crushing defeat at the Jiqu.

古文：初，贼众晨压光颜之垒而阵，光颜不得出，乃自毁其栅之左右，出骑以突之。
现代文：开始，贼兵清晨逼近李光颜之营垒列阵。李光颜军队无法出垒，于是自毁左右墙，出骑兵突袭贼军。
English: At the beginning, the bandits approached Li Guangyan's camp early in the morning and lined up. Li Guangyan's army could not leave the base, so they self-destructed the left and right walls, and the cavalry raided the bandits.

古文：光颜将数骑冒坚而冲之，出入者数四。贼众尽识，矢集于身如蝟。
现代文：李光颜率数骑冒着防守之坚固冲向敌人，四度出入贼阵，贼兵都认得了他，浑身中箭密集如猬之刺。
English: Li Guangyan repeatedly rushed to the enemy, braving the solid defense of the defense, entering and leaving the bandits four times. The bandits all recognized him, and the arrows were dense all over his body like the thorns of a centipede.

古文：其子揽光颜马鞅，止其深入。光颜举刃叱之，乃退。
现代文：其子揽住光颜马缰，不让他深入贼阵，光颜举刀呵叱，其子乃退。
English: His son grabbed Guangyan Maqi and did not let him go deep into the bandit formation. Guangyan raised his sword and scolded, but his son retreated.

古文：于是人争奋跃。贼乃大溃，死者数千人。
现代文：于是将士们个个奋勇争先，贼兵彻底溃败，死者数千人。
English: As a result, the soldiers fought bravely for the lead, the bandits were completely defeated, and thousands of people died.

古文：捷声至京师，人人相贺。
现代文：捷报传至京师，人人互相庆贺。
English: The news of the victory spread to Beijing, and everyone congratulated each other.

古文：时伐蔡之师，大小凡十余镇，自裴度使还，唯奏光颜勇而知义，终不辱命。
现代文：当时讨伐蔡州的军队，包括大小共十余镇，自裴度奉使还朝，惟独奏报李光颜勇而知义，始终不辱朝命。
English: At that time, the army that fought against Caizhou, including a total of more than ten towns of all sizes, had been sent to the imperial court by Pei Du. However, Li Guangyan was the only one to report courageously and wisely, and he never disrespected the imperial command.

古文：至是，果立功焉。
现代文：至此，李光颜果真立下功勋。
English: At this point, Li Guangyan has truly made a great contribution.

古文：是岁十一月，光颜又与怀汝节度乌重胤同破元济之众于小溵河，平其栅。
现代文：当年十一月，李光颜又与怀汝节度使乌重胤共同击败吴元济军于小氵殷河，削平其营垒栅墙。
English: In November of the same year, Li Guangyan and Huairou Jiedu jointly defeated Wu Chungyin and Wu Yuanji's army at Xiaoyuan Yinhe and leveled their camp wall.

古文：初，都统韩弘令诸军齐攻贼城，贼又径攻乌重胤之垒。
现代文：起初，都统韩弘命诸军齐攻贼城，贼兵又径直攻打乌重胤营垒。
English: At first, Emperor Han Hong ordered all the troops to attack the thief city, and the thief soldiers directly attacked Wu Chung-yin's camp.

古文：重胤御之，中数枪，驰请救于光颜。
现代文：乌重胤抵挡贼人，身中数枪，快骑向李光颜求救。
English: Wu Chongyan resisted the thief, was shot several times, and quickly rode to Li Guangyan for help.

古文：光颜以小溵桥贼之堡也，乘其无备，使田颖、宋朝隐袭而取之。乃平其城堑，由是克救重胤。
现代文：李光颜断定小氵殷桥是贼人堡垒，乘其无备，派田颖、宋朝隐攻取该处，将城墙拆毁壕堑填平，乌重胤于是获救。
English: Li Guangyan concluded that Xiaojuan Yinqiao was a thief's fortress. Taking advantage of the situation, he sent Tian Ying and Song Chaoying to capture the place, demolish the city wall and fill in the trenches, and Wu Chongyin was rescued.

古文：韩弘以光颜违令，取颖及朝隐将戮之。
现代文：韩弘认为李光颜违反军令，要抓田颖及宋朝隐准备处死。
English: Han Hong believed that Li Guangyan violated military orders and wanted to arrest Tian Ying and Song Chaoying in preparation for their execution.

古文：颖及朝隐勇而材，军中皆惋惜之。
现代文：田颖及宋朝隐均勇敢而有才干，军中皆为之惋惜。
English: Tian Ying and Song Chaoying were both brave and talented, and the army all felt sorry for them.

古文：光颜畏弘不敢留。
现代文：李光颜畏惧韩弘不敢将二人留下。
English: Afraid of Han Hong, Li Guangyan did not dare to leave the two of them behind.

古文：会中使景忠信至，知其情，乃矫诏令所在械系之。
现代文：恰值中使景忠信到来，闻知情由，便假托诏令以刑械将二人就地囚禁。
English: At the right time, Jing Tadanobu arrived, and upon learning the reason, he ordered the two men to be imprisoned on the spot with the use of torture equipment.

古文：走马入见，具以本末闻。
现代文：迅即驰马回朝谒见皇上，将事情本末一一禀奏。
English: He quickly rode back to the Imperial Palace to see the Emperor and explained the situation from beginning to end.

古文：宪宗赦忠信矫诏罪，令即往释颖及朝隐。
现代文：宪宗赦免景忠信矫诏之罪，命他立即前往军中释放田颖及宋朝隐。
English: Emperor Xianzong pardoned Jing Zhongxin for the crime of issuing the edict and ordered him to immediately go to the army to release Tian Ying and Song Chaoying.

古文：弘及光颜迭以表论。宪宗谓弘使曰： 颖等违都统令，固当处死。
现代文：韩弘与李光颜相继上表论说此事，宪宗对韩弘之使者道： 田颖等人违反都统之令，本当处死。
English: Han Hong and Li Guangyan successively appeared on the table to discuss the matter, and the envoy of the Constitutional Court said to Han Hong: Tian Ying and others violated the order of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and should be executed.

古文：但光颜以其袭贼有功，亦可宥之。
现代文：但李光颜认为他们袭贼有功，也可宽赦。
English: However, Li Guangyan believed that they had done a good job of attacking the thieves and could be pardoned.

古文：军有三令五申，宜舍此以收来效。 
现代文：军队固然有三令五申，亦应放过这两人以收来日之效。 
English: Of course, the military has three orders and five orders, and these two people should also be released to collect the effect of the coming day.

古文：及以诏谕弘，弘不悦。
现代文：及至以诏宣谕韩弘，韩弘不悦。
English: Han Hong was displeased to the point of issuing an edict to Han Hong.

古文：十一年，光颜连败元济之众，拔贼凌云栅，宪宗大悦，赐其告捷者奴婢银锦。
现代文：元和十一年，李光颜连连击败吴元济军，攻取贼人之凌云栅。宪宗大悦，赐给告捷者以奴婢银锦。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Guangyan repeatedly defeated Wu Yuanji's army and captured the thief Lingyun Grate. Emperor Xianzong was very pleased and gave the victors slaves and silver brocade.

古文：进位检校尚书左仆射。
现代文：李光颜升迁检校尚书左仆射。
English: Li Guangyan's promotion and inspection of the school is still a left-handed shot.

古文：十二年四月，光颜败元济之众三万于郾城。其将张伯良奔于蔡州，杀其贼什二三，获马千匹，器甲三万联，皆画雷公符。仍书云： 速破城北军。 
现代文：元和十二年四月，李光颜在郾城击败吴元济三万军队，贼将张伯良逃向蔡州，官军杀死贼兵十分之二三，俘获战马千匹，兵器甲胄三万套，皆有雷公符咒，于是手谕道： 速破城北军。 
English: In April of the 12th year of the Yuan and the 12th year of the Heian, Li Guangyan defeated Wu Yuanji's 30,000-strong army in Shicheng, the thieves fled Chamberlain to Caizhou, the government army killed two-thirds of the thieves, captured a thousand horses, and 30,000 sets of armor, all of which had the thunder god's charm, so he ordered: Quickly break through the northern army of the city.

古文：寻而郾城守将邓怀金请以城降。光颜许之，而收郾城。
现代文：很快郾城守将邓怀金请求献地投降，李光颜准许他，遂收复郾城。
English: Soon, the defense of Handan asked Deng Huaijin to surrender, and Li Guangyan allowed him to do so, and then recaptured Handan.

古文：初，邓怀金以官军围青陵城，绝其归路，怀金惧，谋于郾城令董昌龄。
现代文：起初，邓怀金因官军围困青陵城，断其归路，邓怀金畏惧，同郾城县令董昌龄商议。
English: At first, Deng Huaijin was afraid of the official army besieging Qingling City and cutting off his way back, so he negotiated with Dong Changling, the governor of Lucheng County.

古文：昌龄母素诫其子令降，昌龄因此劝怀金归款于光颜，且曰： 城中之人，父母妻子皆质于蔡州，如不屈而降，则家尽屠矣。
现代文：董昌龄之母素来训诫儿子令他归降，董昌龄因此劝邓怀金归顺李光颜，并派人对李光颜说： 城中之人，父母妻儿皆在蔡州为人质，如不战而降，则家家斩尽杀绝。
English: Dong Changling's mother had always admonished her son to surrender, so Dong Changling persuaded Deng Huaijin to surrender to Li Guangyan, and sent a person to Li Guangyan to say: People in the city, parents, wives and children are all hostages in Caizhou. If you surrender without a fight, your family will be killed.

古文：请来攻城，我则举烽求救。
现代文：请来攻城，我们举烽火求救。
English: Please attack the city. We'll make a bonfire and call for help.

古文：救兵将至，官军逆击之必败，此时当以城降。 
现代文：救兵靠近时，官军迎头攻击必将其打败，此时定当献城投降。 
English: When the rescuers were approaching, the government army's head-on attack would surely defeat them, and at this time the city would be surrendered.

古文：光颜从之，贼果败走。
现代文：李光颜允从，贼兵果然败走。
English: Li Guangyan obeyed, and the bandits were defeated.

古文：于是昌龄执印，帅吏列于门外，怀金与诸将素服倒戈列于门内；光颜受降，乃入罗城，其城自坏五十余步。
现代文：于是董昌龄手捧印信率吏员列队于城门外，邓怀金与诸将脱下戎装放下戈矛，列队于城门内。李光颜受降，进入罗城，那城墙自己坍塌有五十余步长。
English: As a result, Dong Changling, holding a seal letter in his hand, and the clerk lined up outside the city gate. Deng Huijin and the generals took off their military uniforms, put down their spears, and lined up inside the city gate. Li Guangyan accepted the surrender and entered Luocheng. The city wall itself collapsed more than fifty steps long.

古文：时韩弘为汴帅，骄矜倔强。常倚贼势索朝廷姑息，恶光颜力战，阴图挠屈，计无所施。
现代文：当时韩弘为汴州统帅，骄矜倔强，常借用贼人攻守之势迫使朝廷姑息他，忌恨李光颜拼死作战，阴谋设计阻挠，可想不出办法。
English: At that time, Han Hong was the commander-in-chief of Zhangzhou. He was arrogant and stubborn. He often used the situation of a thief to attack and defend to force the court to appease him. He hated Li Guangyan to fight to the death, and could not think of a way to obstruct the conspiracy.

古文：遂举大梁城求得一美妇人，教以歌舞弦管六博之艺，饰之以珠翠金玉衣服之具，计费数百万，命使者送遗光颜，冀一见悦惑而怠于军政也。
现代文：于是选遍大梁城寻到一个美妇人，教给她歌舞弦管六博技艺，用珠翠金玉艳丽衣装打扮她，总计花费数百万钱，命使者将她送赠李光颜，指望李光颜一见便喜爱迷恋而懈怠军务。
English: So he searched all over Dalian City to find a beautiful woman, taught her the skills of singing and dancing, and dressed her in a glamorous costume of pearl and jade, spending a total of millions of money. The messenger of fate gave her to Li Guangyan, hoping that Li Guangyan would fall in love at first sight and slack off military affairs.

古文：使者即赍书先造光颜垒曰： 本使令公德公私爱，忧公暴露，欲进一妓，以慰公征役之思，谨以候命。 
现代文：使者立即携带书信先往李光颜军营通报： 本使令公私心爱公之德重，忧公之辛劳，欲进一妓，以慰劳公征役之思虑，敬候公命。 
English: The envoy immediately carried the letter to Li Guangyan's military camp to inform: This envoy has made the virtue of public and private love of the public, the toil of public anxiety, the desire to enter a prostitute, the thought of conscription as a consolation, and respect for public life.

古文：光颜曰： 今日已暮，明旦纳焉。 
现代文：李光颜道： 今日已晚，明日受纳。 
English: Li Guangyan said, "It's too late today. I'll be accepted tomorrow."

古文：诘朝，光颜乃大宴军士；三军咸集，命使者进妓。
现代文：次日早晨，李光颜大宴军士，三军尽皆聚集，命使者献上乐妓。
English: In the morning of the next day, Li Guangyan held a grand banquet for the soldiers. All three armies gathered, and the messenger of death presented a prostitute.

古文：妓至，则容止端丽，殆非人间所有，一座皆惊。
现代文：那乐妓到来果然容貌举止端庄秀丽，真非人间所有，满座皆惊。
English: When the courtesan arrived, her appearance and demeanor were indeed dignified and beautiful, which is truly something you can't find anywhere else in the world. The entire audience was shocked.

古文：光颜乃于座上谓来使曰： 令公怜光颜离家室久，舍美妓见赠，诚有以荷德也。
现代文：李光颜就在座席上对来使说： 令公怜悯光颜离家室日久，舍弃美妓赠我，确实当领此恩德。
English: On the seat, Li Guangyan said to the messenger: "It is a mercy to the public that Guangyan has been away from home for a long time and has given up the beautiful prostitute as a gift to me. I really should receive this grace.

古文：然光颜受国家恩深，誓不与逆贼同生日月下。
现代文：然而光颜受国家恩深，誓不与逆贼同生日月之下。
English: However, Guangyan was deeply favored by the country and vowed not to be under the same birthday month as the traitor.

古文：今战卒数万，皆背妻子，蹈白刃，光颜奈何以女色为乐？ 
现代文：现在数万战士，皆背妻离子，出生入死，光颜怎能以女色为乐？ 
English: Now there are tens of thousands of soldiers, all of whom have left their wives behind, from birth to death. How can a woman take pleasure in womanhood?

古文：言讫，涕泣呜咽。
现代文：言罢，涕泣呜咽。
English: Say it, sob sob sob.

古文：堂下兵士数万，皆感激流涕。
现代文：堂下兵士数万，皆感激流涕。
English: There are tens of thousands of soldiers here, and they are all so grateful.

古文：乃厚以缣帛酬其来使，俾领其妓自席上而回，谓使者曰： 为光颜多谢令公。
现代文：于是拿出丰厚的绢帛酬谢来使，让他领那美妓离席返程，对使者道： 替我多谢令公。
English: So he brought out a rich reward for the envoy, and asked him to lead the beautiful prostitute away from the table and back. He said to the envoy, "Thank you very much for me, my lord."

古文：光颜事君许国之心，死无贰矣！ 
现代文：光颜事君许国之心，至死不变！ 
English: The heart of the nation will remain unchanged until death!

古文：自此兵众之心，弥加激励。
现代文：从此军队的士气，更加激昂。
English: Since then, the morale of the army has become more passionate.

古文：及裴度至行营，率宾从于方城沱口观板筑、五沟。贼遽至，注弩挺刃，势将及度。光颜决战于前以却之。
现代文：及至裴度来到行营，率幕僚在方城沱口察看修筑城墙，五沟之贼人突至，搭弓举刃，形势危及裴度性命，李光颜挺身上前率兵死战打退了敌人。
English: When Pei Du arrived at the encampment, he led his staff to inspect the construction of the city wall at the entrance of the city gate. Thieves from the five ditches rushed in, raised their bows and raised their blades. The situation endangered Pei Du's life. Li Guangyan stepped forward and led the soldiers in a deadly battle to repel the enemy.

古文：时光颜预虑其来，先使田布以二百骑伏于沟中，出贼不意交击之，度方获免。
现代文：当时李光颜估计贼人可能前来，先派田布带领二百骑兵潜伏沟中，出其不意地袭击贼人，裴度才幸免于难。
English: At that time, Li Guangyan estimated that the thieves might come, and first sent Tianbu to lead two hundred cavalrymen to lurk in the ditch and attack the thieves unexpectedly. Only then did Pei Du survive.

古文：布又先扼其沟中归路，贼多弃骑越沟，相牵坠压而死者千余人。
现代文：田布又预先扼守沟中贼人归路，贼人多弃骑越沟而逃，结果互相牵掣坠沟压死者千余人。
English: Tabu also preemptively blocked the return route of the thieves in the ditch. Many of the thieves abandoned their horses and fled across the ditch. As a result, more than a thousand people were killed when they fell into the ditch.

古文：是日微光颜之救，度几陷矣。
现代文：这天若非李光颜相救，裴度几乎陷入贼手。
English: On this day, if not for Li Guangyan's help, Pei Du almost fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：是月，贼知光颜勇冠诸将，乃悉其众出当光颜之师。
现代文：当月，贼人了解到李光颜勇冠诸将，便派出全部兵力抵挡李光颜的军队。
English: That month, the bandits learned that Li Guangyan was the bravest of all generals, so they sent all their forces to resist Li Guangyan's army.

古文：时李愬乘其无备，急引兵袭蔡州，拔之，获元济。
现代文：此时李朔心乘其无备，火速率兵袭击蔡州，一举攻取，生俘吴元济。
English: At this time, Li Shuo's heart took advantage of his unpreparedness, the fire rate soldiers attacked Caizhou, captured it in one fell swoop, and captured Wu Yuanji alive.

古文：董重质弃洄曲军，入城降愬。
现代文：董重质抛弃洄曲之军，入城向李朔心投降。
English: Dong Jiechi abandoned the army of Xingqu and entered the city to surrender to Li Shuoxin.

古文：光颜知之，跃马入贼营，大呼以降，贼众万余人，皆解甲投戈请命。
现代文：李光颜闻知，跃马入贼营，大呼贼兵投降。贼兵万余人，皆解甲投戈等候发落。
English: When Li Guangyan heard the news, he leapt into the bandit camp and shouted loudly for the bandits to surrender. There were more than ten thousand bandits, all of whom were disarming and waiting for the battle to begin.

古文：贼平，加检校司空。
现代文：叛贼平定，李光颜加授检校司空。
English: The traitors were subdued, and Li Guangyan was promoted to the post of school inspector.

古文：十三年春，命中官宴光颜于居第，赐刍米二十余车。
现代文：元和十三年春，皇上命中官到李光颜居宅赐宴，并赐给刍米二十余车。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Yuan and the 13th year of the Heian, the Emperor's Lieutenant-General went to Li Guangyan's residence to give a banquet, and gave him more than 20 cars of glutinous rice.

古文：宪宗又御麟德殿召对，赐金带锦彩。
现代文：宪宗又于麟德殿召见，赐金带锦彩。
English: Emperor Gensong also summoned him to the Lin De Hall and gave him a gold band and a gold necklace.

古文：朝廷东讨李师道，授光颜义成军节度使。
现代文：朝廷东征李师道，授李光颜义成军节度使。
English: The imperial court sent Li Shidao to the East, and conferred Li Guangyan as the envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：至镇，寻赴行营。
现代文：至镇，立即奔赴行营。
English: to the town and immediately went to the camp.

古文：数旬之内，再败贼军于濮阳，杀戮数千人，进军深入。
现代文：数十日内，两度击败贼军于濮阳，杀死数千人，率军深入贼后方。
English: Within dozens of days, he twice defeated the bandit army in Shenyang, killed thousands of people, and led the army deep into the bandit rear.

古文：十四年，西蕃入寇，移授邠宁节度使。
现代文：元和十四年，西蕃入寇，李光颜改授宁节度使。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Xicheng was invaded by the invaders, Li Guangyan was awarded the post of Ning Festival envoy.

古文：时盐州为吐蕃所毁，命李文悦为刺史，令光颜充勾当修筑盐州城使。仍许以陈许六千人随赴邠宁。
现代文：当时盐州城被吐蕃毁坏，朝廷命李文悦为刺史，令李光颜充任勾当修筑盐州城使，依例准许随带陈许六千人赴宁。
English: At that time, Yanzhou City was destroyed by Tu Wei. The imperial court appointed Li Wenyue as the chief historian, and ordered Li Guangyan to take charge of the work of building Yanzhou City. According to the rules, he was allowed to take six thousand people to Ning with Chen Xu.

古文：是岁，吐蕃侵泾原。
现代文：那年，吐蕃侵泾原。
English: That year, Tibet invaded Tibet.

古文：自田缙镇夏州，以贪猥侵挠党项羌，乃引吐蕃入寇。
现代文：自从田缙镇守夏州，因贪赃卑下侵扰党项羌，羌人便引吐蕃入寇。
English: Since Tianyao Town had been in charge of Xiazhou, and because of their corruption and lowliness, they had interfered with the Party's affairs, the people of Tianyao were induced to invade Xiazhou.

古文：及蕃军攻泾州，边将郝玼血战始退。
现代文：及至吐蕃军进攻泾州，边将郝王此血战才使其退却。
English: When the Tubo army attacked Bozhou, it was only after this bloody battle that the king of Bozhou was forced to retreat.

古文：初，光颜闻贼攻泾州，料兵赴救，邠师喧然曰： 人给五十千而不识战阵，彼何人也！
现代文：起初，李光颜闻知贼攻泾州，部署军队前往援救，宁驻军喧然而议说： 一人供给五十千而不识战阵，那是什么人呀！
English: At first, Li Guangyan heard that thieves were attacking Zhangzhou and deployed troops to rescue them. Ning Garrison noisily argued: One person supplies fifty thousand without knowing the battle line, what kind of person is that!

古文：常额衣资不得而前蹈白刃，此何人也！ 
现代文：正常规定的衣物资用得不到却要前去迎着白刃，这又是什么人哪！ 
English: What kind of person is it who cannot afford the clothing and supplies normally required, but has to go out and face the blade?

古文：愤声恟々不可遏。
现代文：汹汹然愤恨不可遏止。
English: The rage is unstoppable.

古文：光颜素得士心，曲为陈说大义，言发涕流。三军感之，亦泣下，乃欣然即路，击贼退之。
现代文：李光颜素来颇得军心，此时委婉陈说大义，言出流涕，三军为之感动，也流下眼泪，于是欣然出发，击退了贼人。
English: Li Guangyan has always had a strong military spirit. At this time, he spoke eloquently, and the three armies were moved and shed tears, so they gladly set out to repel the thieves.

古文：穆宗即位，就加特进，仍与一子四品正员官。
现代文：穆宗即位，加授李光颜特进，依例给其子四品正员官。
English: Mu Zong was enthroned, Li Guangyan was given a special promotion, and his son was given four official ranks as usual.

古文：寻诏赴阙，赐开化里第，进加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：不久诏令赴阙，赐予开化里宅第，进升加职同中书门下平章事。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict was issued to go to Xing, and he was given the residence of Kaifu, promoted to a higher position, and given the title of a scholar.

古文：穆宗以光颜功冠诸将，故召赴阙，宴赐优给。
现代文：穆宗因李光颜功冠诸将，故召之赴阙，赐宴优赏。
English: Mu Zong invited Li Guangyan, the most decorated general, to the banquet and gave him a prize.

古文：已而带平章复镇，所以报勋臣也。
现代文：随即带着平章官职回到镇署，这是对勋臣的报偿呀。
English: He then returned to the town office with the title of civil servant, which was his reward.

古文：长庆初，迁凤翔节度使，依前检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：长庆初，调任凤翔节度使，依旧检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, Feng Xiang was transferred to the post of the festival envoy, and he was still the inspector of the school, and the book gate of the same school.

古文：岁末，复授许州节度使。
现代文：年底，又授许州节度使。
English: At the end of the year, he was also awarded the title of State Counselor.

古文：朝廷以光颜昔镇陈许，颇得士心，将讨镇、冀，故有此拜。
现代文：朝廷因李光颜从前镇守陈许颇得人心，正欲讨伐镇州、冀州，故有这次授职。
English: The imperial court wanted to subjugate Zhenzhou and Jizhou because Li Guangyan, the former town guard Chen Xu, was very popular. This is why she was given this post.

古文：赴镇日，宰相百僚以故事送别于章敬寺，穆宗御通化门临送之，赐锦彩、银器、良马、玉带等物。
现代文：李光颜赴镇之日，宰相百官按例在章化寺送别，穆宗驾临通化门送行，赐给锦彩、银器、良马、玉带等物。
English: On the day of Li Guangyan's visit to the town, the prime minister and hundreds of officials sent their farewells at Zhanghua Temple as usual, and Mu Zong drove to the Tonghua Gate to see them off, giving them brocade, silverware, fine horses, jade belts and other items.

古文：二年，讨王廷凑，命光颜兼深州行营诸军节度使。
现代文：长庆二年，讨伐王廷凑，朝廷命李光颜兼任深州行营诸军节度使。
English: In the second year of the Changqing Emperor's reign, Li Guangyan was appointed by the imperial court to serve as the envoy of the troops marching to Shenzhou for the festival.

古文：光颜既受命而行，悬军讨贼，艰于馈运。朝廷又以沧、景、德、棣等州俾之兼管，以其邻贼之郡，可便飞挽。
现代文：李光颜受命后即出兵讨贼，孤军深入，粮饷运送艰难，朝廷又将沧、景、德、棣等州划与李光颜兼管，因诸州与贼郡邻近，便于急速运送。
English: After receiving the order, Li Guangyan immediately dispatched troops to deal with the bandits. The isolated army was deep, and it was difficult to transport the grain. The imperial court also divided Cang, Jing, De, and Handan into provinces under the control of Li Guangyan. Because the provinces were close to the bandit counties, it was easy to quickly transport the grain.

古文：光颜以朝廷制置乖方，贼帅连结，未可朝夕平定，事若差跌，即前功悉弃，乃恳辞兼镇。
现代文：李光颜认为朝廷处置失当，贼帅相互勾连，不能短时间平定。如果自己行事有差错，就会前功尽弃，于是恳切推辞兼管方镇之职。
English: Li Guangyan thought that the imperial court's handling was improper, and the thieves were in collusion with each other, and could not be calmed down in a short time. If he made a mistake, he would give up his previous achievements, so he sincerely resigned from the post of being in charge of Fangzhen.

古文：寻以疾作，表祈归镇。
现代文：不久因疾病发作，上表祈请归镇。
English: Due to the onset of illness soon, please return to the town.

古文：朝廷果讨贼无功而赦廷凑。
现代文：朝廷果然讨贼无功而赦免了王廷凑。
English: As expected, the imperial court pardoned Wang Tingzhu.

古文：四年，敬宗即位，正拜司徒。
现代文：长庆四年，敬宗即位，正式拜李光颜为司徒。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Nagakute, Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, and officially made Li Guangyan a disciple.

古文：汴州李絺逐其帅叛，诏光颜率陈许之师讨之。
现代文：汴州李宀介跟随主帅叛乱，诏令李光颜率陈许之师讨伐。
English: Zhangzhou Li Xunkai followed the coach's rebellion and ordered Li Guangyan to lead Chen Xu's division in a crusade.

古文：营于尉氏，俄而诛絺。
现代文：扎营于尉氏，随即诛杀李宀介。
English: He encamped at Jo's, and then killed Lee Sun-suk.

古文：迁太原尹、北京留守、河东节度使，进阶开府仪同三司，仍于正衙受册司徒兼侍中。
现代文：升太原尹、北京留守、河东节度使，进阶开府仪同三司，便于宣政殿册封司徒兼侍中。
English: He was promoted to Taiyuan Yin, Beijing left-behind, and Hedong Festival envoy, and advanced to Kaifu Yi and three divisions, which was convenient for the proclamation of the dynasty.

古文：二年九月卒，年六十六，废朝三日，赠太尉，谥曰忠。
现代文：宝历二年九月李光颜去世，年六十六，停止上朝三日，追赠太尉，谥号为 忠 。
English: Li Guangyan died in September of the second year of the Baoli calendar, 66 years old, stopped ascending to the third day, posthumously awarded the rank of captain, and his nickname was Zhong.

