古文：太宗初践阼，即于正殿之左置弘文馆，精选天下文儒，令以本官兼署学士，给以五品珍膳，更日宿直，以听朝之隙引入内殿，讨论坟典，商略政事，或至夜分乃罢。
现代文：唐太宗刚刚即位不久，就在正殿左侧设置了弘文馆，精心挑选天下通晓儒学的人士，保留他们现任的官职，并兼任弘文馆学士，供给他们五品官员才能享用的精美的膳食，排定当值的日子，并让他们在宫内歇息留宿。唐太宗在上朝听政的间隙时间，就把他们引进内殿，讨论古代典籍，商议谋划政事，有时到半夜才停歇。
English: Not long after his accession to the throne, Emperor Taizong of Tang set up the Confucian Library on the left side of the main hall. He carefully selected people who were well versed in Confucianism from all over the world, retained their current official positions, and also served as scholars of the Library. He provided them with exquisite meals that only five-star officials could enjoy, scheduled their days of duty, and let them rest and stay in the palace. When Emperor Taizong of Tang listened to politics in the last dynasty, he brought them into the inner hall to discuss ancient classics, discuss and plan political affairs, and sometimes stopped until midnight.

古文：又诏勋贤三品以上子孙为弘文学生。
现代文：后来，他又下诏让三品以上的皇亲贵族、贤臣良将的子孙充任弘文馆学生。
English: Later, he also issued an edict to let the descendants of the imperial relatives, nobles, and wise generals with more than three court ranks serve as students of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：贞观二年，诏停周公为先圣，始立孔子庙堂于国学，稽式旧典，以仲尼为先圣，颜子为先师，两边俎豆干戚之容，始备于兹矣。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗下令停止尊崇周公为先圣，在国子监里建立孔子庙堂，查考典籍并依照过去的规定，尊崇孔子为先圣，颜子为先师。在孔子庙堂里，供台两边祭祀用的俎豆、干戚等礼具和乐舞之具也开始齐备。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered to stop honoring Zhou Gongru as the first saint, and to establish a Confucius temple hall in Guozi Prison, to examine the classics and, in accordance with the previous regulations, to honor Confucius as the first saint and Yan Zi as the first teacher. In the Confucius temple hall, ceremonial tools such as peas and dried cicadas and music and dance tools for use in rituals on both sides of the Taiwan Strait were also prepared.

古文：是岁大收天下儒士，赐帛给传，令诣京师，擢以不次，布在廊庙者甚众。
现代文：这一年，唐太宗还招纳大批天下儒士，赏赐给他们布帛，供给车马食宿，下令他们都集聚到京师。这些儒生大都被破格提升为大小不等的官，在朝廷上任官的很多。
English: In the same year, Emperor Taizong also recruited a large number of Confucian scholars from all over the world, rewarded them with cloth, provided them with carriages, horses, food and lodging, and ordered them all to gather in Beijing. These Confucian scholars were all promoted to officials of all sizes, and many of them served as officials in the imperial court.

古文：学生通一大经以上，咸得署吏。
现代文：太学生如果读通一大经以上的经书，就可以入仕做官。
English: If students read through more than one major scripture, they can become officials.

古文：国学增筑学舍四百余间，国子、太学、四门、广文亦增置生员，其书、算各置博士、学生，以备众艺。
现代文：在这之后，国子监增益学舍四百多间，国子学、太学、四门学、广文馆也增加了学生的名额。另外，书学、算学分别设置了博士和学生，使国学的各种技艺都设置齐备了。
English: Since then, the number of students has been increased in more than 400 schools by the State Children's Supervisor, and the number of students has been increased in the State Children's School, the Tai School, the Four Schools, and the Guangwu School. In addition, Ph.D. students and students have been set up separately in calligraphy and mathematics, so that all kinds of skills in Chinese studies have been set up.

古文：太宗又数幸国学，令祭酒、司业、博士讲论，毕，各赐以束帛。
现代文：唐太宗还几次亲临国子监，叫祭酒、司业、博士讲说经术，讲毕，每人赐给帛一束。
English: On several occasions, Emperor Taizong of Tang personally visited the provincial overseer and ordered the sacrificial wine, the overseer and the doctor to finish the sutra recitation. Each of them was given a bunch of gourds.

古文：四方儒生负书而至者，盖以千数。
现代文：儒学之盛，致使全国各地的儒生纷纷携经书前往京城，人数达数千之多。
English: With Confucianism flourishing, thousands of Confucian students from all over the country have come to Beijing with their scriptures.

古文：俄而吐蕃及高昌、高丽、新罗等诸夷酋长，亦遣子弟请入于学。
现代文：不久，吐蕃和高昌、高丽、新罗等族的首领，也派子弟到长安求学。
English: Soon, the chiefs of the Tubo, Gaochang, Goryeo, Silla and other ethnic groups also sent their children to study in Chang'an.

古文：于是国学之内，鼓箧升讲筵者，几至万人，儒学之兴，古昔未有也。
现代文：于是，国子监之内，带着书箱和登上讲席的，几乎有上万人，如此大兴儒学，在古代还不曾有过。
English: As a result, there were almost tens of thousands of people in the Guozijian, carrying bookcases and climbing onto the lecterns. Such a large-scale promotion of Confucianism had never been seen before in ancient times.

古文：贞观十四年诏曰： 梁皇侃、褚仲都，周熊安生、沈重，陈沈文阿、周弘正、张讥，隋何妥、刘炫，并前代名儒，经术可纪，加以所在学徒，多行其讲疏，宜加优赏，以劝后生，可访其子孙见在者，录姓名奏闻。 
现代文：贞观十四年，唐太宗下诏说： 梁代的皇侃、褚仲都，北周的熊安生、沈重，陈代的沈文阿、周弘正、张讥，隋代的何妥、刘炫，都是前代的著名儒生，他们精通经术，广收门徒，对经书有许多继承和发展，应该对他们加以赏赐，以鼓励后学之士，还应当寻访他们的后人。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict saying: Wang Kan and Xing Zhongdu of the Liang Dynasty, Xiong Ansheng and Shen Chong of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Shen Wen'a, Zhou Hongzheng and Zhang Qian of the Chen Dynasty, and He Tuo and Liu Xuan of the Sui Dynasty were all famous Confucian scholars of the previous generation. They were proficient in the study of scripture, had a large number of disciples, and had a lot of inheritance and development of scripture. They should be rewarded in order to encourage later scholars, and their descendants should also be visited.

古文：二十一年诏曰： 左丘明、卜子夏、公羊高、谷梁赤、伏胜、高堂生、戴圣、毛苌、孔安国、刘向、郑众、杜子春、马融、卢植、郑玄、服虔、何休、王肃、王弼、杜预、范宁等二十有一人，并用其书，垂于国胄，既行其道，理合褒崇。
现代文：请有关部门把他们的姓名记录下来，上奏朝廷。 贞观二十一年，唐太宗又下诏说： 左丘明、卜子夏、公羊高、穀梁赤、伏胜、高堂生、戴圣、毛苌、孔安国、刘向、郑众、杜子春、马融、卢植、郑玄、服虔、何休、王肃、王弼、杜预、范宁等二十一人，他们注解经书的著作都被采用，教育太学里的学生，既然遵循他们的学说，理应给予褒扬和尊崇。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong issued another edict: Zuo Qiuming, Bu Zixia, Gong Yang Gao, Gu Liang Chia, Fusheng, Gaodang Sheng, Dai Sheng, Mao Qian, Kong An Guo, Liu Xiang, Zheng Zhong, Du Zichun, Ma Rong, Lu Zhi, Zheng Xuan, Fu Qian, He Xiu, Wang Su, Wang Yao, Du Yuan, Fan Ning and other twenty-one people, their works of commenting on scriptures have been adopted, and students in education, since they follow their doctrine, should be commended and respected.

古文：自今有事于太学，可并配享尼父庙堂。 
现代文：从现在起，太学里凡举行祭祀之典时，可使他们配享孔子庙堂。 
English: From now on, whenever a religious ceremony is held in Taishu, they can enjoy the Confucius Temple.

古文：其尊儒重道如此。
现代文：太宗就是这样尊儒重道的。
English: This is how Taizong respected Confucianism.

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 为政之要，惟在得人。用非其才，必难致治。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 治国的关键，在于使用合适的人才；用人不当，就必然难以治理好国家。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: The key to governing the country lies in the use of suitable talents; if you employ people improperly, it will inevitably be difficult to govern the country well.

古文：今所任用，必须以德行、学识为本。 
现代文：如今，任用人才必须以德行、学识为本。 
English: Nowadays, the appointment of talents must be based on virtue and knowledge.

古文：谏议大夫王珪曰： 人臣若无学业，不能识前言往行，岂堪大任？
现代文：谏议大夫王珪说： 臣子如果没有学问，不能记住前人的言行，怎能担当大任呢？
English: Wang Qi, the doctor of the imperial court, said: "If a courtier has no learning and cannot remember the words and deeds of his predecessors, how can he take on a great responsibility?

古文：汉昭帝时，有人诈称卫太子，聚观者数万人，众皆致惑。
现代文：汉昭帝时，有人冒充卫太子，围观的人达到好几万，大家都不知道该怎么办。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zhao, someone pretended to be the crown prince, and the number of onlookers reached tens of thousands. Everyone did not know what to do.

古文：隽不疑断以蒯聩之事。
现代文：后来，大臣隽不疑用古代蒯聩的先例来处理，将那个人逮捕。
English: Later, the Minister of Justice no doubt used the precedent of ancient justice to deal with and arrest that person.

古文：昭帝曰： 公卿大臣，当用经术明于古义者，此则固非刀笔俗吏所可比拟。  
现代文：对此，汉昭帝说： 公卿大臣，应当由通晓经术、懂得古义的人来担任，这本不是俗吏之辈所能相比的。  
English: In response, Emperor Han Zhao said, "The post of court noble and minister should be held by a person who is well versed in the scriptures and understands the ancient meaning. This is not comparable to that of a commoner.

古文：上曰： 信如卿言。 
现代文：太宗说： 确实像你所说的那样。 
English: Taizong said, "It really is as you say.

古文：贞观四年，太宗以经籍去圣久远，文字讹谬，诏前中书侍郎颜师古于秘书省考定五经。
现代文：贞观四年，唐太宗认为古代圣人的时代离现在很远，圣人的经典在后世流传的过程中，出现了很多文字讹误，难以考证。于是，唐太宗下令前中书侍郎颜师古在秘书省考订《五经》。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang believed that the era of the ancient saints was far away from the present, and the classics of the saints in the process of being passed down to future generations, there were many textual errors, which were difficult to verify. Therefore, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered Yan Shigu, the former secretary of the Central Committee, to revise the "Five Classics" in the secretary province.

古文：及功毕，复诏尚书左仆射房玄龄集诸儒重加详议。
现代文：考订完毕之后，又下令尚书左仆射房玄龄召集许多儒生再次详细讨论、审定。
English: After the examination was completed, he also ordered Shangshu's left-hand man, Shefang Xuanling, to convene many Confucians to discuss and approve it in detail again.

古文：时诸儒传习师说，舛谬已久，皆共非之，异端蜂起。
现代文：当时，这些儒生拘泥于旧说，而这些旧说错乱讹误相传已久，他们都不同意颜师古的考订，一时之间，各种异说蜂起。
English: At that time, these Confucians clung to the old saying, and these old sayings have been passed down for a long time. They all disagreed with Yan Shigu's examination, and all kinds of dissent arose.

古文：而师古辄引晋、宋以来古本，随方晓答，援据详明，皆出其意表，诸儒莫不叹服。
现代文：但是，颜师古引用晋、宋以来古本，对他们提出的疑义一一引经据典，详细地加以说明，使得这些儒生无不叹服。
English: However, Yan Shigu quoted ancient texts from the Jin and Song dynasties, and explained in detail the doubts raised about them, citing scriptures one by one, which made these Confucian scholars all impressed.

古文：太宗称善者久之，赐帛五百匹，加授通直散骑常侍，颁其所定书于天下，令学者习焉。
现代文：唐太宗对颜师古的学识也大为称赞，赏赐给他帛五百匹，加授他为通直散骑常侍，还将他考订的经书颁行天下，让读书人都来学习。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang greatly praised Yan Shigu's knowledge and rewarded him with 500 horses, as well as teaching him to be a horseback riding attendant. He also issued his examination book to the world, so that readers could study it.

古文：太宗又以文学多门，章句繁杂，诏师古与国子祭酒孔颖达等诸儒，撰定五经疏义，凡一百八十卷，名曰《五经正义》，付国学施行。
现代文：后来，唐太宗又因为经术师承不同，解释各异，下令颜师古和国子祭酒孔颖达等大儒，撰写《五经》的疏义，共一百八十卷，名为《五经正义》，交付国子监作教材使用。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered Yan Shigu and Kong Yingda, a great Confucian scholar, to write a 180-volume treatise on the Five Classics, called the Five Classics of Justice, and to submit it to Guo Zi for use as a textbook.

古文：太宗尝谓中书令岑文本曰： 夫人虽禀定性，必须博学以成其道，亦犹蜃性含水，待月光而水垂；木性怀火，待燧动而焰发；人性含灵，待学成而为美。
现代文：唐太宗曾对中书令岑文本说： 人虽然秉有一定的天性，但必须博学才能有所成就。就好比蜃的本性含有水，要见到月光才能吐水；木的本性含有火，但要燧石敲打才能发火。人的本性含有灵气，可是要通过学习，才能美好完善。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty once said to the text of the Chinese book of edicts: Although people have a certain nature, they must be erudite to achieve something. Just as the nature of the earthworm contains water, it can only spit out water when it sees the moonlight; the nature of the tree contains fire, but it can only be ignited by striking the flint. Human nature contains aura, but it can only be perfected through learning.

古文：是以苏秦刺股，董生垂帷。
现代文：所以历史上有苏秦刺股读书，董仲舒放下帷帐讲学的美谈。
English: Therefore, there is a beautiful story in history about Su Qin's reading and Dong Zhongshu's lecturing.

古文：不勤道艺，则其名不立。 
现代文：不勤奋于道艺，功名是不会树立的。 
English: If you are not diligent in Taoism, you will not be able to establish a reputation.

古文：文本对曰： 夫人性相近，情则迁移，必须以学饬情，以成其性。
现代文：岑文本回答说： 人的本性都很相近，情趣却有所差别，必须用学习来修养情趣，使本性完善。
English: The scribe replied, "Human natures are very similar, but people's tastes are different. People must cultivate their tastes and perfect their natures through study.

古文：《礼》云： 玉不琢不成器，人不学不知道。 
现代文：《礼记》说： 玉石不经雕琢就不会成为器具，人不学习就不会懂得道理。 
English: "Li Ji" said: If the jade is not carved, it will not become a tool. If people do not study, they will not understand the truth.

古文：所以古人勤于学问，谓之懿德。 
现代文：所以古人以勤于学习为美德。 
English: Therefore, the ancients regarded diligence in learning as a virtue.

