古文：起玄黓敦牂，尽昭阳协洽，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋元帝永昌元年
English: A total of two years. From the reign of Emperor Jin to the first year of Emperor Yongchang

古文：中宗元皇帝下永昌元年春，正月，郭璞复上疏，请因皇孙生，下赦令，帝从之。
现代文：春季，正月，郭璞再次上疏，请求以元帝皇孙司马衍出世为契机，颁布赦免令，元帝允准。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Guo Gan again went to the emperor and asked him to take the birth of the former emperor's grandson Sima Yan as an opportunity to issue a pardon, which the former emperor granted.

古文：乙卯，大赦，改元。
现代文：乙卯，大赦天下罪犯，改年号为永昌。
English: Second, the world's criminals were amnestied, and the year name was changed to Yongchang.

古文：王敦以璞为记室参军。璞善卜筮，知敦必为乱，己预其祸，甚忧之。
现代文：王敦任用郭璞为记室参军，郭璞擅长卜筮之术，知道王敦必定会作乱，自己将被牵连进灾祸中，为此深深忧虑。
English: Wang Dun appointed Guo Wei as a recorder to join the army. Guo Wei was good at divination. He knew that Wang Dun would certainly make trouble and that he would be involved in the disaster. He was deeply worried about this.

古文：大将军掾颖川陈述卒，璞哭之极哀，曰： 嗣祖，焉知非福也！ 
现代文：王敦大将军府的僚属、颍川人陈述去世，郭璞痛哭欲绝，说： 陈述，你的辞世焉知非福呢！ 
English: Wang Dun's colleague from the General's Office, a person from Luochuan, reported his death. Guo Wei cried bitterly and said: "Report, your death is nothing but a blessing!

古文：敦既与朝廷乖离，乃羁录朝士有时望者，置己幕府，以羊曼及陈国谢鲲为长史。
现代文：王敦已经与朝廷离心离德，于是羁留、录用当朝有名望的士人，安置在自己的幕府。任用羊曼以及陈国人谢鲲为长史。
English: Wang Dun had already parted ways with the imperial court, so he detained and hired the most prestigious officials of the time and placed them in his own shogunate. He had a long history of appointing Yang Man and Chen Guozhong Xie Yao.

古文：曼，祜之兄孙也。
现代文：羊曼是羊祜兄长的孙子。
English: Sheepman is the grandson of Sheep's elder brother.

古文：曼、鲲终日酣醉，故敦不委以事。
现代文：羊曼、谢鲲终日饮酒酣醉，所以王敦并不委派他们从事具体事务。
English: Sheepman and Xie Jun were drunk all day, so Wang Dun did not assign them to engage in specific affairs.

古文：敦将作乱，谓鲲曰： 刘隗奸邪，将危社稷，吾欲除君侧之恶，何如？ 
现代文：王敦准备作乱，对谢鲲说： 刘隗奸佞邪恶，将会危害国家，我打算除去君王身边的这个恶人，怎么样？ 
English: Wang Dun was preparing to start a riot and said to Xie Yao: Liu Yao is a traitor and evil and will harm the country. I plan to get rid of this evil person around the king. How about it?

古文：鲲曰： 隗诚始祸，然城狐社鼠。 
现代文：谢鲲说： 刘隗的确是祸乱之源，但他是藏于城中之狐、匿于社木之鼠，有皇帝的庇护。 
English: Xie Wei said: Liu Wei is indeed the source of the calamity, but he is a fox hiding in the city, a rat hiding in the shrubbery, and has the protection of the emperor.

古文：敦怒曰： 君庸才，岂达大体！ 
现代文：王敦发怒说： 你是庸碌之才，哪里懂得事关大局的道理！ 
English: Wang Dun said angrily: You are a mediocre talent, how can you understand the truth of the overall situation!

古文：出为豫章太守，又留不遣。
现代文：便派谢鲲出任豫章太守，后又羁留谢鲲，不让他到任。
English: He then sent Xie Jun to serve as the governor of Yuzhang, and later detained Xie Jun to prevent him from taking up the post.

古文：戊辰，敦举兵于武昌，上疏罪状刘隗，称： 隗佞邪谗贼，威福自由，妄兴事役，劳扰士民，赋役烦重，怨声盈路。
现代文：戊辰，王敦在武昌举兵，给元帝上疏罗列刘隗的罪状，内称： 刘隗奸佞邪恶，谗言惑众，残害忠良，作威作福。随意发起事端，动用百姓服劳役，士民疲惫扰苦，赋税和劳役负担繁重，怨声载道。
English: Wucheng and Wang Dun raised an army in Wuchang and listed Liu Bei's crimes to the Yuan Emperor, saying: Liu Bei was a traitor and evil, he slandered and misled the public, he harmed the loyal and good, he was a tyrant and spoiled the good. He caused trouble at will, he used the people to perform labor service, he made the people tired and troubled, he had a heavy tax and labor service burden, and his reputation was tarnished.

古文：臣备位宰辅，不可坐视成败，辄进军致讨。
现代文：我担任宰辅的职位，不能对此无动于衷，于是进军声讨。
English: I hold the position of deputy director, and I cannot remain indifferent to this, so I went to investigate.

古文：隗首朝悬，诸军夕退。
现代文：倘若刘隗早上授首，众军傍晚即退。
English: If Liu Bei were to be beheaded in the morning, the troops would withdraw in the evening.

古文：昔太甲颠覆厥度，幸纳伊尹之忠，殷道复昌。
现代文：往昔商朝天子太甲败坏国家制度，幸好接纳了伊尹忠诚无私的处置，才使商朝国运重新昌盛。
English: In the past, the Shang Dynasty Emperor Taiga corrupted the national system, but fortunately accepted the loyal and selfless disposition of Yi Yin, which made the Shang Dynasty national movement flourish again.

古文：愿陛下深垂三思，则四海乂安，社稷永固矣。 
现代文：我希望陛下再三深思，那么将会四海安宁，国家长存。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will think about it again and again, so that there will be peace in the four seas and the country will last forever.

古文：沈充亦起兵于吴兴以应敦，敦以充为大都督、督护东吴诸军事。
现代文：沈充也在吴兴起兵与王敦相呼应，王敦任沈充为大都督、督护东吴地区军事事务。
English: Shenchong also echoed Wang Dun in the rise of soldiers in Wu, and Wang Dun appointed Shenchong as the grand governor and overseer of military affairs in the East Wu region.

古文：敦至芜湖，又上表罪状刁协。
现代文：王敦到达芜湖，又上表罗列刁协的罪状。
English: When Wang Dun arrived at Wuhu, he again listed the charges against Yu Xie.

古文：帝大怒，乙亥，诏曰： 王敦凭恃宠灵，敢肆狂逆，方朕太甲，欲见幽囚。
现代文：元帝勃然大怒，乙亥，下诏说： 王敦凭仗国家对他的恩宠，竞敢肆行狂妄、叛逆之事，把朕比作太甲，想把我幽禁起来。
English: The Yuan Emperor flew into a rage, and issued the following edict: Wang Dun, by virtue of the state's favor to him, dared to commit acts of arrogance and rebellion, likened me to Taiga, and wanted to imprison me.

古文：是可忍也，孰不可忍！
现代文：是可忍，孰不可忍！
English: It is bearable, it is unbearable!

古文：今亲帅六军以诛大逆，有杀敦者，封五千户侯。 
现代文：我现在亲自统帅六军前去诛戮这个大叛贼，有谁能杀掉王敦，封为五千户侯。 
English: I am now personally in command of the six armies to go and kill this great traitor. Who can kill Wang Dun and be awarded the title of five thousand households.

古文：敦兄光录勋含乘轻舟逃归于敦。
现代文：王敦的兄长、光禄勋王含乘坐轻便小舟逃回到王敦身边。
English: Wang Dun's elder brother, Guanglu Xun Wang Han, fled to Wang Dun's side in a small boat.

古文：太子中庶子温峤谓仆射周顗曰： 大将军此举似有所在，当无滥邪？ 
现代文：太子中庶子温峤对仆射周说： 大将军王敦这么做似乎有一定原因，应当不算过分吧？ 
English: The prince's middle son and son-in-law, Wen Xuan, said to the footman Zhou: General Wang Dun seems to have a certain reason for doing this. Shouldn't it be considered excessive?

古文：顗曰： 不然。
现代文：周说： 不对。
English: Zhou said, "That's not right."

古文：人主自非尧、舜，何能无失，人臣安可举兵以胁之！
现代文：人主本来就不是尧、舜那样的圣人，怎么能没有过失呢？作为人臣，怎么可以举兵来胁迫君王！
English: The Lord of men is not a saint like Zhai and Zhai, so how can He be without fault? As a vassal, how can He raise an army to coerce the king?

古文：举动如此，岂得云非乱乎！
现代文：如此举动，哪能说不是叛乱呢！
English: How can such an act not be called a rebellion?

古文：处仲狼抗无上，其意宁有限邪！ 
现代文：王敦傲慢暴戾，目无主上，他的欲望难道会有止境吗！ 
English: Wang Dun is arrogant and violent, with no master in sight. Will there be an end to his desires?

古文：敦初起兵，遣使告梁州刺史甘卓，约与之俱下，卓许之。
现代文：王敦开始起兵时，派使者告诉梁州刺史甘卓，与他相约共同顺长江向下游进发，甘卓同意了。
English: When Wang Dun began to raise an army, he sent an envoy to tell the governor of Liangzhou, Gan Zhuo, to make an appointment with him to march down the Yangtze River together, and Gan Zhuo agreed.

古文：及敦升舟，而卓不赴，使参军孙双诣武昌谏止敦。
现代文：等到王敦登船，甘卓却不来，派参军孙双到武昌劝阻王敦。
English: When Wang Dun boarded the ship, Ganzhuo did not come, but sent Sun Shuang to Wuchang to dissuade Wang Dun.

古文：敦惊曰： 甘侯前与吾语云何，而更有异？
现代文：王敦惊诧地说： 甘卓过去是和我怎么说的，怎么又改变主意了？
English: Wang Dun said in surprise, "Gandru told me what to do in the past, why did he change his mind?

古文：正当虑吾危朝廷耳！
现代文：他是顾忌我危害朝廷吧！
English: He's afraid I'll endanger the imperial court!

古文：吾今但除奸凶，若事济，当以甘侯作公。 
现代文：我现在只想除去奸凶，如果事成，我将让甘卓当公爵。 
English: All I want now is to get rid of the traitors, and if I succeed, I will make Gundotra a duke.

古文：双还报，卓意狐疑。
现代文：孙双回去报知甘卓，甘卓心里犹豫不决。
English: Sun Shuang went back to report to Guanzhuo. Guanzhuo hesitated.

古文：或说卓： 且伪许敦，待敦至都而讨之。 
现代文：有人劝甘卓说： 暂且佯装答应王敦，等王敦到了京都再征讨他。 
English: Someone advised Gan Zhuo to pretend to agree to Wang Dun for the time being, and wait for Wang Dun to come to Kyoto to recruit him.

古文：卓曰： 昔陈敏之乱，吾先从而后图之，论者谓吾惧逼而思变，心常愧之。
现代文：甘卓说： 往昔陈敏作乱，我先是随从，后来图谋反击，论说此事的人都说我是害怕逼迫，因而改变立场，我心中常感愧赧。
English: Guanzhuo said: In the past, Chen Min caused chaos, I first followed, and then tried to fight back. People who discussed this matter said that I was afraid of persecution, so I changed my position. I often felt ashamed.

古文：今若复尔，何以自明！ 
现代文：这回如果再这样做，怎样才能自我表白呢！ 
English: If I do it again, how can I prove myself?

古文：卓使人以敦旨告顺阳太守魏该，该曰： 我所以起兵拒胡贼者，正欲忠于王室耳。
现代文：甘卓派人把王敦的意图告诉顺阳太守魏该，魏该说： 我之所以起兵抗击胡人寇贼，正因想效忠王室而已。
English: Gan Zhuo sent someone to inform Shunyang's governor Wei Jia of Wang Dun's intention. Wei Jia said, "The reason why I raised an army to fight against the Hu people's bandits was precisely because I wanted to be loyal to the royal family."

古文：今王公举兵向天子，非吾所宜与也。 
现代文：现在王敦发兵针对天子，不是我所应当参与的。 
English: Now Wang Dun is sending an army against the Son of Heaven, and I should not be involved.

古文：遂绝之。
现代文：也是加以拒绝。
English: It also refused to do so.

古文：敦遣参军桓罴说谯王承，请承为军司。
现代文：王敦派遣参军桓向谯王司马游说，请司马出任军司。
English: Wang Dun dispatched a member of the army, Huan, to lobby Wang Sima, asking Sima to serve as the military commander.

古文：承叹曰： 吾其死矣！
现代文：司马叹息说： 我怕是要死了。
English: Sima Cheng sighed and said: I'm probably dead!

古文：地荒民寡，势孤援绝，将何以济！
现代文：此地土地荒芜，人民稀少，势力孤单，后援断绝，怎能捱得过去呢！
English: Here, the land is barren, the people are scarce, the forces are alone, the support is cut off, how can you get past it!

古文：然得死忠义，夫复何求！ 
现代文：不过能为忠义而死，还能再有什么希求呢！ 
English: But what more can one ask for than to be able to die for loyalty!

古文：承檄长沙虞悝为长史，会悝遭母丧，承往吊之，曰： 吾欲讨王敦，而兵少粮乏，且新到，恩信未洽。
现代文：司马以文书征召长沙人虞悝为长史，适逢虞悝母亲去世，司马前往吊唁，说： 我想讨伐王敦，但军力不够，粮食匮乏，而且我是新近到任的，恩德和信用还未能润民心。
English: Sima has a long history of conscripting people from Changsha to fight for him. The death of Sima's mother coincided with the death of his mother. Sima went to pay condolences and said, "I want to fight Wangdong, but I don't have enough troops and food, and I've just arrived, and I haven't been able to instill the people with benevolence and trust."

古文：卿兄弟，湘中之豪俊，王室方危，金革之事，古人所不辞，将何以教之？ 
现代文：您家兄弟是湘州地区的豪俊之士，现在王室正遭受危难，古人在服丧期间，投身战事也在所不辞，您对我有什么教诲？ 
English: Your brother is a brave man from the Hunan region. Now the royal family is in danger. During the mourning period, the ancients did not hesitate to join the war. What do you have to teach me?

古文：悝曰： 大王不以悝兄弟猥劣，亲屈临之，敢不致死！
现代文：虞悝说： 大王您不因为我们兄弟身份卑贱而见弃，亲自降节光临，我们岂敢不效命！
English: Gu Yao said: Great King, if you do not abandon us because of our lowly status as brothers, and come to the festival in person, how dare we not fulfill our duty!

古文：然鄙州荒弊，难以进讨；宜且收众固守，传檄四方，敦势必分，分而图之，庶几可捷也。 
现代文：不过鄙州荒凉凋弊，难于出兵讨伐。应当暂时聚众固守，把讨伐王敦的檄书传布四方，这样王敦必得分兵应付。待其兵力分散后再图谋攻击，大概可以取胜。 
English: However, the country was desolate and it was difficult to dispatch troops for a crusade. It was necessary to temporarily gather a large number of people to hold fast, and spread the sermon of the crusade of Wang Dun to the four directions, so that Wang Dun would have enough soldiers to deal with. After his troops were dispersed, he would try to attack again, and he could probably win.

古文：承乃囚桓罴，以悝为长史，以其弟望为司马，督护诸军，与零陵太守尹奉、建昌太守长沙王循、衡阳太守淮陵刘翼、舂陵令长沙易雄，同举兵讨敦。
现代文：司马于是囚禁桓，任虞悝为长史，任命他的兄弟虞望为司马，总领、监护诸军，和零陵太守尹奉、建昌太守、长沙人王循、衡阳太守、淮陵人刘翼、舂陵令、长沙人易雄，共同举兵征讨王敦。
English: Sima then imprisoned Huan, appointed Yu Xuan as Chang Shi, and appointed his brother Yu Wang as Sima, the leader and guardian of the army, together with the governor of Jilin, Yin Bong, the governor of Jianchang, the governor of Changsha, Wang Xun, the governor of Hengyang, the governor of Huairing, Liu Ying, the governor of Jilin, and the governor of Changsha, Yi Xiong, to jointly raise an army to recruit Wang Dun.

古文：雄移檄远近，列敦罪恶，于是一州之内皆应承。
现代文：易雄四处传布檄书，罗列王敦罪状，于是一州之内的郡县，全都响应司马。
English: Yi Xiong spread the slanderous letter everywhere and listed the charges against Wang Dun, so the counties within the state all responded to Sima.

古文：惟湘东太守郑澹不从，承使虞望讨斩之，以徇四境。
现代文：只有湘东太守郑澹不从命，司马让虞望讨伐并把他处斩，用以晓示各地。
English: Only the East Hunan governor, Zheng Qi, did not obey the order, and Sima ordered Yugang to fight and behead him, to be used as a warning to the rest of the country.

古文：澹，敦姊夫也。
现代文：郑澹是王敦的姐夫。
English: Zheng Qi is Wang Dun's brother-in-law.

古文：承遣主簿邓骞至襄阳，说甘卓曰： 刘大连虽骄蹇失众心，非有害于天下。
现代文：司马派遣主簿邓骞到襄阳游说甘卓，说； 刘隗虽然傲慢不驯，有失众望，但并非为害国家。
English: Sima dispatched the chief accountant Deng Wei to Xiangyang to lobby Ganzhuo, saying: Although Liu Wei is arrogant and unruly, he has lost the public's hope, but he is not harming the country.

古文：大将军以其私憾，称兵向阙，此忠臣义士竭节之时也。
现代文：大将军王敦因个人私仇便对朝廷用兵，这正是忠臣义士尽忠的时候。
English: General Wang Dun used troops against the imperial court because of a personal vendetta. This is precisely the time for loyal subjects to be loyal.

古文：公受任方伯，奉辞伐罪，乃桓、文之功也。 
现代文：您受命为一方的统帅，如果禀承君命讨伐他的罪行，这就如同齐桓公和晋文公的功绩。 
English: You have been ordered to be the commander of one side. If you follow your father's order to fight his crimes, it will be the same as the achievements of Prince Qihuan and Prince Jinwen.

古文：卓曰： 桓、文则非吾所能，然志在徇国，当共详思之。 
现代文：甘卓说： 齐桓公和晋文公不是我所能仿效的，不过为国尽职，这是我的心愿，我们应当共同仔细斟酌这件事。 
English: Ganzhuo said, "I cannot emulate Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen, but it is my wish to do my duty for the country. We should carefully consider this matter together."

古文：参军李梁说卓曰： 昔隗嚣跋扈，窦融保河西以奉光武，卒受其福。
现代文：参军李梁劝说甘卓道： 当年隗嚣飞扬跋扈，窦融自保河西之地而拥戴汉光武帝，终于得到福禄。
English: Li Liang persuaded Gan Zhuo to join the army: At that time, the hustle and bustle was in full swing, Dou Rong supported Han Guangwu while protecting the west of the river, and finally got the fortune.

古文：今将军有重望于天下，但当按兵坐以待之，使大将军事捷，当委将军以方面，不捷，朝廷必以将军代之。
现代文：现在将军您在天下人心中有重望，只应按兵不动，坐待事态发展。假如大将军王敦的事情成功，当会委任您统领一方；不成功，朝廷必定会让您取代王敦，何愁不会富贵。
English: Now, General, you have a great hope in the hearts of the people of the world, you should just sit tight and wait for the development of the situation. If the matter of General Wang Dun is successful, you will be appointed to lead the party; if it is not successful, the court will certainly let you replace Wang Dun. Don't worry, you will not be rich.

古文：何忧不富贵，而释此庙胜，决存亡于一战邪？ 
现代文：何必放弃这不战而胜的谋略，依靠一场战斗来定生死存亡呢？ 
English: Why should we give up this strategy of victory without a fight and rely on a battle to determine life and death?

古文：骞谓梁曰： 光武当创业之初，故隗、窦可以文服从容顾望。
现代文：邓骞对李梁说： 汉光武帝当时正处创业初期，所以隗嚣、窦融可以表面臣服，从容观望。
English: Deng Wei said to Li Liang: Emperor Guangwu of Han was in the early stage of entrepreneurship at that time, so the hustle and bustle can be surrendered on the surface, and you can wait and see.

古文：今将军之于本朝，非窦融之比也；襄阳之于太府，非河西之固也。
现代文：现在将军您对于朝廷来说，不是窦融可以类比的；襄阳对于王敦的太府来说，也没有河西那样的险固。
English: Now, General, for the imperial court, you are not comparable to Dou Rong; for Wang Dun's Taifu, Yangyang is not as dangerous as Hexi.

古文：使大将军克刘隗，还武昌，增石城之戍，绝荆、湘之粟，将军欲安归乎！
现代文：如果王敦攻克刘隗，回师武昌，增强石城戍守的兵力，切断荆州、湘州的粮道，将军您将何去何从呢！
English: If Wang Dun conquers Liu Ye, returns to his master Wuchang, strengthens the troops guarding Shicheng, and cuts off the food supply from Jingzhou and Hunan, general, where will you go?

古文：势在人手，而曰我处庙胜，未之闻也。
现代文：大势掌握在别人手中，却说自己处于不战而胜的地位，这是从未听说过的事。
English: It is unheard of to say that you are in a position to win without a fight when the power is in the hands of others.

古文：且为人臣，国家有难，坐视不救，于义安乎！ 
现代文：况且作为人臣，国家遇到危难，坐视不救，这在道义上说得过去吗？ 
English: Moreover, as a vassal, when the country is in danger, do you think it is morally acceptable to stand by and do nothing?

古文：卓尚疑之。
现代文：甘卓还是犹豫不决。
English: Gundotra still hesitates.

古文：骞曰： 今既不为义举，又不承大将军檄，此必至之祸，愚智所见也。
现代文：邓骞说： 现在您既不能为道义而动，又不奉承大将军王敦的檄令，人所共见，一定会招致灾祸。
English: Deng Yu said, "Now you can neither act for the sake of morality nor flatter the edict of General Wang Dun. People all agree that this will surely lead to disaster."

古文：且议者之所难，以彼强而我弱也。
现代文：况且议论此事的人之所以诘难，是因为彼强我弱。
English: Moreover, the reason why people who talk about this are struggling is because he is strong and I am weak.

古文：今大将军兵不过万馀，其留者不能五千；而将军见众既倍之矣。以将军之威名，帅此府之精锐，杖节鸣鼓，以顺讨逆，岂王含所能御哉！
现代文：现在大将军王敦的兵力不过一万有余，留驻的不到五千，而将军您现有的部众已经超过其一倍，凭仗您的威名，统帅府下的精锐士兵，举着朝廷符节，鸣起军鼓，以顺臣身份征讨叛逆，岂是王含所能抵御的！
English: Now, General Wang Dun's troop strength is just over ten thousand, with less than five thousand stationed, while General your existing troops have more than doubled. By virtue of your prestige, the elite soldiers under the commander-in-chief, holding up the imperial symbols, sounding the military drums, and soliciting rebellion as obedient subjects, is Wang Han able to resist!

古文：溯流之众，势不自救，将军之举武昌，若摧枯拉朽，尚何顾虑邪！
现代文：王敦军队如要救援，必须逆江而上，势必救助不及。将军攻下武昌，如同摧枯拉朽，还有什么可顾虑的呢？
English: If Wang Dun's army wants to rescue, it must go upstream, and it is bound to be unable to rescue. The general's capture of Wuchang is like withering away, what else is there to worry about?

古文：武昌既定，据其军实，镇抚二州，以恩意招怀士卒，使还者如归，此吕蒙所以克关羽也。
现代文：武昌一旦平定，拥有其军事物资，镇抚荆州和江州，以恩德招纳、关怀士卒，使得回来的人如同回到了家，这正是吕蒙战胜关羽的方法。
English: Once Wuchang is pacified, it will have its military supplies, and it will help Jingzhou and Jiangzhou, and recruit and care for soldiers with benevolence, so that those who come back will feel like they have returned home. This is exactly the way for Liumeng to defeat Guan Yu.

古文：今释必胜之策，安坐以待危亡，不可以言智矣。 
现代文：现在放弃必胜的策略，安然坐待危亡的降临，这不能说是明智的。 
English: It would be unwise to abandon a winning strategy now and sit back and wait for disaster to strike.

古文：敦恐卓于后为变，又遣参军丹杨乐道融往邀之，必欲与之俱东。
现代文：王敦怕甘卓在后方有变，又派参军、丹杨人乐道融去邀请他，一定要和他一块东进。
English: Wang Dun was afraid that Gan Zhuo would change in the rear, and he sent soldiers to invite him to join the army, and he must go east with him.

古文：道融虽事敦，而忿其悖逆，乃说卓曰： 主上亲临万机，自用谯王为湘州，非专任刘隗也。
现代文：乐道融虽然侍奉王敦，但恨王敦悖逆作乱，于是劝甘卓说： 主上亲自处理国家所有事务，自己任用谯王司马治理湘州，并非由刘隗专权。
English: Although Le Daorong served Wang Dun, he hated Wang Dun's disobedience and disorder, so he advised Gan Zhuo to say: The Lord will personally handle all affairs of the country, and he will appoint Wang Sima to govern Hunan, not by Liu Ye's exclusive power.

古文：而王氏擅权日久，卒见分政，便谓失职，背恩肆逆，举兵向阙。
现代文：而王氏专权已经很久，一旦权势被分夺，便说是失去职位，于是背叛皇恩，肆行叛逆，对朝廷用兵。
English: However, the absolute power of the Wang clan had already existed for a long time. As soon as the power was seized, they said that they had lost their position, so they betrayed the imperial grace, rampantly rebelled, and used soldiers against the imperial court.

古文：国家遇君至厚，今与之同，岂不违负大义！生为逆臣，死为愚鬼，永为宗党之耻，不亦惜乎！
现代文：国家对您的待遇非常优厚，您如果与王敦同行，岂不是违背和辜负了君臣大义，生为叛逆之臣，死为愚昧之鬼，永远是宗族、党朋的耻辱，不是很可惜吗！
English: The state treats you very generously. If you go along with Wang Dun, wouldn't you be violating and betraying the great justice of the prince and the minister? Born as a traitorous minister, dying as a foolish ghost, you will always be a disgrace to your clan and party friends. Isn't it a pity!

古文：为君之计，莫若伪许应命，而驰袭武昌，大将军士众闻之，必不战自溃，大勋可就矣。 
现代文：为您打算，不如佯装听从其令，却急速突袭武昌，大将军王敦的士众听说此事，必定不战自溃，大功便可告成了。 
English: As for your plan, it would be better to pretend to obey his order, but quickly raid Wuchang. When the general Wang Dun's soldiers heard about this, they would certainly self-destruct without a fight, and the great achievement would be completed.

古文：卓雅不欲从敦，闻道融之言，遂决，曰： 吾本意也。 
现代文：甘卓原本就不想追从王敦，听了乐道融所言，于是决断说： 这正是我的本意。 
English: Gan Zhuo originally didn't want to follow Wang Dun, but after listening to what Le Dou Rong said, he decided: This is exactly what I intended.

古文：乃与巴东监军柳纯、南平太守夏侯承、宜都太守谭该等露檄数敦逆状，帅所统致讨。
现代文：于是与巴东监军柳纯、南平太守夏侯承、宜都太守谭该等人，发布檄书数落王敦叛逆的行状，率领麾下军队开始征讨。
English: Therefore, together with Liu Chun, the inspector of the Batong Army, Xia Houcheng, the governor of Nanping Province, and Tan Gui, the governor of Yidu Province, he issued an edict to stop the rebellious behavior, and led the army under his command to begin the investigation.

古文：遣参军司马赞、孙双奉表诣台，罗英至广州约陶侃同进。
现代文：派遣参军司马、孙双持奉上表送到朝廷，派罗英到广州，约陶侃共同进讨。
English: Sima and Sun Shuang, who were dispatched to join the army, sent the above table to the imperial court, sent Luo Ying to Guangzhou, and discussed with Tao Kan.

古文：戴渊在江西，先得卓书，表上之，台内皆称万岁。
现代文：戴渊镇守在长江西部，先得到甘卓的信，用表文的形式奏上，朝廷内都欢呼万岁。
English: Daiyuan, a town guard in the west of the Yangtze River, first received Ganzo's letter and played it in the form of a table text. The imperial court cheered.

古文：陶侃得卓信，即遣参军高宝帅兵北下。
现代文：陶侃见到甘卓的来信，随即派参军高宝领兵北上。
English: When Tao Kan saw the letter from Ganzo, he immediately sent Gaobao to join the army and lead the soldiers northward.

古文：武昌城中传卓军至，人皆奔散。
现代文：武昌城内传言甘卓大军来了，众人都逃奔离散。
English: Rumors spread in Wuchang that the great army of Gan Zhuo had arrived, and everyone fled and scattered.

古文：敦遣从母弟南蛮校尉魏乂、将军李恒帅甲卒二万攻长沙。
现代文：王敦派遣姨母的兄弟、南蛮校尉魏和将军李恒，率领甲士二万人进攻长沙。
English: Wang Dun dispatched his aunt's brother, Namban Lieutenant Wei and General Li Heng, leading 20,000 armored soldiers to attack Changsha.

古文：长沙城池不完，资储又阙，人情震恐。
现代文：长沙的城墙、护城河不完善，物资储备也不充足，人心惊恐。
English: Changsha's city wall and moat are not perfect, and material reserves are not sufficient. People are alarmed.

古文：或说谯王承，南投陶侃或退据零、桂。
现代文：有人劝说谯王司马向南投靠陶侃，或者退守零陵、桂林。
English: Some people tried to persuade Wang Sima to go to the south to support Tao Kan, or to retreat to Ziling and Guilin.

古文：承曰： 吾之起兵，志欲死于忠义，岂可贪生苟免，为奔败之将乎！
现代文：司马说： 我之所以起兵，是心存为忠义献身的志向，怎能贪生怕死、苟且活命，当一个败逃的将领呢！
English: Sima said, "The reason why I joined the army was because I had the ambition to be a loyal and devoted soldier. How can I be greedy for life and afraid of death, clinging to life, when I am a defeated general!"

古文：事之不济，令百姓知吾心耳。 
现代文：即使守卫长沙失败，也让百姓们知道我的心意。 
English: Even if the defense of Changsha fails, I will let the people know my intentions.

古文：乃婴城固守。
现代文：于是环城固守。
English: As a result, Huancheng held firm.

古文：未几，虞望战死，甘卓欲留邓骞为参军，骞不可。卓乃遣参军虞冲与骞偕至长沙，遗谯王承书，劝之固守，当以兵出沔口，断敦归路，则湘围自解。
现代文：不久，虞望战死，甘卓想让邓骞留下任参军，邓骞不同意，甘卓便派参军虞冲和邓骞同赴长沙，并致信谯王司马，劝他固守长沙，自己将遣军自沔口出击，截断王敦的退路，这样湘州之围便会不救自解。
English: Soon after, Yu Wang was killed in battle. Gan Zhuo wanted Deng Jun to stay and join the army, but Deng Jun did not agree. Gan Zhuo then sent Yu Chong, who had joined the army, and Deng Jun to Changsha together. He also sent a letter to Wang Sima, advising him to hold on to Changsha, and to send troops to attack from the Hekou, cutting off Wang Dun's escape route. In this way, the siege of Hunan would be lifted without any help.

古文：承复书称： 江左中兴，草创始尔，岂图恶逆萌自宠臣！
现代文：司马信说： 江东国朝中兴，一切刚刚草创，谁想到由得宠的大臣萌生叛乱。
English: Sima Xin said: The rise of the Eastern Jiangsu Dynasty, everything has just begun, who would have thought that a rebellion would sprout from a favored minister.

古文：吾以宗室受任，志在陨命；而至止尚浅，凡百茫然。足下能卷甲电赴，犹有所及；若其狐疑，则求我于枯鱼之肆矣。 
现代文：我以王朝宗室的身份禀受重任，志在以身殉职。不过到任时日尚短，一切尚未理出头绪，足下如果能轻装电赴来救，或许还来得及；如果犹豫迟滞，那么就只有求我于枯鱼之肆了。 
English: As the royal consort, I have been entrusted with a heavy responsibility, and I am determined to do my duty. However, the time I have been in office is still short, and everything has not yet been sorted out. If I can lightly charge the electricity to come to the rescue, it may still be in time; if I hesitate, then I can only be asked to deal with the dead fish.

古文：卓不能从。
现代文：甘卓未能听从。
English: Gundotra did not listen.

古文：二月，甲午，封皇子昱为琅邪王。
现代文：二月，甲午，元帝封皇子司马昱为琅邪王。
English: In February, in the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Sima Yu, the prince of the former emperor, became the evil king.

古文：后赵王勒立子弘为世子。
现代文：后赵王石勒立儿子石弘为世子。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shi Le established his son Shi Hong as his heir.

古文：遣中山公虎将精卒四万击徐龛。
现代文：派遣中山公石虎统帅精兵四万人攻击徐龛。
English: General Zhongshan Gongshihu dispatched 40,000 elite soldiers to attack Xu Xi.

古文：龛坚守不战，虎筑长围守之。
现代文：徐龛坚守不出战，石虎筑起长长的围墙与之相持。
English: Xu Xi insisted on not going to war, and Shi Hu built a long wall to keep him away.

古文：赵主曜自将击杨难敌，难敌逆战，不胜，退保仇池。
现代文：前赵国主刘曜自为统帅，攻击杨难敌。杨难敌迎战，不能取胜，退走保守仇池。
English: The former Zhao sovereign Liu You, as commander-in-chief, attacked Yang Nianqi. Yang Nianqi met the battle, could not win, and retreated to the conservative Qiuchi.

古文：仇池诸氐、羌及故晋王保将杨韬、陇西太守梁勋皆降于曜。
现代文：仇池氐族、羌族的许多部族，以及原来晋王司马保的部将杨韬、陇西太守梁勋都投降刘曜。
English: Many tribes of the Quechu Yi and Yi people, as well as the former Jin king Sima Bao's general Yang Hui and the Shaanxi governor Liang Xun, all surrendered to Liu You.

古文：曜迁陇西万馀户于长安，进攻仇池。
现代文：刘曜从陇西迁徙一万多户到长安，然后进攻仇池。
English: Liu You migrated more than ten thousand households from Shaanxi to Chang'an, and then attacked Qiu Chi.

古文：会军中大疫，曜亦得疾，将引兵还；恐难敌蹑其后，乃遣光国中郎将王犷说难敌，谕以祸福，难敌遣使称籓。
现代文：适逢军中疫病流行，连刘曜也染上疾病，刘曜准备领兵退还，又怕杨难敌追袭于后，便派光国中郎将王犷游说杨难敌，向他剖明利害，杨难敌于是派使者前来，表示愿为藩属。
English: The epidemic in the army coincided with the epidemic, and even Liu You contracted the disease. Liu You was preparing to lead the troops back, and fearing that Yang Nanchong would pursue them, he sent Guang Guo Zhonglang to lobby Wang Xuan to Yang Nanchong and clarify the interests to him. Yang Nanchong then sent an envoy to come and express his willingness to be a member of the clan.

古文：曜以难敌为假黄钺，都督益、宁、南秦、凉、梁、巴六州、陇上、西域诸军事，上大将军、益、宁、南秦三州牧、武都王。
现代文：刘曜任杨难敌为假黄钺、都督益、宁、南秦、凉、梁、巴六州及陇上、西域诸军事、上大将军、益、宁、南秦三州州牧、武都王。
English: Liu Yu appointed Yang as the implacable enemy of the false Huang Di, the governor of the capital, Ning, the Southern Qin, Liang, Liang, the six states of Pakistan, and the military in the upper and western regions, the commander-in-chief, Yi, Ning, the three states of the Southern Qin, Zhu Mu, and the King of Wudu.

古文：秦州刺史陈安求朝于曜，曜辞以疾。
现代文：秦州刺史陈安请求朝见刘曜，刘曜因病推辞不见。
English: Chen An, the governor of Qin State, requested to see Liu You in the morning, but Liu You did not show up due to illness.

古文：安怒，以为曜已卒，大掠而归。
现代文：陈安发怒，以为刘曜已死，纵兵大肆劫掠后返回。
English: Chen An flew into a rage, thought Liu You was dead, and returned after the soldiers had looted and pillaged.

古文：曜疾甚，乘马舆而还。
现代文：刘曜病情沉重，只能乘坐马车返回，派部将呼延随后监护辎重。
English: Liu Yow is seriously ill and can only return by carriage. The faction will postpone the visit and then place him under close supervision.

古文：使其将呼延寔监辎重于后，安邀击，获之，谓寔曰： 刘曜已死，子尚谁佐！
现代文：陈安在半路截击，抓获了呼延，对他说： 刘曜已经死了，你还辅佐谁呢！
English: Chen An intercepted in the middle of the road, captured Huyan, and said to him: Liu You is already dead, who are you aiding?

古文：吾当与子共定大业。 
现代文：我将和你共创大业。 
English: I will create a great career with you.

古文：寔叱之曰： 汝受人宠禄而叛之，自视智能何如主上？
现代文：呼延叱骂说： 你接受别人的宠爱、俸禄却又背叛他，自己瞧瞧你的智能哪点比得上主上？
English: Huan Yan scolded: "You accept other people's favor and salary, but you betray him. See for yourself where your intelligence is superior to the Lord's."

古文：吾见汝不日枭首于上邽市，何谓大业！
现代文：我看你的首级不久将会悬挂在上街市示众，还谈什么大业！
English: I think your head will soon be hanging in the market square for all to see, what a great cause!

古文：宜速杀我！ 
现代文：你应该快快杀了我？ 
English: Should you hurry up and kill me?

古文：安怒，杀之，以寔长史鲁凭为参军。
现代文：陈安发怒，杀死呼延，让呼延的长史鲁凭当参军。
English: Chen An got angry, killed Huyan, and made Huyan's chieftain Shilupia join the army.

古文：安遣其弟集帅骑三万追曜，卫将军呼延瑜逆击，斩之。
现代文：陈安派兄弟陈集率领三万骑兵追袭刘曜，遭到卫将军呼延瑜的反击，陈集被杀。
English: Chen An sent his brother Chen Ji, leading 30,000 cavalry, to pursue Liu You, but he was counterattacked by Wei general Hu Yan Yu, and Chen Ji was killed.

古文：安乃还上邽，遣将袭汧城，拔之。
现代文：陈安于是回到上，派部将攻克了城。
English: Chen An then returned to Shang, and the faction conquered the city.

古文：陇上氐、羌皆附于安，有众十馀万，自称大都督、假黄钺、大将军、雍、凉、秦、梁四州牧、凉王，以赵募为相国。
现代文：陇上的氐族、羌族部落都归附了陈安，陈安拥有兵众十多万，自称大都督、假黄钺、大将军，雍、凉、秦、梁四州州牧和凉王，任命赵募为相国。
English: The Yao and Qiang tribes on the Yangtze River were all attached to Chen An. Chen An had more than 100,000 soldiers. He claimed to be the great governor, the false Huang Qi, the great general, the Yong, Liang, Qin and Liang four states, the state herdsman and the king of Liang. He appointed Zhao Yan as the sister country.

古文：鲁凭对安大哭曰： 吾不忍见陈安之死也！ 
现代文：鲁凭对着陈安大哭说； 我不忍心看陈安的死啊！ 
English: I can't bear to see Chen An's death!

古文：安怒，命斩之。
现代文：陈安发怒，命令将他斩首。
English: Enraged, Chen An ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：凭曰： 死自吾分，悬吾头于上邽市，观赵之斩陈安也！ 
现代文：鲁凭说： 死亡本是我份内之事。把我的头悬挂在上街市，我要观看赵国斩杀陈安！ 
English: Lupian said, "Death is my duty. I will hang my head in Shangjie Market and watch Zhao Guo behead Chen An!

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是被杀。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：曜闻之，恸哭曰： 贤人，民之望也。
现代文：刘曜听说此事，悲恸地大哭，说： 贤人是民众的寄望所在。
English: When Liu You heard about this, he cried bitterly and said, "Wise men are the hope of the people.

古文：陈安于求贤之秋而多杀贤者，吾知其无所为也！ 
现代文：陈安在应当求贤而用的时候却多杀贤人，我由此得知他不会有什么作为。 
English: Chen An killed more sages when he should have used them, and I learned from this that he would not be able to do anything.

古文：休屠王石武以桑城降赵，赵以武为秦州刺史，封酒泉王。
现代文：休屠王石武献桑城投降了前赵，赵国让石武出任秦州刺史，赐封酒泉王。
English: Xiu Tuo's King Shivu offered Sangcheng to surrender to the former Zhao, Zhao let Shivu take the post of Qin State chief historian, and granted him the title of King of Sake Springs.

古文：帝征戴渊、刘隗入卫建康。
现代文：元帝征召戴渊、刘隗来建康参与防卫。
English: Emperor Yuan summoned Dai Yuan and Liu Ye to Jiankang to participate in the defense.

古文：隗至，百官迎于道，隗岸帻大言，意气自若。
现代文：刘隗到达之时，百官们在道路上迎接，刘隗把头帻掀起露出前额，高谈阔论，意气昂扬。
English: When Liu Wei arrived, hundreds of officials greeted him on the road. Liu Wei raised his head and bared his forehead, talked a lot and was in high spirits.

古文：及入见，与刁协劝帝尽诛王氏；帝不许，隗始有惧色。
现代文：等到入见元帝，和刁协一起劝元帝将王氏宗族尽数诛杀，元帝不同意，刘隗才显露出畏惧的神色。
English: It wasn't until he met Emperor Yuan and, together with Zou Xie, persuaded Emperor Yuan to kill as many members of the Wang clan as possible, and Emperor Yuan disagreed, that Liu Bei revealed his fear.

古文：司空导帅其从弟中领军邃、左卫将军廙、侍中侃、彬及诸宗族二十馀人，每旦诣台待罪。
现代文：司空王导率领堂弟中领军王邃、左卫将军王、侍中王侃、王彬以及各宗族子弟二十多人，每天清晨到朝廷等候定罪。
English: King Siku, led by his cousin, the middle leader of the army, Wang Ye, the left guard general Wang, the middle attendant Wang Kan, Wang Bin, and more than twenty children from various clans, went to the imperial court every morning to wait for conviction.

古文：周顗将入，导呼之曰： 伯仁，以百口累卿！ 
现代文：周将要入朝，王导呼唤他说： 周，我把王氏宗族一百多人的性命托付给您！ 
English: Zhou was about to enter the imperial court, and Wang Du called out to him: "Zhou, I entrust the lives of more than a hundred members of Wang's family to you!

古文：顗直入不顾。
现代文：周连头也不回，直入朝廷。
English: Zhou didn't even look back and went straight to the imperial court.

古文：既见帝，言导忠诚，申救甚至；帝纳其言。
现代文：等到见了元帝，周阐说王导忠诚不二，极力为他辩白，元帝听从了他的意见。
English: When he saw Emperor Yuan, Zhou explained that Wang Du was loyal and tried his best to defend him, and Emperor Yuan listened to his opinion.

古文：顗喜饮酒，至醉而出，导犹在门，又呼之。顗不与言，顾左右曰： 今年杀诸贼奴，取金印如斗大，系肘后。 
现代文：周心中欢喜，以至喝醉了酒。周走出宫门，王导还在门外等候，又呼唤周，周不与他交谈，环顾左右说： 今年杀掉一干乱臣贼子后，能得到斗大的金印，系挂在臂肘之后。 
English: Zhou was so happy in his heart that he even got drunk. Zhou walked out of the palace gate. Wang Du was still waiting outside the gate. He called Zhou again. Zhou did not talk to him. He looked around and said, "This year, after killing a gang of ruffian thieves, I can get a big gold seal. It hangs on the back of my elbow."

古文：既出，又上表明导无罪，言甚切至。
现代文：出来以后，又奏上表章，辨明王导无罪，言辞十分妥帖和有力。
English: After it came out, Wang Du's statement was read aloud again, clarifying that Wang Du was not guilty. His words were very appropriate and powerful.

古文：导不之知，甚恨之。
现代文：王导不知道这些事，对周深为怨恨。
English: Wang Du did not know about these things, and he held a grudge against Zhou Sheng.

古文：帝命还导朝服，召见之。
现代文：元帝令人把朝服送还王导，召王导进见。
English: Emperor Yuan sent the imperial robe back to Wang Du and summoned Wang Du for a meeting.

古文：导稽首曰： 逆臣贼子，何代无之，不意今者近出臣族！ 
现代文：王导跪拜叩首至地，说： 叛臣贼子，哪一个朝代没有，想不到现在我出在臣下宗族之中！ 
English: Wang Du knelt down, bowed his head to the ground, and said: "Traitor thief, which dynasty does not have, I can't imagine that I am now among the vassal clans!

古文：帝跣而执其手曰： 茂弘，方寄卿以百里之命，是何言邪！ 
现代文：元帝来不及穿鞋，赤脚拉着他的手说： 王茂弘，我正要把朝廷政务交给你，你这是说的什么话！ 
English: The former emperor did not have time to put on his shoes, so he dragged his bare feet by the hand and said: Wang Maohong, I am about to hand over the affairs of state to you, what are you talking about!

古文：三月，以导为前锋大都督，加戴渊骠骑将军。
现代文：三月，任命王导为前锋大都督，授予戴渊骠骑将军。
English: In March, Wang Du was appointed as the vanguard grand governor, and Dai Yuan was awarded as the cavalry general.

古文：诏曰： 导以大义灭亲，可以吾为安东时节假之。 
现代文：元帝下诏说： 王导为大义灭亲，可以把我任安东将军时的符节交给他。 
English: Emperor Yuan issued the following edict: Wang Dao killed his relatives for the greater good, so I can give him the rune set I made when I was General Anton.

古文：以周顗为尚书左仆射，王邃为右仆射。
现代文：又任命周为尚书左仆射，王邃为尚书右仆射。
English: He also appointed Zhou as Shangshu's left-hand retainer and Wang Qi as Shangshu's right-hand retainer.

古文：帝遣王廙往谕止敦；敦不从而留之，廙更为敦用。
现代文：元帝派王去告诉王敦，让他停止叛乱。王敦拒不从命，扣留了王，王又为王敦效力。
English: The Yuan Emperor sent Wang to tell Wang Dun to stop the rebellion. Wang Dun refused to obey and detained Wang, who in turn worked for Wang Dun.

古文：征虏将军周札，素矜险好利，帝以为右将军、都督石头诸军事。
现代文：征虏将军周札，素来为人阴险，贪图私利。元帝任他为右将军、都督石头地区军务。
English: The conscript general Zhou Fuda has always been an insidious person, greedy for personal gain. The Yuan Emperor appointed him as the right general and the military governor of the Stone Region.

古文：敦将至，帝使刘隗军金城，札守石头，帝亲被甲徇师于郊外。
现代文：王敦军队日益临近，元帝让刘隗驻军金城，令周札驻守石头，自己亲自披上甲衣，巡视郊外的军队。
English: Wang Dun's army was getting closer and closer. The Yuan Emperor ordered Liu Bei to garrison Jincheng, Zhou Za to garrison Shishi, and himself to put on a coat of armor and inspect the troops in the suburbs.

古文：以甘卓为镇南大将军、侍中、都督荆、梁二州诸军事，陶侃领江州刺史；使各帅所统以蹑敦后。
现代文：又任命甘卓为镇南大将军、侍中、都督荆州、梁州军务，任命陶侃兼领江州刺史职，让他们各自率领所部跟随在王敦军队之后。
English: He also appointed Gan Zhuo as Zhenan general, chamberlain, and military governor of Jingzhou and Liangzhou, and appointed Tao Kan as the military governor of Jiangzhou, so that they could each lead the headquarters to follow Wang Dun's army.

古文：敦至石头，欲攻刘隗。
现代文：王敦到达石头，想攻击刘隗。
English: Wang Dun reached the stone and wanted to attack Liu Ye.

古文：杜弘言于敦曰： 刘隗死士众多，未易可克，不如攻石头。
现代文：杜弘向王敦建议说： 刘隗手下不怕死的士兵众多，不容易战胜，不如进攻石头。
English: Du Hong suggested to Wang Dun, "Liu Gan has many soldiers who are not afraid of death. It is not easy to defeat them. It is better to attack the stones."

古文：周札少恩，兵不为用，攻之必败，札败则隗自走矣。 
现代文：周札对人缺少恩泽，士兵都不愿为他效力，一旦遭攻击必然败走，周札兵败则刘隗自己就会逃走。 
English: Zhou Za lacked favor with people, soldiers were not willing to serve him. Once attacked, they would inevitably be defeated and flee. If Zhou Za's soldiers were defeated, Liu Ye himself would flee.

古文：敦从之，以弘为前锋，攻石头，札果开门纳弘。
现代文：王敦采纳了杜弘的意见，任命他为前锋，进攻石头。周札果然打开城门让杜弘入城。
English: Wang Dun adopted Du Hong's opinion and appointed him as a striker to attack the stone. Zhou Fuda opened the gate for Du Hong to enter the city.

古文：敦据石头。叹曰： 吾不复得为盛德事矣！ 
现代文：王敦占据石头后，感叹地说： 我既为叛臣，再也不会做功德盛大的事情了。 
English: After Wang Dun occupied the stone, he said with a sigh: I am a traitor, and I will never do anything great again.

古文：谢鲲曰： 何为其然也！
现代文：谢鲲说： 为什么这样呢！
English: Xie Yao said: "Why is this happening?

古文：但使自今已往，日忘日去耳。 
现代文：只要从今以后，这些事一天天淡忘，也就会一天天从心中消失了。 
English: As long as these things are forgotten day by day from now on, they will also disappear from the heart day by day.

古文：帝命刁协、刘隗、戴渊帅众攻石头，王导、周顗、郭逸、虞潭等三道出战，协等兵皆大败。
现代文：元帝令刁协、刘隗、戴渊率领兵众进攻石头，王导和周、郭逸、虞潭等分三路出击，刁协等人的军队都大败。
English: The Yuan Emperor ordered Pu Xie, Liu Ye, and Dai Yuan to lead the troops to attack the stone. Wang Du and Zhou, Guo Yat, and Yu Tan made a three-pronged attack, and the troops of Pu Xie and others were defeated.

古文：太子绍闻之，欲自帅将士决战；升车将出，中庶子温峤执鞚谏曰： 殿下国之储副，奈何以身轻天下！ 
现代文：太子司马绍听说以后，打算自己率领将士与敌人决战，坐上军车正要出发，中庶子温峤抓住马勒头劝谏说： 殿下是国家君位的继承人，怎么能逞一己之快，轻弃天下而不顾！ 
English: After hearing of this, the Crown Prince Sima Shao planned to lead his generals into a decisive battle with the enemy. As he was about to set off in a military vehicle, the middle son, Wen Qi, grabbed Malet's head to persuade him, saying, "Your highness is the heir to the throne of the country. How can you be so quick to abandon the world without regard for yourself!

古文：抽剑斩鞅，乃止。
现代文：抽出剑斩断马的鞅带，司马绍这才罢休。
English: Drawing his sword to cut the horse's umbilical cord, Sima Shao finally gave up.

古文：敦拥兵不朝，放士卒劫掠，宫省奔散，惟安东将军刘超按兵直卫，及侍中二人侍帝侧。
现代文：王敦聚集军队，不朝见元帝，放纵士卒劫掠财物，皇宫、朝廷里的人奔逃离散，只有安东将军刘超屯兵不动，当值护卫，以及侍中二人在元帝身边侍奉。
English: Wang Dun gathered an army and did not go to see Emperor Yuan. He allowed his soldiers to loot and plunder. People in the imperial palace and the court ran away and dispersed. Only General Anton Liu Chao did not move, the guards were on duty, and two attendants served around Emperor Yuan.

古文：帝脱戎衣，着朝服，顾而言曰： 欲得我处，当早言！
现代文：元帝脱下军衣，穿上朝服，环顾四周说： 王敦想得到我这个地方，应当早说！
English: The Yuan emperor took off his military uniform, put on his court dress, looked around and said, "If Wang Dun wanted to get me this place, he should have said so earlier!"

古文：何至害民如此！ 
现代文：何至于如此残害百姓！ 
English: What a way to brutalize the people!

古文：又遣使谓敦曰： 公若不忘本朝，于此息兵，则天下尚可共安。
现代文：又派遣使者告诉王敦说： 你如果还没有将朝廷置于脑后，那么就此罢兵，天下还可以安然相处。
English: They also sent an envoy to tell Wang Dun: "If you have not yet put the imperial court behind you, then you should resign from the army, and the world can still get along peacefully."

古文：如其不然，朕当归琅邪以避贤路。 
现代文：如果不是这样，那么朕将回到琅邪，为贤人让路。 
English: If this is not the case, then I will go back to fighting evil and make way for the wise.

古文：刁协、刘隗既败，俱入宫，见帝于太极东除。
现代文：刁协、刘隗战败以后，都进入宫中，在太极殿东侧阶与元帝相见。
English: After the defeat of Yan Xie and Liu Bei, they both entered the palace and met the Yuan Emperor on the east side steps of the Taiji Hall.

古文：帝执协、隗手，流涕呜咽，劝令避祸。
现代文：元帝拉着刁协、刘隗的手，流泪哭泣，呜咽有声，劝说并命令二人出逃以避灾祸。
English: Emperor Yuan held the hands of Yan Xie and Liu Yao, weeping and sobbing, and persuaded and ordered the two to flee to avoid the disaster.

古文：协曰： 臣当守死，不敢有贰。 
现代文：刁协说： 我将守卫到死，不敢有二心。 
English: He said: "I will guard it to the death. I dare not have second thoughts."

古文：帝曰： 今事逼矣，安可不行！ 
现代文：元帝说： 现在事情紧迫了，怎么能不走呢！ 
English: Yuan Di said: Now that things are pressing, how can I not go!

古文：乃令给协、隗人马，使自为计。
现代文：于是下令为刁协、刘隗准备随行的人马，让他们自谋生路。
English: Therefore, he ordered to prepare people to accompany Gong Xie and Liu Ye, and let them earn their own living.

古文：协老，不堪骑乘，素无恩纪，募从者，皆委之，行至江乘，为人所杀，送首于敦。
现代文：刁协年老，难耐骑乘之苦，平素又缺少恩惠，招募随从人员时，大家都推委不去。刁协出行至江乘，被人所杀，把首级送给王敦。
English: He was too old to endure the hardships of riding, and he was always short of favors. When recruiting followers, everyone would not go to the committee. He traveled to Jiangren and was killed, and his head was given to Wang Dun.

古文：隗奔后赵，官至太子太傅而卒。
现代文：刘隗投奔后赵，在任太子太傅时死去。
English: After Liu Bei fled to Zhao, he died while serving as the crown prince.

古文：帝令公卿百官诣石头见敦，敦谓戴渊曰： 前日之战，有馀力乎？ 
现代文：元帝命令百官公卿到石头拜见王敦。王敦对戴渊说： 前日的交战，还有剩余的力量吗？ 
English: Emperor Yuan ordered hundreds of officials and nobles to go to the stone to meet Wang Dun. Wang Dun said to Dai Yuan: The previous day's battle, is there any remaining strength?

古文：渊曰： 岂敢有馀，但力不足耳！ 
现代文：戴渊说： 岂敢留有余力，只是力量不足罢了！ 
English: Dai Yuan said, "Don't you dare to have any spare energy, it's just a lack of strength!"

古文：敦曰： 吾今此举，天下以为何如？ 
现代文：王敦说： 我现在这样的举动，天下人会怎么看？ 
English: Wang Dun said: What will the world think of my current actions?

古文：渊曰： 见形者谓之逆，体诚者谓之忠。 
现代文：戴渊说： 只看到表象的人说是叛逆，体会诚心的人说是忠贞。 
English: Dai Yuan said: Those who only see appearances say it is rebellion, while those who experience sincerity say it is loyalty.

古文：敦笑曰： 卿可谓能言。 
现代文：王敦笑着说： 您可以称得上会说话了。 
English: Wang Dun said with a smile: You can be said to be able to speak.

古文：又谓周顗曰： 伯仁，卿负我！ 
现代文：王敦又对周说： 周伯仁，您辜负了我！ 
English: Wang Dun also said to Zhou: Zhou Boren, you have failed me!

古文：顗曰： 公戎车犯顺，下官亲帅六军，不能其事，使王旅奔败，以此负公。 
现代文：周说： 您依仗武力违背顺上的道德，我亲自统率六军，不能胜任，致使君王的军队战败奔逃，这就是我辜负您的地方。 
English: Zhou said: You have violated the morality of Shun by relying on force. I personally led the six armies and was not competent, causing the king's army to be defeated and flee. This is where I failed you.

古文：辛未，大赦。以敦为丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、江州牧，封武昌郡公；并让不受。
现代文：辛未，元帝实行大赦，任命王敦为丞相、都督中外各军、录尚书事、江州牧，赐封武昌郡公，王敦都推辞不受。
English: In Xinwei, Emperor Yuan implemented an amnesty, appointed Wang Dun as chancellor, governor of all armies in China and abroad, recorded records, Jiangzhou pastoralist, and granted him the title of Wuchang County governor. Wang Dun did not accept the rejection.

古文：初，西都覆没，四方皆劝进于帝。
现代文：当初，西晋都城覆没，四方人士都劝琅琊王即帝位。
English: At first, the capital city of West Jin fell into ruin, and people from all four directions urged the king to abdicate the throne.

古文：敦欲专国政，忌帝年长难制，欲更议所立，王导不从。
现代文：王敦想把握国政，怕元帝年龄较大，难以控制，想另行商议立君的人选，王导不同意。
English: Wang Dun wanted to take control of state affairs, fearing that the Yuan Emperor was older and difficult to control, and wanted to discuss the choice of ruler separately. Wang Du did not agree.

古文：及敦克建康，谓导曰： 不用吾言，几至覆族。 
现代文：等到王敦攻克建康，对王导说： 不遵从我的意见，几乎全族覆灭。 
English: When Wang Dun defeated Jiankang, he said to Wang Du: "If you don't follow my advice, almost your entire family will be destroyed."

古文：敦以太子有勇略，为朝野所向，欲诬以不孝而废之。大会百官，问温峤曰： 皇太子以何德称？ 
现代文：王敦因为太子司马绍有勇有谋，被朝野人士所拥戴，想以不孝的罪名诬陷太子，废除他的太子之位，因此大会百官，问温峤说： 皇太子以什么样的德行著称？ 
English: Because the Crown Prince Sima Shao was courageous and resourceful, he was favored by the people of the court and the people of the field. Wang Dun wanted to frame the crown prince with the accusation of being unfilial and abolish his position as crown prince. Therefore, the hundred officials of the General Assembly asked Wen Qi: What kind of virtue is the crown prince famous for?

古文：声色俱厉。
现代文：问话时声色俱厉。
English: His voice cracked as he asked questions.

古文：峤曰： 钩深致远，盖非浅局所量。以礼观之，可谓孝矣。 
现代文：温峤说： 钩深致远，似乎不是我浅显的度量所能知晓的，依照礼义看来，可以说是做到了孝。 
English: Wen Wei said, "It seems that the depth of the hook is far-reaching, which is not something I can know with my superficial measurement. According to the etiquette, it can be said to have achieved filial piety.

古文：众皆以为信然，敦谋遂沮。
现代文：众人都认为的确如此，王敦的阴谋遭到挫败。
English: Everyone agreed that this was indeed the case and that Wang Dun's plot had been foiled.

古文：帝召周顗于广室，谓之曰： 近日大事，二宫无恙，诸人平安，大将军固副所望邪？ 
现代文：元帝在广室召见周，对他说： 近来发生的大事，二宫未受伤害，大家平安，这是否表明大将军王敦本来就符合众望呢？ 
English: Emperor Yuan summoned Zhou to meet him in the wide room and said to him, "The recent major events have taken place, the Second Palace has not been harmed, and everyone is safe. Does this indicate that the general Wang Dun originally met everyone's expectations?

古文：顗曰： 二宫自如明诏，臣等尚未可知。 
现代文：周说： 二宫的情况，固然与陛下所说的相符，至于我们这些人的遭遇怎样，现在还未可知。 
English: Zhou said: Although the situation in the Second Palace is consistent with what His Majesty said, it is still unknown what will happen to us.

古文：护军长史郝嘏等劝顗避敦，顗曰： 吾备位大臣，朝廷丧败，宁可复草间求活，外投胡、越邪！
现代文：护军长史郝嘏等人劝周避让王敦，周说： 我既然备充大臣的职位，眼见朝廷衰败，难道还能再蛰伏草野中求活命，出外投奔胡、越吗？ 
English: Zhou said: "Since I am preparing to fill the post of minister and see the decline of the imperial court, can I still lie in the grass and beg for my life, and go out to Hu and Yue?"

古文：敦参军吕猗，尝为台郎，性奸谄，戴渊为尚书，恶之。
现代文：王敦的参军吕猗，曾经做过尚书郎，为人奸猾谄谀，戴渊当时任尚书，憎恶他的为人。
English: Lv Ying, who joined the army with Wang Tun, had once been Shang Shuro, and was a treacherous person. Dai Yuan was Shang Shuro at that time, and detested him.

古文：猗说敦曰： 周顗、戴渊，皆有高名，足以惑众，近者之言，曾无怍色，公不除之，恐必有再举之忧。 
现代文：吕猗劝说王敦道： 周、戴渊都有很高的名望，足以盅惑士众，近来的言谈又豪无惭愧的意思，您不除去他们，恐怕将来必定会有重新举兵讨伐的忧患。 
English: Lv Ye persuaded Wang Dun, saying: Zhou and Dai Yuan both have high reputations, which is enough to bewitch the masses of scholars. Their recent remarks have no sense of shame. If you don't remove them, I'm afraid there will definitely be the sorrow of raising an army to fight again in the future.

古文：敦素忌二人之才，心颇然之，从容问王导曰： 周、戴南北之望，当登三司无疑也。 
现代文：王敦素来忌妒他们二人的才能，心中颇以为然，不动声色地询问王导说： 周、戴渊，分别著称于北方和南方，应当升任三公之位是无疑的了。 
English: Wang Dun had always been envious of the talents of the two of them, and he was quite convinced in his heart. He quietly asked Wang Du and said: Zhou and Dai Yuan, famous in the north and south respectively, should be promoted to the position of the three princes without a doubt.

古文：导不答。
现代文：王导不置可否。
English: Wang Du did not say whether he would come or not.

古文：又曰： 若不三司，止应令仆邪？ 
现代文：王敦又说： 如果不用为三公，只让他们担任令或仆射的职位如何？ 
English: Wang Dun also said: If they don't have to be the three princes, how about only letting them hold the positions of commander or gunner?

古文：又不答。
现代文：王导又不回答。
English: Wang Du still did not answer.

古文：敦曰： 若不尔，正当诛尔！ 
现代文：王敦说： 如果不这样，正该诛戮他们！ 
English: Wang Dun said: If not, they should be killed!

古文：又不答。
现代文：王导还是不回答。
English: Wang Du still did not answer.

古文：丙子，敦遣部将陈郡邓岳收顗及渊。
现代文：丙子，王敦派遣部将陈郡人邓岳拘捕周和戴渊。
English: Wang Dun dispatched officers to arrest Deng Yue, a resident of Chen County, Zhou and Dai Yuan.

古文：先是，敦谓谢鲲曰： 吾当以周伯仁为尚书令，戴若思为仆射。 
现代文：此前，王敦对谢鲲说：我将任用周为尚书令，任戴渊为仆射。 
English: Previously, Wang Dun said to Xie Qi: I will appoint Zhou as the chief secretary and Dai Yuan as the deputy.

古文：是日，又问鲲： 近来人情何如？ 
现代文：这天，王敦又问谢鲲说： 近来民情如何？ 
English: On this day, Wang Dun also asked Xie Jun: "How is the people's mood recently?"

古文：鲲曰： 明公之举，虽欲大存社稷，然悠悠之言，实未达高义。
现代文：谢鲲说： 明公的举动，虽然是想保全国家社稷，但民间的议论却认为不合大义。
English: Xie Qi said: Although the move of Ming Gong is to preserve the national social order, the people's discussion believes that it is not in line with the great cause.

古文：若果能举用周、戴，则群情贴然矣！ 
现代文：如果真能举用周和戴渊，那么民众的心情就熨帖平静了。 
English: If Zhou and Dai Yuan can really be used, then the mood of the people will be calmer.

古文：敦怒曰： 君粗疏邪！二子不相当，吾已收之矣！ 
现代文：王敦发怒，说： 你这是粗疏不察，这二人名实不相称，已被我收捕了。 
English: Wang Dun was angry and said, "You are being rude. These two are not worthy of the name. I have already arrested them."

古文：鲲愕然自失。
现代文：谢鲲愕然自失。
English: Xie Yao was flabbergasted.

古文：参军王峤曰：  济济多士，文王以宁。 奈何戮诸名士！ 
现代文：参军王峤说： 济济一堂人才多，文王安宁国富强 ，怎么能诛戮诸位名士呢！ 
English: Wang Yao, who joined the army, said, "There are so many talented people in one place, and King Wen is making the country prosperous and strong. How can he slaughter all the celebrities?"

古文：敦大怒，欲斩峤，众莫敢言。
现代文：王敦勃然大怒，要将王峤斩首，众人中没有谁敢出言相救。
English: Wang Dun flew into a rage and wanted to behead Wang Yao. No one in the crowd dared to speak out to save him.

古文：鲲曰： 明公举大事，不戮一人。
现代文：谢鲲说： 明公图谋大业，不屠戮一个人。
English: Xie Yao said, "Ming Gong is planning a great undertaking, he will not slaughter a single person.

古文：峤以献替忤旨，便以衅鼓，不亦过乎！ 
现代文：现在王峤因陈献可否违背意旨，便要杀戮，不也太过分了吗？ 
English: Now Wang Yao wants to kill people because of whether or not Chen Xuan can go against his will. Isn't that too much?

古文：敦乃释之，黜为领军长史。
现代文：王敦这才放了王峤，贬职为领军长史。
English: It was only then that Wang Dun released Wang Yao and demoted him to be the leader of the army.

古文：峤，浑之族孙也。
现代文：王峤是王浑的族孙。
English: Wang Yao is a descendant of Wang Hun.

古文：顗被收，路经太庙，大言曰： 贼臣王敦，倾覆社稷，枉杀忠臣。神祇有灵，当速杀之！ 
现代文：周被捕，路经太庙，高声说： 贼臣王敦，颠覆国家社稷，胡乱杀害忠臣，神祗如呆显灵，应当快快杀掉他！ 
English: Zhou was arrested. Passing by the Great Temple, he said in a loud voice: Wang Dun, a traitor, subverted the country's social order, and killed loyalists indiscriminately. If the deity appears, he should be killed quickly!

古文：收人以戟伤其口，血流至踵，容止自若，观者皆为流涕。
现代文：捕卒用戟刺伤周的嘴，鲜血下流直至脚后跟，但他容颜举止泰然自若，观望的人都因此而落泪。
English: The arresting officer stabbed Zhou's mouth with a shovel, blood trickled down to his heel, but his face and demeanor were calm, and everyone watching was moved to tears.

古文：并戴渊杀之于石头南门之外。
现代文：周和戴渊都在石头城南门外被杀。
English: Zhou and Dai Yuan were both killed outside the south gate of Stone Town.

古文：帝使侍中王彬劳敦。彬素与顗善，先往哭顗，然后见敦。
现代文：元帝派侍中王彬犒劳王敦，王彬素来与周交好，先去哭吊周，然后去见王敦。
English: The former emperor sent his attendant, Wang Bin, to visit Wang Tun. Wang Bin had always been friendly with Zhou. He first went to visit Zhou, and then went to see Wang Tun.

古文：敦怪其容惨，问之。
现代文：王敦见他容颜凄惨，心中奇怪，便加询问。
English: Wang Dun saw that his face was gloomy and his heart was strange, so he inquired further.

古文：彬曰： 向哭伯仁，情不能已。 
现代文：王彬说： 我刚才去哭吊周伯仁，情不自禁。 
English: Wang Bin said: I just went to cry for Zhou Boren, I couldn't help myself.

古文：敦怒曰： 伯仁自致刑戮；且凡人遇汝，汝何哀而哭之？ 
现代文：王敦发怒说： 周伯仁自找刑戮，再说他把你当作一般人看待，你为什么悲哀并去哭吊他？ 
English: Wang Dun said angrily: Zhou Boren sought the execution himself, and he said that he regarded you as an ordinary person. Why did you mourn and go to mourn him?

古文：彬曰： 伯仁长者，兄之亲友；在朝虽无謇愕，亦非阿党，赦后加之极刑，所以伤惋也。 
现代文：王彬说： 周伯仁是长者，也是兄长你的亲友。他在朝时虽算不上正直，也并不结党营私，却在大赦天下后遭受极刑，我因此伤痛惋惜。 
English: Wang Bin said: Zhou Bolin is an elder, and also your elder brother and friend. Although he was not honest and did not form a party when he was in the imperial court, he was sentenced to capital punishment after the amnesty, which made me sad and regretful.

古文：因勃然数敦曰： 兄抗旌犯顺，杀戮忠良，图为不轨，祸及门户矣！ 
现代文：尔后勃然发怒，数落王敦说： 兄长违抗君命，有违顺德，杀戮忠良，图谋不轨，灾祸将要降临到门户了！ 
English: Afterwards, he flew into a rage and said, "My brother has disobeyed the king's order, violated morality, killed the faithful, plotted evil, and disaster is about to strike at the gates!"

古文：辞气慷慨，声泪俱下。
现代文：言辞情感激扬慷慨，声泪俱下。
English: Words and emotions stirred generosity, and tears welled up.

古文：敦大怒，厉声曰： 尔狂悖乃至此，以吾为不能杀汝邪！ 
现代文：王敦大怒，厉声说： 你狂妄悖乱以至于此！以为我不能杀你吗！ 
English: Wang Dun was furious and said sharply, "You are so arrogant and disorderly that you think I can't kill you!"

古文：时王导在坐，为之惧，劝彬起谢。
现代文：当时王导在坐，为了王彬担心，劝王彬起来谢罪。
English: At that time, Wang Du was sitting. Worried about Wang Bin, he advised Wang Bin to stand up and apologize.

古文：彬曰： 脚痛不能拜！且此复何谢！ 
现代文：王彬说： 我脚痛不能跪拜，再说这又有什么可谢罪的！ 
English: Wang Bin said: My feet hurt and I can't kneel down. Besides, there's nothing to be thankful for!

古文：敦曰： 脚痛孰若颈痛！ 
现代文：王敦说： 脚痛与颈痛比起来怎样？ 
English: Wang Dun said: How does foot pain compare to neck pain?

古文：彬殊无惧容，竟不肯拜。
现代文：王彬毫无惧色，最终不肯下拜。
English: Wang Bin was fearless and eventually refused to bow down.

古文：王导后料检中书故事，乃见顗救己之表，执之流涕曰： 吾虽不杀伯仁，伯仁由我而死，幽冥之中，负此良友！ 
现代文：王导后来清理中书省的旧有档案，才见到周救护自己的上表，拿着流下了眼泪，说： 我虽没杀周伯仁，伯仁是因我而死，我有负于冥间这样的好友！ 
English: Wang Du later cleaned up the old files of the Central Book Ministry, and only then did he see Zhou Anhui's own watch. He held it and shed tears, saying: Although I did not kill Zhou Boren, Boren died because of me. I have such a good friend in the underworld!

古文：沈充拔吴国，杀内史张茂。
现代文：沈充拔吴国，杀内史张茂。
English: Shen Zong pulls out of Wuzhong and kills Zhang Mao.

古文：初，王敦闻甘卓起兵，大惧。
现代文：沈充攻取了吴国，杀了内史张茂。当初，王敦听说甘卓起兵，大为恐惧。
English: Shen Chong conquered the State of Wu and killed the Inner Historian Zhang Mao. At first, Wang Dun was very afraid when he heard that Gan Zhuo had raised an army.

古文：卓兄子卬为敦参军，敦使卬归卓曰： 君此自是臣节，不相责也。
现代文：甘卓兄长之子甘是王敦的参军，王敦派甘回去游说甘卓说： 你这自然是臣子的节义，我不责怪你。
English: Gan, the eldest son of Gan Zhuo's brother, was Wang Dun's choice to join the army. Wang Dun sent Gan back to persuade Gan Zhuo, saying, "You are naturally the son of a courtier. I don't blame you.

古文：吾家计急，不得不尔。
现代文：但我们王家没有更好的办法，不得不这样做。
English: But our royal family had nothing better to do and had to do it.

古文：想便旋军襄阳，当更结好。 
现代文：希望你这就回军至襄阳，我将与你重新交好。 
English: I hope you will return to Yangyang, and I will make friends with you again.

古文：卓虽慕忠义，性多疑少决，军于猪口，欲待诸方同出军，稽留累旬不前。
现代文：甘卓虽然仰慕忠义之事，但性格多疑，缺少决断。驻军于猪口，想等待各方共同出兵，稽留数十天，停足不前。
English: Although Kanjo admired loyalty, he was suspicious and lacked determination. He stationed troops in Inokuchi and wanted to wait for all parties to send troops together. He stayed there for dozens of days and did not move forward.

古文：敦既得建康。乃遣台使以驺虞幡驻卓军。
现代文：王敦得占建康以后，便派遣朝廷使者传送饰有驺虞这种传说中的仁兽图案的旗帜给甘卓，让他的军队不要前进。
English: After Wang Dun got possession of Jiankang, he sent an emissary from the imperial court to convey a banner with the legendary image of a benevolent beast adorned with a skull and crossbones to Gan Zhuo, so that his army would not advance.

古文：卓闻周顗、戴渊死，流涕谓卬曰： 吾之所忧，正为今日。
现代文：甘卓听说周、戴渊的死讯，流着眼泪对甘说： 我所忧患的，正是今天这样的情况。
English: When Gan Zhuo heard the news of the deaths of Zhou and Dai Yuan, he shed tears and said to Gan, "What I am worried about is the situation today.

古文：且使圣上元吉，太子无恙，吾临敦上流，亦未敢遽危社稷。
现代文：倘若圣上大吉无凶，太子不受伤害，我虽然占据着王敦的上游地区，也不敢仓促发兵而使社稷遭到危难。
English: Even though I occupy the upstream area of Wangdong, I would not dare to send troops in haste and put the community in danger.

古文：适吾径据武昌，敦势逼，必劫天子以绝四海之望，不如还襄阳，更思后图。 
现代文：恰好我直接进攻武昌，王敦为情势所逼，必定会劫持天子，用以断绝天下人的期望，不如回到襄阳，再图谋后策。 
English: It just so happened that I directly attacked Wuchang. Wang Dun was forced by the situation to take action, and he would certainly kidnap Tianzi to break the world's expectations. It would be better to return to Xiangyang and try to work out a later strategy.

古文：即命旋军。
现代文：立即下令回军。
English: He immediately ordered the troops to return.

古文：都尉秦康与乐道融说卓曰： 今分兵断彭泽，使敦上下不得相赴，其众自然离散，可一战擒也。
现代文：都尉秦康和乐道融劝阻甘卓说： 如果现在分出一部分兵力截断彭泽县的通路，使王敦的军队上下不能救援，他的部众自然会离散，那么便可以一战而将他擒获。
English: Generalissimo Qin Kang and Le Dao Rong dissuaded Gan Zhuo, saying, "If a part of the army is detached now to cut off the passage of Pengze County, so that Wang Dun's army cannot be rescued, his subordinates will naturally disperse, then he can be captured in one battle.

古文：将军起义兵而中止，窃为将军不取。
现代文：将军您发动正义的军队却半途而止，我私下认为将军不该如此。
English: General, you have launched a righteous army, but it has stopped halfway. Privately, I don't think the general should have done that.

古文：且将军之下，士卒各求其利，欲求西还，亦恐不可得也。 
现代文：再说将军手下的士卒，各自谋求自己的利益，即便想向西退还，恐怕也不一定能够做到。 
English: Furthermore, the soldiers under the general's command, each seeking their own interests, even if they wanted to return to the west, would not necessarily be able to do so.

古文：卓不从。
现代文：甘卓不听。
English: Gundotra wouldn't listen.

古文：道融昼夜泣谏，卓不听；道融忧愤而卒。
现代文：乐道融日日夜夜哭泣苦谏，甘卓仍不听从，乐道融忧愤而死。
English: Le Tao Rong cried bitterly day and night, but Gan Zhuo still did not listen, and Le Tao Rong died of grief and anger.

古文：卓性本宽和，忽更强塞，径还襄阳，意气骚扰，举动失常，识者知其将死矣。
现代文：甘卓性格本来宽和，现在忽然变得强硬不可通融，直接退还到襄阳，神情惶惑不宁，举动失常，有见识的人知道他距死不远了。
English: Gan Zhuo's character was originally amiable, but now he suddenly became tough and uncompromising. He was sent straight back to Xiangyang, his expression was confused and restless, his behavior was abnormal, and people with insight knew that he was not far from death.

古文：王敦以西阳王羕为太宰，加王导尚书令，王廙为荆州刺史；改易百官及诸军镇，转徙黜免者以百数；或朝行暮改，惟意所欲。
现代文：王敦让西阳王司马为太宰，授予王导尚书令，王为荆州刺史，改换朝廷官员和各军镇守将，被降职、免官和迁徙的人数以百计。有时朝令夕改，随心所欲。
English: Wang Dun made Xiyang Wang Sima the Dazai, granted Wang Duanshang Shuling, and Wang Jingzhou Shishi, and changed the imperial officials and the military town guards. The number of people who were demoted, dismissed and migrated was in the hundreds. Sometimes the morning order was changed to evening, as desired.

古文：敦将还武昌，谢鲲言于敦曰： 公至都以来，称疾不朝，是以虽建勋而人心实有未达。
现代文：王敦将要返回武昌，谢鲲对他说： 明公自到京都以来，一直以有病为由不朝见皇上，所以虽然建有功勋，民心其实并未平服。
English: When Wang Dun was about to return to Wuchang, Xie Yao said to him, "Since Ming Gong came to Kyoto, he has always refused to meet the emperor on the grounds that he is ill. Therefore, although he has made great achievements, the people's hearts are not satisfied.

古文：今若朝天子，使君臣释然，则物情皆悦服矣。 
现代文：现在如果朝见天子，使得君上和臣民都心情舒畅，那么民心都会心悦诚服的。 
English: Now, if seeing the Son of Heaven in the morning makes the emperor and his subjects feel comfortable, then the people's hearts will be pleased.

古文：敦曰： 君能保无变乎？ 
现代文：王敦说： 你能保证不发生变故吗？ 
English: Wang Dun said: Can you guarantee that nothing will go wrong?

古文：对曰： 鲲近日入觐，主上侧席，迟得见公，宫省穆然，必无虞也。
现代文：谢鲲回答说： 我近些天入宫觐见皇上，皇上侧席而坐，等待得见主公，宫省之内穆然整肃，必定不会有什么可担忧的。
English: Xie Yao replied, "I recently went to the imperial court to see the emperor. I sat at the emperor's side and waited to see the lord. The imperial palace is being cleaned up. There is certainly nothing to worry about."

古文：公若入朝，鲲请侍从。 
现代文：主公如果入朝，我请求充当您的侍从。 
English: If the Lord comes to the Imperial Court, I beg to be your attendant.

古文：敦勃然曰： 正复杀君等数百人，亦复何损于时！ 
现代文：王敦发怒变色说： 我正要再杀掉你这样的数百人，对时局也不会有什么损害！ 
English: Wang Dun turned pale with anger and said: I am about to kill hundreds of people like you again, and it will not do any harm to the current situation!

古文：竟不朝而去。
现代文：最终也没有朝见天子便离去。
English: In the end, he left without seeing the Son of God.

古文：夏，四月，敦还武昌。
现代文：夏季，四月，王敦回到武昌。
English: In the summer, in April, Wang Dun returned to Wuchang.

古文：初，宜都内史天门周级闻谯王承起兵，使其兄子该潜诣长沙，申款于承。
现代文：当初，宜都内史、天门郡人周级听说谯王司马起兵，让自己兄长的儿子周该潜入长沙，向司马效忠。
English: At first, it was convenient for the history of the capital and the people of Tianmen County to hear that King Sima had raised an army, so that his brother's son, Zhou Ge, would sneak into Changsha and be loyal to Sima.

古文：魏乂等攻湘州急，承遣该及从事邵陵周崎间出求救，皆为逻者所得。
现代文：魏等人急攻湘州，司马派周该和从事邵陵人周崎悄悄地外出寻求救兵，都被巡逻部队抓获。
English: Wei and others made a sudden attack on Hunan, Sima sent Zhou Jia and Zhou Qi, who was engaged in Shao Ling, quietly went out to seek rescue, and were all captured by the patrol force.

古文：又使崎语城中，称大将军已克建康，甘卓还襄阳，外援理绝。
现代文：魏让周崎向城中喊话，说大将军王敦已经攻克建康，甘卓已回军襄阳，外缓已经断绝。
English: Wei asked Zhou Qi to call out to the city, saying that the general Wang Dun had conquered Jiankang, Gan Zhuo had returned to the army of Xiangyang, and the delay had been broken.

古文：崎伪许之，既至城下，大呼曰： 援兵寻至，努力坚守！ 
现代文：周崎假装同意，等到了城下，大声呼喊说： 援兵不久就到，努力坚守！ 
English: Zhou Qi pretended to agree, and waited at the foot of the castle, shouting loudly: Reinforcements will arrive soon, try to hold on!

古文：乂杀之。
现代文：魏杀了他。
English: Wei killed him.

古文：乂考该至死，竟不言其故，周级由是获免。
现代文：魏拷问周该，周该至死不说事情的原委，周该因此免遭祸殃。
English: Wei tortured Zhou Jia, Zhou Jia did not tell the original committee of the matter until his death, so Zhou Jia was spared from the disaster.

古文：乂等攻战日逼，敦又送所得台中人书疏，令乂射以示承。
现代文：魏乂等人攻战日紧，王敦又送来他所得到的朝廷中人的上书和奏疏，令魏用箭射入城中晓示司马。
English: As the day of Wei's attack was drawing near, Wang Dun sent him a letter and a report from someone in the imperial court. Wei was ordered to shoot an arrow into the city to show Sima.

古文：城中知朝廷不守，莫不怅惋。
现代文：城中军民知道朝廷失守，莫不惆怅惋惜。
English: The soldiers and people in the city knew that the imperial court had been defeated, and they did not regret it.

古文：相持且百日，刘翼战死，士卒死伤相枕。
现代文：相持将近百日，刘翼战死，士卒死伤众多，纵横枕藉。
English: After nearly a hundred days of resistance, Liu Ying was killed in battle, and many soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：癸巳，乂拔长沙，承等皆被执。
现代文：癸巳，魏拔取长沙城，司马等人都被俘获。
English: Soon after, Wei captured Changsha City, and Sima and others were captured.

古文：乂将杀虞悝，子弟对之号泣。悝曰： 人生会当有死，今阖门为忠义之鬼，亦复何恨！ 
现代文：魏将要杀死虞悝，虞悝的子弟面对他号陶大哭，虞悝说： 人生该当有一死，现在我满门都是忠义之鬼，又有什么遗憾！ 
English: Wei is going to kill Yuyao, Yuyao's son is crying loudly in front of him, Yuyao said: Life should have a death, now I am full of loyalty ghosts, what a pity!

古文：乂以槛车载承及易雄送武昌，佐吏皆奔散，惟主簿桓雄、西曹书佐韩阶、从事武延，毁服为僮，从承，不离左右。
现代文：魏乂用槛车载着司马和易雄押送去武昌，司马手下的佐吏大多逃奔离散，只有主簿桓雄、西曹书佐韩阶、从事武延三人，毁去官服，充当僮仆追随司马，不离左右。
English: Wei Wei drove Sima and Yi Xiong to Wuchang in a sleigh. Most of Sima's aides fled and dispersed. Only the chief aide, Huan Xiong, the chief aide, Han Qi, and Wu Yan, three people, destroyed their official uniforms and followed Sima as servants, never leaving his side.

古文：乂见桓雄姿貌举止非凡人，惮而杀之。
现代文：魏见桓雄姿态容貌、言行举止都与众不同，心内忌惮，因而将他杀害。
English: Wei saw that Kuanxiong's posture, appearance, speech, and behavior were all different, and he was afraid of him, so he killed him.

古文：韩阶、武延执志愈固。
现代文：韩阶、武延持守心志更加坚定。
English: Han Zha and Wu Yan are more determined to hold on.

古文：荆州刺史王廙承敦旨，杀承于道中，阶、延送承丧至都，葬之而去。
现代文：荆州刺史王接到王敦的旨意，在半道杀掉了司马，韩阶、武延为司马送丧至京都，安葬了他以后才离去。
English: Upon receiving Wang Dun's order, Jingzhou Sisi Wang killed Sima in the middle of the road. Han Zha and Wu Yan sent Sima's funeral to Kyoto and buried him before leaving.

古文：易雄至武昌，意气忼慨，曾无惧容。
现代文：易雄到达武昌，意气慷慨，毫无惧色。
English: Yi Xiong arrived in Wuchang, generous and fearless.

古文：敦遣人以檄示雄而数之，雄曰： 此实有之，惜雄位微力弱，不能救国难耳。
现代文：王敦派人拿着易雄当初起草的讨罪檄书给他看，数落易雄的罪状，易雄说： 确有此事，可惜我职位低微，力量不足，不能挽救国难。
English: Wang Dun sent a person to show him the incriminating letter originally drafted by Ixiong, and to count Ixiong's charges. Ixiong said: This is indeed the case. Unfortunately, my position is low and my strength is insufficient, and I cannot save the country from disaster.

古文：今日之死，固所愿也！ 
现代文：今天赴死，本来就是我的心愿。 
English: To die today is my heart's desire.

古文：敦惮其辞正，释之，遣就舍。
现代文：王敦忌惮他义正辞严，将他释放回家。
English: Wang Dun shunned his righteous words and released him to go home.

古文：众人皆贺之，雄笑曰： 吾安得生！ 
现代文：众人都来称贺，易雄笑着说： 王敦怎能容我活下去！ 
English: Everyone came to congratulate, and Yi Xiong said with a smile: "How can Wang Dun allow me to live!

古文：既而敦遣人潜杀之。
现代文：不久王敦派人将易雄暗杀。
English: Soon Wang Dun sent someone to assassinate Ixiong.

古文：魏乂求邓骞甚急，乡人皆为之惧，骞笑曰： 此欲用我耳，彼新得州，多杀忠良，故求我以厌人望也。 
现代文：魏寻找邓骞十分急迫，乡人们都为邓骞担心，邓骞笑着说： 这是想任用我而已。魏刚刚统治本州，杀害了不少忠良之士，所以要找我来安定民心。 
English: Wei's search for Deng Yao was very urgent, and the villagers were worried about Deng Yao. Deng Yao smiled and said, "They just wanted to appoint me. Wei had just ruled Honshu and killed many loyal people, so they wanted to find me to stabilize the people's hearts."

古文：乃往诣乂。
现代文：于是前往拜见魏。
English: So he went to see Wei.

古文：乂喜曰： 君，古之解扬也。 
现代文：魏欢喜地说： 您是古代的解扬。 
English: Wei said with joy: You are the ancient unwinding.

古文：以为别驾。
现代文：任他为别驾。
English: Let him go.

古文：诏以陶侃领湘州刺史；王敦上侃复还广州，加散骑常侍。
现代文：元帝下诏让陶侃兼领湘州刺史职，王敦上书，又让陶侃返回广州，授予散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed that Tao Kan should also hold the post of Hunan Provincial Historian, and Wang Dun wrote a letter to this effect. Tao Kan was also allowed to return to Guangzhou, and was awarded the title of Sanzhi Changzhuang.

古文：甲午，前赵羊后卒，谥曰献文。
现代文：甲午，前赵的羊后去世，谥号献文。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the former Zhao's sheep died, and the donation was made.

古文：甘卓家人皆劝卓备王敦，卓不从，悉散兵佃作，闻谏，辄怒。
现代文：甘卓的家人都劝甘卓防备王敦，甘卓不听，把兵众悉数遣散从事佃作，一听到有人谏诤就发怒。
English: Ganzo's family members all advised Ganzo to be on guard against Wang Dun, but Ganzo did not listen and sent all of his soldiers to engage in counterfeiting. He became enraged as soon as he heard that someone was counterfeiting.

古文：襄阳太守周虑密承敦意，诈言湖中多鱼，劝卓遣左右悉出捕鱼。
现代文：襄阳太守周虑秘密接受王敦的旨意，诈称湖中有许多鱼，劝甘卓派身边的侍从人众都下湖捕鱼。
English: Yangyang Dazhu Zhou Shen secretly accepted Wang Dun's will, falsely claiming that there were many fish in the lake, and persuaded all the attendants around Gan Zhuo to go fishing in the lake.

古文：五月，乙亥，虑引兵袭卓于寝室，杀之，传首于敦，并杀其诸子。
现代文：五月，乙亥，周虑带兵偷袭，把甘卓杀死于寝室，将首级传送给王敦，同时杀掉甘卓诸子。
English: In May, Yi Hai, Zhou Xian and his soldiers made a surprise attack, killed Ganzo in his bedroom, sent the head to Wang Dun, and killed Ganzo's sons.

古文：敦以从事中郎周抚督沔北诸军事，代卓镇沔中。
现代文：王敦让从事中郎周抚督察沔北地区军务，代替甘卓镇守沔中。
English: Wang Dun let Zhonglang Zhou Fu inspector engage in the military affairs in the north of Fengtai, replacing Ganzhuo Zhengu of Fengtai.

古文：抚，访之子也。
现代文：周抚是周访之子。
English: Zhou Fu is the son of Zhou Qi.

古文：敦既得志，暴慢滋甚，四方贡献多入其府，将相岳牧皆出其门。
现代文：王敦得志以后，越发暴虐傲慢，四方贡献的物品大多送入他的府第，将相及地方的文武大员，全都出自他的门下。
English: After Wang Dun became famous, he became more and more tyrannical and arrogant. Most of the items contributed by the four parties were sent to his capital, and all the local literati and military officers were from his school.

古文：以沈充、钱凤为谋主，唯二人之言是从，所谮无不死者。
现代文：王敦任用沈充、钱凤为谋主，只对他们二人言听计从，凡被他们谮言诋毁之人无不遇害。
English: Wang Dun appointed Shencong and Qianfeng as his advisers. He only listened to the advice of the two of them, and anyone who was slandered by them would be killed.

古文：以诸葛瑶、邓岳、周抚、李恒、谢雍为爪牙。
现代文：又任用诸葛瑶、邓岳、周抚、李恒、谢雍等人为武臣。
English: He also appointed Zhuge Liang, Deng Yue, Zhou Fu, Li Heng, Xie Yong and others as warriors.

古文：充等并凶险骄恣，大起营府，侵人田宅，剽掠市道，识者咸知其将败焉。
现代文：沈充等人都是凶恶阴险骄恣之徒，大肆建造军营府第，侵占他人田宅，公然拦路抢劫。有识之士都知道他们行将败亡。
English: Shen Chong and the others were vicious, insidious, dangerous, and arrogant. They built military camps, occupied other people's homes, and openly robbed roads. People with insight knew that they would be defeated.

古文：秋，七月，后赵中山公虎拔泰山，执徐龛送襄国；后赵王勒盛之以囊，于百尺楼上扑杀之，命王伏都等妻子刳而食之，坑其降卒三千人。
现代文：秋季，七月，后赵的中山公石虎攻取泰山，擒获徐龛送往襄国。后越王石勒把徐龛塞进袋中，从百尺高楼上扔下摔死，又命令王伏都等人的妻子儿女割下徐龛身体上的肉吃掉，坑杀降卒三千人。
English: In the autumn, in July, after Zhao Zhongshan's general Shihu captured Mount Tai, he captured Xu Yao and sent him to Xiangguo. After this, the king of Yue, Shi Le, stuffed Xu Yao into a bag, threw him down from a hundred-foot high building to his death, and ordered the wives and children of Wang Fudu and others to cut off the flesh from Xu Yao's body and eat it, killing at least three thousand people.

古文：兗州刺史郗鉴在邹山三年，有众数万。
现代文：兖州刺史郗鉴留住邹山三年，拥有士众数万。
English: Zhangzhou Zhishi Shujian retained Lushan for three years and has tens of thousands of scholars.

古文：战争不息，百姓饥馑，掘野鼠、蛰燕而食之，为后赵所逼，退屯合肥。尚书右仆射纪瞻，以鉴雅望清德，宜从容台阁，上疏请征之；乃征拜尚书。
现代文：因为当时战争不息，百姓饥馑难忍，以至挖掘田鼠和藏伏避寒的燕子作为食物，后赵乘机进逼，郗鉴退守合肥，尚书右仆射纪瞻认为郗鉴名望不错，道德高尚，应当在朝中施展才能，于是上疏请求征用他。元帝便征召郗鉴任尚书。
English: Because at that time the war was incessant and the people were starving, so much so that they dug up voles and swallows hiding from the cold as food. Later, Zhao took advantage of the opportunity to push forward, and Zou Jian retreated to Hefei. Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Jizhun, thought that Zou Jian was well-known and had high morals, and that he should display his talents in the court, so Shangsu requested to conscript him. The Yuan Emperor then conscripted Zou Jian to serve as Shangshu.

古文：徐、兗间诸坞多降于后赵，后赵置守宰以抚之。
现代文：徐州、兖州地区的坞堡大多投降后赵，后赵在当地设置官员加以抚慰。
English: Most of the dockyards in the Xuzhou and Zhangzhou regions surrendered to He Zhao, and He Zhao set up local officials to appease them.

古文：王敦自领宁、益二州都督。
现代文：王敦自任宁州、益州都督。
English: Wang Dun appointed himself the governor of Ningzhou and Yizhou.

古文：冬，十月，己丑，荆州刺史武陵康侯王廙卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，己丑，荆州刺史、武陵康侯王死。
English: Winter, October, ugly, Jingzhou stabbing history, Wuling Kang Hou Wang death.

古文：王敦以下邳内史王邃都督青、徐、幽、平四州诸军事，镇淮阴；卫将军王含都督沔南诸军事，领荆州刺史；武昌太守丹杨王谅为交州刺史。
现代文：王敦让下邳内史王邃都督青、徐、幽、平四州军务，镇守淮阴；让卫将军王含都督沔南军务，兼任荆州刺史；让武昌太守、丹杨人王谅出任交州刺史。
English: Wang Dun assigned the military affairs of the four prefectures of Qing, Xu, Yu and Ping to the governor of the Lower Yunnan Province, and the military affairs of Huaiyin to the town guard; the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province to the governor of the Southern Yunnan Province, and the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province to the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province; the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province to the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province; the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province to the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province; and the military affairs of the Southern Yunnan Province to the military affairs of

古文：使谅收交州刺史脩湛、新昌太守梁硕杀之。
现代文：又让王谅拘捕原交州刺史湛、新昌太守梁硕并处死。
English: He also ordered Wang Yuanzhong to arrest and execute the former Jiaozhou governor Shizhan and Xinchang governor Liang Shuo.

古文：谅诱湛。斩之。
现代文：王谅诱捕湛，将他斩首。
English: Wang Yu trapped Zhan and beheaded him.

古文：硕举兵围谅于龙编。
现代文：梁硕发兵在龙编包围了王谅。
English: Liang Shuo sent troops to encircle Wang Qian in Longhan.

古文：祖逖既卒，后越屡寇河南，拔襄城、城父，围谯。
现代文：祖逖死后，后赵屡屡侵犯黄河以南，拔取襄城、城父，又围攻谯。
English: After Zu Xi's death, Hou Zhao repeatedly invaded the south of the Yellow River, took Xiangcheng and Chengfutang, and besieged Yunnan.

古文：豫州刺史祖约不能御，退屯寿春。
现代文：豫州刺史祖约抵挡不住，退守寿春。
English: Unable to resist, Yu Zhou stabbed Shizuo and retreated to Shuchun.

古文：后赵遂取陈留，梁、郑之间复骚然矣。
现代文：后赵于是攻取了陈留，梁州、郑州地区的形势又变得动荡不安。
English: After that, Zhao captured Chenliu, and the situation in Liangzhou and Zhengzhou became unstable.

古文：十一月，以临颖元公荀组为太尉；辛酉，薨。
现代文：十一月，东晋任命临颍元公荀组为太尉。辛酉，荀组故去。
English: In November, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Linyi Yuan Gong Yigui as a lieutenant. Xin Yigui and Yigui passed away.

古文：罢司徒，并丞相府。
现代文：东晋取消司徒这种官衔，将其执掌的事务并入丞相府管辖。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty abolished the official title of the magistrate, and the affairs he was in charge of were incorporated into the jurisdiction of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：王敦以司徒官属为留府。
现代文：王敦把原司徒官属成员组成留守府。
English: Wang Dun reorganized the members of the former officers and cadets into the Residual Office.

古文：帝忧愤成疾，闰月，己丑，崩。
现代文：元帝因忧愤染病，闰月，己丑，元帝驾崩。
English: The Yuan Emperor contracted an illness due to grief and anger, the intercalary month, he became ugly, and the Yuan Emperor died.

古文：司空王导受遗诏辅政。
现代文：司空王导接受元帝遗诏辅佐朝政。
English: King Siku accepted Emperor Yuan's will and became an aide to the Imperial Court.

古文：帝恭俭有馀而明断不足，故大业未复而祸乱内兴。
现代文：元帝恭俭有余而明断不足，所以未能恢复大业却在内部发生祸乱。
English: Emperor Yuan's frugality was more than enough, but definitely not enough, so he failed to restore the great cause, but there was internal turmoil.

古文：庚寅，太子即皇帝位，大赦，尊所生母荀氏为建安君。
现代文：庚寅，太子司马绍继承帝位，大赦天下，尊奉生母荀氏为建安君。
English: Geng Yin, Prince Sima Shao succeeded to the throne, the world forgave him, and honored his birth mother, Lady Zou, as Jian Anjun.

古文：十二月，赵主曜葬其父母于粟邑，大赦。
现代文：十二月，前赵主刘曜将其父母安葬在粟邑，大赦天下。
English: In December, Liu You, the former Zhao Lord, buried his parents in Maoyu, a great mercy to the world.

古文：陵下周二里，上高百尺，计用六万夫，作之百日乃成。
现代文：陵墓基长周圆二里，上高百尺，共计动用六万人，建造了一百天才成。
English: The base of the mausoleum has a circumference of two miles and a height of one hundred feet. A total of sixty thousand people were used to build it in one hundred days.

古文：役者夜作，继以脂烛，民甚苦之。
现代文：从事劳役的人挑灯夜作，不分昼夜，百姓深感劳苦。
English: People engaged in labor work work at night, regardless of day and night, and the people are deeply affected by the hardships.

古文：游子远谏，不听。
现代文：游子远谏诤，刘曜不听。
English: Yu Zi is far away, Liu You is not listening.

古文：后赵濮阳景侯张宾卒，后赵王勒哭之恸，曰： 天不欲成吾事邪？
现代文：后赵濮阳景侯张宾故去，后赵王石勒哭吊时十分悲恸，说： 是上天不愿让我成就事业吗？
English: After Zhao Shiyang Jinghong Zhang Bin passed away, Zhao Wang Shile was very sad when he cried and said: Is God unwilling to let me achieve my career?

古文：何夺吾右侯之早也！ 
现代文：为何这么早便夺去了我的右侯！ 
English: Why did you take my right hand so early!

古文：程遐代为右长史。
现代文：程遐代替张宾为右长史。
English: Cheng Hao replaced Zhang Bin as the right leader.

古文：遐，世子弘之舅也，勒每与遐议，有所不合，辄叹曰： 右侯舍我去，乃令我与此辈共事，岂非酷乎！ 
现代文：程遐是世子石弘的娘舅，石勒每逢与程遐议事，意见有所不合，总要叹息说： 右侯舍我而去，却让我和这种人共事，难道不是太残酷了吗！ 
English: Cheng Yao was the maternal uncle of the heir of Shi Hong. Whenever Shi Le had a disagreement with Cheng Yao, he would always sigh and say, "Isn't it too cruel for the right honourable gentleman to leave me and let me work with such a person!"

古文：因流涕弥日。
现代文：为此终日流泪。
English: I shed tears all day because of this.

古文：张茂使将军韩璞帅众取陇西、南安之地，置秦州。
现代文：张茂让将军韩璞率领部众攻取陇西、南安地区，设置秦州。
English: Zhang Maozhan let General Han Zheng lead the troops to conquer the regions of Shaanxi and Nan'an and set up Qinzhou.

古文：慕容廆遣其世子皝袭段末柸，入令支，掠其居民千馀家而还。
现代文：慕容派世子慕容袭击段末，攻入令支，劫掠一千多家居民后返回。
English: At the end of the attack, Murong sent his son Murong to invade Lingzhi, plundered more than a thousand residents and then returned.

古文：肃宗明皇帝上
现代文：肃宗明皇帝上
English: Emperor Suzongming on the throne

古文：中宗元皇帝下太宁元年
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年
English: Emperor Jimmings reign began in the first year of Taining

古文：春，正月，成李骧、任回寇台登，将军司马玖战死，越巂太守李钊、汉嘉太守王载皆以郡降于成。
现代文：春季，正月，成汉李骧、任回侵犯台登，将军司马玖战死，赵太守李钊、汉嘉太守王载都献纳本郡投降成汉。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Chenghan Li Jie and Ren Hui invaded Taitung, General Sima Jie died in the battle, Zhao Dazhong Li Jie and Han Jia Dazhong Wang Zai both surrendered their counties to Chenghan.

古文：二月，庚戌，葬元帝于建平陵。
现代文：二月，庚戌，元帝入葬建平陵。
English: In February, Geng Zi, Emperor Yuan was buried in Jianping Mausoleum.

古文：三月，戊寅朔，改元。
现代文：三月，戊寅朔，改年号为太宁。
English: In March, Wu Yinshuo changed his name to Taining.

古文：饶安、东光、安陵三县灾，烧七千馀家，死者万五千人。
现代文：饶安、东光、安陵三县发生火灾，烧毁七千多家住房，死者达一万五千人。
English: Fires broke out in the three counties of Rao'an, Dongguang and Anling, destroying more than 7,000 houses and killing up to 15,000 people.

古文：后赵寇彭城、下邳，徐州刺史卞敦与征北将军王邃退保盱眙。
现代文：后赵侵犯彭城、下邳，徐州刺史卞敦和征北将军王邃退守盱眙。
English: Later, Zhao invaded Pengcheng, Jiaozuo, Xuzhou, Zhishidun, and the Northern Expeditionary Army's general Wang Qi retreated to Guizhou.

古文：敦，壸之从父兄也。
现代文：卞敦是卞壶的堂兄。
English: Zhen Dun is the cousin of Zou Jiu.

古文：王敦谋篡位，讽朝廷征己；帝手诏征之。
现代文：王敦阴谋篡夺皇位，暗示朝廷征召自己，明帝亲手书写诏书征召他。
English: Wang Dun plotted to usurp the imperial throne, suggesting that the imperial court conscript him, and the Ming emperor conscripted him by writing an edict with his own hand.

古文：夏，四月，加敦黄钺、班剑，奏事不名，入朝不趋，剑履上殿。
现代文：夏季四月，授予王敦黄和班剑，允许他奏事不必通名，入朝不必趋行，佩剑着履上殿。
English: In the summer of April, Wang Dun was awarded the rank of Huang and Pan Jian, allowing him to serve without a common name, enter the court without having to travel, and enter the palace with a sword.

古文：敦移镇姑孰，屯于湖，以司空导为司徒，敦自领扬州牧。
现代文：王敦迁移驻镇姑孰，屯兵于湖。让司空王导任司徒，王敦自任扬州牧。
English: Wang Dun moved his garrison to the town of Guzheng and stationed his troops at the lake. King Siku was assigned as the leader of the garrison, while Wang Dun became Yangzhou's herdsman.

古文：敦欲为逆，王彬谏之甚苦。
现代文：王敦想叛逆篡位，王彬极力苦谏。
English: Wang Dun wanted to rebel and usurp the throne, and Wang Bin tried his best to stop him.

古文：敦变色，目左右，将收之。
现代文：王敦发怒变脸，用目光示意右右侍从，将要逮捕王彬。
English: Wang Dun changed his face in anger and signaled with his eyes to his right-hand attendant that Wang Bin was about to be arrested.

古文：彬正色曰： 君昔岁杀兄，今又杀弟邪！ 
现代文：王彬容颜凛然地说： 您过去杀害兄长，现在又要杀害兄弟吗！ 
English: Wang Bin said with a dignified countenance: You used to kill your elder brother, and now you want to kill your younger brother!

古文：敦乃止，以彬为豫章太守。
现代文：王敦这才罢手，让王彬出任豫章太守。
English: It was only then that Wang Dun gave up and allowed Wang Bin to take up the post of Yuzhang Dazhu.

古文：后赵王勒遣使结好于慕容廆，廆执送建康。
现代文：后赵王石勒派遣使者与慕容通好，慕容将来使拘捕，送至建康。
English: Later, Zhao Wangshile sent an envoy to get along with Murong, and Murong was arrested and sent to Jiankang.

古文：成李骧等进攻宁州，刺史褒中壮公王逊使将军姚岳等拒之，战于螗良，成兵大败。
现代文：成汉的李骧等人进攻宁州，宁州刺史、褒中壮公王逊派将军姚岳等人拒敌，双方在螗交战，成汉的军队大败。
English: Li Wei and others of the Chenghan dynasty attacked Ningzhou, and the Sunni generals Yao Yue and others of the Tang dynasty in Ningzhou and Baozhong Zhuangguo rejected the enemy. The two sides fought at the Battle of Jiuyuan, and the army of the Chenghan dynasty suffered a great defeat.

古文：岳追至泸水，成兵争济，溺死者千馀人。
现代文：姚岳追袭到沪水，成汉士兵争相渡河，溺水而死的有一千多人。
English: Yao Yue pursued them to the Hushui River, and soldiers of the Chenghan Dynasty crossed the river one after another. More than a thousand people died from drowning.

古文：岳以道远，不敢济而还。
现代文：姚岳因为路远，不敢再渡河追击，于是退军。
English: Because of the distance, Yao Yue did not dare to cross the river to pursue, so he withdrew.

古文：逊以岳不穷追，大怒，鞭之，怒甚，冠裂而卒。
现代文：王逊认为姚岳没有穷追敌军，勃然大怒，鞭打姚岳。王逊因为气恼过度，以至冠帽爆裂而死。
English: Wang Xun thought that Yao Yue did not pursue the enemy army, flew into a rage, and whipped Yao Yue. Wang Xun died because his anger was too much, and his cap burst.

古文：逊在州十四年，威行殊俗，州人立其子坚行州府事。诏除坚宁州刺史。
现代文：王逊治理宁州十四年，威仪举动不同寻常。宁州人推举其子王坚代掌州府事务，明帝下诏授王坚为宁州刺史。
English: Wang Xun governed Ningzhou for fourteen years, and his dignified behavior was unusual. The people of Ningzhou elected his son Wang Jian to be in charge of the affairs of the state capital, and the Ming Emperor awarded Wang Jian as the history of Ningzhou.

古文：广州刺史陶侃遣兵救交州；未至，梁硕拔龙编，夺刺史王谅节，谅不与，硕断其右臂。
现代文：广州刺史陶侃派兵救援交州，还未到达目的地，梁硕已攻取了龙编。梁硕抢夺刺史王谅的符节，王谅不给，梁硕砍断他的右臂。
English: The Guangzhou assassin Tao Kan sent soldiers to rescue Jiaozhou, but before they reached their destination, Liang Shuo had already captured Long Bian. Liang Shuo snatched the rune of the assassin Wang Yue, but Wang Yue refused to give it to him, and Liang Shuo cut off his right arm.

古文：谅曰： 死且不避，断臂何为！ 
现代文：王谅说： 我连死都不怕，砍断手臂又有什么用？ 
English: Wang Yuanzhong said, "I'm not even afraid of death, so what's the use of cutting off my arm?"

古文：逾旬而卒。
现代文：过了十来天后去世。
English: He died about ten days later.

古文：六月，壬子，立妃庾氏为皇后；以后兄中领军亮为中书监。
现代文：六月，壬子，明帝立妃子庾氏为皇后，让皇后的兄长中领军庾亮任中书监。
English: In June, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, Ren Zi, appointed the Empress Dowager Zou as the Empress, and appointed the Empress's brother, the middle-ranking general Zou Liang, as the middle-ranking librarian.

古文：梁硕据交州，凶暴失众心。
现代文：梁硕占据交州后，因为凶残暴虐失去民心。
English: After Liang Shuo occupied Jiaozhou, he lost the hearts of the people because of his brutal violence.

古文：陶侃遣参军高宝攻硕，斩之。
现代文：陶侃派遣参军高宝领军进攻梁硕，将他斩首。
English: Tao Kan dispatched Gaobao's army to attack Liang Shuo and beheaded him.

古文：诏以侃领交州刺史，进号征南大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：明帝下诏让陶侃兼任交州刺史，进封号为征南大将军，开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Ming decreed that Tao Kan would also serve as the governor of Jiaozhou, with the title of General of the Conquest of the South, and the title of Kaifu and the three divisions.

古文：未几，吏部郎阮放求为交州刺史，许之。
现代文：不久，吏部郎阮放请求出任交州刺史，获得同意。
English: Not long after, the secretary, Nguyn Phng, requested to be appointed as the secretary of Gyeongju, which was approved.

古文：放行至宁浦，遇高宝，为宝设馔，伏兵杀之。
现代文：阮放行至宁浦，路遇高宝，为高宝设宴，暗伏甲士把高宝杀害。
English: Ruan Fang went to Ningpu, met Gao Bao on the road, held a banquet for Gao Bao, and secretly killed Gao Bao.

古文：宝兵击放，放走，得免，至州。
现代文：高宝手下士兵攻击阮放，阮放逃走，幸免于难。
English: Gao Bao's soldiers attacked Ruan Fang. Ruan Fang escaped and survived.

古文：少时，病卒。
现代文：到达任所不久，因病而死。
English: Shortly after arriving at the post, he died of illness.

古文：放，咸之族子也。
现代文：阮放是阮咸的同族子孙。
English: Nguyn Phng is a descendant of Nguyn Hanh.

古文：陈安围赵征西将军刘贡于南安，休屠王石武自桑城引兵趣上邽以救之，与贡合击安，大破之。
现代文：陈安在南安围困前赵的征西将军刘贡，休屠王石武从桑城率领军队通由上赶来救援，和刘贡合击陈安，给予重创。
English: Before Chen'an was besieged in Nan'an, Liu Gong, Zhao's general of the Western Conquest, came to Chen'an's rescue. Shi Wu, the King of Xiu Tuo, led an army from Sangcheng to rescue Chen'an. He and Liu Gong fought against Chen'an, inflicting heavy losses.

古文：安收馀骑八千，走保陇城。
现代文：陈安收拢残余骑兵八千人，败逃退守陇城。
English: Chen An rounded up the remaining eight thousand cavalrymen, fled in defeat, and retreated to defend Lucheng.

古文：秋，七月，赵主曜自将围陇城，别遣兵围上邽。
现代文：秋季，七月，前赵主刘曜亲任主将围攻陇城，另遣军队围困上。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu You, the former lord of Zhao, personally led the siege of Lucheng, and sent another army to besiege it.

古文：安频出战，辄败。
现代文：陈安频频出战，屡遭败绩。
English: Chen An frequently went to war and was repeatedly defeated.

古文：右军将军刘干攻平襄，克之，陇上诸县悉降。
现代文：前赵右军将军刘攻克了平襄，陇上许多县份投降。
English: Liu, the former general of Zhao Yu's army, conquered Pingxiang and forced many counties to surrender.

古文：安留其将杨伯支、姜冲儿守陇城，自帅精骑突围，出奔陕中。
现代文：陈安留下部将杨伯支、姜冲儿坚守陇城，自己率精锐骑兵突围，逃奔陕中。
English: Chen An left his generals Yang Bochi and Jiang Chong'er to hold fast to Lucheng, and led his elite cavalry to break out of the encirclement and flee to central Shaanxi.

古文：曜遣将军平先等追之。
现代文：刘曜派将军平先等人追击。
English: Liu Ye sent General Pingxian and others to pursue.

古文：安左挥七尺大刀，右运丈八蛇矛，近则刀矛俱发，辄殪五六人，远则左右驰射而走。
现代文：陈安左手挥舞七尺大刀，右手运起丈八蛇矛，一旦敌人接近就刀、矛同时挥动，每次都能杀死五、六人。追敌稍远，便左右驰骋一边发箭，一边退走。
English: Chen An waved a seven-foot-long sword in his left hand, and his right hand raised a long snake spear. As soon as the enemy approached, he would wave the sword and spear at the same time, killing five or six people each time. If he chased the enemy a little further, he would gallop left and right while firing arrows and retreating.

古文：先亦勇捷如飞，与安搏战，三交，遂夺其蛇矛。
现代文：平先也是勇武敏捷如飞，和陈安搏战，三次交手，才夺下陈安的蛇矛。
English: He was also brave and agile as a bird, and fought with Chen An for three times before he won Chen An's snake spear.

古文：会日暮雨甚，安弃马与左右匿于山中；赵兵索之，不知所在。
现代文：适逢天色近暮，大雨滂沱，陈安便丢弃马匹，和左右侍从藏匿于山中。前赵士兵四处搜索，不知其所在。
English: When it was getting dark and it was raining heavily, Chen An abandoned his horses and hid in the mountains with his attendants. The former Zhao soldiers searched everywhere, not knowing where he was.

古文：明日，安遣其将石容觇赵兵，赵辅威将军呼延青人获之，拷问安所在，容卒不肯言，青人杀之。
现代文：第二天，陈安派部将石容窥察赵兵动向，被前赵辅威将军呼延青人抓获。呼延青人拷打石容，询问陈安的藏身之处，石容始终不肯说，被呼延青人杀死。
English: The next day, Chen An's faction sent Shi Rong to spy on Zhao Bei's movement, and he was caught by the former General Zhao Yuwei's Huyan youth. The Huyan youth tortured Shi Rong and asked Chen An where he was hiding. Shi Rong still refused to say, and was killed by the Huyan youth.

古文：雨霁，青人寻其迹，获安于涧曲，斩之。
现代文：雨停以后，呼延青人发现踪迹，在山涧的弯曲处抓住陈安，当即斩首。
English: After the rain stopped, the Huyan youths found a trail, grabbed Chen An at a bend in the mountains, and immediately beheaded him.

古文：安善抚将士，与同甘苦，及死，陇上人思之，为作《壮士之歌》。
现代文：陈安善于抚慰军中将士，和他们同甘共苦。他死后，陇上人想念他，为他作《壮士之歌》。
English: Chen An was good at soothing the lieutenant generals of the army and sharing their joys and sorrows. After his death, his superiors missed him and wrote "Song of the Strong" for him.

古文：杨伯支斩姜冲儿，以陇城降；别将宋亭斩赵募，以上邽降。
现代文：杨伯支斩杀姜冲儿，献纳陇城投降。陈安的别将宋亭杀死赵募，献纳上出降。
English: Yang Bozhi killed Jiang Chong'er and offered to surrender Lucheng. Chen An did not kill Song Ting, but invited Zhao to surrender.

古文：曜徙秦州大姓杨、姜诸族二千馀户于长安。
现代文：刘曜把秦州的豪门大姓杨氏、姜氏名部族二千多人迁徙到长安。
English: Liu You migrated more than 2,000 members of the Yang and Jiang clans from Qinzhou to Chang'an.

古文：氐、羌皆送任请降；以赤亭羌酋姚弋仲为平西将军，封平襄公。
现代文：氐族、羌族也都送来人质请求投降，刘曜任命赤亭羌酋长姚弋仲为平西将军，封为平襄公。
English: The Yao and Shan people also sent hostages to request surrender, and Liu You appointed Yao Jizhong, the chief of the Chateauneuf, as the first general of Pingxi and the first lord of Pingxiang.

古文：帝畏王敦之逼，欲以郗鉴为外援，拜鉴兗州刺史，都督扬州江西诸军事，镇合肥。
现代文：明帝畏惧王敦的逼迫，想引郗鉴为外援，拜授郗鉴为兖州刺史，都督杨州及长江以西的军务，镇守合肥。
English: The Ming Emperor was afraid of Wang Dun's persecution, and he wanted to recruit Zou Jian as a foreign aid, bestow Zou Jian as the governor of Zhangzhou, the military governor of Yangzhou and the west of the Yangtze River, and the town guard of Hefei.

古文：王敦忌之，表鉴为尚书令。
现代文：王敦忌惮郗鉴，上表要求让郗鉴任尚书令。
English: Wang Dun shunned the copybook, and the above table required that the copybook be assigned to Shang Shuling.

古文：八月，诏征鉴还，道经姑孰，敦与之论西朝人士，曰： 乐彦辅，短才耳。考其实，岂胜满武秋邪！ 
现代文：八月，明帝下诏征召郗鉴回京，中途经过姑孰，王敦与郗鉴议论西晋人物，王敦说： 乐广才能有限，考较他的实际作为，哪能胜过满奋呢！ 
English: In August, Emperor Ming issued an edict summoning Xuan Jian to return to Beijing. After passing through Gushan, Wang Dun and Xuan Jian discussed Western Jin figures. Wang Dun said: Xuan Jian's talent is limited. Compared with his actual deeds, what can be better than full of enthusiasm!

古文：鉴曰： 彦辅道韵平淡，愍怀之废，柔而能正。
现代文：郗鉴说： 乐广为人行事的风格是平淡，就连愍帝、怀帝的废弛之政，他都能慢慢纠正。
English: Hao Jian said: Le Guang's style of acting as a person is flat, and he can slowly correct even the wasteful politics of Emperor Gao and Emperor Huai.

古文：武秋失节之士，安得拟之！ 
现代文：满奋则是节操有损的人，怎能与乐广相比！ 
English: A person who is full of energy is a person who is wasteful. How can he be compared to Le Guang!

古文：敦曰： 当是时，危机交急。 
现代文：王敦说： 在满奋那个时候，潜伏的祸端十分急迫。 
English: Wang Dun said: At that time of full enthusiasm, the lurking disaster was very urgent.

古文：鉴曰： 丈夫当死生以之。 
现代文：郗鉴说： 大丈夫应当将生死置之度外。 
English: Hao Jian said: It's okay to put life and death aside.

古文：敦恶其言，不复相见，久留不遣。
现代文：王敦厌恶郗鉴的言论，不再与他相见，并把他长期扣留，不让离开。
English: Wang Dun was disgusted by Gong Jian's remarks, no longer met with him, and detained him for a long time, not allowing him to leave.

古文：敦党皆劝敦杀之，敦不从。
现代文：王敦的党羽都劝王敦杀死郗鉴，王敦没有同意。
English: Wang Dun's followers all advised Wang Dun to kill Gong Jian, but Wang Dun did not agree.

古文：鉴还台，遂与帝谋讨敦。
现代文：郗鉴回到朝廷后，便和明帝共同商议讨伐王敦的办法。
English: After Gong Jian returned to the imperial court, he and Emperor Ming jointly discussed how to fight Wang Dun.

古文：后赵中山公虎帅步骑四万击安东将军曹嶷，青州郡县多降之，遂围广固。
现代文：后赵中山公石虎率领步兵、骑兵共四万人攻击安东将军曹嶷，青州的郡县有不少投降了他，石虎于是进围广固城。
English: After Zhao Zhongshan, Shihu led a total of 40,000 infantry and cavalry to attack the Anton general Cao Wei. Many counties in Qingzhou surrendered to him, and Shihu then entered Guanggu City.

古文：嶷出降，送襄国杀之，坑其众三万。
现代文：曹嶷出城投降，被送到襄国处死。石虎坑杀投降的士众三万人。
English: Cao Pi went out of the city to surrender and was sent to Xiang Guo to be executed. Shi Hukeng killed 30,000 soldiers who surrendered.

古文：虎欲尽杀嶷众，青州刺史刘征曰： 今留征，使牧民也，无民焉牧！
现代文：石虎原想把曹嶷的部众尽数杀死，青州刺史刘征说： 现今让我留下，为的是统治百姓。
English: Shihu originally wanted to kill as many of Cao Pi's subordinates as possible. Liu Zheng, the governor of Qingzhou, said: Let me stay for now, in order to rule the people.

古文：征将归耳！ 
现代文：没有人怎么统治？我准备回去了！ 
English: How can no one govern? I'm ready to go back!

古文：虎乃留男女七百口配征，使镇广固。
现代文：石虎于是留下男女人等七百多口，配属给刘征，让他镇守广固城。
English: Shihu then left more than seven hundred men and women to be assigned to Liu Zheng and let him guard Guanggu City.

古文：赵主曜自陇上西击凉州，遣其将刘咸攻韩璞于冀城，呼延晏攻宁羌护军阴鉴于桑壁，曜自将戎卒二十八万军于河上，列营百馀里，金鼓之声动地，河水为沸，张茂临河诸戍，皆望风奔溃。
现代文：前赵主刘曜由陇上出发向西进攻凉州，派遣部将刘咸进攻驻守冀城的韩璞，又派呼延晏进攻驻守桑壁的宁羌护军阴鉴，自己率领戍卒二十八万人屯军于黄河边，营寨连绵一百多里。金鼓之声震天动地，连黄河的流水都为之激荡。张茂部下沿黄河戍守的士兵，都望风溃逃。
English: The former Zhao Lord Liu You set out westward to attack Liangzhou. He dispatched Liu Han to attack Han Qi, who was garrisoned in Jicheng, and sent Huyan Qi to attack Ningqi, who was garrisoned in Sangbi. He led 280,000 troops along the Yellow River, with encampments stretching for more than a hundred miles. The sound of the golden drum shook the earth, and even the flowing water of the Yellow River was stirred. Zhang Mao's soldiers along the Yellow River fled in panic.

古文：曜扬声欲百道俱济，直抵姑臧，凉州大震。
现代文：刘曜扬言将多路渡河，直捣姑臧城，凉州军民为此大为惊恐。
English: Liu Yowang threatened to cross the river by multiple routes and directly attack Gucheng. The military and civilians in Liangzhou were greatly alarmed by this.

古文：参军马岌劝茂亲出拒战，长史汜祎怒，请斩之。
现代文：参军马岌劝张茂亲自出城拒敌，长史发怒，请求将马岌斩首。
English: Ma Tuo, who had joined the army, advised Zhang Mao to go out of the city to resist the enemy. Chang Shi became angry and requested that Ma Tuo be beheaded.

古文：岌曰： 汜公糟粕书生，刺举小才，不思家国大计。
现代文：马岌说： 只是个无用的书生，有点梗直不讳的小才，却全然不考虑国家大计。
English: Ma Rui said: Just a useless scholar, a little outspoken young talent, but he does not consider the national plan at all.

古文：明公父子欲为朝廷诛刘曜有年矣，今曜自至，远近之情，共观明公此举，当立信勇之验以副秦、陇之望。力虽不敌，势不可以不出。 茂曰： 善！ 
现代文：明公父子两代多年来就想为朝廷翦除刘曜，如今刘曜自己送上门，远近之人都存心想观察明公的举动。当此之时，应当建立诚信、勇敢的实绩以满足秦州、陇上人民的心愿，力量虽然不足，但在情理上不能不出城迎敌。 张茂说： 好！ 
English: For many years, the two generations of Ming Gong's father and son wanted to get rid of Liu You for the imperial court, but now Liu You himself has sent them to the door, and people from near and far are determined to observe Ming Gong's actions. At this time, it is necessary to establish integrity and brave performance to meet the wishes of the people of Qinzhou and Yanshang. Although the strength is insufficient, it is not reasonable to go out of town to meet the enemy. Zhang Mao said: Good!

古文：乃出屯石头。
现代文：于是出城屯军于石头。
English: As a result, the out-of-town garrison marched to Stone.

古文：茂谓参军陈珍曰： 刘曜举三秦之众，乘胜席卷而来，将若之何？ 
现代文：张茂对参军陈珍说： 刘曜调集三秦的兵众，乘着攻破陈安的胜势席卷而来，我们将怎么对付？ 
English: Zhang Mao said to Chen Zhen, a member of the army: Liu You mobilized the soldiers of the Three Qin and took advantage of the victory of Chen An. How will we deal with it?

古文：珍曰： 曜兵虽多，精卒至少，大抵皆氐、羌乌合之众，恩信未洽，且有山东之虞，安能舍其腹心之疾，旷日持久，与我争河西之地邪！
现代文：陈珍说： 刘曜士兵虽多，但精兵极少，大多都是来自氐族和羌族的乌合之众，恩德和威信未曾周遍，况且又对东方的石勒心存顾忌，他怎么能不顾心腹之患，与我方旷日持久的争夺河西之地呢！
English: Chen Zhen said: Although there are many Liu You soldiers, there are very few elite soldiers. Most of them are a ragtag group from the Yao and Yao ethnic groups. Ende and Wenshin have never been familiar with each other. Moreover, they are wary of Shi Le in the East. How could he, regardless of the troubles of his subordinates, fight with us for the land west of the river for a long time?

古文：若二旬不退，珍请得弊卒数千，为明公擒之。 
现代文：如果刘曜二十天以后还不退兵，我请求分派给我数千战斗力不强的士兵，为您把他给抓来。 
English: If Liu You still hasn't left the army after twenty days, I request that you send me a few thousand soldiers who aren't very strong in combat to capture him for you.

古文：茂喜，使珍将兵救韩璞。
现代文：张茂心中欢喜，便派陈珍领兵救援韩璞。
English: Zhang Mao was overjoyed and sent Chen Zhen to lead the troops to rescue Han Yu.

古文：赵诸将争欲济河，赵主曜曰： 吾军势虽盛，然畏威而来者三分有二，中军疲困，其实难用。
现代文：前赵的众将领都争先恐后地想渡过黄河，前赵主刘曜说： 我方军队的声势虽然盛大，但其中迫于威势，不得不来的占有三分之二，中军又疲惫困顿，实际上很难用于作战。
English: Former Zhao's generals were all scrambling to cross the Yellow River. Former Zhao Lord Liu You said: Although our army's reputation is grand, two-thirds of them had to come because of the pressure, and the Chinese army was exhausted. In fact, it was difficult to use it for combat.

古文：今但按甲勿动，以吾威声震之，若出中旬张茂之表不至者，吾为负卿矣。 
现代文：如今只能按兵不动，用我方的声势威摄对方，如果超出十天张茂的降表还不送到的话，就算我辜负了你们。 
English: Now, we can only stand still and use our influence to intimidate the other side. If Zhang Mao's resignation letter does not arrive after ten days, I will have failed you.

古文：茂寻遣使称籓，献马、牛、羊、珍宝不可胜纪。
现代文：不久，张茂果然派遣使者投降称藩臣，献上的马、牛、羊和珍宝不计其数。
English: Not long after, Zhang Mao did indeed send an envoy to surrender, claiming to be a vassal of the domain, and the horses, cattle, sheep, and precious treasures offered were countless.

古文：曜拜茂侍中、都督凉、南北秦、梁、益、巴、汉、陇右、西域杂夷、匈奴诸军事、太师、凉州牧，封凉王，加九锡。
现代文：刘曜授予张茂侍中并都督凉州、南秦州、北秦州、梁州、益州、巴州、汉中、陇右、西域杂夷及匈奴各地的军务，任太师、凉州牧，封为凉王，赐给九锡的礼仪。
English: Liu Yu awarded Zhang Maozhong with the title of the King of Liangzhou and the military service of the military governor of Liangzhou, South Qinzhou, North Qinzhou, Liangzhou, Yizhou, Bazhou, Hanzhong, Zhouhuo, West Qinzhou and Huns, the title of the Grand Master of Liangzhou, the title of the King of Liangzhou, and the etiquette of Jiuxi.

古文：杨难敌闻陈安死，大惧，与弟坚头南奔汉中，赵镇西将军刘厚追击之，大获而还。
现代文：杨难敌听说陈安被杀，十分恐惧，和兄弟杨坚头向南逃往汉中，前赵镇西将军刘厚在后追袭，多所缴获，随后退军。
English: Yang Rongfei heard that Chen An had been killed and was very frightened. He and his brother Yang Jiantuo fled south to Hanzhong. Former Zhao Zhenxi General Liu Hou pursued them, captured many, and then retreated.

古文：赵主曜以大鸿胪田崧为镇南大将军、益州刺史，镇仇池。
现代文：前赵主刘曜任命大鸿胪田崧为镇南大将军、益州刺史，镇守仇池。
English: The former Zhao Lord Liu You appointed the great giant Zou Tianyao as the general of Zhennan, the history of Yizhou, and the town guard of Quchi.

古文：难敌送任请降于成，成安北将军李稚受难敌赂，不送难敌于成都。
现代文：杨难敌呈送人质向成汉清求投降，成汉的安北将军李稚因为接受了杨难敌的贿赂，于是没有把杨难敌遣送到成都。
English: Yang Nanchong presented the hostages to Chenghan Qing for surrender. Chenghan's Anbei General Li Waki did not send Yang Nanchong to Chengdu because he accepted Yang Nanchong's bribe.

古文：赵兵退，即遣不武都，难敌遂据险不服。
现代文：前赵军队退走后，李稚便让杨难敌回到武都，杨难敌于是凭仗地势险固，不再服从成汉。
English: After the retreat of the former Zhao army, Li Zhi allowed Yang Nanyi to return to Wudu. Yang Nanyi then took advantage of the precarious situation and no longer obeyed Chenghan.

古文：稚自悔失计，亟请讨之。
现代文：李稚对自己的失策深为追悔，多次请求出兵征讨杨难敌。
English: Li Fugu deeply regretted his missteps and repeatedly requested that troops be sent to recruit Yang's enemies.

古文：雄遣稚兄侍中、中领军琀与稚出白水，征东将军李寿及琀弟玝出阴平，以击难敌；群臣谏，不听。
现代文：李雄便派遣李稚的兄长、侍中、中领军李和李稚由白水出兵、征东将军李寿以及李的兄弟李由阴平出兵，攻击杨难敌。成汉许多大臣进谏，李雄不听。
English: Li Xiong then sent Li Zhi's brother, the chamberlain, and the middle leader of the army, Li and Li Zhi sent troops from Baishui, the general of the Eastern Expedition, Li Shou, and Li's brother, Li Yingping, sent troops to attack Yang Nanfei. Many ministers of Chenghan entered the palace, but Li Xiong did not listen.

古文：难敌遣兵拒之，寿、玝不得进，而琀、稚长驱至下辨。
现代文：杨难敌发兵拒敌，李寿、李所部无法前进，而李、李稚率领的军队则长驱直入，进抵下辨。
English: It is difficult for the enemy to send troops to repel the enemy. Li Shou and Li Shobu were unable to advance, while the army led by Li and Li Waki was driven straight in, and the advance and arrival were different.

古文：难敌遣兵断其归路，四面攻之。
现代文：杨难敌派军队截断其退路，然后四面包围进攻。
English: Yang ran into enemy troops who cut off his escape route and then surrounded him on all sides.

古文：琀、稚深入无继，皆为难敌所杀，死者数千人。
现代文：李、李稚因过于深入，后援断绝，都被杨难敌所杀，死者数千。
English: Li and Li Waki were killed by Yang's enemies because they were too deep and had no backup, resulting in thousands of deaths.

古文：琀，荡之长子，有才望，雄欲以为嗣，闻其死，不食者数日。
现代文：李即李荡的长子，颇有才学和名望，李雄本想让他作为自己的继承人，听说他死了，好几天吃不下饭。
English: Li, the eldest son of Li Xuan, was quite talented and famous. Li Xiong originally wanted to make him his heir. When he heard that he had died, he couldn't eat for several days.

古文：初，赵主曜长子俭，次子胤。
现代文：当初，前赵主刘曜有长子刘俭，次子刘胤。
English: At first, the former Zhao master Liu You had the eldest son Liu Jian and the second son Liu Yin.

古文：胤年十岁，长七尺五寸，汉主聪奇之，谓曜曰： 此儿神气，非义真之比也，当以为嗣。 
现代文：刘胤年方十岁，身高七尺五寸，汉主刘聪因此惊奇，对刘曜说： 你这个儿子的神气，不是刘俭所能比拟的，应当让他当继承人。 
English: Liu Yin was ten years old and seven feet five inches tall. Master Liu Cong was surprised by this and said to Liu You: Your son's spirit is not comparable to that of Liu Jian, and he should be his successor.

古文：曜曰： 籓国之嗣，能守祭祀足矣，不敢乱长幼之序。 
现代文：刘曜说： 藩国臣民的继承人，能保守住祖先的祭祀就够了，我不敢破坏长幼的秩序。 
English: Liu You said: It is enough for the heirs of the subjects of the domain to be able to preserve the sacrificial rites of their ancestors. I do not dare to destroy the order of the eldest and youngest.

古文：聪曰： 卿之勋德，当世受专征之任，非他臣之比也，吾当更以一国封义真。 
现代文：刘聪说： 以你的功勋和德行，当会世世代代担任征伐的重任，不是别的臣子所可比拟的，我当会另外封给刘俭一个诸侯国封号。 
English: Liu Cong said, "With your merits and virtues, you should have been entrusted with the important task of conquest for generations to come. No other vassal can compare to you. I should have given Liu Jian the title of a vassal state.

古文：乃封俭为临海王，立胤为世子。
现代文：于是封刘俭为临海王，立刘胤为世子。
English: As a result, Liu Jian was named the king of Linhai, and Liu Yin was named the heir.

古文：既长，多力善射，骁捷如风。
现代文：刘胤长大以后，力气很大，精于箭术，勇猛、迅捷如风。
English: When Liu Yin grew up, he was very strong, good at archery, brave and swift as the wind.

古文：靳准之乱，没于黑匿郁鞠部。
现代文：靳准作乱的时侯，刘胤隐匿身世，藏身在匈奴族的黑匿郁鞠部。
English: At the time of the planned rebellion, Liu Yin was in hiding, hiding in the dark and gloomy quarter of the Xiongnu tribe.

古文：陈安既败，胤自言于郁鞠，郁鞠大惊，礼而归之。
现代文：陈安败亡后，刘胤把自己的身世告诉郁鞠，郁鞠大吃一惊，按照相应的礼仪对待，并送他归国。
English: After Chen An's defeat and death, Liu Yin told Ikumi about his background. Ikumi was taken aback, treated him according to the appropriate etiquette, and sent him back to China.

古文：曜悲喜，谓君臣曰： 义光虽已为太子，然冲幼儒谨，恐不堪今之多难。
现代文：刘曜悲喜交加，对群臣们说： 刘熙虽然成为太子，但年龄幼小，拘谨柔顺，恐怕难以承受现今诸多的艰难。
English: With a mixture of sadness and joy, Liu You said to the courtiers: Although Liu Xi has become the crown prince, he is still young, prudent and pliable, and I am afraid it is difficult for him to bear today's many hardships.

古文：义孙，故世子也，材器过人，且涉历艰难。吾欲法周文王、汉光武，以固社稷而安义光，何如？ 
现代文：刘胤本来是我的世子，才能气度出众，而且涉历过许多艰难，我想效法周文王立武王和汉光武帝立明帝的作法，为巩固国家政权另外安排刘熙的地位，怎么样？ 
English: Liu Yin was originally my descendant. His talent was outstanding, and he went through many hardships. I would like to follow the example of Zhou Wen Wang and Han Guangwu Wang and Ming Emperor and arrange Liu Xi's position in order to consolidate the state power. How about it?

古文：太傅呼延晏等皆曰： 陛下为国家无穷之计，岂惟臣等赖之，实宗庙四海之庆。 
现代文：太傅呼延晏等人都说： 陛下为国家的长远命运考虑，岂只是我们这些臣子有所依仗，实在也是祖先和国民的幸运。 
English: Taifu Huyanjun and others said: Your Majesty, considering the long-term fate of the country, is it just us courtiers who have something to rely on, and is it really the luck of the ancestors and the people.

古文：左光禄大夫卜泰、太子太保韩广进曰： 陛下以废立为是，不应更问群臣；若以为疑，固乐闻异同之言。
现代文：左光禄大夫卜泰、太子太保韩广则进谏说： 陛下如果认为自己在太子废立问题上的看法正确，就不应当再向臣下询问；如果觉得没有把握，当然乐于听到不同的意见。
English: Zuo Guanglu's doctor, Bu Tai, and the Crown Prince's bodyguard, Han Guang, said, "Your Majesty, if you think that your opinion on the issue of abolishing the crown prince is correct, you should not ask your subjects again; if you feel unsure, of course you are happy to hear different opinions.

古文：臣窃以为废太子，非也。
现代文：我们私下认为废除当今太子是不对的。
English: Privately, we think it is wrong to abolish the current position of crown prince.

古文：昔文王定嗣于未立之前，则可也；光武以母失恩而废其子，岂足为圣朝之法！
现代文：往昔周文王选定继承人，是在未立太子之前，所以是可以的；汉光武帝因为太子的生母失去恩宠因而废除太子，哪里值得圣贤的朝廷效法！
English: In the past, King Zhou Wen selected the successor before the crown prince was appointed, so it was possible; Emperor Han Guangwu abolished the crown prince because the birth mother of the crown prince lost favor, where is the wisdom of the imperial court to follow suit!

古文：向以东海为嗣，未必不如明帝也。
现代文：以往陛下立东海王刘熙为太子，这未必便不如汉光武帝立明帝为太子。
English: In the past, His Majesty appointed the East Sea King Liu Xi as the crown prince, which is not necessarily inferior to the Han Guangwu Emperor's appointment of Emperor Ming as the crown prince.

古文：胤文武才略，诚高绝于世。然太子孝友仁慈，亦足为承平贤主。
现代文：刘胤的文才武略的确当世高绝，但太子的孝友仁慈，也足以成为承袭国家太平的贤惠君主。
English: Liu Yin's literary talent and military strategy are indeed the best in the world, but the prince's filial piety and benevolence are also enough to become a benevolent monarch who inherits the country's peace.

古文：况东宫者，民、神所系，岂可轻动！
现代文：何况太子与百姓和神灵相关联，怎可轻易变动！
English: Besides, the crown prince is associated with the people and the gods, how can he change so easily!

古文：陛下诚欲如是，臣等有死而已，不敢奉诏， 曜默然。
现代文：陛下如果真的想改立太子，我们宁死也不敢遵奉诏令。 刘曜默默无语。
English: Your Majesty, if you really want to change the position of crown prince, we would rather die than obey the edict. Liu You was speechless.

古文：胤进曰： 父之于子，当爱之如一，今黜熙而立臣，臣何敢自安！
现代文：刘胤进言说： 父亲对儿子的爱，应当无所偏颇，现在如果废黜刘熙改立我，我怎能心安！
English: Liu Yan said, "A father's love for his son should be unbiased. If Liu Xi is deposed and I am reinstated, how can I have peace of mind?

古文：陛下苟以臣为颇堪驱策，岂不能辅熙以承圣业乎！
现代文：陛下只要认为我还可以为国效力，我难道还不能帮助刘熙继承圣业吗？
English: As long as Your Majesty thinks that I can still serve the country, can't I still help Liu Xi inherit the sacred cause?

古文：必若以臣代熙，臣请效死于此，不敢闻命。 
现代文：如果一定要让我替代刘熙，我请求立即死在这里，不敢听命。 
English: If I have to replace Liu Xi, I request to die here immediately, I dare not follow orders.

古文：因歔欷流涕。
现代文：随之抽泣流泪，哀叹出声。
English: As she spoke, she began to sob and shed tears.

古文：曜亦以熙羊后所生，不忍废也，乃追谥前妃卜氏为元悼皇后。
现代文：刘曜也因为刘熙是羊皇后所生，不忍心废黜，于是追谥刘胤的生母、前妃卜氏为元悼皇后。
English: Because Liu Xi was born to the Queen of Sheep, Liu You did not have the heart to depose her, so he pursued Liu Yin's birth mother, the former concubine Bu, to become the Queen of Yuanli.

古文：泰，即胤之舅也，曜喜其公忠，以为上光禄大夫、仪同三司、领太子太傅；封胤为永安王，拜侍中、卫大将军、都督二宫禁卫诸军事、开府仪同三司、录尚书事，命熙于胤尽家人之礼。
现代文：卜泰即刘胤的娘舅，刘曜为嘉奖他的公正和忠贞，任为上光禄大夫、仪同三司、领太子太傅。又封刘胤为永安王，授职为侍中、卫大将军、都督二宫禁卫诸军事、开府仪同三司、录尚书事。命令刘熙用对自家人的礼仪对待刘胤。
English: Putai, Liu Yin's uncle-in-law, was awarded the title of Shangguanglu Doctor, the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of

古文：张茂大城姑臧，修灵钧台。
现代文：张茂在姑臧大兴土木，维修城墙，修筑灵钧台。
English: Zhang Mao carried out major civil engineering works in Gushan, repaired the city wall, and built a funeral hearse.

古文：别驾吴绍谏曰： 明公所以修城筑台者，盖惩既往之患耳。
现代文：别驾吴绍谏止说： 明公之所以修城墙、筑高台，大概因为有鉴于以往遭到攻击的忧患。
English: Don't listen to Wu Shaoqi, he said: The reason why the Ming emperor built the city wall and raised the platform was probably because he was worried about being attacked in the past.

古文：愚以为苟恩未洽于人心，虽处层台，亦无所益，适足以疑群下忠信之志，失士民系托之望，示怯弱之形，启邻敌之谋，将何以佐天子、霸诸候乎！
现代文：我以为只要臣民未曾普遍感受到君上的恩泽，即使身处多层高台上也没有什么好处。只能够使臣下对自己的忠信志向产生疑虑，失去士民们寄托的期望，显示出怯弱的情形，挑动起相邻的敌方来犯的欲念，这怎么能辅佐天子，称霸诸侯呢！
English: I thought that as long as the subjects did not generally feel the grace of the prince, even if they were on a multi-storey high platform, there was no benefit. It could only make the subjects doubt their loyalty, lose the expectations of the people, show a weak situation, and arouse the desire of the neighboring enemy to invade. How can this help the Son of Heaven and dominate the princes?

古文：愿亟罢兹役，以息劳费。 
现代文：希望能急速废止这项工程，停止人力和钱财的巨大耗费。 
English: It is hoped that this project can be quickly cancelled and the huge expenditure of manpower and money can be stopped.

古文：茂曰： 亡兄一旦失身于物，岂无忠臣义士欲尽节者哉！
现代文：张茂说： 亡兄张忽然死于非命，难道没有忠臣义士想为他效死尽忠吗！
English: Zhang Mao said, "My late brother Zhang suddenly died a violent death. Aren't there any loyal vassals who want to serve and die for him?

古文：顾祸生不意，虽有智勇，无所施耳。
现代文：只不过祸乱在意想不到的情况下突发，虽然智勇兼具也无所施展罢了。
English: It's just that the calamity broke out suddenly under unexpected circumstances, and there was nothing to be done in spite of both wisdom and courage.

古文：王公设险，勇夫重闭，古之道也。
现代文：王公设置险阻保守国家，勇夫多设关隘保守其地，这是古人之道。
English: It is the way of the ancients for the prince to set up a dangerous and conservative country, and for the brave man to set up a narrow and conservative country.

古文：今国家未靖，不可以太平之理责人于屯邅之世也。 
现代文：现今国家不太平，不能在这举步维艰的时代用太平盛世的道理去要求人。 始终没有停止修建工程。
English: At present, the country is not peaceful, and it is not possible to use the principle of peace and prosperity to require people in this difficult time.

古文：卒为之。王敦从子允之，方总角，敦爱其聪警，常以自随。
现代文：王敦的侄子王允之，正当童年，王敦因他聪明机警，异常宠爱，经常让他跟随自己。
English: Wang Dun's nephew Wang Yunzhi, just a child, Wang Dun because of his clever and alert, unusually favored, often let him follow himself.

古文：敦常夜饮，允之辞醉先卧。敦与钱凤谋为逆，允之悉闻其言。
现代文：王敦有次在夜晚饮酒，王允之以醉酒为由告辞先睡，王敦便和钱凤一起商讨叛乱之事，被王允之原原本本听到。
English: On one occasion, Wang Dun was drinking alcohol at night. Wang Yun used the excuse that he was drunk to go to sleep first. Wang Dun and Qian Feng then discussed the rebellion together, which was overheard by Wang Yun.

古文：即于卧处大吐，衣面并污。
现代文：王允之随即在睡卧的地方大吐，衣物、脸面都沾上了污秽。
English: Wang Yunzhi immediately vomited in the place where he was sleeping, and his clothes and face were stained with filth.

古文：凤出，敦果照视，见允之卧于吐中，不复疑之。
现代文：钱凤走后，王敦果然持灯前来察看，见王允之睡卧在呕吐的污物中，便不再有疑心。
English: After Qianfeng left, Wang Dun took a lamp and came to inspect. Seeing Wang Yunzhi sleeping in the vomit, he no longer had any suspicions.

古文：会其父舒拜廷尉，允之求归省父，悉以敦、凤之谋白舒。
现代文：不久，适逢王允之的父亲王舒升任廷尉，王允之请求归省父亲，便将王敦、钱凤密谋的内容全部告诉了王舒。
English: Not long after, Wang Yunzhi's father, Wang Shu, was promoted to the position of court lieutenant. At Wang Yunzhi's request to return to his father, he told Wang Shu all the contents of Wang Dun and Qian Feng's conspiracy.

古文：舒与王导俱启帝，阴为之备。
现代文：王舒与王导一块儿禀报皇帝，私下为应付突变做准备。
English: Wang Shu and Wang Du jointly reported to the emperor, privately preparing to deal with the sudden change.

古文：敦欲强其宗族，陵弱帝室，冬，十一月，徙王含为征东将军、都督扬州江西诸军事，王舒为荆州刺史、监荆州沔南诸军事，王彬为江州刺史。
现代文：王敦想增加自己的宗族势力，削弱、欺凌皇室力量，冬季，十一月，调任王含为征东将军、都督扬州、长江西部军务，王舒任荆州刺史、监察荆州、沔水以南军务，王彬任江州刺史。
English: Wang Dun wanted to increase his clan's power, weaken and bully the royal family's power. In winter, in November, he transferred Wang Han to be the general of the Eastern Expedition, the military governor of Yangzhou and the western Yangtze River, Wang Shu to be the military historian of Jingzhou, the military inspector of Jingzhou and the south of Surabaya, and Wang Bin to be the military historian of Jiangzhou.

古文：后赵王勒以参军樊坦为章武内史，勒见其衣冠弊坏，问之。
现代文：后赵王石勒让参军樊坦任章武内史，石勒见他衣帽破旧，询问原因。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shile asked the military to appoint Zhaotan as the internal history of Zhangwu. Shile saw that his clothes and hat were worn out and inquired why.

古文：坦率然对曰： 倾为羯贼所掠，资财荡尽。 
现代文：樊坦未加思索，回答说： 不久前遭到羯族贼寇的抢劫，财物荡然无存。 
English: Zhaotan, without thinking, replied: Not long ago, I was robbed by the Yao bandits, and all my belongings were gone.

古文：勒笑曰： 羯贼乃尔无道邪！
现代文：石勒笑着说： 羯族贼寇竞然这样蛮横无道吗！
English: Shi Ler said with a smile, "Is it possible for the Qiang thieves to be so insolent?

古文：今当相偿。 
现代文：现在我会偿还给你。 
English: Now I'll pay you back.

古文：坦大惧，叩头泣谢。
现代文：樊坦大为恐惧，流着眼泪叩头陪罪。
English: Shantan was terrified and bowed down with tears.

古文：勒赐车马、衣服、装钱三百万而遣之。
现代文：石勒赐给他车马、衣服及办装费三百万，派遣他上任。
English: Shi Le gave him a horse and carriage, clothes, and three million in expenses, and sent him to take office.

古文：是岁，越巂斯叟攻成将任回，成主雄遣征南将军费黑讨之。
现代文：这年，赵人斯叟进攻成汉的将领任回，成汉国主李雄派遣征南将军费黑征讨斯叟。
English: In this year, Zhao Renshun led the attack against the general of Chenghan, and the ruler of Chenghan, Li Xiong, sent the general Fei Hei to conquer Southern Han to fight against Shun.

古文：会稽内史周札，一门五候，宗族强盛，吴士莫与为比，王敦忌之。
现代文：会稽内史周札，一族之中有五人封侯，宗族势力强盛，吴地人士中无人可以比拟，王敦为此忌惮。
English: According to the internal history of the audit committee, there are five feudal lords among the clan, the clan's power is strong, and no one in Wu can be compared, Wang Dun is afraid of this.

古文：敦有疾，钱凤劝敦早除周氏，敦然之。
现代文：王敦生病，钱凤劝王敦早日除灭周氏，得到王敦赞同。
English: When Wang Dun fell ill, Qian Feng advised Wang Dun to eliminate the Zhou clan as soon as possible, which was approved by Wang Dun.

古文：周嵩以兄顗之死，心常愤愤。
现代文：周嵩因为兄长周被王敦所杀，心中经常愤愤不平。
English: Zhou Song was often angry because his brother Zhou was killed by Wang Dun.

古文：敦无子，养王含之子应为嗣，嵩尝于众中言应不宜统兵，敦恶之。
现代文：王敦没有儿子，收养王含之子王应为子嗣，周嵩曾当众说王应不适合统领军队，王敦为此憎恶周嵩。
English: Wang Dun did not have a son. He adopted Wang Han's son Wang Ying as his heir. Zhou Song had publicly said that Wang Ying was not fit to command the army. Wang Dun hated Zhou Song for this.

古文：嵩与札兄子莛皆为敦从事中郎。
现代文：周嵩和周札兄长的儿子周都任王敦的从事中郎。
English: The son of Zhou Song and Zhou Za's elder brother, Zhou was engaged as the middle son of Wang Dun.

古文：会道士李脱以妖术惑众，士民颇信事之。
现代文：适逢道士李脱利用妖术盅惑民众，不少士民都相信追随他。
English: When the Taoist priest Li De used magic to seduce the people, many people believed in following him.

