古文：天祐十六年春正月，李存审城德胜，夹河为栅。
现代文：天祐十六年一月，李存审在德胜筑城，夹黄河建立营栅。
English: In January of the 16th year of Tianyu, Li Cunxin built a city in Desheng and built a camp fence along the Yellow River.

古文：帝还魏州，命昭义军节度使李嗣昭权知幽州军府事。
现代文：庄宗回魏州，命昭义军节度使李嗣昭暂管幽州军府事务。
English: Zhuang Zong returned to Weizhou and ordered Li Shizhao to temporarily take charge of the Yuzhou military affairs.

古文：三月，帝兼领幽州，遣近臣李绍宏提举府事。
现代文：三月，庄宗兼管幽州，派近臣李绍宏管理府事。
English: In March, Zhuangzong also took charge of Yuzhou and sent his close vassal Li Shaohong to manage the affairs of the government.

古文：夏四月，梁将贺瑰围德胜南城，百道攻击，复以艨艟扼断津渡。
现代文：四月，梁将贺瑰包围德胜南城，百路进攻，又用战船把守渡口。
English: In April, Liang besieged Desheng Nancheng with He Gui, attacked from all directions, and guarded the ferry port with warships.

古文：帝驰而往，阵于北岸。
现代文：庄宗急驰而往，在北岸列阵。
English: Zhuang Zong sped away and lined up on the north bank.

古文：南城守将氏延赏告急，且言矢石将尽。
现代文：南城守将氏延赏告急，说箭石快用完了。
English: Nancheng's governor, Mr. Yan Bounty, was in a hurry, saying that the arrow stones were almost used up.

古文：帝以重贿召募能破贼舰者，于是献技者数十，或言能吐火焚舟，或言能禁咒兵刃，悉命试之，无验。
现代文：庄宗以重赏召募能破敌人战船的人，于是有几十个献技的，有的说能吐火焚舟，有的说能念咒语避刀枪，让他们都试试，没效果。
English: Zhuang Zong called for people who could break the enemy's warships with a heavy reward, so there were dozens of dedicated skills, some said they could spit fire and burn boats, some said they could recite spells to avoid swords and guns, let them all try, no effect.

古文：帝忧形于色，亲从都将王建及进曰： 臣请效命。 
现代文：庄宗忧形于色，亲从都将王建及说： 我愿效命。 
English: Zhuang Zong was overcome with sorrow, and he said to Wang Jianji: "I am willing to serve my life."

古文：乃以巨索连舟十艘，选效节勇士三百人，持斧被铠，鼓枻而进，至中流。
现代文：于是用大绳子连起十艘船，选敢死勇士三百人，持斧披甲，划桨前进，到河中流。
English: So he tied up ten boats with a large rope, selected three hundred brave men who were willing to die, put on armor with axes, and paddled forward to the middle of the river.

古文：梁楼船三层，蒙以牛革，悬板为楯。
现代文：梁军楼船有三层，蒙了牛皮，悬大木板做挡板。
English: Liang Junlou ship has three floors, covered with cowhide, hanging large wooden boards to make baffles.

古文：建及率持斧者入艨艟间，斩其竹笮，破其悬楯；又于上流取甕数百，用竹笮维之，积薪于上，灌以脂膏，火发亘空；又以巨舰载甲士，令乘烟鼓噪。
现代文：王建及率持斧勇士突入舰船之间，斩断竹索，砍破悬板。又在上流放几百个大瓦罐，用竹索系住，上面堆积柴草，灌入油膏，点起连天大火。又用大船装载甲士，要他们乘烟火大喊。
English: Wang Jian and his axe-wielding warriors rushed into the middle of the ship, cut the bamboo ropes, and cut the suspended board. They also placed hundreds of large crockery on the top, tied it with bamboo ropes, piled up firewood on it, poured oil paste on it, and lit the sky-high fire. They also loaded the armadillos with large boats and asked them to shout with fireworks.

古文：梁之楼船断绁而下，沈溺者殆半。
现代文：梁军楼船绳断而下沉，淹死的人过半。
English: More than half of the people drowned when the rope of the Liangjunlou ship broke and it sank.

古文：军既得渡，梁军乃退。命骑军追袭至濮阳，俘斩千计。
现代文：部队渡河后，梁军才退，命骑兵追击到濮阳，俘斩几千。
English: After the troops crossed the river, Liang's army retreated, and the cavalry chased them to Fenyang, capturing and slaughtering several thousand.

古文：贺瑰由此饮气遘疾而卒。
现代文：贺瑰因此生气得病而死。
English: As a result, He Gui became so angry that he fell ill and died.

古文：秋七月，帝归晋阳。
现代文：七月，庄宗回到晋阳。
English: In July, Zhuangzong returned to Jinyang.

古文：八月，梁将王瓚帅众数万自黎阳渡河，营于杨村，造舟为梁，以通津路。
现代文：八月，梁将王瓒率几万人从黎阳渡黄河，在杨村宿营，架起舟桥，接通水路。
English: In August, Liang Wangjun led tens of thousands of people from Liyang to cross the Yellow River, camped in Yangcun, set up a boat bridge and connected the waterway.

古文：冬十月，帝自晋阳至魏州，发徒数万以广德胜北城，自是，日与梁军接战。
现代文：十月，庄宗从晋阳到魏州，征发徒役几万，扩充德胜北城，从此，天天和梁军交战。
English: In October, Zhuangzong went from Jinyang to Weizhou to recruit and send tens of thousands of apprentices to expand the northern city of Desheng. Since then, he has been at war with Liang's army every day.

古文：十二月戊戌，帝军于河南，夜伏步兵于潘张村梁军寨下，以骑军掠其饷运，擒其斥候。
现代文：十二月五日，庄宗在黄河南扎营，夜里把步兵埋伏在潘张村梁军营寨下，领骑兵抢夺梁军粮饷运输，抓获他们的侦察兵。
English: On December 5, Zhuang Zong camped in the south of the Yellow River. At night, he ambushed the infantry under Liang's military camp in Pan Zhang Village. The cavalry leader robbed Liang's army of grain and transport, and captured their scouts.

古文：梁王瓚结阵以待，帝军以铁骑突之，诸军继进，梁军大奔，赴水死者甚众，瓚走保北城。
现代文：梁将王瓒布阵以待，庄宗军队用铁骑突击，各军跟进，梁军大逃亡，掉水中淹死的很多，王瓒退保北城。
English: Liang placed Wang Xizhe in a waiting position, Zhuangzong's army mounted a surprise attack with an iron horse, the armies followed suit, Liang's army fled, many drowned in the water, and Wang Xizhe withdrew to the north of the city.

古文：天祐十七年春，幽州民于田中得金印，文曰： 关中龟印 ，李绍宏献于行台。
现代文：天祐十七年春，幽州百姓在田里捡到金印，上面刻有 关中龟印 的文字，李绍宏献给行台。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of Tenyu, the people of Yuzhou found a gold seal in the field, engraved with the words "Guanzhong Kamei," which Li Shaohong dedicated to Xingtai.

古文：秋七月，梁将刘鄩、尹皓寇同州。
现代文：七月，梁将刘寻阝、尹皓侵犯同州。
English: In July, Liang ordered Liu Xingyao and Yin Qi to invade Tongzhou.

古文：先是，河中节度使硃友谦取同州，以其子令德主留务，请梁主降节。梁主怒，不与，遂请旄节于帝。
现代文：早先，河中节度使朱友谦取同州，让自己儿子朱令德主管留守河中事务，请梁主承认，梁主怒，不答应，遂向庄宗请求符节。
English: Earlier, the Mid-Heaven Festival made Zhu Youqian take Tongzhou, and let his son Zhu Lingde remain in charge of Mid-Heaven affairs. He asked Master Liang to admit it, but Master Liang was angry and did not agree, so he asked Zhuangzong for the festival.

古文：梁主乃遣刘鄩与华州节度使尹皓帅兵围同州，友谦来告难，帝遣蕃汉总管李存审、昭义节度使李嗣昭、代州刺史王建及率师赴援。
现代文：梁主便派刘寻阝和华州节度使尹皓率兵包围了同州，朱友谦来向庄宗告急，庄宗派蕃汉总管李存审、昭义节度使李嗣昭、代州刺史王建及率军队前去救援。
English: Master Liang then sent Liu Xunjun and Huazhou Jiedu to have Yin Jiedu lead the troops to encircle the same state, Zhu Youqian came to Zhuang Zong to express his urgency, Zhuang Zong sent Li Cunxin, the general manager of the Han Dynasty, and Zhao Yi Jiedu to have Li Shizhao, Daizhou Jishi Wang Jian and his army to go to the rescue.

古文：九月，师至河中，朝至夕济，梁人不意王师之至，望之大骇。
现代文：九月，部队到河中，从早到晚渡河，梁军没想到庄宗军来，望见后大为惊骇。
English: In September, the troops went to the middle of the river and crossed the river from morning to night. Liang's army did not expect Zhuang Zong's army to come, and they were shocked when they saw it.

古文：明日约战，与硃友谦谋，迟明，进军距梁垒；梁人悉众以出，蒲人在南，王师在北。
现代文：第二天约好作战，和朱友谦合谋，天亮后，进军靠近梁军壁垒，梁人全部出动，蒲人在南，庄宗军在北。
English: The next day, they agreed to fight, and conspired with Zhu Youqian. After dawn, they marched into the barrier near the Liang army. All Liang people were dispatched, the Pu people in the south, and the Zhuozong army in the north.

古文：骑军既接，蒲人小却，李嗣昭以轻骑抗之，梁军奔溃，追斩二千余级。
现代文：骑兵刚接战，蒲人稍为退却，李嗣昭用轻骑兵抗拒，梁军奔溃，追杀二千多人。
English: The cavalry had just joined the battle, the Pu people retreated slightly, Li Shizhao resisted with light cavalry, Liang's army was routed, and more than two thousand people were killed.

古文：是夜，刘鄩收余众保营，自是闭壁不出。
现代文：这晚，刘寻阝收集剩下的人保护军营，从此闭城不出。
English: That night, Liu Huanqian gathered the remaining people to protect the military camp, and the city was never closed again.

古文：数日，鄩遂宵遁。
现代文：几天后，刘寻阝趁夜逃走。
English: A few days later, Liu Huanqian took advantage of the night to escape.

古文：王师追及于渭河，所弃兵仗辎重不可胜计，刘鄩、尹皓单骑获免。
现代文：庄宗军追到渭河，丢下的兵器辎重不可计数，刘寻阝、尹皓单骑逃走。
English: Zhuang Zong's army chased them to the Li River, leaving behind an incalculable amount of weapons. Liu Xingyao and Yin Qi fled on horseback.

古文：未几，鄩忧恚发病而卒。
现代文：没过多久，刘寻阝忧恨发病而死。
English: Not long after, Liu Xingyao died of grief.

古文：王师略地至奉先，嗣昭因谒唐帝诸陵而还。
现代文：庄宗军攻略到奉先，李嗣昭拜谒唐帝各陵墓而回。
English: Zhuangzong's army captured Fengxian, and Li Shizhao paid homage to the mausoleums of Tang emperors and returned.

古文：天祐十八年春正月，魏州开元寺僧传真获传国宝，献于行台。
现代文：天祐十八年一月，魏州开元寺和尚传真得到传国宝，献给行台。
English: In January of the 18th year of Tenyu, the monk of Kaiyuan Temple in Weizhou received a facsimile of a national treasure, dedicated to Xingtao.

古文：验其文，即 受命于天，子孙宝之 八字也，群僚称贺。
现代文：查验上面文字，是 受命于天，子孙宝之 八字，众官称贺。
English: All the officials congratulated themselves for checking the above words, which were ordered by heaven and were the eight precious words of the descendants of Bao.

古文：传真师于广明中，遇京师丧乱得之，秘藏已四十年矣。篆文古体，人不之识，至是献之。
现代文：传真师在广明年间京师动乱时得到，秘藏四十年。篆文古体，人不认识，到现在献上。
English: The facsimile was obtained by the master during the turmoil in Beijing in the middle of Guangxu year, and has been kept secret for forty years.

古文：时淮南杨溥、四川王衍皆遣使致书，劝帝嗣唐帝位，帝不从。
现代文：此时淮南杨溥、西川王衍都派使者送信，劝庄宗继承唐朝帝位，庄宗不答应。
English: At this time, Huainan Yang Jie and Xichuan Wang Yan both sent envoys to persuade Zhuangzong to inherit the throne of the Tang Dynasty, but Zhuangzong did not agree.

古文：二月，代州刺史王建及卒。
现代文：二月，代州刺史王建及死。
English: In February, Wang Jian died in Daizhou.

古文：是月，镇州大将张文礼杀其帅王镕。
现代文：这月，镇州大将张文礼杀害主帅王钅容。
English: This month, Zhenzhou General Zhang Wenli killed head coach Wang Yunyong.

古文：时帝方与诸将宴，酒酣乐作，闻镕遇杀，遽投觯而泣曰： 赵王与吾把臂同盟，分如金石，何负于人，覆宗绝祀，冤哉！ 
现代文：此时庄宗正和诸将宴会，酒酣奏乐，听说王钅容被杀，立时丢掉酒杯哭着说： 赵王和我把臂同盟，情份如同金石，他有什么对不起人的，竟灭绝宗族，真是冤枉啊！ 
English: At this time, Zhuang Zongzheng and the generals were having a banquet, drinking wine and playing music. When he heard that Wang Yirong had been killed, he immediately threw away his wine glass and cried, saying, "King Zhao and I are as close as brothers, our love is like a golden stone. What is wrong with him that he has exterminated the clan? It is really unjust!

古文：先是，滹沱暴涨，漂关城之半，溺死者千计。
现代文：在这以前，滹沱河暴涨，淹没半个关城，淹死了几千人。
English: Prior to this, the Lugu River surged, flooding half of Guancheng and drowning thousands of people.

古文：是岁，天西北有赤昆如血，占者言赵分之灾，至是果验。
现代文：这一年，天西北有赤气如血，占卜者说是赵王的灾祸，现在果然应验。
English: In that year, the northwest sky was red as blood. The soothsayer said that it was the calamity of King Zhao, and now it has come true.

古文：时张文礼遣使请旄节于帝，帝曰： 文礼之罪，期于无赦，敢邀予旄节！ 
现代文：此时张文礼派使者向庄宗请求符节，庄宗说 ：张文礼的罪过，简直不可饶恕，还敢向我要符节！ 
English: At this time, Zhang Wenli sent an envoy to Zhuangzong to ask for a rune, and Zhuangzong said: Zhang Wenli's sin is simply unforgivable, and he dared to ask me for a rune!

古文：左右曰： 方今事繁，不欲与人生事。 
现代文：身边的人说 ：现在事情繁杂，不应和人家生事。 
English: People around me say: Things are complicated now, we shouldn't get into trouble with others.

古文：帝不得已而从之，乃承制授文礼镇州兵马留后。
现代文：庄宗不得已答应了，便授张文礼镇州兵马留后。
English: Zhuangzong had no choice but to agree, and then granted Zhang Wenli the right to remain in the state army.

古文：三月，河中节度使硃友谦、昭义节度使李嗣昭、沧州节度使李存审、定州节度使王处直、邢州节度使李嗣源、成德军兵马留后张文礼、遥领天平军节度使阎宝、大同军节度使李存璋、新州节度使王郁、振武节度使李存进、同州节度使硃令德，各遣使劝进，请帝绍唐帝位，帝报书不允。
现代文：三月，河中节度使朱友谦、昭义节度使李嗣昭、沧州节度使李存审、定州节度使王处直、邢州节度使李嗣源、成德军兵马留后张文礼、遥领天平军节度使阎宝、大同军节度使李存璋、新州节度使王郁、振武节度使李存进、同州节度使朱令德，各派使者劝进，请庄宗继承唐朝帝位，庄宗回信不答应。
English: In March, Zhu Youqian, Zhao Yi, Li Shizhao, Cangzhou, Dingzhou, Wang Shanzhi, Zhang Wenli, Yan Bao, Datong, Li Cunxu, Xinzhou, Wang Yu, Zhenwu, Li Cunjin, Zhu Lingde, all sent envoys to ask Zhuo Zong to succeed to the throne of the Tang Dynasty, but Zhuo Zong did not agree.

古文：《九国志·赵季良传》：季良尝萝手扶御座，自谓辅佐之象，由是颇述天时人事以讽，庄宗深纳其言。
现代文：从此，诸镇共三次上书劝进，各献钱财数十万，以供即位时的耗费，庄宗左右的人也劝庄宗早点顺应人们愿望，庄宗谦让了很久。
English: Since then, the towns have written to Zhuozong three times to persuade him to accept the throne. Each town donated hundreds of thousands of money to cover the expenses of the enthronement. The people around Zhuozong also urged Zhuozong to comply with the people's wishes as soon as possible. Zhuozong humbly conceded for a long time.

古文：秋七月，河东节度副使卢汝弼卒。
现代文：七月，河东节度副使卢汝弼去世。
English: In July, Lu Ruxuan, deputy chief of the Hedong Festival, passed away.

古文：八月庚申，令天平节度使阎宝、成德兵马留后符习率兵讨张文礼于镇州。
现代文：八月七日，令天平节度使阎宝、成德兵马留后符习率兵到镇州讨伐张文礼。
English: On August 7, the Tianping Festival ordered Yan Bao and Chengde soldiers to stay behind and lead the troops to Zhangzhou to fight against Zhang Wenli.

古文：初，王镕令偏将符习以本部兵从帝屯于德胜。
现代文：起初，王钅容令偏将符习以本部兵随庄宗在德胜驻扎。
English: At first, Wang Shunrong ordered the general Fuxi to accompany Zhuangzong to stay in Desheng with headquarters soldiers.

古文：文礼既行弑逆，忌镕故将，多被诛戮，因遣使闻于帝，欲以他兵代习归镇，习等惧，请留。
现代文：张文礼杀了王钅容后，顾忌王钅容旧将，杀了很多，因而派使者告诉庄宗，想用其他兵马代替符习到镇州，符习等人害怕，请求留下。
English: After Zhang Wenli killed Wang Qirong, he was afraid that Wang Qirong, the old general, had killed a lot of people, so he sent an envoy to tell Zhuang Zong that he wanted to use other soldiers and horses to replace Fuxi to Zhenzhou. Fuxi and others were afraid and asked to stay.

古文：帝令传旨于习及别将赵仁贞、乌震等，明正文礼弑逆之罪，且言： 尔等荷戟从征，盖君父之故，衔冤报恩，谁人无心。
现代文：庄宗下令传旨给符习和别将赵仁贞、乌震等人，明确认定张文礼弑逆的罪行，并说： 你们持枪随从出征，都是为了君王，含冤报恩，谁人没这心思。
English: Zhuangzong ordered to send an order to Fuxi and other generals such as Zhao Renzhen and Wu Zhen, clearly identifying Zhang Wenli's treasonous crime, and said: You are all going to the war with guns, for the sake of the king, to repay the favor, who does not have this thought.

古文：吾当给尔资粮，助尔兵甲，尔试思之！ 
现代文：我会给你粮草，给你兵甲，你们多想想！ 
English: I will give you grain and grass, I will give you armor, think about it!

古文：于是习等率诸将三十余人，恸哭于牙门，请讨文礼。
现代文：于是符习等人率各位将领三十余人，在牙门痛哭，请求讨伐张文礼。
English: As a result, Fuxi and others, led by more than 30 generals, cried bitterly at the Gate of the Teeth and asked for a crusade against Zhang Wenli.

古文：帝因授习成德军兵马留后，以部下镇、冀兵致讨于文礼；又遣阎宝以助之，以史建瑭为前锋。
现代文：庄宗授符习为成德军兵马留后，率领部下镇州、冀州的兵马讨伐张文礼，又派阎宝相助，以史建瑭为前锋。
English: After Zhuang Zong awarded Fu Xi to stay with the soldiers and horses of the Chengde Army, he led the soldiers and horses of the subordinate Zhenzhou and Jizhou to fight against Zhang Wenli, and sent Yan Bao to help, with Shi Jiankun as the forward.

古文：甲子，攻赵州，刺史王铤送符印以迎，阎宝遂引军至镇州城下，营于西北隅。
现代文：十一日，攻赵州，刺史王铤送来符印迎接，阎宝就引军到镇州城下，在西北角宿营。
English: On the 11th day, after attacking Zhaozhou, Yan Bao led his army to camp in the northwest corner of Zhenzhou.

古文：是月，张文礼病疽而卒，其子处瑾代掌军事。
现代文：这个月，张文礼得痈疽而死，他儿子张处瑾代理军事。
English: This month, Zhang Wenli died of gangrene, and his son Zhang Shuxuan took over the military.

古文：九月，前锋将史建瑭与镇人战于城下，为流矢所中而卒。
现代文：九月，前锋将史建瑭同镇州军在城下交战，被流矢射中死去。
English: In September, the forward, Shi Jianlian, fought with the Zhenzhou army under the city and was shot dead.

古文：冬十月己未，梁将戴思远攻德胜北城，帝命李嗣源设伏于戚城，令骑军挑战。梁军大至，帝御中军以御之。
现代文：十月七日，梁将戴思远攻德胜北城，庄宗命李嗣源在戚城设下埋伏，令骑兵挑战，梁军大批追来，庄宗率中军抵抗。
English: On October 7th, Liang sent Dai Siyuan to attack Desheng North City. Zhuang Zong ordered Li Siyuan to set up an ambush in the relative city, causing the cavalry to challenge. Liang's army pursued in large numbers, and Zhuang Zong led the Chinese army to resist.

古文：时李从珂伪为梁帜，奔入梁垒，斧其眺楼，持级而还。
现代文：这时李从珂假装梁军举着梁军旗帜，奔入梁军营垒，用战斧砍垮梁军望台，斩下敌人首级而回。
English: At this time, Li Congke pretended to be Liang Jun's banner-bearer, rushed into Liang Jun's camp, used a tomahawk to cut down the Liang Jun's watchtower, cut off the enemy's head and returned.

古文：梁军愈恐，步兵渐至，李嗣源以铁骑三千乘之，梁军大败，俘斩二万计。
现代文：梁军更加惊恐，步兵渐渐来到，李嗣源领三千铁骑冲锋，梁军大败，俘杀二万。
English: Liang's army was even more terrified. The infantry gradually arrived, and Li Siyuan led 3,000 cavalry to charge. Liang's army was defeated and 20,000 were captured.

古文：十二月辛未，王郁诱契丹安巴坚寇幽州，《契丹国志》：王处直在定州，以镇、定为脣齿，恐镇亡而定孤，乃潜使人语其子王郁，使赂契丹，令犯塞以救镇州之围。
现代文：九日，阎宝奏称，定州节度使王处直被他儿子王都囚禁在别室，王都自称留后。十一月，庄宗到镇州城下，张处瑾派弟弟张处琪、幕客齐俭等人迎候庄宗乞求投降，言语仍然不逊服，庄宗下令将他们关押起来。
English: On the 9th, Yan Bao reported that the Dingzhou Festival had caused Wang Shiguang to be imprisoned in another room by his son Wang Du, and Wang Du claimed to stay behind. In November, Zhuo Zong went to the town of Zhenzhou. Zhang Shuguang sent his brother Zhang Shanki, and the shogun's guest Qi Jian, and others to meet Zhuo Zong to beg for surrender. The words were still not submissive, and Zhuo Zong ordered them to be detained.

古文：王郁说太祖曰： 镇州美女如云，金帛似山，天皇速往，则皆为己物也；不然，则为晋王所有矣。 
现代文：此时庄宗军队堆起土山用来进攻敌人营垒，城中也堆起土山抗拒，十来天内，机变百出。张处瑾令韩正时率一千骑兵突围，准备进定州和王处直商议事情，被庄宗游击军追击破灭，剩下的保护行唐，贼将彭斌贝杀了韩正时来投降。
English: At this time, Zhuangzong's army piled up earth mounds to attack the enemy's camp, and the city also piled up earth mounds to resist. Within ten days, there were countless opportunities. Zhang ordered Han Zheng to break through the siege with a thousand cavalry and prepare to go to Dingzhou and Wang Zheng to discuss the matter directly. He was chased and destroyed by Zhuangzong's guerrilla army, and the remaining protection went to Tang. The thief killed Peng Binbei and Han Zheng came to surrender.

古文：太祖以为然，率众而南。遂引军涿州，陷之。又寇定州，王都遣使告急，帝自镇州率五千骑赴之。
现代文：十二月二十日，王郁引诱契丹阿保机侵犯幽州，又带部队攻陷涿州，又侵犯定州，王都派使者告急，庄宗从镇州率五千骑兵赴援。
English: On December 20th, Wang Yu lured the Khitan Apo to invade Yuzhou, and then led his troops to invade and capture Zhangzhou, and then invaded Dingzhou. Wang Du sent an envoy to express his urgency, and Zhuang Zong led five thousand cavalrymen from Zhenzhou to come to the rescue.

古文：天祐十九年春正月甲午，帝至新城，契丹前锋三千骑至新乐。
现代文：天祐十九年一月十三日，庄宗到新城，契丹前锋三千骑兵到新乐。
English: On January 13 of the 19th year of Tianyu, Zhuangzong went to Xincheng, and the Khitan vanguard of three thousand cavalrymen went to Xinle.

古文：是时，梁将戴思远乘虚以寇魏州，军至魏店，李嗣源自领兵驰入魏州。
现代文：这时，梁将戴思远乘虚侵犯魏州，部队到魏店，李嗣源带兵驰入魏州。
English: At this time, Liang sent Dai Siyuan to invade Weizhou, the troops went to Weidian, and Li Siyuan led the troops into Weizhou.

古文：梁人知其有备，乃西渡洹水，陷成安而去。
现代文：梁人知道魏州有防备，便西渡洹水，攻陷成安后离去。
English: The Liang people knew that there were defenses in Weizhou, so they went west to cross the Yanshui River, invaded Cheng'an, and left.

古文：时契丹渡沙河，而诸将相顾失色；又闻梁人内侵，鄴城危急，皆请旋师，唯帝谓不可，乃率亲骑至新城。
现代文：此时契丹渡过沙河口，各位将军相顾失色，又听说梁人侵入内地，邺城危急，都请求回师，只有庄宗说不行，便亲率骑兵到新城。
English: At this time, the Khitan crossed the mouth of the Sha River, the generals lost interest in each other, and they heard that the Liang people had invaded the inland, and that the city was in danger. They all requested to return to the division, but Zhuangzong said no, so he personally led the cavalry to Xincheng.

古文：契丹万余骑，遽见帝军，惶骇而退。
现代文：契丹一万多骑兵，突然见到庄宗，惶恐而退。
English: More than ten thousand cavalrymen of Khitan suddenly saw Zhuangzong and retreated in panic.

古文：帝分军为二广，追蹑数十里，获安巴坚之子。
现代文：庄宗把部队分为二支，追踪几十里，俘获阿保机的儿子。
English: Zhuang Zong divided the troops into two, tracked them for dozens of miles, and captured the son of Ah Bao.

古文：时沙河冰薄，桥梁隘狭，敌争践而过，陷溺者甚众。
现代文：此时沙河上的冰较薄，桥梁狭窄，敌军争着过桥，挤下河的很多。
English: At this time, the ice on the Sand River was thin, the bridge was narrow, and the enemy forces fought to cross the bridge, crowding a lot of cranes down the river.

古文：安巴坚方在定州，闻前军败，退保望都。
现代文：阿保机正在定州，听说前军失败，撤退保卫望都。
English: A Baoji was in Dingzhou when he heard that the former army had failed and had withdrawn to defend the capital.

古文：帝至定州，王都迎谒。是夜，宿于开元寺。
现代文：庄宗到定州，王都迎见，这晚在开元寺过夜。
English: When Zhuangzong arrived in Dingzhou, Wang Du met him and spent the night at Kaiyuan Temple.

古文：李嗣昭引三百骑横击之，晋王始得出，因纵兵奋击，太祖兵败，遂北至易州。
现代文：第二天，引军到望都，契丹迎战，庄宗身先士卒，四次骑马出击，敌人退而列阵，庄宗的步兵也在水边列阵。李嗣昭跃马奋击，敌众大败，俘杀几千，追击到易水，缴获毡裘、帐幕、羊马不可计数。
English: On the second day, the army was led to the capital of Mawang, Khitan met the battle, Zhuang Zong led the way, four times riding out to attack, the enemy retreated and lined up, Zhuang Zong's infantry also lined up on the water's edge. Li Zhi Zhao leapt on his horse and fought hard, the enemy was defeated, several thousand were captured, pursued to Yishui, and captured countless horses, tents, and sheep.

古文：会大雪弥旬，平地数尺，人马死者相属，太祖乃归。
现代文：这时节令已到冬至，平地大雪五尺深，敌人缺乏粮草，人马死于道路的绵绵不绝，庄宗乘胜追袭到幽州。
English: At this time, the festival had reached the winter solstice, the heavy snow on the plain was five feet deep, the enemy lacked grain and grass, people and horses died on the road incessantly, and Zhuangzong took advantage of the victory to attack Yuzhou.

古文：是月，梁将戴思远寇德胜北城，筑垒穿堑，地道云梯，昼夜攻击；李存审极力拒守，城中危急。
现代文：这个月，梁将戴思远侵犯德胜北城，筑垒挖沟，地道云梯，昼夜攻击，李存审极力把守，城中危急。
English: This month, Liang put Dai Siyuan to invade Desheng Beicheng, built a wall, dug a ditch, tunneled a ladder, attacked day and night, Li Cunxin tried his best to defend, and the city was in danger.

古文：帝自幽州闻之，倍道兼行以赴，梁人闻帝至，烧营而遁。
现代文：庄宗在幽州听说后，日夜兼程救援，梁军听说庄宗到，烧掉营房而逃。
English: After hearing of Zhuangzong's arrival in Yuzhou, Liang's army rushed to the rescue day and night. When Liang's army heard of Zhuangzong's arrival, they burned down the barracks and fled.

古文：三月丙午，王师败于镇州城下，阎宝退保赵州。
现代文：三月二十六日，庄宗的军队在镇州城下失败，阎宝退保赵州。
English: On March 26th, Zhuangzong's army failed in the city of Zhenzhou, and Yan Bao withdrew to Zhaozhou.

古文：时镇州累月受围，城中艰食，王师筑垒环之；又决滹沱水以绝城中出路。
现代文：此时镇州被围困几个月，城中粮食紧张，庄宗军筑起堡垒环绕，又挖开滹沱河断绝城中出路。
English: At this time, Zhenzhou was besieged for several months, food was scarce in the city, Zhuangzong's army built a fortress to surround it, and dug up the Wei River to cut off the way out of the city.

古文：是日，城中军出，攻其长围，皆奋力死战，王师不能拒，引师而退。
现代文：这一天，城中军队出来，攻击围敌，都奋力死战，庄宗军抵挡不住，引师撤退。
English: On this day, the troops in the city came out and attacked the besieged enemy. They all fought to the death. Zhuangzong's army could not resist and withdrew.

古文：镇人坏其营垒，取其刍粮者累日。
现代文：镇州人破坏围城营垒，收取粮草，弄了几天。
English: The Zhenzhou people destroyed the siege fortifications, collected grain and grass, and made a few days.

古文：帝闻失律，即以昭义节度使李嗣昭为北面招讨使，进攻镇州。
现代文：庄宗听说失败消息，立即任昭义节度使李嗣昭为北面招讨使，进攻镇州。
English: When Zhuangzong heard the news of the defeat, he immediately appointed Zhao Yi to make Li Shizhao the envoy to the north to attack Zhenzhou.

古文：夏四月，嗣昭为流矢所中，卒于师。
现代文：四月，李嗣昭被流矢射中，在军中死去。
English: In April, Li Shizhao was shot by a stray arrow and died in the army.

古文：己卯，天平节度使阎宝卒。
现代文：二十九日，天平节度使阎宝去世。
English: On the 29th, the Tianping Festival caused the death of Yan Bao.

古文：以振武节度使李存进为北面招讨使。
现代文：任振武节度使李存进为北面招讨使。
English: The appointment of Zhenwu Jiedu caused Li Cunjin to become the envoy to the north.

古文：是月，大同军节度使李存璋卒。
现代文：这个月，大同军节度使李存璋去世。
English: This month, the Datong Army Festival caused Li Cunxu's death.

古文：五月乙酉，李存进围镇州，营于东渡。
现代文：五月六日，李存进包围镇州，在东垣渡扎营。
English: On May 6, Li Cunjin besieged Zhenzhou and encamped at Donggakiwu.

古文：自是，澶渊之西，相州之南，皆为梁人所据。
现代文：梁将戴思远又攻陷共城、新乡等地，从此澶渊以西，相州以南，都为梁人占据。
English: The Liang people conquered and took over the cities of Gongcheng and Xinxiang, and occupied the areas west of the Yanyuan River and south of the Xiangzhou River.

古文：九月戊寅朔，张处球悉城中兵奄至东垣渡，急攻我之垒门。
现代文：九月一日，张处球率城中所有士兵扑向东垣渡，急攻唐军垒门。
English: On September 1, Zhang Du and all the soldiers in the city rushed to Donggakdu and attacked the Tang army's base gate.

古文：时骑军已临贼城，不觉其出，李存进惶骇，引十余人斗于桥上，贼退，我之骑军前后夹击之，贼众大败，步兵数千，殆无还者。
现代文：此时骑兵已临近贼城，没发觉贼军出动。李存进惶恐，带十几人在桥上抗击，贼退，骑兵前后夹击，贼众大败，几千步兵几乎没有生还的。
English: At this time, the cavalry was already approaching the Thieves' Town, but they did not notice the Thieves' Army moving out. Li Cunjin panicked and led more than a dozen people to fight on the bridge. The thieves retreated, the cavalry attacked back and forth, the thieves were defeated, and several thousand infantrymen barely survived.

古文：是役也，李存进战殁于师，以蕃汉马步总管李存审为北面招讨使，以攻镇州。
现代文：这一仗，李存进战死于军中，任蕃汉马步总管李存审为北面招讨使，以攻镇州。
English: In this battle, Li Cunxin died in the army after entering the battle. Li Cunxin, who was the general manager of the Han Ma Bu, acted as the envoy of the north side to attack Zhenzhou.

古文：丙午夜，赵将李再丰之子冲投缒以接王师，诸军登城，迟明毕入，镇州平。
现代文：二十九日夜，赵将李再丰的儿子李冲放绳子接应庄宗军队，诸军登城，天亮时全部进城，镇州平定。
English: On the evening of the 29th, Zhao sent Li Chongbo, the son of Li Zhaifeng, to meet Zhuangzong's army with a rope. The army went to the city, and at dawn they all entered the city, and the town was pacified.

古文：获处球、处瑾、处琪并其母，及同恶高濛李翥、齐俭等，皆折足送行台，镇人请醢而食之；发张文礼尸，磔于市。
现代文：俘获张处球、张处瑾、张处琪和他们的母亲，以及同恶高氵蒙、李翥、齐俭等人，都折断他们的腿送往行台，镇州人请求将他们斩为肉酱而食，挖出张文礼的尸体，在市中斩成肉块。
English: Captured Zhang Duqiu, Zhang Duanqiu, Zhang Duanqi and their mother, as well as fellow evildoers Gao Yimeng, Li Yu, Qi Jian and others, all had their legs broken and were sent to Xingtai. The people of Zhenzhou requested that they be chopped up for meat sauce, and that Zhang Wenli's body be dug up and chopped into pieces in the city.

古文：帝以符习为镇州节度使，乌震为赵州刺史，赵仁贞为深州刺史，李再丰为冀州刺史。
现代文：庄宗任符习为镇州节度使，乌震为赵州刺史，赵仁贞为深州刺史，李再丰为冀州刺史。
English: Zhuangzong appointed Fuxi as the festival envoy of Zhenzhou, Wu Zhen as the history envoy of Zhaozhou, Zhao Renzhen as the history envoy of Shenzhou, and Li Zhaifeng as the history envoy of Jizhou.

古文：镇人请帝兼领本镇，从之，乃以符习遥领天平军节度使。
现代文：镇州人请庄宗兼管本镇，庄宗答应了，便以符习遥领天平军节度使。
English: The people of Zhenzhou asked Zhuangzong to take charge of the town as well. Zhuangzong agreed, and sent the commander of the Tianping Army, Fuxi Yao.

古文：十一月，河东监军张承业卒。
现代文：十一月，河东监军张承业死。
English: In November, Zhang Chengye, the military supervisor of Hedong, died.

古文：十二月，以魏州观察判官张宪权知镇州军州事。
现代文：十二月，任魏州观察判官张宪暂管镇州军事。
English: In December, Zhang Xian, the judge of the Weizhou observation, temporarily took charge of the military in Zhenzhou.

古文：同光元年春正月丙子，五台山僧献铜鼎三，言于山中石崖间得之。
现代文：同光元年一月一日，五台山和尚献三座铜鼎，说是从山中石崖里得到的。
English: On January 1st of the same year, the monks of Mount Wutai offered three bronze tripods, saying that they were obtained from the rocky cliffs in the mountains.

古文：二月，新州团练使李嗣肱卒。
现代文：二月，新州团练使李嗣死。
English: In February, the Xinzhou Rehearsal Team caused the death of Li Xi.

古文：是时，以诸籓镇相继上笺劝进，乃命有司制置百官省寺仗卫法物，期以四月行即位之礼，以河东节度判官庐质为大礼使。
现代文：此时，因为各个藩镇相继上书劝进，便命有关部门设置百官机构仪仗法物，准备在四月举行即位典礼，任河东节度判官卢质为大礼使。
English: At this time, because each province and town successively sent a letter to persuade him to advance, he ordered the relevant departments to set up a ceremonial object of the hundred officials' organization, prepare to hold the enthronement ceremony in April, and appoint Lu Qian, the judge of the Hedong Festival, as the grand envoy.

古文：三月己卯，以横海军节度使、内外蕃汉马步总管李存审为幽州节度使。
现代文：三月五日，任横海军节度使、内外蕃汉马步总管李存审为幽州节度使。
English: On March 5th, Li Cunxin, who was appointed as the envoy of the Yuzhou Navy Festival and the general manager of the Hanmabo of the People's Republic of China, was appointed as the envoy of the Yuzhou Festival.

古文：潞州留后李继韬叛，送款于梁。
现代文：潞州留后李继韬叛变，与梁朝结交。
English: After staying in Zhangzhou, Li Jizhen rebelled and made friends with Liang Dynasty.

古文：是月，筑即位坛于魏州牙城之南。夏四月己巳，帝升坛，祭告昊天上帝，遂即皇帝位，文武臣僚称贺。
现代文：这个月，在魏州牙城南边修筑即位坛。四月二十五日，庄宗登上即位坛，祭告苍天上帝，于是登皇帝位，文武臣僚称贺。
English: This month, the enthronement altar was built on the south side of the imperial city of Weizhou. On April 25th, Zhuangzong ascended the enthronement altar, worshiped the God of Heaven, and then ascended to the throne of the emperor. Wen and Wu ministers congratulated him.

古文：礼毕，御应天门宣制：改天佑二十年为同光元年，大赦天下，自四月二十五日昧爽以前，除十恶五逆、放火行劫、持杖杀人、官典犯赃、屠牛铸钱、合造毒药外，罪无轻重，咸赦除之。
现代文：典礼结束，到应天门宣布诏令：改天祐二十年为同光元年。大赦天下，从四月二十五日黎明以前，除去十恶五逆、放火行劫、持杖杀人、官典犯赃、杀牛铸钱、合造毒药之外，无论罪行轻重，全都赦免。
English: At the end of the ceremony, a decree was issued in response to the gate of heaven: the first year of the twenty-first century will be the same as the first year of the twenty-first century. The world was amnestied, and from the dawn of April 25th, all crimes were pardoned, regardless of severity, except for the ten evils and five vices, arson, robbery, murder with a cane, official code crime, cow killing, money minting, and compounding poison.

古文：应蕃汉马步将校并赐功臣名号，超授检校官，已高者与一子六品正员官，兵士并赐等第优给。
现代文：凡蕃汉马步将校一并赐功臣称号，提升检校官，官位本已很高的赐予一子六品正员官，兵士一并按等级优待赏赐。
English: Every Hanmabou officer was also awarded the title of meritorious subject, the school inspector was promoted, the official rank, which was already very high, was awarded to a son of a six-grade official, and the soldiers were also rewarded according to their rank.

古文：其战殁功臣各加追赠，仍赐谥号。
现代文：战死的功臣追赠功名，并定谥号。
English: The meritorious vassals who died in the war were posthumously awarded their names and given posthumous surnames.

古文：民年八十已上，与免一子役。
现代文：百姓有年纪在八十岁以上的，免去一子的劳役。
English: If a commoner is over eighty years old, one son shall be exempted from labor service.

古文：内外文武职官，并可直言极谏，无有隐讳。
现代文：内外文武官员，都可以直言极谏，不用隐瞒忌讳。
English: Military and civilian officials at home and abroad can be outspoken and do not have to hide the taboo.

古文：贡、选二司，宜令有司速商量施行。
现代文：贡、选两个部门应令有关官员快速开展工作。
English: The two departments of tribute and election should order the relevant officials to carry out the work quickly.

古文：云、应、蔚、朔、易、定、幽、燕及山后八军，秋夏税率量与蠲减。
现代文：云、应、蔚、朔、易、定、幽、燕各州以及山后八军，秋夏的税收酌量减免。
English: The states of Yun, Ying, Wei, Shuo, Yi, Ding, Yu and Yan, as well as the eight armies behind the mountain, will have tax reductions and exemptions in the autumn and summer.

古文：民有三世已上不分居者，与免杂徭。
现代文：百姓中有三代以上没分家的，免去杂役。
English: If there are more than three generations of the same family among the common people, they will be exempted from miscellaneous service.

古文：诸道应有祥瑞，不用闻奏。
现代文：各地出现祥瑞景物不用报告。
English: There is no need to report the appearance of auspicious and auspicious scenery in various regions.

古文：赦书有所未该，委所司条奏以闻云。
现代文：赦书有不全面的地方，委托官员上奏报告。
English: The amnesty document is not comprehensive, and officials have been commissioned to submit a report.

古文：是岁，自正月不雨，人心忧恐，宣赦之日，澍雨溥降。
现代文：这一年从一月以来没下雨，人心忧惧，宣布赦令这一天，普降及时雨。
English: This year, it hasn't rained since January, and people are worried. On this day, when the amnesty was announced, it rained all the time.

古文：初，唐咸通中，金、水、土、火四星聚于毕、昴，太史奏： 毕、昴，赵、魏之分，其下将有王者。 
现代文：起初，唐咸通年间，金、水、土、火四星聚集在毕、昴两宿，太史上奏： 毕、昴两宿是赵州的分野，它下面将会有王者。 
English: At the beginning, during the Tang Dynasty, the four elements of gold, water, earth and fire gathered in the two cities of Bi and Handan. It is said that the two cities of Bi and Handan are the fields of Zhao Prefecture, and there will be a king below it.

古文：懿宗乃诏令镇州王景崇被衮冕摄朝三日，遣臣下备仪注、军府称臣以厌之。
现代文：懿宗便诏令镇州王景崇穿衮冕等帝王礼服代为掌理朝政三天，派臣下备好仪礼，要军府称臣，用这些方法来压服天象。
English: Emperor Xizong then ordered Zhenzhou Wang Jingsong to wear the imperial crown and other imperial ceremonial clothes to take charge of the government for three days, sent his subordinates to prepare the ceremony, asked the military to praise his subordinates, and used these methods to subdue the celestial elephant.

古文：其后四十九年，帝破梁军于柏乡，平定赵、魏，至是即位于鄴宫。
现代文：过了四十九年，庄宗在柏乡破灭梁军，平定赵、魏，到现在终于在邺宫登皇帝位。
English: Forty-nine years later, Zhuangzong defeated Liang's army in Baixiang, pacified Zhao and Wei, and has now finally ascended to the throne in the Summer Palace.

古文：是月，以行台左丞相豆卢革为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、太清宫使；以行台右丞相卢澄为中书侍郎平章事、监修国史；以前定州掌书记李德休为御史中丞；以河东节度判官卢质为兵部尚书，充翰林学士承旨；以河东掌书记冯道为户部侍郎，充翰林学士；以魏博、镇冀观察判官张宪为工部侍郎，充租庸使；以中门使郭崇韬、昭义监军使张居翰并为枢密使；以权知幽州军府事李绍宏为宣徽使；以魏博节度判官王正言为礼部尚书，行兴唐尹；以河东军城都虞候孟知祥为太原尹，充西京副留守；以泽潞节度判官任圆为工部尚书兼真定尹，充北京副留守。
现代文：这个月，任行台左丞相豆卢革为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、太清宫使；任行台右丞相卢澄为中书侍郎平章事、监修国史；任前定州掌书记李德休为御史中丞；任河东节度判官卢质为兵部尚书，充翰林学士承旨；任河东掌书记冯道为户部侍郎，充翰林学士；任魏博、镇冀观察判官张宪为工部侍郎，充租庸使；任中门使郭崇韬、昭义监军使张居翰一起为枢密使；任代理幽州军府事李绍宏为宣徽使；任魏博节度判官王正言为礼部尚书，兼兴唐尹；任河东军城都虞候孟知祥为太原尹，充西京副留守；任泽潞节度判官任圜为工部尚书兼真定尹，充北京副留守。
English: This month, Lu Ge, who was appointed as the Left Wing of the Office of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was appointed as a subordinate chamberlain, and Ping Zhang, who was appointed as a subordinate chancellor of the same, was appointed as an envoy to the Taiqing Palace; Lu Cheng, who was appointed as the Right Wing of the Office of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was appointed as a subordinate chancellor of the same, and was appointed as a supervisor of the national history; Li Dexiu, who was appointed as a vice-chancellor of the same, was appointed as a vice-chancellor of the same; Lu Guo, who was appointed as

古文：诏升魏州为东京兴唐府，改元城县为兴唐县，贵乡县为广晋县，以太原为西京，以镇州为北都。
现代文：下诏升魏州为东京兴唐府，改元城县为兴唐县，贵乡县为广晋县，以太原为西京，以镇州为北都。
English: The following edict raised Weizhou to Tokyo Xingtang Prefecture, and changed Yuancheng County to Xingtang County, Guixiang County to Guangjin County, Taiyuan to West Beijing, and Zhenzhou to North Capital.

古文：是时，所管节度一十三，州五十。
现代文：这时所管辖有十三个节度，五十个州。
English: At that time, there were thirteen states and fifty states under its jurisdiction.

古文：闰月丁丑，以李嗣源为检校侍中，依前横海军节度使、内外蕃汉副总管；以幽州节度使李存审为检校太师、兼中书令，依前蕃汉马步总管；以河东节度使硃友谦为检校太师、兼尚书令。
现代文：闰四月三日，任李嗣源为检校侍中，依前横海军节度使、内外蕃汉副总管；任幽州节度使李存审为检校太师、兼中书令，依前蕃汉马步军总管；任河中节度使朱友谦为检校太师、兼尚书令。
English: On April 3rd, Li Siyuan was appointed as the vice-commissioner of the inspection of the school, according to the former vice-minister of the Navy, and the vice-governor of the Inner and Outer Han Dynasty; the Yuzhou Festival appointed Li Cunxuan as the inspector of the school, and the chief of the Chinese army, according to the former vice-governor of the Han Dynasty; the Central Festival appointed Zhu Youqian as the inspector of the school, and the chief of the Chinese army.

古文：安国军节度使符习加同平章事，定州节度使王都加检校侍中。
现代文：安国军节度使符习加同平章事，定州节度使王都加检校侍中。
English: The An Guo Army Festival made Fu Xi add Tong Ping chapter, and the Dingzhou Festival made Wang Du add inspection school attendant.

古文：是月，追尊曾祖蔚州太保为昭烈皇帝，庙号懿祖；夫人崔氏曰昭列皇后。
现代文：这个月，追尊曾祖父蔚州太保为昭烈皇帝，庙号是懿祖；夫人崔氏为昭烈皇后。
English: This month, the revered great-grandfather Ulshu Taibo was honored as the Emperor Zhaorong, the temple name was Zhezu; his wife Cui was the Empress Zhaorong.

古文：追尊皇祖代州太保为文景皇帝，庙号献祖；夫人秦氏曰文景皇后。
现代文：追尊皇祖代州太保为文景皇帝，庙号是献祖；夫人秦氏为文景皇后。
English: Emperor Suizong's ancestor, Taibo of Zhoushou, was the Emperor of Literature and Culture, and the temple was named after him; his wife, Qin, was the Empress of Literature and Culture.

古文：追尊皇考河东节度使、太师、中书令、晋王为武皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：追尊皇父河东节度使、太师、中书令、晋王为武皇帝，庙号是太祖。
English: Emperor Suizong's father, Emperor Taizu of the Eastern Song Dynasty, Emperor Taishi of the Chinese Song Dynasty, Emperor Jin of the Wu Dynasty, and the temple's name is Taizu.

古文：诏于晋阳立宗庙，以高祖神尧皇帝、太宗文皇帝、懿宗昭圣皇帝、昭宗圣穆皇帝及懿祖以下为七庙。
现代文：下诏在晋阳立宗庙，以高祖神尧皇帝、太宗文皇帝、懿宗昭圣皇帝、昭宗圣穆皇帝及懿祖以下为七庙。
English: The following edict established the ancestral temple in Jinyang, with Emperor Gaozhong, Emperor Taizongwen, Emperor Zhaozong Zhaosheng, Emperor Zhaozong Shengmu and Zhaozhu as the seven temples.

古文：甲午，契丹寇幽州，至易、定而还。
现代文：二十日，契丹侵犯幽州，到易、定二州后回去。
English: On the 20th, the Khitan invaded Yuzhou, and went to Yizhou and Dingzhou before returning.

古文：时有自郓来者，言节度使戴思远领兵在河上，州城无守兵，可袭而取之。
现代文：这时有从郓州来的人，说节度使戴思远领兵到黄河上，州城没守兵，可以袭击攻取。
English: At this time, some people came from Zhangzhou, saying that the festival made Dai Siyuan lead the troops to the Yellow River, and that the state capital had no guards and could be attacked and captured.

古文：帝召李嗣源谋曰： 昭义阻命，梁将董璋攻迫泽州，梁志在泽、潞，不虞别有事生，汶阳无备，不可失也。 
现代文：庄宗召李嗣源谋划说 ：昭义军抗命，梁将董璋攻逼泽州，梁军志在夺取泽州、潞州，没有考虑另有事情发生，汶阳没防备，机不可失。 
English: Zhuang Zong called Li Siyuan to make a plan and said, "The Shao Yi Army is disobeying orders, Liang will force Dong Ye to attack Zezhou, Liang's military ambition is to seize Zezhou and Zhangzhou, without considering other things, Benyang is unprepared, the opportunity must not be lost."

古文：嗣源以为然。
现代文：李嗣源同意庄宗所说。
English: Li Sigen agreed with what Zhuang Zong said.

古文：壬寅，命嗣源率步骑五千，箝枚自河趋郓。
现代文：二十八日，命李嗣源率步兵骑兵五千，衔枚从黄河奔向郓州。
English: On the 28th, Li Siyuan was ordered to lead 5,000 infantry and cavalry from the Yellow River to Zhangzhou.

古文：是夜阴雨，我师至城下，郓人不觉，遂乘城而入，郓州平。
现代文：这天晚上阴雨，部队到城下，郓州人还不知道，遂登城而入，平定郓州。
English: It was cloudy and rainy that evening, and the troops came to the city, but the people of Zhangzhou did not know it, so they entered the city and pacified Zhangzhou.

古文：制以李嗣源为天平军节度使。
现代文：颁布诏令任李嗣源为天平军节度使。
English: The imperial edict was issued appointing Li Siyuan as the Tianping Army's ceremonial envoy.

古文：梁主闻郓州陷，大恐，乃遣王彦章代戴思远总兵以来拒。
现代文：梁主听说郓州陷落，大恐，派王彦章替代戴思远带兵来抵拒。
English: When the lord of Liang heard that Zhangzhou had fallen, he was terrified and sent Wang Yanzhang to replace Dai Siyuan to lead the troops to resist.

古文：时硃守殷守德胜南城，帝惧彦章奔冲，遂幸澶州。
现代文：此时朱守殷守德胜南城，庄宗怕王彦章冲杀，遂到澶州。
English: At this time, Zhu Shou Yin Shou Desheng Nancheng, Zhuang Zong was afraid that Wang Yanzhang would rush to kill him, so he went to Zhangzhou.

古文：五月辛酉，彦章夜率舟师自杨村浮河而下，断德胜之浮桥，攻南城，陷之。
现代文：五月十八日，王彦章晚上率水兵从杨村顺河而下，斩断德胜浮桥，攻下南城。
English: On the evening of May 18, Wang Yanzhang and his sailors sailed down the river from Yangcun, cut off the Desheng Floating Bridge, and captured Nancheng.

古文：帝令中书焦彦宾驰至杨刘，固守其城；令硃守殷撤德胜北城屋木攻具，浮河而下，以助杨刘。
现代文：庄宗命中书焦彦宾骑马奔向杨刘，固守该城，命朱守殷拆除德胜北城屋木做成木筏，顺河而下，以援助杨刘。
English: According to Zhuangzong's order, Jiao Yanbin ran to Yang Liu on horseback to hold on to the city, and ordered Zhu Shouyin to dismantle the houses of Desheng North City to make a raft and go down the river to help Yang Liu.

古文：是时，德胜军食刍茭薪炭数十万计，至是令人辇负入澶州，事既仓卒，耗失殆半。
现代文：此时，德胜军粮食柴草几十万，现在用人车运入澶州，事情办得急，损失过半。
English: At this time, hundreds of thousands of grain, firewood and grasses of the German victorious army were transported into Ganzhou by human vehicles. The matter was handled hastily, and the loss was more than half.

古文：硃守殷以所毁屋木编筏，置步军于其上。
现代文：朱守殷用毁掉的屋木编木筏，让步兵站在上面。
English: Zhu Shouyan used the destroyed roof timbers to weave a raft for the infantry to stand on.

古文：王彦章以舟师沿流而下，各行一岸，每遇转滩水汇，即中流交斗，流矢雨集，或全舟覆没，一彼一此，终日百战，比及杨刘，殆亡其半。
现代文：王彦章带水军沿流而下，双方各行一边，每当遇上转弯汇水处，便在河中交战，箭如雨下，有的全船覆没，彼此都有，每天交战上百次，到杨刘时，伤亡近半。
English: Wang Yanzhang led the navy down the river. Both sides went side by side. Whenever they met the turning point of the water, they fought in the river. The arrows fell like rain, some of them covered the whole ship, and they had each other. They fought hundreds of times a day. When they reached Yang Liu, nearly half of them were killed or injured.

古文：已巳，王彦章、段凝率大军攻杨刘南城，焦彦宾与守城将李周极力固守。
现代文：二十六日，王彦章、段凝率大军攻杨刘南城，焦彦宾和守城将领李周尽力坚守。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yanzhang and Duan Cong led a large army to attack Yang Liu Nancheng. Jiao Yibin and the garrison commander Li Zhou tried their best to hold on.

古文：梁军昼夜攻击，百道齐进，竟不能下，遂结营于杨刘之南，东西延袤十数栅。
现代文：梁军昼夜攻击，百路齐进，却不能攻下，遂在杨刘南边扎营，东西延绵有十几个营栅。
English: Liang's army attacked day and night, marching along a hundred roads, but they were unable to capture it, so they set up camp on the south side of Yang Liu, with more than a dozen camp fences stretching from east to west.

古文：六月己亥，帝亲御军至杨刘，登城望见梁军，重壕复垒，以绝其路，帝乃选勇士持短兵出战。
现代文：六月二十六日，庄宗亲自率兵到杨刘，登城望见梁军，重重沟濠壁垒绝断道路，庄宗选勇士拿短兵器出城。
English: On June 26th, Zhuangzong personally led the troops to Yang Liu. When they reached the city, they could see Liang's army. The road was cut off by a series of ditches and barriers. Zhuangzong's chosen warriors took their short weapons and left the city.

古文：梁军于城门外，连延屈曲，穿掘小壕，伏甲士于中，候帝军至，则弓弩齐发，师人多伤矢，不得进。
现代文：梁军在城门外，连延屈曲，挖掘小沟，埋伏甲士在里面，等庄宗军队一到来，便弓弩齐发，士兵多被射中，不能前进。
English: Liang's army was outside the gate of the city, and they kept bending and digging a small ditch, and the ambush soldiers were inside. As soon as Zhuang Zong's army arrived, the bows and arrows were fired, and many soldiers were shot and could not advance.

古文：帝患之，问计于郭崇韬；崇韬请于下流据河筑垒，以救郓州。
现代文：庄宗为之忧虑，向郭崇韬问计策，郭崇韬请庄宗在下游靠黄河筑垒，用来救郓州。
English: Concerned about this, Zhuangzong asked Guo Chongyi for a strategy. Guo Chongyi asked Zhuangzong to build a barrier downstream of the Yellow River to save Zhangzhou.

古文：又请帝日令勇士挑战，旬日之内，寇若不至，营垒必成。
现代文：又请庄宗每日派勇士挑战，十天内，敌人若不来，营垒必能筑成。
English: He also asked Zhuangzong to send warriors to challenge every day. If the enemy did not come within ten days, the camp would surely be built.

古文：帝善之，即令崇韬与毛璋率数千人中夜往博州济河东，昼夜督役，居六日，营垒将成。
现代文：庄宗认为这办法好，令郭崇韬和毛璋率几千人半夜去博州渡到黄河东边，昼夜督促徒役，六天过去，营垒将要修成。
English: Zhuangzong thought this was a good idea. He ordered Guo Chongzhen and Mao Jun to lead several thousand people to go to Bozhou in the middle of the night and cross to the east side of the Yellow River. They would supervise the campers day and night. Six days later, the camp would be completed.

古文：戊子，梁将王彦章、杜晏球领徒数万，晨压帝之新垒。
现代文：十五日，梁将王彦章、杜彦球领几万人，清晨逼近庄宗的新垒。
English: On the 15th, Liang led tens of thousands of people led by Wang Yanzhang and Du Yan to approach the new base of Zhuozong in the early morning.

古文：时板筑虽毕，墙仞低庳，战具未备，沙城散恶，王彦章列骑环城，虐用其人，使步军堙壕登堞。
现代文：这时板筑虽说做完，墙仍很低，作战器具也没备齐，城墙如沙子，王彦章率骑兵环绕城垒，欺虐城中人，派步兵填平沟壕登上城墙。
English: At this time, although the board building was finished, the wall was still very low, and the combat equipment was not ready. The city wall was like sand. Wang Yanzhang led the cavalry around the fortress, bullied the people in the city, and sent the infantry to fill the trench and climb the city wall.

古文：又于上流下巨舰十余艘，扼断济路。自旦至午，攻击百端，城中危急。
现代文：又从上游开来大舰十几艘，扼守渡口，从早上到中午，百番攻击，城中危急。
English: More than a dozen large ships came from upstream to guard the ferry. From morning to noon, there were hundreds of attacks, and the city was in danger.

古文：帝自杨刘引军阵于西岸，城中望之，大呼，帝舣舟将渡，梁军遂解围，退保邹家口。
现代文：庄宗从杨刘引军在西岸列阵，城里人看见，大喊，庄宗乘船准备渡河，梁军遂解围，退保邹家口。
English: Zhuangzong led an army from Yang Liu to line up on the west bank. The townspeople saw and shouted that Zhuangzong was preparing to cross the river by boat. Liang's army then relieved the siege and retreated to Baojiakou.

古文：秋七月丁未，帝御军沿河而南，梁军弃邹家口夜遁，委弃锅甲刍粮千计。
现代文：七月五日，庄宗率军队沿黄河向南，梁军放弃邹家口夜里逃走，丢下锅甲粮草以千计。
English: On July 5, Zhuang Zong led the army along the Yellow River to the south. Liang's army abandoned Xingjiakou and fled in the night, leaving thousands of pots of grain and grass.

古文：戊午，遣骑将李绍贻直抵梁军垒，梁益恐。
现代文：十六日，派骑将李绍贻直抵梁军营垒，梁军更加惊恐。
English: On the 16th, Li Shaoqi's cavalry arrived at Liang Jun's camp. Liang Jun was even more frightened.

古文：又闻李嗣源自郓州引大军将至，己未夜，梁军拔营而遁，复保于杨村。
现代文：又听说李嗣源从郓州引大军快到了，十七日夜，梁军拔营逃走，又据守杨村。
English: He also heard that Li Siyuan was about to arrive from Zhangzhou to lead a large army. On the evening of the 17th, Liang's army pulled out of the camp and fled, and Yang's village was besieged.

古文：帝军屯于德胜。
现代文：庄宗军在德胜扎营。
English: Zhuangzong's army encamped in Desheng.

古文：甲子，帝幸杨刘城，巡视梁军故垒。
现代文：二十二日，庄宗到杨刘城，巡视梁军故垒。
English: On the 22nd, Zhuo Zong went to Yang Liu City to inspect the ancient fortress of the Liang Army.

古文：八月壬申朔，帝遣李绍斌以甲士五千援泽州。
现代文：八月一日，庄宗派李绍斌带五千甲士援救泽州。
English: On August 1, Zhuang Zong sent Li Shaobin with five thousand soldiers to rescue Zezhou.

古文：初，李继韬之叛也，潞之旧将裴约以兵戍泽州，不徇韬之逆。
现代文：起初，李继韬叛变时，潞州旧将裴约带兵戍守泽州，不随从李继韬叛逆。
English: At first, when Li Jizhe rebelled, Zhangzhou old general Pei You led the troops to defend Zezhou, and did not follow Li Jizhe to rebel.

古文：既而梁遣董璋率众攻其城，约拒守久之，告急于帝，故遣绍斌救之。
现代文：不久梁派董璋率兵攻泽州，裴约拒守很久，向庄宗告急，所以派李绍斌救援。
English: Soon after, Liang sent Dong Xuan and his soldiers to attack Zhezhou. Pei You refused to defend the city for a long time, and was worried about Zhuang Zong, so he sent Li Shaobin to rescue him.

古文：未至而城已陷，裴约被害，帝闻之，嗟痛不已。
现代文：援军没到，城已被攻下，裴约被杀，庄宗听说，感伤不已。
English: Reinforcements did not arrive, the city had been captured, Pei You was killed, Zhuang Zong heard about it and was deeply saddened.

古文：甲戌，帝自杨刘归鄴。
现代文：三日，庄宗从杨刘回邺州。
English: On the third day, Zhuo Zong returned to Zhangzhou from Yang Liu.

古文：梁以段凝代王彦章为帅。
现代文：梁用段凝替代王彦章为主帅。
English: Liang replaced Wang Yanzhang as head coach with Duan Jie.

古文：戊子，凝帅众五万结营于王村，自高陵渡河。
现代文：十七日，段凝率五万兵在王村扎营，从高陵渡黄河。
English: On the 17th, 50,000 soldiers camped in Wangcun and crossed the Yellow River from Gaoling.

古文：帝军遇之，生擒梁前锋军士二百人，戮于都市。
现代文：被庄宗军队遇上，生擒梁军前锋军士二百人，在都市杀掉。
English: Encountered by Zhuangzong's army, 200 soldiers of Liang's army were killed in the city.

古文：庚寅，帝御军至朝城。
现代文：十九日，庄宗率兵到朝城。
English: On the 19th, Zhuo Zong led his troops to the Morning City.

古文：戊戌，梁左右先锋指挥使康延孝领百骑来奔，帝虚怀引见，赐御衣玉带，屏人问之。对曰： 臣窃观汴人兵众不少，论其君臣将校，则终见败亡。
现代文：二十七日，梁左右先锋指挥使康延孝带一百骑兵来投奔，庄宗虚怀引见，赐给御衣玉带，叫开别人后询问康延孝，康延孝说： 我私下认为汴军兵力虽然不少，论起君臣将校来，却终将失败。
English: On the 27th, the commander of Liang's left and right vanguard ordered Kang Yanxiao to rush in with a hundred cavalrymen. Zhuo Zong showed him around, gave him a ceremonial sash, called the others aside and questioned Kang Yanxiao. Kang Yanxiao said, "I privately believe that although there are a lot of soldiers in the Han army, it will ultimately fail when it comes to princes and ministers."

古文：赵岩、赵鹄、张汉杰居中专政，缔结宫掖，贿赂公行。
现代文：赵岩、赵鹄、张汉杰居中专政，与宫中官宦结交，贿赂公行。
English: Zhao Yan, Zhao Yao and Zhang Hanjie were in the middle of the dictatorship, making friends with the palace officials and bribing officials.

古文：段凝素无武略，一朝便见大用；霍彦威、王彦章皆宿将有名，翻出其下。
现代文：段凝一贯没什么武略，一下子却重用他，霍彦威、王彦章都是有名的老将，反而在他下面。
English: Duan Rong has always had no strategy, but he suddenly reused him. Huo Yanwei and Wang Yanzhang are both famous veterans, but they are below him.

古文：自彦章获德胜南城，梁主亦稍奖使。
现代文：自从王彦章攻取德胜南城，梁主也稍加奖赏。
English: Since Wang Yanzhang captured Desheng South City, Liang Lord has also increased the reward slightly.

古文：彦章立性刚暴，不耐凌制，梁主每一发军，即令近臣监护，进止可否，悉取监军处分，彦章悒悒，形于颜色。
现代文：王彦章性格暴烈，耐不住管制，梁主每次发兵，都派近臣监护，是否进退，全靠监军决定，王彦章不乐意，形之于色。
English: Wang Yanzhang had a violent personality and could not stand being controlled. Every time the ruler of Liang sent an army, he sent a close vassal to supervise. Whether to advance or retreat depended entirely on the decision of the supervising army. Wang Yanzhang was not happy, and it showed in his face.

古文：自河津失利，段凝、彦章又献谋，欲数道举军，合董璋以陕虢、泽潞之众，趋石会关以寇太原。
现代文：自黄河渡口失利后，段凝、王彦章又献计，想几路进军，令董璋带陕虢、泽潞的兵，经石会关侵犯太原。
English: After the defeat at the Yellow River ferry, Duan Jian and Wang Yanzhang made another plan to advance in several directions, and ordered Dong Xuan to invade Taiyuan through Shishi Huiguan with soldiers from Shaanxi and Zhejiang.

古文：霍彦威统关西、汝、洛之众自相卫以寇镇定，段凝、杜晏球领大军以当陛下，令王彦章、张汉杰统禁军以攻郓州，决取十月内大举。
现代文：霍彦威带关西、汝、洛的兵经相卫侵犯镇定，段凝、杜晏球领大军抵挡陛下您，令王彦章、张汉杰率禁军攻郓州，决定在十月内大举进攻。
English: Huo Yanwei led the troops of Kansai, You and Luo to invade and calm down after mutual defense, and Wang Yanzhang and Zhang Hanjie led the forbidden army to attack Bozhou, and decided to attack in October.

古文：又自滑州南决破河堤，使水东注曹、濮之间，至于汶阳，弥漫不绝，以陷北军。
现代文：又从滑州南边决开黄河堤，引水东灌，曹、濮之间到汶阳，弥漫一片，用来陷住北军。
English: In addition, the Yellow River dike was broken from the south side of Slanting, the water was diverted to the east, and the area between Cao and Lu to Benyang was diffused, which was used to trap the Northern Army.

古文：臣在军侧闻此议。臣惟汴人兵力，聚则不少，分则无余。
现代文：我在军中听到这个计划，我想汴人兵力，合起来不算少，分开则不算多。
English: When I heard about this plan in the army, I thought that the number of soldiers was not too small when combined, and not too large when separated.

古文：陛下但待分兵，领铁骑五千，自郓州兼程直抵于汴，不旬日，天下事定矣。 
现代文：陛下您只要分兵，领五千铁骑从郓州兼程直抵汴州，不超过十天，天下大事就定了。 
English: Your Majesty, as long as you have a detachment of soldiers, lead five thousand cavalry from Luzhou and travel straight to Luzhou, no more than ten days, the world's major events will be decided.

古文：帝怿然壮之。
现代文：庄宗听了很高兴地赞许他。
English: Zhuang Zong listened and was pleased to praise him.

古文：九月壬寅朔，帝在朝城，凝兵至临河南，与帝之骑军接战。
现代文：九月一日，庄宗在朝城，段凝带兵到临河南，与庄宗骑兵交战。
English: On September 1, Zhuangzong was in the morning city, and Duan Geling led the soldiers to Henan Province to fight with Zhuangzong's cavalry.

古文：是时泽潞叛，卫州、黎阳为梁人所据，州以西、相以南，寇钞日至，编户流亡，计其军赋，不支半年。
现代文：此时泽、潞二州叛变，卫州、黎阳被梁军占据，州城以西、相州以南，贼军每天来抢掠，把流亡户编组后计算军粮不够半年。
English: At this time, the two states of Zhejiang and Fujian rebelled, and the Liang army occupied Weizhou and Liyang. To the west of Suzhou City and south of Xiangzhou, the thief army came to loot every day. After grouping the exiled households, it was not enough to calculate the military food for half a year.

古文：又王郁、卢文进召契丹南侵瀛、涿。
现代文：王郁、卢文进又召契丹南侵瀛、涿二州。
English: Wang Yu and Lu Wenjin also called on Dannan to invade and conquer two provinces.

古文：及闻梁人将图大举，帝深忧之，召将吏谋其大计，或曰： 自我得汶阳以来，须大将固守，城门之外，元是贼疆，细而料之，得不如失。
现代文：听说梁军将大举进军，庄宗深为忧虑，召将军官僚谋划大计，有人说： 从我们得到汶阳以来，必要大将坚守，城门之外，原本是敌人疆土，仔细想想，得不偿失。
English: Hearing that Liang's army would march in large numbers, Zhuangzong was deeply worried and summoned generals and bureaucrats to plan a grand plan. Some people said: Since we have obtained Benyang, it is necessary to stick to the general. Outside the city gate, it was originally the enemy's territory. Think carefully, it is not worth the loss.

古文：今若驰檄告谕梁人，却卫州、黎阳以为郓州，指河为界，约且休兵。
现代文：现在如派人传书告诉梁军，从卫州、黎阳退却以换郓州，指定黄河为边界，约好休兵。
English: Now, if someone were to send a letter to the Liang army, telling them to retreat from Weizhou and Liyang and change to Zhangzhou, designate the Yellow River as the border, and arrange a truce.

古文：我国力稍集，则议改图。 
现代文：我们国力稍为强盛后，再做打算。 
English: After our national strength is a little stronger, we will make plans.

古文：帝曰： 嘻，行此谋则无葬地矣！ 
现代文：庄宗说： 哈哈，用这个办法我们就死无葬身之地了！ 
English: Zhuangzong said, "Ha ha, if we use this method, we will die and have no place to go!"

古文：时郭崇韬劝帝亲御六军，直趋汴州，半月之间，天下可定。
现代文：这时郭崇韬劝庄宗亲自统帅六军，直往汴州，半月之内，天下可定。
English: At this time, Guo Chongyi advised Zhuangzong to personally command the Six Armies and go all the way to Zhangzhou. Within half a month, the whole country could be settled.

古文：帝曰： 正合朕意。
现代文：庄宗说 ：正合我的心意。
English: Shozong said, "It is my heart's desire."

古文：大丈夫得则为王，失则为寇，予行计决矣！ 
现代文：大丈夫胜了就为王，败了就为寇，我已决定好了。 
English: If I win, I'll be king. If I lose, I'll be a thief. I've made up my mind.

古文：又问司天监，对曰： 今岁时不利，深入必无成功。 
现代文：又问司天监，答说： 今年时运不利，深入敌境必不成功。 
English: He also asked the chief overseer of heaven and answered: This year's weather is unfavorable, and it will not be successful to go deep into the enemy territory.

古文：帝弗听。
现代文：庄宗不理睬。
English: Zhuangzong ignored it.

古文：戊辰，梁将王彦章率众至汶河，李嗣源遣骑军侦视，至递公镇，梁军来挑战，嗣源以精骑击而败之，生擒梁将任钊、田章等三百人，俘斩二百级，彦章引众保于中都。
现代文：二十七日，梁将王彦章率兵到汶河，李嗣源派骑兵侦察，到递公镇，梁军来挑战，李嗣源用精锐骑兵出击打败梁军，生擒梁将任钊、田章等三百人，俘斩二百级，王彦章引众兵保护中都。
English: On the 27th, Liang general Wang Yanzhang led his troops to Wenhe, and Li Siyuan sent cavalry to reconnoiter. Li Siyuan challenged Liang's troops with elite cavalry and defeated Liang's troops. Li Siyuan defeated Liang's troops with elite cavalry. Liang general Ren Yao, Tian Zhang and 300 others were killed and 200 were captured. Wang Yanzhang led the soldiers to protect the central capital.

古文：嗣源飞驿告捷，帝置酒大悦，曰： 是当决行渡河之策。 
现代文：李嗣源派骑兵快速告捷，庄宗设酒大喜，说： 真是应当决定实行渡黄河的计策。 
English: Li Siyuan sent his cavalry to achieve a quick victory, and Zhuang Zong was overjoyed and said, "We really should decide to implement the strategy of crossing the Yellow River."

古文：己巳，下令军中将士家属并令归鄴。
现代文：二十八日，下令军中将士家属一起回邺州。
English: On the 28th, he ordered the families of the lieutenant generals to return to Zhangzhou together.

