古文：十有一年春，王三月，公至自晋。
现代文：十一年春季，周历三月，成公从晋国回到鲁国。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, in March of the lunar calendar, Chenggong returned from Jin to Lu.

古文：晋侯使郤犫来聘。
现代文：晋侯派遣郤犫来鲁国聘问。
English: The Jin princes sent Qian to Lu for an interview.

古文：己丑，及郤犫盟。
现代文：己丑日，与郤犫结盟。
English: On the day of his death, he formed an alliance with Shun.

古文：夏，季孙行父如晋。
现代文：夏季，季孙行父去到晋国。
English: In the summer, Ji Sun Xingfu went to Jin Province.

古文：秋，叔孙侨如如齐。
现代文：秋季，叔孙侨如去到齐国。
English: In autumn, the uncles and grandchildren go to Qi Province.

古文：冬十月。
现代文：冬季十月，无事。
English: Winter, October, nothing.

古文：十一年春，王三月，公至自晋。
现代文：十一年，春季，周王朝历法的三月，鲁成公从晋国回来。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, in March of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Lu Chenggong returned from Jin.

古文：晋人以公为贰于楚，故止公。
现代文：晋国人认为成公倾向楚国，所以扣留了他。
English: The people of Jin believed that Chengong was leaning towards Chu, so they detained him.

古文：公请受盟，而后使归。
现代文：成公请求接受盟约，然后让他回国。
English: Chenggu asked to accept the covenant, and then let him return to China.

古文：郤犫来聘，且涖盟。
现代文：郤犫来鲁国聘问，而且参加结盟。
English: He came to inquire about the Lu country and participated in the alliance.

古文：声伯之母不聘，穆姜曰： 吾不以妾为姒。 
现代文：声伯的母亲没有举行媒聘之礼就和叔肸同居，穆姜说： 我不能把姘妇当成嫂嫂。 
English: Voice brother's mother did not hold a matchmaking ceremony and lived with his uncle, Mu Jiang said: I can't think of my wife as my sister-in-law.

古文：生声伯而出之，嫁于齐管于奚。生二子而寡，以归声伯。
现代文：声伯的母亲生了声伯，就被遗弃了，嫁给齐国的管于奚，生了两个孩子以后又守寡，就把两个孩子给了声伯。
English: When Shou Bo's mother gave birth to Shou Bo, she was abandoned. She married Guan Yu Yao of Qi Province. After giving birth to two children and being widowed, she gave her two children to Shou Bo.

古文：声伯以其外弟为大夫，而嫁其外妹于施孝叔。
现代文：声伯让他的异父兄弟做了大夫，又把异父妹妹嫁给施孝叔。
English: Shou Bo made his half-brother a doctor and married his half-sister to Shi Xiao's uncle.

古文：郤犫来聘，求妇于声伯。
现代文：郤犫前来聘问，向声伯求取妻子。
English: came to ask for a wife.

古文：声伯夺施氏妇以与之。
现代文：声伯把施氏的妻子夺过来给了郤犫。
English: Shou Bo took Shi's wife and gave her to Quan.

古文：妇人曰： 鸟兽犹不失俪，子将若何？ 
现代文：这个女人对丈夫说： 鸟兽还不肯失掉配偶，您打算怎么办？ 
English: The woman said to her husband, "What are you going to do, when even the animals won't give up their mates?

古文：曰： 吾不能死亡。 
现代文：她的丈夫说： 我不能够因此死去或者逃亡。 
English: Her husband said: "I can't die or run away because of this.

古文：妇人遂行，生二子于郤氏。郤氏亡，晋人归之施氏。
现代文：这个女人就随郤犫走了。在郤氏那里生了两个孩子，郤氏被灭，晋国人又把她还给施氏。
English: The woman went away with the cormorant. She gave birth to two children with the cormorant, the cormorant was exterminated, and the people of Jin returned her to the cormorant.

古文：施氏逆诸河，沈其二子。
现代文：施氏在黄河边迎接她，把她的两个孩子沉进黄河里。
English: Mr. Shi met her at the Yellow River and drowned her two children in the river.

古文：妇人怒曰： 已不能庇其伉俪而亡之，又不能字人之孤而杀之，将何以终？ 
现代文：这个妇女发怒说： 自己不能保护自己的配偶而让她离开，又不能爱护别人的孤儿而杀死他们，这怎么能有好结果？ 
English: The woman fumed: "How can it be right to kill someone's orphan when you can't protect your own spouse and let her go, and you can't love someone else's orphan?

古文：遂誓施氏。
现代文：就发誓不再做施氏的妻子。
English: She swore that she would no longer be Shi's wife.

古文：夏，季文子如晋报聘，且涖盟也。
现代文：夏季，季文子去到晋国，回报聘问，同时也参加结盟。
English: In the summer, Ji Wenzi went to Jin Province to return the invitation and also participate in the alliance.

古文：周公楚恶惠、襄之偪也，且与伯与争政，不胜，怒而出。
现代文：周公楚讨厌周惠王、周襄王族人的逼迫，同时又和伯舆争夺政权，没有得胜，就生气而离开。
English: Zhou Gongzhu hated the persecution of King Zhou Hui and the Zhou Xiang royal family, and at the same time, he competed for power with Bo Myou. When he did not win, he became angry and left.

古文：及阳樊，王使刘子复之，盟于鄄而入。
现代文：到达阳樊，周简王派刘子让周公楚回来，在鄄地结盟然后进入国内。
English: Arriving in Yangshuo, Zhou Jian Wang sent Liu Zi to let Zhou Gongchu return, make an alliance in Handan and then enter the country.

古文：三日，复出奔晋。
现代文：三天后，周公楚再次离去，逃亡到晋国。
English: Three days later, Zhou Gongzhu left again and fled to Jin Province.

古文：秋，宣伯聘于齐，以修前好。
现代文：秋季，宣伯到齐国聘问，重修过去的友好。
English: In the autumn, Xuan Bo went to Qi Province to ask questions and rebuild the past friendship.

古文：晋郤至与周争鄇田，王命刘康公、单襄公讼诸晋。
现代文：晋国的郤至和周室争夺鄇地的土地，周简王命令刘康公、单襄公到晋国争讼。
English: Zhou Jian Wang ordered Liu Kang Gong and Shan Xiang Gong to go to Jin Province to litigate.

古文：郤至曰： 温，吾故也，故不敢失。 
现代文：郤至说： 温地，过去就是我的封邑，所以不敢丢失。 
English: Zou Zi said, "Wen Di used to be my fiefdom, so I dare not lose it.

古文：刘子、单子曰： 昔周克商，使诸侯抚封，苏忿生以温为司寇，与檀伯达封于河。
现代文：刘康公、单襄公说： 以前周朝战胜商朝，让诸侯据有封地。苏忿生据有温地，做了司寇，和檀伯达封在黄河边上。
English: Liu Kang Gong and Shan Xiang Gong said: In the past, the Zhou Dynasty defeated the Shang Dynasty and allowed the princes to have fiefs. Su Ren Sheng had a warm place, made a scout, and was sealed with Dang Boda on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：苏氏即狄，又不能于狄而奔卫。
现代文：苏氏投奔狄人，又和狄人不合式而逃到卫国。
English: The Su clan sided with the Di people, and then broke with the Di people and fled to the defense of the country.

古文：襄王劳文公而赐之温，狐氏、阳氏先处之，而后及子。
现代文：襄王为了慰劳文公，将温地赐给了他，狐氏、阳氏先住在这里，然后才轮到您。
English: In order to comfort Lao Wen, King Xiang gave him the warm land. Mr. Fox and Mr. Yang lived here first, and then it was your turn.

古文：若治其故，则王官之邑也，子安得之？ 
现代文：如果要追查过去的原因，那么它是周天子属官的封邑，您怎么能得到它？ 
English: If you want to trace the reasons for the past, then it is the fiefdom of Zhou Tianzi's subordinates, how can you get it?

古文：晋侯使郤至勿敢争。
现代文：晋厉公下令要郤至不要争夺。
English: Jin Li Gong ordered that there should be no fighting.

古文：宋华元善于令尹子重，又善于栾武子。闻楚人既许晋籴茷成，而使归复命矣。
现代文：宋国大夫华元和楚令尹子重友好，又和晋大夫栾武子友好，听到楚人已经允许晋国的籴茷求和，而让他回国复命了。
English: Dr. Hua Yuan of the Song Dynasty was friendly with Yin Zichong of the Chu Dynasty, and also friendly with Dr. Yan Wuzi of the Jin Dynasty. When he heard that the Chu people had allowed the Jin Dynasty to sue for peace, he was allowed to return to China.

古文：冬，华元如楚，遂如晋，合晋、楚之成。
现代文：冬季，华元到楚国，又到晋国，促成晋、楚的和好。
English: In winter, Huayuan went to Chu and Jin Provinces to promote the reconciliation between Jin and Chu.

古文：秦、晋为成，将会于令狐，晋侯先至焉。
现代文：秦、晋两国和好，准备在令狐会见。晋厉公先到达。
English: Qin and Jin had reconciled and were preparing to meet at Linghu. Jin Liguo arrived first.

古文：秦伯不肯涉河，次于王城，使史颗盟晋侯于河东。
现代文：秦桓公不肯渡过黄河，住在王城，派遣史颗和晋厉公在河东会盟。
English: King Qin Huan refused to cross the Yellow River and lived in Wangcheng. He dispatched Shi Jian and Jin Liguo to form an alliance in the east of the river.

古文：晋郤犫盟秦伯于河西。
现代文：晋国的郤犫和秦桓公在河西结盟。
English: Shun of Jin allied with Qin Huan in Hexi.

古文：范文子曰： 是盟也何益？
现代文：范文子说： 这样的结盟有什么好处？
English: Fan Wenzi said: What are the benefits of such an alliance?

古文：斋戒，所以质信也。
现代文：斋戒盟誓，是用来表示信用的。
English: Fasting and vows are used to show one's faith.

古文：会所，信之始也。
现代文：约定会见地点，这是信用的开始。
English: Agreeing on a meeting place is the beginning of trust.

古文：始之不从，其可质乎？ 
现代文：开始都不顺从，难道可以相信吗？ 
English: They didn't obey at first, can you believe it?

古文：秦伯归而背晋成。
现代文：秦桓公回去就背弃了和晋国的友好盟约。
English: When Qin Huankong returned, he reneged on the treaty of friendship with Jin.

