古文：谢弘微弘微年十岁，继从叔峻，名犯所继内讳，故以字行。
现代文：谢密字弘微，晋朝西中郎谢万的曾孙、尚书左仆射谢景仁的侄子。
English: Xie Mi, also known as Hong Wei, was the great-grandson of Xie Wan, the second-in-command of the Western Jin Dynasty, and the nephew of Xie Jingren, the right-hand man of Shang Shu.

古文：童幼时精神端审，时然后言。
现代文：祖父谢绍，是车前司马。父亲谢思，是武昌太守。
English: His grandfather, Xie Shao, was a Chezheng Sima, and his father, Xie Si, was the Wuchang governor.

古文：所继叔父混名知人，见而异之，谓思曰： 此儿深中夙敏，方成佳器，有子如此足矣。 
现代文：谢弘微十岁的时候，过继给了堂叔谢峻，他的名字犯了所过继家中的忌讳，所以以字行世。童年时代精神端庄谨慎，时机适当才开口说话。过继后的叔叔谢混很有名气，见到他后认为他很不平凡，对谢思说： 这孩子内心廉正机敏，将成为优秀人材，有这样一个儿子也就足够了。 
English: When Xie Hongwei was ten years old, he was adopted by his uncle Xie Jun. His name broke the taboo in the family of the adopted child, so he went through life with a pen name. In his childhood, he was dignified and cautious, and only spoke when the time was right. The adopted uncle Xie Ming was very famous. After seeing him, he thought he was very extraordinary, and said to Xie Si: This child is honest and astute, and will become an excellent person. Having such a son is enough.

古文：峻司空琰子也，于弘微本服缌，亲戚中表，素不相识，率意承接，皆合礼衷。
现代文：谢峻是司空谢琰的儿子，和谢弘微是较远的亲属，为中表亲戚，素不相识，随意承接，都和礼法相合。
English: Xie Jun is the son of Siku Xie Yao, and Xie Hongwei is a distant relative, a middle table relative. They do not know each other, and they can undertake at will, which is consistent with etiquette.

古文：义熙初，袭爵建昌县侯。
现代文：义熙初年，他世袭爵位为建昌县侯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he received the hereditary title of Prince of Jianchang County.

古文：弘微家素贫俭，而所继丰泰，唯受数千卷书，国吏数人而已，遗财禄秩，一不关预。
现代文：谢弘微家一向贫穷节俭，而过继的家中富足，谢弘微只接受了几千卷书和官吏数人，其他遗产俸禄，全不过问。
English: Xie Hongwei's family had always been poor and frugal, while his adoptive family was rich. Xie Hongwei only accepted a few thousand volumes of books and a few officials, and did not ask about other inheritance salaries.

古文：混闻而惊叹，谓国郎中令漆凯之曰： 建昌国禄本应与北舍共之，国侯既不厝意，今可依常分送。
现代文：谢混听说后十分惊叹，对封国的郎中令漆凯之说： 建昌封国的俸禄本来应该和北舍共同拥有，国侯既然不在意，现在可以照常规分送。 
English: After hearing this, Xie Jian was very surprised and said to the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal.

古文：弘微重违混言，乃少有所受。
现代文：谢弘微难以违背谢混的话，才稍有变化。
English: It is difficult for Xie Hongwei to go against the words of Xie Ming, so there is a slight change.

古文：北舍，弘微本家也。
现代文：北舍，是指谢弘微的本家。
English: The North House is the original home of Xie Hongwei.

古文：混风格高峻，少所交纳，唯与族子灵运、瞻、晦、曜、弘微以文义赏会，常共宴处，居在乌衣巷，故谓之乌衣之游。
现代文：谢混风格高峻，接交的人很少，只和同族兄弟的儿子谢灵运、谢瞻、谢晦、谢曜、谢弘微以文学互相欣赏聚会，常常共同宴饮相处，住在乌衣巷，所以称为乌衣之游。
English: Xie Ming's style is lofty, and he has few friends. He and his brothers' sons, Xie Lingyun, Xie Zhan, Xie Xuan, Xie Yue, and Xie Hongwei, enjoy literature together and often have dinner together. They live in Wuyi Lane, which is why it is called Wuyi Tour.

古文：混诗所言 昔爲乌衣游，戚戚皆亲姓 者也。
现代文：也就是谢混诗中所说的 昔为乌衣游，戚戚皆亲姓 。
English: That is to say, in Xie Ming's poem, "Once upon a time, I was a black-clothed wanderer, and all my relatives had the same surname."

古文：其外虽复高流时誉，莫敢造门。
现代文：此外即使是享誉当时的上流人物，也不敢到门上去。
English: In addition, even the prestigious upper-class people of the time did not dare to go to the door.

古文：瞻等才辞辩富，弘微每以约言服之，混特所敬贵，号曰微子。
现代文：谢瞻富有才华、能言善辩，谢弘微常常用简要的话说服他，谢混特别敬重和珍视，称他作微子。
English: Xie Zhan is talented and eloquent. Xie Hongwei often uses simple words to persuade him. Xie Ming is especially respected and cherished, calling him a "little man."

古文：谓瞻等曰： 汝诸人虽才义丰辩，未必皆惬衆心，至于领会机赏，言约理要，故当与我共推微子。
现代文：对谢瞻等说： 你们几个人虽然才高善辩，却未必都合众人心意，要论领略会意机敏鉴赏、语言简明道理精妙，则应当和我共同推赞微子。 
English: To Xie Zhan and others, he said: Although several of you are highly skilled in debate, you may not all be able to win the hearts and minds of the people. If you want to appreciate the subtleties of the mind, appreciate the subtleties of the mind, and appreciate the subtleties of the language, you should jointly praise and commend with me.

古文：常言 阿远刚躁负气，阿客博而无检，曜仗才而持操不笃，晦自知而纳善不周。设复功济三才，终亦以此爲恨。
现代文：他常说： 阿远刚强浮躁仗气自负，阿客宽博而缺乏检束，谢曜倚仗才能而坚持操行不够严格，谢晦自己有智慧而听取善言不周全，如果要建树有利于天、地、人三才的功业，最终还是以此为遗憾。
English: He often said: "Ayuan is strong, impetuous, and conceited; Ake is broad-minded but lacks discipline; Xie Yue relies on his fighting ability but insists that his conduct is not strict enough; Xie You has wisdom but listens to good words imperfectly; if you want to build a tree that is beneficial to the three talents of heaven, earth, and people, you will eventually regret it.

古文：至如微子，吾无间然 。
现代文：至于像微子，我没有什么挑剔的了。 
English: I'm not picky when it comes to neutrinos.

古文：又言 微子异不伤物，同不害正，若年造六十，必至公辅 。
现代文：又说 微子存异不伤别人，求同不害公正，如果年龄到了六十，一定会成为三公和宰相。 
English: He also said that if a child can tolerate differences without harming others, and seek common ground without harming justice, he will surely become the third generation of princes and prime minister if he reaches the age of sixty.

古文：尝因酣燕之余，爲韵语以奖劝灵运、瞻等曰： 康乐诞通度，实有名家韵，若加绳染功，剖莹乃琼瑾。
现代文：他曾在酒宴上喝得尽兴的时候，吟成韵语来鼓励谢灵运、谢瞻等人说： 康乐诞通度，实有名家韵，若加绳染功，剖莹乃琼瑾。
English: Once, when he was having a good time at a wine banquet, he recited a rhyme to encourage Xie Lingyun, Xie Zhan and others to say: "Harmony in birth is a well-known family rhyme. If you add rope dyeing, you will be able to create a beautiful woman."

古文：宣明体远识，颖达且沈俊，若能去方执，穆穆三才顺。
现代文：宣明体远识，颖达且沉隽，若能去方执，穆穆三才顺。
English: Foresight with a clear vision, persistent and persistent, if you can go to Fangxi, you will be successful.

古文：阿多标独解，弱冠纂华胤，质胜诫无文，其尚又能峻。
现代文：阿多标独解，弱冠纂华胤，质胜诫无文，其尚又能峻。
English: Adobiao is a unique solution, weak crowns codify hua jin, quality and victory commandments have no text, and it is still able to be steep.

古文：通远怀清悟，采采摽兰讯，直辔鲜不踬，抑用解偏吝。
现代文：通远怀清悟，采采詄兰讯，直辔鲜不踬，抑用解偏吝。
English: Tongyuan is clear-minded, open-minded, straightforward, and unselfish. It is best to solve the problem of miserliness with restraint.

古文：微子基微尚，无倦由慕蔺，勿轻一篑少，进往必千仞。
现代文：微子基微尚，无倦由慕蔺，勿轻一篑少，进往必千仞。
English: The microelement base is still small, and it is tireless to rise from the bottom to the top. Don't take one step less, and it will take thousands of steps to get there.

古文：数子勉之哉，风流由尔振。
现代文：数子勉之哉，风流由尔振。
English: The numbers are encouraging, and the love affair is flourishing.

古文：如不犯所知，此外无所慎。 
现代文：如不犯所知，此外无所慎。 
English: If you don't know, you can't do anything.

古文：灵运、瞻等并有诫厉之言，唯弘微独尽褒美。
现代文：对谢灵运、谢瞻等人都有告诫的话，只有对谢弘微一个人完全是赞美。
English: For Xie Lingyun, Xie Zhan and others, there are admonitions, but only for Xie Hongwei is a person completely praised.

古文：曜，弘微兄，多其小字。通远即瞻字。客儿，灵运小名也。
现代文：谢曜，是谢弘微的哥哥， 多 是他的小字。 通远 是谢瞻的字。 客儿 ，是谢灵运的小名。
English: Xie You, is Xie Hongwei's elder brother, mostly his nickname, Tongyuan is Xie Zhan's nickname, and Xie Lingyun's nickname.

古文：晋世名家身有国封者，起家多拜员外散骑侍郎，弘微亦拜员外散骑侍郎、琅邪王大司马参军。
现代文：晋代名家自己有封国的，离家任职大多是担任员外散骑郎，谢弘微也是担任散骑侍郎、琅笽王大司马参军。
English: Famous families in the Jin Dynasty had their own fiefdoms, and most of the positions they held away from home were as non-commissioned horsemen, and Xie Hongwei also served as a horseman, and Shao Wang Da Sima joined the army.

古文：义熙八年，混以刘毅党见诛，混妻晋陵公主改适琅邪王练。
现代文：义熙八年，谢混因为是刘毅的同党而被处死，谢混的妻子晋陵公主改嫁给琅笽人王练。
English: In the eighth year of Yixi, Xie Ming was executed because he was a member of Liu Yi's party. Xie Ming's wife, Princess Jinling, was remarried to Wang Lian.

古文：公主虽执意不行，而诏与谢氏离绝。
现代文：公主虽然执意不去，而诏令她要与谢家离绝。
English: Although the princess was determined not to go, the emperor ordered her to break away from the Xie family.

古文：公主以混家事委之弘微。
现代文：公主把谢混的家事委托给谢弘微。
English: The princess entrusted the family affairs of Xie Ming to Xie Hongwei.

古文：混仍世宰相，一门两封，田业十馀处，僮役千人，唯有二女，年并数岁。
现代文：谢混家几代宰相，一门两次封国，田业十余处，仆役千人，只有两个女儿，年龄都是几岁。
English: Xie Jian's family has produced several generations of prime ministers, one family has been awarded the title of state twice, there are more than ten fields of agriculture, a thousand servants, and only two daughters, all of which are a few years old.

古文：弘微经纪生业，事若在公，一钱尺帛出入，皆有文簿。
现代文：谢弘微经营产业，办事好像执行公务，一个钱一尺帛的出入，都有文簿记录。
English: Xie Hong micro-manages the industry, acts as if performing official duties, and there are records of every penny and every foot of money coming in and going out.

古文：宋武受命，晋陵公主降封东乡君。
现代文：宋武帝做了皇帝，晋陵公主降封为东乡君。
English: Emperor Songwu made him emperor, and Jinling Princess was demoted to Dongxiangjun.

古文：以混得罪前代，东乡君节义可嘉，听还谢氏。
现代文：因为谢混是在前代皇帝时犯的罪，东乡君节义可嘉，允许她归返谢家。
English: Because Xie Ming committed a crime during the reign of the previous emperor, Dongxiang Junjie was gracious and allowed her to return to the Xie family.

古文：自混亡至是九年，而室宇修整，仓廪充盈，门徒不异平日。
现代文：从谢混死到现在九年了，而房舍整齐，仓库丰满，守门的人和平日无异。
English: It's been nine years since Xie Jian died, but the buildings are neat, the warehouses are full, and the gatekeepers are no different from ordinary people.

古文：田畴垦辟，有加于旧。
现代文：田地开垦，比旧时更有增加。
English: Fields have been reclaimed, and crop yields have increased more than in the past.

古文：东乡君叹曰： 仆射生平重此子，可谓知人，仆射爲不亡矣。 
现代文：东乡君赞叹说： 仆射生前就重视这个孩子，可以说是了解人的，仆射等于并没有死。 
English: Dongxiangjun said admiringly, "Puchai valued this child before he was born. It can be said that he understands people. Puchai is not dead.

古文：中外姻亲、道俗义旧见东乡之归者，入门莫不叹息，或爲流涕，感弘微之义也。
现代文：看到东乡君归来的宫廷内外的亲戚、教门和世俗的旧友，进门后无不叹息，有的还流下了眼泪，深为谢弘微的义行所感动。
English: Relatives, clergymen, and secular old friends from both inside and outside the imperial court who saw Dongxiangjun's return, all sighed after entering the door, and some even shed tears, deeply moved by Xie Hongwei's act of charity.

古文：性严正，举止必循礼度，事继亲之党，恭谨过常。
现代文：谢弘微性格严正，举止必定合乎礼度，事奉继亲家人，恭谨超过一般。
English: Xie Hongwei's character is strict, his manners must be courteous, he serves his relatives and family members, and he is more respectful than usual.

古文：伯叔二母，归宗两姑，晨夕瞻奉，尽其诚敬。
现代文：对伯母和婶子、归宗的两个姑母，早晚伺候，尽他的诚敬之心。
English: In the morning and evening, he served his aunt and uncle, and the two aunts who had returned to the family, with all his sincerity.

古文：内外或传语通讯，辄正其衣冠。
现代文：家内家外有时传话通讯，则把衣冠整好。
English: My wife and I sometimes send messages to each other when we are away from home, and then I tidy up my wardrobe.

古文：婢仆之前，不妄言笑。
现代文：在婢仆面前，不随便说笑。
English: Don't joke around in front of your maidservant.

古文：由是尊卑大小，敬之若神。
现代文：因此尊卑大小，就像敬神一样敬他。
English: So respect him as you would respect a god.

古文：时有蔡湛之者，及见谢安兄弟，谓人曰： 弘微貌类中郎，而性似文靖。 
现代文：当时有个蔡湛之，曾见过谢安兄弟，他对人们说： 谢弘微容貌犹如中郎，而性情好似文靖。 
English: At that time, there was a Cai Zhan, who had seen the Xie An brothers, and he said to people: Xie Hongwei's appearance is like Zhong Lang, and his temperament is like Wen Jing.

古文：文帝初封宜都王，镇江陵，以琅邪王球爲友，弘微爲文学。
现代文：文帝起初封为宜都王，镇守江陵，以琅笽人王球为朋友，谢弘微为文学。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wen was named the King of Yidu, the town guard of Jiangling, the friend of Shunren Wangqiu, and the literary friend of Xie Hongwei.

古文：母忧去职，居丧以孝称。
现代文：母亲去世后离职，守丧以孝顺被人称赞。
English: After his mother's death, he left his job and was praised for his filial piety in attending her funeral.

古文：服阕，蔬素踰时。
现代文：服丧完毕，超过了期限还在吃蔬菜和素食。
English: After the funeral, they still eat vegetables and vegetarian food beyond the deadline.

古文：文帝即位，爲黄门侍郎，与王华、王昙首、殷景仁、刘湛等，号曰五臣。
现代文：文帝即位，他担任黄门侍郎，和王华、王昙首、殷景仁、刘湛等，号称五臣。
English: When Emperor Wen ascended the throne, he served as the Yellow Gate chamberlain, along with Wang Hua, Wang Shanshou, Yin Jingren, Liu Zhan, and others, known as the Five Ministers.

古文：迁尚书吏部郎，参机密。
现代文：调任尚书吏部郎，参与机密研究。
English: He was transferred to the Shosho Ritsuburo and participated in confidential research.

古文：寻转右卫将军，诸故吏臣佐，并委弘微选拟。
现代文：不久调任右卫将军，各个旧时的下属官员，都委托谢弘微进行选任。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division, and all the subordinate officials of the old days entrusted Xie Hongwei to carry out the appointment.

古文：居身清约，器服不华，而饮食滋味尽其丰美。
现代文：谢弘微生活清廉简约，器物衣服都不华丽，而饮食滋味却极其丰美。
English: Xie Hongwei's life is clean, simple, and the utensils and clothes are not gorgeous, but the food is extremely delicious.

古文：兄曜历御史中丞，彭城王义康骠骑长史，卒官。
现代文：他的哥哥谢曜历任御史中丞，彭城王刘义康骠骑长史，死在任上。
English: His brother Xie Yue, who served as Vice-President of History, and Liu Yikang, the King of Pengcheng, who served as President of History, died in office.

古文：弘微哀戚过礼，服虽除犹不噉鱼肉。
现代文：谢弘微哀痛超过礼法，丧服虽然除去却仍不吃鱼肉。
English: Xie Hong slightly grieved beyond the etiquette. Although he removed his mourning clothes, he still did not eat fish.

古文：沙门释慧琳尝与之食，见其犹蔬素，谓曰： 檀越素既多疾，即吉犹未复膳。
现代文：和尚释慧琳曾经和他一起吃饭，见他还是只吃蔬菜和素食，对他说： 施主平时就多疾病，除去丧服仍然不恢复膳食。
English: Monk Xie Huilin once had a meal with him and saw that he still only ate vegetables and vegetarian food, and said to him: The benefactor usually has many illnesses, and even after removing his mourning clothes, he still does not resume eating.

古文：若以无益伤生，岂所望于得理。 
现代文：如果因为无益的事情而伤了身子，难道就合乎您所希望的情理吗？ 
English: If you were to be injured for no good reason, would it be reasonable for you to hope?

古文：弘微曰： 衣冠之变，礼不可踰，在心之哀，实未能已。 
现代文：谢弘微说： 衣服帽子的变化，礼数不能越过，而在心中的哀痛，实在难以停止。 
English: Xie Hongwei said: The changes of clothes and hats, the number of greetings can not be passed, and the sorrow in the heart, it is really difficult to stop.

古文：遂废食歔欷不自胜。
现代文：于是中止了吃饭，叹息不能自制。
English: So I stopped eating. I couldn't stop sighing.

古文：弘微少孤，事兄如父。友睦之至，举世莫及。
现代文：谢弘微少年成为孤儿，事奉兄长如同父亲，极其友爱和睦，全社会都比不上。
English: The boy Xie Hongwei became an orphan. He served his elder brother like a father. They were extremely friendly and harmonious. The whole society could not compare.

古文：口不言人短，见兄曜好臧否人物，每闻之，常乱以他语。
现代文：口中不说别人的短处，看到哥哥谢曜好褒贬人物，每当听到的时候，常常就用其他的话来打乱他。
English: He does not talk about the shortcomings of others, and whenever he sees his brother praise or criticize someone, he often disturbs him with other words.

古文：历位中庶子，加侍中。
现代文：历任中庶子，位居侍中。
English: An illegitimate child of successive governors, he was a member of the middle class of retainers.

古文：志在素宦，畏忌权宠，固让不拜，乃听解中庶子。
现代文：他志在做一个平常的官员，害怕和忌讳握权得宠，坚持辞让不接受，于是便听凭他辞去中庶子的职务。
English: He aspired to be an ordinary official, afraid of the taboo of holding power and being favored, insisting that he would not accept the resignation, so he resigned from the position of middle son.

古文：每献替及陈事，必手书焚草，人莫之知。
现代文：每次进谏和言事，必定要烧掉手写的草稿，人们都不知道。
English: Every time there is a dispute, the handwritten draft must be burned, and people don't know about it.

古文：上以弘微能膳羞，每就求食，弘微与亲旧经营。
现代文：皇上因为谢弘微善于做美食，常常去他那里求饭吃，谢弘微和亲友一起制做。
English: Because Emperor Xie Hongwei was good at cooking, he often went to him to ask for food. Xie Hongwei cooked with his relatives and friends.

古文：及进之后，亲人问上所御，弘微不答，别以余语酬之，时人比之汉世孔光。
现代文：等进献上去以后，亲友问他皇上吃得怎样，谢弘微不回答，另外用其他的话来应酬他们，当时的人把他比作汉代的孔光。
English: After the presentation, relatives and friends asked the emperor how he had eaten. Xie Hongwei did not answer, and used other words to entertain them. People at the time compared him to Kongguang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：及东乡君薨，遗财千万，园宅十馀所，又会稽、吴兴、琅邪诸处太傅安、司空琰时事业，奴僮犹数百人，公私咸谓室内资财宜归二女，田宅僮仆应属弘微，弘微一不取。
现代文：东乡君死了以后，遗留财富千万，园宅十几所，另外在会稽、吴兴、琅笽几个地方太傅谢安、司空谢琰时候的家业，奴仆还有几百人，公家和私人都说室内的资财应该归两个女儿，田宅僮仆应该属于谢弘微，而谢弘微一概不要。
English: After the death of Dongxiangjun, he left behind tens of millions of wealth, more than a dozen garden houses, and in addition, in several places such as Hefei, Wuxing and Handan, the family business at the time of Taifu Xie'an and Siku Xie'an, and there were hundreds of slaves. Both public and private people said that the property in the room should belong to the two daughters, the farmhouse and the servants should belong to Xie Hongwei, and Xie Hongwei did not want them at all.

古文：自以私禄营葬。
现代文：自己用私人的俸禄将她埋葬。
English: He used his private salary to bury her.

古文：混女夫殷叡素好摴蒱，闻弘微不取财物，乃滥夺其妻妹及伯母两姑之分以还戏责，内人皆化弘微之让，一无所争。
现代文：谢混女儿的丈夫殷睿平时好赌博，听说谢弘微不取财物，便滥夺他妻妹和伯母以及两个姑姑应得的份额来偿还赌债，家中的妇女们就把谢弘微所让出的部分全都变卖，一点也不去争。
English: Yin Rui, the husband of Xie Jun's daughter, was usually a good gambler. When he heard that Xie Hongwei did not take any property, he took the share of his wife, sister, aunt and two aunts to pay off the gambling debt. The women in the family sold all the parts that Xie Hongwei gave up, and did not fight at all.

古文：弘微舅子领军将军刘湛谓弘微曰： 天下事宜有裁衷，卿此不问，何以居官？ 
现代文：谢弘微舅舅的儿子领军将军刘湛对谢弘微说： 天下的事情应该有个合理的裁判，您这样不管不问，怎么当官？ 
English: General Liu Zhan, the son of Xie Hongwei's uncle and the leader of the army, said to Xie Hongwei: Things in the world should have a reasonable judgment. If you don't care about this, how can you become an official?

古文：弘微笑而不答。
现代文：谢弘微笑而不答。
English: Xie Hong smiled and did not answer.

古文：或有讥以 谢氏累世财産，充殷君一朝戏责，譬弃物江海以爲廉耳 。
现代文：有的人讥笑他是 谢家几代的财产，抵了殷睿一天的赌债，就好像是把财物扔到江海里来作为廉洁一样。 
English: Some people scoffed that he was the property of several generations of the Xie family, and paid off the gambling debt of Yin Rui for one day, just as if he threw the property into the river to be clean.

古文：弘微曰： 亲戚争财，爲鄙之甚，今内人尚能无言，岂可导之使争。
现代文：谢弘微说： 亲戚争财产，十分丑陋，现在家中的妇女们尚且没说什么，怎么可以引导着让她们争夺？
English: Xie Hongwei said: "Relatives fighting over property is very ugly. Now the women in the family haven't said anything, how can you guide them to fight?

古文：今分多共少，不至有乏，身死之后，岂复见关。 
现代文：现在分掉的多，共有的少，不至于会穷乏，身死以后，难道还能有什么关连？ 
English: Now much is divided, but little is common, so that there will be no poverty. After death, can there still be any connection?

古文：东乡君葬，混墓开，弘微牵疾临赴，病遂甚。
现代文：东乡君埋葬，谢混的墓被打开，谢弘微带病赶到，病于是更重了。
English: Dongxiangjun was buried, Xie Jian's grave was opened, and Xie Hong arrived with a slight illness, which worsened.

古文：元嘉十年卒，年四十二。
现代文：元嘉十年去世，年龄四十二岁。
English: Yuan Jia died ten years ago, at the age of forty-two.

古文：文帝叹惜甚至，谓谢景仁曰： 谢弘微、王昙首年踰四十，名位未尽其才，此朕之责也。 
现代文：文帝极为叹惜，对谢景仁说： 谢弘微、王昙首年过四十岁，名位没有能让他们充分发挥才干，这是我的责任。 
English: Emperor Wen was extremely regretful and said to Xie Jingren: Xie Hongwei and Wang Yao were over forty years old in the first year, and their positions did not allow them to give full play to their talents. This is my responsibility.

古文：弘微性宽博，无喜愠。
现代文：谢弘微性情宽厚博大，没有喜怒。
English: Xie Hongwei is generous and broad-minded, without anger.

古文：末年尝与友人棋，友人西南棋有死势，复一客曰： 西南风急，或有覆舟者。 
现代文：末年曾经和友人下棋，友人西南方的棋有致死的形势，又有一个客人说： 西南风急，可能会有翻船的人。 
English: At the end of his life, he used to play chess with a friend. The friend's chess game in the southwest had a fatal situation, and another guest said: The southwest is windy, there may be people who have capsized.

古文：友悟乃救之。
现代文：友人领悟了便进行了挽救。
English: When his friend realized what had happened, he tried to save him.

古文：弘微大怒，投局于地。
现代文：谢弘微大怒，把棋盘扔在了地下。
English: Xie Hong flew into a rage and threw the chessboard underground.

古文：识者知其暮年之事，果以此岁终。
现代文：了解的人知道这是他暮年的征象，果然由此而寿终。
English: Those in the know knew that this was a sign of his twilight years, and he died as a result.

古文：时有一长鬼寄司马文宣家，言被遣杀弘微。
现代文：当时有一个很高的鬼住在司马文宣家，说是受到派遣来杀谢弘微。
English: At that time, there was a very high ghost living in Sima Wenxuan's house, saying that he had been dispatched to kill Xie Hongwei.

古文：弘微疾每剧，辄豫告文宣。
现代文：谢弘微的病每次加重，它就告诉司马文宣。
English: Every time Xie Hongwei's illness got worse, it would tell Sima Wensheng.

古文：及弘微死，与文宣分别而去。
现代文：等谢弘微死后，它也就和司马文宣告别而去。
English: After Xie Hongwei's death, it also said goodbye to Sima Wen.

古文：弘微临终语左右曰： 有二摎书，须刘领军至，可于前烧之，慎勿开也。 
现代文：谢弘微临终的时候告诉身边的人说： 有两橱书，等刘领军到来，可以在他面前烧掉，千万不要打开。 
English: When Xie Hongwei was on his deathbed, he told the people around him: There are two cabinets of books, so when Liu Lianjun arrives, you can burn them in front of him, and don't open them.

古文：书是文帝手敕，上甚痛惜之。
现代文：书是文帝的手敕，皇上对此感到十分痛惜。
English: Books were the handcuffs of Emperor Wen, and the emperor felt very sorry about this.

古文：使二卫千人营毕葬事，追赠太常。
现代文：让左右二卫一千人办完了丧葬事务，追赠他为太常。
English: Let the left and right two guards complete the funeral services for a thousand people, and give him a posthumous gift.

古文：弘微与琅邪王惠、王球并以简淡称，人谓沈约曰： 王惠何如？ 
现代文：谢弘微与琅笽人王惠、王球都以简淡著称，有人对沈约说： 王惠如何？ 
English: Xie Hongwei and the eunuchs Wang Hui and Wang Qiu are famous for their simplicity. Someone said to Shen Yu: How is Wang Hui?

古文：约曰： 令明简。 
现代文：沈约说： 令明简。 
English: Shen Yoyo said: Let's make it clear.

古文：次问王球，约曰： 蒨玉淡。 
现代文：其次又问王球，沈约说： 茜玉淡。 
English: Next, he asked Wang Qiu, and Shen Yu said: "Xie Yutang."

古文：又次问弘微，约曰： 简而不失，淡而不流，古之所谓名臣，弘微当之。 
现代文：又接着问谢弘微，沈约说： 简而不失，淡而不流，古代的所谓名臣，弘微可以当之。 
English: He then asked Xie Hongwei, and Shen Yu said: "Simple but not lacking, light but not flowing, the so-called famous vassals in ancient times, Hongwei can be one of them.

古文：其见美如此。
现代文：他就是如此地受到赞美。
English: That's how he's celebrated.

古文：子庄。
现代文：谢弘微的儿子叫谢庄。
English: Xie Hongwei's son is called Xie Zhuang.

古文：庄字希逸，七岁能属文，及长，韶令美容仪，宋文帝见而异之，谓尚书仆射殷景仁、领军将军刘湛曰： 蓝田生玉，岂虚也哉。 
现代文：谢庄，字希逸，七岁就能写文章，长大后，为人明善，容仪俊美，宋文帝见他以后很感到奇异，对尚书仆射殷景仁、领军将军刘湛说： 蓝田生玉，难道是虚说么？ 
English: Xie Zhuang, known as Xiyi, was able to write articles at the age of seven. When he grew up, he was a bright person with a handsome appearance. Emperor Songwen felt very strange when he saw him. He said to Shang Shufu Sheyin Jingren, the leading general Liu Zhan: "Lantian Zhiyu, is it a lie?

古文：爲随王诞后军谘议，领记室。
现代文：后来他担任随王刘诞的后军咨议，兼任记室。
English: Later, he served as a post-army consultation with Wang Liu Xing, and also served as a secretary.

古文：分左氏经传，随国立篇。
现代文：他把《左传》的经文和传文分开，依随封国来立篇目。
English: He separated the text of "Zo Zhuan" from the introduction, and set up the chapter according to the country.

古文：制木方丈，图山川土地，各有分理。
现代文：制了一块一丈见方的木板，画上山川土地，各有脉络。
English: He made a wooden board one meter high and one meter square, and painted the land of mountains and rivers, each with its own history.

古文：离之则州郡殊别，合之则宇内爲一。
现代文：分开则州郡各不相同，合并则海内联为一体。
English: Separately, the counties of Jeju are all different, but when they are combined, they become one.

古文：元嘉二十七年，魏攻彭城，遣尚书李孝伯与镇军长史张畅语，孝伯访问庄及王微，其名声远布如此。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，魏朝进攻彭城，派遣尚书李孝伯与镇军长史张畅谈话，李孝伯问起了谢庄及王微，他的名声竟传播得如此遥远。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, the Wei Dynasty attacked Pengcheng, and sent Shangshu Li Xiao Bo to talk with the town's military commander Shi Zhang Chang. Li Xiao Bo asked about Xie Zhuang and Wang Wei, and his fame spread so far away.

古文：二十九年，除太子中庶子。
现代文：二十九年，任命为太子中庶子。
English: In 1929, he was named the prince's middle child.

古文：时南平王铄献赤鹦鹉，普诏群臣爲赋。
现代文：当时南平王刘铄进献有红色鹦鹉，诏令群臣写赋。
English: At that time, the king of Nanping, Liu Yujin, presented a red parrot and ordered his courtiers to write about it.

古文：太子左卫率袁淑文冠当时，作赋毕示庄。
现代文：太子左卫率袁淑的文才为当时之冠，作赋完毕交给谢庄看。
English: The literary talent of Prince Zuo Wei and Yuan Shu was the best at that time, and the completed work was handed over to Xie Zhuang.

古文：及见庄赋，叹曰： 江东无我，卿当独秀，我若无卿，亦一时之杰。 
现代文：等到看见了谢庄写的赋，慨叹说： 江东如果没有我，您应当是独自秀美，我如果没有您，也会是一时的杰才。 
English: When she saw the Fu written by Xie Zhuang, she sighed and said: Jiangdong, if not for me, you would have been uniquely beautiful. If not for you, I would have been a temporary genius.

古文：遂隐其赋。
现代文：于是便把他的赋隐藏了起来。
English: So he hid his talent.

古文：元凶弑立，转司徒左长史。
现代文：元凶劭杀父自立后，他转任司徒左长史。
English: After the former thug killed his father and became independent, he was transferred to the post of Stuzo Choshu.

古文：孝武入讨，密送檄书与庄，令加改正宣布之。
现代文：孝武帝入京讨伐，秘密地把檄书送给谢庄，让他加以改正然后宣布。
English: Emperor Xiaowu went to Beijing to fight, and secretly sent the imperial edict to Xie Zhuang, asking him to revise it and then announce it.

古文：庄遣腹心门生具庆奉啓事密诣孝武陈诚。
现代文：谢庄派了一个心腹学生具庆拿上书信秘密地到孝武帝那里表达诚恳的心情。
English: Xie Zhuang sent a confidant to secretly send a letter to Emperor Xiaowu to express his sincere feelings.

古文：及帝践阼，除侍中。
现代文：孝武帝登基以后，任命他为侍中。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, he appointed him as an attendant.

古文：时魏求通互市，上诏群臣博议。
现代文：当时魏朝请求互通贸易，皇上诏令群臣广泛议论。
English: At that time, the Wei Dynasty requested reciprocal trade, and the Emperor's edict was widely discussed by the courtiers.

古文：庄议以爲拒而观衅，有足表强。
现代文：谢庄认为拒绝他们而伺机行动，足可以表现强大。
English: Xie Zhuang believes that rejecting them and waiting for an opportunity to act can be powerful.

古文：骠骑竟陵王诞当爲荆州，征丞相荆州刺史南郡王义宣入辅，义宣固辞不入，而诞便克日下船。
现代文：骠骑竟陵王刘诞应管辖荆州，征调丞相、荆州刺史、南郡王刘义宣入朝辅政，刘义宣坚决推辞不肯入朝，而刘诞便约定日期开船。
English: Liu Yixuan, the king of the imperial mausoleum, was assigned to govern Jing Province, and Liu Yixuan, the prime minister, the governor of Jing Province, and the king of Nan County, were appointed to assist the imperial court. Liu Yixuan resolutely refused to enter the imperial court, and Liu Yixuan agreed on the date of the ship's departure.

古文：庄以丞相既无入志，而骠骑发便有期，如似欲相逼切。
现代文：谢庄认为丞相既然没有入朝的志愿，而骠骑便有了出发的日期，好像是要逼迫似的。
English: Xie Zhuang thought that since the prime minister did not volunteer to enter the imperial court, and the cavalry had a departure date, it seemed to be forced.

古文：帝乃申诞发日，义宣竟亦不下。
现代文：于是就由孝武帝讲明了刘诞出发的时日，刘义宣竟然还是不肯回京。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowu clarified the date of Liu Yixuan's departure, but Liu Yixuan still refused to return to Beijing.

古文：孝建元年，迁左将军。
现代文：孝建元年，调他担任左将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Xiao Jian, he was transferred to the position of General of the Left.

古文：庄有口辩，孝武尝问顔延之曰： 谢希逸月赋何如？ 
现代文：谢庄有辩论的口才，孝武帝曾问颜延之说： 谢希逸的《月赋》怎么样？ 
English: Xie Zhuang had the eloquence of debate. Emperor Xiaowu once asked Yan Yan: What about Xie Xiyi's "Moon Gift"?

古文：答曰： 美则美矣；但庄始知 隔千里兮共明月 。 
现代文：回答说： 美是美，只是谢庄仅仅知道 隔千里兮共明月 。 
English: He replied, "Beauty is beauty, but Xie Zhuang only knows that there is a bright moon thousands of miles away.

古文：帝召庄以延之答语语之,庄应声曰： 延之作秋胡诗，始知 生爲久离别，没爲长不归 。 
现代文：孝武帝召见谢庄，把颜延之的答话告诉了他，谢庄应声说道： 延之作《秋胡诗》，仅仅知道 生为久别离，没为长不归 。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu summoned Xie Zhuang and told him Yan Yanzhi's answer. Xie Zhuang replied: Yan Yanzhi wrote "Autumn Hu Poetry" and only knew that life is a long separation, not a long absence.

古文：帝抚掌竟日。
现代文：孝武帝拍掌高兴了一整天。
English: Emperor Xiaowu clapped his hands for joy all day long.

古文：又王玄谟问庄何者爲双声，何者爲叠韵。
现代文：又王玄谟问谢庄什么是双声，什么是叠韵。
English: Wang Xuanmu also asked Xie Zhuang what is double voice and what is overlapping rhyme.

古文：答曰： 玄护爲双声，碻磝爲叠韵。 
现代文：回答说：  玄护 为双声， 郂 为叠韵。 
English: He replied, "The Xuanwu is a two-part rhyme, and the Gong is a compound rhyme.

古文：其捷速若此。
现代文：他就是如此地敏捷迅速。
English: He's just so nimble and quick.

古文：初，孝武尝赐庄宝剑，庄以与豫州刺史鲁爽，后爽叛，帝因宴问剑所在。
现代文：当初，孝武帝曾赐给谢庄一口宝剑，谢庄把它给了豫州刺史鲁爽。后来鲁爽叛变，孝武帝在一次宴会上问起了宝剑在什么地方。
English: At first, Emperor Xiaowu had given Xiezhuang a piece of the sword, and Xiezhuang gave it to Lu Shuang, the governor of Yuzhou. Later, Lu Shuang rebelled, and Emperor Xiaowu asked where the sword was at a banquet.

古文：答曰： 昔以与鲁爽别，窃爲陛下杜邮之赐。 
现代文：谢庄回答说： 过去我曾拿它与鲁爽送别，私自代陛下作了命他自杀的杜邮之赐。 
English: Xie Zhuang replied, "In the past, I took it to bid farewell to Lu Shuang. On behalf of His Majesty, I gave it as a gift to Du Po, who had committed suicide.

古文：上甚悦，当时以爲知言。
现代文：皇上听了非常高兴，当时的人把这当作见识深远之言。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear this, and people at the time took it as a profound insight.

古文：于时搜才路狭，庄表陈求贤之义曰：臣闻功倾魏后，非特照车之珍，德柔秦客，岂徒秘璧之贵。
现代文：当时搜罗人材的路子十分狭窄，谢庄上表阐明求贤的意义说： 臣听说功勋卓著的魏惠王，并非只是拥有可以光照十二乘车的珍珠，道德温顺的秦国客使蔺相如，那单只是秘密保护了价值连城的和氏璧！
English: At that time, the way to recruit talent was very narrow. Xie Zhuang took the lead in clarifying the meaning of seeking talent, saying: The minister heard that Wei Hui Wang, who had outstanding achievements, did not just have pearls that could illuminate twelve cars, and the moral tame Qin Guoqi was similar to the dragonfly. That one just secretly protected the valuable He Shi Bi!

古文：隆陂所渐，成败之由，何尝不兴资得才，替因失士。
现代文：隆盛与衰微的变化，成功与失败的缘由，何曾不是兴旺凭借获得人才，破败因为失去贤士？
English: The changes of prosperity and decline, the reasons for success and failure, why was it not prosperous by gaining talent, and ruined by losing sages?

古文：故楚书以善人爲宝，虞典以则哲爲难。
现代文：所以《楚书》上以善于任用贤人为宝贵，《虞典》上以采纳遵从明哲为难能。
English: Therefore, in the "Book of Chu," it is valuable to be good at appointing sages, and in the "Book of Fortune," it is difficult to adopt and follow sages.

古文：而进选之举既隳中代，登造之律，未闻当今，必欲丰本康务，庇人济俗，匪更惉懘，奚取九成。
现代文：而举贤任能的措施已经在中世废毁，英才登上仕途的法律并未在当今听到，如果一定要使根本丰盈，事业发达，保护民众，挽救世俗，除非改革弊败，怎能达到圆美？
English: However, the measures to promote talents have been abolished in the Middle Ages, and the law of the career of talents has not been heard today. If it is necessary to make the foundation rich, the cause developed, protect the people, and save the world, unless the reform fails, how can it achieve perfection?

古文：夫才生于时，古今岂贰，士出于世，屯泰焉殊。
现代文：人才生于时代，往古当今哪有二致，贤士出自人间，乱世治世有何区别？
English: Talents are born in times. What's the difference between ancient times and today? Wise men come from the human world. What's the difference between ruling a turbulent world and ruling the world?

古文：升历中阳，英贤起于徐沛，受籙白水，茂异出于荆宛。
现代文：阳气上升至中央，英贤起自徐州沛县，接受道符在白水，异才出于荆宛地区。
English: The yang qi rises to the center, the virtuous rise from Xuzhou Pei County, receive the Taoist symbols in Baishui, and the extraordinary talents come from the Jingwan area.

古文：甯二都智之所産，七隩愚之所育，实遇与不遇、用与不用耳。
现代文：难道两京就是智慧者的产地，乡野就是愚蠢人的故居？实际上只是有没有机遇、不被任用罢了。
English: Are the two capitals the birthplace of the wise, and the countryside the former home of the foolish? In fact, it's just a matter of whether there is an opportunity or not to be appointed.

古文：今大道光亨，万务俟德，而九服之旷，九流之艰，提钧悬衡，委之选部。
现代文：现在大道光明而畅通，万事等待有德的高人，而天下九服的旷远，人间九流的艰难，权衡选拔，只靠吏部。
English: Now the road is bright and smooth, everything is waiting for a virtuous high-ranking person, and the world is far away, the world is difficult, weighing and selecting, only by the cadre department.

古文：一人之鉴易限，天下之才难源，以易限之鉴，镜难源之才，使国罔遗贤，野无滞器，其可得乎？
现代文：一人的观察容易局限，天下的人才难以溯源，用容易局限的观察，映照难以溯源的人才，要使国家没有遗漏的贤达，民间没有余留的大器，难道可以做到吗？
English: One person's observation is easily limited, and the world's talents are difficult to trace. Using easily limited observation, reflecting the talents that are difficult to trace, the country should not miss the sages, and the people should not have any remaining great tools. Can it be done?

古文：昔公叔登臣，管仲升盗，赵文非私亲疏嗣，祁奚岂谄雠比子。
现代文：从前公叔痤举荐商鞅，管仲提升盗贼，赵惠文王并不是偏爱亲生而疏远嗣子，祁奚难道是谄媚仇人而庇护儿子？
English: In the past, Zhao Huiwen Wang did not prefer his own son and alienated his heir. Was he a charming enemy and protected his son?

古文：茹茅以汇，作范前经，举尔所知，式昭往牒。
现代文：同类互相牵引，古代的经典已经提供了典范，所有这些常识，以往的书籍已有明确的记载。
English: Like attracts like, the ancient classics have provided a model, all this common sense, the previous books have been clearly recorded.

古文：且自古任荐，弘明赏罚，成子举三哲而身致魏辅，应侯任二士而已捐秦相，臼季称冀缺而畴以田采，张勃进陈汤而坐之褫爵。此则先事之盛准，亦后王之彜鉴。
现代文：而且自古以来的举荐任用，要明确赏罚，成子荐举了三位贤人而自己成为魏国的辅臣，应侯任用了两个士人而丢了秦国的相位，臼季称举冀缺而酬赠封地，张勃提拔了陈汤而被剥夺了封爵，这些都是前代行事的正确准则，也是后代君王的经常借鉴。
English: Moreover, since ancient times, it is necessary to clearly reward and punish the appointment of recommendation. Cheng Zi recommended three sages and became an assistant minister of Wei. He appointed two scholars and lost the position of Qin. Usu Ji said that he was short of recommendation and was rewarded with a fief. Zhang Bo promoted Chen Tang and was deprived of a knighthood. These are the correct guidelines for the previous generation and are also a frequent reference for future generations of monarchs.

古文：臣谓宜普命大臣，各举所知，以付尚书依分铨用。
现代文：臣认为应该普遍命令大臣，各人举荐自己所了解的贤才，把他们交给尚书依照情况来选用。
English: The vassal thought that the minister should be generally ordered, and each person should recommend the talents they know, and give them to Shangshu to select according to the situation.

古文：若任得其才，举主延赏，有不称职，宜及其坐。
现代文：如果是任用后果然是个人才，举荐的人可以接受赏赐，有不称职的，就应该牵连惩治。
English: If the result of the appointment is an individual talent, the recommenders can receive rewards. If they are incompetent, they should be implicated and punished.

古文：重者免黜，轻者左迁。
现代文：重者罢免，轻者降职。
English: Those who are too heavy should be dismissed, and those who are too light should be demoted.

古文：被举之身，加以禁锢，年数多少，随愆议制。
现代文：被举荐的本人，要加以禁止封闭，勒令不准做官，封闭年数的多少，要根据过失的大小议定。
English: The person who has been recommended should be banned from holding public office, ordered not to hold public office, and the number of years of confinement should be agreed upon according to the degree of fault.

古文：若犯大辟，则任者刑论。
现代文：若犯了死罪，那么保举者就要以刑法论处。
English: If they commit a capital crime, then the sponsor will be punished according to the criminal law.

古文：又政平讼理，莫先亲人，亲人之要，实归守宰。
现代文： 又政治安定诉讼公平，没有比亲近民众更为重要的，而亲近民众的关键，实在是要选好地方长官。
English: In addition, political stability, fair litigation, there is nothing more important than being close to the people, and the key to being close to the people is to choose a good local governor.

古文：故黄霸莅潁川累稔，杜畿居河东历载。
现代文：所以黄霸治理颍川累年，杜畿居官河东多载。
English: As a result, Huangba has been in charge of Luchuan for many years, and Du Gui has been a resident of Hedong for many years.

古文：或就加恩秩，或入崇晖宠。
现代文：有的就地加以提拔，有的入朝提高官位。
English: Some were promoted on the spot, while others were promoted after entering the imperial court.

古文：今莅人之职，宜遵六年之限，进得章明庸惰，退得人不勤劳，如此，则上靡弃能，下无浮谬，考绩之风载泰，薪槱之歌克昌。
现代文：现在官员担任的职务，最好遵照六年的期限，前进一步说，可以显出官员是不是懒惰，后退一步讲，可以保持官员不过分操劳。这样，就可以做到上面没有遗弃贤能，下面没有荒谬官吏，考绩风气通畅，育贤之歌盛行。 
English: In the posts currently held by officials, it is best to comply with the six-year time limit. Going forward, it can be said that officials are lazy, and taking a step back, it can be said that officials are not overworked. In this way, it can be achieved that there is no abandonment of talent above, no absurd officials below, the performance appraisal culture is smooth, and the song of nurturing talent prevails.

古文：初，文帝世，限年三十而仕郡县，六周乃选代，刺史或十年馀。
现代文：起初，文帝时代，限定年龄到三十岁可以担任郡县官职，六周年才选人替代，刺史有的要十年多。
English: At first, in the era of Emperor Wen, a limited age of up to thirty years old could serve as a county official, and a replacement could only be elected on the sixth anniversary. Historically, it took more than ten years.

古文：至是皆易之，仕者不拘长少，莅人以三周爲满，宋之善政于是乎衰。
现代文：到这时全都改换了，做官的人不拘年长年少，任职以三周年为期满，宋朝的良好政治由此衰落了。
English: By this time, all officials had been replaced, regardless of whether they were old or young, and the term of office ended with the third anniversary. As a result, the good politics of the Song Dynasty declined.

古文：是年，拜吏部尚书，庄素多疾，不愿居选部，与大司马江夏王义恭笺，自陈 两胁癖疢，殆与生俱，一月发动，不减两三。
现代文：这年，封为吏部尚书。谢庄平时多病，不愿意在吏部任职，他写信给大司马江夏王刘义恭，自己叙说： 两胁间有痞块，大概是与生俱来的，一个月内发作，不少于两三次。
English: This year, he was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department. Xie Zhuang, who was often ill, did not want to serve in the personnel department. He wrote to the chief secretary of the Ma Jiang Xia Wang Liu Yigong, describing himself: There is a hernia between the two hernias, probably congenital, and it occurs within a month, no less than two or three times.

古文：每痛来逼心，气馀如綖，利患数年，遂成痼疾。
现代文：每当疼痛到来时逼迫心脏，只剩一口气像线一样细。这病已经患了几年，于是成了痼疾。
English: Every time the pain comes, it forces the heart, leaving only a breath as thin as a thread. This disease has been suffering for several years, so it has become a malady.

古文：岋岋惙惙，常如行尸。
现代文：危重疲困，经常如同行尸。
English: Cripplingly tired, often feeling like a walking corpse.

古文：眼患五月来便不复得夜坐，恒闭帷避风。
现代文：眼睛患病五个月来又不再能够夜坐，总是关着帘幕挡风。
English: He has been suffering from eye disease for five months and can no longer sit up at night. He always closes the curtains to keep out the wind.

古文：昼夜惛懵，爲此不复得朝谒诸王，庆吊亲旧。
现代文：昼夜糊糊涂涂，因此不能再朝拜诸王，庆贺吊唁亲友。
English: Day and night are muddled, so we can no longer worship the kings, celebrate and offer condolences to relatives and friends.

古文：今之所止，唯在小合。下官微命，于天下至轻，在己不能不重。
现代文：下官我的小小生命，对于天下来说极为轻微，而在我自己则不能不重视。
English: Subordinate officer, my small life is extremely insignificant for the world, but I cannot but attach importance to it myself.

古文：家世无年，亡高祖四十，曾祖三十三，亡祖四十七，下官新岁便三十五。
现代文：我家祖辈都寿命不长，已故的高祖四十岁，曾祖三十三岁，已故的祖父四十七岁，下官我新年就三十五岁了。
English: My ancestors did not live long. My late great-grandfather was forty years old, my great-grandfather was thirty-three years old, my late grandfather was forty-seven years old, and I will be thirty-five years old in the New Year.

古文：加以疾患如此，当复几时？
现代文：加上疾病这样重，还能再活多久？
English: How much longer can he live with such a serious illness?

古文：入年当申前请，以死自固。
现代文：进入新的一年应当重申以前辞职的请求，因为死亡的威胁而求自保。
English: Going into the new year, he should reiterate his previous request to resign in order to protect himself from the threat of death.

古文：愿侍坐言次，赐垂接助 。
现代文：希望在与皇上陪坐说话时，得到恩赐批准我的请求。 
English: I hope that when I sit and speak with the Emperor, he will grant my request.

古文：三年，坐疾多免官。
现代文：孝建三年，因为病多免去官职。
English: For three years, Xiao Jian was exempted from official duties due to illness.

古文：大明元年，起爲都官尚书。
现代文：大明元年，重新起用为都官尚书。
English: In the first year of the Daimyo era, he was reappointed to the post of Tokyo Metropolitan Government official.

古文：上时亲览朝政，虑权移臣下，以吏部尚书选举所由，欲轻其势力。
现代文：皇上常常亲自处理朝政，恐怕权力转移到大臣手中，因为吏部尚书是官吏选拔的主管者，所以打算削弱它的权势。
English: The emperor often dealt with the affairs of state personally, and I am afraid that power was transferred to the hands of the ministers, because the Ministry of Personnel was in charge of selecting officials, so he intended to weaken its power.

古文：二年，诏吏部尚书依郎分置，并详省闲曹。
现代文：大明二年，诏令吏部尚书依据郎官分别设置，并且要审察删减闲置部门。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial edict set up the personnel department separately according to the rank of officials, and it was necessary to examine the deletion and reduction of idle departments.

古文：又别诏太宰江夏王义恭曰： 吏部尚书由来与录共选，良以一人之识不辨洽通，兼与夺威权不宜专一故也。 
现代文：又另外诏令江夏王刘义恭说： 吏部尚书历来参与录用、共同选拔人材，确是因为一个人的识见不易辨别协调，再加上与夺的威权不应该让一个人专有的缘故。 
English: In addition, Liu Yigong, the ruler of Jiangxia, said: the reason why the Ministry of Personnel has always participated in the recruitment and joint selection of human resources is that it is not easy to distinguish and coordinate a person's insight, and the authority to seize should not be allowed to be exclusive to one person.

古文：于是置吏部尚书二人，省五兵尚书。
现代文：于是设置了吏部尚书二人，取消了五兵尚书。
English: As a result, two officials were appointed and five soldiers were removed.

古文：庄及度支尚书顾觊之并补选职。
现代文：谢庄和度支尚书顾觊之一起补了吏部的职位。
English: Xie Zhuang and Duozhi Shangshu Guzheng were the first to fill the position of the personnel department.

古文：迁左卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：又调任左卫军，加官为给事中。
English: He was also transferred to the Left Guard, and his promotion is pending.

古文：时河南献舞马，诏群臣爲赋，庄所上甚美。
现代文：当时河南献了会跳舞的马，诏令群臣各写一篇赋，谢庄所写的一首极美。
English: At that time, Henan offered dancing horses, and ordered the courtiers to each write a fu, and the one written by Xie Zhuang was extremely beautiful.

古文：又使庄作舞马歌，令乐府歌之。
现代文：又让谢庄作了一首《舞马歌》，令乐府歌唱。
English: He also asked Xie Zhuang to compose a "Dancing Horse Song" for the orchestra to sing.

古文：五年，又爲侍中，领前军将军。
现代文：大明五年，又做了侍中，兼任前军将军。
English: In the fifth year of Daming, he also became a chamberlain, concurrently serving as a former army general.

古文：时孝武出行夜还，敕开门。
现代文：当时孝武帝出行夜间回来，命令开门。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu returned from a trip at night and ordered the door to be opened.

古文：庄居守，以棨信或虚，须墨诏乃开。
现代文：谢庄担任守卫，认为木制的符信有可能虚假，必须有皇帝的墨诏才肯开门。
English: Xie Zhuang acted as a guard, believing that the wooden seal could be false and that the emperor's signature was necessary to open the door.

古文：上后因宴，从容曰： 卿欲效郅君章邪？ 
现代文：皇上后来就着一次宴会，从容地说： 爱卿是要效法郅君章么？ 
English: Later, at a banquet, the Emperor calmly said, "Is Aicheng going to follow the example of Emperor Taizong?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻搜巡有度，郊祀有节，盘于游田，着之前诫。
现代文：回答说： 臣听说巡游狩猎有一定的限度，郊祭天地有一定的节制，游猎无度，前人曾有明白的告诫。
English: He replied, "Minister, I have heard that there is a certain limit to hunting on the road, that there is a certain degree of restraint in the countryside, and that there is no limit to hunting on the road. The ancients had clear warnings.

古文：陛下今蒙犯尘露，晨往宵还，容致不逞之徒，妄生矫诈，臣是以伏须神笔。 
现代文：陛下现在冒着灰尘露水，早晨去，晚上回，可能会有不法的歹徒，狂妄地生出诡诈计谋，臣因此需要看到陛下的神圣笔迹。 
English: Your Majesty is now braving the dust and dew, going in the morning and returning in the evening, there may be lawless gangsters, arrogantly creating treacherous schemes, so the minister needs to see Your Majesty's sacred handwriting.

古文：六年，又爲吏部尚书，领国子博士。
现代文：大明六年，又担任吏部尚书，兼做国子博士。
English: In the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, he also served as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and concurrently served as the doctor of Kuniko.

古文：坐选公车令张奇免官，事在顔师伯传。
现代文：因为选拔公车令张奇的事件被免官，这个事件记在《颜师伯传》中。
English: Zhang Qi was removed from office because of the incident of selecting a bus, which was recorded in "The Biography of Yan Shibo."

古文：后除吴郡太守。
现代文：后来任命他为吴郡太守。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Wu County.

古文：前废帝即位，以爲金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：前废帝登上了帝位，任命谢庄为金紫光禄大夫。
English: The former deposed emperor ascended to the throne and appointed Xie Zhuang as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：初，孝武宠姬殷贵妃薨，庄爲诔，言 赞轨尧门 ，引汉昭帝母赵婕妤尧母门事，废帝在东宫衔之。
现代文：起初，孝武帝的宠姬殷贵妃去世，谢庄写了一篇祭文，说她 赞轨尧门 ，引用了汉昭帝的母亲赵婕妤尧母门的典故，废帝当时在东宫十分怨恨。
English: At first, when Emperor Xiaowu's favorite, Empress Yin Guifei, died, Xie Zhuang wrote an offering, saying that she "praised the gate," quoting the allusion of Han Zhao Di's mother, Zhao Ye's mother gate. The deposed emperor was very resented in the East Palace at that time.

古文：至是遣人诘庄曰： 卿昔作殷贵妃诔，知有东宫不？ 
现代文：现在就派人去责问谢庄说： 您过去作《殷贵妃诔》，知不知道有东宫存在？ 
English: Now send someone to question Xie Zhuang and say: You used to make "The Noble Concubine," do you know if there is an East Palace?

古文：将诛之。
现代文：将要把他杀死。
English: They're going to kill him.

古文：孙奉伯说帝曰： 死是人之所同，政复一往之苦，不足爲困。
现代文：孙奉伯解劝废帝说： 死亡是人所共同的，正好解脱了人生的痛苦，不足以使人困顿。
English: Sun Fongbo explained and advised the emperor: Death is common to all people. It just releases the pain of life, but it is not enough to make people suffer.

古文：庄少长富贵，且系之尚方，使知天下苦剧，然后杀之未晚。 
现代文：谢庄从小到大一直富贵，暂且把他囚禁在尚方狱中，使他知道了天下痛苦的厉害，然后再杀死他也不晚。 
English: Xie Zhuang had been wealthy from childhood to old age. He was temporarily imprisoned in Shangfang Prison so that he would know the severity of suffering in the world, and then it was not too late to kill him.

古文：帝曰： 卿言有理。 
现代文：废帝说： 卿说得有理。 
English: The deposed emperor said, "Sir, you are right.

古文：系于左尚方。
现代文：把他关在了左尚方牢狱。
English: They put him in the Zuo Shangfang Prison.

古文：明帝定乱得出，使爲赦诏。
现代文：明帝平定动乱，谢庄得以放出，让他自己写一份赦免的诏令。
English: Emperor Ming quelled the turmoil and released Xie Zhuang, allowing him to write an amnesty decree himself.

古文：庄夜出署门方坐，命酒酌之，已微醉，传诏停待诏成，其文甚工。
现代文：谢庄夜间走出官署大门坐下，要了酒喝起来，已经微微喝醉，传诏的人停在那里等着，诏书写成了，其中的文词非常精美。
English: Xie Zhuang walked out of the gate of the government office at night and sat down. He ordered wine and drank it. He was already slightly drunk. The person who delivered the edict stopped there and waited. The edict was written, and the words in it were very beautiful.

古文：后爲寻阳王师，加中书令、散骑常侍。
现代文：后来他担任寻阳王的师傅，加封为中书令、散骑常侍。
English: Later, he served as the master of the Sun King, and was awarded the title of Chushirei (中書令) and Sanzhi (散騎) Tsuneishi (常侍).

古文：寻加金紫光禄大夫，给亲信二十人。
现代文：不久又加封为紫光禄大夫，赐给亲信二十人。
English: Soon he was also given the title of Doctor of the Purple Light of Lu, which he bestowed on twenty of his close confidants.

古文：卒，赠右光禄大夫，諡宪子。
现代文：死后，加谥号为宪子。
English: After his death, his posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthum

古文：所着文章四百余首行于世。
现代文：他所著的文章四百余篇流行于世间。
English: More than four hundred articles written by him are popular in the world.

