古文：五国约以伐齐。
现代文：赵、魏、韩、燕、楚五个国家结成联军进攻齐国。
English: Five countries - Zhao, Wei, Han, Yan and Chu - formed a coalition to attack Qi.

古文：昭阳谓楚王曰： 五国以破齐，秦必南图楚。 
现代文：楚国国相昭阳对楚王说： 五国如果攻破了齐国，秦国一定会乘着这个机会向南进攻楚国。 
English: Cho Yang, the minister of state of Chu, said to the king of Chu: If the five countries break through the state of Qi, the state of Qin will certainly take advantage of this opportunity to attack Chu to the south.

古文：王曰： 然则奈何? 
现代文：楚王说： 这可怎么办啊？ 
English: King Chu said, "How can this be?

古文：对曰： 韩氏辅国也，好利而恶难，好利，可营也；恶难，可惧也。
现代文：昭阳回答说： 韩国的辅国，贪图私利，畏惧危难。贪图私利，就可以对他进行利诱；畏惧危难，就可以对他实施威胁。
English: Zhao Yang replied: South Korea's auxiliary countries are greedy for self-interest and afraid of danger. If they are greedy for self-interest, they can entice him; if they are afraid of danger, they can threaten him.

古文：我厚赂之以利，其心必营。我悉兵以临之，其心必惧我。彼惧我兵而营我利，五国之事必可败也。
现代文：我用财物珍宝去拉拢他，他的心思就必定会被眼前的利益所诱惑；我再率兵逼迫威胁他，他心里必定会恐惧我，他害怕我们的大军，又贪图我们的财物，这样五国联军攻打齐国的战事，一定会失败。
English: If I entice him with wealth and treasure, his mind will be seduced by the immediate benefits; if I lead troops to persecute and threaten him, his heart will fear me, he will be afraid of our great army and covet our wealth. In this way, the war of the five-nation alliance against Qi will surely fail.

古文：约绝之后，虽勿与地可。 楚王曰： 善。 
现代文：他们的联盟分散之后，即使不给韩国割地也是完全可行的。 楚王说： 很好。 
English: After the dispersion of their alliance, it is completely feasible even if they do not give land to South Korea.Chu Wang said: Very good.

古文：乃命大公事之韩，见公仲曰： 夫牛阑之事，马陵之难，亲王之所见也。
现代文：于是他派大公事到韩国，会见韩相国公仲，说： 当初牛阑之事，马陵之难，是您亲眼所见。
English: So he sent a high-ranking official to South Korea to meet with his Korean counterpart, Guo Gongzhong, and said, "You saw with your own eyes what happened with the bulls and the difficulties with the horses.

古文：王苟无以五国用兵，请效列城五，请悉楚国之众也，以图于齐。 
现代文：大王如果不与五国联合攻齐，我们愿意献出五个城邑，否则的话，我们就出动全军与齐国为敌。 
English: If the Great King does not make a joint attack with the five countries, we are willing to offer five cities, otherwise, we will send the whole army to fight against Qi.

古文：韩之反赵、魏之后，而楚果弗与地，则五国之事困也。
现代文：韩国与赵、魏解除盟约以后，楚国果然没有割地给韩国，而五国联盟攻齐之事就落空了。
English: After South Korea broke the treaty with Zhao and Wei, Chu did not give land to South Korea, and the five-nation alliance fell through.

