古文：守城之法，木为苍旗，火为赤旗，薪樵为黄旗，石为白旗，水为黑旗，食为菌旗，死士为仓英之旗，竟士为雩旗，多卒为双兔之旗，五尺童子为童旗，女子为梯末妹妹之旗，弩为狗旗，戟为■旗，剑盾为羽旗，车为龙旗，骑为鸟旗。
现代文：译文守城时用旗帜联络的方法是这样的。需要木材时就用青色旗，需要烟火时就用赤色旗，需要柴草时就挂黄旗，需要石头时就用白色旗，需要水时就悬黑色旗，需要食物时就扬绘有食菌的旗，需要调集敢死队时就打出画有苍鹰的旗帜，需调集战斗力最强的战士时就挂出虎旗，征调多余的兵士时挂双兔旗，征调五童子时挂童旗，征调女子时挂姊妹旗，需求弓箭时挂龙旗，需要战马时挂鸟旗，凡是需要征调的物质而旗帜又没有现存符号的，就按所需
English: The method of using flags to communicate when defending the city is as follows: when timber is needed, use a blue flag; when fireworks are needed, use a red flag; when firewood is needed, hang a yellow flag; when stones are needed, use a white flag; when water is needed, hang a black flag; when food is needed, fly a flag with food-eating bacteria; when death squads are needed, fly a flag with a goshawk; when the strongest fighters are needed, fly a tiger flag; when extra soldiers are needed, fly a double rabbit flag; when five children are needed, fly a child flag; when women are needed, fly a sister flag; when bows and arrows

古文：凡所求索旗名不在书者，皆以其形名为旗。城上举旗，备具之官致财物，之足而下旗。
现代文：物质的形状名称含义挂上相应的旗帜。城上悬挂旗帜是军需官在联络征集调用财物，一旦满足军需，应随即把旗帜降下来。
English: The flag is hoisted on the city because the quartermaster is in contact to collect and call the property. Once the quartermaster is satisfied, the flag should be lowered immediately.

古文：凡守城之法：石有积，樵薪有积，■茅有积，雚苇有积，木有积，炭有积，沙有积，松柏有积，蓬艾有积，麻脂有积，金铁有积，粟米有积；井灶有处，重质有居；五兵各有旗；节各有辨；法令各有贞；轻重分数各有请；主慎道路者有经。
现代文：按守城的法则，必须积聚有充分的擂石、柴薪、茅草、芦苇、木材、炭、沙、松柏、蓬艾、麻杆、油脂、铜铁和粮食；水井、炊灶都有适当的地方，敌方重要的抵押品如人质有居处。各军兵种都有各自的旗号；调兵遣将各有符节；法令有定条定例，轻重等级各根据实际情况而定。主持巡查道路的官吏也有各自划定的区域。
English: According to the law of defending the city, it is necessary to accumulate sufficient vermiculite, firewood, thatch, reed, wood, coal, sand, pine, pine, poplar, hemp, grease, copper and iron and grain; wells and cooking stoves have appropriate places, and important collateral of the enemy such as hostages have places of residence. Each army and service has its own flag; the transfer of troops has its own symbols; the laws have rules and regulations, and the weight and weight levels are determined according to the actual situation. The officials who preside over the patrol roads also have their own designated areas.

古文：亭尉各为帜，竿长二丈五，帛长丈五、广半幅者大。
现代文：各个亭尉都有自己的旗帜，旗竿长二丈五尺，帛长一丈五尺，宽半幅，共六面旗帜。
English: Each pavilion has its own flag, the flagpole is two and a half feet long, the pole is one and a half feet long, and the flagpole is one and a half feet wide, for a total of six flags.

古文：寇傅攻前池外廉城上当队鼓三，举一帜；到水中周，鼓四，举二帜；到藩，鼓五，举三帜，到冯垣，鼓六，举四帜，到女垣；鼓七，举五帜；到大城，鼓八，举六帜；乘大城半以上，鼓无休。
现代文：当敌人进攻到护城河外边时，与敌人进攻方位相对的守军就击三下鼓，并悬挂一面旗；当敌人进攻到护城河中洲处时就击五下鼓，挂上三面旗；当敌人进入到城外的第一道矫墙时，就击鼓六下，挂上四面旗；当敌人深入到大城墙下时，就击八下鼓，挂上六面旗；当敌人爬上城墙的一半时，就擂鼓不停。
English: When the enemy attacks outside the moat, the defenders opposite the enemy's attack position will beat three drums and hang a flag; when the enemy attacks the middle of the moat, they will beat five drums and hang three flags; when the enemy enters the first wall outside the city, they will beat six drums and hang four flags; when the enemy goes deep under the great wall, they will beat eight drums and hang six flags; when the enemy climbs halfway up the wall, they will beat the drum non-stop.

古文：夜以火，如此数。寇却解，辄部帜如进数，而无鼓。
现代文：如果是在夜晚，就以举火把来代替挂旗，举火把的数目与白天挂旗的数目一样。
English: If it is at night, the flags are replaced by torches, and the number of torches is the same as the number of flags during the day.

古文：城为隆，长五十尺，四面四门将，门长四十尺，其次三十尺，其次二十五尺，其次二十尺，其次十五尺，高无下四十五尺。
现代文：假如敌人是由进攻而退却，悬挂旗的数目同敌进攻时的数目不变，但不击鼓。城中大将悬挂绛旗，高五十尺，东西南北四门守将的旗帜各高四十尺，其次一等的是三十尺，再次一等的高二十五尺，依次为二十尺，十五尺。不过将旗的高度没有低于十五尺的了。
English: If the enemy retreats from an attack, the number of flags to be hoisted remains the same as the number at the time of the enemy's attack, but there is no beating of drums. The general of the city hangs a banner, fifty feet high, the flags of the four keepers of the east, west, north and south are forty feet high, the second is thirty feet, the first is twenty-five feet high, and the second is twenty feet, fifteen feet. However, the height of the flag is not less than fifteen feet.

古文：城上吏卒置之背，卒于头上；城下吏、卒置之肩，左军于左肩，中军置之胸，各一。
现代文：城里的军官、士兵、男女百姓都通过衣服上的徽章区别开来。城上小吏的徽章戴在衣背上，士兵的徽章戴在帽子上或头巾上；城下的小吏徽章都戴在衣肩上，士兵也是如此。左军的徽章都戴在左肩上，右军的徽章戴在右肩，中军的徽章戴在衣胸前，一人一个微章。
English: The officers, soldiers, and men and women in the city are distinguished by the badges on their clothes. The badges of the minor officials in the city are worn on the back of their clothes, the badges of the soldiers are worn on their hats or headscarves; the badges of the minor officials under the city are worn on the shoulders of their clothes, and so are the soldiers. The badges of the left army are worn on the left shoulder, the badges of the right army are worn on the right shoulder, and the badges of the Chinese army are worn on the front of the chest. Each person has a micro-badge.

古文：鼓，中军一三，每鼓三、十击之，诸有鼓之吏，谨以次应之；当应鼓而不应，不当应而应鼓，主者斩。
现代文：中军有一个号鼓，每次击鼓三至十下，其余有鼓的官吏击鼓应答中军鼓号要仔细按等第进行。应当击鼓回应时却没有按时击鼓，不当击鼓回应时却胡乱击鼓，要处斩其主管人。
English: The Chinese army has a drum, and each time the drum is beaten three to ten times. The remaining officials with drums should carefully follow the beat of the drum to respond to the Chinese army's drum. When they should respond to the drum, they did not beat the drum on time, but when they did not respond to the drum, they beat the drum in a disorderly manner, and their supervisors should be punished.

古文：道广三十步，于城下夹阶者各二，其井，置铁■。
现代文：修建道路要三十步宽，城下夹阶的大道各有两口井，井边设置铁罐。
English: The road to be built should be thirty paces wide, and there should be two wells on each of the avenues under the city, and iron cans should be set up at the edge of the wells.

古文：于道之外为屏，三十步而为之圜，高丈。
现代文：在道路外边筑起屏障，每三十步就砌成一个圆圈，高一丈。
English: They built a barrier on the outside of the road, and every thirty steps they built a circle, one step higher.

古文：为民圂，垣高十二尺以上。
现代文：同。 表 应作 袤 。 靳 应作 勒 。
English: The table should be written.  should be written 勒.

