古文：问曰：病有霍乱者何？
现代文：问：什么叫霍乱？
English: Q: What is cholera?

古文：答曰：呕吐而利，名曰霍乱。
现代文：答：呕吐与腹泻并作，病势急骤，倾刻间有挥霍撩乱之势的，这就叫霍乱。
English: A: If vomiting and diarrhea occur at the same time, the illness is acute, and there is a tendency to squander money and cause chaos, this is called cholera.

古文：问曰：病发热，头痛，身疼，恶寒，吐利者，此属何病？
现代文：问：症候表现为发热、头痛、身痛、畏寒、呕吐腹泻并作，这是什么病？
English: Q: The symptoms are fever, headache, body pain, chills, vomiting and diarrhea. What is this disease?

古文：答曰：此名霍乱。
现代文：答：这叫霍乱。
English: A: It's called cholera.

古文：自吐下，又利止，复，更发热也。
现代文：霍乱的呕吐腹泻是自内而发，故初起与表证同时出现，并且在呕吐腹泻停止后还有头痛、畏寒、发热等表证存在。
English: Vomiting and diarrhea of cholera are self-induced, so they initially appear at the same time as the symptoms, and after the vomiting and diarrhea stop, there are also symptoms such as headache, chills, and fever.

古文：伤寒，其脉微涩者，本是霍乱，今是伤寒，却四五日，至阴经上转入阴，必利，本呕，下利者，不可治也。
现代文：之所以这样，是因为腹泻后津伤肠燥，大便应当变硬。如果病人能够饮食的，为胃气恢复，则病即可痊愈。现在病人反而不能饮食，为胃气未复。
English: The reason for this is that after diarrhea, the intestines are irritated and the stool should become hard. If the patient can eat, the gastric gas will recover, and the disease can be cured. Now the patient cannot eat, and the gastric gas has not recovered.

古文：欲似大便而反矢气，仍不利者，属阳明也，便必硬，十三日愈，所以然者，经尽故也。下利后，当便硬，硬则能食者愈；今反不能食，到后经中，颇能食，复过一经能食，过之一日，当愈。
现代文：经过六天，邪气行至下一经，此时病人稍能进食，为胃气稍复。再过六天，邪气又经过一经，此时病人已能够进食，示邪气行经尽、邪气衰尽、胃气恢复，那么再过一天，即十三天，疾病就会痊愈。
English: After six days, the evil spirit will travel to the next meridian, at which time the patient will be able to eat a little, and the stomach will recover a little. After another six days, the evil spirit will travel through another meridian, at which time the patient will be able to eat, indicating that the evil spirit has passed, the evil spirit has faded, and the stomach has recovered. Then after another day, that is, thirteen days, the disease will be cured.

古文：不愈者，不属阳明也。
现代文：如果到时不痊愈的，就不是阳明病了。
English: If you do not recover by then, it is not Yangming's disease.

古文：恶寒脉微，而复利，利止，亡血也，四逆加人参汤主之。
现代文：畏寒、脉微而又腹泻，因泻利过度、津液内竭而腹泻停止的，用四逆加人参汤主治。
English: If you are afraid of the cold and have a weak pulse but still have diarrhea, or if the diarrhea has stopped due to excessive diarrhea and internal fluid depletion, you should use the Four Contrarian Remedies and ginseng soup as the main treatment.

古文：霍乱，头痛，发热，身疼痛，热多，欲饮水者，五苓散主之；寒多，不用水者，理中丸主之。
现代文：霍乱病，吐泻，头痛发热，身疼痛，为霍乱表里同病，如果表热较甚而想喝水的，用五苓散主治；如果中焦寒湿偏盛而不想喝水的，用理中丸主治。
English: Cholera, diarrhea, headache, fever, body aches, are the same disease as cholera on the surface. If the surface fever is more and you want to drink water, use the five-leaf clover to treat it; if the fever is high and you do not want to drink water, use the rational pill to treat it.

古文：理中丸方
现代文：理中丸方
English: RIZUNAKA MARUKATA

古文：人参甘草白术干姜以上各三两右四味，捣筛为末，蜜和丸，如鸡黄大，以沸汤数合，和一丸，研碎，温服之。
现代文：人参干姜甘草白术各三两以上四味药，捣细筛末，用蜜混合作成鸡蛋黄大小的药丸，然后用开水数合，与一粒药丸混合研碎，趁热服用，白天服三四次，夜晚服二次。
English: Dried ginseng, ginger, licorice, and white ginseng each contain more than three or two four-flavor medicines, and are mixed with honey to form egg-yellow-sized pills. They are then combined with boiled water, mixed and crushed with one pill, and taken while hot. They are taken three or four times during the day and twice at night.

古文：日三服，夜二服，腹中未热，益至三四丸，然不及汤。
现代文：服药后，腹中未感觉热的，可加至三四药丸。然而，丸药的效果不如汤剂。
English: After taking the medicine, if you do not feel hot in the abdomen, you can add up to three or four pills. However, the effect of the pills is not as good as the decoction.

古文：汤法，以四物，依两数切，用水八升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，日三服。
现代文：汤剂的制作方法是：将以上四味药稍切细，用水八升，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，一日服三次。
English: The preparation method of the decoction is as follows: Slice the above four-flavor medicine a little finer, use eight liters of water, boil it to three liters, remove the drug residue, take one liter each time, and take it three times a day.

古文：加减法：若脐上筑者，肾气动也，去术加桂四两。吐多者，去术，加生姜三两。下多者，还用术；悸者，加茯苓二两。渴欲得水者，加术，足前成四两半。腹中痛者，加人参，足前成四两半。
现代文：如果出现脐上筑筑然悸动的，是肾气上逆，去白术，加桂枝四两；如果呕吐甚的，去白术，加生姜三两；如果腹泻严重的，仍用白术；如果心悸不宁的，加茯苓二两；口渴要喝水的，加白术，补足上用量到四两半；腹中疼痛的，加人参，补足上药量到四两半；腹部胀满的，去白术，加附子一枚。
English: If there is a palpitation on the palate, it is the opposite of the kidney gas, go to the white medicine, add four sprigs of cinnamon; if vomiting is severe, go to the white medicine, add three sprigs of ginger; if diarrhea is severe, still use the white medicine; if heart palpitations, add two sprigs of ginger; if thirsty, drink water, add white medicine, supplement the upper dosage to four and a half; if there is pain in the abdomen, add ginseng, supplement the upper dosage to four and a half; if the abdomen is swollen, go to the white medicine, add one aconite.

古文：寒者，加干姜，足前成四两半。
现代文：服药后约一顿饭的时间，吃热稀一升左右，以助药力；并取暖保温，不要脱衣揭被。
English: About one meal time after taking the medicine, eat about one liter of heat to help the medicine; and keep warm, do not strip off.

古文：腹满者，去术，加附子一枚。服汤后，如食顷，饮热粥一升许，微自温，勿发揭衣被。吐利止而身痛不休者，当消息和解其外，宜桂枝汤小和之。吐利汗出，发热恶寒，四肢拘急，手足厥冷者，四逆汤主之。
现代文：呕吐腹泻停止，而身体疼痛仍不解除的，是里和表未解，应当斟酌使用解表的方法，可用桂枝汤解肌祛风，微微和解表邪。呕吐腹泻，汗出，发热畏寒，四肢拘挛紧急，手足厥冷的，是阴盛阳亡的表现，急用四逆汤回阳救逆。
English: If vomiting and diarrhea have stopped, but the body pain is still not relieved, the balance between the body and the table is not resolved, and the method of solving the table should be considered. Guizhi soup can be used to relieve muscle cramps, and slightly dissolve the table evil. Vomiting and diarrhea, sweating, fever and chills, limb cramps and chills, and cold hands and feet are manifestations of yin and yang, and emergency use of four-way soup to return to the sun.

古文：既吐且利，小便复利而大汗出，下利清谷，内寒外热，脉微欲绝者，四逆汤主之。
现代文：呕吐腹泻交作，而又小便通畅，大汗淋漓，所泻之物完谷不化，体表发热，脉微弱至极、似有似无，这是内真寒外假热的阴盛格阳证，急用四逆汤回阳救逆。
English: Vomiting and diarrhea are intertwined, but the urination is smooth, sweating is drenched, the thing that is ejaculated is completely dissolved, the body surface is feverish, the pulse is extremely weak, and there seems to be nothing. This is the yin and yang of true cold and false fever, and the emergency use of the four reverse soups to return to the sun to save the day.

古文：吐已下断，汗出而厥，四肢拘急不解，脉微欲绝者，通脉四逆加猪胆汁汤主之。
现代文：呕吐腹泻已经停止，却见汗出而手足厥冷，四肢挛急不解，脉象微弱、似有似无的，是阴竭阳亡的危候，用通脉四逆加猪胆汤主治。
English: Vomiting and diarrhea have stopped, but I see sweating and my hands and feet are cold, my limbs are in a hurry, my pulse is weak, it seems to be nothing, it is a dangerous disease of yin exhaustion and yang death, and it is treated with four-way pulse and pork gallbladder soup.

古文：吐利发汗，脉平，小烦者，以新虚不胜谷气故也。
现代文：呕吐、腹泻、汗出以后，脉搏呈平和之象，还感觉微烦不适的，是病后新虚，脾胃之气尚弱，不能消化食物所致。
English: After vomiting, diarrhea, and sweating, the pulse is peaceful, and you still feel a little irritable and uncomfortable. This is a new deficiency after illness, the spleen and stomach are still weak, and it is caused by the inability to digest food.

