古文：匈奴，其先祖夏后氏之苗裔也，曰淳维。
现代文：匈奴的祖先是夏后氏的后代，名叫淳维。
English: The ancestor of the Xiongnu was a descendant of the Xia Hou clan, named Jun Wei.

古文：唐虞以上有山戎、獫狁、荤粥，居于北蛮，随畜牧而转移。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜以前有山戎、猃狁、荤粥，居住在北边蛮荒之地，跟随畜牧活动而转移。
English: Tang Yao and Yu Yao used to eat mountain yakitori, bamboo shoots and gourd porridge. They lived in a wild and barren land in the north and moved with the livestock activities.

古文：其畜之所多则马、牛、羊，其奇畜则橐扆、驴骡、駃騠、騊駼、驒騱。
现代文：他们的牲畜多是马、牛、羊，他们的奇特牲畜则是骆驼、驴、骡？騊駼、騨騱。
English: Most of their livestock are horses, cattle, and sheep, but their special livestock are camels, donkeys, mules, donkeys, and donkeys.

古文：逐水草迁徙，毋城郭常处耕田之业，然亦各有分地。
现代文：追逐着水草而迁移，没有城镇常居之地和农耕生产，但是也各自有分占的牧地。
English: They migrate in pursuit of aquatic plants. They have no permanent place of residence in towns or agricultural production, but they also have their own share of pastures.

古文：毋文书，以言语为约束。
现代文：没有文字和书籍，用说话来相互约束。
English: Without words and books, they use speech to constrain each other.

古文：兒能骑羊，引弓射鸟鼠；少长则射狐兔：用为食。
现代文：小孩能够骑羊，拉弓射鸟、鼠；稍大一点就能射狐狸、兔子，用来作食物。
English: Children can ride sheep, pull a bow and shoot birds and mice; slightly older children can shoot foxes and rabbits, which are used for food.

古文：士力能毌弓，尽为甲骑。
现代文：男子都有力量拉开弓，全都是披甲的骑兵。
English: All the men had the strength to draw their bows, and they were all armoured cavalry.

古文：其俗，宽则随畜，因射猎禽兽为生业，急则人习战攻以侵伐，其天性也。
现代文：他们的风俗，平时随意游牧，以射猎禽兽作为职业；形势紧急时，则人人演习作战来进行侵袭征伐，这是他们的天性。
English: Their customs, in peacetime, are random nomadism, with shooting game as a profession; when the situation is urgent, everyone practices warfare to carry out invasion and conquest, which is their nature.

古文：其长兵则弓矢，短兵则刀鋋。
现代文：他们的长兵器是弓和箭，短兵器是刀和铁柄小矛。
English: Their long weapons are bows and arrows, their short weapons are swords and iron-handled spears.

古文：利则进，不利则退，不羞遁走。
现代文：形势有利就进攻，没有利就退却，不以逃跑作为羞耻。
English: Attack when the situation is favorable, retreat when it is not, and do not be ashamed to run away.

古文：苟利所在，不知礼义。
现代文：如果有利可得，就不知道什么是礼义。
English: If there is profit to be made, there is no sense of propriety.

古文：自君王以下，咸食畜肉，衣其皮革，被旃裘。
现代文：从君王以下，都吃牧畜的肉，穿牧畜的皮革，披着带毛的皮袄。
English: From the king on down, they eat meat from livestock, wear leather from livestock, and wear fur coats.

古文：壮者食肥美，老者食其馀。
现代文：健壮的人吃肥美的食物，老年人吃剩下的。
English: Strong people eat fat food, old people eat leftovers.

古文：贵壮健，贱老弱。
现代文：尊重健壮的人，看轻年老体弱的人。
English: Respect the robust, despise the old and infirm.

古文：父死，妻其後母；兄弟死，皆取其妻妻之。
现代文：父亲去世，儿子就把后母作为妻子；兄弟去世，活着的兄弟就全都娶已故兄弟的妻子为妻。
English: When the father dies, the son takes the stepmother as his wife; when the brother dies, all the living brothers marry the wife of the deceased brother.

古文：其俗有名不讳，而无姓字。
现代文：他们的风俗有名却不避讳，没有姓和字。
English: Their customs are well-known but not shunned, and they have no family name or alphabet.

古文：夏道衰，而公刘失其稷官，变于西戎，邑于豳。
现代文：夏朝政治衰微时，公刘失去他的稷官之职，在西戎实行变革，在豳地建起都邑住了下来。
English: When the politics of the Xia Dynasty waned, King Liu lost his position as eunuch, implemented reforms in Xi Rong, built a capital city in Handan, and settled down.

古文：其後三百有馀岁，戎狄攻大王亶父，亶父亡走岐下，而豳人悉从亶父而邑焉，作周。
现代文：这以后三百多年，戎狄族进攻周太王亶父，亶父逃跑到歧山脚下，而豳地民众都跟随亶父来到歧山下，在此营造城邑，建立周国。
English: After this, for more than three hundred years, the Yongdi people attacked Zhou Taiwang and his father, and his father fled to the foot of Mount Bi, while the people of Lushan followed his father to the foot of Mount Bi, where they built towns and established Zhou Province.

古文：其後百有馀岁，周西伯昌伐畎夷氏。
现代文：这以后又过了百余年，周西伯姬昌讨伐畎夷氏。
English: After this, more than a hundred years passed, and Zhou Xi Bao Jichang fought against the Yi clan.

古文：後十有馀年，武王伐纣而营雒邑，复居于酆鄗，放逐戎夷泾、洛之北，以时入贡，命曰 荒服 。
现代文：十多年后，周武王讨伐商纣王，并营建洛邑，重又回到酆京、镐京居住，把戎夷驱逐到泾水和洛水以北，让他们按时向周进贡，叫做 荒服 。
English: More than ten years later, King Zhou Wu fought against the merchants of Shao Wang, and built Luoyang, and returned to Shijing and Shijing to live, and expelled the Eunuchs to the north of Surabaya and Luoshui, so that they could pay tribute to Zhou on time, called Arafu.

古文：其後二百有馀年，周道衰，而穆王伐犬戎，得四白狼四白鹿以归。
现代文：其后二百余年，周朝政治衰微，周穆王讨伐犬戎，获得四条白狼和四只白鹿就回来了。
English: More than two hundred years later, when the Zhou Dynasty was in political decline, King Zhou Mu fought against Injun Rong and won four white wolves and four white deer, and then returned.

古文：自是之後，荒服不至。
现代文：从此以后，荒服的戎夷之人不再来镐京进贡。
English: From then on, people in military uniforms would no longer come to Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：於是周遂作甫刑之辟。
现代文：于是周王朝就制定了《甫刑》的法规。
English: As a result, the Zhou Dynasty formulated the "Imprisonment" law.

古文：穆王之後二百有馀年，周幽王用宠姬襃姒之故，与申侯有卻。
现代文：穆王以后二百余年，周幽王因为宠幸褒姒的缘故，与申侯有了仇怨。
English: More than two hundred years after King Mu, King Zhou Yu had a grudge against Shen Hou because he favored Bao Han.

古文：申侯怒而与犬戎共攻杀周幽王于骊山之下，遂取周之焦穫，而居于泾渭之间，侵暴中国。
现代文：申侯动怒，就和犬戎一起在骊山之下攻击并杀死了周幽王，犬戎就夺得了周朝的焦获之地，君主在泾水和渭水一带，侵犯中原地区。
English: Shen Hou became angry and attacked and killed Zhou Yu Wang together with Injun Rong at the foot of Lushan Mountain. Injun Rong seized the land of the Zhou Dynasty, and the monarch invaded the Central Plains in and around Surabaya and Surabaya.

古文：秦襄公救周，於是周平王去酆鄗而东徙雒邑。
现代文：这时秦襄公援救周王朝，于是周平王离开了酆京、镐京，向东迁徙到洛邑。
English: At this time, Qin Xianggong came to the rescue of the Zhou Dynasty, so King Zhou Ping left Beijing and moved east to Luoyang.

古文：当是之时，秦襄公伐戎至岐，始列为诸侯。
现代文：就在这时，秦襄公攻打戎人来到歧山，开始被封为诸侯。
English: Just at this time, Qin Xianggong attacked the soldiers and came to Gushan, and began to be made a vassal.

古文：是後六十有五年，而山戎越燕而伐齐，齐釐公与战于齐郊。
现代文：此后六十五年，山戎越过燕国进攻齐国，齐釐公同山戎在齐国城外交战。
English: In the following sixty-five years, Shan Rong crossed Yan Province to attack Qi Province, and Qi Gong and Shan Rong waged a diplomatic war in Qi Province.

古文：其後四十四年，而山戎伐燕。
现代文：其后四十四年，山戎进攻燕国。
English: Forty-four years later, Yamashiro attacked Yan Province.

古文：燕告急于齐，齐桓公北伐山戎，山戎走。
现代文：燕国向齐国告急，齐桓公北上讨伐山戎，山戎逃跑。
English: Yan country was in a hurry to Qi country, Qi Kuan went to the north to fight against Shan Rong, and Shan Rong fled.

古文：其後二十有馀年，而戎狄至洛邑，伐周襄王，襄王奔于郑之氾邑。
现代文：这以后二十多年，戎狄来到洛邑，攻打周襄王，襄王逃奔到郑国的氾邑。
English: More than twenty years later, the Yong Di came to Luoyang and attacked Zhou Xiangwang. Xiangwang fled to Fuyang in Zhengzhou.

古文：初，周襄王欲伐郑，故娶戎狄女为后，与戎狄兵共伐郑。
现代文：最初，周襄王想讨伐郑国，所以娶了戎狄的姑娘作王后，同戎狄之兵一起讨伐郑国。
English: At first, King Zhou Xiang wanted to invade Zheng, so he married a girl from Rong Di to be his queen, and together with Rong Di's soldiers, they invaded Zheng.

古文：已而黜狄后，狄后怨，而襄王後母曰惠后，有子子带，欲立之，於是惠后与狄后、子带为内应，开戎狄，戎狄以故得入，破逐周襄王，而立子带为天子。
现代文：不久，襄王废黜了狄后，狄后怨恨；襄王的后母叫惠后，有个儿子叫子带，想立他为王，于是惠后同狄后、子带为内应，为戎狄打开城门，因此戎狄才能进城，打败周军，赶走周襄王，而立子带为天子。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiang deposed Empress Dowager Di, which made Empress Dowager Di resentful; Emperor Xiang's stepmother was called Empress Hui, and she had a son called Zizou, and she wanted to make him king. So Empress Hui, together with Empress Di and Zizou, acted as a go-between and opened the city gates for Emperor Xiang, so Emperor Xiang could enter the city, defeat Zhou's army, and drive out Emperor Zhou, while Emperor Zizou was the son of Heaven.

古文：於是戎狄或居于陆浑，东至於卫，侵盗暴虐中国。中国疾之，故诗人歌之曰 戎狄是应 ， 薄伐獫狁，至於大原 ， 出舆彭彭，城彼朔方 。
现代文：于是戎狄中的一些人就住到了陆浑，东部到达了卫国，侵犯虐害中原人民，中原人痛恨他们，所以《经》的作者们作诗说 打击戎狄 ， 讨伐猃狁，到达大原 ， 出动军车，战马盛多 ， 在北方筑城 。
English: As a result, some people from the Yong Di lived in Lukhun, and some people from the Yong Di lived in the eastern part of the country. They violated and abused the Central Plains people, and the Central Plains people hated them. Therefore, the authors of the "Ching" wrote a poem saying, "Strike Yong Di," "Combat Yong Di," "Arrive at Taiyuan," "Deploy military vehicles," "There are many horses," and "Build a city in the north."

古文：周襄王既居外四年，乃使使告急于晋。
现代文：周襄王在外住了四年，于是派使者向晋国告急。
English: King Zhou Xiang had lived outside the country for four years, so he sent an envoy to Jin in a hurry.

古文：晋文公初立，欲修霸业，乃兴师伐逐戎翟，诛子带，迎内周襄王，居于雒邑。
现代文：当时晋文公刚刚即位执政，想要创建霸业，就发兵讨伐并驱逐了戎狄，杀了子带，迎回周襄王，居住在洛邑。
English: At that time, Prince Jinwen, who had just ascended to the throne, wanted to create a domineering industry, so he sent troops to fight and expel the Yongdi, killed his son, welcomed back King Zhou Xiang, and lived in Luoyang.

古文：当是之时，秦晋为彊国。
现代文：在那时候，秦、晋是强国。
English: At that time, Qin and Jin were powerful countries.

古文：晋文公攘戎翟，居于河西、洛之间，号曰赤翟、白翟。
现代文：晋文公赶跑的戎狄，戎狄居住在河西的圁水、洛水之间，称为赤狄、白狄。
English: Yong Di, who was chased away by Jinwen Gong, lived in the west of the river, between Surabaya and Luoshui, and was known as Red Di and White Di.

古文：秦穆公得由余，西戎八国服於秦，故自陇以西有绵诸、绲戎、翟、镕之戎，岐、梁山、泾、漆之北有义渠、大荔、乌氏、朐衍之戎。
现代文：秦穆公得到由余的帮助，使西戎八个国家都向秦国臣服，所以从陇地往西有緜诸、绲戎、狄、等戎族，歧山、梁山、泾水，漆水以北，有义渠、大荔、乌氏、朐衍等戎族。
English: Qin Mu Gong received help from Yu, so that the eight countries of West Rong all submitted to Qin. Therefore, there were Rong tribes such as Qizhu, Qirong, Di, and Qin in the west of Yunnan, and there were Rong tribes such as Qishan, Liangshan, Surabaya, and north of Lingshui, and there were Rong tribes such as Yi Qu, Dali, Wuji, and Qianyan.

古文：而晋北有林胡、楼烦之戎，燕北有东胡、山戎。
现代文：而晋国北部有林胡、楼烦等戎族，燕国北部有东胡和山戎。
English: In the north of Jin Province, there are Lin Hu, Lou Dui and other Rong ethnic groups, and in the north of Yan Province, there are Dong Hu and Shan Rong ethnic groups.

古文：各分散居谿谷，自有君长，往往而聚者百有馀戎，然莫能相一。
现代文：各自分散居住在溪谷里，都有自己的君长，常常相聚在一起的竟有百多个戎族部落，但都不能相互统一。
English: Each of them lives separately in the valley, each has its own ruler, and there are more than a hundred warrior tribes that often come together, but none of them can unite with each other.

古文：自是之後百有馀年，晋悼公使魏绛和戎翟，戎翟朝晋。
现代文：此后一百多年，晋悼公派魏绛与戎狄人讲和，戎狄都朝见晋国。
English: More than a hundred years later, the Jin dynasty sent Wei Wei to make peace with the Eun Di people, and the Eun Di people came to visit Jin.

古文：後百有馀年，赵襄子逾句注而破并代以临胡貉。
现代文：以后百多年，赵襄子越过句注山，击败并合并了代地，逼近胡人和貉人居住区。
English: More than a hundred years later, Zhao Xiangzi crossed the Juju Mountain, defeated and merged the sub-districts, and approached the residential areas of the Hu people and the Yao people.

古文：其後既与韩魏共灭智伯，分晋地而有之，则赵有代、句注之北，魏有河西、上郡，以与戎界边。
现代文：这以后，赵襄子与韩康子、魏桓子共同消灭了智伯，瓜分了晋国并占有了它的国土。这样，赵国就占有了代地与句注山以北的土地，魏国占有了河西和上郡，因此就和戎人接界。
English: After this, Zhao Xiangzi, together with Han Kangzi and Wei Huanzi, annihilated Zhibo, divided Jin and occupied its land. In this way, Zhao State occupied the land to the north of Dechi and Juju Mountain, and Wei State occupied Hexi and Shang County, so it was bordered by Eon people.

古文：其後义渠之戎筑城郭以自守，而秦稍蚕食，至於惠王，遂拔义渠二十五城。
现代文：这之后，义渠的戎人修建城郭守卫自己，而秦国逐渐蚕食他们，到了惠王时，就攻取了义渠的二十五城。
English: After that, the Yong people of Yiquan built castles to defend themselves, while the Qin State gradually encroached on them. By the time of King Hui, they had captured the twenty-five cities of Yiquan.

古文：惠王击魏，魏尽入西河及上郡于秦。
现代文：惠王攻打魏国，魏国把西河和上郡都给了秦国。
English: Hui Wang attacked Wei, and Wei gave the West River and Shang County to Qin.

古文：秦昭王时，义渠戎王与宣太后乱，有二子。
现代文：秦昭王时，义渠戎人之王与宣太后乱通，生下两个孩子。
English: During the reign of Qin Zhao, the king of the Yi Qu eunuchs had an affair with the Empress Dowager Xuan and gave birth to two children.

古文：宣太后诈而杀义渠戎王於甘泉，遂起兵伐残义渠。
现代文：宣太后在甘泉宫谋杀了义渠戎王，于是发兵讨伐并消灭了义渠。
English: Empress Dowager Xuan murdered King Yixuan Rong at Ganquan Palace, and then sent an army to fight and destroy Yixuan.

古文：於是秦有陇西、北地、上郡，筑长城以拒胡。
现代文：于是秦国占有了陇西、北地、上郡，修筑长城抵御匈奴。
English: As a result, the Qin state occupied Shaanxi, Hubei and Shang County, and built the Great Wall to resist the Xiongnu.

古文：而赵武灵王亦变俗胡服，习骑射，北破林胡、楼烦。
现代文：而赵武灵王也改变风俗，穿起胡服，练习骑马射箭的本领，打败了北方的林胡、楼烦。
English: However, King Zhao Wuling also changed the custom, put on Hu clothing, practiced the skill of riding and archery, and defeated Lin Hu and Lou Du in the north.

古文：筑长城，自代并阴山下，至高阙为塞。而置云中、雁门、代郡。
现代文：修筑长城，从代地沿着阴山修下去，直到高阙，建起关塞，设置云中郡、雁门、代郡。
English: Build the Great Wall, from the place of construction along the gloomy mountains, until Gaocheng, build checkpoints, and set up Yunchuagong County, Ganmen County, and Dai County.

古文：其後燕有贤将秦开，为质於胡，胡甚信之。归而袭破走东胡，东胡卻千馀里。
现代文：这以后燕国有位贤能的将领叫秦开，到胡人那里做人质，胡人特别信任他，他回国后袭击并打跑了东胡，东胡后退千余里。
English: After this, Qin Kai, a capable general from Yan Province, went to the Hu people as a hostage. The Hu people especially trusted him. After he returned to China, he attacked and ran away from the Eastern Hu, and the Eastern Hu retreated more than a thousand miles.

古文：与荆轲刺秦王秦舞阳者，开之孙也。
现代文：当年那位同荆轲一起去刺杀秦王的秦舞阳，就是秦开的孙子。
English: Qin Muyang, who went to assassinate the Qin king with Jing Ye that year, was the grandson of Qin Kai.

古文：燕亦筑长城，自造阳至襄平。置上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东郡以拒胡。
现代文：燕国也修筑长城，从造阳修到襄平；设置了上谷，渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东郡来抵御胡人。
English: Yan's country also built the Great Wall, from Zouyang to Xiangping, and set up the upper valley, Yuyang, Right Beiping, West Liaoning and East Liaoning counties to resist the Hu people.

古文：当是之时，冠带战国七，而三国边於匈奴。
现代文：这个时候，具有文明礼俗且又经常彼此攻伐的大国共有七个，而其中三个和匈奴临界。
English: At this time, there were seven great countries with civilized manners and customs that often fought against each other, and three of them bordered on the Hun.

古文：其後赵将李牧时，匈奴不敢入赵边。
现代文：后来李牧当赵国将军时，匈奴不敢进入赵国的边境。
English: Later, when Li Mu was the general of Zhao, the Xiongnu did not dare to enter the border of Zhao.

古文：後秦灭六国，而始皇帝使蒙恬将十万之众北击胡，悉收河南地。因河为塞，筑四十四县城临河，徙適戍以充之。
现代文：其后秦朝灭亡了六国，秦始皇便派蒙恬领十万大军向北攻打匈奴，把黄河以南的土地全都收复，凭借黄河为边塞，近黄河修起四十四座县城，迁徙因犯罪而被罚守边的人到这里，充实这些县城。
English: After that, the Qin Dynasty perished in the Six Kingdoms, and the First Emperor of Qin sent a hundred thousand troops led by Meng Xuan to attack the Huns in the north, recovering all the land south of the Yellow River, using the Yellow River as a border fortress, building forty-four county towns near the Yellow River, and relocating people who were punished for crimes and guarding the border to enrich these county towns.

古文：而通直道，自九原至云阳，因边山险巉谿谷可缮者治之，起临洮至辽东万馀里。
现代文：又修起直通大道，从九原直到云阳，利用山边、险要的沟堑、溪谷等可以修缮的地方筑起城池，起自临洮，终于辽东，长达万余里。
English: He also built a direct highway from Jiuhara to Yunyang, and used the mountainside, dangerous ravines, valleys and other places that could be repaired to build a city, from Linyi to Liaodong, more than 10,000 miles long.

古文：又度河据阳山北假中。
现代文：又渡过黄河，占据了阳山、北假一带。
English: They also crossed the Yellow River and occupied the areas of Yangshan and Beilun.

古文：当是之时，东胡彊而月氏盛。
现代文：这时，东胡强大而月氏兴盛。
English: At this time, Donghu was strong and the Yue clan flourished.

古文：匈奴单于曰头曼，头曼不胜秦，北徙。
现代文：匈奴的单于叫头曼，头曼打不过秦，就向北迁徙。
English: The Xiongnu only called for the headman, but the headman could not beat Qin, so they migrated to the north.

古文：十馀年而蒙恬死，诸侯畔秦，中国扰乱，诸秦所徙適戍边者皆复去，於是匈奴得宽，复稍度河南与中国界於故塞。
现代文：过了十多年，蒙恬死去，诸侯背叛了秦国，中原混乱，那些被秦谪守边疆的人也都离此而回。于是匈奴得到宽缓之机，又渐渐渡过黄河，在黄河以南与中原旧有的关塞接界。
English: After more than ten years, Mengye died, the princes betrayed Qin, the Central Plains were in chaos, and those who had been appointed by Qin to guard the frontier also left. So the Xiongnu were given a chance to relax, and gradually crossed the Yellow River, to the south of the Yellow River and the Central Plains.

古文：单于有太子名冒顿。
现代文：单于有位太子叫冒顿，后来单于所爱的瘀氏生了个小儿子。
English: There was only one crown prince named Kouton, and later only his beloved Kaji gave birth to a little son.

古文：後有所爱阏氏，生少子，而单于欲废冒顿而立少子，乃使冒顿质於月氏。冒顿既质於月氏，而头曼急击月氏。月氏欲杀冒顿，冒顿盗其善马，骑之亡归。
现代文：单于就想废除冒顿而立小儿子为太子，于是便派冒顿到月氏去当人质。冒顿即已来到月氏当了人质，而头曼却急攻月氏，月氏欲杀冒顿，冒顿偷了月氏的良马，骑着它逃回匈奴。
English: He just wanted to abolish the act of setting up his youngest son as crown prince, so he sent the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of setting up the act of

古文：头曼以为壮，令将万骑。
现代文：头曼认为他勇猛，就命令他统领一万骑兵。
English: The captain thought him brave and ordered him to lead ten thousand cavalry.

古文：冒顿乃作为鸣镝，习勒其骑射，令曰： 鸣镝所射而不悉射者，斩之。 
现代文：冒顿就制造了一种响箭，训练他的部下骑马射箭的本领，下令说： 凡是我的响箭所射的目标，如果谁不跟着我全力去射击它，就斩首。 
English: He immediately created a kind of sounding arrow, trained his men to shoot arrows on horseback, and ordered: "Whoever is the target of my sounding arrow, if he does not follow me to shoot it with all his might, he will be beheaded."

古文：行猎鸟兽，有不射鸣镝所射者，辄斩之。
现代文：首先射猎鸟兽，有人不射响箭所射的目标，冒顿就把他杀了。
English: First of all, they shoot birds and beasts. If someone does not shoot the target of the arrow, they kill him immediately.

古文：已而冒顿以鸣镝自射其善马，左右或不敢射者，冒顿立斩不射善马者。
现代文：不久，冒顿以响箭射击自己的良马，左右之人有不敢射击的，冒顿立即杀了他们。
English: Soon after, he shot his good horse with a loud arrow. If anyone on his right or left did not dare to shoot, he immediately killed them.

古文：居顷之，复以鸣镝自射其爱妻，左右或颇恐，不敢射，冒顿又复斩之。
现代文：过了些日子，冒顿又用响箭射击自己的心爱的妻子，左右之人有感到恐惧的，不敢射击，冒顿又把他们杀了。
English: A few days later, he suddenly shot his beloved wife with a rattlesnake, and those around him who were afraid and did not dare to shoot, he suddenly killed them again.

古文：居顷之，冒顿出猎，以鸣镝射单于善马，左右皆射之。
现代文：过些日子，冒顿出去打猎，用响箭射击单于的良马，左右之人都跟着射。
English: A few days later, he suddenly went out hunting, shooting a lone good horse with a ringing arrow, and everyone around him followed.

古文：於是冒顿知其左右皆可用。
现代文：于是冒顿知道他左右的人都是可以用的人。
English: So he suddenly knew that the people around him were useful people.

古文：从其父单于头曼猎，以鸣镝射头曼，其左右亦皆随鸣镝而射杀单于头曼，遂尽诛其後母与弟及大臣不听从者。
现代文：他跟随单于头曼去打猎，用响箭射击头曼的头，他左右的人也都跟随响箭射死了单于头曼，于是把他的后母及弟弟和不服从的大臣全部杀死。
English: He followed Shanyu Touman to go hunting, and shot Shanyu Touman in the head with a ringing arrow. The people around him also followed the ringing arrow and shot Shanyu Touman to death. He then killed his stepmother, his younger brother, and all the disobedient ministers.

古文：冒顿自立为单于。
现代文：冒顿自己立自己为单于。
English: Take the plunge and set yourself apart.

古文：冒顿既立，是时东胡彊盛，闻冒顿杀父自立，乃使使谓冒顿，欲得头曼时有千里马。
现代文：冒顿当了单于后，这时东胡强大兴盛，听说冒顿杀父自立，就派使者对冒顿说，想得到头曼时的千里马。
English: At that time, Donghu was very powerful and flourishing. When he heard that he had killed his father and become independent, he sent an envoy to say that he wanted to get the first prize.

古文：冒顿问群臣，群臣皆曰： 千里马，匈奴宝马也，勿与。 
现代文：冒顿问群臣，群臣都说： 千里马是匈奴的宝马，不要给。 
English: When I asked the ministers, they all said, "The Chollima is the Hun's BMW, don't give it to him."

古文：冒顿曰： 柰何与人邻国而爱一马乎？ 
现代文：冒顿说： 怎可同人家是邻国却吝惜一匹马呢？ 
English: He suddenly said, "How can we be neighbors with a man and yet begrudge a horse?"

古文：遂与之千里马。
现代文：于是就把千里马给了东胡。
English: So he gave the horse to Dong Hu.

古文：居顷之，东胡以为冒顿畏之，乃使使谓冒顿，欲得单于一阏氏。
现代文：过了一段时间，东胡以为冒顿怕他，就派使者对冒顿说，想要单于的一个阏氏。
English: After a while, Dong Hu thought that he was afraid of him, so he sent an envoy to say that he wanted to be alone with a Shih clan.

古文：冒顿复问左右，左右皆怒曰： 东胡无道，乃求阏氏！请击之。 
现代文：冒顿又询问左右之臣，左右大臣皆发怒说： 东胡没有道理，竟然想要阏氏，请出兵攻打他。 
English: He took the liberty of asking the ministers of the right and the left, and the ministers of the right and the left all said angrily, "Donghu has no reason to even want the Shun clan, please send troops to attack him."

古文：冒顿曰： 柰何与人邻国爱一女子乎？ 
现代文：冒顿说： 怎可同人家为领国却吝惜一个女人呢？ 
English: He suddenly said, "How can you be a ruler of a country and yet begrudge a woman?

古文：遂取所爱阏氏予东胡。
现代文：于是就把自己喜爱的阏氏送给了东胡。
English: As a result, he gave his favorite horse, Mr. Zou, to Dong Hu.

古文：东胡王愈益骄，西侵。
现代文：东胡王愈来愈骄傲，向西进犯侵扰。
English: Donghu Wang became more and more proud, and attacked and harassed the West.

古文：与匈奴间，中有弃地，莫居，千馀里，各居其边为瓯脱。
现代文：东胡与匈奴之间有一块空地，没人居住，这地方有一千多里，双方都在这空地的两边修起哨所。
English: Between the Eastern Hu and the Xiongnu there is an empty space, uninhabited, this place has more than a thousand miles, both sides are building posts on both sides of this open space.

古文：东胡使使谓冒顿曰： 匈奴所与我界瓯脱外弃地，匈奴非能至也，吾欲有之。 
现代文：东胡派使者对冒顿说： 匈奴同我们交界的哨所以外的空地，你们匈奴不能去，我们想占有它。 
English: The emissary of the Eastern Hu faction said to Morton: "You Huns can't go to the open space outside the border post where the Huns meet us. We want to occupy it."

古文：冒顿问群臣，群臣或曰： 此弃地，予之亦可，勿予亦可。 
现代文：冒顿征求群臣意见，群臣中有人说： 这是被丢弃的空地，给他们也可以，不给他们也可以。 
English: He ventured to solicit the opinions of the ministers, and one of the ministers said: This is an abandoned vacant lot, you can give it to them or not.

古文：於是冒顿大怒曰： 地者，国之本也，柰何予之！ 
现代文：于是冒顿大怒，说： 土地，是国家的根本，怎可给他们！ 
English: Then he flew into a rage and said: Land is the foundation of the country, how can we give it to them!

古文：诸言予之者，皆斩之。
现代文：那些说给东胡空地的人都被杀了。
English: Those who said to give Donghu open space were all killed.

古文：冒顿上马，令国中有後者斩，遂东袭击东胡。
现代文：冒顿上马，命令国内如有后退者就杀头，于是向东袭击东胡。
English: He suddenly mounted his horse and ordered to kill anyone who retreated in the country, so he attacked Donghu to the east.

古文：东胡初轻冒顿，不为备。
现代文：东胡最初轻视匈奴，因此没做防备。
English: At first, the Eastern Hu despised the Huns, so they did not take precautions.

古文：及冒顿以兵至，击，大破灭东胡王，而虏其民人及畜产。
现代文：等到冒顿领兵到来，一开战就大败东胡，消灭了东胡王，而且俘虏了东胡百姓和掠夺了牲畜财产。
English: After the arrival of the leader of the Donghu army, he defeated the Donghu as soon as the war started, eliminated the Donghu king, and captured the Donghu people and plundered the livestock property.

古文：既归，西击走月氏，南并楼烦、白羊河南王。
现代文：匈奴冒顿归来后，又打跑了西边的月氏，吞并了南边的楼烦和白羊河南王。
English: After the return of the Xiongnu, the Yue clan in the west was defeated and annexed the southern provinces of Loudui and Baiyang Henan Wang.

古文：悉复收秦所使蒙恬所夺匈奴地者，与汉关故河南塞，至朝、肤施，遂侵燕、代。
现代文：并完全收复了秦派蒙恬从匈奴人那里夺去的土地，与汉朝以原来的河南塞为界，直到朝和肤施两地，于是侵犯燕国和代地。
English: And it completely recovered the land that the Qin faction and the Mongols seized from the Xiongnu people, and the Han Dynasty used the original Henan Province as the boundary, until the two places of Hajj and Qiushi, thus infringing on Yan's country and substitute land.

古文：是时汉兵与项羽相距，中国罢於兵革，以故冒顿得自彊，控弦之士三十馀万。
现代文：这时汉军正与项羽的大兵相互抗争，中原地区被战争搞得疲惫不堪，所以冒顿才能独自强大，拥有能拉弓射箭的军队三十余万。
English: At this time, the Han army was fighting against the soldiers of Xiang Yu. The Central Plains region was exhausted by the war, so it could only be strong by itself, with more than 300,000 troops capable of drawing bows and shooting arrows.

古文：自淳维以至头曼千有馀岁，时大时小，别散分离，尚矣，其世传不可得而次云。
现代文：从淳维到头曼有一千多年，匈奴势力时大时小，经常离散分化，因为时间久远，所以他们的世系不能依次排列出来。
English: From Junwei to Touman, there are more than a thousand years. The Xiongnu forces are large and small, often dispersed and differentiated. Because of the long time, their lineages cannot be arranged in order.

古文：然至冒顿而匈奴最彊大，尽服从北夷，而南与中国为敌国，其世传国官号乃可得而记云。
现代文：但是到了冒顿当单于时，匈奴势力最强大，使北方夷人完全服从自己的统治，而与南方的中国成为敌国，此后，他们的世系，国家的官位名号才能被记录下来。
English: However, it was not until the Han Dynasty was at its most powerful that the northern barbarians were completely subjugated to their rule and became an enemy of China in the south, after which their lineage and the names of the country's officials were recorded.

古文：置左右贤王，左右谷蠡王，左右大将，左右大都尉，左右大当户，左右骨都侯。
现代文：匈奴设置了左、右贤王，左、右谷蠡王，左、右大将，左、右大都尉，左、右大当户，左、右骨都侯等官位。
English: The Xiongnu set up the official ranks of the left and right wise kings, the left and right valley kings, the left and right generals, the left and right grand captains, the left and right grand stewards, and the left and right crown princes.

古文：匈奴谓贤曰 屠耆 ，故常以太子为左屠耆王。
现代文：匈奴人把 贤 称为 屠耆 ，所以常常让太子做左屠耆王。
English: The Xiongnu people called Xian Ruo Tuo, so they often made the prince the king of Zuo Tuo.

古文：自如左右贤王以下至当户，大者万骑，小者数千，凡二十四长，立号曰 万骑 。
现代文：从左、右贤王以下直到当户，官职大的拥有万名骑兵，小的也有数千骑兵，共有二十四位长官，确定名号称 万骑 。
English: From the left and right of the wise king down to the head of the household, there were ten thousand cavalrymen in the higher ranks, and thousands of cavalrymen in the lower ranks. There were a total of twenty-four officers, and the name was determined to be Wanjie.

古文：诸大臣皆世官。
现代文：诸位大臣的官职是世袭的。
English: The offices of ministers are hereditary.

古文：呼衍氏，兰氏，其後有须卜氏，此三姓其贵种也。
现代文：呼衍氏、兰氏，后来又有须卜氏，这三姓是他们的贵族。
English: The Huyan clan, the Lan clan, and later the Subu clan, these three surnames are their aristocrats.

古文：诸左方王将居东方，直上谷以往者，东接秽貉、朝鲜；右方王将居西方，直上郡以西，接月氏、氐、羌；而单于之庭直代、云中：各有分地，逐水草移徙。
现代文：诸位左方的王和将居住在东方，直到上谷郡以东，东边与秽貉和朝鲜接界。右方的王和将居住在西方，直到上郡以西，和月氏、氏、羌接壤。而单于的王庭所在地一直延伸到代、云中两郡。他们各有自己的分地，追寻水草而迁徙住地。
English: The kings and queens on the left will live in the east as far as the east of Shanggu County, which is bordered on the east by Juche and North Korea. The kings and queens on the right will live in the west as far as the west of Shanggu County, bordered by the Yue clan, the Han clan, and the Yao clan. The kings and queens on the right will live in the west as far as the west of Shanggu County, bordered by the Yue clan, the Han clan, and the Yao clan. The kings and queens on the right will live in the west as far as the west of Shanggu County, bordered on the west by

古文：而左右贤王、左右谷蠡王最为大，左右骨都侯辅政。
现代文：左、右贤王和左、右谷蠡王是最大的，左、右骨都侯辅佐单于治国。
English: Zuo and Zuo Jian Wang and Zuo and Zuo Gu Yao Wang were the greatest, and Zuo and Zuo Jian Baotuo Fu Zi alone ruled the country.

古文：诸二十四长亦各自置千长、百长、什长、裨小王、相、封都尉、当户、且渠之属。
现代文：二十四长官也各自设置千长、百长、什长、裨小王、相、封都尉、当户、且渠等属官。
English: Each of the twenty-four prefects also had subordinate officials such as the chichinaga, hyakucho, shichinaga, bukoo, sosho, fudoyo, tohu, and kyo.

古文：岁正月，诸长小会单于庭，祠。
现代文：每年正月，各位官长在单于王庭有小的聚会，举行祭祀。
English: Every year in the first month of the year, all the officials have a small gathering in the royal court and hold a ritual.

古文：五月，大会茏城，祭其先、天地、鬼神。
现代文：五月，在茏城有大的聚会，祭祀祖先、天地神、鬼神。
English: In May, there was a large gathering in Lucheng to worship ancestors, gods of heaven and earth, and ghosts.

古文：秋，马肥，大会蹛林，课校人畜计。
现代文：秋天，马肥壮之时，在蹛林有大的集会，考核和计算人口和牲畜的数目。
English: In the autumn, when the horses are fat, there is a large gathering in Yulin to assess and count the number of people and livestock.

古文：其法，拔刃尺者死，坐盗者没入其家；有罪小者轧，大者死。
现代文：匈奴的法律规定，有意杀人并将刀剑拔出刀鞘一尺的就判死刑，犯盗窃罪的没收他的家产；犯罪轻者判压碎骨节的刑罚，重者处死。
English: According to the laws of the Xiongnu, a person who intentionally killed someone and pulled his sword out of its sheath by one foot was sentenced to death, a person who committed theft was sentenced to confiscation of his property, a person who committed a minor crime was sentenced to have his bones crushed, and a person who committed a serious crime was sentenced to death.

古文：狱久者不过十日，一国之囚不过数人。
现代文：坐牢最久者不过十天，一国的犯人不过几人而已。
English: The longest anyone has spent in prison is just ten days, and there are only a few prisoners in each country.

古文：而单于朝出营，拜日之始生，夕拜月。
现代文：单于在早晨走出营地，去拜初升的太阳，傍晚拜月亮。
English: Only in the morning to go out of the camp, to worship the rising sun, in the evening to worship the moon.

古文：其坐，长左而北乡。
现代文：就坐时，年长的在左边，而且要面朝北方。
English: When sitting, the eldest should be on the left and face north.

古文：日上戊己。
现代文：对于日期，他们崇尚戊日和己日。
English: As far as dates are concerned, they advocate the E-day and the I-day.

古文：其送死，有棺椁金银衣裘，而无封树丧服；近幸臣妾从死者，多至数千百人。
现代文：他们安葬死者，有棺椁、金银和衣裘，但却没有坟和树以及丧服。单于死后，他所亲近和宠幸的大臣妻妾跟随陪葬的，多至数十人或上百人。
English: They buried the dead, with coffins, gold and silver, and clothes, but without graves, trees, and mourning clothes. After his death alone, the wives and concubines of the ministers he was close to and favored accompanied the burial, up to dozens or hundreds of people.

古文：举事而候星月，月盛壮则攻战，月亏则退兵。
现代文：准备打仗时，要先观察星月，如果月亮圆满就去进攻，月亮亏缺就退兵。
English: When preparing for war, we should first observe the stars and the moon. If the moon is full, we should attack. If the moon is deficient, we should retreat.

古文：其攻战，斩首虏赐一卮酒，而所得卤获因以予之，得人以为奴婢。
现代文：匈奴人在攻伐征战时，谁杀死敌人或俘虏敌人，都要赏赐一壶酒，所缴获的战利品也分给他们，抓到的人也给予他们充做奴婢。
English: When the Huns were attacking and conquering, anyone who killed an enemy or captured an enemy was rewarded with a jug of wine, the captured booty was also distributed to them, and those who were captured were also given to them as slaves.

古文：故其战，人人自为趣利，善为诱兵以冒敌。
现代文：所以在打仗时，每个人都自动地去寻求自己的利益，善于埋伏军队以突然迎击敌人。
English: Therefore, in the war, everyone automatically seeks their own interests, and is good at ambushing the army to suddenly meet the enemy.

古文：故其见敌则逐利，如鸟之集；其困败，则瓦解云散矣。
现代文：所以他们见到敌兵就去追逐利益，如同鸟儿飞集一处。如果遇到危难失败，队伍就会瓦解，如同云雾消散。
English: Therefore, when they see the enemy soldiers, they will chase after profits, just like birds flying and gathering in one place. If they fail in the face of danger, the team will disintegrate, just like clouds dissipating.

古文：战而扶舆死者，尽得死者家财。
现代文：战争中谁能将战死的同伴尸体运回来，就可得到死者的全部家财。
English: In war, anyone who can bring back the body of a fallen comrade can get all of the dead person's family wealth.

古文：後北服浑庾、屈射、丁零、鬲昆、薪犁之国。
现代文：后来，冒顿又征服了北方的浑庚、屈射、丁零、鬲昆、薪犁诸国。
English: Later, he conquered the northern provinces of Hun Geng, Qu Sha, Ding Zi, Shikun and Jiuyuan.

古文：於是匈奴贵人大臣皆服，以冒顿单于为贤。
现代文：于是匈奴的贵族、大臣都心服冒顿，认为冒顿单于是贤能的。
English: As a result, the aristocrats and ministers of the Xiongnu all obeyed the emperor, believing that the emperor was virtuous.

古文：是时汉初定中国，徙韩王信於代，都马邑。
现代文：这时，汉朝刚刚平定了中国，把韩王信改派到代地，建都马邑城。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty had just pacified China, reassigned Han Wangxin to an alternate location, and built the capital, Ma'i City.

古文：匈奴大攻围马邑，韩王信降匈奴。
现代文：匈奴大规模进攻马邑，韩王信投降了匈奴。
English: The Xiongnu massively attacked Ma'eup, and Han Wangxin surrendered to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴得信，因引兵南逾句注，攻太原，至晋阳下。
现代文：匈奴得到了韩信，于是率兵向南越过了句注山，攻打太原，直到晋阳城下。
English: The Xiongnu obtained the Han letter, so they led their troops southward, crossed the Juchu Mountain, and attacked Taiyuan until they reached the city of Jinyang.

古文：高帝自将兵往击之。会冬大寒雨雪，卒之堕指者十二三，於是冒顿详败走，诱汉兵。
现代文：高帝亲自领兵前去迎击匈奴，正遇上冬天严寒下雪的天气，战士冻掉手指的有十分之二三，于是冒顿假装失败逃跑，引诱汉军。
English: Emperor Gao personally led the troops to go and fight the Xiongnu. They were encountering severe cold and snowy weather in winter, and two-thirds of the soldiers froze their fingers, so they pretended to be defeated and ran away, luring the Han army.

古文：汉兵逐击冒顿，冒顿匿其精兵，见其羸弱，於是汉悉兵，多步兵，三十二万，北逐之。
现代文：汉军追赶冒顿，冒顿把他的精锐军队隐藏起来，只出现了一些老弱残兵。于是汉朝出动全部军队，多半是步兵，共三十二万人，向北追击匈奴。
English: The Han army chased after the Xiongnu, but the Xiongnu hid his elite army, and only a few old and weak remnants appeared. Therefore, the Han dynasty dispatched the entire army, mostly infantry, a total of 320,000 people, to the north to chase the Xiongnu.

古文：高帝先至平城，步兵未尽到，冒顿纵精兵四十万骑围高帝於白登，七日，汉兵中外不得相救饷。
现代文：高帝首先到达平城，步兵还未全到，冒顿指挥他的四十万精锐骑兵，在白登山把高帝包围起来。七天之内，汉军内外不能相互救助军粮。
English: Gao Di arrived at Pingcheng first, but his infantry was not yet complete, so he took the risk of commanding his four hundred thousand elite cavalry and surrounded Gao Di at Mount Paektu. Within seven days, the Chinese army and the outside world could not rescue each other's military food.

古文：匈奴骑，其西方尽白马，东方尽青駹马，北方尽乌骊马，南方尽骍马。
现代文：匈奴的骑兵，在西方的全是白马，在东方的全是青马，在北方的全是黑马，在南方的全是赤色马。
English: The cavalry of the Xiongnu is all white horses in the west, all blue horses in the east, all black horses in the north, and all red horses in the south.

古文：高帝乃使使间厚遗阏氏，阏氏乃谓冒顿曰： 两主不相困。
现代文：高帝就派使者秘密地送给阏氏很多礼物，阏氏就对冒顿说： 两方的君王不能相互围困。
English: Emperor Gao then sent an emissary to secretly send many gifts to the Gong clan, and the Gong clan said to the emperor: The kings of the two sides cannot besiege each other.

古文：今得汉地，而单于终非能居之也。
现代文：如果得到汉朝的土地，单于终究是不能在那里居住的。
English: If you get Han Dynasty land, you just can't live there after all.

古文：且汉王亦有神，单于察之。 
现代文：而且汉王也有神的帮助，希望单于认真考虑这件事。 
English: Moreover, Han Wang also has God's help, and hopes that he will only seriously consider this matter.

古文：冒顿与韩王信之将王黄、赵利期，而黄、利兵又不来，疑其与汉有谋，亦取阏氏之言，乃解围之一角。
现代文：冒顿与韩王信的将军王黄和赵利约定了会师的日期，但王黄与赵利的军队没按时到来，冒顿疑心他们同汉军有预谋，就采纳了阏氏的建议，解除了包围圈的一角。
English: At first, Wang Huang and Zhao Li, the generals of Han Wangxin, agreed on the date of the meeting of the division, but the army of Wang Huang and Zhao Li did not arrive on time. At first, they suspected that they had premeditated with the Chinese army, so they adopted the suggestion of Mr. Zou and lifted a corner of the encirclement.

古文：於是高帝令士皆持满傅矢外乡，从解角直出，竟与大军合，而冒顿遂引兵而去。汉亦引兵而罢，使刘敬结和亲之约。
现代文：于是高帝命令战士都拉满弓，箭上弦，面朝外，从冒顿解围的那个通道一直冲出来，最后同汉朝大军相会合。冒顿于是领兵而去，而高帝也率兵归来，派刘敬到匈奴缔结和亲的盟约。
English: So Gao Di ordered the soldiers to draw their bows, string their arrows, and face outwards, rushing all the way out of the channel where the siege was lifted, and finally meeting with the Han Dynasty army. So, he led the soldiers away, and Gao Di also led the soldiers back, and sent Liu Jing to the Huns to conclude a covenant of friendship.

古文：是後韩王信为匈奴将，及赵利、王黄等数倍约，侵盗代、云中。
现代文：此后，韩王信当上匈奴的将军，他同赵利和王黄屡次违背汉与匈奴所订的盟约，侵扰掠夺代郡和云中郡。
English: After that, Han Wangxin became a general of the Xiongnu. He, Zhao Li and Wang Huang repeatedly violated the treaty between the Han and the Xiongnu, and invaded and plundered Dai County and Yunnan County.

古文：居无几何，陈豨反，又与韩信合谋击代。
现代文：过了不久的时间，汉朝将军陈豨谋反，又合韩信合谋进攻代地。
English: After a short period of time, the Han Dynasty general Chen Qi plotted a rebellion and conspired with Han Xin to attack the place.

古文：汉使樊哙往击之，复拔代、雁门、云中郡县，不出塞。
现代文：汉朝派遣樊哙前去阻击他们，重新攻占了代郡、雁门和云中等郡县，但却没有越过边塞。
English: The Han Dynasty sent troops to block them and recaptured Dai County, Yanmen County and Yunzhong County, but they did not cross the border.

古文：是时匈奴以汉将众往降，故冒顿常往来侵盗代地。
现代文：这时，匈奴因为一些汉朝的将军前来投降，所以冒顿常常往来于代地，进行侵扰劫夺活动。
English: At this time, because some Han Dynasty generals came to surrender, the Xiongnu often traveled to and from the place, carrying out intrusion and robbery activities.

古文：於是汉患之，高帝乃使刘敬奉宗室女公主为单于阏氏，岁奉匈奴絮缯酒米食物各有数，约为昆弟以和亲，冒顿乃少止。
现代文：于是汉朝对此感到忧虑，高帝就派刘敬送汉朝皇族的公主去给单于当阏氏，每年奉送给匈奴一定数量的棉絮、缯、酒、米和食物，相互结为兄弟，实行和亲政策，冒顿才稍为停止侵扰活动。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty was worried about this, and Emperor Gao sent Liu Jing to send the princess of the Han Dynasty royal family to the Shan-Yu Dangyu clan, and sent a certain amount of cotton wool, straw, wine, rice and food to the Xiongnu every year, to form a brotherhood with each other, to implement the policy of amity, and to stop the intrusion activities.

古文：後燕王卢绾反，率其党数千人降匈奴，往来苦上谷以东。
现代文：后来，燕王卢绾造反，率领他的党徒数千人投降了匈奴，往来于上谷以东，给当地人造成苦难。
English: Later, the Yan king Lu Xun rebelled and led thousands of his followers to surrender to the Xiongnu, traveling to and from the east of Shanggu, causing suffering to the local people.

古文：高祖崩，孝惠、吕太后时，汉初定，故匈奴以骄。
现代文：高祖死去，孝惠帝、吕太后时期，汉王朝刚刚安定，所以匈奴显得骄傲。
English: Gaozu died, and during the reigns of Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Dowager Lv, the Han Dynasty had just stabilized, so the Xiongnu appeared proud.

古文：冒顿乃为书遗高后，妄言。
现代文：冒顿就写信给吕太后，胡说一番。
English: He wrote a letter to Empress Dowager Lv at the drop of a hat, talking nonsense.

古文：高后欲击之，诸将曰： 以高帝贤武，然尚困於平城。 
现代文：吕太后想攻打他，诸位将军说： 凭着高帝的贤明和武功，尚且在平城被围困。 
English: When Empress Dowager Lyu wanted to attack him, the generals said, "Thanks to Emperor Gao's wisdom and military prowess, we were besieged in Pingcheng.

古文：於是高后乃止，复与匈奴和亲。
现代文：于是吕太后才放弃进攻的主张，又和匈奴和亲。
English: As a result, Empress Dowager Lyu gave up the offensive and made peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：至孝文帝初立，复修和亲之事。
现代文：到孝文帝刚刚继位时，又推行和亲之事。
English: By the time Emperor Xiaowen had just ascended the throne, he was promoting the idea of reconciliation.

古文：其三年五月，匈奴右贤王入居河南地，侵盗上郡葆塞蛮夷，杀略人民。
现代文：孝文帝三年的五月，匈奴右贤王进入河南地居住，侵扰掠夺在边塞小城的蛮夷，屠杀抢掠人民。
English: In May of the third year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, the Xiongnu Uxian Wang entered and settled in Henan Province, harassed and plundered the barbarians in the border fortress town, and slaughtered and plundered the people.

古文：於是孝文帝诏丞相灌婴发车骑八万五千，诣高奴，击右贤王。
现代文：于是孝文帝下令让丞相灌婴出动八万五千战车和骑兵，前往高奴，攻打右贤王。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen ordered to dispatch 85,000 chariots and cavalry to Gao Nong to attack King Uxian.

古文：右贤王走出塞。
现代文：右贤王逃跑到塞外。
English: King Ugyen fled to the other side of the country.

古文：文帝幸太原。是时济北王反，文帝归，罢丞相击胡之兵。
现代文：汉文帝亲到太原，这时济北王刘兴居造反，文帝就回到京城，解散了丞相派去打匈奴的军队。
English: Emperor Wen of Han went to Taiyuan. At that time, Liu Xingju, the king of Northern Qi, rebelled. Emperor Wen returned to Beijing and disbanded the army that the prime minister had sent to fight the Xiongnu.

古文：其明年，单于遗汉书曰： 天所立匈奴大单于敬问皇帝无恙。前时皇帝言和亲事，称书意，合欢。
现代文：第二年，匈奴单于送给汉朝一封信说： 上天所立的匈奴大单于恭敬地问侯皇帝平安，前些时候，皇帝说过和亲的事，和来信说的意思相合，双方都高兴。
English: The following year, Xiong Niu sent a letter to the Han Dynasty, saying: "The Xiong Niu, established by Heaven, respectfully asks for the Emperor's peace. Some time ago, the Emperor said something about friendship, which is consistent with the meaning of the letter, and both sides are happy.

古文：汉边吏侵侮右贤王，右贤王不请，听後义卢侯难氏等计，与汉吏相距，绝二主之约，离兄弟之亲。
现代文：汉朝边境的官吏侵扰和侮辱右贤王，右贤王没有请示单于，却听信了后义卢侯难氏等人的计谋，同汉朝官吏相抗拒，断绝了匈奴与汉朝皇帝缔结的条约，离间了汉与匈奴的兄弟般的亲密关系。
English: Officials at the Han Dynasty border harassed and insulted King Ugyen. King Ugyen did not ask for any instructions, but he listened to the schemes of Houyi Lu Hunan and others, resisted the officials of the Han Dynasty, broke the treaty concluded between the Huns and the Emperor of the Han Dynasty, and severed the brotherly and intimate relationship between the Han and the Huns.

古文：皇帝让书再至，发使以书报，不来，汉使不至，汉以其故不和，邻国不附。
现代文：皇帝责备匈奴的书信第二次送来，我们派出使者送信报告情况，结果使者被汉朝扣留未归，而汉朝的使者也不到匈奴来，汉朝因为这个原因不同我们和解，我们邻国也不能归附。
English: The Emperor's letter reproaching the Huns was sent a second time, and we sent an envoy to report the situation. As a result, the envoy was detained by the Han Dynasty and did not return, and the Han Dynasty's envoy did not come to the Huns. For this reason, the Han Dynasty did not reconcile with us, and our neighboring countries could not be annexed.

古文：今以小吏之败约故，罚右贤王，使之西求月氏击之。
现代文：如今因为小官吏破坏了和约的缘故，我惩罚右贤王，派他到西边去寻找月氏打击他们。
English: Now, because the minor officials have broken the peace treaty, I have punished King Uhyeong and sent him to the west to look for the Yue clan and fight them.

古文：以天之福，吏卒良，马彊力，以夷灭月氏，尽斩杀降下之。
现代文：依上天的福佑，官吏和士卒皆很精良，战马强壮有力，因此已平灭了月氏，把反抗不服的全部杀死，并降服了一般百姓。
English: According to God's blessing, the officials and soldiers are all very good, and the horses are strong and powerful, so they have eliminated the Yue clan, killed all the rebels, and subdued the common people.

古文：定楼兰、乌孙、呼揭及其旁二十六国，皆以为匈奴。
现代文：平定了楼兰、乌孙、呼揭和他们旁边的二十六个国家，都变成匈奴的臣民。
English: They conquered Loulan, Usun, Hujie and the 26 countries around them, and all of them became subjects of the Xiongnu.

古文：诸引弓之民，并为一家。
现代文：那些善于弯弓射箭的人们，合并成一家。
English: Those who are good at bows and arrows have merged into one family.

古文：北州已定，原寝兵休士卒养马，除前事，复故约，以安边民，以应始古，使少者得成其长，老者安其处，世世平乐。
现代文：北方已经安定，我们愿意停战，修养兵士，喂养马匹，消除从前令人不快的事情，恢复旧有的条约，以使边疆百姓得到安宁，顺应匈奴与汉人从古以来的好关系，使少年人能够成长起来，老年人能够平安地生活，世世代代和平安乐。
English: The north has been stabilized. We are willing to stop the war, train the soldiers, feed the horses, eliminate the unpleasant things in the past, and restore the old treaties, so that the people in the border areas can have peace, conform to the good relationship between the Huns and the Han people since ancient times, so that the young people can grow up, the elderly can live in peace, and the generations can live in peace and happiness.

古文：未得皇帝之志也，故使郎中系雩浅奉书请，献橐他一匹，骑马二匹，驾二驷。
现代文：我们尚不知皇帝的心意，所以派郎中系雩浅呈送书信请示皇上，并献上骆驼一匹，战马二匹，驾车之马八匹。
English: We still don't know the emperor's intentions, so we sent a letter to the emperor to ask for advice, and presented a camel, two war horses, and eight driving horses.

古文：皇帝即不欲匈奴近塞，则且诏吏民远舍。
现代文：皇帝如果不希望匈奴近汉朝的边塞，那么我就诏告官吏百姓居住到远离汉朝边塞的地方。
English: If the emperor does not want the Xiongnu to be close to the Han Dynasty's border fortress, then I will order the officials and people to live far away from the Han Dynasty's border fortress.

古文：使者至，即遣之。 
现代文：使者到达后，请即刻让他回来。 
English: When the messenger arrives, please send him back immediately.

古文：以六月中来至薪望之地。
现代文：在六月中旬，匈奴使者来到薪望这地方。
English: In mid-June, Hun emissaries came to inspect the site.

古文：书至，汉议击与和亲孰便。
现代文：书信送到后，汉朝就商议攻打和和亲两种政策那种更有利。
English: After the letter was delivered, the Han Dynasty discussed which of the two policies of attack and reconciliation was more advantageous.

古文：公卿皆曰： 单于新破月氏，乘胜，不可击。且得匈奴地，泽卤，非可居也。
现代文：公卿们都说： 单于刚打败月氏，正处在胜利的有利时机，不能攻打他，况且得到匈奴的土地，都是低洼盐碱地，不能居住。
English: The nobles all said, "Since we have just defeated the Yue clan, we are in a favorable time for victory, and we cannot attack him. Moreover, the land we obtained from the Xiongnu is all low-lying saline soil, and it is uninhabitable.

古文：和亲甚便。 
现代文：还是和亲特别有利。 
English: Still, it is especially advantageous to be friends with relatives.

古文：汉许之。
现代文：汉朝答应了匈奴的请求。
English: The Han Dynasty agreed to the request of the Xiongnu.

古文：孝文皇帝前六年，汉遗匈奴书曰： 皇帝敬问匈奴大单于无恙。使郎中系雩浅遗朕书曰： 右贤王不请，听後义卢侯难氏等计，绝二主之约，离兄弟之亲，汉以故不和，邻国不附。
现代文：孝文皇帝前元六年，汉朝送给匈奴的信中说： 皇帝敬问匈奴大单于平安，郎中系雩浅送给我的信中说： 右贤王没请示单于，听信了后义卢侯难氏等的计谋，断绝了匈奴和汉朝国君的和约，离间了兄弟般的亲密关系，汉朝因此不肯与我们和解，邻国也不能为附。
English: Emperor Xiaowen's letter to the Xiongnu in 6 B.C. said: The emperor respectfully asked the Xiongnu to make peace with him, and the letter sent to me by his son-in-law, Xuan Asan, said: King Ugyen did not ask for peace with him, but he listened to the stratagems of Houyi Rouhunan and others, broke the peace treaty between the Xiongnu and the sovereign of the Han Dynasty, and severed the brotherly intimate relationship. Therefore, the Han Dynasty did not want to reconcile with us, and the neighboring countries could not agree.

古文：今以小吏败约，故罚右贤王使西击月氏，尽定之。
现代文：如今因为小官吏破坏了和约，所以罚右贤王让他到西边去攻打月氏，完全平定了他们。
English: Now, because the petty officials broke the peace treaty, King Fuxu Xian let him go to the west to attack the Yue clan and completely pacified them.

古文：原寝兵休士卒养马，除前事，复故约，以安边民，使少者得成其长，老者安其处，世世平乐。 
现代文：愿意停战，修养士卒，喂养马匹，消除从前令人不快的事情，恢复旧有的和约，以使边民得到安宁，使少年人能够成长起来，老年人能够安定地生活，世世代代和平安乐。 
English: They are willing to stop the war, cultivate the soldiers, feed the horses, eliminate the unpleasant things in the past, and restore the old peace treaty, so that the border people can get peace, the young people can grow up, and the elderly can live stably, and the generations can enjoy peace and tranquility.

古文：朕甚嘉之，此古圣主之意也。
现代文：我很赞赏这一想法，这是古代圣明君主的心意啊。
English: I very much appreciate this idea, which is the intention of the ancient Ming monarchs.

古文：汉与匈奴约为兄弟，所以遗单于甚厚。
现代文：汉朝和匈奴缔结和约，结为兄弟，拿来送给匈奴的东西非常丰厚。
English: The Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu concluded a peace treaty and became brothers. The gifts they brought to the Xiongnu were very rich.

古文：倍约离兄弟之亲者，常在匈奴。
现代文：违背和约、离间兄弟般的亲密关系的却常常是匈奴。
English: It is often the Xiongnu who break the peace treaty and estrange the fraternal intimacy.

古文：然右贤王事已在赦前，单于勿深诛。
现代文：但是右贤王的事已经出现在大赦之前，单于不要深责此事。
English: However, the Ugyenwang incident occurred before the amnesty, so don't blame yourself too much.

古文：单于若称书意，明告诸吏，使无负约，有信，敬如单于书。
现代文：单于的行动如果能同来信中所表示的相符合，明确告知各位官吏，让他们不要违背和约，要守信用，我将谨慎地按照单于信中的请求对待此事。
English: If I can act in a way that is consistent with what is expressed in your letter, and clearly inform your officials, so that they do not violate the peace treaty and keep the trust, I will carefully follow the request in your letter.

古文：使者言单于自将伐国有功，甚苦兵事。
现代文：使者说单于亲自率军讨伐别的国家而有功劳，却甚为战争而苦恼。
English: The envoy said that although he personally led the crusade against other countries, he was very distressed by the war.

古文：服绣袷绮衣、绣袷长襦、锦袷袍各一，比余一，黄金饰具带一，黄金胥纰一，绣十匹，锦三十匹，赤綈、绿缯各四十匹，使中大夫意、谒者令肩遗单于。 
现代文：现在有皇帝穿戴的绣袷绮衣、绣袷长襦、锦袷袍各一件，比余一个，黄金装饰的衣带一件，黄金带钩一件，绣花绸十匹，锦缎三十匹，赤绨和绿缯各四十匹，派中大夫意、谒者令肩赠送单于。 
English: Now there are one embroidered satin dress, one embroidered satin long gown and one brocade gown worn by the emperor, one more than the rest, one gold-decorated sash, one gold belt hook, ten embroidered silk, thirty brocade, forty red satin and forty green satin.

古文：後顷之，冒顿死，子稽粥立，号曰老上单于。
现代文：这以后不久，冒顿死去，他儿子稽粥当了君王，叫做老上单于。
English: Soon after this, he suddenly died, and his son, Gyeonggyu, became king, and was called Lao Jangdan Yu.

古文：老上稽粥单于初立，孝文皇帝复遣宗室女公主为单于阏氏，使宦者燕人中行说傅公主。
现代文：老上稽粥单于刚刚继位，孝文皇帝又派遣皇族女公主去做单于的阏氏，让宦官燕国人中行说去当公主的辅佐者。
English: Emperor Xiaowen had just succeeded to the throne, and sent the princess of the imperial family to be the assistant of the princess. The eunuch, Yan Guozhong, was told to be the assistant.

古文：说不欲行，汉彊使之。
现代文：中行说不愿去，汉朝强迫他。
English: Zhonggang said he did not want to go, but the Han Dynasty forced him to go.

古文：说曰： 必我行也，为汉患者。 
现代文：他说： 一定让我去，我将成为汉朝的祸患。 
English: He said: "Let me go, I will be the scourge of the Han Dynasty."

古文：中行说既至，因降单于，单于甚亲幸之。
现代文：中行说到达后，就投降了单于，单于特别宠信他。
English: Zhong Xing said that after he arrived, he surrendered to Duan Yu, Duan Yu especially trusted him.

古文：初，匈奴好汉缯絮食物，中行说曰： 匈奴人众不能当汉之一郡，然所以彊者，以衣食异，无仰於汉也。
现代文：最初，匈奴喜欢汉朝的缯絮和食物，中行说说： 匈奴的人口总数，抵不上汉朝的一个郡，然而所以强大的原因，就在于衣食与汉人不同，不必依赖汉朝。
English: At first, the Xiongnu liked the Han Dynasty's filth and food, Zhong Xing said: The total population of the Xiongnu is less than that of a county in the Han Dynasty, but the reason why they are so powerful is that their food and clothing are different from the Han people, and they do not have to rely on the Han Dynasty.

古文：今单于变俗好汉物，汉物不过什二，则匈奴尽归於汉矣。
现代文：如今单于若改变原有风俗而喜欢汉朝的衣物食品，汉朝给的东西不超过其总数的十分之二，那么匈奴就会完全归属于汉朝了。
English: Today, if we just change the original customs and like the clothing and food of the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty will give no more than two-tenths of its total, then the Xiongnu will fully belong to the Han Dynasty.

古文：其得汉缯絮，以驰草棘中，衣袴皆裂敝，以示不如旃裘之完善也。
现代文：希望把从汉朝得到的缯絮做成衣裤，穿上它在杂草棘丛中骑马奔驰，让衣裤破裂损坏，以此显示汉朝的缯絮不如匈奴的旃衣皮袄坚固完美。
English: It is hoped that the tassels obtained from the Han Dynasty will be made into trousers, worn on horseback in the thorns of weeds, and the trousers will be broken and damaged, thus showing that the tassels of the Han Dynasty are not as strong and perfect as the tassels of the Xiongnu.

古文：得汉食物皆去之，以示不如湩酪之便美也。 
现代文：把从汉朝得来的食物都丢掉，以此显示它们不如匈奴的乳汁和乳汁品方便味美。 
English: Throw away all the food from the Han Dynasty to show that they are not as convenient and delicious as the Hun's milk and milk products.

古文：於是说教单于左右疏记，以计课其人众畜物。
现代文：于是中行说教单于身边的人们分条记事的方法，以便核算记录他们的人口和牲畜的数目。
English: So the midwives taught the people around them how to keep records, so they could count and record the number of their people and livestock.

古文：汉遗单于书，牍以尺一寸，辞曰 皇帝敬问匈奴大单于无恙 ，所遗物及言语云云。
现代文：汉朝送给单于的书信，写在一尺一寸的木札上，开头文词是 皇帝恭敬地问候匈奴大单于平安 ，及写上所送的东西和要说的话。
English: The Han Dynasty sent a letter to Shan Yu, written on a one-foot-one-inch wooden board, with the opening words: "The Emperor respectfully sends greetings to the Xiongnu, Great Shan Yu, and writes down what he sent and what he has to say."

古文：中行说令单于遗汉书以尺二寸牍，及印封皆令广大长，倨傲其辞曰 天地所生日月所置匈奴大单于敬问汉皇帝无恙 ，所以遗物言语亦云云。
现代文：中行说就让单于用一尺二寸的木札写信送给汉朝皇帝，并且把印章和封泥的尺寸都加长加宽加大，把开头语说得很傲慢： 天地所生、日月所安置的匈奴大单于恭敬地问候汉朝皇帝平安。 再写上所送东西和要说的话语。
English: According to Zhong Xing, he had Shan Yu write a letter to the Han Dynasty Emperor on a one-foot-two-inch wooden card, and he made the size of the seal and the sealing mud longer and wider and larger, and said the opening words very arrogantly: "The Xiongnu, born of heaven and earth, placed by the sun and moon, respectfully sends greetings of peace to the Han Dynasty Emperor," and then wrote down the things sent and the words to be said.

古文：汉使或言曰： 匈奴俗贱老。 
现代文：汉朝使者中有人说： 匈奴风俗轻视老年人。 
English: One of the emissaries of the Han Dynasty said: "The Huns despise the elderly.

古文：中行说穷汉使曰： 而汉俗屯戍从军当发者，其老亲岂有不自脱温厚肥美以赍送饮食行戍乎？ 汉使曰： 然。 
现代文：中行说诘难汉朝使者说： 你们汉朝风俗，凡有当兵被派去戍守疆土将要出发的，他们的老年父母难道有不省下来暖和的衣物和肥美食品，把它们送给出行者吃穿的吗？ 汉朝使者说： 是这样。 
English: The emissary of the Han Dynasty said, "It is the custom of the Han Dynasty. If there are soldiers who are sent to defend the territory and are about to set out, do their elderly parents have warm clothes and rich foods that they can spare and give them to the practitioners to eat and wear?" The emissary of the Han Dynasty said, "That's right."

古文：中行说曰： 匈奴明以战攻为事，其老弱不能斗，故以其肥美饮食壮健者，盖以自为守卫，如此父子各得久相保，何以言匈奴轻老也？ 
现代文：中行说说： 匈奴人都明确战争是重要的事，那些年老体弱的人不能打仗，所以把那些肥美的食品给壮健的人吃喝，大概这是为了保卫自己，这样，父亲儿子才能长久地相互保护，怎么可以说匈奴人轻视老年人呢？ 
English: Zhong Xing said, "The Huns are all clear that war is an important matter. Those who are old and weak cannot fight, so they give those fat foods to strong people to eat and drink. This is probably to defend themselves, so that fathers and sons can protect each other for a long time. How can it be said that the Huns despise the elderly?

古文：汉使曰： 匈奴父子乃同穹庐而卧。
现代文：汉朝使者说： 匈奴人父子竟然同在一个毡房睡觉。
English: The Han Dynasty envoy said, "A Hun father and son are sleeping together in the same room.

古文：父死，妻其後母；兄弟死，尽取其妻妻之。
现代文：父亲死后，儿子竟以后母做妻子。兄弟死后，活着的兄弟把死者的妻子都娶做自己的妻子。
English: After his father's death, the son took his mother as his wife. After his brother's death, the living brother took the dead man's wife as his own.

古文：无冠带之饰，阙庭之礼。 
现代文：没有帽子和衣带等服饰，缺少朝廷礼节。 
English: There were no hats, belts or other clothing, and there was a lack of courtly etiquette.

古文：中行说曰： 匈奴之俗，人食畜肉，饮其汁，衣其皮；畜食草饮水，随时转移。
现代文：中行说说： 匈奴的风俗，人人吃牲畜的肉，喝它们的乳汁，用它们的皮做衣服穿；牲畜吃草喝水，随着时序的推移而转换地点。
English: Zhong Xing said: "The custom of the Xiongnu is that everyone eats the meat of livestock, drinks their milk, and uses their skins to make clothes; livestock eat grass and drink water, and change places with the passage of time.

古文：故其急则人习骑射，宽则人乐无事，其约束轻，易行也。
现代文：所以他们在急迫之时，就人人练习骑马射箭的本领，在时势宽松的时候，人们都欢乐无事，他们受到的约束很少，容易做到。
English: Therefore, when they are in a hurry, everyone practices the ability to ride a horse and shoot arrows. When the situation is relaxed, people are happy, they are subject to few constraints, and it is easy to do.

古文：君臣简易，一国之政犹一身也。父子兄弟死，取其妻妻之，恶种姓之失也。
现代文：君臣关系简单，一个国家的政治事务，就像一个人的身体一样，父子和兄弟死了，活着的娶他们的妻子做自己的妻子，这是惧怕种族的消失。
English: The relations of princes and ministers are simple, the political affairs of a country are like a man's body, fathers and sons and brothers die, the living take their wives to be their own wives, this is the fear of the disappearance of the race.

古文：故匈奴虽乱，必立宗种。
现代文：所以匈奴虽然伦常混乱，但却一定要立本族的子孙。
English: Therefore, although the Xiongnu are often confused, they must establish the descendants of their own tribe.

古文：今中国虽详不取其父兄之妻，亲属益疏则相杀，至乃易姓，皆从此类。
现代文：如今中国人虽然佯装正派，不娶他的父兄的妻子做老婆，可是亲属关系却越来越疏远，而且相互残杀，甚至竟改朝易姓，都是由于这类缘故造成的。
English: Today, although the Chinese pretend to be decent and do not marry the wife of his father and brother as a wife, but the kinship is becoming more and more distant, and they kill each other, and even change their surnames, are caused by such reasons.

古文：且礼义之敝，上下交怨望，而室屋之极，生力必屈。
现代文：况且礼义的弊端，使君王臣民之间产生怨恨，而且极力修造宫室房屋，必然使民力耗尽。
English: Moreover, the drawbacks of etiquette and righteousness caused resentment between monarchs and their subjects, and they tried their best to build palatial houses, which inevitably exhausted the people's strength.

古文：夫力耕桑以求衣食，筑城郭以自备，故其民急则不习战功，缓则罢於作业。
现代文：努力耕田种桑而求得衣食满足，修筑城郭以保卫自己，所以百姓在急迫时不去练习攻战本领，在宽松时却又被劳作搞得很疲惫。唉！
English: People work hard to get enough food and clothing by cultivating fields and planting mulberries, and build fortresses to defend themselves, so when they are in a hurry, they don't practice their fighting skills, but when they are relaxed, they are exhausted by hard work. Alas!

古文：嗟土室之人，顾无多辞，令喋喋而佔々，冠固何当？ 
现代文：生活在土石房屋里的汉人啊，姑且不要多说话，喋喋不休，切切私语，戴上帽子，难道还有什么了不起吗？ 
English: Chinese people living in mud and stone houses, even if you don't talk much, chatter incessantly, whisper, wear a hat, is there anything remarkable?

古文：自是之後，汉使欲辩论者，中行说辄曰： 汉使无多言，顾汉所输匈奴缯絮米糵，令其量中，必善美而己矣，何以为言乎？
现代文：自此之后，汉朝使者有想辩论的，中行说就说： 汉朝使者不要多说话，只想着汉朝输送给匈奴的缯絮米蘖，一定要使其数量足，质量好就行了，何必要说话呢！
English: From then on, if the Han Dynasty emissaries wanted to argue, Zhong Xing would say: Han Dynasty emissaries, don't talk too much, just think about the glutinous rice that the Han Dynasty sent to the Xiongnu, be sure to make it sufficient in quantity and good in quality, why do you need to talk!

古文：且所给备善则已；不备，苦恶，则候秋孰，以骑驰蹂而稼穑耳。 
现代文：而且供给匈奴的东西一定要齐全美好，如果不齐全，粗劣，那么等到庄稼成熟时，匈奴就要骑着马奔驰践踏你们成熟待收的庄稼。 
English: Moreover, what is supplied to the Xiongnu must be complete and good. If it is incomplete and inferior, then when the crops are ripe, the Xiongnu will ride a horse-drawn carriage to trample your ripe crops.

古文：日夜教单于候利害处。
现代文：中行说日夜教导单于等待有利的进攻时机和地点。
English: Zhong Xing said that the day and night teaching is just to wait for a favorable time and place to attack.

古文：汉孝文皇帝十四年，匈奴单于十四万骑入朝、萧关，杀北地都尉卬，虏人民畜产甚多，遂至彭阳。使奇兵入烧回中宫，候骑至雍甘泉。
现代文：汉文帝十四年，匈奴单于率领十四万骑兵攻入朝、萧关，杀死了北地都尉孙卬，劫掠很多百姓和牲畜，就到达彭阳，并派突击队攻入回中宫，把它烧毁。
English: In the 14th year of Emperor Hanwen, the Huns led 140,000 cavalry into the provinces of Zhaohui and Shouguan, killed the northern captain Sun Yat-sen, plundered many people and livestock, arrived in Pengyang, and sent a commando to break into the Inner Palace and burn it down.

古文：於是文帝以中尉周舍、郎中令张武为将军，发车千乘，骑十万，军长安旁以备胡寇。
现代文：匈奴侦察骑兵到达雍地的甘泉宫。于是汉文帝用中尉周舍、郎中令张武做将军，派出千辆兵车，十万骑兵，驻守在长安旁边防御匈奴的侵扰。
English: The Hun reconnaissance cavalry reached Ganquan Palace in the highlands. Therefore, Emperor Hanwen made Lieutenant Zhou She and Vice Admiral Zhang Wu generals and sent a thousand chariots and 100,000 cavalrymen to defend against the Hun intrusion next to Chang'an.

古文：而拜昌侯卢卿为上郡将军，甯侯魏为北地将军，隆虑侯周灶为陇西将军，东阳侯张相如为大将军，成侯董赤为前将军，大发车骑往击胡。
现代文：同时又任命昌侯卢卿做上郡将军，宁侯魏遬做北地将军，隆虑侯周灶做陇西将军，东阳侯张相如做大将军，成侯董赤做前将军，派出大量兵车和骑兵去攻打匈奴。
English: At the same time, he also appointed Chang Hou Lu as Shang County General, Ning Hou Wei Wei as Northland General, Long Qian Hou Zhou Zhao as Shaanxi General, Dongyang Hou Zhang Xiangru as Grand General, and Cheng Hou Dong Chia as Former General, and sent a large number of chariots and cavalry to attack the Huns.

古文：单于留塞内月馀乃去，汉逐出塞即还，不能有所杀。
现代文：匈奴单于呆在汉朝边塞以内一个多月就离开了，汉朝兵马追出塞外就返回塞内，没能斩杀敌军。
English: The Xiongnu alone stayed in the Han Dynasty border fortress for more than a month and left. The Han Dynasty soldiers and horses chased out of the fortress and returned to the fortress, but failed to kill the enemy army.

古文：匈奴日已骄，岁入边，杀略人民畜产甚多，云中、辽东最甚，至代郡万馀人。
现代文：匈奴一天比一天骄傲，每年都闯入边境内，杀害和掠夺许多百姓和牲畜，云中郡和辽东郡受害最严重，连同代郡共有万余人被杀掠。
English: The Huns became more and more proud day by day. Every year, they broke into the border territory and killed and plundered many people and livestock. Yunnan and Liaodong counties suffered the most, and more than ten thousand people were killed and plundered together with the present county.

古文：汉患之，乃使使遗匈奴书。单于亦使当户报谢，复言和亲事。
现代文：汉朝忧虑此事，就派使者给匈奴送去一封信，单于也派遣当户来汉送信，以表答谢之意，双方再次商量和亲之事。
English: The Han Dynasty was worried about this and sent an envoy to send a letter to the Xiongnu, and also sent a letter to the Han Dynasty to express their gratitude, and the two sides once again discussed the matter of reconciliation.

古文：孝文帝後二年，使使遗匈奴书曰： 皇帝敬问匈奴大单于无恙。
现代文：孝文帝后元二年，派使者给匈奴送信说： 皇帝敬问匈奴大单于平安。
English: Emperor Xiaowen sent an envoy to the Xiongnu in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, saying: "The emperor respectfully asks the Xiongnu to leave Datan in peace.

古文：使当户且居雕渠难、郎中韩辽遗朕马二匹，已至，敬受。
现代文：你派当户且居雕渠难和郎中韩辽送给我两匹马，已经到达，我恭敬地接受。
English: The two horses that Han Liao, the head of your household and your son-in-law, has sent to me have arrived, and I accept them with respect.

古文：先帝制：长城以北，引弓之国，受命单于；长城以内，冠带之室，朕亦制之。
现代文：汉朝先帝规定：长城以北，是拉弓射箭者的国家，属于单于统辖。长城以内，是戴冠束带者的家室，我也要控制它。
English: The former emperor of the Han Dynasty stipulated: North of the Great Wall is the country of the bow and arrow shooters, which belongs to the sole jurisdiction. Within the Great Wall, it is the family of the crowned and bound, and I also want to control it.

古文：使万民耕织射猎衣食，父子无离，臣主相安，俱无暴逆。
现代文：要让万民百姓种地、织布、射猎而获得衣食，使父子不相分离，君主和臣民相互安心，都没有暴虐和叛逆之事。
English: It is necessary to let all the people obtain food and clothing by farming, weaving, and hunting, so that the father and son are not separated, the monarch and the subjects are mutually reassured, and there is no tyranny and rebellion.

古文：今闻渫恶民贪降其进取之利，倍义绝约，忘万民之命，离两主之驩，然其事已在前矣。
现代文：如今我听说邪恶之民贪图掠取的利益，违背道义，断绝和约，忘却千万百姓的生命，离间两国君主的友谊，但这些都是以前的事情了。
English: Now I hear that the wicked people covet the plundered profits, violate morality, break the peace treaty, forget the lives of thousands of people, and sever the friendship between the two monarchs, but these are all things of the past.

古文：书曰： 二国已和亲，两主驩说，寝兵休卒养马，世世昌乐，闟然更始。 
现代文：你的信中说： 两国已经和亲，两国君王都高兴，停战、休养士卒，喂养马匹，世代昌盛和乐，安定和乐的局面重新开始。
English: Your letter said: The two countries have been reconciled, the kings of the two countries are happy, the armistice, the recuperation of the soldiers, the feeding of the horses, the prosperity and happiness of the generations, and the stability and happiness have begun again.

古文：朕甚嘉之。
现代文：我特别赞赏这个想法。
English: I give him a lot of credit.

古文：圣人者日新，改作更始，使老者得息，幼者得长，各保其首领而终其天年。
现代文：圣明的人天天都能有新的进步，改正不足，重新作起，使老年人得到安养，年幼的人能够成长，各自保持生命，度过一生。
English: The saintly people can make new progress every day, correct deficiencies, and make a fresh start, so that the elderly can be maintained, the young people can grow, and each can maintain life and live a lifetime.

古文：朕与单于俱由此道，顺天恤民，世世相传，施之无穷，天下莫不咸便。
现代文：我和单于都遵循这个道理，顺应天意，安抚百姓，世世代代相传，永远延续下去，天下之人莫不获得利益。
English: I and I alone follow this principle, conform to the will of heaven, appease the people, pass down from generation to generation, continue forever, and benefit everyone in the world.

古文：汉与匈奴邻国之敌，匈奴处北地，寒，杀气早降，故诏吏遗单于秫糵金帛丝絮佗物岁有数。
现代文：汉朝同匈奴是势力相当的邻国；匈奴地处北方，天气寒冷，肃杀之气到来较早，所以我命令官吏每年都送给单于一定数量的秫蘖、金帛、丝絮和其它物品。
English: The Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu were neighbors of equal power; the Xiongnu was located in the north, the weather was cold, and the spirit of suppression came earlier, so I ordered the officials to give a certain amount of money, gold, silk and other items to the Xiongnu every year.

古文：今天下大安，万民熙熙，朕与单于为之父母。
现代文：如今天下特别安宁，万民喜乐，我和单于是他们的父母。
English: If today is a day of special peace and joy for all people, then I and I alone are their parents.

古文：朕追念前事，薄物细故，谋臣计失，皆不足以离兄弟之驩。
现代文：我回想从前的事情，都是些微末小事，是谋臣失策所致，都不足以离间兄弟间的友情。
English: When I think back to the past, all the little things, caused by the mistakes of the advisors, were not enough to break the friendship between the brothers.

古文：朕闻天不颇覆，地不偏载。朕与单于皆捐往细故，俱蹈大道，堕坏前恶，以图长久，使两国之民若一家子。
现代文：我听说天不会只覆盖一方，大地也不会只承载一处，我和单于都要抛弃从前的小误会，都遵循正大的道理行事，消除从前的不快，考虑两国的长远利益，使两国人民如同一家的儿女。
English: I have heard that the sky will not cover only one side, and the earth will not bear only one place. I and everyone should abandon the previous small misunderstanding, follow the upright principle, eliminate the previous unpleasantness, consider the long-term interests of the two countries, and make the people of the two countries like the children of a family.

古文：元元万民，下及鱼鳖，上及飞鸟，跂行喙息蠕动之类，莫不就安利而辟危殆。
现代文：善良的千千万万的百姓，以及水中的鱼鳖，天上的飞鸟，地上爬行、喘息、蠕动的各种兽类和虫类，没有不追寻安全有利的生活环境而躲避危险的。
English: The thousands of kind-hearted people, as well as the fish in the water, the birds in the sky, and all kinds of animals and insects crawling, panting, and wriggling on the ground, do not avoid danger without pursuing a safe and favorable living environment.

古文：故来者不止，天之道也。
现代文：所以前来归顺的都不阻止，这是天经地义的道理。
English: Therefore, they do not stop those who come to surrender, which is a natural reason.

古文：俱去前事：朕释逃虏民，单于无言章尼等。
现代文：往事一概不究，我解除逃往匈奴的汉人的罪责，单于也不要再提起逃往汉朝的章尼等人的事情。
English: I absolve the Han people who fled to the Xiongnu of their guilt, and I will not bring up the case of Zhang Ni and others who fled to the Han Dynasty.

古文：朕闻古之帝王，约分明而无食言。
现代文：我听说古代帝王们订立条约，条款分明，从不背弃。
English: I have heard that the ancient emperors made a treaty with each other, the terms were clear, and they never reneged.

古文：单于留志，天下大安，和亲之後，汉过不先。
现代文：希望单于留心盟约，天下定会特别安宁。和亲以后，汉朝不会首先负约。
English: I hope that just by paying attention to the covenant, the world will be particularly peaceful. After the reconciliation, the Han Dynasty will not be the first to violate the covenant.

古文：单于其察之。 
现代文：请单于明察此事。 
English: The request was made to look into the matter.

古文：单于既约和亲，於是制诏御史曰： 匈奴大单于遗朕书，言和亲已定，亡人不足以益众广地，匈奴无入塞，汉无出塞，犯约者杀之，可以久亲，後无咎，俱便。朕已许之。
现代文：单于已经签署和亲盟约，于是汉文帝就下令御史说： 匈奴大单于送给我的信中说，和亲已确定，逃亡的人不足以增加民众和扩大土地，今后匈奴人不再闯入边塞，汉朝人也不要走出边塞，违犯现今条约的就处死，这就可以长久保持亲近友好关系，今后不再产生祸患，对双方都有利，我已答应了他的要求。
English: As soon as he had signed the treaty with the Huns, Emperor Hanwen ordered the imperial historian to say: "The Hun general said in a letter sent to me that the Huns had determined that the fugitives were not enough to increase the population and expand the land. In the future, the Huns would no longer break into the border fortress, the Han dynasty would not leave the border fortress, and those who violated the current treaty would be put to death. This would maintain a close and friendly relationship for a long time, no more disasters would occur in the future, and it would be beneficial to both sides. I have agreed to his request."

古文：其布告天下，使明知之。 
现代文：希望向全国发布告示，让百姓都知道此事。 
English: It is hoped that a notice will be issued to the whole country to let the people know about this.

古文：後四岁，老上稽粥单于死，子军臣立为单于。
现代文：汉文帝后元四年，老上稽粥单于死去，他的儿子军臣继位当了单于。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Hanwen, the old man who was in charge of porridge died, and his son, the military minister, succeeded to the throne.

古文：既立，孝文皇帝复与匈奴和亲。
现代文：军臣单于继位后，孝文帝再次与匈奴和亲。
English: After the succession of the military vassal, Emperor Xiaowen once again made peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：而中行说复事之。
现代文：而中行说仍然侍奉军臣单于。
English: However, Zhong Xing said that he still served the military vassal alone.

古文：军臣单于立四岁，匈奴复绝和亲，大入上郡、云中各三万骑，所杀略甚众而去。
现代文：军臣单于继位四年时，匈奴又断绝了和亲关系，大举进攻上郡、云中郡，派出三万骑兵，杀死许多汉人，抢掠大量财物而离去。
English: In the fourth year of the succession of the military vassal, the Xiongnu broke off the amicable relationship, attacked Shang County and Yunnan County on a large scale, sent 30,000 cavalry, killed many Han people, looted a large amount of property and left.

古文：於是汉使三将军军屯北地，代屯句注，赵屯飞狐口，缘边亦各坚守以备胡寇。
现代文：于是汉朝派出张武等三位将军，驻军北地、代国驻句注，赵国驻飞口，沿着边塞之地，也各派兵坚守，防备匈奴入侵。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent three generals, including Zhang Wu, to garrison the north, and Zhao stationed in Hekou, along the border fortress, to guard against the invasion of the Xiongnu.

古文：又置三将军，军长安西细柳、渭北棘门、霸上以备胡。
现代文：又安置周亚夫等三位将军率兵驻守长安西边的细柳，渭河北岸的棘门和霸上，以防御匈奴。
English: He also stationed Zhou Yafu and three other generals and their soldiers at Xiliu on the west side of Chang'an and at Spiked Gate and Bagan on the north bank of the Min River to defend against the Xiongnu.

古文：胡骑入代句注边，烽火通於甘泉、长安。
现代文：匈奴骑兵侵入代地句注边界，报警的烽火便通向甘泉和长安。
English: The Hun cavalry invaded the border, and the bonfire of alarms led to Ganquan and Chang'an.

古文：数月，汉兵至边，匈奴亦去远塞，汉兵亦罢。
现代文：几个月后，汉朝兵马来到边境，匈奴远远地离开边塞，汉朝的军队也就作罢。
English: A few months later, the Han Dynasty soldiers and horses came to the border, the Xiongnu left the border fortress far away, and the Han Dynasty army also stopped.

古文：後岁馀，孝文帝崩，孝景帝立，而赵王遂乃阴使人於匈奴。
现代文：此后一年多，孝文帝去世，孝景帝继位，赵王刘遂就暗中派人与匈奴联络。
English: More than a year after that, Emperor Xiaowen died and Emperor Xiaojing succeeded to the throne. Zhao Wang Liu then secretly sent someone to contact the Xiongnu.

古文：吴楚反，欲与赵合谋入边。
现代文：吴、楚等七国叛乱时，匈奴想同赵国联合，入侵边塞。
English: When Wu, Chu and other seven countries rebelled, the Huns wanted to unite with Zhao and invade the border fortress.

古文：汉围破赵，匈奴亦止。
现代文：后来，汉王朝围困并攻破赵国，匈奴也停止了入侵的举动。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty besieged and defeated the Zhao Kingdom, and the Xiongnu also stopped their invasion.

古文：自是之後，孝景帝复与匈奴和亲，通关市，给遗匈奴，遣公主，如故约。
现代文：从此以后，孝景帝又和匈奴和亲，互通关市，送给匈奴礼物，派遣公主嫁给单于，按以前的盟约行事。
English: From then on, Emperor Xiaojing made peace with the Xiongnu, exchanged customs cities, gave gifts to the Xiongnu, sent a princess to marry Shanyu, and acted according to the previous covenant.

古文：终孝景时，时小入盗边，无大寇。
现代文：直到孝景帝去世，匈奴虽然时有小的骚扰边境的活动，却没有大的侵掠行动。
English: Until the death of Emperor Xiao Jing, the Xiongnu did not carry out any large-scale invasion and plunder, although they occasionally harassed the border.

古文：今帝即位，明和亲约束，厚遇，通关市，饶给之。
现代文：当今皇帝汉武帝继位，申明和亲的规定，宽厚地对待匈权，互通关市，赠送大量财物。
English: The current emperor, Emperor Han Wudi, succeeded to the throne, affirmed the provisions of amity, treated Hungary generously, exchanged customs, and presented a large amount of property.

古文：匈奴自单于以下皆亲汉，往来长城下。
现代文：匈奴从单于到平民都亲近汉朝，往来于长城之下。
English: The Xiongnu were close to the Han Dynasty, from individuals to commoners, and traveled under the Great Wall.

古文：汉使马邑下人聂翁壹奸兰出物与匈奴交，详为卖马邑城以诱单于。
现代文：汉朝派马邑城的聂翁壹故意违犯禁令，运出货物同匈奴交易，佯称出卖马邑城以引诱单于。
English: Yan Wengyi, who was sent by the Han Dynasty to Ma'i City, deliberately violated the ban, shipped out goods and traded with the Xiongnu, pretending to sell Ma'i City to lure the Xiongnu.

古文：单于信之，而贪马邑财物，乃以十万骑入武州塞。
现代文：单于相信此事，又贪恋马邑城的财物，就用十万骑兵侵入武州边塞。
English: Not only believing this, but also coveting the property of Ma'yi City, he used 100,000 cavalry to invade the Wuzhou border fortress.

古文：汉伏兵三十馀万马邑旁，御史大夫韩安国为护军，护四将军以伏单于。
现代文：这时，汉朝在马邑城附近埋伏下三十余万大军，御史大夫韩安国担任护军将军，护卫着四位将军准备伏击单于。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty ambushed more than three hundred thousand troops near the city of Mayi, and the Imperial Historian Han An Guo served as the escort general, escorting four generals to prepare an ambush.

古文：单于既入汉塞，未至马邑百馀里，见畜布野而无人牧者，怪之，乃攻亭。
现代文：单于已经进入汉朝边塞，离马邑城尚有一百余里，看到牲畜遍野却无放牧之人，感到奇怪，就去攻打汉朝的侦察哨所。
English: Just because they had entered the Han Dynasty border fortress and were still more than a hundred miles away from the city of Mayi, they were surprised to see people with livestock everywhere but no grazing, so they went to attack the Han Dynasty reconnaissance post.

古文：是时雁门尉史行徼，见寇，葆此亭，知汉兵谋，单于得，欲杀之，尉史乃告单于汉兵所居。
现代文：这时，雁门郡的尉史正在巡察，看到敌军，就保护侦察哨所，他知道汉朝的打算。单于捉到了尉史，想杀死他，尉史便向单于报告了汉朝军队埋伏的地点。
English: At this time, Yanmen County's Ye Shi was on patrol. When he saw the enemy army, he protected the reconnaissance post. He knew the Han Dynasty's intention. When he caught Ye Shi and wanted to kill him, Ye Shi reported to Ye Shi the location of the Han Dynasty army's ambush.

古文：单于大惊曰： 吾固疑之。 
现代文：单于大惊说： 我本来就对此事有疑心。 
English: In a shocked voice, she said, "I was already suspicious about this.

古文：乃引兵还。
现代文：于是单于就率兵而回。
English: So he returned alone with his army.

古文：出曰： 吾得尉史，天也，天使若言。 
现代文：走出边境时说道： 我得到尉史，是天意，天让你向我报告。 
English: When he came out of the border, he said, "It was God's will for me to get the rank and file. God told you to report to me."

古文：以尉史为 天王 。
现代文：就封尉史做 天王 。
English: Be the king of history.

古文：汉兵约单于入马邑而纵，单于不至，以故汉兵无所得。
现代文：汉朝军队曾约定，单于进入马邑城后，再放纵兵士攻杀。如今单于未到马邑，所以汉朝军队一无所获。
English: The Han Dynasty army had agreed to allow soldiers to attack and kill only after entering the city of Mayi. Now they have not reached Mayi, so the Han Dynasty army has gained nothing.

古文：汉将军王恢部出代击胡辎重，闻单于还，兵多，不敢出。
现代文：汉朝将军王恢的军队走出代郡攻击匈奴的辎重，听说单于大军已回，兵卒多，因而不敢出击。
English: The army of the Han Dynasty general Wang Hui went out to attack the Huns on behalf of the county. It is said that the large army has returned alone, and there are many soldiers, so they dare not attack.

古文：汉以恢本造兵谋而不进，斩恢。
现代文：汉朝认为王恢本是这次伏击战的出谋画策的人，却不敢进攻，因而杀了王恢。
English: The Han Dynasty thought that Wang Wei was the mastermind of this ambush, but he did not dare to attack, so he killed Wang Wei.

古文：自是之後，匈奴绝和亲，攻当路塞，往往入盗於汉边，不可胜数。
现代文：从此以后，匈奴断绝和亲关系，攻击直通要道的边塞，常常侵入汉朝边境抢掠，次数多得无法计算。
English: From then on, the Huns broke off the family relationship, attacked the border fortress of the direct access road, and often invaded the Han Dynasty border to loot. The number of times is too many to count.

古文：然匈奴贪，尚乐关市，嗜汉财物，汉亦尚关市不绝以中之。
现代文：但匈奴贪婪，还是喜欢与汉朝互通关市，非常喜欢汉朝的财物，汉朝也仍然与匈奴保持着关市贸易关系，投合他们的心意。
English: However, the Huns were greedy. They still liked to exchange customs with the Han Dynasty, and they were very fond of the Han Dynasty's property. The Han Dynasty still maintained customs and trade relations with the Huns, which suited their hearts.

古文：自马邑军後五年之秋，汉使四将军各万骑击胡关市下。
现代文：马邑军事行动之后的第五年秋天，汉朝派卫青等四位将军各率一万骑兵，在关市附近攻打匈奴。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year after the military operation in Ma'iyi, the Han Dynasty sent Wei Qing and four other generals, each with 10,000 cavalry, to attack the Xiongnu near Guan.

古文：将军卫青出上谷，至茏城，得胡首虏七百人。
现代文：将军卫青率兵走出上谷郡，到达茏城，杀死和俘获匈奴七百余人。
English: General Wei Qing led the troops out of Shanggu County and arrived in Lucheng, killing and capturing more than seven hundred Huns.

古文：公孙贺出云中，无所得。
现代文：公孙贺率兵走出云中郡，没有收获。
English: Gongsun He and his soldiers marched out of Yunzhong County, but there was no harvest.

古文：公孙敖出代郡，为胡所败七千馀人。
现代文：公孙敖率兵走出代郡，被匈奴打败，损失七千余人。
English: Gongsun Ye led his troops out of Dayi County and was defeated by the Xiongnu, losing more than seven thousand people.

古文：李广出雁门，为胡所败，而匈奴生得广，广後得亡归。
现代文：李广率兵走出雁门郡，被匈奴打败，匈奴人活捉了李广，后来李广得以逃归汉朝。
English: Li Guang led his soldiers out of Ganmen County and was defeated by the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu captured Li Guang alive, and later Li Guang was able to escape back to the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉囚敖、广，敖、广赎为庶人。
现代文：汉朝囚禁公孙敖和李广，公孙敖和李广交了赎金，成为平民百姓。
English: The Han Dynasty imprisoned Gongsun Rong and Li Guang. Gongsun Rong and Li Guang paid the ransom and became commoners.

古文：其冬，匈奴数入盗边，渔阳尤甚。
现代文：这年冬天，匈奴屡次闯进边境抢掠，渔阳受害尤其严重。
English: This winter, the Xiongnu repeatedly broke into the border to plunder, and Yuyang suffered particularly badly.

古文：汉使将军韩安国屯渔阳备胡。
现代文：汉朝派将军韩安国驻军渔阳防御匈奴。
English: The Han Dynasty sent a general from Han'an to garrison Yuyang to defend against the Huns.

古文：其明年秋，匈奴二万骑入汉，杀辽西太守，略二千馀人。
现代文：第二年秋天，匈奴两万骑兵侵入汉朝，杀死了辽西太守，掠走两千余人。
English: In the autumn of the following year, twenty thousand Hun cavalry invaded the Han Dynasty, killed Liao Xi Dazhong, and carried off more than two thousand people.

古文：胡又入败渔阳太守军千馀人，围汉将军安国，安国时千馀骑亦且尽，会燕救至，匈奴乃去。
现代文：匈奴又侵入渔阳，打败渔阳太守的一千多军队，把汉朝将军韩安国围困起来。这时韩安国的一千多骑兵也将要全部被歼，恰巧燕王的救兵赶到，匈奴才离去。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Yuyang again, defeated more than a thousand troops of Yuyang Taishu, and besieged the Han dynasty general Han An Guo. At this time, more than a thousand cavalrymen of Han An Guo would also all be annihilated. It just so happened that Yan Wang's rescuers arrived, and the Xiongnu left.

古文：匈奴又入雁门，杀略千馀人。
现代文：匈奴又侵入雁门郡，杀死和抢走千余人。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Yanmen County again, killing and robbing more than a thousand people.

古文：於是汉使将军卫青将三万骑出雁门，李息出代郡，击胡。得首虏数千人。
现代文：于是汉朝派将军卫青率三万骑兵走出雁门，李息率兵逼出代郡，攻打匈奴，杀死和俘虏匈奴数千人。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent General Wei Qing to lead 30,000 cavalry out of the Wild Goose Gate, and Li Xi led the troops to force out of Dai County, attack the Xiongnu, and kill and capture thousands of Xiongnu.

古文：其明年，卫青复出云中以西至陇西，击胡之楼烦、白羊王於河南，得胡首虏数千，牛羊百馀万。
现代文：第二年，卫青又走出云中郡西边及西部的陇西一带，在黄河河套南岸地带攻打匈奴属下的楼烦和白羊王，杀死和俘虏数千人，得到牛羊百余万头。
English: The next year, Wei Qing also went out of the western edge of Yunzhong County and the western part of the west of Shaanxi, and attacked the Huns' Lou Dui and Baiyang Wang on the southern bank of the Yellow River, killing and capturing thousands of people and obtaining more than one million heads of cattle and sheep.

古文：於是汉遂取河南地，筑朔方，复缮故秦时蒙恬所为塞，因河为固。
现代文：于是汉朝就夺取了黄河河套南岸地区，修筑朔方城，又修缮从前秦朝蒙恬所修建的关塞，凭借黄河做为坚固的防线。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty seized the area on the south bank of the Yellow River estuary, built a square city, and repaired the customs house built by the former Qin Dynasty, relying on the Yellow River as a solid defense line.

古文：汉亦弃上谷之什辟县造阳地以予胡。
现代文：汉朝也放弃了上谷郡的曲折僻远的县如造阳一带给匈奴。
English: The Han Dynasty also gave up the twists and turns of remote counties such as Jiuyang to the Xiongnu.

古文：是岁，汉之元朔二年也。
现代文：这年是汉武帝元朔二年。
English: This year is the second year of Emperor Hanwu's reign.

古文：其後冬，匈奴军臣单于死。
现代文：后一年的冬天，匈奴军臣单于死去。
English: In the winter of the following year, the Hun general died alone.

古文：军臣单于弟左谷蠡王伊稚斜自立为单于，攻破军臣单于太子於单。
现代文：军臣单于的弟弟左谷蠡王伊稚斜自立为单于，打败了军臣单于的太子於单。
English: The younger brother of the military vassal Shan Yu, Zuo Gu Zhaowang Yizhichang, stood up for Shan Yu and defeated the prince of the military vassal Shan Yu.

古文：於单亡降汉，汉封於单为涉安侯，数月而死。
现代文：於单逃走，投降汉朝，汉朝封於单为涉安侯，几个月后，他就死了。
English: Yudan ran away and surrendered to the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty made Yudan a vassal of Tang and An, and he died a few months later.

古文：伊稚斜单于既立，其夏，匈奴数万骑入杀代郡太守恭友，略千馀人。
现代文：伊稚斜单于继位后的夏天，匈奴数万骑兵攻入代郡，杀死太守恭友，抢掠一千余人。
English: In the summer after the enthronement of Yizhixiaqin, tens of thousands of Hun cavalry invaded Dai County, killed the eunuch Yasutomo, and robbed more than a thousand people.

古文：其秋，匈奴又入雁门，杀略千馀人。
现代文：当年秋天，匈奴又攻入雁门，杀死和抢走一千余人。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Xiongnu invaded the Wild Goose Gate again, killing and robbing more than a thousand people.

古文：其明年，匈奴又复复入代郡、定襄、上郡，各三万骑，杀略数千人。
现代文：第二年，匈奴又分别派遣三万骑兵攻入代郡、定襄、上郡，杀死和抢走数千人。
English: The following year, the Xiongnu dispatched another 30,000 cavalry to invade the counties of Dai, Dingxiang and Shang, killing and robbing thousands of people.

古文：匈奴右贤王怨汉夺之河南地而筑朔方，数为寇，盗边，及入河南，侵扰朔方，杀略吏民其众。
现代文：匈奴右贤王怨恨汉朝夺走黄河河套南岸的土地，并修筑朔方城，因而屡次侵扰，到边境抢掠，以及攻入河套南岸，侵扰朔方城，杀死和抢劫很多官吏和平民。
English: The Hunnic King Uxian resented the Han Dynasty for taking away the land on the south bank of the Yellow River and building Shuo Fangcheng, so he repeatedly invaded, went to the border to loot, and invaded the south bank of the river, invaded Shuo Fangcheng, killed and robbed many officials and civilians.

古文：其明年春，汉以卫青为大将军，将六将军，十馀万人，出朔方、高阙击胡。
现代文：第二年春天，汉朝用卫青做大将军，统领六位将军，十余万大军，走出朔方、高阙，去攻打匈奴。
English: In the spring of the next year, the Han Dynasty used Wei Qing as a great general, leading six generals and more than 100,000 troops to go out of Shuo Fang and Gao Gan to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：右贤王以为汉兵不能至，饮酒醉，汉兵出塞六七百里，夜围右贤王。
现代文：右贤王以为汉兵不能到来，喝醉了酒，汉兵走出塞外六七百里，夜间包围了右贤王。
English: Ugyen Wang thought that the Chinese soldiers could not come, so he got drunk. The Chinese soldiers went six or seven hundred miles outside the fortress and surrounded Ugyen Wang at night.

古文：右贤王大惊，脱身逃走，诸精骑往往随後去。
现代文：右贤王大惊，脱身逃跑，许多精锐骑兵也都跟着离去。
English: King Ugyen was so shocked that he broke away and ran away, and many of the elite cavalry also followed him.

古文：汉得右贤王众男女万五千人，裨小王十馀人。
现代文：汉朝俘虏右贤王属下的男女一万五千人，裨小王十余人。
English: The Han Dynasty captured fifteen thousand men and women under King Uxian, and more than ten people under King Xiaowang.

古文：其秋，匈奴万骑入杀代郡都尉硃英，略千馀人。
现代文：这年秋天，匈奴一万骑兵攻入代郡，杀死代郡都尉朱英，抢掠一千余人。
English: In the autumn of that year, ten thousand Hun cavalry invaded the county, killed the county's lieutenant Zhu Ying, and robbed more than a thousand people.

古文：其明年春，汉复遣大将军卫青将六将军，兵十馀万骑，乃再出定襄数百里击匈奴，得首虏前後凡万九千馀级，而汉亦亡两将军，军三千馀骑。
现代文：下一年春天，汉朝又派遣大将军卫青率领六将军，和十余万骑兵，再次走出定襄数百里攻打匈奴，前后共杀死和俘获一万九千余人，而汉朝也损失了两位将军和他们统领的三千多骑兵。
English: In the spring of the next year, the Han Dynasty again sent General Wei Qing, led by six generals, and more than 100,000 cavalry to attack the Huns from hundreds of miles away in Dingxiang, killing and capturing more than 19,000 people in total. The Han Dynasty also lost two generals and more than 3,000 cavalry under their command.

古文：右将军建得以身脱，而前将军翕侯赵信兵不利，降匈奴。
现代文：右将军苏建得以只身脱逃，而前将军翕侯赵信出军不利，因而投降匈奴。
English: The right-wing general, Su Jian, was able to escape unharmed, while the former general, Zhou Zhao Xin, was not able to leave the army, and thus surrendered to the Xiongnu.

古文：赵信者，故胡小王，降汉，汉封为翕侯，以前将军与右将军并军分行，独遇单于兵，故尽没。
现代文：赵信本是匈奴的小王，投降汉朝，汉朝封他为翕侯，因为前将军与右将军两军合并，而又与大队军马分开行进，独自遇上了单于的军队，所以全军覆没。
English: Zhao Xinben was a minor king of the Xiongnu. He surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty made him a vassal lord. Because the former general and the right general merged the two armies, but marched separately with the large army of horses, and met the single army alone, the whole army was destroyed.

古文：单于既得翕侯，以为自次王，用其姊妻之，与谋汉。
现代文：单于既已得到了翕侯，就封他为自次王，并将其姐姐嫁给他做妻子，同他商量对付汉朝。
English: As soon as he got the title of prince, he made him the second king, married his sister to him as his wife, and discussed with him how to deal with the Han Dynasty.

古文：信教单于益北绝幕，以诱罢汉兵，徼极而取之，无近塞。
现代文：赵信教单于更加向北迁移，越过沙漠，以此引诱汉军，使其疲务，待他们极度疲劳时再攻取他们，不要到汉朝边塞那里。
English: Zhao Xinjiao simply moved further north, across the desert, in order to lure the Han army, make it tired, wait for them to be extremely tired and then attack them, do not go to the Han Dynasty border fortress.

古文：单于从其计。
现代文：单于听信了他的计谋。
English: I just listened to his plan.

古文：其明年，胡骑万人入上谷，杀数百人。
现代文：第二年，匈奴一万骑兵攻入上谷郡，杀死数百汉人。
English: The following year, the Huns invaded Shanggu County with 10,000 horsemen, killing hundreds of Han Chinese.

古文：其明年春，汉使骠骑将军去病将万骑出陇西，过焉支山千馀里，击匈奴，得胡首虏万八千馀级，破得休屠王祭天金人。
现代文：第二年春天，汉朝派骠骑将军霍去病率领一万骑兵走出陇西，越过焉支山一千馀里，攻打匈奴，斩杀和俘虏匈奴一万八千余人，打败休屠王，获得了祭天金人。
English: In the spring of the next year, the Han Dynasty sent the cavalry general Huo Deguang to lead ten thousand cavalry out of Shaanxi, crossed more than a thousand miles of Yanjishan, attacked the Huns, killed and captured more than eighteen thousand Huns, defeated King Xiu Tuo, and won the gold medal.

古文：其夏，骠骑将军复与合骑侯数万骑出陇西、北地二千里，击匈奴。
现代文：这年夏天，骠骑将军又同合骑侯率领数万骑兵走出陇西、北地二千余里，攻打匈奴。
English: In the summer of that year, the general and his cavalrymen led tens of thousands of cavalrymen out of Shaanxi and the north for more than 2,000 miles to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：过居延，攻祁连山，得胡首虏三万馀人，裨小王以下七十馀人。
现代文：经过居延，攻击祁连山，杀死和俘虏匈奴三万余人，其中有裨小王以下七十余人。
English: After passing through Juyan, they attacked Qilian Mountain, killing and capturing more than thirty thousand Huns, including more than seventy people under Tu Xiaowang.

古文：是时匈奴亦来入代郡、雁门，杀略数百人。
现代文：这时匈奴也侵入代郡、雁门郡，杀死和抢走数百人。
English: At this time, the Huns also invaded Dai County and Yanmen County, killing and robbing hundreds of people.

古文：汉使博望侯及李将军广出右北平，击匈奴左贤王。
现代文：汉朝派博望侯张骞和李广将军走出右北平，进攻匈奴左贤王。
English: The Han Dynasty sent the nobleman Zhang Ye and the general Li Guang out of the right Beiping to attack the Xiongnu Zuoxian Wang.

古文：左贤王围李将军，卒可四千人，且尽，杀虏亦过当。
现代文：左贤王围困了李将军，李将军的兵卒约四千人，都将被消灭，但李将军的军队所杀匈奴人的数目超过了自己军队的损失。
English: Zuo Xianwang besieged General Li. General Li's army of about four thousand soldiers would all be wiped out, but the number of Huns killed by General Li's army exceeded the losses of his own army.

古文：会博望侯军救至，李将军得脱。
现代文：正好博望侯的救兵赶到，李将军得以逃脱。
English: Just as Bohanghou's rescuers arrived, General Li was able to escape.

古文：汉失亡数千人，合骑侯後骠骑将军期，及与博望侯皆当死，赎为庶人。
现代文：汉朝伤亡几千人。合骑侯耽误了骠骑将军所规定的日期，所以他与博望侯张骞都被判为死刑，交付了赎金，变成了平民。
English: Several thousand people were killed and wounded during the Han Dynasty. He delayed the date set by the general of the imperial cavalry, so he and Zhang Jun, the lord of Bohang, were both sentenced to death, paid a ransom and became civilians.

古文：其秋，单于怒浑邪王、休屠王居西方为汉所杀虏数万人，欲召诛之。
现代文：这年秋天，单于对浑邪王、休屠王居住西方而被汉朝杀死和俘虏数万人的事感到愤怒，想召见并诛杀他们。
English: In the autumn of that year, he was outraged by the tens of thousands of people who had been killed and captured by the Han Dynasty because they lived in the West, and he wanted to summon and kill them.

古文：浑邪王与休屠王恐，谋降汉，汉使骠骑将军往迎之。
现代文：浑邪王与休屠王感到恐惧，密谋投降汉朝，汉朝派骠骑将军前去迎接他们。
English: King Hunjia and King Xiu Tu were terrified and plotted to surrender to the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty sent a cavalry general to meet them.

古文：浑邪王杀休屠王，并将其众降汉。
现代文：浑邪王杀了休屠王，合并了他的军队，领着军队投降了汉朝。
English: King Hunjia killed King Xiu Tuo, merged his army, and led the army to surrender to the Han Dynasty.

古文：凡四万馀人，号十万。
现代文：总共四万余人，号称十万。
English: A total of more than forty thousand people, known as one hundred thousand.

古文：於是汉已得浑邪王，则陇西、北地、河西益少胡寇，徙关东贫民处所夺匈奴河南、新秦中以实之，而减北地以西戍卒半。
现代文：于是汉朝自从接受浑邪王投降之后，陇西、北地、河西遭受匈奴侵扰的事越来越少，就开始把关东的贫苦之民，迁移到从匈奴那里夺回的河套南岸和新秦中地区，充实这里的人口，并将北地以西的戍卒减少一半。
English: As a result, since the Han Dynasty accepted the surrender of King Hun Yeol, the number of incidents of Huns invading Shaanxi, Beidong and Hexi became fewer and fewer. The Han Dynasty began to relocate the poor people of Guandong to the southern coast of Hetao and the central region of Xinqin, which had been recaptured from the Huns, to enrich the population here, and to reduce the peasants west of Beidong by half.

古文：其明年，匈奴入右北平、定襄各数万骑，杀略千馀人而去。
现代文：第二年，匈奴向右北平和定襄各派数万骑兵入侵，杀死和抢夺千余人而去。
English: The following year, the Xiongnu invaded tens of thousands of cavalrymen from various factions in North Hebei and Dingxiang, killing and robbing more than a thousand people.

古文：其明年春，汉谋曰 翕侯信为单于计，居幕北，以为汉兵不能至 。
现代文：第二年春天，汉朝君臣谋划对付匈奴的事情，说： 翕侯赵信向单于献计，居住到大沙漠以北去，认为汉朝军队不能到达。 
English: In the spring of the following year, the Han Dynasty's princes and subjects plotted against the Xiongnu, saying: "The warlord Zhaoxin made a plan and went to live north of the great desert, thinking that the Han Dynasty's army could not reach there.

古文：乃粟马发十万骑，私从马凡十四万匹，粮重不与焉。令大将军青、骠骑将军去病中分军，大将军出定襄，骠骑将军出代，咸约绝幕击匈奴。
现代文：就用粟米喂马，开出十万骑兵，再加上自愿担负粮食马匹随军出征的总共有十四万人，粮食和辎重不在此数目之内，命令大将军卫青和骠骑将军霍去病平分军队，大将军率兵走出定襄，骠骑将军率兵走出代郡，都约定越过沙漠攻打匈奴。
English: He fed the horses with millet, dispatched 100,000 cavalry, and in addition to the horses that volunteered to carry grain, a total of 140,000 people went to war with the army. Grain and weight were not included in this number. He ordered the general Wei Qing and the cavalry general Huo to divide the army equally. The general led the soldiers out of Dingxiang, and the cavalry general led the soldiers out of Dai County. They all agreed to cross the desert to attack the Huns.

古文：单于闻之，远其辎重，以精兵待於幕北。
现代文：单于听到这一消息，把辎重送往远处，率精兵守侯在漠北。
English: On hearing this news alone, he sent his baggage to a distant place and stayed in the north of the desert with his best soldiers.

古文：与汉大将军接战一日，会暮，大风起，汉兵纵左右翼围单于。
现代文：匈奴同大将军卫青的军队交战一天，正在日暮时分，刮起了大风，汉军从左右两翼急速围攻单于。
English: The Huns fought with the army of General Wei Qing for one day. At dusk, a strong wind blew, and the Han army quickly besieged Shanyu from the left and right wings.

古文：单于自度战不能如汉兵，单于遂独身与壮骑数百溃汉围西北遁走。
现代文：单于自己料定打下去不能战胜汉军，于是他独自同数百名健壮的骑兵，冲破汉军的包围圈，向西北逃跑。
English: He knew that he alone could not defeat the Chinese army, so he broke through the encirclement of the Chinese army alone with hundreds of robust cavalry and fled to the northwest.

古文：汉兵夜追不得。
现代文：汉军夜晚追赶，没有捉到他。
English: The Chinese army chased him at night, but did not catch him.

古文：行斩捕匈奴首虏万九千级，北至阗颜山赵信城而还。
现代文：但在行进中却杀死和活捉匈奴一万九千人，到达北边阗颜山赵信城就退回来了。
English: However, during the march, they killed and captured 19,000 Xiongnu alive. When they reached the north side of the Yan Mountains, Zhaoxin City retreated.

古文：单于之遁走，其兵往往与汉兵相乱而随单于。
现代文：单于逃跑时，他的军队常常同汉军混战在一起，并设法追随单于。
English: When Duan fled, his troops often scuffled with the Han troops and tried to follow Duan.

古文：单于久不与其大众相得，其右谷蠡王以为单于死，乃自立为单于。
现代文：单于很长时间没有和他的大队人马相会了，他的右谷蠡王以为单于死了，就自立为单于。
English: However, he had not met his brigade for a long time, and his right valley king thought that he was dead, so he became independent.

古文：真单于复得其众，而右谷蠡王乃去其单于号，复为右谷蠡王。
现代文：真单于又找到了他的大军，于是右谷蠡王就自动去掉他的单于王号，又当起右谷蠡王来。
English: Zhenyu alone found his great army again, so Ugu Yue Wang automatically removed his name of Zhenyu Wang and became Ugu Yue Wang again.

古文：汉骠骑将军之出代二千馀里，与左贤王接战，汉兵得胡首虏凡七万馀级，左贤王将皆遁走。
现代文：汉朝骠骑将军霍去病走出代郡两千余里，同左贤王交战，汉军杀死和俘虏匈奴共七万多人，左贤王与其将军都逃跑了。
English: The Han dynasty cavalry general Huo went sick and walked more than two thousand miles out of the county, and fought with Zuoxian Wang. The Han army killed and captured more than seventy thousand Huns. Zuoxian Wang and his general all fled.

古文：骠骑封於狼居胥山，禅姑衍，临翰海而还。
现代文：骠骑将军便在狼居胥山祭天，在姑衍山祭地，举行封禅之礼，直到翰海才回师。
English: General Zou Jia then held the ceremony of the enthronement of Zen at the Wolf Residence, the Lushan Festival Heaven, and the Guyan Mountain Festival Grounds, and did not return to his master until Hanhai.

古文：是後匈奴远遁，而幕南无王庭。
现代文：此后，匈奴向远处逃走，大沙漠以南没有匈奴的王庭。
English: After that, the Xiongnu fled far away, and there was no royal court for the Xiongnu south of the great desert.

古文：汉度河自朔方以西至令居，往往通渠置田，官吏卒五六万人，稍蚕食，地接匈奴以北。
现代文：汉朝军队渡过黄河，从朔方向西直到令居，常常在那里修通沟渠，开垦田地，有官吏士卒五六万人，渐渐蚕食北方土地，地界接近匈奴旧地以北。
English: The Han Dynasty army crossed the Yellow River from the direction of Shuo in the west to Lingju in the west, and often repaired ditches and reclaimed fields there. There were 560,000 officials and officials, gradually encroaching on the northern land, and the land boundary was close to the north of the old Hun land.

古文：初，汉两将军大出围单于，所杀虏八九万，而汉士卒物故亦数万，汉马死者十馀万。
现代文：当初，汉朝的两位将军大规模地出兵围攻单于，杀死和俘虏八九万人，而汉朝士卒也死了好几万，汉朝的马匹死了十多万。
English: At first, two generals of the Han Dynasty sent large-scale troops to besiege Shantou, killing and capturing 890,000 people, while tens of thousands of Han Dynasty soldiers also died, and more than 100,000 Han Dynasty horses died.

古文：匈奴虽病，远去，而汉亦马少，无以复往。
现代文：匈奴虽然搞得疲惫而远去，但汉朝也因为马匹少，无法再去追击。
English: Although the Xiongnu was exhausted and ran away, the Han Dynasty was also unable to pursue because of the lack of horses.

古文：匈奴用赵信之计，遣使於汉，好辞请和亲。
现代文：匈奴采用赵信的计谋，向汉朝派遣使者，说好话请求和亲。
English: The Xiongnu adopted Zhao Xin's strategy and sent an envoy to the Han Dynasty to say good words and ask for peace.

古文：天子下其议，或言和亲，或言遂臣之。
现代文：汉朝天子把这问题交给臣下商议，有人说和亲，有人说趁机让匈奴臣服于汉。
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty gave this issue to his vassals for discussion. Some said to be friendly, others said to take advantage of the opportunity to make the Xiongnu submit to Han.

古文：丞相长史任敞曰： 匈奴新破，困，宜可使为外臣，朝请於边。 
现代文：丞相长史任敞说： 匈奴刚刚遭受失败，处境困难，应当让他们做外臣，每年春秋两季到边境上来朝拜皇上。 
English: "The Xiongnu have just suffered a defeat and are in a difficult situation. They should be allowed to be foreign ministers and come up to the border to pay homage to the emperor in spring and autumn every year.

古文：汉使任敞於单于。
现代文：汉朝就派任敞出使匈奴，去见单于。
English: The Han Dynasty sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to meet with Shan Yu.

古文：单于闻敞计，大怒，留之不遣。
现代文：单于听了任敞的计划，大怒，把他扣留在匈奴，不让他回汉朝。
English: Just because he heard Ren Zang's plan, he was furious, detained him in Xiongnu, and would not let him return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：先是汉亦有所降匈奴使者，单于亦辄留汉使相当。
现代文：在此之前，汉朝也招降过匈奴使者，单于也扣留汉朝使者相抵偿。
English: Prior to this, the Han Dynasty had also invited and surrendered a Hunnic envoy, only to also detain a Han Dynasty envoy in retaliation.

古文：汉方复收士马，会骠骑将军去病死，於是汉久不北击胡。
现代文：汉朝正在重新收集士卒兵马，恰巧骠骑将军霍去病病逝，于是汉朝很长时间没有北上攻打匈奴。
English: The Han Dynasty was in the process of re-gathering soldiers and horses, and it so happened that General Huo died of illness. As a result, the Han Dynasty did not go north to attack the Xiongnu for a long time.

古文：数岁，伊稚斜单于立十三年死，子乌维立为单于。
现代文：几年后，伊稚斜单于继位十三年去世了，他的儿子乌维继位当了单于。
English: A few years later, Yizhikishitan died in the thirteenth year of his reign, and his son Uvi succeeded him.

古文：是岁，汉元鼎三年也。
现代文：这年，是汉武帝元鼎三年。
English: This year is the third year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：乌维单于立，而汉天子始出巡郡县。
现代文：乌维单于继位，汉天子开始出京去巡视郡县。
English: Uwishan succeeded to the throne, and Han Tianzi began to go out of Beijing to inspect counties.

古文：其後汉方南诛两越，不击匈奴，匈奴亦不侵入边。
现代文：这以后汉正在诛杀南方的南越和东越，没有进攻匈奴，匈奴也没有侵入汉朝边境。
English: After that, the Han were fighting and killing the South Vietnamese and East Vietnamese in the south. They did not attack the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu did not invade the Han-North Korean border.

古文：乌维单于立三年，汉已灭南越，遣故太仆贺将万五千骑出九原二千馀里，至浮苴井而还，不见匈奴一人。
现代文：乌维单于继位三年，汉已灭亡南越，就派遣原来的太仆公孙贺率领一万五千骑兵走出九原二千余里，到达浮苴井才撤回，没看到一个匈奴人。
English: Three years after his succession, when the Han Dynasty had already perished in South Vietnam, Ubi sent his former manservant, Sun He, to lead fifteen thousand cavalry out of the Nine Plains for more than two thousand miles, and only retreated when he reached Fuxi Well. He did not see a single Hun.

古文：汉又遣故从骠侯赵破奴万馀骑出令居数千里，至匈河水而还，亦不见匈奴一人。
现代文：汉朝又派遣原来的从骑侯赵破奴率领一万多骑兵走出令居几千里地，到达匈河水才撤回，也没看到一个匈奴人。
English: The Han Dynasty also sent more than ten thousand cavalry led by Zhao Bonu, the original cavalryman, to travel thousands of miles to reach the waters of the Hun River before withdrawing. They did not see a single Hun.

古文：是时天子巡边，至朔方，勒兵十八万骑以见武节，而使郭吉风告单于。
现代文：这时，皇帝巡视边境，到达朔方郡，统率十八万骑兵以显示军威，又派郭吉委婉地告诉单于。
English: At this time, the emperor inspected the border, arrived at Shuofang County, led 180,000 cavalry to show military prestige, and sent Guo Ji to euphemistically tell Shan Yu.

古文：郭吉既至匈奴，匈奴主客问所使，郭吉礼卑言好，曰： 吾见单于而口言。 
现代文：郭吉到了匈奴，匈奴主客询问他出使的任务，郭吉谦卑施礼，说了些好话，说： 我见到单于再亲口对他说。 
English: Guo Ji arrived in Xiongnu. The Xiongnu's guest inquired about the mission he was sent on. Guo Ji humbly bowed and said something good, saying: I saw Shan Yu again and told him in person.

古文：单于见吉，吉曰： 南越王头已悬於汉北阙。
现代文：单于接见了郭吉，郭吉说： 南越王的人头已经悬挂在汉朝京城的北阙之上。
English: Guo Jie said after meeting Guo Jie for the first time, "The human head of the king of southern Vietnam has been hung on the north tower of the Han Dynasty capital.

古文：今单于即前与汉战，天子自将兵待边；单于即不能，即南面而臣於汉。
现代文：如今单于若是能够前去与汉军交战，天子将要亲自领兵在边境上等待你；单于要是不能前去，就应当面朝南方向汉朝称臣。
English: Now, if you are able to go and fight against the Chinese army, the heavenly son will personally lead the soldiers to wait for you at the border; if you are not able to go, you should face south and praise the Han Dynasty.

古文：何徒远走，亡匿於幕北寒苦无水草之地，毋为也。 
现代文：何必白白地向远处逃跑，躲藏在沙漠以北的又冷又艰苦也缺少水草的地方，没有什么作为呢？ 
English: Why flee far away in vain, to hide in the cold, arduous, and weed-deprived lands north of the desert, and do nothing?

古文：语卒而单于大怒，立斩主客见者，而留郭吉不归，迁之北海上。
现代文：他说完了，单于就大怒起来，立刻杀了允许郭吉进见的那位主客，而且扣留郭吉，不让他回汉朝，把他迁移到北海那里去。
English: After he finished speaking, he flew into a rage and immediately killed the host and guest who had allowed Guo Ji to enter, and detained Guo Ji, not allowing him to return to the Han Dynasty and transferring him to the North Sea.

古文：而单于终不肯为寇於汉边，休养息士马，习射猎，数使使於汉，好辞甘言求请和亲。
现代文：单于也始终不肯到汉朝边境去侵扰抢夺，只是休养士卒和马匹，练习射箭打猎的技术，屡次派使者到汉朝，说了好话，请求和亲。
English: However, he always refused to go to the Han Dynasty border to invade and rob. He only rested his soldiers and horses, practiced archery and hunting techniques, repeatedly sent emissaries to the Han Dynasty, said kind words, and asked for reconciliation.

古文：汉使王乌等窥匈奴。
现代文：汉朝派遣王乌等去窥探匈奴的情况。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Wang Wu and others to spy on the Huns.

古文：匈奴法，汉使非去节而以墨黥其面者不得入穹庐。
现代文：匈奴的法律规定，汉朝使者若不放弃旄节和用墨黥面就不能进入毡帐。
English: The laws of the Xiongnu stipulated that the Han Dynasty emissaries could not enter the bank account unless they renounced the use of ink and paper.

古文：王乌，北地人，习胡俗，去其节，黥面，得入穹庐。
现代文：王乌是北地人，熟悉匈奴风俗，就放弃旄节，用墨黥面，所以进入毡帐。
English: Wang Wu is a northerner, familiar with the Xiongnu customs, he gave up the pig feast and used ink noodles, so he entered the piggery.

古文：单于爱之，详许甘言，为遣其太子入汉为质，以求和亲。
现代文：单于喜爱他，假装用好话做出许诺，派遣太子到汉朝做人质，以此要求同汉朝和亲。
English: Instead of just liking him, they pretended to make promises with kind words, and sent the prince to the Han Dynasty to be a hostage, in order to make peace with the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉使杨信於匈奴。
现代文：汉朝派杨信到匈奴去。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Yang Xin to the Xiongnu.

古文：是时汉东拔秽貉、朝鲜以为郡，而西置酒泉郡以鬲绝胡与羌通之路。
现代文：这时，汉朝在东边攻取了秽貉和朝鲜，并设置了郡，而西边设置了酒泉郡，用以隔绝匈奴和羌人的通路。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty conquered Zuoying and Goryeo in the east and set up counties, while Jiuquan County was set up in the west to cut off the passage of the Huns and Jurchens.

古文：汉又西通月氏、大夏，又以公主妻乌孙王，以分匈奴西方之援国。
现代文：汉朝又向西沟通了月氏和大夏，又把公主嫁给乌孙王做妻子，以此离间匈奴和西方援国的关系。
English: The Han Dynasty also communicated with the West about the Moon clan and Daxia, and married the princess to King Wusun as a wife, in order to separate the relationship between the Xiongnu and the Western aid.

古文：又北益广田至胘雷为塞，而匈奴终不敢以为言。
现代文：汉朝又向北扩大田地，直到胘雷，做为边塞，匈奴始终不敢对此表示不满。
English: The Han Dynasty also expanded the fields to the north, as far as Xinglei, as a frontier fortress, and the Xiongnu always dared not express dissatisfaction with this.

古文：是岁，翕侯信死，汉用事者以匈奴为已弱，可臣从也。
现代文：这一年，翕侯赵信死了，汉朝的官员们以为匈奴已经衰弱，可以把他们变为属臣。
English: In the same year, Zhaoxin, the warlord, died, and the officials of the Han Dynasty thought that the Xiongnu had already weakened and could turn them into vassals.

古文：杨信为人刚直屈彊，素非贵臣，单于不亲。
现代文：杨信为人刚直倔强，一向不是汉朝尊贵的大臣，单于不亲近他。
English: Yang Xin is an upright and stubborn person. He has never been an honorable minister of the Han Dynasty, simply because he is not close to him.

古文：单于欲召入，不肯去节，单于乃坐穹庐外见杨信。
现代文：单于想召他到毡帐里，但他不肯放弃旄节，单于就坐在毡帐外面接见杨信。
English: He just wanted to call him to the throne, but he refused to give up the throne, so he just sat outside the throne to receive Yang Xin.

古文：杨信既见单于，说曰： 即欲和亲，以单于太子为质於汉。 
现代文：杨信见到单于后，说： 若想和亲，就把单于太子当做人质送到汉朝去。 
English: When Yang Xin saw Shan Yu, he said, "If you want to be reconciled, you should send Shan Yu to the Han Dynasty as a hostage."

古文：单于曰： 非故约。
现代文：单于说： 这不是以前的盟约。
English: Simply put: This is not the old covenant.

古文：故约，汉常遣翁主，给缯絮食物有品，以和亲，而匈奴亦不扰边。
现代文：从前的盟约规定，汉朝常常派遣公主来匈奴，还送来不同数量的绸布、丝棉和食物，以此同匈奴和亲，而匈奴也不骚扰汉朝边境。
English: According to the previous treaty, the Han Dynasty often sent princesses to the Xiongnu, and also sent different amounts of silk cloth, silk cotton and food to make peace with the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu did not disturb the Han Dynasty border.

古文：今乃欲反古，令吾太子为质，无几矣。 
现代文：现在竟然违反古时的盟约，让我的太子去当人质，这样做，和亲是没有希望的。 
English: Now, in violation of the ancient covenant, my prince has been taken hostage. There is no hope for a reconciliation.

古文：匈奴俗，见汉使非中贵人，其儒先，以为欲说，折其辩；其少年，以为欲刺，折其气。
现代文：匈奴风俗，看到汉朝使者不是皇宫中受宠的宦官，而是儒生，就认为他是来游说的，便想法驳倒他的说辞；如果是少年，就认为他是来指责匈奴，便设法挫败他的气势。
English: According to the custom of the Xiongnu, when they saw that the envoy of the Han Dynasty was not a favored eunuch in the palace, but a Confucian, they thought that he came to lobby, and they tried to refute his words; if it was a boy, they thought that he came to accuse the Xiongnu, and they tried to defeat his momentum.

古文：每汉使入匈奴，匈奴辄报偿。
现代文：每次汉朝使者来到匈奴，匈奴总要给予报偿。
English: Every time an envoy from the Han Dynasty came to the Xiongnu, the Xiongnu would always reward him.

古文：汉留匈奴使，匈奴亦留汉使，必得当乃肯止。
现代文：如果汉朝扣留匈奴使者，匈奴也扣留汉朝使者，一定要使双方扣留的人数相等才肯停止。
English: If the Han Dynasty detains the Hun envoy and the Hun also detains the Han Dynasty envoy, the number of people detained by both sides must be equal before they are willing to stop.

古文：杨信既归，汉使王乌，而单于复以甘言，欲多得汉财物，绐谓王乌曰： 吾欲入汉见天子，面相约为兄弟。 
现代文：杨信回到汉朝后，汉朝又派王乌出使匈奴，而单于又用好话谄媚他，想多得到些汉朝的财物，便欺骗王乌说： 我想到汉朝拜见天子，相互缔约，结为兄弟。 
English: After Yang Xin returned to the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty also sent Wang Wu as an envoy to the Xiongnu, but Yan Yu also flattered him with kind words, and wanted to get more Han Dynasty property, he deceived Wang Wu and said: I want to visit the Han Dynasty, make a contract with each other, and become a brother.

古文：王乌归报汉，汉为单于筑邸于长安。
现代文：王乌归来向汉朝作了汇报，汉朝就为单于在长安修筑了官邸。
English: On his return, Wang Wu reported to the Han Dynasty, which built an official residence in Chang'an for him.

古文：匈奴曰： 非得汉贵人使，吾不与诚语。 
现代文：匈奴说： 不见到汉朝尊贵之人充当的使者，我不同他说实话。 
English: The Xiongnu said, "I don't see a noble person from the Han Dynasty acting as an envoy. I don't think he's telling the truth."

古文：匈奴使其贵人至汉，病，汉予药，欲愈之，不幸而死。
现代文：匈奴派他的尊贵之人出使汉朝，得了病，汉朝给他药吃，想治好他的病，可是他不幸死去。
English: The Xiongnu sent one of his nobles on a mission to the Han Dynasty, and he fell ill. The Han Dynasty gave him medicine to try to cure his illness, but unfortunately he died.

古文：而汉使路充国佩二千石印绶往使，因送其丧，厚葬直数千金，曰 此汉贵人也 。
现代文：汉朝使者路充国佩带二千石的印信出使匈奴，顺便护送他的丧仪队伍，丰厚葬礼的费用价值数千金，说： 这是汉朝的贵人。 
English: The envoy of the Han Dynasty, Lu Chengguo, sent an envoy to the Xiongnu with a stamped letter of two thousand stone, and escorted his funeral procession, the cost of which was worth thousands of gold, saying: This is a noble person of the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于以为汉杀吾贵使者，乃留路充国不归。
现代文：单于认为汉朝杀死了我的尊贵使者，就扣留了路充国，不让他返回汉朝。
English: Just because he thought that the Han Dynasty had killed my distinguished envoy, he detained Luo Chengguo and would not let him return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：诸所言者，单于特空绐王乌，殊无意入汉及遣太子来质。
现代文：单于所说的那些话，只是白白地欺骗王乌，根本无意到汉朝拜见天子，也无意派太子到汉朝做人质。
English: In addition to the words he said, he only deceived Wang Wu in vain. He had no intention of going to the Han Dynasty to worship the Son of Heaven, nor did he intend to send the prince to the Han Dynasty to be a hostage.

古文：於是匈奴数使奇兵侵犯边。
现代文：于是匈奴屡次派突击队侵犯汉朝边境。
English: As a result, the Huns repeatedly sent raiding parties to violate the Han-Dynasty border.

古文：汉乃拜郭昌为拔胡将军，及浞野侯屯朔方以东，备胡。
现代文：汉朝就任命郭昌做拔胡将军，同浞野侯驻防朔方以东，防御匈奴。
English: The Han Dynasty appointed Guo Chang to be the general of Bahu, and he was stationed east of Shuofang to defend against the Xiongnu.

古文：路充国留匈奴三岁，单于死。
现代文：路充国被扣留在匈奴三年时，单于死去。
English: When Luchangguo was detained by the Xiongnu for three years, he died alone.

古文：乌维单于立十岁而死，子乌师庐立为单于。
现代文：乌维单于继位十年就死去了，他儿子乌师庐继位当了单于。
English: In the tenth year of his reign, Uwishan died, and his son, U Shih-tao, succeeded him.

古文：年少，号为兒单于。
现代文：因为乌师庐年龄小，称为儿单于。
English: Because Wu Shizhao is young, he is called a child.

古文：是岁元封六年也。
现代文：这年是汉武帝元封六年。
English: This year is the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：自此之後，单于益西北，左方兵直云中，右方直酒泉、燉煌郡。
现代文：从此以后，单于越发向西北迁移，左边的军队直到云中郡，右方军队直达酒泉和敦煌郡。
English: From then on, the Yuan army moved further and further to the northwest, with the army on the left reaching Yunzhong County and the army on the right reaching Jiuquan and Dunhuang County.

古文：兒单于立，汉使两使者，一吊单于，一吊右贤王，欲以乖其国。
现代文：儿单于继位后，汉朝派遣两位使者，一位吊唁单于，一位吊唁右贤王，想以此离间他们的君臣关系，使国家混乱。
English: After Emperor Jianzhong succeeded to the throne, the Han Dynasty sent two envoys, one to offer condolences to Emperor Jianzhong and the other to offer condolences to King Uixian, hoping to break the monarch-vassal relationship and cause chaos in the country.

古文：使者入匈奴，匈奴悉将致单于。
现代文：使者进入匈奴，匈奴人把他们全部送到单于那儿。
English: Envoys entered the Huns, and the Huns sent them all away.

古文：单于怒而尽留汉使。
现代文：单于发了怒，把汉朝使者全部扣留。
English: He was so angry that he detained all the emissaries of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉使留匈奴者前後十馀辈，而匈奴使来，汉亦辄留相当。
现代文：汉朝使者被扣留在匈奴的前后共有十多批，匈奴使者来到汉朝，汉朝也扣留相等数量的匈奴使者。
English: A total of more than ten batches of Han Dynasty emissaries were detained before and after the Huns. The Huns' emissaries came to the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty also detained an equal number of Huns' emissaries.

古文：是岁，汉使贰师将军广利西伐大宛，而令因杅将军敖筑受降城。
现代文：这一年，汉朝派贰师将军李广利到西边去讨伐大宛，而命令因杅将军公孙敖建造受降城。
English: In the same year, the Han Dynasty sent the general Li Guangli to the west to fight against Dayuan, and ordered the general Gongsun Yao to build the city.

古文：其冬，匈奴大雨雪，畜多饥寒死。
现代文：这年冬天，匈奴下了大雪，牲畜多半因饥饿寒冷而死去。
English: This winter, heavy snow fell on the Huns, and most of the livestock died of hunger and cold.

古文：兒单于年少，好杀伐，国人多不安。
现代文：儿单于年少，喜欢杀人和打仗，国人多半不安心。
English: Children alone at a young age, like to kill and fight, the Chinese people are mostly uneasy.

古文：左大都尉欲杀单于，使人间告汉曰： 我欲杀单于降汉，汉远，即兵来迎我，我即发。 
现代文：左大都尉想杀单于，派人私下报告汉朝说： 我想杀死单于投降汉朝，汉朝遥远，如果汉朝派兵来迎我，我就立刻杀单于。 
English: Captain Zuo wanted to kill Shan Yu, so he sent someone to report to the Han Dynasty in private, saying, "I want to kill Shan Yu for surrendering to the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty is far away. If the Han Dynasty sends troops to meet me, I will immediately kill Shan Yu."

古文：初，汉闻此言，故筑受降城，犹以为远。
现代文：起初，汉朝听到这话，所以修了受降城，天子还认为城离匈奴遥远。
English: At first, the Han Dynasty heard this, so they built a surrender city. Tianzi also thought that the city was far away from the Xiongnu.

古文：其明年春，汉使浞野侯破奴将二万馀骑出朔方西北二千馀里，期至浚稽山而还。
现代文：第二年春天，汉派浞野侯赵破奴率领两万多骑兵走出朔方郡西北二千余里，约定到达浚稽山才回师。
English: In the spring of the following year, the Han Dynasty dispatched more than 20,000 cavalrymen led by Zhao Banu, the Marquis of Shenye, to march more than 2,000 miles northwest of Shuofang County, with the agreement that they would not return to the division until they had reached the Junchi Mountains.

古文：浞野侯既至期而还，左大都尉欲发而觉，单于诛之，发左方兵击浞野。
现代文：浞野侯按时到达约定的地点才回来，左大都尉想杀单于而被发觉，单于杀了他，派出左方的军队攻击浞野侯。
English: He did not return until he arrived at the agreed place on time. Captain Zuo wanted to kill him and was discovered. After killing him, Zuo sent troops from the left to attack him.

古文：浞野侯行捕首虏得数千人。
现代文：浞野侯边走边捕杀匈奴数千人。
English: He killed thousands of Xiongnu as he went.

古文：还，未至受降城四百里，匈奴兵八万骑围之。
现代文：浞野侯回到离受降城四百里的地方，匈奴八万骑兵围攻他。
English: When he returned to a place four hundred miles away from the besieged city, the Huns besieged him with eighty thousand cavalry.

古文：浞野侯夜自出求水，匈奴间捕，生得浞野侯，因急击其军。
现代文：浞野侯在夜晚独自出去找水，匈奴偷偷地搜捕，活捉了浞野侯，趁机急攻他的军队。
English: He went out alone at night to look for water. The Xiongnu secretly hunted him down, captured him alive, and took the opportunity to attack his army.

古文：军中郭纵为护，维王为渠，相与谋曰： 及诸校尉畏亡将军而诛之，莫相劝归。 
现代文：汉军中的郭纵担任护军，维王担任匈奴降兵的头领，两人商量道： 趁诸位校尉害怕失掉将军会遭汉君诛杀，不要相互劝说回归汉朝。 
English: Guo Zheng of the Han army acted as a bodyguard, and Wei Wang acted as the leader of the Hun troops. The two men discussed: Don't persuade each other to return to the Han Dynasty by taking advantage of the fact that the captains are afraid of losing the general and being killed by the Han Emperor.

古文：军遂没於匈奴。
现代文：汉军于是就陷没在匈奴。
English: The Han army was then trapped by the Huns.

古文：匈奴兒单于大喜，遂遣奇兵攻受降城。
现代文：匈奴儿单于大喜，就派遣突击队进攻受降城。
English: The Xiongnu sent a commando to attack the besieged city of Daxi.

古文：不能下，乃寇入边而去。
现代文：受降城没攻下来，就入侵边塞而去。
English: If the conquered city was not taken, they would invade the border fortress and leave.

古文：其明年，单于欲自攻受降城，未至，病死。
现代文：第二年，单于想亲自攻打受降城，但未到受降城，就病死了。
English: In the second year, Sanyu wanted to personally attack the besieged city, but he died of illness before reaching the besieged city.

古文：兒单于立三岁而死。
现代文：儿单于继位三年就死了。
English: He died just three years after taking the throne.

古文：子年少，匈奴乃立其季父乌维单于弟右贤王呴犁湖为单于。
现代文：他儿子年少，匈奴就立他叔父乌维单于的弟弟右贤王呴犁湖当单于。
English: When his son was young, the Xiongnu appointed his uncle Uvi Shan Yu's younger brother, Ugyen Wang Qinhu, as Shan Yu.

古文：是岁太初三年也。
现代文：这一年是汉武帝太初三年。
English: This year was the third year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：呴犁湖单于立，汉使光禄徐自为出五原塞数百里，远者千馀里，筑城鄣列亭至庐朐，而使游击将军韩说、长平侯卫伉屯其旁，使彊弩都尉路博德筑居延泽上。
现代文：呴犁湖单于继位后，汉朝派光禄徐自为走出五原塞数百里，远的一千余里，修筑小的城堡和哨所，直到庐朐，而派游击将军韩说、长平侯卫伉在这地方驻军，又派强弩都尉路博德在居延泽修建城堡。
English: After the succession of Wuhu Shan, the Han Dynasty sent Guanglu Xu to go hundreds of miles out of Wuhan, more than a thousand miles away, to build small castles and outposts, and sent guerrilla generals Han Han and Changping Houwei to garrison troops in this place, and sent strong-arm lieutenant Lubod to build a castle in Jiyanze.

古文：其秋，匈奴大入定襄、云中，杀略数千人，败数二千石而去，行破坏光禄所筑城列亭鄣。
现代文：这年秋天，匈奴大举入侵定襄、云中，杀死和抢掠数千人，打败几位俸禄二千石的高官才离开。行军途中破坏了光禄徐自为所修的城堡。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Xiongnu invaded Dingxiang and Yunchu on a large scale, killing and looting thousands of people, defeating several high-ranking officials with a salary of 2,000 kilos before leaving. On the way, they destroyed the castle that Guanglu Xu had built for himself.

古文：又使右贤王入酒泉、张掖，略数千人。
现代文：又派右贤王侵入九泉、张掖，抢掠数千人。
English: He also sent Uxian Wang to invade Jiuquan and Zhangye, robbing thousands of people.

古文：会任文击救，尽复失所得而去。
现代文：正遇上汉朝将军任文截击相救，匈奴又全部失掉了抢来的汉人而离去。
English: Just as Han Dynasty General Ren Wen intercepted and rescued them, the Xiongnu lost all the Han people they had captured and left.

古文：是岁，贰师将军破大宛，斩其王而还。
现代文：这一年，贰师将军李广利攻破大宛，杀了大宛王才归来。
English: In the same year, the general Li Guangli defeated Dayuan and killed the king of Dayuan before returning.

古文：匈奴欲遮之，不能至。
现代文：匈奴想阻截李广利，却未能赶到。
English: The Xiongnu tried to intercept Li Guangli, but failed to reach him.

古文：其冬，欲攻受降城，会单于病死。
现代文：这年冬天，匈奴想攻打受降城，恰巧单于病死。
English: This winter, the Huns wanted to attack the besieged city, but it just so happened that he died of illness.

古文：呴犁湖单于立一岁死。匈奴乃立其弟左大都尉且鞮侯为单于。
现代文：呴犁湖单于继位一年就死去，匈奴便立他的弟弟左大都尉且鞮侯当了单于。
English: Wuhu Shan died within a year of succeeding to the throne, and the Xiongnu then appointed his younger brother Zuo Duifeng (左大都尉) and Xiong Hou (侯) to succeed him.

古文：汉既诛大宛，威震外国。
现代文：汉朝诛杀大宛国王后，威震国外。
English: After the Han Dynasty assassinated the King of Daewon, Mei Zhen went abroad.

古文：天子意欲遂困胡，乃下诏曰： 高皇帝遗朕平城之忧，高后时单于书绝悖逆。
现代文：天子想乘机围困匈奴，就颁布诏命说： 高皇帝留给我平城的忧虑，高后时，单于来信所言极为背理叛逆。
English: Emperor Gao wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to besiege the Xiongnu, so he issued an imperial edict saying: Emperor Gao left me the worries of Pingcheng. When Gao was empress, he was extremely treacherous and rebellious just because of what he said in the letter.

古文：昔齐襄公复九世之雠，春秋大之。 
现代文：从前齐襄公报了九世之前的怨仇，《春秋》大加赞美。 
English: Once upon a time, Qixiang publicized the grudge before the ninth generation, and "Spring and Autumn" was highly praised.

古文：是岁太初四年也。
现代文：这一年是汉武帝太初四年。
English: This year was the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：且鞮侯单于既立，尽归汉使之不降者。路充国等得归。
现代文：且鞮侯单于继位后，把汉朝被扣留的又不肯投降的使者送归汉朝，路充国等人才回到汉朝。
English: Moreover, after succeeding to the throne, Gong Houdan sent back to the Han Dynasty the emissaries who were detained by the Han Dynasty and refused to surrender, and Lu Chongguo and other talents returned to the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于初立，恐汉袭之，乃自谓 我兒子，安敢望汉天子！
现代文：单于刚刚继位，害怕汉朝袭击他，就自己说： 我是儿子辈分，哪敢同汉天子相比！
English: Just after succeeding to the throne, afraid of the Han Dynasty attacking him, he said to himself: I am a son of generations, how dare I compare myself to the son of heaven!

古文：汉天子，我丈人行也 。
现代文：汉天子是我的长辈。 
English: Han Tianzi is my elder.

古文：汉遣中郎将苏武厚币赂遗单于。
现代文：汉朝派遣中郎将苏武给单于送去了丰厚的礼物。
English: The Han Dynasty dispatched a middle-man to send a rich gift from Suwu to Shan Yu.

古文：单于益骄，礼甚倨，非汉所望也。
现代文：单于越发骄傲，礼节非常不恭敬，汉朝大失所望。
English: In addition to becoming more and more proud, the etiquette was very disrespectful, and the Han Dynasty was greatly disappointed.

古文：其明年，浞野侯破奴得亡归汉。
现代文：第二年，浞野侯赵破奴逃离匈奴，回到汉朝。
English: In the following year, Zhao Bonu, the Marquis of Shenyang, fled from the Xiongnu and returned to the Han Dynasty.

古文：其明年，汉使贰师将军广利以三万骑出酒泉，击右贤王於天山，得胡首虏万馀级而还。匈奴大围贰师将军，几不脱。汉兵物故什六七。
现代文：第二年，汉朝派贰师将军李广利率三万骑兵走出酒泉，在天山攻击右贤王，杀死和俘虏匈奴一万多人，在回来的时候，匈奴人包围了贰师将军，几乎没有逃脱，汉朝军队死去十分之六七。
English: In the second year, the Han Dynasty sent General Li Guangzhi with 30,000 cavalry out of Jiuquan to attack King Uxian in Tianshan, killing and capturing more than 10,000 Huns. When they returned, the Huns surrounded General Li Guangzhi and barely escaped. Sixty-seven out of ten Han Dynasty troops died.

古文：汉复使因杅将军敖出西河，与彊弩都尉会涿涂山，毋所得。
现代文：汉朝又派因杅将军公孙敖走出西河地区，同强弩都尉在涿涂山会合，什么也没有得到。
English: The Han Dynasty also sent the general Gongsun Rong out of the West River region to meet with the captain Qiang Rong in the Zhudu Mountain, but nothing was gained.

古文：又使骑都尉李陵将步骑五千人，出居延北千馀里，与单于会，合战，陵所杀伤万馀人，兵及食尽，欲解归，匈奴围陵，陵降匈奴，其兵遂没，得还者四百人。
现代文：又派骑都尉李陵率步兵五千人，走出居延以北一千余里，同单于相遇，双方交战，李陵的军队杀死杀伤匈奴一万余人，最后武器和粮食用完了，李陵想摆脱困境而回，可是匈奴却包围了李陵，李陵投降了匈奴，他的军队就覆没了，能回到汉朝的只有四百人。
English: He also sent the cavalry captain Li Ling and five thousand infantrymen, walking more than one thousand miles north of Juyan, and the two sides met and fought. Li Ling's army killed and injured more than ten thousand Huns. Finally, the weapons and food ran out. Li Ling wanted to get out of the predicament and return, but the Huns surrounded Li Ling. Li Ling surrendered to the Huns, and his army was destroyed. Only four hundred people could return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于乃贵陵，以其女妻之。
现代文：单于于是尊宠李陵，把他的女儿嫁给李陵做妻子。
English: So he decided to treat Li Ling with respect and married his daughter to Li Ling.

古文：後二岁，复使贰师将军将六万骑，步兵十万，出朔方。
现代文：这之后第二年，汉朝又派贰师将军率六万骑兵、十万步兵，走出朔方郡。
English: After this, in the second year, the Han Dynasty sent the general of the Gong Division, leading sixty thousand cavalry and one hundred thousand infantry, out of Shuofang County.

古文：彊弩都尉路博德将万馀人，与贰师会。
现代文：强弩都尉路博德率领一万余人，同贰师将军会合。
English: More than ten thousand people, led by Lieutenant Lu Baode Qiangyao, met with the general of the same division.

古文：游击将军说将步骑三万人，出五原。
现代文：游击将军韩说率领步兵和骑兵三万人，走出五原。
English: Han, the guerrilla general, led 30,000 infantrymen and cavalrymen out of Wuhuan.

古文：因杅将军敖将万骑步兵三万人，出雁门。
现代文：因杅将军公孙敖率领一万骑兵、三万步兵，走出雁门。
English: On account of this, General Gongsun Rong led ten thousand cavalry and thirty thousand infantry out of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：匈奴闻，悉远其累重於余吾水北，而单于以十万骑待水南，与贰师将军接战。
现代文：匈奴听到这消息，就把他们的许多贵重的东西转运到远远的余吾水以北，而单于率领十万骑兵在余吾水以南等侯汉军，同贰师将军交战。
English: When the Huns heard the news, they transported many of their valuables to the far north of Yuanshui, and led a hundred thousand cavalry in the south of Yuanshui to wait for the Hou Han army and fight with the general of the division.

古文：贰师乃解而引归，与单于连战十馀日。
现代文：贰师将军就离开原地，领兵往回来，同单于连战十多天。
English: General Zou left the place and led the troops back. They fought for more than ten days in a row.

古文：贰师闻其家以巫蛊族灭，因并众降匈奴，得来还千人一两人耳。
现代文：贰师将军听说他的家属因为巫蛊之罪而被灭族，因而就与他的军队一并投降了匈奴。他的军队能够回到汉朝的在一千人中只有一两人罢了。
English: Hearing that his family members had been exterminated for the crime of witchcraft and sorcery, General Zou surrendered to the Xiongnu together with his army, of which only one or two out of a thousand were able to return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：游击说无所得。
现代文：游击将军韩说一无所得。
English: Han, the guerrilla general, says he got nothing.

古文：因杅敖与左贤王战，不利，引归。
现代文：因杅将军公孙敖同左贤王交战，形势不利，就领兵回到汉朝。
English: Due to the unfavorable situation caused by the war between Gongsun Rong, the general of the Han Dynasty, and Zuoxian Wang, he led his troops back to the Han Dynasty.

古文：是岁汉兵之出击匈奴者不得言功多少，功不得御。
现代文：这年汉朝军队走出边塞同匈奴交战的，都不能谈功劳的多少，因为他们的功劳都不能和损失相抵偿。
English: This year, the Han Dynasty troops who came out of the frontier fortress to fight against the Xiongnu cannot talk about the amount of their merits, because their merits cannot compensate for their losses.

古文：有诏捕太医令随但，言贰师将军家室族灭，使广利得降匈奴。
现代文：皇帝下令逮捕太医令随但，因为是他说出了贰师将军家被灭族的消息，致使李广利投降了匈奴。
English: The emperor ordered the arrest of the Grand Physician Zu Dan, because it was he who revealed the news of the extermination of the general's family, which caused Li Guangli to surrender to the Xiongnu.

古文：太史公曰：孔氏著春秋，隐桓之间则章，至定哀之际则微，为其切当世之文而罔襃，忌讳之辞也。
现代文：太史公说：孔子著《春秋》，对于鲁隐公、鲁桓公时期的事情写得显著明白，到了鲁定公和鲁衰公时期，则记述得隐晦含蓄，因为这是切近当代政治而又没有什么可褒扬的文字，是忌讳的文辞。
English: Tai Shikong said: In Spring and Autumn, Confucius wrote about the events of the Luyin and Luhuan Dynasties with remarkable clarity, but when it came to the Lu Ding and Lu Sheng Dynasties, he wrote in a vague and imprecise manner, because it was close to contemporary politics, but there was nothing to praise in it, and it was taboo.

古文：世俗之言匈奴者，患其徼一时之权，而务纳其说，以便偏指，不参彼己；将率席中国广大，气奋，人主因以决策，是以建功不深。
现代文：世俗人中那些谈论匈奴问题的人，错误就在于他们想侥幸获得一时的权势，因而致力于进献谄言，使其偏面的观点有利，而不考虑匈奴和汉朝的实际情况。将帅们对付匈奴只是依仗着中国土地的广大，士气的雄壮，天子就根据这些来制定对策，所以建立的功业不深广。
English: The mistake of those secular people who talk about the Hun issue is that they want to gain momentary power by chance, so they are committed to giving advice and making their biased views advantageous, without considering the actual situation of the Huns and the Han Dynasty. The generals against the Huns only rely on the vastness of China's land and the strong morale. The Son of Heaven will formulate countermeasures based on these, so the achievements are not extensive.

古文：尧虽贤，兴事业不成，得禹而九州宁。
现代文：尧虽然贤明，却未能自己的力量完成大业，在得到大禹以后，全中国才得以安宁。
English: Although he was a wise man, he was not able to complete the great cause with his own strength. Only after he obtained Dayu, the whole of China was able to enjoy peace.

古文：且欲兴圣统，唯在择任将相哉！
现代文：要想发扬光大圣王的传统，只在于选择任用将相啊！
English: If you want to carry forward the tradition of the great holy kings, it is only a matter of choosing the best generals!

古文：唯在择任将相哉！
现代文：只在于选择任用将相啊！
English: The only thing that matters is the choice of appointment!

