古文：符瑞上夫体睿穷几，含灵独秀，谓之圣人，所以能君四海而役万物，使动植之类，莫不各得其所。
现代文：禀赋睿智通晓天机，蕴含霞气出类拔萃的人被称为圣人。圣人凭天分君临四海而役使万物，使动物植物之类无不各得其所。
English: Those who are endowed with wisdom and insight, and who are outstanding in their abilities, are called sages. With their talents, sages reign over the four seas and help all things, so that all animals and plants can find their place.

古文：百姓仰之，欢若亲戚，芬若椒兰，故为旗章舆服以崇之，玉玺黄屋以尊之。以神器之重，推之于兆民之上，自中智以降，则万物之为役者也。
现代文：百姓景仰圣人，喜爱他就像喜爱亲戚，接近他就像接近椒兰一类香草，所以人们以旗章舆服表示推崇，以王玺宫殿表示尊重，委以国家政权，推举他在万民之上，自中等智慧以下的人，便与万物一起为他所役使。
English: The people revered the saint, loved him as if he were a relative, and approached him as if he were a kind of herb, like chili peppers. Therefore, people showed their reverence with flags and uniforms, showed their respect with the palace of the king, entrusted him with state power, and promoted him above all other people. People with average intelligence and below served him together with all things.

古文：性识殊品，盖有愚暴之理存焉。
现代文：由于人的天性知识有差别，因此就存在愚蠢残暴的人。
English: Due to the difference in people's innate knowledge, there are stupid and cruel people.

古文：见圣人利天下，谓天下可以为利；见万物之归圣人，谓之利万物。
现代文：他们看到圣人有利于天下，就认为拥有天下可以获利；看到万物依附于圣人，就认为拥有万物可以获利。
English: Seeing that the sage is beneficial to the world, they think that owning the world can be profitable; seeing that all things are attached to the sage, they think that owning all things can be profitable.

古文：力争之徒，至以逐鹿方之，乱臣贼子，所以多于世也。
现代文：靠武力争斗之徒，甚至用逐鹿来比方争夺天下，造就是世上有很多乱臣贼子的缘故。
English: Those who rely on force to fight, and even use the metaphor of chasing deer to compete for the world, are the reason why there are many ruffian thieves in the world.

古文：夫龙飞九五，配天光宅，有受命之符，天人之应。
现代文：大凡天子即位，德配上天，拥有天下，必然有接受天命的符瑞，有天人感应的预兆。
English: When the Son of Heaven is enthroned, when virtue is matched with heaven, and when one possesses the whole world, there must be evidence of accepting the destiny of heaven, and there must be signs of divine inspiration.

古文：《易》曰： 河出《图》，洛出《书》，而圣人则之。 
现代文：《周易》说： 董回出现《龙图》，洛水出现《龟书》，圣人便以此为准。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: "Dragon Map" appeared in Dong Hui, "Turtle Book" appeared in Luoshui, and the sage took this as the standard.

古文：符瑞之义大矣。
现代文：由此可见，符瑞的意义是很重大的了。
English: It can be seen that the significance of Fu Rui is very significant.

古文：赫胥、燧人之前，无闻焉。
现代文：在赫胥氏、燧人之前，有关符瑞之事尚没有听说过。
English: Before Hebei and Hunan, no one had heard of Fu Rui.

古文：太昊帝宓牺氏，母曰华胥。燧人之世，有大迹出雷泽，华胥履之，而生伏牺于成纪。
现代文：立星童伏羲氏，他的母亲名华胥在燧人压时代，宣连山现了巨人的足迹，华胥脚踏这些足迹，于是在座纪生出佐摹。
English: Lixing Tongfuxi, his mother's name was Huaju, in the era of pressure from the people, the footprints of the giants appeared on the Xuanlian Mountain, and Huaju stepped on these footprints, so he was born in Zaoji.

古文：蛇身人首，有圣德。
现代文：他蛇身人首，有圣德。
English: He is the head of the snake, and he is holy.

古文：燧人氏没，宓牺代之，受《龙图》，画八卦，所谓 河出《图》 者也。
现代文：燧人氏去世，丛羞替代他为君主，接受《龙图》画八卦，造就是所谓 黄河出《图》 的由来。
English: After the death of Mr. Hayato, Cong Xi replaced him as the monarch and accepted the "Dragon Map" to draw eight sagas, which is the origin of the so-called "Map" from the Yellow River.

古文：有景龙之瑞。
现代文：这时有景龙出现的符瑞。
English: At this time, Fu Rui appeared with Jing Long.

古文：炎帝神农氏，母曰女登，游于华阳，有神龙首感女登于常羊山，生炎帝。人身牛首，有圣德，致大火之瑞。
现代文：堂壶神农氏，他的母亲名女登、她到革阳游历，有神龙首接触立登于当王山，于足生下炎帝他人身牛首，有圣德，出现了大火的符瑞。
English: Don Jug Shennong, his mother was a famous woman, she traveled to Goyang, there was a divine dragon's head touched and stood on the Dangwang Mountain, and a fiery emperor was born at his feet, his body was a cow's head, he had holiness, and there was a fiery fury.

古文：嘉禾生，醴泉出。
现代文：嘉禾出现，醴泉涌出。
English: Good weeds appear, and sweet springs gush forth.

古文：黄帝轩辕氏，母曰附宝，见大电光绕北斗枢星，照郊野，感而孕。
现代文：黄帝轩辕氏，他的母亲名附宾，看见强烈的电光环绕北斗枢星，光照郊野，于是有所感触而怀身孕。
English: Mr. Huang Di Xuanqian, his mother's name attached to the guest, saw a strong electric glow around the Big Dipper, illuminating the countryside, so he felt something and became pregnant.

古文：二十五月而生黄帝于寿丘。
现代文：二十五个月后在寿丘生出黄帝。
English: Twenty-five months later, Huang Di was born in Shouqiu.

古文：弱而能言，龙颜，有圣德，劾百神朝而使之。
现代文：黄帝小时便会说话，面貌似龙，有圣德，下令百神朝拜并役使他们。
English: The Yellow Emperor could speak at an early age, his face resembled a dragon, and he had saintly virtues. He ordered the worship of hundreds of gods and served them.

古文：应龙攻蚩尤，战虎、豹、熊、罴四兽之力。以女魃止淫雨。
现代文：命应龙攻打蚩尤，战胜虎、豹、熊、照四种野兽，命女魃止住连绵大雨。
English: In response to the dragon's attack, he defeated the tiger, the leopard, the bear, and the four kinds of beasts, and stopped the continuous heavy rain.

古文：天下既定，圣德光被，群瑞毕臻。
现代文：天下安定后，圣德光照天下，各种各样的吉祥符瑞全部出现了。
English: After the world was stabilized, all kinds of auspicious charms appeared.

古文：有屈轶之草生于庭，佞人入朝，则草指之，是以佞人不敢进。
现代文：有一种叫屈轶的草生在庭前，如果有佞人入朝，那么这草便指向他，因此佞人不敢进身。
English: In front of the court, there is a kind of grass called qu qu qui. If someone enters the court, then this grass will point to him, so the person dares not enter the court.

古文：有景云之瑞，有赤方气与青方气相连；赤方中有两星，青方中有一星，凡三星，皆黄色，以天清明时见于摄提，名曰景星。黄帝黄服斋于中宫，坐于玄扈洛水之上，有凤皇集，不食生虫，不履生草，或止帝之东园，或巢于阿阁，或鸣于庭，其雄自歌，其雌自舞。
现代文：有景云的符瑞，又有南方的赤气与东方的青气相连，南方天空有两颗星，东方天空有一颗星，共三颗星，都呈黄色，在天气清明时出现在摄提，名叫景星黄帝身穿黄色衣服在中宫斋戒，坐在玄扈山和洛水之上，有凤凰飞集，不吃活虫子，不踏活的草木，有时栖息在黄帝的东园，有时栖息在阁楼之上，有时在庭前呜叫，雄乌在地歌唱，雌鸟自由地起舞。
English: There is the fury of the Jingyun, and the red air of the south is connected to the green air of the east. The southern sky has two stars, and the eastern sky has one star. A total of three stars, all yellow, appear in the clear weather. They are named Jingxing Huangdi, wearing yellow clothes, fasting in the middle palace, sitting on the Xuanlu Mountain and Luoshui. There is a phoenix fly agglomerate, not eating live insects, not stepping on live plants. Sometimes it inhabits the East Garden of the Yellow Emperor, sometimes it inhabits the attic, sometimes it wails in front of the court. The male bird sings in the

古文：麒麟在囿，神鸟来仪。
现代文：麒麟在囿苑中，神乌飞来。
English: The unicorn is in the gourd garden, and the god owl flies in.

古文：有大蝼如羊，大螾如虹。
现代文：有像羊一般大的巨型蝼蚁，有像虹一样长的蚯蚓。
English: There are giant ants as big as sheep, with beaks as long as rainbows.

古文：黄帝以土气胜，遂以土德王。
现代文：黄帝以为土气旺盛，于是以上德王。
English: The Yellow Emperor thought that the native spirit was vigorous, so the above German King.

古文：五十年秋七月庚申，天雾三日三夜，昼昏。
现代文：五十年秋七月庚申，天下连续三天三夜下雾，白天昏暗不明。
English: In the autumn and July of the 50th year of Goshun, the sky was foggy for three days and three nights in a row, and the daytime was unclear.

古文：黄帝以问天老、力牧、容成曰： 于公何如？ 
现代文：黄帝为此询问天老、力蝗、查盛道： 这对国家有什么影响? 
English: For this reason, the Yellow Emperor asked Tianlao, Lili Locust, and Cha Sheng: What impact does this have on the country?

古文：天老曰： 臣闻之，国安，其主好文，则凤凰居之；国乱，其主好武，则凤凰去之。今凤凰翔于东郊而乐之，其鸣音中夷则，与天相副。
现代文：天老说： 臣听说国家安宁国君爱文德，那么凤凰就会来国家混乱，国君喜好武力，那么凤凰就会离开、如今凤凰在东郊飞翔而乐居其地，它的鸣声符合乐律，与天意相符。
English: Tianlao said: "The minister heard that the country is peaceful, and the king loves Wende, then the phoenix will bring chaos to the country. The king likes force, then the phoenix will leave. Now the phoenix is flying in the eastern suburbs and is happy to live there. Its singing is in line with the musical rhythm and is in line with the will of heaven.

古文：以是观之，天有严教以赐帝，帝勿犯也。 
现代文：由此可见，上天将有庄严的教令要赐给陛下，陛下不可违背了。 
English: From this, it can be seen that Heaven will have a solemn edict to give to His Majesty, and His Majesty must not violate it.

古文：乃召史卜之，龟燋。史曰： 臣不能占也。
现代文：于是又召太史占卜，龟壳烤焦了，太史说： 臣无法占了。
English: So he summoned the Grand Historian for divination. The turtle's shell was scorched, and the Grand Historian said, "The minister can't account for it."

古文：其问之圣人。 
现代文：请陛下去问圣人。 
English: Your Majesty, please go and ask the saint.

古文：帝曰： 已问天老、力牧、容成矣。 
现代文：黄帝说： 我已经问了天叁、立牲、容寇。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I have already asked Tianyao, Lidao, and Juncao.

古文：史北面再拜曰： 龟不违圣智，故燋。 
现代文：太史向童童再拜说： 龟卜不能超越圣人的智慧，所以烤焦了。 
English: Taishi bowed to Tong Tong again and said, "The turtle cannot surpass the wisdom of the sage, so it was scorched."

古文：雾除，游于洛水之上，见大鱼，杀五牲以醮之，天乃甚雨；七日七夜，鱼流于海，得《图》、《书》焉。
现代文：大雾散去，童童在迢丛泛游，看见一条大鱼，杀五牲来祭祀它，天因而下大雨，一直下了七天七夜，大鱼游入海中，于是得到《龙图》、《龟书》。
English: The fog dispersed, the child wandered in the reed bushes, saw a big fish, killed five animals to sacrifice it, and the sky rained heavily, and it rained for seven days and seven nights. The big fish swam into the sea, so he got "Dragon Map" and "Turtle Book."

古文：《龙图》出河，《龟书》出洛，赤文篆字，以授轩辕。
现代文：《龙圆》出于墓回，《龟书》出于洛水，赤纹篆字，授给轩整区。
English: "Dragon Circle" from Tomb Sweeping, "Book of the Turtle" from Luoshui, red-striped characters, awarded to Xuan Zhe District.

古文：轩辕接万神于明庭，今寒门谷口是也。
现代文：堑翅在明廷接见万神，就是现在的寒门谷口。
English: Gan Ying received all the gods in Mingting, which is now the cold gate valley mouth.

古文：帝挚少昊氏，母曰女节，见星如虹，下流华渚，既而梦接意感，生少昊。
现代文：帝挚少吴氏，母亲名女节，看见星星像彩虹一般坠于华渚，在梦中与此星相交，意有所感，于是生下少昊。
English: Empress Dowager Shao Wu, Mother's Day, saw the stars fall like rainbows on Huazhu, and in her dream, she met the star and felt something, and gave birth to Shao Hao.

古文：登帝位，有凤皇之瑞。
现代文：少昊即帝位，有凤凰来仪的符瑞。
English: Shao Hao is the imperial throne, and there is a phoenix-like Fu Rui.

古文：帝颛顼高阳氏，母曰女枢，见瑶光之星，贯月如虹，感己于幽房之宫，生颛顼于若水。
现代文：帝颛项高阳氏，母亲名女枢，看见瑶光星像彩虹一般流贯月亮，在幽房中与自己相交，在若水生颛顼。
English: Emperor Xiang Gaoyang, the mother of the famous female pivot, saw the radiant star like a rainbow flowing through the moon, intersecting with himself in the secluded room, and in the young aquatic dragonfly.

古文：首戴干戈，有圣德。
现代文：头戴干戈，有圣德。
English: He wears a kangaroo on his head and is a saint.

古文：生十年而佐少昊氏，二十而登帝位。
现代文：生下来十年便辅佐少昊氏，二十岁便登上帝位。
English: Ten years after he was born, he assisted Shao Hao and ascended to the throne at the age of 20.

古文：帝喾高辛氏，生而骈齿，有圣德，代高阳氏王天下。
现代文：帝罂高辛氏，天生的前齿两个并为一个，有圣德，继高阳氏统治天。
English: Emperor Gao Xin, born with two front teeth and one, has sanctity, following Gao Yang's rule of heaven.

古文：使鼓人拊鞞鼓，击钟磬，凤凰鼓翼而舞。
现代文：命令鼓师敲稗鼓，击钟磬，凤凰振翅起舞。
English: He ordered the drummers to beat the gongs and drums, the bells and cymbals, and the phoenixes to dance.

古文：帝尧之母曰庆都，生于斗维之野，常有黄云覆护其上。
现代文：帝尧的母亲名庆都，生在斗维之野，经常有黄云覆护在她的上方。
English: Her mother, Mei Qingdu, who was born in Tuwei, often had a yellow cloud hovering over her.

古文：及长，观于三河，常有龙随之。
现代文：长大之后在三河观赏景物，常有龙跟随她。
English: After she grew up, she enjoyed the scenery in Mikawa. Dragons often followed her.

古文：一旦龙负《图》而至，其文要曰： 亦受天祐。 
现代文：一天清晨龙负《图》而至，上面的文字大意说： 亦受天佑。 
English: One morning, a dragon arrived bearing the word "Tu" (picture), and the words above it said something to the effect of: "He is also blessed by God."

古文：眉八彩，鬓发长七尺二寸，面锐上丰下，足履翼宿。既而阴风四合，赤龙感之。
现代文：图上之人，眉毛八种颜色，鬓发长七尺二寸，面部上小下宽，足踏翼宿，既而阴风四起，赤龙与她交合。
English: The person on the picture has eyebrows of eight colors, her hair is seven feet and two inches long, her face is small and wide, and her foot rests on the wing. Even though it is cloudy, the red dragon mates with her.

古文：孕十四月而生尧于丹陵，其状如图。
现代文：怀孕十四个月后在丹陵生下尧，他的容貌同图上画的一样。
English: Fourteen months into her pregnancy, Danling gave birth to a cub with the same appearance as the one pictured above.

古文：及长，身长十尺，有圣德，封于唐。
现代文：长大后，身高十尺，有圣德，封在唐地。
English: After he grew up, he was ten feet tall, had holiness, and was sealed in Tang.

古文：梦攀天而上。
现代文：尧曾梦见自己攀天而上。
English: Zou once dreamed of climbing to the top of the sky.

古文：高辛氏衰，天下归之。
现代文：高辛氏败，天人民归顺他。
English: Gao Xin was defeated, and the people of Heaven surrendered to him.

古文：在帝位七十年，景星出翼，凤凰在庭，硃草生，嘉禾秀，甘露润，醴泉出，日月如合璧，五星如连珠。
现代文：在帝位七十年，景星出现在翼宿，凤凰飞来庭前，朱草生长，嘉禾茂盛，甘露滋润，醴泉涌出，曰月如合璧，五星似连珠。
English: In the 70th year of the emperor's reign, the star appeared in the wing lodging, the phoenix flew in front of the court, the vermilion grass grew, the precious grass flourished, the nectar moisturized, the spring gushed out, the moon was like a combination, and the five stars were like a string of pearls.

古文：厨中自生肉，其薄如箑，摇动则风生，食物寒而不臭，名曰 箑脯。 
现代文：厨房里自然生出肉，像扇子那样薄，摇动起来便有风，寒冷而不腐臭，就称作 扇脯 。
English: Meat that grows naturally in the kitchen, thin like a fan, shakes when it is windy, cold but not rancid, is called fan stew.

古文：又有草夹阶而生，月朔始生一荚，月半而生十五荚，十六日以后，日落一荚，及晦而尽；月小则一荚焦而不落，名曰 蓂荚，一曰 历荚 。
现代文：又有草在台阶两旁生长，每月初一生一荚，到月半生出十五荚，十六日以后，每天掉一荚，到三十便落尽，如果月小就有一荚枯萎而不掉落，称作 黄荚 ，又称作 历荚 。
English: There is also grass growing on both sides of the steps. At the beginning of each month, there is a sprout, and by the middle of the month, there are fifteen sprouts. After the sixteenth day, one sprout falls every day, and by the thirtieth day, it is all gone. If the moon is small, one sprout will wither and not fall, and it is called the yellow sprout, also known as the calendar sprout.

古文：归功于舜，将以天下禅之。乃洁斋修坛场于河、洛，择良日，率舜等升首山，遵河渚。
现代文：帝尧把功劳归于舜，将要把天下让给疆，于是洗浴斋戒，在黄河、雒邑修建坛场，选择吉曰率领爱等人登上首山，沿着黄河边行进。
English: Emperor Qian gave the credit to Yao and was about to give the world to Jiang, so he took a bath, fasted, built an altar in the Yellow River and Yao's hometown, and led Ai and others to climb the first mountain and march along the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：有五老游焉，盖五星之精也。
现代文：有五位老人在那里漫游，是五星的精灵。
English: Five old men roam there, the spirits of the five stars.

古文：相谓曰： 《河图》将来告帝以期，知我者重瞳黄姚。 
现代文：他们对毫说： 《河图》会把禅让的时间告诉陛下，了解我们的人是重瞳黄姚。 
English: They said to the miller: "The river map will tell your majesty the time for zen, and the person who understands us is Chong Hitomi Huang Yao."

古文：五老因飞为流星，上入昴。
现代文：五老于是飞升化为流星，直上昴宿。
English: As a result, the five old men were transformed into shooting stars, and flew straight up to their lodgings.

古文：二月辛丑昧明，礼备，至于日昃，荣光出河，休气四塞，白云起，回风摇，乃有龙马衔甲，赤文绿色，临坛而止，吐《甲图》而去。
现代文：二月辛丑的清晨，禅让礼仪准备完毕，直到日暮时分，祥光从黄河升起，佳气遍布四面八方，白云升起，旋风飘摇，于是有龙马日衔甲壳而至，龙马绿色有红色花纹，它到坛场止步，吐出《甲图》便离去了。
English: In the early morning of the bitter-ugly February, the Zen let the etiquette be prepared, until the dusk, the auspicious light rose from the Yellow River, the auspicious atmosphere spread in all directions, the white clouds rose, the whirlwind wavered, so there was a dragon horse with a day rank carapace, the dragon horse green had a red pattern, it stopped at the altar, spat out the "meta map" and left.

古文：甲似龟，背广九尺，其图以白玉为检，赤玉为字，泥以黄金，约以青绳。
现代文：甲壳像龟甲，背部宽九尺，上面的图文用白玉作书简，用赤玉为字，用黄金涂饰，用青绳编束。
English: The carapace is like a tortoise shell, the back is nine feet wide, and the above pictures and texts are written in white jade, written in red jade, decorated with gold, and bound with blue rope.

古文：检文曰： 闿色授帝舜。 
现代文：书简上说： 欢乐赐给帝舜。 
English: The brief said: "Give joy to the emperor."

古文：言虞、夏、殷、周、秦、汉当授天命。
现代文：又说虞、夏、殷、周、秦、漠都将接受天命。
English: It is also said that Yu, Xia, Yin, Zhou, Qin and Mu will all accept the fate of heaven.

古文：帝乃写其言，藏于东序。
现代文：帝尧于是记下这些话，藏在束厢房。
English: The emperor then wrote down these words and hid them in his private room.

古文：后二年二月仲辛，率群臣沈璧于洛。
现代文：以后二年二月的仲辛曰，尧率领群臣将璧玉沉入洛水。
English: In February of the following year, Zhong Xin said that Zou led a group of ministers to sink the gem into the Luoshui River.

古文：礼毕，退俟，至于下昃，赤光起，玄龟负书而出，背甲赤文成字，止于坛。
现代文：典礼完毕，退下等候，直到曰暮之时，红光升起，玄龟负书从洛水中出来，甲壳上赤色花纹形成字迹，在坛场停住。
English: When the ceremony is over, stand back and wait until dusk, when the red light rises, the black turtle emerges from the Luo water, the red pattern on the carapace forms the writing, and stops at the altar.

古文：其书言当禅舜，遂让舜。
现代文：上面的文字说应当禅位于舜。于是尧让位于舜。
English: The text above says that zen should be in, so  gives way to.

古文：帝舜有虞氏，母曰握登，见大虹意感，而生舜于姚墟。
现代文：帝舜有虞氏，母亲名握登，看见大虹，意有所感，于是在姚墟生下舜。
English: The emperor's concubine was a member of the Yu clan. Her mother's name was Shifen Deng. When she saw the great rainbow, she felt something and gave birth to a son in Yaoji.

古文：目重瞳子，故名重华。
现代文：他眼睛有两个瞳孔，所以名叫重华。
English: He has two pupils in his eyes, so his name is Chonghua.

古文：龙颜大口，黑色，身长六尺一寸。
现代文：生得龙颜大口，皮肤黝黑，身长六尺一寸。
English: Longyan was born with a large mouth, dark skin, and a height of six feet one inch.

古文：舜父母憎舜，使其涂廪，自下焚之，舜服鸟工衣服飞去。
现代文：舜的父母憎恶舜，命他去涂刷谷仓，从下面放火烧他，舜穿上鸟神的衣服从上空飞离。
English: Toad's parents hate him. They order him to paint the barn, set it on fire from below, and fly away dressed as a bird god.

古文：又使浚井，自上填之以石，舜服龙工衣自傍而出。
现代文：叉命他到井底掏井，从上面填塞石头，舜穿上龙神的衣服从井旁出来。
English: He was ordered to dig a well at the bottom of the well, fill it with stones from above, put on the dragon god's clothes and come out of the well.

古文：耕于历山，梦眉长与发等。
现代文：他在历山耕田，梦见眉毛长得像头发一样长。
English: He dreamed that his eyebrows grew as long as his hair.

古文：及即帝位，蓂荚生于阶，凤凰巢于庭，击石拊石，百兽率舞，景星出房，地出乘黄之马，西王母献白环、玉玦。
现代文：到他就帝位之后，黄荚在台阶生长，凤凰在庭前做巢，敲击石块，百兽一起跳舞，景星出现于房宿，人间产出乘黄马，西王母献上白环和玉块。
English: After he ascended the throne, the yellow dragonfly grew on the steps, the phoenix made a nest in front of the court and tapped on the stones, the beasts danced together, the star appeared in the room, the human output took the yellow horse, and the Western Queen Mother presented the white ring and the jade block.

古文：舜在位十有四年，奏钟石笙筦未罢，而天大雷雨，疾风发屋拔木，桴鼓播地，钟磬乱行，舞人顿伏，乐正狂走。
现代文：舜在位十四年，有一次演奏钟磬笙管尚未结束，而天突然下起大雷雨，狂风掀掉屋瓦，拔倒树木，鼓棰散落地下，钟磬混乱不堪，舞伎全伏在地上，乐师忙乱跑走。
English: In the 14th year of his reign, there was a time when the performance of the gong and gong pipe had not yet ended, and suddenly a heavy thunderstorm came down, the wind swept away the roof tiles, pulled down trees, the drums scattered underground, the gong and gong were in chaos, the dance was completely on the ground, and the musicians ran away in a hurry.

古文：舜乃拥璇持衡而笑曰： 明哉！
现代文：舜于是手持璇玑玉衡笑着说： 很明显啊!
English: So, holding his scepter, Yu Heng smiled and said, "It's obvious!

古文：夫天下非一人之天下也，亦乃见于钟石笙筦乎！ 乃荐禹于天，使行天子事。
现代文：天下并不归我一人所有，这一点也表现在演奏钟磬笙管的时候 于是向上天荐禹，让他代行天子事务。
English: The world does not belong to me alone, this is also reflected in the performance of the gong pipe. Therefore, I recommend Yu to heaven, and let him act on behalf of God's children.

古文：于时和气普应，庆云兴焉，若烟非烟，若云非云，郁郁纷纷，萧索轮囷，百工相和而歌《庆云》。
现代文：这时候天下遍布和顺之气，吉祥的庆云升腾起来，似烟非烟，似云非云，郁郁纷纷，飘流舒卷，百官相和，齐唱《庆云歌》。
English: At this time, the world is filled with the atmosphere of harmony. The auspicious clouds of celebration are rising. It looks like smoke, but it is not smoke. It looks like clouds, but it is not clouds. It looks like clouds, but it is not clouds. It looks like clouds, but it is not clouds. It looks like clouds, but it is not clouds.

古文：帝乃倡之曰： 庆云烂兮，纠缦缦兮。
现代文：帝舜于是领唱道： 庆云灿烂啊，舒缓回旋啊。
English: Then the imperial eunuch led the chorus in singing: "Glorious clouds, soothing swirls."

古文：日月光华，旦复旦兮。 群臣咸进，稽首曰： 明明上天，烂然星陈。日月光华，弘予一人。 
现代文：日月光华，天天照临啊 群臣都来朝拜，叩首唱道： 上天多么明亮，陈列着灿烂的星星日月的光华，照耀我君一人。 
English: The glory of the sun and the moon, shining every day, ah, the courtiers all came to worship, bowing their heads and singing: How bright the heavens are, displaying brilliant stars, the glory of the sun and the moon, shining on me alone.

古文：帝乃再歌曰： 日月有常，星辰有行。
现代文：帝舜于是又唱道： 曰月出入有常度，星辰运行有秩序。
English: The emperor then sang again: "The moon has a regular cycle, and the stars move in an orderly manner."

古文：四时从经，万姓允诚。
现代文：四季更替依从规律，天下万民淳朴诚信。啊!
English: The four seasons follow a regular pattern, and all the people in the world are simple and honest. Ah!

古文：于予论乐，配天之灵。
现代文：评述这乐舞，它与天地之灵媲美。
English: Reviewing the music and dance, it is comparable to the spirit of heaven and earth.

古文：迁于圣肾，莫不咸听。
现代文：散播到圣贤之人，无不仔细倾听。
English: Spread to the sages, who all listen carefully.

古文：乎鼓之，轩乎舞之。
现代文：将鼓声敲响，欢乐地跳起舞来。
English: They beat the drums and danced joyfully.

古文：精华以竭，褰裳去之。 
现代文：我美好的时期将要消失，挽起衣裳就要离去。 
English: My best days are fading away, I'm taking my clothes off and leaving.

古文：于是八风修通，庆云业聚，蟠龙奋迅于其藏，蛟鱼踊跃于其渊，龟鳖咸出其穴，迁虞而事夏。
现代文：于是八面来风，祥云聚集，蟠龙在它藏身处迅速飞腾，蛟鱼在深渊中踊跃跳出，龟鳖全从洞穴中出来，离开虞舜而事奉夏禹。
English: As a result, the wind came from all directions, auspicious clouds gathered, the dragon soared rapidly in its hiding place, the eel jumped out in the abyss, and the turtles all came out of the cave, leaving the cormorant to serve Xia Yu.

古文：舜乃设坛于河，依尧故事。
现代文：舜于是在黄河边设坛，依照尧时的旧例行弹让之事。
English: So he set up a platform on the edge of the Yellow River and played the game according to his old routine.

古文：至于下昃，荣光休气至，黄龙负《图》，长三十二尺，广九尺，出于坛畔，赤文绿错，其文言当禅禹。
现代文：等到日暮之时，祥光瑞气来临，黄龙负《图》，长有三十二尺，宽有九尺，出现在坛场旁边，赤色文字，绿色涂饰，《图》中的文字说，应当禅让给禹。
English: By the time of dusk, the auspicious light and auspicious energy came, and the yellow dragon negative "Tu," thirty-two feet long and nine feet wide, appeared next to the altar, with red text and green painting. The text in "Tu" said that Zen should be given to Yu.

古文：帝禹有夏氏，母曰修己，出行，见流星贯昴，梦接意感，既而吞神珠。
现代文：帝禹有夏氏，母亲名脩己，外山行走，看见流星穿贯昴宿，梦中与流星交合，不久又吞下神珠。
English: Emperor Yu Yu Xia, whose mother's name was Yan Zi, was walking in the mountains when he saw a meteor pass through his lodgings. In his dream, he had intercourse with the meteor and soon swallowed the sacred bead.

古文：修己背剖，而生禹于石纽。
现代文：脩己剖开背部，在石纽生下禹。
English: He cut open his back and gave birth to Yu in Shinui.

古文：虎鼻大口，两耳参镂，首戴钩钤，胸有玉斗，足文履己，故名文命。
现代文：他生得虎鼻大日，两耳有三孔，头上戴钩铃星，胸前有玉斗，足底纹理呈己形，所以禹取名为文命。
English: He was born with a large tiger's nose, two ears with three holes, a hooked star on his head, a ball on his chest, and the texture of the soles of his feet was his own shape, so he was named Wenmin.

古文：长有圣德。
现代文：长大后有圣德。
English: When they grow up, they will have holiness.

古文：长九尺九寸，梦自洗于河，以手取水饮之；又有白狐九尾之瑞。
现代文：身长九尺九寸，梦见自己在黄河中沐浴，用手取水喝。又有九尾白狐的瑞兆。
English: He is nine feet nine inches tall. He dreamed that he was bathing in the Yellow River and drinking water with his hands. There was also the auspicious sign of a white fox with nine tails.

古文：当尧之世，舜举之。
现代文：在尧统治时期，舜举荐他。
English: During the reign of Zou, Zou recommended him.

古文：禹观于河，有长人白面鱼身，出曰： 吾河精也。 
现代文：禹在黄河巡视，有巨人白面鱼身，跳出河面说： 我是河神。 
English: Yu patrols the Yellow River. A giant, white-faced fish jumps out of the water and says, "I am a river god."

古文：呼禹曰： 文命治淫。 
现代文：又呼唤禹说： 塞佥治理洪水。 
English: He also called on Yu, saying: "Flood prevention is the key to flood control.

古文：言讫，授禹《河图》，言治水之事，乃退入于渊。
现代文：说完之后，授予禹《河图》，叙说治水的事情，然后退入深水中。
English: After saying this, Yu was awarded the "river map," described the flood control, and then retreated into the deep water.

古文：禹治水既毕，天锡玄珪，以告成功。
现代文：禹治水以后，上天赐给他玄珪，以表示成功。
English: After Yu cured the water, God gave him Xuan Zang to show his success.

古文：夏道将兴，草木暢茂，青龙止于郊，祝融之神，降于崇山。
现代文：夏朝将要兴起，草木生长茂盛，青龙停留在郊野，火神祝融降临塞旦。
English: The summer morning will rise, plants and trees will grow luxuriantly, the blue dragon will stay in the countryside, and the god of fire will descend to Sedan.

古文：乃受舜禅，即天子之位。
现代文：于是接受舜的惮让即天子之位。
English: As a result, he accepted the position of the son of heaven.

古文：洛出《龟书》六十五字，是为《洪范》，此谓 洛出《书》 者也。
现代文：洛水出现了《龟书》，共六十五个字，这便是《洪范》，这就是所谓的 洛水出现《龟书》 。
English: Luoshui appeared "Turtle Book," a total of sixty-five words, this is "Hong Fan," this is the so-called Luoshui appeared "Turtle Book."

古文：南巡狩，济江，中流有二黄龙负舟，舟人皆惧。禹笑曰： 吾受命于天，屈力以养人。
现代文：禹到南方巡狩，渡垦辽，江中有两条黄龙托着船，船工都害怕了灵笑着说： 我接受天命，尽力养育百姓。
English: When Yu went on a hunting tour to the south and passed through Liao, there were two yellow dragons in the river holding the boat. The boatmen were afraid of the spirits and said with a smile: I accept the fate of heaven and do my best to raise the people.

古文：生，性也；死，命也。
现代文：求生，是人的本性死，是各人的命运。
English: Life and death are predetermined.

古文：奚忧龙哉！ 
现代文：何必害怕龙! 
English: Why be afraid of the dragon!

古文：龙于是曳尾而逝。
现代文：龙于是拖着尾巴消失了。
English: The dragon then disappeared, dragging its tail.

古文：高辛氏之世妃曰简狄，以春分玄鸟至之日，从帝祀郊禖，与其妹浴于玄丘之水。有玄鸟衔卵而坠之，五色甚好，二人竞取，覆以玉筐。
现代文：高辛氏的妃子名个达，她在春分燕子来临的日子随从天子到郊外祭祀天地，同妹妹在玄丘之水沐浴、有燕子衔卵坠落水中，五彩斑斓，非常美丽，二人争相夺取，用一玉筐覆盖着卵。
English: Gao Xin's concubine is famous. On the day of the spring equinox, when the swallows come out, she followed the heavenly beings to the suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth. She bathed with her sister in the water of Xuanqiu, and there were swallows laying eggs in the falling water. They were multicolored and very beautiful, and the two of them competed to capture them, covering the eggs with a jade basket.

古文：简狄先得而吞之，遂孕。
现代文：简狄先得到，吞进肚裹，于是怀了孕。
English: Jandy got it first, swallowed it, and became pregnant.

古文：胸剖而生契。
现代文：剖开胸而生下契。
English: He was born with his chest cut open.

古文：长为尧司徒，成功于民，受封于商。
现代文：垄长大后担任尧的司徒，对百姓有功劳，被封在商地。
English: After Reng grew up, he served as a magistrate of the imperial court, and was awarded for his services to the people. He was sealed in a trading post.

古文：后十三世，生主癸。
现代文：到了第十三代，主癸出生。
English: On the thirteenth generation, the main stork was born.

古文：主癸之妃曰扶都，见白气贯月，意感，以乙日生汤，号天乙。
现代文：主癸的妃子名达都，看见白气流贯月亮，意有所感，在乙曰生下荡，号王乙。
English: The lord's concubine, whose name was Dadu, saw the white air flowing through the moon and had a certain feeling. On the second day, she gave birth to Wang B, hence the name Wang B.

古文：丰下锐上，晰而有髯，句身而扬声，身长九尺，臂有四肘，是曰殷汤。
现代文：面部上尖削下丰满，皮肤白皙而有髯，身子佝侵而声音洪亮，身长九尺，两臂有四肘，这就是壁遥。
English: His face is chiseled and plump, his skin is fair and wrinkled, his body is muscular and his voice is booming, he is nine feet tall and his arms are four cubits long. This is Kabeya.

古文：汤在亳，能修其德。
现代文：荡在毫地，能修养德行。
English: is able to cultivate virtue.

古文：伊挚将应汤命，梦乘船过日月之傍。
现代文：但挚将要应荡的召命，梦见乘船从曰月旁边经过。
English: However, he sincerely wanted to fulfill his calling, and dreamed of taking a boat to pass by the moon.

古文：汤乃东至于洛，观帝尧之坛，沈璧退立，黄鱼双踊，黑鸟随鱼止于坛，化为黑玉。
现代文：汤柬行到达洛水，观看帝尧时的祭坛，将玉璧沉下洛水，侍立在一旁，衹见黄鱼双双跳跃，黑乌随鱼停在祭坛，化成黑玉。
English: Tang Kham went to Luoshui, watched the altar at the time of the emperor's enthronement, sank the jade gem into Luoshui, and stood by. He saw the yellow fish jump in pairs, and the black cormorant stopped at the altar with the fish, turning into a black jade.

古文：又有黑龟，并赤文成字，言夏桀无道，汤当代之。
现代文：又有黑龟，背上赤色花纹形成字迹，说夏桀是无道昏君，汤应当取代他。
English: There is also a black turtle with a red pattern on its back, saying that Xia Yao is a useless dimwit and that Tang should replace him.

古文：檮杌之神，见于邳山。有神牵白狼衔钩而入商朝。
现代文：梢杌之神，出现于邳山有神人牵白狼衔钩进入商朝廷。
English: The god of the treetops appeared in Shaoshan, and the godman led the white wolf into the Shang court.

古文：金德将盛，银自山溢。
现代文：五行中金德将要兴盛，白银从山中溢出。
English: Gold will flourish in the Five Elements, and silver will overflow from the mountains.

古文：汤将奉天命放桀，梦及天而舓之，遂有天下。商人后改天下之号曰殷。
现代文：汤就要奉天命放逐夏桀，做梦用叾头舔天，于足拥有天下商人后来改国号为凿。
English: Tang was to be banished to Xia Ju by order of heaven, dreamed of licking heaven with a hoe, and later changed his country name to Chisel after becoming a merchant who owned the world.

古文：高辛氏之世妃曰姜嫄，助祭郊禖，见大人迹履之。当时歆如有人道感己，遂有身而生男。
现代文：高辛氏的妃子名姜螈，随从天子到郊外祭天地，看见巨人的足迹而踏上去，当时若有所感，似乎有人与她交合，于是有了身孕而生下一男孩。
English: Gao Xin's concubine, named Jiang Qi, followed the heavenly son to the suburban festival world, saw the giant's footprints and stepped on them. At that time, if she had any feeling, it seemed that someone had intercourse with her, so she became pregnant and gave birth to a boy.

古文：以为不详，弃之厄巷，羊牛避而不践；又送之山林之中，会伐林者荐覆之；又取而置寒冰上，大鸟来以一翼藉覆之。
现代文：她认为不吉祥，把他抛弃在小巷中，牛羊避开而不去踩他；又送到山林裹，遇到伐木者用草席覆盖他；又取来放在寒冰上，有大鸟来用一只翅膀覆盖他。
English: She thought it was unlucky, and abandoned him in the alley, so that the cattle and sheep avoided stepping on him; she also sent him to the mountains and forests to be wrapped, and when she met the woodcutter, she covered him with a straw mat; she also took him and put him on the cold ice, and a big bird came and covered him with one wing.

古文：姜嫄以为异，乃收养焉，名之曰弃。
现代文：姜螈认为这孩子很奇异，才收养了他，取名为弃。
English: Jiang Chen thought that this child was very strange, so he adopted him and gave up his name.

古文：枝颐有异相，长为尧稷官，有功于民。
现代文：他有双下颔，形貌特异。匠大后成为尧主管农业的臣子，对百姓有功劳。
English: He had a double lower jaw and a unique appearance. After he graduated from the artisan college, he became a vassal in charge of agriculture, and was of great service to the people.

古文：后稷之孙曰公刘，有德，诸侯皆以天子之礼待之。
现代文：后稷的孙子名公刘，有德行，诸侯都用天子的礼节对待他。
English: Hou Yi's grandson, Liu Mingguo, was virtuous, and all the princes treated him with the etiquette of a son of heaven.

古文：初黄帝之世，谶言曰： 西北为王，期在甲子，昌制命，发行诛，旦行道。 
现代文：起初在黄帝时期，谶言说： 西北称王，时在甲子，昌创基业，施行诛伐，旦行治道。 
English: At the beginning of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Yan Yan said: "Northwestern China is the king, while in Jiaozuo, Chang created the foundation, carried out reclamation, and ruled the country.

古文：及公刘之后，十三世而生季历。
现代文：在公刘之后十三世时；圣历出生。
English: In the thirteenth generation after King Liu, the holy calendar was born.

古文：季历之十年，飞龙盈于殷之牧野，此盖圣人在下位将起之符也。季历之妃曰太任，梦长人感己，溲于豕牢而生昌，是为周文王。
现代文：圣历十岁时，飞龙齐集于殷国的牧野，这是圣人在臣位就要兴起的符瑞季历的妃子名太任，梦见巨人与自己交合，在猪圈中解溲而生下姬昌，造就是周文王。
English: When the sacred calendar was ten years old, the flying dragons gathered together in the pastures of Yin. This was the name of the concubine of Furui calendar, which the saint was about to rise to the position of a vassal. He dreamed that the giant had intercourse with himself, untying the knot in the pigsty and giving birth to Kichang, who became King Zhouwen.

古文：龙颜虎肩，身长十尺，胸有四乳。
现代文：他生得龙颜虎肩，身高十尺，胸前有四乳。
English: He was born with a long face and broad shoulders, is ten feet tall and has four breasts on his chest.

古文：太王曰： 吾世当有兴者，其在昌乎！ 
现代文：太王说： 我们家族将有兴起的人，这个人就是姬昌吧! 
English: The king said, "Our family will have a new member, and this person will be Ji Chang!"

古文：季历之兄曰太伯，知天命在昌，适越终身不反。
现代文：季历的长兄名太伯，知道上天降命于姬昌，就前往垫地，终身不回。
English: The eldest brother of the Quarterly Calendar, named Tai Bo, knew that God's order was given to Ji Chang, so he went to the ground, never to return.

古文：弟仲雍从之，故季历为嗣以及昌。
现代文：太伯之弟仲雍也随从他走了，所以季历得以成为继承人并传位给姬昌。
English: The great-uncle's younger brother Zhong Yong also followed him, so Ji Lian was able to become the heir and pass the throne to Ji Chang.

古文：昌为西伯，作邑于丰。
现代文：坦昌成为西部诸侯首领，在丰地建立城邑。
English: Tanchang became the leader of the western princes and established a city in Fengdi.

古文：文王之妃曰太姒，梦商庭生棘，太子发植梓树于阙间，化为松柏棫柞。
现代文：文王的妃子名太姒，梦见商朝殿廷生长荆棘，太子姬发在宫门前种下梓树，却变成了松柏械柞。
English: Prince Wen's concubine, named Taiko, dreamed of thorns growing in the court of the Shang Dynasty. Prince Hefa planted a tree in front of the palace gate, but it turned into a pine tree.

古文：以告文王，文王币告群臣，与发并拜告梦。
现代文：太姒将梦中的事告诉文王，文王转告群臣并赐给缯帛，又与蜒壁一起跪拜来答谢这个梦。
English: The Empress Dowager told King Wen about the dream, and King Wen told the courtiers and gave the scepter to the Empress Dowager, and kneeled together with the serpentine wall to thank the dream.

古文：季秋之甲子，赤爵衔书及丰，止于昌户，昌拜稽首受之。
现代文：在九月的甲子日，有一朱雀口衔天书来到丰邑，停在姬昌家门，《堕叩首揖拜接受天书。
English: On the day of the birth of the first son in September, a starling with the title of heavenly book came to Fengyi and stopped at the door of Ji Chang's house.

古文：其文要曰： 姬昌，苍帝子，亡殷者纣王。 
现代文：天书大意是： 姬员，是苍壶之子，毁灭殷朝的是纣王。 
English: The essence of the heavenly book is as follows: Hera is the son of the potter, and the king of snakes is the destroyer of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：将畋，史遍卜之，曰： 将大获，非熊非罴，天遗汝师以佐昌。臣太祖史畴为禹卜畋，得皋陶。
现代文：文王将要畋猎，史褊卜说： 将有重大收获，不是熊也不足熊，上天派您的师傅来辅佐您臣的无祖史畴曾为帝禹占卜畋猎，得到皋陶。
English: King Wen was about to go hunting, and Shunbu said, "There will be a great harvest. It's not a bear, it's not a small bear. Heaven has sent your master to assist your vassal. An ancestor once went hunting for Emperor Yu Zhan Bo and got a pot of gold.

古文：其兆如此。 
现代文：这次兆头也是如此。 
English: The signs are the same this time.

古文：王至于磻溪之水，吕尚钓于涯，王下趋拜曰： 望公七年，乃今见光景于斯。 
现代文：文王来到硒溪，看到吕尚在岸边钓鱼，文王下车连忙上前拜揖说： 盼望您已经有七年了直到今天才在这裹见到您。 
English: Wen Wang came to Selenium Creek and saw Lushan fishing on the shore. Wen Wang got off the bus and hurried forward to say: I hope you have been here for seven years until today.

古文：尚立变名答曰： 望钓得玉璜，其文要曰： 姬受命，昌来提，撰尔雒钤报在齐。  
现代文：吕尚起身改名回答道： 我吕望曾钓得玉璜，上面文字大略说： 姬姓受天命，姬昌来提拔，掌尔雒钤，封于齐。
English: Lv Shang stood up and changed his name to answer: I, Lv Wang, once fished for jade anchors. The above words roughly said: Her surname was chosen by fate, and she was promoted, promoted, and promoted.

古文：尚出游，见赤人自雒出，授尚书曰： 命曰吕，佐昌者子。 
现代文：吕尚外出游历，看见赤人从雒水中出来，授给吕尚书文说： 命令吕尚辅佐姬昌的就是你。 
English: Lv Shang went on a journey and saw a red man coming out of the muddy water. He gave Lv Shang a written message saying, "You are the one who ordered Lv Shang to assist Sakichang.

古文：文王梦日月著其身，又摐甗鸣于岐山。
现代文：文王梦见日月附着身上，又有神鸟鸾鹭在岐山啼鸣。
English: King Wen dreamed that the sun and the moon were attached to him, and the sacred bird, the dragonfly, was singing in the Qishan Mountains.

古文：孟春六旬，五纬聚房。
现代文：初春六旬之时，五星聚集房宿。
English: In the early spring of the sixtieth year, the five stars gathered for accommodation.

古文：后有凤凰衔书，游文王之都。
现代文：以后又有凤凰衔书，在文王都城飞游。
English: Later, there was also a phoenix-titled book, which flew around the capital city of the king of literature.

古文：书又曰： 殷帝无道，虐乱天下。皇命已移，不得复久。灵祗远离，百神吹去。五星聚房，昭理四海。 
现代文：书上又说： 殷帝无道，凌虐百姓扰乱天下，天命已经转移，慇商国运不会长久了，神灵远离，百神辞去，五星聚集房宿，将天意所归昭示四海。 
English: The book also said: "Yangdi has no way, abuses the people, disturbs the world, the fate of heaven has been transferred, the merchants and the country will not last long, the gods are far away, the hundreds of gods have resigned, the five stars gather accommodation, and the will of heaven is manifested to the four seas.

古文：文王既没，太子发代立，是为武王。
现代文：文王去世后，太子姬发继位，这就是武王。
English: After the death of King Wen, Prince Hifa succeeded to the throne. This is King Wu.

古文：武王骈齿望羊。
现代文：武王骈齿，高昂远视。
English: King Wu is tall and long-sighted.

古文：将伐纣，至于孟津，八百诸侯，不期而会。
现代文：他将要讨伐纣王，来到孟津，八百诸侯不期而会。
English: He came to Mengjin to fight the Warlord, and eight hundred lords unexpectedly gathered.

古文：咸曰： 纣可伐矣。 
现代文：都说： 可以讨伐纣王了。 
English: They all said, "It's time to fight the Dragon King."

古文：武王不从。
现代文：武王没有听从。
English: King Wu did not listen.

古文：及纣杀比干，囚箕子，微子去之，乃伐纣。
现代文：等到纣王杀死比干，囚禁箕子，微子离去后，才讨伐挝王。
English: He waited until the king of the Yao killed the Bi Gan, imprisoned the Yao Zi, and after the Yao Zi left, before he attacked the king of the Lao.

古文：度孟津，中流，白鱼跃入王舟。
现代文：渡过盂建，船到中流时，白鱼跃入基王船中。
English: When the boat reached the middle of the stream, the white fish jumped into the boat.

古文：王俯取鱼，长三尺，目下有赤文成字，言纣可伐。
现代文：基王俯身拾起白鱼，长有三尺，眼睛下方有赤色花纹形成字迹，说纣王可以征伐。
English: Kei Wang bent down and picked up a white fish, three feet long, with a red pattern under the eye, saying that the king of sharks can be conquered.

古文：王写以世字，鱼文消。
现代文：武王用世上通行的文字写下来，鱼身一的文字立即消失。
English: King Wu wrote it down in the world's most common language, and the fish-like characters immediately disappeared.

古文：燔鱼以告天，有火自天止于王屋，流为赤乌，乌衔谷焉。
现代文：武王就烧煮白鱼祭告上天，有天火从天上坠下，落在武王的屋上，变成了赤乌，赤乌口衔谷物。
English: King Wu then cooked a white fish sacrifice and announced it to the sky. A heavenly fire fell from the sky and landed on King Wu's roof, turning into red wax and red wax-covered grain.

古文：谷者，纪后稷之德；火者，燔鱼以告天，天火流下，应以吉也。遂东伐纣，胜于牧野，兵不血刃，而天下归之。
现代文：谷物是来纪念后稷的功德；火用来烧煮白鱼祭告上天，天火下坠，是吉祥的征兆于是东征讨伐纣王，在牧野大胜，兵不血刃。而天下归于亘皇王。
English: The grain is to commemorate Hou Yi's merits; the fire is used to boil the white fish, and the sacrifice is announced to the sky, and the sky falls down, which is an auspicious sign. Therefore, the eastward expedition to fight the king of the egrets won a great victory in the pasture, and the soldiers were bloodless. And the world belongs to King Wan.

古文：乃封吕望于齐。
现代文：就以蛮地封赏给旦望。
English: He rewarded Tanno generously.

古文：周德既隆，草木茂盛，蒿堪为宫室，因名蒿宫。
现代文：周德既然隆兴，单木生长茂盛，蒿草结实得可以用来建造宫室，于是取名为蒿宫。
English: Since Zhou De was flourishing, the single tree grew luxuriantly, and the eelgrass was so strong that it could be used to build the palace, so it was named the Eel Palace.

古文：武王没，成王少，周公旦摄政七年，制体作乐，神鸟凤凰见，蓂荚生。
现代文：武王去世，成王年少凰公旦代行政务七年，制作礼仪和音乐，神乌凤凰出现，黄荚生长。
English: King Wu passed away, and the young phoenix became the king and served as the regent for seven years, producing etiquette and music. The god Wu Fenghuang appeared, and Huang Qi grew up.

古文：乃与成王观于河、洛，沈璧。
现代文：于是与成王巡视黄河、洛丞，行祭祀沉璧之礼。
English: He then toured the Yellow River and Luocheng with King Cheng and performed a ritual of devotion.

古文：礼毕，王退俟，至于日昧，荣光并出幕河，青云浮至，青龙临坛，衔玄甲之图，吐之而去。
现代文：礼毕，成王退身等候，直到黄昏时，祥光四起，笼罩黄河，青云飘浮而来，青龙来到祭坛，衔玄甲之图，放置坛上离去。
English: After bowing, Cheng Wang retreated and waited until dusk, when Xiang Guang rose in all directions, enveloping the Yellow River, Qingyun floated in, Qinglong came to the altar, took the picture of Xuan Jia, placed it on the altar and left.

古文：礼于洛，亦如之。
现代文：在渔行礼毕，情况也是如此。
English: This is also the case when it comes to fishing.

古文：玄龟青龙苍兕止于坛，背甲刻书，赤文成字。周公援笔以世文写之，书成文消，龟堕甲而去。
现代文：有玄龟、青龙、苍停留在祭坛，背上的甲壳刻有文字，赤色花纹形成字迹，甩公用通行文字书写，写完后龟甲文字消逝，龟弃甲壳离开。
English: There are a black turtle, a blue dragon, and a blue dragon staying at the altar. The carapace on the back is engraved with words, the red pattern forms the writing, and the common common words are written. After writing, the turtle-shaped words disappear, and the turtle-shaped carapace leaves.

古文：其言自周公讫于秦、汉盛衰之符。
现代文：上面是说从周公到秦、汉时期盛衰的符兆。
English: The above is said to be a sign of the rise and fall of the Zhou, Qin and Han dynasties.

古文：麒麟游苑，凤凰翔庭，成王援琴而歌曰： 凤凰翔兮于紫庭，余何德兮以感灵，赖先王兮恩泽臻，于胥乐兮民以宁。 
现代文：麒麟在宫苑嬉游，凤凰在庭前飞翔，成王弹琴歌唱道： 凤凰飞翔啊，在紫色殿廷，我有何德啊，感动了神灵，倚恃先王啊，恩泽备至，上下欢乐啊，百姓安宁。 
English: Kirin frolics in the palace courtyard, the phoenix flies in front of the court, and Cheng Wang plays the piano and sings: Phoenix flies, in the purple palace, what virtue do I have, I have moved the gods, I lean on the previous king, I am ready for grace, I am happy up and down, the people are peaceful.

古文：鲁哀公十四年，孔子夜梦三槐之间，丰、沛之邦，有赤烟气起，乃呼颜渊、子夏往视之。
现代文：鲁哀公十四年，孔子夜间梦见在三棵槐树之间，在丰、沛二地，有赤色云气腾起，于是叫颜渊、子夏一同前往观看。
English: In the 14th year of King Lu's reign, Confucius dreamed at night that red clouds were rising between three eucalyptus trees in Feng and Pei, so he called Yan Yuan and Zixia to go and watch.

古文：驱车到楚西北范氏街，见刍兒摘麟，伤其左前足，薪而覆之。
现代文：驱车来到楚国西北部的范氏街，看见一农家小儿抓到一只麒麟，弄伤它的左前足，用柴草将它覆盖。
English: I drove to Fan's Street in the northwest of Chu Province and saw a farmer's child catch a unicorn, injure its left front leg, and cover it with firewood.

古文：孔子曰： 兒来，汝姓为赤诵，名子乔，字受纪。 
现代文：孔子说： 小孩子过来，你姓赤诵，名子乔，字受纪。 
English: Confucius said: Little children, come here. Recite your family name, your given name, and the word "discipline."

古文：孔子曰： 汝岂有所见邪？ 
现代文：孔子说： 你难道看见了什么吗? 
English: Confucius said, "Do you see anything?"

古文：兒曰： 见一禽，巨如羔羊，头上有角，其未有肉。 
现代文：小孩说： 看见一头走兽，大如羔羊，头上长角，角的末梢有肉。 
English: And the child said, I saw a beast great as a lamb, and it had on the head horns, and the ends of the horns were full of flesh.

古文：孔子曰： 天下已有主也，为赤刘，陈、项为辅，五星入井从岁星。 
现代文：孔子说： 天下已有主人了，就是赤刘，陈、项为辅助，五星入井宿随从岁星。 
English: Confucius said: There is already a master in the world, that is, Red Liu, Chen and Xiang are auxiliary, and the five stars enter the well and stay with the year star.

古文：兒发薪下麟示孔子，孔子趋而往，麟蒙其耳，吐三卷《图》，广三寸，长八寸，每卷二十四字，其言赤刘当起，曰： 周亡，赤气起，大耀兴，玄丘制命，帝卯金。 
现代文：小孩揭开柴草让壬迂看麒麟，壬迂快步上前，衹见麒麟垂着耳朵，吐出三卷《图》，宽三寸，长八寸，每卷二十四个字，上面说赤刘将要兴起，说： 周朝灭亡，赤气腾升。大耀升起，玄丘拟定命令，皇帝是卯金。 
English: The child opened the firewood to let Rinpoche see the unicorn. Rinpoche quickly stepped forward. He saw the unicorn with its ears hanging down and spit out three volumes of "Tu," three inches wide and eight inches long, each volume with twenty-four words. It said that the red Liu would rise, saying: Zhou Dynasty will perish, red qi will rise. Great glory will rise, Xuanqiu will draft an order, and the emperor will be Ujin.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，制《孝经》；既成，使七十二弟子向北辰星罄折而立，使曾子抱《河》、《洛》事北向。
现代文：孔子撰述《春秋》，制定《孝经》，完成之后，派七十二弟子向北极星鞠躬侍立，命曾工捧着《河图》、《洛书》向着北方。
English: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" and formulated "The Book of Filial Piety." After completing it, he sent seventy-two disciples to bow to the North Star and stand in attendance, holding the "River Chart" and "Book of Songs" facing the north.

古文：孔子斋戒向北辰而拜，告备于天曰： 《孝经》四卷，《春秋》、《河》、《洛》凡八十一卷，谨已备。 
现代文：孔子斋戒后对北极星拜揖，向上天祷告成功说： 《孝经》四卷，《春秋》、《河图》、《洛书》共八十一卷，现在已经完备。 
English: After fasting, Confucius paid homage to the North Star and prayed to heaven for success, saying: "The Filial Piety Sutra" four volumes, "Spring and Autumn," "River Chart" and "Book of Songs" a total of eighty-one volumes, are now complete.

古文：天乃洪郁起白雾摩地，赤虹自上下，化为黄玉，长三尺，上有刻文。
现代文：天上突然弥漫了白色大雾下接地面，赤色虹霓从天空飘下，化成黄玉，长有三尺，上面刻有文字。
English: Suddenly, the sky was filled with a white fog touching the ground. A red rainbow trout floated down from the sky and turned into a topaz, three feet long, with words engraved on it.

古文：孔子跪受而读之曰： 宝文出，刘季握。
现代文：孔子跪拜接受然后诵读道： 宝文出现，刘季拥有。
English: Confucius kneeled to accept and then recited: Baowen appeared, Liu Ji possessed.

古文：卯金刀，在轸北。
现代文：卯金刀，在轸星北。
English: Ukinsao, in the north of the country.

古文：字禾子，天下服。 
现代文：字禾子，天下顺从。 
English: The world is obedient to the word of grass.

古文：汉高帝父曰刘执嘉。
现代文：汉高帝的父亲名刘执嘉。
English: Emperor Han's father's name was Liu Xiejia.

古文：执嘉之母，梦赤鸟若龙戏己，而生执嘉，是为太上皇帝。
现代文：执嘉的母亲，梦见赤乌像龙一般与自己嬉戏，生下了执嘉，以后成了太上皇帝。
English: Keijia's mother, dreaming of the dragon playing with itself, gave birth to Keijia, who later became the emperor.

古文：母名含始，是为昭灵后。
现代文：壶帝母亲名含始，就是昭灵后。
English: Jue's mother's name was Hananzhi, that is, Zhaolinghou.

古文：昭灵后游于洛池，有玉鸡衔赤珠，刻曰玉英，吞此者王。
现代文：昭灵后在渣迤游玩，有玉鸡口衔赤珠，刻有文字为玉英，吞食此物的人为王。
English: After Zhaoling, he went to play in the dross. There was a jade chicken with a red bead on its beak, with the words "Jade Ying" engraved on it. Whoever swallowed it was king.

古文：昭灵后取而吞之；又寝于大泽，梦与神遇。
现代文：昭灵后拿来吞食丁义在大泽夜宿，梦中与神交合。
English: Shorying later took to devouring Ding Yi at a dacha in Osawa, and had intercourse with the god in a dream.

古文：是时雷电晦冥，太上皇视之，见蛟龙在其上，遂有身而生季，是为高帝。
现代文：当时雷电大作，天色阴沉，太上皇来看望，衹见蛟龙盘在她的上空，于是有了身孕生下了刘季，就是后来的高壶。
English: At that time, there was thunder and lightning, the sky was gloomy, the emperor came to visit, and he saw the dragon dish above her, so she became pregnant and gave birth to Liu Ji, who later became Gao Jiu.

古文：高帝隆准而龙颜，美须髯，左股有七十二黑子。微时，数从王媪、武负贳酒，醉卧，上常有光怪。
现代文：直帝高鼻梁面容似龙，须髯优美，左股有七十二颗黑痣他在微贱时，屡次到王媪、武负处赊酒，醉卧，上方常有奇异的光亮。
English: Emperor Zhengyi had a long face with a high nose, beautiful whiskers, and seventy-two black moles on his left thigh. When he was lowly, he often went to Wangye and Wuyuan to drink wine, and lay down drunk. There was often a strange light above him.

古文：每留饮，售辄数倍。
现代文：每当高帝在店中饮酒，店裹就能卖出比平常多几倍的酒。
English: Whenever Gao Di drank alcohol in the store, the store could sell several times more alcohol than usual.

古文：武负异之，辄折其契。
现代文：武负很惊奇，总是免去高帝的酒钱。
English: Takeshige was surprised that he was always spared Gao Di's drink money.

古文：单父人吕公好相人，见高帝，谓曰： 臣少好相人，相人多矣，无如季相，愿季自爱。
现代文：单父人吕公善于看相，看见高帝说： 我从年轻时就善于看相，看厂许多人的相，没有一人能与你相比，希望你能自爱。
English: Seeing Gao Di, he said, "I've been good at looking at faces since I was young. I've looked at the faces of many people in the factory. No one can compare to you. I hope you can love yourself."

古文：臣有息女，愿为箕扫妾。 
现代文：我有一亲生女儿，愿意嫁给你为妻。 
English: I have a daughter of my own and I would like to marry her to you.

古文：吕公妻媪怒吕公曰： 公常奇此女，欲为贵人。
现代文：吕公的妻子埋怨吕公说： 你经常认为造个女儿不凡，将会成为贵人。
English: Lu Gong's wife complained to Lu Gong: "You often think that if you make a daughter extraordinary, she will become a noble person.

古文：沛令善公，求不与。何妄许刘季？ 
现代文：沛县令与你交好，想娶她都没有答应为何轻率地许配给刘季? 
English: Peixianling befriended you and wanted to marry you, but you didn't agree. Why did you rashly agree to marry Liu Ji?

古文：吕公曰： 非女子所知。 
现代文：吕公说： 这不是你们女人懂得的。 
English: Lyu Gong said, "This is not something you women understand.

古文：卒与高帝。
现代文：终于嫁给了高帝。
English: She finally married Gao Di.

古文：生惠帝、鲁元公主。
现代文：后来生了惠帝和鲁元公主。
English: Later, Hui Di and Lu Yuan were born.

古文：吕后尝与两子居田中，有一老父过，请饮，吕后因馈之食。
现代文：吕后曾与这两个孩子住在乡村中，有一老人路过讨水喝，吕后就给他食物。
English: Luguo once lived with these two children in the countryside. An old man passed by to ask for water to drink, and Luguo gave him food.

古文：老父相吕后曰： 夫人，天下贵人也。 
现代文：老人为吕后相面说： 夫人是天下的大贵人。 
English: The old man said to Queen Lyu: "Your wife is the most noble person in the world.

古文：令相二子，见惠帝曰： 夫人所以贵者，乃此男。 
现代文：又请老人为儿女相面，看过惠帝说： 夫人之所以尊贵，是因为有这个儿子。 
English: He also asked the old man to meet his sons and daughters face to face. When he saw Hui Di, he said, "The reason why my wife is noble is because she has this son.

古文：相鲁元公主，亦贵。
现代文：看鲁元公主后，也说尊贵。
English: After seeing Princess Lu Yuan, she also said that he was honorable.

古文：老父已去，高帝适从傍舍来，吕后具言之。高帝追问老父。
现代文：老人离开后，高帝正好从邻舍回家，吕后将这事向他一一述说，高帝追上老人求问。
English: After the old man left, Gao Di happened to return home from his neighbor. Lv Hou explained the matter to him one by one. Gao Di caught up with the old man to ask questions.

古文：老父曰： 向者夫人、兒子之贵，皆以君相。
现代文：老人说： 刚才见您的夫人、儿女有贵相，都是因为您有贵相。
English: The old man said, "I just saw that your wife and children have noble features, all because you have noble features.

古文：君贵不可言。 
现代文：您确实贵不可言。 
English: You are indeed precious.

古文：高帝被饮，夜行径泽中。
现代文：有一次直壶饮酒后，夜晚行经泽中。
English: After drinking straight from the jug once, the evening passed in a haze.

古文：前人反曰： 有大蛇当道，愿还。 
现代文：前面有人返回说： 有大蛇挡道，请回吧! 
English: Someone in front turned back and said: There's a big snake in the way, please go back!

古文：高帝醉，曰： 壮士行，何畏？ 
现代文：高帝喝醉了，说： 壮士行路，无所畏惧。 
English: Gao Di was drunk and said, "Strong men travel without fear.

古文：乃前，拔剑斩蛇，蛇分为两，道开而过。
现代文：于是前行，拔剑斩蛇，蛇分为两截，道路通了，便走了过去。
English: So he went ahead, drew his sword and cut the snake. The snake was divided into two pieces, the road was clear, and he walked past.

古文：后人来者，见老妪守蛇曰： 向者赤帝子过，杀之。 
现代文：后面走遇的人，看见一老妇守着蛇说： 刚才赤帝子经过，杀了它。 
English: A person walking behind saw an old woman guarding a snake and said, "Just now, the Red Emperor passed by and killed it."

古文：见者疑妪为诈，欲笞之，忽然不见。
现代文：看到这一情景的人，怀疑老妇胡说。想要打她，她忽然不见了。
English: On seeing this, the onlookers suspected that the old woman was lying. They wanted to beat her, but she suddenly disappeared.

古文：具以状告高帝，帝心喜。
现代文：那人把这件事告诉高壶，直童心裹高兴。
English: The man told this to Gao Jiu, and Zhi Tong was delighted.

古文：秦始皇帝曰： 东南有天子气。 
现代文：塞篮皇说： 东南部有天子之气。 
English: The king of the basket said: The southeast has the spirit of the son of heaven.

古文：于是东游以厌之。
现代文：于是到东方巡游，来抑制天子气。
English: So he went on a cruise to the East to suppress the son of heaven.

古文：高帝隐于芒、砀山泽之间，吕后常知其处。
现代文：高帝隐匿于芒山、垒扯之间的深山大泽之中，吕后总是知道他的处所。
English: Gao Di lurks in the deep mountains and lakes between the ridges of the Mang Mountain. Luguo always knows where he is.

古文：高帝怪问之，对曰： 季所居，上常有云气，故知之。 
现代文：高帝感到奇怪便问她，她回答说： 你星蝼居住的地方，天上有一股云气，所以能知道你的处所。 
English: Gaudi felt strange and asked her. She replied: "Where your star lives, there is a cloud in the sky, so I can know where you are.

古文：高帝为沛公，入秦，五星聚于东井，岁星先至，而四星从之。
现代文：高帝为沛公时，攻进秦地，五星聚集于井宿东，岁星先到，而其他四星紧随其后。
English: When Gao Di, the Emperor of Gao, invaded Qin, the five stars gathered in the east of the well, the year star arrived first, and the other four stars followed.

古文：占曰： 以义取天下。 
现代文：占卜说： 凭道义取得天下。 
English: Divination says: You can gain the whole world by virtue of morality.

古文：初，张良游于下邳沂水之上，有老父来，直至良前，而堕其履。顾谓良曰： 孺子，下取履！ 
现代文：起先，张良行经工郅近丞的桥上，有一老人走来，直到张垦面前，将鞋扔到桥下，望着张良说： 小子下去给我拾鞋。 
English: At first, on the bridge where Zhang Liang was passing through the workman, an old man walked up to Zhang Liang, threw his shoes under the bridge, looked at Zhang Liang and said: Kid, go down and pick up my shoes.

古文：良愕然，欲殴之，以其老，乃下取跪进。
现代文：退旦惊愕，想揍这老人，因为他年老，就下桥去拾取鞋，跪着帮老人穿上。
English: Surprised, he wanted to hit the old man, because he was old, so he went down to the bridge to pick up the shoes and kneeled down to help the old man put them on.

古文：父以足受，笑而去，良殊大惊。
现代文：老人伸脚穿上鞋，笑着走了，张良更是大惊。
English: The old man put on his shoes and walked away with a smile. Zhang Liang was even more shocked.

古文：父去里所复来，曰： 孺子可教也。后五日平明，与我会此。 
现代文：老人离开一里多路又回来，说： 小子可教，五天后清晨，在这儿与我相会。 
English: The old man came back from a distance of more than a mile and said, "Kid, you can teach, five days later in the morning, meet me here."

古文：良怪之，跪应曰： 诺。 
现代文：张良感到奇怪，跪着答应说： 行。 
English: Zhang Liang felt strange, and kneeled down to say yes.

古文：五日，良往，父已先来，怒曰： 何与长者期而后也？
现代文：在第五天，张良前往，老人已先来到，发怒说： 同长辈相约，为什么要迟到呢?
English: On the fifth day, when Zhang Liang was on his way, the old man arrived first and angrily said, "I have an appointment with my elders, why should I be late?

古文：五日，更与我会此。 凡三期而良先至。
现代文：五天后，再与我在这裹相会， 这样约了三回，张良终于在老人之前先到。
English: Five days later, I met him again here, and so on for about three times. Zhang Liang finally arrived before the old man.

古文：老父喜曰： 不当如是邪！ 即出怀中一卷书与之，曰： 读之，此为王者师。
现代文：老人高兴地说： 不应该这样吗厂便从怀中取出一卷书给张良，说： 读此书可以为帝王之师。
English: The old man said happily, "Shouldn't it be like this?" and the miller took a book out of his arms and gave it to Zhang Liang, saying, "You can read this book and become the emperor's teacher."

古文：后十三年，孺子见我济北谷城山下，黄石即我也。 
现代文：十三年后，你这小于到济北谷城山下见我，黄石就是我。 
English: Thirteen years later, you are less than to see me at the foot of the mountain in Jibei Valley, Huangshi is me.

古文：旦视其书，乃《太公兵法》。
现代文：张良天亮看这本书，就是《太公兵法》。
English: Zhang Liang read this book at dawn, it is "Tai Gong Hei Fa."

古文：良以黄石篇为他人说，皆不省，唯高帝说焉。良曰： 此殆天所授矣。 
现代文：张良将《黄石篇》的内容向别人讲述，都不能理解，衹有高帝听得很高兴张良说： 这大概就是上天所授吧! 
English: Zhang Liang told the content of the "Yellow Stone" to others, but they could not understand it. Gao Di was very happy to hear Zhang Liang say: This is probably given by heaven!

古文：五年而成帝业。
现代文：五年时间，高帝便建成帝业。
English: It took five years for Gao Di to build up the empire.

古文：后十三年，张良果得谷城山下黄石，宝而祠之，死与合葬。
现代文：后十三年，张良果然在谷城山下得到黄石，视若珍宝，建祠庙祭祀，死后与黄石合葬。
English: Thirteen years later, Zhang Liang finally obtained Huangshi at the foot of Gucheng Mountain, regarded it as a precious treasure, built an ancestral temple, and was buried with Huangshi after his death.

古文：文帝之母薄姬，魏豹为魏王，纳之后宫。
现代文：文帝的母亲是薄姬，魏豹为魏王时，将她收纳后宫。
English: Emperor Wen's mother was Bo Ji. When Wei Pan was the king of Wei, he took her into his harem.

古文：许负相之，当生天子，魏王豹于是背汉。
现代文：许负为她相面，说她当生天子，魏王刘垫因此背叛了选曲。
English: Xu loaded for her face-to-face, saying that she should be born a son of heaven, Wei Wang Liu Mat therefore betrayed the selection of songs.

古文：汉高帝击虏，而薄姬输织室。
现代文：连直童击败并俘虏魏王室炖，而莲担被送到织房做工。
English: Lien Chia-tong defeated and captured the Wei royal eunuch, while Lian-tang was sent to work in the weaving workshop.

古文：高帝见而美之，内于后宫，岁余乃得幸。将见幸，薄姬言： 妾昨梦青龙据妾心。 
现代文：鱼壶见到她，喜爱她的美色，收纳在后宫，一年多以后薄姬才得到同寝的宠幸将要同寝时，薄姬说： 妾昨夜梦见青龙占据我的心。 
English: The fish kettle saw her, loved her beauty, and kept her in the harem. It took more than a year for Bo Kee to get the privilege of sleeping with her. When they were about to sleep together, Bo Kee said, "Last night, my concubine dreamt that a blue dragon occupied my heart.

古文：高帝曰： 我是也。
现代文：高帝说： 造就是我，我来成全你。 
English: Gao Di said: I am the creator, and I will perfect you.

古文：吾为尔成之。 一御而生文帝。
现代文：一次交合而生下文帝。
English: A single mating resulted in the birth of Emperor Shimo.

古文：景帝王皇后初嫁为金王孙妻，母臧兒卜筮曰： 当贵。 
现代文：景帝王皇后起初嫁给金王孙为妻，母亲越儿为她卜筮，卜辞说： 命中当有大贵。 
English: At first, Emperor Jing's empress married King Sun of Jin as her wife. Her mother, Yue Er, told her a fortune-telling story, saying, "If you are lucky, you will be rich."

古文：乃夺金氏而内太子宫，生男。
现代文：于是同金压退婚而纳入太子宫中，生一男孩。
English: As a result, she withdrew from the marriage with the financial pressure and was included in the crown prince's uterus, giving birth to a boy.

古文：男方在身，梦日入其怀，以告太子。
现代文：她怀孕时，梦见太阳坠入怀中，将这事告诉太子。
English: When she was pregnant, she dreamed of the sun falling into her arms and told the prince about it.

古文：太子曰： 是贵征也。 
现代文：太子说： 这是大贵的征兆。 
English: The prince said: This is a sign of nobility.

古文：生男，是为武帝。
现代文：生下的男孩，就是武壶。
English: The boy she gave birth to is Wu Jiao.

古文：武帝赵婕妤，家在河间，生而两手皆拳，不可开。
现代文：武帝的赵婕妤。家住河间，生下来时，两手握成拳头，不能伸开。
English: Emperor Wu's Zhao Qi. He lived in Haima. When he was born, his hands were clenched into fists and could not be stretched out.

古文：武帝巡狩过河间，望气者言，此有奇女天子气，召而见之。
现代文：武帝巡狩经过河间，方士说这里有奇女天子之气。武帝召见赵婕妤。
English: Emperor Wudi went on a hunting tour through Kawama, and the magicians said that there was the spirit of a strange goddess here. Emperor Wudi summoned Zhao Yao.

古文：武帝自披其手，既时申，得一玉钩。
现代文：武帝亲自掰开她的手，当时就伸开了，得到一枚玉钩。
English: Emperor Wu personally pried open her hand, then stretched it out to get a jade hook.

古文：由是见幸，号曰： 拳夫人。 
现代文：得到武帝宠幸，称她为 拳夫人 。
English: She was favored by Emperor Wu, who called her the "Fist Lady."

古文：进为婕妤，居钩弋宫，大有宠。
现代文：又晋升为婕奸，居住钩：监，十分宠爱。
English: He was also promoted to be a traitor, and lived in prison. He was very fond of Mao.

古文：十四月生男，是为昭帝，号曰： 钩弋子。 
现代文：十四个月后生一男孩，便是昭帝，称作 钩弋子 。
English: Fourteen months later, a boy was born, named Zhao Di, also known as "Hook Mule."

古文：武帝曰： 闻昔尧十四月而生，今钩弋子亦然。 
现代文：武帝说： 听说以前尧母怀孕十四个月生下尧，如今鲤竖也是这样。 
English: Wu Di said, "I heard that in the past, a mother was pregnant for fourteen months and gave birth to a calf, and now it is the same for a foal.

古文：乃名其门曰尧母门。
现代文：于是将她的宫门命名为尧母门。
English: As a result, her palace gate was named the "mother gate."

古文：昭帝元凤三年正月，泰山、莱芜山南，民夜闻汹汹有数千人声，晨往视之，见大石自立，高丈五尺，大四十八围，入地八尺，三石为足，立后，白乌数千集其旁。
现代文：昭帝元凤三年正月，泰山、莱芜山南侧，夜晚百姓听到吵吵嚷嚷，好像有几千人的喧闹声，清晨前往观看，祇见一巨石自己竖立起来，高一丈五尺，粗四十八围，入地八尺，三块大石是它的基脚。
English: In the first month of the third year of Zhao Di Yuan Feng, on the south side of Mount Tai and Mount Laiwu, in the evening, the people heard noisy noises, as if there were thousands of noises, and went to watch in the morning, only to see a huge stone erected by itself, five feet high, forty-eight meters thick, eight feet into the ground, and three large stones were its foundation.

古文：又上林苑中柳树断卧地，一朝自起生枝叶，虫啮其叶成文，曰： 公孙病已立。 陈留襄邑王社忽移至长安。博士眭孟占之曰： 石，阴类。泰山，岱宗，王者禅代之处。将有废故之家，姓公孙，名病已，从白衣为天子者。 
现代文：竖立以后，有几千只白乌飞集在巨石之旁、又，上林苑中有一株柳树折断倒在地上，有一天忽然自行起立，生了新的枝叶，虫子咬树叶形成字迹，说： 公孙病已立、 陈留襄邑的王室社庙忽然迁移到长安博士眭孟占卜说： 石头，属于阴类泰山是岱宗，是帝王禅让的地方，将有以前被废黜的门户，姓公孙，名瘟旦，从平民成为天子。 
English: After it was erected, there were thousands of sooty pigeons gathered around the huge stone. In addition, a willow tree in the Shanglin Garden was broken and fell to the ground. One day, it suddenly stood up on its own and gave birth to new branches and leaves. Worms gnawed on the leaves to form writing, saying: Gongsun disease has been established. The royal shrine and temple in Chenliuangyue suddenly moved to Chang'an. Dr. Zi Meng divination said: Stone, belonging to the yin class, Mount Tai is the Shanzong, it is the place where the emperor Zen lets go. There will be a portal that was previously dethroned

古文：时昭帝幼少，霍光辅政，以孟妖言诛之。及昭帝崩，昌邑王又废，光立宣帝，武帝曾孙，本名病己，在民间白衣三世，如孟言焉。
现代文：当时昭帝年幼，霍光辅佐朝政，认为眭孟妖言惑众将他杀了一，待到昭童去世，昌邑王被废，霍光江宣帝，宣帝是武帝的曾孙，奉名病已，在民间做了三代平民，与眭孟所说相符。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaotian was young, and Huo Guangfu was an assistant to the imperial government. He thought that Yan Meng had killed him with his evil words and deceit. He stayed until Zhaotian died, and Changyi Wang was abolished. Huo Guangjiang was Emperor Xuan, Emperor Xuan was the great-grandson of Emperor Wu. He had been ill for a long time, and had been a commoner for three generations, which was consistent with what Yan Meng said.

古文：元帝王皇后，齐田氏之苗裔。
现代文：元帝王皇后，战国时齐国田氏的后代。
English: Former emperor and empress, descendant of the Kunita clan during the Sengoku period.

古文：祖父翁孺，自东平陵徙元城。元城建公曰： 昔《春秋》沙鹿崩，晋史卜之，阴为阳雄，土火相乘，故沙鹿崩。
现代文：祖父箍壁，从东平陵迁到疽越五越人建公说： 先前《春秋》记载：沙鹿山崩塌，晋国史官占卜，说是阴气比阳气强盛，上和火相互作用，所以业尘山崩溃。
English: Grandfather Zoubi, who moved from Dongping Mausoleum to Xiangyue Yuefeng, said: Previously, "Spring and Autumn" recorded: Shilu Mountain collapsed, Jin historian divination, said that the yin is stronger than the yang, and the upper and fire interaction, so the dust mountain collapsed.

古文：后六百四十五年，宜有圣女兴，其齐田乎？
现代文：以后六百四!五年，应该有圣女兴起，大概是齐国田氏的后代吧?
English: In the next six hundred and forty-four! five years, a saintly woman should arise, probably a descendant of the Chikuchida clan, right?

古文：今翁孺之徙，正值其地，日月当之。
现代文：如今翁孺迁居的正是那个地方，臼月正对着它。
English: It is the very place where Weng Yao has moved to now, and Usuetsu is facing it.

古文：元城郭东有五鹿之墟，即沙鹿地。后八十年，当有贵女兴天下。 
现代文：元城城东有名亘尘的废墟，就是沙鹿山的旧址再过八十年，一定有尊贵的女子兴盛于天。 
English: East of Yuancheng, there is a famous, dusty ruin, the old site of Shalu Mountain. In another eighty years, there will surely be a noble woman flourishing in the sky.

古文：翁孺生禁。禁妻李氏方任身，梦月入其怀，生女，是为元后。
现代文：翁孺牛王墓，王苤的妻子李氏怀孕时，梦见曰月坠入怀中，生卜女儿就是元后。
English: In the tomb of King Wengyao, when the wife of Wang Yao, Li, was pregnant, she dreamed that the moon fell into her arms, and the daughter of the midwife was Empress Yuan.

古文：每许嫁，未行，所许者辄死。
现代文：每次订婚，等不到成婚，男方必死。
English: In every betrothal, the man must die before the marriage is consummated.

古文：卜相者云： 当大贵。 
现代文：占卜看相的人说： 她将大贵。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "She will be very rich."

古文：遂为元帝皇后，生成帝。
现代文：于是成为元帝的皇后，生卜成帝。
English: As a result, she became the empress of the Yuan emperor, and became the emperor.

古文：初，秦始皇世，有长人十二，身长五丈，足迹六尺，见于陇西临洮，前史以为秦亡之征，史臣以为汉兴之符也。
现代文：原先，在塞始皇之世，有十二个巨人，身高五丈，足迹六尺，出现在陇西临洮，前代史官认为是童钥灭亡的征兆，我们这些史臣认为是汉朝兴起的符瑞。
English: Originally, during the reign of the First Emperor of Xie, there were twelve giants, five meters tall, with six-foot footprints, who appeared in Linyi, Shaanxi Province. The previous historians considered this to be a sign of the demise of Tongchuan, while we historians considered it to be a sign of the rise of the Han Dynasty.

古文：自高帝至于平帝，十二主焉。
现代文：从高帝到平帝，共有十二位君主。
English: From Emperor Gao to Emperor Ping, there were a total of twelve emperors.

古文：光武皇帝，父为济阳令。
现代文：光武皇帝，父亲任济阳令。
English: Emperor Guangwu, father of Ren Jiyang.

古文：济阳有武帝行宫，常封闭。哀帝建平元年十二月甲子夜，光武将产，乃开而居之。
现代文：济阳有武帝的行宫，长期关闭哀帝建平元年十二月甲子夜光武赍将要出生，就打开宫门住进去了。
English: Jiyang had a palace for Emperor Wu, but it was closed for a long time. In December of the first year of Emperor Jianping, when Emperor Jia Zi and Empress Dowager Wu Rong were about to be born, they opened the palace gate and moved in.

古文：时有赤光，室中尽明，皇考异焉。
现代文：当时有红光照璃，满室通明，光武帝的父亲很是惊异。
English: At that time, there was red light shining, the room was bright, and Emperor Guangwu's father was very surprised.

古文：使卜者王长卜之。
现代文：令卜卦者王长占卜。
English: The soothsayer Wang Chang divined.

古文：长辟左右曰： 此善事，不可言。 
现代文：王昼屏退左右对他说： 这是大好事，不能说。 
English: Wang Rongping stepped back and said to him, "This is a great thing, I can't say.

古文：是岁，有嘉禾生产屋景天中，一茎九穗，异于凡禾，县界大丰，故名光武曰秀。
现代文：这一年有嘉禾生长在屋舍的天井中，一茎有九穗，同普通的禾稻不同，县内大丰收，所以光武帝取名为秀。
English: This year, there was a kind of rice called "Jiahe" growing in the courtyard of the house. One stem had nine ears, which was different from ordinary rice. The county had a large harvest, so Emperor Guangwu named it "Xiu."

古文：时又有凤凰集济阳，于是画宫为凤凰之象。
现代文：当时又有凤凰飞集济阳，于是将宫室描画上凤凰的形像。
English: At that time, there was also a phoenix flying to Jiyang, so the image of the phoenix was painted on the palace room.

古文：明年，方士有夏贺良者，上言哀帝云： 汉家历运中衰，当再受命。 
现代文：第二年，有个方士名夏贺良，上疏哀帝说： 汉家气运中衰，应当第二次承受天命。 
English: In the second year, there was a fortune-teller named Xia He Liang, who said: "The Han family is in the middle of a bad fortune, and it should bear the fate of heaven for the second time."

古文：于是改号为太初元将元年，称陈圣刘太平皇帝以厌胜之。
现代文：因此改年号为太初元将元年，号称陈圣刘太平皇帝来禳解。
English: Therefore, the name of the year was changed from the first year of the Yuan Dynasty to the first year of the Zhou Dynasty, and it was announced that Emperor Chen Shengliu Taiping came to relieve the situation.

古文：王莽时，善望气者苏伯阿望光武所居县舂陵城郭，唶曰： 气佳哉！
现代文：王莽时，有名叫苏伯阿的人善于望气，他看见光武帝所居住的县邑舂陵城郭，赞叹道： 这气真是太好了，多么繁盛啊! 
English: At the time of Wang Mang, a famous person named Suboa was good at hoping for prosperity. He saw the county town of Fuling, where Emperor Guangwu lived, and said with admiration, "This prosperity is really wonderful, how prosperous it is!"

古文：郁郁葱葱然。 莽忌恶汉，而钱文有金，乃改铸货泉以易之。
现代文：王莽忌恨汉室，当时通用的钱上铸有金字，于是改铸其他货币来替换汉钱。
English: Wang Meng hated the Han family. At that time, gold characters were cast on the general money, so other currencies were cast to replace the Han money.

古文：既而光武起于舂陵之白水乡，货泉之文为 白水真人 也。
现代文：不久光武帝在舂陵白水乡起兵，货币上的文字是 白水真人 。
English: Soon after, Emperor Guangwu raised an army in Baishui Township, Fuling. The characters on the currency were Baishui Zhenren.

古文：初起兵，望见家南有火光，以为人持火，呼之而光遂盛，赫然上属天，有顷不见。
现代文：光武帝开始起兵，看见自己居室的南边有火光，认为有人手持火把，于是呼叫而火光更加明亮，红光直上云霄，一会儿便不见了。
English: Emperor Guangwu began to raise an army. He saw a fire on the south side of his room and thought someone was holding a torch. He called out and the fire became brighter. The red light shot up into the sky and disappeared in an instant.

古文：及在河北，为王郎所逼，将南济滹沱河。
现代文：当他在河北，受到王郎威逼时，将要南渡滹沱河。
English: When he was in Hebei Province, he was forced by Wang Lang to cross the Li River to the south.

古文：导吏还云： 河水流澌，无船可渡。 
现代文：探路的小吏回营报告： 河水飘着冰块，没船渡河。 
English: The pathfinder reports back to camp: the river is full of ice and there is no boat to cross.

古文：左右皆恐惧。
现代文：手下人都很恐惧。
English: The men are terrified.

古文：帝更遣王霸视之。
现代文：光武帝再派王霸前去探视。
English: Emperor Guangwu sent Wang Bawang to visit him again.

古文：霸往视，如吏言。
现代文：王霤来到河边，所见情况与小吏所说一致。
English: Wang Yao came to the river, and what he saw was consistent with what the petty official said.

古文：霸虑还以实对，惊动众心，乃谬云： 冰坚可渡。 
现代文：王霸担心如实报告会使人心浮动，于是撒谎说： 河冰坚硬可以渡河。 
English: Wang Ba was worried that the truthful report would make people's hearts float, so he lied and said: River ice is hard and can cross the river.

古文：帝驰进。
现代文：光武帝驰马前进。
English: Emperor Guangwu galloped forward.

古文：比至，而河水皆合，其坚可乘。
现代文：待到达河边，河冰已经凝结。其坚硬程度足可以渡过车辆。
English: By the time they reach the river, the ice has solidified and is hard enough to allow vehicles to pass.

古文：既渡，余数乘车未毕而冰陷。
现代文：渡河后，祇剩下几辆车子没有过去而河冰开始陷落。
English: After crossing the river, only a few cars remained and the river ice began to fall.

古文：前至下博城西，疑所之。
现代文：前行来到下博城西，对自己的去向犹疑不定。
English: Moving forward, I came to the west of Shimo-Haku Castle, uncertain of my direction.

古文：有一白衣老公在道旁，曰： 努力！
现代文：有一白衣老人站在道旁，说： 奋力前行!
English: An old man in white stood by the roadside and said, "Forward with all your might!"

古文：信都为长安城守，去此八十里耳。 
现代文：信都为长安政权坚守的城池，离此地衹有八十里路。 
English: Xindu is a city that the Chang'an regime has held fast to. It is 80 miles away from here.

古文：言毕，失所在。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：遂至信都，投太守任光。
现代文：于是来到信都，投奔太守继。
English: So he came to Xindu and joined Taizhuzu.

古文：初，光武微时，穰人蔡少公曰： 谶言刘秀发兵捕不道，卯金修德为天子。 
现代文：当初选送帝微贱时，攘人基尘公说： 谶书说：刘秀发兵清除无道之人，卯金修养德行要作天子。 
English: At the time of the initial selection of Emperor Wuyan, the great warrior Ji Danggu said: The imperial edict said: Liu Xiu sent soldiers to purge the wicked, and Ujin, who cultivated virtue, should be the son of heaven.

古文：国师公刘子骏名秀。
现代文：国师公刘子骏名刘秀。
English: National Teacher Liu Zixuan is now known as Liu Xiu.

古文：少公曰： 国师公是也。 
现代文：少公说： 这指的是国师公。 
English: Shoko said, "This refers to Kokushigo."

古文：光武笑曰： 何用知非仆？ 
现代文：光武笑着说： 如何知道不是本人呢? 
English: Guangwu smiled and said, "How do you know it's not me?"

古文：道士西门君惠等并云： 刘秀当为天子。 
现代文：道士西门君惠等人都说： 刘秀应当为天子。 
English: Taoist Simon Junhui and others said: Liu Xiu should be the son of heaven.

古文：光武平定河北，还至中山，将军万修得《赤伏符》，言光武当受命。
现代文：光武帝平定河北，回到中山，将军鱼修得到《赤伏符》，说光武当受天命为天子。
English: Emperor Guangwu pacified Hebei and returned to Zhongshan. General Yu Xiu obtained the "Red Vowel," saying that Guangwu was destined to be the son of heaven.

古文：群臣上尊号，光武辞。
现代文：群臣上皇帝号，光武推辞不受。
English: As the emperor's vassals, Guangwu did not accept the rejection.

古文：前至鄗县，诸生强华又自长安诣鄗，上《赤伏符》，文与修合。
现代文：又前行到壶晒，诸生彊华又从长安来到鄗县，呈上《赤伏符》，文字与墓值所得相合。
English: They also went to Juchang, and the descendants of Xinghua also came from Chang'an to Yixian to present the "Akafufu," the text coinciding with the value of the tomb.

古文：群下又请曰： 受命之符，人应为大。 
现代文：群臣又请求说： 接受天命符瑞的人，应当最为尊贵。 
English: The courtiers also pleaded: Those who accept the fury of fate should be the most honorable.

古文：光武又梦乘赤龙登天，乃即位，都洛阳，营宫阙。
现代文：光武帝又梦见自己乘赤龙登天，于是即皇帝位，建都洛阳，营造宫殿。
English: Emperor Guangwu also dreamed that he ascended to heaven on the back of a red dragon, so he became emperor, built the capital Luoyang, and built a palace.

古文：一夕，有门材自至。是时琅邪开阳县城门，一夕无故自亡，检所得材，即是也，遂名其门曰开阳门。
现代文：有一夜晚建城门的材料自行到来，当时琅邪郡开阳县城门，在一夜之间无缘无故自行不见了，检核洛阳所得的材料，正是开阳城门的，所以造座门就起名为开阳门。
English: One night, the materials for building the city gate arrived on their own. At that time, the city gate of Kaiyang County, Zhangye County, disappeared overnight without any reason. The materials obtained from Luoyang were exactly those of Kaiyang City Gate, so the building gate was named Kaiyang Gate.

古文：先是秦穆公时，陈仓人掘地得物，若羊非羊，若猪非猪，怪，将献之。
现代文：先前在秦穆公时期，陈仓人掘地得到一样东西，似羊非羊，似猪非猪，很奇怪，将要献给穆公。
English: Previously, during the Qin Mu Gong period, Chen Cang people dug up the land to get one thing, like a sheep is not a sheep, like a pig is not a pig, very strange, will be dedicated to Mu Gong.

古文：道逢二僮子，谓之曰： 子知彼乎，名为襜，常在地下食死人脑。
现代文：在路上遇到两个儿童，他们对陈仓人说： 您知道它是什么晤?它叫狙，经常在地底下吃死人的脑子。
English: Encountering two children on the road, they said to Chen Cangran, "Do you know what kind of worm it is? It's called a snail, and it often eats the brains of dead people underground.

古文：若欲杀之，以柏东南枝指之，则死矣。 
现代文：要想杀它，衹要用柏树东南方向的枝条指着它。就死了。 
English: To kill it, the baboon has to point at it with a branch from the south-east direction of the cypress tree, and it will die.

古文：襜因言曰： 此二僮子，名为宝。
现代文：狙于是也开说： 这两个小孩，名叫宝。
English: So the target also said: These two children are called treasure.

古文：得其雄者王，得其雌者霸。 
现代文：获得雄的可以为王，获得雌的可以称霸。 
English: Whoever gets the male can be king, and whoever gets the female can rule.

古文：于是陈仓人遂弃襜而逐二僮子，二僮子化为雉，飞入林。
现代文：因而速盒人放弃了狙而去追逐两个儿童，两儿童变成野鶸飞进深林。
English: So the speeder abandons his aim and chases the two children, who turn into baboons and fly off into the forest.

古文：陈仓人以告穆公，穆公发徒大猎，得其雌者，化而为石，置之汧、渭之间。
现代文：陈仓人将此事告诉穆公，穆公带领徒众大皋围猎，得到雌的，变化成石头，放置在进丞与遭丞之间。
English: Chen Cangren told this to Mu Gong. Mu Gong led the disciples to hunt for the female dragonfly, which was transformed into a stone and placed between Jin Zheng and Zheng Zheng.

古文：至文公，为之立祠，名曰陈宝祠。
现代文：到塞公时为它建立祠庙，名叫陈宝祠。
English: When he arrived in Cebu, he built an ancestral temple for it, called Chen Bao Ancestral Temple.

古文：雄南飞集南阳穰县，其后光武兴于南阳。
现代文：雄的往南飞，栖息在南阳穣县，后来光武帝在南阳兴起。
English: The male flew south and roosted in Nanyang's Jixian County. Later, Emperor Guangwu emerged in Nanyang.

古文：光武之初兴也，隗嚣拥众陇右，招集英俊，而公孙述称帝于蜀，天下云扰，大者连州郡，小者据县邑。
现代文：光武帝开始兴起之时，盐嚣在胧西拥有大军，招集英俊之士，而公孙述则在蜀称帝，天下纷纷扰扰，大的割据者所占之地州郡相连，小的割据者则占据县邑。
English: At the beginning of the rise of Emperor Guangwu, Yanran had a large army in the west and summoned handsome men, while Gongsun Su was proclaimed emperor in Shu. The whole world was disturbed. The land occupied by the large occupiers was connected by prefectures and counties, while the small occupiers occupied counties and towns.

古文：嚣问扶风人班彪曰： 往者周亡，战国并争，天下分裂，数世然后定。
现代文：隗嚣问扶风人班彪道： 先前旦室衰亡，七雄相争，天下分裂，经过好几代才安定下来。
English: Pan Biao, the wind-up man, was asked, "Previously, the dynasty fell, seven strong men fought each other, the world was divided, and it took several generations to settle down.

古文：纵横之事，复起于今乎？
现代文：合纵连横的局面，又会在现今出现吗?
English: Will the situation of converging verticals and horizontals occur again now?

古文：将承运迭兴，在于一人也？
现代文：抑或承担天命更新天下，集中在一人身上?
English: Or do they assume the task of renewing the world, concentrating on one person?

古文：愿先生论之。 
现代文：希望先生说说这个问题。 
English: Mr. Hope, tell us about this problem.

古文：对曰： 周之废兴与汉异。
现代文：班彪回答说： 周塑的兴衰与还伐不同。
English: Ban Biao replied: The rise and fall of the Zhou Dynasty is different from that of the Han Dynasty.

古文：昔周立爵五等，诸侯从政，本根既微，枝叶强大，故其末流有纵横之事，其势然也。
现代文：以前周设立五等爵位，诸侯参预政务，根本衰微之后，枝叶就会强盛，所以到旦曲末叶就出现了合纵连横的局面，这是势所必然。
English: In the past, the Fifth Class Nobility was established in the Zhou Dynasty, and the princes participated in the pre-government affairs. After the fundamental decline, the branches and leaves would flourish, so at the end of the Tang Dynasty, there was a situation of vertical and horizontal convergence, which was inevitable.

古文：汉家承秦之制，郡县治民，主有专己之威，臣无百年之柄。
现代文：塑勉承袭室丛制度，以郡县治理百姓，君主有专制的威严，而臣子不能世代掌权。
English: Shaping and inheriting the system of hereditary chambers, governing the people by county, the monarch has autocratic majesty, and the vassal cannot hold power for generations.

古文：至于成帝，假借外家，哀、平短祚，国嗣三绝，祸自上起，伤不及下。
现代文：到了盛壶，外戚掌权，直童、圣壶之时，享国短暂，三位皇帝都无亲生儿子继位，祸乱起自上层，没有伤害到下层百姓。
English: At the time of Shengjin, when the maternal relative was in power, and Zhi Tong and Shengjin were in power, the country was short-lived, and the three emperors had no biological son to succeed to the throne. The calamity arose from the upper layer, and did not hurt the lower layer of the people.

古文：故王氏之贵，倾擅朝廷，能窃号位，而不根于民，是以即真之后，天下莫不引领而叹。
现代文：因此以王氏家族的贵重，权倾朝廷，虽然可以窃取皇帝名号，但在百姓眼中没有根底，所以王菱即帝位后，天下人无不引领悲叹。
English: Therefore, with the value of the Wang family, the power of the imperial court, although it can steal the emperor's name, it has no foundation in the eyes of the people, so Wang Ling, that is, after the imperial throne, will lead everyone in the world to lament.

古文：十余年间，中外骚扰，远近俱发，假号云合，咸称刘氏，不谋而同辞。
现代文：十余年间，朝廷内外动荡不安，远近到处起兵，假藉名号者如云聚合，大家都自称刘氏，可谓不谋而合。
English: For more than ten years, there was turmoil both inside and outside the imperial court, soldiers were raised everywhere, and people with fake names gathered like clouds. Everyone called themselves the Liu clan, and they could be described as a coincidence.

古文：方今雄桀带州域者，皆无七国世业之资。《诗》云： 皇矣上帝，临下有赫。
现代文：今天占据州郡的豪雄之士，都没有挝七雄那样代基业作为凭藉。《诗经》说： 伟大的上帝，照临下方有威严。
English: The heroes and heroines who occupy the prefectures and counties today do not have the foundation of inheritance as the Lao seven heroes did. "The Book of Songs" says: "Great God, there is majesty below.

古文：鉴观四方，求民之瘼。 
现代文：清楚地了解四面八方，以求解除百姓的苦怨。 
English: It is necessary to have a clear understanding of all sides in order to resolve the grievances of the people.

古文：今民皆讴吟思汉，向仰刘氏，已可知矣。 
现代文：如今百姓都谌歌思念汉朝，向往仰慕刘氏，就此而言，已经可以了解当今大势了。 
English: Nowadays, the people are nostalgic for the Han Dynasty and yearn to admire Mr. Liu. In this respect, it is already possible to understand the current situation.

古文：隗嚣曰： 先生言周、汉之势，可也。
现代文：隗嚣说： 先生所分析的周、漠形势，是正确的。
English: Gong Han said: The Zhou and Mongolian situation analyzed by the professor is correct.

古文：至于但见愚民习识刘氏姓号之故，而谓汉复兴，疏矣。
现代文：至于衹看到愚蠢的百姓习惯于刘氏名号，因此却认为汉朝又会复兴，则不免迂阔了。
English: As for Zou, who saw that the foolish people were accustomed to the name of Liu, and therefore thought that the Han Dynasty would be revived, he was being too broad-minded.

古文：昔秦失其鹿，刘季逐而掎之，时民复知汉乎？ 
现代文：过去秦代失鹿，刘季追逐而得，当时百姓哪裹知道有汉呢? 
English: In the past, the Qin Dynasty lost deer, Liu Ji chased and won. At that time, how did the people know there were Han?

古文：彪既感嚣言，又愍狂狡之不息，乃著《王命论》以救时难。
现代文：班彪既有感于隗嚣的言论，又忧虑狂妄狡诈之徒争斗不息，于是写《王命论》来挽救艰难时世。
English: Ban Biao was not only impressed by the tumultuous speech, but also worried that the arrogant and cunning people would fight incessantly, so he wrote "King's Life" to save the difficult times.

古文：辞曰：
现代文：文章说：
English: The article said:

古文：昔在帝尧之禅曰： 咨尔舜，天之历数在尔躬。 
现代文：以前帝尧在掸让时说： 告诉你舜，上天的历数就在你的身上。 
English: At that time, Emperor Zhenzang said: "Zhen, you are destined to be the heir to rule.

古文：舜亦以命禹。
现代文：舜也是这样告知垂的。
English: Later, Hao also used the same words to admonish Yu.

古文：洎于稷、契，咸佐唐、虞，光济四海，奕世载德，至于汤、武，而有天下。
现代文：至于稷、契，咸曾辅佐唐、虞，光芒普照四海，世世代代都有德行，直到汤、武，才拥有天下。
English: As for Xing and Qi, Xian Zeng assisted Tang and Yu, and their light shone all over the world, and they were virtuous for generations. It wasn't until Tang and Wu that they ruled the world.

古文：虽其遭遇异时，禅代不同，至于应天从民，其揆一焉。
现代文：虽然他们所处时代不同，禅代的方式不同，但从顺应天意民心遣一点而言，他们都是一样的。
English: Although they lived in different times and practiced Zen in different ways, they were all the same in terms of following the will of Heaven and people.

古文：是故刘氏承尧之祚，氏族之世，著于《春秋》。
现代文：所以刘氏上承帝尧的国运，氏族的世系，记载于《春秋》之中。
English: Therefore, the Liu clan's succession to the throne, the lineage of the clan, is recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：唐据火德，而汉绍之。
现代文：卢毫占有火德，而选丛继承它。
English: Roh Miao possesses fire virtue, while Zeng Cong inherits it.

古文：始起沛泽，则神母夜号，以章赤帝之符。
现代文：起初在乸起事，便有神母夜晚哭号之事，用以表明赤帝将兴的符瑞。
English: At the beginning of the rebellion, there was the story of the godmother crying in the night, which was used to show that the Red Emperor would be happy.

古文：由是言之，帝王之祚，必有明圣显懿之德，丰功厚利积累之业，然后精诚通于神明，流泽加于生民。
现代文：由此看来，帝王的国柞，一定有圣明显著美好的德行。丰功伟绩世代积累的功业，然后精诚通于神明，恩惠施及百姓。
English: From this point of view, the emperor's imperial edict must have a clear and beautiful virtue, great achievements, great achievements accumulated over generations, and then be devoted to the gods and benefit the people.

古文：故能为鬼神所福向，天下所归往。
现代文：所以帝王能够为鬼神所保佑，天下归附。
English: Therefore, the emperor can be blessed by ghosts and gods, and the whole world will be attached to him.

古文：未见运世无本，功德不纪，而得掘起在此位者也。
现代文：从未见过世系没有根本，功业德行没有记载的人，骤然兴起而获得帝王之位。
English: Never before have we seen a person, whose lineage is without foundation and whose achievements and virtues are not recorded, suddenly rise to the throne.

古文：世俗见高祖兴于布衣，不达其故，以为适遭暴乱，得奋其剑。
现代文：世俗看到高祖从平民成为帝王，不了解其中缘故，认为他刚好遇到动乱时代，得以施展武力。
English: The world saw Gaozu rise from a commoner to an emperor, but did not understand why. They thought that he just happened to be in a turbulent era and was able to use force.

古文：游说之士，至比天下于逐鹿，幸捷而得之。
现代文：游说之士，甚至把争夺天下比作逐鹿，侥幸敏捷的人就可以得到。
English: lobbyists, and even compare the struggle for the world to the chase of deer, which can be obtained by those who are lucky and agile.

古文：不知神器有命，不可以智力求也。
现代文：殊不知国家神器有天命，不可以凭才智气力来求得。
English: After all, the national artifact has a destiny, and cannot be obtained by virtue of talent and strength.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲啊!
English: How sad!

古文：此世之所以多乱臣贼子者也。
现代文：造就是世间有许多乱臣贼子的原因。
English: This is the reason why there are many ruffians and thieves in the world.

古文：若然者，岂徒暗于天道哉，又不观之于人事矣。
现代文：像这样的人，岂衹是不懂得天意?也是不明白世事了。
English: People like this don't understand God's will? They don't understand the world either.

古文：夫饿馑流隶，饥寒道路，思有裋褐之亵，担石之畜，所愿不过一金，然终于转死沟壑。
现代文：大凡忍饥挨饿的流民，饥寒交迫地奔波于道路，希望有遮蔽身体的粗陋衣服，有斗石粮食的储存，所有愿望不过值一金而已。然而终于辗转死在沟壑。
English: A large number of starving refugees, hungry and cold, rushed along the road, hoping to have coarse clothes to cover their bodies, to have a bucket of grain stored, and all their wishes were worth only one gold. However, they finally died in a ravine.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：贫穷亦有命也。
现代文：贫穷也是命中注定的。
English: Poverty is also destiny.

古文：况乎天子之贵，四海之富，神明之祚，可得而妄据哉！
现代文：何况天子的贵重，四海的富裕，神明给予的国祚，怎能轻易地窃据呢?
English: Besides, how can the preciousness of the heavenly son, the wealth of the four seas, and the national treasure given by the gods be easily stolen?

古文：故虽遭罹厄会，窃其权柄，勇如信、布，强如梁、籍，成如王莽，然卒润镬伏锧，烹菹分裂；又况幺麽不及数子，而欲暗干天位者乎？
现代文：即使在混乱时期，有人掌握权柄，像韩信、英布那样勇，像项梁、项籍那样强，像王莽那样成功，然而这些人最终还是受到鼎烹斧劈，更何况那些小人还比不上上述人物，却企图暗中争夺帝位呢?
English: Even in times of turmoil, some people seize power, as brave as Han Xin and Ying Bu, as strong as Xiang Liang and Xiang Qi, and as successful as Wang Mang. However, these people are eventually defeated by the axe. What's more, those villains are not as good as the above-mentioned figures, but they try to secretly compete for the throne?

古文：是故驽蹇之乘，不骋千里之涂；燕雀之俦，不奋六翮之用；楶棁之材，不荷栋梁之任；斗筲之子，不秉帝王之重。
现代文：所以说驽劣跛足的马所驾的车乘，不能行千里之路；燕子麻雀之类的小乌，不堪展翅高飞；短柱一类的小材，不能负荷栋梁的重任；器量狭小的人不能秉受帝王的贵重。
English: Therefore, it is said that the car driven by a horse with inferior legs cannot travel thousands of miles; small birds such as swallows and sparrows cannot fly high; small trees such as short pillars cannot bear the heavy burden of beams; people with small stature cannot uphold the emperor's preciousness.

古文：《易》曰： 鼎折足，覆公餗。 
现代文：《易经》说： 鼎足折断了，公家的食物被倾覆了。 
English: "I Ching" said: The imperial throne was broken, and the food of the court was overturned.

古文：不胜其任也。
现代文：这正说的是不堪重任。
English: This is what it means to be overburdened.

古文：当秦之末，豪桀共推陈婴而王之。
现代文：在秦朝末年，豪杰共同推举陈婴为王。
English: In the last years of the Qin Dynasty, great heroes jointly elected Chen Jiao as king.

古文：婴母止婴曰： 自吾为子家妇，而世贫贱，卒富贵，不祥。
现代文：速玺母亲劝阻他说： 自从我成为你家的媳妇，世代贫穷，突然富贵，不吉祥。
English: Hayase's mother tried to dissuade him, saying, "Since I became your daughter-in-law, my family has been poor for generations. To suddenly become rich is not auspicious.

古文：不如以兵属人，事成，少受其利；不成，祸有所归。 
现代文：不如带兵归属他人，事业成功，稍能得利，没有成功，灾祸由他人承受。 
English: It is better to lead soldiers to belong to others, to succeed in business, to gain a little, to fail, and to have others bear the disaster.

古文：婴从其言，而陈氏以宁。
现代文：陈婴听从了母亲的话，速压因而安宁。
English: Chen Ying obeyed his mother's words, and Mr. Chen was safe.

古文：王陵之母，亦见项氏之必亡，而刘氏之将兴也。
现代文：王堕的母亲也看到了玺型必然灭亡，而刘氏将要兴盛。
English: Wang Pu's mother also saw the inevitable demise of the Han Dynasty, while the Liu Dynasty would flourish.

古文：是时陵为汉将，而母获于楚。
现代文：当时玉筐为坠将，而母亲被楚军抓获。
English: At that time, Tamkhe was a fallen general, and his mother was captured by the Chu army.

古文：有汉使来，陵母见之，谓曰： 愿告吾子，汉王长者，必得天下，子谨事之，无有二心。 
现代文：有一位汉使者来到茎营，王堕母亲会见他，对他说： 希望你告诉我的儿子，汉王是仁厚长者，一定会取得天下，他要谨慎地事奉汉王，不要有二心。 
English: An emissary of the Han Dynasty came to the stem camp, and the king's fallen mother met him and said to him: I hope you will tell my son that the Han King is a benevolent elder and will surely gain the world. He should be careful to serve the Han King and not have second thoughts.

古文：遂对汉使，伏剑而死，以固勉陵。
现代文：于是面对漠使，伏剑自杀。以此来坚定王堕的决心。
English: So, in the face of the desert envoy, he killed himself with a hidden sword. In this way, he strengthened his determination to become king.

古文：其后果定于汉，陵为宰相封侯。
现代文：后来漠室果然平定天下，王建因而任宰相，封侯爵。
English: Later, the emperor actually pacified the country, and Wang Jian was appointed prime minister and given the title of marquis.

古文：夫以匹妇之明，犹能推事理之致，探祸福之机，全宗祀于无穷，垂册书于《春秋》，而况大丈夫之事乎！
现代文：一个普通妇女，尚且能判断事理，探明祸福，从而保全家族宗庙世代延续，垂名于史册，更何况大丈夫呢?
English: An ordinary woman, even if she can judge things rationally, find out the good and bad, and thus preserve the continuity of the family ancestral temple for generations, and be famous in the annals of history, what's more, is she okay?

古文：是故穷达有命，吉凶由人，婴母知废，陵母知兴，审此二者，帝王之分决矣。
现代文：因此穷困通达有天命，是吉是祸在个人，速婴的母亲知道衰亡之理，王陵的母亲明白兴盛之由，考察遣两点，可见帝王的命数已先天决定了。
English: Therefore, poverty is predestined, good fortune or misfortune depends on the individual, the mother of a premature baby knows the reason for decline and death, the mother of a royal tomb understands the reason for prosperity, and examines two points, it can be seen that the emperor's life has been predetermined.

古文：盖在高祖，其兴也有五：一曰帝尧之苗裔，二曰体貌多奇异，三曰神武有征应，四曰宽明而仁恕，五曰知人善任使。
现代文：对于汉高祖来说，他兴起的原因有五条：一是帝塞的后裔，二是体格容貌多有异人之处，三是神圣英武有征兆，四是宽厚明达而有仁恕之心，五是知人善任。
English: As for Gaozu, there are five reasons for his rise: First, he is a descendant of the emperor; second, he has a strange appearance; third, he is a divine warrior and has the signs of an emperor; fourth, he is a generous and forgiving person; and fifth, he is good at getting to know people and using them well.

古文：加之以信诚好谋，达于听受，见善如不及，用人如由己，从谏如从流，趋时如响赴；当食吐哺，纳子房之策；拔足挥洗，揖郦生之说；寤戍卒之言，断怀土之情；高四皓之名，割肌肤之爱；举韩信于行阵，收陈平于亡命；英雄陈力，群才毕举，此高祖之大略所以成帝业也。
现代文：加上他讲诚信，好谋略，枧听通达开阔，看到别人的长处惟恐自己不如别人，任用下属就好像任用自己，听从劝谏好像江河流水，顺应形势就好像声响相应；中断饮食。来接受张良的谋略；暂停洗足，来拜服鄘食其的辩才；感悟戍卒的言论，于是断绝思念家乡的情怀；建都在长安，推崇商山四皓的美名，不立爱妃戚氏的儿子为太子；从行伍中擢拔韩信，在陈平流亡时收纳了他；许多英雄尽力施展才干，成群才士得到广泛任用，这就是高祖之所以建立帝业的主要原因。
English: In addition, he spoke of honesty, good strategy, listening to others' strengths, fearing that he was not as good as others, appointing subordinates was like appointing himself, listening to advice was like rivers and rivers, and complying with the situation was like the corresponding sound; interrupted his diet; came to accept Zhang Liang's strategy; paused to wash his feet, came to worship and eat his debating skills; impressed by the speech of his pupil, and then broke off the feelings of missing his hometown; built in Chang'an, respected the reputation of the four mountains of commerce, and did not establish the son of the Afeichi clan as the prince; promoted Han Xin from the ranks

古文：若乃灵瑞符应，又可略闻矣。
现代文：至于吉祥的符瑞又可大略述说了。
English: As for the auspicious Fu Rui, it can be briefly described.

古文：初，刘媪妊高祖而梦与神遇，震雷晦冥，有龙蛇之怪。
现代文：起初刘媪怀高祖时做梦与神遇合，黑夜中雷鸣电闪，有龙蛇出现的怪异。
English: At first, when Liu Ye was pregnant with Gao Zu, he had a dream in which he met a god. In the dark, there was thunder and lightning, and a strange dragon and snake appeared.

古文：及长多灵异，有殊于众，是以王、武感物而折契，吕公睹貌而进女；秦皇东游以厌其气，吕后望云而知所处；始受命则白蛇分，西入关则五星聚。
现代文：等到他长大后又多灵异，与普通人大为不同，所以王媪、武负有感于此而免了他的酒债，旦公见他的体貌把女儿嫁给他；秦始皇往东巡游以压制他的王气，吕后观看云彩便知道他所在之处；他开始接受天命时便将白蛇斩为两截，西入秦关时便有五星聚集。
English: When he grew up, he was very resourceful and very different from ordinary people, so Wang Qian and Wu Yun felt this and forgave his liquor debt. Once the prince saw his physique, he married his daughter to him. Qin Shi Huang went on a cruise to the east to suppress his kingliness. Lu Hou knew where he was by looking at the clouds. When he began to accept the fate of heaven, he cut the white snake into two pieces. When he entered Qin Guan in the west, there were five stars gathered.

古文：故淮阴、留侯谓之天授，非人力也。
现代文：所以淮阴侯韩信、留侯张良说他的帝业是天赐给的，而不是人力办得到的。
English: Therefore, Huaiyin Hou and Ruhou all said that this was given by fate, not by human beings.

古文：历古今之得失，验行事之成败，稽帝王之世运，考五者之所谓，取舍不厌斯位，符应不同斯度，而欲昧于权利，越次妄据，外不量力，内不知命，则必丧保家之主，失天年之寿，遇折足之凶，伏鈇钺之诛。
现代文：纵观古今的得失和行事的成败，考察历代帝王的盛衰，对照前面所说的五条，如果谋求的富贵与本身地位不相称，符瑞的征兆又不应在自己身上，却苟且贪求权利，僭越次序妄图富贵，对外不自量力。对内又不识天命，那么一定会丧失家族之主的地位，失去卜天赐给的寿命，遭遇鼎折足的凶祸，受到斧铁诛戮。
English: Looking at the gains and losses of ancient and modern times and the success or failure of actions, and examining the rise and fall of emperors throughout the ages, in contrast to the five points mentioned above, if the wealth sought is not commensurate with one's own status, and the signs of good fortune should not be in oneself, but one is greedy for power, arrogantly tries to be rich, and is not self-disciplined in the outside world. At home, one does not know the fate of heaven, then one will certainly lose the position of the head of the family, lose the life span given by God, encounter the greatest misfortune, and be killed by the axe.

古文：英雄诚知觉寤，畏若祸戒，超然远览，渊然深识，收陵、婴之明分，绝信、布之觊觎，距逐鹿之瞽说，审神器之有授，无贪不可几，为二母之所笑，则福祚流于子孙，天禄其永终矣。
现代文：作为英雄应当有所觉悟，警惕惧怕这种灾祸，放眼远看，深沉思考，要像王陵、陈婴那样明白自己的分量，断绝韩信、墓查那样的觊觎之心，抵挡中原逐鹿的谬说，明白帝王神器自有天授，不贪婪就不会有非分的妄想，就不会被速、三二母所讥笑，那么就可以福祚延续于子孙后代，永远享受天赐的爵禄了。
English: As a hero, he should be aware, be wary of fearing this kind of disaster, look far and wide, think deeply, understand his own weight like a royal tomb and an old baby, break the stubborn heart like Han Xin and tomb inspection, resist the fallacy of chasing deer in the Central Plains, understand that the imperial artifact has its own natural gift, do not be greedy, there will be no delusion of non-participation, and will not be ridiculed by the fast and the three second mother, then the blessing can be continued in future generations, and enjoy the heavenly peerage forever.

古文：隗嚣不纳，果败。
现代文：隗嚣没有听从，果然败亡。
English: He did not listen to the clamor, and was defeated.

古文：汉元、成世，道士言： 谶者云： 赤厄三七。 
现代文：还汉元、成世之时，道士说： 谶纬上说： 赤厄三七。 
English: In the Han Dynasty, at the time of his coming of age, the Taoist said, "In the world, it is said that there are thirty-seven red evils.

古文：三七，二百一十年，有外戚之篡。
现代文：三七，就是二百一十年，外戚篡国。
English: Thirty-seven, that is, two hundred and ten years ago, a foreign relative usurped the country.

古文：祚极三六，当有龙飞之秀，兴复祖宗。 
现代文：十八年之后就有飞龙之秀，再次复兴祖宗基业。 
English: Eighteen years later, Fei Long Zhi Xiu revived the ancestral business.

古文：及莽篡汉，汉二百一十年矣。
现代文：等到王菱篡汉，汉曲正好二百一十年。
English: By the time Wang Ling usurped Han, it would be exactly two hundred and ten years since Chinese music began.

古文：莽十八年而败，光武兴焉。
现代文：王莽十八年后败亡，光武帝复兴汉朝。
English: Wang Mang fell eighteen years later, and Emperor Guangwu revived the Han Dynasty.

古文：明帝初生，丰下兑上，赤色似尧，终登帝位。
现代文：明帝刚生下时，面的下部丰满而上部尖削，赤色似尧，最终登上帝位。
English: When Emperor Ming was just born, the lower part of the face was plump and the upper part was pointed, red like a beak, and eventually ascended to the throne.

古文：和帝邓皇后，祖父禹，佐命光武，常曰： 我将百万人，未尝妄杀一人，子孙当大兴。 
现代文：和帝的邓皇后，祖父邓禹，辅佐光武，经常说： 我率领百万大军，从来没有乱杀一人，子孙后代将大为兴盛。 
English: Emperor Deng's consort, Empress Deng, grandfather Deng Yu, and aide-de-camp Guangwu often said, "I led a million-man army and never killed a single person indiscriminately. Future generations will prosper greatly."

古文：后少时，相者苏文见后，惊曰： 此成汤之骨法也，贵不可言。 
现代文：邓后年幼时，相士苏文见到她，吃惊地说： 这是成汤的骨相，贵不可言。 
English: When Empress Deng was young, Su Wen, her suitor, was surprised to see her and said, "This is Cheng Tang's bone appearance, you can't say it's precious."

古文：后尝梦登梯，以手扪天，天体荡荡正青而滑，有若钟乳者，后仰吮之。
现代文：邓后曾经梦见登楼梯，用手摸天，天体空空荡荡，一片青色而显得光滑，就好像钟乳石，邓后仰首用舌吮吸。
English: Dengou once dreamed of climbing the stairs, touching the sky with her hand, the celestial body was empty, blue and smooth, just like a stalactite, Dengou looked up and sucked with her tongue.

古文：以讯之占梦。
现代文：她将此梦询问占梦者。
English: She asked the soothsayer about the dream.

古文：占梦者曰： 尧梦攀天而上，汤梦及天而呧之，此皆非常梦也。 
现代文：占梦者说： 尧曾梦见攀天而上，汤梦见触天而舔吸，逭都不是普通的梦。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The dragonfly had dreamed of climbing up to the sky, the soup dreamed of touching the sky and licking it, and the dragonfly was not an ordinary dream.

古文：既而入宫，遂登尊位。
现代文：后来她入宫，结果登上皇后的大位。
English: Later, she entered the palace and eventually ascended to the throne of the queen.

古文：安帝未即大位，在邸，数有神光赤蛇嘉应，照曜室内，磐纡殿屋床第之间，后遂入承大统。
现代文：安帝未即帝位之前，居住府邸，屡次有神光赤蛇这样吉祥的征兆，神光照耀室内，赤蛇盘绕在殿屋床笫之间，后来安帝入宫继承了帝位。
English: Before Emperor Andi ascended to the throne, he lived in a palace. There were many auspicious signs such as the divine light and the red snake. The divine light shone in the room, and the red snake was coiled between the mattresses of the palace. Later, Emperor Andi entered the palace and inherited the throne.

古文：初，桓帝之世，有黄星见于楚、宋之分。
现代文：起初在桓帝之时，有黄星出现在楚、宋的分野。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Kan, a yellow star appeared in the fields of Chu and Song.

古文：辽东殷馗曰： 后五十年，当有真人起于谯、沛之间，其锋不可当。 
现代文：辽东殷馗说： 以后五十年，会有真人在尽、迹之间兴起，他的锋芒不可阻挡。 
English: Liaodong Yinqi said: In the next fifty years, there will be a real person rising up from the ashes, and his edge will be unstoppable.

古文：灵帝熹平五年，黄龙见谯。
现代文：灵帝熹垩五年，黄龙出现在盏鳄。
English: In the fifth year of Ling Di's reign, Huanglong appeared in Zhenguo.

古文：光禄大夫乔玄问太史令单飏曰： 此何祥也？ 
现代文：光禄大夫短查问太史令里飓说： 这是什么兆头? 
English: After a brief examination, Dr. Guanglu asked Taishi Lingli Rong and said, "What is this sign?"

古文：飏曰： 其国后当有王者兴，不及五十年，亦当复见天事恆象，此其征也。 
现代文：单飏说： 谯郡将来当有帝王兴起，不要过五十年，也应见到同样的天象出现，造就是征兆。 
English: Shan Yu said: In the future, when an emperor arises in Jixian County, the same celestial phenomenon should be seen not more than 50 years later. The creation is a sign.

古文：内黄殷登默记之。
现代文：内黄人殷登暗暗记在心襄。
English: Inner yellow man Yin Deng secretly memorized in his heart.

古文：其后曹操起于谯，是为魏武帝。
现代文：后来曹操在谯郡兴起，造就是魏武帝。
English: Later, Cao Cao arose in Yixian County, and was created by Emperor Wu of Wei.

古文：建安五年，于黄星见之，岁五十年矣，而武帝破袁绍，天下莫敌。
现代文：麸壶建室五年，距离上次黄星出现，正好五十年。曹操大破袁绍，天下无敌。
English: It has been five years since the pottery room was built, and it has been exactly fifty years since the last yellow star appeared. Cao Cao defeated Yuan Shao and became invincible.

古文：《春秋谶》曰： 代汉者，当涂高也。 
现代文：《春秋谶》书说： 取代汉朝的，是当涂高。 
English: The "Spring and Autumn Classic" book says: To replace the Han Dynasty, it is time to paint high.

古文：汉有周舒者，善内学。
现代文：还未有名叫旦赶的人，精通谶纬内学。
English: There is not yet a famous person who is called "Danzhu," who is proficient in Chinese classics and classics.

古文：人或问之，舒曰： 当涂高者，魏也。 
现代文：有人间他，且厘说： 所谓当涂高，就是魏啊。 
English: Some people said to him, "The so-called Dangtu Gao is Wei."

古文：舒既没，谯周又问术士杜琼曰： 周征君以为当涂高，魏也。
现代文：周舒死后，箬周又问方术之士杜琼道： 周征君认为当涂高就是魏。
English: After Zhou Shu's death, Zou Zhou also asked Du Qiong, a master of the art of painting: Zhou Zecheng believed that when painting high, it was Wei.

古文：其义何在？ 
现代文：这是什么意思? 
English: What does that mean?

古文：琼曰： 魏，阙名也。当涂而高，圣人以类言耳。 
现代文：杜琼说： 魏，是宫阙的名称，面临道路而高大，圣人是就同类事物的比附来说的。 
English: Du Qiong said: Wei is the name of the imperial eunuch, facing the road and tall, the sage said in reference to the comparison of similar things.

古文：又问周曰： 宁复有所怪邪？ 
现代文：又问谯周说： 还有不懂的地方吗? 
English: He also asked Gong Zhou: Is there anything else you don't understand?

古文：周曰： 未达也。 
现代文：说： 还不能完全理解。 
English: "It's not fully understood yet," he said.

古文：琼曰： 古者名官职不言曹，自汉以来，名官尽言曹，吏言属曹，卒言侍曹，此殆天意也。 
现代文：杜琼说： 古代称官职不说曹，从汉代以来，称官职尽用曹，如小吏称曹属，士卒称侍曹，这大概是天意。 
English: Du Qiong said: In ancient times, officials did not say Cao, but since the Han Dynasty, officials have been called Cao. For example, minor officials are called Cao Zhen, and judges are called Cao. This is probably the will of heaven.

古文：周曰： 魏者，大也；曹者，众也。
现代文：题周说： 魏的意思是大，曹的意思是众。
English: Qizhou said: Wei means big, Cao means many.

古文：众而且大，天下之所归乎？ 
现代文：众而且大，天下所以会归附啊! 
English: They are numerous and large, that's why the whole world will join them!

古文：建安十八年，武帝为公，又进爵为王。
现代文：建安十八年，武帝封为公爵，又进爵为王。
English: In the 18th year of Jianan, Emperor Wu was given the title of Duke, and he was also given the title of King.

古文：二十五年，武帝薨，太子丕嗣为魏王，是为文帝。
现代文：二十五年，武帝去世，太子曹丕继位为魏王，造就是魏文帝。
English: Twenty-five years later, Emperor Wu died, and Prince Cao Pi succeeded him as the Wei king, creating the Wei Emperor.

古文：文帝始生，有云青色，员如车盖，当其上终日。
现代文：文帝刚出生时，有青色云气，圆如车上的伞盖，整天遮盖在上方。
English: When Wen Di was just born, there was a bluish cloud, round like the umbrella cover on a car, which covered him all day.

古文：望气者以为至贵之祥，非人臣之气。
现代文：望气的人认为是最尊贵的祥瑞，不是人臣具有的云气。
English: Hopeful people think that it is the most honorable Xiang Rui, not the nobles.

古文：善相者高元吕曰： 其贵不可言。 
现代文：善于看相的高元吕说： 这种现象贵不可言。 
English: Gao Yuanlu, who is good at seeing faces, said: This phenomenon is priceless.

古文：延康元年三月，黄龙又见谯，殷登犹存，叹曰： 黄龙见于熹平也，单飏云： 不及五十年，亦当复见。 
现代文：延康元年三月，黄龙又出现在盏郡，殷登当时还活着，赞叹说： 黄龙出现在熹平年间，单飏说： 不到五十年，应当再次出现。 
English: In March of the first year of Yan Kang, the yellow dragon appeared again in Zhen County. Yin Deng was still alive at the time and said with admiration: The yellow dragon appeared in the years of Xingping, and Shan Yu said: It should appear again in less than fifty years.

古文：今四十五年矣，飏之言其验兹乎。 
现代文：至今四十五年了，单飏的话终于应验了。 
English: Now, forty-five years later, Shan Xuan's words have finally come true.

古文：四月，饶安言白虎见。
现代文：四月，饶安县说是出现了白虎。
English: In April, a white tiger was said to have appeared in Rao'an County.

古文：八月，石邑言凤凰集，又有麒麟见。
现代文：八月，石邑题说是凤凰聚集，又有麒麟出现。
English: In August, it was said that the phoenixes gathered in Shiyi, and the unicorns appeared.

古文：十月，汉帝禅位于魏，魏王辞让不受。博士苏林、董巴上言： 臣闻天之去就，固有常分，圣人当之，昭然不疑。
现代文：十月，漠献帝禅帝位于魏，魏王辞让没有接受，博士苏林、董巴上书说： 臣听说天命的去就，本来就有一定的运数，圣人承当天命，昭然无可疑虑。
English: In October, when Emperor Mu Xian and Emperor Zen were in Wei, and the Wei king did not accept the resignation, Dr. Surin and Dongba wrote: "The minister heard that it was the will of heaven to go there, and he had a certain number of operations, and the saint had the will of heaven, and there was clearly no doubt.

古文：故尧捐骨肉而禅有虞，终无吝色。
现代文：所以唐尧舍弃自己的亲子而禅位于虞舜，终究没有吝惜之意。
English: Therefore, Tang Xuan abandoned his own son and Zen was located in Yuxuan, after all, there was no sense of stinginess.

古文：舜发垄亩而居天下，若固有之。
现代文：舜出身于农耕而拥有天下，就好像他本来就应该如此。
English: He came from farming and he owns the world, as he should.

古文：其相授间，不稽漏刻，天下已传矣。
现代文：他们在授受之际，不拖延时间，天下就已经禅代了。
English: At the time of giving and receiving, they did not delay, and the world was already in the age of Zen.

古文：所以急天命，明天下不可一日无君。
现代文：这是因为要急于顺应天命，表明天下不可以一日没有君主。
English: This is because it is necessary to hasten to comply with the fate of heaven, indicating that the world cannot be without a monarch for a day.

古文：今汉期运已终，妖异绝之已审。
现代文：如今汉朝国运已经终了，妖异现象已表明气数已绝。
English: Now that the Han Dynasty and the National Movement have ended, the strange phenomenon has shown that the number of qi has been exhausted.

古文：陛下受天之命，符瑞告征，丁宁详悉，反覆备至，虽言语相谕，无以代此。
现代文：陛下承受天命，符瑞告示征兆，详细周全，反复备至，即使用语言晓谕，也不过如此。
English: His majesty has received the mandate of heaven, and the signs are detailed and repeated, even in the language of the oracle.

古文：今既发诏书，玺绶未御，固执谦让，上稽天命，下违民情。
现代文：如今陛下发出诏书，不肯接受玉玺，固执地谦让，对上则延误了天命，对下则违背了民情。
English: Now His Majesty has issued an imperial edict, refusing to accept the imperial edict, stubbornly conceding to the former, delaying the destiny of heaven to the latter, and violating the people's will to the former.

古文：臣谨按古之典籍，参以图纬，魏之行运及天道所在，即尊之验，在于今年此月，昭分明。
现代文：臣等谨依照前代的典籍，又参考谶纬图书，魏朝国运以及天道所在。即位登基的征验，就在今年今月，十分清晰明显。
English: The emperors and ministers should follow the classics of the previous generation, and also refer to the books of Zou Wei, the national movement of the Wei Dynasty, and the location of Heaven Road. The enlistment of the enthronement, just this month, is very clear and obvious.

古文：谨条奏如左。
现代文：谨逐条陈奏如下。
English: I would like to present the following points one by one.

古文：唯陛下迁思易虑，以时即位，显告上帝，布诏天下。
现代文：希望陛下改变原先的想法，及时即位，明确地祭告上天，向天下宣布诏令。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will change his original idea, ascend the throne in a timely manner, and announce the imperial edict to the world.

古文：然后改正朔，易服色，正大号，天下幸甚。 
现代文：然后改用新的历法，变更朝廷服色，改用新的国号，天下便感到十分幸运。 
English: Then they switched to a new calendar, changed the color of the imperial robes, and switched to a new country name, and the whole world felt very lucky.

古文：其所陈事曰：
现代文：他们陈述的事情如下：
English: Their account is as follows:

古文：天有十二次，以为分野，王公之国，各有所属。
现代文：天有十二个星域，以此作为世间的分野，王公诸侯的封国，都归属各自不同的分野。
English: There are twelve constellations in the sky, which are the spheres of the world. The fiefdoms of princes and princes all belong to different spheres.

古文：周在鹑火，魏在大梁，岁星行历，凡十二次，所在国天子受命，诸侯以封。
现代文：周的分野在鹑火，魏的分野在大梁，岁星行经之处，十二次一个来回。它所在的国家，是天子就承受天命，是诸侯就得到封爵。
English: Zhou's field is in the campfire, Wei's field is in the beam, and twelve times one goes back and forth where the year star goes. The country where it is located, is the son of heaven to bear the destiny of heaven, and is the prince to be knighted.

古文：周文王始受命，岁星在鹑火。至武王伐纣，十三年，岁星复在鹑火。
现代文：周文王开始承受天命，岁星在鹑火，到了周武王讨伐殷纣王时，过了十三年，岁星又在鹑火。
English: King Zhou Wen began to bear the destiny of heaven, and the year star was on the bonfire. When King Zhou Wu fought against King Yin, after thirteen years, the year star was on the bonfire again.

古文：故《春秋传》曰： 武王伐纣，岁在鹑火。 
现代文：所以《春秋传》说： 周武王讨伐纣王，岁星在鹑火。 
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn Legend" said: King Zhou Wu fought against King Gong, and the year star was on the bonfire.

古文：又曰： 岁之所在，则我有周之分野也。 
现代文：又说： 岁星所在的地方，就是我周室的分野。 
English: He also said: The place where the year star is located is the field of my weekly room.

古文：昔光和七年，岁在大梁，武王始受命为将，讨黄巾。
现代文：先前光和七年，岁星在大梁，武王开始受朝命为将军讨伐黄巾。
English: In the previous light and seven years, the year star was in Dalian, and King Wu began to be ordered by the court to fight the yellow scarf for the general.

古文：是岁，改年为中平元年。
现代文：这年改年号为中干元年。
English: This year, the year was changed to the first year of Zhonggan.

古文：建安元年，岁复在大梁，始拜大将军。
现代文：建安元年岁星又在大梁，武王开始任大将军。
English: In the first year of Jianan, the star of the year also appeared in Daliang, and King Wu began to serve as general.

古文：十三年，复在大梁，始拜丞相。
现代文：十三年岁星又出现在大梁，开始担任丞相。
English: The 13-year-old star appeared again in Dailang and began to serve as the prime minister.

古文：今二十五年，岁复在大梁，陛下受命。
现代文：现在是建安二十五年，岁星又在大梁，陛下承受天命。
English: Now it is the 25th year of Jian'an, the year star is in Dalian again, and His Majesty has received the destiny.

古文：此魏得岁与周文、武受命相应。
现代文：以上可知，魏室得岁星正好与周文王、周武王承受天命的情形相似。
English: From the above, it can be seen that Wei Shuxiu's lucky star is exactly similar to the fate of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu.

古文：今年青龙在庚子，《诗推度灾》曰： 庚者，更也；子者，兹也。
现代文：今年太岁星在庚子，《诗推度灾》说： 庚，就是变更的意思；子，就是在此的意思。
English: This year, the Chinese New Year star is Geng Zi. "Poetry and Disaster Prevention" says: Geng is the meaning of change; Zi is the meaning of the beginning.

古文：圣人制法天下治。 
现代文：圣人制定法令，天下大治。 
English: The sage issues decrees, and the world is governed.

古文：又曰： 王者布德于子，治成于丑。 
现代文：又说： 帝王在于年施布恩德，在丑年治国得到成功。 
English: He also said: The emperor is in the year of Shibunde, and he is successful in governing the country in the year of Ugly.

古文：此言今年天更命圣人，制法天下，布德于民也。
现代文：这是说今年上天重新变更君主，制定法令颁行天下，施及恩德于百姓。
English: This means that this year, the heavens will change the monarch again, enact laws and issue them to the world, and bestow grace on the people.

古文：魏以政制天下，与《诗》协矣。
现代文：魏因此更改天下制度，与《诗推度灾》中所说是相符合的。
English: Wei therefore changed the world system, which is consistent with what is said in "Poetry and Disaster."

古文：颛顼受命，岁在豕韦，卫居其地，亦在豕韦。
现代文：颛顼承受天命，岁星在豕韦分野，堑国位于那个地域，也在豕韦分野。
English: Yunnan bears the destiny of heaven, the year star is in the Yunnan-Hebei area, Yunnan is located in that area, and it is also in the Yunnan-Hebei area.

古文：故《春秋传》曰： 卫，颛顼之墟也。 
现代文：所以《春秋传》说： 卫，是颛顼的故墟。 
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn Legend" said: Wei is the ancient ruins of Shandong.

古文：今十月，斗之所建，则颛顼受命之分也。
现代文：今年十月斗宿所指的月建，正好应合颛顼承受天命的运敷。
English: The moon-building referred to in this year's October dooshuku coincided with the time when the brothers received the heavenly fortune.

古文：魏以十月受禅，此同符始祖受命之验也。
现代文：魏朝在十月接受禅让，这验证了与始祖承受天命同一符瑞。
English: The Wei Dynasty's acceptance of Zen Zhen in October proved that it shared the same fate as the founding fathers.

古文：魏之氏族，出自颛顼，与舜同祖，见于《春秋世家》。
现代文：魏压，出自颛顼帝，与帝爱同一祖先，记载于《春秋世家》。
English: Wei pressure, from Emperor Xuan, from the same ancestor as Emperor Ai, is recorded in "Spring and Autumn Family."

古文：舜以土德承尧之火，今魏亦以土德承汉之火，其于行运合于尧、舜授受之次。
现代文：舜以土德承续尧的火德，如今逸曲也以土德承续选代的火德，国运的行运也同尧、舜授受天命的次序相吻合。
English: The fire virtue of  is succeeded by the earth virtue of, and the fire virtue of  is succeeded by the earth virtue of, and the fire virtue of  is succeeded by the earth virtue of. The movement of the National Games also coincides with the order of  and  receiving the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：魏王犹未许。
现代文：馥王还是没有应允。
English: The king still did not agree.

古文：大史丞许芝又上天文祥瑞：
现代文：太史丞许芝又上奏天文的吉祥符瑞：
English: Tai Shicheng Xu Zhi also played the auspicious fury of astronomy:

古文：自建安三年十二月戊辰，有新天子气见于东南，到今积二十三年。
现代文：自建安三年十二月戊辰日起，有新天子气出现在东南方，到现在已二十三年了。
English: It has been 23 years since a new heaven and earth spirit appeared in Southeast China on the third day of the third month of the third year of Jian'an.

古文：建安十年，茀星出库楼，历犯氐、房宿，北入天市，犯北斗、紫微。
现代文：建室十年，荛星出现于库楼星座，屡次干犯氐、房二星，往北进入天市星，干犯北斗、紫微二星。
English: Ten years after the establishment of the office, the star appeared in the constellation of the warehouse, repeatedly breaking into the two stars of the house and the house, and entering the star of the city of heaven to the north, breaking into the two stars of the Big Dipper and the Purple Dwarf.

古文：氐为天子宿宫，路寝所止。
现代文：氐星是天子的宿宫，行路寝宿的地方。
English: Krypton is the home of the Son of Heaven, the place where he travels and sleeps.

古文：房为天子明堂政教之首。
现代文：房星为天子正殿政治教化之首。
English: Fang Xing is the head of the political education of Tianzi Zhengdong.

古文：北斗七星，主尊辅象近臣。
现代文：北斗七星，主辅臣贵重，象征近臣。
English: The Big Dipper has seven stars, representing the importance of the master, the assistant, and the vassal.

古文：紫微者，北极最尊。
现代文：紫微星，在北极中最为尊贵。
English: Purple star, the most precious star in the Arctic.

古文：此除扫汉家之大异也。
现代文：这就是扫除汉朝的最大特异天象。
English: This is the most extraordinary phenomenon that swept away the Han Dynasty.

古文：建安十八年秋，岁星、镇星、荧惑俱入太微，逆行留守帝坐百有余日。
现代文：建安十八年秋，岁星、镇星、荧惑三星都进入太微，逆行停留在帝星共有百余日。
English: In the autumn of the 18th year of Jian'an, the Year Star, Town Star, and Fluorescent Star all entered Taimiao, and remained retrograde in the Imperial Star for a total of more than 100 days.

古文：岁星入太微，人主改姓。
现代文：岁星进入太微，国君改姓。
English: As the year draws to a close, the country's ruler changes his surname.

古文：镇星入太微，内有兵乱，人主以弱。
现代文：镇星入太微，海内有兵乱，国运因此衰弱。
English: The invasion of the town was too weak, and there was a mutiny at sea, which weakened the national movement.

古文：三者，汉改姓易代之异也。
现代文：上述三条，都是漠代改朝换代的特异天象。
English: The above three are all special celestial phenomena caused by the change of dynasties in the desert era.

古文：建安十九年正月，白虹贯日。
现代文：建安十九年正月，白虹流贯太阳。
English: In the first month of the 19th year of Jian'an, a white rainbow streaked across the sun.

古文：《易传》曰： 后妃擅国，白虹贯日。 
现代文：《易传》说： 后妃专政，白虹流贯太阳。 
English: "I Chuan" said: The empress's dictatorship, the white rainbow flows through the sun.

古文：建安二十一年五月朔己亥，日蚀。
现代文：建安二十一年五月初一己亥，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred at the beginning of May in the 21st year of Jian'an.

古文：建安二十三年三月，茀星晨见东方二十余日，夕出西方，犯历五车、东井、五诸侯、文昌、轩辕、太微，锋炎刺帝坐。
现代文：建安二十三年三月，弗星清晨出现在东方有二十多天，晚上出现在西方，干犯五车、束井、五诸侯、文昌、轩辕、太微，锋芒刺入帝座。
English: In March of the 23rd year of Jian'an, Fuxing appeared in the east in the morning for more than 20 days, and in the west in the evening, committing the crimes of the Five Chariots, Sokai, Five Princes, Wenchang, Xuancheng, and Taiwei, and piercing the imperial throne.

古文：茀者除旧布新，亡恶兴圣之异也。
现代文：弗星是除旧布新、除灭恶政兴起圣明的特异天象。
English: Fu Xing is a special celestial phenomenon of removing the old and replacing it with the new, eliminating the evil government and the rise of the holy light.

古文：建安二十四年二月晦壬子，日蚀。
现代文：建塞二十四年二月晦日壬子，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the last day of February in the 24th year of Jian Ce.

古文：日者阳精，月为侯王，而以亥子日蚀，皆水灭火之异也。
现代文：日是阳气之精，月象征王侯，而在亥子出现日食，都是水灭火的特异天象。
English: The sun is the spirit of the yang, the moon symbolizes the prince, and the eclipse of the sun at the time of the boar is a special celestial phenomenon of water extinguishing fire.

古文：延康元年九月十日黄昏时，月蚀荧惑，过人定时，荧惑出营室，宿羽林。
现代文：延康元年九月十曰黄昏时分，月亮侵蚀荧惑星，深夜人静时，荧惑出营室星宿，停留在羽林星宿。
English: At dusk on September 10th in the first year of Yan Kang, the moon eroded the fluorescent planet, and when the people were quiet in the middle of the night, the fluorescent planets came out of the camp room and stayed in the Hualin stars.

古文：月为大臣侯王之象；荧惑火精，汉氏之行。
现代文：月是大臣侯王的象征，荧惑是火精，象征汉氏的运数。
English: The moon is a symbol of the minister, the prince, and the fire spirit is a symbol of the Han dynasty.

古文：占曰： 汉家以兵亡。 
现代文：占卜说： 汉家因为战乱而败亡。 
English: The soothsayer said: The Han Dynasty fell because of the war.

古文：延康元年九月二十日，《剥》卦天子气不见，皆崩亡之异也。
现代文：延康元年九月二十日，《剥》卦见不到天子气。这些都是坠伐崩溃灭亡的特异天象。
English: On September 20th, the first year of the Yan Kang era, the "Stripped" and "Gou" did not see the son of heaven. These are special celestial objects that fell, collapsed and perished.

古文：荧惑火精，行缩日一度有余。
现代文：荧惑是火精，运行时每天缩小一度多。
English: Fluorescence is a fire essence, shrinking more than once a day during operation.

古文：故太史令王昱以为汉家衰亡之极。
现代文：已故太史令王旦认为艳已经衰亡到极顶。
English: Wang Dan, the late Grand Historian, believed that Yan had reached the peak of her decline.

古文：荧惑大而赤色；光不明，赤而小，与小星无别，皆汉家衰亡之异也。
现代文：荧惑星本来巨大而且是红色；而现在光亮微弱，色红而小，与其他小星没有差别，这些都是漠家衰亡的特异天象。
English: Fluorescent planets used to be huge and red; now they are faint, reddish and small, no different from other small stars. These are unique celestial objects that have fallen into oblivion.

古文：《易传》曰： 上下流通圣贤昌，厥应帝德凤凰翔，万民喜乐无咎殃。 
现代文：《易传》说： 上下畅通圣贤盛昌，感应上天恩德，凤凰飞翔，万民欢乐，没有祸殃。 
English: "I Chuan" said: The saints and sages are prosperous, the benevolence of heaven is felt, the phoenix flies, the people rejoice, and there is no disaster.

古文：《易传》又曰： 圣人受命，厥应凤凰下，天子虏。 
现代文：《易传》又说： 圣人承受天命，应合凤凰飞下的符瑞，天子就要被俘虏。 
English: "I Ching" also says: The sage will bear the fate of heaven and meet the fury of the phoenix flying down, and the heavenly son will be captured.

古文：《易传》又曰： 黄龙见，天灾将至，天子绌，圣人出。 
现代文：《易传》又说： 黄龙出现，天灾将要来临，天子被废，圣人出现。 
English: "I Ching" also says: The yellow dragon appears, the natural disaster is about to come, the heavenly son is abolished, and the saint appears.

古文：黄龙以戊己日见，五色文章皆具，圣人得天受命。
现代文：黄龙在戊己日出现，具有五种色彩和各类花纹，圣人得以承受天命。
English: The yellow dragon appears on the day of the god, with five colors and various patterns, and the saint is able to withstand the fate of heaven.

古文：黄龙以戊寅见，此帝王受命之符瑞最著明者也。
现代文：黄龙在戊寅日出现，这是帝王接受符瑞最明显的征兆。
English: The appearance of the yellow dragon on Wu Yin Day is the most obvious sign of the emperor's acceptance of Fu Rui.

古文：《易传》又曰： 圣人清静行中正，贤人至，民从命，厥应麒麟来。 
现代文：《易传》又说： 圣人清静行事中正，贤人来到，百姓从命，麒麟感应而出现。 
English: "I Ching" also said: The sage is calmly walking, the wise man comes, the people obey, and the unicorn appears.

古文：《春秋玉版谶》曰： 代赤者魏公子。 
现代文：《春秋玉版谶》曰： 代替汉朝的是魏公子。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Edition" says: The Han Dynasty was replaced by the Wei Dynasty.

古文：《春秋佐助期》曰： 汉以许昌失天下。 
现代文：《春秋佐助期》说： 漠因为许昌而失去天下。 
English: "Spring, Autumn, and Succession" says: The desert lost the world because of Xu Chang.

古文：故白马令甘陵李云上事，言许昌气见，当涂高已萌，欲使汉家防绝萌芽。
现代文：已故白马令甘陵人李云上书朝廷，说许昌出现王气，当涂高已经出现，想让漠家防微杜渐。
English: The late Bai Ma Ling, a resident of Ganling, Li Yun, wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying that Xu Chang appeared kingly, and Dang Tu Gao had already appeared, and he wanted to prevent Mo Jia from becoming weak.

古文：今汉都许，日以微弱，当居许昌以失天下。
现代文：如今汉朝建都许昌，日益衰微，将在许昌失去天下。
English: Today, Xu Chang, the capital of the Han Dynasty, is declining day by day, and Xu Chang will lose the world.

古文：当涂高者，魏也；魏者，象魏两阙之名当道而高大者也。
现代文：当涂高，就是魏；魏，是宫廷外两座阙的名称，也就是对着道路的高大建筑。
English: When painted high, it is Wei; Wei is the name of the two towers outside the palace, that is, the tall buildings facing the road.

古文：魏当代汉，如李云之言也。
现代文：魏应当取代汉，正如李云所说。
English: Wei should replace Han, as Li Yun said.

古文：《春秋佐助期》又曰： 汉以蒙孙亡。 
现代文：《春秋佐助期》又说： 漠因为无知的儿孙灭亡。 
English: "Spring, Autumn, and Succession" also said: The children and grandchildren of the ignorant perish.

古文：说者以蒙孙直汉二十四帝，童蒙愚惑以弱亡。
现代文：论者认为这幼稚无知的儿孙是汉第二十四帝，由于幼稚愚昧因而衰弱败亡。
English: Commentators believe that this childish and ignorant grandson was the 24th emperor of Han, who was weakened and fell due to his childish ignorance.

古文：汉帝少时名为董侯，名不正，蒙乱荒惑，其子孙以弱亡也。
现代文：汉帝年少时，名叫董侯，名字不正，幼稚昏乱荒惑，造就是子孙因为衰弱而亡国。
English: When the Han Emperor was young, his name was Dong Hou. The name was not correct, and he was childish, confused and bewildered. This is why his descendants lost their country due to weakness.

古文：《孝经中黄谶》曰： 日载东，纪火光。不横一，圣明聪。
现代文：《孝经中黄谶》说： 日字载束，法度光明，不字横一，圣哲聪慧。
English: "Huang Qi in the Filial Piety Sutra" said: The Japanese character is a bundle, the law is bright, the word is not horizontal, and the sage is clever.

古文：四百之外，易姓而王。
现代文：四百年后，易姓为帝。
English: Four hundred years later, Yi became emperor.

古文：天下归功致太平。 
现代文：天下归功而致太平。 
English: To the world's credit, peace prevailed.

古文：此魏王之姓讳著见图谶也。
现代文：这是魏王的姓名明显出现在图谶之上。
English: This is the name of the Wei king clearly appearing on the map.

古文：《易运期》曰： 言居东，西有午，两日并光日居下。其为主，反为辅，五八四十，黄气受，真人出。 
现代文：《易运期》说： 言居束，西有午，两曰并光曰居下，原为君主，反而成为辅佐，五八四十，黄气承受，真人出现。 
English: "Yi Yun Zi" said: Saying that you live in a bunch, the West has the afternoon, two days and the light say that you live down, originally a monarch, but instead become an assistant, fifty-eight forty, bear the yellow gas, the real person appears.

古文：言午 许 字，两日 昌 字，汉当以许亡，魏当以许昌。
现代文：言午是 许 字，两日是 昌 字，汉代当因为许昌而衰亡，魏朝当因为许昌而昌盛。
English: The word for noon is 许, and the word for two days is 昌. The Han Dynasty fell because of Xu Chang, and the Wei Dynasty flourished because of Xu Chang.

古文：今际会之期在许，是其大效也。《易运期》又曰： 鬼在山，禾女运，王天下。 
现代文：如今与天命会合的时间在许昌，这是图谶之言最大的灵验。《易运期》又说： 鬼在山，禾女运，王天下。 
English: Now, the time to meet with the fate of heaven is in Xuchang, which is the greatest effect of Tu You's words. "Easy Transport Period" also said: The devil is in the mountains, the women's movement is in the country, and the king is in the country.

古文：于是魏王受汉禅，柴于繁阳，有黄鸟衔丹书，集于尚书台，于是改元为黄初。
现代文：于是魏王接受汉代禅让，在繁阳告祭上天。有黄乌日衔丹书，停留在尚书台，于是改元为黄翅。
English: As a result, the Wei king accepted the Han Dynasty's offer of Zen, and offered sacrifices to the heavens in the rising sun. There was a yellow-and-black-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and-yellow-and

古文：汉中平二年，洛阳民讹言虎贲寺有黄人，观者日数万，道路断绝。
现代文：汉灵帝中平二年，盗屋百姓讹传虎贲寺有黄人，来观看的人每天有数万之多，道路都被堵塞。
English: In the second year of the Hanling Emperor's middle-level era, the people of the thief's house spread the rumor that there were yellow people in the Tiger Pagoda Temple. There were tens of thousands of people who came to watch every day, and the roads were blocked.

古文：中平元年，黄巾贼起，云： 苍天已死，黄天当立。 
现代文：中平元年，黄巾起事，说： 苍天已死，黄天当立。 
English: In the first year of Zhongping, the Yellow Turbans rose up and said: "The sky is dead, the yellow sky must stand up."

古文：此魏氏依刘向自云土德之符也。
现代文：这就是魏氏依照刘向的话自称土德的符兆。
English: According to Liu Xiang, this is a sign that the Wei clan claims to be native of Germany.

古文：先是，周敬王之四十七年，宋景公问大夫邢史子臣： 天道何祥？ 
现代文：先前在周敬王四十七年，宋景公问大夫邢空子臣： 天道有什么征兆? 
English: Previously, in the forty-seventh year of King Zhou Jing, Song Jing Gong asked Dr. Yan Kuang's son-in-law: What are the signs of heaven?

古文：对曰： 后五年五月丁亥，臣将死。
现代文：回答道： 后五年五月丁亥，我将会死去。
English: He replied, "After five years, in May of Dinghai, I will die."

古文：死后五年五月丁卯，吴将亡。
现代文：我死后过五年五月丁卯，县厘将要灭亡。
English: When I die, five years from now, the county will be destroyed.

古文：亡后五年，君将终。
现代文：呈国亡后五年，国君您将会去世。
English: Five years after the death of the nation, you, the sovereign, will pass away.

古文：终后四百年，邾王天下。 
现代文：您去世后四百年，将是邾国的天下。 
English: Four hundred years after your death, you will be the ruler of the country.

古文：皆如其言。
现代文：后来发生的事情与这些话相符。
English: The fate of all these people is the same as what Fang Anyu said.

古文：邾王天下，盖谓魏国之后。
现代文：所谓邾国的天下，是说魏是童惬的后代。
English: The so-called "Kingdom of Wei" means that Wei is a descendant of Tonglu.

古文：言四百年则错。
现代文：说四百年后则有误。
English: It would be a mistake to say four hundred years later.

古文：疑年代久远，传记者谬误。
现代文：恐怕是因为年代久远，传闻记载出了错误。
English: I'm afraid that due to the passage of time, the rumours have been recorded incorrectly.

古文：高贵乡公初生，有光气照耀室屋，其后即大位。
现代文：高贵乡公最初出生时，有光气照耀屋室，后来即皇帝位。
English: When the noble townsman was first born, there was light in the room, and later he became emperor.

古文：刘备身长七尺七寸，垂手过膝，顾自见耳。
现代文：刘备身高七尺七寸，垂手超过膝盖，能够看到自己的耳朵。
English: Liu Bei is seven feet seven inches tall, his hands hang over his knees, and he can see his own ears.

古文：《洛书甄耀度》曰： 赤三，德昌九世会备，合为帝际。 
现代文：《洛书甄耀度》说： 赤光三，德行昌盛九世会备，应当为帝。 
English: "Luo Shu Zhen Ya Dao" said: Red Light Three, Virtue-Walking, Prosperous, Ninth Generation, should be the emperor.

古文：《洛书宝予命》曰： 天度帝道备称皇，以统握契，百成不败。 
现代文：《洛书实予命》说： 天运帝道备称皇，因而掌握统治权，长胜不败。 
English: "The Mandate of the People's Republic of China" said: The Emperor of the Heavenly Fortune and the Emperor of the Heavenly Fortune was praised as the emperor, and thus he grasped the right to rule, and he was victorious and invincible.

古文：《洛书录运期》曰： 九侯七杰争民命，炊骸道路，谁使主者玄且来。 
现代文：《洛书录运期》说： 九侯七杰争取百姓的拥戴，尸骸覆盖道路，谁主宰玄且来。 
English: "Laoshu Record of Transportation Period" said: "Nine lords and seven nobles strive for the people's support, the corpses cover the road, and whoever dominates the mystery should come.

古文：备字玄德，故云： 玄且来 也。
现代文：刘备字玄德，所以说 玄且来 。
English: Liu Bei's name is Xuan De, so let's call him Xuan.

古文：《孝经钩命决》曰： 帝三建，九会备。 
现代文：《孝经钩命决》说： 帝三建，九会备。 
English: "Filial piety is the keystone of life" says: The emperor builds three palaces, and the people prepare for nine.

古文：先是，术士周群言，西南数有黄气，直立数丈，如此积年，每有景云祥风，从璇玑下应之。
现代文：以前，术士周群说，西南屡屡出现黄气，竖立有数丈高，这种情况延续了几年，时常有瑞云祥风从北斗星下来与它应合。
English: In the past, the sorcerer Zhou Qun said that the southwest repeatedly appeared yellow, standing several feet high, this situation lasted for several years, and there were often auspicious winds coming down from the Big Dipper to meet it.

古文：建安二十二年中，屡有气如旗，从西竟东，中天而行。
现代文：建安二十二年中，屡次出现了像旗帜一样的云气，从西往东，在天空中运行。
English: In the 22 years of Jianan, clouds like flags appeared repeatedly, moving from west to east in the sky.

古文：图书曰 必有天子出其方。 
现代文：《谶纬图书》说： 一定有天子在这个地方出现。 
English: "The Book of Zou Wei" said: There must be a heavenly son appearing in this place.

古文：太白、荧惑、镇星从岁星，又黄龙见犍为武阳之赤水，九日乃去。
现代文：太白、荧惑、镇星随从岁星，又有黄龙出现在犍为、武阳二郡境内的赤水，九天以后才离去。
English: Too white, fluorescent, town stars follow the year star, and yellow dragons appear in the territory of the two counties of Zhubei and Wuyang, and only leave after nine days.

古文：关羽在襄阳，男子张嘉、王休献玉玺，备后称帝于蜀。
现代文：关羽在襄阳时，当地男子张嘉、王休向他献上玉玺，刘备后来在蜀称帝。
English: When Guan Yu was in Yangyang, local men Zhang Jia and Wang Xiu presented him with a jade scepter, and Liu Bei later became emperor in Shu.

古文：孙坚之祖名钟，家在吴郡富春，独与母居。
现代文：孙坚的祖父孙钟，家住吴郡富春，独自与母亲居住在一起，天性极为孝顺。
English: Sun Jian's grandfather Sun Zhong, who lives in Fuchun, Wu County, lives alone with his mother and is extremely filial by nature.

古文：性至孝，遭岁荒，以种瓜为业。忽有三少年诣钟乞瓜，钟厚待之。
现代文：遭逢荒年，依靠种瓜度日。一天忽然有三位少年人向孙钟求瓜，孙钟殷勤地接待他们。
English: One day, three young men suddenly asked Sun Zhong for melons, and Sun Zhong graciously received them.

古文：三人谓钟曰： 此山下善，可作冢，葬之，当出天子。
现代文：逭三人对他说： 这座山下地势很好，可以作墓地，葬在此地，曰后将出天子。
English: The three of them said to him, "This hillside is in a very good location, it can be used as a cemetery, and you can be buried here.

古文：君可下山百步许，顾见我去，即可葬也。 
现代文：您可以往山下走百来步，回头看到我们离去，就可以葬在这处地方。 
English: You can walk a hundred paces down the mountain, look back and see us leaving, and you can be buried in this place.

古文：钟去三十步，便反顾，见三人并乘白鹤飞去。
现代文：孙钟走了三十来步，便转身回顾，看见三个人一起乘白鹤飞去。
English: Sun Zhong walked about thirty paces, then turned to look back and saw three people flying away together on a white crane.

古文：钟死，即葬其地。
现代文：孙钟死后，便葬在这裹。
English: After Sun Zhong died, he was buried here.

古文：地在县城东，冢上数有光怪，云气五色上属天，衍数里。
现代文：遣地方在县城的东边，坟墓屡次出现光亮，五色云气上舆天接，蔓延好几里。
English: The repatriation site is on the east side of the county seat, and the graves have repeatedly appeared brightly lit. The five-colored clouds are close to each other and spread for several miles.

古文：父老相谓，此非凡气，孙氏其兴矣。
现代文：父老乡亲说，这不是一般的云气，孙氏大概要兴盛了。
English: My father's fellow townspeople said that this was not an ordinary cloud, and that the Sun clan would probably prosper.

古文：坚母任坚，梦肠出绕吴昌门。
现代文：孙坚母亲怀孙坚时，梦见自己肠子出来缠绕吴郡昌门。
English: When Sun Jian's mother was nostalgic for Sun Jian, she dreamed that her intestines came out and wrapped around the Changmen Gate of Wuxi County.

古文：以告邻母，邻母曰： 安知非吉祥也。 
现代文：将这事告诉邻舍老妇，邻舍老妇说： 怎么知道这不是吉祥的梦? 
English: Telling this to an elderly neighbour, she said: "How do you know it's not a lucky dream?

古文：昌门，吴郭门也。
现代文：昌门，是吴郡的外城门。
English: Changmen is the outer city gate of Wuxi County.

古文：坚生而容貌奇异。
现代文：孙坚出生时容貌奇异。
English: Sun Jian was born with a strange appearance.

古文：坚妻吴氏初妊子策，梦月入其怀；后孕子权，又梦日入怀。
现代文：孙坚妻子吴氏起初怀儿子孙策时，梦见月亮进入胸怀；后来怀孕儿子孙权，又梦见太阳进入胸怀。
English: At first, when Sun Jian's wife Wu was pregnant with their son Sun Ce, she dreamed of the moon entering her chest; later, when she was pregnant with her son Sun Quan, she also dreamed of the sun entering her chest.

古文：告坚曰： 昔妊策，梦月入怀，今又梦日入怀，何也？ 
现代文：告诉孙坚说： 以前怀孕孙策，梦见月亮进入胸怀，现在又梦见太阳进入胸怀，这是什么兆头? 
English: He told Sun Jian, "Previously, Sun Ce was pregnant, she dreamed of the moon entering her chest, and now she dreams of the sun entering her chest, what kind of sign is this?

古文：坚曰： 日月阴阳之精，极贵之象，吾子孙其兴乎！ 
现代文：孙坚说： 曰月是阴阳之气的精华，是极其尊贵的象征，我的儿孙将要兴盛了。 
English: Sun Jian said: "The moon is the essence of yin and yang, and is an extremely noble symbol. My children and grandchildren will prosper.

古文：权方颐大口，紫髯，长上短下。
现代文：孙权下颔方正，大口，紫色须髯，上身长，下身短。
English: Sun Quan's lower eyelid is square, large mouth, purple whiskers, long upper body, short lower body.

古文：汉世有刘琬者，能相人，见权兄弟，曰： 孙氏兄弟，虽各才智明达，然禄胙不终。
现代文：漠未有名叫刘琬的人善于看相，见孙权兄弟说： 孙氏兄弟虽然各人才智聪明练达，但是禄位福分不长。
English: A little-known person named Liu Wei was good at reading faces. He said of the Sun Quan brothers: Although the Sun brothers were all clever and accomplished, they did not have long-term good fortune.

古文：唯中弟孝廉，形貌奇伟，骨体不恆，有大贵之表，年又最寿。
现代文：衹有中弟孝廉，形貌奇伟，骨骼非凡，有大富大贵的相貌，年寿又最长。
English: Zou has a middle brother, Xiaolian, with a marvelous appearance, extraordinary bones, a rich and noble appearance, and the longest life expectancy.

古文：尔其识之。 
现代文：你们记下遣一点。 
English: Make a note of the amount.

古文：权时为孝廉。
现代文：孙权当时被举为孝廉。
English: At the time, Sun Quan was held up as a great filial son.

古文：初，秦始皇东巡，济江。
现代文：起先，秦始皇束巡，渡过长丝。
English: At first, Qin Shihuang's inspection tour passed through the filament.

古文：望气者云： 五百年后，江东有天子气出于吴，而金陵之地，有王者之势。 
现代文：望气者说： 五百年以后，江束有天子气在星地出现，而金壁一带，有帝王的气势。 
English: The hopefuls said: After five hundred years, Jiang Zucu will have the heavenly son energy to appear in the stars and the earth, and the area around the Golden Wall will have the imperial momentum.

古文：于是秦始皇乃改金陵曰秣陵，凿北山以绝其势。
现代文：因此台堑遑就改金壁称作拯堕，凿开北山来断绝它的气势。
English: Therefore, Taiwan changed the name of the Great Wall to the Great Wall of Rescue, and cut off the North Mountain to break its momentum.

古文：至吴，又令囚徒十余万人掘污其地，表以恶名，故曰囚卷县，今嘉兴县也。
现代文：来到呈郅时，又命令囚徒十余万人挖掘这土地，用丑恶的名字来称呼，所以叫做囚卷县，就是现在的台玺县。
English: When he came to Hengchun, he ordered more than 100,000 prisoners to dig up the land and call it by an ugly name, so it was called Zhulan County, which is now Taiyuan County.

古文：汉世术士言： 黄旗紫盖，见于斗、牛之间，江东有天子气。 
现代文：方术之士说： 黄色旗帜紫色车盖，出现在、牛星之间，江东有天子气。 
English: Fangzhu said: The yellow flag and purple car cover appear between the cow and the star, and Jiangdong has the spirit of the son of heaven.

古文：献帝兴平中，吴中谣言： 黄金车，斑兰耳。开昌门，出天子。 
现代文：麸童堡垩年间，县郡有歌谣说： 黄金车驾，斑斓华丽，打开昌门，出现天子。 
English: In the early years of Shandong Children's Castle, there was a folk song in the county that said: "The golden chariot is driving, the colorful chariot is gorgeous, open the Changmen, and the son of heaven appears."

古文：魏文帝黄初三年，举兵武昌，并言黄龙、凤凰见。
现代文：魏文壶董翅三年，夏旦、亘媪都说出现了黄龙凤凰。
English: Wei Wenju, Dong Ying, Xia Dan, and Guan Yu all said that the Yellow Dragon and Phoenix appeared.

古文：其年，权称尊号，年至七十一而薨。
现代文：逭一年逊挞称帝，一直活到七十一岁。
English: He was crowned emperor less than a year later and lived until the age of 71.

古文：权子休，初封琅邪王，梦乘龙上天，顾不见尾。
现代文：孙权的儿子至曲起初封堕垩眨，梦见乘龙上天，回头看却见不到龙尾。
English: At first, Sun Quan's son Zhi Qu dreamed of ascending to heaven on a dragon, but when he looked back, he couldn't see the dragon's tail.

古文：后得大位，其子被废。
现代文：后来还堡继承帝位，他的儿子被废黜。
English: He was later restored to the throne, but his son was deposed.

古文：汉元、成之世，先识之士有言曰： 魏年有和，当有开石于西三千余里，系五马，文曰讨曹。 
现代文：汉元、成童之时，有先见之明的人士曾经说： 当魏的年号有和字，将在京城西边三千余里有巨石出现，石上有系着五匹马的图形，文字是讨曹。 
English: When I was a child in the Han Dynasty, a person with foresight once said: The era name of the Wei Dynasty will have a character of "wa," and there will be a huge rock with more than three thousand on the west side of the capital. There will be a figure of five horses tied on the rock, and the text will be "讨曹."

古文：及魏之初兴也，张掖删丹县金山柳谷有石生焉，周围七寻，中高一仞，苍质素章，有五马、麟、鹿、凤凰、仙人之象。
现代文：到了魏塑刚刚兴盛时，在张掖郡删丹锤的金山塑釜长出一块大石，周围七寻，垂直高度有一仞，青色的质地，白色花纹，有五马、麒麟、鹿、凤凰、仙人的图像。
English: When Wei Plastic was just flourishing, a large stone grew out of the Jinshan plastic kettle of Jiudanhammer in Zhangye County. It was surrounded by seven peaks, with a vertical height of one fathom, blue texture, white pattern, and images of five horses, unicorns, deer, phoenixes, and fairies.

古文：始见于建安，形成于黄初，文备于太和。
现代文：最初见于建安之时，形成在董翅年间，花纹在太和年间完备。
English: Originally seen at the time of Jian'an, it was formed during the Dongying period, and the pattern was completed during the Tahe period.

古文：至青龙三年，柳谷之玄川溢涌，石形改易，状似云龟，广六尺，长一丈七尺一寸，围五丈八寸，立于川西。
现代文：到了直垄三年，挝查客川出水，石头形状起了变化，像云龟，宽一丈六尺，长一丈七尺一寸，外围有五丈八寸，立在玄川的西边。
English: In the third year after arriving at Zhulong, when the Laochak River was out of the water, the shape of the stone changed, resembling a cloud turtle, with a width of six feet, a length of seven feet and one inch, and a circumference of five feet and eight inches, standing on the west side of the Xuan River.

古文：有石马十二，其一仙人骑之，其一羁靽，其五有形而不善成，其五成形。
现代文：上面有十二匹石马，其中有一匹马由仙人骑着，另一匹马被羁绊，有五匹马有形状而不完备，另外五匹形体完备。
English: There are twelve stone horses on it, one of which is ridden by a fairy, another horse is tied, five horses have incomplete shapes, and the other five have complete shapes.

古文：又有一牛八卦列宿彗星之象。
现代文：又有一条牛，呈现出八卦、众星宿、彗星的图像。
English: There is also a cow, showing images of the eight sagas, the constellations, and comets.

古文：有玉匣开盖于前，有玉玦二，玉璜一。
现代文：有一只玉盆在石头前打开着盖子，裹面有两块玉块、一只玉璜。
English: There is a jade basin in front of the stone with the lid open, wrapped with two jade blocks and a jade bead.

古文：又有麒麟、凤凰、白虎、马、牛于中布列。
现代文：又有麒麟、凤凰、白虎、马、牛在谷中排列。
English: There are also unicorns, phoenixes, white tigers, horses and oxen lined up in the valley.

古文：有文字曰： 上上三天王述大会讨大曹金但取之金立中大金马一疋中正大吉关寿此马甲寅述水 凡三十五字。
现代文：上面有文字写道： 上上三天王述大会讨大曹金但取之金立中大金马一匹中正大吉关寿此马甲寅述水 共三十五个字。
English: There is a text written on it: On the last three days, Wang Sui held a meeting to discuss Da Cao Jin, but he took Jin Li, Zhong Da Jin Ma, Zhong Zheng Da Ji Guan Shou, this horse, Jia Yin Sui, a total of thirty-five words.

古文：石色苍，而物形及字，并白石书之，皆隆起。
现代文：石头呈青色，而上面的图像和文字，全是用白石写成的，而且隆起来。
English: The stone is bluish, but the images and words on it are all written in white stone and are raised.

古文：魏明帝恶其文有 讨曹 ，凿去为 计 ，以苍石塞之，宿昔而白石满焉。
现代文：魏明帝厌恶文中有 讨曹 字样，凿去 讨 字，改为 计 字，并用青石去填塞，衹一夜青石又被白石填满。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei detested the word "讨曹" in the text, chiseled the word "讨" and changed it to "计," and filled it with bluestone, and overnight the bluestone was filled with white stone.

古文：当时称为祥瑞，班下天下。
现代文：当时被称作吉祥的符瑞，颁示天下。
English: At that time, it was called the auspicious Fu Rui, and was presented to the world.

古文：处士张臶曰： 夫神兆未然，不追往事，此盖将来之休征，当今之怪异也。 
现代文：处士张臶说： 大凡神灵预兆未来，不追述以往的事情，这个现象是将来的吉祥兆头，却是今天的怪异。 
English: Manager Zhang Qi said: The great gods foreshadow the future and do not recount the past. This phenomenon is an auspicious sign for the future, but it is strange today.

古文：既而晋以司马氏受禅。
现代文：后来晋代司马氏接受魏朝禅让为帝。
English: Later, the Jin Dynasty's Sima clan accepted the Wei Dynasty's abdication.

古文：太尉属程猗说曰： 夫大者，盛之极也。
现代文：太尉属官程猗说： 大是兴盛到极顶的意思。
English: "Great" means "prosperous to the peak," said Cheng Yao, a captain.

古文：金者，晋之行也。
现代文：金是晋室运数。
English: The gold is from the Jin dynasty.

古文：中者，物之会也。
现代文：中是事物感应通会。
English: In the middle is the thing induction course.

古文：吉者，福之始也。
现代文：吉是福分的开始。
English: Yoshi is the beginning of good luck.

古文：此言司马氏之王天下，感德而生，应正吉而王之符也。 
现代文：这是说司马氏之所以拥有天下，感应德行而出现，顺应正吉而为帝王的符瑞。 
English: This is to say that Sima's reason for owning the world is that he was inspired by virtue and emerged as the king's Fu Rui in accordance with Zhengji.

古文：猗又为赞曰： 皇德遐通，实降嘉灵。
现代文：程猗又赞颂道： 伟大德行覆盖广远，确实下降了吉祥的符瑞。
English: Cheng Yao also praised: Great virtue covers far and wide, and the auspicious fury has indeed fallen.

古文：乾生其象，坤育其形。
现代文：天描绘它的图像，地孕育它的形状。
English: The sky paints its image, the earth nurtures its shape.

古文：玄石既表，素文以成。瑞虎合仁，白麟耀精。
现代文：黑色石头是它的质地，白色花纹内容完备。吉瑞的老虎符合仁德，白色的麒麟闪耀着精光。
English: The black stone is its texture, and the white pattern is complete. The tiger of Jiri is in line with benevolence, and the white unicorn shines with essence.

古文：神马自图，金言其形。
现代文：神马在图上自然画成，黄金便构成它的外形。
English: The divine horse is naturally drawn on the picture, and the gold forms its shape.

古文：体正而王，中允克明。
现代文：履行正道而为帝王，正直允当能够显明。
English: Honesty should be able to show that he is an emperor who follows the right path.

古文：关寿无疆，于万斯龄。 
现代文：年寿无疆，一直延续万年。 
English: There is no limit to longevity, and it has been going on for 10,000 years.

古文：宣帝有狼顾之相，能使面正向后，而身形不异。
现代文：宣帝司马懿有狼顾的特异相貌，能够回头正视后面而身体可以不动。
English: Xuan Di Sima Yao has the peculiar appearance of a wolf, able to look back and face the back while the body can not move.

古文：魏武帝尝梦有三匹马在一槽中共食，其后宣帝及景、文相继为宰相，遂倾曹氏。
现代文：魏武帝曾梦见有三匹马同在一个马槽中共食，后来宣帝以及景帝司区锤、塞童司马昭相继为宰相，最后倾覆了直氐政权。
English: Emperor Weiwu had a dream that three horses were eating together in a manger. Later, Emperor Xuan and Emperors Jing, Di, Gu and Ma Zhao successively became prime ministers, and finally overthrew the Naosuke regime.

古文：文帝未立世子，有意于齐献王攸。
现代文：塞查没有立世子，有意立齐献王司马丝。
English: Sacha didn't have a son, but he wanted to dedicate his life to Wang Simas.

古文：武帝时为中抚军，惧不立，以相貌示裴秀，秀言于文帝曰： 中抚军振发籍地，垂手过膝，天表如此，非人臣之相也。 
现代文：逮壶司马炎当时任中抚军，担心不立自己，让苤歪给自己看相，墓歪对塞童说： 中抚军披散头发垂地，垂手超过膝盖，天生相貌如此，不是人臣的相貌。 
English: At the time of the arrest, Sima Yan, who was in charge of the Central Military Commission, was worried that he would not be able to stand up for himself, so he let Gao Xiang look at himself. Gao Xiang said to Zaidong: The Central Military Commission's hair hangs down to the ground, and his hands hang over his knees. This is his natural appearance, not the appearance of a vassal.

古文：由是得立。
现代文：因此武帝得以立为世子。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu was able to establish himself as the heir to the throne.

古文：及嗣晋位，其月，襄武县言有大人相，长三丈余，足迹三尺一寸，白发，黄单衣，黄巾，柱杖呼民王始语云： 今当太平。 
现代文：到他继承置王之位时，当月塞逮逊报告说出现了巨人，高有三丈多，足迹长三尺一寸，白发，黄色单衣，黄色头巾，拄着手杖唤住百姓王始说： 如今将要太平。 
English: At the time of his succession to the throne, when the crescent moon was sighted, it was reported that a giant had appeared. He was more than three feet tall, with footprints three feet and one inch long. He had white hair, wore a yellow singlet, a yellow turban, and carried a cane. Wang Shi called out to the people, saying, "Nowadays, there will be peace."

古文：顷之，受魏禅。
现代文：不久，晋接受魏朝挥让。
English: Soon, Jin accepted concessions from the Wei Dynasty.

古文：武帝咸宁元年，大风吹帝社树折，有青气出社中。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年，大风吹折帝社庙旁边的树木，有青气从社中涌出。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, a gale blew down the trees next to the Imperial Shrine and Temple, and a green aura flowed from the shrine.

古文：占者以为东莞有天子气。
现代文：占卜者认为东莞有天子之气。
English: Diviners believe that Dongguan has the spirit of a son of heaven.

古文：时琅邪武王伷封东莞，伷，元帝祖也。
现代文：当时琅邪武王司马佃封在塞差，司屋地，是正查的祖父。
English: At that time, the evil warlord Sima Qufu lived in Xiezha, Shiya Town, and was Zhengcha's grandfather.

古文：元帝以咸宁二年夜生，有光照室，室内尽明，有白毛生于日角之左，眼有精光耀。
现代文：远壶出生于盛窭二年的一个夜晚，当时光亮照耀室中，室内通明，他有白毛生在额头的左边，眼睛裹精光闪耀。
English: Yuan Jue was born on a night in the second year of Sheng Zi, when the light was shining in the room, the room was clear, he had white hair on the left side of his forehead, and his eyes were shining.

古文：随惠帝幸鄴。
现代文：随从惠帝到邺越。
English: He followed Hui Di to Xing Yue.

古文：成都王颖杀东安王繇，繇，元帝叔父也。帝惧，欲出奔，而月明，邀候急，四衢断绝，不得去。
现代文：虚都王司马颖杀死塞童王司马繇，丑区繇是元帝的叔父，元帝当时惧怕，打算逃出邺城，但是月色明亮，司马颖的部下急于追捕他，四处道路已被切断，无法逃脱。
English: Sima Ying, the king of the virtual capital, killed Sima Yao, the king of Saido, and Uguo Yao was the uncle of the former emperor. The former emperor was afraid at the time and planned to escape from Lucheng, but the moon was bright and Sima Ying's subordinates were in a hurry to chase him. All four roads had been cut off and there was no way to escape.

古文：有顷，天阴，风雨大至，候者皆休，乃得去。
现代文：不久，天色转阴，刮起大风，下起大雨，追捕他的人都停止追捕，他才得以逃去。
English: Before long, with the sky darkening, a strong wind blowing, and heavy rain falling, his pursuers gave up the chase, and he was able to escape.

古文：初，武帝伐吴，琅邪武王伷率众出涂中，而王浑逼历阳，王濬已次近路。
现代文：起初，武帝征伐吴国，琅邪武王司马仙率领军队从涂中出战，而王浑的军队已逼近历阳，王浚的军队已进至建邺的附近。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu conquered the State of Wu, and the evil warlord Wang Sima Xian led the army to fight from Tuizhong, while Wang Hun's army had approached Liyang, and Wang Jun's army had entered the vicinity of Jianye.

古文：孙皓欲降，送天子玺绶，近越二将，而远送诣伷，识者咸怪之。
现代文：孙皓打算投降，送上天子的印玺，却越过较近的王浑、王浚二将，送给远处的司马佃，知道这件事的人觉得很奇怪。
English: Sun Yat-sen intended to surrender and send the seal of the Son of Heaven, but he passed over the closer Wang Hun and Wang Jun II to send it to the distant Sima Qian. People who know about this find it very strange.

古文：吴之未亡也，吴郡临平湖一旦自开，湖边得石函，中有小青石，刻作皇帝字。
现代文：吴国没有灭亡的时候，吴郡的临平湖有一天自行疏通，湖边得到一石函，裹面有块小青石，刻作皇帝的字样。
English: When the State of Wu did not perish, the cranes of Linping Lake in Wuxian County cleared the lake one day on their own. The lake got a stone box, wrapped with a piece of small blue stone, engraved with the words of the emperor.

古文：旧言临平湖塞天下乱，开则天下太平。
现代文：以前传说临平邀堵塞则天下大乱，疏通则天下太平。
English: In the past, it was said that if Linping invited a blockage, the world would be in chaos, and if it invited a dredging, the world would be peaceful.

古文：吴人以为美祥。
现代文：吴人认为这是吉利的兆头。
English: Wu people believe that this is a sign of good luck.

古文：俄而吴灭。
现代文：不久吴国被减。
English: Soon after, Wu was reduced in size.

古文：后元帝兴于江左。
现代文：后来元帝在江塞兴起。
English: Later, the Yuan Dynasty arose in Jiangxi Province.

古文：吴亡后，蒋山上常有紫云，数术者亦云，江东犹有帝王气。
现代文：呈国灭亡后蓝山上经常有紫云，方数术士也说江束还有帝王之气。
English: After the demise of Chengguo, there were often purple clouds on the Blue Mountains, and the sorcerers also said that Jiangzhuang still had the spirit of an emperor.

古文：又谣言曰： 五马游度江，一马化为龙。 
现代文：又有民谣说： 五马渡过丝，一马化为龙。 
English: There is also a folk song that says: Five horses pass through silk, one horse turns into a dragon.

古文：元帝与西阳、汝南、南顿、彭城五王过江，而元帝升天位。
现代文：元帝同西阳、汝南、南垄、堑越五王过匡辽，而五壶即皇帝位。
English: Emperor Yuan and the five kings of Xiyang, Runan, Nanrong, and Yueyue overtook Kuangliao, and the five pots became emperor.

古文：谶书曰： 铜马入海建业期。 
现代文：谶纬图书说： 铜马入海建业期。 
English: Zou Wei Book said: The Bronze Horse enters the sea construction period.

古文：元帝小字铜环。
现代文：元帝的小名叫铜环。
English: Emperor Yuan's nickname was Tonghuan.

古文：永嘉初，元帝以安东将军镇建业。时岁、镇星、辰、太白四星聚于牛、女之间，常裴回进退。
现代文：丞墓初，亘查以安东将军的身份镇守建业，当时岁星、镇星、辰星、太白星四星聚集在牛、女二星之间，长时徘徊进退。
English: At the beginning of the Joseon Dynasty, Wang Cha took the identity of General Anton to guard Jianye. At that time, the four stars of the year, the town star, the hour star and the white star gathered between the cow and the two female stars, and wandered in and out for a long time.

古文：愍帝建兴四年，晋陵武进人陈龙在田中得铜铎五枚，柄口皆有龙虎形；又有将雏鸡雀集其前，皆驱去复还，至于再三；又有鹅三四头，高飞且鸣，周回东西，昼夜不下，如此者六七日。
现代文：愍帝建兴四年，晋陵邮武进县入迷董在田地裹得到五枚铜铎，柄口都有龙虎形状；又有带雏鸟的溪雀齐集门前，将它们驱赶开，马上又回来，以至于三番五次：又有三四头鹅，高飞呜叫，东西回旋，日夜不飞下来，像这种情形持续了六七天。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianxing Emperor's reign, the Jin Mausoleum Post Office Wujin County Fan Dong wrapped five bronze gongs in the field, and the handles were all in the shape of dragons and tigers. There were also stream sparrows with chicks gathered in front of the door, drove them away, and immediately returned, so that there were three or four times: there were also three or four geese, flying high and whining, circling around and around, and not flying down day and night. This situation lasted for six or seven days.

古文：会稽剡县陈清又于井中得栈钟，长七寸二分，口径四寸，其器虽小，形制甚精，上有古文书十八字，其四字可识，云： 会稽徽命。 
现代文：会稽郡剡县人迷渣又在井中得到栈钟，长七寸二分，口径四寸，这口钟虽然不大，但制作很精巧，上面有古文写的十八个字，其中有四字可识，写着 会稽徽命 。
English: In the well, the people of Li County, Hui County, also obtained a stack clock. It is seven inches and two minutes long, with a caliber of four inches. Although this clock is not large, it is very elaborately made. There are eighteen characters written in ancient texts on it, of which four can be read. It is written "Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Li County, Hui County, Li County, Hui County, Hui County, Li County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hui County, Hu

古文：豫章有大樟树，大三十五围，枯死积久，永嘉中，忽更荣茂。
现代文：邀童有大樟树，有三十五围粗，枯死了很长时间，丞墓年间，忽然又茂盛起来。
English: There is a big eucalyptus tree in Ying Tong. It is thirty-five meters in circumference and thick. It withered away for a long time, but it suddenly flourished again during the Qing Dynasty.

古文：景纯并言是元帝中兴之应。
现代文：郭璞说这些现象都是亘壶中兴的征兆。
English: Guo Wei said that these phenomena are all signs of the rise of Wuhan ZTE.

古文：初，武帝太康三年，建鄴有寇，余姚人伍振筮之，曰： 寇已灭矣。
现代文：起初在武帝太鏖三年，建邺有贼寇，筮越人垣振就此事卜筮说： 贼寇已经注定灭亡。
English: At the beginning of the third year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was a bandit in Jianye. Zou Yue Rengaki Zhen said about this matter: The bandit is doomed to perish.

古文：三十八年，扬州有天子。 
现代文：三十八年后，扬州有天子。 
English: Thirty-eight years later, Yangzhou has Tianzi.

古文：至元帝即天位，果三十八年。
现代文：到五查即帝位，果然在三十八年后。
English: He ascended to the throne at the time of the Fifth Examination, thirty-eight years later.

古文：先是，宣帝有宠将牛金，屡有功，宣帝作两口榼，一口盛毒酒，一口盛善酒，自饮善酒，毒酒与金，金饮之即毙。
现代文：先前，宣童有宠爱的将领生金屡立战功，宣帝用两只酒桶，一只装毒酒，一只装好酒，自己饮好酒，毒酒给生金饮，生金饮酒后立即死去。
English: In the past, Xuan Tong's favorite general, Sheng Jin, had repeatedly achieved military success. Emperor Xuan used two wine barrels, one containing poisoned wine, one containing good wine, drank good wine himself, gave poisoned wine to Sheng Jin, and died immediately after drinking the poisoned wine.

古文：景帝曰： 金名将，可大用，云何害之？ 
现代文：景帝说： 牛金是名将，可以派上大用场，为什么要毒死他? 
English: Jingdi said: Niu Jin is a famous general, he can be of great use, why poison him?

古文：宣帝曰： 汝忘石瑞，马后有牛乎？ 
现代文：宣帝说： 你难道忘记了石头符瑞上的话，马后有牛啊! 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Have you forgotten the words inscribed on the stone, 'There is a cow behind the horse'?"

古文：元帝母夏侯妃与琅邪国小史姓牛私通，而生元帝。
现代文：元帝的母亲夏侯妃与琅邪国姓牛的小史私通，生下了元帝。
English: Emperor Yuan's mother, Xia Houfei, had an adulterous affair with Xiao Shi, whose surname was Niu, and gave birth to Emperor Yuan.

古文：愍帝之立也，改毗陵为晋陵，时元帝始霸江、扬，而戎翟称制，西都微弱。
现代文：愍帝即位时，将毗陵改为晋陵，当时元帝开始统领江州、扬州，而当时北方戎翟已经称帝，西晋衰微。
English: When Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, the Binling was changed to the Jinling. At that time, Emperor Yuan began to rule the territories of Jiangzhou and Yangzhou, and at that time, the northern Ronglu had already been proclaimed emperor, and the western Jin was in decline.

古文：干宝以为晋将灭于西而兴于东之符也。
现代文：干宝认为这是晋朝在西边灭亡而在东部兴起的兆命。
English: Gan Bao believed that this was a sign of the Jin Dynasty's demise in the west and its rise in the east.

古文：宋武帝居在丹徒，始生之夜，有神光照室；其夕，甘露降于墓树。
现代文：宋武帝居住在丹徒，他出生的那天夜晚，有神光照耀居室，这个晚上，甘露降落在祖坟的树上。
English: Emperor Songwu lived in Dantu. On the night he was born, a divine light shone in his room. That night, nectar fell on the tree of his ancestral tomb.

古文：皇考以高祖生有奇异，名为奇奴。
现代文：他父亲认为宋高祖出生时有奇异现象，取名叫奇奴。
English: His father thought that Song Gaozu was born with a strange phenomenon and named him Qinu.

古文：皇妣既殂，养于舅氏，改为寄奴焉。
现代文：他母亲去世后，寄养在舅父家中，因此改名为寄奴。
English: After his mother's death, he was fostered at his uncle's house, and therefore changed his name to Yoso.

古文：少时诞节嗜酒，自京都还，息于逆旅。
现代文：年轻时行为放荡，喜好饮酒。有一次从京都回家，在旅店歇息。
English: When he was young, he was debauched and liked to drink. Once, he came home from Kyoto and rested at an inn.

古文：逆旅妪曰： 室内有酒，自入取之。 
现代文：开店的女子对他说： 房间裹有酒，自己进去随意饮用。 
English: The woman who opened the shop said to him: "The room is covered in alcohol, go in and drink as much as you like.

古文：帝入室，饮于盎侧，醉卧地。
现代文：武帝进入房间，在酒缸边饮酒，醉倒在地上。
English: Emperor Wu entered the room, drank from the goblet and fell to the floor drunk.

古文：时司徒王谧有门生居在丹徒，还家，亦至此逆旅。
现代文：当时司徒王箠有一一生家居且茎，正要回家，也来到这家旅店。
English: At that time, Szeto Wang Yao had a lifelong home and stem, was about to go home, also came to this hotel.

古文：逆旅妪曰： 刘郎在室内，可入共饮酒。 
现代文：开店女子说： 刘郎在房间裹，你可以进去和他一起饮酒。 
English: The woman who opened the shop said: Liu Lang is in his room, you can go in and have a drink with him.

古文：此门生入室，惊出谓妪曰： 室内那得此异物？ 
现代文：这位门生进入房间，惊愕地跑出来对这女子说： 房间裹怎么会有遣样古怪的东西呢? 
English: The protégé entered the room and, startled, ran out and said to the woman: "How can there be something so strange in the room?

古文：妪遽入之，见帝已觉矣。
现代文：这女子赶快进去看，看见武帝已经醒了。
English: The woman quickly went in to take a look and saw that Emperor Wu had woken up.

古文：妪密问： 向何所见？ 
现代文：女子暗中问那门生： 刚才你看到了什么? 
English: The woman secretly asked the pupil: What did you see just now?

古文：门生曰： 见有一物，五采如蛟龙，非刘郎。 
现代文：门生说： 看见有一样东西，五彩缤纷像蛟龙，不是塑坐。 
English: The protégé said: I saw one thing, colorful like a dragon, not plastic.

古文：门生还以白谧，谧戒使勿言，而与结厚。
现代文：门生回去后将此事告诉了王谧，玉垄要他保守秘密，而倾心与武帝结交。
English: After his protégé returned home, he told Wang Yao about the incident. Yuluan asked him to keep it a secret, but he fell in love with Emperor Wu.

古文：帝尝行至下邳，遇一沙门，沙门曰： 江表寻当丧乱，拯之必君也。 
现代文：武帝曾来到下邳，遇到一位和尚，和尚说： 长江一带不久就会出现动乱，拯救世乱的人，一定是您。 
English: Emperor Wu once came to Jiaozuo and met a monk. The monk said, "There will soon be turmoil along the Yangtze River. You must be the one to save the world from chaos."

古文：帝患手创积年，沙门出怀中黄散一裹与帝，曰： 此创难治，非此药不能瘳也。 
现代文：逮童手上生疮有好几年，和尚从怀中取出一包黄色药粉送给亘游说： 你的疮难以治愈，没有这种药就治不好。 
English: Fang Tong has had sores on his hands for several years. The monk took out a packet of yellow powder from his arms and gave it to Wai Yan, saying, "Your sores are difficult to heal. Without this medicine, they can't be cured."

古文：倏忽不见沙门所在。以散傅创即愈。
现代文：忽然和尚就不见了，用遣药粉敷疮，立即痊愈。
English: All of a sudden, the monk disappeared. He was treated for the sores with yakitori powder and recovered immediately.

古文：余散帝宝录之，后征伐屡被伤，通中者数矣，以散傅之，无不立愈。
现代文：剩下的药粉武帝珍惜地收藏起来，在后来的征战中他屡次受伤，有几次甚至皮肉被刺穿，衹要用这药粉敷上，总是立即愈合。
English: Emperor Wu treasured the remaining powder and kept it in his collection. Later, during his campaigns, he was injured repeatedly. On several occasions, his flesh was even pierced. Whenever he had to apply the powder, his wounds would heal immediately.

古文：自少至长，目中常见二龙在前，始尚小，及贵转大。
现代文：他从小到大眼睛经常看见两条龙在面前，开始龙还小，到他富贵时逐渐变大。
English: From childhood to adulthood, he often saw two dragons in front of him. At first, the dragons were small, but when he became rich, they gradually became bigger.

古文：晋陵人车薮善相人，相帝曰： 君贵不可言，愿无相忘。 
现代文：晋陵人车薮善于看相，看亘游的相说： 您将来富贵不可言，希望不要忘记我。 
English: Jinling rickshaw pullers are good at reading people's faces. When they look at you, they say, "You will be rich and famous in the future. I hope you don't forget me."

古文：晋安帝义熙初，帝始康晋乱，而兴霸业焉。
现代文：置宣童义盥初年，亘嘘开始平定置乱，从而开始兴起霸业。
English: In the first year of setting up Xuan Tong Yixuan, Wu Li began to quell the disturbance, and thus began the rise of hegemony.

古文：庐江霍山常有钟声十二。
现代文：在庐江的霍山经常听到十二声钟响。
English: Twelve bells are often heard ringing in Mount Huoshan on the Li River.

古文：帝将征关、洛，霍山崩，有六钟出，制度精奇，上有古文书一百六十字。
现代文：这童将要征伐颅史、盗盐时，昼山崩塌，有六口钟出现，精巧奇妙，上面有一百六十个古文字。
English: When the boy was about to conquer the skulls and steal the salt, the mountain collapsed, and six bells appeared, exquisite and wonderful, with one hundred and sixty ancient characters on them.

古文：冀州有沙门法称将死，语其弟子普严曰： 嵩皇神告我云，江东有刘将军，是汉家苗裔，当受天命。
现代文：冀州有一名叫法称的和尚将要死去，对他的弟子普严说： 嵩山的神灵告诉我说，江东刘将军是漠家的后代，应当承受天命。
English: In Jizhou, a monk named Fa, who was about to die, said to his disciple Pu Yan: The gods of Songshan told me that General Jiangdong Liu was a descendant of the Mo family and should bear the fate of heaven.

古文：吾以三十二璧，镇金一饼，与将军为信。三十二璧者，刘氏卜世之数也。 
现代文：我将三十二枚玉璧，一块镇金，送给将军作为信物，三十二枚玉璧，是刘氏国运世代相传的数目。 
English: I gave thirty-two pieces of jade, a piece of gold, to the general as a token. Thirty-two pieces of jade is the number of the Liu family's national victory passed down from generation to generation.

古文：普严以告同学法义。
现代文：普严把造话告诉了同学法义。
English: Pu Yan told his classmates the truth about the made-up words.

古文：法义以十三年七月，于嵩高庙石坛下得玉璧三十二枚，黄金一饼。
现代文：法义在义熙十三年七月，于嵩山庙石坛下面得到三十二枚玉璧、一块黄金。
English: In July of the thirteenth year of the reign of Yixi, Haoyi obtained thirty-two pieces of jade and one piece of gold from under the stone altar of Songshan Temple.

古文：汉中城固县水际，忽有雷声，俄而岸崩，得铜钟十二枚。
现代文：汉中郡城固县的水边，忽然出现雷声，不久河岸崩塌，得到十二枚铜钟。
English: On the water's edge of Chenggu County, Hanzhong County, thunder suddenly occurred, and soon the riverbank collapsed, resulting in twelve bronze bells.

古文：又巩县民宋耀得嘉禾九穗。
现代文：又有巩题百姓塞埋得到有九穗的嘉禾。
English: There are also Gongzhi people who have buried and obtained the nine-spike rice.

古文：后二年而受晋禅。
现代文：过了二年塞塑接受置塑的禅让。
English: After two years of reshaping, it is time to accept the zen of reshaping.

古文：孔子《河雒谶》曰： 二口建戈不能方，两金相刻发神锋，空穴无主奇入中，女子独立又为双。 
现代文：孔王的《河雒谶》说： 二口建戈不能方，两金相刻发神锋，空穴无主奇入中，女子独立又为双。 
English: Kong Wang's "River Raft" said: "Two mouths to fight a battle cannot be square, two coins are engraved with divine power, holes have no owner, and women's independence is double."

古文：二口建戈， 刘 字也。
现代文：二口建戈，是 刘 字。
English: Two mouths to fight, is Liu Zhao.

古文：晋氏金行，刘姓又有金，故曰两金相刻。
现代文：置旦金德，刘姓又有金，所以说两金相刻。
English: In addition to being kind, Liu's surname has gold, so it is said that the two golds are intertwined.

古文：空穴无主奇入中，为 寄 字。
现代文：空穴无主奇人中，是 寄 字。
English: In a strange world of empty spaces and no one in charge, it is the letter that matters.

古文：女子独立又为双， 奴 字。
现代文：女子独立又为双，是 奴 字。
English: Women's independence is also a double, it is a slave word.

古文：晋既禅宋，太史令骆达奏陈天文符谶曰： 去义熙元年，至元熙元年十月，太白星昼见经天凡七。
现代文：置塑惮让塞曲后，太史令竖达上奏陈述天文符谶说：从羞历元年，到元熙元年十月，太白星白天出现在天上运行，共有七次。
English: After the sculpture was placed and the music was stopped, Tai Shih gave the order to raise the staff to play a statement of astronomical symbols, saying: From the first year of the Hijri calendar to October of the first year of the Heian calendar, the Taibai star appeared in the sky during the day and ran, a total of seven times.

古文：占曰： 天下革民更王，异姓兴。 
现代文：占卜说： 天下改朝换代，异姓要兴盛起来。 
English: The soothsayer said: As the world changes from one dynasty to another, different surnames will flourish.

古文：义熙元年至元熙元年十一月朔，日有蚀之凡四，皆蚀从上始，臣民失君之象也。
现代文：义熙元年到五恩元年十一月初一，食共有四次，每次日食都是从上方开始，这是臣民失去君主的征象。
English: From the first day of the first month of the year of Yixi to the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first year of the fifth year of the fifth year of the fifth year, there were a total of four eclipses. Each solar eclipse began from above, which was a sign that the subjects had lost their monarch.

古文：义熙十一年五月三日，彗星出天市，其芒扫帝坐。
现代文：盏基十一年五月三日，彗星出现于天市星座，它的光芒扫过帝星。
English: On the third day of May in the eleventh year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the comet appeared in the constellations of the celestial city, and its light swept across the imperial star.

古文：天市在房、心之北，宋之分野。
现代文：天市星在房、心二星的北面，是宋的分野。
English: The celestial city star in the north of the two stars of the room and the heart is the field of the Song Dynasty.

古文：得彗柄者兴，此除旧布新之征。
现代文：得彗星光柄的人兴盛，这是除旧布新的征兆。
English: Those who receive the comet's light flourish. This is a sign of a new beginning.

古文：义熙七年七月二十五日，五虹见于东方。占曰： 五虹见，天子黜，圣人出。 
现代文：义熙七年七月二十五日，五条彩虹在东方出现，占辞说： 五虹出现，天子废，圣人出。 
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of the 7th year of Yixi, five rainbows appeared in the east. The fortune-teller said: "Five rainbows appear, the son of heaven disappears, and a saint appears."

古文：义熙七年八月十一日，新天子气见东南。
现代文：义熙七年八月十一日，新天子气在东南出现。
English: On August 11th, the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a new heaven and earth spirit appeared in the southeast.

古文：十二年，北定中原，崇进宋公。
现代文：十二年陛下北伐平定中原，进位为宋公。
English: In the twelfth year, His Majesty's Northern Expedition pacified the Central Plains, and he was promoted to Song Gong.

古文：岁星裴回房、心之间，大火，宋之分野。
现代文：岁星徘徊在房、心二星之间，大火星是宋的分野。
English: The year star wanders between the two stars of the house and the heart, and the great Mars is the field of Song.

古文：与武王克殷同，得岁星之分者应王也。
现代文：与亘逗战胜壁窟时相同，岁星所在分野的人应当为帝王。
English: Just as when Wotan defeated the Vault, the person in whose field the Year Star is located should be the emperor.

古文：十一年以来至元熙元年，月行失道，恆北入太微中。
现代文：盏毖十一年以来至元熙元年，月亮运行没有循本来的轨道，经常进入太微星的位置。
English: From the 11th year of the lunar calendar to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the moon did not follow the original orbit, and often entered the position of a minor planet.

古文：占： 月入太微廷，王入为主。 
现代文：占辞说； 月亮进入太微星的位置，王要入朝为君主。 
English: The fortune-teller said; The moon has entered the position of a minor star, and the king will enter the court as the monarch.

古文：十三年十月，镇星入太微，积留七十余日，到十四年八月十日，又入太微不去，到元熙元年，积二百余日。
现代文：十三年十月，镇星进入太微，停留丁七十余天，到了十四年八月十日，又进入太微星而不离开，直到五盥元年，停留了二百余日。
English: In October 13th, Zhenxing entered Taimiao and stayed there for more than 70 days. On August 10th, 14th, Zhenxing entered Taimiao and stayed there for more than 200 days.

古文：占： 镇星守太微，亡君之戎。
现代文：占卜说： 镇星守着太微，这是亡君的警告。
English: The soothsayer said, "The town star is too weak to defend itself. This is a warning from the deceased lord."

古文：有立王，有徙王。 
现代文：要立新帝王，而废除旧的帝王。 
English: A new emperor was to be set up and the old emperor abolished.

古文：十四年五月十七日，茀星出北斗魁中。
现代文：十四年五月十七日，菇星出现于北斗魁星中。
English: On May 17, 2014, Mushroom Star appeared in the constellation of the Big Dipper.

古文：占曰： 星茀北斗中，圣人受命。 
现代文：占说： 茆星在北斗中，圣人接受天命。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The bright star is in the Big Dipper, and the sage accepts the destiny."

古文：十四年七月二十九日，彗星出太微中，彗柄起上相星下，芒尾渐长至十余丈，进扫北斗及紫微中。
现代文：十四年七月二十九，彗星在太微星中出现，彗柄上扬至相星的下方，芒尾逐渐加长到十余丈，进而扫入北斗和紫微星。
English: On July 29, 2014, the comet emerged from the Taimixing. The coma rose up to the bottom of the phase star, and the tail gradually increased to more than ten meters in length, before sweeping into the Big Dipper and the Purple Dwarf Star.

古文：占曰： 彗星出太微，社稷亡，天下易政。
现代文：占说： 彗星出现在太微，国亡，天下易主。
English: Zhan said: The comet appeared too small, the country fell, and the world changed hands.

古文：入北斗，帝宫空。 
现代文：进入北斗，帝宫空虚。 
English: Entering the Big Dipper, the imperial palace is empty.

古文：一占： 天下得召人。 
现代文：另一占卜说： 天下得到召人。 
English: Another soothsayer said: The world has received a summoner.

古文：召人，圣主也。
现代文：召人，就是圣主。
English: The Lord is the one who calls.

古文：一曰： 彗孛紫微，天下易主。 
现代文：另一说法： 彗星出现在紫微，天下更换君主。 
English: Another version: A comet appears in Shibei, and the world changes monarchs.

古文：十四年十月一日，荧惑从入太微钩己，至元年四月二十七日，从端门出积尸，留二百六日，绕镇星。
现代文：十四年十月一日，荧惑星进入太微垣形成钩己形状，直到元熙元年四月二十七日，从端门星出来到积尸星，停留了二百零六天，环绕着镇星。
English: On October 1st, 2014, the fluorescent planet entered the Great Wall to form a hook shape, until April 27th, 2019, when it went from the Gate Star to the Corpse Star, and stayed for 206 days, encircling the Town Star.

古文：荧惑与填星钩己天廷，天下更纪。
现代文：荧惑与镇星在天廷形成钩己状，天下改变纪年。
English: Fluorescence and zhenxing form a hook in the heavenly court, and the world changes chronologically.

古文：十四年十二月，岁、太白、辰裴回居斗、牛之间经旬。
现代文：十四年十二月，岁星、太白星、辰星徘徊在斗、牛二星之间有十余天。
English: In December of the fourteenth year, there were more than ten days between the year star, the too-white star, and the hour star.

古文：斗、牛，历数之起。
现代文：斗、牛二星是历数的开始。
English: Du and Niu Er Xing are the beginning of the calendar.

古文：占曰： 三星合，是谓改立。 
现代文：占说： 三星聚合，这是说要改立新君。 
English: Zhan said: "Three stars are converging, which means that a new emperor will be re-established."

古文：元熙元年十二月二十四日，四黑龙登天。
现代文：元熙元年十二月二十四，四条黑龙飞上天空。
English: On December 24th, four black dragons flew into the sky.

古文：《易传》曰： 冬龙见，天子亡社稷，大人应天命之符。 
现代文：《易传》说： 冬龙出现，天子亡国，是大人顺应天命的符瑞。 
English: "I Chuan" said: The appearance of the winter dragon and the death of the heavenly son are the signs of adults conforming to the fate of heaven.

古文：《金雌诗》云： 大火有心水抱之，悠悠百年是其时。 
现代文：《金雌诗》说： 大火有心水抱之，悠悠百年是其时。 
English: "Golden Maiden" said: The great fire has heart water to hold it, and a hundred years is its time.

古文：火，宋之分野。
现代文：火星是宋的分野。
English: Mars is the realm of the Song Dynasty.

古文：水，宋之德也。
现代文：水星是宋的德运。
English: Mercury is the crescendo of Song's Deyun.

古文：《金雌诗》又曰： 云出而两渐欲举，短如之何乃相岨，交哉乱也当何所，唯有隐岩殖禾黍，西南之朋困桓父。 
现代文：《金雌谢说： 云出而两渐欲举，短如之何乃相蛆，交哉乱也当何所，唯有隐岩殖禾黍，西南之朋困桓父。 
English: "Kim Ye Xie said: If the clouds come out and the two gradually want to lift, what is the relationship between the short and the long, and what is the relationship between the chaotic and the chaotic, except for the hidden rock, the friend of the southwest, and the troubled father.

古文：两云 玄 字也。
现代文：两云，是 玄 字。
English: "Two clouds" is the meaning of the word "hypothesis."

古文：短者，云胙短也。
现代文：短，足说福分浅。
English: It is short, and the foot saying "good luck" is shallow.

古文：岩隐不见，唯应见谷，殖禾谷边，则圣讳炳明也。
现代文：山岩隐藏不见，衹能见到山谷，种禾在谷边，则显然是指圣上的名讳。
English: If the rock is not hidden, and the reed can see the valley, and the grain is sown at the edge of the valley, it is obviously a reference to the sacred name of the dragon.

古文：《易》曰： 西南得朋。 
现代文：凋易》说： 西南得到朋友相助。 
English: 凋易》 said: Xi'nan got help from friends.

古文：故能困桓父也。
现代文：所以能困住担玄。
English: That's why I was able to trap him.

古文：刘向谶曰： 上五尽寄致太平，草付合成集群英。 
现代文：刘向的谶言说： 上五尽寄致太平，草付合成集群英。 
English: Liu Xiang's eulogy said: The top five are all sent to Taiping, and the straw is made into a cluster.

古文：前句则陛下小讳，后句则太子讳也。
现代文：前句是陛下的小名，后句则是太子之名。
English: The first sentence is His Majesty's nickname, and the second sentence is the name of the crown prince.

古文：十一年五月，西明门地陷，水涌出，毁门扉阈。
现代文：十一年五月，西塱置下陷，水涌出，毁坏门扇。
English: In May of the eleventh year, the west pier was sunk, and water gushed out, destroying the door.

古文：西者，金乡之门，为水所毁，此金德将衰，水德方兴之象也。
现代文：西边是金所处方向，被水毁坏，这是金德将要衰微，水德正在兴盛的象征。
English: To the west is the direction of gold, destroyed by water, which is a symbol of the decline of gold and the prosperity of water.

古文：太兴中，民于井中得栈钟，上有古文十八字，晋自宣帝至今，数满十八传。
现代文：太兴年间，有百姓从井裹捞得栈钟，上面有十八个古字，从宣壶到现在，置丛正好传了十八代。
English: During the Taiching era, some people got a stack bell from the well, with eighteen ancient characters on it. From Xuan Jiu to the present, the stack has been passed down for eighteen generations.

古文：义熙八年，太社生桑，尤著明者也。
现代文：义熙八年，太庙生出桑树，这是特别明显的征兆。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a mulberry tree sprouted in the Great Temple, which was a particularly obvious sign.

古文：夫六，亢位也。
现代文：六是个满溢的数字。
English: Six is an overflowing number.

古文：汉建安二十五年，一百九十六年而禅魏。
现代文：东汉从开国至建安二十五年，共一百九十六年而让于垫。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty lasted from the founding of the country to the 25th year of Jianan, a total of 196 years.

古文：魏自黄初至咸熙二年，四十六年而禅晋。
现代文：魏从黄初到咸熙二年，四十六年而禅让给置。
English: The Wei Dynasty lasted from the beginning of the Yellow Dynasty to the second year of the Han Dynasty, and in the forty-sixth year, the emperor abdicated.

古文：晋自泰始至今元熙二年，一百五十六年。
现代文：晋从泰始到元熙二年，共一百五十六年。
English: The Jin Dynasty lasted from the beginning of the Tai Dynasty to the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, a total of 156 years.

古文：三代数穷，咸以六年。 
现代文：三朝灭亡之年，都有六年的数字。
English: The year of the demise of the three dynasties all have a number of six years.

古文：少帝即位，景平三年四月，有五色云见西方。
现代文：少帝即位，在景乎三年四月，有五色云出现在西方。
English: The young emperor ascended the throne, and in April of the third year of the reign of King He, five-colored clouds appeared in the west.

古文：时文帝为荆州刺史，镇江陵，寻即大位。
现代文：当时文帝任荆州刺史，驻江陵，不久便即帝位。
English: At that time, Emperor Wenzhou was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, stationed in Gangneung, and soon ascended to the throne.

古文：文帝元嘉中，谣言钱唐当出天子，乃于钱唐置戍军以防之。
现代文：文帝元嘉年问，民谣说钱唐应当出天子，于是在钱唐驻军防备。
English: Wen Diyuan asked the carnival, the folk song said that Qiantang should produce a son of heaven, so he stationed troops in Qiantang to be prepared.

古文：其后，孝武帝即大位于新亭寺之禅堂。 禅 之与 钱 ，音相近也。
现代文：后来孝武帝在新亭寺的禅堂即帝位。 禅 同 钱 读音相近。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaowu was enthroned in the Zen hall of Xingting Temple.

古文：太宗为徐州刺史，出镇彭城，昭太后赐以大珠鹿卢剑，此剑是御服，占者以为嘉祥。
现代文：太宗任徐州刺史，出镇彭城，昭太后路氏赠给他大珠鹿卢剑，这把剑是皇帝用的，占卜者认为是吉祥的兆头。
English: Emperor Taizong was in Xuzhou to make history, and when he came out of the town of Pengcheng, Empress Dowager Lu presented him with the Great Pearl Deer Lu Sword. This sword was used by the emperor, and soothsayers considered it to be an auspicious sign.

古文：前废帝永光初，又讹言湘州出天子，幼主欲南幸湘川以厌之。既而湘东王即尊位，是为明帝。
现代文：前废帝永光初年，又谣传湘州出天子，幼主打算南巡去镇压，后来湘束王即帝位，就是明帝。
English: In the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, there was a rumor that a son of heaven would be born in Hunan, and the young lord planned to go to the south to suppress it. Later, the emperor of Hunan was Emperor Ming.

古文：史臣谨按，冀州道人法称所云玉璧三十二枚，宋氏卜世之数者，盖卜年之数也。谓卜世者，谬其言耳。
现代文：史臣谨按：冀州道人所说玉璧三十二枚，是宋朝国运世系延续的数日，实际上是宋朝国运的年数。
English: According to Shi Zhen: the 32 pieces of jade and gems mentioned by Jizhou Taoists is the number of days of the Song Dynasty's succession, but it is actually the number of years of the Song Dynasty's succession.

古文：三十二者，二三十，则六十矣。
现代文：三十二，两个三十，就是六十了。
English: Thirty-two, two-thirty, makes sixty.

古文：宋氏受命至于禅齐，凡六十年云。
现代文：宋氏接受天命到惮让帝位于查，共六十年。
English: The Song Dynasty accepted the Mandate of Heaven and allowed the emperor to investigate for a total of sixty years.

