古文：二年春，王正月，齐人迁阳。
现代文：二年春季，周历正月，齐国人迁入阳国。
English: In the spring of the second year, the first month of the lunar calendar, the people of Qi moved to Yangguo.

古文：夏五月乙酉，吉禘于庄公。
现代文：夏季五月乙酉日，为庄公举行大祭。
English: In the summer, on the second day of the fifth month, a grand festival is held in honor of Shoko.

古文：秋八月辛丑，公薨。
现代文：秋季八月辛丑日，闵公去世。
English: On a gloomy day in the autumn of August, Shoko passed away.

古文：九月，夫人姜氏孙于邾。
现代文：九月，夫人哀姜逃到邾国。
English: In September, his wife, Ai Jiang, fled to Shan State.

古文：公子庆父出奔莒。
现代文：公子庆父逃到莒国。
English: Prince Qingfu fled to Shandong Province.

古文：冬，齐高子来盟。
现代文：冬季，齐国的高子来鲁国盟会。
English: In the winter, the high school students from Qi came to the Russian Federation.

古文：十有二月狄入卫。
现代文：十二月，狄人进攻卫国。
English: In December, the Di people attacked the motherland.

古文：郑弃其师。
现代文：郑国军队溃散逃回。
English: Zheng's army scattered and fled back.

古文：二年春，虢公败犬戎于渭汭。
现代文：二年春季，虢公在渭水入河的地方打败犬戎。
English: In the spring of the second year, Zou Gong defeated Injun Rong at the place where the water of the Zou River entered the river.

古文：舟之侨曰： 无德而禄，殃也。
现代文：舟之侨说： 没有德行受到宠禄，这是灾祸。
English: The boatman said, "It is a disaster if no virtue is favored."

古文：殃将至矣。 
现代文：灾祸将要来到了。 
English: The calamity will come.

古文：遂奔晋。
现代文：就逃亡到晋国。
English: He fled to Jin Province.

古文：夏，吉禘于庄公，速也。
现代文：夏季，为庄公举行大祭。
English: In summer, a grand festival is held for Zhuanggong.

古文：初，公傅夺卜齮田，公不禁。
现代文：未免太快了。当初，闵公的保傅夺取卜齮的田地，闵公不加禁止。
English: It was too fast. At the beginning, Bao Fu, the guardian of Gongong, seized Bu Yao's fields, but Gongong was not prohibited from doing so.

古文：秋八月辛丑，共仲使卜齮贼公于武闱。
现代文：秋季，八月二十四日，共仲指使卜齮在武闱杀害闵公。
English: In the autumn, on August 24th, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China ordered Bu Yao to kill Xing Gong in Wuxi.

古文：成季以僖公适邾。
现代文：成季带着僖公跑到邾国。
English: Cheng Ji took Zou Gong and ran to Zou.

古文：共仲奔莒，乃入，立之。
现代文：共仲逃亡到莒国，季友和僖公就回到鲁国，拥立僖公为国君。
English: Kojunaka fled to Shikoku, while Kiyotomo and Shikoh returned to Lu and supported Shikoh as the ruler of the country.

古文：以赂求共仲于莒，莒人归之。
现代文：用财货到莒国求取共仲，莒国人把他送了回来。
English: He went to Shan State with money and goods to seek common interests, but the Shan people sent him back empty-handed.

古文：及密，使公子鱼请，不许。
现代文：共仲到达密地，让公子鱼请求赦免。
English: They all went to a secluded place and let the boyfish plead for forgiveness.

古文：哭而往，共仲曰： 奚斯之声也。 
现代文：没有得到同意，公子鱼哭着回去。共仲说： 这是公子鱼的哭声啊！ 
English: Unable to get consent, the male fish went back crying. Konoma said, "This is the cry of the male fish!"

古文：乃缢。
现代文：于是上吊死了。
English: He then hanged himself.

古文：闵公，哀姜之娣叔姜之子也，故齐人立之。
现代文：闵公是哀姜的妹妹叔姜的儿子，所以齐人立他为国君。
English: Shigong was the son of Ailingang's sister Shujang, so Qi people made him the king.

古文：共仲通于哀姜，哀姜欲立之。
现代文：共仲和哀姜私通，哀姜想立他为国君。
English: Gennaka and Aikang had a secret love affair, and Aikang wanted to make him the king.

古文：闵公之死也，哀姜与知之，故孙于邾。
现代文：闵公的被害，哀姜事先知道内情，所以逃到邾国。
English: Ailing Jiang knew the inside story of Gongong's death in advance, so he fled to Gonggong.

古文：齐人取而杀之于夷，以其尸归。僖公请而葬之。
现代文：齐人向邾人索取哀姜，在夷地杀了她，把她的尸首带回去，僖公请求归还尸首安葬。
English: The Qi people asked the Xing people to take the mourner, killed her in Yidi, and took her body back. The Xing requested that the body be returned and buried.

古文：成季之将生也，桓公使卜楚丘之父卜之。
现代文：成季将要出生的时候，鲁桓公让掌卜官楚丘的父亲占卜。
English: When Shigeki was about to be born, Lord Lu Kuan asked the fortune-teller Chu Qiu's father to tell fortunes.

古文：曰： 男也。
现代文：他说： 是男孩子。
English: He said: It's a boy.

古文：其名曰友，在公之右，间于两社，为公室辅。
现代文：他名叫友，是您的右手；处于周社和亳社之间，作为公室的辅助。
English: His name is Tomo, and he is your right hand; he is located between Shusha and Shinsha, and serves as an assistant in the office.

古文：季氏亡则鲁不昌。 
现代文：季氏灭亡，鲁国不能盛昌。 
English: If the Ji clan perished, Lu could not flourish.

古文：又筮之，遇《大有》之《乾》，曰： 同复于父，敬如君所。 
现代文：又占筮，得到《大有》变成《乾》，说： 尊贵如同父亲，敬重如同国君。 
English: And he took up the sceptre, and turned the great into the small, saying, Reverence is like the father, and honour is like the prince.

古文：及生，有文在其手曰 友 ，遂以命之。
现代文：等到生下来，在手掌心有个 友 字，就以友命名。
English: When they are born, if they have the character "友" in the palm of their hand, they are named after their friend.

古文：冬十二月，狄人伐卫。
现代文：冬季，十二月，狄人进攻卫国。
English: In winter, in December, the Di people attacked the motherland.

古文：卫懿公好鹤，鹤有乘轩者。
现代文：卫懿公喜欢鹤，鹤有坐车子的。
English: Weizhong likes cranes, and cranes are fond of riding in cars.

古文：将战，国人受甲者皆曰： 使鹤，鹤实有禄位，余焉能战！ 
现代文：将要作战时，接受甲胄的人们都说： 让鹤去，鹤实际上享有官禄官位，我们哪里能打仗！ 
English: When it was time to fight, the people receiving the armor all said: Let the crane go, the crane actually enjoys an official position, where can we fight!

古文：公与石祁子玦，与甯庄子矢，使守，曰： 以此赞国，择利而为之。 
现代文：懿公把玉佩给了石祁子，把箭给了甯庄子，让他们防守，说： 用这个来赞助国家，选择有利的去做。 
English: He gave the jade feather to Shijiazhuang, and the arrow to Zhangzhuang, and told them to defend themselves, saying, "Use this to support the country, and choose to do what is beneficial."

古文：与夫人绣衣，曰： 听于二子。 
现代文：把绣衣给了夫人，说： 听他们二人的！ 
English: He gave the embroidered dress to his wife and said, "Listen to the two of them!

古文：渠孔御戎，子伯为右，黄夷前驱，孔婴齐殿。
现代文：渠孔为卫懿公驾御战车，子伯作为车右；黄夷打冲锋，孔婴齐指挥后军。
English: Duqong is the chariot driven by Wei Zheng, and Zibo is the right; Huang Yi is leading the charge, and Kong Ying Qi is commanding the rear.

古文：及狄人战于荧泽，卫师败绩，遂灭卫。
现代文：和狄人在荧泽作战，卫军大败，狄人就灭亡了卫国。
English: In the battle with the Di people in Fuze, the guards were defeated, and the Di people perished in the defense of the country.

古文：卫侯不去其旗，是以甚败。
现代文：卫侯不肯去掉自己的旗帜，所以惨败。
English: Wei Hou did not want to remove his banner, so he failed miserably.

古文：狄人囚史华龙滑与礼孔以逐卫人。
现代文：狄人囚禁了史官华龙滑和礼孔以追赶卫国人。
English: The Di people imprisoned the historian Hua Longsui and Li Kong to chase the defenders.

古文：二人曰： 我，大史也，实掌其祭，不先，国不可得也。 
现代文：这两个人说： 我们，是太史之官，执掌祭祀。如果不先回去，你们是不能得到国都的。 
English: The two men said, "We are officials of the Grand Historian, in charge of the sacrificial rites. If you don't go back first, you won't get the capital."

古文：乃先之。
现代文：于是就让他们先回去。
English: So they let them go back first.

古文：至则告守曰： 不可待也。 
现代文：他们到达，就告诉守卫的人说： 不能抵御了。 
English: And when they were come, they told the porter, saying, It is impossible.

古文：夜与国人出。
现代文：夜里和国都的人一起退走。
English: In the evening, they left together with the people from the capital.

古文：狄入卫，遂从之，又败诸河。
现代文：狄人进入卫国国都，跟着追上去，又在黄河边上打败了卫国人。
English: The Di people entered the capital of the defending country, chased after them, and defeated the defenders on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：初，惠公之即位也少，齐人使昭伯烝于宣姜。不可，强之。
现代文：当初，卫惠公即位的时候还很年轻，齐人让昭伯和宣姜私通，昭伯不同意，就逼迫他干。
English: At first, Wei Huigong was still very young when he ascended to the throne. Qi people let Zhao Bo and Xuan Jiang have a private affair. Zhao Bo did not agree, so they forced him to do it.

古文：生齐子、戴公、文公、宋桓夫人、许穆夫人。
现代文：生了齐子、戴公、文公、宋桓夫人、许穆夫人。
English: Qi Zi, Dai Gong, Wen Gong, Mrs. Song Huan, and Mrs. Xu Mu were born.

古文：文公为卫之多患也，先適齐。
现代文：文公由于卫国祸患太多，先到了齐国。
English: Due to too many national defense disasters, Wen Gong went to Qi Province first.

古文：及败，宋桓公逆诸河，宵济。
现代文：等到卫国这次大败，宋桓公在黄河边上迎接，夜里渡河。
English: Waiting for the great defeat of the motherland, Song Huan Gong greeted on the edge of the Yellow River and crossed the river at night.

古文：卫之遗民男女七百有三十人，益之以共、滕之民为五千人，立戴公以庐于曹。
现代文：卫国的遗民男女共计七百三十人，加上共地、滕地的百姓共五千人。立戴公为国君。
English: A total of seven hundred and thirty men and women survived to defend the country, plus a total of five thousand commoners and Tengdi people.

古文：许穆夫人赋《载驰》。
现代文：暂时寄居在曹邑，许穆夫人作了《载驰》这首诗。
English: While temporarily living in Cao's hometown, Mrs. Xu Mu composed the poem "Carrying Away."

古文：齐侯使公子无亏帅车三百乘、甲士三千人以戍曹。归公乘马，祭服五称，牛羊豕鸡狗皆三百，与门材。
现代文：齐桓公派遣公子无亏率领战车三百辆、披甲战士三千人守卫曹邑，赠送给戴公驾车的马匹，祭服五套，牛、羊、猪、鸡、狗都是三百头，还有做门户的木材。
English: Prince Qi Huan sent his son to lead three hundred chariots and three thousand armored soldiers to guard Cao's village, and presented the horses, five sets of sacrificial clothing, three hundred heads of cattle, sheep, pigs, chickens, and dogs, as well as the wood to make the portal.

古文：归夫人鱼轩，重锦三十两。
现代文：赠送给夫人用鱼皮装饰的车子，上等的绸缎三十匹。
English: He presented his wife with a carriage decorated with fish skins, and thirty first-class silk brocades.

古文：郑人恶高克，使帅师次于河上，久而弗召，师溃而归。高克奔陈。
现代文：郑国人讨厌高克，派他率领军队住在黄河边，很久也不召他回来，军队溃散逃回，高克逃亡到陈国。
English: The people of Zheng hated Gao Ke, so they sent him to lead an army and live by the Yellow River. They did not call him back for a long time. The army scattered and fled back, and Gao Ke fled to Chen Province.

古文：郑人为之赋《清人》。
现代文：郑国人为高克作了《清人》这首诗。
English: Zheng Guo Ren composed the poem "Qing Ren" for Gao Ke.

古文：晋侯使大子申生伐东山皋落氏。
现代文：晋献公派遣太子申生进攻东山的皋落氏。
English: Emperor Jinxian dispatched Prince Shen Sheng to attack the Shao Luo clan in the eastern mountains.

古文：里克谏曰： 大子奉冢祀社稷之粢盛，以朝夕视君膳者也，故曰冢子。
现代文：里克进谏说： 太子，是奉事宗庙祭祀、社稷大祭和早晚照看国君饮食的人，所以叫做冢子。
English: Rick said, "The prince is the one who performs the rituals of the family temple, the grand festival, and takes care of the emperor's diet in the morning and evening. That's why he's called the prince."

古文：君行则守，有守则从，从曰抚军，守曰监国，古之制也。
现代文：国君外出就守护国家，如果有别人守护就跟随国君。跟随在外叫做抚军，守护在内叫做监国，这是古代的制度。
English: The sovereign guards the country when he goes out, and if someone else is guarding, he follows the sovereign. Following outside is called supporting the army, and guarding inside is called supervising the country. This is an ancient system.

古文：夫帅师，专行谋，誓军旅，君与国政之所图也，非大子之事也。
现代文：说到带兵一事，对各种策略作出决断，对军队发号施令，这是国君和正卿所应该策划的，不是太子的事情。
English: When it comes to leading soldiers, making decisions on various strategies, and giving orders to the army, this is something that the sovereign and the emperor should plan, not the prince.

古文：师在制命而已。禀命则不威，专命则不孝。故君之嗣適不可以帅师。
现代文：率领大军在于控制命令，太子领兵，如果遇事都要请示就失去威严，擅自发令而不请示就是不孝，所以国君的大儿子不能带领军队。
English: To lead a large army is to control orders. A prince leading an army loses his dignity if he has to ask for instructions in an emergency. To issue orders without asking for instructions is unfilial. Therefore, the eldest son of the sovereign cannot lead an army.

古文：君失其官，帅师不威，将焉用之？
现代文：国君失去了任命职官的准则，太子统率军队也没有威严，何必如此呢？
English: The sovereign has lost the criteria for appointing officials, and the prince leading the army is not dignified. Why is this necessary?

古文：且臣闻皋落氏将战，君其舍之。 
现代文：而且下臣听说皋落氏准备出兵迎战，君王还是不要太子去为好。 
English: Moreover, the vassal heard that the Oroku clan was preparing to send troops to fight, so the monarch did not want the crown prince to go.

古文：公曰： 寡人有子，未知其谁立焉。 
现代文：晋献公说： 我有好几个儿子，还不知道立谁为嗣君呢！ 
English: Jin Xian Gong said, "I have several sons, but I still don't know who to appoint as my heir!"

古文：不对而退。
现代文：里克不回答，退了下去。
English: Rick didn't answer and backed away.

古文：见大子，大子曰： 吾其废乎？ 
现代文：里克进见太子。太子说： 我恐怕要被废了吧！ 
English: Rick went in to see the prince. The prince said: I'm afraid I'm going to be scrapped!

古文：对曰： 告之以临民，教之以军旅，不共是惧，何故废乎？
现代文：里克回答说： 命令您在曲沃治理百姓，教导您熟悉军事，害怕的是不能完成任务，为什么会废立呢？
English: Rick replied, "I ordered you to govern the people in Choowo, to teach you military skills, but I'm afraid you won't be able to complete your mission. Why did you abandon your post?

古文：且子惧不孝，无惧弗得立，修己而不责人，则免于难。 
现代文：而且做儿子的应该害怕不孝，不应该害怕不能立为嗣君。修养自己而不要去责备别人，就可以免于祸难。 
English: Moreover, a son should be afraid of being unfilial, and should not be afraid of not being able to become an heir. Cultivate yourself and do not blame others, and you will be able to avoid disaster.

古文：大子帅师，公衣之偏衣，佩之金玦。
现代文：太子申生带领军队，晋献公让他穿左右两色的衣服，佩带有缺口的青铜环形佩器。
English: Prince Shensheng led the army, and the prince asked him to wear two-colored clothes and a bronze ring with a notch.

古文：狐突御戎，先友为右。
现代文：狐突驾御战车，先友作为车右。
English: Foxtrot driving the chariot, the first friend as the car on the right.

古文：梁馀子养御罕夷，先丹木为右。
现代文：梁馀子养为罕夷驾御战车，先丹木作为车右。
English: Liang Yu's son was raised to drive the chariot, with Danmu driving on the right.

古文：羊舌大夫为尉。
现代文：羊舌大夫作为军尉。
English: Dr. Sheep's Tongue starts as a lieutenant.

古文：先友曰： 衣身之偏，握兵之要。在此行也，子其勉之。
现代文：先友说： 穿着国君衣服的一半，掌握着军事的机要，成败全在这一回了，您要自己勉励啊！
English: The former friend said, "You are wearing half of the emperor's clothes, and you are in control of the military situation. Success or failure is entirely up to you. You have to motivate yourself!"

古文：偏躬无慝，兵要远灾，亲以无灾，又何患焉！ 
现代文：分出一半衣服没有恶意，兵权在手可以远离灾祸，与国君亲近又远离灾祸，又担心什么！ 
English: There is no malice in giving away half of one's clothes. With military power in one's hands, one can stay away from disaster. One can be close to the sovereign and yet stay away from disaster. What is there to worry about?

古文：狐突叹曰： 时，事之征也。衣，身之章也。佩，衷之旗也。
现代文：狐突叹息说： 时令，是事情的象征，衣服，是身分的标识，佩饰，是心志的旗帜。
English: Foxtrot sighed and said: The season is a symbol of things, clothing is a sign of status, adornment, and a banner of the mind.

古文：故敬其事则命以始，服其身则衣之纯，用其衷则佩之度。
现代文：所以如果看重这件事，就应该在春、夏季发布命令；赐予衣服，就不要用杂色；使人衷心为自己所用，就要让他佩带合于礼度的装饰品。
English: Therefore, if you value this matter, you should issue orders in the spring and summer; give clothes, do not use mixed colors; make people sincerely use for themselves, let him wear decorum.

古文：今命以时卒，其事也；衣之尨服，远其躬也，佩以金玦，弃其衷也。
现代文：如今在年终发布命令，那是要让事情不能顺利进行；赐给他穿杂色衣服，那是要使他疏远；让他佩带缺口青铜环佩器，那是表示出丢弃太子的内心。
English: Now, at the end of the year, an order is issued, which is to make things not go smoothly; he is given to wear mixed-colored clothes, which is to alienate him; he is made to wear a notched bronze necklace, which is to show the heart of the discarded prince.

古文：服以远之，时以之，尨凉冬杀，金寒玦离，胡可恃也？
现代文：现在是用衣服疏远他，用时令使他不能顺利进行；杂色，意味凉薄；冬天，意味肃杀；金，意味寒冷；玦，意味决绝，这怎么可以依靠呢？
English: Now it is clothes that alienate him, and the seasons that make him unable to proceed smoothly; variegated colors, meaning cool and thin; winter, meaning cold; gold, meaning cold; crimson, meaning resolute, how can this be relied upon?

古文：虽欲勉之，狄可尽乎？ 
现代文：虽然要勉力而为，狄人难道可以消灭得一人不剩吗？ 
English: Even if it is a struggle, can the Di people be exterminated until there is no one left?

古文：梁馀子养曰： 帅师者受命于庙，受脤于社，有常服矣。
现代文：梁馀子养说： 领兵的人，在太庙里接受命令，在祭祀土神的地方接受祭肉，还应该有一定的服饰。
English: Liang Yu Zi Yao said: Those who lead soldiers should receive orders in the ancient temple, receive sacrificial meat in the place where the local god is worshipped, and should also have certain clothing.

古文：不获而尨，命可知也。
现代文：现在得不到规定的服饰而得到杂色衣服，命令不怀好意可想而知。
English: Now, instead of getting the required attire, they are getting mixed-colored clothes. The order is not well-intentioned.

古文：死而不孝，不如逃之。 
现代文：死了以后还要落个不孝的罪名，不如逃了吧！ 
English: It's better to run away than to die and be called a traitor.

古文：罕夷曰： 尨奇无常，金玦不复，虽复何为？
现代文：罕夷说： 杂色的奇装异服不合规定，青铜环形佩器表示不再回来。
English: Han Yi said: The multi-colored fancy dress is not in accordance with regulations, and the bronze ring-shaped garment indicates that it will not come back.

古文：君有心矣。 
现代文：这样，即使是回来还有什么用？
English: So what's the point of even coming back?

古文：先丹木曰： 是服也，狂夫阻之。
现代文：国君已经有别的心思了。 先丹木说： 这样的衣服，狂人也不会去穿的。
English: The sovereign already had other things on his mind. "A madman wouldn't wear such clothes," said Dangmu.

古文：曰 尽敌而反 ，敌可尽乎！
现代文：国君说： 将敌人消灭光了再回来 ，敌人难道可以消灭得一干二净吗？
English: The sovereign said, "If you wipe out the enemy and then come back, can the enemy be wiped out completely?"

古文：虽尽敌，犹有内谗，不如违之。 
现代文：即使把敌人消灭干净了，还有内部谗言，不如离开这里。 
English: Even if the enemy is wiped out, there will still be internal dissent, so it's better to leave.

古文：狐突欲行。羊舌大夫曰： 不可。
现代文：狐突要走，羊舌大夫说： 不行。
English: Foxtrot wants to go, Dr. Sheep's Tongue says: No.

古文：违命不孝，弃事不忠，虽知其寒，恶不可取，子其死之。 
现代文：违背命令是不孝，抛弃责任是不忠。虽然已经感到了国君的心里冷酷，不孝不忠这样的邪恶是不可取的。您还是为此而死吧！ 
English: To disobey an order is disloyalty, to abandon a responsibility is disloyalty. Although I have sensed the coldness in the heart of the sovereign, such evil as disloyalty is not desirable. You may as well die for it!

古文：大子将战，狐突谏曰： 不可。
现代文：太子准备作战，狐突劝阻说： 不行。
English: The prince prepared to fight, but Foxtrot dissuaded him, saying, "No, you can't.

古文：昔辛伯谂周桓公云： 内宠并后，外宠二政，嬖子配適，大都耦国，乱之本也。 
现代文：从前辛伯劝阻周桓公说： 妾媵并同于王后，宠臣相等于正卿，庶子和嫡子同等，大城和国都相同，这就是祸乱的根本。 
English: In the past, Xin Bo dissuaded Zhou Huan Gong by saying: A concubine is equal to a queen, a favorite is equal to a peer, an illegitimate child is equal to a legitimate child, and a big city and a country are the same. This is the root of evil.

古文：周公弗从，故及于难。
现代文：周桓公不听，所以遭到祸难。
English: Zhou Kuan didn't listen, so he got into trouble.

古文：今乱本成矣，立可必乎？
现代文：现在祸乱的根本已经形成，您还能肯定会立您为嗣君吗？
English: Now that the root of the calamity has been formed, can you still firmly establish yourself as the heir?

古文：孝而安民，子其图之，与其危身以速罪也。 
现代文：您就考虑一下吧！与其危害自身而加快罪过的到来，何如尽孝道而安定百姓！ 
English: Just think about it! Instead of harming yourself and speeding up the arrival of sin, how about fulfilling filial piety and stabilizing the people!

古文：成风闻成季之繇，乃事之，而属僖公焉，故成季立之。
现代文：成风听到成季出生时占卜的卦辞，就和他结交，并且把僖公嘱托给他，所以成季立僖公为国君。
English: When Chengfeng heard the fortune-telling words of Chengqi at the time of his birth, he made friends with him and entrusted him with the imperial command, so Chengqi became the sovereign.

古文：僖之元年，齐桓公迁邢于夷仪。
现代文：僖公元年，齐桓公把邢国迁到夷仪。
English: In the year of  AD, King Qi Kuan moved the country of  to Yiyi.

古文：二年，封卫于楚丘。
现代文：二年，把卫国封在楚丘。
English: In two years, he sealed the defense of the country in Chu Qiu.

古文：邢迁如归，卫国忘亡。
现代文：邢国迁居，好像回到原来的国土；卫国重建，却忘记了亡国之痛。
English: When a country is resettled, it is like returning to the original land; when a country is rebuilt, the pain of losing the country is forgotten.

古文：卫文公大布之衣，大帛之冠，务材训农，通商惠工，敬教劝学，授方任能。
现代文：卫文公穿着粗布衣服，戴着粗帛帽子，努力生产，教导农耕，便利商贩，加惠各种手工业，重视教化，奖励求学，向臣下传授为官之道，任用有能力的人。
English: Dressed in coarse cloth and wearing a coarse hat, Weiwengong worked hard to produce, taught farming, facilitated merchants, favored all kinds of handicrafts, attached importance to enlightenment, rewarded study, taught his subjects how to be officials, and appointed capable people.

古文：元年革车三十乘，季年乃三百乘。
现代文：头一年，战车只有三十辆，到末年，就有了三百辆。
English: In the first year, there were only thirty chariots, but by the end of the year, there were three hundred.

