古文：曾子曰： 敢问圣人之德，无以加于孝乎？ 
现代文：曾子说： 我很冒昧地请问，圣人的德行，没有比孝道更大的了吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi said, "I have the audacity to ask, is there no virtue of a saint greater than filial piety?"

古文：子曰： 天地之性，人为贵。
现代文：孔子说： 天地万物之中，以人类最为尊贵。
English: Confucius said, "Among all things in heaven and earth, human beings are the most precious."

古文：人之行，莫大于孝。
现代文：人类的行为，没有比孝道更为重大的了。
English: There is no human act more important than filial piety.

古文：孝莫大于严父。
现代文：在孝道之中，没有比敬重父亲更重要的了。
English: In filial piety, there is nothing more important than respecting one's father.

古文：严父莫大于配天，则周公其人也。
现代文：敬重父亲，没有比在祭天的时候，将祖先配祀天帝更为重大的了，而只有周公能够做到这一点。
English: Respecting one's father, there is nothing more important than enshrining one's ancestors with the Heavenly Emperor at the time of the Tian Festival, and only Zhou Gong can do this.

古文：昔者，周公郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂，以配上帝。
现代文：当初，周公在郊外祭天的时候，把其始祖后稷配祀天帝；在明堂祭祀，又把父亲文王配祀天帝。
English: In the beginning, when Zhou Gong offered sacrifices to Heaven in the suburbs, he associated his ancestor Hou Yu with the worship of Heavenly Father; when he offered sacrifices in the Ming Hall, he also associated his father, King Wen, with the worship of Heavenly Father.

古文：是以四海之内，各以其职来祭。
现代文：因为他这样做，所以全国各地诸侯能够克尽职守，前来协助他的祭祀活动。
English: Because he did this, princes from all over the country were able to fulfill their duties and come to assist him in his sacrificial activities.

古文：夫圣人之德，又何以加于孝乎？
现代文：可见圣人的德行，又有甚么能超出孝道之上呢？
English: Can you see the virtue of a saint, and what can surpass filial piety?

古文：故亲生之膝下，以养父母日严。圣人因严以教敬，因亲以教爱。
现代文：因为子女对父母亲的敬爱，在年幼相依父母亲膝下时就产生了，待到逐渐长大成人，则一天比一天懂得了对父母亲尊严的爱敬。
English: Because the children's respect for their parents was born when they were young and dependent on their parents, and when they gradually grew up, they learned to respect their parents' dignity day by day.

古文：圣人之教，不肃而成，其政不严而治，其所因者本也。父子之道，天性也，君臣之义也。
现代文：父亲与儿子的亲恩之情，乃是出于人类天生的本性，也体现了君主与臣属之间的义理关系。
English: The affection between father and son is born of the innate nature of human beings, and also embodies the moral relationship between the monarch and his subjects.

古文：父母生之，续莫大焉。君亲临之，厚莫重焉。
现代文：父母生下儿女以传宗接代，没有比此更为重要的了；父亲对于子女又犹如尊严的君王，其施恩于子女，没有比这样的恩爱更厚重的了。
English: There is nothing more important than parents giving birth to children and passing them on to the next generation; there is nothing more profound than a father's generosity to his children, who are like dignified kings to him.

古文：故不爱其亲而爱他人者，谓之悖德；不敬其亲而敬他人者，谓之悖礼。
现代文：所以那种不敬爱自己的父母却去爱敬别人的行为，叫做违背道德；不尊敬自己的父母而尊敬别人的行为，叫做违背礼法。
English: Therefore, the kind of behavior that does not respect one's parents but respects others is called a violation of morality; the behavior that does not respect one's parents but respects others is called a violation of etiquette.

古文：以顺则逆，民无则焉。
现代文：不是顺应人心天理地爱敬父母，偏偏要逆天理而行，人民就无从效法了。
English: It is not natural to love and respect one's parents in accordance with the will of the people, but to act contrary to the will of God, and the people will not follow the example.

古文：不在于善，而皆在于凶德，虽得之，君子不贵也。
现代文：不是在身行爱敬的善道上下功夫，相反凭藉违背道德礼法的恶道施为，虽然能一时得志，也是为君子所卑视的。
English: It is not by practicing the virtuous path of love and respect, but by acting in a way that is contrary to morality and etiquette. Although it can be a momentary gain, it is also despised by the gentleman.

古文：君子则不然，言思可道，行思可乐，德义可尊，作事可法，容止可观，进退可度，以临其民。
现代文：君子的作为则不是这样，其言谈，必须考虑到要让人们所称道奉行；其作为，必须想到可以给人们带来欢乐，其立德行义，能使人民为之尊敬；其行为举止，可使人民予以效法；其容貌行止，皆合规矩，使人们无可挑剔；其一进一退，不越礼违法，成为人民的楷模。
English: This is not the case with the actions of a gentleman. His speech must be considered in order to make people follow what is praised; his actions must be thought to bring joy to people, his virtue and righteousness can make people respect him; his behavior can make people imitate him; his appearance and behavior are all in accordance with the rules, so that people are impeccable; his advance and retreat, not exceeding the etiquette and breaking the law, become a model for the people.

古文：是以其民畏而爱之，则而象之。
现代文：君子以这样的作为来治理国家，统治黎民百姓，所以民众敬畏而爱戴他，并学习仿艾其作为。
English: This is how a gentleman governs the country and rules the people, so the people fear and love him, and learn to imitate his actions.

古文：故能成其德教，而行其政令。
现代文：所以君子能够成就其德治教化，顺利地推行其法规、命令。
English: Therefore, a gentleman can achieve his moral education and successfully implement his regulations and orders.

古文：《诗》云： 淑人君子，其仪不忒。  
现代文：《诗经·曹风·鸠》篇中说： 善人君子，其容貌举止丝毫不差。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Our sovereign is a benevolent gentleman, and his words and deeds never deviate.

