古文：世言韩信伐赵，赵广武君请以奇兵塞井陉口，绝其粮道，成安君不听。
现代文：世人都说韩信攻打赵国时，赵国的广武君请求用一只奇兵堵塞井陉口防守，断绝韩信大军的粮道，成安君没有采纳。
English: People say that when Han Xin attacked Zhao, Zhao's Guangwu Jun requested that a special soldier be used to block the mouth of the well and cut off the food supply of Han Xin's army. Cheng An Jun did not accept this request.

古文：信使间人窥知其不用广武君策，还报，则大喜，乃敢引兵遂下，遂胜赵。
现代文：韩信派间谍暗中刺探得知成安君没有采纳广武君的计策，韩信大喜，马上率军挺进，随即战胜赵国。
English: Han Xin sent spies to secretly spy and learned that Cheng Anjun did not adopt Guangwu Jun's strategy, Han Xin was overjoyed and immediately led the army to advance and immediately defeated Zhao Guo.

古文：使广武计行，信且成禽，信盖自言之矣。
现代文：假使广武君的计策得以实行，韩信就要战败被擒了，这大概是韩信自己说的话。
English: If Guangwu's strategy were to be implemented, Han Xin would be defeated and executed, which is probably what Han Xin himself said.

古文：周瑜拒曹公于赤壁，部将黄盖献火攻之策，会东南风急，悉烧操船，军遂败。
现代文：周瑜和曹操在赤壁对阵，部将黄盖献火攻之计，正巧遇到很猛烈的东南风，这才烧毁了曹操的所有战船，曹军大败。
English: Zhou Yu and Cao Cao faced off in Chibi. Huang Gai, the commander of Cao Cao's army, came up with a plan to attack by setting fire to the city. However, he encountered a very strong southeast wind, which burned all of Cao Cao's warships. Cao's army was soundly defeated.

古文：使天无大风，黄盖不进计，则瑜未必胜。
现代文：假使没起大风，黄盖没有献火攻之计，那么周瑜就未必能取胜。
English: If there is no strong wind and Huang Gai does not have a plan to attack with fire, then Zhou Yu may not be able to win.

古文：是二说者，皆不善观人者也。
现代文：这两种说法都是不善于观察人的结果。
English: Both of these statements are the result of not being good at observing people.

古文：夫以韩信敌陈馀，犹以猛虎当羊豕尔。信与汉王语，请北举燕、赵，正使井陉不得进，必有他奇策矣。
现代文：用韩信对付成安君，就如同用猛虎对付猪羊一样，韩信对汉王刘邦说，请求向北攻下燕国、赵国，假使井陉口不能通入，他必定还会有其他的奇策妙计。
English: Using Han Xin to deal with Cheng Anjun was like using a fierce tiger to deal with pigs and sheep. Han Xin said to Liu Bang, the king of Han, that he asked him to invade Yan and Zhao to the north. If Jing Hukou could not be penetrated, he would certainly have other cunning plans.

古文：其与广武君言曰： 向使成安君听子计，仆亦禽矣。 
现代文：韩信对广武君说： 假若成安君采纳您的计谋，我就要战败被擒了。 
English: Han Xin said to Guang Wu Jun: If Cheng An Jun adopts your scheme, I will be defeated and captured.

古文：盖谦以求言之词也。
现代文：这大概是韩信故意谦虚以求广武君畅所欲言的说法。
English: This is probably Han Xin's deliberately modest way of saying that he wants Guangwu to speak freely.

古文：刘备见瑜，恨其兵少。瑜曰： 此自足用，豫州但观瑜破之。 
现代文：当孙权向周瑜询问破曹操的计策时，周瑜已经说了曹操冒然进军的四种弊端，并说军队已经足够用了，您就看我周瑜怎么大破曹军吧！ 
English: When Sun Quan asked Zhou Yu about the strategy of defeating Cao Cao, Zhou Yu had already said the four drawbacks of Cao Cao's rash march, and said that the army was already enough, you can see how I, Zhou Yu, defeated Cao's army!

古文：正使无火攻之说，其必有以制胜矣。
现代文：假如没有火攻之策，周瑜也必定会有其他克敌制胜的办法。
English: If there is no fire attack strategy, Zhou Yu will certainly have other ways to defeat the enemy.

古文：不然，何以为信、瑜？
现代文：如果不是这样，那么他们还是韩信、周瑜吗？
English: If not, are they still Han Xin and Zhou Yu?

