古文：世祖文皇帝讳蒨，字子华，始兴昭烈王之长子也。
现代文：陈世祖文皇帝名叫陈蒨，字子华，是始兴昭烈王的长子。
English: Emperor Chen Shizhuwen, whose name was Chen Zihua, was the eldest son of King Shi Xingzhao.

古文：少沈敏，有识量，美容仪，留意经史。
现代文：从少年时候起就沉稳敏捷，有见识有胆量，容貌漂亮，留意经史书籍。
English: Since he was a boy, he has been steady and agile, insightful and courageous, good-looking, and attentive to history books.

古文：武帝甚爱之，常称吾家英秀。
现代文：武帝对他十分宠爱，常称他为 我家英秀 。
English: Emperor Wu was very fond of him and often referred to him as my family's Yingxiu.

古文：梁太清初，帝梦两日斗，一大一小，大者光灭坠地，色正黄，其大如斗，帝三分取一怀之。
现代文：梁朝太清初年，文帝梦见有两个太阳争斗，一个大，一个小，大的光芒减弱落地，颜色为正黄，像斗一样大小，文帝取了三分之一揣在怀里。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty of the Taiqing Dynasty, Emperor Wen dreamed that there were two suns fighting, one big, one small, the big light weakened and fell to the ground, the color was pure yellow, as big as a bucket, Emperor Wen took a third of it and carried it in his arms.

古文：侯景之乱，避地临安县郭文举旧宅。
现代文：侯景之乱，他躲避在临安县郭文举的旧宅里。
English: During the Houjing Rebellion, he took refuge in Guo Wencu's old house in Lin'an County.

古文：及武帝举兵南下，景遣吴兴太守信都遵收帝及衡阳献王出都。帝乃密袖小刀，候见景欲图之。
现代文：等到武帝率兵南下，侯景派吴兴太守信都遵收管文帝以及衡阳献王出京，文帝就秘密地在袖子里藏了一把较小的刀，准备在见到侯景的时候对他下手。
English: When Emperor Wu led his troops to the south, and Emperor Wen secretly hid a small knife in his sleeve, ready to attack Hou Jing when he saw him.

古文：及至，以付郎中王翻幽守，故其事不遂。
现代文：到了那里后，因为把他们交给了郎中王翻关押，所以事情没有得手。
English: When they got there, things didn't work out, because they were handed over to the custody of Langzhong Wangfu.

古文：武帝围石头，景欲加害者数矣，会景败，乃得出。
现代文：武帝包围了石头城，侯景曾多次打算杀害他们，后来遇上侯景失败，才得以逃出。
English: Emperor Wu besieged Stone Town. Hou Jing had planned to kill them many times, but later he met with Hou Jing's defeat and was able to escape.

古文：起家吴兴太守。
现代文：文帝起家于吴兴太守。
English: Emperor Wen started his family in the Wu Xing Dynasty.

古文：武帝之讨王僧辩也，先召帝与谋。
现代文：武帝当年讨伐王僧辩时，先召见文帝共同商量。
English: When Emperor Wu was fighting against Wang Sangye that year, he first summoned Emperor Wen for a joint discussion.

古文：时僧辩婿杜龛据吴兴，兵衆甚盛，武帝密令帝还长城，立栅备之。
现代文：当时王僧辩的女婿杜龛占据吴兴，兵将很多，武帝秘密命令文帝回到长城，设立栅栏进行防守。
English: At that time, Du Juan, the son-in-law of Wang Sangye, occupied Wu Xing, and there were many soldiers. Emperor Wu secretly ordered Emperor Wen to return to the Great Wall and set up a fence for defense.

古文：龛遣将杜泰乘虚掩至，将士相视失色，帝言笑自若，部分益明，于是衆心乃定。
现代文：杜龛派遣将领杜泰乘虚杀来，众将士面面相觑，大惊失色，而文帝谈笑自若，军队部署越发分明，于是大家心里才安定下来。
English: Du Wei dispatched the general Du Tai to take advantage of the fictitious murder, the generals looked at each other, shocked, and Emperor Wen talked and laughed, the military deployment became more and more clear, so everyone settled down in their hearts.

古文：及武帝遣周文育讨龛，帝遣将军刘澄、蒋元举攻下龛。
现代文：等到武帝派遣周文育讨伐杜龛的时候，文帝派将军刘澄、蒋元举攻克了杜龛。
English: When Emperor Wu sent Zhou Wenyu to fight the cuckoo, Emperor Wenyu sent generals Liu Cheng and Jiang Yuan to conquer the cuckoo.

古文：拜会稽太守。
现代文：被封为会稽太守。
English: He was appointed as the chief auditor of the association.

古文：武帝受禅，立爲临川王。
现代文：武帝接受了皇位的禅让，又被立为临川王。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the abdication of the imperial throne and was installed as the King of Linchuan.

古文：梦梁武帝以宝刀授己。
现代文：在梦中他遇到梁武帝将一把宝刀交给自己。
English: In his dream, he met Emperor Liangwu, who gave him a precious sword.

古文：周文育、侯安都之败于沌口，武帝诏帝入总军政。
现代文：周文育、侯安都在沌口失败以后，武帝诏令文帝入朝总理军务。
English: After Zhou Wenyu and Hou An both failed in the Battle of Chaozhou, Emperor Wu decreed that Emperor Wenyi take over the military affairs as the prime minister.

古文：寻命率兵城南皖。
现代文：不久又命他率兵驻守南皖。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to garrison Nanlu with his soldiers.

古文：永定三年六月丙午，武帝崩，皇后称遗诏征帝入纂皇统。
现代文：永定三年六月二十一日，武帝逝世，皇后说根据遗诏征文帝入朝继承帝王世系。
English: Emperor Wu died on June 21st, the third year of the Yongding Emperor's reign, and the empress said that according to the imperial edict, Emperor Xuanwen would succeed to the imperial line.

古文：甲寅，至自南皖，入居中书省。
现代文：二十九日，从南皖赶到，入朝主持中书省。
English: A Tingkou, from Nanshan back to Beijing, moved to Zhongshuo.

古文：六月甲子，群臣上諡曰文皇帝，庙号世祖。丙寅，葬永宁陵。
现代文：皇后让文帝承受武帝的宝符，文帝一而再、再而三地辞让，经过公卿大臣坚决请求，这一天在太极前殿登上了皇帝位，实行大赦，诏令各州郡一律停止赴京拜贺。
English: The empress let Emperor Wen receive the treasure of Emperor Wu. Emperor Wen made concessions again and again. After the resolute request of the Minister of Kugyo, Emperor Wen ascended to the throne on this day in front of the Taiji Temple. An amnesty was implemented, and all prefectures and counties were ordered to stop going to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：文帝起自布衣，知百姓疾苦，国家资用，务从俭约。
现代文：文帝是从平民起家，知道百姓的疾苦，国家费用开支，务必讲究节俭。
English: Emperor Wen started from the common people. He knew the hardships of the people and the expenses of the state. He must be thrifty.

古文：妙识真僞，下不容奸。
现代文：他能够巧妙地识别真伪，眼里容不得奸邪。
English: He is able to deftly distinguish between truth and falsehood, and does not tolerate evil in his eyes.

古文：一夜内刺闺取外事分判者，前后相续。
现代文：一夜之中房内进行批示传发外部明判大事的情况，前后不断。
English: Every night, there are government affairs to be dealt with in the Inner Court.

古文：每鸡人伺漏传签于殿中者，令投签于阶石上，枪然有声，云： 吾虽得眠，亦令惊觉。 
现代文：每当报晓的鸡人等漏壶到点向殿中传签的时候，都让他们把签扔到台阶的石头上，叮口当作响，他说： 我虽然睡着，也要惊醒。 
English: Whenever the heralds of the dawn, such as the chicken man and the leaky pot, came to the point of passing the sign to the hall, they let them throw the sign on the stone of the steps and tinkle. He said: Although I am asleep, I want to wake up.

古文：其自强若此云。
现代文：他就是这样地自强不息。
English: That's how he keeps himself going.

