古文：凡将立事，正彼天植，风雨无违。远近高下，各得其嗣。
现代文：凡人君临政视事，首先要端正他的心志，其次是不违背风来雨到的天时，第三是使远近高下的人们都得到很好的治理。
English: For an ordinary ruler to take a critical view of politics, he must first rectify his mind, secondly, he must not go against the wind and rain, and thirdly, he must ensure that people from near and far are well governed.

古文：三经既饬，君乃有国。
现代文：这三个根本问题都解决了，国君便可以保有其国家。
English: With these three fundamental problems solved, the sovereign can keep his country.

古文：喜无以赏，怒无以杀；喜以赏，怒以杀，怨乃起，令乃废，骤令不行，民心乃外。外之有徒，祸乃始牙。
现代文：不可因个人喜悦而行赏，不可因个人恼怒而擅杀。如果是因喜而赏，因怒而杀，人民就会生怨，政令就会废弛。政令多次行不通，人民就有外心；有外心的结了党，祸乱就开始萌芽。
English: One must not reward for personal joy, and one must not kill for personal anger. If one rewards for joy and kills for anger, the people will be resentful, and the government order will be useless. If the government order does not work many times, the people will have an ulterior motive; if the party has an ulterior motive, the disaster will begin to germinate.

古文：众之所忿，置不能图。
现代文：引起了群众的忿怒，少数人是不能图谋应付的。
English: aroused the wrath of the masses, which the minority could not contrive to deal with.

古文：举所美，必观其所终。废所恶，必计其所穷。
现代文：举办所喜欢的事，一定要估计到事情的结局；废止所厌恶的事，一定要考虑到事情的后果。
English: If you organize something you like, you must estimate the outcome of the matter; if you abolish something you dislike, you must consider the consequences of the matter.

古文：庆勉敦敬以显之，富禄有功以劝之，爵贵有名以休之。兼爱无遗，是谓君心。
现代文：用赏赐嘉勉敦厚的人以进行表扬，用俸禄加富有功的人以进行鼓励，用爵位提升有名望的人以进行美誉，要兼爱而没有遗弃，才算得上君主的胸怀。
English: To commend with a reward the worthy, to encourage with a salary the meritorious, to praise with a knighthood the famous, to love and not to forsake, is the heart of a prince.

古文：必先顺教，万民乡风。
现代文：一定要先给教训，万民才趋向好的风化。
English: We must first teach a lesson, so that all people will become better mannered.

古文：旦暮利之，众乃胜任。
现代文：经常给予利益，民众就会胜利完成己任了。
English: Give benefits regularly, and the people will successfully complete their duties.

古文：取人以己，成事以质。
现代文：取用于人要比照一下自己，办事要根据实际力量。
English: It is better to take care of others than to take care of oneself, and to act according to one's actual strength.

古文：审用财，慎施报，察称量；故用财不可以嗇，用力不可以苦。
现代文：要详细斟酌国家的用财，慎重处理施予和报酬，明察事物的分量与限度。所以，君主用财于民不可以吝啬，征用民力不可以过头。
English: It is necessary to consider in detail the use of the state's wealth, carefully handle gifts and rewards, and clearly observe the weight and limits of things. Therefore, the monarch's use of wealth for the people must not be stingy, and the requisition of people's power must not be excessive.

古文：用财嗇则费，用力苦则劳。
现代文：用财吝啬则人民反抗，用力过头则人民疲劳。
English: People will rebel against miserly use of money, and people will tire of excessive use of force.

古文：民不足，令乃辱。民苦殃，令不行。
现代文：人民贫困，政令就繁复无效；人民苦于劳役之灾，政令就无法贯彻。
English: If the people are poor, the decrees will be ineffective; if the people are suffering from the scourge of forced labor, the decrees cannot be implemented.

古文：施报不得，祸乃始昌。祸昌不寤，民乃自图。
现代文：施予酬报不得当，祸乱就开始发展；祸乱发展而人君尚不觉悟，民众就自图造反了。
English: If rewards are not given properly, disasters will begin to develop; if disasters develop and people do not wake up, the people will rebel.

古文：正法直度，罪杀不赦。杀僇必信，民畏而惧。
现代文：法律公正，制度明确；杀有罪，不宽赦；执行杀戮一定说到做到，民众就会畏惧。
English: The law is just and the system is clear; killing is a crime and will not be pardoned; killing must be carried out to the letter, and the people will be afraid.

古文：武威既明，令不再行，顿卒怠倦以辱之，罚罪宥过以惩之，杀僇犯禁以振之。
现代文：权威明示于众，法令就不必一再重申。对怠情的人，要通过训斥予以羞辱；对有过的人，要通过处罚予以惩戒；对犯罪的人，要通过杀戮予以震慑。
English: When authority is manifest, it does not need to be reiterated; when lax, it needs to be shamed by reprimand; when experienced, it needs to be disciplined by punishment; when criminal, it needs to be deterred by killing.

古文：植固不动，倚邪乃恐。
现代文：君主执法之心坚定而不动摇，乖异邪僻的人们就自然恐惧。
English: The monarch's will to enforce the law is firm and unwavering, and people who are deviant and perverse are naturally afraid.

古文：倚革邪化，令往民移。
现代文：乖异邪僻的行为都有了改革和变化，法令颁布下去，民众就跟着行动了。
English: There have been reforms and changes in deviant and perverse behaviors. As the decree is promulgated, the public will follow suit.

古文：法天合德，象法无亲。
现代文：君主应该效法天，对万物全体施德；模仿地，对万物没有私亲。
English: The monarch should imitate heaven, and be kind to all things; imitate earth, and have no private relations with all things.

古文：参于日月，佐于四时。
现代文：要做到与日月同级，与四时并列。
English: It is necessary to achieve the same level as the sun and the moon, and be on a par with the four o'clock.

古文：悦在施有，众在废私。
现代文：使众人喜悦决定于爱施俱行，得民众拥护决定于破除私心。
English: To make people happy is determined by love and charity, and to win people's support is determined by breaking selfishness.

古文：召远在修近，闭祸在除怨。
现代文：要招袜远方的人们，决定于修好国内；要避免祸乱的发生，决定于消除人怨。
English: To attract people from afar, it is determined to repair the country; to avoid the occurrence of disasters, it is determined to eliminate human grievances.

古文：修长在乎任贤，高安在乎同利。
现代文：准备长远大计，在于任用贤人；巩固尊高地位，在于与民同利。
English: The preparation of long-term plans lies in the appointment of sages; the consolidation of high-ranking positions lies in the common interests with the people.

