古文：世俗既信岁时，而又信日。
现代文：社会习俗既迷信岁、月有禁忌，而且又迷信日子也有禁忌。
English: Social customs not only have taboos on superstitious years and months, but also have taboos on superstitious days.

古文：举事若病死灾患，大则谓之犯触岁月，小则谓之不避日禁。
现代文：办事情如果遇到病、死、灾、祸，严重的就认为是触犯了岁、月方面的禁忌，轻微的就认为是没有避开日禁造成的。
English: If you encounter illness, death, calamity, or misfortune while doing business, if it is serious, it is considered to have violated the taboos of the year and month, and if it is minor, it is considered to have been caused by not avoiding the sun ban.

古文：岁月之传既用，日禁之书亦行。
现代文：有关岁、月禁忌的书已经流传开，有关日子禁忌的书也很流行。
English: Books on the taboos of the year and month have been circulated, and books on the taboos of the day are also popular.

古文：世俗之人，委心信之；辩论之士，亦不能定。
现代文：社会上的人，一心一意迷信这些禁忌；善于辩论的人士，也不能确定这些禁忌对不对。
English: People in society believe these taboos with all their hearts; people who are good at debating are not sure whether these taboos are right or wrong.

古文：是以世人举事，不考於心而合於日，不参於义而致於时。
现代文：因此社会上的人办事情，不是通过内心思考来判断事情本身是否该办而只讲究符合吉日，不从事理上去检查事情应不应该做而只要求符合吉时。
English: Therefore, when people in society do things, they do not judge whether the things themselves should be done through inner thinking, but only pay attention to whether it is in accordance with the auspicious day. They do not go to the reason to check whether things should be done or not, but only require that it is in accordance with the auspicious time.

古文：时日之书，众多非一，略举较著，明其是非，使信天时之人，将一疑而倍之。
现代文：有关时日禁忌的书，多种多样不只一种，略微举几本较为突出的，来明辩它的是与非，使迷信天时禁忌的人，都将对它产生怀疑而抛弃它。
English: There is more than one variety of books on the taboo of the day, and a few more prominent ones are mentioned to clarify its pros and cons, so that those who are superstitious about the taboo of the day will doubt it and abandon it.

古文：夫祸福随盛衰而至，代谢而然。
现代文：一个人的福祸是由 禄命 的盛衰而决定的，祸福交替出现而自然如此。
English: A person's fortune and misfortune are determined by the rise and fall of luck and fortune, and it is natural for misfortune and good fortune to alternate.

古文：举事曰凶，人畏凶有效；曰吉，人冀吉有验。
现代文：办事情时禁忌书上说凶，人们就害怕凶祸会有应验；说吉，人们就希望吉祥有应验。
English: When doing things, it is taboo to say evil in the book, people are afraid that the evil will be fulfilled; when saying auspicious, people hope that the auspicious will be fulfilled.

古文：祸福自至，则述前之吉凶，以相戒惧此日禁所以累世不疑，惑者所以连年不悟也。
现代文：事后福祸自然而然出现，人们就议论事前禁忌书上所说的吉凶如何灵验，以此互相警告和恫吓作为今后遵守禁忌的教训。这就是为什么有关日子的禁忌世世代代不被怀疑，糊涂的人长期不觉悟的原因。
English: After the fact, good and evil naturally appear, and people discuss how the good and evil mentioned in the pre-taboo book are effective, and use this to warn and intimidate each other as a lesson for future observance of taboos. This is why the taboo of the day is not suspected for generations, and confused people are not aware of it for a long time.

古文：《葬历》曰： 葬避九空、地臽，及日之刚柔，月之奇耦。 
现代文：葬历上说： 下葬要避开九空、地臽以及日子的刚柔，月份的奇偶。
English: According to the funerary calendar: the burial should avoid the nine skies, the mantle of the earth as well as the hardness and softness of the day, the odd and even of the month.

古文：日吉无害，刚柔相得，奇耦相应，乃为吉良。
现代文：日子吉利没有妨害，刚日柔日配合得当，单双月相适应，这才是下葬的吉利日子。
English: There is no obstacle to the auspicious day, the auspicious day and the auspicious day are properly coordinated, and the single and double months are compatible. This is the auspicious day for burial.

古文：不合此历，转为凶恶。 
现代文：不符合这种日子，就会转变为凶恶的日子。 
English: Days that don't conform to this will turn into evil days.

古文：夫葬，藏棺也；敛，藏尸也。
现代文：下葬，是埋棺材；装殓，是装尸入棺。
English: Burial is to bury the coffin; decoration is to put the corpse into the coffin.

古文：初死藏尸於棺，少久藏棺於墓。
现代文：人刚死要将尸体装在棺材中，不久要将棺材埋到坟墓里。
English: When a person has just died, the body should be placed in a coffin, and the coffin should soon be buried in a grave.

古文：墓与棺何别？
现代文：坟墓和棺材有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between a grave and a coffin?

古文：敛与葬何异？
现代文：装殓同下葬有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between decoration and burial?

古文：敛於棺不避凶，葬於墓独求吉。
现代文：装殓尸体于棺材中不避开凶日，唯独下葬于坟墓中要选择吉日。
English: Decorating the body in the coffin does not avoid the evil day, but it is necessary to choose the auspicious day to be buried in the grave.

古文：如以墓为重，夫墓，土也，棺，木也，五行之性，木土钧也。
现代文：如果以墓为重要，墓，就是土；棺，就是木。从五行的本性来看，木和土是一样的。
English: If the tomb is important, the tomb is earth; the coffin is wood. From the nature of the five elements, wood and earth are the same.

古文：治木以赢尸，穿土以埋棺，治与穿同事，尸与棺一实也。
现代文：制棺材用来装尸体，破土用以埋棺材，制棺与破土同样都是事情，尸体和棺材同是一回事。
English: The coffin-making is used to contain the body, the earth-breaking is used to bury the coffin, the coffin-making and the earth-breaking are the same thing, the body and the coffin are the same thing.

古文：如以穿土贼地之体，凿沟耕园，亦宜择日。
现代文：如果认为破土损害了地之体，那么挖沟耕园，也应当选择日子。
English: If it is considered that earth-breaking damages the earth's body, then digging a trench to cultivate a garden should also choose a day.

古文：世人能异其事，吾将听其禁；不能异其事，吾不从其讳。
现代文：世人能说明装尸入棺和埋棺入墓的区别，挖土和开沟的区别，我将相信这些禁忌；不能说明这些区别，我将不相信这些忌讳。
English: If the world can explain the difference between putting a body in a coffin and burying a coffin in a grave, the difference between digging up the earth and digging a trench, I will believe in these taboos; if it cannot explain these differences, I will not believe in these taboos.

古文：日之不害，又求日之刚柔；刚柔既合，又索月之奇耦。
现代文：日子吉利不凶，又要求日子的刚柔相配，刚柔已经配合了，又要求月份的单双。
English: The days are auspicious and auspicious, and the day's strong and soft are required to match, and the strong and soft have cooperated, and the single and double of the month are required.

古文：夫日之刚柔，月之奇耦，合於《葬历》，验之於吉，无不相得。
现代文：下葬讲究日子的刚柔相配，月份的单双相应，虽然符合于葬历的规定，但是用古代的事实来验证，却与葬历不相符合。
English: Under the burial, they pay attention to the matching of the day's hardness and softness, and the single and double of the month. Although it conforms to the requirements of the funeral calendar, it does not conform to the funeral calendar by using ancient facts to verify.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：春秋之时，天子、诸侯、卿、大夫死以千百数，案其葬日，未必合於历。
现代文：春秋时期，天子、诸侯、卿、大夫死了的要以千百数来计算，考察他们下葬的日子，不一定都符合葬历上的规定。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the number of deaths of princes, lords, nobles, and doctors should be counted in thousands and hundreds, and the days of their burial should be examined, and they may not all meet the requirements of the funeral calendar.

古文：又曰： 雨不克葬，庚寅日中乃葬。 
现代文：又说： 下雨不能下葬，在庚寅日的中午才下葬。 
English: He also said, "It can't be buried in the rain, and it can only be buried at noon on the day of Geng Yin."

古文：假令鲁小君以刚日死，至葬日己丑，刚柔等矣。
现代文：假如鲁小君在刚日死，到下葬的日子是己丑，那么刚柔日相合。
English: If Lu Xiaojun died on the first day of the month and was ugly when he was buried, then the first day of the month coincided with the second day.

古文：刚柔合，善日也。
现代文：刚柔相合，就是好日子。
English: When hard and soft come together, it's a good day.

古文：不克葬者，避雨也。
现代文：没有葬成，是为了避雨。
English: It wasn't buried, it was moved to avoid the rain.

古文：如善日，不当以雨之故，废而不用也。
现代文：如果是好日子，就不该由于下雨的缘故而废弃不用。
English: If it is a good day, it should not be abandoned due to rain.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：雨不便事耳，不用刚柔，重凶不吉，欲便事而犯凶，非鲁人之意，臣子重慎之义也。
现代文：下雨只是对下葬有些不方便罢了，不在刚柔相合的吉日下葬，会遭到大凶而不吉利，为了下葬方便而故意触犯凶日，这既不符合鲁国人的本心，也不符合臣子对葬礼应该重视和谨慎的道理。
English: The rain is just inconvenient for the burial. If you don't bury on the auspicious day of the combination of strong and soft, you will be met with great evil and bad luck. In order to make the burial convenient, you will deliberately violate the evil day. This is not in line with the original intention of the Lu people, nor is it in line with the principle that courtiers should attach importance to and be cautious about funerals.

古文：今废刚柔，待庚寅日中，以为吉也。
现代文：现在废弃刚柔相合的吉日不用，等待庚寅日的中午下葬，这是把晴天当作吉日了。
English: It is no longer necessary to wait for the auspicious day of the combination of hard and soft, but to wait for the noon burial of the day of the combination of hard and soft. This is to regard a sunny day as an auspicious day.

古文：《礼》： 天子七月而葬，诸侯五月，卿、大夫、士三月。 
现代文：《礼记》上说： 天子死后七个月下葬，诸侯死后五个月下葬，卿、大夫、士死后三个月下葬。 
English: "The Book of Rites" says: The emperor was buried seven months after his death, princes were buried five months after their death, and nobles, doctors, and judges were buried three months after their death.

古文：假令天子正月崩，七月葬；二月崩，八月葬。
现代文：假如天子正月死，七月下葬；二月死，八月下葬。
English: If the heavenly son died in the first month, he would be buried in July; if he died in February, he would be buried in August.

古文：诸侯、卿、大夫、士皆然。
现代文：诸侯、卿、大夫、士死后也都按《礼记》的规定办理。
English: The deaths of lords, nobles, doctors, and judges were also handled in accordance with the provisions of the "Li Ji."

古文：如验之《葬历》，则天子、诸侯葬月常奇常耦也。
现代文：如果用葬历来检验，那么天子、诸侯下葬的月份和死的月份对照，总是奇月对上奇月，偶月对上偶月。
English: If the funerary history is used as a test, then the comparison between the month in which the emperor and princes were buried and the month in which they died is always the odd month to the odd month, and the even month to the even month.

古文：衰世好信禁，不肖君好求福。
现代文：没落的时代喜好迷信禁忌，不贤能的君王喜好祈求福佑。
English: Declining times prefer superstitions and taboos, and unworthy kings prefer to pray for blessings.

古文：春秋之时，可谓衰矣！隐、哀之间，不肖甚矣。
现代文：春秋时期，可以说是很衰落了，从鲁隐公到鲁哀公这段时期，不贤能的君王多极了。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, it can be said that it was in decline. During the period from King Luyin to King Luye, there were many incompetent kings.

古文：然而葬埋之日，不见所讳，无忌之故也。
现代文：然而埋葬的日子，不见有什么忌讳，是因为那时没有禁忌的缘故。
English: However, on the day of burial, there is no taboo, because there is no taboo at that time.

古文：周文之世，法度备具，孔子意密，《春秋》义纤，如废吉得凶，妄举触祸，宜有微文小义，贬讥之辞。
现代文：周文王的时代，各种制度都具备了，孔子制定的礼仪极其周密，《春秋》上的道理很细致，如果鲁国人由于废弃吉日不用而遇到凶祸，胡乱做事而遭灾祸，那么《春秋》上应当有含蓄的批评和轻视的议论以及指责讥讽的言辞。
English: In the era of King Zhouwen, all kinds of systems were in place. The etiquette formulated by Confucius was extremely elaborate. The principles in Spring and Autumn were very detailed. If the people of Lu encountered evil because they abandoned the auspicious day and did not use it, and suffered calamity because they did things haphazardly, then in Spring and Autumn there should be implicit criticism and contemptuous discussion as well as accusatory and sarcastic words.

古文：今不见其义，无《葬历》法也。
现代文：现在从《春秋》上看不到这方面的内容，可见当时是没有葬历上的那套规定的。
English: Now, we can't see this aspect from "Spring and Autumn," and it can be seen that there was no set of regulations on the funeral calendar at that time.

古文：祭祀之历，亦有吉凶。
现代文：有关祭祀的历书，也有吉凶日的规定。
English: There are also stipulations about auspicious and inauspicious days in the almanac about the ritual.

古文：假令血忌、月杀之日固凶，以杀牲设祭，必有患祸。
现代文：假如血忌、月杀的日子确实凶，那么在这两个忌日杀牲畜来给鬼神上供品，一定会有灾祸。
English: If the days of bloodshed and moon killing are really evil, then killing livestock on these two days of death to make offerings to ghosts and gods will certainly bring disaster.

古文：夫祭者，供食鬼也；鬼者，死人之精也。
现代文：祭，就是供东西给鬼吃；鬼，就是死人的精气变的。
English: A sacrifice is something offered to a ghost to eat; a ghost is the spirit of a dead person.

古文：若非死人之精，人未尝见鬼之饮食也。
现代文：如果不是死人的精气变的，人们就不会用食品上供，因为人们从来没有见过鬼吃的东西。
English: If it were not for the spirits of the dead, people would not offer food, because people have never seen what ghosts eat.

古文：推生事死，推人事鬼，见生人有饮食，死为鬼当能复饮食，感物思亲，故祭祀也。
现代文：这是把供养活人的做法类推到供奉死人上，把侍奉人的做法类推到侍奉鬼上，看到活人要吃东西，人死了变鬼，应当仍就能吃东西，触及到与死人有关的东西就会引起对死去的亲人的思念，所以就祭祀鬼。
English: This is to analogize the practice of feeding the living to the practice of serving the dead, and the practice of serving the living to the practice of serving the ghosts. Seeing the living wants to eat, the dead turns into ghosts, and should still be able to eat. Touching things related to the dead will cause thoughts of the dead relatives, so they sacrifice ghosts.

古文：及他神百鬼之祠，虽非死人，其事之礼，亦与死人同。
现代文：至于对其他各种鬼神的祭祀，虽然它们不是死人变的，祭祀它们的礼节也与祭祀死人相同。
English: As for the sacrifices to other kinds of ghosts and gods, although they are not mortal, the etiquette of sacrificing them is the same as that of sacrificing the dead.

古文：盖以不见其形，但以生人之礼准况之也。
现代文：这大概是由于看不见鬼神的形体，因此只能以对待活人的礼节进行类比用来对待鬼神。
English: This is probably due to the fact that the form of ghosts and gods cannot be seen, so it can only be used to treat ghosts and gods by analogy with the etiquette of treating living people.

古文：生人饮食无日，鬼神何故有日？
现代文：活人吃东西没有禁忌的日子，鬼神吃东西为什么有禁忌的日子呢？
English: There is no taboo for living people to eat, so why is there a taboo for ghosts and gods to eat?

古文：如鬼神审有知，与人无异，则祭不宜择日。
现代文：如果鬼神果真有知，和人没有什么不同，那么祭祀鬼神就不应当选择日子。
English: If ghosts and gods really do have knowledge, and are no different from people, then the day should not be chosen for the sacrifice of ghosts and gods.

古文：如无知也，不能饮食，虽择日避忌，其何补益？
现代文：如果鬼神无知，不能吃东西，即使选择日子进行避忌，那又有什么好处呢？
English: If ghosts and gods are ignorant and cannot eat, even if they choose days to avoid it, what good is that?

古文：实者，百祀无鬼，死人无知。
现代文：实际上，各种各样的祭祀并没有什么鬼，死人也无知。
English: In fact, there are no ghosts in all kinds of rituals, and the dead are also ignorant.

古文：百祀报功，示不忘德。死如事生，示不背亡。
现代文：各种各样的祭祀是为了报功，表示不忘记先人的恩德；对待死者和侍奉活人一样，是表示不背弃死去的人。
English: Sacrifices of all kinds are meant to pay tribute, to show that we do not forget the kindness of our ancestors; treating the dead and serving the living in the same way is to show that we do not abandon the dead.

古文：祭之无福，不祭无祸。
现代文：祭鬼不会得福，不祭也没有灾祸。
English: Those who sacrifice ghosts will not be blessed, and those who do not sacrifice will not be plagued.

古文：祭与不祭，尚无祸福，况日之吉凶，何能损益？
现代文：祭与不祭，尚且没有什么祸福，何况日子的所谓吉凶，怎么能带给人福祸呢？
English: Sacrifice and non-sacrifice, even if there is no evil or good, let alone the so-called good or bad fortune of the day, how can it bring people good or bad?

古文：如以杀牲见血，避血忌、月杀，则生人食六畜亦宜辟之。
现代文：如果由于宰杀牲畜要见血，应当避开血忌、月杀日，那么活人吃六畜，也应当避开忌日。
English: If you want to see blood because of the slaughter of livestock, you should avoid the day of bloodshed, the day of slaughter, then if a living person eats six animals, you should also avoid the day of death.

古文：海内屠肆，六畜死者，日数千头，不择吉凶，早死者，未必屠工也。
现代文：全国的屠宰铺，每天宰杀的六畜有好几千头，不选择吉日凶日，先死的，不一定是屠工。
English: Slaughterhouses across the country slaughter thousands of animals every day. They don't choose the lucky day or the unlucky day, and the first to die is not necessarily the butcher.

古文：天下死罪，冬月断囚亦数千人，其刑於市，不择吉日，受祸者，未必狱吏也。
现代文：天下犯死罪的人，到冬季处决也是好几千人，在市上处决他们，不选择吉日，遭受灾祸的，不一定是狱吏。
English: People who commit capital crimes in the world are executed by the thousands in the winter. They are executed in the city, and they do not choose a lucky day. It is not necessarily the prison guards who suffer from misfortune.

古文：肉尽杀牲，狱具断囚。
现代文：肉卖完了就要杀牲口，定案完备了就处决犯人。
English: When the meat is sold out, the animals must be killed, and when the final case is complete, the prisoners are executed.

古文：囚断牲杀，创血之实，何以异於祭祀之牲？
现代文：犯人被处决牲口被宰杀，被杀流血的情况，与用来祭祀的牲畜被杀流血有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between a criminal being executed and an animal being slaughtered and bled to death, and an animal being slaughtered and bled to death for sacrifice?

古文：独为祭祀设历，不为屠工、狱吏立见，世俗用意不实类也。
现代文：偏偏为祭祀制定历书，不为屠工、狱吏规定吉凶日，这是世间习俗用意不完备充实的地方。
English: It is a place where the world's customs are not fully prepared, especially when it comes to creating a calendar for religious services, and when it comes to determining auspicious and inauspicious dates for butchers and prison guards.

古文：祭非其鬼，又信非其讳，持二非往求一福，不能得也。
现代文：祭祀不该祭祀的根本不存在的鬼，又迷信不该相信的那些忌讳，抱着两种错误去祈求一种福佑，是不能获得的。
English: It is not possible to worship a non-existent ghost that should not be worshipped, nor to believe in superstitious taboos that should not be believed, and to pray for a blessing with two kinds of mistakes.

古文：《沐书》曰： 子日沐，令人爱之。卯日沐，令人白头。 
现代文：沐书上说： 子日洗头，让人喜爱；卯日洗头，会使人的头发变白。 
English: According to the book, washing your hair on the second day of the lunar month will make people love you; washing your hair on the third day of the lunar month will turn your hair white.

古文：夫人之所爱憎，在容貌之好丑；头发白黑，在年岁之稚老。
现代文：人的喜爱与不喜爱。在于容貌的美丑；头发的白与黑，在于年龄的幼老。
English: People's likes and dislikes lie in the beauty and ugliness of their appearance; the whiteness and blackness of their hair lies in their age.

古文：使丑如嫫母，以子日沐，能得爱乎？
现代文：如果貌丑得像嫫母一样，即使在子日洗头，能得到别人的喜爱吗？
English: If you are as ugly as a mother hen, even if you wash your hair on the day of childbirth, will you be loved by others?

古文：使十五女子以卯日沐，能白发乎？
现代文：让十五岁的女孩子在卯日洗头，能使她的头发变白吗？
English: Will letting a 15-year-old girl wash her hair on the Sabbath turn her hair white?

古文：且沐者，去首垢也。洗去足垢，盥去手垢，浴去身垢，皆去一形之垢，其实等也。
现代文：况且 沐 是为了洗去头上的脏东西。 洗 是除掉足上的脏东西， 盥 是除掉手上的脏东西， 浴 是除掉身上的脏东西，都是洗去同一个身体上的脏东西，它们是同一回事。
English: Moreover, 沐 is to wash away the dirty things on the head, 洗 is to wash away the dirty things on the feet,  is to wash away the dirty things on the hands, 浴 is to wash away the dirty things on the body, all are to wash away the dirty things on the same body, they are the same thing.

古文：洗、盥、浴不择日，而沐独有日。
现代文：洗足、洗手、洗身不选择日子，而唯独洗头要有禁忌的日子。
English: Wash your feet, wash your hands, wash your body, do not choose the day, but only wash your hair to have a taboo day.

古文：如以首为最尊，则浴亦治面，面亦首也。如以发为最尊，则栉亦宜择日。
现代文：如果因为头最尊贵而认为洗头要选择日子，那么洗澡时也要洗脸，脸也是头的一部分，也应该选择日子了。如果认为头发最尊贵，那么梳头也应该选择日子了。
English: If you think that you should choose the day to wash your hair because your head is the most precious, then you should also wash your face when you take a bath. Your face is also a part of your head, so you should also choose the day. If you think that your hair is the most precious, then you should also choose the day to comb your hair.

古文：栉用木，沐用水，水与木俱五行也。
现代文：梳头用木，洗头用水，水与木，都是五行之物。
English: Combing hair with wood, washing hair with water, water and wood, are all five elements.

古文：用木不避忌，用水独择日。
现代文：用木不避忌日子，用水唯独要选择日子。
English: There is no reason to avoid using wood, but there is a reason to use water.

古文：如以水尊於木，则诸用水者宜皆择日。
现代文：如果认为水比木尊贵，那么所有用水的事情应当都要选择日子。
English: If water is considered more precious than wood, then everything to do with water should be chosen by the sun.

古文：且水不若火尊，如必以尊卑，则用火者宜皆择日。
现代文：而且水不如火尊贵，如果一定要根据尊卑来定，那么用火的事情应当都要选择日子。
English: Moreover, water is not as honorable as fire. If it must be determined according to superiority and inferiority, then the use of fire should be done on a daily basis.

古文：且使子沐，人爱之；卯沐，其首白者，谁也？
现代文：况且使得在子日洗头让人喜爱他，卯日洗头他的头发变白的是谁呢？
English: Moreover, washing his hair on the day of the son makes people love him. Who is it that washes his hair on the day of the son and turns his hair white?

古文：夫子之性，水也；卯，木也。
现代文：子的本性，属水；卯的本性，属木。
English: The nature of the son belongs to water; the nature of the son belongs to wood.

古文：水不可爱，木色不白。
现代文：水并不可爱，木的颜色也不是白的。
English: The water is not lovely, nor is the wood white.

古文：子之禽鼠，卯之兽兔也。
现代文：代表子的动物是鼠，代表卯的动物是兔。
English: The representative animal is the rat, and the representative animal is the rabbit.

古文：鼠不可爱，兔毛不白。
现代文：鼠并不可爱，兔毛的颜色也不是白的。
English: Mice are not cute, and rabbit fur is not white.

古文：以子日沐，谁使可爱？
现代文：在子日洗头，谁让他变得可爱呢？
English: Who will make him cute by washing his hair on the day of the baby?

古文：卯日沐，谁使凝白者？
现代文：在卯日洗头，谁让他的头发变成白的呢？
English: Who washes his hair on the sabbath and has his hair turn white?

古文：夫如是，沐之日无吉凶，为沐立日历者，不可用也。
现代文：照此说来，洗头的日子并没有什么吉凶的区别，为洗头规定日历的办法，不可以采用。
English: According to this, there is no auspicious or inauspicious difference between the days of shampooing. The method of setting a calendar for shampooing cannot be used.

古文：裁衣有书，书有吉凶。
现代文：裁剪衣服也有选择日子的书，书上也规定了吉凶的日子。
English: There is also a book for choosing the day for cutting clothes. The book also stipulates the days of good luck and bad luck.

古文：凶日制衣则有祸，吉日则有福。
现代文：凶日缝制衣服就有灾祸，吉日缝制衣服就会有福。
English: Sewing clothes on an unlucky day will bring misfortune, and sewing clothes on a lucky day will bring good luck.

古文：夫衣与食俱辅人体，食辅其内，衣卫其外。
现代文：衣服和饮食都是用来辅助人体的，饮食辅食体内，衣服防护体外。
English: Clothing and diet are both used to assist the human body, diet to supplement the body, clothing to protect the body.

古文：饮食不择日，制衣避忌日，岂以衣为於其身重哉？
现代文：饮食不择日子，缝制衣服却要避开忌日，难道认为衣服对于人的身体更为重要吗？
English: Eating and drinking does not depend on the day, but sewing clothes should avoid the day of death. Do you think that clothes are more important for the human body?

古文：人道所重，莫如食急，故八政一曰食，二曰货。
现代文：人生最重要的事，没有比饮食更重要的了，所以八种政务的第一件是饮食，第二件是财货。
English: The most important thing in life, there is nothing more important than diet, so the first of the eight kinds of government affairs is diet, and the second is wealth.

古文：衣服，货也。
现代文：衣服，属于财货。
English: Clothes, belong to goods.

古文：如以加之於形为尊重，在身之物，莫大於冠。
现代文：如果认为穿戴在身上的就尊贵重要，在人身上的东西，没有比帽子更尊贵的了。
English: If you think that what you wear is precious and important, there is nothing more precious than a hat.

古文：造冠无禁，裁衣有忌，是於尊者略，卑者详也。
现代文：制帽子没有禁忌，裁剪衣服有忌讳，这是对尊贵的反而轻视，对低贱的反而重视了。
English: There is no taboo on making hats, but there is a taboo on tailoring clothes. This shows contempt for the noble, but attention to the lowly.

古文：且夫沐去头垢，冠为首饰；浴除身垢，衣卫体寒。
现代文：洗头是洗去头上的污垢，帽子是头上的装饰品；洗澡是洗去身上的垢泥，衣服是防护身体受寒。
English: Washing the hair is to wash away the dirt on the head, the hat is an ornament on the head; the bath is to wash away the dirt on the body, and the clothes are to protect the body from the cold.

古文：沐有忌，冠无讳；浴无吉凶，衣有利害。
现代文：洗头有忌讳，制帽子却没有忌讳；洗澡没有吉凶的日子，缝制衣服却有或好或坏的时候。
English: There is a taboo against washing hair, but there is no taboo against making hats; there are no lucky or unlucky days for taking a bath, but there are good and bad times for sewing clothes.

古文：俱为一体，共为一身，或善或恶，所讳不均，欲人浅知，不能实也。
现代文：都是一个身体，全在一个人身上，有的忌讳有的不忌讳，所忌讳的太不均匀，俗人的智识浅薄，是不能加以判断的。
English: It is all one body, all in one person, some taboo and some not taboo, the taboo is too uneven, the common man's knowledge is shallow, it cannot be judged.

古文：且衣服不如车马。
现代文：而且衣服也不如车马重要。
English: And clothes are not as important as horses and carriages.

古文：九锡之礼，一曰车马，二曰衣服。
现代文：九锡之礼第一件是车马，第二件才是衣服。
English: The first item of the Jiuxi gift is a horse and carriage, and the second item is clothing.

古文：作车不求良辰，裁衣独求吉日，俗人所重，失轻重之实也。
现代文：造车不要求选择吉利日子，裁剪衣服唯独要选择吉日，俗人所看重的，完全违背了轻与重的实情。
English: Building a car does not require choosing an auspicious day. Cutting clothes only requires choosing an auspicious day. What is valued by the laity completely contradicts the reality of lightness and heaviness.

古文：工伎之书，起宅盖屋必择日。
现代文：工伎之书，规定了起宅盖屋必须选择日子。
English: According to the Book of the Craftsman, the builder must choose the day.

古文：夫屋覆人形，宅居人体，何害於岁月而必择之？
现代文：房屋遮盖人的形体，住宅居住人的身体，对于岁神月神有什么损害而一定要选择日子呢？
English: What harm does it do to the god of the year and the god of the month for the house to cover the human form and the body of the person who lives in the house, so that he must choose the day?

古文：如以障蔽人身者神恶之，则夫装车、治船、着盖、施帽，亦当择日。
现代文：如果由于宅屋遮盖人的身体而鬼神厌恶它，那么人们装配车子、造船、打伞、戴帽也应当选择日子了。
English: If ghosts and gods detest a house because it covers a person's body, then people should also choose a day for assembling cars, building boats, playing with umbrellas, and wearing hats.

古文：如以动地穿土神恶之，则夫凿沟耕园亦宜择日。
现代文：如果因为动地破土而使鬼神厌恶，那么人们开沟耕园也应当选择日子了。
English: If ghosts and gods are loathed because of the earth-moving earth-breaking, then people should also choose the day to dig a ditch and cultivate a garden.

古文：夫动土扰地神，地神能原人无有恶意，但欲居身自安，则神之圣心，必不忿怒。
现代文：触动土地惊扰了土地神，土地神能弄清人并没有恶意，只不过想有居息安身的地方，那么鬼神的善心就一定不会忿怒。
English: Touching the ground disturbs the land god. If the land god can find out that the person has no malicious intent, but only wants to have a place to live and settle down, then the benevolence of the ghost god will certainly not be angry.

古文：不忿怒，虽不择日，犹无祸也。
现代文：鬼神不忿怒，即使不选择起宅盖屋的日子，仍然是没有祸患的。
English: Ghosts and gods are not angry, even if they do not choose the day to build a house, there is still no disaster.

古文：如土地之神不能原人之意，苟恶人动扰之，则虽择日，何益哉？
现代文：如果土地神不能弄清人的本意，果真厌恶人触动土地惊扰了它，那么即使是选择了日子又有什么好处呢？
English: If the land god cannot figure out the original intention of man, and if it is true that he detests man touching the land and disturbing it, then what is the benefit of even choosing the day?

古文：王法禁杀伤人，杀伤人皆伏其罪，虽择日犯法，终不免罪；如不禁也，虽妄杀伤，终不入法。
现代文：王法禁止杀人伤人，杀人伤人的人都要按照罪行受到应有的制裁，即使选择日子犯法，终归不能免去他的罪行。假如王法不禁止杀人伤人，即使胡乱杀人伤人，最终也不会受到法律制裁。
English: The king's law forbids killing and injuring people, and those who kill and injure people must be punished according to their crimes. Even if they choose a day to break the law, they will not be able to get rid of their crimes. If the king's law does not prohibit killing and injuring people, even if they kill and injure people randomly, they will not be subject to legal sanctions in the end.

古文：县官之法，犹鬼神之制也；穿凿之过，犹杀伤之罪也。
现代文：天子的法律，如同鬼神的法律；破土开沟的过错，如同犯了杀伤罪一样。
English: The law of the Son of God is like the law of ghosts and gods; the fault of digging a ditch is like committing the crime of killing and maiming.

古文：人杀伤，不在择日，缮治室宅何，故有忌？
现代文：人杀伤了人犯不犯法不在选择日子；修建房屋，为什么就有忌讳呢？
English: People do not choose the day when they kill or commit a crime; why is there a taboo against building a house?

古文：又学书讳丙日，云： 仓颉以丙日死也。 
现代文：此外学习写字忌讳丙日，说是因为仓颉是在丙日死的。
English: In addition, it is taboo to learn to write on the C day, saying that it is because Cang Yao died on the C day.

古文：礼不以子卯举乐，殷、夏以子卯日亡也。
现代文：周礼规定不在子日、卯日奏乐，因为殷纣、夏桀是在子、卯日死的。
English: According to the rules of the weekly ritual, music should not be performed on the third day of the month, because Yin Xi and Xia Xi died on the third day of the month.

古文：如以丙日书，子卯日举乐，未必有祸，重先王之亡日，凄怆感动，不忍以举事也。
现代文：如果在丙日写字，在子、卯日奏乐，不一定会有祸，是为了尊重先王的亡日，心情悲哀有所感动，不忍心奏乐办事。
English: If you write on the C day and play music on the Zi and U days, there will not necessarily be a disaster. It is to respect the day of the death of the former king. The mood is sad and moved, and I can't bear to play music.

古文：忌日之法，盖丙与子卯之类也，殆有所讳，未必有凶祸也。
现代文：忌日的规定，就是丙日与子日、卯日这一类，可能有什么忌讳，不一定有凶祸。
English: The provisions of the day of death, that is, C-day and Zi-day, U-day and the like, may have some taboos, but do not necessarily have evil.

古文：堪舆历，历上诸神非一，圣人不言，诸子不传，殆无其实。
现代文：有一种堪舆历，历书上的各种鬼神不止一种，圣人不讲它，诸子不传它，大概是没有那种事实。
English: There is a kind of Chinese calendar, and there are more than one kind of ghosts and gods in the calendar book. If the sages do not talk about it, and the sons do not pass it on, there is probably no such fact.

古文：天道难知，假令有之，诸神用事之日也，忌之何福？
现代文：天道很难了解，假设有各种鬼神，鬼神主宰的日子，忌讳它有什么福？
English: The way of heaven is difficult to understand. Suppose there are all kinds of ghosts and gods, and the day is ruled by ghosts and gods. What is the blessing of shunning it?

古文：不讳何祸？
现代文：不忌讳它有什么祸呢？
English: What harm is there in not shunning it?

古文：王者以甲子之日举事，民亦用之，王者闻之，不刑法也。
现代文：君王在甲子日办事情，老百姓也在这一天办事，君王知道了这件事，也不会用法律惩治百姓。
English: Monarchs do things on the first day of the year, and the common people also do things on this day. Monarchs know this, and they will not punish the people with the law.

古文：夫王者不怒民不与己相避，天神何为独当责之？
现代文：既然君王不责怪老百姓不回避自己办事的日子，那么鬼神为什么偏要责备老百姓呢？
English: Since the monarch does not blame the common people and does not avoid doing his own business, why should the ghosts and gods blame the common people?

古文：王法举事，以人事之可否，不问日之吉凶。
现代文：按照王法办事要看对人是否方便，不必过问日子的吉凶。
English: To act according to the king's law depends on whether it is convenient for people, and there is no need to ask about the fortunes of life.

古文：孔子曰： 卜其宅兆而安厝之。 
现代文：孔子说： 占卜他的墓穴墓地而安葬他 。
English: Confucius said, "Divine his grave and bury him."

古文：《春秋》祭祀，不言卜日。
现代文：《春秋》上记载祭祀不讲占卜日子。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," it is recorded that there is no divination on the day of the ritual.

古文：《礼》曰： 内事以柔日，外事以刚日。 
现代文：《礼记》说： 内事在柔日办理，外事在刚日处理。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: Internal affairs should be handled on the next day, and external affairs should be handled on the first day.

古文：刚柔以慎内外，不论吉凶以为祸福。
现代文：区别刚日和柔日，是为了慎重地对待内事和外事，并不是认为刚日、柔日本身有吉凶，会造成什么祸福。
English: The difference between the first day of the month and the second day of the month is to treat domestic and foreign affairs prudently, not to think that the first day of the month and the second day of the month are lucky or unlucky and will cause any misfortune or good fortune.

