古文：韩亿韩绛韩维韩缜韩亿，字宗魏，其先真定灵寿人，徙开封之雍丘。举进士，为大理评事、知永城县，有治声。
现代文：韩亿字宗魏，先祖是真定灵寿人，迁移到开封府的雍丘。推举为进士，为大理评事、知永城县，有治理的才能。
English: Han Yizhe Zong Wei, whose ancestors were the Jin Ding Ling Shou people, migrated to Yongqiu in Kaifeng. He was elected as a Jin scholar, a commentator for Dali and Chiyongcheng County, and had the ability to govern.

古文：他邑讼不决者，郡守皇甫选辄属亿治之。
现代文：其他州邑诉讼不能决断的案件，郡守皇甫选就让韩亿来处理。
English: For other cases that cannot be decided by the lawsuits of prefectures and townships, the county governor, Emperor Fucheng, will let Han Rong handle the case.

古文：通判陈州，会河决，治堤费万计，亿不赋民而营筑之。
现代文：通判陈州，正好河流泛滥，修筑堤防花费数万，韩亿没有向老百姓征收赋税来进行修筑。
English: According to Chenzhou, just as the river floods, it costs tens of thousands to build a dike, and Han Yi did not collect taxes from the people to carry out the construction.

古文：真宗尝欲召试，而与王旦有亲嫌，特召见，改一官知洋州。
现代文：真宗曾想召见考试，却与王旦有亲之嫌，特地召见他，改任职官知洋州。
English: Shinsong once wanted to be summoned to an examination, but he did not feel close to Wang Dan. He was summoned specifically to see him, and was reassigned to the post of official of Zhizhou.

古文：州豪李甲，兄死迫嫂使嫁，因诬其子为他姓，以专其赀。
现代文：州中豪强李甲，兄长死后强迫嫂子改嫁，于是诬陷她的儿子是他姓，以便专门占有兄长的财产。
English: Li Jia, a powerful man in the state, forced his sister-in-law to remarry after the death of his brother, so he falsely accused her son of being his surname in order to exclusively occupy his brother's property.

古文：嫂诉于官，甲辄赂吏掠服之，积十余年，诉不已。
现代文：嫂子向官府控告，李甲就贿赂官吏进行拷打让她屈服，前后十余年，诉讼不断。
English: The sister-in-law complained to the government that Li Jia had bribed officials to torture her into submission, and the litigation continued for more than ten years.

古文：亿视旧牍未尝引乳医为证，召甲出乳医示之，甲亡以为辞，冤遂辨。
现代文：韩亿查看以往的案书没有引用乳医作为证明，召见李甲拿出出生时的医书给他看，李甲无辞以答，冤案于是被辨清。
English: Han Yi checked the previous case book and did not cite the milk doctor as proof, summoned Li Jia to take out the medical book at the time of birth to show him, Li Jia had no choice but to answer, and the grievance was identified.

古文：累迁尚书屯田员外郎、知相州。
现代文：多次升任尚书屯田员外郎、知相州。
English: He was promoted several times to Shoshu Tondenkikan Gairo and Chisoshu.

古文：河北旱，转运使不以实闻，亿独言岁饥，愿贷民租。
现代文：河北发生干旱，转运使不将实情上告，韩亿独自上言说发生灾荒，希望借贷给老百姓租米。
English: There was a drought in Hebei, the transshipment agent did not report the truth, and Han Yi alone reported that there was a disaster, hoping to lend rice to the people.

古文：有诬其子纲请求受金者，亿请自置狱按之，事虽辨，犹降通判大名府。
现代文：有人诬陷韩亿的儿子韩纲接受贿赂，韩亿请求自己办理这件官司，事情虽然弄清楚了，还是被降职任大名府通判。
English: Someone framed Han's son, Han Gang, for accepting bribes. Han requested to handle the lawsuit himself. Although the matter was cleared up, he was demoted to the post of daimyofu magistrate.

古文：寻为殿中侍御史，迁侍御史，安抚淮、浙，除开封府判官，出为河北转运使。
现代文：不久任殿中侍御史，升为侍御史，安抚淮、浙，升为开封府判官，任河北转运使。
English: He was soon appointed to the position of palace attendant-historian, promoted to the position of attendant-historian, pacified Huai and Zhe, was promoted to judge of Kaifeng, and was appointed as envoy to Hebei Province.

古文：仁宗初，进直史馆、知青州，以司封员外郎兼侍御史知杂事，判大理寺丞。
现代文：仁宗即位初年，韩亿任直史馆、知青州，以司封员外郎兼侍御史知杂事，判大理寺丞。
English: In the first year of the enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, Han Yan was appointed to the direct history museum, Zhicheng and Qingzhou, and was appointed as the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary.

古文：吴植知临江军，使人纳金于宰相王钦若，因牙吏至京师，审之，语颇泄，钦若知不可掩，执吏以闻。
现代文：吴植知临江军，派人向宰相王钦若敬献金子，由于小吏来到京师，审问，事情败露，王钦若知道无法掩盖，捉拿小吏。
English: Wu Zetian, commander of the Linjiang Army, sent someone to offer gold to the prime minister, Wang Qin Ruo Jing, but because the minor officials came to Beijing to interrogate, the matter was revealed. If Wang Qin knew that it could not be covered up, he would arrest the minor officials.

古文：诏付台治，而植自言未尝纳金，反诬吏误以问所亲语达钦若。
现代文：诏令交付台司处理，而吴植自己说并未交纳金子，反而诬陷小吏误将自己要对亲戚朋友的问候带给了王钦若。
English: The edict was handed over to the stage manager for processing, and Wu Zhi himself said that he did not pay the gold, but instead framed the minor officials for mistakenly bringing his greetings to relatives and friends to Wang Qinruo.

古文：亿穷治之，盖植以病惧废，金未达而事已露也。
现代文：韩亿穷尽一切加以审理，原来吴植得病害怕被免职，金子未送而事情已经败露了。
English: Han Er exhausted all means to have the case tried. It turned out that Wu Zhi was afraid of being removed from office due to illness, and the matter had already been revealed without the gold being sent.

古文：植乃除名。
现代文：吴植于是被除名。
English: Wu Zhiyu was removed from the list.

古文：并按钦若，诏释不问。
现代文：并按问王钦若，诏令不过问此事。
English: And according to the imperial edict, Wang Qin would not be asked about the matter if asked.

古文：三司更茶法，岁课不登，亿承诏劾之，由丞相而下皆坐失当之罚，其不挠如此。
现代文：三司变更茶法，每年考核结果不加登记，韩亿秉承诏令进行弹劾，从丞相以下都由于失当而受处罚，韩亿就是如此不屈服。
English: The Third Division changed the tea method, the results of the annual assessment were not registered, Han Rong adhered to the imperial edict to impeach, and everyone from the prime minister down was punished for misconduct. Han Rong is so unbending.

古文：自薛奎后，亿独掌台务者逾年。
现代文：从薛奎以后，韩亿单独执掌台务超过一年。
English: Since Xue Kui, Han Yi has been solely in charge of Taiwan affairs for more than a year.

古文：除龙图阁待制，奉使契丹。
现代文：授职龙图阁待制，奉命出使契丹。
English: Longtuge, who was waiting to be awarded the post, was ordered to send Khitan.

古文：时副使者，章献外姻也，妄传皇太后旨于契丹，谕以南北欢好传示子孙之意，亿初不知也。
现代文：这时的副使，是章献太后的姻亲，向契丹妄自传达皇太后旨意，告诉契丹南北欢好并且子孙万代相传的意图，韩亿起初不知道。
English: At that time, the deputy envoy was a relative by marriage of Empress Dowager Zhang Xian, and he told Khitan the will of Empress Dowager Zhang Xian, and told Khitan the intention of pleasing the South and the North and passing it on to the descendants for generations. At first, Han Yi did not know.

古文：契丹主问亿曰： 皇太后即有旨，大使何独不言？ 亿对曰： 本朝每遣使，皇太后必以此戒之，非欲达于北朝也。 契丹主大喜，曰： 此两朝生灵之福也。 人谓副使既失辞，而亿更以为恩意，甚推美之。
现代文：契丹主问韩亿说 ：皇太后已经有旨，大使为何不言说？ 韩亿对答说： 本朝每次派遣使者，皇太后一定以此来告诫使者，并非想依靠北朝。 契丹主大喜，说： 这是两朝老百姓的福气啊。 人们说副使已经失辞，而韩亿却因势利导，将失言变成了恩惠，十分推许赞美他。
English: The Khitan lord asked Han Yi: "The empress dowager already has a mission, why doesn't the ambassador say it?" Han Yi replied: "Every time this court sends an envoy, the empress dowager must use it to admonish the envoy, not to rely on the North Korean court." The Khitan lord was overjoyed and said: "This is a blessing for the people of the two courts. People say that the vice-envoy has broken his word, but Han Yi, because of snobbery, has turned the broken word into a favor, and highly recommends and praises him.

古文：知亳州，召知审刑院，再迁兵部郎中、同判吏部流内铨，以右谏议大夫、枢密直学士知益州。
现代文：任亳州知州，召知审刑院，再升任兵部郎中、同判吏部流内铨，以右谏议大夫、枢密直学士知益州。
English: He was appointed to Chishu, Shizuoka Prefecture, and Shizuoka Sentencing and Punishment Institute, and then he was promoted to Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：故事，益州岁出官粟六万石，辰粜贫民。
现代文：按以往惯例，益州每年拿出官粟六万石，赈济贫民。
English: According to past practice, Yizhou has provided 60,000 koku of official millet every year to help the poor.

古文：是岁大旱，亿倍数出粟，先期予民，民坐是不饥。
现代文：这年发生大旱灾，韩亿拿出数倍的粮食，先发给老百姓，老百姓因此不挨饿。
English: This year, there was a major drought, and Han Ye took out several times more grain and distributed it to the people in advance. As a result, the people did not go hungry.

古文：又疏九升江口，下溉民田数千顷。
现代文：又疏通九升江口，灌溉民田数千顷。
English: It also dredged the mouth of the Jiusheng River and irrigated thousands of hectares of farmland.

古文：维、茂州地接羌夷，蕃部岁至永康官场鬻马，亿虑其觇两川，奏徙场黎州境上。
现代文：维州、茂州与羌夷相邻，蕃部每年到永康官场卖马，韩亿考虑到蕃部趁机侦察两川情况，上奏将卖马场迁到黎州境上。
English: Wuzhou and Maozhou are adjacent to Qianyi, and Zoubu goes to Yongkang every year to sell horses at the official market. Taking into account that Zoubu took the opportunity to investigate the situation in the two rivers, Han Yi moved the horse market to the territory of Lizhou.

古文：拜御史中丞，请如唐制，置御史里行。
现代文：授职御史中丞，请求像唐朝的官制一样，设置御史里行。
English: He was given the post of goshi chujo and requested that the goshi ri line be set up, just like the official system of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：景祐二年，以尚书工部侍郎同知枢密院事。
现代文：景祐二年，以尚书工部侍郎的身份同知枢密院事。
English: In the second year of Keiyu era, he became a member of the Privy Council as a chamberlain of the Imperial Calligraphy Department.

古文：时承平久，武备不戒，乃请二府各列上才任将帅者数十人，稍试用之。
现代文：这时天下太平已久，不修武备，于是请求二府各自列出上等才能的人任将帅数十人，逐步试用他们。
English: At this time, the world had been at peace for a long time, and there was no need to improve military preparedness. Therefore, he asked the two governments to list dozens of high-level talents to be appointed as generals, and gradually try them out.

古文：又言武臣宜知兵，而书禁不传，请纂其要授之。
现代文：又说武臣应该懂得军事，但书被禁止没有流传，请纂集要领进行传授。
English: He also said that warriors should understand military affairs, but the book was banned and has not been circulated. Please compile a collection of essentials for teaching.

古文：于是帝亲集《神武秘略》，以赐边臣。
现代文：这样仁宗亲自纂集《神武秘略》，来赐予守边大臣。
English: In this way, Ninsong personally compiled a collection of "Sacred Secrets" to give to the Minister of Defense.

古文：唃厮啰与赵元昊相攻，来献捷。
现代文：口角厮口罗与赵元昊互相对攻，派人传来捷报。
English: Zhaokou Luo and Zhao Yuanhao attacked each other at the corner of the mouth, and sent people to report the success.

古文：朝廷议加唃厮啰节制。
现代文：朝廷议论加封口角厮口罗节制。
English: The imperial court's deliberation added the angle of sealing the mouth, and the mouth was restrained.

古文：亿曰： 彼皆蕃臣也，今不能谕令解仇，乃因而加赏，非所以绥御四方也。 议遂寝。
现代文：韩亿说 ：他们都是蕃臣，如今不能告谕让他们解除仇恨，却因此而加赏，不是安绥统御天下的办法。 
English: Han said, "They are all vassals. Now, we can't tell them to get rid of their hatred, but we can reward them for it. This is not the way to rule the world peacefully."

古文：元昊岁遣人至京师，出入民间无他禁，亿请下诏为除馆舍礼之，官主贸易，外虽若烦扰，实羁防之。
现代文：加封之议就停止了。赵元昊每年派遣人到京师，出入民间没有任何禁令，韩亿请求下诏替他建馆舍来礼待他，官府主管贸易，表面好像很烦扰，实际上是约束提防他。
English: Zhao Yuanhao sent people to Beijing every year, there was no ban on the entry and exit of the people, Han Yi requested to build a museum for him to treat him politely, and the government department in charge of trade seemed to be very annoying on the surface, but in fact it was a restraint to guard against him.

古文：知开封府范仲淹献《百官图》，指宰相吕夷简差除不平，而阴荐亿可用。
现代文：知开封府范仲淹敬献《百官图》，指责宰相吕夷简等级提拔不平均，但韩亿却被暗中推荐可以任用。
English: Fan Zhongyun, head of the Imperial Household Agency, presented the "one hundred officials map" to the emperor, accusing Prime Minister Lü Yijian of uneven promotion, but Han Yi was secretly recommended for appointment.

古文：仲淹既贬，帝以谕亿。
现代文：范仲淹被贬官后，仁宗将《百官图》之事告诉韩亿。
English: After Fan Zhongyun was demoted, Rinzong told Han Yi the story of "The Map of a Hundred Officials."

古文：亿曰： 仲淹举臣以公，臣之愚陛下所知；举臣以私，则臣委质以来，未尝交托于人。 遂除户部、参知政事。
现代文：韩亿说 ：范仲淹以公心推举臣下，臣下的无能陛下知道；以私心推举臣下，则臣下委质以来，从没有交付托予别人。 于是升为户部、参知政事。
English: Han Yuan said: Fan Zhongtang chose his vassals with sincerity, and his majesty knew the incompetence of his vassals; he chose his vassals with selfishness, and he never entrusted his vassals to others since he was appointed.

古文：会忻州地大震，谏官韩琦言宰相王随、陈尧佐非辅弼才，又言亿子综为群牧判官，不当自请以兄纲代之。遂与宰相皆罢，知应天府，寻加资政殿学士、知成德军。
现代文：正好忻州地方发生大地震，谏官韩琦上书说宰相王随、陈尧佐不是辅佐皇上的人才，又说韩亿的儿子韩综为群牧判官，不应当自己请求以兄长韩纲代替他，于是与宰相都被罢官，知应天府，不久兼任资政殿学士、知成德军。
English: Just as a major earthquake occurred in Bozhou, the eunuch Han Xuan wrote to the emperor saying that the prime minister Wang Sui and Chen Xun Zuo were not the talents to assist the emperor. He also said that Han Han's son Han Zomei was the judge of the herd, and he should not ask his brother Han Gang to replace him. Therefore, both he and the prime minister were dismissed from their posts. He was appointed to Tianfu, and soon he was also appointed as the scholar of the palace of the emperor and the German army.

古文：改澶州，复知亳州，官至尚书左丞，以太子少傅致仕。
现代文：改任澶州，又知亳州，官至尚书左丞，以太子少傅致仕。
English: He was transferred to Bozhou, also known as Bozhou, and was promoted to the rank of Shang Shuzhanzhong, and was promoted to the rank of Tai Zi Shao Fu.

古文：卒，赠太子太保，谥忠宪。
现代文：死后，赠太子太保，谥号忠宪。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo and the posthumous name of Zhongxian.

古文：亿性方重，治家严饬，虽燕居，未尝有惰容。
现代文：韩亿性情稳重正直，治家严谨，即使闲居，也不曾有懒惰之色。
English: Han Yeon's temperament is steady and upright, and he is a strict family man. Even when he was idle, he was never lazy.

古文：见亲旧之孤贫者，常给其昏葬。
现代文：见到亲戚故旧有贫穷孤苦伶仃的人，经常接济他们结婚和丧葬的费用。
English: When I see relatives who used to be poor and lonely, I often help them pay for their weddings and funerals.

古文：臣考寻世次，帝八子，长则和帝，而质、安以下诸帝皆其系胄，请修胎养之令。 且曰： 人君务蕃毓其民，则天亦昌衍其子孙矣。 以尚书兵部员外郎判三司盐铁勾院，卒。
现代文：每见到天下各路有收集拾取官吏的小过失的人，就满脸不高兴，说： 天下太平，圣主之心，即使是昆虫草木，都想使他们各得所处。如今做官的人大则希望成为公卿，次等也希望成为侍从、职司一千石，其下等也希望成为京朝、幕职，为什么要在盛世禁锢他们呢？ 
English: Every time I see people from all over the world collecting and picking up the minor faults of officials, their faces are full of displeasure, saying: The world is peaceful, the heart of the Lord, even insects and plants, all want to put them in their place. Nowadays, officials want to become nobles, second-class officials want to become attendants and officials of a thousand koku, and their subordinates also want to become the Beijing Dynasty and the Shogunate. Why should they be imprisoned in the golden age?

古文：综子宗道，历官至户部侍郎、宝文阁待制。
现代文：韩亿有八个儿子：韩纲、韩综、韩绛、韩维、韩缜、韩纬、韩缅。
English: Han Yi had eight sons: Han Gang, Han Syn, Han Ye, Han Wei, Han Ye, Han Wei, Han Wei, and Han Myong.

古文：韩绛，字子华。
现代文：韩绛字子华，开封雍丘人。
English: Han Han Zihua, a native of Kaifeng and Yongqiu.

古文：举进士甲科，通判陈州。
现代文：推举为进士甲科，任陈州通判。
English: He was elected as a member of Jinshi Jikei, and was appointed as Chen Zhou Tong Zhan.

古文：直集贤院，为开封府推官。
现代文：直集贤院，为开封府推官。
English: Jikishisen-in was the shogun of Kaifeng.

古文：有男子冷青，妄称其母顷在掖庭得幸，有娠而出生己，府以为狂，奏流汝州。
现代文：有一个男子叫冷青，妄言称说他的母亲曾在后宫得到皇帝的宠幸，怀孕后生下自己，府吏认为是狂言，上奏流放汝州。
English: There was a man named Leng Qing, who claimed that his mother had been favored by the emperor in the harem and had given birth to herself. The government officials thought it was a farce and exiled him to Ruzhou.

古文：绛言，留之在外将惑众。
现代文：韩绛说，留在京外将迷惑民众。
English: Han Zheng said that staying outside of Beijing would confuse the public.

古文：追责穷治，盖其母尝执役宫禁，嫁民冷绪，生一女，乃生青，遂论弃市。
现代文：追责穷治，大概是他母亲曾在宫禁中执役，嫁给冷绪，生下一女后，才生下冷青，于是论定将他斩首弃市。
English: He blamed poor governance, probably because his mother had served under palace ban, married Leng Xiu, had a daughter, and then gave birth to Leng Qing, so he decided to behead him and abandon the city.

古文：历户部判官。
现代文：历任户部判官。
English: Successive judges of the Household Division.

古文：入内都都知王守忠兼判内侍省，绛言： 判名太重，且国朝以来，未有兼判两省者。 诏自今勿复除。
现代文：江南发生饥荒，韩绛为体量安抚使，实行方便老百姓的措施数十条。宣州太守廖询贪污残暴不守法度，下令官吏进行治理，老百姓十分高兴。
English: There was a famine in the south of the Yangtze River, and Han Zheng, as a conciliator, implemented dozens of measures to facilitate the people. Xuanzhou Governor Liao inquired about corruption, brutality and non-compliance with the law, and ordered officials to carry out governance. The people were very happy.

古文：道士赵清贶出入宰相庞籍家，以赂败，开封杖流之，道死。
现代文：道士赵清贶出入宰相庞籍家，由于行贿事情败露，开封府将其杖打流放，在路上死亡。
English: Taoist Zhao Qingyao went in and out of Prime Minister Pang's home. Due to the revelation of bribery, the Kaifeng government exiled his cane and he died on the road.

古文：绛言籍讽府杀之，籍与尹俱谪去。
现代文：韩绛说庞籍暗示讽劝开封府而杀死赵清贶，庞籍与开封府尹都被降职离京。
English: Han Zheng said that Pang Zeki killed Zhao Qingyao by insinuating that he was trying to persuade him to open the Kaifeng government. Both Pang Zeki and Kaifeng government official Yin were demoted and left Beijing.

古文：未几复进，绛力争不得，遂解言职。
现代文：不久又进入京师，韩绛力争不能阻止，于是解除言官职务。
English: Soon after, he entered the Beijing Division, and Han Yan could not stop him, so he was relieved of his duties as speaker.

古文：明年，知制诰，乞守河阳，召判流内铨。
现代文：第二年，知制诰，乞求留守河阳，召令主管吏部流内铨。
English: In the second year, he begged to stay in Heyang, and the head of the personnel department called him.

古文：河决商胡，用李仲昌议，开六塔河而患滋甚，命绛安抚河北。
现代文：黄河在商胡决口，用李仲昌建议，开通六塔河但水患更加严重，朝廷命韩绛安抚河北。
English: At the mouth of the Yellow River in Shanghu, Li Zhongchang proposed to open the Liuta River, but the flood was more serious, and the court ordered Han Xuan to pacify Hebei.

古文：时宰主仲昌，人莫敢异。
现代文：这时宰相器重李仲昌，别人都不敢对他提出异议。
English: At this time, the Prime Minister, Li Zhongchang, stepped in, and no one dared to challenge him.

古文：绛劾其蠹国害民，罪不可贷，仲昌遂窜岭表。
现代文：韩绛弹劾李仲昌败坏国家侵害老百姓，罪行不能宽恕，李仲昌于是流放岭表。
English: Han Zheng impeached Li Zhongchang for corrupting the country and infringing on the people, a crime that cannot be forgiven. Li Zhongchang was then exiled to Lingyao.

古文：迁龙图阁直学士、知瀛州。
现代文：升为龙图阁直学士、知瀛州。
English: He was promoted to Longtu Ge Direct Bachelor, Zhisheng.

古文：欧阳修率同列言： 绛宜在朝廷，瀛非所处也。 留知谏院，纠察在京刑狱。
现代文：欧阳修以及同僚们说： 韩绛应在朝廷，瀛州不适宜他呆。 留知谏院，纠察在京师刑狱。
English: Ouyang Xiu and his colleagues said: Han Xuan should be in the imperial court, and Zhangzhou is not suitable for him to stay.

古文：为翰林学士、御史中丞。
现代文：任翰林学士、御史中丞。
English: He served as Hanlin Baccalaureate and Goshi Chujo.

古文：帝祷茅山求嗣，绛草祝辞，因劝帝汰出宫人，及限内臣养子，以重绝人之世，皆从之。
现代文：仁宗在茅山祈祷子嗣，韩绛草写祝辞，于是规劝仁宗减少宫人，以及限制内臣养子，来表示对绝人之世的重视，仁宗都听从了。
English: In Mayama, Ninsong prayed for a son and wrote a congratulatory message. He then advised Ninsong to reduce the number of courtiers and limit the number of vassals who could have children, to show the importance of the afterlife. Ninsong obeyed.

古文：掖庭刘氏通请谒为奸，绛以告帝。
现代文：宫中刘氏与请谒者通奸，韩绛将之告诉仁宗。
English: The Liu clan in the palace committed adultery with the suitor, and Han Zheng told this to Ren Zong.

古文：帝曰： 非卿言，朕无由知。 不数日，出刘氏及他不谨者。
现代文：仁宗说 ：不是你说我还不知道。 不几天，将刘氏及其他不谨慎者全部逐出宫中。
English: Rinzong said, "It's not that you say I don't know yet. In just a few days, I will expel Mr. Liu and all other imprudent people from the palace."

古文：真定守吕溱犯法，从官通章请贳之，绛曰： 法行当自贵者始，更相请援，则公道废矣。 并劾诸请者，溱遂绌。
现代文：真定太守吕溱犯法，从官上章请求赦免他，韩绛说 ：实行法律应当从地位高的人开始，从官相继求情，这样就废除了公道。 
English: Han Zheng said: "The implementation of the law should start with high-ranking people, and officials should be asked to intercede one after another. In this way, justice is abolished."

古文：富弼用张茂实掌禁兵，绛言： 人谓茂实为先帝子，岂宜用典宿卫？ 不报，阖门待罪，自言不敢复称御史中丞。
现代文：并对求情的各位官吏进行弹劾，吕溱于是被贬职。富弼任用张茂实执掌禁兵，韩绛说： 人们说张茂实为真宗的儿子，怎能用他来执掌宿卫？ 没有得到答复，关门待罪，自称不敢再称为御史中丞。
English: He also impeached the officials who pleaded for mercy, and Lv Xuan was demoted. Fuxin appointed Zhang Muxi to take charge of the banned soldiers, and Han Zheng said: People say that Zhang Muxi is the son of Zhenzong, how can he be used to take charge of the guards? He did not get a reply, closed the door and waited for the crime, claiming that he did not dare to be called the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：诏召之，及出，不秉笏穿朝堂，谏官论之，罢知蔡州。
现代文：下诏召见他，到出朝时，没拿朝笏穿过朝堂，谏官对此进行议论，于是罢官任蔡州知州。
English: He was summoned to see him under the imperial edict. When he came out of the imperial palace, he did not take the imperial edict and walk through the imperial hall. The eunuchs discussed this, and he was dismissed from his post as Cai Zhou Zhizhou.

古文：数月，以翰林侍读学士知庆州。
现代文：数月后，韩绛以翰林侍读学士知庆州。
English: A few months later, Han Wei and Han Lin attended the bachelor's degree ceremony in Qingzhou.

古文：熟羌据堡为乱，即日讨平之。
现代文：熟羌占据堡垒发动叛乱，不久就对羌人进行讨伐并平定了羌人叛乱。
English: Familiar with occupying the fortress and launching a rebellion, he soon carried out a crusade against the Yao people and quelled the Yao people's rebellion.

古文：加端明殿学士、知成都府。
现代文：兼任端明殿学士、知成都府。
English: He also held the posts of Dangmyeongjeon Baccalaureate and Zhicheng Prefecture.

古文：张咏镇蜀日，春粜米，秋粜盐，官给券以惠贫弱，历岁久，权归豪右；中人奉使至蜀，使酒吏主贸易，因附益以取悦，绛悉奏罢之。
现代文：张咏镇守蜀地的时候，秋季卖盐，官府发给奖券来对贫弱者给予优惠，时间一长，权益全部归了豪强；宦官奉命出使到蜀地，使酒吏执掌贸易，于是依附豪强来取悦他们，韩绛全部上奏请求罢免这些人。
English: When Zhangye Town was guarding Shudi, salt was sold in the autumn, and the government issued coupons to give preferential treatment to the poor and weak. As time passed, the rights and interests all went to Gaoqiang. The eunuchs were ordered to go to Shudi and make the wine merchants take charge of the trade, so they relied on Gaoqiang to please them. Han Zheng all petitioned to remove these people.

古文：召知开封府，为三司使。
现代文：召知开封府，为三司使。
English: He was summoned to Kaifeng, and became the third envoy.

古文：请以川、陕职田谷输常平仓，而随其事任道里差次给直。
现代文：请求以川、陕职田谷输常平仓，根据官吏所任事和道路的远近给予俸禄。
English: It is requested that Ikawa, Shaanxi Province and Tandani Province should be given a salary according to the duties of officials and the distance of the road.

古文：帝叹曰： 众方姑息，卿独不能徇时邪！ 即行之。
现代文：仁宗感叹说： 众人刚平息，你独不能顺从时俗！ 立即实行。
English: Rinzong sighed and said, "People have just calmed down. You alone cannot conform to the times and customs! Do it immediately."

古文：内诸司吏数干恩泽，绛辄执不可。
现代文：宫内众多官吏多次求取恩惠，韩绛却坚持不行。
English: Many officials in the imperial court repeatedly asked for favors, but Han Yan could not insist.

古文：为帝言： 身犯众怒，惧有飞语。 帝曰： 朕在藩邸日，颇闻有司以国事为人情。
现代文：对仁宗说 ：我冒犯众人，害怕有各种流言蜚语。 仁宗说： 朕在藩邸的时候，经常听说官吏以国事做人情。
English: "I am afraid of offending people and all kinds of gossip," he said to Ninsong.Ninsong said, "When I was at the residence of the clan, I often heard that government officials treated national affairs as a personal matter.

古文：卿所守固善，何惮于谗？ 
现代文：你所坚持的本来是好的，又担心谗言干什么呢？ 
English: What are you insisting is good, and why are you worried about criticism?

古文：神宗立，韩琦荐绛有公辅器，拜枢密副使。始请建审官西院，掌武臣升朝者，以息吏奸。
现代文：神宗即位，韩琦推荐说韩绛有辅佐人主的才能，授职枢密副使，开始请求设置审官西院，掌管武臣升朝之事，来防止官吏为奸。
English: When Emperor Shenzong ascended to the throne, Han Zheng recommended that Han Zheng had the ability to assist the emperor, appointed him as a vice-minister of the privy council, and began to request the establishment of the Western Auditing Office, in charge of the promotion of military officers to the imperial court, to prevent officials from committing treason.

古文：神宗尝问天下遗利，绛请尽地力。
现代文：神宗曾经询问天下剩余之利，韩绛请求尽地力。
English: Shenzong once asked for the world's remaining wealth, and Han Zheng asked for the world's remaining wealth.

古文：因言差役之弊，愿更定其法，役议自此始矣。
现代文：于是指出差役的弊病，希望重新制定法规，役议就从这时开始了。
English: He then pointed out the drawbacks of dispatch officers and hoped to re-establish regulations, and the deliberation began at that time.

古文：代陈升之同制置三司条例，王安石每奏事，必曰： 臣见安石所陈非一，皆至当可用，陛下宜省察。 安石恃以为助。
现代文：代替陈升之同制置三司条例，王安石每次上奏言事，韩绛必定会说： 臣下见王安石所陈述的与其他人不一样，都十分恰当可以采用，陛下应当反省考察。 王安石依靠他来作为援助。
English: In place of Chen Sheng's regulation of the same system and three departments, every time Wang Anshi delivered a speech, Han Zheng would certainly say: His subjects see that what Wang Anshi has stated is different from others, it is very appropriate and can be used, His Majesty should reflect and investigate. Wang Anshi relies on him for assistance.

古文：熙宁三年，参知政事。
现代文：熙宁三年，为参知政事。
English: In the third year of Xi Ning's reign, he became a member of the Council of State.

古文：夏人犯塞，绛请行边，安石亦请往。
现代文：夏人进犯边境，韩绛请求巡视边防，王安石也请求前往。
English: Xia people invaded the border, Han Yu requested to patrol the border, and Wang Anshi also requested to go.

古文：绛曰： 朝廷方赖安石，臣宜行。 乃以为陕西宣抚使。
现代文：韩绛说 ：朝廷正依赖王安石，臣下应当前行。 于是朝廷任命韩绛为陕西宣抚使。
English: Han Zheng said: The imperial court is relying on Wang Anshi, and the vassals should move forward, so the imperial court appointed Han Zheng as the Shaanxi envoy.

古文：既，又兼河东，几事不可待报者，听便宜施行，授以空名告敕，得自除吏。
现代文：以后，又兼管河东，所有事情都不等候禀报，听任随便办理，授以空名告敕，得以自行任命官吏。
English: Later, he was also in charge of Hedong. He did not wait for official reports on all matters, but was allowed to handle them as he pleased. He was given the authority to make announcements in an empty name, and was able to appoint officials on his own.

古文：十二月，即军中拜同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，开幕府于延安。
现代文：十二月，在军中拜同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，在延安设置幕府。
English: In December, while serving in the army, Baidong, a disciple of Zhongshu, received the title of Shogun, and became a scholar of the Shobunkwan University. He set up the Shogunate in Yan'an.

古文：绛素不习兵事，注措乖方，选蕃兵为七军，用知青涧城种谔策，欲取横山，令诸将听命于谔，厚赏犒蕃兵，众皆怨望；又夺骑兵马以与之，有抱马首以泣者。
现代文：韩绛向来不熟悉军事，行动失常，选用蕃兵七个军，运用青涧城知府种谔的谋略，打算夺取横山，命令各位将领听从种谔的命令，对蕃兵赏赐优厚犒劳丰富，众人都抱怨；又夺取骑兵的战马给予蕃兵，有的抱着马头哭泣。
English: Han Xuan had never been familiar with military affairs, and his actions were abnormal. He selected seven armies of horse soldiers, and planned to seize Hengshan by using the strategy of the governor of Qinghai and Shandong to breed horses. He ordered the generals to obey the orders of the breeder, and rewarded the horse soldiers with generous wages. Everyone complained. He also took the cavalry's horses and gave them to the horse soldiers, and some of them hugged the horse's head and cried.

古文：既城啰兀，又冒雪筑抚宁堡，调发骚然。
现代文：在口罗兀筑城后，又冒雪修筑抚宁堡，调度混乱。
English: After the construction of the city in Kuching, it was snowed in to build Fusing Castle, and the scheduling was chaotic.

古文：已而二城陷，趣诸道兵出援，庆卒遂作乱。
现代文：不久二座城堡被攻陷，派遣各路出兵救援，庆州士兵于是发生叛乱。
English: Soon, two castles were captured, and soldiers from all over the country were sent to rescue them. Gyeongju soldiers then rebelled.

古文：议者罪绛，罢知邓州。
现代文：议者怪罪韩绛，免为邓州知州。
English: The legislator blamed Han Zheng, but spared Deng Zhou and Zhizhou.

古文：明年，以观文殿学士徙许州，进大学士，徙大名府。
现代文：第二年，以观文殿学士调任许州，任大学士，调往大名府。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to Hezhou as a bachelor of the Academy of Confucianism and transferred to Damingfu as a university scholar.

古文：七年，复代王安石相。
现代文：熙宁七年，又代替王安石为宰相。
English: In the seventh year of Xi Ning, he also replaced Wang Anshi as prime minister.

古文：既颛处中书，事多稽留不决，且数与吕惠卿争论，乃密请帝再用安石。
现代文：虽位在中书，事情大多争辩不能决断，并多次与吕惠卿争执论辩，于是暗中上奏神宗再次起用王安石。
English: Although it was in the middle of the book, most of the disputes could not be resolved, and there were many disputes and arguments with Lü Huiqing. Therefore, Wang Anshi was secretly used again by Shangso Shenzong.

古文：安石至，颇与绛异。
现代文：王安石任宰相后，与韩绛有许多不一致的地方。
English: After Wang Anshi was appointed prime minister, there were many inconsistencies between him and Han Yu.

古文：有刘佐者，坐法免，安石欲抆拭用佐，绛不可。
现代文：有位叫刘佐的人，由于犯法被免职，王安石打算试用刘佐，韩绛不同意。
English: A person named Liu Zuo was removed from office for violating the law. Wang Anshi planned to try Liu Zuo, but Han Yu disagreed.

古文：议帝前未决，即再拜求去。
现代文：在神宗面前商议不能决断，就再次拜谢请求离职。
English: In the presence of the Shinto priest, the discussion could not be resolved, so he again asked for leave of absence.

古文：帝惊曰： 此小事，何必尔？ 对曰： 小事尚不伸，况大事乎！ 帝为逐佐。
现代文：神宗惊讶地说： 这是小事，何必这样呢？ 韩绛回答说： 小事情都不能决断，又何况大事呢？ 神宗于是驱逐刘佐。
English: Surprised, Shenzong said, "This is a small matter, why is it necessary?" Han Zheng replied, "We can't decide small matters, let alone big ones." Shenzong then expelled Liu Zuo.

古文：未几，绛亦出知许州。
现代文：不久，韩绛也离京师为许州知州。
English: Soon, Han Zheng also left Beijing to become the leader of Xuzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：元丰元年，拜建雄军节度使、知定州。
现代文：元丰元年，授职建雄军节度使、知定州。
English: In the first year of Fengyuan, he was awarded the post of Jianxiong Jun's military festival envoy to Zhidongzhou.

古文：入为西太一宫使。
现代文：进入京师为西太一宫使。
English: He entered the capital as an envoy of the Western Tai and the Imperial Palace.

古文：六年，知河南府。
现代文：元丰六年，知河南府。
English: Yuan Feng, six years old, lives in Henan Province.

古文：夏，大雨，伊、洛间民被溺者十五六。
现代文：夏季，天下大雨，伊、洛之间老百姓被水淹死的人达十分之五六。
English: In the summer, when there is heavy rain, up to five-sixths of the people between Iraq and Afghanistan are drowned.

古文：绛发廪振恤，环城筑堤，数月，水复至，民赖以免。
现代文：韩绛发放粮食赈济，围绕全城修筑堤防。数月后，又发生大水，老百姓因此而免除水患。
English: The Han government distributed grain for relief and built a dike around the entire city. A few months later, another flood occurred, and the people were thus spared from flooding.

古文：哲宗立，更镇江军节度使、开府仪同三司，封康国公，为北京留守。
现代文：哲宗即位，为镇江军节度使、开府仪同三司，封为康国公，为北京留守。
English: When Zhezong ascended the throne, he was appointed as the Zhenjiang military festival envoy, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the title of Kangguogong, and he stayed in Beijing.

古文：河决小吴，都水议傍魏城凿渠东趋金堤，役甚棘。
现代文：黄河在小吴决口，都水司建议依傍魏城开凿水渠东达金堤，劳役十分紧迫。
English: At the Xiaowu mouth of the Yellow River, the Ministry of Water Resources suggested that the canal should be dug east of Weicheng to reach the gold dike. The labor service was very urgent.

古文：绛言： 功必不成，徒耗费国力，而使魏人流徙，非计也。 三奏，讫罢之。
现代文：韩绛说 ：一定不能收到实效，白白耗费国家财力，让魏人流浪迁移，不是一种办法。 
English: Han Zheng said: It must not receive actual results, it is not a way to waste national financial resources and let Wei people wander and migrate.

古文：元祐二年，请老，以司空、检校太尉致仕。
现代文：三次上奏，请求停止这一举动。元二年，请求告老，以司空、检校太尉致仕。
English: Three times he appealed to the emperor, asking him to stop this action. In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he asked to retire, and he was appointed as the first secretary and the first lieutenant of the inspection.

古文：明年，卒，年七十七。
现代文：第二年，死，终年七十七岁。
English: He died the following year, aged 77.

古文：初，宗师在神宗朝，数赐对，常弗忍去亲侧，屡辞官不拜，世以孝与之。
现代文：赠太傅，谥号为献肃。韩绛遇事果敢，不为今后考虑。喜欢接交士大夫，多次推荐司马光可以任用，最后由于与王安石结党又得到任用，因此被清议之士轻视。
English: He was given the title of Taifu, and his posthumous name was Xian Su. Han Zheng was brave in the face of adversity, and did not consider the future. He liked to take over the post of Shidafu, and recommended Sima Guang for appointment many times. Finally, he was appointed again because of his alliance with Wang Anshi, so he was despised by the members of the council.

古文：韩维，字持国。
现代文：韩维字持国，开封雍丘人。
English: Han Wei had the title of holding the country, and was a native of Kaifeng and Yongqiu.

古文：以进士奏名礼部，方亿辅政，不肯试大廷，受荫入官。
现代文：以进士奏名礼部，这时韩亿辅佐朝政，不肯试于大廷，受恩荫做官。
English: At that time, Han Yi, who was an aide to the imperial court, did not want to try his luck in the imperial court, but was favored to become an official.

古文：父没后，闭门不仕。
现代文：父亲死后，闭门不仕。
English: After his father's death, he did not work behind closed doors.

古文：宰相荐其好古嗜学，安于静退，召试学士院，辞不就。
现代文：宰相向朝廷推荐韩维喜好学习和古礼，安心静退，奉召考试学士院，辞谢不任职。
English: The prime minister recommended to the imperial court that Han Wei like to study and ancient rituals, retire with peace of mind, be called to the Examination Academy, and resign from his post.

古文：富弼辟河东幕府，史馆修撰欧阳修荐为检讨、知太常礼院。
现代文：富弼在河东建置幕府，史馆欧阳修推荐他为检讨、知太常礼院。
English: Fuxi built a bakufu in Hedong, and Ouyang Xiu of the History Museum recommended him as a reviewer for the Chida Changli Academy.

古文：礼官议祫享东向位，维请虚室以待太祖。
现代文：礼官议论祭祀应东向位，韩维请求虚室而侍太祖。
English: The etiquette officer argued that the ceremony should be held facing east, and Han Wei requested a virtual room to attend the great ancestor.

古文：温成后立庙用乐，维以为不如礼，请一切裁去。
现代文：温成后建庙使用音乐，韩维认为不合礼仪，请求全部免去。
English: After Wencheng built the temple, he used music, which Han Wei thought was not in accordance with etiquette, and requested that all music be omitted.

古文：议陈执中谥，以为张贵妃治丧皇仪殿、追册位号，皆执中所建，宜曰荣灵。
现代文：议论陈执中的谥号，认为张贵妃死后得以在皇仪殿办理丧事、追位册封号，都是陈执中所建，应当谥为荣灵。
English: Discussing the honorary title in Chen Jie, it was believed that Zhang Guifei was able to hold a funeral in the imperial hall after her death, and the sealing of the record of enthronement was all built in Chen Jie, and should be enshrined as a glorious spirit.

古文：诏谥曰恭，维曰： 责难于君谓之恭，执中何以得此？ 议讫不行，乞罢礼院。
现代文：诏令谥号为恭，韩维说： 向君主责难叫作恭，陈执中凭借什么能享受这个称号呢？ 
English: Han Wei said, "The imperial edict gave the nickname "Kong" to the monarch. How can Chen Xizhong enjoy this title?

古文：以秘阁校理通判泾州。
现代文：议论完后没有允许，乞求免去知礼院。以秘阁校理通判泾州。
English: After the discussion, he did not have permission, and begged to be excused from going to Zhiliyuan. He was sentenced to Zhangzhou by the secret school.

古文：神宗封淮阳郡王、颍王，维皆为记室参军。
现代文：神宗被封淮阳郡王、颍王，韩维都是记室参军。
English: Shenzong was named the king of Huaiyang County, and Han Wei was enlisted in the army.

古文：王每事咨访，维悉心以对，至拜起进趋之容，皆陈其节。
现代文：淮阳郡王、颍王每次有事咨询，韩维全部对答，至于拜谢立起进退的表情，都体现了他的气节。
English: King of Huaiyang County and King of Handan County consulted Han Wei every time they had questions, and Han Wei answered all of them. As for Bai Xie's facial expression, it reflected his temperament.

古文：尝与论天下事，语及功名。维曰： 圣人功名，因事始见，不可有功名心。 王拱手称善。
现代文：曾经与神宗议论天下事，谈到功名，韩维说 ：圣人的功名，因事才可显见，不能有获取功名之心。 
English: Han Wei once had a discussion with a Shinto priest about worldly affairs, and when it came to fame and glory, Han Wei said, "The fame and glory of a saint can only be revealed through their deeds, and they cannot have the heart to gain fame and glory."

古文：闻维引疾请郡，上章留之。
现代文：神宗听说韩维有病请求到州郡，上章留在京师。
English: Shenzong heard that Han Wei was ill and requested to go to Zhoushu County, but Shangzhang stayed in Beijing Division.

古文：时禁中遣使泛至诸臣家，为王择妃。
现代文：这时朝廷派遣使者广泛到各位大臣家中，替王选妃。
English: At this time, the imperial court sent emissaries to the homes of various ministers to choose a wife for the king.

古文：维上疏曰： 王孝友聪明，动履法度，方向经学，以观成德。
现代文：韩维上疏说： 王孝顺友爱聪明，一举一动都遵守礼度，正在学习经学，来仿效以往的道德。
English: Han Wei Shang Shou said: Wang Xiaozhun loves cleverness, respects courtesy in every move, and is studying scripture to emulate the morality of the past.

古文：今卜族授室，宜历选勋望之家，谨择淑媛，考古纳采、问名之义，以礼成之，不宜苟取华色而已。 
现代文：如今卜族寻找家室，应挑选功勋卓著的名门望族，谨慎地选择善良美丽的女子，考古代纳采、问名的仪式，都按照礼仪办理，不应仅仅选择貌美的女子。 
English: Nowadays, when the Bu people are looking for a family, they should select a famous family with outstanding achievements, and carefully choose a kind and beautiful woman. The ancient Natchewan test and the naming ceremony are all handled according to etiquette, and they should not only choose a beautiful woman.

古文：左、右史阙，英宗访除授例，执政曰： 用馆阁久次及进士高第者。 帝曰： 第择人，不必专取高科。 执政以维对，遂同修起居注、侍迩英讲。
现代文：左、右史空缺，英宗询问授职的旧例，执政者说： 任用在馆阁时间长的人以及进士及第的人。 英宗说 ：仅仅选择人员，不一定专门选取考中高榜的人。 执政者认为韩维所说正确，于是任韩维同修起居注、迩英阁侍讲。
English: There were vacancies left and right in history, and Ying Zong inquired about the old practice of conferring positions, and the ruler said: Appoint people who have been in the cabinet for a long time, as well as those who have been promoted and promoted.Ying Zong said: Only select people, do not necessarily select people who are high in the middle of the exam.The ruler thought that what Han Wei said was correct, so he appointed Han Wei to study and live in the cabinet, and to be the assistant lecturer of the cabinet.

古文：帝初免丧，简默不言。
现代文：英宗刚办完丧事，沉默不语。
English: After the funeral, Yingzong was silent.

古文：维上疏曰： 迩英阁者，陛下燕闲之所也。
现代文：韩维上疏说： 迩英阁，是陛下安居的地方。
English: Han Wei Shang Zuo said: "Jinying Ge is the place where His Majesty lives in peace.

古文：侍于侧者，皆献纳论思之臣。
现代文：任侍讲的人，都是进献采纳议论思索的人。
English: Those who are appointed as assistant speakers are all people who think about and discuss ideas.

古文：陈于前者，非经则史。
现代文：在陛下面前陈述的，不是经就是史。
English: What has been presented before Your Majesty is either scripture or history.

古文：可以博咨访之义，穷仁义之道，究成败之原。
现代文：能够广泛咨询查访，穷尽仁义之理，考究成败的原因。
English: Be able to widely consult and visit, exhaust the principles of benevolence and righteousness, and study the reasons for success and failure.

古文：今礼制终毕，臣下倾耳以听玉音，陛下之言，此其时也。
现代文：如今礼制完毕，臣下倾心专听玉音，陛下的言论，在这时就是玉音。
English: Now that the formalities have been completed, the vassals listen with rapt attention to the sound of the gongs. His Majesty's speech, at this time, is the sound of the gongs.

古文：臣请执笔以俟。 进知制诰、知通进银台司。
现代文：臣下请求拿着笔等待。 进知制诰、知通进银台司。
English: Subordinates are requested to hold a pen and wait. Shintsusei, Shintsusei, Shintsusei.

古文：御史吕诲等以濮议得罪，维谏曰： 诲等审议守职，不过欲陛下尽如先王之法而止尔。
现代文：御史吕诲等由于议论濮王而获罪，韩维进谏说： 吕诲等审议尽职，不过是想要陛下完全像先王所实行的制度一样罢了。
English: Han Weizhong said: "Lyu Chun et al. did their due diligence, but they only wanted His Majesty to be completely like the system implemented by the previous king.

古文：请追还前诏，令百官详议，以尽人情；复诲等职任，以全政体。 既而责命不由门下，维又言： 罢黜御史，事关政体，而不使有司与闻，纪纲之失，无甚于此。
现代文：请求收回上次的诏令，让百官详细议论，以便尽人情；又恢复吕诲等的职务，来建全政治体制。 不久规定不让门下参与，韩维又上言说： 罢免御史，事情关系到政体，却不让有司参预议论，朝廷纲纪的破坏，没有超过这样的。
English: He requested that the previous edict be withdrawn, and that the hundred officials be allowed to discuss the matter in detail in order to serve the people; he also requested the reinstatement of the posts of Lü Qi and so on, in order to build a complete political system. Soon, it was stipulated that the subordinates would not be allowed to participate, and Han Wei also said: the dismissal of the Emperor, the matter is related to the political system, but it is not allowed to have the pre-discussion of the judges, and the destruction of the discipline of the imperial court, did not exceed this.

古文：乞解银台司。 不从，遂阖门待罪。
现代文：请求解除银台司之职。 没有听从，于是就关门等待发落。
English: He did not listen to the request to dismiss the director of the Bank of Taiwan, so he closed the door and waited for the announcement.

古文：有诏举台官二人，维言： 吕诲、范纯仁有已试之效，愿复其职。 翰林学士范镇作批答不合旨，出补郡。
现代文：诏令推举台官二人，韩维说： 吕诲、范纯仁已有试用的效果，希望恢复他们的职位。 翰林学士范镇作批答不符合圣旨，离开京师补为郡官。
English: Han Wei said: Lyu Yan and Fan Chunren have been put on probation and hope to resume their positions. Hanlin Scholar Fan Zhen's approval is not in line with the holy will, and he will leave Beijing to become a county official.

古文：维言： 镇所失只在文字，当涵容之。
现代文：韩维说： 范镇的失误之处只在文字，应当包涵容忍他。
English: Han Wei said: Fan Zhen's mistakes are only in writing, and he should be tolerated.

古文：前黜钱公辅，中外以为太重，连退二近臣，而众莫知其所谓，自此谁敢尽忠者？ 
现代文：以前钱公辅降职，朝廷内外都认为处罚太重，连续斥退二位重臣，而其他大臣们都不知道是什么原因，从此后又有谁敢尽忠心呢？ 
English: In the past, Qian Gongfu was demoted, and both inside and outside the imperial court thought that the punishment was too heavy. Two senior ministers were dismissed in succession, while other ministers did not know the reason. Since then, who dares to be loyal?

古文：颍王为皇太子，兼右庶子。
现代文：颍王为皇太子，兼右庶子。
English: Shao Wang was the crown prince, and also the second son.

古文：神宗即位，维进言： 百执事各有职位，当责任，若代之行事，最为失体。
现代文：神宗即位，韩维进言说： 各位执事都有各自的职责，应当各负其责，如果互相代替行事，是最失体的事。
English: At the enthronement of Shenzong, Han Wei said: All the deacons have their own duties, and they should each shoulder their responsibilities. If they act in place of each other, it would be the most unseemly thing.

古文：天下大事不可猝为，人君设施，自有先后。 因释滕文公问孟子居丧之礼，推后世礼文之变，以伸规讽，帝皆嘉纳。
现代文：天下大事不能仓猝办理，人君所建立的各项制度，自然有先有后。 于是向神宗解释滕文公问孟子居丧之礼，推论后世礼仪的变化，以便伸张规谏之风，神宗都认为好而加以采纳。
English: The great events of the world cannot be dealt with in haste, and the systems established by human beings naturally come first and last. Therefore, he explained to the Shenzong that Tengwen Gong asked about the funeral ceremony of Mencius, and inferred the changes in the etiquette of later generations, so as to extend the style of rules and regulations. The Shenzong all thought it was good and adopted it.

古文：除龙图阁直学士。
现代文：升为龙图阁直学士。
English: He was promoted to the direct bachelor of Longtu Pavilion.

古文：御史中丞王陶弹宰相韩琦为跋扈，罢为翰林学士。
现代文：御史中丞王陶弹劾宰相韩琦专横霸道，被免职为翰林学士。
English: Wang Tao, the Grand Historian, impeached the prime minister, Han Zheng, for his arbitrary and domineering behavior, and was removed from his post as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：维言： 中丞之言是，宰相安得无罪？
现代文：韩维说： 中丞所说如果正确，宰相又怎会无罪？
English: Han Wei said: If what Chujo said is correct, how can the prime minister be innocent?

古文：若其非是，安得止罢台职？
现代文：如果不正确，又怎能只免除台职？
English: If it is not correct, how can he only be relieved of his duties?

古文：今为学士，是迁也。 参知政事吴奎论陶事，出知青州。
现代文：如今任学士，是升职。 参知政事吴奎议论王陶之事，出为青州知州。
English: Now he is a bachelor, he is promoted. Wu Kui, the political secretary of the prefectural governor, talked about Wang Tao, and became the prefectural governor of Qingzhou.

古文：维言进退大臣，不当如是。
现代文：韩维说任用斥退大臣，不应当这样。
English: Han Wei said that it should not be like this.

古文：诏迁奎官。
现代文：诏令吴奎升官。
English: The imperial edict promoted Wu Kui to a higher position.

古文：维又言： 执政罢免，则为降黜；今复迁官，则为褒进。
现代文：韩维又说 ：宰相免职，才是降职免官；如今又升官，是褒奖进用。
English: Han Wei also said: the removal of the prime minister is a demotion and dismissal; now it is a promotion, it is a reward and promotion.

古文：二者理难并行，此与王陶罢中丞而加学士何以异？ 章上，奎还就职。
现代文：这两者按理难以一并施行，这与王陶免除中丞之职又加封学士之职有什么不同呢？ 奏章献上，吴奎回京师任职。
English: It is difficult to implement both of them at the same time. How is this different from Wang Tao being exempted from the post of junior middle officer and being awarded the post of bachelor? The report was presented, and Wu Kui returned to the post of Beijing division.

古文：维援前言求去，知汝州。
现代文：韩维援引前次所说请求离开京师，为汝州知州。
English: Han Wei quoted the previously mentioned request to leave Beijing Division and became Ruzhou Zhizhou.

古文：数月，召兼侍讲、判太常寺。
现代文：数月后，奉召兼侍讲、判太常寺。
English: A few months later, he was called to serve as a lay preacher and judge at Daijo-ji Temple.

古文：初，僖祖主已迁，及英宗祔庙，中书以为僖祖与稷、契等，不应毁其庙。
现代文：起初，僖祖庙已迁走，到英宗纎祭祖庙时，中书认为僖祖与稷、契同等，不应毁坏他们的庙宇。
English: At first, the Ancestor's Temple had already moved away, but when they arrived at the Ancestor's Temple of Ying Zong, the Chinese book believed that the Ancestor's Temple was the same as the Ancestor's Temple, and their temples should not be destroyed.

古文：维言： 太祖戡定大乱，子孙遵业，为宋太祖，无可议者。
现代文：韩维说 ：太祖平定叛乱，子孙继承其事业，叫宋太祖，没有什么可议论的。
English: Han Wei said: Grandfather put down the rebellion, his descendants inherited his cause, called Song Grandfather, there is nothing to discuss.

古文：僖祖虽为高祖，然仰迹功业，非有所因，若以所事稷、契事之，惧有未安，宜如故便。 王安石方主初议，持不行。
现代文：僖祖虽然为高祖，但考察他的功业，没有因袭，如果以对待稷、契的礼仪对待僖祖，担心有所不妥，应像过去一样。 王安石正主张毁坏僖祖庙，坚持不准。
English: Although Wang Anshi is a great ancestor, his achievements have been examined, and there is no reason to attack him. If you treat your ancestor with the etiquette of  and 契, you should be worried that something is wrong, as in the past. Wang Anshi is advocating the destruction of the ancestor's temple, and he is not allowed to persist.

古文：熙宁二年，迁翰林学士、知开封府。
现代文：熙宁二年，升为翰林学士、知开封府。
English: In the second year of Xining, he was promoted to Hanlin Baccalaureate and Chikaifeng Prefecture.

古文：明年，为御史中丞，以兄绛在枢府，力辞之。
现代文：第二年，为御史中丞，由于兄长韩绛在枢府，坚决辞谢。
English: In the second year, he was appointed to the position of goshi chujo, but because his older brother Han Min was away at the capital, he firmly declined the position.

古文：安石亦恶其言保甲事，复使为开封。
现代文：王安石也讨厌他议论保甲之事，又让他为开封知府。
English: Wang Anshi also disliked him for talking about the matter of defense, and made him the governor of Kaifeng.

古文：始分置八厢决轻刑，毂下清肃。
现代文：开始设置八厢判决轻刑，部下清整严肃。
English: He began to set up eight chambers to hand down light sentences, while his subordinates remained sober and serious.

古文：时吴充为三司使，帝曰： 维、充以文学进，及任烦剧，而皆称职，可谓得人矣。 兼侍读学士，充群牧使。
现代文：这时吴充任三司使，英宗说： 韩维、吴充以文学进用，任职繁重，但都尽职尽责，可以说任人得当。 兼侍读学士，充群牧使。
English: At this time, Wu Chun served as the Third Divisional Envoy, and Ying Zong said: Han Wei and Wu Chun used literature to advance, and the post was heavy, but they all fulfilled their duties and responsibilities, so it can be said that they were appropriate.

古文：考试制举人，孔文仲对策入等，以切直罢归。
现代文：考试制举人，孔文仲进对策被录取，但由于正直而罢职回家。
English: An examiner, Kong Wenzhongjin Countermeasure was admitted, but because of his honesty, he resigned and went home.

古文：维言： 陛下毋谓文仲为一贱士，黜之何损。
现代文：韩维说 ：陛下不要说孔文仲是一位贫贱之士，贬职有什么损失。
English: Han Wei said: Your Majesty, don't say that Kong Wenzhong is a poor man, what is the loss of demotion.

古文：臣恐贤俊解体，忠良结舌，阿谀苟合者将窥隙而进，为祸不细。 安石益恶之。
现代文：臣下担心贤才俊杰解体，忠良被陷害，阿谀苟合之徒将乘机而被任用，造成的祸害不小。 王安石更加讨厌他。
English: Wang Anshi hated him even more because his subordinates were worried that the virtuous man Junjie would be disintegrated, the loyal man would be framed, and the adulterer would be appointed.

古文：枢密使文彦博求去，帝曰： 密院事剧，当除韩维佐卿。 明日，维奏事殿中，以言不用，请郡。
现代文：枢密使文彦博请求离开京师，神宗说 ：枢密院事情繁多，应当授予韩维佐卿之职。 第二天，韩维在殿中上奏言事，说不被任用，请求补为郡官。
English: The next day, Han Wei made a speech in the hall, saying that he would not be appointed, and requested to be made a county official.

古文：帝曰： 卿东宫旧人，当留以辅政。 对曰： 使臣言得行，贤于富贵；若缘攀附旧恩以进，非臣之愿也。 遂出知襄州，改许州。
现代文：神宗说： 你是东宫旧人，应当留在京师辅佐朝政。 韩维说： 让臣下的建议得以实行，比富贵要好；如果由于攀附旧恩被任用，不是臣下的愿望。 于是离开京师知襄州，又改任许州知州。
English: Shenzong said: You are an old man of the East Palace, you should stay in Beijing as a teacher and assistant to the government. Han Wei said: It is better to let the suggestions of your subjects be implemented than to be rich; if you are appointed because of clinging to old favors, it is not the wish of your subjects. So he left Beijing as a teacher of Zhixiangzhou, and was reappointed as a teacher of Xuzhou.

古文：七年二月，召为学士承旨。
现代文：熙宁七年二月，召为学士承旨。
English: In February of the seventh year of Xi Ning, he was summoned to the bachelor's degree.

古文：入对，帝曰： 天久不雨，朕日夜焦劳，奈何？ 维曰： 陛下忧闵旱灾，损膳避殿，此乃举行故事，恐不足以应天变。
现代文：入朝言对，神宗说： 天许久不下雨，朕日夜焦急，怎么办？ 韩维说： 陛下担忧发生旱灾，减损膳食避住殿中，这是过去的老办法，恐怕不足以应付上天的变化。
English: Han Wei said: His Majesty is worried about a drought, and avoids meals in the palace. This is the old way of the past, and I am afraid it is not enough to cope with the changes in the heavens.

古文：当痛自责己，广求直言。 退，又上疏曰： 近畿内诸县，督索青苗钱甚急，往往鞭挞取足，至伐桑为薪以易钱货，旱灾之际，重罹此苦。
现代文：应当对自己痛加责备，广泛征求正直的言论。 退朝后，又上疏说： 最近京畿诸县，督责索要青苗钱十分紧迫，往往用鞭子抽打来获得，至于砍伐桑树作为柴禾来交换钱物，旱灾发生之际，又遭遇这种苦难。
English: He should severely reproach himself and widely solicit honest opinions.After retiring from the imperial court, Shang Shu said: Recently, in the counties of Gyeonggi Province, the superintendent demanded money for young seedlings very urgently, often using a whip to obtain it.As for cutting down mulberry trees as firewood to exchange for money, this kind of suffering occurred again when droughts occurred.

古文：若夫动甲兵，危士民，匮财用于荒夷之地，朝廷处之不疑，行之甚锐；至于蠲除租税，宽裕逋负，以救愁苦之民，则迟迟而不肯发。
现代文：再如出动军队，危害士兵老百姓，将钱财全部用在荒凉之地，朝廷实行坚决，行动十分迅速。至于免除租税，宽限逃亡负债期限，来拯救贫苦百姓，则迟迟不肯实行。
English: In the case of dispatching an army, endangering soldiers and ordinary people, and spending all the money and resources in a desolate land, the imperial court is resolute and acts very quickly. As for tax exemption, grace period for escaping debt, to save the poor people, it is reluctant to implement.

古文：望陛下奋自英断行之，过于养人，犹愈过于杀人也。 上感悟，即命维草诏求直言。
现代文：希望陛下发挥自己的聪明才智加以决定实行，过于养尊处优，比杀人还要厉害。 神宗深受感动并有所觉悟，就任命韩维草写诏书征求正直之言。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will use his wisdom to decide to implement it, because it is better to pamper oneself than to kill. Deeply moved and enlightened, Shenzong appointed Han Wei Cao to write an edict to solicit honest words.

古文：其略曰： 意者听纳不得于理与？
现代文：大致是说： 我想知道的是：听纳不符合事理吗？
English: He said, roughly: What I want to know is: Is it unreasonable to listen?

古文：狱讼非其情与？
现代文：案件诉讼不符合人情吗？
English: Is the lawsuit against the case inhumane?

古文：赋敛失其节与？
现代文：征敛税赋失去了节制吗？
English: Has tax collection lost its temper?

古文：忠言谠论郁于上闻，而阿谀壅蔽以成其私者众与？ 诏出，人情大悦。
现代文：忠诚正直之言被阻隔皇上不能听到，而阿谀阻塞来成就私意者众多吗？ 诏令颁布，人情十分高兴。
English: Are the words of loyalty and honesty blocked from being heard by the emperor, and are there many people who obstruct the accomplishment of their own wishes? The edict was promulgated, and people were very happy.

古文：有旨体量市易、免行利病，权罢力田、保甲，是日乃雨。
现代文：有圣旨体量市易、免行利的弊病，暂时停止方田、保甲法，这天就下雨了。
English: If there is a deficiency in the volume of the holy will, it is easy to be exempted from the practice, and the practice of rectifying the deficiency is temporarily suspended, it will rain on that day.

古文：王安石罢，会绛入相，加端明殿学士、知河阳，复知许州。
现代文：王安石被罢相后，正好韩绛入朝为相，韩维加端明殿学士、知河阳，又知许州。
English: After Wang Anshi was ousted from the position, Han Wei entered the imperial court as a consort, Han Wei Jia Duan Ming Dian Bao, Zhi He Yang, and Zhi Xuzhou.

古文：帝幸旧邸，进资政殿学士。
现代文：神宗巡幸旧邸，为资政殿学士。
English: The former residence of Shinso Junko, he is a graduate of Shiseido.

古文：曾巩当制，称其纯明亮直，帝令改命词。维知帝意，请提举嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：曾巩当制，称韩维纯洁正直，神宗命令韩维改动命词，韩维知道神宗的心意，于是请求提举嵩山崇福宫。
English: Zeng Gongdang system, saying that Han Wei was pure and honest, Shenzong ordered Han Wei to change the words of destiny. Han Wei knew the intention of Shenzong, so he requested to raise the Songshan Chongfu Palace.

古文：帝崩，赴临阙庭。
现代文：神宗驾崩，韩维奔赴朝廷。
English: After the death of Shenzong, Han Wei rushed to the imperial court.

古文：宣仁后手诏劳问，维对曰： 人情贫则思富，苦则思乐，困则思息，郁则思通。
现代文：宣仁后亲自书写诏令进行慰劳，韩维对答说： 人的性情是贫穷的时候就想着富裕，痛苦的时候就想着欢乐，疲劳的时候就想着休息，忧郁的时候就想着通畅。
English: After Xuanren personally wrote the edict for consolation, Han Wei replied: The human nature is to think of wealth when it is poor, joy when it is painful, rest when it is tired, and smooth when it is gloomy.

古文：诚能常以利民为本，则民富；常以忧民为心，则民乐；赋役非人力所堪者去之，则劳困息；法禁非人情所便者蠲之，则郁塞通。
现代文：确实能够经常以老百姓的利益作为根本，那么老百姓就会富裕；经常将老百姓的忧愁挂在心上，那么老百姓就会快乐；各种不是人力所能承受的赋役都免掉，那么劳累困顿就没有了；免除各种不符合人情的法令，这样烦冤阻滞就通畅了。
English: Indeed, if we can always take the interests of the common people as the foundation, then the common people will be rich; if we can always keep the sorrows of the common people in mind, then the common people will be happy; if we can get rid of all kinds of forced labor that are not humanly bearable, then there will be no labor and hardship; if we can get rid of all kinds of laws that are not in line with human feelings, then the vexation and obstruction will be smooth.

古文：推此而广之，尽诚而行之，则子孙观陛下之德，不待教而成矣。 
现代文：推而广之，全部诚心诚意地实行，那么子孙后代看到陛下的德行，不用教育就养成了这些品德。 
English: By extension, if all of them are sincerely practiced, then future generations will see His Majesty's virtues and develop these virtues without education.

古文：未几，起知陈州，未行，召兼侍读，加大学士。
现代文：不久，出任陈州知州，没有上任，奉召兼侍读，加大学士。
English: Soon, he was appointed to Chenzhou Chizhou, but did not take up the post. He was called to attend school and became a college scholar.

古文：尝言： 先帝以夏国主秉常废，故兴问罪之师。
现代文：曾经说： 先帝因为夏国主秉常被废除，因此发动军队来问罪。
English: He once said: The former emperor launched an army to punish Xia Guozhong because Xia Guozhong Bingru was abolished.

古文：今既复位，有蕃臣礼，宜还其故地。 因陈兵不可不息者三，地不可不弃者五。
现代文：如今已复位，行蕃臣的礼节，应归还其原有的领地。 于是陈述了不能不停止战争的三条理由，以及领地不能不放弃的五条理由。
English: Now that he has been restored to the throne, he should return to his original territory according to the etiquette of a vassal, so he stated three reasons why the war must be stopped and five reasons why the territory must be given up.

古文：又言： 仁宗选建储嗣，一时忠勋皆被宠禄；范镇首开此议，赏独不及，愿褒显其功。 镇于是复起用。
现代文：又说： 仁宗选立皇储，一时的忠诚、功绩显赫之臣都受到宠爱得到俸禄；范镇第一个提出这建议，但没有任何赏赐，希望褒奖显示他的功绩。 范镇于是又被起用。
English: He also said: Rinzong selected the crown prince, and the momentary loyalty and outstanding achievements of prominent ministers were favored and received a salary; Fan Zhen was the first to propose this, but there was no reward, hoping that the reward would show his merits. Fan Zhen was then employed again.

古文：元祐更役法，命维详定。
现代文：元丰年间更改役法，命韩维详细制定。
English: During the Yuanfeng era, the law on military service was amended, and Han Wei's order was formulated in detail.

古文：时四方书疏多言其便，维谓司马光曰： 小人议论，希意迎合，不可不察。 成都转运判官蔡曚附会定差，维恶而劾之。
现代文：这时各地纷纷上疏说明十分方便，韩维对司马光说： 小人的议论，都违心迎合，不能不深察。 成都转运判官蔡日蒙附会定等级，韩维讨厌而弹劾他。
English: At this time, people from all over the country rushed to explain that it was very convenient, and Han Wei said to Sima Guang: The arguments of the villain are contrary to the heart, and cannot but be deeply observed. Chengdu transshipment judge Cai Rihmon attached a certain level, Han Wei hated and impeached him.

古文：执政欲废王安石《新经义》，维以当与先儒之说并行，论者服其平。
现代文：执政者想废除王安石《新经义》，韩维认为应当和先儒的学说共同流行，论者都佩服他处理妥当。
English: The ruling party wanted to abolish Wang Anshi's "New Classics," and Han Wei believed that it should be popular with the teachings of the early Confucians. The commentators all admired his proper handling.

古文：拜门下侍郎。
现代文：授任门下侍郎。
English: He was appointed as a disciple's chamberlain.

古文：御史张舜民以言事罢，王岩叟救之，折简密询上官均。
现代文：御史张舜民由于上书言事被免职，王岩叟挽救他，用书信暗中询问上官均。
English: Wang Yanyan saved his superior Zhang Ximin from being removed from his post because of his written statement, and used the letter to secretly interrogate the superior officers.

古文：语泄，诏岩叟分析。
现代文：谈话泄露，诏令王岩叟分官析职。
English: The conversation was leaked and Wang Iwatsuki was ordered to step down from his post.

古文：维曰： 臣下折简聚谈，更相督责，乃是相率为善，何害于理？
现代文：韩维说 ：臣下用书信聚集会谈，互相监督，这样互相为善，对事理有什么害处呢？
English: Han Wei said: Subordinates use letters to gather for talks, supervise each other, and thus do good to each other. What is the harm to the cause?

古文：若琐琐责善，惧于国事无益也。 
现代文：如果接连不断地责怪善人，恐怕对国家之事没有好处。 
English: I am afraid that it will not be good for the country if we continue to blame good people.

古文：维处东省逾年，有忌之者密为谗诉，诏分司南京。
现代文：韩维在东省任职一年多，有妒嫉他的人暗中诬陷他，诏令分司南京。
English: Han Wei served in Dong Province for more than a year. Some people who were jealous of him secretly framed him and ordered him to be transferred to Nanjing.

古文：尚书右司王存抗声帘前曰： 韩维得罪，莫知其端，臣窃为朝廷惜。 乃还大学士、知邓州。
现代文：尚书右司王存在帘前大声说： 韩维获罪，不知道根源，臣下私下替朝廷惋惜。 于是又任大学士、知邓州。
English: In front of the curtain, Shangshu Rushi Wang said loudly: Han Wei was convicted without knowing the root cause, and the vassal privately felt sorry for the imperial court. So he also served as a university scholar and knew Dengzhou.

古文：兄绛为之请，改汝州。
现代文：兄长韩绛替他请求，改任汝州。
English: At his request, his elder brother, Han Zheng, was transferred to Ruzhou.

古文：久之，以太子少傅致仕，转少师。
现代文：一段时间后，以太子少傅致仕，转少师。
English: After a period of time, Etherchild was promoted to junior master and then to junior teacher.

古文：绍圣中，坐元祐党，降左朝议大夫，再谪崇信军节度副使，均州安置。
现代文：绍圣年间，由于元党案，降职为左朝议大夫，又降为崇信军节度副使，在均州安置。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shoshen, due to the Yuan Party Incident, he was demoted to the position of doctor of the Left Court Council, and was also demoted to vice-envoy of the Song Dynasty of the Chongxin Army, and was resettled in Junzhou.

古文：诸子乞纳官爵，听父里居。
现代文：他的几个儿子请求朝廷给予官爵，让父亲住在故里。
English: Several of his sons petitioned the court to grant him a title of nobility and allow their father to live in his hometown.

古文：哲宗览奏恻然，许之。
现代文：哲宗看了上奏后感到悲哀，答应了他们的请求。
English: After watching the performance, Tetsuzo felt sad and agreed to their request.

古文：元符元年，以幸睿成宫，复左朝议大夫，是岁卒。年八十二。
现代文：元符元年，随哲宗巡幸睿成宫，又恢复左朝议大夫之职，这年死，终年八十二岁。
English: In the first year of the Yuanfu era, he accompanied the Zhezong on a tour of the palace, and resumed his position as doctor of the left court. He died this year, at the age of eighty-two.

古文：徽宗初，悉追复旧官。
现代文：徽宗即位之初，又全部追赠恢复以前所任官职。
English: At the beginning of Huizong's accession to the throne, all of them were posthumously restored to their previous official positions.

古文：韩缜，字玉汝。
现代文：韩缜字玉汝，开封雍丘人。
English: Han Yu Zi Yuru, a native of Kaifeng, Yongchuan.

古文：登进士第，签书南京判官。
现代文：考中进士，签书南京判官。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination and was appointed as a Nanjing magistrate.

古文：仁宗以水灾求直言，缜上疏曰： 今国本未立，无以系天下心，此阴盛阳微之应。 词极剀切。
现代文：仁宗由于发生水灾征求正直的言论，韩缜上疏说： 如今国家的根本没有建立，无法笼络天下人心，这是阴气盛阳气弱的征兆。 
English: As a result of the floods, Rinzong solicited honest remarks, and Han Zhaoxiao said: Today, the country has not been established at all, and it is impossible to win the hearts and minds of the world. This is a sign of the weakness of yin and yang.

古文：刘沆荐其才，命编修三班敕。
现代文：言辞十分切合事理。刘沆向朝廷推荐他有才能，任命为编修三班敕。
English: Liu Bei recommended him to the imperial court, saying that he was talented, and he was appointed as the editor of the third class of imperial edicts.

古文：前此，武臣不执亲丧。
现代文：在此之前，武臣不给亲人服丧。
English: Prior to this, samurai did not allow their relatives to mourn.

古文：缜建言： 三年之服，古今通制；晋襄衰墨从戎，事出一时。 遂著令，自崇班以上听持服。
现代文：韩缜建议说： 三年服丧，是从古到今执行的礼制；晋襄公穿着丧服出征，是一时之事。 于是制定法令，从崇班以上听任他们服丧。
English: Han Zheng suggested: "Three years of mourning is a ceremonial system that has been implemented from ancient times to the present; it is a temporary thing for Jinxianggong to go to war wearing mourning clothes.

古文：为殿中侍御史。
现代文：任殿中侍御史。
English: The history of the attendants in the appointment hall is over.

古文：参知政事孙抃持禄充位；权陕西转运副使薛向赴阙，枢密院辄画旨除为真；刘永年以外戚除防御使；内侍史志聪私役皇城亲从：缜皆极论之。
现代文：参知政事孙扌卞尸位素餐；暂代陕西转运使薛向奔赴朝廷，枢密院就发布诏令授予转运使；刘永年由于是外戚升为防御使；内侍史志聪私自役使皇城亲从，韩缜都详尽地论说。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the political advisor to the emperor, was buried with a simple meal; Xue Xiang, the temporary Shaanxi transit envoy, rushed to the imperial court, and the Privy Council issued a decree to grant the transit envoy; Liu Yongnian, because he was a relative, was promoted to the defense envoy; the imperial attendant Shi Zhicong, who personally served the imperial city, was a close follower. Han Yat-sen discussed all of this in detail.

古文：帝为罢抃，寝向与永年之命，而正志聪罪。
现代文：仁宗为了罢免孙扌卞，停止薛向与刘永年的任命，而纠正史志聪的过失。
English: In order to dismiss Sun Yat-sen, Ren Zong stopped the appointment of Xue Xiang and Liu Yongnian, and corrected Shi Zhicong's mistake.

古文：迁侍御史、度支判官，出为两浙、淮南转运使，移河北。
现代文：升为侍御史、度支判官，离开京师任两浙、淮南转运使，调往河北。
English: He was promoted to the position of courtier and judge, and left Beijing to serve as envoy to Zhejiang and Huainan, and was transferred to Hebei.

古文：夏谅祚死，子秉常嗣，遣使求封册。
现代文：夏人谅祚死，他的儿子秉常即位，派人请求册封。
English: When Emperor Xia died, his son Emperor Xianzang ascended to the throne, and sent someone to request that he be crowned.

古文：朝廷方责夏人不修职贡，欲择人诘其使。
现代文：朝廷正责备夏人不尽职责，打算选派人诘问使者。
English: The imperial court is reproaching Xia for not fulfilling his duties and is planning to send someone to interrogate the envoy.

古文：缜适陛辞，神宗命之往。
现代文：韩缜刚好向皇帝辞谢，神宗让他前往。
English: Han Xuan just happened to resign from the emperor, and Shenzong let him go.

古文：缜至驿问罪，使者引服，迨夜，奏上。
现代文：韩缜到驿站问罪，使者服帖，到晚上，将奏书奉上。
English: Han Zheng went to the station to ask for punishment, the envoy complied, and in the evening, the report was submitted.

古文：帝喜，改使陕西。
现代文：神宗高兴，改为陕西转运使。
English: Shenzong was pleased and changed it to Shaanxi Transfer Envoy.

古文：入知审官西院、直舍人院。
现代文：进入京师知审官西院、直舍人院。
English: He entered the Western Academy and the Jikiseiren Academy, both of which are the official examiners of scholars in Beijing.

古文：以兄绛执政，改集贤殿修撰、盐铁副使，以天章阁待制知秦州。
现代文：由于其兄长韩绛执政，改为集贤殿修撰、盐铁副使，以天章阁待制知秦州。
English: As his elder brother Han Zheng was in power, it was changed to Shuxian of Jixian, vice-envoy of Salt and Iron, and Zhiqin of Tianzhang.

古文：尝宴客夜归，指使傅勍被酒，误随入州宅，与侍妾遇，缜怒，令军校以铁裹杖箠杀之。
现代文：曾经设宴招待客人晚上归来，让傅京力喝酒，误随入州宅，与侍妾相遇，韩缜大怒，令军校用铁杖杀死他。
English: He once held a banquet to invite guests to return in the evening, let Fu Jingli drink, mistakenly followed him into the state house, met with his concubine, Han Yu was furious, and made the military school kill him with an iron rod.

古文：勍妻持血衣，挝登闻鼓以诉，坐落职，分司南京。
现代文：傅京力的妻子拿着血衣，击打登闻鼓进行上诉，由此被降职，分司南京。
English: Fu Jingli's wife held a blood-stained shirt and beat a tambourine to appeal. As a result, she was demoted and transferred to Nanjing.

古文：秦人语曰： 宁逢乳虎，莫逢玉汝。 其暴酷如此。
现代文：秦人俗语说： 宁愿遇到小虎，不要遇到玉汝。 韩缜就是这样残暴。
English: The Qin people had a saying: "I would rather encounter a small tiger than encounter the Jade Emperor." Han Xuan was just as cruel.

古文：久之，还待制、知瀛州。
现代文：一段时间后，恢复待制，知瀛州。
English: After a period of time, the standby system was restored, and Zhifangzhou was reborn.

古文：熙宁七年，辽使萧禧来议代北地界。
现代文：熙宁七年，辽使萧禧来议定北地的边界。
English: In the seventh year of Xining, Liao sent Xiao Xilang to negotiate the border of the North.

古文：召缜馆客，遂报聘，令持图牒致辽主，不克见而还。
现代文：召韩缜到馆迎客，于是回访，令他拿着图册到辽国君主那里，没能见到辽主就返回了。
English: Han Zheng was called to the hall to welcome the guests, so he made a return visit, and he was asked to take the album to the monarch of Liao State. When he could not see the Liao Lord, he returned.

古文：知开封府，禧再至，复馆之。
现代文：知开封府，萧禧又来，再次在别馆款待他。
English: Xiao Xiyi came to visit him again after he opened the Fongfu, and entertained him again in another hall.

古文：诏乘驿诣河东，与禧分画，以分水岭为界。
现代文：诏令乘坐驿车到河东，和萧禧分别划定地界，以分水岭作为界限。
English: Dahirong took a tuk-tuk to Hedong, and delineated the land boundary with Xiao Xie separately, using the watershed as the boundary.

古文：复命，赐袭衣、金带，为枢密都承旨，还龙图阁直学士。
现代文：回复君命，被赐予袭衣、金带，为枢密都承旨，还龙图阁直学士。
English: In response to the king's order, he was given a ceremonial robe and a gold belt, and was awarded the title of Privy Councillor.

古文：元丰五年，官制行，易太中大夫、同知枢密，进知院事。
现代文：元丰五年，实行官制，改为太中大夫、同知枢密，进知院事。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan and Feng Dynasties, the official system was implemented, and it was changed to Taizhong Dafu, Tongzhi Privy Council, and Jinzhi Academy.

古文：哲宗立，拜尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：哲宗即位，授职尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: When Tetsuzo ascended the throne, he was given the post of Shoshu-Utsukushinari and Chushu-Sajiro.

古文：首相蔡确与章惇谋诬东朝，及确为山陵使，缜暴其奸状，由是东朝及外廷悉知之。
现代文：首席宰相蔡确与章谋划诬陷东朝，到蔡确为山陵使时，韩缜公布他的罪行，这样东朝及外廷都知道了这件事。
English: Chief Prime Minister Cai Ji and Zhang planned to frame the Eastern Dynasty. When Cai Ji was the envoy to the Mausoleum, Han Zheng announced his crime, so that the Eastern Dynasty and the Foreign Court knew about it.

古文：确使还，欲以其属高遵惠、张琎、韩宗文为美官。
现代文：蔡确出使回来，打算让其属下高遵惠、张、韩宗文担任好官职。
English: Cai Zhengyi sent an envoy back, intending to have his subordinates Gao Zunhui, Zhang, and Han Zongwen hold good official positions.

古文：宣仁后以访缜，缜曰： 遵惠为太后从父；琎者，中书郎璪之弟；宗文，臣侄也。
现代文：宣仁后来询访韩缜，韩缜说： 高遵惠为太后伯父；张是中书郎张的弟弟；宗文，是臣下的侄儿。
English: Later, Xuanren inquired with Han Zheng. Han Zheng said: Gao Zunhui was the uncle of the Empress Dowager; Zhang was the younger brother of Zhang Zhongshuro; Zongwen was the nephew of a subject.

古文：今擢用非次，则是君臣各私其亲，何以示天下？ 乃止。
现代文：如今提拔选用不依照秩序，这样君臣各自私爱他的亲戚，又用什么来昭示天下呢？ 于是任用被废止。
English: Nowadays, promotion and appointment are not in accordance with the order, so princes and ministers love their relatives, and what do they use to show the world? Therefore, the appointment was abolished.

古文：元祐元年，御史中丞刘挚、谏官孙觉、苏辙、王觌，论缜才鄙望轻，在先朝为奉使，割地六百里以遗契丹，边人怨之切骨，不可使居相位。
现代文：元丰元年，御史中丞刘挚、谏官孙觉、苏辙、王觌，议论韩缜才能低下声望轻，在先朝任奉使，割地六百里来送给契丹，边人对他怀着刻骨仇恨，不能让他位居相位。
English: In the first year of the Yuanfeng era, the imperial historian Liu Zhengyu, the eunuchs Sun Jue, Su Rong, and Wang Qian discussed the low prestige of Han Zhengyu. He served as an envoy in the previous dynasty and cut 600 miles of land to give to Khitan. The people around him had a deep hatred for him and could not let him take the first place.

古文：章数十上，罢为观文殿大学士、知颍昌府。
现代文：数十次上章，罢职为观文殿大学士、知颍昌府。
English: He was promoted to chapter dozens of times, and retired as a scholar of the University of Kunming and Changfu University.

古文：移永兴、河南，拜安武军节度使、知太原府，易节奉宁军。
现代文：移永兴、河南，授予安武军节度使、知太原府，易节奉宁军。
English: It was moved to Yongxing, Henan Province, and the Anwu Army was awarded the title of Seto envoy, Chitahara Prefecture, and the Yongning Army was awarded the title of Issei envoy.

古文：请老，为西太一宫使，以太子太保致仕。
现代文：请求告老，为西太一宫使，以太子太保致仕。
English: The request was sent to the old man, who was the envoy of the West Taiyi Palace, and the ethereal son of the ethereal palace guard.

古文：绍圣四年卒，年七十九。
现代文：绍圣四年死，终年七十九岁。
English: Shaosheng died four years later, at the age of 79.

古文：赠司空，谥曰庄敏。
现代文：追赠司空，谥号为 庄敏 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Siku, and his nickname was Zhuo Min.

古文：缜外事庄重，所至以严称。
现代文：韩缜外表庄重，因而以严厉著称。
English: Han Min is dignified in appearance and is known to be strict.

古文：虽出入将相而寂无功烈，厚自奉养，世以比晋、何、曾云。
现代文：虽然任将相但却默默无闻没有任何建树，奉养丰厚，世人将他与晋朝何曾相比。
English: Although he was a general, he was obscure and without any achievements. He was well-educated, and the world compared him unfavourably with the Jin dynasty.

古文：子宗武。
现代文：儿子韩宗武。
English: His son, Han Zongwu, is the star.

