古文：王亮张稷王莹王亮，字奉叔，琅邪临沂人，晋丞相导之六世孙也。祖偃，宋右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：王亮字奉叔，琅邪临沂人，是晋朝丞相王导的第六代孙。他的祖父王偃，是宋朝的右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: Wang Liangzhe was the sixth generation grandson of Wang Dao, the prime minister of the Jin Dynasty. His grandfather, Wang Liangzhe, was the doctor of Uguanglu and the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父攸，给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：他的父亲王攸，为给事黄门侍郎。
English: His father, Wang You, was the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：亮以名家子，宋末选尚公主，拜驸马都尉、秘书郎，累迁桂阳王文学，南郡王友，秘书丞。
现代文：王亮因为是名门家族的子弟，宋朝末年选配给公主，拜驸马都尉、秘书郎，多次升迁后任桂阳王文学，南郡王友，秘书丞。
English: Because Wang Liang was the son of a famous family, he was assigned to the princess at the end of the Song Dynasty, and became the captain of the horse and the secretary. After several promotions, he was appointed as the King of Guiyang Literature and the King of Nan County, and the secretary.

古文：齐竟陵王子良开西邸，延才俊以为士林馆，使工图画其像，亮亦预焉。
现代文：齐朝的竟陵王子良开辟西邸，延请有才智的人来组建士林馆，派遣工匠为他们画像，王亮也参预其中。
English: Wang Liang also participated in the construction of the West Residence, which was built by the Qianling Prince Liang of the Qi Dynasty. He invited talented people to set up the Shilin Museum and sent craftsmen to paint pictures for them.

古文：迁中书侍郎、大司马从事中郎，出为衡阳太守。
现代文：王亮迁中书侍郎、大司马从事中郎，出任衡阳太守。
English: Wang Liang was transferred to the position of junior secretary, and Daishima was engaged as junior secretary, and became the governor of Hengyang.

古文：以南土卑湿，辞不之官，迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：因为南方地势低下潮湿，他推辞没有去上任，迁给事黄门侍郎。
English: Because the southern terrain is low and wet, he declined to take office and was transferred to the Yellow Gate Chamberlain.

古文：寻拜晋陵太守，在职清公有美政。
现代文：不久王亮拜晋陵太守，任职清廉公正有好的政治措施。
English: Wang Liang soon became the first abbot of the Jin Mausoleum. He was honest and fair and had good political measures.

古文：时齐明帝作相，闻而嘉之，引为领军长史，甚见赏纳。
现代文：当时齐明帝作相，听说后赞扬他，荐举为领军长史，很被赞赏接纳。
English: At that time, Emperor Qiming made an appearance, praised him after hearing about it, and recommended him as the leader of the army for a long time, which was greatly appreciated and accepted.

古文：及即位，累迁太子中庶子，尚书吏部郎，诠序著称，迁侍中。
现代文：等到齐明帝即位，王亮累迁太子中庶子，尚书吏部郎，他以阐述事情条理清晰而出名，又迁侍中。
English: When Emperor Qiming ascended to the throne, Wang Liang, the prince's illegitimate son, was transferred to the position of the prince's secretary. He was famous for explaining things clearly, and he was also transferred to the position of an attendant.

古文：建武末，为吏部尚书，是时尚书右仆射江祏管朝政，多所进拔，为士子所归。
现代文：建武末年，王亮担任吏部尚书。这时尚书右仆射江柘管理朝政，多次推荐选拔人才，成为士子们的归属。
English: At the end of the Jianwu era, Wang Liang served as the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel. This fashion book right-hand man, Shaojiang, managed the government of the dynasty, repeatedly recommended the selection of talents, and became the property of the scholars.

古文：亮自以身居选部，每持异议。
现代文：王亮凭藉身居选部，常常坚持异议。
English: Wang Liang, by virtue of being a member of the Selection Committee, often insisted on dissent.

古文：始亮未为吏部郎时，以祏帝之内弟，故深友祏，祏为之延誉，益为帝所器重；至是与祏昵之如初。
现代文：当初王亮没有做吏部郎时，因为江柘是皇帝的内弟，所以和江柘交情很深，江拓为他播扬声誉，王亮更加被皇帝所器重；到逭时他跟江柘的交情疏远冷淡了，但江柘还像当初一样对他很亲近。
English: At the beginning, when Wang Liang was not a bureaucrat, because Jiang Chen was the emperor's younger brother, he had a deep friendship with Jiang Chen. Jiang Tuo spread his reputation for him, and Wang Liang was even more valued by the emperor. At the time of his death, his friendship with Jiang Chen was distant and cold, but Jiang Chen was still very close to him as he was at the beginning.

古文：及祏遇诛，群小放命，凡所除拜，悉由内宠，亮更弗能止。
现代文：等到江柘被杀，众小人违弃教命，凡是拜官授职，都由内宠决定，王亮就更不能制止。
English: By the time Jiang Chen was killed, all the villains had abandoned their religious precepts, and the appointment of officials was decided by the inner favorites, and Wang Liang could not stop it.

古文：外若详审，内无明鉴，其所选用，拘资次而已，当世不谓为能。
现代文：对外好像详细审察，对内并无显明的鉴识，他们的选拔录用，仅局限在身份等第上罢了，当世的人们不认为他们有才能。
English: Externally, they seem to be scrutinized in detail, but internally there is no obvious discernment. Their selection and recruitment are only limited to status and so on, and people in this world do not think they have talent.

古文：频加通直散骑常侍、太子右卫率，为尚书右仆射、中护军。
现代文：王亮频繁加通直散骑常侍、太子右卫率，担任尚书右仆射、中护军。
English: Wang Liang was frequently promoted to the position of the prince's right guard, and served as the prince's right-hand man and the middle guard.

古文：既而东昏肆虐，淫刑已逞，亮倾侧取容，竟以免戮。
现代文：不久束昏任意残杀，酷刑已经肆行，王亮依附取悦，最终免于被杀。
English: Wang Liang was soon unconscious after the arbitrary killing, and the torture had already been carried out. Wang Liang clung to Zhu Rong and was eventually spared from being killed.

古文：义师至新林，内外百僚皆道迎，其未能拔者，亦间路送诚款，亮独不遣。
现代文：仁义之师到达新林，朝廷内外的众多官员都到路上去欢迎，那些不能脱身的，也派人从小路去表达真诚的心意，惟独王亮没有去。
English: When the Teacher of Righteousness and Benevolence arrived in Xinlin, many officials both inside and outside the imperial court went to the road to welcome him. Those who could not escape also sent people to express their sincere intentions from the path, but Wang Liang did not go.

古文：及城内既定，独推亮为首。
现代文：等到城内已经安定，大家衹推举王亮做首领。
English: After the city was stabilized, everyone elected Wang Liang as the leader.

古文：亮出见高祖，高祖曰： 颠而不扶，安用彼相。 
现代文：王亮出来同高祖相见，高祖说： 盲人跌倒了却不去扶他，哪裹还用得着扶助他的人呢。 
English: Wang Liang came out to meet Gao Zu. Gao Zu said, "If a blind man falls down, but no one helps him, why does he still need someone to help him?"

古文：而弗之罪也。
现代文：却没有给他定罪。
English: But he was not convicted.

古文：霸府开，以为大司马长史、抚军将军、琅邪、清河二郡太守。
现代文：霸府开设后，王亮担任大司马长史、抚军将军、琅邪清河二郡太守。
English: After the establishment of Baifu, Wang Liang served as the grand secretary of Ma Changshi, the general of the army, and the governor of the two counties in Qinghe.

古文：梁台建，授侍中、尚书令，固让不拜，乃为侍中、中书监，兼尚书令。
现代文：梁台建立，授王亮侍中、尚书令，他坚决辞让不肯接受，衹承担侍中、中书监，兼任尚书令。
English: Liang Tai was established, and Wang Liang was awarded the title of Chamberlain and Senior Scribe. He resolutely refused to accept, and took on the role of Chamberlain, Senior Scribe, and Senior Scribe.

古文：高祖受禅，迁侍中、尚书令、中军将军，引参佐命，封豫宁县公，邑二千户。
现代文：高祖接受禅让，王亮迁侍中、尚书令、中军将军，引进参与佐命，封豫宁县公，食邑二千户。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen's offer, Wang Liang transferred the chamberlains, Shang Shuling, and the general of the Chinese army, introduced the participation of the imperial family, and sealed the public of Yuanning County, with 2,000 households in the food village.

古文：天监二年，转左光禄大夫，侍中、中军如故。
现代文：天监二年，王亮转左光禄大夫，侍中、中军还像过去一样。
English: In the second year of Tianjun, Wang Liang became the doctor of the left light, and the attendants and the Chinese army were still the same as in the past.

古文：元日朝会万国，亮辞疾不登殿，设馔别省，而语笑自若。
现代文：正月初一在朝廷会见各国宾客，王亮推说有病没有上殿，设筵别省，并且谈笑自如。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, Wang Liang met with guests from various countries at the imperial court. Wang Liang said that he was sick and did not go to the hall, set up a separate province, and talked and laughed freely.

古文：数日，诏公卿问讯，亮无疾色，御史中丞乐蔼奏大不敬，论弃市刑。
现代文：几日后，皇帝召见公卿询问事情，王亮面无病色，御史中丞乐蔼上奏这是对皇帝大不敬，讨论判处他弃市的刑罚。
English: A few days later, the emperor summoned the nobles to inquire about the matter. Wang Liangming did not look ill, and Gu Shizhongzheng played the piano. This was a great disrespect to the emperor, and they discussed sentencing him to the punishment of abandoning the city.

古文：诏削爵废为庶人。
现代文：皇帝下令削去王亮的官爵废为庶人。
English: The emperor ordered Wang Liang to be stripped of his title and demoted to a commoner.

古文：四年夏，高祖宴于华光殿，谓群臣曰： 朕日昃听政，思闻得失。
现代文：天监四年夏天，高祖在华光殿饮宴群臣，对他们说： 朕每天到日斜仍听理朝政，想听到理政的得与失。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of the Tenko era, Gaozu held a banquet for his retainers at the Hua Guang Palace. He said to them, "I still listen to the government of the dynasty every day. I want to hear the gains and losses of the government.

古文：卿等可谓多士，宜各尽献替。 
现代文：卿等可以说是有才能、有胆识的人，应该各自进谏。 
English: It can be said that those who are talented and courageous, such as Sirs, should be promoted independently.

古文：尚书左丞范缜起曰： 司徒谢朏本有虚名，陛下擢之如此，前尚书令王亮颇有治实，陛下弃之如彼，是愚臣所不知。 
现代文：尚书左丞范缜站起说： 司徒谢肶本来衹有虚名，陛下却这样提拔他，前任尚书令王亮很有料理实事的才能，陛下却如此废弃了他，这些是愚臣所不能知晓的。 
English: Shangshu Zuoxing Fan Rong stood up and said: "Stu Xie Rong originally had a false name, but your majesty promoted him in this way; Shangshu's predecessor Wang Liang was very talented in cooking and practical matters, but your majesty discarded him in this way. These are things that fools cannot know.

古文：高祖变色曰： 卿可更余言。 
现代文：高祖脸色一变说： 卿可再说别的事。 
English: Gaozu's face changed and he said, "Sir, you can say something else.

古文：缜固执不已，高祖不悦。
现代文：范缜坚持己见，高祖很不高兴。
English: Fan Ye persisted in his opinion, Gao Zu was very unhappy.

古文：御史中丞任昉因奏曰：臣闻息夫历诋，汉有正刑；白褒一奏，晋以明罚。
现代文：御史中丞任防趁机上奏道：臣听说息夫多次诋毁别人，汉朝有公正的法度制裁他；白褒一次上奏，晋朝用严明的刑罚惩处他。
English: Goshi Chujo Renbo took advantage of the opportunity to make a report: the minister heard that his son-in-law had repeatedly slandered others, and the Han Dynasty had a fair law to sanction him; Bai Bo once made a report, and the Jin Dynasty punished him with a severe penalty.

古文：况乎附下讪上，毁誉自口者哉。
现代文：何况对于依附下边毁谤上面，诋毁赞誉随口而出的人呢。
English: How much more so for those who attach themselves to slander from below and praise from above.

古文：风闻尚书左丞臣范缜，自晋安还，语人云： 我不诣余人，惟诣王亮；不饷余人，惟饷王亮。 
现代文：我风闻尚书左丞臣范缜，从晋安回来，对别人说： 我不拜访其他人，衹拜访王亮；不款待其他人，衹款待王亮。 
English: I heard a rumor that Shangshu Zuozhong Fan Rong, returning from Jin'an, said to others: I do not visit others, I visit Wang Liang; I do not entertain others, I entertain Wang Liang.

古文：辄收缜白从左右万休到台辨问，与风闻符同。
现代文：就拘捕范缜的白从左右万休到台审问，所供与风闻相符合。
English: On the arrest of Fan Qi, Bai went to Taiwan for interrogation from the left and right, and the information provided was consistent with the rumors.

古文：又今月十日，御饯梁州刺史臣珍国，宴私既洽，群臣并已谒退，时诏留侍中臣昂等十人，访以政道。
现代文：又本月十，皇帝为梁州刺史臣珍国饯行，宴会已经结束，群臣一起请求告退，当时皇帝命令留下侍中臣袁昂等十人，询问施政的方略。
English: On the tenth day of the same month, when the emperor was on a state visit to Liangzhou, and the banquet was over, and all the ministers requested to leave, the emperor ordered ten people, including Yuan Ang, the vice-minister, to stay behind and inquire about the government's strategy.

古文：缜不答所问，而横议沸腾，遂贬裁司徒臣朏，褒举庶人王亮。
现代文：范缜不回答所问之事，却非常激烈地恣意议论，贬斥裁决司徒臣谢肋，赞扬举荐庶人王亮。
English: Fan Rong did not answer the question, but he made a very fierce and arbitrary argument, denouncing the ruling of the scholar and statesman Xie Lei, and praising the recommendation of the commoner Wang Liang.

古文：臣于时预奉恩留，肩随并立，耳目所接，差非风闻。
现代文：我当时也列于奉恩留下的大臣中，追随同僚们一起立于堂上，耳闻目睹，风闻并没有错。
English: At that time, I was also listed as one of the ministers left behind by virtue, standing in the hall with my colleagues, hearing and witnessing, and the rumors are not wrong.

古文：窃寻王有游豫，亲御轩陛，义深推毂，情均《湛露》。
现代文：现今王又出行，亲自驾车到朝廷上，情意深挚荐举人才，人情遍布《湛露》。
English: Now Wang is traveling again, personally driving to the imperial court, sincerely recommending talents, and human feelings are all over "Zanlu."

古文：酒阑宴罢，当扆正立，记事在前，记言在后，轸早朝之念，深求瘼之情，而缜言不逊，妄陈褒贬，伤济济之风，缺侧席之望。
现代文：饮宴结束，面对屏风直立，记载事情之人在前面，记载言论之人在后面，深思早朝之念，探听民间疾苦，但莲缠出言不逊，随意陈述褒奖贬斥之辞，有伤美好的风范，缺乏谦恭的名望。
English: At the end of the banquet, standing upright facing the screen, the person who records the events is in front, the person who records the speech is behind, pondering the thoughts of the early morning, listening to the people's sufferings, but the lotus is full of insolent words, freely stating the words of praise and reprimand, has a hurtful and beautiful demeanor, and lacks the reputation of modesty.

古文：不有严裁，宪准将颓，缜即主。
现代文：没有严厉的裁决，法令的准则将会衰败，范缜即是当事者。
English: Without a stern ruling, the rule of the law will decay, and Fan Ye is the party.

古文：臣谨案：尚书左丞臣范缜，衣冠绪余，言行舛驳，夸谐里落，喧诟周行。
现代文：臣谨案：尚书左丞臣范缜，为衣冠之后，言行不一致，夸耀于乡里，在士宦的行列中大声诟骂。
English: Subordinate courtier: Shangshu Zuozhe Subordinate courtier Fan Yu, after being crowned, words and deeds are inconsistent, boasting in the countryside, shouting abuse in the ranks of scholars.

古文：曲学谀闻，未知去代；弄口鸣舌，祇足饰非。
现代文：拘执于不通之学、谄媚地聆听，不知有所去除替代；搬弄口舌。衹足以文饰遇错。
English: Adhering to the study of incomprehensibility, listening charmingly, not knowing what to remove and replace; playing with the spoken language.

古文：乃者，义师近次，缜丁罹艰棘，曾不呼门，墨縗景附，颇同先觉，实奉龙颜。
现代文：以往，仁义之师短期驻扎，茎垄遭遇亲丧，终不叫门，穿着黑色的丧服如影附身，舆事先认识觉察一样，实际是在敬奉皇帝。
English: In the past, when the teachers of benevolence and righteousness were stationed for a short period of time, the stalks and ridges encountered the bereavement, and finally did not call the door, wearing black mourning clothes as if they were possessed by a shadow. As if they knew and sensed in advance, they were actually honoring the emperor.

古文：而今党协衅余，翻为矛楯，人而无恒，成兹奸詖。
现代文：现在朋辈问相互协调挑衅之余，反转为各种矛盾，人若不恒久，就会成为这种奸邪之辈。
English: Now, instead of asking for mutual coordination and provocation, our peers are turning to all kinds of contradictions. If people do not persevere, they will become this kind of treacherous generation.

古文：日者，饮至策勋，功微赏厚，出守名邦，入司管辖，苞篚罔遗，而假称折辕，衣裙所弊，谗激失所，许与疵废，廷辱民宗。
现代文：从前，庆功策勋，他功劳很小赏赐却很丰厚，外出主管名邦，入司管理统辖，搜刮的财物没有遣漏的，却假称清廉，衣裙可以遮蔽身体，毁谤他人的人很快会失去存身之处，招引非议人家的过失，认为应废黜不用，在朝廷上辱没民之宗师。
English: Once upon a time, he was celebrated for his merits and achievements. His merits were small, but his rewards were very rich. He was in charge of going out to famous countries. He was in charge of the management of entering the court. He did not send out the stolen property, but he pretended to be clean. His clothes could cover his body. People who slandered others would soon lose their place of existence. They would attract the blame of others. They believed that they should be dethroned. They humiliated the people's guru in the court.

古文：自居枢宪，纠奏寂寞。
现代文：自从处于执行国家法令的地位，举奏却沉寂无声。
English: Since it has been in the position of enforcing state laws, it has been silent.

古文：顾望纵容，无至公之议；恶直丑正，有私讦之谈。
现代文：看见错误行为不加制止而任其发展，没有最公正的评论；丑恶正直之人，有私下攻击别人短处的言谈。
English: There is no fairer criticism than to see wrong-doing allowed to go unchecked; there is no truer speech than that of an honest man who privately attacks the faults of others.

古文：宜置之徽纆，肃正国典。
现代文：应该依照法度，严肃地端正国家的制度法令。
English: The country's system and laws should be seriously rectified in accordance with the law.

古文：臣等参议，请以见事免缜所居官，辄勒外收付廷尉法狱治罪。
现代文：臣等参预议论，请求凭藉现有事情罢免茎垄所任官职，勒令另外拘押交付给廷尉法狱治罪。
English: The vassals and others took part in the preliminary discussion, and requested that the official position of Zhu Reng should be dismissed on the basis of the current situation, and that the court should order another detention to be given to the court officer to be sentenced to prison.

古文：应诸连逮，委之狱官，以法制从事。
现代文：应把和范缜有牵连的人一同逮捕，把他们委托于处理诉讼的官吏，按照法令制度处置。
English: The people who are implicated with Fan Xuan should be arrested together, and they should be entrusted to the officials handling the lawsuit and dealt with in accordance with the legal system.

古文：缜位应黄纸，臣辄奉白简。
现代文：范缜的职位应用黄纸，臣敬奉弹劾奏章。
English: Fan Qi's position was written on yellow paper, and the vassal was presented with an impeachment report.

古文：诏闻可。
现代文：皇帝下诏传达许可。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to convey permission.

古文：玺书诘缜曰： 亮少乏才能，无闻时辈，昔经冒入群英，相与岂薄，晚节谄事江祏，为吏部，末协附梅虫儿、茹法珍，遂执昏政。
现代文：诏书责问范缜说： 王亮年轻时缺乏才能，在当时的同辈中没有名声，过去冒入众多杰出的人才中，结交并且希望依附他们，晚年谄媚事奉江柘，任职吏部，最后帮助依附梅虫儿、茹法珍，就执掌昏乱的政治。
English: Wang Liang lacked talent when he was young, and had no reputation among his peers at the time. In the past, he rushed into the midst of many outstanding talents, made friends and hoped to attach himself to them. In his later years, he charmingly served Jiang Chen, served in the cadre department, and finally helped to attach himself to Meizhou Er and Rufa Zhen, and then presided over the chaotic politics.

古文：比屋罹祸，尽家涂炭，四海沸腾，天下横溃，此谁之咎！食乱君之禄，不死于治世。
现代文：家家户户遭受祸乱，都陷入极端困苦的境地，天下纷扰混乱，这是谁的罪责食乱君的俸禄，不死在治世。
English: Every family suffered from the calamity, they all fell into a situation of extreme hardship, the world was in turmoil, this is who's guilt eats the salary of the turbulent ruler, and does not die during the reign.

古文：亮协固凶党，作威作福，靡衣玉食，女乐盈房，势危事逼，自相吞噬。
现代文：王亮协助稳固了凶恶的朋党，作威作福，衣食奢靡，美女音乐充盈房屋，形势危急事情逼迫，就互相吞并。
English: Wang Liang helped to stabilize the vicious party cronies. They were arrogant, indulged in luxury food and clothing, and their houses were filled with beautiful women and music. When the situation was critical and things were pressing, they annexed each other.

古文：建石首题，启靡请罪。
现代文：王亮在建业石头，首先署名于向梁武输诚之文书上，俯倒请罪。
English: Wang Liang first signed the document of sincerity to Liang Wu on the stone of Jianye, and fell down to plead guilty.

古文：朕录其白旗之来，贳其既往之咎。
现代文：朕因其投降而来就录用了他，赦免了以往的罪过。
English: I hired him because of his surrender and forgave his past sins.

古文：亮反覆不忠，奸贿彰暴，有何可论！
现代文：王亮变化无常对王不忠，奸邪贪财明显地暴露出来，有什么可以争议，随便谈及的?
English: Wang Liang's fickleness has clearly exposed Wang Liang's disloyalty, treachery and greed. What can be disputed and casually talked about?

古文：妄相谈述，具以状对。 
现代文：全部根据陈述的回答。 
English: It's all on the record.

古文：所诘十条，缜答支离而已。
现代文：责问的十条，范缜衹能散乱地答覆罢了。
English: Of the ten questions asked, Fan Ye could only reply in a disorganized manner.

古文：亮因屏居闭扫，不通宾客。
现代文：王亮因此隐居闭门，不与宾客交往。
English: As a result, Wang Liang secluded himself behind closed doors and did not mingle with guests.

古文：遭母忧，居丧尽礼。
现代文：他遭逢母亲亡故，服丧尽孝道。
English: He suffered the death of his mother and devoted himself to filial piety.

古文：八年，诏起为秘书监，俄加通直散骑常侍，数日迁太常卿。
现代文：八年，皇帝下韶起用王亮为秘书监，不久加通直散骑常侍，几天后迁太常卿。
English: Eight years later, the emperor promoted Wang Liang to the position of secretary-supervisor. Soon after, Wang Liang was promoted to the position of regular attendant, and a few days later, he was promoted to the position of permanent secretary.

古文：九年，转中书监，加散骑常侍。
现代文：九年，转中书监，加散骑常侍。
English: In the ninth year, he was transferred to the position of middle school librarian.

古文：其年卒。
现代文：那一年王亮去世。
English: That year, Wang Liang passed away.

古文：诏赙钱三万，布五十匹。
现代文：皇帝下韶赠送办理丧事的钱币三万，布帛五千匹。
English: Gao Zu issued an edict to donate 30,000 yuan and 50 cloth horses to help with the funeral.

古文：谥曰炀子。
现代文：王亮的谧号叫炀子。
English: Wang Liang's nickname is Zizi.

古文：张稷，字公乔，吴郡人也。父永，宋右光禄大夫。
现代文：重担字公卖，县题人。他的父亲亟丞，是塞朝右光禄大夫。
English: His father, who was a doctor in the reign of Emperor Go-Shirakawa, was also a doctor in the reign of Emperor Go-Shirakawa.

古文：稷所生母遘疾历时，稷始年十一，夜不解衣而养，永异之。
现代文：张稷的生母得病经历了四季，张扰当时才十一岁，夜襄衣不解带地侍养母亲，张丞认为很奇异。
English: Zhang Yao's birth mother had been ill for four seasons. Zhang Zhan was only eleven years old at the time, and he had to take care of his mother at night, which Zhang Zheng thought was very strange.

古文：及母亡，毁瘠过人，杖而后起。
现代文：等到母亲去世，张稷因居丧过哀而极端瘦弱，超过了一般人，扶着拐杖才能起来。
English: After her mother's death, Zhang Ye was extremely thin and weak due to grief. She was able to get up on crutches, which was more than the average person.

古文：性疏率，朗悟有才略，与族兄充、融、卷等俱知名，时称之曰： 充融卷稷，是为四张。 
现代文：堡担性格粗略轻率，明达有才能，与同族兄弟强室、呈铁、亟鲞等都为世人所知，当时人们称他们： 充、融、卷、稷，造就是四张。 
English: The character of Fortran was rough and reckless, intelligent and talented, and he was known to the world along with his brothers of the same race, Qiangshu, Zhengfei, Erlong, and so on. At that time, people called them: Zong, Rong, Zou, Zou, which is four sheets.

古文：起家著作佐郎，不拜，频居父母忧，六载庐于墓侧。
现代文：张稷起家著作佐郎，没有接受。他接连处理父母丧事，在坟墓旁边搭建小屋守丧六年。
English: He did not accept it. He dealt with the funeral of his parents one after another, building a hut next to the grave to keep the funeral for six years.

古文：服除，为骠骑法曹行参军，迁外兵参军。
现代文：服丧完毕，噩噩担任骠骑法曹行参军，迁外兵参军。
English: After the funeral, he served as a cavalry sergeant to join the army, and a foreign soldier to join the army.

古文：齐永明中，为剡县令，略不视事，多为山水游。
现代文：壹翘丞塱年间，至困担任垄岖令，很少到职处事，多为山水之游。
English: When he was in his twenties, he worked as a ranger, rarely went to work, and mostly went for a trip to the mountains.

古文：会贼唐瑶作乱，稷率厉县人，保全县境。
现代文：适逢贼唐寓之叛乱。张稷率领勉励县裹的人民，保全了县境。
English: It coincided with the rebellion of the thief Tang Yue. Zhang Ye led the people of Yanli County to protect the county border.

古文：入为太子洗马，大司马东曹掾，建安王友，大司马从事中郎。
现代文：他入朝为太子洗马，大司马东曹掾，建安王友，大司马从事中郎。
English: He entered the imperial court to wash horses for the prince, the chief steed Dong Cao, Jian An Wang You, the chief steed engaged in the middle.

古文：武陵王渼为护军，转护军司马，寻为本州治中。
现代文：武陵王萧毕做护军，张稷转护军司马，不久为本州治中。
English: Wuling Wang Xiao Bi served as a military escort, Zhang Ye as a military escort, and soon became the governor of Honshu.

古文：明帝领牧，仍为别驾。
现代文：明帝兼任州牧，张稷仍担任别驾。
English: Emperor Ming also served as the prefect of the prefecture, and Zhang Ye still served as the governor.

古文：时魏寇寿春，以稷为宁朔将军、军主，副尚书仆射沈文季镇豫州。
现代文：当时魏朝入侵犯寿春，任张稷为宁朔将军、军主，副尚书仆射沈文季镇守豫州。
English: At that time, the Wei Dynasty invaded Shouchun, and Zhang Ye was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, the commander of the army, and the deputy of Shang Shubao, Shen Wenzhi, the town guard of Yuzhou.

古文：魏众称百万，围城累日，时经略处分，文季悉委稷焉。
现代文：魏朝兵多号称百万，围困城池好几天，当时策划处理，沈文季全部委托给了张稷。
English: The Wei Dynasty soldiers claimed to be more than a million and besieged the city for several days. At that time, Shen Wencai entrusted all the planning and handling to Zhang Ye.

古文：军退，迁平西司马、宁朔将军、南平内史。
现代文：魏军退去，张稷迁平西司马、宁朔将军、南平内史。
English: The Wei army retreated, and Zhang Xuan moved to quell Western Sima, Ningshuo generals, and Nanping history.

古文：魏又寇雍州，诏以本号都督荆、雍诸军事。
现代文：魏军又侵犯雍州，皇帝诏令用本号都督荆、雍诸军事。
English: The Wei army also invaded Yongzhou, and the emperor issued a decree to use the name of the capital Jing and Yongzhou for military purposes.

古文：时雍州刺史曹虎度樊城岸，以稷知州事。
现代文：当时雍州刺史曹虎跨越樊城边界，任张稷为知州事。
English: At that time, the Yangzhou assassin Cao Hu crossed the border of Lucheng and appointed Zhang Ye as the governor of Lucheng.

古文：魏师退，稷还荆州，就拜黄门侍郎，复为司马、新兴、永宁二郡太守。
现代文：魏军败退，张稷返回荆州，就拜黄门侍郎，又担任司马、新兴永宁二郡太守。
English: After the defeat of the Wei army, Zhang Ye returned to Jingzhou, where he served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and also served as the Sima and the new Yongning Second County Governor.

古文：郡犯私讳，改永宁为长宁。
现代文：郡名犯张稷父亲的讳，改永宁为长宁。
English: The name of the father of the county's most notorious criminal, Zhang Ye, was changed from Yongning to Changning.

古文：寻迁司徒司马，加辅国将军。
现代文：不久张稷迁司徒司马，加辅国将军。
English: Not long after, Zhang Yijian transferred Sita Sima, the general of Qayuo Province.

古文：及江州刺史陈显达举兵反，以本号镇历阳、南谯二郡太守，迁镇南长史、寻阳太守、辅国将军、行江州事。
现代文：等到江州刺史陈颢达率军谋反，张稷以本号镇历阳、南谯二郡太守，迁镇南长史、寻阳太守、辅国将军、行江州事。
English: When Chen Bingda, the governor of Jiangzhou, led his army to plot a rebellion, Zhang Bei took the title of Liyang, the second county governor of Nanxun, and transferred Nanchangshi, the governor of Huanyang, and the general of Fu Guo to conduct affairs in Jiangzhou.

古文：寻征还，为持节、辅国将军、都督北徐州诸军事、北徐州刺史。
现代文：不久他被征召返回，担任持节、辅国将军、都督北徐州诸军事、北徐州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was called back to serve as a military commander, auxiliary general, governor of North Xuzhou Province, and historian of North Xuzhou Province.

古文：出次白下，仍迁都督南兗州诸军事、南兗州刺史。
现代文：出巡驻扎在白下，又迁都督南兖州诸军事、南兖州刺史。
English: The outgoing patrol was stationed in Baixia, and the military of the Southern Luzhou and the history of the Southern Luzhou were relocated.

古文：俄进督北徐、徐、兗、青、冀五州诸军事，将军并如故。
现代文：不久张稷进督北徐、徐、兖、青、冀五州诸军事，所任将军仍如从前。
English: Soon after, Zhang Ye became the military governor of the five states of Bei Xu, Xu, Handan, Qing and Hebei. The generals he appointed were still the same as before.

古文：永元末，征为侍中，宿卫宫城。
现代文：永元末年，张稷被征召为侍中，在宫城中值宿警卫。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, Zhang Ye was conscripted as a chamberlain, and was on duty as a guard in the middle of Miyagi.

古文：义师至，兼卫尉江淹出奔。稷兼卫尉，副王莹都督城内诸军事。
现代文：仁义之师到达，兼卫尉江淹逃亡，张稷兼卫尉，副王莹都督城内诸军事。
English: The teachers of benevolence and righteousness arrived, and the guards fled into the river, and Zhang Xuan, the guards, and Vice-Governor Wang Ying led the military in the city.

古文：时东昏淫虐，义师围城已久，城内思亡而莫有先发。
现代文：那时束昏侯淫乱暴虐，义师围城已经很久，城内的人们想逃跑但没有人先发起。
English: At that time, the city had been besieged for a long time, and the people in the city wanted to escape, but no one took the initiative.

古文：北徐州刺史王珍国就稷谋之，乃使直阁张齐害东昏于含德殿。
现代文：北徐州刺史玉勇叁玺到强捏那裹和他谋划这件事情，就派遣直合张齐在含德殿杀害了东昏侯。
English: When the Northern Xuzhou assassin Yulong Yu came to Qiangqin and plotted with him, he dispatched Zhang Qi to kill Dongwu Hou in Han De Dian.

古文：稷召尚书右仆射王亮等列坐殿前西钟下，谓曰： 昔桀有昏德，鼎迁于殷；商纣暴虐，鼎迁于周。
现代文：张稷召请尚书右仆射王亮等人在殿前西钟下列坐，说： 从前桀有昏愤之德行，鼎迁到殷；商纣残暴肆虐，鼎迁到周。
English: Zhang Ye summoned Shang Shu's right-hand man Sha Wang Liang and others to sit under the west bell in front of the hall, saying: "In the past, there was a virtue of indignation, Ding moved to Yin; Shang Ye's brutality raged, Ding moved to Zhou.

古文：今独夫自绝于天，四海已归圣主，斯实微子去殷之时，项伯归汉之日，可不勉哉！ 
现代文：现在众叛亲离之人自己隔绝于天下，四海之地已归圣主，这是微子离开殷的时候，项伯归附漠的日子，可以不努力吗。 
English: Now that all the renegades have cut themselves off from the world, and the lands of the four seas have been returned to the Holy Lord, this is the time when the microbe leaves the yin, and the day when the longing returns to the desert, can we not make an effort?

古文：乃遣国子博士范云、舍人裴长穆等使石头城诣高祖，高祖以稷为侍中、左卫将军。
现代文：就派遣国子博士茎雪、舍入冬垦垄等出使互玺垣拜诣产担，蛊担把弓鼹任为侍中、左卫将军。
English: He dispatched emissaries such as Kuniko Hakase, Tsuchisetsu, and Tsuchisetsu, and they exchanged greetings with each other, bowed to each other, and appointed the bow and arrow as the second-in-command and the left guard.

古文：高祖总百揆，迁大司马左司马。
现代文：高祖总管各项事务，张运迁大司马左司马。
English: Gao Zu is in charge of various affairs, Zhang Yunqian is the chief secretary, Ma Zuo is the secretary.

古文：梁台建，为散骑常侍、中书令。
现代文：凿初台建立，他担任散骑常侍、中书令。
English: After the establishment of the first stage, he served as a straggler, a regular attendant, and a Chinese calligrapher.

古文：高祖受禅，以功封江安县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：高祖接受禅让，按照功劳封张稷为江安县侯，封邑一千户。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen Zhen, according to the merit of Zhang Ye as the lord of Jiang'an County, with a fief of one thousand households.

古文：又为侍中、国子祭酒，领骁骑将军，迁护军将军、扬州大中正，以事免。
现代文：他又担任侍中、国子祭酒，领骁骑将军，迁护军将军、扬州大中正，因事被罢免。
English: He also served as a chamberlain, the son of the country's sacrificial wine, the leader of the horse cavalry, the general of the escorting army, and the Yangzhou University junior high school, and was dismissed due to the incident.

古文：寻为度支尚书、前将军、太子右卫率，又以公事免。
现代文：不久张稷担任度支尚书、前将军、太子右街率，又因公务被罢免。
English: Not long after, Zhang Ye was appointed as the head of the State Council, former general, and right-hand man of the crown prince, and was dismissed for his official duties.

古文：俄为祠部尚书，转散骑常侍、都官尚书、扬州大中正，以本职知领军事。
现代文：不久任祠部尚书，转散骑常侍、都官尚书、扬州大中正，用本来职务知领军事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the chief priest of the ancestral hall, and later became the chief equerry, the chief official of the capital, and the vice-president of Yangzhou University. He used his original position to lead the military.

古文：寻迁领军将军，中正、侯如故。
现代文：旋即张稷迁领军将军，中正、侯跟原来一样。
English: Zhang Xuan immediately relocated the leading general, and Zhongzheng and Hou remained the same as before.

古文：时魏寇青州，诏假节、行州事。
现代文：当时魏军侵犯青州，韶张稷假节、行州事。
English: At that time, the Wei army invaded Qingzhou, interfered with the Spring Festival, and interfered in the affairs of Qingzhou.

古文：会魏军退，仍出为散骑常侍、将军，吴兴太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：适逢魏军退去，他就外出做散骑常侍、将军、吴兴太守，俸禄为中二千石。
English: When the Wei army retreated, he went out to be a strolling equerry, general, and Wu Xing governor, with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：下车存问遗老，引其子孙，置之右职，政称宽恕。
现代文：张稷到任慰问前朝旧臣，举荐他们的子孙，给他们安置重要的职位，政事称得上宽容仁爱。
English: When Zhang Ye took office, he offered condolences to the former ministers of the former dynasty, recommended their children and grandchildren, and gave them important positions. His government was said to be tolerant and benevolent.

古文：进号云麾将军，征尚书左仆射。
现代文：给张稷进号云麾将军，征任尚书左仆射。
English: Zhang Yujing was given the title of General Yunnan, and Shang Shuxu Zuopu was appointed.

古文：舆驾将欲如稷宅，以盛暑，留幸仆射省，旧临幸供具皆酬太官馔直，帝以稷清贫，手诏不受。
现代文：帝驾想到张稷的府宅，因为酷暑没有去，就留幸仆射省，过去帝王亲临所供器具都报谢给了太官馔直，皇帝认为张稷清贫，亲自书写韶书不接受。
English: The emperor came to think of Zhang Ye's mansion, because the intense heat did not go away, he was lucky enough to shoot the province. In the past, the equipment provided by the emperor himself was thanked to the eunuch Xizhi. The emperor thought that Zhang Ye was poor, and he did not accept to write the letter in person.

古文：出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督青、冀二州诸军事、安北将军、青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：张稷出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督青冀二州诸军事、安北将军、青冀二州刺史。
English: Zhang Xuan is known as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military governor of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, the general of Anbei, and the history of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：会魏寇朐山，诏稷权顿六里，都督众军。
现代文：适逢魏军侵犯朐山，诏令张稷姑且屯驻六里，都督各路军队。
English: When the Wei army invaded Shaoshan, the emperor ordered Zhang Jigu to stay in Liuli, and all the troops of the governor came.

古文：还，进号镇北将军。
现代文：返回后，他进号镇北将军。
English: After returning, he was promoted to the post of Zhenbei general.

古文：初郁洲接边陲，民俗多与魏人交市。
现代文：当初郁洲和边境相接，人民的风俗是多与魏朝人互市。
English: At the beginning, Yuzhou was adjacent to the border, and the customs of the people were mostly intermingled with those of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：及朐山叛，或与魏通，既不自安矣；且稷宽弛无防，僚吏颇侵渔之。
现代文：等到朐山叛乱，有人与魏人勾结，自己已经不能安心了；并且张稷放松没有防备，官吏们都侵夺百姓。
English: By the time of the Lushan Rebellion, some people were colluding with the Wei people, and he could no longer feel at ease. Moreover, Zhangye was not prepared, and the officials all plundered the people.

古文：州人徐道角等夜袭州城，害稷，时年六十三。
现代文：州人徐道角等夜间侵袭州城，杀害了张稷，时年六十三岁。
English: Xu Daojiao, a native of Zhoushan, invaded Zhoushan at night and killed Zhang Xuan, who was 63 years old at the time.

古文：有司奏削爵土。
现代文：有司上奏削夺了他的爵位和封地。
English: A superior officer stripped him of his title and fief.

古文：稷性烈亮，善与人交。
现代文：张稷性格刚烈直率，喜欢和人们交往。
English: Zhang Yao has a strong and forthright personality, and likes to interact with people.

古文：历官无蓄聚，俸禄皆颁之亲故，家无余财。
现代文：历任官职却无积蓄，俸禄都颁发给了亲戚故旧，家裹没有多余的财产。
English: Successive officials have no savings, the salary has been awarded to relatives, and the family has no extra property.

古文：初去吴兴郡，以仆射征，道由吴乡，候稷者满水陆。
现代文：当初张稷离开吴兴郡，以仆射的身份被征召，从吴取道，等候张稷的乡人们挤满了水路和陆路。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye left Wuxing County and was conscripted as a gunner. He took the road from Wuxing, and the villagers waiting for Zhang Ye crowded the waterways and land routes.

古文：稷单装径还京师，人莫之识，其率素如此。
现代文：张稷简单装束径直回到京城，人们没有认出来，他就是这样的直率朴素。
English: Zhang Ye dressed simply and went straight back to Beijing. People didn't recognize him, he was just so straightforward and simple.

古文：稷长女楚瑗，适会稽孔氏，无子归宗。
现代文：张稷的长女楚瑗，出嫁给会稽孔氏，因没有孩子回归母家。
English: Zhang Ye's eldest daughter, Chu Ye, married Mr. Kong, the treasurer of the association, and returned to her mother's home because she had no children.

古文：至稷见害，女以身蔽刃，先父卒。
现代文：等到张稷被害，她用身体遮挡利刃，先于父亲而死。
English: When Zhang Qi was killed, she used her body to shield the sharp blade and died before her father.

古文：稷子嵊，别有传。
现代文：张稷的儿子张嵊，另有列传。
English: Zhang Ye, the son of Zhang Ye, is also listed as a star.

古文：卷字令远，稷从兄也。
现代文：张卷字令速，是张稷的堂兄。
English: Zhang Zizhong is Zhang Yao's cousin.

古文：少以知理著称，能清言，仕至都官尚书，天监初卒。
现代文：年轻时以知晓事理而出名，能清谈，官至都官尚书，天监初年死去。
English: When he was young, he was famous for knowing the facts and reasoning, being able to talk clearly, and reading books even when he was an official in the capital. He died in his first year as a celestial inspector.

古文：王莹，字奉光，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王莹字奉光，是琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Yingzih Bongguang is a person who follows evil.

古文：父懋，光禄大夫、南乡僖侯。
现代文：他的父亲王懋，是光禄大夫、南乡僖侯。
English: His father, Wang Yao, was a Guanglu doctor and Nanxiang magistrate.

古文：莹选尚宋临淮公主，拜驸马都尉，除著作佐郎，累迁太子舍人，抚军功曹，散骑侍郎，司徒左西属。
现代文：王莹选配了宋朝的临淮公主，拜驸马都尉，除著作佐郎，多次迁升为太子舍人，抚军功曹，散骑侍郎，司徒左西属。
English: Wang Ying selected the Song Dynasty's Linhuai Princess, Baiyunma Duifeng, in addition to the author Saro, he was repeatedly promoted to the prince's son, Fuzhun Gong Cao, Sanzhijian Jiro, and Szeto Zuoxi.

古文：齐高帝为骠骑将军，引为从事中郎。
现代文：齐高帝任骠骑将军时，王莹被举荐为从事中郎。
English: When Emperor Qigong was appointed general of cavalry, Wang Ying was recommended to be engaged in the middle.

古文：顷之，出为义兴太守，代谢超宗。
现代文：不久，王莹出任义兴太守，代替谢超宗。
English: Soon, Wang Ying became the governor of Yixing, replacing Xie Chaozong.

古文：超宗去郡，与莹交恶，既还，间莹于懋。
现代文：超宗离开郡，舆王莹相互憎恨仇视，回去以后，向王懋离间王莹。
English: After Chao Zong left the county, Wang Ying and Miao Wang Ying hated each other. After returning, Wang Ying and Miao Wang Ying became estranged.

古文：懋言之于朝廷，以莹供养不足，坐失郡废弃。
现代文：王懋向朝廷禀告，说王莹供养父母不足，由此失去郡职而被弃置不用。
English: Wang Yao made an obituary to the imperial court, saying that Wang Ying's support for his parents was insufficient, as a result of which he lost his county post and was abandoned.

古文：久之，为前军谘议参军，中书侍郎，大司马从事中郎，未拜，丁母忧。
现代文：很久以后，王莹担任前军谘议参军，中书侍郎，大司马从事中郎，没有拜受，因为遭遇母亲丧事。
English: After a long time, Wang Ying served as the former army's advisory to join the army, the middle secretary, and the chief secretary engaged in the middle, but was not worshiped, because he suffered the death of his mother.

古文：服阕，为给事黄门郎，出为宣城太守，迁为骠骑长史。
现代文：守丧期满除服，王莹做给事黄门郎，出为宣城太守，迁骠骑长史。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Wang Ying was stripped of his robes, and became Huangmenlang, the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：复为黄门侍郎、司马、太子中庶子，仍迁侍中，父忧去职。
现代文：又担任黄门侍郎、司马、太子中庶子，仍迁侍中，父亲去世离开了职位。
English: He also served as the Yellow Gate chamberlain, Sima, and the Prince's illegitimate son, and was still a chamberlain when his father died and left the position.

古文：服阕，复为侍中，领射声校尉，又为冠军将军、东阳太守。
现代文：王莹守丧期满除服，又担任侍中，领射声校尉，又做冠军将军、东阳太守。
English: Wang Ying Shou was stripped of his uniform at the end of his term of mourning, and served as an attendant, a captain, a champion general, and the governor of Dongyang.

古文：居郡有惠政，迁吴兴太守。
现代文：王莹在郡襄有仁政，迁吴兴太守。
English: Wang Ying had a benevolent government in Xiang County and transferred Wu Xing to be the governor.

古文：明帝勤忧庶政，莹频处二郡，皆有能名。甚见褒美。
现代文：明帝忧虑各种政务，王莹接连居处二郡，都有能够胜任的名声，很被嘉奖赞美。
English: Emperor Ming worried about all kinds of government affairs, and Wang Ying lived in two counties in succession, and had a reputation of being competent, and was highly praised by awards.

古文：还为太子詹事、中领军。
现代文：他回朝后担任太子詹事、中领军。
English: After his return to the imperial court, he served as the prince of Zhanji and the middle leader.

古文：永元初，政由群小，莹守职而不能有所是非。
现代文：永元初年，政事由众小人统管，王莹忠于职守却不能有所褒贬评论。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, government affairs were controlled by many villains. Wang Yingzhong was loyal to his duties, but he could not be praised or criticized.

古文：莹从弟亮既当朝，于莹素虽不善，时欲引与同事。
现代文：王莹的堂弟王亮执掌朝政后，对王莹平素虽不友好，但也常常想把他引荐作为共事的人。
English: After Wang Ying's cousin Wang Liang took charge of the imperial government, although he was not friendly to Wang Yingping, he often wanted to introduce him as a colleague.

古文：迁尚书左仆射，未拜。会护军崔慧景自京口奉江夏王入伐，莹假节，率众拒慧景于湖头，夜为慧景所袭，众散，莹赴水，乘榜入乐游，因得还台城。
现代文：王莹迁尚书左仆射，未拜，适逢护军崔慧景从京推奉江夏王来讨伐，王莹假节，率领众军在湖头抵抗慧景。夜裹被慧景袭击，军队溃散，王莹跳入水中，抓着木片逃入乐游，因而能够返回台城。
English: Wang Yingqian did not bow, but when the escort of Cui Huiqing from Beijing proposed that the king of Jiangxia come to fight, Wang Ying led the army to resist Huiqing at the head of the lake on the festival day. He was attacked by Huiqing at night, the army was dispersed, Wang Ying jumped into the water, grabbed a piece of wood and fled to Leyou, so he could return to Taicheng.

古文：慧景败，还居领军府。
现代文：崔慧景战败，王莹回朝居于领军府。
English: Cui Huijing was defeated, and Wang Yinghui returned to live in the capital.

古文：义师至，复假节，都督宫城诸军事。
现代文：仁义之师到达，他又假节，都督宫城诸军事。
English: When the Teacher of Righteousness and Benevolence arrived, he made the festival a holiday, and the military of the capital, Miyagi, came out.

古文：建康平，高祖为相国，引莹为左长史，加冠军将军，奉法驾迎和帝于江陵。
现代文：建康平定，高祖为相国，举荐王莹为左长史，加冠军将军，奉送法驾到江陵迎接和帝。
English: Jiankang was pacified, Gao Zu was the fatherland, Wang Ying was recommended as the left long history, plus the champion general, and was sent to Gangneung to meet the emperor.

古文：帝至南州，逊位于别宫。
现代文：和帝到南州，让位于正式寝宫以外的宫室。
English: And the emperor went to Nanzhou, giving way to the palace room outside the official bedroom.

古文：高祖践阼，迁侍中、抚军将军，封建城县公，邑千户。
现代文：高祖即位，王莹迁侍中、抚军将军，封建城县公，食邑千户。
English: Gaozu's enthronement, Wang Yingqian's transfer to the position of chamberlain and general of the army, feudal towns and counties, and thousands of households in food villages.

古文：寻迁尚书左仆射，侍中、抚军如故。
现代文：不久迁尚书左仆射，侍中、抚军还跟原来一样。
English: Soon after, Shosho's left-hand servant Sho was transferred, and the attendants and attendants remained the same as before.

古文：顷之，为护军将军，复迁散骑常侍、中军将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：旋即，王莹任护军将军，又迁散骑常侍、中军将军、丹阳尹。
English: Soon after, Wang Ying was appointed as the general of the escort, and the stragglers, the general of the Chinese army, and Danyang Yin were transferred.

古文：视事三年，迁侍中、光禄大夫，领左卫将军。
现代文：王莹就职治事三年，迁侍中、光禄大夫，领左卫将军。
English: Wang Ying has been in office for three years, and has moved from the position of middle-ranking attendant to the position of doctor of Guanglu, leading the left guard.

古文：俄迁尚书令、云麾将军，侍中如故。
现代文：不久迁尚书令、云麾将军，侍中还与从前一样。
English: Soon after, Shang Shuling and General Yun Qi were transferred, and the chamberlains remained the same as before.

古文：累进号左中权将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：他多次进号左中权将军，给鼓吹一部。
English: He repeatedly entered the number of General Zuo Zhongquan, giving the trumpet part.

古文：莹性清慎，居官恭恪，高祖深重之。
现代文：王莹性格清高慎重，任职恭敬谨慎，高祖很器重他。
English: Wang Ying's character is clear, high and prudent. He is respectful and prudent in his duties. Gao Zu holds him in high regard.

古文：天监十五年，迁左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，丹阳尹、侍中如故。
现代文：天监十五年，王莹迁左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，丹阳尹、侍中还如以前。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heavenly Supervisor, Wang Yingqian remained the doctor of the Left Guanglu, the secretary of the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, Danyang Yin, and the chamberlain as before.

古文：莹将拜，印工铸其印，六铸而龟六毁，既成，颈空不实，补而用之。
现代文：王莹将要受职，铸印的工匠铸造他的印，铸造六次，龟六次都毁坏了，完成以后，龟颈空虚没有充实，填补来使用它。
English: Wang Ying is about to take office. The seal caster casts his seal six times, and the turtle is destroyed six times. After completion, the neck of the turtle is not full of emptiness, and it is filled to use it.

古文：居职六日，暴疾卒。
现代文：王莹任职六天，突然发病而亡。
English: Wang Ying was in office for six days when she suddenly fell ill and died.

古文：赠侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：追赠侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School, Sako Roku no daibu, Kaifu giri, and Sanji.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：孔子称 殷有三仁：微子去之，箕子为之奴，比干谏而死。 
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察说：孔子声称 殷有三位具有仁德的人，微子离开了，箕子成为奴隶，比干因规谏而死 。
English: Confucius claimed that there were three people with benevolence in Yin and Yang. The micro son left, the mule son became a slave, and the beetle died because of the rule.

古文：王亮之居乱世，势位见矣。
现代文：王亮处于乱世，权势地位都显示了出来。
English: Wang Liang is in a turbulent world, and his positions of power are on display.

古文：其于取舍，何与三仁之异欤？
现代文：他对于取舍之宜，和三位有仁德的人有什么不同?
English: What is the difference between him and the three virtuous men in terms of their choice?

古文：及奉兴王，蒙宽政，为佐命，固将愧于心。
现代文：等到拥戴使王成功，承蒙宽容的政治，成为辅助帝王创业的功臣，本来将会在心裹感到惭愧。
English: I would have been ashamed in my heart to wait until I had supported the success of the king, received a tolerant politics, and become a meritorious person assisting the emperor's entrepreneurship.

古文：乃自取废败，非不幸也。
现代文：他白取废弃败亡，不算不幸。
English: It is not a misfortune for him to be abandoned and ruined for nothing.

古文：《易》曰： 非所据而据之，身必危。 
现代文：《易经》说： 不是自己能够有的却占有了它，一定会招致危险。 
English: "I Ching" says: If you possess something that you are not able to have, it will definitely lead to danger.

古文：亮之进退，失所据矣。惜哉！
现代文：王亮的行为举止，就是失去了他的所据。可惜啊!
English: Wang Liang's behavior means that he has lost his ground. What a pity!

古文：张稷因机制变，亦其时也。
现代文：张稷随顺形势应变，也是那个时代造成的。
English: Zhang Ye's ability to adapt to the changing situation was also a result of that era.

古文：王莹印章六毁，岂神之害盈乎？
现代文：王莹铸造印章六次都毁坏了，难道是神灵也嫉恨盈满吗?
English: Wang Ying's casting seal has been destroyed six times. Could it be that the gods are also filled with jealousy?

